Handbook
of Small
Animal
Spinal
Surgery
N. D. Jeffery
Handbook of
Small Animal Spinal
Surgery
N.D. Jeffery
Animal Health
Newmarket, UIK
Present address:
University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UIK
with a contribution from
T.G. Yarrow
Citivet, London, LIK
W.B. Saunders Company Ltd
LONDON PIHILADELPIIA TORONTO SYDNEY TOKYO
W.B. Saunders
24-28 Oval Road
Company Ltd
London NW1 7DX, UK
Bailliere Tindall
The Curtis Center
 Independence Square West
Philadelphia, PA 19106-3399, USA
 55 Horner Avenue
Toronto, Ontario M8Z 4X6, Canada
Harcourt Brace & Company
(Australia) Pty Ltd
30-52 Smidmore Street
Marrickville, NSW 2204, Australia
Harcourt Brace Japan
Ichibancho Central Building
 22-1 Ichibancho
 Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102, Japan
@ 1995 W.B. Saunders Company Ltd
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted, in
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying or otherwise, without the prior permission
of W.B. Saunders Company Ltd,
 24-28 Oval Road, London NW1 7DX, UK
A catalogue record for this book is available from the
British Library
ISBN 0-7020-1688-8
 This book is printed on acid-free paper
Typeset by J&L Composition Ltd, Filey, North Yorkshire
 Printed and bound in Great Britain by Butler and Tanner, Frome
Preface
ix
Acknowledgements
Xi
Chapter 1: Instrumentation
Guest chapter by T.G. Yarrow
Introduction
1
 Diagnostic equipment
1
Operating room
3
Haemostatic agents
6
 Orthopaedic instrumentation
7
Chapter 2: Anatomy
^ Introduction
9
Vertebral column
10
Intervertebral joints
14
 Ligaments of the vertebral column
16
Anatomy of the spinal co1d
18
 Associated reading
23
 Chapter 3: Investigation of Spinal Disease
Introduction
24
History
24
Physical examination
26
Neurological examination
27
Localization of lesions
41
 Associated reading
43
Chapter 4: Ancillary Aids
Introduction
45
 Blood sampling
45
Radiography
46
 Other imaging techniques
57
 Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis
60
Electrodiagnostics
61
 Associated reading
61
 Chapter 5: Pathophysiology of Spinal Cord Injury
Introduction
64
vi
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
 Pathophysiology of acute spinal co1d injury
64
Secondary injury mechanisms
65
 Pathophysiology of chronic (compressive) cord injury
69
Associated reading
70
Chapter 6: Anatomical Anomalies and Congenital Lesions
Introduction
72
 Disorders of the vertebral column
72
 Anomalies of the spinal cord
80
 Associated reading
83
Chapter 7: Degenerative Conditions
 Degenerative disorders of the vertebral column
85
Degenerative conditions of the spinal cord
105
Associated reading
108
 Chapter 8: Fractures, Luxations and External Trauma to the Vertebral
column
Introduction
111
Reduction methods
114
 Methods of surgical fixation of spinal fracture/luxations
115
 Bullets/pellets
123
 Hyperextension,'traumatic discs' and cord concussion
124
 Conservative management of spinal fracture/luxations
126
Associated reading
127
Chapter 9: Tumours
Introduction
128
Classification by location
129
Modes of therapy
136
Associated reading
136
 Chapter 10: Inflammatory, Infectious and Vascular Disease
Introduction
138
Vascular disease
138
 Inflammatory and infectious disease
140
Associated reading
145
Chapter 11: Cervical Spinal Surgery
Introduction
148
Cervical disc surgery
148
 Fractures/subluxations
155
 Neoplasia
163
 Associated reading
166
Chapter 12: The 'Wobbler' Syndrome
Introduction
169
Diagnosis
171
CONTENTS
vii
Differential diagnosis
176
Treatment
176
 Prognosis
183
 Associated reading
184
Chapter 13: Surgery of the Thoracolumbar Spine
Introduction
187
 Decompressive surgery
188
Prophylactic techniques
194
 Fractures and luxations of the thoracolumba1 segment 
197
Other conditions of the thoracolumbar segment (T3-L3)
197
 Neoplasia in the thoracolumbar segment
198
Associated reading
199
 Chapter 14: Surgery of the Lumbosacral and Sacrocaudal Regions
Introduction
202
 Type I disc extrusions in the caudal lumbar region 
203
Lumbosacral stenosis
204
 Fractures and luxations
209
 Neoplasia
212
 Miscellaneous conditions
212
 Associated reading
213
 Chapter 15: Medical and Conservative Therapy
Introduction
215
Antibiotic treatment of spinal disease
215
Corticosteroid therapy of spinal disease
217
Other treatments
219
 Conservative therapy of mild disc-associated symptoms
220
 Associated reading
221
 Chapter 16: Postoperative Care and Physical Therapy
 Introduction
223
Pain
223
Recumbency
224
 Management of incontinent animals
227
Physiotherapy
228
 Associated reading
230
Index
231
In the past, small animal spinal surgery has often been regarded as a subsection of
01thopaedics. This classification is unsatisfactory because the approach to diagnosis
 and treatment of a vertebral or spinal cord lesion must be different to the approach
to a disorder of the appendicula1 skeleton. This difference alises because the most
important structure to be treated in spinal disease is the neural tissue, i.e. the spinal
cord and nerve roots; other considerations such as bone healing are secondary in
importance. The consequence is that neurological examination is essential to deter-
mine diagnosis and prognosis. The response of the nervous system to injury differs
ma1kedly to that of the musculoskeletal system and must be considered when
discussing prognosis.
 Over the last 10 to 15 yea1s there has been a vast expansion in the veterinary
literature dealing with small animal spinal surgery. This book aims to provide an
 Overview of this work, as well as information on diagnostic approaches and recent
studies of the pathophysiology of spinal cord injury.
 Two recent developments have been associated with the increased veterinary
 graphy (an essential prerequisite for most spinal surgery) a relatively safe proce-
dure with good diagnostic yield, and, (i) increased access to suitable surgical
instrumentation.
Although these developments have meant that an increasing number of vete1-
inarians are now inclined to carry out surgery on the vertebral column, many feel
unsure of themselves when dealing with neurological problems. It is hoped that
se jo uosau on apa s, rad u e s aaias un yooq s
with spinal lesions, interpretation of myelography and description of the types of
surgery available, regardless of whether such surgery is to be performed by the
practitioner or at a referral centre.
Jo uoadar pioae on An on sired [eaaas ou ino jas uaaq sey yooq au
comments regaiding the valious surgical lesions that occul throughout the verte-
bral column; the general principles of investigation and treatment are simila1 in all
areas.
Acknowledgements
I wish to extend thanks to many people who have encouraged my interest in
 neurology and neurosurgery and therefore contributed indirectly to this book. In
Tom Yarrow and joe Mayhew. John Fulle1 deserves special thanks for his excellent
drawings and I would also like to thank those at the Animal Health Trust and
 Department of Clinical Veterinary Medicine, Cambridge who supplied some of the
other illustrations. Grateful thanks to Jill Jeffery for correcting grammar and style of
the text, Sandia Tatum and Lolraine Leonaid, for their assistance at the AHT and
 Cambridge Veterinary School libraries and to all those at WB Saunders, especially
Katharine Hinton and Suzanne Haydon.
CHAPTER 1
Instrumentation
T. G. Yarrow
Contents
Introduction 1
Diagnostic equipment  1
Operating room3
Haemostatic agents 6
Orthopaedic instrumentation 7
'For it is impossible, or at least not easy to play a noble part unless furnished with
the necessary equipment' Aristotle, The Nichomachean Ethics.
Neurosurgical procedures require certain specialized equipment and instrumenta-
tion in addition to the standard surgical pack. Although some of the items dis-
cussed in this chapter are not esseritial to carry out surgery on the spine they all are
helpful during certain procedures. It is hoped that this chapter may serve as a guide
 to those considering purchasing equipment for spinal surgery.
Diagnostic equipment
Neurological examination
Certain instruments are required to carry out the neurological examination. These
 include a reflex hammer, artery forceps (mosquito type), penlight, ophthalmoscope,
        d  rd e  e n 
responses of normal animals if a specified set of implements is used for every case.
 A reflex hammer is not essential; the handle end of a heavy pair of scissors will
suffice to stimulate tendon reflexes and is often preferable for examination of small
breeds of dog or cats.
Imaging
RADIOGRAPHY
X-ray generators are designated by the current (mA) and the maximum voltage
(kV) they can produce. For the production of diagnostic films of the vertebral
column in large breeds of dogs, instruments capable of 300 mA and 120 kV are
desirable. Less-powerful generators may be satisfactory but should have a mini-
mum of 100 mA th1ough the range of kV required (up to about 100 kV). Small
2
HANDBOOKOFSMALLANIMALSPINALSURGERY
portable generators are not suitable as it is not possible to obtain enough mA at the
higher kV settings. This means that long exposures are needed, which may produce
movement altefact even in anaesthetized patients
 A grid will be required to reduce the effects of X-ray scatter when radiographing
 parts of the body greater than 10 cm thick. Bucky grids are preferable (to eliminate
 grid lines) but not essential.
 It should be possible to tilt the table on which the animal is positioned for
 radiography. During cistermal myelography the flow of the contrast medium relies
on gravity; it is customary to tilt the table to about 10-15 from horizontal. For small
 dogs and cats a short piece of wood can be used to maintain the animal in a tilted
a yo usod iadoid ansua on inasn Aiaa ane sped we suane
patient. Only certain types of foam are suitable because it must not produce
 artefacts on radiographs. Suitable foam can be purchased in large blocks and cut
 into the required shapes using an electric carving knife. Radiolucent cradles and
calving ropes are other useful positioning aids. Animals subjected to spinal radio-
graphy should be anaesthetized almost without exception, there should never be a
need for the patient to be restrained manually during radiography.
eonu jo uonun pue Sues i ro pasn are sapau hus
contrast agents. Regular hypodermic needles can be used for the same purpose
but are more likely to become blocked. Spinal needles (with a stylet) must be used
for lumba1 puncture. Useful sizes of needle are 20 gauge 2 inch and 3.5 inch, and 22
gauge 1.5 and 3.5 inch.
during myelography the contiast agent often moves rapidly down the subarach-
noid space and films may be required at many sites in quick succession. Wet
 processing also has the drawback that it is difficult to read subtle changes on wet
films.
ADVANCED IMAGING
Access to computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is
not essential for diagnosis of most surgical conditions of the spine, but both can be
useful and are likely to become more widely used by veterinarians in the future.
CT is capable of producing cross-sectional images of areas of interest. Fo1
improved definition of the spinal cord it can be combined with myelography.
Alterations in contrast scales can be made during the scan allowing excellent
definition of bone detail.
MRI can produce suberb images of the spine - it provides most benefit in
evaluation of soft tissue structures and the spinal cord itself. The small size of
veterinary patients (compared with humans) means that great care must be taken to
 attain accurate positioning for optimal sagittal images. In the human medical field
 MR scanning is rapidly replacing all other forms of spinal imaging (except for use
of CT and conventional 1adiographs for fractures).
 Ultrasound may be useful in the future, although experience with spinal cord
ultrasound is currently limited.
INSTRUMENTATION3
ELECTRODIAGNOSTIC INSTRUMENTS
 Electromyography (EMG) and nerve conduction studies can be useful in certain
cases. EMG studies can help in the diagnosis of lumbosacral disorders and can also
help in establishing if a lower motor neurone disorder is generalized or local.
CSF EXAMINATION
 It is recommended that cell counts on CSF be carried out within 20-30 min of
 collection, alternatively the CSF can be mixed with an equal volume of formal
saline which will preserve the cells. If the cell count is to be carried out in a
practice laboratory a standard haemocytometer can be used. Differential cell
often difficult to find sufficient number of cells to count.
Cell sedimentation chambers can be made and used in practice - instructions are
given in several publications. Sedimentation allows sufficient cells to be concen
trated for differential counts. Estimation of protein concentrations, including immu-
noglobulins, can be carried out by outside laboratories; there is not a requirement
for immediate analysis.
Operating room
 It is important that the operating table is of solid construction and that there is little
or no instability - there is a tendency to lean against the table while carrying out
surgery on the spine and it could be catastrophic for the table to wobble or move
during delicate procedures. It is helpful to have the capability to tilt the table both
along and across its long axis. Lateral tilt is helpful for lateral approaches to the
thoracolumbar spine and axial tilt is useful during approaches to the caudal
cervical spine. Positioning aids such as sandbags, cradles, ties and deflatable
bags filled with polystyrene beads may all be required.
Lighting
It should be possible to move the light into a variety of positions so as to allow good
lighting even into the deep cavities which are required to reach the spinal cord in
 some approaches. It is preferable that the light has handles that can be sterilized so
that it can be moved by the surgeon or a scrubbed assistant. Also available are
    q       s
available and preferable as the light will always be directed at the site of interest.
Magnification
Magnification is often useful, especially for removal of intradural lesions. Either
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
A
Figure 1.1Kerrison rongeurs.Footplate is smalland thin allowing its use to remoue lamina during
thoracolumbar'mini hemilaminectomy'or cervical continuous dorsal laminectomy.
Surgicalinstruments
 Retractors of several sorts are required; self-retaining types are most useful. Each
  i  rd si a a in sd  s 
 and versatile. Hand-held retractors are useful at certain stages in many operations;
 is ss s   s pe se ae s a a
nerve retraction, a small blunt and rounded hook, such as the Graham nerve
retractor, is required.
 Rongeurs of several types are required, although if a powered drill is available a
 more limited selection is satisfactory. Large double-action rongeurs are used to
(Figure 1.1) can be used for rapid removal of the dorsal lamina in dorsal laminec-
tomy (especially in the cervical spine) or to remove portions of the pedicle in the
 mini hemilaminectomy. Lempert rongeurs (Figure 1.2), which have very fine tips,
'anan (ois paou) urssarduosp auos paaau a  pasn are
 A selection of microdissectors or picks is required for estimating the depth of
bone to be penetrated and for removal of the inner layer of cortex during laminec-
tomies (Figure 1.3). They are also used for dislodging pieces of extruded disc which
 lie in the vertebral canal and for lifting the anulus and dorsal longitudinal ligament,
allowing these structures to be excised. There are many types of microdissectors:
 blunt, sharp, curved angled or straight. A large selection is useful, blunt types are
required for exploration of intervertebral foramina and ones with a 90° tip are
 required for retrieval of extruded disc material in the ventral slot procedure.
Figure 1.2 Lempert rongeurs. The tips are narrow allowing good access to remove fragments of
dorsal anulus during inverted cone slotting.
INSTRUMENTATION
(a)
(b)
()
Figure 1.3 Selection of some suitable disc instruments. (a) can be useful during inverted cone
slotting. (b) and (c) are useful shapes for general purpose extruded disc retrieval.
 Instruments for microsurgery, such as are used in intraocular surgery, can be
helpful when operating inside the dura. Iris scissors, lens vectis and small needle
hoiders are particularly useful. Jewellers forceps may be preferable to ophthalmo-
logical needle holders as they are cheaper and do not have a catch which can cause
unnecessary jarring of the operation site.
Dural hooks, which are used to grasp and retract the cut dura, are available but
  s a a sa r a sd rs r a  a
used instead. These can also be used to carry out durotomy incisions. Myelotomy is
 best carried out using a broken razor blade in a holder.
Suction and irrigation
 Both suction and irrigation of the surgical field are required. It should be possible to
 s s  a p a    r
 damage to the neural tisue (especially when operating inside the dura). Irigation
can be carried out by pouring or by bulb syringe. Suction/irrigation devices
(Hydroflow, Portex) are particularly useful and time saving. Small metal suction
 probes are usually best but in confined areas intravenous cannulae may also work
Well.
Diathermy
surgeon to carry out very discrete coagulation close to vital structures. If forceps are
used attached directly to the diathermy then the bayonet type are probably best as
they allow the surgeon an unobstructed view of the surgical field. Some bipolar
diathermy units have the capability to coagulate in a wet or bloody field, which is
desirable. Wet fields reduce the adherence of tissue to activated diathermy forceps.
If tissue adheres during coagulation then during subsequent removal the tissue will
tear and often causes haemorrhage to recommence. When not in use the tips of
diathermy forceps should be kept wet to reduce this occurrence.
Powered instruments
While there are many descriptions of standard neurosurgical procedures carried
oe im srq pue s pamo po asn ndod a 'u pr m io
p so po aro ssa m ab aoi o ps aq on suao
Certain procedures can only be carried out using these instruments.
 There is a vast selection of power instruments. Most are driven by compressed
 gas (air or nitrogen) but some are electric. Different brands and types have varying
HANDBOOK OFSMALLANIMALSPINALSURGERY
preferable. Below 50 000 r.p.m. the torque is higher but the bur will not cut
without some pressure, which potentially is a source of danger in animals that
 have very thin bone. At burr speeds of 50 000 or above the bone can be 'painted'
away without pressure being required. These drills are supplied with burr guards
which must allow sufficient working length to allow a ventral slot to be prepared.
Angled burr guards are available, although expensive, and can help during surgery
of the caudal cervical spine and other areas.
 There are a large number of burr sizes and shapes including pineapple, barrel,
cone and spherical. All procedures can be carried out using spherical burrs. There
are also different types of material used to make burrs, such as steel, tungsten
carbide and diamond: steel does not appear to cut well and blunts quickly;
carbide cuts well and has a long life; diamond does not cut but abrades some-
what like sandpaper and can be used for polishing and final removal of bone over
delicate structures.
 Inexperienced users should acquaint themselves with the capability of a powered
drill by practice on cadavers. In use the soft tissue should be meticulously removed
because if it is encountered by the rotating burr it will wrap around it and pull the
 burr sideways. The first bone to be encountered is the outer cortex, which is white
 and hard. It is usually quite thick and can be removed quickly. Under this is a layer
 of cancellous bone which is reddish in colour and soft. This second layer is
cautiously thinned until the white inner cortex is exposed. This layer is often thin
and must be painted away until it is transparent and gives under pressure, it can
then be removed using picks or rongeurs.
 Use of a large rather than a small burr is often advantageous even in very small
patients. Using a large burr (4-6 mm) it is possible to perforate the lamina quickly
and safely. The burr is set at 90° to the lamina and with circular motions a round
cavity is developed. With experience, perforation of the inner cortex can be appre-
ciated and the periosteum is often left intact. The procedure is safe as the large burr
is unlikely suddenly to penetrate all the bone layers (unlike a small burr).
Altematively, during the modified Funquist dorsal laminectomy, the inner cortex
may be cut through with a small bur and the entire lamina removed in one piece.
Haemostatic agents
Bone wax
This product is used to control bleeding from cut bone surfaces. It is warmed and
 moulded in the hand and then pressed into the cut surface. It is easiest to apply
using fingers but in deep, narrow cavities metal instruments must be used - those
haemostatic chemicals appear not to work any better and can be more difficult to
apply to the bone.
 Bleeding from cancellous bone which arises during drilling can sometimes also
be arrested by continued drilling; the bone dust will be distributed centrifugally
into the bone surface and appears to aid haemostasis.
INSTRUMENTATION
Surgical cellulose and similar material
Surgical cellulose is produced as a fine soft mesh and is impregnated with throm-
bin. It has a very large available surface area which encourages clot formation and,
following application, it expands greatly in volume as it absorbs blood. Surgical
cellulose is used mostly to assist in arresting haemorrhage from venous sinuses or
Occasionally from cut cancellous bone. It is ultimately absorbed but, as always with
large foreign bodies, it is preferable not to leave it in situ if possible.
There are a number of collagen-based haemostatic agents available. These are
 alternatives to surgical cellulose. They have the drawback of being less easy to pack
into confined spaces. Gelatin sponge (Gelfoam) is widely used in the USA for
haemostasis and to fill gaps left in bone following surgical excision. It is difficult
to obtain in the UK and some studies have suggested that it is associated with an
unacceptable amount of postoperative scaring.
Patties
 These are made from compressed rayon, cotton or polyester. They are used to
absorb blood or other fluids and are designed to be used on delicate neural tissues
in place of standard gauze swabs. (They absorb blood rather than promoting
haemostasis.) Before use they are moistened with saline and placed on a flat metal
surface. Putting them on metal helps to prevent them from picking up lint from the
drapes. In use they are laid on the tissues and when they fill up with fluid they can
be sucked dry without having to be removed. They are most useful when operating
inside the dura.
Orthopaedic instrumentation
Much standard orthopaedic instrumentation can be required for neurosurgery.
 A/O (ASIF) instruments and implants are certainly preferred but are not essential
in situations in which plates and screws are used. These implants are used for
vertebral body plating for fracture/luxation fixation and fixation across inter-
vertebral diarthrodial joints; screws can also be used instead of pins for the pins/
methylmethacrylate style of fracture/luxation fixation. Pins and wires are used for
many types of fixation; positive threaded pins have great advantages in that
migration is reduced and positive threading reduces the likelihood of pin breakage
at the threaded/non-threaded interface. A slow-speed powered drill is very useful
to drive pins and drill pilot holes for screw fixation. Goniometers are occasionally
useful; plastic protractors can be used as an altemative but require gas sterilization
(they will melt in an autoclave).
 Polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) bone cement should be available. This versa-
tile material can be used for fixation of many spinal fracture/luxations and also for
 replacement of bone defects. Care must be taken in its use because of the exother-
 heat dissipation. PMMA is a large foreign body and can encourage infection - strict
aseptic technique is mandatory during its use.
X
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Figure 1.4 Distractor instrument useful in fracture/luxation reduction. Variable sized pins can be
used.
External fixator systems are occasionally useful, they can be applied either
internally or externally.
Distraction devices
 In cases of fracture/luxation in the vertebral column it may be useful to use a
 distractor. Distraction can often be achieved manually but it can be difficult to carry
out in a controlled manner. At some time the surgeon will almost certainly need to
transfer the distraction instruments to an assistant, which can result in loss of
alignment and can be associated with additional trauma to the delicate neural
 structures. The problem is solved by use of the distractor (Figure 1.4).
A suitable sized pin is inserted at right angles through the spinous processes
cranial and caudal to the fracture/luxation site (alteinatively they can be driven
 across the vertebral bodies themselves). These transfixion pins do not need to be
close to the injured area, thereby allowing room to work. The distraction instru-
ment is attached to the pins and controlled axial distraction can be applied and
maintained. During distraction the fracture/luxation will often realign satisfac-
 torily or it can be manipulated and temporarily fixed while the definitive fixation
is applied. The distractor can be left in place until completion of reduction and
fixation.
CHAPTER 2
Anatomy
Contents
Introduction 9
Vertebral column 10
Intervertebral joints14
Ligaments of the vertebral column 16
Anatomy of the spinal cord 18
Associated reading23
Introduction
Accurate diagnosis and effective treatment of spinal disease in small animals is
 dependent on an understanding of the anatomy and physiology of both the spinal
cord and the vertebral column. Disease of the vertebral column will frequently
cause abnormalities in function of the neural tissue which lies within it
 To understand the forces acting through the vertebral column, analogies with
engineered constructions have been made. The normal kyphotic curve of the
thoracolumbar region can be compared to a bow, and the abdominal musculature 
(in particular the rectus abdominis) is analogous to the string of the bow (Figure
 2.1). The cervical portion of the vertebral column can be compared to a crane which
supports the weight of the head (Figure 2.2).
The forces applied to each part of the vertebral column can be inferred from this
 structure and suggest concentration of stresses around the thoracolumbar junction
and cranial and caudal parts of the cervical vertebral column. Disruption of the
Figure 2.1 The thoracolumbar vertebral column and rectus abdominis muscles form a structure
analogous to a bow and string.
10
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Figure 2.2 The head and cervical vertebral column form a weight which is counterbalanced by the
epaxial musculature and ligaments. The structure is analogous to a crane.
continuity of the vertebral column at these regions may therefore be inferred to be
more likely, and the clinical consequences of degenerative disc disease are most
commonly observed at these sites. Owing to a differential growth between the
spinal cord and the vertebral column, the spinal cord segments are not enclosed
within the vertebral column segments of the same name. The spinal cord segments
are located somewhat cranialy in relation to their relevant vertebral column
segments. This shift in location is most marked in the caudal lumbar area but
can also be observed to a lesser extent in the caudal cervical region (Figures 2.3
and 2.4). A neurological examination will determine which spinal cord (not verte-
bral) segment is affected; care must therefore be taken to ensure that the relevant
area of the vertebral column is examined radiographically.
Vertebral column
The vertebral column consists of a series of irregular bones, plus ligaments, in
which lies the spinal cord. A 'typical' vertebra consists of: (i) body; (i) vertebral
arch - which can be subdivided into right and left pedicles plus the dorsal lamina;
 and (i) various processes to which attach muscles and components of joints. The
constituent parts are variable in size and shape but within each region of the spine,
the vertebrae show a number of common features. Five regions are recognized in
the canine vertebral column: cervical, thoracic, lumbar, sacral and caudal.
Cervical spine - seven vertebrae
The first two vertebrae are the most atypical in the spine, The first cervical vertebra,
the atlas, is unusual in that it has no vertebral body. During embryonic develop
ment, the body becomes attached to the cranial aspect of the second cervical
vertebra (the axis), to form the dens. The atlas has no dorsal spinous process
either, but the transverse processes are the well-developed wings of the atlas
(Figure 2.5). The axis has a very well-developed dorsal spinous process, the most
cranial aspect of which, in life, overhangs the arch of the atlas (Figure 2.6). The dens
ANATOMY
11
Spinal cord
Spinal cord
Vertebral
segment
Vertebral
segment
number
number
number
Cervica
vertebrae
vertebrae
Figure 2.3Relationship of spinal cordwith
cervical vertebrae. Note that there are eight
Figure 2.4 Relationship of spinal cord and
spinal cord segments but only seven vertebrae.
nerve roots with lumbar vertebrae.
of the axis lies in the ventral part of the vertebral canal of the atlas and is
maintained in this position by the transverse atlantal ligament and the apical
ligaments. Articulation of the atlas with the occipital region of the skull allows
movement in the sagittal plane; articulation of the atlas with the axis allows
 rotatory movement about the central axis of the vertebral column.
 The remaining cervical vertebrae possess small spinous processes, which increase
asn are 9 uo sssad asaasu aien a o uo azis ia 
landmarks during ventral surgical approaches to the cervical spine. All cervical
Transverse
Vertebral
foramen
canal
articulatjon
with axis
Figure 2.5 Atlas, caudoventral aspect.
12
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Spinous process
Surface for articulation
with atlas
Figure 2.6 Axis, lateral aspect.
Cranial articula
Figure 2.7 C5, cranial aspect.
vertebrae except C7 possess transverse foramina, through which the vertebral
artery courses. This lies at the lateral aspect of the margins of the body, close to
the base of the transverse processes (Figure 2.7). The cervical vertebral canal is more
 capacious in relation to the spinal cord than that of other segments of the spine.
The cranial articular facets of the cervical vertebrae face almost directly ventrally
on the dorsolateral margins of the vertebral canal and the caudal articular facets
face dorsally. This allows movement between vertebrae both laterally and to a
lesser extent dorsoventrally, while rotatory movement is very limited. The greatest
movement in the cervical spine takes place in the cranial part of this segment.
Thoracic spine - 13 vertebrae
Typical features of thoracic vertebrae are the well-developed spinous processes,
 small transverse processes and articulation with the ribs. The spinous process is
largest on T1 and then becomes progressively smaller on the remaining thoracic
vertebrae. The first 10 thoracic vertebrae possess caudally directed spinous pro-
cesses but on Tl1 the spinous process is relatively small and projects vertically from
the body. This is known as the anticlinal vertebrae and can be a useful landmark on
thoracolumbar radiographs. The spinous processes on the remaining thoracic
vertebrae have a slight cranial inclination (Figure 2.8).
The bodies of the thoracic vertebrae are short. Articulation with the rib takes
place at the cranial aspect of the vertebra and with the costal fovea of the short
transverse process. The articulation of the rib on each vertebrae is located further
ANATOMY
13
foramen
forrib
articulation
ervertebral
onT13
disc space
Figure 2.8 Articulation of T13 with L1, lateral view (with ribs removed).
caudally on the more caudal thoracic vertebrae. The articular facets on the first 10
thoracic vertebrae are orientated similarly to those of the cervical vertebrae,
whereas those of T1l, 12 and 13 form joints parallel to the sagittal plane. Move-
ment of the spine in the cranial thoracic region is rather limited, partly because of
the large muscle masses around the vertebrae plus the ligaments and musculature
associated with the ribs. In the caudal thoracic region, greater movement between
vertebrae is permitted. Movement in the caudal thoracic spine is limited almost
exclusively to flexion and extension within the sagittal plane; a lesser degree of
movement is permitted in the lateral plane.
Lumbar spine - seven vertebrae
The vertebral bodies in this area are long and wide, particularly in the cat. There is a
 general increase in size of the lumbar vertebrae progressing caudally; however, L7
vertebra is somewhat smaller than L6 and the spinous process is also shorter. This
feature can be of use in determining the site of needle introduction for lumbar
myelography. The transverse processes are well developed and directed cranioven-
trally; the spinous processes are directed cranially. Articular facets are orientated
a po siy rnu a rm un r pn a  ao o rs
vertebra lateral to the caudal facets of that preceding it (Figures 2.9 and 2.10).
Articular
process
Accessory
process
Cranial
Caudal
Transverse
process
Figure 2.9 L1, lateral view.
14
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Articular
articula
orocess
vertebra
canai
Figure 2.10 L1, cranial view.
 Movement in the lumbar spine is limited almost exclusively to flexion and exten-
 sion within the sagittal plane but the area is relatively mobile, especially in the more
cranial part.
Sacrum - three vertebrae
 The sacral vertebrae are fused in the adult dog to form the sacrum which articulates
laterally with the ilia. The sacroiliac articulation is a cartilaginous joint allowing
little movement. The three parts of the sacrum are apparent, both grossly and
radiographically. There are three small spinous processes, and two pairs of dorsal
third pair of sacral nerves leaves the vertebral canal between the sacrum and the
first caudal vertebra.
 The bodies of the caudal vertebrae are elongated and present throughout the length
of this segment of the vertebral column. Ventral to the body of the first few
runs. Dorsally, there is a neural arch that contains the caudal nerves. Progressing
caudally, the caudal vertebrae gradually lose the typical features of vertebrae, the
last few being almost featureless cylinders of bone.
Intervertebral joints
Intervertebral discs (IVD)
 These consist of two main portions, an inner nucleus pulposus and an outer anulus
fibrosus (Figure 2.11). The two associated cartilaginous end plates which are
adherent to the neighbouring vertebral bodies are often also included in descrip.
tions of the structure of the IVD. The intervertebral discs lie between adjacent
vertebral bodies and conform to their shape. There is an intervertebral disc at
each intervertebral space, except between the atlas and the axis, and between the
ANATOMY
15
fused vertebrae of the sacrum. There is some variability in the width of the discs;
the largest are in the caudal cervical and caudal lumbar regions.
The outer anulus fibrosus is a fibrocartilaginous tissue consisting of concentric
lamellae of collagenous fibres. Bundles of fibres run obliquely between adjacent
vertebrae crossing each other at angles of 100-120°. The fibres of the anulus are well
attached at their periphery. The inner layers attach to the cartilagirous endplates,
whereas the outer layers attach to the vertebral endplates. the inner layer of the
anulus is more cartilaginous and less fibrous than the outer layers.
The inner portion of the intervertebral disc, the nucleus pulposus, is a semifluid
 gelatinous tissue and is contiguous with the central portion of the cartilaginous
endplates. The nucleus is oval-shaped and eccentrically placed between the middle
and dorsal one-third of the disc. The eccentric position of the nucleus is important,
as it is presumed to be the reason for the greater observed incidence of dorsally
directed disc extrusions *versus those directed ventrally. The dorsally directed
extrusions and protrusions are those responsible for the signs of back pain, ataxia
amounts of glycoprotein and proteoglycans, the exact amount being dependent on
the age and breed of dog. These constituents confer gel-like properties to the
nucleous pulposus and are responsible for the non-compressible nature of the
IVD in a healthy animal. The degenerative processes occurring in intervertebral
discs will be considered elsewhere.
The IVD in the adult is avascular Consequently, its nutrition is dependent on 
passive diffusion pathways. There are two nearby sources of metabolites for the
IVD, the peripheral vascular plexus of the anulus and the vessels adjacent to the
hyaline cartilage of the bone/disc interface. The 'pumping' action of normal
vertebral movement may assist in the delivery of large molecules to the central
portions of the disc. The central disc tissues have low oxygen tensions and high
 concentrations of lactic acid, suggesting that respiration is primarily anaerobic.
 Nerve supply to the IVD is limited to sparse fibres detectable in the outer layers
of the anulus fibrosus, the nucleus being devoid of nerve supply. The dorsal
longitudinal ligament of the dog has been found to be profusely supplied with
nerve fibres and is in intimate contact with the dorsal part of the anulus fibrosus
  dn  ho srau res  p si as au sn
segments either cranially or caudally. This diffuse innervation could account for
the poor localization of back pain noted in both animals and people. Stimulation of
Anulusfibrosus
Nucleus-
pulposus
Figure 2.11 Transverse section of intervertebral disc. Note concentric orientation of fibres of anulus
fibrosus and eccentric position of nucleus,
16
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
nerves in the outer layers of the anulus fibrosus and dorsal longitudinal ligament
could be responsible for the phenomenon of 'discogenic pain' which sometimes
appears to occur in dogs.
Intervertebral synovialjoints
 In addition to the IVD, there are synovial joints between neighbouring vertebrae,
except for the fused bones of the sacrum. The atlanto-occipital and atlanto-axial
joints are somewhat different from those between other vertebrae. The synovial
 joints of the remaining vertebrae lie between the facets. These synovial joints are
 most voluminous between those vertebrae where the most movement is permitted
- the cervical region.
ATLANTO-OCCIPITAL JOINT
 The atlanto-occipital articulation is formed between the occipital condyles and the
cranial articular foveae of the atlas. It is a synovial joint. A lateral atlanto-occipital
ligament runs from each lateral aspect of the dorsal arch of the atlas to the jugular
process of the occipital bone.
ATLANTO-AXIAL JOINT
The atlantoaxial articulation is supported by several ligaments.
(1) The alar ligaments consist of three parts, all originating from the dens. Two
lateral parts run craniolaterally to attach to the medial aspect of the caudal parts
 of the occipital condyles; the middle portion runs directly cranially to attach to
the intercondyloid incisure on the caudal aspect of the ventral skull
 p ais a  q ns e si se i  s sa  (
ventral arch of the atlas to the other. It runs dorsal to the dens thereby main-
taining its position relative to the atlas
(3) The dorsal atlanto axial ligament runs between the dorsal arch of the atlas and
the neural arch of the axis.
There is a synovial joint between the cranial articular facets of the axis and the
caudal articular foveae of the atlas. The joint capsule extends to include both sides
 of this articulation and extends dorsally to incorporate the dorsal atlanto-axial
ligament.
Ligaments of the vertebral column
There are both long and short ligaments of the vertebral column. Long ligaments
run along or between a series of vertebrae, whereas short ligaments run between
adjacent vertebrae only.
ANATOMY
17
Long ligaments
NUCHAL LIGAMENT
This ligament runs between the caudal part of the spinous process of the axis to the
aed si pue sanqg ssea jo pasodoo s h eqaaa jieon isg au jo d iesiop
yellow in appearance. This ligament is probably of little functional importance in
the dog and cat but is a useful landmark during surgery. A portion of the nuchal
ligament can be used in one surgical technique for stabilization of atlanto-axial
subluxation.
SUPRASPINOUS LIGAMENT
This ligament runs along the dorsal tips of all vertebrae caudal to T1. It is relatively
larger in the thoracic region, and may be difficult to identify in other regions of the
spine.
DORSAL LONGTTUDINAL LIGAMENT
 This ligament lies on the floor of the vertebral canal from the dens to the caudal end
of the vertebral canal. It is firmly attached to both the vertebral bodies and to the
dorsal anulus of each intervertebral disc. The dorsal longitudinal ligament is widest 
over the intervertebral discs and narrowest in the middle of each vertebral body.
As uuu u ssisse ym pue heus uedu pue aare e si s
(Figure 2.12). It is also important surgically as an obstacle to be overcome during
ventral approaches to decompress the spinal cord.
81 + 
venous sinuses
Dorsal
kongitudinal
ligarment
Figure 2.12 Dorsal view of dorsal longitudinal ligament and venous sinuses. Note divergence of
Tenous sinuses as they pass over the disc.
18HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
VENTRAL LONGITUDINAL LIGAMENT
This attaches along the ventral aspect of the vertebral bodies along the midline. It
runs from the axis to the sacrum and is far less strong than the dorsal longitudinal
ligament. It may be difficult to identify in some regions of the spine.
Short ligaments
INTERSPINOUS LIGAMENTS
o e  sa a ssad ss e o s s
angles relative to these processes. The interspinous ligaments are most obvious in
         s
FLAVAL LIGAMENTS
   s h aq   inq aa  s o s
o   a a s      
the facet joints. The flaval ligaments can be a source of spinal cord or nerve root
compression in some disorders.
INTERCAPITAL LIGAMENTS
This ligament runs between the heads of the ribs articulating with one thoracic
vertebra. It runs dorsal to the dorsal anulus fibrosus of the intervertebral disc but
ventral to the dorsal longitudinal ligament. There is no intercapital ligament
between the first pair of ribs or between the last two pairs of ribs; the intercapital
ligament between the eleventh pair of ribs is considerably smaller than the others.
This ligament is thought to be important in preventing disc extrusion in the T2-T10
region of the spine.
Anatomy of the spinal cord
The spinal cord is the nerve tissue that extends from the caudal part of the brain to
its termination, as the conus medullaris, in the caudal lumbar region. There is a
canal running through the centre of the spinal cord, which contains cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) and is known as the central canal. It is continuous with the ventricular
system of the brain.
 A pair of spinal nerves emerge between each pair of adjacent vertebrae. The first
pair of cervical nerves emerges between the atlas and occipital bone; thus there are
eight pairs of cervical rerves, then 13 thoracic, seven lumbar and three sacral. The
spinal cord is enveloped in three membranes, termed meninges: the pia mater,
arachnoid mater and the dura mater. The innermost is the pia mater which is
intimately associated with the spinal cord parenchyma. A double leaf of the pia
mater extends dorsally from the ventral midline and invests the ventral spinal
of the pia is the delicate arachnoid mater; the two membranes are associated closely
ANATOMY
19
enough to be frequently referred to together as the pia-arachnoid. There is a space
 on the outer aspect of the arachnoid, which also contains CSF, and is referred to as
the subarachnoid space. Many fine thread-like extensions of the arachnoid project
across this space to contact the outermost membrane, the dura mater. The sub-
contrast agents during myelography. The dura mater is a tough and inelastic
membrane which functions to protect the spinal cord. The spinal cord is suspended
within the dura mater by the denticulate ligaments, which attach to the inner aspect
of the dura and to the pia mater.
 The spinal nerve roots which enter and leave the spinal cord parenchyma are
invested in layers of the meninges. The distribution of dura mater covering is
variable at different sites within the vertebral column. For the cervical nerve roots
C1 to C6, both the dorsal and ventral roots are invested in dura together; elsewhere
in the spine there is a separate covering for each of the two root divisions.
the central grey matter and the more peripheral white matter. The grey matter is
more or less butterfly-shaped at most levels. It contains the cell bodies of the spinal 
 cord neurones, plus a quantity of supporting cells (glia) and connecting nerve
fibres. The white matter contains the axons which make connections with more
 p a a   sau  yo sd  a  
which produce myelin and support and maintain the axons themselves. Groups of
axons with similar cornections (and therefore subserving similar functions) are
grouped together to form tracts, which are reasonably wel defined. The location
 of the various spinal cord tracts running to and from the brain are known with
reasonable accuracy in the dog and cat (Figure 2.13).
The spinal cord is not of uniform diameter. There are areas where it widens; these
are in the caudal cervical/cranial thoracic region and in the lumbar region and are
referred to as the cervical and lumbar intumescences, respectively. At these regions
there are a greater number of cell bodies, which supply the thoracic and pelvic
limbs, respectively, and therefore the cord diameter is increased. The mid-thoracic/
cranial lumbar region of the spinal cord is comparatively narrow in diameter.
Knowledge of the normal appearance of the cord at these sites is particularly
important when evaluating myelograms.
 The spinal cord does not extend throughout the length of the vertebral column. In
dogs, the cord ends at approximately the caudal end of L5, although the exact site is
Gracile + cuneate
tracts
Grey matter
Dorsal +
-Rubrospinal+
ventral
corticospinal
pinocerebell
tracts
tracts
Vestibulospinal -
Ventral
reticulospinal tracts
spinothalamic tract
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.13 Diagram of transverse sections of spinal cord to show position of major ascending (a)
and descending (b) tracts.
20
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
variable with the size and breed. In smaller dogs the cord extends further caudally
in relation to the vertebral column. In cats, the cord ends at about the caudal end of
L6. The termination of the spinal cord is termed the conus medullaris.
Spinal nerves destined to leave the vertebral canal at sites more distal to this end
point continue to run caudally for some distance in the vertebral canal. They form a
collection of nerves running almost parallel to each other, and are referred to as the
cauda equina.
Cross-sectional anatomy of the spinal cord
Ventrally, the centrally located reflection of the pia mater containing the ventral
spinal artery divides the ventral white matter into two halves. The exiting ventral
roots and the pathway for the dorsal roots serve to subdivide further the white
matter into other less well-defined fasciculi: i.e. the dorsal and lateral fasciculi
 Both ascending (i.e. transmitting impulses cranially) and descending (i.e. trans-
mitting impulses caudally) tracts are mixed together in most fasciculi but the dorsal
fasciculi contain only ascending fibres (in the dog and cat). Ascending pathways
contain sensory fibres transmitting the modalities of pain, temperature sensation
 and proprioception (ie. position sense) to the medulla, thalamus, cerebellum and
cerebral cortices. Descending pathways contain fibres transmitting impulses caud-
ally from cranial structures (the upper motor neurone, UMN) to influence the lower
motor neurones (LMN) in the ventral horn, usually via interneurones.
 Important sensory pathways include:
(1) The gracile and cuneate tracts in the dorsal columns which carry proprioceptive
information (plus fine touch and vibratory sensation) first to centres in the
 medulla (the gracile and cuneate nuclei) from where it is then relayed to the
thalamus and cerebral cortices. This infoimation forms the basis for 'conscious
 proprioception', which is frequently tested during neurological examination.
The nerve fibres are large and heavily myelinated. This feature renders them
 more sensitive to insult; in particular they are sensitive to the effects of com-
 pression. Deficits in conscious proprioception are therefore commonly the first
 abnormalities to be observed in animals with spinal cord compression.
  n s   d  ()
the state of contraction of the muscles (i.e. information from the Golgi tendon
organs and the muscle spindles). This information is transmitted to the cere-
bellum for use in integrating and finely regulating the motor responses of the
animal. Lesions in this pathway cause abnormalities to be observed in postural
reactions during the neurological examination.
(3) The spinothalamic tract which carries the modality of deep pain (i.e. aching
pain). This pathway contains lightly or nonmyelinated fibres and contains
 many synapses. The pathway is distributed on both sides of the cord and a
stimulus to one side of the body will elicit a response in the spinothalamic tract
bilaterally. Because of these anatomical features and the lesser degree of
myelination of its constituent fibres, this pathway is very difficult to disrupt
is iea s ssa ed dap yo ss  s s r adn
as it must result from severe disorders which cause more or less complete
functional transection of the cord.
ANATOMY21
Descending pathways of importance include:
a u d  n i  s m  sn a ()
domestic species. Constituent fibres originate from the red nucleus in the
 midbrain and descend after immediate decussation. The locomotor patterns
of walking and rurning are, in part at least, controlled from this site. The red
nucleus itself is subject to influence from the cerebral cortex and the cerebellum.
 The rubrospinal tract is influential in increasing flexor tone.
(2) The vestibulospinal tract originates from the medulla and contains axons which
 have the effect of stimulation of the lower motor neurones to increase extensor
tone on the ipsilateral side and increase flexor tone on the contralateral side.
(3) The reticulospinal tract originates in the pons and is influential in increasing
extensor tone.
(4) The corticospinal tract originates in the motor cortex of the cerebral hemi-
spheres and descends to influence the ventral horn cell (alpha motoneurone)
of the spinal cord via an interneurone. The important difference from human
spinal cord anatomy is that the corticospinal axons do not act directly on the
ventral horn cells but act via an intermediary. In humans, the interruption of the
corticospinal tract, as occurs in strokes, is very serious, with loss of much motor
power and control. In dogs and cats the loss of control is rather transient and
animals can cope well with this interruption.
Overall, there is a balance between the influences increasing the extensor muscle
tone (i.e. antigravity muscles) and those increasing the flexor tone (i.e. encouraging
locomotor activity). This balance is responsible for the tone of the muscles observed
 during neurological examination. Increase or decrease in these influences is able to
 a p a e a  g sxa  d a as
Blood supply to the spinal cord
 d na g s pao si po ss a n ans p
adjacent vertebrae a radicular artery enters the vertebral canal alongside the exiting
spinal nerve. Radicular arteries are derived from the aorta or, in the cervical region,
from the vertebral artery. There are both dorsal and ventral radicular arteries. In the
cervical region the dorsal vessels are branches of the ventral radicular arteries. The
radicular arteries form one ventral and two dorsal spinal arteries which run
uninterrupted on the surface of the cord. The ventral spinal artery lies in the
ventral median fissure and each dorsal spinal artery lies within a dorsolateral
sulcus. There are contributions to the dorsal and ventral spinal arteries at most
interspaces, although the number is variable at different levels of the cord; the
highest proportion of contributions is present in the cervical region and the least in
the thoracic region. A pial arterial plexus is formed by anastamosis of branches of
the dorsal and ventral spinal arteries. The cord parenchyma is supplied by blood
 from both sources, the central one-third by the ventral spinal artery, the outer half
by the pial plexus and the remainder by a combination of both (Figure 2.14). The
capillary network is considerably more dense in the grey than in the white matter.
Flow of blood to the spinal cord is responsive to variations in arterial pCO2 and can
be maintained at a constant level over a wide range of systemic profusion
22
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Dorsolateral
rtery
Radicular
artery
Ventral spina)
artery
Figure 2.14 Diagrammatic representation of blood supply to spinal cord. Shaded area is supplied by
ventral spinal artery, clear area is supplied by dorsolateral arteries and pial plexus.
Venous drainage of the cord is via veins in the dorsal and ventral median fissures
and veins in the dorsolateral and ventrolateral sulci into the radicular veins and
eventually into the epidural venous sinuses. The venous sinuses lie on the lateral
part of the floor of the vertebral canal and have no valves, enabling blood within
them to flow both cranially and caudally. There are numerous connections between
the right and left vessels and they also receive blood from the vertebral bodies. The
paired venous sinuses deviate from each other over the intervertebral discs and
approach each other in the centre of the vertebral bodies. They drain into the extra-
vertebral circulation via intervertebral veins. The venous sinuses are very impor-
tant structures in surgery of the vertebral column, owing to the profuse and
hazardous haemorrhage which may result should they be damaged. The rate of
blood flow within the venous sinuses is largely dependent on obstructions to flow
sinuses will be greater if there is compression of the abdomen, which slows the
 passage of blood to the caudal vena cava.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
The spinal cord is surrounded by the CSF, which is contained in the subarachnoid
space; there is also CSF within the central canal. The CSF is produced in the choroid
plexuses in the brain and tends to flow caudally from the head towards the tail.
Movement of the CSF is encouraged by the pulsation of blood within the arteries of
the spinal cord. CSF leaks out at the cuffs where the nerve roots are surrounded by
the dura and is reabsorbed into the circulation. CSF is also reabsorbed by the
arachnoid villi in the cerebral veins or venous sinuses of the head. The central
canal of the spinal cord is continuous with the ventricular system of the brain and is
lined with the same type of ependymal cells. CSF reaches the subarachnoid space of
the spinal cord by flowing through the lateral apertures of the fourth ventricle.
 The fluid-filled subarachnoid space is commonly used for radiographic studies of
the spinal cord following its opacification with contrast agents. Contrast material is
not normally introduced into the central canal, although this can occasionally be
done in order to demonstrate abnormalities such as syringomyelia.
ANATOMY
23
Associated reading
Braund K.G. (1993) Intervertebral disc disease. In: Bojrab M.J. (ed.) Disease Mechan-
isms in Small Animal Surgery, 2nd edn. Philadelphia, Lea and Febiger, p. 960.
Burke M.J., Banks W.J. (1986) Histochemical study of the anulus fib1osus in normal
canine caudal cervical intervertebral discs. Res. Vet. Sci. 40, 18.
 pro pes a go man pd y (n) d's  "f ang
Prog. Vet. Neurol. 1, 358.
Caulkins S.E., Purinton P.I., Oliver J.E. (1989) Arterial supply to the spinal cord of
the dog. Am. J. Vet. Res. 50, 425.
Crock H.V. (1960) The arterial supply and venous drainage of the vertebral column
of the dog. J. Anat. 94, 88.
Evans H.E., Christensen G.C. (1979) The skeleton. In: Evans H.E., Christensen G.C.
(eds), Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 2nd edn. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders, p. 107.
Fletcher T.F. (1979) Spinal cord and meninges. In: Evans H.E., Christensen G.C.
(eds) Miller's Anatomy of the Dog. 2nd edn. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders, p. 935.
Forsythe W.B., Ghoshal N.G. (1984) Innervation of the canine thoracolumbar
vertebral column. Anat. Rec. 208, 57.
Hansen H.J. (1952) A pathologic-anatomical study on disc degeneration in dog.
Acta Ortho. Scand. Suppl. XI.
CHAPTER 3
Investigation of
Spinal Disease
Contents
introduction
24
History  24
Physical examination  26
Neurological examination 27
Localization of lesions  41
Associated reading43
Introduction
The investigation of an animal with a suspected spinal lesion can be divided into
several parts, which are carried out sequentially, prior to carrying out a plan of
treatment. In common with investigation of disease elsewhere in the body, the
SOAP format of case recording can be a very useful means of ensuring that
diagnostic efforts proceed logically: S, subjective information (i.e. the history
obtained from the owner); O, objective findings of the veterinarian; A, assess-
ment, i.e. possible diagnoses/differential diagnosis; P, plan of action to confirm
 diagnosis and /or initiate treatment.
 The initial part of the investigation for animals with suspected spinal lesions
 includes the following means of diagnosis: history, physical examination, neuro-
logical examination, and ancillary aids (see Chapter 4).
History
 Aq pa sus Aue  oon ue sns A rs pnp 
animal and therefore care should be taken with this part of the investigation.
Signalment-age, breed, sex
业
 Rapidity of onset and duration of symptoms
Is / was the condition progressive?
 Are/ were the symptoms predominantly unilateral?
Has there been any response to previous treatment?
$
 Is there a history of intercurrent or recent other disease?
Family history of any particular disease?
●
 Has the animal been treated at any time for neoplastic disease?
INVESTIGATION OF SPINAL DISEASE
25
Signalment
 Many neurological diseases are associated with specific breed, age or sex of the
patient. This information can be used to help increase the ‘index of suspicion' for
  s o  on dr n   s 
collect direction. However, care must be taken not to rely too heavily on this
type of information, as there may be a possibility of overlooking a more unusual
 or unexpected diagnosis. Signalment information, therefore, should not be used as
a short cut in the logical progression from history-taking to establishment of the
diagnosis.
Rapidity of onset of symptoms
Again, this information can be invaluable as a means of establishing a likely
 differential diagnosis list. The rapidity of onset can be used as a means of ruling
out certain aetiologies, for instance, some conditions typically present peracutely.
such as fibrocartilaginous embolization. An abnormality with insidious onset can
therefore not be a result of this aetiology. However, not all conditions will be
associated with such clear-cut temporal onset and some disorders have a very
variable speed of onset of symptoms, such as neoplasia.
Progression of symptoms
Whether the symptoms are progressive must be established prior to further work
        e 's   
would be most appropriate will be based on this information. Many spinal
 disorders are self limiting (as they are caused by disc extrusions) and so the nature
of the individual's symptoms is the most important factor in determining the
appropriate therapy.
Lateralization
This question is useful to pose in order to correlate findings on radiography, in
particular myelography, with the clinical findings. Often the owner will notice that
one or more limbs were affected before the others, even in animals in which clinical
signs appear to be symmetrical at the time of neurological examination.
Response to previous treatment
s go ana od   o s e se aed pu si sn
sl jo ad au on se a e aai osie Aeu pe (adann iipau on pasodo se)
corticosteroids.
Intercurrent/recent disease
As systemic disease can be a cause for lesions of the spinal cord or vertebral
column, questioning of the owner regarding the animal's recent health can help
26HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
in identifying symptoms that may be related. Two main categories of such disease
and some carcinomas) and systemic infectious or inflammatory disease (especially
canine distemper). Furthermore, it is important to identify presence of unrelated
systemic disease, such as chronic renal failure, which would contraindicate surgery.
Physical examination
A complete physical examination should, of course, be performed on all animals.
Neurological deficits can often be the result of disease of one of the other body
systems. Particular items of interest when investigating for possible spinal disease
include: attitude, temperature, cardiovascular system, orthopaedic disorders,
urinary tract and endocrine system.
Attitude
The general attitude of the animal is significant because some very depressed
animals which have non-neurological primary disease will exhibit neurological
deficits, e.g. those which have profound hypovolaemia due to shock or haemor-
rhage. Pain responses may be altered in these cases. Animals exhibiting changed
be suffering from a primary brain disease.
Temperature
Change in the animal's body temperature is occasionally significant, such as
pyrexia associated with infection, or hypothermia as one sign associated with
ascending myelomalacia
Cardiovascular disease
 () s go a e g   s () s
symptoms associated with CV disease may mimic those of primary neurological
disease, e.g. cardiomyopathy may cause apparent weakness; (i) CV disease may
a e  e po asan e se sad aq A ass A () isi
disease may be a relative or absolute contraindication to spinal surgery.
Musculoskeletal system
animals exhibiting pelvic limb weakness or pain. Several orthopaedic conditions
    s s     
anterior cruciate ligaments, and hip dysplasia/coxofemoral degenerative joint
 o e a o  s r r m s 'n
INVESTIGATION OF SPINAL DISEASE
27
suffering from a spinal disorder. Some neurological diseases will also mimic
orthopaedic conditions, notably brachial plexus disorders.
Lrinary tract
 Examination of the urinary system may help in identifying abnormalities, such as
altered continence, which may help in identification of the type and site of spinal
lesion. Urinary tract infection is a common sequela to incontinence arising from
spinal injury and must be identified so as to allow appropriate management.
Endocrine system
Abnormal endocrine function can lead to secondary disorders of the nervous
system. This usually takes the form of deficits in the function of lower motor
neurones or muscle, often in association with diabetes mellitus, insulin-secreting
 tumours or hyperadrenocorticism. The lesions of the spine that may be most likely
to be confused with such diseases would be those in which lower motor neurone
deficits are apparent, such as lumbosacral disorders.
Neurological examination
The neurological examination is the most important part of the assessment of an
animal thought to be suffering from a spinal disorder. The neurological examina-
tion can determine whether or not neurological disease is present (unless there is an
episodic problem), locate lesions, and in some cases can provide invaluable prog-
nostic information. The precision in localization can be very variable, depending on
the nature of the disease process; for example, a diffuse, mild, non-painful lesion of
the T3-L3 segment of the spinal cord can be only poorly localized but a painful,
severe lesion affecting lower motor neurone pathways to part of a limb can be very
precisely localized. Other investigations may be required to determine the nature of
the disease process but the type of further investigation is often dictated by the
findings on neurological examination.
 Although this book is concermed with spinal disorders, it is important that the
whole nervous system is evaluated, as certain diseases can cause multifocal lesions,
some of which will also involve cranial structures.
 The neurological examination is aimed initially at localizing a lesion to one or
more of the following broad categories: (i) head', (i) C1-C5,(ii) C6-T2, (iv) 3-L3,
(v) L4 caudal, (vi) peripheral nerve, neuromuscular junction or muscle. (NB, The 
 spinal locations refer to spinal cord, not vertebral, segments (Figure 3.1).
 A lesion is categorized into one or more of these locations by examination of both
S  r  's   r ps , 
The neurological examination should be carried out in the same sequence on each
patient. This will enable the examination to be carried out more quickly and with
fewer omissions. Furthermore, a routine sequence of examination will ensure
familiarity with the responses of normal animals at each stage.
28
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Brain
CI-C5 C6-T2
T3-L3
L3-$3 plus caudal
Figure 3.1 Diagrammatic representation of CNS.
Gait
The first part of neurological assessment consists of observing the animal as it
walks, or attempts to, and its response to its surroundings. This is best carried
 Out in a large space and preferably on a non-slip surface. Certain animals, such as
those suspected of suffering fracture or luxation of the vertebral column, should not
be allowed to attempt to walk because of the risk of incurring further injury to the
spinal cord. Abnormalities in the gait can be tentatively designated orthopaedic or
neurological in origin.
Musclemassandtone
Muscle tone can be conveniently assessed while the animal is in lateral recumbency
for testing of the myotatic reflexes and is often carried out before those tests. The
temperament and anxiety level of the animal can render evaluation of muscle tone
difficult. Muscle tone is usually depressed by lesions of the reflex arcs but may be
increased by lesions of the higher centres or their pathways (upper motor neurone
lesion). Muscle mass can be assessed subjectively by palpation, particularly by
 comparing one side of the animal with the other. It can be helpful to assess each
limb by palpation with both left and right hands in order to detect subtle changes.
 Experience of normal muscle mass in animals of different ages and breeds is
invaluable.
Spinal reflexes
These reflexes are tested with the animal in lateral recumbency. It is important to
 relate the character of the responses to the temperament and anxiety level of each
individual animal. Two types of spinal reflex are tested: the myotatic (stretch)
Ieflexes and the withdrawal reflexes.
MYOTATIC REFLEXES
 These are assessed by sharply tapping the muscle or its tendon with a patellar
hammer (plexor) or altermative implement and observing the reflex contraction of
that muscle. The leg to be tested is usually the upper leg (i.e. away from the table)
 xan sn a sd yoq u q  i on aa jo aq u hn na
 monosynaptic and dependent on intact sensory mechanisms (muscle spindles),
muscle function. The presence of an intact reflex indicates that the entire arc is
INVESTIGATIONOFSPINALDISEASE
29
Figure 3.2 Testing the patellar reflex using a patellar hammer.
functional but gives little indication of the state of pathways to and from the higher
centres (Figures 3.2 and 3.3).
Myotatic reflexes can be graded as absent, reduced, normal, hyperactive, or
These are often scored from 0 to 4. An increased response is often observed if there
is a lesion cranial to the arc under assessment (upper motor neurone lesion) and
Dorsalrootganglion
(cellbodyof
afferent fibre)
Motan
rone(in
ventralhornof
spinal cord)
Figure 3.3 Diagram of quadriceps tendon reflex. Sensory impulses are conveyed through afferent
fibres enteringvia thedorsalroot;motor impulses are corveyed through the efferentfibres leavingvia
thewentralroot.
30
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SLIRGERY
Table 3.1 Commonly assessed muscles and thei1 nerves
Muscle
Nerve
Cord segment*
Quadriceps (patellar reflex)
Femoral
L4-L6
Cranial tibial
Peroneal
L6-7
Gastrocnemius
Tibial
L7-S1
Triceps
Radial
C7-r1
Extensor carpi radialis
Radial
C7-T1
Biceps
Musculocutaneous
C6-8
* There is some variation in contribution by various nerve roots to the brachial and lumbosacral
plexuses and their respective peripheral nerves between individual animals.
also occasionally if there is weakness in opposing muscle groups - this is most
commonly observed in animals with weakness in the hamstring muscles as a
active patellar reflexes. A decreased response indicates a lesion in part of the arc
under assessment (this part carnot usually be determined by physical examination
alone).
 Many myotatic reflexes are available for examination in the small animal patient.
However, the patellar reflex is the only one that can be obtained consistently in all
animals and its absence is always abnormal. Absence of other myotatic reflexes
may be suggestive of a reflex arc disorder, especially when the reflex differs from
that on the contralateral limb, but cannot be regarded as definitely abnormal.
The commonly assessed muscles and their respective nerves are shown in Table 3.1.
Flexor reflexes
These reflexes are also 'local' but because they involve activation of several muscles
are dependent on the integrity of a slightly larger area of the spinal cord. The
 receptor organs in this reflex are mainly free nerve endings in the skin which are
responsive to various stimuli such as pressure, heat and cold. The flexor reflex is
assessed in each limb in turn by pinching the skin of the foot with fingers or
forceps; the ability of the animal to withdraw the foot from the stimulus is
evaluated. It is important to assess the strength and degree of flexion at each joint
in the leg, i.e. the hip, stifle and hock in the pelvic limb and the shoulder, elbow and
carpus in the thoracic limb. At the same time as this reflex is examined the
conscious response to pain and the presence or absence of the crossed extensor
reflex (see below) can be evaluated.
The flexor reflex in the pelvic limb allows evaluation of the sciatic nerve and
relevant spinal cord segments; that in the thoracic limb allows evaluation of spinal
cord segments C6-T2 and the nerves originating there.
ANAL REFLEX
  n   i rad  go s  p  x s
digital pressure on the bulb of the penis or vulva. The normal response is
 contraction of the anal sphincter muscle and flexion of the tail. The S1-S3 spinal
INVESTIGATION OFSPINALDISEASE
31
cord and associated nerve roots and nerve (pudendal) are involved in this reflex.
Evaluation of the tone of the muscle of the anal sphincter (by rectal palpation) can
aid in recognition of subtle changes.
Postural reactions
Postural reactions are cornplex responses that maintain the animal in a normal
upright position. Abnormalities in these tests may result from lesions locally' (i.e.
within the reflex arcs at that level - the lower motor neurone lesion), or lesions in
the ascending or descending pathways running between the spinal neurones and
centres within the brain (upper motor neurone lesion).
Several methods are used in assessment of postural reactions; it is preferable to
perform these tests on a non-slip surface, especially when dealing with large-breed
dogs.
CONSCIOUS PROPRIOCEPTIVE POSITIONING REACTIONS
The term ‘conscious' is used because the pathways involved in this response
eventually reach the sensory cortex of the contralateral cerebrum.
 One method of testing proprioceptive (position sense) function is simply to turn
the toes of the foot over onto their dorsal surfaces. A normal anirmal will react by
turming the paw immediately to take weight in a normal position.Any delay in this
response can be considered abnormal (Figure 3.4).(This response could arguably be
due to tactile stimulation of the paw dorsum rather than true proprioceptive
information.)
A second method to test proprioceptive function is to place the foot onto a piece
Of paper or card and slide it slowly laterally Normal animals will tolerate only very
Figure3.4Dog exhibitingknuckling'of the digits-anabnormal response owing to depressionof
conscious proprioception.
HANDBOOKOFSMALLANIMALSPINALSURGERY
sddsu
slight abduction of the limb before lifting and replacing the foot in a normal
position (Figure 3.5).
In larger dogs, the 'sway response' can also be useful. The examiner attempts to
push the dog to one side and, as the animal resists, the sidewards pressure is
suddenly released. The normal individual will quickly replace the feet into posi-
tions appropriate for the animal to remain standing and abnormal animals will
sway or stumble to the side.
Nerve fibres invoived in these responses include the large-diameter heavily
myelinated fibres of the dorsal and dorsolateral columns which are very sensitive
to compressive (and some other) injuries.Consequently, abnormalities of conscious
proprioception are commonly observed in even relatively mild cormpressive lesions
of the spinal cord.
WHEELBARROWING (THORACIG LIMBS), EXTENSOR POSTURAL THRUST (PELVIC LIMBS), HOPPING,
HEMISTANDINGANDHEMIWALKING
These tests evaluate the ability of the animal to initiate and coordinate movement of
various combinations of limbs. Subtle deficits in coordination may be more easily
detected during these tests than during simple observation of ambulation.Further-
more, an estimate of limb strength is possible when the animal is made to bear all
the weight on a limited number of limbs. Deficits in these responses may be a result
of either sensory or motor dysfunction, which may be due to abnormality in either
local reflexes or central pathways (Figures 3.6 and 3.7).
Sensorytests
Tests of sensory function in animals are limited to modalities of proprioception and
pain; unfortunately, the tests described also rely on intact motor pathways and do
not evaluate the sensory pathways alone. Proprioceptive responses are included in
INVESTIGATION OFSPINALDISEASE
33
Figure 3.6 Wheelbarrowing
Figure 3.7 Extensor postural thrust response.
34
HANDBOOKOFSMALLANIMALSPINALSURGERY
important in evaluating the severity of a spinal cord lesion.
SUPERFICIAL SENSATION
This can be assessed by pinching the skin or by light pin-pricking on various areas
of the body. For the animal to demonstrate intact sensation, there needs to be
objective evidence of conscious perception of the stimulus, that is a cranial
response such as crying, or attempting to bite the examiner The presence of a
withdrawal reflex in response to skin stimulation merely demonstrates that the
local reflex arc is intact. The pathways to the brain involved in conscious perception
of superficial skin sensation consist of large-diameter myelinated fibres which are
relatively sensitive to compression injury.
DEEP PAIN RESPONSE
In testing this response a strong, painful stimulus, such as artery forceps cormpres-
sion, is applied to an area of the foot, toe or tail; the normal response is to attempt to
avoid the stimulus, vocalizing or attempts to bite (Figure 3.8). A flexor reflex in
respone to this stimulation does not indicate intact pain sensation.Should intact super-
ficial sensation be present it is not necessary to carry out this test, as it is implied
that the pathway involved in the deep pain response will also be intact. A lesion in
either the peripheral or central pathways can be responsible for failure of normal
response. If the local reflex arc has been determined to be intact (i.e. flexor reflex is
intact) and there is absence of deep pain response, then failure of the central
pathways is implied. The neuronal pathway thought to be responsible for transmis-
sion of this modality (spinothalamic tract) is the most resilient to be assessed;
Figure3.8Assessment of deep pain withartery forceps.The animal is closely observed forevidenceof
INVESTIGATION OF SPINAL DISEASE
35
consequently, abnormalities in central conduction of deep pain stimuli are
 associated with severe, and thus prognostically grave, lesions.
Bladder function
Abnormality in bladder function is encountered in association with many spinal
lesions (Figure 3.9). Much information regarding abnormalities can be obtained by
close questioning of the owner, such as the ability of the animal to urinate properly.
the quality of the urine stream and its frequency, and whether the animal will
urinate in a correct environmental location. During a neurological examination the
bladder tone and resistance to emptying can be evaluated by palpation. Lesions
causing depression in anal reflex or tone are often associated with depression in
bladder sphincter tone.
 Neurogenic disorders of bladder function can be divided into lower and upper
 motor neurone types. Lesions of the sacral spinal cord, cauda equina or related
nerves produce a lower motor neurone bladder. Detrusor contraction is abolished
which allows accumulation of large volumes of urine. In severe lesions the external
 bladder sphincter will also be paralysed. However, the internal sphincter, which is
affected (unless that area of the cord is also injured). Therefore the bladder may be
either easily expressed or show resistance to emptying. Overflow incontinence will
usually result.
 Lesions affecting any part of the nervous system between the pons and the sacral
spinal cord can result in production of an upper motor neurone bladder. In this
 condition the urethral sphincters will usually become hypertonic, thereby render-
ing the bladder difficult to express. Furthermore there is a loss of coordination
between the relaxation of the sphincter and contraction of the detrusor which is
 required for normal micturition to take place, Over a period of time, usually several 
days, an upper motor neurone bladder will usually exhibit reflex emptying in
response to bladder distention. This reflex is mediated via the sacral spinal cord
 segments and is usually not well developed enough to cause complete bladder
emptying.
 Long-term bladder distention from any cause can lead to damage to the detrusor
 'r aa lm se ps e sop   p 
 bladders which are full of urine; overflow will also occur.
Other responses
CUTANEOUS TRUNCI MUSCLE (PANNICULUS) REFLEX
This reflex is used primarily as an aid to localization of a lesion. The reflex is
initiated by pin-prick or pinch of the skin on the flank, cranial to the wings of
the ilia. A normal response is a twitch of the cutaneous trunci (panniculus) muscle
 on both sides of the animal, and sometimes a cranial response. The reflex pathway
includes skin receptors, whose axons enter the related segment of the spinal cord
via the dorsal roots. The impulses are relayed cranially through the spinal cord
white matter to synapses on lower motor neurones at the C8-T1 region, from which
originates the lateral thoracic nerve, which is responsible for innervating the
36
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SLIRGERY
Cordsegments
Cord segments
LI-L4
SI-S3
Spinal cord--
Hypogastric nerve -=:
(sympathetic)
-Pudendal nerve
(somatic efferent)
个
Internal bladder
External bladder
Bladder
sphincter
sphincter
Pelvic nerves:
(i) afferent
(i) parasympathetic (efferent)
Figure 3.9 Diagram of nerve supply to the bladder (simplified). This local circuitry is also under
control fromcentres inthebrain.The pelvic nerves contain bothafferent(sensory）and parasympa-
thetic (efferent)fibres.The sympathetic supply to body ofbladder(β)is inhibitory but sympathetic
cutaneous trunci muscle (Figure 3.10). A 'cut-off′ of this response is commonly
observed in thoracolumbar lesions, i.e. caudal to a certain point on the lumbar or
 thoracic skin the response is absent. Absence of this reflex at a certain level can be
 helpful in determining the level of transverse thoracolumbar spinal cord lesions. It
 must be remembered that the afferent nerves course cranially before entering the
spinal canal; consequently, the location of the 'cut off ′ of the response on the skin
will be somewhat caudal to level of the spinal lesion. The cutaneous trunci muscle
 reflex is normal in animals that have lesions caudal to the L1 spinal cord segment.
The efferent arc can sometimes be affected if there is a lesion in the caudal part of
the cervical intumescence or its associated nerve roots (i.e. lesion of C8/T1 or lateral
thoracic nerve).
BABINSKI (EXTENSOR TOE) REFLEX
With the animal in lateral recumbency, the caudolateral aspect of the distal limb
(hock or carpus to digits) is stroked with a fim implement. Normal animals will
 either not respond, or will slightly flex the digits. An abnormal response is exten-
sion of the digits. The pathway involved in this reflex is not known but abnorm-
alities are observed if there is a lesion of spinal cord tracts. An abnormal Babinski
CROSSED EXTENSOR REFLEX
 The crossed extensor reflex is an abnormal response in which there is a concurrent
extension of the contralateral limb while the tested limb flexes during flexor reflex
 testing. This reflex is not observed in normal animals in lateral recumbency. There
INVESTIGATION OF SPINAL DISEASE
37
Lateralthoracicnerve
Spinal cord lesion
Figure 3.10 Diagram of cutaneous trunci muscle reflex. The afferent arm of the reflex is transmitted
via the spinal cord.A response to stimuiation will occur cranial to the lesion (illustrated) but not
caudally.
can be difficulties in interpretation of this test owing to possible confusion with
voluntary efforts made by the animal in attempts to resist restraint. The presence of
 a crossed extensor reflex is considered to be evidence of a lesion of central pathways
 and is most commonly found in association with long-standing lesions.
SCHIFF-SHERRINGTON PHENOMENON
 Following acute injury to the thoracolumbar spinal cord, this specific syndrome of
paraplegia with concurrent thoracic limb hypertonia can occur. The pelvic limbs are
frequently hypotonic. Postural reaction testing of the thoracic limbs will reveal
 normal responses, although there may be hypertonia. The syndrome results from
the interruption of inhibitory pathways ascending from the lumbar spinal cord to
terminate in the area of the cervical intumescence. This syndrome is usually
associated with severe cord lesions but does not necessarily imply a hopeless
prognosis.
Palpation of the spine
Following examination of the reflexes and responses it is useful systematically to
palpate the entire spine. This is usually best carried out from caudal to cranial.
Deep palpation of the transverse and spinous processes and ventrally directed
pressure are helpful in most areas of the spine. Manipulation of the spine in
flexion, extension and laterally can also be carried out and is most useful in
assessment of the cervical region. During careful examination it is often possible
to locate accurately areas of increased sensitivity (hyperaesthesia). Localization by
 this means is more likely to be inaccurate in animals of nervous disposition.
Examination of the head
Following the systematic examination of the spine and reflexes described above, the
cranial responses should also be examined. This consists of evaluation of the cranial
 nerve reflexes, plus assessment of mentation and other neurological responses. A
detailed description of evaluation of the cranial responses is beyond the scope of
this text but some major features are summarized in Table 3.2.
 Poorly initiated limb movement, misplacement of feet
Aensn sisat d anq uiemnuy 'uddoy rod
localize source of sound
Bumps into obstacles
(puodso1 soop 1nq)
 
See below
 normal
Response to noise
Postural reactions
Postural reactions
Menace response
Observation
Observation
See below
Auditory dysfunction
Visual dysfunction
Intention tremor
Paresis/ataxia
Head bobbing
Paresis/ataxia
suojduhs
Dementia
Depression
deficits
Dysmetria
Seizures
Circling
Ataxia
(midbrain, hindbrain)a
(thalamocortex)
Forebrain
 Brain stem
Cerebellum
Failure of affected pupil to constrict in response to
 Fails to respond (sense of smell is difficult to test
Absent blink response (or other avoidance)
Failure to fixate gaze on moving objects
 Poor laterally directed eye movement 
Depressed corneal sensitivity
response to light
Abnormal response
deviated laterally
objectively)
No blink
Assess tension in lip commisure Weakness
light
Pupillary light reflexes (PLR)
10 /+ Idnd jo uoeaIasgo
Vestibular eye movements
 medial + lateral eyelids
corneal aesthesiometry
Palpation, observation
Menace response
Head movement
Head movement
Observation
Observation
Touch face
Brush ear
PLR
ear
Enlarged palpebral fissure
Muscle loss in temporal
?Depressed appetite
?Corneal ulceration
Medial strabismus
Dilated pupil(s)
Facial drooping
Dilated pupil 
suoduhs
Anosmia
Blindness
(acute)
(1010uon0) (I1
IV (trochlear)
(suaonpqe) I
1 (olfactory)
Sensory
VII (facial)
11 (optic)
No response if bilateral (unilateral dificult to detect)
Tongue deviates to affected side, muscle atrophy
More likely to be exhibited in darkened room
Poor abduction of vocal folds/arytenoids
Very rarely detected/detectable clinically
'peau au lae jou op youm suoisal o anp se Aeu auoipus s, Jauh aarau euei ann e jou s! aa o Aiddns aiau snauedug 
Absent/reduced retching
Abnormal response
Increased stridor
Observe larynx under GA
Response to various head
 positions or movement
 Pharmacological testing
 tongue movements
Listen to breathing
Observation
Gag reflex
Gag reflex
Palpation
Wasting of trapezius plus
Weakness or drooping of
erythema of conjunctiva
sterno cleidomastoid
- drooping of upper lid
Horner's syndrome:
pupil constriction
Nystagmus
Strabismus
suopduhs
 Dysphagia
Dysphagia
Dysphonia
Head tilt
muscles
 Deafness
tongue
(Sso)
Table 3.2 (continued)
(glossopharyngeal)
Sympathetic nerve
XII (hypoglossal)
Cranial nerve
VIII Cochlear
Vestibular
accessory)
(sneA) X
 XI (spinal 
XI
INVESTIGATION OF SPINAL DISEASE
41
 Examination of the pupils is of particular importance in evaluation of animals
with spinal disease, especially if involvement of the cervical and cranial thoracic
levels is suspected. This is because of the possibility of damage to the long pathway
involved in supplying sympathetic function to the eye. Axons from the brain run
caudally within the spinal cord to synapse at T1-T3 in the intermediate grey matter;
subsequently fibres return cranially via the sympathetic trunk and, via a second
 synapse in the cranial cervical ganglion, are distributed to the eye. Lesions at any of
these levels can cause Horner's syndrome, which characteristically consists of
miosis, ptosis, globe retraction and subsequent prolapse of the third eyelid,
testing with 10% phenylephrine, or the finding of other neurological deficits can
aid in identifying the affected level.
Localization of lesions
 Following neurological examination it should be possible to determine in which of
the major functional divisions of the nervous system the lesion or lesions could be
located. Depression of any of the normal responses or reflexes indicates disease in
some part of the nervous system. If the abnormality is in the postural reactions,
localization is not possible without knowledge of the state of the local reflexes. If
these are intact, the lesion is in the central pathways, i.e. cranial to that spinal cord
segment. If the local reflexes are depressed then there is a lesion in that reflex arc.
 By assessment of both thoracic and pelvic limbs the location of the lesion to one of
the categories can be deduced. Difficulties can arise in multifocal disease in which a
 reflex arc abnormality can mask a concomitant central pathway lesion, as absence
 of the local reflex will also cause abnormality of the postural reactions (see Figure
8.1). It is particularly important to be aware of this possibility in cases of spinal
trauma or infectious disease because multiple lesions are likely. In general, attempts
are made to explain all abnormalities by a single lesion, if this is not possible then a
multifocal disease process must be assumed.
 The following signs are associated with lesions at defined spinal segments (not all
signs will be exhibited by each affected animal):
(1) C1-C5. Tetraparesis/tetraplegia or hemiparesis/hemiplegia; ataxia; no head'
signs; Hornel's syndrome; limb reflexes intact or hyperactive.
Summary: UMN lesion to all four legs, with normal head.
The absence of ‘head' signs is particularly important to determine if a lesion in
this segment is suspected, as the signs associated with certain brain lesions can
be very similar.
Hoiner's syndrome; depressed/absent cutaneous trunci reflex (efferent por-
tion).
Summary: UMN to pelvic limbs, LMN to thoracic limbs.
unexpected increase in tone of the thoracic limb extensors with lesions at this
level. This is thought to be the result of the reduction of flexor muscle tone
42
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
which occurs in association with lesions of the more cranial parts of the cervical
intumescence.
(3) T3-L3. Paraparesis/paraplegia or monoparesis/monoplegia; pelvic limb
ataxia; thoracic limb reflexes normal; pelvic limb reflexes normal or hyperac-
tive; loss of part of cutaneous trunci reflex (afferent); sensory loss of varying
degree in hindquarters; abnormalities of micturition (dyssynergia); Schiff-Sher-
rington phenomenon.
Localization within this level is carried out by examination for evidence of pain,
or by evaluation of the cutaneous trunci muscle reflex.
(4) L4-caudal. Pelvic limb ataxia; paraparesis/paraplegia or monoparesis/mono-
depression.
Summary: LMN to hindquarters, normal thoracic limbs.
Localization within each of the C1-C5 and T3-L3 categories is carried out by
careful palpation to examine for areas of hyperaesthesia. However, this is not a
feature of all disease processes, and greater specificity of localization may not be
possible. In the large T3-L3 segment, the cutaneous trunci reflex may be helpful in
determining the exact level affected. However, in some mild lesions this reflex is not
affected at any level, and lesions caudal to L1 do not interfere with the reflex.
Within the C6-T2 and L4 caudal segments, more precise localization of the lesion
 may be possible by ascertaining which of the reflexes are abnormal. In dealing with
the L4-caudal segment, it must be remembered that the cell bodies of these spinal
nerves are located a long way cranial to their eventual exit from the vertebral canal;
 therefore, there is a large area in the vertebral column in which these nerves can be
damaged.
Surgical spinal disease
In general, spinal surgery is concerned with the elimination or reduction of com-
pression of neural tissue. Certain features of spinail cord compressive disease may
be apparent on neurological examination, which can help to indicate the presence
 of a lesion likely to be amenable to surgical therapy:
(1) Location/signalment - because of the high frequency of certain disorders in
middle-aged Dachshund suggests acute disc extrusion.
 (don asan a) po a jo ere p Aa e on uoezno ()
compressive lesions are not usually extensive in the cranial-caudal dimension.
(3) Pain - many compressive lesions are painful; this applies to epidural lesions in
particular, in which pain is often a major feature. However, inflammatory
lesions may also be painful.
Conversely, lesions which are widespread, or multifocal, are more likely to be
e aq  i s  pe sssd sn r  q 
to surgical treatment.
INVESTIGATION OF SPINAL DISEASE
43
 Following the assessment of history, physical and neurological examinations, it 
should then be possible to make a tentative diagnosis, or to formulate a list of
different diagnoses. This should include the location(s) of any spinal disease and
possible aetiologies for such signs at each location. The plan is formulated at this
stage and consideration is given to the means of attaining the diagnosis, and/or
definitive therapy for the lesion - the diagnostic tests likely to be of most value
s         o   s
disease should prompt the use of imaging techniques to define clearly the exact site
of such a lesion. If clinical findings suggest that inflammatory disease is a more
likely problem, then blood sampling or CSF analysis would be a more appropriate
first step.
 A further consideration should be the wishes of the owner, such as whether they
would wish for surgical (or other) treatment of the condition to be carried out. If
surgery is not to be an option, the need to make a precise diagnosis must be
carefully weighed up in relation to the possible hazards of the necessary diagnostic
work. A consideration from the surgeon's point of view is, if a surgical lesion is
discovered, whether the condition and its history of progression/regression, would
warrant surgical intervention in any case. A large number of spinal disorders are
in pursuing a diagnosis that will not alter the treatment offered to the patient.
Associated reading
 Braund K.G. (1985) Localizing lesions using neurologic syndromes - 2. spinal cord
syndromes. Vet. Med. 80, 54.
 Braund K.G., Shores A., Brawner W.R. (1990) Localizing spinal cord lesions th1ough
recognition of neurologic syndromes. Vet. Med. 85, 692.
Chrisman C.L. (1991) The neurologic history/The physical and neurologic
Philadelphia, Lea and Febiger, pp. 25-72.
Gilmore D.G. (1983) Cervical pain in small animals: differential diagnosis. Comp.
Cont. Educ. Pract. Vet. 5, 953.
Griffiths I.R. (1982) Spinal disease in the dog. In Practice 4, 44.
Hackner S.G. (1992) Paresis and paralysis. Comp. Cont. Ed. Pract. Vet. 14, 1179.
Moore M.P (1992) Approach to the patient with spinal disease. Vet. Clin. N. Am. 22,
751.
 Moreau PM. (1982) Neurogenic disorders of micturition in the dog and cat. Comp.
Cont. Ed. Pract. Vet. 4, 12.
O'Brien D. (1988) Neurogenic disorders of micturition. Vet. Chin. N. Am. 18, 529.
Oliver J.E., Lorenz M.D. (1983) Neurologic examination Chapter 3. In: Oliver J.E,
Lorenz M.D. (eds) Handbook on Veterinary Neurologic Diagnosis 1st edn.
Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders, p. 19.
Oliver J.E., Osborne C.A. (1980) Neurogenic urinary incontinence. In: Kirk R.W.
(ed.) Current Veterinary Therapy VIl. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders, p. 1122.
Parker A.J. (1990) Principles of neurologic diagnosis. Prog. Vet. Neurol. 1, 11.
Pollock R.V.H. (1985) Anatomy of a diagnosis. Comp. Cont. Educ. Pract, Vet. 7, 621.
Pollock R.V.H. (1985) Diagnosis by calculation. Comp. Cont. Educ. Pract. Vet. 7, 1019.
44 HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Saidla J.E. (1978) Problem oriented medicine for the veterinarian. J. Am. Anim. Hosp.
Assoc. 14, 307.
 Shores A. (1984) The differential diagnosis of ataxia, paresis or paralysis in large
breed dogs. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 20, 265.
Steinberg H.S. (1982) Myotatic reflexes. Comp. Cont. Ed. Pract. Vet. 4, 895.
Wheeler S.L. (1985) The approach to spinal disease in dogs. Brit. Vet. J. 141, 222.
Wheeler S.L. (1989) Diagnosis of spinal disease in dogs. I. Small Anim. Pract. 30, 81.
CHAPTER 4
Ancillary
Contents
Introduction 45
Blood sampling 45
Radiography
46
Other imaging techniques57
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis60
Electrodiagnostics 61
Associated reading 61
Introduction
 The preceding chapter dealt with the means of diagnosing the approximate site or
sites of disease within the nervous system. The next stage in investigation and
treatment of a spinal disorder is to attempt to diagnose the nature of the lesion
responsible for the clinical signs. In order to define the exact site and/or nature of a
lesion, ancillary aids are required. Definitive diagnosis most often relies on surgical
Blood sampling
Blood samples may be required for several reasons, either in order to try to make a
definite diagnosis of a cause of a spinal disorder, or as a preoperative assessment of
the animal's fitness for surgery.
systems. In certain breeds blood coagulation studies may be required before
surgery is contemplated as there is a high incidence of clotting disorders, such as
von Willebrand's disease in the Dobermann pinscher. The buccal mucosa bleeding
time is generally the most useful parameter to measure and can be carried out
during anaesthesia for radiography.
 Specific tests on animals which have spinal lesions may include serology, such as
pue rusndoxon) pozond no (a) sna ladasp auuo jo unsu
 Neospora) neutralizing antibody titres. In certain parts of the world, it may be
necessary to measure antibody titres against a variety of other infectious agents
including rickettsia and mycoses. When confusion with peripheral nervous system
disease is a possibility, blood electrolytes, glucose concentrations and creatinine
phosphokinase (CPK) activity should also be measured.
46
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Radiography
Obtaining diagnostic images of a lesion is essential prior to decompressive spinal
tion of any animal in which a focal spinal lesion is suspected. Prophylactic surgery,
such as fenestration of thoracolumbar discs, may be carried out without knowledge
 of which disc has been responsible for the animal's previous symptoms. However,
 diagnostic images of the area may be required in order to eliminate other causes of
spinal dysfunction from consideration.
 Certain specifications for X-ray machines are required in order to obtain good
quality radiographs of the spine; these requirements are dealt with in Chapter 1.
The ability to obtain high kV and mAs and the need for a grid (preferably Bucky) to
minimize scatter are important factors.
Plain radiography
 Plain radiographs may be sufficient to reach a 'working' diagnosis in some spinal
conditions. An exact diagnosis is not always essential to enable appropriate treat-
 ment to be applied. In its place a working diagnosis, which provisionally rules out
some of the possible differential diagnoses, is sufficient. For example, in ambulatory
'no ana o dy u sudeoi und 'qus el-i jo aseasp ym saop
provisionaily, a diagnosis of discospondylitis or destructive tumour of the verte-
bral bodies. Many dogs presenting with this symptomatology have mid disc
lesions that will respond to conservative therapy alone; further diagnostic efforts
 are not warranted unless more severe clinical signs are exhibited by the dog.
After localization of the lesion to within a certain spinal cord segment has been
 accomplished by neurological examination, that entire segment should be radio-
 graphed. This is best carried out by both survey and local views of this area. There
is some difficulty in accurate assessment of a large area of the vertebral column on
 One view, owing to divergence of the X-ray beam which can cause loss of detail at
the margins; therefore local views of only a few vertebrae are also required (Figure
4.1).
 In general, survey views include about six vertebrae, whereas the local views will
show only three. The detail on the local views is also enhanced owing to reduction
of radiographic scatter. Local views of only one area may be required if the location
of the lesion has already been deduced from the neurological examination, or of
many areas if the neurological localization cannot be precisely made.
 For radiography of any region, the vertebral column must be accurately aligned
parallel to the X-ray film. In all but the most severely depressed patients, general
 anaesthesia is essential to enable good quality radiographs to be obtained. Both
lateral and ventrodorsal views of the relevant area should be obtained. During
 lateral radiography, padding is required under the mid-cervical spine, under the
ventral chest margin, between the hindlimbs, and often under the mid-lumbar
spine (in thin individuals). For radiography of the cervical spine, the wings of
the atlas should be carefuily positioned perpendicular to the table. For radiographs
of the caudal cervical spine, it is usually helpful to pul the thoracic limbs caudally,
 So as to minimize the overlay of the scapulae and their associated muscles. For
ANCILLARY AIDS
47
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.1 Divergence of X-ray beam (a) causes intervertebral spaces in the centre of the field to
lateral radiographs of the cranial thoracic spine the thoracic limbs are generally best
pulled cranially and maintained in this position by use of calving ropes. When
positioning for lateral radiographs of the thoracolumbar region, it is usually helpful
to draw the thoracic limbs cranially and the pelvic limbs caudally. This minimizes
 the natural kyphosis of the region, which is especially marked in small breed dogs 
and in cats, and which can render interpretation more difficult. Lateral radiographs
 of the lumbosacral region should include flexed, neutral and extended views; care 
 is required to avoid introducing rotation into these views.
 For ventrodorsal views (preferred over dorsoventral views, as less distortion is
 introduced) a radiolucent cradle is useful. For ventrodorsal views of the cervical
spine the endotracheal tube should be withdrawn to a position cranial to the point
 of interest to avoid introducing extraneous radiodense lines (Figure 4.2).
 There are some special plain radiographic views which may be helpful in certain
views will help to delineate extruded disc material in the foramen. Lateralized disc
extrusions are most commonly observed in the cervical region and a 'cloud’ of
calcified disc material will be seen obscuring the margins of the foramen.
 Rotated views of the cranial cervical spine can be helpful in diagnosing abnorm-
alities in the size or shape of the dens of the axis. With the atlas rotated, its wings
will not be superimposed on the dens allowing a clearer view (Figure 4.3). Care
may be needed in placing an animal in this position if there is reduced stability at
this site.
Observations to be made on plain radiographs
：
Vertebrae number and shape
Intervertebral disc space: width, shape, opacity
48
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Figure 4.2 Superimposed endotracheal tube renders myelogram difficult to interpret accurately
 Intervertebral foramen: size, shape
+
Vertebral canal: alignment, width
Vertebral body: size, shape, density
 Lysis or proliferation of bone 
●
 Presence of fracture lines
● Presence of foreign bodies
 Diagnosis of many spinal disorders can be made from plain radiographs alone, for
example discospondylitis, congenital maiformations and most fractures and
Figure 4.3 Rotation of the head and atlas enables the dens of the axis to be clearly seen
ANCILLARY AIDS
49
luxations. Often, however, the significance of abnormalities detected on plain
radiographs is uncertain and therefore contrast radiographs are indicated.
Myelography
Myelography is required in most animals for which surgical treatment is con-
sidered in order to demonstrate unequivocally the presence of a mass lesion.
Previously, myelography has been considered hazardous, partly owing to the
potential toxic effects of the contrast medium on neural tissue. Modern nonionic
contrast media have greatly reduced these toxic complications, rendering myelo-
graphy a relatively benign procedure. However, the risks inherent in myelography
should not be overlooked.
INDICATIONS FOR MYELOGRAPHY
Myelography should only be undertaken if the findings will alter the treatment
 offered for the patient. If a course of action has been or can be decided without the
 information available from myelography it should not be performed. Often, how-
ever, the presence or absence of myelographic lesions will determine the future
treatment offered for patients which have spinal disease.
The presence of positive contrast in the subarachnoid space causes the neural
tissue to be outlined in negative, the spinal cord cannot be seen on routine plain
radiographs. When so outlined, it is possible to ascertain on myelography whether
there is compression and, frequently, it is possible to determine the anatomical
relationship of the compressive lesion to the neural tissue.
Several broad indications for myelography can be given, prior to intended
 surgical treatment:
if no lesion is visible on plain radiographs;
if more than one lesion is visible on plain radiographs;
 to assess the significance of questionable changes observed on plain radio-
graphs;
if dynamic studies of certain conditions are required.
 It is common to detect a variety of abnormalities on plain radiographs of the spine,
such as congenital lesions, spondylosis and narrowed disc spaces. The significance
of these lesions often needs to be assessed by myelography. The most frequent
indication for spinal radiography is in the diagnosis of TL disc disease in dogs. On
plain radiographs there are frequently many abnormalities in the area under
assessment, e.g. narrowed disc spaces, spondylosis, calcification of the nucleus
pulposus of several discs (Figure 4.4). It is often not possible to determine with
absolute accuracy which disc is the cause of current problems by neurological
examination or plain radiography. In this instance, myelography will help to
provide the answer.
 A special application of myelography is in the diagnosis of 'wobbler' dogs, or
dogs which have lumbosacral disease. For these patients, flexed, extended and
the exact type of compression present.
50
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Figure 4.4 Multiple intervertebral disc lesions. The disc responsible for symptoms cannot be deduced
from plain radiographs alone.
Familiarity with the normal myelogram is essential. The subarachnoid space
varies a litle in dimensions in various parts of the spinal cord. The spinal cord
widens at the cervical and lumbar intumescences and is thinner in the caudal
thoracic/cranial lumbar region. The appearance of the discs also varies; the widest
 are in the caudal cervical and the caudal lumbar regions. The ventral subarachnoid
space is narrowed as it crosses many of the disc spaces, especially that between C2
and C3 (Figure 4.5). Normal myelograms are shown in standard anatomy texts.
 Following myelography, the aim should be to diagnose the presence or absence
of a compressive lesion and also to classify the lesion by its anatomical relationship
to the neural tissue. It is of course essential that both lateral and ventrodorsal views
Of the area are obtained.
Three categories of lesion are recognized (Figure 4.6): extradural, intradural/
extramedullary, and intramedullary. Classification into one of these anatomical
groups is important because it is frequently suggestive of the cause of cord
compression. This information needs to be evaluated in combination with the
history of the clinical signs.
 Extradural lesions include extruded disc material, haemorrhage/blood clots and
lesions of the vertebrae themselves. With knowledge of the speed of onset of the
disease a reasonable attempt at diagnosis can be made. However, this information
must be very carefully evaluated as it is possible for extruded disc material to find
its way into unusual positions relative to the cord - for instance dorsal to the dural
 tube. Extradural tumours are frequently malignant and are discussed in Chapter 8.
Intradural/extramedullary lesions are almost exclusively tumours, such as
meningiomas or nerve sheath tumours.
Intramedullary lesions are of two types, either medullary swelling because of
acute cord trauma or vascular injury with subsequent oedema, or enlargement due
to an intramedullary tumour. Care must be taken to obtain a clear history in such
ANCILLARY AIDS
51
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.5 The intervertebral space at C2/C3 can be difficult to evaluate: (a) thinning of ventral
contrast column is normal; (b) elevation of ventral contrast column is abnormal (caused by disc
extrusion).
 cases, as this is often the only way to distinguish the likely aetiology (without
surgery or post mortem examination).
 Although these categories of myelographic lesions are well recognized and
described, there are many instances in which clear differentiation of a lesion into
one of these categories is not possible. This is particularly a problem when dealing
with intradural lesions, where it is often not possible definitely to describe a lesion
 as intra- or extra-medullary. Exploratory surgery is required in such cases. A further 
 comumon finding is of extradural compression associated with (usually consequen-
 tial) intramedullary swelling.
In addition to the information obtained on the relationship of a compressive
lesion to the various meninges, it is usuaily possible to determine the size, shape
and degree of lateralization. This information is invaluable when planning surgical
The contrast agent for myelography can be introduced at one of two sites, either
52
HANDBOOK OFSMALLANIMALSPINALSURGERY
Subarachnoid space
Contrastin
subarachnoid
(a)
(b)
(c)
space
Siteoflesion
Site of lesion
Site of lesion
Figure 4.6Appearance of spinal lesions on myelography depends on their relationship to the
subarachnoid space.(a)Extradural lesion causes compression of the subarachnoid spacefrom with-
ut.(b) Intradural/extramedullary lesions causes ‘'island'effect.(c) Intramedullary lesion causes
contrast columns to‘flare'apart.
at the cerebellomedullary cistern, or via lumbar puncture (L4/5 or L5/6). On
occasion it is necessary to use both routes in one animal.
CISTERNALPUNCTURE
Cisternal puncture has the following advantages: introduction of needle is easier,
and it is a more reliable route to obtain a CSF sample of diagnostic quality (i.e. not
contaminated with blood). Its disadvantages are: potential damage to the medulla
 oblongata; it is potentially dangerous if intracranial pressure is elevated (may cause
Figure 4.7Site forcisternal puncture is found on the midline at a point midway between the external
occipitalprotuberanceandalinebetweenthewingsoftheatas.Aotmarksthesiteofneedleentry
horizontallinemarkstheexternaloccipital crestandtheperpendicularlinejoinsthewingsofthe
atlas.
ANCILLARY AIDS
53
 brain herniation under the tentorium or through the foramen magnum); a sloping
 cases owing to poor contrast flow.
The site of introduction of the needle is found by palpation of the wings of the
 atlas, and the external occipital protuberance of the skull. The site for introduction
of the needle lies at the middle of the triangle formed by these reference points
(Figure 4.7). Routine aseptic precautions should be taken, which conveniently
includes wearing sterile surgical gloves. However, if the tip of the needle and the
site of introduction are not touched, then an ungloved hand is satisfactory.
Volume of contrast agent to inject is about 0.4 ml/kg, up to a maximum of 10 ml,
for the cisternal route. Contrast agent may be introduced with the animal in either
lateral or sternal recumbency and should be injected slowly (over about 1 to 2 min)
to minimize rostrally directed flow and to facilitate mixing with the cerebrospinal
fluid. If the contrast is introduced too rapidly, the contrast column will become
'streaky' and therefore be poorly diagnostic. Head elevation is required after the
contrast has been introduced in order to encourage caudally directed flow in the
 subarachnoid space and discourage flow into the cranium. This is usually achieved
by sloping the radiographic table at approximately 15° to the horizontal.
The site of introduction of the needle is very close to the medulla oblongata and
 there is a potential for neural tissue to be damaged during this procedure, which
can be catastrophic, causing vestibular syndromes, paresis or even death. This risk
can be minimized by careful, slow introduction of the needle and by use of a spinal
needle which contains a stylet. Although regular hypodermic needles can be used
for myelography, they are liable to become blocked with tissue during introduction,
making it difficult to realize when the subarachnoid space has been entered.
Generally, entry into the subarachnoid space can be recognized when the needle
'pops' through and CSF will be readily obtained at the hub. Sometimes some blood
wili be found in the CSF. This can be disregarded if the CSF becomes clear with
continued flow (although it may render the fluid unreliable for analysis - see
 poa  pan s aq r jue  a pue (oa
is severe and continues it is usually possible to withdraw the needle and replace it
 properly. The damaged vessels (branches of the internal venous plexus) lie outside
the subarachnoid space and slightly lateral to the midline and laceration of these
vessels is not dangerous in itself.
 If the intracranial pressure is elevated, such as in multifocal disease involving
intracranial structures, introduction of a needle at the cerebellomedullary cistern
can allow rapid exit of CSF. This will cause a rapid pressure drop in the caudal part
 of the cranium and therefore possible herniation of the brain either under the
 tentorium cerebelli or through the foramen magnum with potentially fatal conse-
quences. The potential for this complication must be carefully evaluated before
 a    pa s    asa  
cervical segment (confusion with an intracranial lesion is particularly likely).
Clinical signs suggestive of elevated intracranial pressure include dilation of the
pupils, poor gag reflex and depression. Vestibular signs are also common in this
group of patients. If there appears to be a substantial possibility of elevated
intracranial pressure, the lumbar route of introduction should be selected in
preference.
 Introduction of contrast material into the skull is to be avoided as it is associated
54
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Figure 4.8 Failure of cisternally introduced contrast to completely fill subarachnoid space around
thoracolumbar junction renders this myelogram non diagnostic of site or type of lesion.
with the development of post-myelographic seizures. The incidence of post-myelo-
graphic seizures has been greatly reduced following the widespread use of the
 nonionic contrast media but has still been reported to occur in approximately 10%
 of cases. Slow injection of contrast agent, with the needle bevel directed caudally
 and with the animal on a well-tilted table is the best way of avoiding this complica-
tion, followed by recovering the animal in sternal recumbency, with the head
elevated (seizures are more likely when the contrast medium flows over the dorsal
and lateral surface of the cerebral hemisphere). If seizures do occur, they can
usually be controlled with a single intravenous bolus of diazepam (0.2 mg/kg)
 and there are usually no further seizures. Close observation of the patient following
myelography is required for early detection of this complication.
 The most common problem encountered with cisternal myelography is that the
study can be non-diagnostic in certain cases. This is particularly common if there is
a severe compressive lesion (either intra- or extra-durally) which can block the flow
 of contrast. The flow of contrast is dependent on gravity alone and so severe lesions
may block the flow sufficiently to prevent proper diagnosis of the nature and
location of the lesion (Figure 4.8).
Severe acute compressive thoracolumbar disease (commonly acute disc extru-
 sions) may cause severe intramedullary swelling with consequent obliteration of
the subarachnoid space over several spinal cord segments. In this instance the
contrast column is frequently interrupted up to two or three vertebrae cranial to
the site of the lesion. The cervical myelogram in such cases may be of some value to
rule out a lesion at some of the disc spaces cranial to the obstruction but often a
 definite diagnosis is not possible. In some cases of neoplasia affecting the spine,
 contrast flow is poor because of severe extradural compression affecting a large
segment and demarcation of the margins of the lesion may be impossible when
relying on cervical myelography alone.
 In some cases of cervical cord disease, a partial myelographic block is sufficient to
cause poor contrast accumulation at the site of the lesion but will allow the bulk of
the material to continue to flow caudally. Such studies are non-diagnostic. A
solution to this problem is to elevate both ends of the animal with the site of
interest at the lowest point and to allow the contrast to accumulate at this area
ANCILLARYAIDS
55
Figure 4.9 Spinal needle correctly placed for tumbar myelography. The L4/5 interspace is used
because this dog is large. Note slight flexion of vertebral column.
for a few minutes before repeating the exposures. Care must be taken at this stage
to avoid introducing contrast agent into the cranium.
LUMBAR PUNCTURE
 Introduction of contrast agent at the lumbar site has the advantage that a good
 contrast flow can be achieved despite attenuation of the subarachnoid space.
Its disadvantages are: introduction of the needle may be difficult, especially in large
 dogs; artefacts are more common; there is potential for injury of neural tissue.
 The site for introduction of the contrast agent is usually at the L4/5 or L5/6
 interspace. A fine needle is used (23-20 gauge), which must have a stylet. The
needle is introduced parallel to the spinal processes and perpendicular to the long
axis of the vertebral column, with the bevel directed cranially (Figure 4.9). The
 needle penetrates the neural tissue (during which a twitch of the anus and tail is
frequently observed), and comes to rest on the floor of the vertebral canal. On
removal of the stylet, flow of CSF, often with some blood contamination, is usually
observed, although this may take some time (about 30 s) to appear, occasionally it
 is necessary to withdraw the needle about 1-2 mm in order to obtain CSF flow. The
introduction of the needle can be carried out with the animal in either sternal or
 lateral recumbency and is facilitated by maximal flexion of the lumbar spine, which
 enlarges the interarcuate space. Contrast agent (up to 0.5 ml/kg, with a maximum
 of 10 ml) is introduced when CSF flow is observed and can be injected under
 moderate pressure. On occasions when CSF flow is not observed, it can be useful
to give a test injection of about 0.5 ml to determine whether the needle is correctly
situated - this is safe provided the needle tip is either resting on or very close to
bone (to ensure that the needle bevel cannot be embedded within neural tissue).
 Injection of the contrast into the spinal cord is possible and can be catastrophic.
 Major problems associated with this technique include difficulties in placing the
 needle correctly, oddly enough placement is usually easier in smaller animals
56
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Figure 4.10 Non-diagnostic tumbar myelogram resulting from inadvertant injection of contrast into
theepiduralspace.
(presumably any error in location of needle introduction at the skin surface is
magnified in larger animals). Assessment of the precise anatomy of the region on
lateral radiographs may be useful because of the degree of overhang of the spinous
 process over the relevant interspace is variable. Comparison with radiographs may
help to orientate correct realignment of the needle during subsequent attempts.
 The second main problem associated with this technique is the introduction of
material into the epidural space rather than into the subarachnoid space. Many
lumbar myelograms suffer from this artefact to some extent, which can sometimes
render the image difficult to interpret (Figure 4.10). Usually, with time, the epidural
component will disperse more rapidly than that in the subarachnoid space (owing
 can be confusing when assessing the lumbosacral region in particular.
 Lumbar myelography is superior in the demonstration of severe compressive
lesions, especially in the thoracolumbar region, as the contrast medium may be
injected under pressure, thereby ensuring adequate fill of the subarachnoid space.
Even so, it is frequently necessary to make the first exposure quickly after the
 contrast has been introduced as rapid dispersal away from these areas will occur.
Acute thoracolumbar cord injury is the most frequent indication for lumbar myelo-
graphy and, in such cases, it is useful to be able to determine to which side the bulk
of the disc material has extruded. Therefore it is prudent that the first view obtained
 following introduction of the contrast agent should be ventrodorsal.
SUMMARY
 In conclusion, cervical myelography is preferred for cervical and lumbosacral
imaging (as there is less problem with artefact) or if only mild compressive lesion
is suspected. Lumbar myelography is preferred if:
● a severe thoracolumbar lesion is suspected,
● a cranial cervical lesion is suspected (because of danger in correct needle
positioning or contrast introduction in such cases), or if there is a strong
ANCILLARYAIDS
57
 suspicion of elevation of intracranial pressure. On occasion it may be necessary
to introduce the contrast agent at both sites, e.g. when the full extent of a large
lesion (often tumour) needs to be determined.
Other imaging techniques
Various other imaging techniques are available which may provide information not
 available from plain and myelographic studies. Only specialist units have the
capabilities to carry out some of these techniques.
Epidurography
 The main indication for this study is in the assessment of the lumbosacral region of
d   s    s  o a 
adequate imaging of the lumbosacral joint but in some animals, paricularly those of
the larger breeds, the dural tube is elevated from the floor of the vertebral canal
Cranial to the lumbosacral joint thereby rendering the myelogram non-diagnostic
for lesions at that location. In a study comparing the diagnostic capabilities of
various radiographic methods, epidurography was rated the best technique for
 evaluation of the low lumbar and sacral regions.
 The technique is straightforward to perform; a needle is introduced through the
 interarcuate space at S3/Co1 or Co1/2 until it contacts the floor of the vertebral
canal (Figure 4.11). Contrast medium (not necessarily nonionic) is injected at
 0.15 ml/kg and radiographs obtained immediately. Both lateral and ventrodorsal
views are useful, and it is often necessary to obtain both flexed and extended views
 to demonstrate dynamic compression of the dural tube. No complications have
been reported following epidurography in the dog.
 Lesions demonstrated by this technique include protrusion of the L7/S1 disc,
tumours. Care must be taken to study the film for artefacts related to contrast
 introduction. False positive and false negative results are reported in both
 experimental and clinical studies of this technique.
Figure 4.11 Spinal needle correctly placed for epidurography
581
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Intraosseus vertebral venography
This technique can be used for evaluation of the lumbosacral region. It is more
difficult to perform satisfactorily than epidurography and usually provides less
reliable information. A bone marrow needle is introduced into the body of one of
the most cranial of the caudal vertebrae; correct positioning is ascertained by
obtaining marrow on aspiration. Contrast medium is introduced and radiographs
 obtained immediately. It is useful to apply compression to the abdomen during
contrast injection as this will encourage the agent to remain in the venous sinuses
rather than return to the caudal vena cava via the abdominal vessels.
This technique is rarely used nowadays as epidurography is more often
diagnostic and simpler to perform.
Discography
This technique is usually reserved for diagnosis of protrusion of the L7 interver-
tebral disc. A spinal needle is introduced through the flaval ligament at the
lumbosacral junction and advanced into the L7 disc. Radiographs are obtained to
 ensure correct positioning. Contrast agent is injected under pressure into the
nucleus of the disc. Normal disc will not allow the introduction of much fluid,
whereas an abnormal disc (i.e. with a protrusion) will accommodate up to 2-3 ml.
 Lateral and ventrodorsal views are obtained following contrast injection, and can
clearly demonstrate the presence of a dorsally or dorsolaterally directed disc
protrusion. This technique can be very useful, although a 13% false positive rate
was found in a recent series of clinical cases. Furthermore, it is only effective in
demonstrating a disc lesion. Should there be cauda equina compression due to
 neoplasia or other cause then that lesion will not be detected. For this reason, the
technique should perhaps be considered as an adjunct to other diagnostic tech-
niques at this level, unless there is clear evidence that a disc lesion is very likely to
be the only cause of the animal's symptoms.
Ultrasonography
 A recent article has described the use of intraoperative ultrasonography in both
normal and cord-injured dogs. The technique enabled detection of fragments of
extruded disc material in the vertebral canal, spinal cord compression and the
 presence or absence of normal cord pulsation. Follow-up ultrasound examination
 nique at present, but there may be other applications, such as the intraoperative
 determination of the location and extent of intramedullary tumours.
Advanced imaging techniques
Access to computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance (MR) scanning
facilities has become more widely available to veterinarians during the last few
years and can provide useful information not available by other means.
ANCILLARYAIDS
59
Figure 4.12 CT myelogram of wobbler dog. This cross-sectional view reveals severe spinal cord
compression by ventral soft tissue mass - a type II disc protrusion (arrow). Courtesy of Dr JV.
Davies.
LD
CT is able to provide information on cross-sections of the spinal cord and vertebral
column, which is not available from conventional radiographic techniques. CT is
frequently used in the assessment of spinal disease in people but its use in animals
is limited by poor definition of the spinal cord and nerve roots unless a contrast
agent is used concurrently. However, plain CT examinations may be useful in the
diagnosis of causes of stenosis of the vertebral canal or to obtain additional
information on vertebral fractures. CT combined with myelography can provide
useful information in dogs affected by the 'wobbler' syndrome (Figure 4.12).
 After routine cervical myelography, the animal is scanned at the levels of interest.
Lateral and dorsal compression of the cord is visible following this procedure,
which may not be apparent on routine myelographic films, and can be used to
suggest the approach to the spinal cord in order to alleviate the compression.
 Lumbosacral CT scanning is carried out in a similar way. Its main use is in the
 diagnosis of nerve root compression within the intervertebral foramen.
MRIMAGING
MRI enables images of the spinal cord and vertebral column to be obtained in
 transverse, sagittal and dorsal planes. The advantages of this technique include the
ability to produce excellent quality images without the need for introduction of
potentially dangerous contrast agents. In humans, the technique is capable of
diagnosing intramedullary lesions such as syringomyelia, which currently are not
easily diagnosed in animals antemortem. In addition, it is possible to prognosticate
based on the appearance of the spinal cord on MR images. The technique has not
yet been widely used in animals owing to the relative lack of access to these
60
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SUIRGERY
Figure 4.13 Sagittal T1 weighted MR scan at the lumbosacral region in a German Shepherd dog
Note the detail visible in the discs and vertebral canal. Courtesy Mrs R. Dennis, Animal Heath Trust
facilities, although its advantages in the diagnosis of lumbosacral disease in dogs
have already been established. It is clearly a technique with a great deal of potential
 in diagnosis of spinal cord and vertebral lesions in small arimal patients (Figure
4.13).
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis
CSF analysis is useful in the diagnosis of inflammatory or infectious diseases of the
spinal cord, meninges or brain. Suspicion of an inflammatory lesion is the most
common indication for obtaining a CSF sample. However, a sample of CSF is
 obtained incidentally from any animal in which (cisternal) myelography is carried
out and it is prudent to analyse this fluid. CSF obtained subsequent to myelo-
 graphy can also be used. The changes in CSF characteristics which are induced by
 myelography have been quantified but an uncontaminated sample is preferable.
CSF analysis can include protein concentration and red and white blood cell
counts; normal values for each have been published elsewhere. In addition, it has
been suggested that measurement of creatine phosphokinase (CPK) activity and
glucose concentration may be of diagnostic value. In animals in which infectious
disease is suspected, antibody titres in CSF can also be used to help in diagnosis, for
 instance canine distemper virus (CDV) titre. Culture of CSF samples can be used to
identify bacterial or fungal causes of spinal disease, although these are rare. CSF
culture is best carried out by obtaining a large volume sample (2-3 ml or more)
and injecting it into a blood culture tube. It is prudent to discuss these tests with
a microbiologist beforehand. On rare occasions, neoplastic conditions may be
identified during examination of CSF, if there is exfoliation of neoplastic cells.
 CSF obtained from either the cisternal and lumbar sites can be analysed; the
ANCILLARY AIDS
61
protein and cell content are slightly different at the two sites in normal dogs. It has
been suggested that obtaining samples from both sites will increase the diagnostic
yield of the technique.
 The finding of increased white cell count suggests involvement of the meninges 
and greatly increased cell counts are found in animals that have meningitis. Care
d  s o a  p     a 
content in the CSF; these findings have been identified in animals afflicted with
intervertebral disc disease and therefore should not be used as conclusive evidence
of the presence of inflammatory or infectious disease of the neuraxis.
Electrodiagnostics
Several electrodiagnostic techniques may be useful in diagnosis of the site and
can be of value in the identification of nerve root compression as a result of disc
protrusion or tumours. This is most useful in cases of lumbosacral disease, in which
there is often possible confusion with hip disease, and also in certain cases of the
'wobbler' syndrome, in which nerve root involvement may be apparent. In both
instances, an abnormal EMG will define a lesion as involving a certain lower motor
neurone (in the absence of other concurrent disease). In cases of lumbosacral
disease, finding an abnormal EMG will strongly suggest significant nerve root
compression. Abnormal EMG findings in the epaxial muscles can aid in the
localization of transverse myelopathies but must be interpreted in the light of
results of imaging studies.
Spinally evoked potentials have been used in attempts to evaluate more objec-
tively the severity of compressive lesions. Both ascending (sensory) and descending
 ou aa s   o sn aa a s (r)
 generally applied and have not been found to be of more value in the diagnosis
 of irreversible spinal cord injury than simple assessment of the pain responses.
Associated reading
Haemostatic testing
Jergens A.E., Turrentine M.A., Kraus K.H., Johnson G.S. (1987) Buccal mucosa
bleeding times of healthy dogs and of dogs in various pathologic states,
including thrombocytopenia, uremia, and von Willebrand's disease. Am. J.
Vet. Res. 48, 1337.
Radiographyandmyelography
Brawner W.R., Braund K.G., Shores A. (1990) Radiographic evaluation of dogs and
cats with acute spinal cord trauma. Vet. Med. 85, 703.
Fletcher TF. (1979) Spinal cord and meninges. In: Evans H.E., Christensen G.C.
(eds), Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 2nd edn. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders, p. 935.
62 HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Kirberger R.M., Roos C.J., Lubbe A.M. (1992) The radiological diagnosis of
thoracolumbar disc disease in the dachshund. Vet. Radiol. Ultras. 33, 255.
Kirberger R.M., Wrigley R.H. (1993) Myelography in the dog: review of patients
with contrast medium in the central canal. Vet. Radiol. lltras. 34, 253.
Lewis D.D., Hosgood G. (1992) Complications associated with the use of iohexol for
myelography of the cervical vertebral column in dogs: 66 cases (1988-1990). J.
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 200, 1381.
Luttgen PJ., Pechman R.D., Hartsfield S.M. (1988). Neuroradiology. Vet. Clin. N.
Am. 18, 501.
Middleton D.L. (1993) Radiographic positioning for the spine and skull. Vet. Clin.
N. Am. 23, 253.
Owens J.M. (1982) The spine. In: Biery D.N. (ed.), Radiographic Interpretation for the
 Small Animal Clinician. St Louis, Ralston Purina, p. 69.
Park, R.D. (1990) Diagnostic imaging of the spine. Prog. Vet. Neurol. 1, 371.
 Prata R.G. (1977) Diagnosis of spinal cord tumours in the dog. Vet. Clin. N. Am. 7,
165.
Roberts R.E., Selcer B.A. (1993) Myelography and epidurography. Vet. Clin. N. Am.
23, 307.
Sande R.D. (1992) Radiography, myelography, computed tomography, and
magnetic resonance imaging of the spine. Vet. Clin. N. Am. 22, 811.
Wheeler S.J., Clayton-Jones D.G., Wright J.A. (1985) Myelography in the cat. I. Small
Anim. Pract. 26, 143.
Wheeler S.J., Davies J.V. (1985) Iohexol myelography in the dog and cat: a series of
one hundred cases, and a comparison with metrizamide and iopomidol. J.
Small Anim. Pract. 26, 247.
Imaging the cauda equina
Feeney D.A., Wise M. (1981) Epidurography in the normal dog: technic and radio-
graphic findings. Vet Radiol. 22, 35.
Hathcock JT., Pechman R.D., Dillon A.R., Knecht C.D., Braund K.G. (1988)
Comparison of three radiographic procedures in evaluation of the canine
lumbosacral spinal canal. Vet. Radiol. 29, 4.
 a    go  x ()  
Radiol. 29, 242.
Morgan J.P., Bailey C.S. (1990) Cauda equina syndrome in the dog: radiographic
evaluation. J. Small Anim. Pract. 31, 69.
Advanced imaging
 de Haan J.J., Shelton S.B., Ackerman N. (1993) Magnetic resonance imaging in the
diagnosis of degenerative lumbosacral stenosis in four dogs. Vet. Surg. 22, 1.
Nakayama M. (1993) Intraoperative spinal ultrasonography in dogs: normal
findings and case history reports. Vet. Radiol. Lltras. 34, 262.
Karkkainen M., Mero M., Nummi P., Punto L. (1991) Low field magnetic resonance
imaging of the canine central nervous system. Vet. Radiol. 32, 71.
Schaeffer D.M., Flanders A.E., Osterholm J.L., Northrup B.E. (1992) Prognostic
ANCILLARY AIDS   63
significance of magnetic resonance imaging in the acute phase of cervical spine
injury. J. Neurosurg. 76, 218.
Sether L.A., Nguyen C., Yu S, Haughton V.M., Ho K-C., Biller D.S., Strandt J.A.,
Eurell J.C. (1990) Canine intervertebral disks: correlation of anatomy and MR
imaging. Radiol. 175, 207.
 Sharp N.J.H., Wheeler S.J., Cofone M. (1992) Radiological evaluation of "wobbler"
syndrome - caudal cervical spondylomyelopathy. J. Small Anim. Pract. 33, 491.
Cerebrospinalfluid examination
Chrisman C.L. (1991) Special ancillary investigations. In: Chrisman C.L. Problems in
Small Animal Neurology, 2nd edn. Philadelphia, Lea and Febiger, p. 81.
Cook JR., DeNicola D.B. (1988) Cerebrospinal fluid. Vet. Clin. N. Am. 18, 475.
Indrieri R.J., Holliday T.A., Keen C.L. (1980) Critical evaluation of creatine phos-
phokinase in cerebrospinal fluid of dogs with neurologic disease. Am. J. Vet.
Res. 41, 1299.
Thomson C.E., Kornegay J.N., Stevens J.B. (1989) Canine intervertebral disc disease:
change in the cerebrospinal fluid. I. Small Anim. Pract. 30, 685.
Vandevelde M., Spano J.S. (1977) Cerebrospinal fluid in canine neurologic disease.
Am. J. Vet. Res. 38, 1827.
Widmer W.R., DeNicola D.B., Blevins W.E., Cook J.R., Cantwell H.D., Teclaw R.T.
(1992)  Cerebrospinal  fluid changes  after iopamidol and  metrizamide
myelography in clinically normal dogs. Am. J. Vet. Res. 53, 396.
Electrophysiology
Shores A., Redding R.W., Knecht C.D. (1987) Spinal-evoked potentials in dogs with
acute compressive thoracolumbar spinal cord disease. Am. J. Vet. Res. 48, 1525.
Sylvestre A.M., Cockshutt J.R., Parent J.M., Brooke J.D., Holmberg D.L., Partlow
G.D. (1993) Magnetic motor evoked potentials for assessing spinal cord
CHAPTER 5
Pathophysiology of Spinal Cord
Iniury
Contents
Introduction 64
Pathophysiology of acute spinal cord injury64
Secondary injury mechanisms65
Pathophysiology of chronic (compressive） cord injury 69
Associated reading70
Introduction
Lesions of the vertebral column, spinal cord and nerve roots which may require
surgical therapy are those in which compression of nerve tissue occurs. The
compression is frequently extramedullary, i.e. outside the spinal cord or nerve
roots, with consequent deformation of the pia mater on its outer surface. How-
ever, in certain circumstances, for example following an acute concussive injury,
 pressure elevation occurs within the parenchyma enclosed by the pia.
 Both categories of lesion can be subject to surgical decompression but, in order to
the pathophysiology of both concussive and compressive spinal cord injuries.
Although concussion and compression can be considered as separate means of
inducing spinal cord injury, and in experimental work they are often deliberately
 distinguished, in clinical situations there is usually a mixture of both mechanisms.
 In many acute injuries (such as acute disc extrusion) the concussive event pre-
dominates. However, lesions within the vertebral canal such as bone fragments or
extruded disc material will continue to compress the cord after the initial concus-
sion has resolved and may result in persistence of some neurological deficits if left
untreated.
Pathophysiology of acute spinal cord injury
Acute injury to the spinal cord occurs commonly in both animals and humans, and
may be due to external causes, such as falls or road traffic accidents, or internal
causes, such as acute disc extrusions. Because of the great social and economic
importance of spinal cord injury in humans, a large number of experimental studies
sod p n  s no s a uo pn pa uq aan
therapeutic modulations of such mechanisms. Many of the studies rely on the
production of lesions by modifications of the ‘weight drop' model of Allen
65
(1911), in which a known weight is dropped a certain distance onto the exposed
spinal cord. The severity of cord injury varies depending on the magnitude of the
injury, i.e. the product of weight and distance dropped.
The changes observed in the spinal cord following acute experimental injury
have been followed both histologically and biochemically. After acute injury the
spinal cord undergoes sequential pathological changes including infarction,
haemorrhage, oedema, axonal and neuronal necrosis and demyelination, followed
by cyst formation.
Immediate effects
Immediately following impact there is a total conduction block, the cause of which
is likely to be efflux of potassium from the mechanicaily deformed cells. (Vascular
changes are thought not to be the cause of the immediate conduction block, owing
to the time relationship of these events.) The change in the ratio of extracelular to
intracellular potassium will cause depolarization and therefore a conduction block.
At this stage there will also be some mechanical damage to blood vessels, with
resultant haemorrhage into the neuropil. The magnitude of the initial injury is small
and involves only a limited segment of cord tissue.
Vascular observations
Within 5 min of a severe concussive injury, sub-pial and grey matter haemorrhage
appears and there is a generalized decrease in blood flow through the cord.
Centrifugal spread of ischaemia occurs during the next 24 h; the extent depends
on the severity of the initial insult. Grey matter blood flow is dramatically reduced
during the first 2 h and remains at low levels for at least the first 24 h. White matter 
blood flow is also reduced initially, for between 1 h and 6 h, but returns to normal,
 Or even is increased according to some investigators, by 24 h. The effect of
decreased blood flow is more marked in the grey matter owing to two main
allows oedema fluid to accumulate and to perpetuate the effects of low blood
flow. The persistence of abnormalities in blood flow is a result of biochemical
changes within the cord, oedema and loss of autoregulation.
Secondary injury mechanisms
Direct mechanical damage to the cord is insignificant compared with the secondary
events that take place as a consequence. Mechanical injury to blood vessels causes
ischaemia, initially by direct mechanical means causing vasospasm and, subse-
quently, by damage to the endothelial cells with activation of secondary injury
mechanisms. By means of secondary injury phenomena the continued autodestruc-
tive events in the spinal cord may progress in the absence of continued spinal cord
pressure. Release of various vasoactive substances and generation of free radicals
occurs which prolongs the period of ischaemia and leads to secondary injury. Many
mediators of the secondary injury have been proposed, including excitotoxic amino
acids, ionic calcium, opioids and oxygen free radicals. Treatment aimed at
66
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
ment options appear to be ineffective but methylprednisolone and some more
recently developed compounds have been found to be efective in reduction of
the severity of cord injury. The mode of action of methylprednisolone in treatment
 of acute cord injury has been demonstrated to be separate from its corticosteroid
Calcium
 Concomitant with early potassium efflux from the cells, there is calcium influx,
which has several consequences, and has been described as the final common
pathway of toxic cell death in the nervous system. Increase in intracellular calcium
arises as a result of a mechanically induced increase in membrane permeability, the
opening of voltage dependent channels and also as a result of glutamate interaction
with the NMDA (N-methyl D-aspartate) receptor. There is vasospasm, impairment
 Of mitochondrial function, and depletion of high-energy phosphate-containing
compounds. Elevation in intracellular calcium concentration is also responsible
for activation of a large range of enzymes. Some of these enzymes are capable of
converting xanthine dehydrogenase to xanthine oxidase, which is a potent produ-
cer of oxygen free radicals in the injured cord. Other activated enzymes include
those involved in the arachidonic acid cascade resulting in the production of
eiconasoids.
Free radicals
 Many of the current investigations into spinal cord injury centre on the role of free
radicals. Free radicals have an unpaired electron in the outermost orbit. They are
therefore extremely reactive and, following reaction with normal molecules, will
number of free radicals are generated during normal cell metabolism, but these are
 scavenged by various agents, including ascorbate, α-tocopherol (vitamin E) and
enzymes such as superoxide dismutase, thereby protecting the cell from their
deleterious effects.
 Ischaemia results in changed metabolism within the cell, with an accumulation of 
lactate, and, in combination with high intracellular calcium levels, the activation of
biochemical pathways promoting free radical production. Haemorrhage into the
neuropil forms a ready source of iron which is required to catalyse the formation of
free radicals. During ischaemic cell damage the formation of free radicals over-
whelms the normal defence mechanisms, allowing damage to occur. Free radicals
will react with the lipid component of the cell membranes, a process known as lipid
peroxidation, which leads to cell membrane dysfunction and ultimately can lead to
cell death. Neural tissue is particularly sensitive to free radical mediated injury
owing to its high lipid content. Free radicals also have other effects such as
 promoting inflammation by enhancing capillary permeability and acting as
chemotactic agents for phagocytic cells.
The significance of free radicals as mediators of spinal cord injury can also be
evaluated by the effects of drugs which have anti-oxidant properties. It has been
 demonstrated that anti-oxidant drugs such as α-tocopherol, methyl prednisolone
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF SPINAL CORD IN/URY
67
and the recently developed aminosteroids (also known as lazaroids) can alleviate
the effects of spinal cord concussion.
Eicosanoids
Activation of phospholipase A, as a result of calcium influx, triggers the production
of leukotrienes, thromboxanes and prostaglandins from arachidonic acid. Increases
 in prostaglandin levels will cause increased vascular permeability and vasocon-
 d  s    s    
which can cause thrombosis and release of 5HT (5-hydroxytryptamine) which will
also alter vascular permeability. Therefore, the consequences of eicosanoid release
include local infarction (due to thrombosis) and accumulation of extra-cellular
fluid. Oedema will exacerbate ischaemia owing to pressure increases within the
parenchyma bounded by the pia mater.
Neurotransmitters
GLUTAMATE
 Some amino acids, in particular glutamate, are active in the CNS as excitatory
neurotransmitters. They have been postulated to be involved in the secondary
injury mechanism.  Mechanically  induced depolarization of neurones causes
release of neurotransmitters, including glutamate. Extracellular glutamate concen-
tration in the injured spinal cord is massively elevated. This neurotransmitter acts
at the NMDA receptor to open charnels allowing increase in intracellular sodium,
chloride and calcium. Experimental studies have shown reduction of the severity of
spinal cord and cerebral ischaemic injury can be achieved by blocking this channel.
Calcium influx is thought to be the mechanism of NMDA receptor mediated spinal
cord injury.
MONOAMINES
Effects due to the neurotransmitter noradrenaline have been suggested in the past
but have since been refuted experimentally.
 The neurotransmitter 5HT is thought to play a role in spinal cord injury; elevated
concentrations of 5HT arise following obstruction of blood vessels by platelet
aggregation. 5HT induces constriction of arteries, arterioles and venules and also
initiates platelet aggregation, thereby inducing a vicious circle of thrombosis of
spinal cord vasculature.
OPIOIDS
Some attention has been given to the increase in endogenous opioid concentrations
observed in the acutely injured spinal cord. These opioids have been demonstrated
 a oe s  n      
that reduction in severity of injury following acute cord trauma can be achieved by
use of opioid receptor biocking agents, such as naloxone. The mechanism of action
68
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
SPINALCORD
CONCUSSION
blood vessel
injury
ISCHAEMIA
 glutamate
CELL
release
Na+
MEMBRANE
pumpfailure
 INJURY
NMDA
八
depolarization
receptor
VSC
ELEVATIONOF
INTRACELLULAR
Lipid
peroxidation
CALCIUM
 phospholipase
protease
activation
activation
elevated
oxygen free
concentration
 radical 
of eiconasoids
formation 
Figure 5.1 Diagram showing pathophysiology of acute spinal cord injury (in simplified form).
VSCC, voltage sensitive caicium channel; NMDA, N-methyl D-aspartate.Positive feedback
pathways are indicated by double lines.
of the protective effects of naloxone is uncertain but probably is via effects on blood
pressure.
Twenty four hours following acute spinal cord injury, the cord shows chronic
 hyperaemia and loss of autoregulation. Oedema persists until 2 weeks after the
 incident. Remyelination of demyelinated uninjured axons starts after 1 week and
 can be complete by 4 weeks; some axons may remain demyelinated.
Little further tissue damage occurs after 24 h following injury. After that time,
   is p s ane j  n  au pe 
 main, medical therapy is indicated to ameliorate the abnormalities in intracellular
 metabolism and blood flow and their resultant injurious effects on the cord; these
treatments are discussed in Chapter 15. Surgical therapy for concussive injuries is
limited to: (i) decompression of the theca, i.e. piotomy, or myelotomy for cases in
which there is no likelihood of recurrent concussion, for instance in acute explosive
disc extrusion; (i) stabilization of damaged areas of the vertebral column if recur-
 rent concussive injuries are probable, for example in spinal fractures or luxations.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF SPINAL CORD INJURY 69
Conclusion
 In general, treatment of acute spinal cord injury is medical rather than surgical.
Methylprednisolone is currently the only available veterinary drug which has been
demonstrated to ameliorate the consequences of clinical spinal cord injury but
 many other preparations are likely to be available in the near future.
 Occasionally, however, surgery may have a role to play. Before contemplating
 surgical intervention in an animal with an acute spinal cord injury, the clinician
e pe aans a s 'aq o si ans au o we u m use pus
decompressing the cord by removal of an extradural mass (disc material, bone
fragments or haematoma)? Or is it aimed at reducing the effects of the concussive
injury by means of piotomy or myelotomy? To be sure of carrying out appropriate
surgery it is essential to understand the history and duration of the injury and to
have radiographic evidence of the presence or absence of a removable extradural
 mass. These considerations are of special importance when dealing with an acute
 cord injury in which a significant mass lesion cannot be observed radiographically.
In such cases, gaining surgical access to the cord without also carrying out piotomy
 may be of no benefit to the patient and medical therapy alone would be more
appropriate.
Pathophysiology of chronic (compressive) cord injury
Although acute and chronic cord injuries are described separately, there is of course
Some overlap between acute concussion and compressive disease in most spinal
cord injuries. In chronic compressive type of lesions, concussive events may be
superimposed, or form an important part of the progression of the disease itself,
e.g. spinal cord of many wobbier dogs suffers chronic compression owing to type II
 disc protrusion, but concussive injuries will take place on a semicontinuous basis
Owing to the superimposed dynamic components of the disorder. Spinal tumours
usually cause chronic compression with little or no concussive injury to the cord.
 Slowly developing or persistent compression will lead to spinal cord injury by a
means similar to acute cord concussion. However, during compression which
develops slowly, the spinal cord has a remarkable ability to compensate for the
induced change in shape. Frequently the symptoms associated with a slowly
developing lesion will develop rapidly at a certain stage, when the cord's
compensatory ability has been exhausted
 Two major factors are responsible for the clinical signs observed in chronic cord
compression: direct mechanical forces and compromise of the vascular supply.
 Mechanical deformation is easily induced in the spinal cord as it is soft and
delicate. Purely mechanical forces are thought by some workers to be responsible
for the observed conduction anomalies. Vascular changes are most likely to occur at
the level of the microcirculation (it has been shown experimentally that occlusion of
major arterial supply to the cord in dogs can be associated with minimal and
 transient neurological deficits). Oedema is a common sequela to spinal cord com-
(d )  r   q   d  d s
draining vessels.
 In contrast to injury resulting from acute cord concussion, in chronic spinal cord
70
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
compression the predominant lesions are demyelination and Wallerian degenera-
tion in the spinal tracts within the white matter. However, there can also (rarely) be
 gressive ischaemia. The relative importance of the grey and white matter damage is
dependent on the location of the compression within the spinal cord, i.e. damage to
 grey matter in the cervical or lumbar intumescences is far more serious than damge
to grey matter in the T3-L3 segment.
The differences between the mechanisms of injury in acute and chronic injuries
can also be related to the vessels affected by the lesion. During chronic compressive
disease, the thinnest-walled vessels (the veins) are preferentially affected leading to
cord congestion, oedema and hyalinization of the affected vasculature. The
 mechanism of ischaemic injury to the cord in compressive disease is similar to
that occurring in acute concussive injuries; however, it proceeds at a much slower
rate, and so is more amenable to medical and surgical intervention. Surgical
removal of lesions responsible for chronic cord compression usually produces
very gratifying and rapid results. Following relief of compression in experimental
vascular leakage of protein. Reperfusion can also result in formation of free radicals.
These two events could account for the transient worsening of neurological deficits
which is occasionally observed in clinical cases following decompression.
Associated reading
Allen A.R. (1911) Surgery of experimental lesion of spinal cord equivalent to crush
injury of fracture dislocation of spinal column. j. Am. Med. Assoc. 57, 878.
 Balentine J.D. (1978) Pathology of experimental spinal cord trauma. I. The necrotic
lesion as a function of vascular injury. Lab. Invest. 39, 236.
Berg R.J., Rucker N.C. (1985) Pathophysiology and medical management of acute
spinal cord injury. Comp. Cont. Ed. Pract. Vet. 7, 646.
Braund K.G. (1993) Acute spinal cord trauma. In: Bojrab M.J. (ed.) Disease Mechan-
isms in Small Animal Surgery, 2nd edn. Philadelphia, Lea and Febiger, p. 1140.
Braund K.G., Shores A., Brawner W.R. (1990) The etiology, pathology and patho-
physiology of acute spinal cord trauma. Vet. Med. 85, 684.
Brown S.A., Hall E.D. (1992) Role of oxygen derived free radicals in the patho-
 genesis of shock and trauma, with focus on central nervous systerm injuries. j.
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 200, 1849.
Choi D.W. (1988) Glutamate neurotoxicity and diseases of the nervous system.
Neurol. 1, 623.
 Coughlan A.R. (1993) Secondary injury mechanisms in acute spinal cord trauma. J.
Small Anim. Pract. 34, 117.
Faden A.1., Simon R.P (1988) A potential role for excitotoxins in the pathophysiology
 Of spinal cord injury. Ann. Neurol. 23, 623.
Griffiths I.R. (1972) The extensive myelopathy of intervertebral disc protrusions in
dogs ("the ascending syndrome'). J. Small Anim. Pract. 13, 425.
Griffiths 1.R. (1975) Vasogenic oedema following acute and chronic spinal cord
compression in the dog. I. Neurosurg. 42, 155.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF SPINAL CORD INJURY
71
   xa e e     (  s
dogs. J. Neurol. Sci. 27, 247.
Hall E.D., Wolf D.L. (1986) A pharmacological analysis of the pathophysiological
mechanisms of post traumatic spinal cord ischaemia. J. Neurosurg. 64, 951.
 Janssens L.A.A. (1991) Mechanical and pathophysiological aspects of acute spinal
cord trauma. J. Small Anim. Pract. 32, 572.
 Sorjonen D.C., Vaughn D.M. (1989) Membrane interactions in central nervous
system injury. Comp. Cont. Ed. Pract. Vet. 11, 248.
Illinois, Charles Thomas, p. 63.
Tator C.H., Fehlings M.G. (1991) Review of the secondary injury theory of acute
 spinal cord trauma with emphasis on vascular mechanisms. J. Neurosurg. 75,
15.
() T qg  so o p ()  m ' 
Disease Mechanisms in Small Animal Surgery, 2nd edn. Philadelphia, Lea and
Febiger, p. 1152.
Wright F, Paimer A.C. (1969) Morphological changes caused by pressure on the
 spinal cord. Path. Vet. 6, 355.
CHAPTER 6
Anatomical Anomalies and
Congenital Lesions
Contents
Introduction 72
Disorders of the vertebral column 7
Anomalies of the spinal cord  80
Associated reading 83
Introduction
 There are many anatomical anomalies of the spinal cord and vertebral column
are found in young animals and are assumed to be congenital and, in some cases,
are inherited. A large number of congenital lesions of the vertebral column are
easily diagnosed on plain radiographs, although their significance may not be so
clearly defined. Some abnormalities of the spinal cord can be diagnosed with the
aid of contrast radiography but many require more advanced imaging techniques
for accurate diagnosis. Many, but not all, congenital disorders of the spinal cord
carnot be treated surgically. Vertebral anomalies may sometimes be treated
effectively by surgery but consistent results may be difficult to achieve.
Disorders of the vertebral column
There are several congenital abnormalities of the vertebral column, some of which
can be associated with concomitant disorders of the spinal cord. The congenital
abnormalities of the vertebral column are caused by abnormalities in embryonic
development and differentiation.
The spinal cord is formed from the ectoderm, the dorsal part of which invagi-
nates to form the neural tube at about 15 days of gestation. The vertebral column is
formed from the surrounding mesoderm, which initially is arranged segmentally in
somites. The notocord lies ventral to the neural tube (Figure 6.1).
 During embryogenesis, part of the cranial somite migrates cranially and part of
   sd      s s 
form the vertebrae; thus, the vertebrae are intersegmental. The notocord cells are
displaced and some parts develop into the nucleus pulposus of the intervertebral
disc of the adult; there are no remnants elsewhere.
 At birth there are three ossification centres in each vertebra; one for the centrum
ANATOMICAL ANOMALIES AND CONGENITAL LESIONS
73
Sclerotomes
cranial + caudal
Spinalcord
halves
Notochord
Segmental artery
Intervertebral Vertebral
disc
body
Figure 6.1 Diagram of embryonic development of the vertebral column. Note that the vertebrae form
from parts of adjacent embryological segments. In the adult the notochord only persists as the nucleus
pulposus, elsewhere it is obliterated (After Colter 1993, with permission).
and one for each half of the developing vertebral arch. Secondary ossification
centres develop later and give rise to the various processes of the vertebrae.
Block vertebrae
Block vertebrae arise because of imperfect migration of the mesoderm of the
somites, resulting in incomplete separation of adjacent vertebrae (Figure 6.2).
This incomplete separation can be of varying degrees, resulting in fusior of
adjacent vertebral bodies, arches or simply incomplete development of the inter-
vertebral disc. This type of abnormality is stable and does not cause clinical signs at
the primary site. Problems can occasionally arise owing to increase in stress on
 neighbouring intervertebral spaces, with consequent degenerative changes and
possible disc protrusion in later life.
Hemivertebrae
 This abnormality affects the vertebral bodies, which may be wedge shaped or
butterfly shaped depending on the portion of the vertebral body which fails to
develop properly. Both ventrodorsal and lateral radiographic views are required
to assess adequately the shape of such malformed vertebrae. They are found
74
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SUIRGERY
Figure6.2 Block vertebra,caused by imperfect separation of L5 and L6. The lesion was symptomless
but rote adjacent spondylosis.
commonly in screw-tailed breeds of dog and occasionally in other breeds, usually
in the thoracic, or less commonly, in the lumbar segment of the vertebral column.
The anomaly responsible for development of hemmivertebrae is not well defined
 but is likely to be due to displacement of somite segments by half a segment
during embryogenesis or failure of development of one side of the ossification
centre of the centrum of the vertebral body. Butterfly vertebrae have a central
membrane which 1epresents persistence of a portion of the notocord (Figure 6.4).
Although hemivertebrae are inherently unstable and may cause twisting or
 abnorrmal flexion (kyphosis) of the vertebral column, they are not always associated
with neurological deficits. Sometimes the hemivertebra is pushed dorsally as growth
occurs in the young animal, causing development of progressive spinal cord com-
pression and clinical signs of a transverse myelopathy (Figure 6.3). Secondary
changes of the abnormal and adjacent vertebrae can occur, such as remodelling of
the spinous processes and spondylosis. These secondary abnormalities can also be
responsible for clinical signs.
Hemivertebrae found in a dog exhibiting suitable clinical signs should not be
assumed to be the cause of the neurological deficits. Myelography is essential to
confirm that there is associated spinal cord compression. Clinical signs arising from
the same site may also result from myelodysplasia, tethering of the cord, or
 arachnoid cysts, some of which can also be diagnosed with myelography. Surgi-
cal correction of compression caused by hemivertebrae can be carried out by
judicious removal of offending bone, plus stabilization where appropriate.
Opinions on prognosis given to the owners of surgically treated dogs should be
tempered by awareness of the possibility of concurrent myelodysplasia.
ANATOMICAL ANOMALIES AND CONGENITAL LESIONS
75
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.3 (a) Hemivertebrae at T6 and T7 associated zwith severe kyphosis (flexion) of the vertebral
column. (b) Myelography demonstrates that this lesion is causing spinal cord compression.
Transitional vertebrae
These vertebrae exhibit characteristics of two adjacent divisions of the vertebral
column, and occur at the junctions of these divisions, e.g. at thoracolumbar junc-
tion. These are frequently clinically insignificant, although common. Thoracolum-
identify prior to surgery in this area as they can cause the surgeon to misidentify
 the level at which surgery is to be carried out (the last rib is often used as a
landmark).
 Transitional vertebrae at the lumbosacral junction (most usually unilateral sacral-
ization, i.e. fusion of one-half of the seventh lumbar vertebra to the ilium and/or
 sacrum) can be associated with clinical signs (Figure 6.5). German Shepherd dogs
exhibiting symptoms of cauda equina compression have been found to have a
higher incidence of transitional vertebrae at the lumbosacral junction compared
with unaffected dogs of the same breed.
Spina bifida
This abnormality is seen most commonly in sciew-tailed brecds of dog and in Manx
cats. Several types are recognized; spina bifida occulta is used to describe imperfect
fusion of the spinous process, and spina bifida manifesta is the term for incomplete
fusion of the vertebral arch with concurrent involvement of the spinal cord and/or
76
HANDBOOK OFSMALLANIMALSPINALSURGERY
Figure 6.4 Butterfly vertebra and imperfect midline fusion at T5/6(arrowed).
Figure 6.5 Transitional vertebra at lumbosacral junction.One side of the (apparent) L7 vertebra is
forminga jointwith the wing oftheilium.
meninges. The meninges may protrude through the defect to reach the skin
(meningocoele) or the central canal may expand and protrude through the opening
to reach the skin; this is termed meningomyelocoele (Figure 6.6). Neurological
deficits are associated with the abnormal neural tissue development and cannot
ANATOMICAL ANOMALIES AND CONGENITAL LESIONS
77
Figure 6.6 Myelogram of meningomyelocoel at the lumbosacral junction in an English bulldog.
 be treated surgically The communication of the subarachnoid space or central canal
with the exterior can lead to meningitis; this communication can be closed surgic-
 ally. The dural tube is exposed and, if necessary (i.e. if there is tethering of the cord),
 dissected free of the surrounding soft tissue and the opening through the dura
sutured to achieve closure (Figure 6.6).
Aplasia/hypoplasia/dysplasia of the dens
 This condition, in which there is failure of proper formation of the dens of the atlas,
is most often encountered in small breeds of dog, in particular toy poodles and
Yorkshire terriers. It is rarely observed in other breeds of dog or in cats. Symptoms
 are not always exhibited unless there has been trauma to the cranial cervical region,
such trauma is often apparently very minor. Clinical signs are often exhibited
 before the arimal is 18 months old. The lack of stability caused by this defect
 allows atlanto-axial subluxation causing ventroflexion of the cranial cervical spine
without neurological deficits affecting all four limbs; occasional animals exhibit
periodic collapsing episodes which may resemble seizures. Treatment is usually
surgical and is discussed in Chapter 11.
Vertebral canal stenosis
Stenosis (narrowing) of the vertebral canal occurs at various levels of the vertebral
canal with variable frequency.
CERVICAL REGION
 In certain breeds of dog stenosis of the cervical vertebral canal is very common. In
 Dobermann pinschers the caudal cervical vertebral canal is almost always stenotic
when compared with dogs of the same size and different breed. Stenosis of the
cervical vertebral canal is also encountered in Basset hounds, great Danes, Irish
wolfhounds and sporadically in other breeds. In the Dobermann, stenosis is most
obvious at the most cranial aspect of the caudal cervical vertebrae, especially C7
78
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Figure 6.7 Stenosis of the cranial aspect of C7 vertebral canal in a middle aged Dobermann pinscher.
Compare ventrodorsal depth at 1 and 2.
the vertebral canal is funnel shaped at such affected vertebrae (Figure 6.7). Symp-
toms associated with stenosis are not always present in the young dog but the bony
stenosis will often exacerbate the effects of degenerative diseases (e.g. type II disc)
 s  n ss o  is      a jo
include progressive ataxia and tetraparesis and can be alleviated by surgery. The
problems of cervical vertebral canal stenosis and degenerative disease of the caudal
cervical region (wobbler syndrome) is considered in more detail in Chapter 12.
THORACIC REGION
 Stenosis of the thoracic vertebral canal has been reported in the Dobermann, in
LUMBOSACRAL JUNCTION
Idiopathic stenosis of the lumbosacral region has been recognized in small and
medium breed dogs (often toy poodles), associated with the failure to form an
adequately sized vertebral canal. The stenosis can be caused by malformation and
thickening of the pedicles and can affect both the vertebral canal at the lumbosacral
junction and the intervertebral foramina at L6/7 and L7/S1. Symptoms are thought
to arise due to both mechanical compression of the cauda equina and compression
of the vascular structures of the area, and can include a variety of clinical signs such
as paresis, pain, paraesthesia and sphincter disturbances. Dogs of between 3 and 8
years old have been reported to be affected by this syndrome.
 Radiographs of the affected region reveal no evidence of degenerative disc
disease, spondylosis, instability, tumour or infection. Stenosis of the vertebral canal
ography, myelography or MRI would be expected to define more clearly the nature
and site of the attenuated area of neural tissue.
Treatment of idiopathic lumbosacral stenosis has been by dorsal laminectomy,
ANATOMICAL ANOMALIES AND CONGENITAL LESIONS
79
with additional decompression of the nerve roots by foraminotomy or facetectomy
as required. Results in all cases were good.
Sacrocaudal hypoplasia
Hypoplasia of elements of the tail is ‘normal in the Manx cat. However, other
abnormalities of the caudal part of the vertebral column can occur concurrently.
These include agenesis of part of the sacrum, spina bifida and its associated
abnormalities, and spinal cord abnormalities such as dysraphism and syringomye-
lia. Similar abnormalities also occasionally develop in breeds of dog with short or
screw tails. Symptoms typically include bladder atony and pelvic limb weakness.
Diagnosis of sacrocaudal hypoplasia can be made by radiography and contrast
radiography; lower motor neurone (LMN) deficits can be documented with
electromyography (EMG). Surgical treatment of this condition is not possible.
Solitary and multiple cartilaginous exostosis
 These terms are used to describe the development of proliferating cartilaginous
 masses in various parts of the body around the growth plates; the terms osteochon-
 droma or osteochondromatosis are also used to describe the same conditions. In the
dog, the abnormal growths occur in either the axial or appendicular skeleton, or
both, and develop only during the growth phase of the individual. If the prolifer-
 ating mass develops on a vertebra it may lead to spinal cord compression. Surgical
excision of the mass may be associated with a good prognosis but prognosis is
dependent on the area affected and the ability of the surgeon totally to excise the
lesion. Solitary lesions are reported to be of little clinical importance in the dog but
severe clinical signs have been reported in one series. Malignant transformation of
multiple cartilaginous exostosis has been reported.
 In cats, a condition usually termed osteochondromatosis, has a very different
course and likely aetiology. The condition in cats has features of a true neoplasm in
 that enlargement of the masses is independent of the normal growth of the animal.
 Most affected cats are young adults and a viral aetiology is suspected. Solitary
cartilaginous exostosis has also been reported in the cat and has a good prognosis
following excision.
Calcinosis circumscripta
There have been reports of calcinosis circumscripta lesions as the cause of both
cervical and thoracolumbar spinal cord compression. The lesions appeared in
immature dogs and surgical excision resulted in remission of symptoms. It is
possible that some reports of cartilaginous exostosis could be descriptions of
variations of this condition
Mucopolysaccharidosis IV
This storage disease has been identified in the Siamese cat (and occasionally in
other breeds), one of the symptoms being progressive paraparesis caused by
proliferation of bone of the vertebral arch. Affected cats have abnormally shaped
80
HANDBOOKOFSMALLANIMALSPINALSURGERY
heads and corneal opacities. Neurological symptoms are first apparent at 4-7
months old and progress rapidly. Surgical treatment of this condition has been
reported, through removal of the offending bone. Although the results were poor, it
must be considered a logical approach to the problem of progressive compression
of the cord.
Anomalies of the spinal cord
Anomalies of the spinal cord are often not amenable to surgical therapy but may be
suspected during diagnostic procedures and are often found in association with
anomalies of the vertebral column. It is important that the surgeon should be aware
of their possible existence, so that the prognosis given for surgical treatment of
congenital skeletal abnormalities can be tempered by an awareness of the possibi-
lity of there being concurrent untreatable disease of the spinal cord. Increasing use
of advanced imaging techriques, especially MRl, is likely to increase the frequency
of antemortem diagnosis of such anomalies.
Spinal dysraphism
In this condition the neural tube fails to close. Many other abnormalities may
coexist, such as syringomyelia (abnormal CSF-filled space in the spinal cord)
(Figure 6.8), and hydromyelia (dilatation of the central canal). The condition has
been described most fully in the Weimaraner and sporadically in other breeds of
dog. Clinical signs include a characteristic (bunny) hopping gait, with crouching
posture and proprioceptive deficits in the hindlimbs. Dogs are usually presented
for examination at a few months of age.
 Usual diagnostic methods, such as contrast radiography and CSF examination
fail to diagnose the abnormality but should be carried out to eliminate the
possibility of a correctable cause for such symptoms.
Figure 6.8 Syringomyelia. In this case the syrinx resulted from an ischaemic lesion. (Photomicro-
graph kindly supplied by N.J.Olby,Cambridge UniversityVeterinary School,UK).
ANATOMICAL ANOMALIES AND CONGENITAL LESIONS
81
Dermoid cysts and pilonodial ducts
 In both these conditions there is a failure during embryological development of the
ectodermally derived neural tissue to detach itself completely from the ectoderm
tal tissue which remain embedded in the spinal cord. These may grow and cause
typical signs of transverse myelopathy and they can be identified as intramedullary
masses on myelography. There are no reports of successful removal of intraspinal
 Pilonodial ducts are ducts which communicate from the integumental surface to
the meninges. The condition has been observed most frequently in the Rhodesian
ridgeback, but also sporadically in other breeds of dog. Frequently, a small tuft of
hair is identified at the skin surface, and the area is surrounded by abnormal
whorling of the hair coat. Secondary infection is the common reason for develop-
ment of clinical signs, with affected dogs showing typical symptoms of meningitis.
The communication to the meninges can be demonstrated by introduction of
nonioric radiographic contrast medium into the sinus. Excision of the duct and
 control of infection have resulted in cures.
Arachnoid cysts
these cysts are a result of repeated trauma to the cord or whether they are
congential lesions. However, they are diagnosed frequently enough in young
(under 1 year) dogs which have no history of trauma for a congenital cause to be
considered likely in many cases. Affected dogs show evidence of a progressive
trarsverse myelopathy. A blind-ended sac of the pia/arachnoid can be identified on
myelographic studies and is thought to be formed as a result of poor separation of
the two layers during development (Figure 6.9). Alternative explanations include
development of such cysts as a result of adhesions formed between the meningeal
layers following trauma to the cord.
 Treatment of arachnoid cysts is by means of surgical excision, or marsupializa-
tion of the liring membrane. A dorsal laminectomy approach (Chapter 13) is
required, followed by durotomy. The cut edges of the dura are retracted by means
Of stay sutures. The cyst is usually distinct and associated with a depression of the
s  r s is  y  s ro  r 
loupes, is helpful. Surgical treatment of these lesions is usually very rewarding.
 although occasional cases will exhibit recurrence of symptoms, presumably owing
to cyst recurrence.
Globoid cell leukodystrophy (Krabbe's disease)
This rare disease has been reported most commonly in West Highland white
teriers, Cairn terriers and occasionally in other breeds of dog and cats. Although
the entire nervous system is involved, this condition often manifests initially as a
spinal cord disease. Symptoms are often first apparent at about 4 months of age
s ar sop po ( t go  e  as e sasap a  n)
initially then develop ataxia. Later symptoms include generalized tremors and
82
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.9Arachnoid cystatT9/T10.
more overt involvement of parts of the brain. Diagnosis is confirmed by post mortem
examination. Spinal cord lesions include demyelination. There is no treatment.
Vascular malformation
Rare cases of congenital malformation of blood vessels within the cord have been
recorded. Signs were consistent with a transverse myelopathy and the condition
was diagnosed post mortem.
Miscellaneous
Various abnormalities such as duplication of the central canal, syringomyelia,
hydromyelia are occasionally encountered. In these cases it is important that
routine diagnostic work is carried out to try to identify a correctable lesion. With
ANATOMICAL ANOMALIES AND CONGENITAL LESIONS
83
increased use of advanced imaging, especially MRI, antemortem identification of
these conditions should become more common. These conditions can sometimes be
the result of trauma (syringomyelia) or other conditions (hydromyelia can be
associated with hydrocephalus); it may become importart, therefore, to identify
the primary cause and surgical therapy may have a part to play. For example,
shunting of hydrocephalus is a recognized treatment for syringomyelia in humans,
and a recent report has described drainage of a syrinx in a dog.
Associated reading
Bailey C.S. (1975) An embryological approach to the clinical significance of
congenital vertebral and spinal cord abnormalities. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc.
11, 426.
 Bailey C.S., Morgan, J.P (1992) Congenital spinal malformations. Vet, Clin. N. Am.
22,985
Bichsel P., Lang J., Vandevelde M., Haeni H.J., Oettli P. (1985) Solitary cartilaginous
exostoses associated with spinal cord compression in three large breed dogs. 1.
Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 21, 619.
Canzinille, L., Kornegay, J.N. (1992) Acquired syringomyelia in a dog. J. Am. Vet.
Med. Assoc. 201, 1225
Colter S.B. (1993) Congenital anomalies of the spine. In: Bojrab M.J. (ed.) Disease
Mechanisms in Small Animal Surgery, 2nd edn. Philadelphia, Lea and Febiger,
950.
Done S.H., Drew R.A., Robins G.M., Lane JG. (1975) Hemivertebra in the dog:
clirical and pathological observations. Vet. Rec. 96, 313.
Dyce J., Herrtage M.E, Houlton J.E.F., Palmer A.C. (1991) Canine spinal 'arachnoid
cysts'. I. Small Anim. Pract. 32, 433.
Finnie J.W., Sinclair I.R. (1981) Multiple cartilaginous exostoses in a dog. J. Small
Anim.Pract. 22, 597.
Gambardella PC., Osborne C.A., Stevens J.B. (1975) Multiple cartilaginous
exostoses in the dog. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 166, 761.
Haskins M.E., Bingel S.A., Northington J.W, Newton C.D., Sunde R.D., Jezyk PF,
 u sised q p ss poo ps () a s
with mucopolysaccharidosis VI. J. Am. Vet, Med, Assoc. 182, 983.
Hirth R.S., Nielsen S.W. (1967) A familial canine globoid cell.leukodystrophy
('Krabbe type'). J. Small Anim. Pract. 8, 569.
Johnson S.G., Hulse D.A. (1989) Odontoid dysplasia with atlantoaxial instability in
a dog. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 25, 400.
Johuson L., Rolsma M., Parker A.J. (1992) Syringomyelia, hydromyelia and hydro-
cephalus in two dogs. Prog. Vet, Neurol. 3, 82.
Knecht C.D., Blevins W.E., Raffe M.R. (1979) Stenosis of the thoracic spinal canal in
English bulldogs. J. Am, Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 15, 181.
Konde L.J., Thrall M.A., Gasper P., Dial S.M., McBiles K., Colgan S., Haskins M.
(1987) Radiographically visualised skeletal changes associated with muco-
polysaccharidosis VI in cats. Vet. Rad. 28, 223.
Kornegay J.N, Cauzinille L., McVey A.S., Thomas W.B., Hopkins A.C., Plummer
S.B., Guenego L, Gainsburg L.A. (1992) Syringomyelia: pathogenesis and
84
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
hnn fo fiaoos uadong  fo usous onu e u sisoue
Neurology, p. 14.
s   e s so   si a  s s
ataxia. J. Small Anim. Pract. 31, 36.
Luttgen PJ., Braund K.G., Storts R.W. (1983) Globoid cell leucodystrophy in a
Basset hount. J. Smal Anim. Pract. 24: 153.
 McEwan J.D., Thomson C., Sullivan, S., Callanan S., Park M. (1992) Thoracic spinal
calcinosis circumscripta causing cord compression in two German shepherd
dog littermates. Vet. Rec. 130, 575.
McGrath J.T. (1965) Spinal dysraphism in the dog. Pathol. Vet. (suppl) 2: 1.
Morgan J.P. (1968) Congenital anomalies of the vertebral column of the dog: a study
of the incidence and significance based on a radiographic and morphologic
study. J. Am. Vet. Rad. 9, 21.
Morgan J.P, Bahr A., Franti C.E., Bailey C.S. (1993) Lumbosacral transitional
  s a    sr e s a
shepherd dogs: 161 cases (1987-1990). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 202, 1877.
Parker A.J., Adams W.M., Zachary J.F. (1983) Spinal arachnoid cysts in the dog. J.
Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 19, 1001.
Pool R.R. (1990) Tumors of bone and cartilage. In: Moulton JE. (ed.) Tumors in
 Domestic Animals. 3rd edn. Berkeley, University of California Press, p. 157.
Selcer E.A., Helman R.G., Selcer R.R. (1984) Dermoid sinus in a shih tzu and a
boxer. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 20, 634.
Selcer E.S., Selcer R.R. (1984) Globoid cell leukodystrophy in two west highland
white terriers and one pomeranian. Comp. Cont. Ed. Pract. Vet. 6, 621.
Tarvin G., Prata R.G. (1980) Lumbosacral stenosis in dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med, Assoc.
177, 154.
Tomlinson J., Higgins R.J., LeCouteur R.A., Knapp D. (1988) Intraspinal epidermoid
cyst in a dog. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 193, 1435.
Wilson J.W. (1982) Spina bifida in the dog and cat. Comp. Cont. Ed. Pract. Vet. 4, 626.
Wilson J.W., Leipold H.W., Lees G.E. (1979) Spina bifida in the dog. Vet. Path. 16,
165.
CHAPTER 7
Degenerative Conditions
Contents
Degenerative disorders of the vertebral column85
Degenerative conditions of the spinal cord 105
Associated reading108
Degenerative conditions which can lead to dysfunction of the spinal cord may
initiaily affect either the vertebral column or the spinal cord itself.
Degenerative disorders of the vertebral column
Disc disease
The term 'disc disease' is used here to encompass the spectrum of degenerative
changes that occur in the intervertebral discs in small animals. This discussion will
 consider the dog in particular because clinical signs as a result of disc disease are
u punos Auanba are sosip papnnoid pue aieiauasap ysnoure iea au u are
cats at post mortem examination.
Although not every dog which has degenerative charges in the intervertebral
discs will exhibit symptoms and not every disc involved will cause symptoms,
clinical signs are frequently observed in affected individuals. Two types of disc
degeneration have been described in the dog and have different pathophysiology
and consequences for the patient. The difference between the two types (Hansen
types I and Il) is primarily a matter of whether material escapes from the nuclear
region and is related to the anatomical site of degeneration.
TYPE I DISC DISEASE
 This type of disc degeneration predominantly afects 'chondrodystrophic' breeds.
These breeds are those in which an abnormal cartilage maturation takes place and
can be simply described as those with short twisted legs. Thus, dachshunds,
Pekingese and Jack Russell terriers are included. However, there are some breeds
with a notably high incidence of disc disease, such as the beagle, which do not at
first appear to fit into this category. Subsequent studies have led to the reclassifica-
tion of the beagle as a chondrodystrophic breed. Other breeds that not infrequently
exhibit type I disc disease include Springer spaniels, Dobermann pinschers and,
occasionally, German shepherd dogs. Mixed breed dogs are also often affected by
this type of disc degeneration. There is a tendency for dogs of certain family lines to
86
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
far the most frequently affected breed in most studies.
Clinical signs of type I disc degeneration are most common in dogs of middle
age, i.e. 5 to 8 years old. However, it is not uncommon to observe radiographic
evidence of disc degeneration in animals under 2 years old, and some dogs under 1
year old will need decompressive surgery to alleviate the effects of disc extrusion.
 Obese individuals are more at risk of developing symptomatic disc degeneration.
The initial changes in type I disc degeneration take place in the nucleus pulposus
with resultant inability to retain the normal degree of hydration, resultirg in a loss
of the disc's important hydro-elastic and incompressible properties. There are
changes in the ground substance from a mucoid to a chondroid nature and divi-
sion of the NP into lobules, separated by sheaves of collagen. Necrosis of cels in
divided lobules occurs followed by deposition of calcium salts beginning in the
periphery of the NP. With time, the abnormal forces that are generated lead to
weakening of the anulus fibrosus, the changes in which are consequent on the
altered mechanical properties of the NP. Fissures develop between layers of the
anulus allowing the rucleus to penetrate and eventually to escape into the sur-
rounding tissues. Similar degenerative changes to those occurring in the anulus
also occur in the dorsal longitudinal ligament. Owing to the eccentric placement of
the nucleus relative to the anulus, escape of the nucleus is most likely to occur in a
 dorsal direction with accumulation of extruded material in the epidural space of the
vertebral canal (Figure 7.1). The bulk of the extruded material is acellular necrotic
 material and is commonly calcified. Although the underlying degenerative changes
are slow to progress, the ultimate escape of nuclear material (termed extrusion) can
be rapid or extremely rapid, thereby causing concussive injury to the spinal cord.
The results of concussive injury have been considered in Chapter 5.
TYPE II DISC DEGENERATION
Type II disc degeneration is considered to be an ageing change and usually occurs
in dogs which would not be included in the chondrodystrophic group. The under-
lying pathological lesion is termed fibrinoid metaplasia; the nucleus undergoes
replacement by fibrinoid tissue, resulting in loss of its normal mechanical abilities
Figure 7.1 Transverse section through type I disc extrusion. Note fhat dorsal anulus is incompiete.
DEGENERATIVE CONDITIONS
87
*MOCKBA
Figure 7.2 Transverse section through type ll disc protrusion. Dorsal anulus is intact,
and increased stress transfer to the anulus. Dehydration of the NP is an early
change, followed by an increase in collagen content of its ground substance.
 Increase in collagen may occur diffusely, or result in the division of the nucleus
into lobules. Degeneration of the anulus occurs concurrently with degeneration of
the nucleus, in contrast to the changes which occur in type I disc degeneration.
There is a charge in the substance between the fibres of the arulus fibrosus
allowing disintegration of the lamellae and consequent intradiscal protrusions.
This allows a protrusion of the nucleus to occur, with consequent bulging of the
anulus dorsally into vertebral canal (termed disc protrusion) (Figure 7.2). These
changes occur over a long period and this type of degenerative charge is frequently
diagnosed in old dogs which do not exhibit symptoms of a spinal cord disorder.
Pain can frequently be elicited on palpation and manipulation of the affected area.
Compression of the spinal cord takes place over a long period of time; neurological
deficits (if present) result from physical deformation of the cord and effects on the
blood supply. The effects of chronic compression on the spinal cord have been
considered in Chapter 5.
 The reason why discs degenerate is not fully understood but mechanical forces
are incriminated owing to consideration of the distribution of lesions within the
vertebral column. Clinical signs of disc disease are observed in association with disc
lesions in the thoracolumbar and cervical segments of the vertebral column. The
most commonly affected area is the junction between the thoracic and the lumbar
regions. This area is under greater stress because of the relatively fixed nature of the
 neighbouring segments of the vertebral column. The thoracic region is relatively
fixed owing to the mass of muscle and additional skeletal elements (ribs and
sternum) of the thorax; the lumbar area has stiffness owing to the strong and
bulky muscles which attach there. Furthermore, at the thoracolumbar junction,
there is a change in the anatomical structure of the vertebrae, with a different
angulation of the spinous processes and articular facets. In the thoracolumbar
region about 70% of clinical disc problems occur at T11-L2. The most commonly
affected disc is between T12 and T13 vertebrae. In the cervical region the highest
proportion of symptomatic lesions occur in the most cranial discs, which are the
intervertebral spaces at which most movement is permitted.
88
HANDBOOK OF SMALI.ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
CLINICAL SIGNS
 Clinical signs relating to disc disease can be variable. Neurological dysfunction is
 sd   d na s   sme o
 deficits will relate to the specific segment of the spinal cord affected. Lateralization
of disc extrusion or protrusion usually occurs, due to the presence of the midline
dorsal longitudinal ligament.
 Lateralization of symptoms is often noted by the owner of affected animals, or
lateralization of the extradural lesion may be apparent on myelographic studies.
 Signs of pain caused by disc extrusion or protrusion may be the result of several
mechanisms;
(1) Discogenic pain - is due to change in pressure distribution within the affected
disc. Free nerve endings are found in small numbers in the dorsal anulus
fibrosus of the disc and also in larger numbers in the dorsal longitudinal
ligament. Stretching of these nerve endings is assumed to be the stimulus
responsible for sensation of pain
(2) Iritation of the meninges - the extradural mass will cause inflammation in the
meninges surrounding the spinal cord, and therefore cause pain mediated by
prostaglandin release
(3) Disturbance of the nerve roots - extruded or protruded discs may compress the
 nerve root as it lies in the intervertebral foramen and both types of disc lesion
can elevate the cord from the floor of the vertebra which may stretch the nerve
 roots. In clinical cases, nerve root compression is frequently found in animals
which exhibit severe spinal pain.
Cervical disc lesions
Symptomatic cervical disc disease is most commonly diagnosed in chondrodys-
trophic breeds of dog such as the dachshund; however, a number of larger breed
 dogs such as cocker (and other) spaniels and beagles are also commonly presented
with symptoms of cervical disc lesions (Figure 7.3). In a series of 1086 clinical cases,
symptomatic cervical disc disease accounted for about 12% of all disc lesions and
the most commonly affected of the cervical discs is between C2 and C3 vertebrae;
the incidence at other cervical sites decreases progressively proceeding caudally.
 Commonly, dogs which have cervical disc lesions will present with pain as the
only symptom. This pain is variable in severity. Some dogs merely exhibit reluc-
tarce to exercise, or to lower the head to drink or eat; others exhibit such severe
signs of pain that physical examination cannot be carried out without general
anaesthesia. Other individuals are more stoic and exhibit only mild pain responses
such as tension or spasm in the cervical musculature during vigorous manipulation
 a as a  e e  s d p
over a period of days to weeks, despite analgesic therapy.
Some dogs which have cervical disc lesions exhibit signs of spinal cord dysfunc-
tion, varying from mild ataxia to non-ambulatory tetraparesis. The neurological
deficits, if present, exhibited by dogs suffering cervical disc disease will reflect the
region of the spinal cord that is affected, ie. the C1-C4 segment or the C5-T3
segment. However, it is often not possible to state categorically which of the two
 areas is affected in each case. The severity of neurological deficits varies but it is
DEGENERATIVE CONDITIONS
89
Figure 7.3 Typical myelographic appearance of type I disc extrusion. Extruded disc material
commonty is found caudal to the intervertebral space,
 o  s  d p s s      a
following acute thoracolumbar disc extrusions. This is thought to be because the
thereby rendering compressive lesions relatively less severe. Peracute reptures of
the cervical discs are also uncommon compared with the occurrence rate in the
thoracolumbar region. Severe cord injury in the C5-C7 region can result in respira-
tory distress or even death due to paralysis of the diaphragm owing to interference
in the phrenic nerve outflow, so clinical cases which have severe lesions at this level
 are rarely presented. Paralysis of the bladder causing incontinence rarely occurs
following cervical disc disease, although it may be difficult to assess continence in a
dog which is unable to stand or move.
Figure 7.4 Type II disc protrusion at C6/7. This type of lesion is a common cause of the 'wobbler"
syndrome-seeChapter 12.
90
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Type II disc protrusion occurs in the cervical region of many breeds, most notably
the Dobermann (Figure 7.4). In this breed the disc lesion is responsible for symp-
toms in the majority of mature animals presented with the 'wobbler' syndrome,
which is considered in Chapter 12.
 Cervical disc extrusions (type I) can occur in several directions and those which
occur laterally can cause compression of the nerve root as it is transmitted through
the intervertebral foramen. Nerve root entrapment can cause very severe pain and
 also can lead to a 'root signature'. Root signature refers to the finding of lameness in
a limb in the absence of musculoskeletal abnormalities, except those causing nerve
root compression. Dogs exhibiting root signature will often hold the leg up spon-
taneously, or when crying during physical examination, and this symptom implies
that there is compression of the nerve roots of the cervical intumescence in the
caudal cervical region. Intermittent signs of this nature are referred to as intermit-
tent claudication and are thought to result from the increased compression of the
 nerve root which occurs during dilatation of the blood vessels which run alongside
the nerve in the intervertebral foramen. Such symptoms are therefore often exhib-
ited following or during bouts of exercise. The nerve root most commonly
compressed in the cervical region is C7 as it exits the foramen between C6 and
C7 vertebrae (Figure 7.5)
Thoracolumbar disc lesions
 The presentation of dogs with evidence of thoracolumbar spinal pain or dysfunc-
tion is cormmon in small animal practice. Most frequently this will be because of
 extrusion of type I discs in chondrodystrophic breeds. The presenting signs in these
dogs can be highly variable. Clinical signs can include anything from pain only to
paraplegia with loss of deep pain sensation. Typical early symptoms include
arching (kyphosis) of the thoracolumbar region with pain evinced on palpation;
mild proprioceptive deficits may or may not be present. Some dogs will exhibit
progression of the symptoms over a period of several days, or even longer. Those
 presenting with vague signs of pain can be easily misdiagnosed as suffering from
Figure 7.5 Lateralized disc extrusion at C6/7. Note cloud of calcifed material in foramen (arrow) in
this 45° oblique radiographic projection. This lesion was not wisible on routine plain or myelographic
Tiews.
DEGENERATIVE CONDITIONS
91
various painful conditions of the abdomen such as prostatitis, gastro-intestinal
obstruction or pancreatitis. The likelihood of confusion may be increased by the
tendency for dogs with severe thoracolumbar spinal pain to 'splint’ the abdomen
by increasing the tone of the abdominal muscles, which helps the dog to maintain
the vertebral column as rigidly as possible. Because of the risk of misdiagnosis it
is helpful for the clinician to have a high 'index of suspicion' for disc disease in
breeds likely to present with this condition. For instance, a middle aged
dachshund presented with an arched back and no other symptoms should be
 closely examined for evidence of back disease before an abdominal condition is
suspected.
 Although pain is a very common symptom of disc disease in the thoracolumbar
segment, the incidence of associated neurological signs is much higher at this site
 than in the cervical region. Neurological signs usually reflect a transverse myelo-
 pathy affecting a portion of the T3-L3 segment. Some type I disc extrusions will
Tesult in a peracute onset of paraplegia. Disc lesions caudal to L4 do occur but are
infrequent, with the exception of type II disc protrusions at the lumbosacral
junction.
 Type I and type II disc lesions are usually expressed in different breeds, but the
 clinical signs typicaly associated with each differ considerably. There is usually a
 slow onset of vertebral column pain with or without symptoms of a transverse
myelopathy associated with type I disc protrusion, whereas the onset of symp-
 toms is much more rapid and often more severe in association with type I disc
extrusions.
The owners of affected dogs will often be able to state which hindlimb was
initially affected in a dog which has shown progressive paraparesis, a feature
which can be very helpful in determining the surgical therapy best suited to the
patient. Extreme lateralization of disc extrusions in the thoracolumbar spine is
relatively uncommon but will occasionally occur; affected animals will exhibit
 of nerve 1oot compression will occur without evidence of concurrent spinal cord
n pno an u paas aq uo ais pou no sd uissa
 region (L4-L7) producing pelvic limb lamenes; abnormalities in myotatic reflexes
 ale also common in this group of cases.
Diagnosis of disc disease
 A strong suspicion of symptomatic disc disease can be made on the basis of history;
signalment and neurological findings. However, there are a large number of
differential diagnoses that must be ruled out. Radiography is the most useful
no anu on pasn aq us sudeopn ud ssop u Aepou psn Aouoo pue
various differential diagnoses when surgical treatment is not contemplated and can
be very suggestive of the site of a significant disc lesion.
Differential diagnosis of disc disease:
●Other compressive lesions
epidural
tumour
fracture/dislocation
92
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
abcess
haematoma
vertebral anomalies
intradural tumour
 Concussive injury
'whiplash' injury (i.e. hyperextension)
 traumatic disc extrusion (normal disc, extrerme
mechanical insult)
 Inflammatory conditions
meningitis/myelitis
 corticosteroid responsive meningitis
GME/reticulosis
viral
bacterial
fungal
protozoal
vasculitis
Vascular conditions
fibrocartilaginous embolization
 For any case in which a disc lesion is suspected the diagnostic procedure is likely to
include a myelogram. It is very important that a CSF sample should be collected
during this procedure as many of the differential diagnoses are associated with
abnormal CSF.
 Calcification of the nucleus occurs as a consequence of type I disc degeneration
mineralized disc does not indicate that the disc is responsible for the symptoms,
 merely that there is disc degeneration in that individual. In the cervical spine a
radiographically calcified disc is frequently the site of an extrusion, whereas in the
thoracolumbar region such discs are uncommonly the site of an 'active' lesion.
 Active type I disc lesions will commonly exhibit one or many of the following
features: narrowing or wedging of the intervertebral space; narrowing of the
intervertebral foramen; collapse of the synovial joints; a cloud of calcified material
seen apparently lying within the vertebral canal (in the cervical region a 'tail of
calcified material can be seen leaving the disc space in many cases) (Figure 7.6).
Although a tentative diagnosis can often be made from a plain radiograph, it is
aq Aeu aau (1) :suoseau 0m 1oy Aydeojau 1no Aiies 0n 4uapnad Aensn
concurrent disease affecting that individual, ie. calcified discs are common in
 middle aged and older chondrodystrophic dogs but are not always the cause of
 paap lm (n o a) ins o a a ( ss see a
whether a compressive lesion can be diagnosed on myelography and its site relative
to the spinal cord (Figure 7.7).
Type II disc protrusions will usually not be evident on plain radiographs
although there is frequently spondylosis of the adjacent vertebral bodies, which
could be interpreted as evidence of instability. Myelography is essential for
diagnosis of type I disc protrusions (Figure 7.8).
DEGENERATIVE CONDITIONS
93
(9/) uosnux sp a 1 dh 0 fo uddn odpu p podhi g ain
Myelography will usually confirm the site of a disc extrusion. However,
extremely lateralized extrusions may not be detected definitively by either routine
plain radiographs or by myelography. In these cases the use of an oblique view (at
45° to ventrodorsal view) to highlight the intervertebral foramen is essential to
demonstrate the site of the extruded material. This view is best carried out before
myelography and is essential in those cases exhibiting a root signalment. A classi-
fication of the various directions of cervical disc extrusion has been described by
Felts and Prata (1983).
Management
A large number of dogs which have symptomatic disc disease can be adequately
managed by conservative treatment. Such treatment usually consists of cage rest for
a variable period, plus use of corticosteroids or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs to reduce pain. In the case of cervical disc extrusions, many conservatively
treated animals will ultimately relapse and require surgery. For dogs which have
mild symptoms caused by thoracolumbar disc extrusions, conservative therapy is
However, there is a high risk of progression of the condition if conservative
therapy is applied inappropriately or casually. Furthermore, thoracolumbar disc
fenstration is an appropriate choice of treatment in an animal which has suffered
multiple episodes of disc extrusion. Conservative therapy is discussed in more
 detail in Chapter 15.
Indications for surgery
Two main types of surgical treatment for disc disease are currently available in the
dog: (i) fenestration and (i) decompressive techniques. Fenestration is a procedure
aimed at reducing the frequency of recurrent bouts of disc extrusion and is there-
fore used for prophylaxis. The efficacy of fenestration in reducing the rate of
recurrence of symptomatic disc disease has been well demonstrated in several
studies. Decompressive (mass removal) techniques are used in order to alleviate
94
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
DEGENERATIVE CONDITIONS
95
(e)
(f)
(8)
Figure 7.7 Selection of type I lumbar disc extrusions. (e) Characteristic plain radiographic findings
associatedwithlesionatT12/13;notewedgingofdiscspace,narrowingofintervertebralforamenand
increased overlap of the articular facets. (b) Typical lateral myelographic appearance associated with
lesion at T12/13. (c) Typical ventrodorsal view of disc extrusion at T12/13; note the clear indication
that disc has extruded to the right-hand side.(d) Typical appearance of type I disc extrusion ina large-
breed dog (Dobermann); note the poor definition of contrast columns, although ventral column
disc extrusion; note the severe attenuation of the contrast columns despite injection at the lumbar site.
(g)Type I disc extrusion at T12/13 in a cat; note the opacification by contrast material within T12
vertebral canal owing to local myelomalacia.
96
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
(a)
(b)
indicating slight assymmetry of the lesion. (b) Type I disc protrusion at L1/2. Note associated
degenerative disease of the intervertebral joints and vertebral bodies.
pain and neurological dysfunction, as an alternative to conservative management
in animals suffering severe extradural compression.
CERVICAL DISC LESIONS
Surgical management is reserved for those ambulatory animals, in which con-
 servative and medical therapy for up to 6 weeks has been ineffective, and for
those exhibiting moderate or severe neurological deficits. Animals exhibiting
very severe pain should be treated surgically as soon as possible on humane
 grounds. Decompressive approaches can be either dorsal, lateral or ventral.
 Fenestration is commonly used as the surgical treatment for dogs which have
 cervical pain that is resistant to medical therapy. If an extrusion is present, it is
 difficult to understand the rationale for fenestration, as the only pain which would
respond to this treatment is discogenic. It therefore seems logical to carry out
 myelography on every potential surgical case and to reserve fenestration for those
cases in which an epidural mass carnot be identified and in which there is no
 evidence for other spinal disease, such as meningitis. Experience using this method
has shown that very few such cases are suitable candidates for fenestration.
DEGENERATIVE CONDITIONS
97
 Decompressive surgery is required for those animals exhibiting severe neurolo-
gical deficits and/or pain and with a demonstrable mass lesion on myelographic
examination. The approach is determined by the site of the extruded material but is
epidural mass overlying the relevant disc space and, commonly, extending a few
millimetres caudally. Concurrent fenestration of all remaining cervical discs is
 recommended by many authors in order to reduce the risk of further extrusions
 at other spaces. The ventral slot operation is prophylactic at the operated space and
usually there will ultimately be fusion of the drilled vertebral bodies.
        s s 
 observed during myelography to lie either lateral, dorsal, or dorsolateral to the
 spinal cord. Surgery to remove material from these sites must be considered
exploratory as the diagnosis must always be in doubt until the area is thoroughly
investigated. However, historical and other details of the individual case can
 provide a strong suspicion that a disc lesion is likely to be the cause of the dog's
symptoms. Dorsolateral extruded material is the most difficult to identify accu-
rately. Decompression of entrapped nerve roots must be carried out via a lateral or
 dorsal approach. Details of these procedures are discussed in Chapter 11.
 Management of cervical type II disc protrusions is included in Chapter 12.
THORACOLUMBAR DISCS
 Controversy centres around the question as to which patients should be treated
 a p u  s  e 
is appropriate, the anirmals can be categorized according to the severity of the
 symptoms which they are exhibiting. These categories are:
 I, pain only, first episode;
 II, pain only, second or more episodes;
 IH, ambulatory paraparesis with or without pain on palpation;
 IV, non-ambulatory paraparesis or paraplegia; deep pain sensation intact;
V, paraplegia, deep pain negative.
Some surgeons will also assess severity according to whether bladder function is
intact or not; however, this is sometimes difficult to determine, for instance in
peracute cases, or if the animal is confined in a cage. The presence or absence of
intact bladder function does not alter the type of treatment recommended. A
further factor is any change in the severity of the clinical signs; animals in which
there is progression of symptoms should be considered more urgent candidates for
surgical therapy; conversely, even badly affected animals in which the symptoms
are regressing should be considered candidates for continued conservative therapy.
 Category I: normally treated conservatively, i.e. by cage confinement followed
by physiotherapy and limited exercise. However, certain individuals, such as
in order to reduce risks of future, perhaps more serious, episodes of disc-
associatd disease.
● Category Il: good candidates for fenestration.
98
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
● Category Ill: could be managed conservatively, but are at risk of deteriorating
 Or suffering recurrence at a later date. Therefore many of these dogs are likely
 se up a as as ne p edod s ie a o
which treatment to carry out for these cases will be determined by the age
 Of the dog, the number of previous episodes, duration of the current episode
and degree of pain that the animal is in. A suitable course of action for
many dogs in this category is to apply conservative therapy initially (unless
the dog is in great pain). If the neurological deficits progress or fail to
resolve then decompressive surgery can be carried out. If the neurological
 deficits resolve, but the dog is perceived to be at high risk of recurrence (i.e.
 is from a family line which has a high incidence of disc extrusions or has
already suffered multiple episodes of disc-related problems), then fenestra-
tion is appropriate. Owners of dogs which fall into neither of these cate-
 gories must still be advised of the risk of recurrence, but surgery would not
be recommended.
Many animals in this group which are treated conservatively will have a
 prolonged period of recovery, and many will not have complete resolution
 r s   d    ru e 
 cant (and often very severe) spinal cord compression which can be clearly
observed on myelograms.
● Category IV: recommend immediate decompressive surgery.
 Dogs treated according to the above recommendations should all be expected to
make a good recovery, i.e. recovery to normal or near normal function (i.e. neuro-
logical examination required to detect proprioceptive or other mild deficits). It
would be expected that many cases in categories Il and IV would also recover
 d   d   ne  p 
neurological recovery is likely to be less satisfactory.
 Category V: this group is controversial. The time lapse between development of
 deep pain negative status and presentation to a veterinarian may be important.
Most of these patients have a peracute onset of paralysis, having suffered acute
concussive injury to the spinal cord. Many authors report that these dogs will
not recover to walk, while others will give a variable prognosis dependent on
the time elapsed since paraplegia occurred. Commonly cited recovery rates
include 50% if operated within 12 h, 25% in first 24 h and 5% if longer than
48 h.
 Successful results in group V dogs are reported to follow conventional
cedure would seem unlikely to affect the prognosis of a severely concussed
cord. Severe concussive injury to the spinal cord sets into motion a cascade of
events leading to necrosis of much spinal cord tissue (see Chapter 5). It seems
improbable that mere removal of the extradural compressive mass will have
 any effect on these events taking place within the substance of the cord.
 In the author's experience, those animals assessed to be 'deep pain negative' will
 not recover, whereas those with any deep pain response (however poor) will
DEGENERATIVE CONDITIONS
66
to clinician, which could account for the differences in results obtained. Use of
extremely severe stimuli (which involves crushing the terminal phalanges of each
digit, the tail, the calcaneus and distal tibia wifh pliers or similar instruments) for
required in order to demonstrate intact pain sensation in some severely affected
cases. Care is required not to fracture the bones involved and to avoid damage to
the skin on these areas. Animals with any degree of pain response, for example
vague turning to the site of compression, are considered deep pain positive and
will recover with conventional surgery, no matter how long they have been in
that state. Some of these animals will not make a full recovery, i.e. will remain
 pain assessment can therefore be thought of as identifying a subset of animals
which are deep pain negative to conventional testing but clearly have the poten-
tial to recover. Furthermore, the technique is a useful means of identifying
clinically those animals with spinal cords which are damaged to the limit of
that which has the potential to recover regardless of treatment. In experimental
 animals as few as 10% intact axons in the thoracolumbar cord are compatible with
the ability to walk unassisted.
 There have been some suggestions that dorsal laminectomy followed by piotomy
 n oo as a   n r a   
treatment can be offered to owners of such dogs up to 48 h after spinal cord injury
Aaaooau oy sisoulod 1ood e lo mn juapnd ms si 1l anq
the offending disc material and removing it. The decompression of the spinal cord
is effected by removal of extruded disc material; the removal of bone has no
 decompressive effect. Several approaches have been described, the advantages
 and disadvantages of each will be discussed in Chapter 13.
 Most type I thoracolumbar disc extrusions will be seen on myelograms as an
 epidural mass associated with the dorsal annulus of the relevant disc. Occasionally,
the extruded material will find its way to an unusual place, such as dorsal to the
cord. This appears to be particularly common in the larger breeds of dog, such as
the German shepherd and the Dobermann pinscher, which occasionally suffer
type I extrusions. The problem in these cases is possible confusion with a tumour.
aq isnu Aiains inq sseu jo adi sn ioy Aioiepueu si youdde jesuop y
can be utilized.
ACQUIRED LUMBOSACRAL STENOSIS (DEGENERATIVE LUMBOSACRAL STENOSIS)
Acquired lumbosacral stenosis in the dog is usually the result of protrusion of type
 II degenerated discs, with or without concurrent abnormalities of the ligamentum
Aa s a   se  d  d 
German shepherd dogs. The onset of the condition is usually insidious but on
Occasion there may be sudden onset of pain and neurological deficits. The condi-
100
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Figure 79 Examination of dog with suspected lumbosacral pain. The hips are kept flexed while the
lumbosacral region is extended (dorsiflexed).
with hip joint disorders. On examination, affected dogs may exhibit a crouching
 gait, often with the pelvic limbs placed much more cranially under the body at rest
than would be expected. Some dogs will exhibit lameness which may be exacer-
 bated by exercise. This has been attributed to effects on the local vasculature and is
referred to as intermittent neurogenic claudication. Affected dogs will often be
 presented because of a perceived difficulty in climbing stairs, or jumping.
ap q ro  p  po xa   q  m
 pressure on the spinous process of L7 vertebra. Care must be taken in examination
of these dogs in that confusion with hip problems is possible and the two condi-
 position when extending the lumbosacral spine (hip joint pain is usually less in this
 position) and to assess hip joint pain by abducting the joint (when pain is unlikely
to be evinced from the lumbosacral region (Figure 7.9).
 Neurological examination may reveal no abnormalities or there may be evidence
 of lower motor neurone disease of the L7-S3 segment, often including reduced hock
strength. This is best observed by assessing the force of hock flexion during pedal
reflex testing. Sometimes evidence of sensory deficits on the lateral surface of the
   r         
 musculature, anal sphincter and tail may be found and confirms that there is 
neurological involvement.
Diagnosis is usually confirmed by imaging the affected region. There has been
some controversy about the best first test to use. Some authors recommend myelo-
graphy as the first test. Myelography is undoubtedly useful in some animals,
 particularly when used in combination with flexion and extension studies (Figure
7.10). However, in some animals, particularly those of the larger breeds, the
DEGENERATIVE CONDITIONS
101
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.10 (a, b) Lateral and ventrodorsal myelograms of the lumbosacral region. Note elevation of
the zentral contrast column on the lateral projection and severe attenuation of the contrast columns
on the ventrodorsal view.
subarachnoid space either terminates or is elevated from the floor of the vertebral
canal some way cranial to the lumbosacral disc, rendering the images non-
 diagnostic. Other techniques include discography, which is best performed with
image intensification, and epidurography. The various techniques have been com-
pared in several studies. False positive and false negative results have been
obtained with most techniques. On the whole, the recommendation would be to
use myelography first, partly in order properly to assess more cranial disc spaces
such as L5 and L6. Discography and epidurography could then be performed if
required (Figure 7.1l). The most useful and non-invasive technique, if available, is
MRI. This technique can demonstrate abnormalities of the L7 disc and the compres-
 sion of the nerve roots very well.
Other degenerative conditions of the vertebral column
DEGENERATIVE JOINT DISEASE (DID) OF THE SYNOVIAL JOINTS
 This condition is very frequently observed in all types of older dog but is especially
common in the larger breeds. In some animals previous occurrence of osteochon-
drosis dissecans may be associated with development of DJD in later life. DJD of
the synovial joints of the vertebral column is certainly very common in the great
 Dane. DJD in the vertebral column may be observed in all regions but is most
 common in the cervical and lumbar areas.
 The diagnosis of DJD in the synovial joints can be made on plain radiographs.
 New bone formation is observed around the articular processes, often forrming sharp
 projections (Figure 7.12). Effusion within these joints is difficult to recognize
radiographically.
d peuds jo asnn e aq Ae pnq suodus pesnoomu jo asne e Araren si qa
 in some dogs, or symptoms of nonspecific stiffness associated with rising from
with DJD, especially in the cervical region if the distended joint capsule extends
102
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.11 (a, b) Lateral and ventrodorsal epidurograms of the lumbosacral region. Note eleoation.
and attenuation of the contrast columns similar to that in Figure 7.10.
 compression has also been observed in some cases of lumbosacral disease.
Treatment for the condition is almost exclusively medical (i.e. nonsteroidal
 analgesics/anti-inflammatory drugs), although surgical therapy could have a role
 in selected cases in order to alleviate compression of nerve roots, i.e. removal of soft
tissue and bone of the joint.
DEGENERATIVE CONDITIONS
103
Figure 7.12 Severe degenerative joint disease affecting the synovial joints between articular facets.
SPONDYLOSIS DEFORMANS
 Spondylosis is the term used to describe the proliferative bony changes which occur
on the ventral and lateral aspects of the vertebral bodies. Hansen (1952) proposed
that spondylosis was caused by stretching of the ventral longitudinal ligament as
the result of ventral disc protrusions; in humans a similar mecharism has been
suggested. Radiographic signs consist of osteophytes, which are most easily visible
on the ventral rmargins of the vertebral endplates. These may grow to large size and
 There will be an associated loss of normal range of movement. Care must be taken
to distinguish between spondylosis, which is a degenerative condition associated
with bony proliferation and spondylitis which is an inflammatory condition in
which bony destruction as well as proliferation occurs. On lateral radiographs it
is possible for early osteophytes to be confused with degenerated disc material
within the vertebral canal; use of ventrodorsal radiographic views will help to
ascertain clearly the position of such osteophytes.
It has been suggested that spondylosis may occur at the site of instability and
there certainly appears to be a high incidence of spondylosis at sites of type II disc
lesions in the cervical and lumbar regions of the vertebral column. However, care
should be exercised in interpretation of the significance of spondylosis; myelo-
graphy is required in order to diagnose definitively the presence of significant
disc lesions or instability at an affected site. Spondylosis occurs with considerable
frequency at the lumbosacral junction but is not always associated with type II disc
protrusions at that site (Figure 7.13).
 Spondylosis is usually regarded as an incidental finding and rarely is a cause of
neurological symptoms in itself, although it may give rise to pain or stiffness.
Occasionally, spondylosis is thought to result in nerve root compression because
 of irmpingerment of the proliferated bone as they exit from the intervertebral
 foramina. This cause of nerve root signs is probably underdiagnosed in dogs as
the condition is quite common in people and can give rise to very significant
symptoms (for instance cervical spondylotic radiculopathy). In dogs the most
junction and as part of the 'wobbler' syndrome, in combination with stenosis of
the intervertebral foramina. It can usually be dermonstrated by myelography that
104
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
spondylosis cannot be the cause of spinal cord compression but the diagnosis of
nerve root compression is very much more difficult. The condition in people is
 more easily recognized owing to the frequent use of CT scanning for investigation
of spinal/nerve root pain.
  a ae shp u sisos q pasnno d po sds yn
 even asymptomatic, certain individuals may be very severely incapacitated. In cats,
 severe spondylosis can be found as a result of vitamin A intoxication, which
frequently affects the cervical region of the vertebral column in this species and
can cause a dramatic reduction in its mobility.
Spondylosis rarely requires treatment as such, as it is usually asymptomatic.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs can be used as symptomatic treatment for
the stiffness exhibited by some individuals which cannot be explained by other
 lesions. Medical treatment will merely suppress the symptoms but will not cause
 regression of the lesion itself.
DURAL OSSIFICATION
 In this condition there is development of bony plaques within the dura mater. Often
this may be recognized on radiographs as a thin radiodense line or lines running
within the vertebral canal, looking similar to myelographic contrast columns
(Figure 7.14). The condition is thought not to be a cause for clinical signs,
although previous confusion of this condition and the clinical signs of degenera-
tive myelopathy has occurred in the German shepherd dog because of the
frequency of both conditions in middle-aged and older dogs of this breed.
 Fractures of the ossified dura with consequent haemorrhage have been reported
as a rare cause of paraparesis.
Figure 7.13 Lumbosacral spondylosis. There may or may not be disc degeneration at the same site -
contrast radiographs and electrophysiological tests would be required for diagnosis.
DEGENERATIVE CONDITIONS
105
Figure 7.14 Dural ossification. Courtesy of Mr M. Herrtage, Cambridge University Veterinary
Schoot, LIK.
SPONDYLOLISTHESIS
 Spondylolisthesis is the term used to describe 'slippage' between one vertebra and
its neighbour. The condifion is often seen in the cervical spine as one part of the
'wobbler' syndrome, or at the lurmbosacral junction. Stressed radiographs may be
required to demonstrate the malalignment, i.e. extended and flexed lateral views.
 The term spondylolisthesis is rejected by some authors on the grounds that the
vertebral body malforimation). Listhesis of adjacent vertebrae may or may not be
a cause of compression of the spinal cord as it traverses the intervertebral space.
Treatment of the condition may be required if there is demonstrable spinal cord
compression, which would normally consist of attempts to stabilize the vertebrae
and /or remove associated soft tissue compressions (discs and ligamentum flavum)
Degenerative conditions of the spinal cord
Degenerative myelopathy
This condition is most commonly encountered in the German shepherd dog but can
 also occur in German shepherd cross-breed dogs and some other large-breed dogs.
The symptoms usually appear when the dog is middle aged or older, i.e. about 7
years or older. The owners typically report that the animal is becoming more
clumsy in the hindquarters, drags the toenails of the pelvic limbs and tends to
sway or even fall as it turns corners. Both sexes appear to be equally affected. The
symptoms usually are equally prominent in both pelvic limbs, but there will
Ooccasionally be slight asymmetry. Continence and nociception remain intact.
 Affected dogs walk with an ataxic pelvic limb gait, sometimes with a tendency to
 mild hypermetria; swaying is often observed, particularly if the dog is made to turn
 in a tight circle. Physical examination usually reveals that there is abnormal wear of
the toenails on the pelvic limbs. Although many affected dogs will have concurrent
hip dysplasia, the gait abnormality can usually clearly be attributed to a neuro-
logical condition in view of the depressed proprioceptive responses. Transient
improvement in the dog's walking ability in response to anti-inflammatory
106
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
medications can often be attributed to the effects of these drugs on concurrent
Orthopaedic disorders.
Neurological examination usually reveals severe depression of the postural
ing. Thoracic limb responses and reflexes are intact in the early stages but very
 advanced cases (usually such animals are unable to support weight on the pelvic
ds a, ose sl ase  sasdsai po isdap xa im (s
reflexes are intact in the vast majority of cases. Occasional animals will exhibit
depression of the patellar reflexes, thereby prompting a more likely diagnosis of
degenerative radiculomyelopathy (i.e. involvement of nerve roots as well as
spinal cord). The condition does not appear to be painful, a feature which can
be important in differentiation from other spinal conditions which may cause
similar symptomatology.
Definitive diagnosis is based on post mortem examination in most cases,
 although MRI and blood tests to demonstrate depressed cell-mediated immune
responses have also been used in order to make the diagnosis in the live animal. In
 many cases, the use of myelography is important in order to rule out the possibility
of compressive disease as a cause of a dog's symptoms. It should be noted that
temporary deterioration in neurological status following myelography appears to
be more common in dogs suffering degenerative myelopathy than in dogs with
other causes of spinal dysfunction. This temporary deterioration can be expected to.
last up to 2 or 3 days and the dog will then retum to premyelographic status.
 Important differential diagnosis to be considered consist of type II disc disease and
intraspinal neoplasia (especially intradural tumours which generally do not result
 s aa aq pa aq sn sasn ea a (d u
 myelography and a likely presumptive diagnosis of degenerative myelopathy can
 be established. A more common finding which can lead to some difficulty is the
discovery of a compressive lesion (especially a type II disc lesion) in a German
shepherd dog of middle age. The question arises as to the significance of such a
lesion compared with the possibility that the dog is also suffering degenerative
myelopathy. It is necessary that the importance of the compressive lesion should be
i e m ss a apun st n nns aaa prsa
problem is to use corticosteroid therapy as a trial
Corticosteroids will usually rapidly (within 2 to 3 days) improve the neurological
status of a dog affected by chronic spinal cord compression. There will be no
appreciable effect on the neurological deficits of a dog affected by degenerative
 myelopathy alone. Following this response the issue of surgery can be discussed
with the client regarding the likely positive results which would accrue from
surgery. If corticosteroids are able substantially to improve the dog's neurological
function it is likely that surgery will have a similar effect.
 Degenerative myelopathy lesions consist of loss of myelin sheaths and axons in
the white matter of the spinal cord. The most affected area is the cranial thoracic
spinal cord and demyelination is the predominant feature. There is an increase in
cellular and vascular components seen at light microscopic level and the
 pathogenesis is assumed to be immune mediated.
Treatment for degenerative myelopathy is limited. The condition is progressive
and most affected dogs will progress to non-ambulatory paraparesis within about 9
to 12 months of onset of symptoms. Treatment with corticosteroids, which has been
DEGENERATIVE CONDITIONS
107
advocated in the past, should be avoided as there is a tendency for it to cause
increased muscle wasting and weakness. More recently, use of amino caproic acid
and vitamin E has been recommended and has been suggested to cause a reduction
in rate of disease progression. Experience in a number of clinics has demonstrated
poor results from this type of therapy. In general, the prognosis appears to be
hopeless.
 In addition to the most common degenerative myelopathy described above, there
have been a number of reports of similar conditions occurring in two young
Aysny unaqs jo An e pue aiood annuu pae ue 'sop piaudaus u
dogs.
Hound ataxia
 A slowly progressive ataxia has been described in several different breeds of
, e ym ha suems y uuy og psn pe sia u iday spou
pelvic limb action was noted; segmental spinal reflexes were intact. Proprioceptive
aau uxa  isod sp pae so u rui aam sass
Wallerian degeneration in most of the spinal cord white matter, with relative
sparing of the dorsal columns. The aetiology is unknown, but a nutritional
 deficiency remains the most likely possibility.
Neuraxonal dystrophy
This condition has been reported in the USA in the Rottweiler. Dogs of this breed
and with consistent symptoms have been clinically examined in this country but
 there are no definitive reports (i.e. histological confirmation) of the condition in the
UK.
 This condition affects young Rottweilers (i.e. around 1 year old). Initial symp-
toms may be observed during puppyhood when the dog is noticed to be clumsy.
Ataxia of the pelvic limbs and a hypermetric thoracic limb gait are the usual
presenting symptoms. Dogs affected with neuraxonal dystrophy do not exhibit
 intact or hyperreflexive. Progression of the disease is very slow, such that affected
dogs of 5 or 6 years old will stil be able to walk, although they are grossly ataxic.
Late in the course of the disease, affected individuals will exhibit deficits of head
 and eye coordination, tremor and loss of menace reflexes. These features can be
 jmportant in differentiation of the condition from leukocencephalomalacia, which
also occurs in the Rottweiler and causes many of the same initial neurological
 di  je an e - nu a s og (moaa as) s
differentiating these diseases from others such as meningitis and the ‘wobbler
syndrome.
 abnormality; however, dystrophic neurones, with spheroidal appearance, will be
observed in certain medullary nuclei.
There is no treatment but affected dogs may live a satisfactory pain-free life for
many years.
108
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Leukoencephalomyelopathy (LEM) of Rottweilers
This condition initialy appears clinically very similar to the neuraxonal dystrophy
which affects the same breed and is described above. LEM has been reported in the
USA, Holland and Australia but there are no reports of this condition in the UK.
 Dogs affected with LEM appear normal until the disease onset at between lb and 4
years old. In the early stages there is ataxia of the pelvic limbs and hypermetria of
the thoracic limbs as in neuraxonal dystrophy. Local spinal reflexes remain intact,
although there is commonly hyperreflexia or even clonus. Paraparesis, tetraparesis
and loss of proprioceptive responses develop during the following few weeks to
months. Severe tetraparesis develops within 6 to 12 months of onset of symptoms,
resulting in the need for euthanasia.
 At post mortem examination all white matter tracts of the spinal cord are affected
 by malacia, especially in the cervical region. Demyelination predominates, together
with mild axonal changes.
The differential diagnosis for animals affected by both the above conditions
includes compressive disease of the spinal cord such as 'wobbler' syndrome, and
various inflammatory or infectious conditions. Myelography is required to elim-
inate compressive lesions from consideration and examination of CSF can help in
ruling out the presence of significant inflammatory disease. If the results of all
above degenerative conditions can be assumed. The differentiation of the two
  n pd e n    p a  s
which the typical features of the two diseases become more apparent. Confirmation
Miscellaneous
There are many reports of degenerative disease affecting the spinal cord of specific
breeds or litters. Some of these conditions have also been shown to be inherited.
The frequency of these disorders is low and many have only been reported once in
the veterinary literature. The characteristic features of many of these diseases is that
they are progressive, nonpainful and may affect young, often pedigree, animals. No
abnormalities are detected on myelographic studies and CSF examination is usually
unhelpful. Diagnosis is usually made at post mortem examination.
Should one of these disorders be suspected it is helpful to refer to a list of
breed-associated spinal cord diseases (e.g. Oliver et al., 1987).
Associated reading
Degeneration of the vertebral column
Ball M.U., McGuire J.A., Swaim S.F., Hoerlein B.F. (1982) Patterns of occurrence of
disk disease among registered dachshunds. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc, 180, 519.
Braund K.G. (1993) Intervertebral disk disease. In: Bojrab M.J. (ed.) Disease Mechan-
isms in Small Animal Surgery, 2nd edn. Philadelphia, Lea and Febiger, p. 960.
Braund K.G., Ghosh T.F., Larsen L.H. (1975) Morphological studies on the canine
DEGENERATIVE CONDITIONS
6109
intervertebral disc. The assignment of the beagle to the achondroplastic
classification. Res. Vet. Sci. 19, 167.
Brown N.O., Helphrey M.L., Prata R.G. (1977) Thoracolumbar disk disease in the
dog: a retrospective analysis of 187 cases. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 13, 665.
Felts J.F., Prata R.G. (1983) Cervical disk disease in the dog: intraforaminal and
lateral extrusions. J. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 19, 755.
Gage E.D. (1975) Incidence of clinical disc disease in the dog. J. Am. Anim. Hosp.
Assoc. 11, 135.
Goggin J.E., Li A., Franti C.E. (1970) Canine intervertebral disc disease: character-
' 's 'i f  ai yo as re pe anq 'xas 'ae Aq ues
1687.
Griffths I.R. (1985) Progressive axonopathy: an inherited neuropathy of boxer dogs
1. further studies of the clinical and electrophysiological features. J. Small Anim,
Pract. 26, 381.
 Hansen H.J. (1952) A pathologic-anatomical study on disc degeneration in dog.
Acta. Ortho. Scand. Suppl. Xl.
King A.S., Smith R.N. (1960) Protrusion of the intervertebral disc in the cat. Vet. Rec.
70, 504.
Larsen J.S., Selby L.A. (1981) Spondylosis deformans in large dogs - relative risk by
breed, age and sex. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 17, 623.
 Morgan J.P., Stavenborn M. (1991) Disseminated idiopathic skeletal hyeprostosis
(DISH) in a dog. Vet. Rad. 32, 65.
Prata R.G. (1983) Cervical and thoracolumbar disc disease in the dog. In: Kirk R.W.
(ed.) Current Veterinary Therapy VIll. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders, p. 708.
Priester W.A. (1976) Canine intervertebral disc disease - 0ccurrence by age, breed
and sex among 8117 cases. Theriogenol. 6, 293.
Romatowski J. (1986) Spondylosis deformans in the dog. Comp. Cont. Ed. Pract. Vet.
8,531,
Verheijen J., Bouw J. (1982) Canine intervertebral disc disease: a review of etio-
logical and predisposing factors. Vet. Quart. 4, 125.
Wright J.A. (1977) A study of the radiographic anatomy of the cervical spine in the
dog. I. Small Anim. Pract. 18, 341.
Wright J.A. (1982) A study of vertebral osteophyte formation in the canine spine. I.
Spinal survey. J. Small Anim. Pract. 23, 697.
Degeneration of the spinal cord and meninges
Chrisman C.L. (1992) Neurological diseases of rottweilers: neuraxonal dystrophy
and leukoencephalomalacia. J. Smal Anim. Pract. 33, 500.
Clemmons R.M. (i989) Degenerative myelopathy. In: Kirk R.W. (ed.) Current
Veterinary Therapy X. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders, p. 830.
Clemmons R.M. (1992) Degenerative myelopathy. Vet. Clin. N. Am. 22, 965.
Cork L.C., Troncoso JC., Price D.L. (1983) Canine neuraxonal dystrophy. J.
Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 42, 286.
Duncan I.D., Griffiths I.R. (1981) Canine giant axonal neuropathy; some aspects of
its clinical, pathological and comparative features. JI. Small Anim. Pract. 22, 491
Gamble D.A., Chrisman C.L. (1984) A leukoenicephalomyelopathy of rottweiler
dogs. Vet. Pathol. 21, 274.
110HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Matthews N.S., deLahunta A. (1985) Degenerative myelopathy in an adult minia-
ture poodle. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 186, 1213.
Morgan J.P. (1969) Spinal dural ossification in the dog. J. Am. Vet. Radiol. Soc. 10, 43.
  s   ( r  a   
predisposition for noninfectious diseases. In: Oliver J.E., Hoerlein B.F,
Mayhew I.G. (eds) Veterinary Neurology, 1st edn. Philadelphia, W.B. Saun-
ders,p.525.
Palmer A.C., Medd R.K., Wilkinson G.T. (1984) Spinal cord degeneration in hound
ataxia. J. Small Anim. Pract. 25, 139.
CHAPTER 8
Fractures, Luxations and External
Trauma to the Vertebral Column
Contents
Introduction 111
Reduction methods 114
Methods of surgical fixation of spinal fracture/dislocations115
Bullets/pellets 123
Hyperextension, 'traumatic discs' and cord concussion 124
Conservative management of spinal fracture/luxations 126
Associated reading 127
Introduction
Trauma to the spinal cord can arise as the result of external agents such as road
traffic accidents or falls, which cause damage to the skeletal elements of the
vertebral column or as a result of internal injury such as that caused by disc
extrusions. In this chapter the results of external trauma will be considered.
Spinal trauma from external agents is common and usually the result of road
 traffic accidents. Severe trauma is required in order to produce vertebral column
injury; consequently, many of the animals presented after such trauma are in shock
 and have other injuries, some of which may be considered more important than the
spinal injury, or be life threatening in themselves. Therefore, it is essential that such
cases should be examined and treated following a logical plan; the 'ABC' method is
frequently used. This approach has been described in detail by Brasmer (1984); A is
for airway, B is for bleeding and C is for central nervous system, etc. This method
ensures that injuries are dealt with in their correct order of priority. It is important
to assess neurological injuries at an early stage because they may require urgent
treatment and also because they may be of sufficient severity that the client may not
wish for further treatment to be continued. This is especially the case for animals
which are liable to become permanently incontinent.
Having dealt with the immediately life-threatening injuries, a complete neuro-
logical examination should be carried out. Neurological examination of such cases
requires great care, as inappropriate handling of the vertebral column may cause
further damage to neural tissue. When possible, the person attending the scene of
the accident should make efforts to secure the patient to a rigid object such as a
plank of wood or other rigid support, thereby limiting the movement at the site of
injury. Smaller animals may sometimes be safely and conveniently manipulated by
the scruff of the neck. Problems can be encountered in the neurological examination
of severely traumatized animals, in particular those that are unconscious at
112
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
B
X
X
Figure 8.1 Symptoms of a lesion at A can be masked by a lesion at B (which affects the lower motor
neurone). Furthermore, a lesion at C can be difficult to detect if there is a lesion at D (which will
produce similar signs plus those relating to the brain).
 presentation. For these cases, radiographs of the entire vertebral column should be
obtained. Other problems relate to the frequency of multiple vertebral injuries (about
20% of animals with vertebral column injuries have lesions at more than one segment
of the vertebral column). For this reason, extreme care must be taken when evaluat-
ing animals with external trauma, particularly as lesions of the lower motor neurone
i'g ani) se med anu su naddn au go suiat ysu uo do
 Force applied to the vertebral column may be in several different planes. Trac-
tion, compression, extension, flexion and torsion may all occur as the result of
external trauma. Commonly, a combination of the various types of force will occur
simultaneously and will also be affected by the tone of the axial musculature during
the traumatic event. The various types of force acting on the vertebral column will
lead to different combinations or types of fracture and luxation. This has been
summarized by Thacher (1993)
 It is important for the surgeon to understand how a particular fracture or
luxation has occurred in order to identify the optimal means of reduction and
fixation of the injury. In the case of a compression fracture of the ventral aspect
of a vertebral body, the likely cause would be axially applied compression. The best
means of stabilizing such a fracture would be to resist compression, for example by
rigid fixation of the ventral aspect of the vertebral body. An animal exhibiting a
fracture/luxation would be presumed to have suffered both axial compression or
   m (  n s    sxa
Aqesun euoyeon juanbasuon au ssappe jsnu Ainju ue yons jo juauean
and aim to promote stability in torsion.
It is important during assessment of vertebral fractures and luxations to remem-
ber that the radiographs represent the positions of the spinal cord and vertebral
column at that instant and that, at the time of injury, the fragments may have been
considerably more displaced. The neurological examination must be used to deter-
mine the severity of the injury, not the positions of the bones on radiographs. The
radiographs may reveal litle displacement in cases in which complete functional
transection of the cord has occurred. The neurological examination must be used as
a basis to decide whether surgical intervention or any treatment at all is warranted
- in cases which have loss of deep pain sensation, euthanasia may be the best
course of action.
Diagnosis
A strong presumption of spinal cord trauma is usually based on the history and
It is important that the entire vertebral column be radiographed as there are
FRACTURES, LUXATIONS AND EXTERNAL TRAUMA
113
 di aq n a ss s s a a
identifying the extent of spinal cord injury, or its exact site in cases which have
multiple vertebral injuries. It may also help to identify the presence of fragments of
bone or haematoma in the spinal canal. However, the presence of contrast agent in
the spinal canal can also obscure bone fragments. Owing to the severe cord injury
：
graphy is preferable to the cervical route, unless suitable positioning of the patient
may incur risk of injury to the spinal cord.
Treatment
Making the decision as to whether an animal should be treated conservatively o1
surgically can be difficult. One indication for surgery is 'instability', which may not
be easy to determine objectively; a second indication is if there is severe disruption
Of the shape of the vertebral canal. The most helpful means of categorizing the
various vertebral column injuries is to use a modification of the three-column
systerm devised for classifying similar injuries in people. The use of this system
can help to define more objectively the significance of the observed abnormalities.
The three columns are: (i) ventral aspect of vertebral body, ventral longitudinal
ligament, ventral part of the anulus fibrosus; (i) dorsal part of vertebral body.
dorsal longitudinal ligament, dorsal anulus; and (i) lamina of vertebrae, synovial
joint and associated capsule, and ligamental structures dorsal to the spinal cord,
such as ligamentum falvum, interspinous ligaments (Figure 8.2). Disruption of two
or more of these columns has been associated with instability sufficient to require
surgical intervention.
ds jo iaquu ar e i aide  aq u Ade aai-u
fractures and luxations and some authors have questioned the ability of internal
fixation adequately to stabilize the injured vertebral column. Treatment by means of
extermal splinting or casts is best applied to those cases which do not have injuries
(il
Figure 8.2 The three columns of the vertebral column are:
(i) dorsal - arch of the vertebral canal and dorsal ligaments (flaval, interspinous and supraspinous
plusjointcapsule)
(i) middle- dorsal longitudinal ligament,dorsal anulus and dorsal portion of the vertebral body
(ii) ventral - ventral longitudinal ligament, ventral anulus and ventral portion of the vertebral body
114
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
sufficient to cause instability (as defined by the three-column system) or severe
disruption of the vertebral canal. Advantages of surgical treatment include the
stable injuries. Early and aggressive attempts at rehabilitation are likely to be
associated with a quicker return to ambulation with fewer of the problems
consequent on recumbency, such as bedsores, urine scalding and pneumonia.
There is controversy regarding the value of laminectomy or hemilaminectomy in
treatment of animals with vertebral fractures or luxations. The benefit of laminec-
tomy is that it allows direct inspection of the dura, more complete estimation of the
degree of compression and removal of loose chips of bone from within the vertebral
canal. Durotomy can also be carried out for prognostic purposes in selected cases.
The problem associated with laminectomy is that it will decrease stability, which
then has to be dealt with before closure. In some cases, such as those with disrup-
tion of the ventral components of the three-column system, removal of the laminae
will render the spine dangerously unstable with a risk of intra-operative collapse.
 Hemilaminectomy must be preferred if feasible as it is less likely to destabilize the
 spine. Some doubt has been cast on the benefits of laminectomy because in some
series of cases the results with and without laminectomy are no different, although
 recent work in humans has suggested that removal of bone fragments in lumbar
fractures is associated with significantly improved results. However, the benefits of
removal of small bone chips from the vertebral canal have also been doubted in
 eme p aq  sd s i sns aa srs se s u
the cord by its innate pulsations and then reabsorbed. When dealing with humans,
the problems can be circumvented by the use of CT or MRI imaging which clearly
define the need for laminectomy for removal of blood clots or bone fragrnents. With
increasing access to these facilities it should be possible for veterinary surgeons to
limit the use of laminectomy to those cases exhibiting clearly defined indications.
Reduction methods
Usually the easiest way to reduce a spinal fracture is to manipulate the bones by
forceps. Sometimes grasping the vertebral bodies is possible. Following long-term
disruption of the vertebral column it can be helpful to use a distractor which allows
the bones to be manipulated into place more easily. The distractor pins are placed
through vertebrae at a convenient distance away from the injury site; they can be
placed through the vertebral bodies or the spinous processes (Figure 8.3). An
assistant is often essential in order to help reduce many of these fractures and
luxations and to hold the bones in the correct alignment while fixation is applied,
 alternatively, the distractor can be used for the same purpose. Some fractures seem
to have inherent stability when they are reduced but care must be taken not to
allow gross uncontroiled displacement of fragments during reduction and fixation
(Figure 8.3).
FRACTURES, LUXATIONS AND EXTERNAL TRAUMA
115
Figure 8.3 Distractor pins placed in spinous processes maintain bone positions facilitating applica-
tion of fixation techinique.
Methods of surgical fixation of
spinal fracture/dislocations
Many of the surgical techniques demand detailed knowledge of the anatomy of the
vertebral column to ensure proper positioning of the implants. This is usually best
provided by having access to anatomical specimens, before and during the proce-
dure, as well as sight of the radiographs during the operation. An important point
to remember in the treatment of spinal luxations and fractures is that accurate
 anatomical aligrment is not a vital prerequisite to return of full function. The
neural tissue is the important structure to be treated in the vertebral column and
although accurate reduction is likely to provide the optimum envirorment for
recovery of the spinal cord it is not usually absolutely essential. This is particularly
 the case in the cervical and caudal lumbar regions as there is relatively more room
for the spinal cord and associated nerve roots.
opnasd e jo uog iessau Aanosqe pou si Aii qnoe aaao
athrosis following failed vertebral fusion is associated with pain in human patients
and therefore should be avoided. Rigid stabilization is usually necessary to prevent
repeated trauma to the neural tissue but often a limited amount of movement will
not hinder neurological recovery.
A large number of different surgical techniques have been used in the treatment
of the traumatized spine, many of which can be successful in many cases. There can
116
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Selection of a technique should be based on its effectiveness in overcoming the
forces that created the fracture/luxation, thereby ensuring support during repai1.
Personal preference or past experience can also guide the choice of fixation; many
of the available techniques can adequately neutralize all the forces acting on a
fracture/luxation.
Vertebralbodyplating
This technique entails attaching a bone plate to the lateral aspect of the relevant
(Figure 8.4). Problems arise because of the extensive dissection required to expose
 the lateral aspect of the vertebral body and the difficulties in applying the plate to
the bone. Problems may also be encountered in trying to fix bone screws into the
bone of the vertebral body, which is frequently rather weak, with thin cortices and
large amounts of cancellous bone. Although it is preferable to be able to apply three
screws on each side of the fracture, in many cases there is insufficient length of bone
in one vertebral body. Poo1 screw purchase and insufficient number of screws can
cause premature loosening of screws, with consequent loss of stability.
Extensive instrumentation, which may not be available to all veterinarians, is
useful for applying bone plates. There is a need for detailed knowledge of the
anatomy of the area to allow drilling of the holes in the most advantageous position
with the least risk of iatrogenic cord injury.
A further drawback to the use of bone plates for vertebral body fixation is the
- o si i ' u e aq u i m i se  u 
 mended for use between T3 and L3 as during application to the lateral aspect of the
vertebral bodies it is necessary to cut the nerve root exiting at the relevant foramen.
The nerve roots between T3 and L3 can be severed with little apparent morbidity.
Bone plates can occasionally be applied elsewhere in the vertebral column, such as
to the arch of the axis; in human surgery plates are commonly applied to the ventral
 aspect of the vertebral bodies. In smali animal species, the application of plates to
the ventral aspect of the vertebrae is complicated by the fact that each screw can
only be allowed to penetrate one cortex, whereas in humans both cortices can be
o}
0
Figure 8.4 Vertebral body plates are applied to the lateral aspect of the vertebral body. Note the
direction of screws, which avoids the vertebral canal and nearby blood vessels and optimizes bone
purchase.
FRACTURES, LUXATIONS AND EXTERNAL TRAUMA
117
(a)
(b)
(d)
(e)
Figure 8.5 (a) Optimal pin placement for pin/PMMA technique in the thoracolumbar region. (b)
unilateral application of pin/PMMA technique in the thoracolumbar region.(d,e) Pre and post
operative lateral radiographs of fracturefluxationat T12/13.Thewire aids in attachment ofPMMA to
the pins.
118HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
penetrated without inevitably causing neurological injury. With purchase on only
One cortex bone screws will usually loosen and the necessity of obtaining purchase
 on four cortices each side of a fracture becomes difficult without the use of multiple
plates. However, some veterinarians have reported the use of ventral plates for
treatment of injuries in the cervical and caudal lumbar regions.
Pins and polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA)
This technique is probably now the most widely used in the treatment of small
animal spinal fractures. Its popularity stems from the relative ease of application to
 any area of the vertebral column, minimal dissection required for application and
provision of rigid stability. Steiruman pins, or Kirschner wires of appropriate
 diameter are driven through the pedicle of the vertebra and the vertebral body.
Pins may be introduced via either ventral (in the cervical region) or dorsal (thoracic,
lumbar, sacral regions) approaches. Following reduction of the fracture, the ends of
 the pins are partially cut, bent and encased in PMMA, which is moulded in a ring
shape or applied as a solid mass (see Figure 8.5).
 The technique has also been modified by the use of screws instead of pins, which
should grip the bone better and the head of the screw will give additional purchase
for the PMMA. However, the type of metal used for manufacture of screws has
poorer flexibility characteristics, which may encourage premature loosering. The
ideal solution is the use of positive-threaded pins (Imex) which combine the
advantages of both screws and pins. Partially threaded pins without the positive
thread are best avoided as they tend to break at the thread-pin interface (Figure
8.6).
 Difficulties encountered in the use of this technique stem from the ability of
 PMMA to potentiate infection and a large mass of PMMA may necessitate excision
 of part of the fascia to allow closure. Because of the potential for septic complica-
technique is mandatory during its use in other fractures. The use of antibiotic-
impregnated PMMA helps to reduce the risk of infection.
Recently, good results have been reported with the use of PMMA and pins when
used unilaterally. This allows a less aggressive exposure and shortens operating
 time. The clinician must decide whether this fixation is sufficiently strong in each
individual case on the basis of the size of the animal and the type of fracture/
 luxation under treatment.
a..
71117771117111173
(b):
Figure 8.6 (a) Conventional (negative) threaded pin. (b) Positive threaded pin. Note reduction of
shaft diameter at the thread-pin interface in the conventional pin.
FRACTURES, LUXATIONS AND EXTERNAL TRAUMA
119
Spinal stapling
This technique refers to the application of pins and wires to the dorsal components
of the vertebrae. Originally, the technique consisted of application of Steinman pins 
driven through the spinous proceses, then bent back on themselves and secured to
the neighbouring spinous processes by wires. This technique has subsequently been
modified by applying the pins to the region of the facets, with segmental wiring to
both rostral and caudal joint facets at each space as well as using spinous process
pins (Figure 8.7). The original technique was reported to be of use only in small dogs
'sho sare u asn si iodns pinom suesgou juasau uo siodai nq 'seo n
The main problem with this technique sterms from the time-consuming dissection
which is required. In large breeds especially it is necessary to apply the pins to
several (4-5) consecutive vertebrae, in order adequately to stabilize one vertebra or
in the lumbosacral region. A further drawback is the requirement for many con-
secutive facets and spinous processes to be intact. Failure due to the wire pulling
through the weak bone of the spinous processes is a potential problerm but less
likely to occur if a suficient number of vertebrae are incorporated in the fixation.
 In theory, the construct is insufficiently stable in torsion. Resistance to torsion by
this means of fixation is dependent on adequate width of attachment and security
of attachment of the pins and wires to the bone. If the more lateral elements are
allowed to ride medially, the consequent reduction in width of the construct will
cause instability as torsion is applied.
Cross pins
This technique has been described in many previous texts, however, it can be
unstable in torsion, especially if there is damage to the diarthrodial intervertebral
joints. It can be deceptively difficult to apply and requires extensive lateral dissec-
-s si eare padnasp an auasa  uoerdde ane pue sadod non uo
pinned. Despite its drawbacks it can be useful, particularly in small dogs and cats
in which it can be more easily applied (Figure 8.8). Another useful function of this
technique can be as a temporary means of reduction before the definitive fixation is
applied.
Spinous process fixation
Two techniques have been described using plates and the spinous processes for
fixation. In one method, the plate is attached to several consecutive spinous
  o n   a an   s  ssss
plates (Lubra plates) are attached by compression applied by screws placed
have been reported commonly from the USA, they have been infrequently used
 in the UK. Both plating techniques suffer from the drawback of requiring a long
sequence of unaffected spinous processes in the region of the injury, and the fact
that the spinous processes offer rather poor purchase for attachment of fixation
devices. Spinous processes may fracture or demineralize under the influence of the
forces applied by these techniques.
120
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
【a】
(b)
(c)
FRACTURES, LUXATIONS AND EXTERNAL TRAUMA
121
(p)
Figure 8.7 (a) Diagram of modified spinal stapling techrique. Note the width of the construct which
includes attachment of wires to the articular facets. (b-d) Pre- and post-operative radiographs of
fracture at L5 treated by spinal stapling technique.
 sd a  n  n   d o
treatment of caudal lumbar fractures.
External fixation
Early experiences with external fixation of spinal fractures in small animals were
 not very successful but recent work has demonstrated its benefits. An advantage is
the possibility of treating open fractures from a distance with minimal interference
with the blood supply. Pins for external fixation can be placed through the vertebral
bodies, through the spinous processes or through both in order to obtain the
 necessary purchase. External fixation has also been combined with internal dorsal
(spinous process) fixation for treatment of caudal lumbar fracture/luxations.
122
HANDBOOKOFSMALLANIMALSPINALSURGERY
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.8(a,b)Lateralandventrodorsalpostoperative radiographsofcatwithfracture/luxationat
L2/3treated bycross-piningCourtesyofTGYarrow,Citiet,LondonE1）Adorsallainetomy
hasalsobeencarriedout.
Potential problems can be related to improper pin placement or to excessive local
Othertechnigues
Several other methods may be used to stabilize injured areas of the spine with good
results. Some of these are applied at very specific areas of the spine and will be
covered in more detail in the sections dealing with surgery by site at each location
in the spinal cord. Examples are: single pin for L7/sacral fracture, cross-pinning or
screws for atlanto-axial subluxation, transarticular screws for cervical luxations.
FRACTURES, LUXATIONS AND EXTERNAL TRAUMA
123
In some instances the use of more than one technique may be warranted, such as
u aidxa rn 'azqeis on nno Auaa ane ym seare u o shop ale u
the lumbosacral junction.
Complications of surgical treatment
fixation.
RECURRENT INSTABILITY
Instability may recur owing to application of a technique which is insufficiently
robust to cope with the normal movements of the patient, resulting in failure of the
implant or implant-bone interface. This may be the result of poor choice of fixation
techrique, insufficient postoperative restraint or poor bone stock. Implant loosen-
ing can cause pain due to compression of neural tissue by implant o1 bone. Distant
migration of pins may also occu1 and cause significant morbidity.
MALUNION / NON-UNION
These complications may or may not be a problem. As mentioned previously, the
rigid and anatomical bone union. However, excessive callus formation can cause
 persistent cord or nerve root compression and dysfunction.
1ATROGENIC INJURY
This can be the result of induction of instability by the surgical approach itself, the
removal of supporting bony elements, or direct damage to neural or vascular
structures. The vertebral body techniques are more likely to lead to iatrogenic
damage, either because of impingement on the cord or due to penetration of the
aorta, which lies adjacent to the ventral aspect of the vertebral bodies in the
thoracolumba1 region.
Bullets/pellets
 It is not uncommon to encounter animals, especially cats, which have sustained
spinal injury from a bullet or air-gun pellet. Often the injury is associated with a
pellet lodged in a vertebra, usually the pedicle. The neurological status of these
animals is variable, ranging from deep pain negative paraplegia to mild paresis and
pain. The prognosis is variable, depending on the severity of the original injury.
Removal of the pellet, which allows decompression and inspection of the damage.
Ho a a ie snoas edde Aeu Annu aun ynov pu ann st
surgery, including disruption of the dura and exposure of the spinal cord par-
enchyma itself, the prognosis is often surprisingly good. Although infection
 wound hygiene and appropriate use of antibiotics usually prevents its occurrence.
124
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Hyperextension, 'traumatic discs' and cord concussion
Hyperextension injuries
Animals sustaining hyperextension injuries have commonly been involved in falls 
from a great height or road traffic accidents. Some affected animals will exhibit very
severe neurological deficits, but this can be very variable. Pain is not necessarily a
feature and would be more likely due to injury to non-neural structures. Hyper-
extension lesions appear to be most common in the cervical region and bull terrier
type dogs may be more commonly affected than others. It seems likely that the
exare rrno  sp yns sd sseu asn ia a
which may be expected in other dogs subjected to trauma of similar magnitude.
 Hyperextension injury resulting in cord concussion is assumed to have taken
place in animals that have signs of spinal cord injury without radiographic evi-
dence of fracture, luxation or traumatic disc extrusion. Hyperextension injuries are
most common in the cervical region, where there is a greater range of normal
movement between vertebrae. Cord concussion is caused by hyperextension dur-
 ing which the ligamentum flavum and the dorsal longitudinal ligament will bulge
s e  m si to a an go d  e  pe c
period of severe cord compression.
 On occasion it may be possible to demonstrate a lesion in one or other of the
ligament systems on myelography and sometimes there will be slight subluxation
visible at the site as a result of the ligamentous injury. Diagnosis of subluxation may
warrant surgical intervention in order to prevent further trauma to the cord.
Although myelography can demonstrate the location of the affected area, the
extreme swelling of the cord which occurs may render it difficult to obtain diag-
 nostic radiographs, even using the lumbar site of contrast introduction. Intrame-
dullary swelling can be visible on myelography for some days or even weeks
following the initial incident (Figure 8.9).
Imaging of similar lesions in the human spinal cord has been achieved by use of
 MR and often reveals lesions of the dorsal ligaments in the injured area. Correlation
 of the MR appearance with the ultimate neurological outcome can be made in 
Figure 8.9 Myelogram of dog which sustained cord concussion due to RTA. Note poor contrast
filling of subarachnoid space at C4/5.
FRACTURES,LUXATIONS AND EXTERNALTRAUMA
125
vertebral disc space at C4/5 and poor contrast filling of the subarachnoid space, sugesting cord
suelling.
human patients; it is to be hoped that with increased access of veterinarians to such
facilities that similar correlations can be made in animals.
Traumatic discs
 In certain situations animals will be presented with spinal cord injury which has
resulted from well-defined external trauma (such as a road traffic accident) but
radiographs fail to reveal vertebral fracture or luxation. In some cases there will be
 narrowing of one of the intervertebral disc spaces in the relevant area of the
vertebral column and these cases are assumed to be affected by a 'traumatic disc
extrusion'. In these cases, the disc which extrudes is histologically normal but
 extrudes because of the extreme forces to which it has been subjected. The result-
 ing cord injury is similar to that caused by an acute type I disc extrusion, ie.
concussive.
Cord concussion
 For animals in which there has been severe spinal cord injury caused by concussion
 alone, the only logical surgical treatment would be laminectomy plus piotomy/
 surgery of this type in animals with less than complete sensory losses. The treat-
 ment of these cases will thus frequently consist of nursing care. Although cortico-
experimental and clinical studies clearly demonstrate that only administration of
methylprednisolone within 8 hours of injury is of benefit. Beneficial effects follow-
 ing even this protocol are not great and in many cases the potential deleterious
effects of corticosteroid therapy will outweigh the benefits. Many animals that have
sustained cord concussion injuries have a good prognosis but frequently require
 considerable time to make a full recovery, i.e. weeks to months. Animals that have
lesions affecting the grey matter of the cervical or lumbar intumescences may be left
with profound and permanent lower motor neurone deficits.
126
HANDBOOKOFSMALLANIMALSPINALSURGERY
(a)
(b)
dsddnd u annifo sudo dn-fxoa()pu a (g an
damage to at least tuo of the three columns of the spine this case was successfully managed by cage
rest alone (Courtesy of Mrs L. Johnson, Bury St Edmunds, UK).
Conservative management of spinal fracture/luxations
Conservative management of animals with spinal fractures or luxation can be very
effective in selected cases. As mentioned previously, the choice between surgery
 and conservative therapy can be difficult to make. In general, ambulatory animals
with injuries which should be stable (ie. only one column disrupted), can be
 managed conservatively. Conservative management can take several forms - in
some cases simple cage rest is sufficient, alternatively the application of a body cast
or other splinting method can be used. Animals which have been treated by
external splints o1 casts may be difficult to handle and urinary incontinence may
cause problems with softening of plaster of Paris casts or urine scalding.
A recent paper has described the use of backsplinting in the treatment of a series
of dogs suffering from thoracolurmbar fracture/luxations (Patterson and Smith
1992). Many of these cases were non-ambulatory at the time of presentation, but
recovered to very satisfactory and often normal status within a short period of time.
Some biomechanical studies on the splint techrique demonstrated that it was able
to withstand the bending forces expected in a large-breed dog. Difficulties can arise
 in applying and attaching the splint to the patient. It is helpful to suspend the
 patient between two supports; one under the shoulders and one under the pelvis to
enable accurate application of splints or casts. Loosening can be avoided by
such as scrotal oedema and urine scalding may still occur. Attentive treatment of
such wounds will minimize their importance. The authors of the report suggest that
 [s a a po u ao psn e a ous s rg sni
 columns) intact (so as to prevent further shortening of the spine).
A recent survey of a large number of surgically and conservatively treated
animals showed little difference in ability to recover, although the conservatively
treated patients were initially less severely injured. Surgically treated animals
recovered more quickly and by more neurological grades than did those treated
conservatively.
Suitable physical therapy varies depending on the nature of the injury, whether
surgery was carried out, and the abilities of the animal. Swimming is the most
useful activity as the animal's buoyancy allows free movement of the limbs without
weightbearing. The effects of flowing water around the patient are also useful to
 massage the muscles and cleanse the skin. Care must be taken with patients with
severe neurological impairment in order to prevent drowning!
Associated reading
 sd ss sn sop  x lds ()   a s
methylmethacrylate. Vet. Surg. 13, 203.
Brasmer T.H. (1984) Examination of the trauma patient. In: The Acutely Traumatised
Small Animal Patient. 1st edn. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders, p. 45.
Bruecke1 K.A., Seim H.B. (1993) Spinal fractures and luxations. In: Slatter D. (ed.)
Textbook of Small Animal Surgery. 2nd edn. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders, p. 1110
Carberry C.A., Flanders J.A., Dietze A.E., Gilmore D.G., Trotter E.J. (1989) Nonsur-
gical management of thoiacic and lumbar spinal fractures and fracture/luxa-
tions in the dog and cat: a review of 17 cases. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 25, 43.
Denis F. (1983) The three column spine and its significance in the classification of
acute thoracolumba1 spinal injuries. Spine 8, 817.
Feeney D.A., Oliver J.E. (1980) Blunt spinal trauma in the dog and cat: insight into
radiographic lesions. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 16, 885.
Gage E.D. (1969) A new method of spinal fixation in the dog. Vet. Med. SAC. 64, 295.
McAnulty J.F., Lenehan T.M., Maletz L.M. (1986) Modified segmental spinal stabi-
McKee W.M. (1990) Spinal trauma in dogs and cats: a review of 51 cases. Vet Rec.
126, 285.
 Matthiesen D.T. (1983) Thoracolumba1 spinal fractures /luxations: surgical manage-
ment. Comp. Cont. Ed. Pract. Vet. 5, 867.
Patterson R.H., Smith G.K. (1992) Backsplinting fo1 treatment of tho1acic and
 lumbar fracture/luxation in the dog: principles of application and cases
series. VCOT 5, 179.
 Selcer R.R., Bubb W.J., Walker T.L. (1991) Management of vertebral column frac-
tures in dogs and cats: 211 cases (1977-1985). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 198, 1965.
Shores A. (1992) Fractures and luxations of the vertebral column. Vet. Clin. N. Am.
22, 171.
Swaim S.F (1971) Vertebral body plating fo1 spinal immobilisation. J. Am. Vet. Med.
Assoc. 158, 1683.
Thacher C. (1993) Biomechanics of cranial fractures, spinal fractures, and luxations.
ua puz fasins muuy nus u susuaw assia (pa) fw qog u
Philadelphia, Lea and Febiger, p. 999.
Turner W.D. (1987) Fractures and fracture-luxations of the lumbar spine: a retro-
spective study in the dog- J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 23, 459.
Wong W.T., Emms S.G. (1992) Use of pins and methylmethacrylate in stabilisation
of fractures and luxations. J. Small Anim. Pract. 33, 415.
n rg sd ies ssd go asn a (ah)  q 'a sd
fixation of the canine spine. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 161, 1651.
CHAPTER 9
sunoun
Contents
Introduction 128
Classification by location129
Modes of therapy136
Associatedreading136
Introduction
Tumours of the spinal cord and vertebral column may be classified in many ways,
including cell of origin and biological behaviour. Howeve1, from a clinical view-
 point, the most useful initial classification is the precise anatomical relationship of
the tumour to the spinal cord parenchyma. This relationship is apparent on
myelographic, CT or MR studies of the spine. The histological classification of a
tumour is important but usually cannot be ascertained before surgical exploration
ability of spinal tumours to surgical therapy is variable and depends on the
histoilogical type and stage of the disease. In many cases, surgery is primarily
 exploratory, to determine whether effective treatment is humanely possible, or as
 a means of obtaining biopsy material. In other cases, surgery may be curative.
 CSF analysis in animals which have spinal tumours is usually unrewarding. Only
very rarely will cell counts be elevated and help to make a specific diagnosis; it is
 unusual to find neoplastic cells in the CSF. In dogs, CSF analysis will not usually
 suggest tumour type, although nonspecific abnormalities such as increased protein
 content may be detected - a finding which is common in any case of spinal cord
compression. The condition of reticulosis, which can be classified as a neoplasm,
can be associated with increases in cell counts. In cats, lymphosarcoma (LSA) is a
frequent cause of spinal cord dysfunction and, if there is invasion of the meninges,
examination of a CSF sample may be expected to yield diagnostic information.
 However, even in cats affected by lymphosarcoma, CSF samples often are negative.
 Blood samples for feline leukaemia virus (FeLV) testing taken from cats in which
LSA is suspected may be of value. In one study about 85% of affected cats were
 positive for FeLV. Bone marrow samples may also be indicated for cats in which
generalized LSA is suspected.
TUMOURS
129
Classification by location
Extradural(epidural)
Extradural tumours arise from the various connective tissue elements, which are
located in the extradural space, o1 from vertebral bone. Some tumours which may
arise as multifocal lesions, such as lymphosaicoma o1 metastatic deposits, can also
appear at this site. In most series of cases extradural tumours are the most
commonly encountered in small animals. The exact proportion of tumours at
different locations is probably difficult to ascertain with any degree of accuracy.
The nature of the reporting institution will influence the type of cases which are
presented most frequently; those institutions dealing predominantly with surgical
spinal disease will probably diagnose a greater proportion of extradural tumours
 owing to their frequent similar presentation to extruded discs.
Symptoms result from compression of the spinal cord as the tumour increases in
size, and are often chronic. However, some extradural tumours will lead to patho-
logical fracture of a vertebra, or acute interruption of blood supply to the spinal
 cord, and therefore can cause acute onset of clinical signs. Extradural tumours will
 appear on myelography as areas of external compression on the contrast columns
(Figure 9.1).
Patients which have extradural tumours may be presented with a valiety of
symptoms, ranging from peracute total loss of motor and sensory function, to an
insidious, progressive loss of function with o1 without apparent pain. In general,
extradural tumours are accompanied by pain as the meninges are distorted and
the nerve 1oots are stretched; however, it may be difficult to demonstrate pain
'assaioid pue snoiisu Aensn are sulis quaed Aaaa u Aneooaibaun
Tumours of the vertebiae usually cause signs of pain initially but most progress
 and cause neurological deficits within about 6 weeks of onset of symptoms. Both
 primary and secondary tumour types have been recognized. In one study 13 of 35
 of dog can be affected by vertebral neoplasia, although there is some evidence that
German shepherd dogs and retrievers may be over-represented.
The presence of an extradural spinal tumour may sometimes be suspected from a
plain radiograph because destruction, or proliferation, of the vertebral bone is a
common finding in many of these cases. However, some cases present with equi-
vocal or no evidence of bone changes rendering myelography essential to locate the
lesion. With hindsight, following myelography, abnormalities on plain radiographs
As uo u pe is a a o e si Ara s aq 
Suggest the presence of a spinal tumour. The main differential diagnosis for an
extradural compressive lesion on a myelogiam is extruded disc material. The
 in differentiating the two possibilities. In general, extruded discs will overlie a disc
space, appearing just dorsal to the anulus fibrosus, while a tumour may appear at
any location and is frequently more lateralized than a disc extrusion. Tumours of
the intervertebral disc itself have not been recorded in the dog or cat. However,
some care must be taken in interpreting myelographic information, as extruded
disc material may find its way to surprising locations, including appearing dorsal
130
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
(a)
(b)
TUMOLRS
131
(p)
Figure 9.1 (a) Extradural tumour (osteosarcoma) affecting spinous process of T7 vertebra; note
‘moth-eaten'appearance typical ofmalignant extradural tumours.(b) Myelogramofsame lesion; note
typical deviation of dorsal contrast column.(c) Myelogram of cat with extradural meningioma at T4.
(d) Lytic lesions (arrowed) within spinous process and articular facet of L1 in dog affected with!
multiple myeloma.
to the dural tube in some cases. This finding appears to be more frequent in larger
breed dogs, perhaps owing to the relatively larger epidural space in these breeds
(Figure 9.2). The location of the extradural mass within the vertebral column may
 also give some clues as to its nature. Extruded discs are most frequently found in
certain regions of the vertebral column and the finding of an extradural mass in the
 mid-thoracic region should prompt the suspicion that the lesion is likely to be a
tumour.
 The definitive diagnosis of the nature of an epidural lesion relies on examination
 of biopsy material and retrieval of appropriate specimens must be obtained before
definitive pronouncements are made on prognosis. Biopsy material is usually
obtained via laminectomy but two recent reports have described the use of fluoro-
 Scopically guided percutaneous fine needle aspirates for the same purpose.
It is frequently apparent during exploratory surgery that total removal of an
extradural tumour is impossible without serious compromise of the integrity of the
vertebral column. Several possibilities exist at this point: immediate euthanasia,
 debulking surgery to decompress the cord followed by the use of other anticancer
 modalities such as radiotherapy and chemotherapy. or aggressive total resection
followed by reconstructive surgery. In veterinary patients, either euthanasia or
 debulking procedures are currently most frequently carried out.
 Extradural tumours in small animals are commonly malignant types which often
have a high propensity to metastasize. Following the tentative diagnosis of an
extradural tumou1 it is essential to obtain thoracic 1adiographs and perhaps other
1321
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Figure9.2 Benign extradural lesion (haematoma) withinvereral canal ofC3.Exploratory surgery
is required to determine nature of such a mtyelographically defined lesion.
studies to search for metastatic deposits. The finding of typical metastatic lesions in
the lungs helps to make the diagnosis and can guide the clinician when considering
the possibilities for further treatment of such individuals. Frequently diagnosed
extradural tumour types include osteosarcoma, fibrosarcoma, lymphosarcoma.
 Osteosarcoma is associated with a poor prognosis in any case, although reasonable
 Survival times can be achieved in selected cases by use of postoperative chemo-
therapy (cisplatin). Treatment of lyphosarcoma with routine triple chemotherapy
(vincristine, cyclophosphamide and prednisolone) can be successful in maintaining
a satisfactory remission time for some patients. However, LSA in some animals can
cause a sudden loss of blood supply to the spinal cord which causes extensive
necrosis, thus preventing recovery despite adequate anticancer treatment.
Occasionally, extradural masses can be benign, such as some meningiomas in
Aenxanui se jo nunor Aeoen ae ass ynuel sie
tumours), implying that surgical extirpation can be curative.
In cats, LSA is the most common cause of nontraumatic myelopathy. LSA
 appears to be predominantly a disease of young cats, and even cats as young as
 7 months have sometimes been found to be affected. FeLV infection is common in
affected animals: tests in 16/19 cats of one series were positive. Treatment by
chemotherapy is most effective and can produce very worthwhile remission
times. The diagnosis, which is best accomplished by means of fine needle aspi-
rate, must first be established. The surgical debulking of such lesions is probably of
little benefit, because the tumour will shrink dramatically in size with drug therapy
alone; however, in one study the one cat treated by both surgery and chemotherapy
had the longest survival time.
TUIMOURS
133
Multiple myeloma can involve any organ or tissue but the vertebral column is
 often involved because of the tumour's origin in bone marrow. One-third of dogs
which have multiple myeloma have spinal involvement. Small areas of punctate
lysis of the vertebral bone are observed on radiographs. Bone pain may be demon-
strable and compression of the spinal cord because of pathological fractures or soff 
 tissue masses can also occur. Examination of urine and serum for abnormal proteins
 is the diagnostic test of choice. Treatment of multiple myeloma is by means of
alkylating drugs such as melphelan or cyclophosphamide plus corticosteroids and
can achieve long survival times.
 Multiple cartilaginous exostosis (also known as osteochondromatosis) can also
cause extradural spinal cord compression and is discussed in Chapter 6. Surgical
 resection is the treatment of choice. In cats the multifocal form of the disease is truly
 neoplastic; the efficacy of surgical treatment is limited by the tendency of the lesion
to recur and its association with viral infection.
Intradural/extramedullary tumours
 This group of tumours is found within the subarachnoid space and so they appear
 as 'islands' within the contrast columns (Figure 9.3). The appearance of the contrast
 columns is often likened to a golf tee because of their typical pattern of attenuation
 of the contrast columns in their vicinity. Lesions other than tumours are unlikely to
Figure 9.3 Typical myelographic appearance of intradural/extramedulliary lesion (this lesion was a
meningioma). Note 'island' effect.
134
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
appear in this relationship with the spinal cord, although haemorrhage or clotted
blood could conceivably look similar. Confusion can arise when intrameduilary
tumour types carnot clearly be defined to be intramedullary as opposed to intra-
 dural/extramedullary. The intradural/extramedullary group of tumours is the
l e o a  sas i  e inoe snan n so
number of tumour types represented in this group, and these are almost exclusively
meningiomas and nerve sheath tumours. They are generally slow growing and so
animals with these tumours will usually exhibit an insidious onset of neurological
signs, frequently over a period of several months. Overt pain is an infrequent
of these tumours may be inferred from plain radiographs of the affected area; for
example enlargement of the intervertebral foramen can be associated with a nerve
root tumour. Myelography is required in almost every case to define the site of
intradural/extramedullary tumours.
 Extramedullary /intradural tumours are often benign or not aggressively malig-
 nant, rendering surgical intervention an attractive option in their treatment. Menin-
giomas, especially in cats, can often be lifted away from the surrounding tissues
and very long remission times can be expected in a large proportion of surgically
treated cases. Some meningiomas may be rather inaccessible for complete removal,
especially when they are located ventral to the spinal cord, debulking surgery
followed by radiation is an alternative option in these cases.
 u  r an u  a  am sop  s
series of 13 cases reported by Fingeroth et al. (1987), a finding which has also been
reported by others. Surgical treatment resulted in improvement of 6 out of 9 cases.
Poor results were associated with location of the lesion at an intumescence, ventral
position in the cord, invasion of neural tissue and iatrogenic trauma. CSF analysis
(elevated protein) was abnormal in only one case.
 An unusual intradural/extramedullary tumour has been reported in young
large-breed dogs. Features include the predeliction for the area T10 to L2; 1l out
g uasad e pio su g oi 9 u aam poau auo u saop 7i jo
surgical removal of these tumours may be beneficial and no metastasis has been
observed to occur in any case. Many different names have been applied to these
tumours, including medulloepitheliomas, neuroepitheliomas - the cell of origin is
unknown and may be non-neural. It has been suggested that the tumour may be a
nephroblastoma and result from the incorporation of primordial kidney elements
into the intradural space.
Intramedullary tumours
This group of tumours is thought to occur with about the same or slightly greater
frequency as the intradural/extramedullary types. Animals bearing these tumours
function, often over a period of 1 to 2 months. They do not usually exhibit pain.
 The appearance of these tumours on myelography is attenuation of the contrast
columns in both lateral and ventrodorsal views, i.e. the cord looks swollen. The
most important differential diagnosis for this appearance is that of cord oedema or
haemorrhage (often secondary to acute cord trauma) (Figure 9.4). The history of the
TUMOURS
135
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.4 (a) Myelographic appearance of intramedullary tumour (astrocytoma) at cervicothoracic
junction in a cat;apparent cord swelling at this site is difficulr to differentiate from the normal
swelling at the cervical intumescence.(b)Myelographic appearanceofintramedullary tumour
(astrocytoma)at T13 in a dog; note flaring'of contrast columns.
of tumour found within the spinal cord are quite limited, being most commonly
astrocytomas or ependymomas, but metastatic lesions (including lymphosarcoma)
may also occur.
Definitive diagnosis requires examination of histological specimens but the
suspicion of a tumour is often very strong beforehand. Fluoroscopically guided
biopsy is a desirable method of diagnosis as the prognosis for these tumours may
be determined mainly by their histological type. In human patients intramedullary
tumours are often removed surgically with subsequent radiotherapy or chemo
therapy given for cases in which removal is incomplete. Intramedullary tumours
are usually benign types which means that adequate (i.e. total) surgical excision
should be curative.The difficulty is to ensure that there is an adequate margin of
excision, without undue iatrogenic damage to the surrounding normal cord.
Specialized microsurgical instruments are desirable for such surgery, although
these tumours can be removed using standard ophthalmological instrumentation.
Radiotherapy of ependymomas can be associated with a good prognosis in human
136
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
patients; however, this type of therapy is rarely ermployed for these types of tumour
 in veterinary cases.
Modes of therapy
As is the case with other tumours, there are three main modes of treatment for
spinal tumours: radiotherapy, chemotherapy and surgery. In general, surgical
treatment is the most likely to result in cure of a solitary tumour with low meta-
static potential. Radiotherapy is another means of controlling local disease, whereas
chemotherapy is the only modality with effect against distant spread of malignant
tumours. All of these modalities have their place in the actual or potential treatment
of spinal tumours in animal species. For tumours which are relatively nonaggres-
is essential only to provide diagnostic material, e.g. ependymoma, which in
humans may be treated as effectively by radiation alone as by surgery plus radio-
pe  are so ids jo unodod a e uoun dea
require systemic treatment with chemotherapeutic agents.
  ra a u p    aq i sde an
spinal tumours, following the example of surgeons operating on human patients.
carried out, using bone cement and bone grafts to stabilize the resultant defects
with relative ease. The cervical region of the spine seems to lend itself most easily to
with extradural or intramedullary tumours is at best guarded and at worst
hopeless.
Associated reading
Bell F.W., Feeney D.A., O'Brien T.J. Caywood D.D., Hultgren B.D. (1992) External
Anim.Hosp.Assoc.28,318.
Fingeroth J.M., Prata R.G., Patnaik A.K. (1987) Spinal meningiomas in dogs: 13
cases (1972-1987). 1. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 191, 720.
 Gilmore D.R. (1983) Neoplasia of the cervical spinal cord and vertebrae in the dog.
J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 19, 1009.
Hammer A.S., Couto C.G. (1994) Complications of multiple myeloma. §. Am. Anim.
Hosp. Assoc. 30, 9.
Harris C.W., Didier PJ., Parker A.J. (1988) Simultaneous central nervous system
reticulosis in two related Afghan hounds. Comp. Cont. Ed. Pract. Vet. 10, 304.
Heyman S.J., Diefenderfer D.L., Goldschmidt M.H., Newton C.D. (1992) Canine
21, 304.
 Irving G., McMillan M.C. (1990) Fluoroscopically guided percutaneous fine needle
aspiration biopsy of thoracolumbar spinal lesions in cats. Prog. Vet. Neurol. 1,
473.
TUMOURS
Jeffery N.D. (1991) Treatment of epidural haemangiosarcoma in a dog. J. Small
Anim. Pract. 32, 359.
Luttgen PJ. (1992) Neoplasms of the spine. Vet. Clin. N. Am. 22, 973.
Luttgen PJ., Braund K.G., Brawner W.R, Vandevelde M. (1980) A retrospective
'od uuy mus 'I ro pue Sop an un son luds au-Auamn jo Ans
21, 213.
Morgan J.P., Ackerman N., Bailey C.S., Pool R.R. (1980) Vertebral tumours in the
dog: a clinical, radiologic and pathologic study of 61 primary and secondary
lesions. Vet. Rad. 21, 197.
Neer T.M., Kreeger J.M. (1987) Cervical spinal cord astrocytoma in a dog. I. Am. Vet.
Med. Assoc. 191, 84.
 Prata R.G. (1977) Diagnosis of spinal cord tumours in the dog. Vet. Clin. N. Am. 7,
165.
   1  ()   '1    
cases (1976-1989). I. Am. Vet. Med. Ass0c. 200, 373.
Summers B.A., deLahunta A., McEntee M., Kuhajda F.P. (1988) A novel intradural
extramedullary spinal cord tumour in young dogs. Acta Neuropath. (Berl.) 75,
402.
Turrel J.M., Pool R.R. (1982) Primary bone tumours in the cat: a retrospective study
Of 15 cats and a literature review. Vet. Rad. 23, 152.
Walker T.L. (1993) Spinal neoplasia. In: Disease Mechanisms in Small Animal Surgery.
Bojrab M.J. (ed.), 2nd edn. Philadelphia, Lea and Febiger, p. 975.
Waters D.J., Hayden D.W. (1990) Intramedullary spinal cord metastasis in the dog.
J. Vet. Int. Med. 4, 207.
Wen B-C., Hussey D.H., Hitchon P.W. et al. (1991) The role of radiation therapy in
the management of ependymomas of the spinal cord. Int. I. Rad. Onc. Biol. Phys.
20, 781.
       1 (  
Wright J.A. (1985) The pathological features associated with spinal tumours in 29
dogs. J. Comp. Path. 95, 549.
Wright J.A., Bell D.A., Clayton-Jones D.G. (1979) The clinical and radiological
features associated with spinal tumours in thirty dogs. J. Small Anim. Pract.
20, 461.
Yoshioka M.M. (1987) Meningioma of the spinal cord in a cat. Comp. Cont. Ed. Pract.
Vet. 9, 34.
CHAPTER 10
Inflammatory, Infectious and
Vascular Diseases
Contents
Introduction 138
Vascular disease  138
Inflammatory and infectious disease140
Associated reading 145
Introduction
There are a number of diseases of the vertebral column and spinal cord caused by
inflammatory, infectious or vascular aetiologies; they are not amenable to surgical
Vascular disease
Fibrocartilaginous embolization (FCE)
Spinal cord infarction secondary to fibrocartilaginous embolization has been.
reported more frequently in dogs than in any other domestic animal. The typical
logical dysfunction usually with distinct lateralization. Occasional cases have been
reported in which the clinical signs progressed over 48-72 h. Cervical embolization
will often cause hemiparesis; thoracolumbar involvement will often cause mono-
s ann si s nq ud as s o re s   s
lived (i.e. less than 1 h) and is rarely appreciated by the attending veterinarian. The
 owners of affected dogs will commonly state that the dog cried at the time of onset
 of the paralysis. After the first 24 h or so, there is frequently minimal involvement 
 of the contralateral limb or limbs. There is a tendency for the condition to affect the
 cervical and lumbar intumescences, with selective and severe involvement of the
grey matter. Large or giant breeds of dog are apparently predisposed to develop
FCE. However, the exact incidence of the condition is difficult to establish because
definitive diagnosis is dependent on histological examination of the spinal cord.
Plain radiography reveals no abnormality and myelography will also be unre-
warding in most cases. Some authors report a slight swelling of the spinal cord at
the site of the lesion within the first 24 h or so following onset of clinical signs.
 The usual conditions from which differential diagnosis must be made are acute
INFLAMMATORY, INFECTIOUS AND VASCULAR DISEASES 139
disc extrusion or neoplasia. Two features in the history which may assist in
differentiation are the clear lateralization of clinical signs in FCE and the selective
involvement of certain areas of the spinal cord in disc extrusions. Neoplasia can be
and puisns pue snueuods si aan j ino pn anisd
s  so  u ho sp  i ae go r p n
time, i.e. several weeks to months. However, the ischaemic nature of the lesion
implies loss of some neurones, which is irreversible, therefore, embolization of grey
matter which supplies a limb will cause more permanent neurological deficits.
Neurological improvement is therefore dependent on resolution of secondary
effects such as haemorrhage and oedema and functional compensation. At post
mortem examination of affected dogs there is an area of necrosis, the region
depending or which vessel becomes occluded. In well-defined cases small frag-
ments of cartilaginous material have been found in the occluded vessels (Figure
10.1). Both arteries and veins have been found to be affected.
a on ssase ua oi sa pean aun mo aenods o usa si 11
vasculature of the cord. The most generally accepted view is that, following
degeneration of the nucleus of the disc, a rise in intradiscal pressure associated
with vigorous activity can allow material to gain access to the venous sinuses and
 s     s     
venous drainage has also been suggested to be the result of disc extrusion into the
vertebral body (this is termed Schmorl's node in humans), which is able to pene-
trate into the arteries in the cancellous bone. Further consideration of mecharics of
FCE has been described by Penwick (1989). Unfortunately, many of the explanations
 of the mechanism remain somewhat unconvincing and unproven. For instance, most
dogs affected by FCE are of those breeds in which acute disc extrusions are rarely
observed and most affected animals do not show demonstrable signs of disc
degeneration when examined post mortem.
order to minimize the effects of oedema and vascular disruption. The mechanism of
ischaemic injury to the spinal cord is similar to that occurring in acute concussive
injury; therefore, the same rules governing corticosteroid therapy elsewhere in the
spine apply to this condition, ie. methyiprednisolone should be administered
within 8 h of occurrence of injury.
Idiopathicspinal cordhaemorrhage
This condition is reported rarely. lt can be associated with disorders of haemostasis
or can occur as a spontaneous disease. Definitive diagnosis cannot be made without
histological examination of biopsy or necropsy material. Suspicion of this condition
in the live animal may occur in cases in which there is an acute onset of severe
diagnosis can be obtained by determination of blood coagulation parameters.
Should these be abnormal, a search for a likely cause should be instituted.
 Occasional cases may be seen in which there is apparent spontaneous haemor-
 rhage into the extradural space. Surgical exploration is required in such cases in
140
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
(a)
(b)
Figure 10.1 (a) Pathological specimen of dog which sustained fibrocartilaginous embolization; note
discoloured infarcted area. (b) High-power view showing cartilaginous material in blood vessel.
(Courtesy of Dr A.C. Palmer, Cambridge University Veterinary School, LIK).
Inflammatory and infectious disease
Discospondylitis/spondylitis
 Discospondylitis refers to infection (usually bacterial) of the intervertebral disc and
the neighbouring vertebral endplates; spondylitis refers to osteomyelitis of the
vertebrae alone. The typical clinical sign is pain (which may be very severe), and
in some cases neurological dysfunction will also develop. Neurological signs are
usually the result of instability or subluxation of the affected region.
INFLAMMATORY, INFECTIOUS AND VASCULAR DISEASES
141
 The cause of the condition is usually systemic infection, with haematogenous
 spread (i.e. bacteraemia) and in many cases is thought to originate from the urinary
system. In some cases foreign body migration from the digestive or respiratory
tracts allows grass seed awns to find their way to the ventral aspect of L1/L2 region
and lodge in the intervertebral discs and cause discospondylitis. In the USA,
brucella
a a  n na   
of
discospondylitis in dogs but this infection has not been diagnosed in the UK.
 Discospondylitis most commonly affects young, large-breed dogs and certain
areas of the spine are more commonly affected. The most common space affected
 is the T5/6 disc, followed by L7 and the caudal cervical region. The most common
bacterial isolates are staphylococci, most of which are resistant to penicillin.
 Diagnosis of discospondylitis can usually be made from plain radiography. There
is destruction of the dense bone of the vertebral endplates, with some bone
proliferation at the margins of the lesion (Figures 10.2 and 10.3). Radiographically
it is possible to confuse spondylosis with discospondylitis; however, in spondylosis
there is only bone proliferation, whereas in discospondylitis there is concurrent
bone destruction. Diagnosis of the type of bacteria involved is usually not required
for initial treatment. Therapy is based on the assumption that there will be a
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 10.2 (a, b) Radiographs of discospondylitis at lumibosacral junction. Note erosion of cranial
endplate of sacrun, aparent widening of disc space and poor definition of caudal endplate of L7
vertebra. (c) Discospondylitis at L2/3 in a cat.
142
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
 penicillin-resistant staphylococcal infection.  Appropriate antibiotic treatment
should be given for about 3 months or more in order to eradicate infection. If
signs persist or progress, or if there is obvious instability at the affected site, then
stabilization is required.
 In rare cases an abcess may forrm in the epidural space. Associated symptoms are
those of pain and transverse myelopathy and may mimic those of a tumour from
such cases allowing cord decompression and retrieval of material for microbial
culture.
Not all discospondylitis/spondylitis lesions will be caused by bacteria, some are
the result of fungal or other (e.g. cryptococcal) infections, but these are uncommon,
especially in the UK. Treatiment of these infections can be very diffcult; very
 prolonged antibiotic therapy may be required.
Meningitis/myelitis
 Meningitis refers to inflammation of the meninges and, although responsible for
syrmptoms of spinal pain, neurological signs are not usually found in the absence of
concurrent cord inflammation. Myelitis refers to inflammation of the cord itself and
is not usually painful but will cause neurological signs. Both meningitis and
 myelitis frequently coexist and may be associated with disease elsewhere in the
number of causal agents for meningitis and myelitis have been identified. Unfortu-
nately, it can sometimes be difficult to reach a definitive diagnosis in every case
without examination of necropsy material.
BACTERIAL
o  asdns e se sn s s s u an si s 
Figure 10.3 Spondylitis at L1/2.
INFLAMMATORY, INFECTIOUS AND VASCULAR DISEASES  143
meningitis and they are also frequently worried regarding zoonotic potential. There
are no documented cases of transmission of meningitis from dog or cat to humans.
 In dogs most cases of bacterial meningitis are the result of penetrating injury, or
spread. This can come about as the result of stick injuries to the pharynx, or local
extension of infection from middle ear infection (in association with intracranial
involvement).
Affected animals frequently show generalized ill health, i.e. anorexia, pyrexia,
weight loss and often severe spinal pain. The course of the illness is usually acute
(days). Diagnosis is made by examination of CSF, which will often contain very
large numbers of neutrophils, plus elevation in total protein content. Xanthochro-
mia is frequent owing to previous haemorrhage. Microbial culture of CSF will
provide confirmation of infection (both aerobic and anaerobic culture should be
performed). The diagnosis is easier to make if there is a high index of suspicion,
such as history of recent stick injury or other relevant information. A history of
recent or concurrent systemic illness may also be relevant.
The most important condition from which differential diagnosis must be made is
acute cervical disc extrusion. The two conditions can be differentiated by myelo-
 graphy, in which no abnormalities are found for cases of meningitis. However, it is
important to obtain a sample of CSF prior to introduction of the contrast agent into
the subarachnoid space. Following contrast administration there may be alteration
 in the cell counts and protein content sufficient to make diagnosis difficult.
Treatment of bacterial meningitis is purely medical; selection of appropriate
treatment is made following microbial culture and sensitivity testing of specimens
of CSF, or from blood culture in some systemically affected individuals. The role of
corticosteroids in treatment of bacterial meningitis has been a source of controversy.
 In human patients it has been found that use of corticosteroids is associated with
greater morbidity and mortality.
VIRAL MENINGITIS
Viruses are the most common infectious cause of meningitis, owing to the ubiquity
 of the canine distemper virus (CDV). Disease caused by CDV is of varying pre-
valence in different areas of this and other countries. Although many dogs are
vaccinated against CDV, some individuals are still liable to succumb to the neuro-
logical form of the disease without exhibiting the classical systemic signs before-
d wy pous pue aopus ienlonomau ue no aisuosau aq us a pue
of the differential diagnosis for practically any neurological symptom, i.e. 'it can do
anything it wants to' Typical signs associated with CDV encephalomyelitis/menin-
 gitis include pain and brainstem signs initially - commonly cerebellar or vestibular
signs are seen early in the course of the disease. There is often a rapid progression of
signs over several days and other areas of the CNS will be affected. It is not unusual
to re-examine an animal 24 h following an initial consultation and find that the
neurological signs are very different from those originally observed. Commonly.
the neurological signs imply multifocal or diffuse disease but signs consistent with
a solitary lesion can also occur.
 Diagnostic tests for CDV include serum antibody titres, examination of conjunc.
tival scrapes for evidence of inclusion bodies in the mucosal cells, and examination
144
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
of CSF for evidence of intrathecal antibody production. Unfortunately, many of the
tests often yield false negative results. False positive results do not occur if tests are
properly assessed, for instance demonstration of rising antibody level to the virus.
The alterations in CSF associated with CDV infection have been described. There is
usually a mild mononuclear pleocytosis, with a moderate increase in the level of
 protein. These changes are nonspecific and therefore are not of assistance in making
a conclusive diagnosis.
 Other viruses have been implicated as causes of meningitis and/or myelitis in the
dog. among them canine parvovirus, herpes virus and Aujesky's disease. Feline
 infectious peritonitis virus (FIP) can cause CNS disease in the cat. This 'dry' form of
the disease usually occurs in cats which do not exhibit the typical symptoms
associated with the effusive form of the disease. Cats affected by the dry form
typically exhibit rapidly progressive symptoms of intracranial disease such as head
tilt, seizures, etc. It is unusual for cats affected with FIP to develop signs of spinal
disease alone but such cases do occasionally occur.
 Useful diagnostic tests for FIP include finding elevation of total blood protein
due to hypergammaglobulinaemia and increase in FIP antibodies in the blood
(when found in conjunction with other typical signs of the disease). It is common
to detect disease elsewhere in the CNS or in the eye (chorioretinitis).
 Treatment of viral meningitis/myelitis in cats and dogs is limited to supportive
care of the animal. Such care may involve administration of intravenous fluids, Or
even parenteral nutrition, plus antibiotics if appropriate. The use of corticosteroids
for treatment of active CDV infection is controversial - proponents of their use
claim that they help to reduce the demyelinating effects of the viral infection which
is in part dependent on the host responses. However, the reduction of potency of
the immune system of the host must be weighed against this possible benefit. It
appears to be safe to use low doses (e.g. 0.1 mg/kg.day prednisolone) of cortico-
steroids in affected dogs. Use of both corticosteroids and tylosine for treatment of
cats suffering with FIP has been recommended but neither appears to be of any
benefit.
There are no specific antiviral preparations that can ameliorate the results of
 active infection. Vaccination of exposed animals against CDV will be protective to
 some extent although, as already stated, some individuals may develop active CDV
infection in the CNS despite what would appear to be adequate vaccination. There
is at present no licenced vaccine for FIP in cats.
NON-INFECTIOUS CAUSES
The most common meningitis in the USA is thought to be corticosteroid responsive
meningitis. An early description of the condition is by Meric et al. (1985). This
syndrome is most often seen in larger breed dogs and usually affects young animals
- most affected dogs are under 2 years old. The syndrome is rather poorly defined
in terms of the pathological lesions as few dogs have been examined histologically.
There is usually a fairly rapid onset of signs of spinal pain, which usually is most
obviously manifest in the cervical region (ie. pain on bending down to eat or drink)
but affected dogs will also often exhibit kyphosis of the thoracolumbar spine and
occasionally a 'walking on eggshells' gait. Neurological signs are infrequent,
INFLAMMATORY, INFECTIOUS AND VASCULAR DISEASES
145
although some dogs will exhibit mild proprioceptive deficits. Pain can easily be
elicited on palpation or manipulation of the vertebral column.
Examination of blood samples will often reveal a mild to moderate neutrophilia
CSF examination reveals moderate to marked neutrophilic pleocytosis and eleva-
tion of protein content. Microbial culture is negative and no significant antibody
titres to the various infectious causes of meningitis can be demonstrated. Following
negative results of all routine diagnostic tests, dogs may be treated with cortico-
 (  ) sp  e e o si s s
then tailed off over about 6 weeks. Some dogs have recurrent bouts of disease -
following tests to re-establish the cause of the symptoms repeated treatment with
corticosteroids and tapering of the dose over a longer period of time is indicated.
The disease will not usually reappear after the dog is 2 to 3 years old. Thus the
prognosis for recovery is excellent, which accounts for the scarcity of affected
animals having undergone post mortem examination.
No aetiological agent has been found to account for this syndrome and it has
 been assumed that there is an immune-mediated component to the disease. In one
report, 3/10 dogs had positive LE clot tests, supporting this contention. There is
some similarity of this syndrome with the vasculitis diseases seen in specific breeds
tions have been reported to resolve following suitable corticosteroid therapy.
although the recovery rate in the Bernese mountain dogs was not 100% of affected
animals. A genetic component is assumed to be involved in the development of
these breed-specific syndromes.
 Another (uncommon) cause of meningitis and myelitis has been diagnosed in
 older dogs. This is the condition variously known as reticulosis or granulomatous
more commonly observed as a result of this disease, but occasional dogs have
been reported in which the signs appear to exclusively affect the spinal cord. The
reported signs were those of slow progressive myelopathy. Myelography was able
to delineate lesions occupying the subarachnoid space. Treatment with cortico-
 steroids had a limited beneficial effect and the diagnosis was ultimately confirmed
at post mortem examination.
 The aetiology of reticulosis is unclear, although both immune mediated and viral
 causes have been suggested.
Associated reading
Vascular disease
 Cordy D.R. (1979) Vascular malformations and haemangiomas of the canine spinal
cord. Vet. Pathol. 16, 275.
deLahunta A. (1977) Fibrocartilaginous embolic ischemic myelopathy. In: Kirk R.W.
(ed.) Current Veterinary Therapy VI. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders, p. 908.
 Dyce J., Houlton J.E.F. (1993) Fibrocartilaginous embolism in the dog. JI. Small Anim.
Pract. 34, 332.
Gilmore D.G., deLahunta A. (1987) Necrotizing myelopathy secondary to
146
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
presumed or confirmed fibrocartilaginous embolism in 24 dogs. JI. Am. Anim.
Hosp. Assoc. 23, 373
 Joshua J.O., Ishmael J. (1968) Pain syndrome associated with spinal haemorrhage in
the dog. Vet. Rec. 83, 165.
 Luttgen P.J. (1990) Common degenerative and vascular neurologic disorders in cats
and dogs. Prog. Vet. Neurol. 1, 387.
 Martin R.A., Shell L., Dodds W.J. (1986) Focal intramedullary spinal cord haematoma
in a dog. I. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 22, 545.
Penwick R.C. (1989) Fibrocartilaginous embolism and ischaemic myelopathy. Comp.
Cont. Ed. Pract. Vet. 11, 287.
Zaki F.A. (1981) Chapter 90 Necrotizing myelopathy in the dog in: Pathophysiology
In: Bojrab M.J. (ed.), Small Animal Surgery ist edn. Philadelphia, Lea and
Febiger, p. 764.
CNS and meningeal infection
Cook J.R., Evinger J.V, Wagner L.A. (1991) Successful combination chemotherapy
for canine cryptococcal meningoencephalitis. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 27, 61.
Fenner W.R. (1984) Treatment of central nervous system infections in small animals.
J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 185, 1176.
Hass J.A., Shell L., Saunders G. (1989) Neurological manifestations of Toxoplasmo-
sis: a literature review and case summary. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 25, 253.
Kornegay FN. (1978) Feline infectious peritonitis: the central nervous system form.
I. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 14, 580.
Meric S.M. (1988) Canine meningitis. J. Vet. Int. Med. 2, 26.
Shell L.G. (1990) Canine distemper. Comp. Cont. Ed. Pract. Vet. 12, 173.
Thomas W.B., Sorjonen D.C., Steiss J.E. (1993) A retrospective evaluation of 38 cases
of canine distemper encephalomyelitis. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 29, 129-133.
Tipold A., Vandevelde M., Jaggy A. (1992) Neurological manifestations of canine
distemper virus infection. J. Small Anim. Pract. 33, 466.
Vandevelde M., Cachin M. (1992) The neurologic form of canine distemper. In: Kirk
Extradural infection
Brennan K.E., Ihrke PJ. (1983) Grass awn migration of dogs and cats: A retro-
spective study of 182 cases. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 182, 1201.
Edwards D.F, Nyland T.G., Weigel J.P. (1988) Thoracic, abdominal and vertebral
actinomycosis. J. Vet. Int. Med. 2, 184.
 Johnston D.E., Summers, B.A. (1971) Osteomyelitis of the lumbar vertebrae in dogs
caused by grass seed foreign bodies. Aust. Vet. J. 47, 289.
Johnson R.G., Prata R.G. (1983) Intradiskal osteomyelitis: a conservative approach.
J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 19,743.
Kornegay J.N. (1986) Diskospondylitis. In: Kirk R.W. (ed.) Current Veterinary
Therapy IX. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders, p. 810.
Kormegay J.N., Barber D.L. (1980) Diskospondylitis in dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
177,337.
INFLAMMATORY, INFECTIOUS AND VASCULAR DISEASES  147
Ndikuwera J., Knottenbelt D.C., Lawrence J., Hill F.W.G. (1987) Spinal abcess in a
dog. Vet. Rec. 120, 554.
Non-infectious inflammatory disease of the CNS and meninges
 Bailey C.S., Higgins R.J. (1986) Characteristics of cerebrospinal fluid associated with
canine granulomatous meningoencephalomyeliis: a restrospective study. J.
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 188, 418.
Harris C.W., Didier PJ., Parker A.J. (1988) Simultaneous central nervous system
reticulosis in two related Afghan hounds. Comp. Cont. Ed. Pract. Vet. 10, 304.
Meric S.M., Child G., Higgins RJ. (1986) Necrotizing vasculitis of the spinal
 pachyleptomeningeal arteries in three Bernese mountain dog littermates. J.
Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 22, 459.
Meric S.M., Perman V., Hardy R.M. (1985) Corticosteroid-responsive meningitis in
ten dogs. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 21, 677.
 Presthus J. (1991) Aseptic suppurative meningitis in Bernese mountain dogs. Eur.
Vet. 1. 1, 24.
 Russo M.E. (1983) Primary reticulosis of the central nervous system in dogs. In:
Kirk R.W. (ed.), Current Veterinary Therapy VIl. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders, p.
732.
 Sarfaty D., Carrillo J.M., Greenlee PG. (1986) Differential diagnosis of granulomatous
meningoencephalomyelitis, distemper and suppurative meningoencephalitis in
the dog. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 188, 387.
Scot-Moncrieff J.C.R., Snyder PW., Glickman L.T. et al. (1992) Systemic necrotising
vasculitis in nine young beagles. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 201, 1553.
Sorjonen D.C. (1990) Clinical and histopathological features of granulomatous
 meningoencephalomyelitis in dogs. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 26, 141.
Thomas J.B., Eger C. (1989) Granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis in 21 dogs.
J. Small Anim. Pract. 30, 287.
CHAPTER 11
Cervical Spinal Surgery
Contents
Introduction 148
Cervical disc surgery 148
Fractures/subluxations 155
Neoplasia 163
Associated reading 166
Introduction
Common indications for operating on the cervical region of the vertebral column
include atlantoaxial subluxation and surgery of the intervertebral discs. The
'wobbler’ syndrome is somewhat distinct from other conditions affecting the
cervical spine and will be discussed in Chapter 12.
Cervical disc surgery
Discussion of the incidence, signalment and diagnosis of cervical disc disease is
included in Chapter 7.
 Some animals presented for treatment of cervical disc disease can be adequately
d  e r  sno go s  s  
plus use of corticosteroids or nonsteroidal drugs to reduce pain. Many conserva-
therapy is discussed in more detail in Chapter 15.
 There are several options for the surgical treatment of cervical disc disease:
fenestration, ventral slot, hemilaminectomy and lateral decompression.
Fenestration
 Fenestration of the cervical discs has been recommended as a treatment for dogs
exhibiting typical signs of disc disease, often without prior myelography. The
reported results are encouraging for those suffering pain only, but many animals
have prolonged recovery periods, which can be attributed to failure of the tech-
nique to address the problem of extruded disc material in the vertebral canal.
Fenestration must now be considered primarily a prophylactic treatment, or as a
symptoms of cervical disc heniation but with no mass lesion detected by myelo-
CERVICAL SPINAL SURGERY
¥149
 of the anulus fibrosus due to degeneration of the nucleus and consequent genera-
tion of abnormal stresses. The diagnosis of discogenic pain must be made with
caution, taking care to rule out other potential causes of cervical pain, such as
various inflammatory diseases, in those cases with negative findings on plain
be some cavalier King Charles spaniels. In this breed it is not unusual to fail to
demonstrate a cause in animals which apparently are suffering considerable
sometimes appear to benefit from fenestration.
 Despite these reservations, fenestration can be of value following definitive
surgery of other discs in the region, as prophylaxis against further episodes of
disc-related cervical pain. However, recurrent disc-related problems in other spaces
following ventral slotting of one space are uncommon.
Fenestration of the cervical discs is carried out via a ventral approach, following
division of the midline sternohyoid and sternomastoid muscles (Figure 11.1). The
trachea, oesophagus and the large blood vessels of the region are retracted to the
 n   e  a   n s  a 
 Care must be taken to avoid damage to the recurrent laryngeal nerve which runs on
the lateral aspect of the trachea. The intervertebral discs are located just caudally to
the V shape made by each pair of insertions of the longus colli tendons on the
caudal ventral prominence of each vertebra. Correct identification of each disc
space is aided by use of a hypodermic needle to penetrate the anulus and palpate
the soft interior of the disc. Fenestration is carried out by removal of an arc of the
ventral anulus, followed by removal of the ruclear material using rongeurs, dental
tartar scrapers or similar implements. A recent article has described the use of an
air drill to aid complete evacuation of the nucleus in thoracolumbar disc fenestra-
tion, the same technique could also be applied to cervical discs. Closure includes
suturing of the longus colli muscles.
 Dogs that exhibited discogenic cervical pain prior to fenestration will be expected
 to have immediate pain relief. If this does not occur the course of the postoperative
's   d p   a d   
such as a lateralized disc extrusion, tumour or meningitis/myelitis
On the whole, fenestration is a safe operation, with few complications, However,
two adverse sequelae to fenestration have been described: (i) inadvertant transfer
of more disc material into the vertebral canal during the procedure, which can
cause worsening of the clinical signs; and (i) the possibility of causing future
problems owing to collapse of the interspace and therefore causing 'redundancy'
of the dorsal anulus. This second complication is more of a consideration in the
treatment of 'wobbler' dogs but may need to be considered before fenestration is
 carried out in any dog.
Ventral slot
Ventral slotting is the procedure of choice for removal of extruded cervical disc
material if, on myelography, the mass can be demonstrated to lie on the floor of the
vertebral canal. This is the most common location for canine cervical disc
extrusions. Following ventral slotting there is usually a very rapid regression of
150
HANDBOOK OF SMALLANIMAL SPINALSURGERY
（a)
b
(d)
(e)
价
Figure 11.1 Ventral approach to the cervical vertebral column: (a) dog is securely positioned in
dorsal recumbency and the neck is in slight extension; (b and c) paired sternohyoid muscles are
exposed and divided in the midline to reveal the trachea; (d) retraction of the trachea to the left
exposes the longus colli muscle; (e) longus colli tendons are severed at their attachment on the
relevant vertebral bodies; (f) retraction of the longus colli muscles exposes the anulus.
symptoms, i.e. relief of pain, within 48 h. Ventral slotting requires more extensive
instrumentation than fenestration.
This technique is carried out using the same approach as fenestration. Correct
identification of the appropriate space is ensured by counting disc spaces from the
C7/T1 disc (or C6/7 in animals in which the transverse processes of C6 are clearly
defined). The central one-third of the neighbouring vertebral bodies is drilled out
 by means of a high-speed air drill until the vertebral canal is reached. The drill hole
is up to one third to one half the length of the vertebral bodies when it reaches the
vertebral canal; it is usual to start the caudal part of the drill hole very close to
the caudal margin of the anulus as the disc lies at an angle to the perpendicular;
the dorsal part of the anulus lies considerably further cranially than the ventral
part (Figure 11.2).
 Following removal of the bone of the floor of the vertebral canal by means of air
drill, rongeurs or small picks, the dorsal longitudinal ligament is grasped and
excised if it is not already torn. Extruded disc material in the vertebral canal can
CERVICAL SPINAL SURGERY
151
(b)
[a]
Slot thrcugh disc
SinL
Dorsal
Extruded disc
longitudinal 
 material
Caudal
ligament
(c)
Figure I1.2 (a) Position and size of slot on ventral aspect of vertebrae; note that burring is centred
Cranial to the intervertebral space.(b) Diagram of slot size and relationships in conventional slot
technigue. (c) Postoperative ventrodorsal radiograph of ventral slot operation at C5/6.
then be seen and removed. It is retrieved from the vertebral canal by means of
suction, fine forceps, rongeurs and dental instruments or microdissectors. It is often
 possible to remove material from the lateral 'gutters' of the vertebral canal via the
ventral slot approach.
A number of complications have been recorded following ventral slotting:
(1) Laceration of the venous sinuses. This is the most common complication,
 occurring in 19% of slots in one series. Haemorrhage following damage to
the venous sinuses can be very severe and occasionally even fatal. Correct
positioning of the animal prior to surgery (i.e. in true dorsal recumbency
with no lateral tilting) and limiting the lateral extent of the slot (i.e. no wider
than one half of the width of the vertebral body) aids in reduction of the
incidence of venous sinus laceration
(2) Severe bradycardia. This is an unusual complication, unless there is a great deal
152
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
e o asaa  o sunon si h pro rds  jo uon go
sympathetic blockade
 a a  r o g s s a a  ()
ventral slotting and therefore care should be exercised to remove no more
than the central one-half of the width of the vertebral body. A new version of
the ventral slot, the inverted cone decompression technique, has also recently
been described. This technique aims to minimize bone removal whilst allowing
maximal access to the vertebral canal; it is most useful for treatment of
'wobbler' dogs, and it will be described further in Chapter 12.
PROGNOSIS
 The prognosis for dogs with dorsally directed disc extrusions which exhibit pain
immediate improvement in their condition and almost all are improved within
good, although in one study of 12 cases, nine improved sufficiently to walk, of
which seven returned to normal. It has also been suggested that dogs with cranial
cervical lesions are more likely to make a complete recovery than those with more
caudal lesions. The period until recovery is complete in tetraparetic cases is related
to the speed of onset of paresis, the more acute the onset, the slower the recovery.
The probability of recovery is not related to the duration of non-ambulatory
tetraparesis.
 A recent retrospective study sought to compare the results of fenestration and
ventral slotting in 1ll ambulatory dogs with symptomatic cervical disc lesions (Fry
 et al. 1991). The results clearly showed that decompressive surgery (slot) is superior
in alleviating symptoms. Only in comparing the rate of intraoperative and immedi-
ate postoperative complications was fenestration superior. However, although the
major complication of slotting was haemorrhage, only one dog died as a result.
Lateral approach
This technique has recently been described and used in two clinical cases of cervical
disc extrusion; it is designed specifically for treatment of very laterialized disc
extrusions (Lipsitz and Bailey, 1992). Suitable cases for this operation would be
those in which the extruded disc material (or other compressive mass) can be
radiographically demonstrated to lie in the foramen. Animals in which a ventral
accumulation of extruded material can be seen on myelography are more simply
treated by means of the ventral slot technique - access to the ventrolateral aspect of
the cord is satisfactory via this route. Lateral approaches to the cervical spine are
difficult owing to the large muscle mass and its orientation relative to the spine,
therefore easy access following this approach is limited to C3/C4 to C5/C6. This
techrique could also be useful for exploration of the C5 and C6 nerve roots in cases
 Of tumours of the nerve roots of the brachial plexus.
The animal is placed in lateral recumbency with the uppermost thoracic limb
 retracted caudally. The skin incision is made parallel to the line of the articular
processes. Dissection through the subcutaneous tissues exposes the brachiocepha-
 licus muscle, which is incised in a cranial-caudal direction to permit access to the
CERVICAL SPINAL SURGERY
153
relevant vertebrae. The exposed dorsal edge of the omotransversarius muscle is
dissected free of neighbouring connective tissue and retracted. Retraction of the cut
brachiocephalicus exposes the serratus ventralis muscle, which is separated by
blunt dissection from the underlying longissimus cervicis muscle; it is then incised
dorsocranially to ventrocaudally. The longissimus cervicis and dorsal border of the
longissimus capitis muscles are then exposed; they are bluntly dissected and
retracted ventrally. At this stage the correct intervertebral space is located by
counting transverse or articular processes. The dorsal branch of the spinal nerve
exiting at the site of interest must be cut to allow adequate exposure of the foramen.
The synovial joint is exposed by elevation of the remaining musculature; the
tendinous attachments of the complexus and multifidus muscles to the articular
processes require sharp incision. Elevation, using periosteal elevators, and retrac-
tion, using Gelpi retractors, of the surrounding muscles is continued to expose the
pedicle and lamina of one-half of the vertebra. Suitable exposure of the spinal cord
and nerve root is achieved using rongeurs and high-speed drill to remove the
overlying bone. Haemorrhage from the venous sinus or its branches can occur
and be profuse; diathermy is helpful to attain good haemostasis.
Closure consists of placement of a fat graft into the laminectomy site and
 reapposition of the incised portions of the serratus ventralis and brachiocephalicus
muscles.
Laminectomy/hemilaminectomy
Dorsal laminectomy of the cervical vertebrae is required in animals in which a mass
lesion is detected by myelography and lies dorsal or dorsolateral to the dural tube,
therefore this approach is primarily used in exploratory surgery. Another use for
soop ranom, uao jo ju  u si ui s u au resnp
(Chapter 12).
 Hemilaminectomy can be used to remove lateralized disc material from the
lateral and ventral aspect of the cord. Using this approach it is possible to open
the intervertebral foramen to free the nerve root from entrapment. The hemilami-
nectomy is combined with facetectomy to allow exposure of the lateral part of the
spinal cord, the nerve roots and the venous sinuses. In most cases only one half of
the lamina needs to be excised to allow removal of extruded disc material.
The dorsal approach to the mid and caudal cervical vertebrae is time consuming.
 sn u s po ss se an on mo 'op prn-a u aa
Incision of the skin reveals subcutaneous muscle which can be divided on the
midline to expose the median fibrous raphe, which is thick and well defined. The
median raphe is incised in the midline and the incision deepened to expose
 the nuchal ligament. There are often many arterial bleeders encountered during this
procedure, which require ligation or diathermy coagulation. After exposure of the
nuchal ligament, it can be detached from its local attachments and retracted
laterally. The spinous processes of the vertebrae can be palpated; the site of interest
is determined most easily by counting from the spinous process of T1, which is the
aaa ae sassd ss a u sae as a eae a u ssae
by incision as close as possible to the bone. They can be retracted laterally using
Gelpi retractors. Exposure of the laminae is carried out by continuing the muscle
elevation more laterally. Care must be taken when elevating muscle from the region
154
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Midline tendinous
raphe
a
(b)
 Spinalis +
semispinalis-
attachment
muscles
of
longissimus
multifidus
muscles
of TI
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 11.3 Dorsal approach to the mid-caudal cervical vertebral column: (a) secure positioning in
Ventral recumbency (midline incision);(b) incision continued through midline raphe;(c) exposure of
the nuchal ligament is facilitated by continuing midline dissection more deeply - it is retracted
laterally exposing the paired midline muscles and a smallintermuscular septum;(d) sharp dissection
through the midline and blunt elevation of the muscles from bone exposes the dorsal surfaces of the
laminae sharp division of the tendons of themultifdus and longissimus tendons maybe required to
carry out hemilaminectomy and facetectomy; (e) extent of bone removal for cervical dorsal laminect-
omy; (f) extent of bone removal for cervical hemilaminectomy and facetectomy
CERVICAL SPINAL SURGERY155
 of the synovial joints, as there are large branches of the vertebral artery just ventral
to the articular processes. In the more caudal portion of the cervical spine, the
approach is slightly complicated by the proximity of the trapezius, rhomboideus
and splenius muscles, which add to the bulk of musculature which must be
retracted. However, the dissection is still carried out in the same way, by proceed-
 ing directly down the midline until encountering the laminae, and then continuing
dissection laterally (Figure 11.3).
 The dorsal approach entails greater risk of blood loss than the ventral approach,
 as a great number of large vessels are encountered and the muscle bellies them-
selves may ooze considerably. There is a risk of incurring serious blood loss in
animais in which blood coagulation is impaired. It is therefore prudent to assess
blood clotting prior to carrying out this surgical approach - especially in breeds in
which there is a high incidence of clotting disorders.
Fractures/subluxations
Atlanto-axial subluxation
Dogs affected by atlanto-axial subluxation usually exhibit severe neck pain, with or
without neurological deficits of the upper motor neurone type affecting all four
limbs. The motor status can vary from fully ambulatory to tetraplegia. Kyphosis of
the thoracolumbar segment is also commonly observed in such cases and may be a
source of possible confusion (with disease of the TL segment). Animals which have
developmental atlanto-axial subluxation will occasionally exhibit episodic collapse.
This can be confused with epilepsy. However, affected dogs usually will merely lie
u   o u anan (snon uee) sponas paaas rog s
tonic/clonic movements of the legs are observed and there is no aura or postictal
disorientation.
 Two groups of animals are most commonly affected by atlanto-axial subluxation:
(1) Young toy breed dogs have a history of mild, or no, trauma to the head and
neck. Commonly, owners will report a history of hitting the head on the
underside of a table when rising. This group is affected because of abnormal
development of the atlanto-axial joint and dens with consequent instability.
These dogs are usually presented when under 18 months old and commonly
less than 1 year old.
(2) Any type of dog following trauma. This group is affected due to fracture of the
q yanoue 'paaq io adk Aue jo aq Aeu shop paoae Aeoueune suap
pae ruo ao aq o readde sop ad ra/punoa pue ar
by this injury. Trauma in these cases is usually severe, either the result of a road
 traffic accident or because of running at full speed into a fence or other obstacle.
Diagnosis
 Plain radiographs are usually sufficient to diagnose subluxation at the atlanto-axial
joint (Figure l1.4). In affected toy breed dogs there is frequently an absence, or
abnormality, of the shape of the dens of the axis. This is most clearly seen in a
ventrodorsal view. Open-mouth views of this region of the vertebral column will
156
HANDBOOKOFSMALLANIMALSPINALSURGERY
Figure11.4 Lateral radiograph of severe atlanto-axial subluxation.
(a)
(b)
Figure 11.5(a)Neutral and (b)flexed lateral radigraphs ofdog affected with atlanto-axial subluxa
tion.This casewasmildly affected necessitating a flexedview to substantiatethediagnosis.
clearly demonstrate abnormality of the dens but it can be hazardous to the animal
to place it in this position. In some cases in which the subluxation of the C1/C2
inferspace is not apparent on nonstressed films, carefully applied flexion of the
cervical spine can aid in demonstration of irstability (Figure 11.5).
In those animals which sustain atlanto-axial subluxation as the result of trauma,
subluxation is usually the result of fracture through the dens and consequent
CERVICAL SPINAL SURGERY
157
craniodorsal displacement of the axis. Although subluxation is usually obvious, the
fracture line may or may not be easily seen on lateral radiographs.
 Positioning of animals for radiography following these injuries must be carried
 out very carefully. In most cases general anaesthesia is required, as it is otherwise
difficult to position the head and neck correctly. There is a tendency for the animal
to rotate the head about the axis unless anaesthetized, which can render interpreta-
in evaluating the integrity of the dens and may be useful in certain individuals.
Following induction of anaesthesia, muscle tone (which can be important in
stabilisation of this injury) is greatly reduced, thus increasing the possibility for
iatrogenic injury to the spinal cord. Care should be taken at all times to limit
movement of the upper cervical spine and to allow movement into extension
(dorsiflexion) only.
Treatment
Both conservative and surgical treatment of atlanto-axial subluxation have been
employed with successful results. Conservative therapy usually consists of applica-
tion of a padded dressing to the cervical spine, for a period of 4 to 6 weeks. In this
time it is hoped that there will be a fibrotic response by the periarticular tissues, or
callus formation following fracture, with a resultant increase in rigidity of the joint.
Gilmore (1984) reported a series of four cases in which all recovered completely
within 12 weeks. Of these cases, three subluxations were the result of road traffic
accidents, with resultant fracture of C2 vertebra, and two exhibited severe neuro-
logical signs. It would be expected that conservative therapy for fractures would be
more reliable than when applied to congenital subluxations, owing to the
additional rigidity to be expected during bony callus formation.
 Au  se ns q aaodde u a n s a
first be appreciated. In order to immobilize the head, a bandage must be applied as
far cranially on the neck as possible, or there will be an increase in the stress applied
to the atlanto-axial joint. If the bandage is applied too far caudally, without
adequate support of the cranial portion, reduction in movement in the caudal
and middle portions of the cervical spine will result in an increase in movement-
 generated stresses in the cranial segment. There can be complications from ban-
compression of the airways or venous drainage, and the development of oedema of
the head, usually especially apparent in the intermandibular space. Bandages need
to be applied so that they form a rigid column extending from just caudal to the
mandible to the shoulders.
There are both dorsal and ventral surgical approaches used in the treatment of
 atlanto-axial subluxation. In most cases a neck collar is also applied following
'poad sueay ay Sunp Apil exa apiaoid oi iduane ue u Arasins
DORSAL APPROACH
 Following a midline incision through the skin, the subcutaneous muscle is divided
to expose the midline raphe of the epaxial muscles of this region (occipitalis,
cervicoscutularis, cervicoauricularis superficialis and biventer cervicis). This is
158
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
divided on the midline to expose the dorsal process of the axis. The exposure is
continued laterally and cranially to expose the arch of the atlas by elevation of the
rectus capitis muscle from the spinous process of the axis. Care must be taken not to
damage the vertebral artery which lies ventrolateral to the articular processes.
 Profuse bleeding can occur as a result of damage to this artery and will greatly
hamper adequate surgical visibility at the site.
Following incision of the atlanto-occipital membrane, luxation of the atlanto-
 iapun paoeid yooy palue-u e jo sueau Aq panpau aq ueo juo! ieixe
cranial edge of the arch of the atlas.
 Stabilization of the luxation can be carried out by a number of means. The most
common technique is to pass a loop of wire under the arch of the atlas and secure
this to the dorsal process of the axis (Figure 11.6). Problems have been associated
with the use of wire, particula1ly in young, small-breed dogs, in which the bone is
especially soft allowing the wire to cut through the bone rather like a cheese wire.
 In order to overcome these problems, two other techniques have been proposed.
 One method is to use multifilament nonabsorbable suture material and the other is
to use a part of the nuchal ligament in place of wire suture. The problems of
'cheesewiring' through the bone have been reduced, but not abolished, by the
 use of these materials. Special retractors have been designed for dorsal fixation of
this subluxation in humans, and a modification has been used in the dog, failure of
this technique has also been reported.
Another drawback to dorsal approaches is the risk of injury to the adjacent
neural structures (medulla oblongata). Animals may even die owing to respiratory
failure during flexion of the atlanto-axial joint which is required in order to pass
suture material under the arch of the atlas.
VENTRAL TECIINIQUES
 Owing to occasional failure of dorsally applied fixation to provide lasting stability
of atlanto-axial subluxation, ventral techniques have been-introduced. These are
(a)
(b)
Figure 11.6 (a) Lateral and (b) dorsoventral views of dorsal fixation of atlanto-axial subluxation.
One loop of suture material is passed under the arch of the atlas and used to provide two sutures.
CERVICAL SPINAL SURGERY
159
(a)
(b)
Figure 11.7 (a) Ventrodorsal and (b) lateral views of ventral fixation of atlanto-axial subluxation.
Optimum pin placement angles are shown.
variations on the theme of cross-pirning the synovial joints between the axis and
atlas. The approach to the joint is made following a ventral midline incision. The
sternomastoideus and sternohyoideus muscles are divided along their midline to
expose the larynx. The insertion of the stermohyoideus muscle on the right-hand
side of the larynx is severed, allowing the larynx, oesophagus, left vagosympathetic
trunk and carotid artery to be retracted to the left. Care must be taken to avoid
 injury to the recurrent laryngeal nerve. The ventral aspect of the atlanto-axial joint
is exposed by dividing the insertions of the longus colli muscles on the atlas.
 Reduction of the subluxation is often achieved simply by positioning the animal
 in dorsal recumbency but manipulation through the synovial joints can also be
 carried out using fine dissectors. On occasion, use of bone forceps to grasp the body
 of the axis can be helpful. Fixation of the relocated bones is most easily accom-
plished by cross-pinning. The optimal angle for the pins to be placed in both planes
has been described by Sorjonen and Shires (1981). In the ventrodorsal view the pin
should be inserted at 29° from the sagittal plane; in the lateral view the pin should
be placed at 21.5° from the dorsal plane (Figure 11.7). It is very helpful to have
 access to sterile goniometers or protractors during operation in order to ensure
correct pin placement.
 Difficulties associated with poor pin placement can arise (such as damage to the
 spinal cord or associated blood vessels) but a more common problem is that pin
migration can occur as a late complication. To avoid this sequela a recent modifica-
tion of the technique is to add a small blob of polymethylmethacrylate cement to
o pesu smas asn on si uondo so  uod n aas on sua ud 
pins (Figure 11.8). Screw placement can be hampered by the poor access to drill the
pilot holes, and the tendency for the screws to cut through the soft bone to lie close
to the margin of the bone of the axis. Another technique is to use a plate (linear or T-
shaped) applied to the ventral aspect of the axis and atlas.
The advantage of the ventral techniques is that following debridement of carti-
xy pi e r aoq s ym uod pue s ias au  a
will result in fusion of the synovial joint, thus reducing the possibility of recurrent
luxation.
 In some animals the use of one technique will result in failure, requiring a second
160
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
attempt at fixation to be made. In some fracture cases, use of both techniques is
required to optimize stability. Animals in which preoperative duration of neuro-
logical signs was short will rapidly return to full function. The prognosis for those
with long-standing neurological deficits is less certain. Although most affected dogs
 make very satisfactory recoveries, occasional animals which are non-ambulatory
 before surgery may fail to recover despite long follow-up times.
 In general, ventral techniques are preferred in the treatment of toy dogs for which
fusion following reduction ard fixation is highly desirable. The failure rate of
ventral surgery is lower than that for the dorsal techniques in this group of dogs.
 A further advantage of ventral approaches in such patients is the possibility for
removal of the dens should it appear misshapen - a limited ventral slot can be used
to approach the dens within the vertebral canal followed by its removal with
rongeurs.
 For those animals which have sustained fractures, which can be expected to heal
rigidly with adequate immobilization, conservative treatment by external support
(b)
(a)
(C)
Figure 11.8 Postoperative radiographs of ventral fixation: (a, b) Lateral and ventrodorsal views of
screw fixation; (c) lateral view of pin fixation, PMMA has been used to prevent pin migration.
CERVICAL SPINAL SURGERY
161
may well be adequate for many cases. If surgery is to be carried out, dorsal
techniques may be preferred, as they are more biomechanically sound (i.e. tension
device applied to tension side of the fracture/luxation). The ventral techniques
suffer from being biomechanically unsound, as the fixation is applied to the
 compression side of the fracture/subluxation.
Otherfracture/luxations of the cervicalvertebral column
ATLANTO-AXIAL SUBLUXATION IN THE CAT
Atlanto-axial luxation/subluxation is not as common in the cat as in the dog, but
ment of these cats was by the same means as in small dogs, by a ventral cross-
pinning technique. Cancellous bone grafts in cats are usually best obtained from the
ilium, rather than the humerus (often only small quantities are available from the
humerus).
ATLANTO-OCCIPITAL. SUBLUXATION
Atlanto-occipital subluxation has been reported rarely in either the cat or the dog.
Two dogs exhibiting mild cervical pain and neurological deficits were treated by
external methods alone, but surgical treatment has also been utilized. Oblique
radiographs of the cranial portion of the cervical spine revealed a fracture of the
ventral part of the atlas, with dorsal displacement of the atlas relative to the
occipital bone. Reduction of the fracture/luxation was secured by means of lag
screws and a tension band runring from the dorsal spine of the axis to the occipital
protuberance. External support was also given. Ability to walk returned within 4
days and a full recovery followed.
FIXATION OF CERVICAL FRACTURES/LUXATIONS
 Most of the fractures in the cervical spine occur in the axis and atlas, in a series
reported by Stone et al. (1978) 78% had fractures of the axis. Fracture of the axis will
cause atlanto-axial subluxation and is discussed above.
Fractures or luxations occurring in the remainder of the cervical spine are less
common, perhaps owing to the large muscle mass which surrounds and supports
the region. Both conservative and surgical techniques of reduction can be appro-
priate. Four techniques of cervical spinal stabilization were evaluated by Swaim
and Greene (1975). The conclusions were that screw fixation through the facets was
the most stable and that ventral plate fixation was difficult and liable to fail owing
to problems in penetration of the dorsal cortex of the vertebral body. The combined
use of Steinman pins and PMMA is now most commonly used as it is versatile and
easy to apply. Fixation techniques using the spinous processes are not reliable in
this area of the vertebral column owing to the poor purchase of such fixation on the
very short spinous processes of the cervical vertebrae. Reduction of fractures and
luxations in this region probably does not need to be so accurate as elsewhere in the
vertebral column, owing to the relatively large size of the vertebral canal. The case
shown in Figure 1i.9 made a complete recovery despite the poor reduction.
162
HANDBOOKOFSMALLANIMALSPINALSURGERY
Figure 11.9 Dorsal and ventral fixation of dog with comminuted fracture of C2. Dorsal fixation is by
braided nylon suture.
 Conservative therapy, including cage rest or plaster of Paris casting can also be
 successful in many cervical fractures even when there is considerable displacement
offragments.
Ventral fixation using pins and PMMA is carried out following a routine ventral
approach to the cervical vertebral bodies. Reduction is accomplished, usually by
the use of small reduction forceps to grasp and manipulate the fragments. Steinman
 pins are driven into the vertebral bodies starting at the midline and diverging so as
to avoid the vertebral caral and the vertebral artery. The exact angle for pins to be
driled in each individual dog can be calculated by making drawings from
measurements on radiographs; however, it is usually approximately 30-35° from
sagittal. Access to a bone specimen and goniometers during operation is also
 helpful. The size and rumber of pins applied to each bone fragment can be varied
but there should be purchase on at least four cortices each side of the fracture/
 luxation. In order to try to prevent postoperative pin migration the pins should be
 notched or bent over near the ends. With the bones correctly aligred and held in
position by temporary fixation, such as wire, a ball of PMMA at the doughy stage of
curing is applied and wrapped around the pins. The pin ends should be completely
encased in bone cement. It is best to include only a short section of the vertebral
column in the fixation as this will reduce the stresses that will be applied through
 the implant during neck movement postoperatively.
MID-CERVICAL SUBLUXATION
An unusual luxation in the cervical spine has been reported by Basinger et al.
(1986), which is most often the result of a dog fight. The twisting and linear
traction applied to the cervical spine in such cases can result in subluxation of
CERVICAL SPINAL SURGERY
163
(a)
MK
(b)
Figure 11.10 (a) Lateral and (b) ventrodorsal views of subluxation of C4/5 in a dog.
both articular facets of one intervertebral joint, usually at C5/C6 or C4/C5 with
 n e p e   s  no s 
cervical vertebrae, this lesion is treated by realignment of the articular facets,
p oe'l sai xu jand o sms Aq a px aq  
11.11). Wire can be used instead of screws, and may be preferable, in that more
 intervertebral movement is permitted, thus reducing stress on the implant.
Neoplasia
Although any type of tumour may occur in the cervical region, there appears to be a
 higher proportion of the intradural types (both intradural/extramedullary and
 intramedullary) in the cervical region. Meningiomas occurred more commonly in
164
HANDBOOKOFSMALLANIMALSPINAISURGERY
(a)
(b)
Figure 11.11 (a)Lateral and(b) ventrodorsal views of fixation of C4/5 subluxation.
the cervical cord than elsewhere in one study in dogs and meningioma in the
Surgical treatment of intradural/extramedullary types of tumour is more feasible
in any case but there also appears to be a greater potential for radical treatment of
extradural tumours in the cervical region than elsewhere in the spine, as it is
possible to resect an entire vertebral body and stabilize the area with relative
ease. The ventral approach to the cervical spine is relatively straightforward and,
following the removal of a vertebral body, incorporation of either graft bone
(autogenous or autologous) or bone cement can be used to bridge the space.
Problems still arise owing to the types of tumour which are commonly involved,
i.e. extradural tumours are frequently malignant and so adjunctive treatment
would still be required.
A recent report described a laminotormy approach for removal of a meningioma
 in the atlanto-axial region (Fingeroth and Smeak, 1989). A routine dorsal approach
Figure 11.12 Lateral radiograph ofmeningioma at C1/2.
CERVICALSPINALSURGERY
165
Dorsal
atanco-axiaf
ligament
Spinal
cord
[a]
Figure 11.13 Laminotomy approach to removal of lesion within C1/2 region. Bone cuts allow
Cranially directed hinging of the lamina of the axis and subsequent secure fixation with wire.
Figure 11.14 Postoperative lateral radiograph of laminotomy.
166HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
to the axis and atlas was made. Narrow bone incisions were made in the dorsal
pedicles of the axis and joined together dorsally in the caudal part of the lamina of
the axis. The loosened portion of the lamina was elevated dorsally and cranially to
expose the spinal cord (Figures 11.12-11.14). Fixation of the laminotomy incision
was by means of tension band wires in the spinous process of the axis. Thus,
removal of the tumour was accomplished without compromising the stability of
the vertebral column. This approach is only possible because of the large mass of
bone with strong ligamentous attachments in this region.
Associated reading
General
Gilmore D.R. (1983) Cervical pain in small animals: differential diagnosis. Comp.
Cont. Ed. Pract. Vet. 5, 953.
Raw M-E. (1987) The differential diagnosis of cervical pain in the dog. Vet. Ann. 27,
312.
Piermattei D.L. (1993) Section IHI The Vertebral Column In: An Atlas of Surgical
Approaches to Bones and Joints of the dog and cat, 3rd edn. Philadelphia, W.B.
Saunders, p. 45.
Intervertebral disc disease
Clark D.M. (1986) An analysis of intraoperative and early postoperative mortality
associated with cervical spinal decompressive surgery in the dog. J. Am. Anim.
Hosp. Assoc. 22, 739.
Denny H.R. (1978) The surgical treatment of cervical disc protrusion in the dog: a
review of 40 cases. J. Small Anim. Pract. 19, 251.
Felts J.F., Prata R.G. (1983) Cervical disk disease in the dog: intraforaminal and
lateral extrusions. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 19, 755.
Fry T.R., Johnson A.L., Hungerford L., Toombs J. (1991) Surgical treatment of
 a    s     s
Gilpin G.N. (1976). Evaluation of three techniques of ventral decompression of the
cervical spinal cord in the dog. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 168, 325.
Goring R.L., Beale B.S., Faulkner R.F. (1991) The inverted cone decompression
drome' in dobermann pinschers. Part 1. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 1991; 27, 403.
Heavner J.E. (1971) Intervertebral disc syndrome in the cat. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
159, 425.
Lipsitz D., Bailey C.S. (1992) Lateral approach for cervical spinal cord decompres-
sion. Prog. Vet. Neurol 3: 39.
Seim H.B., Prata R.G. (1982) Ventral decompression for the treatment of cervical
disk disease in the dog: a review of 54 cases. I. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 18, 233.
Swaim S.F. (1974) Ventral decompression of the cervical spinal cord in the dog. I.
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 1974; 164, 491.
Swaim S.F. (1982) Clinical observations and client evaluation of ventral decompres-
sion for cervical intervertebral disk protrusion. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 181, 259.
CERVICAL SPINAL SURGERY
Tomlinson J. (1985) Tetraparesis following cervical disk fenestration in two dogs. JI.
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 187, 76.
  e so      (  
Pract. Vet. 1992; 14, 1477.
Waters D.J. (1989) Non ambulatory tetraparesis secondary to cervical disk disease
in the dog. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 25, 647.
Aflanto-axial subluxation
Chambers J.N., Betts C.W., Oliver J.E. (1977) The use of non-metallic suture material
for stabilisation of atlantoaxial subluxation. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. 13, 602.
DeCamp C.E., Schirmer R.G., Stickle R.L. (1991) Traumatic atlanto occipital
subluxation in a dog. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 27, 415.
 Derny H.R., Gibbs C., Waterman A. (1988) Atlantoaxial subluxation in the dog: a
review of 30 cases and an evaluation of treatment by lag screw fixation. J. Small
Anim. Pract. 29, 37.
Gilmore D.R. (1984) Nonsurgical management of four cases of atlantoaxial
subluxation in the dog. I. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 20, 93.
LeCouteur R.A., McKeown D., Johnson J., Eger C.E. (1980) Stabilization of atlanto-
axial subluxation in the dog, using the nuchal ligament. J. Am. Vet, Med. Assoc.
177, 1011.
Oliver J.E., Lewis R.E. (1973) Lesions of the atlas and axis in dogs. J. Am. Anim.
Hosp. Assoc. 9, 304.
Sorjonen D.C., Shires PK. (1981) Atlantoaxial instability: a ventral surgical tech-
nique for decompression, fixation and fusion. Vet. Surg. 1, 22
Stead, A.C., Anderson A.A., Coughlan A. (1993) Bone plating to stabilise atlanto-
axial subluxation in four dogs. J. Small Anim. Pract. 34, 462
Swaim S.F., Greene C.E. (1975) Odontoidectomy in a dog. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc.
11, 663.
Thomas W.B., Sorjonen D.C., Simpson S.T. (1991) Surgical management of
atlantoaxial subluxation in 23 dogs. Vet. Surg. 20, 409.
Fractures and luxations
 Basinger R.R., Bjorling D.E., Chambers J.N. (1986) Cervical spinal luxation in two
dogs with entrapment of the cranial articular process of C6 over the caudal
articular process of C5. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 188, 865.
Blass C.E., Waldron D.R., van Ee R.T. (1988) Cervical stabilisation in three dogs
using Steinman pins and methylmethacrylate. J. Am. Anim, Hosp. Assoc. 24, 61.
Denny H.R. (1983) Fractures of the cervical vertebrae in the dog. Vet. Ann. 23, 236.
 Stone E.A., Betts C.W., Chambers J.N. (1979) Cervical fractures in the dog: a
literature and case review. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 15, 463.
 Swaim S.F. (1975) Evaluation of four techniques of cervical spinal fixation in dogs. JI.
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 166, 1080.
168
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Neoplasia
Gilmore D.G. (1983) Neoplasia of the cervical spinal cord and vertebrae in the dog.
J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 19, 1009.
Fingeroth J.M., Prata R.G, Patnaik A.K. (1987) Spinal meningiomas in dogs: 13
cases. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 191, 720.
 Fingeroth J.M., Smeak D.D. (1989) Laminotomy of the axis for surgical access to the
cervical spinal cord. Vet. Surg. 18, 123.
 Neer T.M., Kreeger J.M. (1987) Cervical spinal cord atrocytoma in a dog. I. Am. Vet.
Med. Assoc. 191, 84.
CHAPTER 12
The‘Wobbler' Syndrome
Contents
Introduction 169
Diagnosis   171
Diffeential diagnosis176
Treatment 176
Prognosis 183
Associated reading 184
Introduction
The term 'wobbler' has been applied to the group of dogs which share a set of
symptoms consisting of varying degrees of tetraparesis and ataxia associated with
 anomalous cervical vertebral development and/or degenerative disease of the
caudal cervical region of the vertebral column. The name is somewhat controver-
sial and several alternatives have been proposed, among which caudal cervical
spondylopathy, cervical spondylomyelopathy and cervical spinal instability are the
best known alternatives. The term ‘wobbler' is preferred here as a convenient
shorthand and because of the tradition of the use of this name in the UK. There
is also the advantage that the name is descriptive of the gait of the dog and is not
specific regarding the exact aetiology of the lesion in the spine.
The wobbler syndrome is thought to be multifactorial in aetiology, with evidence
for genetic (breed susceptibility), conformational and dietary factors. In experi-
ments with overnutrition of great Dane dogs there was development of many of
the abnormalities observed in naturally occurring wobblers in this breed.
Two basic categories of affected dogs are recognized:
  n      ss   s  (
(2) Middle-aged or older dogs which have degenerative disease of the cervical
discs (and other ligaments of the vertebral column) with consequent acquired
compression of the cervical spinal cord. This compression may be dynamic or
static.
Some individual dogs do not easily fit into either category.
Immature wobbler dogs
 In the immature dogs group, great Danes and Dobermann pinschers are the most
frequently represented breeds; however, many other breeds have been reported to
be affected, among them Basset hounds, Irish wolfhounds, Rottweilers and
170
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
(a)
(b)
Figure 12.1 (a) Lateral plain and (b) myelographic views of severe cerrical vertebral canal stenosis
in an immature Dobermann pinscher.
 Rhodesian ridgebacks. Affected puppies usually first exhibit symptoms at between
5 and 1l months of age. In this group, the lesion is stenosis of the cervical vertebral
canal, which may occur at one or many levels; the main site of involvement varies
with the breed. It is not uncommon for the entire cervical spine to be affected to a
greater or lesser extent (Figure 12.1). The stenosis may be lateral, or ventrodorsal, or
occasionally a combination of both, which produces a circumferential compression
 of the cord. Lateral compression is especially common in the great Dane and can be
associated with malformation of the vertebral facet joints.
THE‘WOBBLER'SYNDROME
171
Figure 12.2 Lateral myelogram of type II disc at C6 from a mature Dobermann exhibited typical
symptoms of the wobbler syndrome.
Middle-aged wobblers
 degenerated disc, although affected dogs will also frequently have concurrent
 stenosis of the bony part of the vertebral canal. This category of wobbler is
 especially common in middle-aged Dobermanns (Figure 12.2).
Compression of the spinal cord in middle-aged wobbler dogs may be at one or
 many sites within the cervical spine, most commonly at the C6/C7 disc in the
 Dobermann. On myelographic studies it can often be demonstrated that the ventral
compression of the spinal cord caused by the type Il disc protrusion can be
 alleviated by ventroflexion of the neck and exacerbated by dorsiflexion (exten-
sion). There is thus a dynamic component to the spinal cord compression. Allevia-
tion of the cord compression can also be obtained by applying linear traction along
the cervical spine. This feature has been explained in detail by Seim and Withrow
(1982) and has beern used as the basis for many of the modes of surgical therapy for
the condition (Figure 12.3).
 Middle-aged wobbler dogs can also suffer spinal cord compression as a result of
 hyperirophy of the ligamentum flavum or, rarely, as a result of subluxation of an
intervertebral joint.
Diagnosis
Wobbler dogs can present with a wide range of possible symptoms, ranging from
cervical pain to tetraplegia. The most common signs include an ataxic pelvic limb
gait with long strides, often combined with shortened (choppy) thoracic limb
strides. Head carriage is often low. Results of neurological examination are
variable but conscious proprioceptive responses are usually depressed in the
r a    s  e  sa  r 
and crossed extensor responses in the pelvic limbs. The degree of thoracic limb
involvement is variable and may somefimes be difficult to detect. Thoracic limb
172
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Flaval
Dorsal
longitudinal
ligament
Spina
Dorsal
(b)
anulus
(a)
(c)
(p)
(e)
Figure 12.3 Variation in spinal cord compression associated with changes in neck position in disc-
sion by flaval ligament and intervertebral disc; (c) wobbler in extended (dorsiflexed) position -
exacerbates compression; (d) wobbler in flexed position - alleviates compression; (e) wobbler after
application of linear traction to cervicai vertebral column - alleviates compression.
involvement is often made more apparent during wheelbarrowing or hopping
testing, especially if the animal is blindfolded or if the neck is held in extension.
Partial collapse or stumbling frequently occurs, thereby providing evidence of
thoracic limb paresis and ataxia.
 Examination of the thoracic limbs will often suggest upper motor neurone
involvement (i.e. increase in extensor muscle tone and local reflexes are intact).
although the lesion is located caudally in the cervical spine. It is thought that loss of
flexor muscle tone occurs, owing to interference with the grey matter of the cervical
intumescence which supplies these muscles. Frequently there is wasting of the
scapular muscles, with prominence of the scapular spine and affected dogs will
often stand with the shoulder in partial flexion, suggesting weakness of the
shoulder extensors.
Although dogs affected by the wobbler syndrome will usually develop symp-
toms over a long period, occasional dogs will present with acute tetraparesis. In
these cases it is suggested that an episode of hyperextension has occurred which
has caused spinal cord concussion. Myelography of these cases will reveal a
swollen spinal cord and sometimes only minimal evidence of the typical soft tissue
changes associated with the wobbler condition.
 Many wobbler dogs show no evidence of spinal pain but occasional cases do so.
sh e m Aiaa pea a Aeo iq aed no pixe a o are sop as
often spasmodic and can be associated with movement of the head in any direction,
particularly in extension (dorsiflexion). Painful episodes are often accompanied by
THE‘WOBBLER'SYNDROME
173
 elevation of one of the forepaws from the floor. This root signalment is indicative of
compression of one of fhe spinal nerve roots of the cervical intumescence.
Radiological diagnosis
 In susceptible brceds of particular age groups, the diagnosis of wobbler syndrome
 may be strongly suspected on initial clinical examination. Plain radiographs will
 offen reveal abnormalities that are strongly suggestive of the wobbler syndrome,
such as new bone formafion, degenerative joint disease affecfing the synovial joints,
apparent malalignment of adjacent vertebrae, or apparent vertebral canal stenosis.
Areas of the cervical vertebral column where there is apparenf vertebral malalign-
menf must be interpreted with caufion; it is common for such sites not to be the
region of significant spinal cord compression on myelographic studies. Lesions
visible on plain radiographs include: stenosis, malarticulation, proliferation of
bone around synovial joints, spondylosis, narrowed disc space, and malformed
vertebrae (Figure 12.4).
(a)
(b)
Figure 12.4 (a) Lateral radiograph of wobbler dog; typical findings include narrowed disc space,
spondylosis,vertebral canal stenosis.(b)Lateral radiograph of wobbler dog: severe vertebral body
tipping and abnormal diarthrodial articutation.
174
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Figure 12.5 Myelogram of wuobbler dog demonstrating cord atrophy - contrast has floued well
through area of severe compression.
Myelography is essential in order to make a definite diagnosis. The other reason
for carrying out myelography is to locate accurately the site and type of compres-
sion (i.e. at what location of the circumference of the cord), to discover whether a
dynamic compression exists and whether fhere are any secondary sites of cord
compression. Routinely, cervical myelography is the most appropriate, although
problems may be encountered in properly outlining the cervical spinal cord
flows rapidly towards the tail, it can be helpful to re-position if so that the area of
interest is at the lowest point; this is easily achieved by raising the lumbar region
while keeping the table positioned wifh fhe dog's head high. On myelographic
views, it may be possible tentatively to suggest whether there is cord atrophy; i.e. if
the confrast easily passes an area of severe compression, and the cord appears thin,
this would suggest that there is a loss of cord substance (Figure 12.5).
Several views of fhe cervical spine should be obtained with the contrast in place;
neutral lateral, ventrodorsal, flexed lateral and lateral with fhe cervical spine
subjected to linear fraction (Figures 12.6 and 12.7). Some authors have recom-
mended obtaining an extended (dorsiflexed) lateral view. However cord compres-
sion is exacerbated in this position, and neurological deterioration has been
 observed following radiography in this position and so it is best avoided. In the
vast majority of cases the detection of a dynamic lesion can be made without this
view being obtained.
Lesions visible on myelography include: disc extrusion or protrusion, ligamen
tum flavum compression of fhe cord, laferal compression, and alleviation of
compression during linear traction or flexion (i.e. dynamic lesion).
Myelographic studies will usually clearly demonstrafe lesions typical of the
wobbler syndrome. Furthermore, ift should be possible to define the exact subtype
of the condition in each individual animal. The compression can be cafegorized as:
THE‘WOBBLER'SYNDROME
175
(a)
(b)
Figure 12.6 (a) Lateral myelogram of wobbler in 'neutral' position. (b) Lateral myelogram of same
patient after application of linear traction.
Figure 12.7 Ventrodorsal myelogram of great Dane wobbler dog ilustrating lateral compression of
the spinal cord at C4/5.
176
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
multilevel versus single level, dorsal versus ventral versus circumferential, or static
versus dynamic.
 It is important that each case be assigned a definite subtype because therapy
should be aimed at correcting the abnormality in that individual case, rather than
freating every case the same way - the treatment should be tailored to the patient.
Differential diagnosis
 Many other conditions can be confused with the wobbler syndrome - the other
 diseases depend on the type of symptoms exhibited by each dog. For instance, dogs
exhibifing generalized weakness may be suffering from cardiomyopathy (which is
also common in middle-aged Dobermanns), or various metabolic conditions. Dogs
exhibiting cervical pain and tetraparesis or paraparesis could have type I interver-
tebral disc disease, spinal tumour or various inflammatory condifions. In general,
the most important differential diagnosis for the wobbler syndrome in middle-aged
dogs is neoplasia. In young dogs the most likely differential diagnoses would
include congenital anomalies of the spinal cord and infectious agents.
Treatment
 Dogs affected with the wobbler syndrome should be considered potenfial candi-
dates for surgical treatment. Some animals will respond satisfactorily to medical
therapy such as corficosteroids and can be maintained for long periods of time on
 this type of medication. However, studies have shown that most dogs receiving this
type of treatment will slowly deteriorate and, ultimately, most cases wil become
refractory to medical treatment wifhin 1 year of initiation of such therapy. The
prognosis following surgical therapy is worse if the condition has been present for a
long period. Some cases when presented very early in fhe course of the disease may
a 'aeis ,ieu, e on parsi aq o Adenu pris jo poad ius e Ao paau
aged animals will also be suitable candidates for medical therapy.
 Surgery is therefore the preferred means of therapy of wobbler dogs. The exact
type of surgery must be determined by fhe exact nafure of the lesion or lesions in
each case. The surgery will be considered by type of lesion.
Single ventral lesion
This is the most common subtype in the middle-aged Dobermarn. Cord compres-
si sias reun peqa nq uosnnd ssp ilad e aq psne nsn s us
usually found concurrently. In most cases, vertebral canal stenosis is assumed to be
'the straw that breaks the camel's back'). Treatment of the single ventral lesion has
been carried out by several methods.
THE‘WOBBLER' SYNDROME
177
VENTRAL FENESTRATION AND LAG SCREW FIXATION OF ADJACENT VERTEBRAL BODIES
This technique consists of routine fenestration of a series of cervical discs, via a
ventral approach, followed by fixation of adjacent vertebral bodies by means of a
ventral lag screw directed caudally through the fenestrated space. Cancellous bone
 graft obtained from the humeral head is applied to the fenestrated space.
This technique was originally devised in the 1970s and although some good
results have been reported, it must now be considered to have been superseded
by other techniques. From the understanding of the condition as it stands at
present, this technique must be considered potentially hazardous; fenestration
causes 'redundancy' of the dorsal part of the anulus, allowing it to protrude
C  si s  ss     a   n
exacerbate this effect. Fenestration alone has been shown to be an inadequafe
freatment.
VENTRALSLOT
This technique has been in use for many years for fhe freatment of wobblers. The
main controversy regarding this technique has revolved around whether there is a
need for stabilization of the vertebrae in wobbler dogs. Some authors consider
'instability’ to be an important feafure of the syndrome; ventral slotting can
increase instability in the spine (temporarily at least) and therefore possibly wor-
sen the condifion. Ofhers have questioned whether instability actually exists in this
condition and certainly it is difficult objectively to demonstrate an instability.
 Demonstrable instability can also be construed to be a resulf of type II disc lesions
rather than the initiator of such degenerafive processes.
A further problem encountered with simply slotting the offending space is the
difficulty in removing the protruded type Ii disc which is stringy and difficult to
grasp. This problem has been addressed recenfly by the introduction of the
'inverted cone decompression technique' which is a modification of the standard
slotting technique (Figure 12.8). This technique has greatly enhanced the surgeon's
ability to remove the protruded disc material from fhe vertebral canal. The mod-
ification is that the size of the ventral part of the slot is kept to a minimum, while
further dorsally the slot is expanded, particularly laterally. The dorsal anulus is leff
intact while fhe neighbouring dorsal cortex is burred to a thin shell. The dorsal
anulus is then grasped by fine (Lempert) rongeurs and torn out in a ventral
direction. Remnants can be retrieved from the vertebral canal by means of fine
 hooked instruments and then removed by rongeur. The same procedure is used to
excise fhe longitudinal ligament. The dorsal cortex is removed only when no
further anulus or longitudinal ligament can be grasped and excised. This approach
enables the surgeon more completely to decompress the spinal cord, especially
laterally, with a minimum risk of haemorrhage until the final stages.
 The last problem which can be associated with simple slotting of the affected
 e  o e  '  e p    
some cases cause compression of the nerve root as if exits through the intervertebral
foramen. This problem cannot be easily dealt wifh, although complete laferal
excision of protruded disc material, as occurs during fhe inverted cone technique
renders nerve entrapment less likely. If an animal already exhibits narrowing of the
178
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
naus
S
Dorsal
longitudinal
ligament
Figure 128 Cross-section of inverted cone slot.
 intervertebral space, then the complication may be considered less likely to occur. A
further precaution is to avoid simple slotting in patients in which nerve root pain
appears to be a major part of the presenting symptoms.
LINEAR TRACTION AND STABILIZATION/FUSION
 In many wobblers, dynamic myelography will demonstrate fhat fhe cord compres-
sion can be significantly reduced by application of linear traction. For this category
 Of wobbler, if has therefore been suggested that the affected part of the cervical
vertebral column be stabilized in a stretched posifion; this forms the theoretical
basis for many surgical techniques.
 A variety of techniques have been recommended to fix the abnormal interver-
tebral space in the traction posifion. Fixafion has been carried out by means of an
interbody screw, pins and bone cement, or screws and bone cement, Lubra plate or
Harrington rod instrumentation. Spacing of the relevant vertebral bodies has been
carried out by introduction of cortical bone graft, metal spacer, or by relying on the
fixation technique alone. Numerous complications have been recorded in relafion
 to use of these fixation techniques, among which failure to maintain traction owing
to implant failure, or bone resorption adjacenf fo the implant are the commonest
problems. The potential for direct cord injury exists in any technique in which the
implant is directed towards the cord.
Ventral fusion techniques are carried out via a routine ventral approach fo the
 cervical vertebral column. Following a partial ventral slot (when using methyl.
 methacrylate fixation) Steinmann pins of appropriate diameter (usually 2 mm in
 Dobermanns) are driven into the vertebral bodies at an angle of 35° to the perpen-
dicular (although not essential, it is helpful to have a sterile goniometer to guide the
surgeon). This angle is chosen to ensure fhat the spinal cord, nerve roots and
vertebral arteries are not impaled. The pins are driven until a loss of resistance is
felt as fhey penetrate the lamina. The pins are cut off with about 2 cm protruding
from the vertebral surface and are coated in a ball of PMMA. If traction is desired it
 can be applied most conveniently by a non-scrubbed assistant pulling on the dog's
neighbouring disc spaces but it has been suggested that this is associated with
THE‘WOBBLER' SYNDROME
179
Figure 12.9 Postoperative radiograph of wobbler treated by pins and PMMA technique of linear
distraction.
increased risk of complications (see later discussion). Usually 3-5 mm of traction is
 desirable. Traction must be maintained until the PMMA has properly cured (Figure
12.9).
 Lubra plates are applied to the ventral surface of the vertebral bodies with the
 screws diverging away from the spinal cord. The screw length is such that only one
cortex is gripped per screw.
Vertebral body screws are applied by drilling a pilot hole across the intervertebral
space (cranial to caudal). It is helpful for the cervical spine to be in slight dorsi-
flexion to enable optimal placerment. Care must be taken not to penetrate the thin
dorsal cortex of the caudal vertebral body (which lies immediately ventral to the
spinal cord). A lag screw, commonly only partially threaded, is used to fix the
vertebrae in position. It is important to start the cranial screw hole at the furthest
 possible point cranially, as fracture of the ventral prominence of the vertebral body
is a possible complicafion of this technique, and will lead to loss of fixation. Prior to
 introduction of fhe screw, the ventral anulus and the nucleus pulposus are excised.
While traction is applied to the affected interspace and maintained by use of a
special instrument, the spacer (usually a metal washer) is placed into the inter-
vertebral space. The interbody screw is then tightened into position through the 
vertebral bone and the centre of the washer (Figure 12.10).
 A question which must arise when traction/fixafion techniques are utilized is
whether the traction that is placed on the vertebrae can be sustained by the skeletal
tissues involved. Substantial linear traction is required to alleviate compression of
the cord in most of these lesions. During the radiographic procedure it is frequently
necessary to ‘hang' the dog on the tilted table, using the dog's own weight to
180
HANDBOOK OF SMALLANIMALSPINALSURGERY
Figure 12.10 Drawing of postoperative appearance of screw and washer distraction technique.
stretch the spine sufficiently. It must be questioned whether the vertebral end plates
are capable of sustaining such traction without resorpfion of bone and consequent
loss of traction. Bone resorption is one possible mode of failure of the traction
techniques and is most apparent with the intervertebral body techniques using
metal discs or cortical bone implants, which can be observed to collapse into the
endplafes with time. This loss of traction is not necessarily associated with recur-
rence of clinical signs, provided adequate new bone formation has occurred to
stabilize the space. It has been suggested that the intervertebral disc with no forces
 acting through it will atrophy with time and thereby alleviation of compression will
be maintained.
The need to treat a 'dynamic' compression caused by type II disc profrusion by
 means of tracfion must be open to question. The structure responsible for spinal
 cord compression is the protruded disc and if it can be adequately removed (via a
 ventral slot) then there is no need for fixation or traction to eliminate compression
 of fthe cord. It may be possible therefore, for both static and dynamic compression
 of the cord resulting from type II disc protrusions to be treated by ventral slotting.
Single dorsal lesion
This is most commonly either due to stenosis at a single site because of maiforma-
tion of the pedicles and lamina, or because of compression by the ligamentum
flavum. The latter is often seen as a dynamic compressive lesion on myelography. A
dorsal approach and resection of the offending lesion is the most appropriate
technique, together with stabilization if this is thought appropriate. The laminae
 of the affected vertebrae is removed if the bony canal is stenotic, which allows the
 spinal cord greater space.
Multiple dorsal lesions
This is usually caused by multilevel stenosis of the bony vertebral canal and so can
 be seen in young animals. Older animals can be affected if there is hypertrophy of
THE'WOBBLER' SYNDROME
181
Figure 12.11 Drawing of completed continuous dorsal laminectomy. The bone should be wide
enough to be able to see the venous sinuses.
the ligamentum flavum at multiple sites. This condition is best treated by multilevel
decompressive dorsal laminectomy (Figure 12.11). Continuous dorsal laminectomy
(CDL) has been used to decompress the spinal cord over a long portion of the
  n  i  '    sx  p  
 routine dorsal approach to the caudal cervical spine. Following exposure of the
laminae of fhe relevant vertebrae, the bone is removed. This is most convenienfly
 carried out by use of Kerrison rongeurs, but use of an air drill is also possible.
Concurrent durotomy has been recommended but this has rather uncertain
benefits as a method of freatmenf for most compressive lesions of the spinal cord
and is potentially injurious. Stabilizafion may or may not be recommended,
depending on the author.
An alternative approach, laminaplasty, has been proposed for such wobbler
(a)
(b)
Figure 12.12 Cross-sectional view of ‘French window' laminaplasty showing extent of bone cuts and
removal. Note enlargement of vertebral canal depth attained by elevation of laminal flaps.
182
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
dogs; the results of this treatment in large numbers of affected dogs have not been
reported (Figure 12.12).
The dorsal approach to the caudal cervical spine is time consuming, especially in
 large dogs. There is considerable epaxial musculature which must be divided in the
cially when carried out at multiple sites, is also fime consuming and laminaplasty is
even more so. All dorsal procedures carry fhe risk of incurring substanfial blood
p o a  e si an  a adsa 'saq n u s
clotfing disorders. It is prudent to carry out coagulation studies such as buccal
mucosa bleeding fime, or measurement of von Willebrand factor in Dobermarns
which are to undergo dorsal decompressive surgery. Intraoperative haemorrhage in
 dogs affected by von Willebrand's disease can be reduced by use of synthetic ADH
(Desmopressin).
Multiple ventral lesions
 When two disc lesions are present, the cutting of two ventral slots is probably the
treatment of choice; however, some concern has been expressed that there can be a
risk of vertebral collapse following ventral slot of two adjacent spaces. This risk is
reduced if the inverted cone technique is utilized. A series of recent reports has
recommended continuous dorsal laminectomy for treatment of multilevel ventral
compression because good results have been achieved. Surgical stabilization was
not carried out on these cases
Treatment of painful wobblers
 Occasional wobbler dogs are presented with symptoms of severe pain which may
be intermittent in nature, with unpredictable episodes and may be associated wifh
a root signalment, i.e. fhe dog will lift one forepaw from the ground while crying in
pain. Frequenfly in these dogs litfle compression of the spinal cord can be observed
on routine myelography, although the typical signs of the wobbler condition are
seen radiographically (such as vertebral canal stenosis or spondylosis). Electro-
diagnostic studies can be helpful in demonsfrating fhat nerve root abnormalities
  s u au u p ads  so a d 
intervertebral foramen. This compression can be exacerbated by type II disc pro-
trusions in a manner similar to nerve root enfrapment which occurs in people with
cervical spondylotic radiculopathy.
 These cases would appear to be best treated by applying linear traction to the
cervical spine and fixation of the vertebral bodies. These procedures have the effect
bone on the nerve root. Venfral sloffing may be capable of alleviating disc-
associated nerve root compression if adequate excision of fhe protrusion is
aftained. The most importanf site from which disc must be removed is laterally,
therefore the inverted cone technique is best suited. If adequate disc removal carnot
be achieved, ventral slotting is liable to exacerbate nerve root compression because
of collapse of the intervertebral space.
THE ‘WOBBLER' SYNDROME
183
Figure 12.13 Postoperative view of screw fixation of diarthrodial joints at C6/7.
Miscellaneous surgical techniques
Successful treatment of some wobblers which would be difficult to treat by other
techniques can be carried out by simply stabilizing the affected spinal segment 
   e  s a     e )
 adjacent vertebrae following a dorsal approach, plus bone grafting where appo-
priate, or the use of other fusion techniques described earlier - such as interbody
screws.
Prognosis
The prognosis for wobbler dogs has been linked to severity at the time of presenta-
tion, duration of clinical signs and to some extent, the type of therapy offered. Of
these factors the most important appears to be the duration of clinical signs, dogs
which have long-standing neurological deficits have a far worse prognosis than
dogs with similar but acute deficits. The reason for this difference in prognosis is
that irreversible damage to the spinal cord may already have occurred in chronic
cases, which can sometimes be seen during myelography as an atrophic cord. This
appearance is seen to best advantage on CT myelographic studies and this tech-
 io p  dd i    e   
ever, although the prognosis may be somewhat worse in these cases this should not
be a discouragement to performing surgery but a guide to the owners of such dogs
that, although prevention of deterioration and mild improvement may be expected,
return to 100% normal function is not a realistic goal.
 The neurological status at the time of presentation has some bearing on prog-
nosis, obviously the more severe the deficit the worse the prognosis. However, the
 neurological status must also be interpreted in light of the duration of the symp-
toms. Many dogs presented with acute onset of non-ambulatory tetraparesis carry
an excellent prognosis, whereas those dogs presented unable to walk following
 long-term deterioration should be given a poor prognosis.
There is some doubt about how significant the type of surgery carried out is in
 relation to recovery rate. Many different techniques have been applied and very
184
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
similar success rates are claimed for each (about 80-85%). However, there have
been many studies int which different lesions have all been treated by the same
method, rendering the results rather difficult to compare. It seems prudent that
 each case should be assessed as an individual and the lesions treated according to
their site, size, number and severity, rather than diagnosing a case of wobbler
syndrome and treating all cases by the same surgical technique. Using this method
it may be possible to increase the success rate to approaching 100%, although a
certain proportion of cases which have irreversible spinal cord injury will be unable
to recover, regardless of the mode of therapy.
 Following any type of surgery in which fusion of adjacent vertebrae occurs (this
also includes ventral slotting) there is a potential risk of development of secondary
lesions at an adjacent site. This effect has been termed the 'domino' effect and has
 also been observed in human patients following surgery of similar cervical condi-
 tions. The incidence of the domino effect has been reported variably but is up to
 20% of cases in some studies. The cause of this effect is thought to be the 'activation?
of subclinical sites of compression, or their appearance due to increased stress on
 neighbouring disc spaces following surgery which renders an intervertebral space
rigid. This is a complication of most commonly used surgical techniques for
slotting, int which fusion of the vertebral bodies is expected to occur within about
 3 months. The incidence of the domino effect has been highest in those dogs in
which the technique of linear traction plus pins/methylmethacrylate fixation has
been applied. The reason, accordirg to critics of the technique, is that fenestration of
the adjacent disc spaces is carried out to allow traction to be applied by Gelpi
retractors during surgery. It certainly seems advisable to avoid this means of
applying traction to the affected interspace space and altermative methods, such
 as manual traction on the head of the dog during surgery, are therefore preferable.
 The domino effect may become apparent at variable times following surgery, i.e.
 months to years later and, indeed, second sites of compression may become evident
in any case without prior surgical intervention.
Associated reading
Bruecker K.A., Seim H.B., Blass C.E. (1989) Caudal cervical spondylomyelopathy:
 decompression by linear traction and stabilisation with Steinmann pins and
polymethyl methacrylate. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 25, 677.
Bruecker K.A., Seim H.B., Withrow S.J. (1989). Clinical evaluation of three surgical
 methods for treatment of caudal cervical spondylomyelopathy of dogs. Vet.
Surg. 18, 197.
Chambers J.N., Oliver J.E., Kornegay J.N., Malnati G.A. (1982) Ventral decompres-
  sh pa    u a ss in s r 
Vet. Med. Assoc. 180, 410.
Chambers J.N., Oliver J.E., Bjorling D.E. (1986). Update on ventral decompression
 for caudal cervical disc herniation in dobermann pinschers. JI. Am. Anim. Hosp.
Assoc. 22, 775.
Denny H.R., Gibbs, C., Gaskell, C.J. (1977) Cervical spondylopathy in the dog. A
review of thirty five cases. I. Small Anim. Pract. 8, 117.
THE ‘'WOBBLER' SYNDROME
¥185
Ellison G.W., Seim H.B., Clemmons R.M. (1988) Distracted cervical spinal fusion for
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 193, 447.
      ()    
spondylolisthesis in the dog. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 9, 385.
Goring R.L., Beale, B.S., Faulkner R.F. (1991) The inverted cone decompression
syndrome' in doberman pinschers. Part 1. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 27, 403.
Hedhammer A., Wu F., Krook L., Schryrer H.F., de La Hunta A., Whalen J.P.
Kallfelz F.A., Nunez E.A., Hunz H.F, Sheffy B.E., Ryan G.D. (1974) Over
nutrition and skeletal disease: an experimental study in growing great Dane
dogs. Corn. Vet. Suppl. 64 (Suppl. 5.), 58.
 Jeffery N.D. (1993) The use of cervical laminaplasty as a treatment for cervical
spinal stenosis in the dog. Proc. Eur. Soc. Vet. Neurol., 10.
Jergens A.E., Turrentine M.A., Kraus K.H., Johnson G.S. (1987) Buccal mucosa
bleeding times of healthy dogs and of dogs in various pathologic states,
including thrombocytopenia, uremia and von Willebrand's disease. Am. J.
Vet. Res. 48, 1337.
Kraus K.H., Turrentine M.A., Jergens A.E., Johnson G.S. (1989) Effect of des-
mopressin acetate on bleeding times and plasma von Willebrand factor in
doberrmann pinscher dogs with von Willebrand's disease. Vet. Surg. 18, 103.
Lewis D.G. (1989) Cervical spondylomyelopathy ("wobbler syndrome") in the
299 0e ioid wu hns f sss 477 uo psq Aps e :3op
Lincoln J.D., Pettit G.D. (1985) Evaluation of fenestration for treatment of degene-
rative disc disease in the caudal cervical region of large dogs. Vet. Surg. 14, 240.
Lyman R. (1989) Continuous dorsal laminectomy for the treatment of caudal
cervical vertebral instability and malformation. Proc. 13th Ann. Kal. Kan.
Symp. 13.
 Lyman R. (1991) Continuous dorsal laminectomy is the procedure of choice. Prog.
Vet. Neurol, 2, 143.
McKee W.M., Lavelle R.B., Mason T.A. (1989) Vertebral stabilisation for cervical
spondylopathy using a screw and washer technique. J. Small Anim. Pract. 30,
337.
McKee W.M., Lavelle R.B., Richardson J.L., Mason T.A. (1990) Vertebral distraction-
fusion for cervical spondylopathy using a screw and double washer technique.
J. Small Anim. Pract. 31, 22.
Piermattei D.L. (1993) The Vertebral Column In: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 3rd edn. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders, p. 45.
Read R.A. Robins G.M., Carlisle C.H. (1983) Caudal cervical spondylomyelopathy
(wobbler syndrome) in the dog: a review of thirty cases. JI. Small Anim. Pract.
24,605.
Rendano V.T., Smith L.T. (1981) Cervical vertebral malformation-malarticulation
   a ga     - (s )
spinal cord compression in the dog. J. Am. Anim, Hosp. Assoc. 17, 627.
Seim H.B., Withrow S.J. (1982) Pathophysiology and diagnosis of caudal cervical
Hosp. Assoc. 18, 241.
186
 HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Sharp N.J.H., Wheeler S.J., Cofone M. (1992) Radiological evaluation of "wobbler"
syndrome - caudal cervical spondylomyelopathy. J. Small Anim. Pract. 33, 491.
VanGundy T. (1989) Canine wobbler syndrome. Part 1. Pathophysiology and
diagnosis. Comp. Cont. Ed. Pract. Vet. 11, 144.
VanGundy T. (1989) Canine wobbler syndrome. Part I1. Treatment. Comp. Cont. Ed.
Pract. Vet. 11, 269.
Walker T.L. (1990) Use of Harrington rods in caudal cervical spondylomyelopathy.
In: Bojrab M.J. (ed.). Current Techniques in Small Animal Surgery, 3rd edn.
Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders, p. 584.
Wright J.A. (1977) A study of the radiographic anatomy of the cervical spine in the
dog. I. Small Animal Pract. 18, 341.
CHAPTER 13
Surgery of the Thoracolumbar Spine
Contents
Introduction 187
Decompressive surgery 188
Prophylactic techniques 194
Fractures and subluxations of the thoracolumbar segment197
Other conditions of the thoracolumbar segment (T3-L3) 197
Neoplasia in the thoracolumbar segment198
Associated reading 199
Introduction
Of all the abnormalities occurring in the thoracolumbar region of the canine
vertebral column which may require surgical treatment, intervertebral disc disease
 is by far the most common. The incidence of disc disease in dogs is very high and
has been reviewed in Chapter 7. The incidence of disc protrusion in cats is quite
high in post mortem studies but cats rarely exhibit disc-associated clinical signs. In
addition, disc protrusion in cats, as in dogs, can occur secondarily to other
 abnormalities of the vertebral column (Figure 13.1).
 Because of the frequency of canine disc disease, most thoracolumbar surgery is
concerned with relief of the effects of disc disease. Two types of surgery are
employed in the thoracolumbar region for management of disc disease; either
 decompressive surgery (entailing removal of the offending material) or prophylac-
tic surgery which aims to reduce the incidence of future disc-related clinical signs.
Figure 13.1 Myelogram of disc protrusion at T13/L1 in a cat presumed secondary to block vertebra
at L2/3 and spondylosis at L1/2.
188
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Decompressive surgery
-  ass  r s aiss  sd sq o ae a
nectomy and hemilaminectomy. There are some modifications of each type that
have been made through the years in order to improve the success rate and limit
potential complications. The choice of operation in each individual case is deter-
mined partly from precise localization of the disc material and partly from personal
preference of the surgeon. There is some tendency recently for hemilaminectomy
(including the 'mini-hemilaminectomy' ) to be preferred over dorsal laninectomy.
mous with removal of the offending disc material. The removal of bone surround-
ing the spinal cord has no beneficial effect in reduction of cord compression. This
 has previously been stated more eloquently by Prata (1981), who has compared
removal of the bone alone to 'making a hole in the roof of a house to let water out of
the basement'. Whatever the means of surgical approach to the spinal cord, the
removal of offending disc material is the aim. The results of treatment of large
numbers of dogs, which have sustained cord injury as a result of acute disc
extrusion, suggest that removal of the disc material is of great benefit in improving
rate and extent of recovery and as a means of greatly reducing the pain associated
with disc extrusion. Treatment of acute cord oedema may be by both surgical and
 d u d o ao e   snde  se s 
Acute type I disc extrusion in the dog usually causes severe cord concussion in
addition to the mass lesion which causes compression of the cord. The cord
concussion and subsequent vascular events cannot be treated by conventional
 decompressive surgery - the removal of the extruded material wili have no effect
on this aspect of the cord injury. The purpose of surgery is to remove the disc
material which is responsible for continued compression of the cord. In some cases,
in which the extruded disc has a very small volume, the value of conventional
decompressive surgery is probably negligible. The treatment of severe cord trauma,
such as can occur as a result of acute disc extrusions of low volume (i.e. cord
concussion), requires a different approach, because the small mass lesion itself is
not the major cause of spinal cord dysfunction. In these cases, such surgery can be
shown to be of no value if myelography fails to demonstrate a definable mass
lesion. In other animals, the effect of the compressive mass will be a very important
cause of continued spinal cord dysfunction and decompressive surgery will lead to
rapid resolution of clinical signs. There is often a clear cut difference in the rapidity
of onset of symptoms in the two groups of dogs; those with negligible mass lesion
 in the other group are usually progressively affected over a period of several hours
to several days.
(Dorsal) Laminectomy
This operation is carried out via a dorsal approach to the vertebral column (Figure
13.2). Following a midline skin incision and division of the subcutaneous fat, the
 dense dorsal lumbar fascia becormes visible. The fascia is incised on the midline and
elevated from each side of the spinous processes. The epaxial musculature is
SURGERY OF THE THORACOLUMBAR SPINE
189
(a)
b
Transverse
process
Figure 13.2 Dorsal approach to the thoracolumbar vertebral column. (a) Following incision and
retractionoftheskinandsupeficialfasciathedepfasciaisincisedaroundthespinousprocessesand
retracted.(b)The attachments of the multifidus muscle to the articular processes are incised alowing
full exposure of the dorsal aspect of the laminae. (c) For hemilaminectomy and modifications, the
exposure is continued laterally and the tendons of the longissimus muscle are severed close to their
attachmentto the accessory processes.
elevated from the spinous processes and laminae of the involved vertebrae. Dis-
section is carried out as close as possible to the periosteum in order to minimize
haemorrhage. Arterial bleeders (branches of the intercostal or lumbar arteries) are
 often encountered as the tendons of the multifidus muscle are cut at thei attach-
 ments to the mammillary processes of the articular processes. This haermorrhage is
most conveniently arrested by use of diathermy. Muscle is retracted laterally to
expose the pedicles just below the level of the synovial joints bilaterally. Removal
of the spinous processes is usually best carried out by rongeurs. Removal of the
laminae can be carried out by means of rongeurs or by high-speed air drill. Care
sado asn pou op sdg aun peu ansua ot sinai tusn um uaxet aq isn
of the cord as each bite is taken from the lamina.
190
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SLRGERY
Figure 13.3 Transverse section of dorsal laminectomy; the shaded portion of bone is removed. The
inner articular processes (those on the caudal aspect of each vertebra) are usually removed. Cranio-
caudal extent depends on extent of lesion.
Several types of dorsal laminectomy have been described. Funkquist (1962) was
one of the first veterinarians to describe the techniques for laminectomy in the dog.
 She investigated the best method of bone removal consistent with the required
exposure of the spinal cord without incurring risk of instability or laminectomy
membrane formation.
 In the Funquist type A operation the pedicles are removed below the level of the
dorsal dural surface; in the Funquist type B operation the pedicles are left intact
above the spinal cord. It has been found that following type A surgery a 'lami-
enough to cause recurrence of clinical signs; consequently, this form of laminectomy
cutting' of the medial aspect of the pedicles, allowing good access to the spinal cord
and the lateral charnels without removing the pedicles ventral to the dorsal aspect
of the cord (Figure 13.3). Access to the lateral channels is important as this is the site
of extruded disc material in most affected dogs. It has been suggested that tagging
as o apis  po uds aun tn a o sao un ss aug m p a
may be helpful in order to permit enhanced access to these lateral channels. It is
sometimes also helpful to perform rhizotomy (i.e. section of the nerve roots) on one
 or both sides to allow greater manipulation of the cord. Further modifications of the
technique include using saline 'slush' to wash around the cord in an effort to induce
hypothermia of the cord and therefore reduce oedema associated with manipula-
tion. In general, it is preferable that manipulations of the spinal cord be minimized
or avoided altogether.
During closure following dorsal laminectomy it has been recommended that a fat
 graft be placed over the cord. The aim of this procedure is to reduce the formation
of the laminectomy membrane. Some problems have been encountered with the use
of fat grafts, such as swelling of the graft itself in situ (causing enhanced compres-
pue shena jey jo inoaey u are suoasins [euds le pon uoegn uaaa pue (uois
some prefer the use of material such as Gelfoam. However, this material has been
shown to cause increased deposition of fibrous tissue at operation sites. Both free
and pedicle (i.e. with blood supply intact) fat grafts have been used for prophylaxis
 of laminectomy membrane formation but there is no clear advantage to pedicled
SURGERY OF THE THORACOLUMBAR SPINE
191
grafts experimentally and they are more difficult to collect. Some experimental
work has demonstrated quite alarming postoperative cord compression in areas
A   s        
swelling and compression of the cord was found to subside quickly. It seems
advisable to use only thin portions of fat, bearing in mind the large anount of
swelling that can occur with this graft material.
ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF THE DORSAL LAMINECTOMY VERSUS HEMILAMINECTOMY
Advantages:
(1) Relatively little lateral dissection is required before reimoval of the lamira can
 be carried out, so approach is initially quicker, less traumatic and incurs less
risk of haemorrhage.
l  ans aaq ua s si a j an  e aq 
compressive lesion is thought to be situated primarily dorsal to the dural tube,
or if extruded disc material could be situated on either or both sides of the cord.
(3) Access to the dorsal aspect of the cord permits durotomy (for prognostic
 a so    p a    s
very severe cord swelling secondary to any acute trauma, including certain
cases of disc extrusion.
 Disadvantages:
(1) Poor access to the ventral aspect of the cord. This is important, as although disc
material may reach the lateral and ever dorsal aspects of the cord, the main site
of compression is usually ventral, because that is the direction from which the
material originates. Extruded disc material is found ventrally most frequently
in those dogs with relatively small diameter vertebral canals, such as the
Although access to some parts of the vertebral floor is permitted if the cord is
 moved, this is a traumatic procedure and best avoided.
(2) Adequate excision of type II disc protrusions is almost impossible via this
approach.
(3) Simultaneous disc fenestration, which is frequently carried out in dogs which
have disc extrusions, necessitates further lateral dissection. Furthermore, the
instability in the vertebral column (there being disruption of at least two of the
three-column structure of the vertebral column)
(4) Time consuming - although the access through the soft tissue is quicker the
access to spinal cord and nerve roots requires more bone removal, is more time
consuming and potentially more traumatic to the cord.
Hemilaminectomy(andmodifications)
Conventional hemilaminectomy involves the removal of the articular processes of
adjacent vertebrae, together with parts of the pedicle, to expose the dorsolateral
192
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SUIRGERY
Figure 13.4 Transverse section of standard hemilaminectomy. Both articular processes at each
intervertebral space are removed unilaterally.
 aspect of the cord. The initial approach is usually dorsal, as for dorsal laminectomy,
but dissection of the muscles is carried out unilaterally only. It is beneficial to leave
some muscle attached to the spinous processes as this will preserve more of the
blood supply to the epaxial muscles. Following dissection to the level of the
synovial joint, the incision is continued laterally and ventrally, by elevating the
muscle from the pedicle, thereby exposing the accessory process or rib. The tendons
of insertion of the longissimus muscle become visible. These are cut a few milli-
 meters from their attachments on the accessory process or rib; the radicular artery
 runs just ventral to these tendons and should be avoided. Haemorrhage arising
from the radicular artery obscures the surgical field but can be arrested conveni-
remove the articular processes of the vertebrae and further removal of bone is
( ani) po an asodxa ot p e o a Aq o pa
The main modification of this technique is the 'mini-hemilaminectomy' technique
(also referred to as pediculectomy), in which oniy a small portion of the pedicle is
removed, permitting access to only the ventral part of the vertebral canal (Figure
 13.5). The articular processes and diarthrodial joints are left intact in this approach.
This technique can be carried out via a dorsal or lateral approach.
 Following either of the hemilaminectomy approaches there is no need to apply a
Figure 13.5 Transverse section of 'mini-hemilaminectomy'. The foramen is merely enlarged suff-
SURGERY OF THE THORACOLUIMBAR SPINE
193
fat graft as there is little risk of laminectomy membrane formation with its
associated problems.
ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF THE HEMILAMINECTOMY APTROACHES
Advantages:
(1) Full access to the lateral and ventral aspect of the dural tube, where most
extruded disc material will be found. The extruded material can be removed
s n  - im     n o  m
combined with disturbance of the disc material using fine scrapers.
e p as  p a go  ano a  se ag ()
discs; the cord can be easily observed before, during and after this procedure to
detect whether further extrusion has taken place as a result of fenestration.
(3) Essentially no trauma to the cord need be incurred.
Disadvantages:
(1) Further lateral dissection is required
(2) Unilateral approach incurs the risk of operating on the wrong side. This can be
overcome by two means, either by selecting a side on clinical grounds and then
(3) Laceration of the venous sinus which lies on the ventrolateral floor of the
vertebral canal is more likely. However, access to the sinus for coagulation is
also very good.
Other decompressiveprocedures
These techniques are durotomy, piotomy and myelotomy. These techniques are
usually reserved for animals with severe neurological deficits (usually including
loss of deep pain sensation), especially those resulting from acute concussion to the
 ng ssnre as ad o p  a r  
 techniques; piotomy and myelotomy must only be carried out on the dorsal midline
 Of the spinal cord.
 Durotomy refers to incision of the dural sac surrounding the spinal cord. This is
usually best done using a hypodermic needle (20 gauge for most dogs) attached to a
syringe and using the bevel to cut the dura carefully, without stabilizing it. As CSF
starts to drain out and the opening gapes, the edges can be grasped with fine rat-
tooth forceps and the incision lengthened using corneal scissors. It is frequently
q on sapa aun moe on se os adeus I ue ou oisu annp aun uoy on ydiau
retracted with fine monofilament stay sutures (Figure 13.6).
 The decompressive efficacy of durotomy is controversial but it is often carried
 out as a prognostic aid in severely affected arimals. In cases of myelomalacia, the
 cord substance will be more or less liquid and will flow from the dural incision. The
 prognosis for such animals is hopeless and they can be destroyed on the operating
table. Durotomy is also required for access to remove intradural tumours; on
  e     s      nn 
 associated with such lesions. In surgery on humans, great care is taken to ensure a
194
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
(a)
(b)
(G)
(d)
Figure 13.6 (a) Durotomy: the bevel of a hypodermic needle makes a useful cutting edge for
initiating this procedure. (b) Conversion of the incision to an I shape using microsurgical scissors.
o n h (p) a ins nfusnpan a u uo fo sapa ()
blade is the preferred instrument - the incision must be on the midline.
watertight seal following repair of durotomy and failure to achieve this has been
associated with post-operative pain and headaches. In cats and dogs symptoms
consistent with such complications have not been evident and non-closure of the
dura appears to be well tolerated by these species.
 Access for decompression and excision of arachnoid cysts also requires duro-
tomy. Following retraction of the margins of the durotomy incision, a ‘bleb' of
dilated pia/arachnoid can be appreciated. This can be grasped and excised in most
cases allowing an unobstructed flow of CSF. Most animals will recover unevent-
fully following excision of the arachnoid cyst but occasional animals will exhibit
recurrence of symptoms; marsupialization of the cyst has been suggested as a
means of dealing with this potential problem.
assessed in clinical cases. Following durotomy, the pia mater is incised on the
midline with a scalpel, or preferably with a razor blade. Myelotomy refers to the
continuation of this incision down to the central canal. In experimental animals,
both these procedures have been shown not to cause severe neurological deficits.
Prophylactic techniques
 Fenestration is the main surgical alternative to the decompressive techniques that
can be carried out in the TL region of the spine. There is some controversy in the
literature regarding the possible benefits of fenestration of TL discs. It has been
proposed that fenestration has a beneficial effect in itself and encourages and
enhances recovery from the paraparetic state following disc extrusion. It is difficult
to understand how fenestration could have this effect because there is no possibility
of removing extruded disc material from the vertebral canal where it is causing
compression of the spinal cord. It has been suggested that there will be reduction of
SURGERY OF THE THORACOLUMBAR SPINE
195
the 'dynamic' effect of a disc extrusion and reduction of inflammation in the
vertebral canal. However, there is little evidence to substantiate these hypotheses.
 Fenestration is now regarded as purely prophylactic by most spinal surgeons.
The recurrence rate of disc-associated disease has been shown to be markedly
reduced following fenestration, although some authors have questioned the pro-
 phylactic benefits of fenestration compared with those achieved by definitive disc
surgery alone (i.e. disc removal following laminectomy). Commonly, fenestration of
the disc involved and the two adjacent discs has been carried out at the same time
as decompressive disc surgery. The recurrence rate is lower following this proce-
dure than if it is not done but now as low as that following multiple disc fenestra-
tion. Consequently, recommendations have been made that multiple disc
fenestration should be carried out simultaneously with decompressive surgery. In
 order to avoid unnecessary disruption of the blood supply to the epaxial muscles, if
decompressive surgery is to be combined with multiple fenestrations, it is advisable
to employ the dorsolateral approach to the thoracolumbar vertebrae, rather than
the more usual dorsal approach.
The recurrence rate following fenestration has been reported at different rates
according to different authors. Some authors have proposed that recurrence of
 symptoms may be the result of incomplete removal of the nucleus during such
 procedures. Recent experimental work has demonstrated that use of a high-speed
drill to remove the nucleus results in more complete evacuation of the nucleus and
should therefore be recommended.
Three approaches have been described to carry out fenestration of the thoraco-
lumbar discs: (i) dorsal approach, following the same planes as the approach for
decompressive surgery; (i) dorsolateral approach; and (i) ventral approach.
T10 and L5 (Figure 13.7). Incision of the lumbodorsal fascia and the aponeurosis of
the longissimus thoracis et lumborum muscle is carried out slightly lateral to the
midline. The caudal part of the fascial incision is located further laterally (about
2 cm) than the cranial part of the incision (about 0.5 cm); part of the spinalis and
semispinalis muscles also must be incised cranially. There is a clear septum between
the multifidus and longissimus muscle groups, especially caudally This division is
widened until the tendons of the longissimus muscle are found. These can be used
as a guide to the location of the discs because they attach onto the accessory
processes of the vertebrae. The disc space can be identified by ‘polishing' the
lateral anulus with a swab, followed by introduction of a hypodermic needle into
the substance of the disc. A window is cut into the lateral aspect of the disc, an arc
of anulus excised, and the inner nucleus is removed using tartar scrapers or similar
 instruments, or a high-speed drill. It can sometimes be helpful to manipulate the
 spine to encourage expulsion of greater quantities of nuclear material.
   a  s r e  se se e aa 
dog is positioned in right lateral recumbency. The initial surgical approach consists
 Of a long incision over and parallel to the left thirteenth rib. The skin incision is
 moved caudally and a paracostal incision into the abdominal cavity is made.
Abdominal viscera are retracted and the left kidney is moved ventrally. The
iliopsoas muscle is retracted away from the ventral aspect of the vertebrae to
allow access to the discs. Discs L1 to L5 are fenestrated via the abdomen. The
skin incision is then moved cranially, allowing an intercostal thoracotomy to be
196
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
(a)
(b)
Multifidus muscle
ongissimus
Tendonof
mscle
(G)
longissimus muscle
(d)
Lateral aspect of anutus
Figure 13.7 Dorsolateral approach to the thoracolumbar vertebral column.(a) Fascial incision is
made about 1.5 cm lateral to the midline.(b) The spinalis et semispinalis muscle is incised cranially.
(c)Developing the natural division between the multifidus and longissimus musclesallows exposure
of the tendons of the longissimus muscles.(d) Tendons of the longissimus are used as a guide to the
location of the discs- the nerve root must be retracted to allow ciear access,the disc is identified by
palpation with a hypodermic needle.
 carried out between ribs 10 and 11. Artificial respiration is required during the
 thoracotomy. Discs T9 to T13 can be located and fenestrated. Care must be taken to
avoid damage to the sympathetic trunk and aorta which lie close to the lateral and
ventral aspects of these discs.
 During fenestration it is routine to treat all the likely susceptible discs, which
includes T10-L4. Via a ventral approach, spaces T9/10 and L5/6 are also easily
 accessible and may be fenestrated. Care must be taken not to create an iatrogenic
 pneumothorax when attending to the most cranial thoracic discs during the dorso-
lateral approach and to avoid damage to the exiting nerve roots, especially at the
SURGERY OF THE THORACOLUMBAR SPINE
197
 most caudal locations (L4, L5) as these nerve roots are important in maintenance of
normal pelvic limb function.
plication is iatrogenic expulsion of more disc material into the vertebral canal if the
dorsal anulus fibrosus has been torn prior to surgery. This would appear to be more
likely to occur in recent extrusions and perhaps fenestration should be avoided in
such cases for this reason. Some dogs are reported to develop ascending myeloma-
lacia in most series of fenestrations, which is commonly ascribed to the original
lesion. However, ascending myelomalacia is not commonly observed following
decompressive surgery in similar cases, suggesting that some (at least) of these
cases of myelomalacia are the result of iatrogenic disc extrusion during fenestration
   s q s ss  n  s
 cervical discs, and has been attributed to iatrogenic disc extrusion.
Fractures and subluxations of the thoracolumbar segment
This part of the vertebral column is more commonly affected by fractures and
luxations than other regions, presumably at least partly because of its length
compared with other segments. However, there are other features which may
make the thoracolumbar junction area more susceptible to injury, such as the
relative mobility in the mid-lumbar region compared with that of the rigidly
restricted thoracic region and the powerfully muscled caudal lumbar region. This
feature could be construed as being likely to allow concentration of forces at the less
rigid intervening thoracolumbar junction region. It is usually suggested that frac-
tures and luxations in the vertebral column occur at the interface between fixed and
nonfixed areas. However, some studies show that this is not the case, with an equal
 distribution of lesions along the entire lumbar spine.
 Many different techniques are available to treat fractures of this region, although
plate fixation should not be carried out caudal to L4 vertebra, because of the
requirement for rhizotomy. The technique of fixation utilizing pins and PMMA
gested that conservative therapy and support with back splints may be suficient to
allow good recovery of function in many affected animals. It must be remembered
that the position of the bones relative to each other does not give an indication of
stability and should not be used as the sole criterion for decision making when
choosing between conservative and surgical treatment.
Other conditions of the thoracolumbar segment (T3-L3)
Type I disc protrusions
Treatment of type I disc protrusions is somewhat different from that applied to
 o   po are A  l ai sn s I 
affect the lumbar region of such dogs, but on occasion they can be found in the
cranial thoracic region. Excision of type II disc protrusions can be difficult. They are
1981
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
best approached by a hemilaminectomy (or mini-hemilaminectomy). The preferred
by introduction of rongeurs (usually Lempert rongeurs) through the anulus
enabling the interior of the disc to be removed. Tartar scrapers or other similar
 instruments can be used from within the vertebral canal to tear dorsally protruded
portions of anulus in a ventral direction into the intervertebral space from where
 n   n e san   a  
should also be excised; a scalpel blade can be used to cut an appropriately sized
window in this ligament, allowing it to be grasped and removed using rongeurs.
bilateral approach (in many cases) will ensure complete removal.
 Following surgical excision of type I discs it is quite common for there to be a
mild deterioration in the dog's neurological status, which can be attributed to
 or instability. Preoperative preparation with methylprednisolone may be of some
benefit.
Developmental diseases
Hemivertebrae and other congenital disorders of the vertebral column are fre-
quently found in the thoracic region of the spine. On myelographic studies,
compression of the spinal cord which is sometimes caused by this deformity can
 be appreciated. Sometimes dorsal laminectomy is an appropriate approach to such
lesions and can allow the removal of extraneous bone or anomalous fibrous tissue
from the affected area. It must be remembered that hemivertebrae are frequently
 inherently very unstable and that laminectomy can potentially further worsen such
 a situation. It is imperative that these cases are treated by appropriate stabilization
such as methyl methacrylate and pin fixation.
Certain cases of hemivertebra may require more radical therapy, for example if
there is substantial compression associated with dorsal displacement of the verte-
 po ru p  rss q  ii sas   s poa r
vertebral body (corpectomy). This is best carried out via a ventral approach and
rhage and these operations require careful planning. Stabilization can be achieved
by use of bone cement/plates, or extermal fixation plus grafts of autogenous or
heterogenous bone in certain cases.
d Aadod si ns j ssi rns u pae aa us shnsau oes
and executed.
Neoplasia in the thoracolumbar segment
Many tumours of the spine are diagnosed in the thoracolumbar segment. They can
form an important differential diagnosis for the much more commonly observed
disc disease in the same region. The same types of tumour occur in this region as
there is one unusual tumour which has been diagnosed only in dogs and only in
SURGERY OF THE THORACOLUMBAR SPINE 199
this region of the spine. There is some doubt regarding the cell type of origin but the
consensus of opinion is that it is a nephroblastoma. It is thought that there is a
failure of some of the primordial kidney cells to separate from the developing
spinal cord. Consequently, an island of potential kidney cells is isolated in the
spinal cord parenchyma. Affected animals develop symptoms of a progressive
transverse myelopathy - the duration of symptoms prior to therapy or post
mortem examination is generally about 1 month. Dogs affected by this tumour
are young (i.e. < 18 months old).
 The site of the tumour is detected by myelography; a blockage of subarachnoid
contrast flow occurs, consistent with an extramedullary /intradural tumour. Most
cases which have been reported were histologically diagnosed post mortem but
alleviation of symptoms. Ultimately, recurrence occurred in one case resulting in
euthanasia.
Attempted surgical treatment, or exploratory surgery to investigate possible
p e ea  aq a pnn ads  po ps s u sn
laminectomy.
Associated reading
Decompressive surgery
 Allen A.R. (1911) Surgery of experimental lesion of the spinal cord equivalent to
 crush injury of fracture dislocation of the spinal column - a preliminary report.
I. Am. Med. Assoc. 57, 878.
 Bitetto W.V., Thacher C. (1987) A modified lateral decompressive technique for
treatment of canine intervertebral disc disease. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 23,
409.
Black A.P. (1988) Lateral spinal decompression in the dog: a review of 39 cases. J.
Small Anim. Pract. 29, 581.
 Funkquist B. (1962) Thoracolumbar disk protrusion with severe cord compression
 in the dog. Il Treatment by decompressive laminectomy. Acta Vet. Scand. 3,
344.
 Funkquist B. (1970) Decompressive laminectomy in thoracolumbar disc protrusion
with paraplegia in the dog. JI. Small Anim. Pract. 11, 445.
o    s  )  
thoracolumbar disc disease in dogs: a retrospective study of 98 cases. Vet.
Surg. 9, 24.
 Jeffery N.D. (1988) Treatment of acute and chronic thoracolumbar disc disease by
'mini hemilaminectomy'. I. Small Anim. Pract. 29, 611.
McKee W.M. (1992) A comparison of hemilaminectomy (with concomitant disc
fenestration) and dorsal laminectomy for the treatment of thoracolumbar
 disc protrusion in dogs. Vet. Rec. 130, 296.
Parker A.J., Smith C.W. (1975) Functional recovery from spinal cord trauma follow-
ing delayed incision of spinal meninges in dogs. Res. Vet. Sci. 18, 110.
Piermattei D.L. (1993) The Vertebral Column. In: An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to
Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 3rd edn. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders, p. 45.
200HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Prata R.G. (1981) Neurosurgical treatment of thoracolumbar disks: the rationale
and value of laminectomy with concomitant disk removal. J. Am. Anim. Hosp.
Assoc. 17, 17.
Rucker N.C., Lumb W.V., Scott R.J. (1981) Combined pharmacologic and surgical
treatments for acute spinal cord trauma. Am. J. Vet. Res. 42, 1138.
Schulman A., Lippincott C.L. (1987) Dorsolateral hemilaminectomy in the treat-
ment of thoracolumbar intervertebral disc disease in dogs. Comp. Cont. Ed.
Pract. Vet. 9, 305.
Seim II H.B., Nafe L.A. (1981) Spontaneous intervertebral disk extrusion with
associated myelopathy in a cat. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 17, 201.
disk surgery. Comp. Cont. Ed. Pract. Vet. 4, 24.
Teague H.D., Brasmer T.H. (1978) Midline myelotomy of the clinically normal
canine spinal cord. Am. J. Vet. Res. 39, 1584.
Trevor P.B., Martin R.A., Saunders G.K., Trotter E.J. (1991) Healing characteristics of
free and pedicle fat grafts after dorsal laminectomy and durotomy in dogs. Vet.
Surg. 20, 282.
 Trotter E.J. (1990) Dorsal laminectomy for treatment of thoracolumbar disc disease.
In: Bojrab M.J. (ed.), Current Techniques in Small Animal Surgery, 3rd Edn.
Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, p. 608.
Fenestration
 Butterworth S.J., Denny H.R. (1991) Follow up study of 100 cases with thoraco-
 lumbar disc protrusions treated by lateral fenestration. J. Small Anim. Pract. 32,
443.
Davies, J.V., Sharp N.J.H. (1983) A comparison of conservative treatment and
fenestration for thoracolumbar intervertebral disc disease in the dog. J. Small
Anim. Pract. 24, 259.
Holmberg D.L., Palmer N.C., Vanpelt D, Willan A.R. (1990) A comparison of
manual and power assisted thoracolumbar disc fenestration in dogs. Vet.
Surg. 19, 323.
Knapp D.W., Pope E.R., Hewett J.E., Bojrab M.J. (1990) A retrospective study of
 n  p   s    s
(1976-1986). J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 26, 543.
Levine S.H., Caywood D.D. (1984) Recurrence of neurological deficits in dogs
treated for thoracolumbar disk disease. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 20, 889.
Shores A., Cechner P.E., Cantwell H.D. (1985) Structural changes in thoracolumbar
 disks following lateral fenestration. Vet. Surg. 14, 117.
Yturrapse D.J., Lumb W.V. (1973) A dorsolateral muscle separating approach for
thoracolumbar intervertebral disk fenestration in the dog. J. Am. Vet. Med.
Assoc. 162, 1037.
Fractures and luxations
Carberry C.A., Flanders J.A., Dietze A.E., Gilmore D.G., Trotter E. J. (1989) Non-
SURGERY OF THE THORACOLUMBAR SPINE
201
luxations in the dog and cat: a review of 17 cases. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 25,
43.
ment. Comp. Cont. Ed. Pract. Vet. 5, 867.
Patterson R.H., Smith G.K. (1992) Backsplinting for treatment of thoracic and
lumbar fracture/luxation in the dog: principles of application and case
series. V.C.O.T. 5, 179.
 Turner W.D. (1987) Fractures and fracture-luxations of the lumbar spine: a retro-
spective study in the dog. I. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 23, 459.
Neoplasia
Ferretti A., Scanziani E., Colombo S. (1993) Surgical treatment of a spinal cord
tumor resembling nephroblastoma in a young dog. Prog. Vet. Neurol. 4, 84.
 Moissonnier P, Abbott D.P (1993) Canine neuroepithelioma: case report and
literature review. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 29, 397.
CHAPTER 14
theLumbosacral and
of
Sacrocaudal Regions
Contents
Introduction 202
Type I disc extrusions in the caudal lumbar region203
Lumbosacral stenosis 204
Fractures and luxations 209
Neoplasia 212
Miscellaneous conditions 212
Associated reading 213
Introduction
 Included within this chapter are those conditions which affect the lumbosacral (L4-
S3) and more distal spinal cord segments, plus discussion of lesions of the caudal
thoracolumbar segment. The spinal cord terminates as the conus medullaris at
approximately the caudal end of L6 vertebra in the dog but the dural sac continues
slightly further caudally to terminate around the L7/S1 interspace. The relationship
varies somewhat between sizes of dog, with the ends of both the spinal cord and
the dural sac located further caudally in smaller animals or breeds and also varies
between individuals of the same breed. In the cat, the dural sac is a wide structure
which continues beyond the lumbosacral junction into the sacrum.
The spinal cord segments L4-S3 are contained within the vertebrae L4-L6 and
therefore any lesions affecting this region of the vertebral column can give rise to a
-us euma enes an se on pa uo si su sudus jo dnona u
drome and is usually applied to the group of symptoms derived from dysfunction
 nerve roots associated with these spinal cord segments course caudally at a quite
acute angle to the remainder of the dural sac, resembling a horse's tail, hence the
term cauda equina.
Compression of the L7-S3 spinal segments (and related nerves) is most com-
monly the result of lesions at the lumbosacral junction (L7-S1 vertebral segments).
 Care must be taken when evaluating animals with neurological signs suggestive of
a lesion of L6-S3 spinal cord segments, as there are many sites within the vertebral
 column at which a lesion will produce identical symptoms. For example, an animal
o  a  p   od s  d yo ss 
have a lesion at L6/7 L7/S1 vertebrae, 0r possibly within the sacrum. Traction
injuries to the tail are common, especially in cats, and can result in damage to the
 nerve roots or spinal cord contained within the vertebral canal. These injuries will
SURGERY OF THELUMBOSACRALANDSACROCAUDAL
203
result in similar neurological impairment to that observed associated with lesions
which are situated more cranially.
 In addition to lesions within the vertebral column, damage to the lumbosacral
that can be difficult to distinguish from those caused by lesions within the vertebral
canal. Most often, lesions of the lumbosacral plexus will be the result of trauma, in
which case the diagnosis may be more easily made. Commonly, sacroiliac fracture/
separation and ilial fractures may result in dysfunction of the L7 nerve root or the
lumbosacral trunk. These orthopaedic injuries are usually easily recognized on
plain radiographs.
Type I disc extrusions in the caudal lumbar region
Although type I disc extrusions occur most frequently in the thoracolumbar region
(T3-L3) occasional dogs will be presented with evidence of lower motor neurone
(a)
(b)
Figure 14.1 (a) Lateral and (b) oblique lateral radiographs of dog with lateralized type I disc
extrusion at L6/7 (arrow).
204
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SLIRGERY
deficits in one or both pelvic limbs in association with disc extrusions. Such affected
 d r n  xa  sd a   s
paresis, which may be associated with considerable pain. It is unusual for disc
affected dogs will include fibrocartilaginous embolism, which has a predilection
to occur in the lumbosacral intumescence. A difference in clinical presentation is
 that dogs suffering disc extrusions will usually exhibit considerable pain and their
 neurological symptoms are often progressive over a period of days to weeks.
 In animals which have very lateralized symptoms, the initial appearance may be
suggestive of an orthopaedic condition; however, neurological examination will
reveal depression of reflexes in most cases. Diagnosis of extruded discs in this
region may be more difficult, as the extreme lateralization may preclude adequate
identification during myelography. The use of 45° oblique radiographic views can
 aid in identification of extruded disc material (Figure 14.1).
 Lesions within the L4-L6 vertebral colurnn segments can be approached by the
same means as those of the T3-L3 segment, i.e. via hemilaiminectomy or dorsal
 laminectomy. The large wings of the ilia prohibit satisfactory access to the lateral
aspect of L7 vertebra, rendering the dorsal approach the only means of attaining
wide exposure of the structures in this region. Extreme care must be utilized in
a te siou aaau ua a ie u 9i-il jo yoadse pein a on yeodde
tively preclude the lateral application of plates to support the spine following
fractures or luxations in this area.
Lumbosacral stenosis
Non-neoplastic lumbosacral disorders have beenn recognized in dogs with increas-
ing frequency over the last 10 years, and can be subdivided into idiopathic and
 acquired stenosis. Idiopathic stenosis is caused by stenosis of the bony vertebral
canal at the lumbosacral junction. Acquired stenosis is usually due to impingement
into the vertebral canal by proliferating soft tissue structures in the area. Most
commonly, protrusion of the L7 disc is the cause but in some dogs there can be
nerve root compression owing to distention and thickening of the diarthrodial
joints or thickening of the ligamentum flavum. In some cases in which the L7
disc space has collapsed and there may be nerve root compression caused by a
combination of soft tissue structures.
Treatment of degenerative lumbosacral stenosis
Several options exist for the treatment of lurmbosacral type II disc protrusion:
fenestration, disc excision, and fixation/fusion.
FENESTRATION
Fenestration is now rarely considered as an option, although it can be used as a
 technique to recover material for bacteriological culture in cases of discospondylitis.
SURGERY OF THE LLIMBOSACRAL AND SACROCAUDAL
205
 Fenestration will not remove protruded material from the vertebral canal. The
approach is usually ventral, via a laparotomy.
DISCECTOMY
 Disc excision involves creation of a dorsal laminectomy plus excision of the dorsal
annulus and removal of the nucleus pulposus using rongeurs or similar instru-
ments. The dorsal approach to the lumbosacral joint is similar to the approach to
the thoracolumbar vertebrae. Positioning of the animal for surgery of the lumbo-
sacral region is important; if the joint is slightly flexed, good access to the vertebral
canal can be achieved even through small bone incisions. However, the apparent
size of a disc protrusion will be reduced with the lumbosacral joint in flexion.
Therefore the exact positioning needs to be different for each individual animal,
and depends on the certainty of preoperative diagnosis.
 A midline skin incision is made, centring on the lumbosacral junction. A layer of
thin muscle is encountered and there may be a considerable amount of subcuta-
neous fat. The thick lumbosacral fascia is situated ventral to the fat layer and is
divided on the midline. Epaxial musculature is elevated from the spinous processes
and retracted laterally using Gelpi retractors. Subperiosteal elevation of the mus-
culature helps to reduce haemorrhage. Sharp dissection is required to divide
 attachments of the multifidus muscle tendons to the articular processes. The flaval
ligament is grasped using sharp forceps and excised with a scalpel blade to reveal
the contents of the vertebral canal. The joint capsule of the diarthrodial joints
commonly is confluent with the flaval ligament. On occasion it may be necessary
Chisel used to
elevatemuscle
(a)
(b)
(c)
Spinous process
Flaval
of sacrurm
ligament.
Figure 14.2 Dorsal approach to the lumbosacral joint. (a) A midline skin incision is made centring
on the L7/S1 space.(b) Dense fascia is incised in the midline and around the spinous processes. Sharp
and blunt dissection is continued by following the contour of the bone.Tendon attachments to the
lateral aspect of the articular processes need not be divided.(c) Dotted line indicates area of bone
removal.
206
HANDBOOKOFSMALLANIMALSPINALSURGERY
Retraction
of cauda
equina
Windo
sopu!
anulus
(a)
(b)
Figure 14.3 Lumbosacral discectomy. (a)Cauda equina is retracted allowing accessto one-halfof the
dorsal anulus; a window is made and the nucleus removed using rongeurs. (b) The cauda equina is
retracted to the other side allowing completion of excision of the dorsal anulus - a curette may assist
in removal of the nucleus.
a po ansodxa enbape aaaue on lapio u anis s po sred ssioxa oi
contents of the vertebral canal.
The cauda equina is relatively robust and can be handled in the same marner as a
peripheral nerve trunk (like the sciatic nerve for instance) and can be mobilized
laterally to allow suficient access to permit excision of the anulus (Figure 14.3).
 Care must be taken to avoid injury to the large venous sinuses during removal of
the anulus.
 It is often necessary to explore the lateral gutters of the vertebral canal to ensure
that the L7 nerve root is not entrapped either in the vertebral canal or in the
intervertebral foramen. When this is being carried out it should be noted whether
the lumbosacral joint is in extension or flexion, because this will affect the width of
the intervertebral foramen and can interfere with proper assessment of the degree
 Of nerve root compression. The intervertebral foramen may be enlarged by use of
 rongeurs or air drill to allow the nerve root to move freely in the foramen (Figure
14.4). The root can be mobilized with a blunt retractor and should be free to move
about 2-3 mm without tension. Sometimes it is necessary to remove the articular
 process totally in order to accomplish complete decompression of the nerve root -
this is termed facetectomy.
Drawbacks of the discectomy technique include the theoretical problem of
 collapse of the disc space with consequent narrowing of the intervertebral fora-
 men. This could possibly exacerbate subclinical compression of the L7 root, which
 means that accurate assessment of root compression is extremely important during
this procedure. A further problem is that removal of the laminae has a potentially
destabilizing effect and removal of parts of the pedicle (during facetectomy) will
exacerbate this effect and consequently may allow subluxation of the L7/Sl articu-
lation. It is recommended that bilateral facetectomy should not be done unless
secure stabilization of the L7/S1 space is also carried out.
SURGERY OF THE LUMBOSACRAL AND SACROCAUDAL
207
(a)
Protruded
Invertebral
Burr used to
foramen
snjnue
remove bone
Retractionof
caudaequina
b
Figure 14.4 Lumbosacral foraminotomy. (a) Prior to foraminotomy the nerve is compressed by
protruded anulus in the foramen.(b) Disc has been excised as in Figure 14.3.Foramen has been
enlarged by means of air drillburr. The L7 nerve root is decompressed.
DORSAL FIXATION/FUSION
This technique has been advocated by some authors as an alternative means of
decompressing the cauda equina and L7 nerve roots at the L7/S1 interspace
(Slocum and Devine 1986). It can be demonstrated that nerve compression is
exacerbated during extension of the lumbosacral junction and relieved during
flexion or by application of linear traction. The fixation/fusion technique relies
on fixation of the lumbosacral joint in a position of flexion or linear traction.
With the lumbosacral joint correctly positioned, crossed Steinmann pins are driven
 across the L7/S1 diarthrodial joints and buried in the wings of the ilia (Figure 14.5).
It is usual, but not essential, for the pins to be driven across the base of the L7
 spinous process. The flaval ligament but not the dorsal anulus is excised during this
 procedure. Grafted bone is applied to the laminae of the L7 and sacral segments 
after the cortical bone has been debrided from their surfaces. The bone graft is
conveniently obtained from the wings of the ilia and can be a mixture of cancellous
 and cortical bone. Fusion of the interspace has been recorded after about 3 months.
208
HANDBOOKOFSMALLANIMALSPINALSUIRGERY
Figure 14.5 Dorsal cross pin fixation of lumbosacral joint. Pins traverse synovial joint between L7
andS1.
doo Ae on no aso a ant s wm peiosse sno
technique that relies on implants, namely implant failure and migration. Implant
migration is particularly cormmon at this site and it has been suggested that bone
J an 'ns aad e se sud a yo spua a on pdde aq su
threaded pins is not recommended as breakage at the thread-pin interface is
to require bilateral L7 nerve root decompression, as good decompression can be
achieved without compromising the stability of the vertebral column.
CHEMONUCLEOLYSIS
 In this technique an enzyme, usually chynopapain, is injected into the nucleus of
the L7 disc. Following this treatment there is a gradual reduction in disc width and
resolution of the symptoms. Chenonucleolysis has not been reported in a large
number of cases yet but the results of this minimally invasive technique certainly
 appear to be promising. The main drawback is the cost of the enzyme and its short
life after being reconstituted. Discography is essential prior to the injection of the
 enzyme, because it is essential that the dorsal annulus is intact, or enzyme will be
Although image intensification is helpful for carrying out this technique it is not
absolutely essential.
Because this technique causes reduction in disc width, there is still the potential
 problem of consequent intraforaminal entrapment of the L7 nerve roots.
VENTRAL FIXATION/FUSION
This technique has only rarely been reported in the literature. Following a ventral
approach to the lumbosacral junction, a single interbody screw is placed across the
L7 disc space and tightened with a lag effect. The ventral approach necessitates a
laparotomy, extending caudally to reach the brim of the pubis. The abdominal
contents are retracted cranially and laterally. The lumbosacral junction can be
SURGERY OF THE LUMBOSACRAL AND SACROCAUDAL
209
Figure 14.6 Lateral postoperative radiograph of dog following ventral screw fixation of lumbosacral
 joint. Impingement of screw into sacral canal was not associated with clinical symptoms.
easily palpated, as there is an obvious change in the angle between the vertebral
bodies at that site. With care taken to protect the trifurcation of the aorta which lies
close by, the periosteum can be elevated laterally. The disc can be fenestrated using
this approach and the vertebral end plates curetted to encourage postoperative
bone bridging. The angle to place the interbody screw can be determined by
reference to preoperative radiographs. Impingement of the screw into the sacral
vertebral canal seems not to be important (Figure 14.6). Radiographic fusion can be
expected to occur within about three months.
Treatment of idiopathic lumbosacral stenosis
 Reports on cases of idiopathic lumbosacral stenosis which were treated surgically
indicate that good results can be achieved by laminectony, including faceterruy
or foraminotomy if required.
Fractures and luxations
Fracture of theL7vertebral body
Fractures of the L7 vertebral body are relatively common, usually as the result of a
road traffic accident. In one series 10/58 lumbar fractures occurred at L7 vertebra.
The caudal part of the vertebra typically is displaced cranially and ventrally.
Although considerable displacement often occurs, the results of treatment are
usually very good. This may still be the case even when considerable function,
even including loss of deep pain sensation of the hindlimbs, has been lost.
Reduction of the fracture is usually straightforward; the caudal fragment is
grasped in bone-holding forceps, elevated and drawn caudally Stability can be
210
HANDBOOKOFSMALLANIMALSPINALSURGERY
Figure 14.7 Fracture of L7 vertebra. This fracture is not typical of fractures of this vertebra.
Figure 14.8 Postoperative ventrodorsal view of same dog ilustrating transilial bar fixation. The
smaller pins have been used to help reduce the synoviat joints between the articular facets.
assured simply by placing a transilial pin across the caudal articular processes of
L7. The pin should preferably penetrate the base of the spinous process for addi-
tional stability (Figures 14.7 and 14.8).
 Similar fractures and luxations also occur in other vertebrae of the caudal lumbar
region, which can be difficult to treat. Lateral plate application cannot be done at
 this site because of the need for rhizotomy and difficulties in access. Dorsal fixation
by means of pins and PMMA cement can also sometimes be difficult to apply
properly. Three techniques have been described to be of use in this region: spinal
stapling, which requires there to be many consecutive spinous processes intact and
 also much lateral dissection; the technique of combined use of Lubra plates with the
simple transilial bar; and external fixation. Experience with external fixation is still
at an early stage.
SURGERY OF THE LUMBOSACRAL AND SACROCAUDAL
211
Figure 14.9 Sacrocaudal fracture/luxation in a cat. Courtesy of Mr M. Herrtage, Cambridge
LIniversity Veterinary School, LIK.
Sacrocaudalfracture/luxation
This condition is especially common in cats, usually following RTA. Typically the
lesion is a luxation with or without fracture in one or both diarthrodial joints
(Figure 14.9). The degree of displacement of the affected vertebrae may vary
considerably between cases. Damage to the nerve roots usually is the result of
traction, with the result that several of the more cranially located nerve roots of the
lumbosacral plexus may also be involved and dysfunctional. Affected cats typically
 have limp tails, incontinence (usually with little resistance to emptying) and may
show signs of partial sciatic palsy (e.g. weak hock flexion). Pelvic limb symptoms
 Iay be of short duration only. The prognosis for return of function is variable,
reflecting the range of severity of the neural injury, from neurapraxia to complete
severance of the nerves. A good prognosis is expected for the majority of affected
cats, those that have absent anal tone will be less likely to recover full function. In
 one study, cats that were not able to urinate normally at 1 month post-injury never
recovered.
Treatment can consist of several options: (i) conservative, with care of the bladder
by manual expression or indwelling catheter; (i) reduction and fixation of the
fracture/luxation; or (ii) tail amputation. Those animals exhibiting relatively
mild signs are usually treated conservatively; ie. those with weak tail, intact
Full recovery within 3 weeks is common in this group. Those with severe injury, i.e.
loss of pain sensation in the tail, loss of bladder control and severe fracture
 fragment displacement may benefit from surgical exploration and decompression
 of the nerve roots. Removal of haematoma and realignment of the spinal canal may
allow healing of the nerves to occur more easily and stabilization will prevent
further trauma to the nerves. Whether there is a greater rate of recovery in
surgically treated cases is not known. Amputation of the tail may be beneficial
On two counts: one is that there is frequently considerable trauma and soiling of the
tail, which can be difficult to manage; also, the weight of the tail may be responsible
for persistent traction on the nerve roots and thereby hinder recovery.
2121
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
 In all these cases it is worth allowing prolonged periods of time to elapse before
considering that recovery will not occur, up to 3 months or more may be required
before recovery becomes obvious. However, the dedication of the owner and the
veterinarian may also be a factor to be considered before embarking on such
 prolonged treatinent of an incontinent animal. (The complications of incontinence
are discussed in Chapter 16).
Neoplasia
The lumbosacral region appears to be affected reasonably frequently by tumours.
n s e isdou  ps ss   si si
are often indistinguishable from lumbosacral disc disease; care is required to
cially as it allows the full extent of the lesion to be clearly seen. In many cases it is
possible to excise tumours at this site but unfortunately their malignant nature
often precludes long remission tiimes.
 Metastatic tumours can also be found at this location, as at other sites within the
vertebral column. Metastasis of prostatic tumours is particularly common. Typi-
cally there is marked proliferation of the bone of the ventral aspect of the vertebral
bodies at the site of prostatic metastasis.
Miscellaneous conditions
Discospondylitis
The L7 disc space is the second most commonly affected with discospondylitis.
Discospondylitis in dogs is usually treated by antibiotics alone, at least initially.
However, surgical treatment can be useful either for obtaining a specimen for
culture or to stabilize affected vertebral segments.
A ventral approach to the L7 disc can be carried out in order to obtain material
for culture and also for fixation of this intervertebral space. Alternatively, the dorsal
approach followed by discectomy can be employed. Dorsal fixation/fusion follow-
 ing a wide laminectomy at the lumbosacral joint is likely to result in fracture of the
 articular processes.
Osteochondrosis
 Two recent reports have described the radiological appearance and incidence of
osteochondrosis. To date, the condition has been described only in German
shepherd dogs. The symptoms are similar to those of other conditions of the
 lumbosacral region, including pain and poor tail carriage. On plain lateral radio-
graphs, a mass of bone density can be seen lying close to the cranial end plate of the
sacral body. This is commonly associated with a defect in the shape of the sacrum.
Epidurography can clearly denonstrate the compressive effect of the lesion on the
cauda equina. Surgical treatment by means of dorsal laminectomy and excision of
the offending loose body results in resolution of symptoms. The loose portion of the
bone may adhere closely to the vertebral bone, necessitating use of hammer and
chisels or rongeurs to remove it. Care must be taken to protect the nerve roots
during such procedures.
Associated reading
Lumbosacral stenosis/cauda equina syndrome
Betts C.W., Kneller S.K., Skelton J.A. (1976) An unusual case of traumatic spondy-
lolisthesis in a red bone hound. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 12, 470.
Chambers J.N. (1989) Degenerative lumbosacral stenosis in dogs. Vet. Med. Rep. 1,
166.
 Denny H.R., Gibbs C., Holt P.E. (1982) The diagnosis and treatment of cauda equina
lesions in the dog. I. Small Anim. Pract. 23, 425.
Lenehan T.M. (1983) Canine cauda equina syndrome. Comp. Cont. Ed. Pract. Vet. 5,
941.
 Morgan J.P, Bailey C.S. (1990) Cauda equina syndrome in the dog: radiographic
evaluation. J. Small Anim. Pract. 31, 69.
Morgan JP, Bahr A., Franti C.E., Bailey C.S. (1993) Lumbosacral transitional
vertebrae as a predisposing cause of cauda equina syndrome in German
shepherd dogs: 161 cases (1987-1990). J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc: 202, 1877.
Oliver J.E., Selcer R.R., Simpson S. (1978) Cauda equina compression from lumbo-
sacral malarticulation and malformation in the dog. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 173,
207.
 Palmer R.H., Chambers J.N. (1991) Canine lumbosacral diseases. Part I. Anatomy,
pathophysiology and clinical presentation. Comp. Cont. Ed. Pract. Vet. (Europ).
1, 12.
Palmer R.H., Chambers J.N. (1991) Canine lumbosacral diseases. Part I1. Definitive
diagnosis, treatment and prognosis. Comp. Cont. Ed. Pract. Vet. Europ. 1, 95.
Piermattei D.L. (1993) Section Ill The Vertebral Column In: An Atlas of Surgical
Approaches to Bones and Joints of the Dog and Cat, 3rd edn. Philadelphia, W.B.
Saunders, p. 45.
Schulman A.J., Lippincott C.L. (1988) Canine cauda equina syndrome. Comp. Cont.
Ed. Pract. Vet. 10, 835.
Sisson A.F, LeCouteur R.A., Ingram J.T., Park R.D., Child G. (1992) Diagnosis of
cauda equina abnormalities by using electromyography, discography, and
epidurography in dogs. J. Vet. Int. Med. 6, 253.
Slocum B., Devine T. (1986) L7-S1 fixation-fusion for treatment of cauda equina
compression in the dog. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 188, 31.
Tarvin G, Prata R.G. (1980) Lumbosacral stenosis in dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
177, 154.
Fractures and luxations
Dulish M.L.. Nichols J.B. (1981) A surgical technique for management of lower
lumbar fractures: case report. Vet. Surg. 10, 90.
214 HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Helphrey M. (1983) Spinal trauma. In: Bojiab M.J. (ed.) Current Techniques in Small
Animal Surgery, 2nd edn. Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger 577.
Lewis D.D, Stampley A., Bellah J.R., Donner G.S., Ellison G.W. (1989) Repair of
sixth lumbar fracture-luxations, using transilial pins and plastic spinous
process plates in six dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 194, 538.
Shores A. (1992) Fractures and luxations of the vertebral column. Vet. Clin. N. Am.
22, 171.
Shores A., Nichols C., Koelling H.A., Fox W.R. (1988) Combined Kirschner-Ehmer
apparatus and dorsal spinal plate fixation of caudal lumbar fractures in dogs:
biomechanical properties. Am. J. Vet. Res. 49, 1979.
Slocum B., Rudy R.L. (i975) Fractures of the seventh lumba1 vertebra in the dog. J.
Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 11, 167.
 Smeak D.D., Olmstead M.L. (1985) Fracture/luxation of the sacrococcygeal area in
the cat. A retrospective study of 51 cases. Vet. Surg. 14, 319.
Ullman S.L., Boudrieau R.J. (1993) Internal skeletal fixation using a Kirschner
apparatus for stabilisation of fracture/luxations of the lumbosacral joint in
six dogs. Vet. Surg. 22, 11.
Neoplasia
Nafe L.A., King G.K, Hulse D.A., Taylor H.W. (1983) An enlarged intervertebral
do 'uy 'u '1 op e u oes snseideue ue ym posse o
Assoc. 19, 299
Schueler R.O., Roush J.K., Oyster R.A. (1993) Spinal ganglioneuroma in a dog. JI.
Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 203, 539.
Shores A., Kazacos E., Parker A.J., Cantwell H.D. (1984) Meningeal sarcoma
mimicking a sciatic neuropathy in a dog. I. Small Anim. Pract. 25, 719.
Miscellaneous
Gilmore D.R. (1986) Lumbosacral pain in the dog. Canine Pract. 13, 6.
    s 1  s   
Assoc. 23, 57.
Lang J, Hani H, Schawalder P. (1992) A sacral lesion resembling osteochondrosis in
the German shepherd dog. Vet. Rad. Lltras. 33, 69.
Moise N.s., Flanders J.A. (1983) Micturition disorders in cats with sacrocaudal ver-
tebral lesions. In: Kirk R.W. (ed.), Current Veterinary Therapy VllI Philadelphia,
W.B. Saunders, p. 722.
CHAPTER 15
Medical and Conservative Therapy
Contents
Introduction 215
Antibiotic treatment of spinal disease 215
Corticosteroid therapy of spinal disease217
Other treatments 219
Conservative therapy of mild disc-associated symptoms  220
Associated reading 21
Introduction
 There are many lesions of the spinal cord or vertebral column for which surgical
treatment has no effect on the outcome and is therefore inappropriate. For these
types of lesion, medical treatment sometimes has a part to play. There is only a
limited number of drugs which are useful in medical treatment of spinal conditions.
Conditions for which surgery has no role include vascular lesions (e.g. fibrocar-
tilaginous embolization) and inflammatory or infectious conditions of the spinal
cord. Conditions for which surgery may also be inappropriate include those trau-
matic lesions in which the clinical signs are mild and self limiting. Deciding
whether medical or surgical therapy is most appropriate can, in some cases, be
 s an go  p aa  m   pe 
 some patients, although initial medical treatment may be advisable, if clinical signs
progress or fail to resolve then surgery can become a second line of treatment, for
instance in the management of discospondylitis o1 type II disc protrusion. Physical
 therapy is an important part of the management of animals with dysfunction of the
spinal cord, although the means are relatively crude compared with those available
fo1 treatment of human patients. Physical therapy is considered in more detail in
 the section dealing with postoperative care.
Antibiotic treatment of spinal disease
The use of antibiotics in spinal disorders is limited almost exclusively to treatment
of lesions of the extradural tissues, most commonly the vertebrae and the disc
space. Bacterial infection is rarely encountered within the dural sac, and even
more rarely does it involve the neural tissue itself. Theoretical considerations
regarding the penetration of antibiotics into the neural tissue are therefore not
often clinically relevant. There is a blood-spinal cord barrier, similar to that
separating the brain and blood, which impedes the passage of certain drugs into
216
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
CSF and neural parenchyma. On the rare occasions in which infection is present in
the subarachnoid space these considerations may arise, although selection of
 antibiotic in most cases will be determined by culture and sensitivity testing of
appropriate samples. Bacterial infections in the subarachnoid space are usually the
result of a penetrating injury and the correct antibiotic can be determined from
culture of material obtained either from the CSF or from sites outside the vertebral
column. Before sensitivity results are available, it is prudent to treat intradural
 infections with a bacteriocidal antibiotic which achieves good penetration into the
CSF. In general, the more lipid-soluble antibiotics with lower polarity are better
 distributed in the CSF and spinal cord. These antibiotics include chloramphenicol
and trimethoprim. However, the blood-spinal cord barrier will often be impaired
as a result of inflammation enabling other less lipid-soluble antibiotics to cross
more readily into the CSF and spinal cord parenchyma.
 Several types of infection may warrant treatment with antimicrobial drugs: (i)
bacteria, including spirochaetes such as Borrelia; (i) fungal agents such as Crypto-
coccus among others (in the USA); (i) protozoal agents such as Toxoplasma and
Neospora; and (iv) rickettsial infections (USA).
The most common use of antibiotics in spinal disease is in the treatment of
discospondylitis. In discospondylitis, it is usual to assume that the infection is a
pericillin-resistant staphylococcus, unless culture has shown otherwise. Culture
 material in cases of discospondylitis can be obtained from the lesion itself or in
many cases from a blood or urine culture. The most common bacterial pathogen in
most series is Staphylococcus intermedius or S. aureus, although Brucella canis has also
been isolated in cases in the USA. Although some reports have suggested that
discospondylitis be treated with surgery and then antibiotics, other authors suggest
that response to antibiotics and analgesics alone is usually as good. These authors
suggest that surgery should be reserved for the unusual cases in which medical
therapy has been unsuccessful.
 Treatment, as for any bone infection, must be prolonged, often for as long as 3
months. Failure to respond adequately to antibiotics within a suitable period is
indication for surgical exploration of the lesion and collection of a specimen for
culture. Because of the pain associated with discospondylifis, the concurrent use of
 non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs is often warranted. Suitable antibiotics for
treatment of discospondylitis are based on the premise that the infecting bacte-
rium is resistant to normal penicillin, therefore agents such as cephalosporins or
potentiated amoxycillin are most suitable.
 Surgical treatment should be carried out cautiously if indicated for investigation
and treatment of discospondylitis, because there may be instability of the vertebral
intervention in order to identify space-occupying lesions which may require
removal. Care should be taken prior to surgery to identify suitable means of
postoperative stabilization of the surgical area. Surgical treatment should be
limited where possible to curettage for the purpose of obtaining a specimen for
culture. In certain cases it may be possible to obtain enough material from needle
 aspirates, particularly if fluoroscopy is available.
Foreign bodies have been associated with the development of discospondylitis in
 si s  i a  m  r e s 
removal of the incifing agent. Other rare cases requiring surgery and antibiotic
MEDICAL AND CONSERVATIVE THERAPY
217
therapy include those in which a discrete abcess has formed. Cases have been
recorded in which epidural or subdural abcesses have been the cause of cord
dysfunction - myelography can be used to identify such space-occupying lesions.
 Borrelia, the causative organism of Lyme disease, can be eliminated by use of a
variety of drugs including tetracycline and penicillin. Lyme disease has recently
been identified in many parts of the world, including the UK, where its distribution
has become increasingly widespread. Borreliosis can give rise to neurological
symptoms in some affected dogs; the agent gains entry to the CNS itself (as
evidenced by  intrathecal antibody production), therefore antibiotics which
 penetrate the blood-CNS barrier are preferred.
 Protozoal infections are sometimes suspected to be the cause of spinal cord
dysfunction but are rarely proven as a definite cause. However, it is often useful
to give treatment for these conditions where another definite cause cannot be
elucidated. The most commonly incriminated organism is Toxoplasma. However,
some doubt has been cast on the prevalence of this infection, with the recent
discovery of the Neospora organism; nevertheless, therapy for infection by either
 of these organisms is the same. The best treatment is a combination of potentiated
sulphonamides and the antimalarial drug pyrimethamine. Both of these drugs can
penetrate sufficiently well into the CSF to be able to eliminate infection.
Clindamycin can also be used, especially in cats.
 In the USA there are a large number of rickettsial infections of the nervous system
which may require treatment, e.g. Rocky mountain spotted fever, ehrlichiosis.
Treatment of these infections is with tetracyclines. Prognosis can be good if
 infection is detected at an early stage.
Fungal infections are rarely encountered in the UK but are found in some other
parts of the world, e.g. southern states of USA. These diseases are frequently
rapidly progressive and often fatal. Treatment with antifungal drugs is proble-
sive nature of the infections. Although prognosis is usually poor, successful
 treatment of some of these infections has been recorded.
Corticosteroid therapy of spinal disease
Corticosteroids have long been used in the therapy of spinal diseases, both to treat
the cord itself and also as a means of relieving symptoms of pain associated with
some of these diseases.
Use of steroids in acute spinal cord injury
Corticosteroids have been used in attempts to resolve the oedema and reduce the
inflammation and vascular lesions which occur following acute cord injury. Recent
work has demonstrated no benefit from the use of corticosteroids in clinical or
experimental situations except in very limited circumstances. The exception is the
use of methylprednisolone (MP) at a specific dosage (30 mg/kg) within the first 8 h
of the trauma occurring followed by 5.4 mg/kg/h for 23 h. Use of dexamethasone
at any time, except before the injury occurs, has not been demonstrated to have any
 beneficial effect on the rate or extent of recovery of the acutely injured spinal cord.
218
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Furthermore, dosages of MP other than that recommended have not been shown to
be beneficial and can be associated with a poorer prognosis. Use of MP after the 8-h
period can also be associated with a poorer return of function.
 Many other drugs have been tried in the therapy of acute cord injury, including
 naloxone, DMsO, reserpine and thyrotropin; none of these has consistently shown
 a beneficial response. Calcium channel blockers are currently under test at several
institutions. Although they may be efficacious in ameliorating the effects of cord
injury, many have undesirable systemic side-effects and therefore are not yet
available for clinical use. More encouraging has been the reseaich into the mechan-
  yo  a a sie i i siss   yo e yo 
formation. The part of the molecule responsible for protection against free radical
injury is independent of its corticosteroid activity and so research is continuing in
order to identify molecules which will separate the actions completely. One of the
problems associated with use of corticosteroids at high dosages is the development
of side-effects such as gastrointestinal tract ulceration, which can result in severe
and even life-threatening haemorrhage. These newly developed compounds, which
are related to MP, are known as lazaroids or aminosteroids and should be free of
these side effects. They are currently undergoing clinical testing in human subjects.
UIse of corticosteroids in chronic spinal cord compression
Corticosteroids (CS) can also be used in therapy of more chronic conditions such as
long-term cord compression caused by discs or tumours. The effect of steroids in
these cases can be quite dramatic, owing to their effects in reducing the zone of
oedema surrounding such lesions and thereby decreasing their compressive effect.
This anti-oedema effect has been found to be associated with anti-prostagiandin
effects and is shared by some nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. However, use
of corticosteroids in chronic cord compression is probably more helpful as a
Aa  so  a re  e s  s d s
the wobbler syndrome, or other type II disc disease may be best treated by these. In
some cases in which there is some doubt regarding the significance of a type II disc
lesion on the overall neurological status of the animal (e.g. in the German shepherd
dog with type II thoracolumbar disc lesion plus suspected concurrent degenerative
myelopathy) treatment with CS can help to determine the significance of each. If the
 dog improves with CS therapy then the disc protrusion is likely to be significant.
Some clinicians feel that the use of CS (again preferably MP) just prior to surgery
 can help to alleviate the effects of iatrogenic injury to the neural structures resulting
from intraoperative manipulations or the formation of free radicals following
decompression of previously compromised tissues (i.e. that resulting from reperfu-
sion injury). Experience of operating without perioperative use of any CS drugs
suggests that they are not necessary. Animals appear to recover just as quickly
without CS as with and, furthermore, there is a definite reduction in the incidence
  a  e s     o
sufficient to cause problems, then MP can be given following or during surgery as a
precaution with the expectation that a good response to the drug can still be
obtained.
 Deleterious effects of CS given at the time of surgery can include the development
MEDICAL AND CONSERVATIVE THERAPY219
 of gastrointestinal ulceration. Although it is possible to protect the gastric mucosa
to some extent by use of histamine H2 antagonists (e.g. cimetidine), ulceration of
other areas of the gastrointestinal tract (e.g. colon) can still occur. It has been
combined with dexamethasone therapy may be the result of a number of factors,
including transient hypotension and the stress associated with surgery, as well as
the drug itself.
Other treatments
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
These drugs can be used as part of the therapy for dogs exhibiting spinal pain, such
as those affected by discospondylitis, disc extrusions or disc protrusions. In general,
 nerve 1oots or meningeal inflammation, is not as good as that obtained from use of
CS. However, the side-effects of NSAIDs are less widespread and if a positive
 response is obtained then they are preferable for long-term treatment. A major
 problem in their use is that often it can be desirable to use CS drugs if NSAIDs do
 not work and there have been a number of reports of serious complications from
the concurrent use of the two types of drugs. In common with CS, when NSAIDs
are used in the treatment of dogs exhibiting pain alone as a result of disc extrusion,
care must be taken to ensure that dogs are limited strictly in their activity, i.e. cage
 rest only. The relief of pain in these cases can lead to excessive activity on the part of
the dog resulting in exacerbation of symptoms.
Diazepam
 This drug has been recommended as a treatment for an ambulatory dog which has
 problem is that the muscle spasm helps to reduce movement of the affected area of
the spine and reduction in this stiffness may tend to exacerbate the underlying
condition.
Acupuncture
 This means of physical therapy is claimed by some authors to give good response
in cases of acute disc injury to the cord. It can also be helpful in relief of pain
associated with disc disease. The means of action of acupuncture are still largely
undetermined but the postulated changes in blood flow and release of endor-
phines which are thought to occur may be beneficial at certain stages of the
healing process. The great advantages of acupuncture are that it is cheap and
conventional therapy are not available.
220
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Chemonucleolysis
Chemonucleolysis is the chemical dissolution of the intervertebral disc and has
been used as an alternative to surgery in selected human patients. Two enzymes
nucleus of the disc by means of a needle. Either fluoroscopic guidance or a surgical
approach can be utilized to ensure correct positioning. Following injection of the
enzyme there is a reduction in disc width (height). Beneficial results are thought to
 be the result of reduction in size of disc protrusions and denervation of the anulus
fibrosus. Only certain human patients are potential candidates for this technique
and the use of similar guidelines may limit the use of chemonucleolysis in dogs. For
. instance, enzymes are inappropriate for treatment of patients with 'sequestered'
material, i.e. disc material which is free in the vertebral canal, or those suffering
severe neulological dysfunction. The main proposed uses in dogs would be as a
treatment for dogs which have type Il disc protrusions at the lumbosacral junction
or perhaps for type II discs elsewhere. Chemonucleolysis may also have an indica-
tion in dogs which would otherwise be fenestrated. Following chemonucleolysis
there may be a danger that 'redundant' anulus fibrosus could still form a source of
continued spinal cord or nerve root compression.
have established the feasibility of the technique. The results in a series of dogs with
clinical symptoms associated with type I disc protrusions at the lumbosacral
junction have been reported and are quite encouraging. One further remaining
problem with the technique is the high cost of the enzyme.
Conservative therapy of mild disc-associated symptoms
Many animals, especially dogs, are presented for treatment of very mild trauma-
tically induced lesions of the spinal cord. Commonly, such lesions will be the result
of disc extrusions. For mildly affected patients surgery is not warranted as it will
    s        
conservative therapy. Mildly affected cases are those exhibiting pain only, or pain
 plus moderate paraparesis, but the animals are still able to walk unassisted.
 Conservative therapy in these cases entails strict confinement, ie. in a cage or
similar enclosed space, in order to prevent exercise which may cause further
 extrusion of nuclear material. The use of children's playpens is not recommended
as there is a tendency for dogs to stand on their hindlimbs in order to see out, or
even to attempt to climb out. Some animals can be suitably managed at home but
the ownel must be advised in detail regarding the treatment and of what to do
should the condition deteriorate. In general, treatment as an outpatient is more
appropriate for dogs that have cervical disc extrusions because there is no great risk
 of rapid progression of neurological symptoms.
Most thoracolumbar cases are best treated in the hospital, permitting close
 observation, repeated neurological examination and the administration of analge-
sics as required. Many such cases are treated with corticosteroids but, as previously
mentioned, their use is probably mostly as an analgesic rather than curative. The
practice of treating animals which have thoracolumbar disc lesions with CS and
MEDICAL AND CONSERVATIVE THERAPY
221
then discharging them to the owners' care is not to be recommended. The main
activity. This can lead to exacerbation of the existing condition and frequently is
associated with the deterioration of a moderately paretic animal to a state in which
it is unable to walk and requires emergency surgery, or worse still, progression to
following such a treatment regime.
The advised treatment would therefore be either to treat the animals at home by
enforced rest/confinement without any drug treatment, or to admit the dog to a
 hospital kennel and allow the administration of analgesics and/or muscle relax-
ants. The period of rest in the kennels should be determined by the dog's progress 
but would normally entail a stay of at least 5 days. The owners must be advised of
the possibility of recurrence or progression of the condition, i.e. either pain, paresis
 or both and the possible benefits of prophylactic surgery. The normal recommenda-
tion is to allow the dog two episodes of back pain before recommending fenestra-
tion but this may be altered in specific circumstances, such as very young
chondrodystrophic dogs exhibiting signs of back pain (i.e. those with very high
risk of recurrence). Attempts to make a specific diagnosis in these cases need only
be fairly limited. The use of plain radiographs alone is suitable because many of
the differential diagnoses will be associated with changes seen in plain films. The
absence of abnormalities is supportive but not diagnostic of disc disease. The
failure of conservative therapy to produce improvement in symptoms over a
relative short period of time should lead to more effort in diagnosis. The routine
use of myelography fo1 animals exhibiting mild spinal pain of short duration
cannot be recommended because the findings would not alter the treatment
offered to such animals.
Associated reading
Bracken M.B., Shepard M.J., Collins W.F., Holford T.R., Baskin D.S., Eisenburg
H.M., Flamm E., LeoSummers I., Maroon J.C., Marshall I.F, Pert PL. Jr,
Piepmeier J., Sonntag U.K.H., Wagner F.C. Jr, Wilberger J.L., Winn H.R.,
 Young W. (1992) Methylprednisolone or naloxone treatment after acute spinal
cord injury: 1 year follow-up data. (NASCIS 2) J. Neurosurg. 76, 23.
Crawford L.M., Wilson R.C. (1982) Melaena associated with dexamethasone
therapy in the dog. J. Small Anim. Pract. 23, 91.
Dow S.W., Rosychuk R.A.W., McChesney A.E., Curtis C.R. (1990) Effects of flunixin
 and flunixin plus prednisone on the gastrointestinal tract of dogs. Am. J. Vet.
Res. 51, 1131.
Editorial (1990) Steroids after spinal cord injury. Lancet 336, 279.
 Hall E.D. (1992) The neuroprotective pharmacology of methylprednisolone. J.
Neurosurg 76, 13.
Hoerlein B.F., Redding R.W., Hoff E.J., McGuire J.A. (1983) Evaluation of dexa-
methasone, DMSO, mannitol and solcoseryl in acute spinal cord trauma. J. Am.
Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 19, 216.
Hoerlein B.F., Redding R.W., Hoff E.J., MeGuire J.A. (1985) Evaluation of naloxone,
222
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
crocetin, thyrotropin releasing hormone, methylprednisolone, partial myelo-
tomy and hemilaminectomy in the treatment of acute spinal cord trauma. J.
Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 21, 67.
 Janssens L.A.A. (1991) Therapeutic aspects of acute spinal cord trauma. J. Small
Anim. Pract. 32, 620.
Moore R.W., With1ow S.J. (1982) Gastrointestinal haemorrhage and pancreatitis
associated with intervertebral disk disease in the dog. I. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc.
180, 1443.
Rucker N.C. (1990) Management of spinal cord trauma. Prog. Vet. Neurol. 1, 397.
Vonderhaar M.A., Salisbury S.K. (1993) Gastroduodenal ulceration associated with
flunixin meglumine administration in three dogs. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 203,
92.
Young W., DeCrescito V., Flamm E.S., Blight A.R., Gruner J.A. (1988) Pharmacologi
cal therapy of acute spinal cord injury: studies of high dose methylprednisolone
and naloxone. Clin. Neurosurg, 34, 675.
Acupuncture
Janssens L.A.A. (1985) The treatment of canine cervical disc disease by acupunc-
ture: a review of thirty-two cases. J. Small Anim. Pract. 26, 203.
 Janssens L.A.A., DePrins E.M. (1989) Treatment of thoracolumbar disk disease in
Hosp.Assoc. 25, 169.
 Still J. (1989) Analgesic effects of acupuncture in thoracolumbar disc disease in
dogs. J. Small Anim. Pract. 30, 298.
Chemonucleolysis
Atiola M.A.O., Cockshutt J.R., McLaughlin R., Cochrane S., Pernock PW. (1993)
Collagenase chemonucleolysis - a long term radiographic study in normal
dogs. Vet. Radiol. ultras. 34, 321.
Fry T.R., Johnson A.L. (1991) Chemonucleolysis for treatment of intervertebral disk
disease. J. Am. Anim. Hosp. Assoc. 199, 622.
Miyabayashi T, Lord PF, Dubielzig R.R., Biller D.S., Manley PA. (1992)
Chemonucleolysis with collagenase. Vet. Surg. 21, 189.
CHAPTER 16
Postoperative Care and Physical
Therapy
Contents
Introduction 223
Pain 223
Recumbency 224
Management of incontinent animals227
Physiotherapy 228
Associated reading 230
Introduction
 Animals affected by disease of the spine, and those which have undergone surgery
of the spine, often require very demanding nursing attention. Many of these
patients are not fully mobile and may be unable fuily to control urination and
defaecation. Pre- or post-operative pain may also complicate nursing care, because
it will tend to make the animal more apprehensive and therefore less easy to
 handle. Those animals which are recumbent for long periods of time will also be
at risk of long-term complications such as severe muscle wasting, pneumonia,
urinary tract infection and bedsores (decubital ulcers). Aftentive nursing care and
 properly applied physical therapy can aid in reducing the incidence and severity of
these problems.
 Items of special concerm in nursing patients with spinal disease are (i) pain; (i)
recumbency and its attendant problems (pneumonia, faecal/urinary soiling.
bedsores, limb oedema, muscle wasting; and (i) urinary infection.)
Pain
 Many spinal disorders can be extremely painful, especially in those cases in which
there is compression of the nerve roots. Although surgery can be very effective in
 reducing pain in the spine there is frequently a short period of postoperative pain
suffered by the patient. The use of opiate analgesics is almost mandatory as most
other analgesics are not sufficiently potent to alleviate this type of pain. Recently,
however, clinical trials with carprofen, a nonsteroidal anti inflammatory drug
(NSAID), have shown it to be equally effective as pethidine following surgery.
 The perioperative use of carprofen and opiate analgesic together is both possible
and desirable.
Postoperatively it is sensible to use analgesics that do not cause too much
224HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
sedation, for example the use of methadone instead of morphine, so as to allow
 better assessment of the animal's neurological status and to allow it more ability to
exercise for itself. After the immediate period of postoperative pain - about 48 h -
 nonsteroidal analgesics can be substituted for the opiates. The duration of non-
steroidal drug use can be varied depending on the patient but many animals benefit
from use of these drugs over a long period, as they encourage mobility by
eliminating some of the associated pain.
Although some pain is to be anticipated following spinal surgery, its severity
should quickly subside if the operation has been carried out correctly and there are
 no complications. The return of pain in an animal which has previously exhibited
improvement following surgery should be considered serious and an indication of
possible implant failure, subluxation, infection or another postoperative complica-
tion, depending on the type of surgery that was carried out.
Recumbency
The complications of recumbency may fall into early and late categories. Early
complications include the possibility of pneumonia, and urinary and faecal soil-
ing. Later complications of recumbency include bedsores, limb cedema and muscle
wasting.
Pneumonia
 Pneumonia is a particular risk for recumbent animals owing to the tendency to
develop stasis of blood in dependent areas of lung. This can lead to rupture of
delicate capillaries. The exudate and extravasated blood associated with such a
process is an excellent culture medium for opportunist bacteria and bacterial
pneumonia can easily supervene. However, sterile pneumonia (hypostatic pneu-
wall, especially using cupped hands, encourages coughing and can aid in mobiliz-
ing pooled secretions in the bronchial tree (Figure 16.1). Changing the position of an
animal in recumbency will also reduce the likelihood of pneumonia and should be
done frequently, i.e. three to four fimes per 24 h. When dogs bark they will re-
expand semi-collapsed areas of lung and clear secretions from the bronchi, thereby
reducing the potential risk of development of pneumonia. Dogs may sometimes be
a   s o as o  e  y  a
Soiling with urine orfaeces
This type of soiling is more likely in patients that have compromised continence
and reduced ability to change position. In some cases it can be difficult to ascertain
whether an animal is truly incontinent when kept in a cage because of its difficulty
in moving from the soiled area. Animals in the immediate postoperative period are
more likely to become soiled owing to their reduced state of consciousness. Soiling
of the coat causes a greater incidence of skin sores, particularly on the ventral
abdominal skin or in the perineal region, associated with urine scalding. The use of
fleecy bedding such as Vetbed, which allows only unidirectional liquid flow (away
POSTOPERATIVECAREANDPHYSICALTHERAPY
225
Figure 16.1 Physiotherapy for the lungs by means of chest wall percussion. Note the cupped shape of
the hand.
from the animal) is very helpful for such patients. Frequent bathing followed by
 proper and effective drying may be required for some patients.
Bedsores
Bedsores (also known as decubital ulcers) are deep ulcers in the skin and under-
lying tissues which may develop following long-term recumbency and usually
form over prominent areas of bone such as the greater trochanter or lateral aspect
 of the elbow. In common with most postoperative problems, it is preferable to
avoid the complication rather than to treat it following its development. Prevention
 of bedsores consists of keeping the skin and coat clean and dry, frequent turning of
the patient to prevent one area from taking the weight for prolonged periods,
 sores can be very difficult to treat if they develop and can lead to other complica-
 tions such as systemic infection. Severe bedsores may require plastic surgery for
reconstruction of the skin deficits. The use of padded bedding or waterbeds helps to
redistribute the weight of the animal more evenly and can reduce the incidence of
bedsores. A cheap, effective bed for such patients can be made by covering foam
rubber blocks with plastic-coated sheeting; the plastic coat can be easily cleaned,
while the padding will function to distribute the animal's weight more effectively
 and protect against bedsores (Figure 16.2).
Limboedema
 Limb oedema will develop in the recumbent animal as a result of disuse of the limb
and the lack of the normal pumping action of the muscles as they contract and
relax. Tissue fluid tends to accumulate in the tissues. This complication is most
226
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
Figure 16.2 Soft bed suitable for nursing recumbent patient. In order for attending personnel
cormfortably to handle large recumbent dogs a large kennel is required.
 easily observed in areas where there is little soft tissue coverage, such as around the
caudal aspect of the hock surrounding the calcaneal tendon. Oedema will impair
circulation, which can lead to vascular stasis and thrombosis and ultimately
increased rate of local infection or even gangrenous change in severe cases. This
 complication is more frequently observed in recumbent human patients than in
veterinary cases. Massage and passive exercising of the limb help to disperse extra
tissue fluid accumulation and stimulate the normal pumping action of the muscles.
Musclewasting
 Muscle wasting will occur in recumbent animals due simply to disuse but can also
 Occur in certain cases of spinal disease as a result of injury to the lower motor neurone
system (for example,'wobbler' dogs which have lesions affecting the C6 or C7 grey
matter or nerve roots). It may be difficult to differentiate between these two causes of
muscle loss, especially early in the course of its development. Muscle loss due to
lower motor neu1one involvement cannot be alleviated by physical means, except for
treatment of the underlying cause. Muscle loss due to disuse may be minimized by
 passive exercise and encouragement of active exercise by the patient. Swimming is
the best exercise but unfortunately is rarely possible owing to the lack of suitable
facilities. Smaller breed dogs may be allowed to swim in large tanks or baths.
q e n  n o d e si   
those that are incontinent are at particular risk. Urine retention can lead to damage
01 prolonged there can also be damage to the smooth muscle of the bladdel wall
POSTOPERATIVE CARE AND PHYSICAL THERAPY
227
and subsequent dysfunction of the detrusor reflex. In the incontinent state bacteria
are able to gain access at the distal end of the urethra and ascend to the bladder. In
Management of incontinent animals
The management of incontinent animals is somewhat controversial, revolving
 around the use of catheters. Animals that have upper motor neurone incontinence
tend to have bladders that are difficult to express (at least in the early stages) and
incontinence is the overflow type. In certain cases affected by lesions of the sacral
part of the spinal cord there will also be urinary retention and overflow. Catheter-
ization allows the bladder to be easily emptied. The drawback to catheterization is
that it greatly increases the risk of introducing infection into the bladder. In order to
reduce this risk, catheterization should be performed as an aseptic technique and
the skin surrounding the distal urethra requires proper preparation. If the catheter
is to be left in place, it is prudent to use a closed drainage system. This can easily be
 made by attaching an intravenous fluid giving set to the catheter, with the other
end leading to an empty intravenous fluid bag. The collecting bag must be posi-
tioned lower than the patient so that urine will drain away from the bladder. Reflux
into the bladder must also be avoided when the bag is removed for emptying. Use
 Of antibiotics for prophylaxis of urinary tract infection is not effective in animals in
which aseptic conditions are not maintained. Antibiotics should be reserved for
treatment of infection should it develop.
 The alternatives to indwelling catheterization are intermittent catheterization or
manual expression of the bladder. Intermittent catheterization is probably the least
desirable option as there is still a risk of introducing infection and no permanent
drainage. Manual expression can be difficult to achieve, especially in large-breed
recumbent dogs and may still cause urine soiling during bladder emptying. In
  ssdxa  l s  a  a sd 
rupture the bladder. The risk of bladder rupture is greatest in those patients which
 a id d ausa  pe  u s ps aa
steady, moderate pressure is less likely to injure the bladder. In some patients
 Many animals which have incontinence as a result of a thoracolumbar cord lesion
will develop an 'automatic bladder' aftr a period of a few days to a few weeks.
When the bladder becomes full and the pressure is increased (by urine accumula-
tion or by manual pressure) the bladder will empty - but not completely. The small
amount of urine retention still increases the risk of development of cystitis but at
this stage emptying of the bladder by catheter or manually is usually not required,
 although observation of the urine quality, particularly for signs of infection, is still
necessary.
s uu     r aa n s sn
upper motor neurone lesions can cause hypertonicity of the sphincter muscle,
preventing proper emptying. The tone in the internal urethral sphincter can be
reduced by o adrenergic blocking drugs such as phenoxybenzamine (0.5 mg/kg sid
to tid). A few days are required to assess the effects. Low blood pressure and its
 attendant effects on the animal can be observed in some cases. The external urethral
228
HANDBOOKOFSMALLANIMALSPINALSURGERY
sphincter tone can be reduced by diazepam (2-10 mg tid to qid). Enhancement of
detrusor contractility can be achieved by using bethanechol (2.5-10 mg tid); how-
ever, care must be taken to ensure that there is no blockage to outflow before it is
used. There is some evidence that bethanechol will also cause increase in sphincter
tone. For animals in which there has already been development of bladder atony
and distention and consequent damage to the smooth muscle, drug therapy is of
little benefit. In such cases, the bladder can be permanently decompressed by
means of an indwelling catheter which can allow return of function within a few
Weeks.
Physiotherapy
Simple range of motion exercises carried out as frequently as possible will reduce
the incidence of postoperative joint stiffness, limb oedema and muscle wasting.
Animals can be encouraged to exercise as soon as they have recovered from
surgery, provided the pain has been adequately controlled and the surgical site is
stable enough to allow a reasonable range of activities. Although exercise under
surfaces that are unlikely to allow the animal to fall and injure itself. Many patients
which have undergone spinal surgery are ataxic and paretic and may easily fall on
slippery surfaces. Concrete and grass are usually good surfaces but indoor floor
dogs, provision of large rubber floor mats can be extremely useful to avoid the risk
of injury. Paraparetic animals which are able to attempt to walk, but cannot bear
Figure 16.3 Support for a paraparetic dog may be giuen by grasping the base of the tail.
POSTOPERATIVECAREANDPHYSICALTHERAPY
229
nassdodo
abdomen.
weight properly, can be encouraged by supporting the hindquarters. A towel
passed under the abdomen can be used for this purpose; alternatively, a small
dog may be supported by holding the base of the tail (Figures 16.3 and 16.4). Non
ambulatory tetraparetic animals are more difficult to deal with, especially large
breed dogs. Two people are usually required in order to support them adequately.
Variously designed home made slings may help and these can be based on a
hammock type of construction.
Care may be needed to prevent dogs (in particular) from attempting to carry out
activities which are potentially either painful or hazardous to their recovery, such as
climbing stairs, fences or jumping. Motivation to try to walk may be provided by
offering food titbits. Many animals will more quickly learn to walk again when
allowed to return home to the owner's care. They will be in familiar surroundings
and will usually attempt to carry out their routine behaviour and interact with
other animals and people in the house. Animals will not be encouraged to learn to
Walk while confined to a cage at the veterinary clinic. However, before discharging
the animal it is essential that owners are aware of the burden of care that they are
undertaking. It is also prudent to ensure that the patient is recovering as expected
and that further intensive medical attention will not be required.
As a guide, animals can be discharged to the owners within 24-48 h following
uncomplicated treatment of disc extrusions in either the cervical or thoracolumbar
have undergone lumbosacral surgery may require rest in a kennel for several days
following surgery in order to ascertain that instability at the surgical site is not a
problem. Wobbler dogs may require a very variable period of hospitalization
ranging from 48 h to several weeks, depending on pre- and post-operative
status. Animals that have suffered spinal fractures or luxations will also have
variable needs depending on the pre- and post-operative status and stability of
230HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
the injured region. In general, animals which have undergone surgical treatment of
fractures or luxations can be handled more vigorously and discharged to the
owners earlier, than those treated nonoperatively.
Associated reading
Haskins S.C. (1987) Use of analgesics post operatively in a small animal intensive
care setting. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 191, 1266.
Haskins S.C. (1992) Post operative analgesia. Vet. Clin. N. Am. 22, 353.
    s  s    ( a 5
17-24.
 Moreau PM. (1991) How do I treat? Functional urinary obstruction. Prog. Vet.
Neurol. 2, 80.
Nolan A., Reid J. (1993) Comparison of the post operative analgesic and sedative
effects of carprofen and papaveretum in the dog. Vet. Rec, 133, 240.
Tangner C.H. (1984) Physical therapy in small animal practice: basic principles and
application. Comp. Cont. Ea. Pract. Vet. 6, 933.
A/O (ASIF) instruments and implants 7
caudal cervical spondylopathy see wobbler
acquired lumbosacral stenosis see lumbosacral
syndrome
stenosis, degenerative acupuncture 219
caudal lumbar region, type I disc extrusions 203-4
α adrenergic blocking drugs 227
central canal, duplication of 82
alpha motoneurone 21
central nervous system (CNS), diagrammatic
amino caproic acid 107
representation 28
aninostercids 67, 218
cerebrospinal fluid (CsF) analysis 3, 60-1
e  ss   
cervical disc surgery 148-55
anulus fibrosus 14, 15
fenestration 96-7, 148-9
aplasia of the dens 77
indications 96-7
arachnoid cysts 74, 81, 82
laminectomy/hemilaminectomy 153-5
 arachnoid mater 18
lateral apprcach 152-3
astrocytoma 135
ventral slot 149-52
atlanto-axial joint 16
complications 151-2
 atlanto-occipital joint 16
prognosis 152
atlas 10, 11
cervical intumescence 19
Aujesky's disease 144
automatic bladder 227
 cervical spinal surgery, fractures/ subluxations
axis 10-11, 12
15563
atlanto-axial subluxation 155, 156
back splints 126, 197
in the cat 161
beagle, vasculitis diseases in 145
atlanto-occipital subluxation 161
cervical fixation 161-2
 Bernese mountain dog, vasculitis diseases in 145
diagnosis 155-7
bethanechol 228
mid-cervical subluxation 162-3
bladder
 PMMA and pins in ventral fixation 160, 161-2
automatic 227
function 35
treatment 157-61
 dorsal approach 157-8
 nerve supply 36
ventral techriques 158-61
block vertebrae 73, 74
Borrelia 216,217
bridging spondylosis 103
syndrome
cervical spondylotic radiculopathy 104
Brucella canis 216
chemonucleolysis 220
Bucky grids 2, 46
chorioretinitis 144
burrs 6
chymopapain 208, 220
butterfly vertebra 74, 76
cimetidine 219
cisplatin 132
calcinosis circumscripta 79
clindamycin 217
calcium channel blockers 218
collagenase 220
canine distemper virus (CDV) 45, 60, 143-4
computed tomography (CT) 2, 58-9
canine parvovirus 144
conscious proprioception 20
carcinoma 26
continuous dorsal laminectomy (CDL) 181
cardiomyopathy 26
conus medullaris 18, 20 
carprofen 223
corpectomy 198
cauda equina 20
corticospinal tract 21
compression 58, 75
corticosteroid therapy 217-19, 220
syndrome 202
 in acute spinal cord injury 217-18
232
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SLIRGERY
in chronic spinal cord compression 106, 218-19
durotomy of thoracolumbar spinal cord 193-4
in degenerative myelopathy 107
 as   
ehrlichiosis 217
creatinine phosphokinase (CPK) 45, 60
electrodiagnostics 61
Cryptococcus 216
electromyography (EMG) 3, 61
cuneate nucleus 20
encephalitis 142
cyclophosphamide 132, 133
endocarditis 26
cystitis 227
English bulldog, myelocoele in 77
cysts
ependymomas 135, 136
arachnoid 74, 81, 82
epidurography 57
 marsupialization of 194
 in acquired lumbosacral stenosis 101
dermoid 81
epilepsy 155
extradural lesions 50
Dachshund
extramedullary lesions 50
 thoracolumbar disc lesion 42, 91
type I disc disease 86
facetectomy 209
decompressive surgery
fasciculi, dorsal and lateral 20
cervical disc lesions 96-7
feline infectious peritonitis virus (FIP) 144
thoracolumbar 188-94
feline leukaemia virus (FeLV) 128, 132
decubital ulcers 223, 225
fenestration 96
deep pain response 99
cervical 148-9
 degenerative joint disease (DJD) of the synovial
 in lumbosacral stenosis 204-5
joints 101-3
thoracolurmbar 194-5, 196-7
degenerative lumbosacral stenosis see lumbosacral
 in wobbler syndrome 177
 stenosis, degenerative
fibrinoid metaplasia 86
degenerative myelopathy 105-7
fibrocartilaginous embolization (FCE) 25, 138-9,
dens 10, 48
140, 204, 215
aplasia/hypoplasia/dysplasia of 77
fibrosarcoma 132
dermoid cysts 81
foraminotomy 209
descending pathways 20
fungal infections 217
dexamethasone 217, 219
Funquist dorsal laminectomy 6, 190
diabetes mellitus 27
diazepam 54, 219, 228
gelatin sponge (Gelfoam) 7
 disc extrusion
Gelpi 4
acute 64
Gcrman shepherd dogs
traumatic 125
cauda equina compression 75
disc protrusion 87
degenerative myelopathy in 105
in cats 187
osteochondrosis 212
discogenic pain 16, 149
 osteosarcoma 129
discography 58
type II disc lesions in 218
 in acquired lunbosacral stenosis 101
glia 19
discospondylitis 4, 26, 140-2, 212, 214, 216
globoid cel leukodystrophy 81-2
DMSO 218
goniometers 7
 Dobermann pinschers
gracile nucleus 20
blood clotting disorders 182
granulomatous meningoencephalitis 145
cervical vertebral canal stenosis 77, 78
great Danes
thoracic vertebral canal stenosis 78
 overnutrition 169
type II disc protrusion 90
wobbler 169
von Willebrand's disease 45, 182
wobbler 41, 169, 170, 171
haematoma 132
domino effect 184
haemorrhage, idiopathic spinal cord 139
dura mater 18, 19
hemilaminectomy 114, 198
dural hooks 5
cervical 153-5
dural ossification 104-5
thoracolumbar 188, 191-3
durotomy 114
hemivertebrae 734, 75, 198
 dysplasia of the dens 77
herpes virus 144
dysraphism 79
hip dysplasia 26
INDEX
233
Horner's syndrome 41
attitude 26
hound ataxia 107
cardiovascular disease 26
hydrocephalus 83
endocrine system 27
hydromyelia 80, 82, 83
musculoskeletal system 26-7
5-hydroxy tryptamine (5HT) 67
temperature 26
hyperadrenocorticism 27
urinary tract 27
hypoplasia of the dens 77
Kerrison rongeurs 4
 incontinent animals, management of 227-8
Kirscher wires 118
index of suspicion 25, 91, 143
knuckling of the digits 31
instrumentation 1-8
Krabbe's disease 81-2
 diagnostic equipment 1-3
imaging 1-3
laminaplasty 181-2
 neurological examination 1
laminectomy 114, 209
haemostatic agents 6-7
cervical 153-5
bone wax 6
continuous dorsal (CDL) 181
patties 7
thoracolumbar 188-91
surgical cellulose 7
 laminotomy 164-6 Langenbecks retractor 4
 operating 1oom 36
laza1oids 67, 218 Lempert rongeurs 4
diathermy 5
leukocencephalomalacia 107
lighting 3
leukoencephalomyelopathy (LEM) of Rottweilers
magnification 3
108
 microsurgery 4-5
ligaments of vertebral column 16-19
 powered instruments 56
long ligaments 17-18
suction and irrigation 5
 dorsal longitudinal ligament 17
 surgical instruments 4-5
Ruchal ligament 17
table 3
 supraspinous ligament 17
orthopaedic 7-8
ventral longitudinal ligament 18
 intermittent claudication 90, 100
short ligaments 18
 intervertebral discs (IVD) 14-16
flaval ligaments 18
nerve supply 15-16
intercapital ligaments 18
 intervertebral joints, anatomy 14-16
 interspinous igaments 18
 intervertebral synovial joints 16
lipid peroxidation 66
intradural lesions 50
loupes 3
intraosseus vertebral venography 57-8
lower motor neurone (LMN) 20
inverted cone decompression (modified slot)
deficits 27, 79, 100 Lubra plates 119, 210
technique 4, 177
lumbar intumescence 19
investigation of spinal disease 24 43
lumbosacral region
history 246
disorders 27
intercurrent/recent disease 25-6
surgery of 202-13
lateralization 25
lumbosacral spondylosis 104
progression of symptoms 25
 lumbosacral stenosis 204-9
rapidity of onset of symptoms 25
degenerative (acquired)
response to previous treatment 25
chemonucleolysis 208
signalment 25
diagnosis 101
localization of lesions 41-3
discectomy 205-7
surgical spinal disease 42-3
dorsal fixation/fusion 207-8
 neurological examination 27-41
facetectomy 206
bladder function 35
fenestration 204-5
gait 28
indications for surgery 99-101, 102
head examination 37-41
treatment 204-9
muscle mass and tone 28
ventral fixation/fusion 208-9
 palpation of the spine 37
idiopathic 204
postural reactions 31-2
treatment 209
sensory tests 32-5
limb oedema 225-6
 spinal reflexes 28-31
Lyme disease 217
physical examination 26-7
lymphosarcoma (LSA) 128, 129, 132, 135
234
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
 magnetic resonance imaging (MRr) 2, 59
osteosarcoma 129, 130, 132
 in acquired lumbosacral stenosis 101
Manx cat
pain
sacrocaudal hypoplasia 79
deep 99
spina bifida 75
discogenic 16, 149
 medulloepithelioma 134
postoperative 223-4
melphelan 133
resporses 26
meninges 18
pediculectomy 192
meningiomas 50, 134, 136
 pericillin-resistant bacteria 141, 216
extradural 131
phenoxybenzamine 227
laminotomy surgical approach 164
phospholipase A 67
meningitis 60, 77, 81, 97, 107
physiotherapy 228-30
bacterial 142-3
pia-arachnoid 18
non-infectious causes 144-5
pia mater 18
viral 143--4
picks 4, 5
meningocoele 76, 77
pilonodial ducts 81
 meningomyelocele 76
pins and PMMA see PMMA and pins
methadone 224
piotomy 193, 194
methylprednisolone 66, 69, 99, 125, 139, 198,
 PMMA and pins technique
217-18
in thoracolumbar fractures and subluxations 197
microdissectors 4, 5
in ventral fixation 160, 161-2, 178-9
microscopes, operating 3
in vertebral column trauma 117, 118
mild disc-associated symptoms 220-1
pneumonia 224
mini-hemilaminectomy 198
polymethymethacrylate (PMMA) bone cement 7
mucopolysaccharidosis IV 79-80
see also PMMA and pins technique positioning
multiple cartilaginous exostosis 79
aids 2, 3
multiple myeloma 131, 133
 post-myelographic seizures 53, 54
muscle wasting 226
postoperative care 223-30
mycoses 45
 postoperative scaring 7
myelitis 142-5
 postural reactions 31-2
myelocoele 77
conscious proprioceptive positioning 31-2
myelodysplasia 74
extensor postural thrust 32, 33
myelography 49-56
hemistanding 32
 in acquired lumbosacral stenosis 101
hemiwalking 32
cisternal puncture 2, 51-4
hopping 32
 in diagnosis 49
sliding paper test 32
disc extrusion 95
wheelbarowing (thoracic limbs) 32, 33
indications 49-51
prednisolone 132
lumbar puncture 2, 54-6
pupils, examination 41
of spinal tumour 129
pyelonephritis 227
 in wobbler synd1ome 51, 174 6
pyrimethamine 217
myelomalacia 26, 197
9-9 Adeo
naloxone 67-8,218
machine specifications 1-2
Neospora 45, 216, 217
plain 46-9
nephroblastoma 134,199
 see also myelography
Rerve root entrapment 90
recumbency, complications 224-7
 nerve sheath tumours 50
bedsores 223, 225
neuraxonal dystrophy 107-8
limb oedema 225-6
Reuroepithelioma 134
muscle wasting 226
nonsteroidal anti'inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
pneumonia 224
219
soiling with urine or faeces 224-5
noradrenaline 67
urinary tract infection 226-7
nucleus pulposus 14, 15, 86
reflexes
anal 30-1
osteochondromatosis 79, 133
Babinski (extensor toe) 36
osteochond1osis 212-13
cranial nerve 38-40
INDEX
235
crossed extensor 30, 36-7
glutamate 67
cutaneous trunci muscle (panniculus) 35-6, 37,
monoamines 67
42
opioids 67-8
flexor 30-1, 34
spinal dysraphism 80
myotatic 28-30
spinal needles 2
patellar 29, 30
spinocerebrallar pathways 20
spinal 28-31
spinothalamic tract 20, 34
reticulosis 128, 145
spondylitis 140-2
reticulospinal tract 21
spondylolisthesis 105
retractors 4
spondylosis 74,103,182
E
rickettsia infections 45, 216
rongeurs 4
Staphylococcus aureus 216
10ot signature 90
Staphylococcus intermedius 216
Rottweilers
 Steinman pins 118, 119, 161
 leukoencephalomyelopathy (LEM) of 108
subarachnoid space 19
Reuraxonal dystrophy 107
subluxations see fractures/subluxations
rubrospinal tract 21
superoxide dismutase 66
sway response 32
sacrocaudal region
syringomyelia 22, 59, 79, 80, 82, 83
fracture/luxaion 211-12
 hypoplasia 79
temperament, changed 26
surgery of 202-13
thoracolumbar spine, surgery 187-99
sacoiliac articulation 14
decompressive surgery 188-94
sarcoma 26, 212
developmental disease 198
 Schiff-Sherrington phenomenon 37, 42
disc lesions 89, 90-1, 92-3
Schmorl's node 139
 indications for surgery 97-9
seizures, post'myelographic 53, 54
dorsal laminectomy 188-91
sensory pathways 20
 advantages and disadvantages 191
sensory tests 32-5
durotomy 193-4
 deep pain response 34-5
fractures and subluxation of 197
superficial sensation 34
hemilaminectomy 188, 191-3
 Siamese cat, mucopolysaccharidosis IV in 79
advantages and disadvantages 193
 SOAP format of case recording 24
mini-hemilaminectomy 188, 192
solitary cartilaginous exostosis 79
myelotomy 193, 194
 spaniels, cavalier King Charles, cervical pain 149
neoplasia 198-9
spina bifida 75-7, 79
pediculectomy 192
spinal cord
piotomy 193, 194
anatomy 18-22
prophylactic techniques 194-7
anomalies 80-3
type II disc protrusions 197-8
 blood supply 21-2
thromboembolism, aortic 26
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 22
thyrotropin 218
cross-sectional anatomy 20-1
u-tocopherol 66
degenerative conditions 105-8
Toxoplasma 45, 216, 217
haemorrhage, idiopathic 139
 see also spinal cord injury; spinal cord trauma,
cervical vertebral canal stenosis 77
fractures and luxations
lumbosacral vertebral canal stenosis 77
spinal cord injury
 transilial bar fixation 210
 acute, pathophysiology 64-5, 68
tumours 26, 128-36
immediate effects 65
cervical 163-6
 measuring severity 64-5
classification by location 129-36
vascular observations 65
extradural (epidural) 129-33
chroric (compressive), pathophysiology 69-70
intadural/extramedullary 133-6
secondary injury mechanisms 65-9
intramedullary 134-6
calcium 66, 67
lumbosacral 212
eicosanoids 67
modes of therapy 136
free radicals 66-7
nerve sheath 50
neurotransmitters 67-8
prostatic 212
236
HANDBOOK OF SMALL ANIMAL SPINAL SURGERY
thoracolumbar 198-9
bullets/pellets 123
vertebral 129
conservative management 126-7
see also meningiomas
cord concussion 125
diagnosis 112-13
ulrasonography 2, 58
hyperextension injuries 124-5
upper motor neurone (UMN) 20
reduction methods 114, 115
lesions 31
surgical fixation 115-23
urinary tract infection 226-7
complications 123
cross pins 119, 122
vascular malformation 82
external fixation 121-2
ventral slot 177-8
iatrogenic injury 123
vertebrae 10
malunion/non-union 123
 anticlinal 12
 pins and polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA)
butterfly 74, 76
117, 118
transitional 75
recurrent instability 123
vertebral body L7 fracture 209-10
spinal stapling 119, 120-1
vertebral body plating 116-18
spinous process fixation 119
vertebral canal stenosis 77-9, 182
vertebral body plating 116-18
cervical 77-8
 traumatic disc extrusion 125
lumbosacral 78-9
treatment 113-14
thoracic 78
vertebral neoplasia 129
vertebral column
vestibulospinal tract 21
analogy
vincristine 132
cervical, with crane 9, 10
vitamin A intoxication 104
thoracolumbar, with bow and string 9
vitamin E 107
anatomy 10-14
von willebrand's disease 45, 182
cervical 10-12
columns of 113
weight drop model 64
disorders of 72-80
wobbler symnd1ome 78, 90, 107, 108, 169-84
embryoric development 72-3
breeds affected 169-70
forces acting through 9
 compressive cord injury 69
ligaments 16-19
L Audone pios
location of segments 10, 11
CT in 59
lumbar 13-14
diagnosis 171-6
caudal vertebrae 14
differential 176
sacrum 14
radiological 173-6
thoracic 12-13
immature dogs 169-70
sce also vertebral column, degenerative
middle'aged 171
disorders; vertebral column, fractures and
prognosis 183-4
luxations
spondylosis in 104
vertebral column, degenerative disorders 85-105
treatment 176-83
cervical disc lesions 88-90
 linear traction and stabilization/fusion
disc disease 84-8, 92-3, 95
178-80
clinical signs 88
 miscellaneous surgical techniques 183
diagnosis 91-6
multiple dorsal lesions 180-2
type I 85-6, 87, 94, 95
multiple ventral lesions 182
type I1 86-7
of painful wobblers 182
indications for surgery 96-101
screw and washer distraction technique 180
cervical disc lesions 96-7
single dorsal lesion 180
degenerative (acquired) lumbosacral stenosis
single ventral lesion 176-7
99-101, 102
ventral fenestration and lag screw fixation 177
thoracolumbar discs 97-9
ventral slot 177-8
management 96
thoracolumbar disc lesions 89, 90-1, 92-3
xanthine dehydrogenase 66
vertebral column, fractures and luxations 11l-27
xanthine oxidase 66
This book is a guide to decision-making
and the evaluation of cases of spinal
problems in the dog and cat. It is aimed
at the non-specialist practitioner, and
covers investigation and management
(both surgical and non-surgical) of small
animal spinal disease. It is logically
organized and comprehensively
illustrated with line drawings, providing
a concise handbook invaluable to all
small animal practitioners.
ISBND-7D20-1688-8
W.R. Saunders Company Limited
24-28 0val Road
London Nw1 7Dx, UK
"780702"016882
Printed in Great Britain