Canine and Feline
Behavior and Training
A Complete GuidetoUnderstanding
OurTwoBestFriends
LindaP.Case
Canine and Feline
Behavior and Training
A COMPLETE GUIDE
TO UNDERSTANDING
OUR TWO BEST FRIENDS
Joinusonthewebat
agriculture.delmar.cengage.com
Canine and Feline
Behavior and Training
A COMPLETE GUIDE
TO UNDERSTANDING
OUR TWO BEST FRIENDS
By Linda P. Case
With Ilustrations by Bruce MacAllister
DELMAR
CENGAGE Learning'
Australia · Brazil · Japan · Korea · Mexico · Singapore · Spain · United Kingdom · United States
DELMAR
CENGAGE Learning
Canine and Feline Behavior and Training:
 2010 Delmar, Cengage Learning
A Complete Guide to Understanding Our
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright
Two Best Friends
herein may be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used in any form
Linda P. Case
or by any means graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including but not
Vice President, Career and Professional
limited to photocopying, recording, scanning, digitizing, taping, Web 
Editorial: Dave Garza
distribution, information networks, or information storage and retrieval
systems, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976
Director of Learning Solutions: Matthew
 United States Copyright Act, without the prior written permission of
Kane
the publisher.
Acquisitions Editor: Benjamin Penner
Managing Editor: Marah Bellegarde
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at
 Product Manager: Christina Giford
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706
For permission to use material from this text or product,
Editorial Assistant: Scott Royael
submit all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions.
Vice President, Career and Professional
Further permissions questions can be e-mailed to
Marketing: Jennifer McAvey
permissionrequest@cengage.com
Marketing Director: Debbie Yarnell
Marketing Manager: Erin Brennan
Library of Congress Control Number: 2009922730
Marketing Coordinator: Jonathan Sheehan
ISBN-13: 978-1-4283-1053-7
Production Director: Carolyn Miller
ISBN-10: 1-4283-1053-3
 Production Manager: Andrew Crouth
Senior Content Project Manager: James
Delmar
Zayicek
5 Maxwell Drive
Senior Art Director: David Arsenault
Clifton Park, NY 12065-2919
Technology Project Manager: Tom Smith
USA
 Production Technology Analyst: Thomas
Stover
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning solutions
with ofice locations around the globe, including Singapore,the United 
Kingdom, Australia, Mexico, Brazil, and Japan. Locate your local offce at:
intemational.cengage.com/region
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by
Nelson Education, Ltd.
To learn more about Delmar, visit www.cengage.com /delmar
Purchase any of our products at your local college store or at our
preferred online store www.ichapters.com
Notice to the Reader
Publisher does not warrant or guarantee any of the products described herein or perform any independent analysis in connection with any of the product information
contained herein. Publisherdoes not assume, and expressly disclaims, any obligation to obtain and include information other than that provided to it by the manufacturer.
The reader is expressly warned to consider and adopt all safety precautions that might be indicated by the activities describedherein and to avoid all potential hazards. y
following the instructions contained herein, the reader willingly assumes allrisksin connection with such instructions. The publisher makes no representations or warranties 
of any kind, including but not limited to, the warranties of fitness for particular purpose or merchantability, nor are any such representations implied with respect to the
material set forth herein andthe publisher takes no responsibility with respect to such material. The publisher shall not be liable for any special, consequential or exemplary
damages resulting. in whole or part, from the readers' use of, or reliance upon, this material.
Printed in Canada
123456712 11 10.09
dedication
in loving memory of
My Father, Robert Palas
Whose wisdom, compassion, and positive outlook continue
to guide me 
AND
The animal companions who are no longer with us,
but live forever in our hearts:
Dogs - Fauna, Stepper, Roxie, Gusto, Sparks, and Nike
Cats - Mac and Nipper
This page intentionally left blank
table of contents
PREFACE / XV
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS/ xvii
ABOUTTHEAUTHOR/ XiX
SECTION 1 - DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, & COMMUNICATION
CHAPTER 1
The Beginning of the Friendship - Domestication . 
The Evolutionary History and Taxonomy of Dogs and Cats / 2
Domestication: Scavenging Wolves and Opportunistic Wildcats / 5
Social Organization: Why Dogs Are Not Cats and Cats Are Not Dogs / 8
The Social Groups of Dogs / 9
Social Behavior of Cats / 12
History of Dog Breeds and Breed-Specific Behaviors / 15
History of Cat Breeds and Breed-Specific Behaviors /19
References and Further Reacing/22
CHAPTER 2
Behavior through the Life Cycle: Newborns to Seniors
26
The Early Weeks: Neonatal and Transition Periods / 27
Neonatal Period / 28
Transition Period / 28
Practical Applications / 29
Sensitive Period of Socialization / 30
Learning to Be a Dog / 30
Learning to Be a Cat / 32
Contents
Puppy Play vs. Kiten Play / 33
Socialization with Humans / 33
Weaning /36
Juvenile (Adolescent) Period and Adulthood / 38
Senior Pets /39
Reterences and Further Reading / 41
CHAPTER 3
Social Behavior and Communication in Dogs and Cats
44
Olfactory Communication / 45
Urine Marking / 46
Feces Marking / 49
Allorubbing in Cats / 49
Scratching in Cats / 50
Audlitory Signals / 50
Dog Vocalizations / 51
Cat Vocalizations / 53
Visual Signals / 55
Distance-Reducing Signals - Greeting / 56
Distance-Reducing Signals - Play Solicitation / 60
 Distance-lncreasing Signals - Offensive Threat / 63
Distance-lncreasing Signals - Fear / 65
Distance-Increasing Signals - Defensive Threat /67
Predatory and Feeding Behaviors of Dogs and Cats / 68
Predation Sequence and Feeding Behavior of Dogs / 69
Predation Sequence and Feeding Behavior of Cats / 70
Social Relationships of Dogs / 72
Social Relationships of Cats / 75
Reterences and Further Reading / 77
Contents
SECTION 2 - HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
AND PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS
CHAPTER 4
How Dogs and Cats Learn: Principles of Learning Theory 
...
Classical (Pavlovian) Conditioning / 82
Operant Conditioning (Instrumental Learning) / 87
Reinforcement vs. Punishment / 89
Types of Reinforcing Stimuli for Dogs and Cats / 92
Primary and Secondary (Conditioned) Reinforcers / 94
Value of Reinforcing Stimuli / 95
Habituation and Sensitization / 96
Social Learning / 97
Reterences and Further Reading / 101
CHAPTER 5
Practical Applications: Training and Behavior Modification Techniques . .. . .: . .
104
The Roles of Classical and Operant Conditioning / 104
Positive vs. Negative (Aversive) Control of Behavior / 106
An Historical Perspective / 106
More about Aversive Stimuli / 106
Maximizing Pleasant and Minimizing Aversive Stimuli/ 109
Training Preparations / 110
Identify Objectives and Goals / 110
Select a Training Program or Behavior Modification Technique / 111
Develop a Reasonable and Achievable Training Schedule /111
Evaluate Progress / 111
Selecting Primary Reinforcers / 112
Using a Conditioned Reinforcer / 112
Clicker as a Conditioned Reinforcer / 113
Contents
Getting Started / 114
Timing and Schedules of Reinforcement /114
Successive Approximation (Shaping) / 119
Prompting vs. Free-Shaping / 120
Behavior Chains and the Premack Principle /122
Fading Cues and Attaining Stimulus Control / 124
Behavior Modification Technigues / 127
Extinction / 127
Systematic Desensitization / 129
Counter-Conditioning (and Counter-Commanding) / 129
Flooding / 130
References and Further Reading / 131
CHAPTER 6
Training and Problem Prevention for Puppies and Kittens 
. 133
The Newly Adopted Puppy and Kitten /133
The First Day / 134
Establishing a Regular Daily Schedule / 136
Socialization / 136
House-training Puppies / 139
Litter Box Training Kittens / 142
Teaching Puppies to Accept Isolation / 145
Preventing Nipping in Puppies / 147
Teaching Kittens to Play Gently / 149
Teaching Puppies to Chew Appropriate Items / 151
Preventing Objectionable Climbing and Clawing in Kittens / 152
Introducing a New Puppy or Kitten to Other Pets / 154
Introducing a Puppy to a Resident Adult Dog / 154
Introducing a Puppy to a Resident Adult Cat / 155 
Introducing a Kitten to a Resident Adult Cat / 155
Introducing a Kitten to a Resident Adult Dog / 156
References and Further Reading / 157
Contents
CHAPTER 7
Teaching Dogs and Cats Desirable Behaviors and Good Manners. . .
159
Preventing Problems and Building Bonds / 159
Basic Manners Training for Dogs / 160
Teaching Sit / 161
Teaching Down / 163
Teaching Stay / 164
Teaching Wait / 171
Teaching Walk on a Loose Lead / 172
Teaching Come When Called / 176
Training a Well-Mannered Cat / 179
Training Cats to Use Specific Sleeping Areas / 180
Training a Cat to Come When Called / 181
Training a Cat to Walk on a Harness / 181
Reterences and Further Reading / 183
SECTION 3 - UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON
BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
CHAPTER 8
Elimination Problems in Dogs and Cats. .
186
Elimination Problems in Dogs / 187
Incomplete House-Training / 188
Marking Behavior / 192
Submissive/Excitable Urination / 193
Other Causes of House Soiling in Dogs / 195
Elimination Problems in Cats / 195
Inappropriate Elimination /195
Treatment for Inappropriate Elimination / 199
Marking Behavior in Cats / 202
Treatment for Marking / 203
 Pharmacotherapy for House Soiling in Cats / 206
Reterences and Further Reading / 207
Contents
CHAPTER 9
Unruly and Disruptive Behaviors in Dogs and Cats.
. 210
Dogs: Jumping Up /211
Factors to Consider / 211
Training an Alternate and Incompatible Behavior / 213
Approaches to Avoid / 214
Shaping and Practicing / 215
Dogs: Destructive Behaviors / 215
Exploratory Chewing / 215
Chewing as a Resut of Boredom / 219
Chewing (or Stealing) as Attention-Seeking Behaviors / 221
Dogs: Problem Barking / 222
Repetitive Barking / 223
Attention-Seeking Barking / 225
Punishment and Problem Barking / 227
Dogs: Problem Digging / 229
Dogs: Overly Active (Hyperactive) / 230
Cats: Furniture Clawing / 232
Cats: Jumping Up on Counters/Furniture / 233
Cats: Nocturnal Activity / 235
Cats: Excessive Vocalization / 236
Cats: Plant Eating and Pica / 239
Eating Houseplants / 239
Pica (Eating Non-Nutritional Items) / 239
References and Further Reading / 240
CHAPTER 10
Separation, Fear, and Anxiety Problems in Dogs and Cats. . . . .
. 244
Normal vs. Problematic Anxiety and Fear Reactions / 245
Separation Anxiety / 246
Risk Factors and Predisposing Temperament Traits / 247
Behavioral Signs and Diagnosis of Separation Anxiety / 249
Contents
xii
Treatment of Separation Anxiety (Dogs) / 250
Reducing Dependency on Owner / 250
Counter-Conditioning Pre-Departure Cues / 253
Desensitization to Isolation / 254
Management Approaches / 256
Adjunctive Drug Therapy / 256
Ineffective Treatments for Separation Anxiety / 259
Prevention of Separation Stress / 260
A Cautionary Note: Separation Anxiety or Something Else? / 261
Treatment Protocol for Cats with Separation Anxiety / 264
Fear-Related Behavior Problems / 265
Common Fears in Dogs and Cats / 266
The Role of Avoidance Learning in Maintaining Fear-Related Behaviors / 268
Treatment of Fear-RelatedBehavior Problems/269
Reterences and Further Reading / 273
CHAPTER 11
 Problem Aggression in Dogs and Cats. . . :
277
Overview of Aggression / 279
Problem Aggression in Dogs / 281
Dominance-Related Aggression / 282
Possessive Aggression / 289
Territorial Aggresson / 293
Fear-Related Aggression / 295
Ineffective Treatments for Aggression Problems in Dogs / 300
Problem Aggression in Cats / 301
Inter-Cat Aggression in Multiple-Cat Homes / 302
Aggression toward a Newly Introduced Cat / 303
Aggression toward Humans / 304
Reterences and Further Reading / 308
Contents
APPENDIX 1 - Recommended Books / 311
APPENDIX 2 - Resources and Professional Associations/ 313
APPENDIX 3 - Sample Dog Behavior History Profile / 315
APPENDlX 4 - Sample Cat Behavior History Profile / 320
GLOSSARY/324
INDEX/327
preface
e are a nation of dog and cat lovers. Never before in our history have we
oum sjewjue jo dnob e uo Aauow pue Khiaue jeuonowe 'awn alow juads
are kept solely for companionship. In the United States alone, we share our
 homes with over 65 million dogs and more than 75 million cats. Americans
nary care. This devotion is further evidenced by the increasing popularity of pet super-
stores, dog parks, training centers, luxury boarding kennels, dog sports, and doggie
daycare centers. Moreover, the relationships that we have with our dogs and cats are
not inconsequential. During the 1980s, recognition of the human-animal bond led to
serious research into the roles that pets play in our lives. These studies have shown
oueg eun inoge ao buueal pue kiis di aeu ane seo pue shop jeu lealo sill
professionals in a variety of fields.
Working with dogs and cats in any capacity requires an understanding of
species-specific behavior patterns, learning theory, and training techniques. Although
ships with people, and the types of challenges they present can differ dramatically.
Canine and Feline Behavior and Training: A Complete Guide to Understanding Our Two
Best Friends is written to provide well-researched and accessible information about how
dogs and cats behave, learn, and respond to training. The format that is used allows
comparison between dogs and cats and promotes understanding and respect for
each species in their own right. My primary intent with this book is to provide in-depth
information about the behavior and communication patterns of domestic dogs and cats,
focuses on the development of well-adjusted and well-behaved companion pets and
on the use of appropriate and humane training techniques to prevent and solve problem
behaviors.
The organizational structure of the book examines dogs and cats sequentially
within topical sections. This allows readers who have an interest in both dogs and
problem behaviors. For those who are interested primarily in either dogs or cats, clear
XY
Preface
delineations between the two species are provided within chapter subheadings to
domestication, developmental behavior, social behavior, and species-specific behavior
learning theory and its application to companion animal training and problem
 programs, principles of behavior modification, and manners training for young and
conditioning and are designed for teaching desirable behaviors to dogs and cats
and preventing problem behaviors. The underlying theme throughout the book is the
promotion of training to build and maintain strong and positive bonds between owners
and cats, as well as owner responsibilities to reliably provide for those needs. Problem
behaviors and their solutions are addressed in depth in the final section. Content in
these three chapters emphasizes understanding the underlying motivations and causes
ionship in pets' lives, and the use of methods that can successfully modify unwanted
behaviors while still preserving the pet-owner relationship.
This book is written for both professional and hobbyist dog trainers, cat fanciers, and
pet owners who are interested in understanding their pets better and learning how to
best care for their companion animals. It can also serve as a textbook for a variety of
professional programs in companion animal care and training. Chapters include more
pue shop jo seubis uoeounwwoo buoidep sydebooyd pue suoesnl og ueul
cats and various training techniques. Numerous sidebars are included to spotlight new
information and to outline training steps, while boxes present personal case studies.
This format is accessible and user-friendly and will encourage the practical use of
sincere hope that the reader comes away from this book not only with an increased
understanding of behavior and training, but also with the book's intended message of
very much to the quality of our lives.
LindaP.Case
Mahomet,Illinois
June2008
acknowledgments
his book would not have been possible without the help of numerous friends
and colleagues who read and critiqued drafts of the manuscript. Their
suggestions and help have been invaluable and have contributed significantly to
the content and clarity of the book. I am deeply grateful to Rebecca Buraglio,
Jill Cline, April Hammer, Susan Helmink, Erica Jewell, Jessica Lockhart, Sandy Myer,
and Pam Wasson. Special thanks to my mom, Jean Palas, who read every word of the
manuscript, and provided me with many insights and countless hours of enjoyable and
challenging discussions about behavior, training, and our relationships with dogs and
cats. All of the illustrations in this book are the work of Bruce MacAllister, who is not
only an outstanding artist, but a longtime friend. Individual photographs were generously
contributed by acquaintances, family, and friends; my appreciation for these goes to
Meg and Paul Bender, Idil Bozkurt, Diana Chaytor, Justin Frisch, Jon Mnemonic, and
Glen Peterson. Many of the photographs are the work of Heather Mohan-Gibbons,
whose understanding of dog behavior and ability to think “one second before the dog"
allows her to capture often-missed intricacies of behavior. Special mention also to Jim
Robertson for his stunningly beautiful wildlife photography and for being a kindred
spirit in his respect for all of the animals with whom we share this world. Finally, credit
must go to David Rosenbaum, my acquisitions editor, whose enthusiasm and dogged
(pun intended) persistence got me up off of the couch with the dogs to get started on
this project. My thanks also to Chris Gifford, my editor, for her positive attitude, infinite
attention to detail, and willingness to graciously consider my endless modifications and
cogitations as we progressed through the editing process together.
And, as always, boundless gratitude goes to my husband and best friend, Mike, who
continues to provide enthusiasm and support for allof my writing projects, invaluable
computer help, and, most importantly, that needed time together, running and hiking the
work as much as I enjoyed the process.
XYii
Acknowledgments
 In addition, Delmar Cengage Learning and the author would like to thank the following
individuals for their review of the manuscript throughout the development process:
Anita Oberbauer
UC Davis
Gary L. wilson
Moorpark College
Janice Siegford
Michigan State University
Dr. Glenn Wehner
TrumanStateUniversity
abouttheauthor
inda P. Case owns AutumnGold Consulting and Dog Training Center in
of Veterinary Medicine at the University of llinois. She is the author of numerous
 articles on companion animal behavior, nutrition, and healthcare and has written
three other books: The Dog: lts Behavior, Nutrition, and Health, The Cat: Its Behavior,
Nutrition and Health, and Canine and Feline Nutrition: A Resource for Companion
Animal Professionals. Linda and her husband share their lives with three dogs, Cadie,
traveling with their dogs.
Xix
This page intentionally left blank
SECTION1
Domestication, Social Behavior,
& Communication
CHAPTER
The Beginning of the
Friendship - Domestication
ithout a doubt, the dog and cat are the most popular companion ani-
mals in the United States. According to a biannual survey conducted
by the American Pet Product Manufacturers Association, there are
more than 65 million dogs and 77 million cats living in homes today
Moreover, approximately one-third of dog lovers share their lives with two or more
dogs, and almost half of pet-owning homes include multiple cats! So what exactly
Auew os leuabo 'sieo pue suewny pue 'shop pue suewny hubnog jeun l! sem
 ss   p s a    o s
enabled them to forge the strong and ongoing bonds with their human caretakers
that are so important to us today?
THEEVOLUTIONARYHISTORYANDTAXONOMY
OF DOGS AND CATS
Anyone who lives with both dogs and cats will emphatically affirm that the
dog and the cat have some significant and important behavioral differences
In fact, it is often said that some people are *dog people" while other folks are
The Beginning of the Friendship - Domestication
Chapter 1
"cat people" - a distinction that has much to do with respective differences
ences, however, when viewed in the context of evolutionary history, dogs and
cats are actually quite closely related. Both dogs and cats are classified within
the taxonomical order "Carnivora," a group of mammals that evolved approxi-
 sy l snui p m ue o s o  ol t 
about 250 species. The very first carnivores were collectively referred to as the
Miacidae family. This was a very diverse group of small, slender, tree-dwelling
the viveravines branched off from the miacines. Viveravines are now considered
to be the oldest ancestor of the domestic cat, and miacines are the ancestors
 of our present-day dogs. Included with the dog in this group are the ancestors
and foxes), as well as the bear, raccoon, and weasel. The viveravines further
extinct prehistoric cats, including Smilodon, the sabertooth tiger. The second
line included Dinictis; a small cat that later evolved into several distinct cat spe-
cies. Dinictis is considered to be the primary cat ancestor of all cat species alive
today, including our domestic cat.
Today, along with our domestic dog, the other canid species that are found
 in North America include wolves (two species), coyotes (one species), and
foxes (five species) (Figures 1.1 through 1.3). No present-day wild cousins of
the domestic cat are found in North America, but subspecies of the wildcat live
freely in Europe, Northern Africa, and parts of Asia. Canid and felid species are
classified within separate families, the Canidae and Felidae, respectively, within
the order Carnivora (Sidebar 1). Carnivores are so named because of a set
ypnoy leddn pebeue eyl esudwoo yoym (sissueo ay) yeel pabeue jo
PU1
UISEWIU
figure 1.1  Timber Wolf (Canis lupus); The
figure 1.2 Coyote (Canis latrans)
figure 1.3 Red Fox (Vulpes vulpes)
domestic dog s wild progenitor species
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR,& COMMUNICATION
Sidebar 1
CLASSIFICATION OFTHE DOG AND CAT
dog's genus is Canis and its species is familiaris, correctly expressed as
Canis familiaris or C. familiaris. The Canidae family also includes the wolf,
coyote, dingo, fox, jackal, and Cape hunting dog.
The domestic cat is classified as a member of the Felidae family. Like the
dog, the cat (Felis catus) is considered to be a domesticated species that is
taxonomically distinct from its progenitor species, the African wildcat (Fefis
silivestris iybica). This family includes the four genera Felis, Lynx, Panthera,
true cats, all existing as carnivorous predators. The Felis genus is comprised
of 26 cat species, including the domestic cat, Fefis cafus.
TAXONOMY
CAT
DOG
Phylum
Animalia
Animalia
Class
Mammalia
 Mammalia
Order
Carnivora
Carnivora
Family
Felidae
Canidae
Genus
Felis
Canis
Species
catus
familiaris
premolar and the lower first molar on each side of the mouth. Both dogs and
cats have these dental adaptations, which are efficient for shearing and tear-
ing prey. Carnivores also have small, sharp incisors at the front of the mouth for
holding and dissecting prey, and four elongated canine teeth that evolved for
predation and defense.
Interestingly, despite these dental modifications, not all of the present-day spe-
cies that are included in the order Carnivora are strict carnivores. Some, such as
bears and raccoons, are omnivorous and at least one species, the Giant Panda,
 is primarily vegetarian. This diversity is of practical significance when comparing
the feeding behavior and dietary preferences of our present-day dogs and cats.
Although both evolved as predatory species, the dog is decidedly more omni
vorous than the cat, which is classified as an obligate carnivore. As we will see,
these differences significantly affect the predatory and feeding behaviors, and the
type of food-related behavior problems that each species tends to develop.
The Beginning of the Friendship - Domesticatior
Chapter 1
Domestication: Scavenging Wolves
and Opportunistic Wildcats
Both dogs and cats are considered to be *domesticated" species, meaning that
they are genetically and behaviorally distinct from their wild progenitor (ances
tor) species. The phenomenon of domestication can be viewed as an evolution
ary process in which the afected animals have been selectively bred over many
generations to adapt to a new ecological niche - that of living in close asso-
ciation with humans. Domesticated animals rely almost exclusively upon human
adaptations that are common among all species of domestic animals include the
absence of a fear of humans, enhanced adaptability and acceptance of handling
and control, and increased sociability with humans and with other of their own
species (conspecifics). For the dog and the cat, this enhanced sociability is often
o seo pue sbop jo Age ey si l! 'peepul 'puog ewue-uewny aul se ol pauea
Changes of Domestication: Many of the physical and behavioral changes
into adulthood. Paedomorphosis can be achieved through changes in the onset,
rate, or completion of various types of physical development. One subtype of
paedomorphosis, called neoteny, is defined as a reduced rate of development,
resulting in the persistence of juvenile characteristics. For the domestic dog, the
one source of the wide variation in size, body type, and behavior that are seen in
different breeds. This diversity is not as obvious in the domestic cat, which as a
species shows much less variation in appearance than does the dog.
 sn  sn na  i sy s go   so o
changing from being completely nomadic hunter-gatherers to living in semi-
permanent settlements. For a number of years, a theory that was Lsed to explain
aul jo seuny pey uodwnss aul uodn pean bop aul jo uoosaop au
prey species. This explanation further assumed (since archeological evidence
does not preserve attitudes or belief systems), that Mesolithic hunters recognized
the superior hunting abilities of wolves and exploited those abilities by capturing,
raising, and taming individual wolf pups, who were then used as hunting aids.
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR,& COMMUNICATION
Sidebar 2
TRACING THE DOG'S ORIGINS INTHE NEW WORLD
pey 'sasioy pue shid ol selwis 'bop aul peyl pasalag sen ll 'sieas Auew os
been domesticated on several occasions, in different geographic reg ions of the
that we see today in different breeds of dogs as well as their presence through-
institute of lechnology recently provided evidence for a single domestication
another group has been able to explain how the dog first arrived in the Americas.
Dr. Peter Savolainen and his colleagues studied mitochondrial DNA mutations
each species. The evidence showed that the domestic dog split off from wolves
about 15,oo0 years ago and, showed no evidence of any other domestication
event in either the Old or New World after that point in time. Savolainen's group
dogs came from just three female Asian wolves! (More recent studies have in-
creased this estimate to five). The implication of this research is that although
dogs were found all around the world 9,oo0 years ago, this must have been
because they were already traveling with their human companions. Indeed,
lo) bop ssaey ueoixay eul jo dneyew oeueh aul jo uojeujwexe s,dnoib se
Xoloitzcuintel), which is considered to be one of the oldest identifiable breeds
of America, showed that this ancient dog is closely related to several modern
European breeds of dogs and were not at all related to the American grey wolf.
Although the previous results supported a single, Eurasian domestication
event, they could not be considered conclusive because genetic analysis of
American dogs and dogs who had been brought to the New World with
European explorers. To solve the mystery for once and for all, Jennifer Leonard
examined genetic material recovered from the ancient, pre-Columbian
Her results showed unequivocally that while the dogs were all closely related
Collectively, these studies show that a single domestication event occurrec
for the dog, somewhere in Europe or Asia, from Old World grey wolves, and
a separate domestication did not occur in the New World involving the North
American wolf. This means that humans brought the domesticated dog with
Although inter-breeding between dogs and wolves may occur occasionally
buunpue jo aouapiaa ou sl aleyl (am se 'saosoo pue sbop ueamlag pue)
The Beginning of the Friendship - Domesticatior
Chapter 1
studied to date. All of the breeds that we know today are descended from a
single sub-species of wolf living many years ago in Eastern Asia.
Leonard JA, Fisher SC. The origin of the American dogs. 3oth WSAVA Conference, Mexico City, Mexico, May
11-14,2005.
Savolainen P, Zhang Y, Luo J, Lundeberg J, Leitner T. Genetic evidence for an East Asian origin of domestic dogs,
Science, 298:1610-1613, 2002.
Vila C, Maldonado J, Wayne RK. Phylogenetic relationships, evolution, and genetic diversity of the domestic dog.
 Heredity, 90:71-77, 1999.
has been successfully challenged by evolutionary biologists. An alternate, more
defensible theory proposes that the early domestication of the dog was largely
unintentional and occurred as a result of adaptive radiation and natural selection
as wolves adapted to a new ecological niche - the village dump.
At the end of the last lce Age, humans gradually became less nomadic and
began to live in semi-permanent villages. This new way of life not only benefited
people, but also created a new ecosystem into which wolves could adapt. Spe-
cifically, the outskirts of permanent villages provided a steady source of food from
predators, they are also highly opportunistic scavengers, capable of consuming
and thriving on a highly varied and omnivorous diet. Therefore, as a species, the
wolf was already well-suited to feed at these newly formed "dump sites,”" which
contained a wide variety of waste and food scraps.
The selective pressures of this new environment favored less timid wolves with
a higher tolerance (less fear) of human proximity. Quite simply, the less fearful indi-
vduals had increased opportunities to feed because they stayed longer and fled
less readily than the more timid animals. The social behavior of the wolf was also
pack order relaxed as pack-hunting behaviors were replaced by semi-solitary or
group-scavenging behaviors. As this profo-dog became more adapted to eating
and reproducing in the presence of humans, isolated sub-populations became
"naturally" domesticated. In this branching of the dog and wolf's evolutionary tree,
that it is from these semi-domestic village scavenger populations that individual
later) it was the selective breeding of these dogs that led to the working partners
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, & COMMUNICATION
Cats as Opportunistic Mousers: The African wildcat has a similar early domes
tication story to that of the dog, although it occurred more recently. Just as vllage
dump sites attracted scavenging wolves, the grain storage barns of the ancient
in Cyprus) attracted the African wildcat. Granaries naturally are infested with mice
African wildcat. The barns of agricultural communities also provided protected nest
sites for female cats to raise their kittens. The African wildcat is a solitary species
and by nature is extremely shy of humans. Adults live completely separate lives
and use established temitories to advertise their presence and prevent contact with
females do not fomm lasting pair bonds. Males have no involvement at all in raising
avoid contact with others of their species except when breeding.
 So, just as the exploitation of village dump sites by wolves led to changes in their
social behavior, so too did the ecosystem provided by barns and granaries exert
new selective pressures on the African wildcat. As wildcats began to exploit the
sites enhanced an individual's chance of surviving and producing kittens. And, be-
cause there would also have been human presence around these sites, those cats
who were less fearful of humans would also be more "fit" in this new ecologica
niche. Over many generations, this evolving subpopulation became reproductively
isolated from the African wildcat and group-living cats of barns began to exhibit
modified social behaviors. Females shared protected nesting sites within barns
and communaly nursed their kittens. Loosely organized group-living communities
evolved, a way of life that was decidedly different from the African wildcat's solitary
lifestyle. Natural selection for a more communal-living mouser changed several
who is actually much more social than is often assumed. The importance of the
domestic cat's sociability becomes clear when we examine the cat's interaction
with human caretakers and with other cats in multiple-cat homes.
SOCIAL ORGANIZATION: WHY DOGS ARE NOT CATS
AND CATSARE NOT DOGS
Athough dogs evolved from an obligatory pack-living species (the wolfy and cats
from a highly solitary species (the wildcat), the process of domestication along
with the inherent flexibility of social behaviors within species has changed the
The Beginning of the Friendship - Domesticatior
Chapter 1
a variety of social environments - as single pets, with others of their owr
Recent studies of dogs and cats in homes and as strays or feral animals have
led to an increased understanding of the types of social relationships that our
two best friends can develop.
The Social Groups of Dogs
It is well-established that the dog's closest wild relative, Canis fupus, lives as a
highly social, predatory species. In the wild, wolf packs consist of small groups
of related individuals who remain together throughout the year to hunt, rear young.
facilitates the cooperation that is needed for hunting, raising young, and protect
ing teritories together. The pack hierarchy is maintained using highly ritualized
behaviors that signal an individual wolf's intentions and rank. Having ritualized sig-
nals that communicate dominance, submission, and appeasement enhance the
survival and reproductive chances of each individual and the pack as a whole, and
Flexibility of Social Groups: Athough the pack is the first type of social orga-
nization that comes to mind when most people think of wolves, as a species the
wolf is capable of forming a variety of different types of social groups. Biologists
studying wild canids have found that the type of social organization that wild
canids form within a region is influenced by the type of prey species available, and
its abundance and distribution within their territory. Wolves have been observed
as solitary animals. Studies of free-ranging domestic dogs in rural and urban envi-
ronments report similar variations in the social behavior of domestic dogs, ranging
from solitary living or loose pair-bonds to stable but loosely organized groups and
The domestic dog has inherited the social nature of his original wolf ancestor.
Dogs have also retained parts or all of the wolf's ritualized behavior patterns that
function to signal dominance and submission. However, just as domestication
sey ool os 'jom aun woy aoueleadde jeoishyd ui abienip ol bop aul pasnen seu
social behavior been modified. Specifically, the provision of food, shelter, and
protection from other predators over hundreds of generations removed the selec-
tive pressure for the ranked social groups that were needed by wolves to hunt
Aybiy si bop osewop eyl yed bupeaig eul jo sdnd ey esiei pue Aaid ebe
social and demonstrates the same social flexibility of his wild cousins. Dogs form
pet households also develop primary social attachments with the other dogs or
pets who are present. Conversely, the presence of rigid dominant/submissive
rankings or the identification of a particular "alpha" dog within a group is less
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, & COMMUNICATION
Sidebar 3
SOCIAL BEHAVIOR IN FREE-RANGING DOGS
The earliest studies of free-ranging dogs were conducted with dogs who
may have been owned, but were allowed to run free in urban and suburban
settings. These studies, conducted in the 1970s and 1980s, reported that
ol papuel Auo pue elel sem sbop jo sdnoib jo uojewol aul 'sbop leyo
aoinos poo, e punoie ewll jo spoued jous lol paiebaibuoo sbop ueym snooo
jo subis Aue mous pou pip sbop ayl 'uoilppe ul 'eoeld bujsel paloajoid 1o
These studies concluded that free-ranging dogs in cities and suburbs do not
form stable social groups, probably because many had owners who regularly
fed them and provided some level of care.
In contrast, other researchers found that stray (or feral) dogs in urban areas
will form stable social groups and demonstrate long-term affiliative relation-
ships when there is no human care or intervention. In these studies, indi-
papuajep sdnoib alqeis llews ing 'pooj lot auole abeioj ot papual slenpi
consistent with ranked social hierarchies. logether, these studies suggest
that the domestic dog, just like his wolf cousin, modifies social behavior in
response to the distribution and abundance of food and other resources.
ion animal has been highly popularized, in reality the dog is capable of form-
ing a variety of different types of social relationships.
Font E. Spacing and social organization: Urban stray dogs revisited. Applied Anirmal Behaviour Science,
17:319-328,1987
Fox Mw, Beck AM, Blackman E. Behavior and ecology of a small group of urban dogs (Canis farmiiaris). Apptied
Anirmal Ethology, 1:119-137, 1975
age.Applied Animal Behaviour Science, 59:331-348, 1998.
tence of hierarchical roles of individuals within a strictly ranked social group
different functions diversified the dog with regard to the ways in which individuals
form and maintain pair relationships. Wwhile some breeds and individual dogs do
not generally form rigid dominant/subordinate relationships, others more readily
The Beginning of the Friendship - Domesticatior
Chapter 1
obvious, with one dog displaying ofensive threats towards other dogs, guarding
bsal aolouo oi sseooe buunen Auelsisuoo pue 'sot pue pooy oi ssaoo
places. However, in most homes, dominant/subordinate interactions between
dogs are less obvious and, when they do occur, are situational and context-
ul ui sbop leyo woy mog pooj sly piene Aew bop auo 'ajdwexe loy oyoeds
sy ui sdeals lo Aol sly seyel bop yeyoue j esuodsa Aue moys pou png 'awou
they can only be discerned through observing which dog consistenty gains ac-
-qns lo jueweseedde Aeldsip sbop jo bop yolym pue seounosen pellsep ol sseo
little or no competition for resources, and displays of conflict are rare or absent
For this reason, describing all dog social groups in terms of who is "dominant'
and who is "subordinate" is misleading and probably inaccurate for most inter-
dog relationships. In most multiple-dog homes, the majority of dog-to-dog
interactions are deferential in nature, and communication tactics that signal
appeasement, conciliation, and invitations to play are much more common than
are agonistic (conflict-related) interactions. Many dogs living together behave in a
s palaidaui aa rou pinous poe, sul 'aen ae sub pue seidsip aissaibe
denying the existence of seriousness of inter-dog aggression problems within
homes. When these conflicts occur, they can be very difficult problems to treat
popularized but inaccurate portrayal of normal dog-to-dog relationships as
consisting of endless rounds of scheming and batling to achieve "alpha" status
does not generally apply and ignores the context-specific nature of most inter
are more fluid and less hierarchical, and do not directly impact a dog's ability to
obtain food or survive, the dog's social organization is more accurately defined as
a social group rather than the highly popularized and value-laden label of "pack."
For the same reasons, the *pack" model of social organization is an inaccurate
Concepts of pack behavior and ranked social groups became conventional as a way
of explaining relationships between dogs and their owners during the latter half of the
20th century. This resulted from an extrapolation of that period's understanding of
wolf pack behavior onto the social behavior that is observed between dogs and their
human owners. Because social ranking was emphasized, dogs were considered to
caretakers in an effort to achieve "alpha" status. As a result of this highly popularized
pliance with their owner's wishes often came to earn the label of "dominant.'
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, & COMMUNICATION
However, unlike wolves, the dog is the result of generations of purposeful selec-
tive breeding for behaviors that enhance trainability and sociability with humans.
Domestic dogs are well-adapted to forming strong and naturally deferential rela-
tionships with their human caretakers. Although dogs are still capable of display-
ing dominant and submissive signals, the expression of these communication
patterns should not be confused with unrelenting attempts to gain social status
over their owners. Although dominance challenges between dogs and their own-
ers can occur in some dogs, the use of a dominance model for describing the
normal social relationships between all owners and their dogs has been largely
discarded. Many behaviors that in the past were interpreted as a dog “being
dominant' are more often simply unruly or attention-seeking behaviors in dogs
who have not been trained to behave differently.2 These behaviors and their
interpretations are discussed in detail in future chapters
Social Behavior of Cats
It is true that the cat is not as highly social as the dog. And, of course, we simply
need to look to the natural behavior of the African wildcat to understand why.
higher densities with other cats and to tolerate human presence. These changes
provided selective pressure for the cat to develop communicative signals that
related to the availability of food or prey, the number of other cats who are shar-
ing the area, and the frequency and types of interactions that occur with humans.
For example, feral cats tend to live solitary lives around farmed areas containing
abundant and well-dispersed populations of mice and voles. Conversely, when a
centralized and reliable food source is present, free-living cats readily form social
someone regularly provides food to stray cats (Sidebar 4).
In homes, the domestic cat is observed living as an only cat (solitary), as part
of a pair or group of cats, and, not uncommonly, with one or more companion
dogs (Sidebar 5). The cat's flexible nature and ability to adapt to various types of
social groups is demonstrated by the fact that many cats living together in homes
exhibit relatively peaceful coexistence, with affiliative bonds forming between
pairs or groups. However, within groups of cats, the existence of established
a group may be more aggressive than others, interactions between cats within
groups do not conform to the accepted definition of ranked orders in which a
dominant animal controls access to resources such as food, resting places and
interactions with others in the group (e.g., opportunities to mate). This type of
The Beginning of the Friendship - Domesticatior
Chapter 1
SOCIAL BEHAVIOR IN FREE-LIVING AND FERAL CATS
Sidebar 4
concentrated and stable food source supports the development of stable cat
sites. Conversely, free-living cats will adopt solitary living when there is a sur-
aew ol Auo leyeboi buwoo 'auoje juny pue aa seo npe jen Aleais
sapnis layelaer ueny e Ag pal ae oum lo alls abeqieh e punoe aiebaie
sueanb lnpe paielel o psisuoo sdnoib eloos asaul leul moys sieo piesueg o
and their offspring. Adult male cats are found living on the periphery of groups
ous movement of queens between groups is rare and familiar queens within
paysllgeisa ue uiol ol Al oym sueanb abuelis plemoi Asoy moys dnoib e
oml lof lensnun jou sl ll pue sjeo uaawag woj spuog enpaipul 'dnoie
queens to raise their kittens together in a single nest site. Allogrooming.
allorubbing and other affiliative behaviors are commonly observed betweer
cats within groups. While a particular group of females usually has one adult
males who visit, there is no distinct social hierarchy between breeding males.
and intact males rarely behave as full members of the group.
Journal of Animal Ecology, 58:321-328, 1989.
Genovesi LA, Besa M, Toso S. Ecology of a feral cat Felis catus population in an agricultural area of northern Italy
Wildlife Biology, 1:333-337, 1995.
Liberg O, Sandell M. Spatial organization and reproductive tactics in the domestic cat and other felids. In: The
University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1988.
Management, 49:340-346, 1985.
resource guarding and control occasionally is seen between individual cats, but
is generally not a regular component of cat social groups.
Domestication created a cat with an enhanced tolerance of and affiliation for
others compared with its wild ancestors, perhaps as a result of paedomorphism.
Affliative behaviors such as care-soliciting, mutual grooming, and playing are
all seen in young African wildcats but are infrequent or totally absent in adults
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, & COMMUNICATION
Sidebar 5
CATS AND DOGS LIVING TOGETHER - CANTHEY
COMMUNICATE?
o hnop sl sieo pue shop ueamleg uoounwwoo peul puhnoul ualjo s! 1
iors. However, the increased frequency with which people keep dogs and cats
together in homes without problems led investigators to study the relationships
slayo yoee eidleiui Aoaoo oi salge leul pue sieo pue shop ueemeg
communication signals (Feuerstein and Terkel, 2008).
The investigators interviewed 170 owners who shared their homes with both a
dog and a cat and also observed behavior of the pets in a subset of 45 homes.
Greater than 60 percent of owners in the study reported that their dog or cat
ueoled 6 Ajuo pue 'saloads ellsoddo eul lo jed lleul plemol elgeojwe sem
stated that their pet showed aggression toward the alternate-species house
    e a  e  
just as likely to be friendly or aggressive toward their cat housemate as were
cats likely to be friendly or aggressive toward the dog in their home. This result
is in contrast to widely held beliefs that cats instantly dislike dogs and that
eo e lly lo aseyo ol lo pueeg leue ol juem ol Aeyll alow ae sbop
When the pets' behaviors were observed, mutual play made up a substantial
same room or resting together was also common. Cats offered significantly
more play behaviors towards dogs than vice versa, but also were more likely
yolym je abe pue uodope jo lepio eyl 'sbop ueyi eaissaibbe lo (neaj eg ol
the pet was adopted also were important factors affecting pets' relationships.
In homes in which the cat had been adopted first, dogs tended to be more
cat's relationship with the dog. As expected, both dogs and cats who were ad-
opted as young animals were more likely to develop affectionate relationships
The investigators were also interested in the use of communicative body sig-
nals between dog and cat housemates. Of the 45 pairs observed, interactions
busueaw ahsoddo lo paelaun ue pey seloeds auo jo anisod Apog au yolyn u!
together in homes often greeted using a feline-specific pattern, the nose-touch,
The Beginning of the Friendship - Domestication
Chapter 1
figure 1.4 Two familiar cats greeting with *nose touch"
figure 1.5 Dog and cat housemates greeting with *nose touch"
This study suggests that dogs and cats who share homes often develop
close afliative relationships and show this through proximity, mutual play, and
greeting behaviors. In addition, both dogs and cats are able to learn to un-
derstand the other species communication signals. Owners may facilitate the
troducing pets when they are young (preferably six months or younger for cats
'(sbop loj lebunoA 1o leaA auo pue
Feuersten N, Terkel J. Interrelationships of dogs (Canis famiiaris) and cats (Felis catus) living under the same
roof. Appt Anim Behav Sci, 113:150-165, 2008.
In contrast, adult domestic cats continue to seek out petting and affection, are
often very playful and loving, and commonly develop strong and enduring bonds
of attachment and afection with their human owners and with other cats in their
times even only with one person in the home), others are virtual social butterflies,
ready to greet and interact with any visitor. Similarly, while some cats adapt very
well to living with other cats, others do not and are best kept in single-cat homes
HISTORY OF DOG BREEDS AND BREED-SPECIFIC
BEHAVIORS
Of all of the domesticated species of animal that exist today, the dog has prob-
ably been subjected to artificial selection for the longest period of time. Since
domestication, at least 4,0o0 generations of dogs have been selectively bred for
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, & COMMUNICATION
various functions, producing a diverse number of breeds. Most of the functional
-e alem (sbop bupley pue 'bupiene buguny) Aepol eziubooel em jeyl sdnoib
ready in existence during the Roman period almost 2,500 years ago. Since that
oo suewny jo speau geuoouny aun peaw ol sbop jo bupeag eaoaes 'ag
when hunting became associated with aristocracy and was restricted to the
land-owning nobility. Different types of dogs were developed and bred for hunting
beagles or hariers, foxhounds, various types of temiers, and, later in the period,
various types of gundogs. Although the landed gentry paid attention to pedigrees
and prided themselves on the working prowess of their kennel of dogs, selective
breeding and breed development focused upon working ability and behavior and
was not restricted, as are purebreds today, within a set of animals who were iden-
tified as registered members of their breed.
The second wave of breed development occurred during the mid-19th century
aq Aenpen speaa suawdoleap peang ol yoeoidde mau e pauesaida pu
four essential elements: a set of founder animals, reproductive isolation of those
group to stabilize physical and behavioral attributes that define the breed, and,
pazjubooal s! peaiq meu aun 'sseooid sun buunp suiod awos iy ,'adkl peaig.,
modern-day breeds have been developed within the last 150 years by restrict-
ing breeding to animals with verifiable lineages (i.e. "pedigreed" dogs). Prior to
that time, breeding was not restricted within purebred lineages and the name of
a breed simply reflected the function of a loosely related group of dogs who were
all used in a similar manner for either hunting, herding, or guarding.
The first breed clubs of the 180os created most of the purebreds that are in
existence today. The growing dog fancy of that period placed unprecedented
who confommed to a standard appearance described as "ideal" for the breed.
To codify this practice, kennel clubs governing the first dog shows during the late
1800s established "breed barrier" rules. These regulations maintained that only
dogs who were the offspring of a registered dam and sire were recognized as
registered members of the breed and likewise eligible for exhibiting and breeding
Therefore, from each breed's point of origin and creation of a stud book, all future
breeding was limited to descendents of the breed's founding dogs. These rules
ensured that the genetic pool for each breed was reproductively isolated from
that of the general dog population (much as the ruling aristocracy of that period
isolated themselves from the working classes). This projection of the values of the
The Beginning of the Friendship - Domesticatior
Chapter 1
and lineages. Breeding related individuals to one another became a common
practice that was used to rapidly create a uniform appearance and to enhance
the expression of desirable traits within a line of dogs.
number of the founding dogs, their genetic diversity (heterozygosity), and the
vigor with which the prohibition against breeding outside of registered lines was
pue (wel poys aun uy woped ol sbop jo Age aul paoueyua Aeui bupeag
resulted in the highly uniform physical appearance of breeds that we recognize
today, the imposed genetic isolation and the inclusion of relatively small numbers
of founding individuals in the original breed gene pools has also contributed to the
many genetically influenced diseases occurring in purebred dogs today.3
Breeding for a specific type of working function impacts both physical traits
example, the long, slender legs and deep chest of the Greyhound contribute
to its ability to hunt using its eyesight (Figure 1.6). This breed also possesses a
very strong chase instinct, which is considered to be a modification of predatory
behavior. By comparison, the short, thick legs of the Basset Hound contribute to
this breed's talent as a scent trailer, along with behaviors that many owners can
find frustrating - such as a propensity to keep its nose to the ground when out
a breed or breed-type was developed, different dogs display certain behavior
figure 1.6 Greyhound (Sighthound Breed)
figure 1.7 Bassett Hound (Scent Hound Breed)
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR,& COMMUNICATION
aul loj pesn jou ane pue suouedwon se Auewud idey ane sbop jo Auofew au
function of their breed, they stillinherit the behavior patterns and predispositions
that were strongly selected for in the development of that breed (Sidebar 6 and 
must always be considered when teaching new behaviors and when attempting
 to understand and address behavior problems in individual dogs.
Sidebar 6
COMMON BREEDS OF DOGS
Sporting Breeds
Pointers: German Shorthair Pointer, Pointer, Wirehaired Pointing Griffon
Setters: English Setter, Gordon Setter, Irish Setter
Retrievers: Golden Retriever, Labrador Retriever, Flat-coated Retriever
Hounds
Scent Hounds: Basset Hound, Beagle, Bloodhouno
Sight Hounds: Borzoi, Greyhound, Saluki, Whippet
Working Breeds
Akita, Alaskan Malamute, Boxer, Great Dane, Mastiff, Newfoundland
Rottweiler, Siberian Husky
Terriers
Border Terrier, Bull Terrier, Miniature Schnauzer, Parson Russell
Terrier, Smooth and Wire Fox Terrier
Toy Breeds
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel, Chihuahua, Maltese, Pekinese.
Pomeranian, Poodle, Pug, Shih Tzu, Yorkshire Terrier
Herding Breeds
Australian Shepherd, Belgian Tervuren, Border Collie, Collie.
German Shepherd Dog, Pembroke Welsh Corgi, Shetland Sheepdog
Sidebar 7
GENERAL BREED-SPECIFIC BEHAVIORS IN DOGS
(AMERICAN KENNEL CLUB CLASSIFICATIONS)
● Sporting Breeds (Gundogs): These breeds were developed to aid hunters by locating,
 flushing, and retrieving game on land and in water. Sporting dogs are energetic and 
social, and low in aggressive reactivity.
 scent hounds follow a scent trail to find game, while sight hounds use eyesight
and, as a result, are relatively independent or even aloof in nature. Some sight
hounds, such as the Greyhound and whippet, are known for their extremely gentle
and quiet dispositions.
The Beginning of the Friendship - Domesticatior
Chapter 1
19
● Working Breeds: Dogs classified as working breeds were bred to guard property or
livestock, pull sleds, or perform water rescues. Because they were often required to
actively protect by warning or even attacking intruders, the working breeds are high in
 a  'a pn e ui s a   o s
● Terriers: Terriers were developed to find and kill small rodents and other animals that
were considered to be pests. These breeds worked with litle or no direction from their
handler and were required to immediately kill their prey upon catching it. These two
requirements resulted in breeds who have low-to-medium trainability and very high
predatory response.
● Toy Breeds: Many of these dogs represent miniaturizations of other breeds. In some
cases, they retain behaviors similar to that of their larger forefathers. In others, a more
subordinate nature was selected along with the neotenized features. The toys were
behavior of the herd, herding dogs are also usually highly reactive and have a strong
chase instinct.
HISTORY OF CAT BREEDS AND BREED-SPECIFIC
BEHAVIORS
Athough the cat is considered to be a domesticated species, the breeding of
  ls a         s ss
ble of living on the peripheries of human communities, mating and raising kittens
without human care or interference.As a result, barn cats, stray cats, and even
is only within the last 150 years that purebred cats have been developed through
owners still share their lives with “mix-breed" cats (typically referred to as domes
tic shorthairs or domestic longhairs), and only a relatively small proportion select a
purebred cat as a companion.
Even without human interference, a number of mutations occurred early in the
 pm   o  u o   on   s s si
of coloring, seen in Felis siivestris, is the striped tabby (also called mackerel).
Another type of tabby, called the blotched or classic tabby, is considered to be
an early mutation, and today is commonly seen in domestic cats of many breeds
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, & COMMUNICATION
(a) uaed jooo Aagel laao lo pads jo ,adi pm, aui bumous te a'l ane
and the blotched (also called classic) tabby color pattern (left)
now are common in cats include black, orange, white-spotted, and all-white.
Once human intervention in breeding became established, additional colors, coat
and often bizarre characteristics in their quests to create new breeds of cat.
part of that century. The first recorded cat shows were held during the 1870s in
England and in the United States, and official studbooks for the registry of pedi-
gree (purebred) cats were established about 20 years later. Today, more than
400 cat shows are held annually in the United States. These are organized and
regulated by several purebred cat registry organizations, such as the Cat Fanciers
Association, the International Cat Association, and the Canadian Cat Association.
Rex cats, spotted cats, and tailless cats (Sidebar 8). In addition, cats are often
deep chest, broad shoulders and hindquarters, short legs, and a short, round
head. Although there are many variations in this type, it is exemplified by the
British Shorthair and Persian breeds (Figure 1.9). Conversely, cats described as
shaped head, long legs, and a long, slender body. The Siamese is considered to
Although cat breeds differ very dramaticaly in appearance, differences in behav-
ior between breeds are less evident. This may be in part because, unlike the dog.
different cat breeds were not developed for different working functions. Rather
The Beginning of the Friendship - Domestication
Chapter 1
BREEDS OF CATS
Sidebar 8
Abyssinian, American Shorthair, British Shorthair, Burmese, Colorpoint
Shorthair Breeds
Shorthair, Russian Blue, Siamese, Tonkinese
Angora, Balinese, Birman, Himalayan, Javanese, Maine Coon, Persian,
Longhair Breeds
Turkish Van, Norwegian Forest Cat, Somali, Turkish Van
Cornish Rex, Devon Rex, Selkirk Rex
Rex Cats
Bengal, Egyptian Mau, Ocicat
Spotted Breeds
American Bobtail, Cymric (longhaired Manx).
Tailless and Bobtail
Japanese Bobtail, Manx
Breeds
American Curl, Japanese Bobtail, Munchkin, Ragdoll Cat,
Rare and Unusual
Scottish Fold, Sphynx
Cat Breeds
figure 1.9 Manx cat with cobby bocy type
figure 1.10 Siamese cat with oriental bocy type
such as shortened legs or a folded ear were selected to create new breeds of cat.
has resulted in much less diversity in behavior patterns within the population of
domestic cats, when compared with the diversity of behaviors that we see among
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, & COMMUNICATION
behavioral differences are found among cat breeds. For example, the Siamese
Persians, who are typically thought to be inactive and quiet.
Several survey studies of cat show judges and veterinarians have supported the
general temperament characteristics that are reported in most cat books about
popular breeds of cats. A recent study surveyed cat owners' perceptions of their
cats' behaviors and found that two popular breeds of cat (Persian and Siamese)
than non-pedigreed cats.4 However, because this was a survey study of owner
attitudes that did not directly assess cat behavior, these differences may have
been due as much to the expectations and beliefs of the owners as to true differ-
pasebens sioune srpns eul sieo peeng-pexiw pue pargeind ueemeg seoue
that selective breeding of cats in general seems to have selected for a generalized
increase in sociable and friendly cats, regardless of breed. However, because so
few studies of this type have been conducted, it is still difficult to make qualified
conclusions about the effect of breed on the behavior of individual domestic cats
REVIEW QUESTIONS
What factors in human evolution facilitated the domestications of the dog and cat,
respectively?
2.
During the domestication process, what changes occurred in canid social
3.
How did the social behavior of the wildcat change during domestication? What
specific selective pressures caused these changes?
4.
In what ways does a dog's breed (or breed type) influence his or her temperament
and behaviors?
5
Describe the various types of social groups to which cats living in homes may
belong.
REFERENCESAND FURTHER READING
Adams JR, Leonard JA, Waits LP. Widespread occurrence of a domestic dog
mitochondrial DNA haplotype in southeastern US coyotes. Molecular Ecology.
12:541-546,2003.
Beadle M. The cat: History, biology, and behavior, Simon and Schuster, New York, NY, 1977.
The Beginning of the Friendship - Domesticatior
Chapter 1
Byrne RW. Animal communication: What makes a dog able to understand its master?
Current Biol, 13:R3467-R348, 2003.
Cutton-Brock J. A review of the family Canidae with a classification by numerical
methods. Bull Brt Museum Nat Hist Zoology. 29:117-199, 1976
Clutton-Brock, J. A natural history of domesticated mammals. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 0K, pp. 133-140, 1999.
behavior, and evolution. Scribner, New York, NY, 352 pp., 2001.
Davis SJ, Valls FR. Evidence for domestication of the dog 12,0o0 years ago in the
Natufian of Israel. Nature, 276:608-610, 1978.
Driccoll CA, Menotti-Raymond M, Roca AL, et al. The Near Eastern origin of cat
domestication. Science, 317:519-523, 2007.
Feuersten N, Terkel J. Interrelationships of dogs (Canis familiaris) and cats (Felis
catus) living under the same roof. Appl Anim Behav Sci, 113:150-165, 2008
City NY, 1970.
Fox MW. Socio-ecological implications of individual differences in wolf litters:
a developmental and evolutionary perspective. Behay 41:298-313, 1972
NY, 1971
Fox, MW. The dog: Its domestication and behavior. Garland STPM Press, New York,
NY, 1978
Frank H, Frank MG. On the effects of domestication on canine social development
and behavior. Appl Anim Ethology. 8:507-525, 1982.
Goodwin D, Bradshaw JW, Wickens SM. Paedomorphosis affects agonistic visual
signals of domestic dogs. Anim Behay, 53:297-304, 1997
Hare B, Tomasello M. Human-like social skills in dogs? Trends in Cog Sci, 9:439-444,
2005.
Hoage, RJ (Editor). Perceptions of animals in American culture. Smithsonian Institution
Press, Washington, D.C., 151 pp., 1989.
populations with 100 micro satellite markers. J Heredity. 94:81-87, 2003
Kretchmer KR, Fox MW. Effects of domestication on animal behaviour. Vet Rec,
96:102-108, 1975.
Leonard JA, Wayne RK, Wheeler J. Ancient DNA evidence for Old World origin of New
World dogs. Science, 298:1613-1616, 2002.
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, & COMMUNICATION
Miklosi A, Kubinyi E, Topal J. A simple reason for a big difference: Wolves do not look
Morey DF. Size, shape and development in the evolution of the domestic dog. J Arch
Sci, 19:181-204, 1992.
Morey DF. The early evolution of the domestic dog. Amer Scientist, 82:336-347, 1994.
Morris D. Cat breeds of the world. Viking Press, New York, NY, 256 pp., 1999
Odendaal JSJ, Meintjes RA. Neurophysiological correlates of affiliative behaviour
Olsen SJ. Origins of the domestic dog. University of Arizona Press, Tucson, AZ, 1985
Olson PN, Hall MF, Peterson JK, Johnson GS. Using genetic technologies for promot-
ing canine health and temperament. Anim Reprod Sci, 82:225-230, 2004.
Overall K. Update on canine behavioral genetics: What vets should know to
2006.
Parker HG, Kim LV, Sutter NB, et al. Genetic structure of the purebred domestic dog.
Science, 304:1160-1164, 2004.
Podberscek AL, Paul ES, Serpell JA (Editors). Companion animals and us: Exploring the
relationships between people and pets. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK
335 pp., 2000.
pp. 13-31,1988.
humans? Anim Behay, 61:715-722, 2001.
Zo0logist,7:319-330,1967
Serpell JA (Editor). The domestic dog: Its evolution, behavior, and interactions with
people. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 268 pp., 1995.
Tchernov E, Valla FF. Two new dogs and other Natufian dogs from the Southern
Levant. JArchae0logica/ Sci, 24:65-95, 1997.
Turner DC, Bateson P (Editors). The domestic cat: The biology of its behaviour
2nd edition. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 244 pp., 2000.
Vigne JD, Guilaine J, Debue K, Haye GP. Early taming of the cat in Cyprus. Science
304:5668-5669, 2004.
Vila C, Maldonado JE, Wayne RK. Phylogenetic relationships, evolution, and genetic
Wayne RK. Molecular evolution of the dog family. Trends in Genetics, 9:218-224, 1993
The Beginning of the Friendship - Domestication
Chapter 1
Wayne RK. Origin, genetic diversity and genome structure of the domestic dog.
Bioessays, 21:247-257, 1999.
WWillis MB. Breeding dogs for desirable traits. J Small Anim Pract, 28:965-983, 1987.
Young, MS. The evolution of domestic pets and companion animals. Vet Clin North 
Amer, 15:297-309, 1985.
Zeuner, FE. A history of domesticated animals. Harper and Row, New York, NY, 1963.
Footnotes
2 Hetts S. Pet behavior protocols: What to say, what to do, when to refer. AAHA Press.
Lakew00d, CO, 1999.
3 Olson PN, Hall MF, Peterson JK, Johnson GS. Using genetic technologies for promot-
4 Turner DC. Human-cat interactions: relationships with and breed differences
between, non-pedigree, Persian, and Siamese cats. In: Companion animals and us:
JA Serpell, editors, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2000.
2
CHAPTER
Behavior through the Life Cycle:
Newborns to Seniors
Ithough pet owners do not usually acquire dogs and cats until after
 weaning, a great deal has already occurred behaviorally by the time
that most puppies and kittens enter their new homes. Behavior is not
mature and continually adapt in response to experiences. Specifically, experi
ences that occur during early development can have a significant impact on
an animal's behavior later in life. In both dogs and cats, behavioral develop-
(Sidebar 1). These periods include the neonatal and transitional period,
socialization period, and juvenile period. As they reach adulthood, dogs
D asuodsa ui joeueq laui jane oi pue ueal oi enuoo sieo pue
experiences (refuting the adage about “old dogs and new tricks"). Finally,.
as our best friends enter their senior years, some of the physical changes
associated with aging can affect a pet's behavior and temperament.
Behavior through the Life Cycle: Newborns to Seniors
Chapter 2
WHAT ARE SENSITIVE PERIODS OF DEVELOPMENT?
Sidebar 1
Aaul enoapui psiy eyl ol payoee aweoag Apidei souyoey aul uaum shusoe
"critical period" - a short span of time with a definite starting and ending point
during which newborns learn to recognize their primary attachment figures. After
Subsequent studies of developmental behavior in mammals showed that such
mammals experienced similar periods of learning and species-identification, the
onset and offset of these critical periods was much more gradual. For example,
in dogs, the behaviors or preferences acquired during the socialization period
e sy 'apo sl ewue aul uaym paouanu ag ls ueo Aayl ng 'jueodwi ae
result, the term "sensitive period" has replaced the term "critical period" when
describing developmental behavior of the domestic cat and dog.
Sensitive periods of socialization refer to an age range during which a young
animal is highly response to socialization and habituation and to opportunities
to form social attachments. In the case of domesticated companion animals,
puppies are between 3 and 12 weeks old. Although the sensitive period of
cats is less well defined, kittens are most responsive to socialization when they
arebetween 2 and 9 weeks of age
THEEARLY WEEKS:NEONATAL
ANDTRANSITIONPERIODS
dependent upon their mothers for wammth, food, elimination, and protection during
the first few weeks of life. Although there are some differences between newborn
puppies and kittens, they are at similar stages of development during the first
   o   e        s 
without tactile stimulation of the perineal region by the mother dog or cat for the
first few weeks of life. It is not surprising, then, that the sensory worlds of puppies
and kittens at this age consist primarily of the smell and touch of their mothers and
siblings. Indeed, it is through sense of smell that the newborns first learn to recog-
nize their mother and to locate her as the source of warmth and nutrition.
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, & COMMUNICATION
Neonatal Period
Several behavior patterns are unique to the neonatal period. These are adaptive
in the sense that they are closely matched to the needs and abilities of newborn
puppies and to the mother's ability to respond. Neonatal behaviors fade com
age. The rooting reflex is triggered by maternal licking and is characterized by
a "swimming" motion with the front legs as the back legs push forward toward
the warm stimulus (Figure 2.1). Rooting helps the newborn to find the mother's
au woy me buow Aueapeun woy suan pue saiddnd suaaaid pue siea
nesting site. Suckling behavior is seen as soon as the newborn finds the teat.
Suckling is accompanied by kneading of the front limbs and paws, which move
A final unique behavior seen only in neonates is distress calling. These high-
Aouny o poo ae eu uaym sueny pue seiddnd Ag peonpoid a seuo payod
The mother responds immediately, feeding the neonates and providing warmth.
born kittens begin to purr within the first few days of life. Content kittens often
purr continually while they are sucking or being groomed by the mother cat.
Transition Period
The neonatal period is short, lasting only the first 10 to 14 days of life. It is immediately
change as the young puppies and kittens begin to "wake up" to their sensory worlds.
This period begins when eyes open (12 to 14 days in puppies and 7 to 10 days in kit-
tens). Athough the eyes are open by two weeks, puppies and kittens do not see well
until they are about four weeks of age. The transition period ends around three weeks
when the ear canals open and puppies and kittens consistently react to sounds. First
noge ae eu ueum saiddnd u pue sep gt oi tl punoe sua u idne ye
20 days old. In both puppies and kitens, the transition from deciduous teeth to adult
figure 2.1  Rooting reflex in a newborn puppy
y bussnu e ui xaa buipeauy z' anig!
Behavior through the Life Cycle: Newborns to Seniors
Chapter 2
tary self-grooming behaviors between the second and third weeks of life.
During the week of transition, neonatal behavior patterns gradually disappear
and are replaced by behavior patterns that are more adaptive for older puppies
and defecation, and puppies and kittens begin to naturaly move outside of their
walk several days later. As they become more exploratory, associated changes in
their distress calls are observed. While neonates distress call only when they are
hungry or cold, by the end of the transition period puppies and kittens distress
call if they wander too far away from their mother or littermates. During the tran-
sition period, learning can occur as puppies and kittens are capable of forming
associations between stimuli and responses. However, the rate of learning is slow
and the stability of conditioned responses does not reach adult levels until several
weeks later.
Practical Applications
stimulation, early gentle handling by human caretakers is beneficial (Sidebar 2).
THE IMPORTANCE OF EARLY HANDLING
Sidebar 2
shown to have positive long-term effects on both physical and behavioral
and the special senses. Studies with newborn kittens have found that kittens
more confident, exploratory, and socially assertive as adolescents than their
non-handled counterparts. Similar studies with puppies showed that expos-
ing puppies to frequent handling and mild stressors during the first few weeks
paonpoid pue lnws eaou ol alengey oi Age salddnd peoueyue al o
lou pey oum salddnd ueyl plwll ssal pue buobino alow alem oym sjenpiaipu
been handled.
Fox Mw, Stelzner D. Behavioural effects of differential early experience in the dog. Anim Behav, 14:273-181, 1966.
Fox Mw. The Cat:Its Domestication and Behavior. Garland STPM Press, New York, NY, 1978.
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, & COMMUNICATION
During the transition period, as puppies and kittens become capable of react-
ing to olfactory, auditory and visual stimuli, the introduction of toys and other
novel objects can help to stimulate investigative behaviors, even though they
are not yet able to manipulate these toys. It is also advantageous to expose
young puppies and kittens to normal household sounds, smells and sights,
daily handling, petting, and gentle brushing.
SENSITIVE PERIOD OF SOCIALIZATION
kittens), represents a time of very rapid behavioral change, coinciding with the
by which an animal develops species-specific social behaviors, learns to identify
primary attachment figures, and forms social relationships. Dogs and cats differ
from most other animals in that kittens and puppies can be simultaneously social-
ized to their own species (conspecifics) and to humans. Adequate socialization
and habituation to environmental stimuli during this sensitive period can often
prevent the development of inappropriate behaviors or deficits later in life. Dogs
Learning to Be a Dog
their littermates and suroundings. They readily approach and investigate novel
stimuli and show little fear or hesitancy to new objects, sounds, or people. After
five weeks of age, this investigative response diminishes somewhat, but active
seiddnd un sesuodsau leay lo sseusnoaeu leo isaid ol senuuoo yooidde
to form attachments to particular places.
Puppies play intensively with their littermates during the socialization period.
iors and communication signals, and teaches valuable lessons about bite inhi
bition and dominant and subordinate relationships (see Chapter 3, pp. 72-75)
The mother's interactions are equally important during this time. Puppies con-
vide important information to them regarding appropriate behavior with adult
dogs. When puppies play too roughly or become too demanding, the mother
Behavior through the Life Cycle: Newborns to Seniors
Chapter 2
figure 2.3 Six-week old puppy
dog disciplines using growls, dominant body postures and physical reprimands
 such as an inhibited muzzle bite. This important discipline teaches developing
puppies to correctly interpret dominant signals from other dogs, to inhibit their
bites when playing, and to display appropriate submissive postures to a dog
who is displaying dominant signals.
HOW DOES PLAY BETWEEN LITTERMATES
Sidebar 3
TEACH BIte INHIBITION?
Scenario: A litter of five-week-old Labrador retriever puppies are playing
asala-pue-aseuo buisnoi e uibag 'apslo pue ue 'salddnd oml Aiddeu
game, nipping and mouthing each other as they take turns chasing and being
chased. All goes well until Clyde, who is the more confident and bold of the
two puppies, gets too excited and bites down on Marvin's ear - hard. One of 
two possible outcomes occurs:
OUTCOME # 1
Clyde bites Marvin's ear (hard) → Marvin yelps LOUDLY!! (Yip, Yip!)
↑
Marvin runs away, effectively stopping the play.
↑
Clyde is alone, without his playmate.
↑
Clyde learns: Bite hard and play stops (best not to bite hard).
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, & COMMUNICATION
OUTCOME # 2
Clyde bites Marvin's ear (hard) → Marvin yelps LOUDLY!! (Yip, Yip!)
↑
Marvin reacts aggressively, biting Clyde back, HARD
↑
Clyde yelps! (Yip, Yip!) Play stops.
↑
to Marvin and play continues
↑
Clyde learns to inhibit his bite to avoid being bitten in return
(and practices appeasement behaviors)
When puppies are between 8 and 10 weeks of age, they become particularly
adxe mau cl poean sew pue 'saouaadxa pue 'subis 'spunos meu ol aaisues
ences with nervousness or fear. This period is commonly referred to as the "fear
imprint' stage. Although the age range of this period is consistent, breeds and
 individual puppies vary significantly in the degree to which they demonstrate
fearful responses after eight weeks of age. It is probable that both genetics and
busodxe ploae pnoys pue Asues slyl jo aeme eg pnoys seumo meu 'sse
aw siyi buunp gnws buuaybuy Aeuaod jo bupeis ol saiddnd
Learning to Be a Cat
The kiten's transition period is similar to that of the puppy, occurring during the
second to third week of life. Socialization begins near the end of the second
mother cat and with siblings provide important information to kitens about social
behavior, predation, and communication. A unique characteristic of kittens is that
watching their mother perform it successfully. Interestingly, the kitten's reliance
period of socialization when kittens are being handled by human caretakers.
Studies have shown that the presence of a mother cat who is calm and friendly
towards humans reduces anxiety in her kittens and encourages them to interact
with their human caretakers.1
Behavior through the Life Cycle: Newborns to Seniors
Chapter 2
Puppy Play vs. Kitten Play
 pue saidnd un suadoep leos peou loy eid jo auodui aus
cannot be over-emphasized. Puppies and kittens begin to show interest in their
littermates and show rudimentary play behaviors when they are three weeks old.
Over the next several weeks, play becomes an increasingly large part of their
activities. In both species, play teaches young animals to inhibit their bite when
interacting with others and provides repeated opportunities to develop and prac
tice communication and social skills, predatory behaviors, and sexual behaviors.
iors that illustrate some of the fundamental differences between dogs and cats.
 Puppies and kittens both are highly interested in toys and include various types
p saiddnd lauo yoea ym pue auoe uaym Aeid saun peyl sawh ayl ui son jo
from kittens during play in that they spend time chewing and gnawing toys and
other objects in their environment. They also begin to compete for possession of
au 'saweh esay buuna 'sawen em-jo-bn pue Keme-deey 'eseyo buisn sol
puppies practice communicative body postures that signal confidence (domi-
nance), playfulness, and appeasement (submission) to each other. Finally, puppies
(and adult dogs) almost all enjoy shaking, ripping, and tearing apart toys. Violent
feet and ripped apart - appears to be related to the kill portion of the canid preda-
tory sequence. Similarly, extensive periods of chewing and gnawing are part of the
'auet seo u uowoo pou ae sawie reme-daay pue uoissassod Keid uayl o 
icry of feline predatory behaviors. While puppies almost exclusively include another
puppy in object (resource) play, object play in kittens can be either solitary or
the toy by batting it back and forth or taking turns pouncing on it. However, kittens
do not demonstrate the intense interest in resource guarding and possession that
sieo aun Aq paueldxa aq ueo aoualep siul Xeid Addnd jo jueuodwoo jeoidk e s!
history as a solitary hunter that did not need to work cooperatively with others
Conversely, the dog's ancestral history involves group hunting and food sharing:
in which possession of resources is an important part of group life and one way in
which group cohesion and status are signaled within a social group.
Socialization with Humans
As our companions, puppies and kittens must learn not only how to relate to their
own kind, but also to their human caretakers. Puppies are highly responsive to
socialization with people when they are between the ages of 5 and 12 weeks.
although socialization after 12 weeks is also effective and very important for
development. A series of classic studies conducted during the early 1960s with
developing puppies showed that a complete lack of human contact between
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR,& COMMUNICATION
puppies never achieving the ability to trust people or respond to training.2
Athough these studies provide an extreme example of the results of a lack of
socialization, they demonstrate the importance of human interaction during
the primary socialization period. ldeally, puppies should receive frequent and
a Aeul eouo seoueuedxe pue eldoad mau Auew epnjoui ol papuedxe eg
weaned and enter their new home.
Unfortunately, in the real world, not all dogs and cats receive adequate interaction
and handling during the sensitive period of socialization. This may occur because
widespread recognition of the importance of puppy socialization has led to the
development of puppy kindergarten classes (Sidebar 4). These classes can provide
an excellent outlet for a puppy to play with other puppies as well as opportunities
for new owners to leam how to take care of and train their new family member.
nor with the completion of a puppy class. Puppies vary considerably in their ability
Sidebar 4
PUPPY SOCIALIZATION CLASSES
AND KITTEN KINDERGARTEN
Puppy socialization classes can be found in most communities and provide an
saoeld pue salddnd leuo ol Addnd leul aonpojui ol sleumo meu loj Ajunjoddo
in a positive and controlled manner. Classes also provide education for new own-
poad uoezileioos Aewud aul uo azjelideo di pauaisep aie sasselo Addnd
so enroll puppies who are between the ages of 8 and 14 weeks.
'buuiell-esnoy uo suossal epnjoui sesselo Addnd palonpuoo Ajedoid
ing unruly behaviors. Time is set aside for socialization exercises with people
awos 'jueweledwel pue abe oi buploooe payoew ale oum salddnd ym pue
classes also promote habituation by introducing a small agility course or a vari-
ety of new objects and walking surfaces
Although not as common, kitten classes are also offered in some areas,
usually through veterinary clinics. Socialization outside of the home is not as
and opportunities for kittens to become habituated to traveling in the car and
to new places.
Behavior through the Life Cycle: Newborns to Seniors
Chapter 2
to respond to socialization after 12 weeks of age, but most continue to habituate to
new experiences throughout their juvenile period. Individuals also vary in their need
for continued exposure and socialization and in their ability to generalize sociable
behaviors to new individuals and situations.3 For example, some puppies who were
neay ol ssaibai Aew syeam Zl oi dn aldoed ol pue sbop jeuo oi pezeioos-llam
or timid behaviors if socialization is not continued after this age. Therefore, while the
uwny pue uooeun Addnd-oi-ddnd oy suodwn Aea si syeem z, ol g jo ebe
handling, it should not be considered a "window" that closes following this age
period. Rather, socialization and habituation should continue throughout life for the
development of a well-adapted and friendly companion.
For kittens, interaction with humans is very important during the earty weeks
of life because the kitten's socialization period begins at an earlier age and is of
se ubeq pinous bunpuey uewny Aiea Xddnd aun jo jeun ueun uoneinp latous
earty as possible, preferably when kittens are 2 or 3 weeks of age. If no positive
becoming nervous, fearful of, or unfriendly toward humans as adult cats. Stud-
es have shown that daily handling very early in the sensitive period (4 weeks or
friendly and outgoing toward humans than cats who are handled later in the so-
of age), increasing the amount of time each day that the kitten is handled has the
greatest effect on increasing a cat's sociabity. There is also evidence that genet-
ics, maternal influences, and environmental factors have a strong influence on a
cat's friendliness to humans and other animals, regardless of the amount of early
socialization (Sidebar 5).
THAT CAT'S GOT PERSONALITY!
Sidebar 5
develop into friendly and sociable cats, genetics and maternal influences also
influence a cat's ultimate personality. Studies of cats living in homes and surveys
personality types. The first are cats who are easygoing, confident and sociable.
ym buiobno pue Apueu pue Ajwef leyi ylm (nyeld Ajensn aie seo asayi
snoaeu oi uog ale oum suey 'ssauoueu jo sabep sleo e saaoidw Aensn
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, & COMMUNICATION
u lael palpuey ale Aeul j! uesa 'suewny oi sluawyoene buidoleaap jo algedeo
with the temperament of his offspring, even though the male cat plays no role in
cat alone). These studies tell us that the temperament and behavior of a kitten's
parents are as important as is early handling during the first weeks of life in
Karsh EB. The effects of early handling on the development of social bonds between cats and people. In: New
nia Press, Philadelphia, PA, pp. 22-28, 1983.
McCune S. The impact of paternity and early socialization on the development of cats' behaviour to people and
novel objects. Apptied Anirmal Behaviour Science, 45:109-124, 1995.
WEANING
Female dogs and cats naturally begin the weaning process when their
lm pue ssaooid jenpeie Aen e si siui 'ebe jo syeem t oi 7e ae buudso
mother begins to wean, she walks away while her young are nursing, allows
gradual introduction to longer periods of separation teaches puppies and
of their mother'scare.
Although puppies and kittens are weaned at about the same age, a clear
difference occurs between dogs and cats in behaviors associated with provi-
sion of food during weaning. In ancestral dogs and wild canids, the mother
dog regurgitates food for the puppies as she begins to wean. Regurgitation is
triggered by puppies' greeting and food-soliciting (begging) behaviors. These
behaviors include submissive greeting postures, whining, and licking at the
corners of the mother's mouth. These behaviors are important social commu-
nication skills that will remain part of the dog's behavioral repertoire and will
be used during interactions with other dogs (and also with people). Although
most female domestic dogs do not regurgitate food for their puppies, the
food-soliciting behaviors and submissive postures associated with feeding
time are still expressed by puppies and are important for communication
between dogs throughout life (Figure 2.4)
Behavior through the Life Cycle: Newborns to Seniors
Chapter 2
figure 2.4 Puppy submissively licking at corner of her mother's
mouth (greeting behavior and food-soliciting behavior)
In contrast, nutritional weaning of kittens follows a different course. Rather than
enhancing social communication and cooperative behaviors, the weaning process
directs the attention of kittens away from the mother cat and toward solitary preda-
kittens when they are 4 to 5 weeks of age (Figure 2.5). She drops the prey nearby
allows nursing. This process gradually changes the signal for food availability from
the mother cat to the solid food that she provides. As kittens develop, they show
increasing interest in the prey that the mother brings and in attempting to manipu.
ate and kill the prey themselves. Most kittens demonstrate fully developed prey
killing skills by the time they are 6 to 7 weeks of age.
In both dogs and cats, the natural weaning by the mother is characterized
by a period of graduaf lessening of the young's attachment to their mother, as
Kau 'abe jo syeem xis Aq Auenbau buisinu peddois Aiensn aaey suay pue
will show intermittent suckling for several more weeks if they are still with their
mother. If allowed, most mother dogs and cats continue to spend time with
their litter and provide an important source of comfort and discipline until the
puppies and kittens are seven weeks or older (Sidebar 6). A primary difference
between the two species is that as puppies continue to develop social skills
and communicative behaviors related to cooperative hunting and food sharing,
a se uepuadapui alow pue jelos ssa Ahusseaou buwooaq ae sue
learn solitary hunting skills. Thus, while domestication has resulted in enhancing
many of the social behaviors of the cat, it has not created cooperative behaviors
such as those needed by a pack-living hunter such as the dog. These differ-
ences continue to be evident in the social and feeding behaviors of adult dogs
and cats (see Chapter 3, pp. 68-76)
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, & COMMUNICATION
Sidebar 6
WHEN SHOULD PUPPIES AND KITTENS GO
TOTHEIR NEW HOMES?
●Weeks 3 to 7: It is important for puppies and kittens to stay with their mother and litter-
mates during the first part of primary socialization. Emphasis during these weeks is on
learning species-specific behaviors and communication signals. Human handling and
ing, and petting, beginning at two weeks (or earlier) and continuing until weaning.
weeks or longer. If allowed to progress at its normal rate, mothers completely wean
their puppies and kittens by the time they are 7 to 9 weeks old. In human-controlled
her young or the premature removal of a puppy or kitten from the litter can have nega-
tive Tong-term consequences.
● Effects of Early Weaning: Puppies and kittens who are removed from their litters too
early are prevented from learning to interact and communicate normally with other
and a kiften's ability to interact with other cats.
● Welcome Home: Puppies and kittens should remain with their littermates and the
mother cat until they are at least 7 to 8 weeks old. The mother should be allowed to
7 and 9 weeks of age. In cases in which they remain with their liter longer, daily han-
JUVENILE (ADOLESCENT) PERIOD AND ADULTHOOD
maturity. Learning ability is fully developed, and dogs and cats are refining their
span gradually increases. Permanent teeth begin to replace the deciduous teeth
at about 4 to 5 months of age and are usually fully erupted by 6 months of age.
Gradual changes in behavior are seen in response to learning and as a result of
previous experiences.
Sexually related behaviors develop with the onset of puberty. Dogs become
sexually mature between 6 and 16 months, depending upon breed and adult
size. Although most dogs are reproductively mature by the time they are one year
Behavior through the Life Cycle: Newborns to Seniors
Chapter 2
dd, social behaviors continue to develop and change until dogs are 18 months or
dlder. Behaviors that are closely associated with social maturity include territorial,
protective, and dominance aggression. Cats reach sexual maturity between 5 and
9 months of age, although females may show their first estrous cycle when they
are as young as 4 months. With the onset of puberty, sexualy dimorphic behav-
iors such as urine marking, inter-male aggression, inclination to roam, and sexual
mounting begin to occur in males.
Dogs and cats continue to learn and modify their behavior throughout adult life
Although many owners believe that the training of their dog or cat should occur
during the first year of life, it is equaly important for both their pet's manners and
throughout adult life. Training sessions can be directed toward preventing un-
wanted behavior problems, teaching enjoyable games and activities, and reinforc-
ozieos uoppe ul 'agnd un no uaym pue awoy eu ui seuuew pooe bu
throughout life is essential and can take the fom of regular excursions to parks
and new places, accompanying owners on errands and in some cases vacations.
and having opportunities to meet and interact with a variety of people.
SENIORPETS
As a result of improvements in companion animal health care and nutrition, dogs
and cats are living substantially longer in recent decades. Still, even with these
ers, which means that the majority of owners will experience living with an elderly
pet at some point in their life. Because of their wide range in adult size, dogs tend
fo age at different rates. The toy and small breeds live longer and age more slowly
than large and giant breeds of dogs. Size is not typically a factor for cats because
include a pet's lifestyle, fitness level, health care and nutrition, and the presence
 of chronic disease. A common rule of thumb is to consider a dog or cat to be in
their senior years once they have entered the final third of their expected lifespan.
For example, a spaniel-mix with an expected lifespan of 12 years can be con
sidered a senior after 8 years of age. Conversely, a small or toy breed dog with
saoan au uaum Aepie palepisuoo si siear g ol tl jo uedsel peloedxe ue
at around 10 years of age. Although such guidelines are helpful, in the end, every
dog and cat is an individual, and age-related changes will be affected by genetic
health, nutritional status, and lifetime experiences.
For many owners, living with a healthy older adult dog or cat is a special time
   s  sis  s s   
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, & COMMUNICATION
people, dogs and cats experience a series of changes with age that can affect
the pet's behavior and temperament. Older animals are generally less active, tend
to sleep more, play less vigorously, and require less daily exercise than younger
dogs and cats. In some dogs and cats, the presence of arthritis or diminished
sensitivity of vision or hearing may also contribute to changes in behavior and
activity. Older dogs may have trouble maneuvering stairs or jumping into the car,
while cats may be less inclined to jump up onto elevated spaces. While many
they grow older, others may become less social, more iritable, or less tolerant
of changes in their environment or of handling. This may be caused by health
changes such as arthritis or by the onset of age-related cognitive dysfunction.
Regular veterinary care, proper nutrition, and living in a loving home can 
help dogs and cats experience healthy older years with minimal behavior
changes or problems. Although the pet's overall activity level may decline, daily
walks, outings to a favorite park, or supervised retrieving games all help to
keep dogs physically and mentally active. For cats, daily games with a favor-
ite toy or supervised excursions outside can keep life interesting and active.
buouenedxe pue aaoe ssel a oym so pue shop jeplo loy paubisep sleia
an older pet's daily routine can be helpful in preventing disorientation or stress.
Similarly, continuing with the dog's or cat's established daily rituals such as
regular meal times, morning walks, grooming sessions, and play times helps to
support the pet's normal behavior patterns and is enjoyable and important to
both the pet and to the owner during the late years of the pet's life
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.
Describe the set of adaptive behavior patterns that are observed in neonatal
puppies and kittens.
2.
Compare and contrast the period of primary socialization in puppies and kittens.
3.
What species-specific behavior patterns do puppies learn from their mother and
their littermates during the period of primary socialization?
4.
Compare and contrast play behavior in puppies and kittens.
5.
What is "natural' weaning? when should puppies and kittens be weaned and
adopted into their new homes?
Behavior through the Life Cycle: Newborns toSeniors
Chapter 2
REFERENCESANDFURTHER READING
83:306-313. 1973.
Barrett P, Bateson P. The development of play in kittens. Behaviour, 66: 106-120, 1978
cats.Anim Behav, 29:173-180, 1984.
Beadle M. The Cat: History, Biology, and Behavior. Simon and Schuster, New York, NY.
1977.
Beaver BV. Feline Behavior: A Guide for Veterinarians. WB. Saunders Company.
Philadelphia, PA, 276 pp., 1992.
1974.
Bekoff M. Play signals as punctuation: The structure of social play in canids.
Behaviour, 132:419-429, 1995.
Borchelt PL. Behavioral development of the puppy. in: Nutrtion and Behavior in Dogs
Bradshaw JWS.The Behaviour of the Domestic Cat. CAB intenationar, Oxford, UK
219 pp., 1992.
Caro TM. Sex differences in the termination of social play in kittens. Anim Behav.
29:271-279, 1981.
Caro, TM. Effects of the mother, object play and adult experience on predation in
cats.Behav Neural Biol, 29:29-51, 1980.
Duxbury MM, Jackson JA, Line SWW, Anderson RK. Evaluation of association between
retention in the home and attendance at puppy socialization classes. J Amer Vet Med
Ass0c, 223:61-66, 2003.
Elliot O, Scott P. The development of emotional distress reactions to separation in
puppies. J Genetic Psychol, 99:3-22, 1961.
Estep DQ. The ontogeny of behavior in: Readings in Companion Animal Behavior.
1996.
Feldman H. Maternal care and differences in the use of nests in the domestic cat.
Anim Behav, 45:12-23, 1993.
Fox Mww. Behavioral effects of rearing dogs with cats during the "critical period of
socialization".Behaviour, 35:273-280, 1969
Fox MW, Stelzner D. Behavioural effects of differential early experience in the dog
Animal Behav, 14:273-281, 1966.
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, & COMMUNICATION
Frank D, Minero M, Cannas S, Palestrini C. Puppy behaviours when left home alone:
A pilot study. Appl Anim Behav Sci, 104:61-70, 2006.
Freedman DG, King JA, Elliot O. Critical periods in the social development of dogs.
Science, 133:1016-1017, 1961.
Kolb B, Nonneman AJ. The development of social responsiveness in kittens. Anim
Behav, 23:368-374, 1975.
environment. Anim Behav, 61:231-237, 2001.
Markwell PJ, Thorne CJ. Early behavioral development of dogs. J Small Anim Pract,
28:984-991.1987
Martin P, Caro TM. On the functions of play and its role in behavioural develop-
ment.Adv Study Behav, 15:59-103,1985
McCune S. The impact of paternity and early socialization on the development of
cats' behaviour to people and novel objects. Appf Anim Behav Sci, 45:109-124, 1995
Miller J. The domestic cat: Perspective on the nature and diversity of cats. J Amer
Vet Med Ass0c, 208:498-501, 1996.
kitten-mother relations and the cognitive development of the kitten from birth to
eight weeks. Aov Study Behav, 10:164-244, 1979.
Behaviour, C Thorne, editor, Pergamon Press, Oxford, UK, pp. 65-78, 1992.
aggression in cats: The influence of handling and paternity. Physiol Behay
55:1119-1124, 1994.
Rogerson J. Your dog: Its development, behaviour, and training. Popu/ar Dogs
Publishing Company, London, UK, 174 pp., 1990.
Scott JP, Marston MV. Critical periods affecting the development of normal and
maladjustive social behaviour of puppies. J Genetic Psychol, 7 7:25-60, 1950
Seksel K, Maxurski EJ, Taylor A. Puppy socialization programs: short and long term
behavioral effects. Appl Anim Behav Sci, 62:335-349, 1999.
Domestic Dog: fts Evolution, Behavior, and interactions with People, JA Serpell, editor
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 0K, pp. 80-102, 1995.
Slabbert JM, Rasa OA. Observational learning of an acquired maternal behaviour
pattern by working dog pups: An alternative training method? Appl Anim Behav Sci.
53:309-316, 1997.
Slabbert JM, Rasa OA. The effect of early separation from the mother on pups in
bonding to humans and pup health. J South African Vet Assoc, 64:4-8, 1993
Behavior through the Life Cycle: Newborns to Seniors
Chapter 2
Thorne CJ, Mars LS, Markwell PJ. A behavioural study of the queen and her kittens.
Anim Tech, 44:11-17, 1993
Topal J, Gacsi M, Miklosi A, Virany Z, Kubiny E, Csanyi V. Attachment to humans?
A comparative study on hand-reared wolves and differently socialized dog puppies.
Anim Behav, 70:1367-1375, 2005.
Footnotes
1 Rheingold H, Eckermann C. Familiar social and nonsocial stimuli and the kitten's
response to a strange environment. Devel Psychobiol, 4:71-89, 1971.
2 Scott JP, Fuller JL. Genetics and the Social Behavior of the Dog. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 1965.
3 Dehasse J. Sensory, emotional and social development of the young dog. Bulletin Vet 
Clin Ethol, 2:6-29, 1994.
3
CHAPTER
Social Behavior and Communication
in Dogs and Cats
nimals who live as enduring pairs or groups of individuals must engage
in behaviors that allow the formation and maintenance of social relation-
ships within the group. As discussed in Chapter 1, the types of social
 relationships that are fommed vary in response to the abundance and 
dispersion of valued resources such as food, shelter, and accessibility to mates
In general, the dog is considered a more social species than the cat in terms of hav-
ing evolved from an obligatory social species. The domestic cat, on the other hand,
evolved from a more solitary animal and only adapted to living in groups as part of
the domestication process. However, both dogs and cats who live as companions
are members of social groups. At the very least, their social relationships include their
human caretakers, and in many families, dogs and cats also maintain stable relation-
ships with other dogs or cats, and other species of companion animals.
In all of these relationships, effective communication is essential. Species-specific
communication patterns evolved to enable individuals to identify others of their
own species and to interact with each other for social, temitorial and reproductive
purposes. At its simplest, communication occurs when one animal is attentive to 
Social Behavior and Communication in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 3
and reacts to the signals that are sent by another animal. This communication is
direct and immediate. Examples include two dogs who live in the same household
greeting after a short separation, or a cat soliciting and receiving attention from
a specific target, as in the case of a cat leaving scent marks on a doorframe or a
dog howling when isolated. Although the recipient is not present in these cases (or
perhaps even known by the sender), the message that is sent has the potential to
affect the behavior of others. Our domestic dogs and cats are unique in that the
communication signals that they use are directed toward both members of their
own species and also toward humans. This chapter examines the ways in which
dogs and cats communicate using olfactory, visual, auditory, and tactile signals,
and how communication is related to the complex social relationships that indi-
vidual dogs and cats are capable of developing.
OLFACTORYCOMMUNICATION
than our own. The dog's nose contains over 220 million olfactory neurons, while the
an unimpressive 5 million! In addition to being highly sensitive to the odors of other
animals and of their environment, cats and dogs Lse their own body odors as im-
portant communication signals. Deposited scent has several advantages as a com-
convey information about the sender's sex and reproductive stage, even after the
animal has left the immediate area. Using scent to mark temritorial boundaries allows
widely spaced individuals within a habitat (cats) or those of another social group
Most important is the use of sniffing. The sniff is actually a disruption of the nor-
the nasal passages for longer period of time. Sniffing consists of a series of rapid
and short inhalations and exhalations. Air is forced into a space above the sub-
ethmoidal shelf, a bony structure that functions to trap inhaled air. The “sniffed" air
rests within this nasal pocket without being inhaled further into the lungs or being
immediately exhaled, as it would during a normal breathing cycle. This allows in-
creased time for the inhaled air and the scent molecules that it caries to interact
of greeting behavior and appears to provide infommation about an individual's sex,
age, emotional state, and possibly social status. Interestingly, when cats greet,
initial sniffing is usually nose-to-nose, while dogs are more likely to first sniff either
the side of the other dog's face or near the inguinal (groin) area. Finally, cats and
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, & COMMUNICATION
dogs living in pairs or groups may also Lse scent to produce group-specific odors
for identification and to help facilitate group cohesiveness.
UrineMarking
Athough the functions of urine marking are not completely understood, this behavior
has traditionally been described as serving dual, related purposes - to communi-
auun 'seo pue shop yog ul Aoel sew oi pue nppui ue jo Auapi au aeo
marking is evidenced by a characteristic posture. Dogs use a raised-leg urination
display when scent-marking, while cats adopt a standing posture, raising their tail
and spraying urine directly backwards, Lsually toward a vertical target (Figure 3.1
observed in reproductively intact males. However, some female dogs demonstrate
-wis buenbs alym bal puy euo asje Aaul yoym ui uogeuun bal-pasien jo woj e
larly, urine spraying in cats is most commonly observed in adult, intact males, but
neutered males and neutered and intact females are also capable of spraying. Intact
When urine is used to mark territory, the pattern of urination involves frequent
spraying or squatting at numerous sites, with a small volume of urine deposited at
bladder is emptied at a single site. Both dogs and cats intently investigate the
urine marks of others. A dog who is out walking with his owner will be attracted
to spots where other dogs have urinated and will spend several moments sniffing
own urine before moving on (Sidebar 1). Cats sniff areas where other cats have
sprayed or urinated and covered the spot (as in boxes), but unlike dogs, sniffing
figure 3.1 Raised leg urination posture in male dog
figure 3.2 Urine spraying posture in a cat
Social Behavior and Communication in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 3
QRINE MARKING:THE CANINE CALLING CARD
Sidebar 1
Recent studies of urine marking show that dogs can distinguish their own scent
jo uoissassod aeubisap ol pasn ag Aew buyew auun jeyl 'slayo jo eyl wo
viously acknowledged.
of Colorado ethologist Mark Bekoff asked whether dogs are capable of dis-
urine to new areas and observing his dog Jethro's reactions. While Jethro
consistently sniffed all urine marks, he spent very little time investigating his
of other dogs. Although this work must be repeated with more animals, it was
the first study to show that dogs clearly distinguish between their own scent
and that of others.
Urine marking may not only be about communicating identity, but may also
buowy eipui 'emiey ui buall sbop bubuel-aall jo dnoh e ul suaed buyeu
enged food sites, even when the sites were not close to their home territory
suming their meal. The purpose of this could be to aid in relocating the spot in
the future or as a method of identifying a feeding cache as "taken.'
Urine marking has been traditionally viewed as a sexually dimorphic behav.
studies by researchers at Smith College in Massachusetts have shown that
spayed and non-estrus females frequently use urine marking. Females who
were four years or older urine marked more often than did younger females,
more frequently and directed more of their urine to targets than did females
walking within their home area. As expected, intact females who were in sea-
un buoddns 'snisa ui sou aam cu salewaf ueu uao ao paye uos
role of urine marking in reproduction. However, the use of urine marking in
spayed and non-estrus females suggests that this form of communication con-
have their "calling cards," too!
Tales of displaced yellow snow. Behav Proc, 55:75-79, 2001.
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, & COMMUNICATION
Pal SK. Urine marking by free-ranging dogs (Canis famiaris) in relation to sex, season, place and posture. Appi
Anim Behav Sci, 80:45-59,2003.
Wirant SC, McGuire B. Urinary behavior of female domestic dogs (Canis farmiiaris): Influence of reproductive
status, location, and age. Appt Anirm Behav Sci, 85:335-338, 2004.
Terriers in relation to stage of the estrous cycle, location and age. App Anim Behav Sci, 106:161-166, 2007.
the urine of another cat does not usually cause a cat to over-mark with his or her
own urine. Male cats spend a longer period of time investigating than females.
dnoe umo jeu um so pue 'dnon buuoguaieu e wo steo
In addition to sniffing urine marks, cats may react to the odor of another cat's
urine by displaying a “Flehmen" or gape response. When gaping, the cat's head is
aul paloeei ae sd eyl pue uedo Aeed si yinow ayl 'yoeg paind pue pesie
direct airborne and fluid-borne molecules of scent into the two nasal palatine canals
connect to the vomeronasal organ located within the hard palate. The vomeronasal
organ (also called Jacobsen's organ) contains sensitive olfactory cells that stimu-
late areas of the cat's brain associated with sexual behavior, feeding behavior, and
possibly social behaviors. Although dogs do not demonstrate a classic Flehmen
response, some demonstrate “tongue flicking," which appears to function in the
sbop ayl 'oyeg syi buung 'snse ul aeway e Ag yel sem auun aul t Aenadse
Historically, urine marking has been interpreted as a type of communication
area. However, the “drive off competitors" theory has not been supported with
evidence, as the urine deposits left by male dogs do not appear to repel other
male dogs.2 Similarly, studies of free-living cats have found that spray marks in
the territory of one group of cats did not discourage cats from other groups from
traveling through the area. In fact, most of the tomcats who were studied did not
within their territories in visually conspicuous spots. As stated previously, dogs
and cats of both sexes investigate urine marks of others of their species. Males
spend more time investigating areas where the urine of females in estrus is found,
compared with time spent investigating the urine of non-estrus females. This
suggests that urine marking may be a means of providing information about the
Aoel paieubisep e jo pno Aeis ol sieyo ol jeubis buuem,
Social Behavior and Communication in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 3
Feces Marking
The feces of many carnivore species provide another form of scent marking. Anal
sacs, located on each side of the anus, empty into ducts that open near the anal
orifice and contain secretions from apocrine and sebaceous glands located within
ecation and contribute pheromones to the feces and anal region. Studies have
shown that the anal gland secretions of dogs are highly individual in nature, and
'pue) shoa sAuap! pue xes 'abe inoqe sbop leuno ot uonewoju! aproid Aeu
ess commonly, cats) also occasionally express their anal glands independently of
defecation when they are stressed or frightened. Dogs show an interest in the fecal
droppings of other dogs and will often over-mark another dog's feces with urine
However, it is not known how important feces are for marking territory or identifying
ndividuals. Studies of feces as temitorial markers in cats have had inconsistent find-
ings and it is not clear if cats use fecal marks to communicate in the same way that
they use urine marks.4
Allorubbing in Cats
Cats have several types of specialized skin glands that are important for olfac-
forehead, and sebaceous (caudal) glands along the base of the tail. Another
important group of scent glands, the interdigital glands, are located between
the pads of the cat's feet. The secretions of the enlarged sebaceous glands
located on the face are deposited as scent marks when cats rub on objects at
eye level. This behavior is called “bunting," or cheek rubbing, and is often di-
and even toward other pets, particularly dogs. The targeted person (or dog) or
object is rubbed first by the end of the nose, moving down the cat's cheek to
the corners of the mouth, and finally ending near the eyes (Figure 3.3). When
bunting is intense, the cat's lips draw back and its teeth are exposed, lead-
     e    s s s
often bunt their owners during greeting and following separations, it is possible
marking.5 Allorubbing (rubbing between cats) and sniffing are common in cats
who are housemates or belong to the same group, and appears to function in
social communication. When cats sniff each other, they tend to concentrate on
the head region rather than the flanks and tail, suggesting that the glands of the
head provide information about individual identification. Allorubbing is also usu-
ally more subtle than bunting, as the cats gently touch along the length of their
bodies after a nose-touch greeting.
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, & COMMUNICATION
figure 3.3 Bunting behavior directed toward a dog housemate
Scratching in Cats
Cats scratch rough surfaces to remove the dead outer layers of their claws, which
exposes the sharper claw surface underneath. Scratching is also important as a form
of marking as it simultaneously deposits secretions of the interdigital glands onto a
although most cats seem to prefer to be able to stretch upwards while scratching
Free-living cats select scratching sites that are along wel-traveled paths and routes,
to scratch around areas of the house where they spend most of their time. Popular
marks, however, cats do not show interest in or investigate the scratched sites of
ing reassurance and security, and is probably less important as a means of identifying
an individual or communicating the boundaries of a cat's teritory to other cats.
AUDITORY SIGNALS
While scent marks can convey information over time and after an animal has left
the area, vocal signaling has the advantage of being effective over long distances
sounds and use vocal communication frequently. In both species, vocal signals
are often contextual, meaning that similar sounds may convey different messages
depending upon the situation in which they are used. Common dog vocalizations
include grunts, growls, whines, barks, yelps, and howls, while vocalizations of
and strained intensity calls.
Social Behavior and Communication in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 3
Dog Vocalizations
When most people consider dog vocalizations, they immediately think of the bark.
The domestic dog is unique among canids in the use of the bark. Although wolves
alerting vocalization. Repetitive barking and barking in multiple contexts appears to
be unique to the domestic dog. lt has been suggested that, during domestication,
or the approach of intruders. Others suggest that barking is a type of neotenized
behavior, representing vestiges of puppy and adolescent vocalizations. Dogs bark
in a wide variety of situations, including defense of teritory, when announcing the
tention. Barking is an example of a communicative signal that conveys a warning
or change in situation, but is highly variable and context-specific (Sidebar 2).
BARKING UPTHE RIGHT TREE
Sidebar 2
Dogs bark in a variety of situations - as an alert, when isolated, during
these vocalizations context-specific, but each type of bark has a set of
pue buisuep! jo algedeo aie sleumo peyl solslaloeieyo olsnooe anbiun
responding to. Sophia Yin and colleagues at the University of California at
Davis recorded and analyzed the barks of dogs in three different contexts:
while alerting to the doorbell, when isolated from the owner, and during
buyeg jo ,alAis, umo lleul pey sbop jenpiaipui 'sixaiuoo aalyn le ul Aeld
and were easily identified by their barks. When barks within contexts were
examined using spectrographic analysis, the researchers found several
alerting to a stranger at the door (disturbance barks) used a harsh, low-
pitched bark that did not vary significantly in pitch (i.e. the bark was not
was consistently louder when compared with barks that were used during
play or in response to isolation. When dogs were playing, their barks were
'ssaupnol pue yolld ui Ajuenbal palea pue 'jeuol alow pue yolid ul leyby
This suggested that dogs use a variety of different types of barks during
nature of play behavior. Finally, the barks that dogs used during isolation
also varied in frequency and pitch, but tended to be uttered singly and with
a longer interval between each bark than the clustered barks used during
disturbance or play.
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR,& COMMUNICATION
Because barking is an important form of communication between owners
ol pue syieg jeyi Ag sbop Auep! ol aldoed jo Age ayl 'sbop lleul pue
studies have shown that people who listened to unknown dogs barking were
ssal alem ng (syeg aoueginisip) siebueis pe buyeg sbop Auepi ol alge
uewny Kueodwi alow sdeuad pue dlaamoh shop (umouyun) lenpiu!
barks, regardless of whether they knew the dogs and regardless of their own
level of experience with dogs. Low-pitched barks with short inter-bark intervals
bark intervals were characterized as play barks. Barks that were high-pitched
and more tonal tended to be characterized as either fearful or anxious. These
results are in agreement with identified vocalization characteristics that signa
ueo ainb Apeane aie siaumo bop psow peum oi poddns duaios pual Aau
of - that they understand what their dogs are barking about
Molnar C et al. Can humans discriminate between dogs on the base of the acoustic parameters of barks? Behay
Proc,73:76-83,2006.
Pongracz P et al. Human listeners are able to classify dog barks recorded in different situations.  Camp Psychor,
119:136-144, 2005.
Yin S, McCowan B. Barking in domestic dogs; context specificity and individual identification. Anim Behav,
68:343-355,2004.
howl, grunt, yelp, and growl, and demonstrate enommous variation within each of
these vocalization categories. Although it is considered an infantile vocalization in
most canid species, adult dogs continue to whine when seeking attention, during
when dogs are fearful or in pain. Howling is one of the most frequent wolf vocaliza-
tions but is relatively rare in dogs. It is believed that all dogs are capable of howling,
but many do not use this form of vocal communication. Wolves Lse the howl to seek
contact with other pack members when separated or to assemble pack members
prior to hunting or travel. Dogs usually howl when they are isolated or in response to
an unusual sound in their environment, such as sirens, airplanes flying overhead, or
certain types of music. Although the significance of howling is unknown, some think
that it may be related to the dog's ability to perceive frequencies of sound that are
higher than those perceptible to humans. Puppies and adult dogs grunt when greet
ing others or as a sign of contentment or relaxation. Conversely, yelps convey severe
distress, fear, or pain. Finally, growls usually signal defensive or offensive aggression,
but in a modified form also signify playfulness
Social Behavior and Communication in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 3
Cat Vocalizations
Cats vocalize frequently with their owners, with the classic "meow" being the
most easily recognized utterance. In fact, recent studies of cat vocalizations sug-
gest that the meow of the domestic cat may analogous to the bark in dogs. In
general, cat vocalizations can be categorized into general groups based upon
how the sound is produced. Perhaps the most popular and unusual of the cat's
emitted while the cat's mouth is completely closed. Kittens first purr when they
are only a few days old, and adults continue to purr throughout life. The purr is
also unusual in that it is one of the few vocalizations that is produced during both
inhalations and exhalations, rather than only during exhalations, as in most forms
of vocalization. Purring is produced in the cat's throat through alternating activa-
dan e sasnn sul wbeudep au pue sasnw geabuel oisuun aun jo uon
eui eouangun sut si l 'sob aul ui anssaid e jo asealan pue dn-png e
produces the purr sound. Together, the air movement and muscle vibrations of
the chest create the vibrating sensation that can be felt while the cat is purring.
 snu a  am nd su susn o a  u nd s
being groomed by their mother. Adult cats typically purr when they are in contact
they are rolling and rubbing. Wwhile all of these situations are decidedly pleasurable
ill or even in pain. In most cases, purring is only observed when cats are in the
presence of a human or a known cat, so purring may function purely as a form of
social communication. Another type of murmur pattern is the trill, also called the
 n s a  s   uh o s  
their cat's “greeting sound." This vocalization is also used in other amicable social
encounters, such as to establish contact, when playing, or when asking for food.
The volume of this murmur is often very low, and is also heard when a mother cat
returns to her litter after a period of absence
Vowel sounds are made with the mouth open and gradually closing. The most
common vowel sound is the characteristic cat "meow." Interestingly, the majority
of pet cats use the meow almost exclusively when interacting with humans but do
not typically use it when interacting with other cats. Cats' meows are highly vari-
able and context-specific, but all signify some type of amiable social encounter
when the cat wishes to establish contact or to request interaction, play, or food.
Individual cats are known to develop an entire set of meows for specific situations
when interacting with their human caretakers (Sidebar 3). Another less frequently
used vowel sound is the female mating call, which is typically uttered during
proestrus and estrus, when the female is attempting to attract a mate
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, & COMMUNICATION
Sidebar 3
THE CAT'S MEOW
Of the various types of sounds that cats utter, the "meow" is unique in that it
nuuoo peo-ol-eo jo aneef e pou sl pue suewny pemol Auewd paoap ss
nication. In fact, the "meow" appears to be an acoustic signal that has been
uniquely modified during the cat's domestication. Comparisons of the acoustic
characteristics of the meows uttered by domestic cats and those produced
by the African wildcat have shown that those produced by domestic cats are
that had been recorded during several contexts. The listeners knew neither the
species of cat (domestic or wild) nor the situation (food soliciting, agonistic, or
to be significantly more pleasant and less urgent than the calls of the wildcats.
When the domestic cat meows were evaluated acoustically, they were found to
than the vocalizations of the wildcat.
Interestingly, other studies have shown that domestic cats readily learn to
alter both the frequency of their meows and the duration of time that they
vocalize in response to interactions with their owners. It is quite possible
that selection for cat vocalizations that were more pleasant and "infantilized"
during cat-human interactions.
ep aay ui sleo Ag palen soaw ol buuea uaisse dl payse alem sheueisl
absence of other cues such as the cat's body posture and environmental refer-
ences, most human subjects were unable to derive specific information from the
various meows. Most of the subjects readily distinguished between agonistic
(conflict) and affiliative meows, but could not correctly assign specific contexts
within these broad categories. For example, a subject might know that a cat
was meowing in a friendly way but could not distinguish between when she was
soliciting food versus when she was seeking attention.
These results suggest that cats use a variety of meow types in a general
nonspecific way to attract the attention of their caretakers. It follows that ad-
Alenbe ale lesal Aalloe pue uoeuauo 'sanisod Apog se yons sano euo
Social Behavior and Communication in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 3
important for completing the communication, and for successfully getting the
cat's message across.
Nicastro N, Owren MJ. Classification of domestic cat (Felis catus) vocalizations by naive and experienced human
listeners.  Compar Psych, 117:44-52, 2003.
Nicastro N. Perceptual and acoustic evidence for species-level differences in meow vocalizations by domestic cats
(Felis catus) and African wil dcats (Felis sivestris tybica). : Compar Psych, 118:287-296, 2004.
Strained intensity sounds are emitted with the mouth held open for the duration
of the sound. These include the feline growl, hiss, and pain shriek. All of these
vocalizations are used during periods of intense emotional stress. Growls are
buunp pesn aie pue yojd ui mol aie Aay peyl ui sbop Ag epew esoyl ol jeuis
aggressive encounters (usually prior to the start of an actual fight). Conversely,
cats hiss when they are fearful and defensive. The spit is considered to be a more
intense fomm of the hiss, and is used to deter predators or avert threats. Finally,
the male cat's mating call is usually categorized as a strained intensity sound. It is
uttered during mating or when competing for estrus females.
VISUAL SIGNALS
Dogs and cats use complex and varied visual signals to communicate with other
individuals of their species and with humans. The most important forms of visual
evaluating the visual signals of a dog or cat, particular aspects of body posture
that should be noticed include the relative placement of the head and the body's
topline, placement of the feet, carriage of the tail, and the presence or absence
of piloerection. In all cases, the context within which the visual signals are given
and the identity of the receiver of the signals (i.e. a known versus unknown dog;
the owner versus an unknown person) must be considered when interpreting
Msual signals.
Aa pesn ane jeui sieubis jensn eun ui seewis jeeueh awos ane eeu
dogs and cats, but each species uses body postures and facial expressions
that are clearly unique to that species. Once again, we can look to the dif-
predator. Within a pack, wolves rely upon clear communication to facilitate
cooperation during hunts and when feeding young, defending territory, and
protecting the pack. Communication within the social group is also important
Because of the complex social lives of wolves, their ability to communicate
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, & COMMUNICATION
visually with one another is highly developed and complex. The domestic dog
has inherited these complex communication patterns and displays similar vi-
seuhis gens sasn bop Aep-luesaid aul seul sl aouaep lotew y 'seubis gens
with others of his own species and, in some cases, with companion cats living
in the same household (see Chapter 1, pp. 8-12).
Conversely, the cat evolved from a solitary species, the African wildcat, an
animal that lives and hunts alone. During the wildcat's history, there was no
his wild ancestor, selective pressure for sociability occurred very recently in the
cial cats who were capable of living peaceably in groups around a central food
source. The majority of the cat's history was as a solitary individual who had less
need to develop complex communication signals. As a result, many of the cat's
communication signals are interpreted as signals designed to minimize contact
with other adult cats and to prevent aggressive encounters with strangers. Wwhile
domestication has resulted in modifications of these signals, many of the cat's
inherited visual signals are used either to diffuse a potential fight or to signal de-
fensive or offensive aggression.
Regardless of these differences, visual signals for both dogs and cats can
be classified into two broad categories - distance-reducing signals and
distance-increasing signals. Distance-reducing signals include those that
are used between members of social groups during amiable greetings, play.
mutual grooming, and when one animal is showing appeasement or submis-
defensive threats and fear signals
Distance-Reducing Signals - Greeting
Most people who live with dogs and cats easily recognize their pet's friendly greet-
ing behaviors. Both dogs and cats use signals that communicate deference or
appeasement when greeting another animal or human with whom they wish to
interact. A dog who is friendly and confident when greeting has a slightly lowered
either forward or shifted slightly down and back. The mouth is usually held open in
-mous yeet aul jo iie pue Aeuozuoy yog paoan sdy au ym ,uuh buaaie, e
ing. A confident dog will greet familiar humans and dogs with friendly eye contact or
Apueue (t leqepis) ,aoueuuop, jo ubis e pou si sbop u oeuoo ara alolos el
and non-threatening eye contact is often observed between dogs and between
ssal si bop ayl Il :buwooib jeloos pue Aeid 'buneaib buunp suewny pue sbop
Social Behavior and Communication in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 3
figure 3.4 Friendly Rottweiler showing conficdent greeting
figure 3.5 Friendly Labrador Retriever showing appeasing 
signals
greeting signals
change slightly to signal appeasement. The tail is lowered but stil wagging, ears are
down and shifted backwards, and the dog's body posture is lowered (Figure 3.5).
uau, buisadde ue) med juoy e  pue yoeg hubiem liau s Aew shop awos
p ym inys Aeid ae sare ey pue (oy anbuoi) yoll Aew bop aul (aimsae uog
"squinting" appearance. Dogs who are very excited during greeting and who are
-esuowap bop y leaie Aaun se spue puy jieun abbim, ueo aoualejap bumous
ing overt appeasement during greeting will avoid eye contact altogether, but will still
 approach with her head and tail down. The tail is wagging, and the dog may even
(nb, se ansuoosjw sheumo Auew jeun yool e) aoueleadde ,buaoib, e aeu
UNDERSTANDING CANINE EYE CONTACT
Sidebar 4
dogs use and is also a good example of a signal that must always be inter-
one another, some degree of eye contact is initiated. The more confident dog
typically initiates eye contact and will maintain contact for a longer period.
ll siul 'oeuoo ae Apueuy pu aoey Aeld yinow-uado ue Ag pajuedwoooe
lead to either play or continued sniffing and friendly interaction.
Conversely, a direct and unwavering stare, when accompanied by a stiff
body posture and raised head and tail, is interpreted as an offensive threat.
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, & COMMUNICATION
growling. Continued escalation without an aversion of gaze by one of the dogs
can lead to overt aggression and to a fight.
aleis poap pue pabuojoid e laidlelui Aensn sbod 'suewny pue sbop
auue awes aul ul oeal soop psow pue peaiul paao ue se uosiad e wo
Moys awos loeuoo ae jo woy siyl ol bop leyoue ym pinom Aayl pey
deference and appeasing behaviors, while other respond aggressively with
relationship with their human caretakers regularly use and accept friendly
eye contact to communicate. Examples include dogs who are soliciting
attention, playing, or begg ing for food. There is also recent evidence that
-ule leyl poap dl azeo uewny buaidsalui Aoaoo jo algedeo aie sboo
tion to an object of interest in the environment and that dogs understand
eye contact as a form of communication signaling attentional state. Simi-
[eloos algeis e aaey pue leylebol aa oym sbop jo sdnoie lo slled Auel
group show friendly and non-threatening eye contact to each other when
ayl loalp ol ezeo asn pue 'aylo yoee buwooib pue 'buiAeld buaaie
attention of others in their group. In peaceful social groups, dogs rarely use
only seen during disputes over a desired resource such as a treasured toy,
Fukuzawa M, Mills DS, Cooper JJ. More than just a word: Non-semantic command variables affect obedience in
the domestic dog (Canis famiiaris). Appl Anim Behav Sci, 91:129-141, 2005.
Miklosi A, Soproni K, Topal J, Csanyi v. Comprehension of human communicative signs in pet dogs (Canis famiiaris)
/ Compar Psychol, 115:122-126, 2001.
of their owners. / Compar Psychor, 120:169-175, 2006.
All of these postures are nomal distance-reducing signals that convey an interest in
interacting and greeting and communicate a non-threatening intent
Non-threatening greeting behaviors between two dogs includes similar body
uoibe (jeunbu uob jo epis eul Ag pemollo, eoel eul jo buus snid seinsod
(Figure 3.6 and Figure 3.7). The dogs' body postures are relaxed, their ears
are relaxed or back, their mouths are closed and lips are pulled back, their
eyes or either slightly squinted or open wide by avoiding direct stares and
their tails are gently wagging. Although one dog may be more confident than
ayl ui jeayi e eubis pou seop slyt '(hal eyl uo bop eyl 'aseo slyi u leyio eyl
Social Behavior and Communication in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 3
absence of other signs. After sniffing faces and then groin regions, the
greeting either ends peacefully or one dog invites the other to play.
Cats also show characteristic visual signals when greeting their owners or
behaviors in the cat as "affiliative" postures. When a cat is approaching a human
caretaker or a known and friendly member of her social group to greet, the tail
is held vertically and the body posture is raised slightly by extending the back
bal o puey aul yonoi isy lm teo aun 'uosied e buneaih uaun (a'g ainbi) sba
very softly with her nose, followed by head rubbing. Many cats then rub along
the person's legs from head to tail. Wwhen meeting another cat, the nose-touch
occurs nose-to-nose and is followed either by sniffing of the face and mild rub-
bing, sitting next to each other to groom, or by simply walking away (Figure 3.9)
figure 3.7 Continuing to greet; side presentation and sniffing
the first time; face sniffing
figure 3.8 Greeting signals in a friendly cat
figure 3.9 Two familiar cats greeting (*nose touch")
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, & COMMUNICATION
figure 3.10 Cat roling to solicit petting
Some cats also roll onto their backs after greeting their owners. This is a species
specific behavior that is normally demonstrated by female cats immediately after
oolos e io Aeid oi uoeau ue se peedoidden eq oi sheadde pue bueu
for petting directed toward people but not to cats (Figure 3.10).
 pueodwi ue paan seo pue sop jo sainsod buaaie aul jo uosuedwoo a
apuoo Aaue jou s oum bop e Keooeds seo pue sbop ueameq aouael
si bueaib jo ed slyt 'ioey u jeaie ol saisep ls jueweseadde bumous si pue
typical of many companion dogs). Conversely, the cat does not express such a
wide range in types of greeting postures. A cat will generally either greet in friendly
and confident manner, as shown, or will not approach at all (i.e. will demonstrate
fear or aggression). Rolling in cats is considered to be a leamed behavior that solic
its interaction and petting, and should not be confused with signs of appeasement
or submission. Because cats do not engage in the complex dominant/submissive 
interactions or social relationships that are described in dogs, the greeting behavior
of cats does not show the large degrees of variation that are observed in dogs. A
greeting cat who becomes less confident simply will not greet, whereas a dog who
is more deferential will greet just as will a dog who is more confident.
Distance-Reducing Signals - Play Solicitation
Puppies and kittens all play frequently, but play is also an important part of the
and with other dogs, provided they are well-socialized. Similarly, cats who live
o 'sn yieu ui suwny eun ym bueid sofue ose Aue pue 'sawih jo Aee
dogs and cats have a set of highly ritualized behavioral cues that communicate to
another individual the intention of play. However, once again, these signals appear
e Aeid loy seubis jeal 'teo au ui ueu bop aul ui padoap Aybiy ao ag o
Social Behavior and Communication in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 3
important because many of the behaviors that occur during play mimic those
 typically used during aggressive encounters and predation. Therefore, a signal
 that communicates *we are playing now - this is not real" is important to prevent 
misinterpretations and fights.
Perhaps the most well-recognized play posture in dogs is the play bow. This
aul Aeid oi uosied e lo bop jeuoue alaui shop ueum pereldsip si aimsod Apog
dog lowers his forequarters slightly while leaving the back legs extended and
the rump raised (Figure 3.11). when inviting another dog to play, a sideways ap-
buuneau-uou se peeidieui sl yooidde jo ed sui se pesn uao s! yoeoid
The inviting dog may raise a front paw in an intention movement and may paw 
at the face of the other dog (or at the leg of the human playmate). The mouth is
usually open wide, the lips are retracted back horizontally, and the tongue is loll-
ing out. The ears are forward and, if the dog is confident, he will offer friendly eye
contact. Indeed, many dogs attempt to look directly into their owner's eyes when
offering a play bow, perhaps as an attention-seeking gesture (Figure 3.12). If the
slight forward movement and paw does not have the desired result, the dog may
then progress to a full play bow. This is often followed by either a pounce forward
figure 3.12 Play bow in dog showing direct eye
figure 3.11 Canine play bow as an invitation for play
contact to owner
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR,& COMMUNICATION
or running away in an invitation to chase. Dogs (and humans) interpret a play bow
as an invitation to play and will often respond with a similar bow, or will immedi-
ately begin a chase to instigate a "catch-me" game. Both puppies and adult dogs
use play solicitation postures to signal friendly intentions. Interestingly, recent
studies of how dogs and their caretakers interact have found that one of the most
common body postures that humans use to entice their dogs to play is a simula-
Cats demonstrate several types of play. The two most common are object play
and social play. Kittens also show exploratory play, which involves investigating,
climbing, and jumping on novel items within the environment. Exploratory play in
involve another cat or human caretaker, while social play always involves interac-
are often batted around and pounced upon, simulating the cat's normal predatory
sequence. Similarly, hanging toys that move erratically are attractive to many cats.
When soliciting play with their owner or other cats,however, cats (like dogs) use
 than to fight. Kittens (and, less frequently, adult cats) will partially open the mouth
(the cat version of the play face) at the start of interactions. This is oten followed
by the "belly-up" position, with the kitten or cat lying with the belly exposed and
all four feet in the air. The cat paws with the front feet toward the target play
partner, keeping the claws retracted (Figure 3.13). Belly-up is the most common
play solicitation posture that cats ofer to their human owners. A second posture
that cats frequently demonstrate with other cats and occasionally with humans
is the "side step." This posture is characterized by a lateral body position with a
slightly arched back and a slightly raised tail. The cat then either approaches from
the side or hops sideways in an invitation to play. This posture is most commonly
seen when a cat is inviting another cat for a chase game.
figure 3.13 Feline invitation to play
Social Behavior and Communication in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 3
Distance-Increasing Signals - Offensive Threat
A dog who is alert and attending to a stimulus will direct his ears forward and
up, pointed in the direction of the stimulus. f the dog remains confident, the ears
remain forward and up and the eyes are directed to the stimuls. Ofensive threat
refers to a confident dog who is displaying threat signals when in control of a val-
Led resource or when responding to a challenge to a defended temitory or social
status. The dog will stand tall on his toes, raise his head, lean forward, and elevate
his tail. As an interaction becomes more agonistic, piloerection will develop along
the dog's shoulders and back, and facial expression will change. The dog's lips will 
be retracted vertically into a snarl, sometimes called a "C" lip position, and the dog
ae jea, puy pue pemoy uea oi snuuoo bop aul (tl's anb) Adeep pmoin A
 broadly spread. The tail is often wagging stiffly (flagging) at high frequency (Sidebar
 5). If the offensive threat display is directed toward another dog, the threatening 
aul l bop puooes au jo sepnoys ayl leo smedaoy sly eoed on pdwee Aew bop
second dog shows deference (reduced body posture, avoiding eye contact), the
eye contact or growls, a fight may ensue. Wwhen a dog showing offensive threat is
guarding a valued resource such as a bone, toy, or temitory, the dog wil*freeze'
bop eul se nooo Aensn m ehg eassabbe ue 'yooidde ol senuuoo lepnu
defends against the other's access to the resource.
Similar to the dog, a cat who is confident and on the offensive adopts a
offensive threat have piloerection over the back, and will extend their hind
legs to stand at full height. The ears will be drawn partially back and diverted
figure 3.14 Offensive threat posture in a dog
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, & COMMUNICATION
Sidebar 5
TALES OFTHETAIL: WHAT WAGGING TELLS US
e jo ubis jesiaalun ayl eg ol palepisuoo uaho s! jlei buibbem e ybnoyiiy
friendly dog, in reality dogs wag their tails in a variety of circumstances and
Alasool pue paxelal e ylm jeaie shop wjeo pue Apueje (iesnoe) uoeinws
also have an exuberantly wagging tail, often described as the "entire rump-
moving" tail wag. By comparison, an anxious dog will lower her tail and wag
it comparatively slowly as she greets. In all of these situations, a wagging tail
tells us that we are indeed meeting a friendly dog.
ley buiploy s! oym bop y Aois juelep e llel osje ueo lel aul lasamoh
-uoo Ajensn jou sl Aouenbalj ybiy te ll sbem ays se jis pue ybjy AieA jiel
veying friendly intentions. This posture can signal offensive threat and the
possibility of aggression. This is most commonly seen when two unfamiliar
dogs are greeting or when a dog is defending territory. The best approach
bop alllue ayl te yool sAemje ol sl bem el e jo bulueaw ayl buissasse ol
Although the tail can tell us a lot, it is never the entire story. The dog's body
sod sjlel aul ylm buole poeuoo aAe jo asn pue uoissaidxa eioel 'ainisod
dog's emotional state. Watch the entire dog, not just the tail!
aul yo sidnd ayi pue 'tueuoddo sly ie Aoap sezeb peo ayl 'apis eyl ol
eyes are constricted. The tail is held down and pointing toward the ground
(not tucked), and the tip of the tail may be flagging slowly (Figure 3.15). A cat
resident cat progresses to offensive threat. In many cases, posturing alone
exception of territory, cats are less likely than dogs to guard resources such
as toys, food bowls, resting places, or access to their owners. This differ-
more solitary history (i.e. they have less of a need to form strong and enduring
attachments to others in a social group) and to the related difference in eating
patterns (cats evolved as solitary hunters who consumed small prey that was
quickly consumed, thereby having little need to protect or guard a food cache;
see feeding behavior, pp. 71-72).
Social Behavior and Communication in Dogs and Cats
Chapter3
figure 3.15 Offensive threat posture in a cat
Distance-Increasing Signals - Fear
Animals who are fearful are said to display distance-increasing signals because
their primary motivation is to avoid or escape from the fearful stimulus. If escape is
prevented through the use of a cage, leash, or by cornering the animal, defensive
aggression may occur. However, not all dogs and cats who are fearful will become
aggressive if they are unable to escape. Some react to extreme fear and the lack
of an escape route by freezing in place. Regardless, it is important to distinguish
between body postures that signify fear and body postures that indicate that the
dog or cat is becoming defensively aggressive. Similarly, it is of utmost importance
in dogs to distinguish between signals that convey appeasement and those that
convey fear. (Sidebar 6)
IS IT APPEASEMENT, SUbMISSION, OR FEAR?
Sidebar 6
When assessing communication signals in dogs, it is crucial to distinguish
ol sauir bop (neaj e peul s! leaj pue sioiaeyeg buiseedde ueamleg aoueie
asneo aul wo Aeme aaow laule lla os pue alaissod lle pe f uooelelul ploae
(flight), become immobile (freeze), or become defensively aggressive (fight),
In direct contrast, appeasement behaviors are social behaviors that a dog
ing that she is not a threat. Appeasement behaviors are typically seen when a
-ue sayoeoidde bop jelluelejep e ueym lo suewny lo sbop leyio sieaib bop
cates the intent for peaceable interaction and conflict avoidance. Submission
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, & COMMUNICATION
is said to occur when an actual conflict does occur and the appeasing dog
averts aggression through submissive postures.
Because some of the visual signals seen with fear and appeasement are the
se 'buimoys sl bop e jeyl sano jensiA ayl jo e lepisuoo ol jueuodwl s! l 'awes
well the stimulus to which the dog is reacting and the context of the behavior.
m neal sl oym bop e laaamoh 'loeuoo aAe ploae Alensn pue 'umop pue
e 'safe (papunol) uedo aplm 'slidnd paep sey 'joelalui ol budwele eg pou
A dog who is showing appeasing behaviors will approach with a lowered body
e ll 'uub bueaib e pue 'saAe Auinbs 'jei buibbem pue palawol e 'anisod
conflict has occurred and the dog shows submission, he will freeze in place
or lie down and expose his inguinal area, keeping his face averted. (A fearful
ayew oi Aie llm pue Alag siy asodxa lou lm ,sezeeil. pue umop sall oum bop
himself look as small as possible.)
syl sl 'uooelalui aul jo xauoo ayl lepisuoo see dl pueodwi sl l! 'se
a situation in which you would expect this dog to be friendly and social, or is
o sueodwi Aieloadse sl siul zleaf asneo pybiw jeyl uoenls e sdeyied 1!
animal professionals who are required to handle dogs for medical or behavior
reasons. The outcome of attempting to restrain a fearful dog can be decidedly
different from the outcome of attempting to restrain a submitting dog - it is
important to be able to recognize the difference!
The general signs of fear in dogs include a lowered body posture, tucked tail, wide
ooaeoid pue 'sdy peoee ym ynou pesoo 'sdnd paep 'see pepuno pue
(Figure 3.16). Although the dog's ears may be directed forward when the dog initially
notices the stimuls, fearful dogs usually keep their ears pivoted back and down.
the hips, rather than as a continuous line along the entire length of the back, as is
his body posture is often directed backwards rather than forwards and he may
make an effort to escape or willhide behind his owner. Dogs who are nervous
and conflicted - in that they would like to approach but are fearful - often emit a
characteristic “woof" sound in alarm, followed by rapid eye movements sideways
as they search for an escape route. A dog who is non-reactive (i.e. will not become
aggressive) and extremely fearful will often lie down, with the head lowered and
ing or lip licking. Conversely, a dog who is more reactive and perceives himself to be
cornered and unable to escape may become defensively aggressive (see below)
Social Behavior and Communication in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 3
figure 3.16 Fearful dog
figure 3.17 Fearful cat
Similar to dogs, cats who are fearful reduce their body size. If the cat is in
a cage, she will crouch towards the back, lower her head, and tuck her front
either directed toward the frightening stimulus or pivoted backwards. Cats
cautiously as pinned ears indicate that the cat may become defensively
an observation of fear is quite fleeting, because most fearful cats choose to
escape. A common difference between dogs and cats demonstrating fear is
that dogs are more likely to feel conflicted if the fear-inducing stimulus is a
contact and to interact than are cats.
Distance-Increasing Signals - Defensive Threat
Dogs and cats exhibit defensive threat postures when they are fearful and desire
escape, but perceive that there is no escape route available. A dog showing de-
fensive threat will pin his ears back, but the muzzle is now retracted in a snarl and
the dog is gazing toward the stimulus. Some dogs show a characteristic "whale
eye" during this type of threat posture, with the head averted slightly as the dog still
attempts to watch the stimulus that is causing fear. This posture causes the white
of the eye to become easily visible. Some describe the fearful aggressive dog 's
body posture as depicting a state of ambivalence, since the dog is both insecure
and defensive. In other words, the dog shows the lowered body posture of fear, but
(a l'g anbiy) bop jo uosed buuaaul eul e deus Aqissod pue peus lm ose
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, & COMMUNICATION
figure 3.18 Defensive aggressive bocy posture in a dog
figure 3.19 Defensive aggressive body posture in a cat
Similar to dogs, cats on the defensive send somewhat conflicting signals. While
a fearful cat reduces his body size, a defensive cat will often present laterally
sions belie this and reflect the cat's true state of mind. A defensive cat's ears are
flattened down and back, the whiskers are drawn back, the corners of the mouth
are pulled back to bare the teeth, and the pupils of the eyes are dilated. The tail
 is either erect or is concave with the tip pointed down. If the cat is hiding or is
pauuid sjen aun inq umous pou s! Aeldsip jeleiel aun (eben e ui se yons) peujuon
ears, hiss, and open mouth will signify as change from passive fear to defensive
aggression (Figure 3.19). During fights between cats, the defensive cat will flip
over onto his back and, keeping his ears pinned back, will use his back legs and
claws to attack the more confident aggressor.
PREDATORY AND FEEDING BEHAVIORS
OF DOGS AND CATS
Dogs and cats are both members of the order Carnivora which, as the name
the cat is considered to be a "true" or obligate carnivore, the dog is more omnivo-
rous, capable of consuming and deriving nutrition from a variety of animal and
Social Behavior and Communication in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 3
plant foods. In addition, the dog evolved from a species that hunted cooperatively
in groups, using coordinated efforts to prey upon large mammals. In contrast, the
cat evolved from a solitary wildcat that hunted small mammals such as mice and
voles. Domestication has led to significant changes in the daily eating patterns
feeding behaviors of their wild ancestors.
Predation Sequence and Feeding Behavior of Dogs
oo buuny Ag Addns pooy sl! yo yonw sueigo 'om ayt 'aaeei pm s bop eul
operatively with other wolves in its social group. Cooperative hunting behaviors
allow the wolf to prey on large mammals that would otherwise be unavailable to a
wolf hunting alone. As a result, most wolf subspecies tend to be intermittent eat-
ers, gorging themselves immediately affer a kill and then not eating again for an
of a kill leads to the rapid consumption of food and the social facilitation of eat-
that is consumed when an animal is eating with in the presence of conspecifics.
Wolves and other wild canids also exhibit food-hoarding behaviors. Small prey or
the remainder of a killis buried when food is plentiful and later dug up and eaten
when food is not readily available. Finally, most wild canids, including wolves, will
adaptations that occurred during the early stages of domestication as wolves
exploited human waste sites (see Chapter 1, pp. 5-8).
Predatory Behavior: Like other behavior patterns, predatory behavior has been
modified in the domestic dog through domestication and selective breeding.
In most breeds, the intensity of the predatory response has also been signifi
breeds excel at the detection of prey, but the stalk, chase, and bite portion of
predation has been truncated from the sequence. In contrast, the stalking and
oueq Aopaid jo juewbes luoue sluesadan speag bupreu jo bunseu
that has been modified through selective breeding. Terrier breeds have a strong
does include the final killing bite (but not the dissecting or consuming bite). In all
dogs predatory behavior is not directly associated with hunger, but rather with the
presence and movement of prey.
Dogs who chase small animals, cars, children, or bicyclists may be demonstrat-
is silently stalking the target, and continues to chase and attempt to attack and bite
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, & COMMUNICATION
the target regardless of location, this suggests predation. Conversely, many dogs
demonstrate tenitorial aggression by chasing runners, bicyclists, and cars until
ae pue du sew sbop asau aun Moel pausigeisa sbop aul ised are sau
bite, this signifies teritorial aggression, not predatory behavior (see Chapter 11,
pp. 293-295 for a complete discussion of temitorial aggression). while in both
cases the aggression can be severe, a dog who shows stalking behavior with the
Aeadse 'snoeuep aow ney Aeueod sl Aaid oui ebret eun buuun jo je
if this behavior is directed towards children or small pets.
Feeding Behavior: Similar to their wild cousins, many dogs tend to eat rapidly
Although there is limited evidence for this, it has been suggested that certain
breeds of dog are more likely to consume their food rapidly when compared
os 'sawoy bop-aldnw ul i jo sunowe ahel moms lo ayoyo oi bop e
facilitation can influence rate of eating and may encourage food bowl-guarding
behaviors in some individuals. Feeding dogs separately to remove the competi-
tive aspect of mealtime often normalizes the rate of eating and reduces tension.
Training dogs to eat only from their own bowls and teaching good mealtime
manners can also be used to prevent food competition problems from develop-
ing (see Chapter 11, pp. 290-293).
Vestiges of the wolf's food-hoarding behaviors are also seen in domestic dogs.
It is not uncommon for dogs to bury bones in yards or, much to the owner's cha-
grin, to hide coveted food items in furniture or under beds. However, unlike their
wild ancestors, many domestic dogs forget about these hidden caches and rarely
return to dig them up. Related activities that are common to dogs (but found to
be undesirable by most owners) are scavenging and coprophagy (stool-eating).
these behaviors are considered normal, they present a health and sanitation risk,
and should be prevented. Keeping the yard picked up, using supervision, and
teaching dogs a reliable “leave it' command are the best approaches to control-
ling scavenging and stool-eating behaviors in dogs (see Chapter 9, pp. 218-219
for a complete discussion of teaching “leave it").
Predation Sequence and Feeding Behavior of Cats
It is common to think of the domestic cat as a descendant of the wild felids that
prey on large grazing animals. However, owners must remember that the primary
ancestor of the cat is the small African wildcat, Felis fibyca. This desert-dwelling
cat's primary prey is small rodents about the size of field mice. Therefore, the
immediate ancestor of the cat is not an intermittent feeder like the larger wildcats
but rather is an animal that feeds frequently throughout the day by hunting many
small rodents. Like the majority of wild felids, the African wildcat is a solitary ani-
mal, living and hunting alone for much of its life and interacting with others of its
Social Behavior and Communication in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 3
species only during mating season. This solitary nature has resulted in an animal
that eats slowly and is generally uninhibited by the presence of other animals.
Predatory Behavior: Unlike dogs, predatory behaviors of cats have remained
essentially unchanged during domestication. This may reflect the shorter period
of time since domestication as well as the fact that many cats continue to live
    s  ss   s o s ono s
selective pressure for predation. Wwhen hunting, cats locate prey either while
moving slowly through a hunting area or while sitting quietly and waiting. They
initially detect prey in their surroundings using primarily acoustic cues (sound).
sounds (such as those made by a mouse or mole) and to locate the source of
sounds. In addition to being able to hear the high-pitched vocalizations of mice,
the source of the sound or movement. The cat's head is stretched forward and
the ears are erect and pointing toward the area of interest. The entire body is
pressed flat to the ground with forepaws drawn back beneath the shoulders. The
cat remains frozen in this position until the prey animal appears. Most cats show
mounting tension at the sight of prey by shifting their weight back and forth, flag-
ging the end of the tail, and paddling the back feet. The cat then pounces on
the prey. Mice are usually killed with a bite to the nape of the neck, while smaller
'smed aun ylm buiounod Aq pally ane (spug Aqeq lo sioesui ebiel se yons) Aaid
After the prey has been killed, most cats do not immediately consume the
killed animal but rather continue to toy with their prey by batting it around. This
Ag pesneo Aaoe uewaoeidsip e eg oi lbnoyt sl aid ym eid, ol Aouapuel
predatory behaviors are a common form of object play in most cats.) After this
manipulation, many cats carry their prey to a secluded area to eat. However, not
all hunting cats actually end up consuming their prey. Cats who are well-fed will
cats do not typically spend as much time hunting as do free-living cats, predatory
portunity, well-fed cats continue to hunt but consume their prey less consistently.
to their owners, often depositing it in the house or at their caretaker's feet (a be-
Feeding Behavior: Most domestic cats consume their food slowly and do
not respond to other cats by increasing either rate of eating or the amount of
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, & COMMUNICATION
the same bowls either together or at different times of the day. When problems
do occur, they are often very subtle, with one or more cats intimidating a less
assertive cat and not allowing access to the food bowl. For this reason, mul-
in multiple-cat homes. If cats are fed free-choice, most will nibble at the food
auo pe pooy jo junowe ebiel e bujwnsuoo ol pesoddo se Xep eyl inoybnoiyl
time. Several studies of eating behavior in cats have shown that if food is avail
able free-choice, most cats eat frequently and randomly throughout a 24-hour
period.8. 9 However, meal feeding is often preferred by owners because it
represents a time of pleasurable interactions with their cats, characterized by
daily and familiar feeding routines of communication, petting, and handling. In
SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS OF DOGS
It is useful to consider that many dogs (like humans) are members of several
different social groups. The first, and probably most important to owners, is
comprised of the relationships that dogs have with their human caretakers.
These relationships may include a single human owner or a large group of indi-
shop Auew 'uoppe ul 'juaedpueb e ol jeppol e woy ebe ui bubuen 'senpy
dnob geioos (uepodwi Aenbe pue) puooes e esudwoo ployesnoy jieyl ui sbop
Finally, just as human relationships are varied and complex, so too are those of
our dogs. The importance of considering the context within which interactions
occur cannot be overstated. Much of what dogs are concerned with involves
access to and possession of valued resources. Such resources include food
bowls, toys, favorite resting places, access to doorways and the outdoors, and
attention from owners. An individual dog's reaction to the removal of resources
or to being prevented from attaining a resource is influenced by how much the
dog values that particular resource, the dog's relationship to the dog or person
-ebai saouanadxe bunueal ssed s, bop aul pue 'bunadwoo ae Aaul woym ym
ing appeasement and threat behaviors.
When describing canine social behavior, the terms dominance and subordli
nance are sometimes appropriate when describing an interaction between two
individuals in which one dog gains or retains control of a desired resource and
the second dog demonstrates either deference (appeasement behaviors) to
avcid a conflict or submissive behaviors in response to an aggressive threat.
However, it is less clear that the terms dominant and submissive should be used
to describe individuais (Sidebar 7). For example, Figure 3.20 and Figure 3.21
illustrate these two scenarios. In Figure 3.20, the dog on the right is in posses-
sion of a favorite chew toy. The visual signals that he shows include freezing
Social Behavior and Communication in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 3
THE DOMINANCE MODEL: WHAT WORKS AND
Sidebar 7
WHAT DOESN'T
The concept of dominance was first developed in the 1950s as a theory to de-
which dominant animals retained control over all resources and actively defended
to describe the social behavior of the wolf, and then extrapolated (with little evi-
dence) to the social behavior of the dog.
actively competes with another for access to or control over a desired resource
demonstrating dominant behavior or showing dominant signals, and the dog who
relinquishes the resource or declines to compete for it is showing appeasement or
subordinate behavior (signals). These interactions are typically resolved through the
use of ritualized and highly stereotypic communication patterns that rarely involve
individuals in a specific situation, the dominance model can be appropriate as a
"'short-cut" method of describing the results of that interaction.
Now, some problems: Dominance (and its counterpart, submission) does not
pesn Apepinbsiuu uao s! ll yenouie) sawead wel no Aeuosiad s,bop e aquosap
in this way especially in the popular press). Nor is dominant behavior synonymous
personality trait. A dog cannot be "dominant" in isolation because dominant signals
While there are some dogs who seem to "care" about resources more than others
and who display more offensive threat signals than deference signals, it is more
accurate to describe such a dog as "behaving dominantly" rather than as a "domi-
nant dog." Second, a portrayal of dominance as aggression implies that conflicts
eun buunisod peziienu Aubjy eun 'uoissaibbe pue buub! jo alqedeo ane shop le
dogs use to resolve conflicts typically function to prevent aggression, not cause it.
fensive (dominant) threat
Steinker A. Terminology think tank: Social dominance theory as it relates to dogs. / Vet Behav, 2:137-140, 2007.
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, & COMMUNICATION
figure 3.20 Dog showing appeasement signals to ancther dog in possessicn of a
valued resource (bone)
figure 3.21 Dog showing offensive threat posture when in possession of a
He keeps his head positioned above the bone and one paw on top of the bone.
The approaching dog reacts to these signals with appeasement. He looks away
(avoids eye contact), lowers his body posture slightly, and turns away from his
housemate and his bone. The appeasing dog's ears are rotated partially back
but not pinned. His lips are pulled back and his mouth is almost closed, and 
sly jeul ebessaw aul pues sjeubis buiseadde esaul buioll-anbuol eq kew ay
intent is to avoid conflict (threat aversion) and that he will not challenge the other
dog for possession of the bone. The interaction ends peacefully.
In Figure 3.21, the dog in possession of the bone shows escalated guarding
behavior as an offensive threat. He is standing over the toy, his body posture is
raised and forward, his lips are pulled forward in a snar, and he is giving direct
eye contact in a hard stare to the approaching dog. The other dog responds to
these threat signals submissively. He has lowered his body posture significantly.
is looking away, and has raised a paw. These submissive signals should have the
effect of "turning off' aggression in the dog who is showing an offensive threat.
Social Behavior and Communication in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 3
The scenarios illustrated in both of these figures depict the visual signals used
during a possessive conflict between two dogs. It is important to note that in
decidedly more subtle. For example, one dog might simply freeze over his bone
as another dog approaches. The approaching dog reads these signals, realizes
that his housemate is in possession of a desired resource, and so immediately
averts his gaze (threat aversion signal) and simply walks away.
signaling, these behaviors should not be erroneously interpreted as reflecting
"dominant" or "submissive" dogs. First, not all dogs demonstrate a desire to
compete for resources, attain “dominant" status within a group, or have the
potential to show offensive threats or aggression during conflicts. The process
of domestication has resulted in a tempering of the need for dominance ranking
such as enhanced deference and trainability has resulted in a species in which
many individuals are simply *born subordinate." As a result, many dogs never
display signs of ofensive threat towards their owners or toward other dogs, even
upon reaching social maturity or when challenged for possession of a desired
Some of these traits are believed to be influenced by breed. For example, some
breeds, such as beagles and fox hounds, were developed to work in very large
packs and as a result show little need for social hierarchies. Similarly, some hunt-
ence of other adult dogs who were not in their social group during group hunting
excursions. For these breeds, increased sociability and reduced dog-reactivity as
adults were probably selected for early in the breed's creation. In contrast, some
of the working breeds have been developed to guard and protect, and so may
naturally demonstrate more interest in rank order and have a lower threshold
for offensive threats and aggression. However, although some generalities can
and submissive signals is also dependent upon learning, living situation, and the
context of each interaction with other dogs and humans.
SOCIAL RELATIONSHIPS OF CATS
Similar to companion dogs, many house cats maintain multiple social relation-
ships. Today, multiple-cat homes are as common as single-cat homes, and
many cats share their owners and their living space with a resident dog as well.
which they interact with other cats within their social group. It also appears that
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, & COMMUNICATION
some cats interact with their owners in a more infantile way, treating humans
typically show loosely structured cooperative or commensal relationships
However, the concepts of dominance and submission that can be helpful in
the social behavior of cats. The relationships that cats develop with humans
and with other cats are not based upon dominant-subordinate dichotomies.
Cats neither respond to nor understand attempts by humans to impose such a
relationship. Indeed, most owners know that attempts to "dominate" cats will
result in either fear or aggression from the cat, not "submission." In many ways,
the theoretical model of commensalism better explains the social behavior of
the cat, and may apply equally well to the relationships that cats develop with
humans. Gommensalism refers to relationships in which individual (or species)
benefit from associations and interactions with others on a temporary or perma-
nent basis.
The strength of companion animal relationships is typically measured by
Because cats do not commonly follow their owners about the house as do
duration than human-dog interactions. Most cats initiate contact with humans
o eid oi lo apisino oh ol isanban e se 'awn bupee, pe 'bueaib jo woy e se
as a request for petting and cuddling. The behavior patterns that cats show
in all of these situations are the same that they use when greeting or initiating
show to their human caretakers may represent neotenized behaviors or behav-
mau e ui pasn buag mou ae ng aoada wou so au ui aem eyl soi
context. For example, many cats greet their owners with their tail held vertically
and hind limbs extended slightly. After a brief touch of the nose, the cat will
then head and/or flank rub on the owner's legs. Some cats will alternatively rub
on objects and furniture that are in close proximity to the owner. Kittens show
these same patterns of behavior when greeting their mother or an adult cat in
their social group, and adult cats living together in social groups often greet
with a gentle nose touch followed by briefly rubbing against each other. Other
species-specific behavior patterns that cats demonstrate during interactions
with humans include purring, kneading with the paws, and body postures and
of meows and purrs when interacting with humans, and most caretakers are
Social Behavior and Communication in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 3
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.
Compare and contrast urine marking as a form of communicative behavior in dogs
and cats.
2.
Describe the ways in which cats use different types of "rubbing" behaviors to
communicate.
3.
 List the types of feline vocalizations and provide an example of each.
4.
How have the evolutionary histories of dogs and cats influenced the respective
5.
Compare and contrast greeting behavior in dogs and cats.
REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING
Beaver BV. Feline Behavior: A Guide for Veterinarians. W. B. Saunders Company.
Philadelphia, PA, 276 pp., 1992.
Beaver BV. Distance-increasing postures of dogs. Vet Med: Small Anim Clinician.
77:1023-1024, 1982.
76:647-649, 1981.
Bekoff M. Scent-marking by free ranging domestic dogs: Olfactory and visual
components. Biol Behav, 4:123-139, 1979
Biben M. Predation and predatory play behaviour of domestic cats. Anim Behav.
27:81-94, 1979.
Byrne RV. Animal communication: What makes a dog able to understand its master?
Curr Biol, 13:R347-R348, 2003.
Bradshaw JWS. The Behaviour of the Domestic Cat. CAB International, Oxford, UK
219 pp. 1992.
Bradshaw JWS. The evolutionary basis for the feeding behavior of domestic dogs
(Canis familiaris) and cats (Felis catus). J Nutr, 136:1927S-1931S, 2006.
Brown KA, Buchwald JS, Johnson JR, Mikolich, DJ. Vocalization in the cat and kitten.
Develop Psychobiol, 11:559-570, 1978.
Cooper JJ, Ashton C, Bishop S, West R. Clever hounds: Social cognition in the
domestic dog (Canis familiaris). Appl Anim Behav Sci, 81:229-244, 2003.
Edwards C, Heiblum M, Tejeda A, Galindo F. Experimental evaluation of attachment
behaviors in owned cats. J Vet Behav, 2:119-125, 2007.
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, & COMMUNICATION
Feldman H. Methods of scent marking in the domestic cat. Can J Zoology. 72
1093-1099. 1994.
Feuerstein N, Terkel J. Interrelationships of dogs (Canis familiaris) and cats (Felis
Frommolt KH, Gebler A. Directionality of dog vocalizations. J Accous Soc Am,
116:561-565, 2004.
Fukuzawa M, Mills DS, Cooper JJ. More than just a word: Non-semantic command
variables affect obedience in the domestic dog (Canis familiaris). App! Anim Behav
Sci, 91:129-141, 2005.
Hare B, Tomasello M. Human-like social skills in dogs? Trends in Cognitive Sci
9:439-444. 2005
in Companion Animal Behavior, VL Voith and PL Borchelt, editors, Veterinary Learning
Systems, Trenton,NJ, pp.198-206, 1996.
Jongman EC. Adaptation of domestic cats to confinement. J Vet Behay, 2:193-196, 2007.
cats.J Nutr, 136:1947S-1950S, 2006.
Kleiman DG, Eisenberg JF. Comparisons of canid and felid social systems from an
Leyhausen, P. Cat behavior: The predatory and social behavior of domestic and wild
cats. Garland STPM Press, New York, NY, 1979.
Lowe SE, Bradshaw JWS. Ontogeny of indivuality in the domestic cat in the home
environment. Anim Behav, 61:231-237, 2001.
McConnellPB. Acoustic structure and receiver response in domestic dogs, Canis
familiaris.Anim Behav, 39:897-904,1990
Mertens PA. The concept of dominance and the treatment of aggression in multidog
s
in pet dogs (Canis familiaris). J Compar Psychof, 115:122-126, 2001.
Molnar C, Pongracs P, Doka A, Miklosi A. Can humans discriminate between dogs on
Natynczuk S, Bradshaw JwwS, Macdonald DW. Chemical constituents of the anal sacs
of domestic dogs. Biochem System Ecof, 17:83-8, 1989.
Nott HMR. Social behaviour of the dog. In: The Waftham Book of Dog and Cat Behay-
iour, C Thorne, editor, Pergamon Press, Oxford, UK, pp. 97-114, 1992.
season, place and posture.Appl Anim Behay Sci, 80:45-59, 2003.
Social Behavior and Communication in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 3
Pongracz P, Miklosi A, Kbinyi E. Social learning in dogs: The effect of a human demon-
strator on the perfommance of dogs in a detour task. Anim Behav, 62:1109-1117, 2002
Pongracs P, Molnar C, Miklosi A. Acoustic parameters of dog barks carry emotional
information for humans. Appl Anim Behav Sci, 100:228-240, 2006.
Riede T, Fitch T. Vocal tract length and acoustics of vocalization in the domestic dog
(Canis familiaris). J Exp Biol, 202:2859-2867, 1999.
Rooney NJ, Bradshaw JWvS. Breed and sex differences in the behavioural attributes of
specialist search dogs - a questionnaire survey of trainers and handlers. App! Anim
Behav Sci, 86:123-135, 2004.
response to attentional states of their owners. J Compar Psychol, 120:169-175, 2006
Scott JP. The evolution of social behaviour in dogs and wolves. Amer Zoologist
7:373-381, 1967.
Steinker A. Terminology think tank: Social dominance theory as it relates to dogs.
J Vet Behav 2:137-140, 2007.
Turner DC, Bateson P (Editors). The Domestic Cat: The Biology of its Behaviour,
2nd edition. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 0K, 244 pp., 2000.
Yeon SC. The vocal communication of canines. J Vet Behav, 2:141-144, 2007.
July, pp. 414-417, 2007.
tification. Anim Behav, 68:343-355, 2004.
Footnotes
1 Passanisi wC, MacDonald DW. Group discrimination on the basis of urine in a farm
cat colony. In: Chemical Signals in Vertebrates, 5th edition, Dw MacDonald, D Muller
Schwarze, SE Natynczuk, editors, Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, 1990
2 Bekoff M. Scent-marking by free-ranging domestic dogs: olfactory and visual compo-
nents. Biological Behav, 4:123-139, 1979.
volatiles from domestic dogs. In: Chemical Signals in Vertebrates, 5th edition
DW MacDonald, D Muller-Schwarze, SE Natynczuk, editors, Oxford University Press,
Oxford, UK. pp. 640-644, 1990.
4 MacDonald DW, Apps PJ, Carr GM, Kerby G. Social dynamics, nursing coalitions
5 Beaver B. Feline behavior: A guide for veterinarians. W. B. Saunders Company.
Philadelphia,PA,1992
6 Rooney NJ, Bradshaw JWS, Robinson IH. Do dogs respond to play signals given by
humans? Anim Behav, 61:715-722, 2001
Section 1
DOMESTICATION, SOCIAL BEHAVIOR, & COMMUNICATION
(Canis familiaris) and cats (Felis catus). J Nutr, 136:1927S-1931S, 2006
8 Kanarek RB. Availability and caloric density of diet as determinants of meal patterns
in cats, Physio Behav, 15:611-618, 1975.
Anim Behav Sci, 47:61-74, 1996.
SECTION2
How Dogs and Cats Learn - Training
Techniques and Practical Applications
CHAPTER
How Dogs and Cats Learn:
Principles of Learning Theory
he behavior of dogs and cats changes throughout life and is influenced by
 both their environment (experiences) and by genetic makeup. The simplest
definition of leaming involves an enduring change in behavior that occurs in
response to stimuli in the environment. (In a rather circular series of defini-
tions, a stimulus is defined as anything that causes a response.) Dogs and cats, like
humans, are capable of several types of learning. The major fomms that we observe
in our companion animals and that we use to teach dogs and cats new behaviors
are classical conditioning, operant conditioning, and social learning. Although
result in changes in behavior as our two best friends learn about their worlds.
CLASSICAL (PAVLOVIAN) CONDITIONING
Classical conditioning is a form of associative learning that occurs when
an animal responds to relationships between two or more stimuli. Many
people are familiar with the most frequently cited example of stimulus-stimulus
How Dogs and Cats Learn: Principles of Learning Theory
Chapter 4
58
conditioning - Pavlov's salivating dogs and the ringing bell. The basic
elements of this type of learning are a meaningless stimulus (initially called a
"neutral" stimulus) that elicits no response and a meaningful (unconditioned)
stimulus that elicits a response without any prior conditioning. The consis-
tent pairing of the two stimuli, with the neutral stimulus always immediately
jo buueew eyl ui ebueyo e ui shnse 'snnws pauompuooun ayi bupeoaid
ingless at first, consistently predicts the unconditioned stimulus. Classical
conditioning has occurred when the subject begins to show the same or a
very similar response to the neutral stimulus that was initially elicited only by
the unconditioned stimulus. This is called a stimulus-stimulus association and
forms the basic principle of classical conditioning (Sidebar 1).
Returning to Pavov's dogs: Pavov was studying dogs' salivary and gastrointes-
with food (the unconditioned stimulus), they began to salivate (an unconditioned
CLASSICAL CONDITIONING
Sidebar 1
Negative Example: Fear Response
Cat Visiting a Veterinary Clinic
Appearance of Veterinarian 
 Restraint/Pain 
Fear/Anxiety
(neutral stimufus)
(unconditioned stimufus)
{unconditioned
response)
After Several Visits
Appearance of Veterinarian
Fear/Anxiety
(conditioned stimufus)
(conditioned
response)
Positive Example: Excitement/Happiness Response
Owner Returning Home
Sound of Car 
Owner Appears— Happiness/Excitement
(neutral stimufus)
(unconditioned stimufus)
(unconditioned response)
After Several Repetitions
Sound of Car
 Happiness/Excitement
(conditioned stimulus)
(conditioned response)
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
response). The neutral stimulus was the opening of the door as the assistant en-
tered the room each day with food (or, later, the ringing of a bell immediately be-
fore food was presented). As the dogs learned that the opening of the door or the
ringing of a bell reliably predicted the presentation of food, they began to salivate
in response to the door opening (or bell ringing), prior to seeing or smelling food.
tioning is most likely to occur when the two stimuli (neutral and unconditioned)
are closely paired in time and when the pairing is consistent and reliable (i.e. one
stimulus does not occur without the other). These two conditions are referred to
as contiguity (the stimuli are closely paired in time and place) and contingency
(the neutral stimulus is reliably followed by the unconditioned stimulus).
In addition to stimuli contiguity and contingency, the value that a particular Ln-
conditioned stimulus has for the dog or the cat affects the animal's tendency to pay
cally conditioned to events that matter to him than to events that are of no concern
-uo Aiss aooaq Aoinb ueo aog oodueus e dn buoid laumo ue all
yonw si bop awes ayt '(bop juesge ue ui lnsai pue) aw yeg popaid ol pauop
less likely to associate the owner picking up a pen to write a letter with anything
pleasant or unpleasant. This is because writing a letter is an irrelevant event in the
life of a dog. Bath time, on the other hand, is often a very undesirable event for
stimuli that consistently predict the likelihood of a bath are quickly learned
Finally, classical conditioning most frequently occurs with behaviors that are re
spondent in nature. Respondent behaviors are those that are relatively innate and
so are under partial or complete involuntary control. The most common respon-
dent behaviors with which we are familiar in dogs and cats (and which are often
the subject of classically conditioned behavior problems) include those behaviors
expressed when the dog or cat is fearful, anxious, excited, or happy. A few practi-
cal examples demonstrate just how prevalent classical conditioning is in the lives
Box 4.1 FRANkIe AND HiS LeASH
and mail on the kitchen table, changes his shoes into walking shoes, picks up the lead, and calls Frankie. He then
attaches Frankie's collar and lead, and offthey go for their daily walk to the park (which of course, Frankie and
Stan both thoroughly enjoy!). Most dog owners, at this point in this example, have correctly assumed that, at some
How Dogs and Cats Learn: Principles of Learning Theory
Chapter 4
if Frankie begins to show excitement and joy at any stage of the preparations for his walk, he is demonstrating the
results of classical learning. Let's examine what exactly is occurring in this sequence:
(predicts)
(leash = neutral stimulus)
(opportunity to walk = unconditioned stimulus)
(conditioning)
BoX 4.2 FLUFFY AND HER DINNER
Fluffy's owner Fran provides two meals to Fluffy each day. In the morning, Fluffy gets a small bowl of dry cat food
 A o t y  p jo s   a o p a si as b al un 
What stimulus-stimulus association has Fluffy learned?
not evoke a response because Fluffy has not yet associated it with the presentation of her food. However, if Fran
is both reliable and consistent (contingency and contiguity), Fluffy learns that this spoken phrase predicts Fran's
repetitions, the question "Do you want to eat?" is now a conditioned stimulus (Cs) as it now evokes the same
responses as the actual presence of Fluffy's food - meows and excitement!
(predicts)
(predicts)
QUESTION
REFRIGERATOR
DINNER!! (EXCITEMENT!)
(question/refrigerator = neutral stimuli)
(food = unconditioned stimulus)
(conditioning)
QUESTION PREDICTS FOOD
H QUESTION ALONE EXCITEMENT!!
Classical Conditioning in Training Classical conditioning is useful in dog and cat
training in two rather different situations. The first involves the deliberate pairing of
u jo jeay eyl esnoag buwooib pue buysng jsisai sbop bunoA Auew 'aidwexe
brush is unfamiliar. The pleasurable emotions that are associated with the presen-
tation of food treats (unconditioned stimulus) can be used to initially condition the
presence of the brush as a pleasant stimulus, signifying something to look forward
to rather than something to avoid. The brush (a neutral stimulus) is presented, fol-
lowed immediately by food treats, which are given to the dog. The brush (and the
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
food treats) are then removed and the training session is ended. This sequence is
repeated several times until the dog's reaction to seeing the brush is positive and
excited (i.e. he anticipates food treats). At this point, the brush has been trans-
formed from a neutral stimulus to a conditioned stimulus that predicts something
pleasurable. (Note: This type of training differs from counterconditioning, in which
an attempt is made to change the association of a previously classically condi-
tioned stimulus. Using the same example: If the dog had previously developed
a fear or dislike of the brush, counterconditioning could be used to gradually, in
a step-wise manner, change a negative association into a positive association.
When using classical conditioning to promote desirable responses in dogs and
cats, the timing with which the neutral stimulus is presented is an important fac-
tor. The neutral stimuls must be presented immediately before and, if possible,
strong and enduring connection between the two stimuli and the transfommation of
the neutral stimulus into a conditioned stimulus. Conversely, if the conditioned stim-
ulus is presented affer the unconditioned stimulus, learning proceeds slowly, if at
all. Using the previous example, it is a common mistake for owners to present the
food treats and then present the brush. Given this sequence, there is no reason for
the dog to pay attention to the brush if she is already enjoying food treats. For this
The second way in which classical conditioning is used in training involves
"commands"). One example with dogs is teaching a dog to eliminate on com-
mand when taken outdoors. In this case, unconditioned stimuli include internal
signs and external events which trigger eliminative behavior. External events that
can be used in conditioning include events such as eating, waking up after a nap,
or sniffing an area that was previously used for elimination. Neutral stimuli include
taking the dog outside to a specific spot and the command, "hurry up" or "go
aa pinous pue aisisuoo ag pinous puewwoo gqaa aul (e pe bop au o
repeated several times as the dog is circling or sniffing an area of the yard that is
used for elimination. If the new verbal cue is consistently paired with elimination,
it can be used to encourage dogs to eliminate in specific areas or at particular
times during the day. Conversely, if the command is given after the dog is already
in the process of elimination or intermittently, classical conditioning will proceed
much less efficiently, if at all. A second example is the introduction of the com-
mand “Fluffy, come" when teaching a cat to come when called. One approach to
teaching this behavior is to pair an unconditioned stimulus (presence of food) and
eneu e ym (pooy eut ewnsuoo ot busyoeoidde jeo) asuodsan pauopuooun
stimulus (the words "Fluffy, come"). If the verbal cue is presented consistently and
How Dogs and Cats Learn: Principles of Learning Theory
Chapter 4
immediately prior to the presentation of food, classical conditioning will result in
the cat associating the two words with an opportunity to eat, responding by of-
fering the response, coming toward the owner. As we will see later, this example
demonstrates the way in which classical conditioning and operant conditioning
are linked and overlap in many learning situations.
OPERANTCONDITIONING
(INSTRUMENTAL LEARNING)
Learning that occurs as a result of the consequences of behavior is called
operant conditioning or instrumental learning. This terminology originates
from the concept that animals are always "operating on" their environment, and
that these behaviors are reinforced. Conversely, animals tend avoid repeating
relationships between stimuli, operant conditioning involves primarily response-
consequence relationships. For many behaviors that concern owners of compan-
ion dogs and cats, both types of learning are taking place.
reinforcement, negative reinforcement, positive punishment, and negative
punishment. Positive reinforcement occurs when a behavior results in the
delivery of a pleasant or desirable stimulus. For example, a dog quickly learns
that sitting next to her owner and nudging her owner's hand with her nose results
in petting and attention. The behaviors of sitting close and "nose nudging” are
therefore positively reinforced. Negative reinforcement occurs when a behavior
stimulus. A dog is lying in the sun and, as he starts to feel too warm, he rises
and moves to a shady spot. The unpleasant feeling of being overheated is
ended (or avoided) by moving. In this case, we say that the behavior of moving
to a shady spot has been negatively reinforced. The frequency of moving to
a shady spot when overheated will increase in the future as a result of being
an aversive consequence. A cat jumps onto a kitchen counter and activates a
motion-sensitive canister that emits a harmless but unpleasant blast of air. The
au ouo budwnf 'adwxe sy u iseg e aul pio ol eunoo aul go sdwnf o
ended the aversive stimulus.) Finally, behaviors that result in the prevention or
termination of a pleasant stimulus are being negatively punished. A young puppy
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
sy buddu 'oueueos syl ul buiddu sdois Addnd eu pue (uooui aaisod
been negatively punished. If the owner consistently plays with the puppy only if
the puppy plays gently, then playing gently is being positively reinforced.
Sidebar 2
THE USE AND ABUSE OF POSITIVE PUNISHMENT
-uoo oi yoeoidde ue se uoisindwoo paziseydwe sey buuiell bop Alleouois!h
trolling (or to use popular parlance, "correcting") a dog's undesirable behav-
iors. The prevailing paradigm was that physical corrections and coercion are
uli that were recommended were relatively innocuous and did not pose a risk
buyoyo 'sllos eydie se yons 'sleyo 'yneay euoowe lo jeoisyd s,bop e o]
with a slip collar, kneeing a dog in the chest, or hitting the pet were abusive
lof le!juajod sll ol uollppe ul pauopuoo aq leseu pinous pue 'snolebuep pue
buibueuo ol yoeoidde jed ouud e se juawusjund aallisod uodn buylal asnge
a pet's behavior has other important limitations. These include:
because it has often been unintentionally reinforced by the owner), they often habituate
to mild aversive stimuli, forcing an escalation to increasingly harmful punishers.
● It follows that in order to be severe enough to suppress the unwanted behavior, most
punishments also cause fear, avoidance, and, in some cases, aggression.
● Punishment does not address underlying causes or motivations for the unwanted
available to the animal to avoid punishment in the future.
●Because it is very difficult to deliver punishment effectively and remotely, its repeated
use damages the relationship between the pet and owner.
Positive punishment is effective in a few specific situations. These include
seale lo sloalgo ueeo wl Aeme slad daey dl slaysund alowei jo asn aul
and using a conditioned punisher such as "no" or "wrong" to immediately
elicited should not be confused with training the dog or cat not to offer the
behavior again in the future. For this, removing reinforcers, changing the pet's
ueo ll lolaeyeg sseiddns ol pesn sl juewyslund ealjlsod yolym ul seseo ul
● The punishment must be administered promptly, at the moment that the undesired
behavior is occurring; never affter the behavior has occurred.
 It must be consistent; applied every time that the pet offers the unwanted behavior.
●The punishment must be aversive enough to cause a startle response and interrupt the
behavior, but not so aversive as to cause fear.
How Dogs and Cats Learn: Principles of Learning Theory
Chapter 4
● When punishment is delivered by the owner, an alternative behavior should be made
ment not being as good of a source of information as is reinforcement.
American Veterinary Society of Animal Behavior. Guidelines on the use of punishment for dealing with behavior
problems in animals. AvSAB, 2008.
Reinforcement vs. Punishment
behaviors can be taught using any one or combination of the four types of
a training or behavior modification program. Specifically, the use of aversive
stimuli is associated with causing fear and anxiety, and the use of negative
punishment (removal of a desired stimuli; taking away something that the
subject wants) typically causes some degree of frustration. For these reasons
(and others discussed in Chapter 5), the four types of consequences should 
not be viewed as equally effective or valuable for use in practical dog and cat
training. Simply eliciting a behavioral response is not the desired outcome of
fects because noxious events result in avoidance or escape behaviors. The
sibly defensive aggression. Therefore, while the intended change in behavior
may be quickly accomplished through the use of aversive stimuli, reliance
upon positive punishment and negative reinforcement also cause fear, anxiety,
and avoidance behaviors (Sidebar 2). Therefore, in most training situations,
the risk of causing such negative reactions and emotions prohibits the use of
two of the four possible consequences: negative reinforcement and positive
punishment. An example to illustrate this point is teaching a dog to remain in
table 4.1 Consequences in Operant Conditioning
TYPE OF
BEHAVIORAL CHANGE
STIMULUS
INCREASE FREQUENCY
DECREASE FREQUENCY
DESIRABLE
Positive Reinforcement
Negative Punishment
(add stimulus)
(remove stimulus)
AVERSIVE
Negative Reinforcement
Positive Punishment
(remove stimulus)
(add stimulus)
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
a sitting position for a short period of time (called a sit-stay). Each of the four
aul ui eis-js ol Aouepuel s bop e aseaioui pinom peul seouenbesuoo agissod
future are described:
1. Positive reinforcement: The dog is sitting. The trainer provides quiet praise,
gentle petting, and food treats to the dog during the time that the dog
remains in the desired position. In this example, the behavior of remain
ing in a sit position is being positively reinforced; increasing in frequency.
(Figure 4.1)
ing nothing, and waits until the dog moves out of position or attempts to
lie down. Collar jerks or harsh reprimands are given until the dog stops
attempting to move and remains sitting. In this example, the sit-stay is
being negatively reinforced; increasing in frequency. (Figure 4.2)
3. Positive punishment: The dog is sitting. The trainer waits until the dog
moves out of position or attempts to lie down. Collar jerks or harsh rep-
rimands are given until the dog stops attempting to move and remains
sitting. Moving out of position is being positively punished; decreasing in
frequency.
gentle petting, and food treats to the dog during the time that the dog
remains in the desired position. If the dog attempts to move, the trainer
frequency.
This example illustrates the connection between reinforcement and punishment
in practical training situations (see below). When one behavior is being positively
punished, an alternate behavior is simultaneously being negatively reinforced.
below). In this sit-stay example, the combined used of positive reinforcement and
some degree of negative punishment can efectively teach sit/stay and results in
a dog who is relaxed, attentive and calm. Conversely, the repeated use of nega-
tive reinforcement and positive punishment results in a dog who stays in position
achieved, but at the expense of also instilling anxiety or fear as the dog learns that
the only way to avoid aversive consequences is to freeze in place. The repeated
stress and frustration, because removing a desirable stimulus repeatedly also
a behavior that earns the desired stimulus and so has little opportunity to earn
How Dogs and Cats Learn: Principles of Learning Theory
Chapter 4
figure 4.1 Training Sit-Stay with Positive
figure 4.2 Training Sit-Stay with Negative Reinforcement (and
Reinforcement
Positive Punishment)
positive reinforcement. This is a common mistake seen with new trainers who
are expecting too much from a dog, do not design the training session to allow
opportunities for positive reinforcement, or are not using shaping effectively
(see Chapter 5 for details).
The Link between Positive Reinforcement and Negative Punishment: The
examples that are provided above demonstrate the intricate connection
between positive reinforcement and negative punishment. The behavior
that earns the desirable consequences (sit-stay results in treats, praise, and
petting) is linked with a behavior that causes the absence or withdrawal of
the desirable consequences (moving from a sit-stay causes treats/praise/
petting to stop). More subtly, when a dog offers the behavior that is desired,
other behaviors are essentially "off-limits" in the sense that opportunities for
positive reinforcement for alternative behaviors (such as moving out of place)
ciously because withholding desirable consequences (treats, petting) from all
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
behaviors other than the target behavior is only effective if the dog or cat is
capable of offering the desired behavior at a frequency that facilitates learning.
Otherwise, negative punishment of undesirable behaviors (moving, lying down)
desired behavior (sit-stay) and the animal may become stressed or frustrated.
Therefore, training situations should be designed to allow ample opportuni-
ties for the dog or cat to "earn" positive reinforcement and at the same time
minimize negative consequences, even when those consequences appear
relatively mild to the trainer. These considerations and more examples are
provided in Chapters 5 through 7.
larly, negative reinforcement and positive punishment are intricately linked. In
the case of teaching a sit-stay, the behavior that elicits the aversive stimulus
(moving from a sit-stay) is punished (decreases in frequency) while the behavior
that allows the dog to escape or avoid the aversive stimulus (sit-stay) is nega-
tively reinforced. Although it is primarily a matter of desired outcomes, in some
situations, positive punishment alone is used without being paired with negative
sirable behavior, without attempting to increase the frequency of another behav
garbage cans. A noxious-smelling substance is applied to the outer surface of
ing the trash is positively punished by an aversive stimulus (the noxious-tasting
substance). The dog is less likely to offer the behavior of raiding the garbage
can in the future (i.e. garbage-can raiding has been punished; decreasing in
behavior is increased as long as the dog does not raid the garbage. The dog
may do any number of things after leaving the garbage alone - walk away, lie
down, or leave the room.
Types of Reinforcing Stimuli for Dogs and Cats
its effect on the subject, not by its intent. The value that a particular stimulus
has for an individual directly affects its power as a reinforcer or punisher. This
means that, by definition, the subject (dog or cat) determines whether a particu-
enjoy petting and social interaction, and this type of interaction can be a strong
who is timid or who is unusually sensitive to touch may not find the experience
How Dogs and Cats Learn: Principles of Learning Theory
Chapter 4
of petting to be either pleasant or desirable (Figure 4.4). For this dog, petting
would not be a desirable consequence that could be used to positively reinforce
targeted behaviors. Similarly, reinforcers are often affected by circumstances
and the training environment. While food treats are highly useful as a stimulus to
reinforce behaviors in many settings, a dog who is fearful will often refuse to eat.
This instantly makes the presentation of food as a consequence to that dog in
that setting irrelevant and thus not reinforcing. Again, although circular in defini-
tion, a reinforcer is something that reinforces a behavior (causes it to increase in
frequency in the future). If a behavior is not increasing in frequency in response
to the consequence, then the consequence is not a reinforcer for that animal in
that situation.
In dog and cat training, the trainer provides reinforcement for targeted behav-
iors by presenting pre-selected consequences (reinforcers) to the dog or cat. For
(g't anbiy) bued algeolue jo aouanbasuoo eul unelgo ol jepio ui aimny eul u!
counter uses an aversive stimulus (sprayed water) to positively punish counter
figure 4.3 Petting as a positive reinforcer for sit-stay
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
figure 4.5 Cat responding positively to petting and interaction
jumping. Stimuli that serve as highly effective positive reinforcers for dogs in
clude social interaction (petting, praise, petting), opportunities to play a favorite
-sod se Aot aaey e ym Aeid on Ajunuoddo ue pue 'siean pooy mws bumad
tive reinforcers. Aversive stimuli that are used as positive punishers or negative
reinforcers include any event that causes pain, discomfort, or anxiety, and which
the dog or cat prefers to avoid or escape.
Primary and Secondary (Conditioned) Reinforcers
Desirable and aversive stimuli that are used to reinforce or punish behaviors
are further classified into primary (unconditioned) and secondary (conditioned)
reinforcers (Table 4.2). Primary reinforcers are stimuli that have a biological
basis and therefore need little or no prior conditioning (learning) to be effective.
These are stimuli that an animal inherently enjoys and wants more of, or inher-
ently dislikes and wishes to avoid. Positive (desirable) primary reinforcers for
 most well-socialized companion dogs and cats include food, opportunities for
social interaction, and opportunities for exercise or play. Primary aversive stimuli
How Dogs and Cats Learn: Principles of Learning Theory
Chapter 4
table 4.2 Types of Reinforcers for Dogs and Cats
TYPE OF STIMULUS
CATEGORY
PRIMARY
SECONDARY
(Unconditioned)
(Conditioned)
POSITIVE REINFORCEMENT
Presentation of:
Presentation of:
Food treats
Bridging word/click
Exercise (play)
Toys
 Social interaction
Praise/petting*
NEGATIVE REINFORCEMENT
Removal of:
Removal of:
Pain (collar jerk, shock)
Harsh voice
Discomfort
 Threatening gesture 
Fear/anxiety
"Nor'and "Bad dog!"
reinforcers for some dogs and cats (see text for explanations)
dog or cat naturally wishes to avoid.
Secondary reinforcers are stimuli that are either completely neutral or that
have weak positive or negative reinforcing properties. These stimuli are
paired with a primary reinforcer and, once conditioned, take on the reinforc-
"lb poob, Addnd e buet 'aidwexe loy deoojuen Aewud aul jo jemod bu!
followed immediately by a treat will establish a predictive (classical) relation-
eal poo e jo uoeuasaid aul pue ub pooe, spom eul ueamieq dius
Once this relationship has been established, the secondary reinforcer can
occasionally be used without the primary reinforcer because it has acquired
similar reinforcing properties. In addition to word phrases, a clicker (cricket)
is commonly and very successfully used as a secondary reinforcer by dog
Value of Reinforcing Stimuli
A final factor to consider with reinforcing stimuli is the value that a particular stim-
ulus has for the dog or the cat. Because every animal is an individual, a hierarchy
of desirable and aversive stimuli can often be constructed. Understanding which
stimuli are highly valued and which are moderately valued can be very helpful
training. For example, a trainer may identify several types of food treats that her
dog enjoys. She learns from observing her dog that hot dog pieces are highly
valued while soft-moist dog treats are enjoyed but not as intensely, and that dry
kibble has the least strength as a primary positive reinforcer. The same dog may
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
a toy stick) and several types of social interaction or games (tummy rub, head
petting, ear rubs). These hierarchies become important when teaching dogs and
behaviors on which the trainer is focusing within a training session (see Chapter 5
for more details).
HABITUATIONAND SENSITIZATION
that has neither positive nor negative consequences. Habituation occurs as
          i  
tial to either harm or benefit the animal, while irrelevant stimuli are those that
are of no consequence to the animal and so can be "screened out" from his
or her perceptual world. A common example of habituation is a new puppy
being startled by the sound of the dishwasher and then gradually, after several
exposures, no longer reacting to the sound. Similarly, a new kitten may initially
be startled by the movement of the floor sweeper, but slowly becomes habitu-
ated to the appliance after repeated exposures demonstrate that the sweeper
is a harmless stimulus.
Habituation can be short-term or long-term. Short-termhabituation occurs
when an animal is exposed to a novel stimulus repeatedly, but for a relatively short
cleaner to several rooms during that time. If the noise is not excessive and the
ewoy eu ul Addnd meu e Xem bujuejeau-uou e u pebeuew sl jeuealo wnnoen
quickly develops short-term habituation, ignoring the noise after several minutes.
However, if the machine is reintroduced after several days, the puppy may once
snoaueuods pallen si uouawouaud sul 'esuodsa leay lo apes e mous uibe
longer evoke a response. Afer the vacuum cleaner has been used over a period
of weeks, the puppy no longer reacts.
recognize a specific set of non-threatening stimuli in their environments. In
addition, habituation also affects an individual's long-term ability to react to novel
stimuli. Dogs and cats who are habituated to many stimuli are more likely to
that is similar to one that is familiar. For example, a dog who has been habitu-
ated to the sound of cars on the street where he walks with his owner each day
How Dogs and Cats Learn: Principles of Learning Theory
Chapter 4
will usually demonstrate stimulus generalization to the sound of larger or smaller
cars when out walking in a new area. Conversely, a lack of habituation, espe-
cially in mature animals, can be a very serious problem. Adult dogs and cats
who experienced limited exposure to a variety of stimuli during their first year of
a ol ide alow ae 'seoueuedxe mau ol pesodxe ueum panguui alow ae el
fearfully, and may not be capable of readily habituating to new stimuli.
Sensitization is the opposite of habituation. Sensitization occurs when repeated
exposure to a stimulus results in an increase in responsiveness, rather than a
decrease. In dogs and cats, sensitization usually involves either fearful (flight), or
pue syg Auappns bop aut f souno ym bop aul yoodde Ae ew ps
other similar stimuli. In this case, the kitten may become fearful of all dogs, and
continue to be fearful as an adult cat. The efects of sensitization are typically less
stimulus-specific than habituation. This means that any small change in a stimulus
can lead to sensitization, even if the cat was previously habituated to the stimulus.
For example, the kitten who was habituated to the vacuum cleaner may suddenly
become sensitized to the machine if it malfunctions and makes a much louder
noise. Similarly, a cat who had been completely habituated to dogs becomes
sensitized to all dogs if a new dog barks or attempts to chase
SOCIAL LEARNING
Social fearning is a broad term that refers to the tendency of an individual to
attend to the behavior of others in his or her social group and to change behavior
in group-living species in which communication between individuals and atten-
tion to the behavior of others is an important contributor to survival. In addition,
regardless of sociability of the species. Within the broad category of social learn-
ing, several sub-classifications exist. These include allelomimetic behavior, social
facilitation, local enhancement, and observational learning.
behaviors that reflect the tendency of animals within a social group to follow
the example of others. These behaviors are most commonly observed in
puppies and kittens with their littermates, and in groups of dogs and cats who
auebol buisinu pue buideels apnjoui sewue bunoA ui saidwexg yeyebol aal
al oym sieo pue sbop tnpy 'dnoib e se sloelgo meu buebnsaaui pue
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
the same time. These all are examples of allelomimetic behavior.
The second type of social learning is social facilitation. This is related to
allelomimetic behavior in that it too involves the behavior of a group. However,
behavior, social facilitation affects an individual's motivational state or the inten-
dogs. The majority of dogs are strongly affected by the presence of other dogs
be learned from other dogs (Sidebar 3).
Sidebar 3
FOOD PREFERENCELEARNINGIN DOGS
The feeding behavior of the domestic dog has long been known to have a
strong social component. Dogs consume more food and eat more rapidly
ag Aew siolaeyeq buipienb pooj pue sbop leyio jo aouasaid aul ui ueum
learned from other dogs within a social group. In addition, a recent study
conducted by Gwen Lupfer-Johnson and Julie Ross at the University of
shop moy ul paaoaul ag osje Aew bulueal eloos peyl sisabons eys5ly
learn individual food preferences. In this pilot study, the researchers stud-
pue lojeisuowep e se paloe bop auo yolym ui sbop lnpe jo sied zl pal
the other acted as an observer. Demonstrator dogs were fed dog food that
was flavored with either dried basil or dried thyme leaves, out of sight of
reunited with the observer dog and the two dogs were allowed to interact
for 10 minutes. During this time, observer dogs all intently investigated and
smelled around the face and mouth of the demonstrator dogs. Following the
interaction period, the observer dog was taken to another room and offered
equal amounts of each type of flavored food. Food preference was assessed
the observer dog consumed relative to the total amount of food consumed.
Results showed that dogs consumed more of the food that their respective
paired demonstrator had been given than of the alternative flavor. Dogs who
were paired with demonstrator dogs fed basil-flavored dog food consumed
significantly more basil-flavored food than did dog who were paired with
demonstrator dogs fed thyme. These results suggest that domestic dogs
may learn food preferences by observing the food preferences of other dogs,
without having direct access to the food itself.
How Dogs and Cats Learn: Principles of Learning Theory
Chapter 4
The evolutionary significance of learning what foods to consume by observing
others is similar to that suggested for the Norway rat, a species that learns
food selection from others in its social group. The social transmission of food
preferences would be beneficial as dogs were evolving to live close to human
settlements and began to consume a more varied diet as they scavenged trash
sites. Taking social cues from other dogs would provide information about the
types of foods that were currently available, edible and safe. Additional stud-
ies may tell us whether dogs who are well acquainted with each other (socially
who do not live together, as has been shown in rats, and whether dogs are
Lupfer-Johnson G, Ross J. Dogs acquire food preferences from interacting with recently fed conspecifics. Behay
Proc, 74:104-106, 2007.
to and react in the same manner to environmental cues as others in their
social group. Because the individual attends to a stimulus to which he sees
another animal reacting, the resulting behavioral response is similar. Common
examples include dogs who learn to roll in noxious-smelling substances or to
who first smells the area (or feces) and then begins to roll. The second dog
typically learns this behavior by first responding to the other dog's sniffing and
investigations, and then engaging in the same behavior. An example in cats
is the kitten who learns to climb up a set of stairs by following an adult cat
While some behaviorists identify this type of behavior as observational learning,
others maintain that local enhancement is less complex than observational
learning because the inexperienced individual has the opportunity to be
The final (and most complex) type of social learning is observational learning.
Observational learning occurs when a subject learns to perfomm a behavior
by simply observing another animal perform or learn to perfomm the behavior
An important distinction between observational learning and other forms of
physically separated from the animal who is observing the behavior. This constraint
eliminates the opportunity for the observing animal to attend to or react to the
same stimuli as the demonstrator animal. Therefore, when defined in this manner,
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
watching another animal complete the task. A series of recent studies with com
panion dogs have shown that not only are dogs capable of observational learning
from one another, but that this type of learning also occurs between dogs and their
owners (Sidebar 4). In the cat, one of the most highly social periods of life is during
kittenhood, when the kitten is learning from her mother and from her littemates.
This is a period during which observational learning is most important for this spe
cies. For example, kittens quicky learn to perform an arbitrary task, such as press-
ing a lever for food, if they first watch an adult cat successfully perfomm the task
Conversely, if they are just allowed to use trial-and-error (operant) learning, they
learn very slowly or do not learn the behavior at all. Interestingly, kittens learn the
new task fastest if the demonstrator cat is their mother than if it is a known adult
cat who is not their mother.
Sidebar 4
OBSERVATIONAL LEARNING IN DOGS
Similar to kittens, puppies are capable of observational learning when they
watch their mothers or littermates perform a task. An early study found that
pre-weaned puppies could learn to grasp a ribbon and pull a packet of food
pue jel ybnoiyi ysel aul ueal Addnd layioue bulyoen lahe ued layl oiui
Aueoueis pawoed sayoeo bnp uappiy punos pue lo pauaieas aus se
Perhaps even more interesting is recent evidence that dogs not only learn
from observing other dogs, but arevery adept at learning byobserving
'sanbealloo pue zogibuod laled Aq palonpuoo saipnis jo sajas e ul ialdoed 
a "detour task" test was used to investigate the ability of dogs to learn to
aul puiyeg paoeld Aol e lo poo, pey peyl aoue, luaiedsueil 'oadeys-a e
aul jo 1no aaow ol moy aulwnalap dl pamolle alam dnoie auo ul sbog 'xade
puooas e allym (Ajueiedo) soe pue el ybnoiyl pooj ayl uieigo ol aoua,
group first observed a human successfully maneuver the obstacle prior to
many correctly solving the detour problem on their very first attempt! Further
eaasgo jo aei loaje pou pip peeig pue abe sbop e peyl pamous sapnis
tional learning, but that verbal communication from the demonstrator human
significantly enhanced learning.
In another study, the ability of dogs to learn how to extract a ball from a box by
observing their owners push a handle on the box was tested. Dogs who watched
How Dogs and Cats Learn: Principles of Learning Theory
Chapter 4
aul ysnd pue yonol oi pauieal lleg e asealel ol alpuey aul ysnd jeuwo jeul
handle, while those who did not observe were less likely to touch or maneuver
[eloos jeul busabhns 'shop ol shote isuowep jualote ale suewny teul mous
learning is well developed and highly flexible in the domestic dog. These results
development of new training techniques.
Adler LL, Adler HE. Ontogeny of observationalearning in the dog (Canis famiiaris). Devet Psych, 10:267-280,
1977.
Kubinyi E, Topal J, Miklosi I, Csanyi v. Dogs (Canis famiiaris) learn from their owners via observation in a
manipulation task. / Comp Psychot, 117:156-165, 2003.
performance of dogs in a detour task. Anim Behav, 62:1109-1117, 2001.
Pongracz P, Miklosi A, Timar-Geng K, Csanyi v. verbal attention getting as a key factor in social learning between
dog (Canis famiiaris) and human. :/ Comp Psychor, 118:375-383, 2004.
Pongracz P, Miklosi A, Vida v, Csanyi v. The pet dogs' ability for learning from a human demonstrator in a detour
task is independent from the breed and age. App Anirm Behav Sci, 90:309-323, 2005.
Slabbert JM, Rasa OAE. Observational learning of an acquired maternal behaviour pattern by working dog pups:
An alternative training method? App Anirm Behav Sci, 53:309-316, 1997.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.
Provide one practical example for each of classical conditioning that might occur
with a dog and a cat.
2.
WWhat are the four types of consequences of operant conditioning?
3.
List three desirable (pleasant) stimuli that are effective as positive reinforcers with
dogs and cats.
4.
 e lo bop e ym uoezsuas jo aidwexa te pue uoengey jo aldwexa te apaid
0.
What risks are associated with reliance upon negative reinforcement and positive
punishment in dog or cat training?
REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING
Adler LL, Adler HE. Ontogeny of observational learning in the dog (Canis familiaris).
Devel Psych, 10:267-280, 1977.
Borchelt PL, Voith VL. Punishment. In: Readings in Companion Animal Behavior,
1996.
102
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
Burch MR, Bailey JS. How Dogs Learn. Howell Book House, New York, NY,
188 pp., 1999
Donaldson J. Culture Clash: A Revolutionary New Way of Understanding the
 Relationship Between Humans and Domestic Dogs. James and Kenneth Publishers,
Oakland, CA, 221 pp., 1996.
elimination task.Behav Proc, 73:22-28, 2006.
Hare B, Brown M, Williamson C. The domestication of social cognition in dogs.
Science, 298:1634-1636, 2002.
Press, Freedom, CA, 154 pp., 1994.
Kubinyi E, Topal J, Miklosi I, Csanyi V. Dogs (Canis familiaris) learn from their owners
Lindsay SR. Handbook of Applied Dog Behavior and Training, Volume 1: Adaptation
and Learming. lowa State University Press, Ames, IA, 410 pp., 2000.
McKinley S, Young R. The efficacy of the model-rival method when compared with
Appl Anim Behav Sci, 81:357-365, 2003.
McKinley J, Sambrook TD. Use of human-given cues by domestic dogs (Canis
familiaris) and horses (Equus caballus). Anim Cogn, 3:13-22, 2000.
Miklosi A, Soproni K. A comparative analysis of animals understanding of the human
pointing gesture. Anim Cogn, 9:81-93, 2006.
O'Farrell V. Dog's Best Friend: How Not to Be a Problem Owner. Methuen Press
London, 0K, 1994.
Pearce WD, Cheney CD. Behavior Analysis and Learning, 3rd edition. Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Inc, Mahwah, NJ, 388 pp., 2004
Pongracz P, Miklosi A, Kubinyi E, et al. Social learning in dogs; the effect of a human
demonstrator on the performance of dogs in a detour task. Anim Behay.
52:1109-1117,2001
factor in social learning between dog (Canis familiaris) and human. J Comp Psycho.
118:375-383, 2004.
Pongracz P, Miklosi A, Vida V, Csanyi V. The pet dogs' ability for learning from a human
demonstrator in a detour task is independent from the breed and age. App Anim
Behav Sci, 90:309-323, 2005.
Pryor K. Don't Shoot the Dog. Bantam Books, New York, NY, 187 pp., 1984.
Pryor K. Karen Pryor on Behavior. Sunshine Books, North Bend, WA, 405 pp., 1995
Chapter 4
Them. James and Kenneth Publishing. Oakland, CA, 172 pp., 1996.
Rogerson J. Your Dog: Its Development, Behaviour, and Training. Popular Dogs
Publishing Company, London, 0K, 174 pp., 1990.
Schilder MBH, van der Borg JAM. Training dogs with help of the shock collar: Short
and long termbehavioral effects.AppAnim Behav Sci,85:319-334,2004
in response to attentional states of their owners. J Compar Psychol, 120:169-175.
2006.
Slabbert JM, Rasa OAE. Observational learning of an acquired maternal behaviour
pattern by working dog pups: An alternative training method? Appl Anim Behay Sci.
53:309-316, 1997.
12:593-606, 1982.
Anim Behav Sci, 34:263-272, 1992.
Voith VL, Borchelt PL (Edlitors). Readings in Companion Animal Behavior. Veterinary
Learning Systems, Trenton, NJ, 276 pp., 1996.
Yin S. Classical conditioning: Learning by association. Compend Contin Vet, Small
Anim Pract, 472-476, June 2006.
Yin S. Dominance versus leadership in dog training. Compend Contin Eouc Pract Vet,
414-417, 2007
Zentall TR. Imitation: Definitions, evidence and mechanisms. Anim Cogn, 9:335-353.
2006.
CHAPTER
Practical Applications: Training and Behavior
Modification Techniques
raining and behavior modification techniques provide interventions that
allow pet owners and companion animal professionals to guide a dog or
cat's learning toward desired outcomes. Training methods manipulate
stimuli and reinforcers and modify motivation to promote desired behaviors
and eliminate or prevent undesired behaviors. In most training situations, classical
and operant conditioning are the primary forms of learning that trainers manipulate
to teach new behaviors and solve behavior problems in their dog or cat.
THE ROLES OF CLASSICAL AND OPERANT
CONDITIONING
Although classical and operant conditioning are often discussed as if they
are separate and distinct ways in which animals learn, in actuality the two
types of learning are intricately linked. As an animal learns about connections
between stimuli (for example, the presence of the shampoo bottle predicting
Practical Applications: Training and Behavior Modification Techniques
Chapter 5
105
the unpleasantness of a bath), he also may offer a behavior such as leaving
the room and hiding under the owner's bed. In this example, the relationship
while leaving the room to hide under the bed is operantly learned. Hiding
under the bed is negatively reinforced in that the dog avoids the bath, at least
for that moment! Similarly, when we teach dogs and cats to respond to spo-
ken commands ("sit," “come," "roll over"), these verbal cues are initially neutral
repeatedly associated with the pleasantness of a treat or other form of desired
stimuli that is used as a reinforcer (Sidebar 1). The connection between oper-
ant and classical conditioning becomes an important consideration when a
trainer is deciding when to introduce the command for a particular behavior,
called "putting the behavior on cue.'
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN OPERANT AND
Sidebar 1
CLASSICAL CONDITIONING
ing exercises. The example below uses teaching a dog to sit on command. If
this is taught using a conditioned reinforcer such as a clicker, the association
between "click" and "treat" is classically learned. The consequence for offer-
ing "sit" is a click-treat (positive reinforcement). Siting increases in frequency,
signifying operant learning. Finally, when the command "sit" is added to the
exercise, the relationship between hearing the verbal word "sit" and the even-
tual presentation of the treat is classical once again.
Command:
Response:
Consequence:
Consequence:
"SIT""
 Dog Sits
CLICK
Treat
Classical
CLICK!
Treat
Operant
Sitting
Consequence: Treat
dassical
Sit sound
Presentation of Treat
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
POSITIVE VS. NEGATIVE (AVERSIVE)
CONTROL OF BEHAVIOR
An Historical Perspective
Most of the early dog training programs that were developed in the United
aem suebod aseul ew u loy shop busuen jo asodnd au oy aem sass
initially developed during the mid-1900s and were based primarily upon the use
of various aversive stimuli to negatively reinforce desirable behaviors or positively
punish unwanted behaviors. Following the first two world wars, these methods
Methods that emphasized the use of aversive stimuli produced rapid results.
which were needed for military dogs, and so were accepted as being the most
efficient and appropriate approach to dog training at that time. Although these
early methods were using operant learning, the term "escape/avoidance training"
eun weiboid e ui ssaooid buueel eu pequosep Ande ll esneoeq peuioo sem
       
When escape/avoidance is used to teach new behaviors, the dog or cat first
learns to escape an aversive consequence by changing his or her behavior. An
example is teaching a dog to walk on a loose lead using negative reinforcement in
the fom of collar corrections jerks on a training collar). The aversive stimulus (jerks
on the collar is applied as a consequence whenever the dog pulls forward out of
position (forges) or hangs back out of position (lags). During the learning phase,
the dog could escape the discomfort of these jerks by changing her behavior (not
pulling on the lead). As the dog learns the contingencies associated with the nega-
all collar jerks), she begins to avoid the negative stimulus altogether by continually
offering the desired behavior - walking in position on a loose lead.
More about Aversive Stimuli
Escape/avoidance conditioning relies upon an animal's natural desire to avoid
pain and discomfort. It must be recognized that if a stimulus is not sufficiently
aversive, the animal will not change his behavior to avoid it and learning will not
proach (i.e. aversive control of behavior) involves causing some level of discomfort
or pain to the animal. Basic emotions that are associated with pain and discom-
fort are fear and anxiety. Although these can be minimized by using the mildest
         s    n
practical training situations it is dificult to accurately estimate a level of intensity
that is "enough, but not too much." Some trainers suggest using an increasing
hierarchy of intensity, starting at the lowest possible level and working up to an
intensity that results in avoidance behaviors. However, this approach can lead to
Practical Applications: Training and Behavior Modification Techniques
Chapter 5
habituation at each level of intensity, necessitating the use of increasingly severe
or inhumane aversive stimuli. In addition, even when mild aversive stimuli are
used, the introduction of stress or fear ultimately will interfere with an animal's
abiity to learn new behaviors (Sidebar 2).
A second problem with reliance upon negative reinforcement or positive punish-
ment is that the exact nature of each animal's response to an aversive stimulus
is highly variable. Although some dogs and cats will move away from an aversive
stimulus if there is an escape route available, others may freeze in place, panic,
overreact, or become aggressive. As a result, the risk is that the response of the
animal is not always what was intended by the trainer. This is confounded by the
fact that applying an aversive stimulus (either to negatively reinforce or positively
punish a behavior) only provides an animal with infommation about what not to
do, but does not provide information about what to do. Essentially, the animal is
'THE QUIZ?
Sidebar 2
A Parable about Aversive vs. Pleasurable Stimuli
Let us digress from dogs and training for a moment, and consider how
yew abaloo e ul palloue aaey nos peyl auibewl ueal sioalgns uewny
course. You have been attending lectures for several weeks and, although
the material is quite difficult, you feel that the instructor has been explain-
ing the concepts very clearly and that you have been able to learn a great
deal from his lectures. You have completed and handed in three home-
enter the lecture hall for the weekly lecture, your instructor informs the
class of 50 students that he will be administering a surprise quiz. He has
two options for taking the quiz; one in Classroom A and the other in Class-
room B. The instructor has randomly assigned students to each room. He
tells you that the questions on the quiz are exactly the same in each room,
but the consequences for answering quiz questions are slightly different.
Classroom A: The chairs in this room have been electronically wired so that
instructor. The quiz instructions are as follows: The instructor will put an equa
tion to be solved up on the overhead screen. When a student has correctly
solved the problem, he or she should raise a hand and provide the answer
aloud. If the student answers correctly, he or she is dismissed and may have
the remainder of the day off. If the student provides an incorrect answer, he or
she will receive an electric shock and must remain in the class and try again.
All students must answer one question correctly to complete the quiz and
leave the room.
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
front desk. The quiz instructions are as follows: The instructor will put an equa-
tion to be solved up on the overhead screen. When a student has correctly
solved the problem, he or she should raise a hand and provide the answer
aloud. If the student answers correctly, he or she will receive a chocolate. The
dismissed with the remainder of the day off. If the student provides an incor-
sapnis lly 'uebe Al ol paeu m pue paloubi Adwis sl aus lo ay 'amsue poe
Which room would you rather be in?
stimuli in the same manner as do math students)
on the subject's ability to select the desired behavior that will allow escape from
the negative stimulus. Because a variety of behaviors are often equally successful
 in avoiding the stimulus (for example, running away or showing aggression), the
behavior that is elicited each time the correction is applied may not be the behav-
ior that the trainer was expecting to elicit.
Finally, because stress or fear is often introduced with the use of negative rein-
forcement and punishment, the use of escape/avoidance training as a humane
or unintentional abuse, negative stimuli that are associated in any way with the
water from a water bottle quickly associates the squirted water with the pres-
ence of the person. Therefore, the cat may learn to stay off a counter when her
necessarily because she has learned that staying off the counter is the desired
behavior. (The cat will also learn the alternative situation; when the owner is
negative consequences.) For this reason, using punishment that is associated
with the caretaker is generally ineffective and may even be counterproductive.
owner altogether as the animal learns that a behavior that will allow her to avoid
Practical Applications: Training and Behavior Modification Techniques
Chapter 5
Maximizing Pleasant and Minimizing Aversive Stimuli
New knowledge about learning in dogs and cats, coupled with a shift toward
found to be more effective in modifying behavior than negative reinforcement
positive reinforcement is more effective and efficient because a positive con-
food treats and praise are provided only while the dog is sitting, and are
associate the targeted behavior (sitting) with the positive consequences
(praise, petting, food treats). These consequences convey specific infor-
mation to the dog regarding the exact behavior that is being positively
reinforced. This scenario can be compared with the use of aversive conse-
quences that inform the dog about incorrect behaviors such as moving out of
reinforcement lends itself well to successive approximation, which facilitates
teaching complex behaviors and exercises that require a great deal of control
(see pp. 119-122).
Second, an emphasis upon pleasurable stimuli and positive reinforcement
during training promotes subjective emotional states such as pleasure, con-
tentment, and enjoyment in the animal. This can be directly compared with
the varying levels of stress, fear, or distress that are associated with reliance
upon aversive stimuli during training. Because learning new tasks is not
associated with aversive stimuli, the dog or cat is relaxed and comfortable
during training and is more likely to attempt new behaviors. In other words, a
dog who has learned that "guessing wrong" simply goes unrewarded and is
sey oym bop e si ueyi sioeyeg meu Ai oi Aesll eiow yonw sl paysiund jou
a history of receiving aversive consequences for any incorrect behaviors that
she attempted. For example, an alternative approach to squirting a cat with
water to punish her for jumping onto counters is to provide an acceptable ele-
vated ledge in the home that the cat enjoys. Whenever the cat approaches or
sits on the ledge, she is given cat treats or attention. Because this approach
au buoog Ag peiuawbne ag ueo buueal slyl 'abpal mau eyl ol sleunoo
cat's access to the counter tops while training her to use her new spot.
Section2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
TRAINING PREPARATIONS
Whether you are training your new puppy to have good manners, teaching a kitten
ae noA 'bop hnpe ue ui welgoid busueg e buaos o 'jsod buyoieios e esn ol
into two broad categories: teaching new and desirable behaviors (e.g. manners
training) and preventing or eliminating undesirable behaviors (e.g. solving behavior
problems). In an ideal situation, the trainer is teaching "good manners" in his or her
pet before undesirable behaviors and bad habits have developed. Regardless, ani-
mals like people, are complex beings who exhibit a wide range of behaviors that
are influenced by age, the situation or context, and prior experiences. Therefore, it
is important to develop a training plan that considers the following factors.
Identify Objectives and Goals
The trainer should develop a set of clear objectives and goals for training.
When the objectives are to prevent problem behaviors and teach desirable
behaviors, the trainer should list the specific behaviors that he wishes to teach,
Collie may be interested in teaching his dog agility exercises, but the dog has
not yet had any basic obedience training. In this case, the initial objective is to
enroll in a basic obedience class to teach the dog to walk on a loose lead, sit
and lie down on command, stay in position, and come when called. when basic
manners have been introduced, a second objective can be added - introducing
some of the basic agility exercises.
Similarly, if the trainer is interested in preventing behavior problems, objectives
should identify the unwanted behaviors and alternate, incompatible behaviors that
are desired. For example, the owner of a new and very playful kitten understands
the importance of teaching her kitten to play gently. Her objectives may be to
when playing with her human family members.
ing behavior problems. In this case, the first step is to complete a behavioral history
profile that fully describes the problem behaviors and identifies all potential undertying
causes. (General behavior profiles that can be used for initial screening with dogs and
and cats develop house-soiling problems for a variety of reasons. A behavior profile
for house soiling should identify all of these possible causes to allow proper diagnosis
consider the severity of the problem, its undertying cause, and the owner's commit-
ment to the pet and dedication to solving or managing the problem behaviors.
Practical Applications: Training and Behavior Modification Techniques
Chapter 5
Select a Training Program or Behavior
Modification Technique
Teaching a dog or cat new behaviors requires the use of effective reinforcers (See
pp. 112, will refer to “Selecting Primary Reniforcers") and a plan for introducing,
shaping, and maintaining new behaviors. There should be a clear set of the train-
during training, as the trainer must be able to modify the training plan in response
approaches that may aid in reducing or soving the problem behavior.
Develop a Reasonable and Achievable
Training Schedule
cludes short- and long-term goals. These goals will be influenced by the
owner's level of commitment, time available, and ability to train and modify his
able goal for either the pet or the owner. For example, a dog who jumps up
excitedly to greet may be doing so because she is isolated for much of the
solution would include providing the dog with more exercise and interaction
and teaching her to sit for greeting when meeting new people. The owner may
oy s oi bop aun bunyoeel yhm jueisisuooui s! ing esioexe s, bop eut eseaiou
greeting. As a result, the behavior may become more manageable but the dog
will still occasionally jump up to greet. Educating owners regarding reasonable
ciation for the behavior changes that are achieved and prevent "blaming the
dog" for those that are not.
Evaluate Progress
Just as small steps should be included in the training or treatment plan, progress
can also be evaluated in a step-wise manner. Using the example above, if the
owner is aware that her dog jumps up simply because she is being friendly and
exuberant (rather than having an idea of "jumping as misbehavior'), progress can
be assessed with that motivation in mind. If the dog becomes reliable at greeting
new people in a sit position once she has been out on her walk for 10 minutes.
this is an excellent indication of progress. Conversely, she may continue to have
difficulty staying off when she has been isolated or has not received her daily ex-
ercise and interactions. Over time, the owner can focus on the more challenging
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
SELECTINGPRIMARYREINFORCERS
Once a plan has been developed, the trainer must identify and select effective
reinforcing stimuli. Chapter 4 describes the types of reinforcing stimuli (desirable
or aversive), their relative values (high, moderate, low), and their inherent reinforc-
ing properties (primary vs. conditioned stimuli). For the reasons discussed in here
and in Chapter 4, desirable stimuli (commonly refered to as positive reinforcers)
are most effective for use in the majority of training situations. Primary positive
(desirable) reinforcers are stimuli that the dog or cat enjoys and will respond to
with no prior conditioning or exposure.
moist dog treats. Similarly, one cat may respond best to a small piece of tuna
most dogs and cats respond to the opportunity for positive social interactions,
especially if those opportunities involve a member of the pet's primary social
many dogs and cats. Verbal praise is thought to be a reinforcer that has weak
primary reinforcing properties which can be strengthened through associa-
tion with a primary stimulus such as food or play. While there is some dispute
over the degree to which socialization plays a role in conditioning this type of
reinforcer in dogs and cats, it is clear that social interaction is not a completely
neutral stimulus to the majority of pets. Similar to food treats, individuals vary in
spond with great excitement to a squeaker toy as a primary positive reinforcer,
while a retriever may prefer a tennis ball. Some cats enjoy small fuzzy balls that
they can bat around while others get very excited about the opportunity to play
with a laser light beam. Once several primary reinforcers have been identified
for an animal, it is often possible to rank these in terms of their level of value to
the animal and use them judiciously in training.
USINGACONDITIONED REINFORCER
A conditioned (secondary) reinforcer is a neutral stimulus that becomes
associated with a primary reinforcer through classical conditioning (see
Chapter 4, pp. 94-95). Over time, this stimulus acquires the same reinforcing
capabilities as the primary (or unconditioned) reinforcer. A commonly used
example in dog and cat training is verbal praise, specifically a single word
uaul pue bus loy Aoq poob, bop jey sllet leumo jed aul jl .' poob, se yons
Practical Applications: Training and Behavior Modification Techniques
Chapter 5
13
(the food treat). When the phrase "good dog" has become a conditioned
reinforcer, it will serve as a positive reinforcer, even when not paired with
food. (lt is important, however, to still consistently pair the conditioned
ate primary reinforcing properties for dogs and cats, pairing a specific word
secondary reinforcer properties.
A benefit of a conditioned reinforcer, as well as its primary function, is that it
allows the trainer to precisely target a desired behavior at the exact moment
is difficult or even impossible. The most common situation is when the dog
or cat is not physically close to the trainer. Attempting to provide a food treat
to reinforce behaviors when the animal is separated from the trainer by more
than about 12 inches often results in the dog or cat moving toward the trainer,
o pom e buey 'aojeleyl yoyeg meu e ui bubebue Auanbasgns pue
click) that effectively communicates to the animal "Yes! It is that behavior that
is occurring at exactly this moment that will be reinforced!" is an invaluable
training aid.
Clicker as a Conditioned Reinforcer
A very popular conditioned reinforcer that is used in dog and cat training is
the clicker. The click sound made by a small metal or plastic device (com-
monly called a “cricket") is a neutral stimulus (unlike verbal praise, which
enp poys Aea jo pue anbiun yiog si jeui punos e seonpoid leyoo eu
tion, which are important characteristics for effective conditioned reinforcers
Unlike the trainer's voice or words, which can vary significantly in tone and
confusion. As described previously, the click-treat connection is established
through classically conditioning the sound of the click with the presenta-
responses, the click must immediately precede the provision of the treat.
Conditioning is apparent when the dog or cat reacts with a starle or alerting
response to the click sound, indicating that the click now predicts the arrival
of the primary reinforcer (the treat). Once conditioned, the trainer then begins
eleaes oi dn oi puooes e uuhm jeenl e joedxe oi jeo jo bop eul seuoeal
seconds after hearing the click. This training is imperative for the use of the
clicker in any type of exercise that the animal is required to engage in while
physically away from the trainer.
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
GETTINGSTARTED
Because the sound that a clicker makes is neutral and meaningless to the animal,
it must be conditioned as a reliable predictor of a primary reinforcer (treat). This is
easily achieved by clicking and immediately following the click with a treat. Dog
quantity of small treats that can be consumed quickly by the dog. For most dogs,
the opposite), leads to a visible “startle response" to hearing the click. When the
dog clearly begins to look for a treat upon hearing the click sound, the trainer has
with cats is to place a teaspoon of canned food or other moist treat on the end
of a spoon. The cat is allowed one bite of the food following each click. Although
or searching behaviors for the spoon after hearing the click indicate that the
stimulus-stimulus association has been learned.
The next step is to select a very simple behavior that the dog or cat is already offer-
ing to attempt to manipulate operantly. In dogs, a behavior that is often very readily
learned is "eye contact." Most dogs will spontaneously look into their owners' eyes
ue o bop sly oy shm Adwis auen eul 'uoisss buuen e buunp puod awos es
into his eyes, and immediately click-treats (hereafter; CT). After several repetitions,
usui ue buusand 'u ae bueo jo rouenben eu esue m bop au
number of opportunities for reinforcement. In cats, friendly approach is a good be-
havior to begin with. When the trainer sees his cat approaching for petting or to ask
for dinner, the behavior of approaching is reinforced with CT. To faclitate learning.
even a step towards the trainer should receive a CT. Both of these simple behaviors
allow the trainer to become accustomed to accurately isolate (target) behaviors with
a clicker, and provide the dog or cat with repeated opportunities to learn the classi-
forcer. As dogs and cats (and their human caretakers) become more proficient, more
ducing simple operant tasks to dogs (Sidebar 3). However, the ubiquitous use and
success of conditioned reinforcers and specifically of clicker training in professional
dog training provides strong evidence in support of this approach to training (see
TIMING AND SCHEDULES OF REINFORCEMENT
The timing with which stimuli and reinforcers are presented to the animal is an im-
portant consideration when teaching new behaviors. To be effective, positive and
negative reinforcement must occur within one second or fess of the behavior that
Practical Applications: Training and Behavior Modification Techniques
Chapter 5
CLICKERTRAINING VS. FOOD ALONE AS A PRIMARY
Sidebar 3
REINFORCER
siluaseg paigaind jo dnoie e jo Alge aul pauiwexa Apnis pausllgnd Aeoal y
to learn a simple operant task (touching an orange traffic cone with their nose)
reinforcer alone (treat). The number of repetitions and amount of time needed for
and during a strengthening phase (switching to an intermittent schedule of rein-
of repetitions and duration (seconds) needed for extinction of the behavior were
touching, but no food treat followed the click, while the group trained with food
alone received no reinforcement at all during the extinction phase.
yaual aul pue suoadai jo legwnu ueaw au ybnoye peyl pamoys snsey
of time required by dogs trained with CT to learn "nose-touch" were lower than
values for the group of dogs trained with the presentation of food alone, these
differences were not statistically significant. Interestingly, when the dogs were
tions and duration to achieve a reliable response did not differ at all between
the two groups. When the final phase of extinction was introduced, the dogs
who had been trained using a clicker as a conditioned reinforcer continued
to offer "nose-touch" for a significantly longer time and for a larger number of
repetitions than did dogs who were trained using a primary reinforcer alone
The researchers concluded that this study found no difference between dogs
appeared to be more resistant to extinction of the behavior in the absence of a
primary reinforcer once the behavior had been learned. However, the data sup-
sahons 'sbop pauiel-leyolo aul ui buueal paoueuue jo loae, ui puell e paod
ing that additional studies would be helpful. Additionally, the type of task that was
targeted behavior's occurrence). Because one of the reported benefits of using
distance or which do not lend themselves to immediate reinforcement, a study
operant task in domestic dogs (Canis famiiaris). Appi Anirnm Behav Sci, 110:318-329, 2008.
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
is intended to be affected. Learning occurs most rapidly if there is some degree of
follows the behavior by more than one second, the animal is often already engag-
ing in another behavior, and it is this behavior that is inadvertently reinforced. In
fact, the underlying basis for many behavior problems that seem to persist re-
gardless of training can often be traced back to the trainer's use of inaccurately
timed reinforcement (Box 5. 1).
Box 5.1 WHY CAN'T CASSIE SIT-STAY?
Cassie is an eight-month-old Australian shepherd. Her owner, Sally, is teaching Cassie to sit and to stay in posi-
her chest. Sally trained Cassie to sit on command when she was four months old and just recently started to teach
Cassie to stay in place (command = “stay") until she is released (release word = “okay"). Cassie wears a flat buckle
collar and a six-foot nylon lead for her training.
Sally begins her training session by telling Cassie to sit and verbally reinforcing the sit ("good girl, Cassie"). Be-
time. She waits 5 seconds and releases Cassie with her release command: "okay:" Cassie jumps up, and Sally
leasing Cassie. Each time that Sally releases Cassie with "okay' she immediately gives a cheese treat.
Afer several training sessions, Sally begins to notice something odd. Cassie seems to avoid the “sit' command,
often jumping up exuberantly on Sally as soon as Sally asks her to sit. Alternatively, if Cassie does offer sit, she has
started to crouch, as if in a play bow, shortly after being asked to stay.As soon as Sally releases her with “okay"
edly and happily.
What Is Happening? Why Is Cassie Not Learning?
ing her targeted behavior (sit quietly and stay in a sitting position), she is inadvertently but consistently reinforcing
"jump up exuberantly!" Remember, if positive reinforcement (peting, praise, food treats) is provided while Cassie is
waits too long, and reinforces Cassie upon the release word, then Cassie's behavior at this moment movement is
reinforced,not the sit-stay!
The Solution?
Sally continues with her training, slowly shaping a sit-stay behavior. However, instead of providing a reinforcer after
quietly praises her, gives her cheese treats, and gently pets her chest. when Cassie is released, Sally simply says
"working" now is sitting and staying, while jumping up afterwards earns no reward.
Practical Applications: Training and Behavior Modification Techniques
Chapter 5
17
When the trainer reinforces some responses and not others, this is referred
to as differential reinforcement. All operant training is based upon differen-
 i     s       
reinforcing other behaviors that the dog may be offering. Behaviors such as
looking away, yawning, pawing, sighing, or lying down are simply ignored. As
behavior is reinforced with CT. Differential reinforcement is also used during shap
criteria is positively reinforced and every response that does not meet the criteria
is ignored.
a continuous reinforcement schedule. A continuous reinforcement schedule
should be used when new behaviors are being introduced and continued until
the dog or cat is reliably offering the behavior in response to the selected cue.
For example, the dog reliably and consistently sits when asked to "sit" or the
see increase!" to the dog or cat.
An intermittent reinforcement schedule occurs when reinforcement is
provided occasionally as the consequence to the desired behavior. A useful anal-
the slot machines of Las Vegas is responding to an intermittent schedule of rein-
forcement. “Slot-machine playing" behavior is strongly maintained because it is
occasionally and unpredictably reinforced by the arival of money. Similarly, a dog
who has been trained to come when called and gradually switched from continu-
ous to intemmittent reinforcement will continue to offer this behavior in anticipation
of possibly receiving reinforcement. Several types of schedules of intermmittent rein-
aoe jo ad Aue buyoeal ueum bunuen teo pue bop ui pasn uao jsow ae san
behavior. Variable interval schedules are helpful when teaching a dog or cat to stay
n place (sit-stay or down-stay) for a period of time.
of learned behavior than continuous reinforcement schedules. In addition
because the total amount of reinforcement that is used in a training session is
1.8
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
table 5.1 Reinforcement Schedules
TYPE
DEFINITION
Continuous
Reinforcement is provided for every correct response
Variable Interval
dog during a sit-stay exercise at 30 seconds, 40 seconds, 90 seconds, 200 seconds, and
240 seconds)
Fixed Interval
during a sit-stay exercise at 30, 60, 90, 120, 150, 180, 210, and 240 seconds)
Variable Ratio
Reinforcement is provided after an irregular number of correct responses (For example: A food
correct response)
Fixed Ratio
 Reinforcement is provided after a regular number of correct responses ( For example: A
food treat is given to a dog for coming when called after the first, fourth, seventh, tenth, and
thirteenth correct response)
always best to err on the side of caution when considering changing from a
continuous to an intermittent schedule. Switching to an intermittent schedule of
fully understand the desired behavior that is being trained. Similarly, when an
intermittent schedule of reinforcement is introduced, the ratio of reinforced to
not-reinforced repetitions of the behavior should still be very high (i.e. reinforce-
o peseaioap Aenpeie eq ueo oe aul pue (Auanba inooo ls pinoys jueu
interval of time increased).
Although intermittent schedules of reinforcement have been shown to have
advantages in laboratory settings and under very controlled conditions, in
practical dog and cat training most behaviors can be easily maintained using
a continuous schedule of reinforcement. Because trainers always have their
voices and hands available, and because many dogs and cats respond to a
variety of forms of positive reinforcement, there is often no need to switch to an
intermittent schedule of reinforcement. However, if a particular behavior cannot
be consistently reinforced in practical situations, taking the time to introduce
some form of intermittent reinforcement will help to make the behavior more
resistant to extinction. A second situation in which intermittent reinforcement is
helpful is when the desired behavior is occurring at a very high frequency. One
practical example is the use of positive reinforcement to increase "loose lead"
while out walking with the dog. Rather than reinforce every step that the dog
takes with a loose lead, the trainer can use an intermittent schedule and rein-
force proper heel position after a variable number of steps.
Practical Applications: Training and Behavior Modification Techniques
Chapter 5
'uaweiouian jo anpayos jueweui ue buisn ane oum seumo Aa peueueu
For example, the dog who barks for attention during dinnertime has often been
 fed tidbits at variable times, reinforcing (and often strengthening) this behavior.
Similarly, the cat who repeatedly bats pens off of the desk until her owner stops
working on her behavior book to pet her has learned through intermittent rein-
point in this daily game she will be reinforced!
SUCCESSIVE APPROXIMATION (SHAPING)
Because operant conditioning relies upon the consequences of behavior for learn-
ing, the dog or cat must first be able to offer the behavior so that it can be rein-
forced. However, many of the behaviors that trainers are interested in reinforcing
either occur at very low frequencies or are not a part of the animal's behavioral
repertoire in their complete form. An example is waiting for a dog to spontaneously
sit and stay in place for a period of time. Although most dogs do sit now and then,
they do not sit in place without moving (a sit-stay) for more than several seconds.
For this reason, operant conditioning techniques almost always use successive
approximation, also called shaping. Shaping involves starting with a small part or an
approximation of a desired response. The animal should be already offering this little
"piece of the behavior' so that the trainer can differentially reinforce it. As the animal
begins to increase the frequency with which he offers the "piece" (approximation),
the trainer then shifts the criteria to reinforce closer approximations, moving gradu-
ally towards the final and desired response. As the dog or cat is successful at each
behavior, and previous foms of the behavior are no longer reinforced.
Perhaps the best way to describe successive approximation is through an
example. In the case of teaching a sit-stay, a first-level response would be
simply to sit, without requiring the dog to stay in position. When the dog reliably
sits on command, the criterion is shifted and the trainer now reinforces sit
(increased) as the dog is successful, until he is capable of staying for several
can be shaped using the same procedure, but should be taught separately from
shaping time intervals. In other words, the trainer concentrates on increasing
time while staying close to the dog. Once the dog is reliably staying, distance
can then be shaped. When the trainer begins to shape distance, she will move
further and further away from the dog, but only for very short periods of time.
Once both time and distance have been shaped, the two criteria can then
be combined and increasing intervals of time with longer distances can be
simultaneously shaped
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
If failure occurs at any level, the trainer simply drops back down to a lower
response level until the dog or cat is again proficient. One of the most common
mistakes made by novice trainers is to expect too much too soon, reflected by
shifting criteria at a rate that causes the dog or cat to fail. Proceeding gradually
ensures that the subject is proficient at each stage before attempting a more dif-
tive reinforcement). Trainers must also always be willing to drop back to an earlier
of intermediate (successive) steps to facilitate learning. When used correctly, suc-
can be achieved and many problem behaviors can be solved, without the need of
negative reinforcement or punishment (see Chapters 6 and 7).
Prompting vs. Free-Shaping
Because operant conditioning is a consequence-based learning process, train-
 a s    so  a m pd o  
  s       o     s
behavior or response that the trainer has identified as desirable and which will be
reinforced in a given training session. With shaping, criteria will shift as the animal
 begins to offer behaviors that approach the final desired behaviors. Prompting
(also called "luring") is a training method that is used to induce a dog or cat to
offer all or part of a desired behavior so that the opportunity for reinforcement can
dog may not be inclined to offer even the first part of lying down (moving front
sip Aea si pue bop buno aaloe ue si ays esnioag Adwis (ey jo uoy un ino jeey
of the "lying down" behavior by slowly moving a hand containing a food treat from
the puppy's nose towards his front toes (the "nose-to-toes" technique), and rein-
forcing for any movement towards a down position (Figure 5.1). Food treats held
in hands are a very effective training tool because most dogs and cats readily
orient to the treat and the hand, and can then be induced to move into a desired
lauoue si Aoi eluoael e buisso lo buploh 'puey eun bumollol Adwis Aq uogisod
effective lure for some training situations.
Free-shaping refers to simply waiting for the dog or cat to "offer" a desired behavior
'capturing” behaviors because, when perfommed corectly, it involves targeting natu
rally occuring behaviors and then gradually shaping these to approach the new be-
havior that is desired. An example of free-shaping is teaching a dog to shake hands.
Many dogs naturally use their paws to request attention or during play. If the trainer
wishes to capture this behavior with the intent of teaching "shake hands" she waits
Practical Applications: Training and Behavior Modification Techniques
Chapter 5
figure 5.1 Prompting (luring) *down" using a food treat and hand motion
downward (nose-to-toes)
figure 5.2 Free-shaping "shake hands"
until the dog offers even a slight paw lift and immediately reinforces it ("good" or CT).
Once the dog begins to increase the frequency of "lift paw," the trainer then shifts the
criterion slightly and reinforces a higher lift of the paw touching a hand (Figure 5.2)
Athough trainers often debate the pros and cons of prompting vs. free-shaping, in
actuality, both approaches to teaching new behaviors are useful (Sidebar 4).
PROMPTING (LURING) VS. FREE-SHAPING
Sidebar 4
Prompting
●Reduces frustration and increases rate of learming: Using a lure to "jump-start' a be-
with an opportunity to rapidly learn from consequences, thus reducing the frustration
that can occur with free-shaping and enhancing the rate of learning.
· Risks: Prompting a behavior contributes to poor stimulus discrimination: This is the
major disadvantage of prompting new behaviors. The movement of the hand holding
ated with the behavior. In fact, if the trainer is not careful, the prompt itself becomes the
cue tooffer thebehavior.
● Solution: The prompt (lure) MUST be removed as early in the learning process as
possible. For example, if food in the hand is used to prompt lying down, the food must
beremoved from the hand after the doghas offered several repetitions and has not
learned to "wait for the food"' to offer the behavior.
122
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
Free-shaping
a            
learning and the shaping of new and unusual behaviors.
are targeted: Because the subject (dog or cat) does not know what behavior is de-
sired, free-shaping can lead to frustration if the animal continually tries new behaviors
trated, the trainer must can either lower the criteria for reinforcement (i.e. select an ap
    o   pn bo si     
"jump-start"the learning process.
BEHAVIOR CHAINS AND THE PREMACK PRINCIPLE
Teaching a new behavior to a dog or cat often involves a sequence of two or
are called behavior chains and are taught by first breaking the chain of behav-
iors into small individual components and training each component separately.
When the subject is proficient at each piece of the behavior, they are then linked
fogether, starting with just two behaviors, then adding more as the dog or cat
learns to perform each sequence reliably. Many behavior chains are best taught
in the sequence is taught first, thus establishing a strong reinforcement history
(i.e. the dog or cat has had the opportunity to practice the last behavior most
often). Wwhen all of the steps have been taught and the trainer is ready to link them
together, the chaining proceeds from the end of the chain towards the beginning.
The first two behaviors to link together are the final behavior and the second-
to-last behavior. The trainer then works backwards toward the start of the entire
chain (Box 5.2).
Athough back-chaining seems counterintuitive, it functions to “drive" the be-
havior chain because the dog is always working towards the final behavior that
has been most strongly reinforced. As the dog or cat works her way through the
chain, the behaviors near the latter part of the chain are more familiar. Interest-
named affer the behaviorist who first described it, David Premack. A helpful anal-
ogy in human experience is the feeling that many people have during a very long
car trip to a much anticipated vacation site. The early and middle hours of the trip
aaae aul snoy may isel eu buunp ing 'buinbney pue buuog enb awooag uen
Practical Applications: Training and Behavior Modification Techniques
Chapter 5
BoX 5.2 USING BACK-CHAINING TO TEACH RUCKUS TO PUT
HiS TOYS AWAY
toys that he plays with and retrieves. George has provided a large wicker basket for these toys and would like to
George can use when back-chaining this rather complex trick:
STEPS:
1)Break the behavior into its component parts, starting from the last behavior in the chain:
(a) Coming when called from the basket.
(b)Dropping the toy into the basket.
(c)Running to the basket with the toy.
(d)  Retrieving (fetching) the toy.
(e) Marking (indicating) the toy.
(f)Staying close to trainer (sit/down) and toy until asked to fetch.
2)Teach (and strongly reinforce) the last behaviors first:
behavior).
the basket).
(c) Ruckus is standing next to the basket and is given a toy to hold. He is reinforced for dropping to toy into the
basket (and leaving it there).
(d) Each behavior in the sequence is trained separately (using shaping), but these final two should receive the
3)Assembling the steps in the chain:
s
(b) George gives Ruckus a toy as he stands with his head over the basket; he asks Ruckus to drop the toy into
the basket and then calls him to come (strong reinforcement!)
(c) Steps are then added working backwards towards the beginning of the trick (run to the basket with toy is
sig e oui soi siu sind snyont - iep-ii - un '(apis pe ts uaun :oi dn yoid uaun ixau pape
often feels energized as she anticipates the reward of vacation. In this case, the
positive reinforcement for a long task (driving for many hours) is the arrival at a
pleasant location. Similarly, a dog who is performing a behavior chain that has a
well-reinforced final behavior will show increased motivation near the end of the
chain if the last behavior is anticipated as having a very positive "pay-off" (strong
reinforcement history).
form the entire sequence and not quit early affer one or two of the steps in the
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
sequence. By making the final step of the series the "best" part, we teach the
dog or cat to anticipate the final portion (or, as we know it, the completion) of the
trick. The final steps are said to then drive the entire sequence. Behavior chains
can also be taught using forward-chaining - simply linking each behavior in se-
quence of their occurrence. However, this can lead to a decrease in performance
o sdais mey psy eul asnoag 'saues aul yonou em sly syom o o bop eul se
the sequence were those that were most strongly reinforced rather than the final
steps. Therefore, the animal's anticipation of reinforcement would focus on the
first portions of the sequence rather than the last, leading to a tendency to quit
early without completing the entire trick.
Back-chaining behavior chains invoke the Premack Principle, which simply
asuodsan (panisap aow) jabuons e ui abebue oi Aunuoddo aun peun sateiss
the opportunity to engage in each subsequent behavior serves to reinforce the
through the chain. The Premack principle can also be used when selecting
effective reinforcers for training. For example, if an owner trained his dog to
retrieve, and retrieving is a highly valued activity for that particular dog, the
   s    n,     
strong (or that the dog is less naturally motivated to perform), such as waiting
at the owner's side until he is released. Used properly, the dog will quickly
learn that he will have the opportunity to retrieve the toy only if he waits in a sit
position until released
Fading Cues and Attaining Stimulus Control
When to Put a Behavior "On Cue": Cues are the verbal commands or hand
signals that a trainer uses to elicit the targeted behavior. Examples of verbal cues
e epnjou! speubis puey jo seldwex .! leb, pue ,'ewoo, .'umop, 'is, epnjou!
typically add the cue for new behaviors after the dog or cat has learned the new
behavior or at least part of the new behavior. This may appear *"backwards" but
confusion in the dog or cat. For example, once a dog is consistently lying down
for a food treat, the trainer introduces the verbal command “down,”" followed by
any prompts that are used, reinforcing the dog for the down behavior. This fa-
cilitates fading the hand cue or lure to a hand signal as the verbal command be-
comes classically conditioned and evokes the response without the hand cue.
cases, in place of) responding to the verbal cue that is used to elicit the behavior.
Practical Applications: Training and Behavior Modification Techniques
Chapter 5
the dog offering her paw. However, he suddenly notices that the dog begins to
offer his paw for shaking when he simply bends towards the dog, or reaches out
with his own hand, without necessarily waiting for the verbal “shake" command.
These movements have all served as additional (though inadvertent) cues that
have been repeatedly paired with the "shake" command. From the dog's point
of view, these movements have the same meaning as the verbal command itself
(classical conditioning again!). Trainers must be aware of these extraneous cues
(and should attempt to minimize them) as they can interfere with stimuls control
once the behavior has been completely shaped and put on cue.
Once a dog or cat has learned to perform a particular trick "on cue" and is be-
ginning to reliable in his responses, the trainer should identify all of the cues that
sano aul jo Aue jeuaum auwualap pinous pue oi bupuodsa sl peo lo bop au
require fading. Evaluating cues can be as simple as deciding whether to use a
voice command, a hand signal, or both as the cue to elicit a behavior. For exam-
ple, some dog trainers teach dogs to respond to both a hand signal and a voice
In addition to the type of cue, the trainer must also fade any prompting proper-
ties that the cue may have. Using the "down" command as an example: If the
ao si ll Aisnoaid peguosep pdwoid puey eu buisn pybnel Aeui si puewwoo
of the lure is often an appropriate hand signal to use as the command for the
behavior. If the trainer wishes to change the cue that is used to elicit the behavior,
this can be accomplished with classical conditioning. The new (neutral) cue is
given immediately prior to the established cue, each time the behavior is re-
behavior without being paired with the established cue.
Stimufus (Cue) Controf: A stimulus is anything that causes a behavioral re
sponse. In the case of practical dog and cat training, cues are stimuli that elicit
trained behaviors. Because these stimuli do not naturally elicit the desired re-
sponse and have to be taught through association and shaping, they are called
conditioned stimuli. Wwhen the dog offers the behavior (lying down) only in re-
sponse to the conditioned stimulus (the verbal command “down"), the behavior
is said to be under stimulus control. However, most dogs and cats tend to ofer
behaviors when they are not asked for or in response to a different cue. This is
called a lack of stimulus control. Anticipating a command is a common example
of a lack of stimulus control. For example, a dog who offers "shake" prior to the
pily rolls over in response to his owner's command, "shake." Although the dog is
28
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
offering a trained behavior, he is not offering the correct trick for the stimulus (cue)
that the trainer has given.
sciously taught. If it is not, most dogs and cats will simply choose behaviors
that they most enjoy (or that are easiest for them to do or have the strongest
reinforcement history), and offer them repeatedly in response to various cues.
remotely appears to be getting ready to offer them the cue. While this is not a
terrible problem to have in the grand scheme of dog and cat ownership, train-
ers are most successful if they consciously teach stimulus control once they
have a behavior on cue. Helpful tips for attaining stimulus control are outlined
in Sidebar 5.
Sidebar 5
TECHNIQUES FOR ATTAINING STIMULUS CONTROL
problems can arise when the dog or cat offers a particular (favorite) trick in
spontaneously in the absence of the cue. Using the trick of "shake hands" as
the example, the four rules of attaining stimulus control are
·ALWAyS reinforce"the desired behavior for the correct cue": Each time that the trainer
says "shake hands" and the dog responds correctly (offers paw to shake), the trainer
because the classical pairing of the verbal cue ("shake hands") with an opportunity to
●NEVER reinforce"spontaneous offers of the desired behavior": If the dog offers to
shake but the trainer has not asked for the behavior with a cue, the behavior is ignored
offerings are reinforced!
·NEVER reinforce"the desired behavior for an incorrect cue": It is sometimes tempting
ent command; for example, the dog offers to shake hands when asked to sit. A trainer
        n  o a   
● NEVER reinforce"an incorrect behavior for the correct cue": This is the opposite of the
previous mistake - the dog offers a sit behavior when asked to shake hands. No rein-
forcement sends the message, "Sorry, that is not correct; that is not what was asked
Practical Applications: Training and Behavior Modification Techniques
Chapter 5
A Few Additional Tips:
· Change the reinforcer: When a new behavior is taught and being "put on cue;" it is
using lower-value reinforcers for behaviors that the dog knows well and performs reli
ably. This functions to focus the dog's attention on that particular behavior in a training
session because it is the one that is "paying off"' the most.
· Modify the cue: If a dog repeatedly confuses the cues of a trick or repeatedly offers the
wrong response for a particular cue, this may indicate a need to re-teach that cue or
believe is the one that the trainer wants) goes unrewarded. Simply breaking up the
frustration and allow the trainer and dog to start fresh with the new behavior.
BEHAVIORMODIFICATION TECHNIQUES
Behavior modification involves changing behaviors that are considered to be un-
acceptable and problematic to alternate behaviors that are acceptable. Although
wanted behaviors and often also altering the animal's emotional responses during
counter conditioning.
Extinction
learned response that is not desired, over time the response will decrease in
classicaly learned associations. This is accomplished by repeatedly presenting
the conditioned stimulus by itself in the absence of the unconditioned stimulus.
oy esuodsa pauopuoo aul jo (uoouxe lo) auoap enpee e ui snsa sul
example, a dog who jumps up to go for a walk whenever his owner picks up his
keys is demonstrating a classically conditioned association between picking up
keys (conditioned stimulus) and going outside for a walk (unconditioned stimulus).
without following this action with a walk. With classically conditioned responses,
the use of extinction can only be successful if the pairing of the conditioned and
unconditioned stimuli are permanently disassociated.
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
Extinction of operantly learned behaviors is accomplished by withdrawing
first withdrawn, the pet shows a sudden increase in the behavior. This is called
an extinction burst. If the behavior is subsequently never reinforced, extinc-
intermittently during an attempt at extinction, the behavior will again be rein-
problem in dogs that often has been unintentionally operantly conditioned.
 Reinforcement for this type of barking is the owner's attention. Ignoring the dog
although extinction techniques are often recommended for solving behavior
problems, they are not effective in practical settings if used alone and without
other forms of behavior modification.
Limitations of Extinction: When Lsed alone, extinction has several serious
limitations as a behavior modification technique. Removing an expected posi-
tive reinforcer inevitably causes frustration and agitation in the dog or cat, emo-
tions that can lead to other problem behaviors in an affempf fo obfain fhe
same reinforcer. For example, a dog who barks for attention is simply asking
turns and walks away) and no other behavior is reinforced with attention and
affection, the dog is still lonely and still in need of social interaction. He may
oouxe peut si uoewl puooas y 'dn dwnf pue yinow jo ,'ueo no j eu
does not account for the self-reinforcing properties of many problem behaviors.
A dog who barks when excited will not generally stop if ignored because bark-
ing is an expression of excitement and is often innately enjoyable to the dog.
Finally, extinction is only useful as a training tool when the trainer has complete
control over the reinforcers for the behavior. For example, if a dog is barking
because he is chasing squirrels out of his yard, extinction is not an option since
the reinforcer for this behavior is the squirrels running away, something that the
owner cannot control. For these reasons, while extinction techniques can be a
helpful addition to some behavior modification programs, they are not generally
successful when used alone to attempt to reduce a problem behavior.
Adding Differential Reinforcement: The inclusion of differential reinforcement
with extinction reduces the animal's frustration and enhances success at reducing
the problem behavior. Differential reinforcement refers to selecting a competing
(desirable) behavior that is incompatible with the problem behavior and reinforc-
ing that behavior while at the same time extinguishing the problem behavior. Us-
ing the previous example, an appropriate and desirable behavior that could be
Practical Applications: Training and Behavior Modification Techniques
Chapter 5
differentially reinforced while attempting to reduce attention-seeking barking is “sit
for petting." For maximum effectiveness, alternate behaviors should be reinforced
before the dog begins to offer the behavior that the owner is attempting to
trainer should be aware of situations that typically lead to barking and then acts
preemptively to engage the dog in an alternate, desirable behavior that is differ-
an alternate and incompatible behavior.'
Systematic Desensitization
This is a technique that is often used to habituate established fearful or aggres-
at a very low level of intensity until habituation is achieved. The level of intensity
is then increased slightly and the animal is exposed to the stimulus until he is
dog or cat is habituated to the full intensity of the stimulus. For example, a puppy
who has been sensitized to the vacuum cleaner could undergo a program of
machine at a wide distance and gradually activating the vacuum cleaner and
coming closer as the puppy habituates at each level. It is essential to this pro-
gram that the stimulus is presented at a level that is always lower than the level
that elicits a fearful response. A delicate balance of slowly increasing the intensity
of the stimulus and avoiding a fearful response must be maintained for success.
Systematic desensitization is the technique that is routinely used to treat pets
who are shy or fearful with strangers. It is also helpful in the treatment of certain
counter-conditioning (see below).
Counter-Conditioning (and Counter-Commanding)
Counter-conditioning refers to classically conditioning an animal to respond to
a stimulus in a manner that is incompatible with the response that was previ
ously evoked by the same stimulus. A new response that is behaviorally, emo-
tionally, or physiologically incompatible with the previously undesired response
desensitization program for fear/flight responses includes feeding high-value
food treats at each level of desensitization. As the dog or cat becomes habitu-
stimulus with the pleasure of eating, rather than with fear (i.e. a classically con-
ditioned relationship).
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
teaching the animal to offer an alternate voluntary response that is incompatible
cleaner causes a sensitized puppy to attempt to flee, a sit-stay with positive
reinforcement could be counter-commanded during the desensitization pro-
gram. Counter-commanding is used more often in dogs than in cats and works
best with a dog who has had some obedience training and when the unwanted
behavior has a relatively low level of motivation. Positive reinforcement should
aueyo oi sl eoh aul esnoag 'esuodsai e uopuoo-leunoo ol pasn eg sem
a situation that was previously unpleasant into a pleasant experience for the dog.
As with systematic desensitization, it is essential that the counter-conditioning
response is not elicited.
Flooding
ysinbuxe ol pesn eg ueo pue ,uouaaaid esuodsei, palleo ose si bupoo
certain types of avoidance responses. It is the direct opposite of systematic
desensitization. The traditional procedure of removing the association betweer
classically conditioned stimuli may be ineffective in solving some avoidance
dog to learn that the aversive event is no longer present. For example, a dog
who has become frightened by the sound of a loud truck begins to avoid the
tioned stimulus that predicts the fear of the loud truck noise). By avoiding the
curb, the dog never again is exposed to the truck, but also cannot learn that the
truck is usually not present (i.e. the curb is actually not predictive of the truck's
approach). It is also theorized that avoidance behavior may be reinforced by
the fear reduction that occurs when the dog is able to avoid the fear-producing
situation in the first place.
Flooding involves exposing the animal to the avoidance situation while prevent-
ing the avoidance behavior. The dog is “"flooded" with the warning cues, but the
aversive stimulus does not appear. In the case of the truck-fearful dog, this would
involve repeated exposure to the curb, in the absence of loud trucks. Flooding
can be a precarious technique because it usually produces an initial increase in
fear. Therefore, it is extremely important to ensure that the aversive stimulus is not
forthcoming while the flooding is taking place. In general, flooding can be success-
ful in situations in which the animal's fear response is not severe, and in which the
trainer is capable of having complete control over the fear-eliciting stimulus
fact can be extremely damaging to the pet when it is used in an attempt to
Practical Applications: Training and Behavior Modification Techniques
Chapter 5
131
 sis  s s  sd  s  s
advocated the incorrect use of flooding by presenting the aversive stimulus
itself to the dog or cat, rather than the cues that predict the aversive stimulus.
In the case described above, this would entail restraining the dog on a lead while
forcing her to endure the approach of many trucks (ie. “flooding" her with the
jo uoddesw e Auo jou sl anbuyoel buuen, syi (snnwgs bunpod-eay
flooding but is inefective and cruel, and should never be supported. In the vast
method for dealing with fear or avoidance behaviors in dogs and cats.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. 
Identify the classical and operant components of teaching a dog to lie down and
stay in position on command
2.
What is clicker training? Provide an example in dog or cat training.
3.
4.
Discuss the benefits of successive approximation (shaping) in practical dog and
cat training.
What is "back-chaining"? How is it used in dog training and what are its benefits?
REFERENCESANDFURTHER READING
Borchelt PL, Voith VL. Punishment. In: Readings in Companion Animal Behavior, VL Voith
and PL Borchelt, editors, Veterinary Learning Systems, Trenton, NJ, pp. 72-80, 1996.
Burch MR, Bailey JS. How Dogs Learn. Howell Book House, New York, NY, 188 pp..
1999.
Donaldson J. Culture Clash: A Revolutionary New Way of Understanding the
Oakland, CA, 221 pp., 1996.
Fukuzawa M, Mills DS, Cooper JJ. More than just a word: non-semantic command
Sci, 91:129-141, 2005.
Press, Freedom, CA, 154 pp., 1994.
via observation in a manipulation task. J/ Comp Psychol, 117:156-165, 2003.
132
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
Ley J, Coleman GJ, Holmes R, Hemsworth PH. Assessing fear of novel and startling
Lindsay SR. Handbook of Applied Dog Behavior and Training, Volume 1: Adaptation
and Learning. lowa State University Press, Ames, IA, 410 pp., 2000
Mills DS. What's in a word? A review of the attributes of a command affecting the
performance of pet dogs. Anthr0z00s, 18:208-221, 2005.
Miltenberger R. Behavior Modification: Principles and Practices.Brooks/Cole
Publishing. Pacific Grove, CA, 1997.
O'Farrell V. Dog's Best Friend: How Not to Be a Problem Owner. Methuen Press.
London, UK, 1994.
Pearce WD, Cheney CD. Behavior Analysis and Learning, 3rd edition. Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Inc, Mahwah, NJ, 388 pp., 2004
in social learning between dog (Canis familiaris) and human. J Comp Psychol
118:375-383, 2004.
Pryor K. Karen Pryor on Behavior. Sunshine Books, North Bend, WA, 405 pp., 1995
Reid P. Excel-Erated Learning: Explaining How Dogs Learn and How Best to Teach
Them. James and Kenneth Publishing. Oakland, CA, 172 pp., 1996.
Rogerson J. Your Dog: Its Development, Behaviour, and Training. Popular Dogs
Publishing Company, London, 0K, 174 pp., 1990.
Schilder MBH, van der Borg JAM. Training dogs with help of the shock collar: short
and long term behavioral effects.App Anim Behav Sci, 85:319-334, 2004.
Spreat S, Spreat SR. Learning principles. Vet Clin North Amer: Small Anim Pract,
12:593-606, 1982.
VoithVL, Borchelt PL (Editors). Readings in Companion Animal Behavior.Veterinary
Learning Systems, Trenton, NJ, 276 pp., 1996.
Yin S. Classical conditioning: Learning by association. Compend Contin Vet, Smal
Anim Pract, 472-476, June 2006
CHAPTER
Training and Problem Prevention
for Puppies and Kittens
dopting a new puppy or kitten is an exciting time for most families.
Whether the new pet is adopted from a local shelter or purchased from
a breeder, the transition from mother and littermates to a new home and
 family can be stressful. A careful approach to introductions can facilitate
ua jo Addnd aul jo uonebaul pidel pue awou mau aul ol uonsuen yoows e
into the new family. Early training and socialization can prevent many common
behavior problems from developing and contributes to a well mannered and well
behaved adult pet.
THE NEWLY ADOPTED PUPPY AND KITTEN
Most breeders and foster homes wean puppies and kittens when they are
between 7 and 9 weeks of age. For puppies, this age is well within the period
of primary socialization period (5 to 12 weeks; see Chapter 2 for a complete
discussion of sensitive periods of development). Conversely, kittens are entering
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
their new homes near the end of their primary socialization period (2 to 9 weeks)
During the time that puppies and kittens are with their mothers and litermates
communication with members of their own species. When puppies and kittens
are adopted into new homes, they must also learn to communicate with human
human family.
The First Day
home. Although it may be tempting to adopt during holiday seasons, for
their normal daily routine is disrupted, company is arriving, and family mem-
bers may be traveling. During initial introductions, the puppy or kitten should
not be allowed free access to the house, but should be confined to one room
and allowed to explore that room. For puppies, it is often helpful to first intro-
a m ay aeym lo paool sl aeo sy yoiym ui woo eui oi Addnd aui eonp
issnosp e loy 1 iegepis ees ep yoee aw siy jo punowe abel e bupueds
of the appropriate use of crates). For kittens, it is important to introduce the
Sidebar 1
CRATETRAINING
Crating is an effective approach to safe confinement for newly adopted
puppies (or adults) when they cannot be adequately supervised. A crate can
also be used to teach a new kitten or adult cat to use a litter box. In addition,
enjoyable travel. Once an animal is reliably house-trained or litter box-trained
and can be trusted not to damage household items when left alone, the
crate should no longer be needed. Most owners use a crate as needed for
confinement, with the ultimate goal being a pet who can be safely left alone
loose in the home for several hours a day.
Several types of crates are available. A dog's crate should be large
enough to allow the dog to stand up and turn around. For puppies, a
jed jo buiyooig Aq azis aiedoidde ue oi paonpal ag ueo aleio abiel 
of the space. When needed with cats, the crate should be large enough
to accommodate a litter box, a bed, and a water bowl, allowing for some
space between these items.
A combination of classical and operant conditioning should be used to
sanbjuyoal eyl 'aieio e ol pauuoo buleg jdeooe ol sieo pue sbop yoeel
Training and Problem Prevention for Puppies and Kittens
Chapter 6
used for "alone time" training can be used to pair the stimulus of the
crate (neutral stimulus) with the stimulus of a highly desirable food treat
(unconditioned stimulus). The initial introduction to the crate may involve
simply tossing treats into the open door, allowing the pet to enter the crate
and kittens can be classically conditioned to associate the crate with meal
time by feeding them in the crate with the door open. When accustomed
to being in the crate, the door can be closed. The time that the puppy or
poof e yllm palled sAemje sl pue pasealoul Ajenpeib sl peuljuoo sl ualy
panjea Ajybly s! jeyl Aol mayo lo Aol Alaallap
While crating is a highly effective way to keep a young dog safe when alone
and to prevent house soiling and chewing damage, crates can be easily
overused or abused. Studies show that isolation is stressful for puppies,
exacerbated by constraint to a small cage or crate. Although a crate environ-
ment can be enriched, it is still an impoverished environment, lacking in stimu-
lation and restricting natural movement. A general rule of thumb is that a dog
aeo e ui awl paidnauun jo snoy g oi t ueyl alow pueds laaau pnous
When extended isolation is unavoidable, owners must make other arrange
'aw ale speeu jeuoowe pue eoisAyd Alep sAddnd aul leyl ansue ol suau
or using a doggy day-care service. Crating must also never be used as a form
buiplaoid ol eajeuele ue se bop aul eujuoo dl eoeld e se lo juewysjund jo
needed attention or exercise.
Frank D, Minero M, Cannas S, Palestrini C. Puppy behaviours when left home alone: A pilot study. App Anirm
Behav Sci, 104:61-70, 2007.
Hetts S, Clear JD, Calpin JP, Arnold CE, Mateo JM. Influence of housing conditions on beagle behavior. App Anirm
Behav Sci, 34:137-155, 1992.
access to these locations.
o ag uao sill oi e ym ah e oun wy buoue jo 'wy bumad pue wy ol
introduce each person singly to avoid overwhelming the new puppy or kitten with
several excited family members at a time. Finally, owners should make sure that
the new puppy or kitten is provided with a quiet place to rest often during the first
day. lravel and introductions to a new family are exciting, but are also stressful for
a hewpet.
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
Establishing a Regular Daily Schedule
Because many owners have busy schedules and may be away from home
during the work day, adjustments must be made to accommodate the new
syi 'uey lo Addnd eyi buned pue buysng Aieinb bums isnf io ((saiddnd)
time may also be used to give the puppy and kitten exposure to new people
established. Behavior problems that are associated with boredom, frustration,
learns to anticipate a regular schedule of attention, exercise, play, and feeding.
area. Exercise, training and play periods should occur at around the same
time, even on weekends when the family's schedule may change somewhat.
For puppies, the same door should always be used for going outdoors to
eliminate and kittens should be shown their litter box frequently during the first
fewweeksinthenewhome.
SOCIALIZATION
Both puppies and kittens enter the developmental period of primary socialization
breeders and foster homes handle puppies and kittens daily and introduce them
to positive experiences and interactions early in life. Puppies who experience
regular and varied opportunities for socialization while they are still young often
maintain these positive relationships throughout life. Similarly, kittens who are
handled for just several minutes a day during the first five weeks of life by a variety
properly socialized with people and other pets are more likely to be timid, inhibited
and possibly defensively aggressive as adult dogs (see Chapter 2, pp. 33-34).
Kittens who complete their primary socialization period (2 to 9 weeks of age) lack-
ing human interaction have a greater risk of developing into timid adult cats
the pet and the owner, and include both informal training as well as commu-
nity puppy and kitten classes (Sidebars 2 and 3). For puppies, regular walks
moe aldoed jo sada paea pue mau pe oi pue seoid mau ol sdu o pue
habituation and also will establish a pleasurable routine for the dog's entire
life. The proper use of classical conditioning techniques will support emotional
responses to new people and places that are positive (friendly and outgoing)
Training and Problem Prevention for Puppies and Kittens
Chapter 6
37
PUPPY SOCIALIZATION CLASSES
Sidebar 2
Most communities offer several types of puppy kindergarten classes, either
through private dog training schools, pet supply stores, or training clubs.
asneoeg seoueledxa pue 'aldoed 'sbop seu ol ainsodxa buueleaul
puppies are capable of learning at a rapid rate during the primary socializa-
tion period, this age represents a time during which obedience training should
u pue sleuuew ployesnoy yoeal sasselo uaebiapuiy Addnd pso uibag
the effects of a four-week puppy socialization class found that most puppies
responded reliably to basic commands (sit, stay, come, and heel) at the end
ol sleumo ebenooue pue sleuuew salddnd yoeel sessejo Addnd 'spuewwoo
thoroughly socialize their dogs through car rides, walks in the neighborhood
and parks, and opportunities to greet friendly adults and children. All of these
activities contribute to the development of a well-adjusted adult dog. Owners
should be encouraged to continue with these habituation procedures after
completing their class—during the juvenile period and, preferably, throughout
the dog's life.
There is increasing evidence that puppy kindergarten classes are not only
beneficial behaviorally, but that they enhance the probability that dogs will re-
sawoy buumo-bop pgz Aeewixoidde jo Apnis Aaans y 'sawoy ley ul ueu
uojezlleloos Addnd Aeloos auewny e papuehe pey oym sbop peyl paodal
eu shop lnoe se awoy aalidope al ui ea ls ol Aayll alow alam sseo
e papuahe pou pey ing Aouebe awes aul woll paidope alem oym sbop alam
handled frequently as puppies and were more responsive to their owner's
more committed owners decide to attend puppy class in the first place, these
results suggest that some of the skills and education that owners receive at
puppy classes may have long-term benefits to the bond that owners develop
with their dogs.
Seksel K, Mazurski EJ, Taylor A. Puppy socialization programs; short and long term behavioral effects. App Anir?
Behav Sci, 62:335-349, 1999.
attendance at puppy socialization classes.  Am Vet Med Ass0c, 223:61-66, 2003.
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
Sidebar 3
NEW KITTEN CLASSES
ueo sasselo uolezleloos uelly 'sasselo Addnd se uowwoo se pou yonouiy
be both beneficial and enjoyable for cats and their owners. Kitten classes
veterinarians and their staff to educate clients about their new kitten's basic
healthcare, behavior, and training. Like puppy classes, kitten classes also
provide a safe and structured setting for owners to socialize their kittens. The
educational materials and information that are provided during the class aid
in the prevention of future behavior problems such as furniture scratching,
spoylew inoge ueel osje ueo sleumo Aeld aledoiddeul pue bulos asnou
'awoy aul ui sied leyio ol uay laul jo uoonooui ajes pue ledoid ayl og
u ueul sieo ui sejea sinooo uoezieioos Aewd jo poed aul esneoea
pue / ueamleg aie oum suelly ebiei Alensn sasselo uolezleloos 'sboo
14 weeks of age and include 3 to 4 weekly sessions. A properly conducted
kitten class should provide kittens with non-threatening exposure to othel
kittens, to a variety of different types of toys and climbing structures, and
experiences, serving to classically condition the clinic setting and outings
puesealdun lo buiuaiealyl se ueyl leyiei saoueedxe aalsod se leo aul ui
experiences to be avoided.
American Association of Feline Practitioners. Feline Behavior Guidelines, pp.23-24, 2004
as opposed to negative (timid, fearful, or defensively aggressive). Because
classically acquired associations can be pleasant or unpleasant, owners must
purposefully set up these learning situations so that they are enjoyable for the
young puppy and kitten (Box 6.1 and Box 6.2).
Athough the primary socialization period occurs early in life, continued
socialization is also important throughout life to promote habituation and main-
se padaooe Aauab si suuo g ol t ol dn jo abe au 'uozioos Aewd jo
 a good period during which to socialize a new puppy. In fact, there is evidence
au pnoubnout sanuuoo uoezieloos j isow aun jeueq sbop jeun bunsebbns
juvenile period. Similarly, primary socialization ends in kiftens when they are
between 7 and 9 weeks of age. Because kittens are close to the end of this
  s t   s  
Chapter 6
139
Box 6.1  RIlEY AND ALLIE OUT WAlKING
Riley and Allie are litermate Border Collie mixes who were recently adopted by two families who live in the same
neighborhood. Riley lives with the Smith family, while Allie lives several blocks away with the Jones family. Both
just several streets apart, Riley and Allie had very different experiences:
   s     s    o    s 
Mr. Smith that he loves dogs and would like to adopt a puppy someday. Mr. Smith hands a treat to the boy, who
nearby house. As Allie notices the girl, Mr. Jones remembers that the last time Allie met someone new she jumped
up to greet and put her paws on the person. Mr. Jones was embarrassed by her behavior and does not want to
repeat that scenario. Anticipating Allie's jumping, Mr. Jones jerks on Allie's collar and very firmly tells her, "No,
Allie, No jump!" as the girl approaches.Allie cowers back and sits, staring nervously at the approaching girl. As
she should not jump on people.Allie leans away from the girl as she passes, pinning her ears back and cowering
What classical learning occurred in these two scenarios?
(SeeBox6.2)
HOUSE-TRAININGPUPPIES
defecate in an area that is located away from the daily living space. By five weeks
of age, a litter of puppies usually has a preferred area away from their nesting
site that is used for elimination. This natural tendency to urinate and defecate
outdoors to eliminate, starting at a young age. Once a puppy is weaned and
talize on this innate predisposition and actively promotes the development of
desirable location and substrate preferences.
A successful house-training strategy combines control of the puppy's environ-
and defecating outdoors. Providing many and frequent trips outside early in the
house-training process is essential for establishing a strong and positive associa-
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
Box 6.2
ClASSICAl LeArninG: RIleY ANd AllIe OUT WAlKING
Riley's Experience:
Appearance of Boy
Treats/Petting/Praise
Pleasant Emotions
(neutral stimulus)
(unconditioned stimulus)
(unconditioned response)
AfterSeveral OccurrenceswithNewPeople
Appearance of Unfamiliar Person
Pleasant Emotions
(conditioned stimulus)
(conditioned response)
Allie's Experience:
Appearance of Girl
Collar Jerk/Reprimand
Unpleasant Emotions
(neutral stimulus)
(unconditionedstimulus)
(unconditioned response)
AfterSeveral OccurrenceswithNewPeople
Appearance of Unfamiliar Person
Unpleasant Emotions
(conditioned stimulus)
(conditioned response)
elimination outdoors and should not focus on punishment for mistakes made
indoors. Sidebar 4 provides a set of guidelines for house-training young puppies
and Sidebar 5 provides a useful daily schedule. The same approach can be used
when house-training a newly adopted adult dog or when retraining a dog whose
soiling problems.)
If a puppy is well-supervised and taken outside frequently to eliminate,
accidents in the house should be rare. If elimination occurs in the house, the
puppy should not be punished or reprimanded. The use of physical or harsh
verbal punishment during house-training can cause fear and avoidance,
and can result in a puppy who avoids being in the presence of the owner
when eliminating. Punishing dogs for accidents causes them to associate
the punishment with the owner and possibly with the location in the house,
but does not necessarily affect future elimination habits. In fact, a history of
punishment for in-home elimination is often the cause of house-soiling prob-
lems in which the dog eliminates out of sight of the owner, in another room of
the home. (See Chapter 8 for a complete discussion.) If the owner observes
the puppy eliminating in the house, the puppy should be calmly interrupted
(not reprimanded) and carried outside to finish. The spot should be cleaned
Chapter 6
STEPS FOR SUCCESSFUL HOUSE-TRAINING
Sidebar 4
A successfully house-trained dog eliminates reliably outdoors and does
not eliminate indoors. This training can be accomplished through a set of
uelado pue eoisselo yog jo uoeugwoo e pue san juewabeuew aldis
conditioning:
are exploring, they eliminate.Accidents can be prevented with this simple rule: The
the puppy when he cannot be supervised.As the puppy matures and becomes more
reliable, his freedom can be gradually increased.
● Frequent outings: One of the most common mistakes that new owners make with
and young dogs have a limited ability to control their elimination habits. The Rule:
When in doubt, Take him out! (see Sidebar 5)
aaum eane loopino aues aul ol uayei aq pinous Addnd aul reare aues toop aues o
(a/ways!). Many owners introduce a phrase such as "Do you want to go out?" immedi-
ately before taking their puppy outside to eliminate (classical learning).
● Positively reinforce desired behavior: Owners should accompany the puppy outside.
in the form of quiet praise or petting—exuberant praise should be avoided as it may
· Establish a regular feeding and exercise schedule: Puppies should be fed 2 or 3 times
na e uo ym pid pue pym pue 'saw as aui Aaodde e  e
schedule. This promotes regular elimination habits that aid with house-training.
control over elimination and must be taken outside frequently. Unfortunately, some
owners have been led to believe that an eight-week-old puppy can be fully house.
o ep lad saunoddo aidnu ym papiaod ag ls pinous snpe pue shop buno
go outside for elimination.
attractiveness of the spot and the owner should intensify supervision of the
puppy and house-training techniques.
Young dogs should not be allowed unsupervised freedom in the house
until they are completely reliable in terms of house-training. Wwhenever the
puppy or adolescent dog cannot be supervised, he should be confined to a
142
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
Sidebar 5
RECOMMENDED HOUSE-TRAINING SCHEDULE
FOR NEW PUPPIES
ol salunjoddo juenbalf aaey Aaul j! Apidel isow ueal salddnd bunoy
making mistakes indoors. The best way to prevent accidents in the home
pue L ueemleg salddnd loy 'ueo pue Aueinbel apisino salddnd eyel ol s!
12 weeks of age, this means every 20 to 30 minutes during periods
Aenpeib ag ueo ainpayos slyl :buiAeld pue aalloe sl Addnd ayl ueym
aeuiwle ol apisino ob osje pinous salddnd 'sainjew Addnd se papueixe
at these times:
·In themorning immediately afterwaking
● After napping during the day—no matter how short the nap was!
● Following each meal and after long drinks of water
● Ater playing or training sessions (and periodically during extended play sessions)
·Immediatelybeforegoing tobed in the evening
● Puppies less than 12 to 14 weeks of age: Once or twice during the night (small
bladders are not yet able to last the entire night)
soeeu leul aoipui cl paioadxa ag ou pnoys saiddnd bunoy aon eui
paldope Ameu lof pue salddnd yiog lof enul sl slyl 'slaumo ol apisino ob ol
Aa ag Ae aeuwa snw aus uaun pue aeue ol paau au sleat Addnd
short! Adults or adolescents who have not been adequately house-trained
also need to graduaffy learn to wait to eliminate.
indoors, and occasionally approaching the door to indicate a need to go
Ael oi uibeq ueo sheumo 'aunjew seiddnd sy 'esnoy eul u! pemolle s! Addnd
more on the dog's signals and his or her elimination schedule to dictate the
dog's elimination schedule. In general, all dogs, regardless of age, should
during the day.
LITTERBOXTRAININGKITTENS
Similar to puppies, young kittens begin to voluntarily leave their sleeping and
preferences for elimination and prefer to eliminate in loose dirt. Kittens and adult
Training and Problem Prevention for Puppies and Kittens
Chapter 6
143
cats of both sexes use a squatting posture for elimination. (The standing posture
used for spraying is not typically used for elimination but is considered to be a
marking behavior.) Prior to eliminating, a cat will dig and paw at loose dirt (or
litter), sometimes digging a small hole. The cat then positions himself over the
area in a squatting posture with the hind limbs directed outward. After eliminating.
the cat covers the area with loose litter or dirt.
Because cats naturally eliminate in dirt and are attracted back to the same
location and surface for elimination, teaching kittens and cats to use a litter
eo aun jeun buunsue pue xoq aigenns e bupioid Aa pausidwoooe si xog
multi-level houses), a new kitten should be confined to a small room or large
crate that contains a resting place and a clean litter box whenever he is not
as loi xog aui ui soas lo auun jo junowe ws e bueel 'pesiedns
days when first introducing the box can help the kitten to identify the area for
elimination. Most kittens begin to use the box reliably within several days. If
permanent location once the kitten is regularly using it.
The location of the litter box in the home is an important consideration. Owners
should select a location within the cat's core living area that is quiet and can be
easily accessed by the cat at any time of the day. Although it may be convenient
pue pooy steo eyl ol esoo peoeid eg pou pinous xog jel ey seumo ayl o
water bowls or near preferred resting areas. Some cats will not use the box if it
is located in close proximity to the location where they eat or rest. Owners also
should never force the cat to stay in the box; nor should they rub the kitten's
paws in the litter as an attempt to encourage use, because this can cause fear
and subsequent avoidance of the box.
In addition to location, important attributes of a litter box include its size,
construction and the type of filler that is used (Sidebar 6). Keeping the box
clean is of utmost importance because a dirty litter box is one of the most
discussion). The box should be scooped daily, and cleaned and disinfected
on a regular basis to remove odors. If the household includes more than one
refuse to use a box that contains the waste of another cat. Clay litter should be
weeks. When a new kitten or cat is introduced to a home that already includes
one or more cats, an additional box should be added. Boxes should be in
multiple locations to accommodate the social dynamics of the cats. A basic
rule of thumb is that the number of litter boxes in a multiple-cat home should be
equal to the number of cats plus one.
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
Sidebar 6
LITTER BOXES AND LITTERS
An appropriate cat litter box is sized so that an adult cat can comfortably
fit inside, dig, and turn around. The box should be deep enough to contain
poob aplaoid 'uealo oi Asee ag pnoys pue lell jo sayoul g ol g iseel 1e
The traditional box is an open plastic pan. These are easy to clean and
pooo e aie saxog paleaoo 'ued jo adAl siul esn ol uieel Ayoinb sieo psou
choice for homes that include a dog, because many dogs will consume
cat feces if given the opportunity. These boxes include a pan and hood
with an entry opening in one side, which also limits odor and prevents
spillage. However, some cats may feel trapped or insecure in covered
boxes and may be hesitant to use them. In recent years, automated self-
cleaning boxes have been marketed. These include a timed sensor that
activates a cleaning rake several minutes after the cat exits the box. Some
u Ag pauaiybif eg ueo sleuo ing 'xog jo adai siul lajeid cl weas sieo
mechanical noise of the rake. (Note: Although these boxes are helpful in
keeping the box clean, they should not be expected to replace normal
litter box hyg iene.)
snp ewiujw aaey 'uealo pue asn oi Asea aie siell xog lelll algens
or "tracking" properties, and are economical. The most common types
of litter box fillers are clay litters, clumping litters, and silica litters. Many
are available, these litters tend to mask but not eliminate litter box odor,
Aaa ae shal buidni sialll anad asn ou m sio awos pue
popular today and are slightly more expensive than clay litter fillers. This
type of filler reacts to liquid by forming "urine clumps" that are easily
Aau ainxal ul au ale siall buidwnjo asneoeg paaowe pue padooos
can be dusty and may adhere to cats' paws, resulting in tracking through
Silica pellet litters are a relatively new product, comprised of small and
absorbent silica beads that change color when they are saturated. This
provides a signal that it is time to replace the filler with fresh litter. Silica
pellets control odor well but some cats do not tolerate the unusual texture
of the silica beads. These products come in several different textures
their cat.
Chapter 6
TEACHINGPUPPIES TO ACCEPTISOLATION
Isolation can be stressful for dogs, especially if time alone is not introduced
gradually and with the proper use of classical conditioning. This is especially
an important consideration with puppies, who have spent all of their life with
their litter mates and mother (Sidebar 7). Once a puppy had arrived in her new
home, she must gradually learn to be comfortable with being alone. Provided
that regular and adequate time and attention is given to the puppy at other
times of the day, puppies can learn that quiet time alone can be enjoyed
chewing on a special "alone-time-toy" and resting. Conversely, if isolation is
introduced without any attempt to classically condition a positive reaction, the
puppy may learn the opposite - that isolation is associated with feelings of
discomfort and loneliness. Following the simple rules of classical conditioning
can teach most puppies to be comfortable and relaxed during times when their
family is not with them.
DAP AND PRESENCE OF ANOTHER DOG HELP REDUCE
Sidebar 7
NEW PUPPY ANXIETY
believed to promote reassurance and attachment of puppies to their mothers
environment via a plug-in air diffuser (similar to room fresheners). Studies of
DAP as an intervention for the reduction of anxiety or stress have found DAP to
effectively reduce noise-related anxieties and fears, separation-related stress,
and stress associated with shelter environments.
paidope Ameu peyl Aeixue ayl eonpal Aew juewuoaue sAddnd bunos e
Ameu pg jo dnoib y 'sawoy meu lleul ol idepe Aeul se aoueledxe salddnd
wool e ul pasnoy elem 'syeam Ql ol g wolj abe ul buibuel 'salddnd paidope
with their crate and a diffuser that emitted either DAP or a placebo. For a
Aau sawll jo leqwnu aul loy paioluow alem saiddnd 'srep gg jo poed Apnis
researchers found that puppies who tended to be very stressed during the
(i.e. were less stressed) when compared with similarly stressed puppies who
e saiddnd peea-buods ibusalaul ogeoeld aul ol pasodxa ala
paodai ose Apns ayl Xbusalalul (hybiu eyi buunp Aaixue moys pue Ao
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
that an even more influential calming factor for new puppies was the presence
paginisip lo palo Aeie bop leyloue ylm pdais oym saiddnd bop leyloue jo
their owners. The researchers hypothesized that this effect was due to both
jo uojlonpoid ayl ol Algissod pue bop leyjoue jo aouesald jeoisAyd au
appeasing hormone by the adult dog.
au bumolle 'bop lauioue ylm awoy e oi saoe Addnd e uaum aiojalau
puppy to sleep with or near the dog is advisable, provided it is safe for the
e buuajue salddnd loy bop linpe aul ul Aleixue aleaio jou saop pue Addnd
home without other dogs, DAP may be an intervention that can help to reduce
uewuoaue meu siy ol sidepe Addnd eul se Aleixue pue sseis
environmental and management factors on the reports of disturbance and house soiling during the night in
recently adopted puppies (Canis familiaris). Appi Anim Behav Sci, 105:358-368, 2007
It must be emphasized that puppies cannot be expected to quietly accept
alone time if they are not receiving regular and daily periods of attention,
lished, owners can carefully and deliberately begin to introduce scheduled
the owner is at home, and the puppy is crated in a separate room. The puppy
should be first introduced to "alone time" when she has had a recent session
of play or exercise and is tired. Alone-time sessions are paired with a specially
isolation and at no other time. A durable rubber toy or bone stuffed with soft
stores carry a variety of stuffable toys that are designed for this use
As always with classical conditioning, the sequence of events is very impor-
duces the highly desirable stuffed toy. In this sequence, the desired outcome is
that after several repetitions, the crate is associated with the special treat and
Addnd aun 'aoaeu oi ena-uay eun uo mauo ot Aiunoddo ue sioa
such as “kennel or "go to your bed." The puppy is then placed in her crate (or
an exercise pen or puppy-safe room) with the toy. The owner leaves the room.
aenbepe penleoen sey Addnd eul pue pepioid si roi elqenisep Aubiu e fl
toy. The owner returns within 5 to 10 minutes, removes the special toy, and
Training and Problem Prevention for Puppies and Kittens
Chapter 6
Box 6.3
CLASSICAL leArNING: teACHING EmmA tO ACCEPt
Alone time
Go into Crate
Delivery of
Pleasant Emotions
(Confinement)
Special Toy
(Eating food, chewing, napping)
neutral
unconditioned
unconditioned
stimulus
stimulus
response
Owner Leaves Room
10 Minutes Later,Owner Returns
 Puppy Released
Removal of
End of Pleasant Emotions
from Crate
Special Toy
AssociatedwithEating
AfterMultipleOccurrences
(Short time periods; gradually lengthened)
Pleasant Emotions
Crate
(Eating food, chewing, napping)
releases the puppy from her crate or confinement area. The "alone training" is
complete for that session (Box 6.3).
The time that the puppy is left alone is slowly increased, always pairing the crate
or other area of confinement with the presentation of the special toy and pairing
 the owner returning with the removal of the special toy. While the puppy can and
should have access to other toys, the “alone-time" toy must be provided only in
association with periods of isolation. This serves to maintain the toy's high value
to the puppy and its strength as an unconditioned stimulus. Although this training
may not prevent the development of separation stress or boredom-related chew-
 isolated-related stress at an early age and teaching puppies that alone time can
be pleasant rather than distressful. (See Chapter 10 for further discussions of
separation stress in dogs.)
PREVENTINGNIPPINGIN PUPPIES
-wap saiddnd 'shop oy loeueq reid jewou si buiddu pue buunou aue
onstrate these behaviors when they play with other puppies and when playing
with human companions. Dogs also naturally investigate new articles with their
'abe jo suuow anoy laye idne ol ubaq yeat juauead sAddnd aun uaum ,bu
148
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
Box 6.4  DODGEr LeArNS tO PlAY GENTLY
Dodger is a five-week-old Brittany. He has two brothers (Max and Flyer) and one sister (Kelty). The puppies have
su pue Kddnd plog pue aaoe Aaa e si lapoa yaam ised aun buunp Auanbay aou lauabot aid oi paiis
been playing increasingly roughly with his brothers and sister. Luckily, puppies and mother dogs are well-equipped
for teaching each other to inhibit the intensity of their bites and to play gently. ( Interestingly, puppies use the same
punishment.) Here is how Dodger learned to play well with other puppies:
Dodger is playing with Max. They wrestle and chase, yipping and play growling. After several minutes, Kelty and
then Flyer join in. with all four playing, Dodger becomes increasingly excited and stimulated. He starts to play
apoa woy Aeme sunu pue ued u Apnoi sdi lali dea slile uo (peu) umop sang Auapns pue Auonou aou
play becomes increasingly rough as Dodger becomes more excited. While chasing Max, Dodger grabs Max's rear
leg and bites too hard. Like Flyer, Max yips, but then turns back toward Dodger, snarling and bites Dodger's ear.
Dodger yips loudly and stops playing.
to play gently with his littermates.
Puppies first learn to inhibit the intensity of their bite and to play gently from their
littermates and mother (Box 6.4).
lessons as they begin to play with their new family and other pets in the home.
pue Aeld buunp bunddu mieun jo Aisueun eun nauui ot seiddnd yoet isnu sieumo
-dod ol Aenuoo 'os op ol peyse uaum buynow pue buiddu dois Aelaldwoo ol
ular belief, puppies will not learn this on their own, nor will they "outgrow" nipping.
A puppy who is not taught to inhibit his play biting while young can develop into
an adult dog who uses his mouth much too roughly while he is playing. In some
cases, this can even lead to using his mouth aggressively. Conversely, teaching
puppies to play gently without biting leads to adults who play with humans and
The two most effective training techniques for teaching gentle play are
redirection and negative punishment. All play sessions with puppies should
include a pre-selected chew toy or interactive toy that is durable and safe (see
Chapter 9, pp. 216-217 for a complete discussion of toys). The toy is brought out
at the start of every session. During play, all nipping and mouthing is redirected
ll eyel, pue ,eaib, Addnd eul yoeel ol Aunuoddo ue se pesn pue peonponu!
Training and Problem Prevention for Puppies and Kittens
Chapter 6
owner and the toy, the puppy will begin to associate the “special toy" with play
and focus his nipping and tugging to the toy, not to hands or clothing. Negative
pe buiddu u sisled oum seiddnd oy uooanpan jueweldwoo ueo juewusiund
hands. In this case, nipping is negatively punished when the owner abruptly stops
addeun ynow sly esn lo Aybnoi ool Aeid oi subeg Addnd eyl jeaeuaum Aeid
priately. The owner reacts quickly, saying "Ouch - that hurts!l," and immediately
uwwoo eyouy 'wo si Addnd ayl uaym unebe subeg Auo Aeld eid sdos
appropriate play.
sow eyl eid buunp pnoxe ool ewooeg oym saiddnd weo ol pue uonoa
appropriate are “sit," "down," and to come when called. Most puppy socializa-
tion classes include exercises that teach puppies to relax in a sit or down posi-
tion. These exercises should be interjected sporadically into all play sessions,
esnane pue Ahieue s,Addnd aul eelepow ot Aem aanisod e apoid Aeun se
from play with other puppies, or to call the puppy to different family members.
Although these exercises are helpful in redirecting nipping behavior, the trainer
should be cautioned to avoid using a "sit" or "down-stay" only in response to
nipping to avoid unwanted negative associations with these commands.
TEACHINGKITTENS TO PLAY GENTLY
Similar to puppies, kittens first learn to play gently through interactions with
their littermates and mother. Social play in cats includes behavior patterns
that are inhibited or modified versions of feline predatory behavior, or behavior
patterns typically observed during aggressive encounters. During play, kittens'
-lodw aq oi jeadde jeul suoissaidxe jeioe, reidsip raul pue patguui ane sana
tant signals that the encounter is playful rather than agonistic. When litters are
weaned and kittens are placed in new homes, social play will then be directed
toward the new owner or other companion animals in the home. Studies of
the development of play in cats have shown that social play peaks between
oy seunpoddo penuuoo g papuexe ag ueo ng 'abe jo syeam tt pue e
play. Because social play in cats is more likely to escalate into aggression
after 12 weeks of age, it is very important for owners to teach newly adopted
isselo Aueb Aeld oi pue (buwoob pue) bupuey idaooe ol sua
conditioning can be used to teach new kittens or recently adopted adult cats
to accept gentle handling and grooming (Box 6.5).
Inyeld molle ol leaeu s! Aueb keld ol uelnly e buuoeei ot yoeoidde jseq eu
behaviors to be directed towards hands or feet. Because cats are highly
150
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
BoX 6.5  FLUFFY LEARNS TO ENJOY HANDLING AND PETTING
Joe and Sally Smith recently adopted Fluffy, a nine-week-old kitten. Fluffy has a long, cream-colored coat that will
The Smiths select several primary positive reinforcers that Fluffy enjoys. These include Kitty Kat Liver Treats and
small pieces of tuna.
not touching Fluffy with the brush.
 d    su  pe is a  s a pe ysng a sind ar sns es n
does not wait until Fluffy wants the handling session to end but always stops while the kitten is still enjoying the
brushing and petting.
finds mats, she waits to remove these in a later session (and in a different part of the house). Jane does this to
separate pleasant trom unpleasant grooming procedures.
aur ym saeus aus jeu buusng pue buad joy pods eloads, jau seu pue buusna soua Ane sns
several times each week. Because Jane discovered that Fluffy is very sensitive about having her ears handled, she
has designated another area of the house and different time of day for ear care, thus preserving the positive asso
ciations that she has established in Fluffy with brushing.
stimulated by movement, kittens and adult cats readily will chase a moving
kitten to chase and pounce at hands and feet, this teaches the kitten that
ol aaonpoidieunoo sl pue ,ueg pue uodn peounod eg oi soi, ee spuey
with the person's hands or feet being the object to hunt, stalk, and pounce
(see Chapter 2, p. 33 for a complete discussion of object play). As with pup-
the kitten can bat around, as well as interactive toys that are manipulated by
the owner during play sessions. A common and highly popular interactive toy
is a "fishing pole," in which a small toy is attached to the end of a pole with a
long string or elastic line. Some cats also enjoy soft plush toys that are large
Chapter 6
.51
enough to "wrestle" with and will flip over onto their backs to bite and rake the
toy with their claws. Cats are stimulated by novelty and willose interest in toys
is to offer a variety and rotate them every few days. Owners can also store one
ui buunp Auo no wey bubuug 'yoea sieo eut jo no sot eioads, oml no
active play sessions.
and legs as he or she walks past by tossing a desirable toy for the kitten to
e uaym pesn eq ueo juewusund anebeu buuren Addnd oi neliwis 'eseuo
in the home. The owner should stop play immediately, remaining stationary to
remove all reinforcement. Play only resumes once the kitten is calm. Although
mended for rough play, this approach is not advised. Cats quickly learn that
nsnnsip lo peueubuy ewooeg ueo pue keids eul jo eoinos eul sl leumo eu
of the owner and other family members. Causing a cat to avoid interactions
altogether out of fear or nervousness should not be confused with having
taught the cat not to play roughly. (For a complete discussion of play-induced
aggression in cats, see Chapter 11.)
TEACHING PUPPIESTO CHEW APPROPRIATEITEMS
Aooidxe gwou si saiddnd buno ui bumauo oy esno bujepun Aewud 
ing, and sometimes chewing on novel items. Chewing behavior in puppies is not
classified as problem behavior, but rather a normal behavior that must be directed
 to appropriate items. (There are a variety of reasons that problem chewing be-
preventing and solutions are disused in detail in Chapter 9.) Management of the
able chewing and for teaching puppies which items are their own and are safe
for chewing. An important rule is to keep all items that may attract the puppy
secured and out of sight. The puppy must be supervised during allfree time in the
are hard enough to not be destroyed or torn apart quickly and are composed of a
material that is known to be safe when swallowed. Because both dogs and cats
s pou si eu buyawos dn yoid sop ddnd aul l uenba weul ao pue
the owner should simply remove it from his mouth and redirect him to one of his
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
buyewos uo bumauo sl Addnd eu ueym puewudan ysiey e buisn buuen-asnou
undesirable can teach the puppy to chew out of sight of the owner or to run away
aouploae laamoh , buom si ay smouyl, Addnd aun jeu buubis se loeueg
adxe ybnou paueal sey bop ayl peyl Aubis Adwis asaul se yons sioiyag
ence with punishment to avoid chewing in the presence of the owner or, in more
extreme cases, to run away from the owner when in possession of a novel object.
Finally, in addition to managing the puppy's environment and providing plenty of
able commands of "leave it" and "give." The command "leave it" is used when the
dog is intending to pick up something that is either dangerous or off-limits, and
the command "give" can be used to retrieve an item from the dog once he has
ue ane Aeul 'ebe bunos Aan e je lybnel aq ueo asiolexe mau asaul 'dn l! payoid
joyable for the puppy to learn and a great help to the owner when teaching their
puppy about which toys are his and which items are not. (See Chapter 9,
pp. 218-219 for a complete directions for teaching these commands.)
PREVENTINGOBJECTIONABLECLIMBING
ANDCLAWINGINKITTENS
behaviors. Cats use elevated areas as vantage spots to view their surroundings
and also climb to avoid unpleasant stimuli (such as a chasing dog). In kittens.
normal exploratory behaviors include jumping up onto counters and climbing
surfaces that provide a graspable surface such as draperies and furniture. Many
cats also prefer to rest in an elevated space. Providing elevated resting and hiding
sou sad-aidinw un wy woy es sieo daey oi sdieu ose sio loy sods
Although jumping and climbing are normal feline behaviors, most owners wish to
prevent the kitten from jumping onto kitchen counters or climbing the Iving room
curtains. First, adequate and desirable elevated resting and climbing areas in the
home must be available to the cat. These should be introduced to the kitten on the
first day and elevated at a level that the kitten can easily reach. Raised resting plat-
fomms in window sills and climbing structures that include carpet-covered climbing
posts allow cats to choose the type of spot that they prefer. Owners can positively
reinforce the use of these spaces by giving the kitten attention or a food tidbit
whenever he uses a desired spot. In addition to providing several acceptable areas
for climbing and jumping, owners can use environmental management techniques
tractive furniture or draperies, except when supervised. Providing one acceptable
Training and Problem Prevention for Puppies and Kittens
Chapter 6
elevated shelf or platfomm in each room that the cat frequents allows the owner
to preemptively direct the kitten to that spot and away from counters and shelves
that are off-limits to the cat. Cats do not like the feel of the sticky surface and most
avoid the sound and feel of a blast of air. Because these aversive stimuli are mild,
are delivered at the exact moment that the cat jumps onto the prohibited space
from jumping or climbing onto objectionable surfaces.
Scratching behavior has several important functions for cats. These include pro-
vding an opportunity to stretch their limbs after resting, maintaining claw health,
and as a form of communication (see Chapter 3 for a complete discussion of
       a    
havior and because all cats enjoy stretching, even those whose claws are clipped
regularly or who are declawed demonstrate scratching behavior and will use a
scratching post. If an attractive scratching post is not available, cats oten choose
to use the sides of couches and chairs as scratching surfaces. They use these ar-
eas because furniture is typically covered with fabric that is attractive for catching
claws and depositing scent. Cats also tend to claw mark near favorite resting ar-
eas and around areas of entry and exit in the house. Regardless of these "natural
aspects of furniture clawing, most owners do not want their cats to use furniture
adopted kittens can be trained to direct all scratching towards a scratching post
early in life, thus preventing the development of undesirable scratching behaviors.
u aie sisod bus jo sis pue 'sadeus 'sd u ae aaus
most economical are vertical stand-alone posts, while other more elaborate
posts are incorporated into climbing structures. Most cats prefer to use vertical
posts, but a small number are attracted to scratching surfaces that lie flat on the
ground and allow scratching on horizontal surfaces (Figures 6.1 and 6.2). Posts
"(iesis, peio) ouqe, edou jedieo se yons sbujeaoo jo Aeuea e ym ewoo ose
pe ue loy ybnoue yby pue pns eg pnous sisod geoea poom o 'deng
cat to stretch the limbs when reaching upward (approximately 24 to 28 inches for
most cats). Most cats are attracted to rough surfaces that they can shred and pull
apart, and which catch their nails for claw care.
encourages young cats to play near the post and to reach up to bat at the toy with
their front feet. Owners can also toss a small food treat to the kitten every time the
ers must remember that the pemmanent spot for the scratching post should still be
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
figure 6.2 Cat showing horizontal scratching behavior
figure 6.1 Cat using a vertical scratching post
an area in which the cat spends time. Spots that are close to favorite sleeping and
resting areas are attractive to most cats. Owners should avoid placing the post in
spots that are out of the way, such as in the basement or laundry room; if the cat
does not spend time in those areas, he will not use the post. (See Chapter 9,
pp. 232-233 for a complete discussion of problem scratching.)
INTRODUCING A NEW PUPPY OR KITTEN
TO OTHER PETS
Today, many homes include multiple animal companions, oten of several species.
In addition to meeting the new human family members, a new kitten or puppy
may also be introduced to new animal companions. The approach that is used to
upon the species of pet and upon each resident pet's temperament and tolerance
for other animals. Because new puppies and kitens are not yet part of the resi-
dent pet's social group and are not (as some owners mistakenly believe) viewed
Addnd meu e ideooe Aereipawwi iou op sieo pue shop inpe isow 'buudsho se
or kitten. However, if proper introduction procedures are used, stress can be mini-
mized and the new pet can be safely integrated into the existing social group.
Introducing a Puppy to a Resident Adult Dog
Before bringing the new puppy into the house, the resident dog's toys, food
alisseooe jou s! jeul eae ue ui painoes o dn peyoid eq pinoys peg pue wog
to the puppy. This will prevent any possession (resource-guarding) problems from
Chapter 6
occuring during initial introductions. The general rule with puppies is that the
puppy is always controlled or confined when around the resident dog and is never
allowed to jump on or harass the adult dog. If the adult dog's behavior is unpre-
dictable, he should also be kept on a lead during initial introductions. Baby gates
can be used to keep the puppy and the adult physically separated while still allow-
npe eul erebnsaaui ol ob jouueo Addnd eun jeun yede yonoue jey peoeds simog
dog 's food. Similarty, toys and sleeping areas of the adult dog should not be ac
cessible to the puppy until he has been fully accepted by the adult dog and no
introductions and not allowing a young puppy to pester or harass the resident 
adult dog is of utmost importance and cannot be overemphasized.
Introducing a Puppy to a Resident Adult Cat
When introducing a puppy to a resident indoor cat, the cat must be allowed
access to most of her territory and must be provided with escape routes that
allow her to avoid the puppy. The puppy should be confined to one room while
the cat is allowed to have the remainder of the house during the first few days or
weeks. Cats often prowl around the doorway of the room in which the puppy is
kept. Once the cat has shown signs of habituation to the puppy's presence in the
house, she can be allowed to come into the room while the puppy is crated or
held. Puppies should never be allowed to chase or torment a cat, even if the be-
havior appears to be in play. Most cats do not enjoy being chased and what ap-
    a      id     s
anoy ui sualgod joyeg ol peal ueo bop e A peonpui ssas au Aeui nu
cats such as defensive aggression or elimination problems. Owners should never
insist that the cat remain in the same room as the puppy, and must provide safe
areas in the home for the cat even after the puppy has been accepted by the cat.
Introducing a Kitten to a Resident Adult Cat
The best way to promote friendly relationships between cats is to introduce
them gradually, while always ensuring that the resident cat feels comfort-
able and is in control of the level of interaction that occurs. Similar to puppy
introductions, the new kitten should be confined to a room that contains his
food and water bowls and a separate litter box. The resident cat is then al-
algissod se asnoy eui ui eoeds bual jensn sly jo yonw se aaey ol pamo
The new kitten is kept confined to this room and out of sight of the resident
cat until the resident cat becomes comfortable with the kitten's presence and
smell (i.e. no hissing or posturing near the doorway). Visual exposure can be
introduced once the resident cat is not stressed by the kitten's presence. The
kitten should be held and the resident cat allowed to approach. The adult
so aul pue psnpe ol papeau se aw yonw se pamoe ag isnw eo puapisa
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
should not be given physical access to one another until both are showing
relaxed behaviors when in the same room together. Once the resident cat has
completely acclimated to the sight of the new kitten, he can be allowed to
enter the kitten's room. At first, the cats should be allowed physical access
increased as the cats habituate to one another. Although many cats may show
an initial dislike for each other, with time some become playmates and bonded
social partners. Others may not become companions, but learn to tolerate
each other and live peacefully within the same household.
Introducing a Kitten to a Resident Adult Dog
Many kittens are naturally frightened by even the sight and smell of a dog, especially
if they have not been previously socialized to dogs or if their mother showed a fear
aos peu uodeoxa au ym xddnd e loy asou ot neuws ae suonponu shop jo
dogs view kittens and cats as prey and may show predatory reactions to a kit-
ten. For initial introductions, it is helpful to confine the kitten to a crate or to place a
screen or baby gate in the doorway so that the dog can see the new cat, but cannot
yet come into physical contact. If the owner does not know how the dog will react
lo buibun jue/aid ol jojuoo lepun pue peal e uo jdey eg pinoys bop eyl 'jeo e o]
other unwanted behaviors. As they both become habituated, the kitten is released
from confinement, while the dog is kept on a lead to prevent any chasing or unruly
behavior. Each animal's behavior should be monitored carefully and increased time
together can be allowed gradually. The dog should not be allowed to chase or play
or area with the dog. (For dogs who insist on chasing cats, basic obedience training
is often needed to prevent chase behaviors and to keep cats safe.)
REVIEW QUESTIONS
Describe a set of guidelines for successful house-training of young puppies.
2.
What are important factors to consider when introducing a new kitten to an indoor
litter box?
3.
ui buiddju injeid dois pue juaaaid yog ueo shaumo mau yolym ui sAem ssnosia
seiddnd
Describe a protocol for teaching a kitten to use a scratching post (and for
preventing furniture clawing).
 List guidelines for teaching puppies to chew on appropriate items (i.e. chew
bones and toys).
Training and Problem Prevention for Puppies and Kittens
Chapter 6
REFERENCESAND FURTHER READING
Vet Rec0rd, 150:434-438, 2002
Beadle M. The Cat: History, Biology, and Behavior. Simon and Schuster New York, NY,
1977.
Beaver BV. Feline Behavior: A Guide for Veterinarians. W. B. Saunders Company.
Philadelphia, PA, 276 pp., 1992.
Behaviour, 132:419-429, 1995.
Borchelt PL. Behavioral development of the puppy. In: Nutrition and Behavior in Dogs
Bradshaw JWS.The Behaviour of the Domestic Cat. CAB International, Oxford, UK
219 pp., 1992.
Caro TM. Predatory behavior and social play in kittens. Behaviour, 76:1-24, 1981.
Duxbury MM, Jackson JA, Line SWw, Anderson RK. Evaluation of association between
retention in the home and attendance at puppy socialization classes. J Amer Vet Med
Ass0c, 223:61-66, 2003.
A pilot study. Appl Anim Behav Sci, 104:61-70, 2006.
dinic: A pilot study. J Vet Behav, 2:126-135, 2007.
Hetts S, Clear JD, Calpin JP, Arnold CE, Mateo JM. Influence of housing conditions on
Kanning M. Socialization of puppies and kittens. Vet Tech, 24:236-237, 2003
McCune S. The impact of paternity and early socialization on the development of
Miller J. The domestic cat: Perspective on the nature and diversity of cats. J Amer Vet
Med Ass0c, 208:498-501, 1996.
Reisner IR, Houpt KA, Erb HN, Quimby FW. Friendliness to humans and defensive
aggression in cats: The influence of handling and paternity. Physiol Behay, 55:
1119-1124, 1994.
Rogerson J. Your Dog: Its Development, Behaviour, and Training. Popular Dogs
Publishing Company, London, UK, 174 pp., 1990.
Seksel K, Maxurski EJ, Taylor A. Puppy socialization programs: Short and long term
behavioral effects. Appl Anim Behav Sci, 62:335-349, 1999
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp. 80-102, 1995.
Slabbert JM, Rasa OAE. Observational learning of an acquired maternal behaviour
pattern by working dog pups: An alternative training method? Appi Anim Behay Sci.
53:309-316.1997.
Slabbert JM, Rasa OA. The effect of early separation from the mother on pups in
bonding to humans and pup health. J South African Vet Assoc, 64:4-8, 1993.
reports of disturbance and house soiling during the night in recently adopted
  6      s s
Thorne CJ, Mars LS, Markwell PJ. A behavioral study of the queen and her kittens.
Anim Tech, 44:11-17, 1993.
tested behavior traits and its correspondence to later behavior. Appl Anim Behav Sci.
58:151-162. 1998.
CHAPTER
Teaching Dogs and Cats Desirable
Behaviors and Good Manners
PREVENTING PROBLEMS AND BUILDING BONDS
Ask almost any pet owner about their dog or cat and they will gladly provide a list
of the many attributes and marvelous personality quirks of their animal companion
(as often as not, pictures will also be produced). In fact, the relationships that peo-
ple have with their pets have become important enough to attract serious study.
Over the last 30 years, this research has identified numerous benefits of pet own-
as well as with their dogs, while both cat and dog owners benefit from the com-
companion animal brings to their lives. The benefits of this relationship to the ani-
mal companion have also been studied. A recent study found that while most dog
owners provide at least the basic level of care to their dogs, owners who are highly
attached to their dogs are more likely to provide their dogs with an enriched envi-
ronment in terms of opportunities to interact with humans and other dogs, provi-
sion of training, and offering their dogs a variety of toys and play opportunities.
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
Unfortunately, there is also a negative side to keeping dogs and cats as pets
While strong attachments to pets often improve the welfare of the animal, the
opposite is also true; people who are not strongly attached to their animals are
more likely to neglect or abandon their pets. A large survey study examined own-
ers who were relinquishing their pets to shelters in several diferent geographical
areas of the United States.2.3 Among other findings, the researchers reported
This information is important given the unfortunate paradox that, despite our
professed love of dogs and cats, approximately two million dogs and cats are vol-
untarily relinquished by their owners to shelters each year. Behavior problems are
the most common reason that dogs are relinquished; for cats, behavior problems
are the second most common reason for relinquishment. Dogs who house soil,
are destructive in the home, are “overly" active, or are reported to be fearful are at
ment include house soiling, damage to household items, and being "too active.
Finally, these survey studies found that owners who relinquish their pets often
professional help for their pet's behavior problems when they occurred.
Many of these reported problems could be prevented through an enhanced
This chapter provides practical information for the application of the behavior
information and training concepts that were discussed in the first sections of this
cat behavior, and teaching animal companions to show acceptable behaviors
in homes and communities - can contribute to the development of positive and
enduring bonds between owners and their pets and to a decrease in pet neglect
and abandonment.
BASIC MANNERS TRAINING FOR DOGS
Teaching a dog to sit, lie down, come when called, stay until released, and walk
ners obedience classes. Training dogs to respond to these commands not only
makes them more manageable and enjoyable pets to be with, but helps to prevent
aleai e buue pue 'dn buidwnf sjuesad bugeab o, Aeinb js oi bop bunof e
sit-stay can be used to interupt and redirect dogs who become overly stimulated
when playing. Teaching "come when called" reduces running away problems
and also is used to teach dogs to return items that were picked up to be chewed
and when teaching dogs to retrieve. Having a dog who walks on a loose lead
without pulling makes walking with the dog a pleasant experience. This not only
Teaching Dogs and Cats Desirable Behaviors and Good Manners
Chapter 7
pue asiexe o seunuoddo peseaoui pue shuno juenbay aow sebenooue
Teaching Sit
The *sit" command is the first behavior that most dog owners teach to their
paonpou! aq ueo puewwoo ,umop, eul pue ,ls, eul yog bop jo Addnd
lend themselves well to lure training rather than to free-shaping because the
movement of the hand that holds the food lure and induces the behavior can be
faded to a hand-signal cue when the dog becomes proficient. To teach "sit," the
trainer stands directly next to or in front of the dog. A food treat is held in the left
hand and the hand is placed directly in front of the dog 's nose (allowing the dog
to smell the treat). The trainer slowly moves her hand up and forward slightly (in a
diagonal direction) and commands “sit" in a pleasant voice. This movement of the
lure encourages the dog to lean forward and to look up, shifting weight forward
comfortable option, most dogs will immediately sit. The treat is provided immedi-
ately as the dog sits (for a refresher on the importance of timing with operant con-
ditioning, see Chapter 4, p. 87). As the dog eats the treat, the trainer continues to
praise quietly ("good sit . . . that's a beautiful sit").
When the dog offers a sit, he is immediately released with a pre-selected word.
The verbal cue "okay" is commonly used. When released, all praise, petting, and
un eul 'auo sainb pue wo e un ueods si pom asaen aul 'dos sean
should avoid the common mistake of using an enthusiastic release word or using
exuberant praise upon the release. Although this seems appropriate to novice
trainers, using praise as the behavior terminates (i.e. as the dog stands up from
the sit) unintentionally reinforces the behavior of "getting up" rather than the
desired behavior of "sitting." During early training sessions, the use of the lure
should be repeated several times. When the dog begins to spontaneously offer the
in response to the verbal and hand signal cue alone. The primary reinforcer (food
treat) is now delivered immediately as the dog sits (and is not presented as a lure).
Likewise, the primary reinforcer is not given if the dog does not offer the behavior.
When lure training is used to induce a behavior, it is not uncommon for the dog to
wait for the presence of the lure to offer the behavior. The risk of this happening
increases if the trainer fails to remove the lure early in the training sequence. When
this occurs, the trainer simply waits and if the dog offers even an approximation
of sit, the dog is immediately reinforced (timing is crucial, once again). When the
dog begins to offer "sit" in response to the trainer's verbal cue, the initial stages
           
response, the trainer continues to train to achieve generalization, stimulus control,
and fluency (Sidebar 1)
162
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
Sidebar 1
TRAINING FOR RELIABILITY (SIT EXAMPLE)
sano paiuemun apef snw leuel al pappe ueeg sey ano au pue paono
Auo spuodsel oym bop e sl eob ayl Hl 'bupuodsal ag Aew bop ayl yolym ol
to the verbal command of "sit," then the hand signal that was used to initiate
be responding to must also be identified and removed. If the trainer wishes
prior to the hand signal, each time the behavior is requested. After severa
repetitions, the verbal command becomes classically conditioned to elicit the
papel ueyl sl yoiym 'jeubis puey aul yln palled buleg inoylm jolaeyeg
Step 2: Attaining Stimulus (Cue) Control: When the dog offers the behavior
(sit) only in response to the conditioned stimulus (the verbal command "sit"),
the behavior is said to be under stimulus control. In addition to reliably offer-
ing a sit behavior in response to the "sit" command, the dog must not offer
Aisnoiosuoo eg jsnw jeul sseooid buuel ewou aul jo jed s! joijuoo sn
(see Chapter 5, pp. 124-126 for a complete discussion of stimulus control),
Step 3: Generalizing the Behavior: Generalization refers to training the dog
environmental distractions. Because dogs are highly sensitive to the context
environment and in the presence of multiple forms of distraction. Sit is first
taught in locations that are familiar to the dog and which have few distracting
stimuli. As the dog becomes more proficient, the sit is taught in gradually more
distracting and unfamiliar environments.
Step 4: Training for reliabifity (ffuency): Reliability is simply the result of
-unuoddo pue suoede, jo sheqwnu ajenbape bupioid buujell yonoiou
lualep ui pue suooesip jo eouesaid aul u bujuieil pue ssaoons lof sa
environments. If a dog has learned the behavior, has achieved stimulus
au ol jueodwi ale peu saoueiswnolo ul .s., saho Agea bop aul :buue
aunoi bueay e buunp ls aul lo Aoenooe pue uoisioaid
Teaching Dogs and Cats Desirable Behaviors and Good Manners
Chapter 7
Teaching Down
Dogs are initially taught to lie down on command from a sit position. Therefore,
the trainer should teach a reliable *sit" command and have introduced *sit-stay'
before teaching the down command. Once a dog is reliably offering the down
Similar to teaching the sit command, the down command can be introduced
using a lure. Although free-shaping can be used, waiting for an exuberant dog
to spontaneously offer a down position (or even part of a down) so that the
behavior can be positively reinforced is not always the best use of the trainer's
time and can also be very frustrating for the dog if success if not achieved at
a reasonable rate. Training begins with the dog sitting at the trainer's side. The
standing or kneeling next to the dog, with the non-treat hand placed gently on
top of the dog's withers or holding the back of the dog's collar. The treat-holding
hand is placed in front of the dog's nose, allowing the dog to sniff at the treats
in the hand (the lure). The hand is then moved slowly downward, from the dog's
nose to a point on the floor just slightly in front of the dog's front toes. (The ver-
bal command “down" can be introduced with the motion of the hand). If the dog
puey aul suado Aeepawwn seun eu 'umop sall pue poo aul smolloy Apean
and reinforces with one treat. The behavior can also be positively reinforced with
calm verbal praise ("good girl, that's a good down") and with gentle petting along
the dog's back (Figure 7.1).
figure 7.1 Teaching down
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
When teaching the down command, positive reinforcement is withheld if the
dog moves his head toward the ground but does not lie down (i.e. the "vulture
euo ul yauien aul woy Aeme saaow bop aul j! jo 'dn spueis bop auh j! 'asod
to toes" movement of the trainer's hand. Unwanted responses are extinguished
when they do not earn any reinforcement. Because the down position is similar to
a submissive body posture and perhaps because this position places the dog in
(shaping), first reinforcing a simple foot coming forward or head lowered toward
the ground. Holding several food treats in the hand at once allows rapid and con-
tinuous shaping as the trainer gradually shifts the criteria for reinforcement in the
direction of a complete down position.
After several training sessions, most dogs begin to respond consistently to the
movement of the hand from “nose to toes" and the voice command of "down."
The primary reinforcer (food treats) are then moved from the trainer's hand and
a oi sanuuoo leuren eyl 'yonod pan e ui o puey buad aul leue ui paod
the treat hand signal for down, reinforcing immediately when the dog lies down
with a food treat. (Note: Either the left or the right hand can be used as the hand
signal for "down," but the same hand should be used consistently). It is impor-
tant to remove the lure as early in training as possible, to avoid an association
between "food in the hand" and the down position (i.e. the food becomes the
cue for the dog to lie down). This unintentional learning can occur more rapidly
with the down than with the sit because the hand remains close to the dog's
nose as he executes the behavior. An effective approach to teaching dogs that
"it is the behavior that leads to reinforcement, not the presence of the treat in
the hand" involves switching the contingencies of the behavior (Sidebar 2). This
-ue uaum walgoid ,puey aul u jean, eul aos cl pasn aq ose ueo anbjuyoal
ing other behaviors. If the trainer wishes to train the dog to respond primarily to
a voice command, the visual cue (hand movement) must be gradually faded and
the voice command alone is emphasized. Alternatively, the hand movement used
for the lure can be faded to a shortened version of a brief movement of the hand
downward if the trainer desires to use both a verbal and a hand signal command
for the down. The same sequence for gaining proficiency that is used with the sit
Teaching Stay
sis oum bop e 'awou aun ul 'sasn jeooeid Auew seu puewwoo ,eis, aul
ym buieg jo sheueg eu sey elgel auup eul o xeu uosod umop e ui Aainb
the family during dinnertime without begging or being disruptive. The stay com-
aaue siosa uaym lods ley ol ob, oi bop e bunyoeel uaum pesn ose sl pueu
Teaching Dogs and Cats Desirable Behaviors and Good Manners
Chapter 7
SOLVING LURE' PROBLEMS -WHENTHE LURE
Sidebar 2
BECOMESTHE CUE
Although using a lure has many benefits in dog training, a common error is to
fail to remove the lure early in the learning process. If the lure (for example.
food in the hand that is serving as the hand signal for "down"), is not removed
shortly after the behavior has been initiated, the dog learns to recognize the
lure as one of the cues that elicit the behavior. Because food is a potent posi
puey eul ui poo, (ews) poalap ol Asea Aas sl ll asneoag pue snnws aall
rapidly becomes the dog's cue for offering the down behavior. When this
problem occurs, the trainer can use a technique called "reversing the contin-
gency" to teach the dog that food in the hand is not a relevant (discriminating)
stimulus:
Goal: To teach the dog that the presence of food in the signaling hand is not
part of the cue and is not necessary for the opportunity to earn reinforcement.
Rather, it is moving into the down position (the targeted behavior) that earns
the reinforcer, not perceiving the presence of a treat in the trainer's hand. The
trainer will teach the dog that it is the empty hand, signaling the down, that is
a reliable predictor for reinforcement and conversely, a food lure in the signal
hand represents a poor predictor for food.
Step 1: Warm-up Repetitions: The trainer trains 4 to 6 repetitions of "down,"
holding food treats in the signal hand. If he has been sufficiently taught
"down," the dog should reliably follow the hand signal with the lure into the
build a reinforcement history for the training session.
Step 2: One more repetition (no food in hand): Food is removed from the
aul yonod jeall e ul lo puey allsoddo aul ul laule paoeld pue puey bujeubis
dog is again signaled to lie down, but this time with an empty signal hand
(Because there was a rapid rate of positive reinforcement during Step 1, the
majority of dogs will lie down for one repetition without food in the hand). The
dog is immediately reinforced with several food treats from the opposite hand
when she lies down.
food treats in signal hand and requests the dog to lie down using the lure
in the hand for three repetitions. However, during this set of repetitions the
dog is notreinforced for lying down with the lure (verbal praise is given, but
no food treat). After three repetitions, the treats are again removed from the
signal hand, the dog is asked again to down, and is immediafely reinforced
with a food treat from the treat pouch or opposite hand upon lying down
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
The new rule is this: Food in the signal hand never predicts an opportunity fol
nity for positive reinforcement.
Step 4: Proficiency: After several repetitions, the trainer begins to phase out
having treats in the signal hand altogether for the down signal, and just rein-
sey bop aul 'sieail buiploy pou s! l! uaum puey leubis aul ol sasuodsal saoioj
now learned that "it is the behavior (lying down) that predicts positive conse-
quences, not the presence of treats in the trainer's hand.'
or to stay in position for brushing and petting. Moreover, the stay is an exercise
that allows owners to repeatedly reinforce calm and relaxed behaviors in a young
or exuberant dog. Because the command “stay" may mean different things to
different people, the trainer must first be certain what it is that she wishes to
spot, such as a bed, and stay there." For others, stay means "do not move out
section, teaching stay refers to the latter definition (stay in position until released).
Teaching a dog to "go to his place" is actually a form of target training (Sidebar 3).
Sidebar 3
INTRODUCTIONTO TARGET TRAINING
larget training is helpful for a variety of behaviors that owners are interested in
01 pue jebiel ooeds e Ajluep! ol lybnel s! led eyl 'sjeo pue sbop ol bulyoeel
are the touch stick (the animal is trained to touch the end of the stick with the
nose), and a carpet square or mouse pad (the subject is trained to touch the
pad with her paw).
e auiwexa Aealnun ls pue snouno aie sieo pue shop son ryonoi ason
novel object with their noses. A touch stick can be easily introduced by pre
senting the end of the stick to the dog or cat and immediately reinforcing
when the subject sniffs the end of the stick. The exact moment that the dog
or cat touches the stick is marked with either a conditioned word ("Yes!") or
a click, followed in both cases by a treat. (For more about clicker training
aym Auo yos aul yono) jojuoo snnws sayoeal leuel aul pue (.iyonoi)
attained, the touch stick can be used as a lure to guide the dog to different
locations and to teach different body positions. For example, the nose touch
Teaching Dogs and Cats Desirable Behaviors and Good Manners
Chapter 7
unos ind 'aoeld ul ulds se yons 'syojul jo Aiejuea e sbop yoeal ol pasn eq ueo
head down, and crawl. Obedience competition trainers use the nose touch to
eo e buyoeal lof injesn ag ueo yonol asou eul 'sieo loy 'saloeisqo bujebie
to "go to her bed.
Paw Touch: The paw touch can be more challenging to teach because not
eul esn oym sbod 'leef jieul esn Aaul moy jo aleme Ajeinpeu aie sbop ie
ae uouane juem Aaui uaua med oum lo soi aeindiuew pue ploy ol lea
usually more "foot aware" and more likely to quickly learn "hit it" using their
alenbs jedieo llews e se yons siebiel jele 'yonol med pybnel aq ueo uojloae
oiel aul :aon) 'sped yonol med se llam yom ped asnow sandwoo e o
must differ from the target that is used for nose touch, as it is a discriminative
stimulus signaling a different behavior). The target is placed on the floor near
the dog and any interaction with the target, with the exception of touching
the target is moved several inches to help to focus the dog's attention on the
object. Shaping is used to train "front paw on the pad" and the verbal cue ("Hit
it!") is introduced once the dog is placing one or both front feet on the target.
When the pad is reliably targeted, the trainer can shape duration, reinforcing
an increasing number of seconds that the dog's foot remains on the target.
The "hit it" targeting behavior is useful when teaching dogs to "go to your bed"
(place the target on the bed), directed retrieving, and agility contacts
(Figure 7.2). For cats, "hit it" can be used to teach shake hands and wave.
figure 7.2 Target training - Go to your bed
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
When teaching a dog to stay in position, two separate criteria must be
shaped - the duration (length of time) that the dog stays in position and the
space (distance) that separates the dog from the trainer. These two criteria
distance is introduced once the dog has reliably offered “stay in position" for
ni       s     
once each criterion has been thoroughly shaped. while some dogs are more
comfortable in a sit position, others prefer a down. To facilitate early success
(and allow for the continued use of positive reinforcement during shaping), the
trainer should select the position that is most acceptable to the dog and train
that stay position first.
2 seconds) periods of time during which the dog maintains the prescribed position
(sit or down). The trainer reinforces with a continuous schedule using food treats
(a primary positive reinforcer for the majority of dogs), praise, and petting. Because
bued sioueq paxelen pe wo abenooue ol pepuaui ane sesloexa seis
should be gentle and soothing (Figure 7.3). Just as dogs have their own set of
tastes in terms of food treats, so too do they vary in the types of petting and praise
that they enjoy. The trainer should select an area of the dog's body and a style of
of voice used to reinforce “stay' should be calming and quiet in tone.
When the release word is given ("okay"), all treats, petting, and praise stop.
De-emphasizing the release draws the necessary distinction between "stay
(targeted behavior) and movement. As explained previously, although it is
figure 7.3 Gentle and calm praise for sitting and staying
Teaching Dogs and Cats Desirable Behaviors and Good Manners
Chapter 7
quite common for dog owners to believe that they are “rewarding a job well
done" when they praise their dogs at the release of the exercise, this in actual-
ity reinforces the release from the stay, not the behavior of staying in position
targets the desired behavior and prevents reinforcement of the release. This
is especially important because for most dogs, being released from a stay
has several self-reinforcing properties (e.g., moving around is innately more
u sunwai bop eui jeun ewn eul (eoeld auo ui bunA no bunns ueui egeroue
the down position (and is consistently reinforced) is increased gradually. The
criterion (time) is only increased when the dog shows proficiency at each lower
level. Movements out of position are ignored (extinguished). The dog is simply
for duration training and the dog is kept on lead. The trainer always shifts the
criterion (i.e. increases time that the dog remains in position) at a rate that
allows the dog to be successful.
The second criteria, increasing distance, is introduced when the dog is
consistently staying in position for 1 to 2 minutes. The trainer begins by simply
reinforce the dog. If the dog stands or follows the trainer each time that the trainer
steps away, this is information to the trainer that distance is being introduced
aue uoenp uo bum papeau s! ,uosod ui seis, uo buuenet anwad
This “yo-yo" training, with the trainer moving a few steps away and immediately
returning, is gradually shaped by increasing the distance (not time) that the
trainer moves away from the dog. As the dog becomes reliable with increasing
criterion and to retrain at that level.
Duration and distance are combined when the dog reliably stays in posi-
tion for a predetermined duration of time (with the trainer close) and for a pre
determined distance (with the trainer leaving and immediately returning). As
with all training, combined criteria are shaped slowly, starting with incremental
Similar to the initial training, changes in context (commonly referred to as “dis-
tractions") are introduced individually and shaped by starting at the lowest level
7
Section 2
HOWDOGSANDCAISLEARN-TRAININGTECHNIQUES
of intensity possible. This minimizes the risk that the dog will make repeated
o seunpoddo snaewnu ol smoe peu uoisses buue e dn ses pue soe
positive reinforcement. Examples of contextual criteria that can be introduced
presence of familiar and unfamiliar people, near other dogs, and in indoor and
outdoor environments. The owner should identify the various contexts in which it
specifically for those criteria (Box 7.1).
Box 7.1
TEACHING JAKE TO STAY WHEN GREETING VISITORS
Jake is an 11-month-old Australian Shepherd. As a puppy, Jake completed a puppy kindergarten class, where he was
socialized with other puppies and people and was introduced to basic obedience exercises. Jake is very friendly and
loves to meet visitors at home and while out walking. Jake's owners, Steve and Janet Black, have tried to continue
with Jake's obedience training, but they have also allowed Jake to jump up when greeting visitors. The Blacks realize
They decide to teach Jake to sit-stay for petting during greeting visitors to their home. Here are the steps that the
· Select a strong primary reinforcer: The Blacks choose small bits of cheese. During this training, cheese bits
will only be available to Jake as a reinforcer for sit-stay and at no other time.
· Choose the lowest possible intensity of the competing stimulus: Janet has noticed that Jake becomes
most excited with friends whom he knows well and when the visitor directly greets him. Therefore, she and
Jake during the initial training sessions.
· Train "sit-stay"without the visitor, in the area where greeting will take place: Several minutes before
Sam arrives, Janet attaches a lead to Jake and trains several repetitions of sit-stay in the foyer. Even though
Jake is well-trained to stay when no distractions are present, the purpose of this training is to build a recent
reinforcement history for Jake. This is repeated every session.
●Introduce the low-intensity stimulus: When Sam arrives, Jake is commanded to sit-stay and is continually
reinforced while he stays. Sam walks into the area and then immediately leaves. When he leaves, treats stop
and Jake is released. This sequence is repeated 5 to 10 times, with Sam appearing (Jake sit-stay; high value
treats) and then leaving (Jake released, high value treats disappear).
· Increase intensity of a single aftribute of the stimulus and train af each level: The Blacks decide to re-
arrives and then leaves immediately
●Introduce another attribute:When Jake is reliably staying when visitors come into the house but do not
speak to him, Janet asks Sam to come over again. This time Sam briefly says hello to Jake. Jake is reinforced
for maintaining a sit. when Jake is calm and siting, Sam is given a cheese bit and reinforces Jake for siting
visitor immediately walks away,leaving the area (negative punishment).
behavior that the Blacks will practice with Jake frequently, and they will expect mistakes to be made now and then!
Teaching Dogs and Cats Desirable Behaviors and Good Manners
Chapter 7
Teaching Wait
"Wait' is a context-specific behavior that is used to stop a dog's forward
movement. The most common uses of this command include keeping dogs from
o oui bop e bueb ueym jouoo buelyoe pue seb jo soop jo ino buysn
u ysnd o A oym shop ym nesn ose si puewwoo hem, eul eo e jo ino
from one room to another in the home. Some trainers also use the wait command
for walking with a dog who is on a retractable lead or is off-lead in a park. Upon
hearing "wait," the dog is trained to stop and wait for the owner to approach, not
proceeding until released. The wait exercise differs from a stay exercise in that the
dog's position is not important; the dog may remain in a stand, sit, or down posi
tion. The final teaching criterion is a dog who stops moving forward when asked
to"wait."
Because dogs are sensitive to many environmental cues that are associated
with a command, most do not confuse "wait" with "stay" if the wait command
is taught and used in the specific situations (contexts) that are important for a
particular dog and family. For this reason, the wait command is initially taught in
the specific places that it will be used, but without the exciting stimuli that typi-
cally cause problems. For example, a dog who has learned to bolt out of the front
door whenever guests arrive is trained to "wait" at the front door, but initially in the
absence of any competing stimuli such as guests or family members. Similarly, a
dog who has been rushing down the stairs and endangering family members is
initially taught to wait at the top and bottom of the stairs without distractions pres-
ent. The instructions that follow describe teaching the wait exercise at an exterior
door. These can be modified to fit other contexts and situations.
The dog is on-lead and the trainer approaches the door with the dog at his left
side. The lead is kept snug to prevent the dog from rushing ahead and the dog is
near the door and then reaches forward to open the door, without moving to go
o bnus jdey sl peal eyt pue ,tem, oi papuewwoo si bop eyl yoop eyl ybnoiu
prevent forward movement. The trainer immediately reinforces "no movement
onds and then reaches forward and closes the door. This sequence is repeated
this several times within each training session. The next criterion is introduced
when the dog begins to stop when the door opens (classical conditioning again!)
trainer's side. The next step (criterion) is to ask the dog to wait for several sec-
jo no peeooid bop eyl pue leuren eyl pue ,Xeyo, Jo ,ob slel, Ag pemolloy 'spuo
of the car, because the owner wishes for the dog to wait until his lead is attached
before jumping from the car.)
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
The final criterion that is introduced involves teaching the dog to wait at the door
while the owner (and other family members and visitors) pass through the door
without the dog. This is used either when exiting the home or yard without the
 dog, or when visitors arrive and the dog is expected not to attempt to bolt out of
 the door. This is the most difficult and challenging level of training, given that most
dogs love to accompany their owners and because having visitors is a highly dis-
tracting and exciting time for many dogs. As previously stated, the dog is on lead
and the lead is kept snug as the trainer approaches the door. After opening the
door, the dog is commanded to "wait" as the trainer steps through the door to the
outside. The lead is kept on the dog and the trainer immediately walks back to
the dog and reinforces the wait. The trainer then leaves and shuts the door briefly,
returning after a few seconds to reinforce. When this level of the wait command
of visitors or family members coming and going.
TeachingWalk on a Loose Lead
One of the most enjoyable activities that dog owners share with their dogs is
going for walks together. Walking and hiking with dogs provides exercise; visual,
olfactory, and mental stimulation; socialization to new places and people; and
the opportunity to habituate to new stimuli. An added benefit that has been
dxe shop jieui ym buim ae oym aidoad peul si sapns Aee u pepoda
ence more opportunities for positive interactions with other people than do
people who are out walking alone.4 Because walking a dog who is pulling or
dragging his owner along is not enjoyable, teaching loose-lead walking is an
important goal for most dog owners. The primary objectives of this training
aul pe jis ol pue bund inouim peal asool e uo yiem oi bop aul yoeel ol aie
owner'ssidewhen the owner stops.
Training Chalfenges: Paradoxically, while loose-lead walking is of utmost
importance to the bond between owners and their dogs, it can be one of the
most challenging behaviors to train. There are several reasons for this difficulty.
The first is that puling on-lead often has a strong reinforcement history. Dogs pull
because they have learned that pulling forward while going on a walk brings new
smells, sights, and opportunities for interactions with other people. These envi-
proaches the park entrance. This occurs because arriving at the park is a strong
tively reinforced every time that it is ofered. Many dogs have experienced a long
decide that they no longer enjoy walking with a dog who almost dislocates their
shoulder. The second reason that loose-lead walking is a difficult exercise to
Teaching Dogs and Cats Desirable Behaviors and Good Manners
Chapter 7
teach is related to the type of behavior that it is. Essentially, walking on a loose
lead is a place rather than a discrete behavior. Teaching a dog to walk at the own-
er's side within a "no-pull" zone requires that the dog learns to maintain a position
more difficult to train and to achieve proficiency. (To illustrate this point, owners
can be asked to attempt “heeling" next to another person, constantly changing
Changing Reinforcement Contingencies: Because many dogs have been
aaisod = bop e buneaib) shop leuo spiemoi sheumo jiaun lnd ol pemoiie
to investigate smells in the grass (more positive reinforcement), pulling behavior
uenuin buol e ym paeioss si pue shop sue un pauslise -llm s!
history. It is impossible to eliminate these varied and highly potent environmental
reinforcers that dogs receive during walks. However, careful training can change
oose fead rather than tight fead. Remember that the primary reinforcement that
a dog receives for pulling on lead (i.e. maintaining a tight lead) is “"getting places"
and attaining all of the desirable stimuli that are found in those places. The
trainer can modify this response-reinforcer relationship by setting up a rule that
the behavior that willlead to reinforcement is "loose lead" while the behavior that
bop aul esneoag ,uong oy aun buysnd, se anbiuyoat buuien slul ol lajal sie
is taught that the way to get the owner to walk forward is to offer loose lead (go
button), while pulling and maintaining a tight lead causes the trainer to stop and
refuse to move forward (stop button).
Training Criteria: Like any other new behavior, loose-lead walking is trained
jo ads mau e on buoms 'sbop Aueu y buideus buisn 'suawau! lews u!
training collar is helpful in facilitating loose-lead walking (Sidebar 4). Training be-
gins in a quiet area that offers minimal opportunities for environmental reinforce-
ment. The owner's living room works well. The first criterion is that the dog is
trainer puts the lead on the dog (which, because it is often a conditioned stimu-
lus, usually evokes great excitement in the dog), plants her feet, and waits. Any
lead is positively reinforced. The goal of the trainer is to build a strong reinforce-
hip and with no tension on the lead. Remaining stationary while teaching this
minimizes external stimuli that would be attractive to the dog, allowing for a high
rate of reinforcement and success. The trainer can take one or two steps in vari
au uaym pea esool, bumouan 'buuen eul o pd sy buunp suooap sno
Section 2
HOWDOGSANDCAISLEARN-TRAININGTECHNIQUES
Sidebar 4
TYPES OFTRAINING COLLARS
A training goal for most owners is to teach their dog to walk on lead without
uao sl ssauey lo jelloo buuiel e 'suibeg buuiell slyl ueym bund loj Aoisiy
aonoui seoo buuil pasn Auowwoy buueal aeloel ol pie ue se pasn
● Buckle Collar: Fixed-circumference buckle collars are best suited for dogs who do not
that is needed for training small and toy breed dogs and is the collar of choice for dogs
bund noym pal uo yim oi pau ae Aaui aouo
·Limited Slip Collars: These collars lie flat on the dog's neck, like a buckle collar, but
include a loop of added material that keeps the collar loose when not pulling and tight-
ens if the dog pulls. when tight, the collar will not come back off over the dog's head,
which is a benefit for dogs with narrow heads. A limited slip collar is most appropriate
for dogs who do not pull strongly or who have had basic training.
pulls ahead. Most dogs perceive this as an aversive stimulus and stop pulling into the
and respond better to another type of training collar.
When the dog pulls into the collar, the joints contract and pinch skin around the dog's
lar, this aversive stimulus (pinching) is relieved by moving back into a loose-lead posi-
tion. This type of collar is recommended for dogs who do not tolerate halter collars or
s
become associated with the presence of another dog.
cally restricting the dog's ability to fully extend the front legs. Although forging ahead is
reduced, the harness does not provide control of the dog's head. Some dogs who do
not tolerate a head halter response well to no-pull harnesses. However, because this
of training and not as a long-term solution to pulling.
· Metal Slip Collar: These collars (also called “choke collars") exert an aversive stimulus
Because it is dificult to time the aversive correction accurately and because slip collars
exert sudden and concentrated pressure on the dog's neck, trachea, and esophagus
For these reasons, slip collars are not recommended as a training aid.
Teaching Dogs and Cats Desirable Behaviors and Good Manners
Chapter 7
this stage, most dogs quickly learn this and enjoy the game of keeping the lead
loose to earn treats. Pulling behavior can be rapidly extinguished in this setting
by ignoring pulling and providing high value food treats, verbal praise, friendly
a position next to the trainer's left hip is the behavior that "works" (i.e. has posi-
rate of positive reinforcement when teaching loose lead to avoid opportunities for
the dog to pull into the lead and be reinforced by environmental stimuli. Multiple
small treats should be provided and every attempt that the dog makes to stay
close to the left hip is reinforced.
begins to reinforce loose lead while walking. A commonly used verbal cue for
loose-lead walking is "Let's go" or "Heel." The trainer provides the verbal cue in a
pleasant voice and steps forward. Each step that the dog takes while keeping the
lead loose is reinforced. Similar to stationary training, a high rate of reinforcement
should be provided to prevent the dog from pulling forward and attaining rein-
forcement in the form of getting closer to desired environmental stimuli. Whenever
the dog moves out of the no-pull zone and causes the lead to become tight, the
dog looks back or moves back toward the trainer, the trainer immediately rein-
forces the behavior and if the lead is loose again begins to walk. The trainer only
continues to move forward if the dog stays close and loose lead is maintained.
Accurate timing is essential because the goal is to communicate that the behavior
that earns reinforcement is maintaining a loose lead. The dog learns that the be
havior that works to move the trainer forward and toward the reinforcing proper
ties of the walk is to keep her lead slack. Stopping when the dog is pulling uses
negative punishment because the opportunity for something positive to occur is
removed when the unwanted behavior of pulling is offered. Likewise, only moving
forward when the lead is slack delivers immediate positive reinforcement (getting
uosod eey ledod o, (esiid pue sea 'oh o)
A final way in which environmental rewards can be used to the trainer's (and
dog's) benefit is to include them in daily walks as periodic reinforcers for loose
Alieuoiseooo m inq llem sylem Aeleuan bop e uaym pasn aq ueo sul peal
pull toward something specific such as the park entrance or the driveway of a
doggy friend who will be joining the walk. The trainer reinforces loose lead with
food treats, praising, and walking toward the desired stimulus, for example, the
park entrance. If the dog pulls, the trainer not only stops, but walks backwards
several steps and only starts forward again when the dog is heeling nicely. When
the dog offers a few steps of loose lead, the owner releases the dog to enter the
park or to meet the dog friend, using these opportunities as positive reinforcers
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
The environmental reward that is earned is an opportunity to sniff, play, or romp
with a doggy friend. This approach is attractive to owners who would like their
dog to walk nicely at heel for part of the walk but also wish to provide their dogs
time to just "be a dog"; allowing sniffing, exploring and playing. When environ-
mental rewards are used, it is important to introduce another cue, such as "go
play" when the targeted spot is reached and the dog is allowed a period of "just
be a dog" time.
Teaching Come When Called
Auo jou s! pelleo ueum awioo ot pue aweu sy ol puodsal oi bop e bujyoeal
good manners training, it has the potential to save a dog's life. In addition, hav-
ing a dog who will reliably stay close during walks in parks and who comes when
called while out playing in the yard allows off-lead exercise and a more stimulating
and enjoyable life for the dog (Figure 7.4). However, similar to walking on a loose
lead, the unwanted behavior of not coming when called or even worse, running
away, often has a strong reinforcement history. It is not uncommon for owners to
make the mistake of calling their dog to them only in circumstances that the dog
is doing something undesirable, or when they are going to administer something
unpleasant. Something as simple as putting the lead back on the dog and end-
ing the romping time is unpleasant. For example, a dog who is only called to the
pao bueg peun sueal Aoinb sop lauo ym suoisses Aeid jo pue au e leuno
signals the end of social time with other dogs. In this case, coming when called
is being negatively punished, and will decrease in frequency! And, naturally, a dog
who comes when called and is then punished for digging or barking in the yard
will rapidly learn to not respond to a come command (Box 7.2).
figure 7.4 Coming when called in the park
Teaching Dogs and Cats Desirable Behaviors and Good Manners
Chapter 7
Box 7.2 TEAChlNG MAX TO RUN AwAY...
Puppy: As a young puppy, Max was a bit timid and was very attached to Paul. When Max was between 8 and
Five months old: When Max was five months old, he became increasingly confident and curious. while out in
dogs on several of their walks. The day came when Max was off-lead playing and Paul called him: “Max, come!
However, Max was much more interested in sniffing the grass. Paul called again . . . and again . .. and again. Max
learned that responding to "come" was optional, and that the environment has the potential to be much more
reinforcement history.
verbally. Paul tells a trainer later that he is certain that Max understood this because he was "remorseful:" The
trainer explains that Max's behavior was not remorse; it was submissive and possibly fearful. Unfortunately, Paul
assumed (wrongly) that Max had "learned his lesson: The next time that this scenario played itself out, Paul called,
an alternate behavior - running away. Paul was unable to catch Max. Maxs running away behavior was negatively
reinforced (i.e. it was a behavior that allowed Max to avoid an impending unpleasant stimulus).
More learning: Max steals Paul's slipper. Paul chases Max, yelling “Come here now!? Max learns that the fun of
name' and by positively reinforcing (and shaping) coming when called. The result would have been a young dog
Therefore, the first step of training is to ensure that the word "come" becomes
associated (classically conditioned) only with positive stimuli. The trainer selects a
alone (i.e. withheld in all other circumstances). Examples include highly valued food
 treats such as cheese or hotdog bits, a favorite squeaky toy, or a highly desired
ball. These are to be paired only with the behavior of coming when called and
pue 'aweu s,bop aul ol esuodsa ui buunl :sued juauodwoo oml jo pesudwoo
returning to the owner close enough to be touched (i.e. touching the dog's collar).
Shaping the behavior of coming when called is achieved by shifting criteria of
distance and environmental distractions and reinforcers
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
Turn to Your Name: Although this is a step that is often overlooked, teaching a
pasn-lero si aweu s, bop aun yoym ui sawoy ui senodwi Aeloadse si slul 'paio
or has been used as an aversive stimulus, such as yelling the dog's name in a
harsh tone to interrupt an unwanted behavior or as a form of verbal reprimand
eumo ey seab pue sum oym bop e sl ,eweu inos oi um, buyoeel jo eob eul
her attention and anticipates another command to follow. The trainer selects a
quiet area in the home. Standing close to the dog, the trainer quietly speaks the
dog 's name. If the dog turns his head to look, the trainer touches the dog's collar
and immediately reinforces with a high-value treat. This sequence is repeated 
10 to 20 times, with the trainer standing close to the dog and maintaining a high
rate of reinforcement. Once the behavior of "turning to your name" is reliable, the
repeating the training sequence. Touching the collar when the dog comes close
has two important functions. It ensures that the dog comes close enough to the
trainer each time (i.e. a target) and also teaches the dog that someone reaching
for the collar always predicts a treat rather than an aversive outcome (classical
conditioning). The "turn to your name" behavior is then gradually generalized to
other parts of the home, when out on walks, and in the yard.
si bop aun eun ansue oi patendiuew si suawuoue s bop aul (' / xog as
highly motivated to come to the trainer each time that the command "come" is
given. Examples include calling the dog to come at mealtime as the dog's food
 is being prepared, when the owner comes home after being away for work or on
errands, or when the dog is approaching the trainer for attention and affection.
This early training allows the trainer to classically condition the “come" command
with positive stimuli (food, affection, petting) and ensures that all uses of the com-
that owners can use include having one family member hold the dog while an-
other calls the dog from another room of the house. This “back-and-forth" train-
o seunpoddo sapoid pue bop eu lo ewee algoe ue sawooeg uao bu
practice and repetition.
Once "come" has been introduced in these settings, the dog must also be
prevented from not responding (or, worse, running away) when she is called
o ps e ui eay si bop aun yoym ui suons le 'siu juasaid ol yeumo aul ol
even in the home with a dog who has learned to run away) and in which the dog
can choose not to respond, the dog should be either dragging a long line or is
attached to a retractable lead. Wwhen the come command is given, the lead can
Teaching Dogs and Cats Desirable Behaviors and Good Manners
Chapter 7
be picked up and the dog guided into the owner if she does not immediately
respond. Off-lead training can be conducted in a safe area such as a fenced
yard or in the home. Just as with stays, distance, time away, and distractions are
introduced separately and shaped slowly.
When teaching a dog to come when called, it is important to realize that
no matter how well-trained a dog is, she will always potentially respond to
s  a     s  
trainers attempt to minimize the chance of this happening, just like people,
dogs do make mistakes. It is the owner's responsibility to ensure the safety of
his or her dog and not to put the dog in situations in which a failure to respond
will put the dog in physical danger. Moreover, responsible pet ownership means
not allowing a dog to roam freely in a neighborhood, nor to randomly run up to
neighbors or other dogs.
TRAINING A WELL-MANNERED CAT
ddey e oi anguoo ueo jeun shoueq ane ssauiy e uo yiem oi pue palie
well-exercised, and well-behaved feline companion. Just like dogs, cats respond
of reinforcing stimuli are desirable to cats. These include food treats, petting,
preferences - owners should experiment and find out what things are most
enjoyable to their cat. These desirable items can then be selectively managed
for use during training sessions.
The ease or difficulty of teaching a new behavior to a cat depends some-
what upon the extent to which the behavior is in harmony with the cat's natu-
ral instincts. For example, it is very easy to teach cats to use scratching posts
because scratching rough surfaces is a normal marking behavior and also serves
esuodsan u woeid jo joois e ouo dn dunf oi jeo e uren oi Asee s n Xpeiuis
territories. Conversely, while most cats very naturally chase moving objects such
with a "captured" toy (i.e. to retrieve). As a result, teaching a complete retrieve to
1.8.0
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN - TRAINING TECHNIQUES
Training Cats to Use Specific Sleeping Areas
Unfortunately, this normal behavior often results in unwanted behaviors such as
jumping onto counters or dining room tables. An approach to preventing the use
of areas that are unacceptable to the cat's owner is to train the cat to jump up
sod buons e bususgeisa Aa 'eane bunsan paoales e u wogeid lo peq e ouo
tive reinforcement history of one or more acceptable spots, the cat's use of other
um ees ol jeo aun buesgo Aq isly suibeg bunuieh siul 'peonpai eq ueo seae
types of areas she naturally selects for resting. For example, some cats enjoy sit-
ting in window ledges with an outdoor view, while others prefer elevated platforms
on the back of couches or chairs. A cat bed or a platform that is located near a
preferred spot and composed of a desirable material will have the highest likeli-
hood of success as a resting spot (Figure 7.5). when the new bed or platform has
been placed in the desired location, the cat is carried to the platform and fed a
high value treat while on the bed. The cat is reinforced with the select treats each
time she approaches the new bed or is close to the area. A large "jackpot" rein-
forcement can be given when the cat jumps up onto the bed. If the site and the
bed surface are attractive to the cat, the owner should notice that the cat is using
the bed after several repetitions of reinforcement.
Alternatively, if the cat does not begin to use the new resting platform, the
figure 7.5 Cat resting on a raised platform located near a window
Teaching Dogs and Cats Desirable Behaviors and Good Manners
Chapter 7
very particular about their preferred resting spots, but once an acceptable
resting spots should be provided in different rooms of the house. At the
same time environmental corrections (i.e. aversive stimuli) can be placed on
or around the locations that the owner wishes to prevent the cat from using.
Effective aversive stimuli that cause avoidance but do not usually produce
canisters. Making all of the previously used areas unattractive while providing
sueed esn sjeo eyl shys Aensn saoeid busei meu bueadde Aenbe
very quickly. Finally, if the owner wishes to take this training one step further
lebiel buisn pausdwoooe aq ueo siut 'iods jey ot ob, ot jeo aul yoeal pue
training (see Sidebar 3).
Training a Cat to Come When Called
The first step of teaching a cat to come is to ensure that the cat knows and
em peu sanbuyoel ews au busn paseyoe si siul 'aweu sly ol spuodsa
outlined for dogs (see pp. 178-179). The trainer should select a highly valued
treat; a bit of canned food or minced liver work well with cats. The trainer stands
with the trainer not moving and always immediately following the cat's name with
a treat (classical conditioning). When the cat begins to respond to her name by
looking for the treat (and the owner), the trainer can take one step away, while still
facing the cat. The trainer speaks the cat's name and immediately reinforces the
cat when she takes one or two steps to the trainer Many owners do not include
the word “come" with their cats, but simply train their cat to come to their name.
If the trainer prefers to teach the "come" command, it should be inserted as soon
as the cat begins to move toward the trainer, always using "[Cat's name], come."
Once this training has been initiated, it is important that owners never use their
cat's name as an aversive to stop the cat from doing something unwanted. Wwhen
aversive sounds are used, a loud clap or a mechanical sound is preferable to
the cat's name and prevents the development of negative associations with the
owner's voice.
Training a Cat to Walk on a Harness
m jeo e apoid ol Aem jualloxe ue si ssuy e uo ym oi j e buui
enjoyable and safe excursions outside. Walking or allowing a cat to explore
that is specifically designed for cats should be selected and fitted snuggly to
prevent escape. Training the cat to tolerate and walk while wearing a harness
182
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
secure. The first step is to habituate the cat to wearing the harness. An effective
approach is to put the harness on the cat immediately before feeding. This will
classically condition the presence of the harness with the pleasant associations
of eating. As soon as the cat finishes his meal, the harness is removed and the
feeding bowl is picked up and put away. Owners should be patient, as some
cats require several weeks to become habituated to wearing a harness. When
the cat is comfortable with the harness, a lead can be attached and the classical
conditioning training sequence is repeated. The cat is then allowed to drag the
lead around the house, without any resistance. Once the cat is accustomed to
the lead, the trainer can pick up the lead and willfollow the cat around, positively
reinforcing a loose-lead. For some owners, this level of training is acceptable if
 they simply desire that their cat can go outside and explore with the lead and
owner is desired, the trainer begins to lure the cat to follow using a highly valued
food treat. (lt is sometimes helpful to use a long wooden spoon, using a small bit
of canned food in the end, to reinforce walking.) This training is gradually shaped
and walking criterion is shifted to require the cat to follow the owner. Although
many cats can be lead trained, most will not trot at your side the way a dog will.
Rather, an enjoyable walk for a cat involves stopping frequently to sniff and exam-
 ine everything around him.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
Describe how positive reinforcement and successive approximation can be used
to train a dog to stay in place (sitting).
2
Discuss the training challenges that are associated with teaching dogs to walk
comfortably on a loose lead
3
Why is teaching a dog to "turn to your name" an important component of teaching
"'come when called'"?
Describe a training program for teaching an adult cat to sleep on a raised cat bed
placed near a favorite window.
Identify the key components that are needed to attain reliability (fluency) in a
newly trained behavior.
Teaching Dogs and CatsDesirable Behaviors and Good Manners
Chapter 7
183
REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING
Alexander MC. Click for Joy. Sunshine Books, Inc, Waltham, MA, 208 pp., 2003.
Beadle M. The Cat: History, Biology, and Behavior. Simon and Schuster, New York, NY.
1977.
Beaver BV. Feline Behavior: A Guide for Veterinarians. W. B. Saunders Company.
Philadelphia, PA,276 pp.,1992
Burch MR, Bailey JS. How Dogs Learn. Howell Book House, New York, NY, 188 pp.
1999.
Bradshaw JWS. The Behaviour of the Domestic Cat. CAB International, Oxford, UK,
219 pp., 1992.
Ames, IA, 479 pp., 2005.
391 pp.,2003
Csanyi V. If Dogs Could Talk: Exploring the Canine Mind. North Point Press, New York,
NY, 334 pp., 2005.
Donaldson J. Culture Clash: A Revolutionary New Way of Understanding the
Relationship between Humans and Domestic Dogs. James and Kenneth Publishers,
Oakland, CA, 221 pp., 1996.
Miller J. The domestic cat: Perspective on the nature and diversity of cats. J Amer Vet
Med Ass0c, 208:498-501, 1996.
Miklosi A. Dog: Behavior, Evolution and Cognition. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK,
274 pp., 2007.
New J, Salman M, King M, Scarlett J, Kass P, Hutchingson J. Characteristics of
shelter-relinquished animals and their owners compared with animals and their
owners in U.S. pet-owning households. J Appl Anim Welfare Sci, 3:179-210, 2000
Pryor K. Karen Pryor on Behavior. Sunshine Books, North Bend, WA, 1995.
Publishing Company, London, 0K, 174 pp., 1990.
Sanders CR. Understanding Dogs: Living and Working with Canine Companions.
lemple University Press, Philadelphia, PA, 201 pp., 1999.
8
Section 2
HOW DOGS AND CATS LEARN -TRAINING TECHNIQUES
 Shore ER, Douglas DK, Riley ML. what's in it for the companion animals: Pet
attachment and college students' behaviors towards pets. J App; Anim Welfare Sci.
8:1-11, 2005.
pp., 2007.
Salman ME, New JC, Scarlett JM, Kass PH, Ruch-Gallie PH, Hetts S. Human and animal
shelters in the United Stats. J Appl Anim Welfare Sci, 1:207-226, 1998.
Footnotes
1 Shore ER, Douglas DK, Riley ML. What's in it for the companion animals: Pet
attachment and college students' behaviors towards pets. J Appl Anim Welfare Sci
8:1-11, 2005.
2 Salman ME, New JC, Scarlett JM, Kass PH, Ruch-Gallie PH, Hetts S Human and
animal factors related to the relinquishment of dogs and cats in twelve selected
3 New J, Salman M, King M, Scarlett J, Kass P, Hutchingson J. Characteristics of
owners in U.S. pet-owning households. J Appl Anim Welfare Sci, 3:179-210, 2000.
4 Messent PR. Social facilitation of contact with other people by pet dogs. In: New
SECTION3
Understanding and Solving
Common Behavior Problems
8
CHAPTER
Elimination Problems
in Dogs and Cats
ost pet owners have the expectation that their dogs can be trained to
reliably eliminate outdoors and their cats can learn to dependably use
a litter box. Therefore, when house-soiling problems occur, they are
often very disturbing to owners because of these expectations and
because of the damage that is done to home furnishings. Over time, the inability
to resolve a house-soiling problem may cause the owner to isolate the pet, house
the pet outdoors, or even abandon the pet at a shelter. Recent shelter statistics
indicate that house-soiling problems are a common reason that owners relinquish
pets.1 As with all behaviors that people consider to be problematic, effective treat-
ment of house-soiling problems relies upon correctly identifying its cause. Com-
mon causes of house soiling in dogs include incomplete house-training, marking 
Cats who house soil either stop using their litter box for elimination altogether
or are exhibiting marking behavior. Each of these behaviors may be triggered by
several causes. In both dogs and cats, the presence of an underlying medical
problem must always be ruled out prior to addressing the behavioral aspects of a
house soiling problem (Sidebar 1).
Elimination Problems in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 8
187
MEDICAL CONDITIONSTHAT MAY CONTRIBUTE
Sidebar 1
TO HOUSE-SOILING PROBLEMS
In both dogs and cats, medical causes must be considered when previously
-eun oi enguoo peui suoitpuoo qeoipa los asnoy ol uibag sied pauiel
tion in the house or outside of the litter box include any disorder that causes
uied o (enyellod) aeuun ol paeu juenbal e (enAjod) uoeuun pasealou
to inappropriate defecation:
Urination House Soiling
● Increased urine production: Diabetes mellitus, chronic renal disease, hyperadreno-
corticism (Cushing's disease), and psychogenic polydipsia (excessive water
consumption)
● Increased frequency of urination: Urolithiasis, cystitis, enlarged prostate, urinary
tract tumors
● Mobility problems: Arthritis, spinal cord diseases, hip dysplasia
Defecation House Soiling
● Increased frequency of defecation: Colitis (inflammation of the large intestine),
intestinal parasites (whipworm)
· Painful defecation: Anal gland infection, constipation, obstipation
· Mobility problems: Arthritis, spinal cord diseases, hip dysplasia
ELIMINATION PROBLEMSIN DOGS
Puppies younger than four months old have limited bladder control and must
be provided with frequent opportunities to urinate and defecate in an outdoor
during the night. For both puppies and adult dogs who have not been house-
trained, successful house-training relies upon providing the dog with frequent and
uuaaid pue eane oopino aedaidde ue ui eeuwe o seunoddo enba
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
accidents in the house. This is accomplished by closely supervising the puppy
or dog at all times and using confinement to a crate or “safe area" when the dog
cannot be closely watched. Basic classical and operant conditioning techniques
are used to put elimination on cue and to reinforce correct behaviors, respectively
trained, a substantial proportion do not. For example, almost 80 percent of house
soiling problems presented to a veterinary behavior clinic were attributed to in
adequate house-training." Other causes of house soiling in dogs include marking
behavior, submissive or excitable urination, and anxiety-induced elimination.
Incomplete House-Training
The use of ineffective house-training methods coupled with unrealistic
expectations can result in inadequate house-training. For example, owners
should expect to maintain vigilant supervision and a frequent outdoor schedule
with puppies up to five to six months of age. Young dogs must also be confined
to a crate or another suitable area during times when they cannot be closely
supervised. Unrealistically expecting a puppy to be completely trained within
the first few weeks in the new home leads to repeated incidents of urination or
defecation in the home. This can cause a surface or location preference for the
indoor area, which further impedes house-training efforts.
in puppies; by five weeks of age puppies in a litter are leaving their sleeping area
to urinate and defecate, and begin to choose specific locations for elimination.
If no guidance is provided and repeated use of a particular indoor area occurs,
the puppy can develop a substrate preference for carpet or linoleum surfaces
A related problem is seen in dogs who are confined for long periods of time and
forced to eliminate in their crate or kennel. In this case, elimination behaviors may
not develop nommally and instead the puppy acquires a substrate preference
for the smooth surface of a crate or kennel. In extreme cases, the dog learns to
seen in puppies who were purchased from pet stores where they lived confined to
ans aaouoo e ym slauuay ui pasnoy aem oum shop eleus ui pue abeo e
challenging than training a young puppy who was encouraged to develop outdoor
for the development of unwanted preferences and enhances the owner's ability to
paueal sey ose oum inq paue-asnoy Auood Auo jou si oum bop e ui jnsa
to avoid eliminating in the presence of the owner. This behavior is a direct result
Elimination Problems in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 8
of the misconception that it is acceptable to punish a dog for eliminating in the
house whenever the dog is "caught in the act." This oft-repeated myth is not just
an ineffective house-training technique, it is counterproductive and potentially
inhumane. When a dog is punished for eliminating, the aversive stimulus (yelling,
hitting) causes anxiety and fear. Some dogs learn to avoid this consequence
that eliminating near the owner has a negative consequence (yelling, hitting, and
consequence (relief associated with emptying the bladder, no exposure to yelling).
Athough the owner may believe that his dog "knows he is wrong" because the
dog eliminates in another room and shows submissive or fearful body postures
paoadxe s bop eul re soeyeg eseul loy uosean buuapun eu ,'rybneo, uaum
reaction to negative reinforcement and punishment. Essentially, in this case, the
owner has very efficiently trained his dog to eliminate in the house, out of sight,
and in another room (Sidebar 2).
EFFECTS OF PRE-ADOPTION EDUCATION ON OWNER
Sidebar 2
PERCEPTIONS OF HOUSE-TRAINING SUCCESS
Although owners rarely euthanize their dogs for house-soiling problems, it is
an unfortunate fact that they do frequently relinquish them to animal shelters
problems to be very serious. This is especially tragic in light of the fact that
to encourage complete house-training using proper methods through educa-
fion and to help reduce relinquishment of dogs for house soiling reasons.
With this objective in mind, a group of researchers examined the effects of
sanbluyoal buuel-snoy ledoid abenooue ol buesunoo uodope-aid buisn
ayl 'sdnoib oml ol peubisse Ajwopuel alem sleumo leul pue sbop lnpe
treatment group received a short counseling session that provided guidelines
for house-training. The control group received all other normal adoption pro-
house-training group included providing consistent indoor supervision to pre-
no one was at home to supervise the dog. In addition, the use of punishment
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
for accidents, regardless of when they were discovered, was strongly discour-
to clean soiled areas.
One month following adoption, owners were interviewed regarding their
perceptions of house-training success. Overall, a high proportion were satisfied
with the degree to which their dog was house-trained, but significantly more
ouoo aul u shaumo ueul ssaoons paoda dnoia buuienl-asnoy aul ui sheumo
group (98.1 percent vs. 86.4 percent, respectively). More notably, owners who
received pre-adoption counseling were less likely to use verbal punishment
owzue asn ol Aayll alow aem pue buuie-asnoy buunp sbop laul y
cleaners on soiled areas than owners who had not received the counseling.
dnoib palasunoo aul ul sleumo alow ybnoule pul sem bupuy paloadxaun uy
reported satisfaction with their dog's level of training after one month, the actual
ou pip asnoy eyl ui sueplooe aaey ol penuuoo sbop yolym yla Aouenba
differ appreciably between the two groups. This disparity suggests that owners
who received counseling not only were more likely to use appropriate tech-
niques for training and cleanup, but were better prepared to understand the
behavior problem that affects the bond that they have with their dog (and risk of
asnoy noge uoewojui buplaoid peyl ssabbns shnsai asayl (uewysinbue
training to new owners both improves house-training success and encourages
realistic perceptions about the house-training process.
among dogs acquired from shelters.  Amer Vet Med Assoc, 231:558-562, 2007.
Treatment: Treatment for dogs who have not been completely house-trained
is confined to a small area of the house and taken outside at very frequent inter-
vals. Areas of the home that have been soiled are thoroughly cleaned. The dog
is prevented from revisiting the areas during the retraining program using baby
gates or closed doors. The most important rule that the owner must follow is that
the dog is only allowed unsupervised access to the house if he has been taken
outside and has eliminated within the last 30 minutes. If the dog is taken out and
taken outside again 10 to 20 minutes later. An alternative approach is called the
"umbilical cord" technique. The dog is attached to the owner by a leash or is teth-
ered to a piece of furniture in the same room as the owner. This approach pre-
vents the dog from wandering into another room to eliminate and has the added
Elimination Problems in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 8
uwe on bupaau lo subis s bop un ueal ol seumo bubenooue jo nauag
Typical body signals that dogs show include panting and pacing, staring at the
owner, sniffing, pawing, and circling. Because dogs who are perceived as being
incompletely house-trained often give signals that their owners do not recognize
this form of retraining can help the dog to become more reliable and the owner to
sjeubis s, bop eyl ol puodsel ol ueel
 During retraining, a designated area of the yard should be used consistently,
and a specific cue word (Go potty' or "Hurry up") is used to classically condition
can be helpful in encouraging elimination in that area. Owners should also avoid
ending daily walks as soon as the dog eliminates. This habit can inadvertently
cause the dog to delay eliminating when he learns that urination and defecation
always predict an end to an enjoyable outdoor excursion. For this reason, trips
Qutside for elimination only should be separated from trips outdoors for walks and
exercise. Using diferent leashes or exiting different doors for each type of event can
an adequate number of trips outside, reinforcing correct elimination habits, and
preventing indoor accidents will complete the dog's house-training (Box 8.1).
BoX 8.1 CASE STVDY - CHAMP'S HOUSE-TRAINNG PROBLEM
Description of problem: Champ is a neutered, 1-year-old, male, Boxer mix. His owners, Sue and Brad Brown,
destructive at all, and has a number of toys that he chews and plays with. He is crated when the Browns are not at
ably house-trained.
The Browns did not know if Champ was house-trained and instituted a complete training program upon bringing
Brad or Sue in another room of the house, and frequently taking Champ into a designated spot in the yard to
supervised. However, as the Browns allowed Champ to have more freedom in the house, he began to go into the
   e o       i   a     
supervising him. On one occasion, he left the living room where the family was sitting, went into the dining room,
defecated, and returned.
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
Diagnosis: Incomplete house-training; learned surface preference for hard, non-absorbent surfaces; possibly
learned avoidance of owner when eliminating.
Clean all soiled areas with a biological (enzymatic) cleaner. Introduce cue word ("Hurry Up') for elimination and
Outcome: When Champ was prevented access to soiled areas and supervised closely, no further accidents
occurred. After two weeks of strict supervision and no accidents, Sue and Brad were able to gradually
increase Champ's freedom in the home. At the one-month follow-up, the Browns report that Champ is
reliably house-trained
Marking Behavior
Marking is characterized by the frequent voiding of small amounts of urine, usually
targeting socially significant locations (see Chapter 3, pp. 46-48 for a complete
discussion). Less frequently, feces may be deposited in conspicuous areas. All
behavior problem in intact males. With the exception of sleeping areas, parts of
the home or yard in which the dog spends most of his time are frequently marked
by a dog who exhibits urine marking (Figure 8.1). When marking occurs in the
a dog who suddenly begins to mark the resting spot of a newly introduced cat
 is presumed to be expressing anxiety over the change in social structure in the
home. Similarly, a dog may begin marking when a new dog or human family
member has been introduced to the home.
figure 8.1 Marking behavior in male dog
Elimination Problems in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 8
eliminates or significantly decreases marking behavior in more than 90 percent of
intact male dogs.? Contrary to popular belief, this effect is observed even in mature
dogs who have a history of marking. If the dog is marking because of anxiety or
a change in social status, the underlying cause of anxiety must be identified and
treated. Counter-conditioning and systematic desensitization are used to condition
the dog to accept a new member of the household (human or non-human) and to
change classically conditioned associations. In some cases, the Luse of anti-anxiety
medications may be helpful as adjunctive therapy. Because dogs who mark in
the house usually revisit the same areas, blocking access to previously marked
e puaaaid ol sdley Aisnoaid passnosip yoeoidde poo geogwn aun buisn lo seaes
recurence of marking behavior during retraining.
Submissive/Excitable Urination
Submissive and excitable urination are actually two separate disorders but are
often discussed together because it can be difficult to distinguish between the
but in different contexts.
Submissive Urination: Submissive urination is seen in dogs who show
sow si sun yonouniy buneaie buunp saimsod Apoq aaissiwgns Aeaissaoxe
commonly reported as a problem during interactions with their owners or other
greets with lowered head, averted eyes, and retracted lips, and dribbles urine as
figure 8.2 Submissive urination during greeting
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
young puppies who are interacting with adult dogs and for many puppies when
they greet humans. Most dogs gain confidence as they mature and no longer
demonstrate this level of deference. However, some dogs either do not develop
adequate confidence as adults or have learned to offer extreme appeasement 
in response to harsh reprimands for jumping up or for misbehaving during the
ap ueeg sey bop aui peyl aw yoea bop aul papuwudan Aoisayd jo Aege
structive when left alone. This reaction not only causes the dog to show extreme
appeasement and possibly to urinate when greeting, but also increases the dog's
level of anxiety, which further exacerbates anxiety-induced destructive behaviors.
Treatment: Submissive urination can be prevented by decreasing the intensity
of greetings and avoiding standing or leaning over the dog while interacting. An
effective approach to diffuse intense interactions is to redirect the dog by tossing
a biscuit or toy to the side as the dog approaches to greet. The dog's movement
to the side positions her out of direct eye contact and prevents the owner or visitor
from standing directly over the dog. After the dog has consumed several treats in
 this way, she is greeted with the owner or visitor crouching down and positioning
himself laterally (from the side) to avoid leaning over the dog (Figure 8.3). It is also
helpful to train the dog to offer a reliable sit-stay for petting in non-greeting contexts
sits (see Chapter 9, pp. 212-216 for a complete discussion).
Excitable Urination: Excitable urination differs from submissive urination in
that, while it can occur during greeting, it may also happen when a young dog
becomes excited or during play. Dogs who show excitable urination often do not
squat, but rather dribble small amounts of urine as they walk or jump around.
figure 8.3 Properly greeting a submissive dog
Elimination Problems in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 8
over-stimulated dog. Because excitable urination is often caused by a lack of
complete neuromuscular control of the urinary sphincter, most dogs stop show-
ing this form of urination as they mature.
Treatment: As with submissive urination, treatment involves decreasing the
intensity of greeting and play to prevent over-arousal. Redirecting the dog's
play while reducing excitement. Greeting intensity can also be decreased by pro-
viding the dog with several minutes to romp outside before interacting. This also
allows the dog to empty her bladder prior to greeting. Similar to the treatment for
submissive urination, teaching a sit-stay for greeting can help to prevent excitable
urination, provided the sit-stay is first taught in a quiet environment. Distractions
that typically excite the dog are then gradually introduced. When behavior modi
fication alone is not effective, the medication phenypropanolamine can be used
typically prescribed to curtail urinary incontinence, it can also help to reduce excit-
able urination. Behavioral modification should continue and the drug is gradually
reduced and eliminated as the dog improves.
Other Causes of House Soiling in Dogs
Other potential causes for elimination problems in dogs include medical conditions:
separation stress, and environmental fear or anxiety (for example, fear of fireworks).
The most distinguishing factor of separation-induced elimination is that the problem
Occurs only when the dog is isolated and never when the owner is present. Treatment
of separation-related house soiling is directed toward soving the undertying cause
of separation stress (see Chapter 10 for a complete discussion of separation anxiety
n dogs). Similarty, house soiling that is related to environmental or situational fears or
anxiety is treated by either eliminating or reducing the intensity of the causative stimuli
and attempting to desensitize the dog (see Chapter 10, pp. 250-255).
ELIMINATION PROBLEMSIN CATS
who stop using the litter box for elimination purposes (hereafter referred to as
inappropriate elimination) and cats who are exhibiting marking behavior. Each of
these classifications may have one or more causes.
Inappropriate Elimination
Cats who have stopped using their litter box for elimination squat to urinate on a
horizontal surface, voiding a large volume of urine and leaving a large puddle. The
location may be close to but not actually in the box (suggesting a box aversion)
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
or in a particular location (suggesting a substrate or location preference). Some
cats who stop Lsing the box select sites that are quiet and remote, such as be-
hind a couch or in the basement. Others demonstrate a preference for novel or
seemingly unusual surfaces such as in bathtubs, sinks, or over a heating vent.
Regardless of the location or surface that is chosen, failure to use the litter box is
differentiated from marking in that the cat stops using the litter box for most or all
urinations (and, less commonly, for defecation as well).
Health Causes: Cats develop learned aversions to their litter box for environ-
mental, social, or health reasons. Medical problems that cause pain during
urination or defecation are common initiating causes of litter-box aversions. Cats
or the location of the box, and subsequently avoid the box. Common medical
are tender), gastrointestinal disease, and in elderly cats, cognitive dysfunction
(see Sidebar 1). Although a substantial number of cases of inappropriate
elimination develop originally in response to a medical disorder, curing the medical
problem does not always solve the litter-box problem because the cat has an
established association between using the box and pain. Therefore, while medial
disorders must always be ruled out with litter-box problems, behavior modification
even when these problems have been resolved.
Environmental and Social Causes: The most common environmental cause of
litter-box aversion in cats is the owner's failure to keep the litter box clean. Cats
vary in their willingness to Lse a soiled litter box. While some cats are relatively
tolerant of a dirty box, others will avoid a box that has even small amounts of
waste. In multiple-cat homes, the need for a clean box may be amplified if one or
more of the cats dislike using a box that contains another cat's waste. Aversions
in multiple-cat households can also be caused by social conflicts between
cats that prevent a cat from using or going near the box. (lt is also important in
multiple-cat homes to correctly identify the cat who has the elimination problem.)
Even when a cat's negative experience does not directly involve using the litter
box, the cat may begin to avoid the location of the box to reduce the risk of
include being frightened by a loud noise while using the box or having the box
located to a high-traffic area of the home.
Litter Box Location and Type of Filler Material: The location of the box is also
an important consideration. Cats will not use a box that is difficult to get to or
that is located in an area of the home that they rarely use. Placing the box too
close to food bowls or resting areas may also cause aversions. The type of litter
Elimination Problems in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 8
substrate that is used can be important. A sudden change in the texture or scent
of the litter that is used can trigger an aversion. Some cats dislike scented litters
or filler that has an unusual texture. Cats who have developed a litter substrate
aversion may use the box occasionally but will fail to dig and cover wastes,
dig for a shorter period of time, or exit the box abruptly (Sidebar 3). Other
signs of an aversion to litter substrate include straddling the edge of the box to
avoid touching the litter, digging on the floor outside of the box, or eliminating
immediately next to, but not in, the litter box.
LITTER BOX BEHAVIORS IN CATS WITH AND WITHOUT
Sidebar 3
INAPPROPRIATE ELIMINATION
in housecats. These aversions may develop indirectly as a result of an
unpleasant or painful experience while using the box, or directly in response
to attributes of the box or its location. A recent study was conducted to
examine the types of behaviors that cats with and without elimination
problems show around and inside of their litter box. It was theorized that
cats with inappropriate elimination due to an aversion to the box or litter
material might show different behaviors when using the box than cats without
inappropriate elimination.
A group of 40 healthy cats was studied: 20 who reliably used their
behavior (pawing, sniffing, digging, and covering waste) was recorded. In
addition, information about the type of litter box and filler material and its
ocation were collected. Each cat's core area (i.e. the smallest area of the
home that accounted for 75 percent of the cat's activity) was also identified.
The researchers found that the type of box (hooded vs. open), number of
boxes available to the cat, type of liter used, frequency with which owners
cleaned the box, and the cat's claw status (declawed or not) did not differ
between cats who had problem elimination and those who did not. In 37 of the
40 homes, the litter box was located in an area that was outside the periphery
of the cat's core living area. The measured distance of the box from the center
of the cat's core living area was inversely related to the duration of time that
sniffing when the box was located close to their primary living area than when
it was located further away.
Section 3
JNDERSTANDINGAND SOLVINGCOMMONBEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
Perhaps the most noteworthy finding of this study was that cats with problem
tion and tended to spend less time covering their waste than did cats without
inappropriate elimination. Together, these differences suggest that cats with
inappropriate elimination spend less time in and around their litter box. lt is
possible that failure to use the litter box is related to box attributes that affect
will examine whether a cat's actual digging times increase or decrease when
offered different substrates and if differences in digging behavior signify aver
sions or preferences of individual cats.
Sung w, Crowell-Davis SL. Elimination behavior patterns of domestic cats (Fetis catus) with and without elimina-
tion behavior problems. Amer  Vet Res, 67:1500-1504, 2006.
Type of Box: Finally, the size and type of box can cause problems for some cats.
A general rule of thumb is that a cat's litter box should be large enough for the cat
to scratch and easily turn around. This translates to a length that is approximately
112 times the length of the cat, measured from the nose to the base of the tail
are too small. A second issue for some cats is the Lse of a covered litter box
Covered boxes include a pan and hood with an entry opening in one side. This
type of litter box offers privacy and controls odor and spillage and are often used
feel trapped or insecure in covered boxes and are reluctant to Luse them. In recent
years, automated self-cleaning boxes have become increasingly popular. These
    s s  s      s
the box. A cleaning rake slides along the litter and scoops urine and feces into a
container. Although these boxes are convenient for owners, some cats are fright-
ened by the mechanical noise of the rake and begin to avoid the box. The self-
cleaning properties of these boxes may also cause owners to be less fastidious
about box hygiene. Because the rake cannot thoroughly remove waste, some
snoopo lo pallos Abuiseaioui ewooeg Aeu se sexog eseu buisn dos sieo
Learned Surface Preferences: Cats who stop using the litter box because
eliminate. A cat will select a location and surface that is acceptable and, if the
problem persists, will develop a preference for this new location or surface
Elimination Problems in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 8
becomes saturated with urine, it attracts the cat back and becomes a preferred
elimination site. Absorbent surfaces such as carpet or a particular piece of fur-
niture are frequently used, although some cats seem to prefer smooth and cool
surfaces such as bathroom sinks or bathtubs. When surface or location prefer
ences develop, they are usually a result of a litter-box aversion, as opposed to
attractiveness of the lifter box and preventing use of the newly selected surface.
Treatment for Inappropriate Elimination
problems in cats, a complete veterinary examination should be conducted.
ueis aojeg pabeuew o paea ag isnw l! 'punoy si uouoo geopaw e uaun
behavioral treatment. It is not uncommon for house soiling to continue after the
health problem has been resolved because of an associative aversion to the
treatment, litter-box aversions and location preferences often persist and must
be treated behaviorally
Box 8.2 CASE STVDY - LUCY'S LITTER BOX PROBLEM
Description of problem: Lucy is a seven-year-old domestic longhaired cat owned by the Parker family. She has
a history of struvite urolithiasis (lower urinary tract disease caused by crystals composed of struvite), but all of her
her litter box for some urinations, and has used the kitchen and bathroom sinks several times.At first, the Parkers
prevented Lucy from using these areas by placing metal pans in the sinks, and this seemed to be effective for
several days.However, Lucy has started to urinate in the bathtub of an upstairs bathroom. Lucy continues to
defecate in her box, and uses the box for at least some urinations, but also uses the sinks or bathtub once or twice
everyfewdays.
Additional background: Joe Parker heard from his neighbor (who knows a lot about cats) that he should “catch
 her. Lucy stopped urinating and ran away from him. Joe chased her and caught her, and then carried her to her
box and firmly placed her in her litter box. He also gave her another "swat" at the same time (so that she would
know that what she did was wrong). Joe relates that Lucy was "very upset' and struggled all the way to the box. He
tub, but are stillfinding urine in those places.
Diagnosis: Liter-box aversion initiated by pain associated with lower urinary tract disease and exacerbated by
owner's use of punishment. Concomitant development of a surface and location preference (smooth, cool surfaces;
out of owner's presence).
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
Treatment: Complete veterinary checkup for presence of struvite in urine; recommence diet therapy
for struvite urolithiasis; block all access to soiled areas and retrain to use litter box using confinement;
discontinue all use of punishment. Attempt to repair relationship with Joe by having Joe provide all of Lucy's
lower urinary tract disease.
Outcome: One month following treatment, Lucy is again reliably using her litter box (and Lucy's trust in Joe
hasbeenrestored).
Litter Box Hygiene and Management: In all cases, the litter box must be kept
palos 'pesn sl lell algedwno fl 'srep g oi z hese papoid hl ysay pue Aip
clumps are removed daily and the litter is completely replaced every two weeks.
The entire box should be washed with unscented cleaners and thoroughly
moving the box to a new location or increasing the number of litter boxes that
multiple-cat homes. A general rule of thumb is that the number of boxes should
be equal to the number of cats plus one. If the form or scent of the litter material
is suspected to be a cause, a variety of litters can be offered in different boxes
(Sidebar 4). Similarly, some cats dislike the tactile feel of certain types of litter,
and so a variety of textures can be offered and the cat's use monitored.
Sidebar 4
ODOR IN THE LITTER BOX -TO WHOM
IS IT IMPORTANT?
scooping and replacing used litter reduces the amount of waste in the box
and decreases box odor. Although owners appreciate a reduction in fecal
and urine odor generated from a dirty box, the effect that these odors have
on a cat's use of the litter box had not been studied. It was postulated that
Aeids xog-all elolewwoo e buAdde pue Ajeinbei xog ayi bujuealo yog
designed to eliminate odors would enhance the box's attractiveness to cats.
A series of studies was conducted to test this hypothesis
Elimination Problems in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 8
When the odor-eliminating spray was tested with healthy cats who did not
have a house-soiling problem, cats' box preferences were not affected by
the application of the spray. However, when tested with a second group of
cats who showed behaviors suggestive of litter-box aversion (scratching
or pawing near the box, avoiding the box, absence of digging or covering
behaviors), the cats had a significant reduction in these behaviors when their
litter boxes were treated with the odor-reducing product. Cats who regularly
when the litter box was treated with the odor-reducing product. On average
a 40-percent reduction in inappropriate elimination was reported during the
two-week period that the product was used.
These results provide strong support for the belief that odor is an important
factor involved in litter-box aversions in cats with inappropriate elimination
They also suggest that cats who show behaviors that are associated with
from a reduction in litter-box odor. Cleaning the box more oten and applying
an odor-reducing product are two approaches that owners can use to
control litter-box odor. These changes may increase the attractiveness of the
elimination problems
Cottam N, Dodman NH. Effect of an odor eliminator on feline liter box behavior.  Fetine Med Surg.
9:44-50,2007.
Treating Surface Preferences: Surface preferences are treated at the same
time by thoroughly cleaning all areas that the cat has used for elimination. For
absorbent surfaces, a biological cleaner formulated to degrade the odors of
pet waste should be applied liberally. In some cases of prolonged use, it is
necessary to completely remove and replace the surface. Baby gates and closed
doors can be used to temporarily block the cat's access to these areas during
permanently prevented from returning to those areas of the home.
Litter-Box Retraining and Removing Social Causes: Once a suitable box and
litter material have been identified, it is often necessary to confine the cat to a
small room or crate with the new box for retraining. The cat should have ample
room for sleeping and eating, but freedom in the home is limited. Confinement
allows the owner to carefully monitor litter box use and also prevents the cat from
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
revisiting soiled areas. In multiple-cat homes, confinement also can provide a
temporary reprieve from underlying social tension that may have contributed to
the house-soiling problem. As the cat is observed using the box and begins to
If social tension is suspected as an underlying cause, the cat should be provided
with a separate living space that eliminates or reduces the need for contact
between cats who do not get along. Examples include allowing cats to live on
rooms of the home.
Ineffective Treatments: Approaches to treating inappropriate elimination
that are occasionally used but are not effective include punishing the cat
environmental changes. Verbal and physical punishment administered after
the cat has eliminated does not teach the cat to eliminate in the litter box and
in the act" can become frightened and learn to avoid the aversive stimulus by
eliminating in privacy, out of sight of the owner. Similarly, simply confining the cat
to a small space with the same litter material and box may force the cat to use
the box while confined, but will not address the underlying cause of the problem.
unsupervised, if it is the only approach that is used, most cats will revert to the
original problem once allowed access to the home again.
Marking Behavior in Cats
Cats who are exhibiting marking behavior continue to use the litter box for most
eliminations while also voiding urine in small quantities in specific locations. Most
cats spray when urine marking, using the characteristic standing body posture
addition, some cats adopt a normal squatting posture and void small amounts of
urine on a horizontal surface. These cats are still considered to be marking if small
amounts of urine are found, if the location is significant, and if the cat continues to
use the litter box for most urinations. (Note: Urine marking of this type can be dif-
ficult to distinguish from inappropriate urination caused by a mild box aversion or
surface preference.)
It is important for owners to understand that urine marking does not
(see Chapter 3, pp. 46-48). Therefore, most cats who mark continue to use the
litter box and do not demonstrate behaviors that suggest an aversion to the box
or its location. Marking is most frequently exhibited by intact males or by cats
living in multiple-cat homes. lypically marked spots are vertical surfaces such as
Elimination Problems in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 8
walls, drapes, or the legs of furniture. Some cats target very specific items such
as the owner's clothing or locations near a window where the cat can see an
unfamiliar cat prowling outside. When horizontal surfaces are urine marked, the
target is often clothing, the owner's bed, or a piece of furniture. Finally, although
feral cats reportedly deposit feces in conspicuous areas within their hunting
ranges, housecats do not appear to use fecal marking for social communication.4
Therefore, the presence of feces outside of the box usually signifies a litter-box
problem rather than marking behavior.
fdentifying the Cause of Marking: Urine marking by housecats is classified as
being either a sexual or reactional (stress-induced) behavior. Sexual marking is
ing and reproductively intact females often mark during the estrus stage of their
estrous cycle. In both sexes, sexual marking behavior increases during the cat's
to popular belief, neutering is an effective treatment for sexual-marking behavior
regardless of the age of the cat or the duration of spraying.5
When urine marking occurs in neutered cats, the undertying cause is almost
always reactional, resulting from social conflict among cats in a multiple-cat home
induced marking include the introduction of a new cat or cats, a move to a new
home, a change in the cat's or the owner's daily routine, decreased attention from
the owner, or overcrowding with other cats. The areas that are marked can provide
infomation regarding the undertying cause. Spraying near windows and doorways
indicates temitorial marking in response to the presence of cats outside of the
home, while marking walls and furniture within the home is suggestive of conflict
with other cats or anxiety related to the social climate of the home. It is theorized
that in both types of spraying, depositing the cat's own scent around the home
has a calming effect and increases the cat's feelings of security and confidence.6
Treatment for Marking
Treatment for urine marking includes determining the cause and either eliminating
it or managing the cat's surroundings to minimize stress and anxiety. If another
cat has been introduced to the home and is suspected as the cause, the new
cat should be confined and gradually reintroduced to the resident cat or cats.
determine the rate of reintroduction. In cases in which the cause is the cat seeing
must be prevented from seeing the outdoor cat by blocking access to windows
or rooms where the marking occurs. When the cause of spraying is social conflict
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
duced by providing additional vertical space for resting and cubby holes for hid-
ing, and, in some cases, separating cats in different parts of the home. There is
also some evidence that the delivery of aerosolized synthetic feline facial phero-
owner must either find a way to provide the affected cat with his own secure area
within the home or, if that is not possible, consider finding a new home that does
not have multiple cats.
Sidebar 5
FELINE FACIAL PHEROMONES AND URINE-SPRAYING
BEHAVIOR IN CATS
facial glands that are deposited on furniture and other areas of the cat's liv-
ing area when cats bunt and allorub. In recent years, synthetic forms of these
lo Adeeyl eallounpe ue se paisal pue panoenueu ueeg aaey spunodwoo
that depositing synthetic FFP in a cat's living environment causes the cat to
increase his or her own facial marking, leading to increased security and de-
ceased anxiety. Initial reports of the use of FFP with cats who were urine mark-
ing in homes reported a high success rate. However, controlled studies were
needed to corroborate those claims.
Daniel Mills conducted such a study with 22 cats diagnosed with problem
the control group. FFP was administered to the treated group using a heated
quarters. A diffuser that delivered a placebo was used with the control group.
At the start of the study, frequency of spraying in the two groups of cats was
similar. Over a four-week period, frequency of spraying decreased in both
groups, but the reduction was only statistically significant in the FFP-treated
group. In addition, the effectiveness of the FFP as a treatment in reducing
go ou sem ahueyo as siul 'awl ylm aseaioui ol papuei buieids auun
served in the control group. No behavior therapy was provided to the cats in
lo saunoi leui lale ou dl palonsui Aeooads alem sleumo pue Apns siun
behavior with their cats during the study period. Therefore, the decrease in
spraying behaviors that was observed in the FFP-treated cats was presumed
to be in response only to the use of the synthetic pheromone.
Elimination Problems in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 8
In another study, telephone interviews were used to determine long-term
owners reported that their cats had completely stopped spraying and an ad-
ditional 63 percent reported that their cat's spraying behavior was still under
adequate control. Most of the owners used the occasionally or as needed, but
cally with behavioral therapy and management techniques to reduce anxiety
and tension between cats.
marking behavior. Because the use of FFP is non-invasive, is easy for
that are associated with conventional pharmacotherapy, FFP provides
anxiety-related urine spraying.
Mills DS. Pheromonatherapy: Theory and applications. In Practice, 27:368-373, 2005.
Mills DS, Mills CB.Evaluation of a novel method for delivering a synthetic analogue of feline facial pheromone
to control urine spraying by cats. Vet Rec, 149:197-199, 2001.
Mills DS. Long-term follow up of the effect of a pheromone therapy on feline spraying behaviour. vet Rec,
147:746-747, 2000
Just as with failure to use the litter box, all marked areas must be thoroughly
cleaned with a biological cleaner to eliminate urine odor. Common household
mask urine odor and the cat will continue to detect marked areas.7 Initially, the
can also place mildly aversive stimuli over or near marked spots, such as citrus
home were marked, relocating litter boxes close to the spot can change the
box. Regardless of these retraining approaches, however, it is still essential that
the underlying cause of the initial spraying behavior is identified and eliminated
marked areas.
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
Pharmacotherapy for House Soiling in Cats
When house-soiling problems are directly related to territorial behaviors
or social conflict, cats who do not respond to behavior therapy or
all pharmacological agents are associated with side effects, the use of
drug therapy for urine marking or for inappropriate elimination should only
be considered after all other approaches have failed. The three types of 
include selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, and
azaperones (Table 8.1). While many cats respond to drug therapy and behavior
relapse upon cessation of treatment. In these cases, long-term therapy with the
lowest effective dosage of an effective drug may be necessary.
table 8.1 Medications Used to Treat Refractory House Soiling in Cats
CLASS OF DRUG
EXAMPLES
 MODe OF ACTION
SIDE EFFECTS
COMMENTS
Benzodiazepines
Diazepam,
Anti-anxiety:
Lethargy, sedation,
Controls spraying
Alprazolam
reduced state
ataxia, increased
in ~75% of cats
 of arousal
appetite, liver
but problem often 
toxicity (rare)
resumes when
discontinued
Azaperones
Buspirone
Neurotransmitter
Behavioral changes;
May take up
effects; reduces
 gastrointestinal
to 3 weeks to
 social anxiety
upset
affect behavior;
 non-sedating
Tricyclic
Amitriptyline,
 Neurotransmitter
 Increased drink-
Should not be
Antidepressants
 Clomipramine 
effects; reduces
 ing and urination,
prescribed in cats
 arousal, anxiety
 Gl upset, urinary
being treated with
or fecal retention,
monoamine oxidase
glaucoma
inhibitors
SSRIs
Paroxetine,
Enhance availabil-
Loss of appetite,
May take several
Fluoxetine
ity and effects of
diarrhea,vomiting
weeks to affect
serotonin
behavior; used
 effectively for urine
spraying
Elimination Problems in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 8
207
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.
Explain the relevance of "learned avoidance" to house-soiling problems in dogs.
2. 
buuien-asnoy jo uoaidwoo ayi u! pie ol shaumo bop loy sdit jo pes e apioid
in a dog who has not been reliably house trained.
3.
What health problems should be considered in a cat who has stopped using the
litter box?
4.
What are the most common causes of litter-box aversion in cats?
5.
What characteristics of the litter box are important to consider when treating a cat
with a house-soiling problem?
REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING
Borchelt PL. Cat elimination behavior problems. Vet Clin North Amer: Small Anim Pract.
21:257-264, 1991.
Borchelt PL, Voith VL. Diagnosis and treatment of elimination behavior problems
Cooper LL. Feline inappropriate elimination. Vet Cin North Amer: Smal Anim Pract.
27:569-600, 1999.
Cottam N, Dodman NH. Effect of an odor eliminator on feline litter box behavior.
J Feline Med Surg. 9:44-50, 2007.
Crowell-Davis SL. The litterbox blues. Compend Cont Ed Pract Vet, Jan:34-37, 2007.
72:1093-1099, 1994.
Halip JVw, Vaillancourt JP, Luescher UA. A descriptive study of 189 cats engaging in
inappropriate elimination behaviors. Feline Pract, 26(4)18-2, 1998.
treatment in gonadectomized males and females. J Amer Vet Med Assoc.
177:529-565, 1980.
Hart BL, Barrett RE. Effects of castration on fighting, roaming, and urine spraying
in adult male cats. J Amer Vet Med Ass0c, 163:290-296, 1973.
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
Hart BL, Leedy M. Identification of source of urine stains in multi-cat households.
J Amer Vet Med Assoc, 180:77-78, 1982.
Hart BL, Eckstein RA, Powell KL, Dodman NH. Effectiveness of buspirone on urine
spraying and inappropriate urination in cats.JAmerVetMedAssoc,203:254-258
1993.
Herron ME, Lord LK, Hill, LN, Reisner IR. Effects of pre-adoption counseling for owners
Ass0c, 231:558-562, 2007.
Kendall K, Ley J. Cat ownership in Australia: Barriers to ownership and behavior. J Vet
Behav, 1:5-16, 2006.
Koroffsky P. Identifying source of urine on rugs. J Amer Vet Med Assoc, 191 :917, 1987
marking. J Amer Anim Hosp Assoc, 41:3-11, 2005.
MacDonald Dww. Patterns of scent marking with urine and faeces amongst carnivore
communities. Symp Zoolog Soc London, 45:107-114, 1980.
Mills DS. Long-term follow up of the effect of a pheromone therapy on feline spraying
behaviour. Vet Rec, 147:746-747, 2000.
Mills DS, Mills CB. Evaluation of a novel method for delivering a synthetic
analogue of feline facial pheromone to control urine spraying by cats. Vet Rec,
149:197-199, 2001.
1988.
Overall KL. Diagnosing and treating undesirable feline elimination behavior. Feline
Pract, 21:11-15, 1993.
Pal SK. Urine marking by free-ranging dogs (Canis familiaris) in relation to sex,
Salman ME, New JC, Scarlett JM, Kass PH, Ruch-Gallie PH, Hetts S. Human and animal
Simpson BS. Feline house soiling. Part I. Inappropriate elimination. Compend
Continuing Ed Pract Vet, 20:54-66, 1998.
Continuing Ed Pract Vet, 20:301-309, 1998.
Sung VW, Crowell-Davis SL. Eimination behavior patterns of domestic cats (Felis
catus) with and without eliminationbehaviorproblems.Amer J Vet Res
67:1500-1504, 2006
Elimination Problems in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 8
209
Taylor K, Mills DS. A placebo-controlled study to investigate the effect of Dog
Appeasing Pheromone and other environmental and management factors on the
reports of disturbance and house soiling during the night in recently adopted
Tynes V. Canine house-training challenges: From dogs soiling in their crates to dogs
Wirant SC, McGuire B. Urinary behavior of female domestic dogs (Canis familiaris):
in press, 2003.
Wright JC, Amoss RT. Prevalence of house soiling and aggression in kittens during
the first year after adoption from a humane society. J Amer Vet Med Assoc,
224:1790-1795, 2004.
Wright JC, Nesselrote MS. Classification of behavior problems in dogs: distributions
of age, breed, sex and reproductive status. Appl Anim Behav Sci, 19: 169-178, 1987.
Yeon SC, Erb HN, Houpt KA. A retrospective study of canine house soiling: Diagnosis
and treatment. J Amer Anim Hosp Assoc, 35:101-106, 1999.
Footnotes
1 Salman ME, New JC, Scarlett JM, Kass PH, Ruch-Gallie PH, Hetts S. Human and
animal factors related to the relinquishment of dogs and cats in twelve selected
and treatment. J Amer Anim Hosp Assoc, 35:101-106, 1999.
3 Hart BL. Castration and urine marking in dogs. J Amer Vet Med Assoc, 164:140-144,
1974.
communities. Symp Zooiog Soc London, 45:107-114, 1980
5 Hart BL, Barrett RE. Effects of castration on fighting, roaming, and urine spraying in
adult male cats. J Amer Vet Med Assoc, 163:290-296, 1973.
6 Simpson BS. Feline house soiling. Par ll. Urine and fecal marking. Compend
Continuing Ed Pract Vet, 20:301-309, 1998
7 Melese, P. Detecting and neutralizing odor sources in dog and cat urination
problems. Appl Anim Behav Sci, 39:188-189, 1994.
CHAPTER
Unruly and Disruptive Behaviors
in Dogs and Cats
ost problem behaviors that pet owners report in their dogs and cats
 are normal canine and feline behaviors that are being expressed in
circumstances that are not appropriate or in situations that distress the
owner or other animals in the home. Behaviors that are classified as
unruly or disruptive often reflect the exuberance of a young dog or cat who has
not been thoroughly trained or who is experiencing a lack of social interaction,
exercise, or mental stimulation. Meeting a pet's physical and emotional needs is
an important component of animal care and a required part of responsible pet 
of the pet's behavioral needs, has insufficient time or resources available, or is not
sufficiently committed to the pet. The paradox is that spending time interacting
with and training a pet not only helps to prevent unruly and disruptive behaviors,
dogs and cats to be well-behaved family members should be viewed as one of
rather than in the more traditional view of training as discipline that is used to
'correct" a poorly behaving animal. Basic training can prevent problems such as
Unruly and Disruptive Behaviors in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 9
211
jumping up, excitable barking, boredom-induced destructiveness, and nocturnal
hyperactivity. It has the added benefits of improving communication between
owners and their pets, enhancing the development of the human-animal bond,
 o    d 
DOGS: JUMPING UP
When dogs greet their owners and other people, they often put their paws up on
the person in an attempt to engage in physical contact. Some attempt to lick at
the person's face and mouth. Licking near the face is part of normal submissive
greeting behavior but may also be a learned response that has been reinforced
in other situations (i.e. teaching *kiss"). In addition to greeting, some dogs also
jump up and paw at their owners to solicit attention or as an invitation to play.
buidwnf uayw 'aidoad pemol poap ol ueal sbop peul pue sbop ueamleg Aed
Suynow eaissabbe-uou Ag peluedwoooe eg Aew l Keid olos ol pesn si dn
and barking.
Athough all of this physical contact reflects normal communication patterns of
dogs, many owners find jumping and mouthing to be annoying and wish to pre-
vent these behaviors. However, once it is established, jumping up to greet can be
being inconsistent with when they allow or disallow the behavior. For example, a
dog who is allowed to jump on the owner during play, but not when the owner ar-
nives home from work, is receiving inconsistent information. Similarly, some own-
ueum peseald jou ueu ae inq sheqwew Awey uo dn dwnf ot bop jeu molle sie
 the dog jumps on visitors. Because jumping up is inherently reinforcing to the
dog, every episode in which the behavior occurs provides positive consequences
(physical contact, licking, interaction) for the dog and strengthens the behavior.
Inconsistent responses from the owner put successful jumping attempts on an
intermittent reinforcement schedule, serving to further strengthen the behavior.
However, the self-reinforcing properties of jumping up can be used in the trainer's
favor, as the dog can be taught that interaction and petting during greeting or
 o bs g   o a   Ao o 
Factors to Consider
Prior to teaching the alternate behavior, several other factors should be consid-
ered. First, the degree of excitement that the dog is showing should be evaluated.
Dogs who are uncontrollable and appear to be hyper-stimulated during greeting
are often not receiving adequate attention or exercise. For example, it is unrea-
jeuuey joopino ue ul Aep e sinoy oz ol g1 spueds oum bop e joedxe ol elgeuos
to sit quietly for greeting during the few minutes that he spends with his family
H 'pooy pue leeys anbape apod Ae auuey e ui bull ynouy ep yoee
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
is a socially impoverished environment that does not meet a dog's physical or
emotional needs. In this case, changes must first be made to provide for the
dog's social and exercise needs before attempting to gain control and reduce
the family. If one family member believes that jumping and mouthing is accept-
able and encourages the behavior, while another dislikes jumping and attempts
m ,buneaib loy s, Auaisisuoo oi bop ey buyoeet ' yslund jo ebenoosp ol
be unsuccessful. In these cases, a possible solution (provided all family members
agree) is to put the behavior of jumping on cue ("paws up") and to teach "sit for
greeting" as a second behavior (Box 9.1).
Box 9.1
TEACHING SOPHIE TO "PAWS UP" (AND TO SIT
FOR GREETING!
meets several friends with their dogs to go walking several days a week. Jan and Sophie completed a basic obedi-
The only persistent behavior problem that Jan reports with Sophie is that she jumps up on Jan's friends when
on them and even encourage her to do this when they play. Because they all love Sophie and because Jan does
not want to discourage her friends from playing with her dog, she decides to use clicker training to teach Sophie to
put her paws up on a person on command. She then will ask her friends and visitors to always use this command
Here are the steps that Jan uses to train Sophie's new behavior:
+Luring the behavior: Jan realizes that Sophie may be hesitant to jump on her because she has a strong
positive reinforcement history for sitting for greeting with Jan. Therefore, to induce the behavior, Jan first asks
Sophie to sit. She then gently pats her chest and commands "Paws up! in a friendly tone. When Sophie's feet
come up (even a bit), Jan clicks and treats (CT).
on her extended forearm,CT for each successful attempt.
· Gaining stimulus control: Jan fades the visual cue of pating her chest and begins to reinforce only
responses to the verbal command of "Paws up:" Because she recognizes that Sophie is naturally more
"pawsup.
Unruly and Disruptive Behaviors in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 9
213
+ Using differential reinforcement: Jan also uses differential reinforcement to ensure that Sophie continues
to offer “sit for greeting"and to promote stimulus control of each exercise. She selects a very high-value food
treat (small pieces of hot dog) to use only when positively reinforcing "sit for greeting" (the less desirable be-
havior for Sophie). Once she has “paws up" on verbal cue, she decides to use just verbal reinforcement for
this exercise, recognizing that "paws up" itself is inherently reinforcing for Sophie.
+Time to generalize: When Sophie reliable offers both "sit for greeting" and "paws up" with Jan, she begins to
command "Paws up" when they wish to allow Sophie to jump up.
Training an Alternate and Incompatible Behavior
Teaching a dog to sit quietly for petting while he is greeting is incompatible with
jumping up. In other words, it is impossible for a dog to be sitting and jumping
up at the same time. The commands for "sit" and "stay" are first taught in a
non-distracting environment and in situations in which the dog does not normally
attempt to jump up (see Chapter 7, pp. 161-170 for instructions on training these
commands). Once the dog has achieved a reliable sit and stay, the commands
are introduced when the dog is greeting the owner or a family member. A lead
is attached to the dog and very exuberant greeters also benefit from the use of
a head halter to increase control. One person acts as the greeter and a second
person handles the dog. The greeter is provided with several high-value food
treats. As the dog approaches, the greeter holds his hand with the treats at the
dog's eye level and asks the dog to sit as the dog approaches. (Note: Many
novice trainers wait too long to cue the sit. If the dog is already "air-bound"
behavior.) As the dog sits, the greeter provides one treat, keeping several treats
pue dn buidwnf juesaid o peal bnus e sueuew lepuey eul 'puey sly u ls
the dog is reinforced verbally (quiet, calm praise) and with food treats by both the
handler and the greeter (Figure 9.1)
After several repetitions have been reinforced and the dog has started to offer
away several steps, saying nothing and abruptly withdrawing the treat-holding
hand. Jumping up is negatively punished in this situation because the desired
stimuli (the greeter and the treats) are withdrawn in response to the undesired
behavior jumping up). The greeter steps forward to greet only when the dog is
y si bop aup seodwi Aea si ll puewoo js au o spuodsan pue paouo
introduced to the alternate behavior (sit) before attempting to negatively punish
Section 3
figure 9.1 Teaching "sit for greeting'
jumping up, because the dog must have the option of offering a behavior that
will allow him to earn positive reinforcement. If negative punishment is used alone
or before the dog understands that sitting quietly has positive consequences,
jumping up may be punished, but the dog does not know that "sitting" wil avoid
an paeadan aul aeaie au ym oeui il peal pue suausund aaeau
of negative punishment (i.e. backing away) should always be avoided because
frequent episodes of losing an opportunity to greet and interact are extremely
frustrating to the dog and can result in redirected behaviors such as mouthing:
barking, or nipping in frustration.
Approaches to Avoid
Unfortunately, various forms of positive punishment continue to be recommended
for jumping up, despite their ineffectiveness and the risks associated with their
Use. Some traditional advice includes “kneeing" the dog in the chest, stepping
on the dog's back feet, jerking the dog off of the greeter with a training collar, or
yelling "no" in a harsh voice as the dog jumps. None of these approaches are
as effective as the method of teaching dogs to greet in a controlled and friendly
manner, and they all have the potential to be abusive. Even when used carefully,
wns aaisleae yons ol jauuew Apuauy e ui buneaib si oym bop e bunoalgns
causes discomfort and anxiety at the very least and in many cases fear. It cannot
Unruly and Disruptive Behaviors in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 9
be overemphasized that avoidance behaviors and extreme submission should
jo esn peieadel aul 'dn buidwn! snoum jeaib ol buueal ynm pesnjuoo eq iou
positive punishment for jumping results in an insecure dog who greets nervously
and submissively or may become fearful and avoid greeting altogether. For these
reasons, the use of positive punishment for jumping up is never recommended.
Shaping and Practicing
The described approaches: first teaching an alternate and incompatible behavior
[eloos buowan) juawusjund anebeu buippe Auepnid pue (buneaib loy is)
interactions) effectively communicates to the dog that the way to gain all of the
positive stimuli (treats, petting, praise, and interaction) is to offer a sit as a greeting
and to remain sitting for petting. This training is practiced repeatedly with different
visitors and in all of the settings in which the dog typically jumps up. Owners must
also be informed that because jumping up is a normal communication signal for
greeting and because physical contact and interaction are powerful reinforcers for
dogs, sitting for greeting is a training exercise that owners must practice consis-
tently. Although not all dogs learn to sit for greeting in every distracting situation
that they encounter, this training improves overall control and effectively reduces
 jumping up problems in the majority of dogs.
DOGS: DESTRUCTIVE BEHAVIORS
Chewing, scratching, and digging are the most common foms of destructive
behaviors reported by dog owners. Once again, these are nommal behaviors that
or toward forbidden objects. Destructive behaviors can have several underlying
causes. The most common cause of destructiveness in young dogs is nomal
exploratory chewing that the dog has not been taught to direct toward appropri-
ate items. Other causes of destructiveness in the home (chewing, scratching) and
in the yard (digging) include a lack of exercise or mental stimulation, insufficient or
inappropriate training, boredom, and as an expression of learned attention-seeking
behavior. Destructiveness that occurs as a result of separation stress or anxiety is
a final classification and is discussed in detail in Chapter 10 (pp. 246-258)
Exploratory Chewing
euo ose sl pue loeyeg bupeey s bop eul jo ped gewou e si bumeyo jenbey
way in which dogs explore and learn about their environment. Although puppies
tend to chew most vigorously and frequenty, all dogs enjoy chewing and should
be provided with a variety of appealing chew toys throughout life. Puppies and
items are acceptable chew toys and which are not. Training includes prevent-
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
reinforcing the use of appropriate toys. As they explore their new home, puppies
will be especially attracted to items that can be shredded (pillows, children's
stuffed toys, clothing) and objects that can be gnawed (furniture, shoes). These
objects are enticing because this type of chewing mimics the predatory feeding
behaviors of evisceration, dissection, and gnawing on bones. Happily for dog
dogs and recognition of the dog's natural need to chew has led to the develop-
particular preferences, and can also rotate toys occasionally to enhance the dog 's
interest. Chew toys should be offered frequently to the dog, and the dog should
be quietly praised whenever she voluntarily selects a toy or bone to chew.
Sidebar 1
INTERACTIVE, FOOD DELIVERY, AND CHEW TOYS
FOR DOGS
aul bumolle Keld buunp bop pue leumo aul ueamleq abpug e se loe awos
dog to focus on the toy while engaging in positive social interactions with
eyl ueal Aayl se sbop juelegnxa pue bunoA lol eloeueg sl slyl leumo aul
algeideooe jou ing Xeld buunp Aol e uo yleel lleyl esn ol elgeideooe s! 1!
to mouth or nip the person who is playing with them. Interactive toys can
also provide mental stimulation and physical exercise. Teaching dogs to
is incorporated, to reinforce control exercises. Providing several different
maintain a dog's interest. Interactive toys can also be used to teach "find it"
bujujell oiseg 'ujeby 'uoisia pue jueos buisn qoieas shop yolym ui sawen
sl Aol eyl se Aeis-lls e se yons 'aweb ayl oiul paielodlooul eg ueo sesiolexe
adoi paloales-aid e Aeulg ouno, sl ll ueym .palleo ueym awoo., pue uappy
or pull toy can be used to play tug-of-war games. Tug of war provides an
(pamolle bulqqe16 1o bumoi6 ou) Ajue6 Aeld 01 sbop yoeal 01 Alunjoddo
,eAjb, pue .'bn..'1! leb, ol peuje1
panis pue sauog pieu panis se yons swell rsioi aiznd pue Araaaa poos
Kong toys are effective tools to use during classical conditioning exercises. For
example, a bone stuffed with soft-moist treats is presented during grooming
sessions to condition the dog to enjoy being brushed and handled. A stuffed
Unruly and Disruptive Behaviors in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 9
217
toy can also be used as a positive reinforcer for calm behaviors or when
reinforcing control exercises such as a down-stay. Food delivery products for
dogs are also available in a variety of mentally stimulating designs. Examples
include treat balls and hard rubber or plastic products that contain slits and
holes that hold treats. Some of these deliver individual kibble pieces as the dog
pey e loyoue seyo allym ooly aul buoje Aol ayl saysnd o weyl saendjueu
sol alzznd bulmauo pue uoeinduew abeinooua ol Ko aul jo jed oi leanl
include plush toys with smaller pieces that can be pulled out and played with,
entertainment and stimulation for dogs, caution is advised. Just as a crate can
be overused to confine dogs, food delivery toys can be overused and should
never replace positive interactions with people, exercise, or training.
Chew Bones and Toys: Hard bones for dogs are constructed with a variety
bueuo jo spoed papuexa li salunoddo apaaid pue siele jo
pey 'sauo apiymei apnioui sauog mauo leindod jsow aui buimeua pue
sterilized bones, and hard plastic bones. The type of chew bone that is
Aisuajul pue jsaleul s bop aul yoew ol paloajes ag pinoys bop e ol pepiaoid
e sayel peyl euo sl auog meyo aleudoidde pue ajes e 'jelauee ul bumayo o
and the dog does not break apart into large chunks. Similar to other types of
toys, rotating chew bones can help to maintain interest and novelty.
In addition to providing attractive chew toys and bones, and encouraging their use,
owners must also proactively prevent their dog's undesirable chewing. Management
of the environment is the best approach to preventing undesirable chewing and for
teaching dogs which items are their own and are safe for chewing. First, any object
that might be a potential chew target must be secured out of sight and out of reach.
Second, young dogs must be supervised whenever they are loose in the home, both
up something that is not hers, the owner should simply remove it from her mouth
and redirect her to one of her own toys, praising her quietly when she chews on ap-
au bumauo idnueui ot pesn eq ueo ,ou, lo esiou pnol e yonouiy 'suen aeudoud
repeated use of positive punishment should be avoided. Similar to house-training,
the continual use of harsh reprimands when the dog is chewing on something unde
sirable can teach the dog to chew out of sight of the owner or to run away whenever
in possession of a novel item. Also similar to house-training beliefs, owners often
However, avoidance simply indicates that the dog learned through repeated experi-
ence with punishment to stop chewing in the presence of the owner or, in more
extreme cases, to avoid the owner when investigating new objects
Section 3
UNDERSTANDINGAND SOLVINGCOMMONBEHAVIORPROBLEMS
pepea bupioid pue juawuoiaue sAddnd aun buibeuew oi uonppe ui Xieu
and interesting chew toys, owners can teach their dog the two invaluable com-
si bop au uaum pesn s! ,ll aaeal, puewwoo aul ,'anib, pue ,ll aaea, jo spueu
intending to pick up something that is either dangerous or off-limits. The com-
mand “give" is used to retrieve an item from the dog once he has picked it up
(Sidebar 2). These invaluable commands can be taught to puppies and to adult
dogs who have a chewing or stealing problem. They are enjoyable to learn and a
help to the owner when teaching a new puppy or dog about which toys are his
and which items are not.
Sidebar 2
TEACHING "LEAVE IT" AND "GIVE'
Picking up, chewing, and playing with novel items is an activity that almost
identifying which items are acceptable to chew (i.e. dog toys) and which
items are not acceptable to chew (everything else). Teaching the commands
of "leave it" and "give" allows owners to effectively redirect a dog from taking
something that is not his and to retrieve stolen objects. Here are the basic
steps for training these essential commands:
LEAvE IT: Desired response: The dog turns away from an item of interest and
toward the owner, and does not attempt to pick up the item. Steps:
● A lead is attached to the dog's collar and the dog is commanded to sit/stay. The trainer
●Holding the lead snugly, the trainer shows the dog a high-value food treat in his right
hand, held at a position that requires the dog to look away from the object and toward
the trainer (i.e. over his right shoulder).
· The trainer then pleasantly commands "leave it, takes one step backward and Iures
the dog toward him (and away from the object).As soon as the dog rises and moves
toward the treat, the trainer positively reinforces this movement.
● If the dog attempts to reach for the forbidden object, the trainer simply stops the dog
with the lead and redirects him with the food lure.
 s    s         n
and then when the dog is walking toward the object. All turns to the trainer and away
from the object are reinforced.
●The behavior is practiced with other objects, gradually increasing in their desirability to
the dog (start with low-value items and work toward high-value items)
Unruly and Disruptive Behaviors in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 9
GIVE: Desired response: The dog releases the item in his mouth into the
owner's hand. This can be used both with items that the dog is not supposed
to have as well as with his toys when playing games of fetch. Steps:
· Teach with a highly valued toy that is used for fetch games. The toy is tossed and when
askedtosit.
● As the trainer reaches toward the toy with the left hand, a food treat is presented in
bop aul uaum (ani e se 'bop aui oi umous si ean pooy au Au) 'puey ubu au
focuses on the food treat, the trainer commands “give" in a pleasant voice.As the dog
in pe u al e u n  s a a  a o no s so
with the food from the right hand (i.e. "make a trade').
aup buea laye yeq Aoi aui ayei o A ol no Aot aui noy dunl oi pamoe pou si bop aul o
●Note: The purpose of using "make a trade' is to teach the dog to open his mouth and
release an object into the trainer's hand, as opposed to the trainer pulling the object
from the dog's mouth.
·A food treat is used to reinforce “give," but is removed as a lure when the behavior has
been initiated
Chewing as a Result of Boredom
Dogs whose social and behavioral needs are not being met often develop a bar-
rage of boredom-related behaviors. Chewing is innately enjoyable to dogs and
appears to aid in the reduction of stress and anxiety. As a result, destructive
chewing is a common outlet for boredom or a lack of exercise. Destructive chew-
sufficient opportunity for exercise, or who are frequently isolated from their family
haviorists and trainers with complaints about problem behavior, in essence these
basic needs (Sidebar 3). Treatment involves eliminating the cause of boredom and
ul ley bubuug 'soopino Aep jey jo uouod ebie e bupueds si bop au fl 'aidoed
side and instituting a basic manners-training program to teach acceptable indoor
the destructive behaviors are occuring. When a dog must spend many hours
alone because of the owner's work schedule, hiring a professional dog walker to
come in around noon or using community doggy day care can provide adjunct
opportunities for exercise and socialization. Providing a variety of interactive food
delivery toys when the dog must be confined is also helpful but should not be
Section 3
UNDERSTANDINGAND SOLVINGCOMMONBEHAVIORPROBLEMS
Sidebar 3
OWNERS' RESPONSIBILITIES - PROVIDING FOR DOGS
AND CATS' BASIC NEEDS
In 1965, the Brambell Committee in the United Kingdom proposed a set of
Although these standards were originally written to address the needs of farm
animals, lrene Rochlitz modified them to address the needs of companion
animals. The basic five freedoms mandate that owners of companion animals
:seo pue sbop llayl ol buimolloj eyl buplaoid joj alqisuodsal ae
stage and fresh, clean water.
· Suitable living environment: Pets need adequate space, shelter from inclement
and a clean living area.
●Healthcare: For dogs and cats, optimal healthcare includes vaccinations, neutering,
parasite control, identification, and prompt veterinary care when injured or ill.
· Opportunities to express normal, species-specific behaviors: This includes, but is
not limited to, social interactions with humans and other pets, opportunities for regular
andsettings.
· Protection from conditions that may cause fear or distress: For dogs and cats this
to abusive or irresponsible training practices.
 In recent years, studies have been conducted to examine the needs of 
dogs and cats in homes and the quality of life that they experience. Factors
level, and the number of emotional bonds the owner has with other people.
but decreased as the dog aged. In cats, quality of life was higher for cats
living in multiple-cat homes compared with single-cat homes, suggesting that
social interaction with other cats is more important for domestic cats than has
few considered the behavioral needs of their cats. One-third of the cats were
reported by their owners to be poorly socialized and to be fearful or timid
toward visitors. Similarly, a study of dogs reported that while owners typically
sAol ayl ylm paAeld Alalel sbop ayl 'spieA paoue, ul sbop ol sAol paplaoid
'aylebol 'sAol ylm Aeld oi Aunoddo aul ueyl sbop ol juejodwi elow sl
Unruly and Disruptive Behaviors in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 9
these studies provide important insight to factors that affect the level of care
bueonpe ueyw jebiel ol seale psabons pue sied jeul ol aplaoid aldoed peul
potential adopters and current owners about the behavioral and social needs
of their dogs and cats.
Anim Behav Sci, 94:89-98, 2005.
Kobelt AJ, Hensworth PH, Barne JL, Coleman GJ, Butler KL. The behaviour of Labrador retrievers in suburban
backyards: The relationship between the backyard environment and dog behavior. Appi Anirm Behav Sci,
106:70-84,2007.
Marinelli L, Adamelli S, Normando S, Bono G. Quality of life of the pet dog: Influence of owner and dog's
characteristics. Appt Anirm Behav Sci, 108:143-156, 2007.
Anim Behav Sci, 93:97-109, 2005.
Occasionally, dogs learn that a successful method for gaining attention is to
pick up something that is forbidden and entice the owner into an invigorating
is barking; see p. 222) Following the basic rules of operant conditioning, dogs
who steal or chew items for attention have learned that these behaviors "work"
for them. Stealing results in desired interaction with the owner, exercise, and the
opportunity to play a game. Attention-seeking chewing can be distinguished from
au bupioy ellum laumo au yoodde uaaa Aew bop aul 'eouasaid slaumo a
forbidden object, play bow, and then dance teasingly away. There may also be a
history of the owner chasing the dog when he has taken a forbidden item.
that sufficient attention and exercise are being provided to the dog on a regular
sawen se yons uoenwns peuew pue Keid lo, seunuoddo 'sem jl 'sisin
pausllgeise aq isn asaun 'aunon Aip s bop aun jo ped jou ane buuie pue
A dog who is receiving strenuous exercise and who has learned to expect
problem attention-seeking behaviors. For many dogs, simply increasing exercise
and introducing some form of daily mental stimulation such as manners training,
week, reduces or eliminates problem attention-seeking.
seeking chewing. Dogs who chew, steal, or bark for attention usually have very
specific circumstances that trigger the problem behaviors. For example, a young
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
redirection involves providing the dog with an interactive toy before the problem
attention-seeking occurs. For example, before each meal, a hard bone is stuffed
with cheese or soft treats and given to the dog to chew. The dog is attached to
au uo smayo ay se lauup buunp is-umop e uuiw ol paun sl pue pea e
special bone. For dogs who steal items when the owner is watching television
room just before sitting down (i.e. before the problem behavior is triggered).
These toys provide an appropriate chew toy to the dog and effectively prevent
attention-seeking chewing when they are provided before the problem behavior is
for attention" is gradually reconditioned to predict an opportunity to chew on a
favoritebone.
Preemptive redirection differs significantly from waiting until the dog offers the
that is commonly recommended. Waiting for the behavior to occur before redi
the problem behavior and if used repeatedly may actually reinforce it by giving the
dog attention and something that is desired as a "make a trade." Finally, basic
seeking behavior. A reliable "come when called" is needed so that a dog who
steals items can be commanded to bring them back. Similarly, as discussed with
exploratory chewing, teaching the commands "leave it'" and “give” are indispens-
able tools for gaining control with a dog who chews or steals prohibited items
(see Sidebar 2).
DOGS: PROBLEM BARKING
Dogs produce a wide range of sounds and use vocal communication frequently
-Uoo jo Aeuea e ui sinooo pue sbop Aq pesn bueubis jeoos jo wuoj uowwoo
texts. Dogs bark to alert their owners to visitors, during greeting, when they are
dog to bark in certain situations and may even train a "speak" command. So
like most behaviors, barking itself is not a problem. It only becomes so when the
barking is repetitive and when it occurs in a context that owners find undesirable.
For example, barking to ask to go outside or to warn of intruders are typically
when a visitor appears or when they wish to come in from outside are considered
to be ill-behaved. The similarities between these examples of "desirable" and
"undesirable" barking ilustrate a common paradox in our relationships with dogs
Desired contexts (i.e. it is acceptable to bark at the door when someone arrives)
Unruly and Disruptive Behaviors in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 9
and undesired contexts (i.e. it is not acceptable to bark at the window when
someone walks by) can be almost identical from the dog 's point of view. It may
be unreasonable to expect a dog to understand the distinction between them.
Therefore, when diagnosing and treating problem barking in dogs, a complete
behavioral history should be collected to identify triggering stimuli and the context
in which they occur, the behavior's reinforcement history and the owner's level of
Repetitive Barking
Repetitive barking that occurs in response to people or animals approaching a
dog 's house or yard can be either territorial in nature or a manifestation of gen-
eral excitement and arousal. Dogs who are timid or who have not been well-
fear. Excitable barking that becomes repetitive can occur in dogs who become
highly aroused while playing with another dog or person or who are in an anxiety-
may develop repetitive barking that may be more related to boredom than to
territorial behavior. In all of these cases, repetitive barking is commonly labeled
sance barking is presented to a behaviorist or trainer, the context in which the
behavior is occurring and all triggering stimuli must be identified so that its actual
cause can be determined.
Once the underlying cause has been identified, treatment for barking involves
managing the context and the triggering stimuli, and counter-conditioning an
alternate response. For example, a dog who barks incessantly at the door wher
visitors arrive is usually hyper-stimulated and may also be showing territorial
behavior. This behavior is maintained through both classical and operant learn-
ing. Greeting visitors is an unconditioned stimulus that results in excitement and
arousal (and barking). The sound or sight of people approaching and the doorbell
nnging are neutral stimuli that are paired consistently with the unconditioned stim-
uli. In other words, the door bell ringing consistently predicts opportunities to see
visitors and becomes a conditioned stimulus that triggers great excitement in the
e oi pamoe si bop ay uaym pauuw Aueedo si busg algog bop
immediately after barking at the door (i.e. barking behavior is positively reinforced
by social interactions with visitors).
intensity of both the triggering stimuli and the dog's response. Blocking the dog's
access to the door using closed doors or baby gates prevents the reinforcing
properties of excitable barking at the door (i.e. barking results in opportunities
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
also reduces the intensity of the dog's arousal, provided counter-conditioning
techniques are used to prevent frustration. Simply putting the dog in another
causes frustration in the dog and can contribute to an increased level of arousal
and exacerbate excitable and teritorial behaviors. Therefore, removing the dog
nate and incompatible response. The dog is trained to sit or lie down and stay on
a mat that is located across the room or located on the opposite side of a baby
ayl ul ,tew nos ol ob, ol pauen si bop ayl (oop eyl pe Aoap jou 'e'y eieb
absence of any triggering stimuli (see target training, Chapter 7, pp. 166-167).
The owner gradually shapes the behavior until the dog can be commanded to
"go to your mat" from a spot close to the door. As with all operant responses, a
very high-value food reinforcer is selected and is reserved for this training. (For
some dogs, providing a special food-delivery toy on the mat during the down stay
is a strong reinforcer; see Sidebar 1). Basic obedience training is also initiated to
repetitively upon greeting his owner at the door when the owner wishes to still al-
low the dog to greet. In these cases, teaching a "quiet" command is also helpful
as a counter-conditioning exercise (Box 9.2).
B0x 9.2
TEACHING EMMATHE "QUIET'' COMMAND
Emma is a two-year-old weimeraner. She lives with two other Wweimeraners (Katie and Sally) and with her
owner, Jonathan Stevens. Emma is well-behaved in the house and when out on walks and gets along very
well with her housemates and with other dogs whom she knows from walks in her neighborhood. with
one exception, Jonathan reports few problems with Emma or his other two dogs. The exception is Emma's
and to each side. Because Emma is a big dog and her barking is very loud and exuberant, Jonathan has
can be disturbing. Jonathan visits with a local trainer and behaviorist, and undertakes the following program
becomes excessive. Here are the steps that he follows:
+ Introducing the "quiet" command: Jonathan selects situations in which Emma is moderately excited but
does not typically bark. He introduces the cue of "quiet' in these situations, simply by saying “quiet" in a
(Note: The purpose of this step is to classically condition the command “quiet' with the presentation of a treat
in association with calm and quiet behavior.)
· Managing the triggering stimuli: Jonathan notes that being fed with the other dogs increases Emma's
Unruly and Disruptive Behaviors in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 9
Emma's level of excitement before trips outdoors.
· Training an alternate behavior: Jonathan brushes up on Emma's obedience training by training her to
sit and stay reliably in the kitchen (where he prepares her food) and near the door (where they prepare
for walks). He practices these behaviors separately from walks and dinnertime.
·Reinforcing "quiet" at dinnertime: Once Emma reliably offers "quiet" and “sit-stay," Jonathan begins to
she sits and is quiet, he immediately reinforces her from the bowl with a piece of her dinner. If Emma
remains sitting and does not bark, Jonathan continues to prepare the dinner and to reinforce her with
idad le sdis ei suor xa dn sdnn o sg esa hl mo a so pos
when she is not."
· Reinforcing “quiet" before walks: The same training sequence is used prior to walks, Emma is rein-
forced with treats and praise if she sits and is quiet; all walk preparations abruptly stop if she barks.
remaining quiet during times of excitement, Jonathan adds in the other dogs and continues to train
(he expects a short relapse in the problem barking as excitement increases with the presence of the
otherdogs).
Repetitive territorial barking often develops in dogs who spend an excessive
amount of time isolated in a yard or kennel. Dogs who spend many hours in a
yard are under-stimulated and experience isolation in the same way as a dog who
is left alone indoors for long periods. In these cases, it is uncertain whether the
barking is truly teritorial in nature or is more related to boredom. Management
procedures include reducing the time spent in the yard, introducing interactive
-ul pue 'sioopino sl ay peyl ewn eyi buunp puy oi bop eyl loy pies ayl oi sol
brought indoors before barking begins to avoid inadvertently reinforcing barking
behavior. A history of barking that has been followed by being brought indoors (to
stop the barking) maintains the barking behavior, effectively reinforcing repetitive
 barking with the opportunity to escape the yard and to attain social interaction in
the home.
Attention-Seeking Barking
Dogs who bark as an invitation to play or during nommal greeting can learn to
forms of attention-seeking behaviors, barking for attention often has a strong
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
reinforcement history. The owner initially interacts with the dog in response to
one or two barks and unintentionally reinforces barking. After several repetitions,
the dog learns to bark repeatedly to gain this response. (For some dogs, even a
verbal reprimand is perceived as a positive interaction and does not effectively
punish barking.) Wwhen attempting to eliminate attention-seeking barking, the first
step is to examine the dog's daily schedule of attention and exercise. In some
cases, the dog's needs for exercise and attention are not being met and the
dog has learned that the one way to gain attention is through barking. In these
situations, treatment involves increasing daily exercise and walks, and ensuring
that the dog receives positive interactions with the owner on a regular basis.
Basic obedience training is recommended to improve control and to increase
significant reduction in barking for attention.
To address the barking directly, the owner must identify all of the contexts in
which the dog barks for attention. Most dogs have an established pattern and,
when owners are asked to think about this, they realize that the barking occurs
in one or more specific situations. For example, an owner who works at home
 may report that the dog barks for attention whenever the owner is speaking on
the telephone. In an attempt to keep the dog quiet and finish his call, the owner
has developed the habit of peting the dog when she barks during phone calls.
In another situation, a dog may have learned to bark in anticipation of a daily walk
that occurs at 6:o0 p.m., and has gradually extended the period of barking such
that he begins to bark for his walk as soon as the owner returns home from work
at 5:oo p.m. (classical and operant conditioning at work once again). Although
extinction is often recommended for attention-seeking behaviors (i.e. ignoring
successfully as a behavior modification technique because absolutely no bark-
ing behavior can be reinforced. In addition, extinction is always associated with
very discouraging to owners. An alternate and more successful approach is to
 ae         
owner whose dog barks when he is on the phone trains his dog to sit for treats
or to lie down with a stuffed bone each time that he picks up the phone. Similarly.
the owner of the dog who begins barking for her walk at 5:00 P.m. immediately
takes the dog to the yard and plays retrieve for five repetitions upon arriving home
from work. The dog is then given a stuffed bone until 6:00 p.m. These approaches
meet the dog's needs for activity while at the same time breaking the association
between barking and interaction. In all cases, the owner only interacts directly
with the dog (petting, praise, getting ready for a walk), if the dog remains quiet
(as in extinction), but also preemptively manages the dog 's environment and uses
counter-conditioning to decouple the association between barking and attention.
Unruly and Disruptive Behaviors in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 9
Punishment and Problem Barking
Positive punishment such as verbal or physical reprimands are not recommended
for problem barking. Aversives that come directly from the owner may suppress
the dog 's barking temporarily, but it also has the potential to cause fear and
avoidance. If the underlying motivation for the barking behavior is anxiety or
rect punishment cannot address barking that occurs when the owner is absent.
For example, a study of the effectiveness of spraying dogs with a water hose
(owner-delivered punishment) to reduce barking at visitors found that while the
punishment did stop the dog's barking at the time of the incident, it did not
pu (uaed ga) shop jo uoew au sp 0 lee pue souamnoan uaad
resumed problem barking.3
certain types of repetitive barking is the use of bark-activated devices. These
are intended to interrupt barking with an aversive stimulus such as a loud noise,
an electronic shock, or a spray of noxious liquid (citronella). Some products are
designed to be mounted on a wall or counter and can be used with dogs who
bark at one or two specific sites. More frequently, the bark-activated mechanism
ishment because they are activated by the exact behavior they are intended to
suppress - barking. Collars that administer either an electronic shock or citronella
to the vibrations of the dog 's throat during a bark and deliver a shock of adjust-
able intensity to the dog's neck. The citronella spray collar includes a small mi-
crophone that detects the dog's bark and releases a spray of citronella-scented
liquid into the dog's face.
and citronella spray) found that while the two types of collars were of equally
effective, dogs′ owners perceived the citronella spray collar as less aversive
due to an inability of the owners to appreciate the degree of aversiveness that a
experiences. Additional studies have shown that dogs are more likely to habituate
to the citronella spray over time than to other types of aversive stimuli, such as
perceived as less aversive by dogs. Regardless of the type of collar, anti-bark
collars should never be used when the cause of the dog 's barking is anxiety or
au ol esuodsa un uoissaibbe doeaep ol jeualod au sey bop aul j lo tieay
punishment. Because of their potential for abuse and the risk of increasing rather
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
Sidebar 4
EVALUATION OF CITRONELLA ANTI-BARK COLLARS
Several studies have been conducted to examine the effectiveness of citro
nella collars for certain types of nuisance barking. In 2o01, Deborah Wells
of Queens College in Northern lreland tested the effectiveness of continual
ducing barking frequencies of dogs who barked at traffic near their yard, while
Aonis aul ul papnloul sbop aul jo auon 'uoisiaalal aul e lo seo aul ui buaae
reductions in barking during the first week of wearing the collar. However, over
the three-week period, barking gradually increased, albeit to frequencies still
pamoys Aep leyo Aaae lelloo ayl alom oym sbog eids pue lelloo ayl ol uo
greater reduction in barking and less tendency to habituate than did dogs who
wore the collar every day. These results suggest that the aversive nature of the
citronella spray is not severe (i.e. habituation is possible) and that dogs may
learn to associate the sensation of the large and bulky collar with punishment
(uawysjund ou bueubis aouesge sll 'asimayll pue) buyeg log
Another study, published in 2003, was conducted in veterinary clinics
located in the U.S. and Canada. The investigators compared the effectiveness
of the citronella collar with a similar but scentless spray collar for reducing
barking in healthy dogs who were visiting a clinic for boarding or elective
surgery. Although both collars effectively reduced barking, more dogs
responded to the citronella collar (76.67 percent) than to the scentless collar
(59.6 percent). This study also subjectively evaluated the anxiety level of
each of the two clinics reported that the reduction in barking in dogs wearing
the collar caused less barking in other dogs in the kennel area, making
the environment less disturbing for dogs who were ill or recovering and
contributing overall to a less stressful environment.
Because concerns about the stress that might be induced by anti-bark col-
a recent study examined behavioral (activity) and physiological (plasma cor-
shog 'sielloo yieg-lue buuea sbop paleuuey ui sasuodsei ssals (jesal losl
(lemon) collar, or an electronic collar. Both types of punishing collar effectively
-llue yiog yonouly Xg buiylem sbop leyo ol asuodsal u buyeg paonpal
treatment, these levels were still within normal reference range and returned
Unruly and Disruptive Behaviors in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 9
ou sem sbop aul jo eaal Aalloe aul ep puooas aul Ag slaaal aulaseg ol
affected by either type of punishing collar and activity levels did not reflect an
citronella collar when used to control repetitive barking.
Moffat KS, Landsberg GM, Beaudet F. Effectiveness and comparison of citronella and scentless spray bark col-
lars for the control of barking in a veterinary hospital seting.  Amer Anim Hosp Assoc, 29:343-348, 2003.
Steiss JE, Schaffer C, Ahmad HA, voith v. Evaluation of plasma cortisol levels and behavior in dogs wearing bark
control collars. Appi Anirm Behav Sci, 106:96-106, 2007.
Wells DL. The effectiveness of a citronella spray collar in reducing certain forms of barking in dogs. Appt Anir?
Behav Sci, 73:299-309, 2001.
than decreasing problem behaviors, anti-bark collars should only be considered ir
cases that have been found to be resistant to behavior modification, training and
management techniques to reduce repetitive barking.
DOGS: PROBLEM DIGGING
Like most problem behaviors discussed in this chapter, digging is a normal and
yp ui bip sboa (z'e ainbiy) sbop jsow ol bupiemai Ajualeyu! s! bubbip u!
e lws lo sng loy yoes oi 'sep wm uo all ol aoeid jooo e pu al
mals that live beneath the surface of the lawn, as a solution to boredom, and,
less commonly, as an attempt to escape (most dogs will attempt to climb or
sunoy Auew pueds oym sboa (ino buibbip ol pesoddo se eouaj e leso dwn!
in a yard or are under-stimulated and under-exercised learn to entertain them
selves by barking (see above) and by being destructive (digging and chewing).
aul oy bupioid seumo ayl Ag walgoid e ag ol palepisuoo si bubbp uey
the amount of time that the dog spends alone in the yard is the most effective
peyt ui bip oi bop aul ebenooue oi id ey ul peung eg ueo sauog pue sAol 'pier
 o    n o i   n   
effectively suppress digging. However, if the dog is digging because of boredom
or a lack of stimulation, it is likely that other self-reinforcing and destructive
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
figure 9.2 Digging is inherently enjoyable for most dogs
behaviors willtake its place. For this reason, prevention of digging by reducing
opportunities and increasing social interactions and management of the yard are
the preferred approaches.
DOGS: OVERLY ACTIVE (HYPERACTIVE)
Although some owners describe their dogs as "hyperactive," most dogs whose
energy levels exceed the expectations of their owners are showing normal activ
ity levels for their breed, age, and lifestyle. True hyperactivity as a pathological
chronic restlessness even when adequate exercise and mental stimulation have
been provided. Conversely, the majority of dogs whose owners describe them as
hyperactive are showing a high level of activity in situations that the owner finds
about the amount of exercise and attention that the dog requires, and by a lack
of basic training and control. Unfortunately, many of the breeds of dogs that are
popular today are also breeds that have been selected to be very active and en-
ergetic. Golden Retrievers, Labrador Retrievers, Border Collies, Australian Shep-
herds, and the various “Doodles" all have attributes that make them attractive
as family companions but are also breeds that were developed to work as hunt-
s peu aweadwal e anban peul suoouny 'shop bupay lo suouedwoo bu
highly active and athletic. Even though an individual dog may not be used for the
Abieue ybiy eun bupiebel pejeonpe eq isnw sheumo 'esodind pepueu! speeg
levels of dogs and their needs for regular exercise and activity.
Treatment for overly active dogs involves an initial assessment of the dog's
daily opportunities for exercise, mental stimulation, and social interaction. If an
increase in exercise is warranted, this can be achieved through longer daily walks,
Unruly and Disruptive Behaviors in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 9
231
figure 9.3 Retrieving is an enjoyable activity for many dogs
teaching enjoyable games such as fetch, Frisbee, hide-and-seek, swimming, or
aranged play dates with familiar dogs (Figure 9.3). A reputable and well-managed
dog day care can provide positive social interactions and exercise for dogs whose
be cautioned to carefully observe a facility to ensure that their dog is safe and
well-cared-for while enrolled. In cases where the dog must be left alone for a
large part of the day, hiring a professional dog walker to exercise the dog during
the day is another option. In addition to exercise, dogs who are labeled as overly
active often benefit from structured obedience training. Teaching a dog to walk
on lead and to respond reliably to the sit, down, come, and stay commands
enhances the positive bond that the owner has with the dog and also helps the
dog to learn self-control. Some owners and dogs enjoy becoming involved in
a canine sport such as Flyball, agility, or Rally, and these activities all provide a
positive outlet for a dog's energy.5
When unruly behaviors have been unintentionally reinforced by the owner and
function as attention-seeking behaviors for the dog, counter-conditioning and
counter-commanding are used to train alternate and incompatible responses
As discussed previously, ignoring attention-seeking behaviors in an attempt to
extinguish them is recommended by some trainers and behaviorists. However.
 in reality, extinction alone is rarely successful in practical settings because many
of these behaviors are innately reinforcing to the dog and because ignoring the
behavior consistently is very dificult for most owners. In addition, owners must
be informed that ignoring established attention-seeking behaviors is in essence
negative punishment (removing a desirable stimulus to reduce the frequency of
an undesirable behavior). As such, this approach can cause a high degree of
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
-e buuien Auaunouoo inoum peidwene s l j! Aieloedse bop eun u uoesny
ternate and acceptable behaviors. For most dogs, increasing exercise and social
stimulation, retraining basic obedience commands, and providing a structured
daily routine reduces the excess energy problem while at the same time presery-
 bop pue jeumo ueamleq spuoq ealisod aun bunoueuue pue bu!
CATS: FURNITURE CLAWING
Furniture clawing is an expression of normal marking behavior in cats. In addition
to providing a visual and olfactory mark, clawing is also important for claw care
(see Chapter 3, p. 50 for a complete discussion of the functions of scratching)
Cats often choose to use the sides of couches and chairs as scratching posts
because they typically are covered with rough upholstery that is attractive for
catching claws and depositing scent. Since cats usually claw mark near resting
areas, the couch is a likely marking spot if the cat sleeps on or around this piece
of furniture. Ofcourse, regardless of these "natural aspects of furniture clawing,
most cat owners wish to prevent this behavior since clawing is damaging to furni-
ture and otherhousehold items
The best treatment for cats who claw fumiture or other undesirable areas is to
prevent the behavior by providing the cat with one or more suitable scratching
The post should be covered with a heavy, rough fabric such as burlap or a similar
o e lo shgpn pooy buioela 'aw ley jo ap peaib e spuads peo au yoym ui eae
peo e uaum isod aul asn ol ubeg ol jeo aul abeinooue uo jsod aul jo dol aul uo
has an established furniture-scratching problem, the post can be placed directly
in front of the portion of the furniture that the cat is using. The furniture should be
covered with tin foil or plastic wrap to prevent the cat from continuing to use that
it to an area that is more acceptable. Although the fabric of the post will become
wom, it should not be replaced because the cat's scent and visual cues encourage
the cat to continue to use the post for scratching.
the cat to use the post, and preventing the use of furniture during training is
successful. However, because scratched areas continue to carry a cat's scent
and because cats develop preferred scratching surfaces that are often difficult
buoeos pamejeid e se anuny esn oi enuuoo mm so ewos 'eueuo o
buonpe premot peloenp ane seuoeodde suewebeueu 'seseo eseu ul 'enls
damage. Irimming the cat's nails weekly removes the sharp tips of the claws and
significantly reduces damage to furniture that is scratched. Commercialy available
Unruly and Disruptive Behaviors in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 9
plastic nail caps can be glued onto the cat's nails. These completely prevent
damage to furniture, but must be replaced every few weeks. A final solution is
declawing (onychectomy). Declawing the cat on the front feet does not stop the
d s  sue an  m a budae p i o 
unable to leave any type of visual mark. However, declawing is a painful proce-
dure for the cat and removes an important means of self-defense. This surgery
Switzerland, and Finland. Therefore, as a solution for furniture clawing, onychec-
agement approaches have failed.
CATS: JUMPING UP ON COUNTERS/FURNITURE
places. These behaviors are self-reinforcing in that cats prefer spots where
and counters can provide positive consequences in the form of appealing
odors and occasional food tidbits that are present. Some cats develop a
or to play with available "toys" such as paper clips and pens. (Speaking from
experience, it is rather difficult to write when there is a cat walking across one's
computer keyboard.)
Treatment for "counter crawling" in cats first requires that all foods and
cannot be closely supervised. Second, several alternate and equally appeal-
ing elevated rest and play areas must be provided. The owner should select
several acceptable areas around the house such as windowsills or the back
of a couch or chair. At least one of these spots should provide a view of the
outdoors. Kitty condos are excellent alternatives as most include elevated
platforms for climbing and perching, scratching surfaces, and cubby holes
for hiding (Figure 9.4). The cat is encouraged to use these areas by providing
petting and attention, or tossing treats to the cat whenever she approaches
the acceptable areas. Over time, the presence of the cat's scent and the lack of
opportunities for positive reinforcement on counters and desks condition the cat
to prefer the alternate spots
Section 3
,souoo Al, laal-nu Aa papod siods busan pateala aui roua se t' auna
Many cats learn to stay off counters when their owners are present, but
continue to use these surfaces whenever the owner is absent. This usually
occurs because the owner has used some form of punishment to stop the cat
from jumping onto counters. Punishments such as yelling or swatting the cat are
obviously associated with the owner and also carry the risk of causing the cat to
fear and avoid the owner. Although the use of a squirt bottle or loud mechani-
cal noise such as banging a metal pan are often recommended and promoted
person is the source of these aversive stimuli and that the presence of the owner
delivered by the owner will only reduce the behavior when the owner is present,
and always carries the risk of frightening the cat.
Remote punishers are devices that emit a loud noise or blast of air whenever
the cat attempts to jump onto a prohibited counter. Examples include tin cans
containing marbles that will rattle and startle the cat when he jumps up, or the
Unruly and Disruptive Behaviors in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 9
presence of cellophane paper or tin foil. Motion-detection products designed
specifically as remote punishers for cats are also available. These are placed
onto counters and emit a noise or blast of air when activated by motion. While
remote punishers are effective when present, cats do learn that the presence of
the device is associated with the punishment and so will often continue to use the
punishment is used.
CATS:NOCTURNAL ACTIVITY
at dawn and dusk) than diurnal (active during the daylight hours). However,
because most human households operate on a diurnal schedule, cats are
expected to adapt to daily activity patterns that are somewhat unnatural to
them. Given this evolutionary background, it is not surprising that some cats
swoy layo oui buah pue bueid Ag iybiu eyi buunp seumo eyt qums
cats who have high activity levels. For most cats, this problem abates when
they reach 12 to 18 months of age. However, some cats continue nocturnal
activity, even as adults. Undesirable nocturnal behaviors include chasing
around the house, knocking over objects or damaging furnishings, exuberant
play sessions between cats in multiple-cat homes, and attention-seeking
behaviors directed towards the sleeping owner. In extreme cases, the cat will
even ambush the owner during the night, attacking feet, hands, or faces. For
obvious reasons, although being active at night may be "natural for cats,
when owners are losing sleep, their home is being damaged, or they are being
 injured, these behaviors are problematic.
involves ensuring that the cat is receiving adequate exercise and interaction
opportunities with the owner during the daylight hours. Because a cat is more
before bed, the owner should provide nightly play sessions approximately
1 to 2 hours before bedtime. Playing immediately before bedtime is not
recommended because the cat may still be aroused and feeling playful if the
session ends too close to bedtime. A set of novel toys should be selected and
cat to one part of the house, locking the cat out of the bedroom at night, or
setting up remote punishers in areas of the home that are being damaged.
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
B0x 9.3
BOOTS AND HIS TOYS
towards Sandy and also towards Sandy's older cat, Barney. Barney and Boots play often during the day while
 Sandy is at work and frequently sleep together on one of the kitty condo platforms in their home. The problem is
d u Aea pue Aus yog aua oi siduane pue suiu aun yo ai au u aio Aaa osle si sioo ie
Both cats sleep on the bed with Sandy, and Boots will wake at around 3:o0 A.M. every night. He walks back and
forth across the bed, meowing loudly. If ignored, he will alternatively bat at and pounce upon Barney or Sandy
(neither of whom is interested in playing)
To reduce Boots's nighttime festivities, Sandy begins a program of active play and attention for Boots. She selects
from the following types of cat toys and rotates these each evening to maintain Boots' interest. On evenings that
environmental enrichment devices that she selected:
can be balled-up paper, an empty toilet paper tube, or a small stufed toy. There are even cat toys available
that are designed to vibrate, move, and squeak to simulate prey. Most cats will bat, chase, and pounce upon
Bundu yg sy uo bun Aq sot siy .uaosia, soua osie sioog 'se Ae a 'sot al-aid,
the toy with hisfront paws and raking the toy with his back feet.
climbing structure. For safety, Sandy only offers suspended toys when she is home to ensure that Boots does
not become tangled in the cord or attempt to ingest part of the toy.
ssoog shuu no slia mus se yons sot bunaan pue 'alod e wo papuadsns sot buuep 'suo lasls
favorite is a ping-pong ball! He especially enjoys it when Sandy places the ball in the bathtub, where he can
bat it around and up the side of the tub. Ping-pong balls can also provide hours of entertainment for a cat who
Ioves to chase and who is trained to retrieve.
·Climbing structures:Kity condo structures that have several platform levels, scratching posts, and
      s   s    ss
their structure to play ambush games with each other and for rest time.
CATS: EXCESSIVE VOCALIZATION
Cats communicate vocally with their owners and with other cats. The "meow"
used to communicate with other cats). Cats are capable of producing a
Unruly and Disruptive Behaviors in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 9
meanings. In fact, many owners become quite proficient at interpreting their
cats' vocalizations and responding in a manner that provides for their catsi
needs. Therefore, it is not surprising that some cats develop attention-seeking
vocalizations that are excessive. Many cases of "too much meowing" occur
early in the morning when the cat is requesting food, attention, or play from the
such as when a cat detects an unfamiliar cat outside of the home or is experi-
more common in the oriental breeds such as Siamese and Burmese, presum-
frequently than other breeds.
Because excessive vocalizations may be related to pain or illness, a complete
sleep-rest patterns and wakes the owner with persistent meowing may be de-
is often effective. When the cat's vocalizations are determined to be attention-
seeking behaviors, the owner's response to the meows must be investigated.
For example, if the owner has interpreted all meows as requests for food, this
reinforces meowing for attention and also establishes food as the only type of
reward to which the cat responds (which can lead to overweight conditions).
Similarly, if each meow leads to petting and interaction, vocalizing for attention
evenaware
Treatment includes providing proactive positive interaction before
recommended for attention-seeking vocalizations, the ability of owners to
makes this an impractical solution for most owners. Preventing the behavior
through differential reinforcement of alternative behaviors is most effective
('e xoa) eo pue laumo uaameg puog aui buaesad jo leueg aui sey pue
spraying with a water pistol or compressed air canister when the cat meows
for attention, these solutions are not recommended because of the risk of
causing fear and because they do not address the underlying cause of the
behavior - a need for attention and affection.
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
Box 9.4 
TIGGER'S PERSISTENT MEOWING PRObLEM
Tigger is a two-year-old domestic longhair cat, owned by Mike Powers. Mike has had Tigger since he was nine
   o   d  i p   si s n so p po s
when he is watching television or working on his home computer. At night, Tigger sleeps curled up at the end
of Mike's bed.
leave the house at 7:00 A.M. and often does not return home until 7:00 in the evening. Recently, Tigger has started
with him. Mike feels badly because he realizes that Tigger is lonely and under-stimulated because he is forced to
Tigger's needs for attention and exercise and so makes the following changes to Tigger's daily schedule and to his
interactionswithTigger:
· Increased play and exercise in the evening: Mike realizes that he has reduced the amount of time
  o       (s  a  si   b p
energy level, he includes several new toys in their play and also institutes a few "toy management'
rules (see below).
  s    s        s
e esnou pahnis ieus e spuy osle ah 'suoisses Aeld buunp saendueu pue splou e jeu Aot .oo
           e       
hides these around the house for Tigger to find during the day while he is at work.
is sporadically available, Mike begins to rotate Tigger's toys, providing one or two “new" toys each day. In
sessions only.
·Extinction of meowing: To break the nightly cycle of "mid-night meows," Mike stops responding to any
of Tigger's meowing in the middle of the night. Because Mike's time is limited with Tigger, he does not
wish to shut Tigger out of the bedroom. As an alternative, he purchases a set of ear plugs and commits
to one week of ignoring all meows. Tigger attempts to meow several times the first and second nights,
met and adding extinction solves the problem and soon both Tigger and Mike area adapted to their new
daily routine.
Unruly and Disruptive Behaviors in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 9
CATS: PLANT EATING AND PICA
Eating Houseplants
Plant eating is not that unusual, probably because cats who live outdoors
non-toxic plants in their homes and, if their cat goes outdoors, in their gardens.
Cats can be prevented from consuming houseplants by hanging plants or not
allowing the cat access to rooms that have plants on the floor. If the cat has a
definite preference for certain plants, applying a noxious-tasting substance to
dogs, providing a small flowerpot that is planted with grass or catnip and training
the cat to use only this pot as a "grazing area" can provide an alternate and
acceptable outlet for this behavior.
Pica (Eating Non-Nutritional Items)
The term pica refers to the ingestion of non-nutritional items. In cats, pica most
commonly manifests as plant eating (see above) or fabric eating (also referred to
as "wool chewing"). Cats use their molar teeth to chew on pieces of cloth. A cat
who shows this behavior apparently seeks out opportunities to chew on cloth
and is capable of producing large gaping holes in clothing or fabric in a manner
of minutes. There seems to be a breed-specific predilection for this behavior,
represents a neotenized behavior pattern, there are not definitive data to prove
this. It is more probable that fabric eating is a form of obsessive-compulsive
behavior characterized by stereotypical chewing. Because some cats appear
other cats, growing a safe plant or patch of grass in the home specifically for
Finally, because fabric chewing can be related to chronic stress in the cat's life
or a form of obsessive-compulsive disorder, some cats respond favorably to
recommendations
240
Section 3
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.  Describe the steps used to teach a dog to sit for greeting as an alternate behavior
to jumping up to greet.
2.
 What are the most common causes of destructive chewing in dogs?
3.
 Describe the two primary types of anti-bark collars and the advantages
and disadvantages of each.
4.
What types of training and household management techniques can owners use
to keep their cat off countertops?
0.
 Discuss ways in which owners can prevent or reduce overly exuberant nocturnal
activity in their cats.
REFERENCESAND FURTHER READING
Adamelli S, Marinelli L, Normando S, Bono G. Owner and cat features influence the
quality of life of the cat. Appf Anim Behav Sci, 94:89-98, 2005.
Adams GJ, Clarke WT. The prevalence of behavioural problems in domestic dogs:
A survey of 105 dog owners. Australian Vet Pract, 19:135-137, 1989.
AmericanAssociation of FelinePractitioners.Feline Behavior Guidelines.AAFP,43pp.
2004.
 Beaver BV. Effectiveness of products in eliminating cat urine odors from carpet.
J Amer Vet Med Ass0c. 194:1589-1591, 1989
Beaver BV. House soiling in cats: A retrospective study of 120 cases. J Amer Anim
Hosp Ass0c, 25:631-636, 1989.
Beaver BV. Feline behavioral problems other than house soiling. J Amer Anim Hosp
Assoc, 25:465-469, 1989.
Beaver BV. Owner complaints about canine behavior. J Amer Vet Med Assoc.
204:1953-1955, 1994.
demographic variables, potentially problematic behaviors, training engagement
Byrne Rvw. Animal communication: What makes a dog able to understand its master?
Curr Biol, 13:R347-R348, 2003.
Call J, Brauer J, Kaminski J, Tomasello M. Domestic dogs (Canis familiaris) are
Chapter 9
241
Feb:119-121, 2006
Donaldson J. Culture Clash: A Revolutionary New Way of understanding the
Oakland, CA, 221 pp.,1996.
PA, 275 pp.,1985.
head collars. Appl Anim Behav Sci, 80:1-9, 2002.
Heidenberger E. Housing conditions and behavioral problems of indoor cats as
Hennessy MB, Davis HN, Williams MT, Mellot C, Douglas CW. Plasma cortisol levels
of dogs at a county animal shelter. Physiol Behav, 62:481-490, 1997.
Hetts S, Estep DQ. Behavior management: Preventing elimination and destructive
behavior problems. Vet Forum, November:60-61, 1994.
Hilby EF, Rooney NJ, Bradshaw JWS. Dog training methods: Their use, effectiveness
and interaction with behaviour and welfare. Anim Welfare, 13:63-69, 2004
Horwitz D, Mills D, Heath S. BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline Behavioural
Medicine. British Small Animal Veterinary Association, Gloucester, UK, 288 pp., 2002.
Jagoe A, Serpell J. Owner characteristics and interactions and the prevalence of
canine behaviour problems. Appf Anim Behav Sci, 47:31-42, 1996.
Jongman EC. Adaptation of domestic cats to confinement. J Vet Behav, 2:193-196, 2007.
Kobelt AJ, Hemsworth PH, Barnett JL, Coleman GJ. A survey of dog ownership in suburban
Australia - Conditions and behavior problems. Appl Anim Behay Sci, 82:137-148, 2003
Kobelt AJ, Hemsworth PH, Barnett JL, Coleman GJ, Butler KL. The behaviour of
Labrador retrievers in suburban backyards: The relationship between the backyard
environment and dog behavior. Appl Anim Behay Sci, 106:70-84, 2007.
Landsberg G, Hunthausen W, Ackerman L. Handbook of Behaviour Problems in the
Dog and Cat. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, 0K, 211 pp., 2004.
Ledger RA. Owner and dog characteristics: their effects on the success of the
owner-dog relationship. Part 1: Owner attachment and ownership success.
Vet ntermat, 11:2-10, 1999.
Ledger RA. Owner and dog characteristics: their effects on the success of the
vet intermat, 12:8-18,2000.
Lindsay SR. Handbook of Applied Dog Behavior and Training; Volume 2: Etiology
328 pp., 2001.
242
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
Loveridge G. Environmentally enriched housing for dogs. Appl Anim Behay Sci,
59:101-113. 1998.
Marinelli L, Adamelli S, Normando S, Bono G. Quality of life of the pet dog: Influence
of owner and dog's characteristics. Appl Anim Behav Sci, 108:143-156, 2007
Miklosi A, Polgardi R, Topal J, Csanyi V. Intentional behaviors in dog-human
Cognition, 3:159-168, 2000.
Miklosi A, Polgardi R, Topal J, Csanyi V. Use of experimenter-given cues in dogs. Anim
Cognition, 1:113-121, 1998.
Miller J. The domestic cat: Perspective on the nature and diversity of cats. J Amer
Anim Hosp Assoc, 208:498-501, 1996.
Miller DD, Staats SR, Partlo C. Factors associated with the decision to surrender a pet
to an animal shelter. J Amer Anim Hosp Assoc, 209:738-742, 1996.
Moffat KS, Landsberg GM, Beaudet R. Effectiveness and comparison of citronella and
scentless spray bark collars for the control of barking in a veterinary hospital setting
J Amer Anim Hosp Ass0c, 29:343-348, 2003
Morgan M, Houpt KA. Feline behavior problems: The influence of declawing.
Anthroz00s, 3:50-53, 1989.
Appl Anim Behav Sci, 52:299-305. 1996.
Overall K. Clinical Behavioral Medicine for Small Animals. Mosby St. Louis, MO
544 pp., 1997.
Pal SK. Urine marking by free-ranging dogs (Canis familiaris) in relation to sex,
season, place and posture.Appl Anim Behay Sci, 80:45-59, 2003.
Podberscek AL. Positive and negative aspects of our relationship with companion
animals. Vet Res Comm, 30 (suppll:21-27, 2006.
Polsky RH. Electronic collars: Are they worth the risks? J Amer Anim Hosp Assoc
30:463-468. 1994.
Rochlitz I. A review of the housing requirements of domestic cats (Felis silvestris
catus) kept in the home. Appl Anim Behav Sci, 93:97-109, 2005
for dogs? Appl Anim Behav Sci, 52:321-329, 1997.
Schalke E, Stichnoth J, Ott S, Jones-Baade R. Clinical signs caused by the use of
electric training collars on dogs in everyday life situations. Appl Anim Behav Sci,
105:369-380, 2007.
and long term behavioral effects. Appl Anim Behav Sci, 85:319-334, 2004.
Anim Welfare Sci 8:199-209, 2005
Chapter 9
243
Steiss JE, Schaffer C, Ahmad HA, Voith V. Evaluation of plasma cortisol levels and
behavior in dogs wearing bark control collars. Appl Anim Behay Sci, 106:96-106,
2007.
Takeuchi Y, Ogata N, Houpt KA, Scarlett JM. Differences in background and outcome
Topal J, Miklosi A, Csanyi V. Dog-human relationship affects problem solving
Turner DC. Treating canine and feline behaviour problems and advising clients. App!
Anim Behav Sci, 52:199-204, 1997.
Voith VL, Borchelt PL (editors). Readings in Companion Animal Behavior. Veterinary
Learning Systems, Irenton, NJ, 276 pp., 1996.
Wells DL. The effectiveness of a citronella spray collar in reducing certain forms of
barking in dogs. Appl Anim Behav Sci, 73:299-309, 2001.
Wells DL. A review of environmental enrichment for kenneled dogs, Canis familiaris.
Appl Anim Behav Sci, 85:307-317, 2004.
Wells DL, Hepper PG. Prevalence of behaviour problems reported by owners of dogs
purchased from an animal rescue shelter. Appl Anim Behav Sci, 69:55-65, 2000
Yeon SC, Erb HN, Houpt KA. A retrospective study of canine house soiling: Diagnosis
and treatment. J Amer Anim Hosp Assoc, 35:101-106, 1999.
Footnotes
shared activities. Appl Anim Behav Sci, 102:65-84, 2007.
assessed by their owners. Appl Anim Behav Sci, 52:345-364, 1997.
3 Pageat P, Tessier Y. Disruptive stimulus: Definition and application in behavior
therapy. In: Proc of the First Internat Conf Vet Behav Med, UFAw, Potters' Bar UK,
p. 187. 1997.
nuisance barking. J Amer Anim Hosp Assoc, 5:231-235, 1996.
5 Marder A, Reid P. Canine behavior problems: Behavior modification, obedience, and
agillity training. Compend Continuing Ed Pract Vet, 18:975-983, 1996.
10
CHAPTER
Separation, Fear, and Anxiety Problems
in Dogs and Cats
eparation anxiety and fear-related behaviors make up a substantial
trainers. Separation anxiety in dogs is a prevalent problem, comprising
up to 70 percent of cases in some clinics.1.2 In addition, a substantial
as pe ssas uoeides jo subis joueq aos mous shop jo laqunus
point in their life, even though their owners do not seek professional help for
the problem.3 Fears and general anxiety problems are also relatively common.
A survey of pet owners found that almost 40 percent of dogs were fearful of loud
noises, while 22 percent dogs were fearful of unfamiiar adults, 33 percent were
owners who adopt dogs from shelters report problems associated with fearful
behaviors during the first year following adoption.5 Although separation anxiety
is relatively uncommon, shyness and fear-related behavior problems are seen in
many cats. Some cat owners successfuly manage these fears in their cats, but
untreated fear-related behaviors can adversely affect a cat's welfare and quality
Of life.
Separation,Fear,and Anxiety Problems in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 10
NORMALVS. PROBLEMATIC ANXIETY
ANDFEARREACTIONS
experiences or from unfamiliar animals or situations has distinctive survival value
and was selected for during both the dog and the cat's evolutionary history. In
addition, a fear of unfamiliar animals or people is inherent for most wild animal
species. However, for the domestic dog and cat, the genetic changes associated
with domestication have attenuated these reactions. When pets live with families,
socialization to new people, places, and other animals during early development
and throughout life also contributes to reductions in timidity and fear
in many pets, it is not the only factor that influences fear-related behaviors. Fear
reactions can become problematic when negative associations are made with
impacts the animal's safety, quality of life, or relationship with the owner and other
familymembers.
 Similar to fear responses, separation stress is a normal behavior pattern. It is
expressed most intensely in puppies and kittens. Distress crying and increased
reacts by returning to the litter and tending to her young. During weaning, the
gradual introduction of repeated periods of separation from the mother causes
initial distress that decreases with time and maturation. Mild levels of anxiety are
also expected when puppies and kittens are adopted into new homes. As newly
shop Auen 'ewjue peloos e u! paloadxe ane suojunau buunp uonele pue fo! jo
prefer to be in the same room as their owners, whine or pace briefly when they
are left home alone, and become very excited when their owners return. A dog
who prefers to go for a ride with her owner in the car and who enjoys spending
most of her time at the owner's feet is not showing abnomal attachment behavior.
Similarly, although cats vary dramatically in their degree of sociability, a cat who
cuddles in his owner's lap and meows for attention is not showing an abnommal
level of attachment. Conversely, a pet who reacts to being isolated or confined
with an extreme level of anxiety that is out of context with the situation is showing
an abnommal response to separation. Severe separation reactions, especially wher
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
they are retained beyond puppy or kittenhood, are considered to be maladaptive
behaviors because they cause prolonged agitation and stress and place the animal
at risk of injury. For example, dogs who break teeth or injure themselves jumping
out of windows or cats who over-groom and cause skin lesions in response to
SEPARATION ANXIETY
behaviors that dogs (and, less frequently, cats) show in response to the distress
 is characterized by one or more problem behaviors that include agitation (pacing,
jumping up, panting), distress vocalizations (howling, barking, whining), destructive
behaviors (chewing, digging), hyperactivity (excessive greeting behavior, constant
may also occur, such as excessive salivation, self-mutilation, and vomiting. Be-
cause dogs and cats can be destructive, vocalize, and house soil for reasons that
are unrelated to separation stress, it is important to differentiate between the vari-
Sidebar 1
DIAGNOSING SEPARATION ANXIETY
distress and anxiety in response to isolation. These signs include excessive
behaviors can have underlying causes that are unrelated to separation
stress. The following set of questions and answers identify significant features
 that differentiate separation anxiety from other underlying causes of these
behavioral signs.
QUESTION
RESPONSE: SEPARATION STRESS
When does the dog/cat show
Only when isolated from the owner or
destructive behavior?
primary attachment figures
What types of items are destroyed?
Items that are often touched or used
by the owner, such as clothing.
eyeglasses, TV remotes, seat cushions
Where are chewing/digging behaviors
 Usually near areas of entry and exit
directed?
such as interior and exterior doors, door
trim and window ledges
Separation, Fear, and Anxiety Problems in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 10
247
QUESTION
RESPONSE: SEPARATION STRESS
Does confining the dog reduce the
No. The dog does not tolerate crating
problem?
or confinement well. The dog will
destroy bedding or toys left in the crate
and shows repeated and often frantic
attempts to escape the crate
When does the dog/cat house soil?
Only when isolated from the owner or
primary attachment figures (the dog/cat
is otherwise reliably house-trained)
Where does the dog/cat house soil?
 In same room that destruction
occurs; may be near doorway (Cats:
On the owner's bed)
When does the pet vocalize?
 As the owner is preparing to leave
(whining, meowing) and during 
isolation (barking, howling)
When does the pet demonstrate
Whenever the owner is preparing
anxious or nervous behaviors?
to leave and engages in typical
pre-departure cues such as putting
on coat, picking up keys, opening
garage door
Risk Factors and Predisposing Temperament Traits
Dogs: Dogs who have a history of rehoming or were adopted from shelters
one study reported that 26 percent of dogs diagnosed at a behavior clinic with
separation anxiety were adopted from a shelter, compared with only 8 percent
of the general population of dogs.6 Another study that examined almost
500 cases found that dogs originating from shelters were significantly more
likely to demonstrate signs of anxiety and separation stress than dogs who were
obtained from purebred breeders, friends, pet shops, or advertisements.7 what
is not obvious from these studies is the underlying cause of this association.
Are dogs relinquished because of existing problems associated with separation,
or does the environment of the shelter and the experience of abandonment
predispose a dog to future episodes of separation stress? Other factors that may
 influence a dog's risk of developing separation-related problems include gender
change in the dog's living environment or daily routine, and having some form of
noise phobia (thunderstorms, fireworks)
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
There also appears to be a relationship between general anxiety, fear, and
separation stress. Dogs who exhibit separation anxiety tend to have a nervous or
anxious temperament in general and often show behaviors that indicate a high
degree of dependency and attachment to their owner. They may greet the owner in
a hyper-excitable state using prolonged and exaggerated greeting rituals. They are
more likely to follow the owner around the home and to show distress if isolated in
bathroom or will not willingly go outside alone for elimination. These dogs are often
ety and destructiveness. Some dogs with separation anxiety have been described
tolerate confinement to small areas or separation behind a baby gate or other type
car, but cannot tolerate isolation in any other situation. The differences in these two
responses can possibly be explained through classical conditioning. While con
finement to a crate has consistently predicted prolonged periods of isolation (and
spoed pous Aea loy sheo un yel Aiidh ane sbop (exue pue ssens 'anoee
while their owner runs an errand. Therefore, confinement in the car may have been
classically conditioned to predict short and tolerable periods of separation.
comes from case studies, one well-controlled study found that dogs who were
owners excessively, four times more likely to show excessively excited greeting
behaviors, and more than four times more likely to be anxious prior to their owner's
Apms juaoal e Ksiau gexue uoeedes inoum shop alem ueun enuidep
that administered a standard test of attachment to dogs with and without sepa-
that were higher than the control dogs.9 However, this study used a small set of
ally elicited the attachment behaviors that dogs demonstrate in their nommal home
anxiety have intentionally or unintentionally reinforced over-dependence in their
bion anxiety do not support this belief. Owners of dogs with separation anxiety are
not more likely to allow their dog to sleep on the bed, to feed them treats from the
table, or to provide multiple type of toys and other treats than are owners of dogs
that do not have problems with separation.?
Finally, it is possible that the selection for juvenile traits in companion animals
Separation, Fear, and Anxiety Problems in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 10
oides oi pesodsipad ao aq  suny ym Aeso buom log
problems than breeds that were developed to function more independently.11
Examples include the herding breeds and certain types of sporting and working 
breeds. However, studies that have examined breed predispositions to separation
even show agreement on purebred versus mixed breed dog predispositions.12
Cats: Athough separation anxiety is less well documented (and probably less
common) in cats than in dogs, clinical reports in recent years indicate that it is a
genuine problem. Risk factors are similar to those in dogs, and include adoption
from a shelter or frequent rehoming, having a dependent and "clingy' tempera-
ment, and living with a single owner. Cats who experience a sudden change in
at increased risk for separation anxiety.
BEHAVIORAL SIGNS AND DIAGNOSIS
OFSEPARATIONANXIETY
The most obvious feature of separation anxiety is that stress-related behaviors are
had the opportunity to observe the dog, these behaviors commence either prior to
believed that dogs are destructive or vocal for only the first 30 to 60 minutes of iso-
that while the initial 30 to 60 minutes of separation was most stressful to the dogs:
Signs of stress or anxiety are often triggered in affected dogs in response to the
owner's "pre-departure cues." These are classically conditioned stimuli that have
up car keys, locking doors, or putting on a coat. Owners often describe their dogs
Ae bop eul 'ewou eun ereel ol enedaid Aeun se snonos Aeao pue jesdn se
show physical signs of stress such as trembling, salivation, and pacing and may
attempt to block the owner's access to the door. Cats are often described as being
'sbop u buzgoon Auenbay pue bumed busenban 'ainpedap ot loud ,Abuo,
vocalizations that are related to separation, as opposed to watch dog barking.
typically reported during pre-departure, while repetitive barking and howling develop
ater, during isolation. Stress-related vocalizations of dogs are high-pitched and
strained, distinct from those made during temitorial defense or play.
associations that develop cannot be overemphasized. Dogs who are extremely
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
distressed by isolation focus on any cue that consistently predicts the owner's
impending departure. For example, if an owner's normal morning preparations
include rising in response to an alarm, showering, making coffee, dressing,
and leaving the house, the dog may gradually back-chain each association
alarm clock rings. Dogs with severe separation anxiety often have a host of
pre-departure cues to which they react. During treatment, all of these must be
identified and isolated so that they can be decoupled from departure during
counter-conditioning treatment (see p. 253).
to depart, destructive behaviors and house soilling occur exclusively in the
the dog is kept, or toward an item that carries a strong scent of the owner. Dogs
typically scratch and dig at the base of doors, doorknobs, or window dressings,
cause of elimination in the home, the dog is fully house-trained when the owner
is home and the elimination occurs only during isolation, regardless of whether
the dog had eliminated outside prior to the owner's departure. Cats, for reasons
that are not completely understood, oten target the owner's bed for urination
differentiated from inappropriate elimination due to litter-box aversions or surface
preferences because it only occurs when the cat is left alone. In addition, most
cats with separation anxiety only show problem behaviors when they are left
alone for extended periods of several days, rather than during the owner's normal
workday routine.
TREATMENT OF SEPARATION ANXIETY (DOGS)
sal s bop aul aonpai ol si Aexue uodes buean uaym oh Aewud aul
of anxiety and improve her level of security and confidence when isolated.
Training and behavior modification programs for separation stress include using
successive approximation (shaping), counter-conditioning, desensitization, and
management techniques. In some cases, administering anti-anxiety medication is
helpful as adjunctive therapy (see pp. 253-258).
Reducing Dependency on Owner
owner. They may follow the owner from room to room and show signs of distress
Chapter 10
when separated from the owner or confined, even when the owner is still at
home. Teaching a basic control exercise such as the down-stay can be used to
provide opportunities for reinforcing relaxed postures and behaviors. The dog is
first trained to lie down and stay on command, with the owner standing close.
Positive reinforcement is used to shape increasing durations of time that the dog
tions). Negative reinforcement should not be used at any time when teaching this
exercise, because the goal is to train the dog to offer a reliable down-stay while
as positive reinforcers. After durations of 1 to 2 minutes with the owner remaining
distances away from the dog. This can be in the form of "yo-yo" training, as de-
scribed in Chapter 7 (p. 169). Gradual shaping allows the owner to move across
the room, sit at a desk several feet away from the dog, or move back and forth
doing chores around the home. The owner frequently returns to the dog to calmly
reinforce the stay and relaxed behaviors using verbal praise, gentle petting, and
food treats. If the dog shows distress at any point during this training, the owner
ui pebebue allym Aexue lo sss seouaedxe bop aul yoym ui saposide pad
 the down-stay will condition the down-stay as an aversive stimulus as opposed to
choose to teach the dog a "go to your bed" command for this portion of the train-
 ing. This is very helpful when distance is expanded to separation in another room,
as the bed can then be placed in different rooms.
Once the dog has been trained to lie down and stay on command and toler
ates short separations from the owner, the owner uses this command periodi-
cally throughout the day when home with the dog. The objective is always to pair
Each practice down-stay should be positively reinforced and all relaxed and calm
behaviors are rewarded with attention and food treats. Under no circumstances
had a period of activity and exercise and is tired.
Finally, it is important for owners to understand that this part of the behav-
ior modification program is not intended to weaken the bond that they have
from the owner. Although some behaviorists also suggest ignoring the dog
whenever attention-seeking behaviors are shown, this is not recommended
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
Sidebar 2
SHAPING DOWN-STAY TO REDUCE DEPENDENCY
Dependency Responses
Close to Owner
 Pleasure/Relaxation/Comfort
(unconditioned stimufus)
(unconditioned response)
Separated from Owner
 Anxiety/Fear/Frustration
(unconditioned stimufus)
(unconditioned response)
Successive Approximation (Shaping) Down-Stay
Step 1 - Teach Down-Stay Using Positive Reinforcement
Down-Stay (near owner) :
+ High-Value Treats
Pleasure/Relaxation
(operant response)
(positive reinforcement)
(unconditioned response)
Step 2 - Shape Duration
Down Stay (increasing time) 
 High-Value Treats 
 Pleasure/Relaxation
(operant response)
(positive reinforcement)
(unconditioned response)
Step 3 - Shape Distance (Separation)
Down Stay (increasing distance)
→High-Value Toy
 Peasure/Relaxation
(operant response)
(positive reinforcement)
(unconditioned
response)
Step 4 - Gradually Shape Both Duration (Time)
and Distance (Separation) from Dog in Various Rooms and Situations
owners justifiably find such advice unacceptable and are unwilling to comply
excessive attention-seeking is to teach an alternate and incompatible behavior
 that can be used preemptively to redirect the dog (see Chapter 9, pp. 213-214
for a complete discussiony.
Separation, Fear, and Anxiety Problems in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 10
Counter-Conditioning Pre-Departure Cues
When destructive behaviors are caused by anxiety or frustration, alleviating these
emotions should prevent behaviors that are destructive to the owner's home or
all components of a program designed to treat separation stress. These tech-
niques are designed to change the dog 's emotional response to impending isola-
tion from anxiety and fear to emotions of calmness and relaxation. Pre-departure
cues lend themselves to counter-conditioning techniques because they can be
easily separated into small cues to be presented to the dog in situations that are
decoupled from actual departures. Common pre-departure cues that dogs react
to include picking up keys, putting on a coat, gathering together work items such
At the start of the training, the owner makes a list of all of the pre-departure
signals that the dog reacts to, listed in order of increasing negative effect upon
the dog. The cue that has the weakest predictive properties is selected first for
counter-conditioning training. In other words, if the dog strongly reacts to the
owner putting on her coat but shows a moderate or inconsistent response to the
A specifically designated high-value toy or chew bone is selected by the owner.
This may be a hard bone that can be stuffed with moist treats or peanut butter or
Joj bop au Adnooo ueo jeun auoq io Aot  'srofue bop aun jeun Aot Aanllap-pooy e
30 minutes or more will be most effective. Initial training involves simply presenting
this toy to the dog while he is relaxed and happy (Sidebar 3). The owner allows the
dog to chew on the toy for several minutes and then removes the toy while the dog
step is repeated on several occasions to ensure that the dog continues to enjoy the
toy and learns to accept the removal of the toy. Decoupled pre-departure cues are
s engaging in pre-departure cues. The owner gradually desensitizes the dog to
noybnoyt eno aul ot bop eu buisodxe Apaeadan Ag eno anuedap-ad psly eu
the day, providing the special toy for several minutes and never following the cue
with departure. For example the owner may pick up the keys, counter-condition
the dog using the special toy, and then continue about her business around the
of the guardian's absence and also to build a positive association between the
special toy and isolation cues. When the dog has become counter-conditioned to
all pre-departure cues, a program of graduated departures can be introduced.
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
Sidebar 3
COUNTER-CONDITIONING PRE-DEPARTURE CUES
WITH A HIGH VALUE TOY
Conditioned Pre-Departure Cue Example (Keys)
Picking up Keys —
 Owner Departs (lsolation) 
 Anxiety/Fear
(conditioned stimufus)
(unconditioned
(unconditioned
stimufus)
response)
Behavior Modification Program
Introduce High-Value Toy
Special High-Value Toy -
 Pleasure/Relaxation
(unconditioned stimufus)
(unconditioned stimufus)
Counter-Condition Pre-Departure Cue
Picking up Keys 
 Special High-Value Toy 
 Pleasure/
Relaxation
(conditioned stimufus)
(unconditioned
(unconditioned
stimulus)
response)
Repeat with All Pre-Departure Cues
(Decoupled from Owner Departing and Isolation)
Desensitization to lsolation
After pre-departure cues have been counter-conditioned and the dog has been
conditioned to calmly accept periods of separation using the down stay exer-
cises, graduated departures can be introduced. A pre-selected high-value toy
is used to counter-condition and desensitize the dog to isolation in a separate
room while the owner is at home. A daily schedule providing graduated durations
of separation is created. Each practice session is paired with the high-value toy
that was used to condition the dog to pre-departure cues. As with the previous
ay buunp bop eu ol pepod Auo sl Aoi sly 'weboid puauean eyl jo aseud
training sessions. At the start of this phase of the program, the dog is left alone
for very short periods and the owner always returns to the dog before the dog
has lost interest in the toy. This rule ensures that the dog is not left alone long
enough to induce a stress response. As the program progresses, the length of
time that the dog is left alone must always be shorter than the time within which
the dog becomes anxious. If the pre-departure cues have been well-conditioned,
Separation, Fear, and Anxiety Problems in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 10
and the dog has been trained to offer relaxed down-stays apart from the owner
The owner offers the special toy, leaves the dog in the room for a few minutes,
returns, reinforces calm behavior with quiet and calm praise, removes the special
op eu buisalan lee Ame nd sme si ot oads eul Aep au noyno
au buopaid woy paidnooep Ansseoons ueeg eaey sano anpedap-ad j
time and no anxiety occured. This is why it is imperative that the special toy is
not provided at any other time, especially in circumstances during the treatment
program when the owner is required to be away for an extended period and there
be given to the dog when the owner leaves for a period longer than the dog is
capable of tolerating because the item will then lose its value as a safety cue if it
becomes associated with anxiety.
As the dog becomes acclimated to the room and begins to anticipate the
durations, using a sequence of variable time periods (for example, 10 minutes,
4 minutes, 12 minutes, 1 minute). Over time, periods of 30 to 45 minutes are
conditioned. In some cases, it is helpful to provide two special toys as the dura-
tion away increases. Once a dog tolerates 45 minutes of isolation with the owner
still at home, the owner can begin to add the pre-departure cues and, eventu-
ally, to actually leave the house for short periods of time. When these new cues
eaes ol pesaioep eg uebe aouo pnoys poued aw aul desamoy 'peppe ae
minutes and then gradually increased to 30 minutes or more. Again, a schedule
of gradually increasing time periods can be devised, but should be adjusted
during treatment to reflect the dog 's response to each level of separation.
Throughout desensitization, the dog 's response always determines the rate
at which training proceeds. Because dogs differ significantly in their abilities to
tolerate isolation and to counter-condition to the safety cue, the owner uses
the dog's response during the previous session to determine whether the dog
is ready to tolerate increased duration in the current session. A written time
schedule is useful as a guide, but the dog 's abiity to tolerate each level of
separation should be the ultimate criteria to use when determining progression
appear to be stressed or show exaggerated greeting behaviors when the owner
returns. The most important factor is that the dog remains non-anxious. If
the schedule is increased too rapidly and anxiety results, the problem is often
exacerbated and the usefulness of the safety cue is lost
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
Management Approaches
A variety of management practices can be used in conjunction with behav-
tion tend to have lower anxiety levels and are more likely to relax and rest dur-
who learns to expect attention and exercise at certain times every day is more
manageable and may tolerate isolation better as a result of learning to antici-
pate regular periods of exercise and rest. Daily obedience training should be
incorporated into these routines as training can also help to increase a dog's
confidence and security
When destruction is serious and there is potential for injury to the dog, con-
finement may be necessary to prevent further destruction and to protect the
dog. Crating is often the first type of confinement that owners attempt. Unfortu-
nately, if a crate has been used previously, this is often unsuccessful if the crate
the crate and injure themselves in attempts to escape. In cases in which the
crate is not an option but confinement is necessary, the owner may be able
to use a small room, such as a kitchen or playroom, or a secure outdoor ken-
nel. The pivotal criterion for this space is that it is an area to which the dog has
not yet developed an aversive conditioned response. A stufed bone or food-
delivery toy can be provided, but because confinement has the potential to be
stressful, it should not be the same toy that is being developed as a safety cue
during the counter-conditioning portion of the behavior modification program.
 po    o p s a om so  
e pe bop au buoue apnoui pomed pous e ueu aow oj Aeme aq jsnw jaumo
doggy daycare, boarding the dog at a kennel, or hiring a pet sitter to come in to
stay with the dog.
Adjunctive Drug Therapy
modification program. The two that are most commonly used are amitriptyline
for treating canine separation anxiety and has been shown in controlled trials
to be an effective addition to behavior therapy.14 The results of these studies
found that dogs treated with both the drug and behavior therapy improved more
Separation, Fear, and Anxiety Problems in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 10
rapidly than did dogs who were treated with behavior therapy alone. However,
another study reported that clomipramine reduced overall activity level and
suppressed dogs' attention-seeking behaviors but did not significantly improve
response to behavioral therapy.15 A second class of drugs, the benzodiazepines,
times that the owners are forced to leave the dog alone. Of these drugs,
alprazolam and clorazepate are most frequently used. These medications can
help owners to reduce extreme panic in a dog when they have no choice but
to leave the dog alone. The medication is given 1 to 2 hours before the owner
leaves and is intended to reduce anxiety for a single episode. Benzodiazepines
can be used concurrently with the tricyclic antidepressants, and so are helpful in
preventing relapses during a behavior modification program. Other drugs that are
occasionally used include the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (fluoxetine
or paroxetine), the monoamine oxidase B inhibitor selegiline hydrochloride, and
phenothiazines (Table 10.1).
The inclusion of drug therapy can be helpful in reducing anxiety during the
 initial stages of behavior therapy. The majority of dogs are slowly weaned off of
these medications as their behavior improves. In all cases, drug therapy should
table 10.1 Medications Used as Adjunctive Therapy for Separation Anxiety
CLASS OF DRUG
EXAMPLES
 MODE OF ACTION
SIDE EFFECTS
COMMENTS
Tricyclic
Clomipramine
Neurotransmitter
 Increased drinking
Should not be 
 Antidepressants
Amitriptyline
effects; reduces
and urination, GI
prescribed in pets
arousal, anxiety
upset, urinary or
being treated with
fecal retention,
monoamine oxidase
 glaucoma
inhibitors
Monoamine
Selegiline
Inhibits panic or
Gastrointestinal
 May take as long as
Oxidase Inhibitors
phobic reactions,
upset, restlessness
6weekstoshowany
reduces anxiety
and hyperactivity
benefits
Benzodiazepines
Diazepam
Anti-anxiety;
 Lethargy, sedation,
Can be used to for
Alprazolam
reduced state of
ataxia, increased
immediate control
 arousal; fast acting 
 appetite, liver toxicity
 of anxiety during
(rare)
severe episodes
Selective Serotonin
Paroxetine
 Enhance availabil-
Loss of appetite,
May take several
Reuptake Inhibitors
Fluoxetine
ity and effects of 
diarrhea, vomiting 
weeks to affect
serotonin
behavior, Used
 effectively for urine
spraying
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
only be used under the supervision of a veterinary behaviorist and should be
administered in conjunction with a behavior modification program. Finally, in
addition to prescribed drugs such as the tricyclic antidepressants, a hormonal
adjunctive medical therapy for dogs with separation anxiety and may help to
( egepis) sbop ewos ui Aexue eonpa
Sidebar 4
THE EFFECTS OF DOG APPEASING PHEROMONE (DAP)
ON SEPARATION ANXIETY IN DOGS
aewej ayl punoe paieool spueib snoaoeges ayl 'yuig buaib sehe Auoys
aerosolized compounds are administered using either a heated electric
difuser that mounts on a wall or from a small container mounted on the dog's
loj pue 'eo ayl ul bupu lo sasiou pnol jo leej bulonpal loj Adeleyl
calming dogs who are living in a shelter environment. Recently, a group of
researchers examined the potential for DAP to act as an adjunctive therapy
for dogs with separation anxiety.
A group of 67 dogs with diagnosed separation anxiety was recruited
the dogs were destructiveness, excessive vocalizations, and house soiling
 Following recruitment, the dogs were randomly assigned to two groups. The
standard reference group received a behavior modification program to treat
lasnp e buisn paleisiuwpe sem dva pue ainsdeo eio ue se Aiep aoial
installed in an area that the dog spent most of the day or was confined wher
the owner was absent. Placebo diffusers and capsules were supplied to
for 4 to 5 weeks.
Owners and their veterinarians evaluated the effects of treatment on both
isapun Aaixue uoeiedas jo subis eoiaeyeg Aepuooas pue Aejd aul
able behaviors decreased in both groups of dogs. Overall assessments by
adjunctive therapies. In addition, more dogs in the clomipramine group than ir
Separation, Fear, and Anxiety Problems in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 10
the DAP group experienced undesirable side effects. Gastrointestinal upsets
aul ui soop jo siaumo dya ayl oi pasodxa alem oym soop u jou ng auwe
of dogs in the clomipramine group. Results of this study indicate that the ef-
ficacy of treatment with DAP was not inferior to including clomipramine with a
was no negative control group included in this study, improvement cannot be
attributed directly to either clomipramine or DAP and may have been due to
behavior modification alone in both groups of dogs. If it is effective, DAP has
the practical benefits of fewer undesirable side effects, ease of administration,
and higher owner compliance than the drug clomipramine.
Gaultier E, Bonnafous L, Bougrat L, Laront C, Pageat P. Comparison of the effcacy of a synthetic dog-appeasing
pheromone with clomipramine for the treatment of separation-related disorders in dogs. vet Rec, 156:533-538, 2005.
Ineffective Treatments for Separation Anxiety
Punishment is ineffective as an approach to reduce the destruction associated
exacerbating the problem. Although many owners are aware that they should
never punish their dog "after the fact," for example, when they return home to find
a mess, it is unfortunate that some trainers and behaviorists continue to promote
the use of remote punishers such as bark collars or "setting the dog up" by hiding
dog (i.e. "catching him in the act"). It cannot be emphasized strongly enough that
fear and should never be used. Punishment appears to work because it interrupts
and suppresses behavior at the time it is administered. As a result, the owner may
erroneously believe that this approach is effective. To the contrary, while shocking
a stressed dog for barking or harshly reprimanding an anxious dog for destructive
behaviors are aversive enough to inhibit these behaviors at the time that the
punishment occurs, this should not be confused with preventing anxiety-related
behaviors in the future. Because they add to the anxiety and fear of a dog who
is already highly stressed, aversive stimuli (shocking, yelling, hitting) are abusive
and cruel and should never be promoted or condoned. Other approaches that
abusive) include getting a second dog to keep the affected dog company, crating
without including a behavior modification program, and attempting to use a safety
cue such as leaving the radio on or providing a stuffed toy without taking the
necessary steps to classically condition the cue.
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
PREVENTION OF SEPARATION STRESS
puppies' behavioral repertoire. As they grow and develop, puppies usually
time during which they are kept in a separate room or in a crate. Socialization
o spoued poys senbe ym paidnoo 'seoueuadxe pue edoed jo Aeua e o
isolation, gradually teaches puppies to readily accept new experiences and to
be comfortable when separated from their human social partners. A “safety
cue" toy can be introduced early in life, such as a hollow bone or hard rub-
Addnd eun leaueum pepioid si rot lelads su 'siea ym pens Aoi ea
is isolated, pairing the toy with short periods of “alone time." Because the
early introduction of this cue prevents its association with severe anxiety, it
can quickly become classically conditioned to predict pleasurable emotions
of isolation coupled with a consistent daily routine of exercise, attention, play,
during adulthood.
There is some evidence that dogs who respond to commands consistently
or who have been enrolled in obedience training classes may be less likely to
develop separation problems. For example, a study of dogs and their owners
compared the effects of training and human interaction on the human-dog rela-
an eight-week obedience class or who had spent a comparable time period in
showing that dogs who either responded reliably to obedience commands or
who attended obedience classes were less likely to show separation-related be
us 'dysuoe uewny-bop eul jo Anb ieao ayi buodwi Ag shop u
owners of dogs who are obedience trained report fewer behavior problems of
all types. Additional benefits that training might have could be related to the
level of control and graduated separations that are inherent in teaching a dog
to sit or lie down and stay as the trainer moves away or to another room. Most
training programs introduce these exercises through shaping, and it is possible
reinforcement of calm behavior (staying) serves to attenuate over-attachment
behaviors. Alternatively, the association between obedience training and fewer
problems may be that owners who choose to obedience train their dogs are
Chapter 10
ACAUTIONARY NOTE: SEPARATION ANXIETY
OR SOMETHING ELSE?
because of enhanced understanding of this problem, but also because of the
development of effective treatments that include behavior modification programs
and pharmacological therapies (see Sidebar 5 and Box 10.1). This attention has
allowed many trainers, behaviorists and veterinarians to help owners to improve
the quality of their dogs' lives and, in many cases, to keep the dog in the home
lead to misdiagnoses. Signs of separation anxiety are similar to the behavioral
signs of under-stimulated and under-exercised dogs whose social and physical
institute a program of regular obedience training. Wwhile increasing exercise and
when left alone because the dog is tired, it is also possible that some of the
dogs who respond positively to these changes are actually not suffering from
for destructive behaviors or repetitive barking are instead boredom and a lack of
mental stimulation. Similarly, dogs who have not been thoroughly house-trained
elimination in the presence of the owner leads to punishment, not necessarily
because they are suffering from separation anxiety (see Chapter 8, pp. 188-189)
IS BEHAVIOR MODIFICATION EFFECTIVEINTREATING
Sidebar 5
SEPARATION ANXIETY?
Treatment programs designed for dogs with separation anxiety include
labor-intensive, time consuming, and complicated. According to one
study, most dogs with separation-related behavior problems do not receive
or abandoned. Therefore, behavioral therapy programs that are known to
effectively reduce a dog's anxiety and destructive behaviors are needed
treating separation anxiety.
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
of a standard behavior modification program. Owners of 34 dogs with sepa-
follow for 12 weeks. The control group included 16 dogs whose owners did
not request help. At the end of the study period, problem behaviors were
group showed little change and no significant improvement in any problem
tailored to each dog's specific problems and to the lifestyle of the owner. Of
behavior after 12 weeks of treatment.
ou alem lo pauesiom pey 'abueyo ou pey lueoled sg pue sbop paeal au
directives that required little time and were not complicated. For example,
ul buisealoul lol pue 'ano Aajes e se Aol leloads e buiplaoid lof lolaeuegsiu
amount of exercise that the dog received. Conversely, instructions with lowest
compliance were those for counter-conditioning and decoupling pre-departure
cues and for gradual desensitization to isolation.
Together, these results suggest that a small set of easy-to-implement treat-
the dog's behaviors and the owner's lifestyle. Although a gradual program of
desensitization to gradually increasing periods of time alone is the theoretical
"gold standard" of behavior modification, a treatment can only be effective if
-umo yoiym ym pue sseoons umouy aaey eul sanbuyoal puawebeuew pue
ers are most likely to comply.
dogs. Vet Rec, 158:551-554, 2006
Bradshaw JWS, McPherson JA, Casey RA, Larter IS. Aetiology of separation-related behaviour in domestic dogs.
Vet Rec, 151:43-46, 2002.
Takeuchi Y, Houpt KA, Scarlett JM. Evaluation of treatments for separation anxiety in dogs.  Amer Vet Med
As500, 217:342-345, 2000.
Separation, Fear, and Anxiety Problems in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 10
263
Box 10.1 PeAcHes The bOrder cOllie
pleted several obedience classes with Peaches. She relates that Peaches was very easy to train and is well-
behaved at home and when out in public. Peaches is a very active dog and Anne enjoys long walks with her every
evening and runs with Peaches 4 or 5 mornings a week. Peaches is very affectionate ("clingy almost") with all
who she plays with on weekends.
Description of problem: Recently, Peaches has started to be destructive when Anne is not at home.At first,
has heard Peaches howling, sometimes for several hours at a time while Anne is at work. Yesterday, Anne found
at work. Until recently, Peaches had always been fine with this. However, Anne changed jobs about nine months
                  m
Additional background: A coworker informed Anne that Peaches is angry with Anne for being left alone for so
many hours and is “geting back" at Anne by chewing up things that are important to Anne. The coworker has told
few minutes and then come running back into the house to harshly reprimand Peaches if she has taken any of the
items that were left out. She told Anne that she must startle Peaches by yelling and swating her, so as to make this
this problem and because she believes that Peaches is distressed when she is away. Anne states that she abso-
lutely adores Peaches, and that while she does not see this to be a terrible problem, she is worried that Peaches is
unhappy or stressed, and that the problem seems to be gradually worsening.
Counter-condition a safety cue (Anne chooses a hollow bone stuffed with peanut butter); use down-stay training in
pre-departure cues and time alone; use doggy daycare 2 to 3 times per week; hire pet sitter to come in at noon on
one week and complete resolution of signs within one month. (Anne did not take her co-worker's unsolicited advice.)
These distinctions are more important today, given the recent use (and
the attraction of a "quick fix" to frustrated owners may lead to medicating dogs
in lieu of providing for their basic needs. Because informed consent by the
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
animal is impossible and because medications do have the potential for abuse
veterinarians who prescribe medications for the amelioration of anxiety in dogs
and cats must always include a careful diagnostic protocol and encourage
     n   ns
TREATMENT PROTOCOL FOR CATS
WITH SEPARATIONANXIETY
treatment for dogs, with several distinctions. Because the normal feeding be
around toys that move erratically and many cats play with food-delivery toys that
are specifically designed for cats. These products can be classically conditioned
to predict opportunities for positive experiences in the same way as those used
with dogs. Although opportunities for increased exercise and stimulation are more
limited for cats than for dogs, owners can compensate by providing interactive
toys and increasing play. Rotating toys is especially important for cats, as novelty
has been shown to be an important factor in maintaining interest in object play in
cats. Because the majority of cats with separation stress eliminate in a specific
the cat during treatment. While training a reliable down-stay is not possible with
aul uo Aouepuadep jo eabap steo e aonpal oi pesn ag ueo spoyew leyo 'sieo
owner. These include confining the cat to another room with interactive toys for
short periods of time while the owner is home and providing petting and attention
on a predetermined schedule, rather than always in response to the cat's
attention-seeking behaviors (Box 10.2).
Box 10.2
OREO'S SEPARATION PROBLEM
Rob adopted Oreo from his local shelter six months ago. Oreo is extremely affectionate and bonded to Rob imme-
problems with Oreo occurred until Rob had to leave for an overnight business trip, one month ago.
Description of problem: Rob provided sufficient food and water and a clean litter box for Oreo. He packed for his
trip and left home at his usual time on a Tuesday morning. He returned late in the evening on Wednesday. Upon
returning, Oreo met Rob at the door, showing his typical excitement and affection. Rob did notice that Oreo seemed
Chapter 10
had urinated several times on his pillow and in the center of his bed. Rob attributed this to Oreo's first time alone
and did not worry about it too much. However, two weeks later, when Rob again had to travel, he noticed that Oreo
aal oi padand ay se got pamolloy ah 'd siy lo, payod pue abeahni siu ino yooi ay se paee Aaa aweoag
e p  's  o  q o o s au asa s b p g go  i 
him but had again urinated on Rob's bed. (Rob relates that Oreo is completely reliable about using his liter box
when Rob is at home and maintains his normal workday routine.)
reduce his attention-seeking and “clingy" behaviors. Rob also purchased a cat bed for Oreo. He placed the bed in
the living room and reinforced Oreo with atention and food treats whenever he was resting on the bed. For the first
of food-delivery and interactive toys around the apartment.Oreo's new bed was placed in his favorite room of the
and replace them with new toys that Rob had left for this purpose.
house sitter when he has to be away overnight on business to provide Oreo with attention and affection when he
isaway.
FEAR-RELATEDBEHAVIORPROBLEMS
of stimulus that elicits fear and the intensity of the pet's reaction. For example
dogs and cats who show generalized fear to a wide range of situations are often
referred to as being shy or timid. In other cases, a dog or cat may develop very
or situation. An example is the dog who becomes so agitated and frantic upon
hearing fireworks that he is in danger of injuring himself in his attempts to escape,
Or a cat who is temified of a visiting houseguest and hides under a bed, refus
ing to come out to eat or use the litter box. While behavior modification is often
helpful in reducing fear-related behaviors, the long-term prognosis can be highly
jo Aisuejui eul pue uoenp aul 'pesuo jo abe aul uodn spuadep pue algee
the fearful response, the ability to control the eliciting stimuli, and the dog or cat's
basicpersonalitytype.
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
figure 10.1  Fearful (nervous) dog
When confronted with fearful stimuli, animals have one or a combination of three
responses include a lowered head and crouched body posture and hiding or at-
tempting to stay close to the owner. The dog's eyes are wide, ears are back, and
the mouth is either closed with retracted lips or opened and panting (Figure 10.1).
Cats will reduce their body size by lying down with feet tucked underneath the
body, and may lower the head. Fleeing behaviors include all attempts to run
away or avoid the stimulus. Dogs who react aggressively usually will demonstrate
-e ue Aq pemolloy eq Aew sieaun ensuejea bumq jo lie je buiddeus bumoib
tempt to flee. Most fearful animals only become aggressive if their attempts to flee
avoid a frightening experience.
Common Fears in Dogs and Cats
Fear-related behaviors can be divided into four general categories: fear of new
places or situations, fear of unfamiliar people, fear of unfamiliar dogs/cats, and
live exclusively indoors and tend to be very attached to territory, fear behaviors
in cats are most commonly expressed when they are removed from their normal
living spaces (such as a trip in the car, or a move to a new home), or when a new
person or cat enters into the cat's established territory.
Chapter 10
Fearof NewSituations/Places:Fear of newplaces and experiences(agora
their homes, and in house cats who live exclusively indoors. For example, a dog
whose only trips away from home are infrequent visits to the veterinarian's office,
the grooming shop, or a boarding kennel may learn that any trips away from
may have had little or no experiences away from their kennel setting. Cats who
live exclusively indoors, who have not been well-socialized to visitors or to differ
ent types of people, and who only leave the home for trips to the veterinarian's
e sey abe 'sieo pue shop yog ul 'sbues mau le ui inyeay aie Auanbay eoo
significant effect upon the prognosis with these types of fear reactions, with older
adult pets being less responsive to treatment than young adolescents. In some
yaiau aul punoe sym (egoue Asnoaid pue) enba lay oy oh oi esnou
borhood after having been attacked and badly bitten by a neighbor's loose dog.
While the ability of dogs and cats to eventually overcome situational fears varies
greatly, many will retain a certain level of timidity for their entire lives.
Fear of Unfamiliar People or Animals: Dogs and cats who are timid or fearful
leinb e Ag pauwo sl oym bop e sl aldwexe geoidk y 'aldoed jo sabe pue sedk
elderly couple and who shows nervous or fearful behavior when approached by
young children. Similarly, the fear of other animals can develop as a result of a lack
of socialization or continued exposure during adulthood. Some dogs and cats
have not learned nommal intra-species communication patterns and may be unable
 to either send or perceive normal canine or feline communication signals. When
responses and avoidance. In addition, traumatic events such as being attacked by
lems in dogs. The most common stimuli are thunder, gunshots, and fireworks.
While some noise phobias can be managed successfully with a behavior modifi-
au 'jenppui eyl uodn bupuadep Aeaib sauea sisouboid ayt 'weboid uoeo
duration of the phobia, the ability to control exposure to the stimulus, and suc-
cess in finding an efective artificial stimulus to use during the exposure exercises.
 in intensity as the dog ages. Dogs with thunderstorm phobias usually display
a gradient of fearful behavior that is directly proportional to the intensity of the
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
the problems in treating thunderstorm phobia is the number of stimuli to which
pressure and ionization, lightening, and odors. Because the easiest stimulus to
replicate is auditory (i.e. thunder), this is what caretakers usually focus on and is
the cue that is used in desensitization programs.
The Role of Avoidance Learning in Maintaining
Fear-RelatedBehaviors
One of the primary difficulties in solving fears and phobias in dogs and cats is
that the behaviors that allow the pet to escape or avoid the fearful situation are
strongly reinforced each time that they are successful. This is called avoidance
learning and it occurs whenever a behavior in which an animal engages allows
the animal to avoid exposure to an aversive stimulus. In the case of fear, when
a fearful experience causes the pet to attempt to escape (flee), and the animal
example, a dog who was once frightened by a young neighbor boy banging
aun lesaueum abeeb aun ou unu ol paueal leueboi sueo abeqen jelew oml
boy approached. The association between the boy and the loud noise (classical
conditioning) caused the dog to continue to show this behavior even when the
boy did not make any loud noises. Running into the garage essentially prevented
the dog 's exposure to noise, regardless of whether the boy had any intention of
being noisy. Because the dog runs away each time that he sees the boy, he (the
dog) never has the opportunity to learn that the boy is harmless and is not going
to make noise. The behavior of running away was negatively reinforced each time
that it occurred because the dog was able to avoid exposure to an unpleasant
stimulus (the boy, who was a predictor of a frightening noise). A similar example is
the cat who hides under the bed and refuses to come out each time that a visitor
arrives. Because hiding allows the cat to avoid exposure to the aversive stimulus
never has the opportunity to habituate to unfamiliar and non-harmful visitors.
A common error is often made regarding the relationship between the
fearful stimulus. As stated previously, the behaviors that a dog or cat learns will
"work" for avoiding situations that cause them to experience fear are reinforced
whenever they are successful. It is the behaviors that have been reinforced,
not the fear. In other words, the sequence that is operantly learned, running
away or hiding, function to "turn off" the aversive stimulus (operant learning).
The mistake is made when owners are incorrectly advised to neither comfort
nor come to their pet's aid when their pet is frightened, because doing so will
as it is analogous to telling a parent to refuse aid to her child when the toddler
Chapter 10
is screaming in fright at the sight of a clown (which are admittedly quite scary)
Certainly very few parents would inform the clown that they are going to ignore
their terrified child so as not to “reinforce his fear!"
reflects confusion between operant and classical learning situations. It is
and has important biological functions. Pets (like people) do not choose to
threatening or dangerous and leads to escape (or defense) behaviors. It is false to
state that a dog or cat (or person) chooses or willingly decides to experience fear.
However, this is exactly what is implied when owners are advised to not comfort
or aid an animal who is panicking in fear because of the belief that such actions
will "reinforce the pet's fear." The caring (and effective) approach to dealing with
a pet's fearful response is to calmly and quietly come to the pet's aid and remove
him from the fear-inducing situation. Nothing can be done at that point in time
to alter the pet's response because fear has already been triggered and it is the
dwae pepinbsw e un eay sled ayi buuouai Adwis 'suoens buuaybuy pue
to change behavior is counterintuitive to most owners who love their pets, and is
definitely not going to help the pet to overcome his fear.
Treatment of Fear-Related Behavior Problems
The first step in the treatment of fear-related behavior problems is to completely
identify the attributes of all stimuli that elicit fear responses in the pet. The owner
should list all possible situations in which the dog or cat has shown fear or timidity
 in the past. Effective treatment approaches include management to control expo-
the pet's emotional responses to triggering stimuli
fear-related behaviors in both dogs and cats is counter-conditioning. The ultimate
goal of counter-conditioning is to change the pet's immediate response to the
flight or freeze) to one of calmness or even pleasure. In order to accomplish this
the owner must be able to introduce the stimulus at an intensity at which the pet
does not react. For example, a dog who is fearful of unfamiliar people while out
no o Aeme ybnoue ey bulm aie oym aidoed oi pesodxe ag ueo sym uo
Similarly, a cat who is frightened by visitors coming in the door can be confined
to a room that is furthest away from the door or in which the cat is known to feel
comfortable. When these controls are in place, the owner can begin to counter
se 'eseo s bop au ul bued pue eseid 'siean pooy ana-ybiy buisn uopuoo
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
soon as the dog notices a person while out walking (but does not show fear), the
owner quietly says the dog's name (or uses a safety cue such as "look") and pro-
vides very high-value treats and praise (calm, quiet tone of voice). As the person
treats and praise stop.
This classical conditioning sequence is practiced until the dog reacts to the
uodsan syl (easod pue wo sl ais euoowe s bop aul pue pae s
signifies that classical conditioning has been accomplished. The dog now views
the sight of a person at a distance as a reliable predictor of high-value treats
and praise from the owner. This pleasurable stimulus-to-stimulus association
changes that dog's emotional response to the stranger from one of apprehensior
and fear to one of pleasure. In the cat example, the owner stands at the room's
doorway, or next to the wire crate if the cat is confined to a crate as the visitor
high-value treats. Similarly, when the visitor retreats, food treats and praise stop.
hears the door or a visitor.
The most important rule of counter-conditioning fear-related behaviors is that
situations in which fear is triggered should be carefully avoided. A common
mistake that is often made with this program is that owners will observe that
the pet is not showing anxiety or fear when presented with a low level of the
stimulus (i.e. person far away) and then intensify the stimulus too rapidly, for
example by bringing the person closer or allowing the visitor to enter the room.
Often, this results in fear or nervous behaviors in the pet. If the owner allows this
to cccur, the positive associations that were conditioned previously may well
be lost as the dog or cat now has reason to believe that getting treats when
seeing a visitor is predictive of that visitor coming too close. In cases in which it is
the pet from the situation before fear is triggered. This cannot be emphasized
triggered is more than just a step back - it may reduce the effectiveness of future
counter-conditioning attempts.
pue seoueedxe s,ieo lo bop e louoo Aeledwoo oi eigissodwi s l asneoeg
or a visitor comes into the home and attempts to pet the cat and the pet reacts
fearfully, the owner should react neutrally ("come on, sweetie, let's turn around
and walk the other way"' or "let's put you in another room'"), removing the pet
from the situation as quickly as possible. In these cases, treats should not be
Separation, Fear, and Anxiety Problems in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 10
The owner must understand that the provisions of treats are always contingent
stated previously, the classically conditioned stimulus-stimulus relationship that
is desired is stranger/visitor predicts treats/petting (and their associated pleasant
emotional responses).
Some owners may find that counter-conditioning alone is sufficient to reduce
their pets' fear and to control fear-related behaviors. However, adding a program
of systematic desensitization to counter-conditioning can allow further improve
ment. When the dog or cat simply notices the stimulus (for example, a person
stimuli that progresses from the least fearful to the most fearful in the dog 's
eq ueo aldoed jeweun Aa pauaubyy s oum bop aun aidwexa loy uondaaad
counter-conditioned as people are allowed to approach more and more closely.
A sit-stay should be trained so that the dog can learn to offer a behavior that
dog shows no fear at each step, and relaxed responses are practiced on several
occasions, the stimulus intensity can be increased (i.e. a person moves closer)
Again, the objective is to always introduce a stimulus that stays within the pet's
comfort level and that does not elicit fear, allowing the counter-conditioning of
progress all the way to the highest intensity stimulus, many reach a certain point
jo bunuassel e 'seseo aseyl ul yeypny ou buob jo algedeo sl peo jo bop eyl pue
fear is often achieved, but the problem is not completely resolved.
The use of desensitization and counter-conditioning can be a bit more
complicated when treating noise phobias, because these problems require
that a suitable artificial stimulus is found. Recordings of thunderstorm noises
are available for this purpose, but because most dogs and cats who are
thunder-phobic react to multiple stimuli such as changes in air pressure, blowing
wind, and temperature changes, the use of these recordings are frequently
therapy may be advantageous during the treatment program if exposure to the
eliciting stimuli cannot be prevented (for example, during a real storm). Synthetic
pheromones may also be helpful as adjunctive therapy for treating various types
supervision of a veterinary behaviorist.
Some cases of fear-related behaviors are resistant to treatment because the
degree of fear that the dog or cat shows is extreme, the problem has persisted
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
D uosodsipaid oeuen buons e seu led eun jo 'ses no suuow suew o
shyness. Additionally, some owners are unable or unwilling to commit to a
the pet's environment to prevent exposure to fearful stimuli can be the best
solution. Using the examples discussed previously, walking the dog only in areas
where unfamiliar people are not likely to approach and confining the cat when
visitors arrive are acceptable solutions. However, the caretakers should be aware
Lsually abate over time without treatment.
Treatments That Are Not Recommended:“Flooding"involves exposing the
animal to the fear-inducing stimulus and only removing the stimulus when the
that the dog, the environment, and the stimulus are well-controlled. When used.
the initial stages of flooding involve presenting mild forms of the stimulus, if that
is possible. The dog or cat is prevented from escaping and reinforcements (food
treats, praise, and petting) are given only when the subject stops showing fear-
related behaviors and becomes calm. Once exposure to flooding has started, the
trainer must stay committed until the pet becomes calm. Since it is not known
how adversely an animal will react, there is always the risk of unintentionally mak-
ue si bupooy 'nysseons uaym pesn si bupooy ueym nyeay aow jed aui bu
to escape, become aggressive, or become so highly stressed that calmness can
never be achieved. It is also important that an owner (or trainer) not misinterpret
exhaustion or learned helplessness with calm behavior. An added danger is that
animals responds to flooding by generalizing their fear to other associated stimuli
that are presented during the flooding process, such as the setting, the trainer, or
the equipment that is used for restraint. In general, fears that have been exhibited
for a long duration do not respond well to flooding, and may actually be exacer-
mane, using punishment with a fearful dog or cat is often an underlying cause of
the development of fear aggression.
Chapter 10
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.  Compare and contrast behavioral signs of separation stress/anxiety in dogs
 and in cats.
2.
What are "pre-departure cues" and why are they an important consideration when
treating separation anxiety?
3.
 Define systematic desensitization and counter-conditioning.
4.
 Describe the role of avoidance behaviors in maintaining fearful responses in dogs
and cats.
0.
List management approaches that can be used to control separation anxiety
and fears in dog and cats.
REFERENCES ANDFURTHER READING
in its development and treatment. Vet Clin North Amer: Small Anim Pract, 33:324-344,
2003.
Bert B, Harms S, Langen B, Fink H. Clomipramine and selegilne: Do they influence
impulse control? J Vet Pharmacol Therap, 29:41-47, 2006.
Bradshaw JWS, McPherson JA, Casey RA, Larter IS. Aetiology of separation-related
behaviour in domestic dogs. Vet Rec, 151:43-46, 2002.
Clark Gl, Boyer WN. The effects of dog obedience training and behavioral counseling
upon the human-canine relationship. Appl Anim Behav Sci, 37:147-159, 1993.
Flannigan G, Dodman NH. Risk factors and behaviors associated with separation
anxiety in dogs. J Amer Vet Med Assoc, 219:460-466, 2001.
Frank D, Minero M, Cannas S, Palestrini C. Puppy behaviors when left home alone:
Goddard ME, Beilharz RG. Factor analysis of fearfulness in potential guide dogs.
Appl Anim Behav Sci, 12:253-265, 1984.
Griffith CA, Steigerwald ES, Buffington T. Effects of a synthetic facial pheromone
Horwiftz DF. Diagnosis and treatment of canine separation anxiety and the use of
Clomipramine hydrocholoride (Clomicalm). J Amer Anim Hosp Assoc, 36:107-109, 2000.
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
Jagoe A, Serpell J. Owner characteristics and interactions and the prevalence of
canine behaviour problems. Appl Anim Behav Sci, 47:31-42,1996.
King T, Hemsworth PH, Coleman GJ. Fear of novel and startling stimuli in domestic
dogs.ApplAnim Behav Sci, 82:45-64,2003.
Kng JN, Simpson BS, Overall KL, and others. Treatment of separation anxiety in
dogs with clomipramine: Results from a prospective, randomized, double-blind,
67:255-275, 2000.
King JN, Overall KL, Appleby BS, and others. Results of a follow-up investigation
to a clinical trial testing the efficacy of clomipramine in the treatment of separation
anxiety in dogs. ApplAnim Behav Sci, 89:233-242, 2004
Kronen PW, Ludders JVV, Erb HN, Moon PF, Gleed RD. A synthetic fraction of feline
facial pheromones calms but does not reduce struggling in cats before venous
catheterization. Vet Anesthesia Anaigesia, 33:258-265, 2006.
Landsberg G. The distribution of canine behavior cases at three behavior referral
practices. Vet Med, 86:1011-1018, 1991.
Lern M. Behavior modification and phamarcotherapy for separation anxiety in a
2-year-old pointer cross. Can Vet J, 43:220-222, 2002
Levine ED, Ramos D, Mills DS. A prospective study of two self-help CD based
Appeasing Pheromone for the treatment of firework fears in dogs (Canis familiaris).
Appl Anim Behav Sci, 105:311-329, 2007.
separation problems.ApplAnim Behay Sci,63:219-236, 1999
McCrave EA. Diagnostic criteria for separation anxiety in the dog. Vet Clinic North
Amer Small Anim Pract, 21:247-255, 1991
Mills D. Management of noise fears and phobias in pets. n Practice, 27L248-255, 2005
Parthasarathy V, Crowell-Davis SL. Relationship between attachment to owners and
1:109-120, 2006.
Podberscek AL, Hsu Y, Serpell JA. Evaluation of clomipramine as an adjunct
Vet Rec, 145:365-369, 1999.
Prato-Previde E, Custance DM, Spiezio C, Sabatine F. Is the dog-human relationship
BehaV, 140:225-254, 2003.
Schwartz S. Separation anxiety syndrome in cats: 136 cases (1991 - 2000). J Amer
Vet Med Ass0c, 220:1028-1033, 2002.
222:1526-1532, 2003.
Chapter 10
Shore ER, Riley ML, Douglas DK. Pet owners'behaviors and attachment to yard
versus house dogs. Anthroz0os, 19:325-334, 2006.
Takeuchi Y, Ogata N, Houpt KA, Scarlett JM. Differences in background and outcome
and fear related behavior in shelter dogs. Appl Anim Behav Sci, 93:295-38, 2005
Tuber DS, Hothersall D, Peters MF. Treatment of fears and phobias in dogs. Vet Clinics
North Amer, SmallAnim Pract, 12:607-623, 1982
Voith VL, Ganster D. Separation anxiety: Review of 42 cases.Abstract.Appl Anim
Behav Sci, 37:84-85, 1993.
Voith VL, Borchelt PL. Separation anxiety in dogs. In: The Domestic Dog: fts Evolution,
UK, pp. 124-139, 1995.
Voith VL, Goodloe L, Chapman B, Marder AR. Comparison of dogs presented for
Seattle, WA, July 18, 1993.
Voith VL, Wright JC, Danneman JP. Is there a relationship between canine behav-
ior problems and spoiling activities, anthropomorphism, and obedience training?
Appl Anim Behav Sci, 34:263-272, 1992.
dogs purchased from an animal rescue shelter. Appl Anim Behay Sci, 69:55-65
2000.
Footnotes
Amer, Smafl Anim Pract, 21:247-255, 1991.
2 Landsberg G. The distribution of canine behavior cases at three behavior referral
practices. Vet Med, 86:1011-1018, 1991.
3 Bradshaw JWS, McPherson JA, Casey RA, Larter IS. Aetiology of separation-related
behaviour in domestic dogs. Vet Rec, 151:43-46, 2002.
4 Voith V, Borchelt PL. Fears and phobias in companion animals. In: Readings in
pp.140-152, 1996.
 5 Wells DL, Hepper PG. Prevalence of behaviour problems reported by owners of dogs
purchased from an animal rescue shelter. Appl Anim Behav Sci, 69:55-65, 2000.
6 Voith VL, Ganster D. Separation anxiety: Review of 42 cases. Appl Anim Behav Sci,
37:84-85, 1993.
7 Voith VL, Goodloe L, Chapman B, Marder AR. Comparison of dogs presented for
behavior problems by source of dog. Paper presented at AVMA Annual Meeting.
Seattle, WA, July 18, 1993
276
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
8 Flannigan G, Dodman NH. Risk factors and behaviors associated with separation
anxiety in dogs. J Amer Vet Med Assoc, 219:460-466, 2001.
9Parthasarathy V, Crowell-Davis SL. Relationship between attachment to owners and
separation anxiety in pet dogs (Canis lupus familiaris). J Vet Behav: Clin Appl Res,
1:109-120, 2006.
10 Voith VL, Wright JC, Danneman JP. Is there a relationship between canine behavior
Anim Behav Sci, 34:263-272, 1992.
nnov A/tern Anim Exper, 4:162-164, 1990.
12 Voith VL, Borchelt PL. Separation anxiety in dogs. In: The Domestic Dog: Its
Cambridge, UK, pp. 124-139, 1995.
 13 Lund JD, Jorgensen MC. Behaviour patterns and time course of activity in dogs with
separation problems. Appl Anim Behav Sci, 63:219-236, 1999.
14 King JN, Simpson BS, Overall KL, and others. Treatment of separation anxiety in
dogs with clomipramine: Results from a prospective, randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, parallel-group, multi-center clinical trial. Appl Anim Behav Sci,
67:255-275, 2000.
15 Podberscek AL, Hsu Y, Serpell JA. Evaluation of clomipramine as an adjunct to
145:365-369, 1999.
counseling upon the human-canine relationship. Appl Anim Behav Sci,
37:147-159, 1993.
 17 Jagoe A, Serpell J. Owner characteristics and interactions and the prevalence of
canine behaviour problems. Appl Anim Behav Sci, 47:31-42, 1996.
18 Takeuchi Y, Ogata N, Houpt KA, Scarlett JM. Diferences in background and
outcome of three behavior problems of dogs. Appl Anim Behav Sci,
70:297-308, 2001.
CHAPTER
Problem Aggression in Dogs and Cats
 ggression problems are the most commonly reported behavior
problems in dogs and the second-most commonly reported problems
in cats.1.2 Between 3 and 5 million people in the United States are
 bitten by dogs each year and more than 2 million of these bites result
in serious injury.3.4 Children are bitten more often than adults and are particularly
susceptible to serious injury or fatality from dog bites (Sidebar 1). Aggression
between dogs is also a serious problem. This may occur between dogs who
aggression in cats includes biting and scratching that is directed toward people
or toward other cats. Aggression between cats varies from occasional hissing or
scufling between housemates to serious physical attacks against any cat that is
encountered. The most commonly reported form of inter-cat aggression occurs
toward people may include the owners, visitors, or both and has a number of
underlying causes.
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
Sidebar 1
PREVENTING DOG BITES -TEACHING CHILDREN
HOW TO BEHAVE WITH DOGS
ele uojezlelldsou pue Anjui snoas asneo peul sallg bop jo Auolew aul
inflicted upon children, and the most commonly bitten group are children
-ul jo saipns geiaaes 'sies lo sbop seillwejun Ag pou 'spual ol buibuoleg
dren often initiate contact and frequently interact inappropriately with dogs.
Behaviors such as pulling the dog's tail and ears, lying across the dog, hit-
ting the dog, and attempting to ride the dog are commonly reported. Other
studies examining the circumstances of dog bites to young children found
bop aul busyoaoid lae Anu snoui uano aa jo abe au lapun uaiplluo jeul
'buee sem ey allym bop ayl buiginisip se yons sioiaeyeg ajesun ybnoiy
teasing the dog, getting between a mother dog and her puppies, or attempt
ing to lift the dog.
Ag soaeyeg aedoddeui pue aesun jo eouepiae pue sper lo awoy urym
children, community dog-bite prevention efforts are being designed to target
Aaleudoidde aaeueg ol moy uaipllyo bulyoeel uo snooy pue uapllyo bunos
apnjoul awos :asn Aayl jeul spoulew aul ui Aea sweibold 'sbop piemol
demonstrations with a live and well-trained dog, others use photographs and
illustrations of dogs, and one innovative program has children interact with a
computer-generated cartoon dog. Regardless of the teaching approach that is
used, most programs teach details of the following general concepts:
● Gentleness and respect: Children are taught (it does not come naturally to them) to
tease, pull tails, lie upon, or attempt to ride a dog.
● Do not disturb: Children should never approach nor interfere with any dog who
is eating, sleeping, chewing on a bone or toy, confined in a car, tied out or loose
in a yard.
● Listen to the dog: Most programs include basic information describing canine body
(fearful, aggressive) dogs.
· Always ask first: Although most bites involve known dogs, children must still be taught
unsupervised dog approaches the child.)
Problem Aggression in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 11
Finally, because the number of children who are bitten by their own dog is
programs. Fiona Wilson's study found that many parents were unaware of the
dangers that their dog could pose to their children and the majority of parents
family dog. Despite a substantial number of previous dog bites, the parents
auea buidais allym paginisip jl ag ou pnom bop leyl peul pesallag ose
eyl aeoipui shnsal asayl 'plyo ayi Ag pabualeyo ueym lo Xol e bupiene
parent education about the previously described behaviors is as important as is
direct intervention with the children when designing bite-prevention programs.
De Keuster T, De Cock I, Moons CPH. Dog bite prevention: How a blue dog can help. FECAVA Symp,
pp. 136-138, 2005.
Jalango MR. On behalf of children: When teaching about pets, be certain to address safety issues. Early Chid
Educ , 33:289-292, 2006.
Wilson F, Dwyer F, Bennett PC. Prevention of dog bites: Evaluation of a brief educational intervention program
for preschool children. J Commun Psychol, 31:75-86, 2003.
Whenever problem aggression is reported in a dog or cat, the target of the
aggression and its severity, frequency, and potential for causing harm must
problem as aggression and to distinguish the pet's behavior from play or predatory
behaviors. Aggressive behavior in both dogs and cats can be classified according
to the target(s) and with respect to underlying motivation. As with all forms of
behavior problems, proper treatment and management relies upon correctly
detemmining the cause and triggering stimuli. An added concern with problem
during treatment. Treatment approaches for aggression must always include
or aggressive episodes. Because of the seriousness of aggression problems
(especially in dogs), this chapter is intended to provide an overview of the types
additional readings and for infommation regarding professional certification for
dealing with severe behavior problems.)
OVERVIEW OFAGGRESSION
or intends to inflict harm or injury to another individual (human or non-human).
However, this definition is very broad and would also include predation and
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
possibly some forms of rough or uninhibited play. A more precise definition
classifies aggression as a type of agonistic behavior characterized by arousal,
aversively either by atempting to avoid the aggressor or by responding in
defense. Agonistic behaviors refer to the set of behaviors that any animal uses
to resolve conflicts with another individual. Although agonistic behaviors are
often used synonymously with aggression, they include all of the behaviors that
can be used to solve conflicts, such as include flight and submission. Therefore,
conflict. The term arousa/ implies change to an emotional state that accompanies
the animal's intent to cause harm. For example, a dog who is playing expresses
an affective (emotional) state that is affiliative and does not have the intent to
adversely affect her playmate. Conversely, the emotional state of an aggressive
dog or cat differs both in its expression and its intent. It involves a set of
therefore includes threats (growling, lunging, or hissing) that may not actually
result in contact and excludes predation or play behaviors that can cause harm
but which do not involve the same emotional state.
iar people, or other animals is a serious behavior problem, it is important for
owners to understand that as a species-specific behavior pattern, aggression
 ss  s   s  d  
the advantages that these behaviors confer to individuals involved in conflict.
Indeed, if aggressive behaviors were completely maladaptive, they would not
survival and natural selection. Successful defensive behaviors that are aggres-
trait confers advantages in certain circumstances, this does not mean that trait is
never harmful to other individuals or that it is not maladaptive when expressed in
inappropriate circumstances.
Because aggressive behaviors are a part of every dog's and cat's behavioral
makeup, individuals cannot (and should not) be classified as being either
bumoys jo elgedeo sl eo pue bop Aeae ,'eaissaibbe-uou, o ,eassaibbe,
aggressive behavior. In addition, simply labeling an animal as "aggressive"
provides no information about the context in which the aggression occurs or
 the factors that trigger the behavior. Nor is such a label helpful in developing
an effective treatment program. Moreover, the acceptability of the behavior is
typically determined by evaluating the appropriateness of the situation in which
the animal demonstrates aggression, as well as the severity of the aggressive
Problem Aggression in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 11
response. Problem aggression can be classified according to several schemes.
These include dividing aggression according to the target (i.e. the owner,
strangers, or visitors to the home, familiar dogs/cats or unfamiliar dogs/cats)
the type of threat behaviors that the dog shows (offensive or defensive), or
determining if the behavior is learned or inherited. The most widely used method
au buuwelep uodn seai uoissaibbe welgoid buea pue buisoubep loy
function that the aggression has for the dog or cat. This functional classificatior
approach takes into account the context in which the aggression occurs as well
as the types of behavior patterns and body postures that the dog or cat exhibits.
For dogs and cats who live within human social groups, aggressive behaviors
that are classified as problem aggression are typically responses that are either
directed at inappropriate targets (owners, other pets), are triggered in situations
that are not acceptable, or are expressed at a level of intensity that is dangerous.
When the stimulus that triggers the behavior seems to be abnormally subtle
or unreasonable or when the dog's aggressive threshold is unusually low, the
aggression, the pet is showing a normal response to the situation or has learned
problem behaviors, owners must understand that the line that they may draw
but may not be quite so obvious to their dog or cat. For example, an owner
someone approaches, in the belief that this will promote desirable protective
behaviors. However, when the same dog rushes and nips at someone coming
into the house, suddenly the dog's behavior is classified as a problem. Similarly.
an owner who teaches her kitten to chase her feet in play may suddenly decide
ambush family members and inflict painful bites on their ankles.
PROBLEM AGGRESSIONIN DOGS
and physical injury are rare and conflicts between animals are either avoided
altogether or resolved through highly ritualized species-specific communication
signals (see Chapter 3 for a complete discussion). When these signals are
bites do cccur and have several possible causes. Because aggression exists
on a continuum and because one dog may show several types of aggression
in diferent contexts, classifying aggression can be difficult. An individual
including genetics, neurochemical factors, the living environment, and prior
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
aggression as dominance-related, possessive, teritorial, defensive (fear-related),
or pain-induced. Within these categories, human-directed aggression includes
dogs who aggress toward their owner or toward visitors or unfamiliar people,
and dog-directed aggression includes dogs who fight with other dogs in their
unfamiliardogs.
Dominance-Related Aggression
during competitive interactions over the control of valled resources or in
response to a perception of challenges to the dog's social status. Aggression may
be directed toward humans or toward other dogs (intra-species), but is typically
displayed toward individuals with whom the dog has an established social
relationship (family members or other dogs in the home). Dominance-related
Ayneu jeioos jo ebe eyl pe uibeg ol payodai Aensn si ll bumg patgyuun
However, females and neutered dogs of both sexes are capable of developing
dominance aggression. There is some evidence that spaying may result in an
jo subis bumous Apeae alem oum sauey u uoissabbe eoueuwop ui eseaiou
uaid mm poui ed aewey e buideey peu ssabhns jou op pue uoissaibbe
dominance-related aggression.
Dominant Behavior: It is very important to make the distinction between a dog
a dog who is showing dominance-related aggression. As discussed in Chapter 3
(pp. 72-75), the popularization and overuse of the concept of dominance in dogs
postures comprise a normal and necessary set of social signals that dogs use to
communicate confidence and to maintain control over valued resources. There
fident body postures and rarely show deference or appeasing body postures. In
a multiple-dog home, they are more likely to preempt toys and choice sleeping
and maintain peaceful and affectionate relationships with their owner and with
Problem Aggression in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 11
reinforces deferential behaviors and teaches control exercises prevents pushy
and attention-seeking behaviors. Training confident dogs to readily give valued
resources to their owner and to comply with basic obedience commands (sit,
of assertive behaviors to aggression.
Human-Directed Dominance Aggression: Dominance aggression that is
directed toward the owner or other human family members typically occurs in
situations that involve a challenge to the dog's social status or to his control
over a valued resource. lypical provoking situations include disturbing the dog
while he is sleeping, attempting to restrain the dog for grooming, standing over
or abruptly hugging the dog, or physically reprimanding the dog. Attempts to
aa ose Aew bop aun woy Ame suoissessod seuo o pooy 'sauog 'sol es
an aggressive response. (Note: Although possessive aggression is often seen
in dogs with dominance-related aggression, possessive threats alone are not
diagnostic of dominance-related aggression. See "possessive aggression,"
pp. 289-290). Because dominance-related aggression is highly individualized,
owners are often very proficient at predicting the circumstances that will evoke an
aggressive response in their dog. Some owners describe the dog as "becoming
uoissabbe uesaid ol lepo ui ybnoue Ayoinb
Learned behavior is an important component of dominance-related aggression.
A dog who first shows an aggressive response to a situation that he perceives
to be threatening usually warns with a growl or snarl. Most owners, being quick
appropriate and wise from the owner's viewpoint, serves to reinforce the dog's
up his feet to cut nails causes his owner to stop handing his feet, a desirable
outcome for the dog. Similarly, if the owner stops approaching when the dog
growls while holding a stolen sock, the dog learns to use a grow to maintain
control over the valued resource. Similarly and somewhat paradoxically, the use
aggression. When an owner attempts to punish a dog for dominance-related
aggression, the dog will almost invariably intensify his aggressive response. For
example, a dog who growls when asked to move is Lusing normal canine ofensive
signals to communicate an unwillingness to comply and a threat of aggression.
If the owner responds to the dog's growl with physical punishment, the dog
learns that growling did not have the desired outcome (being allowed to stay
where he was). The next time that the dog is asked to move, he escalates the
growl to snarling and eventually to biting. The owner must understand that the
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
dog is aready challenging the owner with the growl and has no reason not to
escalate this behavior if challenged. Ater several repetitions of this scenario, the
dog will preemptively bite when the owner attempts to move him. If previous
the use of punishment is neither effective nor safe as a treatment approach when
dealing with dominance-related aggression (see treatment next page).
Dominance-Related Aggression between Dogs: As discussed in Chapter 3,
dominant and subordinate interactions serve principally to maintain peace
and support social cohesion. Dogs use deference and appeasement signals
Contrary to the highly popularized (and incorrect) version of dominance, social
u 'subis aouaejep Ag pauune Aiwou si shop jo dnoib e uym snis
subtle and non-aggressive and serve to maintain access to desired resources
are often fluid and highly context-specific. Although problems certainly occur and
siaoo ol alge ae sawoy bop-aidnw ui buy sbop Auew 'snoes a aq ueo
peacefully with no or minimal agonistic interactions and are often strongly bonded
to one another (see Chapter 3, pp. 72-75).
Just as the terms dominance and dominance aggression are often misapplied
when referring to interactions between humans and dogs, so too are they
cause of aggression between dogs who live in the same home is most often
either fear or anxiety, resource guarding (possessive aggression), or redirected
aggression during periods of arousal or excitement. The most common situations
in which familiar dogs fight are when competition occurs over food, toys, or
access to the owner, and during occasions that stimulate high arousal or
excitement. Although status may be involved in these situations, it is incorrect to
assume that status conflicts are the underlying cause whenever dogs fight. True
(often the younger) repeateoly attempts to control the behavior and movement of
another dog in the home through offensive aggressive displays. These challenges
or leaving the home, and over the use of toys, food, and resting places. Most
or all of these contexts must be present for a diagnosis of dominance-related
aggression. In addition, the aggressing dog will have an offensive threat body
posture characterized by holding the tail high, with a stiff, forward-directed body
posture. The dog may attempt to place his head over the shoulders of the other
Problem Aggression in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 11
bop mau e ueum snooo ose ueo pouo (sa aau oi auo sewue paaau
is introduced into a home or when an older dog becomes infirm and a younger.
more assertive dog shows increasingly dominant behaviors.
Treatment of Dominance-Related Aggression: The goals of treatment for
o Aieoyoeds peoel eq isnw weiboid juewea eul 'sbop leuo pue eldoed
s op aul uaym uoissabbe awaxe jo seso ul laumo aul jo sagede pu
are highly unpredictable, the owners must consider their ability to keep others
safe and the likelihood of a successful treatment. Every dog is unique, and
owners differ in their motivation and ability to modify the dog's environment anc
implement a consistent training program.
modify the dog's daily schedule and living environment to avoid all situations
and stimuli that have the potential to provoke an offensive threat. For example, if
the dog growls when asked to get off the owner's bed, he is no longer allowed
access to the bedroom. If handling or grooming elicits threats, these proce-
dures are discontinued until they can be reintroduced using counter-conditioning 
and desensitization exercises (see next page). Regardless of whether the dog
resource-guards, all toys, chew bones, and food bowls are picked up and placed
bop eyi buyseal g paouoo si sioopino eyl ol sseooy 'yoeai s bop eul jo no
before approaching the door and teaching a sit-stay or wait command prior to
aoy ey ui ea uaym peai buoi e ol payone si bop au Aeui 'soopno buo
and is never allowed off-lead when outdoors.
classes that are available to pet owners cannot adequately address dominance
previous obedience training. Therefore, training a reliable sit, down, stay, and
come is one of the most important components of a behavior modification
dominance-related aggression because using this exercise allows the owner to
shape and positively reinforce deferential body positions and calm and relaxed be-
haviors. It is imperative that only non-confrontational techniques that use positive
complete instructions). In addition to the sit-stay and down-stay exercises,
the dog must also be trained to come when called, to wait at the door, and to
Section 3
UNDERSTANDINGAND SOLVINGCOMMONBEHAVIORPROBLEMS
sit-stay or down-stay prior to gaining access to any valued resources such as
  si s p o od   o a 
tion, and other valued resources are available as reinforcements for calm, non-
threatening, and well-controlled behavior. (Some trainers and behaviorists refer to
this concept as the "nothing in life is free" or "NILIF" procedure; Sidebar 2.) The
behaviors when they are offered by the dog.
Sidebar 2
GENERAL GUIDELINES FORNOTHING IN LIFE
IS FREE" PROCEDURE (NILIF)
The general premise of behavior modification programs for dogs who are
demonstrating pushy behaviors or dominance-related threats is to change the
ui auo ol ahualleyo pue polluoo jo auo wo laumo aul y djysuoelai s, bop
which the owner has control over all resources and in which the dog readily
offers deferential behaviors for reinforcement. This includes removing the
axa eouaipego buiooeid pue bulyoeel 'seoinosal penea le oi ssaooe s, bop
this program include the following:
the collar and an attached leash or long line while free in the home and while loose in
a yard.
·Obedience training: Control obedience commands of sit, down, stay, come, give, and
leave it should be taught and practiced several times daily in various rooms of the
home. This training is lifelong, not just during treatment for behavior problems
avoided. The dog is trained to come when called from different parts of the home, and
from resting areas using the attached line (the owner should never call the dog from
owner turns and walks away, saying nothing.
dog as positive reinforcers for calm and deferential behaviors (response to sit, down,
stay, wait, come when called).
● Feeding time training: The dog is trained to sit and stay prior to all meals. After puting
the food bowl down, the dog is allowed to eat undisturbed. when the dog is finished,
the owner calls the dog away from the bowl, reinforces with a food treat, and takes the
Problem Aggression in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 11
287
· Space management: The dog's access to desirable sleeping areas and to any spots
that were protected is blocked for several weeks. When the dog has been trained to
reliably respond to obedience commands, the dog is allowed limited access and is
line for come when called, again, always staying six feet or more away from the dog).
All correct responses are positively reinforced.
· Positively reinforce all deferential and calm behaviors: The sit or down command
Finally, any undesirable behaviors that the dog offers are never reinforced. For ex
ample, if the dog constantly seeks attention by staring at or pawing the owner, the
owner simply gets up and walks away. Several minutes later, the owner may call
sue leumo au 'peal pue eoo e uo pnd ol sdwae laumo aul uaym sunow bop
the interaction by walking away. Another attempt should include the sequence of
coming when called, followed by sit, and then the collar and lead are put on the
with the dog (i.e. confrontations are always avoided). Finally, counter-conditioning
and systematic desensitization are Lsed to re-introduce handling and other cir
reintroduced during down-stays, during which gentle touching is reinforced. The
brush can be reintroduced and brushing paired with food treats (classical condi-
tioning; see Chapter 4, pp. 82-87). Every situation in which the dog has shown
 threatening behavior must be identified and reintroduced using counter-conditioning
and desensitization. If there are some contexts that present a very high risk of
aggression or that are not important to the owner to train, management must then
be directed toward preventing the dog from being in those situations
all aggressive displays between dogs and positively reinforces appropriate and
of the dogs are intact males, castration is recommended. This usually results
in a decrease in the level of aggression in most males, but not all dogs respond
noticeably. The primary rule that owners must follow is to correctly identify the
and reinforce that dog. The message that the owner works to communicate is
that pushy and obnoxious behaviors such as stealing toys or bones, shouldering
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
dogs out of the way, or preventing access to the owner for attention wilnot be
reinforced or tolerated (Box 11.1). Conversely, calm, non-threatening behaviors
and compliance with control commands (sit, down, stay, come) are consistently
they comply and withheld if one or both do not. The owner does not reprimand
the dogs if they do not comply with the sit request; she simply gets up and walks
away from them. Management techniques involve the removal of valued toys
and bones to prevent resource-guarding conflicts between dogs (see possessive
aggression for a complete discussion). Owners must understand that treating
inter-dog aggression within a home is not about imposing some preconceived
idea of rank or attempting to identify an "alpha" dog and support that dog. To
Box 11.1
 TEACHING OLIVER AND BAXTER TO SHARE
Description of problem: Sally Sloan is the owner of two neutered male Labrador retrievers, Oliver (twoyears
old) and Baxter (four years old). The dogs have lived together for 18 months (since Sally adopted Oliver). Alithough
(Sally says that she has never intervened when Oliver steals or is pushy because a friend at work told her it is best
to let dogs work these issues out for themselves.) Unfortunately, although Baxter allows Oliver to take his bones,
says that Baxter increasingly hides under her desk to avoid Oliver, and avoids coming over for peting and attention
therules that Sally followswith her dogs:
reinforcement (food treats, praise, and petting) is used for all training.
Problem Aggression in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 11
being called to come, and prior to all interactions with Sally. If they do not comply, Sally simply turns and walks
 s om  n sn  s    m  s   s  s
rapidly and who is more calm and controlled. She reinforces both dogs for complying (i.e. she does not attempt
to reinforce a presumed status order between the two dogs). If Oliver attempts to block Baxter's access to Sally
she simply stands up and walks out of the room, calls both dogs to her, tells them to sit, and reinforces both for
sitting before petting.
+ Management of valued resources: Oliver must be taught that he is not allowed to steal toys, bones, or food
that Oliver complies, Sally initially attaches a lead to Oliver for this training
all rough play. Both dogs then do a short down-stay until they are calm. They learn that rough play leads to a
loss of play opportunities.
allowed to approach each other's bowls while eating.
Outcome: After several weeks, Sally reports that Baxter and Oliver are playing gently together and that Oliver is
better behaved, both with Baxter and - an added benefit - with Sally. She plans to continue with their training and
twodogs.
Refractory Cases: Unfortunately, not all cases of dominance-related
dogs in the home, and the limitations of the owner, must be considered. Some
training program is used and when the owners are dedicated and consistent.
In other cases, the owners may be unwiling or unable to commit to a complete
behavior modification program, or to live in a situation in which the dog may
yns suodo 'sesio yons ul 'sleyo ol no Awey eul ol ebup e ag ol enuuoo
as carefully placing the dog in another home or euthanasia must be considered
with the behavior modification program. A veterinary behaviorist should always be
consulted if considering adjunctive drug therapy.
Possessive Aggression
Possessive aggression is often used synonymously with the term "resource
guarding" and refers to aggressive displays that occur during competition for
valued resources. Highly valued resources for dogs include toys, chew bones,
their food bowl, and access to the owner. In addition, some dogs fixate or
unusual items such as pieces of tissue, articles of clothing, or even the television
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
remote control. Guarding these unusual items usually signifies learned behavior
associated with a history of object-stealing by the dog. When an owner has
reacted by chasing or harshly reprimanding the dog for stealing something, the
dog may learn to respond by guarding the stolen item.
Possessive aggression may be offensive or defensive in nature. Dogs who
their owner (or another dog) with the item and demonstrate offensive threat
postures when challenged. Conversely, dogs who are fearful or anxious when
they are attempting to maintain control of a possession often run and hide with
demonstrate defensive possessive aggression usualy have a history of being
physically punished for stealing or guarding forbidden items. In some of these
cases, the motivation for aggression may have components of both offensive and
defensive threat. Some authors refer to this as "conflict" aggression, because
Aew (uawysiund adioue aul esnoeg) snoaau o snoxue ae oum sbop
show ambiguous signals when they aggress. For example, a dog who wants to
maintain control over a possession but has been punished or teased in the past
when guarding. Finally, food bowl aggression can be classified as a subcategory
of possessive aggression in dogs who guard their food bowl but show no other
Treatment for Possessive Aggression: First, all objects that the dog guards or
any and all future access that the dog has to these objects. Basic obedience
commands are taught or reviewed (sit/down/stay/come) and the dog is also
woy uejan ot pue puewwoo ,aaib, eun buisn suoissassod ysinbua ol paune
picking up objects using the "leave it" command (see Chapter 9, pp. 218-219).
Both "give" and “leave it'" must be shaped, starting with items that are considered
by the dog to be of low value rather than items that the dog has a history
of guarding. As discussed previously, operant conditioning using positive
other dogs in the family, but not with people, both management of the home
between dogs (Box 11.1).
Food bowl aggression is often treated as a special case because it frequently
Occurs independently of other forms of aggression. In addition, food bowl 
Problem Aggression in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 11
practice this form of resource guarding during mealtimes each day. Therefore,
when food bowl aggression is reported, the owners need an immediate plan to
prevent additional opportunities for the dog to aggress while still allowing the
sa pooy anea-ybiy leao ssaibbe oym sboa :alon) bop eul peey ol jeumo
oaid awes au busn paean are spooy uewny leyo lo sdeos algel se yons
as that used for other forms of possessive aggression.) Some dogs demonstrate
food when someone approaches or stiffen slightly as they continue to eat. More
bop eun ueym nooo uoissaibbe jo slesel snoebuep Aieueiod pue snoes
freezes over the bowl, stops eating, growls, and bites or attempts to bite when
a family member approaches
bowls may be showing either offensive or defensive threat postures. Defensive
aggression often develops as a result of an owner frequently removing the dog 's
food bowl while he is eating, with the misguided intent of preventing food bow
aggression. The use of this inappropriate technique teaches the dog that a
person approaching his bowl predicts something aversive, such as the chance
of losing his meal or being teased while he is eating. Unfortunately, this sets the
buee si bop eyl ellym mog s bop eyl ul puey seuo ym js ol sl eoape buom
(As an analogous example, not many people would appreciate having another
person's hand in their plate during dinnertime and most would react adversely,
not positively, to such an experience.) For the dog, this often serves to increase,
not decrease, anxiety about their food bowl. Finally, a history of being physically
punished for mild food guarding behaviors can cause aggression to escalate and
lead to more severe defensive threats.
Management techniques are the simplest approach for treating mild food bowl
guarding. The dog is meal-fed two or three meals a day in a secure room with a
closed door or gate and is trained to sit/stay prior to getting his meal. After be
ing released to eat, the dog is allowed to eat his meal without intemuption. When
the dog has finished eating, he is released from the room and taken outdoors for
elimination. while the dog is outdoors, the bowl is picked up and put away. When
food guarding is directed toward other dogs in the home, the same procedure
is followed. Each dog is taken outdoors separately to prevent excitable or redi-
these management techniques to avoid triggers and prevent aggressive displays
buunsue loy pue mog pooy eu eau Aeixue s bop eu buonpan loy aenbape an
owners do not wish to comply with management approaches, additional training
using counter-conditioning and desensitization can be used to reduce food bowl
guarding behaviors (Sidebar 3).
Section 3
UNDERSTANDINGAND SOLVINGCOMMONBEHAVIORPROBLEMS
Sidebar 3
PROGRAM FOR DOGS SHOWING FOOD BOWL
AGGRESSION
uoedioue pue ainseald ol Aaixue woi lmog poof ley bulyoeodde uosied
Once this change has been initiated, systematic desensitization is added
to the program to acclimate the dog to gradually closer proximities to
aueyo oi weiboid ajes pue nyssaoons e lof slueuodwoo oml ayl 'aldoed
a dog's response to her food bowl include both counter-conditioning and
desensitization. Counter-conditioning: The dog learns that the presence of a
dog learns (gradually) that the proximity of a person does not pose a threat
and not allowed to free-feed):
·Select a safe distance: Prior to the first training meal, the owner selects a spot in the
kitchen (or room where the dog is fed) that is far enough from the dog's feeding spot
and calm manner; no freezing, wolfing food, or growling). The owner places a chair at
that spot.
● Dividing dinner: The dog's ration of food for the meal is divided in half. One half is
placed in his bowl and the second half is poured into a plastic container. The owner
has the dog sit-stay prior to receiving his bowl. After placing the bowl on the floor, the
owner, carrying the container with the food, walks to the chair and sits down.
The owner says nothing as the dog eats his meal.
·Come to me for more: As the owner sees that the dog is finishing, he stays seated,
and calls the dog to him. When the dog comes, the owner requests a sit and positively
reinforces come/sit with one or two pieces of food from the container.
● Return to bowl: The owner then calmly stands, walks back to the dog's bowl, and pours
The owner then returns to the chair and remains seated until the dog finishes eating.
· One more "come when called": When the dog has finished eating, the owner again
calls the dog to him,reinforces with the food treats and then leaves the room (with the
outdoors or out of the room.
The dog must be showing relaxed and happy behaviors upon returning to the owner
and when the owner places the food in the bowl, before proceeding. (This is of utmost
views the owner approaching the bowl as something positive, not as an aversive.)
Problem Aggression in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 11
● Reducing distance (the moving chair): When the dog's behavior indicates
excitement and pleasure upon seeing the owner rise from the chair to place the
  s  o    ae   n   o  
inches closer to the dog's bowl each day.
   t     i s  o    m
dog and the dog is not guarding her food, the training is successful. To be safe and
to show dogs the respect they deserve, owners should not touch, pet, or otherwise
harass their dog during mealtime.
Territorial Aggression
When humans or animals approach their home or yard, many dogs show
orienting behaviors and bark but do not become aggressive. This is normal
behavior and only becomes a problem when the dog becomes uncontrollable
or aggressive. Areas that dogs are most likely to consider their home territory
si bop eul aeum seae leuo Agissod pue seo 'pes 'asnoy seumo eul epnou
valuable resource that must be protected and competitively maintained. Territorial
 ss   s s    so  s
aggression. For fearful or nervous dogs, territorial aggression is a learned behav-
ior that has proven to be effective in driving off intruders and reducing feelings
socialized dogs who have been confined to a small area or tied to a doghouse.
Treatment for Territorial Aggression: First, the dog 's access to guarded areas
Aa pausldwoooe si siul nwns bumole lie ol ansodxe juesaid ot peosei s!
simply bringing the dog into the house or changing the way in which the dog is
guards are off-limits to the dog. This is an important component of treatment
that the dog has unsupervised access to guarded areas. A unique characteristic
of teritorial behavior is that it is always immediately reinforced when the intended
leave. As the mailman departs, the dog's agitation decreases, thus reinforcing the
barking and growling behaviors
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
Counter-conditioning and desensitization are effective techniques for use with
is "come when called" and sit. For dogs who rush doors, some owners prefer
to teach the dog to go to a bed or mat in another room. Target training is used
     6      s  
command must be trained in the absence of triggers for a teritorial response
before attempting to desensitize the dog to eliciting stimuli such as approach of
from the door or window or from the fence in the yard when the dog is calm
and not aroused. In addition, practicing the response in the absence of triggers
must continue to be used throughout the dog 's life to prevent the owner's
approaching the door. When the dog 's response is reliable, a desensitization
program is introduced, starting with the approach of family members or friends
to the guarded area. As the dog begins to associate the presence of visitors
with responding to the counter-command and receiving positive reinforcement
for that response, the stimuli can be gradually intensified. As with all types of
desensitization programs the intensity of the stimulus (e.g. visitors entering the
home or approaching the yard) must never be introduced at a level that elicits an
aggressive response.
A second component to training involves counter-conditioning the dog 's
emotional response to greeting visitors. The arrival of the owners or visitors at the
arrives, the dog is asked to come and sit (or to go to his mat), and the owner
provides very high-value treats to both reinforce the “come when called" and
to counter-condition the dog 's emotional response to a visitor. The goal is that
experiences (treats, petting). Initially, the owner (not the visitor) provides all of the
reinforcement for quiet and controlled behavior. As the dog's behavior improves,
the owner and the visitor can provide treats. However, a very common mistake
that owners make with this training is to attempt to have visitor provide treats to
a dog who is already aroused, barking, and possibly even aggressive. This is at
to provide treats once training and behavior modification have changed the dog's
response to the visitor's presence to calm and friendly behaviors. Just as with
other types of counter-conditioning, if a threat or aggressive episode is triggered
by mistake, the owner must consider that training session a loss, remove the
Problem Aggression in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 11
strong reinforcement history for teritorial aggression, the goal may be simply
to decrease the dog's aggression or to teach the dog to move to another room
whenever visitors arrive.
Fear-Related Aggression
Fear is a basic emotional state in which an animal responds to an aversive
stimulus by either attempting to escape (flight) or by becoming defensive (fight).
In all animals, fear and its attendant behaviors serve to protect the individual
fear-related aggression occur when a dog is approached by an unfamiliar person
or dog. Body postures and facial expressions of fear include lowered body
position and head, tucked tail, wide eyes (whale eye), retracted ears, and panting.
When a fearful dog becomes defensively aggressive, he will retract his lips to
show his teeth in a snarl (Figure 11.1). Although there are some components of
this posture that are similar to submissive body postures, a major difference is
that dogs who are fearful or defensive have widened eyes (not narrowed), usually
Kau se afe aleum, e mous lo) buyoeoidde si oum bop lo uosled aul 1e azeb
lean away), and show piloerection. In contrast, dogs who are showing submission
have narrowed, "squinty"' eyes, do not have piloerection, and are initiating contact
and interaction (i.e. they want to greet). Because some submissive and friendly
dogs show a "greeting grin" that displays their teeth and resembles a snarl, it is
not uncommon for people to misinterpret these signs.
figure 11.1  Defensive threat facial expression
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
socialization to people, other dogs, or novel situations, or prior hammful or
abusive experiences. When dogs are initially exposed to a fear-inducing
situation, most attempt to flee or freeze in place. Aggression is typically used
only if the dog perceives himself to be unable to escape from the aversive
stimulus. For some dogs this perception may occur while on a leash or when
tied out or confined to a yard. Because an aggressive response usually has
the immediate effect of terminating the impending interaction, the aggressive
behaviors are immediately reinforced. In other words, a dog who growls and
sueal lau pemoi buuunu bop e pe lo labuens busyoeoidde ue pe sdeus ine
that an aggressive display stops the approach of the unfamiliar dog or person
After several repetitions of this experience, a dog who is fearful starts to show
aggressive body postures and vocalizations preemptively, before the person or
dog is in close proximity. For example, an owner may relate that his dog barks
aggressively whenever she sees an unleashed dog approaching and will growl
or bite as the dog rushes up to greet. This occurs because the dog has learned
that these behaviors and body postures are effective in preventing exposure
to the frightening stimulus. Because the dog's fear is allayed, the dog never
has the opportunity to learn that the approaching dog may actually be
Treatment for Fear-Related Aggression: Treatment programs for fear-related
(see Chapter 10, pp. 269-272). Counter-conditioning is the primary tool that
is used and, if possible, a desensitization program is added. The first phase of
behavior modification involves counter-conditioning the dog to sit and look to the
"look," and the dog is consistently reinforced with food treats for all friendly and
calm behaviors. It is also recommended that the dog become accustomed to
wearing a head-halter training collar to allow better control of the dog's head and
to aid with keeping the dog focused on the owner during training. All of the initial
feels calm and comfortable. When the dog has been trained to maintain a sit-stay
and to look toward the owner in these non-threatening situations, a standard
program of counter-conditioning is started (see Chapter 10, pp. 269-272 for a
complete description of counter-conditioning for fear-related behavior problems).
When aggression is a component of a dog's fear response, it is of utmost
importance that the desensitization proceeds at a rate at which the dog never
aggression depends upon the length of time that the dog has exhibited the
Problem Aggression in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 11
behavior, the intensity of the aggressive response, and the commitment and
ability of the owner to prevent aggressive episodes during the treatment period.
Most dogs show improvement and many begin to accept and enjoy interactions
with new people. However, many nervous dogs continue to have episodes of fear
or aggression throughout their lives. In all cases, careful household management
ag pouueo jeyt gnwns buuebbu ol pesodxe buieg woy bop eyi bunuaaaid pue
Fear-Related Aggression toward Unfamiliar Dogs: Aggression between
m e buunp peal-uo si bop auo ueum Auowwoo jsow sinooo shop jewejun
and is rapidly approached by another dog who is running loose, or between
ae oym sbop jo sieumg yed bop lo peA e ui esool ae oym sbop peal-o oml
defensively aggressive toward strange dogs often report that their dog is typically
either friendly or aloof toward other dogs when off-lead, but becomes immediately
nervous and shows preemptive threat postures when on-lead or when forced to
greet in a small confined area. Aggressive responses in dogs who are on-lead
toward uncontrolled dogs are so common that it has been erroneously labeled
who has punished the dog for growling or aggressing when another dog appears.
Athough the use of strong aversives such as collar corrections, yelling and hitting
saop i! 'paleisluwpe sl ll ew eul ie esuodsan aaissaibbe s bop e ssaiddns ueo
not change the dog's motivation for aggressing and actually makes the problem
dog, the dog is now fearful of both the approaching dog and the impending
punishment from the owner.
suppressing a behavior and changing a dog 's response to an unpleasant stimulus
(i.e. solving the problem). In the case of fear-related behaviors toward other dogs,
ausse ui ae pue bop buyoodde au woy m Aay ao ouuo saun te
e yons un bop e bujysjund 'snoueu weun buyew sl oym bop e Aq .paleuoo,
situation will clearly not teach the dog to be calm and friendly to approaching
dogs and certainly will not change her perception of other dogs as a threat.
Unfortunately, because harsh physical punishment will suppress a behavior as
not to be confused with a dog learning not to respond to an aversive stimulus.
Usually, all that one has to do is ask how many times the dog has been punished
op aul pue) san eidnw sl lemsue aut ll 'sbop jauo pemoi buissabbe oy
is still aggressing when other dogs approach), then this is clearly informatior
that the use of punishment is not effectively changing the dog's behavior or
emotional response.
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
Treatment for Fear-Related Aggression toward Unfamiliar Dogs: Dogs
who are defensively aggressive toward unfamiliar dogs may have a history of
the problem has occurred several times, the owner understandably becomes
emotions are communicated directly to the dog and cause a vicious cycle of
increased nervousness and defensive behaviors. Treatment involves using
counter-conditioning to change the dog 's emotional response to the sight of an
approaching dog while at the same time protecting the dog from forced contact
with an unfamiliar dog. Counter-conditioning a connection between "dog and
high-value treats" is used to change the dog's reaction to the sight of another
dog. The dog is then gradually desensitized to dogs who approach more closely
(Box 11.2). Although many dogs who are defensively aggressive toward unfamiliar
dogs can be conditioned to react calmly and to "look to their owner" without
being rushed by unfamiliar dogs. Just like people, many dogs value their personal
space and for the owner to have an expectation of comfort when an unfamiliar
dog forces contact is unreasonable.
Box 11.2
TEACHING RANGER TO TOLERATE UNFAMILIAR DOGS
shelter as a neglect case when he was found tied out to a dog house with inadequate shelter and water.Peter and
Mark are a volunteerfoster home and initially took in Ranger to foster because he was showing increasing levels
after three weeks. Ranger is very affectionate and friendly. He has never shown any aggression toward either
Ranger does not guard his toys or his food bowl, is house-trained, and other than lacking some basic manners, is
a delight to live with. Peter and Mark have one other dog in their home, Lucy. Because they knew Ranger's history
was consistently relaxed around Lucy, they carefully introduced supervised "free time" between the two dogs.
The two dogs are now completely comfortable with each other, sleep in the same room, and play often.
Description of problem: Ranger continues to show aggression toward dogs he does not know when out walking.
bop au y ueae 'yoeoidde oi senuuo bop aul h Apnol yueq ol suibaq ay buuoeoidde bop hauoue sees lebuet H
in a friendly manner. He also notices that if the second dog is off-lead and uncontrolled, Ranger's behavior is much
worse than if the otherdog is on-lead.
Problem Aggression in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 11
· Training an alternate response: Ranger is fitted with a halter-type collar and is trained to respond to the com-
side of the walkway and to position themselves between Ranger and an approaching dog. (These exercises
(bop buyoeoudde ue jo jopipaid e se ,yool, pueuuon
cues him with “look, sit' (spoken in a relaxed and happy voice), and provides multiple very-high-value treats as
tinues his walk.
·Prevention: If the situation arises that a dog approaches too quickly or Roger and Mark do not respond
quickly as possible and try again next time.
o se os yued ayi ui bulm uaym nyao ae pue '(aaa) yued bop e ol labuey eyel ou op Aayl peal-uo sbon
dabuey uo duni pue dn ysnu sbop buiaey pioae
manage this to prevent unwanted interactions indefinitely
sdeal 'shop leuo seusnu oum bop e jeun no juiod oi sueodwi Men ose si1l
Sl eoueleqnxe ui bop yeuoue snesse Aeaishyd jo 'bueae ui Aipm weu uodn
are pushy, obnoxious dogs who have not learned proper canine communication
signals. Normal canine greeting behaviors include sniffing of the face or groin
region (often using a side presentation), and do not include one dog leaping upon
"oh, my dog is just friendly' are at fault for allowing their dog to harass other
dogs and for not training their dog for control around other people and dogs.
However, because one cannot control the behavior of other people and because
owners to keep their dogs safe and to avoid unpleasant encounters with loose
a loose dog who is not under control is to immediately turn and walk in the
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
figure 11.2 Two unfamiliar dogs greeting - face sniffing
figure 11.3 Two unfamiliar dogs greeting - side presentation
and snifing
opposite direction, completely ignoring the approaching dog. (If necessary,
turning and throwing a handful of treats toward the dog can effectively stall a
loose dog's approach.) This prevents an unpleasant encounter for the fearful dog
aul jo jeumo aul ol (ijuewusund aaebeu) abessaw e spues osje Aingedoy pue
uncontrolled dog that they are behaving inconsiderately and need to control their
ueo sleumo 'bop asool e wouy Aeme jeb ol alqissodwi s l ueym seseo ul bop
'waun puueq Aeis pue js ot bop liaun unen Aaun yom u! ,eis-is Aajes, e asn
while they block the oncoming dog's access to the dog. Finally, it should go
without saying that dogs who are defensively aggressive should never be taken
to dog parks.
Ineffective Treatments for Aggression Problems in Dogs
Physical punishment has been shown to be ineffective in the treatment of all
problem. Pain has long been recognized as an elicitor of aggression in animals
who are both offensively and defensively motivated. Similarly, using physical
punishment when a dog shows aggression toward another dog functions to
escalate the ongoing conflict between the two dogs and can result in redirected
aggression toward the owner. Although owners must of course break up a
fight, and yelling loudly is often the best way to do this, breaking up a fight with
punishment should not be confused with solving the problem or changing the
relationship between the two dogs. Finally, punishing a dog who is defensively
aggressive only adds to the dog's fear and lack of trust - certainly not an
outcome that is compatible with reduced aggression. Indeed, many cases of
severe fear-related aggression are caused by the use of excessive punishment
when the dog initially showed a defensive threat posture. Case studies of
Problem Aggression in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 11
aam bop aul eudiosp oi sidwee peun poda ose sbop aassaibbe-ueuwop
a common cause of escalated aggression and bites to the owner or others in
should be immediately discontinued. They are ineffective, inhumane, and unsafe
for the owner to support the "dominant" dog. It should be evident by now that
this label does not reflect reality for most social groups of dogs living together in
homes. By subscribing to a belief in strict hierarchical relationships between dogs.
owners are tempted to force their dogs into rigid and unsustainable roles which
and feline aggression, notes that most clients who had been advised to “support
the dominant dog" caused the aggression between the two dogs to escalate.?
al ym eoueuwop jo lege e ubisse Aisnoeuone sheumo esnoeg sueddey su
or no evidence of support it. Even when one dog in the home is showing the
it is questionable whether supporting an overly assertive dog who is bullying
other dogs can be effective at reducing aggression between dogs. If the intent
of supporting the more dominant dog is to encourage the victimized dog to
show deference and appeasement, there are no good data showing that this
in effect ever even happens. Also, it is important for owners to understand that
in many cases of dominance-related aggression between dogs, the victimized
dog fights back because of fear and often has begun to offer preemptive strikes.
thus appearing to be the aggressor. This further complicates the owner's ability
to understand the inter-dog dynamics and to assign labels of "dominant" and
"submissive" to the fighting dogs. Moreover, when one dog is motivated by fear,
supporting the aggressor will not change a response of defensive aggression
because the victimized dog will still have no reason to begin to trust the
aggressor. Supporting the more assertive dog is therefore not recommended
and should be avoided because of the risk of causing an increase in aggression
between the dogs.
PROBLEM AGGRESSION IN CATS
As in other species, aggression is a normal part of the cat's behavioral repertoire.
being injured or becoming a meal for a predator. Cats may also use aggression to
establish and defend teritory. This is most commonly seen in multiple-cat homes
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
aggression allows a mother cat to protect her kittens. Just as in dogs, because
aggressive responses are a part of every cat's behavioral makeup, individual cats
Adwis , ealssaibbe-uou, do ,anlssaibbe, leunle buleq se peysselo eq jouueo
uean eoege bundoleaep u lnydiy jou si os pue sinooo uoissaibe au
Inter-Cat Aggression in Multiple-Cat Homes
Inter-cat aggression is a common problem between cats who share the same
household. Underlying causes include a lack of socialization, inappropriate play
inter-male aggression is common and increases in frequency during the breeding
were single kittens in a litter, or were weaned at too young an age. Cats who have
cause fights to occur during play sessions with other cats. Adult cats who never
encounter with another cat, even after being acquainted for a long period of time
who are just naturally less social than others. Defensive body postures will be
evident in these cats, and a cat who is fearful or defensive may spend much of
his time hiding in the home to avoid interaction with other cats. Finaly, redirected
aggression occurs when a cat who is aggressively stimulated is prevented from
directing his aggression toward the causative agent. A common example is a cat
who is staring out of a window and sees a neighboring cat approach may turn
and attack a house mate. If this redirection occurs with regular frequency, the
interaction becomes a pattern of behavior that defines the relationship between
the two cats. Redirected aggression is also seen in multiple-cat homes in which
cats are overcrowded and one or more cats are unable to maintain a comfortable
personal space.
Counter-conditioning and desensitization are often successful if the aggression
ae so aul jo yog j pue aw jo poued buol e loy bunoo yeeg pou seu
relatively well-socialized to other cats. Meals can be used to counter-condition
aversive emotional reactions. The cats are initially separated in different rooms
using a baby gate and the cats are gradually fed in increasingy closer proxim-
ity to one another (Figure 11.4). During the period of reintroduction, fights and
agonistic responses must be prevented by separating the cats completely except
during feeding times. Each cat should be provided with his own sleeping area
and anxiety during the first few weeks of treatment. However, when drug therapy
Problem Aggression in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 11
on each side of a baby gate
is needed for long periods, the associated side effects and health risks make this
treatment unacceptable to many owners. In some cases, managing the home
and which allow them to avoid contact with each other is the best solution for
all involved. When the density of cats is contributing to aggression and one or
more cats cannot tolerate living in a multiple-cat home, the owners may decide
to rehome one or more of the cats to a home with no other cats.
Aggression toward a Newly Introduced Cat
Aggression between cats who have been recently introduced in a home is Lsually
seen when caretakers are attempting to rapidly introduce a new cat into the
home. The resident cat may react by simply threatening the new cat or by
showing offensive threat postures followed immediately by a physical attack.
In most cases, the new cat reacts either fearfully or with defensive aggression.
cases through careful and gradual introduction of the new cat. Regardless of age
wooi e uum eae lews jo jemo e ol paujuoo ag pnous jeo mau aul dapuae o
for the first several days or weeks. During this time, the resident cat is allowed
access to most of the house, with the exception of the room that contains the
e aul yoeoidde ol pamolle Aienpeib si peo juepisal eul teo paldope Ameu
that contains the new cat. Baby gates and closed doors are used to control the
pace of these introductions. The new cat's territory can be gradually increased,
but only when calm and accepting behaviors are observed in the resident cat
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
Cat caretakers should always be advised to show patience when introducing a
new cat, since some resident cats may need several weeks or even months to
become acclimated to the new arrival. As the new cat gains more freedom in
the home, the resident cat's reactions should be carefully monitored. Feeding
 buo An pue 'a s aul p pue oo s au ui so a
bowls closer together, can be used to enhance this acclimation. If multiple litter
boxes are not already available, more should be added. In addition, providing a
cats in multiple-cat homes to have control over the amount of contact that they
have with other cats. Owners should understand that while some cats eventually
begin to groom, sleep with, and play with each other, others are more solitary by
nature and may simply prefer to be left alone. Understanding and accepting this
variability in cat personality is imperative when attempting to keep two or more
cats peacefully together in the same home.
Aggression toward Humans
For example, some cats ambush human housemates from behind doors and may
severely attack ankles or legs. Others simply play too roughly, scratching or biting
as they become stimulated during play sessions. A similar type of behavior is
petting-induced aggression, which occurs when a cat who is being handled and
petted suddenly turns to claw and bite. Defensive aggression can occur during
another cat or stimulus.
Fear-Related Aggression: Cats who are nervous or fearful toward one or more
family members or toward visitors to the home are quite common. Underlying
causes include a lack of socialization when young or inadequate habituation to
various types of people (common in cats who live exclusively indoors), the use
in their degree of sociability and adaptability. While some are highly social and
habituate easily to multiple situations and people, others are naturally more timid
of cats who are fearful choose avoidance, provided an escape route is available
experiences will resort to aggression to drive away the stimulus that is causing
 the fear. Cats with fear-related aggression show defensive body postures. They
have a lowered body position, legs are tucked under the body, and they exhibit
flattened ears, piloerection, and widened eyes with dilated pupils. The "hiss" is the
characteristic defensive vocalization of cats, although some cats will also growl.
Problem Aggression in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 11
If approached, a defensively posturing cat wil often swat with a front paw (with
claws extended) before attempting to bite. In cases in which a cat has learned
from prior experiences to use aggression preemptively, these warning signals may
be absent and the cat may attack and bite immediately upon feeling threatened
focuses on counter-conditioning and desensitization. The cat should be removed
both prevents aggression and allows control over the counter-conditioning
as Feliway may be helpful in reducing the cat's level of anxiety, especially during
       ss e 
BoX 11.3  MARVIN'S REDIRECTED AGGRESSION
Background: Rebecca Taylor has two cats, Marvin (three years) and Walter (seven years) who until recently have
lived very peaceably together. Last week, however, Marvin started viciously attacking Walter. He will chase him
 si sn   si   sa a se u  nd o ' a pn  o 'an a n
together for almost three years and have always been friendly and loving toward each other. Walter is becoming
frightened of Marvin and has started to hide under the bed, refusing to come out for most of the day. Rebecca
separates Marvin and walter for 30 minutes after each episode, but as soon as Marvin is allowed out he begins
to search for Walter, and attacks again. Rebecca also has tried squirting Marvin with a water botle as soon as
he starts to go after Walter and then locks him in another room until he calms down, but it does not seem to be
   as  s  u ae i s  a   a 
was first installed, Marvin was the most inquisitive, learning the boundaries very quickly and spending as much
time as he could outdoors. Now, if allowed, he is outdoors most of the day. Rebecca states that they have seen a
neighbor's cat sitting in the yard, but on the other side of the Invisible Fence, watching their cats. They have also
observed Marvin staring at this cat and, on one occasion, they saw him chase the strange cat, but he stopped
Cause of aggression: Marvin is most likely showing redirected territorial/ofensive aggression toward Walter. This
has occurred because Marvin is aggressively motivated toward the neighbor cat, but is repeatedly prevented from
counter-conditioning and desensitization to change the aggressive cat's association with the victimized cat.
(unlikely), or restricting Marvin's and walter's time in the yard to periods when the Browns are certain that
other cats are not present.
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
· Preventing repeated episodes: Because redirected aggression can be very severe, Marvin and Walter must
be confined to separate rooms or sections of the home during the treatment program.
wire crate at meal times. Walter is then brought into the room, keeping him on the opposite side of the gate or
                   
meals.As soon as they have finished eating, Walter is removed and taken back to his part of the home. This is
risking an aggressive response in Marvin or a fearful response in Walter.
·Reintroductions: When both cats are eating peacefully together, Rebecca begins to allow them to visit
though a baby gate, dividing two rooms. when this occurs with no aggression, supervised free time in the
home, a room that Marvin is not allowed to enter.
Play (Predatory) Aggression: Cats who bite or scratch while playing or who
ambush people as they walk through a doorway are demonstrating uninhibited
play behaviors and must be taught to play gently without biting or scratching.
toy. This can be a stuffed toy or a hanging toy that is dangled from the doorway
in areas that the cat most often sets up to ambush. Frequently providing new
and attention for the cat each day is also important. Using negative punishment
is effective in some cases, especially if the cat is highly bonded to her human
inappropriate and giving the cat a "time out" by separating the cat from the owner
for several minutes. Using this approach, the cat learns that play will only continue
if her behavior remains playful and no biting or clawing occurs. However, for
this approach to be successful, the owner's timing must be precise. In addition,
causing frustration and unintentionally increasing the cat's aggression. In cases
that are refractory to previously described treatments, positive punishment in the
face as she ambushes or begins to play too aggressively. In these cases, the risk
of having the cat associate the human caretaker with the aversive stimulus (the
should be used with caution.
Petting-fnduced Aggression: Biting while being petted seems rather
paradoxical to cat owners. The cat is sitting in the owner's lap and is apparently
enjoying being petted when, suddenly, she turns and bites and then jumps off
of the lap. In most, but not all cases, the bite is inhibited and does not break skin.
on the owner's lap for several minutes, only to turn suddenly and "bite the hand
Problem Aggression in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 11
that pets it," so to speak. There are several theories that attempt to explain this
behavior Most likely, cats who use biting to end petting sessions have a limited
tolerance for physical interaction and use the feline communication cue for
terminating social grooming when they have had enough. For example, when
two housecats are grooming one another, the interaction is oten abruptly ended
by one cat turning suddenly to bite the other. A second and related theory is
most cats show subtle but distinct signals that they are becoming agitated and
recognize the cat's signals and terminating petting sessions before the cat shows
stopping peting sessions before the cat's tolerance threshold is approached.
o aun bupeey Ag paysgise si pue 'nydiey eg ose ueo buuopuoo-leuno
small tidbits of a highly desirable food during each session of petting.
Redirected Aggression: Redirected aggression occurs when the victim of the
cat's aggression is not the actual stimulus that triggered the cat's response, but
just happens to be close to the cat at the time that the cat becomes aroused.
One of the most common examples of redirected aggression occurs when an
indoor cat observes a cat in the yard through a window or door. This can trigger
the invading cat and so redirects to the owner or another cat in the home.
response of defensive aggression in the cat, such as the presence of unfamiliar
people or animals, or a new environment. An owner who is severely attacked
when she attempts to remove her frightened cat from the room when visitors
bites. Because owners often are completely unaware of the trigger that caused
the attack, this type of feline aggression appears to be unpredictable and can
be very frightening to owners. Treatment involves identifying the trigger for the
aggression and managing the cat's environment to prevent exposure to that
stimulus. When possible, counter-conditioning can be used to reduce the cat's
the cause, counter-conditioning is used to reduce the cat's fear response and
access to windows is often the most effective management technique. Owners
management to prevent future bites and behavior modification and/or anti-anxiety
medications to reduce risk to people and other pets in the home are very
important components of treatment.
308
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. 
aggression in dogs.
2.
Describe the principal steps in a treatment program for dominance-related
aggression occurring between two dogs living in the same home.
3.
ajdwexe ue epiaoid pue sbop ul uoissaibbe aaissessod aued
4.
eui ployasnoy e ou jeo meu e bujonpou Auadoid ioy loojoud e aquosea 
includes one or more resident cats.
5.
Provide a set of tips for preventing human-directed play aggression in cats.
REFERENCESANDFURTHER READING
Appleby DL, Bradshaw JWS, Casey RA. Relationship between aggressive and
Vet Rec, 150:434-438, 2002.
presented at Annual Meeting of the Animal Behavior Society. North Carolina, June, 1985.
Borchelt PL. Aggressive behavior of dogs kept as companion animals: Classification
and influence of sex, reproduction statues and breed. Aop! Anim Behay Sci.
10:45-61,1983.
Borchelt PL, Voith VL. Dominant aggression in dogs. In: Readings in Companion Animal
 Behavior VL Voith and PL Borchelt, editors, Veterinary Learning Systems, Trenton, NJ,
pp. 230-239, 1996.
Campbell WwE. Behavior Problems in Dogs. American Veterinary Publications, Inc., Santa
Barbara, CA, 1975
Donaldson J. Culture Clash: A Revolutionary New Way of Understanding the
Oakland, CA, 221 pp., 1996.
Goodwin D, Bradshaw JWS, Wickens SM. Paedomorphosis affects agonistic visual
Guy NC, Luescher UA, Dohoo SE, Spangler E, Miller JB, Dohoo IR, Bate LA.
Demographic and aggressive characteristics of dogs in a general veterinary
caseload. Appl Anim Behav Sci, 74:15-28, 2001.
Guy NC, Luescher UA, Dohoo SE, Spangler E, Miller JB, Dohoo IR, Bate LA. Risk factors
for dog bites to owners in a general veterinary caseload. Appl Anim Behav Sci.
74:29-42, 2001.
Heidenberger E. Housing conditions and behavioural problems of indoor cats as
Problem Aggression in Dogs and Cats
Chapter 11
Landsberg G. The distribution of canine behavior cases at three behavior referral
practices. Vet Med, 86:1011-1018, 1991.
Levine E, Perry P, Scarlett J, Houpt KA. Intercat aggression in households following the
introduction of a new cat. Appl Anim Behav Sci, 90:325-336, 2005.
Linamo AE, van den Berg L, Leewater PAJ, and others. Genetic variation in
aggression-related traits in Golden Retriever dogs. App! Anim Behav Sci.
104:95-106, 2007.
Line S, Voith VL. Dominance aggression of dogs toward people: Behavior profile and
response to treatment. Appl Anim Behay Sci, 16:77-83, 1986.
Cambridge, 0K, pp. 131-138, 1995.
Love M, Overall KL. How anticipating relationships between dogs and children can
help prevent disasters. J Amer Vet Med Assoc, 219:446-453, 2001
Mertens PA. The concept of dominance and the treatment of aggression in
multi-dog homes: A comment on van Kerklove's commentary. J Aopl Anim Welfare
Scr,7:287-291,2004
pp. 247-252, 2007.
Netto VwJ, Planta DJo. Behavioural testing for aggression in the domestic dog-
Appl Anim Behav Sci, 52:243-263, 1997.
O'Farrell V, Peachey E. Behavioral effects of ovariohysterectomy on bitches. J Small
Anim Pract, 31:595-598, 1990.
Orihel JS, Fraser D. A note on the effectiveness of behavioural rehabilitation for
2007.
Orihel JS, Ledger RA, Fraser D. A survey of the management of inter-dog aggression
by animal shelters in Canada. Anthr0z00s, 18:273-287, 2005.
OverallKL. Working bitches and the neutering myth: Sticking to the science. Vet J,
173:9-11, 2007.
Overall KL. Overview of canine aggression. Invited paper. Woric Congress
WSAVA,2006.
Overall KL. Dog bites to humans - demography, epidemiology, injury, and risk.
JAmer Vet Med Assoc, 218:1923-1034, 2001
Overall KL. Feline aggression. Part ll. Common aggressions. Feline Pract,
22:16-17, 1994.
Ozanne-Smith J, Ashby K, Stathakis VZ. Dog bite and injury prevention - analysis,
Polsky RH. Factors influencing aggressive behavior in dogs. Calfomia Vet.
37:12-15, 1983.
Section 3
UNDERSTANDING AND SOLVING COMMON BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS
unstructured client initiated follow-up. Appf Anim Behav Sci, 105:330-341, 2007
Reisner IR, Houpt KA, Shofer FS. National survey of owner-directed aggression in
English Springer Spaniels. J Amer Vet Med Ass0c, 227:1594-1603, 2005.
Roll A, Unshelm J. Aggressive conflicts amongst dogs and factors affecting them.
Appl Anim Behav Sci, 52:229-242,1997.
Sherman CK, Reisner IR, Taliaferro LA, Houpt KA. Characteristics, treatment, and outcome
of 99 cases of aggression between dogs. Appf Anim Behav Sci, 47:91-108, 1996.
Vas J, Topal J, Gacsi M, Miklosi A, Scanyi V. A friend or an enemy? Dogs' reaction to
an unfamiliar person showing behavioral cues of threat and friendliness at different
times. Appl Anim Behav Sci, 94:99-115, 2005.
Virga V, Houpt KA, Scarlett JM. Effect of Amitriptyline as a pharmacological adjunct to
Anim Hosp Ass0c, 37:325-330, 2001.
Wvilson F, Dwyer F, Bennett PC. Prevention of dog bites: Evaluation of a brief educational
Footnotes
1 Hart B, Hart L. Canine and Feline Behavioral Therapy, Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia,
PA, 275 pp.,1985.
2 Overall KL. Feline aggression. Part ll. Common aggressions. Feline Pract, 22:16-17.
1994.
3 Lockwood R. The ethology and epidemiology of canine aggression. In: The Domes-
Press, Cambridge, UK, pp. 131-138, 1995.
4 Overal KL. Overview of canine aggression. Invited paper. Worid Congress WSAVA,
2006.
 5 O'Farrell V, Peachey E. Behavioral effects of ovariohysterectomy on bitches. J Small
Anim Pract, 31:595-598, 1990.
Vet Med,94:976-978, 1999
7 Overall KL. Understanding dogs that fight. World Congress ASAVA/FECAVA/SSAVA,
pp.148-150, 2006.
appendix 1
Recommended Books
Abrantes R. Dog Language: An Encyciopedia of Canine Behaviour. Wakan Tanka Publishers,
Naperville, IL, 263 pp., 1997
Abrantes R. The Evolution of Canine Social Behavior. Wwakan Tanka Publishers, Naperville, IL,
79 pp., 1997.
Abrantes R. Dogs Home Alone. Wakan Tanka Publishers, Naperville, IL, 50 pp., 1997.
Alexander MC. Cick for Joy. Sunshine Books, Inc, Waltham, MA, 208 pp., 2003.
Aloff, B. Canine Body Language: A Photographic Guide. Dogwise, Wenatchee, WA,
372 pp., 2005.
PA, 276 pp., 1992.
Beaver B.Canine Behavior: A Guide for Veterinarians. WwB Saunders Company, Philadelphia.
PA, 276 pp., 1999.
WA, 162 pp., 2006.
Bradshaw JWS. The Behaviour of the Domestic Cat. CAP International, Oxford, UK,
219 pp., 1992.
Burch MR, Bailey JS. How Dogs Learm. Howell Book House, New York, NY, 188 pp., 1999.
Case LP. The Dog: fts Behavior, Nutrition and Health, second edition, Blackwell Publishing.
Ames lowa, 479 pp., 2005.
391 pp., 2003.
Clutton-Brock J. A Natural History of Domesticated Mammals, second edition. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge UK, 238 pp., 1999.
and Evolution. Scribner Publishing, New York, NY, 352 pp., 2001.
Csanyi V. f Dogs Couid Taik: Expioring the Canine Mind. North Point Press, New York, NY,
334 pp., 2005.
Domjan M. The Essentiais of Conaitioning and Learming, third edition. Wadsworth/Thompson
Learning, Belmont CA, 368 pp., 2005.
Donaldson J. Dogs are From Neptune: Candid Answers to Urgent Questions about Aggression
162 pp., 1998.
311
312
Appendix 1
Donaldson J.Culture Clash:A Revolutionary NewWay of Understanding the Relationship
Between Humans and Domestic Dogs. James and Kenneth Publishers, Oakland, California,
221 pp., 1996.
Lakewood, CO, 335 pp., 1999.
Gloucester, UK, 288 pp., 2002.
Landsberg G, Hunthausen W, Ackerman L. Handbook of Behavior Problems of the Dog and Cat,
second edition. Saunders, New York, NY, 554 pp., 1997.
Lindsay S. Handbook of Applied Dog Behavior and Training (Volumes 1-3). lowa State University
Press, 2002
McConnell PB.For the Love of a Dog: Understanding Emotion inYou andYourBestFriendl
Ballantine Books, 332 pp., 2006.
McConnell PB. 7he Other End of the Leash. Ballantine Books, 272 pp., 2003.
274 pp., 2007.
Canada, 201 pp., 2004.
Overall K. Clinical Behavioral Medicine for Small Animals. Mosby, St. Louis, MO, 544 pp., 1997.
Pryor K. Clicker Training for Cats. Sunshine Books, Waltham, MA, 84 pp., 2001
Robinson I (editor). The Waltham Book of Human-Animal Interaction: Benefits and responsibilities
of pet ownership. Pergamon Press, Oxford UK, 148 pp., 1995
Rogerson J. Your Dog: fts Development, Behaviour and Training. Popular Dogs Publishing
Company, London, 0K, 174 pp., 1990.
Temple University Press, Philadelphia, PA, 201 pp., 1999.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 0K, 268 pp., 1995
Stafford K. 7he Weffare of Dogs. Springer Publishing, Dordrecht, Netherlands, 280 pp., 2007
Andrews and McMeel, Kansas City MO, 301 pp., 1996.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 244 pp., 2000.
Wendet LM. Dogs: A Historical Joumey: The Human/Dog Connection Through the Centuries.
Howell Book House, New York, NY, 258 pp., 1996
appendix 2
Resources and Professional Associations
American Veterinary Society of Animal Behavior
Membership Information
12249 73rd Court North
West Palm Beach, FL 33412
http:/www.avsabonline.org
Animal Behavior Resources Institute
P.O.B0x27348
Golden Valley, MN 55427
http://abrionline.org
Animal Behavior Society
Indiana University
2611 East 10th Street
Bloomington IN 47408-2603
http:/www.animalbehavior.org
Association of Companion Animal Behavior Counselors
P.O. B0x 104
Seville, FL 32190-0104
http://animalbehaviorcounselors.org
Association of Pet Behaviour Counselors (UK)
P.O. Box 46
Worcester, WR8 9YS.
England
http:/www.apbc.org.uk
Association of Pet Dog Trainers (APDT)
150 Executive Center Drive
P.O. B0x 35
Greenville, SC 29615
http://www.apdt.com
313
314
Appendix 2
Canadian Association of Pet Dog Trainers
18700 Chief Lake Road
Prince George, BC
V2K 5K4
http://www.cappdt.ca
Certification Council for Professional Dog Trainers (CCPDT)
Professional Testing Corporation
1350 Broadway. 17th Floor
New York, NY 10018
http://www.ccpdt.org
Companion Animal Sciences Institute
1333 Rainbow Crescent
Ottawa, ON, Canada K1J 8E3
http://www.casinstitute.com
Etologisk Institute
DK-4270 Hong, Denmark
http://www.etologi.dk
International Association of Animal Behavior Consultants (IAABC)
P.O.Box1458
Levittown, PA 19058
http://www.iaabc.org
International Institute for Applied Animal Behavior
1333 Rainbow Crescent
Ottawa, ON, Canada K1J 8E3
http://www.iacab.com/
National Association of Dog Obedience Instructors (NADOl)
PMB 369: 729 Grapevine Hwy
Hurst, Texas 76054-2085
http://www.nadoi.org
SanFranciscoSPCAAcademyforDogTrainers
The San Francisco SPCA
2500-16th Street
San Francisco, CA 94103-4213
http://www.sfspca.org/academy
The Society of Veterinary Behavior Technicians
Membership Information
310 Olympic Lane
Mount Vernon, WA 98274
http://www.svbt.org
appendix3
Sample Dog Behavior History Profile
STUDENT'S NAME
DOG'S NAME
BREED
AGE
SEX
SPAYED/NEUTERED?
Dog/Owner Interactions (Circle Appropriate Answers)
1. My dog was approximately [ess than 7 weeks; 7 to 8 weeks; 8 to 12 weeks; 12 weeks
to 6 months; 6 months to 1 year; older than 1 year] when I cbtained him/her.
aois iad adedsmau aun ui pe tapaag pa-aund] uee woy bop Auu panbol '7 
animal shelter or rescue organization; friend/neighbor; relative; as a stray]l.
 3. Ihave owned my dog for [ess than 1 month; 1 to 6 months; 6 months to 1 year;
1 to 2 years; more than 2 years]
d aui ui shop auo om uu ao som auo soaz] paumo au1 g
indoors alone, loose in the house; indoors alone, crated or confined to a small
area; outdoors in a yard or kennel; tied outdoors]
7.  My dog spends most of his resting/relaxing time: [on his own bed; on the
other.
-1.
8.  At night, my dog sleeps [on my bed; in my bedroom; in the house but not in the
bedroom; crated in the house; in a garage or kennel; tied or kenneled outside]
 pauat e] si sasodund uouuilla lot alli su bop u eun eae jo adi aul b
that he is in most of the day; a fenced yard that we let him out into and leave
him there for periods of time; a fenced yard that he goes into for elimination only;
-1-
315
316
Appendix 3
on-lead; no set area; I walk my dog for elimination]
1 0. The person who my dog most often plays with is: [myself; my partner; my roommate;
my children; visiting friends; other dogs].
11. Toys that my dog most likes to play with include [tug toys; squeaky toys; squeaky toys
minus the squeaker (she always rips them out); rawhide bones; Nyla-bones; tennis
balls; stuffed toys; other
12. My dog's toys can usually be found [ying around the house wherever he has left
them; on his bed or in his crate; near his food/water bowl; put away in a special
13. The way in which I usually exercise my dog is [walks on-lead, several times a day;
in the yard or house; running/jogging with my dog; allowing my dog to play with
neighbor dogs; taking my dog to the dog park; none of the above]
1 4. My dog usually receives strenuous exercise (i.e. hard running and playing for a minimum
weekends; one time per week; rarely]
does not like interacting with other dogs]
16. The type of physical contact that my dog most enjoys is: [tummy rubs; cuddling on the
[ued pue bumed Apmoyybnou sbujyojeos bumed insAeid bumed auee ryono
17. Our household also includes [zero; one; two; three; more than three] additional dogs
and [zero; one; two; three; more than three] cats.
18. In our household, the person who most often feeds, brushes, bathes, and takes the
these responsibilities equally]
19. In our household, the person who most often walks, plays with and trains the dog is
[myself; my partner; my roommate; my children; we all play and walk the dog].
20. I consider myself to be [extremely; very; moderately; slightly] emotionally attached
to my dog
2-
Appendix 3
317
accompanies me.
22. When I go on vacations, my dog [always; often; occasionally; never] accompanies
me/us.
23. Methods that I use to discipline my dog include (circle all that apply): [telling him/
her "No!" and using a harsh voice; using physical reprimands, i.e. hitting or
grabbing his nose; putting him outside or confining him/her to a crate or
small room; ignoring bad behavior; collar corrections, i.e. jerking on the
collar;other
1.
cuddling; using verbal praise ("Good dog!"); playing games; giving food treats;
other
25. The type of collar that I use with my dog is (circle all that apply): [buckle collar; Premier
other.
 26. Regarding obedience class/lessons, goals for myself include (circle allthat apply): [to
increase my understanding of my dog's behavior; to develop a closer relationship
with my dog; to learn how to train my dog to be a better companion and
member of the household; to solve problem behaviors that my dog is exhibiting;
other.
一
BehaviorProfileInformation
1. I would describe my dog's energy level as [hyperactive; very high energy; normal;
normal to low; basic couch potato].
2.  I would describe my dog's emotional attachment to me and/or my family as [excessively
attached; very attached; moderately attached; slightly attached; not attached
at all].
exuberantly friendly; moderately friendly; aloof; hesitant but then is friendly; fearful
 at first but recovers; always fearful; slightly aggressive; very aggressive] manner.
4. My dog greets visitors who she does know at our home in a(n) [hyper-excitable;
exuberantly friendly; moderately friendly; aloof; hesitant but then is friendly; fearfu
at first but recovers; always fearful; slightly aggressive; very aggressive] manner
3-
318
Appendix 3
 5.  When out walking away from home, my dog greets strangers in a(n) hyper-excitable;
at first but recovers; always fearful; slightly aggressive; very aggressive] manner
exuberantly friendly; moderately friendly; aloof; hesitant but then is friendly; fearful
at first but recovers; always fearful; slightly aggressive; very aggressive] manner
7.  At the veterinarian's office, my dog behaves in a(n) [hyper-excitable; exuberantly
friendly; moderately friendly; friendly but quiet; hesitant but then is friendly; fearful
at first but recovers; always fearful; slightly aggressive; very aggressive] manner
himself; when he is greeting me; when strangers come to the house; when he
other small animals; when he is playing with me]
and wags his tail; continues eating and wags his tail; freezes over his food bowl;
begins to wolf down his food; walks away from the bowl; growls quietly; growls or
barksmenacingly]
sans bujwooe ayn Aoua jou sop 1ng Aainb shs 1buwoon ay solua pue
a bit but usually settles down after a few minutes; struggles a bit throughout the
sidwae pue sanbhns huwoon aun snoyonoun Aleoay snbhns huwooa
to nip].
11. When my dog is asked to give one of his/her favorite toys to me he/she [readily gives it to
me; runs away; holds on to it tightly; growls and refuses to give it up; tries to bite]
pue buisam em jo bn Aid 1! yhm buuunu uaun pue leg e buiseuo law o yog
sop so ym bud sh asyo buid sg Awy ym busnoy yn
in the family; playing with dog friends who are not part of the family; playing hide
13. I would describe my dog as: [extremely playful; somewhat playful; not playful at all]
14. The characteristics that I like about my dog include his/her (circle all that apply): playful.
ness; high energy; affection for family members; affection for other people; be-
havior with other dogs; ability to learn new commands; protectiveness; boldness;
(i.e. coat type, size, etc); other —
.
-4-
Appendix 3
15. Have you attended any previous training classes with your dog? Yes/No If so, what type 
of class was it?
16. What commands does your dog usually respond to? [sit; lie down; come; stay; give;
take it (fetch); other
17. Please circle any of the following behavioral problems that you are currently experiencing
with your dog:
house-training
excessive chewing
barking when alone
running away
not coming when called
pulling on the leash
growling at strangers
growling at family members
nipping during play
biting people
possessive over toys/food
chasing cats/squirrels
jumping up to greet
fear of strangers
fear of family member
unmannerly in the car
fear of other dogs
destructive when left alone
rushing out of doors
aggressive towards
stealing objects/food
barking for attention
unfamiliar dogs
fighting with other dogs
digging
in the home
playing too roughly with
other dogs
PLEASE ADD ANY ADDITIONAL COMMENTS REGARDING YOUR DOG'S BEHAVIOR AND
YOUR GOALS FOR BOTH YOU AND YOUR DOG:
(Form provided by permission; Linda P. Case, AutumnGold Consulting and Dog Training Center)
-5-
appendix 4
Sample Cat Behavior History Profile
STUDENT'S NAME
CAT'S NAME
BREED
AGE
SEX
SPAYED/NEUTERED?
Cat/Owner Interactions (Circle Appropriate Answers)
1.My cat was approximately[ess than 7 weeks, 7 to 8 weeks; 8 to 12 weeks; 12 weeks
to 6 months; 6 months to 1 year; older than 1 year] when I cbtained him/her.
 3. Ihave owned my cat for [ess than 1 month; 1 to 6 months; 6 months to 1 year; 1 to
2 years; more than 2 years]
 4.  To my knowledge, I am my cat's [first; second; third; fourth or more] owner
6. Places that my cat enjoys resting include (circle all that apply): [on his
own bed; in windowsils; on the couch; on my bed; in my lap; outdoors; 
other.
but not in the bedroom; outdoors]
 8. I would describe my cats as: [extremely playful; very playful; occasionally playful;
not playful at all].
my partner; my roommate; my children; visiting friends; the dog; other cats in
the family].
320
Appendix 4
Sig isweag asel ishon pahns iws] apnoui shoua jeo Au jeui s/ol l
that roll; toys that can be batted; catnip toys; lure toys (i.e. cat dancer)
other.
toys; going outdoors together for walks or playing; cuddling and petting in my lap;
talking to my cat; brushing or combing; other
1.
12. The type of physical contact that my cat enjoys includes (circle all that apply): [gentle
Aeid buounod pue buiseuo bumad yhnou do injeid idel Aw uo bu!s buid
brushing/combing]
13.Our household also includes[zero; one; two; three; more than three] additional cats
and [zero; one; two; three; more than three] dogs.
14. In our household, the person who most often feeds, brushes, bathes, and takes the
cat to the vet is [myself; my partner; my roommate; my children; we all share these
responsibilities equally].
15. In our household, the person who most often walks, plays with and trains the cat is
[myself; my partner; my roommate; my children; we all play and walk the cat].
everyone in the home].
17. In the household, my cat avoids or shows aggression toward [myself; my partner;
 s o ao ou o   o ho A  A
with everyone in the home].
1 8. I consider myself to be [extremely; very; moderately; slightly] emotionally attached
to my cat.
19. Methods that I use to discipline my cat include (circle all that apply): [telling him "No!
y buems no buy 's'! 'spuewudau eoisAyd bunsn aolon ysey e buisn pue
putting him outside or confining him/her to a crate or small room; ignoring bad
behavior; squirting him with a water bottle; remote correction (scat matt or air
canister); other
cuddling; using verbal praise ("Good girl!"); playing games; giving food treats;
other
2
Appendix 4
21.The type of litter box and litter filler that my cat has are:
 22. Our household has [one; two; three; more than three] litter boxes available for
our cat(s).
24. I remove feces (and liter clumps if applicable) from my cat's litter box: [daily; every other
BehaviorProfileInfommation
1. I would describe my cat's energy level as [hyperactive; very playful; normal; normal to
low; basic couch potato]
2. I would describe my cat's emotional attachment to me and/or my family as [excessively
attached; very attached; moderately attached; slightly attached; not attached
at all].
3. When being petted, my cat usually [enjoys the petting for as long as we will pet her;
enjoys it for a bit and then walks away; enjoys it for a bit and then becomes
ing at them; chasing a toy or ball; rough "wrestling'" play with my hands; playing stalk
cuddling and petting; other.
 5.  My cat will usually or always respond to the following commands (circle all that apply):
[comes to his name; gets off of counters when commanded; retrieves a toy; sits or
lies down on command; meows on command; tricks
1.
6.  My cat lives: [exclusively indoors (never allowed outside); mostly indoors (taken
outdoors on a lead or harness); mostly indoors (allowed outside freedom with
supervision); mostly indoors (allowed outside without supervision); indoor/outdoor;
mostly outdoors],
7. My cat greets visitors to our home in a(n) [friendly; hesitant but then is friendly; fearful
at first but recovers; always fearful (hides); aggressive] manner.
3-
Appendix 4
 8. My cat uses his iter box [always (no house soiling); almost always; about
50 percent of the time; less than 50 percent of the time; hardly at all; never]
9.When my cat does not use the box it is: [urine only and a large amount; urine, but
a very small amount; urine and feces; feces only; N/A].
10. If your cat does not use the box, list all locations that waste has been found:
11. The characteristics that I like about my cat include his/her (circle all that apply):
[playfulness; curiosity; affection for family members; affection for other people;
intelligence; calmness; sweet and gentle nature; behavior with children; physical
appearance (i.e. coat type, size, etc); other
].
12.Please circle any of the following behavioral problems that you are currently experiencing
with your cat:
house soiling (not using litter box)
hyperactive
excessive meowing
scratching furniture/draperies
playing too roughly
aggressive biting
fear of one or more family
with other cats
excessive
members
fear of visitors
kneading
playing too roughly with people
 biting during/after peting
(biting/scratching)
 fighting with other cat(s)
fear of other cats in home
in home
hunting mice/birds
excessive fear in many
situations
PLEASE ADD ANY ADDIMONAL COMMENTS REGARDING YOUR CAT'S BEHAVIOR AND
YOUR GOALS FOR BOTH YOU AND YOUR CAT:
(Form provided by permission; Linda P. Case, AutumnGold Consulting)
-4-
glossary of terms
behaviors, but can also involve fear, flight, or pacifying behaviors
agoraphobic - fear of new or unfamiliar places
allogrooming — grooming (preening) another individual
allorubbing - rubbing on another individual as a form of scent marking and expression of afiliation
young is born at a relatively immature stage of development
anxiety - anticipation of harm or danger
associative learning - learning through associations between two or more stimuli or events
behavior chain - multiple behaviors that are trained together in sequence and which eventually
can be elicited using a single cue
castration - surgical removal of the testes in the male
classical conditioning - type of associative learning in which a neutral stimulus becomes
conditioned to elicit a response through repeated pairing with an unconditioned stimulus
clicker - toy noisemaker commonly used as a conditioned reinforcer in dog and cat training
pue shal lous ylm adk Apog ioeduoo pue 'punou Xpunis 'pauog-eay - adk Apog Agqoo
broad shoulders and hindquarters
brain functions of learning and memory
conditioned reinforcer - neutral stimulus that repeatedly and reliably precedes a primary
dnoa jeloos lo saloads aues aul oi buibuolag - oloadsuoo
buea (saoal loois - eibeydodoo
crepuscular - active during early morning and dusk hours
324
Glossary ofTerms
cue - a stimulus that elicits a behavior; examples include verbal commands and hand signals
desensitization — behavior modification technique that involves gradually increasing an animal's
tolerance to a particular stimulus by gradualy increasing the intensity of the stimulus
over multiple types of desired resources
adapt; usually described in terms of providing food, nesting sites, opportunities to mate, and
protection from predators
occurs or is provided for the behavior
stimuli; precedes extinction (termination) of the behavior
familial - observed within a family lineage
aversive stimulus without opportunity to escape with the intent of desensitizing the animal to the
stimulus; highly risky and not recommended for the majority of behavior problems
largely free from constraints imposed by humans
genotype - genetic makeup of an individual
inguinal - pertaining to the groin region of the body
instrumental learning - trial and error learning (a type of operant learning)
luring - inducing part or all of a behavior by guiding (for example with food in the hand)
normal physiological elimination
negative punishment - the removal or withholding of a pleasurable or desired stimulus in
negative reinforcement - the removal or withholding of an aversive (unpleasant) stimulus in
neophobia - fear of the unknown or unfamiliar
   s  a        -  
simply by observing another engage in the behavior (and is not directly exposed to relevant stimuli)
328
Glossary of Terms
ontogeny — development of an individual from birth to adulthood
sometimes back digits are amputated
ovariohysterectomy - surgical removal of the female reproductive tract (ovaries, oviducts, and
uterus);: spaying
pheromones - hormone-like substances secreted by an individual and which affect the behavior
of another individual of the same species; often related to reproductive behavior
pica — consumption of non-nutritive items
piloerection - reflex in which the muscles at the base of the dog's hairs contract and causes the
hairs on the back to stand up
that results in a decrease in the frequency of the behavior
positive reinforcement - addition of a pleasant or desired stimulus in response to a behavior
that results in an increase in the behavior in the future
of a behavior (i.e. requires no prior learning)
either attains a desired stimulus (R+) or avoids an aversive stimulus (R-)
used in dog and cat training
sensitive periods - developmental stages during which an animal is especially sensitive to
sexual dimorphism - the occurrence of anatomical differences between males and females
of the same species
shaping - modifying behavior by sequentially reinforcing behaviors that progressively
approximate the target behavior; can be used to train dogs and cats to perform behaviors
that would rarely occur spontaneously
social facilitation - effect of group interactions upon individual behavior
socialization period - developmental stage during which young animals form primary social
relationships and develop species-specific behavior patterns
spraying - marking posture used by cats to deposit urine on vertical surfaces
discriminative stimulus)
stressor - a stimulus that elicits a stress response in an animal
unconditional stimulus - stimulus that provokes an unconditioned response
xenophobia - fear of strangers; fear of the unfamiliar
index
Note: Page numbers followed by *f refers to Figures.
A
Aversive stimuli. See also Avoicdance behaviors; Punishment
Affliative behaviors
aggression (cat), 306
cats, 13, 15, 54, 59-60
barking training (dog), 227-229
dogs, 10,15
collars as, 174
playing,280
dlogs name used as, 178
African wildcats, 8, 12, 13, 70
dlown-stay as, 251
Aggression, 73-75. See also Agonistic behaviors
elimination problems, 189, 202, 205
breed-specific, 19
excess vocalizations (cat), 237
conflict and, 290 
fear-related behaviors, 268, 295-297
defensive (cats), 68
Fooding, 130-131
dlefensive (dogs), 67
 jumping behavior training (cat), 153, 181, 234
defined, 279-281
 jumping up behavior training (dog), 214
dlesensitization and, 129
operant conditioning, 87-89, 92-95
dog bite prevention in children, 278-279
 positive vs. negative control of behavior, 106-109 
between dogs, 284-285, 287-289, 297-301
 in separation anxiety, 259
between dogs and cats, 14-15
Avoidance behaviors. See aiso Aversive stimuli
dlominance-related (cats), 39, 70
barking. 227
dlominance-related (dogs), 73-76, 282-289
chewing. 152,217
eye-contact and (dogs), 57-58
fear-related, 268-269, 304
fear-related (cats), 304-306
flooding and, 130 
fear-related (dogs), 65-66, 295-300
house-training. 140, 143, 188-189, 202
fighting,266
jumping up, 215
food bowl (dogs), 11, 70, 289-293
play aggression, 306
free-ranging dogs, 10
response to aversive stimuli, 87, 89, 106-108, 181
human-directed (cats), 304-306
human-directed (dogs), 283-284, 294-295
B
ineffective treatments for (dogs), 300-301
Back-chaining, 122-124
inter-cat, 302-304
Bad behaviors. See Disruptive behaviors
petting-induced (cats), 306-307
play-induced (cats), 306
Bark-activated devices, 227-229
possessive (cats), 33
Barking behaviors, 50-52, 222-229, 236-238
Barnyard cats, 12
possessive (dogs), 154-155, 283, 284, 289-293
Behavior chains, 122-124 
punishment and, 88-89, 227
Behavior modlification. See also Counter-condlitioning;
redirected (cats), 307
territorial (cats), 302-304
Desensitization; Operant conditioning
nothing in life is free (NILIF) procedure, 286-287
territorial (dogs), 70, 293-295
positive reinforcement use, 109
wagging behaviors and (dogs), 64
in separation anxiety problems, 254, 258-259, 261-262
Agonistic behaviors, 10, 63, 280. See aiso Aggression
techniques of, 127-131
Agoraphobia, 267
Bekoff, Mark, 47
Allelomimetic behaviors, 97-98
Benzodiazeines, 257
Allorubbing, 12, 49, 59, 76
Bite prevention, children, 278-279
Apha dogs, 9-10, 11. See aiso Dominant/submissive behaviors
Biting behaviors
Aprazolam, 257
 inhibition of, in puppies, 30-31, 34
Altricial (immature) offspring, 27
mouthing. 211-212,287
American Pet Product Manufacturers Association, 2
nipping in puppies, 147-149
Amitriptyline, 256-257
teaching children about, 278-279
Anti-bark devices, 227-229
Black, Janet, 170
Anxiety. See Separation anxiety
Black, Steve, 170
Appeasement behaviors. See Submissive behaviors
Blackwell E., 262
Arousal, 280
Boredom-related behaviors, 219, 223, 225, 229
Associative learning, 82
 Attention-seeking behaviors
Brambell Committee, 220
Breed clubs, 16
cats, 235, 237
Breeds of dlogs and cats, 15-22
dogs, 221-222, 225-226, 231
Breed-specific behaviors, 18-19, 21-22, 75
327
Index
British Shorthair cats, 20
D
Brown, Brad, 190
DAP (Dog Appeasing Hormone), 145-146, 258-259
Brown, Sue, 190
Declawing, 233
Bunting, 49, 50f
Defensive threat behaviors, 67-68
Dependency reduction, 251-252. See also Separation anxiety
G
Desensitization. See aiso Counter-condlitioning
Canadlian Cat Association, 20
cefined, 129
Canid species, 3
fear-related behavior problems, 269, 271, 298
Canis familians, 4
food bowl aggression, 292-293
Canis lupus, 7, 9
inter-cat aggression, 302
Carnivores, 3-4
isolation, 254-255
Castration, 287
pre-departure cues, 253
Cat Fanciers Association, 20
redirected aggression, 305-306
Chasing behaviors, 69-70
separation anxiety, 261-262
Chew bones and toys for dogs, 151-152, 217
teritorial aggression, 294-296
Chewing behaviors (dogs), 151-152, 215-219, 221-222
Differential reinforcement schedules, 117, 128-129
Children, teaching, 278-279
Digging behaviors, 229-230
Chirrups, 53 
Disruptive behaviors
Citronella anti-bark collars, 227-229
barking (dogs), 222-229
Classes, socialization, 34-35
chewing (dogs),151-152, 215-219,221-222
Classical (Pavlovian) conditioning, 82-87, 104-106
digging (dogs), 229-230
Classification of dogs and cats, 4
excessive vocalization (cats), 236-238
Clawing behaviors, 50, 153-154, 232-233
furniture clawing (cats), 50, 153-154, 232-233
Clicker training, 95, 113-116, 166-167
hyperactive (dogs), 230-232
Click-treats (CT), 114 
Climbing up behaviors (cats), 152-153.
jumping up (dogs), 170, 211-215
180-181, 233-235
nocturnal activity (cats), 235-236
"C" lip position, 63
owner responsibilies, 220-221
Clomipramine, 256-257, 258-259
plant eating and pica (cats), 239
Clorazepate, 257
Distance-inceasing visual signals, 63-67
Cognitive dysfunction, 40 
Distance of stays, 169
Collars, 174, 227-229
Distance-reducing visual signals, 56-62
Come when called commands (cats), 181
Distractions, 169-170 
Come when called commands (dogs), 176-179 
Distress calling, 28, 29
Commensalism, 75
Dog Appeasing Hormone (DAP), 145-146, 258-259
Communications 
Doggy day care, 219
audlitory (cats), 28-29, 50, 53-55, 76, 236-238
Domestication, 5-8 
auditory (dogs), 50-52, 222-227,236-238
 Dominant/submissive behaviors. See aiso Submissive behaviors;
between dogs and cats, 14-15
 Submissive urination (dogs)
olfactory (See Olfactory communications)
cats, 12, 39, 70,75-76
visual (See Visual communications) 
dogs, 56, 72-76, 282-289
Competitive interactions, 70, 280, 282,
dogs vs. wolves, 9-12
284, 289, 293, 301
Double-sided tape, 153, 181
Condlitioned (secondary) reinforcers, 95, 112-113
Down-stay training (dogs), 251-252, 255, 263
Conflict aggression, 290
Down training (dogs), 120, 121f, 124-125, 163-164
Contiguity, 84
Drug therapy, 206, 256-259, 263-264, 305
Contingency. 84
Duration of stays, 168-169
Continuous reinforcement schedules, 117
Coprophagia, 70, 99
Counter-conditioning. See aiso Desensitization
E
aggressive dogs, 287
Eating houseplants (cats), 239
defined, 129-130
Ecological niches, 5
fear-related behavior problems, 269-271, 296, 298-299
 Elimination problems
food bow aggression,292-293
excitable urination (dlogs), 194-195
 inter-cat aggression, 302, 305-307
inappropriate (cats), 195-202
separation anxiety, 253-254, 261-262
incomplete house-training (dogs), 188-191
territorial aggression, 294-295
kittens, 142-144
Counter crawling in cats, 152-153, 180-181, 233-235
learned avoidance in, 140, 143, 188-189, 202
Crane, Paul, 177
litter box aversion (cats), 195-197, 199, 201, 206
Crate training, 134-135, 256
location preferences, 188, 196-199
Cues
marking behavior (cats), 202-204
fading, 124-125
marking behavior (dogs), 192-193
pre-departure, 247, 249-250, 253-255, 263
medical causes, 187,196
safety 255-256,260,262,263
 pre-adoption counseling for owners (dogs), 189190
stimulus control, 124-127, 162
puppies, 139-142
verbal,86
submissive urination (dogs), 193-194
Index
substrate preferences, 188, 191-192, 195-196, 198-199, 201
Give command, 152, 219
urine spraying (cats), 46, 48, 202-205
Goals and cbjectives for training. 110
Ellis, Mark, 298
Go to bed command, 146, 167, 224, 251
Escape/avoidance behaviors. See Avoidance behaviors
Greeting behaviors
Ethology. 27
aggressive,294-295
Evolutionary history, 2-4, 6-7, 55-56
barking, 222-225
Excitable urination (dogs), 194-195
bunting, 49, 50f
Exploratory play, 62
between cats and dogs, 14-15
Extinction, 109, 127-129
cistance-reducing signals (cats), 59-60
Extinction burst, 128
distance-reducing signals (dogs), 56-59
Eye contact in dlogs, 57-58
excessive, 248, 255,299
excitable urination, 194-195
grunting, 52
F
jumping up (dogs), 170, 211-215
Fadling cues, 124-125, 162
of puppies, 37
Fear behaviors, 65-67, 295-300
snifing,45,299-300
aggression (cats), 304-306
 submissive urination, 193-194
aggression (dogs), 65-66, 295-300
tail wagging, 64
common fears, 266-268
trilling, 53 
counter-conditioning, 269-271, 296, 298-299
Groveling behaviors, 57
desensitization to, 269, 271, 298
Growling, 52, 55, 63
learned avcidance in, 268-269, 304
Grunting,52
normal vs. problematic, 245-246
treatment,269-272
visual communications (cats), 67
H
visual communications (dogs), 64-66
Habituation, 30, 96-97
Fear imprint stage, 32
Heeling. 173, 175
Feces marking, 49
Hissing. 55
Feeding behaviors
History, breeds, 15-22
cats, 71-72
Hit it command, 167
dogs, 70
House-training
food bowl aggression, 11, 70, 289-293
 excitable urination (dogs), 194-195
food delivery toys, 216-217
 inappropriate elimination (cats), 195-202
food preference learning, 98-99
 incomplete (dogs), 188-191
Felid species, 3
kittens, 142-144
Feline facial pheromones (FFP), 204-205
learned avoidance in, 140, 143, 188-189, 202
Felis catus, 4
litter box aversion (cats), 195-197, 199, 201, 206
Feliway, 305
location preferences, 188, 196-199
Feral cats, 12-13
marking behavior (cats), 202-204
Feral dogs, 10
marking behavior (dogs), 192-193
FFP (feline facial pheromones), 204-205
medlically-caused soiling problems, 187, 196
Fighting reactions, 266
 pre-adloption counseling for owners (dogs), 189-190
Fillers for cat litter boxes, 144, 196-197
puppies, 139-142
Frst day training, 134-135
submissive urination (dogs), 193-194
Five freedoms, 220
substrate preferences, 188, 191-192, 195-196,
Hagging, 63
198-199, 201
Feeing reactions, 266
urine spraying (cats), 46, 48, 202-205
Fehmen response, 48
Howling, 52
Fooding, 130-131, 272
Human-dlirected aggression, 283-284, 294-295, 304-306
Fuency 162 
Human socialization of pets, 29, 33-34, 136, 138
Fuoxetine, 257
Hunting behaviors. See Predatory behaviors
Food bowl aggression, 11, 70, 289-293
Hyperactive dogs, 230-232
Food competition, 70
Hyper-attachment behaviors, 250, 258, 261.
Food delivery toys for dogs, 216-217
 See aiso Separation anxiety
Food preferences, 98-99
Foreign body type, 20
Free-living cats, 12-13
Free-ranging dogs, 10
Imprinting behavior, 27
Free-shaping vs. prompting, 120-122
 Incomplete house-training. 188-191
Freezing reactions, 266
Inguinal area, 45
Furniture scratching, 50, 153-154, 232-233
 Instrumental learning. See Operant conditioning
Interactive toys for dogs, 216
Intermittent reinforcement schedules, 117-119
G
International Cat Association, 20
Gape response, 48
Introducing pets, 154-156 
Generalization training, 162
lsolation training, 145-147, 254-255.
Gentle play training, 147-151
 See aiso Separation anxiety
Index
NILIF (nothing in life is free) procedures, 286-287
Johnson, Peter, 298
Nipping. 147-149
Jumping up behaviors
Nocturnal activity (cats), 235-236
cats, 152-153, 180-181, 233-235
Noise phobias, 267-268
dogs, 170, 211-215
Nose touch, 14, 15f, 59f, 166-167
Juvenile period, 38-39
Nothing in life is free (NILIF) procedures, 286-287
K
Kittens 
Object play, 62
anxiety in, 32
 Cbligate carnivores, 4 
classes for, 34-35
Cbservational learning, 32, 99-101
gentle play training, 149-151
Offensive threats, 63-64, 65f, 74f
introducing. 155-156
 Olfactory communications
jumping up behavior training. 152-153
allorubbing. 12, 49, 59, 76
litter box training. 142-144
feces marking. 49
play behaviors, 33
neonates, 29
scratching post training, 153-154
scratching, 50
socialization, 32, 34-35, 138
sniffing, 45-46, 48, 49, 299-300
Kitty condos, 233, 234f
urine marking, 39, 46-48, 192-193, 202-204
Kneading behavior, 28, 29
urine spraying, 46, 48, 202-205
Onychectomy. 233
Operant conditioning. See aiso Aversive stimuli:
 Behavior modification 
Learned avoidance. See Avoidance behaviors
link with classical conditioning, 104-106
Leash pulling, 172-176
prompting vs. free-shaping, 120-122
Leave it command, 152, 218
reinforcement, 87, 89-96 
Leonard, Jennifer, 6
schedules of reinforcement, 116-119
Litter box aversion (cats), 195-197, 196, 199, 201, 206
successive approximation, 109, 119-120, 164
Litter box hygiene, 196, 198, 200-201
terminology. 87
Litter box training (kittens), 142-144
Overall, Karen, 301
Litters for cat litter boxes, 144, 196-197
Owner's responsibilities, 220
Local enhancement, 99
Location preferences for elimination, 188, 196-199
P
Lorenz, Konrad, 27
Lupfer-Johnson, Gwen, 98-99
Pack behavior, 9-12
Paedomorphism, 5
Lure training, 120-122, 161, 163, 165-166
Pain shrieks, 55
Parker, Anna, 199
M
Parker, Joe, 199
Marking behaviors
Paroxetine, 257
cats, 202-204
Pavlovian theory 82-87, 104-106
dogs, 192-193
Paws up command, 212-213
feces, 49
Paw touch training, 167
scent, 46-47
Pedigrees, 16-18, 20
scratching.50
Personalities of cats, 35-36
urine, 39, 46-48, 192-193, 202-204
Petting-induced aggression, 306-307
Mating calls, 55
Pharmacotherapy 206, 256-259, 263-264, 305
Medical problems, 187, 196
Phenothiazines, 257
Meowing. 28-29, 50, 53-55, 76, 236-238
Phenylpropanolamine, 195
Miacines, 3
Pheromones, 49, 204-205
Miles, Sandy 236
Pica in cats, 239
Mills, Daniel, 204
Piloerection, 55, 63
Monoamine oxidase B inhibitors, 257
Play behaviors. See aiso Toys
affliative, 280
Mouthing behaviors (dogs), 211-212, 287
aggressive (cats), 306
Murmer patterns,53
cats, 62
dogs, 60-62
between dogs and cats, 14-15
N
kitttens, 33, 149-151
Natural weaning, 37-38
puppies, 30-32, 147-149
Negative behaviors. See Disruptive behaviors
puppies vs. kittens, 33
Negative punishment, 87,89-92, 109, 148-149
Play bows, 61-62
Negative reinforcement, 87, 89-90, 92, 95-96, 107-108
Pointers, 18
Neonatal behavior patterns, 28-29 
Positive punishment, 87, 88-90, 89, 92, 107-108
Neotenized features and behaviors, 19, 75, 76
Positive reinforcement, 87, 89-92, 95-96, 109
Neoteny. 5
Positive vs. negative control of behavior, 106-109
Index
Possessive aggression, 33, 154-155, 283, 284, 289-293
socialization, 30-38
Powers, Mike, 238
transitional, 28-30
Pre-adoption counseling, 189-190
Sensitization, 97
Precocial birds, 27
 Separation anxiety
Predatory behaviors,69-71
 behavioral modlification techniques (dogs),
Pre-departure cues, 247, 249-250, 253-255, 263
254, 258-259, 261-262
Premack, David, 122
behavioral signs, 249-250
Premack Principle,122-124
counter-condlitioning (dogs), 253-254, 261-262
Primary reinforcers, 94, 112, 115
cependency reduction,251-252
Prompting vs. free-shaping, 120-122
diagnosing, 246-247
Proto-dog. 7
down-stay training for, 251-252, 255, 263
Pulling behaviors, 172-176
drug treatment (dogs), 256-259, 263-264
Punishment, 87-92, 107-109, 148-149, 259,
ineffective treatments (dogs), 259
 283-284, 300-301. See aiso Aversive stimuli
management approaches (dogs), 256
Puppies 
non-drug treatment (dogs), 250-256
accepting isolation, 145-147
normal vs. problematic,245-246
chewing appropriately151152
pre-departure cues and, 247, 249-250, 253-255, 263
classes for, 34
prevention of (dogs), 260
 gentle play training, 147-149
risk factors and predisposing temperament traits, 247-249 
house-training, 139-142
safety cue toys, 255-256,260, 262-263
introducing.154-155
treatment (cats), 264-265
play behaviors, 30-33, 147-149
Separation training, 145-147, 254-255
preventing nipping. 147-149
Serotonin uptake inhibitors, 257
socialization, 30-32, 34, 137
Shaping, 91, 119-122
Puppy play vs. kitten play, 33
Side steps in cats, 62
Purebred dogs, 16-18
Sit-stay training (dogs), 90-92, 116, 162-163
Purring. 28, 53 
Sit training (dogs), 161-163, 213-214
"Pushing the go button," 173
Sloan, Sally, 288
Puzzle toys for dlogs, 216-217
Snarling, 63
Sniffing. 45-46, 48, 49, 299-300
Social facilitation, 69, 98
Q
Socialization
Quiet command, 224-225
cefined,30
with humans, 29, 33-34, 136, 138
R
kittens, 32,34-35,138
puppies, 30-32, 34, 137
Redirection training techniques, 148-149, 151, 307
Reinforcement, 87, 89-96, 107-109, 112-114, 116-119
puppy play vs. kitten play 33
Social learning, 97-100
Releasing from commands, 161, 166, 168-169
Reliability training. 162
Social play 62
 Social relationships
Repetitive barking, 223-225
cats, 12-13, 75-76
Resource guarding. See Possessive aggression
dogs, 72, 74-75
Reversing the contingency, 165-166 
Spaying, 282
Rochlitz, lrene, 220
Stay training (dogs), 164-166, 168-170
Rolling in cats, 60, 62
Stealing behaviors, 237-238
Rooting reflex, 28, 29 
Stimulus (cue) control, 124-127, 162
Ross, Julie, 98-99
Stimulus/response, 28, 29
 Royal Institute of Technology, 6
Submissive behaviors, 52, 56, 65-66, 72-76, 74f.
 See aiso Dominant/submissive behaviors;
S
 Submissive urination (dogs)
Safety cue toys, 255-256, 260, 262-263.
Submissive urination (dogs), 193-194
 See aiso Separation anxiety
 Substrate preferences for elimination 
Savolainen, Peter, 6
cats, 195-196, 198-199, 201
Scavenger theory, 5, 8
dogs, 188, 191-192, 196
Scent glands, 49 
Scent marking, 46-47
Suckling behavior, 28
Schedules of reinforcement, 114, 116-119
 Surface preferences for elimination 
Scratching behaviors, 50, 153-154, 232-233
cats, 195-196, 198-199, 201
Scratching posts, 153-154, 232
dogs, 188, 191-192, 196
Secondary reinforcers, 95, 112-113
 Systematic desensitization. See Desensitization
Selegiline hydrochloricde, 257
Senior pets, 39-40
T
Sensitive periods
Takeuchi, Y., 262
clefined, 26-27
Target training, 166-167
juvenile, 38-39
 Taxonomy 4
nenatal,28
Taylor, Rebecca, 305
Index
Territorial behaviors, 70, 223-225, 237, 293-295, 302-304.
target, 166-167
See aiso Marking behaviors
turn to your name (dlogs), 177-178
Timing of reinforcement, 116-119 
wait command (dogs), 171-172
Tongue flicking, 48
walk on a loose lead (dogs), 172-176
Touch sticks, 166-167
walk on harness (cats), 181-182
Toys. See aiso Play behaviors
Transition period, 28-30
cats, 33, 62,71, 236
Tricyclic antidepressants, 256-257
dogs, 33,74,123, 151-152, 216-217, 255-256,
Trling, 53 
260,262-263
Turn to your name command, 177-178
Training. See aiso House-training; Operant conditioning:
 Separation anxiety
barking. 227-229
chewing (dogs), 151-152, 215-219, 221-222
Umbilical cord technique (dogs), 190, 192, 193
classical conditioning in, 85-87
Urine marking, 39, 46-48, 192-193, 202-204
clicker 95, 113-116, 166-167
Urine spraying, 46, 48, 202-205
collars, 174
come when called (cats), 181
V
come when called (dogs), 176-179
Verbal cues, 86
crate,134-135,256
Vila, C., 6
dligging behaviors (dogs), 229-230
Visual communications 
down (dogs), 120, 121f, 124-125, 163-164
 cefensive threat (cats), 68
dlown-stay (dogs),251-252,255,263
cefensive threat (dogs), 67
excessive vocalization (cats), 236-238
evolution of, 55-56
first day. 134-135
eye contact (dogs), 57-58
furniture clawing (cats), 50, 153-154, 232-233
fear (cats), 67
gentle play 147-151
fear (dogs), 64-66
give command,152,219
greetings (cats), 59-60
 goals and objectives, 110
greetings (dogs), 56-59
go to bed, 146, 167, 224, 251
offensive threats (cats), 63-64, 65f
hyperactive behavior (dogs), 230-232
offensive threats (dogs), 63, 74f
isolation, 145-147,254-255
piloerection, 55,63
 jumping on counters and tables (cats), 152-153,
play solicitation (cats), 62
180-181, 233-235
play solicitation (dlogs), 60-62
jumping up (dogs), 170, 211-215
wagging (dogs), 64
kittens, 34-35, 138, 142-144, 149-151, 152-154
Viveravines, 3
leave it, 152,218
Vocalizations
lures, 120-122, 161, 163, 165-166
cats, 28-29, 50, 53-55, 76, 236-238
mouthing, 211-212, 287
dogs, 50-52, 222-227, 236-238
nocturnal activity (cats), 235-236
Vomeronasal organs, 48
paws up command, 212-213
paw touch, 167
W
planning, 110-111
Wagging behavior, 64
plant eating and pica (cats), 239
primary reinforcers, 94, 112, 115
Wait training. 171-172
Walk on a loose lead training, 172-176
progress evaluation, 111
Walk on harness (cats), 181-182
puppies, 34, 137-142, 145-149, 151-152
quiet command, 224-225
Weaning, 36-38
redirection, 148-149, 151,307
Wells, Deborah, 228
releasing from commands (dogs), 161, 166, 168-169
Whining, 52
Wilson, Fiona, 279
reliability. 162
Wilson, Jan, 211
schedules, 111
scratching post, 153-154
Wolf packs, 9
sit (dogs), 161-163, 213-214
sit/stay (dogs), 90-92, 116, 162-163
stay (dogs), 164-166, 168-170
Yelping, 52
stealing behaviors, 237-238
Yin, Sophia, 51