B·S·A·1
413/05.
BSAVAManualof
Pat.anatomia
Canine and Feline
British
Small Animal
Veterinary
Clinical
Association
Pathology
Second edition
Edited by
Elizabeth Villiers
and Laura Blackwood
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
Contents
List of contributors
L
Foreword
vii
Preface
vii
Makingthemostofin-clinicandexternal laboratorytesting
JoanDuncan
2
Interpretationoflaboratorydata
11
JoyArcher
3
Introductiontohaematology
23
ElizabethVilliers
Disordersoferythrocytes
4
33
ElizabethVilliers
5
Disorders of leucocytes
58
LauraBlackwood
6
Disordersofhaemostasis
83
TracyStokol
7
Disordersofplasmaproteins
66
YvonneMcGrottyandKathleenTennant
8
Electrolyteimbalances
113
BarbaraSkellyandRichardMellanby
9
Blood gas analysisand acid-base disorders
135
DerekFlahertyandLauraBlackwood
10
Urine analysis
149
JoyArcher
11
Laboratoryevaluationofrenaldisorders
169
Richard A.Squires
12
Laboratoryevaluationofhepaticdisease
184
EdwardJ.HallandAlexanderJ.German
13
Laboratoryevaluationofgastrointestinaldisease
207
AlexanderJ.GermanandEdwardJ.Hall
14
Laboratoryevaluationofexocrinepancreaticdisease
226
PennyWatson
15
Laboratoryevaluationoflipiddisorders
241
JoanDuncan
16
Laboratoryevaluationofhyperglycaemia andhypoglycaemia
248
ClareKnottenbelt
17
Laboratoryevaluationofhypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism
.260
PeterA.Grahamand CarmelT.Mooney
18
Laboratory diagnosis of adrenal diseases
278
lanRamseyandMichaelHerrtage
ili
19
Laboratory evaluation of thereproductivesystem
293
GaryEnglandandMarcoRusso
20
Diagnosticcytology
305
JohnK.DunnandKarenGerber
21
Bodycavityeffusions
340
KostasPapasouliotisandEmmaDewhurst
22
Laboratoryevaluationofjointandmusclediseases
Laboratory evaluation of jointdisease
355
a
John F.Innes
Laboratoryevaluationofmuscledisorders
364
NatashaOlby
23
Laboratoryevaluationofcerebrospinalfluid
373
KathleenFreeman
24
Laboratoryevaluationofskinandeardisease
381
TimNuttall
25
Diagnosisofbacterial,fungal and mycobacterial diseases
396
TimJagger
26
Diagnosis ofviral infections
410
AlanRadford andSueDawson
27
Diagnosisofprotozoal and arthropod-borne disease
424
KateMurphyandKostasPapasouliotis
Appendices
1
Commonlaboratory abnormalitiesand differential diagnoses
433
2
Test samplerequirements
438
3
Conversiontabies
441
Index
442
Making the most of in-clinic an
external laboratory testing
Joan Duncan
Introduction
service ismaintained
Adequate documentation to prove that all of the
Inrecent years,increased use and understanding of
above are carried out.
clinical pathology has led to more accurate disease
detectionandtheuseofrationaltherapeuticapproaches.
Such accreditation does not apply to practice labo-
It is nowpossible toperform a wide range of analyses in
ratoriesbut the accuracy of results and interpretations
thepracticelaboratoryandveterinarysurgeons are
is central to the diagnosis of disease.For in-clinic
oftenfacedwiththechoiceof external orinternal labo-
testing it is the practice's responsibility to ensure pro-
ratory services. This chapter outlines the benefits and
ductionofreliableresultsandimplementationof proce-
disadvantagesof commercial and practicelaboratories,
dures to identify and correct error,and to ensure that
and details thefactorsthat should beconsideredwhen
theinterpretationsprovidedbytheveterinarysurgeons
establishing a practicelaboratory.Detailed information
are valid and helpful to the management of the case.
regarding specific analysis and interpretation of test
resultscanbefound in laterchapters.
Availability of results
There isaclearmedicalbenefitfor thepatient if
accurate test results are delivered quickly to the clini-
In-clinictestingorexternallaboratory?
cian.Even if apractice does not have facilities for
extensivelaboratorytesting,there arebasicteststhat
Many clinicians,practice managers and veterinary
are easily and reliablyperformed in the practice,and
partnersstrugglewiththe choice of in-clinic laboratory
which provide valuable information.These include:
testing versus submission of samples to an external
laboratory(commercial,universityorgovernmentfacil-
Packed cell volume(PCV)
ity).There is no singleformula that canbe applied to
Blood film examination
determine whether apractice should invest in a clinic
Totalprotein
laboratory.However,it is likely that the combination of
Blood glucose
internaland external laboratory analysesprovidesthe
Urea (and creatinine if possible)
essentialmixofspeed,accuracy,qualityandprofes-
Urinalysis. The results of urinalysis (pH, cells,
 crystals, casts) change with time, and analysis in 
diagnosis.Highlighted here are some of the benefits
the practice is valuable
and disadvantages to be considered.
Electrolytes
Blood gas analysis.
Quality
Theproduction of accurateresultswith ameaningful,
In othercircumstances,where immediate analysis
valid interpretation of the laboratory findings is essential
may not be essential on medical grounds, the rapid
for the commercial survival of diagnostic laboratories.
availability of in-clinicresults may still be considered of
Therefore,considerabletimeandfinancialcommitments
value to the practice,for example,in terms of client
aremade to ensure that such quality is maintained. In
appreciation and communication. However, the pres-
the UK,diagnostic laboratories may apply for quality
sure of providing an instant diagnosis may lead to
accreditation,e.g.IS017025(Generalrequirementsfor
erroneous interpretation ofresults and thebenefit of a
the competence of testing and calibration laboratories).
rapid diagnosis should be balanced against the need for
The laboratorymust demonstrate:
adequate time to consider fully the details of the case.
Although the delay in the availability ofresults is
Validityand acceptableperformanceof
considered a major disadvantagewhen using external
equipment and assays
laboratories,most have taken significant efforts to im-
Optimal procedures toidentify,correct and
prove turnaround time forroutine assays byusing courier
reducetechnicalorinterpretationerror
services, phone or FAX reports and e-mail reports. If
Adequatestaff training and continuing education
suchalaboratoryserviceisreadilyavailable,thenitmay
time tomaintain necessary skills
not be necessary for a practice to invest the time and
Procedures to ensure that thepromised quality of
effort in providing extensive patient-side testing.
1
Chapter 1  Making the most of in-clinic and external laboratory testing
Range of tests
Accurate,repeatableresults.Commercial
The tests listedabovearepricelesswithregard tothe
laboratoriesshouldbeexpectedtodemonstrate
information they provide in emergency situations.Be-
toclients that theperformanceof laboratorytests
yond thesetests,thereisarangeofothersthatmaybe
(measured by accuracy and repeatability) is
performed in the practice,including haematology, bio-
acceptable
chemistry,endocrinology and serological testing.With
Valid and meaningful interpretation of results.
such awiderangeof tests available it is tempting to
Clinicians shouldbe confidentthattheinterpretations
includefacilitiesforall of these inthepracticelabora-
 provided and suggestions for follow-up testing 
tory.However,if it isnotessential orvaluable that the
arehelpfulwithregardtotheinvestigationof the
test is done at thepatient side,thenperhaps a more
disease,and are consistent with theclinical
circumspect approach isprudent.Many of these inves-
presentation and subsequent outcome
tigationsrequiretechnical skill and afocusonlabora-
Advicereadilyavailable fromtechnical,
tory procedures that may not be possible for nursing
professional and support staff
andveterinarystaffwho alsohaveresponsibilities
Expertiseofpathologists.Pathologistsshould
elsewhere in thepractice.
 have a commitment to continuing professional
Motivation andstaffing
development,through attendance or presentation
Thefocused attention andmotivation of nursing and
at scientific meetings,personal study and
publication. Pathologists may have a particular
veterinary staff iscentral to the success of theveteri-
field of interest which is valuable to the practice,
nary laboratory.Errors and mechanical breakdown will
occur,and staff should be prepared to spend time
and,in most cases, are happy to talk to local
correcting such problems.lrrespective of thevolume of
veterinary groups
 Sampling advice and protocols
laboratorytesting performed in the clinic,it isessential
 Regular updates regarding new tests 
to maintain a closelink with veterinary pathologists and
clinical pathologists who can provide additional exper-
Quality assurance systems should be in place to
tise and informationregarding test interpretation,fur-
ensure that the laboratory upholds its
therinvestigations andrecent scientific advances.
commitment toquality in the above areas.
Cost and marketing of laboratory testing
The evaluation of different laboratories is difficult.It
Ingeneral terms,commercial laboratoriesare ableto
is best to select one option and work with that labora-
provide a widerange of tests at highly competitive
tory for some months to ensure that the clinic has
priceswhen compared tothe cost of in-clinic analysis.
gained an insight into its full potential before trying
The price advantage of commercial laboratory profiles
another option.Attempting to compare twolaborato-
becomes of great importancewhere extensive investi-
riesinparallelmakesitdifficulttoestablisharelation-
gations are envisaged.
shipwith either.Irrespectiveof thefinal choice made,
Irrespectiveofwhere theanalysisisperformed,
the following tipsshould help the clinic tomaximize the
 consideration should be given to charges for blood
servicesofmostcommercial laboratories:
sampling and interpretation of results. In-clinic testing
is often charged at a higher rate,justified on thebasis
Plan test and sample selection with care;
of morerapid availabilityof results.However,large
otherwise,the first,and oftenmostimportant,
'mark-ups'for in-clinic or commercial laboratory testing
diagnosticopportunitymaybe lost
may limit the uptake of testing.
Call for advice before sampling. This advice is
Pre-anaestheticlaboratory screeningis commonly
usually provided by support or technical staff and
performed inveterinarypractices,althoughpatientse-
it is often not necessary tospeak to a pathologist
lection,and the range of tests to be included in the
Provide theinformationrequested by the
profile,are controversial issues.Proponents believe
laboratory.This includes details of:patient and
that,in addition to the identificationof subclinical dis-
practice; species; test required; clinical history;
 ease, pre-anaesthetic laboratory testing improves prac-
and specific lesions
ticeprofitability.However,it isessential torealizethat
Where possible, comply with laboratory advice
suchtesting mayrevealclinicallyinsignificant,abnormal
regarding sample collection and always comply
test results (see Chapter 2) which may in turn trigger
with appropraitenationalpostalregulations.Details of
unnecessary,extensive laboratory investigations.
these are available from the diagnostic laboratory
Keep a referral log of the samples despatched.It
Establishing a relationship with a
is useful toincludethe expectedturnaround time
of each sample and detailsof any conversations
commercial laboratory
with thelaboratory,so thatotherstaff members
When selecting a commercial laboratory it is important 
donothaveto duplicatepatient follow-ups
to consider both scientific and personal factors.For
Discuss the cases with the clinical pathologists;
example,twolaboratoriesmayprovidea similarserv-
furtherinterpretationoradvicemaybeavailable
ice,but the practice may already have a trusting
after a full case discussion
relationshipwithapathologistinone facility.lngeneral
 Ask for a review of the report or a second opinion
terms,thefollowing arerealisticexpectationsof the
if necessary.Human error is alwayspossible
service that shouldbereceived when usinga commer-
Provideimmediatefeedbacktostaff and
cial diagnosticlaboratory:
managementregarding anyproblems encountered.
2
Chapter 1  Making the most of in-clinic and external laboratory testing
Running a practice laboratory
Protective clothing.A clean,long-sleeved
laboratory coat shouldbeworn.A disposableapron
It isfirstnecessary to decide on the tests thatwill be
andglovesarerecommendedwhenworkingwith
offered in thepracticelaboratory.lt is essential that
blood, and safety goggles should be available for
these assayswill provideaccurateresultswhenper-
usewhile handlinghazardous chemicals
formedin the practice,by the staff available.Teststhat
Library spacefortextbooks,standardoperating
arebased uponsimpleprinciples,whichuserelatively
procedures (SOPs),equipment logs and sample
robustequipment,andarehighlyrepeatable,areeas-
logs.
ily transferred to the practicelaboratory.However,
cliniciansmustalwayshaverealisticexpectationsof
Health and safety
the accuracyandrepeatabilityof morecomplex in-
Health and safety at work is theresponsibilityof both
clinic testing.There are many occasions where it is
the employer and employee.Employers have a re-
prudentto confirm abnormalitiesidentified inthe clinic,
sponsibilityto protect their staff fromhazards,but
by follow-uptesting at a commercial laboratory,and it
employeeshave aresponsibility to takereasonable
ishelpful to formulate a planforsuch follow-uptesting.
care of themselvesand others.Employers,or the
Irrespectiveof therangeof teststhatwill beper-
PracticeSafetyOfficer,should ensurethatstaffun-
formed in the practice laboratory, it is necessary to
derstand and complywiththe detailed contentsof the
practiceHealth andSafetyPolicyDocument.All vet-
withHealthandSafetyregulations,equipmentmainte-
erinarypracticesmustcomplywith theregulations
nance, laboratory documentation and staff training.
listed below.
Thepracticelaboratory:general
HealthandSafetyatWorkAct1974and
Laboratoryworkshouldonlybecarried outinroomsor
Managementof Health and Safety atWork
areasdedicatedtothatuse.ldeally,apracticelabora-
Regulations1999
tory should provide the following:
It is important that anybody working in thepractice
laboratory is eithersuitably trained oris working under
Dedicated laboratoryspace(nota thoroughfare
thesupervisionofa trainedperson.Trainingincludes
or extension or a room used for other purposes)
not only technical proficiency, but training in safe
Non-slip,impervious flooring which can withstand
systems of work,including operation of all laboratory
cleaningwithstrong disinfectants
equipment. It is the employer's duty:
Dust-free environment,withgoodventilation
Quiet
Toprovideequipmentwhichisfreeofrisk
Sufficient work space to allow easy manipulation
To provide an environment which is freeof risk
of samples and equipment
To ensure that materials areused,moved and
Refrigerator.This should bekept tidywith
storedsafely
adequate space between contents toallow
To ensure safe systems of work are implemented
optimal performance.Flammable materialand
To provide the information and training
foodshouldnotbestored inthelaboratory
necessaryforhealthandsafety
refrigerator.The temperatureshould berecorded
To provide protective clothing
regularly.Where samplingprotocols indicate that
Toprovide adequate first aidfacilities
a sample should be frozen,the recommended
Toensure that the appropriatesafetysigns are
temperature is usually-20°C. The freezer units
present and maintained
withinrefrigeratorsandsomedomesticfreezers
To monitor safety.
donot reach this temperature
Sink
In order tocomplywith the above,it is necessary
Storage spaceforconsumables and chemicals.
for the employerto assess the risks to employees'
The latter should not be stored on high shelves
health and safety,torecord that risk assessment (if
Awashbasin,preferablywithelboworfoot
therearefiveormoreemployees)and totakethe
operation,situated closeto the exit.Bactericidal
actions identified as necessary.There are specific
hand wash and paper towels should be provided.
regulations covering provision of protective clothing,
A mirror above thebasin ishelpful to checkfor
manualhandling,visualdisplayunits,provisionof the
splashesontheface and useof theeyewash
equipment and the display of safety signs.The reader
Eyewash,first aidkitfirst aidnotice advising staff
is referred to theHealth and SafetyExecutivefor
where toget first aid helpand anaccident book
detailed current information.
Appropriatefire extinguishers
The Advisory Committee on DangerousPatho-
Colour-coded waste bins(household waste in
gens produces guidelines that relate to the handling
black bags, clinical waste inyellowbags or rigid
ofspecificpathogens(AdvisoryCommitteeonDan-
containers)
gerous Pathogens 1995 and 2000). These guide-
Spillagekit.This shouldinclude papertowels,cloths,
lines shouldbeavailabletostaffperforming
disinfectant,gloves and forcepsforpicking upglass
microbiological testing.Pathogens are categorized
and a disposal container for the materials used
Flammablesolventscupboard(if flammable
produce disease in humans. Some organisms of
substances are used)
veterinary importance are included in Hazard Group
3
Chapter 1Making the most of in-clinic and external laboratory testing
3 and must behandled ina safetycabinet.These
Control of SubstancesHazardous to Health
includeBrucella,Chlamydophila(formerlyChlamy
(COSHH)2002,Control ofPollutionActand
dia)psittaciMycobacterium,EchinoccocusandToxo
EnvironmentProtectionAct
plasmagondil.Inveterinarydiagnosticlaboratories,
Employers should assess all products used in the
most risk comesfrom faeces orurine although it is
veterinary practice,with regard to the COSHH regula-
important to remember that theriskof handling indi-
tions(Control of Substances Hazardous to Health
vidual samples isoften not known,and that all sam-
2002).The aim is to identify risks associated with the
ples should be handled as if they have a potential risk.
useof individualproducts and to takestepstoreduce
Avian tissues,ovine abortionmaterial and feline fae-
that risk. lf there are five employees or more, the
cesare considered topresent a significantriskof
assessment should be made in writing or stored on a
infection (C. psittaci, T. gondin) and should not be
computer.For each individual chemical or groupof
handled by pregnant women.In addition,primate
chemicals,the assessmentshould containinformation
samples may pose a risk to laboratory staff and it is
regarding the storage, spillage and disposal proce-
 essential to confirm that the diagnostic laboratory is
dures,and any specific first aid requirements in the
happy toreceive suchsamples before dispatch.
event of an accident(Figure 1.1).They should be read
RISKASSESSMENTFORM
Ref No..
Initial assessor.
Signed.
Date
HAZARD
RISK..
1.
Who is at risk?.
2.
How serious is the risk?
Insignificant [
1
Minor[
]
Potentialy major []
Details
3.
What is theprobabilityof it occurring?
Very unlikely[
]Unlikely[
]Likely[
]Very likely [
Comments
Is there a risk to health?
Yes [
No[
门
Details
Is there a risk to the environment?
Yes [
No[
Details.
Who is responsible for this area,procedure or task?.
7.
What controlmeasuresareinplace?
What protective equipment is provided?
Arespecialproceduresneeded forthefollowingandifso aretheyinplace?:
First aid
Yes[
]ON
Details....
Fire
Yes[
No[
Details ..
Spillage
Yes[
1
No i
Details .
Storage
Yes[
No[
Details
10
Arecurrent controls ormeasuressatisfactory?
Yes [
]No[
11.
If not,what additional controlsormeasuresareneeded?
Targetdateforimplementation...
Action to be taken by
Who monitors this risk?...
Date for next review.
Supervisor.
Signed
Date..
1.1
An example of a risk assessment form (BSAVA, 2000).
Chapter 1 Making the most of in-clinic and external laboratory testing
by employees andbereadily available at all times.
Protective clothing should be worn
Assessmentsshouldbereviewedatregularintervals,
No food or drink should be consumed in the
but alsowhere thereisreasontoquestion thevalidity
laboratoryorstored inthelaboratoryrefrigerator
of the assessment or when working practices change.
Cosmetics shouldnot be applied in the laboratory
The categories of information included in a COSHH
Handsmust bewashed frequently,andbefore
assessment include:
leaving thelaboratory
Any cuts or grazes must be covered with a
Identificationandnameofactivity
waterproofdressing
Identification and list of hazardous substances
 Smoking is not permitted
Identificationofroutebywhich they are hazardous
Nothing should be placed in the mouth,
Protection required
e.g.pipettes,pens,pencils
Means of disposal
Open-toed sandals should not be worn
Assessment of risk.
Visitorsshouldbe accompanied at all times
The laboratory should be kept tidy (including
CollectionandDisposalof WasteRegulations1992
floors and walkways) and work tops should be
Clinicalwasteandchemicalwastefromthelaboratory
disinfected aftereachworksession
must be disposed of correctly.Clinical waste is defined
Instructions on equipmentmust befollowed.Do
as any waste which consists of, or is contaminated by,
not attempt to over-ride safety systems on
animal tissue,blood orotherbody fluids.lt should be
equipment,e.g. centrifuges
placed in yellowbags orcontainers,ready for collection
 Standard operating procedures for specimen 
by a licensedwastedisposal company.Rigidyellow
handling and laboratory methods must be read 
containers are used forthe disposalof'sharps'and glass
andcomplied with
slides. Used plastic materials, such as pipette tips,
COSHH assessments for chemicals used,and
should be discarded into a suitable disinfectant for a
tasks performed within the laboratory must be read
minimum of 12 hours before transfer to a bag for
Allchemicalsshouldbeclearlylabelledwith
incineration.Bacteriologicalmediaand samples should
appropriate hazard warning signs
beautoclaved,usinga'dirty'autoclave,beforedisposal.
All spillages must be cleaned up immediately.
Refer to the COSHH assessments for specific
Reporting of Injuries,Diseases and Dangerous
information
Occurrence Regulations1995(RIDDOR)
Waste must bedisposedof in the correctcontainer.
Under these regulations, it is essential to report to the
Equipment
Health andSafetyExecutive anydeath,majorinjury,
The following pieces of equipment form the core of the
work-related disease or injury that causes an ab-
laboratory.Whenused appropriately,theycanprovide
sence of greater than3 days (including non-working
 a large amount of diagnostic information, or are used
days). In addition, the details and nature of any
 for optimal preparation of samples for further analysis.
accident should be logged in an accident book and the
book regularly reviewed by the Safety Officer or
Centrifuge
employerto determine if changes in working practices
Amicrohaematocritcentrifuge,formeasurement of PV,
arerequired.Theaccident bookshouldbekept for3
and a variable speed centrifuge, for centrifugation of
years and should include:
tialforeffectiveseparationofplasma andserumfor
Date and timeof accident
biochemical testing and also allows preparation of
.
Name and address of personnel involved
sedimented samples of cells from urine and body cavity
Place and nature of incident
fluids. However, the centrifugal force required to sepa-
Description of the incident.
rate blood is greater than that required to sediment the
cells inurine andbodycavityfluids,and it is essential to
First Aid Regulations1981
followmanufacturer'sguidelinesforeachsample type.
The minimum first aidprovisionon anywork site is a
Thenoise andvibrationof a centrifuge can create
suitablystocked first aidboxandan appointedperson
workplace stress so it is also useful to trial equipment
to take care of first aid issues.lf it is considered that
before purchase.Newer centrifuges have a locking
thereis asignificant riskof accidents then one ormore
device to prevent opening during operation. Older cen-
staff shouldbe trained in first aid techniques.
trifuges must have a warning label indicating that they
should not be opened while the rotor is stillspinning. The
Local laboratoryrules
safety plate of a microhaematocrit centrifuge should
All staff members should be familiar with the general
alwaysbescrewed inplacebeforeoperation.The
safetyrules(fire,accident,cleanliness)detailedinthe
contentsofthecentrifugeshouldbebalanced adequately
practice Health and Safety Policy. It is essential to
before operation to prevent excess vibration.
establish and enforce a set of local laboratory rules
The equipment should be kept clean and regularly
which decrease the riskof accidents and error in the
checked for signs of wear.lf a breakage orspill occurs
laboratory.Copies of the local safetyrules must be
themachine should be stopped and any aerosols
available to all members of staff and visitors entering
allowedto settlefor30minutesbeforeopening;it
the designated laboratory area. Local rules will com-
should thenbe decontaminatedwitha disinfectant
monlyinclude:
recommended by the manufacturer.
5
Chapter 1Making the most of in-clinic and external laboratory testing
1.2
The optical features of
amicroscope.
(Reproduced fromVeterinary
Interpupillary
adjustment
Nursing,3rdedn,2003,edited
Eyepiece
by DR Lane and B Cooper,with
Body
Eyepiecefocus
permissionfromElsevier.)
enses
Prism
Limb
Nosepiece
Vernier
Objective lenses
scale
Specimen
Coarse
-Stage
focus~
knob
Substage condenser
Fine
Aperture iris diaphragm
Diaphragmcontrol
focus
knob
Condenser
Light-
intensity
control
switchor
rheostsat
Light
Lens
Field iris diaphragmMirror
source
Refractometer
A refractomer (total solids meter) is used to measure
Place a slide on the microscope stage.
the specific gravity(SG)of urine and the total protein
2.
Rotate the 10Xobjective into position.
(TP) concentration of plasma and body fluids.Although
3.
Position the eyepieces so that thereisasingle mage.
refractometersmeasure therefractiveindexofa solu-
4.
Bring thecellularmaterialontheslideintofocus.
tion, they are calibrated to measure SG and TP. They
5.
Locate thefildisdaragmonlClothefildising
areeasytouse,provideveryvaluableinformationand
thebladesof the iris(whichappearasablackimageat the
requirejustasingledropofurine/fluid,ortheplasma
edges)asfaraspossible intothefield of view.Whenfullyclosed
froma microhaematocrit centrifuge tube.The calibra-
a smallareaof light isstill visible.
tionshouldbecheckedregularlyusing distilledwater
6.
Locate thecondenserfocuscontrol.Alter theheightof the
(SG = 1.ooo). The prism should be wiped with soft
condenser tobring theedgeof thefield irisblades intosharp
tissue aftereachuse andshouldbehandledwithcare
focus.
toavoidscratching the surface.
7.
Use thecondensercentringscrewstomovetheareaof interestto
the centreof thefieldof vision.
Microscope
Open the field iris until thelight flls the field of vision.
Monocular or binocular microscopes are available but
9.
the latter arepreferred forprolonged use.In addition,
down thetube.
10.Alter the aperture irisdiaphragm so that the discof light fills
there shouldbe comfortableviewingpositionsforspec-
tacled and non-spectacled operators. Facilities for
approximately 80%of themaximum diameter.Replacethe
photomicrography are available andmaybe helpful for
eyepiece.
training purposes.
Setting up a microscope for optimal image
Theobjectivesrequired aredetermined,inpart,by
1.3
quality.The controls mentioned are common to
the expected use.The most commonlyused combina-
all good quality microscopes,although their appearance
tion is two scanning objectives (4X,10x),a high dry
and location vary slightly.
objective (40X) and oil immersion (100x).However,a
20X objective and a 50X(oil immersion),although
freefromoil.Foroptimal usethemicroscopeshould be
expensive,arevaluable if alargevolume of haemato-
setupaccording totheprinciplesofKoehler(Figures
logy or cytology is expected.When using the 40X
1.2 and 1.3).The following tips should helpkeep the
objective,acoversliporthinlayerofoil isrequiredfor
microscopeingoodconditionandsolvesomeofthe
optimalimagequality.However,thislensmustbekept
common microscopy problems:
6
Chapter1Making themost of in-clinicandexternal laboratorytesting
Themicroscope should be covered toprotect it
adhesion and optimal staining. In addition, a bevelled
edge makesblood filmpreparationeasier, anda frosted
fromdust
It shouldnotbesubject tointensevibration
endallowseasyidentificationof thepatient,dateand
Thelight rheostatshouldbe turned down tothe
type of sample.
lowest level before switching off;ensure it isat
thelowest levelbeforeswitchingon
Selecting abiochemistryorhaematology
Anyoil shouldbecleaned fromthe lenses
analyser
immediately, and from the immersion lens at the
When selecting an individual piece of equipment it is
end of each session.Lint-free tissues can be
essentialto consider allofthe factors in Figures 1.4 and
used toremove excess oil and then the lens
1.5;above all, the equipment should bevalidated for
cleaned with lens cleaning fluid. Lens fluid should
the species for which it will be used,and should
beused sparingly,because,over time,any
produce consistent,accurate and helpful results.
solventsusedmay loosen the adhesivewhich
holds the lens inplace
Themicroscope shouldbeserviced regularlyby
General
a trained engineer
Validated for species?
Replacement bulbs must not be handled with
Robust?
barefingers(whetherhot or cold)
 Before viewing a slide,it should be checked that 
Footprint and workspace available?
the cellularmaterial is on theuppermost side.lf
Range of assays available (check the usefulness of unfamilar assays)
not, then one will be able to focus at low power,
but not at high power or using oil immersion 
Operation
The condenserposition should be checked
Technical skilrequiredforoperation and training for nwoerators?
(Figure 1.2, 1.3) if the image appears refractile or
Batch or single samples only?
thereisa lightingproblem
Large “hands-on'time?
Theremaybeconsiderableheatoutputfrom
Profledeterminedbymanfacturerorcanindividual testsbe
 some microscopes and they should be handled 
selected?
carefully afterprolonged use.
Volume of sample required?
Portable blood glucose meter
Samplerequirements,e.plasmaversus serum(serum takeslonger
Portable blood glucose meters (PBGMs) are avail-
to prepare)?
ablefor themeasurement ofblood glucose inwhole
Interferences, i.lipaemia and haemolysis?Methods which are
blood. In two studies, the performance of individual
significantlyaffected by lipaemiarequiremore attention to the sample
metersinrelationtoalaboratoryreferencemeasure-
collectionprotocolandmayrequireadditionalpreparationstps
ment was found to be variable(Cohn et al., 2000;
 Reagents - number of tests per reagent bottle?
Wess and Reusch, 2000) and it is difficult to give
Shelf-ife for wet eagents once reconstuted?
definitive guidelines,since individual studieshave
Plumbing requirements?
used different experimental design and statistical
methods. Information regarding the possible bias of
Electrical requirements?
an individual PBGMmaybeobtainedfrom themanu-
Transfer of data to patient records?
facturer or the veterinary literature.It is recognized in
human and veterinary medicine that the use of insuf-
Health and Safety
ficient blood,and failure to use control material,are
Check COSHH assessment for reagents
majorpotential sourcesof error.
Disposal of waste?
Safetyof equipment operation?
Stains
Rapidhaematologystains,e.g.RapiDiff ll,givestain
Technical support and repair
ing characteristicssimilar to theRomanowskystains
commonlyused in large laboratories.The colour of
Technical support available?
the cells may be adjusted by altering the length of
Speed of advice?
contact time with each stain.With use,the stain
Value of advice offered and success of recommended interventions?
becomes exhausted and thestaining times should be
Is troubleshooting possible at the practice orwillequipment have tobe
increased. Thick preparations, such as lymph node
returned tomanufacturer?
aspirates,also require increased contact with the
Replacement equipment availableifequipmenthastobereturnedto
individual stains.Otherstains commonly used in the
manufacturer?
practicelaboratoryincludenewmethyleneblue,which
is used foridentification of reticulocytes(see Chapter
Warranty?
4),andSedistainurine stain,foridentificationofcells
 Service agreement available?
and casts in urine sediment.
Cost of repairs (discuss with other users)?
Spare parts available?
Microscopeslides
Good quality microscope slides are essential.Poor
Factors to consider when investing in a
1.4
laboratory analyser.
7
Chapter1Making themost of in-clinicandexternal laboratorytesting
andthatthedocumentsareregularlyreviewed for
Capital cost
possible improvements.Changes in instrumentation
or method may require a change in the SOP. The time
Capital;lost interest
takentoprepare thisdocumentation isconsiderable,
Running cost
but thelong-termvaluewithregard to safety,training
Calibration;consumablespermaintenance cycle;consumablesper
and qualitycannotbeoverstated.Thefollowing infor-
patientsample;wastereagent
mation iscommonly includedin technical SOPs:
Labourcost
Purposeof SOP-the scope of theSOP and if
Analysis;maintenance;reviewing qualityprocedures;troubleshooting
necessary,why thetaskisperformed
Qualitycost
Principleoftest
Health andSafety-summary of,orreferral to,
Qualitycontrolmaterial;auditof performance(equipment and
COSHH assessments for individual reagents.
operators)
Awarenessof therisks of operating equipment
Training cost
Equipment required-majorequipment required
and any specific operating instructions
Initialstaff trainingsubsequentstafftrainingcontinuingprofessional
Reagents - list of reagents,calibration and
developmentforveterinarystafprovidinginterpretations
controlmaterialrequired
Buildingcost
Samples - list of the preferred sample type and
Space forequipment and consumables
alternatives which might be used.Any sampling
considerations should be highlighted,e.g. animal
must be fasted,sample must be collected2
1.5
Coststo considerwhenselectingan analyser
hours after feeding
Method - detailed steps of the method of
performing the task and the disposal of anywaste
Atleasttwoorthreeoptions,whereavailable,sould
Results - how results should be reported, e.g.
be considered,and the potentialadvantages and disad-
total protein reported in g/l
Interpretation - guidelines for interpretation and 
equipment trial.Unfortunately,thereare currentlyonlya
referenceintervals
small numberof independentvalidation studies for
References
some of themore commonlyusedveterinary analysers
Appendix-anyworksheets required,e.g.blood
but informationmaybe obtained fromsalesrepresenta-
film examinationresultssheet.
tives,personalcontactwithotherusersandpostingson
internetfora.A trialperiodisrecommendedtoselect
Stafftraining
equipment tailored to the individual practice,and to
The range of tests offered by a practice laboratory
determine the usefulnessof technical support and train-
determinesthelevelofexpertiserequiredbystaff,and
ing.lt shouldbenoted,however,thatsomeequipment
the training requirements. It is important that anybody
(especiallyhaematology analysers)requires a critical
working in thepracticelaboratory is either suitably
levelof laboratory skills andthefullbenefitof this
trained orisworking underthe supervision of acompe-
equipment maynotberealized during a triaf period.
tent person.Training should include:
When considering the cost of in-clinic equipment
prior to purchase,it is essential to evaluate the full
General safetyprocedures(fire,firstaid,manual
potential cost(Figure 1.5),which shouldbecompared
handling of loads) and local laboratory rules
totheexpectednumberoftestsperweekormonth,and
The use of COSHH assessments
expectedrevenue.
Disposal of wasteand treatment ofspillages
All equipment should be installed according to the
Underpinning scientific knowledge related to the
manufacturer's guidelines.Installation is likely tobe
analysesperformed
performed by the sales representative ortechnical staff
Training foreachSOP,task or group of tasks
andmayrequirespecial attentiontowatersupplies,
(technical proficiency).
electrical supply and computerlinkages.Equipment
should bemaintained according tomanufacturer's
It is important tomaintain trainingrecordsforeach
instructions and serviced by a competent engineer.
memberof staff.These should include details of train-
ingineachitemlistedabove,Drecordsand,ideally,
Systemsofwork
a current Cv.
Astandardoperatingprocedure(SOP)detailsinforma-
Earlyinthetraining period it is likely that all workwill
tion regarding a specific task or set of tasks. There
be checked,followedbyaperiodof‘self-referralEven
should beanSOPtocoveralltasksthat arecommonly
highly experienced staff seek other opinions,espe-
undertaken,such as use and maintenance of the
cially inhaematology and cytology,and it should be
centrifuge, and performing a urinary sediment exami-
easyforpractice stafftohave access toa second
nation.Staff should follow theSOP at alltimes,allow-
opinion,whetheron-site,orfromacommercial labora
ingasafeandstandardizedapproachtolaboratory
tory.Once a memberof staff hasbeenfully trainedand
testing andoperationofequipment.lt isnecessaryfor
 deemed competent to perform an analysis it is still
supervisors to check that staff complywith theSOP
necessary to monitor his or her performance,as it is
8
Chapter1Making themost of in-clinic andexternal laboratorytesting
easyfor stafftowork independently andgradually
Quality control
modify theprocedure overtime.Observation and audit
Quality control(QC) involves the use of solutionswith
are themain methodsof ensuring that staffproduce
a knownanalytical compositionandofstatisticalmeth-
consistent workof an acceptable quality.
ods to document that equipment,reagents and opera-
tors are performing within expected limits.The use of
Trainingresources
this material is outlined in Chapter 2. In addition,
A range of textbooks and haematology atlases are
external QC schemescanbe used to check theper-
available,whichdetail methodsforthepractice labora-
formance of the practice laboratory against others
tory.Anexcellent arrayof imagescan alsobefoundon
using similarequipment.AlthoughexternalQCschemes
the websites of many veterinary schools and institutes.
are used by most commercial laboratories, to the
However, the availability of practical courses or work-
 author's knowledge, there is only one such scheme in
 shops that provide hands-on experience of practical
the UK for practice equipment.
tasks is limited.
Quality management 
Quality assessment
Qualityassurance,ortotalqualitymanagement,referst
Thepracticeshould have areviewpolicyforall QC
a setofprocedures,systemsof workand documentation
procedures,including SOPs and QC results.It is im-
that is in place to limit the risk of laboratory error and to
portanttosolicitandrecordfeedbackfromallthe
 maintain the quality of a service or product. Details of 
clinicians using thepracticelaboratory.Do they have
qualitymanagementareprovided inChapter2,but the
confidence in the results? Does the service answer
following components are important in large diagnostic
their laboratoryneeds?ldeally,feedbackfrom clini-
laboratories and are relevant to the practice laboratory.
cians and qualityprocesses should be used toplan
improvements in the service.Changes in systems
Quality processes
should thenbemonitored to ensure that they do
TheformulationofclearandrelevantSOPs,compliance
actually deliver the expected improvement.Some of
with those SOPs，adequate staff training and proper
themostcommonproblemsencountered arehigh-
selection and care of laboratory equipment should pro-
lighted inFigure1.6and it maybeuseful toconsider
duce accurate, reliable results most of the time. How-
these while planning quality systems for a laboratory.
ever,theuseofqualitycontrol materialsandquality
assessments detect the potential for error(before it
Laboratorydocumentationchecklist
becomes important to the patient) and ensure that any
The following logs are helpful to ensure that allaspects
errorswhich do occur are thoroughly evaluated.
Problemand cause
Action
Inaccurateresults:limitations of equipment ormethod
Select equipment that isvalidated
Understand its uses and limitations
Plan follow-up testingat a diagnosticlaboratory
Laboratoryerrorduetofailureofproperuseormaintenanceofequipment
Produce SOPs forequipment use and maintenance
Ensure compliance withSOPs
RunQCmaterial
Laboratory error due to lack of standardized methods,training and
Write SOPs for technical tasks
verificationof unexpectedresults
Plan stafftraining
Verifyunexpectedresults/seekadvicefromaveterinaryclinical
pathologist
Resultsatributedtowrongpatient
Labelsampleclearlymmediatelyaftersamlecollecton
Keep laboratory tidy
Reduceriskof transcriptionerrorwherepossible
Plan followuptesting where test results arenot consistent wth th
clinical presentation
Incorrectintpretationdutonadequateraningnsufficientlnica
Ensure sampling protocols are followed
therapeutic information,orassumptions regarding sample timing
Interpretresultsin the light of priordrug therapy
Ensuresufficientunderpinning knowledgeandongoingCPD
Invest ingood textbooks andeducationalresources
Failuretoorderappropriatefollow-ontests
Itiseasytolimit testselectiontothosetestsavailableinthepractice
laboratoryandtorepeat thosetestswhenothersmaybemore
appropriateSeekadvicefromaveterinaryclinicalpathologist
Extensivelaboratoryinvestigationsinhealthypatients
Not allabnormal testresults indicate disease.Mild abnormalitiesmaybe
noted in healthy patients.See Chapter 2
1.6
Common pitfalls and limitations of in-clinic laboratory testing.
9
Interpretation of laboratory data
Joy Archer
Introduction
Blood
Withbloodcollectionforhaematology,biochemistry
Laboratorytestresultsformpartof thedatabase from
and special tests,venipuncture should beperformed
which a clinical diagnosismay be made.History,clini-
asatraumatically and asrapidly aspossible,and the
cal examination and ancillary tests (laboratory tests,
samplesubmitted inthecorrectcontainerfor the test.
radiographs, etc.) are interpreted in conjunction with
If blood is collected from indwelling catheters, the
each other to obtain the best possible diagnosis. Labo-
correctprotocol forflushing and sampling should be
ratorydata shouldnotbe interpreted in isolationbut
carefullyfollowed.Traumaticordelayed collectioncan
with anunderstandingof thelaboratorymethods used,
cause plateletactivation and formationofmicrothrombi
and thepotential errorscausedby inappropriatesam-
in the collected sample which'may not be visible to the
ple collection and handling.Appropriate quality control
naked eye, but willinterfere with haematological analy
systemsshould beimplemented in every laboratory to
sis.Trauma can also damage erythrocyte membranes
minimize error.Testresults areinterpretedby compari-
and cause haemolysis.
sonwithreferencevaluesforagroupofhealthyani-
 Unless a vacutainer system for blood collection is
mals and withknowledgeof how diseaseprocesses
used, the needle should be removed from the syringe
can changetheseresults.Theprinciplesofthe method-
before thebloodistransferredgentlytothe tubetoavoid
ology of data analysis, and identification of abnormal
damage to the cells and to minimize haemolysis. With
results, should also be appreciated in relation to clinical
vacutainertubes,once the needlehaspierced thecap,
decision making.
blood should be allowed to transfer from the syringe to
 Errors may be introduced into diagnostic tests at
the tube without added pressure on the plunger.
three main stages:
If a singlesampleistobedividedbetweenseveral
collecting tubes it is good practice to collect into an
Pre-analytical:involving samplecollection and
empty(serum) tube first before collection into tubes
handling
containing anticoagulant agents,to prevent possible
Analytical:involving sample testing andresult
contamination,especiallywith ethylenediaminetetra-
reporting
acetic acid (EDTA) as this affects many analytes.
Post-analytical: involving analysis and
EDTA contamination causes increases inpotassium,
interpretation of test results.
and decreases in calcium,magnesium, creatine kin-
ase (CK) and alkaline phosphatase (ALP). Tubes
shouldbefilled to the correctvolume and gently in-
Pre-analyticalerrors
vertedtomixthebloodwiththepre-measured contents
(e.g EDTA, sodium citrate,lithium heparin). It is impor-
 Poor quality or inappropriate samples can lead to the
tanttocollectan adequatevolumeof bloodforthetests
generationof poorqualityresults andseriouserrors.
required, remembering that approximately 50-60% of
Errorsmaybeintroduced during:
thevolume isplasma/serum.
Sample collection
Haematology: For routine haematology, the antico-
 Sample handling
agulant of choice is EDTA (potassium or sodium salt).
 Sample submission to the laboratory.
It causes thefewest artefactual changes in themor-
phologyofbloodcellsinmostmammalianspecies,
Sample collection
though it is unsuitable for many avian and reptilian 
Everyeffortshould bemadetoobtainthebestpossible
blood cells.If the concentration of EDTA is excessive
sample for testing. Sampling is influenced by the test-
inrelationtobloodvolume,cellswill shrinkandafalsely
ing required. For example, urine for microbiology
low packed cell volume (PCV) will be obtained. EDTA
testingshouldbecollected asepticallybycystocentesis,
tubes less than half full (>3.0 mg EDTA/ml blood)
while forroutine urinalysis anuncontaminatedvoided
reduce the PCV by 5%,while machine-measured
sample collected intoa clean container isoften appro-
haematocrit is unaffected because the red cells re-
priate. Urine from the cage floor is unsuitable for either
expandwhen theyaremixedwithdiluent intheana-
analysis and could introduce artefacts.
lyser(Cornbleet,1983).Ifliquid EDTAis used this can
11
Chapter 2 Interpretation of laboratory data
add to the error by diluting the sample,thusfurther
Food consumption can affect biochemistry tests,
lowering cell counts.Conversely,nsufficient EDTAin
inparticular cholesterol, triglyceride and glucose.
relationtobloodwill leadto clotformation.Small clots
Unless postprandial samples are required (e.g. for
in the sample,which might be missed by visually
bile acid measurement) anovernight(12hour)
inspecting the sample,can cause errors in machine-
fast isbestforgeneral biochemical tests.In some
measuredparameters,inparticulartheplateletcount
animals a longer fast, up to 24 hours, may be
and white cell count.
needed to eliminate such effects.
Therearenormaldiurnalvariationsinsome
Biochemistry:Biochemical tests can beperformed
hormone levels,therefore a set time may be
on either serumorplasma.Manylaboratoriesprefer
indicated for collection of samples for
serum since thisreduces theprobabilityofmicrofibrin
measurementof these hormones,especially if
clot formationin thesample andinterference with instru-
they are tobesequential.
ment automatic sampling. Heparin salts (sodium,am-
monium or lithium)bind and inhibit thrombin,preventing
If samples are tobe collected for monitoring drug
clot formation; therefore the blood can beprocessed
therapy,collection timescanbeimportant and should
rapidlytoyieldplasma,whichisusedformanyhormone
be timed to correspond withpeak and trough drug
tests as well as routine biochemistry.Plasma from
levels;the times should be carefully recorded.Special
stored blood orunseparated samplescan often contain
tests,such as glucose tolerance tests and hormone
small clots which interfere at the analysis stage.
stimulation tests,should have protocols defining test
If serum is needed,a plain tubeorone containinga
substance dosage and times of administration and
separatorgel canbeusedandsamplesshould be held
samplecollection.Timesshouldbecarefullyrecorded
atroom temperatureuntil full clotformationhasoc-
on the sample containers.
curred,usually 15 minutes for small animals, before
centrifugation.lf afull clotdoesnot develop orthere is
 Sample handling
inadequatecentrifugation,fibrin clots may develop in
Once asample hasbeencollected into thecorrecttube
the sample and cause problems during analysis.Clots,
it should beprocessedpromptly.Forhaematology it is
whetherlargeorsmall,cancauseerrors inhaemato-
alwaysbesttomakeoneormorebloodfilmscloseto
logy, biochemistry and blood gas analyses, and also
the time of collection and air dry them.Although EDTA
withcoagulationscreening andshould,therefore,be
preservescell morphology,changesbegin to appear
avoided.Withseparatorgeltubes nofurthermanipula-
withinhours,especiallyinwhitecells.Samplesshould
tionisrequired after centrifugation as the gel is inert
be held in therefrigeratorbefore shipping and/or ana-
andseparates the cells and their continuedmetabo-
lysing.Blood films and cytology smears should not be
lism from the serum/plasma.Most analytes are not
refrigerated or kept close to formalin.Samples for
affected by this substance,but gel tubes are inappro-
plasma andserumshouldbe handledcarefullyto avoid
priatefor therapeutic monitoring of many drugs.For
haemolysis and shouldbe transferred tosuitable stor-
other tubesthe serum/plasma should be carefully
age tubes andstored atthe correcttemperatureforthe
removed from the sedimented cells and placed in the
test(eitherrefrigerated orfrozen).
correct tube (plastic/glass) as soon as possible.
Certainsamplesrequirespecial andtimelyhand-
All tubesshouldbe labelled with the animal's name,
ling.lf reliable results are tobeobtained fromsamples
hospital number date and collection time(if important
thatshouldarrive atthespecialtestinglaboratory
for the test) as soon aspossible after they arefilled to
frozen, these samples must be maintained in this
prevent errors in sample identification.
condition from the time ofcollection andpreparation
If samplesfor glucose are tobestored orsent toa
until analysis.Similarly,if there is delaybetween col-
laboratory,the blood should be collected intofluoride/
lection and analysisofwholeblood samplesforblood
oxalate which inhibits enolaseand,when centrifuged,
gas analysis,gas can diffuse and pH changes occur.
prevents theoxidationofglucose.Sodium citratebinds
Samples forionized calcium and magnesiummeas-
calcium and citrate plasma is used for coagulation
urement must also behandled according to strict
testing.Details of sample volumes required and choice
temperature and timeprotocolsfor reliableresults.
of tubes for a range of tests can be found in Appendix 2.
Samplesforglucose determinationneed tobeplaced
influoride/oxalate,orbeseparatedpromptly andfro-
Sampletiming
zenifanalysisistobedelayed.Glucosedecreases at
Physiological changescan affectsamples,therefore
a rateof3%per hour if unseparated samples are held
the time of sample collection can be important,de-
at room temperature.
pendingonwhichtest istobeperformed.
Samplesubmission
Exercise orexcitement/fearcancause changes
 Submission of inappropriate samples can be the source
 in haematology and may lead to increased
ofnumerouslaboratoryerrors and,inextreme cases,
neutrophil and decreased lymphocyte counts.
will lead totherejectionof thesamplesbythelabora-
These changes are most often seen in young
tory.Thecorrectvolumeofsampleshouldbesubmit-
stressed cats.
ted in the appropriate container,clearly labelled with
Hyperglycaemia is also commonly seen in cats
sample andpatient identification and dateofcollec-
asaresult of stress.
tion.Alongwith thesamplesthereshouldbea clearly
·
Dehydrationmay lead toincreasedPCV.
legible submission form.This should indicate the tests
12
Chapter2Interpretationof laboratorydata
requested,patientidentification(name,number,p
using the equipment and/or testprocedurefor which
they are provided. Manufacturers provide information
cies,age,breedandsex)andabriefhistoryandclinical
for
findings,including information on any drug therapy or
on theexpectedperformance of suchmaterials.lf the
blood replacement products given.Samplesshould be
resultsobtained in alaboratoryare outsidetheselimits,
ne
sent to the testing laboratory using courier services or
patient samples should not be run on the instruments in
reliable mail services;they should arrive with the short-
questionuntil the cause hasbeenfound and corrected
est possible time delay to avoid ageing artefacts in the
and the instrumentortesthasbeenrecalibrated.
samples.Many laboratories have set criteria for sam-
Controls
plerejectioninordertominimizesourcesof laboratory
Aqueous and protein matrix 'serum'-based control
analytical and reporting error. Amongst these are:
materials are commercially available.These contain
Inadequatesampleidentification
multiple analytes and havebeenpre-tested andvali-
 Sample in poor condition due to improper collection,
dated by the manufacturer. They are available for all
tubes, sample volumes, handling and transportation
common haematological and biochemical tests and
Id
Severe haemolysis
canbeobtained fortestvalues at low,medium and high
levels of the expected test results range. A range of
ng
Severe lipaemia
expected values is provided with the control material
al
Markedicterus
Microbiology samples in incorrect transport medium
and theresults obtained in the laboratory should be
within this range.
st
Sample too old.
Twocontrol materialsforeachanalyteshould be
d
At the pre-analytical stage, the greatest numbers of 
run at least once every 24hours.Usually one control
ed
errorsforhaematologytests are introduced by sample
has values representative of a reference healthy'
ageing, and the primary sources of error for biochemi-
valueand theotherhas abnormal highor lowvalues.
cal tests are sample haemolysis,lipaemia and icterus.
Thesematerials are designed toproducevalues in
ranges suitable for human samples, which are not 
e
always similar to the ranges seen in dogs and cats.
.S
Analyticalerror
Therefore control sample pools prepared from animal
Analyticalerrorcanbeintroduced at the analysis stage
serum/plasma may also be used with each batch of
asa consequenceofpre-analytical samplefactors
 patient samples. Usually, if the control samples give
(e.g.haemolysis, lipaemia),or can result from prob-
results within the expected range then it is assumed
lems with equipment or reagents, or test methodology.
that thepatienttestresults are alsovalid andcan
Most laboratorieshave standard operating procedures
be accepted.
(SOPs) for every stage of the analytical process. In
Accuracy and precision in laboratory tests
 addition, laboratories document any unexpected 
For interpretation of laboratory tests to be useful, it is
changes and deviations at each stage of the process,
important to know and set the accuracy,precision and
which canbe reviewedon a regularbasis or when a
allowable error in those tests and then to monitor test
problem is detected.
performance with quality control procedures.
Equipment and reagents
 Detailed records of equipment maintenance according
Accuracy
In a group of replicate values obtained on a sample,
to themanufacturer'sinstructionsshould bekept and
the closer themean of these comes to the trueor
anyfailuresofperformance addressed.Reagents and
knownvalue,themore accurateis the measurement
materialsforcalibration and control should be invent-
 or method. This is a measure of the systematic error
oried with dates of receiptand lot and batchnumbers;
(bias) (Figure 2.1).
they shouldbe stored under the conditionsrecom-
mended by themanufacturers and discardedwhen
outdated.When a newbatchor lot of reagents/
 calibrators/controls is started, its performance should
be comparedwith theoldbatchand sample testsrun
in parallelto ensure that there are no significant changes
in test performance.
Calibration
Daily or more frequent checks on instrument and rea-
(a)
(b)
(c)
sis of samples.Because mostinstruments and reagents
In the three circles,X is the true value and the
2.1
are designed forusewith humansamples,mostof the
dots represent results obtained from sequential
calibrators forboth equipment andreagentsare de-
analysis of the sample.(a)An accurate but imprecise
method:thedots are evenly distributedaround the true
signed to check performance while testing human sam-
value and themean of all thevalues is equal to the truevalue.
ples.Mostcalibrationmaterials aremade toresemble
(b) A precise but inaccurate method:the dots are closely
human blood,serum orplasma.Few still contain these
clustered together,showing that thereisgoodrepeatability,
products, unless in denatured form. They are produced
but the results are consistently biased.(c) A method which is
by themanufacturers toconform toNationalStandards
both accurate and precise:allthe dots are close to the true
guidelines andareusuallypre-assayedforperformance
value and are tightly clustered together.
13
Chapter2Interpretationof laboratorydata
Precision
befalselyrejected.Thus,thislimit hasa good detection
Inagroupofreplicatevaluesobtainedonasample,the
rateforerrorbut will falsely detecterrorin5%of‘good
closer these are to eachother themoreprecise is the
control runs.For many tests the limit is increased to
measurement or method.This is a measure of repro-
 3SD (13s) before rejection is indicated. Using the 13s
ducibilityorrandom error.
limit therewillbe a lowerrateof falserejection(around
 Accuracy and precision are important in the inter-
1%),butalsoalowerrateoferrordetection.The choice
pretation of test results. Assessing accuracy (system-
of ruleused isbased on the accuracy andprecisionof
atic analytical error) and precision (random analytical
the specific test and the number of controls used (i.e.
error)allows the determinationof thetotal analytical
low,mediumandhigh,orclosetonormal’andhighor
error of a method (see Figure 2.1).
low).Forexample the 12srule is suitable for electro-
lytes, as these methods have small SDs and CVs,
Allowableerror
while the 22s (see below) or 13s rule or multiple rules
This is defined as the maximum amount of error allow-
would be more appropriate forenzymes and hormone
 able in a test result for it to have any clinical diagnostic
tests, which have larger SDs and CVs.
usefulness orvalue.Once thelevel of allowable ana-
Controldata canbemonitoredusing Levey-Jennings
lytical errorhasbeendetermined,qualitygoalscanbe
control charts (Figure 2.2). These can be produced by
set and an internal quality control systemcanbeused
manually plotting data,but most modern instrument
to monitor achievement of these.
computers generate and store these charts and perform
Qualitycontrolsystems
statistical analysisof the datain them automatically.
Quality control (QC) systems usually monitor test per-
 Most charts are constructed to cover a period of 1 month 
or 30 days of data collection and analysis.
formance quality at three levels:
Daily (short-term) monitoring for systematic and
12s
random errors in each run to ensure thatpatient
sample test results are acceptable
11
Weekly to monthly (medium-term) monitoring for
the development of systematic errors(bias) and
2SD
toensure that theanalyticalmethodsremainfree
1SD
of random error
 Monthly to yearly (long-term) monitoring that
Mea
analytical methods remain as accurate and
1SD
precise as possible. This usually uses an internal
2SD
QC and an external proficiency testing control
system.The most widely used external QC
2.2
A Levey-Jennings plot systemwith anallowable
systemsarebased on human samples.These
error of ±2SD from the mean (1s).The first
includeUKNational ExternalQualityAssessment
seven values appear in control and are close to the
Service (NEQAS) for haematology and
mean,evenly distributedeither sideof it.Theeighthvalue
biochemistry and RandoxQualityAssessment
is outside the control limits(as indicated by the arrow),but
Service(RQAS)forbiochemistry.Aveterinary
subsequent values are within control limits.
microbiology QCservice is provided by the
For thedetectionofbothrandom and systematic
Veterinary Laboratory Agency (VLA).
error,moreeffectivemultiplerulequalitycontrolcharts
involving cumulative mean values and a wider range of
Internal qualitycontrol
control limits,canbeused.TheWestgard control rules
Each test method has a characteristicinherent vari-
ability which can be expressed as the standard devia-
are themost widely used multiplerulecharts and are
summarized below (x=mean value.)
tion(SD)or as the coefficient of variation(CV)
(calculated from SD/mean x 100%).The higher the
The 12srule(one control value exceedingx±
SD andCV,thegreatertheinherentvariabilitywithin
2SD) is an early warning for further testing using
the test. Typically the SD and CV are small for analytes
other control rules.
such as electrolytes,moderate forenzymes and much
The 13srule(one control value exceedingx±
largerformosthormones.Instrument-measured haem-
3SD) is sensitive to random error(il.e.imprecision).
atologyparameters have smaller CVs than those
The 22srule (two consecutive values exceedingx
derived from manual procedures.
+ 2SD or 2 consecutive values less than x-
TheSDcanbe established for a given testor
 2SD) is sensitive to systematic error (i.e. bias).
instrument by recording values obtained on control
The Rusrulerejects arun if one observation
materials over 20-30runs.Most analysers can store
exceedsx+2SD and one observation is less
this information and calculate theSDandCVvalues.
than x- 2SD within one run. (Two controls, the
These are then used to set control limits.Commonly
highlevel and the normalorlowlevel control,are
the mean±2SD is set as the limit for rejection of patient
used in each run.) This rule is sensitive to
test data,and thisisreferred toas the12srule underthe
random error(i.e.imprecision).
Westgard QC system(seebelow).Using the 2SD limit,
The 4srulerejectsarun if 4consecutivecontrol
95%ofcontrolvaluesareexpected tofallwithin the
observations all exceedx+1SDorare allless thanx
limits but5%of valueswill falloutsidethelimitsandso
-1 SD and is sensitive to systematic error (i.e. bias).
14
Chapter2Interpretationoflaboratorydata
The10Xrulerejects a run if 10 consecutive
majority of samples are from sick animals. However,
control observationsfallon one side of the mean,
deviationsfromusual test result patternscanprobably
and is sensitive to systematic error (bias).
stillbe used tomonitor performance.
These ruleshelp to classify the type of error (ran-
The delta check
dom error or systematic error).The analysis process
 Using computer-based systems it is possible to check
can thenbeinspectedforcausesof that error,the
results for the current sample in relation to previous
problem corrected and the control samplere-run.Fig-
samplesfrom thesamepatient.A deltacheckcantest
ure2.3 shows a Levey-Jennings chart with several
forresults thatvarybyaset amount orsetpercentage
rules being violated.
and isvaluableformonitoring analytes that change little
fromdaytodayforanindividualpatient,forexample
creatinine orPCV.ltisunlikelythat a consecutive series
13S
of tests would show marked changesunless there had
been a major change in the clinical condition.
Effectsofpre-analytical error in
4SD
compoundinganalyticalerror
3SD
Changesin the sample that occurred at the pre-analyti-
2SD
cal stage and affected the conditionof the sampleupon
1SD
arrival at the laboratory, can compound analytical
error.Both sample ageing and haemolysis can affect
Mea
haematology results. Common conditions that affect
1SD
analytical performance of biochemical assays are
2SD
haemolysis, lipaemia and icterus (Figure 2.4). Most 
3SD
laboratoriesreport thepresenceof haemolysis,lipae-
4SD
mia and icterus with the results,and usually state
12S
whetheritismildmoderateorsevereordenotethisn
41s
terms of 1+ to 4+. Frequently they willalso report the
A Levey-Jennings plot using the Westgard
2.3
Multirules system.The first five readings are in
control. Readings 6-9 all exceed 1SD on the same side of
Analyte
Effectof
Effectof
Effectof
the mean,violating the 4srule.This is an indicator of
haemolysis
lipaemia
icterus
systematic error(bias).Inaddition,reading7violatesthe
RBCcount
Decreased
1ruleFllwingrecalbratinof theanalerreading
10 and11are incontrolbut reading12exceedsDs,
Haemoglobin
Increased
Increased
violating the1srule,reflectingrandomerror.Trouble
concentration
shooting revealed an error in test procedure.Subsequent
Haematocrit
Decreased
readings are 'in control'.
MCHC
Increased
Increased
Some large laboratories have recently adopted a
Potassium
Increased
more sophisticatedcontrol systemalso developed by
Glucose
Decreased
Increased
Westgard,calledthe6SigmaRulesSystem(Westgard,
Creatinine
Decreased
Increased
2001),which was originally used forindustrial manu-
facturing processes. Most laboratory testing does not 
Calcium
Increased
Increased
as yet extend much beyond the control rules de-
Inorganic
Increased
Increased
scribedabove.
phosphate
Total protein
Increased
Externalqualitycontrol
(refractometer)
Most large veterinary laboratories also participate in
Albumin
Decreased
external QC programmes.In these a central agency
ALT
Increased
Increased
provides each laboratory in theprogramme with‘un-
AST
Increased
Increased
known',oftenpretested,materialsforbothhaemato-
logy and biochemical testing. The results obtained by
ALP
Increased
Increased
the laboratory are returned to the agency, which, in
GGT
Decreased
Variable
turn,issues statistical evaluations of all theresults,
Creatine kinase
Increased
providing an external unbiased measure of the accu-
Amylase
Decreased
Decreased
racy of thelaboratory'stestprocedures.
Lipase
Decreased
Decreased
Use of patient data in quality decisions
Bile acids
Decreased
Increased
Inhumantestinglaboratoriespatient data arecom-
Bilirubin
Increased
Increased
monly used as a method of monitoring test perform-
ance, as large numbers of their samples are from
2.4
Examples of common interferences. The effects
normal healthyindividuals.Unfortunately,inveterinary
vary depending on the analyser and test
laboratories it is not as easy to use this method as the
method being used.
15
Chapter2Interpretationof laboratorydata
expectedtype andseverityofinterference andtowhich
provided,e.g.dogvaluesforacatsample.Themajority
analytes.In casesof extreme contamination the tests
oferrorsat thisstageare,however,relatedtontrr
may not be performed.
tation. Error may occur because the person inter-
Many laboratories have developed interfero-
preting the results is a third party and is incompletely
grammesfor usewith their instruments and for all
informed (for example, of a history of drug therapy), or
biochemical tests.To construct an interferogramme a
because the clinician in charge of the case is unaware
serum/plasma sample is split intoaliquots inwhich
of certain changes that can occurinlaboratorytests in
varyingamountsofhaemolysis/lipaemia/icterusarecre-
certain conditions.
ated.To create haemolysis a blood clot ismacerated
and thehaemolysed fluidharvestedbycentrifugation
and its haemoglobin content determined.This is then
Units of measurement
added toclearserum/plasma atvarying concentrations,
In many countries,laboratory testresults arereported in
which canbemeasured using a haematologyanalyser
Sl units (Systeme International dUnites),while in the
and subjectively visually graded as 1+ through to 4+,
 USA they are still widely reported in conventional units 
justas clinical samples aregraded.Apanelof biochemi-
(non-Sl units) based on mass gravimetric measure-
cal tests is run on the samples and the effect of the
ments. Most recent textbooks and veterinary journals
varying levels of haemolysis on theresults is plotted
nowhavetestresultsreportedinbothtypesofunit.Many
graphically.Inasimilarwaytheeffectsof lipaemiaare
bookscontainconversiontableswithfactorsforconvert-
assessedby adding varyingquantitiesofafat emulsion,
ingvaluesineitherdirectionforthemostcommonly
and the effects of icterus are assessed by adding
encountered analytes.A few non-Sl units have been
varying quantities of purified bilirubin.
retained,eitherbecauseof the complexityofconverting
Testsforsome analytes are affected moreprofoundly
them intoSl unitsorbecauseof theirwidespread use.
than others;the effect varies depending on the method
Litre () is the designated measure of volume. SI
and analyser being used,and some tests are not af-
unitsreport the concentration ofconstituents in terms
fected until haemolysis and lipaemia arevery severe.
of the numbers of dissolved molecules,measured in
 Interfering substances may interfere directly in a
moles (with decimal units mol,mmol,μmol,pmol).A
chemicalreactionor,morecommonly,withcolorimetric
moleofachemicalcontainsthenumberofgrams
methods and enzyme assay kinetic detection meth-
equivalent to its molecular weight. Conventional units
ods.For example,haemoglobin may absorb at the
report concentrations of constituents in terms of dis-
same wavelength as the colour product of a reaction,
solved mass in grams (g, mg, μg, pg).
 or lipid may interfere with a turbidimetric assay by
Sl units are not used for totalprotein,forexample,
increasing the turbidity. Hormone assays, including
those which rely on immunological methods, may also
becausethis isacomplexof moleculesofdifferent
molecularweights.Therefore it isusuallyreported as
beaffected
g/l. Albumin is also reported in g/l (although it could be
Lipaemia and haemolysis also lead to errors in
reported in μmol/l), largely because the relationship
haematologicalparameters(Figure 2.4).Lipaemia may
between totalproteinand albuminis close and theyare
interferewith the spectrophotometricassayforhaemo-
considered togetherwhen test results are evaluated.
globin (Hb), resulting in falsely high Hb and mean
TheSl unitofenzyme activity isthekatal,whichis
corpuscular haemoglobin concentration (MCHC). Large
defined as the amount of enzyme that will catalyse the
lipiddropletsmaybefalselycountedasleucocytesor
transformationof1mole of substrateper second in an
plateletsby some analysers(e.g.the Cell-Dyn).Haemo-
assay system.Thisisthe acceptedreporting unitbythe
lysisfalselyraisesMCHCand lowersPCVand thered
IUPAC (International Union of Biochemistry), but not 
cell count.Blood replacement products prepared from
for clinical tests,and the international unit(IU) contin-
bovine haemoglobin interfere with tests inasimilarway
ues to be used. There is a constant relationship be-
tohaemolysis(directlyinareaction orwith colorimetric
tweenkatal andIUwhenmeasuredunder identical
methods).The effects are dose-dependentand persist
conditions:1 katal =60 million IU.
for 48hours ormore after administration.
Some conversion factors are shown inFigure 2.5.
External quality assurance schemes
A more complete conversion tablecanbefound in
Manylarge laboratories alsobelong toquality assur-
Appendix 3.
ance (QA) schemes, which provide assurance that the
laboratory tests are performed and managed accord-
Gravimetricunit conversion
Slunit
ing to set standards. In the UK the major system is
UnitedKingdomAccreditationService(UKAS) which
g/100mlx10
g/
followsinternational guidelinessetdownby theInter-
g/100mlx10
mol/l
national Organization for Standardization(ISO) for
mol wt
laboratory performance.
pg/ml x
103
pmol/
molwt
Post-analytical errors
mEq/x
1
mmol/l
valency
Errors can occur due to reporting of incorrect values or
ascribing the results to the wrong patient. Occasionally
Conversion factors from gravimetric units to Sl
the incorrect referencevaluesfor thespeciesmay be
2.5
units.See also Appendix 3.
16
Chapter 2 Interpretation of laboratory data
Interpretation oftestresults
Determinationof reference interval:Oncethepopu-
lationofhealthynormalanimalshasbeenselected,the
For the interpretation of testresults otherpieces of
referencevaluesobtained from these aresubjected to
informationarerequired.Theseincludeahistory,clini-
statistical analysisto determine thereferenceintervals
cal examination,listofdifferentials,referencevalues
for each test. The values can be analysed by paramet-
generated by thetesting laboratory and other guide-
ric methods if they form a Gaussian or'normal’ sym-
lines,such asclinical cut-off limits.Some of these may
metrical bell-shaped curve distribution whenahistogram
be provided by the testing laboratory or they can be
 is plotted (Figure 2.6a). With a Gaussian distribution, a
generated by the clinician. Outlines of some of these
reference interval is establishedbasedonthemean
are givenbelow.Detailed methods canbe found in
and 2SDs from the mean (Figure 2.7).
referencedspecial textsand arebeyond thescopeof
thischapter.
mode=median=mean
mode
Referencevalues/referenceintervals
These areusuallyreferred to asnormal values,ex-
pected values or, more commonly，as‘reference
ranges'. They are usually derived from a reference
populationof normalhealthy'animals,butforin-house
and patient-side analyserstheymaybesuppliedbythe
manufacturer. They are used by the clinician in the
evaluationof the testresults and in theformulationof
(a)
(q)
a diagnosis forthe patient.Therefore itisimportantthat
The distribution of values foran analyte.In(a) there
theclinician understands their origin and derivation,
2.6
isaGaussian symmetrical distributionand the
andheorsheshouldrequest thisinformation fromthe
median,mean and mode are in the same central position.
testing laboratories,or manufacturers of laboratory
These data could be analysed by parametricmethods,
equipmentandtestkits.ldeally,referencevaluesshould
calculating the mean and 2SD to produce reference values.
be constructed using the guidelines of the National
(b)The data points arenotin a symmetrical distribution and the
mode,median and mean are diferent.These data would be
Committeefor Clinical Laboratory Standards(NcCLS,
 analysed by non-parametric methods (usually using 
1995).However,this is difficult inveterinarymedicine
percentiles)to produce reference values.
because of the large numberof species and breeds
 encompassed. The major dificulty is identifying an
12
adequate population for use as the reference popula-
tion.Some compromiseshave,therefore,beenmade
in methodology and in acceptableminimum numbers
of animals.Another consideration is the not inconsid-
erablecostofestablishingreferencevaluesforthe
large number of tests performed by the average veteri-
nary clinical pathology laboratory.
A reference range is defined as the entire range of
values (actual minimum to maximum measured val-
-2SD
-1SD
Mean+1SD
+2SD
ues) obtained foratest ona population of healthy, non-
Results
diseased animals.In practice,a reference interval is
REFERENCEINTERVAL
used,whichistheintervalbetweenanupperandlower
The usual reference intervals,using the central
limit andcommonly includes thecentral 95%of the
2.7
valueswith exclusion of the lowest and highest
apparently healthy 'normal' reference population de-
2.5%ofthereferencevalues.
termined by statistical methods. The reference popula-
tionfromwhichsamplesare tobeobtained should be
If the distribution is a skewed asymmetrical distribu-
tion(Figure 2.6b), the values are transformed using
established. Ideally this population should be repre-
logarithmic or root transformation toproduce amore
sentative of the animalsfromwhomsamplesaresent
 Gaussian distribution and then the interval is defined.
to the individual laboratory.Inpractice thisis difficult to
Alternatively,non-parametric statistical methods can
obtain. Bias may occur if a restricted group of animals 
be used (Solberg, 1987). This commonly involves
isused,forexample valuesfrom a colony ofyoung
ranking values and using percentile limits.The value at
Beagle dogs or from catterycats.The reference popu-
the 97.5t percentile is the upper reference limit and the
lation should represent a general mix of breeds, sexes
value at the 2.5th percentile is the lower reference limit.
 and ages living in different environmental conditions.
The values obtained from thereference population are
Thereferencevaluesgeneratedbythelaboratoryor
put into ascending order.lf nis the numberof samples,
instrument fromwhichtheresultswereobtainedshould
the position of the sample result lying on the 2.5th
always be used.
percentile is calculated (n+1) x0.025,and that on the
Reference values are affected by pre-analytical
97.5th percentile is calculated (n+ 1)x 0.975. For
 and analytical variables, so these stages should be 
example,if there are78 dogs in thereference popula-
subject torigorousquality controlbefore establishment
tion the 2.5th percentile is calculated as (78 + 1) x0.025
of referencevalues.
= 1.975 = approximately 2. The samples are ranked in
17
Eolice
Chapter2Interpretationoflaboratorydata
ascending order from 1 to 78. The value of the second
narrowerbreed-and age-relatedreferenceintervals
result in the ascending series is thelower limit of the
canbe sourcedfrom theveterinaryliterature but,
reference interval.The97.5tpercentile is（78+1)x
withoutknowledgeof theselectionofsubjects,tests
0.975 = 77. The value of the 77h sample is the upper
and instrumentation used, it is difficult to transfer these
limit of the reference interval (Figure 2.7).
forusewithotherlaboratories'testresultsorother
Whenpreparing the histograms ofvalues,oneor
populations (see below).
more‘outliers'mayberecorded.Unless thesevalues
are known tobe theresult of pre-analytical oranalytical
Alternativemethodsofdeterminingreference
errortheyshouldberetained.Non-parametricallyde-
intervals
rivedreference limitswouldbeonlyslightly changed by
the exclusion of a single outlierif theywerebased on
Computer-basedanalysisofnormalsubpopulation:
a minimum of 120 samples (which is unlikely in veteri-
Becauseof the difficulties encountered establishing
nary medicine). With smaller populations special sta-
reference intervals,alternatives to the methods de-
tistical testsforoutliers canbe applied(Dixon,1953).
scribed have been sought.The introduction and in-
Ideally, when the outlier is removed it is appropriate to
creasing use of computer databases and laboratory
retest theremainingvaluesforany additional outliers.
information management systems(LiMs),has allowed
It hasbeensuggested that200subjectsarerequired
storedpatientdatatobeusedtoconstructreference
for the construction ofreference intervals with an
intervals.lfa largeproportionof thepatientsamples
are fromhealthy individuals,computerized methods
hasbeen adjusted downward to60or aboveforpara-
based on a combinationof laboratory and diagnostic
metricand120orabovefornon-parametricderived
datacanbeused toselectdatafromhealthypatients
intervals. However,in veterinary medicine a more
to produce reference ranges (Kouri et al.,1994). This
achievable number is a minimum of 40 subjects.
system could be adapted using the Systemized No-
It shouldbeborne inmind thatareferenceinterval
menclature of Medicine(SNOMED)coding systemfor
represents expectedresultsin95%of healthyanimals,
and using these methods 5% of the truly normal or
patients'and select apparently healthy animals. Statis-
healthyanimalswouldbe classified as abnormal(2.5%
tical methods could be applied to thesevalues.This
belowthelimitformeasuredvaluesand2.5%above
methodwould betterrepresent thepopulation of ani-
the limit for measuredvalues).Therefore,in every20
malstested at the individual laboratoryorhospital and
healthy animals therewillbe one animal with test
wouldmake acquisitionof adequatenumbersofvalues
results outside thereference normal values.However,
(results) easier.However,it would be critical to ensure
as this isa normal healthy animal the test result would
that theanimalsselectedwere infact clinicallynormal
be expected tobe close to theset limits.For most tests
at the time of testing.Also, this type of data accumula-
and analytes this is acceptable, as truly diseased
tion has inherent increased levels of error related to
animalswillbeexpectedtohavevaluesfarhigheror
pre-analytical and analyticalfactors.Further analysis
lowerthanthese intervals.Whenevaluatingapanelof
and documentationof thismethod isneededbefore
test results from a single animal there is a probability of
widespreaduse isencouraged.
1-0.95(where nis the number of tests in the panel)
thatnotallvalueswillbewithin the setreference
Transference:This is anothermorewidelyused and
interval.Thus,for20results thereis a64%chance that
accepted method.When newinstrumentationormeth-
one result will be ‘abnormal',[100 x(1 - 0.952°)]. This
ods are introduced into a laboratory,reference inter-
becomes important when evaluating results from po-
vals canbe obtained from:
tentiallyclinicallyhealthy animalsforpre-anaesthetic
screensorgeriatricprofiling,forexample
Anexistingreference intervalgenerated inthe
same laboratory on an old instrument or using an
Limitationsofreferenceintervals
oldmethod
Mostlaboratoriesprovidereferenceintervalsforthe
Valuesfromanotherlaboratoryusingthesame
tests performed,based on a wide-ranging general
instrument and or method
healthy population.A narrow selection of healthy sub-
The literature.
jectssplit intosubgroups(forexample,ageandbreed
groups) would be ideal but this is not practical. It is
These intervals are transferred using a process of
importanttobeawareofdeviationsfromtheprovided
validation.Inordertodothiscertainconditionsmustbe
ranges,particularlyinyounganimals,foranalytessuch
met inregard toinstrumentation,method and animal
ashaematocrit(HCT),mean cell volume (MCV),total
population.lftheseoverlapthen a minimumof20
protein,globulins,calcium,phosphorus and alkaline
‘healthy'animalsshouldbetested andaminireference
phosphatase.Likewise certain hormone levels, elec-
interval created.lf nomore thantwo of theresults are
trolyteandproteinvalueswillbeatvariancewiththe
outsidethetransferredintervalsthenitcanbeadopted.
quoted values in pregnant animals, depending on the
Recommendations are to use a sample of 40-60
stage of gestation, and lactating animals. Specific
individuals inhumanmedicine,whichwouldbe equiva-
breed-related anomaliesshould alsobeconsidered,
lent toproducinga newreferenceinterval inveterinary
e.g.increased HCTin Greyhounds,increased MCVin
medicine.Thetransferenceofestablishedreference
some MiniaturePoodles,large platelets and thrombo-
intervalscanbe statisticallyvalidatedusingMonte
cytopenia in CavalierKingCharlesSpaniels.Certain
Carlo significance testing (Holes et al., 1994).
18
Chapter2Interpretationof laboratorydata
Intra-individualreferenceinterval:Amethodfavoured
Decision analysis in this context involves the
in human medicine and research is the intra-individual
conceptsof the sensitivity，specificity and predictive
reference interval,using the subject tocreate hisor her
valueof thetestresults(see alsoChapter26):
ownreferencehealthy'interval.Notunexpectedly the
The diagnostic sensitivity of a test is the
rangeofresultsobtained in anindividual over timeis
probability of obtaining a positive test result in an
consistentlyless than thepopulation-based reference
animal thathasthedisease
interval(Figure 2.8).The variability of results over time
The diagnostic specificity of a test is the
 means that a healthy individual may obtain results
probability of obtaining a negative test result in
 outside the population reference interval when healthy
an animal thatdoesnothave thedisease
and inside thepopulation interval when ill.
A true positive result(TP) correctly identifies a
diseased animal ashaving thedisease
A true negative result (TN) correctly identifies an
Individual
unaffected animal asfree from the disease
A falsepositiveresult(FP)occurswhen an
unaffected animal is incorrectlyidentified as
havingthedisease
Group
A false negative result(FN) occurs when a
diseased animal is incorrectlyidentifiedby the
test as freefrom disease.
Positive predictive value is the probability
that an animal with a positive testresult has
the disease(expressed as a percentage)
=
TP
×100 (%)
TP+FP
Negativepredictivevalueistheprobabilitythat
an animal with a negative test result does not
Individual's
Group's
have the disease (expressed asa percentage)
mean
mean
TN
x100 (%)
Ilustration of theproblems withpopulation-
N+N
2.8
based referenceintervals when applied to the
Prevalence is an estimate of the frequency of a
individual. It can be seen that in individualshealthy
 disease in a population at a point in time
values'fluctuatemuch less than thevaluesfora
TP+FN
population. The shaded areas represent results falling
x100(%)
outside 2SD of the mean, which equates to the lower and
 +++
upper 2.5% of the reference values.
 Prevalence is important in determining the predic-
tivevalue of a test.For a test with a diagnosticsensi-
Clinical decisionlimits
tivity of 95%and a diagnostic specificity of 95%,the
Therelevance of results in clinical decisionmaking is
predictive value of a positive test result within a popu-
basedon clinical information and theclinical relevance
lation, with a disease prevalence of 50%, is 95%.
of a laboratory test, not just on a test result outside the
However, if the prevalence is only. 5% then the predi-
reference interval. Test results may be used to:
tive value of a positive test falls to only 50%, causing
thepredictivevaluefor thetesttobenobetter than
Establish,exclude or confirm the presence of a
chance or flipping a coin.
particulardisease
Monitor disease progression
A test that has reasonably high sensitivity and
 Monitor therapy or progression or regression of a
disease
with a high probability of having the disease will,
 Provide prognostic information
therefore,bevery poorin a population where disease
Screenpopulations of healthy animals.
prevalence is very low, i.e. as a screening test in a
healthypopulation.llustrativeexamplesof thiscan be
The importance of certain test characteristics de-
found in Chapter 26.
pends on the use to which the test is tobeput.lf a test
Generally the aim istomaximizebothsensitivity
is to be used to screen for a disease of low prevalence
and specificity,but no testis100%sensitive and100%
in a healthy population then it must be very sensitive
specific.As one is maximized,the otheris decreased.
(identify a high proportion of affected animals),whilst
In thediagnosticsituationa testwith100%sensitivity
specificityislessimportant(animalswhichtest positive
maygenerate unacceptablenumbers of falsepositive
canbesubjectedtofurther,morespecifictests).Screen-
test results.Likewise,when a test is100%specific it
ing tests also need to be safe and inexpensive. For
 may generate unacceptable numbers of false negative 
tests that areused to confirm a diagnosis,specificity is
results.In the clinical diagnosis of disease,othermedi-
more important(the test shouldnot incorrectly identify
cal decision limitscanbeused,andwhereresultshave
a numerical value(i.e.notjust positive ornegative) cut-
 of a positive result are serious (e.g chemotherapy,
off values canbe selected tomaximize the discrimina-
surgery or even euthanasia).
tory power of the test (Figure 2.9).
19
Chapter 2 Interpretation of laboratory data
bea truenegative and the animal does nothave the
Healthy
Diseased
disease.However,there are many false positive re-
sultsand these animalswould have tohaveanother
diagnostic test, such as an ACTH stimulation test, to
confirm thepresence of disease.lf a highcut-off value
is set,thespecificitywillbeincreased tocloseto100%
withveryfewfalsepositiveresultsbut sensitivitywill
decrease andmorefalsenegativeswill begenerated.
In caseswhere tests are affected by more than one
disease, setting cut-off limits becomes difficult. For
example,manyenzymesproducedbythepancreasare
handled by the kidneyforinactivationand excretion.In
thisinstance,to obtainhigh specificityfordiagnosis of
(a)
pancreatitis in an animal with renal compromise, a very
high cut-off limit for the pancreatic enzyme tests would
HealthyDiseased
have to be set, and false negatives would be likely. In
general, cut-off limits are set at levels that produce the
highestdiagnosticefficiencyfora particular disease.
Receiver-operating characteristiccurve analysis:
Thiscanbe used toshowgraphicallythe abilityofatest
to discriminatebetweendisease andnon-disease,or
to compare the eficiency of two tests in the diagnosis
ofa disease.Toform areceiver-operating characteris-
tic(ROC)curve,sensitivity(truepositiverate)isplotted
against1-specificity(false positive rate).Different cut-
off values can then be applied to generate the best 
(b)
values for decisions about diagnosis(Dawson-
Demonstrationof the problemof trying to
Saunders and Trapp, 2000). A perfect diagnostic test
2.9
establishcut-offpointsforanytestbetween
would have 100%sensitivity and100%specificity and
healthy individuals and diseased individuals.In(a) the test
becloseto the topleft corner of the graph.A diagonal
results from healthy animals donot overlap thetestresults
(lower left cornerto upper right corner) would indicate
from diseased animals and so there is a clear cut-off
indicatedby line1.This test has100%sensitivity and
a useless test.The point on the curve which is closest
specificity.in (b) the test results from healthy animals
to the upper left corner is the cut-off value or decision
overlap those from diseased animals.lf the cut-off issetat
limit that provides thegreatest diagnosticaccuracy
line1 the test issensitive butnot specific,becauseahigh
(efficiency of the test)(Figure 2.10).The area underthe
proportion of healthy animals will haveresults above the
curve describes the accuracyof the test;therefore,the
cut-off.Converselyif thecut-off issetat line3theest
 greater this area, the more accurate is the test in 
becomesmore specific(very few non-diseased animals
diagnosing the disease in question.
haveresults above the cut-off),but ismuchlesssensitive
(a significant proportion of diseased animals have results
below the cut-off).lf line2isselected as thecut-off,the
test hasmoderate sensitivity and specificity.
Cut-offvalues:Thereisrarely aperfect separation of
testresultsforhealthyand diseased animals,andsome
degreeofoverlapofthetwopopulationsoccurs,sothere
is usually a need for ‘trade-offs' in the clinical decision
 process. This involves setting cut-off values which mini-
a particular test. Cut-offvalues are determined using the
conceptsofsensitivity,specificityandpredictivevalue,
1-specificity
based ondistributionof testresultsfromhealthy ani-
2.10
The receiver-operating characteristic(ROC)
mals,nimalwiththiasfintrst,ndcrn
situations,a third groupwitha differentdiseasewhich
 gives a test result different to a healthy animal.
cut-off values,in this example numbered1-6.Cut-off level
Forexample,ifoneusestheurinecortisol:creatinine
1 is the lowestcut-off plotted and gives a highsensitivity
but low specificity.Cut-off level 6 is the highest cut-off
ratiofor thediagnosisofhyperadrenocorticism and
plotted. The specificity is much higher (close to Y axis) but
setsa lowcut-offvalue,thetest will have closeto100%
the sensitivity is lower.Cut-offlevel4has thebestcompromise
diagnostic sensitivity (there will be very fewfalse nega-
of sensitivity and specificity,lying closest to the topleft
tiveresults)but a lowspecificitywithmanyfalseposi-
cornerof the graph.A good testhas valuesclose to theupper
tiveresults.This canbe interpreted clinically to mean
left corner of the graph.Test results around the diagonal
that if the testresult isnegative then it is highly likelyto
dotted line would indicate a useless test.
20
Chapter 2
2Interpretationoflaboratorydata
Likelihoodratios:These,withpre-testprobabilityof
the disease,can providepost-test information about
Analyte
Coefficient of variation(%)
the disease(Cockroft and Holmes,2003):
Between
Within
Analytical
dogs
adog
variation
The likelihoodratio(LR) forapositive test result
Red blood cell count
4.4
5.4
2.8
measureshow many timesmore likely it is to
obtain a positive test result from an animal that
Haematocrit
5.2
6.4
1.1
has the disease than from an animal who does
White blood cell count
12.3
12.1
3.7
nothave the disease
The LR for a negative test result measures how
Sodium
3.5
3.2
0.1
many timesmore likely it is to obtainanegative
Potassium
3.6
3.3
0.1
resultfrom ananimal who doesnothave the
disease than from an animal who has the disease.
Urea
35.1
16.1
3.8
Creatinine
12.9
14.6
2.9
An evidence-based medicine approach to the inter-
pretation of the results of diagnostic tests utilizing
Total protein
3.1
2.6
1.1
practicerecords and meta analysis(comparisonof
Albumin
3.0
2.4
1.6
studies,methods and results by sophisticated statis-
ALT
23.7
9.7
3.2
tics) can be found in Cockroft and Holmes (2003).
ALP
34.2
8.6
1.7
Biologicalvariation
TotalT4
17.2
17.0
4.0
It ispresumed that inhealth there isa homeostatic
environment for most analytes,with analyte levels
FreeT4
24.3
20.2
6.7
fluctuating around a fixed homeostaticset point and
Thyroid stimulating hormone
43.6
13.6
8.8
 that in disease this fluctuation will be greater. This
leadstobiologicalvariationwithin an animalandbe-
2.11
Biological variation in dogs forselected
tween animalsat anyparticulartimepoint.In humans
diagnostic tests. Analytical variation is the
it hasbeenshown thatwithin-orbetween-individual
variation inresultsproducedby an analyserwhen asingle
variation is largelyof thesamemagnitudeinhealthy
sample is run repeatedly.
people and in people with chronic stable disease
conditions.It is also assumed that this is largely inde-
urea may simplyreflectbiological orassayvariation,
 pendent of analytical method used to measure any
whichcould account forvariationsofupto19%within
analyte,and is not affected by the numberof individu-
one animal.
als in a population or regional, country or race differ-
ences.Makingtheseassumptions,ifthereisadifference
Biological variability, analytical variation
between two consecutive measurements in an indi-
and test error
vidual this may be due to:
There are statistical methods forincorporating biologi-
cal variation into test analysis,using the method of
Pre-analytical variation
nested analysisof variancewhichwill provide a CV of
Analytical variation
intra-animal andbetween-animal variability.Thisbio-
Biologicalvariation
logical variability, expressed as the coefficient of vari-
Thepatientbecoming diseased
ation,can be factored into the maximal allowable
The patient recoveringfrom the disease.
imprecisionof a test.Analytical variation alone usually
contributesaround10%oftestresultvariation,andcan
The coefficients ofvariation(CVs)for commonly
alsobefactoredintothemaximumallowablebiasof an
used analytes in dogs are shown in Figure 2.11. The
assayandhenceinto themaximumtotal allowable
lowCVsforelectrolyteandproteinlevelsreflect the
error ofa testbefore theresult isrejected ina QC
narrowregulation of theseparameters in thebody and
programme (Fraser et al.,1997).These methods are
thehighprecisionof analytical testsfor thesepara-
not widely used inveterinarymedicine but they help to
meters.Conversely,urea and creatinine have much
explain thecriticaldifferencebetweenananimal's
higher CVs.Urea is affected by diet and creatinine is
results and those of the population of healthy animals
affected bymuscle mass and exercise and their levels
whenthe animalis assumed healthyorshould not have
are not so closely controlled in thebody.Hormones
anexpected change in a particular test result.
have greater variability due to circadian rhythms and 
thetestmethodsarenotasaccurateandpreciseasin
otherbiochemical tests.
Rationallaboratorydata
Knowledge of thevariationinCVsfor different
interpretation
analytes is importantwhenmonitoring specificpara-
meters.Forexample,inadogwithhypoadrenocorticism
Thisis anart,basedonexperienceandknowledgeof
an increase in potassium of > 3.3% (approximately
physiology and pathology of disease processes,as
0.25-0.30mmol/l)wouldreflect a‘real'increase and
wellas anunderstandingoferrorfactorsthatcanoccur
not be attributable tointrapatientbiological variation or
at any stage of test result production.Laboratory test
assayvariation.However,a similar smallincrease in
results are only a smallpart of the database onwhich
21
Chapter2Interpretation of laboratorydata
a clinical diagnosis is made and so should be inter-
affect many tests that measure liverparameters.
preted in conjunctionwith asmuchotherinformation
They can alsoprofoundly affect thecomplete
about thepatient aspossible.When anabnormal test
 blood count (CBC), again depending on duration 
result is obtained it is goodpractice to consider it in
and dose level,and several specifictests,such
relationto:
as T4 levels.Many anticonvulsants can affect
liver enzyme levels through induction.Bromide
The historyand clinical examination,and
compounds can directly affectanalytical testsfor
differential diagnoses previously formulated
chloride and cholesterol through interference.
The magnitude of the abnormality: is it close to
theprovidedreferencevalues,ina greyzoneor
Because of the rapidity of sample analysis by auto-
is it markedlyloweror higher than this?.
mated methods and the economic advantage of re-
Could theresultberelated topre-analytical error,
questing manytests at one time itiscommonpractice to
suchasinadequatefasting,mmediate
obtainadatabaseincludingCBC,biochemistryprofileor
postprandial sampling, effects of exercise?
organ-specific profile and urinalysis.This is frequently
Is the sample of poor quality,e.g. errors due to
describedasaminimumdatabase.Forinitialevaluation
ageing,haemolysis,lipaemaoricterus,microclot
this can be helpful and all the components of the
formation?(Many of thesefactorswill be
laboratory data should be analysed and interpreted in
reported uponby agood laboratory)
relationto eachother.Thiscan assist formulation orre-
Could anabnormal resultbe due toaparticular
ranking of differential diagnoses. It can also prompt 
breed-specificeffect?Forexample,
further more specific tests targeted to a particular organ
hyperkalaemiamayoccurinsamplesfromAkitas
or disease process.For monitoring of progress a more
due toinvitro haemolysis and thehighpotassium
limited selection of specific tests is usually adequate.
content of theirred cells
Theresultsof thesecanbe evaluatedinconjunctionwith
Is it anisolated abnormalresult andrelated to
prior test results for the same analytes.
probability (as discussed above, in a panel of 20
tests there is a 64% chance of one result being
abnormal)?In that case it maybewise torepeat
the testwith a freshsamplebefore anyfurther
References and further reading
decision is made
Is theresult inaninconclusiverange'when
BellamyJECand OlexsonDW(20oo)QualityAssuranceHandbook
forVeterinaryLaboratories.lowaStateUniversityPress,Ames
clinical cut-off limits areprovided by the reporting
Cockcroft PD and Holmes MA(2003)Appraising the evidence.In:
laboratory?For example,an inconclusivepost-
HandbookofEvidence-BasedVeterinaryMedicine,pp.84-106.
ACTH stimulation testcortisol level inan animal
BlackwellPublishing,Oxford
Cornbleet J(1983)Spuriousresultsfromautomated hematologycell
with suspected hyperadrenocorticism.In this
counters.LaboratoryMedicine14,509-514
case an alternative test could be chosen,e.g.a
Dawson-Saunders B and Trapp RG(200o) Evaluating diagnostic
procedures.In:asicandClinicalBiostatistics,2ednpp.3
low-dose dexamethasone suppression test
247.AppletonandLange,Norwalk
Is the unexpected result due to the effects of
Dixon WJ (1953) Processing data for outliers.Biometrics 9,74-89
intercurrent illness?Exampleswould be aT4
Fraser CG,Hyltoft-Petersen P,Luibeer JC and Ricos C (1997)
Proposalforseinggenerallyapplicablequalitygoalsbased
level within thereference interval foracatwith a
solelyonbiologynnalsofClinicaBiochemistry412
 high index of suspicion for hyperthyroidism but
HolesEW,ahnSE,MolnarPAandBermesWE（1994)Verificaton
whichalsohas intercurrent disease,ora lowT4
of referenceranges by using a MonteCarlo sampling technique.
ClinicalChemistry40,2216-2222
level in a dogwithnormal thyroid function
KouriT,airistVandVirtanenA（1994）Rferenceintrvalsdevelpd
affectedbyotherdisease
fromdatafrom hospitalizedpatients:computerizedmethods
based upon combinationof laboratory and diagnostic data.
Is the unexpected result due to current drug
therapy? Glucocorticoid therapy,in particular,
National CommitteeforClinical Laboratory Standards(1995)Howto
can interfere physiologicallywith many tests.In
define anddeterminereferenceintervalsinthe clinicallaboratory.
ApprovedguidelinesNCCLSdocumentC28-A.NCCLS,Villanova
dogs, glucocorticoids can induce the steroid
isoenzyme thusincreasing thetotal alkaline
uncertaintyindiagnostictestingPreventativeVeterinaryMedicine
45,139-162
phosphataselevels and also affectplasma
Solberg HE(1987) Establishment and use of reference intervals.In:
glucose levels and urine specific gravity.
FundamentalofClinical Chemistry,dedn,ed.wT,
Glucocorticoids increase lipase levels and,
pp.197-212.WBSaunders,Philadephia
WestgardJO(2001)SixSigmaQualityDesignandControl.Westgard
 depending on duration of therapy, they can also
QC,Madison
22
Introduction to haematology
ElizabethVilliers
Introduction
TheEDTAtubeshouldbefilledpreciselytothelevel
indicated.nderfiling, resulting in EDTA excess,may
The completeblood count(CBC) is an integral part of
artefactuallyreducered cell sizeand altercellmorpho-
the diagnosticinvestigation of anysystemicdisease
logy. If liquid anticoagulant is being used, underfilling
process.lt consists of two components:
may also result in significant sample dilution. Overfill-
ingmaylead to clot formation.
Quantitativeexaminationof the cells,including:
The sample should be mixed carefully by gently
packed cell volume(PCV),total redblood cell
invertingitseveral timestoensureadequatedistribu-
count(RBC),haemoglobin(Hb)concentration;
tion of the anticoagulant.The tube should not be
total whiteblood cell count(WBC),differential
shakensincethismaycausehaemolysis.
WBCcount,andplateletcount.Inaddition,the
Bloodsmearsshouldbemadesoonafterobtaining
red cellmean corpuscularvolume(McV),mean
the blood sample or cellular degeneration willimpede
corpuscularhaemoglobin(MCH) and mean
interpretation.Cellmorphologybeginstodeteriorate
corpuscularhaemoglobin concentration(MCHC)
within 12hours,so if blood is being mailed to an
areevaluated andtotalplasmaproteinis
external laboratory, a blood smear should be made at 
measured
the timeof sampling(seebelow)and mailed along with
Qualitativeexaminationofbloodsmearsfor
the EDTA sample. The EDTA sample should be kept in
changes in cellular morphology.
the fridge until it is put in the post.
Itcannotbeover-emphasizedthatboththese
Haemolysis
elementsshould alwaysbeperformed.
Damage to the cells during or after sampling may lead
to haemolysis(Figure 3.1).This results ina falsely low
RBC and PCV,and a falsely high MCHC.Plasma
protein measured using a refractometer is also falsely
Blood sampling
elevated.Causesof haemolysisinclude:
Jugular,rather thanperipheral,veinvenipuncture s
Narrow gauge needle
recommended inordertominimize thepotential for
Excessive suctionon the syringe
cell damage during blood sampling; 21 gauge needles
Excessive agitation of theblood in the tube
are usuallyusedindogs,whilst23gaugeneedlesare
Prolonged storage
generallypreferred incats.However,smallerneedles
Storage at high temperatures.
haemolysis.Thephlebotomist should trytoensure a
slickvenipuncturetechnique,withminimalmovement
of theneedleinandoutof thevein,and should avoid
excessive suction on the syringe during sampling.
3.1
Haemolysed
After the samplehasbeen obtained,the needle is
blood:the
plasma is red.
removedfrom thesyringeand thesampleisgently
expressed into theappropriateanticoagulanttube.
Ethylenediamine tetra-aceticacid(EDTA) isgener-
ally the anticoagulant of choice forhaematologybe-
cause cells arewell preserved and smears stain well.
However,in cats EDTA may,on occasion,induce
platelet clumping,resultinginfalselylow automated
plateletcounts.Sodium citratecanbeused asan
alternativeinthis situation and thisanticoagulantis
alsoused incoagulation tests.Heparin is unsuitable
forhaematology since it results inpoorleucocyte
staining onbloodfilms.
23
Chapter3Introductiontohaematology
Basic quantification techniques
C
% tube occupied by buffy coat =
B+C+D
Packedcellvolume
ThePCVaccuratelyreflectstheredcellcountaslongas
where B=width of red cells,C=width of buffy coat
the meanvolume of the red cells(Mcv)is within
and D=width of plasma.
referencelimits.PCV isreadily measured using a
The first 1% equates to approximately 10 x 10%/l;
microhaematocrit centrifuge.Blood in an EDTA tube
 and each percent thereafter equates to approximately
shouldbewellmixed andamicrocapillarytubefilled to
20 x 10%/1.
about65-75%byplacingthehaematocrit tubeintothe
EDTA tube and tilting the latter.The base of the
Plasmaprotein
microhaematocrit tube ispluggedwith clayanditisthen
This canbemeasured usingarefractometer(Figure
centrifugedfor5minutesathighspeed（12,500-15,000
3.3).The microhaematocrit tube is scored andbroken
rpm).The red cells arepacked at the bottom of the tube
above thebuffycoat.A drop of theplasma isexpressed
above the clayplug.Thewhite cellsform the buffycoat,
ontotheprismandtheproteinvalueread fromthescale.
whichsitsontopof thered cellsand isseenasa grey/
Mostrefractometershaveaninternalscaleforplasma
creamlayer.Theplatelets lie at the topof thebuffycoat
protein and urine specific gravity. lf the scale is gradu-
andmaybediscernibleasathin,cream-colouredlayer
atedonly forrefractiveindexa conversionchart is
adjacent to the slightly greyer buffy coat.The plasma is
necessary.Plasmaproteinmayalsobe measuredusing
found above the platelet layer(Figure3.2).
abiochemicalanalyser.Note thathaemolysis,lipaemia
andmarked icterusfalselyelevateplasmaprotein.
Diagrammatic
3.2
representation of a
InterpretationofPcVandplasmaprotein
microhaematocrit tube following
Plasma protein and PCV should be interpreted to-
centrifugation.The PCV is
calculatedby dividing the
gether.Inananaemiacausedbyreducedproduction of
length of the packed red cells
redcells,thenumberof redcellsfallswhilst thevolume
(B) by the total length of the
of plasma present is unchanged and so the PCV is low.
packedred cells,buffy coat and
In contrast,acute haemorrhageresultsinlossofboth
plasma (B + C + D). A sliding
red cells andplasma andso initially thePCV doesnot
D=plasma
measuring device(haematocrit
fall.Following theshiftof interstitial fluid into the circu-
reader) can be used.
lation, plasma volume expands and the PCV falls,
reaching itsnadirby24hoursafterthehaemorrhage.
C=buffy coat
LowPcV and lowplasma protein:recent or
ongoing external haemorrhage.Plasma protein is
being lost from thebody alongwith red cells.
Internal haemorrhagemay initially cause only a
B=red cells
mild reductioninplasmaproteins,and then
proteinsarerapidlyreabsorbed.
Low plasma protein with normal PcV usually
indicateshypoproteinaemia(usually
A=clay plug
hypoalbuminaemia)due tocausesother than
haemorrhage.Theseincludefailure ofproduction
(e.g. chronic liver disease) or protein loss (e.g.
In addition to the PCV,examination of the
glomerulonephropathy).
 microhaematocrit tube provides other useful informa-
HighPcVwithhighplasmaproteinisseenwith
tion.Grossexamination of the plasma detectsicterus,
dehydration.Water lost from the bodyresults in
haemolysisorlipaemia.Averybroadestimateof the
increased concentration of bothred cells and
whitecellcountcanbemadebycalculating theper-
protein. However, these parameters provide only a
centageof the tube occupied by thebuffy coat:
crude estimate of an animal's hydration status.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Measuring plasmaprotein using a refractometer.(a)The microhaematocrit tube isscored just above thebuffy
3.3
coat,using a diamond writer or razor blade.(b)The tube is broken at the scored line.(c) The plasma is expelled
from the tube onto therefractometer prism by swifly flicking the tube downwards towards the prism,taking carenot to
24
Chapter3Introductiontohaematology
Highplasmaproteinwithnormalor lowPcV
is usuallyduetohyperglobulinaemia.Marked
hyperglobulinaemia is seen with myeloma and 
someBcell lymphomas,aswellassome
External
Internal
infectious diseases,such as ehrlichiosis.
electrode
electrode
Evaluationof albumin andglobulin,andprotein
electrophoresisareindicatedtoinvestigate
persistently loworhighplasmaproteinvalues
Electrically
(see Chapter7).
fluid
conductive
Cells
Automatedcellcounts
Sensing
zone
Prior to using any analyser theblood should be thor-
Diagrammaticrepresentation of an impedance
oughly mixed and checked for clots.This is best
3.5
counting chamber.Cells within an electrically
achieved by using a small wooden stick (an‘orange
stick').This is wiped around the inside of the tube and
doing theyimpede theflowof electricitythroughthe
thenremoved andexamined.Anyclotsinthesample
aperture, creating a pulse.
should be scooped up by the stick (Figure 3.4). Sam-
plescontaining clotsshould be discarded since they
HCT(/I)
MCV(f)xRBC（x1012/)
will havefalsely lowplateletand leucocytecounts and
redcell counts maybe increased or decreased.
1000
MCHC(g/dl)=
Hb (g/dl)
(W)IOH
MCH(pg)
Hb(g/dl)x10
RBC(x1012/)
3.6
Calculation of red cellparameters.
Sincethedistinctionbetweenplateletsandredcells
ismadeonthebasisofcellsize,errorsmayoccurwhen
A blood clot in an EDTA sample is detected by
3.4
wiping a wooden stick around theinner surface
miscounted as small red cells or vice versa.This is
of the tube. Clotted samples should be discarded.
morecommonincats,since theyhavesmallerredcells
and often have variably sized platelets. lf very large
Manualhaemocytometertechniquesarerarelyused
numbers of macroplatelets arepresent this may falsely
nowadays and havebeensupersededbya choice of
increasetheRBCandHCTandlower theMCVand
several in-househaematologyanalysersorlargeflow
platelet count (Figure 3.7).Conversely,if microcytic
cytometry analysers in commerciai laboratories.Im-
red cells are present, they may be miscounted as
pedance cellcounters andquantitativebuffy coat(QBC)
platelets,resulting na falselyhighplateletcount.
analysersarethemaintypesof haematologyanalys-
ers available for practice use;aflowcytometerhas also
recentlybecomeavailable.
Impedancecellcounters
In these analysers a chambercontaining anelectrically
a
conductivefluid isdivided into two areas connectedby
a small aperture.An electric current is passed into this
fluid and flows through the aperture. A stream of cells is
directed towards the aperture;as cellspass through
theyinterferewith theflowofcurrent,creatingapulse
RBC
RBC
(Figure 3.5). The pulse height is proportional tocellsize;
(a)
(b)
pulse frequency is proportional to cell number. The
3.7
Histogram plots produced by theCell-Dyn 3500
RBC,MCVandplateletcountaredeterminedindiluted
showing separationofplatelets andredcells
blood,platelets being distinguished from red cells by
basedon size.Plot(a) froma dog,shows good separation
theirsmallersize.Haemoglobin(Hb) is measured spec-
withawelldefinedpeakofplateletstotheleft andred
trophotometricallyafterredcelllysis.Thus,forredcells
cells to the right.However on plot(b),from a cat,the two
the analyser measures RBC, MCV and Hb. It then
peaks are not welldefined.The analyser gave a platelet
count of 1481x10/l. Inspection of thebloodfilm
calculates thehaematocrit (HCT),mean corpuscular
suggested the countwasmuch lower than this,with
haemoglobin(MCH),andmean corpuscularhaemo-
globin concentration(MCHC)using theformulae shown
toa count of510x10/l.TheMCVwaslowandsome of
inFigure3.6.
the microcytic red cells were being counted as platelets.
25
Chapter 3 Introduction to haematology
Leucocytes arecountedafterlysingredbloodcells.
and platelets as well as white cells.Sincered cells are
In some analysers cell-specific lysing solutions are
packedwithhaemoglobintheyaremuchdenser than
platelets andsothere is betterseparationof thesetwocell
used toproducea differential white cellcount.Inothers
types than when using impedance analysers.For count-
the lysing agent results in shrinkage of the lymphocyte,
monocyte and granulocyte nuclei at different rates,
ingleucocytestheH1combinesflowcytometry and
facilitating a three-part differential count.
cytochemistry:leucocytesare distinguished on the basis
Flowcytometers
susceptibility to lysing reagents.The plots produced by
Large commercial laboratory analysers, such as the
these analysersareveryusefulforidentifying abnormal
Bayer H1(formerly knownasTechnicon H1)andthe Cell-
cellspopulationsftshitsandregenerativeanaemias
(Figure 3.8). The Cell-Dyn differs in that it uses imped-
Dyn3500analyser,are essentially flowcytometers.An
in-house analyser(Lasercyte,Idexx)has alsorecently
ance technology to count red cell and platelets and flow
become available.A streamof cells isdirected througha
cytometry to count whitecells.
laser beam and, as cells pass through the beam, they
Quantitativebuffycoatanalysers
scatter light at different angles.The amountof low angle
QBC machines rely on separation of red cells,
orforwardscattercorrelateswithcell sizeandthe amount
of highangleorside scattercorrelateswithcell granularity
granulocytes,monocytes/lymphocytes and platelets
ordensity.TheH1usesthistechnology to count redcells
intovariouslayersinamicrohaematocrit tubecontain-
ing thevitlstain,acridine range,whichistakenuby
DNA, RNA and lipoprotein in the cells.The tube con-
Macrocytic
Normocytic
tainsacylindricalfloat thatforcesthecellstospreadout
hypochromic
normochromic
inathinlayerbetweenthefloatand thetube.After
centrifugationultraviolet light isdirectedat thestained
cellswhich thenemit fluorescent light.Nucleated cells,
which contain DNA,emit green fluorescence,whilst
cells containing lipoprotein or RNA emit red light.
Normocytic
Reticulocytes canbedistinguished from mature red
hypochromic
cellsbecause theyhave moreRNA.Eosinophilscan
be distinguished fromneutrophilsbecause theyhave
more lipoprotein. Platelets are rich in lipoprotein and so
Scatterplot of red cells using theBayer H1
emit red light.The amountof red orgreen lightemitted
3.8
haematology analyser.The grid shows red cell
is proportional to the number of cells present in the
size on they axis and haemoglobin content on thex axis.
spacebetweenthefloatand thetube,which,inturn,is
Normocyticnormochromicred cellsfall into the central
dependent on cell size.Hence a celllayer consisting of
box. In a regenerative anaemia, the macrocytic
smaller cells (e.g. lymphocytes) will emit relatively
hypochromiccellsfall into the upper left boxand so the
more light that a layer of larger cells (e.g.neutrophils),
plot is shifted up and to the left.(Courtesy of Heather
Holloway,ldexxLaboratories,Wetherby,UK.)
asshown inFigure3.9.TheQBCanalyserthuscalcu-
Changes in
DNA
slope
RNA/LP
EOS
Plasma
Reticulocytes
Change
Topof
thefloat
Bottomof
thefloat
PLT
L/M
GRANS
RBCs
Thewidthof eachcellpopulationor
band tellshowmanycellsthere are.
A wider band meansmorecells.
Diagrammaticrepresentationof thebuffycoat,expandedbyacylindrical float,andahistogramshowingthe
3.9
amount of fluorescence emitted byDNA(innucleated cells)andRNA/lipoprotein(inreticulocytes,platelets(PLT)
and eosinophils (EOs) in the various layers of the buffy coat. (Courtesy of Idexx laboratories,Wetherby, UK.) GRANS =
granulocytes; L/M = lymphocytes and monocytes.
26
Chapter3Introduction tohaematology
lates the PCV,WBC,neutrophil,eosinophil,mono-
nuclearcell (lymphocytes andmonocytes)and platelet
countsfromthewidthof thevariousbandsof fluores-
cence.The MCHC can be calculated because it is
inverselycorrelatedwiththedistancethefloat hassunk
into thepacked red cellayer.Hb is calculated from the
PCV and MCHC: Hb (g/dl) = MCHC × PCV% /100. All
calculatedcellcountsarebasedon the assumption
that cell volumes are normal,so,in disease states
where cell volumes are altered (e.g.in leukaemia),
inaccuraciesmay occur.
(a)
RBC
(b)
RBC
3.10
Using theCell-Dyn theRDW iscalculated from
the frequency distribution plot of red cell size
Redbloodcellparameters
(sizeonxaxis,frequency onyaxis).RDwis the
coefficientofvariationof redcellsizeandisexpressedas
HCT,RBC and Hb all give an indication of thered cell
apercentage.(a)Healthy dog (RDW=15%).(b)A dog
mass.Asdiscussed above,HCTisacalculatedvalue
red cell curve ismuch wider and extends further to the
producedby theanalyserand isusuallyexpressed
right, reflecting the numerous larger red cells present.
as I/l. lt is equivalent to the PCV,which is usually
expressed as a percentage, i.e. a HCT of 0.25 II is
the same as a PCV of 25%. All three parameters rise
Mean corpuscular haemoglobin concentration
in dehydrated animals and fall in anaemic animals.In
MCHCindicates themeanconcentrationofhaemo-
microcytic anaemia the reduction in HCT is more
globinperredcell.ltiscalculatedbydividing theHbby
marked than that inRBCbecause theformer isre-
theHCTand,sincethelatterisaffectedbyredcellsize,
ducedfurtherby thesmallcell size.Haemolysisfalsely
MCHC isa moreuseful indicatorof the amountof
lowerstheRBCandHCTbutHbwillnotbeaffected
haemoglobin present inred cells.If a normal animal
since the already“free'haemoglobinfrom thepre-
hasanMcVtowardsthebottomof thenormal range
viously lysed cellswill be measured alongwithHb
theMCH may be low,even though the cellscontain a
released from cells lysed inthe analyser.Since mean
 normal amount of haemoglobin relative to their size 
cell haemoglobin concentration(MCHC) iscalculated
(smallercellsshould havelesstotalhaemoglobin than
by dividing HbbyPCV,thisparameter is falsely
big cells). The MCHC, which corrects for this variation
elevated inhaemolysis.Hbisfalselyelevated in
in cell size,would be normal.
lipaemicsamples.
Normal MCHC defines thered cellsas
Redcellindices
normochromic and isseeninnon-regenerative
anaemia aswell as innormal animals
Meancorpuscularvolume
Decreased MCHC is synonymous with
MCV indicates the average size of the red cells. In-
hypochromasia and isseen inregenerative
 creased McV is seen in regenerative anaemia, along
anaemiaand irondeficiency
withdecreased MCHand MCHC.Macrocyticanaemia
Raised MCHCisalmostalwaysdueto
may also be seen with a non-regenerative anaemia
haemolysis,andmaybeseenartefactually in
caused bymyelodysplasia incats,ofteninassociation
lipaemic samples.
with FeLV infection.Sampleageing(e.g.samples 2or
more days old)results in red cell swelling and in-
creased Mcv. Non-regenerative anaemia is usually
Whitecellcounts
normocytic.LowMCV isseen in iron deficiency.These
are discussed indetail inChapter4.
All haematology analysers can determine the total white
cell count and this is usually expressed as cells x10%/l.
Red cell distribution width
Most modernimpedanceanalysersgivea three-part
Thered celldistribution width(RDW)describes the
leucocyte differential count(granulocytes,monocytes
variabilityinredcell size.ltisa moresensitive indicator
and lymphocytes) andsomegive a five-part differential
ofalteredredcellsizethantheMCV,since,inthelattr,
count.QBC machines count neutrophils,eosinophils
a relatively large number of cells must have alteredsize
andmononuclearcells,butcannot distinguish lympho-
before themeanvalue is altered.TheRDWdescribes
 cytes and monocytes (these are lumped together as
the entirepopulationofredcellsinsteadofoneaverage
mononuclearcells).High tech flowcytometry analysers
value (Figure 3.10).
giveafull white celldifferentialcount,i.e.the numberand
percentage of neutrophils,lymphocytes,eosinophils,
Meancorpuscularhaemoglobin
monocytes and basophils aredetermined.The H1ana-
MCH is expressed in picograms (pg) and indicates
lyser can alsoidentifybandneutrophils.
themean quantity(weight)of haemoglobinper aver-
Whilst the total WBC is generally accurate, differen-
ageredcell.It doesnot takeintoaccount thevolume of
tial counts are not always accurate. Some analysers
thered cell since it iscalculatedbydividing theHb by
have problems identifying monocytes, eosinophils or
theRBC.
basophils.Blastcells(e.g.inleukaemia)maybemissed.
27
Chapter 3 Introduction to haematology
Except in the H1 analyser,band neutrophils are not
To assessplatelet abnormalities,e.g.
distinguished from mature neutrophils.These factors
macroplatelets and platelet clumps.
highlight the importance of blood filmexamination.
Nucleated red cells(nRBCs)and even large plate-
Bloodfilm examination isessential incommercial
letsmaybemiscounted asleucocytes.Some analys-
laboratories,even where high tech,quality controlled,
ersmayidentifynRBCs andcorrectthewhite cellcount
'gold standard'analysers arebeing used.Inthe practice
accordingly, others may have flags for these, which
laboratory,wherein-houseanalysersmayprovideless
prompt the clinician to examine a blood film and then
accurateleucocytedifferentialandplateletcountsblood
correct thereportedWBCusing theformula:
filmexaminationisperhapsevenmoreimportant;failure
to perform blood fim examination may result in frequent
100
xAutomated white
 serious errors in clinical decision making.
Corrected WBC=
100+Numberof
cellcount
nRBCsper
Preparation of blood films
100WBCs
Bloodsamplesmearsshouldbepreparedsoon after
taking the blood sample.Polished glass slideswith
frosted ends arepreferred sincepencil canbe used for
Platelet counts
easy labelling.Slides shouldbe handledby theiredges/
All analyserscanperforma plateletcount,althoughthe
ends since grease from fingers canresult inpoor
accuracyof thesecountsisveryvariabledepending on
smearing.lfin doubt the slidecanbewiped cleanusing
the analyserused.As discussed above,analyser error
a tissuebefore use.Thetechnique forsmearprepara-
ismore likelyincatsbecause theirsmallredcellscanbe
tion is shown in Figure 3.12.
falselycounted asplateletsor largeplateletscanbe
miscounted as smallred cells.Significant laboratory
errorcanalsooccurifplateletsformclumpsinvitro:
platelets inclumps arenot counted bythe analyserand
so lead toa falsely low count.This is a common
laboratory errorandismore likelytooccurif theblood
samplingprocedure does not go smoothly;in cats it can
occurevenfollowingatraumaticvenipuncture,possibly
due to the effectsof EDTA.Clumping maybereduced
(a
b
by sampling into sodium citrate tubes.Wheneveralow
plateletcount isrecordedbyananalyser,abloodfilm
should be examined: if platelet clumps are found at the
tail of the smear(Figure 3.11) this is the likely cause of
the apparent thrombocytopenia and a fresh blood sam-
ple is required toobtain an accurate platelet count.
Macroplateletsorshift plateletsareoftenpresent if
thereis anacceleratedrate ofthrombopoiesis andmay
be miscounted as small red cells (see above).
3.11
Aplatelet
clump seen
at the tail of ablood
smear from a dog.
(e)
Platelets areround
with slightlygrainy
Aspreaderlideisrequiredtomakethesmear:thisisnarrowerthan
cytoplasm but no
thesmearslietoavoidspreadingthecellsovertheedeof thelide
nucleus.(May-
Grunwald-Giemsa
havingfirstscoreditwithabadeordimondwritrThespreadersle
stain; original
shouldbewashedinwateranddriedregularlyandshouldbereplaced
magnificationX1000.)
periodicalyastheedgecanbecomeroughened
Thebloodsampleismixedcarefullyand thena sampleharvested usinga
microhaematoritubeAdropofbloodisplacedontotheendofaslide(a)
The prederlie sheldbetween thethumbandseond finer
placing theindexfingerontopof thepreader.Thishelpstoapplyeven
pressure onthe spreaderwhen smearing (b)
Blood films
Thespreaderisplacedatanangleofabout30degreesinfrontof the
bloodspotandslidbackwardsuntilicomesintocontactwiththeblood
A blood smear should alwaysbe evaluated in conjunc-
tionwith automated cell counts.This is required:
Themomentthsoccursthespreaderisadvancedforwardssmoothly
andquickly.Asthemearismadeafeatherededeformsdonoti
To checktheleucocytedifferential count
thespreaderslideuntilthefeatherededgeiscompletelyformed(d）
To assess cell morphology, e.g. polychromasia,
Ideallythesmearshouldextendtoapproximatelytwothirdsofthe
anisocytosis,fragmentedred cells,spherocytes,
lengthoftheslideandshouldahavefairlysquarefeatherededge(e)
Heinzbodies,red cellparasites
·The smear should be allowed tofully air dry priortostaining.
To assess white cell abnormalities,e.g.toxic
3.12
Preparation of blood films.
neutrophils,left shiftblastcell
28
Chapter3Introductiontohaematology
Causes of poor quality smears are discussed and
five dips),an orange/pink dye in the second pot
illustrated inFigures3.13 and 3.14.
(usually three dips)and a blue dye inthe thirdpot
(usually six dips).The intensity of theblue and orange
cial
staining canbealtered byvarying thenumberof dips
Cause
Solution
ed,
Problem
in eachpotand it isworthexperimenting to determine
optimum staining. Smears are dipped in buffered
tice
Smear too long
Spreader speed
Morerapidspreader
water torinse and then air dried.lt is helpful to add a
ess
(feathered edge has
tooslow
speed
bod
coverslip and a mounting medium gluecan be used.
disappeared off the
Lowviscosity
 One or two drops of the mounting medium are placed
ure
end)
blood,i.e.anaemia
lent
Excessblood
Apply smaller blood
onacoverslipand thesmearslideisslowlylowered
applied to slide
onto the coverslip. N.B. Make sure the glue has set
spot
prior to examination, and avoid getting it on the
Smear too shor/thick
Spreader speed
Slower spreader
microscope lenses.
toofast
speed
fter
High viscosity
Filmexamination
with
blood, i.e.high PCV
A set procedure should be followed for blood film
Ifor
Feathered edge
Uneven contact of
Apply even pressure
examinationtoensure that all cell lines areexamined
ges/
consists of long
spreader with slide
using indexfingeron
 properly. Initially the smear is checked for large plate-
oor
streaked tails（Figure
topof spreader
let clumps (Figure 3.11) by examining the feathered
sing
3.14a)
Spreader has
Replace spreader
edge at low power(X20orX40).The smear is then
ara-
roughened edge
examined at higher power in the thin area in from the
Smear hasholes or
Grease on slide
Clean slidesbefore
feathered edge where the cells are evenly distributed
gaps
Lipaemia
use
in a monolayer(Figure 3.15). In this‘examination
Smearthickat
Blood in front of
Ensurefirmcontact
area'thered cellsshould not usuallybe touching one
feathered edge end
spreader
of spreaderand slide
another.Donotexamine cellsat thefeatherededge
of film
when pulling
(distorted)orin thick areasof thesmearwhere the
spreader backwards
cells are in clumps (cells do not lie flat in these areas).
towardsbloodspot
Thered cells,white cells and platelets are examined
in turn.
Causes and solutions of poor qualityblood
3.13
films.
Examination area
Feathered
edge
3.15
Diagrammaticrepresentationof ablood film
showing the area of theblood film in which cell
examination should beperformed.
6
d
Examinationofred cells
Evaluation of thered cells should include an assess-
e.
ide
Examples of blood smears.(a) Smear has a
3.14
ment of colour,size and shape,and examination for
ide
ragged featherededge due to uneven contact
inclusions. Red cell from dogs and cats are anucleate
ed
of thespreaderwith the slide,possiblybecausehe
and stain pink.Caninered cellshave a pale area in the
spreader is dirty or roughened. (b) Smear has holes in,
which maybe due to grease on the slide or lipaemia.
centre of the cells(central pallor) which is notobvious
inga
Ne(a)
(c) Smear is too long because too much blood has been
in feline red cells. Canine red cells are larger (dia-
applied to the slide.Blood in front of the spreaderhas
meter 7 μm) than feline red cells (diameter 5.5 μm)
even
resulted in the dense line at the tail.(d) Smear is too short,
(Figure 3.16).
whichmaybebecause insufficient blood was applied to
Anisocytosis refers to a variation in cellsize. Some
the slide or the spreader speed was too fast.(e) A good
variation in cell size is normal infeline blood.Imma-
ood
smearwith aneven‘square'end.
(c)
turered cells(reticulocytes)arelarger(macrocytic)
iy
than mature cells and also stain a blue-grey colour,
Stains
which is described aspolychromasia.Only small
Several types of rapid 'dunking' kits (e.g. Diff-Quick)
numbers(<1%)of immaturered cells are seen in
are available.Hema-Gurr(BDH) isrecommended by
normal animals.
the author. These stains are more than adequate for
Poikilocytosis refers to altered red cell shape,e.g
in-house use. These kits have a three-stage staining
due to the formation of acanthocytes orschistocytes.
Red cell abnormalities are discussed inChapter4.
procedurewhich incorporates a fixative pot(usually
29
Introduction
fo
ci
(d, ili)
(e,i)
(e, ii)
(t,i)
Atlas of red cells and leucocytes.(a,i) Normal canine red cells with central pallor.(a,ii)Normal feline red cells are smaller than canine cells and donothave obvious
3.16
central pallor.(b,i)Normal neutrophil withsegmentednucleusand light,clearcytoplasm.(b,i) Infemalesaproportionof neutrophilshaveaBarrbody（arrow),a small
(c,i) Normal monocytesare larger thanneutrophils,havevariably shapednucleiandbasophiliccytoplasmcontaining several vacuoles.(c,ii)The monocytenucleus（upperleft)
maybebandshapedbut iswiderthanneutrophil nucleus(lowerright)andhasmoreopen,stippledchromatin.(d,i)Small lymphocytewithdenseroundnucleus andcytoplasm
onlyvisibleat theop.d,iiLargerymphocytewithmoreabundantcytoplasmd,iiLargegranular lymphocytecontaining several largepink granulese,ielineosinophil
withrod shaped cytoplasmicgranules.Theneutrophil above it issmaller andhasclearcytoplasm.(e,i) Canine eosinophil with largerround granuleswhichareunevenly
distributed inthe cytoplasm.(e,i)Eosinophil withvacuolated cytoplasm from a Greyhound.(f,i)Caninebasophil withanelongatedribbon-likenucleus and indistinct lilac
granules.f,i)Felinebasophil withlilacand purple granules.fCourtesy of L.lackwood.)(a-e)May-GrunwaldGiemsa stain,(f)api-Diffstain;original magnificationX000.)
Chapter3
Introductiontohaematology
Examinationofleucocytes
A differentialwhitecellcount isperformedbycounting
Monocytes withU shaped
Band neutrophils
leucocytes at both the edges and in the middle of the
nuclei
smear in the examination area;largercells tend tobe
Wider,argernucleuswith
Narrownucleus
pushed to the edges of the smear,and smaller cells
knob shaped ends
tend tobe more concentrated in themiddle.An exam-
Open, stippled chromatin
Dense,condensed chromatin
pleof abattlementmeander method of counting is
Sky-blue to deeply basophilic
Pale grey cytoplasm
shown inFigure3.17.Atotalof atleast100,preferably
200 cells, should be counted. Nucleated red cells
cytoplasm
Toxic bandsmaybe slightly
basophilicutasdarka
should beincluded and then thecorrectedwhite cell
count is calculated.The percentage of each celltype is
monocytes
thenmultipliedbythetotal whitecellcounttodetermine
Cytoplasmoften contains
Cytoplasmnon-vacuolated
anabsolutecountforeachcelltype.Whitecell morpho-
discrete vacuoles and
Toxic bandsmay be foamy (not
logical abnormalities,such astoxic change oratypical
sometimescontainsfineink,
discretevacuoles)and contain
blast cells, should be noted (see Chapter 5).
dust-like granules
distinctgranules
Diff
Rapi
Factors that aid differentiation of monocytes
3.18
with U-shaped nuclei fromband neutrophils.
(?)
LUL
stain
larger thancaninered cells and have sparsecytoplasm
which is not bevisible all theway round the nucleus.
msa
 Medium-sized lymphocytes may approach the size of
neutrophils and have moreabundant cytoplasm,often
completelyencirclingthenucleus.Reactivelymphocytes
are larger still, with a nucleus approximately 1.5 times
3.17
Battlementmeander trackforperforminga
the diameterof acanineredcell and abundantdeeply
white cell differential count.
basophilic cytoplasm,oftenwith a darker tinge at the
periphery.Occasional reactive lymphocytes may be
Neutrophil are the predominant celltype, followed
seeninhealth,but these cellsusuallyreflectantigenic
by lymphocytes.Theratioof neutrophils:lymphocytes
stimulation.Afewlymphocytes containing severalpromi-
is 3.5:1 in the dog and 2:1 in the cat. Normal animals
nent magenta red/pink cytoplasmic granules on one
haveonly smallnumbersofeosinophils andmonocytes
side of thenucleusmaybe present.These are known as
and onlyvery occasional to absent basophils.
large granular lymphocytes'. Lymphoblasts (large cells
with one ormorenucleoliare not foundonblood films
Neutrophils:These arerelativelylarge(approximately
from healthy animals.
twotimes thediameter of aredcell)and havean
elongated,segmented nucleus with three to five lobes
Eosinophils:These are slightly largerthan neutrophils,
(Figure 3.16b). Cytoplasm is light blue-grey but the
and are characterized bynumerous,prominent,pink
cytoplasmicgranulespresent donot stain.Immature
cytoplasmic granules (Figure 3.16e). In cats these are
neutrophils,termedbands’，are seen infrequently in
always abundant and arerod-shaped and uniform in
healthbutincreased numbers arepresentininflamma-
size.In dogs the numberand size of granules arevery
tory conditions.Band neutrophils have an elongated,
variable.Classically there are abundant smallround
oftenU-shaped,non-lobulated nucleus withparallel
granulesbut theremaybe only small numbers of larger
sides.Shallow indentations less than50%of the width
granules. Cytoplasm between the granules is lightly
of the nucleusmaybepresent.Toxicneutrophils are
basopilic and may contain clearvacuoles.Eosinophils
seen insevere inflammation,especiallyassociated
ofGreyhoundsare alwaysveryvacuolated andcontain
withbacterialinfection andare discussed inChapter5.
few to no granules. Eosinophil nuclei are lobulated but
usually only have two to three lobes.
Monocytes:These are larger thanneutrophils and
have abundant sky-blue cytoplasm,often containing
Basophils:These arerarein blood smearsfrom
cleardiscretevacuolesandsometimesfine,pink,dust-
normal animals.They are a similar size to eosinophils
like granules (Figure 3.16c). The shape of the nucleus
and have an elongated 'ribbon-like' segmented nu-
isveryvariableandcanberound,kidneybean-shaped
cleus and variablenumbers ofcytoplasmic granules.In
lobulated, U-shaped or S-shaped. Monocytes with
dogs these granules are sparse and dark purple;in
U-shapednuclei maybe difficult to distinguish from
cats theyareabundant andpalelilac,sometimeswith
band neutrophils,especially those showing toxic
a few dark purple granules (Figure 3.16f).
change,butseveral differences aid identification,as
shown in Figure 3.18.
Examinationofplatelets
Platelets are small round structures with no nucleus.
Lymphocytes:These havea round nucleus with con-
They are quarter to half the diameter of red cells with
densed,smudgedchromatinandanarrowrimofbaso-
pink cytoplasm and fine granules.Platelet numbers
philic cytoplasm (Figure 3.16d). Lymphocytes vary in
canbe estimated by counting thenumberof platelets
size:smalllymphocytespredominate and are slightly
seen in aX1000 field(i.e.X10eyepieceandX100
31
Chapter3
Introductiontohaematology
objective),having first determined that no platelet
clumps are present. Five fields are counted and a
mean value is calculated. The normal count is 10-30
platelets per X1000 field (Figure 3.19). Each platelet
perX1000fieldequatestoapproximately15x10%/l.
Thus if 10 platelets are seen per X1000 field, the
platelet count is approximately 10x15=150x10/.
Animals with severe thrombocytopenia (<30 x 10%/)
have only O-3 platelets per field.The presence of large
‘shift'platelets should benoted,as thesemaybe an
indicatorof activethrombopoiesis,especially in dogs.
Furtherreading
HarveyJW(2001)Bonemarrowexamination.In:Atlasof Veterinary
Haematology.BloodandBoneMarrowofDomesticAnimalsed.
Performing anestimatedplatelet count.The
JWHarveyp.93-123.WBSaundersPhiladelphia
3.19
blood filmisexaminedusing theX100oil
immersionlensin theexamination area.Thenumber of
NCJan11ilimiila
plateletsperfield iscountedandameanvalueof five
fields iscalculated.Thisvalue ismultiplied by15 to
FundamentalsofVterinaryClinicaPathologyednd
produce the count x 10%/l.
StockhamandMAScottpp3148.lowaStatePress,lowa.
32
10
e
Disorders of erythrocytes
0
e
ElizabethVilliers
Introduction
erythropoietin.Certain cytokines released during in-
flammation,e.g.interleukin 1 and tumour necrosis
Erythrocytedisordersfall intotwobroadgroups:anae-
factor, inhibit erythropoiesis.
mia;and erythrocytosis(orpolycythaemia).Anaemia
may be due to reduced red cell production, which
Pluripotentstemcellsdevelopintoearly erythroid
resultsinnon-regenerative anaemia,orincreasedred
precursors,known asburst-forming units
cellloss,which results in regenerative anaemia.
erythroid(BFU-E),under the influence of
Changesinred cellparameters,such asmeancorpus-
interleukin3.
cularvolume(McV)and mean corpuscularhaemo-
BFU-Edivideandform colony-formingunits-
globin concentration (MCHC), and morphological
erythroid(CFU-E),which,in turn,divideand
changes(e.g.presence orabsence of polychromasia)
differentiate into proerythroblasts (alsoknown as
aidinthedifferentiationofthecauseofanaemia.To
rubriblasts)under the influence of erythropoietin.
understand howthese changes arise,itisnecessaryto
Proerythroblastsdevelopintoearlynormoblasts
reviewtheprocessoferythropoiesis.
(prorubricytes),which, in turn, divide into
intermediate normoblasts(metarubricytes) and
thenlatenormoblasts(rubricytes)(Figures4.1
Areviewoferythropoiesis
and 4.2).As these divisions take place the cells
progressivelybecome smaller,and also
Erythropoiesistakesplaceinthebone marrow,inislets
accumulateincreasing amountsofhaemoglobin.
around central macrophagesknown asnurse cells.
Oncea critical amountof haemoglobin has
These cellsphagocytose debris,such as extruded
formed,thenucleusisextruded anda
nuclearmaterial,storeironashaemosiderinandsupply
reticulocyte is formed.
ironasferritinforhaemsynthesis.Themainregulator
of erythropoiesis is erythropoietin，a glycoprotein
Thedevelopmenttime fromBFU-Etoreticulocyteis
produced inthekidneyinresponsetorenal tissue
approximately 7 days. Reticulocytes remain in the
hypoxia.Otherhormones,such as'thyroxine,growth
bonemarrowfor24-48hoursbeforebeingreleased
hormone and corticosteroids,enhance the effect of
intothecirculation,wheretheyreachfullmaturation
4.1
Erythropoiesis.
Haemoglobin synthesis
The developing
red cellsbecome
progressively smaller and
Proerythroblast
nomaolast
Intrmsdae 
Reticulocyte
accumulatehaemoglobin.
They arereleased into the
circulationas
reticulocytes.
Cell
Cell
Cell
No further
division
division
division
division
In thebonemarrow
Maturered cell
24-48hours
Inthe circulation
33
Chapter4Disordersoferythrocytes
Normal erythropoiesis depends on normal haemo-
globin synthesis and normal DNA synthesis.Haemo-
globin consists of four interlinked globin chains
(constructed from amino acids),each of which has a
cleft containing a haem molecule.Haem consists of a
LN
IN
protoporphyrin ring containing a central molecule of 
PEB
iron(Figure4.4).Theprotoporphyrinringis synthesized
from the amino acid glycine and theKrebs cycle
intermediatesuccinyl-CoA,byaseriesof enzymatic
reactions.Thusthebasicingredients'of haemoglobin
IN
are aminoacidsand iron,and haemoglobin synthesis
EN
isimpeded if there is protein deficiency (e.g.malnutri-
chronic external blood loss).Defective haemoglobin
4.2
Stagesof erythropoiesisshown onabone
 synthesis may also result from lead toxicity, due to
marrow aspirate(EN,early normoblast;IN,
intermediate normoblast:;LN,latenormoblast;PEB,
inhibition of some of the enzymatic reactions involved
proerythroblast).(May-Grunwald-Giemsa stain;original
in protoporphyrin synthesis.
magnificationX1000.)
4.4
aftera further24-48hours.Reticulocytes are not
Diagrammatic
capable of cell division but continue to synthesize
representation of
haemoglobin.Theydevelopintomatureerythrocytes
the structure of
whenhaemoglobinsynthesisiscompletedand thecell
haemoglobin with
sizehasreduced to adultsize.
fourhaem rings
Keyfeaturesofreticulocytesare:
connectedby
globin chains
They are larger than mature red cells
Theycontainlesshaemoglobinthanmaturered
cells
They contain numerous clumpsof ribosomal
RNAwhichimpart apolychromatophilic(bluish-
pink) colour to thecytoplasmon Romanowsky
staining (Figure 4.3) and stain as dark clumps
The trigger for extrusion of the nucleus from the
withnewmethyleneblue.
normoblast isthe accumulationofacritical amountof
haemoglobin.lf therate of haemoglobin synthesis is
reduced,forexampleduetoirondeficiency,thenucleus
isretainedwithin theredcellprecursorfor longerand
additional cell divisions take place,resulting in the
production of smaller(microcytic) cells.
Anaemia
Anaemiaischaracterizedbyreducednumbersoferyth-
rocytes,whichresultsinreducedpackedcellvolume
(PCV) andred cell count,andreduced haemoglobin
concentration.Decreased erythrocyte haemoglobin
contentalsoproducesanaemia andareduced haemo-
globin concentration.There are many causes of anae-
4.3
Bloodfilmfromadogwithregenerative
mia,but theseall fall into oneof twogroups:
anaemia due to blood loss.There ismarked
polychromasia(darkerpurple cells,bottom arrow).Target
cells(codocytes)arepresent (top arrow);these have a
Anaemia due toreducedredcell production
wideareaofcentralpallorwithinwhichthereisacentral
(leading tonon-regenerative anaemia)
circular density of haemoglobin.(May-Grunwald-Giemsa
Anaemiaduetoincreasedredcellloss(leading
stain; original magnification X1000.)
to regenerative anaemia). This may result from
haemorrhage or haemolysis.
Matureerythrocytescirculateforapproximately110
 days in the dog and 70 days in the cat. Senescent red 
Characteristicsofregenerativeanaemia
cellsarelost in the liver,spleen and bone marrow.As
Thebonemarrowrespondstoredcelllossbyincreasing
oldcellsarelost,theyarereplacedbyreticulocytes
red cellproduction and,after aninitial lag phase of
releasedfromthemarrowand thussmallnumbers
3-5days,increased numbers of reticulocytes are
(approximately1%)ofpolychromaticcellsorreticulocytes
released into the circulation. Reticulocytes are re-
areseenonbloodsmearsfromnormaldogsandcats.
leased at an earlier stage than theywouldbe in a
34
Chapter 4 Disorders of erythrocytes
no-
normal animal and maybelarger,orevennucleated.
present tomove themeanout of the normal range.
no-
Thus aregenerative anaemiaischaracterized by
MCVandMCHCarenotverysensitivemarkersof
ins
numerous circulating reticulocytes ± nucleated red
regeneration,and maybe altered forotherreasons
sa
cells.Sincereticulocytes arelarger,meancorpuscu-
(Figures4.5 and 4.6).Thered cell distribution width
fa
larvolume(McV) isincreased,and since they have
(RDW,seeChapter3) isamore sensitiveindicator,
of
less haemoglobin,mean corpuscular haemoglobin
sincerelativelysmallnumbersoflargercellswill
ed
concentration (MCHC) is reduced:the anaemia is
increase thisparameter.Onhistogramplotspro-
cle
macrocytic and hypochromic. However, MCV and
duced by impedance analysers a hump of larger cells
tic
MCHCaremeanvaluesandso,inamildlyregenera
is seen on the right of the curve,representing
bin
tive anaemia,theremaynotbesufficientreticulocytes
reticulocytes (Figure 4.7).
sis
!
or
Causes of altered MCV
Mechanism/other features
in
IncreasedMCV
to
ed
Regenerativeanaemia
Increasedcirculatingreticulocyteswhicharelargr
Felineeukaemiavirusinectionmyeloproliferative
Duringerythropoiesisthereisdelayednuclearmaturationalongsidenormalhaemoglobin
disease
productionresultinginfwercelldivisionsbeforethenuclusisextrudd
FamilialmacrocytosisinToyandMiniaturePoodles
AlsoincreasednucleatedredcellsandHowell-Jollybodies.Incidentalfinding.Pathogenesis
(Schalm,1976)
unknown.No anaemia or clinical signs
Hereditary stomatocytosis inAlaskanMalamutes
and MiniatureSchnauzers（Fletchetal,1975;
water.MiniatureSchnauzersareasymptomatic.Malamuteshaveconcurrentchondrodysplasia
Brown et al.,1994)
Aged blood samples (>24 hours)
Red cellswelling in vitro
Autoagglutination
Clumpsof redcellscounted byanalyserasonelargeredcell
Hyperosmolality,e.g.due tohypernatraemia
Whenbloodismixedwithanalyserdiluentwatermovesintoredcellsleadingtoswelling
DecreasedMCV
Irondeficiency
Liverdisease;portosystemic shunts
Cause unclearbt ielytobeduetabnormal ironmetabolimMC nomalormilly
reduced.May also see mild anaemia
Anaemiaof chronicinflammatorydisease
Usuallynormocyticnormochromicbutmaybecomemicrocyticif long-standing.Likelytobedue
to abnormal ironmetabolism
Familial microcytosis in Akitas
Incidental finding
4.5
Causeofaltered
Mechanism
MCHC
IncreasedMCHC
Intravascular
Free haemoglobin (Hb) as well as Hb from
haemolysis;
cells ismeasuredand thisaffects
number
haemolysisin vitro
calculation of MCHC
Lipaemia;numerous
InterferencewithspectrophotometricHb
Cell
Heinzbodies
assay
ReducedMCHC
Regenerative anaemia
Increasedcirculatingreticulocyteswhich
haveleshamglobin llreeneratv
anaemiashave lowMCHC
lrondeficiency
Reduced productionof haemoglobin
Redcellsize
Aged blood samples
Red cell swelling invitroleadstoincreased
(>24 hours)
HCTand consequent decreased calculated
A histogram showing red cell size on theXaxis
MCHC
4.7
and cellnumber(n) theYaxis,from a dog with
regenerative anaemia. There is a hump'to the right of the
Causes of altered mean corpuscularhaemoglobin
main peak(arrow) indicating increased numbers of large
4.6
concentration and their mechanisms.
red cells.
35
Chapter4Disordersoferythrocytes
OnabloodfilmstainedwitharoutineRomanowsky
Characteristicsof non-regenerative anaemia
or rapid (e.g. Diff-Quik) stain, the regenerative re-
Innon-regenerativeanaemia thereisnoincreased
sponse manifests as polychromasia (increased num-
releaseofreticulocytesfromthebonemarrowandthe
bersofpolychromaticcells) andanisocytosis(variation
anaemiaisnormocyticandnormochromic,with no
in cell size) with macrocytosis(see Figure 4.3). The
increase in RDw.On a blood film,thered cells are
numberofpolychromaticcellsandmacrocytesper
uniform in size and polychromatic cells are rare (<1.5%
highpower field shouldbe assessed to gauge the
ofredcellsor<1perhighpower100xfield).lmmediately
regenerativeresponse,as showninFigure4.8.Incats,
following red cell loss,anaemia appears non-regen-
reticulocytestendtoremaininthemarrowuntil theyare
erative,and anincrease in circulatingreticulocytesis
 only weakly polychromatophilic and so the degree of
not seen for3-4 days.
polychromasia seeninaregenerativeanaemiaisless
marked thanforthedog.
Distinguishingregenerativefrom non-
Otherblood filmfeatures of regeneration include:
regenerative anaemia
Evaluationof theMCV,MCHCand thepresenceor
Howell-Jolly bodies(remnants of nuclear
absence of polychromasia and anisocytosis help to
material,most often seen in cats)(Figure 4.9a)
distinguishregenerative andnon-regenerative anae-
Target cells(see Figure 4.3) are frequently seen,
mia,butthemostaccuratewayofevaluating thebone
but are not specificforregeneration.Theymay
marrow'sresponse is by measuring the circulating
alsobeseeninrenal andhepaticdisorders,and
reticulocyte count.
hypochromictargetcells areseenin iron
deficiency (see below)
Reticulocyte counts
Basophilic stippling (due to aggregated
Reticulocytes can beidentified using supravital stains
ribosomes, appearing as small punctuate 
(stain living cells),such as new methylene blue and
inclusions; Figure 4.9b) is occasionally seen in
brilliantcresylgreen,whichstainthereticulumnetwork
regenerationinsmall animalsbut ismoreoften
 of aggregated ribosomes, mitochondria and organelles
associatedwithleadpoisoning
presentinimmature cells.Thisreticulum networkislost
Nucleated red cells(Figure 4.9c).
as the red cell matures and soreticulocyte counts
shouldbeperformedonfreshsamples(preferably<6
Circulating nucleated red cells in the absenceof
hours old).
polychromasiaarenotindicativeofaregenerative
Toperformareticulocytecount:
response and maybe seen with bonemarrow disease
(e.g.myeloproliferative disease) and with splenic dis-
1.Mix equal parts of blood (in EDTA) and a 0.5%
ease (e.g. neoplasia), as well as in lead poisoning.
solution of new methylene blue in normal saline.
Grade
Polychromasia in dogs
Polychromasia in cats
Macrocytosis (dogs and cats)
Occasional
<1 cel/hpf
<1 cell every other hpf
Slightly largercells,1 cel/hpf
1+
1-2 cells/hpf
<1 cel/hpf
Slightly larger cells,1cells/hf
2+
2-3 cells/hpf
-2cells/hpf
Slightlyagerandlargerstillcellspreentellh
3+
4-8cells/hpf
3-5 cells/hpf
Largecellspresent,5-10/hpf
4+
>8clls/hpf
>5 cells/hpf
Large cells present, >10/hpf
4.8
Agradingsystemforpolychromasia andmacrocytosisindogsand cats.Occasional indicatesnoregeneration,
1+and2+indicatemildregeneration,3+and 4+indicatemoderateand markedregeneration.Thisgrading is
subjectiveand willalso depend on the thicknessof thesmearand the total number ofcellsper highpower(1oox)field
(hpf).Gradingsystemsmayvaryslightlybetweendifferent laboratories.
(a)
(b)
(c)
4.9
Features of regenerative anaemia.(a) Howell-Jolly bodies inred cells areprominent dark circular inclusions of
varying size (black arrow). A nucleated red blood cellis also present (white arrow).(b) Basophilic stippling.
Numerous tiny inclusions are seen across the cell surface.(c) A late normoblast with a small dark nucleus and
polychromaticcytoplasm(left) andproerythoblast with a larger nucleus and relatively less cytoplasm(right).with a
neutrophil between the two.(May-Grunwald-Giemsa stain;original magnificationX1000.)
36
Chapter 4Disorders of erythrocytes
2.Leave to stand at room temperature for 15-20
Reticulocytesare absentorpresentonlyinsmall
minutes.
numbers (<1.5%) in normal blood.Following acute
3.
Mix again.
haemorrhage or haemolysis, increased numbers of 
4.
Make ablood smear(see Chapter 3).
reticulocytesarenotevidentforatleast48hours,with
5.
Scan thesmearat lowpowerfirst tocheckfor
maximalproduction by4-7 days.Inregenerative
evendistributionofreticulocytes.Occasionally,
anaemias,withanormalfunctioningbonemarrow,the
the reticulocytes areunevenly distributed and are
magnitudeof thereticulocyteresponseshould match
preferentiallypushed to the tail.
the severityofthe anaemia.Forexample,nadog,mild
6.Evaluate the smear at highpower(10ox) in the
anaemiaandaPCVof30%shouldleadtoaslight
monolayerregion(examination area,see
increase in reticulocyte count (e.g.2%),whilst severe
Chapter 3).
anaemia and aPCVof 15%shouldlead to a much
higherreticulocyte count (e.g.20-50%).Haemolytic
Indogs,allreticulocytesareaggregateforms:these
anaemias generallyresult in a more marked reticulo-
arelargerthanmatureredcellsandcontainlarge
cytosis than do haemorrhagic anaemias.
 clumps of aggregated ribosomes (Figure 4.10a). In 
Thereticulocytecount must be interpreted in the
cats there are twoforms of reticulocyte:punctuate and
light of the degreeof anaemia.It is preferable to use the
aggregate.Punctatereticulocytesare more mature
absolutereticulocyte count,as this isnot affectedby
than aggregate reticulocytes, are similar in size to
variationinred cell numberin theway thatreticulocyte
mature red cells,and contain two to sixfine dots of
percentage is, as shown in Figure 4.11.
residual RNA (Figure 4.10b). Only the aggregate forms
should be included in the count (punctate reticulocytes
are counted asmaturered cells).Becausethere isa
transition from the aggregateto thepunctuate stage,
15%
reticulocytes
some cells may be difficult to classify.
Toperformthecountatleast300cells,butpreferably
30%
reticulocytes
arecountedand thepercentage ofreticulocytesis
Normal
Mild anaemia
Severeanaer
calculated.
4.11
The effect of degree of anaemia on uncorrected
reticulocyte percentage. The proportions of
mature red cells and reticulocytes are shown schematically
in red and black,respectively.The normal animal on the left
hasa lowpercentage of reticulocytes.In the animalswith
mild and severe anaemia,thesame absolutenumberof
reticulocytesiscirculating,but thereticulocytepercentage
ishigherinsevereanaemiabecause there arefewer
mature cells.This gives thefalse impression that the severe
 anaemia is more regenerative than the mild anaemia.
Absolute reticulocyte count (x 10%/) =
Observed%reticulocytesxRBC(x1012/1)x10
Guidelinesfor thedegreeof reticulocyteresponse
(a)
are shown inFigure 4.12.
Alternatively,thecorrectedreticulocytepercentage
(CRP)canbeused.
CRP(%)=
Reticulocyte percentagexPatient'sPCV
AveragePCVforpatient(45%indog,37%incat)
A third correction,the reticulocyte production index
(RPI), is sometimes used in dogs. With increasing
severity ofanaemia,reticulocytes spend less time
maturing in thebone marrow and longer in the circula-
tionbefore maturing into erythrocytes.This means that
CRPandabsolutereticulocytecountmayoveresti-
mate thedegreeoferythropoietic activityin thebone
marrow.TheRPI is calculatedbydividing theCRPby
(b)
the reticulocyte maturation time (RMT),which varies
4.10
Reticulocytes. (a) In the dog. reticulocytes have
depending on the degreeof anaemia:
numerous dark-staining aggregates of
RPI=CRP/RMT
large clumps of ribosomes(black arrow),whilst punctuate
reticulocyteshavea few small inclusions(white arrow).
whereRMT=1dayforaPCVof45%,1.5daysfor35%，
(New methylene blue stain;original magnification X1000.)
2 days for 25%,and 2.5 days for 15%.
37
Chapter4Disordersoferythrocytes
Degreeof
Caninereticulocytes(x10/)
Felineaggregate reticulocytes(x10/)
Feline punctate reticulocytes(x10%/)
regeneration
(RP shown in parentheses)
(RP shown in parentheses)
None
<60 (<1.5%)
<40（<0.5%）
<200
Slight
60-150 (1.5-4%)
41-70 (0.5-2%)
200-500
Moderate
150-300(5-20%)
70-100 (3-4%)
500-1000
Marked
>500(>20%)
>200 (>4%)
1000-1500
Guidelinesforinterpreting thereticulocyteresponse,based onabsolutereticulocyte count.(RP,reticulocyte
4.12
percentage(uncorrected).)
AnRPl of<1 indicates a non-regenerative anae-
clinical signsforthe degree of anaemia.In contrast,
mia,RPIof 1-2indicates a slightresponse,RPI >2
animalswithacuteanaemia,whichhavenothadtime
indicates a moderate response and RPI >3 indicates a
to adapt physiologically,have severe clinical signs
markedresponse,asis seeninhaemolysis.However,
associatedwitharelativelymildtomoderate anaemia.
these arehumanred cell maturation timesandvalues
Blood loss anaemia
foranaemic dogsorcats are not known(Stockham and
Scott,2002).Thus,theRPI maynotbereliableindogs
The clinical and clinicopathological picture of acute
and cats and is infrequently used.The author's prefer-
and chronic haemorrhage differ in many respects and
enceistocalculatetheabsolutereticulocytecount.
so are considered separately.
Feline reticulocytes
Acute haemorrhage
Acute haemorrhagemay occurfollowing trauma or
Aggregate andpunctuatereticulocytes arepresent in
feline blood (see Figure 4.10b). Aggregate reticulocytes
surgery, or due to bleeding gastrointestinal ulcers or
circulate fora short time(approximately 12 hours)
tumours, rupture of a vascular tumour (e.g. splenic
before developing intopunctatereticulocytes,which
haemangiosarcoma)or coagulopathy(e.g.warfarin
toxicity). Acute severe blood loss (up to 30-40% of
developintomaturered cells after10days.Aggregate
reticulocytesarepolychromaticonRomanowsky stains
bloodvolume,beyond which death is likelytooccur)
but punctatereticulocytes arenot.Normal catsmay
causes hypovolaemic shock with collapse,marked
have up to10%punctate reticulocytes.Following an
mucosal pallor, tachycardia and weak pulses (con-
episodeofredcell loss,punctatereticulocytesstartto
trastingwith theboundingpulses seen in animalswith
increaseby1week,peakat around2-3weeksand
acutehaemolysis).Immediatelyfollowing acutehaem-
then gradually decline. Thus,increased punctate
orrhagetheplasmaproteinandredcellparameters
reticulocytes indicate a regenerative response 2-4
(includingPCV) are normal because both red cells and
plasma arelost inproportion.After about 4hours,the
weeksearlier,whilstincreasedaggregatereticulocytes
indicate recentbonemarrow stimulation.The aggre-
PCVandplasmaproteinstart tofallasbloodvolume is
expandedbyinterstitial fluidmovinginto thecircula-
marrow'sresponsetoanaemia,andpunctatereticulo-
tion.Plasma protein usuallyfallsfirstbecause splenic
cytes arenotusually counted (they are counted as
contractionmayoffset thefall inPCV.ThePCVdoes
mature cells).However,in mild anaemia thepunctate
not indicatethefullmagnitudeof bloodlossforat least
count isusefulbecause themarrowtendstoretainthe
24 hours after theonset of haemorrhage.
aggregatereticulocytesuntilthey matureintopunctate
Followinginternal haemorrhageupto approximately
reticulocytes.Guidelinesforinterpreting thepunctate
60%of the red cells as well as plasma protein are
reticulocyte count are shown inFigure 4.12.
reabsorbedviathelymphaticsoverafewdays,resulting
inarapidincreaseinPCVandplasmaprotein.Red cells
Physiologicalresponsetoanaemia
may be damaged during this process,resulting in the
Thereleaseofoxygenfrom haemoglobintothe tissues
formationofacanthocytes;these shouldbedistinguished
is determinedbythe affinityof haemoglobinforoxygen.
from echinocytes(Figure 4.13).The remaining red cells
Lower affinity means thata higherproportionof oxygen
are phagocytosed by macrophages and their iron is
carried by haemoglobin is released to tissues.Haemo-
recycled.Theanaemiaresolvesduetoacombinationof
globin affinity isreduced intissue hypoxia,aslactic
redcellreabsorptionandbonemarrowregeneration.
acidreleasedvia anaerobicglycolysisleadstolowered
Themagnitude of theregenerativeresponsemaynotbe
microenvironmental pH.In addition,haemoglobin af-
verymarked if a largeproportion of cells isreabsorbed.
finityisregulated by2,3diphosphoglycerate (2,3DPG),
Following external haemorrhage,proteinandred
a compound found in high concentrations in red cells.
cells(and hence iron)are lost from thebody and so
Increased2,3DPGconcentrationleadstolowered
recovery from anaemia depends totally on the bone
marrow's response. This regenerative response is
tissues.2,3DPGconcentration increases in anaemia
usually apparent in the peripheral blood after 3-4 days.
ThePCVrisesquiterapidlyandisusuallylownormal
caladaptationtotheanaemicstate,maximizing the
within2-3weeksof asinglehaemorrhagicepisode.
capacityof theirreducednumberof red cellsto carry
Plasmaproteinshouldreturntonormalafter5-7days:
anddeliveroxygen.Animalswithchronicanaemiacan
persistently low protein beyond this time is suggestive
compensateremarkablywellandhaverelativelymild
 of ongoing external blood loss.
38
Chapter4Disordersoferythrocytes
signs,coagulation tests(see Chapter6),radiography,
beindicated.
Chronichaemorrhageandiron-deficiencyanaemia
Chronic haemorrhage results in an insidious onset,
chronicanaemia.Theanimal isabletoadapttothe
anaemic state andso showsrelativelymild signsfor
the degree of anaemia.Chronicexternalhaemorrhage
initiallyleadstoaregenerativeanaemia,but,asiron
deficiency develops,the anaemia progressively be-
(a)
comesnon-regenerative.Mostbodyironisfound in
haemoglobin(65%),andonly smallamounts of iron are
found in myoglobin and enzymes or attached to the
transportermolecule,transferrin(5%).Theremainder
is stored invarious tissues ashaemosiderinandferri-
tin: a small amount of ferritin is present in the plasma.
Chronicexternal blood lossresults in loss ofhaem iron.
In response to the blood loss,iron stores are mobilized
and utilized forerythropoiesis,butwhen these stores
become depleted iron deficiency develops. Young
animalsbecomeiron deficient following blood loss
morequicklythenadultsbecausetheyhavelowiron
stores,and the bone marrow has less capacity to
(b)
increase the rate of haematopoiesis,as it is very
4.13
(a)Acanthocytes('spur cells') have rounded
activelyproducingredcellstomatchgrowthrate.
projections of variable length and reflect
Iron deficiencyresults ininadequatehaemoglobin-
membrane damage,whichmay occurwithreabsorptionof
ization of red cells and therelease of microcytichypo-
redcellsfollowinginternal haemorrhage,or fragmentation
as red cells pass through tumours,such as
chromicredcellsintothecirculation,withresultant low
haemangiosarcoma and lymphoma,or clots in
MCV and MCHC. MCV falls first;as iron becomes
disseminated intravascular coagulation.(b)Crenated red
progressively depleted,MCHC thenfalls.The combi-
cells/echinocytes have numerous short, evenly spaced
nationofmicrocyticand normocytic(present fromprior
surface projections of uniform dimensions and are usually
to the onset of iron deficiency)red cells leads to
an artefactual change in thick smears;red cells shrink
increased RDw.Persistent thrombocytosisisacom-
when the smeardries or with excessEDTA.Echinocytes
may sometimes be seen in uraemia.(May-Grunwald-
monfeatureof chronic haemorrhage.Plasma proteins
Giemsa stain;original magnification X1000.)
are lost along with red cells and, if blood loss is
substantial,there ishypoproteinaemia withproportion-
Acute blood loss is usually associated with a neu-
ately lowalbumin andglobulin.
trophilic leucocytosiswith increased numbers of band
On the blood film the red cells do not always have
neutrophils,especially following haemorrhage intoa
a smallerdiameterbutare thin(flat),pale-staining cells
body cavity.Thepresence of immatureredcells and
termed leptocytes,whichhave a large area of central
granulocyticprecursorsin thecirculationisknown asa
pallor and a thin rimof haemoglobin (Figure 4.14).
leucoerythroblasticresponseandmayalsobeseenin
Target cells (codocytes) and folded or fragmented red
immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia(see Figure
cells (schistocytes,seeFigure 4.25) may be present.
 5.6). Immediately following haemorrhage there will be
a mild to moderate thrombocytopenia,reflecting in-
creased consumption ofplatelets;thisis usuallyrapidly
followed byarebound thrombocytosis with the produc-
tion of large'shift' platelets.
In summary,the clinicopathological features of
acutehaemorrhage are:
 Anaemia: initially non-regenerative, after 3-4
daysbecomesregenerative.Acanthocytesmay
beseenwithinternal haemorrhage
Lowplasma proteins,returning to normal more
quickly with internal haemorrhage
Neutrophiliawithleftshift
4.14
Bloodfilmfroma dogwithsevereiron-
Thrombocytopenia then rebound thrombocytosis.
deficiency anaemia with numerous leptocytes.
Theseareverypale,withawideareaofcentralpallorand
The cause orsourceof thehaemorrhagemay
a thinrim of haemoglobinbut do not appear tohave a
reduceddiameter(theyhavereducedmeancellvolume
be obviouson clinical examination,orfurtherinvesti-
because they are thin/flat).(May-Grunwald Giemsa stain;
gationsmay berequired.Depending on the clinical
original magnification X1000.)
39
Chapter4Disordersoferythrocytes
In summary, the clinicopathological features of
sessed bymeasuring serum iron,serumferritin,total
chronicblood loss/iron-deficiencyanaemia are:
iron binding capacity (TIBC), percentage transferrin 
saturation and bone marrow haemosiderin stores.
Microcytichypochromicanaemia with
hypochromic leptocytesseenonbloodfilm
Serum iron:Serumironmeasuresthe total amount of
Lowplasma proteinwithsevereblood loss
ironboundtoboth transferrin and ferritin.However,the
Thrombocytosis
amountof ferritin-iron inserum isvery small unless
Reticulocyte count increased initially, then falls
ferritin is markedly increased (e.g. occasionally in
as animal becomes iron-deficient.
hepatic damage or malignant histiocytosis(Newlands
et al., 1994)), so serum iron generally reflects iron
These findings should prompta searchforexternal
bound to transferrin.lron within haemoglobin is not
blood loss.Chronicexternal blood lossmayresult from
detectedbythis test.
blood loss into the gastrointestinal (Gl), urogenital or
Serum iron concentration is lowin iron-deficiency
respiratory tract,orfrom the skinsurface(e.g.insevere
anaemia,AIDandwithacuteand chronicinflammatory
flea infestation). Gl bleeding is the most common
reactions (due to sequestration of iron within
 cause of iron-deficiency anaemia in dogs and may be
macrophages in the liver, spleen and marrow)and in
due to ulceration,parasitism,neoplasia or inflamma-
dogswithportosystemicshunts.
tory bowel disease (Ristic and Stidworthy, 2002). Uro-
genital bleeding may be due to neoplasia, chronic
Ferritin:Ferritin concentrationsin theserum correlate
infections/inflammatory conditions or idiopathic renal
wellwith body iron stores and so are low in iron-
haemorrhage. Respiratory tract bleeding may be due
deficiencyanaemiaandnormalinAID.However,ferri-
to nasal or pulmonary haemorrhage, most often caused
tin is an acute phase protein reactant, and so can
by neoplasia.Blood can be coughed up and swal-
increasewith acuteinflammation.Ferritin ismeasured
lowed,thus mimicking Gl haemorrhage. The source of
using immunoassays,whichare unfortunately notrou-
bleeding may be evident from the clinical history (e.g.
tinely available for use in the dog and cat.
melaena,haematuria,lice or flea infestation).Other-
wise,urinalysis and faecal occult blood tests shouldbe
Totaliron-binding capacity:TIBCis anindirectmeas-
carried out.Thepatient should be on ameat-free diet
urement of transferrin. The patient's serum sample is
for at least 3 days before performing the faecal occult
floodedwith excess iron,whichbinds to all the avail-
blood test, since myoglobin (present in meat) cross
able binding sites on transferrin.The unbound iron is
reactswith haemoglobin inthetest.Faecalanalysisfor
thenremovedby chemical methods and the iron con-
 centration in the remaining sample is evaluated. The
contrast radiography) of the Gl or urogenital tract may
amount of iron measured is proportional to the amount
 be useful in determining the site of blood loss.
of transferrin present.TIBC is low in AID and also with
Anaemiaofchronicinflammatory disease(AID,see
severe liver disease (due to reduced production of
later) usually leads to a mild to moderate normocytic
transferrin), but it is normal in dogs and cats with iron-
normochromic non-regenerative anaemia, 
but
deficiencyanaemia(itiselevatedinmostotherspecies
occasionally leads to microcytic normochromic or mi-
with iron deficiency).
crocytichypochromic anaemia due toreduced iron
availability.This can be confused with iron-deficiency
Percentagetransferrinsaturation:Thisiscalculated
anaemia.A severe microcytic hypochromic anaemia
by dividing the serum iron concentration by the TIBC
(PCV<20%)is almost certainly due to iron deficiency,
andis anindicatorof thepercentageof transferrin
but,if the anaemia ismild ormoderate,evaluationof
binding sites which are occupied by iron. In normal
iron storesis usefulto distinguishiron-deficiencyanae-
animals this is approximately 33%; it is reduced in iron-
mia and AID (Figure 4.15). Iron stores may be as-
deficiency anaemiaand increased inAID.
PCV
lron stores
Typeofanaemia
Bonemarrowhaemosiderinstores:Haemosiderin
<20%:severe
lron-deficiency
stores canbe assessed by staining abonemarrow
anaemia
aspirate with Prussian blue.Haemosiderin in seen as
anaemia
 blue aggregates within macrophages. This is the
>20%:mild to
Lowserumiron
Anaemia of
Lowtotaliron-bindingcapacity
inflammatory
most accuratemethod of assessingbodyironstores
moderate
anaemia
High bone marrow iron
disease
in dogs, but is an invasive procedure. lf there is
Highpercentage transferrin
stainable iron in the bone marrow,thisrulesout iron
saturation
deficiency asa causeforanaemia(Stone andFreden,
>20%:mild to
Lowserumiron
Iron-deficiency
1990). Stainable iron is not present in normal cat bone
moderate
Normal or high total iron-
anaemia
marrow(Harvey,2001).
anaemia
binding capacity
Lowbonemarrow iron
Haemolyticanaemia
Low percentagetransferin
There are many causes of haemolysis, but the most 
saturation
important in dogs and cats are:
4.15
Role of iron stores in microcytichypochromic
anaemia indistinguishinganaemia of chronic
Immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia(IMHA)
inflammatory disease from iron-deficiency anaemia.
(primary or secondary)
40
Chapter4Disordersoferythrocytes
tal
Heinzbody/eccentrocyte anaemia dueto
Immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia
rin
oxidativedamage
Immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia (IMHA) is a
Microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia, e.g.
common causeof haemolytic anaemia indogs(espe-
associated with haemangiosarcoma
cially bitches) but is less common in cats. Cocker
of
Feline leukaemia virus(FeLV)infection
Spaniels, English Springer Spaniels, Poodles, Old 
Mycoplasma haemofelis (Haemobartonella felis)
English Sheepdogs and Collie breeds are predisposed.
sS
infection
The absenceof dog erythrocyteantigen7hasbeen
in
Babesia canisinfection
reported tobe associatedwithan increasedriskof
ds
Malignanthistiocytosis(discussed later in non-
IMHAin CockerSpaniels(Miller et al.,2004).In dogs,
on
regenerative anaemia)
60-75%cases are primary(idiopathic) and are some-
Inheritedredcelldefects
times termed autoimmune haemolytic anaemia. IMHA
ot
Severehypophosphataemia.
 may also be secondary to certaindrugs(e.g. potentiated 
sulphonamides,cephalosporins,non-steroidalanti-in-
Haemolytic anaemia results in regenerative anae-
flammatory drugs),neoplasia(Mellanby et al.,2004),
in
mia,and theresponse is usually more marked than
systemic lupus erythematosus and infections,such as
in
that seen following haemorrhage because iron is
babesiosis,ehrlichiosis or localized bacterial infec-
more readily utilizable. Depending on the cause, the
tions(e.g.subacute endocarditis).There are conflict-
red cellsmaybedestroyed intravascularlyorextra-
ing reportsregarding the association of IMHA with
vascularly, or both.
vaccination (Duval and Giger, 1996). Primary IMHA is
e
In extravascular haemolysis,damaged red cells
 much less common in the cat but secondary IMHA may
-
i-
are phagocytosed by macrophages,mainly in the
be induced byhaemotrophicMycoplasma(formerly
n
spleen, and to some extent in the liver and bone
Haemobartonella)infections,FeLVinfection,lympho-
p
marrow.The anaemia usually has an insidious onset
proliferative diseases,transfusionwith blood of inap-
(days to weeks) and maybe mild or severe.
propriate blood group, and certain drugs.
In intravascular haemolysis,red cells are lysed
within the circulation asa consequenceofdirect
Pathophysiologyandlaboratoryfindings:InIMHA
 membrane damage. The anaemia is acute in onset 
the animal produces antibodies(most commonly IgG
(hours to days) and is severe.Free intravascular
butsometimes IgMoroccasionally lgA) directed against
haemoglobinfromlysedredcellsimmediatelyforms
its own red cells. In severe cases, high levels of
a complex with haptoglobin;this complexis cleared
complement-fixing antibody(usually IgM) are present
fromthecirculationbyhepatocytesandmacrophages,
on the red cell surface, leading to severe membrane
and within these cellshaemoglobin isbroken down to
damage; extracellular water leaks into the celleading
bilirubin.Accumulating haemoglobin/haptoglobin
to swelling and rupturewithin the circulation(Figure
complexes result in haemoglobinaemia(pink
4.16).Theresult is intravascular haemolysis and the
plasma). When the supply of haptoglobin becomes
anaemia is acute and severe.
saturated,free haemoglobin accumulates in the
plasmaand haemoglobinaemiaworsens.Freehaem-
IgM
oglobin isabletopassthroughthe glomerularbarrier
resultinginhaemoglobinuria andassociatedrenal
tubulardamage.
Jaundice may be seen with both forms of haemo-
lysis,if itisacuteand/orsevere.Haemoglobinisbroken
downwithinmacrophages(and hepatocytesfollowing
intravascular haemolysis) to form unconjugated bi-
lirubin,ironand amino acids.lronand amino acidsare
Complement
recycled for future erythropoiesis.Unconjugated bi-
lirubin isreleased from themacrophages and trans-
ported tothe liverwhere it is taken up,conjugated and
4.16
Intravascular haemolysis.Large amounts of
excreted in the bile.The rate-limiting step in this proc-
antibody on thered cell surface lead to
ess is the excretion of conjugated bilirubin into bile. If 
complement fixation,damage to thered cellmembrane
this limit is exceeded,conjugatedbilirubinbacks upin
andmovement of waterinto the cell,causing swelling
hepatocytes andspillsout intothe circulationwhere it
and lysis.
competeswithunconjugated bilirubin for uptake by
hepatocytes.Thusbothforms ofbilirubin areincreased
Erythrogramchanges:Erythrocyteghostsmay be
in the plasma. Initialy unconjugated bilirubin predomi-
seen on theblood film aspale-staining‘empty'cells.
nates but, with time, the proportion of conjugated
In less severe cases the surface antibody (usually
bilirubinincreases,and maybecome thepredominant
IgG) is recognizedby the Fc receptoron macrophages
form, especially if there is concurrent liver damage
in the spleen(and to a lesser extent in the liver),and
(e.g. due to hypoxia). The renal threshold for bilirubin
the entire cellisphagocytosed,resulting in extravas-
excretion is low, pecially in dogs, and so relatively
cularhaemolysis(Figure 4.17).Sometimes only part
minorincreases inplasma bilirubin result in bilirubinu-
of the cell membrane isphagocytosed and there-
ria. Thus bilirubinuria is generally detected before
maining cell contents are squeezed within a smaller
tissuejaundice.
surface arealeading tospherocyte formation.
41
Chapter4Disordersoferythrocytes
Spherocytesaresphericalinshape,andonblood films
theyappearsmallerthannormal redcellswithdarker/
denser cytoplasm lacking central pallor(Figure 4.18).
Careshouldbe taken to look in the examination area
monolayerand avoidlooking at thetail of thesmears
wherecells areflattened and lose theirnormal central
pallor,giving the false impression of spherocytes.
Spherocytesaredifficult toseeincatbloodbecause
normal felinered cells have minimal or no central
pallor.Spherocytes arelessflexiblethannormal red
cells andsobecome sequestered in the liverorspleen
leading to accelerated erythrophagocytosis.They are
regarded as diagnosticforIMHA in dogs,and often
(a)
very large numbers are seen(30-40%or more).Small
numbersof spherocytesmaybeseenwith zinc toxico-
sis,oxidative damage and neoplasia.
Macrophage
Spherocyte
IgG
Extravascular haemolysis.Antibody Fc
(b)
4.17
receptors on macrophages bind to the antibody
on thered cell surface,leading to phagocytosis of thered
cell. Phagocytosis of a portion of the red cell membrane
leads to formation of spherocytes.
(c)
4.19
In-saline agglutination.(a) After mixing equal
volumesof bloodand saline on a slide,large
clumps of red cells are seen.This should be confirmed by
examining microscopically (b), since occasionally saline
4.18
Bloodfilmfroma4-year-oldfemaleCocker
fails to break up rouleaux.Agglutination leads to formation
Spaniel with IMHA.Numerous spherocytes are
of large irregular clumps of red cells.Rouleaux(c) are
seen,whicharesmaller and denser thannormal red cells
long chains or stacks of red cells.The unstained slide is
and lackcentral pallor.(May-Grunwald-Giemsa;original
examinedusing the 20Xor40Xobjective,with the
magnificationX1000.)
condenser lowered.
Autoagglutination:lfveryhighlevelsofantibodyare
The addition of saline distinguishes true agglutina-
present,individual antibodies canbindtomore than
tion from rouleauxformation(stacking ofred cells in
one red cell, causing cells to clump together: this is
chains);rouleauxarebrokenup following the addition
autoagglutination. Cellclumps sequester in the spleen
of saline.Rouleauxmay form innormal animals,espe-
and liver,leadingto acceleratedremovalandsoa
ciallycats,andoftenformif thereisinflammation and/
higherrate ofhaemolysis.Autoagglutination maybe
or hyperglobulinaemia.Some authorsadvocate serial
seengrosslywithin the sample tube,but isbest de-
washing of red cells(uptofourtimes) before assessing
tectedbyplacingafewdropsof bloodona glassslide
for autoagglutination,but thismaywashoff sufficient
and adding anequal(or greater)volume of saline.The
erythrocyte-bound antibodytorender thetestfalsely
slide isrocked gently and after 1-2minutes is exam-
negative and isnotrecommended(Scott-Moncrieff et
ined grossly before a coverslip is added and it is
al., 2001). Autoagglutination is regarded as being
examined microscopically(Figure 4.19).
diagnosticforIMHA.
42
Chapter 4  Disorders of erythrocytes
In dogs,most cases of IMHA show extravascular
Biochemical changes:Elevated liver enzymesmay
reflect hypoxic damage, as discussed above. Azotae-
haemolysis leading to a subacute or insidious onset
 anaemia, which is mild to severe. Spherocytosis is
mia may be prerenal,or may reflect haemoglobin-
induced damage. Fibrinogen is frequently increased
common but autoagglutination is not.The regenera-
tive response is not seen for 2-5 days after the onset
and hyperglobulinaemia is not uncommon.
but then may be marked. Sometimes this form may
present as a persistently non-regenerative anaemia
Summary:The clinicopathological featuresof IMHA
becausered cell precursors are phagocytosed before
are:
they are released from the bone marrow. IMHA with
intravascularhaemolysis ismuch less common,and
·
Moderate to severe anaemia, which is initially
leads to acute onset, severe anaemia,oftenwith
non-regenerative('pre-regenerative')
autoagglutination. The prognosis is much more
After2-3daysbecomesregenerative:
guarded. Haemoglobinaemia and haemoglobinuria
macrocytichypochromicwithmarked
areseen only inseverecases and areoften transient.
 polychromasia (3+ or 4+) reflecting marked
Duetotheacuteonset,animalsoftenpresentwhenthe
reticulocytosis.Often thereticulocyte count is
anaemia is non-regenerative(pre-regenerative').With
>25%and the absolute reticulocyte count is
bothextravascularandintravascularformsjaundiceis
>350 x 10%/l. The reticulocyte index is generally 
seenonlyinseverecases,althoughhyperbilirubinuria
>3.(Occasionally remains non-regenerative
is common. Marked or persistent jaundice usually
due to intramedullary destructionof
indicates concurrenthepatobiliary disease and has
reticulocytes)
been shown to be a poor prognostic indicator (Klag et
Marked anisocytosis due to the presence of large
al.,1993).
reticulocytesandsmall spherocytes
 Spherocytes are usually seen (not always).
These are difficult to see in the cat
Leucogram changes: In dogs with both forms of
 Autoagglutination in severe cases
IMHA,a moderate to severe neutrophilia (may ex-
Mild,moderateorsevereneutrophiliawithleft
ceed50x10%/l) and monocytosisare common.There
 may be a marked left shift and toxic changes in the
shift and sometimes toxic change
 Plasma proteins normal to slightly increased
neutrophils and bands (see Chapter 5).The mecha-
nism of this leucocytosis is unclear, but may be a
Bilirubin and liver enzymes may be elevated.
consequence of non-specific stimulation of the bone
Bilirubinuria is almost invariably present
Haemoglobinaemia and haemoglobinuria may be
marrow, or secondary to the effects of complement
present with intravascular haemolysis.
which is increased due to the immune-mediated
disease. Leucocytosis may be much more signifi-
cant,occurring secondary to tissue necrosis arising
Confirmatorytesting
due to anaemic hypoxia (most frequently hepatic
necrosis) or due to infarction caused by thrombo-
Coombs'test:The Coombs'test,or direct antibody
 embolism. There appears to be an association be-
test (DAT), is used to detect the presence of antibody
tween the magnitude of the leucocytosis and the
and/or complement on the surface of red cells. Serial
severity of necrosis (McManus and Craig, 2001).
dilutions of Coombs' reagent, which contains spe-
Necrosis results inrelease of various cytokines which
cies-specific antiglobulin directed against lgM,igG
stimulate granulopoiesis andrelease ofneutrophils
and complement,is incubated with the patient's
from the marrow.
washed red cells.The antiglobulin binds with the
antibodies/complement on thered cells,resulting in
Coagulationabnormalities:Thrombocytopenia occurs
agglutination,which may be seen grossly as small
in about 65%of cases of IMHA.Inless than 20%of
specks of clumped cells suspended in the test well
(Figure 4.20). A small amount of the suspension is
patients it is severe(<50x10/l),with associated
clinical signs such as petechial haemorrhages,
placed on a microscope slide and examined at low
epistaxis and melaena. This usually reflects concur-
powertoconfirm agglutination.Themaximal dilution
rentimmune-mediatedthrombocytopenia(Evanssyn-
at which agglutination takesplace is therecorded
drome) (McCullough, 2003). Dogs with IMHA are
result.There isnoclearassociationbetween the titre
frequently ina hypercoagulablestateat the timeof
and disease severity,althoughlow titreresults are
diagnosis and are at risk of developing disseminated
more commonly due to secondary rather than primary
IMHA (Day, 2000). The test is performed at 37°℃, but
intravascular coagulation (DIC) (McCullough, 2003).
should also be performed at 4°℃, since occasionally
vatedpartial thromboplastintime,prothrombintime,
IgM antibody causing acute onset intravascular
haemolysis is detected at 4°℃ but not (or at a lower
fibrin(ogen) degradation products or D-dimers and
titre) at 37°℃ (Day, 1996 and 2000). However, non-
reductionsinantithrombin ill)are also common(Scott-
Moncrieff et al.,2001). DIC is recognized in 12-45%
pathogenic cold agglutinins may cause a false posi-
of dogs with IMHA and thromboembolism is a com-
tive result (generally at a low titre).
mon cause of death (Klag etal.,1993; Scott-Moncrieff
The Coombs'test has ratherpoor sensitivity,and
et al., 2001). Schistocytes may be seen in DIC due to
false negative results have beenreported to occur in
red cell fragmentation (see Figure 4.25).
10-40% of cases. This may be due to:
43
Chapter4Disordersoferythrocytes
Theinherentlypoorsensitivityof thetest (low
not beused tomake a diagnosis by itself.A negative
amounts of antibody on the red cellsurface may
resultshouldnotexclude IMHAifsigns and laboratory
not be detectable)
results are consistent with the disease.
Problemswithlaboratorytechnique:
Becauseof theproblem of falsenegativeresults,
Inadequate dilution of the antiglobulinwhich
 other immunological tests have been developed. A
may lead to the prozone effect(excess anti-
direct flowcytometricimmunofluorescence assaywas
globulin inrelation to the amountof antibody
found to be highly sensitive and specific and had the
present inhibits agglutination)
additional advantage ofbeing quick and easy toper-
Poor antiglobulin storage
form (Quigley et al., 2000); however, this test is not 
 Performing the test at incorrect temperatures.
commerciallyavailable.Acell-enzyme-linkedimmuno-
sorbent assay (an ELISA-based method) has also
False positive results(generallya low titre) may
been described; this test has good sensitivity but is
occur due to:
verytime-consuming and,again,isnotcommercially
available (Barker et al.,1993).
Non-specific adsorption of antibody on to the red
cellsurface
Otherinvestigations:Since IMHAmaybe secondary to
The presence of antibodies attached to
underlying neoplastic orinfectious disease,investiga-
organisms or drugson the red cell surface
tionsshould beperformed to excludeorconfirm the
Previousblood transfusion
presence of an underlying cause. These tests should
The presence of low titres of non-pathogeniccold
be tailored tothe individual,sinceblanket testing may
agglutinins which may be present in healthy dogs
be expensive and unrewarding.
and cats.
In cats,FeLVtestingandexaminationof smearsfor
Mycoplasmahaemofelis(Haemobartonella felis),as
Therefore,titres<1:16shouldbeinterpretedwith
well as PCR testing (of EDTA samples) is useful. In 
caution.A positive Coombs'test provides supportive
 dogs, blood film examination and PCR testing may be 
evidenceforIMHA in animalswith appropriate clinical
used to checkforbabesiosis and ehrlichiosis if there is
signsandlaboratoryresults,butapositiveresultshould
a history of foreign travel toan endemic area.
Screeningradiographs may be useful to screen for
Antibody to IgM,IgG
underlying neoplasia.The antinuclear antibody (ANA)
orcomplement
test is indicated if there are signs of multisystem
involvement (e.g.glomerulonephritis,polyarthritis,
polymyositis, immune-mediated skin disease) and 
systemic lupuserythematosusissuspected,but thisis
very rare. Bone marrow analysis is useful if the anae-
mia ispersistentlynon-regenerative,orwhere there is
 a suspicion of underlying lymphoproliferative disease.
Haemolytic anaemia associatedwith infections
Important causes of haemolysis incats areFeLV and
Mycoplasmahaemofelisinfectionsandindogs,Babe-
sia canis.FeLV is discussed under non-regenerative
(a)
anaemia.
Feline infectious anaemia:This may occur as a pri-
mary disease orincombinationwithanotherdisease
process,such as FeLV infection,feline immunodefi-
ciencyvirus(FIv)infection,felineinfectiousperitonitir
toxoplasmosis.The causative organism of feline infec-
tiousanaemia,formerlycalledHaemobartonellafelis,
has recently been reclassified following DNA analysis.
Twodistinct genotypeshavebeen identified:the large
form,Mycoplasmahaemofelisandthesmallform,an
datusMycoplasmahaemominutum.M.haemofelis is
known tobemorepathogenicthanM.haemominutum.
b）
Following acuteinfectiontheformermaycauseasevere
Coombs'test.(a) Antibody directed against
4.20
haemolyticanaemia;thelatterresults in minimal clinical
IgM,IgG and complement is incubatedwith the
signs and negligible haematological changes unless
patient's washed red cells.The antiglobulin binds with the
thereisco-infectionwithFeLV,whenitleadstoanaemia
antibodies/complement on the red cells,resulting in
agglutination.(b)The test isperformed on a microtitre
and mayinduce myeloproliferative disease(Foleyetal.,
plate,with progressively more dilute antiglobulin. In a
1998; George et al, 2002).
positive test,small clumpsof redcellsremainsuspended
Theseorganisms attachthemselvesto theexternal
in the wellwhilst inanegative test thered cellssinktothe
surfaceof thered cell rather thanpassing into the
bottom of the well,forming a button.
cytoplasm.Infection withM.haemofelisleadstodirect
44
Chapter4Disordersoferythrocytes
red cell membrane damageresulting inmainly extra-
Stain precipitate may be confused with organisms and
vascularhaemolysis,althoughintravascularhaemoly-
so stain should be carefully filtered before use. Stain
sis may also occur. Attachment may also triggerformation
precipitate generally appears as clumps or dots of
ofanti-erythrocyte antibodiesresulting in secondary
irregularsizeandshape,seenbothwithinredcellsand
IMHA.Following infection, cyclic episodes of parasit-
between cells.Experimentally,it hasbeen shown that
aemia,lasting2days,ccur atroughly6-dayinter-
EDTA dislodges parasites from red cells, although the
vals.During parasitaemia organisms may be seen in a
concentration of EDTA used was far greater than that 
high proportion of red cells (90% or more), but between
present in EDTA collection tubes (Harvey and Gaskin,
episodesparasitesarenot detectable onblood films.
1977). It is prudent either to make smears immediately
The haematocrit (HCT) fluctuates with the parasitaemia;
aftersamplingwithnoanticoagulant,orto ensureblood
it may fall sharply to 0.15 1 or lower with peak parasit-
hasbeen in EDTAfornomore than30minutespriorto
aemia,and thenriserapidly,althoughnot tobaseline
making smears.Because of the episodicparasitaemia
levels. This rise in HCT is not simply due to a regenera-
and the lackof sensitivity of examination,anegative
tive bonemarrowresponse,but alsoreflectsreleaseof
blood film doesnotexcludeFlAandserial films can be
red cellsfrom the spleen afterremoval of parasitesfrom
examined over a few days. PCR provides a better
their surface by macrophages (a process known as
alternative method of detection and has the added
pitting).Episodes of parasitaemiaresult in a progres-
advantageofbeingabletodistinguishM.haemofelis
sivelyworseninganaemia.Followingrecovery,cats
and M.haemominutum(see Chapter27).Real-time
remainchronically infected forundeterminedperiod,
PCR,whichcan quantifyorganismDNA,is nowcom-
duringwhich time there isno detectableparasitaemia,
merciallyavailable(Taskeretal.,2003).PCRispositive
althoughPCR testing ispositive.Reactivation of infec-
from3dayspost-infection,becomesnegativewhilston
tion may cause clinical disease(Foley et al.,1998).
antibiotic treatment,and may become positive3-5
weeks after finishing antibiotic treatment. Following
Laboratory findings: The anaemia is usually highly
recovery catsremainpositivefor at least 6months.
regenerative (macrocyticand hypochromic with marked
reticulocytosis),butmaybenon-regenerative,reflect
Babesiosis:The causative organismsof babesiosis in
ing concurrent disease (commonly FeLV infection,
dogs areBabesia canisand B.gibsoniThere are three
which mayresult in macrocytic normochromic anae-
 subtypes of B. canis:
mia).Nucleated red cells are commonly seen.Leuco-
cyte counts are variable, and platelets are usually
B.canis var.rossi,which occurs in South Africa
normal.Reticulocyte countsare likelytobeunreliable
and ishighlypathogenic,causing severedisease
if performed during parasitaemic episodes, since the
B.canis var.canis,which occurs in Europe and
supravital stains used also stain the organisms. There
ismoderatelysevere
maybe autoagglutination and/or apositiveCoombs
B. canis var. vogeli, which occurs worldwide and 
test if there issecondary IMHA.
is mildly pathogenic.
Provided that samples are obtained during an epi-
sode of parasitaemia, organisms may be identified
Babesiosisis notendemicinthe UK.Itis a tick-borne
usingtheRomanowskystains(Giemsa,May-Grunwald
infection,andthetickvectorsarenotendemic,butsmall
Giemsa,Wright's)orwithacridine orange.Thelatteris
numbershavebeenidentified closetoquarantineken-
mostsensitive,butrequiresafluorescentmicroscope:
nels.Babesiais anintracytoplasmic protozoan parasite
 the organisms stain bright orange but false positive
that replicatesbybudding in thered cells.It causesboth
results may occur due to non-specific fluorescence or
intravascularand extravascularhaemolysis(and thus a
staining of Howell-Jolly bodies. The organisms stain
regenerative anaemia) and, depending on the strain,
blue-grey to pale purple with Romanowsky stains and
canlead tomoderateanaemiaormarked anaemiawith
appearas small cocci, singly or in chains (Figure 4.21).
haemoglobinuria,haemoglobinaemia and jaundice.In
addition, secondary complications, such as renal, he-
patic, respiratory or CNS dysfunction, can arise as a
result of anexcessive systemicinflammatoryresponse.
Thrombocytopeniais very common, arisingeitherdueto
secondaryimmune-mediatedthrombocytopeniaorto
DIC. Secondary IMHA may also develop. Dogs are
sometimesco-infectedwithEhrlichia.
In the acutephaseofinfection,organismsmaybe
seen on the blood film using Romanowsky stains.
B. canis appears as large pear-shaped organisms,
usually in pairs (Figure 4.22). B. gibsoni organisms
are much smaller, circular bodies. Organisms are
more often seen in capillary blood(e.g.from an ear
prick)oronsmearsmadefromredcellsjustbelow
Blood film froma5-year-old femaleDomestic
4.21
buffycoat after centrifugation of a microhaematocrit
Shorthair cat with anaemia.Single Mycoplasma
tube.Organisms arenotalways visualized,and serol-
(Haemobartonella) organisms are seen at the periphery of
ogy or PCR are more sensitive methods for diagnosis
many cells.(May-Grunwald-Giemsa stain;original
magnificationXi000.)
(see Chapter27).
45
Chapter4Disordersoferythrocytes
HBs damage red cells by reducing their deform-
ability,leadingtoentrapment in the sinusoidsof the
spleen and subsequent extravascular haemolysis.In
m
addition, depletion of SH groups leads to altered
membranepermeability,which canresult inosmotic
a
swelling ofred cells and intravascular haemolysis
b
(Solter and Scott, 1987). Thus HB haemolytic anae-
e
mia ischaracterized by extravascularand sometimes
intravascular haemolysis. There isa regenerative
anaemia andoften a neutrophiliaand monocytosis.
HBs are seen in a large proportion of the red cells as 
non-staininground bodies,usuallyprotruding from
the surfaceof thecell(Figure 4.23).HBs mayinterfere
Blood film from a dog with babesiosis.Budding
with the spectrophotometric assayfor haemoglobin,
4.22
Babesia canis organisms are seen in several
resulting in an incongruously high Hb (and hence
red cells.(May-Grunwald Giemsa stain;original
MCHC), with low HCT and RBC reflecting the true
magnification X1000.)
severityof theanaemia.
Haemolysis caused by oxidative damage
Oxygen is a potent oxidant because it can giverise to
highly reactive derivatives, such ashydrogen peroxide
andsuperoxidefreeradicals.Due to thepresenceof
oxygenwithinred cells,thereisa constant lowlevelof
oxidant production. Oxidant damage within the cells is
limited by several protective enzymes,such as re-
duced glutathione,superoxide dismutase and meth-
aemoglobinreductase.When animalsareexposed to
oxidativetoxins,theseprotectiveenzymesbecome
overwhelmed andoxidative injury occurs.Oxidants
can damage haemoglobin orredcells inthreeways:
Oxidation of the sulphydryl(-SH) groups on the
(a)
globin chains in haemoglobin results in the
formation of Heinz bodies (HBs), aggregates of
precipitatedhaemoglobinattachedtotheinner
erythrocytemembrane.Cats aremore
susceptibletoHBformationbecause theyhave
eight weak -SH groups on their haemoglobin 
compared with twoin otherspecies
Direct damage to the red cell membrane results 
in haemolysis and theformationof eccentrocytes
Oxidation of the ferrous iron(Fe2+) to ferric iron
(Fe²+)in haem moleculesresults in the formation
of methaemoglobin(metHb).
There arenumeroussubstancesreported tohave
 caused oxidative damage in dogs and cats, including
(b)
paracetamol (acetaminophen), onions and zinc. Oxi-
Blood filmsfroma catwithHeinzbody
4.23
dants may cause al threetypes of injury orone type may
haemolytic anaemia.(a) Using May-Grunwald
Giemsa stain,non-staining bodies areseenprotruding
predominate.Forexample,paracetamolleadstometHb
from the cellmembrane(arrowed).(b) Ona smear
and HB formation but noteccentrocytes. Onions in dogs
stainedwithnewmethylene blue,the Heinzbodies are
lead to the formation of HBs and eccentrocytes but not
obvious dark-staining round bodies.(Original
metHb.The reason for these differences is not known.
magnificationX1000.)
Heinzbodyhaemolyticanaemia:HBformationhas
In cats HBformationisnot always associated with
been associatedwith onion toxicity inboth dogs and
anaemia and lowtomoderatenumbersof HBsmaybe
cats.Onions may be raw,cooked or dried.Onion
seenin catswith diabetes mellitus,hyperthyroidism
powder in babyfood is themost common source of
and lymphoma,and after propofol administration.HB
onion incats.Othercauses of HBhaemolyticanaemia
formation occursmorereadily incats due to the struc-
include ingestedparacetamol,zinc,garlic andnaph-
ture of globin (eight -SH groups) and HBs are seen
thalene, application of benzocaine spray or cream to
morefrequentlybecause the feline spleen does not
inflamed skin and injectionof vitaminK(vitaminK3 and
contain sinusoids and so is not efficient at removing
occasionallyvitaminK1).
HBs from the red cell surface.
46
Chapter4Disordersof erythrocytes
Oxidativeinjuryleadingtodirectmembranedam-
age:Zinc and naphthalene (inmothballs) can cause
membranedamageandintravascularhaemolysis,with
minimal or absent Heinz body or MetHb formation,
 although zinc can also lead to HB formation. Mem-
brane damage may lead to the formation of
eccentrocytes,which arered cells inwhichhaemo-
globinis displaced to onesideof thecellleaving a pale
“empty' area on the other side (Figure 4.24). Again
thesearelessdeformablethannormalredcellsand
becomeentrapped in the spleen andremoved by
extravascularhaemolysis.Theyarean indicatorof
severe oxidative injury.
Blood smearfroman8-year-oldGerman
4.25
Shepherd Dog with a splenic mass,showing
schistocytes(arrowed).(May-Grunwald Giemsa stain;
original magnification X1000.)
schistocytes or anaemia should not be used as apredic-
tor of malignancywhen spleniclesions are detected
(Elders and Blackwood,2003).
Inheritedred cell defects
Inherent metabolic defects, most frequently red cell
enzyme deficiencies,have been reported in certain
breeds. The defect leads to membrane damage with 
consequent extravascular haemolysis and anaemia.
Blood filmfroma dogwithzinctoxicity,showing
4.24
Red cell pyruvate kinase deficiency occurs in
large numbersof eccentrocyteswith
Basenjis,WestHighlandWhiteTerriers,CairnTerri-
haemoglobin shifted toone sideof the cell,leaving the
ers, Miniature Poodles and Abyssinian, Somali and
other side clear.(Wright's stain; original magnification
X1000.)(Courtesy of Dennis DeNicola.)
Domestic Shorthair cats. In dogs the anaemia is
highlyregenerative andmoderatetosevereand there
Oxidativeinjuryleadingtoformationof methaemo-
is progressive development ofmyelofibrosis and
globin:lnsmallanimals,thisismostcommonlycaused
 osteosclerosis, leading to death between 1 and 5 
byparacetamol,especiallyincatswherethetoxicdose
yearsof age.Affectedcatshaveamild tomoderate
is very low (usually 50-60 mg/kg). This toxin leads to
(sometimes intermittent) anaemia and may live to an
theformationof metHband HBs.HB formationleads to
advancedage.
haemolysis,but the overriding clinical featureofpara-
Red cell phosphofructokinase (PFK) deficiency
cetamol toxicityincatsisthehypoxiaassociatedwith
occurs in English Springer Spaniels.The defect leads
metHb,whichcannot take upoxygen.Blood appears
to energydepletioninredcells,causinglow-gradered
chocolate-brown when30-40%oftotalhaemoglobin is
cell loss.There is a marked regenerativeresponse
in the form of metHb;deathoccurswhen this level
whichmaycompletelycompensateforredcell loss,
exceeds80%.Methaemoglobinaemia canbereadily
maintaining thePCVwithin thenormal range.The
detectedbyplacingadropofvenousbloodonwhite
defect alsocausesredcellsto havemarkedalkaline
blottingpaper:the spot of bloodstaysbrownwhereas
fragility. Hyperventilation during strenuous exercise
 normal venous blood would become oxygenated on
orexcessive barking canlead toalkalosis and conse-
exposureto air and the spot would turnred.
quent intravascular haemolysis:a haemolytic crisis
associatedwithsevereanaemia,jaundiceandhaem-
Haemolysiscaused bymechanical damage:
oglobinuria may ensue.PFK-deficient dogs may
microangiopathichaemolyticanaemia
have a normal lifespan if alkalosis-inducing situations
Red cells may become damaged as they pass through
are avoided.
abnormal vessels withinvascular neoplasms,such as
Both these diseases canbeidentifiedusinga PCR-
haemangiosarcoma, or when passing through fibrin
based DNA test.
clots in the circulation in DIC.This mechanical damage
results in theformation of schistocytes and/or
Hypophosphataemia
acanthocyteswhich are subsequentlyphagocytosed in
Hypophosphataemia may arise in small animals fol-
spleen,leading to anaemia(Figure 4.25).The anaemia
lowing commencement of insulin therapy for diabetes
is usuallymild,unlessthereisconcurrenthaemorrhage
mellitus and following tube feeding of anorexic cats
(e.g. from a neoplasm). Schistocytes are commonly
with hepatic lipidosis ('refeeding syndrome'). Low
foundinassociationwithspleniclesions,classicallywith
phosphate concentrations cause depletion of aden-
 haemangiosarcoma, but also with benign lesions, such 
osine triphosphate (ATP),increased red cell rigidity
ashaemangiomas and haematomas;thepresence of
and haemolysis.
47
Chapter 4Disorders of erythrocytes
Non-regenerative anaemia
Non-regenerative anaemia may be due to primary bone
Infections
marrowdisease,secondarytounderlyinginflammatory
Canine and feline parvovirus(R)
or metabolic disease ormay bepre-regenerative'，due
Ehrlichia canis (R/l)
to acute red celloss before the regenerative response
FIV (I)
hasbecome established.Thepre-regenerative anae-
FeLV()
mia wilhave developed acutely and so the animal
showsmarkedclinicalsigns,suchastachycardiawea
ness and exercise intolerance,relative to the degree of
Oestrogens (R/I)
anaemia. Conversely, truly non-regenerative anaemia
Meloxicam(Metacam)()
Griseofulvin (R)
developsgraduallyoverweeks tomonths as aresult of
Chemotherapy (R)
progressive lossof the alreadycirculatingredcells as
Phenylbutazone()
theyreach theend of their lifespan.The animal under-
Trimethoprim/sulphonamide(R)
goesphysiological adaptation to anaemia and shows
relatively mild clinical signs for the degree of anaemia.
Idiopathic()
Primarybonemarrowdisordersleadtomoderateto
Immune-mediated(R/)
severe anaemia,whilstanaemia ofchronicdisease
leads tomild tomoderate anaemia(PCVgenerallynot
Endogenous oestrogen(R/)
less than 24%in dogs and 20% in cats).
4.26
Causes of aplastic anaemia.R,may be
Primarybonemarrowdisorders
reversible;I,irreversible.
Importantcausesofprimarybone marrowdiseaseare
aplastic pancytopenia(aplastic anaemia),leukaemia,
lead tospontaneousbleeding and associated anae-
myelophthisis,pure red cell aplasia,myelofibrosis,
mia.Within2-3weeks there is a neutropenia,continu-
myelodysplasticsyndrome(MDS) and FeLVinfection.
ing thrombocytopenia andanon-regenerative anaemia
In addition to thesometimes severe anaemia,there
develops. Clinical signs relate to thrombocytopenia
may be depression of other cellines and, depending
(petechial haemorrhages,melaena etc.)and neutro-
on the cause,atypical circulating cells. Severe iron
penia (pyrexia and sepsis), as well as the anaemia
deficiencyleadstonon-regenerative anaemia and is
(lethargy and pallor).
discussed above.
Pure red cell aplasia and non-regenerative IMHA:
Aplasticpancytopenia(aplasticanaemia):Aplastic
These conditions areboth characterized byimmune-
pancytopeniaresultsfrom damage to stem cells or
mediated destruction of red cell precursors in the bone
marrowmicroenvironment leading tobonemarrow
marrowleadingtoseverenon-regenerativeanaemia.
failure.The frequentlyused term,aplasticanaemia,is
Other cellines areunaffected. Inprimarypurered cell
confusing since all cell lines are affected, not just the
aplasia(PRCA)thereisdepletionof the entire red cell
red cells.Marrow damage may be caused byinfec-
seriesduetoselectivedestructionofthe earlyerythroid
tions,drugs,toxins orby immune-mediated mecha-
precursors.Bonemarrow aspirationrevealsa com-
nisms,ormaybe idiopathic.In the acute form of the
plete absenceoferythroidcells,orverysmall numbers
disease,destructionofprogenitor and dividing cells
of proerythroblastsandearlynormoblasts(theearliest
leadstoleucopenia/neutropeniaand thrombocyto-
precursors).Granulocytic,monocyticand platelet pre-
penia within 5 days and 8-10 days,respectively.
cursorsarepresent innormaltoincreasednumbers.
Anaemiadevelopsmoregraduallyduetothelongred
Plasmacells and smallymphocytes maybeincreased,
cellifespan.Bone marrowaspirationreveals amixof
especiallyincats,where lymphocytesconstitute upto
necrotic lysing cells,macrophages and stromal cells.
45%of total marrow cells (Stokol, 1999).In non-
Depending on the cause,thebone marrow may re-
regenerative IMHA,red cell destructiontakesplace at
coverandberepopulated,usuallywithin3weeksofthe
a laterstage,commonlyat thelatenormoblaststageor
original marrow injury, or the disease may progress to
reticulocytestage.There arenormaltoincreasederyth-
the chronic form.In the chronic form the stem cell
roid cells in the bone marrow,but with a maturation
damageisirreversible,and theredmarrowisreplaced
arrest at the intermediate orlate normoblast stage(i.e.
cellsappeartomaturenormallytotheintermediateor
moderatetosevere anaemia.Causesofaplastic anae-
latenormoblast stage,but latenormoblasts or and/or
mia are summarized in Figure 4.26.
polychromaticred cells (reticulocytes),respectively,
are absentorreduced in number).In some cases there
Oestrogentoxicity:Thedog isverysusceptibleto the
are numerous marrowmacrophages containing
myelotoxiceffectsof oestrogen,eitherwhengivenfor
haemosiderinorphagocytosedredcells/normoblasts
urinaryincontinenceorasmisalliance therapy,orwhen
reflecting intramedullary destruction (Figure 4.27).
released fromatesticulartumour,althoughthereiswide
Marrow plasma cells and lymphocytes may be in-
individual variation.Toxicitycanbe duetoan overdose
creased.Inboth diseases spherocytesare occasion-
of administeredoestrogen,but may also occur as an
allyseen,althoughtheCoombs'test islesscommonly
idiosyncraticreactiontoa therapeuticdose.Intheearly
positive (Weiss, 2002). lron stores are normal to in-
stages there is a neutrophilia,which may be marked,
creased.Immunosuppressive therapy(asforIMHA) is
witha left shift anda thrombocytopenia.Thelattermay
ofteneffective.
48
Chapter4Disordersoferythrocytes
develops more slowly.Bone marrow suppression is
much less marked and may be confined to a mild to
moderate,non-regenerativeanaemia,sometimeswith
a mild thrombocytopenia.
Myelophthisisreferstoan infiltrationof thebone
marrow with non-haemopoietic neoplastic cells, for
examplemetastasisofcarcinoma/adenocarcinoma or,
less commonly,sarcoma.As with leukaemia,a pan-
cytopenia may develop.
Malignant histiocytosisanderythrophagocyticdis-
orders:Aless common neoplastic cause of anaemia is
malignant histiocytosis (MH) which occurs in dogs,
especially Bernese Mountain Dogs and Golden Retriev-
Bonemarrowaspirate from a dogwith non-
4.27
ers;itis rare incats (Kraje etal.,2001). MH is asystemic,
regenerative IMHA.There arenumerousred
cell precursors and a macrophage containing
neoplastic proliferation of histiocytic cells.These are
haemosiderin and phagocytosed normoblasts.(May-
antigen-presenting cells,which arise in the bone mar-
Grunwald-Giemsa stain; original magnification X1000.)
row and, in health,are found in the skin, mucosal
surfaces,various organs and lymph nodes. The neo-
SecondaryPRCA occurs in association with hu-
plastic histiocytes may infiltrate the spleen, liver, lung,
manrecombinant erythropoietin therapy,parvovirus
lymphnodes,skin and bonemarrow.The latterleadsto
infection and in cats infectedwithFeLV subgroup-C.
anaemia andsometimesdepressionofothercellines,
FeLV-induced PRCA is progressive, invariably fatal,
most commonly platelets.The anaemia may be regen-
anddoes notleadtoincreased numbersoflymphocytes
erative or non-regenerative and isnot simply due to
inthebonemarrow.
bone marrow crowding, but also due to erythrophago-
cytosis by the histiocytic cells. Leucophagia occurs
Leukaemia/myelophthisis:Leukaemia ischaracter-
much less commonly. The cells are found in clusters or
ized byneoplastic transformation of haemopoieticpre-
sheets and are largewithmoderateabundant foamyor
cursorcellsofonecelline inthebone marrow,leading
vacuolated cytoplasm,and largeroundpleomorphic
to clonal expansionof the affectedcelline and,usually,
nuclei containing coarse chromatin andpale nucleoli
release of large numbers of neoplastic cells into the
(Figure 4.29). Binucleate or multinucleate cells may be
 circulation (see Chapter 5). The bone marrow becomes 
present (Moore and Rosin,1986;Dunn et al.,1995).
crowdedoutby the neoplasticcells,leading tosuppres-
sion of normal haemopoiesis (Figure 4.28). The neo-
plastic cells compete for nutrients and also may release
inhibitory substances, alladding to the suppression. The
result is anaemia,neutropenia and thrombocytopenia,
togetherwith circulating atypical(leukaemic) cells.In
acute leukaemia, in which the cells do not undergo
differentiationbutremainataprimitiveblaststage,the
neoplastic infiltrate develops rapidly and those cell
lineswith the shortest circulating time(neutrophilsand
platelets)become depletedfirst.Anaemia develops
more slowly,and may not have developed at the time
of first presentation in very acute cases. In chronic
leukaemia theneoplasticcellsundergo differentiation
(a)
within thebone marrowand theneoplastic infiltrate
(b)
Bonemarrow aspirate from a Bernese Mountain
4.29
Bone marrow aspirate from a dogwith acute
Dog with malignant histiocytosis.(a) There are
4.28
lymphoid leukaemia. The marrow is effaced by
large atypical histiocytic cells showingmarked
Iymphoblasts.(May-Grunwald-Giemsa stain;original
anisocytosis.(b)An atypical mitotic figure is seen.(May-
magnificationX1000.)
Grunwald-Giemsa stain; original magnification X1000.)
49
Chapter4Disordersoferythrocytes
Increasednumbersoferythrophagocyticmacro-
4.31
Bone
phages may be seen in non-regenerative IMHA(see
marrow
aspiratefroma cat
above). These macrophages resemble the histiocytic
showing megaloblastic
cellsinMH,butarelesspleomorphic,and arepresent
change of the red cell
in smaller numbersas either single cellsorin small
precursors.The
clusters.Inaddition,MHinvolvesmultipleorganswhilst
normoblastshave
the macrophages in non-regenerative IMHA are con-
immaturenucleiwith
finedtothebonemarrow,thusthetwo diseasescanbe
abundant,mature
cytoplasm (arrowed).
differentiated.TheprognosisforMH isverypoor.
(Courtesy of JK Dunn.)
A third diseaseleading toerythrophagocytic
(May-Grunwald-
macrophages in thebonemarrowishaemophagocytic
Giemsa; original
syndrome (haemophagic histiocytosis). This is a benign
magnificationX1000.)
proliferation of histiocytes,occurring secondary to
infectious,neoplasticormetabolicdiseases,resulting
anaemia.lnMDS-refractoryanaemia,dysplasticchanges
in cytopenias of at least two cell lines: anaemia and
are confined to the erythroid line and this condition
thrombocytopenia,anaemia and neutropenia orpan-
appears to have a fair prognosis; other forms of MDS
cytopenia may occur(Walton et al.,1996).Although
appear refectory to therapy and are associated with
the cytopeniasarepotentiallyreversibleif theunderly-
short survival times.MDSmayprogress to acute my-
ing disease is treated,generally theprognosis ispoor.
eloidleukaemia.Most catswithMDSareinfectedwith
FeLV.SecondaryMDSmayoccurinassociationwithan
Myelofibrosis:Inthisdisease thenormal haemopoi-
underlyingcause,suchaslymphoma,MHA,immune
etictissueisreplacedwithproliferatingfibroblastsand
mediated thrombocytopenia,myelofibrosis and drugs,
associatedreticulin and collagen fibres.Fibroblast
including cephalosporins and vincristine; it may be re-
proliferation may be due to a primary myeloprolifera-
versible once theunderlying cause is removed(Weiss
tive disease,but more commonly is secondary to an
and Aird,2001).
underlyingcause,suchasIMHA,pureredcellaplasia
neoplasia(within oroutside thebone marrow),toxic
Anaemia and feline leukaemiavirus
marrow damageand the inheritedredcelldefect,
FeLVmaycause anaemia duetoseveral mechanisms:
pyruvate kinase deficiency (see above).Deposition of
fibroustissueresultsinreducedhaemopoiesis,espe-
Macrocyticnon-regenerative anaemia,probably
ciallyreducederythropoiesis.Theresult is severe non-
duetoadirectmyelodysplasticeffectof thevirus.
regenerativeanaemia,sometimesthrombocytopenia,
Nuclearmaturation is depressed and so is out of
but rarelyleucopenia.Bonemarrow aspirationresults
stepwithhaemoglobinizationof thecytoplasm,
in a‘dry tap'and a core biopsy isrequired tomake a
 and haemoglobinization is complete before nucleus
diagnosis(Figure 4.30).
is mature. The nucleus is extruded before the cell
has undergone the usual number of mitotic
divisions,resulting in a macrocytic red cell
Aplastic pancytopenia
Secondary pure red cell aplasia
Leukaemia andMDStypicallycause anaemia as
well as leucopenia and thrombocytopenia
FeLV-related immunosuppression may lead to
infectious or inflammatory diseases which, in
turn, may lead to anaemia of chronic disease
FeLVmay also inducehaemolyticanaemiaby
inducing the formation of antibodies directed
against virus antigen on the red cell surface.
Anaemia due to nutritional deficiencies
Iron deficiency is the most common nutritional defi-
Bonemarrow core biopsy stainedwithreticulin
4.30
ciency and is discussed above in chronic blood loss.
froma dog with myelofibrosis.There are
numerousblack-staining collagenfibresreplacing the
Severemalnutrition may alsocause anaemia,due to
normal haemopoietic tissue.(Reticulin stain;original
combineddeficiencyofprotein,energy,Bvitaminsand
magnification X200.)
minerals.Folateorcobalamin(VitaminB12)deficiency
maycause anaemiabecause thesevitaminsarere-
Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDs):This compriseS
quired for DNA synthesis. The effect of deficiency on
a heterogenous group of diseases, characterized by
erythropoiesis is that nuclearmaturation lagsbehind
abnormal development of haemopoieticprecursors,
cytoplasmicmaturation and thered cellprecursor
leading to atypical (dysplastic) changes in erythroid,
dividesfewertimesthanusualbeforethecriticalamount
granulocytic ormegakaryocytic cellines and peripheral
ofhaemoglobin accumulatestotriggerextrusionof the
cytopenias(Figure 4.31)(see also Chapter 5).There is
nucleus.The result is the formation of largered blood
usually abicytopenia orpancytopenia,although only
cells which contain a normal amount ofhaemoglobin
anaemia isseeninoneformof MDS,MDS-refractory
(macrocytic,normochromic).
50
Chapter4Disordersoferythrocytes
Deficienciesof thesevitamins areunusual in dogs
haemorrhage,duetogastric ulceration,andreduction
and cats,but cobalamin deficiency occurs in as an
inred cellifespan,due to uraemic toxins.Unlike other
autosomalrecessivedisorderinGiantSchnauzersdue
secondary anaemias,theanaemiaof renal failure can
todefective ileal absorption.Affectedpuppiesare
be severe and cause significant clinical signs.Treat-
stunted,have moderatenon-regenerative anaemia
ment with recombinant human erythropoietin (rhRPO)
(normocytic but with increased RDW and some macro-
increasesPCVandimproveswell-being,buteventu-
cytic cellspresent on the blood film) and alsoneutro-
allyleadstothedevelopmentofanti-erythropoietin
penia (again due to defective DNA synthesis). Platelet
antibodies which block the effects of,not only the
numbersareusuallynormal.Alltheseabnormalities
administeredrhRPO,butalsothe animal'sendogenous
resolvefollowingparenteral supplementationwithco-
erythropoietin.Thisleads tosecondarypurered cell
balamin. Cobalamin deficiency may occur in cats with
aplasia and severe anaemia.Recombinant canine
exocrinepancreaticinsufficiencyandsevereileal dis-
erythropoietinhasrecentlybecomeavailable.
ease, although does not always lead to anaemia.
Folate-deficiency anaemia is very uncommon,despite
Anaemiasecondarytoendocrinedisease:Both
cortisol and thyroxine enhance the effectsof erythro-
such as phenobarbital.
poietin, so deficiencies in these hormones lead to
anaemia.Mildanaemiaisoftenseeninhypothyroidism,
Anaemiasecondarytoinflammatoryor
andcanbe considered aphysiological adaptation to
metabolicdisease
loweredmetabolicrate.Mild tomoderateanaemia
Non-regenerative anaemia commonly results from a
frequentlyoccursindogswith hypoadrenocorticism,
disease outside thebonemarrow.Suchdiseasescan
although thismaybemasked byhaemoconcentration.
be broadly categorized into anaemia of inflammatory
Gl haemorrhage may occur,in whichcasea more
 disease (AID), anaemia secondary to endocrine dis-
severeanaemia isseen.
easeand anaemia of chronicrenal failure.
Evaluatingnon-regenerative anaemia
Bonemarrowsampling isindicated inanimalswith
Anaemiaofinflammatorydisease:Thisisoften
termed anaemia ofchronic(inflammatory)disease,
non-regenerative anaemia,once it has been estab-
lished that the anaemia is trulynon-regenerative
althoughanaemiamaydevelopquitequickly(within10
rather than pre-regenerative, and when underlying
days) inassociation withmanyinflammatorydisorders,
causes of secondary anaemia have been ruled out.
e.g.due to chronic infection,tissue trauma or tissue
Renal failure isthemainsecondarycauseofsevere
necrosis associated with malignant neoplasms.The
 non-regenerative anaemia (PCV <20% in dogs, <18% 
anaemia is mild to moderate (PCV approximately
in cats)whilst AID and endocrine disease are un-
25-36% in the dog,19-26 % in the cat) and is rarely
likelytocausesuchsevereanaemia.Bonemarrow
clinically significant;clinical signsrelate to the under-
maybesampled eitherbyperforming abonemarrow
lying cause.There are several mechanisms involved in
aspirate or a core biopsy. Aspirates provide superior
the development of AID:
cellulardetail whilstcorebiopsiesallowevaluationof
cellularity and for the presence of fibrous tissue. Often 
Decreasedirondeliveryfromstoragesitestored
anaspirate and core sample are taken simultane-
cell precursors results in a relative iron deficiency
ously as the samplesprovide complementary infor-
Shortenedred cellsurvival,possiblydueto
mation.Otherindications forbone marrow sampling
increased oxidative damage orbinding of
aregiven in Chapter5.
immunoglobulin toredcell membranes leading to
increasedclearancebymacrophages
Bonemarrow aspiration:Theaspirate is obtained
Bluntedreleaseof andresponse toerythropoietin,
using a 10-20 mlsyringe and a Klima needle which has
probablydueto the effectofcytokines,such as
an interlocking stylet. Klima needles are designed for 
interleukin1andtumournecrosisfactor,which
repeated use but must be sharpened regularly.Alter-
arereleased in inflammation.
natively,disposableneedlescanbeusedseveraltimes
before they are discarded(these cannotbe steam
The anaemia is usuallynormocytic and normo-
sterilizedsorequirechemical orethylene oxidesterili-
chromic,although occasionallyit is microcytic and
zation). The needle and syringe can be primed with 
hypochromic (due to relative iron deficiency),in which
EDTAsolution(obtainedbyadding 2-3mi of saline to
case evaluation of iron stores is useful to distinguish
a 10ml EDTA tube)prior tosampling.
this from true iron deficiency (seeFigure 4.15).There
Sampling sites include theiliac crest,the greater
isoften aninflammatoryleucogram and acutephase
tubercle of the humerus,the tibial crest and the
 proteins (such as fibrinogen) as well as globulins may
trochantericfossa of the femur.The usual sitefor
beelevated.
aspiration in the dog is the iliac crest and this is
described below.In small dogs and catsthe iliac crest
Anaemia secondarytorenal failure:Chronicrenal
israthernarrowandtheproximal humerusorthe
failureleadstodecreasedproductionoferythropoietin,
trochantericfossa of the femur are the preferred
leading to decreased erythropoiesis,resulting
sites.Samples from dogsare usually obtained under
in normocytic,normochromic,non-regenerative anae-
sedation, whilst general anaesthesia may be pre-
mia.Otherfactorscontributing to the anaemia include
ferredincats.
51
Chapter4Disordersoferythrocytes
To obtainasample from theiliaccrest:
different direction, e.g. slightly obliquely, or at an
alternative site,such as the proximal shaft of hu-
1.The dog is positioned in sternal recumbencywith
merus. lf aspiration is stillunsuccessful a bone mar-
thehind legstucked upalongside the trunk.
row core biopsy should be performed. Repeated 'dry
2. The skin over the iliac crest is aseptically prepared.
taps'maybeduetomyelofibrosisorpackingoutofthe
3.A smallamount of local anaesthetic is infiltrated
bone marrowby tumourinfiltrate.
into the skinand subcutisover theiliaccrestand
Evaluation is generally carried out by a clinical path-
the needleis then advancedonto thebonewhich
 ologist since it requires training and experience. How-
feels hard. Mild pressure is applied to the needle
evertheclinicianshould checkthequalityof thesample
and further localanaestheticisinfiltrated intothe
by staining one or two smears(e.g.with a rapid dunking
periosteum.
stain kit). Agood smear contains marrowflecks (spicules)
4.
A small stab incisionismade intheskinand the
of haemopoieticcellswhichhavespread out toform a
Klima needle is introduced through the subcutis
monolayer (Figure 4.33). Excessive haemodilution re-
and onto theiliaccrest which is stabilized
sults inpoor cell morphology. lf no intact spiculesare
between fingerand thumb(Figure4.32a).
present interpretation is difficult or impossible.
5.Theneedleisdirectedventrally andslightlymedially
and advanced into thebonecortexbyrotating it
 to and fro whilst applying firm pressure. Once the
needleis through thebone cortexit will be firmly
lodged in the bone(moving theneedlefrom side
to side willmove the dog from side to side).
6.The stylet is removed and a 10or 20 ml syringe
is attached to theneedle.The marrow is then
aspiratedbyseveralquiteforcefulwithdrawalsof
the plunger. (There may be a transient pain
 response as the marrow is aspirated from
conscious animals.)
7. The plunger is released as soon as marrow
appears in the syringe and the needle and
syringe are removed quickly,as one unit.
A good quality bone marrow aspirate. The
4.33
smear isvery cellular and cells have spread
intoa monolayerwithout clotting.Three large
A dropof marrowisplaced at the topendofseveral
slideswhicharepositioned ata nearvertical angle
nuclei.(May-Grunwald-Giemsa stain;original
(Figure4.32b).Bloodruns down to thebottomof the
magnificationX1000.)
slide,whilst themarrowspiculesremain on the slide.A
smearismadebyplacingasecondslideflatoverthefirst
In normal bone marrow approximately two to six
slide at right angles to it. This has the effect of crushing
megakaryocytesareseen ina marrowfleck,which
the marrow spicules.The second slide is then drawn
 occupies most of a low power (X20) field. The myeloid 
acrossthefirst slideina horizontalplane and the smear
(granulocytic)anderythroid series areexaminedunder
isproducedon thelowersurfaceof thesecondslide
high power.The ratio of myeloid:erythroid cells is
(Figure 4.32c).Smears should be made quickly as the
0.75-1.5, and there should be a pyramidal arrange-
marrow clots rapidly. The smears are allowed to air dry.
mentwithsmall numbersofearlyprecursors andlarger
If theneedleisnotcompletelythroughthecortex
numbersof maturing cells.Thebone marrowof normal
or if hasbeenpushed in too far and islodged against
dogs contains <15% lymphoid cells (<20% in cats),
the far cortex,aspiration will be unsuccessful.The
which are mostly small lymphocytes, and<2%plasma
stylet should bereplaced and the needlemoved
cells.Small numbers of macrophages are present,
accordingly before re-aspirating. If aspiration if still
which may contain phagocytosed cellular debris. Bone
unsuccessful theneedleshould bewithdrawn and a
 marrow cytology is beyond the scope of this chapter
secondattemptmade,directing theneedleinaslightly
but is well described by Harvey(2001).
(a)
(b)
?
4.32
to run off the bottom of the slide but retaining the spicules.(c) Smears are made by placing a second slide over the first 
slide,thus spreading the spicules,and then smoothly drawing the slides apart.
52
Chapter 4Disorders of erythrocytes
Bonemarrowcorebiopsy:AJamshidineedleis used
Alternatively,theincreasedlevelsoferythropoietin
an
hu-
and again the siteof choice is the liac crest inmedium
may be present without systemic hypoxia,termed
ar-
to large dogs and usually the trochanteric fossa in cats
inappropriatesecondaryerythrocytosis.Thishasbeen
dry
and small dogs.
reportedinconjunction withrenal tumours(carcinoma,
adenocarcinoma,fibrosarcomaand lymphoma)andis
the
thought to be the result of local hypoxia within the
1.The needle is inserted through thecortex as
th-
described for the aspirate.
kidney or secretion of erythropoietin by the tumour.
 2. The stylet is removed and the needle is
Benign renal cysts and hydronephrosis have also been
W-
ble
advanceda further1-2cmintothemarrow
suggestedascausesofinappropriatesecondaryeryth-
rocytosis.Extra-renal neoplasia is uncommonly asso-
ng
cavity.
3.The needle is then rotated vigorously in one
ciatedwitherythrocytosisbutone casereport
(S
directiontoensure thebiopsysample is
documented erythrocytosis in a dog with a nasal fibro-
a
sectioned at its base.
sarcoma inwhich thetumourwas foundto secrete
e-
4.The needle is removed from the bone and the
erythropoietin (Couto et al.,1989). In the cat most
re
core is expelled from the top of needle using a
cases of erythrocytosis are primary, and secondary
blunt probe.
erythrocytosis isvery uncommon,only occurring occa-
5.The core should be fixed in buffered formalin.
sionally in response tohypoxia(Watson et al.,1994).
The sample must be decalcified prior to
Mild erythrocytosis may occure in association with
sectioning and staining, and this process may
hyperthyroidism but does not cause clinical signs.
take several days.
Differentiating causes of erythrocytosis
 In relative erythrocytosis clinical examination usually
A corebiopsyhastheadvantage that the architec-
reveals signs of dehydration.In addition,total protein,
ture of the marrow can be evaluated and cellularity
urea and creatinine are usually elevated.ThePCV
can be accurately assessed.The core biopsy ispar-
ticularly useful in the diagnosis of aplastic pancyto-
returns tonormal once the dehydrationiscorrected.
If relative erythrocytosiscanberuled outcauses of
penia and myelofibrosis.
secondaryerythrocytosis shouldbeinvestigated.Thor-
 acic radiographs and echocardiography are used to
assess the cardiopulmonary systems. Arterial blood
Erythrocytosis
gases are useful in assessing for hypoxia.The normal
partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) is 85-100 mmHg,
Erythrocytosisischaracterizedbyanincreasein the
whilst incases of physiologically appropriate erythro-
redcell count,haemoglobinconcentration andPCV.lt
cytosis the PO2 is significantly reduced (e.g. <60
can be classified as relative or absolute. Absolute
mmHg).Renal ultrasonography or an intravenous ex-
erythrocytosisisclassified as primary(true) orsecond-
cretory urogram are usedto assessforrenal neoplasia.
ary.Relative erythrocytosisiscaused bydisturbances
If nosecondary cause is identified a presumptive
influidbalanceresultingindehydration.The totalred
diagnosis ofprimary erythrocytosis is made.Bone
cell massremainsnormalbut thedecrease inplasma
marrow aspirationisnot helpful in distinguishing pri-
volumeresult is in an increase in the totalplasma
mary and secondary erythrocytosis sinceinboth
 protein concentration. The term polycythaemia is fre-
cases erythroid hyperplasia is present, but the red
quentlyused todescribe increasedredcellcount,but
cells and their precursors are morphologically nor-
thisimpliesanincreaseofseveralellinesnotjusted
mal. Measurement of erythropoietin is helpful: eryth-
cells, and so its use is discouraged.
ropoietinisloworlownormalinprimaryerythrocytosis
andisusuallyelevatedinsecondaryerythrocytosis,in
Primaryerythrocytosis
particular in animals with renal tumours.However,
 Primary erythrocytosis, also known as polycythaemia
erythropoietinisnot always elevated insecondary
rubra vera, is a chronic myeloproliferative disease
erythrocytosisandmaybenormal in animalswith
characterized by clonal proliferation of erythroid pre-
primary erythrocytosis,thus erythropoietin concen-
cursor cells withmaturation and differentiation into
trationsshouldneverreplacea thorough clinical and
morphologicallynormal red blood cells.Thisprolifera-
laboratory evaluation.
tion isnotcontrolledbynormal feedbackmechanisms
and is not drivenbyerythropoietin.Indeed erythropoi-
etinlevels areusuallyloworundetectable.
Blood typing
Secondary erythrocytosis
Rapid in-house tests are available for blood typing of 
 This occurs in response to increased erythropoietin
canine and feline blood. These tests are used prior to
secretion, which may be an appropriate compensatory
blood transfusion and in cats can be used prior to
response to chronic hypoxia due to:
mating toprevent neonatal isoerythrolysis.
In cats there are3blood types:A,BandAB.Type
Chronicpulmonary disease
A is dominantoverABand B and typeABisdominant
Right to left cardiovascular shunting, e.g. patent 
over B.Type A is common in the DomesticShorthair.
ductusarteriosus,tetralogyof Fallot
Type B is common in the British Shorthair and to a
Animals living at high altitude.
lesser extent the Cornish and Devon Rex and Birman 
53
Chapter4Disordersoferythrocytes
breeds.Type AB is very rare.All typeB catshave high
DEA 1.1 or DEA 1.2.DEA 1.1 is the most potent
titre of naturally occurring anti-Aisoantibodies.lf atype
 stimulator of isoantibody production. There are no
B cat receives a type A blood transfusion a severelife-
naturally occurring isoantibodies to DEA 1.1 and so
threateningorfatal transfusionreactionwill takeplace.
acute transfusionreactionsarenotseen followinga
A proportion of type A cats have naturally occurring
first transfusion,butwill occur following subsequent
anti-Bisoantibodies,theseleadtomild/delayed trans-
transfusions.There is a low prevalence of naturally
fusion reaction when such a cat is given type B blood.
occurring isoantibodiestoDEA3,5and7,whichcan
Transfusion reactions can beprevented by ensuring
leadtomild,delayed,butnotacutetransfusionsrea
donorandrecipientare of the sameblood typeusingin-
tions.DEA 4 ispresent in most dogs and naturally
house test cards(Rapid Vet-H (feline)) which identify
occurring isoantibodies do not occur.Rapid in-house
 blood group using an agglutinating reaction.
tests cards are available foridentifying DEA1.1(Rapid
 In dogs six blood groups, termed dog erythrocyte
Vet-H (canine)),but not for other canine blood types.
antigens (DEA),are described:DEA 1.1,1.2,3,4,5
Blood typing and transfusion are discussed in detail in
and 7. More than one DEA may be present in an
theBSAVAManualofSmall Animal Haematologyand
individualalthoughfDEAtye1isresent,itiseithr
TransfusionMedicine(2000).
Case examples
Case 1
Signalment
6-year-old,neuteredfemaleLabrador.
Biochemistry
Result
Referenceinterval
History and clinical findings
Sodium (mmol/l)
145.3
135.0-155.0
Potassium (mmoll)
3.02
3.5-5.8
previous4days.Shehadbeen treated withimmunosuppressive doses
Glucose(mmoll)
7.3
3.3-5.8
of prednisolone on the assumption that IMHA was the cause of the
Urea (mmol/l)
8.6
2.5-6.7
clinical signs.The dog's condition had deteriorated and so she was
Creatinine (μmol/)
referredtoasecondclinicClinicalexaminationrevealedjaundiceand
48
45-150
mucosalpalopalpableplenomegaly,tachycardiaand tachypnoea
Calcium(mmol/l)
2.49
2.3-2.8
Clinical pathology data
Inorganicphosphate
0.97
0.78-1.41
(mmol/)
Haematology
TP(g/)
Result
Reference interval
61
60.0-80.0
Albumin (g/)
29
25-40
RBC (x1012/)
1.46
5.5-8.5
Globulin (g/)
32
20-45
Hb (g/dl)
3.5
12-18
ALT (IU/I)
33
5.0-60.0
HCT(/)
0.105
0.37-0.55
ALP (IU/)
1078
<130
MCV (fl)
72
60-77
GGT (IU/)
8
0.1-9.0
MCHC (g/dl)
32
30-36
Cholesterol(mmoll)
3.9
2.5-5.9
RDW (%)
22
13-17
Bile acids (μmol/l)
5
0-10
Uncorrected reticulocyte
Bilirubin (μmol/ml)
42
15.8
2-17
<1
percentage (%)
Sample comment:plasma is icteric.
Absolute reticulocyte count
24
<50
Whatarethe significantabnormalities and
(x10%/)
what are thepossible causes?
Platelets (x10%/)
175
200-500
There isa severe anaemiawhich isnomocytic,normochromic.However
Plasma proteins(g/l)
86
60-80
thepolychromasiaanisocytosisndelevatedreticulocytcoutindicat
thisisaregenerativeanaemiailustrating thatevaluationofnumericalred
WBC（x10%/1)
26.9
6.0-15.0
Neutrophils (band) (x10°/)
2.6
<1.0
Giventhejaundicetheanaemiaislikelytobeduetohaemolysis.TheHeinz
Neutrophils(segmented)
bodiesarehighlysignificantandsuggestthehaemolysisisdetooxidative
22.4
3.0-11.5
damage.Plasma proteinmeasuredbyrefractometer(haematologyre-
(x10%/)
sultsiselevatedwhilsterumproteinmeasuredbochemicallyiswithn
Lymphocytes (x 10%/)
0.8
1-4.8
thereferenceintevalTheplasmaproteiniserroneouslyhighduetothe
Monocytes (x10%/)
1.1
0.2-1.5
icteruswhichdoesnotintererewiththebochemicalassayhleucogram
showsaneutrophiliaandleftshiftreflectinganinflammatoryresponsehe
Eosinophils（x109/)
0.0
0.05-0.8
basophiliccytoplasmandDohleinclusionsnotedintheneutrophilsindi-
catea degreeof toxicchange,whichmaybesevereinflammatory
Filmcomments
responsesandisntspecificfrbacterialinfection(seeChapte）h
Red cells:2+anisocytosis3+polychromasia.Large numbersof Heinz
bodies.Occasional nucleatedredcellandHowell-Jollybody.
OnbiochemistryALPismarkedlyelevated whilstGGTandALTare
Leucocytes:Neutrophil cytoplasmoftenbasophilic.Some neutrophils
withinthereferenceinterval.Thispaternisconsistentwithsteroid
contain Dohle bodies.
Platelets:Numbersseenappearconsistent withcountSome anisocytosis.
Case 1continues
54
Chapter 4
Disordersoferythrocytes
Case 1 continued
maybeufthcfomtalliforegoduhaenni
and bolts, which may contain zinc.
inductionTheelevatedbiliubininassociationwithanaemiaandnormal
bileacidsisconsistentwithprehepaticjaundiceThenormalbileacids
Caseoutcome
mean hepaticrposthepaticjaundiceiveryunlkelyThemild hr
Followingquestioning theownervolnteered thatthedghadvomited
glycaemimayedetstrssrthffectsfstroidthrapyai
achild'stoy2dayspriortoreferralThevomitedtoywasapproximately
insulinrestahhali
half theweightfanewlypurchased identica toy,indicating tha
tion of vomiting and inappetance.
substantial corrosionhad taken place within the stomach.This toy
Theoveralfindingsareof haemolyticanaemiacausedbyoxidative
couldhaebeenasourceofzincandsoserumincwasevaluatdt
red cellinjury.Posiblecausesinclude onions,garlicparacetamol
wasmarkedlyelevatedat257μmoll（referenceinterval30-61μmoll),
benzocaine,naphthalene,copperandzinc.
confirming that thecauseof thehaemolysiswaszinctoxicity.Thedog
made an uneventful recovery.
Whatfurtherinvestigationsshouldbe
performed?
(Case1courtesyofNicholasBexfield,UniversityofCambridge）
Furtherinvestigationsshouldincludecarefulquestioningof theowner
regardingpiacsstanyoftheetoxisminaladiograhy
Case2
Signalment
7-year-oldmale CockerSpaniel.
Biochemistry(continued)Result
Reference interval
History
Calcium(mmol/)
2.6
2.3-2.8
Suddenlladihvid
Inorganicphosphate
1.1
0.78-1.41
examinationrevealedpyrexiapallorand icterus.
(mmoll)
Clinicalpathologydata
TP(g/)
64.8
60.0-80.0
Albumin(g/)
32.0
25-40
Haematology
Result
Reference interval
Globulin (g/)
32.8
20-45
RBC（x1012/)
0.75
5.5-8.5
ALT (IU/I)
2773
5.0-60.0
Hb (g/d)
4.53
12-18
ALP (IU/)
455
<130
PCV (%)
37-55
Bilirubin (μmol/ml)
141
2-17
MCV(fl)
77
60-77
79
30-36
'Sample comment: EDTA and serum samples grossy haemolysed.
MCHC (g/dl)
WBC(×10%/)
9.3
6.0-15.0
Urineanalysis
Metamyelocytes (x10°/1)
1.4
Grossappearance
Red-brown
Neutrophils(band)(（x10%/)
3.6
<1.0
SG
1.037
Neutrophils (segmented)
13.7
3.0-11.5
Dipstick
Sample too strongly coloured to
(x10%/)
read accurately.Possibly 4+blood/
Lymphocytes (x10%/)
0.8
1-4.8
Hb and 4+ bilirubin.
Monocytes (x 10/)
0.6
0.2-1.5
Sedimentexamination
Red cells5/hpf; white cells5/hpf
Eosinophils(x 10/)
0.0
0.05-0.8
100
200-500
What abnormalities are present and what is
Platelets (x10/1)
thelikely cause?
Plasma proteins(g/l)
86
60-80
TheresasevereanamiabasedonthemanualThepresencf
numerousspherocytesandghostcellscoupledwiththeicterus/elevated
Filmcomments
bilirubin andhaemolysedplasma is strongly suggestiveof immune-
WhitecellsNeutrophilshowmildtoxicchangewithoccasionalDhle
mediatedhaemolyticanaemiawithintravascularhaemolysisThereia
body.
neutrophiliandmarkedleftshiftwhichiscommonlyeeninthisdisease.
Red cells:2+polychromasia.Moderate numbers of spherocytes and
Thereidiscrpancbweenthwhchsaproximal
numerous ghost red cells seen.
quartrfthwrrencintervalthcountwhichssn
Platelets:Some small clumpsandsomemacroplatelets.Numbersseen
15of thlwerenceinalandtamgobinwh
appear higher than count.
approximatl3oftheowerrerenceintalnaddiionth
isextremelyhigh.ThesediscrepanciessuggestlaboratoryerrorFurther
Biochemistry
Result
Reference interval
inspectionof thesamplerevealedmarkedautoagglutination.Clumpsof
redcldlllint
Sodium(mmol/l)
146.2
135.0-155.0
whilsthemanualPCVacuraely relets thedegree of anaemia.he
Potassium(mmol/)
3.5
3.5-5.8
haemoglobingivesafalslyhigndicationfredellmassecaur
3.9
3.3-5.8
haemoglobinpresentasaresult of invivohaemolysishasbeenmeas-
Glucose (mmoll)
uredalongwithhaemoglobin liberatedfromtheredcellswithin the
Urea(mmol/l)
22.8
2.5-6.7
analyserThisalsoexplainstheelevatedMCHC,whichicalculatdb
Creatinine(umol/l)
49
45-150
Case 2continues
55
Chapter4Disordersoferythrocytes
Case2continued
Urinedipstickanalysisshowsamarkedreactionforblood/haemo-
globinThelackof redcelsonthesedmentsuggestruehaemoglobinu
dividing thehaemoglobin by the PCV.Haemolysishasresulted in a
riarathhaamatrilugcellanitcilly
falselyhighplasmaprotein(readonarefractometer)whilsthebiochemi-
in dilute urine.Haemoglobinuria indicates intravascularhaemolysis.
cal proteinmeasurement isunaffectedTheMCVislikelytobeinaccu
Bilirubinuria is almost invariably detected in animals withhaemolytic
ratebecausesomesmallclumpsof redcellsmayhavebeencountedas
anaemia,dueto thelowrenal threshold forbilirubin.
singlelagredellshsf teredellalenlythmanual
isaccurateinthiscase.heblood filmshowsonlymoderatepolychro
Whatothertestswould you do?
masiattr
Autoagglutinationshouldbeconfirmedbyperformingasalineagglutina-
response has become fullyestablished.
tion test and examining microscopically. A Coombs' test could be
ThereisamarkedelevationinALTandASTaswellasamoderate
performedifautoagglutinationwerenotpresent.coagulationprofile
could beperformed to investigate thepossibilityof DIC.
hypoxia or thrombus formation leading to ischaemic damage. The
Otherinvestigations amed atdetecting anunderlying disease(e.g.
elevatdbilirubinmaybeinpartprpaticdhamolysand
neplasiintinhouldonsdredalthughrmay
partlyhepaticduetoreduced uptake,conjugation and excretionf
seen commonly in this breed.
bilirubinhelevatedureawithnormalcreatininemayreflectincreased
protein breakdown due to thehighrateof haemolysis,orpossibly
gastrointestinal haemorrhage.
Case3
Signalment
Classify thisanaemia.Whatarethe
10-month-old female neutered DomesticShorthair.
potential causesforthis?
Thisisavery severenormocytic,normochromic,non-regenerative
History andclinicalexamination
anaemiaThechronichistoryandthefactthatthcatisstillaivwiththi
Gradual onsetof dullness andlethargyover thepreceding3weeks.
very severe anaemiindicate thediseasemust havehada radual
Clinicalsignshavedeterioratedoverthelastfewdaysandthecatsnw
onsetittmfrthaadapylgicalssibla
primarybonemarrowdiseasessuchaspureredcellaplasiaandon
palemucousmembranesandmoderate tachycardiabutnootherabnor-
regeneratimdylasimprlrati
malities.
myelophthisisandFeLV-relatedanaemiaTheanaemiaistoosevereto
be secondary to inflammatory disease or renal failure and in addiion
Clinical pathology data
there areno clinical signssuggesting renal failure.
Haematology
Results
Reference interval
Whatotherabnormalitiesarepresentand
whatistheirsignificance?
RBC(x1012/)
1.23
5.0-10.0
Themarked rouleauxformationmay suggest an increase in globulins.
Hb (g/dl)
1.8
8-15
Thereisamildlymphocytosisbut thisissignificant inasickstressed
HCT(/)
0.052
0.26-0.45
animal inwhich lymphopenia or low normal lymphocyte count is ex-
pected.This may uggest a lympoproliferativ disease, although th
MCV (l)
42
39-55
lymphocyte morphology is normal and could also suggest chronic
MCHC (g/dl)
36
30-36
immune stimulation.
Reticulocytes (x10%/)
42
<50
Whatfurther testswould you do?
WBC(x10%/)
12.9
5.5-19.5
FurthertestsshouldncludeFVandFIVtestingbiochemicalscree
Neutrophils(x10°/)
6.7
3.0-11.5
aspiration.ScreeningforMycoplasmahaemofelis/haemominutemshould
Lymphocytes (x10°/1)
6.1
1.54.8
alsobe performed since this infection could contribute to the anaemia.
Monocytes (x10/1)
0.1
0.2-1.5
Furtherdata
Eosinophils(x10%/)
0.0
0.05-0.8
In-houseFeLV andFIV andMycoplasmaPCRtests were negative.
Biochemicalscreeningrevealedmildlyelevated liverenzymesconsist
Platelets (x10%/)
209
200-800
ent withhypoxicdamage.Bonemarrowaspirationrevealedanormal
Plasma proteins (g/)
74
60-80
myeloidseriesbutmarkedlydepletederythroidserieswithonlyocca
sional proerythroblastsseen.Therewereincreasednumbersof small
lymphocyteswhichaccountedfor28%of thetotalnucleatedcells.These
Filmcomments
Redcellsarenormcyticnomochromicwth markedrouleauxfrmation.
findingsindicatepureredcellaplasiaThecatreceivedablodtrans
Leucocyte morphology is unremarkable.
Referencesandfurtherreading
erythrophagocytosisinadogwithnasalfibrosarcoma.Journalof
VeterinarynternaMedicine3183-185
Day MJ (1996) Serial monitoring of clinical,haematological and
BarkerRN,Gruffydd-JonesTJ and ElsonCJ(1993)Redcell-bound
immunological parameters in canine autoimmunehaemolytic
anaemia.JournalofSmallAnimalPractice37,523-534
linkedantiglobulintestindogswith autoimmune haemolysisor
Day MJ(200o)Immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia In:Schalms
otheranaemias.ResearchinVeterinaryScience54,170-178
VeterinarHamatlogydndFFmanGinan
BrownDE,WeiserMGandThrallMA(1994)Erythrocyticindicesand
NCan6iintiaWiinila
volume distributionina dogwith stomatocytosis.Veterinary
DayM,LittlewoodJandMackinA(20oo)BSAVAManual of Smal
Pathology31,247-250
CoutoCG,Boudrieau RJand Zanjani ED(1989)Tumourassociated
Publications,Gloucester
56
Disorders of leucocytes
LauraBlackwood
Introduction
roles in haemopoiesis and immune function.Although
generallyprotectiveorsupportiveof thehosttissue,
Leucocytes(whitebloodcells)includebothgranulocytes
leucocytesarealsoinvolved inhost-harmful allergic
(neutrophils,eosinophils and basophils)and mono-
and immune-mediated disease.
nuclear cells (monocytes and lymphocytes).Leuco-
Normal leucocytemorphologyis illustrated inFig-
cytesarevital forhostdefence,andforinitiation and
ure3.16and anoverviewof haemopoiesis isgiven in
controlofinflammationandimmunity.Neutrophils,macro-
Chapter4.Thehaemopoieticcells in the bone marrow
phages and natural killer(NK) cells(specialized lymph-
canbedividedinto threegroups:pluripotentstemcells;
oid cells)providetheinnateimmuneresponse,whichis
differentiating progenitor cells;and fully functional ma-
the first line of defence against an invadingpathogen
ture blood cells.Pluripotent stem cells are capable of
and does not involve immunological memory.Lymphoid
self-renewal.Ascellsbecomecommitted toacertain
cellsorchestrate theadaptiveor acquired immunere-
cell lineage,their abilitytoproliferateisreduced and
sponse,activatedby the inflammation inducedbyany
eventually lost. Thus, the marrow has a pyramidal
pathogen that getspast the innate response.The adap-
structure,inwhichonestemcellgivesrisetomany
tiveimmuneresponsedevelopsimmunologicalmemory.
daughter cells (Figure 5.1). Specific information con-
In addition tobeingeffectorcells(cellsthat carryout
cerningproductionof allcell lines in dogs and cats is
functions),white blood cellsplayimportantregulatory
lacking,sothedescriptionsinthischapteralsodraw
Pluripotent stem cell
5.1
Haemopoiesis.
O
Myel
Lympho
CFU
GM
CFU-Eo
CFU
BFU-E
O
Bcel
as
个
个
个
?
RBC
Megakaryocyte
个
BONEMARROW
盒
y
?
BLOOD
Neutrophil
Monocyte
Eosinophi
Platelets
RBC
介
Macrophages
58
Chapter5Disordersofleucocytes
fromavailableinformationinothermammalianstudies.
thanatanylaterlifestage,andremainedelevatedabove
The factors controlling granulopoiesis are less well
adult values until 4 months of age (Harper et al, 2003).
defined thanthosecontrolling erythropoiesis.
In this group,total WBC counts tended to decrease from
2 years of age,and WBC counts in dogs under5 years
Assessment ofleucocytes
(Harperetal.,2003).Fortheyoung(<1year) and theold
Assessmentofwhitebloodcellsrequirestotaland
(>8years)therewerealso significantdifferencesintotal
count between the two breeds,with Beagles having
differential white cell counts(determined using blood
higher counts, especially as puppies. Thus, juvenile
samples takenintoEDTA) and blood smearexamina-
rangesbased onlaboratoryBeaglesmaynotreflect
tion(see Chapters 2and 3).Afreshblood smear should
be submittedtothe laboratorywitheveryEDTAblood
normality in other breeds.
sample,as artefactual changes in cells occur within
logical) leucocyteabnormalitieshavebeen identified.
hours of sampling. Most in-house analysers produce
Sighthounds tend tohavelowerWBCcounts than
reliabletotalWBCcountsbutdifferential andplatelet
other breeds.Belgian Tervueren dogs in the USA have
counts aregenerallylessreliable(Bienzle etal.,2000;
Papasouliotis,2002;Dewhurst et al.,2003).All ma-
beendocumented tohavelowerneutrophil,monocyte
and lymphocytecounts than otherdogs(Greenfield et
chine-generateddifferentialcountsshouldbeverifiedby
al.,2oo0),althougharecentstudyfailed toshowsuch
a manual200-celldifferentialcount,and ineverycasea
blood smear shouldbeevaluatedfor morphological
physiological leucopenia inTerveurens in their home
country(Gommeren etal.,2004).The latter studyalso
abnormalities.Automated analyserscount normoblasts
supported a decrease in total WBC count with ageing,
as white blood cellsbecause they are nucleated, and
as found in Labradors and Beagles.
these must be identified on smears.Lastly,platelet
countsshouldbeverifiedbysmearexamination,and
Morphological variations inleucocytesare also
breed-related.Forexample,Greyhoundshaveabnor-
automated analysersdonotalwaysprovideaccurate
maleosinophils,whichlackdistinctgranulesandcon-
plateletcountsfor cats(see Chapter4).
Buffy coat smears(where a smear is madeof the
tainnumerousclearcytoplasmicvacuoles,butthese
dogs have no related disease problems. Similarly,
buffy coat only,aftercentrifugation) can be examined.
Birman catsshowatypical neutrophil granulation that
Therearenoredbloodcells,andverylargenumbers
is not associated with neutrophil dysfunction.
ofwhite blood cellscanbeexaminedrapidly.Buffycoat
smears arerarelyusedbut maybe useful in identifying
lownumbersof aberrantcellsorintracellularorgan-
isms where onlya smallproportionof cells areaffected.
Granulocytes
Reference intervals
Granulopoiesisistheprocessbywhichgranulocytes
Referenceintervalsarederivedfromavailable'normal
are produced. The CFU-C (so called because it was
first described in colony-forming units in culture) is the
propriate forthe individualpatient.ldeally age-,breed-
multipotent stemcell forthe granulocyteseries.These
and sex-matched animalswith similarbackgrounds
stem cells are morphologically similar to small
andenvironmentand fromthe same geographical area
lymphocytes.In thepresence ofcolony-stimulating
should be used (see Chapter 2) but this is clearly
factors(CSFs)theyproliferate anddifferentiateinto the
impractical. Thereference interval provided by the
cells of the granulocyte-monocyte lineages. The CFU-
laboratory carrying out the analysesshould beused.
GM (granulocyte- monocyte colony-forming unit) has
beenidentified as theparticularCFU-Cprogenitor that
Age-andbreed-relatedchanges
gives rise to both granulocytes and monocytes.
Leucocyte counts in infant and juvenile cats and dogs
G-CSF (granulocyte colony-stimulating factor) and
vary from those in adults, and this reflects the new
GM-CSF(granulocyte-monocyte colony-stimulating
challenges theyface.Changes are also apparent in
factor)are the specific CSFs involved in granulo-
dams:total WBCcounts are increased duringpreg-
poiesis.There are most likely colony-stimulating fac-
nancyand lactation,andreturn tonormal afterwean-
tors(CSFs)for each cellineage.In addition to CSFs,
ing.Kittens have a normal leucogram at birth,but,by
macrophages,activated lymphocytes and endothelial
3-4 months of age, neutrophil and lymphocyte counts 
cellsproducelocal factors(mainlycytokines) that stimu-
considerably exceed theadult range.Thesereturn to
late granulopoiesis.Regulation of production ispartly
the adult rangeby5-6monthsof age.
achieved by a negative feedback effect mediated by
Much of the initial data for dogs are based on
inhibitory substances frommature neutrophils and
prostaglandin E from macrophages, unless there is 
be abovethereferencerange forthefirstfewdaysoflife
continued stimulationforgranulocyterelease.
but arewithin the adult rangeby7-10 days(Shafrine et
The first morphologicallyrecognizable granulocyte
al,1973).Lymphocytosis is a common finding,and
is the myeloblast.These cells differentiate through
dogsless than6monthsof age typicallyhavelymphocyte
progranulocyte,myelocyte,metamyelocyte and band
countsbetween2and10x10%/1.TotalWBCcountshave
forms to become mature granulocytes (Figure 5.2).
alsobeenassessedinagroupofBeagles andLabrador
The capacityfor cell division is lost at themetamyelo-
Retrieversfrompet stockheld byanutritioncompany.
cyte stage, by which time 16-32 myelocytes have
Total leucocytecountswere higherat 3-8weeksof age
arisenfrom eachmyeloblast.
59
Chapter 5 Disorders of leucocytes
5.2
Granulopoiesis.
Myeloblast
Promyelocyte
Cell division
Myelocytes
Metamyelocytes
heutrophils
No further
cell division
Segmented
neutrophils
harvest cells from the CNP,and movement of cells
Neutrophils
between the MNP and CNP pools can affect counts.
The neutrophil,or polymorphonuclear (PMN) leuco-
In dogs roughly half the neutrophils exist in each pool,
cyte (Figure 5.3), is approximately 10-15 μm in dia-
but in cats the marginating pool is three times greater
meter(about1.5-2caninered cells)and has a nucleus
than the circulating pool.
divided into threetofive lobes by indentations.The
The circulating half-life of neutrophils in dogs and
nucleus has dark purple-staining clumped chromatin.
cats is only 6-12 hours,and counts can change
The cytoplasm contains microbicidal and enzymatic
rapidlyin disease states.Even in the normal animal,
granulesimportanttoitsfunction,but theseareeither
the total neutrophilpool isreplaced 1-2.5 times daily.
indiscernible oronly faintlyvisible as eosinophilicgran-
Neutrophilsleaving the circulation are lost across
ules against thepale pink cytoplasm on Romanowsky
mucosal surfaces or phagocytosed in the liver and
stains.Barrbodies (see Figure 3.16bi) are protrusions
spleen. In the normal animal, there is no appreciable
of the nucleuspresent inbitches and in up to11%of
tissue pool,although large numbers of neutrophils
queens, and are of no clinical significance.
 may accumulate in tissues in disease. Neutrophils in 
Neutrophils play a vital role in the defence of the
normal tissuessurvive only1-4days,andsurvival is
organism against pathogens,and can:
shortened in disease.
Kill orinactivatebacteriaastsungirarai
Neutrophil shifts
Modulate theimmuneresponse
Circulating neutrophils may show left and right shits.
Eliminate infected and,in some cases,
These termsarise from the sideof the cell counter/
transformed cells.
page on which the neutrophils are recorded: band
neutrophilsarerecordedtotheleftof matureneutrophils,
Neutrophilsexist in thebodyin threemajorpools:
so anincreased numberofimmature cells isdescribed
the bonemarrow,blood and tissue pools(Figure 5.4).
as a left shift.
The bone marrow pool consists of the mitotic(dividing)
pool, the maturation pool and the storage pool. In the
Left shift: This occurs when the storage pool is
normal animals the storage pool of mature neutrophils
depleted and thereiscontinueddemand for
harbours 5-7 days'worth of neutrophils.Itis only when
neutrophils,whichismetbythereleaseof immature
the demand is great and this pool is depleted that
neutrophils(predominantlybandforms)fromthematu-
neutrophils are released from the maturation pool and
ration pool.if disease is severe or protracted,meta
immatureforms(bandforms ormoreimmaturecells,
Figure 5.3) are released into the circulation. In the
Bandneutrophils areof similarsizetomature cellsbut
circulation,theneutrophilsform twopools,thecirculat-
have a minimally indented (suggested < 50% of the
ing (CNP) and marginating (MNP) pools. The MNP
width)U-shapednucleuswith almostparallel sides
consistsof cells stuck toorrolling along the endo-
(Figure 5.3b,c,d). Clinical pathologists are variably
theliumofsmall bloodvessels.Blood samplesonly
60
Chapter5
Disordersof leucocytes
a
(b)
(d)
e
(f)
g
(k)
(I)
5.3
Neutrophils,characterized by a segmented nucleus with three to five lobes.(a) Normal neutrophil from a dog.
(b,c,d) Band neutrophils,with U-shaped nuclei lacking segmentation.In (c)the band cell is to the left of a
poorly preserved segmented neutrophil.(e, f) Hypersegmented neutrophils(feline).There is also pyknotic change.
are also evident (arrowed). In both (e) and (f) there is red cell crenation, supporting in vitro change due to an aged sample.
These changes make appreciation of toxic change difficult.(g,h, i, j, k) Toxic changes in band and mature neutrophils.
In (g) there is nuclear swelling,chromatin clumping,cytoplasmicbasophilia, and faint granulation. In (h) there is nuclear
swelling,cytoplasmicbasophilia and a Dohlebody(arrowed).In(j) there is a swollennucleus,with slightly clumped
chromatin,and faint vacuolation.In(k) nuclear swelling,chromatin clumping and cytoplasmicbasophila are seen.
I):original magnification X1000 (except (f, h) X400).)
strict in theirdefinition of a band neutrophil and argue
astohowdeeptheindentationscanbebeforethe
neutrophil is mature,and this results in different
normal reference intervals forband forms.Thenuclei
ofbandforms stainlessheavilythan thoseof mature
neutrophils,as the chromatin is less condensed.
Left shiftsmaybe eitherregenerativeordegenera-
tive:
Inaregenerativeleftshift,there areincreased
band neutrophils and there isa neutrophilia in
BONEMARROW
PLOLS
TISSUE
whichmatureneutrophilsexceed bands
POOLS
POOLS
Inadegenerativeleftshift,thereisalowor
Normal neutrophildemand
Marginatingpoo
normal leucocyte count and band cellsexceed
Circulating pool
mature neutrophils.This is inappropriate and
suggests that the bone marrow is unable to
maintain adequateneutrophil numberstomeet
5.4
The major neutrophil pools of the body.
theincreaseddemand.
61
Chapter5Disordersof leucocytes
Thereis no universally acceptedvalue for what
redistribute from the marginating to the circulating
constitutes a significant left shift,but>1x 10/band
pools.There isno left shift.Vigorous exercise also
neutrophilsisoftenused.Anincreaseinbandneutrophils
produces a similar response, most commonly in young
reflects anactiveinflammatoryresponse,which could
dogs.Physiological neutrophiliamaybe accompanied
be duetoinfection,immune-mediateddisease,tissue
damage/necrosisorneoplasia;bandcellsarenotpathog-
than the neutrophilia incats) and/or hyperglycaemia,
nomonicforbacterial infection(see below).Inanimals
and is transient(20 minutes).
withPelger-Huet anomaly,band neutrophils arere-
leased into the circulation andleft shift isnot indicative
Stress/steroid-inducedneutrophilia:Endogenous
ofanincreased inflammatoryresponse.
cortisolorexogenouscorticosteroidsproduceama
A neutrophilia with a declining left shift may reflect
ture neutrophilia, mainly as a result of increased re-
declining tissuedemand oracceleratedbonemarrow
lease of neutrophilsfromthe storagepool,and also,to
production meeting demand, and can be a good prog-
alesserextent,shiftofcellsfrom themarginating tothe
nostic indicator.A degenerativeleft shift is a poor
circulating pool, and reduced endothelial adherence
prognostic indicator.
resulting inprolonged circulation time (a true right
shift).There is usually no left shift.Counts in dogs tend
Rightshift:Thisoccurs when there isreducedegress
tobeintherange15-25x10%/lbutmayoccasionallybe
from the circulation,mostoftenmediatedby endog-
as high as 40x109/.Increases incats areless marked
enouscortisolorexogenouscorticosteroids.Amature
and thetotalWBCcountdoesnotusuallyexceed20x
neutrophiliaresults,though thismaybeindistinguish-
10%/1 (but may occasionally be as high as 30 x 10/l).
ablefromothertypesofmatureneutrophiliaunless
Othersteroid-associated abnormalitiesmaybepresent:
morphologicalchanges occur.Hypersegmentationand
in dogs,monocytosis,lymphopenia and eosinopenia,
pyknosis represent normal ageing change but
and biochemical changes(markedly elevated alkaline
neutrophilsusuallyexit the circulationbefore these
phosphatasewithmoderately elevatedalanine
changes are evident: these changes may be seen in a
transaminase) are typical;in cats,monocytosis is not
right shift.Both changes may also occur in vitro, and
commonandlymphopeniaandeosinopeniamaybe
are commonartefacts（Figure5.3e,f).However,the
the only other abnormalities,as there is nosteroid-
presence of such cells in a fresh blood smear suggests
induced alkaline phosphatase.
extended neutrophil transit time.Hypersegmented
neutrophilshave more than five lobes in the nucleus.
Acuteinflammatoryresponse:Neutrophilia dueto
inflammation isseen in awiderangeof diseasepro-
Neutrophilia
cesses,andmayfeaturealeftshift.Theleftshiftmay
Themost common causes of neutrophilia aresumma-
be regenerative or degenerative,depending on the
rized in Figure 5.5.
demand forneutrophilsand themarrow'sability to
produce these.In the face of increased demand,mar-
Physiologicalneutrophilia:Thisisespeciallycom-
row transit time may be reduced and the neutrophils
mon in cats. Emotional distress or fear results in
(mature and immature) may show toxic change(see
release of adrenaline(epinephrine),and neutrophils
below). Although bacterial infections may be the most
Cause
Associated conditions
Mechanism of neutrophilia
Recognition factors
Physiological
Emotional distress;fearvigorous
Redistributionof neutrophils from
No left shift
neutrophilia
exercise
marginating to circulating pools
Concurrent abnormalities:
Lymphocytosis
Hyperglycaemia
Stress/steroid
Hyperadrenocorticism;exogenous
Increased release of neutrophils
No left shit
response
corticosteroids
from storage pool.Shift from
Concurrent abnormalities (dogs):
marginating to circulating pool.
Monocytosis
Prolonged circulation time
Lymphopenia
Eosinopenia
Elevated alkalinephosphatase
Concurrent abnormalities (cats):
Lymphopenia
Eosinopenia
Acute inflammatory
Bacterial infections;other infections;
Increased demand in response to
Mayfeature:
response
immune-mediated disease;
pathogens and inflammation
Left shift
neoplasia tissue necrosis
Toxic change
Superimposed stress haemogram
Others (rare)
Chronic granulocytic leukaemia;
See Figure 5.7
See Figure 5.7
neutrophil dysfunction
5.5
Causes of neutrophilia in dogs and cats
62
Chapter5Disordersof leucocytes
common causeofan acute inflammatoryresponse in
Increased cytoplasmicbasophilia,asaresultof
practice, immune-mediated diseases and neoplasia
increasedresidual cytoplasmicRNA
arealsofrequentcauses.Inimmune-mediated haemo-
Cytoplasmicvacuolation duetolossofgranule and
lyticanaemia(IMHA),a marked neutrophiliawitha left
membrane integrity during disturbed maturation
shift is common.This is thought to be due to non-
Dohlebodies:these are grey-blue
specific effects of marrow hyperactivity inresponse to
intracytoplasmicinclusionsrepresenting
the anaemia,endogenous steroidproduction and,in
aggregates of cytoplasmic reticulum. Dohle
some cases,systemicinflammatoryresponsesecond-
bodiesarefound in normal cats and arenot
ary to tissue hypoxia and thrombosis.lf the left shift is
considered toreflect toxicchange unless they
arefrequent and prominent
anaemia with circulating nucleated red blood cells
Toxic granulation due to retention of acid
(normoblastosis),this is called a leucoerythroblastic
mucopolysaccharides in primary granules (which
blood picture(Figure5.6;see also Chapter4).In many
stainwithRomanowskystains,unlikethesecondary
animals with an acute inflammatory response there is
granules usually present in normal neutrophils)
a superimposed stress haemogram, and eosinopenia
Giant neutrophils
and lymphopenia are common.
Nuclear swelling
Doughnut nuclei.
Degenerative changes
Degenerative changes occur in neutrophils in the tis-
sues rather than in the circulation,as a result of
endotoxin exposure; they include nuclear swelling,
chromatin dissociation and nucleareosinophilia(Fig-
ure 5.3l). These changes are more often appreciated in
tissue andfluidsamples,andareonlyrarelyseeninthe
circulationinbacteraemia/septicaemia.
Extreme neutrophilia
Markedlyelevated neutrophil counts are againseen in
a widevarietyof disease situations,andhavebeen
associated with poor prognosis in both dogs and cats.
Extremeneutrophiliaswhere thereisamarkedleft shift
have been described as leukaemoid reactions,be-
cause of the presence of immature cells.This term is
5.6
A leucoerythroblasticbloodpicture ina dog
misleading,andeitherextremeneutrophiliaorextreme
with IMHA.There sred cellagglutination,and
most of thered cells thathave agglutinated are
neutrophilic leucocytosis is preferred. The absolute
spherocytes.There isa stronglyregenerativered cell
numbers thatconstitute anextremeneutrophilia are
response,withreticulocytes andnormoblasts,anda
controversial,buta totalWBCcount>50x10°/l,with
similarlyregenerativemyeloidresponse,withband
>50%neutrophils,has been suggested for dogs and
neutrophils and also band-like monocytes.(May-
cats(Lucroy andMadewell,1999,2001).The causes
Grunwald-Giemsa stain;original magnification X400.)
of extreme neutrophilia are summarized inFigure 5.7.
All diseases that cancause extremeneutrophiliascan
Toxicchange
also causelessmarked neutrophilia.
Toxic change refers to the morphological abnormali-
ties (Figure 5.3g-k) seen in neutrophils in severe
inflammatorydisease,especiallyseverebacterial in-
Neutropenia
fections,and in IMHA.These changes occur in the
Neutropenia is generally a result of:
bonemarrowpriortoreleaseand are associatedwith
enhanced neutrophil turnoverandreducedmaturation
Overwhelming demand and increasedmigration
time,asaresult of intense stimulation of granulopoi-
from circulation to tissues
esis.Some drugs and toxinscan cause similarmorpho-
Decreased survival of cells
logical changes. Toxic changes include:
Reduced or ineffective granulopoiesis.
Cause
Examples of disease processes
Mechanism of neutrophilia
Recognition factors
Severe localized
Pyometra:pyothorax;peritonitis;
Extreme demand for neutrophils
Compatible clinical signs.Toxicchange in
pyogenic infections
abscess
as disease processnotcontrolled
neutrophils.Significant etshift
Other infectious
Parasitic(e.g.Dirofilaria);
Extreme demand for neutrophils
Compatible clinical signs.Radiographic,
diseases
Rickettsial(Ehrlichia);Hepatozoon;
as disease process not controlled
cytologicaland polymerase chainreaction
Fungal
(PCR)findings
5.7
Causes of extreme neutrophilia in dogs and cats.(continues)
63
Chapter5Disorders of leucocytes
Examples of disease processes
Mechanism of neutrophilia
Recognition factors
Cause
Immune-mediated haemolytic
Non-specifi stimulationof
Compatible clinical signs:
Immune-mediated
granulopoiesis(IMHA,MT).
IMHA:markedlyregenerative anaemia
disease
anaemia(IMHA);immune-mediated
Response toinflammation.Tissue
spherocytsispossiblyutoagglutinatn
thrombocytopenia (IMTP);immune-
necrosis due to hypoxia (IMHA),
IMTP:profound thrombocytopeniaflow
mediated polyarthritis(IMPA)
thrombosis
cytometryanti-plateletantbodypositive
(see Chapter6)
IMPA:apprpriate join fluidcytology (see
Chapter 22)
Tissue necrosis in largemass
Compatible clinical signs(mass lesion)
Neoplasia
Any solid tumour
lesions.Possible productionof
colony-stimulating factorsbythe
tumour
Trauma;infection;neoplasia;
Response to inflammation at site
Clinical signsof theprimary disease
Tissuenecrosis
vascularocclusion(torsions,
of necrosis
thrombosis,tumour emboli)
Neoplastic transformation of
Left shit.Aberrant cels.Thrombocytopenia.
Chronic granulocytic
committed mature granulocyte
Myeloid extramedullaryhaematopoiesis in
leukaemia
multiple sites
Leucocyte adhesion deficiency
Continueddemand forneutrophils
Breed.Demonstrableneutrophildysfunction
Neutrophil dysfunction
(lrish Setters)
as pathogens not eliminated due
to neutrophil dysfuntion
5.7
(continued) Causes of extreme neutrophilia in dogs and cats.
Overwhelming demand is most common in severe
reactions),andothercell linesmaybeaffected.There
bacterial infections, such as pyometra, peritonitis or
is also a fourth, less common, type of neutropenia
caused by shift from the circulating to marginating pool.
pyothorax. In these cases, toxic change and a degen-
This is a transient cause of neutropenia in the first
erative left shift are common, and there are compatible
minutes to hours of endotoxic or anaphylactic shock.
clinical signs. Reduced granulopoiesis is due either to
bone marrow disease or to drug toxicity (cytotoxic
The causes of neutropenia and features that help
 drug-related myelosuppression or idiosyncratic drug
differentiate them, are summarized in Figure 5.8.
Examplesof disease process
Mechanism of neutropenia(s)
Recognition factors
Cause
Peracute bacterial
Endotoxic or septic shock;
Overwhelming demand/decreased
Left shift(maybe degenerative).Toxic change.
peritonitis;pyometraaspiration
survival
Appropriate clinical signs
infections
pneumonia;acute salmonellosis
Heat stroke; septic shock
Overwhelming demand/decreased
Appropriate clinical signs
Extreme pyrexia
survival duetosystemicinflammatory
response
Shift from CNP to MNP
Transient(minutestohours).Mayresolve or
Initial period of
neutropeniamaypersistduetoincreased
endotoxicor
demand if endotoxaemic
anaphylactic shock
Feline leukaemia virus(FeLV);
Reducedorineffective granulopoiesis.
Appropriate virological results(see Chapter 26).
Retroviral infection
felineimmunodeficiency virus
FeV:mtratti
FeLV:otherhaematologicalabnormalities
immune-mediatedaetiologyin some
common,speciallyanaemia(non-regenerative,
(FIV)
cases,mydyasticm
possiblymacrocytic)occasional pancytopenia.
leukaemias.FiV:disturbanceof
Neutrpniamyetransintristr
myeloid progenitor growth
FIV:non-regenerative anaemialymphopenia
common.Neutropeniaoftenmildand transient in
clinical cases
Increased consumption(endotoxaemia,
Compatile history andclinicalsinsProfd
Parvoviral infection
Feline panleucopenia virus;
gastrointestinaldisease).Viral
degenerativeleft shitwithearlyand aberrant
canine parvovirus
cytotoxicitytohaemopoieticstemcells.
precursors
Ineffectiveneutrophilproduction
5.8
Causes of neutropenia in dogs and cats.(continues)
64
Chapter5Disordersof leucocytes
Cause
Examples of disease process
Mechanism of neutropenia(s)
Recognition factors
Myelodysplastic
Myelodysplastic syndrome;
Inefective granulopoiesis
Non-specificlinicalsigns.Othercytopenias（often
disease
refractory cytopenia
anaemiapeciallycats)Mrphologicalevidnce
ofdisturbedmaturationingranulocytandothr
cellines.Diagnosisrequiresbonemarrow
evaluation.Mayprogresstomyeloid leukaemia.
MaybeassociatedwithFeLVinfection
Leukaemia
Acute lymphoblasticleukaemia;
Reduced/ineffectivegranulopoiesis
Non-pecificclinical sisrexia
acute myeloid leukaemia (less
due to marrow infiltration by tumour
petechialhamorrhagesdiseminatd
severeneutropeniawith chronic
cells
intravascularcoagulation(DIC),paraneoplastic
leukaemias)
syndromes.Thrombocytopenia.Mild anaemia.
Circulating abnormalcells.Bonemarrowrequired
fordiagnosis
Myelophthisis/
Leukaemia (see above);
Reduced/ineffective granulopoiesis
Signs of uderlying dseasNnpicliial
myelofibrosis
metastaticneoplasia;
due tomarrow infitrtionby non-
signs.Othercytopenias.Bonemarowrequired for
myelofibrosis/osteopetrosis;
haemopoieticcells
diagnosis.N.B.Myelofibrosis in dogs is
occasionally granulomatous
characterizdyn-egenerativ anamind
disease
significant other cytopenias are uncommon.
Myelofibrosisincatsisoftenassociated withFeLV
infection,and neutropeniaisalso common
Cytotoxicdrug
Virtuallyall cytotoxicagents
Targetingofcytotoxiceffecttorapidly
History of recent cytotoxicdrug administration.
therapy
(L-asparaginase not
dividingcells inthemarrow
Pyrexialinasif
myelosuppressive,and
thrombocytopenia.Left shift and toxic change as
vincristine mildly)
recover.Usuallyoccurs5-7daysafterdrug
administrationandresolvesin2472hours
Idiosyncraticdrug
Oestrogen;chloramphenicol;
Toxicitytoprogenitorandcommitted
Oestrogentoxicityproducesinitianeutrophiia
reactions
phenylbutazone;
cellsat any level.lmmune-mediated
then neutropenia,thrombocytopenia and anaemia.
cephalosporins;many others
component suspected formany drugs
Othersmayaffect onlyneutrophilsorcause
pancytopenia(aplasticanaemia).Maybe
reversibleorirreversible
Chediak-Higashi
Autosomalrecessivedisorder in
Impairedreleaseofneutrophils from
Breed.Hpigmntatinf skinhair.
syndrome(rare)
Persiancats
themarrow.Otherfactors
Increasedsusceptibilitytobacterialinfections
(neutrophil dysfunction)
Cyclic
Autosomal recessive,grey
Possible defect inG-CSFpost-receptor
Otherwhitcelatltandretiulocytecout
haemopoiesis in
Collies
signal transduction
may alsofluctuatecyclicallyReboundneutrophilia
grey Collies(rare)
after 2-4 days of neutropenia
Immune-mediated
Idiosyncratic drugreaction.Primary
Noothercytopenias.Demonstrable antineutrophil
neutropenia(rare)
immune-mediateddestruction.
antibodies(flowcytometry).(Responseto steroids)
Secondary immune-mediated
destruction
Hereditary
Reported inGiantSchnauzers
Giant Schnauzers:selective
Ageandbreedfamilyhistory.GiantSchnauzers:
neutropenia(rare)
and Collies (both autosomal
malabsorption of vitaminB12
concurrent anaemia
recessive)
5.8
(continued) Causes of neutropenia in dogs and cats.
Neutrophil dysfunction
neutrophils and eosinophils.Affected cats have bleed-
Neutrophil dysfunction maybehereditary or acquired.
ing tendencies due toplatelet dysfunction.They have
Hereditary neutrophil dysfunction hasbeenreported in
lowto normal neutrophil counts,and the neutrophils
lrish Setters (leucocyte adhesion deficiency,LAD),
show impaired chemotaxis andbacterial cell killing.
Weimeraners(oxidative metabolic disorder) and
Acquired neutrophil dysfunction is probably quite
Dobermanns (defect in bacterial cell killing). These
commonly seen in small animals but is largely unrecog-
diseases canbe confirmedon thebasisof neutrophil
nized.The most studied occurrence is in diabetes
functiontests(withappropriatecontrols)and,inthecase
mellitus in dogs, where reduced neutrophil bactericidal
ofLAD,bytheabsenceofCD11bandCD18expression.
activity and impaired adhesion,migration andphago
Chediak-Higashi syndrome is an inherited auto-
cytosis occur.The degree of adhesion correlates in-
somal recessive disorderof themicrotubules and gran-
verselywithglucoselevels,sothemorepoorlycontrolled
ules inleucocytes andothercells,reportedinsmoke-blue
the diabetes,theless able the neutrophils are to func-
Persian cats with yellow-green irises. Haematologically,
tion.Reduced adherence capacity has not yet been
abnormallylarge eosinophilicgranulesare seenin
demonstrated indiabeticcats.Defective chemotaxis
65
Chapter 5Disorders of leucocytes
andreducedbacterial killing havebeenreported incats
withfelineleukaemiavirus(FeLV)infection,and defec
tive chemotaxis infeline infectious peritonitis.Neoplasia
is also a recognized cause of neutrophil dysfunction in
humans,but this hasnot been studied indogs andcats.
Lastly,glucocorticoidsresultinimpairedneutrophilfunc-
tioninhumansbut,again,thishasnotbeendocumented
in smallanimals.
（6)
Otherhereditaryneutrophil abnormalities
iteddisorderreportedinDomesticShorthaircats andin
dogs. The homozygous form is lethal, and in hetero-
zygotes granulocytes fail to lobulate from band to
segmented forms, so there is a persistent left shift.
These unsegmented neutrophils appear to have nor-
malfunction.Megakaryocytes arealso hyposegmented.
Cyclic haemopoiesis,leucocyte adhesion deficiency
d
andBirmancatneutrophilgranulationare otherheredi-
tary abnormalities.
Cytoplasmicinclusions
The cytoplasm of neutrophils may contain abnormal
granules,vacuoles,organismsandvariousotherinclu-
sions,notofall whichareassociatedwithdiseasestates.
 Dohle bodies and toxic granulation are associated
with toxic change (see above and Figure 5.3). The
neutrophils of Birmancatsmaycontain similargranules,
e
whicharemore azurophilic,butarenormal in thisbreed.
Both dogs and cats with genetic defects in mucopoly-
Eosinophils have a segmented nucleuswith
5.9
only two or three lobes,and coarse eosinophilic
saccharidemetabolismresulting inlysosomal storage
cytoplasmic granules.(a,b,c) Canine eosinophils have
  se     s
widelyvarying numbersof roundvariablysizedgranules.
neutrophils (and large abnormal basophil granules).
(d, e)Feline eosinophils have smallrod-shaped orangy
Cytoplasmicvacuolationmaydevelopinneutrophils
pink granules,which areverynumerous and uniform.
inEDTA;thesevacuolesare clear and fewinnumber,
(May-Grunwald-Giemsa; original magnification X1000.)
and are not as pronounced orfoamy'as those seen in
toxic change (see Figure 5.3). Vacuolation has been
pink granules are very numerous and uniform (Figure
associatedwithhighdosesofchloramphenicoland
5.9). These granules contain an arsenal of preformed
phenylbutazone,and subtlevacuolationmaybeseen
toxins.Background cytoplasm is lightly basophilic.
incholesteryl ester storage disease.
Eosinophils areimportant defenders againstpara-
Infectious agents are sometimes seen within
sites,particularlyhelminths,andmediat inflammatory
neutrophils:these include Ehrlichia canis,E.ewingii,
reactions.Additionally,they are often theeffectorcell
Histoplasmacapsulatum,HepatozooncanisandLeish-
of host tissue damage in allergic disease. Like
mania donovani (see Chapter 27).However,the sen-
neutrophils,theyhave a marrowstoragepool and a
sitivityofmicroscopicdetectionfordiagnosisisgenerally
shortcirculating half-lifebut,ulikeneutrophils,thre
low.It is veryunusual to seebacteria within circulating
isa large tissuepool ofeosinophilsinnormal animals.
neutrophils,except in a septicaemic crisis.
They congregate in the loose connective tissues of
Canine distemper inclusions may be seen in
organs vulnerable to entry by pathogens:the skin,the
dogs either following vaccination or after natural
respiratory tract and the gastrointestinal tract.Because
infection:these arehomogenously pink-magenta
eosinophils normallyrepresent only a small percent-
roundish structures.
ageof thecirculating granulocytes,a500-celldifferen-
Haemosiderin granules have been observed in the
tialcountisrecommendedforaccuratedetermination
neutrophils of dogsfollowing blood transfusion:their
of numbers.
significance is unknown.
Eosinophilia
Eosinophils
There are very many potential causes of eosinophilia,
The eosinophil is a striking cell, slightly larger than a
particularlyincats:these aresummarized inFigure
neutrophil,with a segmented nucleus with only two or
5.10.As eosinophils arereally tissue cells,local eosi-
three lobes,and coarse eosinophilic cytoplasmicgran-
nophilic inflammation is not always accompanied by
ules.In the dog,these granules areround andvariably
circulatingeosinophiliaInaddition,the degreeofosi
sized,andnumbersareveryvariableccasinalll
nophiliaisvariable,andisnotindicativeof thedisease
one or two very large granules are seen within a cell
process. Paraneoplastic eosinophilias are particularly
(Figure 5.9). In the cat, the smallrod-shaped orangey
66
Chapter5Disordersofleucocytes
node andsmall intestine aremajorsitesof infiltration.
Disease process
Diagnosis relies upon exclusion of the causes of
secondary eosinophilia. Differentiation of idiopathic
Parasitic
HES incats fromchroniceosinophilicleukaemia
Ectoparasites*pulmonary(Aelurostronglyus,Angiostrongylus);
(CEL)isdifficult,ifnotimpossible,asbotharecharac
heartworm（Dirofilaria);nteric(Giardiacoccidiaascarids）
terizedbyeosinophilichyperplasiainthebonemar-
Allergic
row and eosinophilicinfiltration ofotherorgans.It
hasbeen suggested that abnormal eosinophilprecur-
Feline asthma*
sor morphology and concurrent anaemia suggest
Eosinophilic bronchopenumonopathy(dogs)*
CEL.In any case,the prognosis is similarly grim for
Flea allergy dermatitis*
both,and theymayrepresentvariantsof thesame
Eosinophilic granuloma complex(cats)*
disease.ltiscontroversialwhether eosinophilic leuk-
Atopy(dogs)*
aemia occurs in the dog.
Food hypersensitivity*
Inflammatory
Eosinopenia
Eosinopenia isa relative term asmanyreference
Inflammatoryboweldisease(eosinophilicenteritis)*
intervalsextendtozero,butit maybeseen inacute
Eosinophilicmyositis*
infections,nresponsetocorticosteroids andaspartf
Panosteitis
the stressleucogram.Corticosteroidsinhibiteosinophil
Focal inflammation
release frombone marrowand alsopromoteseques-
Lower urinary tract disease (cats)
tration of eosinophils in tissues.
Rhinitis/sinusitis
Eosinophilic granulomacomplex(cats)
Basophils
Steatitis
The basophil is larger than the neutrophil (similar to
Neoplastic
eosinophilandmonocyte)withalong,mildlylobulated,
ribbon-like nucleus.In the dog,unevenly scattered
Mast cell tumour(disseminated/intestinal)*
dark purplish cytoplasmic granules are seen against a
Lymphoma
pale grey-blue cytoplasm(Figure 5.11).In the cat,the
Myeloproliferativediseaseeosinophilicleukaemiahypereosinophilic
round to oval granules aremuch denserand tend to
syndrome(cats)
pack the cell: these stain less intensely with Ro-
Miscellaneous tumours
Infectious
a pink to orange tint (Figure 5.11).
Basophils are involved in allergic disease and
Feline panleucopenia virus
intheimmuneresponse tosome parasites.Basophils
Feline infectious peritonitis
also participate with eosinophils in inflammatory
Toxoplasmosis
Upperrespiratory tract infection
Pyometra
Miscellaneous
Hypoadrenocorticism(dogs)*
Chronicrenal failure (cats)
Cardiac disease (cats)
Immune-mediated skin disease
Others
(a
(b)
Causes of eosinophilia in cats and dogs. The
5.10
more frequent causes are asterisked.
commonincats,and maybeassociatedwithmany
tumours,including lymphoma.lnsomediseases,there
maybe tissueinfiltrationaswellaseosinophilia,anda
resultant hypereosinophilic syndrome.This is reported
in feline(and human) intestinal T-celllymphomas,and
ismediatedbyexcessiveproductionof thecytokine
(c)
interleukin5by the neoplastic Tcells(Barrs et al.,
2002;Cave et al.,2004).
5.11
Basophils.(a) Canine basophil and neutrophil.
Hypereosinophilic syndrome (HES) is character-
The basophil (on the right) is larger than the
izedbyapersistent,marked,predominantlymature
neutrophil and has a long mildly lobulated ribbon-like
nucleus.(b) Canine basophil with unevenly scattered dark
eosinophilia,eosinophilic infiltration of multiple tis-
purplish cytoplasmic granules against a pale grey-blue
sues.Mostcases are idiopathic,withnounderlying
cytoplasm.(c)Feline basophil, showing much more
cause,andidiopathicHES is uncommonincats and
densely packed oval grey-lavender granules.(May-
extremelyrare indogs.lncats,bonemarrow,lymph
Grunwald-Giemsa;original magnification X1000.)
67
Chapter5Disordersof leucocytes
reactions,and theymay also have roles in delayed
Mononuclear cells
hypersensitivity,haemostasis and lipolysis.Like
neutrophils and eosinophils, they have a marrow
Monocytes
storage pool and a short circulating half-life.In tis-
The monocyte appears larger than a neutrophil;
sues, they may survive up to 2 weeks. Because
although the cells are similar in size,in a smear
basophils normallyrepresent onlya tinypercentage
the monocyte adheres more to the glass and be-
of the granulocytes,accurate counts can only be
comes more flattened.It has a variably shaped
determinedbycounting thousandsof cells orbyusing
nucleus (round,oval,bean to dumbbell,bi-or multi-
directcountingmethods(haemocytometer,seeChap-
lobed)withreticular or lacy chromatin.Cytoplasm is
ter3) and special stains (toluidine blue or histamine
relatively abundant andblue-grey incolourwith a
immunocytochemical stains).
ground glass appearance and occasional finepink/
Basophilia tends to echo eosinophilia, and is
magenta granules (canine are more granular than
most often due to allergicdisease orparasitism;it
feline monocytes)(Figure 5.13).Vacuolationinblood
isoccasionally seen in inflammatoryhaemograms.
samples is usually an in vitro change butcan also
Dirofilariaimmitisinfectionisanimportantcause
reflect increased phagocytic activity.Cells may
inNorthAmerica.Basophilia may alsobe seen in
haverather irregularcytoplasmicboundariesand
animals with mast cell neoplasia,and is a common
appearroundorslightlyangular,orevenhavelittle
finding in humanswith leukaemia andmyeloprolifera-
projections orpseudopodia. It can be difficult to differ-
tivedisorders.Basophilic leukaemia has been re-
entiatea toxicbandneutrophil fromamonocyte:
ported in cats and dogs, and may be associated with
monocytes that have band-shaped nuclei usually
hyperhistaminaemia.
have rounded,knob-or dumbbell-shaped ends(Fig-
Basopeniaisrarelyappreciated,butcanbecaused
ure5.13h).
by corticosteroids.
Themonocyteis the circulatingprecursorof the
macrophage,and circulates for only a short time
Mast cells
(approximately 8 hours in the cat) before migrating
Mast cells are not seen in the circulation inhealthy
into the tissues. There is no storage poolof monocytes,
animalsbutmaybeseeninfrequently in inflammatory
or neoplastic conditions.They are round cells with a
circulating pools. The tissue pool is sizeable, and
central round to oval nucleus,which may stain pale
residentmacrophages innormal tissuehave avery
blue,but is often at leastpartially obscured by the
long lifespan(up toyears),while those recruited in
variablysized,red-to-purplegranulesinthecytoplasm
inflammation anddisease aremuch shorter lived.
(Figure 5.12). Mast cells are essentially tissue cells,
Macrophages,along withneutrophils and naturalkiller
and haveimportant roles inallergicand otherinflam-
cells,are thefirst lineofdefenceintheinnateimmune
matory responses,where they interact with other
response. They present antigen to lymphocytes to
leucocytes.lfpresentinthecirculation,mastcellsona
initiate the adaptiveimmuneresponse,and secrete
blood smeartend to accumulate at thefeathered edge,
cytokines and chemical mediators of inflammation.
as they are large cells.
Monocytes/macrophages also phagocytose patho-
gens,deadorinfectedcells,cellscoatedwithantibod
5.12
Canine mast cell.
ies,and foreign material. Macrophages within the
Thisisaround
bone marrowprovide an essential supporting rolefor
cell witha central round-to-
haemopoiesis.Monocytes/macrophages are essen-
oval nucleus,partially
tialforlife,and,togetherwithspecializedmacrophages
obscured by thevariably
in some tissues,form the mononuclearphagocyte
sizedred-to-lilacandpurple
granules in the cytoplasm.
system (MPS).
(Rapi-DiffIl;original
Monocytosis is traditionally associated with
magnification x1000.)
chronic inflammation andmayaccompany neu-
trophilia in these cases. However, monocytosis 
may alsobeseenin acute inflammatoryresponses
andoverall isaninconsistent findingininflamma-
Mast cellsmay be seen in the circulation ina
tory diseases. It is common in immune-mediated
varietyofnon-neoplasticand neoplasticconditions,
disease and in disease processeswhere there is
and are oftenfound in inflammatory conditions,ac-
tissue necrosis,e.g.where there is a large solid
companying an inflammatory leucogram.Non-
tumouror tumourswithareasthathaveoutgrown
neoplasticand neoplasticmastcellscannotbereadily
the blood supply.Occasionally,monocytosis may
differentiatedmorphologically.The examination of a
be seen in neutropenicanimals,when itis believed
to be a 'compensatory' response, and a rebound
cutaneousmastcell tumours isnotrecommended,as
monocytosisis common in animalsrecovering from
thepresence of mast cells hasnot been shown to
neutropenia.Monocytosis is also part of a stress
correlate with stage or prognosis, and very high
leucogram, but is not always present in dogs and is
numbers of mastcellsmaybeseen in non-neoplastic
not generally observed in cats. Finally, monocyto-
disorders.Circulating mast cellnumbers high enough
sis may be seen in monocytic or myelomonocytic
tocauseanoverall leucocytosismeritfurtherinvesti-
leukaemias,where counts arelikelygreatlytoex-
gation andbonemarrowsampling.
ceed the normal range.
68
Chapter5Disordersofleucocytes
(a)
(b)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(e)
5.13
but can also reflect increased phagocytic activity.In (h) amedium-sized lymphocyte (left isbeside amonocyte with aband-
shaped nucleus with rounded ends.((a,c.f,g)Rapi DiffIl,(b,d,e,h)May-Grunwald-Giemsa; original magnification X1000.)
Lymphocytes
The pathways of cell activation and regulation are
highly coordinated,and activatedTcells orchestrate
Lymphopoiesis
the antigen-specificimmuneresponse through a com-
Mostlymphopoiesisoccursintheperipheral lymphoid
plex web of intercellular signals and interactions.Much
tissues in response to antigenic stimulation:there are
of lymphocyte production occurs in the periphery in 
nolymphoid germinal centres in normal marrow,and
response to these signals.
lymphoid cells makeup only5%or lessof themarrow
haematopoieticcells.Primitivelymphocytes(pre-Tcells)
Distribution
Mostof the lymphocytes in the circulation are small
migrate from thebone marrow and undergo develop-
lymphocytes.hesecellshave denselystaining,roundt
ment in the thymiccortex(and some other peripheral
lymphoid sites) into T cells. Pre-B cells develop into B
slightly ovalindented nuclei and very scant, pale blue
cells in the marrow,then migrate to the peripheral
cytoplasm,which appears to extendonlypart wayround
the nucleus (Figure 5.14).The nuclei have smudged
lymphoid tissues.Immunologically,Tcells are defined
by the surface expression of a T cellreceptor complex
chromatin and nonucleoliA few slightly larger(up to
about thesizeofaneutrophil)medium lymphocytes,with
called CD3,while B cells express a Bcell receptor
complex called CD79a. These two complexes, and
morecytoplasm,arealsoanormalfinding,andoccasion
ally cells containing a few reddish granules are seen.
other cell surface expressed markers,are used to
Reactivelymphocytes maybe largerandhave increased
identifyTand Bcell tumoursbyimmunohistochemistry
amounts of intenselybasophiliccytoplasm.Atypical and
and flowcytometry(seebelow).
malignant lymphoblasts may be seen in lymphopro-
Both T and B lymphocytes become activated on
liferativediseases:features of malignancy arediscussed
exposureto appropriately presented antigens.Various
in Chapter20and illustrated inFigure5.14.
subsets of Tcells havebeenidentified：
Blood acts as a transport system forlymphocyte
T helper cells (Th, CD4+) mediate cell-mediated
redistribution andrecirculation,butonly5%of thetotal
immunity and humoral immunity.Th cells arevital
body lymphocyte pool is circulating in the blood. This
to theprocessbywhichactivatedBlymphocytes
doesnot mean that lymphocytes are static cells in the
undergo transformation to lymphoblasts, then 
tissues,and unlike othercells theyre-enter the circula-
plasma cells,which produce antigen-specific
tion aftermigrating into the peripherallymphoid tissues:
immunoglobulin
there is a continuous recirculation of lymphoid cells
Regulatory T cells (Treg, CD25+; another group 
throughout the body.Lymphoid cells drain from tissues
of CD4+ cells) are generally immunosuppressive
(via afferent lymphatics) to the regional lymph nodes,
T cells required for maintenance of self-tolerance
then(via efferent lymphatics) enter the thoracic duct.
and control of immune function.Activation of
The lymphoid cellsenterthe circulation via thethoracic
these cells is thought to be part of pathogenesis
duct,and leave the circulation in response to adhesion
during feline immunodeficiency virus infection
factors expressed in vascular endothelium.This
(Valenkamp et al.,2004)
recirculation,and a continued ability to mitose,are
CytotoxicTcells(CD8+cells)andnatural killer
uniquefeaturesoflymphoid cells.The circulatinglympho-
(NK) cells (morphologically large granular
cytes consist of various populations but, in normal ani-
Iymphocytes) mediate cell kiling.
mals, most are long-lived recirculating memory T cells.
69
Chapter5Disordersofleucocytes
(d)
(a)
(g)
(i)
Lymphocytes.(a) Normal canine small lymphocyte,with very scant blue cytoplasm that appears to extend only
5.14
absence of nucleoli.(c) Late normoblast(nucleated red blood cell).This is NoT lymphoid and is smaller,with an
eccentricallyplaced nucleus and clumped chromatin.(d,e,f)Medium lymphocytesmaybeup to about the sizeof a
neutrophil;occasionallycells contain a fewreddish granules.(g) Largereactive lymphocyte with increased amounts of
intenselybasophiliccytoplasm.(h) Large atypical neoplasticcells from a case of lymphoid leukaemia.(i) Large
lymphoblastsshowing featuresofmalignancy:cytoplasmicbasophilia,coursenuclearchromatin,prominentnucleoliand
nuclear moulding.(May-Grunwald-Giemsa;original magnification(a-f,h)X1000,(g)X400.)
Loss of lymph, e.g. in chylothorax or lymphangiectasia,
Lymphocytosis
can depress circulating lymphocyte numbers. More
Lymphocytosismaybephysiological,mediatedbyadren-
canine and feline lymphoma patients show lympho-
alinerelease(especiallyin cats);counts maybe>20x
10°%1. Young dogs and cats tend to have higher lympho-
penia than show lymphocytosis; this may reflect either
cyte counts than adult animals.Lymphocytosis may
stressorblockageof normal lymphaticflowand failure
of cells to reach the circulation.Immunosuppressive
drug therapy reduces circulating lymphocyte numbers.
immune stimulation.Mild lymphocytosis,or a normal
lymphocyte count despite medical stress,is acommon
Rarely,animalswithprimaryimmunodeficienciesmay
finding in hypoadrenocorticism.In lymphoproliferative
be lymphopenic (but counts may also be normal).
diseases, either lymphocytosis or lymphopenia maybe
Reactive lymphocytes
seen;in lymphoma,lymphopenia is more common.
 Reactive lymphocytes are antigenically stimulated
Lymphopenia
lymphocytesthatare occasionallyseenin the circulation
Lymphopenia is most commonly seen as a result of
in a very wide range of conditions. They may be large,
and nuclei have clumped chromatin (but no prominent 
exogenousorendogenouscorticosteroids,whichcause
a shift of lymphocytes from the circulation, and also
nucleoli and a scallioped outline. These cells have
lymphocytolysis.This is a commonfeature of the stress
increased amounts of intenselybasophilic cytoplasm
haemogram.However, in acute inflammation, lympho-
and may have a perinuclear Golgi zone (Figure 5.14f).
penia may not simply be a ‘stress' response but may
result from increased margination of lymphocytes to
Abnormal lymphocytes
the site of inflammation and to lymph nodes, coupled
The presence of circulating abnormal cells is much
with reduced migration out of lymph nodes. Lympho-
moresuggestiveof lymphoproliferative disease than
penia is alsoa feature of the acute phase of many viral
any changein lymphocyte count.Thefeatures associ-
infections,andmaybeseeninsepsisorendotoxaemia.
ated with malignancy are discussed in Chapter 20 and
70
Chapter5Disordersof leucocytes
illustrated inFigure5.14.In lymphoproliferative dis-
eases,abnormallymphoidcellsonbloodsmearexam-
Features suggestive
Clinical manifestations
ination may either reflect escape from cells from
of leukaemia
neoplasticperipheral lymphoid tissue into the circula-
Neutropenia
Sepsis
tion(socalled'overspill'),orbone marrowinvolvement.
Thrombocytopenia
Petechial and ecchymotichaemorrhages,
Some clinical pathologists use the term 'overspill leuk-
melaena,epistaxis
aemia'whenever they see increased or aberrant
lymphoid cells in the circulation of patients with lymph-
Leucocytosis
Possibly hyperviscosity syndrome:bleeding
oma:this is a misleading term as the circulating cells
diatheses;ocular changes;neurological
may reflect marrow involvement,especially where
signs;polyuria/polydipsia;thromboembolic
counts are high.
disease
Haematological features of leukaemia,and the
5.15
clinical consequences of these abnormalities.
Leukaemias
Lymphoproliferativedisorders includelymphoma,lym-
Chronic leukaemias occur when the neoplastic
phoid leukaemias and plasma cell myeloma,while
transformation occurs in either a stem cell or later cell
myeloproliferativedisordersencompassmyeloid,mono-
but progeny retain a strong tendency to differentiate.
cytic,megakaryocytic and erythroid leukaemias (i.e.all
Although proliferation is uncontrolled, the cells are
non-lymphoid leukaemias)and myelodysplastic syn-
morphologicallywelldifferentiated(butoften arefunc-
dromes.Leukaemiaisaneoplasticconditionofthebone
marrow,in which neoplastic cells arising from either
insidious onset of less severe clinical signs, and less
lymphoid ornon-lymphoidhaematopoieticstemcellsor
profound cytopenias, but may still present acutely.
theirprogenyundergoclonalexpansion,withorwithout
cellulardifferentiation.Frequently,theleukaemic cells
Acute leukaemia
 are released into the peripheral blood, often in large
Acutelymphoblasticleukaemia(ALL) ismore common
numbers,andmayalsoinfiltrateotherorgans,sucha
thanacutemyeloid leukaemia(AML)inboth the dog
the liver, spleen and peripheral lymph nodes. Leuk-
and cat.In either type,animalspresent with acute
aemia causes clinical signsbyfourmain mechanisms:
 onset lethargy, malaise, anorexia and weakness. Clini-
cal signs include pallor, hepatosplenomegaly, mild 
Failureofnormalhaemopoiesis
lymphadenopathy, pyrexia, shifting lameness and,
Organ dysfunction due to infiltrationbyleukaemic
occasionally,central nervous system signs.Marked
cells
neutropenia and thrombocytopenia are common and
Hyperviscosity due to very high circulating
there are usually abnormal cells in circulation:if counts
numbers of aberrant cells
areveryhighhyperviscositymayresult.Bone marrow
Paraneoplasticsyndromes,such as
aspirates have >30% neoplastic blast cells (>40% for
hypercalcaemiaorimmune-mediated disease.
lymphoblasts) andoften the marrowisvirtuallyablated
by tumourcells,resultingindepletionof megakaryoctes,
Leukaemia may be acute or chronic.Acute
and both erythroid andmyeloid series (including the
leukaemiasoccur when neoplastic transformation
storage pool) (Figure 5.16).
occursatthestemcel/committedblaststage,andthe
 malignant cells have little differentiation potential.
The neoplastic cells are poorly differentiated,and
proliferaterapidlyandinanuncontrolledmanner,with
arrested ordefective maturation.The clinical course
is rapid,and clinical signs are severe.Marrow infiltra-
tion due touncontrolledproliferation of tumour cells
results incrowding of normal marrowelements,com-
petition for nutrients,failure of marrow to elaborate
stimulatory factors and thebuild upof inhibitoryfac-
torsreleased by the neoplastic cells.As a result of
this,normal blood cell production isreduced.Thefirst
manifestationof thisisusuallyneutropenia,because
neutrophils have ahalf-lifeof hours in the circulation,
anda storagepool inthemarrowwhichwillprovide a
supplyforabout5 days.Platelets are also short-lived,
so concurrent thrombocytopenia is common,and
some patients showthrombocytopenia first.Redcells
5.16
Bonemarrowaspiratefrom adogwithacute
havea long circulatinglifespan,soanaemiadevelops
lymphoblastic leukaemia.The marrowhasbeen
ablated by tumour cells,andvirtuallynonormal
much later aspre-existing cells maintain levelsfor
haemopoieticcells are seen.In this field,there are densely
longer.The haemopoietic consequences of leuk-
packed large neoplastic blast cells.These cells show
aemia,and clinical consequences of these,are sum-
features of malignancy(course chromatin,pleomorphic
marized inFigure5.15.
nucleoli, cytoplasmic basophilia,nuclear moulding).
71
Chapter5Disordersof leucocytes
The diagnosis of leukaemia isgenerally straightfor-
Chronicgranulocyticleukaemia
ward whenconcurrent haematology andbonemarrow
Chronic granulocytic leukaemia (CGL) is rare and difi-
are examined, although typing is dificult. The main
cytologicaldifferential diagnosisforacuteleukaemiais
inappetence and weight loss over an insidious course.
bone marrow in the acute stages ofrepopulation,for
There maybehepatosplenomegaly.Haematologyshows
example after chemotherapeuticdrug administration
amassivematureneutrophilia,andbone marrowaspi-
or parvovirusinfection.Generally the clinical history in
rates show marked myeloid hyperplasia.In CGL (and
these caseswould ensure againstconfusionwithleu-
otherchronicmyeloidleukaemias),bonemarrowevalu-
kaemia,and bone marrow sampling is seldom indi-
ation shows<30%blast cells,and blast counts may
cated inthesecases.It canbedifficult todifferentiate
even be normal. Mild dysplastic changes,with mor-
ALLfromstageVlymphomawithbonemarrowinvolve-
phologically abnormal granulocyte precursors,may
ment:criteria are summarized inFigure 5.17.
beseen inthebonemarrow;marrowmore typically
plasia,withnoobviousatypical features,andsodoes
Lymphoma with bone
Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia
not differentiate CGL from areactiveneutrophilia.The
marrowinvolvement
matureneutrophilsmaybehypersegmented,butother-
<40%blasts inmarrow
>40%blasts inmarrow
wise appearnormal,and diagnosisrelies onelimina-
tion of other causes of neutrophilia.
Lowernumberof circulating
Higher number of circulating blasts
blasts
Mild orabsent cytopenias
Severe cytopenias
Myelodysplastic syndromes
Massivelymphadenopathy
Mild tomoderate lymphadenopathy
Myelodysplastic syndromes(MDS)are challengingto
May not be systemically ill
Usually systemicallyill
diagnose,andrelyonexaminationof abonemarrow
5.17
Selectedcriteria toassistdifferentiation of
enced clinical pathologist.The hallmark of MDS is
lymphomawithbonemarrowinvolvementfrom
ineffectivehaemopoiesiswith disturbedmaturation,
acute lymphoblasticleukaemia.
resulting in haematological andbone marrow abnor-
malities.These are a heterogeneous group of condi-
Immunophenotyping can be carried out by flow
tions andinsomecircumstancesmayrepresenta
cytometry(bloodormarrowinEDTA)orbyimmuno-
preleukaemicstate.Haematological featuresinclude
cytochemistry(marrow smears orbiopsy specimens)
non-regenerative anaemia(whichisoccasionallymac-
to identifywhetherthe tumourismyeloidorlymphoid,
rocytic),neutropenia,thrombocytopenia and occa-
and to further subtype the cell of origin in some cases.
sionally monocytosis.On bonemarrowexamination
The biochemical changes seenin acuteleukaemias
there are less than 30%blast cells,and dysplastic
mayreflectorganinfiltration(e.g.raised liverenzymes),
change is seen,often affecting more than one cell
hyperviscosity(azotaemia)and paraneoplastic syn-
line. Cells are morphologically abnormal and matura-
dromes(hypercalcaemiaorhypergammaglobulinaemia
tionmayappeardisorderly.
in lymphoid leukaemias).
Chronic leukaemia
Myelofibrosis
Chronic lymphocyticleukaemia
Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL)usually affects
Myelofibrosis isan increase incollagen and other
middle-aged toold dogs,withamalepredisposition.ltis
fibrous elements in themarrow matrix(see Figure
veryrare in cats.Animals presentvaguely,and signs
4.30). lt is thought to be a reactive marrow response
may wax andwane;anorexia,lethargy，polyuria and
thatcanbe associatedwithmanydiseasesbutoften
polydipsia,mild hepatosplenomegaly,lymphadeno-
the initiating cause is unknown. In humans, mega-
pathy,pallorandpyrexiaarecommon.Lymphocytosis(6
karyocytic disorders are a common cause of myelo-
to>100x10/) isseen,with apopulationofmorphologi-
fibrosis;where these cellsarenot involved,activated
cally normal mature lymphocytes,andmild cytopenias.
monocytes and macrophages have been implicated.
Diagnosisrequires exclusion of other causes of lym-
The aetiopathogenesis ispoorly understood in small
phocytosis, haematology and aspiration or biopsy of
animals.
bone marrow,thoughinasmallproportionofthesecases
Dogs with myelofibrosis usually present with non-
(especiallylargegranularleukaemias) diseasemayorigi-
regenerative anaemia, and it is thought that in many
nate in the spleen.Bone marrow examination must be
casesthereisanimmune-mediated mechanism.They
carriedout asthe circulating populationmay appearmore
present when the anaemiabecomes severe,weeksto
mature than that in themarrow,and diseaserequiring
monthsaftertheinitiatinginsult,whichisseldomiden-
more aggressive management than CLL must be identi-
tified.Myelofibrosis is also associated with some my-
fied,asinappropriate treatmentwillprovokeresistance.
eloidleukaemias,and iscommonincatswithMDSor
Bonemarrowaspiration demonstratesincreasednum-
AML,where theprimary disease dominatespresenta-
bers of smallymphocytes (>30%of nucleated cells in the
tion.FeLV infection or exposure may play a role.
Idiosyncratic drug reactions may also initiate myelo-
decreasederythroid andmyeloid activity.
fibrosis in both species.
72
Chapter 5 Disorders of leucocytes
Beyond thehaemogram:other
Antigen detected
Cellular specificity
evaluations of leucocytes
orclone
Bone marrow aspiration
Canine
Bonemarrowevaluation isrequired todiagnose and
CD3
All Tcells
subtype myelodysplastic and leukaemic diseases, and
CD4
Thelpercellsetrpils
isvery useful in many disease situations(Figure 5.18).
CD5
AllTcells
CD8
CytotoxicTcellsNKcells
Neutropenia
CD11/18
Allleucocytes
Thrombocytopenia
CD11b/CD11c
Granulocytes,monocytes
Pancytopenia
Abnormalimmaturelymphocytesorgranulocytesinthecirculation
CD11d
NKcellcytotoxicTlarge granularlymphocytes
Inexplicablyhighnumbersofanycellineinthecirculation
CD18
Alleucocytes
Non-regenerative anaemia
CD14
Monocytes,macrophages
Lymphoma
Hyperproteinaemia
CD18
Alleucocytes
Hypercalcaemiaofunknownorigin
CD21
Bcells
Pyrexiaof unknown origin
CD25
Suctdsticnaf
Band Tcells,monocytes
Detection of FeLV in discordant cats
CD34
Haemopoietic progenitor cells
CD41
Plateletsmegakaryoyt
Indications for bone marrow sampling in cats
5.18
and dogs.
CD41/CD61
Plateletsmegakaryocty
CD45
Aleucocytes
In normal marrow,themyeloidtoerythroidratio is
CD45RA
Bcellsellsubsetrimitiveblastsftr
approximately 0.75-1.5:1 in dogs, and 1-4:1 in cats.
lineages
Myeloid hyperplasia,and an increase in this ratio,will
CD62
Activated platelets
be seen in any inflammatory response. Where there
CD79a
Bcells
is an ongoing demand for neutrophils,depletion of
the storage pool may be evident, and there may be
MHC classII
Monocytesmacrophages,Bcells
toxic change.
Thy-1
Monocytemarophagesellmls
Sampling of bone marrow and sample handling are
MAC387
Monocytmacrophae,erohils and thir
discussed in Chapter4.
precursors
MPO
Neutrophils and their precursors
Immunophenotypingofleucocytes
Feline
Immunophenotyping is the determination of cell type
by the identification of cell surface markers using
CD3
AllTcells
antibodies.In canine lymphoma,immunophenotyping
CD4
Helper Tcells
is of prognostic significance,as, in general, T cell
CD8
NK cells,T cells
tumours carry a poorer prognosis.Morphological
CD5
All T cells
subtype, based on cytological evaluation, may also
prove to be of prognostic relevance (Ponce et al,
CD11b
Granulocytes,monocytes
2004),and there are alsoestablished clinical prognos-
CD18
Allleucocytes
tic indicators. Immunophenotyping also has a role in
CD21-like
Bcells
prognostication and treatment selectionin leukaemias:
CD41/CD61
Plateletmegakaryocyt
morphological differentiationofacutelymphoidand
myeloidleukaemiasisoftendifficultorimpossible,and
CD45
Alleucocytes
cytochemical stains established in human medicine
MHCclassI
Mnocytemacrophaesl
have not proved useful in cats and dogs (see below).
CL2A
Platelets
Immunophenotyping gives not only a cell ineage, but 
CF2555A
Tcells
also,insomecases,can suggeststageof maturation
arrest and clonal expansion,because some cell sur-
CF26A
Tand Bcells
facemarkers are expressed duringrestrictedphases
FeMy
Maturegranulocytesandmonocytes,mature
ofcell development.
myeloid precursorcells
Immunophenotypingofhaemolymphaticcellsre-
FeEr1,FeEr2
Immature erythroid precursors(60%),mature
liesondetectionofcell surface markersusually as-
erythroid precursors
signed CD (clusters of differentiation) numbers. There
K-1,Q-3
Immature erythroidprecursors
aremore than 150 CDs assigned in human medicine,
K-7
Immature erythroid precursors
butonlyrelatively few currentlyhavedefinedroles in
leucocyte disorders in small animals:selected impor-
Selected markers used for immunophenotyping
tant CDs are summarized in Figure 5.19. In many
5.19
canine and feline blood and bone marrow cells.
laboratories,samples are initially screened for CD3
(Data from Weiss (2003); sources of monoclonal
and CD79atoconfirmlymphoid originandidentify Tor
antibodies are available in thereference.)
73
Chapter5Disordersof leucocytes
Bcell lineage.However,some lymphoid tumours are
investigatedarelabelledwithoneormorefluoro-
negativefor CD3and CD79a;theuseofapanel of
chrome-labelled antibodies (fluorochromes are col-
antibodies will allow identification of further cases of
      
lymphoproliferativediseaseandalsomyeloprolifera-
wavelengthandre-emit it at a higherwavelength).A
tive disease.Some lymphoid tumours are dually posi-
streamof labelled cellsisthendirected through alaser
tivefor CD3 and CD79a;in these cases,theuse of a
beamand the amountof fluorescence and light scatter
panel can help determine thecell oforigin.
patternsarerecorded and analysed by a computer to
Immunophenotyping may be carried out by
produce histograms and dot plotsfromwhich the cell
types present can be identified.Further information
flow cytometry(Figure 5.21).Immunochemical tech-
canbefound atwww.hmds.org.uk/cytometry.htlm and
niquesoftenworkbestonunfixed tissues/smearsbut
http://flowcyt.salk.edu/.FCcanbe used in a variety of
some antibodiesdetectepitopesresistant to the effects
clinical situations:
of fixation and can be used on routine formalin-fixed
tissue,forexample CD3(CD3-12(Serotec)or#A452
To immunophenotype lympho-and
(Dako))and CD79a for typing caninelymphoma.
myeloproliferativediseases,whereitdetects
specific marked antigens on the surface of
the cells
To confirm immune-mediated disease(especially
immune-mediated thrombocytopenia),where it
detects antibodies bound to target cells
Forthedetectionofminimalresidual diseasein
humanleukaemiapatients(not availablefor
small animals).
FCis availableat theUniversityof Cambridge:5-
10ml of EDTA-bloodshouldbesubmitted together
with an unstained air-dried blood smear.FC will con-
firm the cell of origin in a leukaemicpatient,but cyto-
logical bonemarrow evaluation is alsorequired for
accurate diagnosis, treatment planning and prognosti-
5.20
Immunophenotyping leukaemia. This is a buffy
cation,andbonemarrowsamplesshouldbesubmitted
coat smear, from a dog with leukaemia, stained
at the same time.FCcan also be carried outon marrow
with anti-CD3 antibodies.Thebrown staining is apositive
aspirates ineither EDTA orcitrate anticoagulant.
result, indicating that this is a tumour of T cell origin.
(Courtesy of E. Villiers.)
Polymerase chainreaction
PCR tests forinfectious organisms(see Chapter 27)
maybeuseful in caseswhere arthropod-borne infec-
tions are suspected. In addition,PCR from EDTA-
treatedbloodsamplesisused todetectmicroscopic
residual disease in human leukaemia and lymphoma
patients,whereparticular geneticderangementsspe-
cific to neoplastic cells are detected.This technique
hasrecently beenreportedincaninelymphomapatients,
although itsvalue in detectingresidual disease and
relapsehasnotbeen determined(Keller et al.,2004).
Cytochemical tests
Neoplasticcellsoften contain thesame enzymesand
cellularproduct as theirnormal counterparts,and tech-
200
400
009
niqueswhich stainfor thesemay helpidentify the cell
Flow cytometry results (dot plot) from a blood
of origin. However, abnormal cells may have also
5.21
sample,from a dog with acute myeloid
metabolicabnormalitiesthataltertheirstainingcharac-
leukaemia.The concentrated dots in theboxed off area
teristics, and a negative result does not exclude a
(known as the gate)represent blast cells of myeloid origin.
particular lineage.In addition,some of the molecules
The smallcluster in thelower left corner are lymphoid.
stainedforarecommontocellsofdifferentlineages.To
(Courtesy of E.Villiers.)
overcome these difficulties,a panel of stains must be
used (Figure 5.22).
Flowcytometry
Cytochemical analysishasbeenwidelyusedfor
Flow cytometry is agenerictechnology thatcounts and
identificationoforiginof human haemopoietictumours,
but was never well established in small animals. In
clesina flowstream:thistechnologyis usedbymany
both humans and smallanimals,usefulnesshasbeen
automated haematology analysers (see Chapter 3). In
limited dueto thelackof specificstainsfor lymphoid
immunological flow cytometry(FC),the cells to be
cells;whilemanymyeloid tumourscanbeidentified,
74
Chapter5
Disordersof leucocytes
Cytochemical stain
Lymphoid leukaemia
Myeloid leukaemia
Monocytic leukaemia
Peroxidase
Negative
Positiveusually stronglyma
Negative or weakly positive in dogs;
negative in cats)
negativeincats
Negative
Positive (some cells)
Negative
Alkaline phosphatase
Negative
Negative
Positive
Lipase
Usually negative
Positive
Chloroacetate esterase(CAE)(specific
Negative
esterase)
Negative
Positive
Alpha naphthyl butyrate esterase(NBE)
Negative (or focal staining)
(non-specific esterase)
Sudan black
Negative
Positive
Positive in dogs;negative in cats
5.22
Cytochemical testsfor leukaemia,withguidelinesasto typical staining characteristics.Lymphoid cellsgenerally
donot stain with cytochemical stains(though are occasionallypositivewith alkalinephosphatase or alpha
stainnegatively.Resultscanbedifficult to interpret,and theuseofa screeningpanel makessuccessfulidentificationmore
likely,forexamplebypickingupmarkersofbothmyeloidand monocyticcells inmyelomonocytic leukaemia.Forfurther
detailsseeGrindem(200o)andRaskinandValenciano(2000).
negative staining withmyeloid stains does not imply
morphologically similar,butthere is considerable over-
lymphoid origin.In addition,there is often discordance
lapwith red cell size(see Chapter 3).Activated plate-
between cytochemical and immunological diagnoses
lets may have small pseudopodia and may form
(Kheiri et al.,1998) and immunochemistry is,as a
aggregates, which tend tobe dragged to the feathered
single procedure,superior. In human medicine,classi-
edgeof the blood smear.Feline platelets areespecially
fication of leukaemia integrates clinical information,
 prone to aggregation in vitro.
cell morphology, cytochemistry, immunophenotyping,
cytogenetic and molecular genetic diagnostic tech-
5.23
niques.In animals,often onlyclinical information,cell
Platelets.(a) Canine
morphology and immunophenotyping are used.
platelets are
considerably smaller
Functional tests
than red blood cells.
B cellfunctioncanbeassessedtosomeextentby
They are anucleate
quantifying lgG,IgAand lgM,butitisimportant tohave
fragments
containing purplish
age-matched referenceranges or controls.Deficien-
granules.(b) Feline
cies in T cell responses can be identified by assessing
platelets overlap in
response to stimulation in a lymphocyte stimulation(or
size with red blood
blastogenesis) test.
cells.Pseudopodia
Neutrophil dysfunctionmayinvolveabnormalities
are just visible.
in any of the steps inneutrophil activity(adherence,
(May-Grunwald-
chemotaxis and migration, phagocytosis, cytotoxicity),
Giemsa;original
magnification
and ideally all steps should be assessed by carrying
X1000.)
outa panel of tests.Most assays are species-specific,
andrequirerigorousoptimization andqualitycontrol,
andtherearecurrentlynocommerciallyavailabletests
 of neutrophil function for small animals. However, a
variety of assays have been carried out,including
(6
neutrophil adherence,chemotaxis,migration and bac-
terial cellkilling test indogswithdiabetesmellitus,and
in dogs and cats with morphologically abnormal white
Plateletshave a criticalrole inhaemostasis and
bloodcellsorsuspected immunodeficiency syndromes
 maintenance of vascular integrity (see Chapter 6) but 
(Andreasen and Roth,2000).
are also essential for inflammation and wound healing.
These effects are mediated by complex cell-to-cell
interactionsandreleaseofmanysolublemediators
from activated platelets(Gentry,2000).
Platelets
Platelets are produced from megakaryocytes,mainly
The plateletis a small anucleate cytoplasmic fragment.
within thebonemarrow,butalsowithinthepulmonary
In dogs,platelets aregenerally about25-50%of the
and splenicparenchyma.The regulation of thrombo-
diameterofaredcell,withoccasional largercells.The
poiesis is fairlywell characterized,but themechanism
cytoplasm is clear and pale grey with numerous pink-
bywhichplatelets areformed remains unclear.Plate-
purple granules (Figure 5.23). Feline platelets are
letshavea shortcirculatinghalf-lifeand thereisno
75
Chapter 5 Disorders of leucocytes
tissuepool.lfproductionfails,thrombocytopenia de-
Exogenous corticosteroids and other drugs, including
velopswithin5daysindogsandlessincats,wherethe
vincristine, can cause thrombocytosis. Splenectomy
half-life may be as short as 36 hours. Platelets are
causes thrombocytosis by decreasing platelet phago-
phagocytosed by macrophages,mainly in the spleen.
cytosis bymacrophages.Mostcases ofreactive throm-
Plateletcountsfrom automatedanalysersshould
bocytosis in dogs have counts <1000 x 10%/l. In cats,
alwaysbeverifiedbymanual smearexamination see
counts are more variable, and in this species the
Chapters 3 and 6).Mean platelet volume(MPV) is
presence of microcyticred cells can also result in an
reported by someanalysers and maybeusefulindogs,
artefactuallyvastlyincreasedplatelet count.
althoughthepresenceof largeimmatureshiftplatelets
is a better indicatorof increased thrombopoiesis than
Essentialthrombocythaemia
is an overall increase in MPV. In cats, platelet size is
This is a myeloproliferative disorder where there is
veryvariableandlargeplateletsarenotareliable
megakaryocyteproliferationin thebonemarrow and
indicator of increased thrombopoiesis.
excessive,autonomous production of structurally and
functionally abnormal platelets.It is rare in smallani-
Thrombocytopenia
mals,and poorly characterized,but it is well docu-
Thrombocytopenia is discussed in Chapter 6, and
mented inpeople,where there are clearly defined
causes are summarized in Figure 6.18.
criteria for diagnosis. Features reported in animals
include a marked thrombocytosis,anaemia(which
Thrombocytosis
mayberegenerative or non-regenerative) and haem-
There are threemain types of thyrombocytosis:
orrhage or haemolysis.Splenomegaly,due to ex-
tramedullaryhaematopoiesis,iscommon.Bonemarrow
Physiological thrombocytosiscan occur due to
aspirates show megakaryoblast and megakaryocyte
mobilization ofplateletsfrom thesplenicand
hyperplasia,ncreasedplateletbuddingwithsheetsof
pulmonarypools due to epinephrine release or
platelets, erythroid hypoplasia and myeloid hyperpla-
exercise
sia. Diagnosis depends upon meeting defined criteria
Reactive thrombocytosisismostoften a
 and an experienced clinical pathologist should be 
transient,reactiveresponse to anotherprimary
consulted.Thrombocytosis secondary to other causes
diseaseprocess,and is the commonest type of
should be excluded.
thrombocytosis
Plateletdysfunction
Essential thrombocythaemia(primary
thrombocytosis,thromboasthenia,idiopathic
Thrombopathia(orthrombocytopathy) should be sus-
thrombocythaemia) is arare myeloproliferative
pected in animals with bleeding tendencies,but normal
(orslightlyincreased)plateletcounts,coagulationtest
disorder.
results and von Willebrand factorantigen.Diagnosis is
Reactive thrombocytosis
discussed in Chapter 6.Thrombocytopathias may be
This is associated with many conditions;in particular,
inheritedoracquired,and causes aresummarized in
conditions associatedwithperipheral lossofplatelets
Figure 5.24.
(haemorrhage,destruction)often produce a‘rebound
thrombocytosis.Increased thrombopoiesis is also as-
Inherited
 sociated with acute and chronic inflammatory condi-
Cats:Chediak-Higashi syndrome
Dogs:reed-associatedinOtteroundGreatPyreneemrican
neoplasia,drug therapy and splenectomy.In dogs and
cats,reportedneoplasticassociationsincludelymph-
neutropenia)
oma,leukaemia,mastcelltumoursand avarietyof
other solid tumours.Of the inflammatory conditions,
Acquired
 gastrointestinal diseases predominate, and thrombo-
Azotaemia
cytosis may,in part, be a response to blood loss in
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
some cases, as well as a secondary effect of the
Drug-aciatd:nonsteroidalantinflamatorydrus
inflammatory process.lIt is thought cytokines mediate
Dysproteinaemia
thrombocytosis inmostreactive causes,but this has
Ehrlichial infection
not been investigated in small animals.
Hepatopathy
Thrombocytosishasalsobeenassociatedwith
Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia
some endocrinedisorders,includinghyperadrenocor-
ticism,wherehighlevelsofendogenousglucocorticoids
5.24
Examples of causes of platelet dysfunction in
may decreaseplateletphagocytosisbymacrophages.
the dog and cat.
76
Chapter5Disorders of leucocytes
Case examples
Case 1
Signalment
Biochemistry(continued)Result
Referenceinterval
10-year-oldmale neutered Collie cross.
Cholesterol(mmol/)
3.9
3.2-6.5
History
Presumptive diagnosis of immune-mediated skin disease had been
Bile acids (μmol/)
29.4
0-15
madeseveramonthspreviously;treatedwithprednisoloneandazathio
Bilirubin (umol/l)
0.8
0-20
prine.Recenthistory of slowing down andpoor exercise tolerance.
Clinicalexaminationrevealed tachycardia(168bpm）,atappingpuse
What abnormalities are present?
pale mucousmembranes,and petechiae on the gums.
Clinicalpathology data
Haematology
Severen-rgnrativenm
Profound thrombocytopenia
Haematology
Result
Reference interval
Moderate neutropenia
RBC(x1012/)
1.78
5.4-8.0
Lymphopenia
4.9
12.00-18.00
Monocytopenia
Hb (g/dl)
0.35-0.55
Biochemistry
HCT (/)
0.13
Hypoproteinaemiabottomof referencerangealbumin;lowglobulin
MCV (Il)
73.0
65.0-75.0
Markedly elevated(10x)ALP
Moderately tomarkedly elevated(5x)ALT
MCHC (g/dl)
37.4
32.0-37.0
Mildlyelevatedpreprandialbileacids
Reticulocytes (%)
<0.1
0.0-1
Verymildly elevated glucose
WBC(x10%/)
2.6
6.0-18.0
Howwould you interpret theseresults and
Neutrophils (segmented)
1.89
3.0-12.0
what are the likely differential diagnoses?
(x10°/)
There is a pancytopenia (anaemia,thrombocytopenia,leucopenia),
0.0-0.3
spgndoq 
Neutrophils (band) (x 10%/)
0.20
Given the dogs history,this ismost probably due to druginduced
Lymphocytes (x 10%/)
0.47
1.0-3.8
myelosuppressionThemaindiferential is emergencef anunderlying
Monocytes (x10°/)
0.03
0-1.20
causeof theimmunemediateddiseasesuchaslymphoproliferative
diseaseaffecting thebonemarrowhedegreefanamiaisvry
Eosinophils (x 10°/l)
<0.01
0.1-1.30
profound forrecentmyelosuppression(asred bloodcellsarelonglived),
Basophils (x10%/)
<0.01
Rare
andmayinpartbeduetoblood lossduetothethrombocytopenia.This
issupportedbythehypoproteinaemia.(Immune-mediateddestructionis
Platelets(x10%/1)
8
150-400
lessliklasthresvidncfregenratinsphrocysis
no increase in bilirubin.)
Filmcomment
TheveryelevatedALPandmoderatelyelevatedALTmost ely
Red blood cells normocytic,normochromic. No platelet aggregates
reflectpreviouscorticosteroidadministrationalthoughhypoxiad
seen: count appears genuine.
anaemiamaybecontributing the elevationinALT.Themildly elevated
preprandial bile acid concentration is in the grey area Chapte 2, and
Biochemistry
Result
Reference interval
maybeduetomildsteroidinducedhepatopathyornon-specifcelevation.
Sodium(mmoll)
150
140-153
The mildly elevated glucose is most likely due to stress or
corticosteroids
Potassium(mmol/l)
4.24
3.80-5.30
Whatfurther testswouldyou recommend?
Chloride (mmol/l)
119
99-115
Bonemarrowaspiration(if celcounts donot rapidly improve)
Glucose(mmol/)
6.5
3.5-5.5
Possibly Coombs'test and anti-platelet antibody
5.0
3.5-6.0
Biopsy of skin lesions
Urea(mmol/l)
Creatinine(μmol/l)
59.0
20-110
Case outcome
Inviewof thehistorydrug-inducedmyelosuppressionwassupected.
Calcium(mmol/)
2.38
2.20-2.70
Azathioprine treatment wasstoppedand thehaematologywasmoni-
Inorganic phosphate
1.33
0.80-2.0
(mmoll)
regeneratnfdaynmarwaspirationmband
TP(g/)
57.0-78.0
antplatantbdysterecaidoComandantlal
43.0
antibodytestswerenegative.Bonemarrowaspirateswereconsistent
Albumin (g/)
23.0
23.0-31.0
withrecoveringhamopoisisandtherewasnoevidencefneoplasti
Globulin(g/)
20.0
27.0-40.0
infiltratihneksutrophindlltmrreml
redcellparametersnormalizedwithin5weeks.ltranspiredthedog had
ALT (IU/)
230
7-50
beengiven twice therecommendeddoseof azathioprinefor5weeks
ALP(IU/)
1090
0-100
prior to presentation. Biopsy of the skin lesions confirmed immune-
mediateddisease,and thiswasmanagedwithciclosporin.
Case2follows
77
Chapter 5 Disorders of leucocytes
Case 2
Signalment
Eosinophilic bronchopneumonopathy (previously known as pulmo-
Young adult rescued)male crossbred dog.
nary infiltrate with eosinophils).
Historyand clinical findings
Three-weekhistoryofadyhackingcoughprecipitatedbyexerciser
Hypereosinophilic syndromeisalsoapossibility,thoughevidence
excitement.Nohistoryof traveloutsidetheUK.Onclinicalexamination,
eosinophiliaforareasonunrelated toitsrespiratorysigns.
thedogwasobese.Onthoracicauscultationbreathsoundsweredullin
Themildlyelevatedalbuminmayreflectdehydrationduetobeing
starved prior to travelling to the surgery.
at rest the respiratory pattern returned tonormal.
Clinical pathology data
Whatfurthertestswouldyourecommend?
Thoracic radiography
Haematology
Result
Reference interval
Bronchoscopy
Bronchoalveolar lavages
RBC（x1012/)
6.46
5.4-8.0
Faecal parasitology(forlung worm larvae)
Hb (g/dl)
17.1
12.00-18.00
Coagulation screen (as coagulopathies may occur secondary to
HCT (VI)
0.44
Angiostrongylus)
0.35-0.55
Furtherinvestigationstruleoutinfitrationofotherorgans(abdomi-
MCV(fl)
68.0
65.0-75.0
nal ultrasonography,NAas indicatedbonemarrowaspiraton)
MCHC(g/dl)
37.8
32.0-37.0
Resultsof furthertests
Reticulocytes (%)
0.7
0.0-1
Thoracicradiographsrevealed tracheobronchiallymphnodeenlarge
WBC (x10%/)
40.4
6.0-18.0
mentndverail-indradpaitisnddiffusareasfm
Neutrophils(segmented)
alveolarandinterstitialpattenBronchoscopyrevealedslightreddening
14.4
3.0-12.0
of thetracheaandexcessmucoidmaterialinbothtracheaandbronchi
(x109/)
Abdominal ultrasonography was unremarkable.Faecal parasitology
Neutrophils (band) (x 10°/)
0.94
0.0-0.3
was negative.
Lymphocytes (x10%/)
1.51
1.0-3.8
Bronchoalveolar lavagefluid
Monocytes (x10°/)
0.18
0-1.20
Eosinophils(x 10号/)
22.0
0.1-1.30
RBC(x1012/)
0.003
1.32
Rare
WBC (x10%/)
7.39
Basophils (x10°/)
Platelets (x 10%/)
367
150-400
Neutrophils(x10%/)
1.18
Lymphocytes (x10%/)
0.07
Filmcomment
Macrophages (x 10%/)
0.07
Eosinophils are morphologically normal.
Biochemistry
Eosinophils(x10%/)
6.06
No abnormalities.
Cytology
What abnormalities are present?
OccasionalmastcellsandbasophilsseenNoevidenceof parasitesor
Haematology
bacteria.
Moderate mature neutrophilia
Howwouldyou interpret these results and
Slight left shift
whatarethelikelydifferentialdiagnoses?
Eosinophilia
Basophilia
Howwouldyou interprettheseresultsand
reactions and, like mast cells, are often found where there is an
what are thelikely differential diagnoses?
eosinophiicinfitate.Adiagnosisofeosinophilicbronchopneumonopathy
Theretilthlghislng
wasmade onthebasis of these findings and the radiographic appear-
inflammatoryresponseThemarkedeosinophiliacouldhaveanumber
ance.A parasitic causehas not been entirelyruled out.
of causes(seeFigure5.10）but themost liely，considering thedogs
history and clinical signs,are:
Case outcome
The dogreceiveda5-daycourseoffenbendazoleat lungworm doses (in
Pulmonary parasites(Angiostrongylus vasorum)
case of undiagnosed parasitism)and was then treated with immuno-
HeartwormDiofilaimitistandtosinophiliary
suppressive doses of corticosteroids.Heresponded dramatically and
marked)
was weanedoff therapy gradually over4months.
Case 3
Signalment
Clinicalpathologydata
11-year-oldmale crossbred dog.
Haematology
Result
History and clinical findings
Reference interval
Two-weekhistoryofmalaiselethargyandpolyuria/polydipsianli
RBC(x1012/)
2.38
5.4-8.0
calexaminationthedogwasquiethemucousmembraneswerepale.
Hb (g/dl)
9.8
12.00-18.00
Therewasmildgeneralizedlymphadenopathyandhepatosplenomegaly.
Case 3 continues
78
Chapter5Disordersof leucocytes
Case3continued
Slight increase in normoblasts
Moderate thrombocytopenia
Haematology (continued)Result
Referenceinterval
Biochemistry
HCT (VI)
0.21
0.35-0.55
Mid hypprotinamia aluminjs belwrefrencerangenmal
globulin
MCV (l)
87.8
65.0-75.0
Moderately elevated (2x)ALT
MCHC (g/dl)
37.8
32.0-37.0
Howwouldyouinterprettheseresults and
Reticulocytes(%)
2.0
0.0-1
what are thelikely differential diagnoses?
WBC(x10%/)
156.0
6.0-18.0
Theveryhighlymphocytecount andtheatypical featuresof thesecells
described by the clinical pathologist are suggestive of leukaemia.The
Neutrophils(segmented)
4.20
3.0-12.0
degreeof increaseincellnumbersisveryunlikelytobeduetoareactive
(x109/)
process.Bone marrow disease(infiltrate) is supported by the thrombo-
Neutrophils (band) (x 10%/)
0.24
0.0-0.3
cytopeniawnormalneutrophilcountforasickdog)andanamiahe
149.0
Lymphocytes (x10%/)
1.0-3.8
is also supportive of bone marrow disease.
Monocytes (x10°/)
0.70
0-1.20
The lowalbuminmaybearesultof reduced hepaticsynthesis,orof
Eosinophils(x10%/)
0.50
proteinlossinurineorfromtheintestine secondarytotumourinfiltrate.
0.1-1.30
The elevatedALTmostlikelyreflectshypoxicdamagetothehepatocytes
Basophils (x10%/)
0
Rare
(as a resultof the anaemia) butmaybedue to tumourinfitrate intheliver.
Normoblasts(x10%/)
0.20
0-0.1
Whatfurther testswouldyourecommend?
Platelets (x10%/)
57
150-400
Bone marrowaspiration
Flowcytometry
Filmcomment
Ultrasonography (for tumour staging)
Urinalysis(torule out urinary protein loss)
Thelymphocytesareapproximatelythesame sizeasneutrophilsand
have abundant pale to deep blue (basophilic) cytoplasm.Some of the
Resultsoffurthertests
cellshowcytoplasmicblebbingandsmallredintracytoplasmic gran-
Bonemarrow aspiration
ules,andafewcellshavereniform(kidney-orbean-shaped)nucleiew
other nucleated cells seen.
Aspiratecelluarwithflecks/spiculespresent.Nomegakaryocytesr
ironstores.Themajorityof thecells 85-95%)on the smears arearge
Biochemistry
Result
Referenceinterval
neutrophil.Extremelylownumbersof erythroid andmyeloid seriescells
TP (g/)
54.0
57.0-78.0
were present, but these showed orderly maturation.
Albumin (g/)
21.0
23.0-31.0
Flowcytometry
ALT(IU/)
110
7-50
The lymphoidcellsexpressedCD3(expressed byTcells),CD5（Tcells
and a subset of B cells), CD8 (cytotoxicT cells),CD11d (NK cells/
cytotoxicargegranularlymphocytes)hTcellsubsetfell
Allotherbiochemical parametersnormal.
and some antigen-presenting cells),D11a(allleucocytes),CD45 (all
What abnormalities arepresent?
haemopoieticcells）andCD45RA(BcellsandasubsetofTcells).They
did notexpressCD34(stem cells).Thesefindingsconfirmedaleukaemia
Haematology
of large granular lymphocytes.
·Moderatemacrocyticbut normochromic anaemia
一
Inappropriately poor regeneration
Case outcome
Absolutereticulocyte count 47x10/
TheprognosiswasuardedduetotheseverityofmarrowinfitrationTh
Macrocytosis
dogwas treatedwithcombinationchemotherapy,and achievedpartial
Low normal neutrophil count
remissionenjyedanxcellentqualityflifformnthafterhi
Lymphocytosis,composed of atypical lymphoid cells
time diseaseprogressionoccurred andeuthanasia wasperformed.
Case 4
Signalment
7-year-old neutered crossbred bitch.
Haematology(continued)Result
Reference interval
History and clinical findings
HCT(/)
0.41
0.35-0.55
Historyof being subdued and lethargicfor several months:stopped
MCV(fl)
67.0
65.0-75.0
wantingtoexercise,andhaddifficultysitting downcomfortably.Slight
MCHC (g/dl)
35.5
32.0-37.0
Reticulocytes (%)
2.6
0.0-1
aroundstifleockbowandcapiwithmilddistallimbedm
WBC(x10°/1)
21.0
6.0-18.0
Joints painful on manipulation.Pyrexia (39.9°C).
Clinical pathology data
Neutrophils(segmented)
16.6
3.0-12.0
(x109/)
Haematology
Result
Reference interval
Neutrophils(band)(x10%/)
2.56
0.0-0.3
RBC(x1012/)
6.07
5.4-8.0
Lymphocytes (x 10°/)
1.20
1.0-3.8
Hb (g/dl)
14.6
12.00-18.00
Case 4 continues 
79
Chapter5Disordersof leucocytes
Case 4continued
Biochemistry
Slightly elevated globulin
Haematology (continued)Result
Reference interval
Markedly elevated ALP(x9)
Slightly elevated ALT(<x2)
Monocytes (x10%/1)
0.22
0-1.20
Hypercholesterolaemia
Eosinophils (x10%/)
0.37
0.1-1.30
Howwouldyou interpret theseresults and
Basophils (x10%/)
0
Rare
whatarethelikelydifferentialdiagnoses?
378
150-400
Thrilsiaht
Platelets(x10%/)
acute inflammatoryresponse.The elevated globulin also supports an
ongoing inflammatoryconditionThemarkedlyelevatedALPandmildly
Filmcomments
elevated ALTmaybearesut of previous steroid therapy (asALPis
NeutrophilsshowalefshiftOccasionalDohlebodies.
typicallyelevatedtoamuchgreaterdegreethanLTbycorticosteroid
Biochemistry
Result
Reference interval
cismistxcludedbutiotsuggestedbythehisoryandclinca
Sodium (mmoll)
150
140-153
findings.Non-specific elevationsecondary tosystemic inflammatory
diseasemayalocontributeTheelevatedcholesterolisanon-specific
Potassium(mmol/l)
4.49
3.80-5.30
findingthamarflectinadequatfastingpriortoamlingendoi
Chloride (mmoll)
112
99-115
pathiesiingyeradrencorticmancreatiihlstsi
Glucose(mmoll)
7.9
3.5-5.5
tein-losing nephropathy or primary hyperlipidaemia.The clinical
Urea(mmoll)
5.5
3.5-6.0
tissue swelling) is the most likely cause.
Creatinine(μmol/)
62.0
20-110
What further testswouldyourecommend?
Calcium(mmol/)
2.46
2.20-2.70
Arthrocentesis
1.77
0.80-2.0
Investigationforcomorbidity
Inorganicphosphate
(mmol/l)
一
Urinalysis
Radiography andultrasonographyof the thorax and abdomen
TP (g/)
71.0
57.0-78.0
Synovial fluid culture
Albumin (g/)
28.0
23.0-31.0
(Biopsyfperiarticularof tissuetoruleotvasulit)
Globulin(g/l)
43.0
27.040.0
to change clinical decision-making)
ALT (IU/)
63
7-50
Case outcome
ALP (IU/)
961
0-100
Cytologyof joint sampleswasconsistentwithimmune-mediatedpoly-
Cholesterol(mmol/)
9.0
3.2-6.5
arthritisculurerengtivehdgwastraedwithprdnile
and azathioprine andresponded well.
What abnormalities arepresent?
Haematology
Moderatemature neutrophilia
Left shift
Case 5
Signalment
4-year-old femaleneutered CockerSpaniel.
Haematology(continues)Result
Reference interval
WBC(x10%/)
1.23
6.0-17.0
History and clinical findings
Twodayhistoryofgeneralizedandprogressivecutaneouserythema;
Neutrophils (segmented)
0.37
3.0-11.5
markedperipheralandfacialoedemaandmalaise.Thepatient was
(x10%/)
tachycardic(180bpm)and had tacky,hyperaemicmucousmembranes
Neutrophils (band)(x10%/)
0.63
0.0-0.3
and a slow cailary refil time. She was hyperpnoeic. There was
Lymphocytes (x10%/)
0.2
1.0-4.8
generalied cutaneous erythema.
Monocytes (x10%/)
0.1
0.2-1.50
Clinicalpathologydata
Eosinophils(x10%/)
0
0.1-1.30
Haematology
Result
Referenceinterval
Basophils (x10%/)
0
0.0-0.5
RBC(x1012/)
8.24
5.5-8.5
Platelets (x10%/)
146
150-400
Hb (g/d)
19.5
12.00-18.00
HCT(V)
0.60
0.37-0.55
Filmcomments
Neutropeniawithleft shit.Cellsshowtoxicchange(foamybasophiic
MCV (l)
73.0
60.0-77.0
MCH(pg)
23.7
19.5-24.5
MCHC(g/dl)
32
32.0-37.0
Case 5 continues
80
Chapter5Disordersofleucocytes
Case 5continued
marrowis unable tomaintain adequateneutrophil numbers tomeet the
increased demandToxicchangereflectsreducedmaturation timeasa
Biochemistry
Result
Referenceinterval
resultfintensestimulationofgranulopoiesisDegenerativeletshitwith
Sodium (mmol/)
136
140-153
ciatedwithbacterial infection）andadegenerativeleftshiftisapoor
Potassium(mmol/l)
4.78
3.80-5.30
prognosticindicatorLymphopeniamaybeduetostress,ormayreflct
Glucose(mmol/l)
3.5-5.5
loss into the oedema fluid (third-space loss).
4.5
Theslightlylowtotalproteinmayalsobearesultofthird-spaceloss
Urea(mmoll)
6.2
3.5-6.0
though usually albumin loss exceeds globulin loss. As the dog is
Creatinine (μmoll)
54.0
20-110
by correction of fluid deficits.
Calcium(mmol/l)
1.91
2.20-2.70
TheelevatedALPmayreflectsecondaryeffectsof the underlying
Inorganicphosphate
0.64
0.80-2.0
diseasflstaisndaryaf
(mmol/)
torymediatrsandcytokinesinsepsisTsnormalwhichsuggests
TP (g/)
57.0-78.0
thereitsinificantpatcelluadamgu thisouldreflta
55.0
end-stageliverdiseaseandenzymeexhaustionThismaybelesslikely
Albumin (g/)
28.0
23.0-31.0
asalbuminremainwihinthenomarangebagainhpoalbuminama
Globulin(g/)
may be unmasked by rehydration.
27.0
27.0-40.0
ALT (IU/I)
29
7-50
lossoffludlumeverloadassociatdwithcongestivheartfalre
ALP(IU/)
liverdiseseorprotisydomeiabetemlitusexluddb
470
0-100
the normal blood glucose.The sodium:potassiumratiois28.45,and the
Cholesterol (mmol/l)
6.6
3.2-6.5
history and presentation arenot typical of hypoadrenocorticism.Third
spacelossof sodiumintotheoedemafluidseemsthemostlikelycause.
Whatabnormalitiesarepresent?
Whatfurthertestswouldyourecommend?
Haematology
Investigationsshouldbedirectedatidentifyingtheunderlyinginflamma
Raisedhaematocrit
tory disease:
Leucopenia
Neutropeniawithleft shit and toxicchange
Biopsy and cultureof the cutaneous lesions
Borderline thrombocytopeniabutclumps seenon smear;probably
Imaging （radiographyandultrasonography toidentifyinflammatory
normal
foci and effusions).
Biochemistry
Case outcome
Slightly low total protein
Skinbiopsyrevealedamassiveinfiltrateofneutrophilsintothe skinand
Moderately elevated ALP(4x)
subcutiswithmanybacteriaevident.hesinsbcutiswasthonly
Hyponatraemia
focusof infection/inflammationidentifiedThismayhavebeeneither
Hypocalcaemia
Borderline cholesterol
vascularintegrityormmune-mediatedvasculitisThedogwastreated
Howwouldyou interpret theseresults and
withaggressive supportive therapy(forhypovolaemic/endotoxic shock
what are thelikelydifferential diagnoses?
andmetabolic acidosis)and broad-spectrum(four-quadrant antibiotics,
Theraisedhaematocritmost likelyrefectshpovolaemiaasthiss
butdeterioratedprecipitouslyandwaseuthanased.Post-mortemexami-
nation was declined.
supporedbytheclinicalfindingsThereasevereutropeniawith
leftshifandtoxicchangeThirresentsdegenerativefshi
(Case5:primary clinician was Sophia Tzannes.)
band cels exceed mature neutrophils.This suggests that the bone
Referencesandfurtherreading
Gommeren KWG,Daminet S,VanholenL,VandenbergheA and
Duchateau L(2004) Prevalence of physiologic leucopenia in the
Tervurenand theGroenendaelinFlanders.ScientificProceedings,
AndreasenCBand RothJA(20oo)Neutrophilfunctionabnormalities,
BSAVA47Annual Congress,Birmingham,566
In:Schalm'sVeterinary Hematology,ed.BFFeldman etal.,pp.
Greenfield CL, Messick JB, Solter PF and Schaeffer DJ (2000)
356-365.LipincottWilliams&WikinsBaltimore
paraneoplastic syndrome in a cat with intestinal T cell
MedicalAssociation216,866-871
lymphosarcoma.Journal of SmallAnimalPractice43,401-405
GrindemCB(20oo)Acutemyeloidleukaemia.In:Schalm's Veterinary
Hematology,ed.BFFeldman et al.,pp.717-726.Lippincott
Williams&Wilkins,Baltimore
useinveterinarypractice.Journalof theAmericanVeterinary
HammerAS(1999)Thrombocytosis indogs and cats;aretrospective
MedicalAssociation217,1195-1200
study.ComparativeHaematology International1,181-186
Harper EJ,Hackett RM,Wikinson Jand Heaton PR(2003）Age-
lymphoma with paraneoplastic eosinophilia - immuno-
chemotherapywithvinblastine andhumanrecombinantinterferon
results in Beagles and Labrador Retrievers.Journal of the
α2b.Veterinary andComparativeOncology2,91-97
AmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation223,1436-1442
Day MJ(2000)Biologyof lymphocytes andplasmacells.In:Schalm's
Jones RFand ParisR(1963)TheGreyhound eosinophil.Journal of
SmallAnimal Practice 4(Supp),29-33
KellerRL,AveryC,BuettC,WalnAandlvS(204)
Dewhurst EC,Crawford C,Cue S,Dodkin S,German AJand
Detectionof neoplastic lymphocytes in peripheral blood of
Papasouliotis K(2003) Analysisof canine and feline haemograms
dogswithlymphomabypolymerasechainreactionforantigen
usingtheVetScanHMTanalyserJournal ofSmalAnimal
receptorgenerearrangement.Veterinary Clinical Pathology
Practice44,443-448
GentryPA(2000)PlateletbiologyIn:SchalmsVeterinaryHematology,
3,144-149
KheiriMarrlnagrahndilt
Wilkins,Baltimore
acute leukaemias.Cytometry34,82-86
81
Disorders of haemostasis
Tracy Stokol
Introduction
Unactivatedplatelet
The haemostaticsystemconsistsofacomplexarray
of cells,enzymes,cofactors and inhibitors that func-
tioninanintegrated fashion tofacilitaterepair of
W
injured blood vessels(see alsoBSAVA Manual of
Endothelial cell
CanineandFelineHaematologyandTransfusion
Medicine).Formationof a stable thrombus is essen-
Subendothelialmatrix
Haemorrhage
tial toprevent life-threatening haemorrhage,and its
(a) Endothelial injury
dissolutionrestoresvesselpatency.Excessivehaem-
orrhage and/or thrombosis occurwhencomponents
ofhaemostasisaredefective.
Endot
elial
Haemorrhage
Overviewofhaemostasis
(b) Platelet adhesion
Haemostasis is initiated when the endothelium is
disrupted,exposingthethrombogenicsubendothelial
Activatedplatelet
matrixtoplatelets and haemostaticproteins.A com-
ADP.TXA2
ing a thrombus.It is usefulto divide haemostasis into
Endothelial cell
primary,secondary and tertiarypathways.However,
this distinction is artificial;all thepathwaysprobably
3
occursimultaneouslyinvivo,ratherthaninasequen-
tialfashion.Theoutcomeof thesepathways is an
(c) Platelet activation
intricatebalance of activationoffset by inhibition.
Initially,coagulationisfavouredpermittingformation
Primaryplateletplug
ofa stable thrombus.Fibrinolysis then dominates,
promoting thrombus dissolution andrestoration of
vessel patency.
Endothelial cel
Primaryhaemostasis
Cessation of haemorrhage
Primaryhaemostasisis theformationof theplatelet
plug, the initiating event in haemostasis. It involves
(d)Plateletaggregation
platelet adhesion,viavonWillebrand factor(vWf),to
Primary haemostasis:(a)The subendothelial
thesubendothelial matrix,withsubsequentactivation
6.1
matrix, containing tissue factor-bearing cells and
andaggregationtoformaprimary platelet plug(Figure
vonWillebrandfactor,isexposedonvessel injury.
6.1).Thisplug isweak and readily removed by re-
(b)Platelets adhere.vWf actsasabridge between matrix
components and platelet glycoprotein(GP)receptors,
established bloodflow;it must,therefore,befurther
specifically GPIb-V-IX.(c) Once adherent,platelets
stabilizedbyfibrin.Animportantconsequenceofplate-
activate,undergo shape change,reease storage granules
let activation isphosphatidylserine(PS) exposure on
(e.g.ADP),produce lipid mediators(e.g.thromboxane A2
the outerplatelet membrane.PS,also calledplatelet
TXA),upregulate fibrinogen receptors(GPllb/lla),and
exposePS(illustratedby darkerplatelet exteriors).The
release of lipidmediators and granule contents activates
and recruits more platelets.(d)Platelets aggregate,
permitting the coagulationcascade to proceed (Figure
mediatedby fibrinogenbinding toGPllb/lla,thusforming a
6.2).PSexposure on activated platelets provides an
platelet plug.vWf can also participate in platelet
aggregation bybinding to GPllb/lla.The plug is stabilied
stasis(Heemskerk et al.,2002).
when fibrin binds to aggregated platelets.
83
Chapter6Disordersofhaemostasis
6.2
The linkbetweenprimary and
Prothrombinase
secondary haemostasis.
complex
Platelet activation provides the essential
link.Coagulation proceeds on the
FII
Flla
negatively charged phospholipid
surface of activated platelets.The
platelet membrane is an asymmetrical
Tenase
phospholipid bilayer,enriched in
FVa
FXa
PC,SM
phosphatidylcholine(PC) and
sphingomyelin (SM) on the outer surface
Platelet
FX
and phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) and
membrane
phosphatidylserine (PS) on the inner
surface.This asymmetry is lost on
PE,PS
platelet activation.PS is exposed on the
FVllla
outer surface and is a crucial binding
component for coagulation factors.The
tenase（FIXa,FVIlla,calcium) and
prothrombinase（FXa,FVa,calcium)
complexes assemble on thePS surface,
are protected from inhibitors and
activate FX and prothrombin (Fll),
Calcium
respectively.
Secondaryhaemostasis
cascade is initiated and proceeds on a PS-containing
Secondary haemostasis is the formation of fibrin.The
cell surface,particularly on platelets and,possibly,
traditionalseparation of the coagulationcascade into
leucocytes. Coagulation proteases (coagulation fac-
intrinsic,extrinsicand common pathways is useful for
tors) and cofactors bind as supramolecular complexes
understandingtestabnormalities,buthaemostasisdoes
toPS(seeFigure 6.2);this localizes coagulationfac-
notoccuras such in vivo.Coagulation is initiatedby the
tors,protects them from inactivation and enhances
theiractivity(Hoffman and Monroe,2001;Heemskerk
and amplified by the intrinsicpathway (Figure 6.3)
et al.,2002).Factors historically thought to activate
(Hoffman and Monroe, 2001; Morrissey, 2001). The
coagulation, such as contact pathway factors (factor
6.3
Secondaryhaemostasis:
the coagulation cascade.
Initiation
Amplification
The cascade is initiated (blue
arrows) by the extrinsic pathway and
Factor VII
amplified(red arrows)bythe
Factor XI
FXla
intrinsic pathway.Tissue factor(TF),
Extrinsic
expressed by subendothelial matrix
Tissue factor(TF)
pathway
cells,binds and activates FVll.This
Intrinsic
Factor IX-
FIXa
complex initiates coagulation by
TF-Vlla
pathway
activating FX,which cleaves
complex
prothrombin to thrombin.The small
amount of thrombin generated
FVilla
FactorVIlI
activates platelets (exposing PS)and
FXI,FVlll and FV.FXla,bound toPS
on activated platelets,rapidly
activatesFIX.FIXa and FXa,aspart
of the tenase and prothrombinase 
complexes,respectively(see Figure
6.2), produce an explosive localized
burst of thrombin.This thrombin
burst converts fibrinogen to soluble
Common
Factorll
Flla
fibrin and inhibits fibrinolysis.Thus,
pathway
Prothrombin
the intrinsic pathway amplifies
thrombin generation. Soluble fibrin
rapidlypolymerizesand is
crosslinked by thrombin-activated
Fibrinoge
Soluble
FXllla.Crosslinked fibrin
fibrin
incorporates into theplateletplug.
forming a stable thrombus.The
FactorXilll
TF-FVlla complex can directly
activate Fix(alternative pathway-
dotted blue lines),but FX is its
preferred substrate. Contact factors
arenot illustrated,because they do
Inot participate in fibrin formation.
84
Chapter 6 Disorders of haemostasis
Xll, prekallikrein and high molecular weight kininogen
fibrin or fibrinogen,releasing fibrin(ogen) degradation
(HMwk),are now known to have no role in fibrin
products (FDPs). D-dimer is also released by plasmin-
formation, explaining why animals with contact factor
mediated lysis of crosslinked fibrin (Figure 6.4). Again,
deficiencies donot bleed excessively.Although con-
haemostaticpathwaysareinextricablylinked.Contact
tactfactors areimportant inclottingtestsinvitro,their
pathway activationproducesbradykinin,whichinduces
significance incoagulation in vivo is doubtful.The end
tPA release and cleaves plasminogen directly, thus
productof secondaryhaemostasisiscrosslinkedfibrin,
promoting fibrinolysis.Thrombin inhibits fibrinolysis,
which binds to and stabilizes the platelet plug.
preventing dissolution of the clot as it is being formed.
 Once again, there are essential links between path-
ways.Platelets,which are activatedbythrombin,pro-
Inhibitors
vide the PS surface for the cascade.Thrombin also
There are naturally occurring inhibitors for every as-
inhibitsfibrinolysis and activatedcoagulationfactors
pect of haemostasis (Figure 6.5). Most are effective at
(see Figure 6.5).
binding“fluid-phase'factors,whereas their activityis
limitedwhen factors arePS-or fibrin-bound.This
Tertiaryhaemostasis
restrictshaemostasis to sites of injury and limitsthe
Tertiaryhaemostasisisfibrinolysisorbreakdownofthe
extentofthrombusformationand/orfibrinolysis
fibrin clot.Plasminogen is converted to plasmin by
(Hoffman and Monroe, 2001). Excessive thrombosis is
tissue plasminogen activator (tPA).Plasmin cleaves
the usual consequence of inadequate inhibition.
Fibrinolysis.Tissue
FDPS
6.4
plasminogen activator(tPA),
D-dimer
released byendothelial cells,converts
plasminogen to plasmin.Plasmin lyses
tPA
fibrinogen and fibrin within the clot,
Bradykinin
releasing fibrin(ogen) degradation
products (FDPs),includingD-dimer.
Bradykinin,producedby FXlla/kallikrein-
mediated cleavage of HMwK,induces
tPArelease and candirectly activate
plasminogen.Thus,contact pathway
Plasminogen
Plasmin
factors areinvolved infibrinolysis,not
coagulation.
Fibrin thrombus
Inhibitor
Mechanism of action
General inhibitors
Endothelium
Physical barrier
Receptorsforinhibitorseg.thrombomodlinbindsthrombinandactivatsprotin
Hepari-iglyinglycasGGsnanceanthrombinisufactpatanibtaty
ertaisxi
Secretefiltibitrlaigenactivatinbr
Plasmaproteins
Non-sinibfnyiidhrlolnann
Coagulationcascadeinhibitors
Tissuefactorpathwayinhibitor
InhibitsTF-FVllacomplex-activityenhancedbyheparin-likeGAGs
Antithrombin
Inhibittmllladtiitadbiadn-
Thrombin
Inhibits FVlla and FVa by actiating protein C and protein S afte binding to thrombomodulin
ProteinC
InactivateFVa andVilla-activated by thrombin binding to thrombomodulin
Protein S
Cofactor for activated proteinC
Fibrinolyticpathwayinhibitors
Thrombin-activatable fibrinolytic inhibitor
intrinsic pathway
Plasminogenactivatorinhibitors(PAl)
Bindandinactivatetissueplasminogenactivator
Antiplasmin
Binds and inactivates plasmin
6.5
Inhibitorsofhaemostasis
85
Chapter6Disordersofhaemostasis
Clinical signs associatedwith
haemostatic disorders
Clinical signsare excessive haemorrhageorthrombo-
sis,depending on the disorder.Clues to the underlying
disorder canbe obtained froma thoroughclinical
examination and complete history (Figure 6.6),be-
cause abnormalities in eachpathwayproduce charac-
teristic clinical signs.
Signalment
Age,breed,sex
6.7
Clinical signsof primary haemostatic disorders.
Petechiae and ecchymoses,with gingival
Details of haemorrhage
haemorrhage,are evident in the oral mucosa of a young
Dobermann with immune-mediated thrombocytopenia.
Site
(Courtesy of S Barr)
Frequency
Severity
Initiating factors(e.g.trauma)
Ageat firstepisode
Familyhisorygnsin iblingparentsrogny
Accessto toxins
E.g. anticoagulant rodenticides
Drug history
E.g.non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Travelhistory
Infectious diseases
6.8
Clinical signs of secondary haemostatic
disorders.Severe and extensive bruising
Pertinent history details for investigating
6.6
occurred in the inguinal area after neutering in a male
haemostatic disorders.
German ShepherdDog with haemophilia A(FVll
deficiency).
With all disorders,depending on disease severity,
haemorrhage can be spontaneous or induced by sur-
Tests forthe diagnosis of
gery or trauma.
haemostatic disorders
Primaryhaemostaticdisordersusuallyresult
Testscanbeseparated alonghaemostaticpathways
in spontaneousbleedingfrommucosal
(Figure6.9).Only those testsreadilyavailable to the
surfaces,e.g.epistaxis orhaematuria.
practitionerwill bediscussed indetail.Bloodshould be
Petechiae aresymptomaticof thrombocytopenia
collected into twotubes:
(Figure 6.7) orvasculitis,but not von
Willebrand'sdisease(vWD)
EDTA(platelet count,D-dimer andvon
Secondaryhaemostaticdisordersusually
Willebrandfactorantigen(vWf:Ag),genetic
cause more severebleeding intobodycavities
testing)
(e.g.joints) or subcutaneous tissue,with
Citrate (coagulation testing, FDPs, D-dimer,
ecchymoses (bruising),but not petechiae
specific factors,antithrombin(AT),vWf:Ag).
(Figure 6.8).Delayed bleeding or rebleeding
oftenoccursduetolackofplateletplug
It cannot beoveremphasized thatblood mustbe
stabilization
collected and handled properly to ensure accurate test
Tertiaryhaemostaticdisorderscause
results(Figure 6.10).Coagulation factors are readily
thrombosis.Ischaemia duetovessel or
 activated by venepuncture and are unstable in stored
microvessel thrombosiscausesend-organ
samples.Whenever possible,blood should be col-
(e.g.liver,lung)dysfunction or failure.Because
lected from a resting,quiet animal.Known stresses,
resulting signs are not specific(e.g.dyspnoea
such as surgical trauma or drugs,can influence test
from pulmonary thromboembolism),thrombosis
results,hinderinginterpretation.Forexample,increases
canbe difficult orimpossible to diagnose,even
in D-dimerand fibrinogen canoccuras a consequence
onpost-mortemexamination(thrombi canlyse
 of surgery-induced fibrinolysis and inflammation, re-
after death).
spectively. If an animal bleeds excessively during a
86
Chapter6Disorders of haemostasis
Primaryhaemostasis
Primary haemostasis
Platelet counta
Plateletcount
This is mandatory in every patient presenting with
Clotretraction
vWD:vWf:Ag,genetictestinga
signs attributable to a haemostatic disorder. Counts
Buccal mucosal bleeding time
 can be estimated from blood smears (Figure 6.11), but
Biopsy-vascular disordersa
accurate enumerationisusuallyachievedwith auto-
mated or in-house analysers. In-house analysers are
Secondaryhaemostasis
Whole blood clotting time (WBCT)a
Activated coagulation time(ACT)a
Prothrombin time (PT)a
Activated partial thromboplastintime(aPTT)
Fibrinogen concentration or thrombin clot time
Proteinsinduced byvitaminKabsenceorantagonism(PIVKA test)
Specificfactor assays 
Thrombin/antithrombin complexes-indicates thrombin activation
(thrombosis)
Tertiary haemostasis
Fibrin(ogen）gradationproducts(FDPs）-d
Plasminogen
Tissue plasminogenactivator（TPA)
Plasmin
(a)
Plasmin/antiplasmincomplexes-indicatesplasminactivation
(fibrinolysis)
Inhibitors
Antithrombina
Protein Cand protein S
Tests for the diagnosis of haemostatic disorders.
6.9
aTestavailable to theveterinarypractitioner,
either in-house or through referral laboratories.
Cleanvnipncturprrablyfromalgeripheranf
venipunctureanhefirstmfblooddoestneedt
(b)
discarded.
Constant steadyblood flowduring venipuncture.
0
Correctfilingofcitratetubeunder-orover-filingcanprolongr
shortencoagulationtimes(especiallyunder-fling).Aratioof
O
part citrateto9partsblood shouldbemaintained.
Minimize frothng sheaing,hamolysis donot forceld
through needles.
Ideallyrawitrateanticoagulantintaringeandrawblod
(throughauttelycatherintotesring.gtcll
bloodda.citratandollect45mlfblood
0C
thecatheter/eedleandgently syringe thebloodintoaon-
anticoagulant tube.
Centrifuge tube promptly and separate plasma.
Ship coled plasma(ideally on ice)toreach laboratory within 24
000
hours.
(c)
If thereistobe delayin submission>24hours,freeze sample and
Estimation of platelet counts from blood smears.
submit on dry ice.
6.11
(a) Platelet numbers can be estimated from the
Correct sample collection and handling of
6.10
1platelet/100xoil immersionfield（OlF)=15x10/l in
citrate tubes for haemostatic assays.
dogs and15-20x 10°/l in cats.Healthy dogs andcats
typicallyhave>10platelets/OIF(>150x10°/1).(b)Platelet
surgical procedure,however,perioperative sample
clumps(arrowed),often located at the feathered edge,
collection will be necessary. n such cases,abnormal
invalidateplateletcountsobtainedbyanymethod.These
are usually a consequence of poor venipuncture
results of screening assays,such asprothrombin time
technique in dogs,but are often unavoidable in cats.
(PT)and activatedpartial thromboplastintime(aPTT),
(c) Blood smear from a dogwith severe immune-mediated
shouldreflect thecause of haemorrhagerather than
thrombocytopenia;no platelets are seen.(Wright's stain;
being a consequence of surgery.
original magnification (a,c)X250;(b) X100)
87
Chapter6Disordersofhaemostasis
usuallybasedonquantitativebuffycoatanalysis
(Bienzle etal.,20o0)orelectroniccountingmethods.In
general,their accuracy is lower than that of automated
analysers at veterinary laboratories, some of which 
flag platelet clumps. In general, platelet clumps de-
crease the count and increase themeanplateletvol-
ume (clumps are 'seen'as single large platelets).They
mayalsoartefactuallyincreasetheleucocytecount
(clumped platelets are‘seen’by the machines as
leucocytes).These artefacts are analyser-dependent;
clumpsmay actuallyincrease the platelet count inbuffy
coat analysers, for example. Platelets clump readily
duringblood collectionincatsfor unknownreasons,
making it difficult toobtain accurateplateletcountsin
Buccal mucosal bleeding time. This procedure
6.12
this species. Sampling into citrate may reduce the
can beperformed in awake or sedated dogs;
clumping tendency.However,if citrate is used for
however,catsrequire sedation(e.g.diazepam and
platelet counts,it is essential to fill the tube to the
ketamine)Theupper lip is tied back with gauze.This
appropriatevolume.Even with appropriate filling, the
must befirm enough tohold the lipinplace,butnotcause
vascularengorgement,which can prolong thebleeding
count may be slightly lower than that in EDTA due to
time.A standardized incision(5mm long by1mm wide) is
dilutional effects. All counts should be verified by
then made in the buccal mucosa using a specialized
 smear examination, because clumping will decrease
device.The wound is blotted with filterpaper(taking care
and even invalidate the count. A general rule of thumb
not to touch the actual incision,which can disturb the
is that,in thepresence ofclumps,theplateletcount
forming platelet plugs).BMBT is the time taken from
shouldbe consideredaminimumnumberand the'real"
creating the incision to cessation of bleeding.
count is likely to be much higher. Spontaneous haemor-
rhage typically occurs with platelet counts <30 x 10%/,
Detectionofaprimary haemostaticdefect in
whereas surgery- or trauma-induced haemorrhage
bleeding animals.BMBTisindicated ifresultsof
canoccurwithcounts<50x10/1.lf platelet function is
routine haemostatictesting(platelet count,
concurrently impaired (e.g. aspirin therapy), bleeding
 coagulation assays) are within reference intervals
may occur at higher counts (<150 x 10%/). It also must 
in an animal with excessive bleeding, particularly
be emphasized that, for unknown reasons, not all
thatassociatedwithprimaryhaemostaticdefects,
animals with severe thrombocytopenia(<30x10/) will
e.g. mucosal bleeding
bleedexcessively.
Presurgical screen toidentifyDobermanns
(particularly thosewithunknownvWf:Ag values)
Plateletfunction
‘at risk' of haemorrhage due to vWD. If
Thrombopathia(orthrombocytopathy) should be sus-
presurgical BMBT is prolonged in a Dobermann,
pected inanimals with bleeding tendencies,butnormal
elective surgery should be delayed and the dog
platelet counts and coagulation testresults.Specific
should be tested forvD.Alternatively,surgery
diagnosis requires specialized platelet function tests,
could proceed, but appropriate prophylactic
such as evaluation of platelet aggregation, which are
treatmentshouldbeprovided,particularlywith
notreadilyavailableandmayonlybeofferedbyreferral
invasive procedures where surgical haemostasis
laboratories.Rudimentaryplateletfunctiontests that
maybe difficult
can beperformed inveterinarypracticeincludebuccal
BMBThasbeen used anecdotallyasaroutine
mucosal bleeding time (BMBT), cuticle bleeding time
screening test of haemostasisbefore invasive
and clotretraction;only the formerof theseis stillused
biopsy or aspiration procedures in animals, e.g.
for this purpose.
liver biopsy. The use of the test for this purpose is
controversial inhumanpatients,however,and no
Buccalmucosal bleeding time:Thisisaglobal test
controlled studieshave beenperformed in animals
ofprimaryhaemostasisbut is not specificforapar-
to verify that BMBT is predictive of haemorrhage
ticulardisorder.A shallowcut ismade in thebuccal
(other than in dogs with vWD) in this seting.
mucosa and the timerequired forcessation of bleed-
ing is recorded (Figure 6.12). The cut is shallow
Cuticle bleeding time:This hasbeen used historic-
e nd ad d au a pas aq o yn
does not require fibrin (secondary haemostasis).
removed using guillotine-type nail clippers and the
Therefore,it specifically tests primary haemostasis.
duration of bleeding is timed.However,this test suffer
In healthy dogs,BMBT is 1.7-3.3 minutes and can be
from lack of reproducibility (lack of standardization of
mildly prolonged (to 4.2 minutes) in anaesthetized or
cut depth).The depth of the cutrequiresbothplatelet
sedated dogs.BMBT of healthy anaesthetized cats is
<3.3 minutes. BMBT can be prolonged with thrombo-
plug and fibrin formation to seal the defect, thus it will
cytopenia (<75 x 10%/),thrombopathias (e.g. aspirin)
be prolonged in disorders of secondary,as well as
primary,amostasis.herefore,itislessspecificthan
andvWD. BMBT is insensitive;it will only be pro-
BMBTforprimary haemostasis and is no longer recom-
longed with relatively severe defects (e.g. vWf:Ag
mended for this purpose.
<20%).It is useful for the following:
88
Chapter6Disordersofhaemostasis
Clotretraction:Afteraclothasformedinaglassornon-
extrinsicand commonpathways,aPTT tests the intrin-
anticoagulant tube, the clot retracts, condenses and
sic and common pathways (Figure 6.13) and TCT.
separates from serum.Clot retraction is mediated by
primarily tests the fibrinogen component of the com-
contractileproteinsinplatelets and thusrequires normal
mon pathway. These tests are performed on citrated
plateletnumberand function.Maximal retractiontakes
plasma,usingspecificreagentsthatactivateclottingn
about 1-2hours,afterwhich the clot lyses.However,
vitro,with the formation of fibrin being the end point.
this isa crude and insensitive test;interpretation is
Results areexpressed as the time takenfora fibrin clot
subjectiveanddifficult.Furthermore,itisnotspecific;the
toform.ForPT and aPTT,the test reagents include a
retraction time will be abnormal with anaemia and
specificactivatorof the coagulationpathway(tissue
defects infibrinformation,suchashypofibrinogenaemia.
factororthromboplastinforPTanda contactactivator,
such as kaolin, for aPTT), an exogenous source of
vonWillebrand'sdisease
phospholipid,and calcium(which mustbeprovided as
vonWillebrand’sdisease(vwD)is due toa deficiency
it is chelated by the citrate anticoagulant).These as-
or abnormality in vonWillebrand factor(vwf),a large
saysdonotrelyonthepatient'splatelets toprovide
multimeric glycoprotein,which circulates as a non-
phospholipid forfibrinformation and are unaffectedby
covalentcomplexwithfactorVIll(FVlll).vWfusedtobe
thrombocytopenia or thrombopathia, including Scott
calledFVlll-related antigen,but thistermisconfusing
syndrome (see below).
and shouldnolongerbeused.vWf isesssential for
plateletstothesubendothelial matrixandtoeachother
Intrinsic
(seeFigure 6.1).vWD is usually diagnosed by meas-
FXlla
uring vWf (vWf antigen or vWf:Ag) using antibodies
againstvWf in enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA)or immunoelectrophoresis assays.The re-
sults of individual patients are expressed as a unit
FXla
value or percentage of a species-specific standard
Extrinsic
plasma pool,which is designatedas100%or100U/dl.
TF-VIla
vWD is diagnosed whenvWf:Ag values are<50%(50
complex
FIXa
U/d),whereasvalues>70%are considered normal.
Values between these ranges are‘equivocal':the
aPTT
animal couldbea carrierof vWDorcould be normal. In
PT
FVllla
ACT
symptomaticdogs,it isimportant toobtainavWf:Ag
PIVKA
value,because this is diagnostic(values<50%are
Common
compatible withvWD) and correlates toclinical signs
FXa
(clinical bleeding is seen with values <35% in dogs).
BMBT is prolonged in vWD,but cannot be used for
diagnosis, as it is not specific or sensitive for this
disorder(BMBTwillonlybeprolonged ifvWf:Ag is
Flla
Thrombin
<20%). Tests for the specific vWf gene mutation are
availableforselectbreeds,e.g.ScottishTerrier,Man
chester Terrier (see www.vetgen.com)and Dutch
Kooiker dogs.DNA samples are stable for airmail
Fibrinogen
Fibrin
shipping.Genetictests arebest used for carrierdetec-
tion(dueto the overlap of vWf:Agvalues in dogs that
are carriers or normal) and management of breeding 
6.13
Coagulation assays.The coagulationcascade
programs.Genetic tests do not provide information
can be divided into three pathways:intrinsic
about vWf:Ag values (which can bepredictive of clini-
（FXII,FXI,FIX,FVIlI),extrinsic（FVII,TF)andcommon（FX
cal bleeding), and are more expensive and less avail-
Fll,and fibrinogen).Prothrombin time(PT)and PIVKA test
able than vWf:Ag assays.
(FVll,FXand Fil) evaluate extrinsic and common pathway
factors.Activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) and
activated coagulation time (ACT) measure intrinsic and
Secondaryhaemostasis
common pathway activities. These tests can be used to
Thecoagulationcascadeisevaluatedbyglobalscreen-
identify specific factors potentially responsible for
ingassays.When these tests are abnormally pro-
prolonged results.
longed individual factorassays are used toidentify the
specificfactorsinvolved.
Abnormal results arebest interpreted using the
'waterfall'model of thecoagulation cascade(Figures
Coagulation screening assays
6.13 and 6.14).Results from different coagulation
analysers (and laboratories) are not directly compar-
Prothrombintime(PT),activatedpartialthrombo-
able,due to different reagents and methods for clot
plastin time(aPTT)and thrombinclottime:PT(also
detection.Animalshavemorerapid coagulationtimes
calledone-stage prothrombin time),aPTTand thrombin
than humans. Therefore,species-specific reference
clot time(TCTorfibrinogen concentration)are used to
intervalsshouldbeestablished andprovided byeach
detectcoagulationcascade abnormalities.PTteststhe
laboratoryandtestingshould,ideally,beperformedby
89
Chapter6Disordersofhaemostasis
reference intervals are 3-13 minutes for dogs and
Assayresult
Associated defects
8minutes for cats.However,the test is insensitive
to factor deficiencies (it will only be prolonged if
PT
aPTT
TCT
factorsare<5%of normal)and is influenced by
T
N
N
Extrinsicpathway:FVll
othervariables,including thevolumeof blood,haem
IntrinsitwayIX
atocrit, tube size and tube coating (clotting times
N
N
are longer, e.g. 9-20 minutes, in dogs where plastic
N
N
Hypofirinogenamiahparinthray
or silicone tubes are used forsamples,soglassmust
Common pathwaydefects:FX,Fll
be used). Furthermore, WBCT is not specific for
↑
+
N
Multipledefectsincombinedpathways,
intrinsic pathway defects.Platelet phospholipid is
e.g.vitaminKdeficiency，DIC
requiredforclotformation,therefore theWBCTwill
Severe hypofibrinogenaemia(<0.05g/1),
be prolonged with severe thrombocytopenia. Due to
these considerations,this test is not recommended
heparin therapy
Multiple defectsincombined pathways,
for routineuse,with the activated coagulation time
e.g.liver disease,DIC
(ACT)being thepreferred test.Inemergency situa-
tions or if ACT tubes are unavailable, WBCT may be
Abnormalities in coagulation assay results and
used. A prolonged WBCT suggests a severe coagu-
6.14
associated defects.(DIC=disseminated
lopathy,for example due to anticoagulantrodenti-
intravascular coagulation;N=normal.)
cide toxicosis, particularly in those animals with a
high clinical index of suspicion of this disorder. If
WBCTiswithinreferenceintervals,however,aham
a veterinarylaboratory.Neweranalysersallow these
tests to be performed in-house.Reference intervals
ostaticdisordermaystillbepresent andbloodshould
should stillbe establishedand/orsamplesfromcontrol
alwaysbe collected into citrate formore specific
animals testedwithpatients toverifyresults;control
coagulation testing.
data can thenbeused to establish intervals.These
Activated coagulation time:This isa modified aPTT
analysersmaynotbesensitivetomild factordeficien-
that islesssensitive tofactordeficiencies(<10%) than
cies;if results do not match clinical signs, sample
referral to a specialized testing laboratory is advised.
aPTT(<30%).Whole blood without anticoagulant is
ForTCT,a standard concentrationof thrombin is
added toa specialtubecontaining diatomaceous earth
added to thepatient'splasma;this convertsfibrino-
as acontact(factorXill) activator,and thetubeisgently
gen to fibrin. TCT will be prolonged by deficient
inverted at specificintervals until a clot isdetected.To
(hypofibrinogenaemia) or abnormal fibrinogen
minimizevariability inresults due to temperature,the
(dysfibrinogenaemia), defective fibrin formation (e.g.
tube should be prewarmed and kept at 37°℃ during
inhibition ofpolymerizationdue toFDPs)orthrombin
testing, preferably in a heating block (the armpit can
inhibitors(e.g.heparin).The time can be converted to
serve as a heater).Unlike the aPTT test,in which an
a fibrinogen concentration (g/) by comparing the
exogenous source of phospholipid is provided, the
patient's clotting time to thatof a standard curve
ACT testreliesonthepatient'splateletsforphosphol-
derived from purified fibrinogen.Once again,refer-
ipid to support thereaction.Therefore,severe throm-
ence intervals should be established for this assay
bocytopenia (<10 x 10/) will mildly prolong ACT. ACT
and, wherever possible, species-specific fibrinogen
is a useful in-house screening test for severe defects
should be used toderive the standard curve.The use
and will be prolonged with anticoagulant rodenticide
ofhumanfibrinogenforthispurpose decreasesassay
intoxicationanddisseminated intravascularcoagula-
sensitivity.Fibrinogenconcentrationcanalsobemeas-
tion (DIC). It can also be used to monitor heparin
ured in EDTA-anticoagulatedblood byheat precipita-
therapy (desirable therapeutic target is 1.2x baseline).
tion (Schalm's fibrinogen). With this technique, the
Reported reference intervals are 60-90 seconds in
fibrinogen concentration is equivalent to the differ-
dogs and<165 seconds in cats.
ence in plasma protein(asmeasured by a refracto-
meter)before andafterheating plasmato56°C(which
PIVKAtest:PIVKAsreferto inactiveproteinsinduced
precipitates fibrinogen). The test is only sensitive to
by vitamin K absence or antagonism.However,the
changes in fibrinogen of 1.0 g/l (which is also the
PivKAtestdoesnotdirectlytestfor these inactive
lowestmeasurablevalue)and,therefore,shouldnot
precursors but is a modified PT performed on diluted
be relied upon for identifying decreased fibrinogen
plasma,which issensitive todeficienciesinFX,VII
and Fll. Although the most severe prolongations (>63 s;
concentrations in dogs with bleeding disorders.
reference 15-18 s) are seen with anticoagulant roden-
Schalm's fibrinogen can be used for detecting high
ticide intoxication,the PIVKA testis not specificforthis.
fibrinogen concentrations in animalswith inflamma-
Prolonged values are also seen with other vitamin K-
tory disease (fibrinogen is an acute phase reactant
protein) or hypercoagulable states (e.g. immune-
responsive disorders, e.g. cholestatic liver disease,
mediated haemolytic anaemia, IMHA).Mild changes
inflammatory bowel disease,and non-vitamin K-
will be missed,however.
responsive disorders,e.g.DIC,acute liver disease/
failure,hparin therapy,FVlldeficiency.Routine ue
Whole blood clotting time:Whole blood clotting
of this test cannot berecommended due to limited
time (WBCT) is a simple, but crude, screening test
for the intrinsicpathwayof coagulation.Reported
aPTT assays for disease diagnosis.
90
Chapter6Disordersofhaemostasis
Specific factor assays
Individual factor assays are performed to determine
the underlying defectresponsibleforabnormalscreen-
ing coagulation tests.These are modifications of the
screeningassays,wheretheabilityofpatientplasmato
correct theprolonged clotting timesof specificfactor-
3
deficient plasma isdetermined.Results are expressed
as apercentcoagulant activityof astandardplasma
pool, assigned a value of 100%. An inability to correct
theprolongedtime indicates a deficiencyof thatfactor.
Typically,single factor deficiencies of30%cause
haemorrhage,but if multiple factor deficiencies exist,
milderreductions(<50%)mayyield clinical signs.
Latex agglutination plasma FDP assays.The
Tertiaryhaemostasis
6.16
assaycontainsred latexbeads coatedwith
Tests for fibrinolysis are generally restricted to FDPs
monoclonal antibodies against FDPs (fragments X,Y, D or
andD-dimer,becauseotherassays,suchasplasmin-
E).Well 1 = positive control. Well 2= negative control.Wells
ogen, tPA and plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAl),
3-6 = patient samples, diluted as indicated before adding
are notreadily available.
latexbeads:well 3=patient 1,diluted 1:2:well4=patient
1,diluted 1:8;well5=patient 2,diluted 1:2;well6=patient
Fibrin(ogen) degradation products
2,diluted 1:8.The absence of agglutination at both dilutions
indicates a negative reaction,i.e.FDPs <5 μg/ml (patient
Plasmin cleaves fibrinogen and soluble fibrin simi-
2).Healthy dogs have FDPs<5 μg/ml.An agglutination
larly, yielding degradation fragments (Figure 6.15),
reaction indicates apositive reactionwithFDPs>5μg/ml,
whicharedetectedwithlatexagglutination-based
whichis semi-quantified by the dilutions,i.e.FDPsare
immunological assays.Traditional FDP assays con-
>20μg/ml if both dilutions are positive,whereasFDPs are
tainpolyclonal antibodieswhichcrossreact withintact
5-20 μg/ml (patient 1) if only the 1:2 dilution is positive.
fibrinogen and require specialized collection tubes for
itsremoval.However,monoclonalantibodiesinnewer
D-dimer
 assays permit measurement of FDPs in plasma (Fig-
The use of D-dimer tests for diagnosis of haemostatic
ure 6.16), allowing all coagulation assays to be per-
disorders in dogs hasbeen recently reviewed(Stokol,
formed on a single (citrate) tube. Plasma FDP assays
 2003). D-dimer is a new antigen (neo-epitope) created
appear to be sensitive for detecting FDPs in dogs and
onfibrinwhen it is crosslinkedbyFXilla.Plasmin cleav-
arepreferred over older serum assays for this pur-
age of crosslinked fibrin(but notfibrinogen)exposesthe
pose. However, they may not work in cats (Stokol,
D-dimer epitope within crosslinked fragments, called X-
2003).FDPs are not specific for DIC;increased val-
oligomers (Figure 6.15). D-dimer can then be detected
uesmaybeseenwithotherthromboembolicdiseases
using immunological assays, particularly latex aggluti-
and internal haemorrhage.
nation. D-dimer values are <0.25 μg/ml in healthy dogs.
D-dimer tests appearto be sensitive for detecting throm-
bosisindogswithDiC,butvaluesmaybeincreasedwith
Thrombin
any fibrinolytic condition, e.g. postsurgical wound heal-
Fibrinogen/
Insoluble
solublefibrin
FactorXill'
crosslinked fibrin
ing orinternal haemorrhage.QuantitativeD-dimerre-
sults should be provided,because thehighestvalues
appear to occur with thromboembolism(TE). In most
laboratories,D-dimerhasreplaced FDPtestingforthe
Plasmin
Plasmin
detection of fibrinolysis in dogs.
Inhibitors
Currently, antithrombin Ill (AT) is the only available
Fibrin(ogen)
Fibrin degradation
inhibitor test.AT ismeasured using tests based on its
degradationproducts
products
Fragments X,Y,D,E
X-oligomers,D-dimer
ability to inhibit thrombin or activated factor X (factor 
Xa) activity.The activity of these factors is detected
6.15
Fibrin(ogen)degradation products and
using chromogenic substrates specific for each factor.
D-dimer.Fibrinogen is converted to soluble
The ATconcentrationisinverselyproportionaltofactor
fibrinby thrombin.Thrombin also activatesFXill,which
activity (i.e.high factorXa activity indicates low AT
crosslinks fibrin.Plasmin cleaves fibrinogen and soluble
concentration).The result is expressed as a percent-
(FDPs),fragmentsX,,D and E.In contrast,plamin
age of a species-specific standard pool, designated as
degradation of crosslinkedfibrinyields specific
100%.Healthy animalshave ATvalues>80%;values
crosslinked fragmentsof varying molecularweight,called
<50% are associated with a risk for thrombosis.AT
X-oligomers. D-dimer is a neo-epitope produced by
levels are decreased inDIC,protein-losing disorders
crosslinking and is the smallest X-linked fragment. It is
(enteropathy,nephropathy) and with certain drugs,
rarelyfound as anindividualentity invivo,butoccurs
e.g. L-asparaginase. Newer tests which measure
withinX-oligomers.D-dimer is thus specific forfibrinolysis
and indicates thrombin andplasmin activation,whereas
heparin concentrations are being developed formoni-
FDPs indicate plasmin activation only.
toring prophylactic heparin therapy.
91
Chapter6Disordersof haemostasis
TypeIischaracterizedbydecreasedvWf of
Disorders ofhaemostasis
normal multimeric structure.This is themost
Haemostatic disorders can be inherited(Figure 6.17)
common type and is found in highprevalence in
 or acquired. Inherited defects should be suspected in
Dobermanns(60%),Manchester Terriers,
young animals,especially those withrecurrent bleed
AiredaleTerriersand Rottweilers.The genetic
ing episodes ora known family history.Most inherited
mutation appears tobe a splice site defect in
diseases cause excessive haemorrhage;animalsgen-
breedstested todateand it isinherited asan
erallydonotsufferfrom inheritedfibrinolyticdisor-
autosomal recessive trait.Bleeding can occur if
ders,which predispose humans to thrombosis.
vWf:Ag values are<35%
Type ll vwD results in more severe bleeding
Acquired disorders affect animalsof any age,butare
commoninolderanimals,due to underlying diseases
than typel,asvWf is defective inamount
which affect haemostasis.
and structure,witharelative lackofhigher
molecular weight multimers (which are more
Inheriteddisorders
effective in haemostasis).This type has
beendiagnosed inGermanWirehairand
Primaryhaemostasis
Shorthair Pointers
Inherited primary haemostatic defects are uncommon,
Type Ill vWD is themostsevere type,with an
with the exception of vWD, which is the most common
absolute vWf deficiency (vWf:Ag <1%). This is
inheriteddisorderof haemostasis.
inheritedasan autosomal recessive trait and has
beendiagnosed inScottishTerriers,Shetland
vonWillebrand'sdisease:Thishasbeendiagnosed in
Sheepdogs, Chesapeake Bay Retrievers and
many breeds of dogs and, rarely, in cats (Brooks, 2000).
Dutch Kooiker dogs.
Defect
Cause
Breeds
Diagnostic tests
Primary haemostasis
?- dogs are asymptomatic
Cavalier King CharlesSpaniel
Platelet count(usually 30-150x10%/)
Inherited thrombocytopenia
GPIIb/lla deficiency
Great Pyrenees,Otterhound
BMBTlaftint
Glanzman's thrombasthenia
cytometryforplateletGPreceptors
Bassett Hound
BMBTftin
BassettHound thrombopathia
？cAMPdefect
Unknown thrombopathia
?signalling defects
Boxerpit,mxd-r
Storage pool deficiency
?dense granule defect
American Cocker Spaniel
Chediak-Higashi syndrome
Dense granule defect
Persian cat
Defective plateletPSexposure
German Shepherd Dog
Specifictestsforplatelet procoagulant
Scott syndrome
activity
Deficiency typeI orll) or
Type I:many
vWf:AgBMBT,genetic tests
vWD
abnormality(type ll invWf
Typell:GermanWirehaired pointer,
German Shorthairpointer
Tyeoish trier
Kooiker, Shetand Sheepdog
Secondaryhaemostasis
FVlldeficiency sex-id
Many dogs and cats
aPTT,FVIII:C
HaemophiliaA
FIX deficiency sex-linked
Manydgrit
aPTT,FIX:C,genticess
HaemophiliaB
Siamesemstirthair
FXIdeficiency,autosomal
German ShepherdDog,Kerry Blue
aPTT,FXI:C
Haemophilia C
Terrier,Pyrenean MountainDog
FactorXdeficiency
Autosomal
Boxer,AmericanCockerSpaniel,
PT,aPTT,FX:C
JackRussellTerrierDSH
FactorVll deficiency
Autosomal
Beagle,AlaskanMalamute
PT,VII:C
FXll deficiency
Cats, Poodles
aPTT,FXII:C
Hageman trait
Carboxylase enzyme
Devon Rex
PT,aAPTT,PIVKA
VitaminK-dependent factors
（FII,FVIIFIX,X)
abnormality
6.17
Inherited disorders of haemostasis.(F:C= factor coagulant activity.)
92
Chapter6Disordersofhaemostasis
Thrombocytopenia:Up to50%ofGreyhounds,and
FVIll:C)ormild(5-25%FVIll:C) deficiencies may show
perhaps other sight hounds,have platelet counts that
subtle clinical signs.Indeed,the widespread dissemi-
are lower (80-148x10/l) thanreference intervals
nation of haemophilia A in German Shepherd Dogs has
establishedformixedbreedsof dogs(150-400x109/l)
been attributed to a single prolific sire with mild FVllC
(Sullivan et al.,1994).An inherited thrombocytopenia
deficiency. Haemophilia A and B (FIX deficiency) are
occurs in CavalierKing CharlesSpaniels(Pedersen et
sex-linkeddisorders,withexpressionbeingrestrictedto
al.,2002).These dogs have low platelet counts (30-150
males(dams being obligate carriers).Breed-specific
x10/l),and many platelets are large and may not be
defectshavebeenidentified in theFiXgene(Mauseret
included intheplateletcountwithsomeanalysers.
al.,1996;Gu et al,1999).A FVlll gene inversion has
These dogs are typically asymptomatic.
beendescribed inseveral dogbreedswithsevere
haemophila A, ie. <1% FVll:C (Hough et al, 2002;
Thrombopathia:Inheritedthrombopathiashavebeen
Lozier et al.,2002;Brooks,personal communication).
recognized in several breeds of dogs and cats (Figure
Thesediseases causeprolongedaPTTandrequire
6.17) and should be suspected in a young animal
specificfactoranalysis toidentify theprecise defect in
displaying bleeding atributable to a defect in primary
the intrinsic pathway (see Figures 6.13 and 6.14).
haemostasis,butwith platelet counts and screening
Assay reagents and procedures differ in their sensitiv-
coagulation assays withinreferenceintervals.BMBTis
ity tofactordeficiencies,with aPTTbeing morepro-
typically prolonged and platelet function tests, e.g.
longedwith haemophilia B than haemophilia A.The
aggregation, are abnormal.Flowcytometric-based im-
degree ofprolongation in aPTTwithhaemophilia A
may be mild and the disease may be missed if insen-
havepermitted the accurate diagnosisofGlanzmann's
sitive aPTT assays are used for screeningpatients.
thrombasthenia or GPllb/lla deficiency.The mutation
ACTandWBCTmaybeprolongedwithseveredefi-
inthe GPllb/lla gene has also been identified in certain
ciencies of both factors.However,due to theirpoor
dog breeds with this disorder.Scott syndrome is a
sensitivitiesand lackof specificity(both are affectedby
newlyrecognized,inheritedplateletdefectinGerman
thrombocytopenia),they shouldnotbe used as screen-
Shepherd Dogs. Dogs present with moderate to se-
ing tests for inherited factor deficiencies.
vere spontaneous (e.g.epistaxis or hyphaema)or
Factor Xll deficiency: Haemophilia A and B have
surgery-induced haemorrhage.They have defective
plateletexposure,therefore fibrin formation,butot
been reported in cats,but the most common cause for
platelet aggregation, is defective. Diagnosis remained 
prolonged aPTT in this species is FXll (Hageman
factor) deficiency. This factor has no role in fibrin
elusive becauseroutine and specialized assayresults,
formation,so these animals areasymptomatic andthe
advent of assays specific forplateletprocoagulant
disease is most oftendiagnosed when prolonged aPTT
activity, such as flow cytometric-measured platelet PS
is detected onpresurgical or other screening assays.
exposure,enabledaccurate diagnosis of thisunusual
disorder (Brooks et al, 2002). This disease highlights
VitaminK-dependentfactors:Ahereditaryvitamin-K
responsive coagulopathy has been reported in Devon
theimportance ofPS-expressing cells in thehaemo-
Rex cats. Cats of both sexes suffer from haematomas,
staticprocess.
conjunctival haemorrhage,haemarthrosis and mas-
sivebleeding intobody cavities.Theyhaveprolonged
Secondaryhaemostasis
PTs and aPTTs,with normal fibrinogen and platelet
Inherited deficienciesof all coagulationfactorshave
counts. Allvitamin K-dependent factors (Fll, FVII, FIX
been reported in animals,with the exception of tissue
and FX) are decreased.The abnormal coagulation
factor(see Figure 6.17).FVlll (haemophiliaA) and FIX
 times and bleeding symptoms are responsive to vita-
(haemophilia B) deficiencyare most common.Factor
min K1 therapy. The defect is due to an abnormal
deficiencies are identified when screening tests (PT,
aPTT, TCT) are prolonged; the combination of assay
gamma-glutamylcarboxylaseenzyme,whichactivates
thevitaminK-dependent coagulationfactors.
abnormalitiesprovides clues as to theunderlying de-
fect (see Figure 6.14).Associated clinical signs de
Acquired disorders
pend on the underlying defect (e.g. FXll deficiency is
asymptomatic) and the degree of factor deficiency.
Primaryhaemostasis
HaemophiliaAand B:HaemophiliaA(FVlldeficiency)
Thrombocytopenia:Thrombocytopeniais themost
is themostcommoninherited defectof secondary
common acquired haemostaticdisorder and is due to
haemostasis.lt has been diagnosed in manybreeds of
decreased bone marrow production,destruction,con-
dogs,includingmixedbreeds,butsarticularlypreva
sumption, sequestration and loss of platelets (Figure
lentin GermanShepherd Dogs.HaemophiliaAhas also
6.18). Severe thrombocytopenias (<50 x 10/) are due
been detected in cats.Dogs typically present with ex-
todecreasedproduction,destructionorconsumption.lt
cessive haemorrhage at a young age,including haem-
is rare toseeplateletcounts<100x10%/ldue tohaem-
atomas,bleeding after surgery and recurring joint
orrhage or sequestration alone. Therefore, a severe
lameness from haemarthrosis.Clinical signscorrelate
thrombocytopenia(<50x 109/l) is usually the cause,
to the degree of FVll deficiency.The worst symptoms
rather than a consequence,of haemorrhage. Also,
are seen in dogs with severe deficiencies(<1%FVIl
sequestration (in the liver,spleen or pulmonary circula
coagulant activity,FVll:C);dogs withmoderate(1-5%
tion) is the least likely cause of thrombocytopenia.
93
Chapter6Disordersofhaemostasis
AcquiredvonWillebrand'sdisease:Thishasbeen
Decreasedbone marrowproduction
associatedwith hypothyroidism insome dogbreeds.
However, proof for a definitive association is lacking
Immune-mediated (more common in dogs than cats)
Infectiousehrlichacanisfelineeukamaviru
and thyroidsupplementation isnotrecommended as
treatment for dogs with vWD,unless the dog is proven
Drug reactions-canbe due to direct cytotoxicityorimmune-mediated
to be concurrently hypothyroid.
effects
Neoplasiae.gacuteleukaemiamyelodyplasticsyndrome
Acquired thrombopathias:Theseoccurwithneopla-
myelophthisis
sia, renal and hepatic disease, infectious diseases
Increased destruction
(e.g.feline infectious peritonitisvirus),DiC (due to the
Primary immune-mediated
anti-plateleteffectof FDPs) and drugs.Drugs knownto
Secondarymmemdiatede.g.inectiousdisaselasia
interfere with platelet function, uch as aspirin, shoud
systemic lupus erythematosus (rare)
be avoidedin animalswith provenorsuspected haem-
ostaticdefects.Aspirin irreversibly inhibitsplatelet
Increased consumption
cyclo-oxygenase,causing platelet function abnorma-
Disseminatedintravascularcoagulation,e.gDirofilariammiti,
lities that persist for thelifespan of the platelet (7-10
Anist
days). However, haemorrhage is rarely induced by
haemolyticanaemia
aspirin administration alone;a concurrent haemostatic
Localizedintravascularcoagulation,e.ghaemangiosarcoma
abnormality (e.g. thrombocytopenia)must usually be
Vasculitis
present to induce bleeding.
Increased loss
Secondaryhaemostasis
Haemorrhagee.gsecondary to anticoagulant rodenticide toxicity,
neoplasia
VitaminKdeficiencyorantagonism:VitaminKis
Sequestration
carboxylase,which catalyses the conversion of
Splenomegaly,hepatomegaly
glutamicacid to gamma-carboxyglutamic acid in spe-
Pulmonarycirculation-secondarytosepsis,endotoxaemiaorhypoxia
cificcoagulationfactors（FllFVilFIX,F)andinhibi-
tors (proteins C and S). This carboxylation is required
6.18
Causes of acquired thrombocytopenia.
for the calcium-dependent binding of these factors to
PS.In the absenceofvitaminK,these factors accu-
mulate asinactiveprecursors,resulting in functional
deficiencies whichmanifest as prolonged PT,aPTT,
Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia(ITP)is a
PIVKA andACT/WBCT(thelatterwithseveredefi-
common cause of acquired thrombocytopenias in
ciencies).FVll has the shortest half-life of all factors
(approximately 6 hours), so PT and PIVKA tests will
infectious diseases (e.g.rickettsial orviralinfections),
be prolonged before aPTT; thus these tests are more
immune-mediated diseases(e.g.lupus) or neoplasia.
sensitive tovitaminK deficiency andarepreferred for
A high prevalence of primary ITP is found in Cocker
diagnosis or monitoring responseto therapy.Vitamin
Spanieis,Miniature and ToyPoodles,German Shep
herd Dogs and Old English Sheepdogs,suggesting a
toxicosis,cholestatic liver disease (vitamin K is fat
geneticpredispositiontoITPinthesebreeds.Animals
soluble),malabsorption(e.g.exocrine pancreatic in-
typically present with mucosal haemorrhage, pe-
sufficiency) and administration of some drugs (e.g.
techiaeand ecchymoses.Platelet counts are usually
sulphaquinoxolone).Excessive haemorrhage is typi-
<30 x 10%/1. Routine coagulation screening tests (PT,
cally seenwith anticoagulantrodenticidepoisoning,
aPTT,TCT)are withinreference intervals,although
but is not always evident with these other diseases,
ACTandWBCTmaybeprolonged,becausebothrely
despite abnormal test results. Some dogs with anti-
onplateletphospholipidfor clot formation.Platelet-
coagulant rodenticide toxicosis may be mildly to
bound IgGantibodies canbe detected using ELISAor
moderately thrombocytopenic (45-153 x 10%/l); the 
flow cytometric assays.These antibodies confirm
mechanismisunclearandmaybeduetoblood loss
that the thrombocytopenia is immune-mediated
orimmune-mediated destructionafterblood transfu-
(completely or in part),but does not differentiate
sions.Elevated FDPs may alsobe seen,probably as
betweenprimaryand secondary causes.Forinstance,
aresultof internal haemorrhage.
dogs with neoplasia and infectious diseases, such
Animalswith vitaminKdeficiency should be treated
as ehrlichiosis and heartworm infection,canhave
with vitaminK1.Response to treatmentcanbe as-
anti-platelet lgG,indicating that the thrombocytop-
sessed bycessationof haemorrhageand normaliza-
enia is,atleast inpart,immune-mediated;treatment
tion of coagulation tests.Most first-generation
of the underlying disease is required,however, to
anticoagulant rodenticides, e.g. warfarin, have a
resolve clinical signs (Lewis et al.,1995, Scott et
short half-life (approximately 15hours),thus treat-
al.,2002).Values of anti-platelet lgG increase in
ment should be given for at least 1 week if animals
stored samples;samples should be tested for anti-
are intoxicated with these compounds.However,
bodywithin24hoursof collectiontominimizefalse-
second generation anticoagulant rodenticides,
positive results.
e.g. brodifacoum, or first generation indandiones,
94
Chapter6Disordersofhaemostasis
e.g. diphacinone, have longer half-lives (up to 6 days)
(synthetic liver failure),DiC(acute or fulminant liver
and require vitamin K therapy forup to 6 weeks. Since
disease)orvitaminKdeficiency(cholestaticdiseases).
in manycases thenatureof the ingested compound
Furthermore,platelet number or function may be ab-
is unknown,it is best to treat animals suspected of
normal.Manyanimalswith liver diseasehave abnor-
having rodenticide toxicosis for a minimum of 4-6
mal coagulation times, including PT, aPTT, PIVKAs
weeks.This canbe expensive;if desired,therapy can
and FDPs, which do not always correlate to clinical
be stopped after 1 week and PT (or PIVKAs) can be
bleeding tendencies.
measured2-3dayslatertodetermine if therodenti-
cide is still in the circulation. This is not routinely
Renaldisease:Renal disease canresult ineither
recommended, however,as clinical signs can re-
haemorrhage or thrombosis. Renal failure-induced
develop during this time.
haemorrhagehasbeenattributed to thrombopathia
(defective adhesion and/or aggregation),whereas
Disseminated intravascular coagulation:DiCre-
thrombosis, seen with protein-losing nephropathy,is
sults from the systemicactivation of haemostasis due
duetoATloss,hyperfibrinogenaemiaand/orplatelet
to anunderlying diseasewhichcauses severevessel
hyperaggregability.
injury or excessive TF expression.In some disorders,
e.g.mucinous carcinomas,DiC can be initiated by
Other diseases:Many other disorders are associated
direct activation of FX.Theresult is systemic platelet
withhaemostaticdefects,includingsnake envenoma
andcoagulationfactoractivationandfibrinolysis,caus
tion,infectious diseases(e.g.leptospirosis),neoplasia
ing thrombocytopenia,factor deficiencies(from plas-
and immune-mediated conditions.The haemostatic
 min-mediated cleavage), inhibitor consumption and
problems can be due to vasculitis,thrombocytopenia
FDPgeneration.FDPs canexacerbate clinical signs
or thrombopathia(enhanced ordecreased function),
by inhibitingplateletfunction and fibrinpolymeriza-
anticoagulants (e.g. heparin from mast cell tumors),
tion. Many diseases can induce DIC, e.g. sepsis,
and DIC.Many drugs,including analgesics, anaesth
pancreatitis, neoplasia and IMHA. Angiostrongylus
tics and chemotherapeutics,can cause coagulation
vasorum,anematodefound inthepulmonarycircula-
factor andplatelet abnormalities.
tion,can cause DIC and haemorrhage in affected
dogs. This has been attributed to the first stagelarvae
Tertiaryhaemostasis
andimmature parasites(Schelling etal.,1986;Ramsey
Most acquired fibrinolytic disorders are associated with
et al.,1996).Clinically,animals with DICpresent with
DIC,which has the dual effect of promoting haem-
excessive haemorrhage and/or thrombosis.Haemor-
orrhage from excessive plasmin activation(cleaves
rhageisoftenobviousanddramatic,butmostpatients
coagulation factors and fibrin) and thrombosis from
have concurrentorpreceding thrombosis resulting in
stimulating the secretion of fibrinolyticinhibitors.
end-organ dysfunction or failure.The consequences
of thrombosis are often underestimated,but they
Thrombosis
contribute significantly tomorbidity and mortality.
Thromboembolism (TE) encompasses all haemostatic
There is no single pathognomonic test for DIC. It is 
 pathways. Thrombosis can be due to:
diagnosed if all of the following are present:
 Endothelial cell injury, e.g. heartworm infection 
Appropriate clinical signs
Increasedplatelet functionornumber,e.g.
An initiating disease
nephrotic syndrome,neoplasia
Abnormalities in all haemostaticpathways
Increased activity or decreased inhibition of
Thrombocytopenia
coagulation factors, e.g. AT deficiency,
Prolonged coagulation times (one or more)
hyperfibrinogenaemia
and/orhypofibrinogenaemia
Inhibition of fibrinolysis,e.g.DIC.
IncreasedFDPsand/orD-dimer
Decreased AT.
DIC is the prototypical thromboembolic disease,
but other disorders, predisposing to or resulting in 
Red cellfragmentation(schistocytes,acanthocytes,
thrombosis,arebeing recognizedwith increased fre-
keratocytes) from microthrombosis may be evident in
quency.These include protein-losing diseases,im-
blood smears butis notspecific.Themost consistently
mune-mediated disease,neoplasia,sepsis,cardiac
abnormal and therefore most diagnostically useful
disease,hyperadrenocorticism,intravenouscatheteri-
tests are AT, aPTT, platelet counts and plasma FDPs/
zation and administration of some drugs (e.g.
D-dimer.Specific factor assays are of novalue due to
corticosteroids).Unfortunately,specificdiagnostictests
activation and cleavage of coagulation factors.
for TE are unavailable. Diagnosis relies upon a high
clinical index of suspicion (e.g. pulmonary TE should
Hepaticdisease:The liveris the site of factorsynthesis
be suspected in a dog with IMHA and dyspnoea with
and clearance and is a rich source of tissue factor. Bile
ventilation/perfusion mismatch),and supportive labo-
is required for vitamin K absorption. Liver disease can
ratory evidence,including increased D-dimer and
result inhaemostaticdefectsduetofactordeficiencies
decreasedATvalues.
95
Chapter6Disordersofhaemostasis
Case examples
Case 1
Signalment
2-year-old female,intact Dobermann.
Coagulation(continued)Result
Referenceinterval
History andclinicalexamination
Fibrinogen (g/)
3.5
1.1-2.6
10-dayhistrfstaxindginialigistxis
Plasma FDP (μg/ml)
<5
<5
alsoccurredmntpreviouslyandrelvedwihoutraten
dog collapsed just before presentation. She was weak, dpressed.
vWf:Ag (%)
12
70-180
tachycardicand tachypnoei,withpalemucosaandpetechialand
ecchymotichaemorrhages.
Based onthepresenting clinical signs,
Clinical pathology data
whichhaemostaticpathwaysareinvolved
and is thisinherited or acquired?
Haematology and TP
Result
Reference interval
disrderprbablyingatltsaarae
RBC(x1012/)
1.5
5.6-8.5
WD).hemostcommonplateletdisordersareacquiredratherthan
HCT (/)
600
0.39-0.57
inheritedweverhisdogyoungashadrecurrentamorrha
andisaDobannrd witigealcfhe
MCV (fl)
61
64-73
 concurrent vWD is possible.
MCHC (g/dl)
31
31-37
Howwouldyou interpret the changes in the
Reticulocytes (%)
18.5
0-1.5
haemogram and coagulationresults?
Absolutereticulocyte count
278
<60
Thedogaseveremiroctimcrmicenerativani.
(x10°/)
Regenerationis evident from thereticulocytosis（18.5%)withahigh
Normoblasts(/100 WBC)
absolute reticulocyte count(278x10%/1;reference interval<80x10%/).
7
0
The anamia is probably due toblood loss (lowtotal protein), wih
Normoblasts(x10/)
2.5
0
secondaryirondeficiencyresulting inmicrocytosisThebloodlossisdue
WBC(x10%/)
35.0
7.5-19.9
to a severe thrombocytopenia (<12 x 10/).
Thedogalhasaecoctosiswithnetrophiliandalef shift
Neutrophils(segmented)
23.0
3.9-14.7
(n toxicchange) and monocytosisThis lucogram is common in dogs
(x109/)
withIMHAorITPand isthought tobeduetogeneralizedbonemarrow
Neutrophils (band) (x 10°/)
2.8
0-0.3
inflammation or necrosis in organssuchas theliver.
Lymphocytes (x10%/)
2.1
1.5-5.2
Haemostaticcreening assays arewithinnormalimits.Fibrinogen
Monocytes (x 10°/)
5.7
0.3-2.2
isanacutephaseproteinandwillincreaseininflammatorystates;ithis
Eosinophils(x10%/)
1.4
0.1-1.6
dog,thimaybesecondarythypoxictissuedamageWf:Agisseverely
decreased;values this lowcanresult in spontaneous haemorrhage.
Platelets (x10/)
<12#
179-483
TP (g/)
59-78
What is your diagnosis?
45
Severe thrombocytopenia with secondary haemorrhagic and iron-
a The bloodsmearfom this dog is shown in Figure6.11c.
deficiencynaemiaexacerbatedbyinheritedvWD.hethromboct
peniaislielytoemmunemdiatedecauseunderlyingdiorde
Coagulation
Result
Reference interval
werenotfoundand thenormalcoagulationprofilearguesagainstDIC.
The dog responded to immunosuppressive doses of corticosteroids.
PT (s)
6
6-8
Note that the dogs previous bout of epistaxis couldhave beenduet
aPTT (s)
18
12-21
vWD or the thrombocytopenia (which was of sufficient duration to
induce the severe anaemia).
Case 2
Signalment
Further evaluation
1-year-oldmaleneuteredScotishTerrier.
An oralmucosaswabwastakenforvWDgenetic testing.Thedogwas
History
veterinary laboratory:
subcutaneoushaematomas.Cauterywasneeded tostophaemorrhage
Coagulation
Result
Reference interval
afternail-cliingnitialcoagulationassayswereperformedatlocal
medical laboratory.
Platelet count (x10/)
259
179-483
Clinical pathology data
PT (S)
15
13-19
Initial testing
aPTT (s)
20
10-17
TCT(S)
8
5-9
Coagulation
Result
Reference interval
PT (S)
<9
11-14
The bloodwasreferred toa specializedveterinarycoagulation
aPTT (s)
22
testing laboratoryformorespecifictests:
20-31
Case2continues
96
Chapter6
Disordersofhaemostasis
Case 2 continued
Veterinarylaboratory
Normalafigendprgddi
Coagulation
Result
Reference interval
defectintheintrinsicathway（FXlFXI,FXFV)（eFigure6.
and 6.14).
Factor VIll:C(%)
50-200
2
Specificfactorassays
Factor IX:C(%)
81
50-150
FactorVIisseverelydcreasedwithnormalFI:CandvWAt
latterwasdoneoutof interestandwasnotrequired.
vWf:Ag(%)
127
70-180
Howwouldyou explain the discrepancyin
resultsfromthemedicalandveterinary
Based on presenting signs,is the disorder
laboratories?
inheritedoracquiredandwhichpathwayis
Thiscaseemphasizesthatallaboratoriesarenotequalforcoagulation
involved?
testing.Dogs have morerapid coagulation pathways than humans,
Spontaneous and surgery-inducedhaemorrhageina young dog sug
therefore human-basedreference intervals(including those provided
fromamedicallaboratoryaelngerthandg-basedintevalshee
gests aninheriteddisorder.AlthoughvWDshould be suspected ina
youngSottishTerrer(feitherex)theseverityf thehamorrhage
foretheTwasshorerandtheaPTTwaswithintheprovidedrefrence
intervalsfromthemedicallaboratorywhichdelayed thediagnosisnd
andoccurrenceofhaematomasismorecompatiblewitha disorderof
secondary haemostasis.Since the dog ismalehaemophiliaAor B
led tounnecessary and expensive testing (vWD genetictest).
should be the primary differential diagnoses.
What is your diagnosis?
Theresults areconsistent withhaemophiliaA(FVll deficiency).
Howwould you interpret theresults?
WasthevWDgenetictestrequired?
Medical laboratory
Testing forvWDwasalogicalstepafterreceivingnormalcoagulation
DecreasedPT,ormalaPTT.hisarguesagainstacoagulationcascad
resultbutaWfAgtestwouldhavebeencheaperandustasdiagn
deect,throrWDeeticttashisinicatd th 
ticAllafectedScotishTerriers(homozygousforWD)haveundetectable
dog did not have the vWD mutation.
vWf:Ag values (<1%).
Case 3
Signalment
8-ear-oldfmalterdaradrerver
Urine analysis
Result(Dipstick)
Specific gravty
History
1.012
Inguinalavddaawiitd
Protein
3+
dehiscedwoundbruisingbloodydischarge)indlegedemaevre
Sediment findings
Moderate granularcasts
extremities and oliguria.
Clinicalpathologydata
Biochemistry
Result
Referenceinterval
Referenceinterval
Glucose(mmol/)
2.4
3.3-6.7
Haematology
Result
Urea(mmol/)
44
3-11
HCT (1)
0.45
0.39-0.57
28.1
7.5-19.9
Creatinine (μmol/l)
370
44-124
WBC(x10%/)
Neutrophils(segmented)
19.1
3.9-14.7
Inorganic phosphate
6.2
0.7-2.1
(x10/)
(mmoll)
Neutrophils(band)
5.4
0-0.3
Bicarbonate(mmoll)
5
16-26
(x10%/)
Anion gap (mmoll)
47
13-26
Lymphocytes (x10%/)
0.8
1.5-5.2
ALT (IU/I)
1037
13-79
Monocytes (x 10%/)
2.8
0.3-2.2
AST(IU/)
427
13-52
Eosinophils (x10%/)
0.0
0.1-1.6
Platelets (x109/)
60
179-483
Cytologyof wound discharge:Septicneutrophiic inflammation
Smearcomments
How would you interpret the results?
Redcellmoderateschistoyewacanthocy
Haemogram:
Whitecells:neutrophils showmarked toxic change
Thedgalsidtetrphilwhlshih
marked toxic change andmonocytosis:this indicates an inflamma-
Coagulation
Result
Reference interval
tory leucogram
17
13-19
There isaconcurrent lymphopenia andeosinopenia:thiscan be
PT (S)
attributed to inflammation or stress(endogenous corticosteroid
aPTT (s)
25
10-17
release)
Fibrinogen (g/)
0.9
1.1-2.6
Thereisamoderatethrombocytopeniawithfragmentationinjuryof
red blood cells(acanthocytes and schistocytes).
Plasma FDP (μg/ml)
>20
<5
D-dimer (μg/ml)
2.0
<0.25
Case 3continues
97
Chapter6Disordersofhaemostasis
Case 3continued
sd
Coagulation panel:
acid fromhypoxiaandretained organicacidsfromrenalfailure)
Normal PT and prolonged aPTT:intrinsic pathway abnormality
Isosthenuriawithacutetubularinurygranularcastprotinuriathat
Hypofibrinogenaemia:indicatesexcessive consumption
is excessive for the USG).
Increased FDPs and D-dimer:indicate excessive fibrinolysis.
What is your diagnosis?
Biochemistry:
Theresults indicateDICsecondary to septicshockfrom aninfected
Severeazotaemiaand hyperphosphataemia:decreasedglomerular
surgical wound. There are abnormalies in all three haemostatic path-
fltrationratfromacuterenalfailureoliguriaazotamiawith-
waysthrmbocytniaprlongedahyfibrinogenamiand
sthenuria,granularcasts,protinuri
ncreasedDs-dmerdcelfragmentatonfromthrmbosisn
Moderate hypoglycaemia:sepsis
initiatingdisease（sepsis）andevidenceofhaemorrhagebruisingbloody
Hepatocelarinjury(increased AL)
discharge）andthromosisacuteenalfalurendliverinuryacidoss）
Referencesand furtherreading
canine angiostrongylosis.VeterinaryRecord138,360-363
Scheling CGGreene CEPrestwoodAKand TsangVC（1986)
Coagulationabnormalities associated withacute Angiostrongylus
Day MJ,LittlewoodJandMackinA(20oo)BSAVAManual of Canine
vasorum infectionindogs.AmericanJournalofVeterinary
andFelineHaematologyandTransfusionMedicine.BSAVA
Research47,2669-2673
Publications,Gloucester
ScottMAaiser L,DavisJMandSchwartzKA(2002)Development
ofasensitiveimmunoradiometricassayfordetectionofplatelet
useinveterinarypractice.Journalof theAmericanVeterinary
AmericanJournalofVeterinaryResearch63,124-136
MedicalAss0ciation217,1195-1200
Brooks M(2000)vonWilebrand’s disease.In:Schaim'sVeterinary
Stokol T(2003)PlasmaD-dimerforthediagnosisof thromboembolic
HematlogyVol.4dBFFeldmanetal509515.ippinco
disordersindogs.Veterinary Clinics ofNorth America:Small
Animal Practice33,1419-1435.
Williams&Wilkins,Philadelphia
SullivanPS,EvansHLandMcDonaldTP(1994)Plateletconcentration
Brooks MB,Catalfamo JL,Brown HA,Ivanova P and Lovaglio J
and hemoglobin function ingreyhounds.Journal of the American
VeterinaryMedicalAssociation205,838-841
ofplateletprocoagulantactivity.Blood99,2434-2441
GuW,BrooksM,CatalfamoJ,RayJand RayK(1999)Two distinct
mutationscause severehemophilia Bin twounrelated canine
pedigrees.Thrombosis and Haemostasis82,1270-1275
HeemskerkJW,BeversEMandLindhoutT(2002)Plateletactivationand
Editors' addendum: Methodology for
bloodcoagulation.ThrombosisandHaemostasis88,186-193
Hoffman MandMonroeDM(2001)Acell-basedmodelofhemostasis.
wholeblood clotting time
ThrombosisandHaemostasis85,958-965
Hough C,Kamisue S,Cameron C,Notey C,Tinlin S,Giles A and
Cleanvenipuncture-preferablyfrom a large
transcription of theFvlllgene asacause ofsevere canine
peripheralvein.(lf venipuncture is clean,the first
mililitre of blood doesnot need tobe discarded).
humanhemophilia.Thrombosis and Haemostasis87,659-665
Placeapproximately1ml of blood intwoorthree
Lewis DC,MeyersKM,Callan MB,BuchelerJand GigerU（1995)
Detectionofplatelet-boundandserumplatelet-bindableantibodies
plainglass tubes,andincubateat37°Cineither
fordiagnosisofidiopathicthrombocytopenicpurpuraindogs.Journal
a waterbathora dryblock if available:a
of theAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation206,47-52
LozieNutaaEhuNhngcolTCeling
makeshiftwaterbathinaplasticcontainercanbe
Read M and Morgan RA(2002)TheChapel HillhemophiliaAdog
kept close to37Cfor theperiod of timerequired.
colonyexhibitsafactorVll geneinversion.Proceedingsof the
Check one tube every30 seconds,and replace
NationalAcademyofSciencesof the UnitedStatesof America
inwaterbath afterexamining.
99,12991-12996
MauserAE,WhitlarkJ,WhitneyKMandLothropCD（1996）Adeletion
WBCTcanalsobedeterminedbydrawingblood
mutation causes hemophilia Bin Lhasa Apso dogs.Blood88,
into (non-heparinized) capillary tubes and then
3451-3455
Morrissey JH(2001)Tissue factor:anenzyme cofactor anda true
breaking theseat30sintervals:asuitable
receptor.ThrombosisandHaemostasis86,66-74
dryblock should be used if available,or
Pedersen HD,Haggstrom J,OlsenLH,ChristensenK,Selin A
Burmeister ML and Larsen H (2002) Idiopathicasymptomatic
alternatively the tubescanbewarmed in an
thrombocytopenia in Cavalier King Charles Spaniels is an
armpit.Thecapillary method is morehazardous
autosomalrecessivetrait.JournalofVeterinaryInternalMedicine
topersonnel.
16,169-173
RamseyIK,itlwoodJDDunnJKand HerrtageME（1996）Rolf
Reportedreference intervalsare3-13minutes
chronic disseminated intravascular coagulation in a case of
for dogs and8minutesforcats.
98
Disorders of plasma proteins
Yvonne McGrotty and Kathleen Tennant
Introduction
immunoglobulins(IgG,IgM,IgAand IgE)are the main
components of the globulin fraction,but globulins also
Plasmaprotein abnormalities are associatedwitha
provide oncotic support and are involved in drug trans-
widevarietyof diseaseprocesses and area significant
port.The globulin fractions can be separated by serum
biochemicalfindinginboth dogs and cats.Theplasma
protein electrophoresis.
 proteins are comprised of albumin, globulin and fibrin-
ogen fractions.Measurement of serum proteins ex-
Fibrinogen
cludesfibrinogen,whichsinvolvedinbloodclotting,o
Fibrinogen is converted to insoluble fibrin during the
serum valuesare approximately5%lowerthanplasma
coagulationcascadeleading to theformationof a
protein levels.Adult referenceintervals are shown in
stableblood clot.Fibrinogen is synthesized in the liver.
Figure 7.1,although results should always be inter-
Increased levels of fibrinogen signify non-specific in-
preted using a laboratory's own reference intervals.
flammatory disease, while reduced levels can result
Reference intervalsforjuvenile animals are lower than
fromseverehepaticinsufficiency,disseminatedintra-
those of adults.
(FactorIdeficiency).The presence ofa clot within the
sample or the use of lithium heparin as an anticoag-
Protein
Reference interval in
Reference interval in
ulantwill lead tofalselyreduced fibrinogenlevels.
(1/6) sbop
cats(g/l)
Total protein
50-78
60-85
Albumin
29-36
26-36
Methods ofmeasuring protein
Globulin
28-42
27-45
Total protein is measured by spectrophotometry or
Fibrinogen
2-4
2-4
the Biuret method.TheBiuret method usesareagent
composed of copper ions at an alkaline pH. A violet-
Adult referenceranges from Glasgow University
coloured complex is formed when serum or plasma
Diagnostic Services.
are mixed with the reagent. The intensity of the violet
colour isproportional to thenumber ofpeptide
Albumin
bondspresent and so is also proportional to the
amount of total protein present. The amount of protein
 Albumin is a large osmotically active protein with an
is then quantified using spectrophotometric meth-
averagemolecularweightof69,000daltons and a half-
ods.An estimate ofprotein concentration can also
lifeof between17and19days.Albuminis synthesized
be obtained using a refractometer,which measures
in the liver.Almost75%of colloid oncoticpressure is
total solids (Figure 7.2). Several factors (Figure
attributed to albumin.Any decrease in albumin con-
7.3)falselyincreaserefractometermeasurements of
centrationcanresultina significantdecreaseinoncotic
pressurewitharesultantfluidshift from theintravascu-
total solids:
lar space into the interstitium.This causes hypoten-
sion,oedema (subcutaneous,pulmonary)and body
Haemolysis
cavityeffusions(pleuraleffusion,ascites).lncreasesin
Lipaemia
albuminconcentration areusually aresult of dehydra-
Syntheticcolloids(including haemoglobinbased
tion and haemoconcentration.
oxygen carrying solutions)
Severehyperglycaemia
Globulin
Azotaemia
Globulinshavemolecularweightsranging from90,000
Hypernatraemia
Daltons (β-globulin) to 156,000 daltons (y-globulin).
Hyperchloraemia
The α-globulins and most of the β-globulins are synthe-
Hyperbilirubinaemia.
sized in the liver,while the immunoglobulins are
produced following antigenic stimulation of plasma
Thustherefractometermethod canonlybeusedfor
cells and B lymphocytes in lymphoid tissue. The
clear, non-lipaemic serum.
99
Chapter7Disorders of plasma proteins
Spectrophotometric methods of total protein meas-
Therefractometershouldbecalibrated to1.oo0usingdistiled
urementwillbefalsely increased byhyperbilirubinaemia.
water priortouse
Albumin concentration canbe determined bybind-
2.
EDTA blood orheparinizedbloodiscentrifuged and theplasma
ing to bromocresol green (BCG) dye. The resulting
aspirated intoa syringe
coloured solutionisthenmeasuredspectrophotometri-
3.
Theplasmaisplacedontherefractometerandthetotalsolids
cally. Globulin concentration is then determined by
valueisread from the appropriate scale
subtracting the albumin concentrationfrom the total
Units are in g/dl (to convert to g/l,multiply by 10)
proteinmeasurement.Amore accurate determination
of the globulin fraction isobtainedby electrophoresis.
Fibrinogen can be measured by either heat precipita-
tion(Figure 7.4) or the Von Clauss method,which
evaluatesfunctionalfibrinogen.TheVonClaussmethod
isnot widely available.The heat precipitation method
isnotsufficiently accurate todetectdecreased fibrino-
gen and socannot be used in assessment of dissemi-
nated intravascularcoagulation orfibrinogendeficiency.
7.2
Refractometer measurement of total solids.
1.
Filltwohaematocrit tubeswithheparinized blood （tubesAandB)
2.
Heat one tube to 56-58°C for 3minutes (B)
3.
Centrifuge tubesAandBinamicrohaematocrit centrifuge
4.
Measure totalsolidsineachof thetubesusingarefractometer
(seeFigure 7.2)
Calculatetheamountof fibrinogenaccording to thefollowing
formula:
Fibrinogen measurement = Total solids of tube A (g/) - Total solids of 
tubeB(g/)
Measurement of fibrinogenby heat
7.4
precipitation.
Serum protein electrophoresis
a
Electrophoresiscanbeused toseparate thedifferent
protein fractions.Serum orplasma,in an alkaline
environment, is placed on a cellulose acetate gel in an
electricalfield.Theindividualproteinfractionsmigrate
towardsthe anode at differentspeeds dependingon
their size and charge and are then stained and scanned
by a densitometer.The intensity of the staining is
illustrated as anelectrophoretictrace.Electrophoretic
traces fromnormalanimalsproduce a tallnarrow
albuminspike atone end and threeglobulinfractions:
α-globulins, β-globulins and -globulins (immuno-
globulins)(Figure7.5).Canine and feline α-globulins
6
7.3
Factorsthat
interferewith
refractometermethods
of measuring total
solids.(a) Haemolysis.
In this case,immune-
mediated haemolytic
anaemia hasled to
autoagglutination.
(b)Hyperbilirubinaemia.
(c) Synthetic colloids.
AIb
al2
β
人
7.5
Serumproteinelectrophoresis from anormal
dog.
100
Chapter 7 Disorders of plasma proteins
andβ-globulins are further subdivided intoα，α，β
Blood buffering:buffersdonateoraccept
and β sub-fractions. If plasma is used instead of
hydrogen ions in order to minimize a change in
serum, alarge fibrinogen peak will be presentbetween
thebloodpH.Bicarbonate is the most important
blood buffer, but the plasma proteins provide
the β and the fractions,which can obscure the
immunoglobulin fraction and make interpretation diffi-
 approximately 20% of the buffering capacity (see 
cult. Figure 7.6 lists the proteins present in the three
Chapter 9).Albumin has a greater role than
globulin in blood buffering.
globulin fractions.
Hormone transport:thyroxine,reproductive
hormonesandawidevarietyofotherhormones
Alpha-globulins(o-globulins)
arebound to theplasma proteinsin thecirculation.
Drug transport:numerous drugs, including non-
α-Antiproteinase inhibitor
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, thiopentone
α-Acid glycoprotein
and furosemide are highly protein-bound.
α-Macroglobulin
Coagulation:secondary haemostasis involves
Ceruloplasmin
the conversion of soluble fibrinogen to insoluble
ProteinC
fibrin by the actionof thrombin.
Haptoglobin
Acute phase response: acute phase proteins
Beta-globulins(β-globulins)
produced by the liver in response to inflammation 
Fibrinogen
assist healing and limit tissue damage.
Complement
C-reactive protein
Theacutephaseproteins
Ferrtin
The acutephaseresponseis an innate defencemecha-
Some immunoglobulins
nism that is designed to limit tissue damage and
Gamma-globulins(-globulins)
promotehealing following trauma,infectionorinflam-
mation.Activation of granulocytesand mononuclear
IgA
cellsat the siteof inflammationleadstorelease ofpro-
IgE
inflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin-6 (IL-6),
IgG
which in turn stimulates the hepaticproductionof
gM
the acute phase proteins (Figure 7.7). Clinically, the
Alpha-globulins,beta-globulins and gamma-
acute phase response results in pyrexia and anorexia.
7.6
globulins.
Canine haematological changes include leucocytosis
and increased erythrocytesedimentation rate.
The acutephaseproteins(APPs) produced by the
Functions ofplasma proteins
liver are glycoproteins: they include haptoglobin (Hp);
C-reactive protein(CRP);serum amyloidA(SAA);and
Theplasma proteinshavea wide variety of functions,
α-acid glycoprotein (AGP).The concentration of these
including maintaining oncotic pressure, blood buffer-
proteins in the bloodstream is related to the severity of
ing, coagulation and transport of hormones and drugs.
the initiating disease process.
Haptoglobin, CRP, SAA,AGP,ceruloplasmin and
 Oncotic pressure: capillary walls are relatively
fibrinogen increase in response to inflammation in the
impermeable to the large osmotically active
dog and are therefore called positive APPs.CRPis the
plasma proteins.The osmotic pressure
mostsensitiveAPPin dogsandserum concentrations
generated by these large protein molecules
increaseover100timeswithin24-48hoursof stimula-
encouragesmovementof fluid intothe
tion.Production of albumin decreases during inflam-
intravascular space. Approximately 75% of
mation as the liver switches toproduction of those
colloid oncoticpressure is attributed toalbumin.
 proteins described above, so albumin is a negative 
Stimulation of the acute phase
Haptoglobin.
7.7
response.AGP:α,-acid
SAA
glycoprotein; CRP: C-reactive protein;
Infection
Acutephase
IL:interleukin;LPS:lipopolysaccharide;
AGP
proteins
SAA:serum amyloidA;TNFo:tumour
CRP
necrosis factor alpha.(Courtesy of
Dr PD Eckersall.)
LPS
IL-6
Liver
Inflammation
Monocyte/
TNF
macrophage
101
Chapter7Disordersofplasmaproteins
APP.Studiesrelating to theacute phase response in
Hyperproteinaemia
the dog have focused mainly on haptoglobin and CRP
concentrations. Haptoglobin is measured in an auto-
Hyperproteinaemiaisarelative orabsoluteincrease in
matedassaybasedonhaptoglobin-haemoglobinbind-
protein concentration andresults from hyperalbu-
ing. In healthy dogs, haptoglobin is present in low
minaemia orhyperglobulinaemia, orboth. Albumin and 
concentrations,butincreasesfollowingsurgery,trauma
globulin concentrations should be assessed concur-
orprednisolone administration.Thisresponse ofhapto-
rently.Hyperalbuminaemia is usually relative,due to
globintoglucocorticoidsisnot documented inother
haemoconcentration,and is accompanied by other
species.lt mayberelatedto thecaninespecies-
haematologicalandclinicalindicatorsofhypovolaemia
specifichepatocyte induction of steroid-induced alka-
(e.g.increased packed cell volume,tachycardia).
linephosphatase,inresponse toraised glucocorticoid
Hyperalbuminaemia is sometimes found in dogs with
concentrations.Areferencerange forcaninehapto-
hyperadrenocorticism,although the reasonfor this is
globinhasbeenreported as0-3g/land concentrations
unclear.Artefactual hyperalbuminaemia occurs in the
above10g/l areconsideredconsistentwithamajor
presence of lipaemia when spectrophotometric meth-
inflammatoryresponse.
odsareused.
CRP is analysed using an enzyme-linked immuno-
sorbent assay(ELiSA)orimmunoturbidimetric assay.
Hyperglobulinaemia
Immunoturbidimetricassaysforcanine CRPmeasure
Increases inglobulin concentrationmayoccur with
light absorbedby theformation of an antigen-antibody
infectious and inflammatory diseases(e.g. canine pyo-
complex following addition of antiserum.In humans,
derma,felinegingivitis/stomatitis)inwhichawidevari-
increased CRPconcentrationhasbeen shown topredict
ety of antigens arepresented toB lymphocytes.This
an increased riskof myocardial infarction,and increased
subsequently results in numerous different clones of
mortalityinpatientsfollowingmyocardial infarctionor
plasma cells,eachofwhichproducesa single antigen-
stroke.Indogs,CRPhasbeenshowntoincreaserapidly
specific immunoglobulin. This results in a polyclonal
following surgeryand todecrease as inflammationre-
gammopathy characterized bybroad-basedpeaks mi-
solves.CRPmayprove tobea useful markerof disease
gratingmostlyacross theβandyregions of the electro-
and response to therapyin dogs,but furtherresearchis
phoretic trace (Figure 7.8).lgM production dominates in
required.Inhumanmedicine,CRPassaysareusedasan
the earlyresponse.Previously encountered antigens
aid to diagnosis,prognosis andresponse to treatment.
stimulate a more rapid response from memory B cells,
Studies using an ELISA assay validated for canine CRP
resulting in more IgG production than the initial re-
determined that healthy animalshave a CRPof<10mg/
sponse.Occasionallyarangeofdifferentimmunoglobu-
whilst thosewith anacute phaseresponse have a CRP
lintypesmigrate toarestricted/narrowbandonthe
of >10 mg/l (Eckersall et al., 1989). Although a test for
electrophoretic trace resulting in a narrow-based spike.
CRP shouldprovide avaluable addition to diagnostic
This is known as a restricted polyclonal gammopathy or
investigations in canine medicine, it has had limited
oligoclonal gammopathy, and may be seen in associa-
application duetocurrent lackofavailability.
tion with ehrlichiosis, leishmaniasis and FIP.
In cats,AGP is the acute phase protein which has
received mostattentioninveterinary medicine.AGPis
anon-specificmarkerofinflammation and increases
followingviral,bacterial orfungal infection,aswell as
trauma.SerumAGPconcentrationshavealsobeen
documented to increase in catswithvariousneo-
plasms,including lymphosarcoma.In cases of sus-
pected feline infectious peritonitis(FIP),raised AGP
concentrations (>1500 mg/ml),inconjunction with fluid
cytology or appropriate clinical signs, can help distin-
guish cats with FIP from cats with similar clinical signs.
Transferrinandferritinareβ-globulinsinvolved inthe
transport of iron and are also APPs. lron transported in
theblood isboundto transferrin andthisismeasured as
serum iron.Total iron binding capacity (TIBC) is an
indirect measurementof the amountof iron that transfer-
rin willbind.Decreased transferrin concentrations are
associatedwithliverdisease,whilenormalorincreased
concentrations areseenwithirondeficiency.Transferrin
AIb
Q102
β-y
isa negativeAPPandconcentrations decrease during
7.8
Apolyclonal gammopathywithβ-ybridging ina
the acute phaseresponse.Serum ferritin assays are
German ShepherdDog with chronichepatitis.
species-specific,butprovideamore accurateindication
of total bodyironstatus.Ferritinconcentrationsincrease
during the acute phaseresponse following stimulation
In contrast,a monoclonal gammopathyresults from
by interleukin-1(IL-1).Liver disease,haemolytic dis-
production of a single typeof immunoglobulinby a
ease and some neoplastic disorders also result in
neoplastic proliferation of a single clone of plasma cells
increasedferritinconcentrations.
orBlymphocytes.ltis characterized bya steeply sided,
102
Chapter7Disorders ofplasmaproteins
Inordertodeterminewhetherthereisamonoclonal
narrow-basedmonoclonal spike ontheelectrophoreto-
gram, usually in the β or  regions (Figure 7.9). A true
or a polyclonal gammopathy, antibodies against dif-
ferent light chains are used. With an anti-kappa and
monoclonal elevation is composed of a single immu-
noglobulin withasingle heavychainclass and lightchain
an anti-lambda antibody,onlyonewill formaprecipi-
type (Figure 7.10). Monoclonal gammopathies can be
tation arc if there is a monoclonal gammopathy;in an
difficult to differentiate from oligoclonal gammopathies
oligoclonal gammopathyboth antibodieswill form
using the electrophoretic trace alone,as both may give
arcs.Itisusefultorun a controlserum on the opposite
side of the trough.Immunoelectrophoresis is illus-
a narrowspike.Immunoelectrophoresiscanbe used to
identify the typeof antibodypresent (e.g.IgG,IgM,gA)
trated in Figure 7.11.
and to distinguish monoclonal from oligoclonal
gammopathy. Monoclonal gammopathy has a single
lightchain(eitherkappaorlambda),whereasoligoclonal
gammopathy has both types of light chain present.
In standard immunoelectrophoresis,once electro-
phoresishasseparated theproteins,antibodyisplaced
ina troughalongside thezone of electrophoresis and
allowed todiffusepassively through the gel.Precipita-
tion occurs if the antibody(e.g.anti-lgM)interacts with
the relevant antigen (e.g. IgM),and a precipitation arc
is formed.Most commonly antibodies against particu-
larimmunonoglobulin isotypes areare used toidentify
the type of antibodypresent.
D
Electrophoretically
(Test serum)
separated protein
Origin,
o
Trough contains anti-lgG
antiserum
o
(Normalserum)
Precipitin arc forms
at point of equivalence
7.11
Characterization of serum paraprotein in
multiplemyelomaby immunoelectrophoresis
AlbαO2ββ2
(IEP).Electrophoretically separated serum from a normal
dog(Lane A)and a dog with paraproteinaemia (Lane B)
7.9
Amonoclonal gammopathy ina Kerry Blue
demonstrating a monoclonal gammopathy.Serum from
Terrierwith chroniclymphocyticleukaemia.
this dog (Lane C) and the normal dog (Lane D) are
separated,andantiserum todoglgGloaded intoa trough
cut between the electrophoresed proteins.During
overnight incubation,the antiserum difuses from the
Schematic
troughand interactswithserumprotein,forminganarcof
precipitation.The nature of the precipitin arc in Lane C
immunoglobulin
structure
Light
confirms that this is an IgG myeloma.
chain
(K,2)
Polyclonalgammopathies
Polyclonal gammopathies may occur in response to
suppurative and inflammatory conditions,includingpyo-
metra, skin disease (particularly parasitism or chronic
Disulphide
bonds
pyoderma)andviral,fungal andprotozoal infections.
Immune-mediateddisease,suchassystemiclupus
erythematosusorimmune-mediatedpolyarthritis,may
cause polyclonal gammopathies,but the increases in
Heavychain
globulin concentrations are generally less marked than
(α,，,e,μ)
those seen in infectious disease.
Animals with Ehrlichia (Hoskins et al.,1983)or
7.10
A simplified diagram showing immunoglobulin
Leishmania infections (Font et al.,1994) (see Chapter
structure.
103
Chapter 7 Disorders of plasma proteins
27)mayhave eithera typicalpolyclonal gammopathy,
Monoclonalgammopathiesappearontheelectro-
oramonoclonalgammopathy.Insomecases,notably
phoretogramasnarrowsteep-sidedpeaks,smallerin
with Ehrlichia,an apparentlymonoclonal spike ispro-
width at thebaseof thepeakthanthealbuminband
duced which,on immunoelectrophoresis,is found to
(see Figure 7.9). They are infrequently found in the
beoligoclonal,withmore thanonesubclassof heavy
αregion,the majority occurring inβ or yregions.
chainproteinpresent in serum andbothkand入 light
Often thereis a depression in theproductionofother
chains present in urine.
globulins,giving arelativelyflattened baseline from
Chronic pyoderma (Burkhard et al., 1995) and
whichthe spikearises.Rarelybiclonalgammopathies
plasmacyticgastroenterocolitis(Diehletal.,1992)may
result intwodiscretenarrowspikes,incircumstances
similar to thosewhich give rise to monoclonal spikes
gammopathies,although polyclonal elevations are
(Jacobs et al.,1986).This appearance may be due to
muchmorefrequent.CatswithFiP most oftenhave
variation intheconfigurationof thesame immuno-
largepolyclonalgammopathies,withmostoftheeleva-
globulin causing differential migration,or due to
tion in theyregion.Chronic hepatitis in dogs may also
a true biclonal gammopathy (Figure 7.14). As dis-
produce polyclonal gammopathies,in some cases
cussed above,differentiation of mono-or biclonal
producingabridgebetweentheβandregionsas
gammopathiesfromoligogammopathiescanbeun-
showninFigure7.8.Causesofpolyclonalgammopathy
dertakenwithimmunoelectrophoresis.
are shown inFigure 7.12.
Chronictnbtrilviralgr
Inflammation (acute and chronic)
Immune-mediated disease(e.g.immune-mediated polyarthritis
systemiclupus erythematosus)
Neoplasia
Chronichepatopathies
Feline infectiousperitonitis
Parasites（e.g.SarcoptesscabieLishmaniaDirofilaria)
Ehrlichia (can be monoclonal)
Conditionsassociatedwithpolyclonal
7.12
gammopathies.
Monoclonalgammopathies
Monoclonal gammopathies result from the excessive
synthesis ofa single immunoglobulin,heavychain or
light chain(Bence-Jones protein) subunit by a single
Abα.2
βP2
clone of Bcells.Theproteinproducts of the clone may
alsobereferred to as paraproteins orM-proteins'
7.14
Abiclonal gammopathyina mixedbreeddog
withmultiple myeloma.
Clinical signsassociatedwithmonoclonal gammo-
pathiesvary according to the underlying aetiology,the
magnitudeof thegammopathy and the classof immu-
Waldenstrom'smacroglobulinaemia:Thisisapri-
noglobulin or subunit involved.
Lymphoid orplasma cell neoplasms are themost
mary neoplasm of lymphocytoid plasma cells,the
intermediatestageofdifferentiationbetweenBlympho-
commoncauses(Figure7.13)althoughidiopathiccases
are reported (Dewhirst et al.,1977).As discussed
cytes andfunctionalplasmacells inwhichtheparapro-
above,certain inflammatory conditions including
tein secreted is IgM (Dimopoulous and Alexanian,
Ehrlichiaand Leishmaniainfections,chronicpyoderma
1994).Neoplasticcells arepresentin thebone marrow
andplasmacyticgastroenterocolitishavebeenreported
and sometimes in other tissues,butnot in theperi-
toproducemonoclonalgammopathies,althoughthese
pheralblood.BonylesionsdonotoccurandBence-
may,infact,havebeenoligoclonal gammopathies.
Jones proteinuria is uncommon.
Solitaryplasma cell tumours:Cutaneous,gastro-
Multiplemyeloma
intestinal andsolitaryosseousplasmacell tumours,
Waldenstrom'smacroglobulinaemia
alongwithplasma cell tumoursatotherextramed-
Lymphoma
ullary sites, may all uncommonly be associated
Extramedullaryplasmacytoma
with hyperglobulinaemia (Mandel and Esplin, 1994).
Chroniclymphocytic leukaemia
Solitary osseous plasmacytoma may progress to
Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance
multiplemyeloma.
Ehrlichia infectiona
Leishmania infection
Plasmacyticgastroenterocolitis
Monoclonalgammopathyofunknownsignificance
(MGus):Rarely,a monoclonal gammopathywithouta
Conditionsassociatedwithmonoclonal
detectable underlying cause occurs in dogs.(Dewhirst
7.13
gammopathies.a May be oligoclonal
et al.,1977).In human patients,approximately16%of
gammopathyrather than truemonoclonal gammopathy.
MGUScasesgoonto developmultiplemyeloma.
104
Chapter7Disordersofplasmaproteins
Multiplemyeloma:Multiplemyelomaisacommon
Multiplemyelomais associated with increased sus-
cause of monoclonal gammopathy. This plasma cell
ceptibility to infection:this maybe due toleucopenia
neoplasm isassociatedwith:
occurring if the bone marrow is effaced.Thrombo-
cytopenia and anaemia may also occur as a result of
Neoplasticplasma cell infiltration of the bone
myelophthisis.lnaddition,thepresenceofamonoclonal
marrow,usuallywith>30%plasma cells.
gammopathy suppresses immunoglobulin production
Frequently thecells are atypical and are in
by normal plasma cells, so decreases the ability to
clusters (Figure 7.15).Due to the often patchy
mountanormal humoral response toinfection.
natureof theinfiltrate,singlebone marrow
Renal dysfunction is a common feature of multiple
aspirates or biopsies can miss the neoplastic cells:
myeloma,duetotissuehypoxiawherehyperviscosity
multiple samplesmaybe required.Other causes
exists,precipitation of light chains in glomeruli and
forplasma cellproliferation in thebonemarrow,
tubules andthesecondaryeffectsof hypercalcaemia
such as EhrlichiaorLeishmania infections,should
and dehydration.
be excluded,as these maycauseplasma cell
counts approaching the numbers seen in multiple
Hyperviscosity syndrome
myeloma.In these instances,atypia of the plasma
Hyperviscosity of theblood is seen in approximately
cells,thepresenceofa truemonoclonal
20%of dogs with multiple myeloma(Forrester and
gammopathy and hypercalcaemiaaremore
Relford,1992).High levelsofIgAor lgGareusually
supportive of multiple myeloma. Neoplastic
required tocreate this effect(total protein measure-
plasmacellsmayalsobeaspiratedfromother
ments are often>100 g/) but where larger,high mo-
affected tissues,including lytic bone lesions
lecular weight IgM is the paraprotein (such as in
Monoclonal gammopathies(commonly IgG/lgA)
Waldenstrom'smacroglobulinaemia),hyperviscosity
Osteolyticskeletal lesions(punched out or
is common.Hyperviscosity can also be caused by
mottled ill defined lucenciesradiographically)
markederythrocytosis ormarkedleucocytosis,forex-
 Bence-Jones proteinuria (seen in 30-40% of 
ampleinleukaemia.These causescanbe detected on
cases of myeloma)
routinehaematology.
Hypercalcaemia.Although parathyroid hormone-
Clinical signs of hyperviscosity are associated with
related protein(PTHrP) production hasbeen
sludging of blood and consequent tissue hypoxia. The
rarelyreported in association with multiple
CNS and kidneys are the most susceptible organs and
myeloma,hypercalcaemia ispresent inupto
clinical signs include lethargy,stupor,coma or sei-
20%of dogs with the disease,partly due to
zures aswell aspolydipsia/polyuria associated with
increased protein-bound calcium(some calcium
renaldysfunction.Bleedingdiathesismayresultfrom
binds to globulins, although four times as much
coatingof plateletswithparaproteins andconsequent
binds to albumin) and also due to osteolysis and
plateletdysfunctionorbyparaproteinsinhibitingor
releaseof skeletal calcium.lf renal function is
binding clotting factors,resulting in prolongations in
decreased,thismaycompoundhypercalcaemia.
prothrombin time(PT) and activated partial thrombo-
plastin time(aPTT)in thepresenceofnormal factor
plasma concentrations.Gingivalbleedingorepistaxis
are common manifestations.Retinal haemorrhages
maybepresentinadditiontotortuousretinalvessels.
Cardiovasculareffectsarerelatedtoincreasedwork-
load;tachycardia,murmursandrefractoryheartfailure
are reported(McBride et al.,1988).
AnOstwald'sviscometercanbeused tomeasure
serumviscosity,ora simplified methodcanbe used in
the practice laboratory(Forresterand Relford,1992).
The principle of thetestis tocompare the time taken for
a givenvolumeofserumtoemptyfromanarrowgauge
pipetteorcapillarytubecompared toan equal volume
of distilled water. The pipette or tube is filled with a
7.15
standardvolume ofwaterortestserumandsuspended
Bonemarrowaspiratecytologyshowingplasma
cell infiltration in a case of canine multiple
vertically.A clamp canbe used to hold thepipette or
myeloma.(Wright's stain;original magnificationX1000.)
tube in the upright position to ensure there is no
variation in anglebetween samples.The time for the
In dogs,multiplemyeloma isnotuncommon,com
standardvolume ofwaterand then testserum to drain
prising approximately 8% of haemopoietic tumours,
completelyfrom thetubeisrecorded.Anormal serum
with lgA and lgGgammopathiesequallycommon(up
canbe timed in addition asa control.
to40%of all cases).IgM gammopathies are less
common,andskeletallesionsarefoundlessfrequently
Flowof serum(seconds)/Flowof water(seconds)=Relative viscosity
in association with IgM than IgAor IgG.Multiple myel-
omaoccursrarelyincats,whereitisassociatedwitha
Therearemanyreportedreferencerangesforrela-
greaterproportionof lgGgammopathiesandrarely
tiveviscosity in the dog,butvalues>2aresuspicious
results in skeletal lesions(Drazner,1982)
and many animals with hyperviscosity have values >5.
105
Chapter7Disordersofplasmaproteins
Bence-Jonesproteins
however,and the technique is largely confined to
A monomorphicpopulation of immunoglobulin light
human hospitals.As the sample cannot beallowed to
chains,BenceJonesproteins,havebeenreported in
cool between sampling and processing,the patient
almost all conditions which induce monoclonal
must betakento thelaboratory andphlebotomized on
gammopathies. In myeloma they are present in 40% of
site.Electrophoresisorquantificationisperformed on
dogs and 17%of cats.They are filtered at the glomeru-
onesamplemaintained at 37°Candon another after
lus,and when they exceed the tubular resorptive
precipitation of the cryoglobulinsbyrefrigeration at
capacity,appear in urine.Standard urine analysis
4℃.This difficult technique is rarely employed in
dipsticksarenotsensitive toBence-Jonesproteinsso
veterinary patients.
othermethods are employed for detection.Theheat
precipitation method relies on the Bence-Jones pro-
teinsprecipitatingwhenheated tobetween40°Cand
Hypoproteinaemia
60°℃,redissolvingat100°Cthenprecipitatingascooled.
SampleswithlowconcentrationsofBence-Jonespro-
Simultaneous decreases in both albumin and globulin
teinsmaygiveafalsenegative.Whilerarelyperformed
may be due to equal dilution of the plasma,non-
inveterinarylaboratories,concentrationoftheurineby
selective/discriminatory external losses,orfailure of
ultrafiltrationorpolyethyleneglycol dialysismayyield
protein absorption,assimilation or production.Selec-
positive precipitationresults in some of these cases.
tivedecreasesofalbuminorglobulinmay occurdue to
Thishas largely been superseded by urine electro-
failure of production in their different tissues of origin,
phoresis,which is more reliable (Figure 7.16).The
or due toselectivelosses that are determinedby their
resultingnarrow-based spikeon theurine electro-
different physical qualities.
phoretogrammaybe confirmed asBence-Jonespro-
teinsbyimmunoelectrophoresiswithantibodiesdirected
Dilutional hypoproteinaemia
at light chain subtypes.
Dilutional hypoproteinaemia occurs when the total
amount of protein in the plasma is static but the plasma
volume expands,giving anequal dilution ofalbumin
andglobulin.Thismaybeseenasa sequeltovigorous
fluid therapy,especiallywithconcurrentrenal disease,
in congestiveheartfailure and liverdisease,orinwater
retentiondue toexcessive antidiuretichormone secre-
tion.Certain erythrocyte parameters (packed cell vol-
ume (PCV),red blood cell count(RBC)and haemo-
globin) and biochemical parameters,such as sodium,
mayalsoberelatively decreased.
Protein loss
Whole blood loss
In the peracute stage of blood loss the PCV and total
protein will be unchanged, but as extravascular fluid
movesintravascularlytocompensate,a dilutionaleffect
takes place.Albumin and globulins decrease in propor-
Alb
2
tionalongwithPCV,RBCand haemoglobin.Recovery
7.16
Urine electrophoresis of a concentrated urine
of protein levelsfollowing haemorrhage mayoccurmore
sample, showing Bence-Jones proteinuria.
quicklyininternalhaemorrhage,withthereabsorptionof
plasma proteins and other blood constituents,com-
Cryoglobulins
paredwithexternal haemorrhagewheredenovosyn-
Cryoglobulins,which precipitate out in low tempera-
thesis is required toreplace lost plasmaproteins.
tures to resolubilize on warming,may be formed
from monoclonal IgG,IgM andoccasionally IgA,as
Protein-losing nephropathy
wellasmonoclonalorpolyclonalmixturesofthese
Glomerulonephritisoramyloidosiscanleadtodisrup-
tionoftheselectivepermeabilityoftheglomerular
liferativediseaseorbeassociatedwithinflammatory
basement membrane,allowing normally retained
disorders.On occasion there is no apparent under-
proteins,including albumin and antithrombin ll, to
lying cause (Nagata et al., 1998). Clinically, skin
escape into the filtrate.The ability of the tubules
lesions or necrosis may occur,particularly at the
toreabsorb theseproteinsis limited and losses into
extremities.Arthritis,glomerulonephritis and neuro-
urineoccur.Therelatively large sizeof most globulins
logical signsmay alsobe noted.
means that most areretained.Hypercholesterolaem-
iamay develop innephrotic syndrome,ashepatic
precipitate out and then fall into the cellpellet during
productionofvery lowdensity lipoproteins(VLDL)
centrifugation,especially if this iscarried out at low
increasesand defective lipolysisof lipoproteins in
temperatures.Centrifugation should be performed at
plasma occurs. It has been suggested that proteins
37°℃;heated centrifuges are not widely available,
neededfor the activationof lipoprotein lipaseor for
106
Chapter7Disordersofplasmaproteins
lowdensity lipoproteins(LDL)binding to endothelial
enteropathies. Many processes may contribute to
cells are lost along with other small proteins, contri-
hypoproteinaemia in enteropathies,but the luminal
buting to the development of hypercholesterolaemia
loss of both globulins and albumin is most important.
through failure of lipolysisrather than upregulated
These proteins are derived from themucosal vascula-
synthesis (Orth and Ritz,1998).
ture and interstitial space.Breakdown of themucosal
Quantificationofrenalproteinlossmaybeachieved
barrier leads toindiscriminateprotein loss into the
using the urine protein:creatinine ratio;this essen-
lumen.In addition,lymphatic obstruction or dysfunc-
tially correctsproteinloss to allow for variation in
tion allows losses of protein-rich lymph into thegutvia
concentration of the urine,by relating the protein
ruptured lymphatics,and, in most cases,panhypo-
loss to the creatinine loss,which should be constant
proteinaemia results. Reduced peptidase and amino
(see Chapter 10).In addition to glomerular disease,
acid transport activity at the brushborder,andreduc-
theprotein:creatinineratio is also elevated where
tion of absorptive surface area where there isvillous
there is significant inflammation,for example due
destruction,may also contribute to hypoproteinaemia.
to urinary tract infection,sourine sedimentexamina-
Recentlyvalidated testsforprotein-losing entero-
tion should be performed first to rule this out. Time of
pathyinclude faecal α-proteinase inhibitor(seeChap-
day andfeeding donot significantly alterresults,but
ter 13).This protein is normally found in plasma,lymph
the test doesrelyona constantrateof creatinine
and interstitial fluid but not in the gastrointestinal tract.
excretion andmaynotbe suitableforanimalsinacute
The amountinfaeceshasbeenshowntocorrelate with
renalfailure.
histological abnormalitiesof thegastrointestinal tract
Urine protein electrophoresismaybeemployed to
but may not always correlate to serum albumin in the
demonstrate that theprotein lost isalbumin.
dog,making itamore useful screening test for possible
Mild tomoderatehypoproteinaemiamayoccurin
early protein-losing enteropathy before significant pro-
Fanconi's syndrome, where a renal tubular defect
tein losshas occurred.
results in the inability to reabsorb normally filtered
Rarely, protein-losing enteropathy may be associ-
amino acids and glucose (see Chapter 11).
ated with hyperglobulinaemia;this has been reported
ina small numberof Basenjiswith lymphangiectasia or
Dermal protein loss
eosinophilic enteritis (Breitschwerdt et al.,1980).
Widespread skin disease or damage with exudation,
particularly burns,may result in non-specific hypo-
Failureofproduction
proteinaemia during the early stages.Inflammation
may mask the losses as the disease progresses, with
Hepatic insufficiency
APPs and globulinsrising.Widespread burns may
Albumin is synthesized exclusively in the liver and so
induce a hypermetabolic state that worsens the nega-
reduced hepatic function can lead to hypoalbu-
tive protein balance.
minaemia.The liver is capable of approximately dou-
bling albuminproduction inresponse to losses and the
Malabsorption, maldigestion and protein-
functional reserve is large,so that normal albumin
losing enteropathies
production is maintained even in the face of wide-
Digestionand absorptionareintimatelyrelated anatomi-
spread hepatic disease. Only when function is mark-
cally and physiologically,so disturbances in one often
edly compromised,as in end-stage liver disease or
leadtoabnormalitiesintheother,andhypoproteinaemias
with portosystemic shunting,is hypoalbuminaemia
canresult fromfailureineithermechanisminavarietyof
noted.Clotting factors may also be affected,with
diseasestates.Forexample,exocrinepancreaticinsuf-
resultant prolongations of clotting times(potentially
ficiency (EPl) can cause enteropathy, and has both
bothPTand aPTT).APPproduction may decline.It is
direct (failure to produce proteases) and indirect
unusual for globulins to decrease significantly due to
(maldigestion of carbohydrates and lipids,creating a
the other tissues of origin:more frequently there is an
negative energy balance) effects on albumin levels.
increase inglobulinswithhepaticinflammatorydisor-
There are marked decreases inpepsin,chymotrypsin,
ders giving an elevation in the β andfractions of the
carboxypeptidases, elastase and collagenase activity,
withmuch dietary proteinlost infaeces.Serum trypsin-
Hepatic function tests may reveal elevated resting
like immunoreactivity (TLl) levels are low (see Chapter
andstimulatedserumbileacids(see Chapter12).Liver
14).Undigested muscle fibres and lipid droplets may be
enzymes are often elevated, although they may be
demonstrated onfaecal examination.
within reference ranges in portosytemic shunts and
Despite the multiple derangements inprotein di-
chronic hepatic diseases, such as cirrhosis. Other
gestion, some animals with EPI demonstrate normal
markersfor decreased hepaticfunction include de-
protein levels while others develophypoalbuminaemia.
 creases in urea (the ornithine cycle taking place pre-
Where there is concurrent enteropathy,loss of both
dominantly in the liver) and glucose.
albumin and globulins ispossible.
Protein-losing gastroenteropathies may result from
Cachexia
a numberof pathological processes,including ulcera-
Cachexia is one of themost common paraneoplastic
tion,inflammation,lymphatic or vascular disorders,
syndromesinveterinaryand humanpatients,although
with many possible underlying aetiologies, such as
it maybe associated with other disease states,anda
neoplasia,idiopathicnteropathies,hyrsensitivitis,
majorfeatureisweightlossin the face of normal intake.
lymphangiectasia orinfectious(viral,parasitic,fungal)
Anorexiamaycompound the effects.Derangements in
107
Chapter7Disordersofplasmaproteins
carbohydrate and lipidmetabolismoccurin additionto
havebeen identified in the dog and cat(Figure 7.17).
alterationsinnitrogenbalance and amino acid profiles
Identificationrelies on quantification of specific
(Vail et al.,1990).A shift toward inefficient anaerobic
immunoglobulins and on a demonstrated deficiency
respiration,and thepredilection of tumour tissue for
compared tonormal animalsof thesame age.
amino acid derived gluconeogenesis can result in
Immunoglobulins canbe individuallyquantified
marked loss of muscle tissue and total body nitrogen.
using a radial immunodiffusion technique similarto
Althoughtotalliverproteinsynthesistendstoincrease,
that used for theidentificationofspecificimmuno-
thisdoesnotmatchbreakdown and,insome animals,
globulins on an electrophoretogram.An agarose
hypoalbuminaemia may eventuallyresult.
gel,impregnated evenly with an antibodyraised
against the immunoglobulin of interest,has wells
Hypoglobulinaemia
cut into it.Test serum and known concentrations
Hypoglobulinaemia is most commonly seen in puppies
ofthe targetimmunoglobulinare added to the
thatarenotyetfullyimmunocompetent,astheirmater-
wells.Afterincubation and diffusion of the immuno-
nal immunitywanesfromapproximately12weeksof
globulin out into the gel,a ring of precipitation
age.Most have achieved adult levels of immuno-
formedbyantigen-antibody complexesforms where
globuinsby6monthsof age,but,until that time,they
the immunoglobulin and antibody concentration is
may be predisposed to upperrespiratory infections.
optimal (Figure 7.18). The radius of the ring is de-
LowerreferencevaluesforretiredGreyhounds com-
pendenton the concentration of the target immu-
pared to standardreferencerangeshavebeen re-
noglobulin in the well.The radius of therings of
ported(Steissetal.,2000)andbreed-relatedvariations
precipitiationformedbydifferentstandardsisplot-
in IgA concentrationshave been documented(McNeil
tedagainst the concentrationof immunoglobulin
and Spit, 2002).
used,to give a standard curve.Theradius of the test
Severalspecificgeneticallybasedimmunodeficien-
serumiscompared to thestandard curve to allow
cies with resultant decreases in globulin production
calculation of immunoglobulin concentration.The
assay isnot currentlyperformed inUKveterinary
laboratories,butquantitiativeimmunoglobulinsmay
Hereditary immunodeficiencies
Breeds affected
bemeasured at the Departmentof Small Animal
IgA deficiency
German Shepherd Dog,Shar-
Medicine and Surgery,School of Veterinary Medi-
Pei,BalerishWfhud,
cine,Hanover,Germany,ratmanyorCanadian
English Cocker Spaniel
laboratories. Individual laboratories should be con-
tacted for confirmation of tests performed and
IgG(±IgA±IgM)deficiency
Weimeraner
sample requirements.
and neutrophil dysfunction
IgA'deficiencyhasbeenrecognized inseveral
Lethal acrodermatitis
EnglishBullTerrier
breeds,including German Shepherd Dogs,where it 
X-linked SCID
responsible fordecreased skin and mucosal immunity.
Cardigan CorgiBasset Hound
Some healthyShar-Peishaverelatively low lgAcon-
Autosomal recessive SCID
JackRussellTerrier
centrations.Clinically significant decreases in either
IgMdeficiency
Dobermann
IgA orlgMhave also beenreported in thisbreed along
withdecreased lymphocyteresponse tomitogens:
Hereditaryimmunodeficienciesresulting in
clinically thismayaffectolderdogs(mean age3years)
7.17
reduced immunoglobulins.SCID:severe
than thoseaffected by otherprimaryimmunodeficien-
combined immunodeficiency.
cies(Rivas et al.,1995).
7.18
Radial
Target
immunodiffusion
immunoglobulin
technique for quantifying
immunoglobulins.
Antibody to
immunoglobulin
Optimal antigen/antibody.
Antigen (Ig)excess
concentration and precipitation
inwell
ofring
Antibody excess in gel
108
Chapter7Disorders of plasmaproteins
IgGdeficiencyhasbeendemonstratedinWeime-
X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency
raners,in individualswithrecurrent bacterial infec-
(X-SCID),whichresults in lowlymphocytecounts and
tionsorinfectionsrefractory to treatment(Couto et
lowto absent lgG and lgA,hasbeenreported in the
al.,1989;Day etal.,1997).These dogs may alsohave
Bassett Hound and the Cardigan Corgi (Pullen et
decreased IgM and/orlgA concentrations.Neutrophil
al.,1997). IgM may be unaffected. Autosomal SCID
dysfunctionmayalsobepresent.SelectiveIgM defi-
hasbeenrecorded in theJackRussell Terrier(Bellet
ciency has been documented in the Dobermann
al.,2002)inmultiplelittersfromthesame damand sire;
(Plechner, 1979).
these dogshadundetectable IgM,reduced IgGand
LethalacrodermatitisofBullTerriers,whichfollows
leucopenia and lymphopenia comparedwith unaffec-
an autosomalrecessive mode of inheritance,results in
ted littermates.
 decreased IgA in addition to a domed palate, progres-
There are many immunodeficienciesthatdo notaffect
sive hyperkeratotic skin lesions and decreased zinc
immunoglobulin levels or function, and a normal immuno-
levels in peripheral blood.
globulin panel is no guarantee of immunocompetence.
Case examples
Case 1
Signalment
10-year-oldmaleBoxerdog
Biochemistry(continued)Result
Referenceinterval
Inorganicphosphate
1.09
0.8-2.0
History
RecurrentnilateralepistaxisethargyforweeksClinicalexaminatin
(mmol/)
TP (g/)
was unremarkable.
104.1
49-71
Albumin (g/)
Clinicalpathology data
23.3
28-39
Globulin (g/)
80.3
21-41
Haematology
Result
Reference interval
ALT(IU/I)
23
13-88
RBC (x1012/)
4.25
5.5-8.5
ALP (IU/I)
280
19-285
Hb (g/dl)
9.6
12.0-18.0
CK(IU/)
129
61-395
HCT (/I)
0.30
0.37-0.55
Total bilirubin (μmol/)
0.8
0-2.4
MCV(fl)
70.5
60-77
MCH(pg)
22.5
19.5-24.5
What abnormalities arepresent?
MCHC(g/dl)
Haematology
32.1
31.0-37.0
Moderateleucopeniaduetomildneutropeniaandlymphopenia
Reticulocytes (%)
0
0-0.5
Mild normochromic,normocyticnon-regenerativeanaemia
WBC(×10%/)
4.38
6-17.1
·Mild thrombocytopenia.
Neutrophils(x10%/)
2.98
3-11.5
Biochemistry
Moderate tomarked hyperproteinaemia duetomarked
Lymphocytes (x 10/)
0.90
1-4.8
hyperglobulinaemia
Monocytes (x10%/)
0.5
0.15-1.5
Mild hypoalbuminaemia
0.00
0-1.3
·Mild hypercalcaemia.
Eosinophils（x10/)
Basophils (x10%/)
0.00
0-0.2
Howwouldyou interpret theseresults and
what are the likely differential diagnoses?
Platelets(x10%/)
112
150-900
Haematology
The haematology shows a mild pancytopenia with no evidence of
Film comment
Erythrocytes normochromic, normocytic.Neutrophils mature and
regenerative attemptsby the erythroid line（lackof reticulocytes）or
unremarkable morphology.Platelet numbers appear slightlyreduced
granulocytes（noevidenceof left shift inneutrophils）.Thereisnoflm
comment concerning shitt(immature)plateletsalthough thisis an
with no clumpsnoted.Twoplasma cellsnoted in thefeathered edge.
unreliableindicatorofplateletproductionThedegreeofthrombocytopenia
isinsuficientalonetocause theepistaxisseenclinicallTheanaemia
Biochemistry
Result
Referenceinterval
isinparatleastduetothepistaxisalthougharegenerativeresponse
Sodium(mmol/l)
151
146-155
4.1-5.3
suggestive of widespread bone marrow compromise, such as
Potassium (mmol/l)
4.1
myelopthisismylfirosioxicitralastianamihre
Chloride (mmol/)
112
107-115
of plasmacellsinperipheralbloodisextremelyunusualeveninlasma
Glucose(mmol/l)
4.7
3.4-5.3
cell neoplasia.
Urea(mmoll)
6.6
3-9.1
Biochemistry
Thebiochemistryshowsamarkedinreasinglobulins.Thismaybede
Creatinine (μmol/)
132
98-163
toinflammationrlastiprodutinegnmultipemylmll
Calcium(mmol/l)
2.81
2.13-2.7
Case 1continues
109
Chapter7Disordersofplasmaproteins
Case 1 continued
Skeletal suveyradiographstolok forlyticboelesinseenn
lymphomaheformerisunlikelyconsideringthehamatologyfindings.
multiplemyeloma
Urine analysisincldingbothproteinreatinineratio,toexclude
Increasesdutamoconcentrtionrhydrationarossibl
albuminand sodiumhavenotincreased instepandbothurea and
renallossofalbuminandassayforBenceJonesproteins.pecific
gravitymay be used to confirm that haemoconcentration isnot a
creatinine fail to show azotaemia.
The mild decrease in albumin is likely to be compensatory to the
contributer to thehyperproteinaemia
hypergulimiaathugcreasetamorrhage
Clottingprofilewithormalplaeltumberrothrombintimand
functionefusinsrprote-lsingnropathyarepossile.
activatedpartial thromboplastin timewillhelptoeliminate secondary
Thehpecalcamiameasuredismildbutwhencombined witht
haemostaticdisordersasacauseof epistaxis.Withthe presenceof
suchhighglliatuctindirdershouldupt
hypoalbuminamiaecmemoresinificantncedecreasedamin
leads to decreased total calcium.However,calcium also binds to
buccal mucosal bleeding times wil helpinvestigate this cause.
globulins(fourtimeslessthantoalbumin)and themarked increasein
Results of further tests
globulinheremaybesufficienttooffsetthereductioninalbumin.Thusthe
Radiography showedmottled lucencies on several dorsal spinous
mildhypercalcaemiamaybeduetoincreasedproteinbinding.Other
processes.Bonemarrowaspirationshowedhypercellularitydespite
possiblecausestoconsiderinthiscasearehypercalcaemiaofmalignancy,
andhypercalcaemia due tobone lysiswhichmay occur inmultiple
Thesecomprised45%fallnucleatedcellpresentinbroadsheetsand
myeloma.
clusters,showing mildvariationin sizeand somemorphological
Whatfurthertestswouldyourecommend?
abnormalities including binucleated examples and increased nuclear to
Bonemarrowaspiration:thiscouldbejustifiedonthebasisof the
cytoplasmicratioinafewSerumproteinelectrophoresisdemonstrated
a singlemonoclonal spike in the region and confirmed the
pancytopenialonebut thepresenceflasmacellsinirculatn
hypoalbuminaemia.Thesefindingsareconsistentwithmultiplemyeloma.
hypercalcaemiaandlyticlesionsmakethisthe singlemostimportant
furthertest topursueadiagnosisofmultiplemyeloma
Bence-Jones proteins wereabsent from urine.These are found
inconsistently inmultiplemyeloma.
Serumproteinelectrophoresistodefinethehyperglobulinaemia
anddistinguishaninflammatorywide-based response(whichmay
Case outcome
be expectedwithosteomyelisfromamonoclonalresponse(from
Owners declined treatment.At post-mortem examination plasma cell
multiplemyeloma)
infitrationwasdemonstratedintheskeletallyticlesions.
Case 2
Signalment
Filmcomments
8-year-old female neutered JackRussellTerrier.
Red cell morpholgy: redcells normocytic normochromic wth mnimal
History
polychromasia.
Threewistryfmiingdahgrxndw
Whitecellfshiticalllapelidnriginssi
loss.
reactive,although somehavenucleoli.
Platelets appear consistent withcount given.
Clinical pathology data
Biochemistry
Result
Reference interval
Haematology
Result
Reference interval
Sodium(mmoll)
146.1
139-154
RBC(x1012/)
4.4
5.500-8.500
Potassium(mmoll)
2.9
3.60-5.60
Hb (g/dl)
105
12.0-18.0
Glucose(mmol/l)
3.8
3.0-5.0
HCT (/)
0.31
0.39-0.55
Urea(mmoll)
6.1
1.7-7.4
MCV (f/l)
71.1
60.0-77.0
Creatinine (μmoll)
37.5
30-90
MCHC (g/dl)
33.5
32.0-36.0
Calcium(mmol/l)
1.71
2.30-3.00
Reticulocytes (%)
0.0
0.0-0.5
Inorganic phosphate
1.31
0.90-1.20
WBC(x10°/)
28.5
6.00-15.00
(mmol/)
TP (g/)
Neutrophils(segmented)
3.600-12.000
30.2
58.0-73.0
20.52
(x109/)
Albumin (g/l)
12.4
26.0-35.0
Neutrophils(band)(x10°/)
Globulin(g/l)
0.57
0.00-0.04
17.8
28.0-42.0
Lymphocytes (x10/)
0.70-4.80
ALT (IU/I)
2.85
59.0
15-60
Monocytes(x10%/)
ALP(IU/)
1.71
47.8
20-60
0.000-1.500
Eosinophils(x10/)
0.0
0.0-1.0
Whatabnormalities arepresent?
Basophils (x10%/)
0.0
0.0-0.2
Haematology
Atypical mononuclear cells
2.57
Mild normocytic,normochromicnon-regenerativeanaemia
(x10%/)
Leucocytosiswhichsdueetrphilwithmildefift
Mild monocytosis
Metamyelocytes (x 10%/)
0.29
Mild thrombocytopenia
Platelets (x10°/1)
126
200-500
Atypical mononuclear cells.
Case 2 continues
110
Chapter 7 Disorders of plasma proteins
Case 2continued
Thebiochemicaland haematologicalabnormalitiesaresuggestive
ofaPLEandthiscorrelateswithclinical signsSevereinflammatory
e
Biochemistry
Severe hypoalbuminaemia
possibledifferential diagnoses.
Hypoglobulinaemia
Whatfurthertestswouldyourecommend?
Hypocalcaemia
Hypokalaemia.
Urinalysis:to exclude protein loss via the urine (including urine
protein:creatinineratio and sediment examination)
How wouldyou interpret theseresults and
Bileacidfunctiontest:toexcludeseverehepaticinsufficiencyas
whatarethelikelydifferential diagnoses?
the cause of hypoproteinaemia
ThehamatologyhwsaeuthiiawithaleftshitTheechange
Abdominal ultrasonography: to assess gastrointestinal wall
mayreftlmmanblttnidnrai
thicknessandarchitectureMesentericlymphnodesizecanalsbe
anaemiayresultfrmanychronicdiasbonmarowdisear
assessdfelargedinneedleapracanbtand
acutebloodloss(withinsufficienttimeforthebonemarrowtoresond）.
Thoracocentesis/abdominocentesis:ifclinicalsignsindicatedthe
-Mid thrombocytopenia may be due to decreased production (bone
presencefbdcavitefionentsisoudf
marrow disease), increased consumption （thrombus formation,
determine proteincontent andcytologyof thefluid
disseminatedintravasularcoagulation)loss(bloodloss)orpossily
Faecal -protease inhibitor: to detect protein loss via the
increaseddestruction(immune-mediatedthrombocytopeniaalthough
gastrointestinlractThis testissefulnthearlystagesf
thisusuallyresults inmuchmore severethrombocytopenia.
when few clinical signs are present
Amildmonocytsisinconjnction withleft shitedneutrophiiais
Gastrointestinalbiopyendosopicorfulthicknessgutbipies
consistent with on-going inflammation.The presence of atypical
are necessary to confirm a diagnosis of PLE. Severe hypo-
mononuclearcellissupicousfannderlyingneplasticdirder
albuminaemiamayimpairwoundhealing andincrease theriskof
surgicalwound dehiscence following fullthickness gutbiopsies.
The biochemical changes are dominated by severe panhypo-
End
proteinaemia.Hypoalbuminaemiamay be due to:
tissueisobtainedandsopathologicalchangesindeeperlayersofthe
intestinal wall may bemissed.
Proteinloss protein-losing enteropathy (PLE) (globulis are also
Furtherresults
decreased;protein-losingnephropathy(globulinconcentrationusually
normal;haemorrhage(PCVand globulinsalsodecreased);efusions
Thickenedintestinalloopswereidentifiedusingultrasound
Decreased production of protein: severe liver insufficiency;
Uppergastrointstinalndpywaspeformedtbtanntestial
malabsorption;maldigestion;starvation.
biopsies.The duodenal mucosa was grossly abnormal with a
cobbletoeapaanceandwasverfrialnnraer
Hypoglobulinaemiaresultsfrombloodlossorprotein-losingenteropathy.
of lymphocytesandplasmacelswerepresentinthelamina propria
Calciumhiglyprtinud,erelbinail
consistent withadiagnosisof lymphocyticplasmacyticenteritis.
result in decreased serum calcium concentration.A corrected calcium
Outcome and post-mortem findings
concentrationcanbecalculatedtodeterminethesignificanceof the
The dogresponded poorly to treatment andwaseuthanased4weeks
hypocalcaemia.Anionizedcalciumconcentrationwilldeterminewhether
thebiologicalyactivecalciumfractionisdecreased.
later.Apost-mortemexaminationwasperformedandconfirmed the
presenceof lymphomawhichunfortunatelymaybemisdiagnosedas
Hypokalaemiaoccurs due to decreased intake(e.g.anorexia)or
inflammatoryboweldiseaseonendoscopyduetothesuperficialnature
increased lss(.gnlfairediarha)verehkalam
of thetisuesspecimens obtainedThismayexplainthe presencef
cancauseprofoundweakessaralyticntestinalileusandcardiac
atypical mononuclear cellsin the blood.
arrhythmias.
(IgA)gammopathyinadog.Journalof theAmericanVeterinary
Referencesandfurtherreading
MedicalAssociation170,1313-1316
Diehl K.Lappin M,Jones Rand Cayatte S (1992)Monoclonal
BakerRandValli V(1986)Areviewof feline proteinelectrophoresis.
gammopathyinadogwithplasmacyticgastroenterocolitis.Journal
of theAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation2011233-1236
VeterinaryClinicalPathology15,20-25
DimopoulousMandAlexanianR(1994)Waldenstrom'smacro-
BellTutiltiaraandDaM）
globulinaemia.Blood83,1452-1459
Autosomalrecessive severecombined immunodeficiencyof
DraznerF(1982)Multiplemyelomainthecat.JournaloftheAmerican
JackRussellTerrier.JournalofVeterinaryDiagnosticInvestigation
AnimalHospitalAssociation4,200-214
14,194-204
BreitshwerdE,HalliwellWFolyC,StarkDandorwin（9）
immunosorbentassayforcanineC-reactive protein.Veterinary
A hereditary diarrheticsyndromeintheBasenjicharacterisedby
malabsortionproteinloingeneropathyandhyergamma
Record124,490-491
EckrDfaDr
globulinemia.JournaloftheAmericanAnimalHospitalAssociation
Parton R,Bennett D and Fitzpatrick JL（1999）An automated
16,551-560
assayforhaptoglobin:prevention of interference fromalbumin.
BurkhardMMyD,osychuRNlSandhultheiss（1995)
Monoclonalgammopathyinadogwithchronicpyoderma.Journal
ComparativeHaematologyInternationa/9,117-124
Felsburg P(1992)Overviewof the immune systemand immuno-
ofVeterinaryInternalMedicine9,357-360
deficiency disease.Veterinary ClinicsofNorthAmerica:Small
BushBM（1991）Interpretationof LaboratoryResultsforSmallAnimal
Cliniciansdn.Blackwellciencexrd
AnimalPractice24,629-653
Font A,Closa JandMascort J(1994) Monoclonal gammopathy in a
CoutoCrakwaJnsnGietPHillafradd
dogwithvisceralleishmaniasis.JournalofVeterinary Internal
KocibaG（1989)Invitroimmunologicalfeaturesof Weimaraner
Medicine823-235
dogswith neutrophil abnormalities andrecurrent infections.
ForresterSand RelfordR(1992)Serum hyperviscosity syndrome:its
VeterinaryImmunologyandImmunopathology23,103-112
DayM(1999)Immunodeficiency disease.In:ClinicalImmunologyof
diagnosisandtreatment.VeterinaryMedicine874854
GiraudelJ,PagesJ-PandGuelfijJ-F(2002)Monoclonalgammopathies
in the dog:aretrospective study of 18 cases(1986-1999) and
Limited,London
literaturereview.JournaloftheAmericanAnimalHospital
Day M,Power C,Oleshko J and Rose M（1997)Low serum
immunoglobulinconcentrations inrelatedWeimeraner dogs.
Association38,135-147
HoskinsJ,BartaOandRothschmittJ(1983)Serumhyperviscosity
JournalofSmallAnimalPractice38,311-315
syndromeassociated withEhrlichia canis infectionina dog.
DewhirstM,StampGandHurwitzA(1977)Idiopathicmonocolonal
111
Electrolyte imbalances
Barbara Skelly and Richard Mellanby
Introduction
Hyperkalaemia
Themaintenance of normalelectrolyteconcentrations
 is fundamental to health. Derangements affect many
Increased intake
Impairedrenalexcretion
 organs, including the nervous system and cardiac and
Redistribution
skeletal muscle.Majorimbalancescan cause severe
FOOD
Normalplasmapotassium
clinical signs and death.Levels of the major electro-
CELLS
lytes(potassium,sodium,calcium and magnesium)
Renal losses
are closely controlled by the action of multiple hor-
Gastrointestinal losses
Redistribution
mones and by the kidneys.
Hypokalaemia
Disorders of potassium homeostasis
The main mechanisms leading to the
8.1
development of hyper-or hypokalaemia.
Measurementofpotassium inserum and
Laboratory orinterpretiveerror
plasma
Potassium canbemeasured by flame emission spec-
Haemolysed blood sample
trophotometry or,more commonly,by using direct
Thrombocytosis
Massive leucocytosis
or indirect ion-selective electrodes.Only direct ion-
sensitiveelectrodesareunaffectedbylipaemiaor
Increased potassium from exogenous sources
markedhyperproteinaemia,whichartefactuallyraise
potassium concentration when othermethods areused.
Intravenousfluidtherapycontainingpotassiumsalts
Increased dietaryintakeorsupplementation
Distribution of potassium in the body
Reduced potassium excretion
Potassium isprimarily locatedwithincellsand ismain-
Anuric oroliguricrenalfalure
tained in this compartment by the sodium/potassium
Urinaryoutflowobstruction
ATPase pump. The result of this pumping mechanism
Urinarybladderupture
is that theserumconcentrationofpotassium islow
Hypoadrenocorticism
Primary hypoaldosteronism
(3.5-5.8 mmol/l in dogs and 3.6-4.5 mmol/ in cats),
Drug therapyPotassium-sparing diuretics,e.g.spironolactone
while the intracellular potassium concentration is high
Angiotensinconvertingenzymeinhibitors
(140-150 mmol/l in both species).
Non-steroidalantintlammatoryagents
Both hyper- and hypokalaemia have profound ef-
Potasiumredistributionmovement fromcell intoextracellular
fects on the heart.Hyperkalaemia leads to brady-
fluid
cardia, atrial standstill and ventricular escape,while
Metabolicacidosis-causedbyaninorganicacid
hypokalaemia canpredispose to tachyarrhythmias.
Hyperosmolality
Pseudohypoadrenocorticism Whipworms
How is potassium balance maintained?
Hypovolaemia caused by severe
Potassium enters thebody in food.The main route for
vomiting/diarrhoea
Effectivecirculating volumedepletiondueto
excretion isrenal,anda smallamount islost insweat
pleuraleritonealorericardialeffusion
and faeces(Figure 8.1).Alterations in aldosterone and
Massivetissrutonulim
serumpotassium concentrationscontrol thelossof
Beta-adrenergic blockade
potassium in the distal nephron.
Digitalis toxicity
Miscellaneous causes
Hyperkalaemia
Drug therapy - ACE-inhibitors
Hyperkalaemia may be due to laboratory error, failure
EDTA contamination of blood samples
ofrenal excretion,redistributionofpotassium out of
Late gestation pregnancy
cells into the extracellular fluid(ECF)or exogenous
Differential diagnosis of hyperkalaemia.The
sources (Figure 8.2).
8.2
most common differentials are shown in italics.
113
Chapter8Electrolyteimbalances
Laboratoryorinterpretive error
HYPOKALAEMIA
Elevated numbers ofplatelets and leucocytes can
K+
release theirintracellularpotassiuminvitro,especially
in clotted serum samples,with resultant hyperkal-
aemia.A haemolysed blood sample may have an
increased potassium concentration although,since
red cells have alowintracellularpotassium concentra-
Na+
tion,the increase observed may reflect the lysis of
other cell lines.The red cells of Akita have unusually
Na
highintracellularpotassium;haemolysisthus produces
a more dramatic effect (Degen,1987).
Hypero
Failure ofrenal excretion
Failureof renal excretion isusuallyduetoeitherrenal
failure orurinary tract obstruction. Hypoadrenocorticism
HYPERKALAEMIA
isalesscommoncause.
Factorsaffectingpotassium movement into and
8.3
out of the cell(represented by an oval in this
Renalfailureasacauseforhyperkalaemia:Serum
diagram).The Na+/K+/ATPase pump mediates the
potassiumrisesbecause a fall in the glomerularfiltra-
movement of potassium into the cell, whereas outward
tion rate (GFR) reduces distal tubular flow and, as a
movement is caused by solvent drag or by displacement
of potassium by other cations.
consequence,reduces potassium excretion.Forrenal
failure to cause hyperkalaemia theremust be asignifi-
cant reduction in urine production(either anuria or
oliguria),usually due to acute renalfailure orend-stage
enters theECFtopreserve electroneutrality.Organic
chronicrenalfailure.
acids,such as lactic acid orketoacids,do not provoke
thismovementofpotassiumordosotoalimitedextent,
Urinary tract obstruction: If there is complete ob-
presumably since their associated anions are able to
struction to urineoutflow thenpotassium concentra-
follow them to an intracellular location more easily. The
tionsriserapidly anddramaticallyduetoa sudden
hyperkalaemia of diabeticketoacidosis occursvia a
marked reduction in GFR. Metabolic acidosis also
differentmechanism(solventdrag)wherebywatermove-
develops andexacerbatesthe hyperkalaemia duetoa
ment out of cells drawspotassium into the ECF.Respi-
shift ofpotassium outof cells into theinterstitiumand
plasma.Azotaemia,hyperphosphataemia and hypo-
redistribution;the reasons for this are unclear.
calcaemia are commonlypresent.
Pseudohypoadrenocorticism:This hasbeen de-
Urinarytractrupture:In uroabdomen,urine is not
scribed indogswithTrichurisvulpisinfection andother
voided and thewhole bodypotassium loadrises,with
primarygastrointestinaldiseases(DiBartola etal.,1985;
a subsequent rise in plasma potassium.High levels of
Graves et al., 1994). Fluid sequestration into body
creatinine in abdominalfluid suggests thaturinary tract
cavities or into the pericardial sac (so-called third
rupture has occurred(Chapter 21).
spaceloss)mayalsocauseelectrolyteabnormalities
that mimic hypoadrenocorticism. The mechanisms for
Hypoadrenocorticism:Inhypoadrenocorticism (Chap-
thisarecomplex and involve:
ter 18) low levelsofaldosteroneleadtodecreased
sodiumresorptionandreducedpotassium excretion in
Hypovolaemia,inducing anti-diuretichormone
the distal nephron.This usually results in a marked
(ADH)release and waterretention(lowering
elevationinserumpotassium,coupledwithhyponatrae-
sodium)
mia andamarkedreductionin thesodium:potassium
A reductionin tubularfluidflow to the distal
ratio(<24).A small proportion of cases do not have
tubule, due to decreased GFR,leading to
electrolyte abnormalities(Sadek and Schaer,1996).An
reduced potassium excretion
ACTH stimulation test provides the definitive diagnosis,
Repeated drainage of effusions, leading to total 
withcortisol levelsusuallybeingundetectablepreand
body sodium loss
post ACTH (see Chapter 18).
Patient thirst,leading to increasedwaterintake
(lowering sodium)
Potassium redistribution
Metabolic acidosismay develop due to
Factors affectingpotassiumredistributionare summa-
alimentary loss of bicarbonate, leading to a shift
rized in Figure 8.3.
of potassium out of cells.
Acid-basedisturbances:Hydrogenionsfrom strong
Thenetresult is a dilutionof extracellular sodium
acids,such ashydrochloric acid,are able to displace
and an increase inextracellularpotassium.
potassium from cells,resulting inhyperkalaemia(see
Chapter 9). This occurs because chloride (the major
Massive tissue breakdown:Thisresults in hyper-
extracellular anion) cannot follow hydrogen ions into
kalaemia due torelease ofmassiveamountsof intra-
cells,andsowhenhydrogenions entercells,potassium
cellularpotassium into thecirculation.Causes include:
114
Chapter8Electrolyteimbalances
Laboratoryorinterpretive error
HYPOKALAEMIA
Elevatednumbersofplatelets and leucocytescan
K+
release theirintracellularpotassium invitro,especially
in clotted serum samples,with resultant hyperkai-
aemia. A haemolysed blood sample may have an
increased potassium concentration although, since
ergicagonists
red cellshave alowintracellularpotassium concentra-
K
Na
tion,the increase observedmay reflect the lysis of
Na+
other cellines.The red cells of Akita have unusually
highintracellularpotassium;haemolysisthusproduces
a more dramatic effect (Degen,1987).
Hyperc
Failureofrenalexcretion
Failure of renal excretion is usuallydue toeitherrenal
HYPERKALAEMIA
failure orurinarytractobstruction.Hypoadrenocorticism
is aless common cause.
Factorsaffectingpotassiummovement into and
8.3
out of the cell(represented by an oval in this
diagram).The Na/K+/ATPase pump mediates the
Renal failure asa causeforhyperkalaemia:Serum
movement of potassium into the cell,whereas outward
potassium risesbecausea fall in the glomerularfiltra-
movement is caused by solvent drag or by displacement
tionrate(GFR)reduces distal tubularflow and,as a
of potassiumby other cations.
consequence,reducespotassium excretion.Forrenal
failure to cause hyperkalaemia there must be a signifi-
cantreduction in urine production(either anuria or
enterstheECFtopreserveelectroneutrality.Organic
oliguria)usuallyduetoacuterenalfailureorend-stage
acids,such aslactic acid orketoacids,do not provoke
chronicrenal failure.
thismovementof potassiumordosotoalimitedextent,
presumably since their associated anions are able to
Urinary tractobstruction:If there is complete ob-
follow them toan intracellular locationmore easily.The
struction to urine outflow then potassium concentra-
hyperkalaemia of diabetic ketoacidosis occurs via a
tionsriserapidly anddramaticallydue toa sudden
differentmechanism(solventdrag)wherebywatermove-
marked reduction in GFR. Metabolic acidosis also
ment out of cells draws potassium into the ECF.Respi-
develops and exacerbates the hyperkalaemia due to a
ratory acidosis does not appear to provoke potassium
shiftofpotassiumoutofcellsinto theinterstitiumand
redistribution;the reasons for this are unclear.
 plasma. Azotaemia, hyperphosphataemia and hypo-
calcaemia are commonlypresent.
Pseudohypoadrenocorticism:This has been de-
scribed indogs withTrichuris vulpisinfection and other
Urinary tract rupture:In uroabdomen,urine is not
voided and the whole body potassium load rises, with
primarygastrointestinaldiseases(DiBartolaetal.,1985;
Graves et al., 1994). Fluid sequestration into body
a subsequent rise in plasma potassium. High levels of
cavities or into the pericardial sac (so-called third
creatinine in abdominalfluid suggests that urinary tract
space loss) may also cause electrolyte abnormalities
rupturehasoccurred (Chapter21).
that mimic hypoadrenocorticism.The mechanisms for
Hypoadrenocorticism:Inhypoadrenocorticism(Chap-
this are complex and involve:
ter 18)lowlevelsofaldosteroneleadtodecreased
Hypovolaemia,inducing anti-diuretichormone
sodium resorption and reduced potassium excretion in
(ADH) release and water retention (lowering
the distal nephron. This usually results in a marked
sodium)
elevationinserumpotassium,coupledwithhyponatrae-
Areductionin tubularfluidflow to thedistal
mia and a marked reduction in the sodium:potassium
tubule, due to decreased GFR, leading to 
ratio(<24).A small proportion of cases do not have
reducedpotassiumexcretion
electrolyte abnormalities(Sadek andSchaer,1996).An
Repeated drainage of effusions, leading to total
ACTH stimulation test provides the definitive diagnosis,
bodysodiumloss
with cortisol levels usuallybeing undetectablepre and
Patient thirst,leading to increased water intake
post ACTH (see Chapter 18).
(lowering sodium)
Metabolicacidosismaydevelopdueto
Potassiumredistribution
alimentary loss of bicarbonate, leading to a shift 
Factors affecting potassium redistribution are summa-
of potassium out of cells.
rized in Figure 8.3.
The net result is a dilution of extracellular sodium
Acid-base disturbances:Hydrogenions from strong
and an increase in extracellular potassium.
acids,such ashydrochloric acid,are ableto displace
potassium from cells,resulting in hyperkalaemia (see
Massive tissue breakdown:Thisresultsin hyper-
Chapter 9).This occurs because chloride (the major
kalaemia due toreleaseof massive amountsof intra-
extracellular anion)cannot follow hydrogen ions into
cellularpotassium into the circulation.Causes include:
cells,andsowhenhydrogenionsentercells,otassium
114
Chapter8Electrolyteimbalances
Hypokalaemiacausedbypotassiumshiftintocells
electrodes are unaffected by lipaemia ormarked hyper-
Just as metabolicacidosis causespotassium to move
proteinaemia,which artefactuallyincreasesodium(toa
outof cells,alkalaemia cancausepotassium to move
greater extent thanpotassium) concentration'when
intocells(Figure 8.3).This effect is slight,however
othermethodsareused.
and rarely causes clinically significant hypokalaemia.
(See also section below onDiabetes mellitus.)
Theroleofsodiuminthebody
Sodiumisprimarilyresponsibleforproviding themeans
HypokalaemicmyopathyofBurmesecats:Burm-
withwhichwaterisretained orlost through the action of
esecatshavebeenreportedtosufferfromintermittent,
thekidneys.Undernormal conditions,the sodium and,
spontaneouslyimprovingweakness that hasanage
therefore,thewatercontentof thebodyismaintained
of onset of 2-6 months(Figure 8.5). Serum potassium
within a narrowrange.Thisbalanceis upset byeither:
is usually<3.0mmol/landcreatinekinaseisoften
elevated.Diagnosis is by exclusion ofother known
Lossof sodium and water(volumedepletion)
causes andbyproving thatthefractional excretionof
Lossof wateralone (dehydration)
potassium isnormal,i.e.appropriatelydecreased(<5%)
Gainof water(volume overload).
inapotassium-depleted animal (see Chapter11).
Incats and dogsnormal serumsodiumconcentra-
tionsrangebetween135and155mmol/l.
Sodium is the major cation present in the ECF and
isresponsibleforthepreservationofelectroneutrality.
Eachsodiumionisbalancedwithan appropriate
cation;chloridemakes up two thirdsof the total con-
centrationofcationsintheECF,withbicarbonatethe
next most prevalent.
Regulationofplasmasodium
 Plasma sodium levels are controlled by the regulation 
of bloodvolumeandplasmaosmolalityvia thefollow-
Young Burmese cat showing generalized
8.5
weakness andcervicalventroflexiondueto
ing mechanisms:
hypokalaemic myopathy.(Courtesy of ME Hertage,
University of Cambridge.)
Activation of therenin-angiotensin-aldosterone
system(RAAS)
Hyperthyroidism:Hypokalaemiaisarareconsequence
Release of ADH.
of hyperthyroidism in cats and is speculated to be
secondary either topolyuria causing potassium wasting
Reducedbloodvolumeresults inactivation of the
or to potassium shift into cells (Nemzek et al.,1994).
RAAS, leading to formation of angiotensinIl and re-
leaseof aldosterone(Figure8.6).Angiotensin llcauses
Diabetesmellitus-a causeofbothhyper-
increased sympathetictoneand soincreased blood
andhypokalaemia
pressureandincreasedabsorptionofsodium,chloride
Uncontrolled or ketoacidotic diabetic patientsmay
andwaterin theproximal tubuleof thekidney.Aldo-
presentwith normal potassium levelsor may be
steronecauses increasedresorptionofsodium in
hyperkalaemic,although most have whole-bodypot-
exchange forpotassium in the distal tubule.
assium depletion due to polyuria(osmotic diuresis).
Volumereductionandeffectivevolumereduction,
Several mechanisms are involved,including serum
as found in congestive heart failure,also trigger re-
hyperosmolality and insulindeficiency.In addition,
leaseofADHviastimulationofcarotidsinusbarorecep-
ketones,suchas acetoacetate andβ-hydroxybutyrate,
tors (Figure 8.6). However, these volume receptors
act as non-absorbable anions in the urine, trapping
are much less sensitive and,unlike the RAAS,are
cationssothatpotassiumexcretionisenhanced.When
activatedonlyafterasubstantial decreaseincirculat-
insulin therapyisstarted,potassiumrapidlyreturns to
ing volume.
an intracellular location leaving the animalhypokalae-
Thesechanges arereversed if there is an expan-
mic and thewhole-bodypotassium deficitbecomes
sion of circulating volume.
apparent.Once fluid therapy formanagement of a
ketoacidoticcrisis is underway,potassiummonitoring
Plasmaosmolality
isvital inorderto avoidseverehypokalaemia.
Plasmaosmolalityisareflectionof thenumberof
osmotically active particles of solute,measured in
mosmol/kg.ItisregulatedbyADHandthethirstmecha-
Disorders ofsodium homeostasis
nism (Figure 8.7).Changes in plasma osmolality,prin-
cipally caused by changes in sodium concentration,
Measurementofsodium in serum and
are detected by osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus.
plasma
Increasedosmolalityleadstoactivationofthethirst
Sodium canbemeasuredbyflameemissionspectro-
mechanism and ADH release from theneurohypophy-
photometry or, more commonly，by using direct or
sis of the pituitary gland.ADH acts at the renal collect-
indirection-selective electrodes.Onlydirection-sensitive
ing ducts to increase thereabsorptionofwater.
116
Chapter 8 Electrolyte imbalances
Tumour lysis syndrome following chemotherapy
Decreased intake
in the face of a large chemosensitive tumour
burden,e.g.lymphoma
Anorexia:Thisisprobably the most common cause of
Reperfusion injury following aortic
hypokalaemia insmall animalpractice.
thromboembolicdiseasein cats
latrogenic causes: Fluid therapy using potassium-
·
Severe trauma.
free fluids (0.9% NaCl) or low-potassium fluids
(Hartmann's solution)canlead tohypokalaemia,par-
Miscellaneous causes of hyperkalaemia
ticularly in anorexic animals.Fluids containing glu-
cose,or insulin therapy,will cause theserum/plasma
Drugtherapy:Angiotensinconvertingenzyme(ACE)
potassium concentration to drop aspotassium moves
inhibitorscause hyperkalaemiabyinhibitionof angio-
into cells from the ECF(seeFigure 8.3).
tensin-mediated aldosterone release.As they are
frequentlyused in conjunctionwith loopdiuretics,
Increased lossofpotassium
- which increase renal potassium loss, this effect is
often insignificant.
Gastrointestinal disease:Vomiting and diarrhoea,or
the two combined,canlead to clinicallysignificant
EDTAcontaminationofblood samples:lf the sy-
hypokalaemia by thefollowing mechanisms:
ringe tip touches the inside of an EDTA tube it may
become contaminated with potassium EDTA, so that
Potassium loss into the gastrointestinal(Gl) tract
when the remaining sample is expelled into the se-
Volume contraction stimulatesaldosterone
rum/heparin tube, it becomes contaminated. This
release and retentionof sodium withconcurrent
 results in marked hyperkalaemia, hypocalcaemia (cal-
potassium loss
cium chelated by theEDTA)andalsolow alkaline
Vomiting of gastric contents may result in
metabolic alkalosis, promoting movement of
phosphatase.
potassium into cells from the ECF.
Hypokalaemia
Reduced intake dueto anorexia orinappetence
The causes of hypokalaemia are summarized inFig-
ure 8.4and themostcommon causes are discussed
may compound these effects.
below.
Chronicrenal failure:Catswithchronicrenal failure are
much more likely to be hypokalaemic than dogs and may
developmuscleweaknessassociatedwithpotassium
depletion.Themechanismbehind the hypokalaemia is
Decreased intake
probablymultifactorial(increased urinary and Gllosses
Anorexia
and reduced absorption).An improvement in renal
Fluid therapyusing K-free fluids
function occurs following potassium supplementation,
and supplementationhasbeenrecommended inall cats
Increased loss
with chronicrenal failure(Dow andFettman,1992).
Gastrointestinal losses
Vomiting and/ordiarrhoea
Drug-associated hypokalaemia: Loop diuretics (e.g.
Urinary losses
furosemide)and thiazide diuretics commonly cause
Chronicrenalfailure
hypokalaemia. Spironolactone, a potassium-sparing
Post-obstructive diuresis
diuretic,isoftenused incombinationwithfurosemide
Polyuria
tooffset thehypokalaemia.Dogs and catsreceiving
Renal tubular acidosis
digoxinmustbemonitoredparticularlyclosely,since
Hyperadrenocorticism
hypokalaemiapotentiates digoxin toxicity andpredis-
Hyperaldosteronism (Conn's syndrome)
poses to development of dysrhythmias.
Hypomagnesaemia
Metabolicacidosis
Drug therapy:
Penicillin
Hyperadrenocorticism andhyperaldosteronism:
Loopandthiazidediuretics
Hypokalaemia duetoendocrine diseaseisrareindogs
Mineralocorticoid excess
and cats.Hypokalaemia develops in hyperaldo-
steronism due to excessive urinaryexcretionof potas-
Potassiumredistribution-increasedentryinto cells
sium, and this has been reported in cats (Conn's
Alkalaemia
syndrome) (Bruyette, 2001) and, more rarely, in dogs
Elevated insulin levels
(Rijnberk etal.,2001).Diagnosis relies on demonstrat-
Beta-adrenergic agonist administration
ingan elevated aldosterone concentration intheface
Hypothermia
of low ornormal renin concentrations.Hypokalaemia
Hypokalaemicmyopathy of Burmesecats
can alsooccurinhyperadrenocorticismwhenexcess
Miscellaneous causes
cortisol acts as an agonist forthe aldosterone receptor.
This effectis usuallyblocked bytherapidconversion of
Hyperthyroidism
cortisoltocortisonein thekidneybutcanbe seen when
Differential diagnosis of hypokalaemia.The
adrenal tumoursproduce excessive amountsofcorti-
8.4
most common differentials are shown in italics.
sol thatexceed themaximumrate of thisconversion.
115
Chapter 8 Electrolyte imbalances
8.6
Activation of the renin-
HYPOVOLAEMIA
angiotensin system
leading toaldosterone secretion
and an increase in systemic
blood pressure.When there is a
Sensed bycarotid
significant drop inblood
Renal hypoperfusion
sinus baroreceptors
pressure,ADH release is also
AngiotensinI
stimulated.
RENIN RELEASE
ADHRELEASE
Angiotensin Il
Waterreabsorbed in
collecting ducts
Aldosterone
Reabsorption of Nat,
Systemic
secretion
CandH2Oin
oog
proximal tubule
pressure
Reabsorption
of Na+in distal
tubule
RAAS activation
Hypernatraemia with water loss in excess of sodium
Sympathetic tone
ANP
Hypotonic fluid loss
Gastrointestinaldisease-vomitingand/ordiarrhoea
ADHrelease
Renal failure
Hyperosmola
Hypovolaemia
Thirst
Diabetes mellitus
Diuretictherapy
Normalosmolality
Normalvolume
Loss of pure water
Nephrogenicdiabetesinsipidus
Therelationshipbetween osmoregulationand
Central diabetesinsipidus
8.7
volumeregulation.Although hyperosmolality is
Primary adipsia
the primary stimulus for ADH release and increase in
Heatstroke
thirst,severehypovolaemiacanalsostimulatethesame
Pyrexia
mechanisms.(ANP,atrial natriuretic peptide)
Burns orextensive degloving injury
Waterdeprivation
Themaintenanceof normalosmolalityinvolvesthe
Hypernatraemia causedbyexcessive sodium gain
gain orloss of waterwhile themaintenanceof circulat-
ing volume involves the gain or loss of sodium. When
Increased salt ingestion
Hypertonicintravenousfluidtherapy
volume depletionissevere,even if osmolalityislow,
ADHreleaseand the thirstmechanism areactivated
Intravenoussodiumbicarbonate
Hyperaldosteronism
leading to dilutional hyponatraemia.
Hyperadrenocorticism
Hypernatraemia
The differential diagnosisof hypernatraemia.The
In animals where the hypernatraemia is secondary to
8.8
most common differentials are shown in italics.
volume depletion,the early clinical signs reflect hyo-
volaemia.When the plasma sodium concentration
increases,plasma osmolality increases.This creates
Hypernatraemiawithwaterlossinexcessofsodium
anosmoticgradient,thatfavourswatermovementout
ofcells,andcellulardehydration,whichleadstorup
Hypotonicfluidloss:Hypovolaemia due tohypotonic
ture ofcerebralvessels andfocal haemorrhage in the
fluidlossisthemostcommoncauseofhypernatraemia
nervoussystem.Clinicalsignsincludelethargy,weak-
becausethediseasesunderlying the electrolyteimbal-
ness, vocalization,muscle rigidity, twitching,seizures
ance aresofrequentlyencountered.When waterislost
and coma,signs similarto those associatedwithhypo
inexcessofsodium,forexamplethroughvomitingor
natraemia.The severity of the clinical signs depends
diarrhoea,thenhypovolaemia andwholebodysodium
on therateatwhich thehypernatraemia developsas
depletionmayoccur inthefaceofhypernatraemia.
well as themagnitude of the sodium concentration.
Movement of hypotonicfluid into a body cavity (ascites
Thedifferential diagnosesofhypernatraemia are
orpleural effusion)orother thirdspacescan similarly
listed in Figure 8.8. For an animal to become
lead to hypernatraemia. Renal hypotonic losses can
hypernatraemic it must either:
occursecondaryto theuseof diuretics,osmoticdiure-
sis (e.g.glucosuria) orpost-obstructive diuresis.
Losewaterin excessofsodium
Have anincreased sodium intakeeitherorally or
Heatstroke,pyrexia,burns orextensive deglov
through parenteral routes,e.g.intravenous fluid
ing injury:Thisgroup of conditions is characterized
therapy.
byfreewater lossthroughtheskinduetoskindeficits,
117
Kosiee
Chapter8Electrolyte imbalances
or to theincrease inwaterevaporationfromtheskin
ADHsecretionfrom thehypothalamusfailstooccur in
andrespiratorytractasananimalattemptstolowerits
responsetoincreasedplasmaosmolalitybutcanoccur
body temperature.
whenvolume is depleted(Crawfordetal.,1984;Dow
et al.,1987;Jeffery et al.,2003). This condition is
Waterdeprivation:Animalsthat areeitherunable
usuallycongenital but therehavebeen reportsof
or unwilling to drink water,such as disorientated
acquiredforms inolder animalssecondary toinflam-
geriatricpatients orthose with neurological disease,
matory disease (Mackay and Curtis,1999).Plasma
maybecome waterdeprived and should beassisted
sodiumlevelsare typically>170mmol/landovert
to drink.
neurological signs are often present,although animals
are not volume depleted.
Central diabetes insipidus:Central diabetesinsip-
idusis an uncommon condition in which there is a
Hypernatraemiacaused byexcessive sodiumgain
completeorpartial absenceof theproduction and
release ofADH inresponse to increased plasma
Increasedsaltingestion,hypertonicintravenous
'osmolality or to volume depletion. It can be congenital
fluid therapy,intravenous sodium bicarbonate:
(Post et al.,1989)oracquired secondary to trauma
Hypernatraemia asaresult of excessive salt intake
(Authement et al., 1989), neoplasia, pituitary cysts,
is uncommon(Khanna et al.,1997) but it can occur
inflammation or pituitary malformation (Harb et al.,
due to the ingestion of sea water,use of sodium
1996).Affected animals are unable to concentrate
phosphate enemas and as a consequence of intra-
theirurine andproduce large quantitiesof verydilute
venoushypertonicsalinefluid therapyorlarge doses
urine (urine specific gravity typically <1.005).Poly-
of sodiumbicarbonate.
dipsia occurs secondarily to try to maintain adequate
waterbalance.Hypernatraemia resultswhenpure
Hyperaldosteronism and hyperadrenocorticism:
water loss exceeds intake.Diagnosis isby the water
Hypernatraemia canoccursecondary toaldosterone
deprivationtestormodifiedwater deprivation test
or cortisol excess from secretory tumours of the adre-
andresponsetoexogenously administered synthetic
nalgland.Thisis discussed inmore detailin the section
ADH(1-desamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin or DDAVP)
onhypokalaemia.
(see Chapter 10).
Hyponatraemia
Nephrogenicdiabetes insipidus:Congenitalnephro-
Clinical signs of hyponatraemia are generally not
genicdiabetesinsipidusis extremelyrare(Takemura,
observedatalluntiltheplasmasodiumconcentration
1998;Luzius etal.,1992),while acquired nephrogenic
fallsbelow 125mmol/i.Ifhyponatraemia develops
diabetesinsipidusisarelativelycommon consequence
gradually then the clinical signs are few andless
of many systemic diseases, e.g. hyperadrenocorti-
severe:thebrainisprotectedfrombecomingoede-
cism,hypoadrenocorticism,hepatic disease,hyper-
matous by the movement of organic,osmotically
calcaemia and diseases inwhich there is a septic
active molecules(osmolytes)andpotassium ionsout
focus, such as pyometra. Although ADH is produced
of the cells,thus ensuring that the intracellularosmo-
and released inresponse to hyperosmolality,thekid-
lalitydecreaseswith theextracellular osmolality.lf,
ney is unable to respond adequately.The congenital
however,there is arapid decreaseinsodium andof
form of this disease is difficult to confirm and isa
plasma osmolality thenwater canmove into thebrain
diagnosis of exclusion(Luzius et al.,1992).
rapidlyand cerebral oedema develops (Figure 8.9),
resulting in lethargy,weakness,nausea,vomiting,
Primary adipsia (essential hypernatraemia): Prim-
incoordination and seizures.
aryadipsia isarare conditiondefined bya defect in the
Hyponatraemia may be due to excess loss of
central thirst mechanismcaused bymalfunctionof the
sodiumorgainofwateroracombinationofboth
osmoreceptors of the hypothalamus.Consequently,
(Figure8.10).
The cellular adaptation to
8.9
hyponatraemia in the
nervous system. (a) Cells within the
Na+
EXTRACELLULARFLUID
Na+
Na+
Na+
nervous system are protected from
Na+
Na+
VATEF
dehydration by the presence of
Na+
idiogenic, organic osmoles().
(b)When hyponatraemia develops
slowly a re-equilibration can occur
Na+
Na+
and osmotic balance is maintained.
Na
Na+
Na
However,when hyponatraemia
develops rapidly,theintracellular
space ishyperosmolarwithrespect to
(a)
(q)
the extracellularfluid,watermoves
(c)
into the cells and cerebral oedema
develops (c).
118
Chapter 8Electrolyte imbalances
Sodiumlosswithvolume depletionduetoGl,renal
Sodium loss
or third space loss:Animals may become hypo-
natraemicwhenelectrolytes and waterare lostconcur-
Hypoadrenocorticism
rently through the Gl tract orwhenfluid movesintoa
Gastrointestinallosse.gvomitingand/ordiarho
third space, e.g. the pleural or peritoneal cavity, or
Third-spacing of fluid
Pleuraleffusion，e.g.chylothoraxorlung lobetorsion
when renal losses have occurred (Figure 8.11).Al-
Peritoneaeffusion.gpticron-pticperitnits
though fluid losses,particularly through the Gl tract,
rupturedbladder
areusually hypotonicinnature,the subsequentphysio-
Diuretic administration
logical responses(increase inADH release,increase
in thirst,decrease inrenal water excretion)serve to
Volume overload
dilute theplasmaviaanincreaseinwaterintake and
Congestive heart failure
water retention. In volume-depleted animals the urin-
Nephrotic syndrome
Liver disease
Advanced renal disease
Diuretic administration:Animalsreceiving thiazide
Hyponatraemia with normovolaemia
and,toalesserextent,loopdiureticsarecommonly
mildlyhyponatraemic.Severe hyponatraemia is un-
Psychogenic polydipsia
usual, although idiosyncratic reactions can occur. Thi-
Inapropriatfluidtherayadinistrationfhtofid
azide diuretics can produce a situation whereby sodium
InappropriateADHsecretion
and potassium arelost inexcessof water.Electrolyte
Hypothyroid myxoedematous coma
Exercise-associated hyponatraemia
monitoring is important in animalsreceiving chronic
diuretic therapy.
Hyponatraemiadue toincrease inplasma osmolality
Hyponatraemia due to volume overload
Diabetesmellitus
Mannitoladministration
Congestiveheartfailure,hepaticfailure,ephrotic
Pseudohyponatraemia
syndrome andend-stagerenalfailure:Thecommon
feature in these conditions is volume expansion in the
Hyperlipidaemia
face of a perceived,but not true,hypovolaemia.Hypo-
Hyperproteinaemia
natraemiaresults from decreased sodium concentra-
tion in an expanded volume. Total body stores of
8.10
The differential diagnoses of hyponatraemia.The
most common differentials are shown in italics.
sodium are generally increased.
In congestive heart failure (CHF), as cardiac out-
put falls, renal perfusion and, consequently, GFR
Hyponatraemia due to sodium loss
decrease. This increases the proximal tubule's ability
Hypoadrenocorticism:Themost common cause of
toreabsorbsodium andwateranddecreases the
hyponatraemia due to sodium loss is hypo-
tubularflowtomoredistalsiteswheretubularfluid
adrenocorticism. Aldosterone mediates sodium up-
would thenbediluted toallowwater tobeexcreted.
take and potassium loss in the distal tubule (see Figure
The renin-angiotensin system is rapidly activated
and ADH release is precipitated through the stimula-
8.7) so the combination of hyponatraemia with hyper-
kalaemia provides the classic electrolyte profile for
tion of baroreceptors in the arterial circulation.Vol-
hypoadrenocorticism. In this case, although there is
ume overload on thevenoussideof the circulation,
volume depletion,theurine specific gravity and osmo-
though sensed bybaroreceptors in the left atrium,
fails to prevent ADH release. What is perceived is
lality are inappropriately low.An ACTH-stimulation test
avolumedeficit,althoughwhathasreallyoccurred
would provide confirmation.
8.11
The mechanism of the
ADHsecretion
developmentof
hyponatraemia throughvolume
depletionviarenal andnon-renal
routes.(Posm = plasma
osmolality)
WATER
Thirst stimulation
RETENTION
FLUID
LOSS
Aldosteronereleas
Renal loss
Non-renal loss
e.g. Gl loss;
K+loss
third space loss
DECREASE IN Posm
→
ANDPLASMANa+
Na+movement
into cells
119
Chapter8Electrolyteimbalances
isaredistributionofvolumeand a decreaseineffec-
sugarisrapidly takenupby cells leaving an addition of
tivevolume(i.e. the volume effectively involved in
water to the circulation.Muchof the water is also
tissue perfusion).
redistributed betweenbody compartmentsso that the
Innephrotic syndromeorwherethereis hepatic
circulation is not appreciably expanded.The net result
cirrhosis,similar volume redistribution occurs. Re-
is that the induction of natriuresis leads to hyponat-
ducedplasmaproteinlevelsresult inreducedplasma
raemiainthefaceofnormovolaemia.
oncoticpressureso that watermovesinto extravascu-
larlocationsandvolume depletion leadsagaintoADH
Causes of sodium:potassium ratio
release.Othermechanisms alsocontributetoareduc-
abnormalities
tion in circulating volume. In hepatic disease portal
Althoughhypoadrenocorticismisthemostobviouscause
hypertension leads to the development of ascites,
forareducedsodium:potassiumratio,there are several
while arteriovenous shuntingreduces theperceived
othercommonly encountered causes(Figure 8.12)
circulating volume. Nephrotic syndrome presents a
complexpictureinwhichvolume expansionandoedema
develop due tosodiumretention that isgoverned by
Hypoadrenocorticism
PrimarygastrointestinldieaseinldingTrichurisvulpisinfstatn
mechanisms other than therenin-angiotensin system
andToxocara canisinfestation
(Brown et al.,1982).
Pleural,peritoneal orpericardialefusion
Inadvancedrenal failurepolydipsiacanleadtoan
Renal failure
Heart failure
neys find difficult to excrete.This results in volume
Pancreatis
expansion and dilutional hyponatraemia.
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Urinary tract rupture
Syndromeof inappropriateADH secretion:Inappro-
Urinary bladder obstruction
priateADHrelease,orpotentiationoftheeffectsofADH,
Pyometra
Neoplastic disease
is rarely identified inveterinarypatients,although it is
Late gestation pregnancy Schar tal01)
widely recognized inhuman medicine.A recent report
describes the syndrome in conjunction with granuloma-
Differential diagnosis of low sodium:potassium
tous meningoencephalitis in a dog (Brofman et al.,
8.12
2003). When ADH is secreted inappropriately,water is
ratio.
retained and body fluids are, therefore, diluted and
expand. This leads to hyponatraemia and hypo-osmola-
Disordersofchloridehomeostasis
waterthrough theactivationofvolumereceptors.This
Measuring chloride concentrations
lattereffect meansthatoedema doesnotoccur andthat
Chloridecanbemeasuredinserumorplasmasamples
hyponatraemia is the major net result.
using spectrophotometric and colorimetric methods
and by using ion-selective electrodes,and should be
Psychogenicpolydipsia:Psychogenicpolydipsiais
measured on samplespromptly separated from cells.
usually described in large-breed dogs and is classified
Lipaemia,hyperbilirubinaemia and haemoglobin-
as a behavioural problemas there isnodeficiencyof
aemiacan artificiallyraisethechlorideconcentration
ADH synthesis,release and function,but the normal
when colorimetric methods are used.lon-specificelec-
control of thirst is overruled (Houpt,1991).As the daily
trodes are prone to interference from bromide ions in
water consumption increases, water excretion also
animals being treated with potassium bromide.
increases along withrenal sodium excretion. Thus
Sodium is the majorcationpresent in the ECF and,
both theplasma and urine osmolalities arelow.A water
for the preservation ofelectroneutrality,each sodium
deprivationtest or modified water deprivation test
ionmustbebalancedwithanappropriatecation.
(designed to correct medullary washout) can identify
Chloridemakes up two thirdsof the total concentration
mostcases and candifferentiatebetweenpsycho-
ofcationsintheECF,withbicarbonatethenext most
genicpolydipsia and the ADH deficiencypresent in
prevalent.Thus changes in chloride concentration
central diabetes insipidus(see Chapter10).
tend to followchanges in either sodiumorbicarbonate
concentration,inordertomaintainelectroneutrality.
Hypothyroid myxoedematous coma:Both cardiac
output andglomerularfiltrationrate arereduced in
Hyperchloraemia
hypothyroid animals. In hypothyroid myxoedema this
Hyperchloraemia may occur in association with
may be pronounced, leading to ADH release and a
hypernatraemia where thereiswater lossinexcessof
reduction inflow in the distal tubule of thekidney，
sodium loss or excess gain of sodium.Hyperchlor-
stimulating further ADHrelease.In addition there is
aemia without hypernatraemia is generally due to in-
movementofwater from theintravascular compart-
creased loss of bicarbonate into the gutin diarrhoea,or
ment into theinterstitium.Hyponatraemiaresultsfrom
into thekidney inrenal tubular acidosis.Both of these
a dilutional effectwhilenormalvolume ismaintained.
situations lead to a non-anion gap (hyperchloraemic)
metabolic acidosis(see Chapter 9).Hyperchloraemia
Hypotonicfluid administration:Hypotonicfluidsare
mayalsooccurduetoincreasedintake,eitheriatrogenic
classified asthose thatresult inanetwatergain,such
(fluid therapy, chloride-containing drugs) or accidental
as 5%dextrose.When5%dextrose is infused,the
(salt poisoning,see section on hypernatraemia).
120
Chapter8Electrolyteimbalances
Hypochloraemia
and intracellular compartmentsrespectively.Magne-
Hypochloraemia may occur in association with hypo-
sium is absorbed through the gut and is excreted by
natraemia as discussed above.In the absence of
the kidneys but no hormone has been found to have
hyponatraemia, hypochloraemia usually suggests the
aroleinregulating theconcentrationof magnesium in
presence of alkalosis (excess bicarbonate results in a
the blood.
reductioninchloride tomaintainelectroneutrality)and
The clinical signs of magnesium imbalance have a
the clinical signs are secondary to the acid-base
majorimpacton thecardiovascularsystem andthe
disturbance.Themost common cause ofa metabolic
neuromuscular system.
alkalosis andhypochloraemiainsmall animal practice
Thereislittlepublished data or experience in the
is the vomiting of stomach contents.Other causes of
managementofmagnesiumdisorders inveterinary
hypochloraemiainclude:
patients,though thereis considerable interest in this
electrolyte incriticalcarepatients.
The useof diuretics such as thiazides or loop
diuretics(furosemide)
Hypermagnesaemia
The administration of any drugs or fluid therapy
Hypermagnesaemiaisarare disorderand theprimary
that contain proportionately more sodium than
cause inveterinarymedicineisrenal failurewhere the
chloride, e.g. penicillins and sodium bicarbonate;
rate of magnesium excretion falls in parallel with the
this effect is rarely seen at commonly used 
decline in GFR.Other less common causesof
dosages
hypermagnesaemia include iatrogenic overdose and
Hyperadrenocorticism,as steroidhormones
the endocrinopathies hypoadrenocorticism,hypothy-
increase sodium reabsorption and renal
roidism and hyperparathyroidism.
 Clinical signs of hypermagnesaemia are not obvi-
chlorideloss
High anion gap metabolic acidosis (see Chapter
ousunless the serum concentration is severelyele-
9).Accumulation of unmeasured anions,such as
vated. Electrocardiographic changes include
ketonesin diabeticketoacidosis,orin ethylene
prolongation of thePR interval andwidening of the
glycol toxicity, leads to a fall in the measured
QRS complex.Thiscanprogresstocompleteatrioven-
anions (chloride and bicarbonate) in order to
tricular block and asystole.Neuromuscular signs in-
maintain electroneutrality.
cludemyotactichyporeflexia and,in extreme cases,
muscle paralysis (Martin,1998).
Hypomagnesaemia
Disorders of magnesium
Many of the conditions that result in hypokalaemia will 
homeostasis
also cause hypomagnesaemia.
Measuring serum magnesium
Causes of hypomagnesaemia include:
Only about 1% of total body magnesium is present in
serum.Likecalcium,thephysiologicallyactive formof
GIloss
magnesium is theionized form that makesup about
Anorexia
70%of the total.Fewlaboratoriesofferionizedmagne-
Renal tubular disease
sium measurement so usually total serum levels are
Hypercalcaemia
used. The drawbacks to this include:
Glucosuria
·
 Drug administration (diuretics, digoxin, cisplatin
Variationintotal magnesium levelswithhyper-
and ciclosporin)
and hypoalbuminaemia(compare calcium)
Endocrine disease(hyperthyroidism,
Poorrepresentation of totalbodymagnesium
hypoparathyroidism)
status through serum measurement
Redistribution induced by insulin or
 The occurrence of normal serum magnesium in
catecholamines.
the face of whole body hypomagnesaemia.
Hypomagnesaemia can cause cardiac arrhythmias
The normalrange fortotal magnesium concentration
and can increase the sensitivity of the heart to digoxin-
is 0.59-0.86mmol/l fordogs and 0.74-1.20mmol/l for
induced arrhythmias.These arrhythmias maybediffi-
cats (Clinical Pathology Laboratory, Cambridge Vet-
cult tocontrol without magnesium as well as potassium
erinary School):published values forboth total and
supplementation.Neuromuscular signs also occur when 
ionized magnesium arevariable and oneshouldrefer
there is concurrent hypokalaemia or hypocalcaemia
to thereferencerangefor the laboratoryused.
and include muscle weakness,muscle fasciculations,
ataxia orseizures.
Theimportanceofmagnesiuminthebody
In metabolicdisorders,such as diabeticketoacid-
and the consequences of imbalances
osis,magnesium depletionmaycausehypokalaemia
Magnesiumexists in thebody in an intracellular
that is refractory topotassiumsupplementation unless
location and,after potassium,is the second most
magnesium is administered simultaneously (Dhupa
abundant intracellular cation. Magnesium is a critical
and Proulx,1998). Similarly,in human critical care
co-factorforthefunctioning of the sodium/potassium
patients,hypomagnesaemiawasidentifiedfrequently
ATPasepump and thus hasan important role in the
aseitheraprimaryelectrolytedisorderoraspart ofa
partitioningof sodium andpotassium into theirextra-
complexdisorder alongsidehypokalaemia.
121
Chapter8Electrolyte imbalances
Disorders ofcalcium homeostasis
Parathyroid
glands
Disordersofcalciummetabolism arerelativelycom-
PTH
mon in small animal practice.As well as causing
significant clinical signs whichmay requireurgent
treatment,alteredplasma calcium concentrationscan
Serumcalcium
helprefine thedifferentialdiagnoses inananimal
25(0K）
25（OH)D
Serum phosphatet
showing vague clinical signs and can direct subse-
Intestine
quent diagnostic evaluation.
Reviewofcalciummetabolism
Feedbackcontrol of theformation of 1,25
Calciumisfoundinthreeformswithinplasma(Ganong,
8.13
dihydroxyvitaminD3（1.25（OH),D3)from25
2001):
hydroxvitamin D3(25(OH)D3).
Physiologicallyactiveionizedform
reabsorption in the distal tubule of the nephron
(approximately50%)
and increasing urinary phosphate excretion.
Chelatedformcomplexedwithlactate,citrate and
Circulating ionized calcium acts directly on the
bicarbonate(approximately10%)
parathyroidglandsin anegativefeedback
Protein-bound form (approximately 40%). Four
fashiontoregulate thesecretionofPTH.
timesmorecalciumbindsto albumin than to
Increasedplasma phosphate concentration
globulin.
stimulatesPTH secretionbyloweringplasma
calciumconcentrationand inhibiting the
Thepercentageofcalcium ineachformisvariable
formation of1,25(OH)D3
and depends on albumin and otherproteinlevels,
VitaminDisfirstmetabolizedintheliverto25
acid-base balance and concentrations of adminis-
hydroxyvitaminDwhich isthen metabolized to
tered potential chelators, such as citrate (Dhupa and
1,25(OH)D3 in the kidneys.1,25(OH),D3 raises
Proulx,1998).Ananimal'scalciumconcentrationshould
serumcalcium concentrationsbyincreasing
alwaysbe interpreted alongside the albumin concen-
intestinal absorption of calcium,mobilizing
tration.Hypoalbuminaemia canresult ina spurious
calciumfrombone andcausing calcium
hypocalcaemia (i.e. low total but normal ionized cal-
reabsorption in thekidney.The formation of 1,25
cium)or maskhypercalcaemia.A correction formula
(OH),D3 is catalysed by 1α hydroxylase and is 
hasbeen described fordogswhichadjusts thetotal
regulated bycalcium,phosphate andPTH
calcium concentration to the albumin concentration:
concentrations.1,25(OH),D3 formation is
facilitated by PTH and inhibited by
Corrected calcium (mg/dl)=
hyperphosphataemia(Figure 18.13).The less
Measured calcium(mg/dl)-Albumin (g/dl)+ 3.5
active24,25dihydroxyvitaminD isalsoformed in
the kidneys
To use this calculationSl unitsmust first be con-
Calcitonin issecreted by Ccells of the thyroid
verted to non-Sl units:
gland andreduces calcium resorption from the
bonetherebyloweringplasmacalcium
Ca(mmol/l)x4=Ca(mg/dl)
concentrations.
Albumin（g/l)÷10=Albumin (g/dl)
A fourth hormone,parathyroid hormone related
It isnowwidely accepted that thisformula has
protein (PTHrP),plays an important role in calcium
limitations and it is not commonly used(Meuten et
metabolism,particularly inmalignantconditionsinhu-
al.,1982).
mans and dogs (Rosol et al.,1992). PTHrP has a
Changes in blood pH lead to alterations in the
similarstructureandfunctiontoparathyroid hormone
negative chargesonprotein moleculeswhich,in turn,
and causes hypercalcaemia by increasing bone
leadto alterationsin theamountofcalciumboundto
resorption andrenal tubularresorptionofcalcium.
protein.In acidosis,there isa decrease in negative
charge on albumin molecules which results in a de-
Assays used in theinvestigation of
creasedprotein-bound fraction and an increased ion-
calcium disorders
ized fraction of calcium, whilst the total calcium is
The pathogenesis of calcium metabolism disorders
unchanged.The converse is true of alkalosis.
variesbetween diseasesand hasbecomebetterun-
The main hormones involved in the regulation of
derstoodwiththedevelopmentandvalidationof hor-
calcium metabolism in healthy animals are parathyroid
mone assays and routine measurement of ionized
hormone（PTH),1,25dihydroxyvitaminD(1,25（OH)D3)
calcium concentrations(Refsal et al.,2001).
and calcitonin (Figure 8.13).
Totalcalcium
Parathyroid hormoneissecreted bythechief
Totalcalciumismeasuredbyspectrophotometricmeth-
cells in theparathyroid glands and causes
ods using serum (preferable)or heparin plasma. Cal-
plasmacalciumconcentrationstoincreaseby
ciumcannotbemeasuredinEDTA,citrateoroxalate
mobilizing calcium frombone,increasing calcium
plasma as these anticoagulants chelate calcium.
122
Chapter8Electrolyteimbalances
Haemolysis and lipaemia usuallyresult in a false
careful fashion as PTH. The majority of hypercalcae-
increase,although the effect depends on the assay
mic dogs with an underlying malignancy have an
systembeingused.Total calcium maybe falselyre-
elevated PTHrP concentration. In contrast, dogs with
duced in samplesmore than24 hoursold.Reference
hypercalcaemiaassociatedwithchronicrenalfailure
rangesforserumarelower thanforplasmabecause
orprimaryhyperparathyroidismduetoaparathyroid
calcium is utilized in clot formation.
adenoma donothave anelevatedPTHrPconcentra-
tions(Mellanby et al.,2003a).There is no correlation
lonized calcium
between PTHrP concentration and the degree of hy-
lonized calcium concentrationscanbe measured by
percalcaemia (either ionized or total calcium).
anion-specificelectrode(e.g.inalaboratory orpatient-
side analyser).lonized calcium concentrationscan be
VitaminD
altered by in vitro changes in sample pH: red cell
Themeasurement of serum 25 hydroxyvitaminD con-
metabolismresultsinlacticacidformation,reducedpH
centration by high performance liquid chromatography
and,thus,increasedionizedcalcium;converselyevapo-
and1,25(OH),D3concentrationsbyradioimmunoassay
ration of carbon dioxide(CO2) from the sampleresults
hasrecentlybeen described in dogs(Rumbeiha et al.,
in increased pH and,thus,decreased ionized calcium.
1999;Gerber et al.,2003;Mellanby et al.,2003b).
lonized calciumshouldbemeasuredimmediatelyafter
Separatedserum issentovernighttoThe Supraregional
collection.Alternatively,sample into a heparin
Assay ServiceVitaminD Laboratory,UniversityDe-
partment of Medicine,Manchester Royal Infirmary,
place ina closed tube with nospace above the sample,
OxfordRoadManchesterM39W.Basednamall
preventing COevaporation.Serum gel tubes should
numberof clinicallynormal adult dogs,theprovisional
not beusedasthegelcontains calcium.Somelabora-
referencerangesfor25(OH)D3and1,25（OH)D3are
toriesprocess standard serum or heparin and then
19.3-43.6 ng/ml and 16.0-40.0 pg/ml, respectively.
correctfor thealteredpHusingachemical formula.
This assumes that the patient's pH is normal and so
Calcitonin
can bemisleading:if the patient was acidotic or alka-
A radioimmunoassayhasbeen developed for canine
lotictheadjustedionizedcalciumwillnotbeatrue
calcitonin,but is not currently available.Disorders of
reflectionof theplasma concentration in the animal.
altered calcitonin secretion in small animalshave not
been described (Rosol et al.,1995).
Parathyroidhormoneassays
A two-siteimmunoradiometricPTHassay hasbeen
Hypercalcaemia
validated for both the dog and cat (Torrance and
Nachreiner,1989;Barber et al.,1993).PTH is a labile
Hypercalcaemia in dogs
protein and care has to be taken in the transportation of
The clinical signs of hypercalcaemia vary depending
the sample to thelaboratory;it is advisable todiscuss
on the underlying cause,although neuromuscular,Gl,
specificrequirements with the laboratory.Usually,the
renal and cardiac systems are most commonly af-
sample is collected into EDTA,theplasma separated
fected (Nelson,2003). One of the most important
immediately andstoredfrozen(-20Cis adequate for
effectsof hypercalcaemia is the inhibition ofADH
short-term shortage).Theplasma shouldbe deliveredto
which leads to an inability to concentrate urine and
the laboratory frozenin special freezerpacks(usually
causes polyuria and polydipsia.Urine specific gravity
supplied bythe laboratory;seeChapter 18).PTH tends
maybe isosthenuricor hyposthenuric.lf theanimal
to be markedly elevated in primary hyperparathyroidism
fails to drink enough water to compensate for the
and chronicrenal failure.PTH is also elevated inhyper-
increased urinarywaterloss,dehydrationwill develop
adrenocorticism, probably due to increased urinary ex-
with resultant prerenal azotaemia.Long-standing or
cretionof calcium;however,ionized and total calcium
severehypercalcaemia,especiallyif accompaniedby
concentrations are normally within thereferenceranges
hyperphosphataemia,mayresult inrenaltubulardam-
(Ramsey and Herrtage,2001).
age and an intrinsic renal azotaemia. Consequently, it
isdifficult to distinguishprerenal andrenal azotaemia
Parathyroid hormone-relatedprotein
in animals with hypercalcaemia,since the urine spe-
Recent studies have clinicallyvalidated a two-site
cific gravity will be lowered inboth situations.Other
immunoradiometric assay for parathyroid hormone-
clinical signs can include lethargy,muscle weakness,
related protein(PTHrP) in both dogs and cats(Bolliger
seizures,inappetance, vomiting, constipation, diar-
et al,2002;Mellanby et al,2003a).The assay uses
rhoea and cardiac arrhythmias.Clinical signs maybe
twodifferent antibodies to humanPTHrPwhich are
mild,especially in cases of primary hyperparathy-
specificfordifferent,welldefinedregionsof thePTHrP
roidism when the hypercalcaemia may befirst de-
molecule. The two-site assays are generally consid-
tected accidentally,often when biochemistrypanels
ered tobesuperiorto assayswhichonlydetectone
areperformed forunrelatedreasons(Nelson,2003).
region of the PTHrP molecule since the two-site assays
Themostcommoncausesof hypercalcaemiainthe
aremore likely tomeasure intactPTHrPrather than
dog are malignancy,hypoadrenocorticism,primary
PTHrP fragments.Aradioimmunoassay has also been
hyperparathyroidism and renal failure (Figure 8.14).
validatedinthe dog,although this assayis notcurrently
These four disorders accounted for 95% of dogs in a
commercially available(Rosoletal.,1992).PTHrP is
seriesof40casesofhypercalcaemia(Elliott et al.,
alsoalabileprotein andshouldbehandledinthesame
1991). Lymphoma and anal sacadenocarcinomas are
123
Chapter8
Electrolyte imbalances
Disease
Pathophysiological mechanism
Comments
Malignancy
Frequentlybutnotinvariablydueoctopicproductionf
Total and ionized hypercalcaemiatends tobemarked.
PTHrp
PTH concentration is usually suppressed
Primary
Due to excessive production of PTHbya parathyroid tumour
Hypercalcaemia tends to be marked and ionized calcium is
hyperparathyroidism
(usuallyadenoma)PTHrpconcentrationisusualywithin
elevated.Phosphateconcentration tends tobeloworlow
referencerange
normal
Chronic renal failure
Precisemechanism ispoorlyunderstood-maybe due to
Hypercalcaemia tends tobemild and ionized calcium is
autonomous productionof PTHoraleredcalciumset point
usuallywithinthereferencerange.1,5(OH),D3
concentration is often low.PTH is elevated
Hypoadrenocorticism
Precisemechanism is poorlyunderstood
Hypercalcaemia isfound inapproximatelyone thirdof all
cases.reaphosphateandcreatininearecommonly
elevated.lonized calciumcanbe elevated ornormal
Young animal
Bone remodelling
Hypercalcaemia tendstobemildand associated withmild
elevationsinphosphateandalkalinephosphatase
Less common causes
HypervitaminosisD
Elevated vitaminDmetabolitescause hypercalcaemia
Canoccur duetorodenticide poisoning orinmanagement
and frequentlyhyperphosphataemia.lonizedcalciumis
of hypoparathyroidism.Hypercalcaemia can bemarked and
elevated and PTHisusually suppressed
animals are frequently at riskof soft tissuemineralization
dueto concurrent elevatedphosphate
Granulomatous diseases
Commonly observed in humans-hypercalcaemia
Reported inonlyahandfulofcases.ElevatedPTHrp
considered tobedueto dysregulated productionof
concentrationshavebeenassociatedwithtwo
1,25(OH),D3bymacrophagesin granulomatous lesons;
hypercalcaemic dogs with granulomatous diseases
limiteddatasupportsthismechanisminbothdogsand
(Fradkin et al,2001)
cats.PTHusuallysuppressed
8.14
Causes and pathophysiology of hypercalcaemia in dogs.
twoof themost commoncauses of malignancy-related
A large numberof other tumourshavebeenasso-
hypercalcaemia. Other, less commonly recognized
ciatedwithhypercalcaemia.Theseincludedthymoma,
causesofhypercalcaemiainclude hypervitaminosis D,
pulmonary carcinoma, nasal carcinoma, malignant
granulomatous diseases,non-malignant skeletal dis-
melanoma,multiplemyelomaandleukaemia(Matuset
ease,dehydration,juvenile animals and laboratory
al.,1986;Rosolet al.,1992;Foley et al.,2000;Kleiter
error(Nelson,2003).
et al.,2001;Pressler et al.,2002).
Since hypercalcaemia of malignancy is largely
Malignancy:Lymphoma isoneof themost common
PTHrp driven,both total and ionized calcium are ele-
canine neoplasms and is the most common cause of
vatedwhilst phosphate isusually lowor lownormal.
malignancy-related hypercalcaemia (Figure 8.15).
Hypercalcaemicdogswithlymphoma tendtohave
elevated concentrations of PTHrP,in contrast to
normocalcaemicdogswithlymphoma,whichhavelow
orundetectable concentrations of PTHrP(Figure8.16)
(Mellanbyetal.,2003a).PTHconcentrationstendtobe
suppressed. However, not all hypercalcaemic dogs
have elevated PTHrP concentrations and elevated
concentrations of 1,25(OH),D3 and prostaglandins
havebeen implicated in thepathogenesisofmalig-
nancy-related hypercalcaemia in humans.Hypercal-
caemiaisalsoassociatedwithotherlymphoproliferative
diseases, such as multiple myeloma and leukaemia.
Anal sac adenocarcinoma are arguably the sec-
ondmostcommoncauseof malignancy-related hyper-
calcaemia and typicallyaffect olderdogs.Thereported
incidenceof hypercalcaemiavariesbetween25and
90%of allcases and,in some instances,the tumour
lems develop(Bennett et al.,2002;Williams et al.,
2003).Again,ectopic production of PTHrP by the
8.15
Right lateral radiograph showing a soft tissue
mass in the cranial thorax (arrowed).Fine
tumour appearstobe the cause of thehypercalcae-
needle aspirates wereobtained and a cytological
mia in most cases.
diagnosis of lymphoma was made.
124
Chapter8
Electrolyte imbalances
Primary
Malignancy-associated
Hypervitaminosis D
Chronicrenal
hyperparathyroidism
hypercalcaemia
failure
Total calcium
↑
torNor↓
lonized calcium
f
↑
↑
LorN
Phosphate
J0N
Nor↓
Nort
f
(May be elevated if there is
(May be elevated if there is
azotaemia secondary to
azotaemia secondary to
hypercalcaemia)
hypercalcaemia)
Urea/creatinine
Nort
Nort
T
(Maybeelevatedwithhyercalcaemiaofanycauseduetoehydrationandinsevereprolongedhypercalcaemiadueto
renal tubular damage)
PTH
f
+
↑
PTHrp
N
↑(usually)
N
N
1,25(OH)D3
n/a
n/a
tor Nor↓(depends on
+
nature of vitamin D toxin)
25 (OH)D
n/a
n/a
Nor t(depends on
Nort
nature of vitaminD toxin)
8.16
Typical biochemical and hormonal changes in common causes of hypercalcaemia (t,increased;↓,decreased
N,normal;n/a,no data)(Bruyette andFeldman,1988;Barber and Eiliot,1998;Gerber et al.,2003;Mellanby et
al., 2003a,b).
normal in dogs with chronicrenal failure.Also,in
roidism is a well recognized cause of hypercalcaemia in
chronic renal failure phosphate is elevated, whilst in
dogs (Figure 8.17). Hypercalcaemia is often found inci-
primaryhyperparathyroidismphosphateisexpectedto
dentally when the dog has a biochemistry profile for
be low, although this may be offset by reduced renal
another reason. Most dogs are middle-aged to elderly
excretion of phosphate due to renal damage caused by
and the Keeshond is over-represented. In the majority
thehypercalcaemia.Thusnormal orevenelevated
 of cases the disease is caused by a single parathyroid
phosphate concentrations maybeseen in azotaemic
adenoma,althoughparathyroidglandcarcinomashave
dogs with primary hyperparathyroidism.
also been recognized.When present, clinical signs
Ultrasonographyoftheventralneckcanbevery
include polyuria,polydipsia,listlessness and muscle
helpful in the detection of anenlargedparathyroid
weakness (Berger and Feldman, 1987).As well as a
gland (Wisner et al., 1993). Because the autonomous
moderate to marked hypercalcaemia, most dogs with
parathyroid adenoma causessuppressionof theother
primaryhyperparathyroidismhaveloworlownormal
threeparathyroid glands,hypocalcaemia isa common
phosphate concentrations and a moderate tomarked
postoperative complication.Vitamin D supplementa-
elevationinPTH(Figure8.16).Thepresentationof dogs
tion is therefore usually given a fewdaysbefore sur-
with primary hyperparathyroidism can be biochemically
concentration should be closely monitored.
duetochronicrenalfailure;bothconditionsmayhave
elevated total plasma calcium,urea,creatinine and
Chronicrenal failure:Chronicrenal failure is usually
PTH concentrations and produce urine which is
associated with normocalcaemia or hypocalcaemia,
isosthenuric.In these casesmeasurement of ionized
Typically,renal dysfunction leads to serumphosphate
calcium is advisable, as it is elevated in dogs with
retention due to decreased glomerular fitration. This
leadstoafallinionizedcalciumsincethebloodionized
(a)
(c)
8.17
(a) Ultrasonography of the thyroid gland frequently detects parathyroid nodules in dogs with primary
hyperparathyroidism.(b)Appearance of parathyroid adenoma during surgery.(Courtesy of N. Bacon.)
(c) Parathyroid gland adenoma following surgical excision.
125
Chapter8Electrolyteimbalances
calciumxphosphateproduct must remain constant.
Clinical sign
Noted frequency(%)
Noted frequency (%)
Elevated phosphate inhibits 1α hydroxylase resulting
in hypercalcaemic
in hypercalcaemic
in reduced formationof1,25（OH)D3.in addition the
sbop
cats
failing kidney has a reduced capacity to produce 1α
hydroxylase, further contributing to lowered 1,25
Anorexia
88
70
(OH)D3,whichleadstoreducedabsorptionofcalcium
Polydipsia/
68
24
from theintestine.Thesefactorsresultinadecrease in
polyuria
plasmacalciumconcentration and anincrease inpara-
Vomiting
53
18
thyroidhormone.This initiallyresults inareturn of
calcium tonormal but,asrenal dysfunctionworsens,
Muscular
23
0
thisnegative feedback maybecome insufficient to
weaknessor
maintainplasma calcium concentrations and hypocal-
twitching
caemia develops.Thus thehallmarks of chronicrenal
failure are azotaemia, hyperphosphataemia, mild
8.18
Clinical signs noted in hypercalcaemic dogs
and cats (Elliot et al., 1991; Savary et al.,2000).
hypocalcaemia andisosthenuria.
Although chronicrenal failure is typically associ-
ated with normocalcaemia or hypocalcaemia,in a
important differences.Themost frequentlyrecorded
small proportion of cases the patient becomes hyper-
clinical signs are anorexia and lethargy,withpolydipsia
calcaemic. The aetiology of hypercalcaemia associ-
and polyuria being less commonly noted(Figure 8.18)
ated with chronic renal failure,however,is poorly
(Elliott et al., 1991; Savary et al., 2000).
understood;it may be due to autonomous secretion of
In cats, malignancy and renal failure appear to be
PTH, a raised set point for calcium autoregulation or
the most common causes of hypercalcaemia(Savary
increased bindingof calcium toretained anions,such
et al., 2ooo). Squamous cell carcinoma is associated
as citrate or phosphate. As discussed above, ionized
withhypercalcaemia asfrequentlyaslymphoma,in
calcium isusuallynormal inrenal failure,although on
contrastto dogs, where lymphoma isthe mostcommon
occasion it may be elevated.
cause of malignancy-related hypercalcaemia.Anal
sacadenocarcinomasare veryinfrequently diagnosed
Hypoadrenocorticism:Hypoadrenocorticism wasthe
incats and there arenopublishedreports of hypercal-
second mostcommoncauseof hypercalcaemia inone
caemia associatedwith these tumours.Hypercalcae-
large series of hypercalcaemic dogs and approxi-
miahas alsobeen associatedwith awiderangeof
mately 30% of dogs with hypoadrenocorticism present
otherneoplasticdisordersincludingmultiplemyeloma,
with hypercalcaemia(Eliotetal.,1991;Petersonetal.,
leukaemia,bronchogenic carcinoma andvarioussar-
1996). The hypercalcaemia tends to be mild and the
comas (Savary et al, 2000).
aetiology is unclear.
As in dogs, hypercalcaemia is occasionally ob-
served incatswith chronicrenal failure and theunder-
Miscellaneous causes:Young animalsoften havea
lying mechanism for hypercalcaemia is poorly
mild hypercalcaemia and hyperphosphataemia.Hyper-
understood.There are only a very small number of
calcaemia is also associatedwithvitaminD intoxica-
reportedcasesofhypercalcaemia associatedwith
tion. This can develop following ingestion of vitamin
feline hypoadrenocorticism (Peterson et al.,1989).
D-containing rodenticides,or maybeiatrogenic due to
Primary hyperparathyroidism has been reported in
overzealous dietary supplementation, treatment of
small numbersofDomesticShorthair andSiamese
hypoparathyroidism or following ingestion of topical
cats, and, as in dogs, is characterized by autonomous
secretion of PTH by a parathyroid adenoma: these
preparationsfor the treatment of psoriasis.Theprinci-
pal effectofexcessive consumption ofvitaminDis
animals have a normal or highPTH in the faceof
increasedGl absorptionofcalcium andphosphate
hypercalcaemia(Kallet et al.,1991).Dietary factors
leading tohypercalcaemia and hyperphosphataemia.
may contribute to hypercalcaemia: for example, long-
lonizedcalciumconcentrationswillbeelevated and
term use of phosphate-restricted diets in animalswith-
PTH concentration should be suppressed. Hypercal-
out renal disease often results in hypophosphataemia
caemiaisoccasionallyassociatedwith granulomatous
and compensatory mild hypercalcaemia.
diseases, such as blastomycosis and schistosomiasis
Idiopathichypercalcaemia is emerging as an im-
(Dow etal.,1986;Fradkin etal.,2001;Mellanby etal.,
portant differentialof hypercalcaemia in cats Midkiff et
2003b). The precise mechanism of the hypercalcae-
al.,2ooo).lt is a diagnosisreserved forcats where the
mia associatedwith granulomatousdiseases insmall
underlying cause of the hypercalcaemia cannot be
animals is ill defined but may be due to excessive
identified despite extensive diagnostic evaluation and
production of 1,25(OH),D3 by macrophages. The hy-
long-term follow-up. Affected cats tend to be young to
percalcaemia isoftenmild andshouldresolvewith
middle-aged and longhaired cats may be predisposed.
appropriate treatmentoftheunderlyingdisease.Again,
Both total and ionizedcalciumaremoderately in-
ionizedcalcium concentration iselevated andPTH is
creased andplasma PTH concentrations are normalor
low, with normal PTHrP concentrations. Feline idio-
suppressed.
pathic hypercalcaemia hasalsobeen associatedwith
Hypercalcaemia in cats
calcium oxalate urolithiasis.An association between
There are many similarities in the causes of hypercal-
acidifying diets and hypercalcaemia has also been
caemia betweencats anddogsbuttherearealsosome
noted. It is important torule out known causes of
126
Chapter8Electrolyteimbalances
creatinine,lowphosphate and a singleparathyroid
percalcaemia prior to symptomatic treatment. Pred-
nodule on ultrasonographyareindicativeofprimary
nisolone mayreduce plasma calcium concentrations,
hyperparathyroidism.ElevatedPTHrPandlowPTH
although the long-termprognosisremainsguarded.
concentrations are highly suggestive of an underlying
neoplasia. Hypervitaminosis D can be confirmed as
Diagnostic approach to hypercalcaemia
thecauseofhypercalcaemiaif vitaminDmetabolites
Thereisnowell defined,universallyacceptedstrategy
areelevatedandthePTHconcentrationis suppressed.
for the evaluation of small animals with hypercalcae-
Figure 8.16 summarizes thebiochemical and hor-
mia,but the following evaluations are often included:
monal changesseen in commoncauses ofhyper-
calcaemia and Figure 8.19 outlines a suggested
Thorough history
approach to hypercalcaemia,although the investi-
Careful clinicalexamination
gations depend on the initial clinical findings and
·
Serum/plasmabiochemistry
biochemistry results.
Imaging techniques to identify neoplasia (or 
 granulomatous lesions), including
Hypocalcaemia
ultrasonography of the ventral neck if primary
hyperparathyroidism is suspected.
Clinical signs
The clinical signs of hypocalcaemia vary, depending on
Ultimately PTH,PTHrP and vitamin Dmetabolite
the underlying cause. Animals can be asymptomatic,
assays will not only allow the clinician to understand
although many animals predominantly show signs of
 the pathogenesis of the hypercalcaemia in individual
neurological dysfunction,directlyattributable toa hypo
cases,but, in many cases, will be required before
calcaemia-induced increase inneuronalexcitability.
a firm diagnosis can be made (see Figure 8.16).
Theseincludenervousness,behaviouralchanges,focal
ElevatedPTH concentrations in a generally well
muscle twitching (especially ear and facial muscles),
dog with marked hypercalcaemia, normal urea and
facial rubbing, muscle cramps, stiff gait, tetany and
Lookfor neoplasia/lymphoproliferative disease
Clinical examination (check anal sacs)
Aspirate/biopsysample takenfrom anyenlargedorfirm lymphnodes
Haematologyprofile-cytopeniassuggestbone marrow disease
Thoracicradiography-cranial mediastinal mass,hilarlymphadenopathy?
Abdominalradiography-hepatomegaly,splenomegaly,enlargedS,
other abdominal mass?
±Scan liver and spleen and take FNA if infitrate suspected
Bonemarrowaspirate
Neoplasia detected?
No
ACTH stimulationtest
Hypercalcaemiaof
Normal
malignancy
Flat line
Hypoadrenocorticism
PTH elevated?
Yes
No
Azotaemia?
PTHrPelevated?
No
Yes
Yes
No
Ultrasonography
iCa elevated?
Continue search
1,25（OH）D3or
ofneckand
fortumour
25(OH)D
Yes
Nc
exploratory
elevated?
surgery
Yes
Parathyroidnodule
Renalfailure
Granulomatouslesions
detected:primary
or other causes of
hyperparathyroidism
hypervitaminosis D
8.19
Diagnostic approach to hypercalcaemia.
127
Chapter8Electrolyte imbalances
seizures.Exercise,excitement and stressmayinduce
Vitamin D deficiency:Inadequate dietary vitamin D is
or worsen clinical signs. Additional clinical signs may
ararecause of hypocalcaemia.Chronicrenal failure in
includefever,cataractsandcardiacabnormalities,such
both dogs and cats may lead to mild hypocalcaemia,
as tachyarrhythmias (Nelson,2003).
usuallywith normalionizedcalcium(BarberandElliott,
1998),due toreduced 1,25(OH),D3 (see above).
Causesof hypocalcaemia
Reduced intestinal absorption of Vitamin D(a
Hypocalcaemia has beenreported in a variety of clini-
fat-soluble vitamin) in dogs and cats with a protein-
cal conditionsand occurswhen thereis eitherimpaired
losing enteropathy or exocrine pancreatic insuffi-
PTHsecretionoraction,impairedvitaminDsynthesis
ciency,mayleadtomild hypocalcaemia(Mellanbyet
or action,orncases of calciumprecipitation orchela
al.,2003b). Hypoalbuminaemia contributes to the
tion(Figure 8.20)(Dhupa and Proulx,1998).
hypocalcaemia.
Hypoalbuminaemia:Thisisacommoncause ofhypo-
Precipitation or chelation of calcium:Causes of
 calcaemia; the hypocalcaemia is normally not of clini-
 precipitation or chelation of calcium are listed below.
cal significance asionized calcium is not decreased.
ImpairedPTHsecretion:Idiopathicprimaryhypopar-
Ethylene glycol toxicity: calcium binding to
athyroidism can result in severe hypocalcaemia
oxalic acid in therenal tubulesleads tocalcium
(Bruyette and Feldmann,1988).Primaryhypoparathy-
oxalatecrystalluria and increasedrenal lossof
roidismisrare,butiatrogenichypoparathyroidismmay
calcium.
Acuterenal failure:rapidlyrisingphosphate
occur incats due todamageof theparathyroid gland
during thyroidectomy. Again this may cause severe
complexeswithcalcium leadingto
hypocalcaemia.
hypocalcaemia. Increased renal tubular loss of
calcium exacerbateshypocalcaemia.
Increasedcalciumloss:Eclampsia occursmostcom-
Urinary tract obstruction: mild to moderate
monly in young, small dogs although any age or breed
hypocalcaemia may be due to increasedbinding
may be affected.The syndrome isrelatively rareincats.
of calcium tophosphate.
Clinical signs are usually seen 2 weeks post whelping
Phosphate enemas: have been reported to
(i.e.at peak lactation) due toa combination of massive
 cause hypocalcaemia in cats due to rapidly rising
calcium loss through lactation and fetal drain of calcium
serumphosphate levels.
duringfetalskeletonossification.Otherspeculatedcausa-
Acute tumour lysis syndrome:hypocalcaemia
tivefactorsincludeparathyroidglandatrophy andpoor
may result from phosphate(released from lysed
dietary supply of calcium(Drobatz and Casey,2000).
cells) binding calcium.
Disease
Pathophysiological mechanism
Comments
Acuterenal failure
Rapidlyrisingphosphatecomplexeswithcalciumleadingto
Azotaemia,elevatedphosphate
hypocalcaemia.lncreased renal tubular lossof calcium
exacerbates hypocalcaemia
Chronicrenal failure
Reduced1,25(OH）D3production
Hypoparathyroidism
Reduced PTH productionbyparathyroid gland
Both ionized and total calciumreduced.
Phosphate concentration tends tobe
elevatedTHconcentratininapproprial
low forhypocalcaemiccondition
Pancreatitis
Precisemechanismill defined butmaybe duetosequestration
Increasing severityof ionized
ofcalcmnripancratifatasreultfaonifiatnr
hypocalcaemia hasbeen correlated with
in soft tissues
poorer prognosis (Kimmel et al.2001)
Hypoalbuminaemia
Since 40%percent of total calcium isabminboud
lonized calcium is normal
hypoalbuminemialeadstoareduced total calciumconcentration
Eclampsia
Speculatedcausesincludeparathroidglandatrophyoor
Occursmostcommonlyinyoung,small
dogs 2weeks post whelping
lactationandfetaldrainofcalciumduringfetalskeleton
ossification
Protein-losing enteropathies
Hypocalcaemiamaybe due to hypoalbuminaemia alone;
howevermanycasesoflymphangectasiahavelowinized
calcium concentrations.Thismaybe dueto vitaminD
malabsorptionortohypomagnesaemialeading toimpaired
PTH secretionoraltered PTHaction
8.20
Causes and pathophysiology of hypocalcaemia in dogs.
128
Chapter8Electrolyteimbalances
Pancreatitis:hypocalcaemia mayresult from
a combination of low calcium,low alkaline phos-
sequestrationofcalcium inperipancreaticfat or
phatase and highpotassium.Total calcium may fall
in soft tissues as a result of saponification.
in samples which have been stored for over 24 hours
Increasing severityof ionized hypocalcaemiahas
before analysis.
beencorrelatedwithpoorerprognosis in cats
with acute pancreatitis (Kimmel et al.,2001).
Diagnostic approach to hypocalcaemia
Blood transfusion:citrate chelation of calcium
Thelistof thecommondifferentialsforhypocalcaemia
may lead tohypocalcaemia(Juktowitzet al.,
is relatively short and the history,physicalexamination
2002). This is only likely to occur if several units
findings,haematology,biochemistryandurinalysisare
are transfused or if blood collectionbags are
often very helpful in establishing the cause of the
underfilled,resulting in citrate excess （this most
hypocalcaemia (Figure 8.21). Bile acids maybe helpful
commonly occurs when inappropriate volumes of 
in evaluating liver function in cases of hypo-
 blood are collected into the full volume of
albuminaemia(seeChapter12).Trypsin-likeimmuno-
anticoagulant and subsequently administered to
a small patient).
pancreatic disease is suspected (see Chapter 14).
Abdominal imaging maybe helpful to evaluate the
Spurioushypocalcaemia canbeseenwith sam-
patientforGl,liverandrenaldiseases andpancreatitis.
ple contamination by EDTA when the tip of the
PTHisrequireddefinitivelytoconfirmcasesofprimary
syringebecomescontaminatedwithpotassium EDTA
hypoparathyroidism. Primary hypoparathyroidism is
as it touches the inside of the tube.Therest of the
the most likely diagnosis in a non-lactating, non-
sample is then injected into the serum orplasma
azotaemic,hyperphosphataemicdog with clinical signs
tube along with the potassium EDTA. This causes
of hypocalcaemia (Nelson, 2003).
Disease process
Total calcium(tCa)
lonized calcium(iCa)
Other laboratory abnormalities
Hypoalbuminaemia
↑
N
Low albumin
Hypoparathyroidism
K
↓
↑Phosphatelownormal to lowPTH
Chronic renal failure
N
Phosphateureacreatinn
Non-regenerative anaemia
Protein-losing enteropathy
JON
↓Albumin, globulin,
NorCholesterol
Exocrinepancreaticinsuficiency
JON
↓Albumin
Lowtrypsin-likeimmunoreactivity
Ethylene glycol toxicity
↑
↓
Ureareatininsate
↓Glucose,pH
Calcium oxalate crystalluria
Acuterenal failure
N
↑Urea,creatinine,phosphate
oliguria or anuria
Pancreatitis
+
Amylase,lipase
Urea,creatinine,phosphate
Inflammatory leucogram
8.21
Biochemical changes in selected causes of hypocalcaemia (t, increased; I, decreased;N, normal).
Case examples
Case 1
Signalment
Biochemistry(continued)Result
Reference interval
9-year-old male,neutered Lhasa Apso.
History
Sodium(mmol/)
132.4
135-155
PolyuriaplydipsiandweigtlosMorerecentlyhehasecomedll
Potassium(mmol/)
4.0
3.5-5.8
Glucose (mmoll)
32.0
3.4-5.3
Clinicalpathologydata
lonized calcium(mmol/)
1.40
1.18-1.40
Result
Referenceinterval
Bicarbonate(mmol/)
14.3
20-24
Biochemistry
7.195
pH
7.38-7.43
P,CO(mmHg)
27.1
35-45
Case 1 continues 
129
Chapter8Electrolyte imbalances
Case 1 continued
Biochemistry
Result
Reference interval
Urine analysis
pH
7.225
7.38-7.43
Dipstick:4+ketones,4+glucose,nootherabnormalities
P,CO(mmHg)
24.9
35-45
What abnormalities are present?
Sodium(mmoll)
143.3
135-155
Acidaemia
Potassium(mmol/)
3.2
3.5-5.8
Lowbicarbonate
Low P,CO2
Glucose (mmoll)
21.6
3.4-5.3
Hyponatraemia
lonized calcium (mmol/)
1.40
1.18-1.40
Hyperglycaemia
Glucosuria
Bicarbonate(mmol/l)
16.2
20-24
Ketonuria.
After treatment,what abnormalities are
Howwouldyou interpret theseresults and
whatisthemost likelydiagnosis?
present?
Acidaemiawithalowbicarbonateconcentrationindicatesthathere
Acidaemia
Low bicarbonate
is a metabolic acidosis. lf this were the case then a reduced
Low P.CO2
Hypokalaemia
excess CO and allowrespiratory compensation for the metabolic
Hyperglycaemia.
acidosis to occur.
Hyponatraemia is caused by a combination of urinary loss due to
What has caused these abnormalities?
polyuriaand dilutionalhyponatraemiawherebyanexpansionof the
The blood gas abnormalities are still present, although they have
extracellularfluidoccursthroughwatermovementoutofcells.Thiswater
improved in comparison to the original blood gas picture.ThepCOhas
movementis provoked by the high extracelular glucose concentration.
fallenstillowerasrespiratory compensation becomesmoremarked.
Inthiscasethepolyuriaislikelytobeanosmoticduresiscausedbythe
The blood glucosehasdroppedmarkedly afterinsulinadministration.
high glucose concentration.
Hypokalaemiahasnowdeveloped aftertheonsetoftreatment while
Urine analysisrevealsglucosuriawhichsnsuprisinggivenh
thehyponatraemiahasresolved.Hypokalaemiain thisseting isdueto
blood glucose concentration,andalsoketonuria.
Themostlikelydiagnosis is that this dog hasdiabeticketoacido
resolutionofthehyperglycaemiwillacontributstherewillss
sis(DKA).
solvent drag to encourage potassiummovement out of thecells.As
potassiumhasnowbeenredistributedapotassiumdeficithasbeen
What further testswould you recommend?
unmasked and the dog is hypokalaemic.
Measureureaand creatininetoassessrenal function
Measure phosphate concentration
Case summary
Assssthmajrgantin.glivr
Lookforafocusofinfection/inflammationthatmayhaveprecipitated
been added to the fluid therapyused initially.Diabetic animals are
the DKA crisis:
usuallynormokalaemic orhypokalaemicwhen initially assessed but
Haematology profile
frequentlybecome severelyhypokalaemiconcefluidsandinsulinare
Urine culture
given.Bysupplementingpotassiumintheintravenousfluidsfromthe
Blood culture
beginningeverehypokalamiacanbeavoidedltmustbermm
± Radiography and ultrasonography depending on the body
system involved.
Close monitoring of electrolytes in DKA patients is advisable,as
hypokalaemia canresult in severe weaknessgut stasis andcan
Continuetomonitorglucose,electrolytes andbloodgasparameters
predispose tocardiac arrhythmias.Hypophosphataemiaduetothe
assess ongoing treatment.
intracellularmovementofphosphoruscanalsobeprecipitatedonce
treatment has begun and generallyoccurs on the second dayof
Treatment and further tests
treatment.The signs ofhypophosphataemia include muscle weak-
Therapywasinitiatedusing0.2IU/kg soluble insulinand0.9%NaCl.
ness,gutstasisanorexiaandvomiting.Redbloodcellfragityis
Twohours afterthestartof treatmentvenous bloodgasmeasurement
increased byalackofadenosine triphosphate(ATP) within the eryth-
wasrepeated:
rocyte andin sverecasesamolsscancu
Case 2
Signalment
2-year-oldmale,neutered Cairn Terrier.
Biochemistry
Result
Reference interval
History
Sodium (mmoll)
187.2
135-155
Reported tohave had someneurological problems(bizarrebehaviour,
Potassium(mmoll)
4.25
3.50-5.80
head pressing)as a puppy.Several weekhistory of vomiting and
Chloride (mmoll)
149
105-120
diarrhoeaeculiarbhaviourandreltancetodrink.linicalexami
nation shows him tobe thinbut very bright andwithminimal signs of
Glucose (mmoll)
6.0
3.0-5.0
dehydration.
Urea(mmoll)
9.4
3.3-8.0
Clinical pathology data
Haematological parameterswereunremarkable.
Case 2continues
130
Chapter8Electrolyte imbalances
Case2continued
Primary adipsia oressential hypernatraemia
Diabetes insipidus.
Biochemistry(continued)Result
Reference interval
In thisasetheabsenceof thirstandreluctancetodrinkhaden
Creatinine (μmol/)
135
45-150
remarkedonbythwrenfboutsfvmiinganddah
that would be assumed would mae the dog stil more hypernatraemic
Calcium (mmol/)
2.80
2.30-2.80
anddehydratdhigcancncentratitinviencedby
Inorganic phosphate
1.27
0.60-1.30
that the urine specific gravity ishigh.The concurrent gastrointestinal
(mmol/l)
diseaseseemedtobetheprecipitatingproblemthat ledtheownerto
TP (g/)
67.2
60.0-80.0
atayoungagebutthesehadnotpersistedandhadnotbeeninvestigated
Albumin (g/)
40.0
25.040.0
furtheriventhishstoryand theverehyeatramiaould
lackof thistiteemsmostlelythatthsghaprimaryadi
Globulin (g/)
27.2
20.0-45.0
essential hypernatraemia.
ALT(IU/I)
29
21-59
Whatfurthertestswouldyourecommend?
ALP (IU/)
323
3-142
Brain magneticresonance imaging (MRI)
Cerebrospinal fluid(CSF)analysis.
Urine analysis
Case summary
Urine specific gravity >1.050
Dipstick:unremarkable
hypothalamussuchthattheydonotrespondappropriatelytoanincrease
What abnormalities are present?
inplasmaosmolality.hiscanbeaninheritedorcongenitaldefectorcan
Marked hypernatraemia
hypothalamus,e.g.granulomatousmeningoencephalitis.In this dog it
Hyperchloraemia
seemslikelythat thereisacongenital defectasthesameneurological
Mild elevation in urea.
sinswerebseedwhenthedogwaafewmonthsofagenMwa
How would you interpret these results and
performedthatconfirmedthat therewerestructuralabnormalitiesinthe
what are the likely differential diagnoses?
brain that could explain the dog's clinical signs.
Hypernatraemiawithfewornosignsofdehydrationcanbecausedby:
Themanagementof thisconditioninvovescautiousfluidtherapyt
restorenormalsodiumbalancefollowedbyregulatedwaterintakeinthe
formof foodmadeintoagruelorencouraging thedog to drinkbyusing
priate fluid therapy)
flavoured water or a mixture of milk and water.
Case3
Signalment
Biochemistry
Result
5-yearoldfmaleOldEnglishhpg
Reference interval
History andphysical examination
Sodium(mmol/l)
139.5
135-155
2-week history of lethargy,inappetanceand weight loss.On clinical
Potassium(mmol/)
5.73
3.5-5.8
examinationthedogwasdepressedslightlydehydratedandinoor
Sodium:potassium ratio
24.3
>27
bodyconditionTheheartratewas120beats/minute.Peripherallymph
Chloride(mmol/l)
115
105-120
nodes and anal sacs were palpably normal.
Urea (mmoll)
7.9
3.3-8.0
Clinicalpathologydata
Creatinine (μmol/)
139
45-150
Haematology
Result
Reference interval
Calcium(mmol/l)
3.56
2.2-2.7
RBC(x1012/)
6.94
5.5-8.5
Inorganic phosphate
2.03
0.6-1.3
(Ip/6) qH
17.2
12.0-18.0
(mmol/)
TP (g/)
58.5
60-80
HCT(/)
0.497
0.37-0.55
Albumin (g/l)
30.4
25-40
MCV(fl)
71.6
60-77
ALT (IU/I)
70
MCH (pg)
24.8
19.5-24.5
21-59
ALP (IU/I)
179
3-142
MCHC (g/dl)
34.7
30.0-37.0
WBC(x10°/)
23.9
6.0-17.5
What are the abnormalities?
Neutrophils(x10%/)
18.6
2.5-11.5
The most significant anmalityis themerate hpercalcaiah
Lymphocytes (x 10°/)
3.52
0.5-4.8
sodiumpotassiumratioislow,althoughsodiumandpotassiumconcen
trations arwitin thereenceangesphatsmldlylatd
Monocytes (x10%/)
0.45
0.2-1.5
Basophils (x 10%/)
0.034
0.0-0.50
hyperparathyroidism.Themild elevation inliver enzymes is a non-
0.05-1.3
specificchange andcouldbesecondarytoavarietyofextrahepatic
Eosinophils (x10%/)
1.26
causes aswellas anyhepatopathy.There isamild neutrophilia which
Platelets(x109/1)
244
150-500
could reflect inflammationorastressresponse.Thelymphocytecountis
towardsthetopofthrerencerangewhichnusuainsckanimal.
Case3continues
131
Chapter8Electrolyteimbalances
Case 3 continued
sodium:potassium ratio.The dog can be assessed for an underlying
What are the differential diagnoses inthis
radiographyandultrasonography.fncauseisfoundultrasonograhy
case?
ofthethyroidglandandmeasurementofPTHwouldbeusefultoevaluate
Themostikelydifferentialdiagnosesarehypoadrenocorticismmali
the dog for hyperparathyroidism.
nancyand primary hyperparathyroidism.The absenceof azotaemia
An ACTH stimulation revealed undetectable concentrations of cor-
rules out chronic renal failure.Less common differential diagnoses
tisol pre and post administration of ACTH hormone resulting in a
include granulomatous disease and hypervitaminosis D.
How would you investigate this case further?
not always have abnormal sodium and potassium concentrations
Anadrenocorticotrophin (ACTH) stimulation test should be performed
(Peterson et al,1996) or the classical leucogram findings(see Chapter
to assess for hypoadrenocorticism, especially given the low
Case 4
Signalment
10-yearoldmalneuteredcrosbreeddg
Biochemistry (continued)Result
Reference interval
History
lonized calcium (mmo/l)
2.12
1.18-1.40
3-weekhistoryoflthargyinappetanceand weightloss.Clinicalexami
Inorganic phosphate
0.98
0.78-1.41
nationrevealed that the dogwasdepressed andslightlydehydrated.On
(mmol/l)
palpationerpherallmphodesandanaacsweremal.
TP (g/)
72.8
60-80
Clinicalpathologydata
Albumin (g/)
33.3
25-45
Haematology
Result
Reference interval
Whataretheabnormalitiesandwhatarethe
RBC（x1012/）
7.49
5.5-8.5
differential diagnoses in this case?
Hb (g/dl)
17.1
12.0-18.0
ionized hypercalcaemia.Themost likely differential diagnoses are
HCT (/)
0.50
0.37-0.55
malignancyandprimaryhyperparathyroidism.Hypoadrenocorticism is
MCV (f)
67.2
60-77
unlikelygiventhenormalsodiumandpotassiumconcentrationsnormal
MCH(pg)
22.9
19.5-24.5
sodium:potassium ratio and thelymphopenia.Thenormal creatinine and
phosphate concentrations rule out chronic renal failure.
MCHC(g/dl)
34.0
32.0-37.0
Howwouldyouinvestigatethiscase
WBC(x10%/)
7.52
6.0-17.5
further?
Neutrophils (x 10%/)
5.31
3-11.5
Becausemalignancy isconsidered tobe themostlikely cause of the
Lymphocytes (x 10%/)
0.96
1.0-4.8
PTHcould bemeasured toinvestigate thepathogenesisofthehypercal-
Monocytes(x10/1)
1.16
0.2-1.5
Eosinophils(x10°/)
0.024
0.05-1.3
identifythecauseof thehypercalcaemia thenanACTHstimulationtest
Basophils(x10%/)
0.067
0.0-0.5
should beconsideredasthenormalelectrolyteconcentrationsandratios
Platelets (x10°%/)
219
150-500
do not eliminate hypoadrenocorticism as a differential diagnosis.
In this case thoracic radiography revealed a cranial mediastinal
mass.Anultrasound guidedfineneedle aspirate of themediastinal mass
Biochemistry
Result
Referenceinterval
diagnosis of lymphoma.
Sodium(mmoll)
143.5
135-155
The absence of peripheral lymphadenopathy does not rule out
Potassium(mmo/)
3.80
3.5-5.8
calcaemia,thoracicand abdominal radiographyandultrasonography
Sodium:potassium ratio
37.8
>27
shouldeperformedHowevermanyotherdiseaseprocessescancaue
Chloride (mmo/)
107.2
105-120
a mass in themediastinum,e.g.thymomas,cystslipomasheartbase
Urea(mmoll)
7.9
tumours,ectopic thyroid tumours.Thymomas are also associatedwith
3.3-8.0
Creatinine(umol/)
118
45-150
Calcium (mmol/)
3.96
2.3-2.8
See also Chapter 16, Case 1.
References
homeostasis in 80 cases diagnosed between1992 and 1995.
JournalofSmallAnimalPractice39,108-116
Bennett PF,DeNicolaDB,BonneyP,GlickmanNW and KnappDW
Authement JM,Boudrieau RJand Kaplan PM(1989) Transient,
(2002) Canine anal sac adenocarcinomas:clinical presentation
andresponsetotherapy.JournalofVeterinaryInternalMedicine
of theAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation194,683-685
16,100-104
Berger BandFeldmanEC(1987)Primary hyperparathyroidism in
intactparathyroidhormone:assayvalidationandsamplehandling
dogs:21cases(1976-1986).Journalof AmericanVeterinary
studies.JournalofSmallAnimalPractice34,614-620
MedicalAssociation191,350-356
BarberPJ and ElliottJ (1998)Feline chronicrenal failure:calcium
BolligerP,GrahamAichard,RosolRJ,NachreinerRFand
132
Blood gas analysis and
acid-base disorders
DerekFlaherty and LauraBlackwood
Introduction
Term(units)
Definition
Acid-base disturbances are common, and can signifi-
Alveolar
cantlyimpactoncasemorbidityandmortalityif unrec-
Arterial
a
ognized or treated inappropriately. While blood gas
A-(mmoll)
Anion(ofweakacidbufepair)
analysis can identify the presence of these distur-
AG(mmoll)
Aniongap
bances,areasonableunderstanding of theunderlying
pathophysiology is required to manage the case ad-
BE
Baseexcesmoutfacidnmmolqir
equately.Unfortunately,muchof thepublishedwork
to return1 litre of blood toapHof7.4ata PCO
of 40mmHg (5.3 kPa)
on blood gas analysis is based on human sampling.
The differences between normal values in small ani-
FO(%ordecimal of 1)
Fractionofinspired oxygen;e.groomairhasa
mals andhumans also mean that some of the defini-
FOof21%or0.21
tions used in human medicine fit awkwardlywhen
+H
Hydrogen ion
applied to animals.For example,acidaemia is often
[H1] (nmoll)
Hydrogen ion concentration
defined asa blood pH<7.35,but manyreference
HA
Weak acid
intervals forcats extend into thisrange.However,the
principles applied in human medicine have been ap-
HCO-
Bicarbonate ion
plied tosmallanimalsfordecadesnow and,while it is
H,CO
Carbonic acid
likely thatsome of the detailed datareported inthe
kPa
KiloPascal:Slunitofpressure:1kPa=7.52mmHg
literature areunsuitablefordirecttransfertoanimal
mEq/l
Milequivalentsper itre
patients,the principles of interpretation provide useful
mmHg
Millmetres of mercuy cmmnlyusedui f
guidelines.As for any other analyte,thereference
interval should beestablishedfor eachsystem.
pressure
Thischapterwill give anoverviewandbasicguid-
Porp
Pressureorpartial pressure:thetermpartial
ance onbloodgas analysis,but it is only withregular
pressurereferstothefactthatthetotalpressure
assessment of blood gas samples that the clinician is
isduetoacombinationofgases)
likely tobecome competentintheir interpretation.
P(A-aO（mmHg orkPa)
Alveolararerialxygengradintdifferee
Complexacid-basedisorderswillnotbecovered in
betweencalculatedalveolarPOandmeasured
detail in this chapter; the interested reader is referred
arterial PO2
toFurther Reading.Theabbreviations andterminology
PCO(mmHg or kPa)
Parial pressureof carbondioxide inaeralblod
used in the chapter are summarized in Figure 9.1.
PO2 (mmHg or kPa)
Partialpressureofoxygeninarterialblood
Pa(mmHg or kPa)
Barometic pressure
PHO (mmHg or kPa)
Saturatedvapourpressureofwater
pH scale
pK
Negativelogof thedissocationconstantHat
whichtheconcentrationsof theionized[A]and
The concentration of hydrogen ions([H+]) in thebodyis
unionized forms [HA] are the same
tightlycontrolledwithinarelativelynarrowrangeof
approximately 35-45 nmoll. These tiny concentra-
P.CO（mmHgor kPa)
Partialpressureofcarbondioxideinvenousblood
tions areawkwardtoworkwith clinicallyand it ismore
PO(mmHg or kPa)
Partial pressure of oxygein venusblood
commontodiscussthenegativelogarithm(base10)of
RQ
RespiratoryquotientratifuptakeO
the H+concentration,i.e.the pH.
exhaled).Nominal value=0.8
$.O2 (%)
Saturationofhaemoglobinwithoxygeninarterial
pH =-logo[H+]
blood
pH changes in the opposite direction to [H]:
S,O (%)
Saturationfhaemogloinwithoxygeninarterial
reductions in[H+] lead toan increase inpH and
bloodmeasured bypulseoximetry
viceversa.
V/Q
Ventilation-perfusion
Because of the logarithmic scale,the changes in
[H+] required to produce any given numerical
Abbreviations and terminology used in blood
9.1
change inpH vary at different pH values.For
gas analysis.
135
Chapter 9Blood gas analysis and acid-base disorders
The HCO-HCO system links the respiratory and
example,twice asmany H+ions are needed to
change thepH from7.5 to7.4 as are needed to
renal responses to changes in H+,which arevital for
buffering purposes:
change it from 7.8 to 7.7. This means that
changes in pH in acidaemic (usually defined as
blood pH <7.35) animals can reflect large
Respiratory response: increased free H ions,
reduced ECF pH, hypercapnia (an increase in
deviations from normal [H+]. Around the normal
 range a change of 1 nmol/i of H+ equates to 0.01
PCO2, also called hypercarbia) and hypoxaemia
all stimulateventilation.Healthypatients can
pH unit.
excrete a great deal of CO2. In normal lungs, the
limit to COexcretion is the availability of HCO
Buffering
Renal response: the kidney excretes H*, and also
effectively regenerates the HCO- supply,so
Chemical reactions within the body produce hydrogen
allows buffering to continue.Renal control of
ionsthatwouldrapidlyleadtoalterationsinpHincompat-
plasma HCO- is mediated by control of HCO
iblewith lifeif theywere allowed toaccumulate.Therate
resorption,and titratableacid and ammonium
ofproduction of H+istoorapid foreliminationfromthe
excretion.
body to keep pace, and buffering must come in to play.
Buffers arecombinationsof weakacidswith their'conju-
The respiratory and renal responses are effectively
gatebaseslf[H]inthebody startsto rise,theconjugate
yoked togetherina continuum.lf CO2levelswithin the
base can‘mop up’this excess, limiting the effect on pH.
bodyincrease,theequationabovewillpushtotheright
Similarly, if [H+] starts to drop, more weak acid can
and the excess H+ (and HcO-) produced can then be
dissociate toraise the[H+] back towards normal.
eliminated by the kidneys.lf H+concentrations rise,the
Manydifferentbuffersexistwithin thebody,inthe
equation will move to the left, generating extra CO2,
intracellular(ICF)and extracellularfluid(ECF)and in
whichcanbeeliminatedvia the lungs.Thisreactionis
bone.Acutely,bufferingintheECFismostimportant,as
not limitedbyHCO-because of the large quantities of
it takes hoursfortheH+loadtobedistributedthroughout
HCO-inthe ECF,andalso the tremendouscapacityof
thebodyandforintracellularbufferstobe activated.The
the kidney to reabsorb and regenerate HCO as re-
most important buffering system is the carbonic acid
quired.This is an oversimplification of what occurs in
(HCO)-bicarbonate(HCO) system in the ECF:
vivo,but gives some idea of the importanceof the
HCO-HCO-system.
CO2 +HO =HCO=H++HCO
The Henderson-Hasselbalch equationrelates
pH, H,CO and HCO- for the H,CO-HCO- system.
The significance of thisparticularsystem lies in the
fact that,unlikemostotherbuffers,saturationdoesnot
The derivation of this equation(Figure 9.2)illustrates
one of the most important points in acid-base physi-
occur because the end products(CO2,water,H+and
HCO-) are dissipated by pulmonary (CO2) or renal
ology: provided the ratio of HCO- to COremains at
routes. The pulmonary capacity to excrete CO2 is
itsusual valueof approximately20:1,thepHwill be
enormous.Inaddition,virtuallytotalresorptionormas-
normal regardlessof anydeviationfromnormal in
sive excretion of HCO can occur in the kidney in
the individual HCO-and COvalues.This concept is
important when trying to calculate the appropriate
response to alterations in plasma HcO-For both these
reasons, the buffering potential is huge compared with
compensatoryresponses foran acid-base distur-
that of otherweak acidsfound in theECF andICF.
bance (seelater).
Derivationof theHenderson-Hasselbalchequation
pH=-logo[H-]
ForanyweacidtheinizationequibriumcanbeexpressedasHA
Kisthe equilibrium constant (orionization constant) for this reaction and isdefined as:K=[H-][A-] /[HA]
Rearranging thisequation gives:[H]K[HA]/[A-]
If weexprethisinlog fom:log[H]-logK+log([A]/[HA])
-logK=pthpHatwhichtheconcentrationsof theonized[A]andunionizedformsHA]arethesamewhenthereactionsevenlybalanced）
Thus:pH=pK+log([A-[HA]).This istheHenderson-Hasslbalchequation.
Forcarbonicacidinthebicarbonatebuffering system:
pH=pKa+log0([HCO] /[HCO])
(pKof carbonic acid =6.1)
pH=6.1+log{[HCO]/(0.225xPCO）}
The concentrtionof HCO depends upon the dssolved CO, which depends upon the pCOMost carbonic
acidin thebodyexistsasdissolvedCO2，and0.225isthe solubiltycoefficient ofCOinblood inmlkPa
pH=6.1+logo 24/(0.225x5.3)
Mean[HOinarterialblood is24mmol,whilemeanPCOis5.3Pa
pH=6.1+logo(24/1.1925)
pH=6.1+1.3
pH=7.4
7.4isthemidpointof thenormalpHrangeof bodyfluids
9.2
Derivation of theHenderson-Hasselbalch equation.
136
Chapter9Bloodgasanalysisandacid-basedisorders
Samples for blood gas analysismust be stored
Blood gas analysis
aerobically, with no air/vacuum space adjacent to the
blood sample into which CO2 could evaporate. Com-
A blood gas analyser will directly measure pH,PCO
(partial pressure of CO2) and PO (partial pressure of
monly,samples are obtained in an anticoagulant-
oxygen)inthe sample,andwillderivevaluesforHCO
treated syringe and,after sampling,the syringe is
and base excess, based on standard normograms.
capped with a rubber bung or plastic cap. Alterna-
Hand-held analysers are becoming more widely avail-
tively,theneedlemaybebentovertoformaseal,but
able inveterinarypractice,and areusefulformeasure-
thisislesseffective and more dangerous.The sample
ment of blood gases and also ionized calcium. These
is introduced to the blood gas analyser directlyfrom
units also offera range of other biochemical analyses,
the syringe. Transferring blood to a tube will alter gas
but have notbeen fullyvalidated insmall animalsfor
pressures,and exchange will occur between the
blood and air trapped in the tube with it. Samples
these tests.
Arterial samples are essential forassessmentof
should beprocessedwithin 15minutes,and placed
respiratoryfunction,buteithervenousorarterialsam-
onice until analysis,tominimize changes inblood gas
plescanprovideusefulinformationof the animal's
concentrations asaresult of continued cellmetabo-
metabolic status.Arterial samplesmaybe drawnfrom
lism.Less than 200 μl of freshwhole blood or
thedorsalpedalarteries(Figure9.3)orfemoralartery
heparinizedwholeblood isrequired forhand-held
in dogs,and from the femoral artery in cats.After
analysers,and traditional analysers alsorequireonly
sampling,pressure must be applied for an adequate
small volumesof blood.
period of time(5 minutes) to prevent haematoma
Blood gas analysers routinely analyse samples
formation.Heparin is the standard anticoagulantfor
at 37°C,but some units have facilities for entry of
blood gas analysis.Heparin sodium(1000 IU/ml)can
the actualpatient temperature and correction of out-
be aspirated from a vial in a sterile manner,using a
put toallow for deviations from37C.Patient tem-
23 or 25 G needle, until the syringe barrel is filled,
perature has an effect on both PO2 and PCO2
then the excess expelled;thispreloaded 1or2ml
However,it is thought that more errors are madeby
syringe is used to collect the sample. The syringe
correcting forpatient temperature than byignoring
should be 50-100% full after sampling. Too much
temperature,socorrection isnotrecommended.Ref-
heparin can cause a drop inPCO(and in calculated
erence values for pyrexic and hypothermic states
HCO-).Alternatively, pre-heparinized blood-gas
are unknown.
Reported normal values for arterial and venous
syringes can be purchased,which ensures there is
 blood gases are summarized in Figure 9.4.
no anticoagulant excess.
pH
The normal pH value of blood is approximately 7.35-
7.45,although reference intervals for smallanimals
sometimes includevalues slightly outside thisrange
(Figure 9.4).
Acidaemia refers toa pH value<7.35(7.36 in
some texts)
Alkalaemia refers toa pH >7.45(7.44 in some
texts)
Theterms acidosis and alkalosisrefer to the
processes thatoccurata cellularlevel,which
Sampling for blood gas analysis from the dorsal
maygiverisetoanacidaemiaoralkalaemia if
9.3
left uncompensated.
pedal artery.
Parameter
sbo0
Cats
Arterial blood
Arterial blood
Venousblood
7.35-7.44
7.31-7.46
7.28-7.41
pH
7.35-7.46
30.8-42.8mmHg
33.6-41.2mmHg
25.2-36.8mmHg
32.7-44.7mmHg
PCO2
4.47-5.48kPa
3.35-4.89kPa
4.35-5.94kPa
4.10-5.69kPa
80.9-103.3mmHg
47.9-56.3mmHg
95.4-118.2mmHg
27-50mmHg
PO(room air)
10.76-13.74kPa
6.37-7.49kPa
12.69-15.72kPa
3.59-6.65kPa
18.8-25.6mmol/l
20.8-24.2mmoll
14.4-21.6mmol/l
18.0-23.2mmol/l
HCO
0±4
0±4
0±4
0±4
Base excess
Approximate normal arterial and venous blood gas values for dogs and cats.(Data from Zweens et al.(1977),
9.4
Rodkey et al.(1978),Haskins(1983) and Senior(1995).)The accepted Sl unit for gas pressure is the kilopascal,
137
chapter9Blood gas analysisand acid-base disorders
As a general rule,pH valuesof≤7.0 and ≥7.65are
(3.3 kPa), although this can rise to around 120 mmHg
immediately life-threatening.Specifictreatmentof the
(16.0 kPa) in patients breathing 100% oxygen. Calcu-
acid-base disorder may be required if the pHis <7.2 or
lation of the alveolar-arterial oxygen gradient can be
>7.6,but treatment of the underlying disease is most
used to help assessthe contribution of hypoventilation
important forcorrectionof acid-base disturbances.
orventilationperfusionmismatch tohypoxaemia.
POfordogsbreathingroom air is approximately
P.CO,
80-104mmHg(10.76-13.74kPa),and forcats is95-
PCO values (subscript'a' signifies arterial sample;'v
118mmHg(12.69-15.72kPa).POislowerthanPaO2
signifiesvenous) indicate the abilityofalveolarventila-
andvenous samples should notbe used to assess
tiontoremove theCOproducedbythebody.PCOis
adequacyofoxygenation.Normal P,Ovalues(breath-
directlyproportionaltotherateofCOproduction,and
ing room air) areapproximately 48-56mmHg (6.37-
inversely proportional to alveolarventilation;i.e.if
7.49 kPa) in dogs and as varied as 27 to 50 mmHg
alveolarminuteventilationweretodecreaseby50%
(3.59-6.65kPa) in cats.
without any change in COproduction,the PCO2
would double.Measurement ofPaCOis considered
Bicarbonate
the'gold standard’for assessing adequacyof ventila-
HCO: may be measured directly by the blood gas
tion in any patient.Many clinicians use a working range
analyser but,more commonly,it isa derivedvalue
of35-45mmHgindogs,and,using theseparameters,
based on thePCOand pH values.Some analysers
PCOvalues<35mmHg (<4.65kPa)indicate hyper-
givearesult foronlyoneformof HcO-(usually'actual
ventilation,while values > 45 mmHg (> 5.98 kPa)
bicarbonate),while othersprovide informationon two
indicate hypoventilation.However,reported normal
forms:‘actual’and‘standard’bicarbonate. If the ana-
ranges are lower than this(30.8-42.8 mmHg,4.10-
lyserjustgivesa singlebicarbonatevalue,it ismost
5.69kPa),and cats tend to have lower values again
likely to be actua/ bicarbonate, though this should be
(25.2-36.8mmHg,3.35-4.89kPa) (seeFigure 9.4).
confirmed with the manufacturer.For example,the
Normal P,COishigher than PCO2,andvalues are
i-STATprovidesa calculatedactualbicarbonatevalue.
approximately 33-41 mmHg (4.47-5.48 kPa) in dogs
and33-45mmHg(4.35-5.94kPa)in cats.The capac-
Actual bicarbonate
ity of venous blood to carry CO is greater than that of
Actual bicarbonate(HCOa)isthe HCO-concentration
arterial bloodbecauseof theabilityofdeoxyhaemo-
in the blood that results fromboth metabolic and respi-
globintobuffermoreH+.
ratory effects. The HCO-HCO-equation is as follows:
PO,
CO+HOHCO=H++HCO
POvaluesindicate the ability of the lungs tooxygen-
Thus, although HCO- concentration can change
ateblood.However,thePOcanonlybeinterpretedin
directlyasa result ofa metabolic disorder(lossorgain
lightof thePO(alveolarpartialpressure ofoxygen),
of HCO), from the equation, it can also be seen that
which,nturn,isased on the fraction f oxygen in th
alterationsin COlevels in thebloodwill influence the
inspired air,accordingtothealveolargasequation:
HCO- levels; an increase in CO, causes a shift of the
equationtotheright,increasingHcOproduction,and
PAO2=FO2(Pa-PHo)-PaCO2
viceversa.Consequently,HcOvalues asreported
0.8
byblood gas analysers will be abnormal with either a
respiratoryorametabolicdisturbance.
where:
Standard bicarbonate
FiOis thefractional inspiredoxygen
Many analyserscan titrate theCObackto a value of
concentration (e.g.FiOis 0.21 for room air (21%
40 mmHg(5.3kPa),and can then calculate what the
O)or 1.0 for 100%O)
HCO-value would be at this COconcentration.This
Pisbarometricpressure
isreportedasthe standard bicarbonate(HcO-s) value,
PHoisthe saturatedvapourpressure ofwater
which estimates theHCO-concentration in theblood
(47mmHg(~6.25kPa)at normalbody
which arises solely due to metabolic factors,but ig-
temperature)
nores thechange in HCO-which is brought about by
0.8 is the respiratory quotient (RQ).The RQ is the
altered COconcentrations;i.e.HCOsonly deviates
ratio of OuptaketoCOexhaled,and is assumed
from normal whenthereisa primarymetabolicdisorder
to be 0.8. (Some variation in RQ occurs depending 
orwhere thereismetaboliccompensation forarespi-
on diet,asaconsequenceof nitrogen excretion,
ratory disorder.
but this is generally not clinically significant.)
TotalCO
Once thePOhasbeencalculated from theabove
Total CO(TcO2)represents the total amountof CO2
equation,it can thenbecomparedwith thePOvalue
that canberecovered from thesampleunderanaero-
from thearterialbloodsample.The arithmeticdifference
bicconditions,andencompassesCOfromboth HcO
betweenthetwo isknownasthealveolar-arterial oxy-
andHCO.As theHCO-toHCOratiois20:1,TCO2
gen difference or gradient,and is signified byP(AaO2.In
gives a good index of total HCO-activity.TCOwill be
normal patients breathing room air, the upper limit of
about5%higher thanplasma HCOconcentration,
normality for theP(A-a)O2is approximately 25 mmHg
andadifferencebetweenTCOandHCOofmore
138
Chapter 9 Blood gas analysis and acid-base disorders
than 5% suggests the patient probably has an acidosis.
Metabolic acidosis
Howeverbyitlfffrslittnformatin,na
Metabolicacidosis implies aprimaryreduction in HcO-
a general rule, TCO is typically ignored when HCO
concentration. This may arise due to:
results are concomitantly presented. The plasma
HCO, PaCO and pH are more useful in evaluating
Loss of HcO,e.g.as aresult of severe
acid-base status.TCOgives no direct information
diarrhoea
aboutrespiratory function.
Failure to excrete H+, e.g. in renal failure or renal
tubular acidosis
Baseexcess/basedeficit
Accumulationofacid,which ismoppedup'by
The base excess (BE) value is a parameter derived by
the HCO-.For example,in shock the acid that
the blood gasanalyser.Like the HCOmeasurement
accumulates is lactic acid, and in diabetic
it provides an indication of the degree of metabolic
ketoacidosis, ketoacids. Lactic acidosis is a
dysfunction,butwithslightlygreateraccuracy,sinceit
common pathway in many diseaseprocesses,
takes into account all the buffering systems within the
and lactate levels may correlate with prognosis
body,not just the contribution from the HCO-HCO
(high and persistently high levels being
buffer. It is defined as the amount of acid, in mmol/i,
associatedwitha poorprognosis).
required toreturn1 litreof blood toapHof 7.4at a
PCO2of40mmHg（5.3kPa).Like theHCOvalue,BE
In metabolic acidosis,the body attempts to com-
 only deviates from normal when there is a primary
pensate for the disturbance by lowering CO levels
metabolic disturbance,ormetabolic compensation for
through hyperventilation to maintain the HCO:CO2
arespiratorydisorder.Whilesome analysersreporta
ratio.
BEresultthersreportasedeficitresultnesimly
being the negative of the other,i.e.abase excess of 6
Anion gap
mmol/l isthe sameasabase deficit of-6mmol/l.The
situation is confused by the fact that either canhave a
The anion gap (AG) is a useful measurement when
positive or negative value: normal base excess is 0± 4
attempting to determine thecause of ametabolicacid-
mmol/l, and negative BE values are often reported. To
osis.Itrepresentsthedifference between the commonly
avoid confusion,it isrecommended that BE is used.
measured cations (positive ions) in plasma and com-
monly measured anions (negative ions). To maintain 
electroneutrality,the number of cations and anions in
Simple acid-base disorders
the plasma must be equal (Equation 9.1),but a propor-
tionof circulating anions and cations arenotmeasured
There are four primary (or simple) acid-base distur-
routinely by laboratory tests.The unmeasured anions
bances:metabolic acidosis;metabolic alkalosis;respi-
(e.g. negatively charged proteins, phosphate, lactate)
ratory acidosis; and respiratory alkalosis. Metabolic
are present in larger quantities than unmeasured cati-
acidosis is the most common clinically significant acid-
 ons (e.g. calcium, magnesium, globulins) so there are
base disturbance.
fewer measured anions.This means that when the
measured anions are subtracted from the measured
Metabolic disturbances affect primarily HCO
 cations the answer is not zero, and this is the calculated
concentration,and there is usuallya
anion gap (Equation 2).
compensatory change in P CO2 (Figure 9.5)
Respiratory disturbances affect primarily CO2
Equation9.1(Na++K++UC+)-(CI+HCO+UA-)=0
partial pressure,and there is usually a
compensatory change in HCO-(Figure 9.5).
where UC= unmeasured cations; UA = unmeasured anions.
pH is determined by the ratio of HCO-to CO2
Equation 9.2AG=(Na++K)-(CI+HCO-)
(Henderson-Hasslebalch equation),which is normally
maintainedat approximately20:1.Remembering this
(Ktisomitted by some authorsfrom the equationasitcontributes
allows one always to determine the appropriate bodily
little to the overall charge difference).
response to a primary acid-base disturbance.
Disorder
Uncompensated
Compensated
pH
HCO
PCO2
pH
HCO-
PCO2
Compensatoryresponse
↑↑
↓
Normal
↑
↑
↓
Hyperventiltion to ↓PCO
Metabolic acidosis
Metabolic alkalosis
↑↑
t
Normal
↑
Hypoventiltion to T PCO2
Respiratory acidosis
Normal
↑
↑
HCO-retention by kidneys
Normal
↑
IncreasedHCO-eliminationby kidneys
Respiratoryalkalosis
9.5
Simple acid-base disorders and their compensatory responses.
139
Chapter9Bloodgasanalysisand acid-basedisorders
FromEquation9.1,to maintainelectroneutrality，a
willbehigh.Thus,theAGisusedtodeterminewhether
decrease in HCO-(metabolic acidosis) has to be
metabolic acidosis is due to primary HCO-loss(nor-
balanced by an increase ineither chloride
or
mal AG), orto accumulation of organic acids within the
unmeasured anions.If thechloridereplaces the HCO
body (high AG)
(as usually occurs with direct HCO-loss from the
Normal AGvalueshavebeenreported tobe in
body),itcanbeseenfromEquation9.2thattheAGwill
therangeof 12-25mmol/l in dogs and 13-27mmol/l
be normal(hyperchloraemicmetabolic acidosis).How-
in cats.
ever,if thereductioninHCO-is due toaccumulation
Causesof metabolic acidosis and the associated AG
of unmeasured anions(such as lactate,beta-hydroxy-
aresummarized inFigure9.6.Changes in AG donot
butyrate or acetoacetate) and the chloride concentra-
implymetabolicacidosis,thoughincreased aniongapis
tion remains normal (normochloraemic metabolic
mostoftenassociatedwithacidosis.AG isusuallyused
acidosis),itcanbeseenfromEquation9.2that theAG
to categorize an already diagnosed acidosis.
Cause of altered aniongap
Disease state
Mechanism
High anion gap acidosis
Azotaemia or uraemia
Advanced renal failure
Accumulationoforganicacidsduetofailureofrenalexcretion
(elevation inAGmay not be very marked)
Lactic acidosis
Shockhyovolamiapooris
Lactate accumulation
perfusion
Ketoacidosis
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Increased hepaticproductionofketoacids(acetoacetateandbeta
hydroxybutyrate)
Volume contraction and acidaemia causeslacticacidosis
Hyperosmolarnon-ketoticdiabetes
Diabetesmellitus
Accumulationofmeasured cations,especially sodium
mellitus
N.B.Willonlybe acidoticif volumecontractioncauseslactic
acidosis
Toxicity
Ethyleneglycolaspirin,methanolr
Accumulation of metabolic products (acids)
paraldehyde toxicosis
Normal aniongap(hyperchloraemic)acidosis
Diarrhoea
Many GI diseases:diarrhoeamust be
Loss of HCO-
severe
Earlyrenal failure
Early renal failure
Reduced excretionofammnia with subequent retentionfH
and failure toregenerate HCO-
Renal tubular acidosis
Proximal(Fanconi syndrome)ordistal
Defectiverenalacidprocessingwithfailuretoexcretenormal
renaltubulardefects
quantities of metabolically produced acid
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
Inhibitionof carbonicanhydrase conversionofHCOtoHCO
Acidifying agents
Exogenous acid load
Hyperalimentation(in parenteral
Acid load asa consequence ofmetabolismof nutrients(especially
nutrition)
amino acids)
Veryrapid intravenousrehydration
Rapid dilution of plasma bicarbonate
Ketoacidosiswithrenal ketone loss
Diabetes mellitus
Renalexcretionof ketoacidssuficient topreventahighaniongap
developing
Lowaniongap(oftenoccursinabsenceofmetabolicacidosis)
Retained non-sodium cations
WherethereareincreasedcationsCFsodiumisreducedt
Paraneoplastichyperproteinaemia
maintainelectroneutralitysomeasuredcationsfallhecalculated
(increased cations)
anion gap is therefore low
Hypercalcaemia
Hypermagnesaemia
Lithium toxicity
Hypoalbuminaemia,dilution
Reduced concentrationof unmeasured anions（bydilution),with
electroneutraltySodiumandpotassiumwhicharephysiologically
maintainedinarwrangrtreatyal
9.6
Types of metabolic acidosis and causes of altered anion gap.(Low anion gap conditions are not well
characterized in small animals and some of thecauses are extrapolated fromhumans.)
140
chapter9Bloodgas analysisand acid-basedisorders
High aniongap acidosis:This occurs due to accumu-
Rarely,patients develop hyperosmolar non-ketotic
lationof acids in theECF.lf the ionthat accumulates is
diabetesmellitus(HNDM),whichischaracterized by
readily excreted (by the kidney),then the concentration
severe hyperglycaemia(>35mmol/l),hyperosmolality
of the acid is limited and a high AG does not develop.
(>350 mOsm/kg) and dehydration without ketosis or
HighAG acidosisisseen in impaired tissue perfusion
acidosis (unless there is lactic acidosis). HNDM may
(e.g.hypovolaemicshock),advanced renalfailure(see
result in high AG due to increases in both sodium and
below),toxicosis(ethylene glycol and salicylate) and
potassium,which aremeasuredcations,aspartof the
diabeticketoacidosis.In ethylene glycol toxicity,the
hyperosmolar state.Notall cases of HNDM are initially
high AG is due to accumulations of metabolites(or-
acidotic (though all have high AG),but most cases
ganic acids)of the compound, exacerbated by lactic
rapidlydevelopseverehypovolaemia and lactic acido-
acidosis and acuterenal failure.Furtherexamples are
sis,further increasing the AG.
given in Figure 9.6.
Renal failure
Normal anion gap (hyperchloraemic) metabolic
In early renal failure, AG is normal and there is a hyper-
acidosis:This occurs in any clinical situation where
chloraemic metabolic acidosis. This is thought to be due
thekidneyisabletoexcretethe accumulating acid,and
toreduced excretion ofammoniumions(NH+)(formed
reduced HcO-isbalanced by increased chloride,or
byammonia(NH)binding H+in the tubule lumen),with
where there is HCO- loss with subsequent chloride
subsequent retention of H+ and failure to regenerate
retention.Classicexamples are showninFigure9.6.ln
HCO-In normalanimals,renal ammonia productionis
the earlystagesof ketoacidosis,orearlyormild lactic
one method by which the kidney excretes H.
acidosis,this type of acidosis willalsodevelopbutwill
Inadvanced renal failure,reduced glomerularfiltra
become a highAG acidosis astheacids accumulate.
tion rate and associated retention of anions(phos-
phate,sulphate and,sometimes,lactate)resultsina
Low anion gap: This arises less commonly, and is
high AG acidosis.
poorly characterized in smallanimals.AlowAGismost
often seenwhere thereare increased unmeasured
Metabolic alkalosis
cations (globulins, calcium and magnesium), as ECF
Metabolic alkalosis implies aprimary increase in HCO
sodium is reduced to maintain electroneutrality,so
levels. This may occur iatrogenically (e.g. over-treat-
measuredcations fall.Thecalculated AG is therefore
ment of a metabolicacidosis with NaHCOin the
low.Low AG often occurs in the absence of acidosis.
intravenous fluids) or,more commonly,due to loss of
acid from the body,whichleavesa relative excess of
Diabetesmellitus
HCO-.The classical clinical situation is severe pro-
Metabolicacidosisinketoacidoticdiabeticsmaybe
tracted true gastricvomiting,for example,due topy-
 characterized by a normal or high AG, depending on
loricoutflowobstruction.Compensationisbyareduction
thebalance betweenproduction,metabolism and ex-
inrespiration toallowCOlevelstorise tomaintain the
cretion of ketone anions.Ketones are filtered and
all-important HCO:CO ratio. However,there is a limit
resorbed by the kidneys.
to respiratory compensation for metabolic alkalosis, as
In high AG ketosis, ketones produced by the liver
thereduced respiration mayinduce hypoxaemia, which
exceedrenal excretion.This is the common clinical
will then stimulate respiration. (Most patients with
situation,as volume contraction associated with polyu-
 chronic vomiting, due to causes other than true pyloric
riadrivesrenalsodiumresorption,andenhanced tubu-
obstruction,are acidotic,as bilious vomiting tends to
larresorptionofsodium isassociatedwithenhanced
lead to acidosis due to loss of HCO-.) The causes of 
resorption of accompanying anions, including the
metabolic alkalosis are summarized in Figure 9.7.
ketoacids. In addition,lactic acidosis (due to poor
perfusion in volume-contracted patients) can contrib-
Respiratory acidosis
ute to the high AG, and result in a much more severe
Respiratory acidosis implies a primary rise in PcO2,
metabolic acidosis than diabetic ketoacidosis alone.
which the body will attempt to correct by retention of
In animals with less severe hypovolaemia,renal
HCO-by the kidney, thus restoring the HCO-:CO2
excretionofketoacidsmaybesufficient topreventa
ratio.Respiratory acidosisis seen most commonly with
high AG developing. These animals are acidotic, but
alveolar hypoventilation:causes are summarized in
with normal AG.
Figure 9.8.
Cause of alkalosis
Disease state
Mechanism
HCO-overload
latrogenic(most common)
Excess supplementation
Severe and protracted gastric
Pyloric outflow obstruction
LossofH(invomit,Oaccumulationvolumedletionandenhancedrena
vomiting
secretioninexchange forNaretentionmaintainsalkalosis
Loop or thiazide diuretics
Cardiac patients
retention.Naretentionduetohypovolaemiamaintainsacidososis(asabove)
9.7
Causes of metabolic alkalosis.
141
Chapter 9 Blood gas analysis and acid-base disorders
metabolicandnotrespiratory),eitherbyretainingor
Respiratory acidosis
Respiratory alkalosis
excreting extra carbon dioxide. Although respiratory
Upper airway obstruction
compensation begins working fairly rapidly,it takes
several hours to achievemaximum effect.Finally,
Pleural cavity disease:
metabolic compensation will come into play. This
Pleural effusion
Pneumothorax
usually takes several hours tobegin having a signifi-
canteffect,and2-5daysfortheseeffectstobecome
Pulmonary disease:
Pulmonary disease:
maximal. Although metabolic compensation will oc-
Severepneumonia
·Pneumonia
cur foraprimaryrespiratorydisorder,itis alsopossi-
Severe pulmonary oedema
Interstitial lung disease
ble to havemetaboliccompensationfor a primary
Diffusemetastaticdisease
metabolic disorder.This will only occurif thekidney is
Massivepulmonary
thromboembolism
not the underlying cause of theproblem.
Althoughmetabolicandrespiratorycompensation
Depression of central control of
Central stimulation of respiration:
for simpleacid-base disorders canhelp limit the
respiration:
Anxiety,fear
effect of the disorder on pH, there is a limit to
shna.
Excitement
the body's ability to compensate.In simple disorders,
Toxins
Pain
the expected responses can be quantified (Figure
Brainstem disease
Pyrexia
9.9) but the compensatory responses listed in the
(Drugtherapy)
table are basedon meanvalues,andsomepatients
Depression of neuromuscular
may lie outside thecalculated compensationvalue.lf
respiratoryfunction:
there ismarked discrepancybetween thepatient's
Neurological/neuromuscular
blood value and expected compensatory response,
disease
however, it tends to suggest that there may be a
Toxins
mixedacid-basedisorder,i.e.twoormoredisorders
Cardiopulmonary arrest
occurring simultaneously.Another way to identify
mixeddisorders inanimalswithhighAGmetabolic
9.8
Causes of respiratory acidosis andrespiratory
acidosis is to compare the change in AG to the
alkalosis.
change in HCO-: in simple acid-base disturbances,
these changes will be of similar magnitude (i.e. each
Respiratoryalkalosis
1 mmol/I increase inAG should bemirroredbya fall
Respiratory alkalosis implies a primary reduction in
of[HCO-]by 1mmol/).
PCO levels (hyperventilation). Compensation is by
increased elimination of HCO-by thekidney.The
causesofrespiratory alkalosis are summarized in
Evaluationofsamples
Figure 9.8.
Asystematicapproachshouldbeadoptedwhenevalu-
Responses to acid-base
ating blood gas data.
disturbances
1.Examine the pH
Whenever an acid-base disorder occurs,the body
IfpH is in the normal range,this may imply:
willattempt torestorepHbacktowardsthenormal
range. Intra-and extracellular buffering systems will
There isno acid-base disturbance
begin working as soon as an alteration in acid-base
There is an acid-base disturbance which has
status is detected,thus providing rapid protection
beencompletelycompensated for
againstchangesin pH.Overthe nextfewminutes,the
There are two opposing acid-base disturbances
respiratorysystemwill starttoattempttocompensate
(a mixed disorder), which are cancelling each
for thedisturbance(provided theprimarydisorderis
other out,in terms of effect on pH.
Disturbance
Primary change
Expected compensation
Acute respiratoryacidosis
Each 10mmHg(1.33kPa)tPCO2
HCO-↑by1.5mmol/l
Chronicrespiratoryacidosis
Each 10 mmHg(1.33 kPa)t PCO2
HCO-↑by 3.5mmoll
Acuterespiratory alkalosis
Each10mmHg（1.33kPa)↓PCO2
HCO↓by 2.5 mmol/l
Chronicrespiratoryalkalosis
Each 10mmHg（1.33kPa)↓PCO2
HCO-↓ by 5.5 mmol/
Metabolic acidosis
Each1mmoli↓HCO
PaCO ↓ by 0.7 mmHg (~0.1 kPa)
Metabolic alkalosis
Each1mmol/↑HCO
PaCOt by 0.7 mmHg (~0.1 kPa)
Expected compensatoryresponses forprimary acid-base disturbances.(Based on canine data fromDiBartola
66
(1992).)
142
Chapter 9Blood gas analysis and acid-base disorders
If there is anacidaemia (pH<7.35),there mustbe an
problem. Because complete compensation is uncom-
mon,apHatorclosetothemidpointof thepHsuggests
underlying metabolic orrespiratory acidosis,orboth.lf
there is an alkalaemia (pH >7.45), there must be an
that two opposing disorders are occurring (i.e.there is
underlying metabolic or respiratory alkalosis, or both.
a mixed disturbance).Concurrent respiratoryalkalosis
Evenwithmaximal compensation for anydisorder,
and metabolic acidosis could resultin apH thatis at or
the pH will tend not to return to the midpoint of the
close to 7.4.
normalrange(althoughit may liejust withinthe normal
range), and the body does not usually overcompen-
5.Assesswhether the compensatory
sate for an acid-base disturbance.lf there were a
response is as expected
Refer to Figure 9.9. If the compensatory response is
primary metabolic orrespiratory acidosis,evenwith
respiratory or metaboliccompensation,respectively,
not as expected,this may suggest thepresence of a
thepH would stillbe<7.4;it would lie towards the
mixed acid-base disorder.
acidaemic side of the midpoint of thepH range.Simi-
 6. Assess the patient's oxygenation
larly,if there were a primary metabolic or respiratory
The patient's oxygenation is assessed on an arterial
would still be >7.4.
sample,using the alveolar gas equation,and calculat-
ing the alveolar-arterial oxygen difference. Unless the
2.Lookat thePCO
patient is exhibiting respiratory signs, this is seldom
carriedout,and,asanalternative,aroughguidetoth
If PCO is elevated, there is either a primary
expectedPOisto multiply the inspired Oconcentra-
respiratory acidosis or a compensatoryresponse
tionbyafactorof5,ie.if thepatient isbreathingroom
to a metabolic alkalosis.
air(21%O2),the POshould be around 100mmHg
IfPCOis low,there iseitheraprimary
(13.3 kPa). If breathing 100% O2, the expected PaO2
respiratory alkalosis ora compensatoryresponse
wouldbe around500mmHg (66.5kPa).
to a metabolic acidosis.
3.Lookat theactual andstandard
Blood gas analysis in respiratory
bicarbonatevalues,and thebaseexcess
patients
In general, BE and HCO will change in a similar
direction,as they arebothvariantsonthesame theme
Arterial samplesmustbe used to assessrespiratory
patients, and PO2 and PCO2 are the most important 
(see earlier).
parameters,asitisthe animal'sgasexchangecapacity
that is of interest. Arterial blood gas tensions are
If thereispurelyarespiratorydisturbance,HCOa
will be altered but HCOsand BE will be normal
affected by hypoventilation, ventilation-perfusion mis-
 If there is a metabolic disorder, or a metabolic
match(VA/QorV/Q)and,rarely,diffusionabnormali-
compensatory response, HCOs and HCOa and 
ties.Blood gas analysismay,however,benormal in
BEwill change.
mildrespiratoryconditionsand in the earlystagesof
more severe disease.
4.Distinguish the primary disturbance
Normal arterial oxygen tension (PaO2) is approxi-
fromthecompensatoryresponse
In a patient with a low PCO2 and a low HCOs, for
and,at these values,haemoglobin saturation ap-
example,does the patient have:
proaches 97-100%.At values less than about 60
mmHg (8 kPa) there is significant hypoxaemia, and
below 40-50 mmHg (5.3-6.6 kPa) cyanosis may be-
Aprimaryrespiratory alkalosiswith metabolic
compensation,or
come evident.
A primary metabolic acidosis with respiratory
Manycliniciansuse avaluefornormal PCOof35-
45 mmHg (4.65-5.98 kPa) in the dog:this is based on
compensation?
human data and will result in overdiagnosis of hyper-
Evaluation of thepatient'shistory and clinical signs
ventilation. Normal P,CO2in dogs is 30.8-42.8 mmHg
shouldhelpidentify theprimarydisturbance.
(4.10-5.69kPa),and cats tend tohavelowervalues of
It should beremembered that thepH will move in
25.2-36.8 mmHg (3.35-4.89kPa) (see Figure 9.4).
the same direction asfortheprimarydisorder,and the
Normal PcOis higher thanPCO2,andvalues are
approximately 33-41 mmHg (4.47-5.48 kPa) in dogs
Even with maximal compensation, if the pH returns to
and 33-45 mmHg (4.35-5.94 kPa) in cats.
Hypoventilation (alveolar hypoventilation) results 
the normal range itusuallylies at its extremes.Thus,in
this case,if the pH of the sample were <7.4 (i.e. to the
in hypercapnia (respiratory acidosis, see Figure 9.8)
acidaemic side of the pHrange),it would suggest that
 and may also lead to hypoxaemia, although this de-
the primary problemwas anacidosis,andwould fit best
 pends upon both the degree of hypercapnia, and the
with the secondexplanation, above. Ifthe pH were >7.4
FO2.Forexample,an animal undergeneral anaesthe-
(i.e. to the alkalaemic side of the pH range), the first
sia breathing 100% O2 is unlikely to exhibit hypox-
explanation would be most appropriate. Interpretation
aemia,even in the face of severe hypercapnia.
Hypoventilation is most often caused by upper airway
becomes more complex if the pH is at or close to 7.4,
asit becomesdifficulttodetermine whichistheprimary
obstruction, pleural effusion and drugs or disorders
143
Chapter9Blood gas analysis and acid-base disorders
affecting central control of respiration(e.g.general
anaesthesia) ordiseases affecting the neuromuscular
100-
components of the respiratory system. In animals with
chronichypercapnia,chloride may become depleted.
This isbecause the continuous acid loadwhich the
(SO2)
body producesmust be buffered andexcreted,butO
excretionis limited,so more acid mustbe excretedby
60-
the kidney，and thisrequires chloride.The plasma
ration
levelsof HcOremainelevated,ascompensationfor
the respiratory acidosis.
40
Ventilation-perfusion (V/Q) mismatch(or imbal-
ance)occurswhenthereiseithernormalventilationbut
inadequate perfusion(so there is insufficient blood
passing the alveoli for oxygen to be taken up into the
pulmonarycapillaries),orinadequateventilationbut
20
40
60
80
adequateperfusion(wherepulmonarycapillaryblood
Partial pressure of oxygen(PaO2)(mmHg)
reachesthealveolinadequatequantities,butventila
tionto thosealveoli hasbeen insufficienttoallow
9.10
Oxygen-haemoglobin dissociation curve.Note
the almost linear relation between SO and PO2
 optimal oxygenation). In both situations, oxygen trans-
at PO2 values <60 mmHg.
fer is inefficient, and, if mpairment is severe nough,
the result is hypoxaemia. However, although blood
oxygenationisusuallyimpairedinthissituation,patients
Somebloodgasanalyserswill estimatetheSO,the
withV/Qmismatchareusuallynormocapnic,because
saturation of haemoglobin with oxygen in arterial gas.
COdiffuses easily and exchange is not limited. In-
Thisvalue iscalculatedbasedon thePObutdoes not
deed,patientswithV/Qmismatchsevereenough to
make anyallowanceforotherfactorswhichaffectthe
induce hypoxaemiamayactuallybe hypocapnicsince
haemoglobin oxygenation curve, e.g. concentrations 
the hypoxaemia may stimulateventilatory drive.In-
of2,3 diphosphoglycerate inred blood cells(see Chap-
creasing theFO2willusuallyimprove thehypoxaemia
ter4).The S,O(haemoglobin saturation measured by
in patients with V/Q mismatch.V/Q mismatch is most
pulse oximetry) is usually similar to SO and canbe
oftenassociatedwithsignificantlowerairwayand
used to give an indication of PO2.Due to the almost
pulmonaryparenchymal disease,where there is diffu-
linearrelation between SOorSOandPOatPaO2
sion impairment,especially interstitial and alveolar
values<60 mmHg (7.98kPa)(Figure 9.10), somekey
diseases,suchaspneumoniaandpulmonaryoedema.
valuesareworthy of note:POvalues of40,50and60
Severe chronic bronchitis, asthma or obstructive pul-
mmHg(5.32,6.65and7.98kPa)correspondto SO2or
monarydiseasecan also cause mismatch.Lastly,itis
S,O2values of 70,80 and 90%,respectively. S,O2
commonlyseen inpulmonarythromboembolism.
values<90%are of immediateconcern.
In clinicalpractice,a simplifiedversionof the alveo-
Whenconsideringoxygenation,it shouldberemem
lar-arterial oxygengradientequation isoftenusedto
differentiate hypoxaemia caused by alveolar
isalsoaffectedbythepH.AtanygivenPO2,haemoglobin
hypoventilation from that caused byV/Q mismatch:
has less affinityforoxygen if thepH dropsbecause the
oxygenation curve moves to the right.This means that
P(A-a)O2=[150-(PaCO/0.8)-PaO2]
oxygenis givenupmorereadilyattissuelevel.However,
where there is pooroxygenation, thisreduced affinity
This equation assumesvalues for FO(based on
also means that poorer haemoglobin saturation may be
roomair),barometricressure,saturatedvapourpre-
achieved,and,inhypoxaemicanimals,thismayactually
sure of waterand respiratory quotient(RQ:seeFigure
 limit the oxygen delivery to tissues.
9.1). It will be greatly affected by thepatient receiving
supplemental oxygen(inwhichcase thefull equation
should be used),and to a lesser extent the natural
Effects of blood gas disturbances on
variationsinbarometricpressure,alterationsinvapour
otheranalytes
pressure withbody temperature,andvariations inRQ
(which do occur,butarenever measured).However,
Animalswith acid-basedisordersmayhavesecond-
although it is imprecise, the alveolar-arterial oxygen
ary abnormalities in other biochemicalparameters,
gradientcalculated in thiswaydoesprovideuseful
of whichpotassium is probably the most important.
information. In normal animals,it is<25 mmHg(3.32
Chloridelevels are often altered inmetabolic acidosis,
kPa), and usually <10 mmHg (1.33 kPa). In hypo-
as described above, where there is compensatory
ventilationwhere there is hypoxaemia,it is usually
hyperchloraemia in normal anion gapmetabolic acido-
slightlyelevated,butmaybenormal,dependingonthe
sis, to maintain electrical neutrality.
relative changes inPCOandPO2.InV/Q mismatch
Potassium distribution is affected by acid-base
the alveolar-arterial oxygen gradient is usually mark-
disturbances,and potassium disorders,themselves,
edly elevated (>25 mmHg;3.32kPa).
can exacerbate acid-base disorders.In metabolic
Therelation betweenSOandPOis illustrated in
acidosis (but not respiratory acidosis),potassium is
Figure 9.10,in a haemoglobin oxygenation curve.
translocated from the ICF to the ECF in exchange for
144
Chapter9
Bloodgasanalysisand acid-base disorders
H;chloride cannot follow H+ into cells, so exchange
the ECF,which maintains the alkalosis. Thus the
 must occur. This may result in hyperkalaemia, though
alkalosis isnotcorrected,and there is H+secretion in
measured serum orplasma potassium concentration
the urine.This is called‘paradoxical aciduria',where
is oftennormal as thesepatientsoften have an overall
acid urine isproduced in theface of alkalosis.
depletion of total body potassium. Where the acid can
follow the H+into the cell(e.g. lactate) this effect may
be less profound. In metabolic alkalosis, the opposite
Mixed acid-base disturbances
can occur, and potassium shifts into cells,but this
rarely causes a significant hypokalaemia. However, in
Complex ormixed acid-base disturbances should be
potassium depletion, alkalosis may be exacerbated.If
there is ECF volume depletion,this may limit the
disturbance fails to develop(seeFigures 9.5 and 9.9),
normal renal response to metabolic alkalosis (rapid
if the PCO2 and HCO changes are not in the same
HCO- excretion) and prevent correction. The kidney
direction,orif the changes inAGandHCOarenotof
 prioritizes volume expansion above acid-base bal-
similar magnitude.Ifbothcause pHchanges inthe same
ance,and sodiumretentionoccurs to expandplasma
direction(e.g.a combinedrespiratory and metabolic
volume.Sodium is reabsorbed in the distal tubule in
acidosis),life-threatening disturbances are likely and
exchange for H+ or potassium, and if potassium is
treating the immediate crises is vital.Ifthe two conditions
depleted, more H is exchanged. Secretion of H into
act disparately,thepH maybenormaland treatmentof
the tubule lumen is associated with HCO-entry into
one condition may unmask a second disturbance.
Case examples
Case 1
Signalment
Blood gas analysis
Result
Reference interval
5-year-oldmale Dalmatian.
History and clinical findings
pH
7.2
7.35-7.44
Anrexia frvi
HCO-(mmol/l)
20.8-24.2
Collaped,unt wthonestedddyurad
PO(mmHg)
33.9
47.9-56.3
capilaryrefiltimeof1s.ColdextremitiesHeart rateof70pmand
a machinery murmur (point of maximum intensity over aorticvalve);
P,CO(mmHg)
30.6
33.6-41.2
temperature0Crepiratryrat36breatminutwelling
BE (mmol/)
-11.4
0±4
and pain on palpation of let elbow and right shoulder.
Clinicalpathologydata
What abnormalities are present?
Haematology
Haematology
Result
Reference interval
Mild erythrocytosis
RBC（X102/)
8.71
5.5-8.5
Neutrophiliwithmild left shirt
HCT (/)
0.565
0.37-0.55
Lymphopenia
Slight monocytosis
Hb (g/dl)
18.05
12.00-18.00
Blood gas analysis
MCV (fl)
66.2
60.0-77.0
·Slight hyperchloraemia
MCHC(g/dl)
36.7
32.0-36.0
LowpH
WBC(x10%/)
33.1
6.0-12.8
Reduced HCO
Low P,O2
Neutrophils(segmented)
28.9
3.0-11.8
LowP,CO
(x109/1)
Neutrophils(band)(x10/)
1.5
0.0-0.5
Howwouldyou interpret these results and
what are the likely differential diagnoses?
Lymphocytes(x10%/)
0.6
1.0-4.8
Theincreasedhaematocritmost ikelyreflectshypovolaemia.Neutrophilia
Monocytes (x10%/)
2.1
0.15-1.35
Eosinophils (x10°/)
0
0.1-1.25
beacaueof themnocytosisAsthereislmhopeniatheresprobably
a superimposed stressleucogram.The toxicchangereportedonsmear
Basophils (x10°/)
0.0
Rare
examination suggestsrapidmarrowtransit time duetodemand for
Platelets (x10/)
404
200-500
neutrophilprodutogstinghrrioulmmatyr.
Thebloodgasreultsshwthepatientisacidamicslwb
Filmcomment
thisgivesnoindicationofarterialoxygenationandshouldnotbeusedto
Neutrophils show toxic change.
with therdctioninOrefectinespratorycmensationhig
Biochemistry
Result
Referenceinterval
hyperchloraemiahasdevelopedtomaintainelecroneutrality,.e.thissa
144
hyperchloramicmetabolicacidsis.The anion gap canbe calculated:
Sodium (mmol/)
135-155
Potassium(mmoll)
4.3
3.5-5.5
AG=（144+4.3)-(118+14)=16.3(12-25mmol/)
Chloride(mmol/)
118
95-115
Case 1 continues
145
Chapter9
9Bloodgasanalysisand acid-basedisorders
Case 1continued
Blood and urine culture
Given theclinical presentation pyrexia,signsof septic shck
Arthrocentesisforcytologycultureandsensitivitytesting.
machineryrmurhifingamenessconsistentwithinfectivarthrits
themost likelyprimarydiseaseisbacterial endocarditisThedogisin
Resultsoffurthertests
septic shock and has developed acidosis as a result (most likely) of
Cardiacultrasonographydemonstratedvegetativelesionsonthe aortic
lactateaccumulationbutthisasnotceededrenalexretionand
valve,consistent withbacterial endocarditis
increase in anion gap has occurred.
Case outcome
Whatfurthertestswouldyourecommend?
The dog received apropriate supporiv therapyand aggressve intra
Cardiac ultrasonography
venousantibiotictherapy,andmadeafullrecovery.
Case 2
Signalment
7-year-old female neuteredYorkshireTerrer.
Blood gas analysis
Result
Reference interval
(venous)(continued)
Historyand clinical findings
P.CO2（mmHg)
 2-week histor of PU/PD. Now vomiting, depressed and inappetent. On
25
33.6-41.2
clinicalxaminatinqandredwihiratoryrat
TCO(mmol/)
10.4
20-25
breathsperminute.Discomfort oncranialabdominal palpation.
BE(mmol/l)
-18.7
0±4
Clinicalpathologydata
What abnormalities are present?
Biochemistry
Result
Referenceinterval
Biochemistry
Sodium(mmol/)
128
135-155
Hyperglycaemia
Potassium(mmol/l)
5.3
3.60-5.60
.
Slightly low albumin
Markedly elevated(10x)ALP
Chloride(mmol/l)
99.4
100-116
Marginally elevatedALT
Glucose(mmol/l)
20.0
3.3-5.8
Hyponatraemia
Borderline hypochloraemia
Urea (mmoll)
6.4
3.5-7.7
Slightlylow total calcium
Creatinine (μmol/)
62
45-50
LowHCO
Calcium (mmoll)
2.14
2.40-2.90
Urine analysis
Inorganic phosphate
SG suggests adequate concentrating abity
1.49
0.80-1.6
(mmol/l)
Proteinuria
Reduced pH
TP(g/)
56.0
55.0-75.0
Marked glucosuria
Albumin (g/)
21.0
23.0-31.0
Markedketonuria
·Haematuria
Globulin (g/l)
35.0
27.0-40.0
Blood gas analysis
ALT (IU/)
66
5.0-60.0
Acidaemia
ALP (IU/I)
1329
0-130
.LowPO2
Low P,CO2
Decreased (i.e.more negative) base excess
Urine analysis
LowHCO-
Low total CO(consistent with low bicarbonate)
SG
1.034
Howwouldyou interpret theseresults and
Protein
1+
what are the likely differential diagnoses?
pH
5.0
The hyperglycaemia,glucosuriaandketonuria confirma diagnosisof
Glucose
diabeticketoacidosis(DKA).The slightlylowalbuminmaybedueto the
+<
Ketones
3+
has concurrentpancreatitis.ThemarkedelevationinALPwithmuchlesser
Biirubin
+
elevation in ALT suggest that, in addition to secondary hepatopathy
Sediment examination
RBC 10 per hpf; WBC<5 per hpf
(hepaticlipidaccumulation）duetothediabetesmellitustheremayalse
moresigifiathlestasiandthiscouldalexplandbyancr
titiswhichicommoncomlicationfdiabetmelituSmilalyw
Blood gas analysis
totalcalciummaybeparlyduetothelowalbuminbutmayalsobeduet
Result
Reference interval
pancreatitishiswouldbeconsistent withthedog'sclinical presentation.
(venous)
Hyponatraemiaisalso likely due to thediabetesmelitus.During the
pH
7.187
7.35-7.44
developmentofDKA,ketoneanionsareexcretedintourineandsince
HCO（mmoll)(venous)
electricalneutralitysalwaysmaintained,thisisaccompaniedbyan
9.6
26-30
obligatorylossofsodiumandpotassiumonsHponatraemiaistherfore
HCO-(mmol/)(actual)
9.6
20.8-24.2
common.Potassiumistypicalyatthehighendofthenormalrangeinspite
P,O2(mmHg)
43
47.9-56.3
Case 2continues
146
chapter9Bloodgasanalysisandacid-basedisorders
Case2continued
Theincreaseinaniongapcanalsobecomparedtothereductionin
bicarbonatinsmpleacidbasedisturbanceshesechangeswibf
ofthisincreasedurinssaswithdevelpingcidsisthersinreasd
similarmagnitude (ie.each1 mmollincrease inAG should bemirrored
uptakeofhydrogenions(intocells）inexchangeforpotassiumions(whic
byafallinbicarbonateconcentrationfmmol/Inthiscase,theanion
moveoutintotheECF).Thustheserumpotassiumisnormaldespite total
gaphasincreasedbyapproximatly8.5(frmtheuppelitof5),and
bodydpletionnthebsenceoffurherdatathlowbicarbonatcould
bicarbonatehasdecreasedbyapproximately11.2-14.6mmol/(fromthe
be due either tometabolic acidosisor tometabolic compensation for
uper andlwrrecealThmg ust tha te
respiratoralosis bu thisds it swelwth thclical pe.
mixedproblemormayreflect thefacthat thereisincompletecompen-
ThGftntqu
sationscofirmedbythmarkedacidamirhfatthath
ingabilityasthelargeamountofglucoseintheurinewilincreasethe
estimatesofcompensationareextrapolatedfromhumandataandwe
SG.Theacidicnatureof theurineisduetoexcretionofketoacids.The
areusing truedogreerencevaluesforbicarbonate,which slightly
haematuriaismostlikelyduetoasecondaryurinarytractinfection:this
reduce the appreciated drop in bicarbonate.
is not always accompanied by an inflammatory sediment.
Anotherwaytassessthecompensatoryresponseistocalculate
On venousbloodgasanalysis,the lowpH tellsus the patient s
the expected compensationforthe dropin HCO(seeFigure9.9）.For
acidaemic.The lowbicarbonateisconsistent withametabolicacidosis.
each1mmolreduction in[HCO],weshould expectareductionin
POswbuthiivcaionfrriaxynatnandh
P,COf0.7mmHg:n thiscase,thismeansthatwewouldexpectthe
not be used to assess respiratory function.P,COisreduced as a
P.CO to be reduced by between7.84 and 11.2mmol (based on the
compensatoryreponse tothemetabolicacidosis,and theincreased
redctioninOing thupandlendof thee
interval.Theactualreductionreported isbetween8.6and10.22mmol.
(thoughpainduetothepancreatitismayalsobeacontributoryfactor).
This supports a simple disorder.
Thebaseexcessreflectsthe primarymetabolic disturbance.
What further tests would you recommend?
lf we calculate the aniongap:AG=(128+5.5)-(99.4+9.6)=43.5
(referenceinterval12-25mmol).Thismarkedelevationintheaniongap
Urine culture and sensitivitytesting
Abdominalultrasonography(thepconfirmpancreatis)
is due to theaccumulation of theunmeasuredketoacids(andpossibly
 cPLI, amylase, lijase ± TLi
lactate accumulation).
Case 3
Signalment
Biochemistry
Result
Referenceinterval
10-year-old female neutered Dobermann.
Sodium(mmol/)
144
140-153
History and clinical findings
Potassium (mmol/l)
4.74
3.80-5.30
Diagnosed with immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia (IMHA) and
Chloride(mmol/)
115
99-115
thrombocytopenia(IMTP)3months previously.Good responseto treat-
mentwithprednisoloneandazathioprine.Acutedeterioration48hours
Urea (mmoll)
6.1
3.5-6.0
priortntainwisunorxrcilrac
Creatinine(μmoll)
76
20-110
nessandrespiratorysignsClinicalexaminationevealedtachye
Calcium(mmol/l)
2.56
hyperpnoea andpalepink-greytocyanoticmucousmembranes.Respi-
2.20-2.70
ratoryrateandeffortremainedincreasedatrest.
Inorganic phosphate(mmoll)
1.46
0.80-2.0
Clinical pathology data
TP (g/l)
71.0
57.0-78.0
Albumin (g/)
24.0
23.0-31.0
Haematology
Result
Reference interval
Globulin(g/)
47.0
27.0-40.0
RBC(x1012/)
2.47
5.50-8.00
ALP(IU/I)
931
0-100
HCT(/I)
0.19
0.35-0.55
122
7-50
6.9
12.00-18.00
ALT(IU/I)
(Ip/6)qH
Cholesterol(mmol/)
3.9
3.2-6.5
MCV (fl)
79.0
65.0-75.0
MCH(pg)
27.9
19.5-24.5
Blood gas analysis (on
Result
Referenceinterval
MCHC(g/dl)
35.4
32-37
admission; dog breathing
RDW (%)
27.2
14-17
room air)
Reticulocytes (%)
31
<1
pH
7.403
7.35-7.44
Normoblasts (x10/l)
2.24
occasional
PaO（mmHg)
87
80.9-103.3
WBC(x10°%/)
21.2
6.0-18.0
PaCO (mmHg)
22.4
30.8-42.8
Neutrophils (segmented)
14.3
3.0-12.0
BE(mmoll)
-11
0±4
(x109/)
HCO-(mmoll)(actual)
14
18.8-25.6
Neutrophils(band)(x10°/)
0.63
0-0.3
TCO(mmol/)
15
20-25
Lymphocytes (x10°/)
2.87
1.2-3.8
Monocytes (x 10%/)
0.7
0.0-1.20
What abnormalities are present?
Eosinophils（x10%/)
0.35
0.0-1.3
Haematology
Basophils (x10°/)
0
0.0-0.2
Moderatentenselyregenerativeanamia(seeChat)
-Macrocytic
Platelets (x10/l)
14
200-500
Case3continues>
147
chapter 9Blood gas analysis and acid-base disorders
Case 3 continued
Increased RDW
occurredacutelyor4.411mmollifmorechronicThustheseresult
Absolute reticulocyte count =31/100x2.47x1012/1
couldindicatachronicrespiratorylkalosisstheHOconcentration
falinttmnatryrane iis f
=0.776x1012/
=776×10%/
compensationtorestorethepHtxactly7.4andthismaysuportamixd
Increasednucleated red blood cells(normoblasts)
distubancerepiratoryaalosisndncurrentmtboliacidsi.
Mature neutrophilia
Themetabolicacidosissalikelyresultof impaired tisueoxygenation
Profound thrombocytopenia
generating lactate during anaerobic metabolism.
Biochemistry
Anotherwaytoidentifymixeddisorders inanimalswithhighAG
metabolic acidosis is to compare the change in AG to the change in
Elevated globulins
HCO(seeabve)inthiscase,haniongapimalsdest
Markedly elevated(9x)ALP
us in identifying a mixed disorder.
Moderately elevated(2.5x)ALT
Bloodgas analysis
AG=（144+4.74)-(115+14)=19.74(12-25mmol/)
Low PCO2
This patient has respiratory signs so we should calculate the
Decreased (morenegative) base excess
alveolar-arterial oxygengradient:
LowHCO
PAa02=[150-(PCO/0.8)-PO]
Howwouldyou interpret theseresultsand
=150-(22.4/0.8)-87
what are the likely differential diagnoses?
Resultsuggest that the IMHA and IMTP areno longercontrolledDIC
=150-28-87
=35mmHg
maybecontributing to the thrombocytopenia.Theneutrophiliamay
Elevationsof thealveolar-arterialoxygengradient to>25mmHg in
or stress.Theremayalsobe an ongoing inflammatory response.
patientsbreathingroomairareconsistentwithventilation-perfusion
Themildlyraisedglobulin ismost likely aresult of theimmune
mismatch.V/Qmismatchismostoftenassociatedwithsignificantlower
mediateddiseaseThemarkedelevationofALPwithmoderateelevation
airway and pulmonary parenchymal disease(where there is difusion
of ALTis consistent withcorticsteroid therapy (seeChapter2）ALT
impairmentespeciallyinterstitialandalveolardseasessuchaspn
moniaandpulmonaryoedema.Severechronicbronchitisasthmaor
totheanaemia(possiblyexacerbatedbysuspectedrespiratorydisease)
obstructive pulmonary diseasecanalsocausemismatch.Lastlyitis
BloodpHfalsjustabovethmdpointoftherangeOiswitin th
commonly seen in pulmonary thromboembolism(PTE).Thehistoryand
normalrangethoughthelinicasignsfhyperpoeaandtachynoea
clinicalsignshicaseareconsistentithandboththmu
mediateddiseaseandthetreatmentarepredisposingfactorsforthrom-
(due to hypoxic driveif respiratoryworkreduced）.ThereducedHO
boembolicdiseasediagnosis is presumptive after exclusionof other
and PCO are the most significant abnormalties.These canbe ex-
causesthainatdwitthsaa
contributing to the respiratory alkalosis.
sationorbyarespiratoryalkalosiswithmetaboliccompensation.Asbase
Whatfurthertestswouldyourecommend?
excessdeviatesfromnormal whenthereiseitheraprimarymetabolic
·Thoracicradiography torule out aiway or pumonary disease
disturbance,ormetaboliccompensationforarespiratory disorder,this
·Full coagulation screen for DIC
doesnothelp discriminate.Howeveras the pH fallsjust above the
midpointf7respiratoryalalosisisthemorelielprimarychang
Results of further tests
Respiratoryalkalosismaybe due topulmonarydisease,orcentral
Thoracicradiographsshowedonlypumonaryover-inflationwitho
stimulationof respiratione.duethyoxiainthiscase).tisa
evidence of pulmonary parenchymal disease.
possible thatwehaveamixed disorder,andwe should determine
Treatment and caseoutcome
whether the reduction in HCO- is appropriate.
Thebichwastreated withoxygensupplementatioandwmolecular
Inrespiratoryalkalosiseach10mmHgreductioninPCOshoudbe
weighthparinhbecamecreasinglhyoxiifoxygenupplem
accompaniedbyacompensatoryreductioninHcO-of2.5mmollifacute,
tationwasstoppedTheownersdeclinedmoreaggressivemmunosup
orupto5.5mmollif chronic.ThereductioninHCOinthiscaseis atleast
pressive therapy to try tocontrol the primarydiseaseand shewas
4.8andupto11.6mmoll.PCOisreducedbyapproximately8-20mmHg.
euthanased due to disease progresson.
Furtherreading
the anion gap in evaluation of acid-base disorders in dogs.
CompendiumonContinuing Education for thePracticing
AdamsLGandPolzinDJ(1989)Mixedacid-basedisorders.Veterinary
Veterinarian4,1021-1032
Robertson SA(1989)Simple acid-base disorders.Veterinary Clinics
ClinicsofNorthAmerica:SmallAnimalPractice19,307-326
ofNorthAmerica:SmallAnimal Practice19,289-306
DiBartola SP(1992) Introduction toacid-base disorders.In:Fluid
RodkeyWGHannonJP,DramiseJG,WhiteRD,WelshDCand
TherapyinSmallnimal Practiceed.SPDiBartolapp.193
Persky BN(1978)Arterializedcapillaryblood used todetermine
215.WBSaunders,Philadelphia
the acid-base and bloodgasstatus of dogs.AmericanJournal of
DiBartola SPand De Morais HAS(1992) Respiratory acid-base
VeterinaryResearch39,459-464
disorders.In:Fluid Therapy inSmallAnimal Practice,ed.SP
RubushJM(2001)Metabolic acid-basedisordersVeterinary Clinics
DiBartlap.258-275.WBSaundersPhiladlphia
ofNorthAmerica:SmallAnimal Practice31,1323-1354
DriscollPBrownT,winnuttCandWardleT（1997)ASimpleGuide
SeniorDF(1995)Fluid therapy,electrolytesandacid-basecontrol
toBloodGasAnalysis.BMJPublishing Group,London
HaskinsSC（1983）Bloodgasesandacid-basebalance:clinical
In:TextbookofVeterinary InternalMedicine,4edn,ed.SJ
Etinger and ECFeldman,pp.294-312.WB Saunders,
interpretationandtherapeuticimplications.ln:CurrentVeterinary
Philadelphia
VerwardPMlantMFargFandBrauP）
Philadelphia
The accuracy of thei-STAT,portable analyser for measuring
MartinL(1999)AllYouReallyNeedtoKnowtoInterpretArterialBlood
GasesninottWillamndWiinlad
Peterson M(1998)Endocrine emergencies.In:BSAVA Manual of
VeterinaryScience73,71-75
ZweensJ,GrankenaH,vanKamenEJ,RispinsPandZijstraG
Endocrinology.2edn,ed.AGTorrance and CTMooneypp
163-172.BSAVAPublications,Gloucester
theunanaesthetized dog.AmericanJournalofPhysiology233
PolzinDJ,StevensJBandOsborneCA(1982)Clinicalapplicationof
F412-F415
148
Urine analysis
Joy Archer
Introduction
storedforpreferablynomore than6-12hoursafter
collection.Refrigerated urine should be brought to
Urine analysis is a simple,non-invasive and cheap
room temperature and thoroughlymixed before analy-
laboratorytestthatrapidlyprovidesvaluableinforma-
sis.Urine should not be frozen if sediment analysis is
tion about the urinary tract and other body systems. A
to be performed. Casts are particularly vulnerable to
disintegration and will only be detected if fresh urine is
complete urine analysis (including dipstick, specific
gravity(SG)and sediment examination) should be
examined very soon after collection.Castsmay be the
 only laboratory abnormality present in early renal dis-
performed,even if one component part shows no
abnormalities. Concurrent serum or plasma biochemi-
ease (prior to the developmentofazotaemia).During
storage, other formed elements may change; there
cal analysisisoftenrequired togainmaximumbenefit
may be cellular disintegration, and urine pH may alter.
from urine analysis.
Free-catch samples should be collected into a
These changes in urine composition are more pro-
clean container withminimal contact of the voided
nounced the longer the storage time and the higher the
temperature. In addition, microorganisms can con-
urine with the animal's body.ldeally,new clean clear
containers with tight-fitting lids should beprovided.
tinuetomultiplywhether theyarepresent asinfectious
Use of containers provided by owners shouid be dis-
agents or contaminants. The common changes found
couraged as these can contain traces of detergents,
in aged urine are summarized inFigure 10.1.
bleach,drugs,cosmetics and other compounds that
can affect the tests.Aseptic collection techniques
(cystocentesis,catheterizationincertaincircumstances)
Gross appearance
should beused if the sample is tobe cultured.
Before beginning any analysis the urine sample should
Hydration statusgreatlyaffectsSG and certain
drugs and dietary supplements can affect results (in-
be observed in a transparent containerfor clarity(tur-
cludingdipstickand sedimentevaluation),soanymedi-
bidity)and colour,and these recorded using a consist-
cation or supplementation the animal has received
ent system of semiquantitativereporting.Normal urine
should be noted.
shouldbeclearandyellowtostraw-coloured,depend-
Urineshouldbeanalysed asrapidlyaspossible
ing on concentration of coloured pigment molecules.
The interpretation of gross findings is summarized in
after collection,ideally within30minutes.lf this isnot
 possible it should be refrigerated immediately and
Figure 10.2.
Change
Cause
Constituent
Colour and clarity
Dark and turbid
RBC lysis; growth of bacteria
Increase
Proliferationofurease-producingbacteriasplitingureatoammona
pH
Bilirubin
Decrease
Broken down by sunlight
Disintegration
LowSG;lowpH;increased temperature;vigorous shaking
Casts
↑Crystals and amorphous material
Storage at low temperature; evaporation; pH change
Sediment
Morphological change,disintegration
LowSG and osmolality
Epithelial cells
Swelling, lysis, vacuolation
Low SG and osmolality
Whiteblood cells
Crenation,lysis
Low SG and osmolality
Red blood cells
Bacteria
Growth
Long-temstorageathihmeraturepeciallyvoidedsamls
andin plain(not boricacid）tubes
10.1
Changes seen in aged urine.
149
Chapter 10
Urine analysis
digitsof theurineSGby36approximatesosmolality.
Appearance
Cause
However,this is inaccurate if the urine contains large
Clear,vryalestw
Low SG (very dilute urine)
numbers of molecules (e.g. glucose) as these have a
muchgreatereffectonurineSG than onosmolality.
colour
Clear to slightly turbid,
High SG (concentrated urine)
Refractometers
deepyellow
Refractometers are calibrated toread Rl,SG and
Bright red
Fresh blood（unoxidized）
plasma protein.Manyrefractometers compensate for
changes intemperaturebetween15and37°C.Most
Red
Free haemoglobin/lysed RBC
are calibrated for usewith human samples,although
Red-brown
Older(oxidized）haemoglobin/lysed RBC
instruments for veterinary use are available. The latter
Myoglobin
haveonecalibrationscalefordogs and largeanimal
Darkred-brown
Transfusion of haemoglobin-based
urine(which is similar to a scale for human urine) and
oxygen-carrying solution(Oxyglobin)
a separate scale for cat urine.Human-based instru-
ments will slightly overestimate the SG of cat urine.
Red-pink
Consumptionof beetroot orred food
Care of therefractometeris summarized inFigure
dyes
10.3.UrineSG canbe determined bysome dipsticks
Dark yellow/greenish
Bilirubin
by a chemical method butthis is unreliableinveterinary
Tetracycline group of drugs
patients and is not recommended.
Orange-yellow
Cloudy
Increases in any constituents:
Cells
Rinse and dry theclearoptical surfaceaftereachuse
WBC
Regularlycheckthezerosetingwithdoubledistilledwater
一
RBC
（ddH,O):SG1.000
Epithelial cells
Checkaccuracyofcalibrationwith5%NaCIsolutionind:
Casts
SG1.022
Mucus
Useit within the temperature range of calibation(1537℃)
Bacteria
Avoid scratching/damaging the optical surface
Amorphousmaterial/crystals
10.3
Care of therefractometer.ddH,O=doubly
Changes in colour and clarity of urine.
distilled water.
10.2
RBC= red blood cells;WBC= white blood cells.
Interpretationofresults
SG in healthwill vary with the state ofhydration and
fluid intake. Under normal conditions urine SG ranges 
Specific gravity
between1.015and1.040inhealthydogs and between
The specific gravity (SG) ofurine is a useful indicator of
1.036 and 1.060 in healthy cats.Details of SG ranges
renal concentrating ability.This can be readily ob-
andosmolality areshown inFigure10.4.
 SG should be measured in conjunction with dipstick 
tained by measuring the refractive index (Rl) in a
specially calibrated refractometer. The instrument
analysis. When there is a marked increase in urine
measures the degree through which light is bent (re-
glucoseorproteincontent,SGwillbeincreased and this
fracted) when it passes through a liquid: the amount of
couldlead to theassumption that the animal hasbetter
refraction(refractive index) is afunction of the amount
concentrating abilitythan it actually has.Interpretationof
urine SG values requires knowledge of other para-
and type of solute (particles) in that liquid.Rl and SG
meters, e.g. water intake, drug therapy, clinical condi-
arecorrelated,astheSG isdefined astheratioof the
tionandhaematologicalandbiochemicalparameters.
weightoftheliquidtoanequalvolumeof distilledwater.
The SGof a solution thus depends on the number and
molecular weight(size) of particles in the solution.
Condition
SG
Osmolality
Urine always has anSG greaterthan thatof distilled
(mOsm)
water,which has an SG of 1.ooo.The SG of urine is
increased by large amounts ofglucose,protein,lipid
Usual range inhealthy dogs
1.015-1.045
and contrast material.
Usual range in healthycats
1.035-1.060
There is also areasonably closerelationshipbe-
(May vary outside these
tween SG and osmolality. However, urine SG varies
ranges depending onfluid
with thetypefsolutepresent, whileosmolalitydoesnot.
intake and hydration status)
Osmolalitydependsonthe numberofosmotically active
Possiblerange
1.001-1.080
particles in solutionregardless of their size (SG depends
Hyposthenuria
<1.008
<300
upon both number and size) and is considered to be a
Isosthenuria
1.008-1.012
more accurate assessment of renaltubularconcentrat-
Approximately
ing (and diluting) ability thanSG.However,SG is easily
300
measured(refractometer),while osmolality determin-
Hypersthenuria
>1.012
>300
ationsrequirea special freezepoint depression osmo-
meter. In dogs,it is possible to calculate approximate
10.4
Urine specific gravity and osmolalityranges.
osmolality from urine SG:multiplication of thelast 2
150
Chapter10Urine analysis
SG is a valuable test for evaluating kidney diluting
Polyuria can result from:
and concentrating ability, as the loss of concentrating
abilityis amongst the first signs ofrenal tubular disease.
Osmotic diuresis
Loss of medullary tonicity (renal medullary
SG values >1.030 in the dog and >1.035 in the
washout)
catareindicativeofadequaterenal concentrating
Deficiency in anti-diuretic hormone(ADH)
ability and,if found inanazotaemic animal,
Resistance to ADH.
would indicateprerenalazotaemia.
Isosthenuric urine in an azotaemic animal
Assessmentofpolyuria andpolydipsiabywater
indicates intrinsicrenal failure.
deprivationtestingisdiscussedattheendofthechapter.
SG valuesbetween 1.015 and 1.030 (dog) or
1.035(cat) indicate that some urine
Osmotic diuresis
concentrationhas occurred but do not confirm
This occurs in diabetes mellitus,Fanconi syndrome
adequaterenal concentrating ability and so,in an
(see Chapter 11) and primary renal glucosuria,where
azotaemic animal, would suggest early renal
an excessamountofglucose intheglomerularfiltrate
failure (see Chapter 11).
preventswaterbeingreabsorbed in the distal tubule.
SG values persistently less than 1.020 support
the presence of polyuria and consequent
Loss of medullary tonicity(medullarywashout)
polydipsia.
Inhealth,highconcentrationsofureaandsodiuminthe
interstitialfluidof therenalmedullaleadtoanareaof
The approach to differentiation of causes of altered
hypertonicity which is crucial for effective water
urine SG is summarized in Figure 10.5.
resorption in the renal tubules.Loss of hypertonicity in
therenalmedullamayresult fromhypoadrenocorticism
Common causes of low urine SG and
(loss of sodium), liver disease (reduced urea),pro-
polyuria
longed or vigorous fluid therapy or prolongedpoly-
Renal dysfunction is an important causeofpolyuria
dipsia, e.g. due to psychogenic polydipsia (PP). SG
leadingtoisosthenuria,andisdiscussedinChapter11.
valuesmaybe isosthenuricorhyposthenuric.
SG
Clinical findings
Otherlaboratory changes
Causes
±↑Ureaprotein, albumin,packed cell
Plasmahyeroolaltycausngincreased waterretention
>1.030 dog
Dehydration
>1.035cat
volume(PCV),Na*
by the kidney
±Urea,creatinine,protein,albumin,
Renal concentratingefctcausedbyrenalorexrarnal
<1.030dog
Dehydration
<1.035cat
PCV,Na
disease
1.012-1.030dog
Polyuria
tUrea and creatinine
Early renal failure
1.012-1.035 cat
1.020-1.030
Polyuria/polydipsia
↑Blood glucose
Diabetes melitus
Hyperadrenocorticism
Polyuria/polydipsia
Urea,creatinine±phosphate,K
Witholiguriaacuterenalfae
1.008-1.012
With polyuriacnnfalepst
(seealsobelow)
obstruction
1.008-1.012
Polyuria/polydipsia
No azotaemia with:
or<1.008
tAlkaline phosphatase (ALP),
Hyperadrenocorticismsteroid therapy
cholesterol, glucose
↑Calcium
Hypercalcaemia
NaandtK
Hypoadrenocorticism
±Inflammatory leucogram
Pyometra,pyelonpriis
↓Urea
Renalmedullarywashout postobstruction
↓Urea, bile acids
Hepaticinsufficiency
TT4
Hyperthyroidism(cats)
None
Psychgenlydiauricthayludta
Partial central diabetesinsipidus
<1.008
Polyuria/polydipsia
Central or nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
10.5
Differentiation of common causes of altered urine specificgravity.
151
Chapter 10
Urine analysis
dipsticks are designed for monitoring constituents in
Resistance to anti-diuretic hormone
human urine; therefore, some of the tests are not
Resistance toADH,termed nephrogenic diabetes in-
sipidus(NDl),occurs commonly secondary to many
suitable for use with animal urine,i.e. SG, nitrite,
conditions,including hyercalcaemia,chronic liveds
leucocyteesteraseactivity(WBC) andurobilinogen.
ease, pyometra,hyperadrenocorticism and hypo-
Toensurethemostreliableresultsfromthesetests:
kalaemia. Primary NDI is rare, though it is reported as
a congenital, familial disorder in Huskies. In NDI, SG
Fresh,in-date sticks should be used
Thesticks shouldbe stored in the original
valuesmaybeisosthenuric orhyposthenuric.
container tightly capped (the lid contains 
Deficiencyin anti-diuretichormone
dessicant)
 Storage should be at the suggested temperature 
Deficiency in ADH, termed central diabetes insipidus
(CDI),maybeidiopathicorresult fromintracranialtrauma,
in a dry place
neoplasia or malformations.In partial CDI suboptimal
The enclosed instructionsfor use should be
amounts of ADH are released, often only in response
followed carefully,i.e.tapoff excessurineafter
to very high plasma osmolality; SG values may be
dipping, and check the colour changes at the 
isosthenuric orhyposthenuric.With total ADH deficiency
indicated times
SG values are persistently hyposthenuric and the urine
The testpadsshould notbe touchedwith the
does not concentrate following water deprivation.
fingers
Test pads are read manually by comparing strip
to test chart provided or by using an automated
stick reader.
Dipstickchemical tests
 Practical guidelines for dipstick use are summar-
Theseare a qualitative tosemiquantitativemethodof
ized in Figures 10.6 and 10.7.
monitoring the majorchemicalsofinterestinurine.The
Test
Reported range
Method
Comments
Interference
Hydrogen ion (H+)
FalsepH:contamination withacid from
pH
5-9
concentrationby colour
albumin strip,detergents.Falsecolourdue
topresence of blood substitute(Oxyglobin）
indicator
Glucose oxidase/peroxidase
Not affected by ketones
Falsepositivechlorine bleach,
Glucose
Negative
reaction.Calbrated toavoid
cephalosporins,Oxyglobin
1+(2.8mmol/l)
2+(5.5mmol/)
Falsenegativethymolfmalin
interference byvitaminC
refrigeration sincelowtemperatureinhbits
3+(17mmoll)
(>5mmol/)
4+（55mmol/l)
reaction)
Nitroprussidereaction
Most sensitive to acetoacetate,
FalsepositivepigmenturiaOxyglobin,
Ketones
Negative
less sensitive to acetone.
sulphur drugs,veryconcentratedurine
1+（0.5-4mmol/)
2+(4-10mmol/l)
Does not react with
False negative:old urine
3+(>10mmol/l)
beta-hydroxybutyrate
Negative
Tetra bromophenol blue
Most sensitive to albumin.
Falsepositive:pigmenturia,Oxyglobin,
Protein
1+ (0.3 g/)
reaction at acidpH
Does not detect globulins
ammonia-based disinfectants,
2+(1.0 g/)
or Bence Jones proteins
chlorhexidine,very alkalineurine(pH>8.0)
3+(5.0 g/)
Conjugated bilirubincoupled
False positive:pigmenturia
Bilirubin
Negative
FaleeativeviaminCproonged
1+
withdiazodichloroanilinein
exposure to sunlight (biiubindegraded to
2+
acidmedium
3+
urobilinogen)
Heme peroxidases catalyse
Erythrocytesresult in
False positivebleachbaseddetergents,
Blood
Negative
oxidation of o-toluidine blue
speckles onpad but high
bacteria or WBCperoxidases
1+（5-10RBC/ul)
numbers give difuse colour
Falsenegativeconcentratedurine
2+(25RBC/ul）)
3+（50RBC/ul）
4+250RBC/ul)
Heme peroxidasescatalyse
Diffusecolouronpadwith
As for blood
Haemoglobin
Negative
1+,2+,3+,4+
oxidationofo-toluidineblue
haemolysed cells,free
same equivalents
haemomyoglobin or free
as blood
myoglobin
Specifictest:diazonium salt
Falsepositive:aspirin,transient positive
Urobilinogen
Negative
reacts with urobilinogen
when thereis3+bilirubinpresent
1+(17μmol/l)
Falsenegativefrmalinexposure
2+(70μmol/)
sunlight oraedurine urobilinogenoxidied
3+(140μmol/l)
4+(200μmol/)
to urobilin)
10.6
Dipstick analysis:methods and interferences.(continues)
152
Chapter 10Urine analysis
Test
Reported range
Method
Comments
Interference
Nitrites
Negative or
Bacteria (e.g.Escherichia
Require bacteriainurinein
False positive:old voided (ie.non-sterile
positive
coll convert nitrate tonitrite
bladder for4-8 hours for
collection)urine
in thebladder.Nitritereacts
enough conversionof nitrate
Falsenegative:vitaminC,antibiotis
with napthylethyleneto
tonitrite to be detectable.
produce colour change
Unreliable in dogs and cats
Leucocyte
Negative or
Leucocytesrelease esterase
Unreliable in dogs and cats
False negative:common,cause unknown
esterase
positive
intourinefoming indxy
whichreacts withadiazonium
salt to give a colour change
10.6
(continued) Dipstick analysis: methods and interferences.
Test
Normalvalue
Alteredvalue
Possiblecauses
pH
6.0-7.5
Increase
Urease-containingbacteria（e.g.StaphlococusProteus）
Old urine sample
Transient followingameal
Renal tubular acidosis
Metabolic alkalosis
Decrease
Metabolicacidosis
Hypochloraemicmetabolicalkalosis(uncommon)
Renal tubularacidosis
Hypokalaemia
Glucose
Negativ or trace
1+or greater
Hyperglycaemia exceeding renal theshold:
Diabetesmellitus
Stress hyperglycaemia incats
Hyperadrenocorticism
Normal serum glucose:
Renal tubular disease
Primary renal glucosuria
Fanconisyndrome
Ketones
Negative or race
1+or greater
Diabeticketoacidosis
Starvation
Very young animals
Protein
Negativeor trace
2+ormore
Pyuria (infection)
>1+in dlute urine
Glomerulonephrtisoramyloidosis leading to protein-losing nephropathy
Haemorrhage (see text)
Genital tract secretions
Bilirubin
Negative in cats; trace or
Trace/1+orabove incats
Haemolytic anaemia
1+ in dogs with SG >1.025;
2+or more in dogs
Hepatobillary disease(especially cats)
2+ in dogs with SG >1.040
Blood
Negative
Positive
Haematuria (see Figure 10.15)
Haemoglobin
Negative
Positive
Intravascularhaemolysis(e.g.immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia)
Myoglobinuria(due tomuscle damage)
Urobilinogen
Negative
Positive
and cats.Bilirubin more useful
Nitrites
Negative
Notreliableinanimalsduetouncontrollableurineretentiontimeinthe
bladderwithfrequent falsenegatives
Leucocyte
Negative
Not sensitive enoughtodetect inflammation(urinary tract infection(UTI)
esterase
inanimals.eedtocheckurine sedimentforleucocytes
10.7
Interpretationof dipstick analysis
Urine pH
compared to those taken using apHmeter,sowhen
UrinepH doesnotnecessarilyreflect thebody'spH
an accurate measurement of urine pH is critical
and isalsoinfluencedbydiet,recentfeeding,bact
for clinical decisionmaking,forexamplewhenevalu-
rial infection and storage time.Urine is usually acidic
ating cases of urolithiasis,the measurement should
 in dogs and cats. Studies have shown that dipstick
be made with apH meter(Heuteretal.,1998;Raskin
measurementsof pH areinherently inaccuratewhen
et al.,2002).
153
Chapter10Urine analysis
Causes of alkaline urine include:
Proteinuria
A smallamountofprotein maybe normal but the
·Feeding:thisresults in transiently alkaline urine
dipstick result should be interpreted with knowledge of
as a result of the postprandial alkaline tidewhich
the urineSG,as thesignificanceof theresultisrelated
occurs when secretion of gastric acid causes a
to the concentration of the urine.For example,a 3+
relative alkalosis
protein dipstickresult in urine of SG 1.008 indicates a
Urinary tract infection with urease-producing
much greaterprotein loss than the same3+protein in
bacteria,such asProteus orStaphylococcus;
urine of SG 1.045. Proteinuria may result from
thesebreakdownureatoammonia,resulting in
alkaline urine
inflammationorinfectionwithin theurinary tract.Haem-
Metabolic and respiratory alkalosis;theseresult
orrhage must be marked (macroscopic rather than
in reduced hydrogen ion(H+) excretion into urine
microscopic)beforeit causes significantproteinuria
(see Chapter9)
(Vaden et al.,2004).Thus sediment examination is
Urinary retention(e.g.due to obstruction);this
important in the evaluationofproteinuria.
mayresult indecompositionofurea to ammonia
Contamination by detergents or disinfectants.
Urine protein:creatinine ratio
If there is no evidence of inflammation in the sediment 
If urine ispersistently alkaline and artefactshave
orno grosshaematuria,the urine protein:creatinine
beenruled out,urine culture andsedimentexamina-
ratio(UPC) can be used to quantify proteinuria(Figure
tion should beperformed.
10.8). The quantity of protein lost is related to the
Causes of decreased pH,i.e.acidic urine,include:
amount of creatinineinthe urine to correct forvariation
in urine SG.This ispossiblebecause the excretion of
Metabolic and respiratory acidosis,leading to
creatinineisrelativelystableforanindividualandthere
increasedH+excretion
is essentially no tubular reabsorption in dogs and cats.
Vomiting: paradoxical aciduria with metabolic
Urine total protein and creatinine aremeasured on the
alkalosis may occur in hypochloraemic vomiting
same sample by automated chemical methods,re-
animals.Vomiting results in loss of hydrochloric
ported in the same units and a ratio obtained:
acid (HCI) and also potassium (K+). In the kidney
sodium(Na+) isresorbed in the tubules where it
Urine protein:creatinine ratio(UPC)=Urine protein (mg/dl)
is usually exchanged forK+,which is excreted.
Urine creatinine (mg/dl)
Namay be reabsorbed with chloride (Cl) or
bicarbonate(HCO). Since both K+and Cl are in
Units may need to be converted from Sl units to
short supplydueto thevomiting,Na+isresorbed
perform the calculation:
withHCO，resulting inmore acidicurine
Hypokalaemia:increasedrenal resorption of K+is
Protein (g/) x 100 = Protein (mg/dl)
accompaniedbyincreased excretion of H+
Creatinine (mmol/) x1000/88.4 =Creatinine (mg/dl)
Glucosuria
Glucose isfreelyfiltered thenreabsorbed intheproxi-
UPC
Significance
mal tubule, but resorptive capacity is limited. Glucos-
uria occurswhenbloodglucose exceeds thisrenal
<0.5
Normal
threshold,for example in diabetes mellitus or asa
0.5-1.0
Greyzone,questionable significance
result of stress incats(fructosamine is useful to distin-
guish stress and diabetes,see Chapter 16).The renal
>2.0
Significant proteinuria
threshold in dogs is 10 mmoll and is slightly higher in
>5.0
Indicative of glomerular disease especially
cats (14-17mmol/l).
glomerulonephritisandglomerularbasement
Glucosuriain theabsenceofhyperglycaemiare-
membranedamage/protein-losing nephropathy
flectsa tubularresorption defect inwhich therenal
>8.0-12.0
Frequentlyassociated withamyloidosis
tubules fail to reabsorb glucose from the glomerular
filtrate.Fanconi syndrome and primary renal glucos-
Interpretation of urine protein:creatinine ratio.
uria are examplesof tubular transportdefects that
10.8
This should not be measured in urine when
occurin dogs (see Chapter 11).
inflammation or gross haematuria is presentin the sediment.
Ketonuria
The typeof glomerular diseasepresent cannotbe
Insmallanimals ketonuria is usuallyassociated
determinedfrom theUPCandbiopsyandhistology are
with diabeticketoacidosis(DKA),although it may
required fora definitive diagnosis and prognosis.(See
alsobe seen in starvation.It is important to note that
Chapter 11 for further discussion on proteinuria.)
dipsticks detectacetoacetate and,toalesserextent,
UPC should notbe measured orinterpretedin urine
acetone,but donot detect betahydroxybutyrate
thatcontains>100whitebloodcells in thesediment or
(BHB).During the initial stages of insulin therapy for
if there is evidence of grosshaematuria,since these
DKA thereis increasedconversionofBHBtoaceto-
may cause anincreaseintheurinetotalproteinand
acetate andso thedegreeof ketonuriamayinitially
 give a falsely elevated UPC. This can be above the
appearto increase.
range that indicates thepresence of glomerular loss.
154
Chapter10Urine analysis
N.B.Microscopic haematuria haslittle impact on the
Haematuria,haemoglobinuria and
UPC, and only gross haematuria leads to significant
myoglobinuria
alteration of theratio(Vadenet al.,2004).
The dipstickpadsforblood and haemoglobinboth use
the same chemical method,but a speckled appear-
Albumin and globulin
ance to the dipstick pad is indicative of haematuria,
The dipstickmainly detectsalbuminand isinsensitive
whilst a diffusecolourchange suggestshaemoglob-
to globulin or Bence Jones proteins (light chain frag-
inuria (or myoglobinuria).However,a diffuse colour
ments of immunoglobulinwhichmaybepresent in
changemay also be seen with severe haematuria and
urine of animalswith multiple myeloma(see Chapter
thepadsdonotreliablydifferentiatehaematuriaand
7).Albumin,globulin and Bence Jones proteins areall
haemoglobinuria.Sedimentexamination is useful for
detected using the sulphasalicylic acid (SSA) method:
making the distinction, although red cells may lyse in
when SSAis added to urine,proteins are denatured
vitro, especially in dilute urine, resulting in the false
and form a precipitate which makes the sample turbid.
impressionof haemoglobinuriarather thanhaema-
The turbiditycanbeassessedvisuallyormore accu-
turia.Truehaemoglobinuria results from intravascular
ratelyusing spectrophotometry,comparing the sample
haemolysis(e.g.due toimmune-mediated haemolytic
turbidity with that of a set of standards.The SSA
anaemia) and isaccompaniedbyhaemoglobinaemia
method isnotwidelyused incommercial laboratories.
and anaemia.Haemoglobinaemia canbeidentified by
centrifuginga bloodsample andexamining theplasma
Microalbuminuria
(whichispink/red).Myoglobinuriais seenuncommonly
Persistent microalbuminuria (MA) is an indicator of
in small animals, but may result from severe muscle
glomerular damage associated with early progressive
damage due to trauma or ischaemia (e.g. associated
renaldisease in humans.Such lowlevelalbumin loss is
with aortic thromboembolism in cats). The muscle
not detected by routine dipstick analysis.Recently new,
enzymes creatine kinase (CK)and aspartate transami-
verysensitive,separatedipsticksforurinemicroalbumin
nase(AsT) are usually markedly elevated in serum/
have become available foruse in dogs and cats.These
plasma.Myoglobin isa small protein which israpidly
are immunological tests using a monoclonal antibody
cleared from the circulation,so myoglobinuria is not
specificforcanineorfeline albumin.Studieshave shown
accompaniedby pigmented plasma.
that 20-25%of healthy dogs and13%ofhealthy cats
have MA,whilst approximately 40%of dogs and cats
Urine sediment analysis
with a medical condition have MA (Jensen 2001;
Wisnewski et al.,2004).The prevalence of MA in-
The third andperhaps most important component of a
creases with age (Radecki et al.,2003).Diseases that
completeroutine urinalysis is the microscopicexami-
havebeen associatedwithMAincludecardiovascular
nation of the sediment.A consistentvolume of urine
disease,urogenital disease,dental disease,airway
should be used for preparing the sediment for analysis.
disease,pyoderma,inflammatoryboweldisase,hyr
Laboratories use volumes that vary (10 ml, 5 ml, 3 ml) 
thyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, diabetes mellitus,
toproduce a semiquantitativeresult.Larger laborato-
infectious diseases and neoplasia Grauer et al.,2001;
ries alsouse disposable microscope slides,with a grid,
Vaden et al.,2001;Pressleretal.,2003;Wisnewskiet
which hold a set volume of sediment (usually 0.5 ml).
al.,2004).Prednisolone therapy may also lead to MA.
Experienced microscopists use unstained sediment
Thus it appears that a significant proportion of normal
and a phase contrast microscope.Less confident per-
animals and animalswithdiseases unrelatedto the
sonsmayelect to stainthesedimentbeforemicroscopy
renal systemmayhave MA.It isnotclear at this time
tofacilitate cellidentification.Aregularmicroscopewith
whatproportionof animalswithMAwill developrenal
thecondenserloweredcanbe used toidentifycellsin
disease or protein-losing nephropathy.Animals with
unstained sediment if phase contrast is not available.
end-stage renal disease may test negative for MA. The
Themicroscope should bekept clean and in good
diagnosticusefulnessof thistestis stillunderevaluation.
workingorder,withlensandcondenseralignmentmain-
tained forthebest possiblevisible field and resolution.lf
Bilirubinuria
an oil immersion(1oox)objective isused foridentifying
There isalow renal threshold forbilirubin and even small
bacteria or assessing cell morphology, the lens should
increases in plasmabilirubin canlead tobilirubinuria.
be wipedclean aftereach use toprevent oil dripping into
Thus bilirubinuria is detected prior to hyperbilirubinae-
the condenser andseepinginto theobjective.lIt is also
mia or jaundice.Bilirubin in urine is in the form of
advisable to place a coverslip on the sample to protect
conjugatedbilirubin,sinceunconjugatedbilirubinisbound
theobjectivelensfrom damage.
toalbumin,which does not usually pass through the
A suggested method for preparation and analysis is 
glomerularbarrierin significant amounts unlessglomeru-
as follows:
lar diseaseispresent.Bilirubinuriaisnotseeninhealthy
catsbuta small amountof bilirubinmaybefound in the
1.Fresh urine or warmed previously refrigerated
urine of normal dogs (see Figure 10.7). This is in part
urine should beused
becausetheyhaveaverylowrenalthreshold,andinpart
 2. The sample is mixed well but gently to prevent 
becausecaninerenal tubularcells areabletocatabolize
cast destruction.
haemoglobin to unconjugated bilirubin, conjugate it and
3.Aconstant volume（10,5or3ml,often3ml is
thensecreteitinto the urine.lncreased bilirubinuria may
used for cat urine),is placed in a conical
becausedbycholestasisorhaemolyticanaemia.
centrifuge tube.
155
Chapter10
Urineanalysis
4. The urine is centrifuged gently (suggested 1,000
13.Forfurther identification of cell types or to
rpm for 5 minutes; this willvary with the type of
differentiate bacteria from particles the 10oX oil
centrifuge used). if a smaller volume of urine (i.e.
immersion objective can be used.
<3ml) is used with high speed centrifugation the
14.Fat and air bubbles can usually be distinguished
amountof sedimentobtainedmaybetoosmall
by fine focusing and moving the condenser.
especiallyif the urine is very dilute.The high
15.Brownianmotionofparticles can usuallybe
speed may also damage cells and destroy casts.
distinguished frommotilebacteria at10oXpower.
5.
The supernatant is decanted (this can beused in
therefractometerforSG orfor dipstick analysis,
Urinesedimentresults shouldbeinterpreted witha
especially ifonlya small volumeof urineis available).
knowledgeof howthesamplewascollected,itschemi-
6.A few dropsof liquid will remain in the tube.
cal composition(dipstick analysis) and its SG. Most
Sediment is mixed in this to resuspend it, either by
importantly the clinical conditionof the animal and any
haematology and biochemistry results (if available)
gently tapping the tube or pipetting up and down.
*7.fa specialized urine stain,such asSedistain,is
should also be taken into account.The presence of
being used,1 dropisadded to thesediment and
increasedleucocytesandbacteria ina cystocentesis
mixed. (N.B. Stain will develop precipitate with
sample from an animal with urinary frequency and an
timeandneedstobediscardedorfilteredbefore
inflammatoryleucogramwouldconfirm theneedfor
use because stainprecipitate canbemistaken
forbacteria)
whereasasimilar free-catch sample froma bitch
8.A drop of sediment is placed ona clean glass slide
during oestruswould notelicit the sameresponse.
and a coverslip is placed on it avoiding air bubbles.
Similarly, cells with an abnormal appearance in urine
9. The slide is placed on the microscope stage and
froman animalwithpainlesshaematuria wouldsug-
the whole area is scanned on low power (10x
gest further cytological analysis and investigation,un-
objective). lf unstained sediment is being used,
less it wereknown that the animal had received drugs
thecondensershouldbelowered until there is
known tobe toxic/irritant tourinarybladdercells.Like-
good resolution.
wisefurtherinvestigationof proteinuria afterpositive
10. The presence of crystals is reported at this
dipstickprotein isnotindicatedwheresediment con-
magnification.A consistent scheme is used,i.e.
tains large numbers of red andwhiteblood cells and
1+,2+,3+or light,moderate,heavy.ldentificatin
bacteria.lf large numbersofepithelial cells and/orcells
 of crystal types should be attempted.
with abnormal morphology are found during routine
11. The objective is changed to high power (40x)
sediment analysis further cytology is advisable,e
cially if there is a history ofhaematuria and a suspicion
and the area is rescanned.The numbers of
erythrocytes, leucocytes and epithelial cells,
of neoplasiain theurinary tract(see Cytology,below).
casts, crystals and bacteria seen per high power 
field are counted and recorded (Figure 10.9). It is
Casts
advisable tocount in5-10different fields and
Casts are formed in therenal tubules fromTamm-
then average thenumbers unless there arevery
Horsfallmucoproteinsecreted byrenal tubularepithe-
large numbersseen.
lial cells.Thesecondensetoform hyalinecasts(Figure
12.Otherconstituents arereported,e.g.sperm,mucus
10.10a). The hyaline casts may then acquire cellular
strands,yeast,fungi,nematode eggs,fat droplets.
debris and become granular casts (Figure 10.10b) or
Element
Look-alike
Distinguishing feature of look-alike
Fat droplets
Variabalfffs
Yeast
Usually oval or budding
Whiteblood
RBCs(unstained）
Smallehnfeaistnd
cells(WBCs)
Transitional cells
Usually larger thanWBCs and have smallroundnucleus
Bacteria
Fat droplets
Refractile
Fine amorphous material
Brownian motion
Yeast
Usuallyoval or budding
Stain precipitate
Variable sizes
Starch granules
Largerwithcentralcross
Crystals
Glass fragments
Variable size(difficulto distinguish)
Casts
Muscle fibres
Internal striations
Cotton fibres
Intealstriationsaseullathedufaceandtncrratdantra
Aggregatesof amorphousmaterial
Difficultodistinguishbutusuallyscant infreshurine
10.9
I Distinguishing features of formed elements and cells in urine sediment.
156
Chapter10Urineanalysis
traplipiddropletstobecomefattycasts.Whenthese
white or red cell casts, respectively (Figure 10.10d),
casts age and/ordeteriorate andsolidifyin the tubules
whilst epithelialcellcasts(Figure 10.10e)occurdueto
they form waxy casts (Figure 10.10c). Normal urine
severe damage to the renal tubule leading to sloughing
may containa few hyaline orgranular casts,but
of cells. Casts maybe flushed into the bladder urine
increased numbers reflect renal pathology,usually
intermittently,andtheyalsodisintegraterapidlyin
acutetubulardisease(Figure10.11).Inflammationor
alkaline orold urine,so the absence of casts doesnot
haemorrhageinthekidneymayleadtotheformationof
excluderenal tubulardisease.
(b:i)
(b:ii)-
(c:i)
(c:ii)
(d:i)
(d:ii）g
2
le)
10.10
Urine sediment casts.(a)Hyalinecast with little structureanda faint light appearance.Anoccasional hyaline cast
maybe found innormal urine.Theseare the earliestcasts formed inrenal disease.They arevery fragile and easily
destroyed inurine.(Unstained sediment.)(b) Granularcasts (i unstained and(i stained with Sedistain.Thesecastscanbe
seen with toxic injury to the renal tubules,and with haemoglobinuria(as well asred cell casts) and myoglobinuria.(e) Waxy
casts (i) unstained and (i) stained with Sedistain.These develop from the disintegration and consolidation in casts as they
mature in the damaged tubules.When foundin urine they indicate chronicity of therenal condition.(d) Mixed cellular casts (i)
unstained and(i)stainedwithSedistain.Thesecastscanbe foundwith acuterenal damage,trauma and ininflammationof
thekidney.Theyarevery fragile and readily disintegrate with rough handling and storage of urine.(e)Histology section from
a kidney, stained with H&E, showing a large mixed cellular and waxy cast within a renal tubule.(Original magnification X400.)
Type of cast
Normal findings
Significance ofabnormal findings
Hyaline
None or rare
Common in glomerularproteinuria and amyloidosis
Granular(fine or coarse)
None orrare
Tubular damage due to:
Nephrotoxins(e.g.aminoglycosides)
Haemoglobinuria-ormyoglobinuria-induced nephropathy
·
Renal ischaemia
White celland epithelial casts
None
Acutedamagewithinflammationorsloughingofcellsinkidney
Red blood cell
None
Acuterraatha
Fatty
None
In cats with tubular damage
In dogs with diabetesmellitus
Granular/waxy
None
These develop from degenerating granular or cellarcasts and indicate duration/chronicity
Waxy
of disease
Haemoglobin
None
Developwithhaemoglobinuri/myoglobinuriarespectively
Myoglobin
10.11
Interpretation of urine sediment analysis: casts.
157
Chapter 10
 Urine analysis
Crystals
dueto thepresenceofurease-producingbacteria in
Thepresence of crystals in urine(Figure 10.12) canbe
urinary tract infection.Calcium phosphate and,occa-
of no clinical significance inhealth,butin animalswith
sionally,calciumoxalate crystalsmayforminassocia-
histories of urolithiasis orrelevant clinical signs they
tion with hypercalcaemia (Figures 10.12b-10.12d).
may be significant (Figure 10.13).A knowledge of
Uric acid and ammonium biurate crystals (Figures
underlying causes or predisposing factors to the for-
10.12e-10.12f) canbe found in urine of dogs and cats
mation of various crystals canhelp direct furtherinves-
withseverehepaticdysfunctionandportosystemic
tigations.Both struviteand calcium oxalate crystals
shunting; they are also seen in the urine of Dalmatians
maybe present in healthy dogs and cats and are the
due to a metabolic defect (discussed in Urolith section).
most common typesofcrystalsfound.Struvite crystals
Cystinecrystals(Figure 10.12g)form due toa rare
(Figure 10.12a)form in alkaline urine,which mayarise
tubularresorptivedefect,reported inEnglishBulldogs
(a)
[b]
(c:i)
(c: ii)
(d)
(el
+
(g)
h
(i)
Urine sediment crystals. (a) Struvite (magnesium ammonium phosphate) crystals with a typical coffin lid'
10.12
structure. These crystals can have various structures depending on conditions during formation and growth.
(b)Calciumoxalatedihydrate crystalsarethemost commonformofcalciumoxalatecrystal found.Theyhave a typical
ethylene glycol toxicity.The structure is distinctive and different:(i) in dogs they are elongated andneedle shaped;(i in
form clusters.(e) Uric acid crystals are most commonly‘diamond’shaped but can take other forms and are clear orpale
yellow.(f)Ammonium biurate crystals are usuallypaleyellowtobrown andmayaggregate to form clusters;the typical
thorn apple'appearance.(g) Cystine crystals have a typical hexagonal shape.(h) Drug-associated crystals.Many drugs
and theirmetabolitesmay crystallize in urine.This is an example of crystal formation from sulphonamide drugs and their
metabolitesinurine,whichisnotuncommon.(i)Cholesterolcrystalsareverythin,flatandrectangular.(i)Bilirubincrystals
usually are in the form of yellow tored fine needles.(Unstainedsediment;original magnificationX400.)
158
Chapter10Urineanalysis
Typeof crystals
Normal findings
Significanceof abnormal findings
Struvite(magnesium
Maybe seen in normal dogs
Form in alkaline urine
ammonium phosphate)
and cats with alkaline urine.
UTI with urease-producing bacteria
Variableincidence depending
Maylead tostruvitecalculi
on pHGand storagef
BUTnotareliableindicatorofpresenceofstruvitecalculiascommoninnormal
sample
animals with urine pH >6.5
Calciumoxalatemonohydrate
Veryoccasionallypresent i
Ethylene glycol poisoning
normal dogs and cats
Consumptionof toxic plants in cats
Calciumoxalate dihydrate
May be present in normal
Forminacidoreutralorweaklyalkalineurine
dogs andcats
Maylead tocalciumoxalatecalculi
monohydrate form)
Calcium phosphate
May be present in normal
Forminweakacid toalkalineurine
sbop
May lead to urolithiasis
Hypercalcaemia ispredisposing factor
Ammoniumurate/biurate
Common in Dalmatians and
Uric acidcrystals forminacidurine
Uric acid
English Bulldogs
Urate/biuratecrystalsforminalkalineurine
Forminhepaticdisease/portosystemic shunts
Form due tometabolicdefectinDalmatians
May lead tourate calculi
Bilirubin
May be present in normal
Form in hepatobiliary disease especiallycats
dogswithconcentratedurine
Form in acid urine
Cystine
Absent in normal animal's
Form in acid urine
urine
FormduetefectintublarresrptionfcystinnBulMastifnglihBulg
Dachshund,Chihuahua
Leucine/tyrosine
Absent in normal animal's
Form in acid urine
urine
Formduetometabolicdisease/inheritedtubulardisease
Cholesterol
Maybe present in normal
Forminacid to neutral urine
dogs and cats
May form in chronicprotein-losing nephropathy
Amorphousmaterial
Common in concentrated
(variablecontent)
urine
10.13
Interpretation of urinesediment analysis:crystals.
and some other breeds. Large numbers of crystals in
cells(usually neutrophils) arelargerthanred cells,and
dilute urine, persistent crystalluria and large crystals
areroundwithgranularcytoplasmandoftenanindis-
have greatersignificance inrelation to stone formation.
tinct nucleus（Figure 10.14b).Normalurine sediment
If largenumbersofcalciumoxalatemonohydrate
contains small numbers of transitional epithelial cells
along with dihydrate crystals are found in urine, inges-
fromthe bladder;increased numbersare seen second-
tion of toxic substances, particularly ethylene glycol
ary tobladderinflammation/irritation.Transitional cells
(antifreeze) and certain toxicplants,should be sus-
are large and round to oval, with a central round
pected.High concentrations of these substances can
nucleus and abundant cytoplasm (Figure 10.14c).
be metabolized to produce oxalates,which precipitate
Voided urine may also contain squamous epithelial
in therenal tubules as calcium oxalates and can cause
cellsfrom the urethra andvaginawhichare alsolarge
irreversiblerenalfailure(seeChapter11).
ls e ue ads lpod hnnue ue a ing
Unusual crystalsmay be formed if large quantities
roundnucleus(Figure10.14d).Ararerenalandureteral
of drug or drug metabolites concentrate in urine, e.g.
epithelial cellmay alsobefound.Thesearesmall with
sulphonamide drugs frequentlyform crystals(Figure
arelativelylargeroundnucleusandlesscytoplasm
10.12h).Unusual, difficult to identify crystals can
(Figure 10.14e).The significance of increased num-
oftenbe drug-derived.Cholesterol crystals(Figure
bersofredandwhitebloodcellsand epithelial cellsis
10.12i)maybeseen innormalanimalsorinnephrotic
summarized in Figure 10.15.
syndrome.Bilirubin crystals (Figure 10.12j) may be
seen when there is marked bilirubinuria,due to
Miscellaneous findings
cholestasis or haemolytic anaemia,and may occa-
Bacteria may reflect contamination or infection;an
sionally be seen in concentrated urine from normal
associatedinflammatoryresponsewouldsupport the
dogs (especially males).
latter(Figure10.16a),but is not always present.Other
organisms,such asnematodes,yeastand fungimay
Cells
occasionallybeidentified(Figures10.16b-e)and their
Redand white blood cellsmaybe seen in lownumbers
significance is summarized inFigure 10.17.Sperm,
in normal urine. Red cells (Figure 10.14a) may be
mucus strands and cotton fibre contaminants are shown
confusedwith fat dropletsoryeast(Figure10.9).White
in Figure 10.16(f-h).
159
Chapter 10
Urine analysis
a
(c:ii)
(b)
(d)
(c:i)
(e)
10.14
iscommonwhen cells are inurinefora prolongedperiod.(Unstained sediment.)(b)RBC,WBCand bladder
epithelialcelinsedmentTwolargepithelial cellsareseenontheeft,threeneutrophilsontherightust to thelf
the neutrophils there are two crenated RBCs.(Unstained sediment.)(e) Clusterof bladderepithelial cells(i)unstained and
(i)stainedwithSedistain.Bladdermucosacellswillexfoliate formingclustersandraftsinurinewithinflammation/irritation.
(d) Unstained preparationmature squamousepithelial cells andbacteria which couldbe contaminantsfrom the distal
from the ureters and renal pelvis.(Original magnification X400.)
Celltype
Normal findings
Significanceof abnormal findings
RBCs
<5 per high powerfield (hpf)
Cystocentesismaylead to small increase
Moderatenumbersin freecatchurinein intactfemales
Microscopicormacroscopichaematuriain:
Renayr
Thrombocytopenia
Vasculitis
WBCs
<5/hpf
Smallnumbers in free catchurine
Usually neutrophils,
Moderate to large numbers in inflammation or infection of the kidney or urinary tract
occasionallyeosinophils
Epithelial cells
0-2/hpf
Small numbers in free catch urine
Smallcellsfrom kidney/upper
Increased numbersf smallcelinuper tract inlammationorinfectn
tract
Sheetsof uniformlargecells inbladderor lower tract inflammationorinfection
Large cells from bladder or
Squamouscel inbladder and lowerurinary tractinflammationorinfection
urethra
hyperplasia
10.15
Interpretation of urine sediment analysis:cells.
160
Chapter 10
Urine analysis
a
d
le)
T
(g)
(h)
10.16
Urine sediment:miscellaneous.(a) Sediment containing degenerate neutrophils and numerous bacteria
consistent with urinary tract infection.(Unstained.)(b)Aspergillus spp.Fungal contamination,especially in free-
catch and old urine,is common.(Sedistain.)(c)Alternaria spp,a contaminant especially in free-catch urine.(Sedistain.)
(d)Parasite eggs canbefound if there is faecal contamination of the sample or,rarely,when organisms arepresent in the
kidney itself.(Sedistain.)(e) Mites are rare contaminants in free-catch urine.(Sedistain.)(f) Sperm are found in entire
male dog urine.(Sedistain.)(g)Mucus strands.Variable amountsof fine material floaton the surface of urinepreparations
magnification (a)X1000,(b,c,d,e)X200,(f,g,h)X400.)
Component
Normal findings
Significance of abnormal findings
Bacteria:
None
If present in cystocentesis sample indicate significant infection
>1-3x10*/ml rods or >1x10/ml
If presentina free-catchsamplemaybecontaminantswhichhaveproliferated
cocci must be present to be
detectableinurine sediment
Mucin
Smallamount may be present
Fat droplets
Normal incats
Sperm
Normal in males
Yeasts
None
In free-catchurinemaybe contaminants,thusinfection should beconfirmed on
cystocentesis sample
Infectionusuallyoccursonlyin immunosuppressed animals
Fungi
None
Aspergillusinfectionusuallyoccursonlyinimmunosuppressedanimals
Nematodes
None
Rareinfection withDioctophymarenaleorCapillria plica.Faecal contamination
Starch granules
None
Contaminants
Pollen grains.
10.17
Urine sediment analysis interpretation: miscellaneous.
161
Chapter10Urineanalysis
Urine cytology
exfoliate in large numbers in rafts and clusters.There
canalsobemetaplasticchangesinthecytoplasmdue
Whenabnormalorincreasednumbersof epithelial
to the chronicityof the condition(Figure10.18a),and
cells are seen on a standard sediment examination,
in some instances nuclear changes can be very
cytological examination of a stained smear should be
similarto those seenwithneoplasia.Guidance froma
performed. A fresh sample of urine should be concen-
cytologist is advisable in these situations.Numerous
trated(preferablyusingaslowercentifugation speed to
neutrophilsmaybe seenininflammatoryorinfectious
minimize cell damage) and thesediment placed on a
conditions:these may be very degenerate, some-
slideprecoatedwithserum(toensure attachment of
times showloss ofnormal segmentednuclear mor-
cells).The cells should be gently spread into a mono-
phology and may be confused with small epithelial
layerand thepreparation air driedbeforestaining with
cells (Figure 10.18b).
a Romanowsky type stain(Wright's Giemsa or a re-
Neoplasticdisease of the urinarysystem is usually
lated rapid stain).
 malignant and frequently causes haematuria. The most
The pH,SG and ageing of urine has a profound
common tumouris thetransitional cell carcinoma.
effectoncellmorphologyandcausesswellingandloss
Cells from this are large and can exhibit marked aniso-
of internal morphological detail, so urine for special
cytosis and anisokaryosis as well as many other cri-
cytological analysis should be as fresh as possible.lf a
teria ofmalignancy(seeChapter20)(Figures10.18c-d).
delay in making smears is anticipated,boric acid may
Less common tumours are urothelial carcinoma or
help preserve cellular morphology. However, if sam-
adenocarcinoma,in which cells are usually smaller
ples are to be mailed out to an external laboratory,
with deeply staining cytoplasm (Figure 10.18e), and 
centrifuged smears shouldbe preparedin house when-
squamouscellcarcinoma,inwhichexfoliatedcellsare
everpossible,airdriedorwet fixed withasprayfixative
large and have cytoplasmiccharacteristicsof keratini-
and mailed alongwitha urine sample.Smearsmade
zation, cytoplasmic vacuolation and nuclear changes
from24-hour-old urine are oftenimpossible tointerpret
characteristic of malignancy(Figure 10.18f).Cells from
duetocell deterioration.
primary tumours of the kidney epithelial cells (carci-
Normal urine sedimentcontainssmall numbers of
noma) are infrequently shed into the urine. These are
epithelial cells (described above) seen singly or in
usually small cells with clear cytoplasm and a central
small clusters.Chronic infection or inflammation re-
round nucleus.
lated to urolithiasis and certain drugs can cause
Rhabdomyosarcoma (botyroid) bladder tumours
increased exfoliationof lining epithelial cells into the
are rare, but can occur in young dogs of large breeds.
urine. There may be marked morphological hyper-
Leiomyomas/sarcomas may also occur in the urinary
plastic or dysplastic changesof these cellswhich can
systembutcellsfrom theserarelyexfoliateinto the
(a)
(c)
(e)
(#)
(d)
10.18
Urine sediment cytology. (a) Clusters of epithelial cells showing squamous metaplasia which can occur in
bladderpithelial cellsneutrophilserythrocytes andbacteria.lf the samplewas asepticallycollected thiswould indicate
pyuria urinary tract infection(UTl).Thiskind of sediment is some timesreferred to asactive sediment.(Giemsa stain.)
(c)Transitional cell carcinoma of thebladder.The cells exhibit many criteria of malignancy:variation incelland nuclear
size,multinucleated cells,coarsenuclearchromatin and highnuclear:cytoplasmicratio.(Wright‘'sGiemsa stain.)
particularly size and shape of nucleoli(Papanicolaou stain.)(e)A cluster of cellsfrom an urothelial carcinoma.The cells
aresmaller than those in the transitional cellcarcinomawithfoamycytoplasmand largenucleiwithmultiplenucleoli.
(Giemsa stain.)(f) Raft of cells from a squamous cell carcinoma of thebladder.These cells arelargewith anangular
X1000,(b,d)X500.)
162
Chapter10Urine analysis
urine.Renalorbladderlymphoma canresult in exfolia-
years therehasbeen a change in therelativepropor-
 tion of large numbers of often abnormal lymphocytes 
tionof theseuroliths,with a increase in incidence of
into the urine.
calciumoxalateurolithisis and a decrease in struvite
Cytological diagnosisof bladdertumours isparticu-
(Ling et al.,2003).This is likely to be related to the
larlydifficult aspolypsandepithelial hyperplasiamay
widespread use of manufactured urinary acidifying
exfoliate similar cells.lf a cytological diagnosis of
dietswithrestricted magnesiumcontent.In one study
malignant tumour is made, follow-up biopsy and histo-
in dogs analysing urolith submissions, approximately
logyareadvisable,particularlyin thecaseof bladder
44%were struvite and 42%were calciumoxalate
mucosal tumours,to confirm malignancyand the de-
(Houston et al.,2004). Struvite were most common in
gree of invasiveness of thetumour.
female dogs and calcium oxalate in male dogs. In cats
50%of urolithsubmissions were calcium oxalate and
44%were struvite,while themajority of urethralplugs
Uroliths(calculi/stones)
(81%) were struvite(Houston et al.,2003).
Clues to the type of urolith present are the breed,
Uroliths(the preferred term)or crystals can be ana-
urinepH,urolithradiodensity(calciumoxalate,calcium
lysed formineral contentusing semiquantitative chemi-
phosphate,cystineand struvite uroliths areradiodense,
cal analysis kits. The following constituents can be
whilst urates are radiolucent and the type of crystals
measured:
seen inurine sediment.However the type of crystal
present is not always the same as the type of urolith. All
Calcium
types of uroliths in the bladder may lead to a secondary
Oxalate
urinary tract infection,and,if the organism produces
Phosphate
urease,urine pH increases leading to struvite crystal
Magnesium
formation.
Ammonium
Uric acid
Struviteuroliths
Cystine.
Struvite uroliths(Figure10.19)mayformin sterileurine
that containshigh concentrations of magnesium,phos-
Urolithscan also be analysed using X-ray
phorus and ammoniumions and isof neutral toalkaline
crystallography,polarized light microscopy and infra-
pH.In dogs,they are formed more frequently,and
red(IR) spectroscopy.These methodsare preferable
morerapidly,whenthereis alsoa co-existinginfection,
to chemical semiquantitative mineral ion analysis.
particularlywith urease-producingbacteria(Staphylo-
Identification of crystal types and/or mineral content
coccus and Proteus).This enzyme can split urea
is essential for successful therapy in animals with
(abundant in urine) to produce ammonium ions and
related urolithiasis.
CO,which forms bicarbonate and increases urine pH.
Urolithsarebelieved toform morereadily insuper-
The ammoniumionsbecome part of the struvite crys-
saturated urine.However,otherfactorsplay apart:
tals. Increased concentrations of these ions are also
reported to affect the mucins glycosaminoglycans pro-
The presence of a nucleation centre ornidus
duced by the bladder mucosal lining cells,reducing
(e.g. bacteria, mucin plug)
theirprotective ability. Struvite calculi are most com-
Urine pH
mon in youngfemale dogs and in thefollowing breeds:
Duration of urine supersaturation
mixed breeds,Miniature Schnauzers,Shih Tzu and
Absence of crystallization inhibitors normally
Bichon Frise.
producedbybladdermucosal cells
Possibly geneticfactors.
Risk factor analysis for urolithformation canbe
performed and expressed as therelative supersatura-
tion(RSS) index.The RSS is obtained by complex
computer-based analysis of urine volume,pH and con-
tent of calcium,oxalate,magnesium,uric acid,mucin,
citrate and pyrophosphate.RSSwere developed and
are used by foodmanufacturersfor theformulation of
dietssuitablefortreatment andpreventionof struvite,
calciumoxalate andcalciumphosphateurolithiasisin
both dogs and cats. Several studies have suggested
that RSS can be used to predict the risk of formation of
these uroliths.Inpractice,analysing urine pH and the
10.19
Struvitestonesfrom the bladderof a dog.
amounts and types ofcrystalspresent canbe used as a
guide towhich typeofcalculusmay be likely to form,or
In cats,struvitecalculi formationismost commonin
has formed and ispresent.Such analysis can also be
sterileconditions inolderfemalecats and islesscom-
used to monitor the effectiveness of therapy.
monly associated with infection (where there is no age
Struvite andcalciumoxalate arethemostcommon
or sexpredilection).In cats,struvite is alsoa common
uroliths identified indogs and catsbutover thelast20
component ofmany urethral plugswhich occuralmost
163
Chapter10Urine analysis
exclusivelyinmaleneutered catswithorwithouturinary
Cystine uroliths
tractinfection (UTI).High-magnesium dry diets,alkaline
These form due to an inborn error of amino acid
urine andareduction inurineglycosaminoglycans have
metabolismwhichleadstoreducedtubularresorption
beenimplicated in the development of both struvite
stones and struvite-rich plugs.
accumulation.Thisresultsincystine crystalluriaand,in
some cases,urolith formation.The conditionisrare but
Calcium oxalateuroliths
isreported usually inyoung male dogsof theEnglish
Calciumoxalate urolithsform in acid toneutralurine,
Bulldog, Dachshund and Bassett Hound breeds. It is
usually in the absence of UTl. In dogs, they occur
rarelyreported in cats.
more commonly inoldermale animals.Abreedpre-
disposition for Lhasa Apso,Shih Tzu,BichonFrise,
Silica uroliths
MiniaturePoodles,MiniatureSchnauzers andYork-
Thesearerarebut theirformation inacid toneutral
shire Terriers is reported.In cats,calcium oxalate
urine, in association with acidifying diets,has been
uroliths are more common in males,with no age
reported.Manyof these dietscontainlarge amounts of
restriction.Burmese,Himalayan and Persiancatsare
plantgluten,soyabean andmaizehullswhichare high
reported tobemore often affected.Riskfactorsfor
in silica.Theyhavebeenfound inmiddle-aged male
their formation are a high-protein diet, increased
dogs of the German Shepherd Dog,Golden Retriever
dietary calcium,oxalate,sodium andvitamin C.The
andLabradorRetrieverbreeds.
acidifying dietsforpreventing struviteformationmay
also be contributory in some cases,as they have
reduced magnesium and produce acid urine. A pos-
Urinarytestsfortubulardamage
sibleinheritedmechanismwhichminimizes thepro-
Urinegamma-glutamyl
compoundscapableofinhibitingcalciumoxalatecrys-
transferase:creatinineratio
tal growth has also been implicated in both cats and
Ifacutesevererenal tubulardamageornecrosisis
dogs. These inhibitory compounds include Tamm-
suspected (e.g.following aminoglycoside treatment)a
Horsfallprotein,nephrocalcin andprothrombinfrag-
urinary testfor tubular damage canbeperformed.
ments,whichincreasethesolubilityofcalciumoxalate
Gamma-glutamyl transferase(Y-glutamyl transpeptid-
and prevent crystal aggregation.
ase,GGT)is synthesized by renal tubular epithelial
cells,andwhen theyareinjuredorsloughed,itislost
Calciumphosphateuroliths
into the urine in large amounts (although plasma GGT
Calciumphosphate crystalsformmuchlessfrequently
is not increased). Creatinine is not reabsorbed by the
thaneitherstruviteorcalciumoxalateinbothcats
tubules,sourineGGTcanberelatedtourinecreatinine
and dogs. Growth and aggregation can lead to stone
tocorrectforvariationinurine SG.GGTandcreatinine
formationwhichhasbeenassociatedwithhyper-
aremeasured by automaticmethods in the same
calcaemia and high urine calcium concentrations.
sampleofurineandaratioobtained:
They form most easily in alkaline urine. There are
different types of calcium phosphate uroliths, includ-
Urine GGT (IU/)
ing hydroxyapatite,carbonateapatite and brushite
Urine creatinine (mg/dl)
(tricalcium phosphate).They have been associated
with increaseddietarycalcium,phosphorus andvita-
Unitsmayneed tobe convertedfromSl units to
min D;renal tubular acidosis;and hypercalcaemia
perform the calculation:
associatedwith hyperparathyroidism,but not para-
neoplastic syndromes.They can form at any urine
Creatinine（mmol/l)x1000/88.4=Creatinine（mg/dl)
pH.In dogs there is an increased incidence in males
but no age association.They are more common in
A normal urine GGT:creatinine ratioof 0.14±0.10
Cocker Spaniels,Yorkshire Terriers and Miniature
has been reported foradultdogs(Gossett etal.,1987),
Schnauzers.They are uncommon in cats but occur
whilst a studyof6-month-old maleBeaglesreported a
most frequentlyinmiddle-agedfemalecats,withno
higher value of0.34±0.53(Grauer et al.,1995).The
breed predilection.
ratio is increased with tubular damage,e.g. following
gentamycin-induced nephrotoxicosis.
Ammoniumurateanduricaciduroliths
These form in acid to neutral pH urine.They are
uncommon in both dogs and cats with the exception of
Assessmentofpolyuria/polydipsia by
the Dalmatian;in this breed there is an inherited
water deprivation testing
reduced ability to oxidize uric acid to allantoin,causing
accumulationof uric acid inplasma andurine,which
Waterdeprivationtests(WDT)are used inpatientswith
can leadto urolith formation.There is also anincreased
hyposthenuria (i.e. SG <1.007) to diferentiate between
incidence of these urolithsin other breeds,including
central diabetes insipidus(CDI),nephrogenic diabetes
EnglishBulldog,YorkshireTerrier,MiniatureSchnau-
insipidus (NDI) and psychogenicpolydipsia(PP).How-
zer and Shih Tzu. These uroliths can also occurin dogs
ever,animalswithhypercalcaemia,hyperadrenocorti-
and catswith severe hepatic dysfunction and
portosystemic shunts.
infections may occasionallyhavehyposthenuria,and
164
Chapter 10 Urine analysis
WDTisdangerousorcontraindicatedin thesepatients.
themonitoring methods of choice are measuring urine
Thistestis also contraindicatedinpolyuric animals that
SG andrecording bodyweight.Whenperforming the
are dehydrated and/orazotaemic.Polyuria and poly-
test thesamebalance/scalesmustbeusedforeach
dipsia (PU/PD) are frequently reported in dogs and
weighing and the samerefractometermustbe used for
cats,butIDIandarrlativlyrareandi
measuring urine SG throughout.
essential toattempt torule out all other causes of
It is important torule outhyperadrenocorticism
 polyuria and polydipsia before performing a WDT. The
(Cushing's disease)as a causeof PU/PDbefore per-
testisdesignedtodeterminewhetherADHisreleased
forming a WDT.Although some animals with this
in response to dehydration(increased plasma osmo-
condition can concentrate urine normally following
lality), and whether the kidney can respond to ADH.
waterdeprivation,manyare abletoconcentrateurine
When the test is performed correctlyDi,NDI, and 
to SG >1.008,but not to >1.025,because of ADH
can be diferentiated from each other in the majority of
antagonism. When desmopressin (DDAVP, a syn-
cases (Figure 10.20). Serum and urine osmolality can
thetic ADH analogue) is administered,concentrating
be measured tomonitortheresponse towaterdepriva-
ability returns, thus mimicking CDI.
tion but freezepoint depression osmometers are not
If the animal is markedly polyuric,waterdeprivation
widely available to veterinary practitioners. Therefore
should be donewith extremecautionbecause such
animalsmaybecomerapidly dehydrated,asaresult
of pre-existing medullary washout. In these animals it
Protocol
isbetter torestrictwaterintakepartiallyfor5days
beforehand (120 ml/kg per day on days -5, -4 and-3,
Partialwaterrestrictionfor-3dayspriortothetestisrecommended
tocorrectmedullarywashoutAbout100m/kg isallowedonthefirst
90ml/kgonday-2and60ml/kgonthedaybeforethe
dayreducingby10-15%perdayfr2furtherdaysOnthefouhday
test). Salt canbe added to the food from day-5 to help
completewaterdeprivation iscommenced asfollows:
correct medullary washout.
Empty bladder (catheter)measure urine S.G.
2.
Weigh animal
Tests used in conjunction with water
3.
Deprivetheanimalof foodand water
deprivation testing
At 1-2hourly intervals:
Empty the bladderand measure urine S.G.
 Endogenous plasma ADH levels are used to distin-
1.
2.
Weighthe animal
guish between CDI, NDI and PP in humans as part
3.
of theWDT.ADH measurement is availableona
Discontinuethe test when:
limited basis for veterinary patients in human hospi-
The urine S.G.is>1.025
tal laboratories but it is expensive and has a long
Or there hasbeen>5% loss of body weight
Or the animal becomes azotaemic or depressed
turnaround time,and,therefore,isimpracticalinmost
clinic cases.
Interpretation
The Hickey-Hare test is sometimes used if the
PP canbe identified at this stagebecause theSG willbecome>1.025
WDTis non-diagnostic.This test measures renal
CDIandNDI wilfil toconcentrateabove1.010 evenwhen thereis
tubular and pituitary responses to hyperosmolality
>5% loss of body weight
(intravenous hypertonic saline administration) by as-
Valuesbetween1.010and1.020areequivocalandindicate
sessing theoutput,Gand,ifpossible,smolalityf
submaximal concentration suggesting partial central Dl
urine. In normal animals and animals with PP, the
testisperformed(preferablyimmediatelyaftertheWDT):
urine output progressively decreases and urine SG
1.
Empty thebladderandmeasureurine SG
and osmolality increasefollowing hypertonic saline
2.
Inject desmopressin intravenouslyorintramuscularly (2.0μg
administration,whilst there isnoresponseinanimals
for smalldogs<15kg.4.0μg for dogs>15kg)
with CDI and NDl.However thereisa significant risk
3.
MeasureurineSGevery2hoursfor610hoursthena2
of inducing marked hypertonicity (hyperosmolality),
and24hours
especially in severely polyuric animals. The test re-
Provide smallamountsof water(3m/kg/hour)during and
following the test topreventcerebraloedema
quires close monitoring and is probably best per-
Intrepretation of desmopressinresponsetest
formed in referral hospitals.
Urine SGvalues>1.015 indicative CDI
A closely monitored trial of the ADH analogue
Failuretoconcentrate above1.010isindicative of NDI
desmopressin(DDAVP) administration over5-7days
UrineSGvaluesbetween.010and1015arequivocaland
is oftena safer alternativewhenWDTisnon-diagnos-
could reflectmedullary washout
tic.Desmopressin administration shouldcausea>50%
decreaseinwaterintakeinCDl,butwill havenoeffect
10.20
Water deprivation test and its interpretation.
in NDI.
Case examples
Case 1
Signalment
diagnosedand treated but thePD/PUpersisted.Thedogwas drinking
2-year-old entire femaleBoxer
180-280mlofwater/kg/day,butwasotherwisebrightandwell.Thre
wereno abnormalitiesdetected onclinical examination.
History
2-monthhistory of PD/PU witha sudden onset.Cystitishadbeen
Case 1continues
165
Chapter 10
Urineanalysis
Case 1continued
What abnormalities arepresentand what
are the differential diagnoses?
Clinical pathology data
vals.Thisruesuteveral mortantcaesfD/suchasnl
Haematology
Result
Referenceinterval
failuredeitivdaorcn
RBC（x1012/1)
7.7
5.5-8.5
cluded but most cases would have at least one of the following:
Hb (g/d)
17.2
12-18
elevatedchlesterolevatdrstresseucogramthser
HCT (/)
0.53
0.37-0.55
seen in this case.Other than PD/PU there were no clinical findings
MCV(Il)
69.8
60-77
suggestive of HACand so thiswasexcluded from the differential
diagnosis istThe urine analysis shows amarkedhyposthenuria with
MCH (pg)
22.3
19.5-24.5
noevidenceofinflammation.Thesefindingsaresuggestiveof diabetes
MCHC(g/dl)
32.0
31-37
insipidus or psychogenic polydipsia.
WBC（×10%/）
6.2
6-17.1
What further testswouldyouperform?
Neutrophils(x10%/)
4.4
3-11.5
A water deprivation test should be performed.
Lymphocytes (x10°/)
1.2
1-4.8
Resultsoffurthertests
Monocytes(x10%/)
0.2
0.15-1.5
Gradualwaterdeprivationover48hwasfollowedbyawaterdepriva-
tion test.The water intake was reduced to100ml/kg/day and then
Eosinophils (x10°/1)
0.37
0-1.3
thedogwasabruptlydrivedfwaeodyweighturieGand
Basophils (x 10/)
0.00
0-0.2
urine and plasma osmolality wererecorded.Plasmaurea andcreati
Platelets (x10%/)
212
150-900
nine were 3.76mmoll and 81 μmol/l at time 0 and 4.62mmoll and
86μmol/l at T + 12 h.
Biochemistry
Result
Reference interval
Time
Body weight
Urine
Urine
Plasma
(%reduction)
SG
osmolality
osmolality
Sodium (mmoll)
149.6
136-155
T=0h
23.8kg
3.5-5.8
1.002
100mmol/kg
282mmol/kg
Potassium (mmoll)
4.07
23.6 kg (0.8%)
1.004
132mmol/kg
312mmol/kg
Chloride(mmoll)
116
107-120
T+4h
T+10h
23.2 kg (2.5%)
1.005
165mmol/kg
3.4-5.3
326mmol/kg
Glucose(mmol/)
5.6
Urea(mmol)
3.3-8.0
T+12h
4.5
22.8 kg (4.2%)
1.004
45-150
T+13h
22.5kg (5.4%)
Creatinine (μmoll)
103
1.004
Calcium(mmol/l)
2.2-2.9
T=13.1hWater was offered in100mlaliquots every45min for
2.73
following4hthenin200mlllquotsfor2hthenunrestricted
Inorganic phosphate
1.46
0.8-2.0
T+ 16 h 4ug DDAVP injectedi.m.
(mmol/l)
TP(g/)
T+18h-
1.026772 mmol/kg
321mmol/kg
62.3
60-80
Albumin (g/l)
31.5
25-45
How would you interpret these results?
Globulin(g/l)
30.8
21-41
Theresults showa failure to concentrate urine after 13hofwater
ALT(IU/)
17
21-59
deprivationin the face of dehydration(indicated byweight loss>5%of
original bodyweight and inreasing plasmaosmolalty)This exles
ALP (IU/I)
83
3-142
psychogenic polydipsia and is consistent withnephrogenic orcentral
Bile acids (μmol/)
2
<10
diabetesinsipidus(CDl).Urine became more concentrated following
administration of DDAVP,indicating CDI.In the absence of other
neurological signsorhistoryof trauma,the CDIwasconsideredidio
Urine analysis
pathicalthoughunderlyingcausessuchasneoplasawerenotinvesti
Gross appearance
Very pale yellow,clear
gated further.
SG
1.002
Caseoutcome
Theclinicalsignswerewell ontrlldwithDAVdrpsadministerd
Dipstickresults
pH5.0;negative for protein,
ketonbilirubinrobilingn
into the conjunctival sac.The dog was lost to follow-up after 6months.
Sediment examination
1-2WBC per hpf;no casts or
(Case 1 courtesy of E Villiers.)
crystals seen
Case 2
Signalment
dysuriaandnocturiaMultiplecoursesof antibiotics.Possiblediscomfort
13-year-old female Bearded Collie.
on sitting down.Very tense onabdominalpalpation.Noother significant
clinicalfindings.
History andclinicalfindings
5-month history of haematuria.Increased frequency of urination;
Case 2continues
166
Chapter10
Urine analysis
Case 2continued
Clinical pathology data
Urine analysis
SG(refractometer)
1.024
Dipstickresults
pH6.5;protein+to++;blood +++;
negative for glucose,ketones,
urobilinogen, biirubin,
haemoglobin
Sediment examination
SeeFigure 10.21
What abnormalities arepresent?
Urinalysis
Mild to moderate proteinuria
Markedhaematuria thismayaccount fortheproteinuriaasthedog
has gross haematuria
SG ineeping with polyuriaor ealy nalfilure
10.21
Cytologicalappearanceof theurinesedimentshowingvarious
areas of the smear.(Wright's stain;originalmagnificationX1000.)
Urine cytology
Mixed pulationf cellonsistingfnutrophilsandepihll
cells
Neutrophilsaredegenerateand showkaryolysisIntracellulabacte
riaareseen.Bothrods（likelytobeEscherichiacolinhissite）and
cocci arepresent
Epithelialcellsarplmorphiwithsomevrylarcelwithhih
nuclear:cytoplasmicratioandopenchromatin.Binucleatecells are
also seen.Cytoplasm is variablybasophilicbut in some cells shows
increasedbasophiliaandvacuolationisalsoapparent
Numerous background RBCs and free bacteria.
Howwouldyou interpret theseresults and
what are the likely differential diagnoses?
The cytologicalfindingsconfirmthat thedoghasacterialcysittishe
10.22
Pneumocystogram.
transitionalepithelialcelshowfeaturessuggestiveofmalignancybut
in thepresenceofafloridinflammatoryresponse(and withtheverylong
historyofurinarytractdisease)thesechangemustbeinterpretdwih
caution,asdyplasticcellmaymimicneoplasa.
Whatfurthertestswouldyourecommend?
Culture and sensitivity testing
magingtidentiyanmasseinandsutipviaca
if indicated,orcystoscopy andbiopsy.
Resultsoffurthertests
Apneumocystogramanddouble-contrastcystogram(Figures10.22and
10.23)showedanill-definedmassextending fromtheapexofthebladder
along thdorsalwallalmost tothetrigoneTheoutineisirregularwth
amotheatnappearance suggestingmuosal disruptionhebladder
10.23
Double contrast cystogram.
mayberesulfiufficientnlationnthoubleontratt
thisisagenuinefindinghisexteniveill-deinedregulamasswhh
dysplasiacaused bythe severeinfammationpresent；and frther
hascausedmosaldisutinisselyelastiandmostl
diagnosticinvestigationsshouldalwaysbeperformedwhenneoplasiais
a transitional cell carcinoma.This should be confirmed by suction biopsy
suspected cytologically.
(declined by the owner on grounds of cost).
Caseoutcome
Thesefindingareconsistent wthabladdertumourwthsecondary
Thedgatretlityrxisivdf
urinarytractinfection.Greatcareshouldbetakenindiagnosingneopla
6months.
siaonurinylogyeciallyifthrsconcurrennmman
thiscaseTheatypicalcelularfeaturescouldhavebeenduetotissue
(Case 2 courtesy of L Blackwood.)
Grauer GF, Greco DS,Behrend EN et al.(1995)Estimation of
Referencesandfurtherreading
quantitative enzymuria in dogs with gentamycin-induced
nephrotoxicosisusingenzyme/creatinineratiosfromspoturine
GossettKA,Turnwald GH,KearneyMTet al.(1987).Evaluationof
samplesournalofVetrinaryInternaMedicine9323-327
gamma-glutamyl transpetidase-to-creatinineratio from spot
GraueFhaBaaaainM
urine samples of urine supernatant as an indicator of urinaryy
and Jensen DF(2002).Development of microalbuminuria in
enzymeexcretion indogs.AmericanJournal ofVeterinary
dogswithheartwormdisease.JournalofVeterinary Internal
Research48.455-457
Medicine16,352（abstract)
167
.aboratory evaluation
of renal disorders
Richard A. Squires
Introduction
Term
Definitions
Diagnostic investigation of suspected renal disease
begins with a consideration of the signalment,history
Anion gap (serum)
Calculatedbysubtracting thetypicallymeasured
andphysicalexamination findings.Thereafter,if renal
serum anions(chloride and bicarbonate)from
diseaseisstillsuspected,laboratoryinvestigationsare
the typically measured cations (sodium and
carried out.The most useful laboratory tests at this
potassium).The normal anion gap (consisting
stage of the investigation are a serum biochemistry
mostly of unmeasured anions like plasma
proteins) is12-24mmol/ indogs and13-27
profile and complete urine analysis.There isrelatively
mmoll in cats.(See Chapter 9)
littletobegainedbydoing onewithout the other,since
accuratediagnosisofmostrenal disordersrequires
Azotaemia
An abnormal increase in theconcentrationof
integration of information gained from urine andserum
non-protein nitrogenous wastes (such as
biochemical analyses.
creatinineandureanitrogen）inblood
Laboratory investigation of the various categories
Glomerular
The totalvolumeof fluid filteredbyallof the
of renal failure, protein-losing nephropathy and renal
fitrationrate
glomerulinbothkidneys perunit time.TheGFR
tubular disorders will be described in this chapter.
(GFR)
isdirectlyproportionaltotheremaining
Urine analysis is discussed in Chapter 10.
functional renal mass
Isosthenuria
A stateinwhichthekidneyscannot form urine
Renal failure
withahigherora lowerspecificgravitythanthat
Overviewanddefinitions
of protein-freeplasma;urine specific gravity
becomesfixed around 1.010(1.007-1.013）
A varietyof adverseinfluences(e.g.toxins,overdosed
(SeeChapter10)
drugs,infectious agents,ischaemic insults)can dam-
age the kidneys, either reversibly or permanently, to
Osmolality
The concentrationofosmoticallyactive
produce renal disease.When renal disease is severe
particles ina solutionexpressed in termsof
enough torender66-75%of thenephronsnon-func-
thenumberof osmoles of soluteperkilogram of
tional,urine concentrating ability is compromised and
solventOsmolalityisdirectlyproportional
the animal becomespolydipsic,polyuric and unable to
toboilingpointelvatonfrezingon
depressionanddeclineinvapourpressure.
producemaximally concentrated urine.This extent of
(SeeChapter10)
renal disease issometimestermedrenal insufficiency.
Whenmore than75%of thenephrons arerendered
Renal disease
Damageorfunctionalimpairment of thekidneys.
non-functional,excretoryfunctionis compromised to
Canvarynverityfromverymidovr
the extent that non-proteinnitrogenouswaste sub-
enough to cause uraemia
stances,suchascreatinine andurea,begintoaccumu-
Renal
Renal functional impairmentnot severe
lateintheblood.Thisaccumulationistermed azotaemia
insufficiency
enoughtaeaztamibtufficn
andrenal disease severeenoughtocauseazotaemia
cause lossof renalreserveThesepatients
inawell hydratedanimal istermedrenalfailure.Ad-
have a reduced ability to compensate for
dehydration.Theirurine concentrating abilityis
taemia may be associated with a set of unpleasant
usually diminished
clinicalfeaturestermeduraemia.Uraemia arisesprin-
cipallyasaconsequenceof accumulationofawide
Renal failure
Renal functional impairment sufficient to cause
varietyof toxicsubstances,collectivelytermed urae-
azotaemia.Urine concentrating ability is usually
mictoxins.Typical clinical featuresof uraemia include
impaired
lethargy,depression,anorexia,vomiting,diarrhoea,
Uraemia
The constellationofadverseclinicalsigns
anaemia andoral andgastriculceration.Some com-
caused byadvanced renal failure,r
mon terms are defined inFigure 11.1.
(occasionally)other causesof severe azotaemia
Intrinsicrenal failure maybecategorizedasacute,
subacute or chronic.Acuterenal failure(ARF) devel-
Definition of some terms commonly used in
11.1
ops over a short period of time(typicallyless than a
discussion of renal disorders.
169
Chapter11Laboratoryevaluationofrenal disorders
week)whereas chronicfailureusually take months to
and ammoniavia theureacycle.Hepaticsynthesisof
develop.Subacutefailureis anintermediatecategory
urea is an energy-requiring process that permits excre-
andmaybecaused,forexample,bysomeaggressive
tion ofexcess ammonia,most ofwhichis formed during
renal bacterial infections (e.g. leptospirosis). It can
deaminationofaminoacids.Although ureaisclassified
sometimes be a challenge for the clinician to distin-
asa uraemic toxin,itisconsiderablyless toxicthanits
guish acute from chronic renal failure(CRF).Although
progenitor,ammonia.Urea is a small,uncharged mol-
patientswithARFare usually extremelyill(because
ecule(relative molecularmass60 daltons)that isnot
they havebeen abruptly exposed to uraemic toxins),
protein-bound. It diffuses rapidly throughout all body
theirrenal pathologymaybereversibleif they canbe
fluidcompartmentsandis freelyfiltered at theglomeru-
supported through their crisis.Conversely,CRF is
larbasementmembrane.When theoverall glomerular
usually a consequence of incremental,irreversible
filtration rate (GFR) of a dog or cat declines below
renal pathology. Patients with mild to moderate CRF
about25%ofnormal,serumurea concentration ex-
may appear remarkably well for a given degree of
ceeds the upper limit of the reference range.
azotaemia,becausetheirbodieshavehad timetoadapt
Mostofthe ammoniaincorporatedintoureacomes
to exposure to uraemic toxins. However, patients with
fromproteinbreakdown.Thus,therateofurea forma-
advanced,or end-stagerenal failurefeel veryunwell
tion ishighly dependent on dietaryprotein content
regardlessof howlong theirdiseasehasbeendevelop-
and the rate ofendogenous proteincatabolism.High-
ing.History,physical examination,laboratory ests and
protein diets,particularly those that contain much
imaging studies can help distinguish between acute,
proteinof lowbiologicalvalue,and gastrointestinal
subacute and chronic forms ofrenal failure.
haemorrhage increase the serum ureaconcentration
Severeintrinsicrenal diseaseisnot theonlycause
somewhat,even in animalswith normalrenal func-
of azotaemia,which mayalsobecausedbyprerenal
tion.The increased serum urea caused by feeding a
andpostrenal factors.Prerenalazotaemia arisesas
high-protein diet is of no clinical significance to a
a consequence of renal blood perfusionbeing inad-
healthy animal, but patients withrenal insufficiency
equateto allowclearanceof thenitrogenouswastes
have a more substantial increase inserum urea asa
being produced in the body. Prerenal azotaemia may
consequenceofeating suchfoods thandonormal
thus arise as a consequence of either:
animals.Because of the complicating effects of re-
cent meals,blood samplesformeasurementof serum
Lower than normal renal blood perfusion,e.g.
urea should ideallybedrawn after the animal has
severedehydration,hypovolaemia,congestive
undergone a 12-hour fast.
heartfailure
Anything that increases endogenousproteincata-
Higher thannormal production of nitrogenous
bolism can increaseserum urea concentration,inde-
wastes,e.g.high-protein diet,gastrointestinal
pendentof diet andrenal excretory function.Some
haemorrhage, endogenous protein catabolism.
 specific causes of increased endogenous protein
catabolism include:
Postrenalazotaemia developsas aconsequenceof:
Fever
Urinary tract rupture
Starvation
Obstructionof theurinary tract distal tothe
Vigorous,prolongedexercise
kidneys.
Recent glucocorticoid administration
Burns
Bilateralobstruction oravulsionoftheureters,
Sepsis.
rupture of the urinary bladder and urethral obstruction
are examplesof causes of postrenal azotaemia.Se-
Conversely,the following will tend toreduceserum
vererenal trauma,with urine leakage,produces an
urea:
equivalentpathophysiologicaleffect.Laboratorytests
Anabolicsteroids
mia fromprimary,intrinsicrenal azotaemia.
。
Severe hepaticdysfunction
Feeding of a protein-restricted,high-quality
Componentsofazotaemia
proteindiet thatmeetscalorificneeds.
Urea and creatinine accumulate in thebodiesof pa-
tients with failing kidneys.The blood,plasma or serum
As well asbeingfreelyfiltered at theglomerular
concentrations of these substances are useful indica-
basement membrane,urea is reabsorbed in the tu-
torsof the extent ofretention of nitrogenous waste
bules and collecting ducts.During intense diuresis,
products and hence the degreeofrenalfailure.Inorder
approximately 60% of filtered urea is cleared by the
tointerpret renal function tests accurately,a basic
kidneys, with 40% being reabsorbed. However,when
understanding of the origins,metabolism and excre-
theflowof fluid through therenal tubules isrelatively
tionof urea and creatinine is necessary.
sluggish,much moreurea isreabsorbed andretained.
Thismay be of advantage to a normal animal, since
Urea
retentionof urea in therenal medullary interstitium is
Ureaisthemajornitrogenouswasteproduct ofmam-
one of the mechanisms bywhich thekidneys are able
mals and isultimately excreted almost exclusively in
to concentrate urine.A healthy animal with declining
urine.It is synthesized in the liver from carbon dioxide
urine output (e.g.because of restricted access to
170
Chapter11Laboratoryevaluationofrenal disorders
drinking water)becomes increasingly able to concen-
azotaemicanimals;insomepatients,serumcreatinine
trateitsurine.Froma diagnosticpoint ofview,serum
concentrationssomewhatunderestimatetheseverity
ureawill tend tounderestimate GFR indehydrated
of renal failure in late-stage disease.
animals(i.e.the situation will lookworse than it really
Most laboratories measure serum creatinine
is)andoverestimaterenal excretoryfunction inwell
using a method that involves the Jaffe reaction, in
hydrated polydipsic animals or thosereceiving vigor-
whichcreatinine and picratereact together under
ous intravenous fluid therapy. An ‘artificial' improve-
alkalineconditionstoproduceadetectablecoloured
ment inrenal function(as assessed by a decrease in
complex.Unfortunately,a number of non-creatinine
serumurea concentration) is frequently seen in hospi-
substances alsoreact with alkaline picrate toproduce
talized CRFpatients that have beenreceiving 2-3
coloured substances,so themethod is notvery spe-
timesmaintenance intravenous fluid therapy for sev-
cific. These non-creatinine chromogens adversely
eral days.In this situation,the serum creatinine is a
affect the accuracy of serum creatinine estimation,
morereliable indicatorof GFR than the serumurea.
particularlywhenrenal failure ismildand serum
Most laboratorymethodsfor quantitation of urea
creatinineisrelativelylow.Non-creatinine chromogens
arepresentinserumbutare notusuallyfound in urine.
ammonia and carbon dioxide.The ammonia can then
Therefore,diagnostic methods(such as clearance
be detected using acolour indicatorand sometimes a
tests)thatcompare the serumcreatinine concentra-
second enzyme.This method is highly specific be-
tionwith that inurineareparticularly affectedby the
cause urease targetsurea.Most available dipsticks for
fairly modest inaccuracies caused by these subst-
semi-quantitationofbloodurea are inaccurateand
ances.Enzymaticmethodsforquantitation of serum
should only beused as apreliminary diagnostic tool in
emergency settings.
because of their high cost.
In many American textbooks,the concentrationof
Serum creatinine concentrations are usuallypro-
urea inblood is expressed in termsof the amount of
vided inmg/dl in American textbooks.To convert
urea nitrogen rather than theentireurea molecule
creatinine reportedinmg/dlto Slunits (μmol/),multiply
(hence the term blood urea nitrogen, BUN, is com-
by 88.4. (See also Appendix 3.)
monly encountered).BUN (mg/dl) can be converted to
serum urea (mmol/l; Sl unit)by multiplying by 0.357.
Diagnosticvalueofserum creatinine and serum
urea
Creatinine
Bothserumurea and serumcreatinine are insensitive
Small quantities of creatinine are ingested by dogs and
measuresof renalexcretorydysfunction.Upto75%of
catsintheanimaltissuestheyeat,but thevastmajority
total renal filteringcapacitycanbelostwithout these
isproducedfromtheirownskeletal musclebybreak-
bloodparametersexceeding theirreferenceranges.
down of creatine.Approximately 1.6-2.0%of total
This means that many renal failure patients have lost
body creatine is converted to creatinine each day ina
more than 90%of their nephrons,because their rem-
rather constant,non-enzymatic, irreversible process.
nant nephrons become hypertrophied and
The amount ofcreatinine formed daily thereforede-
hyperfunctional.Creatinine is notreabsorbed by the
pends upon the total body creatine,which,in turn,s
renal tubules,whereas urea is,so one would predict
determined by dietary intake,rate of synthesis and,
thatserum creatinineconcentrationwouldbe amore
mostimportantly,total skeletal muscle mass.Muscu-
reliable indicatorofGFRthan serum urea.Thispredic-
lar' dogs or cats would be expected to have a some-
tion is widely accepted and has been confirmed by
whathigher serum creatinine concentration thanless
research(Finco et al.,1995).However,serum creati-
muscular ones,otherfactors(such asrenal function)
nine concentration doesnot increasepreciselyinpro-
being equal.
portion toa decrease in GFR.A modest deviation
Like urea, creatinine is a relatively small molecule
occurs asa consequence of extrarenal (i.e.gastro-
(113 daltons)that isnot protein-bound and is freely
intestinal) creatinine losses increasing in a non-linear
filteredat the glomerularbasement membrane.Unlike
and unpredictable fashion asazotaemia worsens.
urea,creatinineisnotreabsorbed bytherenal tubules
Although serum creatinine concentration is gener-
or collecting ducts. In male dogs, a very small amount
ally held tobea superior measure of GFR in dogs and
of creatinineis activelysecreted into thetubularfiltrate
catsthanserumurea,atleastonestudyof humanrenal
by theproximalrenal tubules.Suchsecretiondoesnot
failurepatientshasindicated thatserumureacorre-
occur in bitches or cats of either sex and is of little
lates somewhat more directlywith symptomsof urae-
clinical significance,even in male dogs.
miathanserumcreatinine concentration does(Kassirer,
More significantly,creatinine diffuses into the gas-
1971).Equivalent studies have not been carried outin
trointestinallumenandissubsequentlymetabolizedby
dogs andcats,butitisclearthatneitherserumureanor
intestinal bacteria.Thisrepresents a substantial and
serum creatinine should be relied upon to predict
probablyunderemphasizedpathwayforcreatininere-
preciselywhen signsofuraemiawill develop inan
moval,particularly in azotaemic animals.Although
individual patient.
someof thecreatininebroken downbyintestinal bac-
Figure 11.2 summarizes important clinically rele-
teriamayberecycledtoproducemorecreatinine,most
vant information about serum urea and serum creati-
that ismetabolizedinthiswayispermanentlyremoved
nine.Figure 11.3representstherelationshipbetween
fromthebody.Intestinalbacterialcatabolismof creati-
GFR,serum creatinine,serum urea and key mile-
nine becomes increasingly significant in severely
stones in disease progression.
171
Chapter11Laboratoryevaluationofrenaldisorders
Feature
Urea
Creatinine
Typical serumconcentrationreference
3.1-10.9mmoll
60-128μmol/
range of dogs
Typicalserumconcentrationreference
4.8-11.6mmol/l
60-163μmol/l
range of cats
Origin within the body
Exogenous orendogenous protein catabolism,
Non-enzymatichydrolysis of skeletal muscle creatine
via theurea cycle
Rate of production
Variable,dependingondiet andendogenous
Muchmore constant daily production
proteinmetabolism
Handling by the kidney
Freelyflteredwithsubstantialtubular
Freely fitered and not reabsorbed by the tubules.
reabsorption
Insignificant tubular secretion occurs in male dogs
Extrarenal clearancemechanisms
None of significance.Ureametabolized bygut
Significant and variable catabolism by gut bacteria.ln
bacteria isconverted backtoureainafutile
azotaemichumansup to66%of allcreatinine formed
cycleand iseventually cleared by thekidneys
may be cleared byextrarenal routes
Prediction of
 Insensitive; fair in advanced disease
Insensitive; good in advanced disease
glomerularfiltrationrate
Correlation with uraemia
Very good
Not as good (in humans)
11.2
Important features of serum urea and serum creatinine.(Reference intervals should be those provided by the
specific laboratory.)
Optimalrenal
Worsening azotaemia.
function with
-Damage
concentrate urine
remainsintact.No
-Damage
orobablyreducedurine
-Damage→
concentrateurine
azotaemiayet
Still no azotaemia
ikelytobecausinguraemia
urea
serum
or
100%
75%
50%
25%
0%
Residual renal function(GFR)
Therelationships between glomerularfiltrationrate(GFR)and serum creatinine,serum urea and key clinical
11.3
milestones.Theblue panel indicates the normal range(reference interval).
Theserumurea:serumcreatinineratio
helpindistinguishingprerenalfromrenalandpostrenal
When serum urea and serum creatinine concentra-
causes of azotaemia in dogs (Finco and Duncan,
tionshave been measured simultaneouslyin apatient,
1976),an increased ratio in non-azotaemic or very
theratioofonetotheotheriseasilyestimated.Efforts
mildlyazotaemic animalssuspected tohavegastro-
havebeenmade touse thisratiodiagnostically,with
intestinal haemorrhageisusedbysomecliniciansto
muchmore success havingbeen achieved in human
support that suspicion.Dehydration bordering on
medicinethanincanineandfelinemedicine.Although
prerenal azotaemiainanimalswithnormalrenalfunc-
theserumurea:serumcreatinineratiowasfoundnotto
tioncanalsoincrease theserum urea:serumcreatinine
172
Chapter11Laboratoryevaluationofrenaldisorders
ratio.Given that its clinical value is rather limited,
routineprecise calculation andreporting of theserum
Fractional excretion(%)of any solute(So)can be calculated
urea:serum creatinine ratio is unwarranted.
from thisformula:
[Urines/Serums）/（Urinec，/Serume.）]x100
Serumelectrolytedisturbancesinrenal
which is mathematically identical to:
failure
[(Urines x Serumex)/ (Urinec x Serums)] x 10
As well as being the major organs for excretion of
excess nitrogenous waste products, the kidneys playa
Urines=concentrationof thesolutein the patient's urine
crucial homeostaticrole incontrolling theplasma con-
Serums=concentrationof thesoluteinthepatientsserum
centrationsofseveralelectrolyteswithin tight limits
Urinec= concentration of creatinine in the patient'surine
(see Chapter 8). These include sodium, potassium,
Seruma= concentrationof creatininein the patient'sserum
chloride,phosphate and magnesium ions.Thegastro-
intestinal tracthas limited ability todiscriminatewhen
absorbing electrolytes. In contrast, the kidneys are
Situationsin whichFEdetermination maybe useful:
abletoexcreteorreabsorbvariableamountsofeach
Investigationofpatientswithsuspectedrenaltubulardisorders,
electrolyte in response to the body's needs.Forexam-
suchasFanconisyndrome.FEofelectrolytes(sodiumchlride
ple,more than99%ofthefilteredsodiumisreabsorbed
by healthy kidneys under normal circumstances. The
becalculated
handlingof aparticular electrolyteby thekidney is
usually calculated and expressed as its fractional ex-
potentialyphrotoxicdrugs.nthissetingFEelvation
cretion(FE),as compared with creatinine(fractional
moresensitiveindicatorof renaldamagethanazotaemia
clearance is a synonym for FE).Creatinine is a useful
FEof sodium(FEna)isoccasionallyusedasanaid to distinguish
yardstick,sinceitisfreelyfilteredandnotreabsorbed
prerenalazotaemiafromacuteintrinsicrenalfailure.Classically,
FEN is <1% in cases with prerenal azotaemia and >2% in acute
bytherenaltubules.Inotherwords,100%ofthefiltered
intrinsicrenalfailure.Howevertherearemanyexceptionstoths
load of creatinine is excreted.By contrast,a much
lesserproportionofthefilteredloadofmostelectro-
rule.
lytes is excreted.The fractional excretion of sodium,
Fractional excretion(FE):method of calculation
chloride and calciumisnormally<1%.Incontrast,the
11.4
and usefulness.
fractional excretion ofpotassium andphosphorusis
relatively high,reaching 23.9%and73%,respectively,
at aboutthe samestage ofrenaldiseaseasazotaemia.
in cats.Fractional excretion ofelectrolytesshouldbe
Itisthought thatimperceptibly mild hyperphosphataemia
determined after a period of fasting (usually 12-15
develops earlier in renal disease, causing marginal
hours) because ingested electrolytes surplus tore-
ionizedhypocalcaemia and a consequent increase in
quirementsareexcretedpostprandially.However,even
secretion of parathyroid hormone (PTH) by the para-
after fasting, the diet ingested in the days and weeks
thyroid glands. Increased plasma PTH induces en-
preceding the fast will influence the FE of predomi-
hanced phosphaturiabythekidneys,returning plasma
nantly intracellular electrolytes,such as potassium,
phosphate and calciumlevels towards normal,but at
phosphorus and magnesium;so some authorities rec-
the expenseofapersistentlyelevatedplasmaPTH.
 ommend feeding a standardized diet for several days
Asrenal failure advances,plasmaPTH increases
to a weekbefore conducting a FE testFigure 11.4
further,but eventually is insufficient to prevent
showshowFEs are calculated and lists some clinical
hyperphosphataemia. Hypocalcaemia may develop,
situations in which they are useful.
perhaps inpart as a consequence of precipitation of
In normal health,renal homeostatic mechanisms
calcium phosphate from blood (because of the
maintainplasma electrolyteconcentrationswithintight
hyperphosphataemia).Evolvingresistance of the skel-
limits.However,whenGFRreachesaverylowlevel,
eton to the calcium-mobilizing effects of PTHis another
plasma electrolyte homeostasis may fail.Plasma so-
 possible explanation. Hypocalcaemia may also be
dium,for example,usually remains normal until the
caused in part by impaired intestinal absorption of
very terminal stages of renal failure, when it may
calcium,in turna consequenceofcalcitriol deficiency.
decrease or (sometimes) increase. In dogs,plasma
Calcitriol (1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol; active vita-
potassium typically remains normal during the polyuric
min D) is a hormone important in gastrointestinal
stagesof renalfailurebutisincreased duringoliguria or
calcium absorption, synthesis of which is normally
anuria of terminal CRF or ARF. It also typically in-
completed by the kidneys. Synthesis is impaired in
creasesin severepostrenal azotaemicstates.When
failing kidneys.The relationships between plasma cal-
catswithrenal failurewere fed a dietcontaininga
cium,plasma phosphate,PTH andcalcitriol are sum-
marginally low potassium concentration(0.35%on a
marized in Figure 11.5.
dry matter basis),renal losses of potassium were
Somecanine and felinepatientswithrenal disease
 sufficient to cause total body potassium depletion and
havehypercalcaemia(defined here as an increase in
hypokalaemia.Hypokalaemic polymyopathy ensued,
the plasma or serum total calcium).This may be due
manifested as muscle weakness, particularly of the
merely to an increase in the amount of biologically
neck muscles (Dow et al.,1987).
inactive complexed calciumbound to phosphates,
Hyperphosphataemiais themost consistentelec-
oxalates and various other anions in their blood.How-
trolyte disturbance in patients with renal failure.It
ever,insomehypercalcaemicrenalfailurepatientsthe
develops asa directconsequence of decreased GFR,
biologically active ionized calcium is shown to be
173
Chapter 11
Laboratoryevaluationofrenaldisorders
Less phosphate is excreted
by thekidneys
Imperceptibly mild
Alarge amount of
hyperphosphataemia
phosph
develops
Blood
KIDNEYDAMAGE
excretedbythekidneys
iCaxPproduct
mustremaincons
GFR declines
Kidneyproductionof calcitriol
Plasma ionized
(active vitamin D)diminishes
calcium decreases
decreaseslesscalciumisabsorbed
slightly
Hyperphosphataemia and mild
ionizedhypocalcaemiaresolve
Bloodionize
iumisakey
forthemoment
by theparathyroidgland
PTHenhances phosphaturia
PlasmaPTHincreases
to comAlensatlGand
11.5
Relationshipsbetweenplasma calcium,phosphate,PTH and calcitriol.(GFR:glomerular filtrationrate;iCa:
elevated,evenwhencorrected forbloodpH.Ithas
Categorizing azotaemia as prerenal,renal
beensuggested that sometimes the hyperplasticpara-
orpostrenal
thyroidglandsfoundinrenal failurepatientshavean
Wheneverazotaemiaisidentified,itisessentialto
alteredset-pointfordetection andresponse toblood
categorizeit asprerenal,renal orpostrenal inorigin
ionizedcalcium.A level of blood ionizedcalcium that
(Figure 11.6). This should be done as early as poss-
wouldnormallybe highenough to switch off PTH
ible in the diagnostic investigation.In most casesitis
relativelystraightforwardtomakethedistinctionon
thebasis ofhistory,physical examination and urine
issometimesdescribed astertiaryhyperparathyroidism
analysis findings.Theurine specificgravity,meas-
(whereprimaryhyperparathyroidism referstoexcessive
ured before fluid administration,can be particularly
production of PTHbya hyperplasticor neoplasticpara-
helpful in identifying prerenal azotaemia.Ultrasono-
thyroidgland,andrenalsecondaryhyperparathyroidism
refers to increased PTHproduction inresponse torenal
icallocalization in theinvestigationof postrenalcauses
functional impairment as described above).
ofazotaemia.
Clinical features
Prerenal
Acute intrinsic renal
Postrenal
History of pollakiuria/stranguria?
Maybe a component of the overall
Unlikely unless the situation
Urethral obstruction causing post-
 azotaemia, but is not the primary
 has been prolonged 
 renal azotaemia. Seen more 
examination?Difficult orimpossible
cause
 commonly in males than females
urethral catheterization?
Localized subcutaneousfluid
Maybea component of the overall
Unlikely
A featureof someruptures of the
accumulationaround theperineumor
azotamit
lower urinary tract.Aconsequence
the caudal ventral abdomen?
cause
of urine leakage
Peritonealeffusionfoundonphysical
Usuallynoperitonealfluidisseen.fluid isfoundand analysedit
If urineisleaking into theperitoneal
examination/abdominal imaging/
will haveroughlythe samecreatinineconcentrationasthat foundin
cavityluidwillbefoundanditill
abdominocentesis?
serum
have a higher creatinine
concentration than serum
Features helpful for distinguishing prerenal,acute renal and postrenal causes of azotaemia(Serum:serum
11.6
creatinine concentration: SerumN: serum sodium concentration;Urine.: urine creatinine concentration;
UrineNe: urine sodium concentration).(continues)
174
Chapter11Laboratoryevaluationofrenaldisorders
Clinical features
Prerenal
Acute intrinsic renal
Postrenal
Hyperkalaemiaconcurrent with the
Usuallyabsent orverymildly
Sometimes present,
Likelytobepresentifthepost-renal
azotaemia?
elevated due to dehydration.
particularlyif thepatient is
problem hasbeen present for long
An exceptionisAddison'sdisease
oliguric or anuric
enough
Urine specificgravitybeforefluid therapy
Usually hypersthenuric
Usuallysosthenuric,bun
Variable and unhelpful inmaking
is started?
(>1.030 in dogs, >1.035 in cats),
peracutesituations the
the diagnosis
but some drugs and non-renal
bladder may contain
illnesses can cause dehydration
concentrated urine that was
and prerenal azotaemiain the
formed before theonsetof
faceofdilute urine
renal failure.Freshly formed
urine should be analysed
Urine sedimentmicroscopicfinding
Benign orquiet sediment.Casts
Active sediment withmany
Variableperhapsmarked
before fluid therapy is started?
maybe seen afterehydration
tubular casts and (perhaps)
haematuriaif the urinary tract has
hascommenced
red and white blood cells
recentlybeen traumatized
Response to12-24hours'intravenous
Completeresolutionof the
Initialysomeimprovement
Minimalbenefit if thelowerurinary
fluid therapy?（rehydrate over6-8hours
azotaemiaif itwasentirely
if there wasaprerenal
tract continuestoleakundetected
then provide1.5-2.0xmaintenance
prerenal
component to the overall
requirmentifthissdgedsafeon
azotaemia
basis ofa fullclinicalevaluation)
Fractional excretionof sodium(%)
Usually1%,as long as the
Usually >2%,but there are
Unhelpful in the diagnosis of
[UrinenxSerume)/(Urinecx
patient isnotreceiving natriuretic
many exceptions
post-renalproblems
Serum)）]x100
diuretictherapy
Urinea:Serume, ratio
>20
<10
Unhelpfulin making the diagnosis
11.6
(continued)Features helpful for distinguishing prerenal,acute renal and postrenal causes of azotaemia
(Serum., serum creatinine concentration; Serum: serum sodium concentration; Urinee: urine creatinine
concentration; Urinen: urine sodium concentration).
Readerswill occasionallyencounteranazotaemic
azotaemia thatresolvescompletelywhen
patient with non-renal illness(es),or unknown or
unconsidered drug exposure,that presents a greater
The danger here is that clinicians are aware that
diagnostic challenge than usual. In particular, drugs
hypercalcaemia can sometimes cause irreversible
and non-renal illnesses that can causeisosthenuria in
intrinsic renal failure and may incorrectly assume
theface of dehydrationmay mislead theunwary clini-
its presence in any azotaemichypercalcaemic
cian into diagnosing intrinsicrenal failure when the
patient.Thisfalse assumptionmay lead them to
problem is,in fact,prerenal.Examples of such situa-
offer a prognosis far worse than is warranted.
tions include:
Many causes ofhypercalcaemia(e.g.lymphoma,
multiplemyeloma,primaryhyperparathyroidism)
A dehydrated,azotaemic cat with isosthenuric
canbemanagedvery effectively,withpatients
urinemaybemisdiagnosed as having renal
enjoyinganexcellentqualityof lifeoverthe
failurewhen,infact,ithasbeenrnderd
medium to long term.
dehydrated and isosthenuricbyanoverdoseof a
potent diuretic such as furosemide.lf the diuretic
It is importanttoemphasizethatsomenon-renal
is being used to treat cardiomyopathy, the
illnessesanddrugscancauseprerenal azotaemia
prerenal azotaemia maybe exacerbated bypoor
combined with excessive natriuresis (renal sodium
cardiacoutput
loss).Yetavidrenal sodium retention(i.e.a low frac-
A mildlydehydrated,azotaemicdogwithpoor
tionalexcretionof sodium,FEna)isoneof the diagnos-
pulse quality has a urine specificgravity of 1.016.
tic criteriacommonly listedasusefulforidentifying
Serumelectrolytes(Na+andK+)arenot
prerenal azotaemia,where sodium retention is re-
measured. It is misdiagnosed as having renal
quired forwater retention.To complicate matters fur-
failurewhen infact it hashypoadrenocorticism
ther,there are several formsofacute intrinsicrenal
(Addison's disease).The azotaemia isprerenal
failurethat are associatedwithalowornormal,rather
due tohypovolaemia,and the doghaspoor
than high,FEna.Here are afewexamplesfromhuman
urine-concentrating abilitybecause ofsodium
medicine,not allofwhich havebeenconfirmed indogs
wasting,hyponatraemia and a consequently
and cats:
diminishedconcentration of sodium in therenal
medullary interstitium.The sodium wasting is a
Radiographic contrast agent-induced
consequence of hypoaldosteronism (part of
nephropathy
Addison's disease)
Acute glomerulonephritis
Hypercalcaemia can cause dehydration,
Sepsis-induced acute tubular necrosis
isosthenuria and mild tomoderateprerenal
Obstructive uropathy.
175
Chapter11Laboratoryevaluationofrenaldisorders
Clinicians should thereforebe careful not toaccept
physical examination and,sometimes,imaging stud
FEna testresultsuncriticallyandshouldnotnarrow
ies playa crucial role in making the distinction between
down on a diagnosis of acuteintrinsicrenal failure
acute and chronic failure (Figure 11.7). Laboratory test
without thoroughly excluding the possibility of polyuric
results usuallyplay a lesserrole.However,none of
prerenal disease.
these laboratory tests provides unequivocal results,
Fortunately, prerenal azotaemia can be distin-
because thereis some overlap in the effectsofARF
guished from acute intrinsic renal failure in many pa-
andCRFonallof theselaboratoryparameters.
tients simplybyprovidingintravenousfluid therapy and
Manyanimalswith end-stageCRFsufferaterminal
monitoring to see whether the azotaemia promptly and
acute deterioration in renal function, often accompa-
completelyresolves.lf it doesso in24-48hours,the
nied by features of ARF (for example metabolic acid-
problemwasmost likelyprerenal.If it isinappropriate
osis and hyperkalaemia).This situation is sometimes
orunsafetousetest'fluid therapyinaparticularpatient
termedacuteonchronicfailure.Giventhatthisisa
(for example,onewith unstable congestive heart fail-
rathercommonscenario,experienced cliniciansmight
ure) then other approaches can be taken. The urine to
be inclined tojumptoconclusionswhenfacedwith
serum creatinine ratio should be >20 in animals with
acute deteriorationof a CRFpatient.There is,how-
prerenalazotaemiaand<10inanimalswithacute
ever,anotherkind of transitionfromchronicto acuteor
intrinsicrenal failure.In humanmedicine,the fractional
subacuterenalfailure that isnotnecessarilyterminal.
excretionofurea(FEurea)hasrecentlybeenfound tobe
Ananimal thathasbeenmanaged successfullyfor
superior to the fractional excretion of sodium(FEna) for
CRFformanymonths oryearsmay deteriorate abruptly
distinguishingpatientswithprerenal azotaemiawho
(say, over 2-4 weeks) both clinically and in terms of a
arereceivingloopdiureticsfrom thosewithacute
dramaticallyworsening serum creatinine concentra-
intrinsicrenal failure caused by tubularnecrosis
tion. It should not be immediately assumed that this is
(Carvounis et al.,2002)
duetoinevitable,terminalprogressionof itsCRF.That
mayindeedbethecase,butvigorous effortsshouldbe
Acute renal failure versus severe chronic
madetoidentifynnderlyingcause,particularlyi th
failure
animal'srenalfailurewasnotwelladvancedbefore the
Thisis animportant distinction tomake,because there
acute deterioration.Urine bacterial culture is one valu-
isa chance that thepathology inARFwillbereversible,
able test to consider under these circumstances,re-
whereas the prognosis for significant improvement in
gardless of urine sediment findings(see Chapters10
GFR in patients with severe end-stage chronic failure
and 25). Clinically silent pyelonephritis can complicate
is extremely poor (without renal allograft). History,
CRF and causerapid deterioration in GFR.
Parameter
Acute failure
Severechronic failure
History
PerfectlyathynilryetlMay
Usuallywekstonthfpolyuriaolydiaw-ra
anaesthesiarexposuretoaephrotoxicdrugorxn
Physical examination
Goodbodyconditionbutextremelydepressedrelative
Maybecachectic.Tolerating severeazotaemiaratherwell
to the degree of azotaemia
(like a drug addictused to the toxins)
The kidneys are usually(but not invariably) small and
be swollen or painful
non-painful
Packed cellvolume
Anaemiasnotusualypresentnlessacue
Non-rnrativanmaftnta
gastrointestinal hemorrhage hasoccurred
It maybeunmaskedbyfuidtherapy
Serum electrolytes
Hyperkalaemia isoften present
Hyperkalaemiaisabsentuntil terminalacutedeterioration
occurs
Serumphosphateistypicallyelevated inbothacuteand chronicfailuresoitdoesNOThelpindistinguishing acute from
chronicfailure
Acid-base status
Metabolicacidosisofenpresent
Metabolic acidosis absent ormild
Urine analysis
Sedientisactivewithcastscellsdebrisetccoming
Sedialltivssxam
from the kidneys
tract infection has complicated CRF
Urine output
ManyARFpatientsareanuric oroliguric.PolyuricARF
CRFpatientsareusuallypolyuricuntiltheveryteminalstages
may be under-diagnosed (e.g.caused by
aminoglycosides)
Urinespificgravityiselpfuidistinguishingacutefrhrnicfa
Biopsy
Acutetentiallyrvrsibleal
Chronic,irreversiblechanges
Response to therapy
Acutefbltt
Chronicrenalfaluresrreversblalthoughrrectinfy
be supported through the crisis
Features that help to distinguish acute renal failure(ARF) from severe chronic renal failure(CRF).(Adapted from
11.7
Squires et al., 1998.)
176
Chapter11Laboratoryevaluationofrenal disorders
Ethyleneglycolpoisoning
also markedly increase the serum osmolality and
Ethylene glycol(1,2-ethanediol is a poisonous,colour-
osmolal gap. A few clinical laboratories in ‘human'
less,sweet-tasting liquid thatmixesreadilywith water.t
hospitals canmeasure ethylene glycol concentrations
is the major ingredient (approximately 95% by volume)
directly,rendering unnecessary the measurement of
ofmost commercially available antifreeze solutions,
serumosmolalityfordiagnosisof thispoisoning.
which usually also contain ayellow-green dye.Ethylene
In toxicity, generation of acid metabolites by the
glycol is an excellent antifreeze and de-icing agent
liver iswell underwaywithin3hoursof ingesting
because its small molecules(62 daltons) mix readily
ethylene glycol.PlasmapH,bicarbonateand total CO
withwater,dramaticallyincreasingtheosmolalityand
concentrations are decreased. Partial respiratory com-
suppressing the freezing point. Because of its sweet
pensationforthe developing metabolic acidosis lowers
taste and widespread availability,ethylene glycol com-
the pCOin some patients. The anion gap (see Chapter
monly causes poisoning in both dogs and cats.
The
9) widens as unmeasured anionic metabolites accu-
minimum lethaldose ofethylene glycolis 1.4 ml/kg body
mulate in the blood. By this stage, the urine will be
weight for cats and about 5.5 ml/kg for dogs. The
isosthenuricas a consequence of osmotic diuresis and
incidence ofpoisoning issimilar in thetwospeciesbut
plasma hyperosmolality-inducedpolydipsia.By3hours
the case fatality rate is higher in cats.
Unmetabolized ethylene glycol causes gastrointes-
oxalatecrystalluria maybeevident,although it some-
tinal,central nervous sytem depressant andosmotic
times takeslonger to appear.Calcium oxalate mono-
diureticeffectssimilartothose ofethanol,butitsmajor
hydrate crystals(six-sided prisms)are more oftenseen
toxicity lies in thefact that it isbiotransformed in the
thanthecalciumoxalate dihydrateform(Maltese cross
livertoseveralhighlytoxicmetabolites(glycoaldehyde,
or envelope shape) (see Figure 10.13)
glycolic acid, glyoxalic acid and oxalic acid). These
From 12 hours post-ingestion in cats,and 36 hours
result inseveremetabolicacidosis andrenal tubular
post-ingestionindogs,thereisafurtherdeteriorationin
injurysufficient tocauseoliguricoranuricacuterenal
untreated animals thathave ingestedasufficient amount
failure.The clinical signs of antifreeze poisoning(re-
of the poison, usually culminating in death. Clinically,
viewed by Thrall et al, 1997) reflect these underlying
the following changes occur:
metabolic processes. Early signs caused by
Fluid intakemaynot match thelossescaused by
unmetabolized ethylene glycol are seen from 30 min-
diuresis,sohaemoconcentrationmay develop
utes to 12 hours post-ingestion,with ARF caused by
Acidicmetabolitesofethylene glycol cause
metabolites developing 12-24 hours after ingestion in
severerenal tubulardamage
cats and 48-72hours post-ingestion in dogs.
Laboratory abnormalitiesfound in patients presented
Calciumoxalate crystalsform inrenal tubular
lumina and continue to spill into the urine
 an hour or more after ethylene glycol ingestion include
(animals that survive poisoning may continue to
serum hyperosmolality and increased osmolal gap.
havecalcium oxalate crystalluria forup to2
Serum osmolality can be measured using a freezing
weeks after the crisis).
point depression osmometer;manyveterinary clinical
Approximatelyhalf ofaffected animalswill be
laboratorieshave these.The testis available in the UK
hypocalcaemic,partlybecausecalcium is
at largerlaboratories.Serumhyperosmolalitydevelops
chelated byoxalate
rapidly after ingestion because ethylene glycol is a
Glomerularfiltrationdecreases,causing
small,osmoticallyactivemoleculethatdiffusesreadily
worsening azotaemia and hyperphosphataemia
from the gastrointestinal lumen into the blood. A rela-
The urineremains isosthenuricbut polyuria may
tively small volume of ingested antifreeze solution pro-
be replaced by oliguria or anuria, signalling a
vides a massive number of osmotically active particles.
much worse prognosis
Theosmolal gapisthedifferencebetweenmeasured
 Oliguria or anuria leads to hyperkalaemia
andcalculatedserumosmolality,whenserumosmo-
Uraemia develops,associatedwitha stress
lality is calculated (in mmol/kg) using this formula:
leucogram and hyperglycaemia (ethylene glycol
Calculated serum osmolality=
metabolites directly affect glucose metabolism
2 (Seruma + Serums) + Serumau + Serumurea
and worsen thehyperglycaemia).
where
Early diagnosis of ethylene glycol poisoning is
 Serumna= serum sodium concentration (mmoll)
essential forasuccessful outcome.Assuming that the
Serum = serum potassium concentration (mmol/)
history or clinical signs have aroused suspicion,ready
 Serumau = serum glucose concentration (mmol/l)
access to an osmometeror specific ethylene glycol
 Serumurea = serum urea concentration (mmol/I) 
detection kit can be extremely helpful. Failing this,
detection of an increased anion gap and, particularly,
Measuredserumosmolalityrangeisapproximately
calciumoxalatecrystalluriainapatientwithcompatible
290-313 mmol/kg in healthy dogs and cats,tendingto
clinical signs is usually sufficient to justify commencing
be a little higher in cats. The osmolal gap is normally
specific treatment.
10 mmol/kg or less. The 'extra' osmoles provided by
ethylene glycol in poisoned animals markedly in-
Detecting mild or early renal disease
creasethegapbetween measured andcalculated
It is occasionallyusefultodetermine theoverall GFRof
osmolality, often to 150 mmol/kg or more. However,
an animal that is not in renal failure but may neverthe-
other less commonly ingested toxins,like methanol,
less have significant renaldisease. This mightbe done,
177
Chapter11Laboratoryevaluationofrenal disorders
forexample,toinvestigateasuspectedcaseoffamilial
nephropathyorfurthercharacterizetherenalexcretory
Endogenouscreatinine clearance=
reserveof a non-azotaemicanimalwithmarkedpro-
Urinecr x Urine volume (ml)
teinuria.lt canalsohelpindefining theextent of repair
that hasoccurred after anepisode ofARF.In these
Serumcr x Time (minutes) x Body weight (kg)
cases,ultrasound-guided renal biopsy might be an
appropriate alternative, but GFR estimations are,
where
nevertheless,occasionallyindicated.
Serume = serum creatinine concentration (μmol/)
Urinecr = urine creatinine concentration (mmol/l).
Creatinine clearance
 Endogenous creatinine clearance is probably still the
WhenthecommonlyemployedJaffemethodfor
most widely applied clinical method of GFRestimation in
creatinine quantitation is used,endogenous creatinine
canine and feline medicine.It is inconvenient,in that it
clearance will tend to underestimate GFR in non-
requirescollectionof allof theurineproduced bythe
azotaemic animals because of non-creatinine chromo-
animal over a timed period (usually 24 hours).Having
gens being present in their serum but not their urine.
achieved this (by intermittent urethral catheterization,
Addition of ‘extra’creatinine (i.e. performance of an
indwellingcatheter placementor use of a makeshift
exogenous,rather than endogenous,creatinine clear-
'metabolic cage') the calculation of endogenous creati-
ance test) solves this problem. A protocol is summa-
nine clearanceand,byextension,GFRisstraightforward:
rized in Figure 11.8 (Watson et al., 2002).
Patient details
AgedBoxerwithmildclinicaldehydrationandurineSG1.025.Renalinsuffciencyissuspected.Plasmacreatinineconcentrationinfastedconditionsis
159μmol/.
Plasma exogenous creatinine clearance test
Creatinine (80mg/kg =707μmol/kg) is givenby intravenous bolus injection.
Optionl:Dynamictest
After 2hours,1ml of blood is sampled.
Observed plasmacreatinineconcentrationis946μmol/,ie.anexcessof787μmol/loverthebasal concentration.
As787μmollexceeds the 2-hourthreshold value(636μmol/),theanimal shouldbeconsidered toberenallyimpaired.
Option2:Glomerularfiltrationrate(GFR)assessment
1ml blood samples arecollected at 10minutesand at 12,6and 10hour.
The following concentrations are observed:
Time (minutes)
Observed plasma creatinine(umol/)
Observed plasma concentration minus basallevel(umol/)
Just before injection
159
0
10
1733
1574
60
1025
866
120
946
787
360
645
486
600
548
389
Thearea undertheplasma curve(AuC) iscalculated by the trapezoidalrule:
The AUC between0and 10 min(estimated as a rectangle)=10 x1574=15.740
The trapezoid between 10 and 60min has area =(60-10)x(1574+866)/2=61,000
Continueuntilthe last trapezoid:(600-360)x（486+389）/2=105.000
The totalAUCisthe sumof the trapezoids=384,090μmol.min/l=384μmol.min/ml
The plasma creatinine clearance(i.e.GFR estimate) isequal to the dose divided by the total AUC:
GFR=707/384=1.84ml/kg/min
limited sampling strategy.
Notes
The dog should be fasted overnight (at least).
Determinationoftheexactdoseadministerediscritical.Weighoutanhydrouscreatinine(foranominarateof80mg/kg）andaddm/kgofsterile
distilledwater.Forconversionfrommg/kgtoμmol/kg,dividebytherelativemolecularmassof creatinine(113)andmultiplyby10o0（ie.multiply
the mg/kg dose by 8.84).
Injectthecreatininethroughacathetridealviaastper;thenfushthedeadsaceofthecatheterwithslie
Don'tbestressedbytimeWhatismostimportantistonowtheexact timeofsamplingForexampleif thesamplestakenat12andnot0
minutesusethexacttmemintes）forCcalculationorthednamictestitismortantotrytocollectbloodat theaccuratetimfr
comparison with thethreshold value.
Bloodcanbesampledfromthecephalicvein.lfusingatourniquetdonotplaceit toosoonasthecreatinineconcentrationinthesamplewillnotbe
representative of the systemic concentration.
Creatininestablenlasmaassaycanbedelayed.weveritismportanttodoalltheassaysnnebatch（avoidassayingthreetus
on the day of the test and two others the day after).Use the same anticoagulant(if any) for all samplings.
11.8
permission;see also Watson et al.,2003.)
178
Chapter11Laboratory evaluation of renal disorders
lohexol clearance
Lipiduria is,however,a common finding of no
More recently, a much more convenient method for
clinical significance in healthy dogs and cats. Oedema
estimationofGFRhasbeendescribed,whichinvolves
is only found in asmallminorityof dogs and catswith
heavy proteinuria and consequenthypoalbuminaemia.
measuring the clearance of the radiographic contrast
agent iohexol from blood (Moe and Heiene, 1995;
Therefore,only three of the five‘classicalfeatures of
Finco et al., 2001). The method has been shown to
thenephrotic syndrome are likely to be found in a
nephrotic dog or cat:
correlatewell with'gold standard’methodsformeas-
urement of GFR, yet no urine collection is required. A
Marked proteinuria
300mg/kgbodyweightbolusof iohexol is injected
Hypoalbuminaemia
intravenouslyandbloodsamplesarecollectedfrom
Hypercholesterolaemia.
thepatient at2,3and4hours subsequently.Knowing
the iohexol concentration in the three samples,the
Proteinuria may be detected as an incidental find-
weightof thepatient,and theprecise time theiohexol
ing orbesuspected on the basis of clinical examination
was injected and the blood samples collected, the GFR
or serumbiochemical results.Useof dipsticks and the
canbecalculated.Measurement of serumorplasma
urine protein:urine creatinineratio(UP:UC) toevaluate
iohexol clearance is not yet being widely practised,
the severity of proteinuria is covered in Chapter 10.
becauseexpensive equipmentisneededfortheiohexol
UP:UCmeasurementis invalid in animals that have an
quantitation.However,thismethod should prove use-
'active'urine sediment that reveals evidence of urinary
ful in the future for detectionof early ormildrenal
tract inflammation,asit hasbeenshown thatbacterial
dysfunction,wellbelowthe limitsof detectionof serum
urinary tract infection can sometimes raise the UP:UC
creatinine or serum urea. Alternatively, exogenous
well up into the 'glomerular' range. On the other hand,
creatinine clearance testing can be carried out as
the presence of blood ina urine sample (in the absence
sterile creatinine is now available in the UK.
of inflammation) isamuch lessimportantcontraindica-
tion for carrying out UP:UC since it has been shown
Renal scintigraphy
that gross blood contamination of urine is required to
When it isimportant to determine therelative contribu-
raise the UP:UC to a point where it could lead to
tion of each of the two kidneys to overall GFR, quanti-
misdiagnosis of a glomerulopathy.
tative renal scintigraphy can be used. This is a
 Figure 11.9 offers a diagnostic approach to pro-
sophisticated imaging method involving the injection of
teinuria from the point of dipstick detection onwards.
aradionuclide and subsequentdetectionofthe amount
of thatradionuclide appearingin thekidneys overtime,
generally by useofa gamma camera.Renal scintigra-
Dipstick test positive
(Free catch/catheter)
phy isparticularlyvaluablewhen unilateral nephrec-
tomy of a diseased kidney is being contemplated.
Repeatby
cystocentesis
Enzyme detection
ositive
Negativ
Detection of enzymes released from damaged renal
epithelial cells in urine (enzymuria) has been investi-
Ruleout
Transientprobier
artefacts
genital disease
 gated and found to show promise in some situations as
+
amethod for detecting early ormild renal disease
Check urine
Check genital
(Grauer et al.,1995;Palacio et al., 1997). N-acetyl-
sediment
structures
β-D-glucosaminidase (NAG) and gamma-glutamyl
Active
Inactive
transferase(GGT) havebeen studiedmore than other
enzymes and have shown promise. 24-hour measure-
ment of urinary enzyme excretion is considered
superior to measuring enzyme concentrations in'spot'
urine samples. However,in one study, spot urine
sampleGGT/creatinineandNAG/creatinineratioswere
significantly correlated with 24-hour GGT and NAG
excretion in dogs with mild aminoglycoside-induced
Diagnostic approach to classifying dipstick-
nephrotoxicosis,but not in those with more severe,
11.9
detected proteinuria.
long-standing disease (Grauer et al., 1995).
Renal tubular defects
Nephrotic syndrome
Glomerular diseaseleading tomarkedproteinuria is
Muchofthediscussionofrenaldiseasetothispointhas
the root cause of the nephrotic syndrome. In dogs and
emphasized glomerular dysfunction:renal excretory
cats it is usually caused by glomerulonephritis or(less
failureisa functionof inadequateGFRand nephrotic
commonly) amyloidosis. The syndrome in humans has
syndrome is caused by excessive leakage of albumin
beenclassically described as consistingof marked
throughadefectiveordamagedglomerularbasement
membrane. Yet the renal tubules play a vital role in
proteinuria,hypoalbuminaemia,hypercholesterolaemia,
determining thefinal compositionof urine through
lipiduriaandoedema.
179
Chapter11Laboratoryevaluationofrenaldisorders
exquisitelyselectivereabsorptionfromthefiltrateand
Fanconi syndrome
secretioninto it.They are absolutely crucial toelectro
Fanconi syndrome is an umbrella term for a group of
lyte, water and acid-base homeostasis. The tubule
complex tubular disorders(familial and acquired).Ex-
cells are alsoresponsiblefor synthesizing some hor-
cessive amounts of glucose,phosphate,amino acids,
mones(calcitriol,erythropoietin and renin)and meta-
bicarbonate, calcium and potassium are lost,along
bolizingothersmadeelsewhere(e.g.peptide hormones,
withfilteredproteinswithamolecularweightlessthan
such as gastrin, insulin and PTH).
50,000 daltons.Inaddition,Fanconisyndrome-affected
Althoughfamilial Fanconi syndrome of Basenjis is
animalshaverenal tubular acidosis and obligatory
thebestknown of the renal tubular defects,not all
polyuria that does not respond to exogenous anti-
tubulopathies are inherited.Forexample,heavy met-
diuretichormone administration.
als,out-of-date tetracycline and azathioprine can each
Diagnosis of renal tubular disorders
very similar to the familial forms of disease.
Definitive diagnosis ofrenal tubular disorders hinges
Classically,renal tubular defectscause excessive
lossof substances that are normallyretained bythe
cessively by the diseased kidneys.Glucosuria in a
kidneys. Depending upon which transporters are af-
euglycaemic animal is often the first clue to thefact thata
fected,theproblemmaybe isolatedtoaparticular
tubulardisorderispresent.Aserumchemistryprofilemay
substance ormaybe complex,involving many different
subsequentlyrevealthatanumberofelectrolytes arelow
substances.
orborderline low.Fractional excretion(FE) studies and
An exampleofan isolated renal tubular defect
quantitation of amino acids inurine are usually done next
is cystinuria,an inborn error of metabolism that af-
andwill typicallyreveal excessive losses of several
fects EnglishBulldogs(anda numberof otherbreeds)
electrolytes and some amino acids.FE studies arerela-
and strongly predisposes to cystine urolith formation.
tivelyspecialized,soitiswisetoconsultaclinicalpatholo-
There are otherisolatedrenal tubulardefects that
gist before submitting samplesfor analysis.lt should be
involveotheramino acids,uricacid,carbohydrates
checkedifthelaboratoryrecommendsanyparticular
(e.g.glucose),electrolytes (e.g.calcium,phosphate,
magnesium, bicarbonate), hydrogen ions and water.
measurements.A 12-15hourfast immediatelyprior to
Animals thathavedifficultyreclaimingbicarbonate
FE measurements is always recommended.
from the proximal tubular filtrate or secreting acid
Diagnosis of renal tubular acidosis,and determin-
into the collecting ducts are prone to develop meta-
ingwhether it is proximal or distal, is an even more
bolic acidosis.They are said to have proximal or distal
specialized field thathasbeenproperlyreviewed else-
renal tubular acidosis,respectively.Their urine is
where(Bartges,2000).n general,diagnosisrequires
insufficientlyacidicforthedegreeofmetabolic acid-
accuratemeasurementofurinepH inresponse to
osis present.
orallyadministered acid and or alkali loads.
Case examples
Case 1
Signalment
9 year-old-male castrated mixed breed dog.
Haematology (continued)Result
Reference interval
Historyandclinicalexamination
Neutrophils (band) (x 10%/)
0
0-0.3
18-monthhistoryofpolydipsia/olyuriawithoccasionalconstipationx
Lymphocytes (x10%/)
1.9
1.0-4.8
months of progressive lethargy,anorexia and weight loss.Another
Monocytes (x 10%/)
0.35
0.15-1.35
practice documented hypercalcaemia(3.75mmol/l)one yearpreviously.
The dog was in poor body condition, and depressed.A small(0.7 cm)
Eosinophils (x10%/)
0.15
0.1-1.25
nodule was palpated in the right anal sac.
Basophils (x10/)
Rare
Clinicalpathology data
Platelets (x 10/)
Adequate
145-440
Haematology
Result
Reference interval
Biochemistry
5.5-8.5
Result
Reference interval
RBC（×1012/)
7.03
Sodium(mmoll)
Hb (g/dl)
16.0
12.0-18.0
153
145-158
Potassium(mmol/l)
HCT (V)
0.48
0.37-0.55
4.4
3.6-5.8
68
Chloride(mmol/)
MCV(f)
66-77
120
105-122
MCH (pg)
23
19.9-24.5
Glucose(mmoll)
3.39
3.9-6.1
MCHC(g/dl)
Urea (mmoll)
33.92
33
31-34
3.6-7.1
WBC(x10%/)
Creatinine(μmol/l)
12.3
424
50-110
6.0-17.4
Neutrophils (segmented)
9.9
3.0-11.5
Inorganic phosphate (mmol/)
2.1
0.8-1.6
(x109/)
Case 1 continues 
180
Chapter11Laboratoryevaluationofrenaldisorders
Case 1 continued
Urinalysis
Isosthenuria
Biochemistry(continued)
Reference interval
Bilirubinuria
Result
Bacteruria
Total carbondioxide(mmol/)
18
18-30
Haematuriaon sedimentexamination
Total calcium(mmoll)
3.82
2.20-2.58
How would you interpret these results?
TP (g/)
67
50-75
The concurrent presenceof theanal sacmass and hypercalcaemia
Albumin (g/)
30
22-35
aresuggestiveofanalsacadenocarcinoma.Howeverthehypercal
54
0-130
caemiahasbeenpresentforat leastayearyetthemassremains
ALT(IU/I)
small. Other likely causesof hypercalcaemia include lymphoma
AST(IU/I)
12
10-50
(althoughgainthhistryverlngrmarhyrathyridm
ALP(IU/I)
188
0-200
and chronicrenal failureUncomplicatedchronicrenalfailureisless
likely given themagnitude of the hypercalcaemia.
CK (IU/I)
456
0-460
Isosthenuriainthiscasemaybeduetohypercalcaemia(antagonism
Cholesterol(mmoll)
3.97
2.58-5.85
of ADH)or chronicrenal failure,ora combination of both.The
0-6.9
bacteruria mostlikelyreflectsurinary tract infection acquiredasa
Total bilirubin (μmol/)
3.42
consequence of theisosthenuria.Asmallamountof bilirubinmaybe
found intheurinef normaldogsorotherpigmentsmayproduce
false bilirubinuria (see Chapter 10).
Urine analysis
Source
Cystocentesis
What further tests would you recommend?
Volume
6ml
Urine culture and sensitivity testing
Colour
Light yellow
Measurement of parathyroid hormone(PTH) and parathyroid hor-
mone-related peptide(PTHrP)
Turbidity
Hazy
Measurement of blood ionizedcalcium
Specific gravity
1.011
pH
6.0
Furtherclinicalpathologydata
Protein
Negative
Urine culture and sensitivity testing
Glucose
Negative
HeavygrowthofEscherichiacoli withabroadrangeofsensitivity.
Ketone
Negative
PTH assay and ionized calcium:
PTH = 48 pmol/l(normal 2-13)
Bilirubin
1+
lonized calcium =1.53mmol/(referencerange 1.25-1.4)
Blood/Hb
2+(moderate)
(PTHrP not measured)
Urobilinogen
1+
What abnormalities are present?
PTH is markedly elevated in the face of markedly elevated ionized
Urinesedimentexamination
calcium.PTHisusuallylowinmalignancy-associatedhypercalcaemia,
Epithelial cells
andelevationsinchronicrenalfalurearegenerallyoflessermagnitude.
Few,transitional
lonized calcium is elevated.
Crystals
Few,amorphous
How would you interpret these results?
RBC
Too numerous to count (reference
Theseresultsuggestprmaryyerparathyroidmisthemost ikelycae
range<5)
of thehyercalcaemiaandthat theanalsamassmaynotbetheaue.
WBC
15-30 per hpf (reference
What further tests would you recommend?
range<5)
Utrasonography of the thyroid glands, and surgical explorationof the
Debris
Large amount
neck.Thoracicradiographyand abdominal ultrasonography tostagefor
Bacteria
Many rods
metastatic disease from the anal sacmass.
In this case, no evidence of metastatic disease was found. On
Casts
Noneseen
surgicalexplorationof theneck,a solitaryparathyroidnodulewas
resected;thiswasaparathyroidadenomaTherightanalsacmasswas
What abnormalities arepresent?
also removed; this was a low-grade apocrine gland adenocarcinoma.
Haematology
The azotaemiawas presumed tobedue torenal damage caused by the
chronic hypercalcaemia. Primary hyperparathyroidism is expected to
No significant abnormalities
leadtolworlwnormalphosphateutinthcasethisisffy
Biochemistry
Hypercalcaemia with normal serum protein and albumin
phosphate.
Hyperphosphataemia
Azotaemia
Case2follows
181
Chapter 11
Laboratoryevaluationofrenal disorders
Case 2
Signalment
What abnormalities arepresent?
3-year-oldmalecastratedLabradorRetriever.
Euglycaemic glycosuria
History
Mildazotaemiainthefaceofborderlineisosthenuria
Afewmonthofolydipsiaandpolyuriandarecentnsetfapparent
Mild hypokalaemia
Decreased total carbon dioxide
joint stiffness.Physicalexaminationrevealednoarticularabnormalities,
Proteinuria.
but bonepanwasvidentpeciallyverthemtaphy
Howwould you interpret theseresults and
Clinicalpathologydata
what are the likely differential diagnoses?
Haemogram
Persistenteuglycaemicglycosuriaindicatesthat thereisdefective
Unremarkable.
reabsorptionofglucosebytherenaltubulesratherthansupporting
adiagnosisofdiabetesmellitusDefective transportofglucoseby the
Biochemistry
ResultReferenceinterval
renaltubules(so-calledrenalglycosuria)maybepartofabroader
Sodium (mmoll)
disorderthatalsoaffectsresorptionofelectrolytesandaminoacids.
146
145-158
Fanconisyndromeisanumbrella termfora groupof conditionsthat
Potassium (mmoll)
3.5
3.6-5.8
are associated with defectiverenal tubular transport of glucose,
phosphateodumpotassiumvariousaminoacidsandbica
Chloride (mmol/l)
122
105-122
nate.Fanconisyndromeisbest nownasadiseaseofBasenjisbt
Glucose(mmol/l)
4.7
3.9-6.1
ithasalsobeenreportedtoaffectmembersofotherbreedsandmay
Urea(mmoll)
7.5
3.6-7.1
beseenasanacquireddisorderindogsofanybreed thathavebeen
exposed tovariousnephrotoxins.Fanconi syndrome occursocca-
Creatinine (μmoll)
127
50-110
sionally inLabradorRetrieversandhasbeenobserved tocause
Total carbon dioxide(mmol/)
15.3
18-30
stiffnessandapparentboneorjointpainindogsof thisbreed.The
Total calcium(mmoll)
reasonfortheassociationofFanconisyndromewithbonepainis
2.5
2.20-2.58
uncertainbutmayberelatedtochronicwithdrawalofminera from
Inorganic phosphate(mmoll)
1.2
0.8-1.6
the bones,particularly of calcium and phosphorus,as a conse
(/6)
72
50-75
quence of excessive renal losses.
Thisdog'sazotaemiainthefaceof borderlinesosthenuriamighte
Albumin (g/)
29
22-35
supporivefdiagnosifearlyrenafailreHowevertheay
ALT(IU/)
139
0-130
glucosuriawouldbeexpected tocauseanobligatoryosmoticdiure
ALP (IU/)
sis andperhapsobligatoryisosthenuraheazotamiamaythre
242
0-200
forebepatyretirelyprrenalansquencefmilddhydrtn
CK(IU/)
455
0-460
thatwasnotdetectedduringphysicalexamination.Themostexpe
ditiouswaytoestablishtheextentofanyprerenalcomponent isto
Cholesterol (mmoll)
5.7
2.58-5.85
Total bilirubin (μumo/)
4.1
0-6.9
Themild hypokalaemiawasunexplainedandconsideredrelatively
unimportant,given howclose the observed value was to the bottom
Urine analysis
of thereferencerange.ltcouldreflectexcessiverenallossesof
potassiumbut therearemanyotherplausibleexplanatins.
Source
Cystocentesis
The decreased totalCOisconsistent withmetabolicacidosis.ln this
Volume
5ml
case,there is a normal anion gap.(Anion gap=(146+3.5)-(122
Colour
Pale yellow
+15.3).)Normalaniongapmetabolicacidosisisconsistentwithrenal
or gastrointestinal loss of bicarbonate.Total COwas used to
Turbidity
Clear
approximate bicarbonate(see Chapter 9).
SG
1.013
The dipstick-detected proteinuria was confirmed by urine
protein:creatinine ratio determination.Themagnitude of the pro-
pH
6.0
tinuriawaeativelyilonsstntwithtullsssrcoul
Protein
2+
Glucose
aemiaandabnormalriesedimentfindingrectivelymak
4+
Ketone
Negative
Whatfurthertestswouldyou consider?
Biirubin
Negative
Haemoglobin
Negative
the acid-base status of thisdog.
Urobilinogen
Negative
Ifprerenalaztamiawrupctedntravenousfuidcoud
administered at 1.5-2.0 xmaintenance overnight to determine the
effect of this iteventionontheverallazotamia vernigt luid
Sedimentexamination
therapywould be expected tocorrectmild prerenal azotaemia in
Unremarkable
mostcases.
Furthertests
Repeatestingconfirmed thepersistenceof euglycaemicglycosuria
standarddietfrseveraldaysthefractionalexcretionofseveral
Urine protein:urine creatinine ratio = 2.3(normal<0.2;questionable
electrlytesandaminoacidscouldbemeasuredtodeterminewhether
0.2-1.0)
thisisacaseof selectiverenalglycosuriaoracase ofFanconi
syndromeinvolvingseveraldiferentkindsofrenaltubulartransporter.
Case 2 continues
182
Chapter11
ILaboratoryevaluationofrenaldisorders
Case 2 continued
After the correction of any dehydration,endogenous creatinine
Fractional excretion of calcium= 3.1%(normal 0-0.4)
clearancemeasurement and ultrasound-guided renal biopsy could
Fractional excretion of phosphorus=65%(normal 3-39)
be considered.
Fractional excretion of 16outof 23amino acids wasmarkedly
Furtherresults
abnormal.
Fractional excretion of sodium =1.3%(normal 0-0.7)
These results are consistent withFanconi syndrome.
Fractional excretion of potassium=24%(normal 0-20)
Referencesandfurtherreading
GrauGF,DrndNndMFmanMandll
(1995) Estimation of quantitative enzymuria in dogswith
gentamicin-induced nephrotoxicosis using urine enzyme/
Bartges JW (2000) Disorders of renal tubules.In: Textbook of
creatinineratios fromspoturine samples.Journal ofVeterinary
InternalMedicine9,324-327
KassirerJP(1971)Clinicalevaluationof kidneyfunction-glomerular
Saunders,Philadelphia
function.NewEnglandJournalofMedicine285,385-389
CarvounisCP,NisarSand Guro-RazumanS(2002)Significanceof
MoeLand HeieneR(1995)Estimation of glomerularfiltrationrate in
Science58,138-143
Dow SW,LeCouteur RA.Fettman MJ and Spurgeon TL (1987)
Palacio J,ListeF and Gascon M(1997)Enzymuria as an index of
Potassiumdepletion incats:hypokalemicpolymyopathy.Journal
renal damage in canineleishmaniasis.Veterinary Record140,
oftheAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation19115631568
477-480
FincoDR(1997)Kidneyfunction.ln:ClinicalBiochemistryofDomestic
SquiresRA,Elliott J and BrownS (1998)Renal failure.In:Canine
Animalsdn,danarvyandrus
Medicineandhraputis4dndGormanp.292.
441-484.AcademicPress,SanDiego
BlackwellScienceLtd,Oxford
FincoDR,BraseltonWEandCooperTA(2001)Relationshipbetween
ThrallMA,Grauer GF andDial SM(1997)Antifreeze poisoning.In:
plasma iohexolclearanceandurinaryexogenouscreatinine
Kirk'sCurrentVeterinary TherapyXil:SmallAnimalPractice,
clearanceindogs.JournalofVeterinaryInternalMedicine15,
eds.J Bonagura and RWKirk,pp.232-237.W.B.Saunders,
368-373
Philadelphia
FincoDR,BrownSAVadenSLandFergusonDC（1995）Relationship
Watson AD,Lefebvre HP,German AGand FontA (2003)Early
between plasma creatinine concentrationandglomerularfitration
diagnosisofchronicrenal failure.WalthamFocus(Special Edition)
rateindogs.JournalofVeterinaryPharmacologyandTherapeutics
October2003
18,418-421
WatsnDbreHPordtD,aroutFrJPra
FincoDRand DuncanJR(1976) Evaluation of bloodurea nitrogen and
JP.Conchou F and Toutain PL(2002)Plasma exogenous
serumcreatinine concentrationsas indicators of renal dysfunction:
creatinine clearance testin dogs:comparison with other methods
a studyof111cases andareviewof related literature.Journal of
and proposed limited sampling strategy.Journal ofVeterinary
the AmericanVeterinary Medical Association168,593-601
Internal Medicine 16,22-33
183
Laboratory evaluation
of hepatic disease
Edward J. Hall and Alexander J. German
Introduction
Function
Abnormal laboratory test result
associated withliver dysfunction
Hepatic diseases frequently present a diagnostic chal-
lenge because clinical signs arevaried and often
Carbohydrate metabolism:
vague.Despite arangeofdiagnostic testsofboth
Glucose homeostasis
Hyper- or hypoglycaemia
hepatic damage and function,there is rarely a single
Lipid metabolism:
test that definitively identifies the problem; the many
Cholesterol
Hypo-or hypercholesterolaemia
clinical signs of liver disease (Figure 12.1) are only
Fatty acids
Hyperriglyceridaemia
sometimes related to specific laboratory abnormali-
Lipoproteins
Lipaemia
ties,such asjaundice(Figure12.2).Furthermore,the
Bile acids
Elevated bile acids
liverhasgreatfunctional reservecapacityand signs
are often not apparent until significant hepatic dys-
Protein metabolism:
function is present. As a result, laboratory analyses
Albumin
Hypoalbuminaemia
may allow early detection and characterization of
Globulins
Increased acute phase proteins,
 early liver disease. Moreover, other systemic dis-
immunoglobulins
eases can cause abnormal hepatic test results
Coagulation proteins
Coagulopathies
(Figure 12.3).
Vitamin metabolism
?Decreased folate,cobalamin
VitaminE,vitaminKmaybereduced
The aims of clinicopathological evaluation of hepa-
depending on the disease
tic disease are to:
Immunological functions
Hyperglobulinaemia
Identifyand characterizehepaticdamage and
Increasedacutephaseproteins
dysfunction
Identify possible primary causes of secondary
Detoxification
Hyperammonaemia
Decreased urea
liverdisease
Hyperbilirubinaemia
Differentiate causes of icterus
Evaluate potential anaesthetic risks
Clinicopathological abnormalities associated
Assess prognosis
12.2
withdisturbancesofhepatobiliaryfunction.
Assess the response to xenobiotics, i.e. drugs
and toxins
Monitorresponse to therapy.
Acute pancreatitis
Diabetesmellitus
Exocrine pancreaticinsuffcency
Extrahepaticbacterialifection
Depressindtindl
Hyperadrenocorticism
Stunting and weight loss
Hyperthyroidism
Vomitingdahoeandychlif
Hypoadrenocorticism
Polydipsia and polyuria
Hypothyroidism
Ascites
Immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia
Icterus
Inflammatoryboweldisease
Altered liver size
Protein-losing enteropathy
Bleeding tendency
Right-sided heart failure
Abdominal pain(rare)
Septicaemia
Encephalopathy
Shock
Clinical signs of hepatobiliary disease.Adapted
Some of themorecommonextrahepaticdisorders
12.1
12.3
from Sevelius and Jonsson(1996).
thatcancause abnormal liver testresults.
184
Chapter12Laboratoryevaluationof hepaticdisease
Diagnostic approach to liver disease
thediagnostic investigation,inparticular thehistory
andphysicalexamination.Forexample,feline hyper-
In most cases,a tentative diagnosisof liver disease
thyroidismcausessecondaryincreasesinliveren-
can be deduced from the results of laboratory tests in
zymes, and so measurement of thyroid function is
conjunction with imaging techniques.However, the
indicatedbeforeliverbiopsyinoldercatswith in-
definitive diagnosis of primary liver disease usually
creasedenzymeactivitieswhen theyhavesignsof
dependsultimatelyonhistological examinationof liver
polyphagia and weight loss.
biopsyspecimens.lnmostcases,primaryextrahepatic
Even when increased serum enzyme activities are
causesofsecondaryliverdiseasewillbeidentified
associatedwithprimary liver disease,it is apopular
before biopsy is considered.
misconception that these are ‘liver function tests'. In
The age, gender and breed of the patientmay assist
severe chronic hepatopathies, such as cirrhosis, and
with formulation of a differential diagnosis list;for
also in congenital portosystemic shunts (PsS), there
example,chronic hepatitis ismore prevalentin middle-
may be marked hepatic dysfunction with no or minimal
aged female Dobermanns.Acute diseases have a
markerenzymereleasebecause thereisinsufficient
sudden onset, but chronic disease may also appear to
functional hepatic mass to synthesize the enzymes.
develop suddenly，as signs are only manifested once
These tests give littleindicationof the type of disease
thefunctionalreserve capacityoftheliverisexhausted.
present,or the overall functional state of liver,orthe
Nevertheless,carefulquestioningof owners often elic-
reversibility of the disease. The magnitude of the
its evidence of previous recurring low-grade illness.A
increase in activity is not necessarily important,al-
history of weight loss and ascites also suggests chronic
though it may correlatewith thenumber of cells in-
disease.
volved,especially in acute disease.Mild elevations
Physical examination is important in identifying
may eitherbeofnoconsequenceorreflect lossof
underlyingdisorderscausingsecondary liverdisease.
almost all hepatocytes in end-stage disease. Serum
For example, in hyperadrenocorticism cutaneous
changes (e.g. thin skin,comedones and calcinosis
their intracellular location (and thus their tendency to
cutis)maybe seen in conjunction with hepatomegaly
leak from hepatocytes),theirpotential forinduction by
and elevated serum alkaline phosphatase. Indeed, the
drugs and also their serum half-life. It has been postu-
importance of history and physicalexamination cannot
lated thatoccasional persistent elevations of liver en-
be overemphasized, and any test results must always
zymes inthe absence of abnormal hepaticfunction and
be interpreted in the light of these findings.
histopathology may reflect the presence of macro-
A diagnostic approach to liverdisease includes:
enzymes,which are large,antibody-bound complexes
ofenzymesclearedfrom thecirculationmoreslowly
Clinical history
than normal,but which have no clinical significance.
Physical examination
However,persistently elevated livermarkerenzymes
Laboratory tests
usually indicate persistent, chronic disease.
Examination of ascitic fluid
Liver enzyme activities that can be measured in
Imaging
serum can be classified into two major types:
Liver biopsy.
The hepatocellular enzymes that are released by
cell damage (leakage markers)
Minimum database
Thebiliaryenzymeswhose synthesis is induced
by drugs and retained bile (cholestatic markers).
 Serum biochemistry, haematology and urinalysis 
areperformed routinelywhen investigating animals
A numberofenzymes areavailableformeasure-
with suspected hepatic disease before performing
ment,butwithin eachclassone enzymerarelyoffers
more specific tests or considering liver biopsy. Bio-
greaterdiagnostic advantage overthe others.There-
chemical findings are often themost useful in diag-
fore,theroutine biochemical profileusually only of-
nosis of liver disease.
fers oneortwo enzymeswithineachclass,withwhich
the clinicianbecomesfamiliar.Enzyme activities are
Enzymemarkersof liverdisease
measurable in serum orheparinizedplasma and are
Increased activitiesinserum of liver-specificenzymes
stable over several days as long as the sample is not
aregenerally considered markersof liverdiseaseas
exposed to excessive heat. The effects of haemo-
theyreflectliverdamage'However,increased activi-
lysis,icterus and lipaemiaarevariable,dependingn
ties are common and not necessarily associated with
the analyser and method being used.Reference
clinically significantprimary liver disease.Systemic
valueswillvarybetween laboratoriesdependingon
disease and various drugs can cause misleading
the assay methodology,and comparison ofresults
increases in serum activities(secondary orreactive
fromdifferent laboratoriesisbetterachievedbycom-
hepatopathies)whicharepotentiallyreversiblewith-
paring themagnitude of anyincreasewith respect to
out any specific therapyfor liver disease.It can be
the upperreferencerangevalue,ratherthancompar-
a clinical dilemma todecidewhether liverenzyme
ing absolute numbers;e.g.an alanine aminotrans-
elevations aresignificant,andwhethertheyrepresent
ferase(ALT)of250represents a4-foldincreaseif the
primary or secondary liver disease.It is important
upper limit of thereference range is 60,but only a
to interpret all resultsin light of theother aspectsof
2.5-fold increase if the limit is100.
185
Chapter12Laboratoryevaluationofhepaticdisease
Hepatocellular/leakageenzymes
Alanine aminotransferase(ALT)(alsoknownas se-
rum ALT (SALT); formerly serum glutamate-pyruvate
dehydrogenase (SGPT): This is a cytosolic enzyme
found in hepatocytes in concentrations 10,000-fold
greater than in normal serum. Measurement of its
release into serum is considered the screening test of
becauseof itshighsensitivity.The likelihoodoffalse
negative results,i.e.ALT within the reference range
5
despitsignificantactiveiverdamagesverylow
Days following acute injury
is considered to be liver-specific in dogs and cats
a)
because,although there areother tissue sources(e.g.
heart, kidney and muscle)these isoenzymes are either
present inlowconcentrations ortheir serum half-life is
short.However,ALT may increase in very severe
muscle diseases,e.g.muscular dystrophy in dogs. In
addition,ALT increases are not specific for primary
liver damage;increasesof equal magnitudemay be
seen in secondary(reactive) hepatopathies.
The serum half-lifeofALT in dogsisvariously
reported tobebetween3hours and 4 days.The half-
life is significantly shorter in cats and therefore the
normalreferencerangeislowerandsmallerincreases
Months during chronic injury
aremore significant.Immediate increases in serum
(b)
ALTactivitiesarefoundfollowingreleaseeitherdue
tohepatocyte necrosis orbyleakage'because of
alteredcellmembranepermeabilityand/oraltered
AL
cellmetabolism.Acute hepatopathies,such as infec-
tious canine hepatitis or liver toxins, may cause a
rapid 100-fold increase in activity (Figures 12.4a,
ALT
12.5). Increases may not be as marked in chronic
hepatitis,but are persistent.
The magnitude of the rise in ALT in acute liver
diseaseisroughlyproportional to thenumberof hepato-
cytesaffected,butacommonmistakein theinterpreta
tionofALT istogive toomuch significance to the
8
10
12
14
magnitudeoftherise.Althoughatleasta2-foldincrease
Days following bile ductobstruction
(c)
is needed before any significance is attached, themag
nitude of the rise in ALT beyond this does not directly
12.4
Patternsof changes inserum liver enzymes
following (a) an acute injury with resolution,
reflecttheseverityof thedisease,itsreversibilityorth
(b)persistent injury and (c) cholestasis.In (a) note the
prognosis, and is not an indicator of liver function or
parallel riseinALTandASTbut longerpersistence of ALT
dysfunction. As mentioned above,ALT tends to in-
because of its longer half-life and synthesis during hepatic
creasemore in acute thanin chronic disease;indeed,in
repair.Therise inALPlags behindALT,may continue for
end-stage liverdiseasewhen there is little activedam-
a period afterresolution,and persists for longer.In (b)
age occurring, ALT activities may be within the refer-
hepatocellularmarkerenzymesremainpersistently
elevated,althoughthereisa generaldeclinewithdisease
encerangeifthereareonlyafewhepatocytesleftoleak
progression as assessed by increasing bile acid
enzyme.Yetrecoveryfrom acutehepatitisismore likely
concentration.In (c)note the rise andplateau in ALPwith
thanwith chronic disease,and it is thepersistence of
lesser increase in ALT and AST.
enzyme elevation that is often of more diagnostic and,
particularly, prognostic importance (Figure 12.4b).
WhilstafallinALTactivitiescanbeabadprognostic
liver disease（Figure 12.4c).Extrahepaticbile duct
signif itreflectslossof hepatocytes,agradualdeclinein
obstructionand consequentbile stasisleadto accumu-
ALT following an acute insult usually indicates a good
lation of toxic bile salts which cause hepatocyte dam-
prognosis;in dogs activities should fall by50%every
age and enzyme leakage.Therises in serum ALT
3-4 days, and have returned to normal in 2-3 weeks
activity (e.g.2-10-fold)often donot reach the magni-
(Figure 12.4a).Activities decline more slowly than would
tudeof theincrease incholestaticmarkerenzymes
be predicted from the enzyme's short half-life because
(e.g. 10-100-fold). Similarly, cholangitis in cats only
serumALTisderivedbothfrom leaky,damagedcells
causes a moderate (5-10-fold) increase inALT.
and fromregeneratinghepatocytes.
Rises inALTactivityarealsoseen in somecases
ALTrisesimmediatelyfollowing acutehepatocyte
ofprimary andmetastatichepaticneoplasia if there
injury,butincreases occurmore slowly in cholestatic
is leakagefrom tumour cellsortumour-associated
186
Chapter12Laboratoryevaluationofhepaticdisease
necrosis.However,significantinfiltrationwithlymphoma
AmajorproblemintheinterpretationofALTactivities
or largeprimary liver tumoursmay causeminimal
is that the changes in activity are sensitive to secondary
increases in ALT.
and clinically insignificant hepatopathies. It is not un-
Small increases inALTcan alsobecaused bymicro-
usual toseeupto5-fold increases inALT indogswith
somalenzyme induction afteradministrationof hepato-
primary gastrointestinal disease. Liver biopsy is not
toxic drugs (Figure 12.5),and the rise in activity tends to
indicatedinmostof thesecasesbecauseliverfunction
bedose-dependent.Therapeutic doses of anticonvul-
tests (see below) are normal. If histological analysis is
sants,suchasphenobarbital,usuallyproducea45-fold
performed,changesaremildorabsent.Itisbelievedthat
increase,whereastoxicdosescancause a50-foldrise.
releaseofcytokinesby activatedKupffercellsresultsin
Idiosyncraticreactionswith thedevelopmentof signifi-
mild,reversiblehepatocytedamage.
cant liver dysfunction are likely tobe associatedwith
Increased ALTcanoccursecondarytofattyinfiltra-
greaterrisesinALT.GlucocorticoidscanalsoinduceALT
tionindiabetesmellitus.ALTcanalsobeincreased
activity;doses of prednisolone >4 mg/kg can cause a 10-
secondaryto hypoxic liverdamage,and ALTincreases
foldriseinALT,buttheincreaseisusuallydisproportion-
inhaemolyticanaemiamaymisleadcliniciansinto
atelyless than the induced rise inalkaline phosphatase
thinking that a primary hepatopathy is present. Given
(ALP) (see below). Increased activity may persist for
the large numberof Kupffer cells in the liver,and its
several weeksfollowing a singledoseof steroids due to
large blood supply, increased ALT may be seen in
enzyme induction and steroid hepatopathy.
response to sepsis and endotoxaemia from any site.
Thus,sinceevenperiodontaldiseasecancausemildly
elevated serumALT activities,the careful clinician
Azathioprine
usually checksat leastone other liverenzyme and,if
Barbiturates（includingphenobarbitalprimidone）
necessary, performs a liver function test before em-
Glucocorticoids(dogs)
barkingonliverbiopsy.However,persistent elevation
Griseofulvin
of ALTover1-2monthsis indicationforfurtherinves-
Halothane
tigations,suchasliverbiopsy，eveniflinicalsignsare
Ketoconazole
Mebendazole
notyetapparentand liverfunctiontests arenormal
Paracetamol (acetaminophen)
(provided no primary underlying disorder can be found).
Sulphonamides
Whenaclinicianisfacedwithapatient withappar-
ently non-specific increases nALT,found eitheron
Importanthepatotoxicdrugsknownor
routine biochemical screen or during illness,a logical
12.5
suspected to cause increases in ALT.
approach tobetakenis shown inFigure12.6.
IncreasedALT
History
Physical examination
Imaging
Otherlab.tests
No evidence of liver disease
Possibleliver disease
Breedwithknownpredilection
(bile acids normal)
for hepatic disease
Withdrawpotential hepatotoxins/drugs
Retest at 2-3week intervalsfor1-2months
Lookforextrahepaticdisease
+
ALT
ALTincreased or unchanged
Potential extrahepaticdiseasefound
No extrahepaticdiseasefound
normal
or
patient clinically worsening
44
Resolve disease
Clottingprofile
Liverbiopsy
ALT
Persistently
+
normal
increasedALT
Histological diagnosis
of liverdisease
12.6
Logical approach toapatient withnon-specific increase inserum ALTactivity.
187
Chapter 12Laboratory evaluationof hepatic disease
Aspartateaminotransferase(AsT)(alsoknown as
with ALT. However, their specificity for cholestatic
serum AST (SAST);formerly serum glutamate-
disease is limited;increases arefrequently seen in
oxaloacetate transaminase(SGOT):This is another
other diseases,and,in the dog,a corticosteroid-in-
hepatocellularenzyme that is released by cell damage,
duced isoenzyme is a frequent complication.
but,nlikeT,itsalofoundinsignificantquantiti
in cardiac and skeletal muscle.However,muscle in-
Alkalinephosphatase(ALP)(alsoknown asAPor
flammationisrelativelyuncommon in the dog andcat,
serum AP(SAP)):In the liver,ALP is anchored in the
and can be identified by simultaneous measurement of
microsomal and biliary canalicularmembranes of
a muscle-specific enzyme, e.g. creatine kinase (CK)
hepatocytes and is normally secreted into bile.Hepatic
(see Chapter22).In liverdisease,risesinASTusually
ALPisreleasedinto theblood as aresult of cholestasis
parallel ALT.Thus anincrease inAST and CK but not
(extra-orintrahepatic) and drug induction.Thelevel of
ALT probably indicates muscle damage. AST may also
ALPactivitycannotbeusedtodistinguishbetweenintra-
beincreasedbyhaemolysis andrelease fromRBCs.
and extrahepatic cholestasis,and thevalue of ALP,
Since AST appears to have no advantage over ALT
even as a test of cholestasis, is limited by the presence
asamarkerofhepatocytedamageintermsofspecificity,
of a numberof isoenzymes;this isparticularly the case
it is of limitedvalue.However,because some of the
in dogs, where there is a steroid-induced isoenzyme
hepatocellularASTismitochondrial-boundratherthan
(Figure 12.7). ALP has higher specificity for cholestasis
all free in the cytosol,some clinicians argue that
in cats than in dogs as there are no steroid-induced
releaserequires more severeinjury,i.e.cell necrosis
rather than increased cell membrane permeability.
Therefore,release ofAST often lags slightly behind
ALT (seeFigure12.4),but since itshalf-life sshortr,
Primaryliver disease
its presence probably indicates more profound or
Cholestasis:
persistent injury than suggested by an increase in ALT
Intrahepatic
alone.lt may,therefore,beamore specificmarkerf
Extrahepatic
significant liver damage thanALT,asit isless likelyto
Hepatic inflammation:
Parenchymatous
be increased in secondary hepatopathies,e.g.gluco-
Cholangitis
corticoid hepatopathy.Inhumans,differentiationof the
Nodular hyperplasia
cytosolic andmitochondrial isoformsof AST has prog-
nostic implications,but this testis not currentlyavail
Neoplasia
able in veterinary medicine.
Extrahepaticconditions
Increases inAST in acute hepatitisparallel in-
Bonemetabolism:
creases in ALT,although they are rarely more than
Growth
50-fold.AlthoughlevelsofASTdeclineoverseveral
Osteomyelitis
weeks,theyusuallynormalizebeforeALT;persistently
Fracturerepair
elevated AST is a poor prognostic sign. Smaller in-
Osteosarcoma
creases in AST are seen in chronic hepatitis and
Secondaryrenal hyperparathyroidism
cholestaticdisease.Onceagain,theplasmahalf-lifeof
Gastrointestinal disease:
1hour in cats is less than in dogs(5 hours) and
Gastroenteritis
therefore smaller increases are as significant; it has
Pancreatitis
been suggested that AsT is a more sensitive marker of
Hyperthyroidism
significant liver disease in cats.
Pregnancy
Right-sided heart failure
Others:Inmost casesALT andAST are the only
Sepsis:
hepatocellularmarkerenzymes that need tobe meas-
Systemicinfections
ured.However,there area numberof othercandidate
Pyometra
markers,developedprimarilyforruminants,thathave
Urological disease:
been proposed foruse in dogs and cats. These include
Nephritis
arginase,glutamatedehydrogenase,lactate dehydro-
Cystic calculi
genase, sorbitol dehydrogenase and ornithine
Drug-induced
carbamoyltransferase.Nonehave been showntohave
any significant advantagesand some,suchaslactate
Corticosteroids:
dehydrogenase (LDH),are so ubiquitous as to be
latrogenic
Hyperadrenocorticism
unhelpful.Arginase is perhaps potentially useful as its
Endogenous (stress)?
release tends tobelessinsecondaryhepatopathies
Anticonvulsants:
(as it is localized in the mitochondria),and,unlike ALT
Phenobarbital
and AST, leakage ceases during recovery. Therefore,
Primidone
persistent increases carry a poorer prognosis.
Phenytoin
Azathioprine
Biliary/cholestaticmarkerenzymes
Oneor two membrane-bound enzymes that arere-
12.7
Causes of increased ALP in dogs.Cats do not
leased particularly in response to cholestasis are usu-
producesteroid-inducedALPisoenzyme,and
allymeasured inabiochemistryprofile inconjunction
increased activities arelessnotable inextrahepatic disease.
188
Chapter 12Laboratory evaluation of hepatic disease
isoenzymes (see below).In addition, the half-life of
result of intrahepatic cholestasis.Finally,metabolic
liverALPincatsis only 6hours compared to3days in
diseases,such as canine diabetes mellitus and idi-
dogs, and there is also a smaller total ALP activity in
opathic feline hepatic lipidosis,where there is fatty
felineliver;therefore,lesserrisesaremore significant
infiltration of the liverandhepatocyte swelling,also
in cats than in dogs. However, ALP is not as sensitive
causes a risein ALP.The level of increase inALP does
in cats as in dogs and can be normal in jaundiced cats.
not correlatewith the disease process.
ALPispresentintheliver,bone,ntstine,kidny
 and placenta. However, renal and intestinal sources
Steroid-induced ALP:In dogs, interpretation of ALPs
rarely contribute to increased serum levels and the key
complicated by the presenceof a(cortico)steroid-
causesof increasedserumALParecholestasis,drug/
induced ALPisoenzyme(CIALP or SIALP).Toconfuse
hormone induction and increased osteoblasticactivity.
the issuefurther,varying proportions of SiALPmaybe
TheALPcontentofintestineis actually higherthan liver
produced in primary cholestatic liver disease. The
but, because the plasma half-life of the intestinal
SIALPisoenzymecanbequantified byelectrophoretic
isoenzyme (approximately 6 minutes) is much shorter
separation methods, but chemical manipulations have
than the liver isoenzyme (3 days) and because it is
also been described,and the levamisole inhibition
largely lost into the intestinal lumen, raised serum
assay is most useful. However, there is some contro-
activitiesof the alimentary isoenzyme arerarelyseen.
versy as to whether SIALP represents a truly novel
IncreasedserumALPinprimaryintestinal disease is
isoenzyme; it may actually represent the intestinal
more likelytobe theresult of secondaryhepatic dam-
isoenzyme that hasundergone abnormalglycosylation,
age thanintestinal isoenzymerelease.Similarly,renal
delaying its clearance from the blood by the mono-
ALPis excreted inurine and isof no significance when
nuclear-phagocytic system(MPS).In thishypothesis,
measuring serumALP.PlacentalALPis obviously only
insteadof thecirculating half-lifeof 6minutesof the
detectable in pregnancy.
native intestinal isoenzyme,hyperglycosylation pro-
BoneALP isreleased inresponse toosteoblastic
longs the half-life of SIALP to 3 days (Meyer, 1996a).
activity.In young growing dogs the normal total serum
It is not certain whether the intestinal ALPisproduced
ALP range is approximately twice the adult level be-
in the intestine and then glycosylated by the liver or
cause of thepresenceof this isoenzyme.ln adult dogs
whetherit is actually synthesizedby the liver,following
with active bone lesions(e.g.fractures,osteomyelitis
upregulation of the normally dormant gene within
and bone tumours)and in secondary renal hyperpara-
hepatocytes, to produce the specific isoenzyme iden-
thyroidism,ALPincreasesareseenbutarerarelymore
tical to theintestinal formbutwithan additional sialic
than5-fold.lf thereis anyconfusion,assay ofanother
acid molecule attached.
cholestatic markerwhich has nobone isoenzyme(see
 SIALP does not appear be a problem in cats, but in
below)willbehelpful.
dogs the response to exogenous corticosteroids varies
Hepatic ALPis released into the blood as aresult of
with thetyef stroid,osage,frequencyadrout
cholestasis(extra-orintrahepatic)and drug induction.
administration,and alsobetweenindividuals,resulting
In cholestasis,the increasesin serum hepaticALPdo
in massive elevations in individual patients. Some
not simply represent regurgitation from within
believe thatthe stress-inducedincreases in concentra-
hepatocytes,but also both solubilization of ALP from
tions of endogenous steroids in sick animals may be
membranesbyaccumulatedbilesalts,andinductionof
sufficient to induce ALP. Whatever its origin, SIALP
de novo synthesis.Thus,after an acute hepatic insult
complicates the interpretation of increases in total
ALP release is delayed compared with that of ALT,
ALP,as it may be induced by endogenous and exo-
because of the need forinduction of synthesis.In dogs,
 genous (oral, parenteral and topical) steroids. Further-
ALPbegins torise8hours afterbiliaryobstruction, and
more, any increase may persist for 6 weeks after the
increases 15-fold in 2-4 days. Peak activity 100-fold
steroid administration has ceased.
above normal is reached in 1-2 weeks,and then
 Normal dogs have <15% SIALP but, after gluco-
activity reaches a plateau at a lower level (see Figure
corticoid administration,this may rise to 85%,with a
12.4c).ALP is alsousually thelastenzyme toreturn to
resultant rise in total ALP.However,increased SIAL
thereferencerange afteran acute insult asimpairment
has alsobeen found inprimary hepatobiliary disease,
of bileflowisusuallythelast functional disturbanceto
diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism and pancreatitis,
andsynthesis canalsobeinducedby anticonvulsants.
resolution of the injury (see Figure 12.4).
Hyperbilirubinaemia is not a feature of steroid- (or
Cholestasismaybecausedbyawiderangeof
otherdrug-)inducedincreasesinALP,althoughsome-
intra-orextrahepaticlesions. Extrahepatic (posthepatic)
timesbilirubinuria and amild increase in serumbile
bile duct obstruction(e.g.by pancreatitis and pancre-
acid concentrations(see below) are found.The find-
atic neoplasia) causes a rise inALP.However,intra-
ing of increased total ALP in isolation (i.e. with no or
hepaticcholestasis isalso associated withincreased
minimal increase in ALT) is suggestive of hyper-
ALPandcanbecausednotonlybycholangitis,butalso
adrenocorticism but increased ALP may also be seen
byhepatitiswithhepatocyteswellingoccluding small
in benign nodular hyperplasia of the liver,and a
biliary canaliculi.There is a tendency for periportal
review of the clinical signs and/or evaluation of adre-
injury to cause greater increases in ALP than centrilo-
nal function (see Chapter 18) should be performed to
bular damage. Similarly,primary hepatic neoplasia
distinguish the two conditions.
(hepatocellularand biliary carcinomas)has alsobeen
Mostdogs with hyperadrenocorticism have elevated
associated with increased ALP,presumed tobeas a
SIALP and so the absenceof SIALPmay helpruleout
189
Chapter12Laboratoryevaluationof hepatic disease
Hypercholesterolaemia may develop in major bile
hyperadrenocorticism.However,induction of SIALP
by steroids is unpredictable, and excessive steroid
ductocclusionin dogs andcats,butmay alsobeseen
in diseases which secondarily affect the liver, e.g.
concentrationsmayalso causeintrahepaticcholestasis
and increasesinthehepaticALPisoenzyme.Equally
diabetes mellitus, hyperadrenocorticism, hypothy-
important,SIALP may be expressed in other hepato-
roidism,hyperlipidaemia,pancreatitisand nephrotic
biliary diseases,diabetes mellitus,hypothyroidism
syndrome. Whilst hypocholesterolaemia can be found
andpancreatitis(Meyer,1996a)and with anticonvul-
in casesofS,cirrhosis and liverfailure,it can also
sant therapy. Thus measurement of the SIALP
be a consequence of malabsorption.
isoenzyme has fallen from favour and is not generally
available in the UK.
Triglycerides
Abnormalities of lipid metabolism in hepatic disease
are not well characterized. Hypertriglyceridaemia is
Gamma-glutamyl transferase(GGT)(alsoknown as
seeninbiliaryobstruction,andreducedconcentrations
Y-glutamyl transpeptidase or y-GT): GGT is another
may be seen in chronic hepatitis.Lipaemia is seen ina
microsomal membrane-bound glycoprotein, associ-
numberofmetabolicdiseases thatsecondarily affect
ated with the biliary tree,that increases in plasma in
 the liver, e.g. diabetes melitus, hyperadrenocorticism 
response to cholestasis. It generally parallels rises in
and hypothyroidism (see Chapter 15).
ALP activity, but is perhaps less influenced by hepato-
cyte necrosis. There are GGT isoenzymes in other
Glucose
tissues,notably kidney,pancreas,intestine,heart,
Homeostatic mechanisms are so effective that signifi-
lungs,muscle andRBCs,butmostcirculatingGGTis
cant fasting hypoglycaemia isonly seen occasionally
presumed to be of hepatic origin. There is no bone
inprimaryliverdiseases,whenthereisseverehepatic
isoenzyme and thereforeincreased GGTisnotseen in
compromise, e.g. massive hepatic necrosis, PSS and 
 growth or bone disease. However, colostrum and milk
end-stage liver disease.Congenital hepatic enzyme
contain GGT andmay cause an increase innursing
deficiencies,termed glycogen storage diseases,are
animals up to 10 days of age. As with ALP, a steroid-
very rare but may cause hypoglycaemia and hepatic
induced isoenzyme is also present, but synthesis is
engorgement with stored glycogen. Sepsis and large
apparentlyless likelytobeinducedbyanticonvulsants.
or diffuse tumours, such as hepatoma or lymphoma,
Differences in thezonal distribution of GGTcom-
may also cause hypoglycaemia through excessive
paredwith that of ALPmay influence thesensitivity of
glucose utilization orrelease of insulin-like factors(see
GGT in various diseases. GGT is also found in the
Chapter 16).
lower biliary tree but, like ALP, GGT lacks complete
specificity in differentiating cholestatic from hepatocel-
Urea andcreatinine
lular disease. Ithas been suggested that measurement 
Lowserumconcentrationsof urea,relativetoserum
of ALP and GGT together increases their diagnostic
creatinine,aresometimesseeninanimalswithPssor
value. In dogs it is probably more specific and less
severeliverdysfunctionbecauseoffailuretoconvert
sensitive than ALP, but in cats the converse appears
ammonia to urea (see below).
true.In cats,most cholestatic disease causes greater
Azotaemia(increased serum urea and creatinine
increases in GGT than ALP, except in idiopathic he-
concentrations) indicates decreased glomerular filtra-
patic lipidosiswhereALPincreasesmay occurin the
tion, which can be a consequence of primary hepatic
absence of a significant rise in GGT. It has been
disease. In a fasting sample, a disproportionate in-
postulated that this discordance reflects either delayed
crease in ureacomparedwithcreatinine canbeseen
clearance of ALP or excess production.
withgastrointestinal haemorrhage.Acombination of
In summary, measurement of ALP in dogs is gen-
coagulopathy andportal hypertension in liver disease
erally preferred toGGT,with the converse incatsbut,
can lead to occult gastrointestinal haemorrhage that
in some situations, measurement of both enzymes 
may be detected by changes in the urea:creatinine
may provide additional information.
ratioinmildlyazotaemicanimalsbeforehaematemesis
ormelaena arenoted.
Other serum biochemistry parameters
commonlyalteredinliverdisease
Serumproteins
Manybiochemical testsarenot specific indicatorsof
The liveristhesourceofallalbuminandmostglobulins
liverdisease,butdoofferacrudeassessmentof liver
(except-globulins),so serum total protein and,espe-
status,oraidrecognitionof diseasesthateithermimic
cially,albuminconcentrationscanbeconsideredcrude
the clinical signsof liver disease or actually cause
markers of liverfunction.The differential diagnosisfor
secondary liver disease.
hypoproteinaemia includes liver disease, protein-
losing nephropathies (PLN) and protein-losing entero-
Cholesterol
pathies (PLE).These three classes of disease can
Cholesterolisderived fromthedietand hepaticsynthe-
often be distinguished by their clinical signs, their
sis,and undergoes enterohepaticrecycling.However,
relative changes in albumin and globulin concentra-
theusefulnessofserum cholesterol concentrationasa
tions,and simple confirmatorylaboratorytests(Figure
12.8). A further differential diagnosis for hypoprotein-
marker of liver disease is limited asits concentration
maybedecreased,normalorincreased,dependingon
aemiaisblood loss,whichcanbeassessedbyconcur-
the typeof liverdiseaseand the dietary intake.
rentlymeasuringhaematological parameters.
190
Chapter12Laboratoryevaluationofhepaticdisease
Cause
Albumin
Globulin
Clinical signs
Confirmatory test
Liver disease
Normalort
Varied(includes diarrhoea and
Liver function test
weight loss)
Protein-losing enteropathy
↓
 Diarrhoea and weight loss
None readily available(5Cr-albumin
excretion,faecal α-PI)
Protein-losingnephropathy
↑
Normal
Nephroticsyndrome and weight loss
Proteinuria(dstick,uri
protein:creatinineratio)
12.8
Differentiation of hypoproteinaemia.
Albumin:mild decreases (<20%) in albumin
concentration are seen in anorexia,as an acute
phase response in inflammatory diseases(with
albumin
the down-regulation of synthesis inversely related
α-antitrypsin
to the increase in serum globulin) and in ascitic
animals,because of the increased volume of
haptoglobin
distribution. The half-life of albumin in dogs is
reported tobe between1and3weeks,so
significant reductions in albumin concentration
r-globulin
developslowlyandindicate theexistenceof
chronic disease.Dogs and cats also have a large
reservecapacityforalbumin synthesis,and
profound hypoalbuminaemia in liver disease is
usuallyonlyseenwithPsSand severe
hepatocellular dysfunction.In end-stage liver
disease thereisbothdecreased albumin
synthesis and dilutionof serumby sodium and
12.9
Serumprotein electrophoresis from(a) one
waterretention.
healthy dog.(b) one dog with chronic
progressive hepatitis and good prognosis (note weak
Globulins:hyperglobulinaemia is common in
staining of albumin and the distinct α,-antitrypsin and
acquired liver disease,not justbecause there
haptoglobin fractions),and (c)one dog with late stage
may be an inflammatory aetiology,but also
cirrhosis and poor prognosis (note the weak staining of
because of acutephaseresponses and
albumin and the almost abolished α,-antitrypsin and
decreased clearance of antigen byKupffercells,
haptoglobin fractions).(From BSAVA Manual of Canine
resulting in a systemicimmuneresponse.
andFelineGastroenterology.)
Therefore,most globulins are increased in
inflammatory diseases:α-and β-globulins
include acutephaseproteins and increase in
haemostaticdisorders(see Chapter4).Internal bleed-
 inflammation in parallel with -globulins. The
ing from hepatic tumours, such as haemangiosar-
hyperglobulinaemiamaybe sufficient to mask
coma,generallyresultsin moderate anaemia.More
hypoalbuminaemia ifonlytotal protein
profound anaemiamayresult fromprimary haemolytic
concentration is measured.Hyperglobulinaemia
disease(with associated icterus),orfrom hepatic dis-
isparticularlyseenincatswithfeline infectious
 eases that result in profuse haemorrhage, e.g. hepatic
peritonitis(FiP)and lymphocytic
trauma,peliosisand hepaticamyloidosis(conditions
cholangiohepatitis, two conditions that can both
that cause spontaneous hepatic rupture)or gastro-
cause jaundice and ascites.
intestinal bleeding secondary to portal hypertension.
Microcytosis(Figure 12.10)isrelatively common in
Serum protein electrophoresis can be helpful in
dogs with congenital portosystemic shunt (PsS) and is
long-term monitoring and determining prognosis;nor-
seen occasionally in acquired liver disease;it isbe-
maltoelevated haptoglobin and a,-antitrypsinconcen-
lieved toreflectabnormal ironmetabolism.Chronic
trationsindicateabetterprognosis(Figure12.9),whilst
blood losswith iron deficiency anaemia is the major
an increase in albumin concentration(unless due to
differential diagnosis.
dehydration) is a good prognostic sign.
Variablered cell shapes(poikilocytosis) withirregu-
larly spiculated erythrocytes(acanthocytes or spur
Routine haematology
cells) and target cells are seen in chronic liver disease
(Figures 12.10 and 12.11) and are probably the result 
Red cell series
of changes in phospholipid metabolism.Microangio-
Mild tomoderate anaemia(haematocrit>0.20and
pathic haemolytic anaemia with the presence of RBC
<0.35 I/ in dogs, and >0.18 but <0.24 VI in cats) is 
fragments (schistocytes) can be associated with in-
common in liver disease, and usually results from
flammatory and benign or malignantneoplastichepatic
chronicillnessand/orgastrointestinalbleeding and/or
(and splenic) diseases (Figure 12.11b).
191
Chapter 12
Laboratoryevaluationof hepaticdisease
Specific gravity
Ifpolyuria/polydipsiaissuspectedfromthe history,this
canbe confirmed bydocumentinga consistently low
urine specific gravity (<1.020).
Bilirubin
The normal degradation and metabolism of bilirubin is
shown in Figure 12.12. Small quantities of bilirubin
are common in urine samples from normal dogs, as
therenal threshold is low.There are threepotential
sources.Firstly,a small amount of conjugated bili-
(a)
b)
rubin escapes from the liverinto the circulation,and
12.10
Blood smears from (a) a dog with a congenital
readily passes through the glomeruli. Secondly,
PSS,showing anisocytosis,microcytosismild
unconjugated bilirubin (bound to albumin) may be
hypochromia,and a number of acanthocytes(spur cells);
present where there is mild proteinuria,which can be
and (b) a normal dog.(Wright's Giemsa)(Courtesy of
found in normal dogs. Thirdly, in dogs the normal
MGraham.)
kidney may have a minor role in processing effete
haemoglobin.Onlya large total amountofurinary
7um
bilirubin is significant and semi-quantitative dipstick
7un
results should be interpreted in the light of the overall
urine concentration. In cats, the quantity of bilirubin
excreted urine is insufficient togivepositiveresults,
and bilirubinuria is almost always significant.
Haemoglobin&other
haemoproteins
RETICULOENDOTHELIAL
CELL
Blood smears from(a) a Cocker Spaniel with
12.11
chronic hepatitis showing slight anisocytosis,
Unconjugated
hypochromia and target cells, and (b) a German
bilirubin-albumin
Shepherd Dog with hepatic haemangiosarcoma showing
a single nucleated RBC(normoblast),and two
Portal
HEPATOCYTE
Urine
acanthocytes.A large lymphocyte is alsopresent.
vein
(Wright's Giemsa)(Courtesy of MGraham.)
Conjugated bilirubin
Whitecellseries
There are noWBCchangespathognomonicforhe-
BILIARYSYSTEM
paticdisease(seeChapter5).The total WBCcount
Enterohepatic
circulation
maybe increased and an inflammatory leucogram is
seen in acute infectious disease (e.g. leptospirosis)
INTESTINE
andsometimesinseverechronicinflammatoryhepato-
pathies and neoplastic liver diseases with necrosis of
Bacteria
tumour nodules.
Mesobilinogen
Platelets
Bacteria
Moderatereductioninplatelet numbers and abnormal
Urobilinogen
platelet function are non-specific changes sometimes 
seen in severeliver disease.
Bacteria
Urobilin & Stercobilin
Urinalysis
Discoloured (i.e. orange) urine may be the first indica-
tiontoownersthat theirpetisjaundiced,butfurther
Faecal colour
biochemicalandmicroscopicexaminationofurinemay
provide the clinicianwithadditional informationabout
12.12
Schematicrepresentation of thenormal
metabolism of bilirubin and urobilinogen.
liverdysfunction.
192
Chapter12Laboratoryevaluationofhepaticdisease
Urobilinogen
invariablybeabnormal and donotassist inidentifying
 Urobilinogen is synthesized from bile pigments by
the diseaseprocess.Therefore,once haemolytic(pre-
intestinalbacteria.Someisreabsorbed,mostofwhich
hepatic) jaundice has been ruled out, evidence of
undergoes enterohepaticrecycling and re-excretion in
hyperbilirubinaemia is a specific markerof hepatobiliary
bile.However,about 20%passes the glomerulus.
dysfunction and no other testof function is required to
Thus, the presence of urobilinogen in urine is normal
indicateliverdisease and/ororbiliaryobstruction.
and a marker of enterohepatic recycling of bile (see
Figure 12.12). Increased amounts in the urine are
Markersofliverfunction
associatedwithhyperbilirubinaemia,unlesscomplete
biliaryobstructionispresent,whenurobilinogenwillbe
Bilirubin
absent.Although the test is found onmost 'multi-test
 Serum bilirubin concentration in dogs and cats should
urine dipsticks,its usefulness is minimal.
not normally exceed 7 μmol/l. Hyperbilirubinaemia
results injaundice (icterus), whichis the yellowdiscolor-
Urate crystalluria
ation of tissues by accumulated bile pigments. Jaun-
Abnormaluricacidmetabolismandhyperammonaemia
dice may be indicative of liver disease,but can be
in liverdisease canresultinprecipitationof ammonium
caused byotherconditions(Figure 12.14)anddoes not
biurate crystals in the urine. Occasionally massive
occur in all hepatic disorders.For example,it is not
crystalluria causes obvious brown turbidity(Figure
 seen in congenital PSS or steroid hepatopathy and is
12.13a),butmostly characteristiccrystals arefound by
only rarely seen in metastatic disease.
microscopic examination of urine sediment.The crys-
Clinically, jaundice is firstly and most readily de-
tals resemble mites or thorn-apples(Figure 12.13b).
tected in the sclera when concentrations exceed 25
Urate crystals can be found on serial urinalyses in
μmoll,because the human eye can usually only detect
 approximately two-thirds of dogs with congenital PSS.
theyellow colour againstpink mucous membranes at
about45μmol/1.However,hyperbilirubinaemiacanbe
seen inseparated serum at about 17μmol/l.Chemical
measurementsof serum bilirubin are thereforemost
Dogs
Cats
Prehepatic
Haemolytic anaemia:
Haemolytic anaemia:
Immune-mediated haemolytic
Haemoplasmas
anaemia
(Haemobartonella)
Babesia
Immune-mediated haemolytic
anaemia
Primary liverdisease
Acute hepatitis:
Acute hepatitis
a
(b)
Drugs,leptospirosis,
Chronic hepatisand cirhosis
12.13
(a) Gross appearance of urate crystals in
infectious canine hepatitis
Cholangiohepatitis:
canine urine.(b) Microscopic appearance of
Chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis:
e.g.lymphocytic-plasmacytic
urate crystals in urine sediment from a dog witha
Copper,-antitrypsin,
type
congenital portosystemic shunt.(Courtesy of w-Millard.)
anticonvulsants
Idiopathichepaticlipidosis
Cholangiohepatitis:
Neoplasia:
Suppurative
Lymphoma
Liver function tests
Neoplasia:
Carcinoma
Increasesin livermarkerenzymesdonotnecessarily
Secondary liver disease
correlatewith thedegreeof liver damageanddonot
Septicaemia and endotoxaemia
Feline infectious peritonitis
distinguishlocalized fromdiffuse disease.They,there-
Diabetes mellitus
fore,donotofferanyinformation onoverall liverfunc-
Toxoplasma
tion, and in cases of congenital Pss may actually be
Paracetamol(acetaminophen)
normal.In these situations specifictests are available
Hyperthyroidism(rarely)
tomeasure liverfunction.
Posthepatic disease
Liverfunction testsmaybecrudemarkersof overall
liver function (e.g. bilirubin metabolism) or they may
Extrahepaticbiliarydisease:
Extrahepaticbiliary disease:
dynamicallyassess certainfunctionalpathways in the
Common bileduct or gall
Chronic pancreatitis
liver (e.g.enterohepatic recycling of bile acids).The
bladderrupture
former are often adequate when hepatic dysfunction is
Pancreatitis
Pancreaticcarcinoma
marked,whilst the latter are useful in confirming the
Biliary carcinoma
requirementforfurtherinvestigation whenclinicalsigns
are equivocal. In the presence of jaundice, many
12.14
dynamic liver function tests (e.g.bile acid assay) will
Common causes of jaundice in dogs and cats.
193
Chapter12Laboratoryevaluationofhepaticdisease
sensitive.Further,becauseof thelowrenal threshold,
Mild hyperbilirubinaemia(oftenwithout clinically
bilirubinuria usuallyprecedes jaundice in dogs.
overt jaundice)may occurinsome hyperthyroid cats,
Inordertounderstand jaundiceit isnecessaryto
probablysecondarytoaccelerated haemoproteinturn-
understandthephysiologyof bilirubinmetabolism(Fig-
over in the cat'shypermetabolicstate.
ure 12.12).Bilirubin is the major bile pigment and is a
Increasedbilirubinproductionmayalsooccur
productof thedegradation of haemoproteinfrom hae-
duringresorptionof largehaematomas,butrarely
moglobin,myoglobin and haem-containing enzymes
issufficienttoproducejaundice.Intracavitaryhaem-
(e.g. cytochromes). The phagocytic cells of the MPS,
orrhage(e.g.haemoperitoneum) doesnot produce
particularlyintheliver,spleenandbonemarrow,engulf
jaundice,asmany RBCs (approximately 40%) are
senescent and abnormal RBCs,and convert haemo-
resorbed intact. Similarly gastrointestinal haemor-
globintobilirubinviabiliverdin.Freebilirubinisinsolu-
rhage doesnotcause jaundice because thehaemo-
ble in waterandiscarriedintheplasma to hepatocytes
globinismetabolizedbybacteria to non-absorbable
reversibly bound to albumin.Here it is taken up and,
porphyrins.
along with bilirubin produced within the hepatocytes
Immune-mediatedhaemolyticanaemiaisthe
from intracellularhaemoproteins,conjugated tobili-
mostcommoncauseof prehepaticjaundice,although
rubin diglucuronide.Conjugation of bilirubin aids aque-
other non-immune causes of haemolysis occur(see
oussolubilizationandexcretionviathebiliarycanaliculi.
Chapter4).The capacityof theliver for hepatic
Afterbiliaryexcretionandgallbladderstorage,bile
bilirubin processing is normally large, so develop-
ispassedtotheintestine viathecommonbileduct.Bile
ment of jaundice dependsnotonlyonhaemolysisof
pigmentisconverted byintestinalbacteria toa number
a large number of red blood cells, but also on the
of faecal pigments,including stercobilin,which pro-
presence of concurrent hypoxic liver damage associ-
duce normal faecalcolour.Thepigment urobilinogenis
atedwiththeanaemia.
also produced (see above).
Initially during haemolytic jaundice the accumu-
Hyperbilirubinaemia can be caused by three basic
lated bilirubin is predominantly unconjugated,but
mechanisms (Figure 12.14):
gradually conjugated bilirubin accumulates as well.
Spherocytosis and a positive Coombs'test support a
Prehepaticcauses-increasedproduction of
diagnosis of immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia
bilirubin exceeding the capacityfor hepatic
(see Chapter4).Faeces maybeorange coloured(due
excretion
to excess bilirubin excretion),significant bilirubinuria
Hepatic causes-abnormal uptake,conjugation
willbe present and urinary urobilinogen in the urine will
orsecretionbyhepatocytes
be increased.Hypoxia may cause some increase in
Posthepatic causes-obstruction of either intra-
liver-specific enzymes (ALT, AST) that may be mis-
orextrahepaticbiliaryexcretionorbiliarytract
leadingbut,ithehaematocritisnormalorthereisnly
rupture.
mild anaemia, any jaundice and liver enzyme eleva-
tions are not of haemolytic origin.
These three typesofhyperbilirubinaemia canoften
bedistinguishedbyacombinationofother laboratory
tests,such as haematocrit,cholesterol and hepato-
abnormalities,affecting bilirubinuptake and conjuga
tion,usuallyco-existwithintrahepaticcholestasis.Thus
Bergh test hasbeen advocated for their differentiation
increased hepatocellularand cholestaticenzymes as-
bymeasuring therelativeproportions of unconjugated
sociatedwith jaundice aresuggestiveofprimary he-
and conjugated bilirubin. However, the results are
patic disease,although it should be remembered that
unreliable and the test is not recommended.Its
enzymes maybe increased inhaemolytic anaemia and
unreliablilitys,npart,duetothevariableresencef
may not be increased in terminal cirrhosis.
bilirubin bound irreversibly to serum albumin.This
Hepatic jaundice is usually theresult of a combina-
covalently-bound8-bilirubin(biliprotein)cannotbetaken
tion of hepatocyte dysfunction and intrahepatic
up by hepatocytes and merely adds to the hyperbili-
cholestasis;both ALTand ALP are usuallyincreased,
rubinaemia.However,it isfound invariable amounts
whilstcholesterol isoften decreased.AlteredRBC
between2and96%of circulating bilirubin.The clear-
integrityandconsequent increaseddestructionmay
anceofS-bilirubinis asslowastheturnoverofalbumin
alsocontributetothejaundiceand thusboth
(i.e.half-life upto3weeks),andjaundicecanoccasion-
unconjugated and conjugated bilirubin may appear in
allypersistwell beyond thetimeofresolutionof the
theblood.Bilirubinuria andurobilinogen areexpected
cause,both from a clinical and laboratory（except
on urinalysis.
bilirubin)perspective.Persistentjaundice,afterclinical
Extrahepatobiliary disease can also cause
recovery,occursmostfrequentlyindogswithobstruc-
cholestaticjaundice,but the exact mechanisms are
tivejaundice associatedwith acutepancreatitis.There-
poorly defined.Sepsis outside the hepatobiliary sys-
fore,prolongedjaundicedoesnotnecessarilyindicate
tem can cause intrahepaticcholestasis and jaundice
persistentdisease,and hyperbilirubinaemia shouldbe
interpreted inlightofotherclinicalfeatures.
an effect of inflammatorycytokines and/orbacterial
endotoxin.
Prehepaticjaundice:Increasedproductionof bilirubin
Geneticdefectsofbilirubinuptakeandsecretion,
isalmost invariablyassociatedwithhaemolysis and
as seen in Southdown and Corriedale sheep,respec-
typicallya lowhaematocrit ispresent.
tively,have notbeendescribed indogs andcats.
194
Chapter12Laboratoryevaluationof hepaticdisease
Posthepaticjaundice:Posthepaticjaundiceoccurs
Serum proteins
withbileductobstruction,oftenassociatedwithpan-
Total concentrationsof albumin andglobulin offer
creaticoduodenal disease.Extrahepaticbileductob-
crude indicesof liverfunction asdiscussed above.
struction is characterized byhyperbilirubinaemia in
Serumprotein electrophoresisoffersprognosticinfor-
associationwithhypercholesterolaemia,andincreases
mation,and maydemonstrateincreased acutephase
in cholestaticenzymesgreaterthanincreasesinhepa-
proteinsynthesis associated withinflammatoryhepato-
tocellular enzymes.
pathies,ormay identifyproductionof abnormalpro-
Although anincrease in conjugated bilirubin alone
teins in certain liverdiseases.Thefetal liver-derived
mightbeexpected,asthedefectinbilirubinexcretion
protein,α-fetoprotein,is not typically synthesized by
occurs after hepatic conjugation, this rarely occurs
normal adult liver, but is released into serum when
because, by the time clinical signs occur, there is
hepaticregeneration takesplace.ltispresent in serum
significant dysfunction of hepatocyte conjugation
inanumberofliverdiseasesbuttheassayisnot
mechanisms andbilesalt induced damage.Increased
routinely available.Similarly,chronichepatitis associ-
cholestaticmarkers(ALP,GGT)and hypercholesterol-
atedwithα,-antitrypsinaccumulationcanbecharac-
aemia are found,and faeces are grey and acholic
terized by demonstration of abnormal isoforms by
(Figure 12.15), whilst urine urobilinogen is absent if
isoelectric focusing (Sevelius and Jonsson,1996). In
obstructioniscomplete.Ultrasoundexaminationof the
contrast,copperhepatotoxicosiscannotbeidentified
biliary treecanbehelpful inconfirming the obstruction
by assayofplasma ceruloplasminbutcanonlybe
and identifying its cause.
confirmedon assayofcopper inaliverbiopsyorby
Passage of acholic faeces, where bile pigments are
genetic testing.
absent, is usually the result of persistent mechanical
Liver autoantibodies (anti-nuclear antibody, anti-
extrahepaticbileductobstruction.Incatswithsevere
mitochondrial antibody，etc.)develop inhumanliver
cholangitis, obstruction is most commonly due to the
disease,and havebeennoted incanine chronichepa-
accumulationof biliarysludge,butoccasionallyaclear
titis.Their significance is not clear,and they are not
viscous bilewhich lacks pigment is produced,resulting
routinelymeasured.
in acholicfaeceseven in the absenceofobstruction.
Coagulation times
Acholicfaeces.Pale
Theliverplaysacentral roleinthecoagulation and
12.15
faeces lacking bile
fibrinolytic systems,and subtle abnormalitiesmay be
pigments passed by a jaundiced
detected by assay of individual factor activities.How-
dogwithacompletebileduct
ever,overallcoagulation abilityassessedbywhole
obstruction caused by a pancreatic
blood clotting time,one-stage prothrombin time(OSPT
carcinoma.
orPT)andactivatedpartialthromboplastintime(aPTT)
(seeChapter6),is usuallyonly significantlyprolonged in
severe disease.Whilst a bleeding diathesis will be
an occult tendency should alwaysbe suspected,and a
clottingprofileismandatorybeforea liverbiopsyis
performed.Coagulationfactorproteins,synthesized in
the liver,areactivated throughavitaminK-dependent
process. Measurement of inactive vitamin K-dependent
coagulationfactors,so-calledproteinsinducedbyvita-
min K absence or antagonism'(PIVKAs),by their inhibi-
tion of theOSPT,detectssubtle changesinproduction
ofactive coagulation factors.However, the test for
PIVKAs doesnot directly test for these inactiveprecur-
Ruptureofthebiliarytractiseitheraresultoftrauma
sors;it isamodifiedPTperformedondilutedplasma.
or spontaneous pathology (e.g.obstruction and perfo-
Routine useof this test isnotrecommended due to
ration during passage of a gall stone), and leads to
limitedavailabilityandlackofclearsuperiorityoverPT
accumulationofbilein theperitoneal cavity(Figure
and aPTTassaysfordisease diagnosis.
12.16).The severityof jaundice graduallyincreases as
Aswellasdeficienciesof clotting factors and failure
bile accumulates.
ofvitamin K-dependent activation,bleeding tenden-
ciesinliverdiseasemayalsoreflect increasedfibri-
12.16
Bile
nolysis,demonstrable asincreased fibrindegradation
peritonitis.
products(FDPs) and D-dimers,and platelet dysfunc-
Obvious bile-like
tion,which is most easilyassessedby determining the
fluid obtained by
buccal mucosal bleeding time (see Chapter 6).A
abdominocentesis in
a dog 7 days after
buccal mucosal bleeding time should alwaysbeper-
abdominal trauma in
formed priorto hepaticbiopsy,because some studies
aroad traffic
havesuggested thatcomplicationsarisemorecom-
accident.
monlyduetoplateletdysfunctionresultinginprimary
haemostatic abnormalities,rather than secondary
(coagulation factor)haemostaticabnormalities.
195
chapter12Laboratoryevaluationofhepaticdisease
Occasionally bleeding occursbecause of acquired
The presence of aprotein-rich,cellularexudate,or
vitaminK deficiencyin complete bile duct obstruction;
the presence of significant amounts of blood,chyle or
absence of bilesaltsprecludesintestinal absorption of
urine suggestextrahepaticdiseases.Thepresence of
this fat-soluble vitamin,particularly following antibiotic
a bile-like fluid is consistent with bile peritonitis associ-
therapywhenbacterial synthesisof vitaminK is im-
atedwithruptureof theextrahepaticbiliarytree.Al-
paired.Both PTand aPTT are abnormal.This problem
though thepatient isjaundicedwhen suffering bile
hasoccasionallybeenreportedinfeline biliarydisease
peritonitis, the bilirubin concentration is much greater
and in feline exocrinepancreatic insufficiency;it ap-
in the peritonealfluid.However,thegross appearance
pears tobe arare featureof caninebiliarydisease.
of the abdominal effusion is generally sufficient to
make a diagnosis of bile peritonitis (Figure 12.16).
Urea
Low serum concentrationsofurea are sometimes seen
Dynamic liver function tests
inanimalswithPSSorsevere liverdysfunctionbe-
These tests rely on analysis ofpaired blood samples to
cause of failure to convert ammonia to urea. However,
assessthecapacity ofthe livertoclearendogenous(bile
thismarkeris unreliable because the normal lower limit
acids,ammonia) or exogenous (bromosulphthalein,
for serum urea concentration is close to the limit of
indocyanine green) substances from the circulation.
sensitivity of the assay, and prolonged anorexia can
Impaired clearance is suggestive of hepatocellular dys-
produce very low urea concentrations.
function and/or portosystemic shunting, but does not
differentiate the cause.Therefore, additional tests,in-
Uricacid
cluding portovenography,ultrasonography and biopsy
Uricacid is an excretorymetaboliteof hepaticpurine
are required. Dynamic tests are not useful if the patient
degradation,andincreased serum uric acid concentra-
is icteric.Scintigraphy is also a dynamic test thatcanbe
tioncanbeusedasamarkerofhepaticdysfunction
used to assess both shunting and hepatic MPS function,
(Reyers etal.,2001). Urate crystalluria is also a marker
buttheneedforradioisotopesand expensive equipment
of hepatic dysfunction.However,uric acid also accu-
precludes its use in general practice.
mulates indogswith inherited abnormalities of purine
metabolism,such as Dalmatians.
Endogenous metabolism tests
Ascites
These tests assess themetaboliccapacityof theliver,
and arefeasibleforveterinarysurgeonsingeneral
Theaccumulationof freefluid in theperitoneal cavity
practice.
canbeindicative of liver disease.Mechanismsof fluid
accumulationcanbeidentifiedbydiagnosticabdomi-
Serum bile acids:Bile acids (bile salts) are major
nocentesis and measurement of the protein and cellu-
constituentsofbile,but are not the same as bile
lar content.Classification of the fluid as transudate,
pigments (i.e.bilirubin).Fasting serum total bile acid
modified transudate orexudate can be helpful(see
(FSBA)concentrationisareflectionoftheenterohepatic
Chapter 21). Assessment of the serum-ascites albu-
circulation of bile acids(Figure 12.17).Bile acids are
min gradient can help in classificationof the effusion
(Pembleton-Corbett et al.,2000).
A pure,low-protein transudate will accumulate if
Cholesterol
there is hypoproteinaemia.However,liver disease in
Cholic acid
Chenodeoxycholicacid
nismalone,and hydrothoraxorsubcutaneousoedema
Taurine or Glycine
arerarelyseen in liverdisease.Ascites inliverdisease
usually arises through a combination of hypoalbumin-
aemia and portal hypertension,resulting in accum-
HEPATICPOOL
Porta
OFBILESALTS
ulation of a modified transudate. The term ‘modified
veir
GALLBLADDER
transudate'is perhaps an unfortunatemisnomer in liver
STORAGE
disease,as it isusually not‘modified’afterformation.
DUODENUM
Whilst modificationbyinfection and inflammation can
occur,in liverdisease,asciticfluid ismore commonly
~Cholate
just a transudate that results from increased hydrostatic
Enterohepatic
pressure (i.e.portal hypertension). However,as hepatic
Glyco ~
Chenodeoxycholate
circulation
sinusoids are highly permeable,the fluid entering the
Fatmicellarization
Intestinal
mately 80%of serum proteins.Hepatic lymph is there-
bacteria
foreprotein-richand,whenthelymphaticsareobstructed
Cholic&deoxycholicacids
by intra-or posthepatic causes,it accumulates aspro-
Chenodeoxycholic&lithocholic acids
tein-richasciticfluid.Onlyprehepaticportalhypertension
(e.g.portal vein thrombosis,over-zealousPSS ligation),
ILEUM
Carrier-mediated
as wellas simplehypoalbuminaemia,will cause a typical
一→
uptake
low-protein transudate.Amodified transudate may indi-
Faecalloss
(~95%day)
(~5%perday)
problem,suchascardiactamponadeorright-sided heart
12.17
Schematicrepresentationofnormal
enterohepatic circulation of bile salts.
196
Chapter12Laboratoryevaluationof hepaticdisease
synthesized in the liver at arate to compensatefor
higher of the tworesults.In posthepatic jaundice fast-
smallfaecallosses,whilsttheenterohepaticcirculation
ing levelscanbeveryhigh,butoften donot increase
much postprandially.
several timesper meal.Hepatic dysfunctionand/or
Bile acids can be measured accurately by radio-
portosystemic shuntingpermitsbile acids toreach the
immunoassay but,in most veterinary laboratories,
systemic circulation where they can be measured.
 enzymatic fluorimetric or spectrophotometric methods 
Measurement of urinary bile acids has also been
are used,and lipaemia,aswell ashaemolysis,can
proposed as a test of liver function (see below).
produce spurious results.Reference ranges for bile
Bile acids(cholic and chenodeoxycholic acid) are
acids aresomewhatcontroversial,notonlybecauseof
synthesized in theliverfromcholesterol,andareconju-
methodological problems in some laboratories,but
gated,predominantlywithtaurine,beforebiliaryexcre-
because of the effectof secondaryhepatopathies.The
tion as salts.Conjugated bile acids are ionized at the pH
initial criteriaof<5μmol FSBA and<10μmolPPSBA
of the intestinal lumen and are lipid-insoluble,which
are too strict, and clinically normal individuals can
 prevents their absorption through the intestinal mucosa.
sometime have bile acid concentrations that are
Onlywhenfat absorption,throughmicellarization,has
double these values. Specificity is improved by in-
beencompleted arebileacidsreabsorbedonspecific
creasing the upperlimit of thereferencerange,but at
receptors in the ileum.Some of theprimarybileacids
the expense of sensitivity.Concentrations>25μmol/l,
(cholic and chenodeoxycholic acid) are metabolized by
forbothFSBAandPPSBA,correlatewiththepresence
intestinal bacteria tosecondarybileacids(deoxycholic
of histological lesions, although in some cases these
and lithocholic acids)before reabsorption,and about
may still be secondary hepatopathies.
5%escaperecycling and arelost infaeces.Onreturn to
An FSBA concentration of >40 μmolI is usually
theliver,bile acidsareefficientlyremoved from the
taken as conclusive evidence ofprimary hepatic dys-
portal blood by hepatocytes and are re-excreted.
function and a need toperformfurther tests,such as a
The rate of synthesis and the size and distribution
biopsy, unless an underlying disease can be identified.
of thebile acid pool canbe abnormal in liver disease if
The magnitude of the FSBA over approximately 100
there is one or a combination of the following:
μmoll apparently has little predictive value for the
severityofanyparticularhepatopathy,andsomecases
Areductioninhepatocellularmass
of PSShavenormal FSBAand massivelyraised(>800
Impaired hepatocyte function
μmol/I)PPSBA.
Disturbed enterohepatic circulation including:
The interpretation of FSBA concentrations between
Disruption of flow of portal blood to the liver
 20 and 40 μmoll is a grey area, and recommendations 
Obstruction of biliaryflowfrom the liver.
for thesepatients are:
Look for extrahepatic disease
ThusFSBAwill be abnormal ifhepaticfunction is
。
Repeat FSBA with a PPSBA and look for at least
suboptimal, or if there is portosystemic shunting, or if
a 2-fold increase
biliaryobstructionoccurs,andincreases inserumbile
Repeat FSBA in 2-4weeks.
acids(SBA) arenot specific for certain disease types.
They will be present in extrahepatic bile duct obstruction
10
as well as primary liver disease and congenital PSS.
FSBAaremostvaluableforthe detectionofPSS
If clinical signs and otherresults suggestprimary
liverdisease,carry out furtherinvestigations.
and chronichepatitis/cirrhosisbefore thedevelopment
of jaundice.The test is simple and sensitive and is
Commercial bile acid assaysmeasure total con-
readily available toveterinary practitioners.However,
centrations and donot distinguishbetweenprimary
given that FSBA can be increased by non-hepatic
and secondarybile acids.In the future,fractionationof
diseases(occasionallyupto100μmol/l),the sensitivity
serum bile acids into specific acids, such as cholic and
and specificityfor detecting primaryhepatic diseases
chenodeoxycholic,mayhave diagnosticutilityinthe
are not as good as initially hoped.
identification of specific hepatopathies.
Thesensitivity of the test isimproved by measure-
ment of 2-hourpostprandial serum bile acid(PPSBA)
Urinarybile acids:Measurementof urinarybileacids
concentration.Ingestion of food causesrelease of bile
has also been proposed as atestofliverfunction indogs
through stimulation of gall bladder contraction,and
and cats as it theoretically provides an assessment of
increases the amountofbileacidsavailablefor
the cumulative production and excretion of bile acids
enterohepatic recycling. This provides a safe endo-
(Balkmanetal.,2003;Trainoretal.,2003).Tocorrectfor
genous test of hepatic function.
variations in urine specific gravity and dilution of bile
Thevalueof thePPSBAmeasurementisstillcontro-
acids,results are expressedasbile acid:creatinineratio
versial, although undoubtedly some patients with PsS
(similar to protein:creatinine ratio,see Chapter 10).
do have normal FSBA and massively abnormal PPSBA
Analysing the amounts of sulphated and non-sulphated
concentrations.Yet,confusing decreases in the post-
bile acids was found to offer no advantage over meas-
prandial sample are sometimesfound;possible expla-
uring total urinary bile acids (TUBA),in contrast to the
nations include inherent variability,failure to store all
situation in humans. Some controversy exists as to the
new bile in the gall bladder, incomplete gall bladder
sensitivity and specificity of TUBA,andwhether this
contraction on feeding and intestinal bacterial metabo-
offers any diagnostic advantagesoverdynamicSBA
lism.Thegeneralrecommendationisto interpretthe
measurement(Steiner et al.,2003).
197
Chapter12Laboratoryevaluationofhepaticdisease
Plasmaammoniaandammoniatolerance test:
are already encephalopathic.Therectal ammonia tol-
Ammonia,producedbyintestinalbacteria,isnormally
erance test hasthe advantage of not provoking imme-
cleared fromtheportalbloodbytheliver:normalportal
diatevomitingbuttheabsorptionofammonia ismore
bloodcontainsupto350μmol/l ammonia,but<50
variable and samplesmustbe taken at 20 and40
μmol/ entersthe systemiccirculationfrom theliver.
minutes.The colon has tobeprepared byenema,and,
Increasedrestingplasma ammonia concentrationis
since the results are less sensitive,this method is
evidenceof hepaticdysfunction and/orportosystemic
shunting(Figure12.18).Veryrarely,hyperammonaemia
hasbeenadvocated asasafertestofammonia toler-
is caused byan abnormalityin the urea cycle.This may
ance.lIt was sensitivefordetecting congenital PsSbut
beeitherduetoa geneticdefect,orsecondaryto
cobalamin deficiency.In thiscircumstance,serum bile
TheATTtestwill detectPSS,butmaynotbeable
acids(see above)willbe normal.
to detect subtler hepatic dysfunction.Further,meth-
The degree of hyperammonaemia correlates
odological difficultiesmakethetestdifficulttoperform
in practice.Storage increases ammonia content of
andsoitisareasonablemarkerforthecondition,
blood andsoplasma must beharvestedonice and
although the clinical signs of encephalopathy can
ammoniaassayedwithin30minutestoproducemean-
developsecondarytotheaccumulationofothertoxic
ingful results.Although dry chemistry ammonia tests
metabolites.Further,fasting blood ammonia concen-
are available in veterinary practice,results are fre-
trationonlyprovidesarelatively insensitivemeasure
quently unreliable (Sterczer et al.,1999). The test is,
of hepatic function,because resting concentrations
therefore,limited to institutions and practices with
arefrequentlynormal inpatientswithliverdisease,
immediateaccesstoacommercial laboratory.
including some with PSs. The sensitivity of the test
canbeimprovedbyperforming anammonia toler-
Exogenousexcretiontests
ance test(ATT),administering exogenous ammonia
These testsareofhistoricalinterest,havingbeen
eitherorallyorperrectum todeterminewhether
 superseded by dynamic bile acid measurements.
ammonia intolerance exists.Ammonium chloride is
Bromosulphthalein(BSP)retention testing
eitherstomachtubeorenema,andabloodsampleis
involved theintravenous administration of the
taken30 minuteslater.Plasma ammonia concentra-
organicdye,BSP,followedbybloodsamplingat
tion does notincrease significantlyin normalpatients;
30minutesand measurementof thepercentage
marked increasesareseen inPss.Theperoral test
retention of thedye.Given that BSPis a potential
isquitesensitive,butcancausevomitingandcanbe
carcinogen, it is no longer commercially available 
potentiallydangerousnpatients,especiallycats,that
and the test isnotnowperformed.
ninoacic
(a)
(b)
NH3
Portal
hypertensior
coagulopathy
(c)
(d)
12.18
Metabolism of ammonia(NH) in(a)normal animals,and animals with(b) urea cycle enzyme defect（rare),
(c) congenital portosystemic shunting and (d) cirrhosis with secondary acquired shunting.
198
Chapter 12
Laboratoryevaluationofhepaticdisease
Indocyanine green(ICG)retention test.TheICG
test was developed to replace BSP but offers no
advantage overbile acidmeasurement(seeabove).
Exogenousmetabolism tests
Aminopyrine test:Hepatic metabolism of intraven-
 ously administered 13C-labelled aminopyrine results in
formationof1cO2,which canbemeasured inbreath.
Preliminary testssuggest that it is a sensitive test of
hepatic dysfunction(Moelleretal.,2001;Chiaramonte
et al., 2003). The 13C isotope is non-radioactive and
therefore safe,butanalysisrequiresmassspectroscopy.
Impression smearof liver froma dogwith
P-450cytochromeoxidaseactivity:Hepaticmeta-
12.19
infectious canine hepatitis showing
bolic degradative capacity can be assessed by meas-
characteristic intranuclear inclusions.(H&E;original
uring clearance of antipyrine or caffeine by the hepatic
magnification x400.)
 P-450 cytochrome oxidase system or conversion of 
lidocaine to monoethylglyexylidide (MEGX). These
Staining fine needle aspirates for copper gran-
tests havenotyet been used inveterinary medicine.
uleswithrubeanicacid can identify copperhepato-
toxicosis (in Bedlington Terriers and other canine
breeds),buthistopathological staining and biochemi-
Genetic testing
cal quantitation of copper content arenecessary to
avoid false negatives.
It is apparent that a number of chronic hepatopathies 
Many causes of vacuolar hepatopathies are listed
have a recognizable inheritance pattern and, in the
inFigure12.20;the cytologicalfindingofenlargedcells
future, specific genetic tests will be available. For
withvacuolatedcytoplasmmaynotbediagnostically
copperhepatotoxicosis,an autosomal recessivecon-
helpful in dogs. Small foamy vacuoles may indicate
ditionofBedlingtonTerriers,linkage analysishasbeen
glycogen accumulation, e.g. in steroid hepatopathy.
availablefor severalyears,allowing detectionof af-
Numerous larger discrete vacuoles in enlarged
fected dogs and selection of healthy breeding stock
(Rothuizen et al., 1999). Recently, a mutation in the
hepatocytes arehighlysuggestive of hepatic lipidosis
in cats,although this may be secondary to underlying
MURRgene hasbeenidentified as thecause of this
primary disease in the liver,suchas inflammationand
disease in affected dogs (Klomp et al., 2003) and a
metabolic abnormalities(Wang et al.,2004).
genetic test for the condition hasbeen patented.
Chronic infections and inflammation:
Liverbiopsy
Severe dental disease
Pyelonephritis
Indications
Diabetes mellitus
Despite the plethora of clinicopathological tests of liver
Hyperadrenocorticism
damage and dysfunction,identification of specific
Hyperlipidaemia
hepatopathies usually requires liver biopsy. indica-
Hypothyroidism
Inflammatoryboweldisease
tions for liver biopsy include:
Neoplasia
Pancreatitis
Persistentelevations of liver enzymeswith no
Hepatic lipidosis
apparent underlying disease
Treatment withglucocorticoids
Increased FSBAorPPSBA
 Altered liver size or ultrasonographic architecture
12.20
Some causes of vacuolar hepatopathies.
 Progressive signs of liver disease.
Cytology
Canine inflammatory liver disease cannot be diag-
Itispossibletoperformcytologicalexaminationof liver
nosedreliablyby cytology:differentiationof chronic
cells either by fine needle aspiration(FNA)or by a
hepatitis and cirrhosis cannot bemade as observation
touch preparation of a liver biopsy specimen (see 
of the tissue architecture is needed. Similarly it is not
Chapter 20). However,the accuracy of FNA has been
usually possible to diagnose cholangiohepatitis in cats
questioned.Onerecent study found only a 30%and
without solidbiopsy.
50% agreement between the cytological and histo-
Infiltrationwithmalignant cellsmaybe detectedby
pathological diagnosesin canine and feline liver dis-
FNAinprimary andmetastaticliverdisease:malignant
eases respectively (Wang et al., 2004).
hepaticneoplasia,haemopoieticneoplasia(lymphoma,
Thepresence of intranuclear inclusionbodiesis
leukaemic infiltrates, mast cell tumours) and dissemi-
considered diagnostic of infectious canine hepatitis
nated metastatic neoplasia may all be diagnosed cyto-
(Figure 12.19) but this is usually only found during a
logically. It is not possible to distinguish cytologically
post-mortemexamination.
hepatoma frombenign nodularhyperplasia.
199
Chapter 12Laboratory evaluation of hepatic disease
Histopathology
Feature
Special stain
Specimensforhistopathological examinationcan be
collected by a number of methods, but a coagulation
Amyloid
Congored
profilemust alwaysbeperformedbeforebiopsybe-
Bacteria
Gram,Ziehl-Nielsen
cause of the dangers of potential haemorrhage. Fur-
ther,buccal mucosal bleeding time (BMBT) is
Bile
Fouchet'svanGieson
recommended,sincesomestudieshaveindicatedthat
Collagen
Masson'strichrome, van Gieson
complicationsmore closelycorrelate withproblemsof
primary haemostasis.In practice liverbiopsy isoften
Copper
Rhodamine,rubeanicacid
limitedtowedgebiopsyatexploratorylaparotomy.The
Copper-assocated
Orcein
techniquesused are described indetail intheBSAVA
protein
Manual ofCanineandFelineGastroenterology.
Elastin
ElasticvanGionWerts
Percutaneousbiopsy techniqueshave been de-
vised to provide a core of tissue,and are safest
Fibrin,fibrinoid
Martius scarlet blue (MSB)
if performed under ultrasonographic visualization
Glycogen
Periodic acid-Schiff(PAS)(diastase-positive),
(Figure 12.21). However, percutaneous biopsy is
Best's carmine,Bauer-Feulgen(frozen)
nowfalling fromfavourbecause the sizeof abiopsy
specimen is often inadequate for an accurate his-
α-Antitrypsin
PAS(unreliable),immunostaining
topathological diagnosis. The diagnostic accuracy
Iron(ferric)
Perl'sPrussian blue
of two needle biopsies hasbeen shown to beless
than 50%comparedwith surgical biopsy(Coleet
Lipid
Oil-red-O(frozen)
al.,2002),and multiple biopsies are required.
Lipofuscin
Schmorl,Ziehl-Nielsen
Laparoscopic biopsy ispreferred asfocallesions can
Reticulin
Reticulin stain
be visualized,larger biopsies obtained,and exces-
sive bleeding identified.
12.22
Some of the special stains available for
characterizationofhepaticpathological changes.
12.21
Ultrasound-
guided
Prognostic indices
percutaneous
needlebiopsy
As well as identifying and helping to characterize
of theliver
hepatopathies, laboratory testing can provide some
using an
automated
prognostic information.
'gun'to fire the
biopsyneedle.
Good prognostic signs
Theultrasound
probe is
Decreasing hyperbilirubinaemia
covered ina
Decreasing liverenzymes.Withresolutionof an
sterile sleeve.
acutehepaticinsult,ALTshould fall
 approximately 50% every 3-4 days in the dog.
InitiallyincreasingALTmay indicateregeneration
rather than continued hepatocyte damage. ALP
maycontinuetoriseafter theinjury and take
several weeks to normalize (see Figure 12.4)
Normoglycaemia
Normal coagulation times
Increasing serum albumin, not due to
dehydration.In inflammatory disease albumin is
frequentlysubnormal asanegative acutephase
response,butserum protein electrophoresis at
that timewill shownormal toelevated
A numberof stains,inaddition toroutine H&E,are
haptoglobin and α,-antitrypsin. This is a good
availabletofacilitatecharacterization of hepaticpath-
prognostic sign (see Figure 12.9)
ology (Figure 12.22). However, the clinician needs to
Increasing cholesterol concentration(if
work with the pathologist,providing all therelevant
previously low).
historical,clinical and clinicopathological information,
inorderthatappropriate stains areused and arelevant
Badprognosticsigns
diagnosis is reached.
Pieces of hepatic tissue about the size of 1 cm
Increases in AST and arginase as well as ALT,
cubes arerequired foraccurate determinationof he-
suggesting moreseverehepatocellular damage
patic coppercontentby atomic absorption spectropho-
Persistent elevationofALT,AST,arginase etc.,
tometry.Formalin-fixed tissue canbe used.
indicativeofcontinuingdamage
200
Chapter 12Laboratory evaluation of hepatic disease
Hypoglycaemia and prolonged PT in chronic
Acute hepatitis and hepaticnecrosis
hepatitis.In Dobermanns with copper-associated
Acuteinflammatory conditions(whetherdueto toxicor
chronichepatitis,these abnormalitieswere
infectious causes) usually cause rapid, moderate to
shown tobepredictorsofimminent death
marked increases in ALT (see Figure 12.4a).Other
Hypoalbuminaemia due to failure of synthesis.
hepatocellularenzymes are likelytobeincreased,but
A decrease inalbumin and otheracutephase
rises inASTand arginase activitymaybe indicative of
proteinson serumprotein electrophoresis is
more severedamage.lntrahepaticcholestasis,caused
indicative of end-stage disease and carries a
by hepatocyte swelling, induces a slower rise in ALP
poor prognosis (see Figure 12.9).
and GGT. Depending on the severity of the hepatic
damage therewillbevarying impairment of bile acid
circulation, and, in severe cases, hyperbilirubinamia
Patternrecognition in liver disease
will follow.Hypoalbuminaemiaisnotafeaturebecause
of the acuteness of the condition.
Apart from liver biopsy and visualization of Pss (i.e.
   o  
Chronichepatitis
rarelyanyonetest that provides a definitive diagno-
Histopathological assessment of liver tissue is usu-
sis. Laboratory tests are only capable of identifying
allyrequired to differentiate specifictypesofchronic
suspected liver disease,but particular patterns of
hepatitis;laboratorytesting merelyprovidesevidence
clinicopathologicalabnormalities,wheninterpretedin
of persistent damageanddysfunction,identifying the
light of the clinical findings, can often provide a high
needforbiopsy.In most disordersmoderate to severe
indexofsuspicion of certain diseases.The character-
and persistent increases in ALT (or AST) and ALP (or
istic clinicopathological features of certain conditions
GGT)are most characteristic(seeFigure 12.4b).The
are describedbelow.However,whilst patternrecog-
absoluteactivities canfluctuatespontaneouslyand
nition can assist the diagnostic approach, all results
the clinician shouldnot assume that a decrease in
must be interpreted in light of the clinical picture.In
enzyme activity at one time point is necessarily in-
this regard, laboratory artefacts may produce abnor-
dicative ofremission.
mal results,and laboratoryerrorsmayoccur.The bile
Liver biopsy is indicated if there are persistent
acid assaycanbeproblematic,and some dry chem-
elevationsinenzyme activityorincreased FSBA.Jaun-
istryanalysersareinaccurate,especiallywhenmeas-
dice suggests significant hepaticimpairment andmay
uring ammonia.Further,if poor quality or unsuitable
herald the development of cirrhosis.Late in the dis-
samples are presented to the laboratory,the results
ease, serum albumin is likely tobe decreased and may
may be inaccurate and misleading (see Chapter 2).
be a poor prognostic indicator.
Someof the common artefacts are summarized in
Figure 12.23.
Cirrhosis
Hepatic fibrosis and nodular regeneration in cirrhosis,
the endresultofvariousformsofchronichepatitis,are
associated withsignificanthepaticdysfunctionasdem-
Analyte
False increase
False decrease
onstratedbyincreasedSBAand,eventually,jaundice.
Hypoalbuminaemia, low blood urea and,ultimately,
Bilirubin
Severe haemolysis
UVlight
coagulopathies and ascites may develop and animals
Lipaemia
Viscous serum(dry
often develop multiple secondary (acquired) Pss.Hypo-
chemistry)
glycaemia is a marker for end-stage cirrhosis, and is a
Bile acids
Hypertriglyceridaemia
Severe chylomicronaemia
poorprognosticindicator.Serumproteinelectrophore-
Increased serum
Haemolysis
sis may demonstrate hypoalbuminaemia and decreases
dehydrogenases
in acute phase proteins (see Figure 12.9). Serum
Ammonia
Delayed assay
enzyme activitiesmaybe elevated,butcanbenormal
Strenuous exercise
if thereisno activeinflammationorif minimalhepato-
Dry chemistry analyser
cellular tissue remains.
ALT
Severe haemolysis
Congenital portosystemic shunts
Lipaemia
Given the absence of hepatic inflammation and
AST
 Severe haemolysis
cholestasis in most cases of congenital PsS, liver
Lipaemia
enzyme concentrations are often only mildly elevated
Ketoacidosis
or even normal. Shunting and hepatic bypass is char-
ALP
Jaundice
Fluoride
acterized by increased FSBA and/or PPSBA; a typical
 Lipaemia
Oxalate
'shunt pattern', with normal FSBA and markedly ele-
Storage (haemolysis)
Citrate
vated PPSBA,has also been described.Hyper-
EDTA
ammonaemiaand/orammonia intolerancemayalso
GGT
Lipaemia
beseen.Serumurea,albumin,cholesteroland,occa-
Fluorideand oxalate
sionally,glucosemay allbe decreased.Haematology
quitefrequentlyshowsmicrocyticanaemiaandpoikilo-
Potential laboratory artefactsaffecting liver test
cytosis(see Figure 12.10),and urate crystalluria (see
12.23
results.
Figure 12.13) may be found.
201
Chapter 12  Laboratory evaluation of hepatic disease
Glucocorticoids
Feline idiopathic hepatic lipidosis
Both endogenous and exogenous glucocorticoids in-
Massivefattyinfiltrationof theliverincatsis associated
duce anincrease inALP/GGTwithminimal increases
withmarkedhepaticdysfunctionwithincreasedFSBA
in ALT/AST in dogs. Cats appear resistant to these
and often jaundice.Cholestatic markers would be
changes.The response in dogs is quite variable and
expectedtobeincreased,butthereisoftenanincrease
can persist forat least6weeks after the administration
inALPbut no significant rise inGGT.Thereason for
 of even a single dose of steroid in some individuals.
this unique discrepancy between ALP and GGT is not
When severe steroid hepatopathy is present,moder-
understood.The diagnosis can be confirmed by he-
ate increases inALTmay developbut the increase is
patic biopsy, although FNA cytology may be sufficient
generally disproportionate to the magnitude of the
for a diagnosis.
increase in ALP. There may be mild hepatic impair-
ment and mild to moderate increases in FSBA, very
Cholangiohepatitis
occasionallyreaching ashigh as100μmol/l,but jaun-
In dogs, cholangiohepatitis and associated cholecystitis
dice is exceptionally rare. There may also be hyper-
appear to be most commonly associated with ascending
infection, and an inflammatory leucogram may be seen.
glycaemia and hypercholesterolaemia. If there is no
history of exogenous steroid administration then dy-
Increases in ALT as well as ALP suggest extension of
namichormone tests forhyperadrenocorticism(see
the inflammation into the hepatic parenchyma in addi-
Chapter18) shouldbe considered if clinical signsare
tion to intrahepatic cholestasis. Cholecystitis may be
compatiblewith the diagnosis.
suspected byultrasonographic changes in the gallblad-
der wall,but diagnosis is usually made on histological
Benign nodular hyperplasia
examination of liver biopsy tissue,supportedbybac-
A common incidental finding in old dogs,nodular
teriological culture of bile and/or liver tissue.
hyperplasiaisusuallyconsideredtohaveno significant
Lymphocytic cholangitis in cats is not uncommon
effectonoveralliverfunction.However,therecanbe
and increases in liverenzymesand liver dysfunction
a markedrise inserumALPwithminimal changes in
are expected; occasionally lymphocytosis is seen.
ALT (Meyer,1996b).In this situation,themajor diffr
Sometimesprotein-richasciticfluid ispresent,and the
ential diagnosiswould behyperadrenocorticism as
major differential diagnosis would be FIP.
there should be no signs consistent with liver disease.
Nodularhyperplasia may thus explain occasional cases
Extrahepatic bile duct obstruction
where hyperadrenocorticism is suspected because of
Bileduct obstruction is classically associated with
increased ALPbut the endocrine status isnormal by
jaundice,hypercholesterolaemia and increasedALP;
dynamic hormone testing.
increases inhepatocellularmarkerenzymes areoften
smaller in magnitude. Initially,obstruction is associ-
Primary hepatic neoplasia
atedwithALPand GGTincreasesbut,ifpersistent,
Primary hepatocellular tumours may be associated
bilirubinuria and then hyperbilirubinaemia develop.The
with increases inALTand/orALP,dependenton the
onset ofobstruction is gradual if caused by biliary and
presence of associated inflammation or necrosis and/
pancreatictumoursorbychronicinflammatorylesions.
or intrahepatic cholestasis. Biliary carcinomas may
Acutepancreatitiscan alsocause temporarybileduct
cause increases in ALP and obstructivejaundice;other
obstruction,andonsetof jaundiceisoftensuddenand
tumours cause jaundice infrequently. Hypoglycaemia
may be preceded by the more typical signs of pan-
maybe notedwith large hepatomas,but many are
creatitis. Abnormalities in hepatic parameters will not
clinicopathologically'silent'.
onlyreflect the bile duct obstruction,but also toxic
hepatic changes secondary to pancreatic inflamma-
Metastaticliver disease
tion (see Chapter 14). In cases of biliary obstruction,
In primary hepatic or metastatic haemangiosarcoma
ultrasonographic examination can be very helpful in
determining a cause before exploratory surgery.
despite extensive tumour infitration.Presentation with
Drugs
haemoperitoneum and haematological abnormalities,
such as mild anaemia (which may be regenerative) and
Toxichepatopathiesmaybe associatedwithincreases
schistocytes(see Figure 12.11),are more commonly
in hepatocellular enzyme markers, if hepatocellular
damage is present.Drugs, such as glucocorticoids and
seen,although these findings are not specific for
malignant disease. Focal metastatic disease is best
anticonvulsants,induceproductionof ALP/GGT,and
detected ultrasonographically and confirmed by fine
anticonvulsants,toalesserextent,caninducesynthe-
needle aspirate or biopsy; many, particularly older,
sisofALT.Figure12.5lists some of themoreimportant
animalswill haveareasof increased or decreased
known orsuspected hepatotoxicdrugsthat cancause
increases in ALT in dogs and cats. Epileptic dogs on
echogenicitydue topathologyother thanneoplasia.
chronic phenobarbital therapy sometimes develop
Hepaticlymphoma
chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis (Bunch,1993).How-
Enzyme elevation is an unreliable indicator of hepatic
ever,asbarbituratesregularlyinduceliverenzymes,
involvementinlymphomabuthepatomegaly,otherclini-
increased activitiesintheblood cannotbeconsidered
cal signs of lymphoma, increases in FSBA, and, some-
an indicationof active liverdamage.Such dogs should
times,hypercalcaemia are usually enoughto indicate
have liver function monitored by dynamic bile acid
thened forfinendle aspiratinor,frequired,biy.
testing every 6 months.
202
Chapter12Laboratoryevaluationofhepaticdisease
Metabolicdisease
Summary
Varioushormonal and metabolicdiseasescausesec-
There is a variety of markers of hepatic pathologywith
ondary hepatopathies. Vacuolar hepatopathies with ac-
variablesensitivityandspecificity.Ataminimum,meas-
 cumulationo lipid (e.g.diabetesmellitus,feline idiopathic
urementofALT,ALPandFSBAshouldbeperformed
hepatic lipidosis) or glycogen (e.g. hyperadrenocorti-
in suspected liver disease,andwillidentifymostcon-
cism)cancause increasesin liverenzymes,butusually
ditions. However, imaging and, ultimately, liver biopsy
overall hepatic function is minimally impaired. Identifica-
(after a coagulation profile) will be needed to reach a
tionof theprimarydisorderusuallyprecludestheneed to
definitive diagnosis.
investigate the liver beyond measuring SBAs.
Case examples
Case 1
Signalment
13-year-oldmaleYorkshireTerrier.
Biochemistry
Result
Reference interval
History
TP(g/)
65.3
58.0-73.0
Halitosisduetosevere dentaldisease.Laboratorytestsperformedasa
Albumin (g/)
32.0
26.0-35.0
routine pre-anaesthetic screen.
Globulin (g/)
33.3
18.0-37.0
Clinical pathology data
ALT(IU/)
295
15-60
Haematology
Result
Reference interval
AST (IU/I)
12
7-50
RBC(x101²/)
ALP (IU/)
6.9
5.50-8.50
95
20-60
Hb(g/dl)
14.8
12.0-18.0
GGT (IU/)
2
0-8
HCT (I/)
0.48
Urine specific gravity
0.39-0.55
1.040
MCV(fl)
69.0
60.0-77.0
Whatabnormalitiesarepresent?
WBC (x10%/)
8.3
6.0-15.0
Neutrophils (segmented)
5.5
3.60-12.00
5-fold increase inALT,but normal AST
(x109/）)
·二
Less than 2-fold increase inALPand normal GGT.
Lymphocytes (x10/)
1.3
0.70-4.80
How would you interpret these results and
Monocytes (x 10%/)
1.2
0.0-1.50
what arethelikelydifferentialdiagnoses?
There is:
Eosinophils(x10°/)
0.3
0.0-1.0
Basophils (x 10°/)
A significantrisenTand thsstnagerlatedfindig
0
0.0-0.2
Normal AST (the other hepatocellular marker)
Platelets (x10°/)
325
200-500
Alessthana2fold riseinLisinsignificantandGGTiswithinthe
referencerange.
Biochemistry
Result
Referenceinterval
Thismostlikelyasecondary (reactive)hepatopathy and thereis
Sodium(mmol/l)
153
139-154
unlikelyanyiificanivdaseslythri
related to the periodontal disease.
Potassium(mmoll)
4.1
3.60-5.60
Whatfurthertestswouldyourecommend?
Glucose (mmoll)
4.9
3.0-5.0
Urea(mmoll)
6.5
1.7-7.4
Iftherewasanydoubtivefnctioncouldbeassessedbymeasring
pre-and postprandial serumbileacidsbefore anaesthetizing the
Creatinine (μmol/l)
82
30-90
patient for dental treatment
Calcium(mmol/)
2.81
2.30-3.00
AlternativelytheALTcouldemonitoredafterthedentaltreatment
Inorganic phosphate
1.1
0.90-1.20
to ensureresolution.ALTshouldreturn tonormal within3-4weeks
(mmol/l)
Iftherasedrsstsafterdntaltreatmntthnthrrl
ingdiseasesshouldbesearchedforbeforeconsideringliverbiopsy.
Case2follows
203
Chapter 12
2Laboratoryevaluationofhepaticdisease
Case 2
Signalment
What abnormalities arepresent?
7-year-old,spayed femaleLabradorRetriever.
There is:
History
Mild normocytic,normochromicnon-regenerative anaemia
 2-month history of poor appete, increased thirst and weight loss.
Slight leucocytosis and mature neutrophilia
Sudden onset of jaundice.
Marked hyperbilirubinaemia
Moderate increase inbothhepatocellular(ALTand AST)and
Clinicalpathology data
cholestatic (ALP and GGT) marker enzymes
Haematology
Hypoalbuminaemia and hyperglobulinaemia
Result
Reference interval
Mild hypocalcaemia
RBC (x1012/1)
4.8
5.50-8.00
Low urea concentration
Hb (g/dl)
10.6
Hypocholesterolaemia
12.0-18.0
Isosthenuricurine specific gravity
HCT(/)
0.33
0.39-0.55
Creatinine couldnotbemeasured because severehyperbilirubin-
MCV (fl)
69.0
60.0-77.0
aemia interferes with the colorimetric assay.
MCHC(g/d)
32.1
32.0-36.0
How would you interpret these results and
whatarethelikelydifferentialdiagnoses?
Reticulocytes (x10%/)
50
<60
15.5
6.00-15.00
The anaemia ismild and likelytobeananaemia of chronicdisease
WBC（x109/)
TheWBCpattenprobablyndicatesastressresponsethoughh
Neutrophils (segmented)
13.1
3.600-12.00
neutrophilia mayreflect an inflammatoryresponse
(x109/)
The jaundice isunlikely tobe prehepatic inorigin as the anaemia is
Lymphocytes(x109/)
0.9
0.70-4.80
not severe enough to explain the hyperbilirubinaemia
Monocytes(x10%/)
1.4
0.0-1.50
the increases inbothALTandALPand thehypocholesterolaemia
Eosinophils (x10%/)
0.1
0.0-1.0
Changes in serum proteins are consistent with an inflammatory
Basophils (x 10%/)
0.0
70-00
hepatopathy
Mild hypocalcaemiais likelyareflectionofmildhypoalbuminaemia
Platelets(x10%/)
235
200-500
Low urea concentration mayreflect poor appetite,diuresisand
hepatic dysfunction
Theisosthenuricurineisconsistentwiththehistoryof increased
Biochemistry
Result
Reference interval
thirst.
Sodium (mmol/)
150
139-154
A chronic hepatopathy is likely:
Potassium(mmol/)
4.9
3.60-5.60
3.4
3.0-5.0
Prolonged history
Glucose(mmol/)
Evidence of hepatic damage
Urea (mmol/)
1.1
1.7-7.4
Evidenceof hepaticdysfunctionhyoalbuminaemiayperbilrubin-
Creatinine (umol/)
not
30-90
aemia).
measurable
2.2
The most likely differentials are:
Calcium(mmol/)
2.30-3.00
Inorganic phosphate
1.2
0.90-1.20
Chronichepatitis
(mmol/l)
Lobular dissecting hepatitis
TP (g/)
64.3
58.0-73.0
Chronic active hepatitis
Copper hepatotoxicosis
Albumin(g/)
19.0
26.0-35.0
Cholangitis/cholangiohepatitis fromascending biliaryinfection
Globulin (g/)
45.3
18.0-37.0
Extensive primary hepatictumour
Hepatocellular carcinoma
ALT(IU/I)
357
15-60
Biliary carcinoma
AST(IU/I)
95
7-50
Hepatic lymphoma.
ALP (IU/I)
220
20-60
Whatfurther testswouldyou recommend?
GGT(IU/I)
23
0-8
Bile acid measurement is superfluous as hyperbilirubinaemia con-
Bilirubin (μmol/)
157
0-10
firmshepatic dysfunction
Radiographic and ulrasonographic imaging of the liver
Cholesterol(mmol/)
2.1
3.5-9.0
Assessmentfcagulationprfilpatlcountaad
Urine specific gravity
1.012
buccalmucosalbleeding time,tocheckforsafetyof liverbopsy
Liver biopsy.
204
Chapter12Laboratoryevaluationofhepaticdisease
Case 3
Signalment
7-monthold,emaleentireWest Highland WhiteTerr.
Biochemistry (continued)Result
Reference interval
History
Bilirubin (μmo/l)
2.1
0-10
Depressed,thin with intermittent vomiting and diarrhoea.
Urine specific gravity
1.020
Clinical pathology data
Whatabnormalitiesarepresent?
Haematology
Result
Reference interval
There is:
RBC (x 1012/1)
4.9
5.50-8.00
A moderate microcytic anaemia
Hb (g/dl)
9.1
12.0-18.0
Leucocytosis due to a mature neutrophiia
(W) 1OH
0.27
0.39-0.55
Hypoproteinaemia associated withhypoalbuminaemia
IncreasesinALTandALP(fivetimesupperlimitof referencerange)
MCV (1)
55
60.0-77.0
Low urea and creatinine concentrations.
MCHC (g/dl)
33.8
32.0-36.0
Howwouldyou interprettheseresults and
WBC（x10%/1)
23.3
6.00-15.00
whatarethelikelydifferential diagnoses?
Neutrophils(segmented)
18.1
3.600-12.00
Microcyticanaemiaisassociated withiron-deficiencyanaemiaand
(x10%/)
hepatic disease,especially portosystemic shunting.There isno
2.9
0.70-4.80
gross evidence of bloodloss.Hypochromasiaof theredcellsand
Lymphocytes (x 10%/)
thrombocytosischaracteristicofbloodossanaemiaarenotpresent
Monocytes (x10%/)
1.4
0.0-1.50
WBCresponse issuggestive of astressresponse
Eosinophils(x10°/)
0.8
0.0-1.0
RaisedALT(x5）indicates somehepatocellular changesbut ot
severehepatocellular damage
Basophils(x 10%/)
0.1
0.0-0.2
Raised ALP may indicatecholestasis,undocumented steroid admin-
Platelets (x10/1)
398
200-500
istrationrbonegrowthinayounganimal
Lowureaandcreatininecanindicatediuresis.Lowureacould alo
indicatehepaticdysfunctionandlowcreatininecouldreflectthe
Biochemistry
Result
Reference interval
dog's poor muscle mass.
Sodium(mmol/)
140
139-154
The history and lab results are suggestive of:
Potassium(mmol)
3.9
3.60-5.60
Congenitalportosystemicshunt, althoughincreasesinliverenzymes
Glucose(mmol/)
3.4
3.0-5.0
are typicallyabsent ormild
Urea (mmol/l)
0.9
1.7-7.4
Acquired juvenile hepatopathy
Lobular dissecting hepatitis
Creatinine (μmol/)
28
30-90
Idiopathic juvenile hepatic fibrosis.
Calcium(mmol/1)
2.9
2.30-3.00
What further testswould you recommend?
Inorganic phosphate
1.6
0.90-1.20
Pre-andpostprandial bileacidstoassesshepaticfunctioninanon
(mmol/l)
icteric dog.They are likely to beabnormal despite the normal
TP (g/)
44.0
58.0-73.0
bilirubinalthoughincongenitalSatypicalpaterofnormalpre
Albumin (g/)
21.0
26.0-35.0
prandialandelevatedpostprandial bile acidsisoftenseen
Ifbileacidsareomalasesfaecalcultloodapssiblea
Globulin(g/l)
23.0
18.0-37.0
of iron-deficiency anaemia
ALT(IU/)
298
15-60
Radiographytoassess liverandkidney sizes.Microhepatica and
renomegalyaretypicalof congenital PSS
ALP(IU/)
301
20-60
Ultrasngrahyssslivizeandvalt
Cholesterol(mmoll)
3.7
3.5-9.0
Portovenography
.
Advanced imaging (scintigraphy).
Referencesandfurtherreading
CenterSA,ErbHNandJosephSA(1995)Measurementof serumbile
acid concentrationsfordiagnosis of hepatobiliarydiseaseincats.
Balkman CE, Center SA,Randolph JF, Trainor D,Warner KL,
1048-1054
Crawford MA,AdachiKand Erb HN(2003)Evaluationof urine
CenteAManwarrTatandWilentzE（99）valuan
sulfatedandnonsulfatedbileacidsasadiagnostictestforliver
of twelve-hourpreprandialandtwo-hourpostprandialserumbile
diseaseindogs.Journalof theAmericanVeterinaryMedical
acid concentration fordiagnosis of hepatobiliary disease indogs.
Association222,1368-35
JournaloftheAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation199,
Bunch SE(1993)Hepatotoxicity associated with pharmacologic
217-226
ChiaramontD,StneJroussardJD,Bar,Gummingr
Small AnimalPractice23,659-670
MoellerEM,WilliamsDA,ShumwayR(2003)Use of aC-13-
aminopyrinebloodtest:firstclinicalimpressions.CanadianJournal
VeterinaryClinicsofNorthAmerica:SmallAnimalPractice23,
ofVeterinaryResearch67,183-189
625-657
ColeT,ntrAFldNwandHniBAWa
Center SA(1996)Chapters30 and32-35In:Strombeck's Small
KLand Erb HN.(2002) Diagnostic comparison of needle and
AnimalGastroenterology.Eds:WG Guifordetal,pp.553-632
and pp.654-846.WBSaunders,Philadelphia
theAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation220,1483-1490
205
Laboratory evaluation of
gastrointestinal disease
Alexander J. German and Edward J. Hall
A diagnosticapproach to
gastrointestinal disease
Patientinformation
Age
Laboratory investigations are an important compo-
Gender
nent of the diagnostic approach to gastrointestinal
Breed
(Gl) disease,although in most Gl cases they do
Environmental history
not provide a definitive diagnosis,and results of
other investigations are equally important(Figure
Indoor vs.outdoor
13.1).Nevertheless,laboratory investigations nar-
Free roaming
row the list of differential diagnoses,and direct
Scavenging
further investigation.
Exposure to parasites
Contact withinfected animals
Recent change of environment
Signalment
Presenting
Endemic disease area
complaint
Past medical history
History
Vaccination status
Physical
Worming status
Examination
Previous abdominal surgery
Previous cutaneousmast cel tumour excision
Initialproblem
Drug history
listand
differential
Progressionof clinical signs
diagnosis
Severity
Other
Duration
Preliminary
investigations:
Frequency
tests
e.g.imaging
Continuous or intermittent
Length of sign-free intervals
Refined
Moderating influences(improve orworsen signs)-e.g. treatments,
Laboratory
problem list
and
diets
investigations
differential
Order of appearance of signs
diagnosis
Other
investigations:
13.2
History for cases of gastrointestinal disease.
Specifictests
e.g.endoscopy,
laparotomy,
treatment trials
Final
diagnosis and
General
treatment
Rule out other systems disease
Overviewof investigationof gastrointestinal
13.1
Oropharynx
disorders.
Mucousmembranes:hydration status;cardiovascular status;anaemia;
icterus
The usual diagnosticapproachisfirst toeliminate
Tongue:linear foreignbody
diseases not involving the Gl tract. It is important
to takea fullhistory（Figure 13.2) and toperform
Cervical region
a complete physical examination(Figure 13.3).
Thyroid nodule(hyperthyroidism)
Themain clinical signs associated with Gl disease
arevomiting,diarrhoea,weight loss,haematemesis
13.3
Physical examination for cases of
andmelaena.
gastrointestinal disease.(continues)
207
Chapter 13Laboratory evaluation of gastrointestinal disease
Vomiting
Abdomen
Vomiting canresult fromnumerouscauses(Figures
Palpationeffusionsmassesbunchingof intestinalloopsforeign
13.5,13.6).The first aim is to differentiate vomiting
bodies;associated pain;faeces;abnormal accumulations of ingesta;
fromretching duetoexpectoration,and fromregurgi-
lymphadenopathy;diseases of other systems
tation(Figure13.7).Directexaminationof the vomitus
Auscultion:ileus;borborygmi
may assist in diagnosis. The presence of bile, di-
gested blood oracidiccontents(pH<5)confirms the
Rectal examination
materialtobevomitus.Aurine dipstickcanbeusedto
Digitalexamination:masses;foreignbodies;haemostaticdisorders
identify bilirubin andpH,for confirmation of bile and
(blood);dehydration
acidic contents, respectively. However, the absence
Collectionof stoolsamle:laboratoryanalysis;melaena
of these findings doesnot exclude thepresence of
Rectal mucosal scrape:cytology
vomiting.lfvomitingoccursshortlyaftereating,then
Cutaneous examination
contentswill notbe acidified,and ifintestinal contents
arepresent, the contents may have a pH >6.Bile will
Poorcoatconditionscalemalnutriton
only be present if intestinal contents are vomited in
Pruritus: food hypersensitity
additiontogastriccontents,andwillbeabsent if there
Pedalpruritus:Uncinaria stenocephalainfection（larvalmigration)
is a pyloric obstruction. Once vomiting has been
confirmed, non-GI diseases should be investigated
(continued) Physical examination for cases of
 next, and an integrated approach is required to achieve 
gastrointestinai disease.
a diagnosis (Figure 13.8).
For emergency and critical care cases, analysis of 
samples for an emergency database should be per-
Gastroenteric causes
formed at this stage (Figure 13.4),to enable selection
of appropriate intravenous fluid therapy and initial
Acute gastritis-enteritis:
Infectious
treatment.In other cases,it is usually necessary to
Bacterial
submit samples forhaematological and serum bio-
Viral
Parasitic
analyses(bacteriologicalandparasitologicalexamina-
Haemorhagic gastroenteritis
tion). From this point, further investigations may be
Toxic
necessary,including diagnostic imaging (radiography
Gastrointestinalobstruction:
and ultrasonography),exclusion of exocrine pancre-
Foreign body
Completeobstruction
aticinsufficiency(EPl)and,ultimately,directexamina-
Linear
tionof the smallintestine(Sl) byendoscopy orsurgery.
Intussusception
This enablescollection of tissue samples for histologi-
Gastric volvulus
cal examination.However,many cases with signs of Gl
Dietary indiscretion:
diseaseareacute,non-fatalandself-limiting,andnly
Ingestion of inappropriateor spoiled foods
require symptomatic support without a definitive diag-
Over-eating
nosis:detailed investigations are appropriate if sys-
Non-gastroenteric causes
temic signs accompany vomiting and diarrhoea, or
signs are unresponsive to symptomatic treatment.
Diseases of other systems:
Pancreatic disease
Hepatic disease
Renal disease
Haematology
Endocrine disease
Packed cell volume (PCV)
(Motion sickness)
CNS disease
Total protein (refractometer)
Infectionbactramia,pticamia
Blood smearexamination
Biochemistry
Chemotherapeuticdrugs
Antibacterials (chloramphenicol)
Urea
Digitalis
Glucose
Narcotics
Electrolytes
Theophylline
Xylazine
Urinalysis
Apomorphine
Dipsticktests
Toxins
Ethyleneglycol
Specificgravitybyrefractometer
Herbicides
Additional(if available)
Plants
Organophosphates
Blood gas analysis(acid-base): PCO2, PO2, HCO,etc.
Strychnine
13.4
Emergency database.
13.5
Major causes of vomiting of acute onset.
208
Chapter 13
Laboratoryevaluationofgastrointestinal disease
Gastroenteric disease
Preliminary tests(allcases)
Haematology
Obstructive disease:
Serum biochemistry
Foreign objects
Urinalysis
Intussusception
Faecal bacteriology
Neoplasia
Pyloric stenosis
Faecalparasitology
Gastric antralmucosal hyperplasia
Folateandcobalamin(forsuspectedsmallintestinaldisease)
Chronic partial gastric volvulus
Additionalteststo eliminatenon-gastrointestinaldiseases
Congenital structuralabnormalies
Inflammatory disease:
Exocrine pancreaticinsufficiency(allcases):
Inflammatoryboweldisease
Trypsin-like immunoreactivity
Gastritis
Testsforpancreatitis(occasionalindication):
Caninepancreaticspecificlipase(PLI）
Enteritis
(Trypsin-like immunoreactivity)
Colitis
Gastrointestinallcerationrosin
(Amylase)
Parasites(e.g.Physaloptera)
(Lipase)
Endocrinopathies(occasionalindication):
Non-gastroenteric diseases (systemicdiseases stimulating
Adrenocorticotropichormone(ACTH) stimulation test
chemoreceptortrigger zone±vagalafferents)
Total T4/free T4(cats)
Pancreaticdisease:
Gastrinmeasurement(forgastrinoma)
Pancreatitis
Testsspecific for gastrointestinal disease
Neoplasia
Histopathologicalassessment of stomach andsmallintestine (all
Exocrinepancreaticinsuficiency
cases)
Hepatic disease:
Cytological assessment (occasional cases)
Chronic hepatitis
Portovascular anomaly
Additional testswithlimited indication
Neoplasia
Testsfor gastric spiral organisms
Hepatocellular dysfunction
Histopathological assessment
Toxic
Other
Infectious
Renaldisease
Suggested approach
Endocrinopathies/metabolic:
Preliminary tests should beperformed inallcases
Hypoadrenocorticism
TLI should awaysbeperformed to eliminate theposibity of l
Diabetesmellitus
Ifabdominalpain is present andor thereissupporive evidenceof
Hyperthyroidism
pancreatitisondiagnosticmagingestsforpancreatisshould
Hypercalcaemia
performed
Hypothyroidism
CNSdisease:
Oldercatsshouldbetestedforhyperthyroidism
Limbicepilepsy
AnACTHstimulationtest shouldbeconsidered(inbothspecies)
especiallyifsuportivlectrlytechangesarepreent
Neoplasia
Encephalitis
Gastrinmeasurementshouldbeconsidered ifapancreaticmass
Raised intracranial pressure
isdetectedand/rhyperrophicgastropathyisdetectedongastric
Vestibulardisease
biopsy specimens
Cardiac diseases:
Assumingnon-gastrointestinal diseases have beeneliminated,
Heartworm
biopsyspecimensshouldbe procuredforhistopathological
Congestive hear failure
assessment
Exploratorylaparotomyshouldbeconsidered subsequentto
endoscopicbipsyifresultsdonotfitorresponsetochosen
13.6
Major causes of chronicvomiting.
therapyispoor
Additionaltestslisted haverareindicationsandfurtheradvice
should be sought priorto theirconsideration
Clinical sign
Vomiting
Regurgitation
Abdominal effort
Marked
None
13.8
Approachto laboratorytesting forchronic
vomiting.
Signs of nausea
Yes
No
Timing of food
Variable
Variable
Diarrhoea
ejection
There are numerous causes of diarrhoea in dogs and
cats (Figure 13.9).Again, a thorough history is neces-
Character of food
Undigested, parialy
Undigested,
'sausage-shape'
sarytoidentifytheoriginof thediarrhoea,althoughI
digested or digested
diseases can provoke large intestine (Ll) diarrhoea
Bile stained
Acid pH
and somecaseshave signsconsistentwith bothSland
LI disease (Figure 13.10).Physical findings may be
Associated signs
Retching
Dyspnoea
helpful (see Figure 13.3). Given that signs of malab-
Coughing
Drooling
sorption are non-specific,a trypsin-like immunoreac-
tivity(TLl) testshould alwaysbeperformedtoeliminate
the possibility of EPl. The general approach to chronic
13.7
Differentiating vomiting from regurgitation.
diarrhoea is summarized inFigure 13.11.
209
Chapter13
Laboratoryevaluationofgastrointestinaldisease
Gastrointestinal disease
Preliminary tests(all cases)
Primary smallintestinal disease
Haematology
Serum biochemistry
Primary large intestinaldisease
Urinalysis
Dietary-induced:
Faecalbacteriology
Food poisoning
Faecal parasitology
Gluttony
Folate and cobalamin
Sudden change of diet
Additional teststoeliminatenon-gastrointestinaldiseases
Gastric disease:
Achlorhydria(rare)
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (all cases):
Dumping syndromes(rare)
Trypsin-likeimmunoreactivity
Pancreatic disease:
Tests forpancreatitis(occasional indication):
Exocrinepancreaticinsuficiency
Canine pancreaticspecificlipase
(Trypsin-like immunoreactivity)
Pancreatitis
Pancreaticneoplasia
(Amylase)
(Lipase)
Liver disease:
Endocrinopathies(occasionalindication):
Hepatocellula failure
ACTH stimulation test
Intrahepatic and extrahepatic cholestasis
Total T4/freeT4 (cats)
Non-gastrointestinal disease
Testsspecificforgastrointestinaldisease
Polysystemic infections:
Histopathologicalassessment of stomachandsmallintestine(all
Dogdismirsti
cases)
CatsFelinenfctiousperitonitis（FP)elineeukamiaviru
Cytological assessment (occasional cases)
(FeLV),feline immunodeficiency virus(FIV)
Additional testswithlimited indication
Endocrine disease:
Tests of intestinal function
Hypoadrenocorticism
Protein loss:faecal α-proteinase inhibitor(α-PI)
Hyperthyroidism (rare in dogs only)
Malabsorption:ugarprobetestsbreathhydrogentesting
Hypothyroidism
Permeability:sugarprobetests
APUDomas(gastrinoma/Zollinger-Ellison syndrome)(rare)
Immune function:serumIgA concentrations
Renal disease:
Uraemia
Suggested approach
Nephrotic syndrome
Preliminary testsshould be performed inall cases
Miscellaneous:
TLIshouldalwayseperformedtoeliminatethepossibilityofEPI
Toxaemia:pyometra;peritonitis
Ifabdominalpainispresentand/orthereissupportive evidenceof
Congestive hear failure
pancreatitndagostimagingstfoancreatitshoul
Immune-mediated disease
performed
Metastaticneoplasia
Oldercatsshouldbetested forhyperthyroidism
Varioustoxins anddrugs
AnACTH stimulation test should be considered(inbothspecies),
especiallyifsupportiveelectrolytechangesarepresent
13.9
Causes of diarrhoea.
Assumingnon-gastrointestinaldiseasesareelminatedbiopy
specimensshouldbeprocured forhistopathological assessment
Exploratorylaparotomyshouldbeconsideredsubsequentto
endoscopicbiopsyifresultsdontfitrresponsetochosen
therapyispoor
Clinical sign
Large intestine
Additionaltestslistedhaverareindicationsandfurtheradvice
Small intestine
should be sought prior to their consideration
Tenesmus
Rare
Common
13.11
Approachtolaboratorytestingforchronic
Frequency
2-3xnormal/day
>3xnormal/day
diarrhoea.
Urgency
Uncommon
Common
Weightloss
Stoolvolume
Increased
Multiple smallvolumes
There arenumerousdifferentialdiagnosesforweight
Rare
loss indogs and cats(Figure 13.12),but Gl diseases
Mucus
Common
are common causes.In some situations,intestinal
Freshblood
Uncommon,melaena
Common
diseasecanpresentwithweight loss andnoother
Vomiting
localizing signs(e.g.vomiting ordiarrhoea).ATLI test
Occasionally
Uncommon
shouldbeperformedearlyintheinvestigationtorule
Weight loss
Common
Rare
out EPlbeforemore involved investigationsof the
intestineareattempted.Thegenerallaboratoryap-
Differentiation of smallfrom large intestinal
proach to the diagnosis of weight loss is similar to that
13.10
signs.
described for chronic diarrhoea (see Figure 13.11).
210
Chapter13Laboratoryevaluationofgastrointestinal disease
Physiological
Ingestionof blood
Excessivedemand forenergywithrespect tointake:
Oral haemorrhage
Temperature
Nasal haemorrhage
Exercise
Pharyngeal haemorrhage
Growth
Haemoptysis
Gestation/lactation
Glerosion/ulceration
Inadequateintake/consumption:
Dietary factors
Metabolic:
Intake problems
Uraemia
Poor qualityfood
Hepatic disease
Inflammatory:
Insufficientamount
Gastritis
No food
Enteritis
Pathological
Haemorrhagic enteritis
Transfer of food:
Ulceration
Neoplastic:
Cranial/cervical injury
Smoothmuscle tumours
Dysphagia
Swallowing disorders
Lymphoma
Epithelial celltumours
Regurgitation
Paraneoplastic:
Vomiting
Mastcell tumours
Maldigestion:
Hypergastrinaemia
Exocrinepancreaticinsufficiency
Vascular/ischaemic:
Bile saltdeficiency
(Gastrinomas/APUDomas)
Cholestasis
Arteriovenousfistula
Hepatocellular dysfunction
Aneurysms
Specificintestinalenzyme deficiencye.glactase
Hypovolaemia
Malabsorption:
Hypoadrenocorticism
Inflammation(inflammatory bowel disease)
Thrombosis
Infitration
Infarction
Neoplasia
Foreign bodies:
Amyloidosis(rare)
Reperfusion injury
Lymphangiectasia
Drug-induced:
Systemicdiseases:
NSAIDs
Hepatic disease
Haemostatic disorders
Cardiac disease
Diabetesmellitus
Primary:
Renal disease
Thrombocytopenia
Cancer cachexia
Thrombocytopathy
Hypoadrenocorticism
von Willebrand’'sdisease
Secondary:
Hyperthyroidism
Muscle wasting:
Factordeficiencies
Coumarin toxicity
Myopathy
Mixed:
Neuropathy
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
13.12
Causes of weight loss in dogs and cats.
13.13
Causes of haematemesis and melaena.
Haematemesis and melaena
Possiblecausesofhaematemesisand melaena are
Routine diagnostic procedures
shown in Figure 13.13.Haematological parameters
may confirm the presence of chronic blood loss and
Preliminary investigations usually include routine
enabletheseverityofbloodlosstobedetermined;they
haematologicalandserumbiochemical analysesand
maybe typical of chronicblood lossassociatedwith
urinalysis. Other general tests include routine faecal
irondeficiency(i.e.microcytosis,hypochromasia,throm-
analyses(initially parasitology and bacteriology). Such
bocytosis). Associated iron deficiency can be con-
investigationsshould beusedinconjunctionwithother
firmed bya varietyof laboratorytests(seeChapter4).
clinical interventionsinanintegrated diagnosticap-
 Serum biochemical parameters provide information on
proach (see Figure 13.1).
underlying causes of Gl blood loss such as renal
disease, hepatic disease and endocrinopathies. If GI
Routine haematology
haemorrhage is suspected but melaena has not been
noted,faecaloccultbloodcanbemeasured.However,
Red cell parameters
whilstbothfaecaloccultblood andassessmentof iron
An increase in haematocrit,especially in conjunction
status might confirm blood loss, they provide no infor-
with increasedserumtotalprotein,isoftenamarkerof
mation as to the underlying cause.
dehydration. This is typically associated with acute Gl
211
chapter 13Laboratory evaluation of gastrointestinal disease
Albumin and globulin
diseasesand,dependingnseverity,mayindicatethe
Decreases inproteinconcentrations maybenoted in
need for parenteral fluid therapy.The most marked
Gl disease, particularly chronic intestinal diseases
haemoconcentration is typically seen in acute
(protein-losing enteropathies (PLEs); Figure 13.14).
haemorrhagic gastroenteritis (HGE). The increase in
Protein-losing gastropathies are rare.In most cases of
haematocrit ismarked,whiletotal proteinisusually
PLE, panhypoproteinaemia is noted, in contrast to
normal or increased, but proportionately lower than
hepatic dysfunction orprotein-losing nephropathy (PLN)
wouldbeexpectedfromthecorrespondingincreasein
where hypoalbuminaemia alone is typical. Historical
haematocrit.
and physical examination findings and the results of
AnaemiacanbeassociatedwithGl disorders,and
may indicate intestinal blood loss or chronic inflamma-
sis,urinalysis) assist in differentiating causes of
tionassociatedwithintestinaldisease.Theanaemia
hypoalbuminaemia,so that PLN,liver dysfunction and
associatedwithacutebloodloss isusuallymarkedly
other causes (e.g. blood loss, vasculitis, burns) can
regenerative,assuming therehasbeensufficient time
relativelyeasilyberuledout.Serumproteinconcentra-
for a bonemarrowresponse to occur.Characteristics
tions are insensitive indicators of Gl protein loss,and
that suggest chronic,iron-deficient, blood-loss anaemia
tests that are moresensitiveincludemeasurement of
include microcytosis, decreased red cell haemoglobin
α,-proteinase inhibitor (α,-PI ) in faeces (see below).
and thrombocytosis. Anaemia may also accompany
other disorders causing secondary Gl signs, such as
chronic renal failure and endocrinopathies (e.g.
Lymphangiectasia
hypoadrenocorticism, hypothyroidism), and microcytic
Primary:
anaemia can accompany some hepatic disorders.
Intestinal
See Chapter 4 for further details on red cellpara-
Generalized
meters.
Secondary:
Venui
Whitecell parameters
cirrhosis
In GI disorderswithaninflammatoryaetiology,suchas
Infectious
inflammatoryboweldisease(IBD),neutrophiliawithor
without a left shift may be seen. Such changes are
Parvovirus
usually mild,and donot assist in differentiating Gl
Salmonellosis
inflammation from inflammationinotherorgans.Marked
Structural
neutrophiliamaybe associated withsevere inflamma-
tion, for example in diseases associated with bacter-
Intussusception
aemia/septicaemia,particularlywhenthemucosalbarrier
Neoplasia
is severely compromised, i.e. mucosal ulceration is 
Lymphoma
present.A degenerative left shift could also be seen in
these circumstances.Neutrophilia is also a common
Inflammation
finding in feline infectious peritonitis (FIP),and maybe
Inflammatoryboweldisease:lymphoplasmacyticenteritis;eosinophilic
associatedwith anaemia andlymphopenia.
enteritis;granulomatous enteritis
Eosinophilia maybe associatedwithparasitism,
dietary sensitivity and eosinophilic gastroenteritis see
Endoparasitism
Chapter5).However,aneosinophilcount slightlyabove
Giardia
the reference range established for healthy dogs of
(Ancylostoma)
most breeds can be normal in German Shepherd
Gastrointestinal haemorrhage
Dogs. If eosinophilia is genuine, non-Gl causes, such
as ectoparasitism and hypoadrenocorticism, need to
Haemorrhagicenteritis
be excluded before considering food allergyoreosino-
Neoplasia
philic gastroenteritis.
Ulceration
If leucopenia is seen in cases of acute gastroenter-
itis,parvovirusinfectionshould besuspected,as these
13.14
Protein-losing enteropathies.
entericviruses alsoattacktherapidlydividing cellsofthe
bone marrow. Cytotoxic drugs may also cause Gl signs
Increasedprotein concentrationsusuallyindicate
and leucopenia (see Chapter 5).Lymphopenia can be
dehydration if the accompanying clinical picture fits.
seen in lymphangiectasia, but other laboratory abnor-
Hyperglobulinaemia can be seen insome Gldisorders:
malities would be expected, e.g. panhypoproteinaemia
thoseassociatedwithintenseinflammation(e.g.Basenji
and hypocholesterolaemia. Circulating atypical
enteropathy), some infections (e.g. FIP) and lympho-
lymphocytes are uncommon, but may be associated
proliferative diseases(lymphoma,myeloma).
with lymphoproliferative disorders affecting the Gl tract.
See Chapter7forfurtherdetails onserumproteins.
Routine serum biochemistry
Sodium and potassium
A full panel of routine biochemical tests is recom-
Electrolyte abnormalities may be a feature of persist-
mended inall cases,primarily toidentify dysfunctionof
entvomiting,intestinalobstructionandsecretorydiar-
otherbodysytemsincludingrenalhpaticanden
rhoea.Electrolytemeasurements,ideallyinassociation
crine disorders, which may present with Gl signs.
212
Chapter13Laboratoryevaluationofgastrointestinal disease
diseasesand,dependingonseverity,mayindicatethe
Albumin and globulin
need forparenteral fluid therapy.Themostmarked
Decreases in protein concentrations may be noted in
haemoconcentration is typically seen in acute
Gl disease, particularly chronic intestinal diseases
haemorrhagic gastroenteritis (HGE).The increase in
(protein-losing enteropathies (PLEs); Figure 13.14).
haematocrit ismarked,while totalprotein is usually
Protein-losing gastropathies are rare.In most cases of
normal or increased, but proportionately lower than
PLE, panhypoproteinaemia is noted, in contrast to
would be expected from the corresponding increase in
hepaticdysfunctionorprotein-losingnephropathy(PLN)
haematocrit.
where hypoalbuminaemia alone is typical.Historical
Anaemia canbeassociatedwithGldisorders,and
and physical examination findings and the results of
may indicate intestinal blood loss or chronic inflamma-
other laboratory analyses(e.g.haematological analy-
tionassociatedwithintestinal disease.Theanaemia
sis,urinalysis) assist in differentiating causes of
associatedwith acuteblood loss is usuallymarkedly
hypoalbuminaemia,so that LN,liverdysfunction and
regenerative,assuming therehasbeen sufficient time
other causes (e.g. blood loss, vasculitis, burns) can
for a bone marrowresponse tooccur.Characteristics
relatively easilyberuledout.Serumprotein concentra-
that suggest chronic, iron-deficient,blood-loss anamia
tions are insensitive indicators of Gl protein loss, and
includemicrocytosis,decreasedred cellhaemoglobin
tests thatare more sensitive includemeasurement of
and thrombocytosis.Anaemiamayalsoaccompany
O,-proteinase inhibitor (α,-Pl ) in faeces (see below).
other disorders causing secondary Gl signs, such as
chronic renal failure and endocrinopathies (e.g
Lymphangiectasia
hypoadrenocorticism,hypothyroidism), and microcytic
anaemia can accompany somehepatic disorders.
Primary:
SeeChapter4forfurtherdetailsonredcellpara-
Intestinal
meters.
Generalized
Secondary:
Venousiadia
White cell parameters
cirrhosis
InGIdisorderswithaninflammatoryaetiology,suchas
inflammatorybowel disease(IBD),neutrophilia withor
Infectious
without a left shift may be seen.Such changes are
Parvovirus
usually mild, and do not assist in differentiating Gl
Salmonellosis
inflammation from inflammationin other organs. Marked
neutrophilia may be associated with severe inflamma-
Structural
tion,for example in diseases associated withbacter-
Intussusception
aemia/septicaemia,particularlywhenthemucosalbarrier
is severely compromised,i.e.mucosal ulceration is
Neoplasia
present. A degenerative left shift could also be seen in
Lymphoma
these circumstances.Neutrophilia isalso a common
finding in feline infectious peritonitis (FIP), and may be
Inflammation
associatedwith anaemia andlymphopenia.
Inflammatory boweldisease:lymphoplasmacyticenteritis;eosinophilic
Eosinophilia may be associated with parasitism,
enteritisgranulomatous enteritis
dietary sensitivity and eosinophilicgastroenteritis(see
Endoparasitism
Chapter5).However,aneosinophil countslightlyabove
the reference range established for healthy dogs of
Giardia
most breeds canbe normal in GermanShepherd
(Ancylostoma)
Dogs.If eosinophilia s genuine,non-Gl causes,suh
Gastrointestinal haemorrhage
as ectoparasitism and hypoadrenocorticism,need to
Haemorrhagic enteritis
be excluded before considering food allergyoreosino-
Neoplasia
philic gastroenteritis.
Ulceration
If leucopenia is seen in cases of acute gastroenter-
itis, parvovirus infection should be suspected, as these
13.14
Protein-losing enteropathies.
entericviruses alsoattacktherapidlydividingcellsof the
bone marrow.Cytotoxic drugs may also cause Gl signs
and leucopenia(see Chapter5).Lymphopenia can be
Increased protein concentrations usuallyindicate
seen in lymphangiectasia,but otherlaboratory abnor-
dehydration if the accompanying clinical picture fits.
malitieswouldbe expected,e.g.panhypoproteinaemia
Hyperglobulinaemia can be seenin some GIdisorders:
and hypocholesterolaemia. Circulating atypical
those associatedwithintense inflammation(e.g.Basenji
lymphocytes are uncommon,but may be associated
enteropathy), some infections (e.g.FIP) and lympho-
withlymphoproliferative disordersaffecting theGl tract.
proliferative diseases (lymphoma,myeloma).
SeeChapter7forfurtherdetailsonserumproteins.
Routineserumbiochemistry
A full panel of routine biochemical tests is recom-
Sodiumand potassium
mendedinallcases,primarilytoidentifydysfunctionof
Electrolyte abnormalities may be a feature of persist-
otherbodysystemsncludingrenalhepaticandend
entvomiting,intestinalobstruction andsecretorydiar-
crinedisorders,whichmaypresentwithGl signs
rhoea.Electrolytemeasurements,ideallyinassociation
212
Chapter13Laboratoryevaluationofgastrointestinal disease
with blood-gas analysis, are important in determining
ammonia to urea.Elevated urea and creatinine con-
the most appropriate type of fluid for initial replace-
centrations can be associated with prerenal (e.g. de-
ment.Hypokalaemiaisa commonfindingin Gldisease
hydration),intrinsic renal or postrenal azotaemia.
asaresult of anorexia and Gl losses.Hyponatraemia
Numerousdiseasesthatcausevomitingand diarrhoea
and hyperkalaemia are suggestive of hypoadreno-
causedehydrationand,therefore,areassociatedwith
corticism, which can cause Gl signs. Other potential
elevated urea and creatinine concentrations.Given
laboratory abnormalities inhypoadrenocorticism in-
that digestion and assimilation of protein leads to
clude azotaemia,hypercalcaemia,non-regenerative
increasedureasynthesisintheliver,elevatedureacan
anaemia,lymphocytosis and eosinophilia.However,
also be associated with recent dietary protein intake.
similar electrolyte changes(i.e.hyponatraemia and
By a similar mechanism, gastric or upper intestinal
hyperkalaemia)canbe associatedwithprimaryGl
haemorrhage can alsoincrease ureaconcentrations.
disease, especially with Salmonella and whipworm
infections,and therefore an adrenocorticotropic hor-
Calciumandmagnesium
mone (ACTH) stimulation test should always be per-
Lowtotal calciumandmagnesiumconcentrationscan
formed to confirm hypoadrenocorticism.
beseenincaseswithPLE.Thereductionintotalserum
SeeChapter8forfurther detailsonelectrolyte
calcium can,in part,be explained by the concurrent
abnormalities.
hypoalbuminaemia,anda correction equation can be
used to estimate itscontribution in dogs(see Chapter
Liverenzymes
8).However,ionized hypocalcaemia andionizedhypo-
Liverenzymes routinely measured in smallanimals are
magnesaemia havebeenreported in some cases of
broadly characterized as hepatocellular/leakage en-
PLE(Kimmel et al.,2000),and othermechanisms are
zymes (most often alanine aminotransferase (ALT))
likely to be involved, such as vitamin D, calcium and
and biliary/cholestatic markers(most often alkaline
magnesiummalabsorption.
phosphatase (ALP) (see Chapter 12). Mild to moder-
 ate increases in the serum activities of these enzymes
Serum bile acids
may be seen in primary Gl disease. Such changes are
Serum total bile acid concentrationis areflection of the
likely torepresent areactivehepatopathycaused by
enterohepaticcirculationof bile acids,and elevated
deliveryof luminally derived antigens,endotoxinsand
concentrations are associated with hepatic dysfunc-
bacteria to the liver from the Gl tract via the portal
tion,biliaryobstructionorportosystemic shunting(see
circulation. This is probably associated with permeabil-
Chapter12).Hepatopathiessecondarytoa numberof
ity alterationsof themucosal barrier accompanying
diseases, including those affecting the Gl tract, can
many Gl diseases. It can, therefore,be difficult to
cause milderincreases.
differentiateprimaryGldiseasewithasecondaryhepat-
opathyfromprimaryhepatopathiesassociatedwith
Folate and cobalamin
vomitinganddiarrhoea.Measurementofserumbile
Serum folate and cobalamin assays are routinely
acidscan be helpful,although some Gl diseases can
availablefordogs andcats and arewidelyused forthe
be associated with mild increases in bile acid concen-
investigationof Gl cases.However,manyfactorscan
trations.In cats with IBD, moderate to marked in-
affect concentrations of both folate and cobalamin
 creases in liver enzyme activities may suggest
(Figure 13.15).Therefore,clinicians should interpret
significant hepatic pathology as well as Gl disease,
since simultaneous inflammatory changes in related
 organs (Sl, liver and pancreas) are recognized.
Cobalamin
Folate
Cholesterol
Factors increasing
High dietary
High dietary intake
Increased serum cholesterol concentrations arerarely
concentrations
intake
Parenteral
 associated with primary Gl disease, but may be seen
Parenteral
supplementation
in diseases that cause secondary Gl signs (e.g. endo-
supplementation
Intestinal bacterial
crinopathies and renal, hepatic or pancreatic disease).
metabolism
Lowintestinal pH
Hypercholesterolaemia canbe associatedwithPLN,
which is also an important differential diagnosis for
Exocrinepancreatic
insufficiency
hypoalbuminaemia.As cholesterol is synthesized in
the liver,low serum cholesterol concentrations are
Factors decreasing
Dietary
Dietary deticiency (rare)
typically associated with diseases involving hepato-
concentrations
deficiency
Proximal or diffuse small
cellular dysfunction, but hypocholesterolaemia may
llealdisease
intestinal disease
alsobe afeatureofprimary intestinal diseases,most
llealresection
Drugs,e.g.sufasalazine
notably in diseases that cause fat malabsorption.
Intestinal
LowintestinalpH
Marked hypocholesterolaemia is most consistently
bacterial
associatedwith lymphangiectasia.
metabolism
Exocrine
Urea and creatinine
pancreatic
Low serum concentrations of urea,relative to serum
insufficiency
 creatinine, are sometimes seen in animals with Gl
signs caused by portosystemic shunts (PSSs)or se-
Factors influencing serum folate andcobalamin
13.15
vere liver dysfunctionbecauseof failureto convert
concentrations.
213
chapter13Laboratoryevaluationofgastrointestinaldisease
the results with care.Currently,the main value of
havebeendocumented in associationwithalimentary
these tests isin documenting thepresence of malab-
lymphoma. In Giant Schnauzers, a specific intrinsic
sorptionrather than small intestinal bacterial
factor-cobalamin receptor deficiency has beenre-
overgrowth(SIBO).
ported,which is associatedwith severe cobalamin
deficiency(Fyfeetal.,1991).lfcobalamin deficiencyis
Malabsorption:Folateispredominantly absorbed in
documented,parenteralsupplementationwithcobala-
the proximal Sl,whilst cobalamin,bound to intrinsic
min isrecommendedor theresponse to treatment of
factor,is absorbedbya specific carrier mechanism in
theunderlying Gl diseasemay remain suboptimal.
the distal Sl (Figure 13.16).Therefore,a subnormal
Decreased folate concentrationscan alsobe seen
 concentration of folate suggests proximal small intes-
secondary to malabsorption.lf documented,supple-
tinaldisease,alowcobalaminconcentrationcanoccur
mentation (with oral folic acid) can be considered.
in diseasesinvolving thedistal intestine,andboth low
folateand cobalaminmaybeseen if diffusediseaseis
Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth: SIBO can
present.Thesetests arelimitedby theirlackof specificity
occur secondary tomany disorders.The aetiology
for particularprimary diseases,but thepresence of
of‘primary'or idiopathic SIBOhasrecentlybeen re-
malabsorption can be confirmed and the need for
evaluated,and the termidiopathicantibiotic-responsive
vitamin supplementation assessed.
diarrhoea(ARD) is preferred for these cases.The
Cobalamindeficiency is documented more com-
featuresofthesetwodisordersaresummarizedin
monly as a sequel to small intestinal disease,particu-
Figure 13.17.Folate and cobalamin are still used to
larly in cats,and systemic metabolic consequences
diagnose SiBOincompanionanimals.Given that many
have been recognized (Simpson et al.,2001). Al-
bacterial species synthesize folate,whilst others can
though any Gl diseases(and some pancreatic dis-
bind cobalamin, increased numbers of small intestinal
eases)canpotentially cause a decreased serum
bacteria may increase serum folate concentrations,
cobalaminconcentrationincats,mostseveredecreases
decrease serum cobalamin concentrations, or doboth.
Stomach
Stomach
>
Proximal
Proximal
small
small
Pancreas
intestine
口
intestine
?
Cobalamin
O
9
Dietaryprotein
O
Midsmall
Midsmall
intestine
intestine
R-protein
00
Intrinsicfactor
Cobalaminreceptor
√
Folate deconjugase
Distal
Folate carriers
Distal
small
small
intestine
intestine
(a)
(b)
13.16
Assimilation of folate and cobalamin.(a)Dietary folate ispresent in food asa conjugated form,folate
polyglutamate.Thisconjugate is digestedby folatedeconjugase,anenzyme on themicrovillarmembrane,
whichremoves allbut oneresidue.Theresultant folate monoglutamate is takenupvia specificcarriers in themid small
intestine.(b)Following ingestion,cobalamin is released from dietary protein in the stomach. It then binds to non-specific
binding proteins(e.g.R-proteins').In the smallintestine cobalamin transfers onto intrinsicfactor(IF),which is synthesized
by the stomach(dog)and pancreas(dog and cat).Cobalamin-IF complexes pass along the intestine until the distal small
intestine,wherecobalamin is transported across themucosa and into theportal circulation.
214
Chapter13Laboratoryevaluationofgastrointestinaldisease
SIBO
ARD
Causes
Alwaysoccurssecondary tounderlyingdisease:
Idiopathic
Exocrinepancreaticinsufficiency
Other causes of malabsorption?
Partial obstruction
Decreased gastric acid production(e.g.drug
therapy,gastricsurger
Signalment
Cats and dogs
Dogs only
Any age or gender
Young dogsof eithersex
Anybreed
GermanShepherd Dogs predisposed
History
Predominantly smallintestinal diarhoea,although
Predominantly smallintestinaldiarrhoeaandweight loss/failure
other signs possible
to gain weight
Signs of underlying disease?
lfpartialbstutnouldbeylicala
Physicalexamination
Signs of underlying disease
Varies fromnosignstopoorbodycondition
Ifpartial obstruction,mayhave abnormalitieson
abdominal palpation
Preliminary laboratory
Signs of underlying disease?
No specificfindings
tests
No specific findings
Faecalanalysis
Negative
Negative
Folate/cobalamin
Variableresults
Variableresults
Diagnosticimaging
Findings specific to underlying disease
No specificfindings
Evidenceofpartial obstruction
Intestinal biopsy
Not required
Normal ormildinflammatory change only
Recommended method
Diagnose underlying disease:e.gTLI for EPI;
Rule out all other Gl diseases (see Figure 13.11)
of diagnosis
ultrasonographyforpartial obstruction
Response toantibacterialtrial
Remission often requiring antibacterials
13.17
exocrine pancreatic insufficiency;TLl: trypsin-like immunoreactivity.)
However,measurementof serum folate and cobalamin
Serology
concentrationshaspoor sensitivity and specificityfor
In cats,serological tests for feline leukaemia virus
canine SIO,and resultsdonotcorrelatwithquantita
(FeLV)andfelineimmunodeficiencyvirus(FIV) should
tive duodenal juice culture (Walkely and Neiger,2000).
be considered,especiallyin casespresenting with
Somestudiessuggestthatconcurrentlyincreasedfolate
chronic Gl signs.Coronavirusserologymay alsobe
and decreased cobalamin concentrations are most spe-
useful in some cases.Serology for infectious dis-
cificfor SIBO,but thishas not been universally docu-
eases,suchasparvovirus,cansometimesbeuseful,
mented(Germanetal.,2003).Moreover,neitherchanges
although it isoften complicated by titres derived from
in folate norcobalamin(norboth) can reliably discrimi-
vaccination and the need to document rising titres to
nate dogswith idiopathicARD(idiopathicSIBO) from
prove activeinfection.
those with otheraetiologies (German et al,2003). Thus,
measurementof folateand cobalaminconcentrationsis
Tests of endocrine disease
of limitedvalue in thediagnosisofSIBO/ARD.
Routine haematological, serum biochemical and urin
Routine urinalysis
alysisfindingscanoften increase the indexof suspi-
Routine urinalysis,involving biochemical assessment
cion for endocrinopathies as the cause of Gl signs.
More specific diagnostic tests are thenrequired (see
(dipstick analysis),assessment of specific gravity by
Chapters 17and 18)
refractometerandsedimentanalysis(see Chapter10)is
animportant component of thepreliminary diagnostic
database and should beperformed inall cases.Abnor-
Faecal analysis
malitiescansometimesbeidentifiedonsedimentanaly-
Faecalexaminationsareanimportantpartofthe
sis that assist in differentiating causes of vomiting and
investigation of Gl disease,and,in general practice,
diarrhoea,e.g.ammoniumbiurate crystalswould be
samples areregularly submitted foridentificationof
suggestive of a PSS or hepatocellular dysfunction.
parasites and bacteriological culture.Otherinvestiga-
Identification ofproteinuria confirmedbya raised urine
tions that are occasionally beneficial include descrip-
protein:creatinineratio indicates the presence of PLN in
tion of faecal characteristics,direct faecal smear
cases of hypoalbuminaemia, although in Soft-Coated
examination, assessment of parvovirus antigen and
WheatenTerriers,concurrent PLE and PLN can occur.
assessment of rectal cytology.
215
Chapter 13
3Laboratoryevaluationofgastrointestinal disease
Character of faeces
detected if a directsmearisstainedwith an acid-fast
Informationonfaecalcharactercanbederivedfrom
stain.However,this organism is more commonly as-
thehistoryorbydirectexamination of a stool sample
sessed using special faecal flotation techniques (see 
(faecal material canbecollected bydigital rectal ex-
below).Faeces can alsobe stained forundigested
amination).Thepresence of diarrhoea canbe con-
starch granules (Lugol's iodine),fat globules (Sudan
firmed,and the likely siteof pathology canbe deduced.
stain) and muscle fibres(Wright'sor Diff-Quik stains)
If freshbloodormucus ispresent,a large intestinal
and their presence may indicate malabsorption,but
disorder is most likely, whilst changes in colour or
these tests are unreliable.
withorwithout malabsorption.
Faecal concentration methods
Althoughdirectexaminationoffaecal samplescan
Direct faecal smear
identifyendoparasites,faecalconcentrationmethods
On occasion,a direct smear of fresh faeces can
are usually more rewarding. Faeces can be ‘concen-
provide useful information. Unstained wet mounts
trated'eitherwith flotation(using sugarsolution orzinc
canbe used to identifyprotozoal trophozoites,such
sulphate) or sedimentation techniques. The methods 
as Giardia.Identification of Trichomonas,Tritricho-
are described in Figure 13.18.Sugar solutions detect
monas,Pentatrichomonas,Balantidium,and Enta-
the majority of parasites (Figure 13.19), including
moeba species may be significant for Li diarrhoea.
coccidia and Cryptosporidium.Formalin-ether sedi-
Further,giventhatenterotoxinproductionby Clostrid-
mentation techniques are suitable for metazoan ova
iumperfringensisapotentialcauseofdiarrhoea,Diff-
(roundworms,hookworms and whipworms), or if a
Quik-stained faecal smears can be examined for
zoonoticinfection (such as Strongyloides) is suspected.
clostridial endospores.lf largenumbersof clostridial
Zinc sulphate flotation is recommended to detect Giar-
endospores (>5 per 100x oil immersion field)are
dia oocysts.A direct smear,sedimentation or the
detected,C.perfringensenterotoxicosisispossible;
Baermann technique can identify larvae of Strongy-
however, the correlation between sporulation and
loides,althoughthelattertechniqueismorecommonly
toxin elaboration is controversial since endospores
used to detect lungworm(Angiostrongylus vasorum or
can be found in stool samples from normal dogs
Oslerusosler)larvae.
(Marks et al.,2002).Other diagnostic tests, such as
As with any diagnostic test, interpretation is as
detection ofC.perfringens enterotoxin antigen by
important as methodology. ldentification of a parasite
ELISA or reverse passive latex agglutination, are
does notnecessarilyprove causation,particularly in
required to confirm diagnosis (see below).
cases presenting with chronic Gl signs.Most cestodes
A direct smear of faeces can also be used to detect 
and nematodesdonot cause clinical signs in adult
fungal elements if fungal diseases are endemic in
dogs;ascarids can cause clinical signs in immature
the area,althoughrectal cytologymaybemore appro-
animals,butrarely cause significantclinicaldiseasein
priate (see below). Cryptosporidium spores can be
adults.Further,coccidia and many other protozoans
Faecal flotation
Place3gfacein15f solongarsolutin(454guar355mlwaterr3% zinsulphate solion33gzisulhatein0l
distlled waer, specific gravity 1.18)
2.
Mix thoroughly.
3.
Strain through a stranreclthIf thereexcessft aftefitering, th samlecanbemixdwith methacetater
centrifuged and the supernatant discarded.
Place in 15 ml polypropylene centrfuge te.
4.
5.
Centrifuge at 1500 rpm for 5 minutes.
6.
7.
Place coverslip onmicroscope slide and examineStain with Lugol's iodine for zinc sulphate flotation,i desired.
Faecal sedimentation
Water
1.
Mixsampleof freshfaeces withwaterandstrainonce toremovedebris.
2.
Allow sampleto setlefor between 30 minutes and 2 hours.
3.
Placethesedimentonamicroscope slide,placeacoverslipoverthesediment andexamine.
Formalinether
Mix samle of freh faeces with water and strinonce to remove debris.
1.
2.
Centrfuge strained faeces andresuspend in9mlof 5% fmali soltion.
3.
Add3ml of ethyl acetate and shakevigorously.
Recentrifugeanddiscard thedebrisat the formalithylacetat inteace
Examine the sediment as above.
13.18
Methodologies forperforming faecal examinationforparasites
216
Chapter13
Laboratoryevaluationofgastrointestinaldisease
Egg sizes
50um
12x10um
10×15um
36×30um
37x32um
42×35um
60x40um
70×35μum
72x45um
80x38m
50um
Toxoplasma
Giardia
lsospora
Taenia sp.
Isospora
Ancylostoma
Capillaria
Uncinaria
Trichuris
puon
canis
felis
caninum
aerophila
stenocephalavulpis
75x65μm
82×70um
87×75μm
97×30μm
105×63um
45x45μum
2.2mmx34um
Toxocara cati
Toxascaris
Toxocara
Paragonimus
Grain mite egg
Dipylidiumcaninum
Strongyloides
leonina
canis
(non-parasitic)
1-63eggs/packet
stercoralis
13.19
Faecal parasitology. (Courtesy of Hoechst-Roussel-Agri Vet Company, USA; permission requested)
areusuallyincidental findings onfaecal examination.
theycorrelatepoorlywiththesmallintestinalflora,and
Incontrast,parasitessuchashookworms,whipworms,
so are not suitable for the diagnosis of SIBO. There-
Giardia and Cryptosporidium are more often associ-
fore, targetted evaluation for potential pathogens,e.g.
ated with clinical disease.Nevertheless,thepresence
Salmonella,Campylobacter,Clostridium perfringens
of anunderlying diseasemay allowsuchparasites to
andClostridiumdifficilebycultureonselectivemedia
colonize the Gl tract.Therefore,all positive findings
should be performed.Escherichia coli can also be
should be interpreted in the light of the clinical presen-
cultured frommostfaecal samplesbutonlycertain
tation.lf any doubtexists astowhether a particular
strains arepathogenic,and it ismoreappropriate to
agent is causal, a treatment trial is indicated.
usemolecularprobes to detectpathogenicitymarkers
(enteropathogenic E. coli(EPEC)) (Turk et al.,1998).
Bacteria
MoleculartestingforEPECiscommerciallyavailable
Bacterial cultureof faecesismost commonlyindicated
from the Royal Veterinary College,UK.
in animalswith acute Gl signs,particularly diarrhoea,
Given that all potential pathogens can be isolated
and is especially important ifcasespresentwith
bothfrom healthy animalsandthosewithclinical signs,
haemorrhagic diarrhoea, pyrexia,an inflammatory
determining the significance of positive results can be
leucogram,or if neutrophils are identified on rectal
difficult.As it is a potential zoonosis, the isolation of
cytology (see below). Bacterial culture is also often
Salmonellais invariably significant.However,the deci-
performed in preliminary diagnostic screening of all 
sion to treat a particular animal depends upon its
cases with chronic Gl signs.Use of inappropriate
individual circumstancesbecauseacarrierstatemay
 techniques is a common reason for false negatives,
develop after therapy.
andsamplesof freshfaecal matter,ratherthanswabs,
For Campylobacter, examination of a stained faecal
should be submitted promptly to laboratories that are
smear for slender,seagullshaped bacteria can yield a
equipped to culture themainpathogenicbacteria.
presumptive diagnosis.A positive diagnosis by culture
However, given that many of the bacteria classed as
ismore likelyfromfreshfaeces,because thebacteria
pathogens canalsobe found in normal individuals,all
arefragile.lf shipmenttoalaboratoryisrequired,Amies
resultsmustbeinterpreted inlight of theclinicalpres-
transportmedium(containingcharcoal) isrecommended.
entation.Some laboratoriesrecommendroutine cul-
Campylobacter areusuallyidentified togenusrather
ture of faecal samples on the basis that changes in
thanspecieslevel,and it isassumed thatmost isolates
predominant populations of bacteria correlate with
arepotential pathogens such as C.jejuni.However,if
disease.However,there are currently no published
studies to support such an approach,and the effectof
different species,including C.upsaliensis,for which
postal delay on the relative growth rates of different
pathogenicity is not established.Inappropriate treat-
organismsisoftenignored.Further,whilstfaecalflora
ment in these circumstancesmay allow the develop-
mightberepresentativeofcolonicbacterialpopulations,
mentofantimicrobial resistance.
【oi-ce
Chapter13Laboratory evaluation of gastrointestinal disease
Clostridia are commonisolatesfrom thefaecesof
healthy cats and dogs, and disease is thought to be
Signalment and history
more closely associated with periodic enterotoxin pro-
Young animal
duction. Clostridium diffile is responsible for antibi-
Unvaccinated animal
otic-associatedpseudomembranous colitisin humans
Exposureorpotentialexposuretoparvoviruse.gaffectedin-contact
and has been incriminated as a cause ofchronic
animal orcontaminated environment)
diarrhoeaindogs.Enterotoxin-producing C.perfringens
Clinical signs
has alsobeenassociatedwithacute andchronicGl
signs. As sporulation has been assumed to coincide
Acute/peracutgastrointstinalsigswihorwit:
withenterotoxinelaboration,examinationofa Diff-
Haematemesismelaena or severehaematochezia
Quik-stainedfaecalsmearfor'safety-pin'shapedsporu-
Pyrexia
lating C.perfringens(>5per100xoil immersionfield is
Leucopenia or neutropenia
supportive) has been suggested as a simple screening
Indicationsforperforming faecal parvovirus
test.However,becauseendosporescanbeseeninthe
13.20
antigen ELISA.
faecesof healthydogs aswell as those withclinical
signs, their presence does not invariably confirm a
diagnosis, and some studies have suggested that
Occultblood
detectionof the enterotoxin ismore indicative of dis-
The test is used to search for Gl bleeding that is not
ease (Marks et al.,2002).C.perfringens enterotoxin
apparentgrosslyasmelaenaorhaematochezia.Haem-
can be detected infaecesbyreversepassivelatex
orrhage can potentially occurat any levelofthe Gl tract,
agglutination or by ELISA. The ELISA gives fewer
and thetestissensitive enoughtodetect2mlbloodper
false-positive andfalse-negativeresults,but thetoxin
30 kg body weight. Given that the test merely detects
may be found in healthy dogs. The test is available in
haemoglobin,false-positiveresults can arise from the
 the UK through some commercial laboratories.
ingestion of diets containing meat (and blood) and
even, in some cases, fresh uncooked vegetables due
Giardia
to the presence of interfering peroxidases.Therefore,
Trophozoites can sometimes be identified in very fresh
thepatientmustbefed a meat-free dietforatleast72
stained or unstained faecal smears,but oocysts are
hoursbefore samples are obtained.
best found byrepeated zinc sulphate flotation.A com-
mercially available ELiSA and a rapid immuno-
Rectalcytology
chromatographicmethod canbeusedto detect Giardia
Samples can be taken for cytologicalanalysis by mildly
infaeces.However,whilstconvenienttoperform,they
abrading therectal wall witha glovedfingerafterrectal
donot necessarilyhave greater accuracy than per-
examination.The material is then rolled onto a micro-
forming zinc sulphate flotation on three consecutive
scope slide and the smear stained. The test is easy to
samples.Alternative approaches includeexamining
perform and non-invasive,but results are most often
duodenal fluid for Giardia trophozoites,although this
negative.Such examinations are of limited used for
has againnotbeen shown tobe superior tofaecal
small intestinal disease,and are instead most appro-
methods.Molecularprobes are availablefordetection
priate for diseases involving the large intestine and,
of Giardiainhumans,but thesehaveyettobeadapted
particularly,the rectum.Increased numbers of
forsmall animals.
neutrophils maybe suggestive of a bacterial problem
and indicate the need for faecal culture.Clostridial
Parvovirus antigen
endospores and fungal/oomycete elements (Histo-
The diarrhoea causedbymost virusesis usually acute
plasma,Aspergillus,Candida,Pythium)may also be
and self-limitingwith no need for a positive diagnosis.
identified.However,perhapsthemostspecificresults
Electron microscopy has been used in the past to
come frompalpable masseswithin therectum,from
identify characteristic viral particles(e.g.rotavirus,
which samplescan morereadilybetaken.
coronavirus,parvovirus),but thisisnotused inclinical
practice.The only virus that requires a specific diagno-
Analysisofcellsand tissuespecimens
sisisparvovirus,andafaecal ELiSAiscommercially
available. Indications for the test are listed in Figure
Histopathology
13.20.Fresh faeces samples should be submitted,
Histopathology of gastric and intestinal biopsy speci-
ideally taken24-36hours after theonsetofclinical
mens remains the gold standard for the diagnosis of Gl
signs.False-negative results can arise if samples are
disease (Figure 13.21), although it has many limita-
takentooearlyinthecourseof the disease,sothe test
tions. Biopsy specimens can be normal by light
should be repeated after 36-48 hours if clinical signs
microscopy in almost half of cats and dogs with chronic
are still consistent with parvovirus.False-negative re-
Gldisease,suggestingthateithermanydiseaseshave
sults canalso occurif samplesaretaken toolate inthe
a functional ratherthanmorphological abnormality or
diseaseprocessbecause shedding decreasesafter
that sampling problems have occurred. Another major
the first week,although thepatient is still contagious.
problemwithrelianceonhistopathological diagnoses
Theoretically,false-negative results can also occur
ispooragreementbetween histopathologists(Willard
due to interference from coproantibody,whilst weak
et al.,2002).Standardized criteria are currentlybeing
false positives occur between 5 and 15 days after
established as a means of improving agreement.How-
vaccinationwithamodified livevaccine.
ever, the primary clinician should always interpret
218
Chapter13Laboratoryevaluationofgastrointestinaldisease
greatestbenefit islikely tobeinthedifferentiationof
severe lymphocytic-plasmacytic enteritis from ali-
mentarylymphoma,as the cellularand nuclearchar-
acteristics ofmalignancycanbebetter assessed.
Diagnostic procedures with
occasional application
Numerous testshavebeen developed in an attempt
to investigate Gl diseases non-invasively.However,
many of these tests are not commercially available,
many have not properly been validated and many
aremoreapplicabletoreferral orresearchinstitutions
13.21
Photomicrographof biopsy specimen from the
rather than general practice.What follows is a sum-
duodenum of an8-year-old neuteredmale
mary of themain testsavailable,and theirindications.
crossbred dog with diarrhoea,ascites and severe
panhypoproteinaemia(albumin 10 g/l,reference interval:
However,thesetestsarenotrecommendedforroutine
25-31 gl/; globulins 20 g/,reference interval:27-40 g/).
use at present.
There isevidenceofvillousatrophy,epithelial erosions
andmild lacteal dilatation.There isavariable,mixed
Furthertestsforchronicvomiting
inflammatory cellinfiltrate within the mucosa.These
Themainadditionaltestsreportedforcasesthatpresent
findings wouldbe consistentwith amixed inflammatory
with chronic vomiting are assessment of gastric lipase
bowel disease.(HE stain;original magnification x10)
(Courtesy of R.Fox,University of Liverpool.)
activity,assessment forgastric spiral organisms and
measurement of serum gastrin.
results cautiously in light of clinical presentation,and
Gastric lipase immunoreactivity
results should be questioned if the histopathological
Anassayforgastric lipasehasbeendeveloped(Steiner
diagnosis does not fit the clinical picture.Tissue sam-
etal.,2002),butmeasurementof serum lipase activity
ples collected by endoscopy are superficial, small and
did not aid in the diagnosis and differentiation of differ-
oftendistorted.nsomecases,therefore,full-thickness
ent gastric diseases.Further work would be required
biopsy specimens may be required subsequent to
beforesuch tests are adopted forcompanionanimals.
endoscopy,if results are notrepresentative.
Gastricdiseasescansometimes elevate serumpan-
creaticlipase activity,butrarelyto thelevels thatare
Cytology
diagnostic forpancreatitis.
Cytologyof endoscopicbiopsy squashpreparations
or mucosal brushings (Figure 13.22) can be a useful
Testsfor gastric spiral organisms
adjunct to diagnosis of Gl disease (Jergens et al,
Tests used to assess the presence of gastric spiral
1998).Brush cytology provides superior information;
organisms(GsO),includeexaminationofbiopsyspeci-
it complements,rather than replaces, histopathology
mens,light orelectron microscopy,brush cytology,the
as it does not provide architectural information.Its
rapid urease test,urea breath tests,PCR assay and
serological assessment.Mostof thesemethodshave
beenmodifiedfrom techniquesused fordetectionof
Helicobacterpylori in humans.However,the species
of GSOseen incompanion animalsdifferfrom that in
humans,andtheymaybecommensalorganismsinthe
majority of healthy dogs and cats.These organisms
could produce clinical disease through complex
pathogeneticmechanisms,but theirtrue significance
as pathogens remains tobe established.
Histopathology:The mostroutinely available test is
histopathological examination of gastric biopsymate-
rial.Visualization is improved if special staining proce-
dures are performed, e.g. Warthin-Starry silver stain.
Cytological specimen(collected by cytology
 Some histopathologists comment on the presence of
13.22
brush) from theduodenumof a6-year-old
GSO within gastric glands, but there is no evidence to
neuteredmaleStaffordshireBull Terrierwith chronic
suggest that this correlates with pathogenicity.The
vomiting and diarrhoea.Thepreparation demonstrates
presence of aninflammatory (lymphocytic-plasmacytic)
clumps of normal epithelial cells. Streaks of nuclear
infiltratewithin themucosa andlymphoidnodularhyper-
material are due to rupture during smearing.The
histopathological specimens from thiscasewere
plasia may suggest an associated gastritis. Although
unremarkable,and the dogresponded to dietary
similarfindingshavebeen documented instudies in-
management,suggesting an adverse reaction to food.
volvingexperimental infection of dogs and catswith
(Rapid Romanowsky stain;original magnification x40.)
Helicobacter organisms, the histopathological changes
219
Chapter13Laboratoryevaluationofgastrointestinaldisease
donot correlatewith thepresence ofclinical signs.Itis
“indirect' methods include serum unconjugated bile
recommended that the documentation of GSOinbiopsy
acidsandbreathhydrogen analysis.
material be interpreted with caution.
Quantitativebacterialcultureofduodenaljuice:
OthertechniquesforidentifyingGSO:
Duodenal juice canbe collected at duodenoscopy
with sterile tubing,or atexploratory celiotomy by
Inaresearchsetting,electronmicroscopyand
needle aspiration through the intestinal wall.How-
PCR arerequired toidentify the exact speciesof
ever,collection of sufficient sample without blood
GSO that ispresent
tissue and bilecontamination canbe difficult.Routine
Theurease testisanindirectmarkerforthe
bacteriological methods are used to detect andquan-
presenceofpathogenic'GSO.Pathogenicity of
tifybacterial species.Isolatescanbetyped to the
GSO(atleastinhumans)correlateswith their
genusorspecieslevel,andvaluesareobtainedfor
abilitytoproduceurease,whichneutralizes
totalbacterial numbersandfornumbersof aerobes
gastricacidbysplittingureaintoammonia and
and obligate anaerobes.
bicarbonate.A mucosal biopsy specimen(usually
Unfortunately,therearelimitationswith theuseof
endoscopic) is incubated in test medium;the
quantitative culture of duodenal juice(German et al.,
productionof ammoniaby ureasecauses a pH-
2003).Themainconcern is that large intra-individual
dependentcolourchange
variation exists induodenaljuicecultureresults;one
Urea breath test protocols are a method by which
report documented a sevenlog-unit difference be-
ureaseproductioncanbe assessed non-invasively,
tweenbacterial countsobtainedontwoseparateocca-
but such protocols are rarely used in practice.
sions from the same animal (Delles et al., 1994).
Further,healthy dogs have been documented with
Gastrin measurement
small intestinal bacterial populationsin excessof the
Gastrin isnormallysecreted by G-cells in thegastric
suggested ‘normal’ upper limit (105 colony forming
and duodenal mucosa,and stimulatesthesecretionof
units/ml).A recent study suggested that the use of
gastric acidbyparietal cells.Onoccasion,it is neces-
quantitativebacterial culture of duodenal juice does
sary to measure gastrin in clinical cases, and this can
not aid in decisionmaking for cases of Gl disease
beperformedeitherbyradioimmunoassayorELISA
(German et al.,2003).The routine diagnostic use of
(using cross-reactive antibodies to human gastrin).
duodenaljuicebacterial culture is notrecommended.
Special handling isrequired toprevent gastrin degra-
dation,and the testiscurrentlylimited toamenable
Serum unconjugatedbile acids:Bile acids aresyn-
hospital laboratories orresearchinstitutions.
thesized and conjugated in theliverand subsequently
Manygastricdiseasescanelevateserumgastrin
excreted into theintestinevia thebiliary tract.Certain
concentrations,ncludingchronicgastritis,gastricila
intestinal bacterial species deconjugatebile acids,
tation-volvulus and pyloric stenosis; increases also
which then are absorbed by the small intestine, and
occurin chronicrenal failure and secondaryto drug
escape enterohepaticrecyclingbythe liver.Therefore,
administration(e.g.antacids,acid-blocking drugs and
in theory,increasesinsmall intestinal bacterialnum-
glucocorticoids).Therefore,routine use of the test is
bersmight result in increases in serum unconjugated
not helpful. The main indication for serum gastrin
bile acids (SUBA).Gas chromatography-mass
measurement is in casesofsuspectedgastrinoma,
spectrometrymethodshavebeendevelopedandvali-
and marked increases (e.g.>500 pg/ml) are usually
dated forthe major canine unconjugated bile acids
seen.Giventhathighgastrinconcentrations couldalso
(lithocholic acid,ursodeoxycholic acid,dexoycholic
arise if hyposecretion of gastric acid occurs(particu-
acid,chenodexoycholicacidandcholic acid) (Melgarejo
larlywhere Hantagonists orprotonpump inhibitors
etal.,200o),andavaluefortotal SUBAismostoften
areinuse),concurrentmeasurementofgastricluminal
used indiagnosis.Measurementof canineuncon-
pH has been recommended. lf gastrinoma is sus-
jugated bile acids (UBA) is commercially available in
pected,but onlymoderate increasesinserumgastrin
theUSAand,sinceBAarestable,nospecialhand
concentrationaredocumented,aprovocativetestcould
ling requirements are required. Preliminary work sug-
be considered (Altschul et al.,1997).Endoscopy and
gested that increased SUBA concentrationswere
biopsymayprovidefurthersupportiveevidencefora
sensitive and specific for canine SIBO,although a
gastrinoma,by demonstratinggastricmucosal hyper-
recent study questioned their utility (German et al.,
trophy and ulceration.
2003).SUBAconcentrationscorrelatepoorlywithquan-
titative bacteriology,and increased SUBA concentra
Furthertestsfor chronicdiarrhoea
tions couldnotreliablydiscriminatedogswithidiopathic
ARD from those with other Gl diseases. Although test
Alternativetestsforsmallintestinalbacterial
sensitivity can be increased if multiple (four to five)
overgrowth
samples are taken,this makes the test too costly and
TheonlywidelyavailabletestsforSIBOindogsare
impractical forroutine use.Test sensitivityforhuman
folate and cobalamin concentrations(see above).How-
SIBO isimproved by measuring postprandialincreases
ever,given the problems associated with their use,
in SUBA concentrations,and such an approach may
attemptshavebeenmade atvalidatingothermethods.
prove useful in the future for dogs. More work is
The current diagnosticgoldstandard forSIBOisquan-
requiredtoclarifytheuseofsuchmarkersforthe
titativebacterial cultureofduodenal juicewhilstother
investigationofGl diseases.
220
Chapter13Laboratory evaluation of gastrointestinal disease
Breath hydrogen:Hydrogen breath tests have also
thisprocedureisrarelyusedclinically,butremainsthe
been advocated for assessment of SIBO, either in a
standardby which other tests are judged.
fasted state or after administration of a test meal.How-
ever,protocolshavenotbeenuniversallyacceptedand
Faecalα-proteinase inhibitor (α,-Pl) concentra-
correlationwithquantitativebacterialcultureispoor
tion: In human gastroenterology, faecal α,-PI is a
(Walkley and Neiger, 2000).Therefore,breath hydro-
reliable marker of Gl protein loss.A canine-specific
gen analysisremains a research technique.
ELISAforthismarkerhasrecentlybeen developed at
TexasA&MUniversity.α-Plisaserumproteinwith a
OthertestsforSIBO:Anumberof testsforintestinal
molecularweight similarto albumin and intestinal pro-
bacterial metaboliteshavebeendevised fordiagnosis
tein losswill,therefore,lead tolossofbothproteinsat
of human SIBO; examples include the nitrosonaphthol
a similarrate.However,in contrast to albumin,α,-Pl is
test, urinary indican excretion, bacterial release of
relativelyresistanttoproteolysisand thus canbe
sulfapyridine fromsulfasalazine andbacterial release
measured in the faeces. Preliminary work has sug-
of p-amino benzoic acid (PABA) from a bile salt conju-
gested that it is valuable for the diagnosis of PLE
gate (PABA-UDCA). However, none of these is cur-
(Melgarejoet al.,1998),and may prove tobeamore
rently used in companion animals.
sensitivemarker than serum albumin concentrations
for the detection of early disease (Murphy et al.,2003).
Tests of gastrointestinal function
However,the assay is invalidated by thepresence of
 The main functions of the Gl tract are assimilation of 
blood in the faecal stool; digital rectal evacuation of
nutrients and immune integrity (immune responsive-
faecescauses enoughmucosal abrasion toincrease
ness and immunological tolerance). Efficient assimila-
faecal α,-Pl concentrations and invalidate the result.
tion of nutrients requires adequate digestive and
To improve diagnostic accuracy, three fresh faecal
absorptive function,and normal Gl motility.Immune
samplesshouldbecollected ina48-hourperiod,and
integrity requires appropriate functions of the immune 
then shipped on ice to the laboratory.NoUK laboratory
system and adequatemucosal barrierfunction.Given
currently offers the test, so its use is limited.
that the clinical consequencesof Gl disease are usu-
ally theresultof disruption to one ormanyof these
Intestinal permeability and absorptive function
mechanisms,methods have been developed topro-
vide direct information on GI functionality.Numerous
Intestinalpermeability:Intestinalpermeabilityisan
methods have been developed to assess absorptive
index of mucosal barrier function and is assessed by
function,protein absorptionor loss,permeability and
measuringunmediated uptakeof non-digestibleprobe
immune function.However,despite thepromise that
markers.Tests utilize a probe that is not metabolized
many research techniques show, few have been suc-
cessfully adapted forclinical diagnosis.Further,since
route(anindexof permeability)the probe ismeasured
these tests rarely provide an aetiological diagnosis,
in plasma or urine. 51Cr-EDTA was used in original
theydonotobviatetheneed forhistopathological
studies,butisnotpracticalforroutine clinicaluse.Non-
assessment.Therefore,noneiscurrentlyrecommended
absorbable sugars (e.g. lactulose or o-methyl-D-glu-
forroutineuse.
cose) canbe used as an alternative;when disrupted
barrierfunctionispresent,increased amountscanbe
Malabsorption
absorbed anddetectedeither inplasma or urine.
Theonlywidelyavailabletestsfordetectionof malab-
However, variability arises due to non-mucosal factors
sorption are measurement of serum vitamins(folate
including gastric emptying rate, intestinal transit and
and cobalamin -see above).Historically, tests that
completeness of urine collection (if the probe is meas-
havebeen used to document malabsorption include
ured inurine).
the fatabsorptiontest,theoralglucose absorptiontest,
Absorptivefunction:lfasugarprobeischosen,thatis
the starch digestion test and the D-xylose absorption
test.However, all such methods require multiple blood
normally completely absorbed via transcellular path-
samples or urine collection and are insensitive.More
ways(e.g.rhamnoseorxylose),theefficiencyofabsorp-
recently, protocols for breath hydrogen analysis have
tioncanbeassessed.Pathologicalprocessesthatreduce
the surface area for absorption (e.g. villus atrophy), will
been describedwithpotential use in the diagnosisof
decrease the amount of test probe absorbed and hence
malabsorption.Breathhydrogen analysishas limited
that which appears in plasma or urine. Again, non-
availability,andhasnotbeenwidely adopted.
mucosal factors causevariability inresults.
Glproteinloss
Combined tests:Variability causedby non-mucosal
Gl protein loss is usually assessed by measuring
factors can be eliminated by concurrently measuring
serum protein concentrations (see above). However,
the absorptionof twoprobeswith different pathwaysof
these tests are insensitive andcannot detect early or
absorption (e.g.lactulose/rhamnose, xylose/o-methyl-
milddiseasebecauseconcentrationsonlydeclineonce
D-glucose). Calculation of their excretion ratio elimi-
the capacity for hepatic production is overcome. His-
natesvariability from extramucosal factors,sinceboth
torically,intestinal protein losshasbeen detected by
probes should be affected equally. Sensitivity is in-
measuring the faecalloss of 51chromium-labelled albu-
creased when decreasedsurface area and increased
min.However,clinical application of this test is limited
permeability are present concurrently. Again, either
bythefactthatthe compoundisradioactive.Therefore,
urineorplasmacanbeassayed.
221
Chapter13
Laboratoryevaluationofgastrointestinaldisease
Glimmunefunction
Food hypersensitivity:Antigen-specific serum anti-
Therearethreemain indicationsfor testingimmune
bodies (lgE or lgG) to food components can be
function:assessing immune competence;assessing
measured invitroandanumberof laboratoriesnow
for food allergy; and assessing for the presence of Gi
offer this commercially.However,although tests
inflammation.
are easytoperform,results donot correlate with
actual clinical reactions in patients. Further, such
Immuneintegrity:IgAistheprinciplesecretoryimmu-
food-specificantibodiescanalsobepresentinnormal
noglobulinwithintheGl systemand,theoretically,gA
individuals.Therefore,such tests are not currently
deficiency could predispose to disease.There have
recommended.
beenoccasional reports of IgA deficiency indogs,but
it is unlikely that lgA deficiencyplays an important part
in predisposing to disease in themajority of dogs and
Inflammation:Numerous methods have been de-
cats,and routine assessment is notrecommended.
scribed for assessing therole of the immunesystem in
Further,there arecurrentlynocommerciallaboratories
Gl disease.These include immunohistochemistry
in the UK that offer this service.
andflowcytometry formapping the distributionof
ThemaincircumstanceswhenassessmentofIgA
mucosalimmunecellpopulations(Germanetal.,2001;
concentrations could be considered would bein young
Zenteketal.,2002),andreversetranscriptasepolymer-
individualssufferingfromrepeatedinfectionsatbody
ase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for assessing cytokine
surfaces(mucosae and skin).Young animals have
mRNA(German et al.,200o).However,none of the
lower IgA concentrations than adults,so an appropri-
techniques described is yet appropriate to apply to
ate age-matchedcontrolrangeshouldbeused.Serum
clinical diagnosis.
lgA concentrationsprovide a global assessment of IgA
Otherrecent studieshavemeasured serum acute
status,andarediagnosticifconcentrationsareabsent,
phase proteins (APPs), and increases in some
but correlationwithmucosal concentrationswithin the
markers(e.g.C-reactive protein)have been docu-
Gl tract is poor. Whole gut lavage is the only recom-
mented in samples from dogs with IBD (Jergens et
mended methodforassessmentofGlimmunoglobulins
al.,2003).APPs are non-specific markers of inflam-
inhumans,butisrarelyperformedincompanionani-
mation,so these tests alone are not diagnostic for
malsdue to technical difficulties.Some studieshave
IBD.However, IBD indices (scoring systems for dis-
assessedfaecal lgAconcentrationsbutmarked intra-
ease activity) are used widely in human IBD, and
individualvariationand thefactthat levelscorrelate
preliminary work in dogs has been encouraging
poorlywith totalintestinalproductionmeanthismethod
(Jergens et al., 2003). In combination, APPs and IBD
isnotrecommended.Moreworkisrequiredbeforethe
indices may provide a non-invasive means of assess-
routinemeasurementofIgA concentrationscan be
ing disease severity and for monitoring response to
recommended.
treatment.
Case examples
Case 1
Signalment
8-year-oldmale,neutered crossbred dog.
Haematology(continued)Result
Referenceinterval
History
Monocytes(x10%/)
0.07
0.10-1.80
4-weekhistoryofdiarrhoeaweightossandoccasonalvomiting.b
Eosinophils(x10/)
0.77
0.10-1.20
dominal distensiondetectedonphysicalexamination,thewisenre
Basophils (x10%/)
0.00
0.00-0.10
markable.
Platelets(x10%/)
654
200-500
Clinicalpathologydata
Haematology
Result
Reference interval
Biochemistry
Result
Reference interval
RBC(x1012/1)
4.07
5.40-8.00
Sodium(mmoll)
146.0
140-153
Hb (g/dl)
10.5
12-18
Potassium (mmoll)
5.30
3.80-5.30
HCT (/I)
0.28
0.35-0.55
Chloride (mmol/)
108.0
99-115
MCV(fl)
69.0
65-75
Glucose (mmoll)
6.1
3.5-5.5
MCHC (g/dl)
37.0
34-37
Urea (mmol/)
6.8
3.5-6.0
WBC(x10%/)
17.8
6.0-18.0
Creatinine (μmol/l)
73.0
60-100
Neutrophils(segmented)
16.3
3.00-12.00
1.8
3.2-6.5
Calcium(mmol/l)
(x109/)
Lymphocytes (x10%/)
0.49
0.80-3.80
Case 1continues
222
Chapter13
Laboratoryevaluationofgastrointestinaldisease
Case 1continued
Whatfurthertestswouldyourecommend?
.
Measurementof fastingandpostprandialbileacidconcentrationsto
Biochemistry(continued)
Result
Referenceinterval
assess liver function.
Inorganicphosphate
1.32
0.80-2.00
Urinalysisandassessmentofurineproteincreatinineratiotolookfor
(mmol/)
evidence of PLN.
Measurement of serum folate and cobalamin concentrations to
TP (g/)
30.0
57.0-78.0
assess forpossiblemalabsorption.
Albumin (g/l)
10.0
23.0-31.0
Abdominocentesiscouldalsobeperformed toconfirmthepresence
Globulin (g/l)
ofascites anddetermine thenature of thefluid.Thismight helpto
20.0
27.0-40.0
determine the pathophysiological mechanism,e.g.a transudate
ALT (IU/)
35
7-50
would probablyberelated to the hypoalbuminaemia.
ALP(IU/)
Plasmaionizedcalcium concentrations couldalsobemeasured
90
0-100
since thisrepresentsthe active fraction.
Cholesterol(mmol/l)
1.8
3.2-6.5
Further clinical pathology data
Faecal analysis
Results
Biochemistry
Result
Reference interval
Bacterial culture
Negative for Campylobacter,
Fasting bile acids (μmol/l)
1.8
0-15.0
Salmonella or Clostridium
Postprandial bile acids
2.6
0-15.0
Parasitological examinationNegative forallparasites
(μmol/)
TLI(ng/ml)
18
<5
What abnormalitiesarepresent?
Folate (ng/ml)
2.4
3.5-8.5
Haematology
Cobalamin (ng/)
115
215-500
Mild normocytic normochromic anaemia
lonized calcium(mmol/l)
0.96
1.12-1.40
Mature neutrophila
Lymphopenia
Thrombocytosis.
Urine analysis
Result
Reference interval
Biochemistry
Severe panhypoproteinaemia
pH
6.5
5.5-7.5
Hypocalcaemia
SG
1.038
1.001-1.070
Hypocholesterolaemia.
Protein
-ve
Howwouldyou interpret theseresults and
what are the likely differential diagnoses?
UP:C
0.18
<1
Thematureneutrophiliamost likelyrepresentsastressleucogram
-ve
sincetherewerenosignstosuggesthyperadrenocorticimandexog
Glucose
-ve
enousglucocorticoidshadnotbeenadministeredTheymayalsoreflect
Ketones
-ve
although chylothorax, chyloabdomen, lymphangiectasia or lympho-
Deposit
Occasional RBC
proliferativediseaseswould alsobepossible.
Themid anamia(thrombocytosisisnon-secific cldsuggest
What abnormalities arepresent?
blood-lossanaemiawhichwouldnormalyberegenerative.Alterna-
tively,the anaemia could represent anaemia of chronic disease.A
Biochemistry
Low serum folateconcentrations
erativeornot.
Hypocobalaminaemia
Themajordiffrentialsforseverelydecreasedserumproteincon
lonized hypocalcaemia.
centrationwouldreasedpatiythesrotningn
Urinalysis
opathy(PLE)and protein-losing nephropathy(PLN）.Blood losscannot
No significant abnormalities detected.
explainthhprotnamiacauealthouganamiisprsn
isonlymildandoutofproportiontothehypoproteinaemiaLEismost
Howwouldyou interpret theseresults and
likely since thismost often results inhypoalbuminaemia and
whatarethelikelydifferentialdiagnoses?
hypoglobulnmiwhilstanddcreasedpatiythesisually
Thenormalbileacidstimulationtestandabsenceofproteinuriamake
resultinhypabuminamiaalonewevereiterrenanorti
hepatic dysfunction and PLN unlikely.The normal TLI concentration
diseasecanecometlydiscountdandfrrstse.gurinaly
excludesEPlThereforethemostlikelycauseof theclinical signsand
laboratoryanalysesisintestinaldiseasewithassociatedPLEThemost
pobablyaccountsfortacitsincefuminconcentrations
likelydifferentialdiagnosesforPLEareinflammatoryboweldisease,
belowabout15g/animalsareatriskofdevelopingabdominaleffusions
lymphangiectasiaandalmentarylymphomaFurther,therehavebeen
or subcutaneous oedema.
recentreportsofPLEinassociationwithcryptdilatation/abscessation
Thehypocalcaemiaisprobablyduetothehypoalbuminamiane
but the underlyingmechanism isnot known.Intestinal histoplasmosis
theprotein-bound fractionofcalciumwillbelowAformulacanbeused
wouldbe possible if in an endemic area.
to corect for the degree of hypoalbuminaemia（see Chapter 8),to
Thelowfolate and cobalamin concentrations suggest intestinal
determine whether decreased albumin concentrations are toblame.
malabsorption in addition to PLE in this case.
Measurementof plasmaionizedcalciumconcentrationswould provide
lonized hypocalcaemia ispresentbut,at thislevelisunlkely
amoreaccurateassessment of the significanceof thishypocalcaemia.
to cause clinical signs.Nevertheless,hypoalbuminaemia isnot the
Hypocholesterolaemia can result from either hepatic dysfunction or
intestinalmalabsorption.
Case 1 continues
223
Chapter13Laboratoryevaluationofgastrointestinaldisease
Case1continued
getedaspirationoffluid(ifnecessary）heintestinaltractcouldbe
onlycauseofthelowtotalcalciumconcentrationpreviouslynoted.Thelow
assessed subjectively and objectively (measurement of intestinal
ionizedcalciumismost lielyrelatedtomalabsorptionofcalciumthis
wallthicess)thrabminal strutur(e.givridyan
dependentonvitaminD,whichcanalobelowincasesofmalabsorptin.
creas,spleen)could also be visualized to confirm that no other
abnormalities were present elsewhere
Whatfurthertestswouldyourecommend?
Themostimportantsteptoestablishadiagnosiswouldbeintestinal
Abdomnocentesicouldstibeperformedutgiventhat thesif
celiotomy.Thelatterismore likely to give the definitive diagnosis
useful information
sincelymphomaand lymphangiectasiacansometimesbemissedon
Diagnostic imaging may assist in establishing a diagnosis.Uitra
endoscopicbiopsy.Howeveritcarriesaddiional riskinthispatint
sonography would confirm the presence of ascites and allowtar-
given the severe hypoalbuminaemia.
Case 2
Signalment
What abnormalitiesarepresent?
15-week-old female crossbred dog (unvaccinated).
Haematology
History
Normocyticnormochromicanaemia
48-hourhistoryof vomiting and severe haemorrhagicdiarrhoea;a 24-
Severeucopenialagelyduetseverenetrpenia
hour history of generalized seizures. On physical examination: de-
Biochemistry
Panhypoproteinaemia
approximately 10% dehydrated.
Hypocalcaemia
Clinicalpathology data
Hyponatraemia
Hypokalaemia
Haematology
Result
Reference interval
Increase ALP concentrations.
RBC(x1012/)
3.84
How would you interpret these results and
5.40-8.00
whatarethelikelydifferential diagnoses?
Hb (g/dl)
9.5
12.0-18.0
Careshoudbeexercisedinntrpretingallf thesevalueecause
HCT(/)
0.25
0.35-0.55
65-75
ofequivalent ageto thepatientare likely tohavemildreductions in
MCV (f/)
65.7
red cellmass and proteins,and ncreases incaciuminorganicphs
MCHC (g/dl)
37.7
34-37
phate and ALP compared to the reference range.This probably
WBC (x10%/)
2.0
6.0-18.0
explains theincreasedALPandcontributes to theapparent anaemia
and hypoproteinaemia.
Neutrophils(segmented)
0.12
3.00-12.00
The severe neutropenia could be caused by consumption of
(x109/1)
Lymphocytes (x 10°/)
1.86
0.80-3.80
or decreased production （secondary to:infections,e.g.parvovirus,
Monocytes (x 10°%/)
0.02
0.10-1.80
marrowneoplasiamyelopthisismmune-mediated destructionof pre
Eosinophils (x10%/)
<0.01
0.10-1.20
cursors).Increased destruction isunlikely,given thelack of left shift;
thereisnohistoryfdrugueandbonemarrowneplasiasuely
Basophils(x10%/)
<0.01
0.00-0.10
Platelets (x10/)
246
200-500
sionarenotendemic to theUK.Giventhat the dogisunvaccinatedand
hascompatibleclinicalsinsaovirusnfectionismostlielyalthoug
overwhelming sepsisandmmune-mediated destructioncannotbeex-
Biochemistry
Result
Reference interval
cluded completely.
In light of the haemorrhagic nature of the diarhoea, the mild
Sodium(mmol/l)
119.0
140-153
anaemiamost likelyrepresentsblood loss.Thefull extent of theanaemia
Potassium(mmol/)
3.48
3.80-5.30
mayntvidntahisryhdnfn
Glucose (mmol/)
5.0
3.5-5.5
haselapsedtoallowcompleteredistributionoffluidsbetweenbody
compartments.Further,therehasbeeninsufficient timetodetermine
Urea(mmol/)
5.6
3.5-6.0
whetherornot the anaemia isregenerative(usually takes3-5 days).
Creatinine (μmol/)
68.0
60-100
Sequentialodslswhihldedatiulytcoutwol
thebestwaytodetermine thekineticsof anaemia in thiscase.
Calcium (mmoll)
1.88
3.2-6.5
The possible decreased serum proteinconcentrationscanresult
Inorganic phosphate
1.49
0.80-2.00
from decreased synthesis（hepaticinsufficiency,inadequateintake,
(mmol/)
malabrptin）qutratinbodycavityffusnaculopathy）
TP (g/)
creasedloss(protein-losingenteropathyornephropathy,cutaneousloss
31.0
57.0-78.0
(e.g.burns),blood loss) or dilution.With respect to the severe
Albumin(g/)
15.0
23.0-31.0
haemorrhagicdarrhoea,themostprobablecausesareeitherbloodlss
16.0
27.0-40.0
or gastrointestinal protein loss,ora combination.
Globulin (g/)
Thehypocalcaemiaismostlikelyduetothehypoproteinaemiasince
ALT(IU/I)
44
7-50
40%of calcium is protein-bound.Measurement of plasma ionized
ALP (IU/I)
346
0-100
calciumconcentrationswouldberequired toprovideamoreaccurate
assessment of the significance of this hypocalcaemia.
Cholesterol(mmol/)
3.8
3.2-6.5
Case 2 continues
224
Chapter 13
Laboratoryevaluationofgastrointestinaldisease
Case2continued
Hypokalaemiacanresultfromdecreasedintake,translocationextra
Changes in sodium are primarily due to changes in freewater
cellulatntracellarrincreasedlssgastrintstinltractrinry
distribution(e.g.ossorgain).Giventhepresenceofhypovolaemiain
tracteticasehokalamarobablyccurdndy
thiscase(basedonhistoryandphysicalexamination)themostliely
to the severe gastrointestinal signs.
explanationisincreased lossof sodium(withwater)fromgastrointes-
Whatfurther testswouldyou recommend?
tinal tract.Inlightof theacuteonset,thehyponatraemiamaywell
explain theseizures.
Otherpossiblecausesof hyponatraemiaincludeincreased lossvia
inga faecal ELISA
Measurementoffastingandpostprandialbileacidconcentrationsto
thekiyadenrtcimthirdsacelssegare
peritonitisetpeudhyponatramaasalsbeenportd wih
assessliverfunction
Urinalysisto excluderenal protein
hyperlipidaemia(notpresent here).
Plasma ionizedcalciumconcentrationscould alsobemeasured,
Thehypokalaemiaismildincomparisonwiththehyponatraemia.
sincethisrepresentstheactive fraction.
Referencesandfurtherreading
MarksSL,KatherEJ,Kass PHandMelliAC(2002）Genotypicand
phenotypic characterisationofClostridium perfringens and
Altschul M,SimpsonKW,Dykes NJ,MauldinEA,ReubiJCand
Clostridumdificileindiarrheicandhealthydogs.Journalof
CummingsJF(1997) Evaluation of somatostatin analogues for
VeterinaryInternaMedicine16,533-540
the detectionand treatment of gastrinoma ina dog.Journal of
SmallAnimalPractice38,286-291
immunosorbent assay forcanine alpha 1-protease inhibitor.
DellesWilrdMDnBsmW
AmericanJournalofVeterinaryResearch59,127-130
Lees GE,Helman R and Reinhart G（1994) Comparison of
MelgarejoT,WilliamsDA,OConnellNCandSetchellKDR(2000)
speciesandnumbersof bacteriainconcurrentlyculturedsamples
Serumunconjugated bile acidsasatestforintestinal bacterial
ofproximal small intestinal fluidandendoscopicallyobtained
overgrowthindogs.DigestiveDiseases andSciences45,407
duodenal mucosain dogswith intestinal bacterial overgrowth.
MurphyFGmanJRuauGnJMWiiamDAandall
414
AmericanJournalofVeterinaryResearch55,957-964
FyfeJC,GigerHalCAeykPF,umppSAevineJSand
EJ (2003）Faecal alpha-1 protease inhibitor concentrations in
dogswithchronicgastrointestinal disease.Veterinary Clinical
malabsorption and cobalamin deficiency in dogs.Pediatric
Pathology32,6772
SimpnWtthStrauAyalDa
Research29,24-31
GermanAJ,HelpsCR,HallEJandDayMJ(200o)CytokinemRNA
and Reimers TJ (2001) Subnormal concentrations of serum
expression inmucosal biopsies from GermanShepherdDogs
cobalamin(vitamin B,)in cats with gastrointestinal disease.
JournalofVeerinaryternalMedicin15263
SteineMridgRWlcizyWiliamsDA02）lu
Sciences45,7-17
GermanaaGStWiliamand
tissuesobtainedfromdogs.AmericanJournal ofVeterinary
bacterialovergrowthand antibiotic-responsivediarrheaindogs.
Research63,722-727
JournalfVerinaryntenaMedicine17343
TurkJaxMilG
German AJ,Hall EJ and Day MJ(2001) Immune cell populations
Turnquist SandKreegerJ(1998)Examination for heat-labile,
within theduodenalmucosaofdogswithenteropathiesJournal
ofVeterinarynternalMedicine15,1425
Escherichiacolisolatesobtained fromdogsdyingwithdiarrhea:
Jergens AE,Andreassen CB,Hagemoser WA,Ridgway Jand
122cases(1992-1996).Journalof theAmericanVeterinary
CambelKL(1998)Cytologicexaminationofexfoliativespecimens
MedicalAssociation212,1735-1736
obtainedduringendoscopyfordiagnosisofgastrointestinal tract
WalkleyHMand NeigerR(20oo)Accuracyofthreenon-invasivetests
diseaseindgsandcatounaftheAmericanVterinay
todiagnosesmallintestinalbacterialovergrowthindogs.ournal
MedicalAssociation2131755-1759
of SmallAnimal Practice41,478
JergnrAranEinEl
Willard MD,JergensAE,DuncanRB,LebMSMCrackenMD
PD,BensonTJ,Evans R（2003）A scoringindex for disease
DeNovo R,Herlman RG,Harbison JL (2002)Interobserver
activityincanineinflammatoryboweldisease.JournalofVeterinary
variation among histopathologic evaluations of intestinal tissues
InternalMedicine17,291
fromdogsandcats.Journalof theAmericanVeterinaryMedical
KimmelSE,WaddellLSandMichelKE(000)Hypomagnesemiaand
Association220,1177-1182
hypocalcemia associatedwithprotein-losing enteropathy in
Znt
Yorkshireterriers:fivecases(1992-1998).JournaloftheAmerican
VeterinaryMedicalAssociation217703706
smallandlargeintestineindogswithnon-specificdietarysensitivity.
JournalofNutrition132,1652S-1654
225
Laboratory evaluation of
exocrine pancreatic disease
Penny Watson
Introduction
Pancreatitis
Exocrine acinar cells comprise about 98% of the nor-
Pathophysiology
mal pancreas,and insulin-secreting endocrine islets
The aetiopathogenesis of pancreatitis is incompletely
about 2%.Theacinar cells secreteenzymes involved
understood,but the final common pathwayof pancrea
intheinitialdigestionoffood,includinglipase(forwhich
titis appears to be the inappropriate early activation of
the pancreas is the main source),alpha-amylase,
trypsinogenwithin thepancreas,asaresultofincreased
phospholipase and the proteolytic enzymes trypsin,
autoactivation and/orreduced autolysis (Naruse et al,
chymotrypsin and elastase.Proteases are stored and
1999). Activated trypsin then activates other enzymes
released as inactive zymogens, which are cleaved in 
and theresultispancreaticautodigestion,inflammation
the small intestine to active enzymes. Trypsinogen is
and peripancreatic fat necrosis.There is an associated
split by intestinal enterokinase,and activated trypsin
systemic inflammatory response(SiR) ineventhe mild-
then cleaves the otherproteases.
est pancreatitis. Many other organs may be involved
Diseasesof the exocrinepancreas arerelatively
and,in the most severe cases, there is multi-organ
common but often misdiagnosed in dogs and cats,
failureanddisseminatedintravascularcoagulation(Dic).
because of non-specific clinical signs and a lack of
The circulating protease inhibitors α,-antitrypsin (α-
sensitive and specific clinicopathological tests.Pan-
protease inhibitor)andα-macroglobulinremove trypsin
creatitis,acute and chronicandvarying fromsevereto
andotherproteases from the circulation,andsaturation
subclinical, is the most common disease of the exo-
of these inhibitors by excessive circulating proteases
crine pancreas in both species.Exocrine pancreatic
contributestosystemicinflammation.However,genera-
insufficiency, although less common, is also recog-
lized neutrophil activation and cytokine release is prob-
nized frequently.Pancreatic abscesses,pseudocysts
ably the primary causeof SIR(Norman,1998)
and pancreaticneoplasia are less common.
Potential trigger factors for pancreatitis in dogs and
There areimportant differencesbetweencats and
cats are outlined in Figure 14.2. Unlike human cases,
dogsinpancreatic structure,diseaseassociations and
90%of canine and feline cases remain idiopathic and
clinical pathology (Figure 14.1).
someof these are likelytorepresent hereditary disease.
Feature
Dogs
Cats
Anatomy
Usually two pancreatic ducts:
Usually singlemajorpancreati duct jins thecmmonbiledt
Large accessory duct from right limb tominor papila
before entering duodenumat duodenal papilla3cmdistal to
in duodenum
Smallpancreaticduct fromleft imbtomajorduodenal
bileductandmajorpancreaticductremainseparate
papilla in duodenumnext to but not joining)bile duct
Disease associations
Pancreatitiscommonlyassociatedwithendocrinedisease
Pancreatitiscommonlyassociated withcholangiohepatitisand/or
（see text）Associationwithliverandsmallintestinal
inflammatorybowel disease.Oftenconcurrenthepaticlipidosis.
diseasenot studied/recognized
Mayalsobeassociatedwithnephritis
Pancreatitis:
Most casesacute.Low-grade chronicdiseaseincreasingly
Mostcaseslow-gradechronicinterstitialandachallenget
spectrumof disease
recognized
diagnoseAcute severecasesoccur lessfrequently
Pancreatitis:
HistologygoldstandardVarietyofcatalyticand
Histology gold standard.Catalyticassaysnohelp.Immunoassays
diagnosis
mmunoassaysavailalUrangrahyquiteenst
lesssensitiveandsecificthanindogs.Ultrasonographyless
Obvious/suggestiveclinical signsinacutecases
sensitivtanrganifcln
Causes of exocrine
Ofenpancreatcacinratrhyreasedincidnc
Most cassendstaechronicpancreatisPancreatican
pancreatic
certainbreeds(especiallyGermanShepherdDogs).
atrophy not reported
insufficiency
End-stagechronicpancreatitisdoesoccur
14.1
Comparison of pancreatic structure and disease in dogs and cats.
226
Chapter 14 Laboratory evaluation of exocrine pancreatic disease
Riskfactors
Causes
Idiopathic(90%)
Unknown (some may be hereditary)
Duct obstruction±hypersecretion±bilerefluxinto
Experimental
pancreaticduct
Neoplasia
Surgery±cholangitis+roleinchronic pancreatitis
Hyperriglyceridaemia
InherentrmliidalimbdrlatMniatuecae)
Endocrinediabetemelitushyeradrenocortismhypothyroidism
Breed/sex?
nreasedriseiaydmlafhleridaa
Miniature Schnauzers-see above)
Diet
Dietarinihf
Malnutrtion
Obesity?
Trauma
Road trafficaccident
Surgery
"High rise syndrome'
Ischaemia/reperfusion
Surgery (not just pancreas)
Gastricdilatation-volvulus
Shock
Severe anaemia (common association)
Hypercalcaemia
Experimental
Hypercalcaemiaof malignancy (uncommonassociationclinically)
Primary hyperparathyroidism
Drugs/toxins
Orgatazarahaifi
suphadralimdtasiummidsiblysridr
Infections
Toxoplasma
Others(uncommon)
14.2
Risk factors and potential clinical causes of pancreatitis in dogs and cats.
Diagnosis
incidence of low-grade,chronic diseasewith particu-
larly low-grade,non-specific clinical signs.They also
Overview
have a high incidence of concurrent disease(particu-
Pancreatitis may be defined as acute or chronic(Fig-
larly cholangiohepatitis and/orinflammatoryboweldis-
ures 14.3,14.4)but these terms are histopathological
ease)and a lack of specific diagnostic tests,making
rather than clinical:disease severity does not differen-
the diagnosis of pancreatitis difficult.In dogs,acute
tiate acute from chronic pancreatitis. In dogs, chronic
disease is believed to be commonest,but chronic
pancreatitis is often recurrent, and a long subclinical
diseasemay alsobe frequent and under-recognized
phase can culminateina dramatic acute-on-chronic
(Watson, 2003).
episode,which is clinically and clinicopathologically
Thegoldstandardfordiagnosis ofpancreatitisis
identical to a single,acute bout of pancreatitis.How-
biopsy and histopathological examination,but this is
ever,acute-on-chronic disease may lead tomore sig-
often neither practical nor indicated.No single clinico-
nificant long-termsequelae,such as thedevelopment
pathologicaltestcurrently availablehas100%sensitiv-
ofexocrinepancreaticinsufficiency(EPl) and/ordiabe-
ity and specificity for the diagnosis of pancreatitis in
tesmellitus.In general,chronic disease ismore chal-
dogs and cats,and non-invasive diagnosis remains
lenging to diagnose, as the clinical signs, diagnostic
presumptive,basedonsupportiveresultsfrom clinical
imaging findings and clinicopathological changes are
and diagnostic imagingfindings aswell as theresults
less dramatic than in acute disease.Cats show a high
of blood tests.
Acute
Chronic
Chronicactive
Histology
Pancreaticinflammationwithneutrophils
Inflammatory infitrae,mainly
Aschronicbut withneutrophiic
Varyingdgreesofancratierosiedma
mononuclearcellFibrosisodular
inflammation
and peripancreatic fatnecrosis
hyperplasia,architectural disruption
Reversibility of
Histological changes potentially
Architectural disruptionirreversible
Architectural disruption
histological features
completelyreversible
irreversible
Clinical features
Variesfromsevereand fatal(usuallynecrotizing)
Generally mild
Maybe severe.Can presentas
tomild and subclinical(usually interstial
a single bout of acute disease
inflammation)
14.3
Features of acute and chronic pancreatitis.
227
Chapter14Laboratoryevaluationofexocrinepancreaticdisease
(c)
b
(d)
14.4
hyperaemia.(b) Histopathological appearance of acute(fatal)pancreatitis ina dog.Note extensive neutrophilic
infiltrate andinflammatory exudate but absence of fibrosis.A normal acinus is arrowed.(H&E stain;original magnification
X100.)(Courtesy of In Practice and Aude Roulois.)(c) Gross appearance of chronic pancreatitis at laparotomy (right,
duodenal limb).Note nodular appearance of pancreas and extensive adhesions to duodenum obscuring the mesentery.
(Courtesy of In Practice and Dr Stephen Baines.)(d)Histopathological appearance of chronic pancreatitis in a dog (the
Haematology and biochemistry
most important concurrent diseases in dogs are
Haematology and biochemical screens are important
diabetes mellitus (especially ketoacidotic diabetes),
in animals with pancreatitis.
hyperadrenocorticism and hypothyroidism;up to
50%of dogswithseverepancreatitishaveone or
Significant changes often occur due to the SIR
more of these endocrinopathies.There are also
associatedwith pancreatitis.A modified organ-
associations withgastrointestinal (Gl) disease and
scoring system based on clinical and
with epilepsy(which mayrepresent the effects of
clinicopathological changes on admission isvery
treatment).The most important associated
useful in assessing prognosis and treatment in
diseasesincatsarediabetesmellitus,hepatic
dogs (Figures 14.5 and 14.6).
lipidosis,inflammatorybowel disease and
Pancreatitismay be secondary to another disease,
cholangiohepatitis.Catswithpancreatitismayalso
which may be suggested by biochemical changes,
have anincreased incidenceof interstitial nephritis.
and whichrequirestreatment orprevention to
Pancreatitismaylead tosecondarycomplications
control the pancreatitis.Concurrent disease is
andsequelae thatrequirerecognition and
common,particularlyinseverepancreatitis.The
treatment(seeFigure 14.7).
Severity
Disease score
Prognosis
Expectedmortality(%)
Mild
0
Excellent
Moderate
Good to fair
11
2
Fair topoor
20
Severe
3
Poor
66
Grave
100
A modified organ scoring system for canine acutepancreatitis.The severity scoring system isbased on the
14.5
number of organ systems apart from the pancreas that show evidence of failure or compromise at initial
presentation.The organ system involvement is assessed clinicopathologically as shown inFigure 14.6.This scoring system
was developed for acutepancreatitisin dogs.It isunclearwhether this systemcanbeapplied tocats or toacute-on-
chronicpancreatitis(Ruauxand Atwell,1998;Ruaux,2000).
228
Chapter 14
Laboratoryevaluationofexocrinepancreaticdisease
Organ
Criteria for scoring
Laboratory
Acute sequelae
system
referenceinterval
Hepatic
One ormore of alkaline
Dehydration
Variesbetween
phosphatase(ALP),aspartate
laboratories
Metabolic acidosis
aminotransferase(AST)or
Pre-renalazotaemia
alanine aminotransferase(ALT)
Electrolytedisturbances
>3xuppereference range
Hypokalaemia (mostimportant)
Hyponatraemia
Renal
Urea>14mmol/l
Urea 2.5-9.5
Hypochloraemia
Creatinine>265 μmoll
mmol/
Mild hypocalcaemia and hypomagnesaemia(not usually clinically
Creatinine53-159
significant)
μmol/
Hepatic involvement
Leucocytic
>10%band neutrophils or total
Band neutrophils
Systemicinflammatoryresponse syndrome
whitecell count>24x10%
0.0-0.2x10%/
Systemic hypotension
WBC4.5-17×10%l
Acuterespiratorydistresssyndrome
Endocrine
Bloodglucose>13mmoll and/or
Blood glucose
Cardiacarrhythmias
pancreas
β-hydroxybutyrate>1mmol/
3.3-6.8mmoll
Coagulopathies
β-Hydroxybutyrate
Difuseintravascular coagulation
0.0-0.6mmol/l
Pancreatic abscesses
Acid-base
Pancreatic pseudocysts
Bicarbonate<13or>26mmoll
Bicarbonate15-24
and/or
mmol/l
Chronic sequelae
aniongap<15or>38mmoll
Anion gap17-35
Exocrinepanreaticinsuficiecy9%enyss）
mmol/l
Diabetes mellitus(80%betacelloss)
Fibrosisaroundbileductchronicbiliaryobstruction
severity scoring system in canine acute
Potentiallyneoplastictransformation
pancreatitis.Anabnormality ineach system addsone
Pancreatic abscesses
point to thescore,with theexception thatif increased
Pancreatic pseudocysts
glucose,butyrate and acidosis co-exist (e.g.in diabetic
ketoacidosis),endocrine pancreas and acid-base are
14.7
Potential sequelae of acute and chronic
counted as one system(Ruaux and Atwell,1998).
pancreatitis.
Haematologicaland biochemicalabnormalities seen
through vomiting,reduced intake and fluid therapy
inpancreatitis are summarizedinFigures14.8and14.9.
increasing renal loss. Hypokalaemia must be recog-
Electrolyte changes seen with acute pancreatitis
nized and treated, as itcan cause ongoing Glatony and
often include significant hypokalaemia due to loss
become life-threatening if marked.
Parameter
Change
Frequency of change in
Frequencyof
Reason/comments
sbop
change in cats
Neutrophils
Increased±left
Common (55-60%)
Less common than
Systemicinflammatoryresponse
shit
dogs (about30%)
Decreased±
Veryuncommon
Uncommon （up to
Degenerativeresponse due tooverwhelming
degenerativeleft
15%)
inflammation-poorprognostic indicator in cats?
shift
Haematocrit
Increased
Moderatelycommon
Moderatelycommon
Dehydration(may become low in some once
(upto 20%)
(upto 13-20%)
rehydrated)
Decreased (both
Moderatelycommon
26-55%
Anaemia of chronic disease
regenerative and
(24%)
Bleeding gastrointestinal ulcers
non-regenerative
±Shortened red cellifespan (azotaemia and
anaemia seen)
sepsis)
+Reduced production(above+anorexia)
Fibrinogen
Increased
Common
Inflammatoryresponse
Decreased
Uncommon
Consumption in DIC
Fibrin degradation
Increased
Uncommon(16% of
products (and also
Coagulationabnormalitiesassociatedwith
severe cases)
circulating proteases
probably D-dimers)
±DIC
Platelets
Decreased
Common in severe cases
Uncommon,usually
Coagulationabnormalitiesassociated with
(59%)
normal oronly slightly
circulating proteases
decreased
±DIC
14.8
changesarelikely tobelessdramaticSchaer979;Hiland VanWinkle993;Hessetal,1998;Mansfield andJones
2001).(continues)
?
229
Chapter14Laboratory evaluation of exocrinepancreaticdisease
Parameter
Change
Frequency of change in
Frequencyof
Reason/comments
sbop
change in cats
Increased
Prolongedprothrombin
Only measured in small
Coagulation abnormalities associated with
Coagulation times
time in43%cases,
numbers of cases but
circulating proteases
prolongedpartial
often prolonged in those.
±DIC
thromboplastin time in
N.B.Up to 20%of cats
61%cases
have thromboembolic
disease
(continued) Potential non-specific findings on haematology screens in pancreatitis in dogs and cats.These
14.8
figuresarefromdogsandcatswithsevere,acutepancreatitisthereiverylittlenformationonchroniclow
grade diseasebutchangesarelikely tobelessdramatic(Schaer1979;HillandVanWinkle1993:Hessetal1998；
Mansfield and Jones,2001).
Parameter
Change
Frequency of change in
Frequencyof
Reason/comments
sbop
change in cats
Increased
Common
Common
Urea±creatinine
Prerenalfailureduetodehydration
Urea:53-65%
Urea:57%
±Hypotension（classicallyurea elevatedmost)
Creatinine:50-59%
Creatinine:33%
Intrinsicrenalfailuresepsismmunecomplexes
underlying orpre-existing disease)
Relatively common(20%)
Very common(56%)
Increased loss invomiting
Potassium
Decreased
Fluid therapy
Reducedintake+aldosteronerelease secondaryto
hypovolaemia
Sodium
Increased
Uncommon（12%）
Uncommon(4%)
Dehydration
Decreased
Relatively common(33%)
Relatively common(23%)
Loss in Gl secretions withvomiting
Chloride
Decreased
Very common(81%)
Unknown but likely to be
Loss in GI secretions with vomiting
common
Calcium
Increased
Uncommon(9%)
Uncommon(5%)
Maybe causerather thaneffect?
Decreased
Uncommon (3%)
Very common andpoor
Saponificationinperipancreaticfat（unproven)
Not a prognostic indicator
prognostic indicator (up
Increasedglucagonreleaseincreasingcalcitonin
to40-45%reduced total
(shown in some)
calcium,up to60%
reduced ionized calcium)
Phosphate
Increased
Common (55%)
Quite common (27%)
Usualydrdedrenlxcretionandanm
alsoazotaemic
Uncommon (0% in one
Quite common (14%)
Usuallysecondary totreatment odiabetemelitus
Decreased
study)
orincreased insulinincreasingcellularuptake.Can
become clinically important in cats
Magnesium
Decreased
Reported but unknown
Reported but unknown
Saponification in peripancreatic fat
frequency
frequency
Glucose
Increased
Common(30-88%)
Common(64%）
Increased glucagon,cortisolandcatecholamines
and reduced insulin.40%became normal,30%
permanentlydiabetic(Hess etal,1998）
Decreased
Common (up to 40%)
Uncommon (4%)
Sepsis/systemicinflammatoryresponse
Anorexiaandmalnutrition(especiallysmallbreeds)
Concurrent liver disease
Albumin
Increased
Common(39-50%)
Quite common(8-30%)
Dehydration
Decreased
Quite common (17%)
Quite common(24%)
Gut loss
Anorexia ormalnutrition
Concurrent iver disease
±Renalloss
Increased
Common(24%)
Dehydrationwithinflammationincreasingglobulins
Total protein
Common(27%)
Decreased
Common(45%)
Uncommon(14%)
As albumin
14.9
changesarelilytbessdramaticSchar1979:HillandanWinkl993Hesstal998;Mansfield ands,
2001).(continues)
230
Chapter14Laboratoryevaluationofexocrinepancreaticdisease
Parameter
Change
Frequency of change in
Frequencyof
Reason/comments
sbop
change in cats
Hepatocellular
Increased
Common (61%)
Common(68%)
Hepaticnecrosis and lipidosis due to sepsis,local
enzymes(ALT
effects of pancreaticenzymes
andAST)
±Concurrent disease(most important in cats)
Cholestatic
Increased
Very common (79%)
Common（50%）
Biliaryobstructioncausedbyinflamedpancreas
enzymes(ALP and
In lipidosis ALP high but
(common cats and dogs)
gamma-glutamyl
GGToften normal
±Primary or concurrent disease (cholangitis or
transferase(GGT))
lipidosis in cats)
±Steroid-induced ALP isoenzyme (in dogs only)
Bilirubin
Increased
Common（53%)
Verycommon(64%)
AsALP
Cholesterol
Increased
Common(48-80%)
Common (64%)
Commonlyelevated:seetext.Mayalsoincrease
withsecondarycholestasis
Triglycerides
Increased
Common leads to
Uncommon (10%?)
Commonly elevated:see text
lipaemicserum
but rarelymeasured
(continued)Potential non-specific changes on biochemistry screen in pancreatitis in dogs and cats.These
14.9
grade disease but changes are likely to be less dramatic(Schaer,1979;Hill and VanWinkle,1993;Hess etal.,1998;
Mansfield and Jones, 2001).
Coagulation screens:Coagulation abnormalities are
of a concurrenturine sample before commencing fluid
common,particularlyinsevere acutedisease inboth
therapyisimportant todeterminewhetherthereisalso
dogs and cats due to DIC. In addition, proteolytic
intrinsic renal compromise.
enzymes(proteases)released from thepancreascata-
Pancreaticoedema,fibrosisorneoplasiacancause
bolizecomplementandvonWillebrandfactor,contrib-
partialorcompletebiliaryobstruction,and consequent
uting to thehaemostaticabnormalities.
increasesin liverenzymes.Dogs withpancreatitismay
presentwithjaundice.Incats,pancreatitisandcholangio-
Analysis ofeffusions:Body cavity effusions are
hepatitis oftenoccur concurrently.There is also a high
common inpancreatitis and maybepleural aswell as
incidenceofhepatic lipidosisincatswithsevereacute
peritoneal.They are usually serosanguineous exu-
pancreatitis.
dates,although transudates and chylous effusions
Increasedcholesterolandtriglyceridesarecommon
havebeenreported incats.Effusions form due tofocal
andmayrepresenteitheracauseor an effectof the
peritonitis and fat necrosis in the abdomen,and more
disease.However,experimental pancreatitis does not
generalizedvasculitis,inflammationandfatnecrosisin
causeelevationsincholesterolandtriglyceridesindogs,
thepleural space.Amylaseand lipase levelsinthefluid
eventhoughitaltersthepatternsof lipoproteins(Whitney
maybeelevated,althoughthediagnosticorprognostic
et al.,1987).Many of theriskfactorsforpancreatitis in
usefulnessof these measurementshasnotbeen as-
dogs(particularlythe endocrinopathies)are associated
sessed in small animals.
with lipaemia,soithasbeenconcludedthat theincrease
in lipidsismore likely tobeacausethan aneffect.
Bloodgas analysis:Blood gas analysisin animals
with pancreatitis shows metabolic acidosis in most
Otherclinicopathological tests
cases.There may alsobe concurrent respiratory acid-
osis and hypoxia if thereisacuterespiratorydistress
Urinalysis:A high urine specific gravitywith azot-
syndrome associated with thepancreatitis.
aemia suggests acute prerenal failure due to dehydra-
tionandshock.However,dogswithseverepancreatitis
Specific enzyme assays
oftenhave isosthenuricurine,suggesting concurrent
Non-invasive diagnosis ofpancreatitisindogs and cats
intrinsicrenaldamage.Proteinuriaisseenin upto78%
requiresthe useofspecificpancreaticenzymeassays,
of dogs(Hess etal.,1998),probably duetoa combina-
butthese assays varygreatlyinsensitivity andspecificity
tionof SIR and tubular damage.Glucosuria maybe
betweenspecies and individuals,and nosingle assay
seen inboth dogs and cats and maybe temporary due
is totallysensitive and specific.
to increased insulinresistance and a‘pre-diabetic
In dogs and cats, the time of onset of the episode
response.Blood and urine glucose should be moni-
ofpancreatitisisrarelyknown.Pancreatic enzymes
tored after thepancreatitishasresolvedtoassess
have distincthalf-lives:indogsthe half-lifeof amylase
whether theanimal istrulyaninsulin-dependentdia-
isapproximately5 hours and thatof lipase isapproxi-
betic.The presence of ketones in the urine inboth dogs
mately 2 hours.Many animals are examined an un-
and cats with pancreatitis indicates diabetic ketoacid-
knownperiod,oftendas,afterthensetofthedisease,
osiswhichrequires immediate and urgent treatment.
bywhich time the enzymesmayhavereturned
Concurrentpancreatitisin a diabetic animal increases
to normal.In addition,the pancreas can respond to
theriskofketoacidosisandmortality.
inflammationbyshuttingoffproductionofenzymes
231
Chapter14Laboratoryevaluationofexocrinepancreaticdisease
and,nngoing,chronicdisase,hereprogressive
level;generally onlyelevationsof3-5timesnormal
lossofpancreaticmasswithanassociatedoverall
(orabove) are considered suggestive ofpancreatitis
reduction in enzyme production.All these factors
(provided noneof the secondarycauses ofelevations
contribute to the variable,oftenpoor sensitivityof
outlined inFigure 14.10arepresent).In the cat,
enzyme assays.Finally,assaysareoften affectedby
plasma amylase and lipase,although measurable,
renal clearanceand drug therapy,particularlyster-
are of nouse at all in the diagnosis of pancreatitis as
oids.Eachassayhas advantages anddisadvantages
theymaybeelevated innormal cats and normal in
(Figure 14.10).
pancreatitis cases.
Pancreaticenzyme assayscurrentlyavailablefor
use indogs andcats aredividedinto catalyticassays
Immunoassays:These areorgan-specific,and may
and immunoassays.
bespecies-specificand canmeasureprecursorsin
addition to active enzymes.They use an antibody
Catalyticassays:These measureplasma levels of
directed against part of the enzyme molecule(usually
distinct fromthe activesite)whichisdetectedbyeither
measuring the enzyme's ability to catalyse a specific
radioimmunoassay (RlA) or an enzyme-linked
reaction.Catalyticassays donot measure inactive
immunosorbent assay (ELiSA).
precursors,such aszymogens,so arenotused for
proteases(e.g.trypsin).They are neither species-nor
Trypsin-like immunoreactivity(TLi):This measures
organ-specific:acatalyticlipaseassaywillpotentially
trypsin and trypsinogen.It is species-specific.Canine
detect any lipasereaching the circulation,including
and feline (andhuman) TLIare available.The canine
gastriclipase,intestinalacidiclipase,lipoproteinlipase
TLI (cTLl) testused in theUKwas developed at the Gl
and other extrapancreatic lipases.There is a high
LaboratoryatTexasAandMUniversity,andisanRIA.
backgroundnon-pancreaticactivityforbothamylase
ThefelineTLI (fTLl) testiscurrentlyonlyavailable in
and lipase:plasma levelsofamylaseand lipaseare
Texas(UKlaboratorieswillforwardsamples)and isan
normal in dogsafter totalpancreatectomy.Plasma
ELISA.TheTLI testwas originally developed in cats
lipase isalsooftennormal in dogs with EPl,which
and dogs for the diagnosis of exocrine pancreatic
equatestolossof90%ofexocrineenzymeoutput
insufficiency,butcanbeused as an additional test in
(Steiner et al.,2001).Thus these assays are neither
pancreatitis,although it may benomore useful than
sensitive nor specific.Hess et al.(1998) found a
lipaseinthediagnosisofpancreatitis indogs.Specificity
sensitivityofonly69%foramylaseand39%forlipase
hasbeenreported asabout65%but sensitivityonly
in dogswithfatal acutepancreatitis.
33%(Steiner,2003).Some dogsmayhave elevated
Small elevationsinamylaseor lipaseareunlikely
TLI andnormal lipase andviceversa,so it may be
to be significant,because of the high background
worth'measuringboth.
Assay
Advantages
Disadvantages
Catalytic assays (N.B.Dogs only;no use in cats)
Amylase
Widely used.Available on
Lowsensitivityandspecificity.Highbackgroundlevelbecausereleased fromothersources
in-house analysers.Not
inoluding smallintestine.Lessoftenelevated thanotherpancreaticenzymes.Renallyexcreted:
affected (orpossibly reduced)
elevated2-3-foldinazotaemiaMaybenormalinsevere/chronicpancreatitisduetoenzyme
by steroids
depletion± loss of tissue.No prognosticvalue
Lipase
As sensitive as canine TLlif
other causes ruled out.
inazotaemia.Maybenormal insevere/chronicpancreatitisduetoenzymedepletionandinhibition
Degree of elevationmay have
prognostic significance.
Steroidselevateupto5-fold
Immunoassays
Canine TLI
Elevations highly specific for
Said torise and fallmorequickly thanlipase/amylasebutelevationsoftenpersist inclinical cases.
pancreatitis.Maybenomore
Renallyexcreted:elevated2-3-fold inazotaemia.Maybeinappropriatelylowinsevere/chronic
sensitive than lipase
FelineTLI
One of only two assays
LowersensitivityandspecificitythancanineTLlRenallyexcretedsoelevatedinazotaemia
availableforcats
Canine PLI
Early indicationsmore
CurrentlyonlyavailableinUSA（timedelaybeforereceivingresults）.Unclearyetifaffectedby
sensitive and specific than TLI
steroids.lncreased inrenal diseasebutmaynotbe significant
Organ-specific sono
interferencefrom
extrapancreatic sources
FelinePLI
Very new test.Appearsmore
OnlyavailableinUSA.Verylitlepublisheddataonitsse
sensitive and specificthanfTLI
14.10
like mmunoreactivity;PLl,pancreatic lipaseimmunoreactivity).
232
Chapter14Laboratoryevaluationofexocrinepancreaticdisease
Incats,TLlis theonlyestablishedblood test avail-
appropriately chosenpancreatic enzyme assays
able for the diagnosis of pancreatitis.Unfortunately,
should be used to reach a presumptive diagnosis of
fTLIhasalowersensitivity andspecificityfordiagnosis
pancreatitis.Definitive diagnosis is only gained by
of pancreatitis in cats than cTLl in dogs.Most
histological examination of the pancreas which is not
concerningly,falsepositiveshave beenreported in
appropriate in many acute cases.
catswithhepaticorGl disease,which are the condi-
tionsmost likely tobe confused clinically with pancrea-
Prognosticindicators
titis in cats.Swift etal.(2000)found a sensitivity of55%
In dogs, the best prognostic indicator currently avail-
andspecificityof56%fordiagnosisof pancreatitiswith
able is thecalculatedorganscore(Figures14.5and
fTLI.However,theyused alowercut-offthancurrently
14.6).Of the individual clinicopathological tests,uri-
recommended(>82ng/l) andused the RIArather than
nary TAP:creatinine ratio is the most useful (Mansfield
the ELISA.Gerhardt et al.(2001)used the ELISA and
et al.,2003),although elevations in serum lipase,
founda sensitivity of62%if thecut-off were82ng/l,a
creatinine andphosphate and low urine SG have
sensitivity of 33%with a cut-off of 100ng/l(currently
shown some value as negative prognostic indicators.
accepted cut-off for diagnosisof caninepancreatitis)
The degree of elevation of TLI does not appear to be
and a sensitivityof 86%if thecutoff were49ng/1(top
prognostically useful. The prognostic relevance of the
of normal range).
degreeof elevation in cPLl isunknown.
Recognized negative prognostic indicators in cats
Pancreaticlipaseimmunoreactivity(PLl):Thismeas-
includelowionized calciumandleucopenia(Kimmelet
ures lipase of pancreatic origin only.Therefore,it is
al.,2001).Urinary orplasma TAPdonot seem tobe
pancreasspecific and,unlike lipase,PLI is not only
prognostically helpful in cats.
high in pancreatitis but also very low in EPl. It is
Othertestswhichhavebeen assessed asprognos-
species-specificandbothcanine and felinePLI are
tic indicators but are not clinically useful include
available.Both are newtests and currently only avail-
α-macroglobulin(circulatingproteaseinhibitor)(Ruaux
able inTexas(UKlaboratorieswillforward samples).
ThecaninePLiis anELISA and the felinePLI anRIA.
trypsincomplexes,whichhavetooshortahalf-lifetobe
Publishedworkon caninePLl is currentlylimited,but
clinically useful (Suchodolski et al.,2001).
earlyworksuggestsit has a highersensitivity thanTLI
orlipase forthe diagnosis of pancreatitis in dogs.Early
work on the clinical use of PLIsuggests it may be more
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
sensitive andspecificthanfTLI andmayremainele-
vated for longer than fTLI in experimental feline pan-
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (EPl) is a functional
creatitis (Williams et al.,2003).
lackofpancreaticenzymesresulting in clinical signsof
steatorrhoea and weight loss. Unlike pancreatitis, it is
Trypsin activationpeptide(TAP):AnassayforTAPhas
diagnosedbyclinicalsignsandpancreaticfunctiontests
beenrecently developed.TAPis thepeptidecleaved
and not on theresultsof pancreatichistopathology.
from trypsinogen by enterokinase in the small intes-
tine,resulting in active trypsin.lt is highly conserved
Causes
between species,so the human ELISA can be used in
Pancreatic acinar atrophy(PAA) isbelieved tobe the
both dogs and cats.
predominantcauseof EPlindogsbutend-stage chronic
Theoretically,thereshouldbenoTAPintheplasma
pancreatitis is also important (Keller, 1990; Watson,
inhealthy animals if all the trypsinogen is activated
2003).PAAisparticularlyrecognizedinGermanShep-
within the small intestine.However, the finding of low
herd Dogs,in which an autosomal mode of inheritance
but significant levels of TAP in the plasma of healthy
hasbeen demonstrated;it hasalso been described in
dogs (Mansfield and Jones, 2000) suggests that a
Rough Collies,in English Setters and sporadically in
small amount ofnormal trypsinogenautoactivation
other breeds. Histological studies in German Shep-
occurs in the pancreas.Elevations in plasma TAP
herd Dogs suggest an immune-mediated disease di-
levels should be diagnostic of pancreatitis,but ele-
rected against theacini.The isletcellsarespared and
vatedplasmaTAPhasa specificityofonly76%and
dogswithPAAarenot typically diabetic.Most dogs
sensitivity of 53%for pancreatitis in dogs.Urinary
develop the disease in young adulthood,butapropor-
TAP:creatinineratio hasa higherspecificitybut lower
tionof GermanShepherdDogsremain subclinical for
sensitivity thanplasma TAP.There is a muchwider
a prolonged period,in spiteof clinicopathological evi-
dence of pancreatic enzyme insufficiency,and only
than in humans,and urinary TAP is also increased in
develop clinical signs late in life.PAA has not been
renal disease (Mansfield and Jones,2000).
recognized in cats and end-stage pancreatitis isthe
commonestcauseof felineEPl.
Summary
EPI can alsodevelopasa consequenceof chronic
The non-invasive diagnosis ofpancreatitis isprob-
pancreatitis in which there is extensive loss of pancrea-
lematical. In both dogs and cats, a combination of
tic acini.As chronic diseasemay be largely subclinical
history,clinical findings,diagnostic imaging findings
oronly present asoccasional clinicalacute-on-chronic
(radiography to rule out intestinal obstruction as a
cause of acute vomiting and otherpathology,and
may be under-estimated. Many dogs with end-stage
ultrasonography of the pancreas) and the results of
chronicpancreatitis also develop diabetes mellitus
233
Chapter14Laboratoryevaluationofexocrinepancreaticdisease
eitherbeforeorafterEPlasaresultofconcurrentislet
A singlenormal orhigh TLl ina breed of dog
cell destruction(Keller,1990;Watson,2003) and the
other than a German Shepherd,with suspicious
situation is likely tobesimilarincats.
clinical signs,does notrule out EPI.TLI can
EPI maydevelopsecondarytopancreatictumours
increase toor above thenormalrangein dogs
in dogsandcats,usuallydue toblockageofpancreatic
withEPl secondary to chronicend-stage
ducts by the tumours,although destruction of acinar
pancreatitis,if itismeasured during aboutof
tissue by the mass and associatedpancreatitis also
disease (Keller,1990;Watson,2003).This is
playarole.
because EPI reduces TLl,but pancreatitis
Finally,clinical EPlmay developinthepresenceof
elevates it.A similar situation may arise incats,
but thishas not beenwell documented.
of the duodenum inactivating lipase in theintestinal
Therefore,in any animal with suspected EPI
lumen.This israre in small animals.
secondary to chronicpancreatitis,TLI
measurementsshouldberepeated,preferably
Diagnosis
when the animal is showing no clinical signs of
Thediagnosisof EPl relieson demonstratingreduced
pancreatitis.Alternatively,a testforenzyme
pancreatic enzyme output. The most sensitive and
activity in the gut,such as a faecal elastase test,
specificwayofdoing thisisbymeasuringreduced
could beused in these animals,since
circulating enzyme activity.However,there areprob
pancreatitisleadstoenzymereleaseinto the
lems interpreting these results in the presence of
abdomenandblood streambutnotinto the
concurrent pancreatitis.In these cases,measurement
pancreatic ducts which drain into the gut.
of reduced enzyme activity in the gut,bymeasuring
reducedfaecal enzyme activity,maybeuseful.
A lowcPLlalsohas good sensitivity and specificity
for the diagnosis of EPl in dogs (Steiner et al, 2001),
Blood tests:immunoassays
but isnotsuperior toTLl and the latterismorereadily
Measurementofreduced TLl in theblood has a high
available.PLl isalso likelytobelowincatswith EPl.
sensitivity andspecificityforthe diagnosis of EPlindogs
Unlike in humans,amylase and lipase are not
andcats,andiscurrentlythesingletestofchoiceinsmall
consistently low in dogs and cats withEPl.This is
animals.Afasting serumsample isrequired because
because of the highbackground levelsof enzyme from
therelease ofpancreaticenzymesassociatedwith
other organs.
feeding canraise thelevels.It isnotnecessary to stop
exogenouspancreaticenzymesupplementationbefore
Faecal tests
measuringTLIbecausethetestisanimmunoassay
which doesnot cross-react with theTLlof otherspecies
Faecaltrypsinactivity:Measurementof faecal trypsin
(andvery little exogenous pancreatic enzyme is ab-
activity has such a low sensitivity and specificityfor the
sorbed).There are some problems in interpreting the
diagnosisof EPl that it isnotworthdoing!Likewise,
results,particularlyin dogs,as outlinedbelow:
microscopicexaminationorfaecesforundigestedfat,
starchand musclefibres isnothelpful:aswithplasma
A lowserum TLl (<2.5ng/l in dogs)alone does not
turbidity,other conditionsapartfrom EPI cancause
diagnoseclinical EPlif there areno compatible
maldigestion/malabsorption.Observation of a subjec-
clinical signs.SerumTLI should bemeasured
several times,overseveralweekstomonths,and
atedwithEPl,but thishasavery lowsensitivity;most
bepersistently low to demonstrateEPl.
dogswithEPl haveonlymild tomoderate increases in
Occasionally,a singleTLImaybelowinadogwith
faecalfat,overlappingwithnormaldogsanddogswith
pancreatitisasaresultofa temporaryreduction in
otherdiseases.Inaddition,animalswithEPloftenhave
enzymeproduction.Adogwithpersistentlylow
intermittentlynormal faeces.Faecalproteolyticactivity
TLI but nosteatorrhoea orweight losswould be
canbeassessed inanumberofways,butagainthese
considered tohave‘subclinical'EPland should
testsgenerallyhave poor sensitivity and specificity.
not be treated butbemonitored forany evidence
Bacteria in the gutcanalsoproduceproteolytic en-
of clinical disease.Subclinical EPl is uncommon
zymes,and these certainly produce false negative re-
but hasbeen reported ina small number of
sults in tests such as the gelatine (radiographic film)
GermanShepherdDogswithPAA(Wiberg etal,
digestion tests.Normal dogs,unlike humans,show
1999);it has not yet been reported in cats.A TLI
intermittentexcretionofpancreaticproteases,solevels
stimulation test maygivemoreinformation about
maybelowonsinglefaecalsamplesfromnormalani-
the statusof the animalbut israrelyperformed
mals.Thetestscanbeimprovedby stimulationwithatest
(Wiberg et al.,1999;Wiberg,2004)
food(e.g.soybean) but the testsremain difficult to per-
A TLI in the grey area(2.5-5.0 ng/ in dogs) is
formandinterpret(WestermarckandSandholm,1980).
not diagnosticof EPland the testneedstobe
repeateda few weeks to months later. In a
Faecal elastase:This appears to have highersensitiv-
proportion of dogs(45%in one study:Wiberg et
ityandspecificitythan theotherfaecaltestsforthe
al.,1999),the TLI willreturn to the normal range.
diagnosis of EPl in dogs.Elastase is apancreatic
In about 10%of dogs,theTLl will drop down to
enzyme andaspecies-specific ELISAforcanine elastase
thelevel diagnosticof EPl,whilein therestit
hasbeendeveloped and is available forcommercial use
remains in the grey area
in dogs(Spillman etal.,2001).Aswithcanine TLl,there
234
Chapter 14
Laboratoryevaluationofexocrinepancreaticdisease
isnocross-reactionwithelastasefromotherspecies,so
Findingamarked hypoproteinuria ormoresevere
dogscanremainonenzymesupplementationwhilethe
changes on haematology and biochemistry screens in
test isperformed.There ismarkedvariationinelastase
an animal with EPI should trigger a search for another
levelsinnormal canine faecescompared with humans.
disease. Cats and dogs with end-stage pancreatitis may
Thesensitivityandspecificityofthetestareimprovedby
presentwithmoreseveresecondarychangesonblood
taking three separate faecal samples on3 days orusing
screens asoutlined in thepancreatitissection.A high
a cut-offvalue fordiagnosisof EPl whichisbelow this
percentage of these end-stage pancreatitis animals (up
variation in most dogs. Measurement may be particul-
to50%)will alsohaveconcurrent diabetesmellitus and
arly usefulin animalswithend-stagepancreatitisand/or
will show typical clinicopathological changes.
pancreaticductblockagewhere TLlresultsmightbe
misleading(Spillman et al.,2000).
Pancreatic neoplasia
Faecalculture andsensitivity,andparasiteexami-
nation:Atleastonefaecal cultureandsensitivity and
Neoplasia of the exocrine pancreas is uncommon in
cats and dogs.
parasite examination(seeChapter13) should be car-
Pancreatic adenocarcinomas are generally very
ried out onall animalswith EPi.Concurrent Gl infec-
tions are notuncommonin these dogs,secondary to
malignant and haveusually disseminatedwidelybythe
time of diagnosis. They are often subclinical but can
disruption of the Gl environment and immunity.Treat-
ment of the EPl willnot be successful unless concur-
result in single orrepeatbouts ofpancreatitisand/or
the development of EPl.Although the development of
rent infections are alsorecognized and treated.
EPI secondary toneoplasia israre(<10%of cases in
man), it has been reported in both dogs (Bright,1985)
Additional tests
Itis advisable to measure serum cobalamin (B12)
and cats.lt occurs due to a combination of duct
blockage and pancreatic parenchymal destruction.
concentrationin animalswith EPlbecause cobalaminis
Occasionally, pancreatic carcinomas can cause
oftenreduced due to adeficiencyofpancreaticintrinsic
factor(Halletal.,1991).In cats withend-stage pancrea-
paraneoplastichypercalcaemia,although this israre.
titis, the low cobalamin is compounded by the high
Pancreatic adenomas arerare in small animalsbut
incidenceofconcurrentinflammatorybowel disease,
have beenreported in cats(Bjorneby andKari,2002).
whichoftenfurtherreducescobalaminbyreducing ileal
Nodular hyperplasia of the exocrinepancreasis com-
mon in older dogs and cats.This usually presents as
absorption.Cobalamin deficiency hasbeenreported to
cause villous atrophy and reduced Gl function, weight
multiple small masses,whereas pancreatic tumours
loss and diarrhoea in cats.lf low cobalamin is docu-
are usually single;histologyis necessary definitively to
differentiate hyperplasia from neoplasia.
mented in dogs and catswith EPl it is important to
Pancreatic tumours are not associated with any
supplementwithparenteral B12injections.
Serum folate concentrationsmayalsobemeas-
specificclinicopathological changes and they may
uredinthese animals,andareelevated inabouta third
cause no changes inenzyme activities at all.However,
of dogs. This may indicate small intestinal bacterial
some cases havebeen associated withverymarked
overgrowth (SIBO), although the sensitivity and
elevations in serum lipase concentration(Quigley et
al,2001).Alternatively,they canresult inrecurrent
specificity of a high serum folate for the diagnosis of
SIBO is poor (see Chapter 13). Up to 75% of dogs with
bouts of pancreatitis, with typical associated blood
EPI alsohave SIBO,secondary to increased undi-
changes,and EPl candevelop.In the lattercases,TLI
gested nutrients in the gut,reduction in the antibac-
maybelowornormal,orevenelevatediftheEPlisdue
terialeffectsofpancreatic secretions and chronic
to duct blockageand there isplentyof remainingacinar
maldigestion leading to malnutrition and reduced gut
tissue to produce trypsin.In cases with suspected EPI
immunity.The definition and diagnosis of SIBO is
due topancreatic tumours,testsof enzyme function,
problematical and it isbettertoassumeSIBOinnewly
such asthefaecalelastasetest,are likelytobeamore
diagnoseddogswithPlandtreatappropriately,rather
sensitive meanstodiagnose the insufficiency.Marked
elevations in liver enzymes and jaundice may be seen
than rely on theresults of diagnostic tests.The impor-
tance of SIBO in cats with EPI is unknown.
in some cases asaresultofextrahepaticobstructionof
A small number of dogs with EPl have low serum
the bile duct by the mass (Mayhew et al.,2002).
Ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration cytology
folate levels (4% in the study by Hall et al.,1991). In
some cases,this may be due to concurrent inflamma-
mayhelptodifferentiatebetweeninflammatoryand
toryboweldiseasereducingjejunalabsorptionoffolate.
neoplastic lesions ofthe pancreas(Bennet etal.,2001;
Haematologyand biochemistry screensin dogs and
Bjorneby and Kari,2002). Care must be taken,as
catswithEPlareoftennormal.Inverycachexicanimals,
dysplastic changes in epithelial cellsin the presence of
inflammation may appear very similar to neoplasia.
theymayshowsubtlechangesassociatedwithmalnu-
trition,negative nitrogenbalance and breakdown of
bodymuscle,suchaslowalbuminandglobulin,mildly
Pancreatic abscesses, cysts and
elevatedliverenzymes,lowcholesterolandtriglycerides
pseudocysts
and lymphopenia.Animals with EPl,particularly Ger-
manShepherdDogs,oftenpresentwithdermatological
Pancreatic abscesses, cysts and pseudocysts are
neutrophilia resulting from chronic pyoderma.
a complication of pancreatitis.
235
chapter14Laboratoryevaluationofexocrinepancreaticdisease
Pancreatic cysts may be congenital (e.g.as part
value of thismeasurement in small animals is
of the polycysticrenal disease in Persian cats) or
unknown.Cytologically,a pseudocyst contains
secondaryto cysticneoplasia,butmost
amorphous debris,someneutrophilsand
commonly are secondary topancreatitis.
macrophagesand,rarely,smallnumbersof
Pseudocysts have been recognized in
reactivefibroblasts.
association withpancreatitis in bothcatsand
A true pancreatic abscess isa collection of septic
dogs.A pseudocyst isa collection of fluid
exudatewhichresultsfromsecondaryinfection of
containing pancreatic enzymes and debrisina
necroticpancreatictissueorapancreatic
non-epithelialized sac.Fluid analysis generally
pseudocysts.Cytologically,there are many
shows amodified transudate,and the levels of
degenerativeneutrophils andvariablenumbers
amylase and lipase can be measured. In
ofpancreaticacinarcellswhich may appear
humans,the enzymes are more elevated in
atypical or dysplastic as aresult of inflammation.
pseudocystsassociated withpancreatitis than in
They arefortunatelyrare in dogs and cats as
those associated with cystic carcinomas,but the
they are associated with a poorprognosis.
Case examples
Case 1
Signalment
3-year-oldentirefemaleMiniatureDachshund.
Biochemistry(continued)Result
Reference interval
History and clinical findings
AST(IU/I)
29
20-32
10-dayhistoryofseverevomiting(foodandthenbileandanorexiaOn
ALP(IU/)
1129
3-142
clinicalexaminationthedogwasthindpresedandabout%dhy
Amylase (IU/)
3585
167-1126
drated.Therewasnopalpableintestinal foreignbody.
Lipase (IU/I)
3471
0-200
Clinical pathology data
Urine analysis
Haematology
Result
SG1.050,nothingremarkableondipstick.
Reference interval
RBC(x1012/1)
7.8
5.5-8.5
What abnormalities are present?
Hb (g/dl)
17.1
12-18
Haematology
HCT (V)
0.47
0.37-0.55
Mature neutrophilia
MCV (fl)
Lymphopenia.
60.3
60-77
Biochemistry
MCHC(g/d)
60.3
32-37
Hypoglycaemia
WBC(x10/)
37.2
6.0-17.0
Marked elevation in ALP
Neutrophils(x10%/1)
36.5
3.0-11.5
Mildly elevated urea
Neutrophils（band)(x10%/)
Marked elevations in bothamylase and lipase
0
0-0.3
Hypokalaemia
Lymphocytes (x10%/)
0.4
1.0-4.8
Hypoproteinaemiaand hypoalbuminaemia.
Monocytes(x10°/1)
0.3
0.2-1.5
Eosinophils(x10%/)
TheSG of theurine confirms adequaterenal concentrating ability.
0
0.1-1.3
Platelets (x10/)
How would you interpret these results?
406
175-500
Fibrinogen (g/l)
Theneutrophilaprobablyrflctinflammationalthoughitmayl
3.0
2.0-4.0
reflectstress.Lymphopeniaismost ikelytobeastressresponse.
Markedelevationsinbothamylaseandlipasearestronglysugges-
tifpeztva
Biochemistry
Result
Reference interval
but highurineSG.However,thedegreeofelevationsofamylaseand
Sodium(mmol/l)
155.4
135.0-155.0
lipaseinthiscasecouldnotbeexplainedbyreducedrenalexcretion
Potassum (mmoll)
3.7-5.8
alone.Hypokalaemiaisprobablysecondarytovomitingandlowglucose
2.28
secondarytomalnutritionand hypermetabolism(particularlyinasmall
Glucose (mmoll)
1.7
3.4-5.3
dog).Lowprotinandalbuminmayrefectmalnutrionandprobablegut
Urea(mmoll)
11.5
3.3-6.7
loss（thereisnorenallossasthereisnoproteinintheurine）.othth
Creatinine (umol/)
low potassium and the low glucosecould become life-threatening so
66
70-170
needimmediatetreatmentMarkedelevationinALPsmostlikelytobe
Calcium(mmoll)
2.33
2.2-2.7
duetoacombinationofcholestasiassociatedwithpancreatitiand
Inorganicphosphate
2.17
0.6-1.3
stressinreasingsteridinducedienym
(mmoll)
Results of further tests
TP (g/l)
43.1
55.0-80.0
Abdominalradiographsshowedpoorabdominalcontrastbutnoother
Albumin (g/l)
22.8
25-45
abnormalities.Abdominalultrasonographyshowedmixedyperechoic
Globulin(g/l)
20.3
echogenicityofpancreasand hyperechoicadjacentmesentery.TLland
25-45
cPLI werenotmeasured during thisvisit.
ALT(IU/I)
21
21-59
Case 1 continues
236
Chapter14Laboratoryevaluationofexocrinepancreaticdisease
Case 1 continued
AtT+77months,thedogwasshowingsignsofgastrointestinaldisease.
Thedogwastreatedlong termwithalowfatdietandpancreaticenzyme
Diagnosis
supplementation.
Acutepancreatitiswasdiagnosed(organscore2thereforemoderately
severe）.Thedogrecoveredafter2weeksofintensivemanagementwith
Howwouldyou interpret these results?
fluid therapyanti-emetis,analgesics and nutritional support.
TheseresultsshowedthatthedoghaddevelopedEPIby1monthafter
theapparentsingleepisodeofacutepancreatisconfirmingthatthis
Follow-up
wasrobablyinfactnacutnchronicisdewhichadresuln
Thedogwasfollowedupatregularintervalswithrepeatmeasurements
extensivelossof pancreaticacinar tissue.ThecPLIisalsolow(T+78
of TLIandcPLlas outlinedbelow(neitherimmunoassaywasperformed
months)dgsclinica sidheaelato
at the first presentation).
months) elevating both assays into the normal range.This would
TLI(ng/ml)
CPLI(ng/ml)
complicate diagnosisof EPlif these hadbeen the only samples taken.
Normal>5.0
Normal2.2-102
EPI<2.5
Pancreatitis >200
Case outcome
Pancreatitis>35
The dog isdoing welnearly years from original pesentationon a low-
T+1month
2.5
becomeovertlydabeticbutdynamictstingshowshehamarkedly
T+5.5months
3.7
reducedinsulinreleaseconsistentwithmarkedlyreducedpancreatic
T+18months
1.8
beta cell function.
T+77months
11.6
134
T+78months
1.7
5.6
T=time at initial presentation with acutepancreatitis
Case 2
Signalment
7-year-old neutered maleDomesticShorthair cat.
Biochemistry
Result
Referenceinterval
History and clinical findings
Sodium(mmoll)
150.9
135.0-155.0
Potassium (mmol/l)
3.66
3.6-4.5
Clinically,the cat wasdepressed and weakwithathreadyperipheral
Glucose(mmol/)
6.5
4.0-5.3
pulseandpalejaundicedmucousmembranesTherewasapalpable
Urea (mmoll)
cranial abdominalmass,whichwaspainful.
5.7
6.7-10.0
Creatinine (μmol/l)
118
45-150
Clinical pathology data
Calcium(mmoll)
2.38
1.9-2.4
Haematology
Result
Reference interval
Inorganicphosphate
1.35
0.7-1.2
RBC(x1012/)
8.3
5.0-10.0
(mmol/)
(Ip/6) qH
12.6
8.0-15.0
TP (g/)
82
55.0-80.0
Albumin (g/)
27
25-45
HCT(/)
0.38
0.26-0.45
MCV (Il)
45.9
39-55
Globulin (g/l)
55
25-45
MCHC (g/dl)
33.3
30-36
ALT(IU/I)
698
16-44
WBC(x10°/)
26.2
5.5-19.5
AST (IU/)
275
0-32
Neutrophils(x10%/)
24.6
2.5-12.5
ALP (IU/)
564
16-68
Neutrophils(band)(x10°/)
0
0-0.3
Total bilirubin (μumoll)
85
0-15
Lymphocytes (x10%/)
1.15
1.5-7.0
Monocytes (x10%/)
0.2
0.0-1.5
Urine analysis
Eosinophils (x10%/)
0.20
0.0-1.5
SG
>1.050
Platelets (x10/)
156
200-800
Protein
2+
Fibrinogen (g/)
2.0
1.0-3.0
Blood
>3+
pH
G
Film comment
Red cell appear normocytic and normochromic. WBC morpholgy
Microscopy
Packed fieldsof red blood cells,
appearsnormal.Plateletsconsistent withcount given.
white cells40 perhpf.Many bilirubin
Coagulation tests
crystals
PT31s(normal<7-12 s)
aPTT >2minutes (normal<15 s)
Case 2continues
237
Chapter14Laboratoryevaluationofexocrinepancreaticdisease
Case 2 continued
Whatfurthertestswouldbeuseful?
What abnormalities are present?
fTLI
Haematology
B12and folate
Marked neutrophilia
Fibrin degradation products or D-dimers
(Mildthrombocytopenia)
Coagulation screen showsmarked prolongations ofPTandaPTT.
Chapter12)
Urine culture and sensitivity.
Biochemistry
Mildlyelevated glucose
Results of further tests
MarkedlyelvatedALPALTandT
Markedly elevated bilirubin
Slight hyperphosphataemia
in the pylorus,suggestiveofdelayed gastric emptying.Abdominal
Elevated globulin (and total protein）.
How would you interpret the results?
assumedtobethemassvisibleonradiographswithnormalechogenicity
Theneutrophiliasconsistentwithinflammation.Theslightlyreduced
stomach.Thegallbladderwas dilated and thecystic ductwas tortuous
platelets,accompanied by theprolonged coagulation times,may
but thehepaticparenchyma was of normal echogenicity.
reflectDIC.
FelineTLl wasmeasured and theresult(whichcamebackafterthe
TheinedriGrbablftdratima
cat had died)was272ng/ml（reference interval12-82)suggestiveof
be contributed tobytheproteinuria.Sediment examination suggests
pancreatitis.FolateandB12werealsomeasuredandwerenormal.
urinary tract inflammation.
Diagnosis
elevatfiylinatinifcan
AcutepancreatitiswastentativelydagnosedThecatdiedhoursafter
admissioninspiteofintensivemanagement withintravenousfluids
rubinmaybeeitherhepaticorposthepatic.Thepresence of thecranial
antibiotics andanalgesics.Post-mortemexaminationconfirmed acute
abdominalmasscouldbeconsistentwithanobstructivelesionand
necrotizing pancreatitis.
posthepatic jaundice.
Slight hyperphosphataemiamaybe thefirst signof prerenalazo-
taemiadeveloping.Similarly,theelevated total protein andglobulin
probablyreflecthypovolaemia.Thismaybemaskinghypoalbuminaemia.
Case3
Signalment
12-month-old neutered female German Shepherd.
Biochemistry
Result
Reference interval
History and clinical findings
Sodium (mmol/l)
149.3
135.0-155.0
Weight sspolyhagiamiting bi and intitent darha ith
Potassium(mmol/l)
5.13
3.7-5.8
mucus passed 3-4times a dayforseveralmonths.Clinicalexamination
Glucose (mmol/)
2.9
3.4-5.3
revealedpoorbodyconditionwitha drycoatbutwasotherwiseunre
markable.
Urea(mmol/l)
5.7
3.3-6.7
Clinical pathology data
Creatinine(μmol/l)
112
70-170
Calcium(mmol/l)
2.64
2.2-2.7
Haematology
Result
Reference interval
Inorganic phosphate
0.87
0.6-1.3
RBC(x1012/)
8.76
5.5-8.5
(mmol/l)
TP(g/)
Hb (g/dl)
62.5
55.0-80.0
19.1
12-18
HCT (I)
ALT (IU/)
52
21-59
0.60
0.37-0.55
MCV (tl)
AST(IU/I)
57
60-77
20-32
68.7
ALP(IU/)
42
3-142
MCHC(g/dl)
31.7
32-37
WBC(x10°/)
13.1
6.0-17.0
Gastrointestinal panel
Result
Reference interval
Neutrophils (x 10°/)
11.4
3.0-11.5
TLI (ng/ml)
<1.5
EPI<2.5
Lymphocytes (x10%/)
0.4
1.0-4.8
Normal >5.0
Monocytes (x10%/)
1.0
0.2-1.5
Folate (ng/ml)
2.6
3-13
0.2
Cobalamin (pg/ml)
534
Eosinophils (x 10°/)
0.1-1.3
>200
Platelets (x10°/)
180
175-500
Fibrinogen (g/l)
1.0
2.0-4.0
Case 3 continues
238
Chapter14Laboratoryevaluationofexocrinepancreaticdisease
Case 3 continued
Diagnosis and treatment
Paipbalur
Faecal culture
infetongiiy
CampylbacteulturedativprasitologyanGida
supplementationanda courseof erythromycinfortheCampylobacter
What abnormalities are present?
followedbymetronidazoleforpossiblesecondarysmallintestinalbacte
rialovergrowthThefaecalqualityimprovedandshegainedalitleweih
Haematology
but the vomiting continued.
Lymphopenia
Mild eythrocytosis.
TLI(ng/ml)
Folate(ng/ml)
Cobalamin (pg/ml)
Biochemistry
(EPI<2.5,
(normal3-13)
(normal>200)
Hypoglycaemia
normal>5)
Gastrointestinal panel
2monthslater
1.8
1.1
294
Subnormal TLI
5monthslater
1.5
4.1
<100
Lowfolate
Normal cobalamin.
Follow-up
Faecalculture
Campylobacter.
Final diagnosis and outcome
ThepersistentlywTonfrmdlThperistentlylwfolaad
How would you interpret these results?
progressivereductionincobalamininspiteofenzymesupplementation
Haematologyisnormalexceptforalymphopenia(mostlikelytobestress
suggestedinfiltativediseaseinthesmallintestinereducingabsrption.
relatedadmilderyhrocytosisssiblycndarymildhy
Theowerdelinedanyfurhrwork-urbipsisoanovelrotin
aemia.Themildreductioninglucosemaybedue tomalnutrition,or
diet andsteroidtherapywerecommenced withapresumptivediagnosis
inappropriatesamplehandling (wrong anticoagulant).
of concurrent inflammatory bowel disease.Theimprovement was dra-
The lowTLlina GermanShepherdDogwith thishistoryishighly
matic:thevomiting stopped and thedoggainedweight.
suggestfi
advisableThelowfolateisunusual(itshouldbeincreasedduetosmall
intestinalbacterialvergrowth）Cobalaminisnormalalthoughitfen
reducedinEPI.TheCampylobacterinfectionisprobablysecondarybut
should betreated as itmay worsen the clinical signs.
Referencesand furtherreading
Medicine andSurgery3,125-132
Mansfield CS,Jones BR and Spillman T (2003）Assessing the
severityof canine pancreatitis.ResearchinVeterinaryScience
Bennett PF,Hahn KA,Toal RL and Legendre AM (2001)
74,137-144
Ultrasonographic and cytopathological diagnosis of exocrine
Mayhew PD,Holt DE,McLear RC and Washabau RJ (2002)
pancreaticcarcinomain thedogandcat.Journalof theAmerican
Animal HospitalAssociation37,466-473
cats.Journal of SmallAnimal Practice43,247-253
ClinicsofNorthAmerica:SmallAnimalPractice32,1293-1312
of chronicpancreatitis:aperspectiveon thefuture.Molecular
MedicineToday5,493-499
maldigestionsyndrome.Journalof theAmericanVeterinary
NormanJ (1998)Therole of cytokines in the pathogenesisof acute
MedicalAss0ciation187,420-421
pancreatitis.AmericanJournal ofSurgery175,7683
CookAKBreitschwerdtEB,vinJF,BunchSEandLinnO（1993）
QuigleyKA,JacksonMLand HainesDM2001)Hyperlipasemiain6
dogswithpancreaticorhepaticneoplasiaeviencefortumour
cases(1985-1990).Journalof theAmericanVeterinary Medical
lipaseproduction.VeterinaryClinicalPathology30,114120
Association203,673-679
GeraWiiah
pancreatitis indogs.Compendiumon Continuing Education for
Hewicker-Trautwein M and NolteI(2001)Comparison of the
thePracticingVeterinarian22,531-542
sensitivityof different diagnostictestsforpancreatitisincats.
RuauxCGandAtwellRB(1998)Aseverityscoreforspontaneouscanine
JournalofVeterinaryInternaMedicine15,29-333
acutepancreatitis.AustralianVeterinaryJournal76,804808
HallEJ,BondMMan,BattRMandMan(991）suy
Ruaux CGand Atwell RB(1999)Levelsof total α-macroglobulin and
of the diagnosis and treatment of canine exocrine pancreatic
trypsin-likeimmunoreactivityarepoorindicatorsofclinicalseverty
HessRS,SaundersM,VanWinkleTJ,ShoferFSandWashabauRJ
Science67,83-87
(1998)Clinicopathological,radiographic and ultrasonographic
SchaerM(1979)Aclinicopathological surveyof acutepancreatitis in
abnormalitiesindogs withfatal acute pancreatitis:70cases
30dogs and5cats.Journal of theAmerican Animal Hospital
(1986-1995).Journalof theAmericanVeterinaryMedical
Association15,681-87
Association213,66560
SpillmabergMEkailingryi
Hill RCandVanWinkleTJ(1993)Acute necrotizing pancreatitis and
acute suppurativepancreatitisinthecat:aretrospectivestudyof
40cases(1976-1989).Journalof VeterinaryInternalMedicine7,
insufficiencyormaldogsanddogswithchronicenteropathiesThe
25-33
EuropeanJournalofComparativeGastroenterology5,16
KellerET(199o)Highserum trypsin-likeimmunoreactivity secondary
SpillmannTWitSTeiekamSEimCBurkhard
topancreatitis in a dogwith exocrine pancreatic insufficiency.
Eigenbrodt Eand Sziegoleit A (2001) An immunoassay for
Journalof theAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation196,
canine pancreatic elastase 1asan indicator of exocrine
623-626
pancreaticinsufficiencyindogs.JournalofVeterinaryDiagnostic
Kimmel SE,Washabau RJ and DrobatzKJ (2001) Incidence and
Investigation13,468-474
prognostic value of low plasma ionised calcium concentration in
Steiner JM(2003)Diagnosisof pancreatitis.Veterinary Clinicsof
cats with acute pancreatitis:46cases(1996-1998).Journal of
NorthAmerica:SmallAnimalPractice33,1181-1195
theAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation219,1105-1109
SteinerMGumingeRRuGMandWiliamsDA2001Srum
pancreaticinsufficiency.JournalofVeterinaryInternalMedicine
dogswithothersystemicdiseases.AustralianVeterinaryJournal
15,274
Steiner JM and Williams DA (20oo)Serum feline trypsin-like
Mansfield CSandJonesBR(2001)Reviewof felinepancreatitispart
78,416-422
immunoractivity in catswithexocrinepancreatic insufficiency.
two:clinical signsdiagnosisand treatment.JournalofFeline
JournalofVeterinaryInternalMedicine14,627-629
239
Laboratory evaluation of
lipid disorders
Joan Duncan
Introduction
surrounding a hydrophobic lipid centre containing
triglyceride and cholesterol esters (Figure 15.2). The
The lipids,including triglycerides and cholesterol
apolipoproteins(designated apoA,apoB,etc.) are
(Figure 15.1),are essential for normal physiological
specific proteins that direct the lipoproteins to their
function.Triglyceridesare a source ofchemical en-
sitesofmetabolismandactascofactorsin the enzymatic
ergy,while cholesterol is a structural component of cell
reactions of lipid metabolism.
membranes and an essential precursorin steroid hor-
mone synthesis.Decreasedorincreased plasma lipid
concentrations are identifiedrelatively frequently in
Apolipoprotein
veterinary patients.Hyperlipidaemia,an increase in
plasma cholesterol and/or triglyceride,is most com-
Polarlipid
surface
Phospholipid
mon.lt may arise as theresult ofaprimary defect in
layer
lipoproteinmetabolismorasaconsequenceof an
underlying systemic disease.This chapteroutlinesthe
majorevents in lipidmetabolism and theinvestigation
of hyperlipidaemia.
Non-polar
CH
CH
lipidcore
15.2
Schematicrepresentation ofa lipoprotein.The
Cholesterol
polar surface layer iscomposed ofphospho-
lipids,cholesterol and apolipoproteins.Thenon-polarcore
contains triglyceride and cholesterol esters.
CH2)8—CHs
(CH2)
There are four discrete populations of lipoproteins
recognized in the dog andcat,classifiedonthebasis
（CH2—CH2）-CHs
Triglyceride
of theirsize,density,lipidandapolipoproteincontent,
Chemical structures of cholesterol anda
and electrophoreticmobility.Each lipoprotein species
15.1
triglyceride.Triglycerides are the result of
has a specific function (Figure 15.3). The classes
esterification of threefattyacids and glycerol.
recognized in the dog are:
Chylomicrons
Verylowdensity lipoproteins(VLDLs),which
Lipid metabolism in the dog and cat
transport primarily triglyceride (TG),with a small
amountofcholesterol
Lipids and lipoproteins
Low density lipoproteins(LDLs),which transport
Lipids are insoluble and aretransported through the
primarilycholesterol
plasma totheir sitesof utilization in lipid-protein com-
High density lipoproteins(HDLs),which also
plexes called lipoproteins.The interactionsbetween
transportprimarily cholesterol.
lipoproteins and tissues ensure the efficient transport
of lipid in response to physiological demand. Lipo-
Figure 15.4shows an outline of lipid metabolism
proteins are composed of a surface coat, containing
which is based on observations in dogs, cats and
phospholipid, free cholesterol and apolipoproteins,
humans.
241
Chapter15
Laboratoryevaluationof lipiddisorders
Lipoprotein
Function
Predominantlytriglyceride transport
Chylomicrons
Transprt fdietarylidpreinatlytriglyridrmthnttinteeripheraltsanir
Very low densitylipoproteins(VLDL)
Exporftrilyidadclerifyt
(see below).
Predominantlycholesteroltransport
Low densitylipoproteins(LDL)
Delivery of cholesterol toperipheraltissues.
High density lipoproteins (HDL)
DonatesapoCandapoEtochylomicronsandVLDL,facilting deliveryof thecontentsof theselipoproteinsto
the tissue,and their remnants to the liver.
15.3
Functions of the lipoproteins involved in lipid metabolism.
Circulationand peripheral tissues
FFA
FFA
CMremnant
O
LPLhydrolysis of TG rele
esFFAfromCMandVLDL
VLDLremnant
O
FFA
FFA
LDL
O
Donates apoC&apoE
Chalesteralacquired by HDL
vedfromcirculation
HDL
HDL
Liver
LDL
Schematicrpresentationof lipidmetabolism.CMchylomicrons;FFA,freefattyacids;LPL,lipoprotein liae;
15.4
TG,triglyceride)
Dietarylipid metabolism
plasma insulin concentrations,ensuring delivery of
IngestedTGisbrokendown in the intestine intofatty
fatty acids to the adipose tissue during the postprandial
acids and monoglyceride,which are then taken upby
period. The remaining chylomicron remnant is
intestinal luminal cells and reassembled into TG. This
removed from thecirculationbyhepatocytes,viaa
TG is assembled with cholesterol,phospholipids and
receptorwhichrecognizes apoE.
the apolipoprotein, apoB4, to form chylomicrons. Fol-
lowingsecretionfromtheluminalcells,thechylomicrons
Endogenous lipid metabolism
entertheintestinallactealsandlymphatics,wherethey
Lipoproteins are synthesized continuously in the liverin
transfertothethoracicductand,finally,thecirculation.
the form of VLDLs and HDLs,although secretion is
Chylomicron synthesis, therefore, accompanies fat
influenced by nutritional and metabolic changes which
absorption and this lipoprotein class is detected in
alterdemandforthe lipidscarriedinthelipoproteincore.
postprandial plasma.Afterentering the circulation,the
chylomicrons acquire apoC and apoE from HDL.
VLDLandLDL
ApoC-ll activates the enzyme lipoprotein lipase(LPL),
VLDLs are large macromolecules that contain pre-
which hydrolyses the chylomicron core TG,liberating
dominantlyTG,withasmallamountofcholesteroland
fatty acids for uptake by the peripheral tissues. LPL is
apoBoo(also apoB4 in the dog).Upon entering the
bound to the endothelium of a number of tissues,
circulation,thecore lipid ofVLDLissubjected tothe
particularly skeletal muscle and adipose tissue.The
lipolytic action of LPL, in a similar fashion to
activityofadipose tissueLPLcorrelatespositivelywith
chylomicrons,liberating fatty acidsfrom hydrolysed
242
Chapter15Laboratoryevaluationoflipiddisorders
TG.Theresulting remnantmayberemoved from the
(Figure15.5),and is not secondary to hypercholestero-
circulationbyahepaticreceptor,orfurthermodified to
laemia.Thisturbidityof thesampleisimportant,sinceit
intermediate-densitylipoproteins(IDL),andthenLDLs.
mayinterferewith theproductionofaccurate laboratory
LDLs areremoved fromthecirculationbya cellsurface
results.Themagnitude and direction oferror depends
receptor(apoB,Ereceptor)found in theliverandperi-
upon thedegree of lipaemia and themethodology of the
pheral tissues, ensuring delivery of cholesterol to a
test;potentialeffects are listed inFigure15.6.Diagnostic
wide variety of tissues.
laboratoriesand themanufacturersofpatient-side ana-
lysersareabletoprovideinformationregardingthe
HDL
effectof lipaemia ontheir specificmethodologies.The
In the dog and cat,HDLs are the major carrier of
visual appraisal of a spun serum or plasma sample for
plasma cholesterol.They accept cholesterol from the
the presence of lipaemia is therefore an essential com-
peripheral tissues and transport it to the liverwhere it
ponent of any biochemical analysis,and allows the
may be stored, used in the synthesis of bile acids,
operatortopredictpotentialinterferencewithlaboratory
excreted orredistributed.In addition,HDLs donate
analyses.Theeffectof lipaemia onlaboratorytestsmay
apoCand apoEto chylomicrons andVLDLs,facilitat-
be compounded by in vitro haemolysis. The degree of
ing the metabolism of these lipoproteins.
haemolysis may be related to the length of contact time
HDLs are synthesized primarily in the liver in the
form of a disc-shaped phospholipid bilayer containing
cholesterol and apoA-l (a crucial structural protein of
Hyperlipidaemia
this lipoprotein class).The immature lipoprotein circu-
Increasedconcentrationsofplasmacholesteroland/ortriglyceride.
latesthrough theperipheral tissueswhereit collects
Hyperriglyceridaemiamaybeaccompaniedbylipaemia.
tissue cholesterol,thus forming a mature HDL. During
Lipaemia
HDLmaturation,free cholesterolat thesurfaceof the
HDL is esterifiedby the action of lecithin:cholesterol
Theturbidityofwholebloodserumorplasmacausedbyanincreaed
acyltransferase(LCAT) and the cholesteryl ester en-
tersthelipidcoreof thelipoprotein.nthisway,choles
terolisdrawnfrom theperipheraltissuesintothe
15.5
Definition of terms.
immature lipoprotein. Progressive accumulation of
cholesterolresultsinexpansionof themacromolecule,
which isultimatelyreturned to the liverandremoved
Parameter
Potentialeffect
from thecirculationbyhepaticreceptors.Thecholesteryl
Haemoglobin
Increased
esters in thecore of HDL arenot transferred to other
lipoproteinspecies,but are directed totheliver for
Mean corpuscularhaemoglobin
Increased
excretion.The containmentof cholesterylesterswithin
concentration (MCHC)
the HDL class and their efficient uptake by hepatic
Electrolytesby ion-specific electrode
Not affected
receptorsmayplaya majorroleintheprotectionof the
dog from atherosclerosis.Incontrast,LDL is the main
Glucose
Increased
cholesterol carrier species in humans,and is consid-
Blood urea nitrogen
Variable
ered to be the major participating lipoprotein in the 
developmentof atherosclerosis.
Creatinine
Increased
Calcium
Increased
Phosphate
Increased
Measurementof lipidsandlipoproteins
Total protein (refractometer)
Increased
The measurement of plasma cholesterol and TG can
Albumin
Decreased
easily be performed using enzymatic, colorimetric
methods designedforpatient-sidebiochemistry ana-
Alanine aminotransferase(ALT)
Increased
lysersand large-scale commercial analysers.Serum
Aspartate aminotransferase(AST)
Increased
or heparinized plasma are usually acceptable, and a
fasted sample (ideally 12hours) is preferred.Where
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
Increased
immediate analysisisnotpossible,theserumorplasma
Gamma-glutamy ransferase (GGT)
Variable
should beseparated fromthecellsandthe samplemay
Amylase
Decreased
be stored for4days at2-8°Cwithout significant effect
on either analyte.
Lipase
Decreased
Cholesterol isoftenincluded inroutine screening
Cholesterol
Variable
profiles,especially where endocrine disease is sus-
pected,andhypercholesterolaemia isrelatively com-
Bile acids
Increased
monly identified.Estimation of the TG concentration is
Bilirubin
Increased
less commonly included inroutine profiles,but meas-
urementshouldbeperformed whenlipaemiaisdetected
Thepotential effects of lipaemia on the results
onvisual appraisal of theplasma.Lipaemia isthemilky
15.6
ofbiochemical tests.Diagnostic laboratories
turbidityofplasmacaused by theaccumulationof tri-
and manufacturers ofpatient-side analysers will provide
glyceride-rich lipoproteins (chylomicrons,VLDL)
details for their specific test methods.
243
Chapter15Laboratoryevaluationof lipiddisorders
witherythrocytes.Therefore,rapid analysisorimmedi-
The demonstration of fasting hyperlipidaemia
ateseparationof thecellsfromtheplasmacanreduce
should initiateroutine screening(clinical and labora-
this phenomenon.Forbiochemical tests,preparationof
tory) for underlying endocrine or systemic disease
plasma(which canbeseparatedimmediately),rather
(Figures 15.8 and 15.9). A full haematology and
than serum,can be helpful.
biochemistry screen,urinalysis and specificendo-
Whenlipaemiaispresent,thepossibilityofphysio-
crinetesting mayberequired.lfunderlying disease is
logical hyperlipidaemiasecondarytoarecentmeal
recognized then further lipid investigationisusually
should be consideredinitially.lf the lipaemia ispresent
unnecessary.Wherenounderlying disease or inher-
toadegreewhichwill interferewithroutineanalysis
itedbasisisproven,thehyperlipidaemiaisclassified
thenit wouldbeprudent tocollectafasting sample(12-
as idiopathic.In these cases it maybenecessary to
16hours)forrepeat analysis.Measurement of the TG
categorize thelipoprotein disturbances further in
concentrationinthefasting sample allowsconfirmation
order toselectamanagementstrategy.
orexclusion ofpathologicalhyperlipidaemia.Insome
patients,there may still be considerable lipaemia
present,evenafterfasting.TheTG concentrationmust
Physiological hyperlipidaemia
bemeasuredinanaliquotof thelipaemicsample,but
manipulation is thenrequired toclear theturbidityfor
Postprandial hypertriglyceridaemia
further analysis.Refrigeration of the sample helps to
Secondary hyperlipidaemia
clearthesampleofchylomicrons,whichfloattothetop,
forming a creamlayer.Plasma collectedfrombelow
Diabetes mellitus
the cream layermaybe suitableforanalysis.Clearing
Hypothyroidism
agentscanbeusedtoremovetheoffendinglipoproteins,
Hyperadrenocorticism
howeverthemanufacturerrecommendsthattheef-
Cholestaticliver disease
fectsof the agentonbiochemical resultsshould be
Glomerulonephritis
establishedforeachlaboratorysystem.
Non-nephrotic renal disease
Glucocorticoid therapy
Megoestrolacetate (cats)
Investigation ofhyperlipidaemia
Inherited hyperlipidaemia(proven or suspected)
Where lipaemia ispresent inafasted sample it is
Inheritedhyperchylomicronaemiain thecat
possibletocharacterizefurtherthe abnormalitiesof lipid
Idiopathichyperlipidaemia in theMiniatureSchnauzer
metabolism,i.e.is the lipaemia associated with an
HypercholesterolaemiaintheBriard
increased concentrationofchylomicrons,VLDLorboth?
Theserumorplasmais storedovernightat4℃.
Idiopathic hyperlipidaemia
Chylomicronsfloattothetopofthesampleforminga
creamlayer'，while anincreaseintheVLDLconcentra-
15.8
The potential causes of hyperlipidaemia
(increased cholesterol and/or triglyceride)
tionischaracterized byageneralizedopalescenceof
theplasma(Figure15.7).Laboratoryconfirmationof the
presenceof theseand theotherclassesof lipoproteins
canbeachievedbylipoproteinelectrophoresisand
Hyperlipidaemia
combinedultracentrifugation/precipitationmethods.
，
Thesetechniquesarenotroutinelyavailableforveteri-
Fasted sample?
narypatientsbut are available through some university
clinicalpathology laboratories in the UK and elsewhere.
No
A cream layerof chylomicrons
Fast(12-16h）a
15.7
above an opalescent plasma
Lipids withinreference
containing VLDL in a sample from a dog
confirmed
nterval
with concurrent diabetesmellitus and
hypothyroidism.
Exclude:
corticism
Proteinuria
Nodlisgase
confirmed
Treat diseaseandmonitorlipids
Resolved hyperlipidaemia
idiopathichyperlipidaemia
15.9
The investigation of hyperlipidaemia.
244
Chapter15Laboratoryevaluationof lipiddisorders
Abnormalities of lipid metabolism:
Historically,it wasproposed that canine pancrea-
potential causes
titis caused hypertriglyceridaemia,but more recently it
has become accepted that marked hypertrigly-
Physiological
ceridaemia(>5mmol/l) maypredispose anindividual
The absorption of dietary fat from the intestines is
topancreatitis.Althoughnotallpatientswith hypertrigly-
accompanied by the formation of chylomicrons.The
ceridaemiadeveloppancreatitis,dietaryinterventionis
accumulation of these TG-rich lipoproteinslendsa
warranted in an attempt to reduce the TG concentra-
turbidity (lipaemia)to the serum orplasma of normal
tion.Moderate hypercholesterolaemia is alsonoted in
individuals,whichclearsby46hours aftereating.
some cases of pancreatitis (Bauer,20o0),possibly
secondary to biliary obstruction.
Diabetes mellitus
Hyperlipidaemia is commonly associated with endo-
Renal disease
crine disease.Canine diabetes mellitus (DM) is often
Glomerulonephritisandnon-nephroticrenal disease
accompaniedbymildtomoderatehypercholesterolae-
havebeen associatedwithavarietyof lipid abnormali-
mia (<15mmol/l)andhypertriglyceridaemia.Mecha-
ties(Down and Krawiec,1996)including mild tomoder-
nisms for hyperlipidaemia in DM include impaired LPL
ate hypertriglyceridaemia and hypercholesterolaemia.
activity (this enzymerequires insulin for its activation)
Therelationshipbetweenrenal function andlipidme-
and increased mobilization of body fat. Hyperlipidae-
tabolismhasnotbeenextensivelystudiedindogs and
mia has alsobeennoted withfeline diabetes mellitus.
catsbut exclusion of proteinuria is an important step in
Hypothyroidism
the investigation of hyperlipidaemia.
Two thirds of dogs with hypothyroidism arereported to
Neoplasia
have an increased serum cholesterolconcentration.
Cancer cachexia in man and animals hasbeen asso-
Hypertriglyceridaemia may ormay notbepresent.The
ciatedwith abnormalitiesof lipid metabolism.In one
lipid abnormalitiesareprobablysecondarytoreduced
hepatic clearance of LDLs and reduced LPL activity
studyof caninelymphoma(Ogilvieetal.,1994),dogs
withdiseasehad significantlyhigher TGconcentra-
(Barrieetal.,1993).Hypercholesterolaemiasecondaryto
tions.Inman,itisproposed that the metabolicaltera
hypothyroidism may be mild to marked and,in the au
tions may berelated to the tumour type,butextensive
thor's experience,marked hypercholesterolaemia(>15
researchonthe effectof tumour typeon lipidmetabo-
mmol/l) is most commonly associated with hypothy-
lism in veterinary patients has not been performed.
 roidism alone, or a combination of endocrine disorders.
There areoccasionalreportsof anunusualipopro-
Drug therapy and diet
tein (β-VLDL) in the plasma of dogs with marked
Drugs which may cause hypercholesterolaemia in-
hypercholesterolaemia and hypothyroidism. The fac-
clude corticosteroids,phenytoin and methimazole
torswhich determinethe appearanceof thislipoprotein
(Burkhard and Meyer,1995).An increase inTG con-
arenot clear,butinman it has been proposed that this
centration maybenoted with corticosteroids,oestro-
lipoproteinhas a markedatherogenicpotential
gensandcholestyramine(Burkhardand Meyer,1995).
The clinical consequences ofmild ormoderate
Megestrolacetate isreported to causehyperlipidae-
hypercholesterolaemia arenot usually serious.How-
mia in cats (Bauer,1992).
ever,spontaneous atherosclerosis is a potential com-
Theeffectofdietshould alsobeconsideredwhen
plication of marked hypercholesterolaemia.Hess etal.
evaluatinglipidabnormalities.Dietswhichprovidemany
(2003) demonstrated that dogs with atherosclerosis
of thecaloriesasfatmaybeassociatedwithmildly
aremore likelytohaveconcurrentDMorhypothy-
increased cholesterol concentrations(Bauer,2000).
roidism than dogs without vascular changes.Theclini-
cal signsof vasculardisease depend upon the organ or
Familial hyperchylomicronaemia in cats
tissue affectedbutneurological signshavebeen de-
An inherited defect of LPLactivity isrecognized asthe
scribed,including stupor,seizures and paresis sec-
causeof familial hyperchylomicronaemiaincats(Peritz
ondary to iliac thrombosis (Zeiss andWaddle,1995).
et al.,1990).The defect,which hasbeenrecognized in
Hyperadrenocorticism
kittens andyoung adults,results in the accumulationof
Hyperadrenocorticismisoften accompanied bymild to
chylomicrons andVLDL in theplasma of fasted cats.
moderatehypercholesterolaemia(usually<15mmol/l)
Peritz et al.(1990) identified apoint mutation which
prevents LPL binding with the endothelial surface.How-
and hypertriglyceridaemia,secondary to increased
concentrations of LDLs andVLDLs.
ever, more recently reported cases of feline hyper-
chylomicronaemia in the United Kingdom have not
Liver,intestinal and pancreatic disease
demonstrated this mutation(Gunn-Moore etal.,1997).
Cholestatic disease is commonly associated with
Someofthekittenswithhypertriglyceridaemiahave
moderatetomarkedhypercholesterolaemia,largely
presentedwith concurrent,profound anaemia(Gunn-
due toreducedbiliaryexcretionofcholesterol.The
Moore et al.,1997)and,in many cases,theowners
lipidabnormalitiesresolvewithcorrectionoftheunder-
have sought veterinary advice because of a highkitten
lyingbiliary stasis.Hypocholesterolaemia hasbeen
mortalityratewithin individual litters.Thecauseof the
observed inpatientswithsevere hepaticdysfunction,
anaemia and thenature of its relationship to the
especiallycirrhosis,andasaconsequenceof protein-
hypertriglyceridaemia havenotbeen determined.In
losing enteropathies.
other cats andkittens,additional signs have been
245
Chapter15Laboratoryevaluationoflipiddisorders
described,including the developmentofxanthomas
hypertriglyceridaemia and include abdominal pain,
(lipid granulomas)overbony prominences and at sites
anorexia,intestinal signs,seizures,lpaemia retinalis
of trauma,Horner'ssyndrome,otherperipheral neuro-
and lipid-laden aqueoushumour.
pathies(Jones,1993),lipaemia retinalis (pale pink
appearance of theretinal vessels)and lipid-laden
ldiopathichypercholesterolaemiaofthe
Briard
aqueous humour.
Mild hypercholesterolaemia(<9 mmol/l) has been
HyperlipidaemiaoftheMiniatureSchnauzer
reported inBriards in the UnitedKingdom(Watsonet
IdiopathichyperlipidaemiaintheMiniatureSchnauzer
al.,1993).
is thought tobetheresult of an inherited defect,the
exact nature of which has not been elucidated. The
Therapyforhyperlipidaemia
clinicalentityischaracterizedbyhypertriglyceridaemia
associated with increased VLDLs,with or without
With thepossible exceptionof thelipid changesasso-
accompanying hyperchylomicronaemia(Whitney
et
ciated with neoplasia,theplasma lipid alterationsof
al.,1993).Proposed mechanisms include increased
dogs and catswithsecondaryhyperlipidaemiaresolve
production of VLDL, reduced clearance of this lipopro-
aftersuccessful stabilizationor treatment of the under-
teinsecondarytodecreased LPL activity and the
lying diseaseprocess.Wheretheabnormalitiesdonot
presenceofahepaticmembranereceptordefectwith
resolve,orinherited/idiopathichyperlipidaemiaissus-
impairedlipoproteinremnantclearance(Bauer,2000).
pected,then dietary,andpossiblytherapeutic,inter-
Clinicalsignsmaybenotedwithmoderatetomarked
vention,is indicated (Duncan,2004).
Case examples
Case 1
Signalment
Sample quality
10-year-old male Boxer.
No lipidaemia noted.
History
What abnormalities arepresent?
Gradualnstfpolyuripoldpsiaandabdminalenlargmenti
Increased liverenzymeactivitiesbothALPandALTtwiceupperlimit of
present for several months.
the normal range),hyperglycaemia and hypercholesterolaemia.
Clinical pathology data
Howwouldyou interpret theseresults?
Theresultsanwiththelnicareentationcouldsprtdia
Biochemistry
Result
Reference interval
sisofhyperadrenocorticism.Hypothyroidismisalsoapossibility,though
Glucose(mmol/l)
4.3-6.9
lesslikelyduetothepolydiiaandpolyuriaandthelevated.
8.22
2.6
2.5-9.6
Whatfurther testswouldyou recommend?
Urea(mmol/l)
AnACTHstimulationtestorlowdosedexamethasomesuppressontest
Creatinine (μmoll)
74
44-159
(see Chapter 18) should be performed to confirm the diagnosis of
Calcium(mmol/)
2.47
1.98-3.0
hyperadrenocoricism:theACTHstimulationtestistheusualfirst test
performedasitislesslikelytoproducefalsepositiveresultsinother
Albumin (g/l)
31
27-38
diseasestates.Thiswouldnotdifferentiatebetweenpituitaryandadrenal
ALT(IU/)
220
10-100
dependentdiseasehoweverTotalT4andTSHcouldbemeasuredsee
ALP(IU/I)
444
23-212
Chapter 17).
Cholesterol (mmol/l)
10.82
2.8-8.3
Case outcome
Bilirubin(μmoll)
The dogwasconfirmed tohavehyperadrenocorticismusing theACTH
10
0-15
stimulation test.
Case 2
Signalment
6-year-old Cocker Spaniel.
Biochemistry(continued)Result
Reference interval
History
Chloride(mmol/l)
108.0
100-116
2-3wekstryflyurlyipsindanrexiamildwig
Glucose (mmol/)
5.6
3.3-5.8
Clinical pathology data
Urea(mmol/l)
32.3
2.5-6.7
Biochemistry
Creatinine(μmol/)
322.5
20.0-150.0
Result
Reference interval
141.0
Calcium(mmoll)
2.73
Sodium(mmol/l)
2.40-2.90
135-155
Inorganic phosphate
4.16
0.8-1.6
Potassium(mmoll)
5.45
3.6-5.6
(mmol/l)
Sodiumpotassium ratio
25.87
28-40
Case 2 continues
246
Chapter 15Laboratory evaluation of lipid disorders
Case 2 continued
What abnormalitiesarepresent?
Biochemistry
Reference interval
Hypoalbuminaemia
Biochemistry(continued)Result
Hypercholesterolaemia
TP(g/l)
49.9
55.0-75.0
Azotaemia,hyerphosphatamia
Albumin(g/)
20.6
25.0-41.0
Na:K ratio is slightly decreased
Globulin(g/)
20.0-45.0
Urinalysis
29.3
Marked proteinuria
ALT(IU/I)
19.0
5.0-60.0
，
Submaximal concentration of the urine
ALP (IU/)
43.1
<130
Markedlyincreased protein:creatinineratio
Cholesterol(mmo/)
17.00
3.2-6.2
How wouldyou interpret theseresults?
Theazotamiahyphshatamindumaxialncentratf
Bile acids (fasting)
6.5
0.1-5.0
theurinesupport renalinsuficiencyandrenalazotaemiaThemarked
(μmoll)
proteinuriaislikelytohaveaffected(increasedtheurinespecificgravity.
Total biliubin (μmol/l)
1.6
0.1-5.1
Theurinaryprotinlossisfutherquantifiedbyaproteincreatininerat
whichinthiscaseismarkedlyincreased.Intheabsenceof significant
haematuriaandinflammationsuchmarkedproteinuriasconsistentwih
Sample quality
glomerulaprotinlosssuchasmightbenotedwithglomerulonephrits
No lipidaemia noted.
Both thehypoalbuminaemia andhypercholesterolaemianoted in
thebiochemistryscreencouldbeaconsequenceofrenalproteinloss.
Othercausesofhypoalbuminaemiaincludehepaticandintestinaldis
Urine analysis
ease,whileendocrinedisease(especiallyhypothyroidism）couldbea
Specific gravity
1.022
potentialcauseof thehypercholesterolaemia.Intheabsenceofcurrent
signssuprtivfthrddseliidmaltrear
Protein
++++
abletotherenaldisease.Furthertesting forhypothyroidismmaybe
RBC
<5
warrantedbutthepresenceofnon-thyroidaldiseasewouldbeexpected
tohaveanimpact onthyraid hormoneconcentrations(seeChapter17).
WBC
<5
TheNa：Kratioisslightlydcreasedwhichcouldbenotedin
Protein:creatinine ratio
14.96(reference interval <1)
assciationwithhypoadrenocorticismtherdiseaseprocessesn
ing primaryrenal diseaseshould alsobeconsidered.
References and furtherreading
anaemiainkittens.VeterinaryRecord140,355-359
Hess RS,KassPH andVanWinkleTJ (2003)Association between
diabetesmellitushypothyroidismorhyperadrenocorticismand
Barrie J,Watson TDG, Stear MJ and Nash AS (1993) Plasma
atherosclerosisindogs.JournalofVeterinaryInternalMedicine
cholesteroland lipoproteinconcentrationsin the dog:Theeffects
17,489-494
ofage,genderandendocrine diseaseJournalofSmalAnimal
JonesBR(1993)Inherited hyperchylomicronaemiain thecat.Journal
Practice34,507-512
ofSmallAnimalPractice34,493-499
BauerJE(1992)Diet-induced alterationsoflipoproteinmetabolism.
OgilvGrdBaiMWlsManMDain
Journal of theAmericanVeterinaryMedical Association201,
CandFettman MJ (1994)Alterations in lipoprotein profiles in
1691-1694
BauerJE(2ooo)Hyperlipidemias.In:TextbookofVeterinaryInternal
Medicn5dndJEttingrandFmanp.292
PeritrirH
WBSaundersPhiladephia
HaydenMR(1990)Characterizationof alipoproteinlipase class
Burkhard MJand MeyerDJ(1995)Causesandeffectsof interference
Ill type defect in hypertriglyceridemic cats.Clinical and
InvestigativeMedicine13259-263
Kirk'sCurrentVtrinaryTherapyXll,d.JDBonagurap.14
WatsonP,SimpsonKW Odedra RMand Bedford PGC(1993)
20.WB Saunders,Philadelphia
Hypercholesterolaemia in Briards in the United Kingdom.
DownLKand KrawiecDR(1996)Dyslipoproteinemia of chronicrenal
Research inVeterinaryScience54,80-85
failure:itsrelevance to canine progressive kidney disease.
WhitneyMS,BoonGD,RebarAH,StoryJAandBottomsGD（1993)
Compendium on ContinuingEducation for thePracticing
Ultracentrifugalandelectrophoreticcharacteristicsof theplasma
Veterinarian18,65-74
lipoproteins ofMiniature Schnauzer dogs with idiopathic
DuncanJ(2004)Hyperlipidaemia.lIn:BSAVAManualofEndocrinology.
hyperlipoproteinemia.JournalofVeterinaryInternalMedicine7
3rdedn,ed.CTMooneyandMPeterson.pp.49-56.BSAVA
253-260
Gloucester
ZeissCJ and WaddleG(1995)Hypothyroidism and atherosclerosis
GunnMooreDAWatsnTDGdkinSJlaxtrAC,CrispinM
and Gruffydd-Jones T(1997)Transient hyperlipidaemia and
Veterinarian171117-1128
247
Laboratory evaluation of
hyperglycaemiaand hypoglycaemia
Clare Knottenbelt
Glucose homeostasis
(glycogenolysis)orbybreakdownof fattyacidsor
amino acids (gluconeogenesis)(Figure 16.2).Other
Glucose homeostasis is maintained byan interaction
hormones(growth hormone,glucocorticoids,proges-
betweendietaryintake,liverstorageandrelease,and
terone andoestrogen)alterglucose concentrations by
the effectsof themajorhormonescontrollingblood
affecting the cellularresponse toinsulin orenhancing
glucose concentrations(insulin and glucagon)(Figure
hepatic glucose release.
16.1).The liver acts as storage organ where glucose
isstoredasglycogen.Glucosecanbereleased from
Insulin
the liverby thebreakdown of theseglycogenstores
Insulin isproduced by thebeta isletcellsof thepan-
creasand isthemajor controller ofplasma glucose
concentrations.Whenbloodglucose increases,insulin
isreleased by the islet cells,resulting in increased
PANCREAS
tAmino acids
cellularuptakeof glucose and areduction in theblood
glucose concentration(Figure16.3).When blood glu-
cose concentrationsarelow,insulinrelease is sup-
Cortisol
pressedand the blood insulinconcentrationfalls.Insulin
releaseisalsostimulatedbyfattyacids,some amino
acids,ketones and glucagons.
tGlucose
↓Glucose
Theperipheral effects of insulin include:
Glucose homeostasis:effects of insulin and
Inhibition of gluconeogenesis
16.1
glucagon onblood glucose concentrations in
Increased glucose utilizationby cells
normal animals.
Preventionof fatbreakdown.
LIVER
MUSCLE
Glycogen
Glycogen
Insulin
Adrenaline
Adrenaline
Growth
Glucagon
Glucagon
+
+
Insulin
hormone
Growth
Cortisol
hormone
Glucose
Glucose
Glucagon
Growthhormone
Cortisol
Glucagon
Adrenaline
INTESTINE
X
ADIPOSETISSUE
Dietary
BLOOD
Fat stores
carbohydrate
maintained
Glucose
16.2
Glucose homeostasis:effectsof counter-regulatoryhormones.
248
Chapter16Laboratoryevaluationofhyperglycaemia andhypoglycaemia
the transcription process.Glucocorticoids alsopro-
mote gluconeogenesis,lipolysis and musclebreak-
down,thereby increasing circulating blood glucose
concentrations.
Insulin
Catecholamines
Glucose
Catecholamines stimulate gluconeogenesis,glyco-
genolysisand lipolysisbyinhibiting peripheral glucose
use through a B-adrenergic mechanism,which may
involveadecrease incellularglucose transport.
C-peptide
Time
C-peptideispart of thepro-insulin moleculein dogs
Feeding
and is secreted at the same time as insulin.Itspres
enceinthecirculationmeansthatthereisstillsome
16.3
The effect of feedingonblood levelsofglucose
and insulin in normal patients.
residualbeta cellinsulinproduction.Howeverthisdoes
The effects of insulin are inhibited by growth hor-
mone,glucocorticoids,oestrogen and progesterone:
Assessment ofblood glucose
these hormones cause a resistance to theperipheral
effects of insulin so that greater concentrations of
Plasma glucose
insulin arerequired to achieve the samereduction in
 Plasma glucose can be assessed using a glucometer,
blood glucose concentrations(see Figure 16.2)
in-housedrychemistry analyseror submittedto an
external laboratory (Figure16.4).As glucose is only
Glucagon
containedwithintheplasma componentofblood,glu-
Glucagon isproduced by the endocrine pancreas.Its
coseconcentration isinfluenced by thepacked cell
main role is to increase glucose concentration by
volume(PcV)when wholeblood isused forglucose
assessment.Thismeans that glucoseconcentrations
in theliver.Increased glucagon secretionoccurswhen
will be overestimated in anaemicpatients and under-
blood glucose concentrations fall,while increases in
estimated inpatientswith increased PcVs.Measure-
blood glucose suppress secretion of glucagon.
ments of glucose concentration made using whole
blood willalsobe lowerthan thosemade using plasma.
Other hormones
lIf blood for glucose estimation is to be stored,
plasmashouldbeseparatedassoonaspossibleafter
Growthhormone
collection.Glucoseconcentrationswillfallby5-10%
Growth hormoneisproducedinthepituitarygland,and
perhourduetocontinued utilizationofglucosebyred
in the mammary gland of entire bitches,under the
and white bloodcells.This decline in glucose concen-
stimulation ofprogesterone.Growth hormone stimu-
tration will be more marked if there is significant
lateshepatic glucoseproduction and adipocyte lipo-
erythrocytosis or leucocytosis.Fluoride oxalate anti-
lysis.lt antagonizes insulin activity by causing a
coagulant is an enzyme inhibitor,which prevents
decreasein thenumberofperipheral insulinreceptors
cellular glucose utilization.
andbyinhibiting glucose transport intocells.Thismay
Itisvital thatanumberoffactorsareconsidered
bemediated by a reduction in theexpressionof glu-
priorto collectionof blood forglucose measurement:
cose transporter genes.
Glucose concentrationswill increase after
Progesterone
feeding
Progesterone isproduced by the corpus luteum during
Stressorexcitementbefore andduringsampling
dioestrus,whetherornot thebitchorqueen ispreg-
can cause increased bloodglucose
nant.Progesterone reduces insulin binding and glu-
concentrations.
cose transportinperipheraltissues,andalsostimulates
secretion of growth hormone in dogs.Progesterone
Whenmeasuringbloodglucosethefollowing should
levelswill decline7days afterspaying or spontaneous
beobserved
regressionof thecorpusluteum.
Fast thepatientfor12hours（unless thepatient
Cortisol
isimmature)
 Glucocorticoids antagonize both the peripheral and
Avoid stressand excitement throughoutsampling
hepatic effects of insulinbyreducing the number
Avoid the use of certain sedatives (especially
and efficacyofglucose transportersand increasing
medetomidine and ketamine)(see Figure 16.5)
circulating concentrations of glucagon and fatty acids.
Separateserumfrom cellularcomponentswithin
Theprecisemechanismisunclear,however,asgluco-
30 minutesof collection
corticoids stimulate receptor gene transcription
Usefluorideoxalate anticoagulant ifplasma
separation is not possible.
249
Chapter 16
Laboratoryevaluationofhyperglycaemiaandhypoglycaemia
Method of assessment
Advantages
Disadvantages
Glucometer
Small volumesof blood required
Rapidresults
Affected by PCV(see text)
Cheap
Reliabilityof resultscanvarybetweenglucometers
Useful for assessing trends
Fluorideoxalateanticoagulantinterfereswiththeenzymereactiononsome
glucometer strips
In-house dry chemistry
Rapid results
Fluoride oxalateanticoagulant cannot beused becauseglucose oxidase enzyme in
most assaysisblocked by fluoride.Must assayheparinized sampleswithin1hour
of collection (see text)
Externallaboratory
Most accurate assessment of
Fluorideoxalatemustbeusedasglucoseconcentrationwillfallifother
glucose concentrations
anticoagulantsareusedandcellsarelet incontact withserumseetext)
Relativelyexpensive
16.4
Methods of assessing glucose.
Glycated proteins
Hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism:the
Proteinsbind irreversiblytoglucose and measurement
increasedprotein turnoverassociatedwith
hyperthyroidismresults inareduction in
of meanblood glucose concentrations overaperiod of
fructosamine concentrations(due toa shortened
time.Thehalf-lifeof theprotein determinestheperiod
half-life).This may be an important confounding
overwhich the glycatedproteinsreflectbloodglucose
factor in the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus in cats
concentration.When blood glucose concentrations
withhyperthyroidism.Conversely，dogswith
increase there is an increase in glucose binding and
hypothyroidism(and some cats after
therefore anincrease inglycatedprotein concentra-
thyroidectomy)mayhave elevated fructosamine
tions.This increase is also affected by the duration of
concentrationsbecause of deceleratedprotein
theincreaseinbloodglucose.lftheincreaseinglucose
turnover(Reusch et al.,2002)
is transient, there will be no significant increase in
Azotaemiaindogs:azotaemiahasbeen
glycated protein concentrations(Marca etal.,2o0o).In
associated withfructosamineconcentrationsbelow
addition to theglucose concentrations,anydisease
thereferencerangein some normoglycaemic
that significantly affects the half-lifeof theprotein
dogs,due to denaturation of albumin(Reusch
concerned will influence the result.The most com-
and Harberer,2001).The significance in dogs
monlymeasured glycatedproteins arefructosamine
with diabetes mellitus has notbeen investigated.
and glycated haemoglobin.
Glycated haemoglobin
Serum fructosamine
Glycatedhaemoglobinreflectstheglycaemiccontrol
Fructosamine is irreversibly glycated albumin and is
overtheprevious 4-8weeks as itisdependentonred
useful forassessingmeanbloodglucoseconcentra-
bloodcellhalf-life.EDTAorheparinizedwholeblood
tions in both dogsand cats.Albumin has a shorter half-
must be submitted for analysis. Glycated haemoglobin
life than haemoglobin(seebelow)and fructosamine
canbeusefulformonitoringglycaemiccontrol indogs,
reflects glycaemiccontroloverthe 2-3weekspriorto
but itcanbenormal inrecentlydiagnoseddiabetics
sampling.Fructosamine concentrations are not af-
and fructosamineisusuallypreferred.Catshavelower
fected by transient stress hyperglycaemia and are
reference concentrations, which may be due toa
thereforeuseful indistinguishingbetween diabetes
shorter red blood cell life-span,or the presence of
mellitus and stress-orexcitement-associated hyper-
fewer glucose binding sites onfelinehaemoglobin
glycaemia.Fructosamine concentration maybelow in
(Hasegawa et al., 1992), so fructosamine is generally
patients with recurrent hypoglycaemia,and assess-
preferred forbothdiagnosis andmonitoringincats.
mentoffructosamine can thereforebehelpful inthe
Glycated haemoglobin isnot currently available at
diagnosis of insulinoma(Thoresen et al.,1995)espe-
commercial laboratories in theUnitedKingdom.
Glycated haemoglobinmustalwaysbeinterpreted
(Mellanbyand Herrtage,2002).Fructosaminecanonly
in light of the haemoglobin concentration:
be measured in serum samples.
Anaemia.Anaemiais,bydefinition,areductionn
Factors affectingserum fructosamineconcentra-
haemoglobin concentration.Therefore,inpatients
tions:
with anaemia therewillbelesshaemoglobinand
Albumin/protein concentration:reductions in
fewer binding sites for glucose.The glycated
serumprotein concentrations canreduce the
haemoglobinconcentrationwillbe lower
fructosamine concentration;fructosamine will,
Erythrocytosis/polycythaemia.Increased
however,remainelevatedinpatientswith
haemoglobin concentrations (as occurs in
concurrent hypoproteinaemia andpoorly
polycythaemia)willresult in increased availability
controlled diabetesmellitus,unlesssevere
ofglucosebinding sites andfalse elevationsin
hypoproteinaemia is present(Jensen,1993)
glycated haemoglobin.
250
Chapter16Laboratoryevaluationofhyperglycaemia and hypoglycaemia
Hyperglycaemia
ABDOMEN
The common causes of hyperglycaemia are summa-
rized in Figure 16.5.
Cause
Mechanism
Postprandial
Normal due to absorptionofdietaryderived
glucose.Should return tonormal within
4hours
Stressorexcitement
Stress'hormone associated:predominantly
(may be significant in
catecholamines
cats)
Diabetes mellitus
Insulin deficiency(failure of production）or
insulin resistance
Glucose-containing
Ongoing glucose administration
fluids
16.6
Ultrasound image showing an enlarged
Hyperadrenocorticism
Insulin antagonism andperipheral
heterogenous pancreas in a dog with chronic
（rare in cats,common
resistance
pancreatitis. Chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic
in dogs)
neoplasia can cause diabetesmellitus,dueto destruction
of the islet cells of the pancreas.
Acromegaly(rare)
Insulinresistanceandgluconeogenesis
Acute pancreatitis
Inadequate insulinproduction due tobeta
Type2diabetes(non-insulin dependent diabetes
celldamage,peripheralresistance
mellitus,NIDDM) is thought toberelated to
Peracute liver damage
Inhibitionofhepaticinsulinaction
obesity and islet amyloidosis in humans.These
mechanisms arepotential causative factors in
Sedatives
Reduced insulin production（medetomidine)
feline diabetes mellitus.Obesity results in
Stress hormone associated (ketamine)
reversible insulin resistanceby causing down-
Insulinresistance(glucocorticoids,
regulationof insulinreceptors,impairedreceptor
progestogens)
binding and post-receptor defects.Thisresults in
Possiblepancreatictoxicityinhumans
an increase in insulin production and concurrent
(furosemide,thiazide diuretics)
amylin production,whichmay result in amyloid
deposition in the pancreas. Initially insulin
16.5
Causes and mechanisms of hyperglycaemia.
production increases to compensate for the effects
of obesity,buteventually the islet cellsbecome
Diabetes mellitus
exhausted(glucose toxicity) and fail toproduce
sufficientinsulin.Obesity-associated diabeteshas
Pathophysiology
beenreported in dogs but is relativelyrare
Diabetes mellitus iscaused by inadequate insulin
Type3diabetesmellitusresultsfrom insulin
activity.Thismayresult fromafailure of beta cell insulin
resistance due to antagonizing hormones,such
production and/orrelease,ormaybe associatedwith
asgrowth hormone,progesterone,
peripheralinsulinresistance.The absence of appropri-
glucocorticoidsandcatecholamines.
ateinsulinactivitycausespersistenthyperglycaemia.
In human medicine,diabeteshasbeen classified into
Whenbloodglucose concentrationsexceed the
three types:
renal threshold(11-18mmol/l incats and 10-12
mmoll in dogs), glucose is excreted in the urine. This
Type1diabetesmellitus(insulin-dependent
glucosuriapreventsnormal water resorptionand
diabetes mellitus,IDDM)is thought tobe
causes an osmotic diuresis, resulting in polyuria.
associatedwithimmune-mediateddestructionof
There is a compensatorypolydipsia in order tomain-
thepancreaticbeta cells.Almost all diabetic dogs
tainbodywater.Patientswithdiabetesmellitus,there-
andmany diabeticcats have IDDM.Dogsare
fore,frequentlypresentwithpolyuria andpolydipsia.
thought tohave immune-mediated islet
Patientswith untreated diabetes mellitus can de-
destruction,and50%of newly diagnosed
velopketoacidosis due to theongoing failure of insulin
diabeticshave increased anti-beta cell
inhibition of lipolysis and gluconeogenesis,which re-
antibodies. There appears to be a genetic
sults in production of ketones (seebelow).
susceptibility,but a trigger is required to
precipitate beta cell autoimmunity.Anti-beta cell
Clinicopathologicalfeatures
antibodies have not been found in untreated
diabetic cats(Hoenig et al.,2003) and chronic
Persistent marked hyperglycaemia.Note:In cats,
pancreatitismayberesponsibleforislet
stresshyperglycaemiacanbemarkedandmaybe
destruction and amyloid deposition in this
confusedwithdiabetesmellitus;measurement of
species.Chronicpancreatitis may also cause
glycatedproteinsmaythereforebemore useful in
diabetes mellitus in dogs (Figure 16.6)
cats in which diabetes mellitus is suspected.
251
Chapter16Laboratoryevaluationof hyperglycaemia andhypoglycaemia
Concurrent glucosuria.Note:in cats,stress
prolonged.Elevationsinglycatedproteinsmust,there-
associatedhyperglycaemiacanbesomarked that
fore,be used to confirm the diagnosis in cats and
itexceedstherenal threshold and is,therefore,
provide a useful baseline for monitoring in dogs.
associated with glucosuria.In catsthathavebeen
chronicallyorrepeatedlystressed,glucosuriamay
Monitoring the diabeticpatient
be detected on routine urine sampling.
Stability of diabetes mellitus is most readily assessed
Increasedglycatedproteins(fructosamineor
by resolution of clinical signs（normal thirst,appetite
glycatedhaemoglobin).
and urination) and maintenance of body weight in both
Elevationsinliverenzymes(alkaline
cats and dogs.
phosphatase and alanine aminotransferase)due
Monitoringurine glucose and ketonesprovides use-
to diabeticvacuolarhepatopathy(hepatic
ful informationregarding stability of diabetic animals.In
lipidosis) or concurrent pancreatitis.
dogsthisisrelativelysimple and hasbeenthemainstay
Elevated triglyceride concentration due toinsulin
of many traditional diabetic regimes.Alterationof insulin
deficiencyresulting inimpaired lipoprotein lipase
doseonthebasisofmorningurineglucosemeasure-
(LPL)activity.Without LPL,triglycerides are not
ment isnolongerrecommended,however twice daily
hydrolysed and taken up by cells and so
urine monitoring can provide useful information fordose
accumulateinthebloodstream.Obesity,high
adjustment,particularly in the earlystagesofdiabetic
calorific intake and excess hepaticproduction of
stabilization, and can be performed at home.
triglyceridealsocontributeto the increase in
The glycated proteins (see above) provide a useful
triglycerides commonly seen in diabetic patients.
method of documentingimproved glycaemic control.In
Elevatedcholesterol concentrationoccurstoa
a wellcontrolleddiabetic,glycatedproteinconcentration
lesser degree than elevated triglycerides.In
should be just above thereferencerange.In a patient
humans it is associated with increased hepatic
that hasbeenrecentlydiagnosedasadiabetic,glycated
production,impaired clearance due to reduced
proteins should onlybe measured once an appropriate
receptor activity and increased intake of
period of time has elapsed(at least one half-life) so that
saturated fatty acids.
significant changes are evident. Changes in the glycated
Electrolyte changes(hyper/hyponatraemia,
proteinconcentrationcanonlybeusedtodeterminethat
hypokalaemia).(See Chapter 8.)
a change ininsulin dose isrequired,and should notbe
High incidence of urinary tract infections, which
used as the solebasisforincreasing dose.Inpatients
maybe detected on routine analysis and culture
thathavebeenoninsulinforprolongedperiodsorhave
(seeChapters10 and25) ormaybeoccult
beenreceivingsteadilyincreasinginsulindoses,glycated
(clinically silent). It is important to culture urine in
proteins do not provide information on whether the
any diabeticpatientwith evidence of urinary tract
insulin dose should be increased or decreased. For
infectionorif diabetes isdifficult tostabilize.
example,a patient receiving too much insulin will de-
Urine specificgravitywill beincreased bythe
veloparebound hyperglycaemia(Somogyieffect)(see
presence of glucose and is therefore usually
Figure16.10) and the glycated proteins will be elevated
higher than expected in a patient with polyuria.
despite too high a dose of insulinbeing given.In this
Thepresence of ketonuria is associated with
situationa glucose curveis required to determine what
diabetic ketoacidosis (see below).
dosemodification isrequired.Generally fructosamine is
more useful in monitoring diabetics since it has a shorter
Diagnosisof diabetesmellitus
half-life than glycated haemoglobin.
Diabetesmellitus is diagnosed on thebasis of appro-
Serial bloodglucose curvesare used toestablish
priate clinical signs (Figure 16.7), persistent hyper-
the duration of insulineffectand determine if thedose
glycaemia and concurrentglucosuria.In cats stress
is providing adequate glycaemic control (Figures 16.8
hyperglycaemia can exceed therenal threshold and
to 16.10). Glucose curves have traditionally been per-
result in glucosuria,particularlyif the stress hasbeen
formedwith thepatient hospitalized. Incatsit maybe
helpful toplace an intravenous catheter for blood
sampling in order tominimize the stressassociated
with 2-hourly blood sampling.In some dogs,owners
maybe ableto sampleblood glucose usingear-prick
glucometers.This system will minimize the effect of
stress associatedwithhospitalization,allowsformore
frequent glucose assessment andprovides amore
realisticcurve based on thepatient'shome lifestyle.
Continuousglucosemonitoringsystemsarebeing
investigated inboth cats and dogs.These devices
assess interstitial fluid glucose concentrations using
a subcutaneous sensor.Early studies suggest that
interstitial fluid glucoseconcentrationsmaynotreflect
blood glucose concentrationspostprandially and glu-
Cataracts develop in dogs with uncontrolled
coseresults arenot available inreal time(Davison et
16.7
diabetes mellitus dueto trapping of sorbitol within
al,2003b).Further studies arerequired to calibrate
the lens.They are not seen in cats with diabetes mellitus.
these devices.
252
Chapter 16 Laboratory evaluation of hyperglycaemia and hypoglycaemia
can develop,which maywarrantchanging the typeof
insulin from bovine(mostsimilartofeline)toporcine
25
(most similar to canine)or vice versa.However,there
20
appearstobecrossreactivityof anti-insulin antibodies
andvariablereactivityto thedifferent insulinsubunits
(Davison et al., 2003a).Antibodies against exogenous
insulinhave alsobeenreported infour diabeticcats
5
(Hoenig et al., 2003).
4681012141618202224
Diabeticketoacidosis
0
2
Time after insulin injection (hours)
Pathophysiology
16.8
24-hour glucose curve consistent with short
duration of insulin action.There is an initial
Inketoticdiabeticanimals,increased fatbreakdown
good response to insulin injection at 0 hours. By 12
(lipolysis) results in formation of the ketones, acetone,
hours post-insulin,blood glucose concentrations are
acetoacetate and betahydroxybutyrate,andhyper-
markedly elevated.
ketonaemia. These ketones exceed the renal thresh-
old andketonuriaresults.Ketones are alsoknown as
ketone acids,as accumulationof ketonesoverwhelms
Insulinresistance
25
thebuffering mechanismsresulting in increased hy-
1/10
drogen ions and decreased bicarbonate (i.e.a meta-
20
bolic acidosis).Ketosis isconfirmed byketonuria,and
15
ketoacidosisby documentationof metabolicacidosis.
10
Thepathophysiology of diabeticketoacidosis(DKA)is
not fullyunderstoodbut is thought tobe multifactorial
5
(Figure 16.11). It results from a low insulin:glucose
ratioduetoanabsoluteorrelative insulindeficiency
681012141618202224
and the effects of counter-regulatory diabetogenic hor-
Time afterinsulin injection(hours)
mones (see above).lt has been suggested that DKA is
more common inpatientswith low levelsof endo-
16.9
24-hour glucose curve consistent with insulin
genous insulin, but it has recently been shown that
resistance.There is no response to insulin given
at O hours.
dogswithDKA dohavedetectable concentrationsof
insulin (Parsons et al.,2002). Ketogenesis is also
increasedduringfastinganddehydration,bothofwhich
Somogyi effect
mayexacerbateDKA.Ketosisitselfresultsindehydra-
30
tion,anorexiaandincreasedamountsofdiabetogenic
25
hormones,thereby exacerbating the lipolysis and ke-
20
tone formation resulting inketoacidosis(see Figures
15
16.2 and 16.11).Patients receiving even low doses of
10
insulinrarelydevelopketosis,unlessthere is aconcur-
rent predisposing cause. Dogs and cats diagnosed
5
withDKAshouldbe investigated todetermineany
4681012141618202224
potential cause ofinsulinresistance.DKAiscommonly
Time after insulin injection (hours)
associated with infections (especially those of the
urinary tract, pancreatitis,heart disease, gastro-
16.10
24-hour glucose curve consistent with the
Somogyi effect.Insulin injection at O hours
intestinalproblemsoranydisease that canresultin an
results in hypoglycaemia.There is then an immediate
increase in'stress'hormones.
marked increase inbloodglucose concentrations,which
can be maintained for up to 72hours.
Clinicopathologicalfeatures
The diagnosis of diabetic ketoacidosis is based on the
presence of persistent hyperglycaemia (or elevated
Insulin resistance
glycated proteins) glucosuria and ketonuria with a
Failure torespondto insulin isoften termed insulin
history of signs consistent with diabetes mellitus.
resistance,howeverthis term should onlybe used in
Dipsticktestsforketonuria detectacetoacetatebut
patientsreceiving more than2IU/kg of insulin ateach
donotdetectβ-hydroxybutyrate(BHB).However,BHB
injection.In this situation the serial glucose curve
rarely exists alone in the urine of patients with DKA.lt
wouldreveal noresponse to insulinadministration
isworthrememberingthat,atthestartofinsulintherapy,
(Figure 16.9).Where true resistance is documented
BHBisconvertedtoacetoacetate,so theketonuriawill
investigationsshouldbeundertakentoruleoutdis-
initialy appear to worsen as the concentrations of 
easesassociatedwithincreasedconcentrationsof the
measured ketones increases.
counter-regulatory hormones, such as urinary tract
If the animal is clinicallyunwell, then the DKA is
infections(catecholamines),hyperadrenocorticism(cor-
assumed tobesevere.Patientswithdiabetesmellitus
tisol)or acromegaly(growth hormone or IGF-1). In a
and ketonuria but no overt clinical signs have mild
fewpatients antibodies against theexogenous insulin
DKA, which is not an emergency.
253
Chapter16
Laboratoryevaluationof hyperglycaemiaand hypoglycaemia
16.11
LIVER glycogen
stores
The pathophysiology of
diabeticketoacidosis.
Insulin deficiency or
nsulin
ADIPOSE
antagonism, and counter-
BLOOD
Growth hormone
TISSUE
regulatory diabetogenic
antagonism
Progesterone
Stress
hormones(shown in red),
hormones
result infailureof glucose
uptake in the periphery
and liver (red crosses). In
the absence of insulin,the
Insulin
Ketones
hormones (in green)
deficiency
stimulate lipolysis and the
PERIPHERAL
TISSUES
formation of ketones.Both
Glucose
glucose and ketones are
Growthhormone
excreted in the urine.
Stresshormones
KIDNEY
GLUCOSURIA
KETONURIA
During thedevelopmentof DKA,ketoneanions are
OsmolalityisrarelycalculatedinanimalswithDKA,
excretedintourine and,sinceelectrical neutrality is
but is important in the diagnosis of hyperosmolar non-
always maintained, this is accompanied by an obliga-
ketotic diabetes mellitus as thesepatientsoften need
tory loss of sodium and potassium.Hyponatraemia
emergencytreatment.
may therefore bepresent.Thetotal bodypotassium is
depletedwithdeveloping acidosis,ascellsincrease
Hyperosmolarnon-ketoticdiabetesmellitus
uptakeofhydrogen ions inexchangeforpotassium
Patients mayrarelydevelop hyperosmolarnon-ketotic
ions.Thisresults ina normal blood potassium concen-
diabetes mellitus(HNDM),which is characterized by
tration despite total body depletion.Astreatmentwith
insulin is started,glucose andpotassium moveback
(>350mOsm/kg)and dehydrationwithoutketosisor
into the cells and bloodpotassium falls dramatically.
acidosis (unless there is lactic acidosis) (Peterson,
Phosphate is also lost during DKA, but cellular mecha-
1998). This condition is thought to reflect the presence
nismssimilartothose describedforpotassiumresultin
of remaining functional beta cells.These cellsproduce
a normal blood phosphate concentration at presenta-
enough insulin to prevent fat breakdown (lipolysis)
tion.Blood phosphate concentrations will fall dramati-
therebypreventing development of ketosis.The clini-
cally after approximately 24hours of insulin therapy in
cal signsusuallyassociatedwith earlyDKAdonot
patients with DKA.The ensuing severe hypophospha-
occur,and dehydration due to concurrent diseases,
taemiamay result inred cell haemolysisand
inadequateintake andexcessfluidlosscan,therefore,
associated anaemia.Intravenousfluids should be
besevere.Thisdehydrationresults ina failure of renal
supplementedwithpotassiumphosphateandpotas-
glucoseexcretiondue toreducedglomerularfiltration
sium chloride in all patientswithDKA.
rate and further increases blood glucose. The total
Bloodosmolalitycanincreaseinsomepatientswith
bodyelectrolyteabnormalitiesinHNDMareusually
DKA,however,manywillhaveconcurrenthyponatra
similar to those in DKA,howeverhyponatraemia is rare
mia,which protects them from this dangerous compli-
(as it would protect against hyperosmolality).Azotae-
cation.Thepresence ofametabolic acidosiswillresult
mia is usually severe.
ventilation),but a marked anion gap will develop in
some patients(see Chapter9).
Hypoglycaemia
Bloodosmolalityiscalculatedbythefollowing
equation:
The common causes of hypoglycaemia are summa-
rized in Figure 16.12.
Osmolality(mOsm/kg) =
2(Na +K)(mmol/)+Urea(mmol/l) +Glucose(mmol/)
Insulinoma
An insulinoma is a neoplasm of thepancreaticbeta
(Normal osmolality is290-313mOsm/kg indogs.
cells,whichremainfunctionalandproduce insulin.The
Cats may have a slightly higher reference range.)
neoplasticcellsremain sensitive topositivefeedback
254
Chapter 16 Laboratory evaluation of hyperglycaemia and hypoglycaemia
Cause
Mechanism
Laboratory error
Inappropriate anticoagulant
Delayeratllfthirr
Insulinoma
Insulinproductionandreleasebyneoplasticbetacellsdespitenormo-orhypoglycaemia
latrogenic
Overdoseofinsulinorotherhyoglycaemicagentse.gglipizide
Hypoadrenocorticism
Absence of cortisol
Hypopituitarism
Absenceof growthhormoneorACTH(and thereforecortisol）
Endotoxaemia
Decreased hepaticglucose productionandincreased tissueutilization
Congenital portosystemic shunts
Insufficient glycogenstoresandpoorgluconeogenesis
Severe liver disease(failure)
Absence of glyoogenolysis and gluconeogenesis
Juvenilehglycmappeciaymia
Inadequateglycogenstoreslimitedfatandmusclmass
and toybreeds)
Hunting dogs
Excessiveglucose demandandinadequate glycogenstores
Glycogen storage diseases
Deficiencyofenzymesrequiredforglycogenconversion
Starvation
Loss of glycogen stores andinadequateintake
Paraneoplastic(leiomyomaleiomyosarcoma,lymphoma,
Excessiveiatnrpdtfulihfrthi
haemangisarcomaargepatiumourstr
likefactors（withsimilareffectstoinsulin)
Polycythaemia/leukaemia
Increasedglucoseutlizationpostsampling(artefactual)
Chronicrenal failure
Impairedhepaticglucoseproduction
16.12
Causes and mechanisms of hypoglycaemia.
and therefore increase insulinproduction andrelease
patientswithinsulinomaandmaybeusefulwhen
when there is hyperglycaemia (for example after a
hypoglycaemia cannot be documented.
meal)butfailto stopinsulinrelease when thepatient is
In the past Whipple'striad (symptoms after fasting or
normoglycaemic or hypoglycaemic.These patients
exercise; symptoms associated with hypoglycaemia;
can thereforebecome severelyhypoglycaemicwhen
and response to administration of glucose) was used to
food is withheld, and may also showsigns aftereating
diagnose an insulin-secreting tumour;however,most
or exercise. Compensatory sympathoadrenal stimula-
causesof hypoglycaemiawillmeet thethree criteriaof
tion results in muscular tremors, nervousness, rest-
Whipple's triad and it is of no diagnostic value.
lessness and hunger and often precedes the onset of
neuroglycopenic signs, such as lethargy, weakness,
Insulin concentrations:Insulin concentrations can
ataxia,abnormal behaviour andconvulsions or coma.
be measured inserum.Some laboratoriesprefer the
These compensatory mechanismsmean thatclinical
serumtobefrozen immediately aftercollection.Inter-
signs are usually short-lived due to prompt recovery
pretation of insulin concentrations is easier if the sam-
aftereachepisodeof hypoglycaemia.
pleiscollected whenthereisconcurrenthypoglycaemia.
in patients where hypoglycaemia cannot be docu-
Diagnosis
mented the insulin:glucoseratio canbe used(see
Diagnosis is dependent on demonstration of an el-
below).The amendedinsulin:glucoseratioisnot thought
evatedseruminsulinconcentrationintheface of hypo-
to offer any diagnostic advantage in small animals, as
it isbased on work inhumans.
High insulin concentrations in the presence of hyper-
Interpretation of insulin concentrations should con-
sider the following:
glycaemia are appropriate and therefore arenot nec-
essarily consistentwith insulinoma.Elevated insulin
concentrations in the presence of normoglycaemia
Reference range =<20μlU/1
may be consistent with insulinoma,provided the
>20μlU/=absolute hyperinsulinaemia
hyperinsulinaemia is severe enough.The use of the
consistent with an insulinoma
glucose:insulin ratio may improve the diagnosis of
10-20μlU/=relativehyperinsulinaemia
insulinomas in these circumstances.However,the
consistent with an insulinoma
best method of diagnosisremainshyperinsulinaemia
5-10 μlU/l = possible insulinoma
in the presence of hypoglycaemia.
<5μlU/l = inconsistent with insulinoma.
Patientswith insulinoma usually develop hypogly-
caemia within 12 hours of fasting, so it vitail to ensure
Fortheinsulin:glucoseratio,insulin concentration
that blood glucose is monitored regularly whilst with-
(μlU/l) is divided by glucose concentration (mmol/l).
holding food froma suspected insulinoma patient.
An insulin:glucoseratio>4.2IU/mol isconsistent
Fructosamine concentrations may be subnormal in
with insulinoma.
255
Chapter 16Laboratory evaluation of hyperglycaemia and hypoglycaemia
Case examples
Case 1
Signalment
2-year-oldmale Malemoise dog.
Biochemistry(continued)Result
Referenceinterval
History
ALT (IU/)
69
<90
1-monthhistoryoflargevolumediarrhoeawithoccasionalhaematochezia
AST(IU/I)
and increddreasd atiandwegh sTh
106
<40
collapsedyesterdayandhasremainedveryweak sincethen.
ALP(IU/)
86
<230
Clinical pathology data
Na:Kratio
14.6
>27
Haematology
Result
Referenceinterval
What abnormalities are present?
RBC(x1012/)
8.64
5.5-8.5
Haematology
Hb (g/dl)
19
12.0-18.0
Leucocytosis,eosinophilia,neutrophilia and normal lymphocyte count.
HCT (/)
0.52
0.37-0.55
Eosinopenia and lymphopenia would be expected due to thestressof
60.0-77.0
chronic illness.
MCV (fl)
60.5
Biochemistry
MCH(pg)
21.9
19.5-24.5
Subnrmrairaamiarmila
MCHC(g/dl)
36.3
32.0-36.0
hypercalcaemiahyperphosphataemia,markedazotaemia,hy
albuminaemia,elevatedAST.
WBC(x10%/)
21.7
6.0-12.0
Neutrophils (x10%/)
How would you interpret these results and
14.5
3.0-11.8
what are the likely differential diagnoses?
Neutrophils (band)(x10°/)
0.217
0.0
Hypoadrenocorticismwithsecondarysevereazotaemiaassociated
Lymphocytes (x 10%/1)
3.3
1.0-4.8
withmareddhydratnmostilybasedonthlectrolytedisr
bancenmlrcamiglyamnd
Monocytes(x10%/)
0.2
0.15-1.35
nophilia and lymphocytosis.
Eosinophils (x10°/)
3.3
0.1-1.25
cortisol,which normally increases blood glucose concentrations and
Biochemistry
Result
Reference interval
ment forhypoadrenocorticismwithmineralocorticoid andglucocorticoid
Sodium(mmoll)
131.7
136-159
supplementation.
Potassium(mmol)
8.99
3.4-5.8
Whatfurthertestswouldyourecommend?
Glucose(mmoll)
3.1
3.3-5.5
Adrenocorticotropic hormone(ACTH) stimulation test.There-
Urea(mmol/)
64.2
2.7-9.2
 sults in this case were:
Pre-ACTH cortisol=<6.0nmoll
Creatinine (μmol/)
533
91-180
-Post-ACTH cortisol =<6.0 nmol/
Calcium(mmol/l)
3.32
2.34-3.0
This result is consistent with hypoadrenocorticism.
Inorganic phosphate (mmol/l)
5.1
1.29-2.9
Albumin (g/l)
Urinalysiswillnotdifferentiatepre-renalazotaemia(reversiblefrom
22
28-42
renal azotaemia (potentially irreversible) in patients with hypo-
Globulin(g/)
40
27-45
adrenocorticismassodiumdepletioncausesisosthenuriain these
animals (see Chapter 11).
Case2
Signalment
13-week-oldfemalePomeranianpuppy.
Biochemistry
Result
Adult reference interval
History
Sodium(mmol/)
149
136-159
Episode of weaknessat 5weeksof agesubsequentlyhasremained
Potassium(mmol/)
2.4
3.4-5.8
quieterthanlimatvelsourstaingffc
Glucose (mmol/l)
1.7
3.3-5.5
lifelessezureprrtpresentatinollapsedfohpreviur
What abnormalities are present?
Clinical pathology data
Hypoglycaemia and hypokalaemia.
Howwould you interpret theseresults and
Haematology
Result
Adult reference interval
whatare the likelydifferential diagnoses?
HCT (/)
0.36
0.37-0.55
seizures.Hypokalaemia probablyreflects inadequate intake.A tentative
diagnosis of juvenile hypoglycaemia can thereforebe made.
What further tests would you recommend?
Response to intravenous glucose bolus.
256
Chapter16Laboratoryevaluationof hyperglycaemiaandhypoglycaemia
Case3
Signalment
6-year-old female,neuteredCairnTerrier.
Biochemistry (continued)Result
Reference interval
History
ALP(IU/)
428
<230
Marked increaseinthirstandurinationoverprevious2weeks.Now
Cholesterol(mmol/l)
4.47
2.0-7.0
drinking about 240ml/kg/day.Someweight loss anddevelopment of
Na:K ratio
31.8
>27
cloudy eyes overa similarperiod.
Triglycerides (mmol/l)
1.45
<0.6
Clinical pathology data
Haematology
Result
Reference interval
Urine analysis
RBC(x1012/1)
7.88
5.5-8.5
Protein
Hb (g/dl)
17.3
12.0-18.0
Glucose
++
HCT (I/)
0.53
0.37-0.55
Ketones
+++
MCV (tl)
67.2
60.0-77.0
Blood
-ve
MCH (pg)
22
19.5-24.5
pH
6.5
MCHC (g/d)
32.5
32.0-36.0
Specific gravity
1.048
WBC(x10%/)
15.8
6.0-12.0
Protein:creatinine ratio
1.32
Neutrophils (x 10%/)
13.59
3.0-11.8
Sediment
FewWBC,fewsmallpithelialells
Neutrophils(band)(x10°/1)
0.32
Lymphocytes (x10/)
1.11
1.0-4.8
What abnormalities arepresent?
0.47
Haematology
Monocytes(x10/)
0.15-1.35
0.1-1.25
Leucocytosis due tomature neutrophilia.
Eosinophils(x10°/)
0.16
Increased ALP(just under twice normal),insignficantly smallincrease in
Basophils(x10°/)
0
0.0-0.6
ASThyrriglyridamiahgamiadfrt
Normoblasts(x10°/)
0.16
0
Biochemistry
ProteinuriaglucosuriaktnuriaWhitebloodcellsonurinesedment.
Platelets (x10°/)
201
200-500
How would you interpret these results and
what are the likely differential diagnoses?
Biochemistry
Result
Reference interval
Biochemistryandurinalysisabnormalitiesareall consistent withdiabe
Sodium (mmoll)
144.4
136-159
tesmellitusThespecificgravityisnotconsistentwithpolyuriathisis
because of the presence of glucose in the urine,which has a higher
Potassium (mmoll)
4.54
3.4-5.8
densitythanwater.Thepresenceofketonesisconsistentwithketosis
Glucose (mmoll)
17.8
3.3-5.5
and thispatientthereforerequiresprompttreatmentTheproteinuriaand
white blood cells in theurinemaybedueto a urinary tract infection,which
Urea (mmol/l)
4.5
2.7-9.2
is common in patients with diabetesmelitus.
Creatinine (μmol/)
78
91-180
Whatfurthertestswouldyourecommend?
Calcium(mmoll)
2.63
2.34-3.0
Inorganic phosphate
1.29
1.29-2.9
Fructosamineisusefultoprovideabaselineformonitoringglucose
(mmol/l)
control and alsohelps to confirm diabetes melltus in equivocal
cases.In thiscase fructosamine was546μmoll（reference range
Albumin (g/)
34.0
28-42
162-310μmol/).
Globulin (g/l)
36.0
27-45
Urineculturemaybewarrantedtoconfirmurinarytractinfectionand
ALT(IU/)
88
<90
provide antimicrobial sensitivity.
AST (IU/)
41
<40
Case 4follows
257
Chapter 16 Laboratory evaluation of hyperglycaemia and hypoglycaemia
Case 4
Signalment
Biochemistry (continued)Result
10-year-oldmale entire StaffordshireBullTerrier.
Reference interval
History
Urea(mmol/)
3.4
2.7-9.2
3-weekhistoryofintermittenthindlimbweaknessapproximately threetimes
Creatinine (μmol/)
97
91-180
weekly.Usually associated withexerciseintheaftenoon (priorto feeding).
Calcium (mmoll)
2.74
2.34-3.0
Clinical pathology data
Inorganicphosphate
1.6
1.29-2.9
Haematology
Result
(mmol/l)
Reference interval
5.5-8.5
Albumin (g/)
RBC (x1012/)
41.0
28-42
7.49
Globulin (g/)
33.0
27-45
Hb(g/dl)
17.0
12.0-18.0
ALT(IU/)
61
<90
HCT(1/)
0.46
0.37-0.55
60.0-77.0
AST(IU/)
27
<40
MCV (l)
61.0
ALP (IU/)
157
<230
MCH(pg)
22.6
19.5-24.5
Na:K ratio
40
>27
MCHC (g/dl)
37.1
32.0-36.0
WBC (x10%/)
8.0
6.0-12.0
What abnormalities arepresent?
Neutrophils(x10/)
5.49
3.0-11.8
Haematology
Neutrophils(band)(x10%/)
0
0
MildincreasinMC(arfactual; Cha)
Lymphocytes(x10%/)
1.96
1.0-4.8
Biochemistry
Monocytes (x10°/1)
0.24
0.15-1.35
Hypoglycaemia.
0.24
0.1-1.25
How would you interpret these results and
Eosinophils(x 10/)
whatare the likelydifferential diagnoses?
Basophils(x 10%/)
0
0.0-0.6
First,confirm that glucoseresultisnotalaboratoryeror.lfresult iscorrect,
Normoblasts(x10%/)
0.08
0
themost likely differential given the history and signalment is insulinoma.
What furthertests would yourecommend?
Fructosamine may confirm persistenthypoglycaemia.
Biochemistry
Result
Reference interval
Insulinconcentration withconcurrenthypoglycaemiawillconfirm
Sodium (mmoll)
148
136-159
hyperinsulinaemia.Insulin concentrationin thiscasewas22μlU/.
Uitrasonography,exploratory laparotomy and histopathology
Potassium(mmol/l)
3.7
3.4-5.8
wil be required to confirm that hyperinsulinaemia is relaed to an
Glucose (mmoll)
2.6
3.3-5.5
insulinoma in the pancreas.
Case5
Signalment
12-year-old,femaleneuteredDomesticShorthaircat.
Haematology(continued)Result
Reference interval
Eosinophils(x10%/)
0.468
0.0-1.0
History
Increased urination and thirst for the previous2months.Increased
Basophils(x10°/)
0.0
0.0-0.2
appetitefortheprevious4yearsand long-termobesity.
Clinicalpathology data
Biochemistry
Result
Reference interval
Sodium (mmoll)
152
145-156
Haematology
Result
Reference interval
Potassium (mmol/)
4.26
4.00-5.00
RBC(x1012/)
9.40
5.50-10.0
Glucose (mmol/)
21.8
3.3-5.0
Hb(g/dl)
13.1
8.0-14.0
Urea(mmol/l)
15.4
2.8-9.8
HCT (/)
0.44
0.24-0.45
Creatinine (umoll)
120
26-118
MCV (Il)
47.0
39.0-55.0
Calcium(mmol/l)
2.43
2.10-2.90
MCHC(g/dl)
29.6
30.0-36.0
TP(g/l)
72.2
69.0-79.0
WBC(x10%/)
11.7
7.0-20.0
Albumin (g/l)
29.5
28.0-35.0
Neutrophils(segmented)
8.307
2.5-12.8
Globulin(g/l)
42.7
23.0-50.0
(x109/1)
ALT(IU/)
34
15-60
Neutrophils (band) (x10%/)
0.0
0.0
ALP (IU/I)
116
20-100
Lymphocytes (x10%/)
2.340
1.5007.000
TotalT4(nmol/)
60
13-48
Monocytes (x10%/)
0.585
0.07-0.85
Case 5 continues
258
Chapter16Laboratoryevaluationofhyperglycaemiaandhypoglycaemia
Case 5continued
or diabetes mellitus.The very mild increase seen in MCHC is not
significant(seeChapter4）Thiscathashyerthyroidism;however,th
What abnormalities arepresent?
T4 concentration doesnotreflect the severityof clinical signs.lt is
Haematology
possiblethatasecond diseaseissuppressing theT4concentration.
Very mild increase in MCHC.
What further tests would you recommend?
Biochemistry
Urinalisrencfgosenandifigrvi
Hyperglycamarased ttatamiainreasd
this case marked glucosuria was present.
How would you interpret these results and
Fructosamine is useful toconfirmif there hasbeen persistent
what are thelikelydifferential diagnoses?
hyperglycaemiabut isaffectedbyhyperthyroidism.lnthiscase
Hyperglycaiassignificatcoldestresassciatdor
fructosamine=3.90mmoll(laboratory reference range 2.19-3.47
diabetesmelitus.IncreasedT4isconsistentwithhyperthyroidism.Mild
mmol/l.Ashyperthyroidismtendstoreduce fructosamineconcen-
azotaemia（urea increased more than creatinine),whichmayreflect
trationsthisnreaseisinificant.ombinedwiththeurineresul
dehydrationsecondarytohyperthyroidism,duetopolyuriawithinad
equateatrintakermayrfctrenalfalureecallyifcat
mellitus.TheincreasedT4maypromoteketogenesissobothdis-
reducedmusclemassncreasedALPisconsistentwithhyperthyroidism
easesrequiremanagement.
References and furtherreading
antibodies intreated anduntreated diabetic cats.Veterinary
Immunology&lmmunopathology77,93-102
Jensen AL(1993)Various protein and albumin corrections of the
BennetN(2002)Monitoring techniquesfor diabetesmellitus inthe
serum fructosamine concentration in the diagnosis of canine
dog and thecat.ClinicalTechniquesinSmallAnimalPractice17,
diabetesmellitus.VeterinaryResearchCommunications1713
65-69
23
BriggsCE,NesonRW,FeldmanEC,EllittDAandNeal LA（20)
LosteA and Marca MC(2001)Fructosamineandglycated hemoglobin
intheassessmentof glycaemiccontrol.VeterinaryResearch32
55-62
cases(1995-1998).Journalof theAmericanVeterinaryMedical
Marca MC,Loste Aand Ramos J. (200o) Effect of acute
Association217,48-53
hyperglycaemia on the serum fructosamine andblood glycated
BruskiewiczKA,NelsonRW,Feldman ECandGriffeySM（1997)
haemoglobin concentrations in canine samples.Veterinary
ResearchCommunications24,11-16
Journal of theAmericanVeterinary Medical Association211,
MellanbyRJand HerrtageME(2002)Insulinomainanormoglycaemic
188-192
dogwithlowserumfructosamine.Journal of Small Animal
CohnLA,McCawDL,TateDJand Johnson JC(200o)Assessment
Practice43,506-508
of fiveportableblood glucose meters,a point-of-care analyzer,
and colorteststripsformeasuring blood glucoseconcentration
Clinicalsignserialbloodglucosedeterminationsrinegluoe
indogs.JournaloftheAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation
and glycated blood proteins.Veterinary Clinicsof NorthAmerica:
216,198-202
Small AnimalPractice25,571-584
Davison LJ,Podd SL,Ristic JM,Herrtage ME,Parnham A and
Nichols Rand CrenshawKL (1995)Complications and concurrent
Catchpole B(2002)Evaluationof two point-of-care analysers for
measurement of fructosamine or haemoglobin A1c in dogs.
formsofdiabetesmellitus.VeterinaryClinicsofNorthAmerica：
Journal ofSmallAnimalPractice43.526-532
SmallAnimalPractice25,617-624
DavisonLJRisticJMEHertageMERamseyKandCatchpol
Parsons SE,DrobatzKJ,Lamb SV,Ward CRand HessRS.(2002)
(2003a)Anti-insulinantibodiesindogswithnaturally occurring
Endogenous serum concentration in dogs with diabetic
diabetesmellitus.Veterinarylmmunologyand Immunopathology
ketoacidosis.JournalofVeterinaryEmergencyandCritical Care
91,53-60
12,147-152
DavirtMBist
PetersonM(1998)Endocrine emergencies.In:BSAVA Manual of
and Catchpole B(2003b) Evaluation of a continuous glucose
CanineandFelineEndocrinology2dedned.AGTorranceand
monitoring systemindiabetic dogs.Journal ofSmallAnimal
Practice44,435-442
Reusch CE,Gerber B,Boretti FS (2002) Serum fructosamine
GrecoDS(2004)Diabeticketoacidosis.In:BSAVAManualofCanine
concentrationsindogswith hyperthyroidism.VeterinaryResearch
and FelineEndocrinology,3edn,ed.CTMooneyand ME
Communications26,531-536
Peterson,pp.142-149.BSAVAPublications,Gloucester
Reusch CEand TomsaK(1999)Serum fructosamine concentration
incatswithovert hyperthyroidism.Journalof theAmerican
CanineandFelineEndocrinologyandReroductionednd
VeterinaryMedicalAssociation215,1297-1300
Philadelphia
and cats with hypo- or hyperproteinaemia,azotaemia,
HasegawaS,SakTTakmuraN,oyamaH,MotoyoshiS（199a）
hyperlipidaemiaandhyperbilirubinaemiaVeterinaryRecord148
Glycatedhaemoglobin fractions innormal and diabeticdogs
370-376
measuredbyhighperformanceliquidchromatography.Journal
Siliart BandStambouli F(1996) Laboratory diagnosis of insulinoma
ofVeterinaryMedica/Science53,65-68
inthedog:aretrospectivestudyandanewdiagnosticprocedure.
HasegawaSakTTamuraNoyamaHMotyoshi（19)
Journalof SmallAnimalPractice37,367-370
Glycated haemoglobin fractions in normal and diabetic cats
ThoresenSleksandrsenMLnaasredaP,Grndal
measuredbyhighperformance liquid chromatography.Journal
and BerthelsenK(1995)Pancreaticinsulin-secreting carcinoma
ofVetrinaryMedicalScience5489
inadog:fructosaminefordetermining persistent hypoglycaemia.
Hoenig MReuschCandPetersonME(20oo)eta celland insulin
JournalofSmallAnimalPractice36,282-286
259
Laboratory evaluation of
hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism
Peter A. Graham and Carmel T. Mooney
Introduction
epithelium;the lumen of which contains colloid,
a gelatinous storage substance for thyroglobulin
Hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidismarethemostcom-
secreted by the follicular cells (Figure 17.1).Thyro-
mon endocrine disorders of dogs and cats,respect-
globulin isalarge glycoproteincontainingiodotyrosines
ively,and testing for these diseases is frequently
thatserve asprecursorsfor thyroid hormone synthe-
carried out in practice. Interpretation relies on a good
sis.Most of the stepsinvolved in thyroid hormone
understanding of thyroidphysiology and the myriad
synthesisarecatalysedbytheenzymethyroidper-
factors,otherthanthyroid disease,thatcanaffecttests
oxidase（TPO).
of thyroid function.
Themetabolicallyactive thyroid hormones are the
iodothyronines:3,5,3',5'-L-tetraiodothyronine（thyrox-
ine（T4))and3,5,3-L-triodothyronine(triodothyronine
Physiology ofthe thyroid gland
(T3)). T4 is the main secretory product of the thyroid
gland.Only small amounts of T3,the more meta-
The thyroid glandofdogs andcatsexistsastwo
bolicallyactivehormone,and3,3',5'-L-triodothyronine
separatelobeslocated oneithersideof thetrachea
(reverse T3(rT3)),an inactive product,are produced
extendingdownwardsoverthefirstfiveorsixtracheal
by the thyroid gland.The majority of circulating T3
rings.Each thyroid lobeiscomposed of microscopic
spherical follicles lined by a single layerof thyroid
andrT3isproducedbyperipheralmonodeiodination
of T4,which occurs mainly in the liver and kidney
(Figure 17.2);so T4 isoften considered tobe a pro-
hormone.ActivationtoT3ispotentiallyautoregulated
in theperiphery.
The thyroid hormonescirculatebound toplasma
proteins.The exactproteins and theirbinding affinities
varybetweenspecies.Indogs,circulatingT4isbound
to thyroxine-binding globulin(TBG) and to a lesser
extent thyroxine-bindingprealbumin(TBPA),albumin,a
highdensitylipoprotein(HDL2)and averylowdensity
lipoprotein.CatsdependprimarilyonalbuminandTBPA.
Approximately 99.9% of T4 is protein-bound in both
species,and theremaining fractionis free andmetaboli-
cally active.T3 is slightly lessprotein-bound with a free
fraction of approximately1%.For both hormones,the
Histological appearance of healthy canine
bound fractionacts as areservoirtobufferhormone
17.1
thyroid tissue. Note the follicular architecture.
deliverytotarget tissues.
T3
5'D
H
CH
-COOH
NH2
rT3
5D
-COOH
17.2
The structure of thyroxine(T4).triodothyronine（T3)andreverseT3(rT3)and the effects of 5-and 5
deiodinases.
260
Chapter17Laboratoryevaluationofhypothyroidism andhyperthyroidism
17.3
The hypothalamic-
pituitary-thyroid-
Hypothalamus
TRH
extrathyroid axis,
demonstrating theinteraction
between the various factors
controlling thyroid function
（TRH,thyrotropin releasing
Pituitary gland
TSH
hormone;TSH,thyroid
stimulatinghormone
(thyrotropin);T4,thyroxine;
T3,triodothyronine;+,
stimulation; -, inhibition).
Thyroidgland
Circulation
Extrathyroidal tissues
Controlof thyroid hormoneproductionismediated
Laboratory methods for assessment
vianegativefeedback(Figure 17.3).The hypothalamus
ofthyroid function
secretes thyrotropin releasing hormone (TRH) into
thehypophysealportalsystemandthisactson the
Avarietyof testsand methodologies is available for
anteriorpituitarypromoting the synthesis and secre-
measurementoftotalandfreethyroidhormonecon-
tionof thyrotropin(thyroid stimulatinghormone(TSH)).
centrations,thyroid autoantibodies and pituitary hor-
TSH acts on the thyroid cells,promoting trapping of
mones thatmayplayarole inassessmentof thyroid
iodide and synthesis and release of the thyroid hor-
function.Inaddition,the hypothalamic-thyroid-pituitary
axis can bemanipulated through the administration of
andT3producesanegativefeedbackeffectonthe
various stimulatoryandsuppressive agents.Adescrip-
anterior pituitary,which serves to decrease TSH
tion of the methodology of the most commonly used
synthesis and release and,subsequently,thyroid
testsisprovidedelsewhere(BSAVA Manualof Canine
hormone production.Peripherally，protein binding,
andFelineEndocrinology).
cytosolicbuffers and the activitiesof the deiodinase
In general,thyroid hormones areprettyrobust and
enzymesofferadditional areasforcontrol of thyroid
stable with some notable exceptions （Figure 17.4).
hormone action.
Thereisnoeffectof timeofdayfordiagnosticsampling,
Thyroid hormones havenumerous functions but
but timepost-medication is important for therapeutic
theirmajorinfluenceisonmetabolicrate,growth and
monitoring.Haemolysis and lipaemia rarelyaffect the
tissue turnover.They also interact with the nervous
resultsofradioimmunoassays(RlAs)but this maynot
system by increasing overall sympatheticdrive.The
be the case for non-isotopicmethods.
clinical presentations inanimalswith a deficiency of
thyroid hormone,therefore,caninclude stunting,skin
Total thyroid hormonemeasurement
and hair abnormalities,lethargy and increasedbody
Both total T4and total T3canbereadilymeasured in
weight.Conversely,inhyperthyroid individuals,there
serum(orplasma) samples from dogs and cats.RIA is
isweightloss,hyperactivity,intermittentvomiting/diar-
thepreferred laboratorymethodbut,becauseof the
rhoea and signs of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.The
necessary use of radioisotopes,is generally confined
effectof thyroid hormoneon tissuesisrelativelyslow
to commercial laboratories.Assays that avoid the use
and,consequently,clinical signscan takesome time
ofradioisotopesofferseveral advantagesincluding
(weeksto months) to developafter lossof thyroid
longershelf-life,no exposuretoradioactive material,
function or as hyperfunction commences.Similarly it
easierdisposalandpotentialapplicationinthepractice
takestimeforclinical signstodisappearafterappropri-
laboratory.Theyincludeenzyme-linkedimmunosorbent
atetreatmenthasbeen initiated.
261
Chapter 17Laboratory evaluationof hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism
Analyte
Sampletype
Handling considerations
Indications
Total T4
Serum/plasma
None
Diagnosing hyperthyroidism
Diagnosing hypothyroidism (with TSH)
Therapeutic monitoring
TRH/TSHresponse tests
T3 suppression test
TotalT3
Serum/plasma
None
Noadvantage over total T4 for diagnosticpurposes
Assessment of absorption forT3suppression test
FreeT4
Serumplasma
Avoid delayed transport
Diagnosing hypo-and hyperthyroidism
Severe hyperlipaemia
CTSH
Serum/plasma
None
Diagnosing caninehypothyroidism (with T4)
Therapeuticmonitoring
TRHresponse test
Thyroglobulin
Serum orblood spot
None
Assessment of thyroid pathology
autoantibody
T4andT3
Serum/plasma
None
Assessment of thyroid autoimmunity
autoantibodies
Assessment of immunoassay interference
17.4
Sample requirements,special handling considerations and uses of the analytes forassessment of thyroid disease.
automatedsystemsthatuseadvancedsignalgenera-
dialysateis subsequently subjectedto anultrasensitive
tion and detection systems(e.g.chemiluminescence).
RIA.The dialysis step ensures that freeT4measure-
Although early reports were critical, there have been
ment isnotaffected by alteredprotein binding and
improvementsin thesemethodsoverrecentyears and,
crossreacting substances.Care should be taken to
in some circumstances,they correlate well with RIA
avoidprolonged transport(>5days) asmeasured free
(Lurye etal.,2002;Peterson etal.,2003).However,itis
T4 concentrations can increase with time.In regions
usuallyrecommended thatone testmethod isused
withveryhighenvironmental temperaturesthiseffect
exclusively with its own test-specific reference range.
can be seen inas little as 2 days.Thispresumably
Manyof thekitsavailablefortotal thyroid hormone
results fromdegradationorloss of affinity ofthe binding
concentrations are designedprimarilyforusewith hu-
proteins,allowing the freefraction tobecome greater.
man serum.In dogs and cats the binding affinitiesand
Highserumconcentrationsoffreefattyacidshavea
overall concentrationsof themajorbindingproteinsare
similareffect.
lower than in humans.Consequentlykits designed for
humanusemustbemodified to allowforthemeasure-
Thyrotropin measurement
mentof the lowercirculating total thyroid hormone
Aspecies-specificassay(chemiluminescentorimmuno-
concentrations in dogs and cats,andvalidated to ac-
radiometric (IRMA) for measurement of canine TSH
count fordifferences inplasmaproteinbinding.
(cTSH) is available.A species-specificfeline assay is
not yet available.
Free thyroxine measurement
Despite thedifferencesin circulating concentrations of
Thyroid autoantibodymeasurement
totalT4betweendogs,catsandman,absolute fre4
A variety of antibodies can be produced during im-
concentrations are similar.Free T4measurement is
mune-mediated thyroid disease.A species-specific
difficult,notleast becauseof its circulationinminute
method formeasurement of canine thyroglobulin
quantities(pmollratherthan nmol/l).Several methods
autoantibodies(TgAA) isreadily available commer-
of measurement are available and include direct and
cially.InaproportionofTgAApositivecases,T3andT4
analogueradio-and chemiluminescentimmunoassay
autoantibodies (T3AA and T4AA) are produced be-
methods.These assayshavebeenprimarilydevel-
cause theTgAA is formed against an epitope contain-
opedforuseinhumansandremaincontroversial as
ing aniodothyronine site.These antibodies have limited
accurate assessmentsof true freehormone concen-
impact on the availability of thyroid hormones in vivo.
trations.In dogs and cats,this controversy is exacer-
However,they can have a dramatic impact on labora-
bated.Althoughnotallmethodshavebeenevaluated
tory testprocedures andcanresult in spuriouslyhighor
in dogsandcats,itisclearthatresultsfrom analogue
lowtotal thyroidhormone concentrations,depending
methods offer no further information than total T4
on theparticular assay andseparation system used.
measurement alone.
Assessmentof freeT4concentrationsby equilib-
Dynamic thyroid function tests
rium dialysis orultrafiltration ispreferred.Mostcom-
Dynamic thyroid function testsareoftenrecommended
mercial laboratoriesuse the equilibrium dialysis
toconfirm orrefutea diagnosisof thyroid dysfunction,
technique as it is available in kit form.In this method,
particularlywhen baseline testresults are equivocal.
thepatient sample undergoes a dialysisstepand the
They can alsobe usedtodetermine the siteofthelesion.
262
Chapter17Laboratory evaluationofhypothyroidismandhyperthyroidism
T3suppression
TSHstimulation
TRH stimulation
Drug
Liothyronine
Bovine TSH
HumanTSH
TRH
Dose
20μg 8-hourly for
0.1IU/kg (dogs)
50-75μg/dog
100-600μg (dogs)
7 doses (cats only)
0.5 IU/kg (cats)
0.025-0.20mg/cat
0.1mg/kg (cats)
Route
Oral
Intravenous
Intravenous
Intravenous
Sampling times
0and 2-4hours after
0and6hours
0and 6 hours (dogs)
0and4hours
last dose
0and 6-8 hours (cats)
Assay
TotalT4
TotalT4
Total T4
TotalT4
Referencerange
<20nmol/ with>50%
50%increase exceeding
As for bovine TSH
At least >20% increase or>6nmol/
suppression
approximately23nmoll
(sbop)
(sbop)
>60%increase (cats)
>100% increase (cats)
17.5
Commonly usedprotocolsfor dynamic thyroidfunctiontests in dogs andcats.Valuesquoted for interpretation
are guidelinesonly.Each individual laboratory should furnish itsownreference interval.
Inmostcases,the total T4responsetoeitherexog-
changes must have occurred prior to the appearance of
enousRH,SHorsyntheticT3isassessed,although
clinical signs of hypothyroidism (Graham et al.,2001).
cTSH can be measured after administration of TRH.
Thiscondition isrecognized as a heritable trait.
Both exogenous TRH and T3 are readily available.
Idiopathicthyroid degenerationischaracterized by
BovineTSH,previouslyused fortheTSHresponsetest,
alossofthyroidparenchymawithreplacement by
is no longer available as a pharmaceutical preparation.
adipose or fibrous tissue.The cause is not yet defined,
A recombinant human β-subunit TSH is now available
but thereis evidence that these lesionsmaybe anend
and,althoughexpensive,appearstowork wellinhealthy
stage of lymphocytic thyroiditis (Graham et al.,2001).
dogs and cats(Sauve andParadis,2000;Stegeman et
al.,2003). The most commonly used protocols for these
Congenital hypothyroidism(cretinism)
tests are outlined inFigure 17.5.
Dogs that are hypothyroid at birth fail to grow and
developnormally;theyare usually describedas having
disproportionate dwarfism.lf goitre ispresenta defectin
Hypothyroidism
one of the steps of hormonogenesisor,less commonly,
iodine deficiency is thelikely cause.Defects in TPO
Hypothyroidism is primarily a concern in dogs although
havebeendescribedinToyFoxTerrierswithcongenital
occasionally investigation is required incats.
hypothyroidism and goitre(Fyfe et al.,2003).However,
Canine hypothyroidism
goitre is absent in most reports of congenital hypothy-
roidism. A lack of production of TSH is the suspected
A range of possible causes of canine hypothyroidism
cause of juvenile hypothyroidism in GiantSchnauzers
 exists. Primary hypothyroidism refers to disease arising
(Greco et al.,1991),Boxers(Mooney and Anderson,
1993) and Scottish Deerhounds(Robinson etal,1988).
itself.Hypothyroidism may also arise because of a
However,mostreportswerepublished prior to the
deficiency of TSH or TRH, so-called secondary and
 availability of the cTSH assay, so this is unproven.
tertiary hypothyroidism. Although the former has been
recognized indogsandcats,thelatterhasneverbeen
Laboratory diagnosis of canine hypothyroidism
reported.The distinctionis not always clear,however,
Caninehypothyroidismis difficult to diagnosebecause
and manyreferto this type of hypothyroidism as central.
of the long preclinical phase,the variety of presenting
The overwhelming majority of hypothyroid cases arise
complaintsand thepoorspecificityofseveral of the
from irreversible acquired thyroidgland disease.Onlya
diagnostic tests.lt is probably one of the most
small percentage of hypothyroidismresults from nutri-
overdiagnosed conditions inveterinary medicine,but
tional,congenitalpititaryrthercondi.
certaincircumstances canlead tounderdiagnosis.
A commonphysiological response to anyillness is
Adult-onsethypothyroidism
a lowering of circulating thyroid hormone concentra-
Primary, irreversible destruction of the thyroid gland
tions.It is,thereforeoften difficult to distinguishbe
accountsforalmost all of the naturallyoccurring cases
tweenpathologicalandphysiologicalthyroid-deficient
of hypothyroidism in adult dogs.The histopathological
states,and the diagnostic specificity of thyroid hor-
descriptioniseitherlymphocyticthyroiditis oridiopathic
mone measurements is consequently poor. In addi-
thyroid degeneration (atrophy), each of which occurs
tion,early in the disease,animals may be overtly
with approximately equal frequency.
hypothyroid on laboratory testing but may not display
Lymphocytic thyroiditis,also referred to as
classicorwelldefinedclinicalfeaturesformanymonths
autoimmunethyroiditis,ischaracterizedbylymphocytic
thereafter.Finally,hypothyroid dogs may haverefer-
infiltrationofthethyroidglandswithprogressivedestruc-
ence range serum thyroid hormone concentrations
tionof thyroid follicles.Thereisa variationintherate of
because of analytical interference by crossreacting
progression of this process but extensive pathological
anti-thyroid hormone antibodies.
263
Chapter17Laboratoryevaluationofhypothyroidismandhyperthyroidism
Avarietyofclinicalpathologyabnormalitiescanbe
Total T4 is lowered innon-thyroidal illness asa
seeninhypothyroiddogs althoughnoneistruly specific
normal physiological response to thatillness. Although
(Figure 17.6) (Panciera,1994a;Dixon et al.,1999).
severalmechanismsareresponsible,notallareclearly
Historically,hypothyroidismwassuggested tohavean
defined in the dog.Possible explanations include:
adverse effect onvonWillebrand factor antigenand
clotting times but thishasbeen disproved(Avgeris et
Glucocorticoid-mediated TSH suppression
al,1990;Panciera and Johnson,1994).
Reduced serum protein binding
Alteredperipheral hormonemetabolism.
Clinical pathological abnormality
%of hypothyroid dogs
The suppressive effect ofnon-thyroidal illnesscan
Haematology
beprofound and hasbeendemonstrated inbothacute
and chronic illnesses (Panciera, 1994b; Elliot et al.,
Mild normocytic anaemia
18-40
1995;Calvert et al.,1998;Panciera etal.,2003;Torres
Serumbiochemistry
etal.,2003).ngeneral,themore severe theillness,the
Elevated cholesterol
73-78
greater theeffecton thyroid hormone concentrations
(Kantrowitz et al, 2001). In some chronic conditions,
Elevated triglyceride
88
such as osteoarthritis, there appears to be little effect
Elevated creatinekinase
18-35
(Paradis etal.,2003).The preferred terminology forthis
effectisthe“low-T4stateofmedical illness'althoughthe
Elevated alkaline phosphatase
30
phrase‘euthyroid sicksyndrome'has alsobeenused.
A similar phenomenon occurs with a variety of drugs,
Clinical pathological abnormalities in hypothyroid
17.6
including glucocorticoids, long-term phenobarbital,
dogs(Panciera,1994a;Dixon et al.,1999).
acetylsalicylic acid, amiodarone, clomipramine and
Laboratory tests for directly investigating thyroid
sulphonamide-containing antibiotics (Bicer et al.,2002;
disease canbedivided into those thatassess thyroid
Gulikers and Panciera,2003;Williamson et al,2002;
function and those that provideevidence of pathology
Daminet and Ferguson, 2003; Daminet et al., 2003).
(thyroiditis).
Sulphonamide therapy warrants specificmention as
itpotentially causesatruebutreversiblehypothyroidism,
Thyroid hormones:Low concentrations of thyroid
presumably mediated through inhibition of TPO,an
hormones are poorly specific for hypothyroidism. Con-
enzyme essential for thyroid hormone production. As a
centrations can be decreased inresponse to general
result,circulating total T4 concentrations can be se-
verely depressed. The effects of sulphonamide therapy
non-thyroidal illnessoradministration of many drugs.
Exogenous thyroid hormone supplementation therapy
isrelativelylong-livedafterwithdrawalwithfullrecovery
can alsointerferewithdiagnostictestingand a greater
inafewweeks.Awithdrawalperiodof 3weeksis
than4-weekwithdrawal period isrequiredbefore
recommended priorto assessing thyroid function.
retesting(Panciera et al.,1990).
WhilsttotalT4concentrationsshouldbeinterpreted
cautiouslyindogsbeing treatedwith thedrugs listed
Total thyroxine:Total T4isareasonablysensitive test
above,more recent studies have shown that some
(up to100%) but it is poorly specific(as low as 70%)
drugs havenoorminimal effects on thyroid function
(Figure 17.7).(For discussions of sensitivity and
including bromide, propanolol, etodolac, ketoprofen,
specificity,eeChapters2and26.fortunately,tl
meloxicam, carprofen and chondroitin sulfate/glucos-
T4 concentrations canbe lowinavarietyof situations
amine (Panciera and Johnston,2002;Daminet and
other than hypothyroidism.lf used as the sole diagnos-
Ferguson, 2003; Daminet et al., 2003; Sauve et al,
2003). Thyroid function can be reasonably reliably as-
tictestforhypothyroidism,manyfalsepositiveresults
would ensue.
sessed in animals receiving these medications.
TT4
FT4d
TSH
TT4/TSH
FT4d/TSH
TgAA
Study
Sen
Spec
Sen
Spec
Sen
Spec
Sen
Spec
Sen
Spec
Spec
Sen
91
97
Iversen etal.,1998
100
100
Nachreiner et al,1998
86
94
Beale andTorres,1991
Nelson et al.,1991
98
73
97
78
Peterson et al,1997
89
82
98
93
76
93
67
98
74
98
Scott-Moncriffet al998
100
78
63
88
63
100
Dion andMooney,1999b
100
75
80
94
87
82
87
92
80
97
Published diagnostic performance of tests used in the diagnosis of caninehypothyroidism and thyroid
17.7
pathologyllvaluesexpressedaspercentageTT4,total thyroxineT4dfree thyroxinebyequilbriumdialysis
TSH,throid stimulatingrmone(throtropinTgAA,hyroglobulinautoantiodesensnsitivitececificit
264
Chapter 17Laboratory evaluation of hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism
Several physiological mechanisms are also re-
Suppressive effect of non-thyroidal illnesswhich
sponsible for low circulating total T4 concentrations
presumably is metabolically protective and a
in dogs. Of the potential factors,time of year, age,
beneficial response to illness
dioestrus,exerciseandnutritionalstatus,donoteffect
Suppressive effect of various drug therapies,
total T4concentrationsenoughtomisdiagnoseeu-or
including sulphonamides,acetylsalicylic acid,
hypothyroidism,althoughextreme dietalterationmay
glucocorticoids,amiodarone and clomipramine.
(Castilloetal.,001).Breed,ontheotherhand,canbe
very important.Greyhounds,other‘sighthounds’and
In animalswhichareknown tobeTgAAnegative,
sled dogsusuallyhavevaluesat thelow endor
measurementofserumtotal T3maybehelpful in
below the general reference range(Gaughan and
specificcircumstances,e.g.the'sighthound'reference
Bruyette,2001;Leeetal,2004)Valuesmay evenb
range for total T3 may be more similar to that of the
undetectable inhealthyindividualsof thesebreeds.
general population than that for total or free T4.
Relying ona reference range total T4 concentration
alone toruleouta diagnosisofhypothyroidism also has
Thyrotropin:Dogswith primary hypothyroidism are
its drawbacks particularly if T4AAs are present (see
expected tohaveanelevated serum cTSHconcentra-
below).Thus,neithera reference range orlow total4
tionbecauseof thelossof thenegativefeedbackeffect
concentration result can be relied upon accurately to
of the thyroid hormones.Unfortunately,notallcasesof
confirm orrefutehypothyroidism.The useof aserial
primaryhypothyroidismexhibitelevatedvaluesand
testing protocol, only progressing to additional thyroid
some euthyroid (sick and healthy) dogs have been
test if an initial'screening' total T4 is abnormal, is a
shown tohave elevated values.Clinical studies of
flawed approach.
cTSHmeasurementforthediagnosisofhypothyroidism
Assessment of total T4 concentrations has sev-
reportsensitivity between 63% and 87% and specificity
eral advantages including itsrelative inexpense and
between 82%and 100%(see Figure 17.7).
ready availability.
Thepoor diagnosticsensitivity of cTSH measure-
ment could ariseforseveralreasons,not allof which
Freethyroxinebyequilibriumdialysis:Measurementof
arewellunderstood:
freeT4 concentrations isa more specificdiagnostic
test for hypothyroidism than measurement of total T4
Thepresence of concurrent non-thyroidal illness
alone(see Figure 17.7). It is most helpful when:
could potentially suppress a previously high
cTSHinto thereferencerange in a dogwith
primaryhypothyroidism
There is significant non-thyroidal illness present
Concurrent drug therapy,particularlywith
suppressing total T4 concentrations
glucocorticoids, potentially suppresses cTSH
The animal isreceiving medication that can
concentrationsinto thereferencerangein
influence protein binding and ultimately total T4
hypothyroid dogs
concentrations
Randomfluctuation of cTSH into thereference
WhenT4AAs arepresentresulting infalsely
range inhypothyroid animals,particularlyifonly
elevated total T4concentrations.
minimallyelevated initially
Existenceofcentral rather thanprimary
In these cases serum freeT4concentrations are
hypothyroidism
expected toremainwithinreferencerange.However,
The possible existence of various isomers of
although it is less affected by non-thyroidalillness and
cTSHnot all of which aremeasured using current
drug therapies,free T4 concentrations may be sup-
assay techniques.
pressed by severe illness and glucocorticoids, long-
termphenobarbital therapyand clomipramine.
Elevated cTSHvaluesineuthyroiddogsareless
In addition, free T4 is a less sensitive diagnostic
commonbut alsonot wellunderstood.Possibleexpla-
test than total4,particularlyin the earlystages of the
nations include:
illness(Dixon and Mooney,1999b).It is also suscep-
tible to endogenous and exogenoussampleeffects
Recovery of thyroid function from the effects of
(seeabove)
previous non-thyroidal illness or drug use
Treatment with sulphonamide-containing or
Total triodothyronine:The measurement of serum
phenobarbital drugs
totalT3offersnorealadvantageoverthemeasure-
During the prolonged progression of thyroid
ment of total or free T4concentrations(see Figure
pathology from normal to thyroid failure,an
17.7).ltis arelatively poor predictor of thyroid function
intermediate stepisa compensated phase in
for the followingreasons:
which much higher concentrations of TSH are
generated to stimulate thedecreasing thyroid
A high prevalence of interfering T3AAs in
massandmaintainnormal thyroidhormone
hypothyroid dogs
concentrations.
Possible up-regulation of deiodinase activity in
animalswith failing thyroid functionresultingin
The use of cTSH measurements alone isnot re-
maintenanceof circulating total T3
commended:it should be interpreted inconjunction
concentrations
withother thyroid hormoneresults.
265
Chapter 17Laboratory evaluation of hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism
Thyroglobulin autoantibodies:The majority of
Putting it all together-thyroidprofiles:Theintro-
canine hypothyroidism is caused by lymphocytic
duction of methods for free T4,cTSH and TgAA
thyroiditis.As part of this inflammatory process,anti-
measurementhave significantlyimproved the diag-
bodiesto thyroid antigensmaybeexpressed and
nosticcapabilityforhypothyroidismcomparedwith
released into the circulation.Thyroglobulin is the
total T4 measurement alone.When used together
principal antigen forwhich measurable serum anti-
the diagnostic short-comings of each test are mini-
bodies are present. Measurement of TgAA therefore
mized.In most situations,a combined thyroidpro-
provides evidenceforanactiveinflammatoryprocess
file is better for investigating hypothyroidism than
in the thyroid glands.A positive TgAA status cannot
serial individual tests.In combination,the gain from
provide any information on thyroid function per se
the highsensitivity of T4 andhigh specificity cTSH
because thyroid dysfunction doesnot occuruntil at
measurements is maximized.
least 60-70% ofthe gland is destroyed.Consequently,
bothlymphocyticthyroiditis and TgAAs canbepresent
Theminimumrecommended thyroidprofileistotal
in dogs which are not yet functionally hypothyroid. t
T4 and cTSH.
maytakeseveral monthstoyearsforhypothyroidism
to developand,in some cases,a functionalproblem
FreeT4shouldbeaddedorused insteadof total T4
neverarises.
when the patient is known to have non-thyroidal
Limited studieshave beenpublished comparing
illness or to be receiving potentially interfering thera-
TgAA results and histological examination of thyroid
pies (e.g. glucocorticoids and barbiturates) or when
biopsymaterial.However,of thosepublished,theres
T4-crossreactingTgAA are suspected.The addition
excellent diagnostic sensitivity and specificity (>90% in
of TgAA to the initial profile serves as a screen to
each case) (see Figure 17.7). Lymphocytic thyroiditis,
determinewhetherthetotal T4resultcanbebelieved
asdeterminedby serum TgAA measurement,does
tobefreefrominterferencebyT4AAandhelpsdefine
occur in thegeneral healthycaninepopulationwith
thepathogenesisof thyroid dysfunction.In addition,it
prevalence estimatesofbetween2%and3%
mayhelpwith some equivocal cases and identify
(Nachreineret al.,1998;Dixon and Mooney,1999a).
subclinical thyroid disease.
Measurement of TgAA provides advantages in
 The most common diagnostic dilemma is finding
detecting thyroidpathologylongbeforeachange in
low T4 and reference range cTSH results in a dog. This
thyroid function is apparent.This may have implica-
could indicate:
tions forbreeding selection.In addition,it may allow
timelyinstitutionof therapy without waiting fordramatic
The animal is responding appropriately to a
clinical signsto develop.Althoughwidespread studies
physiological stress (such as non-thyroidal 
are limited,approximately 20%of dogs with positive
illness)
TgAAstatusand nootherthyroidhormone abnormality
 The animal is on medication that suppresses T4 
progress to thyroid dysfunction within1 year(Graham
et al.,2001). Assuming a similar proportion would
concentrations
It is one of the proportion of hypothyroid dogs
progress in eachsubsequent year,themajority could
(approximately 15% or more) in which an 
be hypothyroid within 4years or so.However,longer
elevatedTSHresult isnotdetected.
termstudiesarecurrently lacking.
Despite the excellent diagnostic performance
In suchcases,freeT4andTgAA assessmentmay
reported for this test in the assessment of thyroid
bewarranted.FreeT4servestodifferentiatethelowT4
pathology, there are some reports that false weak
state of medical illnessorthe effectof drug therapies
positiveresults occasionally occur inrecentlyvacci-
from truehypothyroidism inmanycases.lf a diagnosis
nated dogs as aresult ofnon-specific binding of
remainsunclear,retesting atalaterdate,nstituting
immunoglobulin G (lgG).
therapeutic trial orembarking ona TSH stimulation test
isrecommended.
Thyroidhormone autoantibodies:Autoantibodies
In interpreting the results of tests which have
to T4 and T3 only develop in aproportion of TgAA
less than perfect diagnostic sensitivity and specificity,
positive dogs.However,thehighprevalenceof T3AAs
the effect of prevalence on the predictive value of
in the dogis one of the mainreasons that measure-
positive and negative test results must be considered
mentof T3has limitedvalue in thediagnosisof
(see Chapter 26). In large thyroid diagnostic labora-
hypothyroidism.In most commonly used assay sys-
tories,arough estimate canbemadeof theprevalence
tems,autoantibodiescausefalselyelevatedvalues
ofhypothyroidism in the populationbeing tested.
thatcanbeextreme,and theymayresult inelevation
Clear-cut diagnosesofhypothyroidismweremade in
of a lowvalue into the reference range.Similarly,the
approximately 8%of samples submitted to one
presenceof T4AAspotentiallyresults in an under-
laboratory(Diagnostic Centerfor Population and Animal
diagnosis of hypothyroidism in approximately 10%
Health,Michigan State University)and unclassified
of cases if thediagnosis issolelyrelianton demon-
cases (low total or free T4 but reference range cTSH)
strationof lowtotal T4values,asT4AAs increase
accounted fora further17%.Figure 17.8comparesthe
measured values into the reference range.T3AAs
predictive values of positive andnegative testresultsfor
have anestimatedprevalenceof 34%inhypothyroid
total T4measuredaloneandfortotal T4measured in
dogs compared with 15% for T4AAs (Graham et
combinationwithcTSHandillustratestheenhanced
al.,2001).
diagnosticconfidence for combinedresults.
266
Chapter17Laboratoryevaluationofhypothyroidismandhyperthyroidism
Test
Pre-testprobability
10%
25%
50%
Sensitivity
Specificity
PPV
NPV
PPV
NPV
PPV
NPV
TT4 alone
89
75
28
98
54
95
78
87
T4/TSH
87
98
83
99
94
96
98
88
Positive and negativepredictivevalues for themeasurement of TT4and thecombinationof TT4 and TSH at three
17.8
different levelsof pre-test probability(orprevalenceof hypothyroidism intestedgroup) atexample levelsof
diagnosticsensitivityandspecificityThetableshowsthatapre-testprobabilityof10%similartothatexperiencedby
diagnosticlaboratories)means that less than30%of dogswith a low total T4result alone have hypothyroidism.Even at the
relativelyhighpre-testprobabilityof25%,a lowtotalT4 stillonlyhasapositivepredictivevalueof approximately50%,
similarto the clinician guessing whether or nothypothyroidism is present.The combination of TT4 and TSH measurement
gives more useful PV and NPV over arange of pre-test probabilities consistent with clinical practice(10-25%).Allvalues
presented aspercentages.See Chapter2for methodsof calculation(PPV,positive predictive value;NPV,negative
predictive value;TT4,total thyroxine;TSH,thyroid stimulating hormone(thyrotropin).
Dynamicthyroidfunctiontests:Theideal toolsfor
the reference range to achieve the same goal. The
investigating endocrine disorders are thedynamic
sampling time canbeflexibleif thecliniciancan apply
function (stimulation and suppression) tests.Cer-
knowledge of the half-life of T4 in extrapolating be-
tainly theTSHstimulation test isconsideredbymany
tweenthese targets(high-normal orslightly above at
tobe theclosest toa‘goldstandard'test of thyroid
peak,low-normal at the trough).The serum concen-
function.Unfortunately,pharmaceutical grade TSH
trationofcTSH takesseveral daystochange and
now has limited availability. More recently,a
therefore themeasurementof thishormoneprovides
recombinanthumanβ-subunit TSH hasbecome avail-
information onthe adequacyof therapyinthepreced-
able (Sauve and Paradis, 2000). Given its expense
ingfewdaysrather thanjuston theday of thetest.
and theimproved diagnosticperformance of multiple
Comparedtothemeasurementof total T4 alone,
concurrentbasal thyroid hormone assessments,it is
combined total T4 andcTSHhelpsidentify long-term
unlikely to gainwidespread use except in diagnosti-
compliance failures and avoids unnecessary dose
cally equivocal cases.
adjustment.Reasonable clinical response can be
The TRH response test gained some support
expectedwhenpeakthyroid hormone concentrations
following the reduced availabilityof TSH but the
are in the top end or above the reference range and
results of this test are difficult to interpret and many
cTSHconcentrations are withinreferencerange(Dixon
euthyroid dogs areclassifiederroneouslyashypothy-
et al.,2002).
roid(Frank,1996).ltmayhave someuseinassessing
Feline hypothyroidism
thepituitaryproduction of TSH inrare cases of sus-
pectedpituitaryhypothyroidism.
Hypothyroidism occurs rarely in cats.Usually this is
iatrogenicfollowingtreatmentforhyperthyroidismbut
Monitoring thyroid hormonereplacement therapy
there have also been some spontaneous cases
The exogenousT4used for treating hypothyroidism is
(Sjollema etal.,1991;Tanase etal.,1991;Rand etal.,
immunologically identical to endogenousT4,so the
1993). The measurement of TSH using the widely
same assays can be used to measure its circulating
available canine assaymay be of some helpinmaking
concentration.Inaddition,thenegativefeedbackeffect
 a diagnosis of primary or iatrogenic hypothyroidism
of exogenous T4 decreases production ofcTSH.Thus,
with similartest performance characteristicsto itsuse
the measurement of both T4 and cTSH concentrations
in dogs (i.e. imperfect sensitivity).
can provideuseful indications of the adequacy of
thyroid hormone supplementation.
The measurement of serum total T4 concentra-
Hyperthyroidism
tionsprovides anindicationofthe adequacyoftherapy
on thedayof the test;peak concentrations areusually
Hyperthyroidism is primarilya concernincats andonly
achievedaround3hourspostpill.Commonrecom-
rarely is investigation required in dogs.
mendationsfor therapeuticmonitoring are tomeas-
ureT44-6hours aftermedication.Withfewevidence
Feline hyperthyroidism
based studies available, an assumption has often
Feline hyperthyroidism (thyrotoxicosis) was first defini-
tively diagnosed in1979 and its incidence has increased
centrationsat leastalittle above thelowerlimitof the
dramatically since then.It is now the most common
reference range throughout the day. Given the half-
endocrinedisorderof thecatanda diseasefrequently
life ofT4ofbetween6and10hours,itisclearthatto
encountered inpractice.Itisunclearif thisisbecauseit
achieve such a goal withonce dailymedicationusu-
is truly a new disease or because it isbeing diagnosed
allyrequirespeakconcentrationstobea littleabove
more frequently asaresult of improvedpractitionerand
thereferencerange.Withtwice daily therapypeak
client wareness,a growing cat population, increased
concentrationswould onlyneed tobeinthetoppartof
longevity ora combination of these factors.
267
Chapter17Laboratoryevaluationofhypothyroidismandhyperthyroidism
Hyperthyroidismisamultisystemicdisorderarising
Haematology:lnearlyreportsof hyperthyroidism,mild
from increased thyroid hormoneproduction by an ab-
tomoderate erythrocytosisandmacrocytosiswere
normally functioning thyroid gland.Histopathologically,
considered toberelatively common(Petersonet al.,
thenormal thyroid folliculararchitecture isreplacedby
1983).These changesmayreflect increasederythro-
multiple, well defined, hyperplastic nodules ranging
poietin production,resulting from increased oxygen
from<1mmto>2cmindiameterandusuallydescribed
consumption,or direct thyroid hormone-mediatedβ-
as adenomatoushyperplasia(adenoma).Thisresults in
adrenergicstimulationoferythroidmarrow.However,
enlargementof eitherone(<30%of cases)ormore
thesefindings have notbeen confirmed in all studies
commonlyboth(>70%of cases) thyroid lobes(goitre).
(Thodayand Mooney,1992)andwhen theydooccur
Thyroid carcinoma is a rare cause of hyperthyroidism in
they are clinically insignificant.
the cat,accounting for less than 2%of cases.
Anaemia,on the other hand,appears to berare
Hyperthyroidism typically affects older cats(usually
andis usuallyassociated withsevere hyperthyroidism.
>10 years of age) ofeithersex and anybreed.There has
Itmayresultfrombonemarrowexhaustionorironor
beenarecentreportof hyperthyroidism inakittenbut,
othermicronutrient deficiency.A significantlyhigher
given that thehistopathological appearance wasdiffer-
incidenceofHeinzbodyformationand increased
ent to thatseen inoldercats,itprobablyrepresentsa
plateletsize havebeenreportedincatswith hyperthy
distinct and rare clinical entity (Gordon et al.,2003).
roidismcomparedwithhealthycats(Mooney,2001)
Theaetiologyof thedisorderremainsunclearand
However,these abnormalities appear tohave mini-
prevention is therefore not possible.However,be-
mal clinical significance.
causeof the benignnature of thelesionsinthemajority
Changes in white blood cell parameters arenot
of cases, the disease carries an excellent prognosis
unusual inhyperthyroidismbut arerelativelynon-spe-
with effective therapy.
cific.The most frequent changes include leucocytosis,
matureneutrophilia,lymphopeniaandeosinopenia,pre
Laboratory diagnosis of feline hyperthyroidism
sumably reflecting a stress response.However,eosi-
Classically hyperthyroidism is associated with weight
nophilia andlymphocytosismay occurina small number
loss,despite anincreased ornormal appetite,hyper-
of catspotentiallyresultingfrom arelative decrease in
activity,tachycardia,ntermittentgastrointestinal signs
availablecortisol because of enhancedmetabolism
of vomiting and diarrhoea,cardiacmurmurandgoitre.
induced by thyroid hormone excess.
However, cats are less highly symptomatic now com-
pared to 15years ago,presumably because of in-
Serum biochemistry:The most striking biochemical
creased awareness. This,coupled with its high
abnormalitiesareelevationsintheliverenzymes,alanine
prevalence,meansthat manyoldercatsundergotest-
aminotransferase (ALT),alkaline phosphatase (ALP),
ingforhyperthyroidismthatmayactuallyhavethe
lactatedehydrogenase(LDH) and aspartate aminotrans-
disease,orthatmaybesufferingfromavarietyof non-
ferase(AST).At leastoneof theseenzymesiselevated
thyroidal illnessesor that may indeed behealthy.This
in over90%of hyperthyroid cats(Peterson et al.,1983;
impacts the performance of the diagnostictests used in
Thoday andMooney,1992;Broussard and Peterson,
confirming,butprobablymoreimportantlyinrefutinga
1995).The elevations in these enzymes can be dra
diagnosisof hyperthyroidism.
matic(>5oo Iu/) but areusually significantlycorrelated
to total T4 concentrations (Foster and Thoday,2000).
Routineclinicopathologicalfeatures:Routinehaema-
Liverenzyme elevation maybe minimal,if present at
tological and biochemical investigations are useful in
all, in early or mild cases of hyperthyroidism and
concurrenthepaticdisease should be suspected if
there aremarkedelevationsinthese enzymesbutonly
ingor diagnosing non-thyroidal illnesses in animals
mildlyelevated serumthyroid hormone concentra-
presenting with similar clinical signs or in depicting
tions.When elevated asaresult of hyperthyroidism,
concurrent disorders that mayultimately affect the
liver enzymeconcentrationsdecrease towithin the
prognosis.
referencerange withsuccessfulmanagement of the
thyrotoxicosis(Mooney et al.,1992).
Despite themarkedelevations inhepaticenzymes,
Clinicalpathologicalabnormality
%of cases
histological examinationof hyperthyroid cat livershas
Haematology
revealedonlymodestandnon-specificchanges,possibly
Erythrocytosis
50
caused by malnutrition, congestive cardiac failure,in-
Macrocytosis
fections,hepaticanoxiaanddirecttoxiceffectsofthyroid
50
hormones on the liver. Several recent reports have
Serumbiochemistry
shownthatbothliverandbonecontributetoincreased
Elevated liverenzymes
90
ALP activity in hyperthyroid cats (Mooney, 2001).
Azotaemia
20
Hyperphosphataemia,in the absence of azotae-
mia,wasoriginallyreported in approximately20%of
Hyperphosphataemia
36-43
Common haematological andbiochemical
percentage(36-43%)of hyperthyroidcats(Peterson
17.9
abnormalitiesassociatedwithhyperthyroidism
et al.,1983;Archer and Taylor,1996;Barber and
(Peterson et al.,1983;Thoday and Mooney,1992:
Elliott,1996).Serum total calcium is largelyunaffected
Broussard and Peterson,1995).
byhyperthyroidismbut ionized calcium isdecreased
268
Chapter17Laboratoryevaluationofhypothyroidism andhyperthyroidism
and circulating parathormone(PTH)increased.Circu-
Total thyroxine concentration:mosthyperthyroid
lating osteocalcinconcentration,ameasureofosteo-
cats exhibit an elevated circulating total T4
blasticactivityandboneremodelling,iselevated in
concentration with values up to approximately 20
somehyperthyroid cats(ArcherandTaylor,1996).The
timestheupper limitof thereferencerange
aetiology of these changes is unknown but, given the
reported.Total T4 is a highly specific diagnostic
increasedconcentrationsof thebone isoenzymeof
testforhyperthyroidism,aselevatedvaluesdo
ALP, it may reflect alterations in bone turnover. The
notoccur in euthyroid cats.lt is relatively
clinical consequences areunclear.
inexpensive andreadilyaccessible.However,
Mild tomoderateazotaemia occursinjustover20%
approximately 10% of hyperthyroid cats have
of hyperthyroid cats (Broussard and Peterson, 1995).
serum total T4concentrationswithin the
While thisisnotunexpectedinagroupof agedcats,the
reference range(Peterson et al.,2001).This
increasecould be exacerbatedbytheincreasedprotein
increasesto40%ofcases if only thosewithmild
catabolism andprerenal uraemia of thyrotoxicosis.In
clinical diseaseare selected.Inmostof these
hyperthyroidcatswithout azotaemia,serumcreatinine
catstotal T4values arewithin themid tohigh
concentrationis significantlylowercomparedwith thatin
reference range.Thus hyperthyroidism cannot be
age-matched,healthyanimals(Barberand Elliott,1996).
excluded incatsbydemonstration of a single
Thismayberelatedtoreducedmusclemass.Whatever
reference range total T4 concentration alone.
its cause,it has implications when assessingrenal
Thereareseveralexplanationsforreference
functioninhyperthyroidcatspriortodeciding onthebest
range total T4valuesinhyperthyroid cats:
optionfortreatment,particularlybecauserenalfunction
Non-specific thyroid hormone fluctuationmay
may deteriorate aftercommencing therapy(see below).
result in reference range total T4values in
Anumberofother clinicopathological abnormalities
catswith marginal elevations.A circadian
have been described in hyperthyroid cats,although
rhythm does not exist incatsbut circulating
theseremainrare.Clinically significanthypokalaemia
hormoneconcentrationsvarybothwithin and,
hasbeenreported infourhyperthyroid catsbut the
more pronouncedly,between days（Peterson
aetiology remains unclear (Nemzek et al, 1994). Two
et al.,1987).Increased thyroidalproduction
separate studies(Graham et al.,1999;Reusch and
and fluctuations inbindingproteins orother
Tomsa,1999) have shown that serum fructosamine
undefined haemodynamic changes possibly
concentrationissignificantlylowerinhyperthyroid
account for these changes. Serum total T4
compared with healthy cats,presumably asa resultf
concentrationswill often increaseinto the
increased proteinturnover.Importantly,17-50%ofcases
thyrotoxic range on retesting 3-6 weeks later.
hadvaluesbelow therespectivereferencerange and
However,in some cats,a longerinterval is
caution is therefore advised in interpreting serum
required and testing when more overt clinical
fructosamine concentration in hyperthyroid cats,par-
signs develop may be more appropriate. (In
ticularly if they are concurrently diabetic, since the
catswithmarkedlyelevatedcirculating total
hyperglycaemia associatedwithdiabetesmaynot be
T4 concentration, the degree of fluctuation is
reflected byhighfructosamine inhyperthyroid cats.
of little diagnostic significance)
Other analytes(e.g.cholesterol,sodium,chloride,
Non-thyroidal illness has a suppressive effect
bilirubin,albumin and globulin)are largely unaffected
on circulating total T4 concentration in cats
by hyperthyroidism. Circulating glucose may be
resulting in mid to high referencerange
elevated,presumablyreflectingastressresponse.
values in mild hyperthyroidism.The
mechanismsremain unclearbutaremore
Urinalysis:Examination of urine in thyrotoxic cats is
likely to involve changes in peripheral thyroid
hormonemetabolism orproteinbindingrather
in one study ranged from 1.009-1.050 (mean 1.031) in
thananyeffecton thehypothalamic-pituitary
57hyperthyroid catswith only twovalues(4%) below
axis.Similar to the phenomenon of
1.015(Peterson et al.,1983).
fluctuation,the degree of suppression has
little diagnostic significance in hyperthyroid
Assessmentof thyroid function:Unlike the situation
catswithmarkedly elevated circulatingtotal
in canine hypothyroidism,there arenolaboratorytests
that depict theunderlying thyroidpathologyinhyper-
T4 concentration.In euthyroid cats,non-
thyroidal ilness tends to suppress total T4
thyroid cats.Elevated circulating concentrations of the
concentrations into thelowend orbelow the
thyroid hormonesserve asthebiochemical hallmarkof
reference range,depending on the severityof
the illness.Total T4 measurement can be
Thyroid hormones:For the diagnosis ofhyperthy-
used as a prognostic indicator(Mooney et al.,
roidism,totalT3,totalT4andfreeT4canbemeasured
1996; Peterson et al., 2001) (Figure 17.10).
although thediagnosticperformanceofeachvaries.
Consequently,concurrenthyperthyroidism
MeasurementofTSHconcentration,frequentlyusedin
should alwaysbe suspected in catswith
humans,is not recommended in cats.A species
severenon-thyroidal illnessand serum total
specificassay doesnotexistand,althoughpreliminary
T4 concentrationswithin themid tohigh
reports suggest that the canine assay canbe used for
reference range. It is likely that serum total T4
felineTSH,therelativelyhighlowerlimitof detection
concentrations would increase into the
curtails its usefulness in hyperthyroidism.
thyrotoxicrangeupontreatmentorrecovery
269
Chapter17Laboratory evaluationof hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism
Most of these catshad serum total T4
%Mortality
concentrationsinthelowerendoforbelowthe
reference range.As a consequence,caution is
advisedininterpretinganelevatedfreeT4value
100
alone.A stepwise approach isrecommended:
80
serum total T4concentrations shouldbe
60
assessed first in cats suspected of
hyperthyroidism.lf valuesarefoundwithin the
mid tohighreferencerange,consideration
shouldbegiven tomeasurementof the
20
corresponding freeT4concentration.lfelevated,
hyperthyroidism is confirmed
<5
<10
<15
<15-25>25
Total triodothyronine concentration:serum total
TotalT4(nmol/l)
T4 andT3 concentrations are highly correlated in
17.10
The relationshipof mortality to serum total T4
hyperthyroid cats.However,over30%of
concentrationsin107catswithavarietyof
hyperthyroid cats havereferencerange serum
non-thyroidal illnesses.
total T3 concentrations(Peterson et al.,2001).
Themajorityof catswithsuchvalueshas serum
from thenon-thyroidal illness.Occasionally
total T4concentrationseitherwithinthereference
serum total T4 concentrations are suppressed
range oronlymarginallyelevated (e.g.usually<65
to the lowerhalf of thereferencerange in
nmol/l,always<100 nmoll).These cases are
hyperthyroidcatsthathaveextremenon-
usuallyclassifiedasearlyormildlyaffectedand it
thyroidal illnesses.However,in these cases,
is likelythat total T3concentrationswould increase
thenon-thyroidal illness dictatesthe
into thediagnosticthyrotoxicrangeif thedisorder
prognosis and pursuing hyperthyroidism is of
were allowed toprogress untreated.It ispossible
less clinical importance.In large studies of
that thisphenomenon reflects a compensatory
hyperthyroid cats,approximately20%of cats
decreaseinperipheralconversionof T4tothe
withreferencerangetotalT4valueshavean
more activeT3ashyperthyroidism is developing,
identifiable concurrent illness.The
althoughina small numberofcasesthesuppressive
overwhelmingmajority areclassified asmild
effectof severeconcurrent non-thyroidal illness
orearly cases(Peterson et al.,2001)
mayplayarole.Due tothepoordiagnostic sensitivity
Free thyroxine by equilibrium dialysis: in human
of total T3measurement,it isnolonger
thyrotoxicosis,assessment of freeT4 is
recommended forthe evaluationofhyperthyroidism.
considered abetter diagnostictest for
hyperthyroidismbecause it islessaffected by
Dynamicthyroidfunctiontests:Inthemajorityof hyper-
non-thyroidal factors thantotal T4andprovidesa
thyroidcatswithreferencerange total T4concentra-
more accuratereflection of thyroid status.In
tionsthe diagnosiscanbeconfirmedbyconsideration
addition,whenserum total T4concentration is
of the presence of concurrent non-thyroidal illness,
increased,theconcentrationof freeT4is
retestingatalaterdateorby simultaneous assessment
disproportionately increased.In hyperthyroid
of free T4 concentrations.Dynamic thyroid function
cats,serum free and total T4concentrations are
tests,previouslyrecommendedforconfirminghyper-
highlysignificantlycorrelated.Inall catswith
thyroidisminequivocal cases,aretherefore almost
markedlyelevatedtotal T4concentrations,free
obsolete.Theyshouldonlybeconsidered in catswith
T4concentration isconcurrently elevated,adding
clinical signsof hyperthyroidism whenrepeatedserum
littlediagnosticinformationtothatalready
total T4concentrationsremainwithin thereference
obtained.However,as inhumans,it is amore
range, or free T4 analysis is unavailable or diagnosti-
sensitiveindicatorofhyperthyroidism thantotal
cally unhelpful.A brief description of these tests is
T4 measurement alone. Estimates suggest that
givenhereand inFigure17.5.Furtherdetailscanbe
up to98%ofhyperthyroidcatshaveanelevated
found elsewhere(Mooney,2001).
circulating freeT4concentration.More
significantly,approximately95%of hyperthyroid
T3 suppression test:in healthy individuals,T3
catswithreferencerange total T4values,
has a suppressive effect on pituitary TSH
becauseof mild diseaseor the suppressive
secretion and subsequently on T4production by
effects of concurrentnon-thyroidal illness,have
the thyroid gland.In hyperthyroidism,because of
concurrentelevated freeT4concentrations
autonomousproductionof thyroid hormonesand
(Peterson et al.,2001).Measurement of free T4
chronic suppression of TSH,this suppressive
concentrations is difficult.It ismore expensive
effect islost.Thus,serum totalT4concentrations
andlessreadilyavailablethantotalT4and is
showminimal orno decrease inhyperthyroid
more subject to samplehandling errors.More
catsfollowing exogenousT3administration and
significantly,itisalessspecificdiagnostictestfor
valuesremain higher than approximately20
hyperthyroidism,aselevatedvalueshavebeen
nmol/l with less than 35% suppression over the
demonstrated inupto12%of sickeuthyroidcats
durationofthetest.Simultaneousmeasurement
(Mooney et al.,1996;Peterson et al.,2001).
ofserumtotal T3concentrations isrequired to
270
Chapter 17Laboratory evaluation of hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism
ensure compliant administration and adequate
roid drug administration.Earlyinthe course of therapy,
absorptionof thedrug and thusavoidfalse
mild and transient haematological abnormalities,in-
positiveresults.Generally,thetest is most useful
cluding lymphocytosis,eosinophiliaorleucopeniaoccur
inrulingout,ratherthanconfirming,hyperthyroidism
inup to15%of casesbut without anyapparent clinical
TSH stimulation test:dueto itspoor diagnostic
effect (Peterson et al., 1988; Mooney et al., 1992).
performance thistest has largelybeen
More serious haematological complications occur in
superseded,although the availabilty of
<5%of cases,usually within the first 3 months of
recombinant humanTSH mayrenewinterest in its
therapy, and include agranulocytosis and thrombo-
application in cats.Exogenous TSH is a potent
cytopenia,either alone or concurrently;more rarely,
stimulatorof thyroidhormonesecretionbutserum
immune-mediated haemolyticanaemia isseen.Fort-
total T4concentrationsshow littleornoincrease
nightly completeblood and platelet counts have been
following exogenous TSH administration in
recommended,inordertodetectsuchreactions.How-
hyperthyroid cats. This is presumably because the
ever,becauseof theirrarity andunpredictability,as
thyroid gland of affectedcatssecretesthyroid
sessment of a complete blood count if clinical signs
hormones independentlyof TSH control or
indicate is more cost-effective.A hepatopathy charac-
because T4 is already being produced at a near
terized by marked increases in liver enzymes and
maximalratewith limitedreservecapacity.Cats
bilirubinconcentrationoccurs in<2%of treated cats.
with equivocallyelevatedserum total T4
Serumantinuclearantibodiesdevelopinapproximately
concentrations tend toexhibitresults
50%ofhyperthyroidcatstreatedwithmethimazolefor
indistinguishable from thoseinhealthy animals
longer than 6 months,usually in cats on high dose
and thus thetest has limited diagnosticvalue
therapy (>15 mg/day) (Peterson et al., 1988).
TRH stimulation test:TRH islessexpensive and
Serum total T4 concentrations areusually lowfor
easiertoobtain thanTSH.Serum total T4
weekstomonths aftersurgicalthyroidectomy orradio-
concentrations increase minimally(<50%)after
active iodine therapy but will eventually increase into
TRH administration in mildly hyperthyroid cats.
thereferencerange.Treatmentforhypothyroidism is
Compared to the T3 suppression test, this test is
only indicated if cats exhibit definite clinical signs and
quickerand avoids tablet administration.However,
is rarely required.
TRH isassociatedwith transient adverse
reactions,such as salivation,vomiting,
Effectof therapyonrenal function
tachypnoea and defecation.In addition,resultsof
Hyperthyroidismisknowntoincreaseglomerularfiltra-
the testarelargelyindistinguishablebetweensick
tionrate(GFR),decrease circulating creatinine con-
euthyroid and hyperthyroid catswithconcurrent
centration andmask underlying renal disease.All
disease and total T4concentrationswithin or
treatmentsforhyperthyroidism havebeen associated
below the reference range (Tomsa et al.,2001).
witha decreaseinGFRcapableof unmaskinglatent
renal disease(Mooney,2001).Therefore,renal dys-
Monitoringresponse to therapy
functionshould alwaysbeconsidered a potential ad-
Irrespectiveof thetherapeuticmodalitychosen,meas
versereaction of treatment and assessed if clinical
urementof serum total T4concentrationsisofmost
signs develop.Several studies have attempted to
value in monitoring efficacy.
predict those cats in which renal failure is likely to
In cats treatedwith the antithyroid drugs,methima-
develop.However,theonly successful methodshave
zole and carbimazole,assessment of total T4 concen-
involvedestimatingGFRandarenotreadilyapplicable
trationisrecommended3weeksaftercommencing
inpractice.Serum urea and creatinine concentrations
therapy or after each dose adjustment. Once cats are
andurinespecificgravityshouldbecarefullyevaluated
stable,serumtotalT4concentrationsshouldbechecked
in all cats. If both serum parameters are within refer-
every-6months,ormorefrequentlyif indicated clini-
encerange and the urine is concentrated,theriskof
cally.Regular assessment is necessary as antithyroid
developingrenal failureafter treatment isminimal.
drugs have no effect on the underlying lesions and the
However,creatinine concentration should be evalu-
thyroidnodulescontinueto growand enlarge,neces-
ated in lightof the animal's muscle mass,with lower
 sitating an increased dosage in the long term.
values expected in emaciated cats.lf the serum pa-
The aim of therapy is to suppress serum total T4
rameters are higher than expected and the urine is
concentrationstowithinthelowerhalforslightlybelow
dilute,there is a riskof developing renal failure upon
the referencerange.EvenifT4issupressed,clinical
treatmentof thehyperthyroidism.
signs of hypothyroidism do not develop, presumably
because corresponding total T3(the more metabolically
Canine hyperthyroidism
active hormone)concentrations tend toremain within
Hyperthyroidism is exceptionallyrare in dogs and
thereference range.This is thought to be because of
almost alwaystheresultof thyroidcarcinomawithonly
preferentialthyroidalsecretionofT3,althoughincreased
sporadicreports associatedwiththyroidadenoma(Law-
renceetal,1991;zzola,002)owever,hyerthy
1992).In addition,serumfree T4concentrations ap-
roidismonlyoccursinapproximately10-20%of thyroid
pear to remain relatively higher than total T4 during
carcinomas. Measurement of serum total T4 is ade-
antithyroidmedication.
quatefordiagnosisbut elevations areusuallymodest
Laboratory analysismayberequired toassess
comparedto the markedincreasesoftenseeninhyper-
adverse reactions specifically associated with antithy-
thyroidcats.
271
Chapter17Laboratoryevaluationof hypothyroidismandhyperthyroidism
Case examples
Case1
Signalment
6-year old neutered femaleLabrador cross.
Biochemistry (continued)Result
Reference interval
History
TP (g/)
67
55-75
Generalized weakness.On clinical examination there was obesity,
Albumin (g/l)
34
29-35
bradycardia (60 bpm) and mild thinning of the coat.
Globulin (g/)
33
18-38
Clinical pathology data
Albumin:globulin ratio
1.03
0.50-1.20
Haematology
Result
Reference interval
ALT(IU/)
59
0-40
RBC (x 1012/)
5.75
5.4-8.5
AST(IU/I)
38
0-45
Hb (g/dl)
14.2
ALP(IU/)
12-18
187
0-135
GGT(IU/)
3
0-14
HCT(/)
0.39
0.37-0.56
GDH(IU/)
8
6-0
MCV (fl)
68.0
65-75
MCHC(g/dl)
36
31-35
CK(IU/)
108
0-400
Amylase (IU/)
256
7.9
5-18
400-2750
WBC(x10%/)
Lipase (IU/I)
230
0-500
Neutrophils（x109/1)
5.37
3.7-13.32
Cholesterol(mmol/)
12.9
3.8-7.9
Neutrophils (band) (x10%/)
0.00
0-0.54
Total bilirubin (μmol/l)
1.3
0-5.0
Lymphocytes (x10%/)
1.42
1.00-3.60
Total T4(nmol/)
<6
13-52
Monocytes (x10/)
0.32
0.20-0.72
TSH (ng/ml)
3.85
<0.68
Eosinophils (x10%/)
0.79
0.10-1.25
Basophils(x10°/l)
0.00
0.05-0.18
What abnormalities are present?
591
200-900
Slight elevations in ALP and ALT
Platelets (x10%/)
Moderateelevation in cholesterol
Subnormal total T4
Film comment
Moderately elevatedTSH
Platelet comment-appear consistent with count
No morphological abnormalities observed
Howwould you interpret theseresults?
The elevationsinALPandALTare slight,andGGTand GDHare
Biochemistry
Result
Reference interval
withinreferencerangesSuchafindingison-specificandobserved
Sodium(mmol/l)
150
135-150
inmany medicallyilldogs and in some hypothyroid dogs.
The combinationof low total T4andmoderately elevatedTSH
Potassium(mmol/)
5.6
3.5-5.6
Chloride(mmoll)
107
95-124
the animal hasnotrecently beenreceivingsulpha'typemedications
Glucose (mmol/l)
4.6
3.0-5.5
orotherreversible thyroid inhibitors.
Urea(mmol/)
8.5
3.5-7.0
Evenincaseswhereaconfident diagnosisofhypothyroidismcanbe
Creatinine (μmol/l)
95
0-130
madesomeof theclassicallyreportedclinicalpathologyfeaturese.g
Calcium(mmol/l)
normocyticnormochromicanaemia,elevated creatinekinase)are ab-
2.52
2.3-3.0
sent.Apositive clinical response to adequate thyroid replacement
1.7
0.9-1.6
Inorganicphosphate
therapy would confirm thediagnosisfurther.lf the elevationsinALP
(mmol/l)
and ALTcontinued,furthernvestigationforhepaticdiseasemaybe
warranted.
Case2
Signalment
Clinical pathology data
4-yearoldentiremaleGermanShorthairedPointer.
Haematology
Result
History
Referenceinterval
The ownershadnoticed circularcrusting erythematouspatchesonthe
RBC (×1012/)
4.89
5.4-8.5
ventralabdomenoverthepreviousfewweeksandthedoghadlostsome
(Ip/6) qH
10.9
12-18
ofhisenergy.Clinicalexamination wasunremarkableexceptfortheskin
lesions,consistent with superficialpyoderma.
Case 2 continues
272
chapter17Laboratoryevaluationof hypothyroidismandhyperthyroidism
Case 2 continued
What abnormalities arepresent?
。
MildnormocyticnormochromicanaemiaNoevidenceofregenera
Haematology(continued)Result
Referenceinterval
tion given absence of polychromasia
Mild elevation inALP
HCT(/)
0.32
0.37-0.56
Borderline total T4
MCV(fl)
65.1
65-75
How would you interpret these results?
MCHC (g/d)
34
31-35
WBC(×10°/)
13.1
5-18
cases of veryrecenthaemorrhage orhaemolysis.
Neutrophils(x10%/)
9.17
3.7-13.32
Mild elevationinALPwithnootherevidenceof hepatopathyisa
Neutrophils (band)(x10°/1)
0.00
0-0.54
common non-specificfinding in cases of medicalillness.
Lymphocytes (x10%/)
3.54
1.00-3.60
Has hypothyroidism been ruled out?
Monocytes (x10%/)
0.13
0.20-0.72
Hypothyroidismhasnotbeenruledoutbythissinglenormal totalT4
reultniaatui
Eosinophils(x10%/)
0.26
0.10-1.25
withsignificantnon-thyroidalillnessaloworlownormalT4concentration
Basophils (x 10%/)
0.00
0.05-0.18
wouldnormallybeexpectednthispatientthereissomeevidencen
Platelets (x10%/)
198
200-900
present.ThepresenceofT4cross-reactinganti-thyroglobulinantibodies
(T4AA)causesfalse increasesin reported total T4concentrations.Such
Film comment
antibodies are observed in around10%of hypothyroid dogs.
Platelets-numbers appearadequate on the smear
Red cells-normochromic,normocytic
Ifnot,whatfurthertestswouldyou
White cells- no morphologic abnormalies
recommend?
MeasuringTHwouldelpidentifyprimaryhypothyroidismandfre
Biochemistry
Result
Referenceinterval
by equilibrium dialysisisfree from interference byT4AA.Measuring
thyroglobulinautoantibody（TgAA)(ordirectmeasurementofT4AA）will
Sodium(mmol/)
141
135-150
helpidentify anypotentially cross-reacting antibodies.
Potassium(mmoll)
4.7
3.5-5.6
Further clinical pathology results
Chloride (mmoll)
103
95-124
Endocrinology
Glucose(mmol/)
4.7
3.0-5.5
Result
Reference interval
4.9
3.5-7.0
TSH (ng/ml)
Urea (mmol/l)
2.79
<0.68
Creatinine (μmol/)
FreeT4by equilibrium
<2.0
7-40
61
0-130
dialysis (pmol/l)
Calcium (mmol/)
2.36
2.3-3.0
TgAA (%)
1026
<200
Inorganic phosphate
1.5
0.9-1.6
(mmol/l)
T4AA
3.5
<2.0
TP(g/)
64
55-75
Albumin (g/)
30
29-35
control serawhich areassigneda valueof 100%.Greater than200is
Globulin(g/)
34
18-38
deemedabnormal.SimilarlyT4AAisexpressedrelativetothemeas
uredactivityofnegativecontrolserawhichareassignedavalueof1,and
Albumin:globulin ratio
0.88
0.50-1.20
>2 is deemed abnormal.
ALT (IU/)
38
0-40
Howwouldyouinterpretthisfurthersetof
AST(IU/)
37
0-45
results?
ALP(IU/I)
189
0-135
The combinationof elevatedTSHand lowfreeT4confirms primary
GGT(IU/)
0-14
hypothyroidism
5
The positiveTgAAresult confirms lymphocytic thyroiditis as the
GDH(IU/I)
3
0-9
CK(IU/)
340
0-400
stanceinthe totalT4result:thisisconfirmedbythepositiveT4AA.
Amylase (IU/)
598
400-2750
InthiscaseandincaseswhretheeffectfAAissogreatast
Lipase (IU/I)
319
0-500
causeanabove-reference-range-resultthreireasontobesuspicious
andcontinuewithfurtherthyroidtestingbutinmanycaseswhichhave
Cholesterol (mmoll)
4.6
3.8-7.9
T4AA,the totalT4result isnotclearlyhigh.Aminimumcanine thyroid
Total bilirubin(μumol/)
1.6
0-5.0
investigatnrforhulnla（ift
Total T4 (nmoll)
52
13-52
addition to total T4.
Case3continues
273
Chapter17Laboratoryevaluationofhypothyroidism andhyperthyroidism
Case3
Signalment
Endocrinology
Result
6-yearold spayed femaleDobermannPinscher.
Referenceinterval
Total T4(nmol/)
6
13-52
History
1-2weesof pldipandplurisityvthelast fya
TSH (ng/ml)
0.09
<0.68
urine samplepresentedafewdayspriorto this visit wasstronglypositive
TgAA(%)
108
200
for glucose.
Clinical pathology data
What abnormalities arepresent?
Mild normocyticnormochromicanaemia.No evidence of regenera-
tion given absence of polychromasia.
Haematology
Result
Referenceinterval
Mildelevationnalkalinephosphatasealanineaminotranserase,
gammaglutamyl transferaseandglutamatedehydrogenase.
RBC (x1012/)
5.08
5.4-8.5
Moderatelyelevated cholesterol.
Hb (g/dl)
11.9
12-18
Markedly elevated glucose.
HCT(N)
0.37-0.56
Subnormal thyroxine.
0.35
How would you interpret these results?
MCV(f)
68.2
65-75
The dominatingresult istheglucoseconcentration.ssuspected
MCHC (g/dl)
34
31-35
fromtheurineresultadiagnosisofdiabetesmelitusisconfird
WBC (x10%/)
7.3
5-18
3.7-13.32
with such a diagnosis.
Neutrophils(x10%/)
5.4
Thereisa subnormaltotal T4but theTSHisnormal.Thenegative
Neutrophils(band)(x 10°/)
0.00
0-0.54
TgAArulesout the presence of active immune-mediated thyroid
1.10
1.00-3.60
pathology.lt could be that thisdogisone of the proportion of
Lymphocytes(x10%/)
hypothyroid dogs inwhich an elevatedTSH isnot detected.This
Monocytes (x 10%/)
0.15
0.20-0.72
proportionisvariablyreportedbutmaybeaslowas13%.TgAA-
Eosinophils(x10°/)
0.66
0.10-1.25
negatiaaccoufrnlaoudffthrption
dogcouldbeoneofasfewas7%ofhypothyroiddogsthatcouldgive
Basophils(x10%/)
0.00
0.05-0.18
thispattenof testresults.Amorelikelyexplanationisthatthidog
Platelets (x10%/)
279
200-900
Inthiscasewhrdiabemellituaseenconfirmedthchance
Film comment
of a low T4 state of medicalillness is high.
Thehypercholesterolaemiainthiscasecannotbeusedtoprovide
Plateletsnumbersappearappropriateonthesmear
support fora diagnosisof hypothyroidismsinceitwouldalsobe
Red cells-normocytic normochromic
expected because of the confirmeddiabetesmelltus.
White cells-nomorphological abnormalies
Ishypothyroidism confirmed?If notwhat
Biochemistry
Result
Referenceinterval
furthertestswouldyou recommend?
Glucose(mmoll)
22.3
3.0-5.5
No.Tofurtherelucidatewhetherhypothyroidismcouldbea contributing
factorinthisgeityudwiswaittiltn-thl
Urea (mmoll)
3.5
3.5-7.0
ilnesswascontrlledbeforerepeating totalT4andTSHmeasurements.
Creatinine (umol/)
106
0-130
An alternativewouldbetomeasure freeT4byequilibriumdialysisasit
islesscommonly affected bythe presenceof non-thyroidalilnessthan
Calcium(mmoll)
2.53
2.3-3.0
is totalT4.
Inorganicphosphate
1.1
0.9-1.6
Further clinical pathologyresults
(mmol/)
After4weeksof insulintherayareeat smlewastak.
TP(g/)
68
55-75
Albumin (g/l)
34
29-35
Endocrinology
Result
Reference interval
Globulin(g/)
34
18-38
Total T4 (nmol/l)
28
13-52
Albumin:globulinratio
1.00
0.50-1.20
TSH (ng/ml)
0.12
<0.68
ALT(IU/)
65
0-40
0-45
How would you interpret these additional
AST(IU/)
26
results?
ALP (IU/I)
215
0-135
Takenalnwipviireulththrid
GGT (IU/I)
18
0-14
been conclusively ruled out.
GDH (IU/I)
20
0-9
CK (IU/)
136
0-400
Amylase (IU/l)
428
400-2750
Lipase (IU/)
489
0-500
Cholesterol (mmol/)
10.4
3.8-7.9
Total bilirubin (μmol/l)
1.2
0-5.0
274
Chapter17Laboratoryevaluationofhypothyroidismandhyperthyroidism
Case4
Signalment
Wouldyouinterpret the total T4result any
5-year old intact male GoldenRetriever weighing 35kg.
differentlywith theinformation thatthe
samplewasobtained 4 hourspost-pill?
History
At4hourspostpilthepeakT4concentrationhaspassedandvalueswil
Hypothyroidismwasconfirmed 2months ago.TgAAwasnegative at the
continuetodeclineuntilthetimeof thenextpillTherateof declinewill
timeof diagnosis.Since that time the dog hasbeenreceiving 0.8mg
beequivalenttoahalf-lifeof6-10hours.Thenextpillisduein20hours.
L-thyroxineoncedaily.Thetwoownersdisagreeaboutwhethertherehas
Atahallifefhourswecanexpectmorethanthreehalf-livestass
beena clinical response to themedication.
andcanpredictatroughconcentration4nmol(32168,4).Evenwith
Clinical pathology data
ahalf-lifeof10hours,thepredicted troughconcentrationwouldbe
subnormal(8nmol/l).Given the interval post-pill,this totalT4concentra-
Endocrinology
tionmayreflect inadequate therapy.
Result
Reference interval
Total T4(nmol/)
32
13-52
Whatisyouroverall interpretation of the
results?
TSH (ng/ml)
1.05
<0.68
TheTSHvaluilevatedconfirmingcontinuedphysiologicalhyothy
roidism.The TSH concentration takes days to change and therefore
Howwouldyou interpret the total T4 result?
aditionallyconfirmsthattherapyhasbeensuboptimalforsometimeand
The totalT4resultcanbebelievedbecausethispatientwasrecently
shown tobeTgAA-negative.lt isveryunlikely thatTgAA(including
therapeuticmonitoringresultsareinfact supporting oneanotherwhen
T4crossreactingsubsetswouldstarttoappearafterdiagnosisand
combined with knowledge of the interval post-pill.
the initiation of therapy.
ThetotalT4valueseemsreasonableitiswellinsidethereference
range for normal dogs.
Case5
Signalment
7year-old female,neutered DomesticShorthair cat.
Biochemistry (continued)Result
Referenceinterval
History
Urea(mmol/)
119.8
6.6-10
Prolongedhistoryofpolyuriapolsisiamorerecent3days）historyf
Creatinine (umol/)
1704
40-170
anorexiaandprofounddepressionafterreturningfrombeingmissingfor
Calcium (mmol/l)
2.38
2.00-3.00
severaldaynphyicalexaminationthecatwasdehydratedpaleand
had small bilateralpalpable nodules in thecervical area.
Inorganic phosphate
6.64
1.6-2.5
(mmol/l)
Clinical pathology data
TP (g/)
90.9
59.0-78.0
Haematology
Result
Referenceinterval
Albumin (g/l)
36.2
23.0-35.0
RBC (x1012/)
9.00
5.5-10.0
Globulin (g/)
54.7
24.0-48.0
HCT (/)
0.36
0.27-0.45
ALT(IU/)
24
5-25
Hb (g/dl)
12.6
8.00-14.00
ALP(IU/)
22
5-40
MCV (f/)
40.2
39-55
Amylase (μmoll)
1554
<730
MCHC(g/dl)
34.6
30.0-36.0
Lipase (IU/L)
90
<200
WBC(x10°/)
11.8
8-20
Urine specific gravity
1.012
Neutrophils (segmented)
11.7
2.8-15.0
(x10%/)
FreeT4by equilibriumdialysis
75.54 pmol/l (reference interval
Lymphocytes (x 10%/)
0.10
1.8-11
8.14-41.45)
Monocytes (x10°/)
0.0
0.0-1.5
What abnormalities arepresent?
Eosinopenia and lymphopenia
Eosinophils(x10%/)
0.0
0.0-1.0
Hyperproteinaemia:elevated globulin andalbumin
Basophils(x10%/)
0.0
0.0-0.1
Markedlyelevatedurea and creatinine
Platelets (x10/)
673
300-800
Mildly elevated glucose
Elevated phosphate
Elevatedamylase
Biochemistry
Result
Reference interval
Isosthenuria
Elevated freeT4concentration
Sodium(mmoll)
154
147-156
Potassium (mmoll)
4.50
4.00-5.50
Glucose(mmol/)
11.7
3.3-5.0
Case 5 continues>
275
Chapter17Laboratoryevaluationofhypothyroidismandhyperthyroidism
Case5continued
inappropriatelyelevatedincatswithnon-thyroidalillness.Parathy
How would you interpret these results and
lesions in cats.
whatare the likelydifferential diagnoses?
The haematologyresults of lymphopenia and eosinopenia are con-
What further tests wouldyou recommend?
sistentwith stress.Giventhe clinical dehydration,therelatively
normal red cellparametersmaybemaskingmild anaemia.
is100%specificandthereforeunlikelytobeelevated incatswithnon-
Thebiochemicalchangesaredominated bymarkedazotaemiawith
thyroidaliess.weveritcanedecreasedintthererencerange
hyposthenuriain thefaceofclinical dehydration,suggestive f
inhyperthyroidcatsbyconcurrenton-thyroidaldisordersheseverity
severerenalfailureTheelevatedproteinandamylaseconcentra-
of theillnessdictatesthedegreeof suppression.Inthiscatassessment
tionsresult fromthis
of thyroid functionislessofaconcernbecauseof theseverityofrenal
Mildlyelevated plasma glucose ismostlikely due tostress,a
failure.HowevertotaT4nalysiswouldhavebeenabetterchoice.
common phenomenon in cats.
mid tohighendof thereferencerangesuggestsconcurrenthyperthy-
findingofplpableodleintcericalareaweverfr
roidismWioutoncurrenttotanalsisnpretatnfily
analysislacksspecificityfordiagnosinghyperthyraidismandcanbe
elevated freeT4 concentration cannot bemade.
References
GaughanKR and Bruyette DS(2001)Thyroid function testing in
Greyhounds.AmericanJournalofVeterinaryResearch62,1130-
1133
Gordon JM,Ehrhart EJ,Sisson DD and Jones MA(2003)Juvenile
andosteocalcin in the serumof hyperthyroid cats.Canadian
hyperthyroidisminacat.JounaloftheAmericanAnimalHospital
VeterinaryJourna/37,735-739
Association39,67-71
Avgeris S,Lothrop CDJrand McDonald TP(1990）Plasma von
Graham PA,Mooney CTandMurrayM(1999)Serum fructosamine
Willebrandfactor concentration and thyroidfunctionindogs.
concentrations in hyperthyroid cats.American Journal of
Journalof theAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation196,
Veterinarsrch71715
921-924
GrahamPA,NachreinerR,Refsal KRandProvencher-BolligerAL
BarberPJand Elliott J(1996)Studyof calcium homeostasisinfeline
(2001)Lymphocyticthyroiditis.Veterinary ClinicsofNorthAmerica:
hyperthyroidism.JournalofSmallAnimalPractice37,575-582
SmallAnimalPractice31,915-933
Beale K and Torres S(1991) Thyroid pathology and serum
GrecoDSFeldman EC,PetrsonME,TurnerJL,HodgesCMand
antithyroglobulin antibodies inhypothyroid andhealthy dogs.
ShipmanLW(1991)Congenitalhypothyroiddwarfisminafamily
JournalftrinaryInternaMdicin528
of giantschnauzers.JournalofVeterinaryInternalMedicine5,
57-65
CanadianVeterinaryJournal43,125-126
Gulikers KP and Panciera DL (2003) Evaluation of the effects of
BicerS,NakayamaTand HamlinRL(2002)Efectsof chronicoral
clomipramineoncaninethyroidfunctiontests.Journalof Veterinary
amiodaroneonleftventricularfunction,CGs,serumchemistries,
InternalMedicine17,44-49
andexercise tolerance inhealthy dogs.Journal ofVeterinary
Iversen L,Jensen AL,Hoier R et al. (1998)Development and
InternalMedicine16,247-254
Broussard JD and Peterson ME (1995) Changes in clinical and
for the detectionof thyroglobulinautoantibodiesincanine serum
1993.JournaloftheAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation
KantrowitzB,PetersonME,MelianCandNicholsR(2001）Serum
206,302-305
totalthyroxine,totaltriiodothyronine,freethyroxine,andthyrotropin
Calvert CA,Jacobs GJ, Medleau L, Pickus CW,Brown J and
concentrationsindogswithnonthyroidaldisease.Journalof the
McDermott M（1998)Thyroid-stimulating hormone stimulation
testsin cardiomyopathicDobermanpinschers:aretrospective
LawrenceDThmpsonJLaytonWCaderwoodMaysMEllisn
study.ournalferinaryntenaMedicine12343348
G and Mannella C(1991) Hyperthyroidism associated with a
CastilaliaCartriGMrqrigu
thyroidadenoma ina dog.Journal of theAmericanVeterinary
andPisarevMA(2o01)Changesinthyroidfunctioninpuppiesfed
MedicalAssociation199,8183
a high iodine commercial diet.VeterinaryJourrta/161,80-84
LeeJA,Hinchcliff KW,Piercy RJ,Schmidt KEandNelsonS(2004)
Daminet ,Croubels S,Duchateau L,DebunneAvan Geffen C
Effects of racing and nontraining on plasma thyroid hormone
Hoybergs Y,van Bree H and de Rick A (2003) Influence of
concentrationsinsleddogs.Journalof theAmericanVeterinary
acetylsalicylicacidandketoprofenoncaninethyroidfunction
MedicalAssociation224,226-231
tests.TheVeterinaryJourna/166,224-232
Lurye JC,Behrend EN and Kemppainen RJ (2002)Evaluation of an
Daminet S and Ferguson DC(2003) Influence of drugs on thyroid
functionindogs.JournalofVeterinaryInternalMedicine17,463
472
cats.Journalof theAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation
Dixon RM and Mooney CT (1999a) Canine serum thyroglobulin
221,243-249
autoantibodiesinhealth,hypothyroidismandnon-thyroidalillness.
Mooney CT (2001)Feline hyperthyroidism:diagnostics and
ResearchinVeterinaryScience66,243
therapeutics.Veterinary Clinicsof NorthAmerica:SmallAnimal
Dixon RMandMooneyCT(1999b)Evaluationof serumfreethyroxine
Practice31,963-983
and thyrotropin concentrations in the diagnosis of canine
Mooney CTandAndersonTJ(1993)Congenital hypothyroidism ina
hypothyroidism.Journal SmallAnimalPractice40,72-78
boxerdog.Journal ofSmallAnimalPractice34,3135
DixonRM,ReidSWandMooneyCT(1999)Epidemiological,clinical,
Mooney CT,Little CJ andMacraeAW（1996)Effect of illnessnot
haematological and biochemical characteristics of canine
associatedwiththethyroidglandonserumtotaland freethyroxine
hypothyroidism.VeterinaryRecord145,481-487
concentrationsincats.JournaloftheAmericanVeterinaryMedical
DixonRM,ReidSWandMooneyCT(2002)Treatmentandtherapeutic
Association208,2004-2008
monitoringof canine hypothyroidism.Journal of SmallAnimal
Mooney CT,ThodayKLandDoxey DL(1992)Carbimazole therapy
Practice43,334-340
of felinehyperthyroidism.Journal ofSmallAnimalPractice33,
Elliot DA,King LG,and Zerbe CA （1995) Thyroid hormone
228-235
concentrationsincriticallyillintensivecarepatients.TheJournal
NachreinerRF,RefsalKR,GrahamPA,HauptmanJandWatsonGL
ofVeterinaryEmergencyandCriticalCare5,17-23
(1998)Prevalenceof autoantibodiestothyroglobulinindogswith
nonthyroidal illness.AmericanJournal ofVeterinaryResearch
phosphatasein34hyperthyroidcats:aqualitative andquantitative
59,951-955
study.ResearchinVeterinaryScience68,89-94
NelsonRW,hleSL,FeldmanECandBottomsGD(1991）Serumfre
FrankLA(1996)Comparisonofthyrotropin-releasing hormone（TRH)
thyroxineconcentrationinhealthydogs,dogswithhypothyroidism,
tothyrotropin(TSH）stimulationforevaluating thyroidfunctionin
dogs.Journal of theAmericanAnimal HospitalAssociation32
VeterinaryMedicalAssociation198,1401-1407
481-487
NemzekJA,KrugerJMWalshawRandHauptmanJG（1994)Acu
FyfeJCammiang,Qw,Grm
onset of hypokalaemia and muscular weakness in four
PAandFetroVM(2003)Congenital hypothyroidismwithgoiterin
hyperthyroidcats.Journalof theAmericanVeterinaryMedical
toyfoxtrrerounalfVterinarytrnaMdicin
Association205,65-68
276
Laboratory diagnosis
of adrenal diseases
lanRamsey and Michael Herrtage
Introduction
Adrenalsteroidsynthesisandrelease
Glucocorticoidrelease iscontrolledalmostentirelyby
Eachadrenalgland iscomposedofacortexanda
adrenocorticotropichormone(ACTH) secreted by the
medulla,which are embryologically and functionally
anterirituitaywhichntun,igulatdyort
separate endocrine glands.The cortexis essential for
tropin releasing hormone(CRH) from the hypothala-
life,butthemedullaisnot.Themostcommondisorders
mus(Figure 18.1).ACTH causes cortisol release from
affecttheadrenalcortexand causeeitherhyper-
the adrenal cortex,with serum concentrationsrising
adrenocorticism (HAC) or hypoadrenocorticism. Con-
almost immediately.Cortisol hasdirectnegativefeed-
ditions affecting the adrenal medulla arerare,the most
back effects on:
common being neoplasia (phaeochromocytoma).
The adrenal cortex produces about30 different
Thehypothalamustodecreaseformationof CRH
hormones, many of which have little or no clinical
The anteriorpituitary gland to decreaseformation
significance.Thehormonescanbe divided into three
ofACTH.
groupsbased on theirpredominant actions:
Thereisprobablyaninternalor'shortloop'negative
Mineralocorticoids areresponsiblefor
feedbackcontrol byACTH onCRH.Thesefeedback
electrolyte andwaterhomeostasis.Aldosterone,
mechanisms helptoregulate theplasma concentration
themost important,is produced bythezona
of cortisol.
glomerulosa
Theprincipal mineralocorticoidreleased by the
Glucocorticoidspromotegluconeogenesis,
adrenal cortexisaldosterone.The secretion ofaldo-
lipolysis andprotein catabolism.They also
steroneismainlyregulatedbytherenin-angiotensin
antagonize the effect of insulin and are anti-
system and the serum potassium concentration.
inflammatory andimmunosuppressive.Cortisol,
ACTHonlyhasapermissive effecton itssecretion at
the most important,isproduced in thezonas
physiological doses(Figure 18.2).Pharmacological
fasciculata andreticularis
dosesofACTHwillhowever,inducethesecretionof
Sex hormones, particularly male hormones
aldosterone,e.g.inperforming anACTH stimulation
thathaveweakandrogenicactivity,are
test.Aldosteroneprimarilyactson theproximal con-
produced in smallquantitiesin thezonas
voluted tubuletoincreasesodiumreabsorption and
fasciculata and reticularis.
on thedistal convolutedtubuletoincreasesodium
Dopamine
Metabolic factors
Liver
Decreased blood
Kidney
Serotonin～
'Stress'
Hypothalamus
Sodium
andwater
reabsorption
CRH
uebo
Renir
O
Pituitary
Angiotensinl
Potassium
Cortisol
?
excretion
ACTH
AngiotensinI
Aldosterone
Hyperkalaemia
Adrenal
glands
Lung
ACTH
Adrenal
(tonic effects only)
18.1
The regulation of cortisol release(CRH,
18.2
The regulation of aldosterone release(ACE.
corticotropin releasinghormone).
angiotensin converting enzyme).
278
Chapter18Laboratorydiagnosisofadrenal diseases
reabsorption in exchange for potassium ions. Os-
moticforcesensurethatthisresultsin anincreasein
Common signs ofhyperadrenocorticism
waterretention.
Poldpialyurl
Further details on adrenal steroid synthesis and
Lethargy
regulationof theirrelease canbefoundintheBSAVA
Manual ofEndocrinology.
Dermatological changes:
Symmetricalalopeciapoorhairregrowthcomedonesin
thinning
Hyperfragile skin (in cats)
Abdominal distension(pot belly)
Canine hyperadrenocorticism
Excessive panting
Hyperadrenocorticism(HAC),results from a chronic
Muscle weakness
excess of glucocorticoid secretion.The disease has
Anoestrusandgenital atrophy
twospontaneousformsandmayalsobeproduced
iatrogenicallyby theadministrationof steroids.The
Uncommon signsof hyperadrenocorticism
most common cause of spontaneous HAC is the
Dermatologicalchanges:
overproduction of ACTH by a smallbenign pituitary
Coatcolouhangeherpimentationcalcnosicut
microadenoma (pituitary-dependent HAC (PD-HAC)
Excessivebruisingandpoorwound healing
or Cushing's disease).Excessive secretion of ACTH
Stif hindlimbgait (due topseudomyotonia)
results in bilateral adrenocortical hyperplasia and
Dyspnoea(due to pulmonary thromboembolism)
overproduction of cortisol and its precursors.Other
causes of PD-HAC include larger tumours(macro-
Neurological signs(due torapid tumour growth）:
Ataxiat
adenomas)and diffuse hyperplasia of the ACTH-
walkingurlratmvi
secreting cells (corticotrophs). PD-HAC accounts for
about 85%of all spontaneous canine HAC.Macro-
Clinical signs of canine hyperadrenocorticism.
adenomas are seen in about 10%of thesecases.
18.3
It is important to employ specific endocrine
Rarely,pituitary adenocarcinoma has been docu-
tests only in animals thathave appropriate clinical signs.
mented.Theincidence of pituitary corticotroph hyper-
plasia isdebatedintheliterature.
Adrenal-dependent HAC(AD-HAC)results from
Investigationofhyperadrenocorticism
the overproductionof cortisol by an adrenal tumour.
Theprocess of investigating and confirmingcanine
Adrenal tumoursmay show a range of biological
HACis summarized inFigure 18.4.Beforeperforming
(including metastatic) behaviour and the neoplastic
any laboratorytestsfor HACit is important to obtain an
cells release variable amounts of cortisol (and other
accuratehistory and perform a thorough clinical exami-
precursorsteroids).Approximatelyhalfthesetumours
nation.Hyperadrenocorticism isa chronic disease and
aremalignant.Thereleaseofcortisol from thetumour
manyof the changesdevelopslowlyand so aremissed
may,rmaynot,beinfluencedbyACTH.Moreover,
the extentof the effectof ACTHisvariable.Therefore
erablybetweenindividualanimalsandafewcases
adrenal tumoursdonotbehavepredictablyinany
may only show one or two signs.
endocrine test.The contralateral adrenal gland is
Full blood and urine profiles are carried out to:
usually atrophic.
The clinical signs of HACaresummarized inFigure
Identifyanynon-specificindicatorsof thedisease
18.3.Signs of AD-HAC are indistinguishable from
Excludeothercausesofpolyuria/polydipsia,
those of PD-HAC（Reusch and Feldman,1991).AD-
polyphagia,etc.
HAC is more common in larger breeds than PD-HAC,
Identifyintercurrent disease thatmight affect
and is more common in bitches (about 70%of cases
subsequent therapy.
are in females).
HAC is much less common in the cat than in the
Themorecommon laboratorychanges that are
dog.Although fewer studies have beenpublished in
seen incanineHACaresummarized inFigure18.5
the cat,itappears thatPD-HACaccounts fora similar
and below.
proportion of HAC cases to those seenin dogs (Nelson
et al.,1988;Watson and Herrtage,1998).Theclinical
Bloodprofiles
and clinicopathological findingsof felineHAC are de-
scribed later in this chapter.
Alkalinephosphatase(ALP):Serum ALPconcentra-
latrogenicHACmaybeproducedby theadmin-
tions are increased inover90%of casesof canine
istrationof glucocorticoids.ltisfairly commonin the
HAC.The increase is commonly5-40 timesthe upper
dog but relativelyrarein the cat.Clinical and clinico-
endof thereferencerange,and this isperhaps the
pathologicalpresentations are similar to spontane-
most sensitive biochemical indicator of HAC.
ous HACbut theresultsof specificendocrine tests
Glucocorticoids,both endogenous and exogenous,
are different.The differences observed depend on
inducea specificisoenzymeofALPthatisuniquetothe
the dose and type ofglucocorticoid administered.
dog.However,increases in serum ALP occur in many
Obtainingareliablehistory canpreventexpensive
other conditions and a normal serumALP concentra-
and unnecessary testing.
tion does not exclude a diagnosis of HAC.
279
Chapter18Laboratorydiagnosisofadrenaldiseases
Suspect hyperadrenocorticism
Angex vmtn dherhoen 
Historyand physical examination
inHAC
IfS.G>1.030 thenHACunlikely
←
Urinalysis(including specific gravity)
→Specificgravity 1.001-1.030,+/-protein,blood
If ALP is normal then HAC
Routine biochemistry
IncreasedALP,ALTcholesterolglucose
isunlikely
Decreased urea
cyte count >1.5 x 109/1
Routine haematology
Increased neutrophil and occasionally RBCcounts
Decreased eosinophil and lymphocyte counts
Post-ACTHcortisol>600nmol/l,withnoother
ACTH stimulation test
signsofstressful illness
Post-ACTH cortisol <40nmol/l
Post-ACTHcortisol concentration<600nmol/I
consideriatrogenicHAC
HACnot excluded
8-hourcortisol
Low dose dexamethasone
8-hourcortisol
40nmol/1
suppression test
>40nmol/l
CONSIDEROTHERDIFFERENTIALS
Determine if adrenal
HYPERADRENOCORTICISMCONFIRMED
orpituitarydependent
Radiography,ultrasonography,
erone
endogenous ACTH
cortisol creatinineratio
18.4
and with anticonvulsantand exogenous glucocorticoid
Haematology
therapy (Teske et al.,1989).
Increased total WBC
Neutrophiia
Alanine aminotransferase(ALT):ALTis commonly
Eosinopenia
mildly elevated in HAC,as a result of hepatocyte
Lymphopenia
damage due to glycogen accumulation. Increases of
Monocytosis
more than five times the upper limit of thereference
Biochemistry
IncreasedALP-highproportionofdogsbutonly30%ofcats
subsequent therapy.
Increased ALT
Hypercholesterolaemia
Bileacid concentrations:Resting and postprandial
Hyperglycaemia-morepronounced incats(overt diabetesmelltusis
serum bile acid concentrationsmay showamild to
common)
moderate elevation(up to 60 μmol/l pre-andpostpran-
Decreased circulating totalT4
dially) in some cases of HAC, due to steroid hepatopa-
Urinalysis
thy.When abnormal resultsareobtained,HAC isbest
Specific graity isgenerallylow(<015), smtimesssthenuricor
differentiated fromprimary liverdisordersbytheclinical
hyposthenuric
history,physical examination and diagnostic imaging
Proteinuria
Glucosuria common incatslessso indogs
Glucose:Glucose concentration is usuallyin the high
normalrange.About 10%ofcases developovert
occultUTI)
diabetes mellitus,which iscaused by antagonism to
theactionofinsulinbythegluconeogeniceffectsof
18.5
Summary of changesseen on routine
excessglucocorticoids.Initiallyserum insulin concen-
haematology,biochemistry and urinalysis in
HAC in approximate order of frequency.
trations increase to maintain normoglycaemia,but
eventually thepancreaticisletcellsbecome exhausted
giving rise to overt diabetesmellitus.
The steroid-induced alkaline phosphatase(SIALP)
can be quantified(seeChapter 12) and initial studies
Urea and creatinine:Creatinine concentration usu-
suggested that SIALP measurement provided an ac-
ally tends to be in the low to normal range. This may
curatedifferentiationof the causesof increasedALP
reflect loss of muscle mass as well as the effects of
However subsequent studies have concluded that,
glucocorticoid-induced polyuria.Urea is variable:in-
whilemeasurementofALsquitesensitive,itisnot
creasedproteincatabolismandglucocorticoid-induced
specificfor spontaneous canineHAC:SIALPcanbe
increased inprimaryhepatopathies,diabetesmellitus
normal,increased or decreased.
280
Chapter18Laboratorydiagnosisofadrenal diseases
Cholesteroland lipaemia:Cholesteroland triglycer-
Basal cortisol measurements areof no value in the
ide concentrations areusually increased due to gluco-
diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism,as normal dogs,
corticoid stimulation of lipolysis.Cholesterol is usually
those with HAC and thosestressed by another illness
>8 mmol/l but is also raised in hypothyroidism, diabe-
have cortisol concentrations thatfluctuatewidelyand
tesmellitus,chronicpancreatitis,cholestaticliverdis
overlap toa considerableextent.
Therearetwolong-establishedtestsusedforthe
be differential diagnoses.Elevated triglyceride and
diagnosis of canine HAC;the ACTH stimulation test
consequent lipaemia can also occur,although less
and the low dose dexamethasone suppression test
frequently than elevated cholesterol.
(LDDST).Thetestchosendependsonindividualowner,
dog andveterinaryfactors,including time constraints,
Electrolytes:Sodium,potassium and calciumconcen-
cost,personal preference and the particular form of
trations are usually in thereference range.Phosphate is
HAC that is suspected.
often increased when compared with age-matched con-
About80%of all dogswithhyperadrenocorticism
trols(Tebb et al.,2003a).This probably reflects the
arepositiveontheACTHstimulationtest,and90-95%
increased bonemetabolism indogswithHAC.
arepositive on the LDDST.The sensitivity of ACTH
stimulationtesting in the diagnosisof adrenal depend-
Urinalysis
ent disease is much lower(as lowas 60%).Some dogs
withfunctional adrenal tumourscangivenormalre-
Urine specific gravity:Urine specificgravity(SG) is
sults on both tests (Norman et al.,1999). It should be
usually<1.015,and is often hyposthenuric （<1.008)
notedthatthereportedsensitivityandspecificity，and
providedwater hasnotbeenwithheld.This is due to
positive and negative predictive values for these two
antagonism of antidiuretic hormone(ADH)leading toa
testsvarywith thepopulationsampled.Forexample,if
secondary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.Dogs with
dogs with clinical presentations not suggestive of
HACcanusually concentrate theirurine if deprived of
hyperadrenocorticism and finaldiagnosesofnon-
water,but their concentrating ability isfrequently re-
adrenal illnesses are examined then14%are(falsely)
duced.However,insomecasesofPD-HACduetoa
positiveonACTH stimulationand56%are(falsely)posi-
macroadenoma,compression of theposteriorlobeof
tiveonlowdose dexamethasonesuppression testing
thepituitaryand extension into thehypothalamusmay
(Kaplan et al.,1995).False positive results may be
cause disruption of ADH production and release.This
seen,forexamplewithdiabetesmellitus,renalfailure
will result in signs of central diabetes insipidus (see
Chapter 10).Confirmation of this diagnosis using a
or pyometra.However,this group of dogs is not nor-
mally tested forhyperadrenocorticism.(See Chapters
waterdeprivationtestcanonlybemadeaftertheHAC
2and 26for discussions of sensitivity,specificityand
hasbeen controlled.
positive and negativepredictive values.)
Urinary tract infection:Urine(collected by cysto-
Some cases of HAC are presented with highly
centesis) should be cultured,because urinary tract
suggestive clinical signs but diagnostic tests prove
infections occurin about50%of casesof HAC.Urinary
equivocal or negative. In these circumstances it is
tract infection occursbecausevoiding is never com-
sensible to check forother endocrine diseases(par-
plete due to muscle weakness. Immunosuppression
ticularly hypothyroidism)and then torepeat thetests.
If this approach is unsuccessful at determining the
may alsoplayarole.There isoften little evidenceof
cause of the dog'spresenting signs then two other
inflammatorycellsin thesedimentof theurine and,
tests for HAC, the 17-hydroxyprogesterone (17-OHP)
indeed,thereareoftenfewclinicalsignsofurinarytract
test and theurine corticoid:creatinineratio,are some-
infection,due to the immunosuppressive action of
times useful.Neither test is a replacement for the
excess glucocorticoids.Lower urinary tract infections
can ascend to thekidneys to cause pyelonephritis.
ACTH stimulation test or LDDST.
Urine protein:Up to45%of dogswith untreated
ACTH stimulation test:Thetest method isdescribed
in Figure 18.6.
HACmay haveproteinuria,defined asa urine protein:
Cortisol is stable for manyweeks at 4°C.Cortisol
creatinine ratio(UPCR)>1.0,in the absence of urinary
is measured using radioimmunoassays,and immuno-
tract infection(HurleyandVaden,1998).Proteinuria is
usually mild (UPCR<5.0),but canbe severe(>10.0),
radiometricassays areconsidered themostreliable.
and maybe associatedwith systemichypertension.
Interpretation is summarized in Figure 18.7. In normal
dogs,pre-ACTH cortisol concentrations are usually
Despite theseverityofproteinuriainsomecases,HAC
hasnotbeen shown toproducenephroticsyndrome or
hypoalbuminaemia.
1.
2ml blood sample obtained in a heparin or plain tube.
2.
SyntheticACTHadministered intravenously(preferably）or
Urine glucose:Glucosuria occurs in10%of dogs with
HAC:theserepresentcaseswithovertdiabetesmellitus.
in dogs<5kg.
3.
Obtain another2ml blood sample30-90minutes(if ACTHgiven
Standard endocrine tests
intravenously）or1-2hours(ifACTHgivenintramuscularly）later.
Specific endocrine tests should only be undertaken in
animals with clinical evidence of HAC.Indiscriminate
testing alters diagnostic efficiencyandmakes accurate
18.6
The ACTH stimulation test.
interpretation difficult (Kaplan et al.,1995)
281
Chapter18Laboratorydiagnosisof adrenal diseases
Low dose dexamethasone suppression test: The
1600
method for theLDDSTis described inFigure 18.8.
1400
The expected results of LDDSTs are shown in
1200
HAC
Figure18.9.Interpretationmust bebased on the labo-
ratory's reference range.As a guide,normal dogs
1000
show>50%suppression of cortisol concentrations at
700
3hours and suppress to<30nmol/l at 8hours.lf the
doseofdexamethasonefailstosuppresscirculating
600
cortisol concentrations adequately(i.e.the 8-hourcor-
rtisol
400
Normal
tisol is>40nmol/l)inadogwithcompatibleclinical
Cort
200
signs,a diagnosis of HAC is confirmed.
hACor iHAC
Pre ACTH
PostACTH
1.
Obtaina 2ml bloodsampleinaplainorheparin tubeearlyinthe
18.7
Interpretationof theACTH stimulationtest.
morning.
Normal dogs showa2-3-fold increase in
Inject 0.015mg/kg dexamethasonei..
cortisol concentrations but theseremain<450nmol/l.Most
3.
Collectbloodsampleshoursand8hoursafteradministration
of dexamethasone.
>600nmol/l.False positive results occur with'stressful
illnesses, such as unstable diabetes mellitus.The
4.
Serumorplasmashouldbeseparatedbeforetransport to
expected results in cases of iatrogenic HAC (iHAC) and
laboratory.
hypoadrenocorticism (hAC) are also shown.
Thebasaland8-hourpost-dexamethasone samplesarethemost
importantforinterpretationof thetestTheintermediatesampleisnot
essential butmay be useful in some cases.
between20and250nmol/landpost-ACTHcortisol
concentrations arebetween200 to 450 nmol/l.Re-
18.8
gardlessof thepre-ACTHcortisolvalue,adiagnosisof
The low dose dexamethasone suppression test.
HACis confirmedby apost-ACTH cortisol concentra-
tion>600nmol/l indogswith compatibleclinical signs
and no evidence of acute stressful illnesses.Values
300
between450and600nmol/lshouldberegardedas
(nmol/l)
indicativeof anabnormaladrenal cortexbut thecause
(HAC or stress) cannot be determined.Post-ACTH
cortisol concentrations<40 nmol/l in dogswith obvious
'200
PD-HACorAD-HAC
HAC
clinical signs of hyperadrenocorticism are consistent
with the diagnosis of iatrogenichyperadrenocorticism.
When interpretingACTH stimulation tests it isim-
portanttorememberthatothersteroidswill bedetected
100
in the cortisol assay.The degree ofcross reactivity
PD-HAC
betweencortisolandpharmaceutical steroidsvaries:
Normal
for example, prednisolone cross reacts about 30%
hAC or iHAC
whereasdexamethasonedoesnotcrossreact.Pred-
nisolone canbe detected byacortisol assayforup to
0
3
8
24hours after administration.
Hourspost dexamethasone
Advantagesof theACTH stimulation test include:
18.9
Interpretationof thelowdosedexamethasone
Simple,quick and specific
suppression test.Normal dogs show>50%
suppression of cortisol concentrations at 3 hours with values
Bestscreening testfordistinguishing
<30nmol/l at 8 hours.Dogs with HAC show little or no
spontaneous from iatrogenic HAC
suppression at 8 hours. Cases with PD-HAC may show an
Providesbaselineinformationformonitoring
initial suppression at 3 hours.The effects of iatrogenic HAC
mitotane and trilostane therapy(seebelow).
(iHAC) and hypoadrenocorticism (hAC) are also shown.
Disadvantagesof theACTH stimulationtestinclude:
If the3-4hour sampleis suppressed normally or
Minimal valueindifferentiatingpituitaryfrom
near-normally (to<40mmol/),while the 8-hour sample
adrenalHAC
shows escape from suppression(i.e.is>40 nmol/l),then
False negative results(i.e.a normal response)
a diagnosis of PD-HACcanbemade(Peterson,1984).
mayoccur,especiallyinAD-HA
A failure to suppressplasma cortisol at both 3-4hours
Falsepositiveresults(i.e.anexaggerated
and8hours isnothelpfulindetermining thecauseofthe
response) may occurwith chronic stress dueto
HAC (i.e.it could be pituitary or adrenal dependent).
non-adrenal illness.The highest post-ACTH
Somecasesshowa pattern of low cortisol produc-
cortisol concentrationrecorded inone seriesof
tion that isnot suppressed throughout the test.This
59 dogswithnon-adrenal illnesseswas about
abnormalpatternshouldpromptfurtherinvestigation
850 nmol/l (although 95%of the dogs had values
foran adrenal tumour,assome adrenal tumours may
<600 nmol/i) (Kaplan et al.,1995).
principallyrelease cortisol precursors.
282
Chapter 18Laboratorydiagnosisof adrenal diseases
Advantagesof theLDDSTinclude:
Asa guide,the reference ratio fornormal dogs is
<10x10-6(Stolp et al.,1983).The ratio is increased in
More sensitive than the ACTH stimulation test in
dogswithHACbutalsoinmanydogswithnon-adrenal
confirmingHAC
illness(SmileyandPeterson,1993).Thereforethistest
May confirm the diagnosis ofPD-HAC
isnotverypecific,butisuseful forscreeningforHAC
Disadvantages of theLDDST include:
since it is highly sensitive.Values in thereference
range makea diagnosisof HAChighlyunlikelyand the
Not as specific as the ACTH stimulation test,i.e.
test is best used to exclude the diagnosis of HAC.The
it ismore likely toproducefalsepositives,
test cannotreliably differentiatePD-from AD-HAC
especially if it isperformed ina stressful
unless theratioexceeds100x106,when it becomes
environment. In chronicallyill animals that donot
verylikelythat the dog is sufferingfromPD-HAC
have hyperadrenocorticism it canbe(falsely)
(Galac et al.,1997).Itis of littlevalue inmonitoring the
positive inup to56%of cases
responsetomitotane therapyin dogswith HAC.
TakeslongertoperformthanACTHstimulation
Doesnotprovidepre-treatment information that
ACTHstimulation of 17-hydroxyprogesterone:
maybe used in monitoring the effectsof therapy.
Recently,the measurement of 17-OHP before and
Additional tests for atypical HAC
afterACTH stimulationhasbeenshown tobeuseful in
helpingto confirm the diagnosisof atypical HAC(Ristic
Some cases of HAC have classical clinical signs and
et al.,2002).In atypical HAC theremaybe a derange-
changes on routine haematology and biochemistrybut
ment of the steroidproductionpathway andsomeof
 equivocal results on the specific endocrine tests de-
the precursors of cortisol, such as 17-OHP,may be
scribed above;these are termed atypical HAC.If,on
abnormally increased.Bothpituitary-dependent and
repetition of the standard tests outlined above,the
adrenal-dependent atypical HAC cases have been
resultsremain inconclusive and the clinical signsper-
reported(Norman et al.,1999;Ristic et al.,2002).
sist,thenfurthertestsforatypical forms of HACcanbe
The method is identical to that described above
undertaken.It isoftenbest toperformboth of the tests
for the standard ACTH stimulation testand thus
outlined belowtoobtain as muchevidenceas possible.
measurements of 17-OHP can be made on the same
Urinary corticoid:creatinine ratio:Cortisol and its
samples aftercortisol concentrations havebeen meas-
metabolites(corticoids)are excretedinurine.Bymeas-
ured.17-OHP concentrations are stable in plasma at
uring urine corticoids in themorning sample,the con-
4°C forseveral weeks.
centration will reflect cortisol release over several
Figure 18.10 summarizes the interpretation. In nor-
hours, thereby adjusting for fluctuations in plasma
maldogs,post-ACTH17-OHPconcentrations aremostly
cortisol concentrations.Urine corticoid concentration
between 1.0 and 8.0 nmol/l. In dogs with classical and
increases with increasedplasma cortisol concentra-
atypicalhyperadrenocorticismplasma17-OHPconcen-
tion.Relating theurine corticoid concentration to urine
trations show an exaggerated response to ACTH stimu-
creatinine concentration provides a correction for any
lationwithconcentrationsincreasingtobetween6.5and
diferences in urine concentration.Evaluation of uri-
38nmol/l after stimulation(Ristic et al.,2002).There is
nary corticoid:creatinineratio(UCCR),ratherthan the
a degreeofoverlapbetweennormal andaffected ani-
morelaborious24-hoururinarycorticoidexcretion,has
malsandthereissome controversyoverthecutoffvalue
beenshown tobe asimple andvaluable screening test
for the diagnosis of HAC. A recent study suggested
(Rijnberk et al.,1988).However,urine corticoids may
a post-ACTH stimulation 17-OHP concentration of
not always reflect plasma cortisol concentrations. Rate
of cortisol breakdown canbeinfluenced by otherfac-
tors (e.g.hepatic disease,drug administration).
32
The owner should obtain a urine sampleat home
28
everymorning for3 days and then these samplescan
24
Typical HAC
eitheranalysed separately(preferred) or1 ml aliquots
tration
can bemixed togetherbefore analysis(cheaper).Urine
samples obtained in a clinical environment areunsuit-
16
Atypical HAC
able asthe stressof being takento theclinicissufficient
12
to increase the urine cortisol to levels that are sugges-
tive of HAC (Vonderen et al.,1998).A single sample
17-OHP
8
Normal
obtained at home is also unsuitable.
4
The UcCR is calculated as:
PreACTH
Post ACTH
urine cortisol concentration(umol/l)
urine creatinine concentration (μmol/l).
18.10
Normal dogs show a 2-3-fold increase in
17-OHP concentrations but these remain <10 nmoll.
Itmaybe necessaryto convertvaluesin otherunits:
Most dogs with typical or atypical HAC have post-ACTH
Cortisol μg/dlx27.59=Cortisol nmol/l
17-OHPconcentrations>8nmol/1.Falsepositiveresults
may occur with'stressful'illnesses,suchasunstable
Cortisol nmol/ /1000=Cortisolμmol/l
diabetesmellitus,neoplasia and liverdisease.False
Creatininemmol/l x1000=Creatinineμmol/l.
negatives can also occur but are uncommon.
283
Chapter18Laboratorydiagnosisofadrenal diseases
>8.5nmol/l couldbe used asacutoff with a sensitivity
PD-HAC show suppression of cortisol at 3 hours but
and specificityof about70%;but a fewnormal dogs
not at 8hours.However,if this doesnot occur,then
may havepost-ACTH 17-OHP concentrations ashigh
PD-HACcannotbe excluded.Somecases of AD-HAC
as 17nmol/l anddogswith'stressful'diseasesmay be
mayshowlowconcentrationsofcortisolthroughoutthe
as high as38nmol/l(Chapman et al.,2003).
test without any suppression (Norman et al.,1999).
The test isbest used to identify confirmatory evi-
denceof abnormalitiesof steroidmetabolism in ani-
High dose dexamethasone suppression test:The
malswith considerable clinical evidence of such
high dose dexamethasone suppression test is prob-
abnormalities.The testshould notbeused todistin-
ably now unnecessary in most situations,due to the
guishbetween diseased and healthy animals.
availabilityofother,moreconvenient,tests.Theproce
dureisasoutlinedinFigure18.8fortheLDDSTexcept
Distinguishing pituitary-and adrenal-dependent
thatthedoseofdexamethasoneusedisincreasedto
HAC
0.1mg/kg.Suppressionofcortisolat3hoursorat3and
Distinguishing thetwomajorformsof HACisuseful in
8hours is consistent with PD-HAC.However,if this
the management and essential forprognosisof the
doesnot occur,thenPD-HACcannot be excluded.
condition,though it is not necessary to make the
Lackof adequate suppression(i.e.cortisol concentra-
distinctioninall cases.Both endocrine tests and adre-
tions>40 nmoll at 3-4 hours and at 8 hours) is seen in
nal ultrasonographyare used.The bestendocrinological
all AD-HAC cases and in 20-30 %of PD-HAC cases.
testisthe endogenousACTH assay,although thelow
The highdose dexamethasone suppression testcan-
dose dexamethasone and high dose dexamethasone
not be used to distinguish between normal dogs and
tests may contribute.lt is usually assumed that if an
thosewithHAC(unlike theLDDST).
adrenal tumourisnot detected the diseaseispituitary
in origin.It isonly necessary to confirm thepresence
Effects on other endocrine tests
and sizeof a suspectedpituitary tumour in dogswith
HAC and neurological signs. Magnetic resonance
Thyroxine (T4) concentrations:Basal thyroxine
imagingis thebest methodforexamining thepituitary
concentrations are decreased in about 70%of dogs
gland.In its absence,highresolution computed tomo-
with HAC (Peterson et al.,1984).This is thought to
graphy (HRCT) is an acceptable alternative.
be due toinhibition ofpituitary secretion of thyroid
Sometimesconflicting results are obtained,such
stimulatinghormone(TSH) and so TSH levelsare
as lowACTHconcentrationswith evidenceofmild
usually low (Ramsey and Herrtage,1998).The re-
bilateral adrenomegaly.In these cases the only solu-
sponseof thyroxine toTRHor TSHstimulationusually
tion is repeating some orall of the tests. In rare cases
parallels a normal response,butthyroxineconcentra-
pituitary and adrenal tumours have been found in the
tions both pre-and post-TRH or TSH are subnormal
same animal. This situation is identified after in-depth
(Peterson et al.,1984).However,in some cases of
investigationsofanimalsthathaveconflictingresults
from theinvestigationsoutlined inthissection or after
spontaneous HAC,canine TSH concentrations are
normal or even increased;in these cases,the low
failureofconventional therapy.
T4 may be due to cortisol altering thyroid hormone
binding toplasma proteinsorenhancing themetabo-
Endogenous ACTH:Endogenous ACTH concentra-
lism of thyroid hormone.
tion is usually high or normal in PD-HAC (>25 pg/ml),
but lowin AD-HAC (<5 pg/ml). Equivocal results (5-25
Parathyroid hormone concentrations:Glucocorti-
pg/ml)are sometimes seen.The assay should be
repeated in these circumstances,as some of these
coids areknown toincrease urinary calcium excretion
in canine HAC.In order to maintain normal circulating
results are due to poor sample handling (see below).
Onrare occasions lowACTH values (<5pg/ml)have
concentrationsofcalcium,parathyroid hormone(PTH)
beenrecorded inPDH casesbuthighACTHvalues
concentrations are increased in over 80%of cases of
have never been recorded in adrenal tumours.The
HAC(Ramsey and Hertage,2001).PTH concentra-
tionsdecreasewithtreatment,butnotusuallytonormal
assayisthereforelessspecificfor thediagnosisof
adrenal-dependentdisease thanforpituitary-depend-
concentrations(Tebb et al.,2003b).
ent disease.The testis easy toperformbut isless
accurate thanultrasonographywhenperformedby
Growthhormoneandinsulin-likegrowthfactor1
anexperiencedoperatorintheexclusionofadrenal
concentrations:HAC reduces spontaneous and
tumours (Gould et al.,2001).
stimulated growth hormone (GH) secretion by en-
Endogenous ACTH ismeasured(byradio-immu-
hancedreleaseofsomatostatinfrom thehypothal-
noassay)after collectinga single blood sample into
amus.Reduced GH secretion from the pituitary may
EDTAandrapidlyseparating and freezing theplasma
result inreduced serum insulin-likegrowthfactor1
(within 15 minutes).The sample must be sent by a
(IGF-1) concentrations.
guaranteedexpressdeliveryserviceinaspecialfreezer
packthatcanbeborrowed fromaspecialist laboratory.
Insulin and C-peptide concentrations:Both insulin
and C-peptide (which is released in equimolar con-
Low dose dexamethasone suppression test:As
centrationsto insulin) concentrations are increased
discussed above the LDDST may help in distinguish-
in dogswith hyperadrenocorticism(Montgomery et
ing betweencauses of HAc because some cases of
al.,2003).
284
Chapter18Laboratorydiagnosisof adrenal diseases
Tests for monitoring therapy
Mitotane is initially given as an induction course
which results in the suppression of the ACTH stimula-
Trilostane
tiontest.Generallyapost-ACTHcortisolof between20
Trilostane is a steroid synthesis inhibitor that is li-
and 120nmol/l indicatessatisfactorycontrol (Kintzer
censed for the treatment of HACin the UK and is used
and Peterson,1991;Dunn et al.,1995).Maintenance
in othercountries asan alternative tomitotane.It is
therapyis thengivenandmonitoredbyACTH stimula-
recommendedthatACTH stimulationtestsareper-
tiontests,initiallymonthly and thenevery3-6months.
formed at 10-14 days,30 days and90 days after
Furtherdetailsonmitotane therapy areavailable in the
starting therapy (Neiger et al.,2002). As trilostane
BSAVAManual ofEndocrinology.
has a short plasma half-life,it is important that this
Dogs treatedwith mitotane,particularlywhen they
test isperformed4-6hours after thedrughasbeen
have been treated for several months, may develop
administered.
acute signs of hypoadrenocorticism(see below).Oc-
casionally,theremay be evidence ofhyperkalaemia
If thepost-ACTH cortisol concentration is<20
andhyponatraemia.Shouldthisoccur,treatmentshould
nmol/i,trilostaneisstoppedfor48hours and then
bestopped and anACTH stimulation test should be
re-introduced at a lower dose.
performed:post-ACTH cortisol would beexpected to
If the post-ACTH cortisol concentration is
be<20nmol/l.
between20nmol/l and120nmol/land thepatient
Plasma 17-OHP concentrations can be used to
appears tobe clinicallywell controlled then the
monitortreatmentofatypical HACcaseswhenmitotane
dose is unaltered.
is used.
If thepost-ACTH cortisol concentration is>120
nmoli and the clinical signs appear poorly
Othermedical therapy
controlled then the dose of trilostanemayneed
In some countries,ketoconazoleis used for the treat-
to beincreased to twice daily administration.
ment ofPD-HAC,particularly in those dogs thatcan-
An ACTH stimulation test can be performed 24
not tolerate mitotane.Ketoconazole therapy is
hours after trilostane administration(i.e.just
monitored in a similar fashion to that described for
before the next trilostane administration)to
trilostane.Ketoconazole can cause hepatotoxicity:
investigate this.If thepost-ACTHcortisol
increases in liverenzymes indogs treatedwith this
concentration is>250nmol/l at24hours
drug areacauseforconcernandrequirewithdrawal
after trilostane,but the post-ACTH cortisol
of the drug in most cases.
concentration4hoursafter trilostane is<120
In the USA and some other countries,selegiline
nmol/i then an increase to twice daily dosing
(L-deprenyl) is licensed for the treatment of PD-HAC.
is justified.
The current evidence indicates that there is minimal
If anACTH stimulation test isperformed
endocrinological improvement but some clinical im-
inadvertently at timesother than4-6hours
provement;nolaboratorymonitoringisrecommended
after dosing with trilostane,the post-ACTH
(Reusch et al.,1999).
cortisolconcentrationshouldbe>20nmol/l
and<250nmol/l.
Once the clinical conditionof the animal and the
Feline hyperadrenocorticism
dose rate have been stabilized, the dog should be
examinedand anACTH stimulation testperformed
Adrenal diseasesin the catare uncommon compared
every 3-6 months. Serum biochemistry should be
with those in the dog:HAC is the most common of
performedperiodically to check forhyperkalaemia
these,but hasbeenreported in less than 100 cats.
(whichmayreflect low aldosterone concentrations in
Primary hyperaldosteronism (or Conn's Syndrome)
some,but not all, cases).
is also reported in cats (see later).Most (80%) cats
Inatypical HACtreated with trilostane,measure-
with confirmed HAC have concurrent diabetes
ment of 17-OHPisnot helpful inmonitoring since the
mellitus.Aswellas showing mostof the same signs
concentrations are massively increased.This is pre-
of HAC as dogs, many also have hyperfragile skin.
Hyperglycaemia(about 80%)and hypercholesterol-
hydroxypregnenolone,which would be expected to
aemia （about 50%) are the most common serum
increasebecause of inhibitionof 3B-hydroxysteroid
biochemistry abnormalities. High serum ALP activity
dehydrogenase by trilostane.
is uncommon,developing inonly a third of cats.Urine
Itis importanttonote that manyaspectsoftrilostane's
SG is generally <1.020.
use incanine HAC are stillunder investigation and,
TheACTH stimulationtestisthemostusefultestfor
therefore,the aboverecommendations are likely to
the diagnosis of feline HAC.However,as the peak
change.
responseincatsisvariable,samplesmustbeobtained
at 30,60 and120minutes after the intravenous injec-
Mitotane
tion of 0.125mg ACTH(0.25 mg if>5kg)(Schoeman et
Mitotane is themainstay of medical management of
al.,20oo).The sensitivityof thetestisvariablyreported
PD-HAC in most countries.lIt is a cytotoxic agent that
from 50-80%. It can also give a positive result in
principally causes necrosis of the zona fasciculata
cats withnon-adrenal diseases.As in the dog,values
and zonareticularisof the adrenal glands.
>600 nmol/l are very suggestive of HAC.
285
Chapter 18 Laboratory diagnosis of adrenal diseases
The low dose(0.015mg/kg)dexamethasone sup-
Spontaneoushypoadrenocorticism(=idiopathic
pression test isnot considered tobe useful in the
hypoadrenocorticism)
diagnosisof felineHACasfalsepositive testresults
Mitotane-induced hypoadrenocorticism
Trilostane-induced hypoadrenocorticism
are seen in manycatswith non-adrenalillness.Dexa-
methasone suppression testing using ahigher dex-
latrogenic hypoadrenocorticism (due to sudden
amethasonedosage(0.1mg/kg)hasbeen advocated
withdrawal ofglucocorticoid therapy).
as a screening test with a reported sensitivity of 78%.
Serumcortisolvaluesinall normal cats andmostcats
Different causes of hypoadrenocorticism are asso-
withnon-adrenal illness aresaid tobe suppressed
ciated with varying degrees of mineralocorticoid and
withthisdose,whilstallcatswithAD-HACandmost
glucocorticoid deficiency.
cats with PD-HAC fail to suppress cortisol at either
3-4or8hours.However,too fewcaseshavebeen
Investigation of hypoadrenocorticism
evaluatedto assess accuratelythesensitivityand
Many cases are presented with signs that could be
specificity.The higher dose dexamethasone sup-
suggestive of hypoadrenocorticism, such as lethargy,
pression test is used incats as a screening test,not
weight loss, poor appetite, vomiting, diarrhoea or pi-
fordistinguishingbetweenadrenalandpituitaryforms
sodic collapse(Figure 18.11).Figure 18.12 summa-
ofthe disease.
rizes the approach to a suspected case of canine
A combined dexamethasone suppression/ACTH
hypoadrenocorticism.
stimulation test protocol wassuggested foruse in cats:
however,it hasnot been sufficiently investigated to
Routine biochemistry,haematologyandurinalysis
recommend its routine use.
Thevalueofanytestfordistinguishingreliably
Aroutinebloodprofileoftenprovidesthefirstindication
between pituitary- and adrenal-dependent forms of
that hypoadrenocorticism may be present. The com-
mon biochemical,haematological and urinalysis find-
feline HAChas not been assessed.A very high dose
(1.0 mg/kg) dexamethasone suppression test or meas-
ings in cases of hypoadrenocorticism are shown in
urement ofbasal endogenous ACTH concentration
Figure 18.13.
have been used to differentiate catswithPD-HACfrom
those with AD-HAC. Normal to high plasma ACTH
Body
Examples
Similarities in presenting
levels support a diagnosis of PD-HAC,whereas low
concentrations are consistent with AD-HAC.
system/organ
signs
The urinary corticoid:creatinine ratio is not widely
Kidney
Decompensated
Dehydration
used in cats butis likely tobesensitive if non-specific.
renal failure
Polyuria/polydipsia
Urine should always be collected at home (not in
Vomiting
the hospital environment) as all stressful situations
Anorexia
willelevate the urinary corticoid:creatinine ratio.A
valueof less than10x10-probablyrulesout hyper-
Exocrine
Acute pancreatitis
Abdominal pain,
cortisolaemia(Rochlitz,1999).Almost all cats with
pancreas
dehydration
HACwill bepositive,but false positive testresults
Anorexia
Vomiting
may be seen frequently in cats with,non-adrenal
illness.lmportantly,hyperthyroid cats haveincreased
Diarrhoea
ratios.Recent results suggest that laboratory extrac-
Gastrointestinal
Infectious enteritis
Anorexia
tionof corticoids may improve the diagnostic effi-
tract
(various)
Vomiting
ciencybut largerscalestudiesareneeded before this
Haemorrhagic diarrhoea
canberecommended.
There are no reliable reports of using ACTH stimu-
Hepatobiliary
Hepatitis (toxic,
Vomiting
lation teststomonitor the treatment of largenumbers
tract
inflammatory)
Diarrhoea
of catswith HAC and so target values have to be
Neuromuscular
Myaesthenia
Episodic weakness
extrapolated from dogs(see above).Cats havebeen
system
gravis
Regurgitation/vomiting
successfully treatedwith trilostane using these extra-
polated values(Neiger et al.,2004).
Endocrine
Hypothyroidism
Bradycardia
system
Dullness
Cardiovascular
Third degree heart
Bradycardia
Canine hypoadrenocorticism
system
block
Episodic collapse
Haemopoietic
Anaemia
Pale mucous membranes
Hypoadrenocorticism is defined as the absolute lack
Collapse
system
ofadrenocortical steroids.This includes a lack of
mineralocorticoids and glucocorticoids.Isolated defi-
Systemic
Neoplasia(e.g.
Many!
ciencies inglucocorticoids have beenreported but not
disease
lymphoma)
isolated deficiencies inmineralocorticoids(Dunn and
Herrtage, 1998). Canine hypoadrenocorticism can be
Conditions that mayresemble canine
classified according to theunderlying cause,of which
18.11
hypoadrenocorticism in at least two major
fourare of importance:
presenting signs.
286
Chapter18Laboratorydiagnosisofadrenal diseases
Suspect hypoadrenocorticism
Episodic collapse
Review history
Recurrent Gl signs
Weightloss
Nopreviousrelevant
medical history
Lethargy
Response to non-specific therapy
Tachycardia
Full clinical examination
Heart rate
Hydration status
Urineoutput
Hypoadrenocorticism not
excludedbutlesslikely
Inparticular
Routine biochemistryand haematology
Normal Nat and K+
REMEMBERELECTROLYTES!
Also sometimes
Calcium ↑,glucose ↓,albumin ↓,
Hypoadrenocorticism not
Total WBC and differential
excludedbutmuchlesslikely
Hypoadrenocorticism suspected
RBCcount↓
Considerotherdifferential
ACTH stimulation test
diagnoses (see Figure 18.15)
Post-ACTH cortisol
Post-ACTH cortisol
>80nmol/l
<40nmol/I
Post-ACTH cortisol concentration
Hypoadrenocorticism
40-80nmol/thenconsider
Hypoadrenocorticism
excluded
confirmed
18.12
A summary of the investigation of canine hypoadrenocorticism. It is not necessarytoperform allthese investigations
Biochemistry:Incasesofcaninehypoadrenocorticism
Test
Abnormality
biochemistrywill nearly always(>90%) demonstrate
Biochemistry
hyperkalaemiaandhyponatraemia,withhypochlorae-
miabeingseen inabout80%ofcases(Petersonetal.,
Azotaemia
Increasedurea and creatinine(canbevery high)
1996).Whilst hypoadrenocorticism is the commonest
Electrolytes
Increased potassium
causeofacombinationofreducedsodiumand in-
Decreased sodium
creasedpotassium,individual changes are associated
Decreased chloride
witha widerrange of conditions(Figure18.14;seealso
Decreased sodium:potassiumratio(<27:1)
Chapter 8).
Calcium
May be increased (however usually<4.0 mmol/)
Manylaboratoriesquote thesodium:potassium
ratio.Whilstareducedsodium:potassiumratio(<27:1)
Glucose
Maybedecreased(onlyrarelyclinically signifiant)
issuggestiveof hypoadrenocorticism,itisnotdiagnos-
Albumin
Maybe decreased
ticofthecondition.Thisisparticularlytruewhenoneof
the electrolytesiswithin itsreferencerange.Aratioof
Haematology
<20:1 is very suggestive of hypoadrenocorticism but is
Red blood cells
Normallymild non-regenerative anaemia
Maybemasked byhaemoconcentration
Maybesevereduetohaemorrhage
Metabolic
Occasionallysevere duetoconcurrent immune-
mediated haemolytic anaemia
Hypoadrenocorticism
Severegastrointestinaldisease withhaemorrhageintointestines
White blood cells
Total count isnormal to low
Renaldisease
Lymphocytesmaybe increased
Chylothorax/pleural effusions
Neutrophillymphocyteratiodecreased
Pregnancy(+vomiting)
Eosinophilia
Drugs/poisons
Urinalysis
Trilostane
Specificgravity
Usually low normal(1.015-1.030)
Mitotane
SG maynot increase in dehydrated dogs with
Combinationtherapyforcardiacdiseaseespeciallyif combinedwith
hypoadrenocorticism and it canbe difficult to
sodium-restricted diet
distinguish prerenal azotaemia from intrinsic renal
failure
18.14
Differential diagnosis of combined
hyponatraemia and hyperkalaemia.Conditions
18.13
Common abnormalitiesinroutine laboratory
that may cause isolatedhyponatraemia or hyperkalaemia
profiles of dogs with hypoadrenocorticism.
are listed in Appendix 1.
287
Chapter18Laboratorydiagnosisofadrenal diseases
not very sensitive.Absolute electrolyte concentrations
Anaemia ispresent in about one quarter of dogs at
aremorereliableindicatorsofhypoadrenocorticism.
presentationbuttheactualincidencemaybemuch
Cases ofhypoadrenocorticism with normal sodium
higherasit will oftenbemasked byconcurrentdehydra-
and potassium concentrations are veryrare.In such
tion.Usually this anaemia is mild, normocytic and
cases,further testing (ACTH stimulation test) should
normochromic.However,in somecases,gastrointest-
alwaysbeperformedbeforestarting therapy.
inal haemorrhage or concurrent immune-mediated
Biochemistrymayalsodemonstrate azotaemia(90%
haemolyticanaemia mayproduce amoresevere anae-
miawithevidenceofregeneration.
and hypoalbuminaemia (6%)(Peterson et al.,1996).
Metabolic acidosis is often evident on blood gasanaly-
Urinalysis:Urinalysismay often demonstrate a nor-
sis.None of these changes is as specific orassensitive
mal tolow normal SG.This can make the distinction
as thechangesinelectrolyteconcentrations.Azotaemia
between hypoadrenocorticism and renal failure diffi-
maybevery severe and iscaused byprerenal factors
cult in the azotaemic patient. Clinical history and
(predominantlyhypovolaemia,butgastrointestinalhaem-
laboratory findingsmust be combined tomake this
orrhage maycontribute to the increased urea concen-
distinction(Figure 18.15).Decompensated chronic
tration).Dehydration mayalsomask some ofthe changes
renalfailurewill onlyrarelybe associatedwith hyper-
noted above.Seebelowand Chapter 11 for further
kalaemia and/orhyponatraemia.Acuterenal failure,
discussionof how tomake the important distinction
whilst associated with electrolytechanges,can usu-
betweenrenal failureandhypoadrenocorticism.
allybe distinguished from acute hypoadrenocorticism
by the reduction in urinary output and the short
Haematology:Haematologyprofilesofdogswith
clinicalhistory.Moreover,withadequatefluidtherapy,
hypoadrenocorticismarecharacterizedmorebythe
the increased urea and creatinine concentrations
absence of abnormalities than their presence.In many
ofa dog with hypoadrenocorticismwillreturn to
ill (and therefore stressed) dogs neutrophil numbers
normal within24hours,whereas inrenal failure the
are highnormaltoincreased,whereaseosinophilsand
urea and creatinine concentrationswill take longer
lymphocytes are low normal to decreased.
In
to recover (if at all).
hypoadrenocorticismwhitebloodcellcountsarelower
Themostpractical implication of thisdiscussionis
thanwould be expectedfora sickdog andsometimes
thatanydog,butparticularlyyoungerdogs,shouldhave
there may be areverse stress leucogram (low normal)
theirelectrolytesmeasuredwhenpresentedwithsigns
numbers of neutrophils with increased numbers of
that are suggestive of renal failure to avoid missing the
lymphocytes and eosinophils).
alternative diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism.
Acute(oliguric) renal failure
Chronicrenal failure
Hypoadrenocorticism
History
Weight loss
No
Yes
Yes
PU/PD
Can develop later
Yes-often severe
Uncommon and usually mild
Othersmitingdiarhoea,collape
Yes
Yes
Yes
depression,recent'stressful'incident
Clinicalexamination
Urine output
Poor ornone
Excessive
Normal or mildly increased
Uraemic glossitis
Uncommon
Rare
Never reported
Normal heart rate
Tachycardia more likly
Tachycardiamorelikely
Bradycardia possible
Pale mucous membranes
No
Likely
Likely
Clinical pathology
Urine specificgravty
>1.030
Between1.008and 1.020
Variablebut canbe as low as1.008
Hyperkalaemia
Possible
Normo-orhypokalaemic
Verycommon
Hyponatraemia
Possible
No
Very common
Increased urea
Yes
Yes
Yes
Urea>40mmol/l
Rare
Common
Occasional
Increased creatinine
Yes
Yes
Yes
Increased calcium
Rare
Rare
About30%
Increased phosphate
After4days
Verycommon
About30%
Stress'leucogram
Yes
Yes
No
Anaemia
No
Yes
Yes
18.15
Summary of the differencesbetween hypoadrenocorticismandrenal failure,one of itscommonest differential
chronicrenal failuredue to juvenilenephropathies.Categoriesarealsonotmutuallyexclusive,orexample,acute
decompensation may occur with chronicrenal failure.
288
Chapter18
3Laboratorydiagnosisofadrenaldiseases
Specificendocrinetests
timeofexamination.Aldosteroneshouldalsobe
It isnotacceptabletodiagnosehypoadrenocorticism
measured incaseswithpost-ACTH cortisol concen-
on thebasisofa therapeutictrial of steroids.Thereare
trationsbetween40and80nmol/l.Thenormalaldo-
several conditions that maypresent with clinical signs
steronevaluespost-ACTH stimulation liebetween
similar to those seen in hypoadrenocorticism (and/or
100and 600pmol/l (Willard et al,1987;Dunn and
electrolyte changes),which will also improve signifi-
Herrtage,1998).
cantly with glucocorticoid administration.
Testsformonitoring therapy
ACTH stimulation test:TheACTH stimulation test
Urea and creatinine should bemonitored initially to
isa highly sensitive and specific test for hypo-
ensure adequatehydration status.Serum electrolytes
adrenocorticism(>95%inboth cases)(Peterson et
should initiallybecheckedweeklyforthefirstmonth,
al,1996) and should be performed in all suspected
then monthly.Once theregimenhasbeen adapted to
cases.It is not suggested that an ACTH stimulation
the individual patient then thefrequencyofrechecks
testisperformedoneverycasethat ispresented
can bereduced to every3months.Manydogs require
withrecurrentvomiting and diarrhoea,butaroutine
increaseddosesoffludrocortisoneduring their lives
haematology andbiochemistryprofile(includingelec-
andsosomeformofelectrolytemonitoring isadvis-
trolyte analysis) should be obtained,looking for evi-
able.Relyingonclinical signs is arelativelypoor
dence of hypoadrenocorticism.For cases with a
indicatorof thequalityofcontrolachieved.
greaterrange of the clinical signs of hypoadreno-
corticism(e.g.vomiting,diarrhoea,weight loss and
episodiccollapse) the clinician mayelect toperform
an ACTH stimulation test at the same time as the
Feline hypoadrenocorticism
routine laboratoryprofiles.The test is performed as
Hypoadrenocorticism hasbeenreported infewerthan
described inFigure 18.6.
20 cats. The largest series (of 10) suggested that the
Note thathypoadrenocorticism cannot be diag-
clinicopathological changes seen incats with
nosedusing the LDDST.
The diagnosis is confirmed if the post-ACTH corti-
hypoadrenocorticism are similartothoseseenindogs
(Peterson et al.,1989). The sodium:potassium ratio is
sol concentration is<40nmol/l. Howeverasmallper-
particularly unreliable in cats,and is decreased by
centageofcasesofhypoadrenocorticismwithclassical
several otherconditions such asgastrointestinal dis-
laboratory abnormalitiesand consistentclinical signs
eases and body cavity effusions.
may havepost-ACTH cortisol concentrations as high
as80nmol/(seeFigure18.7).Notethatifa supranormal
result(500-800nmol/l) isobtained thisisunlikely to
indicatehyperadrencorticismbutratherthemetabolic
Otheradrenal diseases
stressof another illness that more closelyresembles
hypoadrenocorticism in its presentation.
Hyperaldosteronism(Conn's syndrome)
As discussed above,the test can be influenced by
Severalexamplesoffunctional adrenal tumoursthat
the administrationofexogenous glucocorticoids.Hydro-
release aldosterone havebeenreported incats(Flood
cortisone and prednisolone cross react in the assay
et al.,1999),and similartumours havebeenreported
and thereforegive false increases.Other glucocorti-
in dogs.
coids,suchasdexamethasone,donotcrossreactbut
Themajorlaboratoryfindingishypokalaemia,and
may suppress theresponse.The duration and dose of
associatedcervical ventroflexion isseen in most af-
such therapywill determine the degree of suppression
fectedcats.Metabolicalkalosisand hypertensionmay
of the response. Sometimes clinicians are presented
alsobe seenin these cases.Alkalosisrarelyrequires
with suspected cases of hypoadrenocorticism that
specifictreatment,buthypertension,if found,should
havebeen given a single doseofdexamethasone the
be treated.Electrolytes should continue to be moni-
previousevening.In such circumstances,it isprudent
tored during treatment
to support the animal with fluid therapy for 24 hours
Basalaldosterone isoftenincreased>600pmol/l.
beforeperforming an ACTHstimulation test.lt is highly
However, in equivocal cases, ACTH stimulation tests
unlikely that the ACTH stimulation test will be suffi-
shouldbeused todemonstrate an inappropriate al-
ciently suppressed to give a false positiveresult for
dosterone response.Normal values have notbeen
hypoadrenocorticism36hours afterasingledoseof
published forpost-ACTH aldosterone concentrations
dexamethasone.Prednisolone should not be given
in cats.However,from extrapolation from dogs a
during the 24 hours before an ACTH stimulation test as
valueof>600pmol/l wouldberegardedassuggestive
it may crossreact with cortisol in the assay.
of hyperaldosteronism.
Measurementof aldosterone:In some cases of
Phaeochromocytomas
hypoadrenocorticismit isvaluabletomeasurethe
Thelaboratorydiagnosisofaphaeochromocytoma is
response ofaldosteronetoACTH stimulation.Indogs
complicatedbytherapidbreakdownof thevasoactive
withnormal electrolytes,measurementofaldoster-
amines by plasma enzymes.Tests for adrenaline
onewilldistinguishbetween truehypocortisolism
metabolites inurine collected over 24hourshavebeen
anddogswithamineralocorticoiddeficiencythat
described;however,referencerangeshavenotbeen
hasnotproduced electrolyte abnormalities at the
established forveterinarypatients.
289
Chapter18Laboratorydiagnosisofadrenal diseases
Case examples
Case 1
Signalment
Biochemistry(continued)Result
Reference interval
PyrenneanMountainDog,male,weighing57kg.
ALP(IU/I)
278
0-230
History and clinical findings
GGT (IU/)
10
Non-pruriticalpeciaof18monthsdurationMorerecentlyprogressive
0-20
polyuria/polydipsia(approximately00m/k/day)polphagiaandmild
Cholesterol (mmol/)
11.7
2.0-7.0
loss of muscle mass.
No weight loss orgain,
What abnormalities are present?
and good exercise tol-
Haematology
erance.Clinicalexami-
nation demonstrated
Eosinopenia
abnormal skin thinning,
Lymphopenia
comedones,lossofskin
Monocytosis.
elasticity anda pot-bel-
Biochemistry
liedappearancewitha
Mildly increased ALP and ALT
pendulous prepuce.
Mildly increased glucose
Increased cholesterol.
Clinical pathology data
How would you interpret these results and
Haematology
Result
what are the likelydifferential diagnoses?
Reference interval
The history and appearance of the dog are sggestive of an endocrin-
RBC(x1012/)
7.99
5.5-8.5
pathy,pecificallyhyperadrenocorticism.Lymphopeniamonocytsis
Hb (g/dl)
17.9
12-18
corticosteroids,althoughneutrophilia isnot present.
HCT (I/)
0.47
0.37-0.55
The most specificchange on theroutinebiochemistry is thein-
MCV (fl)
60
60-77
creased cholesterol which is consistent with a number of endocrino-
MCH(pg)
pathies (diabetesmelitushypothyroidism and hyperadrenocorticism)
22.4
19.5-24.5
as wellas some liver diseases.Postprandial effectsmight also cause
MCHC (g/dl)
37.6
32-37
increased cholesterol.
WBC(x10°/)
11.2
6-17
Thevery slightlyincreased glucose concentrationisconsistentwith
stressandeffectivelyexcludesdiabetemelitus.
Neutrophils (segmented)
7.2
3-11.5
ThemildincreasesinALTandALPare verynon-specificandcould
(x10%/)
beduetalmstanyystmimtabolicnlammatoryoxicorlasti
Neutrophils (band) (x 10%/)
0-0.3
condition as wellas any hepatopathy.
Hyperadrenocorticismisthemost likelydifferential diagnosis.
Lymphocytes (x10%/)
0.45
1-4.8
What further testswouldyou recommend?
Monocytes(x10%/)
3.5
0.2-1.5
ACTH stimulation test
Eosinophils(x10°/1)
0.05
0.1-1.3
Lowdose dexamethasone test (if ACTH stimulation test negative)
Basophils(x10°/)
0
0
Combined T4 and TSH measurement.
Platelets(x10%/)
381
175-500
Endocrinology
ResultReference interval
Total T4 (nmol/)
12
15-45
Result
Reference interval
TSH (ng/ml)
Biochemistry
0.44
690-0
Sodium (mmoll)
144
Cortisol pre ACTH (nmol/l)
45
50-250
135-155
Potassum(mmoll)
4.0
3.5-5.8
Cortisol post ACTH (nmoll)
254
<400
Chloride(mmol/l)
109
95-115
Cortisol basal(nmol/l)
31
50-250
3.3-5.5
Cortisol 3hourpost dex(nmoll)
34
Glucose(mmoll)
6.1
<40
Urea (mmol/l)
2.5-8.5
Cortisol 8hourpost dex(nmol)
34
<40
3.3
Creatinine(μmol/)
91
45-155
How would you interpret these results and
Calcium(mmol/l)
2.6
2.3-3.0
what are the likely differential diagnoses?
1.3-1.9
TheACTH stimulation testiswithinreferencelimits.Thelowdose
Inorganicphosphate
1.45
(mmol/l)
dexamethasone suppressiontest isdifficult to interpret.Theabsolute
valuesarebelowthenormalreferencerangeforcortisolthroughouthe
TP(g/)
57
50-78
assay.Howeverthereisnosuppressionof thecortisolfollowingdexam
Albumin (g/)
30
25-35
ethasoneadministration.Thispatternmaybeconsistentwithanadrenal
tumourbutpersistentadrenalsuppressionorfailuretoinjectthedexa-
Globulin(g/l)
27
25-40
methasone properly are alsopossible interpretations.
ALT(IU/)
128
0-90
Case 1continues
290
Chapter 18
Laboratorydiagnosisofadrenal diseases
Case 1 continued
Trial therapywithtrlostaneormitotane（butmaybeinappropriate
The lowtotal thyroxine concentrationandnormalTSHconcentra-
and potentially hazardous for the dog.
tionareconsistentwiththscallesickethyrodsynromeorlow4
2months lateranACTHstimulationtest andalowdosedexametha-
state ofmedical llness,see Chapter17)
sone suppressiontestwereperformedand theresultsof bothwere
What further testswould you recommend?
diagnostic of hyperadrenocorticism:
Asthisdgsstillilavrarenrtimstthat
specificbutmoresensitive thanthe standardACTHstimulation test is
Endocrinology
Result
Referenceinterval
probablythebestoptionMeasurementof17-hydroxyprogesteronewas
Cortisol pre ACTH (nmoll)
undertakenonpre-andpost-ACTHsamples.Theresultswere1.0ng/ml
146
50-250
pre-ACTHand4.6ng/mlpost-ACTH.Theseresultsarewithinreference
Cortisol post ACTH (nmol/l)
610
<400
rangesandhyperadrenocorticismisnotconfirmed.Cortisolmeasuredon
Endogenous ACTH (pg/ml)
<5
20-80
thesame sampleswas117and459nmoll,respectively.Note thepost
ACTHcortisolconcentrationisnowgreaterthan400nmoll(whichisthe
Cortisol basal (nmoll)
147
50-250
uppelimi o theencerangeistillssthan0molwhicis
Cortisol3hourpost dex
135
<40
thelevelat whichhyperadrenocorticismcouldbeconfirmedin thiscase.
(nmol/l)
What advice would you give the owner?
Cortisol 8hourpost dex
117
<40
There several possible coursesof action:
(nmol/l)
Wait for1-2monthsand thenrepeatheACTHstimulationtestand
EndogenousACTHlevelsareconsistent withanadrenaltumourMedi-
or lowdosedexamethasone test
caltherapywassuccessfulincontrollingtheclinicalsignsforyearsTh
Diagnosticimaging （looking foranadrenal tumour withultrasonog-
dogdiedofunrelatedcausesandatpost-mortemexaminationaunilat-
raphyandthenlooking forapituitarytumourwithMRIorCT)
eral adrenalmasswas found withno evidence ofmetastasis.
Case 2
Signalment
4-year-old female Standard Poodle.
Biochemistry
Result
Reference interval
History and clinical findings
Chloride (mmoll)
117
95-115
2monthisrhagandda
Glucose(mmoll)
4.2
3.3-5.5
titeClinicalexaminationrevealedthatthedogwasalittlethinandwas
Urea (mmol/l)
20.7
2.5-8.5
generally weak.Mucous membranes were dry but pink.Noother
Creatinine(umol)
184
45-155
abnormalities were detected (heartrate was 90perminute).
Calcium(mmoll)
Clinical pathology data
2.7
2.3-3.0
Inorganic phosphate
2.11
1.3-1.9
Haematology
Result
Referenceinterval
(mmol/l)
RBC(x1012/)
6.26
TP(g/)
5.5-8.5
62
50-78
Hb (g/dl)
14.4
Albumin (g/)
12-18
23
25-35
HCT(/)
Globulin (g/)
0.39
0.37-0.55
39
25-40
MCV(tl)
63
60-77
ALT(IU/I)
67
0-90
MCH(pg)
22.9
ALP(IU/)
45
0-230
19.5-24.5
MCHC(g/dl)
GGT(IU/)
36.3
32-37
5
0-20
WBC(x10%/)
Cholesterol(mmoll)
15.8
6-17
2.8
2.0-7.0
Neutrophils(segmented)
5.85
3-11.5
Urinalysis
(x10/)
Specific gravity
Neutrophils(band)(x10°/)
1.024
0
0-0.3
Dipstick analysis
Noproteinbloodglucoserkeones
Lymphocytes(x10%/)
7.43
1.0-4.8
pH=6.5
Monocytes(x10%/)
0.63
0.2-1.5
What abnormalities are present?
Eosinophils (x109/)
1.9
0.1-1.3
Haematology
Basophils(x10%/)
0
0
Eosinophilia
Platelets (x10%/)
364
175-500
Lymphocytosis.
Biochemistry
Film comment
Mild hypoalbuminaemia
Some of the lymphocytes appear to bereactive
Azotaemia
Hyperkalaemia
Mild hyperchloraemia
Biochemistry
Result
Reference interval
Hyperphosphataemia.
Sodium (mmol/l)
143
135-155
Urinalysis
Potassium (mmoll)
6.5
3.5-5.8
SG suggests concentrating abilty compromised.
Case 2 continues
291
Chapter18
Laboratorydiagnosisofadrenal diseases
Case 2 continued
hypoadrenocorticismResponsetofluidtherapywill beneededtofurther
Howwouldyou interpret theseresults and
assess therenal function.
what are the likely differential diagnoses?
Themoststrikinghaematologicalabnormalityislymphocytosislnfectious
diseasesparticularlyviralinfectionslymphoprolifeativediseasesand
What further testswouldyou recommend?
hypoadrenocorticismmayallproducethischangeTheincreasedeosi
AnACTHstimulationtestandpossiblymeasurementofendogenous
nophil count and theneutrophil count within the lowerpart of the
ACTH.
referencerange arealsoconsistent withhypoadrenocorticism.Theres
no anaemia (which mayocur inabout 30%of cases of hypoadreno-
Endocrinology
Result
Reference interval
corticism)althoughanaemiamaybemasked by dehydration.
There is a hyperkalaemia without hyponatraemia,with a
Cortisol pre ACTH (nmol/)
5
50-250
sodium:potassiumratioof 22（reference >27).The hyperkalaemia is
Cortisol post ACTH (nmoll)
<5
<400
consistentwithradenocorticmmfrmfrenalfar
rice poisoning and poor sample handling.
Endogenous ACTH (pg/ml)
259
20-80
Theaztamiissignificantwithrltivelyhighreathencrat
nine concentrationswhichiscommoninprerenalazotaemiaorwhere
The results of the ACTH stimulation test confirm thisasacase of
therisgatrointstiamorhagprerenalaztamiaresd
urineSGispctdhiinatamiafrnlriginsthn
indicates that this is a case of primary (i.e.adrenal-dependent)
expected.InthiscasetheurineSGisintermediateacommonfeatureof
hypoadrenocorticism.
References
Peterson ME,Ferguson DC,Kintzer PP andDruckerWD（1984)
Effectsof spontaneoushyperadrenocorticismon serum thyroid
hormoneconcentrationsinthedog.AmericanJournalof Veterinary
Chaanaif
Research45,2034-2038
Peterson ME,Greco DS and Orth DN （1989) Primary
hypoadrenocorticismintencats.Journal ofVeterinary Internal
hydroxyprogesteroneforthediagnosisofhyperadrenocorticism
Medicine3,55-58
indogs.VeterinaryRecord153,771-775
PetersonME,KemppainenRJandGravesTK(1988)Episodicbutot
DunnKJ and HerrtageME(1998)Hypocortisolaemia ina Labrador
retriever.JournalofSmallAnimalPractice39,90-93
thyroxine in the normal cat.(Abstract) American College of
DunnKJ,HertageMEandDunnJK(1995）UseofACTHstimulation
VeterinaryInternalMedicineScientificProceedings,721
tests tomonitor the treatment of canine hyperadrenocorticism.
PetersonME,KintzerPP andKass PH(1996)Pretreatment clinical
VeterinaryRcord37115
and laboratory findingsin dogswith hypoadrenocorticism：225
FloodSM,RandolphJF,GelzerARMandRefsalK（1999）Primary
cases(1979-1993).Journalof theAmericanVeterinaryMedical
hyperaldosteronismintwocats.Journalof theAmericanAnimal
Association208,85-91
Hospital Association35,411-416
Ramsey IKand Herrtage ME(1998)Theeffectofthyrotropinreleasing
GalacS,ooistraHS,TeskEandRijnberkA(1997）rinarycorticoid/
hormoneonthyrotropinconcentrationsineuthyroid,hypothyroid
hyperadrenocorticism and hyperadrenocorticism due to
InternalMedicine12,235
adrenocorticaltumourinthedog.VeterinayQuartrly19720
ReuschCEand Feldman EC(1991)Canine hyperadrenocorticism
GouldMBanEAMannionPAvansandrtagME
due to adrenocortical neoplasia.Pretreatmentevaluation of41
of endogenousACTH concentration and adrenal ultrasonographyto
dogs.JournalofVeterinaryInternalMedicine5,310
distinguishthe causeof caninehyperadrenocorticism.Joumalof
Reusch CE,Steffen T and Hoerauf A (1999)The efficacy of L-
SmallAnimal Practice42,113-121
Deprenylin dogswith pituitary-dependenthyperadrenocorticism.
HertageME(2004)Caninehyperadrenocorticism.In:BSAVAManual
JournalofVeterinaryInternalMedicine13,291-301
ofCanineandFlineEndocrinologyrdedndoonyand
RijnberkA,WeesAvandMolJA(1988)Assessmentof two testsfor
MEPetrsonp.5171SAVAublicationsGluester
thediagnosisofcaninehyperadrenocorticism.VeterinaryRecord
HurleyKJ and Vaden SL(1998) Evaluation ofurine protein content in
122,178-180
dogswithpituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism.Journalof
RisticJMEamseyKathM,EvansHJandHrrtagME(）
theAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation212,369-373
The useof 17-hydroxyprogesterone in the diagnosis of canine
Kaplan AJ,Peterson ME and Kemppainen RJ (1995)Effects of
hyperadrencorticism.JournalofVeterinaryInternalMedicine16,
disease on the results of diagnostic tests for use in detecting
433-439
hyperadrenocorticismindogs.JournaloftheAmericanVeterinary
RochlitzI（1999) Use of urinary cortisol to creatinine ratios and
MedicalAssociation207,445451
behavioural measures to monitor the adaption of cats to new
KemppainenRJandSartinJL(1984) Evidence forepisodicbut not
environments.(Abstract)BSAVACongressProceedings,306
circadianactivityinplasmaconcentrationsofadrenocorticotrophin,
SchoemanJP,EvansHJ,ChildsDandHerrtageME(20oo)Cortisol
cortisoland thyroxine indogs.JournalofEndocrinology103,
response to two diferentdosesof intravenous syntheticACTH
219-226
(tetracosactrin)inoverweightcats.Journal ofSmallAnimal
Practice41,552-557
200dogswithpituitary-dependenthyperadrenocorticism.Journal
ofVeterinaryInternalMedicine5,182-190
measurements in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism(Abstract).
MontgomeryTMNesonRW,FedmanECRobertsonKandPolonsky
JournalofVeterinaryntenalMedicine7737
KS (2003) Basal and glucagon-stimulated plasma C-peptide
concentrationsnealthyogdogswithdabetesmelituand
on parathyroid hormone concentrations in dogs with
dogswithhyperadrenocorticism.JournalofVeterinaryInternal
hyperadrenocorticism(Abstract).Journal ofVeterinary Internal
Medicine10,116-122
Medicine17,737
NeigerR,Ramsey I,OConnorJ,HurleyKJ and MooneyCT(2002)
TeskeE,RothuizenJ,BruijineJandRijnberkA(1989)Corticosteroid
Trilostanetreatment of78dogswithpituitary dependent
induced alkaline phosphatase isoenzyme in the diagnosis of
hyperadrenocorticism.VeterinaryRecord150,799-804
caninehypercorticism.VeterinaryRecord12512-14.
NeigerRWittALNobleAandGermanAJ(2004）Trilostanethrapy
VonderenooistraandRjnberk9）flncftiry
cats.JournalofVeterinaryInternalMedicine18,160-164
VeterinaryIntrnalMdcin12,431-435
NelsonRW，FeldmanECandSmithMC(1988）Hyperadrenocorticism
WatsonPJandHerrtageME(1998) Hyperadrenocorticism insixcats.
in cats:seven cases(1978-1987).Journal of the American
JournalofSmallAnimalPractice39,175-184
VeterinaryMedical Association193,245-250
WillardMD,RefsalKandThacker E(1987) Evaluation of plasma
NormanEJ,Thompson HandMooney CT(1999) Dynamic adrenal
aldosteroneconcentrationsbeforeand afterACTHadministration
functiontestingineightdogswithhyperadrenocorticismassociated
in clinicallynormal dogs and indogswithvarious diseases.
withadrenocortical neoplasia.VeterinaryRecord144,551-554
AmericanJournalofVeterinaryResearch48,1713-1718
292
Laboratory evaluation of
the reproductive system
Gary England and Marco Russo
Introduction
hormone(FSH)and luteinizing hormone(LH) from the
pituitarygland;these,intun,stimulatefollicularrowh
Investigationofdiseasesof thereproductivetractre-
and theproductionofoestrogen.Araisedplasma
quiresa detailedbreedinghistoryanda thorough
oestrogen concentration initiates the onset of pro-
clinicalexamination,followedbycareful applicationof
oestrus,whenvulval oedema and a sanguineous dis-
a number of laboratory tests. The purpose of this
charge occur.The bitch is attractive to the male at this
chapter is to describe the logical application of labora-
time,butwill notaccept mating.Asubsequentdecline
tory testing to common clinical presentationsmet by
in oestrogen and slight increase in plasma progester-
veterinary surgeons in first opinion practice.
oneinitiatesoestrus,atwhichtime thebitchwillallow
mating.Duringoestrus,thevulva becomes lessoede-
matous and the discharge clearerand less sanguine-
Female
ous.The rise in plasma progesterone concentration is
theresultofpre-ovulatory luteinizationand thelow
Thebitch
oestrogen:progesterone ratio causes a surge in LH
The bitch differsfrommany of the domesticspeciesin
from the pituitary gland. Most ovulations begin 48
that she is monoestrous, with a long period of anoe-
hours after peak LH concentrations are reached.For-
strusbetweensuccessiveperiodsofoestrus,whether
mation of the corpus luteum occurs quickly afterovula-
she is pregnant or not.There does not seem to be a
tion.High concentrations of progesterone occur
seasonal cyclicityinmost breeds and the average
approximately7daysafterovulationand inmany
interval between oestrus periods is 7 months. Under-
bitches this signifies the end of standing oestrus.
standing the normal physiology is essential so that
There is a similar duration ofprogesterone secre-
these normalbut unusual,features of reproductive
tion in the non-pregnant and pregnant bitch (Figure
function are not confused with pathology.
19.1). The non-pregnant luteal phase is termed met-
oestrus or dioestrus (these terms are used synony-
Reproductive physiology
mously). In both pregnancy and non-pregnancy,
Puberty generally commences between 6 and 24
progesterone is associated with mammary enlarge-
monthsof age,oftenwithin1to6monthsof thebitch
ment.Progesterone production during the luteal phase
attainingadultheight andweight.Beforepuberty,and
ismaintained principallyby the luteotrophic effects of
during each period of anoestrus,theovaries appear
thepituitaryhormoneprolactin.
to be in a quiescent state.The onset of oestrus (or
During the non-pregnant luteal phase progester-
puberty) isinitiatedbyincreasedsecretionof gonado-
onecausesmammaryglandenlargement and,when
trophin releasing hormone (GnRH) from the hypo-
combined with anincrease inplasmaprolactin(caused
thalamusandasubsequentreleaseoffollicle stimulating
by a decline in plasma progesterone), results in the
19.1
Schematic
representationof
progesterone concentrations
Pregnant
during pregnant and non-
Non-pregnant
pregnant luteal phasesof the
bitch.
Proge
Parturition
30
15
15
30
45
60
90
105
120
135
Days inrelation toLHsurge
293
Chapter19Laboratoryevaluationof thereproductivesystem
secretionofmilkandinbehavioural changesthatare
Oestradiolconcentrationiselevated during thelast
typical of pregnancy.This latter condition,termed
weekofpregnancyandprolactinconcentrationisele-
vated inthelastthirdofpregnancyand throughout
inallnon-pregnantbitches.Insomecasesthe changes
lactation.Prolactinhasa luteotrophicactionsimilar to
aresevereandproducedmarked clinical signs,whilst
that in the bitch.There are no significant changes in
in others the signsmaybeunnoticed by the owner.
prolactin concentration during pseudopregnancy.
Following pregnancy or the non-pregnant luteal
Relaxin is present in the plasma from approxi-
phase, the quiescent anoestrus state resumes, and
matelyday25,and,similarlytorelaxinin thebitch,it
plasmaprogesterone concentrationsreturn tobase-
increasestopeakvaluesatapproximatelyday50,and
line values.The factors whichresult in cessation of
declinesafterparturition.
progesterone secretion are unknown.
Laboratorytechniques
The queen
Techniques available fortheinvestigation of reproduc-
Thequeenisapolyoestrousbreederin whichovulation
tivetractdisease includemeasurementofconcentra-
isinduced by coitus.Cyclicity in thequeen isinfluenced
tionsof thereproductivesexsteroids(progesterone,
byphotoperiod.
oestrogenandtestosterone)andluteinizinghormone
(LH),and cytologicalinvestigationofcollected fluidsor
Reproductive physiology
aspirates.Endocrinological evaluation frequentlyre-
Inmostqueens ovulationmust be induced by coitus(or
quiresradioimmunoassaysperformedinspecialistlabo-
artificial stimulation),although it may occur in a small
ratories, but enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays
numberof queens without an obvious stimulus. In the
(ELISAs) are available for the measurement of both
majority,copulation produces a rapid pituitary-medi-
progesterone and LH.All hormone determinations can
ated release of LH.Ovulation occurs onceLH concen-
be made in either plasma or serum.
tration exceeds a thresholdvalue.
Usually multiple copulations within a short time are
Failure to cycle
required to produce anLH surge of sufficient magni-
A common clinicalpresentationofbitches isa failure
tudetoinduceovulation.Progesterone concentration
to cycle.In many cases this may be an apparent
remainsbasal untilafter the mating-induced LH surge,
andincreasesafterovulation;peakvaluesarereached
because theownerhasnotobserved the signsof
1 month aftermating.In pregnant queensprogester-
oestrus.Elevated plasma progesterone concentra-
oneconcentrationdeclinesslowlyuntilday60 and
tions (>2.0 ng/ml (6.5 nmol/l)) demonstrate that ovu-
remainsrelativelylowforthelastweek,beforedeclin-
lation has occurred within the last 60 days(i.e.the
oestrus or puberty has been missed).
usually 64-68days frommating. In a queen that has
In the queen there isa normal period of anoestrus
beenmatedbutdoesnotbecomepregnant,progester-
during winter.Thisinfluences the timingof the onset
oneconcentrationisinitiallyidenticaltothatofearly
ofpuberty since most queensreachpubertyin the
pregnancybutthenrapidlyreturnstobasalvalues,with
spring.Cyclicitymaythereforecommenceat6months
thelutealphaselastingbetween30and45daysbefore
of age(or slightly less) forqueens born in the autumn,
the queen returns to oestrus (Figure 19.2).These
but queens born in spring often do notreachpuberty
queens are said tobe pseudopregnant,although the
until thenext springwhen they are 12months old.
only clinical sign is an absence of oestrus.Non-ovulat-
Vaginal cytologywillenablethedocumentationof
ing(non-mated orinadequately mated)queensdonot
normal cyclical activity.
havealutealphaseandreturn tooestrusafteran
In thosecaseswhereitisclearthat lackofoestrus
interval of approximately21days.Throughout preg-
isnottheresultof failureofobservationbytheowner,
nancy theprimary source of progesterone is the ovary,
failure to cycle may be primary (no oestrus before 24
and there does not appear tobe a significant contribu-
months,i.e.delayedpuberty)orsecondary(nooestrous
tion from the placenta.
activity within 12 months of a previous cycle,i.e.
19.2
Schematic
Pregnant
representation of
ratic
Pseudopregnant
progesterone concentrations
concentr
Non-mated-
inpregnant,pseudopregnant
and non-mated queens.
Oestrus
Parturition
Pregnancy
-10
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Days in relation to LH surge
294
Chapter19Laboratory evaluationof thereproductivesystem
prolongedanoestrus).Inmostcasesa specificdisease
Progesterone-producing ovarian cysts have also
processmayberesponsible,andcareful investigation
been described in the bitch and queen, producing
of the underlying cause is important for appropriate
prolonged interoestrous intervals and cystic endo-
treatment andprognosis.
metrial hyperplasia.The ovarian cysts may be identi-
fiedultrasonographicallyand the diagnosis confirmed
Delayedpuberty
by persistently elevated plasma progesterone concen-
Ingeneral,bitches thatdonotreachpubertyby21/2
trations.Hormone concentrations that remain on a
years of age are considered to have delayed puberty.
plateauoveraperiodof 6weekswould besuspicious,
Investigationinvolves evaluating housinganddiet(since
as in the normal luteal phase progesterone concentra-
poor environmental conditions and nutrition may be
tions decline during this time; plateau values for >8
associatedwithfailureto cycle),andclinicalexamina-
weeks would be diagnostic.
tiontoruleoutchronicdisease.Chromosomal abnor-
In some cases,ovarian neoplasms that produce
malitiesmaycause delayedpuberty andestablishing
eitherprogesteroneorandrogensresult ina failure to
the karyotype is keyto diagnosis. EDTA blood samples
return to cyclical activity. They may be diagnosed by
need tobe transported rapidly to thelaboratory.Nor-
serial estimation of plasma progesterone and testo-
mally there are 78chromosomes (77xx);common
sterone concentrations.
abnormalitiesincludeeitherabsence(77xO) oraddi-
tional chromosomes (79xxX, 79xxY) or, in some
Optimaltimetobreed
cases,mixed chromosome aberrations(78xx/78xY).
The most common cause of infertility in the bitch is
mating at an inappropriate time.In the queen,on the
(havinga small cranially positioned vulva and develop-
other hand, coitus is the trigger for ovulation, and the
ing clitoral enlargement at puberty).A smaller propor-
optimal mating timeisgenerally thought tobe thefirst
tion of bitches are phenotypically normal but the
few daysof oestrus.
abnormal complement ofsexchromosomesresults in
 Bitches ovulate approximately 12 days after the
ovarian hypoplasia orovarian dysgenesis.
onset of pro-oestrus;however,some normal bitches
There is litle information available for queens,
mayovulate asearly as5dayswhilst others ovulate as
although it is clear that chromosomal abnormalities
late as30 days after the onset of pro-oestrus.Many
can influence the onset of puberty in the same manner
breederstry toimposestandardmatingregimeson
as in the bitch.
days 10 and 12, but for many bitches this is not
appropriate. Careful monitoring of oestrus is important
Prolonged anoestrus
toestablishthetimeofovulationandthereforethemost
 Prolonged anoestrus in the bitch represents an inter-
appropriate timefor mating(Figure19.3).Observation
oestrous interval greater thananticipatedforthatpar-
of thebehaviourof thebitchhaslimitedvalue,and
ticular animal (usually more than 12 months from the
although there may be clear changes affecting the
previous cycle).In the queen it represents an animal
external genitalia (the onset of vulval softening,for
that doesnotresumecyclical activity afterwinter.
example,occurs1to2dayspriortoovulation),labora
There are several causesoffailure ofnormal
tory investigation canbe extremely useful.
cyclicity,including chronic systemic disease,drug-
inducedanoestrus(glucocorticoids,anabolicsteroids,
Hormone measurement
androgensandprogestogens)andhypothyroidism(see
Measurementofperipheralplasma concentrationsof
Chapter 17).Although hypothyroidism has been asso-
LH is a potentially useful method of determining the
ciated with prolonged anoestrus, the mechanism of
optimum time to mate, although assay kits are not
this abnormalityhasnotbeenfullyestablished.Follow-
always readily available.Plasma progesterone concen-
ing replacement therapy most bitchesreturn to oestrus
trationsbegintoincreasetowardsthe endofpro-oestrus
within 6 months, although a consistent relationship
at the time of the LH surge, so serial monitoring of
betweenthyroid disease andreproductivefunctionhas
plasma progesterone concentration allows the anticipa-
yet tobeestablished.
tion of ovulation (Figure 19.4).Progesterone may be
Period
Days from LH surge
Days from ovulation
Peridfptntialferitheeled
-3 to +7(or later)
-5 to+5(or later)
Periodofpotntialfertilizationofmatureocytes:theferilizationperiod
+4 to+6(or later)
+2to +4(or later)
Timeof oocytematuration(estimated）
+4to+5
+2to+3
Periodofeakferilityinbitchesofhigherilityatnaturalmating
0to +6
-2to+4
Prefered time formanaged breedingof natural serviceor freshsemeninsemination
+2to+6
Oto+4
Timeforcriticalmanagedbreedingorfrozensemenartificialinsemination
+4to+6
+2to+4
Periodofreducedferilitywithmatingsrinseminationslatenestrus
+7to+9
+5to+7
The timingof peakfertityinrelationshipto the dayof theLH surgeand dayof ovulationNote that dayOisnot
19.3
the same forboth:ovulation occurs 2 days aftertheLH surge.
295
Chapter19Laboratoryevaluationof thereproductivesystem
Day7(before LH surge)
Day of LH surge
Days 4-5 after LH surge(when
Days8-11after
oocytesmature)
LHsurge
Plasma progesterone (ng/ml)
<0.5
0.9-3.0
3.5-12
8.0-25
19.4
 Plasma progesterone concentrations in relationship to the fertile period of the bitch.
measured using ELISA test kitsdesigned forin-practice
fertile period canbepredicted by calculating the
useor in commercial laboratoriesusingradioimmu-
percentageofcornifiedoranuclearepithelialcells
noassay.Bothmethodshave been shown tobe useful
using a modified Wright-Giemsa stain. Breeding
forpredicting theoptimummating timein thebitch.
should be attempted throughout the period when
Breedingor insemination should beplanned be-
>80%of epithelial cells are anuclear (Figures 19.5
tween4and6daysafterprogesteroneconcentra-
and19.6).whilst this is a useful guide,somebitches
tionsexceed 2.0ng/ml(6.5nmol/l)(theconcentration
reachpeakvaluesofonly60%cornification,whilst in
typically observed at the time of the LH surge).Some
others theremaybe twopeaksofcornification.
reports suggest that breeding should commence
Neutrophils aregenerally absent from thevaginal
one day afterprogesterone concentrations exceed
smearduring oestrusbecause thekeratinized epithe-
8.0-10.0 ng/ml (25.0-32.0 nmol/),which is com-
lium is impervious to these cells. Their reappearance
monlyseen2daysafterovulationwhenoocytes
duringlateoestrusreflects thebreakdown of this
becomefertilizable.
epithelium.Thereturn of neutrophils to the vaginal
smearhasbeenused bysomeworkers as anindicator
Vaginal cytology
of thetimeofoptimumfertility.Typical changesin
Examinationofexfoliativevaginalepithelial cellsis
vaginal cytology are shown inFigure19.7.
frequently used to monitor the oestrous cycle. During
At the Guide Dogs for the Blind Association in the
pro-oestrus,increasedplasmaoestrogenconcentra-
UK,matingonthebasisofvaginal cytology wasfound
tions cause thickening of the vaginal mucosa, which
becomes a keratinized squamous epithelium.Sur-
bitchescomparedwith a similargroupmatedonlyon
facevaginalepithelial cellsmaybecollectedusing a
the basisof the onsetof pro-oestrus(England,1992)
saline-moistened swaborbyaspiration.Therelative
Whelping rates have been consistently maintained
proportionsof different typesofepithelial cellscanbe
above90%overa 10-yearperiod since the introduc-
used as a markerof the endocrine environment.The
tion of thisregime.
Early pro-oestrus
Pro-oestrus
Earlyoestrus
Oestrus
Feature
Anoestrus
Early metoestrus
Anuclear cells(%)
10
30
50
80
5
Erythrocytes
+++
++
Neutrophils
++
++++
Debris and mucus
++
++
+++
19.5
Periovulatory changes in the vaginal smear of bitches.
19.6
Changes in the
Ovulation
percentageof
100-
anuclearvaginal epithelial cells
inrelationtoovulationand the
peri-ovulatory changes in
progesterone concentration in
cells (%)
75
the bitch.
Progesterone
1
Anuclearcells
ntrati
Anuclear
50
25
-12
-10
8-
-6
-2
0
2
6
10
12
14
16
Days inrelation toLH surge
296
Chapter19
Laboratoryevaluationof thereproductivesystem
(a)
(b)
(ci)
(di)
dii)
19.7
epithelial cellswhich havea small volumeof cytoplasmcompared to the size of thenucleus.Themajorityof
cells are roughly circular in shape.Neutrophilsmay bepresent in small numbersbut are not evident in thisexample.
(b)Pro-oestrus.Thepredominant celltypes aresmallintermediate epithelial cells,whichhave an increasedvolume of
cytoplasm compared to the sizeof the nucleus.The cellsare irregular in shape and appear somewhat flattened with sharp
edges.Erythrocytes arepresent in large numbers.Neutrophils may be present in small numbers as in this sample.
() Oestrus.Thepredominantcelltypes arelarge intermediateepithelial cellsand anuclearepithelial cells,which havea
largevolume of cytoplasm compared to the sizeof thenucleus,and an absent nucleus,respectively.Thecells are two
dimensionallyflattened and arevery irregularin shape(oftenreferred to as'cornflake'cells).Erythrocytesarepresent in
small numbers.Neutrophils are absent from the smear.(d) Metoestrus.Thepredominant celltypes are large and small
intermediateepithelial cells.Large numbers of neutrophils are againpresent.Erythrocytesmaybepresent in smallnumbers.
(Diff-Quik stain;original magnification X400)
Abnormaloestrus
ovulation.Frequent matings are likely toproduce a
There are many presentations of abnormal oestrous
largerLHsurgeif theyoccuronthefirstorsecondday
cycles,including those that appearshorterorlonger
 of oestrus. Inappropriate mating regimes imposed by
thannormal,orwherethereisashortperiodbetween
thebreedermayresultinafailureofovulation.Thiscan
one cycle and thenext.Investigations involve careful
readilybedetectedby anabsenceofelevatedplasma
monitoring of each cycle,and vaginal cytology and
progesterone after the end of oestrus;queens that do
progesteronemeasurements areoften useful.
notovulategenerallyreturntooestruswithashort
interval whilst ovulating queens either enter pseudo-
Splitoestrus
pregnancy orbecomepregnant.
In bitches, a short interval between clinical signs of
Incasesofovulationfailureinthebitch,vaginal
oestrus is often described as a split oestrus. This
cytological changes are similar to thoseobserved in a
occursmostfrequentlyatpuberty,butcanoccuratany
normal cycle,although thereisa lessrapiddeclinein
age. After an initial phase of follicular growth and
anuclearcells and a smaller influxof neutrophils just
oestrogen secretion,the folliclesregress and signsof
priortotheendof thesignsofoestruscomparedwith
oestrus disappear. Vaginal cytology shows an initial
a normal oestrus.The accurate diagnosis is made by
(normal) progressive increase of anuclear cells,fol-
detectinganabsence of an increase inplasma proges-
lowedbya decline,usuallybeforemaximum cornifica-
teroneconcentration on serial samples.
tion isreached.Often there isonlyamaximumof 50%
anuclear cells.There is no increase in plasma proges-
Prolongedpro-oestrus or oestrus
terone.Usuallya second follicularphase appears2-12
Although unusual, some normal bitchesmay showpro-
weeks later. in some cases this may be repeated
oestrous oroestrous behaviour lasting up to 30 days or
several times until finally thebitchovulatesnormally.
more(forbitchesovulating30 days after the onset of
This syndrome is confusing since it may be thought that
pro-oestrus).These animals do not require treatment
thebitchhasfailedtoovulateorthatfertilizationwith
butcareful assessmentof theoptimummatingtime,
subsequent resorption/abortion has occurred.
mentof plasmaprogesterone.
Ovulationfailure
In some cases,however,there is an underlying
Ovulation failure is probably one of the most common
pathology. Oestrogen-secreting follicular cysts may
causesof infertilityin thequeen.Several matingsina
producepersistent oestrus.This is often inconvenient
short period oftime arenecessary to ensure that the LH
fortheownerandmayultimatelyleadtobonemarrow
surge occurring aftercoitus is of sufficient magnitudeto
suppression with anaemia,leucopenia and thrombo-
exceed the thresholdvaluenecessarytostimulate
cytopenia.In thesebitches there ispersistence of a
297
Chapter 19
Laboratoryevaluationof thereproductivesystem
Day7(before LH surge)
Day of LH surge
Days 4-5 afterLH surge (when
Days8-11after
oocytes mature)
LHsurge
<0.5
0.9-3.0
3.5-12
8.0-25
Plasma progesterone (ng/ml)
19.4
Plasma progesterone concentrations in relationship to the fertile period of the bitch.
measuredusingELISA test kitsdesigned forin-practice
fertileperiod can bepredictedby calculating the
useorincommercial laboratoriesusingradioimmu-
percentageofcornifiedoranuclearepithelialcells
noassay.Bothmethods havebeen shown tobeuseful
using a modified Wright-Giemsa stain. Breeding
for predicting the optimum mating time in the bitch.
should beattempted throughout theperiodwhen
Breeding or insemination should be planned be-
>80%ofepithelial cells areanuclear(Figures19.5
tween 4 and 6 days after progesterone concentra-
and 19.6).Whilst this is ausefulguide,some bitches
tions exceed2.0ng/ml(6.5nmol/l)(the concentration
reachpeakvaluesofonly60%cornification,whilst in
typically observed at the time of the LH surge). Some
others there maybe twopeaksof cornification.
reports suggest that breeding should commence
Neutrophils are generally absent from thevaginal
one day afterprogesterone concentrationsexceed
smear during oestrusbecause thekeratinized epithe-
8.0-10.0 ng/ml (25.0-32.0 nmol/l), which is com-
lium is impervious to these cells. Their reappearance
monlyseen2daysafterovulationwhenoocytes
during late oestrus reflects the breakdown of this
becomefertilizable.
epithelium.The return ofneutrophils to thevaginal
smearhasbeen used bysomeworkers as anindicator
Vaginal cytology
of the time ofoptimumfertility.Typicalchangesin
Examinationof exfoliativevaginal epithelial cells is
vaginal cytology are shown inFigure 19.7.
frequentlyused to monitorthe oestrous cycle.During
At theGuideDogsfor theBlindAssociationinthe
pro-oestrus,increasedplasma oestrogenconcentra-
UK,matingonthebasisofvaginalcytologywasfound
tionscause thickening of thevaginal mucosa,which
to increase thepregnancyrateand litter sizeof
becomes a keratinized squamous epithelium.Sur-
bitches comparedwitha similargroupmated only on
face vaginal epithelial cells may be collected using a
thebasis of the onset of pro-oestrus(England,1992).
saline-moistened swab orby aspiration.The relative
Whelping rates have been consistently maintained
proportions of different types of epithelial cells can be
above 90% over a 10-year period since the introduc-
usedasa markerof the endocrineenvironment.The
tion of thisregime.
Feature
Anoestrus
Early pro-oestrus
Pro-oestrus
Earlyoestrus
Oestrus
Earlymetoestrus
Anuclear cells(%)
10
30
50
80
5
Erythrocytes
+++
++
Neutrophils
++++
++
+
Debris and mucus
+++
++
+++
++
19.5
Periovulatory changes in thevaginal smear of bitches
19.6
Changes in the
Ovulation
percentage of
anuclearvaginal epithelial cells
100-
inrelationtoovulationand the
peri-ovulatory changes in
progesterone concentration in
Progesterone
thebitch.
Anuclearcells
50-
0
25
+0
-10
8-
6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
-12
16
Days in relation to LH surge
296
Chapter 19
Laboratoryevaluationofthereproductivesystem
(a)
(b)
（ci)
(dii)
Exfoliative vaginal cytology from bitches.(a)Anoestrus.Thepredominant cell types are small parabasal
19.7
epithelial cells,which have a smallvolume of cytoplasm compared to the sizeof thenucleus.The majority of
(b)Pro-oestrus.Thepredominant celltypes aresmallintermediate epithelial cells,whichhave an increasedvolume of
large volume of cytoplasmcompared to the sizeof thenucleus,andanabsent nucleus,respectively.The cells aretwo
dimensionally flattened and arevery irregular in shape(oftenreferred to as'cornflake’cells).Erythrocytes are present in
(Diff-Quik stain;original magnificationX400)
Abnormal oestrus
ovulation.Frequent matingsarelikely toproduce a
Therearemanypresentationsofabnormal oestrous
larger LH surge if theyoccur on the first orsecond day
 cycles, including those that appear shorter or longer
 of oestrus. Inappropriate mating regimes imposed by
thannormal,orwhere there isa shortperiodbetween
thebreedermayresult inafailureofovulation.Thiscan
one cycle and thenext.Investigations involve careful
readilybedetectedbyanabsenceofelevated plasma
monitoring of each cycle,andvaginal cytology and
progesterone after the endofoestrus;queens that do
progesterone measurements are often useful.
notovulategenerallyreturn tooestruswitha short
interval whilst ovulating queens either enterpseudo-
Splitoestrus
pregnancy orbecome pregnant.
Inbitches,a short interval between clinical signs of
In cases ofovulationfailure in thebitch,vaginal
oestrus is often described asa split oestrus. This
cytological changes are similar to those observed ina
occursmostfrequentlyatpuberty,butcanoccuratany
normal cycle,although there is alessrapid decline in
age.After an initial phase of follicular growth and
anuclear cells and a smallerinfluxof neutrophilsjust
oestrogensecretion,thefolliclesregress and signsof
prior to the end of the signs of oestrus compared with
oestrus disappear. Vaginal cytology shows an initial
a normal oestrus.The accurate diagnosis is made by
(normal)progressive increaseofanuclearcells,fol-
detecting anabsence of anincrease in plasma proges-
lowedbyadecline,usuallybeforemaximumcornifica-
terone concentrationon serial samples.
tion is reached.Often there is only a maximum of 50%
anuclear cells.There is no increase in plasma proges-
Prolongedpro-oestrusoroestrus
terone. Usually a second follicularphase appears 2-12
Althoughunusual,somenormalbitchesmayshowpro-
weeks later.In some cases this may be repeated
oestrousoroestrousbehaviourlastingupto30daysor
several timesuntil finally thebitchovulatesnormally.
more(forbitchesovulating30daysafterthe onset of
This syndrome is confusing since it may be thought that
pro-oestrus).Theseanimalsdonotrequiretreatment
thebitchhasfailedtoovulateorthatfertilizationwith
but careful assessment of the optimum mating time,
subsequent resorption/abortionhas occurred.
usuallybyevaluationofvaginal cytologyormeasure-
ment of plasma progesterone.
Ovulationfailure
In some cases,however, there is an underlying
Ovulationfailureisprobablyone of themostcommon
pathology. Oestrogen-secreting follicular cysts may
causes of infertilityin the queen.Several matings in a
produce persistent oestrus.This isoften inconvenient
shortperiodoftimearenecessarytoensure that theLH
fortheownerandmayultimatelylead tobonemarrow
surge occurringaftercoitusisof sufficient magnitudeto
suppressionwith anaemia,leucopenia and thrombo-
exceedthethresholdvaluenecessarytostimulate
cytopenia.In thesebitches there ispersistence ofa
297
Chapter19Laboratoryevaluationof thereproductivesystem
largeproportionof anuclearvaginalepithelialcellsand
Bitch upto 60 days after aperiod of
no increase inplasma progesterone.In addition,large
attractiveness
(8-12 mm diameter) fluid-filled folliclesmaybeidenti-
Bitcheswith ovarian remnantsusuallyhavenormal
fied using ultrasonography.
ovulationandaresultantincreaseinplasmaprogester-
This syndrome isnot recognized in the queen.
one,which remains elevated for approximately 60
days afterthe end ofoestrus.A single sample demon-
Ovarian neoplasia
strating elevatedprogesterone isdiagnosticofrem-
Epithelial tumoursarethemostfrequentlyidentified
nant ovarian tissue(rememberin the queen therewill
ovarian neoplasmsseen in bitches and queensbut are
benoelevatedprogesteroneunlessovulationhas
notcommonand account forapproximately 1%of all
been stimulated).
neoplasms.Tumours thatreleaseoestrogenmaypro-
duce signsofpersistentoestrus and bonemarrow
Bitchor queen remote froma period of
suppression,although clinical signs are also often re-
attractiveness
lated toa masseffectorascites(thelatterisusually due
In bitches that donot currentlyhave signs of oestrus,
towidespreadmetastasis throughout the abdominal
or are not within 60 days of the lastoestrus,it is
cavity,oftentermedcarcinomatosis).Signsof persistent
necessaryto considerstimulationtestsfor the confir-
oestrusrelatetopersistentlyelevatedplasma oestrogen
mation of remnant ovarian tissue.Gonadotrophins
(>50 pg/ml).There is thickening of the vaginal wall and
stimulatethereleaseof17β-oestradiolfrom theca
subsequentincrease in thepercentageof anuclearcells
internal cellswithin theovarianremnant and can be
found on vaginal cytology. In some cases the principal
given directlyin theformofhCG（which isLH-like
hormoneproduced is eitherprogesterone or testoster-
in activity),or GnRH can be used to stimulate the
one;in these cases serial estimation of these hormones
releaseofendogenousgonadotrophin.Abloodsam
mayconfirm the diagnosis.
ple is taken forassay of basal oestrogen,either hCG
Neoplasiamaybe suspectedon thebasisof an
(25IU/kg s.c.)or GnRH analogue (2.2μg/kg i.m.or
ultrasoundexamination,althoughconfirmationrequires
0.01μg/kgi.v.)isinjected,anda second blood sample
cytological orhistological investigation.
istaken2hourslater.With both testsoestrogen
concentrationsincreasebyafactorof2-3when there
Presenceofovarian tissue
is ovarian tissue.These tests are also applicable in
Alleged oestrous activity following routine 'spay'(ovario-
the queen.
hysterectomy) is not an uncommon presentation in
clinicalpractice.Insomecases,ownersobservemount-
Pregnancy diagnosis
ing and/orthrustingbehaviour and assume that this is
Measurementofplasmarelaxin,acutephaseproteins,
asignofoestrus(althoughitiscommonlyobserved in
both neutered and entire bitches). In other cases,
progesterone andprolactin may all be used forpreg-
males are attracted to the bitchbecause of a non-
nancy diagnosis,although plasma relaxin concentra-
tion is considered themost reliable method.
oestrous vulval discharge(e.g.vaginitis),orbecause
of other odours (e.g.in skin disease). Determination of
trueremnantovariantissueismost simply done by
Plasma relaxin
examinationof thefemaleduringperiodsofapparent
Relaxin is a pregnancy-specificprotein that ispro-
attractiveness(seelater).Examinationatother times
duced by the placenta.Relaxin concentrations
usuallyrequires measurement ofplasma hormones.
increase inpregnant bitchesandqueensfrom approxi-
mately24 daysafterovulation,andcontinue to in-
Bitch or queen during periods of attractiveness
creaseprogressivelyuntil thelast2weekspriorto
In these cases the simplest diagnostic tool is collec-
parturition,when there is a slight decrease.Relaxin
tionofavaginal smear andevaluationforchanges
may be measured using ELiSA test kits designed forin-
typicalofpro-oestrus oroestrus,asdescribed above.
practice use. This assay has high accuracy and preci-
Plasma hormone testing maybe useful butrequires
sion. Some studies suggest that higher concentrations
considerationof the time atwhich the sample has
been taken.Plasma oestrogen concentrations are
due to a greater total placental tissue),but other
elevated (25-50pg/ml) during late anoestrus,pro-
studieshave disputed this relationship.
oestrusandearlyoestrus;theydeclinetobasal during
mid and late oestrus.In thebitch plasma progester-
Acute phase proteins
one measurement in late oestrus isvery useful,as
Acute phaseproteins（fibrinogen,C-reactive protein,
progressiveluteinization ofpre-ovulatoryfolliclesre-
haptoglobin)are elevated in pregnant bitches com-
sults inincreased inplasmaprogesterone tovalues
paredwith concentrations in non-pregnant bitches.
>2.0 ng/ml (6.5nmol/l) around the time of ovulation.
Pregnancycanbediagnosedasearlyas20days after
In the queen therewill be no increase in progester-
ovulationbymeasuringfibrinogenor C-reactivepro-
oneunlessovulationhasbeenstimulated.Ovulation
tein,althoughfalsepositivediagnosesmayoccurwith
canbe inducedby the administration of eitherhuman
other conditions that stimulaterelease of thesepro-
chorionic gonadotrophin(hcG)or gonadotrophin re-
teins(e.g.some inflammatory conditions such as pyo-
leasinghormone(GnRH);detectionofelevatedplasma
metra).Unlikethe situation withplasmarelaxin,there
progesteronebetween7and30dayslaterisdiagnostic
isnorelationshipbetween absolute concentrations
of an ovarian remnant.
and thenumberof fetuses.
298
Chapter 19
9Laboratoryevaluationofthereproductivesystem
Plasma progesterone
Prolactin
Inthebitchtherearegreatsimilaritiesbetween the
Prolactin is produced in the pregnant and non-preg-
nantbitch,althoughprolactinconcentrationsaregreater
portantly,there is a longnon-pregnant luteal phase.
during pregnancy.
Similarlyinthequeen there isasignificantelevation
Other changes that occur during pregnancy
ofprogesterone when ovulation occursbutpreg-
Pregnant bitches normally develop a significant de-
nancy does not ensue.Thus,for both species,the
crease inhaematocrit,reaching minimumvaluesby
measurementofplasmaprogesterone alonehasno
day 60of pregnancy.Thisfinding isattributed to a
value for the diagnosis ofpregnancy.However,in
pregnancy-related increase inbloodvolume.
bitches the combinationofplasmaprogesterone and
acutephase proteinconcentrations isamore useful
Vulval discharge
indicatorandsomecommercial diagnosticlaborato-
Vulval dischargeisarelativelycommonprobleminthe
riesweight'themeasureofacutephaseproteins in
bitch and queen.ltis most frequently seen in prepuber-
blood(seeabove)accordingto theconcentrationof
tal animalswithprepubertalvaginitis.There are many
progesterone.In thismethod thelaboratory would
causesof vulvaldischarge thatmayresult indischarge
paygreaterattention to a'medium'concentration of
from the urinary or reproductive tract (Figure 19.8).
acutephaseproteininthefaceofa‘high'concentra-
Investigationofvulval dischargeinvolvescollection
tionof progesterone,than in the face of a'medium'or
of thebreedinghistoryand afullbreedingsoundness
“low’concentration of progesterone.lt is suggested
examination, including endoscopy of the caudal
that this algorithmimprovesthereliabilityof the acute
genitourinary tractand ultrasonographyof the uterus,
phaseprotein assay.The combined assay can be
ovaries,bladderandkidneys.Laboratoryinvestigation
used todiagnosepregnancyfrom3weeksafter
ofany discharge should includeroutine cytology.In
matingonwards,butismostaccuratefrom28days
some specificcases,bacteriological andvirological
aftermating onwards.
investigationmayalsobeuseful.
Natureof the
Condition
History
Condition of
Cytological findings
Comments
discharge
thevulva
Clear or strawcoloured
Oestrus
Expected in‘heat'
Swollenor
LIEC,AEC,RBC,no
Attractive tomale
slightly soft
WBC
Mucoid
Metoestrus
Recent oestrus
Large but soft
PBC,SIEC,VSEC,
Nomalaise
WBC
Mucoid
Normal
Pregnant/recent
Large but soft
PBC,SIEC,WBC
No malaise;does not threaten
pregnancy
oestrus
pregnancy
Purulent
Juvenile
Before first "heat'
Normal
PBC,SIEC,WBC
Mayrespond to antibiotics butrecurs.
vaginitis
Recovery after puberty
Purulent
Vaginitis
Variable but often
Depends on
Depends on the stage
Specific causesinclude chemical
excessive licking,
the stage of
of the cycle
irritation (urine),mechanical iritation
attractive tomale
the cycle
(FB),neoplasia,anatomical
abnormalitiesandcertainbacterial or
viral infections
Purulent/haemorrhagic
Pyometra
Oestrus2-8weeks
Slightly swollen
WBC,SIEC,EC
Diagnosisusingulrasonography or
previously
RBC,bacteria,cell
radiography.Often malaise
debris
Purulent/haemorrhagic
Metritis
Recent parturition
Large
Multinucleated cells,
Severemalaise
LIEC,LIEC,uterine
cells
Haemorrhagic
Pro-oestrus
Expected inheat
Swollen
SIEC,LIEC,RBC,
Attractivetomale
WBC
Haemorrhagic
Oestrus
Expected in‘heat'
Swollenor
LIEC,AEC,RBC,no
Attractiveto male
slightly soft
WBC
Haemorrhagic
Follicular
Persistent discharge
Swollen
LIEC,RBC,±WBC
No malaise;atractive tomale;may
cysts
develop bonemarrow suppression
Haemorrhagic
Vaginal
Recent trauma or
Depends on
RBC,dpends on the
Rare;may startup to2weeksafter
ulceration
mating
the stage of
stage of the cycle
mating
thecycle
Differential diagnosis of vulval discharge in the bitch.(AEC:anuclear epithelial cells:FB:foreign body;LIEC:
19.8
large intermediate epithelial cells;PBC:parabasal cells;RBC:erythrocytes;SIEC:small intermediate epithelial
cells;VSIEC:vacuolated small intermediate epithelial cells(metoestrus cells');WBC:polymorphonuclear leucocytes)
(continues)
299
Chapter19Laboratoryevaluationof thereproductivesystem
Nature of the
Condition
History
Condition of
Cytological findings
Comments
discharge
the vulva
Haemorrhagic
Placental
Pregnant
Normalor
RBC,mucus
Ultrasonography,radiographyetc.will
separation
slightly swollen
confirm pregnancy
Haemorrhagic
Sub-involution
Persistent discharge
Normal or
RBC,large
Nomalaise;refractory to treatment
ofplacental
after whelping
slightly swollen
polynucleated
sites
vacuolated cells
Haemorrhagic
Transmissible
Not all countriesof
Depends on
RBC,tumour cells
If tumour identified on vulva orin
venereal
theworld
the stage of
(round cells)
vagina,cytological/histological
tumour
thecycle
confirmation isrequired
Haemorrhagic
Cystitis
Frequent urination
Depends on
RBC,mucus
Smallvolumes of urine, dysuria
the stage of
the cycle
Haemorrhagic
Urinary tract
Dysuria
Depends on
RBC,tumour cells
Endoscopy may show origin of
neoplasia
the stage of
(most often
haemorhagandpsitivc
the cycle
transitional cells)
cysto-orurethrography mayreveala
mass.Cytological or histological
confirmation isrequired
Haemorrhagic/brown
Abortion
Pregnant
Slightly
RBC,mucus
Ultrasonography shows uterus with
enlarged
similarappearance topost-partum
Green/brown
Parturition
Pregnant
Slightlyswollen
RBC,SIEC,uterine
Pantingstmaingikprdtn
cells
Green/brown
Dystocia,
Non-productive
Slightly swollen
RBC,SIEC,uterine
Ultrasonography will confirm
placental
straining
cells
pregnancy and fetal viability
separation
19.8
body;LIEC:large intermediate epithelial cells;PBC:parabasal cells;RBC:erythrocytes;SIEC:small
intermediate epithelial cells;VSIEC:vacuolated smallintermediate epithelial cells(metoestruscells);
WBC:polymorphonuclear leucocytes)
Cytology
Virology: Canine herpesvirus is found with a low
Cytological examinationofvulval dischargemaybe
prevalence in the UK, and may be associated with a
useful (Figure 19.8) to determine its aetiology, al-
vulval discharge if it causesresorption or abortion.In
though cytology is onlypart of the investigation and
somecasessmallvesiclesareidentifiedwithin the
clinicalexamination,radiographyandultrasonography
vestibuleandvaginaandvirusmaybeisolatedfrom
also need tobe employed.
these.Inother cases paired serology samples are
useful for documenting acute infection.
Microbiology
In the queen serological screening (see Chapter
27) is used to test for organisms that may result in
Bacteriology: In the UK there are no bacterial vene-
pregnancy failure andresult in a vulval discharge
realpathogens,althoughBrucellacanisiswidelypresent
(felineherpesvirus1,felinepanleucopeniavirus,fline
in muchof continental Europe.Inboth thebitch and
leukaemiavirus,feline coronavirus).
queen,routinebacteriological screening ofavulval
dischargenormallyresults in the isolationofmixed
bacterialcommensalorganisms,includingEscherichia
Male
coli,staphylococci,streptococci(includingbetahaemo-
lytic streptococci) and others,such asPseudomonas
The dog and tom cat
and Proteus. Rarely, a pure growth of bacteria is
Reproductive dysfunction appearstobecommon in the
isolated,buteveninthesecasesitisveryunusual for
maledog,withtheauthorsobservingincreasedreferrals
theorganismtobetheprimarypathogen;rather,itisan
formalefactorinfertilityoverthelast3-5years.
opportunistic invasion secondary to an underlying dis-
ease. Currently in the UK there is no rationale for the
Reproductivephysiology
routine bacteriological screening of bitchesor stud
The control of testicularfunctionisvia thegonado-
dogs prior tobreeding.
trophinsystempreviouslydescribedinthefemale.
IncountrieswhereBrucellacanisispresent,itmay
Luteinizing hormone(LH)(also called interstitial cell
be a recognized cause ofinfertilityinbitches and be
stimulating hormone)stimulates the Leydig cells to
associated with a vulval discharge.There is possibility
producetestosterone,dihydrotestosteroneandsmall
of this organism entering the Uk with the increased
quantitiesof oestradiol.LH secretion is regulated by
transportation of dogs to other countries for the pur-
a feedbackmechanism involving testosteroneand
pose of breeding.
oestradiol.Androgensmediatethedevelopment and
300
Chapter19Laboratoryevaluationof thereproductivesystem
maintenanceofprimaryandsecondarysexualchar-
Spermatozoal number:Measurement of the total
acteristics andnormal sexual behaviourand potency,
numberofspermwithin theejaculate is themost
aswellasplayinganimportantroleintheinitiationand
accurate assessment of spermproduction.The total
maintenance of spermatogenesis.Follicle stimulating
sperm outputiscalculated bymultiplying thevolume of
hormone(FSH) stimulatesspermatogenesisindirectly
the sperm-containing(second) fraction by the sperm
by an action upon the Sertoli cells. These cells also
concentration.Sperm concentration is conventionally
secrete inhibin,whichactsuponthepituitarytoregu-
measuredusingahaemocytometercounting chamber
late the secretionofFSH.Concentrationsoftestoster-
afterdilutionof thesample,usuallywithdistilledwater
one,LH and FSH fluctuate throughout the day.
at aratioof1in200.A traditionalNeubauercounting
Spermatozoa areproduced in the seminiferous tu-
chamber(seeFigure 23.3) is usually used;the number
bulesand then transportedintotheepididymidesfor
ofsperm in five of the large squares(each comprising
maturation and storage. Sperm acquire the ability to
16small squares)arecounted and that total multiplied
fertilize during thephaseof epididymal maturation
by a factor of 10 x 106 (e.g.if after a 1:200 dilution, 36
and thereisgoodevidencethatdihydrotestosterone
sperm are counted in this area, the sperm concentra-
is pivotal in this event.
tionwill be360millionspermperml(360x10%/ml)
Arelationshiphasbeen demonstratedbetween
Breeding soundness
breed and thenumberof spermejaculated.Larger
 A breeding soundness examination involves collection
breedsproducemoresperm.Thereis,however,awide
ofa breeding history,detailed clinical examination
normal rangeof total sperm outputfor fertiledogs
(including ultrasonography of the testes) and labora-
(Figure 19.9) and tom cats (Figure 19.10).
tory investigation of a semen sample.Methodsof
semen collectionare described instandard texts.
Spermatozoal morphology:Sperm morphology
The ejaculate ofthe dog hasthree distinct fractions,
can be examined using a background stain such as
ofwhich the firstand thirdoriginatefrom theprostate
Indian ink,orby staining with Giemsa.Spermacis
gland.In the tom cat the ejaculate is relatively homo-
astainthatfacilitatesevaluationofacrosomal mor-
genous.Normally onlythesecond fractionof the dog's
phology and nigrosin-eosin allows assessment of
ejaculate,but theentireejaculateof the tom,isevalu-
live/deadratios.
ated forthepurposeofinvestigating fertility.Cytologi-
For nigrosin and eosin staining a dropof semen is
cal andbacteriologicalexaminationof the third fraction
mixedwith5dropsofstainandasmearismade
of the dog'sejaculatemaybe useful for demonstrating
immediately and allowed todry.Examinationwithoil
the cause ofprostatic disease.
immersionmicroscopy allowsdetermination ofboth
vital staining(dead or membrane-damaged sperm
Assessmentofsemen quality
are stained pink by the eosin,live sperm remain
Evaluation of a semen sample can be useful for confir-
unstained)and individual sperm morphology.One
mation of normal fertility in an animal prior to breeding,
hundred spermareexamined andnotedasbeing
 or when there is concern over infertilty. Furthermore,
either dead (pink) or live (white) and their individual
detailed semen evaluation should be undertaken in
morphology are recorded. An example of a table for
 potential stud dogs prior to purchase, before importa-
recording sperm morphology and vital staining is
tion and before embarking upon semen preservation.
given in Figure 19.11.
Progressive
Sperm-rich
Sperm concentration
Total sperm
Live normal
motility (%)
volume (ml)
(x10/ml)
output (x105)
sperm (%)
Mean
82.1
1.2
328.6
410.8
73.5
SEM
0.9
0.05
15.3
21.3
2.1
Range
40-95
0.3-3.2
50-610
36-1550
50-92
19.9
months after semen collection (unpublished observations). SEM = standard error of the mean.
Progressive
Sperm-rich
Sperm concentration
Total sperm
Livenormal
motility (%)
volume (ml)
(x10%/ml)
output (x105)
sperm (%)
Mean
62.5
0.65
95.2
145.0
56.4
SEM
2.8
0.02
25.3
34.3
4.2
Range
40-65
0.25-1.10
52-120
32-178
39-69
19.10
Seminal characteristics from5 fertile tom cats(collected by artificial vagina)(unpublishedobservations).
SEM= standard error of themean.
301
Chapter 19Laboratory evaluationof the reproductive system
Morphology
Numberof
Numberof
Category
Description
Percentage
live sperm
dead sperm
of sperm
Normal
Immotile sperm
Proximal droplets
Sperm thataremotilebutnot
Distal droplets
progressive
Coiled tail
Sperm that have sluggish
motility andpoorprogression
Detached head
Sperm withreasonablemotility
Other morphological
andmoderateprogression
abnormalities
Spermwithrapid forward
Exampleofa tableused forrecording the
progressivemotility
19.11
morphological andvital status of sperm stained
with nigrosin-eosin.
19.13
Exampleof a tableused forrecording
estimated spermmotility inunstained sperm
examined at body temperature.
For normal fertility there areusually>60% live nor-
mal spermatozoa;values<60%are associated with
reducedfertilty,althoughsomefertiledogshavevalues
For normal fertility there are usually>60%of sperm
below this (see Figure 19.9).Normal and abnormal
withnormal motilitydefinedasrapid forwardprogres-
spermmorphologyare demonstrated inFigure 19.12.
sion(category IV in Figure 9.13).Note that motile
sperm incategoriesI-lldonothavenormal motility.
The cut-offpoint forareductioninfertilityiswhen the
percentageofspermwithrapidforwardprogression
reducesbelow60%,althoughsome fertiledogshave
values slightly below this (seeFigure 19.9).
Microbiological screening:In some countries,rou-
tine screening of dogs for Brucella canis is recom-
(a)
(b)
mended. This organism is not currently present in the
UK and so screening here is unnecessary.Dogs may
harbour herpesvirusin small vesiclelesionspresent
on the penis and mucosa of the sheath,but clinical
inspection usually reveals thelesions,andvirological
screening of theprepuce is unlikely to detect virus in
the absence of lesions.
(c)
(P)
19.12
Dog semen stained with nigrosin/eosin.
Absence of testicular tissue
(a) Normal sperm morphology (one centrally
Maleswith an absenceofscrotal testes areeither
positioned sperm hasa coiled tail.Nigrosin provides
previously castrated or arebilateral cryptorchids.
thebackground colour and eosinstains dead sperm
Anorchia is very rare in both the dog and tom cat.
(none is present in this field).(b) A large number of
sperm have significant bending of the tails andmid-
Innormal entire dogs there issignificantvariation
pieces.These morphological changes are either
in testosteroneproductionthroughout thedaywith
secondary or tertiary sperm abnormalities.The sperm
testosterone concentrationsof 0.5-1.5ng/ml(1.7-5.2
positioned in the top right corner has a distal
mmol/l) at the trough of production,and 3.5-6.0ng/ml
cytoplasmicdroplet.(c) Individual dog spermwith a
(12.1-20.8 mmol/) at the peak of production. In dogs
spherical swelling at the region of the neck.This is a
withnotestes,testosterone concentrationsare<0.5
broken/abnormal necks and a significant tail abnormality.
ng/ml (<1.7mmol/l).Single samples could potentially
be takenatthe troughofproduction,resultinginafalse
diagnosis.ofabsent testicular tissue.For thisreason
Spermatozoal motility:Dog spermmotility isconven-
stimulationtestsarenormallyperformed usingeither
tionallyevaluatedbyplacingadropofsemenona
hCG or a GnRH analogue.A basal plasma/serum
microscope slide under a coverslip and observing
sample is obtained, hCG (44 IU/kg i.m.) or GnRH
sperm movement at X200 and X400 magnification.
analogue (2.0 μg/kg i.m.) is injected and a second
Importantly,sperm motility isinfluenced by tempera-
blood sample is taken 60-120minutes later.Inboth
ture and samplesshould beexamined ata standard
casesa significant increasein testosteroneconcentra-
temperature,commonly 38°C.Not all sperm that are
tion (to>5.0 ng/ml (17 mmol/) in thepost-stimulation
motilehavenormalmotility,anditisimportanttorecord
sampleis diagnostic of testiculartissue.There should
the typeof motilityand thepercentageof spermwith
benofalsepositive diagnoses.
that motility.Spermthathavenormal motilityswimvery
quickly in straight lines across thefield ofview(they
The infertile male
havegoodprogression).Anexampleofatable used for
Males with presumed infertility should have semen
recording spermmotilityisgiven inFigure 19.13
collected and evaluated as described above.Such
302
Chapter 19
Laboratoryevaluationof thereproductivesystem
examinationmayreveal thecauseof the infertility.In
Asthenozoospermia:Asthenozoospermia is normal
additionitmayalsobeprudenttoundertakea more
sperm morphology but a reduction in motilty.The
detailedexaminationof theseminalplasma.
conditionisrarein the dogwithout concurrentoligo
zoospermia.Recognized causes include:
Semen quality
Contaminationof theejaculatewith toxic
Laboratory investigationof a semen sample in an
compounds(latex artificial vagina liners,
alleged infertilemalemayreveala numberof different
abnormalities,including abnormalitiesofspermnumber,
lubricants,certain plastic syringes,urine,water,
sperm morphology orsperm motility.These abnormali-
sterilizing agents)
Agglutinationof sperm indogs thatproduce
tiesmaybeidentified concurrently.
antisperm antibodies(seen insome dogswith
Brucella canis infection).
Azoospermia:Azoospermia is anapparently normal
ejaculation producing an ejaculate that containsno
Seminal plasma
sperm. There is a number of causes, including incom-
Measurementofalkalinephosphataseconcentration
plete ejaculation,obstructive azoospermia and go-
in the seminal plasmamaybe useful forthe diagnosis
nadal dysfunction （which may be congenital or
of dogswith obstruction of the tubular genitalia.This
acquired). In the dog,measurement of alkaline phos-
enzyme originates from the epididymides,and there-
phatase concentrationinseminal plasma maybehelp-
fore a low concentrationmay indicate either incom-
ful in differentiating these conditions (see seminal
plete ejaculation or tubular obstruction.Normal
plasmabelow).
concentrations(5000-40,000IU/)combinedwith an
absence of sperm indicate azoospermia.
oligozoospermia:Oligozoospermia isanejaculate
The ejaculate of the tom cat contains significant
containing lownumbersof morphologicallynormal
concentrations of alkaline phosphatase.
sperm.This is rare in dogs but may occur for one of
Cytology
several reasons:
Common haematology stains can be used for cytologi-
Incompleteejaculation
calexaminationofejaculate.ltisnotuncommonforlow
Retrograde ejaculation
numbersof inflammatorycellstobeidentifiedwithin
Frequent ejaculation
the semen sample;mostoriginate from theprepuce
Recent testicularinsult.
during semen collection.High numbers of inflamma-
torycellsareseenincasesofepididymitis,orchitisand
prostatitis. Red blood cells and prostatic cells are
Confirmationofretrograde ejaculationcanbemade
commonlyidentified intheprostaticfluid of dogswith
benign prostatic hyperplasia, and multinucleate cells
collection,and thenafterattemptedsemencollection,
may be identified in dogs with prostatic neoplasia.
catheterizing thebladder,collectionof urine and lav-
age of the bladder with 10-20 ml of saline.The col-
Many dogswithsignificantprostaticdiseasewill not
ejaculate and therefore prostatic fluid needs to be
lected urine and flushings should be centrifuged to look
collectedvialavage of theprostaticurethra aftermas-
for thepresence of sperm.Large numbers of sperm
sage of thegland perrectum,orvia ultrasound-guided
(>10perlowpowerfield) inawetpreparationof the
fine needle aspiration.
centrifuged pellet is diagnostic.
Microbiology
Teratozoospermia:Teratozoospermia isabnormal
There is little informationavailableforthe tom cat.
sperm morphology,which,in many cases,results in
impairedspermmotility.Whenpresent in largenum-
Bacteriology: There has been considerable debate
bers,abnormal midpiece droplets,othermidpiece de-
concerning theroleofbacteria within theprostaticfluid
fects,and abnormalitiesof thebase/midpieceregion
andseminal plasma of dogs.However many aerobic
areassociated with infertility.Sperm with midpiece
and anaerobicorganismsarefrequently isolated from
defectsanddeformedacrosomeshavebeenfound
theprepuceof the dog and thebacterialflora isusually
following experimental Brucella canis infection.
mixed.These bacteria are similarto those identified in
Primary spermatozoal abnormalities (abnormali-
thebitch,includingbetahaemolyticStreptococcusand
arenowconsidered normal commensal organisms
malformations of the sperm head) may result from
Brucella canis may cause epididymitis,orchitis and
orchitis,congenital defectsofspermatogenesis,toxin
infertilityand isaknownvenerealpathogen,but isnot
exposure,administrationofhormonal orchemothera-
currently present in theUK.Recent data suggests that
peutic agentsorelevated scrotal temperature.Sec-
mycoplasmas and ureaplasmas are also commensal
ondaryspermatozoalabnormalities(abnormalitiesthat)
organisms,although some authors have suggested
occur after spermformationbut during spermmatura-
that they are implicated in cases of infertility.
tion,e.g.bending ofthemidpiece ortailmayoccurwith
epididymal disordersorfollowing the administration of
Virology:Herpesvirusmay cause vesicular lesions
agents thatinfluence epididymal function.Tertiary ab-
on the penis and prepuce.These lesions are usually
normalities,such asbroken tails,occur asaresultof
asymptomatic,although in some cases there is sec-
poor semen collection or handling.
ondary infection and pain at coitus.Themain concern
303
Chapter 19
Laboratoryevaluationof thereproductivesystem
ispotential of transmissiontothebitchat coitus.Virus
Testicular disease
maybe isolated from thevesiclesorexposuremaybe
Inmaleswithknowntesticulardisease(smalltestesor
detectedserologically.
testesofabnormal texture),theprimary diagnostictool
Hormone measurement
ful to collect a semen sample(see above),ortoperform
There is littlepublishedinformationconcerningmeas-
fineneedle aspiration forcytological evaluation.
urementofplasma hormonesand theirrelationship to
Ultrasonography is useful in evaluation of sus-
infertility indogs and tomcats.Insomeinfertilemales
pectedtesticulartumours.Oestrogen-secretingtumours
theremaybenormal plasma concentrationsof testo-
（usually Sertoli cell tumours) can be diagnosed by
steroneand LH,andelevated concentrationsofFSH
documenting increased concentrationofoestradiol
(presumablyduetoreducedproductionof inhibinby
after stimulation withGnRHor hCG (seePresence of
the Sertoli cells). Serial measurement of FSH may
ovarian tissue, above).
therefore be useful in these cases;normal FSHvalues
Testicularbiopsyiswidelyrecommended instand-
are 70-85 ng/ml.
ard texts fortheinvestigationofa wide rangeof disease
Low serum testosterone and LH concentrations
processes. lt is now clear however that testicular
indicateapossiblehypothalamic,pituitaryortesticular
biopsy may itself result in severe testicular pathology.
dysfunction.Pituitary or hypothalamicdiseasecanbe
Whilst the sample collected maybe diagnostic,the
further demonstratedbypersistentlylowLH concen-
diagnostic benefit of the procedure rarely justifies the
trations following GnRH challenge (2.0 μg/kg i.m.),
risk to future fertility in the authors'opinion.
whereas increasedLH following such administration
Cytological investigation of prostatic disease is
confirms theproblem tobe testicular in origin.
discussed in Chapter20.
Case examples
Case1
Signalment
A blood sample collected2weeks after the endof the period of
11-year-oldfmaleringeraniepayedatearfae
atractiveness showed that plasma progesterone was0.5 ng/ml.
History
How would you interpret these results and
Episodesofmaleattractivenessthathavewaxedandwanedoverthelast
whatarethepossibledifferential
5months.Smallvolume vulval dischargeandincreased licking of the
diagnoses?
vulva.o signs of pseudopregnancy following the pisdesofmale
Vaginalcytologicalresultsconfirmtheabsenceofoestrusinthebitch.A
attractiveness.
failureofprogesterone to increaseafter theperiod ofattractiveness
confirmsthathebitchdoesnothaveanovarianremnantThemostlikely
Clinicalpathology data
diagnosisismaleatractiontothevulvaldischargethecauseofwhih
Vaginalcytologycollectedatthetimeofatractivenessrevealedapproxi-
hasnotyetbeenelucidated.Anatrophicvaginitiswouldbeconsistent
mately20neutrophilperfoderateamountsfmucuand95%
parabasal cells with5%small intermediate cells.Large numbersof
neutrophils and mucus identified on the vaginal smear.
culture was not performed
Case 2
Signalment
ALPconcentrationin thecombined first andsecond fractionswas
6-year-oldmale LabradorRetriever.
35,000U(rerenceinteval50004000U/）
History
How would you interpret these results and
what are thepossible differential
matedoverariodofmonthsadfailedtbcomepregnantrmal
diagnoses?
libido.Testesofnormalsizebutsomewhat soft intexture.
The presence of high（normal)concentrationsof ALPintheabsenceof
Clinical pathology data
sperm indicate azoospermia.The clinical findings fit with this asa
There wasnclarsearationof the smen saintthreefrts.
diagnosis(basedonthesoft testes).Ultrasonographyof thetestesis
warrantedAutoimmunedegenerativeorchitisisrecognizedasacause
No spermwere present.What wasthought tobe the third fractionwas
of azoospermia in the Labrador.
heavily contaminated witherythrocytes
References and furtherreading
MedicinedndJEingerandCFmanp57
1580.WBSaunders,Philadelphia
MooneyCT andPeterson ME(2004) BSAVA Manual of Canine
England Gcw(1992) Vaginal cytology and cervicovaginal mucus
and Feline Endocrinology,3d edn.BSAVA Publications,
arborisationinthebreedingmanage
jement of bitches.Journal of
Gloucester
SmallAnimalPractice33,577-582
SimpsonG,EnglandGCWandHarveyM(1998)BSAVAManualof
EnglandGCW(20oo)Semen evaluation,artificialinseminationand
Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatal Care.BSAVA
infertility in the male dog.In:TextbookofVeterinary Internal
Publications,Cheltenham
304
Diagnostic cytology
John K. Dunn and Karen Gerber
Introduction
Diagnostic accuracy
The diagnostic accuracy of cytology is influenced by
Diagnostic cytology (cytopathology) is most frequently
many factors,including:
used to investigate superficial cutaneous or subcu-
taneous masses,lymphadenopathy and body cavity
thequalityof thesamplesubmitted
effusions.The examination of body cavity effusions is
。
the organ and disease process being
reviewed in Chapter 21; indications for cytological
investigated
examinationare listed inFigure20.1.
theexperience and trainingof the
cytopathologist.
Soft tissue masses:
Sample qualityisaffected byoperatorexperience,
cutaneous/subcutaneous lesions
in both sample harvesting and handling prior to sub-
enlarged lymph nodes
mission.Forexample,excessive downward pressure
intrathoracic orintra-abdominal masses
when preparing a crush smear can render a good-
Suspected splenicorhepaticpathology
quality aspirate non-diagnosticbycausing cell rupture.
Bodycavityfsnsurrtnidl
Some organs exfoliate cells easily (e.g.lymph nodes),
Upperandlowerrespiratory tractdisease:
whereasit maybemore difficult toharvestdiagnostic
nasal flush
samples from other organs (e.g. kidney, bone). In
tracheal wash
bronchoalveolarlavage
suspected neoplasia, tumour type will also influence
pulmonary aspirates
cellyield.Discreteround celland epithelial tumours
Synovial fluidanalysis
tend to exfoliatecellsinsheetsorlargeclusterswhereas
Cerebrospinal fluid analysis
aspirates from tumoursofmesenchymal origin are
Urogenital disease:
more frequently non-diagnosticbecause thecells within
prostaticaspirates/washes
the tumoursarebound together inamatrixmaterial
kidney aspirates
such as collagen or osteoid.
urine sediment examination
A study by Kristensen et al.(1990) showed a
Staging of the oestrous cycle(vaginal cytology)
positive correlationbetween cytological andhistologi-
Bonemarrowevaluation
cal diagnoses in86%ofcasesof canineand feline liver
disease.The specimens that did not correlate well
20.1
Indications for cytological examination.
originated from livers affected by diseases in which the
cellsdidnotreadilyexfoliateorwherelesionswere
 Cytology is a useful diagnostic tool in a practice
discrete(focal or multifocal).Correlation is improved
setting,incesamplescanbecollectedquickly,asily
where there is diffuse change: Roth (2001) showed
and inexpensively.There is usually no requirement for
 good correlation, especially in cases of fatty change
a general anaesthetic(although light sedation maybe
and lymphoma.Discordance between the cytological
required),theprocessing time is short,andresults are
and histological findingsoccurred most frequentlywith
available in minutes.The collection techniques are
fibrosis and hepatitis(where evidence of inflammation
lessinvasive thansurgical biopsyand thereforegive
was not seen on the cytology specimens). Where mass
rise to fewer complications. Potential complications
lesionsarevisualized byultrasonography，or other
include haemorrhage,pneumothorax (intrathoracic
imaging techniques,itmightbe expected that accuracy
lesions),sepsis,bacteraemia and tumour seeding,
may be improved, but this is not borne out by recent
eitheralong theneedletractorvia thehaematogenous
work (Wang et al., 2004.) This study, comparing the
route.lnreality,suchcomplicationsareextremelyrare.
results of cytology of ultrasound-guided fine needle
The riskof haemorrhage is greaterif the animal has an
aspirates of the liver with histological diagnoses in
underlying coagulopathy(more sowith aspirates from
dogs andcats,reported a much lowerrateofagree-
liver and kidneys than the spleen since thespleen has
ment (30% for dogs; 51% for cats). The highest per-
a fibroelastic capsule).Tumour seeding hasoccasion-
centage of agreement occurred in vacuolar
ally beenreported with aspirates from transitional cell
hepatopathy.Inflammation wascorrectly identified in
carcinomasof thebladderwall.
<40%of cases (Wang et al.,2004). In contrast to the
305
Chapter 20 Diagnostic cytology
poor agreement forhepatic diseases,Villiers et al.,
It is importantalsotorealize thatacytological
(1995) showed goodcorrelation(82%)between cyto-
specimenmaynotalwaysberepresentativeofthe
logical and histological diagnoses for canine intra-
lesion under investigation;e.g.perilesional fat may be
thoraciclesions.Morerecently,Bonfantietal.(2004)
aspirated in animalsthatareparticularlyobese.Large
reported 89.4% agreement between cytology and his-
lymphomatouslymphnodesmaybecomenecrotic and
tology of deep thoracic and abdominal masses,and
yield non-diagnosticaspirates.Impression smearsor
100%specificity forneoplasia.Similarly,Chalita etal.
scrapings of ulcerated lesionsmay contain only super-
(2001) reported 89% accuracy using fine needle aspi-
ficial cells andsecondaryinflammation/infectionmay
ratecytologyincanine skinandsoft tissuetumours.
result in dysplasticchangeswhich canmimic those
associatedwith neoplasia(seebelow).
Limitations of diagnostic cytology
Artefacts
conjunction with histological examination of a surgical
Failure to recognize artefacts or non-diagnostic sam-
biopsy.Biopsy specimens have the advantage of pre-
plescanlead toserious and oftendangerous errors in
servingtissuearchitecture,andthereforeprovidemore
interpretation.The worstscenarioiswhenapoor-quality
informationregarding thetissueoforigin andbiological
orhypocellular smear is over-interpreted.Many arte-
behaviour of a tumour (e.g. grading, degree of tissue
factsarise because ofpoor sample collection,smear
infiltration,presence or absence of necrosis).
preparation or staining techniques (Figure 20.2a-d).
Therequirement forhistological examinationde-
Some problems areunavoidable;splenicaspirates,for
pends toa large extent on the type of lesion under
example,nvariablycontainalotofblood,reflectingth
investigation.Small mobile orvery firm lesions,for
vascularity of theorgan.Smears that are too thick or
example,are unlikelytoyield sufficient material for
heavilycontaminatedwithbloodaredifficult tointerpret.
cytological evaluation.Virtually all mastcell tumours
Poorsmearpreparationmayresult inlargenumbersof
and histiocytomascanbediagnoseddefinitivelyonthe
smudgedcells,bare'nucleiorcytoplasmicstrands,and
basis of cytological examination alone (although histol-
other degenerative changes suchas nuclear and cyto-
ogy is usually required to grade mast celltumours);in
plasmicvacuolation.Othercommonartefactsinclude
contrast,poorlydifferentiatedtumours,epeciallythoe
excessivestainrecipitate,dirtyslides,waterartefact,
of mesenchymal origin,nearly alwaysrequire concur-
starchgranules(from surgical gloves;Figure 20.2e)and
rent histological examinationof abiopsy specimen in
ultrasoundgel aspiratedwhenfine needle aspiration is
order to define tissuetypeaccurately.
performed underultrasound guidance (Figure 20.2f).
a
(b)
(c)
el
（f）
Fine needle aspirates:artefacts.(a) This aspirate from a smallcutaneousmass consists only of blood;there are
20.2
numerous smallplatelet clusters(arrowed).(b) In this lymph node aspirate there are ruptured nuclei and strands
of nuclear proteinresulting from damage during the smearingprocess.c)The lymphoid cellshavebeen stripped of their
cytoplasm,leaving numerousbarenuclei.(d)This aspirate appearsto consist of apopulation of small round cells,but the
thickness of the smear is such thatmore precise cytological interpretation is not possible.(e)This aspirate contains a large
isultrasound gel.(f,Courtesyof LBlackwood.)(Wrightsstain（a-e,Rapi-DiffIl(f);original magnificationX400（f),X500
(a,b,d,e),x1000（c))
306
Chapter20Diagnostic cytology
Collection techniques
with the needle inserted in the mass.Release the
suctionandwithdrawtheneedlefromthelesion.
The choice of collection technique depends on the
Fine needle aspirates can also be obtained using
anatomical location and characteristicsof thelesion,
a non-suction (needle-only) technique (Figure
and also the temperament of thepatient.
20.3d).This method causes less damage to
fragile cells,e.g.lymphoid cells,and minimizes
Fine needle aspiration
blood contamination.lt is therefore useful for
Indications forfine needle aspiration(FNA)forcytology
aspiratinghighlyvascularmassesandlymph
are as listed inFigure 20.1.
nodes,andforobtainingultrasound-guided
samples of lesionswithin body cavities(see
FNA technique
below).The needle is moved to and fro several
The area inwhich thelesion is located isclipped and
timeswithin the lesion and thenwithdrawn.
cleanedwith alcohol (if abodycavity orjoint space is
tobepenetrated,or the sample isrequiredformicro-
No matter which technique is used, an air-filled
biology,the site should be surgically prepared).The
syringeis attached to the needle(if a syringeis already
mass isimmobilizedwithonehandanda21or23
attached,itisdisconnected from theneedleandfilled
gaugeneedlewith5ml syringe attached inserted into
with air).The contents of the needle containing the
the lesion (Figure 20.3a,b). Suction is applied,either
sample are then expelled ontooneormore clean glass
continuously orintermittently.
sides(see Figure 20.5),and smears prepared using
one of the techniques described below.Aspirates from
Continuous suction is used for firm masses,
fluid-filled lesionsshouldbetransferred into anEDTA
e.g. suspected sarcomas,which are less likely to
tube (and a plain tube if microbiology is required).A
exfoliatelarge numbersof cells.Withdrawthe
fresh smear should beprepared immediately using a
plunger to onehalf to threequartersof the
blood film or line concentration technique(seebelow).
volume of the syringe (to apply 2-3 ml suction)
(Figure 20.3c).Maintain suction and move the
Special considerations:
needleto and fro,redirecting theneedleseveral
timeswithin the lesion.Release the suction and
Fineneedle aspirates from internal organs(liver,
remove theneedlefrom themass.Disconnect
spleen,kidney) and intrathoracic orintra-
the needle from the syringe.
abdominal massesarebestperformed under
Intermittentsuctionis a variation of this
ultrasound guidance (Figure 20.4).This ensures
technique and ismore suitable for smaller
that largevesselsareavoided and the aspirateis
lesions,where it is not possible to advance or
collected from arepresentative part of thelesion.
redirect the needle without exiting the mass.
The procedure is generally welltolerated; light
Withdrawandreleasetheplungerseveral times
sedation may be necessary in some cases.The
overlying chestorabdominal wall should be
surgicallyprepared.Continuous orintermittent
suction or non-suction techniquescan be used to
obtainthe sample,keeping theneedleina single
plane and advancing it to andfro
For splenic aspirates,which are excessively
contaminatedwithblood,aspiratedsamplescan
beapplied toslidesprepositioned at45degrees
ormore to the horizontal,e.g.against a sandbag
(as for a bone marrow aspirate),or the slides can
beheldvertically to allowexcessblood to run
a
(b)
down the slidebefore making the smear
Long spinal needlescanbeused forverydeep
lesions(the stylet being removed and needle
attachedonce theneedleispositionedwithinthe
lesion).
20.4
FNA of
intrathoracicon
intrabdominal
(c)
(d)
massesisbest
performed under
20.3
Fineneedle aspiration technique.A needle,with
a 5ml syringe attached,is inserted into:(a)an
ultrasound
enlarged prescapular lymph node;(b) a mammary gland
guidance.
(Reproduced
mass.(c) Suction is applied to the syringe by withdrawing
withpermission
the plunger.(d) Non-suction (needle-only) method.
from In Practice.)
(d,Courtesy of L Blackwood)
307
Chapter 20 Diagnostic cytology
A coagulationprofileandplateletcount should be
performedifahaemostaticdefectisconsidered
likely,uchasinliverdisase,although
significant haemorrhage israrely encountered
following FNA.
Smear preparation
A smear canbeprepared using oneof the following
methods.
 Squash preparation: The aspirate is expelled on to the
centreofaglassslide(Figure 20.5a).Asecond spreader
slideisplaced horizontally and at right anglestospread
the sample,takingcarenottoexert toomuchdownward
pressure to avoid rupturing the cells.The spreader slide
is then drawn quickly and smoothly across the bottom
slide (Figure 20.5b).In most cases the weight of the
20.6
Smear preparation:line concentration
technique.After the spreader hasbeen
spreaderslide is sufficient to spread the cells.Note that
advanced two thirds of the way along the bottom slide it is
itisthesmearproducedontheundersideofthespreader
lifted abruptly upwards in order toconcentrate cells at the
slide that is examined underthe microscope.
end of the smear.
20.5
Processing fluid samples
Fluid aspiratesshould be collectedinto EDTA andalso
Smear
preparation:
intoaplain tube if microbiologywill berequired.The
squash
sample is thenprocessed using the methods de-
technique.
scribed foreffusions inChapter21.
(a)The aspirate
Fluidsoflowcellularity,suchas transudates,peri-
isexpelledonto
toneal fluid and CSFsamples,should be centrifuged
the centre of the
bottom slide.
at slow speed(1000-1500 RPM) for5minutes to
(b)The spreader
concentrate the cells. The sediment is then
slide is placed
resuspended ina few drops of supernatant,and a
gently on top of
smear made.It shouldbe noted,however,that cen
thisanddrawn
trifugationandresuspensionmaycreateadditional
acrossatright
cellularartefacts.Mostcommerciallaboratories usea
angles in the
cytospincentrifuge,which deposits cellsdirectlyona
direction ofthe
arrow
predefined area of the slide.
Impression smears and scrapings
Impression smears
(b)
Impression smears can be prepared from the surface
of ulcerated cutaneous lesions(Figure 20.7a,b). Im-
Blood film technique:A‘spreaderslidewithone
printsshouldbe takenbefore and aftercleaning the
cornermissingisused toprepare the smearin orderto
lesionwitha saline-moistened gauze swab.Several
avoidspreading thecellsover theedgesof theslide.
imprintscanbeprepared onone slide simplybymak-
The aspirateis expelled fromthe syringe towards one
ingcontactwiththe surfaceof thelesion（theslide
end of the slide.Thespreader slide should be angled
shouldnotbe smeared across thelesion).Impression
at20-45degreesinfrontofthesampleandthendrawn
smearscan alsobeprepared from thecutsurfaceof
backuntil it comesintocontactwith the sampledrop
surgically excised orpost-mortem specimens(Figure
(see Figure 3.12). After the sample has spread along
20.7c-e). Excess blood or tissue fluid is removed
theinterface of the two slides,the spreaderslide is
before making the smear,by blotting the surface dry
advancedgentlyforwards tocreatea smearwitha
with a clean paper towel (Figure 20.7d).
feathered edge.This technique is useful forfluid aspi-
The disadvantages of this technique are:
rates(but not thosewith low cellularity).
A modificationof this techniqueis thelineconcen-
It collectsrelativelyfewcells
tration' technique.The sample is smeared as for a
The cells collected may not necessarily be
blood film but after the spreader has been advanced
representativeof thelesionunderinvestigation.
about two-thirds of thewayalong thebottom slideit is
For example,ulcerated lesions are often
lifted abruptly upwards (Figure 20.6).This has the
secondarilyinflamedorinfected,whichmay
effect of concentrating cells along a line at the end of
resultinonlyinflammatorycellsbeingharvested
the smear.This technique is useful for hypocellular
ormayinduce inthe cellsof interestdysplastic
fluid aspirates,e.g.aspirates fromcysticmasses,orfor
changesthatmimicthoseassociatedwith
samplesheavilycontaminatedwith blood.
neoplasia.
308
Chapter 20 Diagnostic cytology
damage. It should be rubbed against the surface of the
lesionorvaginal wall,andthengentlyrolledontoa
clean glass slide (not dragged across it).
Brushings
Brushings are useful for obtaining cells from very soft
friable specimens,e.g.splenichaemangiosarcomas.
(a)
Cellsaretransferred fromthecutsurfaceof the excised
b
tissue to a glassslidewith a finecamelhairpaintbrush.
This technique can also be used to evaluate the gastro-
intestinal tract by passing a brush through the biopsy
channel of an endoscope.
Stains
Romanowskystains
Romanowsky stains,such as Wright's, Giemsa,
Wright's-Giemsa and May-Grunwald-Giemsa,gen-
erally provide excellentcytoplasmicand nucleardetail,
(c)
and have the advantage of staining bacterial organ-
isms.Several alcohol-basedfast'stainingkits such as
Diff-Quikare alsocommercially available.
 Smears should be air-dried or, if staining is to be 
delayed for more than a few days, cellpreservation
canbe enhanced by fixing in methyl alcohol for2-3
minutes.A good smear consists of a monolayer of
cells that fix' to the slide within 30-60 seconds.
Smearsthataretoo thickdry slowly,resultinginpoor
d
el
morphological detail and condensation and shrinking
Impression smearscanbeprepared from the
of nuclei. Thicker smears, such as those prepared
20.7
surface of an ulcerated cutaneous lesion,e.g.
from lymph node or bone marrow aspirates,may
cutaneous lymphoma(a,b).The technique is also useful
havetobestainedfortwice therecommended time or
for collecting cells from the cut surface of a surgically
even longer.
excised or postmortem specimen,e.g.spleen(c).Excess
It is important torealize that the tinctorial properties
blood is firstremovedbyblotting the cutsurfacewith a
clean paper towel (d).Several imprints can be prepared
of thedifferentRomanowskystainsvaryconsiderably
on the same slide(e).(Reproduced with permission from
(some stain more blue or morepink than others) and
InPractice.)
also that some of therapidstainingkitsmaynotstain
mast cell granules.
Impressionsmearsarethereforeof limited use in
the diagnosisof superficial neoplasticlesions,butcan
Newmethyleneblue
be useful forintraoperative confirmation of neoplasia
Newmethylene blue(NMB) israrelyusedasa cytologi-
when impression smears frombiopsy samples or ex-
cal stain.It is an aqueous stain that allows immediate
cised tissueareexamined.
examinationofasmearafterapplicationto air-dried
cells.It providesexcellent nuclearand nucleolardetail
Scrapings
and isuseful forstaining thick,haemodiluted smears
Scrapings collectmore cells than impression smears
that contain large clumps of cells.
but areotherwisesubject to the same disadvantages.
Scraping isa usefultechniquefor harvesting cells from
Trichrome stains
lesions thatare unlikelytoyieldlargenumbersof cells
Trichrome stains, such as Papanicolaou or Sano's
on fine needle aspiration, e.g.mesenchymal tumours
modified stain,are applied to cells that have been
that areulcerated.The technique is similarto that used
immediatelywet-fixed in alcohol orbyusingaspray
to collect skin scrapingsfor dermatological investiga-
fixative.Air-dried cellscanberehydratedfor30 sec-
tions(see Chapter 24).The material collected on the
ondsinsaline and thenwet-fixed in the same way.Like
scalpel blade is teased on to a glass slide with a needle
NMB,these stains provide superior nuclear and
and the smearprepared using the squashpreparation
nucleolardetailbut cytoplasm stainsweakly.Wet fixa-
technique (see above).
tion also causes red cell lysis, which may improve
visual examinationofanyclumpsofcells thatare
Swabsmears
present. These stains are useful for very thick smears
A swaborcotton bud canbe used tocollectcellsfrom
or those heavily contaminatedwithblood.However,
fistulous tracts and from the vagina.The swab should
the staining techniques are time-consuming and not
be firstmoistenedwith normal saline tominimisecell
generallypracticalforaveterinarypracticelaboratory.
309
Chapter 20 Diagnostic cytology
Other stains
If non-inflammatory,is the lesion neoplastic,
Other special stains are sometimes used on cytologi-
hyperplasticor dysplastic?
cal specimens;forexample,toluidine blue(mastcell
If neoplastic,what is the origin of thecells
granules inpoorly differentiated mast cell tumours),
present and is the lesion benign or malignant?
Fontana stain (malignant melanomas with very few
melanin pigment granules),and periodic acid-Schiff
 Some cytological terminology is explained in Fig-
(fungal hyphae and fungal spores).
ure20.8.
Microscopic evaluation of a
Cytology of inflammatory disease
cytological specimen
Classification
1
Thesmearshouldbescanned at lowmagnification
An inflammatory response can be classified as acute,
(4Xor10Xobjective)toidentify areasof increased
cellularity or areas with different staining
subacute,chronic active or chronic.These termsrefer
characteristics.Crystals,foreign bodies and
moretodifferent typesofinflammationthanto the
duration of the inflammatory response (see below)
parasites are usuallyvisible at lowmagnification.
since,inreality,therelativepercentagesofinflamma-
2
The2oXobjective lenscanbeused toassess
cellularity and cellular composition,i.e.the
tory cell types do not reliablypredict duration.
relative numbers of different cell types (e.g.
Inflammationcanalsobe categorized,according to
inflammatory cells,epithelial cells).
the predominant inflammatory celltype(s)present,as:
Changing to the 40X objective (or 50X or 60Xdry
purulent/suppurative(neutrophils);eosinophilic(eosino-
3
phils); mixed (mixed cell types including neutrophils,
lens)andthentothe100xoilimmersionlensallows
evaluationofcellmorphologyingreaterdetail
lymphocytes,plasmacellsandmacrophages);orgranu-
lomatous(mixed cell types but predominantly mono-
The basic aim of cytological evaluation is to estab-
nuclear cells and macrophages).
lish an aetiological and/or morphological diagnosis in
The authorsprefer touse these two classification
order to obtain a more accurate prognosis. An attempt
systems in combination.Henceforth,throughout this
should be made to answer thefollowing questions:
chapter:
Is the qualityof the specimen good enoughto
Acute equates to apurulent,suppurative or
evaluate?
neutrophilic inflammatory response
Are thecells present normal forthis anatomical site?
Chronic active equates to a mixed inflammatory
Is the lesion inflammatory/reactive ornon-
response
inflammatory?
Chronic equates to a granulomatous
If inflammatory,what is the predominant
inflammatoryresponse(althoughsome authors
inflammatory cell type(s) and isan aetiological
use the termgranulomatousonlywhen
agent present;i.e.is there evidenceofbacterial
inflammatory giant cells and a significant number
or fungal infection?
ofepithelioid macrophages arepresent)
Term
Definition
Anisocytosis
Variation in cell size
Anisokaryosis
Variation innuclear size
Emperipolesis
Thepresenceofonecelltypewithinthecytoplasmofanother;sometimesseeninneoplasticepithelialcellsinsquamouscell
carcinoma
Hyperplasia
Areversibleincreasencellnumbersbroughtaboutbyincreasedmitticactivityinresponsetoastimulus
Neoplasia
ellilinirlatr
oralterationsncellcyclecontrolandcelldifferentiationsftenmpairedseenapls
Metaplasia
AreversibleprocesswhereonematurecelltypeisreplacedbyanothermaturecelltypeThisrpresentstheadaptivereplacementf
anormalcellpulationbycellssensitivetastilsFrxamlenrensetochronicuprawayritationilid
columnarepithelialcellof thetracheaandbronchiarereplacedbystratifiedsquamousepithelialcells
Dysplasia
ReversibleproliferativecellularchangesthatoccurinreponsetoiritationorinflammationDysplasticchangeischaracterizedby
abnormalszehapeandoranizationfmatureellomefthmorpholgicalabnormaliesparticlarlythoseresultingn
Anaplasia
Describesalackofcellulardifferentiation.Poorlydifferentiated tumoursaregenerallymoremalignant
Chromatin
Themicropicaaaneof thnlecratinhchratinatcanderibdasthineilyrcaly
pattern
stippledaceyreticularcoarse（ropy)lmpedrmudgedtecomesmorecoarseasmalignantotentialinreas
20.8
310
Chapter20
Diagnosticcytology
This terminology emphasizes the fact that different
20.10
categoriesof inflammationare not mutually exclusive.
Forexample,somemixedinflammatoryresponseschar-
Degenerative
acterizedbya mixedpopulationofneutrophils and
neutrophils.
(a)Peritoneal fluid
macrophages areoftenreferred toaspyogranulomatous.
The severity of the inflammatory response can be
from a 6-year-old
Domestic Shorthair
assessed subjectively as mild,moderate orsevere.
cat with peritonitis.
The neutrophils show
Acute inflammation
severe degenerative
If>70%of the total numberof nucleated cellsare
changes (karyolysis).
neutrophils,the inflammatory response is classified as
(b)Peritoneal fluid
acute,suppurativeorpurulent(althoughsome authors
(a)
from a dog with right-
sided congestive
onlyuse the termssuppurativeorpurulentwhen the
heart failure.There are
numberof neutrophilsexceeds85%ofthetotalnumber
numerous pyknotic
of nucleated cells present)(Figure 20.9).The remain-
neutrophils.Note the
ing cells are amixture ofmononuclearcells(monocytes,
round dark-staining
macrophages,lymphocytes and plasma cells).
.Cell
balls'ofnuclear
morphology may provide a clue to the aetiology.
chromatin(arrowed).
(Wright's stain;original
magnificationX1000)
(Reproduced with
permissionfrom In
Practice.)
Karyolysis andkaryorrhexis indicate sudden cell
death.Degenerateneutrophils,particularythoseshow-
ingkaryolyticchanges，areusuallyassociated with
septiclesions especially those caused byendotoxin-
20.9
Synovial fluid froma dogwith immune-mediated
producing orpyogenicbacteria,e.g.in pyothorax.
polyarthritis.The neutrophils appear well
Pyknosis implies slower cell death,associated
preserved and many arehypersegmented.(Wright's stain;
with ageing of neutrophils in the inflammatory pro-
original magnificationX1000)
cess,and islessindicativeof sepsis.Some bacterial
Neutrophils
infections,e.g.Nocardia,do not produce marked
Neutrophilscanshowavarietyofdegenerativechanges:
degenerative changes.
Neutrophils should alwaysbeexamined for the
Swelling and hyalinization of nucleus(the
presence ofingestedbacteria(Figure20.11),since the
nucleus assumes a glass-like' appearance,ie.it
presence of intracellular bacteria makes contamina-
is shinybut notrefractile)
tion after sampling less likely and supports a diagnosis
Loss of nuclearlobulation and rupture of nuclear
of bacterial infection.
membrane (karyolysis;Figure 20.10a)
Nuclear fragmentation and formation of 'nuclear
20.11
dust'(karyorrhexis)
Shrinkageofnuclearmaterial into darkstaining
Degenerate
hyperchromaticmasses(pyknosis;Figure 20.10b).
neutrophils
containing
Well preserved(non-degenerate)neutrophils tend
ingested
tobe associatedwithnon-septicconditions suchas
bacteria in
peritoneal fluid
immune-mediatedpolyarthritis,althoughitisimportant
from a Springer
torealize that the absenceofdegenerative change
Spanielwith
doesnotexcludeabacterial aetiology.For example,
septic
bacteria arerarely seen injoint fluid aspirates,even
peritonitis.
from cases of confirmed septic arthritis,and the
(Wright's stain;
neutrophils can often appear surprisingly well pre-
original
served.Neutrophilmorphology may alsobe expected
magnification
X1000)
to improve rapidly if an animal has already received
antibiotics.Conversely,neutrophilsinbodycavityeffu-
sions,particularlyineffusionswithahighproteincon-
tentorthatcontainalotofblood,starttodegenerateif
Special considerations
there isa significant delayinprocessing the sample
It is important to realize that in some lesions the
(this ageing process occurs in vitro and does not
inflammatoryresponsemay either mask,orbe sec-
necessarily indicate an infectious aetiology).
ondary to,another pathological process.
311
Chapter20Diagnostic cytology
Ulcerated cutaneouslesionsareinvariably
coveredwithinflammatorycellsandbacteria
Impressionsmearstakenfromsuch lesionsmay
therefore not be representative of the underlying
pathological process.Priorremoval of superficial
exudateandcellulardebriswitha saline-soaked
gauzeswabmayprovideamorerepresentative
impression smear.
Certain tumours, e.g. squamous cell carcinomas,
frequentlyelicitanintenseinflammatory
response.Thoroughexaminationofa smearmay
berequired to detect neoplastic cells
Inflammation may beexpected to induce
dysplastic changes innormal cells adjacent to
thelesion(Figure 20.12).These morphological
20.13
Fineneedleaspiratefromacutaneousmassin
changesoftenresemble those associatedwith
a young German Shepherd Dog. There is a
neoplasia:variation in cell size and shape;
mixed population of eosinophils and neutrophils,
consistent with an eosinophilic granuloma.A macrophage
variation in nuclear/nucleolar size,shape and
is also seen in the field.(Wright's stain; original
number;increased nuclear:cytoplasmic(N:C)
magnificationx10o0)
ratio;and coarser nuclear chromatin.Since the
morphological changesassociatedwithdysplasia
observed on impression smears of feline eosinophilic
canresemblesomeof thoseassociatedwith
granuloma complex lesions.Increased numbers of
neoplasia/malignancyit isverydifficult,ifnot
eosinophils are oftenpresent in aspirates from mast
often impossible,to determinewith the aid of
cell tumours and, less frequently,lymphomas and
cytology alonewhether an inflammatory
histiocytictumours,presumablyinresponse to the
response is secondary toneoplasia orwhether it
releaseofcytokinesfrom theneoplasticcells.
is theinflammatoryresponsethat isinitiatingthe
dysplasticchanges.
Chronic inflammation
The chronicinflammatoryresponse ischaracterized by
a predominance of mononuclearinflammatory cells,i.e.
monocytes,macrophages,lymphocytes and plasma
cells.At least 50%of the inflammatory cellspresent are
macrophages and theremaining nucleated cell popula-
tionmayconsistof amixtureoffairlywellpreserved
neutrophils,lymphocytes and plasma cells.Possible
aetiologiesfor this type of response include: low-grade
irritants (inert foreign material);fungi (e.g.Histoplasma
capsulatum);and certainbacteria(e.g.Mycobacterium,
Actinomyces,Nocardia).Resolvingacuteinflammatory
reactionsmay alsoshow thistype of mixedpopulation.
Macrophages
Macrophages arereadilyidentified by:size(diameter
20-100μm;3-12 times thediameterofa redblood
Nasal flush from a dogwith nasal aspergillosis.
cell);anovalorbean-shapednucleus;and abundant
20.12
This cluster of cuboidal epithelial cells shows
paleblue cytoplasm(with Romanowsky stains),which
dysplastic changes: they are larger than normal and a
maycontainnumerousvacuoles and/orphagocytosed
moderate degree of anisocytosis,anisokaryosis and
cellularmaterial(Figure 20.14).The nucleus is often
variation in N:Cratio is evident.Some nuclei contain a
eccentricallyplacedandhasalaceyorreticulated
visible nucleolus. Neutrophils and lymphocytes are also
chromatin pattern.
present.No tumour was identified onpost-mortem
examination(Wright's stain;original magnificationX500)
Thislarge
(Reproduced with permission from In Practice.)
reactive
macrophage contains
Eosinophilicinflammatory response
two phagocytosed
Aneosinophilicinflammatoryresponseisasubcategory
neutrophils.(Wright's
ofacuteinflammationcharacterizedbyanincreased
stain; original
number(usually>10%)ofeosinophils in the sample
magnification X1000).
(Figure 20.13).The presence of a large number of
eosinophilssuggestseithera hypersensitivity compo-
nent to theinflammatoryresponse or thepresenceof
aparasiticagent(e.g.OslerusosleriorAngiostrongylus
vasorumlarvaeinbronchoalveolarlavagefluid).Large
numbersof eosinophils and neutrophils are frequently
312
Chapter20Diagnosticcytology
Granulomatousinflammation
this type of inflammatory response are fairly similar to
This isa subcategoryof chronicinflammation,charac-
those thatcaninitiate chronicorgranulomatousinflam-
terized by significant numbers of large reactive and
mation:migrating grass awns;release of keratin from
smallerepithelioid macrophages and,insomecases,
a ruptured epidermal inclusion or sebaceous cyst;
inflammatory giant cells as well as smaller numbers of
fungal infections;and certain bacterial infections,e.g.
neutrophils,lymphocytes and plasma cells.
Mycobacterium,Actinomyces,Nocardia.
Epithelioid macrophages
These are smaller macrophages (Figure 20.15) that are
Cytology of neoplasia
not actively phagocytic;theyresemble epithelial cells in
appearance and are often seen in small clusters.
Cytology is a useful diagnostic tool for determining
whetheralesion isneoplasticand,secondly,if it
neoplastic,for establishing whether it is benign or
malignant. It should be emphasized, however, that
sometumours,cytologicallyat least,canappearbe
nign'when they are actually highly malignant,e.g.
thyroid carcinomas.Cytological examination should
not beregarded as a substitute forhistological ex-
amination,since itprovidesnoinformationregarding
the architecture of the tumour and itsrelationship to
adjacent structures,nor can it determine whethera
tumouriswelldemarcatedorlocallyinvasive.Cytologi-
calexamination,certainlyinthecaseofmostspindle
cell tumours,rarelyprovides a histiogenic diagnosis.
Nevertheless,it often provides vital diagnostic and
prognosticinformationregarding tumourtype and may
20.15
Pyogranulomatousinflammatory response.The
alsohelptodeterminewhethersurgical intervention,
smallermononuclear cells(arrowed) are
either to excise or biopsy,is required.
epithelioid macrophages.(Wright's stain;original
magnification X500).
Criteria formalignancy
The cytological criteria for differentiating reactive or
Inflammatorygiant cells
dysplasticcellsfromneoplastic cells,andforassess-
These are large multinucleated cells (Figure 20.16),
ing thedegreeofmalignancy,relyheavilyonchanges
whichmustbedifferentiated frommultinucleatedneo-
innuclear and nucleolarmorphology.Cytoplasmic
plastic cells.The nuclei of inflammatory giant cellsare
changes associated with malignancy are less specific;
usuallyuniforminsize andshape(incontrasttothemore
similarchangesmaybeseenwith hyperplasia and in
pleomorphicnuclei seen inmultinucleatedneoplastic
response to inflammation (dysplasia).
cells) and are usually arranged around theperiphery of
the cell.Increased numbers of inflammatory giant cells
Non-specific cellular criteria
are a feature of many foreign body reactions.
Aspiratesfrommalignant tumours tend tocontain
20.16
more cells.
Amultinucleate giant
Cellularpleomorphism,i.e.variation in cell size
cell in exudate froma
(anisocytosis) and shape, is greater in
fistuloustract
malignancy.There is an increased number of
associated with a
larger cells, showing variation in the N:C ratio.
penetrating foreign
A population ofcells in an abnormal location isa
body on the flankof a
good indicatorof neoplasia(evenif thecell
German Shepherd
population ismonomorphicandnuclear criteria
Dog. (Wright's stain;
originalmagnification
for malignancy are absent).For example,a
X500)(Reproduced
population of small well differentiated lymphocytes
with permission from
aspirated froma cutaneousmass isconsistent
InPractice.)
with a diagnosis of cutaneous lymphoma.
Chronicactiveinflammation
Cytoplasmic criteria (less definitive than nuclear
Theterm chronicactiveinflammation describes amixed
criteria)
inflammatoryresponsewithboth chronicand active
components.By definition,50-70% of the inflammatory
Increased cytoplasmicbasophilia(due to
cells are neutrophils and 30-50%are mononuclearcells
increased RNA content)maybe seen in any
(lymphocytesandmacrophages).Whenmacrophages
metabolically active population of cells (e.g.
and neutrophils are the majorcelltypespresent,thisis
hyperplasticcell,secretoryglandular pithelial
sometimesreferred to as apyogranulomatous inflam-
cells)and is therefore not necessarilyindicative
matory response (see Figure 20.15). The causes of
ofneoplasia.
313
Chapter20Diagnosticcytology
Cytoplasmicmarginsmaybelesswell defined
and thecytoplasmmay appearvacuolatedor
excessively granulated inmalignant cells.
Thepresence of large coalescing vacuoles or
‘signet ring’cells,where thenucleus ispushed”
totheperipheryof thecellbya singlelarge
cytoplasmic vacuole (Figure 20.17a), and
evidence of acinus formation (Figure 20.17b) are
highly suggestive of malignancy (carcinoma).
20.17
(a)
Cytoplasmic features
suggesting
malignancy.
(a)Pleural fluid froma
bitchwithpulmonary
metastases from a
mammary
adenocarcinoma.The
large'signetring'cells
(arrowed) each have
one large cytoplasmic
vacuole and a nucleus
thathasbeen
'pushed'to the
periphery of the cell.
(b) An acinus in a fine
needle aspiratefroma
dog with pulmonary
adenocarcinoma.
(Wright's stain;original
magnificationX1000)
Nuclear criteria
The following are suggestive of malignancy:
Variation in nuclear size(anisokaryosis) and
(c)
shape(Figure 20.18a)
20.18
Nuclear features suggesting malignancy.
Increased N:C ratio or variation in N:C ratio
(a)Marked anisocytosis,anisokaryosisand
within the same populationof cells
variation inN:Cratio in an aspirate from a dogwith
Multiple (>4) nucleoli in one nucleus or a single
haemangiopericytoma.Some cells also showa coarse
very large nucleolus(approaching the size ofa
reticulated chromatin pattern and unusually large nucleoli.
(b)Considerable variation in the size,shape and number
redcell)
of nucleoli within thenuclei of cells fromamammary
Variation innucleolar size,shape andnumber,
adenocarcinoma.One large multinucleated cell ispresent
especiallywithin the same nucleus.The
(arrowed).(c)Three abnormal mitotic figures are seen
presenceofextremelylarge,angularor
to theleft of a cell with threenuclei of variable size in this
irregularly shaped nucleoli is highly suggestive of
aspirate from a soft tissue(giant cell) sarcoma ina Flat-
malignancy (Figure 20.18b)
coatedRetriever.Wright's stain;originalmagnificationX500
Coarse, ropey or reticulated nuclear chromatin
(a),X1000 (b,c))(b,c@Axiom Veterinary Laboratories)
pattern
The nucleus may become distorted (nuclear
A singlepopulation of cells containing young imma-
moulding) as it is compressed by adjacent 
tureblasticnuclei ishighly suggestiveof malignancy,
neoplasticcellsorbya second nucleus within the
especially if there is evidenceof nuclearand nucleolar
same neoplasticcell
pleomorphism.Recognition of more than threeof the
Multinucleation(more significant if the nuclei
abovenuclearcriteria isregardedasstrongevidence
within the same cellvary in size;Figure 20.18c)
formalignancy.
Increased numbersof mitotic figures.This may
alsobe seenwith benign hyperplasia;the
Classification of tumour cell type
presenceofabnormal mitoticfigureswherenuclei
Tumoursmaybebroadlyclassifiedasepithelial,mes-
divide inmore than two directionsornuclear
enchymal(spindle cell)or discrete round cell tumours.
division is uneven ismore significant and is
Themorphologicalfeaturesofeachof thesecatego-
highly suggestive of malignancy (Figure 20.18c).
riesaredescribed below.Classification intooneof
314
Chapter20Diagnostic cytology
these threetumourtypesisprimarilybasedonthesize
Tumoursofepithelialorigin tend to exfoliatecells in
and shape ofcells aspirated andon their tendency to
sheetsorcohesive clusters.Thecellsvaryinshape
exfoliate singly or in clusters.While this system is
depending on the tissue of origin.They are usually
useful for classifying themajority of tumoursit isnot
roundorpolyhedral,with abundantcytoplasmandwell
flawless.Forexample,apoorlydifferentiated tumour
defined cytoplasmicmargins(Figure 20.19).Columnar
may be clearly malignant but demonstrate insufficient
orcuboidalepithelialcells arepresentintherespiratory
morphological characteristicsto allow further classifi-
and gastrointestinal tracts.
cation aseithera carcinoma orsarcoma.Conversely,
some tumours,forexamplethyroid carcinomas,may
respect to colour,granularity and degreeof vacuola-
showfewcytological criteriaof malignancyandmaybe
tion,depending on the location,and function of the
diagnosed erroneously as benign.
cells. The presence of intracellularsecretory product or
acinus formation (see Figure 20.17b) suggests the
Epithelialtumours
cells areof glandular epithelial origin.
Epithelial cells line the oral and nasal cavities,and
Thenucleusisusuallyround,withasmoothorfinely
the gastrointestinal,urogenital andrespiratory tracts.
stippled chromatinpattern(whichbecomescoarseras
Secretoryandnon-secretory epithelial cells are also
the malignant potential increases).One or more nu-
present in the skin and glandular tissue.Adenomas or
cleoliareusuallypresent(nucleoli can alsobe seen in
carcinomas/adenocarcinomasmay therefore ariseat
hyperplastic and dysplasticepithelial cells,especially
all these sites.
thosewithasecretory capacity).Thesebecomelarger
Epithelialcellsmayberound,cuboidalorcolumnar,
and more irregular in shape as the cells undergo
and have common adjoiningborders.
malignant transformation(Figure20.20).
Epithelial cellsbecome dysplasticinresponseto
localized inflammation orirritation.Dysplastic changes
(seeFigure 20.12) include:variationsin size andshape
of cell,nucleus and nucleoli;increased N:C ratio;and
coarser nuclearchromatin.Thesechangescanresem-
ble thoseassociatedwith neoplasia.
Commonlyencounteredtumoursofepithelialorigin
include sebaceous glandadenomas/adenocarcinomas
(see Figure 20.19),perianaladenomas/adenocarcino-
mas,squamous cell carcinoma （see Figure 20.31),
transitional carcinomas of the bladder,basal cell
tumours(see Figures 20.26 and 20.30),mammary
gland tumours(seeFigure20.18b)and tumours of
otherglandular epithelial tissue,e.g.prostaticadeno-
carcinomas(seeFigure22.63).
20.19
Clusterof epithelial cellsfrom a sebaceous
Mesenchymal tumours
gland adenoma on theback of a 7-year-old Toy
Mesenchymal cells (spindle cells) are present in adi-
Poodle.The cells and their nuclei are of uniform size and
shape.The cytoplasm appears finely vacuolated,
posetisumuscleone,artilage,firousisu
suggesting the cells have a secretory capacity.(Wright's
inbloodandlymphaticvessels.Theytypicallyhave
stain;original magnificationX1000)
elongated cytoplasmictails anda round oroval nucleus.
(b）
20.20
Fine needle aspirates from prostate glands.(a) Ahoneycomb'cluster of hyperplasticprostaticepithelial cells
prostaticcarcinoma.The cellsshowmarked anisocytosis,anisokaryosis andvariation inN:Cratio.Considerablevariation
in the size,shape andnumberof nucleoli is alsoevident.(c)Theseprostatic epithelial cells showing similarchangesto
those in (b).Some of the nuclei appear to containmore than onenucleolus.However,there is alsoevidence of an
associated infammatoryreonsewithnumerousneutrophil.nacytologicalasisand without histologica back-up,it
secondary)orwhether theinflammationwastheprimaryproblem andhad induceddysplasticorreactivechangesin the
prostaticepithelial cells.(Wright's stain;original magnificationX500（a),X1000(b,c,）)（a,b,Reproduced with permission
fromInPractice.c,AxiomVeterinaryLaboratories)
315
Chapter20 Diagnosticcytology
Mesenchymal tumours(commonlyreferred toas
Round cell tumours
spindle cell tumours)are derived from connective
Round celltumours exfoliatediscreteroundcellswith
tissue.Fine needle aspiratesfrom these tumours are
welldefined cytoplasmicmarginsand a round or in-
often hypocellular because the cells are embedded in
dented nucleus.They areoften haemopoietic in origin.
an extracellular matrix(e.g.osteoid(bone),chondroid
Aspirates from round cell tumours are usually ex-
(cartilage), collagen (fibrous tissue)). The aspirated
tremely cellular.The cells exfoliate individually or in
cells,therefore,areoftendiscrete,althoughafewsmall
small clusters.
clusters maybe present.
Tumoursclassifiedasdiscreteroundcelltumours
Well differentiated mesenchymal cells areusually
includelymphoma（Figure 20.22),plasmacytoma
ofsmall tomediumsize and are classically spindle-
(see Figure 20.39),histiocytoma （Figure 20.23),
shaped,with cytoplasmic tailstrailing away from the
mast cell tumour(Figure20.24) and transmissible
nucleus(Figure20.21).Cytoplasmicborders are often
venereal tumour(see Figure20.41).Most round cell
poorly defined,and thenucleiare oval orelliptical with
tumours can be accurately identified cytologically
a smooth orfinelacey chromatinpattern.Asmalignant
becauseof theirspecificcytoplasmic,nuclearand
potentialincreases,thenucleus enlargesand the cells
tinctorial properties.The cytological features of dif-
maybecomerounder and/or assumea stellate(star-
ferentround cell tumours are described in the sec-
like) appearance with short,blunt cytoplasmicprojec-
tion on Cytology of cutaneous and subcutaneous 
tions rather than long cytoplasmic tails. Nuclear
lesions.
chromatinbecomescoarserand thenucleolibecome
moreprominent.
20.22
Multicentric lymphoma. This lymph node
aspirateconsistsof a populationof large
Spindle-shaped cellswith cytoplasmic tails
lymphoblasts with multiple nucleoli;thenuclei are
20.21
trailing away from the nucleus in an aspirate
approximately three times the diameter of aredbloodcell.
from an oral fibrosarcoma.Thenuclei contain several
(Wright's stain;original magnificationX1000)(@Axiom
nucleoli.A moderate degree of anisocytosis is evident.
Veterinary Laboratories)
There is eosinophilic matrix material towards the top left
hand corner,which is probably collagen.(Wright's stain;
original magnificationX1000)(Reproduced with
permission from InPractice)
Accurate identification of tissue type inmany
instances is not possible on a cytological basis
alone.Thisisespeciallytrueofpoorlydifferentiated
mesenchymal tumours,although the type of extra-
cellularmatrix,locationof thelesion,and itsclinical
and/orradiographic appearance often provide impor-
tant clues.
Mesenchymalcellsbecome dysplasticinresponse
to local inflammation or irritation and these cells
maybeverydifficulttodifferentiatefromneoplastic
cells. lf granulation tissue is present in the lesion,
young fibroblastsmay similarlybemistakenforneo-
plastic cells.
Commonmesenchymal tumours include lipoma/
20.23
Fineneedleaspiratefromacaninehistiocytoma
liposarcoma(see Figure 20.34),chondroma/chondro-
on thepinna of a 1-year-old terrier cross.The
sarcoma,osteoma/osteosarcoma,fibroma/fibrosar-
cells are round,with discrete cytoplasmic margins.
Although the cellsin aspirates from histiocytomas almost
coma(seeFigure20.21),haemangioma/haemangio-
alwaysshowamild tomoderatedegreeofanisocytosis
sarcoma(seeFigure20.36),haemangiopericytoma
and anisokaryosis,these tumours are benign and usually
(seeFigure20.35),neurofibroma/neurofibrosarcoma,
regress spontaneously.(Wright's stain:original
andmyxoma/myxosarcoma.
magnification X1000)(Courtesy of EVilliers)
316
Chapter20Diagnosticcytology
20.26
Fineneedle aspirate from abasal cell tumour
(a)
(trichoblastoma) on the distal limb of a dog
There is a monomorphic population of basal epithelial
cells.Basal cells usually exfoliate in cohesive clusters or
sheets.(Wright's stain;original magnification X500)
(AxiomVeterinary Laboratories.)
Cytology of cutaneous and
subcutaneous lesions
Most cutaneous and subcutaneous lesions can be
categorized sufficiently toprovide useful clinical guid-
ance.Specimensfor cytological examination areusu-
6
allyobtainedbyFNA or,if the lesion isulcerated,by
Mast cell tumours.(a) Aspirate from an MCT on
impressionsmears.The disadvantages and limitations
20.24
thelowerlimbofa crossbred dog.Themast
of thelattertechniquehavebeen discussedearlier.
cells contain denselypacked azurophilic cytoplasmic
Normalskiniscomposedofseveral layersofsqua-
granules.Thenucleiarerelatively unstained because the
mous epithelial cells.Basalepithelial cells areround
stain is‘soaked up'by the granules.(b) Aspirate from an
and deeply basophilicwith a high N:Cratio.The cells
MCT on the prepuce of a Boxer. Compared with (a),the
in the most superficial layerbecome cornified (kerati-
mast cells aremuch larger,withmarkedvariation in cell
and nuclear size.The cytoplasmicgranules arevariable:
nized) and theirnuclei become pyknoticor disappear
some cells have abundant granules(black arrow) but in
completely.Hence,aspirates from cutaneous or sub-
other cells the granules are scant and fine(white arrow).
cutaneouslesionsmaycontainvariablenumbersof
Abinucleated cellis seen in the topright corner.(Wright's
cornified squamousepithelialcellsoranucleatedkerati-
stain;original magnification X1000)
nized squames (also referred to askeratin scrolls or
bars).As the cellsbecome keratinized,the cytoplasm
Although malignant melanomas(Figure 20.25) and
becomes lightblue(Romanowsky)and thecell outline
basal cell tumours(Figure20.26)may yield discrete
becomes angular.
round cells on cytological smears, they are not in-
Theadnexal structuresoftheepidermis include
cluded in this category (they are usually classified as
hair follicles, sweat glands and sebaceous glands.
mesenchymalandepithelial tumours,respectively).
Immediatelybelowtheepidermisisthedermisand
below thisis the subcutis.Aspirates of the dermis and
subcutis may contain adipose tissue, collagen and
glandular elements.
Subcutaneous non-neoplastic lesions
Abscess
Skin or subcutaneous abscesses are especially com-
monincats,and areoftentheresultofabitewound.A
creamywhitepurulent exudate isusually aspirated.
Cytologicalexaminationrevealsa large numberof
extremelydegenerateneutrophils,manyofwhichmay
contain intracellularbacteria (seeFigure 20.11). Sta-
phylococciusually appearin small clusters,whereas
streptococci tend to formchains.Gram'sstain may be
20.25
Fineneedleaspirate fromamalignant melanoma.
helpful toidentifyorganisms in aspirates containinga
Although the cells areround,malignant
lot of cell debris.
melanomas are classified as mesenchymal tumours.Note
the melanin pigment granules.The nuclei contain at least
Actinomyces,Nocardia,Mycobacteriumand cer-
one large nucleolus.(Wright's stain;original magnification
tain fungal infections tend to elicit a mixed (pyogranu-
X1000)(Reproduced with permission from In Practice.)
lomatous) or granulomatous inflammatoryresponse.
Kofice
Chapter20Diagnosticcytology
Penetratingforeign bodiesare more likely tobe asso-
20.28
Fine
ciatedwitheitherNocardiaorActinomycesinfection.
needle
Thesubcutaneous swellings thatresult mayrupture,
aspiratefrom a
submandibular
leaving eitherarawulceratedlesion orfistulous tracts
salivary glandcyst
thatdischargereddishbrownfluid.Actinomyces and
(sialocele) ina
Nocardiaareslenderfilamentousbranchingrods,which
Springer Spaniel.
oftenhaveabeaded appearancewithRomanowsky
(a) A cluster of cells
staining.Actinomycesis Gram-positive but acid-fast-
withabundant finely
negative;Nocardia is also Gram-positive and may
vaculoated
cytoplasm.Some of
stainslightlyacid-fast-positive withZiehl-Neelsen(ZN)
thesecellscontain
stain.Myobacteriacancausedeep-seated abscesses,
phagocytosed red
especially in cats.Large numbers of negatively stain-
(a)
cells, suggesting
ing rods canbeseenwithin the cytoplasm of
theyareprobably
macrophagesonaRomanowsky-stained smear(these
macrophages.
stain positive withZN stain).
(b)The cell on the
right containsa
rhomboid crystal of
Haematoma
haematoidin,
Haematomas are large blood-filled masses,usually
indicatingprevious
resulting from trauma.An aspirate fromarecently
intracavitatory
formedhaematomahas the appearanceofblood,
haemorrhage.
except that platelets are usually absent.This is fol-
(Wright's stain;
lowedbyanincrease inthenumberof macrophages,
original
magnification
many ofwhich may contain phagocytosed red cells
X1000)
(Figure 20.27).Macrophages in longer standing hae-
(Axiom Veterinary
matomasmaycontainhaemoglobinbreakdownprod-
Laboratories.)
uctsinthe formofbluishblackhaemosideringranules
orhaematoidin crystals(see Figure 20.28b).As the
haematoma continues to organize, plump fibroblasts
Nodular panniculitis(steatitis)
maybe seen in aspirated fluid.
anceofdiscretesolitaryormultiplefluctuant lesions
on the dorsal trunk and neck.The lesions usually
rupture releasing a whitishoryellowbrown oily
fluid.Aspirates from such lesions contain a mixed
population of non-degenerate neutrophils and macro-
phages located in a“fatty'background deposit.A
similar type of lesion （lipogranuloma) can be seen
with injection sitereactions.Variable numbersof
small lymphocytes,plasma cells and mesenchymal-
type cells may also be seen.Culture and histological
examinationarerecommended torule out infectious
causes of panniculitis.
Cutaneous non-neoplastic lesions
20.27
Fine needle aspirate from a large haematoma
on the shoulderofa Labrador Retriever.This
consists of red blood cells and largereactive
Eosinophilicplaque/granuloma
macrophages,manyof which contain phagocytosed red
Feline eosinophilicplaques tend tooccur on theface,
cells(erythrophagocytosis).(Wright's stain;original
neck,abdomen and medial thighs.The lesions ulcer-
magnificationX10oo)(AxiomVeterinary Laboratories.)
ateandbecomesecondarilyinfectedwithbacteria.
Aspirates or impression smears from such lesions
Sialocele
consistof largenumbers ofeosinophilsand neutrophils
Sialoceles(orsalivary gland cysts) usuallyresult from
(see Figure 20.13).Mast cells may alsobe present.
traumaorinfection.Theyoftenforminthe submandibu-
larregionandcontainclearorblood-tingedfluid that
Epidermal inclusion cyst orepidermoid cyst
may appear quite viscous and stringy. Aspirates are
Epidermal inclusion cysts occur in middle-aged or
usuallycontaminatedwithbloodandcontainavariable
older dogs. They are usually firm or fluctuant and
numberof large,finelyvacuolatedmononuclearcells
wellcircumscribed.They are often located onthe
(Figure20.28a).These areprobably macrophages but
dorsum oron the tail head.Aspiratesconsistalmost
it has also been suggested that some of the non-
entirelyofkeratinized squamesand cellulardebris;
phagocyticcellsmaybereactiveglandular epithelial
cholesterol crystals and afewsmall clustersofnormal
cells.Someof themacrophagesmaycontainphago-
or dysplastic epithelial cellsmayalsobe seen(Figure
cytosedred cellsorhaemoglobinbreakdownproducts
20.29).Rupture of the cyst can induce an intense
intheformofhaematoidincrystals,indicatingprevious
localized pyogranulomatousresponse,necessitating
intracavitatory haemorrhage(Figure 20.28b).
surgical excision.
318
Chapter20Diagnostic cytology
tend tooccur mostfrequentlyon thehead,neck and
trunkofolderdogs.Sebaceousepithelialcellscontain
a moderate amountofpale,finelyvacuolated cyto-
plasm and a small centrally located nucleus (see
Figure 20.19).Sebaceous adenocarcinomas arerela-
tivelyrare.They areoftenulcerated andpoorly circum-
scribed,andthesebaceousepithelialcellsshowobvious
criteriaofmalignancy.
Squamous cell carcinoma
Squamouscell carcinoma (Scc) is a common tumour
indogsand,especially,cats.Incats,thetumoursmost
commonly occur on the tips of thepinnae orface,
20.29
Fineneedleaspiratefrom anepidermal
whereas in dogsthey aremore commonon the limbs,
inclusion cyst from a dog's back.This consists
especiallythe digits,nailbeds andfootpads.Thetumours
of a large number of keratinized squames.A cholesterol
tend to ulcerate. They are locally invasive and may
crystal canbe seen(arrowed)and a neutrophil is present
metastasize to the regional lymph node.
(N).(Wright's stain;original magnification X1000)
SCCsoftenelicitanintenseinflammatoryresponse.
(Axiom Veterinary Laboratories.)
Thecellsmayexfoliatesinglyorinclusters andmay
Tumoursofepithelialorigin
showvarying degreesofdifferentiation.Amixtureof
intermediate,superficialand anucleated squamous
Basal cell tumours
epithelial cellswithangularcellborders maybeseen in
Basal cell tumours are typically single,well circum-
well differentiated tumours.Some epithelial cellsmay
scribed,intradermal lesions.Occasionally they may
contain othercelltypes,e.g.neutrophils (thisis termed
ulcerateorbecomecysticbut they arealmostalways
emperipolesis),and there may be evidence of peri-
benign.Theyaremost frequentlylocated on theneck
nuclearvacuolation.Poorly differentiated SCCs,in
and limbs.Basal cells exfoliate in compact clusters.
contrast,showamoremarkeddegreeofanisocytosis
They have scant basophilic cytoplasm,which may
and anisokaryosis and the cells have a higher N:C
contain melanin or keratohyaline granules.Basal cell
ratio.Nuclear chromatin often has a coarseropey or
tumours in which basal cellspredominate are also
'moth-eaten’appearance(Figure 20.31).
called trichoblastomas(seeFigure 20.26).Some basal
cell tumoursshowevidenceofadnexal differentiation.
Thosewithsebaceousdifferentiationcontainseba-
ceous epithelial cellswithmore abundantvacuolated
cytoplasm and a round centrally located nucleus(Fig-
ure 20.30). Basal cell tumours that become cystic or
havefolliculardifferentiationmay containkeratinized
epithelial cellsorkeratinizeddebris.
(b)
20.31
Squamouscell carcinoma.(a)Fine needle
20.30
Fineneedle aspiratefrom abasal cell tumour
aspirate from an SCC on the nose of a 15-year-
with sebaceous differentiation.The epithelial
old cat.The cellshave round nuclei,containing several
cellshave around,basally located nucleus and an
prominent nucleoli,and moderate to abundant,intensely
extended'sock'of cytoplasm;if these cells were seen end
basophilic,cytoplasm.Amixed populationof small
on,theywould resemble those inFigure 20.27.The arrow
lymphocytesand neutrophils,with dark condensed
points to sebaceous epithelial cells.(Wright's stain;original
nuclear chromatin, is also present.(b)Fine needle
magnificationX10oo)(@AxiomVeterinaryLaboratories.)
aspirate from an SCC below the mandible of a cat. Note
theperinuclearvacuolationof thecytoplasm,coarse
Sebaceous adenoma
nuclear chromatin and large irregularly shaped nucleoli.
These tumoursareoftenmistakenlyreferred to as
Several non-degenerate neutrophils can also be seen.
‘warts'They areoftensmall multilobulatedlesions and
(Wright's stain;original magnification X500 (a),X1000 (b))
319
Chapter 20 Diagnostic cytology
Perianaladenoma
These are usually seen in intact male dogs (very
occasionally infemales)andmost arelocatedon the
perineum adjacent to the anus. They can also be found
occasionally on the tailand prepuce.Thelesions tend
to lobulate orulcerate as theyincrease in size.OnFNA
the cells exfoliate in clusters and arehepatoid in
appearance(i.e.they resemblehepatocytes;Figure
20.32).The cells have abundant granular pinkish/blue
cytoplasm (Romanowsky) and a round nucleus con-
taining a single centrally located nucleolus.Perianal
adenomas are benign;perianal adenocarcinomas are
rarely encountered.They tend to show moreobvious
criteria of malignancy but some may appearwell differ-
entiatedandcannotreliablybedifferentiatedfrom
adenomas on a cytological basis.
Fineneedle aspirate from an apocrine gland
20.33
tumour of the anal sac ina 7-year-old German
Shepherd bitch.Cells from these tumours often exfoliate in
large sheets,have a moderate amount of palebasophilic
cytoplasm anda round nucleus.Only amild degree of
anisocytosis and anisokaryosis is evident.(Wright's stain;
original magnificationX1000)(@AxiomVeterinary
Laboratories.)
Grossly,aspirates from lipomas have a greasy
appearance and consist of numerousfat droplets that
can be stained with Sudanred.Intact adipocytes may
be aspirated either singly or in large aggregates.
Adipocytes have abundant clear cytoplasm and a
small dark nucleus, which is compressed on the peri-
20.32
Fineneedle aspirate from a smallperianal mass
phery of the cell(Figure 20.34a). Small blood vessels
on an entire male Cocker Spaniel.There is a
may also be seen.Since normal adipose tissue ap-
small cluster of epithelial cellswithround uniform nuclei
pears similar cytologically, diagnosis of a lipoma is
and abundant basophilic,grainycytoplasmresembling
hepatocyte cytoplasm(hence the term hepatoid tumour).
based on an assumption that the aspirate is repre-
(Wright's stain;original magnificationX1000)(Courtesy of
sentative of the lesion under investigation and that the
EVilliers)
aspirate hasnotbeen taken fromperilesional fat.
Liposarcomas arerare tumours.Theyhavebeen
Apocrine gland adenocarcinoma of the anal sac
reported most frequently on the ventral abdomen. They
These tumours arise from the glandsin thewallsof the
are firm,poorly demarcated and adhere to underlying
anal sacs.Theyhave a greater tendency to occur in
tissue.Some may ulcerate.Aspirates consist of dense
olderfemale dogs.Adenocarcinomas of the anal sac are
aggregatesof plumpspindle-shapedmesenchymal cells
malignant and have often spread to the sublumbar
containingnumerousvariably sized lipidvacuoles.The
lymph nodes by the time they are diagnosed. For this
cells show obvious malignant features such as large
reason it isimportant theyaredifferentiatedfromperi-
vesicularnucleiwithprominent nucleoli,variationinN:C
anal adenomas.Up to 50%of cases have a para-
ratio and multinucleation(Figure 20.34b).
neoplastichypercalcaemia(see Chapter 8).Cells from
these tumours usually exfoliate inlarge sheetsorclus-
ters and have amoderate amountofpalebasophilic
cytoplasm and around or oval nucleus;cytoplasmic
margins are poorly defined (Figure 20.33).Malignant
characteristics are usuallypresentbut may not be as
pronounced aswith carcinomasinvolving othertissues.
Tumoursofmesenchymalorigin
Lipoma
Lipomas are commonbenignmesenchymal tumours.
They usually affect older obese dogs and occur most
commonly on the trunk and proximal limbs.Most lipo-
mas are soft discrete masses that arise in the subcutis.
20.34
(a)Lipoma:the aspirate resembles normal
adipose tissue.(Wright's stain;original
slowly.Some lipomasmayinfiltratebetween muscles.
magnificationX10oo)(@AxiomVeterinary Laboratories.)
320
Chapter20Diagnosticcytology
lot of blood.Small elongated endothelial cells are
oftenpresent inverylownumbersandmaybe
difficult toidentify if the aspirateisseverelycontami-
natedwithblood.
Cutaneousorsubcutaneoushaemangiosarcomas
arerelativelyraretumoursofolderdogsandcats.
Some haemangiosarcomas appear well differenti-
ated and cannot be differentiated from haemangi-
omas.In contrast,the cells aspirated fromanaplastic
haemangiosarcomas have a high N:C ratio,oval
nucleiwith a coarsenuclear chromatin pattern and
prominent nucleoli,and basophilic cytoplasm that
may be vacuolated(Figures20.36and 20.56).There
(b)
maybeevidenceoferythrophagocytosisand/or
chronic haemorrhage (haemosiderin-laden macro-
20.34
(b) Liposarcoma: the aspirate contains a
phages may be present).
population of mesenchymal cells showing
several criteria of malignancy.(Wright's stain;original
magnificationX10oo)(@AxiomVeterinaryLaboratories.)
Haemangiopericytoma
Haemangiopericytomas are relatively common
tumours,which are thought to arisefrom the cells that
linebloodvessels.Theyoccur in dogs and are most
frequentlylocatedon the limbs.Althoughtheyusually
donotmetastasize,haemangiopericytomasarelocally
invasive andwith conservative excision therateof
recurrence is high.Fine needle aspirates are often
quite cellular and consist of plump spindle cells(Figure
20.35) with an oval-shaped nucleus and basophilic
cytoplasm,whichmaybevacuolated.Nuclearchroma-
20.36
tinhasacoarsestippledorreticulatedappearance
Fineneedleaspiratefromacutaneous
haemangiosarcomalocatedover theelbow joint
(see Figure 20.20a).Some cellsmaybe seen adhering
of a Boxer,showing a population of spindle-shaped cells
to the surface of capillaries.
with elongated cytoplasmic tails.A mild to moderate
degree of anisocytosis and anisokaryosisis evident.
Cytologically,itwouldbe difficult todifferentiate this
tumour from the haemangiopericytoma shown in Figure
20.35(although from a clinical perspective the mass
would appearquite different).Histological examination
would almost certainlyberequired toprovide a definitive
diagnosis. (Wright's stain;original magnification X1000)
(AxiomVeterinary Laboratories.)
Fibromaand fibrosarcoma
Fibromasarerelativelyrare tumours and arecom-
posed of well differentiated spindle cells with an oval
nucleus and elongated cytoplasmic tails extending
away from the nucleus.Fibrosarcomas are more
common,particularlyinthecat,andhaveapredilec-
tionforthe oralcavity,headand limbs.These tumours
arepoorlycircumscribed andmayulcerate.Vaccine-
inducedfibrosarcomas arelocallyinvasiveand slow
20.35
Fineneedleaspiratefromahaemangiopericytoma
on the thigh of a Bull Mastiff bitch.Theplump
tometastasize.Aspirates taken fromreactive granu-
spindle-shaped cells have wispy cytoplasmic tails and
lationtissue,fibromasandwell differentiatedfibro-
round or oval nuclei.The nuclear chromatin is quite
sarcomas may appear remarkably similar,making
coarse and some nuclei contain oneormore small bluish
nucleoli.(Wright's stain;original magnification X1000)
Cellsfrom lesswelldifferentiated fibrosarcomasare
(AxiomVeterinaryLaboratories.)
plumper and have a higher N:Cratio(see Figures
20.21 and 20.37).Nuclear pleomorphism is more
Haemangioma and haemangiosarcoma
pronounced and the occasional multinucleated giant
Haemangiomas are benign tumours arising from
cell maybepresent.Thecellsmaybe located in an
vascularendothelialcellsandaremorecommonin
eosinophilic matrix material (collagen).Histology is
dogs than cats.They may be solitary or multiple,are
oftenrequiredtodifferentiatefibrosarcomasfrom
dark red in colour,and aspirates usually contain a
other spindle cell tumours.
321
Chapter20Diagnosticcytology
Otherhistiocyticneoplasms
Other histiocytic neoplasms that can involve the skin
includecutaneoushistiocytosis,systemic histiocytosis
and malignant histiocytosis.
Canine cutaneous histiocytosis is characterized
by the developmentofmultifocal lesionssimilar
to those described for cutaneoushistiocytoma.The
lesionsmaywaxandwaneoveraperiodofmonths
toyears.
Systemichistiocytosisoccursinyoungadultmale
BerneseMountainDogsbut has alsobeenreported in
otherbreeds.The skin is consistently affected but
regional lymph nodes and ocular sites (e.g. conjunc-
tiva) may alsobe involved.Like cutaneous histiocyto-
20.37
Fine needle aspirate from a suspectedvaccine-
induced sarcoma on theneck of a cat.The
sis, this disorder follows a chronic waxing and waning
course.The histiocytes in systemic histiocytosis do not
cytoplasm of these spindle cells is vacuolated and there is
marked anisocytosis,anisokaryosis and variation inN:C
showthedegreeof malignantatypiaseeninmalignant
ratio.Nuclear chromatin appears coarse and each
histiocytosis. Aspirates may also contain moderate
nucleus contains a large irregular nucleolus.The cells are
numbers of lymphocytesand neutrophils.
located in a granular eosinophilicbackground deposit.
Malignant histiocytosis is a rapidly progressive dis-
(Wright's stain;original magnificationX10oo)(@Axiom
ease that occurs inolderBernese MountainDogs and,
Veterinary Laboratories.)
less frequently,in other breeds.lt has also been
reportedincats.Malignanthistiocytesmayinfiltratethe
Melanoma
spleen,lymph nodes,lung andbone marrow;the skin
Benignandmalignantmelanomas occurmore frequently
is only occasionallyinvolved.Aspirates containlarge
in dogs than in cats.The capacity of a melanoma to
mononuclear cells with abundant vacuolated cyto-
metastasize depends on its location.Tumours arising in
plasmshowing markedanisocytosis and anisokaryosis
the digits,oral cavity or mucocutaneousjunctions,e.g.
(see Figure 20.58). There may be evidence of
on the lip,generally carry a much poorerprognosisthan
cytophagia.Nuclear chromatin appears coarse and
cutaneousmelanomas.The cytological appearance of
the nuclei often contain largeprominent nucleoli.In
cells inaspiratesfrom melanomasvaries from epithe-
addition,there may be evidence of multinucleation,
lioid tomesenchymal; in some cases the cells can even
and numerous abnormal mitoticfiguresmaybepresent.
resemble those seen in discreteround cell tumours.
Melaninpigmentgranulescanusuallybe seenwithinthe
Mastcell tumour
cells,althoughthe degree of pigmentation is oftenquite
This is an extremely common tumour in dogs,occur-
variable.Cellsfromwelldifferentiatedmelanomascon-
ring most frequently on the trunk and limbs.The preva-
tain numerous fine black-green granules,which may
lence ishighest in theBoxer,PugandBostonTerrier.
obscure nuclearmorphology.Cells frompoorly differen-
Mast cell tumours occurless frequently in cats.
tiated tumours,in contrast,may containscantmelanin
They tend to occur on the head, neck and limbs.Most
pigment granules and the cells usuallyhavelarge nuclei
solitary lesions are benign.Multiple‘histiocytic type”
containing several large irregularnucleoli.Anisocytosis
mastcelltumourshavebeenreportedinyoung Siamese
and anisokaryosis are usually evident(see Figure 20.25).
cats.Thelesions oftenregress spontaneously.
Amelanoticmelanomas are quite rare;withcareful
Mastcellscontain azurophiliccytoplasmicgranules
examination,a few melanin granules can usually be
thatcanobscure thenuclei.It shouldbenoted that
seen in at least a few of the cells.
somewater-solublerapidRomanowskystainsmaynot
stain mast cell granules.The degree of cytoplasmic
Discreteround cell tumours
granularity isquitevariable.Mast cellswith densely
packed cytoplasmic granules and nuclei of uniform
Caninehistiocytoma
sizearegenerallyregarded asbeingwell differenti-
Histiocytomas arevery commontumours thatoriginate
ated(seeFigure 20.24a).As the malignant potential
from epidermal Langerhans'cells.Mostoccurinyoung
ofthetumourincreases,thecytoplasmcontainsfewer
dogs less than 5 years of age. They are small, well
granules,the nuclei contain large prominent nucleoli,
circumscribed tumours and canoccur on thehead
and a more marked degree of anisocytosis,
(especially the pinnae),paws,limbs and trunk.Some
anisokaryosis and variation inN:Cratiobecomes
mayulcerate;most regress spontaneously.Despite
evident(seeFigure20.24b).Toluidine blue can be
thefact that thesetumoursarebenign,the cellscan
showamild tomoderatedegreeofanisocytosis and
atedcells.Determining the frequencyof agyrophilic
anisokaryosis.Thenuclei areround,oval orindented
and thecellshave amoderate amountofpalebaso-
showntocorrelatewell with thehistological gradeof
philic cytoplasm(see Figure 20.23).Some nucleimay
the tumour in dogs (Kravis et al.,1996).Aspirates
contain one or more poorly defined nucleoli.An in-
from mostcaninemast cell tumours also contain a
creasednumberoflymphocytesmaybeseenasthe
moderate numberof eosinophils.Mesenchymal cells
tumour starts to regress.
are also frequentlyobserved(Figure 20.38).
322
Chapter20Diagnosticcytology
basophilic cytoplasm(Figure 20.40).Occasionally,in
addition to generalized skin involvement,circulating
T cells are present in the blood,i.e. the animal is
leukaemic (this is known as Sezary syndrome). The
non-epitheliotrophicform of cutaneous lymphoma in-
volves the infiltrationofthe dermisand subcutisby
neoplasticlymphoid cells.
20.38
Fineneedle aspirate from a mast cell tumour on
the flank of a Boxer.There are numerous mast
cells with dense azurophilic cytoplasmic granules.Three
eosinophils arepresent(red arrows)andone large
mesenchymal cell,probablyareactive fibrocyte,can also
be seen (white arrow).(Wright's stain;original
magnificationX10o0)(@AxiomVeterinary Laboratories.)
20.40
Fineneedle aspiratefrom an11-year-old
GermanPointerwith epitheliotrophic lymphoma
Extramedullaryplasmacytoma
(mycosis fungoides).The cells are quite large (the nuclei
Plasmacytomasareneoplasticproliferationsofplasma
areapproximately threetimesthe diameterofaredblood
cells. They have been reported on the skin especially the
cell)and have a variable amount of basophilic cytoplasm.
digitsandears),ralcavity,gingivaandtongueofoldr
The nucleiareround,indented or convoluted.One mitotic
dogs,but are rare in cats.Although the cells can appear
figure is present (arrowed).(Wright's stain;original
magnificationX10oo)(@AxiomVeterinary Laboratories.)
extremelypleomorphic,mostplasmacytomasarebe-
nign and surgical excision is usually curative.Aspirates
are usuallyquite cellular.The cells have a variable
Canine transmissiblevenereal tumour
amount of darkbasophiliccytoplasm andaround ec-
Transmissible venereal tumours(TVTs) are most
centricallyplaced nucleus with a coarse chromatinpat-
frequentlyseeninyoung,roaming,sexuallyactivedogs.
tern.Amoderate degree of anisocytosis,anisokaryosis
They arise as a result of sexual contact and transplan-
andvariationinN:Cratioisusuallyevident.Binucleated
tation of intactcells.In the UK they areusuallyonly seen
and/or multinucleated cells areoftenpresent(Figure
in dogsimported from temperate climates.Thelesions
20.39). Pink amorphous material (amyloid) may be
areusually locatedon theexternalgenitalia ororonasal
intimatelyassociatedwith theplasmacytoidcells.
area,and are poorly circumscribed,ulcerated and
haemorrhagic.Superficial secondarybacterial infection
Fine needle
iscommon.The cells from TVTs are large and round
20.39
aspirate from
withamoderate amount ofpalebasophiliccytoplasm
aplasmacytomaonthe
thatmaycontainsmallpunctatevacuoles(Figure 20.41).
muzzle of a terrier
Thenucleiareround,withcoarsenuclearchromatinand
cross. The cells have
 one or two prominent nucleolil Mitotic figures and a
darkbasophilic
cytoplasm and a round
mixed inflammatory cellpopulation may be present. The
eccentrically placed
lesionsmayregress spontaneously.Metastasis is rare
nucleus.One large
but the rate of recurrence ishigh.
binucleated cell is
present(arrowed).
(Wright's stain; original
magnification X1000)
(AxiomVeterinary
Laboratories.)
Cutaneouslymphoma
Lymphomamayariseprimarilyin the skinor,occasion-
ally,as a manifestation of generalized lymphoma.
Cutaneous lymphoma usuallypresents assolitary or
multiple nodules or plaques. It can be classified as
epitheliotrophic(alsoknown asmycosis fungoides) or
20.41
Fineneedle aspirate froma transmissible
non-epitheliotrophic.Epitheliotrophic lymphoma is the
venereal tumour in thevagina of acrossbred
more common form and is usually of T cellorigin.The
bitch that had been livingin Spain,showinga populationof
neoplasticT cells infiltrate theepidermis and adnexa.
round cells with some variation inN:Cratio.Note the
They vary in size from small to large,with round,
punctatecytoplasmic vacuoles.Neutrophils arealso present.
Secondary superficial inflammation and/orinfectionis
indentedorconvolutednuclei thatmaycontainvisible
commonwith these tumours.(Wright's stain;original
nucleoli.The cellspossess a variable amount ofpale
magnificationX1000)(@AxiomVeterinary Laboratories.)
323
Chapter20Diagnosticcytology
Cytologyof lymphnodes
A fewtingiblebodymacrophages,lymphoglandular
bodies,andverylownumbersof plasmacellsmaybe
Direct FNA cytology is a useful diagnostic tool to
seen.
identify the cause of lymphadenopathy in apatient
without the need for anaesthesia.Cytology may
Tingiblebodymacrophagesarelarge
help in the diagnosis ofbenign lymph node hyper-
mononuclear cellswith abundantbasophilic
plasia,lymphoma,lymphadenitis(where infectious
vacuolated cytoplasm.In areasofhigh cell
agents (e.g. Leishmania) may be identified) and
turnover the macrophages contain phagocytosed
metastatic neoplasia.
basophilic cellular debris,hence thename
tingible body macrophages.
Sampling
Lymphoglandular bodies are basophilic
FNA isperformed using the needle-only or continu-
fragments of lymphoid cytoplasm,which are
 ous suction method as described earlier. Impression
approximately a quarter the size of a red blood
smearsof biopsied lymphnodescan alsobeexam-
cell.Their presence reflects the increased
ined.lfmulticentriclymphadenopathyispresent,more
fragility of neoplastic lymphocytes.
Bare nuclei that lackintactcytoplasmcan have
then one lymph node should always be aspirated. The
bestsamplesareoften harvestedfrom thepopliteal
prominent nucleoli.These nucleimust not be
node:the submandibular lymph node is often very
confused with lymphoblasts as they are of no
reactive,reflecting oral/dental disease;and pre-
diagnostic significance.
scapular lymph node aspirates frequently contain
Plasma cells(seeFigure 20.43)have a moderate
N:Cratio,an eccentricnucleus with clumped
variableamountsofcell-freefatthatoftenincreases
chromatin(often arranged like the spokes of a
the fragilityof thelymphocytes,resultinginruptureof
wheel) and deeply basophilic cytoplasm;many
cells orpoor preservation.
have a pale perinuclear area compatible with a
Normal findings
Golgi zone.
In a smear from a‘normal non-enlarged lymph node,
In addition,smears fromnormal nodes maycontain
small welldifferentiated lymphocytespredominate
the occasional mast cell.Feline lymph nodes may
(>90%),with lower numbers of medium-sized and
containa higherproportion of mast cells compared to
large lymphocytes (lymphoblasts).
canine lymphnodes.lIt canbedifficult todistinguish
relativelywelldifferentiatedmetastaticmastcellsfrom
Small lymphocyteshave a diameter
reactive mast cells that arepart of the‘normal’cell
approximately 1.5 times that of a red blood cell,
population within lymph nodes. Some authors quote up 
a single round nucleus, densely clumped
to3%mast cells or6mastcellsper slide as acceptable.
chromatin,nonucleoliandscantbasophilic
cytoplasm.
Abnormalfindings
Lymphoblasts(Figure 20.42)are 2-4 times the
Lymphnode hyperplasia
size of a red blood cell.They have abundant pale
Lymph node hyperplasia occurs in response to any
basophilic cytoplasm and a lower N:C ratio than
antigenic stimulus.Cytologically,small lymphocytes
small lymphocytes, diffuse finely stippled
stillpredominatebutmedium-sized lymphocytesand
chromatin,and a variablenumberofnucleoli.
lymphoblastsmayconstituteupto20%of the lymphoid
population.Increased numbers of plasma cells and
macrophages may also be seen.Mott cells may be
present;these areplasma cellscontaining numerous
large, lightly basophilic spherical structures (Russell
bodies) that contain immunoglobulin (Figure 20.43).
Small
lymphocytes
Plasma cells
Large lymphoblast
Mott cell
20.43
Fine needle aspirate from areactive/
20.42
Fineneedleaspirate from the submandibular
hyperplastic lymph node in a dog.The
Iymph node.Observe the difference in size
presence of increased numbers of plasma cells and Mott
betweena'normal'smallymphocyteanda large
cells indicatesaresponse toa strong immunological
lymphocyte/lymphoblast.(Wright's stain;original
stimulus.(Wright's stain;original magnification X500)
magnificationX50o)(AxiomVeterinary Laboratories.)
(Axiom Veterinary Laboratories.)
324
Chapter20Diagnostic cytology
Lymphoma
In dogs,low-gradelymphomasoccurlesscommonly
Lymphoma is characterized by the proliferation of
and are difficult to diagnose cytologicallybecause the
neoplastic lymphocytes formed as a result of prolifera-
proliferating neoplastic cells are small, well differenti-
tionof amalignant clone of lymphoid cells.Most lympho-
ated lymphocytesthataremorphologicallyindistinguish-
masindogs areofhigh grade and thustheproliferating
able from normal small lymphocytes. If a fine needle
cells are lymphoblasts (Figure 20.44).A cytological
aspirateof amarkedlyenlarged lymphnodeconsists of
diagnosis of lymphoma is established when a single
a monomorphicpopulation of small lymphocyteswith-
population of lymphoblasts forms>50%of the total
 out reactive change, small cell lymphoma should be
lymphoidpopulation.lnearlycasesoflymphoma,where
considered(Figure20.45).However,definitive diagno-
thepopulation of malignant lymphoblasts isincreased
sisoftenrequiresexcisionand histologicalevaluationof
but does not exceed50%of the total population, the
the lymph node.Mixed (smalland large lymphocytes)
cytological interpretation will be equivocal and histologi-
cal evaluation is required.Histological investigation
and require histological confirmation.
entails assessment of architectureof the node and
Lymphoglandular
bodies
cell
20.45
Fine needle aspirate from a lymph node of a
(a)
Nucleoli
patient with prominent multicentric
lymphadenopathy.The majority of cells are small
lymphocytes.Some have comet tails of cytoplasm
Nucleoli
extending from the nucleus(so-called ‘hand-mirror
morphology);these tails extend in different directions,
distinguishing them from artefacts caused during smear
preparation.The monomorphicpopulation of small
lymphocytes is suggestive of small cell(lymphocytic)
lymphoma;thiswas confirmed byhistopathology.
(Wright's stain;original magnificationX50o)(@Axiom
Veterinary Laboratories.)
In cats,lymphomamaybemore difficult to diag-
nosewithcytologybecausemixed-orlow-gradelym-
phomas aremore common.In addition,certain forms
(q)
ofreactive hyperplasiamaybeverymarked andcanbe
confused with lymphoma.
20.44
Centroblastic subtype of B cell lymphoma: fine
Morphological features of neoplasticcellsmaybe
needle aspirate from thepopliteal lymphnode
of an adult dog with generalized lymphadenopathy.The
used toclassifylymphomas.Inveterinary medicine the
cellshave a round nucleus,fine chromatin pattern,two to
updated Kiel Classification, which considers morphol-
fourprominent small basophilicmarginallyplacednucleoli
ogy and immunophenotype, is most frequently used
andscantbasophiliccytoplasm.Centroblastic lymphoma
(Fournel-Fleury et al.,1997;Raskin,2001). Immuno-
is the most common subtypein dogs,representing about
phenotyping canbe carriedout on cytological as well
half of all canine lymphoma cases.(Wright's stain;original
as histological specimens to identify B, T or null cell
magnificationX500(a),X1000(b))(@AxiomVeterinary
lymphomas (Figure 20.46). In general,lymphomas of
Laboratories.)
BcellphenotypehaveabetterprognosisthenTcell
Tingible body macrophages,which phagocytose
lymphomas.However,a recent study demonstrated
lymphocyteremnants,may increase in number with
Burkitt-likeBcellymphomawas associatedwithavery
lymphoma due to increased rates of cell death
poorprognosis,whilstone subtypeof Tcell lymphoma
(apoptosis). Lymphoglandularbodies may be present in
(classified as clear cell lymphoma) was associated
low numbers in normal or hyperplastic lymph nodes but 
with a relatively favourableprognosis(Ponce et al,
are usually present in high numbers in lymphoma.This
2004).Thus,simply classifying lymphoma as B cell or
maybedueto theincreased fragilityof the neoplastic
T cell appearstobe anoversimplification;morphologi-
lymphocytes,which aremore susceptible to rupture.
cal classification is also important.
325
Chapter20 Diagnostic cytology
20.46
Immunophenotyping.
Medulla
Immunohistochemical
staining with CD79a of a
section of canine lymph
node. Strong positive
(brown) staining of the
lymphoid population,
which haseffacedmost
of the lymph node,
indicates that this is a
B celllymphoma.
Residual Tlymphocytes
in the medullary cords
arenegative for CD79a
but stained positively for
CD3. Arrows in (b)
indicateCD79a+
lymphoid cells. (Original
magnification X40 (a),
X100(b))(Courtesy of
KCSmithand MA
Eosinophils
Silkstone)
(b)
20.47
(a) Suppurative lymphadenitis.Lymph node
aspirate showing increased numbersof
neutrophils and plasma cells,in addition to theresident
lymphoid population.(b) Eosinophilic lymphadenitis.
Lymph node aspirate from aWest HighlandWhiteTerrier
with a history of chronic skin disease.There are increased
numbers of eosinophils,plasma cells and macrophages,
Lymphadenitis
and also increased numbers of medium-sized and large
Lymphadenitisischaracterizedbyanincreasednumber
lymphoid cells.(Wright's stain;original magnification X500
of inflammatorycellsinthelymphnode,usuallyaccom-
(a),X400 (b))(@Axiom Veterinary Laboratories.)
paniedbyreactive lymphoidhyperplasia.Three types
of lymphadenitismaybe seen:
Suppurative lymphadenitis:Increased
numbers of neutrophils(Figure20.47a) may be
associatedwithmetastaticrapidlyexpanding
tumours(especially squamous cell carcinoma),
bacterial infections and fungal orprotozoal
(e.g. Toxoplasma) infections
Granulomatous/pyogranulomatous
lymphadenitis:Increased numbers of
Malignantcells
macrophages,withorwithoutincreasednumbers
of neutrophils,maybe associatedwith
a)
leishmaniasisormycobacterial infections
Mast cells
Eosinophiliclymphadenitis:Increased
numbers of eosinophils(Figure 20.47b),mast
cells and sometimes melanophages may be
observed with chronic skin conditions
(dermatopathic lymphadenopathy),allergic
conditions involving therespiratoryor
gastrointestinal tract(where tracheobronchial or
mesentericlymphadenopathy maybeobserved)
orinassociationwithmetastaticmast cell
tumours. Eosinophilic lymphadenitis is also seen
(b)
occasionally in feline lymphoma.
20.48
Metastatic lymph node tumours.(a) Carcinoma.
There are clusters and individual epithelial cells
Metastaticneoplasia
that are not normally resident in this regional lymph node.
Malignanttumoursoftenmetastasizetoregionallymph
These cells exhibit several criteria of malignancy:large
nodes via haematogenous or lymphatic routes.Meta-
nuclei,variable N:Cratio and prominent nucleoli.(b) Mast
stasis to a lymphnode occursmore commonlywith
cell tumour.There are high numbers of mast cells in this
aspirate froma lymphnodedraining an area fromwhicha
epithelial(Figure20.48a)orglandulartumours,round
cell tumours(e.g.mast cell tumours;Figure 20.48b)
tumourwasremoved.(Wright's stain;original magnification
andmelanomasthanwithsarcomas.
X100 (a),X500 (b)(@Axiom Veterinary Laboratories.)
326
Chapter20Diagnosticcytology
Cytologicalexaminationrevealsabackgroundpopu-
Cytology of the liver,spleen and kidney
lationof lymphoidcells compatiblewithareactive/
Sampling
hyperplasticnode.Metastatictumour cells are seen
Specimens of liver, spleen and kidney for cytological
eitherasscattered individual cells,orasgroupsof cells
concentrated in one area of the smear.The cells are
examination can be collected by percutaneous FNA.
non-haemopoietic inorigin and are morphologically dis-
Smears are prepared using the methods described
tinct fromthelymphoidand inflammatorycellpopulations
above (the squash technique ispreferred).Aspirates
seen in benign disease.The cell type may be apparent
arebestcollected underultrasound guidancetoen-
(e.g.epithelial, mesenchymal) or the cells may appear
sure that a representative sample isobtained.This is
anaplastic (poorly differentiated)As noted earlier,it an
especially important when sampling nodular or focal
bedifficult todistinguishametastaticwell differentiated
lesions.Impression smears can be prepared from
mast cell tumour from mast cells that are part of the
biopsy samples.
‘normal' cell population within the lymph node. Higher
FNA is usually performedwith the animalin dorsal or
percentages of mastcells orpoorly granulated mast cells
right lateralrecumbency.The technique is similarto that
suggest potential metastasis. Concurrent lymphadenitis
describedearlier,except that a slightlylonger22gauge
1-1.5inchneedleisusuallyrequired.Spinalneedlesare
maybepresent if the tumourisrapidlyexpansile.
A recent study in dogs and cats found that FNA
also suitable.Aspiratesfrom these organs areinvariably
cytology showed100%sensitivityand96%specificity
contaminatedwithblood,and thismustbe taken into
in detecting tumourmetastasesinlymphnodes,where
consideration when examining and interpreting smears.
histological examination of the entire node was the
The degree of blood contamination can be minimized by
gold standard (Langenbach et al, 2001). However,
using the non-suction(needle-only) technique.
while apositive identificationofmetastasisisalways
Liver
significant,anegativeresultoncytologydoesnotrule
Clotting times (one-stage prothrombin and activated
out the presence of metastatic disease.
partialthromboplastintimes)andbuccalmucosalbleed-
Haemopoieticneoplasia
ing timeshouldbechecked in animalswith severe
diffuse hepaticdysfunction as these patients may have
Lymphoma is discussed above.Other haemopoietic
tumours,including lymphoid leukaemia(Figure 20.49),
clinically significant coagulation defects that contrain-
myeloid leukaemia andmalignanthistiocytosis,mayalo
dicate sampling.Samples can be collected easily from
infitrate lymph nodes. Diagnosis is made in the context 
d   e    s
of peripheral blood and bone marrow evaluation.
beyond the costal arch.lf the liver cannotbe palpated,
theneedle should be insertedcraniomedially into the
liver through the left 12t or13h intercostal space.Focal
lesions should be visualized using ultrasonography.
Small lymphocytes
Complications are rare.
Normalfindings
Liver aspirates are usually quite cellular. Hepatocytes
exfoliate readily,either as single cells or in clusters.
Normal hepatocytes have a moderate amount of pale
basophiliccytoplasm andaround nucleus witha single
prominent nucleolus (Figure 20.50).The cytoplasm
 often appears granular and has a pinkish tinge (Ro-
manowsky). Some cells may appear vacuolated or
contain scant greenish-black bilepigment granules.
Cytoplasmic margins are well defined.Compact clus-
tersofsmallercuboidalorlowcolumnarepithelialcells,
witharoundnucleusandrelatively littlecytoplasm,
mayalsobepresent;these arebiliary epithelial cells.
0000
(b)n oc
20.49
Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia.(a) Infiltration of
a lymph node.Interpretation was made based
on other haematological findings, as it is not possible to
20.50
Normal feline hepatocytes. The cells have a
distinguish the neoplastic small lymphocytesfrom the
round nucleus and amoderate amount of rather
'normal'resident small lymphocytes using light microscopy.
granular palebasophilic cytoplasm.Each nucleus contains
(b)Peripheral blood from the patient,which had presented
a single,centrallylocated nucleolus.Thecells and theirnuclei
withmarked lymphocytosis andhepato/splenomegaly.
are of uniform size and shape.(Wright's stain;original
(Wright's stain;original magnificationX500(a),X400(b))
magnificationX50o)(@AxiomVeterinary Laboratories.)
327
Chapter 20 Diagnostic cytology
Common non-neoplastic disorders
Cholestasis:This results in the accumulation of intra-
cytoplasmicbilepigment andformationofcanalicular
bile casts(Figure 20.51).Cholestasis is often accom-
evidenceof inflammation.
20.51
Cholestasis
resultsin
the accumulation of
intracytoplasmicbile
pigmentand the
formation of bile casts
(arrowed).(Wright's
stain; original
20.52
Feline hepaticlipidosis.Fine needle aspirate
magnificationX500)
from the liver of an adult British Shorthair cat
(AxiomVeterinary
with hepatomegaly and jaundice.The hepatocytes'
Laboratories.)
cytoplasm is distendedwith numerous large clear
vacuoles,consistent with accumulation of fat.(Wright's
stain;original magnification X10o0)(Courtesy of EVilliers)
Glucocorticoid hepatopathy:Glucocorticoid adminis-
trationtodogsresultsinamoderatetomarkedincrease
Inflammation(cholangitis orcholangiohepatitis):
inserumALPactivitywithlesspronouncedincreases in
Cholangiohepatitis occurs more frequentlyin cats than
otherliverenzymessuchasGGTandalanineamino-
in dogs andcanbeclassified assuppurativeorlym-
transferase (ALT).The hepatocytes become swollen
phocytic. Diagnosis of inflammation is often difficult,
with glycogen and water(hydropic degeneration).Cyto-
especially in animalswith a marked neutrophilia,be-
logically,thismanifestsas diffuse cytoplasmicvacuola
cause fine needle aspirates from liver are always
tion(Figure 20.53)(thevacuolesareless discrete than
contaminated withblood.
those seen in casesof hepatic lipidosis).Similarabnor-
Suppurative cholangiohepatitis can arise as a re-
malities inhepatocytemorphology canbeseen inre-
sult of an ascendingbiliary tract infection.Aspirates
sponse to toxic insult and ischaemia.
containa largenumberofneutrophils thatare inti-
mately associatedwith clusters of hepatocytes.Bacte-
ria may be seen in some cases. In contrast, lymphocytic
cholangiohepatitis is characterized by the presence of
increased numbers of lymphocytesand plasma cells.
Differentiation of lymphocytic cholangioheptitis from
chroniclymphocyticleukaemiaorsmall cellymphoma
infiltrating the liver mayrequirebiopsy.Cytological
evidence ofcholestasis maybe seen inboth the
suppurative and lymphocytic forms of the disease.
Cytologicalexaminationofliveraspiratesfroma cat
withfelineinfectiousperitonitismay showevidenceof
apyogranulomatous inflammatoryresponse charac-
terizedbythepresenceofsignificantnumbersofnon-
Other causes of chronic pyogranulomatous inflamma-
tionoftheliverincludemycobacterialinfection,mycotic
20.53
Glucocorticoid hepatopathy.Fine needle
infections such as aspergillosis and histoplasmosis,
aspirate from the liverof a dogwith
hyperadrenocorticism.Hypercortisolaemia results in
and certain protozoal infections,e.g. leishmaniasis.
hepatocytes,characterizedby diffuse cytoplasmic
Feline hepaticlipidosis:Hepaticlipidosis tendsto
vacuolation.(Wright's stain;original magnification X500)
occurin obese cats.Clinical signs include anorexia,
(AxiomVeterinary Laboratories.)
jaundice and hepatomegaly.Affected animalsusually
have amarkedincreaseinalkalinephosphatase(ALP)
Extramedullary haemopoiesis:This occurs most
concentration with little orno increase ingamma-
frequently in response to chronic anaemia and is char-
glutamyl transferase (GGT)(see Chapter 12).The
acterized bythepresenceof late erythroid precursors in
condition iseasy todiagnoseona cytological basis.
the liver(and spleen;see Figure 20.55);myeloid precur-
Hepatocytesbecomedistendedwithmultiplediscrete
sors andmegakaryocytesmayalsobepresent in low
lipidvacuoles ofvarying size（Figure20.52)and the
numbers. Extramedullary haemopoiesis can also be
nuclei maybe pushed to the periphery of the cell.A
observed in dogswith chronichepatitis andnodular
milderdegreeof lipid accumulationinhepatocytescan
regenerative hyperplasia.A fewhaemopoieticprecur-
occur secondary to diabetes mellitus in dogs.
sorsmaybepresentin aspiratesfromnormal livers.
328
Chapter 20 Diagnostic cytology
Nodular hyperplasia:Hyperplasticnodulesof hepa-
ticparenchyma andfibrous tissuecanbeseen in the
liversofolderdogs.Onultrasound examination these
sia.Fineneedleaspiratesof theseregenerativenod-
ules yieldhepatocytesthatoften appearmorphologically
normal.The hepatocytesmaybeslightly largerthan
normal,and a mild degree of anisocytosis and
anisokaryosismaybeevident.Anincreased numberof
binucleated hepatocytes may also bepresent.On a
cytologicalbasissuchlesions are difficult, if notmpos
sible, to differentiate from hepatocellular adenomas
and,in somecases,well differentiated carcinomas.
(a)
Miscellaneous disorders resulting in pigment
accumulationwithinhepatocytes:
Copper toxicityoccursprimarilyinBedlington and
WestHighlandWhiteTerriers.Fineneedle
aspiratesfrom affected animals contain amixed
inflammatory cell population.Rubeanic acid can
be used todemonstratecopperwithin
hepatocytesaspalegreengranules
Increased storesofhaemosiderinwithin
hepatocytesmaybeassociated with immune-
b
mediated haemolytic disease.Haemosiderin
20.54
Primary liver tumours.(a)Hepatocellular
stainsbluishblackwithPrussianblue
carcinoma in a dog. The hepatocytes have
Lipofuscin pigment granulesstainblue with Luxol
darkerandmore basophiliccytoplasm;thenuclei contain
blue.Lipofuscin accumulation doesnotrepresent
multiple prominent nucleoli. Some of the nucleoliare
a pathological process. lt is most frequently
exceptionally large.(b) Bile duct carcinoma ina cat.The
cellsin this aspirate are approximately thesame size as
observed in thehepatocytesof oldercats and
maybeconfusedwith bilepigment.
lesscytoplasm thanhepatocytes and showfewof the
Primarylivertumours
bile duct carcinoma was confirmed histologically.
Primary epithelial tumours of the liver include hepato-
(Wright's stain;original magnificationX1000（a),X500(b))
cellular adenomas/adenocarcinomas and cholangio-
(AxiomVeterinaryLaboratories.)
cellular(bile duct)adenomas/carcinomas.Fine needle
aspiratesfromlivertumours are typically hypercellular
Tumourmetastases and liver involvement in
and contain large cell clusters.
haemopoieticneoplasia
Hepatomasarerelativelyraretumours,whichtend
Tumourmetastases inthe livercanoftenbe detected
toinvolve one liver lobe.Cytological differentiation of
cytologically.Metastasistothe liver maybe expected
hepatomasfromnodularhyperplasiaisdifficult,if not
with neuroendocrine tumours(e.g.pancreaticislet
impossible.Hepatocellular carcinomas also tend to
celltumours),disseminatedmastocytosis,carcinoma
involve a single liver lobe.Diagnosisof hepatocellular
(e.g.pancreas,intestinal tract) or sarcoma(e.g.hae-
carcinoma isbased on thepresence ofhepatocytes
mangiosarcoma). Similarly, malignant histiocytosis
that are showing obvious signs of malignancy (e.g.
(seeFigure20.58)and haemolymphaticneoplasia
darkbasophiliccytoplasm,highN:Cratio,largenuclei
(particularly lymphoma,acute lymphoblastic leukae-
with large prominentnucleoli and evidence of
mia and acute myeloid leukaemia;see Spleen,be-
multinucleation)(Figure20.54a).Poorly differentiated
low)commonly involve the liver.Although in most
hepatocellularcarcinomasmaybeimpossibletodiffer-
casestheneoplasticcellscanbe classifiedinto oneof
entiate from metastatic carcinoma, e.g. of the pan-
the previouslymentioned categories,special immu-
creas. Conversely, some hepatocellular carcinomas
nocytochemical staining techniques may be required
contain hepatocytes that do not appear overtly malig-
to define cell type accurately.
nant,and these lesions cannotbe differentiated from
nodularhyperplasia andhepatomas.
Spleen
Cholangiocellular carcinomas (bile duct carcino-
ThemainindicationsforFNAof the spleenarespleno
mas) are composedof cells that are approximatelythe
megaly or thepresence of a splenicmass.The most
same size as,or slightly bigger than,normal biliary
common causesof splenomegalyin dogs and cats
epithelialcellsandshowfewofthenormal criteria
includelymphoproliferative andmyeloproliferative dis-
associatedwith malignancy(Figure20.54b).They are
ease,haemangiosarcoma,immune-mediatedhaemo-
often arrangedinsheetsorclusters,and there maybe
lytic anaemia,extramedullary haemopoiesis,and
evidence of tubule oracinus formation.The lesions are
certain infectious conditions,e.g.histoplasmosis.Un-
multiple and diffuse, involving all liver lobes.
less a diffuse lesion(e.g. lymphoma) is expected,the
329
Chapter 20 Diagnostic cytology
technique is best performed under ultrasound guid-
Primary splenic neoplasia
ance.The riskofintra-abdominal haemorrhage and
The most common primary splenic tumour in dogs
seedingof tumourmetastaseswithin theperitoneal
is haemangiosarcoma.Fibrosarcomas,leiomyosar-
cavity should beconsidered if attempting toaspiratea
comasandotherundifferentiated sarcomas areless
suspectedhaemangiosarcoma.
frequentlyencountered.
Haemangiosarcoma ischaracterized by thepres-
Normal findings
enceofmesenchymal-type cellswithpoorlydefined
Thespleenispart of thehaemolymphaticsystem and its
cytoplasmic margins(Figure 20.56).The neoplastic
cytological appearancegenerallyresemblesthatofa
cells have darkbasophiliccytoplasm thatmay be
normal lymphnode,with small lymphocytespredomi-
vacuolated.Marked anisocytosis,anisokaryosisand
nating in most fields(see Figure 20.42);lymphoblasts,
variationinN:Cratioisusuallyevident.Somecellsare
plasmacells and macrophages are alsopresentbut in
quite clearly spindle-shaped;others are rounder and
lowernumbers.Some of the macrophagesmaycontain
plumper.Nuclear chromatin tends to be coarsely
haemosiderin.Small endothelial-lined capillariesanda
clumped or has a coarse stippled appearance.
few mast cells may alsobe seen.Aspirates from the
Scrapings orimpression smears of splenic tissue tend
capsularsurface maycontainsheets of mesothelial cells.
tobemorereliable thansmearsprepared from fine
Splenic aspirates are always severely contaminated
needleaspirates,whicharerelativelyinsensitivefor
withbloodand thereforecontainvariablenumbersof
the diagnosis of splenichaemangiosarcoma.
whiteblood cells andplatelets.Small numbersofhaemo-
poieticprecursors,includingtheoccasionalmegakaryo-
cyte,maybeseen in aspirates fromnormal spleens.
Common non-neoplasticdisorders
Splenichyperplasia:Thisoccursinresponse to sys
temic infection (e.g.babesiosis,leishmaniasis,ehrlichi-
osis,histoplasmosis) and immune-mediated disease
(e.g. immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia (IMHA),
thrombocytopenia). Small and medium-sized lympho-
cytesremain thepredominant celltypesbut there are
relativeincreasesinthenumbersoflymphoblasts,plasma
cells and macrophages.Increased numbers of macro-
phages,containing either haemosiderin and/or phago-
cytosedred cells,maybeseenin some cases of IMHA.
20.56
Haemangiosarcoma:fine needle aspirate from
thespleenof a7-year-oldGermanShepherd
Dog.There is a cluster of mesenchymal cells with dark
Splenitisorsplenicabscessation:Amarkedincrease
basophilic cytoplasm.The cytoplasm of the neoplastic
in thenumberof neutrophilsoccurswithsplenitisand
cells may bevacuolated (inset).(Wright's stain;original
splenic abscessation,bothrelativelyrare conditions.
magnificationX10o0)(@AxiomVeterinary Laboratories.)
Extramedullaryhaemopoiesis:Thisoccurs in any
Haemolymphatic neoplasia
conditionwhere thebonemarrow cannqt sustain an
Haemolymphatictumourssimilarto thosewhichcan
increased demand forred blood cells.Precursors from
infiltrate the liver can also involve the spleen.These
all three cell linesmay bepresent but members of the
include lymphoma,acute myeloid or lymphoblastic
erythroid seriesusuallypredominate(Figure 20.55).
leukaemia,chroniclymphocyticormyeloid leukaemia,
multiple myeloma(Figure 20.57),malignant histiocyt-
osis(Figure 20.58),and disseminated mastocytosis
(more common in cats).
LN
Pro
IN
EN
MF
20.55
Extramedullaryhaemopoiesisseen in fine
needle aspirates from spleen.All stages of red
20.57
Multiplemyeloma:fineneedle aspirate from the
cell development are present:Pro=proerythroblast
spleen of a dog. The plasma cells have a
(rubriblast);EN= early normoblast (prorubricyte);
moderate amount of dark basophilic cytoplasm and an
IN= intermediate normoblast(rubricyte);LN=late
eccentricallyplaced nucleus.Note the prominent
normoblast (metarubricyte).A mitotic figure is present
perinuclear“halo'which represents the Golgi apparatus.
(MF).(Wright's stain;original magnificationX1000)
(Wright's stain;original magnificationX10oo)(@Axiom
(Courtesy of EVilliers)
VeterinaryLaboratories.)
330
Chapter2oDiagnosticcytology
Non-neoplastic disorders
Inflammation:A largenumber(>90%)of degenerate
neutrophils(withorwithoutbacteria)inarenalaspirate
is consistent with acute pyelonephritis.A pyo-
granulomatousinflammatoryresponsemaybeseenin
feline infectious peritonitis.
Renal cysts and abscesses:Renal cysts may be
single or multiple,congenital or acquired.Aspirated
fluid is usuallyclear or slightly straw-coloured and
containsveryfew cells(theoccasional epithelial cell
neutrophil or macrophage may be seen).Renal carci-
nomascansometimesbecome cystic;thesetumours
Malignant histiocytosis:splenicaspirate from a
rarely exfoliate malignantcellsinto the cysticfluid.
20.58
dog.There are several large round histiocytes
Renal abscesses are uncommon in dogs and cats.
with large nuclei and prominent nucleoli.One cell is
Theyoccasionallyoccursecondary topyelonephritis.
phagocytosing red blood cells. (Wright's stain;original
The aspiratedmaterial is typicalofanacuteseptic
magnification X500)
inflammatory exudate.
Kidney
Neoplasia
FNA of thekidneyis a useful procedure for the inves-
Primaryrenal carcinomasareuncommon indogsand
tigation of suspected neoplasia,especiallyrenal lym-
cats,but maybe cystic(see above).Diagnosis isbased
phoma in dogs and cats.FNA also lends itself tocystic
on thepresence of a population of epithelial cells
and inflammatory lesions,e.g.in feline infectious peri-
tonitis.lf possible FNA is best performed under ultra-
thoughthedegreeofcytologicalatypiamaynotbe as
sound guidance, using a non-aspiration technique
pronounced as in carcinomas involving other organs,
withoutredirection,inordertoensuretheneedleisnot
such as the lung).
directed into the renal hilus.
Lymphoma is the most common renal tumour,
especiallyin the cat,andusuallyinvolvesbothkidneys.
Normal findings
Cytological diagnosis is relatively straightforward.As-
Renal tubular epithelial cellsareroundtopolygonal
cellswith abundant basophilicgranular cytoplasm and
entirely of large lymphoblasts with a highN:Cratio(see
a round nucleus containing a small single nucleolus
Figures 20.22 and 20.44).
(Figure 20.59).The cells exfoliate singly or in clusters
and are of uniform size and shape.Tubularfragments
orcasts may sometimes be seen.Therenal tubular
Cytology oftheprostategland
epithelial cellsofcatsmaybevacuolatedduetothe
presence of lipid droplets.Similar cells maybe seen in
Theprostatemaybe sampled byperforming aprostatic
dogswithdiabetesmellitusorwhichhavereceived
wash orby direct FNA.Common indications forsam-
long-term corticosteroids.
plingareprostatomegaly,otherabnormalitiesinshape,
symmetry or consistency,and prostatic pain.
Sampling
Prostaticwash
1.The bladder is emptied by inserting a sterile
urethral catheter.Thebladder maybeflushed
with saline and emptied again at thispoint to
ensure that all urine has been removed.A
sample of the saline flush can be collected for
comparison with the prostatic wash to help clarify
the site of pathology (bladder versus prostate).
2.
Thecatheterispartiallywithdrawn to thelevel of
theprostate,guiding the catheterperrectum.
3.The prostate is massaged per rectum and
20.59
Fine needle aspirate from a felinekidney.
transabdominallyandthen5mlofsterilesalineis
showingaclusterof normal renal tubular
injected into the urinary catheter.
epithelial cells with granularbasophilic cytoplasm and a
4.After further massage,material is aspirated into
round nucleus containing a single nucleolus.The
the catheterusing a 10 or 20ml syringe.It is
cytoplasmmaybevacuolated,especiallyincats,dueto
the presence of lipid droplets (inset). (Wright's stain;
important toensure that thecontentsof the
original magnificationX5oo)(@AxiomVeterinary
catheteraswell asthoseof the syringe are
Laboratories.)
harvested.
331
Chapter 20 Diagnostic cytology
For turbid samplesa direct smear of thewash is
prepared.It is usually necessary to concentrate the
Bacteria
sample by centrifugation (see Chapter 21);however,if
thiscannotbe doneonsite,placingsomeof thewash
intoanEDTA tubeinadditiontothedirectsmear is
advisable.Asample should alsobeplaced ina sterile
plain pot for culture if infection is suspected.
ProstaticFNA
This isperformed percutaneously via the caudal abdo-
men using ultrasound guidance.The prostate may be
pushed cranially with a gloved finger in the rectum.
Squash smears arepreparedasdescribedearlier.
FNA may be more helpful then a prostatic wash,
especially for the diagnosis of neoplasia,since cells
may notexfoliateinto theprostaticurethra.In addition,
FNA avoids the possibility of contamination by material
20.60
Septic suppurative prostatitis/prostatic abscess.
Neutrophilshave phagocytosed bacteria,
from theurinarybladder:distinctionbetween squa-
indicating active infection.Prostaticepithelial cellsshow
mousmetaplasia and squamous cell contamination
typical cytological features of dysplasia,which include
fromthedistal urethra canbemadewithgreater
marked anisocytosis and increased cytoplasmic
certainty.Preservation and morphological detail of
basophilia.(Wright's stain;original magnification X500)
prostatic cells obtained by FNA are superior to cells
(AxiomVeterinaryLaboratories.)
obtained bya prostaticwash,since the cells arenotin
direct contact with urine.FNA should not be performed
ifaprostatic abscess is suspected because of the risk
of rupture of the abscess and subsequent peritonitis.
Normalfindings
A prostaticwash from a‘normalpatient consists of
prostatic epithelial cells;it may also contain cells from
theproximal and distal urinary tract,as wellassperma-
tozoa.Prostaticepithelial cells are small uniform cuboi-
dalcells,usuallyfound in small cohesive clusters.They
Squamous metaplasia
have a moderate N:Cratio,a single round centrally
located nucleus,finelystippled chromatin and moder-
ateamountsofbasophilic cytoplasm.Some may have
a small inconspicuous nucleolus.
20.61
Ultrasound-guided direct fine needle aspirate
Cells from the distal urethra are usually large super-
from a bilaterally enlargedprostate.Prostatic
ficial squamous epithelial cells with abundant blue cyto-
epithelial cells that have undergone squamousmetaplasia
plasm(Romanowsky) and a round pyknotic nucleus.
have abundant hyalinized basophilic cytoplasm and
Transitionalepithelial cells,collected fromtheproximal
occasionally contain a small pyknotic nucleus. Compare
urethra andbladder,arelargerthanprostaticepithelial
thenormal prostaticepithelial cells in the topright hand
cells,have a lowerN:Cratioand lighter cytoplasm.
cornerwith the squamousepithelial cellsin therest of the
field.(Wright's stain;original magnification X100)
(AxiomVeterinaryLaboratories.)
Non-neoplastic disorders
Inflammation:Neutrophilicinflammation characterizes
Benignprostatichyperplasia:Thisis characterized
prostatitis and is usually due tobacterial infection.The
by symmetrical enlargement of the prostate,and oc-
neutrophils areusually degeneratedue totheeffectsof
curs under hormonal influence in intact older male
bacterialtoxins.Intracellularbacteria areoftenidentified
dogs(mediated mainly by dihydrotestosterone in the
(Figure 20.60).Prostatic epithelial cells are seen in
presence of an altered androgen:oestrogen ratio).
clustersandmaybedysplasticor undergo squamous
Cytologically,there maybe anincreased cellyieldof
metaplasia secondary to the inflammatory reaction.
prostaticepithelial cells,whichareof uniformsize and
Squamous metaplasia:Prostatic epithelial cells
epithelium.Theymay have a mild increase inN:Cratio,
developmorphological and staining characteristics
andsmall indistinct nucleolimaybe seen(Figure 20.62).
of squamous epithelium(Figure 20.61),due to the
Prostatic hyperplasia can occur in association with
influenceofincreasedcirculatingconcentrationsof
inflammation and squamous metaplasia.
oestrogen,e.g.afunctional Sertolicelltumour,chronic
irritation,orinflammation.It may be difficult to distin-
Prostatic cyst:Prostatic cystsmaybe single ormul-
guishsquamousmetaplasia from‘normal'squamous
tiple,intraprostatic or paraprostatic(arising from a
epitheliumthatoriginatesfrom thedistalurethra and
remnant of the uterusmasculinus).They can occur in
isobtained by contamination during the prostatic
association withBPH orsquamousmetaplasia.Sero-
washprocedure.
sanguineous to brown fluid is usually aspirated. This
332
Chapter 20 Diagnostic cytology
(b)
20.62
Fineneedle aspirate froma bilaterally enlarged
(b)
prostate in an entire middle-aged dog. The
prostatic epithelial cells are of uniform size and shape and
20.63
Prostaticcarcinoma:direct fine needle aspirate
are arranged in large honeycomb' clusters.The
from an asymmetrically enlarged prostate in a
appearance is consistent with benign prostatic
dog that presented with a clinical history of tenesmus and
hyperplasia.The higher power view shows a sheet of cells
haematuria.There are multiple atypical features,including
resembling a honeycomb mosaic. Cytoplasm is finely
anisocytosis,anisokaryosis,nuclearmoulding and
vacuolated and nucleoliarenotvisible.(Wright'sstain;
prominent pleomorphicnucleoli.The eosinophilic
original magnification X100（a),X400（b))（a,@Axiom
VeterinaryLaboratories;b,courtesy of EVilliers.)
be seen in prostatic glandular tissue.The higher power
viewdemonstratesacoarsenuclear chromatinpattern
and increased cytoplasmic basophilia,both indicators of
malignancy.(Wright's stain;original magnification
X500(a),X1000(b))
cellulardebrisand/orlownumbersof redblood cells or
neutrophils and macrophages plus a few benign
prostatic or squamous epithelial cells. The cysts may
Cytologyoftherespiratorytract
become secondarily infected,in which case higher
numbers of neutrophils will be present.
Samples for cytology can be obtained directly from the
respiratorytractusinganendoscopeor,blindly,through
Neoplasia
anendotracheal tube orbytranstracheal aspiration.
Prostatic neoplasia,in contrast to otherprostatic dis
These are useful techniques for investigating animals
eases,canbe seen inboth intact and neutered dogs
with tracheal,bronchial orlowerrespiratory tractdis-
(Obradovich et al.,1987;Teske et al.,2002).Adeno-
ease,especially airwayordiffusealveolardisease.
carcinomasofprostaticorigin are themostcommon
They are inexpensive and minimally invasive tools.
tumours,followed by transitional cell carcinoma from
However, they have limited application with
the prostatic urethra.Prostatomegaly is usually asym-
parenchymal(interstitial or focal) disease that does not
metrical butcanbe symmetrical.Onmicroscopicex-
cross the bronchial walls.Thus,where there is gener-
amination,cell clusters are often very disorganized
alizedinterstitialdiseaseorwhere afocallesioncanbe
and show typical cytological features of malignancy,
visualized (e.g. with ultrasonography) FNA may be
including prominent anisokaryosis,anisocytosis,pleo
more appropriate. There is a significant risk of pneu-
morphicnuclei and nucleoli that are often multiple,
mothoraxwhen aeratedlungispenetratedwhilst tak-
prominent or large(Figure 20.63).FNA maybemore
ing a fine needle aspirate from the lungs.This risk can
sensitivethanprostaticwashfordetecting adenocarci-
beminimized byusingafineneedle,byperforming the
noma if the tumour hasnot invaded the urethra.The
procedure undergeneral anaesthesia,and by control-
prognosisforprostatic neoplasia ispoor.
ling respiration during the sampling procedure.
333
Chapter 20  Diagnostic cytology
Sampling equipment
Only a small proportion of the injected saline is
Thebasicequipmentrequiredforobtaining cytology
usually aspirated.The yield may be improved by
specimensfrom therespiratory tract is:
coupage during the collection procedure.lf more than
one siteisofinterest theprocedure canberepeated but
Catheter:jugularcatheter;maleurinary catheter
samplesmustbe labelled appropriately.
plusintravenous cannula;orbiopsy channel
catheter
Sampling through an endotracheal tube
Syringes containing warm saline (0.9% sodium
Blindsampling bypassing a catheter through a sterile
chloride)
endotracheal (ET) tube while thepatient isanaesthe-
20ml syringeforsuction ormucus extractor
tized is commonly used incats and small dogs.Care
attached to suction machine(Figure 20.64)
shouldbetakentominimizecontact between the tipof
Transport containers - EDTA for cytology, plain
the ET tube and the oropharynx during intubation to
sterile tubeforculture
avoid oropharyngeal contamination.Coupage and turn-
Glass slides for direct smears of mucus flecks.
ing thepatient may improve cellyield.
1. A jugular catheter or sterile polypropylene male
dogurinary catheter(2.0 mm,2.7mm or3.3mm
depending onpatient size) ispassed through the
ET tube.The tip of the catheter can becut off to
remove the side holes,but care must be taken to
ensure that the tipis not sharp.
2.The distance the catheter is inserted varies
dependingontheanatomical locationfromwhich
a sample isrequired.
3. 0.3-0.5 ml/kg of warmed saline is injected into
20.64
Amucus extractorcan beused to harvest
material fromtrachealwashingor
thecatheterand aspirated back as described
bronchoalveolar lavage.The green-ended tube is
forBAL.
attached toa suction machine （low seting)and the other
tube is attached to the tracheal catheter.(Courtesy of
Transtracheal collection
EVilliers)
This technique canbe used where general anaesthe-
sia is a risk to thepatient.Mild sedation may be
Sampling techniques
necessary,depending on the patient's temperament.
There are three techniquesforobtaining a sample:via
Suitable catheters are:
a bronchoscope;through an endotracheal tube; or by
transtracheal collection.Thelattertwotechniques gen-
Through-the-needle long jugularcatheter
erallyyieldsamplesrepresentativeof thetracheaand
(19-22 gauge,8 inches long forcats and small
primary or(at best) secondary bronchi(referred to as
（<10kg) dogs;19 gauge,12or 24inches long
a tracheal wash(Tw)),although some material from
for larger dogs)
 the lower bronchioles and alveolimay be collected. For
3.5Frenchpolyethylene maleurinarycatheter,
patientswith deepparenchymal diseasetheendo-
togetherwith a16gauge through-the-needle
scopictechnique ispreferred,since this is most likely
intravenous cannula
toyieldmaterial from thelowerbronchiolesoralveoli
Transtracheal lavage set (Figure 20.65).
(i.e.bronchoalveolarlavage).In practice,the choice of
procedure is determined by the site of respiratory
The technique is as follows:
pathology，the suitability of the patient for general
anaesthesia and the equipmentavailable.
1.Thepatient isrestrained in a sternal position with
the head elevated.
Bronchoalveolarlavage
 2. The area over the larynx or proximal trachea is
Bronchoalveolar lavage(BAL)canbeperformed using
clipped and surgically prepared.The usual site is
a flexible endoscope:
thecricothyroid ligamentbutanalternativesite is
between two tracheal rings(measure against
1.Undergeneral anaesthesia theendoscope is
radiograph orthepatient).
inserted into abronchus,until it fitssnugly.
3.Local anaesthetic is injected into the skin and
2. A catheter is inserted into the biopsy channel of
subcutisover the cricothyroid ligament,which
the endoscope.
canbe palpated.A small skin incision ismade
3. A large volume of saline (10 ml for dogs up to 8
over theligament.
kg and forcats;25ml for larger dogs) is injected,
4.If a through-the-needle catheter is used,the
flooding the alveoliassociatedwith that
 needle is inserted through the ligament into the
bronchus.
trachea.The catheter is then passed through the
4.The exfoliatedmaterial is aspirated using a
needle and down the trachea.Theneedle can
mucus extractor attached toa suction machine
then be retracted.Alternatively,an intravenous
(seeFigure 20.64) ora large syringe attached via
cannula ispassed through thecricothyroid
a 3-way tap (multiple suctions).
ligament, the stylet removed, and the urinary
334
Chapter 20 Diagnostic cytology
20.65
Transtracheal
lavageset:re-
useablestainless
steel trocarand
cannulaplus
Reusable trochar
catheter.The
Cannula from side:
catheterhasa
noterounded tip
rounded tipto
prevent tracheal
Cannula from top:
baseplate and Luer lock
traumaand isonly
intended for one-
time use.
Disposablesingleusepolyethylenecatheterwithroundedt
catheterthreaded throughthecannula anddown
Limitations
the trachea.The catheter should be long enough to
reachthetrachealbifurcationorcarina,approximately
Cytology may be unsuccessful if an inappropriate
at thelevel of the4th intercostal space.
medium is used forthe wash.For example,
5.
An aliquot of warmed saline(2-4ml forcats and
sterilewaterwill lyse anycellsharvested,dueo
small (< 10 kg) dogs; 10-20 ml for larger dogs) is
the effects of osmosis.
injectedinto thecatheterand aspiratedback,as
 Cytology samples may be non-diagnostic if
described for BAL.
there are large amounts of mucus (e.g. in
chronicbronchitis)and directsmearsarenot
Up to 40-50%of the aliquot is retrieved.Patients
submitted in addition to the sample in EDTA.
may cough during the procedure,which may help
Cells of diagnostic significancemay be difficult
sample collection,but coughing canalsoresult in the
to identify if trapped in dry mucus,as they dry
catheter tipbeing coughed into the pharynx,and this
more slowly and shrivel up (round up).
shouldbe avoidedasit mayresult inoropharyngeal
As a general rule,if there isnomacroscopic
contamination.
evidence of floccules,foamyfluid ormucus,
the sample may be acellular or is unlikely to
RepeatingaTWorBAL
contain anadequatenumberof cellsonwhich
Thismay be necessaryif the initial procedure is unsuc-
to base a diagnosis.
cessful orif there ismarked oropharyngeal contamina-
Cytology results compatible with findings in a
tion. Repeating the wash or lavage within 24 hours is
"healthy’ patient do not exclude the possibility of
inadvisable,asitisnotpossibletodistinguishbetween
pulmonary disease,since the samplemightnot
pathological neutrophilicinflammationandanincrease
berepresentative.
in neutrophils secondary to the sampling procedure.
Thus,sampling shouldonlyberepeated afteraninter-
Normal findings
val of at least 48hours.
In normal animals the appearance of samples from TW
and BALdiffers.
 Sample handling
A normal TW sample consists of:
Ina successful washsample there are usually at least
a fewsmallflecksof flocculentmaterial and/ormucus
A small amountofmucus,seen aswispy
in the aspirated fluid.Largerflecks orstrands of mucus
basophilic orpink material(Romanowsky)
should be harvested usingapipette,placed directlyon
Columnar orcuboidal epithelial cells.These
a slide,and a squash smear prepared(see earlier).
should be the predominant cell type. Cells
Theremainingmaterial shouldbedividedbetween
generally have a single round nucleus in a basal
anEDTA tubeforcytologyand aplainsterile tubeor
location.One end of the cell can terminate in a
swabforbacterial culture if necessary.lf thesampleis
tail and the othermaybeciliated(Figure 20.66a).
tobepostedout,some laboratoriesrecommendplac-
Many free cilia,originating from these cells,can
ing a third aliquot into another EDTA tube to which a
be seen in thebackground asaresultof trauma
dropof10%formalinhasbeen added,although these
during sampling
Small numbers of goblet cells (Figure 20.66b).
samplesrequire specialized staining.lIt is important to
label thistube asformalin-fixedand topackageit
These have a similar appearance tocolumnar
separately,since formalin fumesfrequently result in
cells,but also containvariable amounts of
poor uptake of Romanovsky-type stains,used by the
round dark-staining mucusgranulesin their
majority of laboratories.
cytoplasm
Ifthe sampleistobeexamined in-house a sediment
Small numbersofalveolarmacrophagesand
smear should be prepared from the EDTA sample (see
neutrophils
Chapter 21).
Occasional lymphocytes.
335
Chapter 20 Diagnostic cytology
Simonsiella
20.67
Oropharyngeal contamination.Squash smear of
a large fleckof material,harvested witha
squamous epithelial cells(large angular cells) and a
mixed bacterial population,including Simonsiella sp.
(Wright's stain;original magnification X400)(@Axiom
VeterinaryLaboratories.)
Goblet cell
Abnormal findings
Neutrophilicorsuppurativeinflammation
Non-infectious:Neutrophils are generally non-de-
generate and no bacteria are present. Neutrophils
poorcellpreservationrather thanthelyticeffectof
bacterial toxins. Neutrophils may also appear degener-
ate if there is a delay between sampling andmaking
Normal tracheal wash:centrifuged smears from
smears. Neutrophils are present in both acute and
20.66
a dog.（a)There arenormal’columnar ciliated
chronic inflammation.
epithelial cellswithbasal nuclei,alecytoplasmandcilia
In chronicbronchitisthemostprominentfeaturesare
at one pole.The insert highlights the cilia that identify
neutrophilic(or mixed) inflammation and goblet cell
these cells.(b) A goblet cell with dark basophilic mucus
hyperplasia,resulting in increased mucus production.
granules surrounded by columnar epithelial cells is also
The cytologicalpattern of chronicbronchitismay also
seen.(Wright's stain;original magnification X1.00)
includeactivatedmacrophages,dentifiedaslargeround
(@AxiomVeterinary Laboratories.)
cells(often bi-ormultinucleate) and epithelial hyperpla-
For BAL samples:
sia (characterized by variation in size, and deeply ba-
sophiliccytoplasm).Therespiratory tractisvery sensitive
Theproportionof epithelial cellsismuchlower
to tissue irritation,and even sterile saline canresult in
(1-15%)
suppurative inflammation, which is important to bear in
Macrophages aregenerally the predominant cell
mind when a TWorBAL has toberepeated.
type
Other causes of tissue irritation are diverse and
Neutrophils and lymphocytes generally each form
include earlyforeignbodyreaction,chemicals,noxious
<5%of the total cellpopulation
substances (including smoke) and underlying neoplasia.
In dogs,eosinophilsusually constitute<5%of the
Neutrophilicinflammationmaypredominate inal-
population; in cats 5-25% of cells may be
lergicdisease.Forexample,theinflammatoryresponse
eosinophils (Padrid et al., 1991).
seeninfeline asthmamaybeprimarilyneutrophilic or
mixed (neutrophils, macrophages and eosinophils) or
Contamination
primarily eosinophilic. Eosinophils are not seen con-
 Oropharyngeal contamination may occur with BAL or
sistently.Neutrophils are generally non-degenerate
ET sampling but is very rare with tracheal washing,
unless secondary bacterial infection is present.Thus a
unless the catheter was inserted craniodorsally in-
TW sample consisting predominantly of neutrophils
stead of caudoventrally duringplacement or changed
(± bacteria) without eosinophils could be due to allergic
direction when the patient coughed.The presence of
diseaseortoprimarybacterialinfection.Insuchcases,
superficialsquamousepithelial cells,withorwithouta
persistence of neutrophilic inflammation but disap-
mixed populationof adherentbacteria (inparticular
pearance of bacteria after antibiotic therapy,with ap-
Simonsiella spp., which have a railroad-track appear-
propriate clinical changes, would be more supportive
ance)are markers oforal contamination(Figure 20.67).
of allergic disease.
336
Chapter20Diagnosticcytology
Infectious:
Fungi
Bacterial infectionusuallyresultsina marked
Blastomycesdermatitidis
increase incellularity,with apredominanceof
Cryptococcusneoformans
neutrophils,which often appeardegenerate.
Coccidioidesimmitis
Bacteria maybeseenintra-orextracellularly
Histoplasmacapsulatum
Sporothrix schencki
(Figure 20.68).They must be distinguished from
Aspergillus spp.
bacteriaduetooropharyngeal contamination,
Protozoa
whichareextracellularoronthesurfaceof
squamouscells and arenotassociatedwith an
Toxoplasmagondi
inflammatoryresponse.
Neospora caninum
Parasiticworms,particularly Oslerus
Cytauxzoon felis
Pneumocystis carini
(Filaroides),can cause an eosinophilic
inflammationorneutrophilicinflammatory
20.70
Fungal and protozoal infections thatcan causea
response,due to dying adultwormsor larvae,
neutrophilic inflammation in the respiratory tract.
respectively(Figure20.69).
Fungalandprotozoal infectionsgenerally
Eosinophilicinflammation
cause granulomatousinflammation,butmay
Eosinophils can be present in healthy (asymptomatic)
alsobe associatedwitha neutrophilicresponse
patients,and theprecisepercentagepresent isconten-
(Figure 20.70).
tious.Normal valuesvary widely:from<5%in dogs
(although some publications mention<24%)to<25%in
cats.The significance of cytological findings must be
interpreted in the context of history,clinical signs and
resultsobtainedfromotherdiagnostictests.Bearingthis
in mind,if there is increased cellularity (often marked)
and thenumberofeosinophils exceeds10%of the total
nucleated cell count,then there may be a significant
hypersensitivity component to the inflammatory re
sponse.Conversely,if thetotal cellcount islow,ornly
Intracytoplasmicbacteria
slightly increased,care should be taken not to over-
interpretthesignificanceoftheeosinophils,especiallyin
cats.Eosinophilicormixedinflammation,composedof
variable numbers of eosinophils,neutrophils
macrophages, small lymphocytes and plasma cells,
 characterizes some allergic and parasitic conditions.
Eosinophilic inflammation maybe seen with:
20.68
Septic suppurativerespiratory tract
inflammation:BAL from an adult male dog with
Allergy (Figure 20.71): allergic bronchitis; feline
a history of regurgitation and pyrexia. Numerous
asthma;eosinophilic bronchopneumonopathy
degeneratebacteria are seen ina proteinaceous
(EBP),alsoknown aspulmonary infiltratewith
background.Bacteria have been phagocytosed by the
eosinophils(PIE)
neutrophils,indicating active infection.(Wright's stain;
original magnification X1000)(@ Axiom Veterinary
Paraneoplastic syndromes,e.g.in association
with T cell lymphoma
Laboratories.)
Parasitic larvae or ova (Figure 20.72)
Eosinophils
20.71
Sample froma 6-year-olddogwitha historyof
chronic coughing,recent deterioration and
20.69
Parasitichelminth larvae(Oslerus spp.)in a
pyrexia,showing aneosinophilicrespiratory tract
tracheal washfroma dog.Higherpowerviews
inflammationwithasecondarysepticsuppurative
revealeda mixed eosinophilicand neutrophilic
component.The eosinophils seen here have prominent
inflammatory reaction.(Wright's stain;original
pinkgranules,but thesemay sometimes be less obvious.
magnificationX40)(@AxiomVeterinary Laboratories.)
(Wright's stain; original magnification X400)
337
Chapter 20 Diagnostic cytology
Species
Morphology
Diagnostictests
Larvae
Oslerus(Filaroides)
Dog
232-266 μm long;S-shaped til(Figure20.74)
Bronchoscopy;Baermann technique
osleri
Filaroides hirthi
Dog
240-290μmlong
Zinc sulphate flotation(not alwaysreliable)
Aelurostrongylus
Cat
360μmlongnthedtail1stagelavaehave
Baermann technique
abstrusus
dorsalandventral cuticularspinesontails)
Angiostrongylus
Dog
2.5 cm;resemble Aelurostrongylus;small
Baermann technique
cephalibutton and wavy tail
Crenosomavulpis
Dog
<16mmlong;straight tilwell developed bursae and
Baermann technique
large dorsalray
Ova
Capillaria aerophila
Cat,Dog
60-35μm;oval;bipolar(double-operculated)
Zinc sulphate fotation; BAL
Paragonimus spp.
Cat,Dog
80-115μm;ovalunipolar(single operculum）
Zinc sulphate flotation
20.72
Differentiationof thevariousparasiticlung infec-
mucusformedinsmallbronchioles,whichcanalsoform
tionsis based onmorphological criteria of theparasites
with chronic smallairway disease.
(seeFigure 20.72).FaecalexaminationbyBaermann
Theunderlyingcausesofmixed inflammationare
orzincsulphate flotation isoftennecessary toconfirm
numerous and include:foreign bodies;chronic allergy
thepresence of an underlyingparasite and is also
(including feline asthma);canine chronic bronchitis;inha-
useful when the pathogenesis of the parasite only
lation pneumonia;and necrosis secondary to neoplasia.
involves deep lung parenchyma,not alveoli or
bronchiolesnormallyharvestedvia BALorTW.For
Haemorrhage
example,Paragonimusisonlypresentina focal loca-
RedbloodcellsinaTWorBALsample may indicate
tioninthecaudalrightlung lobe.Faecalexaminationto
true haemorrhage but can also be iatrogenic in origin.
diagnose Capillariaisnotalwaysnecessary since they
Erythrophagocytosis(macrophagesengulfingred cells),
liveinthetracheaandbronchi,soarereadilyidentified
haemosiderin-ladenmacrophages(Figure20.74a)and
on wash samples,unlike Paragonimus.
Mixed inflammation
A combination of macrophages and/or neutrophils with
eosinophilsandlymphocytescanbe seen in acute or
Haemosiderin
chronic inflammation.Macrophages become activated
and appearlarger,withbi-ormultinucleation inchronic
inflammation.The inflammatoryresponsemaybe ac-
companied by epithelial and/or goblet cell hyperplasia
and/orincreasedmucus production.Curschmann's spi-
(a)
rals (Figure 20.73) are tight spiral coils of inspissated
Iron
20.73
Curschmann's spirals,deeplybasophilic tight
spiral coils composed of inspissated mucus,in
a trachealwashfromanelderlyPoodle withchroniccoughing
20.74
Respiratory tract samples suggesting
haemorrhage.(a)Macrophage filled withblack
exacerbated byexercisebut improvedsomewhatwith
granules.(Wright's stain;original magnification X50o)(b)
steroid administration.The spirals form when there is
Perls-positive staining confirmsthat theblack globular
material in the macrophages ishaemosiderinrather than
hyperplasia.(Wright's stain;original magnificationX40)
mucin or carbon.(Per’'s stain;original magnification X500)
(AxiomVeterinary Laboratories.)
(AxiomVeterinaryLaboratories.)
338
Chapter20 Diagnostic cytology
haematoidincrystals all indicatepre-existingairway
Hyperplasia anddysplasia ofrespiratoryepithelium
haemorrhage andareuseful indistinguishingtrue from
may occur in response to chronic airway irritation and
iatrogenic haemorrhage. Granular material in macro-
should not be mistaken for neoplasia.
phagesmaybehaemosiderin,mucinorcarbon.Haemo-
siderin,a blood breakdown pigment,contains iron
whichstainspositivelywithPrussianblue(Perl’s stain)
References and furtherreading
(Figure 20.74b).
Haemorrhage into theairwaysmaybedueto:
BakerRand LumsdenJH(20oo)ColorAtlasof Cytologyof theDog
and Cat.Mosby,St Louis
BonfantiU,Bussadori C,ZatelliA,DeLorenzi D,MasserdottiC
Vasculardamageduetoneoplasia,infectious
BertazzoloW,Faverzani S,Ghisleni G,Capobianco R and
Caniatti M (2004）.Percutaneous fine-needle biopsy of deep
diseases,or trauma(including coughing in cats
thoracic and abdominal masses in dogs and cats.Journal of
with chronic asthma)
SmallAnimalPractice45,191-198
Increased diapedesis (movement of blood cells
Chalita MC, Matera JM,Alves MT and Longatto Filho A (2001)
through intactvessel walls)associatedwith
incanineskinandsoftissuetumors.AnalyticalandQuantitative
congestive heart failure or coagulopathies.
Cytology and Histology23,395-399
CowellRL,TylerRDandMeinkothJH(1999)DiagnosticCytologyof
theDogandCat2ndditonMosby,Stouis
Neoplasia
Cytological evidence of either primary and metastatic
FoureFluryMaglandGulf（9）olAtasfC
interpretation.InPractice20,429-437
neoplasia israre inTWorBAL samples.
Cytology of the Dog and Cat. Conference Nationale des
Neoplasticcells are only seen if thepathological
VeterinairesSpecialisesenPetitsAnimaux,Paris
process breaks through into the alveoli or bronchi;
FourlryMaJrcairPMThaba
neoplasiainvolving therespiratory tractisusually con-
andimmunologicalclassificationofcaninemalignantlymphomas:
fined totheinterstitiumof thepulmonaryparenchyma.
comparison withhuman non-Hodgkin's lymphomas.Journal of
Exceptions include canine lymphoma,where cytologi-
ComparativePathology117,35-59
HawkinsEC,Morison WB,DeNicola DB and Blevins WE(1993)
cal evaluationof an endoscopicBALsample ismore
Cytologicalanalysisofbronchoalveolarlavagefluid from47dogs
sensitivethanradiographyforidentifyingpulmonary
withmulticentricmalignant lymphoma.Journalof theAmerican
involvement(Hawkins.et al.,1993).
VeterinaryMedicalAssociation203,1418-1425
KravisLD,Vail,DMKissbethWC,gilviGKandVolkLM（1996)
Metastaticneoplasia(Figure20.75) is more com-
mon than primaryrespiratory tract neoplasia.Meta-
needleaspirates and biopsyspecimens frommastcell tumours
static lesions are usually diffuse and distributed
indogs.Journalof theAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation
209,1418-1420
throughoutalllunglobes,whereasprimaryrespiratory
KristensenAT,Weiss DJ,KlausnerJS and HardyRM(1990)Liver
neoplasia tendstopresentwith alarger,solitarylesion.
cytologyincanine and felinehepaticdisease.Compendiumon
ContinuingEducationforthePracticingVeterinarian12797808
LangnbaAManuMndrichfSandre
KU(2001)Sensitivityand specificity of methods of assessing the
Nucleoli
regionallymphnodesforevidence ofmetastasisindogs andcats
withsolidtumours.Journalof theAmericanVeterinaryMedical
Neoplastic
Association218,1424-1428
ObradovichJ,WalshawRand Goullaud E（1987)Theinfluenceof
cells
castration on the development of prostaticcarcinoma inthe dog:
Degenerative
43cases(1978-1985).Journalof VeterinarylntermalMedicine1,
columnar
183-187
epithelial cells
PadridPA,FdmanBF,FunkK,amitzEMReilDandrossE
(1991）Cytological,microbiological andbiochemicalanalysisof
cats.
AmericanJournalofVeterinaryResearch52,1300-1307
PonceF,ManJP,diuD,MralTurineli,Ch
Monfray Kand Fournel-Fleury C(2004)Prognostic significance
ofmorphological subtypes in canine malignant lymphoma during
chemotherapy.TheVeterinaryJourna/167,158-166
Raskin RA(2001) Lymphoid system.In:Atlas of Canine and Feline
CytologydaskinRAandMyDJ93134Baudrs,
Philadelphia
RaskinREand MeyerDJ(20o1)Atlasof Canine andFeline Cytology.
20.75
Metastaticpulmonary carcinoma in an unspayed
WBSaunders,Philadelphia
12-year-old bitch with a history of histologically
confirmed mammary carcinoma.Note thepresence of
dogsandcats:56cases.VeterinaryClinicalPathology30,3558
TeskeE,NaanECvanDijkEMVanGarderenEandSchalkenA
atypical featuresincludinganisokaryosis,nuclearmoulding
(2002)Canine prostate carcinoma:epidemiologicalevidence of
and large prominent nucleoli.(Wright's stain;original
an increased risk in castrated dogs.Molecular and Cellular
magnificationX10oo)(@AxiomVeterinary Laboratories.)
Endocrinology197,251-255
ViliersEJunnJKfferiesRandNichollsPK（995）Acomparin
ofcytologicaland histopathologicaldiagnosisofintrathoraciclesions.
Carcinomas(both primary and secondary)are the
In:BSAVACongressPaperSynopses1995,edJVDavies.256
Villiers EJandDunnJK(1998)Collection andpreparationof smears
most commonformof neoplasia involvingtherespira-
for cytologicalexamination.InPractice20,370-377
tory tract.Squamous cell carcinoma of the lungmay
WangKW,ancieraDL,ARukibatRKandRadiZA(2004）Accuracy
be difficult to distinguishfromsquamousmetaplasia.
of ultrasound-guidedfine-needle aspiration of theliver and
The lung is also oneoftheprimarysitesofcanine
Journalof theAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation224
malignant histiocytosis.
75-78
339
Diagnosis of bacterial, fungal
and mycobacterial diseases
Tim Jagger
Introduction
bacteriaare oftenhard tovisualizeagainstback-
ground material(Figure 25.1).Bacteria are generally
Sampling forbacterial and,to alesser extent,fungal
easier tovisualizewithRomanowskystainsasboth
andmycobacterial diseases, is common in veterinary
Gram-negative and Gram-positivebacteria stain uni-
practice.Thischapterwill reviewsampling procedures
formly dark blue （Figures 25.2-25.5).Rapid Ro-
and the interpretation of results,including the signifi-
manowsky stains,such asDiff-Quik,arenotideal as
cance ofbacterial and mycoticisolates atdifferent
thereislittle contrastbetweenthebacteria andback-
anatomical sites.Forreasons of safetyandexpertise,
ground material. Stain precipitate, which is more
mostveterinarypracticessubmitsamplestoveterinary
common with this type of stain,can also easily be
laboratories.Laboratorymethodology isincluded only
mistaken forbacteria.
whereitpromotesanunderstandingofthe significance
of theresults obtained,for example in antibacterial
25.1
Nasal
susceptibility testing.Comments apply to both dogs
flush from
and catsunlessotherwisestated.
a cat.Pasteurella
multocida:Gram-
negative bacilli stain
pink against a pink
Directmicroscopy
background.(Gram
stain;original
Directmicroscopyofsmearsfrompathologicallesions
magnification
X1000.)
and fluidsisa useful but underutilized initial investiga-
tive tool.The goals of direct microscopyare:
Todetectbacteriaandothermicroorganisms
25.2
Nasal
To determinebacterial morphology(and Gram
flushfrom
staining characteristics)
a cat.Pasteurella
Toidentify anyinflammatoryresponse
multocida:bacterial
Topredict theidentificationof the
bacilli staindarkblue
with bipolar staining
microorganismsdetected
Todirect antimicrobial therapypending the
evidentin some
organisms.(Modified
resultsofbacterial andothercultures.
Wright-Giemsa stain;
original
Suitable samples include:
magnification
X1000.)
Impression smearsfrom cutaneouslesionsor
tissuebiopsyspecimens
Smearsfromswabsof aural,vaginal ornasal
25.3
Nasal
discharges
swab
Directsmearsfromturbidperitonealorpleural
from a dog.
fluids and abscessmaterial
Staphylococcus
aureus:degenerate
Concentratedsedimentsmearsfromurine,
neutrophilswith
bronchoalveolar lavages,prostaticwashes,and
intracellular bacterial
cellular cerebrospinal fluid(CSF)(see Chapters
cocci in clusters
10,20,21 and 23).
('bunches of
grapes'),with
Staining techniques
background mucus.
(Modified Wright-
ThestainsofchoiceforbacteriaareRomanowsky
Giemsa stain; original
stains(e.g.Leishman'sand modified Wright-Giemsa)
magnification
and the Gram stain.Pink-staining Gram-negative
X1000.)
396
Chapter25Diagnosisofbacterial,fungal andmycobacterial diseases
25.4
Material
25.6
Abdominal
collected
abscess
from a dog by a
bronchoscope.
ina cat.
Mycobacterium
B-haemolytic
tuberculosis
streptococci:
complex:acid-fast
bacterial cocci in
bacilli(red) and
pairs and short
chains phagocytosed
necrotic cellular
material.(Ziehl-
by neutrophils.
Neelsen stain;
(Modified Wright-
original magnification
Giemsa stain;
X1000.)(Courtesy of
original magnification
JDuncan.)
X1000.)
Aspirate
Sampling forbacterialcultures
25.5
froma
subcutaneous
Samplesforbacterial culturesareideallyprocessed
abscess in a dog.
within2hoursofcollection,butthissrarelyachieved
Bacteroides sp.and
inveterinarypractice.Delays inprocessing,tempera-
Escherichiacoli
ture changes and desiccation all combine to reduce
pleomorphicmixed
bacterial bacilli and
bacterial survival,andrapidlygrowingcontaminants
degenerate
readily overgrowmore fastidiouspathogenicspecies.
neutrophils.
Sampling techniques, sampling materials and sample
(Modified Wright-
storage methods must be selected carefully to optimize
Giemsa stain;
bacterial survival.
original magnification
X1000.)
Samplingmaterials
A range of sampling materials is usually made avail-
ablebyveterinarylaboratories.
Different protocols are availablefor Gramstaining;
the following protocolis inuse inthe author'slaboratory
Anaerobictransportdevicesarecommercially
(alternative materials inbrackets):
available but not commonly used by veterinary
laboratories.They are designed to transport
1. The air-dried smear is passed through the top
'material containing obligate anaerobes but are
of a bunsen flame three times.Do not
alsosuitableforaerobesandfacultative
overheat.
anaerobes.
2.
The slide is allowed tocool and floodedwith
Blood culturemedium isa nutrient typebroth that
crystal violet (or methyl violet or gentian violet)
commonly supportsboth aerobic andanaerobic
for1 minute.
bacterial growth. It can only be used for fluids
3.
The slide iswashed gently with water.
aspirated from sterile body sites-usually blood,
4.
Theslide isfloodedwith Gram'siodine and left
 CSF or synovial fluid.
for1minute.
Boric acid preservative is a crystallinematerial in
5.
lodineiswashed from theslidewithGram's
a sterile universal tube.It is used only forurine;
differentiator(acetone) until no more colour
samples in boric acid preservative give culture
comes from the film:usually 2-5 seconds.
resultscomparabletofreshurinewhen stored for
The slide is washed gently with water.
up to 72 hours.
7.
The slide isflooded withsafranin(dilute
All swabs aremade of non-inhibitorymaterial,
carbofuchsin,neutral red) and left for1minute.
such asviscose,and come with a sterile
8.
The slideiswashed gentlywithwater.
transportcontainer.Swabsareusuallyimmersed
9. The slide is blotted with blotting paper.
ina transportmedium topreventdesiccationof
the sample.
Because of cell permeability the crystal violet-
Mini-tipswabsaresuitableforsampling small
iodine complex will be washed from Gram-negative
sites, such as sinus tracts.
bacteriabythesolventbutnotfromGram-positive
Transport media are buffered, non-nutritive
bacteria.Upon counter-staining with safranin,organ-
materialsthat limit therateofreplication of
isms that hadbeen decolorized(Gram-negative)will
bacteria,preventing overgrowthbyrapidly growing
stain pink.Gram-positive organisms that retain the
species.The mostcommon example isAmies
crystalviolet dye willappearblue-black/purple micro-
charcoal transportmedium,usuallysupplied
scopically.Commercialkitsarealsoavailablefor
alongwith a sterile swab.Transport media are
Gram staining.
usually suitableforaerobic and anaerobic
Further staining techniques are used to detect acid-
bacteria and forfungi.Some fastidious species
fast organisms, such as Mycobacterium spp. (Ziehl-
will not survive in these nutritionally poormedia.
Neelsenstain)(Figure25.6)ormycotichyphae(periodic
Sterile universal containers(20ml volume)are
acid-Schiff,PAS).
suitable for a range of materials including fluids,
397
Chapter25
5Diagnosis ofbacterial,fungal andmycobacterial diseases
tissue,faeces and plain urine.These tubes
Anaerobicbacteria aremostcommonlyisolated
shouldnotcontainpreservativesor
inmixed growths of two(ormore)anaerobicspecies.
anticoagulants. Submission of samples in blood
Mixed infectionswithaerobes are also common
tubes,withorwithoutanticoagulant,shouldbe
avoidedwherepossible,as accurateinformation
lococci,β-haemolyticstreptococci,Escherichiacoli,
isnot available for survival rates forbacteria in
Pasteurellamultocida,Enterococcusspp.andArcano-
these tubes.
bacterium pyogenes).
Common anaerobic bacterial pathogens(>10%of
Principlesofsampling
cases) include Clostridiumperfringens and spp.,and
Bacteroidesmelaninogenicus andspp.Less common
Obtainsamplesfrom liveanimalsbefore
isolates (<10%of cases) include Actinomyces spp.,
antibiotic treatment and as early in the disease
Eubacteriumspp.,Peptostreptococcusspp.,Propioni-
process as possible.
bacterium acnes,Bacteroides fragilis,andFusobac-
Take appropriate samples for the types of
teriumnecrophorumandspp.
cultures required.
Obligateanaerobes donotsurviveformore than
Take all possible steps to minimize
20minutes in air.Recovery is enhanced byavoiding
contamination.
all contact with atmospheric oxygen.
Donot use plain swabs.Inoculated swabs should
beplaced in bacterial transport medium to
Samples taken should belarge enough to
prevent desiccation and tomaintain theviability
maintain anaerobic conditions(>2ml of fluid
of aerobic and anaerobicorganisms.
or>2cmof tissue)or tissue should be
Packsamplesforexternal laboratoriessafely and
immersed inabacterial transportmedium,such
according to the carrier's regulations.
asAmies.Air shouldbeexcluded from liquid
Alwaysinclude detailsof theanatomical site
samples where possible.This can be achieved
sampled, date of sampling,any antibiotic
using an anaerobic transport device or by
treatment and a clinical history with samples.
expelling air from the collection syringe and
capping it. The use of swabs should be avoided
Specific sampling requirementsdepend upon the
wherepossible.
typeof materialandthelikelypathogenicspecies atthe
Samples should be held in a cool place(about
anatomical sitesampled.
15°℃) but not refrigerated.Refrigeration(<4°℃)
kills anaerobes (oxygen absorption is greater at
Sample storage and processing
Even with the use of suitable transportmedia and
(25°C) favour overgrowth of aerobic bacteria.
samplingmaterials,bacterial cultures shouldbeinocu-
Tissue and fluid samples not protected by
latedwithin24hoursof collectionwherepossible.
bacterial transportmediummustbecultured
Bacterial survival is optimizedwhen samples are held
within 24hours.
at room temperature,making samples suitable for
referral to externalveterinary laboratories.Refrigera-
tion is harmful to many species of bacteria.
Sampling forblood cultures
Blood cultures areindicatedinanyanimal suspectedof
Sampling foranaerobiccultures
having a bacteraemia(e.g.endocarditis or pyrexia of
unknown origin) and mustbetakenpriorto treatment
Obligate anaerobic bacteria are unable to grow in the
with antibiotics.Three samplesaretakenover a 24-
presence of oxygen.Theyform an important part of the
hour period,except in acutely septicpatients when
normal flora of dogs and cats,e.g. at the gingival
three samples maybe taken over a 30-minute period,
margin and in the intestines.
prior to starting antimicrobial treatment.
The most common clinical conditions involving
anaerobicbacterial infections are:
The skinisprepared asforsurgeryto avoid
culture contamination.
Abscesses
10ml of blood is collectedusing a sterile syringe
Anal sacculitis
andneedle(ornewly inserted jugularintravenous
Bacterial peritonitis
catheter).
Bacteraemia
The culturemediumbottle diaphragm is
Enteritis/colitis
disinfected with 70%alcohol and allowed to dry.
Endometritis
Usinganewsterileneedle,theblood is
Fractures involving trauma to soft tissue
transferred to theblood culturemediumbottle
Osteomyelitis
and mixed by inverting.
Periodontal disease
The sample is incubated at approximately 37°C if
Postsurgical infection
possibleanddispatchedto thelaboratorybynext
Pyothorax
day delivery.Samples maybedispatched at
Skin granulomas
room temperature; bacteria are unlikely to die
Wounds
once they are in the medium.
398
Chapter25
Diagnosis ofbacterial,fungal and mycobacterial diseases
Significant isolatesincludeall Enterobacteriaceae,
Non-pathogenicbacteriaisolated fromclinicalsam-
Bacteroidesspp.,Pseudomonasaeruginosa,Staphylo
plesareoccasionallydescribedascontaminants.These
coccus intermedius,β-haemolytic streptococci and
may originateeitherfrom the environment orfrom the
yeasts.Non-haemolytic streptococci and Clostridium
normal bacterial flora at that anatomical site. Voided or
spp.are significant in repeat cultures.Contaminants
catheterized urinesamplescommonlycontainbacte-
includeCorynebacteriumspp.,Bacillusspp.andother
rial contaminants.
skin commensals (see Figure 25.11).
Theisolation of a bacterial speciesfrom diseased
tissueisnotproofof pathogenicity;thefollowingfactors
must be considered when assessing the significance
Samplingforfluidcultures
of a bacterial isolate:
Fluid samplesarecommonlycollected forbacterial
It is necessary toknowwhich species arepart of
and fungal cultures in addition to cytological examina-
thenormal bacterial flora andwhichspeciesare
tion.These include:
pathogens at different anatomical sites
 Surveys of bacteria isolated in association with
Tracheal,bronchial andprostaticwashes-wash
diseaseoften donot establish thepathogenicity
solution is collectedforbacterial andmycotic
of thebacterialspeciesisolated
cultures.Isotonic saline is mostcommonlyused
It canbedifficulttodistinguishbetweennormal
but better cultureresultswill be obtained if a
flora and opportunisticpathogensinclinical
buffered solution,such as lactated Ringer's,is
samples:eithermay multiplytooccupya new
used.Anaerobicbacterial culturesarenot
environmental nichecreated by diseaseor
indicated therefore thewashsolution iscollected
otherfactors
intoa sterileuniversal container
Thenumberofbacterial species isolated is
 Peritoneal and pleural fluid - fluid is collected 
important(multiple isolates suggest
aseptically from the unopened bodycavity.Both
contamination or normal flora) as is the weight of
aerobic and anaerobic culturesare indicated;
bacterial growth (pure and profuse growth
thereforeairshouldbeexcluded byexpelling air
suggests a pathogenic bacterium).
from the syringe,being careful toremove the
needle and to cap the endof the syringe.Fluid
Inpractice,samples from a limited number of clini-
maybepresented in aplain sterile tube if the
cal conditions giverise to the majorityof submissions
tube isfilled to exclude air.Alternatively,fluid
toveterinarylaboratoriesforbacterial cultures;these
maybe transferred immediately toan anaerobic
conditions are considered below.
transportdevice
Otitisexterna
Abscessmaterial-againboth aerobic and
anaerobic cultures areindicated.Fluid is collected
Bacterial and fungal organisms are not considered to
be primary causes of otitis externa, but secondary
asforperitonealandpleuralfluidcultures
CSF-bacterial infections are uncommon and
infections,often by more than one pathogen,are
usually involve one species.Sample
common (see also Chapter 24). Cats have similar
contamination is usually not a problem.Fluid is
normal bacterialflora andpathogenicbacteriatodogs.
collected into a sterile tube.Alternatively,CSF is
Materialiscollectedfrom thehorizontalearcanal
inoculatedintobloodtransportmediumto
using a swab through anotoscopeifpossible,orfrom
maximize recovery of pathogenic species.
the vertical ear canal.Aerobic and yeast cultures
should be requested.The significance of bacterial
isolates is summarized in Figure 25.7.
Significanceofbacterialisolates
Bacteria that live in association with ananimal but do
Normal aerobicbacterial flora of the canine ear
not cause disease are called commensals,and most
Common (>10%of dogs sampled)
anatomicalsitesaccessibleforsamplinghaveanes-
Staphylococcus spp.(coagulase-positive); Streptococcus spp.
tablishedpopulationofcommensalspecies,referredto
Others (<10%of dogs sampled)
asnormal bacterial flora.These include residents
Bacilusspp:Enterobacteriaceae;Staphylococcusspp.coagulase-
(which constantly inhabit an area and canre-establish
negative)
themselves in that area) and transients (which origi-
natefrom the environmentorother anatomical sites
Aerobicbacteriaassociatedwithcanine otitis externa
and are carried passively).
Common (>10%of affected dogs)
Bacteria thatcause disease arecalledpathogens
Escherichiacoli;Proteusspp.Pseudomonasaeruginosa;
Staphylococcus intermedius;Streptococcus spp.(β-haemolytic)
animals ormay be saprophytes(bacteria that normally
Others (<10%of affected dogs)
inhabit the environment and obtain nutrients from non-
BacilussppCoryebacterumspp:EnterobactersppEnterocccu
living organicmatter).Opportunisticpathogens are
spp:Klebsiellaspp:PasteurellasppStaphylococcusaureus;
bacteria thatarepartof thenormal bacterialflora but
Staphylococcus spp.(coagulase-negative)
occasionally cause disease.Opportunisticpathogens
mayalsobe environmental bacteria that donot cause
25.7
Canine otitis externa:significance of bacterial
diseaseundernormal circumstances.
isolates.
399
Chapter25
5Diagnosis of bacterial, fungal and mycobacterial diseases
Conjunctivitis
Mostcasesof pyoderma areassociated withcoagu-
Conjunctivitis is the most common feline ophthalmic
lase-positivestaphylococci,predominantlyStaphylo
disorder and isoften associatedwithnon-bacterial
coccusintermedius,which isresidenton themucous
infection(Feline herpesvirus-1,Chlamydophila felis
membranes of dogs and formspart of the transient
andMycoplasmafelis).Bacteriaisolatedfromcasesof
flora of the skin and hair coat.Opportunist Gram-
conjunctivitis are similar to the normal conjunctival
negativepathogens tend tobe isolated fromchronic
bacterial flora.
and deep pyodermas.
A sample shouldbetakenbefore instillationof local
Thecoagulasetestdetectscoagulaseenzyme
anaesthetic.Theeyelid isreflected gentlyand a mini-
producedbypathogenicStaphylococcusspecies,such
tip swab isrolled across the conjunctiva.The swab is
as S.intermedius or S.aureus.Coagulase-negative
moistened as required with sterile saline (unnecessary
staphylococcitendtobenon-pathogeniccommensals.
Therapid slide test usedbymany laboratorieswill not
transport medium.Aerobicbacterial cultures only are
detect all pathogenic staphylococci; the tube test (Fig-
requested.The significance of bacterial isolates is
ure 25.9) is more sensitive.
summarized in Figure 25.8.
25.9
The tube coagulase
test:rabbit plasma is
Normalaerobicbacterial flora of theconjunctiva
incubated with a bacterial
suspension.Fibrinogen is
Dogs
converted tofibrinbycoagulase
Common(>10%of dogs sampled)
enzyme to give a weak clot in
BacilusCoryebacterum spp:Neisseria spPeumnas
theright hand tube,which is
coagulase-positive.The left
Streptococcus spp.(α-andnon-haemolytic)
hand tube shows a negative
result.
Others (<10%of dogs sampled)
Acinetobacterspp.:Alcaligenesspp.:Brahamellacatarhalis;
Citrobacterspp.:Enterobacterspp:;Enterococcusspp.;Escherichia
coli;Flavobacterium spp;Haemophilusspp.:Klebsiellaspp
MicrocsspMoraxellsNardPaterella
Proteus spp.:Streptococcus spp.（β-haemolyti)
The sampling technique depends upon the type of
Cats
lesion(see Chapter 24).The type of culture requested
Common(>10%of cats sampled)
also depends on the type of lesion:
Staphylococcusspp.
Intactpustulesand superficial wounds-aerobic
Others(<10%of cats sampled)
BacilsppCoryebacterumsppStptccs.
cultures only
 Surface pyoderma lesions - aerobic and yeast
(α-haemolytic)
cultures
Aerobic bacteria associated with conjunctivitis
Deep lesions or discharging sinus tracts (Figure
Dogs
25.10)-aerobic culture of discharge;aerobic,
anaerobic,fungal or mycobacterial culture of
Common (>10%of affected dogs)
tissue submit tissue collected by surgical biopsy
EscherichiacoliProteusmirabilisStaphylococcusspp.
inaplainsterilecontainerorembedded in
(coagulasepsiv andnegative); Strtoocs spp(αand
bacterial transport medium)
B-haemolytic)
Deep wounds - aerobic and anaerobic cultures.
Others (<10%of affected dogs)
BacilssppCorynebacterium sppKlebsiellaspp.Moraxellspp
NeisseriasppPasteurellasppeudomonass
Cats
Common(>10%of affected cats)
Staphylococcusspp.(coagulase-negative);Streptococcusspp.(β-and
non-haemolytic)
25.8
Conjunctivitis: significance of bacterial isolates.
Skininfections andwounds
Skin infections,particularly pyoderma,are very com
mon in dogsbutuncommonincats,with the exception
of subcutaneous bite wound abscesses.Underlying
conditions,suchasseborrhoeicskindisease,modify
themicroenvironment so thatnormal skinflora organ-
25.10
Pus expressed from a deep pyoderma lesion in
a dog with concurrent demodicosis.(Courtesy
genicbacteria (see also Chapter 24).
of R Wilkinson.)
400
Chapter25Diagnosisofbacterial,fungalandmycobacterial diseases
The significanceof bacterial isolates frombacterial
There arefoururine-samplingmethodsusedindogs
skin infections is summarized in Figure 25.11.
and cats:midstream voided urine;assistedmicturition;
catheterization;and cystocentesis(see Chapter10).
Urine in the bladder is considered sterile. Voided
Normal aerobicbacterial flora of canine skin
and catheterizedurine samples are contaminatedby
Common (>10%of dogs sampled)
residentbacterial flora from themid-urethra to the
AcinetobactrBailsspCoryebacteriumppMicroc
external genitalia (vagina, vestibule and prepuce). In
spp:Protesstahylcoccuspp.coagulasepsitivand
dogs,bacterial contaminationoccurs in up to 85%of
negative);Streptococcus spp.(ox-haemolytic)
voidedmidstream samples andupto26%of catheter-
Others (<10%of dogs sampled)
ized samples.Contamination is greater in samples
EnterocccusphrichiaolNcadiapdns
frombitches thanfrommale dogs.Cystocentesisisthe
spp.:Streptococcus spp.(B-haemolytic)
preferred collection method forurine culture.Contami-
Bacterial pathogens associated with canine skininfections
nation is uncommon but has been reported in up to
12% of cystocentesis samples, presumed to be from
Pathogens
skin,transport ormicrobiological processing.
Staphylococcus intermedius;Staphylococcus aureus
Fresh urine should be cultured within 2 hours or
Opportunist pathogens
mayberefrigeratedforupto6hours.Urinesamplesin
ProteusEheriaclasturellltciddns
boric acid preservative for up to 72 hours give culture
spp:Streptococcusspp.（a,β-andnon-haemolytic)
results comparable to fresh urine, whereas up to 65%
Granulomatous skin lesions
ofurine samplessubmitted to laboratoriesinplain
Actinomycesviscosus(anaerobic);Nocardiaasteroides
tubesshowafalsepositivebacteruria.Thegrowthof
more than three bacterial speciesis almost always
Canine skin infections: significance of bacterial
attributable to contamination; most UTis involve one
25.11
isolates.
bacterial species only.
Bacterialenteritis
Urine sedimentmicroscopy
Faecal cultures largelyreflect the bacterial flora of the
For details of this method see Chapter 10.Urine
caecum andcolon.Anaerobespredominate butmost
sedimentsshouldbeprepared immediately aftercol-
laboratories donot routinely inoculate anaerobiccul-
lectionwherepossible.Thenumberofwhitebloodcells
tures fromfaecal samples.The composition and dis-
(WBCs) per X400 high power microscope field (per
tribution of the aerobic faecal flora are altered in
hpf) is a useful rule of thumb to help to diagnose UTl.
enteric disease but faecal cultures are usuallynot
The following guidelines relate to urine sediment pre-
pared from5mlofurine(conicalcentrifuge tube,1000-
not be detected.
2000rpmfor5minutes,sedimentresuspended inthe
Normal aerobicfaecal flora include Escherichia
fluid remaining after the supernatant is decanted).
coli,otherEnterobacteriaceae andEnterococcusspp.
These guidelines do notapply when significantly smaller
Campylobacterspp.have been isolated from 4-40% of
volumes of urine are sedimented, for example if a
asymptomatic dogs' faeces and from 4% of asympto-
StatSpin centrifuge is used.
maticcats'faeces.Salmonellaspp.havebeenisolated
from 1-36% of healthy or hospitalized dogs' faeces
Midstreamvoided:>8WBCsperhpf associated
and 1-18%of healthyor hospitalized cats'faeces.
withUTI
Established enteric pathogens include Escherichia
Catheterized:>8WBCsperhpfassociatedwithUTI
coli,Campylobacterspp.,Clostridiumperfringens,al-
Cystocentesis:>3WBCsperhpf associated with
monella spp., Shigella spp. (rare) and Yersinia spp.
UTI.
(rare).Pathogenic strains of E.coliare poorly charac-
terized (see also Chapter13);entericinfection is most
The absence ofWBCs does notrule out UTI;
common in neonates but haemorrhagic gastroenteritis
numbers may be suppressed due to glucocorticoid
hasbeenreported in dogs over 3months of age.Most
therapy,hyperadrenocorticism,immunosuppressive
E.coli isolatedfrom faeces are likely to benormal
therapy or antibiotic treatment. WBCs may be in-
faecal flora.
creased in dogs with prostatitis or vaginitis.
Fresh diarrhoeal faecesshouldbesubmitted in a
The presence or absence of bacteria in the urine
sterileuniversal container.Rectal swabs should only
sedimentgives acrude measure of thebacterial count.
be used inneonatal animalsoranimals acutelyill with
Bacilli are onlyvisualizedinurine sediment whenthere
diarrhoea. The swab is inserted beyond the anal
areatleast104/ml.Cocciarehardertoseeandareonly
sphincterandrotated.One should ensure thatfaeces
visualized when there are at least 105/ml (see Figure
ispresentbeforeplacing theswabinbacterial trans-
25.12 for the significance of these levels).
port medium.
Looking at the number of WBCs and the presence
Urinary tract infection
of bacteria in urine sediment(Figure 25.13) increases
the sensitivity for detection of UTl.Urine sediment
Urinary tract infection (UTI) is defined as continuing
examinationmaynot,however,revealanybacteriaor
bacterial multiplicationwithin the urinarysystem de-
WBCs in animals with significant UTIs,especially
tected by the presence of abacteruria.UTls areoften
pyelonephritis.Negativeresultson sedimentexamina-
asymptomatic.
tion should notexcludeurine culture.
401
Chapter25
Diagnosisofbacterial,fungal andmycobacterial diseases
Method of collection
Dog
Cat
Equivocal
ON
n
Equivocal
Cystocentesis
>103
103
>103
<103
Catheterized
>105
10-105
<103
>103
102-103
<102
Voided
>106
10-106
<105
>105
10-105
<104
25.12
Urine bacterial counts (per ml) associated with urinary tract infection.
Quantitativebacterialcultures
Bacteruriamaybequantifiedandexpressed asthe
numberof colony forming units(CFUs)perml of urine.
Interpretation depends upon the collectionmethod.
Also the antibacterialpropertiesoffeline urinemean
thatadifferentlevelofsignificanceshouldbetaken
compared with that for canine urine(seeFigure 25.12).
The significance of bacterial isolatesissummarized in
Figure 25.14.
Infective arthritis
Infective arthritisisusually causedbybacterial infec-
tion.Direct inoculationis the commonroute of infection
25.13
Urine sediment;numerous neutrophilswith
segmented nuclei andbacterial bacilli with
spread is much less common butmay be seen in
occasional large uroepithelial cells.(Unstained;original
neonates.Common bacterial isolates from infected
magnificationX400.)
jointsindogsincludeStaphylococcusintermediusand
β-haemolytic streptococci.Less common isolates in-
Urine sample contaminants
clude Enterobacteriaceae,anaerobes,Pasteurella
Dogs
multocida, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Proteus spp.
Maledog
and Nocardia asteroides.Joint infections in cats are
Eschericiacoli;ProteusmirabilisStaphylococcus spp.(coagulase-
uncommon and usually duetopenetratingbite wounds,
positiveand-negative);Streptococcuscanis
sooropharyngealflora,includingPasteurellamultocida,
Bacteroides spp.,Streptococcus spp.and spiro-
Bitch
EscherichiacoliMicrococcusspp.:Proteusspp.Staphylococcus spp
chaetes,predominate.
Direct cultures of synovial fluid swabsonly isolate
(coagulase-negative and-positive);Streptococcuscanis
bacteria from 50%of infected joints.Thepreferred
Cats
technique is touse blood culture medium.Joint fluid is
Corynebacterium spp.;EscherichiacoliFlavobacterium spp
inoculated intobloodculturemediumthatsupports
Pasteurellaspp.:Staphylococcusspp.:Streptococcusspp.
aerobicandanaerobicgrowth.Thesametechniqueas
Aerobic bacteria associated with urinary tract infection
described for blood cultures is used.Approaches to
arthrocentesis areillustrated in Chapter 22a.Figure
Dogs
25.15 illustrates stifle arthrocentesis.
Common(>10%of affected dogs)
positive)*;Streptococcus spp.(a-andβ-haemolytic)*
Others (<10%of affected dogs)
AcinetobactersppBordetellabronchisepticaCitrobacterspp.;
spp:Pseudomonas spp.Salmonella spp.:Staphylococcus spp.
(coagulase-negative)
Cats
Common(>10%of affected cats)
s
spp.(coagulase-positive)*;Streptococcus spp.
Others(<10%of affected cats)
Pseudomonas spp.
Urinary tract infection:significance of bacterial
25.15
Stifle arthrocentesis.Bloody fluid consistent with
25.14
isolates.Established urinary tract pathogens
joint trauma,inset shows turbid synovial fluid
are asterisked.
from a septic joint. (Courtesy of S Butterworth.)
402
Chapter25
Diagnosisofbacterial,fungal andmycobacterial diseases
Cytologicalexaminationofsynovialfluidwillusually
Pathological fungal infections involve tissue inva-
identifyaninflammatoryarthritisbutwillnotreliably
sion.Infections can be superficial, subcutaneous or
distinguish between septic arthritis and immune-medi-
systemic,but only superficial skin infections are com-
ated arthritis(see Chapter22a).
moninthe UK.These aredividedintodermatophytoses,
Vaginitis and infertility
caused by dermatophytes(ringworm),and dermato-
Vaginal swabsarecommonlysubmitted frombitches
mycoses,causedbycommensalsoftheskinandmucous
fortheinvestigationofvaginitis andinfertility,despite
membranes,mostcommonlyMalasseziapachyderm
atis and Candida spp. Nasal aspergillosis in dogs and
thefact that there arenoknownbacterialsexually
Cryptococcus neoformans infections are encountered,
transmitted diseases of dogs in the UK.The relation-
but systemic mycoses(Figure 25.17) are rare.
shipbetweenvaginitis andinfertilityisnota simple one
(see Chapter 19) but vaginal bacteriological sampling
of infertile bitches without clinical signs of genital infec-
tion is usually not indicated.
 Concurrent urinary tract infection is seen in 20% of
olderbitches with vaginitis.Bacteria prevalentin vagin-
itis are also prevalent in the normal vaginal flora.
Usuallyonly one ortwobacterial specieswill beiso-
lated from cases of vaginitis but up to 18% of normal
dogs also have only one bacterial species cultured
from vaginal swabs.
Samples are taken from the anterior vagina where
possible:
The vulva is cleaned with surgical scrub,rinsed
with70%alcohol and allowedtodry
25.17
Fungal hyphae in a splenic capsule.Systemic
Aspeculum(e.g.humannasal speculum)orguarded
mycosis in a 5-year-old Whippet secondary to
swab is introduced into the cranial vagina
azathioprine therapy.(H&E;original magnification X400.)
(Courtesy of J Hargreaves.)
The dorsal and ventral vaginal walls are swabbed.
The significance of bacterial isolates from vaginal
Dermatophytes
swabs is summarized in Figure 25.16.
Dermatophytes are unique amongst fungi in that they
can invade andmaintaininfectioninkeratinized tis-
sues. The majority of infections are caused by Micro-
Normalaerobicbacterialfloraof thecaninevagina
sporum canis. M. gypseum and Trichophyton menta-
Common(>10%of dogs sampled)
grophytes are occasionalpathogensin dogs and rare
Coryebactriumheriaoloraxellaasl
pathogens in cats. T. erinacei is an occasional patho-
multocidProts:tapyloccsscaglseatv
gen in dogs.Other dermatophyte species are isolated
andpositivetretocsspp(αandhaemolytic
only sporadically.Prevalence is low,with only 16%
Others(<10%of dogs sampled)
positive cultures from over 80o0 samples from sus-
AcinetbactcalieneacalBalsspCira
pected dermatophyteinfectionsindogs andcatsinone
spp:EnterobactersppEnterococusslabacteriump
UK survey (Sparkes et al., 1993).
HaemoplusspplebsiellaspbaispMcroc
M.canis infection is usually acquired from an in-
spp:NeiseriappPmnasppStrtocssppnn
fected cat and asymptomatic cats are an important
haemolytic)
reservoir.Carriage rates of 0-88%have been re-
Aerobicbacteriaassociated withcaninevaginitis
cordedinasymptomaticcatsbutoneUKsurveyputthe
isolation rate at only 2.2%(Sparkes et al.,1994).
BaciluspCitrbatfdiCryacterumspEheria
Asymptomaticculture-positivecatsmaybeinfected or
cliEnterocusampilpplebsie
MicrocssppasturelulidProtusmiraiis
may be transient carriers.In contrast to M.canis,M.
 gypseum is geophilic and infection is often acquired
Pseudomonasspp.:Staphylococcusaureus;Staphylococcus
intermedusStapylococcussppcoagulasenegative);
from digging.
Streptococcus spp.(B-haemolytic)
 Sampling procedures are described in Chapter 24.
Canine vaginitis:significance of bacterial
Malasseziapachydermatis
25.16
isolates.
M.pachydermatisispartof thenormal bacterial skin
flora andiscommonlyfoundinthe earcanals,onthe
oral and anal mucosa,in the anal sacsand in the
Sampling for fungal cultures
vagina. It is thought to have a symbiotic relationship
with commensal staphylococci. it is also a common
Although there are some 250,000 speciesof fungi,
opportunistpathogen associatedwithotitisexterna
fewer than150species areknown tobepathogenicto
animals and man. Many saprophytic fungi have been
and skin disease in dogs.In contrast,in cats it is an
identified asnormal flora,particularlyof thehairand
uncommon cause ofotitis externa and ararecause of
skin disease.Both culture and microscopy are utilized
skin;most are contaminants from the air or soil.
toidentifyinfection:
403
Chapter 25 Diagnosis of bacterial, fungal and mycobacterial diseases
Culture:skin and external ear-swabs are
Microscopy: cytological examination of nasal
submittedforyeastcultureinbacterial transport
discharges suffers the same inaccuracies as
medium
fungal culture.
Microscopy - impression smears are taken from
Serological examination: see later section on
affectedskin,airdried andstainedwitha
serological and other tests.
Romanowsky stain.More than one organism per
Rhinoscopy may allow visualization of fungal
X400microscope field is significant.Smears may
plaques.
bepreparedfromswabsforears and less
Radiology typically demonstrates destruction of
accessible areas of skin.More than 10
nasal turbinates with radiolucency.
organismsperX400microscopefield are
Histopathological examination isuseful to confirm
considered significant inrelation to otitis externa
the significance of fungal isolates.
Donot send tape strippings to laboratories,as
Cryptococcusneoformans
these are difficult to stain and examine.
C. neoformans is a ubiquitous, saprophytic, yeast-lie
Malasseziapachydermatisyeastshaveacharac-
fungus.Infections areprevalentinareasof NorthAmerica
teristicpeanut shape and abroad-based apical bud
but infection is rarely diagnosed in the UK. Subacute or
(Figure 25.18).
chronicinfectionsof the CNS,respiratorysystem,skin
and eye may be seen in cats.The organism is cultured
from nasal discharges, CSF and biopsy specimens.
Serology for circulating antigen is available (see later)
 and cytological examination of discharges and tissue
aspirates may be diagnostic.Cryptococcosis is a seri-
ous potential zoonosis and suspected infected tissues
shouldbe handled in a microbiological safety cabinet.
Sampling for mycobacterial cultures
Mycobacterium spp.are uncommon pathogens in cats
and sporadic pathogens in dogs. Classical tubercul-
osis (TB),feline leprosy and opportunist mycobacteri-
 osis have all been reported in cats in the UK and
Malasseziapachydermatisyeasts,anucleate
produce primarily cutaneous lesions (Figure 25.19).
25.18
squamous epithelial cells and debrisfrom a
dog's ear.Several yeasts have broad-based apical buds.
Mycobacterium tuberculosisandM.bovis
(Leishman's stain;original magnification X400.)
occasionally cause classical TB in dogs and cats.
M.lepraemurium(feline leprosy) is contracted
Candida species
through rodent bites and doesnot grow on
Candidaspp.yeastsarecommensalsof theears,nose,
routinelaboratory media.Infection canbecome
oral cavity and anal mucosa.Prolonged antibiotic treat-
generalized and is usually identified through
ment,damage tomucosal surfaces,mmunodeficiency
histopathology. Recently, two different feline
and immunosuppression all predispose to infection.
leprosysyndromeshavebeendescribedwithan
Infectionisrareinbothdogs andcatsbutmayinvolvethe
unidentified Mycobacterium speciesresponsible
ear,intertrigenousareas,nailbedand interdigitalareas
forinfection inoldercats(Malik et al.,2002).
(dogs), paws and mucocutaneous junctions (cats), or
Saprophytes,such asM.chelonei,M.fortuitum,
the lower urinary tract(dogs and cats).
M.phlei,M.smegmatisM.thermoresistable and
M.xenopi,cause infection through contamination
Samplesfor culture andmicroscopy are taken as
of cutaneous wounds. These organisms are
forMalasseziapachydermatis.
difficult to stainin histopathological sectionsbut
Cytological preparations show narrow-based
arerelatively easy to culture.
yeast cells with multilateral budding. Hyphae may
bepresent.
25.19
Cutaneous lesion
Aspergillusspecies
inacatdue toa
Nasal aspergillosis in dogsiscausedbyAspergillus
Mycobacterium
fumigatus,and ismuch more common thaninfection
microti-like
withPenicillium,although clinicallyindistinguishable.
organism.
Nasal infections with fungi are rare in the cat.Dissemi-
(Courtesyof
nated aspergillosis israre.
DGunn-Moore.)
Cultures of nasal discharge are often negative for
Aspergillus incases of nasal aspergillosis and
positive inrandomlysamplednormal dogs and
dogs with nasal neoplasia.
404
Chapter25Diagnosisofbacterial,fungal andmycobacterial diseases
Specialized culture techniques and containment
electrophoresis (reported 0-15%falsepositives)
facilities are essential to culture and identify the spe-
and ELISA techniquesmayalsobeused.
ciesinvolved.Detailsof mycobacterialreferencelabo-
Bartonellahenselae-apolymerasechain
ratoriesaregivenin theResourcessection at theend
reaction(PCR)test is offeredon EDTA blood by
ofthis chapter;samplesmayalsobe submittedthrough
theAcarusLaboratory,Universityof Bristol.
anyveterinarylaboratory.Thetypeofsample depends
Brucella canis-slideagglutination,tube
upon the site:
agglutination,agar-gelimmunodiffusion,indirect
fluorescent antibody and ELISA testshave all
Skin lesions-surgical biopsyis the sample of
beenused todetectantibodiesinserum.All tests
choice.Fresh tissueis submitted ina sterile
occasionallygivefalsepositiveresults,as
universaltube
antibodies to lipopolysaccharide antigens of
Systemicdisease-samplesfrom surgical
several bacterial species crossreactwithB.
biopsiesfrom intestinal tubercles,lymph nodes,
canis.False negative reactions are less common.
pulmonary tubercles, bones and tonsils are
Chlamydophila felis-culture,antigen detection
submitted as appropriate.Again,fresh tissue is
andserological testshavelargelybeen
submitted in a sterile universal tube.
superseded by the useof thePCR test.The
conjunctiva (or other mucosal surface) is rubbed
Samplesshould alsobe submitted forcytological
vigorouslywitha cottonswabtoharvestepithelial
andhistopathological examination:
cells containing the organism and the swab(s) is
submittedwithout transportmediumforPCR
Air-dried slides from fine needle aspirates and
testing.N.B.Theclassification ofChlamydiaceae
biopsymaterialinformalsalineshouldbesubmitted
Slides are stainedwithZiehl-Neelsen stain to
hasrecentlychanged.Chlamydiapsittaci has
beendifferentiatedby16Sand23SrRNA
demonstrate characteristic acid-fast bacilli(see
sequencing into a numberof new species
Figure 25.6)
including Chlamydophilapsittaci,C.abortus,
Biopsysamplesmaybe divided at the timeof
C.felis and C.caviae.C.felis is an obligate
sampling and one half frozen for possible culture
intracellularparasite and ispart of thenormal
pendingtheresultsofhistopathologicalexamination.
flora of thefeline conjunctiva and respiratory,
gastrointestinal and urogenital systems.C.felis
Sampling for mycoplasmal cultures
causes acute,chronic and recurrent conjunctivitis
in cats. Nasal and lower respiratory tract
Mycoplasmas are the smallest free-living micro-
infections arelesscommon and the significance
of genital infection is unclear.Chlamydophila
Ureaplasmaand Acholeplasma.Theseorganisms
infection in dogs is thought to be rare.
formpartof thenormal floraonmucosalsurfacesin
Clostridiumperfringens-testsforC.perfringens
the upperrespiratory,genital andurinary tracts.They
enterotoxin(reversepassivelatexagglutination
areoccasionally associatedwithdisease:
orELISA)arenot species-specific.Samples can
thereforebetestedbyveterinaryormedical
Bitewound abscesses in cats
laboratories;1gof faeces isrequired and may
Conjunctivitisin cats
berefrigeratedorfrozenbefore analysis.False
Genital tract infections in cats and dogs (possible
negativetestresults areseenwithwatery
associationwithinfertility)
diarrhoea,interfering substances orsampling late
Lowerrespiratorytractinfectionincatsanddogs
in the course of the disease.Positive testresults
(often inassociationwithotherpathogens)
areobtained fromaffected animalsandclinically
UTI in dogs.
healthycarrieranimalsandmustthereforebe
correlated with clinical findings,endoscopy and
Mycoplasmasmayoccasionallybeisolatedfrom
histologicalexaminationof colonicbiopsy samples.
bacterial swabsandfluids,andsomeveterinarylabo-
Cryptococcus neoformans- latex agglutination
ratorieswill supplyliquid-phasetransportmedia.See
and ELISAtestsareavailableforcryptococcal
Resources section at the end of this chapter.
capsularantigeninserum,urine and SF,where
sensitivity is >90% and specificity >97%(cats
Serologicaland other tests
and humans).Antigen may also be detected in
pleural orbronchoalveolarlavage fluid.
Not allmicroorganisms are easily cultured;serological
Leptospira spp.-the microscopicagglutination
and other tests are alsousedto identify infection.
test(MAT),complement fixationandELISAare all
Furtheradviceregarding sample submission should
used to detect antibody to Leptospira spp.The
beobtainedfromtheveterinarylaboratory.
MATismost commonly used and issensitive and
serovar-specific. Titres may not rise significantly in
Aspergillusfumigatus-agargel immunodiffusion
acute infection;acute and convalescent sera may
is commonlyused to detect antibodies to
berequiredtoidentifyactiveinfection(4-foldincrease
Aspergillusspp.inserum.A 6%falsepositiverate
in titre in2-4weeks).Titres infield infection are
isreported,possibly due to frequent exposure to
usuallygreaterthanvaccinal titresbutmaybe
environmental aspergilli. Counterimmune
reduced by early effective antibiotic treatment.
405
Chapter25Diagnosisofbacterial,fungalandmycobacterial diseases
Antibacterialsusceptibility
Agar gel disc diffusion
A uniformsuspensionofthebacteriumis spreadacross
Testing techniques
Invitrosusceptibilitytestingisindicatedforanybacterial
knownconcentrationofantibioticareadded.Typically
sixto eight discs are added to oneplate.Theplate is
predicted and/or when the organism is capable of devel-
then incubated.lf the bacterium is sensitive toan
opingresistance toantimicrobial drugs.Until recently,
antibiotic,a zone of inhibition occurs around the disc.
onlytheagargeldiscdiffusiontechnique wasusedinthe
Zone diameters are compared topublished figures to
UK.Nowbroth dilutionminimum inhibitory concentra-
determinewhetherabacteriumissensitive orresistant
tion(MiC) testingis also used to generate information on
toan antibiotic (Figure 25.20).Results have been
invitrosusceptibilityofbacterialpathogens.Whatever
showntobe95%reproduciblebetweenlaboratories
technique is used it is important to standardize the
whenstandardizedproceduresareused.
method and interpretation.The most commonly used
standards are those approved by the National Commit-
Broth dilution MIC
tee for Clinical Laboratory Standards(NCCLS,2001).
The minimum inhibitory concentration (MiC) is the
lowest concentration ofanantibiotic that inhibits the
growth of a givenstrainof bacterium.If the growth ofa
bacterialpathogencanbe inhibitedinvivo thena
healthyimmune systemwill complete the jobofelimi-
nating infection. MiCs are determined by inoculating a
bacterial isolateintoaseriesof testwells,usuallyfour
to six,with doubling dilutions of the antibiotic to be
tested against.Afterincubation the wells areexamined
for growth or inhibition of growth.
Interpretation of testresults
Agargel diffusionandbroth dilutionMiCresults are
compared in Figure 25.21.The list of antibiotics
selected for testing is appropriate for the bacterial
species and follows NCCLS recommendations. Both
25.20
Agar gel disc diffusion;Pseudomonas
aeruginosa showing invitroresistance to fusidic
techniques classify thebacterial isolate asresistant
acid(FC),trimethoprim/sulphonamide(SXT)and
(R),sensitive (S)orof intermediate resistance (l) in
amoxicillin/clavulanate(AUG).
vitro to each antibiotic.
Agar gel discdiffusion
Broth dilution MIC
Antibiotic
Result
Antibiotic
Result
MIC
Antibioticconcentrationrange(μg/ml)
Penicilin
R
Penicillin
Resistant
>=16
0.03
ssrrrR
16
Ampicilin
R
Ampicillin
Resistant
>=16
0.12
ssrrR
16
Amoxicili/clavulanate
S
Amoxicillin/clavulanate
SENSITIVE
<=2
2
Ssr
Cefalexin
Cefalexin
SENSITIVE
<=2
2
Sssir
32
Erythromycin
Erythromycin
SENSITIVE
<=0.5
0.5
Siir
8
Clindamycin
S
Clindamycin
SENSITIVE
<=0.5
0.5
Sirr
8
Enrofloxacin
S
Enrofloxacin
SENSITIVE
<=0.25
0.25
Ssir
Marbofloxacin
2
Marbofloxacin
SENSITIVE
<=0.25
0.25
Ssir
2
Trimethoprim/
Trimethoprim/
SENSITIVE
<=10
10
Sssrrr
320
sulphonamide
sulphonamide
Tetracycline
S
Tetracycline
SENSITIVE
sSsrr
16
S=Sensitive
s=Sensitive
1=Intermediate
i=Intermediate
R=Resistant
r=Resistant
25.21
Staphylococcus intermediustoselected antibiotics.Agargeldiscdiffusionclassifiesthebacterial isolateassimply
resistantsensitiveorof intermediateresistancetoeachantibiotic.BrothdilutionMiCalsogivesthelowestinhibitory
antibioticconcentration tested,theMiC isreported as<= the lowest concentration(amoxicillin/clavulanate,cefalexin,
erythromycin,clindamycin,enrofloxacin,marbofloxacin,trimethoprim/sulphonamide).lf thebacterium isresistant to the
highest concentration, the MIC is reported as >= the highest concentration of the antibiotic (penicilin, ampicillin).The range
ori(intermediate)Thefirstconcentrationatwhichthereisresistance,ie.thefirstronthescale,is thebreakpoint.hepoint
at which theMICresult falls onthe s-i-r scale is givenby theuseof a capitalletter,and corresponds to the the antibiotic
concentration given in the MiC column (2 mg/ml in the case of tetracycline). See also Case 2.
406
Chapter25
5Diagnosis of bacterial,fungal and mycobacterial diseases
Further interpretation of MiC test results follows a
thantheplasma levelsonwhichtheMiCdilutions
logical sequence:
arebased
If an organism shows resistance to allthe
TheMiCvalueinμg/ml isnoted.If thebacterium
antibioticsselected then thismaybeovercome
issensitive at the lowest antibiotic concentration
by selecting one that reaches high tissue
tested, then the MIC willbe given as<= the
concentrationsorbyincreasing thedose and/or
lowestconcentration(amoxicillin/clavulanate,
frequency of administration
cefalexin, erythromycin, clindamycin,
Animalswithcompromised immunesystemswill
enrofloxacin,marbofloxacinandtrimethoprim/
requireahigher drug concentration than the MIC
sulphonamide inFigure 25.21).If the bacterium
number to achievebactericidal concentrations of
is resistant at the highest antibiotic concentration
the antibioticin tissues
tested,then the MiCwill be given as >= the
highest concentration (penicillin and ampicillin).
Limitations to invitro susceptibility
The range of antibiotic concentrations is given
testing
numerically as thelowest and highest
Only fast-growing aerobic bacteria, such as staphylo-
concentration tested (0.03 and 16 μg/ml,
cocci and Enterobacteriaceae,areroutinely tested.
respectively, in the case of penicillin). Each
Susceptibilitytestingof slow-growingaerobicbacteria,
antibiotic concentration tested in thisrangeis
obligate anaerobic bacteria,bacteria growing in a
represented by a letter (s, i or r) on the scale
microaerophilicenvironment(e.g.Campylobacterspp.)
reading from left (highest concentration) to right
and fungi is beyond the scope of most veterinary
(lowest concentration). There are 10
laboratories.Published guidelines for antibacterial
concentrations or test wellsforpenicillin and3for
susceptibilityareconsideredmorereliablefor these
potentiated amoxicillin.
organisms (Quinn et al.,1994;Aucoin,2002).
Each antibioticconcentration is classified as
Invitro susceptibility tests assume anaverage
representing sensitivity (s),intermediate sensitivity
serumconcentrationof the antimicrobial drug.Tissue
(i) or resistance (r) based on in vitro studies. The
levelsmay differ from theseserum levelsforanumber
breakpoint' is represented by the first letterr on
of reasons:
the scale.The s-i-r scale is fixed for each
combinationof antibiotic and bacterial species.
Use in speciesor ages of animalsnot covered by
Finally, the point at which the MiC result falls on
the data sheet applications
the s-i-r scale is given by the use of a capital
Useof a different drugformulation to the class-
letter,and corresponds to the antibiotic
representative example used in the tests
concentration given in the *MiC' column (2 μg/ml 
Variable tissue penetration - usually low in CSF
in the case of tetracycline).
and high in urine
Topical drug concentrations areusuallymuch
The interpretation of theresults ofMiC testing
higher than serum concentrations.For this
makesuseof all these data:
reason,some laboratories donotprovide
susceptibilitytestingfor topical antibiotics.
SENSITIVE (MIC <= any number) - The 
antibiotic is effective at the lowest concentration
Generallynvitroantbacterialucptibilityttin
tested and should be effective in serum orurine
SENSITIVE (MIC any number) - The antibiotic is
ismostsuccessfulatpredicting failureof adrug toclear
infection in vivo.The predictive value of invitro testing
effective,but not at the lowest concentration
for a good therapeutic response is moderate.A veteri-
tested.Referto theMICrangetodetermine
where in the range it tested. The closer the MIC
is to the breakpoint, theless likely it is that the
resultsagainstaknowledgeofwhich antibioticsare
most effective at which anatomical sites.
bacteriumwillbesusceptibleinvivo to this
antibiotic
Intermediate(MiC any number)-The antibiotic
Methicillin-resistantStaphylococcus
may be effective inhigh dosages,orif it
aureus
concentrates at the site
The isolation ofmethicillin-resistantStaphylococcus
Resistant (MIC any number) -The antibiotic will
aureus (MRSA) from companion animals has been
be unlikely toreach effectiveserum levels.
reportedrecently in the press(Anon,2003).MRSA is
Choosean antibiotic towhich the organism is
susceptible
ment of severe staphylococcal disease and is a con-
Resistant (MIC>=any number)-Choose an
antibiotic to which the organism is susceptible.
Isolatesfrom companionanimals aretypically from
postoperative infections and open wounds. On the
 The following points should also be considered
basisof the strain types involved it is thought that
when selecting an antibiotic:
infection of companion animals with MRSA is likely to
be the result of transmission from the human popula-
Safety,easeofuseandcost
tion (Rich et al, 2004). Strict hygiene is important in
Someantibioticsreachmuchhigher tissuelevels
reducing MRSA.
407
Chapter 25
Diagnosisofbacterial,fungal and mycobacterial diseases
Case examples
Case 1
Signalment
Whatarethelikelybacterial species?
5-year-oldmaleneuteredSpringerSpaniel.
The most likely bacterial species,based on 47published cases of
pyothoraxindogs(Walkeretal,2000）are:
History
Dyspnoea.
Gram-positive cocci
Peptostreptococcus spp.(anaerobic,27%of
Microscopy
isolates)
Flocculentpuswascollectedfromthepleuralcavity.Gram-stainedsmears
Streptococcus canis(aerobic,11%)
Staphylococcusintermedius(aerobic,4%not
containednumerousneutrophilswithpleomorphicGram-positive bacili
(Figure 25.22)and Gram-positive cocci in short chains(Figure 25.23).
commonly in chains)
Gram-positive bacilli
Actinomyces spp.(aerobic,19%)
25.22
Nocardia spp.(aerobic,4%)
Eubacterium spp.(anaerobic,3%)
Canine pleural fluid.
Propionibacterium spp.(anaerobic,2%)
Gram-positivebacili
(arrowed)and
neutrophils.(Gram
Should initial antibiotic therapybe directed
stain;original
against aerobicor anaerobicbacteria?
magnification X1000.)
Thebalance ofprobabilitiessuggestsamixed anaerobicandaerobic
infectionindicatingthatantbioticsshoudbeselectedwithactivity
against both.
Bacterial cultures isolatedBacteroides andPeptostreptococcus.
Bacteroidesspp.areGram-negativeanaerobesthat werenotientifed
25.23
inthe smearsoGram-positivebacilliwereisolatedThiscaseillus
tratessome of thelimitations andadvantagesof directmicroscopy:
Caninepleural fluid
chain of Gram-
Gram-negativebacillicanbedifficult tovisualizeagainstbackground
positive cocci
material on a Gram-stained smear (see Figure 25.1)
(arrowed)and
Suboptial saling andstoragecnditionswilfect theviabityof
neutrophils.(Gram
fastidioutnritrii
stain;original
bacteriamayberecognized onmicroscopy
magnification X1000.)
·
A workingknowledgeofcommon bacterial isolatesin different
speciesatiferentanatmicalsitesirequiredtinterprettheresult
of direct microscopy.
Case2
Signalment
Why are theseresultsconsistent with a
10-year-oldfemaleneuteredWestHighlandWhiteTerrer.
urinary tract infection?
ThesignifcanerfWrenindiettsignifica
History
bacterialcount(seeFigure25.12)andthesolationandientificationf
Polyuria/polydipsia.
arecognizedurinarytractbacterialpathogen(seeFigure25.14）allpoint
Urine sediment examination and
to a urinary tract infection.
bacteriological cultures
Howwouldyou use theMiCdata tohelp to
select an appropriate antibiotic for use in
20-30 WBCsper hpf
thiscase?
5-10 RBCs per hpf
Theresultsindicate susceptibilityof theisolatetoalltheantibiotics
Bacterialculturesfromthevoidedurinesampleisolated>10CFU/ml
testedvlyalfftivathwstln
of Enterococcus spp.
and it should therefore be effective in serum or urine.Tetracycline
predictsthesusceptibilityoftheisolatetorelatedantimicrobialssuchas
MICantibacterialsusceptibilitytestinggavethefollowingresults:
oxytetraclandxylixyracyldn
groundsfcostsasiladinistedandsrelilythandxy
Broth dilution MIC
cline toconcentratein theurine.Giventhehistoryof polyuria/polydipsia
Antibiotic
Result
MIC
Referencerange
it would be important to rule out renal failure,as this would bea
(μg/ml)
contraindication to the use of oxytetracycline.
ThesecondchoiceantiboticwouldbeampicillinasthMfalls
Penicilin
SENSITIVE
4
0.03
sssssssSsr 16
furthest fromthebreakpointonthes-rcale.Costeaseofadminis
Ampicilin
SENSITIVE
0.5
0.12
ssSsssr
16
tration andsafety areall satisfiedby theuseof thisantibiotic.The
decreasedriskof adverseeffectswhencomparedwithoxytetracycline
Enrofloxacin
SENSITIVE
1
0.25
ssSr
2
may make this the preferred choice for some clinicians.Ampicillin
Marbofloxacin
SENSITIVE
1
0.25
ssSr
2
predicts the invitro susceptibility to amoxicillin,whichmayalso there-
Tetracycline
SENSITIVE
<=1
Sssir
fore be used.
1
16
408
Chapter25
Diagnosisofbacterial,fungal andmycobacterial diseases
Referencesandfurtherreading
WalkerAL,JangSSandHirshDC(20oo)Bacteriaassociatedwith
pyothoraxofdogsandcats:98cases(1989-1998).Journalofthe
AddieDand Ramsay1(2001).The laboratory diagnosisof infectious
AmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation216,359-363
diseases.In:BSAVAManualof CanineandFeline Infectious
Publications,Cheltenham
Anon (2003) Hospital superbug MRSA spreads to animals. The
Resources
Observer,14December
Aucoin D(2002)Target-The Antimicrobial ReferenceGuide to
EffectiveTreatment,2edn.NorthAmericanCompendiums
Mycobacterialreferencelaboratories
Inc.,Port Huron
Health Protection Agency
BibersteinELandZeeYC(19go)Reviewof VeterinaryMicrobiology.
Mycobacterium Reference Unit and Regional Centre for
Blackwell Scientific,Boston
Mycobacteriology
Dunning MandStonehewerJ (2002)Urinarytractinfectionsin smal
DulwichHospital
animalspathophysiologyanddiagnosis.nPractice24,418432
EastDulwichGrove
London
coccus aureusindogs andcats:anemerging problem?Journal
SE228QF
ofSmallAnimal Practice45,591-7
Tel.020 86932830
GreeneCG(1998)InfectiousDiseasesof theDogand Cat,2dedn.
WBSaunders,Philadelphia
National Public HealthService of Wales
Gunn-MooreDand ShawS(1997)Mycobacterial disease in the cat.
Regional Centre forMycobacteriology
InPractice19,493-501
Llandough Hospital
HoultonJEF(1994)Ancillaryaidstothe diagnosisof jointdisease.ln:
Cardiff
BSAVAManualofSmallAnimalArthrology,ed.JEFHoultonand
CF642XX
RWCollinson,pp.22-38.BSAVAPublications,Cheltenham
Tel.02920716408
MalikR,HughesMS,JamesG,MainP,WigneyDICanfieldPJ,
ScottishMycobacteriaReferenceLaboratory
EdinburghRoyal Infirmary
Surgery4,43-59
51LittleFrance Crescent
MillerJM(1996)SpecimenManagement inClinical Microbiology.
AmericanSocietyforMicrobiology,WashingtonDC
NCCLS(2001）PerformanceStandardsforAntimicrobiaDiskand
Tel.01312426022
DilutionSusceptibiltyTestsforBacteriaIsolatedfromAnimals
ApprovedStandard.M31-A2.Wayne,PA
ReferencelaboratoriesarealsosituatedinBirminghamNewcast
Quinn PJ,Carter ME,Markey Band Carter GR（1994)Clinical
VeterinaryMicrobiology.Mosby，StLouis
Theselaboratoriestogetherform theUKMycobacterial Networkto
QuinnJMaryarEllynardC
monitor tuberculosis drug resistance in humans.
MaguireD(2002)VeterinaryMicrobiologyandMicrobialDisease.
BlackwellScience Ltd,Oxford
Mycoplasma
RichMandRoberts L(2004).Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
Specialist adviceonMycoplasma cultures canbeobtained from:
154,310
Mycoplasma Experience
SparkHrufyddnTJhawSEriglandSte
1NorburyRoad
Reigate
felinedermatophytosisintheUnitedKingdomfrom1956to1991.
Surrey
VeterinaryRecord133,57-61
RH29BY
Sparkes AH,WerrettG,Stokes CR and Gruffydd-Jones TJ (1994)
Microsporumcanis:inapparentcarriagebycatsandtheviability
Tel.01737226662
ofarthrospores.JournalofSmallAnimalPractice35,397-401
Fax.01737224751
E-mail.mexp@mycoplasma-exp.com
409
Diagnosis of viral infections
AlanRadford andSusanDawson
Introduction
(HA),and much newer ones,such as those based on
PCR.Some rely on thepresenceof thewholevirus
Viral infections ofsmallanimals are common and
(e.g.isolation,electron microscopy)whereas others
frequently represent an important cause of disease.
detect specific components or fractions of the virus
Althoughprecise diagnosis isnotalwaysnecessary,
(e.g.antigen detection).Currently,no one test consist-
it mayberequired todetermine appropriatetherapy
entlyoutperformstheothersinallcases,andallmethod-
and prognosis,and togive advice about thepotential
ologies are still used in routine diagnosis.
for disease in othersusceptible animals sharing the
same environment. In many cases,a presumptive
Virus isolation
diagnosismaybemadewithoutrecourse tospecific
Virus isolationrelieson the abilityofsomeviruses to
diagnostic tests, based on the signalment, history,
replicate in cell cultures in the laboratory. Clinical
clinical signs and more routine diagnostic assays,
samples aretaken andplaced intospecializedvirus
such as haematology and biochemistry. For exam-
transportmedium(VTM),whichrestrictsthegrowthof
ple,lackof vaccination and panleucopenia suggest
bacterial contaminants in the sample during transit to
canine parvovirus;mouth ulcers and upperrespira-
the laboratory. Vl relies on having both functional
tory tractdisease suggest felinecalicivirus.However,
virusparticles and a cellinethat supports thereplica-
amore definitive diagnosismay be facilitated by
tion of thevirus in the laboratory.lt worksbest for
usingoneormoreofawiderangeof specificdiag-
viruses that are stable outside the host (e.g.canine
parvovirus (CPV), feline calicivirus (FCV), cowpox
nostic tests.
This chapter will cover the theory of the most
virus),but works poorly for very fragile viruses that
common diagnostic tests available for small animal
rapidly lose infectivity outside the host (e.g. feline
viruses.In order to interpret any givenresult correctly,
coronavirus). The cell cultures used are generally
it is critical to understandboth thebiology of thevirus
semi-permanentcell linesgrown asamonolayer on
in question and theprinciplesof the testused.For a
plastic.However,primary cellines and organexplants
moredetaileddiscussionofvirusbiology,readersare
may be used less commonly.
referred to othertexts(e.g.Greene,1998).
Virusreplication isusually associatedwithcellular
Viral diagnostic tests canbe divided into two
toxicity that is manifested as a cytopathic effect(cpe).
categories:
In the cell culture common cpes include cell lysis,
syncytium formationand inclusionbody formation
(Figure 26.1).Usually the combination of the cell type
Teststhatdetectpartsof thevirus,such as
that supports virus growth and the nature or pattern of
isolation,antigendetection,polymerasechain
the cpe is sufficient to achieve a diagnosis. In some 
reaction(PCR)and both light and electron
cases,thevirusmaybefurthercharacterizedbyfixing
microscopy(EM)
Tests that detect antibody produced by the
thecells and staining theviral antigenswithvirus
immune response to the virus,following either
specific antisera.
infection orvaccination.
Theprincipal disadvantageofVl is therequire-
ment fordedicatedfacilitiestomaintainthegrowth of
No single test is perfect: the advantages and dis-
cellsinculture,limiting suchteststospecialistlabora-
tories.It is advisable to use the correct VTM supplied
advantages of various methodologies are discussed
by the laboratory,as this medium will have been
below.In addition,when interpreting test results it is
tested toensure it isnot harmful tothecellculture
important toconsiderthelimitationsof the testandthe
system being used.Despite theuseof VTM,viruses
biological behaviour of specificviral infections.
can still be inactivated in transport or the VTM can
become contaminatedwithbacteriafrom thesample,
and this canrender the sample unusable.Arguably,
Virus detection
themajordrawbackofVl isthetime takentoreport
samplesasnovirus isolated’,whichmaybeaslong
Thesetestsincludehistoricallywellestablished tests
as2-3weeks,and maybe toolateto inform clinical
such as virus isolation(Vl)and haemagglutination
decision making.
410
Chapter26
Diagnosisofviral infections
b
(C)
(e)
26.1
(arrowed).(@ Susan Dawson)(b)Feline herpesvirus(FHV) cpe(in tissue culture) manifests asballooning of cells
and long strands of cellular material(arrowed).(@Susan Dawson)(c) Feline immunodeficiency virus(Fiv) cpe (in
intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies (arrowed).(H&E stain)(Courtesy of M Bennett)(e) Feline herpesvirus syncytium and
intranuclear inclusion bodies(arrow shows inclusionbody within a syncytium).(H&E stain)(Courtesy of RM Gaskell)
Viral antigen detectioninclinical
caninedistempervirus)ortissuesection(immunohisto-
specimens
logy) (Figure 26.2A,B). In other cases, where the antigen
Antigen detectionrelies on the ability ofviral antigens
isfreeinabiologicalsolution,suchasinbloodorserum,
present within clinical samples(e.g.blood and tissue
the antigenmust first be captured.This can be achieved
sections)toreact specificallywith antibodiesraised to
witha specificantibodywhich isbound toa solid surface
thatparticularantigen.Therearetwocommonsources
(antigen capture or‘sandwich)(Figure 26.2C,D)
of these antigen-specific antibodies:
Once the antigen hasbeenimmobilized,itcanbe
detected byincubation with a specificantibody.Some-
Polyclonal antiseracontain arangeofantibodies
timesthisantibodyhasacolouredmoleculedirectly
to different epitopesfrom thevirus and usually
attached to it, such as fluorescein or colloidal gold
come from infected animals
particles,to allow the directvisualizationofbound
Monoclonal antibodiescome fromexperimental
antibody (immunofluorescence (Figure 26.3)and
mice;they areproduced from a single clone of
rapid immunomigration,RIM).Alternatively, the anti-
B-cellsand therefore arespecificfora single
body mayhave an enzyme attached to it (commonly
epitope.
phosphatase or peroxidase;Figure 26.4) that cata-
lyses thesubsequent synthesisofa colouredproduct.
In the first stage of the process,the antigen in
However, more commonly, this antibody is unlabelled
question needs tobeimmobilized on a solid surface.ln
and its specificbinding isdetectedwitha second
antibody that is labelled(Figure 26.2B,D). In such a
beimmobilizedona glass slidewithin infected cells,
two-antibodysystem the antibodies arereferred to as
such asina tissue smear(feline leukaemia virus(FeLV),
theprimary andsecondary antibodies.
411
Chapter 26
Diagnosisofviral infections
26.2
Viralantigen
detection.Direct
and indirect methods.The
antigen tobe detected is in
red.
Secondary
antibody
Direct
detection
Primary
Secondary
of antigen
antibody
antibody
Antigen
Direct
Primary
detection
ofantigen
antibody
antibody
A
B
26.3
using eitheranenzyme-linked immunosorbentassay
(ELISA)in thecommercial laboratory,ortheRIMkits
Immunofluorescence
most frequently usedin generalpractice(Figure 26.5).
of FeLV antigens ina
The term ELISArefersto a widerange of teststhat take
peripheral blood
place onaplasticsurface and canbeusedeitherforthe
smear,showing
greenpositive
detection of antigen or antibody (see below).The prin-
fluorescence in
cipal advantage of direct viral antigen detection within
leucocytesand
infectedcellsistheabilitytolocalizeviralantigen
platelets.(Courtesy
expression to the appropriate cellular compartment,
ofOJarrett)
thereby reducing the numberof falsepositives.This
doesnotapplytoRiMpracticekitsandmayexplain
someof thefalsepositivesobtainedwithsuchtests.
Polymerasechainreaction
Unlike other methods for detecting virus, PCR is
uniqueindetecting theviralgeneticinformationrather
thanviral protein.PCR allows the specificmultiplica-
tion(amplification) of smallamounts of DNA toa level
thatcanbereadily detected.Theamplification is
specific,being limited to a particular region of DNA
(target) by the use of short molecules of single-
stranded DNA (primers) that are complementary to
the DNA oneither sideof thetarget.Whilst the
specificsof anygivenPCRmayvary,theprinciplesof
eachremainthesameand consistofdenaturation,
annealing and extension phases,which are repeated
multiple timesin the same order.
Immunoperoxidasemethod.Granulomatous
In the first stage of the PCR, the DNA double
26.4
inflammationof the intestinal serosa in acat
helix(template) isheated toaround94°Cto
with feline infectiousperitonitis(FIP),showinga central
separate(denature) the two strandsofDNA
(Figure 26.6a)
viral antigen (stained brown).(Courtesy of A.Kipar)
In thesecond stageof thePCR,theDNAis
cooled downto allow thesingle-strandedprimers
Thebestexampleofviral antigendetectionfrom
tobind(anneal) specifically totheir target
clinical specimensin small animals isprobablyFeLV,
sequence in the single-stranded template.The
inwhichp27is detected intheblood.Thisviralprotein
annealing temperatureisoneof themost critical
isproduced in abundance inFeLV-infected animals
things in any PCR and depends on the sequence
within infected cells and spills out into the serum.The
of the primer(Figure26.6b;primers in red)
p27proteinmaybe detected directly onblood smears
In the thirdroundof thePCR,theDNAisheated
whereantignresentpaticularlywithinwhitlod
to approximately 72°C.At this temperature, the
cells and platelets (immunofluorescence; Figure 26.3).
DNA polymerase extends the primers in the 5' to
Alternatively,itcanbedetectedbyantigencapture
3'direction(Figure 26.6c).
412
Chapter 26 Diagnosis of viral infections
Examplesofrapid
26.5
immunomigrationtechnology
alsamplecontainingp27antigen
used for the detection of (a) FeLV p27
antigen and (b) FIV antibodies.(Based on
pictures kindly suppliedbySynbiotics
TESTRESULTWINDOW:Membran
Europe)
insample
supportfortest
SAMPLEWELL:
CONTROLWINDOW
P27in sample binds to antibody1
Aqueous environment of mer
mbraneleadstomigrationofparticles
and2-resultp27positive
Positive control testresult;second
ireaofimmobilizedparticles
02
migration of thereagents
TESTWINDOWCONTROLWINDOW
a)
nple containingFIVantibodies
e boundFIV antigen to
Membranesupportfortest
Membranebound
todetect
FIV antibodiesi
plebindFiVantigeninsamplewell
embraneleadstomigrationofparticles
bothFIVantigens-resultFiVantibody
Posit
migration of thereagents
(b)
ESTWINDOV
413
Chapter26Diagnosisof viral infections
26.6
Polymerase chain reaction.
Reactions occur in a solution
TEMPLATE
containing the templateDNA,theDNA
TAAGGTAGCCA-5"
polymerase enzyme and nucleotides.The
templateis double-strandedDNA,shown as
twoblacklineswith thenucleotides ateach
(a)DENATURATION:94℃
endspecified.3'and5'referto the different
3-AGTCGGCTAG
TATCGTCGGA-5
chemical ends of the DNA,and are shown
because DNA polymerase extends the
6'-TCAGCCGATC
ATAGCAGCCT-3
sequence only in the 5' to3' direction.
(a)Denaturation:theDNA template isheated.
(b)PRIMERANNEALING
so the double strands separate,allowing
access by the primers and enzyme.(b) Primer
annealing:atalower temperature,specially
designed primers (short sequences of DNA
B'-TCAGCOGATC
shown in red)complementary to the DNA
(C)PRIMEREXTENSION:72C
sequence flanking the area of interest bind
single stranded template DNA.(c)Primer
extension:DNA polymerasecreatesa
3-AGAGGGGTAG
complementary DNA strand (shown in blue)
from the primer ina5'to3'direction.The
result is double-stranded DNA that is a copy
(d)PCRresult
of the template DNA.These cycles are
repeated,andDNA copiesincrease
exponentially.(d) Results of typical PCR:
lanes 1-6 arepositive;lanes7 and 8 are
negative;lanes9and10 arepositive controls;
lane11 is the negative control;lane 12 is a
molecularweightmarker to identify thesizeof
the amplified DNA product.
Attheendoftheextensionphase,theDNAisagain
where theproductsof thePCRarere-amplified in
double-stranded and one cyclehasbeen completed.
a second reaction.With such high sensitivity, PCR
An individualPCRwilltypicallyrepeat thiscycle35-40
may give a positive result when other tests,such as
times,with thenumberof targetmolecules,in theory,
VlorEM,arenegative(Mochizukietal.,1993;Schunck
doubling ineachcycle.AmplifiedDNA moleculesare
etal.,1995)
detectedbyrunning themon anagarosegel,where an
OnceviralDNAhasbeenamplified,itsnucleotide
electriccurrentseparatesthemonthebasisoftheir
sequence can alsobedetermined.Thisallows confir-
size(Figure 26.6d)
mationthattheDNA amplifiedbythePCRisindeedthe
Since theDNApolymerasesused in thereaction
targetDNA,and this is important forquality control.In
onlyreplicate DNA andnot RNA,thePCRreaction
addition,by sequencing a variableregion of thevirus
mustbemodified forRNAviruses.Inthiscase,theviral
genome,strainsofviruscanbecomparedanddifferen
RNAmustfirstbeconverted toDNAbyincubationwith
tiated.This isparticularly useful for typing studies,
a reverse transcriptaseenzyme;thisDNAcan then be
often allowing the source of infections tobe identified.
amplified byPCR.Thewholeprotocol isreferred to as
Whilst this is not always clinicallynecessary,it can
a reverse transcriptasePCRorRT-PCR.
prove useful ininvestigating thepotential ability of live
The principal advantage of PCR is its speed(a
vaccines to cause disease (e.g. feline calicivirus)
result maybeattainable inas little as1workingday,
(Radford etal.,20oo).In the future,itmaybepossible
whereas isolation may take upto2-3weeks).in
to designPCRsthat identifyvirulent formsof virus and
addition,PCRsmaybesetuptodetectmorethanone
distinguish them from less harmful types. In small
pathogen, saving on cost and time(e.g.feline herpes-
virus and Chlamydophila felis)(Sykes et al.,1999;
diagnosis of feline infectious peritonitis (FIP).
Helps etal.,2003).An exciting recent development in
The principal drawbacks of PCR are the require-
PCR technology islight-cycler'PCR.This system is
ment for specialist facilities(although most laborato-
even morerapid than conventional PCR and also
ries now have these available)and its sensitivity.
allows the quantification of specificDNA in theoriginal
Because it is so sensitive,PCR is extremelyprone to
sample. In human medicine, this type of PCR is being
false positives unless carried out inspecially designed
used toquantifyviral load inordertostagehuman
laboratoriesbyhighlytrainedstaff.
immunodeficiencyvirusinfection and monitor there-
sponseto antiviral therapy.Such quantificationmay
Histopathology
becomeavailablein thefuturetoallow thestagingof
Virusesaretoosmall to allowdirectvisualization of
felineimmunodeficiencyvirus(FiV)infection.
individual virusparticlesbylightmicroscopy.However,
As well as its speed, a well designed PCR is
forsomeviruses,thepatternof thehistopathological
extremelysensitive,being capableof detectingvery
changes associated with thevirus areso specific that
smallquantitiesofDNA.Insomecases,thesensitivity
itcanallowa definitivediagnosistobe made(Figure
can be increased further by using a nested PCR,
26.7).Another commondiagnosticfeature of some
414
Chapter26
Diagnosisofviral infections
Histopathology.
26.7
Lesions can
sometimes be used to
providea diagnosisfor
viral infections.
(a) Cowpox lesion in a cat.
The arrow indicatesan
intracytoplasmic inclusion.
(H&E stain;original
magnificationX400)
(Courtesy of MBennett.)
(b)Infectious canine
hepatitis, showing
adenoviral inclusions
(arrowed) in infected
hepatocytes.(H&E stain;
original magnification
X1000)(Courtesy of A
(a
Kipar)
viruses areinclusionbodies,whichrepresent aggre-
can beidentified based ontheirmorphological appear-
gates ofvirusproteinswithin the cell.Thesemay be
ance and size (Figure 26.8). The use of EM is limited
intranuclear (herpesviruses,canine adenovirus)or
because of its expense, associated with the need for
intracytoplasmic(cowpox,rabiesNegri bodies,canine
highlyspecialized equipment,and due to the availabil-
distemper). In many cases, the presence of viral anti-
ity ofcheaper,moresensitive,assaysformostviruses.
gen within histological sections may be confirmed by
Itisstillusedforthedemonstrationofpoxvirusparticles
immunohistology (see above).Such tests are fairly
in clinical specimens(cowpox),or for the demonstra-
cumbersomeandrequirespecialistpathologicalinter-
tion of virus particles in faeces. lt also remains a
pretation.However,they still have theiruse in those
valuabletool inresearchfortheinvestigationof out-
cases where more definitive diagnosis cannot be
breaksof diseasecausedbynewviruses,where,by
achieved by other means (e.g. FIP).
definition,specifictestswill notbe available.
Electronmicroscopy
Haemagglutination
Perhaps the purest example of virus antigen detection
For many years it has been recognized that some
isdirect visualizationof thevirusinclinical samplesby
viruses have the seemingly peculiar ability to aggluti-
electronmicroscopy(EM).However,virus particles are
nate(clump)redbloodcells;thisistermed haemagglu-
verysmall and can easilybe missed,evenwith the
tination (HA).Although the mechanism by which this
electron microscope.EM is particularly suited to those
occursmaynotbeknown,HAcanbeused fordiagno-
caseswhere largeamounts of virus arepresent within
sis. The result can be confirmed by inhibiting the HA
clinical samples.Visualizationof virusparticlescanbe
withspecificantiserumraised against the virus:haem-
enhancedbyclumping them togetherwithspecific
agglutination inhibition (HAl;Figure 26.9). The best
antisera(immune EM).Once seen,most viruseshave
examplesofvirusesinsmallanimal virologythatcause
a fairly distinctive appearance to the trained eye, and
HA are the parvoviruses of cats and dogs.
26.8
Electronmicroscopy.thoughoftendifficult tofindmost viruseshaveaverycharacteristimorphologyhich
Bennett)(b)Feline herpesvirus particle with capsid morphology and envelope.(Courtesy of RMGaskell (c) Canine
parvovirus particles in a faecal sample.(@Alan Radford)
415
Chapter26Diagnosisofviral infections
laboratory,differences inthetitresmaybe
observedforagivensamplerunon different
days.Therefore,anallowance has tobe made
forexperimental error.Formanytests,up to
4-fold differencesintitre areacceptableas
2
4
experimentalerror,whereasdifferencesof
26.9
Haemagglutination inhibition.The presence of
>4-fold are taken as significant.
specific antibodies againstvirus is detected by
inhibition of red cell agglutination.Where agglutination
Anothermethodofdifferentiating acuteand
occurs,cellsareclumpedandremaininsuspension;where
previousinfectionistolookforlgMclass
agglutinationisinhibitedcellsettletoformapellet.ells
antibodies,whichareonlypresent earlyin
1,4 and5 are positive(agglutination is inhibited).Wells 2
infection.TheseIgMtestsarenot always
and3 are negative (no inhibition of agglutination).lf this
available forindividual viral infections.The
wereahaemagglutinationtest,theoppositeresultswould
majorityof antibody tests used insmall animal
be reported.(Courtesy of DD Addie)
virology detect IgGclass antibodies.
Antibodies donot developimmediatelyafter
viral infection,so thereisa lagphasewhere
infection ispresentbut antibodiescannotbe
Antibody detection
detected.Thismaybetheperiodof timewhen
clinical signs are present and,therefore,
In contrast tothoseteststhatdirectlydemonstratepart
diagnosisisrequired.
orwhole of a specificvirus todiagnose infection,
Antibodies are alsolikelybepresentfollowing
antibodytestsdetectthehost'simmuneresponseto
vaccinationand thesecanmakethe
interpretationof testresultsdifficult.Forsome
particularvirus.For all antibodytests there aresome
virusesantibody titreswouldbeexpected tobe
factors that must be considered.
higherafter acuteinfection thanfollowing
vaccination.However,in most cases it is not
Antibodiesmaypersistfora long time after
possibletodifferentiatebetween infection and
acuteviral infection and thereforedetection of
vaccinationbased on antibody titres alone.
antibodiesindicatespreviousaswellascurrent
Therefore,detectionofantibodyfordiagnosing
infection.Whereanimalsareabletomountan
infection in animals thathavebeenpreviously
immuneresponsebutantibodies areunable to
vaccinated is not appropriate.Morerecently,
eliminate thevirus,aswithFIVinfection,then
markerorDIVA(Differentiating Infectedfrom
thepresence ofantibodiescanindicate
Vaccinated Animals)vaccineshavebeen
current infection.
produced,whichallowthe immuneresponse in
Aswellasdeterminingthesimplepresenceor
avaccinated animal tobedifferentiatedfrom
absenceofa particularantibody,withmany
thatin aninfectedanimal.Althoughnosuch
antibody tests(ELISA,immunofluorescence,
vaccinesareavailablecurrentlyforusein
virus neutralization,HAl),it is also possibleto
dogs andcats,these maybecome available in
determine the amount（titre)of antibody againsta
thefuture.
particular virus.The test antiserum is serially
The presence ofmaternally derived antibody
diluteduntil it nolongerproducesapositive
(MDA)mayinterferewithantibody testsfor
reaction ina given test.Thispoint iscalled the
diagnosis.The age of the animal mayindicate
endpoint and theantibodytitreisusuallygiven
whethertheantibodiesfound arefrom thedam.
as the amount of times the test antiserum needs
However,some antibodieslast longer than
tobe diluted to reach this endpoint.Thus,the
others,dependentonthelevelsacquiredfrom
higher thelevel ofantibodiespresent inthe test
the dam,and there are'grey'areaswhere
sample,the more the serum canbe diluted
interpretation canbe difficult.MDAs causemost
beforereaching the endpoint.Although not
problems when screeningkittens forFIV
commonlyused clinically,measuring antibody
infection.In this case,kittens canbetested at12
levelsisrequiredtoindicaterising antibodytitres
weeksofage.However,thereissomeevidence
suggestiveof recent infection and is also used to
that MDAsmaylast longer,forupto6months in
demonstratesatisfactoryresponsetovaccination
occasional animals.
(e.g.rabies).
A rising antibody titre canbeused to suggest
Broadly speaking, antibody tests can be divided
recent infection.This usually means comparing
into two groups:
theantibody titreina sampleduring acute
diseasewith that in a convalescent sample.
Detection using bound antigen(Figure 26.10);
If comparing antibody titres,it is important touse
testsincorporating thismethodologyare
thesamediagnosticmethod and laboratoryforall
antibodyELISA,IFT,Westernblotting and
titre comparisons.This is because there can be
rapid immunomigration
markeddifferencesintitresbetween thesame
Detectionbyinhibitionofa detectable feature;
samplestestedusingdifferentmethodologies.
suchmethods includevirusneutralization tests
Evenwiththesamemethod inasingle
andHAI.
416
Chapter26
Diagnosisofviral infections
AntibodyELiSA
ELISA tests are most commonly carried out in plastic
plateswithsmall wellsforeachsample.Occasionally
they canalsobe carried outon membranes.The most
commonly used antibody ELiSA test for small animal
viruses isfor anti-FIVantibodies.The ELISAformat is
Conjugated anti-feline
 particularly appropriate for processing large numbers 
or anti-canine antibody
of samples and alsofor measuring antibody titres.
Immunofluorescence
Feline orcanine
In immunofluorescence,the test serum(antiserum) is
antibodyintest
incubated on infected cell cultures.lf specific antibody
sample
ispresent,itwillbindtothepecificviralantigensand
is then detected using a further species-specific anti-
body witha fluorescent molecule attached.The in-
Bound antigen
fected cellswith theantibodies attachedare then
examinedunderafluorescentmicroscope and apple-
green fluorescence(more rarely orange) is seen where
the antibody is present (Figure 26.11). The antibody
26.10
Detection of antibody using bound antigen.
onlyattachestoareas of the cell wherevirusispresent;
Antigen from the virus is immobilied on a solid
thislocalizationwithin thecellhelpstoensurethe
surface tobind or capture anyvirus-specific antibodies
present in the test sample.Unbound,non-specific
specificityof thetest.The cellculturesshouldcontain
antibodiesareremoved by washing.Subsequently,the
both infected and uninfected cells to improve the
presence of bound specificantibody is detected with a
specificity of the test; in a true positive reaction only
second species-specific antibody that reacts with any
infected cellsshould fluoresce.The titreofantibodies
antibody from that species,i.e.anti-dog IgGor anti-cat
can be determined by seriallydiluting the antiserum.
IgG.Thissecond antibody incorporatesamarkersystem
Immunofluorescence isusedcommonlytodetermine
that allows itsbinding to be detected.Thismay be a
directly visible product (e.g.fluorescein or colloidal gold
anti-feline coronavirus antibody titres.
particles) or,more commonly,an enzyme that catalyses a
colour reaction with its substrate(e.g.peroxidase and
Westernblotting
alkaline phosphatase).The same format is essentially
In Western blotting the virus against which antibodies
used forELISA,immunofluorescence,Westernblot and
 are to be detected is first disrupted into its individual
RIMtests.
proteins(Figure 26.12).These proteins are then sepa-
Anti-feline antibody
conjugated to
fluorescein
D
Anti-virus
feline antibody
(a)
 Virl antigen in cell cytoplasm 
可
C
26.11
Immunofluorescence.
(a) Cartoon of a typical
immunofluorescencereaction.
(b) Cells infected with feline
calicivirus showing typical FCV cpe.
(Alan Radford)(c)Same slideas
(b) showing specific green
fluorescence inFCV-positive cells.
( Alan Radford)(d) Positive green
immunofluorescencereaction for
FIV.(Courtesy of O Jarrett)
(e)Positive yellow
immunofluorescencereaction for
(el
feline coronavirus.(Courtesy of M
Bennett)
417
Chapter26
Diagnosisofviral infections
26.12
A typical Westernblot
arges
reaction.The viral
proteinsaredisassembled and
separated on a gel according to
theirmolecular weight.Specific
antiviral antibodies from patient
serum (black) are used as a
target for subsequent antibody
detectionby the secondary
Viralproteins
separated
antibody system(blue withblack
bysize
spiked star).
Viralproteins
disassembled
ratedbysize on a gel using an electriccurrent,trans-
thevirusisdetectedbythelackofdevelopmentof
ferred(blotted)ontoa membrane,and used to detect
cytopathiceffects in cell culture.Virusneutralization
specific antibodies present in the test antiserum.If
testsarerelativelylaborious and,formanyviral infec-
specificanti-virus antibodies arepresent theybind to
tions,havebeen superceded bynewer andquicker
theindividualviral proteinson themembrane and are
methods.A good example of their remaining use is the
detected by a secondary antibody system.Positive
measurement of anti-rabies antibody titres following
results areseenas aseriesofbandson themembrane,
vaccinationaspartof thePETS travelscheme,where
corresponding to the individual viral proteins recog-
theantibodytitrehastoreachacertainlevelfor the
nized bythe immune response.This banding patternis
animal tobe classified asresponding tovaccination.
highlyspecificforeachvirusandmakes theWestern
blot a highly specifictest.Western blotting is used by
Haemagglutinationinhibition
some laboratoriesforthedetectionofanti-FIVantibod-
Wherevirusesare capable of HA,the presence of
ies.ltis a fairly time-consuming and expensive test,so
specific antibodies against theseviruses can be de-
is notroutinelyused forthemajorityof viraldiagnostics.
tected bythe inhibition of this agglutination(seeFigure
It can be used to confirm positive FIVRIM tests.
26.9).Again,the test antiserum can be diluted until no
Because it detectsantibodiestoseveralviralproteins
further HAl occurs, giving a titre for the antibodies
it may alsobeofusein'end-stage'FiVinfectionwhere
present. This methodology is relatively labour-inten-
RIM testsmaybefalsely negative.
sive and is carried out only at specialist laboratories.
HAl is only applicable for viruses that have HA activity
Rapid immunomigration
(e.g. canine and feline parvoviruses).
In this test the antigen-antibody complexes are cap-
turedon tocolloidal goldparticlesand thendiffuse
alongamembranetobecapturedby thesecondary
Test accuracy
antigen(seeFigure26.5b).Where they are captured,
a colourchange develops to indicate thetest asposi-
Sensitivityand specificity
tive.Thereis alsoapositive controlband toconfirm that
No diagnostic test isperfect.In order to measure the
thecomplexes havemigrated sufficientlyalong the
accuracy of a test,theresults of the test need to be
membrane. If this control reaction does not develop,
compared to an accepted'gold standard’orknown true
thetestshouldberepeated,otherwiseafalsenegative
result.Bycomparingtheresultachievedwithagiventest
result may occur.
to that achieved by the gold standard,it ispossible to
The best examples of antibody RIM tests in small
calculate two simplemeasures of the test's accuracy:
antibodies.These tests are commonly used within the
The sensitivity of a test is the proportion of true
practicesituationand have the advantage ofbeing easy
positivesdetectedbythetest
touseandquick.Theydo,however,havelimitations and
Thespecificityofa test istheproportionof true
in somecasespositiveresultsshould beconfirmedby
negatives detected by the test.
other tests, particularly in low prevalence populations
and where a positive result is unexpected (see below).
Example
A population of10o0 dogs is tested for virusX.
Virusneutralization
According to the gold standard test,100 dogs are
Specific antibody in the test sample is used toneutral-
positive forvirusX and900 arenegative(equal toa
ize a set amountofalaboratoryvirus.Neutralizationof
prevalenceof 10%).
418
Chapter26Diagnosis ofviral infections
A new test forvirusX is applied to the same
The criticalfeatureofboththePPVandNPVisthat,
population. Of the 100 animals that really have the
unlike thesensitivityandspecificitywhich areinherent
virus according to the gold standard test,90 test
features ofa given test,thePPVand NPVare affectd
positive (true positives) with the new test;the remain-
by theprevalenceof the condition in thepopulation
dertestnegative(false negatives).Ofthe900 dogsthat
being tested.
are actuallynegative forvirusXby the gold standard
test,855testnegative(truenegative)with thenewtest
and 45 test positive (false positives).
Example
These data canbe tabulated ina grid(Figure
The same diagnostic test for virus X is applied to
26.13a). Using this grid and calculating down the
another population of 1000 dogs,in which the preva-
columns,itcanbeseenthatthisequatestoasensitivity
lence of thevirusis only1%(10 dogs positive and990
of 90% and a specificity of 95% for the new test.
dogs negative) (Figure 26.13b). The sensitivity and
For most tests, sensitivity and specificity are in-
specificityremain the same (we have applied the same
test).Thistime,of942negative results 941are correct
decreasesandviceversaherefore,itisveryrare
and only one is incorrect(falsenegative),giving a NPV
get a test that has both 100% sensitivity and specificity.
of99.9%.Critically,however,of58positiveresultsonly
9arecorrect,with amassive 49beingincorrect(false
positives),giving aPPV of only16%(9/58x100).Put
True status
anotherway,thismeansthat in this low-prevalence
VirusXnegative
population,lessthanoneofeveryfivepositiveresults
VirusXpositive
is correct. In contrast, negative results are nearly
90/135=
90
45
67%
alwaysright.
test
positive
Positivepredictive
855/865=
Clinical significance
VirusX
10
855
99%
Whentrying to interpret theaccuracyofagiventest it
positive
33
is importanttobe aware of its sensitivity andspecificity,
90/100=
=006/998
andwhat goldstandardwasused toevaluatethe test.
90%
95%
Unfortunately, the answers to some, or even all, of
sensitivity
specificty
thesequestionsmaybeunknown!
(a) Population size 1000;prevalence 10%
In addition,whendecidinghowtointerpretpositive
and negative results,it is important to consider the
prevalenceofinfectionand tobeaware that thiswill
True status
vary depending on the population tested.Forexample,
VirusXpositive
VirusXnegative
theprevalenceof anyvirus is likely tobelower ina
9/58=
clinicallynormal population that isbeing screened for
VirusX
9
49
16%
infection than itisin apopulation of sick animalsbeing
positive
Positivepredictive
testedfordisease.Therefore,thePPV islikely tobe
941/942
lowerwhenscreening forinfectionin healthypopulations
1
941
99.9%
Virusx
and higherwhen testing animalswhere there isa
positive
clinical index of suspicion for disease. This can be
9/10-
941/990=
illustratedusingFIVwhere,inclinicallynormalcats,th
90%
95%
prevalence of infectionis likely tobe<1%in theUK.In
sensitivity
specifity
suchcats,atestwhosesensitivityandspecificityare
(b)Population size1000;prevalence1%
95% would give a PPV of approximately 16%! These
positiveresultsmust be treatedwithgreatcaution and
26.13
Measurements of a test's accuracy.
should be confirmed with a second independent test,
especially as the consequences of a positive result
Positive and negative predictive values
mayserious.
Using the same grid (Figure 26.13a), two further very
Howdoes thiscompareto testsperformedon
useful measures of a test's accuracy can be calculated:
clinically sick animals?It is certainly true that the
prevalence of a given disease is likely tobe higher in
The positive predictive value (PPV) is the
sick thanin the healthy cats.However,thisprevalence
likelihood of a positive test being genuine
is oftenunknown,willbynomeansbe100%(otherwise
Thenegative predictive value(NPV) is the
we would not need to test),and it is likely to vary
likelihood of a negative test being genuine.
depending on the clinician(aswill be seen if one
considerstheproportionof clinically sickcatsone tests
Thesevaluescanbecalculated fromFigure26.13a
forFIV that actually test negative).Therefore,evenin
byusing thedataintherows.Of135positiveresults90
populations of sick animals, the PPV may still be low
are correct,givingaPPVof67%(90/135x100）.Of865
(andunacceptable) andtestresultsmay still need tobe
negative results 855 are correct,giving a NPVof 99%.
confirmed.For an interesting discussion of the sensi-
Thus,althoughthistestappearstohaverelativelyhigh
tivityandspecificityof theRIMtestsforFeLVandFIV,
valuesforbothsensitivityandspecificity,apositivetest
see Hartmann et al.,2001.(Sensitivity and specificity
is onlycorrect in two thirdsof cases.
are also discussed in Chapter 2.)
419
Chapter26Diagnosisofviral infections
Falsepositivesand falsenegatives
Tests based ondetecting antibody titres(virus
Withmosttests,falsepositivesandfalsenegativeswill
neutralization) are generally not usedbecauseof vac-
occurandrepresent failuresofa giventest.However,
cination and the highprevalence of infection in the
these maybe compounded byplacing theincorrect
population.Theyhavesomeuseindeterminingwhether
clinical interpretationuponwhatisactuallya correct
avaccineresponse islikelytoneutralizeaparticular
testresult.Common causes of false positive and
strain of virus.
negativeresults are shown inFigure 26.14.
Sequencing of portionsof theFCVgenomecanbe
usedasamethod of moleculartypingof FCV although
this technique is only carried out in certain specialist
Test type
Causes of false
Causes of false
laboratories and is expensive.For this test,the viral
positiveresults
negativeresults
genomemustfirstbeamplifiedbyRT-PCR,eitherfrom
Alltests
Poor sampling technique
virus inaswab,r,moreusually,fromvirus first grown
Sample deterioration in
in cell culture. This typing method hasbeen used in the
transit
investigationofadversevaccinereactions(Radford et
Operatorerror
al., 2000).
Incorrect reagent storage
Felineherpesvirus
Virustests
Contamination
Strainvariation
(especially PCR)
Feline herpesvirus(FHV) is also associated with upper
respiratory tract disease and,similarly to FcV,clini-
Antibody tests
Cross reactive
Antigen excess:all
callyrecovered cats can become carriers.It is also
antibodies
antibody-bound and
frequentlyassociatedwithoculardisease.
Anti-mouse antibodies:
unavailable tobe
Diagnosisof FHV ismostcommonlymadebyVI
somecatshave
detected in the test
antibodies against
fromoropharyngeal swabs(cpe shown in Figure 26.1b).
mouse antibodies and
In addition, some specialist laboratories also offer
these can cross-react
PCR,which is quicker than Vl, and may allow the
with themouse
detection of higher numbers of shedding cats.Some
antibodies used in
laboratoriesoffera combinedPCRtodetectFHV and
some diagnostic tests
another feline ocular/respiratory pathogen,
Anti-cellculture
Chlamydophila felis(so-called multiplex PCR).The
antibodies
swabmaterial.Itisadvisableto contact the laboratory
Causes of false positive and false negative test
26.14
prior to sample collection.
results.
Once infected, it is likely that allcatsbecome latently
infectedcarriers.Sheddingbecomesintermittentand
often followsaperiod of stress,solatentlyinfected
Feline viruses
carriersmaynotbe detected bysingle diagnostictests.
As withFCV,tests based on detecting antibody
Diagnosis and interpretation of feline virus infections is
titres (virus neutralization) are generally not used be-
often complicated.This reflects complexcarrier states,
cause of vaccination and the high prevalenceof infec
and thefrequentuseofvaccinesthatoftendonot
tion in the population.
protect against infection.
Felineleukaemiavirus
Feline calicivirus
FeLV is associated with both malignant and non-
Feline calicivirus(FCV)is one of the virusesinvolvedin
malignant clinical conditions.The most common syn-
upper respiratory tract disease.In addition, due to the
dromesseenarelymphoma,leukaemia and anaemia.
largenumberofdifferentstrainsof thevirus,therecan
Not all cats infectedwith thevirus go on todevelop
be variableclinical signsrangingfromsubclinicalinfec-
these clinical syndromes,and only persistently in-
tiontoaseveresystemicdiseasewithhighmortality.
fectedcatswillsuccumbtomostFeLV-relateddis-
Diagnosis ofFCV is usually madebyVI from
eases;however,transientexposureincreases therisk
oropharyngeal swabsorother affected tissues(cpe
of later development of malignant disease.
shown in Figure 26.1a).A plain sterile cotton-tipped
Most cats clearviral infection and therefore any
swabshould be used tocollectsaliva from inside the
positive results should be followed upby re-testing in12
cat'smouth andplacedintoaVTM.TheVTM isbest
weekstodeterminewhetherpersistentinfectionhas
supplied by the laboratory that is carrying out the
been established. Initial screening tests available for
isolation.AsFCVcanbeisolatedfromclinicallynormal
FeLVrelyondetectionoffreep27antigeninheparinized
carrieranimals,caremustbetakenwheninterpreting
bloodbyELISAorRIM(seeFigure26.5a).FeLVantigen
positivevirus isolations.Virus isolation does not nec-
can alsobe detectedin white blood cellsbyimmunofluo-
essarily equate to disease. In addition to Vl, some
rescence,usually on smears of heparinizedblood(see
laboratorieshave triedtodevelopRT-PCRstodetect
Figure 26.3).The sensitivity and specificity of these tests
theviral genome.These have thepotentialadvantage
varies,and is likely tobereasonably high for the com-
ofbeing quick.However,to the authors'knowledge,
mercially availablepracticekits.However,becauseof
mostPCRssuffer from theinability to detectsome
thelowprevalenceof FeLV insomepopulations(ap-
strains,which maylead tofalsenegativeresults.
proximately 1%of healthy cats), the PPV of in-house
420
Chapter26Diagnosisofviral infections
testingis lowand more than half thepositiveresultsmay
Maternallyderived antibodymaylastupto6
be false positives. This is most important if a positive
monthsinsomeindividuals
result is found in a healthy cat.
Thetimetoseroconversionmeansthatinfected
Vl isalsoused to confirmpositiveresultsfromp27
animals will be antibody-negative early in
screeningtests,andcanbecarriedoutusingthesame
disease.Seroconversion typically takes around
heparinizedsample.Vlisexpectedtobe100%specific
8weeks but may be longer(up to 6 months) in
but may give negativeresults if the cat isundergoing
somecats
recentinfectionorrecoveryfrominfection.Avery small
Loss of antibody may occur in terminal disease
numberof catsmaygive discordantresults,beingp27
due toa combination of immunosuppression and
antigen-positive butVl-negative,duetolocalizationof
antigen excess. lf there is a high clinical
virus infection within a specific tissue,such as the
suspicion that a cat has terminal FIV-related
mammary gland.Theprognosisfor these discordant
disease and it is antibody-negativebyRIM,it
cats is unclear.Depending on the testused,it may be
should beretestedusing adifferentmethod,such
more likely that the antigenresult was a falsepositive.
as Western blotting, VI or PCR
Following on from initial infection some cats de-
AnFIVvaccine hasbeenmarketed in theUSA.
veloplatent infection,with theviruspresent inbone
Vaccinatedcatswill testpositiveforantibody.
marrow.In these casesVl frombone marrowmay be
positive.The role of latent infections in disease is
Because of these limitations with antibody tests,it
uncertain,althoughmostlatentlyinfectedcatsappear
tohave eliminated theviruswithin a few months.lf
26.1c) or PCR in certain circumstances.However,
one is considering sampling a cat to determine if it is
these test are not aswidely available.
latently infectedwith FeLV,it is advisable to first
contact the laboratory to discuss the optimal sample
Feline coronavirus
collection procedure.
Feline coronavirus(FCoV)infectionis commonincats,
PCRcan be used to detectFeLVviral genes,for
especially where grouped together. Infection is most
example integratedretroviral elements in theDNA
commonly subclinical orassociatedwith mild diar-
of some lymphoid tumours.The presence of these
rhoea.However,in occasional cats infection leads to
DNA fragments confirms that the animal hasbeen
feline infectiousperitonitis,a usuallyfatal disease.lts
exposed toFeLVbutdoesnotimplypersistent infec-
notcompletelyunderstoodwhy somecats develop
tion.These are specialized techniquesrequiring cell
FIP,although the immune status and genetics of the
or tissue samples.
cat, the strain of the coronavirus and mutation of the
Virus neutralizing(VN)antibodiescan be detected
viruswithin the cat are all thought to play a role.
infelineserum,and thepresenceofVN antibodies in
It is not possible categorically to diagnose FIP
the absence of viral antigen is anexcellent indicatorof
clinically,and definitive diagnosis is based on histo-
aprotected cat,which haspreviouslybeenexposed to
pathologyof affected tissues(seeFigure 26.4).There
naturalinfection.CatspositiveforVNantibodiesdonot
areno definitive diagnostictests available forFiPand
requireFeLVvaccination.Conversely,because the
diagnosisisoftenbasedonacombinationof laboratory
currentvaccines maynot induceVN antibodiesthe
tests and clinical examinations.
virusneutralization test doesnot give anyindication of
Diagnosis of FCoV infection may be easier,al-
whether a cathas been previously vaccinated orwhether
though the results still have to be interpretedwith
vaccination has been protective. Finally, cats with
care.Antibody titres can be measured byimmuno-
persistent FeLV infectionbecome immunotolerant to
fluorescence（Figure 26.11e) or ELiSA,andviral
FeLV antigens and donotmakeantibodies.
genome canbe detected byPCR.If antibodyor
viral antigen is present in blood samples this may
Feline immunodeficiency virus
indicate infection withFCoV but does not diagnose
Infectionwith this retrovirus is characterized bya
FIP.There is still no way to distinguish those feline
prolongedincubationperiodbefore thedevelopmentof
coronaviruses that causeFiPfrom those that do not.
clinical signs.Once clinical signs develop they are
Examination of effusions (e.g. abdominal fluid) by
associated with immunosuppression and accompany-
PCR or immunofluorescent staining of cells is a more
ing secondary infections,so arevery variable.There-
useful test for diagnosing FiP, although still is not
fore,catswitharangeofclinicalsignsmaybetestedfor
completely specific.Cats should not be euthanased
feline immunodeficiency virus (Fiv) infection along
on the grounds of a positive FCoV test result alone.
with manyhealthycats aspart of routine testing.
Althoughnotroutinelyperformed,PCRhasalsobeen
Most diagnostic testsforFIVinfection detect anti-
used to monitor FCoV shedding patterns (Addie and
body.ForFIV,the presence of antibody is indicativeof
Jarrett,2001).
persistent infection,as the immune response is not
Othertestshelpfulasanaid todiagnosisofFIP
able toeliminate thevirus.Most samplesare tested
include:
within-house RIMkits(seeFigure 26.5b),butantibod-
iescanalsobedetectedin laboratorieswithimmuno-
Routine haematology-lymphopenia,neutrophilic
fluorescence(Figure 26.11a),ELISA tests orWestern
leucocytosis,non-regenerative anaemia
blotting (see Figure 26.12).
Routine biochemistry-hyperproteinaemia
Where diagnosis relies on detection of antibody it is
(hypergammaglobulinaemia),low
important tobe aware that:
albumin:globulin ratio
421
Chapter26Diagnosisofviral infections
Acute-phaseproteins-elevatedα-acid
Ante-mortem diagnosisof canine distempervirus
glycoprotein (AGP) and haptoglobin
(CDV)-associated disease is not always straightfor-
Examination of effusions-highprotein content
ward.VI can be difficult but may be possible,and is
(>35g/lorasevaluatedbyRivalta's test
most likelytosucceed fromthebuffycoat.Some
(Hartmann et al., 2003)), low albumin:globulin
laboratories mayuse immunofluorescence to demon-
ratio,low total cell count.
strateviralantigen directly in acetone-fixed cytological
smears.Suitable samples include conjunctiva,tonsil,
Cowpoxvirus
buffycoat,respiratoryepithelium,cerebrospinal fluid
Cowpox virus circulates in wild rodents and can occa-
(CSF),bone marrow or urine sediment.As these tests
sionallyinfect cats causing skinlesions.ltis a zoonotic
arenotroutinelyperformed,it isrecommended to
infectionandmoreseverediseaseisseen inboth
contactthediagnosticlaboratorytodiscussthemost
human and feline immunocompromised patients. There-
suitablesamplesforcollection.
fore,careshouldbetakenwhenhandlinginfectedcats
Pairedvirus neutralization tests(carriedout using
andsamples.
serum samples) may demonstrate rising antibody
The virus survives for long periods in the environ-
titres,butoftenantibodylevelshave alreadypeaked
mentandsamplesofscabmaterialcanbetransported
by the time clinical samples arefirst taken.Antibody
to the laboratorywithout specialist transport media.Vl
levelsmayalsobemeasured intheCSFand thismay
(see Figure 26.1d) or electron microscopy (see Figure
be more specific in cases of neurological disease.
26.8a)can identify thevirus.If tissue sampleshave
Anti-CDVantibodiesareproduced locallyin the cen-
beenfixed,eosinophilicintracytoplasmicinclusionbod-
tral nervous system (CNS) in animals with neurologi-
ies can be seen histopathologically (Figure 26.7a).
cal disease and arenotusuallypresent invaccinated
dogs or dogs with distemper but without CNS signs.
Feline panleucopenia virus
InordertoruleoutiatrogeniccontaminationofCSF
Feline panleucopenia virus(FPV;also called feline
withblood-derivedantibodies,aserum:CSFantibody
parvovirus) multiplies inrapidly dividing cells and the
ratiocanbeperformedandcomparedtoanother
clinical signsreflect thispropensity.The clinical signs
infectious agent.
rangeinseverityfromsubclinicaltosuddendeath,with
Characteristichistopathological changes found on
enteritis,panleucopenia andcerebellarhypoplasia.
post-mortem examination include eosinophilicintra-
Where cerebellar hypoplasia is present in kittens,
cytoplasmic inclusion bodies and detection of viral
diagnosis maybe based on clinical signs.However,
antigen in infected cells by immunohistology.
diagnostictestsarerequiredwhereenteritisorsudden
Virusneutralizationteststomeasureserumanti-
death are themain clinical signs.Virus isolation or
body can be used to characterize the immune re-
detection(HAorELISA/RIMtests)fromfaecalsamples
sponsetovaccination and inform the decision on the
isoftenunsuccessful,asmanyanimalswillhaveceased
requirement forboostervaccinations.RT-PCRs have
tosheddetectableviralantigenbythe timeovert clinical
beendeveloped todetectviral genomebutarenot
diseasedevelops.PCRmaybeamoresensitivemethod
readily available.
of viral detection infaecal and tissuesamples.
Antibodytitres canbe measured,although many
Canineparvovirus
catswill have antibodiespresentdue tovaccination or
Canine parvovirus-1(CPV-1)(also called minute vi-
previous infection.Rising antibody titresmaybe diffi-
rus) has been suggested tobe a rare cause of diar-
cult todemonstrateoverthe course of infection.
rhoea.Theclinical signsassociatedwithCPV-2are
As the name of the virus suggests, affected cats
variable andrange from inapparent to severe gastro-
areusuallyseverelypanleucopenic and thiscan help
intestinal diseasewithvomiting and diarrhoea;se-
diagnosis.
verelyaffectedpuppiesmaydiewithin72hours of the
onset of clinical signs.
CPV-2canbedetected inthefaecesofclinically
Canine viruses
affected animals by isolation,EM(see Figure 26.8c),
HA,antigen capture assays and PCR. The latter is
Diagnosis of disease associated with viral infections is
likelytobemostsensitivebut,inallcases,theamoun
generallymorestraightforwardinthedogthanin the
ofvirusshed infaeceshasoftenseverelydeclinedby
cat because,in general,canine viruses do not have
thetimeclinical signsdevelopandsofalsenegatives
complexcarrierstates,and caninevaccines appearto
are apossibility.Animalsthat haverecentlyreceiveda
bemuch more efficient inblockinginfection and dis-
liveCPv-2vaccinemayalsotestfalsepositiveon
ease.As such,vaccination historyis animportant part
some faecal virus tests.
of thediagnosticwork-upfor canineviral infections.
Antibodylevelscanbemeasured against CPV-2
but may be difficult to interpret in some cases. High
Canine distemper virus
antibodytitresinanimalsthathavebeensickfor3or
The clinical signs of acute distemper are varied and
more days are highly suggestiveof CPVinfection.
depend on the epithelial surface most infected.Possi-
Since antibodylevels are often high bythe time clinical
ble clinical signs include nasal discharge, conjunctivi-
signsdevelop,it isoftennotpossibleto demonstrate
tis,coughing,dyspnoea,vomiting,diarrhoea and
rising antibody titres.The measurement of IgM levels
hyperkeratosis.Some dogs go on to develop acute
maybeofferedbysomelaboratories andislikelytobe
and/orchronicneurological signs.
more useful incasesof acutedisease.
422
Chapter26Diagnosisofviral infections
HAl (see Figure 26.9) to measure serum antibody
Rabiesvirus
can be used tocharacterize the immune response to
Rabiesvirus is a neurotropicviruscapable of infecting
vaccinationand inform the decisionon therequirement
many animal speciesworldwide,including humans.
forboostervaccinations.PCRhasbeen shownexperi-
Although clinical signscanbevariable,aprogression
mentally tobemoresensitive thanothermethodsfor
isoften described throughprodromal (behavioural
detecting CPV-2 in faeces, but is not readily available.
changes),excitative(nervousness,aggression,trem-
ors,spasms,vocalization) and paralytic(incoordina-
Canine coronavirus
tion,convulsions,paralysis,coma)phases.Infections
Canine coronavirus infection isgenerally associated
usually fatal in the absence of specific postexposure
with only mild diarrhoea.Virus can be isolated from
immune therapy.Rabies is a notifiable disease.
freshfaecalsamplesprovidingtheyarrive at thelabo-
Veterinary surgeons suspecting a case of rabies
ratoryquickly.
basedonhistoryandclinical signsshoulddetain the
animal and notify the local veterinaryofficer.Specific
Canine herpesvirus
diagnosis is coordinated by government agencies
The clinical signs associatedwith canineherpesvirus
(DEFRA in theUK),and carried outby a specialist
arevariedanddependontheageofinfection,ranging
laboratory.Possibletestsused todetectvirus include
from abortion and stillbirths,to fading puppy syn-
VI (initially in mice but mostly now replaced by cell
drome andmildrespiratory disease inpuppies;more
culture)orPCR.Histopathologicalexamination shows
rarely，canine herpesvirus causesvesicular genital
characteristicNegri inclusion bodies in thebrain.Im-
lesions in adults.
munological techniques canbe used to confirm the
Virus canbe isolated frommany tissues incasesof
specificity of antigen in cell cultures or fixed tissues.
sy snd 
Whilst it is hoped that veterinary surgeons in the UK
 glands, lungs, spleen, liver and lymph nodes. In adult 
areunlikely tobeinvolved in diagnosing rabies infec-
dogs, theviruscan normally only be isolated from the
tion,itisnowcommonforownerstorequestvaccina-
oral mucosa and the respiratory and genital tracts.On
tionunder theUKPETSTravel Scheme.Inordertobe
post-mortem examination intranuclear inclusionbod-
certified,animalsmustshowanadequateresponseto
iesareevident.
vaccination.Serum samplesfor thispurposemust be
senttoanapprovedlaboratorywhereafluorescent
Canine adenovirus
antibodyvirus neutralization test is usually carried out.
The clinical signs associated with canine adenovirus
(CAV) type 1 infection are variable and range from mild
pyrexia to acute abdominal catastropheand death.
References and further reading
CAV-2isoneof thepathogensassociatedwith the
“kennel cough'complex.
Addie DD and Jarrett O(2001)Use of a reverse-transcriptase
In the more severe casesof CAV-1-associated
polymerasechainreaction formonitoring the shedding of feline
coronavirusbyhealthy cats.VeterinaryRecord148,649-653
disease, biochemical changes associated with hepatic
Greene CE(1998) InfectiousDiseasesof theDog andCat,2edn.
necrosis and disseminatedintravascularcoagulopathy
WBSaunders,Philadelphia
HartmannK,WererMgerinkHandJarrett(2001）omparisn
are suggestive of infection.
of sixin-house diagnostictestsfortherapiddiagnosisof feline
Virus isolation from throat swabs in laboratory VTM
immunodeficiencyvirus andfeline leukaemia virus infections.
canbeusedtodemonstrateinfection,thevirusgrowing
VeterinaryRecord149,317-320
HamainirgDna
readily in several celltypes from different species.On
S,FrostJ,EgbenikH,LutzHandHermannsW(003)Comparisn
post-mortemexamination,liverchanges areoftenquite
of differentteststodiagnosefelineinfectiousperitonitisournal
specific for CAV-1 infection and include intranuclear
ofVeterinaryInternalMedicine17,781-790
Helps C,Reeves N,Egan K,Howard P and Harbour D(2003)
inclusion bodies (seeFigure 26.7). Similar inclusion
Detection ofChlamydophila felis and feline herpesvirusby
bodies areevident intherespiratory epithelium of dogs
multiplexreal-timePCRanalysis.JournalofClinicalMicrobiology
with CAV-2-associatedkennelcough.Immunohisto-
41,2734-2736
MochiuanGariaaanhidMana
logymayalsobeavailable atsomelaboratories,and
R(1993) Comparison of polymerase chainreaction withvirus
maybeperformed on acetone-fixed impressionsfor
isolation and haemagglutination assays for the detection of
rapid diagnosis.
Science55,60-63
Virusneutralizationtests areavailable tomeasure
RadfordADDawsonSWhambyC,yvarandGaskellRM(2）
anti-CAV-1serum antibodyand canbeusedtocharac-
Comparison of serological and sequence-based methods for
typingfelinecalicivirusisolatesfromvaccinefailures.Veterinary
terize the immune response tovaccination.
Record146,117-123
Schunck B,Kraft W and Truyen U(1995)A simple touch-down
Canineparainfluenzavirus
polymerase chainreactionforthe detectionof canine parvovirus
and feline panleukopenia virus in feces.Journal ofVirology
Like CAV-2, canine parainfluenza virus is one of the
Methods55,427-433
pathogens associated with the kennel cough' com-
Sykes JE,Anderson GA,Studdert VP and Browning GF（1999)
PrevalenceoffelineChlamydiapsittaciand felineherpesvirus1
plex.Diagnosis is byvirus isolation of virus from a
incatswithupperrespiratorytractdisease.JournalofVeterinary
throat swab inVTM.
InternalMedicine13,153-162
423