MANUALOF
SKIN
DISEASES
OF
THE
EDOG
AND
CAT
secondedition
SUEPATERSON
Blackwell
Publishing
小尾巴宠物健康中心http:/ttahc.taobao.com
Manual of
Skin Diseases of the
Dog and Cat
Manual of
Skin Diseases of the
Dog and Cat
Second Edition
Sue PaterSOn MA VetMB DVD DipECVD MRCVS
RCVS and European Specialist in Veterinary Dermatology
Head of Dermatology and Director Rutiand House Referral Hospita!
St Helens, Merseyside
Blackwell
Publishing
This edition first published 2008
@ 1998, 2000, 2008 Blackwell Publishing
Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons in February 2007. Blackwell's publishing programme
has been merged with Wiley's global Scientific, Technical, and Medical business to form Wiley-Blackwell.
Registered office
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, United Kingdom
Editorial offce
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, United Kingdom
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for information about how to apply for
 permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
The right of the author to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with the
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted by
the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of the publisher.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be
available in electronic books.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names
and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of
their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. This
publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered.
It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. If professional
advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional should be sought.
First published 1998 and 2000 as Skin Diseases of the Dog and Skin Diseases of the Cat by Blackwell Science Ltd
 Second edition published by Blackwell Publishing 2008
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Paterson, Sue.
 Manual of skin diseases of the dog and cat / Sue Paterson. - 2nd ed.
p.；cm.
Originally published as two separate works: Skin diseases of the dog / Sue Paterson. 1998, and Skin diseases of
the cat / Sue Paterson. 2000.
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-1-4051-6753-6 (pbk. : alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 1-4051-6753-X (pbk. : alk. paper) 1. Dogs-Diseases-Handbooks, manuals, etc. 2. Cats-Diseases-
Handbooks, manuals, etc. 3. Veterinary dermatology-Handbooks, manuals, etc. I. Paterson, Sue. Skin
Diseases of the Dog. II. Paterson, Sue. Skin Diseases of the Cat. Ill. Title.
[DNLM: 1. Dog Diseases-Handbooks. 2. Cat Diseases-Handbooks. 3. Skin Diseases-veterinary-Handbooks.
SF 992.S55 P297m 2008]
SF992.S55P37 2008
636.7'08965-dc22
2007039707
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Set in 10/12pt Sabon by Aptara Inc., New Delhi, India
Printed in Singapore by C.O.S. Printers Pte Ltd
1 2008
Contents
Dedication
vi
12  Alopecia
214
Acknowledgements
vi
Abbreviations
vii
13   Nutritional skin disease
231
 1  Introduction - structure and function
1
14
 Congenital and hereditary
skin diseases
238
 2  Approach to the case
9
15  Pigment abnormalities
259
3 Diagnostic tests
13
16  Psychogenic skin disease
268
4
 Bacterial skin disease
26
Fungal skin disease
57
17
 Keratinisation defects
277
3
6
Viral, rickettsial and protozoal
18 Miscellaneous skin diseases in
the dog
diseases
82
292
Parasitic skin disease
100
 19  Miscellaneous skin diseases in
7
the cat
304
8
 Endocrine and metabolic skin disease
136
 20  Environmental skin diseases
317
6
 Otitis externa
162
21
Neoplastic and non-neoplastic
10
 Allergic skin disease
173
tumours
326
11
Immune mediated skin disease
188
Index
350
Dedication
To Richard, Sam and Matt
Acknowledgements
To all the staff especially the dermatology crew (Steve, Laura, Bernie,
Emma and Lydia) at Rutland House as well as "the boys"
for putting up with my madness, my friend and co-conspirator Janie
and of course to all our loyal referring veterinarians without whom
I would not have a day job.
Thanks,
Sue
Abbreviations
Dose schedule and measurerment units:
EMG
electromyogram
MRI
magnetic resonance imaging
sid
once daily
HA
hospital acquired
bid
twice daily
CA
community acquired
tid
three times daily
BCG
bacille Calmette-Guerin
Pb
four times daily
DTM
dermatophyte test medium
Po2
every other day
ELISA
 enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
by mouth
CDV
canine distemper
pO
by subcutaneous injection
FeLV
feline leukaemia virus
bs
subcutaneously
FIV
feline immunodeficiency virus
SC
by intravenous injection
FIP
feline infectious peritonitis
iv
by intramuscular injection
FRV
feline rhinotracheitis virus
im
millimetres
FCV
feline calici virus
mm
cm
centimetres
FSV
feline sarcoma virus
kg
kilograms
ADV
Aujeszky's disease virus
milligrams
FHV1
 feline herpes virus 1
mg
ml
millilitres
TSH
thyroid-stimulating hormone
ALT
alanine transaminase/
alanine aminotransferase/
alanine transferase
General:
SAP
serum alkaline phosphatase
ALP
alkaline phosphatase
BMZ
basement membrane zone
SAT
serum aspartate transaminase
IRS
inner root sheath
AST
aspartate transaminase
ORS
outer root sheath
TT4
total thyroxine
DTM
dermatophyte test medium
FT4
free thyroxine
SDA
Sabouraud's dextrose agar
TT3
total triiodothyronine
MRSA
methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus
FT3
free triiodothyronine
vili
Abbreviations
SAP
serum alkaline phosphatase
TEN
toxic epidermal necrolysis
LDH
lactate dehydrogenase
EM
erythema multiforme
ACTH
 adrenocorticotrophic hormone
CM
Chiari-like malformation
CRF
corticotropin-releasing factor
SM
syringomyelia
IGF-1
insulin-like growth factor - 1
EB
epidermolysis bullosa
NME
 necrolytic migratory erythema
WKS
Waardenburg-Klein syndrome
SLE
systemic lupus erythematosus
VKH
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome
ANA
antinuclear antibody test
FOPS
feline orofacial pain syndrome
LE
lupus erythematosus
TVT
transmissible venereal tumour
CAD
 cold agglutinin disease
SCC
squamous cell carcinoma
 Please note that some of the drugs mentioned in this book are not licensed specifically for use in animals.
It is the veterinary surgeons responsibility to ensure that where possible a licensed drug should be used
and the veterinary cascade should be followed.
Introduction - structure
and functior
Dermatological diseases remain some of the most
Storage of vitamins, electrolytes, water, fat,
common and frustrating problems presented to
carbohydrates and protein
veterinary surgeons in practice.
All veterinary
 Immune regulation to prevent development of
practitioners
20% of their
infection and neoplasia
caseload to include
skin
and as such they
Antibacterial and antifungal activity
Vitamin D production
Pigment production to protect against solar
tunity to seek
advice through a referral
damage
from their veterinary
Communication as to the health of the indi-
eralist should not only
vidual and sexual identity
managementofcommondisease:
but should also
Secretion via epitrichial, atrichial and seba-
have the ability to identify
requiring
spe
ceous glands
cialised care,
Excretion
the canine and feline body. It is crucial for the pro-
Structure of the skin
vision of a wide range of functions. These include
the following:
Epidermis
 Effective barrier to prevent loss of water, elec-
trolytes and macromolecules
This is the most superficial layer of the skin and
Mechanical protection from chemical, physi-
is composed of multiple layers of cells. There are
cal and microbial damage
four distinct cell types:
Elasticity to allow movement
Production of adnexa, e.g. hair and claws 
Keratinocytes ~ 85%
 Nerve sensors to allow the perception of heat,
Langerhans cells ~ 3-8%
cold, pressure, pain and itch
■
Melanocytes ~ 5%
 Temperature regulation
Merkel cells ~ 2%
2Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Keratinocytes
scavengers for cytotoxic radicals,
contribution to inflammatory response via
These cells form the bulk of the epidermis. They
production of cytokines.
are constantly reproducing and pushing upwards
from the stratum basale to replace those cells
Merkel cells
above them. As they move into the outermost lay-
ers of the epidermis they are shed as dead horny
These are dendritic epidermal cells confined to the
cells. They have a variety of functions in both pro-
basal cell layer of the epidermis or just below.
viding structural support for the skin and playing
They are predominantly found in tylotrich pads
a role in epidermal immunity as
and hair follicle epithelium. Their principal func-
tions are
they produce structural keratins,
are phagocytic and capable of processing anti-
specialised slow-adapting mechanoreceptors,
gens,
influencing cutaneous blood flow and sweat
produce cytokines (IL-1, IL-3, prostaglan-
production,
dins, leukotrienes, interferon) to stimulate or
coordinating keratinocytes proliferation,
inhibit the immune response.
controlling of hair cycle by maintaining and
stimulating hair follicle stem cell population.
Langerhans cells
These are mononuclear dendritic cells that form
Epidermal structure
 an important part of the immune surveillance of
The epidermis in the dog and cat is a very thin
the skin. They can be found basally or suprabasi-
structure; it is only 2-3 nucleated cells thick not
lar. Their principal functions are
including the horny cell layer. In haired skin it is
0.1-0.5 mm thick and in the footpads and planum
antigen processing and presentation to helper
nasale up to 1.5 mm. It can be divided into dif-
T lymphocytes,
ferent layers working from the inner to the outer
induction of cytotoxic T lymphocytes di-
layers; these are as follows:
rected to modified alloantigens,
 production of cytokines including IL-1, and
Stratum basale - basal cell layer
 phagocytic activity.
■
■
Stratum spinosum - spinous/prickle cell layer
Stratum granulosum - granular cell layer
Melanocytes
■
 Stratum lucidum - clear cell layer
These are dendritic cells found within the basal
Stratum corneum - horny cell layer
layer of the epidermis, outer root sheath, hair
        
Stratum basale
baceous and sweat glands. In the epidermis,
This is made up of a single layer of columnar cells,
each melanocyte communicates via its dendritic
tightly adherent to the basement membrane. It
projections with 10-20 keratinocytes to form
is mostly made up of keratinocytes. Hemidesmo-
the ‘epidermal melanin unit'. Each melanocyte
somes are located along the inner aspect of the
produces eumelanin or pheomelanin within
basal keratinocytes. These structures act to an-
melanosomes through series of steps from tyro-
chor the epidermis to the basement membrane
sine. Melanosomes containing pigment migrate
zone. The basal cell layer is the initial site of
to the end of dendrites and transfer melanin to
keratin production.
adjacent epidermal cells. They have a variety of
important functions:
Stratum spinosum
 This layer is generally 1-2 cells thick except in
 production of protective colouration and for
footpads, nasal planum and at mucocutaneous
sexual attraction,
junctions where there may be up to 20 cell layers.
 barrier against ionising radiation,
Cells within it are polyhedral to flattened cuboidal
Introduction-structure and function
in shape. The prickles' or desmosomes are inter
Maintaining tissue architecture and acting as
cellular bridges that mediate adhesion between
a physical barrier.
keratinocytes. Keratinocytes within this layer syn-
Aiding wound healing.
thesise lamellar granules, which are important in
 Regulating nutrition between the epithelium
the barrier function of the skin. Keratin produc-
and the underlying connective tissue.
tion also accelerates in the stratum spinosum and
is formed into bundles.
The BMZ can be divided into four components;
moving from the epidermis to the dermis it can
Stratum granulosum
be divided into
The granular cell layer is not always present in
haired skin, where it occurs it is made up of a layer
basal cell plasma membrane - contains the
 of 1-2 flattened cells. In non-haired skin it may
anchoring hemidesmosomes of basal cells,
be up to 4-8 cells thick. The cells contain kera-
lamina lucida,
tohyaline granules, which are rich in proflaggrin.
lamina densa,
Within this layer proflaggrin is converted to flag-
 sublamina dense - contains anchoring fibrils
grin, which acts to bind keratin flaments as the
and dermal microfbril bundles.
cornified envelope starts to form. Lamellar gran-
ules migrate to the periphery of the cells and dis-
charge their contents, rich in phospholipids and
Dermis
ceramides, into intercellular space to form lipid-
rich lamellae between cells. Degeneration of cell
 organelles and the nucleus starts in this level.
The dermis is part of the body's connective tis-
sue system; it accounts for most of the tensile
strength and elasticity of the skin. It is made from
Stratum fucidum
a combination of insoluble fibres (collagen and
This is a compact layer of dead keratinocytes only
elastin) and soluble polymers (proteoglycans and
found in footpads and nasal planum.
hyaluronan).
Fibrous components resist tensile forces. The
Stratum corneum
soluble polymers help dissipate compressive
This is the outermost layer of the epidermis and
forces. The dermis is composed of four main com-
consists of multiple layers of flattened cornified
ponents:
cells. These are constantly shed to balance the
proliferation of basal cells. On the canine trunk it
fbres
is about 47 cells thick. The transit time from the
 ground substance
stratum basale to stratum corneum is approxi-
cells
mately 22 days. The cells have an internal scaf-
epidermal appendages, arrector pili muscles,
fold of keratin/flaggrin and an external lipid-rich
blood and lymph vessels
cornified cell envelope.
Fibres
Basement membrane zone (BMZ)
The dermal fibres are produced by fibroblasts and
are collagenous, reticular or elastic.
This is the area that separates the epidermis from
the dermis. The functions of this area are as
Colfagenous fibres (coffagen)
follows:
These account for about 90% of all dermal f-
bres and 80% of the extracellular matrix. They
Acting to anchor the epidermis to the dermis.
form thick bands of multiple protein fibrils. They
 Maintaining a functional and proliferative
provide tensile strength and some elasticity.
epidermis.
Collagen types are as follows:
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
 Predominant collagen types in the dermis are
They are under cholinergic nerve control. Pilo-
fbrillar and collagen I (87%), III (10%)
erection is associated with *flight or fight'. It is
V (3%)
also important as a mechanism for thermoregu-
 Collagen VI present as microfibrils.
lation and emptying sebaceous glands
Collagen IV (lamina densa) and collagen V
(lamina lucida) found in BMZ.
Blood vessels
Collagen Vll found in anchoring fibrils of
Three intercommunicating plexuses of arteries
BMZ.
and veins are found within the dermis:
Reticular fibres (reticulin)
deep plexus, which supplies the subcutis,
These fibres form a network of fine branching
lower portions of hair follicle and epitrichial
structures.
sweat gland;
 middle plexus, which supplies the arrector pili
Elastin fibres
muscle, middle portion of hair follicle and se-
These fibres account for about 4% of the extracel-
baceous gland;
lular matrix. They are single fine branching struc-
 superficial plexus, which supplies upper por-
tures bordering collagen bundles. They give the
tion of hair follicles and sends capillary loops
skin much of its elasticity.
up to the epidermis.
Ground substance
Arteriovenous anastomoses are the connections
between arteries and veins found especially in the
The ground substance is produced by fibroblasts.
deep dermis that allows blood to bypass the cap-
It is composed of glycosaminoglycans linked to
illary bed; they are most commonly seen in the
proteoglycans. It fills the space around all the
extremities.
other structures to provide dermal support. It
contributes to water storage, lubrication, growth
Lymph vessels
and development.
These arise from capillary networks in superfi-
cial dermis and surround adnexal structures. The
Cells
vessels that arise from these networks drain into a
subcutaneous lymphatic plexus. Lymphatics con-
The normal dermis is sparsely populated with
cells. Fibroblasts and dermal dendrocytes are
trol the microcirculation of the skin. Their main
found throughout the dermis. Melanocytes are
functions are as follows:
found around superficial  blood  vessels and
draining away debris and excess matter that
around hair bulbs. Mast cells can also be found
 around superficial dermal blood vessels and ap-
results from daily wear and tear in the skin;
serving as channels for the return of proteins
pendages. Other cells that can be seen in very
small numbers in normal skin are neutrophils,
and cells from tissues to blood stream;
inking the skin and regional lymph nodes;
eosinophils, lymphocytes, histiocytes and plasma
carrying material that has penetrated the skin,
cells.
e.g. solvents, topical drugs, vaccines inflam-
matory products.
Epidermal appendages
Arrector pili muscles
These are smooth muscles that originate in su-
Nerves
 perficial dermis and insert at the bulge region of
The nerve supply to the skin can be divided
primary hair follicle. They are present in all haired
 into a dermal network, hair follicle network and
skin especially prominent in neck and rump. Con-
 specialised end organs within the dermis. Sen-
traction of muscle raises the hair (piloerection).
sory nerves can be either thermoreceptors (cold
Introduction - structure and function  5
or warm units) thought to be in the epidermis
surrounding ones and contain a single stout
or mechanoreceptors (Pacinian corpuscle, Ruffini
hair and an annular complex of neurovascu-
corpuscles), which are spread throughout the
lar tissue at the level of the sebaceous gland.
skin. Mechanoreceptors are also associated with
These hairs are thought to act as rapid acting
hairs; either large guard hairs or tylotrich hairs (G
mechanoreceptors.
and T hair units) or all hair, especially down hairs
(D hair units). Motor nerves supply the arrector
Structure of the hair follicle
pili muscle and the epitrichial sweat gland.
The hair follicle has five major components:
Hair follicle
 dermal hair papilla
hair matrix
The hair follicle can be divided into three sections:
hair
inner root sheath
Infundibulum, which extends from the en-
 outer root sheath
trance of sebaceous gland to epithelial sur-
face.
 Isthmus, extending from the entrance of se-
Dermal hair papilla
baceous gland to the attachment of arrector
Extension of dermal connective tissue covered by
pili muscle.
basement membrane.
ment of arrector pili muscle to the dermal
Hair matrix
papilla.
The hair matrix is made up of nucleated epithelial
cells covering the dermal papilla that give rise to
The dog and cat both have compound hair fol-
the hair and inner root sheath.
licle. A cluster consists of 2-5 large primary
hairs surrounded by groups of smallr secondary
Hair
(down) hairs. One of the primary hairs is the
The hair is made up of three parts - medulla, cor-
largest (central primary hair) and the others are
tex and cuticle:
smaller (lateral primary hairs). Each primary hair
can have 5-20 secondary hairs accompanying it.
Medulla, which is the innermost region com-
Each primary hair has an arrector pili mus-
cle, sebaceous gland and sweat (epitrichial) gland.
posed of longitudinal rows of cuboidal cells.
Each secondary hair usually has only a seba-
Cortex, composed of cornified spindle-
ceous gland. Primary hairs emerge independently
shaped cells, containing pigment to colour the
hair.
through individual holes; the secondary hairs
emerge through a common hole. Two specialised
Cuticle, the outermost layer of flattened
forms of tactile hairs are found in mammalian
cornified anuclear cells, these form ‘tiles' that
skin; these are the sinus hairs and tylotrich hairs:
interlock with the cuticle of the inner root
sheath.
Sinus hairs (vibrissae, whiskers) are found
on the muzzle, lips, eyelid, face and throat,
Secondary (down) hairs have a narrower medulla
also on the palmar aspect of the carpus of
and more prominent cuticle than primary hairs.
cats. Hairs are thick, stiff and tapered dis-
Lanugo hairs have no medulla.
tally. They are thought to act as slow-adapting
mechanoreceptors.
Inner root sheath (IRS)
Tylotrich hairs are scattered amongst nor-
The function of the IRS is to mould the hair within
mal body hairs. Follicles are larger than the
it, which is accomplished by hardening in advance
6 Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
of the hair. It is composed of three concentric lay-
tion is thought to be predominantly triglycerides
ers all of which contain eosinophilic granules (tri-
and wax esters this mixes with fatty acids derived
chohyalin granules). Working from the innermost
from follicular bacteria to make the sebum ex-
layer outwards, these layers are as follows:
creted onto the skin surface. Functions of sebum
include
 IRS cuticle single layer of overlapping cells
that point towards the hair bulb and interlock
physical barrier by lubrication and hydration
with cells of hair cuticle.
of skin and hairs,
Huxley's layer consisting of 1-3 nucleated cell
layers.
chemical barrier (sebum/sweat emulsion has
antimicrobial activities),
 Henle's layer - a single layer of anuclear cells.
pheromonal properties.
Outer root sheath (ORS)
The ORS is a downward extension of the epi-
dermis. It is thickest towards the epidermis and
Sweat gland
thinnest towards the hair bulb. In the infundibu-
lum normal keratinisation occurs in the same way
Two types are recognised: the epitrichial (apoc-
as the epidermis with the formation of keratohya-
rine) or atrichial (eccrine) sweat glands.
line granules. In the isthmus trichilemmal keratin-
isation occurs. Below the level of the isthmus no
keratinisation occurs as ORS is covered by IRS.
Epitrichial (apocrine)
The ORS is surrounded by two other structures,
These are distributed throughout haired skin but
which are the basement membrane (glassy mem-
not found in footpad or nasal planum. These
brane), a downward extension of the epidermal
structures are located below sebaceous glands and
basement membrane, and the fibrous root sheath,
 open through duct into hair follicle canal in the
which is a layer of thick connective tissue.
 infundibular region above sebaceous gland open-
ss  s   a  
haired areas as sebaceous glands. They have a
Arrector pili muscle
rich blood supply but are not innervated. Their
control is thought to be by diffusion of neuro-
See Section “Epidermal appendages'
transmitters from the circulation. The secretions
from these glands are thought to help act as a
chemical barrier as the secretion is especially rich
Sebaceous gland
in IgA. Epitrichial sweat is also thought to have
pheromonal properties.
The sebaceous glands are distributed throughout
haired skin. They are not found in the footpads or
nasal planum. They open through a duct into hair
Atrichial (eccrine)
follicle canal in the infundibular region. They tend
to be large and numerous in sparsely haired areas
Atrichial sweat glands are only found in footpads
and are not associated with hairs. They have a
especially mucocutaneous junctions and interdig-
rich nerve supply; direct nerve control thought to
ital spaces, dorsal neck, rump and chin (submen-
tal organ) and dorsal tail (tail gland, supracau-
occur.
dal organ, preen gland). Sebaceous glands have
an abundant blood supply and are innervated:
their oily sebum secretion thought to be under
The hair cycle
hormonal control; androgens causing hypertro-
phy and hyperplasia; oestrogens and glucocorti-
The hair cycle is made up of three main parts:
coids causing involution. Sebaceous gland secre-
anagen, catagen and telogen.
Introduction-structure and function
Anagen (growing phase)
Table 1.1 Resident and transient bacteria of the canine skin.
A new hair bulb forms and germ cells at the
base of follicle extend down to surround the der-
Resident organisms -
 Transient organisms -
 mal papilla deep in the dermis. A well-developed
dog skin
dog skin
spindle-shaped dermal papilla covered by hair
matrix (ball and claw' appearance) can be iden-
Skin
Skin
tified to form the hair bulb. Hair matrix cells are
●Micrococcus spp.
●Escherichia coli
often heavily melanised and show mitotic activity.
●Coagulase negative
●Proteus mirabilis
A hair plucked in anagen shows a large expanded
staphylococcus esp. S.
●Corynebacteritum spp.
 root that is moist and glistening, often pigmented
epidermidis, S. xylosus
Bacillus spp.
and square at the end.
● Alpha haemolytic
●Pseudomonas spp.
streptococci
Clostridium spp.
Catagen (intermediate phase)
●Propionibacterium
acnes
During this phase hair growth stops and the der-
●Acinetobacter spp.
mal papilla moves away from matrix cells as hair
● Gram negative aerobes
moves up in dermis.
Hairs
●Micrococcus spp.
Telogen (resting phase)
● Gram negative aerobes
Bacillus spp.
 During this phase the dermal papilla separates
●Staphylococcus
from the bulb of matrix cells (*club' hair appear-
intermedius (seeded
from mucosa?
ance). The pigment is lost from bulb and there is
no visible mitotic activity. Hairs plucked in tel-
Hair follicles
●Micrococcus spp.
ogen show a tapered club root with little or no
Propionibacterium acne
pigment.
●Streptococci
Bacillus spp.
Staphylococcus
Subcutis (hypodermis)
intermedius (seeded
from mucosa?
Mucosal sites
This is the deepest and thickest layer of the skin; it
Staphylococcus
is 90 % triglyceride by weight. There is no subcutis
intermedius (nares,
 in the lips, cheek, eyelid, external ear and anus.
oropharynx and anal
Fibrous bands that are continuous with the fi-
ring,
brous structures of the dermis penetrate and lobu-
late the subcutaneous fat into lobules of lipocytes.
fibrous skeletal components. Superficial portions
Cutaneous ecology
dermis to provide additional protection to some
Both canine and feline skins have a normal mi-
of the deeper structures. Functions of the subcutis
croflora. Bacteria are located in the superficial
include
epidermis and infundibulum of the hair follicles.
The normal flora is a mixture of micro-organisms
that live in symbiosis. These so-called *normal in-
an energy reserve,
habitants' can be classified as resident or transient
 important in thermogenesis and insulation,
 protective padding and support,
(see Tables 1.1 and 1.2):
maintaining surface contours,
steroid reservoir, site of steroid metabolism
 Resident organisms can successfully multiply
and oestrogen production.
on normal skin.
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
宁
Table 1.2 Resident and transient bacteria of the feline skin.
Table 1.4 Faecal contaminants of the canine and feline
skin.
Resident organisms -
 Transient organisms -
cat skin
cat skin
Faecal contaminants of skin- dog and cat (anaerobes)
Micrococcus spp.
 Beta haemolytic
Actinomyces spp.
streptoc occi
Clostridium spp.
Peptostreptococcus spp.
Coagulase negative
E. Cofi
Bacteroides spp.
staphylococcus esp.
P. mirabilis
S.simulans
Fusobacterium spp.
Prevotella spp.
Alpha haemolytic
Pseudomonas spp.
streptococci
Acinetobacter spp.
Alcaligenes spp.
Coagulase positive
Bacillus spp.
Selected references and further reading
staphylococcus esp. S.
Staphylococcus spp.
intermedius, S. atureus
(coagulase positive)
Staphylococcus spp.
Campbell, K.L. (ed) and Lichtensteiger, C.A.
(coagulase negative
(2004) Structure and function of the skin. In:
except S. simufans)
Small Animal Dermatology Secrets. pp. 1-9.
Hanley and Belfus, Philadelphia
Haake, A.R. and Holbrook, K. (1999) The struc-
Transient organisms do not multiply on the
ture and development of the skin. In: Freed-
normal skin of most animals. They can be
berg, I.M. et al. (eds). Fitzpatrick's Dermatol-
cultured from normal skin but are of no sig-
ogy in General Medicine. 5th edn. pp. 70-113.
nificance unless they become involved in the
McGraw-Hill, New York
pathological process as secondary invaders.
Jenkinson, D.M. (1990) Sweat and sebaceous
glands and their function in domestic animals.
In some situations, bacteria from other body sites
In: von Tscharner, C. and Halliwell, R.E.W.
can be important as pathogens. In bite wounds in
(eds).Advances in Veterinary Dermatology I.
cats the pathogenic organisms are usually those
 p. 229. Bailliere Tindall, Philadelphia
derived from the mouth flora (Table 1.3).
Kwochka, K.W. (1993) The structure and func-
Faecal contamination of skin and soft
tis-
tion of epidermal lipids. Vet Dermatol, 4, 151
sue, especially where wounds are
licked,
can
Mason, I.S. and Lloyd, D.H. (1993) Scanning
lead to faecal anaerobes becoming pathogens
electron microscopical studies of the living epi-
(Table 1.4).
dermis and stratum corneum in dogs. In: Ihrke,
P.J. et al. (eds). Advances in Veterinary Derma-
tology H1. p. 131. Pergamon, Oxford
Table 1.3  Normal flora of the feline mouth.
Scott, D.W. (1990) The biology of hair growth
and its disturbance. In: von Tscharner,
C
Normal mouth flora of the cat
and Halliwell, R.E.W. (eds). Advances in Vet-
erinary Dermatology
w I. Pp. 3-33. Bailliere
Tindall, Philadelphia
Pasteureffa muftocida
Scott, D.W. et al. (2001) Structure and function
Beta haemolytic streptococci
Corynebacterium spp.
of the skin. In: Muller and Kirk's Small Anima!
Actinomyces spp.
Dermatology.6th edn. pp. 1-70. WB Saunders,
Bacteroides spp.
Philadelphia
Fusobacterium spp.
Suter, M.M. et al. (1997) Keratinocyte biology
and pathology. Vet Dermatol, 8, 67
Approach to the case
History taking
Owner complaint
It is important to assess how reliable your owner
Time is always the most important limiting fac-
is. Owners can mislead a clinician by failing to
tor when taking a history from a client. Often,
it is impossible to assess a patient during a nor-
give an accurate history. Other members of the
family present in a consultation can often pro-
mal consultation and it is tempting to prescribe
vide useful information, especially children. At
a symptomatic treatment during a busy clinic
This is a justifiable practice providing the therapy
this stage, decide whether you are dealing with
a pruritic disease, seborrhoeic problem, pustular
that is supplied does not compromise the ability
to investigate the problem more thoroughly at a
disease, etc. This can help with the emphasis of
your questioning.
later date. Antibiotics, antihistamines and topical
therapy in the form of shampoos will rarely com-
plicate a diagnosis. The response of a patient to
such treatments can often help in directing fur-
Ceneral details
ther tests. Symptomatic steroid therapy is rarely
indicated and often makes further investigations
The age, sex, breed, colour and weight of the an-
impossible in the short term.
imal can give important clues to the nature of the
 History taking needs to be logical and different
disease. For example, demodex is more usually
clinicians approach their questioning in a differ-
found in young dogs; certain breeds are predis-
ent manner. Often, the emphasis will be changed
posed to particular diseases.
depending on the initial owner complaint.
History forms are used extensively by some
clinicians, but the author does not use a pre-
Ceneral health
printed sheet as she feels that this tends not to
encourage relevant questioning that can be var-
Level of activity, e.g. lethargy, poor exercise
ied for each case. The history itself can be divided
tolerance in canine hypothyroidism or hyper-
into six sections.
activity in feline hyperthyroidism.
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Sexual behaviour, e.g. abnormal attention to
other dogs in cases of Sertoli cell tumours.
Appetite/thirst is often increased in hypera-
 drenocorticism and in steroid administration.
 Feeding, especially the types of food, changes
of diet, titbits, supplements; are cats being fed
elsewhere?
Gastrointestinal signs; e.g., signs of colitis can
be associated with dietary intolerances.
 Urogenital signs, e.g. cystitis associated with
hyperadrenocorticism.
Cardio-thoracic signs of a bradycardia are of-
ten seen in canine hypothyroidism; previous
Figure 2.1  Lesions of cat pox in a Siamese cat.
history of respiratory disease in a kitten may
be an indicator of a naso-pharyngeal polyp.
Dermatological history
Central nervous system signs, e.g. fits may oc-
cur in hyperadrenocorticism, or otitis interna
When did the symptoms first appear?
may be associated with long-standing allergic
■
What part of the body was first affected?
otitis.
Progression of the disease; has there been
 Locomotor system signs, e.g. polyarthritis as
sociated with systemic lupus erythematosus;
evidence of any seasonality?
Is pruritus present?
lameness can also be seen with onychodys
 trophy in dogs and nail bed problems, e.g.
Previous therapy
 pemphigus foliaceus, in cats.
Eye disease, e.g. conjunctivitis, may be seen
with allergy in both dogs and cats; keratocon-
What previous therapy has been given?
junctivitis sicca may accompany canine hy-
How has the pet responded to previous treat-
pothyroidism.
ment?
Ear disease may be seen as an extension of an
allergic or endocrine disorder.
Weight loss - associated with neoplasia, dia
betes, chronic systemic disorders.
Environmental history
Other in contact animals, either pets or wild
animals, e.g. foxes and hedgehogs in cases of
dogs or small rodents for hunting cats, which
can be a source of cat pox (Figure 2.1).
 Human contacts - owner contagion especially
ringworm, scabies, cheyletiella (Figure 2.2),
flea bites.
 Animal's environment; e.g., does the dog live
 indoors or outdoors? What types of bedding
are used? Does the pet sleep on the owner's
bed?
Holidays/kennelling; especially if the pet im-
Figure 2.2  Papular lesions of Cheyfetieffa on the arms of an
 proved in a kennelled environment.
owner.
Approach to the case
11
Flea treatment; especially which products are
used, how often and when it was last used?
Topical treatment; when was the dog last
shampooed, have any cream or lotions been
applied?
Examination of the animal
Once a history has been taken the animal can be
examined. A general physical inspection should
be undertaken in every case. A more detailed
examination of some organ systems can be under-
taken where indicated. Ophthalmological, neuro-
muscular examination including cranial nerve re-
flexes may be indicated in some systemic diseases.
Physical examination
Figure 2.3 Does the dog scratch during the consultation?
It is important to have adequate space, good
owner and pet cooperation (sedation of the pet
 may be necessary) and good lighting.
Before even touching the dog or cat it is im-
 portant to assess the animal's general appearance
(Figure 2.3), demeanour body condition. After
that the examination should be logical to include
the following:
Temperature, pulse and respiratory rate.
Mouth - especially the gums and palate
(Figure 2.4) looking for abnormalities of
colour, petechiation (Figure 2.5), lesions such
Figure 2.4  Eosinophilic granuloma on the soft palate.
as ulcers and erosions.
Ears/eyes - are often affected as an extension
of the skin disease.
 Palpation of peripheral lymph nodes - lym-
phadenopathy can be seen with neoplastic
disease or infections.
Auscultation of the chest - bradycardia
(hypothyroidism),  tachycardia  (hyperthy-
roidism).
Abdominal
 palpation - abdominal masses,
hepatomegaly in endocrine disease.
Musculature - masticatory muscles can be at-
rophic with dermatomyositis, facial asymme-
try with cranial nerve damage in otitis media,
pot bellied appearance in hyperadrenocorti-
cism.
Figure 2.5 Petechiation on the gums of a dog.
12Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Genitalia: male - scrotal masses, gynaecomas-
Glabrous (non-haired) skin
tia with sex hormone imbalances; female -
Skin quality - atrophic/inelastic with hypera-
vulval enlargement seen with sex hormone
drenocorticism, skin fragility syndrome.
imbalances.
Skin temperature - often cool in hypothy-
roidism.
Colour
pallor, erythema, hyperpigmenta-
Dermatological examination
tion, jaundice.
 Primary and secondary lesions - pustules,
This should include the whole of the skin and all
 papules, comedones, etc.
of the mucous membranes:
Haired skin
Has the animal given you any dermatological
Will the hair epilate easily?
clues whilst it has been in the room? Is dog
Are there areas of stubble suggesting the hair
scratching during the consultation? Is the cat
has been chewed out?
over grooming?
Do the hairs look unusual - are there follicu-
lar casts?
General assessment of the coat
 Is there evidence of pigment abnormalities on
Presence of scales suggestive of increased epi-
the hairs?
dermal turn over or crust often associated
with superficial infection with bacteria or der-
After taking a careful history and completing
a physical and dermatological examination, the
matophytes.
Hair colour/texture - is the coat faded, have
clinician should be in a position to compile a list
of differential diagnoses. This helps in deciding
primary hairs been lost?
which further diagnostic tests are required. It is
often not necessary to perform every test on each
Skin
animal. This can also act as a guide to the own-
It is important to check the inaccessible areas of
ers at an early
stage as to the possible causes of
the skin, always turn the animal over to check
the disease,
the prognosis, and what diagnostic
the ventral abdominal skin (Figure 2.6) as well
investigations are to be undertaken. It is impor-
as inside the mouth and ears; the perianal skin;
tant at this stage to discuss a treatment plan with
interdigital spaces and footpads. Assessment 
of
the owner including the potential costs.
the skin should include the following.
Selected references and further reading
Bloom, P. (2004) Diagnostic techniques in derma-
tology. In: Campbell, K.L. (ed) Small Animal
Dermatology Secrets. pp. 21-33. Hanley and
Belfus, Philadelphia
Medleau, L. and Hnilica, K. (2006) Diagnostic
techniques. In: Small Animal Dermatology A
Color Atlas and Therapeutic Guide. 2nd edn.
 Pp. 12-24. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
Scott, D.W. et al. (2001) Diagnostic methods. In:
Muller and Kirk's Small Animal Dermatology.
Figure 2.6  Ventral abdominal skin showing primary pustular
and papular lesions.
6th edn. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
Diagnostic-tests
Initial diagnostic tests
Minimum database for otitis in cat or dog:
Ear flap
There can be no excuse not to perform a basic
Acetate tape impression smears skin
diagnostic panel on all cases. Many laboratories
Skin scrapings - superficial and deep
now offer a skin panel as part of their service.
Hair plucking/trichography
However, despite careful packaging of samples
Impression smears/exudate from lesions
prior to posting they rarely arrive at the labo-
ratory in the state they left the practice. A good
External ear canal
quality microscope is essential, but other than this
expense initial diagnostic tests require a minimal
 Ear discharge - unstained and stained
amount of outlay for equipment.
Minimum database for skin disease for both
the cat and dog:
Wet paper test
Wet paper test
The coat is brushed onto a piece of wet paper. Flea
Coat brushings
faeces will show up as red streaks (Figure 3.1).
Diascopy
This should be undertaken in all cases of pruritic
 Acetate tape impression smears of coat and
skin disease, especially where there is dorsal in-
skin
volvement. It is important to check if the pet has
Skin scrapings - superficial and deep
been shampooed recently. False positive tests are
Hair plucking/trichography
common in cats due to the fact that faeces are
Cutaneous cytology - impression smears, fine
groomed out of the coat.
needle aspirate
Coat brushings
In addition, in the cat (all cases) and inflammatory
skin disease dog:
The coat is brushed onto dry paper (Figure 3.2)
 Fungal culture
and can be examined with a hand lens to look for
14Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Figure 3.1 Wet paper test; flea faeces appear as red streaks
Figure 3.3 Tape stripping hair from the dorsum.
on wet paper.
surface parasites, e.g. cheyletiella, lice. Alterna-
Acetate tape impression smears
tively, the material on the paper can be mounted
in either potassium hydroxide of liquid paraffin
and examined under the microscope.
This technique can be performed on the skin or
hair.
Diascopy
Hair
The tape is pressed repeatedly onto the coat to
This is a useful and simple technique to assess
pick up eggs from the hairs (Figure 3.3), e.g.
the difference between vasodilation and haemor-
cheyletiella, lice as well as parasites on the sur-
rhage. Aglasslide is placed over an erythematous
face of the skin, e.g. lice, trombicula. This is a
lesion and gentle pressure is applied:
useful technique to trap some of the fast mov-
ing parasites, which can often be seen with the
Erythematous lesions blanche when pressure
naked eye. It can also be used to identify flea fae-
is applied as they are caused by dilated blood
 ces. Selection of site is important in the cat where
vessels.
samples should be taken from areas where the cat
 Haemorrhagic lesions do not blanche when
is unable to lick, e.g. the back of the neck.
pressure is applied as they are caused by red
blood cell leakage out of vessels.
Skin
The tape is pressed firmly onto an alopecic area
of skin, which may be clipped if necessary. Site
selection is important. Thickened lichenified skin
is most likely to reveal evidence of yeast infec-
tion. The author will usually rub the tape gen-
tly with a thumbnail to ensure good contact of
the tape with the skin. A modified Wright's stain
such as Diff-Quik can then be applied to the tape,
which is then carefully inverted with the adhesive
slide downwards onto a microscope slide for ex-
amination. As the tape acts as a cover slip, the
sample can be examined under high power (100x
oil immersion) if necessary. This method can be
Figure 3.2  Coat brushing technique
used to identify surface bacteria; yeast, especially
Diagnostic tests 15
Table 3.1  Mounting material for skin scrapes - advantages
 and disadvantages.
Liquid paraffin
Potassium hydroxide
Non-irritant to skin
Potential skin irritant
Will not clear the sample
Will clear the sample
by digesting keratin
 Does not kill the mites,
Mites killed
which can thus be
identified by movement 
across the slide
Figure 3.4  Skin scraping technique.
Mites will curl up if the
Mites well preserved
sample is not examined 
and observation of 
soon after it is taken,
body parts easier, esp.
these are listed in Table 3.1. Hair may be gently
making mite identification
cheyletiella
clipped away if the coat is very thick. The scalpel
difficult
blade is normally held perpendicular to the skin
and the scraping should be in the direction of the
hair coat. Material should be spread thinly onto
Malassezia; parasites, especially surface living de-
the slides. Multiple samples should be taken from
modex Demodex corniei (dog) Demodex gatoi
non-excoriated areas. When potassium hydrox-
(cat).
ide is used, the slides may be gently warmed to
break up keratin and/or left to stand for 10-15
Skin scrapings
minutes prior to examination.
Skin scrapes are essential as part of any basic der-
Deep skin scraping
matological investigation. Scrapes may be taken
into either liquid paraffin or 10% potassium hy-
droxide. When liquid paraffin is used a few drops
The technique is identical to that for superfi-
cial scrapings except that scrapings should be
can be gently added to the sample before a cover
slip is added. When potassium hydroxide is used
taken to a depth where the skin is erythematous
the sample is best left to stand for 10-15 minutes
and mild capillary ooze is seen (Figures 3.4 and
and may be gently warmed before examining as
this allows the potassium hydroxide to digest ker-
atin to clear the feld. There are advantages and
disadvantages of both mounting materials (see
Table 3.1).
Superficial skin scraping
A scalpel blade should be blunted by gently rub-
bing on the microscope slide prior to use. It is
moistened with either 10% potassium hydroxide
or liquid paraffin to provide better collection of
material and scraped through the coat and super-
ficial layers of the skin. There are advantages and
Figure 3.5  The skin scrape may be mounted in liquid paraffin
disadvantages of using each mounting material;
or potassium hydroxide.
16
Manuai of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Table 3.2  Ectoparasites and most appropriate tests to identify them.
Parasite
Methods that are most useful to identify
Comments
Cheyletietta spp.
Superficial skin scrapes, tape strips, coat
False negative in animals grooming excessively
brushing
Demodex canis
Deep skin scrapes, hair plucks, skin biopsy
Skin scrapes false negatives on thickened
lesions and from shar-peis; biopsy and hair
pluck better; choose areas of comedones for
scraping
Demodex corniei
Superficial skin scrapes, tape strips 
Demodex cati
 Deep skin scrapes, hair plucks, skin biopsy
Choose areas of comedones for scraping
Demodex gatoi
Superficial skin scrapes, tape strips
Lateral shoulder may be predilection site
Felicola subrostratus
Superficial skin scrapes, tape strips, coat
brushing
Fleas
Wet paper test, tape strips, coat brushing
False negative in animals grooming excessively
Linognath us setosus
Superficial skin scrapes, tape strips
Lynxacarus radosky
Superficial skin scrape, tape strip, coat
brushing
Neotrombicula
Superficial skin scrape, tape strip
autumnalis
Notoedres cati
Superficial skin scrape, tape strip
Otodectes cynotis
Superficial skin scrape, tape strip (skin) wax
examination 
Sarcoptes scabiei
 Deep skin scrape
 False negatives common, predilection sites ear 
tips and lateral elbows; serology and empirical
therapy also useful
Trichodectes canis
 Superficial skin scrape, tape strip, coat
brushing
3.5). The skin may be pinched to express the
mites from the follicles. Different depths of scrap-
ing are needed to identify different ectoparasites
(Table 3.2).
Hair plucking/trichography
Hair plucks are a useful way to assess a variety of
different factors including the presence of fungal
infection, trauma, shaft defects and hair growth
phase (Figure 3.6).
Hair tip
Examination of the tip is particularly useful in
cats where damage to the hair tips suggests
Figure 3.6 Hair plucking for trichography
Diagnostic tests
17
Figure 3.7 Traumatised hair suggesting excessive grooming
Figure 3.9 Follicular casts on hair shafts.
self-inflicted trauma (Figure 3.7). In hair loss
through endocrine disease, the tip remains finely
tapered (Figure 3.8).
Hair shaft
Dermatophyte ectothrix spores can be identified
 on the shafts of the hairs. Spores appear as small
spherical structures in rows along the shaft. Pig-
 ment changes such as clumping of pigment along
the shaft are typical of colour mutant alope-
cia follicular dysplasia. Follicular casts can be
seen in sebaceous adenitis, follicular dystrophy,
demodicosis and hyperadrenocorticism (Figure
3.9). Ectoparasite eggs such as cheyletiella and
lice can be seen attached to hair shafts (Figure
Figure 3.10 Lice eggs cemented to hair shafts.
3.10). Other shaft abnormalities such as trichor-
rhexis nodosa have been recorded but are rare
(Figure 3.11).
Figure 3.8 Non-traumatised hair tip in hair loss through
Figure 3.11   Trichorrhexis nodosa showing 'paint brush-like'
endocrine disease.
splitting of hair shafts.
18
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Cutaneous cytology
Cytological examination is a useful technique that
allows the clinician to look for the presence of
infection (bacteria, yeast, fungi) and also assess
infltrating cell types (neoplastic, inflammatory
cells, acanthocytes).
Three techniques may be employed:
Direct impression smears
一
Examination of pustule contents
Fine needle aspirates
Figure 3.12  Follicular demodex on bulb of hair plucked from
 an area of comedone formation.
Direct impression smears
This technique is suitable for any exudative le-
Hair bulbs
sion, e.g. erosions, ulcers, papules and furuncles,
Examination of the bulbs allows assessment of the
or for obtaining samples from the undersides of
stage of the growth cycle of each hair. Parasites
crusts.
such as demodex can also be seen at the level of
the hair bulb (Figure 3.12):
None exudative lesions can be picked with a
sterile 25 gauge needle to express fluid.
Telogen hairs have elongated unpigmented
The microscope slide is gently pressed onto
spear-shaped roots (Figure 3.13). These are
the lesion to collect exudates (Figure 3.14).
hairs in the resting phase and are most com-
The sample may be air dried or carefully
monly seen in endocrine disease. Most hairs
warmed to dry (the author uses a small hand-
 in normal dogs will be in this stage.
held hair dryer).
 The slide is stained using a modified Wright's
Anagen hairs have bent club shaped roots that
are heavily pigmented (Figure 3.13). These
stain (Diff-Quik) and gently rinsed and dried
are growing hairs and should be identified in
again.
samples from normal dogs. In dogs with pro-
The sample should always be examined on
 longed growth phase, e.g. poodles, most hairs
low power (10x objective) initially to select
will be in this stage.
areas for close inspection, subsequently on
high power (40x) or under oil immersion
(100x).
Figure 3.13 Anagen hair bulb in lower half of picture is dark
and curled. Telogen hair bulb is long, thin and unpigmented.
Figure 3.14  Impression smear of exudative lesion.
Diagnostic tests 19
Figure 3.15  Acanthocytes from a sterile pustule in the case
Figure 3.16 Fine needle aspirates from placues on a dog's
of pemphigus foliaceus.
dorsum.
Examination of pustule contents
The pressure on the needle should be released
This method is useful for pustular lesions to iden-
before the needle is withdrawn. The sampling
tify if they have an infectious or sterile aetiology.
should be stopped if there is evidence of blood
The pustule should be picked with a sterile 25
in the hub of the needle.
gauge needle and the contents gently pressed onto
The needle is then removed and the plunger
the slide. It should be stained as above. Findings
withdra wn to fill the syringe with air.
include the following:
The needle is then replaced and the contents
of the needle expressed onto a clean micro-
 Bacteria plus degenerate neutrophils identi-
scope slide.
fied in bacterial infection.
The material may be gently smeared if neces-
Acanthocytes
(rounded
nucleated
ker
sary and stained as above. The slide should
 atinocytes), non-degenerate white blood cells
be scanned initially on a low power (4x
(usually neutrophils and eosinophils) seen in
or 10x) to identify areas of interest before
immunological diseases such as pemphigus
using high power (40x) or oil immersion
(Figure 3.15).
(100x).
Demodex mites, bacteria and degenerate neu-
trophils can be seen in follicular demodex.
Fungal culture
Fine needle aspirates
Dermatophyte culture should be undertaken in
Aspirates are most suitable for nodular lesions
any inflammatory canine skin disease and any
especially neoplastic and pyogranulomatous dis-
feline skin problem. A sterile toothbrush, hair-
ease:
brush or carpet square coat brushing can be used
(Figure 3.17).
A 21-23 gauge needle attached to a 2 or 5 ml
syringe should be used (Figure 3.16).
The lesion should be sterilised with spirit and
Sampling lesions
immobilised between finger and thumb.
 Samples of hair and scale can be collected by
The needle is inserted into the lesion whilst
brushing the lesion and an area of at least
pressure is applied to the plunger to create
3 cm? around its periphery. Alternatively,
negative pressure. The needle can be con-
 sterile forceps can be used to pick off scale,
stantly repositioned within the lesion without
 crust and hair.
removing it, to draw up as much material as
Wood's lamp examination of hairs may help
possible.
select suitable hairs for sampling.
20 Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Figure 3.17 Tooth brushing from coat for dermatophyte
Figure 3.18 Collection of ear wax using a cotton swab.
culture.
 Nail clippings can also be cultured in cases
Examination of ear wax
of onychomycosis by clipping the nail and
then grinding it up or shaving it and sprin-
Both plain unstained samples and stained sam-
kling onto the culture medium.
ples should be examined from the external ear
canal (Figure 3.18). This procedure can be used
to make initial decisions for treatment, possibly
Sampling non-lesional skin/asymptomatic
 pending cultures, and can also be used to monitor
carriers
the progress of the disease.
A toothbrush is best employed to comb
through the whole coat.
Initial sampling
Plain sample is prepared by rolling wax col-
lected on a cotton wool swab from the ex-
Choice of culture medium
ternal ear canal onto a microscope slide (Fig-
 Samples can be bedded on dermatophyte test
ure 3.19). The sample should then be exam-
medium (DTM) or else Sabouraud's dextrose
ined unstained. Initially, this should be done
agar (SDA). Care should be taken to rest the
on low power (4x, 10×) rarely is a higher
samples on the surface and not embed them
power needed. Demodex spp. and Otodectes
in the medium.
cynotis can be identified by this technique.
DTM has the advantage of producing a
colour change as dermatophytes grow, but
macroconidia production is generally better
on SDA.
     s 
growth. Dermatophyte colonies appear as
white fluffy or buff-coloured colonies. Pig-
mented colonies are almost always contam-
inants.
 Dermatophytes lead to a colour change on the
medium from yellow to red. Colonies sporu-
late poorly on DTM but colonies can be col-
lected in many cases by the use of acetate tape
touched onto the surface to collect macro-
conidia, which can subsequently be stained
Figure 3.19 The cotton swab is rolled along the slide and air
and mounted.
dried.
Diagnostic tests
21
Further diagnostic tests
Initial investigations will give information as to
which further tests are deemed necessary. It is im-
portant to discuss these again with the owner at
this stage.
Culture
Culture has become a more important tool
 in investigation, especially since methicillin re-
sistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) isolates
Figure 3.20 Degenerate neutrophils and bacteria on a
have been identified in small animals. Bacte-
stained sample of ear wax.
 u ii iou hnd si ao 
cases of bacterial pyoderma; however, it should
be undertaken in certain circumstances (see
Wax may also be collected and prepared in the
same way but air dried or gently warmed and
Table 3.3).
The main groups of pathogens that can be cul-
then stained with Diff-Quik. Examination
tured are as follows:
should be performed with both low and high
power objectives. This technique will identify
different cell types and micro-organisms such
Bacteria: sterile swabs or tissue culture
as bacteria (rods and cocci, Figure 3.20) or
can be submitted for aerobic or anaerobic
yeast (Figure 3.21).
culture.
 Fungi: hair, scale and crust can be submitted
for growth on DTM or SDA.
Follow-up samples
Yeast: contact plates are usually employed to
look for Malassezia.
These samples should be taken at different
points during therapy.
Assessment of the inflammatory infiltrate and
micro-organisms helps to make judgements
Superficial bacterial culture
on the progression of the disease and response
Sterile swabs can be used to collect moist exudates
to therapy.
from the skin or for absorbing pustule contents
from pricked pustules. In ears, samples should
be taken before any cleaning takes place. The
more chronic the lesion the more important it is
to look for anaerobic bacteria as well as aero-
bic pathogens. It is important to inform the lab-
oratory if you are suspicious of an unusual or
zoonotic organism, e.g. nocardia, mycobacterium
or MRSA.
Deep bacterial culture
Samples from deep lesions are best taken as sterile
biopsy samples. Samples once harvested should
be placed in a transport swab container or else
sterile saline and delivered to the laboratory as
Figure 3.21 Malassezia yeast on a stained sample of ear wax.
quickly as possible.
22
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Table 3.3Indications for bacteriology culture.
Indications for bacteriology culture
Comment
Cytology reveals cocci and there has been no
High clinical suspicion of resistant staphyloc occus
response to (1} appropriate antibiotic at (2) correct
possible MRSA
dose for (3} appropriate length of time
Cytology reveals evidence of cocci and rods or just
Difficult to predict antibiotic therapy; multiple
rods
antibiotics may be needed 
Deep pyoderma
A long course of antibiotics is required so early
appropriate antibiotic therapy is needed 
Chronic disease - where glucocorticoids and 
May be overgrowth of commensals or anaerobes with
multiple antibiotic treatments have been used
unpredictable sensitivity
German shepherd dog pyoderma
 Often unpredictable sensitivity and multiple pathogens
Biopsy
 Allergy and superficial parasites (fleas, sar-
coptes, etc.)
 Biopsy can provide an enormous amount of infor-
mation if appropriate samples are taken. Ideally,
Types of biopsy
samples should be from early lesions and where
possible primary lesions should be biopsied. The
 Punch biopsy: 6 mm or 8 mm biopsy sample.
major indications for biopsy include the follow-
Excisional biopsy.
ing:
Nail biopsy/amputation (see section on nail
disease).
Suspected neoplastic lesions (Figure 3.22).
Ulcerative or vesicular lesions.
 Skin disease unresponsive to rational therapy.
 Unusual or serious skin disease, especially
when the dog is systemically unwell.
To make a diagnosis where expensive or po-
tentially dangerous drugs are to be used.
Often a biopsy will not give a definitive diagno-
sis but will allow the clinician to place a disease
within a general group. The main categories are
as follows:
Neoplasia
Infection and deep parasites (folliculitis, cel-
lulites, furunculosis, demodicosis)
 Immune mediated disease, e.g. autoimmune
disease, vasculitis
Endocrine(
disease, e.g.
. hyperadrenocorti-
cism, follicular dysplasia
Figure 3.22  Erythroderma with scale, nodules and plaques in
Keratinisation
 disorders,
e.g
sebaceous
a dog with epitheliotrophic lymphoma. Such presenting signs
adenitis, primary seborrhoea
warrant biopsy.
Diagnostic tests
23
Table 3.4Biopsy techniques.
Procedure
Comments
 Select an appropriate area for biopsy
Choose primary lesions, e.g. pustules, vesicles
Chronically damaged skin and secondary lesions, e.g.
ulcers, lichenification and alopecia, rarely provide 
 good diagnostic information
 Select multiple areas to biopsy
Sample at least three areas and different representative
lesions; footpad and nasal lesions are difficult to biopsy
but provide useful information
Clip the area gently but do not prep the skin
Overpreparation of the skin can remove crust and
scale, which is useful diagnostically; cleaning can
affect tissue culture results
Inject a small bleb of local anaesthetic into the
Suitable agents include lidocaine, novocaine and
subcutaneous skin
articaine
 Punch biopsy: use a disposable punch (6-8 mm);
If a blunt punch is used it can distort the tissue by
place over the lesion; apply gentle pressure and 
producing shearing forces and give unreliable results
twist the punch
Once the full thickness of skin has been penetrated 
Care should be taken over delicate structures to ensure
the punch can be withdrawn 
they are not damaged
Excisional biopsy: an elliptical excision is made
This technique is useful for larger lesions also nose,
around a lesion with a scalpel blade
footpads and ear flaps
Fine forceps should be used to grab the
If the epidermis is grasped or heavy forceps are used,
subcutaneous fat on the sample and any adherent 
 the sample can be damaged
fat can be snipped with fine forceps to release it 
Mount the sample on a piece of card
Allows the pathologist to orientate the sample for
processing
 Place in 10% formalin solution
Ensure that the sample is in at least 10x its own volume
of formalin to ensure that it is adequately preserved
Ensure that the submission form contains a detailed
Providing the pathologist with information allows them
 clinical history and a list of differential diagnoses
to provide you with more useful information
Submit to a pathologist with a level of expertise in
Subtle or rare diseases may not be recognised by a
 dermatohistopathology
general pathologist
 Once the sample has been removed the wound may
be closed using sutures or staples
 For biopsy techniques, see Table 3.4.
Serology testing
These tests rely on the identification of antigen-
Allergy testing
specific antibody levels and are available for both
environmental allergens and food allergens. The
 Allergy testing can be performed to identify of-
 use of serology to identify food allergic individ-
fending allergens in both cases of food allergy
uals remains controversial with questions asked
and atopic dermatitis. In vitro tests (serology) are
about the sensitivity and specificity of these tests.
available for food allergy, and both in vitro (serol-
The author prefers to use a carefully selected
ogy) and in vivo (intradermal skin testing) are
food trial followed by dietary challenge to investi-
available for atopic dermatitis.
 gate food-allergic individuals. Serology testing for
24
Manuai of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Table 3.5 Advantages and disacdvantages of serological versus intradermal allergy tests.
Serological tests
Intradermal tests
Can be performed by veterinary surgeon in practice
Needs to be performed by experienced operator
No outlay for diagnostic kit so individual animals
Expensive intradermal allergens need to be purchased;
can be tested, but test is relatively expensive
a kit should contain at least 40 allergens; it is a
cost-effective procedure provided multiple tests are
performed within the shelf life of the kit
Allergens tested are those offered by central
Allergens tested can be individualised for specific area
laboratory
Animal does not require sedation or clipping
Animal needs sedation and clipping
Glucocorticoid withdrawal is probably indicated;
Glucocorticoid and antihistamine withdrawal is
antihistamines may not interfere with testing
 needed prior to testing
No check to see if the animals' test has been
Use of histamine (positive control} and sterile diluent
affected by inadequate drug withdrawal
(negative control) allows investigator to decrease the
risk of false negative and positive results
False negative results can be seen in allergic animals
A higher percentage of dogs produce meaningful
that subsequently have positive intradermal allergy
 positive reactions to intradermal allergy testing than
tests and successfully respond to vaccines
serology
Animal stress during the procedure should not
Animal stress during the procedure may lead to false
interfere with test results
negative results
Good results are seen with allergen-specific
Response to allergen-specific immunotherapy is
immunotherapy based on serological testing
recognised as being superior when based on
intradermal tests compared to serology
environmental allergens does produce good re-
shortcut when owner's funds are inadequate to
sults and does have significant advantages over
allow a more detailed investigation. The use of
intradermal allergy testing (see Table 3.5).
anti-inflammatories is rarely indicated as a thera-
peutic trial, and in the author's opinion immuno-
Intradermal allergy testing
suppressive therapy in any form should never be
Intradermal allergy testing is considered to be the
gold standard test for the identification of envi-
 ronmental allergens in atopic dermatitis. It is the
author's and indeed most veterinary dermatolo-
gists' preferred test. Intradermal allergy testing
involves measuring the allergic response in the
skin, which is the target reaction for the allergy
reaction (Figure 3.23). These tests also have ad-
vantages and disadvantages (see Table 3.5).
Trialtherapy
Figure 3.23  Intradermal allergy tests to a variety of environ-
A therapeutic trial can be employed in a vari-
mental allergens. Positive reactions are represented as erythe-
ety of situations and can be used as a justifiable
matous weals.
Diagnostic tests
25
used without stringent efforts to make a diagno-
 Electromyogram (EMG) to identify abnormal
sis. Situations where trial therapy may be used
traces seen with dermatomyositis or in en-
include the following:
docrine disease.
Advanced diagnostic imaging, e.g. magnetic
Anti-parasitic therapy - in cases of suspected
resonance imaging (MRI) in cases of chronic
scabies, flea allergic dermatitis.
ear disease or in pruritus associated with neu-
Antibiotics - in pustular disease to assess if the
rological disease.
aetiology is an infectious or sterile disease.
Food trial - where a diet is suspected as a
Once a diagnosis has been made it is important to
cause of the disease - food allergy, zinc re-
again discuss with the owner the long-term prog-
sponsive disease.
nosis for the animal, the success rate for the ther-
 Drug withdrawal - in cases where the lesions
apy, and the length of course of the treatment.
 may have been caused by a reaction to a drug.
Is a short course of drugs required or can the
a roy Adeiau uo aq 01 sp aun ioadxa iaumo
The reader is referred to the specific sections for
What are the side effects of therapy? What hap-
more detailed descriptions of further diagnostic
pens if the disease is not treated? What will it
tests that may be employed.
 all cost? This procedure can often take as long
In endocrine disease or where the dog or cat
as the initial consultation, but is as important.
is thought to have cutaneous lesions as a mani-
If the owner appreciates which diagnostic tests
festation of systemic disease, blood tests may be
have been undertaken and the seriousness of the
needed. These may include
disease, then long-term client compliance is much
better.
routine haematology and biochemistry,
viral screens in cats,
endocrine screen including thyroid function
Selected references and further reading
tests,
dynamic function tests, ACTH stimulation
test, low/high dose dexamethasone suppres-
Bloom, P. (2004) Diagnostic techniques in derma-
sion test.
tology. In: Campbell, K.L. (ed) Small Animal
Dermatology Secrets. pp. 21-33. Hanley and
There will be situations where the dermatologist
Belfus, Philadelphia
or veterinary surgeon needs to redirect a skin case
Dunstan, R. W. et al. (2004) A guide to taking skin
to another discipline for further investigation:
biopsies: a pathologist's perspective. In: Camp-
bell, K.L. (ed) Small Animal Dermatology Se-
Ultrasonography, e.g. for visualisation of
crets. pp. 34-42. Hanley and Belfus, Philadel-
adrenal glands in hyperadrenocorticism or
phia
liver architecture in necrolytic migratory ery
Medleau, L. and Hnilica, K. (2006) Diagnostic
thema.
techniques. In: Small Animal Dermatology: A
Radiography to diagnose calcinosis cutis or
Color Atlas and Therapeutic Guide. 2nd edn.
underlying bone pathology in acral lick gran-
Pp. 12-24. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
uloma.
Scott, D.W. et al. (2001) Diagnostic methods. In:
Electrocardiogram (ECG) may identify car
Muller and Kirk's Small Animal Dermatology.
diac abnormalities seen with hypothyroidism.
6th edn. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
Bacterial skin
disease
General
Surface
Superficial
Deep
The primary pathogen in the dog is Stapbylococ-
cus intermedius. Staphylococcus is thought to be
a resident of the mucosae, especially the nasal,
Surface pyoderma
 anal, genital tract areas, and is seeded to the skin
through grooming or other activities. It is rare
 Outermost layers of the epidermis are involved.
for it to cause an infection without an underlying
It can be seen as
factor. Almost any skin condition may lead to in-
fection but the most common triggers are allergy,
 acute moist dermatitis (hot spot, wet eczema),
a]
keratinisation disorders and follicular diseases. In
(b) intertrigo complex
deep pyodermas non-resident organisms such as
Pseudomonas spp., Actinomyces spp., Nocardia
Acute moist dermatitis
spp. and Mycobacteria spp. can be isolated.
Cause and pathogenesis
Bacterial skin infection in the cat is rare. Sub.
Acute moist dermatitis as its name suggests is a
cutaneous abscesses are the most common forms
rapidly developing surface bacterialinfection that
of infection usually
is created by the animal as a result of self-inflicted
are almostalways as
trauma, which may be licking, rubbing or chew-
sociated with other
sease processes
ing. It is common in dogs and rare in cats. No
such as metabolic or immunc
ical abnormal-
breed predilection is recognised. Most cases oc-
cur in the summer and autumn. Fleas are the most
tions is S. intermedius. In deep pyoderma many
common inciting trigger.
different aerobic and anaerobic bacteria includ-
The site of the lesions can give a clue to the
ing Pasteurella multocida, beta-haemolytic strep-
underlying cause. Most lesions are found on
tococcus, Actinomyces spp. Bacteroides spp. and
the trunk (fleas), tail base (fleas, impacted anal
Fusobacterium spp. can be identified.
glands), lateral thigh (fleas), neck (allergy) face
 Pyoderma can be classified according to depth as
(otitis) (Figure 4.1). Other causes include the
follows:
following:
Bacterial skin disease
27
Figure 4.1 Acute moist dermatitis secondary to otitis ex-
terna. Typical appearance of erythema with exudation and
self-inflicted trauma.
Figure 4.3 Area of acute moist dermatitis without satellite
lesions.
Allergy - atopy (Figure 4.2), food, flea allergy.
Ectoparasites - cheyletiella, lice.
by papules or pustules, so-called satellite lesions,
Localised pain - arthritis, soft tissue pain es-
the dermatitis is not confined to the surface and
pecially anal glands, dental problems.
is a superficial or deep pyoderma.
Otitis externa.
Trauma - bites, injection reaction.
Hygiene - poor coat condition, inadequate
Differential diagnosis
grooming (especially long coated dogs).
 Superficial or deep localised pyoderma
Demodicosis
Hyperthermia secondary to hyperthyroidism.
 Psychogenic - flanks or tail (especially in ori-
Dermatophytosis
ental cat breeds).
Neoplasia especially mast cell tumour, se-
baceous gland adenocarcinoma (dog), squa-
mous cell carcinoma (cat)
Clinical signs
Eosinophilic granuloma (cat)
Localised area of moist erythematous exudation
Ulcerative dermatitis with linear subepider
mal fibrosis (cat)
(Figure 4.3). Margins are clearly defined. Typi-
cally, the lesion is surrounded by halo of erythe-
matous skin. If the central lesion is surrounded
Diagnosis
 History, e.g. presence of otitis, poor flea con-
trol.
Clinical signs - the presence of satellite lesions
suggest a deeper infected process, which re-
quires more aggressive antibiotic treatment.
Skin scrape.
Cytology - reveals degenerate neutrophils
and often mixed bacteria.
Fungal culture.
Treatment
 Check for underlying causes, especially if a
recurrent problem. Flea control is important
in all cases.
Figure 4.2 Acute moist dermatitis caused through face
rubbing in an allergic cat.
Clip area (if necessary under sedation).
28
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Use a collar or equivalent to break self-
perpetuating itch/scratch cycle.
Topical therapy should be used to
dry the skin, e.g. 5% aluminium acetate
 or calamine lotion applied 2-3 times daily
for 2-7 days;
 cleanse the skin, e.g. antibacterial sham-
口
poo containing acetic acid, benzoyl perox-
ide, chlorhexidine, ethyl lactate used prior
to drying agents;
decrease pruritus, e.g. topical antibiotic
and steroid combinations for short-term
use only (up to 7 days), e.g. fusidic acid/
betamethasone.
Systemic glucocorticoid therapy may be used
Figure 4.4   Pseudomonas colonisation of lip fold in a spaniel.
if there is no evidence of bacterial colonisation
beyond the surface, e.g. prednisolone 1 mg/kg
Body fold
po sid (dogs) or 2 mg/kg po sid (cats) for 5-10
■
Interdigital folds
■
Scrotal folds
Intertrigo complex (skin fold pyoderma)
Diagnosis
■
Cytology of lesions with direct impression
Cause and pathogenesis
smear or acetate tape stained with Diff-Quik
Intertrigo complex occurs where skin folds
to look for bacteria and yeast.
become colonised with pathogenic organisms.
Skin scrapings to check for parasite involve-
Other factors that contribute are the maceration
ment (See section on diagnosis for tech-
of the skin through overgrooming, tear staining
niques).
or urine scalding. Bacterial involvement is com-
Culture and sensitivity is rarely needed.
mon but intertrigo can occur where bacteria are
seen in conjunction with or with only yeast and/or
Treatment
surface demodex. Different anatomical locations
Medical therapy:
provide different micro-environments to allow
commensal organisms to multiply and cause dis-
Medical therapy is preferable where possible
ease. These include most commonly the follow-
but is often life long.
ing:
Cleansing of the infected area can be under-
taken with medicated wipes, shampoos or
Bacteria - S. intermedius, Pseudomonas spp.
spra ys.
(Figure 4.4)
Topical cleansing dependent on pathogen:
Yeast - Malassezia pachydermatis (dog),
Bacteria - acetic acid, benzoyl peroxide,
Malassezia sympodialis (cat)
chlorhexidine or ethyl lactate.
Ectoparasites - Demodex canis (dog), De-
Yeast - boric acid, clotrimazole, keto-
modex gatoi (cat)
conazole or miconazole.
Topical protectants/creams depend on patho-
Types of intertrigo (see Table 4.1)
gen:
Gram positive bacteria - fusidic acid, neo-
Lip fold
mycin.
Facial fold
口
Gram negative bacteria - silver sulphadi-
Vulval fold
azine, polymyxin.
Tail fold
口
Yeast - clotrimazole, miconazole.
Bacterial skin disease
29
Table 4.1
 Intertrigo - different presentations.
 Site of fold 
 Organism involved 
dermatitis
Breed incidence
Concurrent disease
commonly
 Specific therapy
Genera!
Not an excfusive fist
Must be identified and
Not an excfusive fist
General medica!
comments
treated if possible
therapy; see specific
agents under treatment
below
Lip fold dogs
Spaniels
Dental disease, e.g.
Matassezia spp.
Topical cleansing and 
 calculi, gingivitis any
Staphylococcus spp.
emollient protection
disease causing excessive
Pseudomonas spp.
Surgical cheiloplasty
 salivation 
 Facial fold dogs
Brachiocephalic
Primary eye disease
Malassezia spp.
Topical cleansing and 
breeds, e.g. bulldog 
causing epiphora, e.g.
Staphylococcus spp.
 emollient protection
(Figure 4.5), Boxer
distichiasis
Demodex spp.
Surgical removal of 
Secondary corneal
facial folds
disease can occur due to
rubbing
Facial fold cats
Persians other short 
 Primary eye disease
Malassezia spp.
Topical cleansing and 
faced breeds
causing ocular discharge,
Staphylococcus spp.
 emollient protection 
(Figure 4.6)
e.g. infectious or allergic
Demodex spp.
 Facial fold resection 
conjunctivitis
 Often due to immature
Staphylococcus spp.
Topical cleansing and 
vulva due to early spaying
Psetdomonas spp.
emollient protection 
 or urinary tract disease
Vulvaplasty
(Figure 4.7), e.g. cystitis,
urolithiasis
Tail fold dogs
Bulldogs
Corkscrew tail often due
Malassezia spp.
Topical cleansing and
to poor docking 
Staphylococcus spp.
emollient protection
(Figure 4.8)
Pseudomonas spp.
Surgical 'filleting' of 
end of tail to remove
bone
ssop ploy Apog
Spaniels, bassets,
More common in obese
Malassezia spp.
Topical cleansing and
bloodhounds,
animals
Staphylococcus spp.
emollient protection 
 shar-pies esp. on
neck
Body fold cats
 Mammary folds most
Most common in obese
Staphylococcus spp.
Topical cleansing and
commonly
cats and those with
emollient protection
mammary hyperplasia
due to hormonal therapy
or lactation
Interdigital folds
Gun dogs, Boxers
Underlying atopy leading
Matassezia spp.
Topical cleansing
ssop
(Figure 4.9)
 to foot licking
Staphylococcus spp.
Interdigital folds
Devon Rex
 Possible associated with
Malassezia spp.
Topical cleansing ±
cats
(Figure 4.10) possible
 keratinisation disorder or
Staphylococcus spp.
 systemic anti-yeast
associated with
allergy
sanup
keratinisation
 disorder or allergy
Scrotal folds
Entire males
 Often associated with
Malassezia spp.
Topical cleansing and
s80p
allergy
emollient protection 
30
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Figure 4.5 Surface infection in a bulldog's facial fold.
Figure 4.8 Surface infection is a corkscrew tail fold of a
bulldog.
Figure 4.6 Facial fold pyoderma in a Persian cat.
Figure 4.9  Interdigital intertrigo with malassezia infection in
 an atopic Boxer.
Figure 4.7
Surface infection due to incontinence in an old
bitch.
Figure 4.10 Nail fold Malassezia in a Devon Rex.
Bacterial skin disease
Adjunct therapy:
Where necessary underlying disease needs
to be addressed, e.g. weight reduction pro-
gramme for obese animals, castration for
scrotal folds, dental therapy for gingivitis. In-
vestigation and therapy of allergy, demodico-
sis, bladder, eye disease.
Surgical therapy:
 Surgical therapy should only be undertaken
when medical therapy has been unsuccessful
Figure 4.11Juvenile impetigo in a young dog.
and underlying disease has been controlled. It
should not be a substitute for medical therapy.
Surgical intervention involves removal of the
Inadequate nutrition
excessive folds. Most commonly applied to
Systemic disease, e.g. distemper
the face, vulva and lips.
Feline juvenile impetigo - bacteria involved
usually staphylococcus, P. multocida or beta-
Superficial bacterial infection
haemolytic streptococcus. Most common causes
(superficial pyoderma)
are
 overgrooming of kittens by queen,
Superficial bacterial infection involves the epider-
systemic disease, e.g. cat flu.
mis and the intact follicle and does not extend
 deeper into the dermis or involve damage to the
Canine adult onset bullous impetigo (Figure
hair follicle.
4.12) - caused by staphylococcus but may also
Types
be caused by Gram negative bacteria. Older dogs
secondary to the following:
(a)Impetigo
(b) Folliculitis
Endocrine disease
(c)  Mucocutaneous pyoderma
 Debilitating disease, e.g. internal neoplasia
(d)  Methicillin resistant Stapbylococcus aureus
(e)  Dermatophilosis
Impetigo
Subcorneal pustules especially found in sparsely
haired areas usually on the ventral abdominal
skin.
Cause and pathogenesis
Canine juvenile impetigo (Figure 4.11) - usually
staphylococcus seen in young dogs secondary to
the following:
Parasitism (fleas, cheyletiella, endoparasites)
Figure 4.12 Bullous impetigo caused by staphylococcus in
Poor hygiene
a dog with hypothyroidism.
32
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Miliary dermatitis
Dermatophytosis
Sterile pustular disease
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs
Skin scrapings
Cytology of lesions - degenerate neutrophils
with bacteria
Culture and sensitivity
Fungal culture (especially cats)
Identification of underlying disease where
Figure 4.13 Adult onset impetigo on the ear secondary to
appropriate
atopy.
Treatment
 Juvenile impetigo/feline adult onset impetigo:
Feline adult onset impetigo - causal organisms as
口
Where possible identify and treat under-
feline juvenile disease. Secondary to the follow-
ing:
lying causes; however, the condition can
-dd e s u isnouds ssai
 pies as general health and immune status
Viral immunosuppression, e.g. FeLV, FIV, pox
improves.
virus
Antibacterial shampoos, spray or wipes
 Debilitating disease, e.g. neoplasia
containing acetic acid, benzoyl peroxide,
Endocrine disease, e.g. hyperadrenocorticism
chlorhexidine, ethyl lactate can be used 2-
Allergy especially atopy (Figure 4.13)
 3 times weekly until cure, approximately
10 days.
Clinical signs
Topical
antibiotic
creams
(without
Non-follicular pustules, rupture
form
口
to
steroid) can be used on localised lesions;
 papules and crusts. Pruritus variable.
suitable products contain fusidic acid or
 Distribution can be generalised but often seen
neomycin.
on hairless ventral abdominal areas.
 Antibiotics are rarely necessary. In severe
Small non-follicular pustules on
1glabrous
7
cases 3 weeks of antibiotics required and
skin ruptured to form epidermal collarettes,
for 7 days beyond clinical resolution (see
papules and crust.
Table 4.2, oral antibiotics for superficial
Adult onset bullous impetigo clinical signs as
bacterial skin disease).
feline disease and juvenile canine disease ex-
 Canine adult onset bullous impetigo:
cept the pustules are large and flaccid. These
口冏
 Identification of underlying disease is im-
rupture causing loss of large areas of epider-
portant to prevent recurrence.
mis.
Antibacterial shampoos as juvenile im-
petigo above.
Differential diagnosis
Antibiotics used for 10 days beyond clin-
Canine disease:
ical cure based on culture and sensitivity
if necessary.
Sterile pustular disease, e.g. pemphigus foli-
aceus, sterile eosinophilic pustulosis
Mucocutaneous pyoderma
Demodicosis
 Dermatophytosis
Bacterial infection of the mucocutaneous junction
usually affects the lips and perioral skin. Uncom-
Feline disease:
 mon condition only recorded in dogs.
Bacterial skin disease
66
Table 4.2 Antibacterial therapy for superficial and deep bacterial infection - see also under specific diseases.
Antibiotic
Dose rate
Indications
 Amikacinl
5-10 mg/kg sq bid 
Gram negative rods, atypical
mycobacteria; M. avium
Amoxicillin
11-22 mg/kg po bid/tid
Cat bite abscesses
 Ampicillin
pibyp!q od by/aw oz
Actinomyces, Nocardia,
Dermatophitus
Cephalexin
25 mg/kg po bid
Nocardia, Dermatophilus
Clavamox
12.5-25 mg/kg po bid - tid
Cat bite abscesses, staphylococcal
(amoxicillin/clavulanate)
infections
Clindamycin
5.5 mg/kg po bid
Nocardia, cat bite abscesses,
staphylococcal infections
Clofazimine
 2-12 mg/kg po bid long
Feline leprosy
courses up to 6 months
required
Enrofloxacin
 5.0 mg/kg po bid
Gram negative rods, atypical
mycobacteria; M. avium;
staphylococcal infections
Lincomycin
22 mg/kg po bid
Staphylococcal infections,
Dermatophitus
Penicillin G procaine
10-15 mg/kg im or sq bid
Actinomyces
 Potentiated sulphonamides
Dose is mg of total product
Actinobacillus, Nocardia 
(trimethoprim/sulphonamide)
30 mg/kg po bid 
Rifampin2
 5 mg/kg po bid 
Feline leprosy
Streptomycin
10 mg/kg im or sc sid
Actinobacilfus, plaque
Tetracycline
10-22 mg/kg po bid - tid 
Actinomyces, L-form bacteria plaque
Note: For full list of abbreviations see front of book.
1 Nephrotoxic drug - monitor renal function.
2 Hepatotoxic drug - monitor hepatic function.
Cause and pathogenesis
 Unknown cause. Bacteria involved usually coag-
ulase positive staphylococcus.
Clinical signs
Any age or sex. German shepherd dogs and
German shepherd dog crosses appear to be
 predisposed.
Mucocutaneous erythema, swelling followed
by crusting and erosion (Figure 4.14).
Lesions often bilaterally symmetrical usually
Figure 4.14 MucocutaneouspyodermainaGerman
 painful leading to self-inflicted trauma.
shepherd dog
34Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Most common sites: commissures of the
dogs with chronic disease and multiple antibiotic
mouth but also nares, eyelids, vulva, prepuce
therapies. Methicillin resistant S. aureus (MRSA)
and anus.
(see notes below on this pathogen) is also recog-
nised as a significant pathogen in dogs and cat.
Differential diagnosis
In cats commonly the bacteria involved include
 Intertrigo complex
staphylococcus (both coagulase positive and neg-
Demodicosis
ative), P. multocida and beta-haemolytic strepto-
Dermatophytosis
coccus.
Malassezia dermatitis
 Bacterial infection is introduced into the skin
 Autoimmune skin disease
by grooming and self-inflicted trauma.
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
 Some of the most common predisposing factors
include the following:
Diagnosis
■
History and clinical signs.
■
Ectoparasites - demodex, scabies, fleas.
Skin scrapings.
■
Endocrinopathy - hypothyroidism (dog) hy-
Cytology of lesions - degenerate neutrophils
perthyroidism (cat), hyperadrenocorticism.
with bacteria usually cocci.
、
Allergy - food, atopy (Figure 4.15), fleas.
Culture and sensitivity - rarely needed.
Immunosuppression - iatrogenic, e.g. gluco-
Fungal culture.
corticoids, cyclosporines, progestagens, cyto
Histopathology reveals signs of epidermal hy-
toxic drugs; disease neoplasia (lymphoma),
perplasia, superficial epidermal pustules with
viral disease (cats, FeLV, FIV, FIP).
crusting. Lichenoid infltrate dermatitis with
mixed dermal infltrate.
Clinical signs
Short coated breeds - small tufts of hair
Treatment
leading to alopecia usually seen on the dor-
 Clipping and cleansing of area; may need se-
sum and producing a moth-eaten appearance
dation to achieve this.
(Figure 4.16).
 Antibacterial shampoos or wipes containing
acetic acid, benzoyl peroxide, chlorhexidine
or ethyl lactate.
Topical ointments, e.g. fusidic acid (cocci on
cytology) flamazine (rods on cytology) twice
daily for 14 days then twice weekly.
 Systemic antibiotics indicated in severe cases,
based on culture and sensitivity a minimum
of 3-4 weeks (see Table 4.2).
 Relapses require long-term maintenance ther-
apy with topical and/or systemic treatment.
Bacterial folliculitis
A superficial infection leading to the formation of
follicular pustules caused by bacterial infection of
the intact hair follicle. Common disease in the dog
and rare in the cat.
Cause and pathogenesis
In dogs major pathogen is S. intermedius. Staphy-
Figure 4.15 Bacterial folliculitis on ventral neck secondary
lococcus schleiferi is also isolated especially in
to atopy.
Bacterial skin disease
35
Figure 4.16 Short coat folliculitis in a bulldog.
Figure 4.18 Epidermal collarettes on the flanks of a dog.
Long coated breeds - increased hair loss lead-
ing to thinning of the coat before progressing,
Dermatophytosis
Demodicosis
eventually leading to alopecia (Figure 4.17).
Scabies
Coat often dull and lacks lustre with excessive
 Pemphigus foliaceus/erythematosus
scaling.
Miliary dermatitis (cat)
Primary lesions include follicular pustules
(pustule hair protruding), papules as well as
epidermal collarettes (Figure 4.18), crusts,
Diagnosis
target lesions (Figure 4.19), excoriation and
Skin scraping.
alopecia with variable pruritus.
Fungal examination - microscopy and cul-
 Distribution depends on predisposing factors.
ture.
Primary lesions are most obvious on glabrous
Cytology - degenerate neutrophils with evi-
skin; alopecia is noticeable on the dorsum and
dence of bacteria with phagocytosis.
flanks.
Culture and sensitivity - sample should be
taken from an intact pustule where possible.
Differential diagnosis
Histopathology from an intact pustule re veals
Other follicular diseases in dog and cat:
non-specific interfollicular superficial der-
matitis, with perifolliculitis and folliculitis.
Figure 4.17 Erythema alopecia and hair loss due to
staphylococcal folliculitis.
Figure 4.19  Target lesion typical of staphylococcal infection.
36
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Treatment
Table 4.3 Situations where MRSA should be suspected.
Topical therapy may be useful but is not a sub-
stitute for systemic antibiotics. Suitable topi-
 cal agents include those listed under therapy
●Patients with non-healing wounds
of impetigo.
● Patients with non-antibiotic responsive infections
Systemic antibiotics based on culture and
where previous cytology and/or culture indicates that
staphylococci are involved
sensitivity. Antibiotics suitable for empiri-
cal therapy include clindamycin, potentiated
● Patients from known MRSA positive households or
those belong to health care workers
sulphonamides and cephalexin (see Table
● Patients with a history of chronic antibiotic therapy
4.2). Minimum courses of treatment 21-28
days (10 days beyond clinical cure).
● Patients that have been hospitalised after orthopaedic
surgery
 If pyoderma occurs within 3 months of ces-
sation of treatment, then appropriate tests to
● Patients from a veterinary environment where there
identify predisposing factors are essential, e.g.
has been previous cases of MRSA
endocrine/allergy test.
Where a poor response to antibiotic therapy
is seen, i.e. primary pustular lesions are still
Infection can produce signs similar to those
 present whilst the animal is on therapy, con-
of autoimmune disease with severe erosions
sider antibiotic resistance (MRSA) or a sterile
and ulceration (Figure 4.20) often involving
pustular disease.
the mucocutaneous junctions in addition to
the skin (Figure 4.21).
Methicillin resistant S. aureus
Infection may also affect surgical wounds, es-
pecially following orthopaedic surgery or in-
A long discussion on MRSA is beyond the scope
dwelling catheters.
of this book. The following is intended as a brief
outline only.
Diagnosis
Cause and pathogenesis
Clinical signs, history especially failure to re-
Many different MRSA isolates have been iden-
 spond to antibiotic therapy.
tifed. These can be categorised into 11 clonal
Culture - swabs should be submitted in trans-
groups: 5 are hospital acquired (HA) and 6 are
 port medium to a laboratory capable of isolat-
community acquired (CA). Most of the cases
ing MRSA and accurately reporting antibiotic
identified in the UK in humans are HA isolates
and belong to the epidemic (E) clones E15 and
E16.
imals is unknown. However, isolates in the UK
from small animal cases have identified HA-
MRSA clones E15 and E16 suggesting that infec-
tion came from a human source. It would appear
that there is a common link between MRSA infec-
tion in small animals and a hospital or health care
worker contact. Situations where MRSA infec-
tion should be suspected are detailed in Table 4.3.
Clinical signs
Skin lesions.
Clinical lesions can be indistinguishable from
those of non-MRSA infections in cats and
Figure 4.20 Oral ulceration seen as a result of MRSA
s6op
infection.
Bacterial skin disease
37
Dermatophilosis
Rare superficial crusting dermatosis caused by
Dermatophilus congolensis seen in both cats and
's6op
Cause and pathogenesis
Farm animals are usually source of infection.
Predisposing factors:
Moisture required for zoospore release.
Skin trauma required to allow cutaneous pen-
etration, e.g. ectoparasites, trauma.
Figure 4.21  Periocular infection with MRSA.
Clinical signs
Rare disease.
sensitivity. MRSA control measures should be
Lesions usually occur on the dorsum, also
implemented whilst awaiting the bacteriology
face, ears and feet.
Early lesions, papules and pustules develop-
results. These include institution of strict hy-
giene measures and barrier nursing within the
ing into crusts.
‘Paint brush' lesions - crusts containing em-
veterinary environment.
bedded hair with ulcerated purulent areas.
Owners should be warned of the potential
zoonotic risk, especially if immunocompro-
mised individuals are in contact with the
Differential diagnosis
Other pustular diseases, e.g. impetigo, pem-
pet.
phigus foliaceus, staphylococcal folliculitis.
Seborrhoeic disease.
Treatment of MRSA
 Dermatophytosis.
Antibiotic selection should be based on cul-
Zinc responsive dermatosis.
ture and sensitivity. MRSA infection is often
sensitive to potentiated sulphonamides and
clindamycin, which are good empirical selec-
Diagnosis
tions if there is a high level of suspicion of
History and clinical signs.
MRSA pending sensitivity results.
Direct smear of underside of crust stained
 Antibiotic therapy should be continued for at
with Diff-Quik - parallel rows of cocci ‘rail
road track'. In chronic cases this is often neg-
least 10 days beyond clinical cure and may be
needed for up to 6 weeks.
ative.
Most animals with
MRSA
will survive
Culture and sensitivity of crusts and exudate.
providing appropriate antibiotic therapy is
Skin biopsy reveals a hyperplastic superf-
instituted. Death is attributable to the un-
cial perivascular dermatitis with a palisad-
derlying condition or inappropriate use of
ing crust of orthokeratotic parakeratosis and
glucocorticoids and not the MRSA in most
leukocytes.
cases.
It is suggested that most animals with MRSA
Treatment
infections have mucosal colonisation, al-
 Removal of predisposing factors.
though it is unclear whether this is a cause
Systemic antibiotics based on culture and
or consequence of infection. If the animal re-
sensitivity. Ampicillin, cephalosporins, lin-
mains colonised, potential risks and precau-
comycin useful for empirical therapy 10-14
tions must be discussed with the owner.
day course (for doses, see Table 4.2).
38
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Crust removal using antiseborrhoeic sham-
(c)Pyotraumatic dermatitis
 poo, e.g. benzoyl peroxide is useful.
(d)  Nasal furunculosis
(e)  Chin pyoderma (canine acne)
(f)Pododermatitis
Deep bacterial infections (deep
(g)  German shepherd dog pyoderma
pyoderma)
(h)  Acral lick dermatitis
(i)  Anaerobic cellulitis
Infection of deeper tissues of the dermis and of-
ten the subcutis. Infection starts as a surface or
Subcutaneous abscesses
follicular insult that spreads to deeper structures
 and breaks out of the follicles. There are always
 Bite wounds are the most common reason for sub-
underlying causes for the infection, which must
cutaneous abscesses. They are the most common
 be identified. Deep pyoderma is common in dogs
form of localised deep pyoderma in the cat.
and rare in cats.
Localised deep pyoderma - predisposing fac-
Cause and pathogenesis
tors include the following:
Most commonly seen in all male cats prone
to fighting (Figure 4.23).
 Self-inflicted trauma
Small puncture wound from cat's canine teeth
Wounds
injects bacteria into the skin.
Foreign body (Figure 4.22)
Bacteria involved usually those of feline
Subcutaneous abscesses (especially in cats)
oral cavity, i.e. P. multocida, beta-haemolytic
streptococcus, Bacteroides spp. and fusiform
Generalised deep pyoderma - predisposing fac-
bacilli.
tors include the following:
The wound heals rapidly and a local infection
develops over 48-72 hours.
Ectoparasites especially demodicosis
Allergy
Clinical signs
 Systemic disease causing immuno-incompe-
Swollen area covered only by a small crust
tence
Common sites - tail base, shoulder, neck, leg
 Inappropriate treatment with an ineffective
and neck
antibiotic or with corticosteroids
Types:
(a)  Subcutaneous abscesses
(b)  Furunculosis
Figure 4.22 Localised deep pyoderma due to penetrating
foreign body in the forelimb.
Figure 4.23 Bite wound on the side of the face.
Bacterial skin disease
66
Area warm and painful to touch
Animal often febrile
Localised lymphadenopathy
Differential diagnosis
Other less common bacteria infections
Mycobacteria spp.
口
口
Yersinia pestis
Nocardia spp.
Actinomyces spp.
Fungal mycetoma
Neoplasia
 Foreign body
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs
Aspiration of exudates - typical purulent
material
Figure 4.24 Deep Gram negative infection in a dog.
Cytology of exudates - mixed inflammatory
cells with mixed bacterial population
 Response to therapy
Endocrinopathy - hypothyroidism (Figure
4.26) (dog), hyperadrenocorticism.
 Ectoparasites especially demodex, scabies.
Treatment
Primary keratinisation disorders.
Surgical drainage (sedation is often required).
Immunosuppression through systemic disease
Flushing of the abscess with saline
or
(Figure 4.27) or through inappropriate use
chlorhexidine (0.025%) or EDTA tris/chlorh-
of anti-inflammatory drugs, e.g. glucocorti-
exidine solution.
coids, cyclosporines, progestagens.
Antibiotics 7-10 days. Amoxicillin, clin-
Autoimmune skin and immune mediated
 damycin can be used for empirical therapy
disease.
(see Table 4.2).
Allergy.
Uncomplicated localised abscesses  S
should
heal uneventfully with appropriate therapy.
Clinical signs
Intact male cats should be castrated.
Depends on severity and extent of disease.
If there is failure to heal, an immunosuppres-
Most commonly seen on pressure points and
sive factor should be sought or other differ-
entials explored.
Furunculosis
Furunculosis occurs when rupture of deeply in-
fected follicles occurs within the dermis, infection
spreads to involve deep levels of the dermis. Most
commonly seen in dogs; rare in cats.
Cause and pathogenesis
Initial insult to follicle can be caused by bacteria,
especially S. intermedius, but also by Gram neg-
ative bacteria such as Pseudomonas spp. (Figures
4.24 and 4.25). Mixed populations are common.
 Underlying diseases include the following:
Figure 4.25 Close-up of dog in Figure 4.24.
40
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Differential diagnosis
Autoimmune disease especially sterile pustu-
lar diseases
 Drug eruption
Erythema multiforme
Neoplasia
 Deep fungal infection
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
1
Cytology of exudates, stained with Diff-Quik.
Mixed inflammatory infltrate with bacteria
often cocci also rods.
Skin scrapings.
Fungal culture.
 Bacteriology - culture and sensitivity (aerobic
and anaerobic):
口
 Surface swabs may give unrepresentative
Figure 4.26 Periocular furunculosis secondary to hypothy-
results due to contamination with oral
roidism.
flora, tissue culture usually better taken
from biopsy.
on the trunk, but can occur anywhere on the
tous folliculitis with furunculosis.
body.
Investigation of underlying cause.
 Early mild lesions - discrete papules progress-
ing to ulcerated pustules and haemorrhagic
Treatment
bullae with crusting.
Any underlying cause should be identified and
Severe lesions
red/purple
papules/bullae
treated.
with fistulation discharging exudate, marked
Antibiotics based on culture and sensitivity
crusting.
6-8 weeks minimum at least 2 weeks beyond
Lymphadenopathy is common.
clinical cure.
Animal usually depressed,
anorexic and
Clipping and cleansing lesions - under seda-
pyrexic.
tion/GA if necessary. Often large areas of the
dog need to be clipped out.
Deep cleansing bath soaks and whirlpool
treatment may be useful.
Antibacterial washes/soaks, e.g. acetic acid,
chlorhexidine, ethyl lactate (see topical ther-
apy for impetigo). Benzoyl peroxide may be
too harsh on open sores.
Calamine lotion to dry lesions.
Treatment of underlying conditions esse-
ntial.
If there is concurrent pruritus then an
Elizabethan collar should be used to pre-
vent self-traumatisation, or sedating anti-
histamines, e.g. promethazine 12.5-50 mg
po
bid;
Figure 4.27 Periocular cellulitis in an immunosuppressed
glucocorticoids
are contraindi-
cat. (Source: Picture courtesy of P: Boydell.}
cated.
Bacterial skin disease
41
Pyotraumatic folliculitis
Treatment
As for furunculosis.
Clinical appearance similar to acute moist der-
Elizabethan collar may help reduce traumati-
matitis/hot spot, but is a deep infective process
and therefore different management. Common in
sation.
dogs and uncommon in cats.
Nasal folliculitis/furunculosis
Cause and pathogenesis
Cause and pathogenesis
As for acute moist dermatitis - may be a
 Deep infection of bridge of nose extending
 progression from the surface infection; often
 around nostrils, uncommon in dogs and rare
other immunosuppressive factors are present,
in cats.
e.g. concurrent immunosuppressive disease.
May be created by trauma to the area, espe-
 In cats may be secondary to viral disease, e.g.
cially due to rooting or associated with insect
FeLV, FIV.
bites.
 Predisposed dog breeds: golden retriever, Lab-
 Predisposed breeds: German shepherd dog,
rador retriever.
English bull terrier, Border collie.
Clinical signs
Clinical signs
Thickened, plaque-like skin - usually neck.
Acute papules and pustules (Figure 4.29)
cheek, rump.
rapidly progressing to furunculosis with as-
daap aeu sasnd pue saed a
sociated erythema, alopecia and swelling.
infective process compared to localised sur-
Lesion usually painful.
 Lesions only affect the haired area of the skin
face lesions in a true *hot spot' (Figure 4.28).
 and there is sparing of the planum nasale un-
like autoimmune skin disease.
Differential diagnosis
Scarring usually occurs.
Acute moist dermatitis (surface infection)
Neoplasia
Differential diagnosis
Eosinophilic granuloma (cat)
Autoimmune skin disease
 Drug eruption
Diagnosis
Dermatomyositis
As for furunculosis.
Demodicosis
Dermatophytosis
especiallyTrichopbyton
mentagrophytes
Figure 4.28 Pyotraumatic dermatitis due to atopy in a
hypothyroid dog: note the presence of satellite lesions to
Figure 4.29  Nasal furunculosis in a Labrador secondary to
denote deep infective process.
allergy.
42
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Sterile nasal eosinophilic folliculitis/furunc
ulosis
Mosquito bite hypersensitivity (cat)
Diagnosis
As for furunculosis.
Cytology reveals signs of mixed inflamma-
tory infiltrate with bacteria usually Staphy-
lococcus spp. Polymorphs are mostly neu-
trophils compared to eosinophilic folliculitis,
which is exclusively eosinophilic with few
ba cteria.
Treatment
As for furunculosis.
Topical treatment is difficult to use because
of the pain of the lesions; however, if possi-
ble gently applied warm water soaks may be
used daily to decrease scarring and remove
Figure 4.30 Chin furunculosis.
crust.
 Prognosis good but scarring can occur.
Differential diagnosis
Demodicosis
Chin pyoderma (canine acne)
■
 Dermatophytosis
 Deep folliculitis/furunculosis of the chin and lips
Contact dermatitis
of young dogs; very rare in cats.
Juvenile cellulitis
Cause and pathogenesis
Diagnosis
Follicular damage initially sterile caused by
■
 History and clinical signs especially in predis-
 trauma to the chin from
posed breeds.
口
lying on hard floors,
Cytology - mixed inflammatory infltrate
口冏
friction from chew toys,
with bacteria usually Staphylococcus spp.
 pruritus due to allergy.
Skin scrapes to rule out demodex.
 Bacterial infection occurs  secondarily
to
Biopsy - folliculitis and furunculosis, often
trauma.
bacteria not seen on sections.
Androgens limited role as condition can be
seen in neutered dogs and females.
Genetic predisposition may exist. Predisposed
Treatment
dog breeds: large short coated especially En-
Remove and treat any underlying factors.
Mild cases - benzoyl peroxide shampoo daily
glish bulldog, Great Dane, mastiffs and Boxer
followed by fusidic acid cream. Should be ap-
(Figure 4.30).
plied daily until clinical remission, then every
3-5 days for maintenance.
Clinical signs
 Severe cases - secondary bacterial infection
 Initial signs non-painful, non-pruritic come-
with keratin and hair as foreign bodies in the
dones.
skin.
 Alopecia, follicular papules develop into lo-
Antibiotics are needed for 4-6 weeks based
calised furunculosis.
on culture and sensitivity in combination with
Serosanguinous discharge can be severe.
topical therapy.
Bacterial skin disease
43
In many dogs response is complete and life
long in others; long-term therapy is required.
Pododermatitis (interdigital pyoderma)
Cause and pathogenesis
Folliculitis and furunculosis of the feet often af-
fect interdigital spaces. Initial lesions may be ster-
ile and infection is secondary in many chronic
cases. Common in dogs and rare in cats. Often
referred to as interdigital cyst, these are not true
cysts. There are numerous underlying causes; see
Table 4.4.
Figure 4.31  Interdigital lesion due to a penetrating grass
seed.
Table 4.4 Causes of pododermatitis.
Lesion confined to a
Lesions affect multiple
single foot
feet
 Foreign body, e.g.
 Contact irritant/allergy
grass awn (Figure 4.31)
Trauma - harsh
Allergy - food, atopy
flooring, rough ground
(Figure 4.32)
Conformation - due to
Conformation - due to
orthopaedic disease or
orthopaedic disease or
breed, e.g. Pekingese,
breed, e.g. Pekingese,
saopling
saopling
Fungal infection with
Fungal infection with
Figure 4.32  Interdigital lesions in an atopic Labrador.
dermatophytosis
dermatophytosis
Neoplasia - squamous
Neoplasia especially
cell carcinoma, mast 
Iymphoma
cell tumour,
plasmacytoma
Abnormal weight
Psychogenic lesions -
bearing on that leg due
nervous dogs, e.g.
to disease on another
poodles
limb
 Sterile pyogranulomas
especially in English
bulldog, dachshund,
Great Dane, Boxer
Ectoparasites, e.g.
demodex,Pelodera,
hookworms, ticks,
Neotrombicula
Bacterial infection due to
immunodeficiency.
endocrinopathy
(Figure 4.33)
Figure 4.33 Multiple interdigital lesions secondary to
hypothyroidism in a Great Dane.
44Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Clinical signs
Systemic antibiotics based on culture and sen-
Lesions found especially on the front feet.
sitivity for 6-8 weeks and for at least 2 weeks
Interdigital erythema with pustules, nodules,
beyond clinical cure. Secondary infection is
fistulae, haemorrhagic bullae, fistulae, ulcers.
common and thus should be eliminated in all
Exudate variable, may be serosanguinous or
cases before any anti-inflammatory therapy is
haemorrhagic.
prescribed.
Pruritus depends
6 on cause, but usually
Cleansing antibacterial wipes may be useful
 painful, dog often lame.
 for therapy and for maintenance after resolu-
Predisposed breeds: English bulldog, Great
tion.
Dane, English bull terrier, Boxer, German
Foot soaks may be useful for 10-15 minute
shepherd dog, Labrador retriever, golden re-
period in antibacterial washes, e.g. acetic
triever.
acid, chlorhexidine, ethyl lactate or regular
shampoos, if the dog will allow it.
Diagnosis
Topical antibiotics - fusidic acid (mupirocin
As furunculosis, including the following:
2% should be avoided in view of its use
in cases of MRSA). Especially useful for
Cytology useful to assess degree of infection
 treatment of early superficial lesions and for
 and make decision such as whether culture is
maintenance once deep infection has been
needed:
treated.
  Mixed  inflammatory infiltrate usually
Sterile dermal granulomas - prednisolone
cocci (Staphylococcus spp.) occasionally
1 mg/kg po sid for 10 days, then alternate
rods. If rods are present tissue culture in-
days.
Protection of feet - boots, etc. Useful in
dicated.
suppurative to pyogranuloma-
chronic cases where there is pronounced sec-
tous perifolliculitis, folliculitis, furunculosis.
ondary changes to the feet, such as abnormal
Nodular to diffuse pyogranulomatous der-
healing of the pads that does not allow natu-
matitis. Intralesional bacteria may be difficult
ral weight bearing.
to find.
 Fusion podoplasty can be undertaken as a sal-
Investigation of underlying disease may in-
vage procedure in severe cases whereby all
clude the following:
diseased interdigital tissue is removed and the
Radiography for bony changes underly-
digits are fused together.
口
 ing cutaneous lesions, radiopaque foreign
bodies.
German shepherd dog pyoderma
口
MRI may be necessary on occasions to
identify foreign material.
Deep folliculitis/furunculosis/cellulitis often idio
Routine blood samples - endocrine tests.
 pathic of middle-aged German shepherd dogs and
Allergy investigation.
German shepherd dog crosses of both sexes.
口
Cause and pathogenesis
Treatment
It is thought that these dogs have an inherited im-
Single lesions:
 mune incompetence triggered through an insult
to the skin or immune system. Familial predispo-
Exploration of lesion under anaesthetic, flush
sition is often seen.
dilute chlorhexidine/EDTA chlorhexidine
Bacterial infection is usually with coagulase
Antibiotics often not necessary.
positive Staphylococcus spp. However in chronic
cases, especially those that have had multiple an-
Multiple lesions:
tibiotic treatments, overgrowth with commensal
bacteria can cause infection.
Treatment of specific underlying disease is
Many contributory factors, no one cause in all
essential.
cases:
Bacterial skin disease
45
Food trial
口
Allergy tests
口
 Skin scrapes and biopsies for demodicosis
Treatment
 Important to identify and treat any contribu-
tory factors.
Antibiotic and topical treatment as furuncu-
losis.
 Dogs benefit from antibacterial soaks, gentle
shampoo therapy and whirlpool baths.
Clinical course variable; some cases resolve
Figure 4.34  Severe furunculosis on the medical aspect of the
with treatment, especially if an underlying
hind leg in German shepherd dog pyoderma.
cause can be identified.
In severe cases, relapses are common and
Endocrine diseases especially hypothyroid-
these dogs require lifetime treatment.
ism, also hyperadrenocorticism.
Allergy especially flea allergic dermatitis, also
Acral lick granuloma
atopy, food allergy.
 For investigation and underlying causes, see
Clinical signs
Chapter 16 - Psychogenic skin disease.
s o iq s aq re si
There is almost always a deep infective pro-
on dorsum, rump, ventral abdomen, uncom-
cess associated with this disease.
monly legs, head, neck.
Bacterial infection should be treated as lo-
Lesions may start as typical signs of super-
calised furunculosis.
ficial pyoderma with papules, pustules but
progress to deep-seated folliculitis/furuncu-
Anaerobic cellulitis
losis, ulcers, haemorrhagic bullae, exudative
Deep bacterial infection dissecting through tissue
lesions with serosanguineous exudate (Figure
planes. Uncommon in dogs and rare in cats.
4.34).
Skin: painful and discoloured.
Cause and pathogenesis
Variable degrees of pruritus but can be severe
self-inflicted trauma due to pruritus.
Commonly
 seen after puncture wounds, es-
Dogs
debilitated,
anorexic,
pyrexic
with
Infection can also occur after surgery, trauma
weight loss seen in severe cases.
(Figure 4.35), burns and neoplasia.
May also result as a progression from inade-
Diagnosis
As furunculosis.
quately treated superficial pyoderma.
Cytology
- mixed inflammatory infltrate
with bacteria often cocci (Staphylococcus
Clinical signs
spp.); however, rods can be seen.
 Poorly demarcated lesions, oedema, swelling
 Antibiotic therapy is best based on culture
and necrosis.
and sensitivity taken from tissue culture.
Skin friable, dark, discoloured and will slough
Strenuous efforts should be made to identify
easily.
 any underlying factors; supplementary tests
 Malodorous discharge from sinus tracts and
should include the following:
furuncles often with crepitus.
 Routine haematology and biochemistry
 Bacteria involved include Clostridium spp.
口
口
Thyroid function test
and Bacteroides spp. (Figure 4.36).
High levels of ectoparasite control espe-
口
Animal systemically ill, pyrexic, anorexic and
cially fleas and scabies
lethargic.
46
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Uncommon pyogranulomatous
bacterial infections
(a)  Bacterial pseudomycetoma
(b]  Mycobacterial infection
(c) Opportunistic mycobacteria
(d)Feline leprosy
(e) Actinomycosis
(f)Actinbacillosis
(g)Nocardiosis
Figure 4.35 Anaerobic infection on the shoulder of a
Bacterial pseudomycetoma
 Pomeranian after a bite wound.
(botryomycosis)
Diagnosis
Chronic pyogranulomatous infection caused by
History and clinical signs.
 Exudative cytology - degenerate polymorphs
non-branching bacteria, which form tissue gran-
ules. Uncommon disease in dogs and cats.
with bacteria, rods and cocci.
Skin scrapings.
Culture and sensitivity should be for both aer-
Cause and pathogenesis
obic and anaerobic infection from discharge
Usually
coagulase positive Stapbylococcus
or from tissue culture.
spp., less commonly Pseudomonas spp., Pro-
teus spp.,Streptococcus spp.and Actinobacil-
Treatment
lus spp
 Surgical debridement may be necessary.
Commonly seen after puncture wounds pen-
Antibiotics based on culture and sensitiv-
etrating injury, bites, foreign body reaction.
ity may require 8-12 weeks of therapy and
Pyogranuloma forms as host contains infec-
should be for 2 weeks beyond clinical cure.
tion but cannot eliminate it.
Useful drugs include clindamycin, cephal-
osporins and metronidazole.
Clinical signs
Topical therapy as furunculosis with antibac-
Firm nodules usually non-painful and non-
terial shampoos and soaks. Animals benefit
pruritic. May be single or multiple.
from whirlpool baths.
Purulent discharge contains small white tis-
sue grains (which are macroscopic colonies
of bacteria).
Site depends on initial insult; any area of body
can be affected but extremities common.
Lesions usually insidious onset.
Differential diagnosis
Other infectious granulomas:
口
actinomycosis
口
nocardiosis
口
mycobacteria
口
Yersinia pestis (cat)
Figure 4.36 Anaerobic infection with Bacteroides spp. in a
Eumycotic mycetoma
dog with chronic pododermatitis.
 Dermatophytic pseudomycetoma
Bacterial skin disease
47
Systemic mycosis
 Sterile pyogranulomatous disease
Neoplasia
Diagnosis
 History and clinical signs especially presence
of tissue grains.
Cytology of exudates - typically neutrophils
and macrophages with granules that are com-
posed of dense bacterial colonies.
Skin biopsy - examination should include
special fungal and bacterial stains. Typical
 picture nodular to diffuse pyogranulomatous
dermatitis and panniculitis with tissue grains
Figure 4.37Mycobacterial infection on ventral abdomen of
containing bacteria.
cat. (Source: Copyright 2008, Ellie Mardell.}
Treatment
Variable malodorous yellow/green discharge
- no tissue grains present.
Nodules need to be surgically excised.
Associated anorexia, pyrexia, and lymphade-
 Post-operative antibiotics should be given for
nopathy.
at least 4 weeks based on tissue culture.
Without surgery antibiotics are rarely effec-
Differential diagnosis
tive alone.
 Prognosis after appropriate therapy is good.
As bacterial pseudomycetoma.
Diagnosis
Mycobacterial infections
 Radiography of chest to check for pulmonary
lesions.
Cutaneous form of tuberculosis. Very rare my-
Biopsy should include special stain for my-
cobacterial infection in dogs and cats.
cobacteria (Ziehl-Neelson) - nodular to
diffuse pyogranulomatous dermatitis with
Cause and pathogenesis
variable numbers of intracellular acid fast,
positive bacilli.
 Most commonly, infection is passed from hu-
 Culture - laboratory needs to be alerted to
 mans and contaminated meat or milk.
use special media to harvest bacteria.
Usually caused by Mycobacterium tubercu-
 Bacille Calmette-Guerin (BCG) or purified
losis, Mycobacterium bovis and Mycobac-
protein derivative intradermal test. Erythema
terium tuberculosis-bovis.
with central necrosis is seen at the injection
Rarely M. avium complex - environmental
site 10-14 days if a positive result occurs.
 saprophyte of less public health concern.
Treatment
dinical signs
Public health authority should be notified and
 Respiratory and gastrointestinal signs most
asked for guidance.
common, leading to weight loss, cough, dys-
M. tuberculosis and M. bovis - euthanasia
pnoea, vomiting or diarrhoea.
due to public health risk.
Cutaneous lesions present as single/multiple
 If euthanasia is not an option then chemother-
ulcers, abscesses, plaques and nodules (Figure
apy may be useful in some cases (see
4.37), especially on head, neck and limbs.
Table 4.5).
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Table 4.5 Possible therapies for tuberculosis.
Mycobacterium
Drugs and dose rate
M. tubercufosis
Dogs and cats: isoniazid
10-20 mg/kg po sid plus
ethambutol 15 mg/kg im sid
Dogs only: pyrazinamide
15-40 mg/kg po sid plus
rifampin 10-20 mg/kg bid/sid
M. bovis
Cats after surgical excision:
rifampin 4 mg/kg po sid
 Cats: rifampin 10-20 mg/kg
Figure 4.38 Atypical mycobacteria infection in flank
M. tubercufosis/
M. bovis
 po sid plus enrofloxacin 5-10
snid pq/pis od sy/u
clarithromycin5-10 mg/kg
Not considered to be a zoonotic risk or con-
po bid
tagious to other animals.
M. avium
Dogs and cats: Doxycycline
10 mg/kg po bid or
Clinical signs
clofazimine 4 mg/kg po sid
plus enrofloxacin 5-10 mg/kg
Lesions develop over several weeks at any site,
po sid/bid plus clarithromycin
usually localised at the site of inoculation.
5 mg/kg po bid
 Present as chronic non-healing abscesses with
fistulae, focal purple depressions intermin-
gled with punctuate ulcers that drain serosan-
 M. avium - antibiotic therapy may be used
guinous or purulent discharge.
based on culture and sensitivity. Surgical re-
Most commonly found caudal abdomen,
moval of lesions or cryosurgery often pro-
lower back and pelvic areas, especially in
duces only temporary success.
cats adipose tissue of inguinal and caudal ab-
domen.
Pain and lymphadenopathy variable.
Opportunistic mycobacterial infections
■
 Lesions can expand to involve large areas of
abdomen.
Granulomatous disease caused by atypical my-
 Dissemination to internal organs is rare.
cobacterium, rare in dogs and uncommon in
Cats usually depressed, lethargic, anorexic,
cats.
reluctant to move.
Cause and pathogenesis
Differential diagnosis
 Free living saprophytic organisms usually
As bacterial pseudomycetoma.
harmless but can be facultative pathogens
when inadvertently inoculated into the skin,
usually through bites (Figure 4.38).
Diagnosis
Obese animals may be predisposed.
History and clinical signs.
Sources of infection include soil and artif-
Cytology best undertaken by fine needle aspi-
cial and natural water sources. Facultative
rates of closed lesions. Findings neutrophils,
pathogens include M. fortuitum, M. chelonei,
 macrophages. Intracellular acid fast bacilli
M. xenopi, M. smegmatis, M. phlei, M. ther-
difficult to see with routine stains.
moresistible and M. visibilis. Cats most com-
Mycobacterial culture often successful in iso-
monly M. fortuitum and M. chelonei.
lating organism compared to those of leprosy.
Bacterial skin disease
49
Table 4.6   Antibiotics useful for therapy of opportunistic
Cause and Pathogenesis
mycobacteria.
 Infection caused by two poorly characterised
mycobacterial species.
Sna
Dose rate
Agents are difficult to culture and only iden
tified on stained biopsy sections.
Thought to be caused by Mycobacterium lep-
Ciprofloxacin
62.5-125 mg/cat po bid
raemurium and an un-named mycobacterial
Clarithromycin
5-10 mg/kg po bid
species.
Clofazimine
8 mg/kg po sid
Doxycycline or
5-12.5 mg/kg po bid or
Clinical signs
minocycline
25-50 mg/cat po tid or bid 
M. lepraemurium: young cats <4 years of age:
immediately after meals
Enrofloxacin 
5-15 mg/kg po bid or 25-75
mg/cat po sid (use with care
Rapidly progressive lesions in that wides-
in cats due to potential retinal
pread involvement may only take 2 months.
toxicity}
Lesions are non-painful: single or multiple
Marbofloxacin
2.75-5.5 mg/kg po bid
nodules often with non-healing fistulae. Le-
 sions of variable size: a few mm up to 4 cm.
Lesions can be found at any site but usu-
ally found on head or extremities as single
Biopsy reveals nodular to diffuse pyogranu-
or groups of nodules.
lomatous dermatitis and panniculitis. Intrale-
Cat systemically well, no systemic spread to
sional organisms may be difficult to find.
internal organs.
Treatment
 Unknown species: older cats >9 years with im-
munosuppressive disease, e.g. FeLV:
Spontaneous resolution uncommon.
Wide surgical excision of infected tissue is
Lesions start as localised, non-painful, non-
necessary, taking care not to spread infection
along tissue grains.
ulcerated subcutaneous and cutaneous nod-
 Chemotherapy for relapses or if surgery not
ules on head or extremities.
possible.
 Lesions spread slowly over months to years
Antibiotics based on sensitivity needed for
and will occasionally affect internal organs.
long courses, 3-6 months, and should be con-
tinued for 6-8 weeks after clinical cure. Useful
Differential diagnosis
drugs are listed in Table 4.6.
As bacterial pseudomycetoma.
Doxycycline may be useful prophylactically
after penetrating wounds in cats to prevent
Diagnosis
colonisation with atypical mycobacteria.
 Prognosis for cure is poor, although appropri-
History and clinical signs.
ate therapy and long-term therapy will allow
Cytology from a fine needle aspirate or an
the animal to live a good quality of life.
impression smear - mixed inflammatory infil-
trate with some intracellular acid fast bacilli
that do not stain on routine smears.
Feline leprosy syndrome
 Biopsy reveals diffuse pyogranulomatous der-
matitis and panniculitis with intracellular
Granulomatous infection thought to be caused by
and extracellular acid fast bacilli. M. lep-
two different acid fast organisms. Uncommon dis-
raemurium lesions tend to have caseous
ease of cats.
necrosis and moderate numbers of bacteria,
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
510
Un-named bacilli have no caseous necrosis
Nodules range from a few mm to 5 cm in size
 and large numbers of bacilli.
and are non-painful and non-pruritic.
Culture is almost always negative due to dif-
Most commonly, lesions have been described
ficulty in growing the organisms.
on the head and dorsal ear folds.
Polymerase chain reaction techniques can be
Dogs are systemically well, no spread to in-
used to identify the organisms DNA.
ternal organs has been recognised.
Treatment
Differential diagnoses
M.lepraemurium:
As bacterial pseudomycetoma.
Complete surgical removal carries the highest
Diagnosis
success rate for single or well-circumscribed
History and clinical signs.
lesions. Risk with surgery of spreading infec-
Cytology from a fine needl aspirate: mixed
tion along tissue lines.
inflammatory infltrate mostly macrophages
 If surgical removal is not possible then medi-
with a few to moderate numbers of medium
cal therapy can be employed:
length intracellular ( within macrophages) and
 Clofazimine 8-10 mg/kg po sid or 50 mg/
extracellular acid fast bacilli that do not stain
cat po every 48 hours. Long courses of
therapy are needed and for at least 2-3
on routine smears.
 Biopsy reveals diffuse pyogranulomatous der-
months after clinical cure.
matitis and panniculitis with intracellular and
extracellular acid fast bacilli
Unknown mycobacterium:
Culture negative due to difficulty growing the
organisms.
Surgical excision is rarely possible.
Polymerase chain reaction techniques used to
Medical therapy may be useful using
identify novel organisms DNA.
clarithromycin 62.5 mg/cat po bid and ri-
fampin 10-15 mg/kg po sid; therapy needs
Treatment
to be for several months and for at least
2 months beyond clinical cure.
Self-limiting disease as lesions regress within
3-4 weeks.
If lesions do not resolve then excisional
surgery is best form of therapy.
Canine leproid granuloma syndrome
In severe refractory cases combination ther-
Cutaneous mycobacterial disease of dogs caused
apy with rifampin and clarithromycin or ri-
fampin and doxycycline may be used.
by an unknown mycobacterium.
Cause and pathogenesis
Actinomycosis
Thought to be caused by an environmental my-
cobacterium that is inoculated into the skin of
Pyogranulomatous or suppurative disease caused
dogs by biting flies. It has been reported on the
by Gram positive anaerobic flamentous Actino-
African continent, America, New Zealand and
myces organisms, including A.viscosus., A.odon
Australia.
tolyticus. Rare in cats, uncommon in dogs.
Clinical signs
Cause and pathogenesis
Lesions appear as single to multiple well-
Opportunistic commensals of gastrointestinal
circumscribed subcutaneous nodules.
tract.
Bacterial skin disease
51
Infection caused by contamination of pene-
Table 4.7Drug therapies for Actinomycosis.
tating wounds with Actinomyces spp., espe-
cially seen in outdoor and hunting dogs.
Drug
Dose rate
dinical signs
Penicillin G
Dogs:
potassium po, sq,
im, iv OR
60,000 U/kg tid 
Penicillin V
Insidious disease lesions can occur up to
 potassium po
2 years after injury.
Clindamycin
 5-10 mg/kg sq bid 
 Firm to fluctuant painful abscesses seen at any
Erythromycin
10 mg/kg po tid 
site.
Minocycline
5-25 mg/kg iv or po bid 
 Fistulae and exudate variable, discharge vari-
Amoxicillin 
 20-40 mg/kg im, sq or po qid
able colour and consistency usually malodor-
ous.
Yellow-tan soft granules (macroscopic colo-
nies of actinomycetes) seen in 50% of cases.
Treatment
 Infection may spread to involve other organs:
Wide surgical excision preferable - risk of
E.g. osteomyelitis, abdominal or thoracic cav-
spread of infection along tissue planes.
ity.
Debulk and chemotherapy if surgery not pos-
sible.
Cats:
 Penicillin G potassium drug of choice. Other
suitable drugs are listed with this in Table 4.7.
Treatment is needed for 1 month after com-
Most commonly seen as a pyothorax or as
plete remission, minimum 3-4 months.
subcutaneous abscesses.
Relapses common, prognosis for complete
Exudate from abscess malodorous, serosan-
cure is guarded.
guinous to purulent.
Differential diagnosis
Actinobacillosis
As bacterial pseudomycetoma especially nocar-
diosis.
Pyogranulomatous disease caused by Gram nega-
tive aerobic coccobacillus Actinobacillus ligniere-
sii. Rare disease in dogs and cats.
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
Cause and pathogenesis
Direct smear of fine needle aspirates with
Commensal of the oral cavity.
Gram stain - suppurative to pyogranuloma-
 Infection occurs by contamination of injury
tous inflammation with mixed population of
around face and mouth.
bacteria. Actinomycetes appear as Gram pos-
itive beaded filamentous organisms.
Clinical signs
Anaerobic culture is needed to identify organ-
isms that can be diffcult to culture.
Lesions insidious onset, develop over weeks
 Biopsy reveals nodular to diffuse suppurative
to months.
 to pyogranulomatous dermatitis plus panni-
Painful abscesses often neck and mouth.
culitis. May contain tissue grains of Gram
 Exudate thick white/green - odourless.
 positive filamentous organisms.
Yellow sulphur granules often present.
52Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Differential diagnosis
As bacterial pseudomycetoma.
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
 Direct smear of fine needle aspirate - Gram
stain. Mixed inflammatory infltrate Gram
negative coccobacilli.
Aerobic culture of pus.
 Biopsy - nodular to diffuse suppurative to
pyogranulomatous dermatitis plus panniculi-
tis. Tissue grains usually present
Treatment
Wide surgical excision.
Drainage, curettage 
2 and chemotherapy if
surgery not possible.
Useful drugs include sodium iodide (20 mg/
Figure 4.39 Nocardia infection on the footpad.
 1S %0 10 / 70 10 
twice daily), streptomycin, sulphonamides,
Systemic signs include pyothorax, pyrexia,
and tetracycline.
 Treatment for 1 month after remission ther-
depression, inappetance and dyspnoea.
apy for a minimum 3-4 months.
Neurological signs may be present.
 Relapses common and prognosis is guarded.
Differential diagnosis
Nocardiosis
As bacterial pseudomycetoma.
Pyogenic and suppurative infection caused by
Gram positive, partially acid fast branch-
Diagnosis
ing filamentous aerobe Nocardia sp. especially
History and clinical signs.
N.asteroides, N.brasiliensis Uncommon in dogs
Direct smear of fine needle aspirate - Gram
and rare in cats.
stain. Nocardia differ to Actinomyces spp. as
 partial acid fast and branch at right angles,
Cause and pathogenesis
can look like Chinese characters.
 Soil saprophytes normally non-pathogenic.
Aerobic culture needed for isolation.
Infection by wound contamination, inhala-
 Biopsy reveals a nodular to diffuse dermatitis
tion and ingestion.
with panniculitis often with tissue grains.
 Common in immuno-compromised animals.
Treatment
Clinical signs
Surgical drainage in combination with antibi-
Localised nodules with cellulites and abscess
otic therapy.
formation. Secondary ulceration and fistulous
 Antibiotic therapy based on culture and sen-
tracts.
sitivity where possible.
 Lesions tend to occur on areas of wounding,
Useful drugs include potentiated sulphon-
i.e. the limbs, feet (Figure 4.39) and abdomen
amides, ampicillin combined with erythr-
(cats).
 omycin or cephalosporin.
Bacterial skin disease
65
Treatment should be for at least 1 month after
Diagnosis
remission and a minimum 3-4 months.
History and clinical signs.
Prognosis guarded.
Cytology of exudates or lymph node aspi-
 rate mixed inflammatory infltrate with small
Gram negative bipolar coccobacilli
Plague
Culture of exudate.
Immunofluorescence of impression smears
Rare zoonotic disease caused by facultative anaer-
or polymerase chain reaction technique of
obic Gram negative coccobacillus Yersinia pestis.
exudates or lymph node aspirate to detect
Dogs resistant to infection. Uncommon disease in
Yersinia pestis antigen.
cats but they are susceptible.
Serology - fourfold increase in antibody to
Yersinia pestis in two samples taken 14 days
Cause and pathogenesis
apart.
Yersinia cannot penetrate broken skin but can
Treatment
invade mucous membranes.
Cats are infected when eating infected rodent,
 Prompt therapy important due to rapid and
which act as the reservoir for infection, and
fatal progression of the disease.
are bitten by rodent fleas, which act as the
 Barrier nursing should be practiced and an-
vector for Yersinia.
imals should be isolated as any fluids from
3 forms recognised - bubonic, pneumonic and
infected animals are contagious.
septicaemic plague. Bubonic is most common
Antibiotics should be started at the earli-
Incubation period 1-2 days by ingestion or in-
est possible opportunity and given parenter-
halation but 2-6 days by flea bite, penetrating
ally to avoid risk to veterinary staff or
wound or mucous membrane.
owner. A minimum of 3 weeks is required
Humans become infected by
 cats bringing
and should be extended well beyond clinical
home fleas or dead rodents or from feline
cure.
body fluids, e.g. pus, saliva.
Antibiotics based on culture and sensitivity
where possible. Useful drugs are listed in
Table 4.8.
dinical signs
 Flea treatment with a rapidly acting adulticide
 Usually occurs as an acute and fatal disease;
is essential.
50% of cases bubonic plague present with
Abscesses should be lanced and flushed with
skin signs.
0.025% chlorhexidine.
Localised abscesses occur near infection site,
Asymptomatic in contacts may be treated
especially head and neck. Often lymph node
with tetracycline 20 mg/kg po bid for 7 days.
 abscessation occurs (bubo) with accompany-
Prognosis is very poor unless cases are caught
ing lymphadenopathy.
early.
Septicaemic and pneumonic form less com-
mon. Seen as pyrexia, anorexia, depression --
Table 4.8 Drugs useful for therapy of plaque.
up to 75 % mortality, often not diagnosed un-
til advanced and fatal.
Drugs
Dosage
Differential diagnosis
As bacterial pseudomycetoma as well as
Gentamicin
 2-4 mg/kg im or sq sid or bid
 Chloramphenicol
15 mg/kg im or iv bid
Trimethoprim
15 mg/kg im or iv bid
Wound infections
sulphadiazine
Cat abscesses
54Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
L-form infections
Cause and pathogenesis
Spread by hard-shelled ticks of the genus Ixodes.
Skin infection caused by cell wall deficient bacte-
ria similar to Mycoplasma spp. Disease is uncom-
Clinical signs
 mon in cats and rare in dogs.
Most common signs not cutaneous but pol-
Cause and pathogenesis
yarthropathy.
 Cutaneous lesions very rare and variable, tend
Mode of infection is usually by contamination of
to occur 1-2 weeks at site of tick bite.
bite wounds or surgical wounds.
 Urticaria, papules, acute moist dermatitis has
all been recorded.
dinical signs
Cutaneous
s signs include persistent and
Diagnosis
spreading cellulitis and synovitis, exudate
History and clinical signs.
non-odorous, often over joints.
Serology - cross reactivity is seen with other
Systemic signs include commonly pyrexia, de-
species of spirochetes, so positive titre not di-
 pre ssed and polyarthropathy.
 agnostic and a rising or falling titre is more
useful.
Differential diagnosis
As bacterial pseudomycetoma.
Treatment
 Antibiotics, especially tetracycline and ampicillin
Diagnosis
10-14 days.
History and clinical signs.
 Cytology of exudates - pyogranulomatous in-
flammation, bacteria cannot be seen.
Bacterial skin infections associated with
Culture unsuccessful unless special L-form
medium is used.
primary immunodeficiencies
 Biopsy - pyogranulomatous dermatitis with
 non-specific non-diagnostic pattern.
Primary immunological defects lead to increased
Electron microscopy of fresh tissue reveals
susceptibility to infection. These diseases should
pleomorphic cell wall deficient organisms in
 be considered when infection occurs in young an-
macrophages.
imals where no cause can be identified.
Treatment
Severe combined immunodeficiency
 Usually unresponsive to range of antibiotics
usually used to treat pyoderma.
Complete response seen to tetracycline at
Both B and T cell lines non-functional.
dose of 22 mg/kg po tid or doxycycline 5-10
mg/kg po bid. Treatment should be continued
Clinical signs
for 7-10 days beyond clinical cure.
 Young puppies, basset hound predisposed.
Severe bacterial pyoderma, otitis, diarrhoea
and respiratory infections.
Lyme borreliosis
 Death before 4 months of age.
Multisystemic disease caused by Gram negative
Treatment
spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi. Rare disease in
both dogs and cats.
Usually ineffective.
Bacterial skin disease
55
Cyclic haematopoiesis
Cyclic fluctuation of all cellular blood elements.
Clinical signs
Cyclic signs are seen during signs of neu-
 ropaenia approximately 8-12 days lasting
2-4 days.
Grey collies predisposed.
 Recurrent gastrointestinal and skin infections 
occur.
Haemorrhages associated with thrombocy-
topenia.
Life expectancy approximately 3 years.
Treatment
Supportive antibiotic therapy-bactericidal drugs.
Figure 4.40 Shar-pei with suspected IgA cleficiency.
Selective IgA deficiency
Granulocytopathy syndrome
Deficiency of mucosal antibody IgA
 Leukocyte adhesion molecule deficiency.
dinical signs
Clinical signs
Young dogs especially shar-peis (Figure 4.40).
Young dogs, Irish setter predisposed.
Upper respiratory tract infections, otitis,
Recurrent bacterial dermatitis, gingivitis,
staphylococcal pyoderma and atopic dermati-
osteomyelitis.
tis.
Not usually life threatening.
Treatment
Supportive antibiotic therapy - bactericidal drugs.
Treatment
Chronic antibiotic therapy.
C3 deficiency
Transient hypogammagfobufinaemia
Lack of complement component important for a
Delayed onset of immunoglobulin synthesis seen
bacterial opsonisation.
in young puppies.
Clinical signs
dinical signs
 Young dogs, Brittany spaniel predisposed.
 Bacterial upper respiratory tract and skin infec-
 Recurrent Gram negative bacterial infections
tions start at 2-3 months of age.
and Clostridia spp.
Treatment
Treatment
Spontaneous recovery occurs at 5-6 months of
Supportive antibiotic therapy - bactericidal drugs
age.
when possible.
56Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Selected references and further reading
Hall, J.A. (2004) Antimicrobial therapy. In:
Campbell, K.L. (ed). Small Animal Dermatol-
ogy Secrets. Pp. 57-63. Hanley and Belfus,
Davidson, E.B. (1998) Managing bite wounds in
Philadelphia
dogs and cats. Part I. Compend Contin Educ,
Ihrke, PJ. and DeManuelle, T.C. (1999) Ger-
20,811
man shepherd dog pyoderma: an overview and
Davidson, E.B. (1998) Managing bite wounds in
antimicrobial management. Compend Contin
 dogs and cats. Part I1. Compend Contin Educ,
Educ, 21,44-49
20,974
Medleau, L. and
1 Hnilica, K.(2006) Bacte-
DeBoer, D.J. (1995) Management of chronic and
rial skin disease. In: Small Animal Dermatol-
recurrent pyoderma in the dog. In: Bonagura,
Ogy: A Color Atlas and Therapeutic Guide.
J.D. (ed). Kirk Current Veterinary Therapy XI1.
2nd edn. pp. 26-61. WB Saunders, Philadel-
p. 611. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
phia
DeBoer, D.J. and Pukay, B.P.(1993) Recurrent py-
Scott, D.W. et al. (2001) Bacterial Skin Disease
oderma and immunostimulants. In: Ihrke, P.J.
Muller andKirk's Small Animal Dermatology.
Et al. (eds). Advances in Veterinary Dermatol-
6th edn. pPp. 274-335. WB Saunders, Philadel-
ogy I1. p. 443. Pergamon, Oxford
phia
Greene, C.E. et al.
(1998)
Antibacterial
Thomas, R.C. (2004) Principles of topical ther-
chemotherapy. In: Greene, C.E. and Kersey, R.
apy. In: Campbell, K.L. (ed). Small Animal Der-
(eds). Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat.
matology Secrets. pp. 71-85. Hanley and Bel-
Pp. 185-205. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
fus, Philadelphia
Fungal skin
disease
A mycosis (pl. mycoses) is a disease caused by a
Zoonotic infection (Figure 5.1).
fungus.
Transmission occurs from
Mycoses can be classified according to their
口
infected animal (hair, scale),
depth of infection:
口
environmental contamination,
fomites (grooming equipment, bedding).
(1) Superficial
口
(2)  Subcutaneous (intermediate)
(3)Systemic (deep)
Source of infection:
M.canis
zoophilic
reservoir
dermatophyte
Superficial mycoses
usually cats
T.mentagrophytes
zoophilic
reservoir
 dermatophyte
rodents
Fungal infections of the superficial layers of skin,
M. gypseum
geophilic
reservoir soil
hairs and claws:
dermatophyte
T. erinacei
zoophilic
reservoir
(a)  Dermatophytosis
dermatophyte
hedgehogs
(b)Candidiasis
M. persicolor
zoophilic
reservoir
(c)  Malasseziasis
dermatophyte
small rodents
Dermatophytosis
Predisposing factors:
Dermatophytosis is an infection of the hair shaft
Strong breed predilections exist in Persian
and stratum corneum caused by keratophilic
cats (Figure 5.2), Jack Russell terriers (Fig-
fungi. Common in cats and dogs.
ure 5.3), and Yorkshire terriers appear to be
 predisposed.
Cause and pathogenesis
Cell mediated immunity is important; factors
Usually caused by Microsporum canis, Mi-
affecting this predispose to infection:
Crosporum gypseum,and Trichophyton men-
口
young animals - delayed development of
tagrophytes.
immunity and local skin mechanisms
58
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Figure 5.1 Ringworm lesion on owner caused by M. canis.
Figure 5.4 Superficial infection with M. canis of footpads
in a dog with hepatocutaneous disease due to a pancreatic
tumour.
口
viral infection (FeLV, FIV, FIP)
口
neoplasia (Figure 5.4)
口
poor nutrition
口
 anti-inflammatory or immunosuppressive
drug therapy
pregnancy/lactation
Clinical signs
Variable, dependent on type of fungus and
post-immune status, lesions may be localised
(Figures 5.5 and 5.6) or generalised (Fig-
Figure 5.2 Exfoliative erythroderma due to M. canis.
ure 5.7). Pruritus is mild.
Figure 5.3  Folliculitis on the lateral aspect of a Jack Russell
Figure 5.5 Scarring on the nose of a Jack Russell due to
terrier due to T. mentagrophytes.
7. mentagrophytes infection.
Fungal skin disease
59
Figure 5.6 Typical crusting and scaling periocular lesions of
M. canis in a collie.
Figure 5.9 Trichophyton infection of dog's leg.
Lesions heal leaving scarring alopecia.
M. persicolor infections often generalised se-
borrhoea plus papulopustular crusts on face.
Kerion localised, well-circumscribed exuda-
tive nodular lesion (Figure 5.10).
Onychomycosis is a common presentation in
dogs, very rare in cats. Usually Trichophy-
Figure 5.7 Diffuse alopecia with macular areas of hyperpig-
ton spp. can affect one or more digits caus-
mentation caused by M. canis.
ing paronychia and onychodystrophy (Figure
Classical' lesion, circular patches of alopecia
5.11).
cigarette ash' scale usually seen on ears and
 In cats dermatophytosis can present as mili-
extremities (Figure 5.8).
tary dermatitis (Figure 5.12).
Trichophyton infections also folliculitis and
Pseudomycetoma seen in Persian cats appears
furunculosis confined to single leg (Figure
as ulcerated, discharging subcutaneous nod-
5.9).
ules, especially on the trunk and tail base
(Figure 5.13).
Figure 5.8 Typical periocular grey crusting seen with
M. canis infection.
Figure 5.10 Kerion on carpus of dog.
60
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Figure 5.13 Pseudomycetoma in a Persian cat. (Source:
Picture courtesy R. Bond.}
Figure 5.11 Onychomycosis in a Labrador
Asymptomatic carrier state recognised in cats
Diagnosis
especially long-haired cats including Persians.
Carrier state rare in dogs, except possibly the
Ultraviolet ( Wood's lamp, Figure 5.14) exam-
Yorkshire terrier.
 ination of hairs - apple green fluorescence on
individually plucked hair shafts. Only 50%
Differential diagnosis
of M. canis infection fluoresces:
口荘
False negatives occur if Wood's lamp not
(a) Crusting follicular lesions:
warmed up, fluorescence destroyed by
Staphylococcal folliculitis
topical drugs, e.g. iodine.
口
False positives can occur if bacterial in-
■
Demodicosis
 fection is present (not apple green fluores-
Pemphigus foliaceus
cence), topical medication on the hair may
Miliary dermatitis in cats (allergic causes)
fluoresce.
Ectoparasites (scabies, cheyletiella)
Microscopy of plucked hairs or scale in 10%
(b) Kerion:
potassium hydroxide or mineral oil. In pos-
itive cases arthrospores are often visible on
 Acral lick granuloma
hair shafts (Figure 5.15); these may be diff-
Neoplasia especially squamous cell carci-
cult to find.
noma, mast cell tumour
Figure 5.12 Widespread papulocrustous dermatitis due to
Figure 5.14 Wood's lamp should be turned on and allowed
M. canis.
to warm up before being used.
Fungal skin disease
61
9
Figure 5.15 Arthrospores of M. canis on a plucked hair.
Fungal culture using the MacKenzie method
(Figures 5.16-5.19). Sterile toothbrush bru-
shed through coat then implanted into culture
medium. Dermatophyte test medium (DTM)
Figure 5.17 Reverse pigment M. canis on Sabouraud's
or Sabouraud's dextrose agar:
dextrose agar.
口荘
False negatives on DTM - some isolates
produce no colour change.
False positives on DTM - saprophytic
cular dermatitis, follicular orthokeratosis or
口
fungi cause colour changes (Figure 5.20).
parakeratosis. Fungal hyphae can be seen on
Biopsy not always diagnostic. Histopatholog-
normal stains or special fungal stains may be
ical findings variable include perifolliculitis,
necessary.
folliculitis, furunculosis, superficial perivas-
Figure 5.16 Colony morphology M. canis on Sabouraud's
Figure 5.18 Colony morphology
M
gypseumon
dextrose agar.
Sabouraud's dextrose agar.
62
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Apply shampoo or rinse to whole body twice
weekly (see Table 5.2).
All treatment should be continued for 2 weeks
after negative fungal cultures.
Mia
Systemic treatment:
99P
Indications
 generalised dermatophytosis
 and any local lesions unresponsive after 3-4
weeks of topical treatment. It is often possible
to resolve dermatophytosis in dogs with top-
ical therapy alone; in cats systemic therapy is
required in most cases.
All of the systemic drugs for dermatophytosis
are potentially teratogenic.
Systemic therapy is usually needed for a min-
imum of 4-6 weeks and often doubles this in
long-haired cats (see Tables 5.3 and 5.4).
Figure 5.19 Reverse pigment M. gypseum on Sabouraud's
Onychomycosis may require 6-9 months of
dextrose agar.
treatment
Treatment should continue until two negative
Treatment
cultures are obtained 3 weeks apart.
Animal
Topical treatment:
Environment including fomites
 Thorough cleaning is important. New types
 Localised lesions gentle clipping.
of vacuums that expel air may contaminate
Lotion or cream applied twice daily up to
the environment so should be used with
6 cm beyond active edge of the lesion until
care.
the lesions resolve (see Table 5.2).
Liquid disinfection is useful, provided the
Generalised lesions whole body clip (proba-
chemicals do not damage fabrics etc. Suit-
 bly not necessary if animal can be shampooed
adequately).
rite (1-10 dilution household bleach) and
enilconazole.
 Fogging may be useful in catteries and en-
vironments where fabrics cannot be treated
with liquid disinfectant, e.g. enilconazole
foggers.
Cattery management of dermatophytosis
General points:
 This is an expensive procedure if performed ade-
quately. Costing should be based on loss of rev-
enue through cessation of breeding programme
and selling of cats/kittens as well as treatment
 costs. It is sensible to prepare an estimate for your
Figure 5.20 False-positive colour change caused by sapro-
client before starting.
phytic fungi. Note colonies are black.
Fungal skin disease
63
Microconidia
Uncommon
Abundant
Abundant
Abundant
-ow weneip auin iz' aint
-o weieeip auil ez's ainy
Figure 5.24 Line diagram macro-
conidia T. mentagrophytes.
conidia M. persicolor.
conidia M. gypseum.
Appearance of macroconidia
conidia M. canis.
QLOLD-
Often terminal knob 
round tip, relatively
thin spinous walls
terminalknob
cigar shaped with
thin smooth walls
Sparse elongated,
thin, smooth walls 
spindle-shaped,
curved tip. Thick
ellipsoid-shaped,
Rare structures,
spinous wall
Multicellular 
Abundant
Abundant
short stalk.
 Reverse pigment 
 Pale yellow tan 
Peach rose/deep
Yellow/orange
Yellow buff tan
dark red brown
occasionally
brown
ochre
Culture characteristics on SBA
Table 5.1  Dermatophyte colony and microscopic morphology.
White buff
Cream-light
cinnamon
Light buff 
White-
then powdery with
central depression 
 cotton wool like 
finged periphery 
Initial growth
irregular fringe
Flat powdery
Flat,
T. mentagrophytes
(zoophilic form)
M. gypseum
M. persicolor
 Species
M. canis
64 Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Table 5.2 Drugs suitable for topical therapy of
Table 5.4 Protocol for therapy of dermatophytosis using
dermatophytosis.
pulse itraconazole.
Local lesions 
Ceneralised lesions
Alternate week protocol 
Weekend protocol
1% terbinafine cream
2% miconazole shampoo
Itraconazole is given
Itraconazole is given once
1 % clotrimazole cream,
once daily at a dose of
daily at a dose of 10 mg/kg
2% ketoconazole
shampoo
10 mg/kg for 2 weeks
for 2 weeks then each
lotion, solution 
then given for a week on
Saturday and Sunday as a
2% enilconazole cream
0.2% enilconazole
and a week off
weekend treatment
1-2% miconazole
2-4% lime sulphur
Continue until 2
Continue until 2 negative
cream, spray lotion
negative cultures 3
cultures 3 weeks apart
2% boric acid shampoo
weeks apart
Estimation of costs should include the follow-
Options for therapy
ing:
■
 Aim for complete eradication of dermato-
phytes from the cattery (Protocol 1).
Systemic drug therapy for all cats over the age
■
 Depopulation of the cattery (Protocol 2).
of 12 weeks (except pregnant individual who
■
Treatment of only those cats leaving the
 cannot be treated until after kittening) for up
premise (Protocol 3).
to 12-16 weeks for short-haired cats, more in
long haired.
 Topical therapy ± clipping.
Protocol 1: Complete eradication of
 Routine ectoparasitic control.
dermatophytes from the cattery (see Table 5.5)
Laboratory tests - multiple fungal culture ini-
Assessment of degree of infection:
Toothbrush cultures performed on all
tially to assess degree of cattery contamina-
口
tion and then at least three per cat before ces-
cats.
sation of therapy.
Toothbrush cultures from environment,
口
Treatment of the environment with liquid
e.g. soft furnishings, window ledges, heat-
disinfectants/foggers.
ing vents.
Table 5.3 Systemic therapy for dermatophytosis in dogs and cats.
Systemic drug
Dogs
Cats
Comments 
Griseofulvin (microsized)
50 mg/kg/day po sid
pis od Aep/ay/su 0s
Best given with fatty meal
Ketoconazole
10 mg/kg po sid/bid
p!g/p!s od /ay/ew 0l
 Best given with acid solution, e.g. tomato
juice. Rarely tolerated in cats due to G.1.
upsets. Hepatotoxic, effects cortisol and
sex hormone levels
traconazole
 5-10 mg/kg po sid 
 5-10 mg/kg po sid 
Well tolerated in cats. Best given with
food, can be used as pulse therapy (see
Table 5.3 below?
Terbinafine
30-40 mg/kg po sid 
30-40 mg/kg po sid 
Lufenuron 
Fungal skin disease
65
Table 5.5 Treatment groups used in therapy of dermatophytosis in a cattery.
Group 1
Group 2
 dno
Group 4
Cats
Queens
Positive cultures
Cats
Weekly treatment with lime
Topical therapy with an 
as Group 4
Topical therapy with lime
sulphur
 anti-fungal rinse or shampoo
sulphur every 5-7 days
 until kittening then as
 If any cats develop lesions
Systemic therapy pulse
Group 4
move to Group 4
itraconazole (see Table 5.3}
Continue to monitor this 
Sample cats after 3 weeks, then
group with cultures whilst
every 2 weeks until 2 negative
treating other groups
cultures 3 weeks apart; negative
 cats move to Group 1
Environment
Kittens
Negative cultures 
Environment
Weekly treatment with
Topical therapy until at least
as Group 1
Liquid disinfection
enilconazole and 5% sodium
12 weeks of age when
(enilconazole or 5% sodium 
hypochlorite
systemic therapy can be
hypochlorite} and enilconazole
started as Group 4
foggers twice weekly
Continue to monitor with
environmental samples
Close the cattery to all visitors, stop-breeding
 Repopulation after three negative cultures
 programmes, sale of kittens, etc.
from the environment 2 weeks apart.
 Isolate all cats that are culture negative in a
culture negative environment (Group 1).
Protocol 3: Treatment of only those cats leaving
Isolate all pregnant queens (Group 2)
the premise
Isolate all breeding males (Group 3). Two sep-
No attempt is made to treat any cats in the
arate groups, e.g. Group 3a (negative culture)
cattery that are accepted as having endemic
and Group 3b (positive culture) can be cre-
ringworm.
ated if necessary.
 Isolation facilities should be made available
 Isolate all other positive cats (Group 4).
for outgoing cats and kittens.
To prevent
cross-contamination to non-
The isolation facility allows any cat to be sep-
infected groups. All grooming equipment,
arated and treated with systemic and topical
feeding bowl, utensils, etc. should be confined
to each group. Where possible specifc per-
sons should be allocated to the care of each
group.
phur topically once weekly, during pregnancy.
 All cats should have routine ectoparasitic con-
Once kittens are born, start the queen on itra-
trol used on them throughout the treatment
conazole pulse treatment.
period.
At 4 weeks of age, culture the kittens and be-
kittens can be started on itraconazole at 12
weeks.
Protocol 2: Depopulation of the cattery
No cat should leave the cattery until three
 Rehoming or euthanasia (at owners request)
negative cultures have been obtained 2 weeks
of all infected animals.
apart.
Thorough decontamination of environment
This can be used for queens wishing to go out
(liquid disinfection/foggers).
to stud and for kittens to be sold.
66
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Bullous pemphigoid
Erythema multiforme
Leishmaniasis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
 Necrolytic migratory erythema
Vasculitis
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
Skin:
 Pyotraumatic dermatitis
Intertrigo
Figure 5.25 Mucocutaneous candidiasis of the periocular
skin in a dog with hyperadrenocorticism.
■
Erythema multiforme
Leishmaniasis
Candidiasis
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
Candidiasis is an opportunistic cutaneous infec-
tion due to the dimorphic fungus Candida spp.
Diagnosis
Rare infection in both dogs and cats.
History and clinical signs.
Cytology of exudates by smear or acetate tape
Cause and pathogenesis
reveals mixed inflammatory infltrate with
 Infection is caused by Candida spp., especially
typical budding yeasts and rare pseudohy-
Candida albicans,Candida parapsilosis.
phae.
Opportunistic infection caused by loss of in-
Culture on Sabouraud's dextrose agar not di-
agnostic as this is a normal mucosal inhabi-
to, e.g. trauma, burns, skin maceration.
tant.
Predisposing factors.
 Biopsy of lesions useful to confrm diagno-
 Immunosuppression through
sis. Shows parakeratotic hyperkeratosis, bud-
disease, e.g. diabetes melltus, hypera-
ding yeast with occasional hyphae in surface
口
drenocorticism, neoplasia,
keratin.
口冏
drug therapy, e.g. glucocorticoids, long-
term antibiotics.
Treatment
Clinical signs
Correction of underlying factors essential.
Mucocutaneous lesions and generalised dis-
 Lesions found at moist macerated areas of
skin and mucous membranes, e.g. ear, intert-
ease:
riginous areas, oral cavity (Figure 5.25).
Systemic therapy is needed for at least
4 weeks and until complete resolution of
 Mucous membranes lesions appear as single
to multiple malodorous shallow ulcers cov-
lesions.
口
Systemic treatment ketoconazole 5-10
ered in thick grey/white plaques with erythe-
mg/kg po sid, itraconazole 5-10 mg/kg po
matous margins.
sid, fluconazole 5 mg/kg po bid.
 Skin lesions appear as non-healing, oozing
erythematous plaques and ulcers. Crusted le-
sions can be seen around nail beds.
Cutaneous lesions
Differential diagnosis
Local lesions:
 Clipping and application of topical treat-
Mucocutaneous form:
ment three times daily (see Table 5.6).
口
Lesions should be treated until complete
 Pemphigus vulgaris
clinical cure.
Fungal skin disease
67
Table 5.6  Topical therapy suitable for local lesions of
Candidiasis.
Drug
Administration
Nystatin
100,000 u/g cream, ointment tid-qid
Miconazole
1-2% cream, spray, lotion bid-sid
Clotrimazole
1 % cream, lotion or solution qid-tid 
Amphotericin B
 3% cream, lotion or ointment tid-qid
Malasseziasis
Figure 5.26 Malassezia secondary to hyperthyroidism.
Malasseziasis is a surface infection, principally of
Chronic glucocorticoids therapy especially in
moist skin folds and the external ear canal. It is
allergic dogs.
very common in dogs and rare in cats.
Keratinisation disorders.
Neoplasia - thymoma (cat), paraneoplastic
Cause and pathogenesis
alopecia (cat).
In dogs the disease is caused by the skin commen-
sal Malassezia pachydermatis, in cats M. pachy-
Clinical signs
dermatitis is involved but M. sympodialis and M.
 No age or sex incidence.
globosa have also been implicated.
Cutaneous overgrowth of Malassezia spp. on
Predisposed breeds - West Highland white
terrier, basset hound, English Setters, poodle,
the skin leads to disease.
cocker spaniel, Jack Russell terrier, Shih-Tzu,
Invasion of superficial epidermal layers occurs
due to changes in surface microclimate by
springer spaniels, German shepherd dogs.
Seasonality depends on underlying factors.
increased sebum/cerumen production,
moist maceration of skin,
Dogs:
 trauma especially licking.
Lesions found most commonly on ears, lip
folds, interdigital spaces (Figure 5.27), ventral
In some animals a hypersensitivity reaction to
Malassezia has been identified. It is controversial
if this is a separate disease entity or merely pro-
duction of antibody in atopic animals in response
to cutaneous colonisation with yeast.
Predisposing factors:
Allergy - atopy, food allergy.
Bacterial infection.
Viral disease - FIV, FeLV, FIP.
Endocrine disease - hypothyroidism (dog),
hyperthyroidism (cat) (Figure 5.26), hypera-
drenocorticism.
 Internal disease, especially those affecting
lipid metabolism, pancreatic disease, diabetes
Figure 5.27 Malassezia of the interdigital spaces in a West
mellitus.
Highland white terrier.
68
Manual ofSkin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Figure 5.28 Malassezia in the body skin folds of a shar-pei.
Figure 5.30 Malassezia affecting the nail bed producing a
dark brown discharge.
neck, intertriginous areas (Figure 5.28), me-
dial thighs, axillae (Figure 5.29) and perianal
areas.
Cats:
 Pruritus variable but usually moderate to
severe, typically poorly responsive to anti-
Pruritus moderate to severe.
inflammatory therapy.
Greasy seborrhoea with erythema and alope-
Acutely - malodorous erythematous, greasy,
cia (Figure 5.31).
scaly plaques, macules and patches.
Dark brown/black ceruminous otitis.
Chronically - skin becomes lichenified, hyper-
Chronic chin acne.
 pigmented and hyperkeratotic.
Paronychia common with dark brown nail
Differential diagnosis
bed discharge (Figure 5.30).
Concurrent otitis externa often seen.
Allergy (food, atopy, fleas)
Staphylococcal folliculitis
Ectoparasites - scabies, demodex
Neoplasia (epitheliotropic lymphoma)
These diseases can occur concurrently  with
Malassezia dermatitis.
Figure 5.29  Generalised malassezia on the ventral abdomen
of an English bull terrier.
Figure 5.31   Malassezia secondary to hepatic carcinoma.
Fungal skin disease
69
Creams/lotion containing miconazole, enil-
conazole, clotrimazole.
Systemic treatment:
Treatment should be given until lesions resolve
and negative cytology is achieved:
Ketoconazole 5-10 mg/kg po sid/bid for 7
days until clinical cure.
Itraconazole 5-10 mg/kg po sid for 7 days
until clinical cure or as pulse therapy (see the
Figure 5.32 Purple staining peanut-shaped yeasts on tape
section on dermatophytosis).
strips stained with Diff-Quik.
When predisposing factors cannot be identi-
fied or treated adequately, chronic therapy is
indicated. Both ketoconazole and itracona-
Diagnosis
zole can be given at a full dose rate twice
History and clinical signs.
weekly for maintenance therapy.
Terbinafine 30 mg/kg po sid for 2-4 weeks
Cytology of skin scrapings, direct smears or
has been successful in some cases.
acetate tape impression smears stained with
Diff-Quik reveal typical budding yeasts that
 appear as dark blue/purple peanut-shaped or-
ganisms (Figure 5.32). Organisms usually nu-
Subcutaneous mycoses (interrmediate
merous but should be at least >2 per high
mycoses)
 power (100×) field. In hypersensitivity reac-
tions yeast may be sparse.
Fungal infections of viable skin, usually caused
Serology available commercially to look for
by infection of traumatised skin by saprophytes:
Malassezia IgE and intradermal allergy test-
ing can be performed to identify dogs with
(a)  Pseudomycetoma
‘Malassezia hypersensitivity'
(b)  Eumycotic mycetoma
Culture with special contact plates.
(c)Phaeohyphomycosis
Biopsy shows superficial perivascular to in-
(d)  Pythiosis
terstitial lymphohistiocytic
dermatitis with
(e)  Zygomycosis
yeasts in surface keratin.
(f)  Sporotrichosis
(g)Lagenidiosis
Treatment
Therapy of predisposing factors is essential.
Pseudomycetoma
Topical treatment:
Unusual form of dermatophytosis in which der-
Applied twice weekly to localised or gener-
matophilic fungi form hyphae in dermal and sub-
alised disease until a clinical improvement is
cutaneous tissue. Very rare in dogs and uncom-
seen, then reduced to every 10-14 days for
mon in cats.
maintenance.
Shampoo containing miconazole, chlorhex-
idine, selenium sulphide, ketoconazole, tar,
Cause and pathogenesis
boric acid. Baths may be followed by a rinse
Nodular lesions formed by infection of deep tissue
or the rinse can be used alone.
by dermatophytes. Differentiated from dermato-
 Rinses - enilconazole, lime sulphur.
phytosis by the fact that they are not restricted to
70Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
superficial tissue. The dermatophyte most com-
Ketoconazole and griseofulvin are generally
monly involved in cat lesions is M. canis. Persian
not as effective in therapy (for dose rates, see
cats appear to be highly predisposed. Yorkshire
the section on dermatophytosis).
terriers may also be at increased risk. M. canis
 and T. mentagrophytes most commonly isolated
Eumycotic mycetoma
in canine cases.
Owners need to be aware of zoonotic risk,
Skin infection caused by a range of saprophytic
which can persist for months.
environmental and pathogenic plant fungi. Un-
common to rare disease in dogs and cats.
Clinical signs
Lesions are usually non-painful, non-pruritic
Cause and pathogenesis
firm dermal or subcutaneous nodules.
Lesions are caused by wound contamina-
 Commonly nodules ulcerate and produce pu-
tion by soil saprophytes especially Pseu-
rulent exudate.
doallescheria boydii.
Lesions most commonly found on the trunck,
 Fungi form macroscopic colonies in the der-
flanks or tail.
mis and subcutis, which form tissue grains or
Animals commonly have concurrent der-
granules.
matophytosis.
Clinical signs
Differential diagnosis
Lesions usually solitary poorly defined nod-
Other deep bacterial and fungal infection
ules, especially on extremities (Figure 5.33),
Foreign body reactions
tend to be painful.
Neoplasia
Triad of signs typical of mycetoma:
口冏
Nodular swelling
Diagnosis
口
 Draining fistulas - serous, haemorrhagic
Cytology of exudates or fine needle aspirate
or purulent
reveals pyogranulomatous inflammation with
口
 Granules - macroscopic fungal colonies
fungal hyphae.
Dematiaceous fungi - black-grained myce-
Biopsy of lesions shows nodular to diffuse
toma, e.g. Curvularia geniculata, Madurella
pyogranulomatous dermatitis and panniculi-
spp.
tis with septate hyphae, chains of pseudohy.
Non-pigmented fungi - white-grained myce-
phae.
tomas, e.g. P. boydi, Acremonium spp.
Fungal culture of exudates, aspirate or tissue
collected at biopsy. M. canis most commonly
isolated.
Treatment
 Best response to therapy, and the best prog-
nosis for clinical cure is if both surgical and
 medical therapies are used concurrently.
 Lesions need to be removed surgically if pos-
sible.
Concurrent anti-fungal therapy is needed
 leading up to and for se veral weeks to months
post-operatively until complete clinical cure.
Systemic therapy most successful with itra-
Figure 5.33 Mycetoma on a cat's nose. (Source: Copyright
conazole 10 mg/kg po sid.
2008, Dr. Stephen Shaw.}
Fungal skin disease7
71
Medical therapy alone produces a poor re-
sponse, possible ketoconazole, itraconazole
5-10 mg/kg daily. Treatment should be con-
tinued for at least 2-3 months beyond clinical
cure.
Phaeohyphomycosis
 Cutaneous lesions formed by saprophytic fungi.
Uncommon disease in cats and rare in dogs. No
zoonotic risk to humans.
Cause and pathogenesis
Figure 5.34 Cytology of mycetoma. (Source: Copyright
Wound  contamination by  saprophytic fungi
2008, Dr. Stephen Shaw.}
found in soil and organic materials. No granules,
but fungi form pigmented hyphae. Causal organ-
Differential diagnosis
isms include Alternaria spp., Bipolaris spp., Cla-
dosporium spp., Curvularia spp., Exophiala spp.,
Sterile granulomas
Monilia spp., Ochroconis spp., Phialemonium
 Infectious granulomas, e.g. bacteria, fungi
spp., Phiaiophora spp., Pseudo microdochium
Foreign body granuloma
spp., Scolebasidium spp., Stemphilium spp.,Fon-
Neoplasia
secaea spp.
Cat bite abscess
 Plasma cell pododermatitis
Clinical signs
Diagnosis
Dogs:
History and clinical signs.
Single or multiple ulcerated subcutaneous
Cytology of aspirates, direct smears or
 nodules especially on extremities.
squashed preparations of grains reveal fungi;
Often underlying osteomyelitis.
cell infiltrate tends to be pyogranulomatous
 Disseminated disease has been reported.
(Figure 5.34).
Culture of grains or biopsy material on
Cats:
Sabouraud's dextrose agar. To decide if fungi
are acting as pathogens rather than contam-
Usually solitary subcutaneous nodules, ab-
inants, histopathological examination is re-
scess or cyst-like lesions that ulcerate and
quired.
 Biopsy reveals nodular to diffuse pyogranu-
drain.
lomatous dermatitis and panniculitis with ir-
 Lesions most commonly identified on extrem-
regularly shaped tissue grains. Tissue grains
ities (Figure 5.35) and face.
made up of broad, septate branching pig-
 Disseminated disease rare.
mented or non-pigmented fungal hyphae.
Differential diagnosis
Treatment
As eumycotic mycetoma.
No zoonotic risk to humans or other animals.
Diagnosis
Wide surgical incision where possible; how-
ever, amputation of limb may be necessary.
History and clinical signs.
 If the lesion cannot be completely excised then
Cytology of aspirate or direct smear reveals
 medical therapy may be used in combination.
 pyogranulomatous inflammation. Pigmented
72
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Damaged skin or mucosa infected by aquatic
fungi Pythium insidiosum usually through
standing in stagnant water.
Clinical signs
Dogs:
 Can present with either cutaneous lesions or gas-
trointestinal disease.
Skin lesions:
口冏
 Lesions solitary or multiple nodules that
Figure 5.35 Skin disease caused by opportunistic fungus
 coalesce to form large masses of spongy,
Exophiala werneckii. (Source: Picture courtesy R. Bond.}
proliferative fistulating ulcerated tissue.
Lesions can be found at any site but usu-
fungi may be seen, but not a consistent find-
ally correspond to the area that has been
ing.
submerged in water, e.g. legs, tail base,
Culture preferably of biopsy material on
ventral neck and head.
Sabouraud's dextrose agar. Positive fungal
口
Pruritus variable.
culture should be confirmed by histopathol-
Gastrointestinal disease:
ogy.
Clinical signs variable, depending on site
 Biopsy shows nodular to diffuse pyogranu-
of infltrative lesions, e.g. granulomatous
lomatous dermatitis and panniculitis, with
gastritis (vomiting), oesophagitis (regurgi-
thick-walled pigmented septate hyphae.
tation), enteritis (diarrhoea).
 Dogs usually show signs of weight loss.
Treatment
Wide surgical excision where possible; how-
Cats:
 ever, recurrence is common and the prognosis 
Only the cutaneous form of the disease has been
is poor.
described.
 Systemic anti-fungal therapy is needed for
weeks to months and should be continued for
Skin lesions:
at least 4 weeks beyond clinical resolution.
Single or multiple subcutaneous locally
Some possible response to combinations of
ketoconazole/itraconazole ± flucytosine or
invasive, draining nodules and ulcerated
plaques.
amphotericin B ± flucytosine.
Lesions usually seen on extremities, e.g.
feet, inguinal area, tail head or face.
Pythiosis
 Differential diagnosis
Deep tissue infection with aquatic protozoan,
which has fungus-like features in mammalian tis-
As eumycotic mycetoma.
sue. Uncommon in dogs, large breed dogs espe-
cially German shepherd dog predisposed. Rare in
Diagnosis
cats. No zoonotic risk to humans and not conta-
History of water exposure and clinical signs.
gious to other animals.
Cytology of aspirates or direct smear fungal
element rarely seen. Cellular findings of gran-
Cause and pathogenesis
ulomatous inflammation with eosinophils.
A disease mostly confined to tropical and sub-
 Culture should be taken from biopsy material
 tropical swamp areas.
and special medium is required.
Fungal skin disease7
62
Biopsy reveals nodular to diffuse granulo-
into the body via the respiratory or gastrointesti-
matous dermatitis with foci of necrosis with
nal tract through the same route.
cosinophils. Visualisation of hyphae requires
special stains.
Clinical signs
 Immunohistochemistry can be used to detect
Clinical signs are usually those associated
P. insidiosum antigen.
with gastrointestinal tract, respiratory system
Polymerase(
chain reaction can identify
or disseminated disease.
P insidiosum DNA.
Generalised disease is usually fatal.
P. insidiosum serum antibodies can be de-
 Skin lesions ulcerated draining nodules espe-
tected by enzyme-linked immunosorbent as-
cially extremities.
say (ELISA) or Western immunoblot analysis.
Differential diagnosis
Treatment
As eumycotic mycetoma.
Wide surgical excision is the treatment of
choice. Recurrence can occur; amputation of
Diagnosis
affected limb is often necessary. To monitor
for recurrence serum anti-P insidiosum anti-
History and clinical signs.
body titres can be followed by ELISA every 3
Cytology of aspirate or direct smear reveals
months for a year.
pyogranulomatous inflammation with fungal
 Immunotherapy with P. insidiosum vaccine
elements.
Culture of biopsy material to confrm the
may be useful in dogs with acute disease <2
presence of bacteria must be confrmed on
months duration.
histopathology.
Anti-fungal medication is rarely successful
(<25% of cases). Progress can be monitored
Biopsy reveals nodular to diffuse pyogranulo-
with serum anti-P. insidiosum antibody titres
matous dermatitis and panniculitis, with nu-
Individual therapy with itraconazole or am-
 merous broad, occasionally septate branching
photericin B produces disappointing results.
hyphae.
Best results reported with combination of
itraconazole (10 mg/kg po sid) and terbinafine
Treatment
(5-10 mg/kg po sid).
Wide surgical excision where possible or de-
Chronic disease carries a poor prognosis.
bulking therapy is essential. If complete sur-
gical excision cannot be performed the prog-
nosis is very poor.
Zygomycosis
Anti-fungal therapy is needed for weeks to
months and continued for at least 4 weeks
Zygomycosis is a deep fungal infection caused by
beyond clinical resolution.
fungi from the class of fungi called Zygomycetes.
 Most suitable drug is amphotericin B 0.5 mg/
Fungi in this class include Rhizopus spp., Mucor
kg, for dogs, or 0.25 mg/kg, for cats, given
spp,Absidia spp., Basidiobolus spp., Conidiobo-
intravenously three times weekly up to 8-
lus spp. and Mortierella spp. Rare disease in both
12 mg/kg, for dogs, and 4-6 mg/kg, for cats.
the dog and cat. No zoonotic risk to humans and
 Potassium iodide, benzimidazole and keto-
not contagious.
conazole usually ineffective.
Cause and pathogenesis
Sporotrichosis
Ubiquitous soil saprophytes, also found as flora
of skin and hair coat, produce infection through
Nodular skin disease caused by dimorphic fun-
wound contamination. They can also gain entry
 gus and environmental saprophyte. Uncommon
74Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
in dogs and cats. Hunting dogs and intact male
Table 5.7 Drugs used to treat sporotrichosis in the dog
cats appear to be at increased risk. No zoonotic
and cat.
risk from dogs to humans; however cats highly
contagious to man.
Drug
Cat
Dog
Cause and pathogenesis
Potassium
20 mg/kg po with
40 mg/kg po
A common disease caused by ubiquitous soil
iodide
food bid 
with food tid!
saprophytes Sporothrix schencki.
Ketoconazole
5-10 mg/kg po
 5-15 mg/kg po
Infection is caused by wound contamination
with food sid 
with food bid 
usually through puncture wounds from splin-
traconazole
5-10 mg/kg po
 5-10 mg/kg po
ters, thorn.
with food bid/sid!
with food bid/sid
Clinical signs
I Drug of choice in each species.
Dogs:
Culture of both exudate and biopsy sam-
Cutaneous form - multiple ulcerated nod-
ple. Diffcult to isolate organisms from ca-
ules and plaques especially head, pinnae and
trunk. Lesions are non-pruritic and non-
nine cases, much easier to culture from
painful. No systemic signs.
cats.
 Biopsy reveals signs of nodular to diffuse
Cutaneolymphatic form - single nodule on
limb leads to ascending lymphatic infection -
suppurative to pyogranulomatous dermatitis.
Fungal elements rarely seen in dogs, but com-
regional lymphadenopathy.
mon in cats.
Immunofluorescent antibody test useful to
Cats:
identify S. schenckii in tissue or exudate.
Wide range of lesions including non-healing
puncture wounds, abscesses, crusted nodules
Treatment
with draining sinus tracts, ulceration and tis-
Anti-fungal therapy is needed for weeks to
sue necrosis.
months and should be given for at least 4
 Lesions usually found on head and extremi-
ties.
weeks after clinical resolution (see Table 5.7).
Care should be taken when handling espe-
 Disseminated disease is common, cats system-
ically unwell, lethargic, anorexic and pyrexic.
cially cats due to the zoonotic risk.
Glucocorticoids are contraindicated in all
Differential diagnosis
cases. Even after apparent cure these can
cause recurrence.
As eumycotic mycetoma
Lagenidiosis
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
Aquatic oomycetes that normally parasitise other
Cytology of aspirate or direct smear reveals
water living organism such as fungi, algae, ne-
signs of suppurative or pyogranulomatous in-
matodes and crustaceans have been identified as
flammation. Organisms usually diffcult
to
causing cutaneous fungal infection in dogs. Rare
find but when present typical intra- and ex-
in dogs; young/middle-aged dogs that swim in a
tracellular oval cigar-shaped yeasts. Organ-
lake or pond may be predisposed. Not recorded
ism much more prevalent in cats than in
in cats. No zoonotic risk, no risk of contagion to
dogs.
other animals.
Fungal skin disease 75
Cause and pathogenesis
 Unless radical excision is possible the prog-
Nodular ulcerative skin disease caused by Lageni-
nosis is poor.
Systemic anti-fungal therapy with itracona-
dium spp. has recently been recognised in south-
zole, amphotericin B rarely of benefit.
eastern United States.
dinical signs
Systenic mycoses
Cutaneous lesions appear as firm dermal
to subcutaneous nodules or erythematous
Fungal infections of internal organs caused by soil
masses with localised areas of necrosis
saprophytes.
Fistulous tracts common, which drain
 Contagion usually occurs by inhalation; di-
haemorrhagic mucopurulent exudate.
rect cutaneous inoculation is rare. Skin lesions
Lesions are found most commonly on extre m-
usually develop after haematogenous spread to
ities and the trunk.
skin.
 Dissemination to lungs, mediastinum and
 great vessels has been recorded.
(a) Blastomycosis
(b)  Coccidiodomycosis
(c) Cryptococcosis
Differential diagnosis
(d) Histoplasmosis
As eumycotic mycetoma.
(e) Aspergillosis
(f) Protothecosis
Diagnosis
Blastomycosis
History and clinical signs.
Cytology reveals evidence of granulomatous
inflammation often with eosinophils and fun-
Systemic disease with cutaneous manifestations
gal elements.
caused by inhalation of conidia of Blastomyces
 dermatitidis, an environmental saprophyte. A
Fungal culture on conventional media usually
unsuccessful, special media required.
 rare disease in cats and uncommon in dogs. Most
Biopsy typically shows nodular
rtodiffuse
often seen in young male outdoor dogs especially
eosinophilic
pyogranulomatous
dermatitis
sporting breeds.
and panniculitis. Irregularly branching fun-
 Blastomycosis is a zoonosis; however, it is the
 gal hyphae found extracellularly and within
fungal cultures that are infectious not the infected
animals.
giant cells.
Western immunoblot analysis can be used to
detect anti-Lagenidium serum antibodies
Cause and pathogenesis
Polymerase
chain reaction of infected
tis-
Rare disease caused by inhalation of the coni-
sue can be used to identify
Lagenidium
dia of B. dermatitidis. It is found most com-
DNA.
monly in areas with acidic or sandy soil close to
 Radiography and ultrasound of thorax and
water. Primarily found in North America along
abdomen essential if evidence of disseminated
the rivers, i.e. Ohio, Misssippi, Missouri, St
disease.
Lawrence and Tennessee. It is also seen in the
southern mid-Atlantic states and Southern Great
Lakes. Initially, inhalation of conidia leads to lung
Treatment
disease. The disease then disseminates to lymph
Wide surgical excision of affected area is
nodes, eyes, skin, bone and other organs. In rare
treatment of choice. Limb amputation may
cases, conidia can be inoculated directly into the
be necessary in some cases.
skin.
76Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Clinical signs
 Drug of choice is itraconazole:
For cats, 5 mg/kg po bid for 2-3 months
Systemic disease causes respiratory (dys-
口
as above.
pnoea, cough, exercise intolerance), ocu-
 For dogs, 5 mg/kg po bid for 5 days
lar (uveitis, retinal detachment, glaucoma)
then 5 mg/kg po sid for 2-3 months as
and locomotor and central nervous system
above.
signs.
Other possible therapies include the follow-
 Forty per cent of cases have skin disease in-
 cluding ulcerated draining nodules producing
ing:
口
Fluconazole 2.5-5.0 mg/kg po or iv sid.
a serosanguineous to purulent exudates and
Amphotericin B:
plaques.
For dogs, 0.5 mg/kg iv three times
Lesions multiple and can be found at any
weekly up to cumulative dose of 8-
site, especially face, nasal planum and claw
12 mg/kg.
beds.
 For cats, 0.25 mg/kg iv three times
weekly up to cumulative dose of 4-
6 mg/kg.
Differential diagnosis
：
Amphotericin B lipid complex 1.0 mg/kg
Other systemic bacterial and fungal diseases:
iv three times weekly up to a cumulative
Neoplasia.
dose of 12 mg/kg (dogs).
 Prognosis is good unless there is severe CNS
or respiratory disease.
Diagnosis
Relapse is common within 12 months usu-
ally due to shortened course of therapy,
History and clinical signs.
which can be successfully restarted in most
Cytology of aspirates or direct smear re-
veals suppurative or pyogranulomatous in-
cases.
flammation with oval broad-based bud-
ding yeast with thick double-contoured cell
walls.
Coccidiodomycosis
 Culture not recommended due to the zoonotic
 nature of the disease. If submitted, important 
Systemic disease with cutaneous manifestations
to send sample to specialised laboratory.
caused by inhalation of conidia of Coccidiodes
Biopsy shows signs of nodular to diffuse,
immitis, an environmental saprophyte. A rare dis-
suppurative to pyogranulomatous dermatitis
ease in cats and uncommon in dogs. Most of-
with large thick double-walled broad-based
ten seen in young male medium to large outdoor
budding yeast easily seen in sections.
dogs.
Agar gel immunodiffusion to detect serum an-
Coccidiodomycosis is a zoonosis; however, it
tibodies may be useful. In early disease this
is the fungal cultures that are infectious not the
test may be negative.
infected animals.
General diagnostic tests may also be per-
formed to assess for involvement of other
organ systems.
Cause and pathogenesis
Rare disease caused by inhalation of the conidia
of C. immitis. It is found most commonly in desert
Treatment
 areas, primarily found in southwestern United
Long courses of anti-fungal therapy are
States, Mexico, Central America and South
needed. A minimum of 2-3 months and for
America. Initially, inhalation of conidia leads
4 weeks beyond clinical resolution.
to lung disease. The disease then disseminates
Fungal skin disease
77
to lymph nodes, eyes, skin, bone and other
Treatment
organs. In rare cases, conidia can be inoculated
 Long courses of anti-fungal therapy are
directly into the skin.
needed. A minimum of 12 months in cases of
 disseminated disease and for 8 weeks beyond
clinical resolution (cutaneous and pulmonary
dinical signs
disease).
Systemic disease causing respiratory (cough,
 Drug of choice is ketoconazole:
dyspnoea, tachypnoea) ocular, locomotor sys-
口
 For cats, 5 mg/kg po bid or 10 mg/kg po
tem signs, pyrexia.
sid with food.
Cutaneous lesions include multiple ulcerated
1
 For dogs, 5-10 mg/kg po bid with food.
papules, nodules and subcutaneous abscesses
Other possible therapies include
with draining tracts, especially in dogs over
口
fluconazole 5 mg/kg po bid with food,
infected long bones.
口
itraconazole 5-10 mg/kg po bid with
In cats, abscesses and nodules occur without
food.
involvement of underlying bone
Prognosis is variable.
 Relapse is common usually due to shortened
course of therapy, which can be successfully
Differential diagnosis
restarted in most cases. Once relapse has oc-
curred, animals need to stay on long-term low
Other systemic bacterial and fungal diseases:
dose therapy for lifetime maintenance.
Neoplasia.
Diagnosis
Cryptococcosis
History and clinical signs.
Systemic disease with cutaneous manifestations
Cytology of aspirates or direct smear reveals
caused by inhalation of organisms of Cryptococ-
suppurative or pyogranulomatous inflamma
neoformans, an environmental saprophyte.
tion; the organisms are rarely found.
CMS
Anunc
mmon disease in cats that is rare in dogs.
Culture not recommended due to the zoonotic
Most often seen in young male dogs.
nature of the disease. If submitted, impor-
Cryptococcus-infected animals and cultures
tant to send sample to specialised labora-
have no risk to humans.
tory.
Biopsy shows signs of nodular to diffuse, sup-
purative to pyogranulomatous dermatitis and
Cause and pathogenesis
panniculitis with few to several large round
Rare disease caused by inhalation of the or-
double-walled structures called spherules that
ganisms of C. neoformans.
contain endospores.
It is especially associated with pigeon drop-
A variety of methods are available to de-
pings.
tect antibodies against C. immitis. This in-
cludes complement fixation, latex agglutina-
tible to disease.
tion and ELISA. False negative can be found
Initially inhalation of organisms leads to
in early cases of the disease. False posi-
establishment in the animal's nasal cavity,
tives can be seen in healthy dogs in endemic
paranasal sinuses or lungs. The disease then
areas.
disseminates to lymph nodes, eyes, skin, CNS
General diagnostic tests may also be per-
and other organs.
formed to assess for involvement of other or-
 In rare cases, conidia can be inoculated di-
gan systems.
rectly into the skin.
78
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Dogs:
Most commonly systemic disease usually
CNS or ophthalmologic signs, also respira-
tory tract.
Skin lesions less common and present as cu-
taneous ulcers on nose, lips, oral cavity or
around the nail beds.
Differential diagnosis
Other systemic bacterial and fungal diseases:
Neoplasia.
Diagnosis
 History and clinical signs.
Cytology of aspirates or direct smear reveals
Figure 5.36  Ulcerated granuloma on the bridge of the nose
pyogranulomatous inflammation with nar-
 in a cat with cryptococcosis.
row budding thin-walled yeast surrounded by
Clinical signs
clear refractile capsule.
Culture can be undertaken, samples best sub-
Cats:
mitted to specialised laboratory.
Biopsy shows signs of nodular to diffuse
 Most commonly present with respiratory dis-
 pyogranulomatous dermatitis and panniculi-
ease (wheezing, snuffling, nasal discharge).
tis with numerous organisms.
CNS and ocular disease (dilated pupils, blind-
ELISA or latex agglutination testing can be
ness) can occur.
used to detect serum antibodies to cryptococ-
Skin signs are multiple non-painful papules
cal capsular antigen. In localised disease this
and nodules that ulcerate (Figure 5.36).
test may be negative.
Typical lesion is a firm subcutaneous swelling
over the bridge of the nose (Figure 5.37).
formed to assess for involvement of other or-
 Regional lymphadenopathy common.
gan systems.
Treatment
Cutaneous lesions should be removed surgi-
cally where possible.
Long courses of anti-fungal therapy are
needed. A minimum of 2-3 months and for
4 weeks beyond clinical resolution and ide-
ally until negative serum cryptococcal anti-
bodies.
Drug regimes:
口
 Itraconazole 5-10 mg/kg po sid/bid for
2-3 months as above.
 Fluconazole 5-15 mg/kg po sid/bid for
Figure 5.37
Typical lesion of cryptococcus over the bridge
of the nose.
2-3 months as above.
Fungal skin disease7
79
Amphotericin B 0.5-0.8 mg/kg added to
Diagnosis
0.45% saline /2.5% glucose:
History and clinical signs.
 For cats 400 ml; for dogs <20 kg, 500
Cytology of aspirate or direct smear re-
ml and >20 kg, 1,000 ml sq 2-3 times
veals pyogranulomatous inflammation with
weekly until cumulative dose of 8-24
numerous small round yeast like bodies with
mg/kg is reached.
Ketoconazole 5-10 mg/kg po with food
narrow halo
口
Culture not recommended due to highly con-
sid/bid.
tagious nature of H. capsulatum.
 Prognosis for cats is fair to good unless there is
Biopsy shows nodular to diffuse pyogranu-
severe CNS disease. In cats with CNS disease
lomatous dermatitis with numerous intracel-
and in dogs the prognosis is poor.
lular organisms. Special fungal stains may
be needed to help in identification of the
Histoplasmosis
yeast.
Serology is not a reliable test.
General diagnostic tests may also be per-
Systemic disease with cutaneous manifestations
caused by inhalation or ingestion of organisms
formed to assess for involvement of other or-
of Histoplasma capsulatum, an environmental
gan systems.
saprophyte. An uncommon disease in cats and a
rare condition in dogs. Most often seen in young
adult cats.
Treatment
Histoplasmosis is a zoonosis; however, it is the
Long courses of anti-fungal therapy are
fungal cultures that are infectious not the infected
needed. A minimum of 4-6 months and for
animals.
 8 weeks beyond clinical resolution.
Drug regimes:
Cause and pathogenesis
 Itraconazole 10 mg/kg po sid/bid.
 Inhalation or ingestion of the conidia of H.
口
 Fluconazole 2.5-5 mg/kg po sid/bid.
capsulatum initially leads to infection in the
Combination therapy with itraconazole
lungs or gastrointestinal tract.
or fluconazole with amphotericin B may
Worldwide distribution in both temperate
be useful:
and subtropical areas, especially moist humid
For cats, 0.25 mg/kg iv three times
environments often associated with birds and
weekly until cumulative dose of 4-
bat droppings.
 8 mg/kg is reached.
The disease then disseminates to lymph
 For dogs, 0.5 mg/kg iv three times
 nodes, eyes, skin, CNS and other organs.
weekly until cumulative dose of 5-
10 mg/kg is reached.
Cinical signs
 Prognosis for cats is fair to good unless there
is severe systemic disease. In dogs with GI or
 Systemic disease often vague and non-specific
systemic disease the prognosis is poor.
such as anorexia, pyrexia also respiratory
(dyspnoea, tachypnoea), gastrointestinal,
ocular signs.
Cutaneous lesions are uncommon multiple,
ulcerated papules and nodules at any site.
Aspergillosis
Cutaneous disease caused by infection with the
Differential diagnosis
environmental and cutaneous saprophyte As-
Other fungal and bacterial infections:
pergillus spp. Uncommon in cats and dogs. Does
Neoplasia
not represent a zoonotic risk to humans.
B0Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Cause and pathogenesis
Cutaneous and nasal lesions can be treated
with  systemic medication.  Approximately
Caused by Aspergillus sp. especially As-
50% cure rate:
pergillus fumigatus.
口
 For dogs, ketoconazole 5-15 mg/kg po sid
 Fungi are found as saprophytes in nature and
with food, itraconazole 5-10 mg/kg po
 as components of normal skin, hair coat and
sid with food, fluconazole 2.5-5 mg/kg
mucosae.
po sid with food.
Opportunistic invasion of mucosae or skin
 For cats, itraconazole 5 mg/kg po sid with
occurs, often seen in immunosuppressed
food.
animals.
Nasal aspergillus requires topical therapy
usually with enilconazole flush.
Clinical signs
 Disseminated disease treatment unsuccessful.
Cutaneous and mucocutaneous aspergillosis
 presents most commonly as nasal disease with
a haemorrhagic nasal discharge.
Protothecosis
Epistaxis is usually unilateral with secondary
ulceration, crusting and depigmentation of
Skin disease caused by a saprophytic, achloro-
external nares.
phyllous alga found in Europe, Asia and North
 Disseminated aspergillosis presents as muco-
America. Rare disease in dogs and cats. No
sal ulcers and cutaneous ulcers and nodules.
zoonotic risk to humans.
Differential diagnosis
Cause and pathogenesis
Cutaneous lesions of nasal aspergillosis:
Rare disease caused by Prototheca spp.espe-
口
Discoid lupus erythematosus
cially Prototheca wickerhamii.
口
Pemphigus foliaceus/erythematosus
 Infection can be via the gastrointestinal tract
Neoplasia especially epitheliotropic lym-
or through the skin and mucosa.
phoma
Protheca sp. is an opportunistic invader of
Drug eruptions
contaminated wounds and mucosa. Animals
usually had contact with sewage or stagnant
Diagnosis
water.
 Disseminated disease usually seen in immuno-
Clinical signs.
suppressed animals.
 Cytology of aspirates or direct smear inflam-
matory infltrate unusual to find fungal ele-
ments. When cultured on Sabouraud's dex-
Clinical signs
rose agar interpretation is difficult due to the
fact that both false positives and negatives can
Cats:
be identified, as this organism is part of the
normal skin flora.
 Cutaneous lesions appear as large firm nod-
 Biopsy reveals signs of numerous organisms
ules especially seen on the distal extremities,
that appear as septate branched hyphae.
head or tail.
 Serology using ELISA useful. Commercial
 Disseminated disease not reported.
testing is available for Aspergillus fumigatus,
niger, nidulus, terrus and flavus
Dog:
Treatment
 Most commonly presents as disseminated dis-
Long courses of systemic medication are usu-
ease. Usually gastrointestinal signs especially
ally needed usually 2-3 months and for 3-4
colitis also ocular and central nervous system
weeks beyond clinical cure.
signs.
Fungal skin disease
8
Skin lesions are rare, papules, nodules often
Selected references and further reading
on trunk, over pressure points and at muco-
cutaneous junctions.
Bond, R. (2002) Pathogenesis of Malassezia der-
matitis. In: Thoday, K.L. et al. (eds) Advances
Differential diagnosis
in Veterinary Dermatology.Vol. 4. pp.69-75.
Blackwell Science, Oxford
Other fungal and bacterial infections: Neoplasia.
Campbell, K.L. (2004) Deep mycoses. In: Camp-
bell, K.L. (ed) Small Animal Dermatology
Diagnosis
Philadelphia
History and clinical signs.
Foil, C.S. (1998) Dermatophytosis. In: Greene,
C.E. and Kersey, R. (eds) Infectious Diseases of
Cytology of aspirate or direct smear re-
the Dog and Cat.pp. 262-270. WB Saunders,
veals pyogranulomatous inflammation with
Philadelphia
numerous intracellular organisms. These
[d  
Greene, C.E. and Chandler, FW. (1998) Can-
appear as round,
spherules that vary in size and contain endo-
didiasis, torulopsosis and rhodotorulosis. In:
Greene, C.E. and Kersey, R. (eds). Infectious
spores.
Diseases of the Dog and Cat.pp. 414-417. WB
 Biopsy shows nodular to diffuse pyogranulo-
Saunders, Philadelphia
matous dermatitis and panniculitis with nu-
merous intracellular organisms
Hill, P.B. et al. (1995) A review of systemic anti-
fungal agents. Vet Dermatol, 6, 59
 Fungal culture is best performed by an expe-
Medleau, L. and Hnilica, K. (2006) Fungal skin
rienced laboratory.
disease. In: Small Animal Dermatology: A
Color Atlas and Therapeutic Guide. 2nd edn.
Treatment
Pp. 63-97. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
Moriello, K.A. (1990) Management of dermato-
Wide surgical excision of lesions is the ther-
phytes infections in catteries and multiple cat
apy of choice.
households. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Systemic anti-fungal therapy is rarely effec-
Pract, 20,1457
tive; possible drug combinations include the
Moriello, K.A. (2004) Superficial mycotic infec-
following:
tions. In: Campbell, K.L. (ed) Small Animal
 Itraconazole 5-10 mg/kg po sid/bid with
Dermatology Secrets. Pp. 157-169. Hanley
food.
and Belfus, Philadelphia
 Fluconazole 2.5-5 mg/kg po or iv bid.
口
Moriello, K.A. and DeBoer, D.J. (1995) Efficacy
口
Ketoconazole 10-15 mg/kg po sid/bid
of griseofulvin and itraconazole in the treat-
with food.
ment of experimentally induced dermatophy-
Combination therapy with tetracycline at
tosis in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc, 207,439
 22 mg/kg po tid and amphotericin B may
Scott, D.W. et al. (2001) Fungal skin disease. In:
be useful:
Muller and Kirk's SmallAnimal Dermatology.
 For cats, 0.25 mg/kg iv three times
6th edn. pp. 336-422. WB Saunders, Philadel-
weekly until cumulative dose of 4 mg/
phia
kg is reached.
Thomas, R.C. (2004) Principles of topical ther-
For dogs, 0.25-0.5 mg/kg iv three
apy. In: Campbell, K.L. (ed). Small Animal
times weekly until cumulative dose of
Dermatology Secrets. pp. 71-85. Hanley and
8 mg/kg is reached.
Belfus, Philadelphia
Toboada, J. (2000) Systemic mycoses. In: Ettinger,
Prognosis is poor when disseminated disease is
S.J. and Feldman, E.C. (eds). Textbook of Vet-
present and when lesions cannot be surgically re-
erinary Internal Medicine. Sth edn. pp. 453-
sected.
477. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
Viral, rickettsial and
protozoal
I diseases
Viral disease
discharge, Figure 6.1), gastrointestinal (diar-
 rhoea) and neurological signs.
Cutaneous lesions:
(a)  Canine distemper (CDV)
口冏
 Impetigo-like disease seen in young pup-
(b)  Contagious viral pustular dermatitis (Orf)
pies.
(c)  Pseudorabies ('mad itch')
口
Nasal and footpad hyperkeratosis (hard
(d)  Papillomavirus
pad disease) (Figure 6.2).
(e)  Feline leukaemia virus (FeLV)
(f) Giant cell dermatosis
 Differential diagnosis
(g)  Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)
(h)  Feline pox virus
Footpad and nasal signs:
(i) Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)
口
 Familial footpad hyperkeratosis
(j)Feline rhinotracheitis virus (FRV)
口荘
Hereditary nasal parakeratosis of the
(k)  Feline calici virus (FCV)
Labrador retriever
(1)  Feline sarcoma virus (FSV)
口
 Pemphigus foliaceus
口
Lupus erythematosus
口
 Drug eruption
Canine distemper
口
Necrolytic migratory erythema
口
Zinc responsive dermatosis
Cause and pathogenesis
口冏
 Idiopathic nasodigital hyperkeratosis
Systemic disease caused by morbillivirus most
Diagnosis
commonly seen in young unvaccinated puppies.
History of lack of vaccination.
Rare in dogs; does not occur in cats.
Clinical signs and ruled out of other differen-
Clinical signs
tials.
 Immunocytology or PCR technique of blood,
 Most common signs are systemic in the form
nasal, ocular discharge, saliva, conjunctival
of respiratory (mucopurulent oculonasal
scrapings CSF to detect viral antigens.
Viral, rickettsial and protozoal diseases 
83
Contagious viral pustular dermatitis
(Orf)
Cause and pathogenesis
Rare dermatitis of dogs and cats caused by
 parapox virus. A common disease of sheep and
goats, which are the usual source of infection.
Virus carried in infected scabs and crusts. Dogs
contract infection through eating infected mate-
rial; only isolated cases in cats. It is a zoonotic
disease.
Clinical signs
Figure 6.1  Nasal discharge in a dog with distemper.
 Lesions present as areas of acute moist der-
matitis with ulceration and crusting.
Biopsy of footpads reveals non-specific signs
 Predilection sites are contact areas especially
including
orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis,
the face and mouth.
mononuclear perivascular infltrate. Rarely
typical signs of balloon degeneration and
Differential diagnosis
eosinophilic intracytoplasmic viral inclusions
Other causes of acute moist dermatitis.
are seen.
 Immunohistochemistry of skin of footpad or
planum nasale to detect viral antigen.
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs especially farm
Treatment
dogs, which have contact with sheep/goats.
Electron microscopy of scabs reveals signs of
Symptomatic treatment to make the dog com-
virus.
fortable with fluids and broad spectrum an-
Skin biopsy reveals signs of epidermal hy-
tibiotic cover.
perplasia, balloon degeneration, acantholysis
 No specific antiviral therapy is available.
within the stratum spinosum and neutrophil
 Prognosis is guarded.
accumulation.
Treatment
Symptomatic t
therapy with antibacterial
shampoo and creams and broad spectrum
antibiotic cover.
 Clinical signs are usually self-limiting.
Glucocorticoids contraindicated.
Pseudorabies ('mad itch')
Cause and pathogenesis
Severely pruritic skin disease caused by alpha-
herpes virus, which results in the death of the
Figure 6.2  Footpad hyperkeratosis in a dog with distemper.
animals. Very rare disease in dogs and cats. Pigs
B4Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
act as reservoirs of infection. Pets are infected
Papillomavirus
by contact with infected animals or by eating in-
fected carcasses. On oral or oronasal infection,
Cause and pathogenesis
 the virus is spread by way of the cranial nerves to
the central nervous system. The incubation period
is short: from 1 to 6 days. Mortality in dogs and
induced by papillomavirus. Different cutaneous
cats is 100%. In rural areas, infection is caused
manifestations are thought to be caused by dis-
tinct papilloma viruses. At least five different pa-
by consumption of uncooked pork or offal from
 pilloma viruses have been identifed in dogs and
pigs.
eight in cats. Majority of lesions will regress in
normal individual as a cell-mediated immune re-
Clinical signs
sponse develops. Regression can take 4-6 months
Excessive salivation, restlessness, neurologi-
for orallesions and 6-12 months for cutaneous le-
cal signs.
sions. Transmission is by direct and indirect con-
d as - os Axe so
tact. The incubation period can be 1-2 months.
 of upper body especially head.
Clinical signs
Cats mostly present with neurological signs;
pruritus is rare.
Dogs:
Differential diagnosis
Oral papillomatosis:
Papillomas found in oral cavity (Figure
口
Ectoparasites especially scabies
6.3), lips, conjunctiva and external nares.
Allergy - atopy, food allergy
口
Lesions appear as multiple smooth white
Neuritis
papules and plaques.
Rabies
Especially seen in immunosuppressed an-
imals, e.g. puppies.
Diagnosis
Lesions regress in 3 months.
Cutaneous exophytic papillomas:
History and clinical signs especially contact
Lesions affect the head (Figure 6.4), eye-
with infected animals.
lids and feet (Figure 6.5).
 Diagnosis is usually retrospective at post-
Usually solitary lesions; elevated smooth
mortem.
to papilliferous growths may be flesh
Histopathology of the brain reveals non-
coloured or pigmented on narrow base.
suppurative encephalitis located in the brain
stem, mainly near the floor of the IV
ventricle.
Aujeszky's disease virus (ADV) antigen and
ADV nucleic acid distribution can be identi-
fed using immunohistochemistry and in situ
hybridization coincided with the histopatho-
logical lesions.
Treatment
 Source of infection should be identified.
 Prevention is possible by avoiding exposure
to pigs or fresh pig products.
 Unrewarding to treat dogs; elective euthana-
Figure 6.3 Papilloma lesions found in the oral cavity of a
sia once diagnosis has been made.
young puppy.
Viral, rickettsial and protozoal diseases
85
Multiple pigmented epidermal plaques:
Non-regressing lesions on the ventrum
and medial thighs.
 Usually multiple pigmented macules and
plaques.
口
Possible
genetic
predisposition,
espe-
cially young adult pugs, miniature schn-
auzers.
口
Some lesions can undergo malignant
 ransformation into squamous cell carci-
noma.
Genital papilloma:
Figure 6.4 Cutaneous papillomas on the face of a young
口
 Lesions appear as papillomatous plaques
Boxer puppy.
on penile or vaginal mucosa.
Usually <0.5 cm in size.
Cats:
 Most commonly seen in older dogs, espe-
口
cially cocker spaniels and Kerry blue ter-
Oral papilloma:
rier.
Lesions found in oral cavity, especially on
 Inverted papilloma:
the ventral aspect of tongue.
Most commonly seen on ventral abdomen
 Multiple raised oval flat-topped lesions,
口
and inguinal area.
48 mm in size.
Lesions are single to multiple endophytic
Multiple viral papilloma:
口
masses, 1-2 cm across extending into
口
'seo Pio oi aae aIPP
crater-like invagination.
口
Lesions found on haired skin of head,
Footpad papillomas:
 neck, trunk and proximal limbs (Figure
Usually seen in adult dogs as horn-like'
6.6).
口
 projections on multiple pads.
口
Usually multiple lesions, 3 mm to 3 cm
Interdigital lesions have been reported in
 pigmented macules and plaques.
口
greyhounds.
口
Some lesions can undergo malignant
 Dogs commonly present with lameness.
squamous cell carcinoma.
Figure 6.5  Multiple papillomas in the interdigital spaces of
Figure 6.6 Pigmented viral papillomas on the footpad of a
bop e
Cat.
B6Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
 Solitary cutaneous papilloma:
Immunomodulating drugs such as levamisole
口冏
 Rare disease; seen in adult cats.
and thiabendazole show unproven benefit.
 Any site appears as small pedunculated
masses <0.5 cm.
Feline sarcoid (see Chapter 21).
Feline leukaemia virus
Cause and pathogenesis
Differential diagnosis
FeLV is an oncogenic retrovirus that causes im-
Neoplasia especially squamous cell carci-
 munosuppression leading to the formation of skin
noma
tumours and chronic infection.
Collagenous nevus
Virus is contagious to other cats but not dogs
Granulation tissue
or humans.
Eosinophilic granuloma
Clinical signs
Diagnosis
Skin tumours lymphoma, fbrosarcoma (see
Clinical appearance of lesions.
Chapter 21).
Biopsy reveals epidermal hyperplasia and pa-
Cutaneous horns, which present as firm horn-
pillomatosis with balloon degeneration. In-
like projections usually seen on footpads, oc-
 tranuclear inclusions are an inconsistent find-
casionally on face. Often seen as a cutaneous
ing.
marker for FeLV.
Immunohistochemistry or PCR techniques
 Immunosuppression can lead to the following:
can be used to identify papilloma virus
antigen in tissue.
 Bacterial infection such as gingivitis, folliculi-
tis, paronychia (Figure 6.7), abscesses (Figure
Treatment
6.8) especially in cases of atypical mycobac-
 terium, nocardia; may present as non-healing
 Spontaneous regression occurs in many cases
but can take many months.
wounds.
 Surgical excision can be undertaken on per-
Yeast or fungal infection especially dermat-
ophytosis, malassezia, cryptococcus; infec-
sistent lesions, but care should be taken not
tion often poorly responsive or relapsing.
to seed the infection to other sites.
Viral infection especially cow pox (Figure
Ablation using laser or cryotherapy may be
6.9).
successful but multiple treatments are usually
 Parasites especially demodicosis.
required.
Topical therapy may be useful. An Eliza-
bethan collar should be used to prevent an-
imals licking off the medication.
Dogs:
 5-fluorouracil 0.5% solution can be
used on cutaneous lesions every 24
hours for 5 days, then once weekly for
4-6 weeks.
 Dogs and cats:
 5% imiquimod cream applied every
24-48 hours until lesion regression.
Autogenous (wart) vaccines can be prepared
by some laboratories, but are of questionable
benefit.
Figure 6.7 Bacterial paronychia in cat with FelV.
Viral, rickettsial and protozoal diseases 87
Figure 6.8 Abscess on paw in FelV positive cat.
Figure 6.10 Lesions of giant cell dermatosis affecting the
face.
Differential diagnosis
Bactericidal and fungicidal therapy offers the
Any bacterial, fungal, viral or ectoparasitic dis-
best chance of success.
 n  d si  s
 Some cases respond completely and therapy
therapy or where unusual organisms are isolated.
can be withdrawn, others require long-term
tre atment.
 Immunosuppressive therapy in the form of
Diagnosis
glucocorticoids and cyclosporine should be
Serological tests to confirm FeLV.
avoided.
Specific investigations of dermatological le-
sions as appropriate.
Ciant cefl dermatosis
Treatment
Cause and pathogenesis
Usually palliative and symptomatic treatment
Infection with FeLV is thought to cause neoplastic
only.
alteration of keratinocytes by recombination with
The response to therapy for secondary bacte-
host's oncogenes, leading to skin disease.
rial infection should be based on appropriate
culture and sensitivity.
Clinical signs
No breed or sex predilection is seen.
 All reported cases have been less than 6 years
of age.
Lesions present as crusting and scaling with
diffuse alopecia.
Variable distribution, ears and periauricular
skin commonly involved (Figures 6.10 and
6.11).
Differential diagnosis
Dermatophytosis
 Neoplasia especially lymphoma, thymoma
Figure 6.9 Extensive lesions of cat pox in an FelV positive
Primary keratinisation disorder
cat.
Cheyletiella
88
Manuai of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Figure 6.11 Lesions of giant cell dermatosis affecting the nail
Figure 6.12 Pyoderma in an FlV positive cat.
beds.
Differential diagnosis
Diagnosis
Rule-outs including fungal culture and skin
As FeLV.
scrapings.
 Serology to confirm the presence of FeLV.
Diagnosis
Biopsy reveals signs of typical syncytial-type
Serological tests for FIV.
giant cells in the epidermis and outer root
sheath of the hair follicle
 Immunohistochemistry may be used to iden-
Treatment
tify FeLV antigen in skin samples.
As FeLV.
Treatment
 No response to antibacterial or antifungal
Feline pox virus
therapy.
Cause and pathogenesis
 Poor prognosis; most cats euthanised.
Cutaneous disease caused by poxvirus, which is
a member of the Orthopoxvirus genus.
Feline immunodeficiency virus
 Uncommon disease only found in cats, rural
hunting cats predisposed. Small wild rodents are
Cause and pathogenesis
thought to be the reservoir for infection. Cats be-
A retrovirus capable of producing cytosuppres-
come infected through a bite wound. Disease is
 seen in Western European countries, including the
sion. Clinical signs overlap with those of FeLV
 United Kingdom and Asia. No sex, breed or age
infections. Virus is contagious to other cats but
not dogs or humans.
incidence recognised, although most cases occur
 in the autumn when the rodent population is high-
Clinical signs
est. It is a zoonotic disease.
See FeLV. The clinical signs associated with
Clinical signs
FIV infection are clinically similar to those
of FeLV and can only be differentiated by
 Initial lesion is an infected bite wound usually
 serological identification of the virus involved
 on head (Figure 6.13) or forelimb.
(Figure 6.12).
Viraemia after local replication leads to
 The two viruses can occur concurrently lead-
the formation of multiple secondary lesions,
ing to synergistic immunosuppression.
which are usually seen 1-3 weeks later.
Viral, rickettsial and protozoal diseases B9
Less common manifestations include oral
vesicles and ulcers.
 Lesions are self-limiting in a fit animal and
will dry and exfoliate over the next 4-6
weeks.
Systemic S
signs
(pyrexia,
diarrhoea)
rare
unless
cat
immunosuppressed
or anti-
inflammatory therapy is used.
Differential diagnosis
 Dermatophytosis
 Eosinophilic granuloma complex/miliary der-
matitis
 Neoplasia (lymphoma, mast cell tumour)
Superficial pyoderma
Pemphigus foliaceus
Diagnosis
Figure 6.13  Primary bite wound thought to be from a rodent
in the case of cat pox.
Clinical signs and history.
 Electron microscopy of scabs for virus.
 Secondary lesions appear as ulcerated papules
Virus isolation from tissue or scabs (sub-
 and nodules leading to crusted sores (Figure
[ u Aioiioqel aeirdoidde ue on pa
6.14).
transport medium).
Lesions are larger than those of miliary der-
 Biopsy reveals epidermal hyperplasia, balloon
matitis and up to 1 cm in diameter.
and reticular degeneration, microvesicles oc-
Pruritus variable but can be intense.
 casionally with characteristic eosinophilic in-
tracytoplasmic inclusions in keratinocytes.
 Serology (specialised laboratories only).
Treatment
Lesions heal slowly over 3-4 weeks without
therapy in uncomplicated cases.
When secondary infection is present antibi-
otics should be prescribed based on culture
and sensitivity. Empirical therapy can be un-
dertaken with cephalexin, clindamycin or
clavamox.
 Symptomatic therapy of pruritus should be
with antihistamines:
口
 Chlorpheniramine 4 mg/cat po bid/tid.
口
Promethazine 12.5 mg/cat po bid.
An Elizabethan collar can be used to prevent
self-traumatisation.
Glucocorticoids are contraindicated.
 In immunosuppressed or systemically ill cats,
+
supportive therapy is also required.
Figure 6.14 Secondary lesions of cat pox on the face of a
cat.
 Euthanasia is often necessary in severe cases.
90Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Feline infectious peritonitis
Cause and pathogenesis
A multi-systemic viral disease caused by a
coronavirus. Systemic disease can be effusive
(exudate found in body cavities) and/or non-
effusive (pyogranulomatous lesions in various
sites).
Virus is contagious to other cats but not dogs
or humans.
Clinical signs
Figure 6.15 Ocular and nasal discharge in a cat with
Systemic disease:
herpesvirus.
Usually affects abdominal organs often ab-
Upper respiratory tract signs most common,
dominal distension, also ocular and neurolog
 especially seen in young and immunosuppressed
ical signs.
cats. Virus is contagious to other cats but not dogs
 or humans.
Cutaneous lesions:
Clinical signs
Usually associated with debilitation and
Systemic signs:
ataxia.
Ulcerative lesions around the head and neck
have been seen in experimentally infected
Depression, anorexia.
 Mucopurulent ocular and nasal discharge
cats.
(Figure 6.15) leading to crusting of external
 nares and eyelids.
Diagnosis
 Conjunctivitis and ulcerative or interstitial
 History and clinical signs.
keratitis.
Positive FIP titre in combination with sup-
 Oral ulceration leading to hypersalivation.
portive serum chemistry, haematology and
Sneezing and in severe cases dyspnoea and
fluid analysis.
coughing.
 Histopathology in reported cases experimen-
tally induced showed signs of a vasculitis.
Cutaneous signs - uncommon:
Treatment
Superficial ulcers can occur anywhere on the
 Symptomatic and supportive therapy.
body especially footpads (Figure 6.16), face
and trunk.
 Periocular alopecia with erythema and ero-
Feline rhinotracheitis
sions.
 Ulcers can be precipitated by stress or trauma.
Cause and pathogenesis
Differential diagnosis
Very common disease caused by a herpes virus
(feline herpes virus 1, FHV1). Route ofinfection is
Respiratory tract disease:
intranasal, oral or conjunctival. Most commonly
seen in boarding facilities and catteries.
FCV, Bordetella, Chlamydia, Mycoplasma
Viral, rickettsial and protozoal diseases
.6
Combinations of alpha-interferon, lysine and
imiquimod may be useful:
Alpha-interferon 30 U po sid for a week
on and a week off.
Lysine 200-400 mg/cat po sid.
口
口
Imiquimod cream initially applied to cu-
taneous lesions daily for 3 days then twice
weekly until lesions resolve.
Glucocorticoids are contraindicated.
Prognosis is good; most cats recover in 2-3
weeks.
Figure 6.16 Ulcers on footpads of cat with feline herpes
Feline calici virus
virus.
Cause and pathogenesis
Cutaneous signs:
Common viral disease caused by a calici virus
Infection occurs by the oral, intranasal or con-
Vasculitis
junctival routes. Endemic in many catteries
 Drug eruptions
and rescue centres where chronic shedders are
Contact irritant/allergy
present.
 Erythema multiforme
Upper respiratory and oral cavity signs occur
Neoplasia (lymphoma)
most commonly.
Bacterial infection
Three forms of infection are recognised:
Acute FCV infection
口
Chronic FCV infection
Diagnosis
Virulent systemic FCV infection
 History and clinical signs in an unvaccinated
Acute and chronic infections are caused by
cat.
vaccine sensitive strains of virus. Virulent sys-
Oropharyngeal or skin swabs in viral trans-
temic FCV is caused by one of at least two
 port medium.
non-vaccine sensitive strains (FCV-ARI, FCV-
Biopsy reveals ulcerative and necrotic der-
KAOS) that have been identified.
matitis with mixed inflammatory cell infl-
trate. In some cases epidermal cells may con-
Clinical signs
 tain basophilic intranuclear inclusions.
 Electron microscopy to identify virus in ker-
Acute FCV infection:
atinocytes.
 Fluorescent antibody or PCR techniques on
 conjunctival smears to detect viral antigen.
 Transient self-limiting disease.
 Most commonly cats present with oral le-
 sions. Usually on the tongue (Figure 6.17) but
Treatment
also soft palate, lips, nasal philtrum.
No specific anti-viral therapy is available.
 Primary lesions are vesicles (Figure 6.18) that
Symptomatic therapy using broad spectrum
rupture to form ulcers.
 systemic and ophthalological antibiotics for
 Cutaneous ulceration has also been reported
secondary infection.
 on feet and perineum.
Topical anti-viral eye preparations for ocular
Ocular, nasal, conjunctival and pulmonary
signs.
disease less severe than FVR1.
92
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Skin lesions include oral ulcers, alopecia,
crusting and ulceration of face, ear pinnae,
footpads and nares; oedema of face and limbs
reported.
Systemic signs include pyrexia, nasal and oc-
ular discharge, dyspnoea, arthropathy, jaun-
dice, gastrointestinal signs and death.
Differential diagnosis
Respiratory tract disease:
FCV,Bordetella,Chlamydia,Mycoplasma
Figure 6.17 Oral ulceration in a cat with calicivirus
infection. (Source: Picture courtesy of D. Crossley.)
Other causes of oral ulceration;
 Systemic signs include depression, pyrexia,
Other viral infections
sneezing,
conjunctivitis,
oculonasal
dis-
■
Pemphigus vulgaris
charge; rarely arthropathy and pneumonia.
Bacterial stomatitis
Drug eruption
Chronic FCV infection:
■
Systemic lupus erythematosus
■
Renal disease
 Clinical signs confined to the mouth.
Neoplasia especially lymphoma
Proliferative or ulcerative gingivitis and stom-
atitis (plasmacytic/lymphocytic in nature).
Diagnosis
Animals often have halitosis, dysphagia, hy-
Clinical signs in an unvaccinated cat, espe-
persalivation, inappetence and weight loss.
cially where oral ulceration predominates.
Oropharyngeal or skin swabs in viral trans-
Virulent systemic FCV infection:
 port medium for culture; PCR technique to
isolate FCV.
 Range of presentations from asymptomatic
Serology for FCV antibodies.
carrier to severe disease and death.
 Fluorescent antibody testing on conjunctival
Incubation period ~7 days.
 smears to look for calici virus antigens.
 Biopsy reveals in cases of virulent systemic
FCV epithelial necrosis with ulceration.
Inflammation usually minimal. Superficial
Oedema or vasculitis may be present.
Treatment
Supportive nursing care with systemic broad
spectrum antibiotic therapy for secondary in-
fection.
In outbreaks of virulent systemic FCV the es-
tablishment should be closed and disinfected.
Prognosis:
 For acute disease prognosis is good in ft
Figure 6.18 Vesicles on the gums of a cat with calicivirus
mature animals. Can be fatal in young kit-
infection. (Source: Picture courtesy of D. Crossley.)
tens and immunosuppressed cats.
Viral, rickettsial and protozoal diseases
66
Chronic disease prognosis is guarded be-
Acute disease:
cause the disease is progressive and diff-
口
 Erythema, petechiation, oedema, ulcera-
cult to treat.
tion and necrosis of mucus membranes
Virulent disease caries worst prognosis for
and extremities, often with retinal haem-
adult cats who are most likely to develop
orrhages.
severe disease and die.
Vesicles and macules are seen on buccal
mucosa.
Chronic/recovering disease:
Feline sarcoma virus
 Necrosis of the extremities can occur.
Sarcoma virus has been associated with the for-
Differential diagnosis
mation of cutaneous fibrosarcomas in young cats
Other causes of vasculitis:
(see Chapter 21),
Infectious agents
■
 Immune-mediated disease
Rickettsial disease
■
Toxins
Canine Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
Cause and pathogenesis
Blood profle reveals signs of thrombo-
Necrotising vasculitis caused by Rickettsia rick-
cytopaenia, leukocytosis and hypoalbumin-
ettsii. Only recognised to date in the United
aemia.
States. Disease is transmitted by ticks in eastern
 Biopsy reveals signs of necrotising vasculitis
United States, Dermacentor variabilis (American
and thrombosis.
dog tick), and western United States, Dermacen-
Indirect immunofluorescent assay for Rick-
tor andersoni (Rocky Mountain wood tick). R.
ettsial rickettsi antigen looking for fourfold
rickettsii picked up by tick from small rodents
and passed onto humans or dogs. It multiplies
Direct immunofluorescent or immunohisto-
in vascular endothelium and vascular smooth
chemistry assay for R. rickettsii antigen from
muscle to produce vasculitis and thrombosis. A
acute skin lesions.
zoonotic disease. Most common in dogs in en-
PCR technique on skin biopsies to look for
demic areas and outdoor types. High incidence
Rickettsia DNA.
is during March to October during tick feeding
times.
Treatment
Careful removal of all ticks, taking care not
dinical signs
to puncture their bodies, which will release
Systemic signs of fever, anorexia, lethargy are seen
infectious organisms.
~ 5 days after the initial tick bite.
Supportive care for 1-2 weeks with antibi-
 Other signs include the following:
otics and fluids if needed.
 Antibiotic therapy with one of the following
Abdominal pain, myalgia, polyarthritis, dysp-
in order of preference:
 noea, neurological disease (vestibular disease,
 Doxycycline 10-20 mg/kg po or iv bid
coma, seizures).
1-2 weeks.
Occasionally melaena, epistaxis and haema-
 Tetracycline 25-30 mg/kg po or iv qid 1-2
turia.
weeks.
 Chloramphenicol may be useful in preg-
口
Cutaneous lesions:
 nant animals and puppies <6 months of
94
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
age; 15-30 mg/kg po, sq, im or iv qid 1-2
口
False negative can occur in acute disease
weeks.
<3 weeks duration.
Enrofloxacin (adult dogs only) 5-10 mg/
False positive results can occur as natural
kg po or sq bid for 1-2 weeks.
titres in dogs in endemic areas.
 Topical therapy to prevent dogs in endemic
PCR technique on blood, bone or splenic as-
 areas; picking up ticks is important.
pirate to detect Ehrlichia antigen.
 Prognosis is good if the disease is identifed
and treated early. In chronic disease debilitat-
Treatment
ing disfigurement can occur.
Supportive therapy with fluids as appropriate.
Antibiotic therapy with one of the following
in order of preference:
Canine ehrlichiosis
口
 Doxycycline 10 mg/kg po bid for 4 weeks.
Tetracycline 22 mg/kg po tid 2-3 weeks.
口
Cause and pathogenesis
 Chloramphenicol may be useful in preg-
Worldwide tick-borne disease caused by Ehrlichia
nant animals and puppies (<6 months of
spp. most commonly Ehrlichia canis. Ehrlichia
age); 15-30 mg/kg po, sq or iv qid 2-3
rickettsial organisms infect mononuclear, granu-
weeks.
locytic or thrombocytic cells.
 Imidocarb dipropionate 5 mg/kg im given
Not a zoonosis, but humans can become in-
twice 2-3 weeks apart.
fected by ticks.
Topical therapy to prevent dogs in endemic
areas; picking up ticks is important.
 Dogs usually show a rapid response to treat-
Clinical signs
ment once it is started. Platelet counts should
Systemic signs include
start to improve within 48 hours, taking 2
口
 depression, lethargy, anorexia;
weeks to recover completely.
口
commonly splenomegaly, hepatomegaly;
Prognosis is good if the disease is identified
 less commonly uveitis, polymyositis, pol-
and treated early. Dogs with chronic disease
yarthritis and CNS signs.
carry a guarded prognosis.
Cutaneous lesions:
  Dermal petechiae and ecchymoses
Protozoal diseases
Differential diagnosis
Other causes of vasculitis and thrombocy-
(a)  Caryosporosis
 topaenia including
(b)Neosporosis
口冏
 immune-mediated disease,
(c)Sarcocystosis
infections especially Rocky Mountain
(d) Babesiosis
spotted fever,
(e)  Leishmaniasis
drug eruptions.
Diagnosis
Caryosporosis
 Blood profle reveals signs of normochromic,
 Nodular skin lesions caused by coccidia of genus
normocytic non-regenerative anaemia. Often
Caryospora spp.
thrombocytopaenia and/or leukopaenia also
present.
Cause and pathogenesis
Indirect immunofluorescent antibody
or
ELISA to detect serum anti-Ehrlichia antibod-
A rare disease of dogs. Life cycle of the para-
ies:
site is complex, involving rodents, reptiles and
Viral, rickettsial and protozoal diseases
56
raptors. Infection of the dog occurs by ingestion
is not completely understood but transplacental
of infected host containing the coccidia.
infection thought to occur. It is most commonly
identified in young dogs with neuromuscular dis-
dinical signs
ease.
Systemic disease includes
Clinical signs
口
anorexia, inappetence and diarrhoea.
Cutaneous lesions include
Systemic signs most commonly seen in young
 nodules and plaques usually found on the
口
dogs; cutaneous lesions are rare and have only
trunk.
been recorded in middle aged to older dogs
with immunosuppressive disease.
Differential diagnosis
:sop Sunoy
 Infectious granulomatous disease - fungal
Neuromuscular  dysfunction  especially
hind leg paralysis, also meningoencephali-
and bacterial infection
Neoplasia
tis.
:ssop 1apIO
 Sterile nodular panniculitis
 Cutaneous signs appear as multiple firm
 Sterile pyogranuloma and pyogranuloma
pruritic, ulcerative fistulous nodules rang-
Leishmaniasis
ing from 0.5 to 2.0 cm in diameter.
Can be found at any site but commonly
Diagnosis
on perineum, eyelid, neck and thorax.
History and clinical signs.
Systemic signs include myocarditis and
 Skin biopsy reveals a pyogranulomatous tis-
pneumonia.
sue reaction with eosinophils and numerous
protozoa. Immunohistochemistry useful for
Differential diagnosis
positive identification.
 Infectious granulomatous disease - fungal
Treatment
and bacterial infection
Neoplasia
Supportive and symptomatic therapy where
 Sterile nodular panniculitis
appropriate.
 Sterile pyogranuloma and pyogranuloma
 Antibiotic therapy with either of the follow-
Leishmaniasis
ing:
Clindamycin 12.5 mg/kg po bid or 10 mg/
Diagnosis
kg po tid until complete resolution of le-
 sions, which can take 4-6 weeks. Medica-
History and clinical signs.
tion may need to be extended for a further
Cytology shows signs of mixed inflammatory
 4 weeks in immunosuppressed animals.
infiltrate; organisms can occasionally be seen
Trimethoprim-sulphadiazine  15  mg/kg
in neutrophils and macrophages.
po bid until resolution of lesions as above
 Biopsy reveals diffuse pyogranulomatous der-
 matitis with deep dermal nodular infltrates of
plasma cells and lymphocytes. Neospora or-
Neosporosis
ganisms appear as ovoid intracellular tachy-
 zoites within keratinocytes, macrophages and
Ulcerative skin disease caused by cyst forming
endothelial cells
protozoal parasite Neospora caninum.
 Indirect fluorescent antibody or Neospora ag-
glutination test looking for serum antibody
Cause and pathogenesis
levels.
Disease can affect many different species includ-
 Immunohistochemistry of skin biopsies to
ing dogs, cattle, sheep, goats and horses. Life cycle
identify N. caninum tachyzoites.
96
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Treatment
Trimethoprim-sulphadiazine 15 mg/kg po
bid until resolution of lesions, which can take
Supportive and symptomatic therapy where
 2-4 weeks then prolonged course for a further
appropriate.
Antibiotic therapy with either of the follow-
4 weeks.
ing:
Clindamycin 12.5 mg/kg po bid or 10 mg/
Babesiosis
kg po tid until complete resolution of le-
sions, which can take 4-6 weeks. Medica-
Cause and pathogenesis
tion may need to be extended for a further
Babesiosis is caused by an intracellular para-
4 weeks in immunosuppressed animals.
site of the red blood cells inoculated by Ixodes
Trimethoprim-sulphadiazine 15
mg/kg
ticks. Babesia canis is the most common cause
po bid until resolution of lesions as above.
of this disease and has a worldwide distribu-
Pyrimethamine 1 mg/kg po sid.
tion. Seasonal incidence spring and autumn to
 Prognosis is poor if the disease is rapidly pro-
correspond to tick feeding times. Parasite causes
gressive or not identified early. Treated an-
intravascular  and 
1 extravascular haemolysis,
imals may be left with permanent gait and
thrombocytopaenia, disseminated intravascular
conformational abnormalities
coagulation. There are three forms of the disease,
per acute, acute, and chronic.
Sarcocystosis
Clinical signs
Vasculitis caused by protozoan parasite Sarco-
Per acute disease:
Cystis canis. Life cycle of Sarcocystis spp. is un-
口
Dogs present with inappetence, depres-
known.
sion, weakness and pyrexia.
口
Examination
reveals
jaundice  and
Cause and pathogenesis
anaemia.
 Infection occurs by ingestion of tissue cysts within
口
Animals often die before a diagnosis can
tissue of the host.
be confirmed.
Acute and chronic disease:
Clinical signs
Systemic signs:
 Pyrexia, anaemia, icterus, gastroin-
 Usually non-pathogenic.
testinal, renal, respiratory, neuromus-
 Usually seen in hunting dogs and wild dogs
cular signs.
due to scavenging for wild meat.
Cutaneous lesions:
Cutaneous lesions when occur multifocal ab-
 Babesia causes clinical signs of a vas-
scesses.
culitis.
 Oedema, petechiation, necrosis of ax-
Diagnosis
illa, groin, scrotum, lower limbs and
 History and clinical signs.
ear tips.
Histopathology of skin reveals signs of pro-
tozoa seen in sections.
Diagnosis
 Immunohistochemistry and PCR techniques
can be used to identify the organisms in tissue.
History and clinical signs especially exposure
Transmission electron microscopy revealed
to ticks.
 Blood smear taken from peripheral blood in
merozoites consistent with Sarcocystis spp.
per acute and some acute and chronic cases
reveal bullseye' appearing red blood cells that
Treatment
contain low levels of haemoglobin. Babesia
Usually unsuccessful and animals tend to be
organisms are present as small, usually single,
euthanised.
pleomorphic organisms.
Viral, rickettsial and protozoal diseases
6
Where parasites are not seen on smears, blood
 may be submitted for indirect fluorescent an-
tibody test.
Skin biopsy reveals signs of leukocytoclastic
vasculitis with or without epidermal necrosis.
Serological tests for Babesia.
Treatment
Symptomatic treatment with intravenous flu-
ids and good nursing care.
Antiparasitic treatment:
口
 Imidocarb dipropionate at 5 mg/kg body
weight by deep muscular injection every
2 weeks for two treatments.
Figure 6.19 Scaling on the ear pinna of a dog with
leishmaniasis.
fore generalising. Periocular scaling and
Leishmaniasis
alopecia common (Figure 6.20).
口
Nasodigital hyperkeratosis can occur con-
Dermatitis caused by protozoan parasite Leish-
currently (Figure 6.21).
mania spp. Disease is seen in Mediterranean
Ulcerative dermatitis especially at pres-
countries, Central America, parts of Africa, Mid-
sure points, mucocutaneous junctions
dle East and dogs imported from or holidaying in
(Figure 6.22), footpads and pinnae less
endemic areas. It is a common disease in dogs in
common signs.
endemic areas, rare in cats. Zoonotic disease, al-
 Onychogryposis and paronychia may be
though direct transmission from dogs to humans
seen.
is very rare. Infected animals in a household can
 Sterile ventral pustular dermatitis (Figure
 act as a potential reservoir of infection.
6.23).
Cause and pathogenesis
Cats:
Disease transmitted by blood sucking sand flies
usually Phlebotomus. In the Mediterranean ar-
Visceral signs very rare.
eas L. donovani is recognised as being the most
Cutaneous lesions:
important vector. Incubation period is prolonged
 Single to multiple often ulcerated nodules
and can be from weeks to years.
on ear pinnae, eyelids, lips and nose.
Cinical signs
Dogs:
Visceral signs include
weight loss, lethargy, exercise intolerance,
 muscle wasting, pyrexia, hepatospleno-
megaly, lameness and conjunctivitis.
Cutaneous lesions:
Most common clinical signs are of an ex-
foliative dermatitis with fine scaling; usu-
ally starts on the head but spreads to ear
pinnae (Figure 6.19) and extremities be-
Figure 6.20 Periocular scaling caused by leishmaniasis.
98
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Differential diagnosis
Due to wide variety of presenting signs leishma-
niasis can mimic almost any other disease.
Diagnosis
 History especially dogs in or from endemic
 areas and clinical signs.
Cytology taken from lymph nodes or bone
marrow reveals Leishmania amastigotes usu-
ally within macrophages.
Indirect immunofluorescent assay or ELISA
looking for high anti-Leishmania antibodies,
Figure 6.21  Digital hyperkeratosis in a dog with leishmani-
false positive and negative results can be seen
asis.
in dogs; false negatives common in cats.
 Biopsy reveals variable findings ranging from
orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis and parakera-
tosis to granulomatous perifolliculitis, super-
ficial perivascular dermatitis. I
Leishmania
amastigotes appear as round to oval baso-
philic organism usually within macrophages.
 Organism can be identified in approximately
50% of cases.
Immunohistochemistry of skin biopsies can
be used to identify Leishmania antigen.
PCR technique can be used to detect Leish-
mania DNA in skin biopsies or bone marrow.
Treatment
Figure 6.22  Ulceration at the mucocutaneous junction in a
The disease is not curable and carries a
dog with leishmaniasis.
guarded prognosis. Relapses are common re-
quiring repeat courses of treatment.
In dogs without renal disease a good quality
of life is possible with periodic retreatments.
When concurrent renal disease is present the
prognosis is very poor and euthanasia should
be considered.
 Dogs drugs therapy can be undertaken with
the following:
口
Protocol 1:
meglumine antimonate 100 mg/kg iv
 or sq sid for 3-4 weeks, or
sodium stibogluconate 30-50 mg/kg iv
or sq sid for 3-4 weeks.
口
Protocol 2:
Figure 6.23 Ventral pustules on abdomen of a dog with leish-
maniasis.
Allopurinol 6-8 mg/kg po tid or 15
mg/kg po bid for 6-9 months.
Viral, rickettsial and protozoal diseases
66
Other drugs that have been used with vari-
Matousek, J.L. (2004) Miscellaneous infections.
able success rate include amphotericin B,
In: Campbell, K.L. (ed). Small Animal Der-
ketoconazole and itraconazole.
matology Secrets. pp. 183-187. Hanley and
 Prevention should be practiced where pos-
Belfus, Philadelphia
sible to avoid endemic areas; use insect
Medleau, L. and Hnilica, K. (2006) Viral, rick-
 repellents and keep dogs indoors during
ettsial and protozoal diseases. In: Small Animal
high risk periods from 1 hour before sun-
Dermatology: A Color Atlas and Therapeutic
set to 1 hour after dawn. Repellent collars
Guide. 2nd edn. Pp. 139-158. WB Saunders,
containing 4.0% deltamethrin are avail-
Philadelphia
able.
Nagata, M. (2000) Canine papillomaviruses.
Cats:
In: Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIII
No treatment protocols have been re-
Small Animal Practice. p. 569. WB Saunders,
ported in cats.
 Philadelphia
Scott, D.W. et al. (2001) Viral, Rickettsial and
Protozoal Diseases Muller and Kirk's Small An-
imal Dermatology. 6th edn. pPp. 517-542. WB
Selected references and further reading
Saunders, Philadelphia
Slappendel, R.J. et al. (2000) Leishmaniasis. In:
Lappin, M.R. (2000) Protozoal and miscel-
Greene, C.E. (ed). Infectious Diseases of the
laneous infections. In: Ettinger, S.J. and
Dog and Cat. 2nd edn. Pp. 450-458. WB
Feldman, E.C. (eds).Textbook of Veterinary
Saunders, Philadelphia
 Internal Medicine. Sth edn. pp. 408-417. WB
Sundberg, J.P. et al. (2000) Feline papillomas and
Saunders, Philadelphia
papillomavirus. Vet Pathol, 37, 1-10
Parasitic skin disease
Arthropod parasites
(e)  Notoedric mange
(f)Trombiculiasis
Arachnids
(g)Dermanyssus gallinae
(h)  Lynxacarus radosky
Mites
Otodectes cynotis
(a)  Otodectes cynotis
 Cause and pathogenesis
(b)  Cheyletiellosis
Otodectes cynotis is a psoroptiform mite. It is
(c)Demodicosis
a non-burrowing mite that lives and feeds on
(d) Sarcoptic mange
the surface of the skin especially in the ears (see
Table 7.1). A common disease in dogs and cats,
Table 7.1Otodectes cynotis.
Otodectes cynotis
Distinguishing features
Oval mite, four pairs of legs, all except rudimentary
fourth pair of female extend beyond body margin
Male all legs short unjointed pedicles with
suckers
Female first two pairs of legs pedicles with
suckers
Terminal anus
Active mite and will move about in samples
collected into liquid paraffin
Eggs found within ear wax
Figure 7.2
Figure 7.1  Otodectes cynotis mite.
Parasitic skin disease
101
Life cycle - host specific
MALE ADULT
EGG
4-day incubation
ADULT
LARVA (6 legs)
21 days
Copulates if
3-12 days feeds/rests
female developed
DEUTONYMPH (8 legs)
PROTONYMPH (S legs)
Can exist in environment for short periods
especially in kittens. It is highly contagious be-
Differential diagnosis
tween animals, potential zoonosis.
Other causes of otitis externa.
Ectopic infestation:
Clinical signs
口
 Other ectoparasitic diseases especially flea
Otitis externa:
allergic dermatitis.
口
Ceruminous discharge from ear canal -
口
Allergic diseases.
and 7.4).
 Discharge can become purulent if sec-
Diagnosis
ondary infection occurs.
History and clinical signs.
口
Pruritus variable, but 
usually
marked
Direct otoscopic observation of mites which
and not uncommon to see areas of self-
can be seen with the naked eye as white mov-
 inflicted trauma and hot spots' on side of
ing specks.
faced over external ear canal.
Examination of ear wax in liquid paraffin
口
 Aural haematomas can occur as a result
or potassium hydroxide for identification of
of head shaking.
eggs, nymph, larvae and adult Otodectes
Ectopic infestation:
cynotis.
Usually seen in cats.
口
Ectopic
infestation both superficial skin
Tend to occur on the neck, rump and tail,
scrapings or acetate tapes can be used to iden-
can be asymptomatic or pruritic.
tify mites.
Lesions present as papular crusted erup-
tions.
Figure 7.3 Ceruminous discharge from ear canal in a
Figure 7.2 Otodectes cynotis eggs.
German shepherd dog.
102
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Oral miticidal drops also constitute an extra-
label usage:
 Ivermectin 0.3 mg/kg po every 10 days for
3 applications.
口
Moxidectin (dogs) 0.2 mg/kg po every 10
days for 3 applications.
Where pruritus is severe a short course of anti-
inflammatory therapy is indicated with pred-
nisolone 1 mg/kg po sid 7-10 days.
Cheyletielfosis
Cause and pathogenesis
Figure 7.4 Coffee ground discharge typical of Otodectes
Common disease caused by Cheyletiella spp.
cynotis.
These are non-burrowing surface living and
feeding parasites (Table 7.2). They are most
breeding farms'and rescue centres.These are
Treatment
large mites that lead to the typical appearance
 Important to treat not only affected animal
of "walking dandruff'. C. yasguri is consid-
but all in contact.
ered the species to be found on the dog; C.
Cleaning of canals should be undertaken with
blakei the cat species and C. parasitovorax
a mild ceruminolytic cleaner to ensure good
the rabbit species. However, cross-infestation
 penetration of other topical medication.
Medication should be directed at treating
can occur.
Highly contagious.
the aural infestation and also any ectopic
Zoonoses: Human lesions appear as pruritic
mites. When topical treatment is used,
it
papules
s at contact sites with animal. Often
should be combined with a whole body treat-
arranged in groups of three.
ment such as fipronil or pyrethrin powder
(dogs).
Clinical signs
 Topical  therapy
with
1 a parasiticidal otic
Young and immunosuppressed animals are
preparation.
predisposed.
Most proprietary ear drops have a miticidal
Variable presentation; some animals can act
claim although most do not contain a specific
as asymptomatic carriers.
anti-miticidal drug.
Marked scaling usually on the dorsum giving
 Other preparations that may be used consti-
the coat a powdery appearance (Figure 7.7).
tute an extra-label usage:
Animals are usually pruritic leading to self-
口
10% fpronil solution 2 drops into the ear
inflicted trauma (Figure 7.8).
twice weekly for 3-4 weeks.
Primary lesions inconsistent finding but pre-
1% injectable ivermectin diluted 1:9 with
sent as crusted papules.
propylene glycol 2-4 drops into the ear
daily for 3-4 weeks.
 Systemic therapy can be undertaken with pro-
EGG
priety spot on preparation. Many products
have miticidal claims:
ADULT
21 days
LARVAE
口
Selamectin 6 mg/kg applied every 2 weeks
for 4 applications.
NYMPH 2
NYMPH 1
Moxidectin 2.5 mg/kg applied every
2
weeks (dogs), 1.0 mg/kg (cats) for 4 ap-
 Can live for a short period in the environment,
plications.
females up to 10 days
Parasitic skin disease
103
Table 7.2 Cheyletielta spp.
Cheyletiella
Distinguishing features
Large saddle shaped mite
Four pairs of legs bear combs
Accessory mouth part terminate in hooks.
Figure 7.6
Sensory organ on genu 1
● Heart shape C. yasguri
Comb shape C. blakei
Global shape C. parasitovorax
Egg attached to hair at one end only by
filaments
Figure 7.5 Cheyletieffa mite.
Fast moving mite in liquid paraffin
Differential diagnosis
Food allergy
 Flea allergic dermatitis
Atopy
Sarcoptes scabiei
Ectopic otodectes
Diagnosis
Pediculosis
History and clinical signs.
Identification of parasite (adult cheyletiella
mites, nymphs, larvae and ova):
Figure 7.6 Close-up of Cheyfetieffa head showing hooks on
accessory mouth parts.
Figure 7.7 Dorsal scaling on a Labrador with cheyletiellosis.
104
4Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Oral medication that can be used; extra-label
 is ivermectin 0.2-0.3 mg/kg po on 3 occasions
at 10 day intervals.
Environmental treatment can be undertaken
using any flea insecticidal sprays.
Demodicosis (demodectic mange/red mange)
Canine demodicosis
Cause and pathogenesis Common skin disease
of dogs caused by increased number of demodex
mites.
Demodex is a normal skin commensal. Three
Figure 7.8 Flank alopecia secondary to Cheyletiella
forms have been identified in the dog (see Table
7.3):
Demodex canis - inhabitant of canine pilose-
Coat brushing onto dark paper or into a
baceous unit (hair follicle, sebaceous duct and
Petri dish, then direct examination with
gland) (Figure 7.9, Table 7.3).
magnifying glass.
Demodex injai - inhabitant of canine pilose-
Superficial skin scrapings into mineral oil
baceous unit (hair follicle, sebaceous duct and
or potassium hydroxide (10%).
gland) (Figure 7.11, Table 7.3).
 Acetate tape impression smears examined
Demodex cornei - inhabitant of the stratum
microscopically.
Faecal examination for cheyletiella eggs.
corneum (Figure 7.12, Table 7.3).
Therapeutic trial with a topical miticidal
Demodex canis mites are passed from mother
Bnp
to pup during frst 2-3 days after birth. The
mode of transmission of the other two mites is
non-specific pattern of superficial perivas-
unknown.
cular dermatitis with variable numbers of
 Development of the disease is associated with
eosinophils.
immune deficiency. A hereditary T cell defect of
varying severity is thought to predispose certain
dogs. T lymphocyte depression is induced by the
Treatment
 parasite itself and is proportionate to the number
Important to treat all in contact animals as
of mites.
well as those showing clinical signs.
Concurrent pyoderma contributes to the im-
Topical sprays and shampoos are available;
munosuppression.
these should be applied once weekly for 4
applications; suitable products include 2-3%
Predisposed breeds:
lime sulphur, 1% selenium sulphide, 1% per-
Pure bred dogs have increased susceptibility, es-
methrin.
pecially shar-pei, West Highland white terriers,
Topical spot on preparations with licensed
English bulldogs, Scottish terriers, Old English
indication include those containing fipronil
sheepdogs, German shepherd dogs.
7.5-15 mg/kg, selamectin 6 mg/kg, mox-
Types of demodex:
idectin 2.5 mg/kg (dog) 1.0 mg/kg (cat), which
should be applied every 2 weeks for 3 appli-
Localised (squamous):
cations.
口
Cutaneous - less than 5 patches
 Topical sprays that are suitable with licensed
 Pododemodicosis - single foot
 Demodectic otitis
at a concentration of 6 ml/kg body weight
Generalised:
twice at 2 weekly intervals.
口
 Juvenile onset - greater than 5 patches
Parasitic skin disease
105
Table 7.3 Demodex spp. in the dog.
Demodex canis
Distinguishing features
Long cigar shaped mites
 Adults and nymphs have eight
legs, larvae six legs
 Eggs typical fusiform shape
Figure 7.10
Figure 7.9 Photograph of Demodex canis
adult mite.
Demodex cornei
Distinguishing features
Short cigar shaped mites
 Adults and nymphs have eight
legs, larvae six legs
Eggs typical fusiform shape
Figure 7.11 Photograph of adult D. cornei.
Demodex injai
Distinguishing features
Very long cigar shaped mites
Adults and nymphs have eight
legs, larvae six legs
Eggs typical fusiform shape
Figure 7.12
106
6Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Figure 7.10 Photograph of D. canis egg.
Figure 7.14 Pododemodicosis in a German shepherd dog.
口
 Pododemodicosis - 2 or more feet in-
volved
 Usually secondary pyoderma leading
Adult onset
to variable degrees of pruritus with
Clinical signs
oedema and pain.
Demodectic otitis:
May occur in isolation or as part of
Localised demodicosis:
 generalised disease.
Cutaneous:
Erythematous, ceruminous otitis, pru-
Age of onset usually 3-6 months.
ritus variable.
Less than 5 patches.
Generalised:
Lesions present with erythema, alope-
口
 Juvenile onset:
cia often with fine scaling.
Caused by Demodex canis and De-
Pruritus variable, usually mild.
modex cornei.
Commonly face affected especially the
Age of onset 3-18 months.
 periocular skin (Figure 7.13).
Usually an extension of localised dis-
Pododemodicosis:
ease due to failure of spontaneous re-
Can be remnant of generalised disease
mission or glucocorticoid usage.
or as the only area involved (Figure
 Numerous lesions especially head, legs
7.14).
and trunk (Figure 7.15).
Figure  7.13 Localised  demodectic  mange  showing
Figure 7.15 Generalised squamous demodicosis showing
periocular scaling.
numerous alopecic patches over the trunk and legs.
Parasitic skin disease 107
Figure 7.18  Chronic pododemodicosis in a Staffordshire bull
terrier.
Figure 7.16Puppy with generalised demodicosis.
Predisposed breeds - Old English
Erythema,
alopecia, scaling
with
sheepdogs, Shih-Tzu, giant breeds.
comedones (Figure 7.16) progresses
 Often poorly responsive to treatment.
often to crusted, haemorrhagic lesions.
Adult onset:
Secondary pyoderma is common, usu-
 Rare disease caused by all three forms
ally caused by Stapbylococcus inter-
of demodex mite.
medius, although Proteus mirabilis
 Age of onset usually greater than 3
and Pseudomonas aeruginosa can be
years.
involved (Figure 7.17).
Lesions and distribution as juvenile
Infection  leads to  folliculitis/furun-
onset disease. When D. injai is present,
culosis, generalised lymphadenopathy.
lesions may be more dorsal with sec-
Dogs with secondary infection tend to
ondary seborrhoea.
be depressed, lethargic, inappetent.
 Dogs with secondary infection tend to
Pododemodicosis:
be depressed, lethargic, inappetent.
口
May be caused by all three forms of
 Usually secondary to internal disease
the mite (Figure 7.18).
(hypothyroidism (Figure  7.19), hy-
 As localised except more than one foot
peradrenocorticism, diabetes mellitus)
involved.
malignant neoplasia or immunosup-
pressive treatment.
Underlying trigger can occur >2 years
after cutaneous lesions.
Prognosis dependent on identification
of underlying problem.
Differential diagnosis
 Localised demodex:
口
Dermatophytosis
口
Canine acne
 Allergy especially atopy
Figure 7.17 Demodicosis in an English bull terrier showing
Generalised demodex:
severely infected haemorrhagic lesions.
 Pyoderma
108
3Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
口
Any dogs with pyoderma or seborrhoea
should be scraped.
Acetate tape impression smears:
Useful  to identify
superficial
non-
follicular mites
Hair plucking:
口
 Useful for follicular mites in pododemod-
icosis, which are pulled out with the
hairs.
Biopsy reveals perivascular dermatitis with
mites present in stratum corneum and folli-
cles. Varying degrees of perifolliculitis, folli-
culitis and furunculosis can be seen. Biopsies
are essential in
'aenbape
口冏
fbrotic
 interdigital lesions,
where bio-
psy is the only way to rule out demo-
Figure 7.19 Adult onset demodicosis in a dog with
dex.
hypothyroidism.
Examination of ear wax in cases of demod-
ectic otitis will reveal mites as well, often ev-
idence of secondary infection.
口
Dermatophytosis
Adult onset disease
investigation of inter-
口
 Pemphigus complex
essential; diagnostic tests depen-
口
Drug eruption
dent on clues from history. A useful minimum
口
Seborrhoea
database may include
Dermatomyositis
blood samples including endocrine func-
tion tests,
radiography, ultrasonography
Diagnosis
Treatment
History and clinical signs.
Localised form:
 Skin scrapings from predilection areas, i.e.
Most cases resolve spontaneously after 6-
areas of comedone formation to reveal the
8 weeks provided that glucocorticoids are
mites, larvae, nymphs and ova.
not prescribed.
口
 Deep scrapings from areas of comedones.
Where pyoderma is identified this must be
Squeeze skin to extrude mites from folli
口
cles before scraping.
treated.
No difference is seen in the healing be-
门
tween treated and untreated cases.
Topical therapy may be used in the
Life cycle - host specific
form of gentle anti-parasitic treatments,
e.g. lime sulphur, selenium sulphide
EGG
or
follicular flushing agents, e.g. benzoyl
peroxide.
口
Anti-parasitic therapy is rarely required
ADULT
LARVA
(8legs)。
(6 legs)
but any of the therapies for generalised
disease may be used if necessary.
NYMPH
口
Monitor cases with repeat skin scrapes to
(81egs)
ensure resolution.
Parasitic skin disease
109
Deterioration of condition indicates pro-
口
All of the drugs below are unlicensed for de-
 gression to generalised demodicosis.
modicosis and constitute an extra-label use
Otitis - amitraz in mineral oil 1:9 dilution
for therapy. They should be used when ami-
daily (extra-label indication).
traz treatment has failed or considered unsuit-
Pododemodicosis can be very (
difficult to
able:
treat. Any of the therapies for generalised dis-
口
Ivermectin:
ease can be used. In addition, amitraz foot
Contraindicated in collie's and related
soaks may be useful using 0.125% solution
breeds.
every 1-3 days.
Administered orally at 0.2-0.6 mg/kg
Generalised forms:
 po sid until 30 days beyond clinical
口
Diffcult disease to treat - good owner
cure (60-200 days).
compliance is essential.
 Dose should be started at 0.1 mg/kg
 Check dog's general health and manage-
daily and increased daily by 0.1 mg/kg
ment; intact bitches should be neutered
up to 0.6 mg/kg to minimise the risk
as oestrous or pregnancy will result in re-
of side effects.
lapse of the disease.
 Side effects include incoordination,
In adult onset disease important to iden-
weakness, dilated pupils, blindness,
tify and treat the underlying condition
ataxia and in rare cases collapse and
where possible.
coma.
Any form of glucocorticoid contraindi-
Milbemycin:
cated.
Administered orally at 0.5-2 mg/kg po
When secondary pyoderma is present, an-
sid until 30 days beyond clinical cure
(course may be prolonged).
of 4 weeks for superficial infection and up
Side effects uncommon, but if they oc-
to 12 weeks for deep infection and for at
cur are similar to those for ivermectin.
least 10 days after clinical resolution.
Doramectin:
Antiparasitic therapy:
Administered orally at 0.6 mg/kg sq
口
5%amitraz:
once weekly until 30 days beyond clin-
Clip dog down to short stubble all
ical cure (course may be prolonged).
 over, and keep dog clipped throughout
Side effects are uncommon but similar
treatment (sedation may be necessary
to ivermectin.
for clipping)
1% moxidectin:
Bath dog in antiseborrhoeic shampoo
Injectable cattle solution can be ad-
to remove crust and scale, e.g. benzoyl
ministered at a dose of 0.4 mg/kg po
peroxide or sulphur/salicylic acid con-
every 24-72 hours until 30 days be-
taining products.
Apply amitraz at dilution of 1:100
longed).
(0.05%) in water to whole body. Ap-
Side effects similar to those for iver-
plicators should be warned to wear
 mectin are reported to be common.
gloves, protective clothing and work in
No dog should be considered cured until 12
a ventilated area. Allow the solution to
 months after treatment has stopped.
dry on the dog.
Repeat every 7 days until 2 weeks after
oil will assess numbers of dead and live mites.
mites can no longer be identified on
Face and feet usually clear the last. These
scrapings (6-12 weeks).
should always be scraped.
Side effects in dogs include sedation
Immunostimulants have been reported to
12-24 hours duration, pruritus, aller-
have a variable benefit. Drugs that have been
gic reactions (rare), weakness, ataxia
investigated include vitamin E, levamisole
(very rare).
and thiabendazole.
110Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Feline demodicosis
Clinical signs
Cause and pathogenesis Rare skin disease of
Localised and generalised forms of the disease
cats caused by increased number of demodex
are recognised.
mites.
Pruritus is variable in both forms of disease.
 Demodex mites are commensals of normal fe-
Localised disease:
line skin. Two different species of demodex mites
口冏
Patchya
alopecia
1with
1 erythema and
have been identified: Demodex cati and Demodex
scale.
gatoi (see Table 7.4).
 Affects face (Figure 7.21) and head espe-
 Demodex cati is usually associated with under-
cially eyelids and periocular skin.
lying disease:
Can occur as ceruminous otitis externa.
Generalised form:
Viral infection FIV, FeLV
 Lesions presents with multifocal variably
！
Endocrine disease diabetes mellitus, hypera-
pruritic macules, alopecic patches, hy-
drenocorticism
perpigmentation, erythema and scaling
 Immune mediated disease, systemic lupus ery.
(Figure 7.22).
thematosus
口
Affects head also neck, trunk, limbs and
Demodex gatoi not known if this is a true com-
ventrum.
mensal; thought to be contagious.
Ceruminous otitis can also be present.
Table 7.4 Demodex spp. in the cat.
Demodex cati: Distinguishing features
Long cigar shaped mites
Adults and nymphs have eight legs,
larvae six legs
 Eggs slim oval shape
Demodex gatoi: Distinguishing features
Short mite with blunt rounded abdomen
Adults and nymphs have eight legs,
larvae six legs
 Eggs slim oval shape
Figure 7.20  Short non-follicular demodex;
Demodex gatoi. (Source: Picture courtesy of
A. Foster.}
Parasitic skin disease 111
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
Microscopy:
口
 Deep and superficial scrapings to look for
adult mites, eggs, larvae and nymphs of
D. cati. D. gatoi may be difficult to find.
口
Acetate tape impression smears to identify
surface mites of D. gatoi.
    i e 
together with history and clinical signs are of-
ten indicated for D. gatoi.
 Biopsy reveals suppurative perivascular der-
matitis with mites present in stratum corneum
and follicles Varying degrees of perifolliculi-
tis, folliculitis and furunculosis can be seen.
Figure 7.21Demodex cati lesions on cat's face.
 No drug is licensed for treatment of demod-
ectic mange in the cat.
Clinical response is dependent on immune
Differential diagnosis
status of the cat. Any predisposing factors
should be identified and treated.
Generalised disease:
D.gatoi:
口
Dermatophytosis
口
2-4% lime sulphur:
口
 Ectoparasitic diseases, especially Otod-
Applied every 3-7 days for 4-8 weeks.
ectes,Cheyletiella
Cats usually improve during the first
口
Cutaneous neoplasia
4 weeks but treatment must be contin-
 Allergy (atopy, food “allergy')
口
ued for a total of 6-8 weeks.
口
Scabies
 Ivermectin and milbemycin:
口
口
 Flea allergic dermatitis
There have been suggestions that this
drug may also be effective, but reports
are anecdotal.
D.cati:
口
For both forms of disease treatment needs
to be applied for 3-4 weeks and until clin-
ical resolution of signs is seen and negative
skin scrapes obtained.
Localised lesions:
0.015-0.025%amitraz:
 May be effective when applied to lo-
calised lesions daily until clinical reso-
lution.
Generalised lesions:
口
2% lime sulphur:
Figure 7.22 Non-scaling symmetrical alopecia caused by
Applied as a whole body dip once
Demodex gatoi. (Source: Picture courtesy of J. Henfrey.}
weekly
112
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Table 7.5 Sarcoptes scabiei
Sarcoptes scabiei
Distinguishing features
Oval mite
Length
Two pairs anterior legs long
unjointed stalks with suckers
Two pairs posterior legs do not 
extend beyond the borders of
thebody
Terminal anus
Eggs round
Very active mite in liquid
paraffin
Figure 7.23
Amitraz 0.015-0.025%:
shelters, also in areas with high fox populations,
Applied to whole body every 7-14
which act as a reservoir for infection to domestic
days; n.b.: amitraz should not be ap-
pets. Common disease in dogs; very rare in cats.
plied to diabetic cats.
A zoonotic disease, which is passed from dogs to
Doramectin:
man. Human lesions appear as papular eruptions
Administered by injection at a dose
on arms and trunk. Disease in man (unlike human
rate of 0.6 mg/kg sq once weekly.
scabies) is selflimiting unless there is repeat con-
Prognosis:
tact with infected animals. Mites induce allergic
Localised demodicosis carries a good
reaction that leads to severe pruritus.
prognosis.
Generalised demodicosis carries a good to
Clinical signs
guarded prognosis depending on any im-
 Predilection areas are those areas of skin with
munosuppressive factors that are present
 and whether they are amenable to therapy.
little hair.
 Acute disease lesions are found on ear tips
(Figure 7.24), elbows (Figure 7.25), ventral
Sarcoptic mange (canine scabies)
abdomen and hocks:
 Cause and pathogenesis
口
 Pruritus poorly controlled with glucocor-
 Non-seasonal contagious ectoparasitic disease
ticoids.
caused by Sarcoptes scabiei var canis, a superficial
口
Crusted papules, with generalised scale.
burrowing mite (see Table 7.5). Commonly seen
Self-inflicted trauma leads to excoriation
in animals from large breeding farms and rescue
(Figure 7.26).
Parasitic skin disease
113
Figure 7.24 Typical crusting along the margins of the ear
Figure 7.26  Severe self-inflicted trauma on the feet of a dog
pinna in a Labrador.
with scabies.
 In chronic disease, lesions will become gen-
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
eralised although dorsum is often spared
 Pinnal - pedal reflex seen when the dog at-
(Figure 7.27):
tempts to scratch with its back foot when the
Chronic lesions present with hyperpig-
edge of the ipsilateral pinna is rubbed (70-
mentation, lichenification.
90% of cases).
Norwegian scabies is a rare variant seen in
Microscopy in the form of deep skin scrap-
immunosuppressed animals where there is in-
ings (important to scrape to achieve capillary
tense pruritus, massive hair loss and scale and
 ooze) from non-excoriated predilection sites,
mites are numerous.
e.g. ear margins, elbows, hocks (clip hair be-
fore scraping). Mites, eggs or faecal pellets are
diffcult to find but are diagnostic.
Differential diagnosis
Allergy (contact, atopy, food)
Malassezia dermatitis
Cheyletiellosis
Pelodera dermatitis
Pediculosis
Figure 7.25 Erythema and crusting on the elbows of a dog
Figure 7.27 Generalised sarcoptic mange in a German
with scabies.
shepherd dog.
114 Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Life cycle
EGGS (laid in skin tunnels
by burrowing female)
Hatch and move to surface
ADULTS
21 days
Mate in pockets
LARVAE
on surface
NYMPHS
Survival of the host approximately 7 days
Biopsy reveals a non-specific pattern of super-
for cats. The best results are seen when
ficial perivascular dermatitis often with heavy
it is applied on 3 occasions at 2 weekly
cosinophilic infiltrate with epidermal hyper-
intervals.
plasia. Mites are a rare finding in the stratum
5%amitraz:
corneum.
Clip dog down to short stubble all
Therapeutic trial is useful where mites have
over, and keep dog clipped throughout
not been identifed by other diagnostic tests.
treatment (sedation may be necessary
An improvement in clinical signs after treat-
for clipping)
 ment with an appropriate scabicide allows a
Bath dog in antiseborrhoeic shampoo
retrospective diagnosis.
to remove crust and scale, e.g. benzoyl
Serology by ELISA can be used to detect circu-
peroxide or sulphur/salicylic acid con-
lating IgG antibodies against Sarcoptes anti-
taining products.
gen. False negative can be seen early in the
Apply amitraz at dilution of 1:100
disease and in young animals. False positives
(0.05%) in water to whole body. Ap-
can be seen in animals recovering from the
plicators should be warned to wear
disease.
gloves, protective clothing and work in
In Norwegian scabies, attempts should be
a ventilated area. Allow the solution to
made to identify any concurrent immunosup-
dry on the dog.
pressive factors.
Repeat every 7 days for 6 weeks.
Side effects in dogs
include
seda-
Treatment
tion 12-24 hours duration, pruritus,
Animal treatment - affected and all in contact
allergic reactions
s(rare),
weakness,
animals need to be treated:
ataxia (very rare).
Antiparasitic therapy:
 Drugs detailed below are unlicensed for sar-
Selamectin:
coptic mange and constitute an extra-label
 Selamectin is licensed for the treatment
use for therapy:
of canine scabies. It should be applied
2-3% lime sulphur:
topically at 6-12 mg/kg. The best re-
 Applied topically to whole body every
sults are seen when it is applied on 3
5-7 days as a leave on solution for 4-6
occasions at 2 weekly intervals.
weeks. Useful in very young animals.
Moxidectin:
Side effects uncommon, and can be ir-
 Moxidectin is licensed as a spot on
ritant on ulcerated skin.
 preparation for treatment of sarcoptic
Fipronil spray:
 mange. It should be applied topically
Applied topically at a concentration
at 2.5 mg/kg for dogs and 1.0 mg/kg
of 3.0 ml/kg to whole body on 3
Parasitic skin disease
115
Occasions at 2 week intervals. Useful
Table 7.6 Notoedres cati.
in very young animals.
Side effects uncommon; may be irri-
tant on ulcerated skin.
Notoedres cati: Distinguishing features
Ivermectin:
Contraindicated in collie's and related
 Oval mite, eggs round (smalle than Sarcoptes)
breeds.
Administered at 0.2-0.4 mg/kg po
Two pairs anterior legs long medium length unjointed
stalks with suckers
 Sa  A bS r a a
4-6 weeks.
Two pairs posterior legs do not extend beyond the
borders of the body
Side effects - see demodicosis.
Milbemycin:
Body obvious striations
Administered at 0.75 mg/kg po sid for
Dorsal anus (terminal anus Sarcoptes)
30 days or 2 mg/kg po every 7 days for
4-6 weeks; beyond clinical cure.
 infest foxes, dogs and rabbits. A zoonotic disease;
Side effects - see demodicosis.
can be passed from infested hosts to man. Disease
1% moxidectin:
has a worldwide distribution but is very rare in
Injectable cattle solution can be ad-
ministered at a dose of 0.2-0.25 mg/kg
the UK foxes, dogs and rabbits. N. cati is an obli-
gate parasite that survives off the host only a few
po or sq every 7 days for 4-6 weeks.
Side effects similar to those for iver-
days. Infested cats carry large numbers of mites,
which are easily found on scrapings.
mectin are reported to be common.
Environmental treatment is important espe-
Clinical signs
cially in kennel situations:
Severely pruritic skin disease that is poorly
Infested bedding should be disposed of
controlled with glucocorticoids.
 and antiparasitic sprays should be used in
the environment, e.g. permethrin.
Disease initially starts on the medial edge of
ear pinna, spread rapidly to rest of face and
Glucocorticoids may be useful in severely pru-
ritic animals but should not be given until a
neck (Figure 7.28).
Cats grooming activities lead to further
diagnosis is made. Prednisolone 1 mg/kg po
spread to feet and perineum.
sid for 7-10 days can be given.
Skin appears thickened and alopecic, covered
Pyoderma can occur as a rare secondary com-
with thick yellow/grey crusts with papules.
plication. Appropriate systemic antibiotics
Self-inflicted trauma leads to excoriation.
should be given for 3-4 weeks. In such cases
glucocorticoids should be withheld
In cases of Norwegian scabies, underlying im-
munosuppressive factors should be treated
where possible.
Prognosis is good for uncomplicated cases,
provided adequate therapy is given. In Nor-
wegian scabies, the prognosis is guarded un-
less an underlying trigger can be identifed and
treated successfully.
Notoedric mange (feline scabies)
Cause and pathogenesis
Non-seasonal contagious ectoparasitic disease
caused by Notoedres cati a superficial burrowing
Figure 7.28 Facial excoriation due to Notoedres cati.
mite (see Table 7.6). Rare disease in cats; can also
(Source: Picture courtesy of J. Henfrey.}
116
6Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Chronic disease will generalise and debili-
plicators should be warned to wear
tated animals with severe disease can die.
gloves, protective clothing and work in
a ventilated area. Allow the solution to
dry on the dog.
Differential diagnosis
Repeat every 7 days for 3 weeks.
 Allergy - atopy, food, fleas
Selamectin:
Cheyletiellosis
May be applied topically at 6.0 mg/kg.
Otodectes cynotis
The best results are seen when it is ap-
Pediculosis
plied on 3 occasions at 2 weekly inter-
 Autoimmune skin disease especially pemphi-
vals.
gus foliaceus
Ivermectin:
Administered at 0.2-0.3 mg/kg po or
sq every 2 weeks for 4-6 weeks.
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
Environmental treatment is important espe-
Microscopy in the form of deep scrapings.
cially in catteries:
口
Infested bedding should be disposed of
Mites easier to find than scabies mites but
 are small and best identified under low power
and antiparasitic sprays should be used in
with reduced light.
Glucocorticoids may be useful in severely pru-
Biopsy will occasionally reveal signs of mites.
ritic animals but should not
Pattern is non-specific of superficial perivas-
be given until a
diagnosis
Prednisolone, 2 mg/kg po
cular dermatitis often with heavy eosinophilic
infltrate. Areas of focal parakeratosis are
Pyoderma can occur as a rare secondary com-
common
Therapeutic trial rarely indicated as mites can
plication.
Appropriate
systemic
antibiotics
should be given for 3-4 weeks. In such cases
be easily found. However, a significant im-
provement seen after treatment with matri-
glucocorticoids should be withheld
cide allows retrospective diagnosis.
Prognosis is good for uncomplicated cases,
Treatment
Animal treatment - affected and all in contact
animals need to be treated:
Trombiculiasis
口
Antiparasitic therapy:
Cause and pathogenesis
2-3%lime sulphur:
 Seasonal pruritic skin disease caused commonly
Clip cat down to short stubble all
by harvest mite Neotrombicula autumnalis, also
over, and keep the coat clipped short
Walchia americana in the USA and chiggers
throughout treatment (sedation may
Eutrombicula spp. (see Table 7.7, Figure 5.29).
be necessary for clipping).
 They are worldwide in distribution and found in
Bath cat in a mild antiseborrhoeic
 a wide range of different environmental habitats.
shampoo to remove crust and scale,
The mites are free living and it is larval form thatis
e.g. sulphur/salicylic acid.
parasitic on animals. The usual hosts are wild an-
Apply lime sulphur topically to whole
imals but domestic pets, e.g. dog and cat, as well
body every 5-7 days as a leave on so-
as man can be affected. Harvest mites are seen
lution for 2-3 weeks.
in grassland areas in late summer/early autumn
5% amitraz:
 especially chalky soils in temperate climates but
Clip and shampoo cat as for lime sul-
can be seen all year round in warm regions. Trom-
phur therapy.
biculiasis is uncommon in dogs and cats. Not a
Apply amitraz at concentration
1of
 zoonotic disease but humans can be infested from
0.015% in water to whole body. Ap-
the same source as dogs and cats.
Parasitic skin disease
117
 EGGS Laid in moist ground
ADULTS
50-70 days
LARVAE (6 legs)
 Free living in organic material
PARASITIC STAGE
Late summer/autumn
NYMPH
drop to ground
Clinical signs
Secondary lesions are caused through self-
Larvae found in areas of skin in contact with
inflicted trauma, i.e. excoriations and alope-
the ground, e.g. between paws, ear pinnae
cia.
(Figure 7.30).
Larvae are visible to the naked eye as bright
Differential diagnosis
'aieadde un eded, 'sop pat
■
Allergy especially atopy, contact allergy
Pruritus directed at sites where larvae feed es-
Sarcoptic mange
 pecially the feet.
■
■
 Pelodera dermatitis
Lesions are papulocrustous eruptions, occa-
Hookworm dermatitis
sionally wheals and vesicles.
Demodicosis
Table 7.7Neotrombicuta autumnalis.
Neotrombicula autumnalis
Distinguishing features
Larvae are found on animal have
six legs
Length 0.6 mm
 Bright red/orange in colour when
engorged
Long whip like appendages on legs
Size of a pin head
Figure 7.29
118
BManuai of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Many of the anti-flea therapies have been
shown to be effective.
Fipronil spray 0.25% is the preferred method
of treatment at a concentration of 6 mg/kg
 applied every 2 weeks. It may also be used
as a preventative treatment in animals in high
risk environments.
Glucocorticoids at anti-inflammatory dosage,
ie. prednisolone 1 mg/kg po sid (dogs) or
2 mg/kg po sid (cats) for 2-3 days, may be
used where severe pruritus is present.
Figure 7.30 Bright red Trombicula larvae on ear pinna
Dermanyssus gallinae
Cause and pathogenesis
The poultry mite Dermanyssus gallinae caused
Diagnosis
 non-seasonal pruritic skin disease in dogs and cats
 Microscopy in the form of skin scrapings into
 mineral oil and directly mounted tape strips
(see Table 7.8, Figure 7.31). Non-host-specific
ectoparasite whose main host is poultry but
from areas where mites are visible. Larvae can
 be seen with naked eye as bright orange/red
will also attack dogs, cats and man. Adult mite
lives in nests and cracks in poultry cages/houses.
dots approximately 0.6 mm in length.
Animals are  infected through environmental
 Biopsy reveals a non-specific pattern that is
contamination. Rare disease in both dogs and
cular dermatitis.
cats. Non-zoonotic but humans can be infested
from the same source as dogs and cats.
Treatment
Clinical signs
Pets should be kept away from high risk areas
Clinical signs are usually confined to the ex-
where larvae are known to be a problem.
tremities and the dorsum.
Table 7.8 Dermanyssus galfinae.
 Dermanyssus gallinae
Distinguishing features
Eight-legged white/grey/black mite;
becomes red when engorged
Length up to 1.0 mm
First pair of appendages (chelicerae)
whip-like
Anus posterior half of anal plate
Figure 7.31 Dermanyssus gaffinae mite.
Parasitic skin disease 119
Life cycle
EGGS
Blood meal
ADULT
7 days to 5 months
NYMPH (6 legs)
48 hours
DEUTONYMPH 48 hours
PROTONYMPH
(8 legs)
(8 legs)
Lives in the environment
Lesions appear as areas of erythema with
poorly contagious. Infections occur through di-
papulocrustous eruptions.
rect contact or via fomites.
Similar in appearance to other fur mites; iden-
Differential diagnosis
tification requires a competent parapsychologist.
Other ectoparasitic diseases especially
Very rare disease of cats. Can cause a papular rash
口
Trombiculiasis
in humans.
Flea allergic dermatitis
口
Cheyletiellosis
Clinical signs
Contact allergy/irritants
Cats may be infested asymptomatically, only
Allergy (atopy/food)
showing signs of a dull coat.
 Mites usually attach to the ends of hairs on the
Diagnosis
dorsum to give the coat a ‘salt-and-pepper'
History and clinical signs.
appearance.
Microscopy in the form of skin scrapings into
 Damaged hair can be easily epilated.
mineral oil and directly mounted tape strips
May present with signs of multiple papu-
reveal the typical red mites.
locrustous eruptions. Often pruritus may be
Biopsy reveals a non-specific
patternof
minimal.
cosinophil-rich superfcial perivascular der-
matitis.
Differential diagnosis
Other ectoparasitic diseases:
Treatment
Cheyletiella
Avoidance of the infested premise is impor-
口
 Pediculosis
tant to prevent continual re-infestation.
口
Otodectes cynotis
Dogs/cats antiparasitic therapies as cheyle-
tiella.
Environmental treatment with permethrin- or
Table 7.9 Lynxacarus radosky.
pyrethrin-based sprays.
Lynxacarus radosky: Distinguishing features
Lynxacarus radosky
Cause and pathogenesis
Lynxacarus radosky is a small cat fur clasping
Elongated body 430-520 μm in length
mite that has been primarily reported in Australia,
 Flap-like sternal extensions contain first two grasping
Fiji, Puerto Rico and parts of America (Hawaii
legs
and Florida) (see Table 7.9). In the United King-
All legs have terminal suckers
dom, it may be found on imported animals. It is
120Manuai of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Allergy (fleas, atopy, food)
Diagnosis
Dermatophytosis
 Microscopy ofear wax and superficial scrapes
of skin from external ear canal reveal larvae,
nymphs and adult spinous ear ticks.
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
Treatment
 Microscopy in the form of superficial skin
Where possible, ticks should be removed
scrapes, tape strippings from hair or hair
 manually with fine forceps. It is essential to
plucks. Mites can be identified attached to
ensure that the tick is not squashed as its body
hairs.
fluids may be infectious. There is, however, a
 Biopsy of no benefit, often no skin changes
risk of incomplete removal and the produc-
present.
tion of ^tick head’ granulomas.
Topical acaracides should be used on the ani-
mal to remove the ticks; suitable products in-
Treatment
clude those containing fipronil, amitraz (dog)
All in contact cats must be treated.
and permethrin (dogs), pyriprole (dogs).
Topical ectoparasiticides as cheyletiella.
Preventative therapy with topical spot on or
Ticks
with 4.0% deltamethrin.
(a) Argasid - soft ticks
Environmental therapy with 
 permethrin- or
 pyrethrin-based sprays may be useful in ken-
(b)  Ixodid - hard ticks
nels or the immediate environment.
Argasid ticks
Ixodid ticks
Cause and pathogenesis
Cause and pathogenesis
The most important of the soft ticks affecting
Ixodid or hard ticks contain several genera. These
dogs and cats in the spinous ear tick, Otobius
are Rhipicephaluss
 megnini. It is principally found in warm arid cli-
spp., Dermacentor 
spp-,
 mates such as North and South America. The
Ixodes spp., Amblyomma spp. and Haemo-
 physalis spp. Ixodid ticks are large parasites up to
adult form is not parasitic; it is the larvae and
0.5 cm in size. Common ticks in the United King
nymph that can infest the external ear canals of
dom include Ixodes ricinus (caster bean tick, Fig-
domestic pets leading to acute otitis externa. They
ure 7.32) and Ixodes hexagonus (hedgehog tick,
uncommonly cause disease in dogs and rarely in
cats. This is not a zoonosis but humans can be in-
fested as a result of the same environmental con-
tamination as pets.
Clinical signs
Animals present with acute onset otitis ex-
terna with shaking and rubbing of the head.
There is severe inflammation of the external
 ear canal with a ceruminous discharge.
Differential diagnosis
Other causes of otitis externa, especially Oto-
dectes cynotis.
Figure 7.32 Mead of Ixodes ricinus tick.
Parasitic skin disease
121
Ticks can be vectors of bacterial, rickettsial,
viral and protozoal diseases. Examples of
tick-borne disease include ehrlichiosis, Rocky
mountain spotted fever and Lyme disease and
tick paralysis.
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
Identification of the tick in situ.
Treatment
Where possible, ticks should be removed
manually with fine forceps. It is essential to
ensure that the tick is not squashed as its body
Figure 7.33 Ixodes hexagonus ticks.
fluids may be infectious. There is, however, a
risk of incomplete removal and the produc-
Figure 7.33). Both dogs and cats can be infested.
tion of ^tick head’ granulomas.
It is a common disease of dogs and rare in cats.
Topical acaracides should be used on the ani-
This is not a zoonosis but humans can be infested
mal to remove the ticks; suitable products in-
from the same environmental source as the dogs
clude those containin
fipronil, amitraz(dog)
and cats.
Preventative therapy with topical spot on or
Clinical signs
 In many cases dogs act as asymptomatic car-
riers.
with 4.0% deltamethrin.
Local irritation or hypersensitivity reactions
 Environmental therapy with permethrin- or
can occur at the site of tick attachment.
pyrethrin-based sprays may be useful in ken-
Ticks tend to attach to sites in contact with
nels or the immediate environment.
the ground, e.g. feet, neck, head (Figure 7.34),
ears.
Insects
A “tick head’ granuloma can form, especially
if the tick is scratched out by the pet or the tick
(1) Fleas
is removed by an owner and the head remains
(2)Pediculosis
embedded.
(3)  Flies
(a) Fly dermatitis
(b)Mosquito bite hypersensitivity
(c)Fly strike (Myiasis)
(4) Cuterebriasis
(5) Hymenoptera
Fleas
Fleas are small, wingless, blood-sucking insects.
They are the most common cause of skin dis-
ease in dogs and cats worldwide. In temperate
climates, they are generally only a problem during
the warmer summer months. In warmer climates,
Figure 7.34  Ixodes ricinus tick on the head.
fleas can cause disease for 12 months of the year.
122
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
EGGS Laid on ground
Female lays 2,000-8,000 eggs
Hatch 2-7 weeks
ADULT Feeds
2 months to3 years
LARVAE Feed 3-12 days
on host
on host
690 days off host
17-100 days off host
 Rest and moult
Rest and moult
NYMPH
Feed3-10 days
on host
More than 90% of fleas found on dogs and
saliva. Should be considered and ruled out of
cats are Ctenocephalides felis felis (see Table 7.10,
the differentials for any pruritic skin disease
Figures 7.35 and 7.36).
of the dog or cat.
Other species that may also be found
on
Flea saliva contains at least 15 potentially
:ssop
 allergenic components, these are complete
antigens not haptens.
Ctenocephalides canis(dog)
Non-allergic animals tolerate fleas and de-
Echidnophaga gallinacea (stick tight poultry)
velop minimal clinical signs.
Spilopsyllus cuniculi (rabbit)
 Reactions occurring in flea allergic animals
Pulex irritans (human)
include the following:
Archaeopsylla erinacei (hedgehog)
口
 Type I - immediate hypersensitivity
口
Type IV - delayed hypersensitivity
Cause and pathogenesis
Cutaneous basophil hypersensitivity
口
 A very common pruritic skin disease of dogs
It is common that atopic animals have con-
and cats that have been sensitised to flea
 current flea allergy.
Table 7.10 Ctenocephatides felis.
Ctenocephalides felis felis
Distinguishing features
Small brown wingless insects, body
laterally compressed 
Elongated head
Both genal and pronotal combs
present; 8-9 genal combs present the
first comb same length as second
Figure 5.36
Eggs oval
Figure 7.35
Parasitic skin disease 123
Figure 7.36Mead of Ctenocephalides felis felis showing
both genal and pronotal combs.
Figure 7.38 Anaemia in a puppy with severe flea infestation.
Clinical signs
sal (Figure 7.39), lumbosacral area,
Dogs:
 Non-flea allergic animals:
caudomedial thighs, ventral abdomen.
May have fleas but show no dermato-
 Fibropruritic nodules seen occasion-
logical signs (Figure 7.37).
ally in dorsal lumbosacral area (Figure
May show any one of a range of
7.40).
anaemia (Figure 7.38), mild skin
Usually ears, feet, face spared.
irritation, tape worms, acute moist
Cats:
dermatitis (hot spots) or acral lick
口
Non-flea allergic animals:
granuloma.
May have fleas but show no clinical
Flea allergic animals:
signs.
口
 Most commonly 3-5 years of age.
May show any one of a range of
anaemia, mild skin irritation, tape
Acutely pruritic crusted papules with
erythema, areas of acute moist der-
matitis.
Chronically
- alopecia, lichenifica-
tion, hyperpigmentation usually dor-
Figure 7.37 Non-flea allergic puppy with numerous adult
Figure 7.39  Dorsal lichenification and hyperpigmentation
fleas.
with secondary alopecia in the flea allergic dog.
124
4Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Figure 7.40 Fibropruritic nodules on the dorsum of a
Retriever.
worms, acute moist dermatitis (hot
spots).
口
 Flea allergic animals:
No age incidence.
Figure 7.42 Ventral abdominal alopecia caused by flea
Can present with many different clini-
allergy.
cal signs including the following:
OPapulocrustous reaction especially
Malassezia dermatitis
on the dorsum - “miliary dermati-
■
Dermatophytosis
tis' (Figure 7.41).
■
Superficial pyoderma
Q
 Self-induced symmetrical alopecia
■
Demodicosis
on ventrum (Figure 7.42) or flanks.
Psychogenic alopecia (cat)
Eosinophilic granuloma complex
(Figure 7.43).
 Facial pruritus.
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
Identification of fleas or flea *dirt' may be dif-
Differential diagnosis
ficult especially in a cat that is overgroom-
 Allergy especially food, atopy
Pediculosis
ing or a dog that is being regularly sham-
pooed. A wet paper test allows visualisation
Cheyletiellosis
Figure 7.41 Miliary dermatitis caused by flea allergic
Figure 7.43 Indolent ulcer secondary to flea allergic
dermatitis.
dermatitis.
Parasitic skin disease 125
Life cycle
40-50/days
ADULT
 EGG Laid on host but falls
5-140 days
 into environment
Can be prolonged
1-10 days
in adverse conditions
21-174 days
1st larval stage
PUPAE
 3rd larval stage
 2nd larval stage
5-11 days
of pet's blood in flea faeces, which produces
Treatment
red streaks when coat is brushed onto wet pa-
[a]
 Flea control:
per (Figure 7.44).
This should be tailored to the individual
Tapeworm segments from Dipylidium spp.
based on numbers and types of pet, ability of
(the flea is the intermediate host of this tape
owner to use particular products and client
worm) found in the perianal area or in fae-
finances. Affected and allin contact dogs and
cal flotation samples indicate the presence of
cats should be treated. It is important to use
fleas.
integrated flea control so that both an adulti-
Human lesions pruritic papules usually
on
cide and insect growth regulator (juvenoid)
lower legs (Figure 7.45).
are used in combination. This may be un-
 dertaken using different combinations, e.g.
ing with flea
antigens
False-negative reac-
topical animal and environmental products,
tions can be seen
systemic animal products alone, or topical
hvpe
sensitivity
yand the
animal products alone.
lack of specificity
gens,i.e.whole
Client education regarding flea life cycle
body flea extract
essential:
 Environmental control:
of superficial to deep usually
eosinophil-rich
口
 Internal environment most important
perivascular to interstitial dermatitis
in temperate climate, both indoor
Response to strict flea control programme.
and outdoor environments (yards,
Figure 7.44  Flea dirt on wet paper.
Figure 7.45  Pruritic papules on the leg of the owner.
126
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
pounds, etc.) need to be treated in
occasions 2-3 weeks apart. Prolonged
warm clima tes.
use of this drug should be avoided.
 Thorough vacuuming plus disposal of
Medroxyprogesterone
口
acetate
not
bag is useful within the home.
suitable for therapy of this disease in
 Pesticides applied to the environment
the cat or dog.
口
as powders or sprays:
Antihistamines - limited usage.
Desiccating agents, e.g. sodium
(c) Antibiotics should be given for secondary py-
borate.
oderma for 3-4 weeks. If pyoderma is present
 Insect growth regulators - cypro-
then glucocorticoids should not be given.
mazine, fenoxycarb, methoprene,
(d)  Hypo-sensitisation - success questionable.
 permethrin, piriproxyfen.
Animal spot on containing juvenoid,
口
Pediculosis
e.g. methoprene (dogs).
口
Systemic treatment given to dogs
or
Cause and pathogenesis
cats as tablets,
liquids or injections
Pediculosis is an uncommon pruritic skin disease
Insect growth
regulators,
e.g
caused by lice (see Table 7.11). Lice tend to be
lufenuron
host specific. They can be spread from dog to dog
Animal:
and from cat to cat but spread between species
Adulticide therapy may need to be
 including man is uncommon.
used at an increased frequency in the
Two suborders:
early stages of the disease, first 4-
 6 weeks until environmental therapy
Mallophaga - biting lice:
becomes effective. Nitenpyram at 1
口
Trichodectes canis (dog)
mg/kg may 1
need to be
every
Heterodoxus spiniger (dog) (warm cli-
used
mates only)
 in a cat. Topical spot on or spray ther-
Felicola subrostratus (cat)
√
apy may be needed every 2 weeks. Ex-
Anoplura - sucking lice:
amples of adulticides include the fol-
Linognathus setosus (dog)
lowing:
Sprays-
fipronil.
Biting lice cause more irritation than sucking lice.
Systemic
nitenpyram.
Biting lice move rapidly through the coat and can
Spot-on
fipronil (cat and dog),
be difficult to sample
imidacloprid (cat and dog),
Disease seen especially in winter, tend to be seen
,metaf-
lumizole (dog), pyriprole
(op)
in cold climates where they are a more common
selamectin (cat and dog).
ectoparasite than fleas, lice killed by high skin
(b)  Anti-inflammatories:
temperatures.
Glucocorticoid may be given to help con-
Predisposing factors include systemic disease
trol pruritus in the early stages of therapy,
especially in cats immunosuppressed with viral
but if flea treatment is used as a therapeu-
disease and poor hygiene, poor levels of nutrition
tic trial this may make interpretation of
and overcrowding as seen in neglected animals.
results diffcult:
口
Prednisolone (
0.5-1
1 mg/kg po sid
Clinical signs
(dogs) 1-2 mg/kg po sid (cats) for 7-
Lice usually found feeding at body openings
10 days then tapering to lowest pos-
(medial canthus eyes, perianal area), ear tips
sible alternate day dosage. Only short
and matted areas of hair on body.
courses should be required if flea con-
 Sucking lice cause anaemia plus debilitation.
trol is rigorous.
Pruritus may be variable; some animals can
口
Methylprednisolone acetate (cat only)
be asymptomatic carriers, other present with
20 mg/cat or 4 mg/kg sq or im on two
seborrhoea.
Parasitic skin disease
127
Table 7.11 Lice in the dog and cat.
Biting lice
Trichodectes canis
Felicola subrostratus
Figure 7.46Photograph of Trichodectes canis adult.
Figure 7.47Feticola subrostratus - biting louse.
Distinguishing features
 Small dorso-ventrally flattened wingless insects 2-3 mm in length
Six legs, broad head, three segmented antennae at side of head
Large mouth parts designed for biting
Rapidly moving parasite
Operculate egg of louse cemented to hairs
Sucking lice
Linognathus setosus: Distinguishing
features sucking lice
Small dorso-ventrally flattened wingless
insects 2-3 mm in length
Six legs, broad head, three segmented 
antennae at side of head 
 Mouth parts adapted for sucking
Slow moving parasite
Figure 7.48  Lice eggs cemented to hair shafts.
128Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Life cycle - host specific
EGGS
Operculate egg cemented to hairs
ADULT
14-21 days
NYMPH
2-3 months
 Papular eruptions in sensitive animals leading
 Eggs (nits) stuck to hairs identified by hair
 to self-excoriation (Figure 7.49) and alopecia;
pluckings or acetate tape of hairs.
may present with signs of military dermati-
Biopsy
reveals
 non-specific
and
non-
tis or eosinophilic granuloma (Figure 7.50) in
diagnostic signs of superficial perivascular
cats.
dermatitis often with eosinophilic compo-
nent.
Differential diagnosis
 Flea allergic dermatitis
Treatment
Cheyletiellosis
Identification and treatment of any underly-
Scabies
ing factors is important. Where anaemia is
Dermatophytosis
 present this should be treated, which includes
 Allergy especially atopy, food
blood transfusion in severe cases.
Treatment of affected animal and all in con-
Diagnosis
tacts is important.
History and clinical signs.
Animal treatment:
Microscopy to identify:
口
Clip coat to remove thick crusts and mats
Lice by either acetate tapes or superfcial
to allow penetration of treatment.
口
skin scrapings:
Insecticidal shampoo or leave on (
dips
Sucking lice - slow moving, easy to
may be used on 3 occasions at 14 day
catch.
intervals. Suitable products contain se-
 Biting lice - active, move rapidly.
lenium sulphide 1%, lime sulphur 2%,
Figure 7.49 Papules and erythema from the flank of a dog
Figure 7.50  Eosinophilic granuloma secondary to lice infes-
with lice.
tation.
Parasitic skin disease
129
permethrin 1% (dogs). Selenium sulphide
Differential diagnosis
and lime sulphur have the advantage of
 Other ectoparasitic diseases especially
 being keratolytic to help remove the scale.
口
Scabies
Licensed topical insecticide spot on
口
Pediculosis
formulations include those containing
Vasculitis
fpronil, imidacloprid, pyriprole, metaflu-
Leishmaniasis
mizole, and selamectin have good activ-
Autoimmune skin disease
ity against lice. These are probably most
Sunlight-induced neoplasia
effective when used at the recommended
dose rate (per label) but more frequently
Diagnosis
than recommended at 14 day intervals for
History (especially exposure to flies) and clin-
3 applications.
ical signs.
 Insecticidal sprays include fipronil 0.25%
Elimination of other causes by microscopy
used at a dose of 6 mg/kg every 14 days
and biopsy.
for 3 applications.
口
 Systemic therapy with ivermectin consti-
flies.
tutes an extra-label use at 0.2 mg/kg po or
sq every 14 days for 3 applications.
Treatment
Environmental treatment:
Fly avoidance where possible. The source of
This should be undertaken as part of
flies should be identifed, e.g. local dung heap,
therapy especially bedding and grooming
area of standing water (knowledge of fly life
equipment. Products suitable for environ-
cycle important) and removed or the animals
mental flea control may be used once or
housing should be moved.
twice at 2 week intervals
Fly repellents containing permethrin (dogs)
may be applied daily, where small flies are
Flies
thought to be important barrier cream/oils
Fly dermatitis
may be useful.
1."Collars containing 4%
Cause and pathogenesis
 deltamethrin may be useful in dogs.
Uncommon pruritic skin disease caused by biting
Treatment of lesions with a topical antibi-
flies usually dogs housed outdoors. It is a rare
otics/glucocorticoid preparation may be used
disease in cats.
twice daily for up to 10 days. Prolonged use
 Important flies include the following:
of such products can lead to skin changes and
should be avoided.
Stomoxys calcitrans (stable fly)
Simulium spp. (black fly)
Mosquito bite hypersensitivity
Tabanus spp. (horse fly)
Cause and pathogenesis 
Chrysops spp. (deer fly)
An uncommon seasonal disease seen in cats that
are hypersensitive to mosquito bites. Only occur
Clinical signs
in warm climates and any seasonality is related
 Bites usually occur on the most exposed areas
to the mosquito feeding times. Lesions are seen
of the body. The most common site is the ear
most commonly in outdoor cats. Lesions resolve
tip in prick-eared dogs but other areas can be
without treatment when cats are confined to a
involved especially the face, ventral abdomen
mosquito-free environment.
 and legs.
Lesions consist of haemorrhagic papules
Clinical signs
and crusts, overlying areas of erosions and
Lesions commonly affect the bridge of the
ulcerations.
nose, medial aspect of ear pinnae, also foot-
 Pruritus is variable.
pads, lips and chin.
130 Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Acute lesions range from erythematous
that have continual re-exposure for the re-
plaques and papules to ulcerated erosions
 mainder of the mosquito season.
with superficial crusting. They have a sym-
口
Methylprednisolone acetate 20 mg/cat or
metrical distribution.
4 mg/kg sq or im on every 2-3 months dur-
 Chronic lesions include scaling, alopecia and
ing the mosquito period. Prolonged use of
nodules often with pigment changes (hypo-
this drug should be avoided.
or hyperpigmentation). Crusting and hyperk-
eratosis can be seen on the footpads.
Fly strike (myiasis)
 Systemic signs include lymphadenopathy and
Cause and pathogenesis
pyrexia.
Myiasis is the infestation of the skin of living an-
imals with maggots from dipterous flies. The flies
Differential diagnosis
are attracted to lay their eggs on warm wet skin,
Pemphigus foliaceus/erythematosus
especially urine and faecal stained areas as well as
Allergy (atopy, food, flea)
draining wounds. The maggots (larvae) that hatch
Dermatophytosis
secrete proteolytic enzymes that digest the tissue.
Demodicosis
Myiasis is a common disease in both dogs and
Otodectes cynotis
cats. Predisposing factors include poor hygiene,
 Plasma cell pododermatitis
debilitation due to age or illness and urinary or
faecal incontinence. Three types of flies are im-
portant in the pathogenesis of the disease:
Diagnosis
History of mosquito exposure and clinical
Primary flies - initiate strike especially Lucilia
signs.
spp. and Calliphora spp.
Resolution of lesions occurs when cat is hos-
Secondary flies -
larvae
extend
lesions
Chrysomyia spp., Sarcophaga spp.
5-7 days.
Tertiary flies - last to invade; cause further
Response to therapy
 with insect repellents
inflammation, e.g. Musca spp.
Histopathology reveals non-specific changes
 of superficial perivascular
dermatitis with
Clinical signs
eosinophilic infiltrates and collagen degener-
ation.
Lesions affect skin around nose, eyes, mouth,
anus (Figure 7.51) and genitalia, as well as
neglected wounds.
Treatment
Prevention of mosquito bites by
口
hospitalisation or confinement during
high risk periods especially dawn and
dusk when mosquitoes feed;
口
insect repellents applied to short and
sparsely haired areas; permethrin-based
repellents should be used with care as
many human insect repellent products are
toxic to cats.
Treatment of the bites:
 Anti-inflammatory doses of prednisolone
口
-7 ioy pasn aq Aeu pis od syau s-
3 weeks to treat bites once they have
occurred.
口
Courses of prednisolone can be extended
and used on an alternate day basis for cats
Figure 7.51Debilitated cat with fly myiasis of perianal skin
Parasitic skin disease  131
Antibiotics based on culture and sensitivity if
necessary.
 Prognosis is variable depending on the under-
lying causes and the extent of tissue damage
prior to therapy.
Cuterebriasis
Cause and pathogenesis
Infection of skin of living animals with larvae of
Cuterebra spp. Generally, a disease seen in dogs
and cats in warm climates in the late summer and
autumn and imported dogs and cats in temperate
climates, such as in United Kingdom.
Animals are contaminated by picking up eggs
laid by adult flies in the environment usually close
to burrows or nests of rabbits or rodents, which
are their natural hosts (rabbits, chipmunks, squir-
Figure 7.52 Close-up of the case in Figure 7.51.
rels, mice). Normally, the larvae crawl into the
fur of the host, enter the body through a natu-
Typical appearance is of punched out ulcers
ral opening, and then migrate to a subcutaneous 
with tissue necrosis containing larvae (Figure
site.
7.52).
Aberrant migration can occur, in unnatural
 Maggots will orientate vertically within the
host, to the central nervous system, trachea, nos-
wounds to maximize use of the space.
trils, pharynx or intraocularly.
Diagnosis
Identification of larvae in wounds, on hair
Clinical signs
and skin.
 Lesions usually found as solitary nodules on
the head, neck and trunk.
Treatment
Treatment of predisposing factors is impor-
across with a central air hole and fistula.
 Lesions are non-painful and non-pruritic.
tant to prevent recurrence. Animal should be
Other clinical signs can occur dependent on
moved to a clean fly-free environment.
the site of aberrant migration.
Clip hair from lesions and clean the area thor
oughly with an antibacterial wash, e.g. acetic
acid, chlorhexidine, ethyl lactate to remove
all larvae. Surgical debridement may be nec-
Differential diagnosis
essary in severe cases.
Subcutaneous abscesses
+
 Insecticidal wash or spray may be used on
Myiasis
the rest of coat, e.g. pyrethrin or pyrethroid
Neoplasia
based (dogs) with care to avoid toxicity in a
debilitated animal.
Systemic larvicidal drugs (unlicensed) that
Diagnosis
may be of benefit include the following:
History of exposure and clinical signs.
 Nitenpyram 1 mg/kg po sid for 7 days.
 Identification of larvae in lesions as a variably
口
口冏
Ivermectin 0.2-0.4 mg/kg sq on a single
coloured (white,cream, brown or black) larva
occasion.
with black spines covering its body.
132
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Treatment
Differential diagnosis
Incision of the air hold, which needs to be
Other localised and generalised causes of ur-
carefully enlarged for gentle extraction of lar-
ticaria and angioedema.
vae using fine forceps. There is a risk of ana-
phylaxis if the larva is crushed or incom-
Diagnosis
pletely removed.
History of exposure to the insects and clinical
Wound hygiene is important as the hole will
signs.
tend to heal slowly. It must be kept clean with
daily flushes with chlorhexidine ± edta-tris.
Treatment
Where secondary infection is present, ap-
Localised problem:
propriate antibiotics will be needed for 2-3
口
Remove sting if possible and give a
weeks.
single injection of a short-acting gluco-
corticoid injection, e.g. dexamethasone
Hymenoptera (bees, wasps, hornets)
0.05-0.1 mg/kg sq or im followed by anti-
Cause and pathogenesis
histamines, e.g. chlorpheniramine po 0.2-
Hymenoptera are non-parasitic venomous insects
1.0 mg/kg tid or qid.
that cause an acute inflammatory reaction in the
 Topical antihistamine cream may have
口
skin of dogs and cats. Toxin released into the skin
some benefit.
as insect stings leading to local or systemic signs.
Anaphylaxis should be treated with intramus-
The severity of clinical signs depends on the num-
cular adrenaline and intravenous glucocorti-
ber of stings and animal sensitivity. Common dis-
coids.
ease in dogs, uncommon disease in cats. Tends
to be a seasonal problem found in the summer
in temperate climates but is perennial in warm
climates.
Helminth parasites
Clinical signs
Uncinariasis (hookworm dermatitis)
 Lesions may be localised or generalised.
Localised lesions in mild cases present with
Cause and pathogenesis
redness and oedema.
Generalised disease can produce extensive
Cutaneous lesions caused by the percutaneous
areas of angioedema (Figure 7.53) with
penetration of the third stage larvae of the hook.
anaphylaxis leading to death; can occur in se-
worm Uncinaria stenocephala in previously sen-
vere cases.
sitised individuals. Hookworm rarely completes
its life cycle by this route. U. stenocephala is the
 hookworm that causes disease in temperate and
sub-artic climates and has been most commonly
recorded in Ireland, England and United States.
The dog is the natural host for Uncinaria. It is
most commonly seen in dogs that live outdoors,
especially in grassed or earthed runs, or damp
contaminated kennels. It is a rare cause of skin
disease.
Clinical signs
 Acute lesions appear as papular eruptions on
Figure 7.53 Angioedema on the face of a Labrador after a
contact sites with ground especially feet (in-
bee sting.
terdigitally), sternum and ventral abdomen.
Parasitic skin disease
661
Chronic lesions are erythematous with
treated, which may be treated with
swelling and alopecia, which can be severe on
sodium borate 0.5 kg/m? periodically.
the feet. Digital hyperkeratosis is a common
finding.
Ancylostomiasis
Pruritus
variable, but lesions tend to be
painful.
Cause and pathogenesis
Occasionally onychorrhexis may be seen and
arthritis of the interphalangeal joints.
Cutaneous lesions caused by the percutaneous
penetration of the third stage larvae of the hook-
Differential diagnosis
worm Ancylostoma braziliense, A. caninum. An-
cylostoma sp. is the hookworm that causes dis-
Contact dermatitis
ease in warm climates. The dog is the natural host
Pododemodicosis
for Uncinaria. It is most commonly seen in dogs
 Pelodera dermatitis
that live outdoors especially in grassed or earthed
Diroflariasis
runs, or damp contaminated kennels. It is a very
 Dermatophytosis
rare cause of skin disease in dogs.
Strongyloidiasis
Clinical signs
Diagnosis
As Uncinaria stenocephala.
 History especially of poor housing together
with clinical signs.
Diagnosis
Rule out of other differentials.
Faecal examination by floatation for hook
As Uncinaria stenocephala.
worm eggs.
 Biopsy reveals non-specific signs of perivascu-
Treatment
lar dermatitis, which is often eosinophil rich.
AsUncinaria stenocephala
On rare occasions, larvae can be seen in tis-
sues surrounded by a mixed inflammatory cell
Pelodera dermatitis
infltrate.
Therapeutic trial with anthelmintics. Lesions
will improve after appropriate treatment.
Cause and pathogenesis
Pelodera dermatitis is caused by cutaneous in-
Treatment
festation with larvae of free living nematode
Pelodera strongyloides. The adult nematodes,
Animal treatment:
which are not parasitic, live in damp soil and
 It is important to treat both the affected
decaying vegetation. The larval form is parasitic
and all in contact animals immediately
and will invade skin of dogs at points of contact
and then establish an anthelmintic proto-
with ground. Most commonly seen in dogs kept
col for future prophylaxis.
in poor sanitation on earth runs or dirty straw
Anthelmintics suitable for use for treat-
bedding. Uncommon condition of dogs.
ment and prophylaxis include fenbenda-
zole, mebendazole, and pyrantel. Initial
Clinical signs
therapy should be twice 3 weeks apart.
Environmental treatment:
Acute lesions present as papules with ery-
口
Improvement of hygiene by faeces re-
thema and secondary alopecia on areas that
moval in runs and frequent changes of
are in contact with the ground especially feet,
bedding.
legs, perineum and sternum.
 Remove earthed and grassed runs and
 Chronic lesions may lead to lichenification
replace with dry paved runs, or gravel
 and hyperpigmentation of the skin.
134
4Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Pruritus very variable; may be mild to intense.
velop over the subsequent 8-12 months in subcu-
Secondary pyoderma is present in some cases.
taneous tissues of limbs. Females migrate to the
surface of the skin to form a nodule. When the
Differential diagnosis
dog enters water again the nodule ruptures to ex-
pose females, which release Li stage. In North
As Uncinaria stenocephala
America Dracunculus insignis principally affects
racoons, minks and other wild mammals. Infec-
Diagnosis
tion in dogs and cats is uncommon. In Africa and
History of environmental exposure and clini-
Asia D. medinesis infests many different mam-
cal signs.
mals including dogs and man.
 Microscopy in the form of superficial skin
scrapings demonstrates small motile nema-
Clinical signs
tode larvae approximately 65 mm in length.
Lesions present as single or multiple subcu-
Larvae and adults can be found in contami-
nated litter from environment.
taneous nodules on limbs, head and ventral
Biopsy reveals signs of a perifolliculitis, folli-
abdomen.
 Nodules may be painful and show variable
culitis and furunculosis, which is eosinophil
rich. Nematodes can be seen within follicles
degrees of pruritus.
and within dermal granulomas.
Non-healing fistulae develop over the nod-
ules.
Treatment
Differential diagnosis
 Animal treatment:
Antiseborrhoeic
shampoo, e.g.
sul-
Cuterebriasis
phur/salicylic acid to remove crust and
Bacterial or fungal granuloma
scale followed by a scabicidal dip, e.g.
Neoplasia
0.025% amitraz or 2% lime sulphur.
Anti-inflammatory  therapy  with pred-
Diagnosis
nisolone 0.5-1 mg/kg po sid for 5-7 days.
 Antibiotics may be necessary if secondary
History of exposure to the parasite and clini-
口冏
cal signs.
pyoderma is present.
Microscopy in the form of cytology of exu-
Environmental trea tment:
 Improvement of hygiene in kennels by re-
dates from the fistula demonstrates a mixed
口冏
moval and destruction of all bedding and
 inflammatory infltrate with 500 μm long ne-
 treatment of the environment with a par-
matode larvae with tapered ends.
asiticide, e.g. sodium borate (see Unci-
Biopsy reveals a subcutaneous pseudocyst
naria).
that contains adult and larval nematodes sur-
 Prognosis is good, provided the environment
rounded by a pyogranulomatous infltrate,
is treated adequately.
which is eosinophil rich.
Treatment
Dracunculiasis
Environmental treatment:
Removal of contaminated water source or
Cause and pathogenesis
decontamination of the source.
Nodular cutaneous disease caused by Dracun-
Animal treatment:
culus spp., a nematode that parasitizes subcuta-
口
Worm can be removed from the nodule by
neous tissue. Dogs become infected by ingestion
winding up on a stick over several days.
of Cyclop (a crustacean), the intermediate host,
Preferred treatment is excision of the
whilst drinking contaminated water. Adults de-
nodule.
Parasitic skin disease
135
1
Medical treatment may be undertaken
Treatment
with thiabendazole or metronidazole.
 Therapy for the heartworm will lead to a res-
 Prognosis is good, provided the source of ne-
olution of the cutaneous lesions.
matode and crustacean is removed from the
Suitable drugs include
sodiumt
thiac
environment.
etarsamide or melarsomine dihydrochloride
Dirofilariasis (heart worm)
Selected references and further reading
Cause and pathogenesis
Buerger, R.G. (1995) Insect and arachnid hyper-
Dirofilariasis is a skin disease caused by ei
sensitivity disorders of dogs and cats. In: Kirk's
ther Diroflaria immitis (heart worm) or D.
Current Veterinary Therapy XlI Small Animal
repens. It is an uncommon disease of dogs
Practice. pp. 631-634. WB Saunders, Philadel-
seen principally in warm climates. Dogs are
phia
infected by intermediate host, a biting fly, usu-
Carlotti, D.N. and Jacobs, D.E. (2000) Ther-
ally a mosquito.
apy control and prevention of flea allergic der-
D. immitis lives in right ventricle of the heart;
matitis in dogs and cats. Vet Dermatol, 11,
its microflaria rarely cause skin disease
83-98
D. repens lives in subcutaneous tissue, is of
Curtis, C.F. (2004) Current trends in the treat-
trivial veterinary importance, but causes le-
ment of Sarcoptes, Cheyletiella and Otodectes 
sions in cutaneous tissues due to microfilaria.
mite infestations in dogs and cats. Vet Derma-
tol, 15,108-114
Cinical signs
 Kennis, R. (2004) Arthropod parasites. In: Camp-
bell, K.L. (ed) Small Animal Dermatology
 Lesions present as pruritic ulcerated papules,
Secrets. Pp. 126-131. Hanley and Belfus,
nodules and plaques.
Philadelphia
They are principally found on the head and
Kennis, R. (2004) Parasiticides in dermatology.
limb.
 In: Campbell, K.L. (ed). Small Animal Derma-
tology Secrets. pp. 64-68. Hanley and Belfus,
Philadelphia
Differential diagnosis
Medleau, L. and Hnilica, K. (2006) Viral, para-
Cuterebriasis
sitic skin disorders. In: Small Animal Derma-
Bacterial or fungal granuloma
tology: A Color Atlas and Therapeutic Guide.
Neoplasia
2nd edn. Pp. 99-138. WB Saunders, Philadel-
phia
Mueller, R.S. (2004) Treatment protocols for de-
Diagnosis
modicosis: an evidence based review. Vet Der-
History and clinical signs.
matol, 15,75-89
 Microscopy in the form of a direct examina-
Scott, D.W. et al. (2001) Parasitic skin disease.
tion of blood smear for microfilaria.
Muller and Kirk's Small Animal Dermatology.
 Blood test - positive Knott's test for microfi-
6th edn. pp. 423-515. WB Saunders, Philadel-
laria.
phia
Biopsy reveals signs of microflarial segments
Thomas, R.C. (2004) Helminth dermatoses. In:
seen within dermal pyogranulomas often sur-
Campbell, K.L. (ed) Small Animal Dermatol-
rounded by an eosinophil-rich eosinophilic
ogy Secrets. pp. 137-142. Hanley and Belfus,
infiltrate.
Philadelphia
Endocrine and metabolic
skin disease
Canine hypothyroidism
Pituitary suppression - illness, e.g. hyper-
adrenocorticism, malnutrition.
Receptor defects.
 Most common endocrine skin disease in the dog.
Tertiary hypothyroidism caused by a de-
ficiency of thyrotropin-releasing hormone
(TRH) from hypothalamus:
Cause and pathogenesis
Congenital defects
口
 Acquired destruction
Most cases of hypothyroidism in the dog are due
 Receptor deficits
to primary hypothyroidism, most of which are
lymphocytic thyroiditis:
Clinical signs
Primary hypothyroidism caused by a direct
deficiency of thyroid hormone:
Adult onset hypothyroidism:
 Lymphocytic thyroiditis (90% of all cases)
caused by autoimmune damage mediated
Age incidence 6-10 years (earlier in giant
 through both humoral and cell mediated
breeds).
responses.
 Predisposed breeds include golden retriever,
 Idiopathic atrophy may possibly be the
Labrador, Doberman, dachshund, Irish setter,
end stage of lymphocytic thyroiditis.
Great Dane, English bull terrier but can be
口冏
 Neoplastic destruction.
variable depending on local gene pool.
Secondary hypothyroidism caused by a defi-
Non-cutaneous signs:
ciency of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
口
 Lethargy, obesity (Figure 8.1), heat seek-
from anterior pituitary:
ing, aggression, anaemia.
口
 Congenital defect - usually associated
口
Gastrointestinal signs - often vague inter-
with pituitary dwarfism.
mittent diarrhoea.
口冏
 Pituitary destruction - expanding neo-
口
Central
nervous system
head tilt,
plasms.
nystagmus, hemiparesis, cranial nerve
Endocrine and metabolic skin disease 137
Figure 8.1 Obese hypothyroid Bullmastif.
Figure 8.3 Rat tail in an English bull terrier with hypothy-
roidism.
dysfunction (facial, laryngeal nerve paral-
ysis), hypermetria.
Seborrhoea generalised plus ceruminous
Cardiovascular signs
口
口
 exercise intoler-
otitis (Figure 8.4).
ance, bradycardia; cardiac arrhythmias
Recurrent bacterial (Staphylococcus spp.)
ECG shows signs of flat T waves.
(Figure 8.5) and yeast (Malassezia) infec-
Ocular signs - corneal lipidosis, kerato-
口
tions, plus demodicosis.
conjunctivitis sicca.
 Hypertrichosis - rare finding, especially
口
Urogenital signs - infertility, abnormal
 Boxers and Irish setters.
seasons.
口
 Pruritus mild except where secondary in-
Cutaneous signs:
fection present.
 Bilaterally symmetrical alopecia (Figure
口
 Delayed wound healing - poor hair re-
口
8.2) spares the extremities; hairs easily
 growth after clipping.
epilated.
口
 Alopecia can also be seen on bridge of
nose and tail (rat tail, Figure 8.3).
口
Dry dull brittle hair coat.
Myxoedema - cool puffy skin.
口
Variable pigment changes to skin and
coat.
Figure 8.2 Bilaterally symmetrical alopecia in a Doberman
Figure 8.4 Ceruminous otitis with seborrhoeic casts around
with hypothyroidism.
the periphery of the ear pinna in a hypothyroid Doberman.
138
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Malassezia and demodicosis may also be
present.
Thyroid function tests:
Basal levels of total thyroxine (TT4), free thy-
roxine (FT4), total triiodothyronine (TT3),
and free triiodothyronine (fT3) can be mis-
leading. They can be elevated or depressed
in conditions other than thyroid disease (see
Table 8.1).
Endogenous TSH assay can be used in com-
Figure 8.5 Recurrent bacterial infection in a hypothyroid
bination with TT4 and FT4:
bop
TSH levels elevated in primary hypothy-
roidism.
TSH levels low or normal in secondary
Congenital hypothyroidism:
hypothyroidism.
Very rare condition seen in puppies from 4
TSH and TRH stimulation tests are rarely
weeks of age.
used now in diagnosis of primary hypothy-
Quiet, mentally retarded, disproportionate
roidism. TRH stimulation test can be used to
dwarves, i.e. short limbs and necks compared
distinguish between primary, secondary and
to the rest of their bodies.
tertiary hypothyroidism:
口冏
 Primary hypothyroidism low basal TT4/
high basal TSH/unresponsive to TRH.
Differential diagnosis
口
Secondary hypothyroidism low basal
TT4/low  basal  TSH/unresponsive
to
Hypothyroidism is a multisystemic disease that
TRH.
can mimic many other diseases. Other causes
of endocrine alopecia, superficial pyoderma,
Table 8.1  Factors affecting total T4 levels (TT4).
Malassezia dermatitis and demodicosis should be
considered.
Factors reducing TT4
Factors increasing TT4
Diagnosis
Normal fluctuations
Normal fluctuations
History and clinical signs.
Non-thyroidal illness
 Recovery from disease
Haematology and biochemistry show a
Age >7 years
Age <3 months
range of non-specific signs including nor-
Autoantibodies
Autoantibodies
mochromic,  1
 
Drugs including 
 Drugs including
anaemia (30%), elevations in cholesterol
phenobarbitone, frusemide,
oestrogen,
(50-75%), creatinine kinase (~ 50%), serum
glucocorticoids,
progesterone, insulin,
aspartate transaminase (SAT) and alanine
sulphonamides, non-steroidal 
 narcotic analgesics
anti-inflammatory drugs.
transaminase (ALT).
phenylbutazone, mitotane,
 Skin biopsy reveals non-specific endocrine
general anaesthetics
changes including orthokeratotic hyperker-
 Some breeds especially
Dioestrous, pregnancy
atosis, follicular keratosis, follicular dilata-
greyhounds
tion, telogenisation of hair follicles, epi-
 Prolonged periods of 
Obesity
dermal melanosis, sebaceous gland atrophy
inappetence
and a thin dermis. Evidence of pyoderma,
Endocrine and metabolic skin disease
139
口
Tertiary
hypothyroidism
low
basal
Spontaneously occurring hypothyroidism
TT4/low basal TSH/responsive to TRH.
is a very rare disease; only a few cases
Thyroid biopsy - not useful in practice
recorded.
口
latrogenic disease most commonly seen
secondary to radioactive iodine therapy or
Treatment
thyroidectomy for hyperthyroidism.
Congenital hypothyroidism seen in young kit-
Therapy of any concurrent diseases, e.g. pyo-
tens caused by a variety of mechanisms; all
derma, Malassezia, demodex needs to be ad-
are thought to be inherited as an autosomal
dressed but may only be partially successful
recessive trait.
until thyroid treatment is started.
 Thyroid gland agenesis or dysgenesis
口
Therapy of hypothyroidism:
口
Dyshormonogenesis
Lifetime treatment required in all cases.
Impaired organification of iodides (do-
Supplementation with levothyroxine (T4)
mestic short-haired cats and Abyssinians).
at a dose of 0.01-0.02 mg/kg po sid or bid.
口
Inability of the gland to respond to TSH.
 Dogs with cardiac disease should start at
lower dose rate of 0.005 mg/kg po sid or
bid increasing by 0.005 mg/kg increments
Clinical signs
every 2 weeks to maintenance.
 Lethargy improves often within days.
Cutaneous lesions can take up to 5
Adult onset - spontaneous occurring:
months to respond.
口
 Side effects rare due to the rapid metabolic
Non-cutaneous signs - lethargy, obesity, heat
turnover of the T4, faecal excretion,
seeking.
and poor absorption from gastrointesti-
Cutaneous signs:
nal tracts. If these occur, signs of hyper-
Dry, dull brittle hair coat.
thyroidism include anxiety, panting, poly-
Myxoedema - cool puffy skin.
dipsia, polyphagia, diarrhoea.
口
Variable pigment changes to skin and
口
Supplementation with liothyronine (T3)
coat.
rarely indicated.
口
 Seborrhoea generalised.
 Post-pill monitoring should be undertaken
口
Delayed wound healing - poor hair re-
46 weeks after starting treatment. TT4 peaks
growth after clipping.
4-6 hours after T4 administration, therefore
Alopecia not normally a feature; some
bloods at this time should show high normal
cats may loose hair from their ears.
or supranormal TT4 levels.
Prognosis for a full recovery is good in most
cases except where central nervous system or
Adult onset - iatrogenic:
muscular signs have been present for some
time.
 Non-cutaneous signs - initially lethargy but
usually short lived, no changes in body weight
 or appetite.
Feline hypothyroidism
Cutaneous signs:
口
Generalised seborrhoea.
 Dorsal matting due to reduced grooming
Very rare endocrine skin disease in the cat.
√
activity.
口
Alopecia of pressure points, pinnae, dor-
Cause and pathogenesis
sal and lateral tail base region.
 Adult onset hypothyroidism:
Congenital hypothyroidism:
140 Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Very rare disease; recognised in kittens from
cats double or treble their levels; hypothy-
4 weeks of age.
roid cats show little or no response.
 Often kittens will die at an early age before
TRH stimulation test - most reliable test
hypothyroidism is suspected.
for diagnosis of hypothyroidism in the cat.
Non-cutaneous signs - lethargic and mentally
Measure T4 levels before and 4 hours af-
dull, decreased rate of growth. Stunted kit-
ter the slow (may induce vomiting) intra-
tens are disproportionate dwarves with short
venous injection 100 μg of TRH. Healthy
broad head, enlarged skull, shortened limbs,
cats demonstrate a 50-100% rise in T4;
retained deciduous teeth, short round body,
hypothyroid cats fail to respond.
small ears.
Thyroid biopsy - not useful in practice.
Cutaneous signs:
Hair coat is fine due to reduction in pri-
Treatment
mary hairs; true alopecia is rare.
口冏
Seborrhoea commonly seen
Lifetime treatment required in all cases. Sup-
Thickened skin.
 plementation is undertaken with levothyrox-
ine (T4) at a dose of 0.05-0.2 mg/cat po sid.
Differential diagnosis
The response to therapy depends on the
form of disease. Congenital hypothyroidism
Traumatic alopecia, e.g. due to allergy, ec-
is often poorly responsive whereas acquired
 toparasites, psychogenic
hypothyroidism usually responds well to ther-
Dermatophytosis
apy:
Demodicosis
口
Lethargy improves often within days.
Hyperadrenocorticism
Cutaneous lesions can take up to 6 weeks
Hyperthyroidism
to respond
Liothyronine (T3) supplementation rarely in-
dicated.
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
Feline hyperthyroidism
 Haematology and biochemistry reveal non-
specific but inconsistent changes 
includ-
ing
 normochromic,
normocytic,
non-
Very common endocrine disorder caused by over-
regenerative anaemia and hypercholestero-
production of thyroid hormone thyroxine (T4)
laemia.
and triodothyronine (T3).
Thyroid function tests:
Basal levels of TT4, FT4, TT3, and FT3
can be misleading.
Cause and pathogenesis
口
 In cases of congenital hypothyroidism
In most cases hyperthyroidism can be attributed
TT4 should be within the range 52-72
to a solitary thyroid adenoma or multinodular
nmol/l by 4 weeks of age.
adenomatous hyperplasia of the thyroid. Carci-
Non-thyroidal illness - (euthyroid sick
nomas of the gland are rare in cats. Clinical signs
syndrome) and drug therapy (see Table
are caused by the resulting acceleration in basal
8.1) can influence these tests.
metabolic rate.
TSH stimulation tests - superior to basal
thyroid levels. Contact laboratory for ad-
vice before performing the test. Proto-
Clinical signs
col undertaken by measuring T4 level be-
fore and 6-7 hours after administration
Age incidence 6-20 years with an average age
of 0.5-1.0 IU /kg of bovine TSH. Healthy
12 years.
Endocrine and metabolic skin disease 141
Figure 8.6 Enlargesthyroid gland - palpable in the conscious
Figure 8.8 Generalised seborrhoea oleosa in hyperthyroid
cat.
Cat.
nised.
grooming. In severe cases self-inflicted
Onset of signs tends to be insidious.
trauma can occur (Figure 8.9).
95% of cats have a palpable enlarged cervical
 Increased claw growth.
mass (Figure 8.6).
Secondary
 pyoderma
(Staphylococcus
Non-cutaneous signs include weight loss
spp.) and yeast (Malassezia spp.).
(Figure 8.7), polyphagia, polydipsia, diar-
rhoea and vomiting, hyperactivity, tachycar-
dia and respiratory abnormalities. Occasion-
Differential diagnosis
ally lethargy, weakness and inappetence can
be seen.
Hyperadrenocorticism
Cutaneous signs seen in about 30-40% of
Allergy (food, fleas, atopy)*
 cases and include the following:
Dermatophytosis*
口
Excessive shedding of hair coat, which can
 Psychogenic alopecia
be easily epilated.
 Seborrhoea oleosa leading to matting of
口
Note: Asterisk (*) signifies that the condition can
hair coat (Figure 8.8).
occur concurrently, exacerbated by hyperthyroid
Focal, often
bilaterally
symmetrical,
alopecia (usually flanks) due to over-
state.
Figure 8.7 Severe weight loss in an untreated hyperthyroid
Figure 8.9 Acute moist dermatitis due to overgrooming in a
cat.
hyperthyroid cat.
142
2Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Table 8.2 Factors affecting TT4 level in cats.
 TRH stimulation test is performed by giv-
ing 0.1 mg/kg TRH by slow intravenous
injection. Bloods are taken at 0 and 4
Factors causing depression
Non-thyroidal factors
hours. Euthyroid cats show a greater than
of elevated TT4 levels
causing elevation of TT4
60% increase in TT4; hyperthyroid cats
(false-negative reactions)
(false-positive reactions)
show less than 50% increase in TT4
le vels.
Concurrent disease, e.g.
 Overlap with normal
Radionuclide imaging can be useful to iden-
renal disease, diabetes 
cats
tify any ectopic thyroid tissue. Thyroid scan-
mellitus 
ning is undertaken after the intravenous ad-
Concurrent therapy, e.g.
ministration of a suitable radionuclide, e.g.
glucocorticoids (methyl 
technetium-99M (pertechnetate). F
Radionu-
prednisolone acetate),
hormones (megestrol 
clide is concentrated in a hyperactive glandu-
acetate}
lar tissue.
Sedation where it is needed
to take blood samples
Treatment
 Surgical excision has both advantages and
disadvantages (see Table 8.3); see further
Diagnosis
reading list for suitable surgical texts for de-
tails of thyroidectomy.
Oral anti-thyroid drugs can be used success-
History and clinical signs especially palpable
fully to treat many cats (see Table 8.4). Suit-
thyroid nodule
 able drugs include carbimazole 5 mg/cat po
Haematology and biochemistry reveal a va-
riety of non-diagnostic changes including in-
tid or methimazole 5 mg/cat po sid. These
creases in serum alkaline phosphatase (SAP),
drugs may need to be used in combination
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), alanine amino-
transferase (ALT) and aspartate transaminase
Table 8.3  Advantages and disadvantages of surgical therapy
(AST).
of hyperthyroidism.
Thyroid function tests:
口
Elevations in basal levels of total T4
Advantages
Disadvantages
(TT4), and total T3 (TT3) are diagnos-
tic; however, both false-negative and false-
positive reactions can be seen (see Table
Relatively inexpensive
Anaesthetic risk
8.2).
especially if cat is
tachycardic or has renal
dysfunction
when 15-25 μg of liothyronine given
Surgery that can
 Induction of thyrotoxic
orally every 8 hours for 7 doses. TT4 and
normally be undertaken
crisis
FT4 levels are measured before drug ad-
in first opinion practice
ministration and 2-4 hours after the last
without need for referral
dose. Hyperthyroid cats show no change
latrogenic
in their TT4 or FT4 levels. Normal cats
hypoparathyroidism
show a 50% depression in TT4 and FT4.
latrogenic hypothyroidism
 TSH stimulation test is performed by giv-
Incomplete removal of
ing 0.5 IU/kg intravenous injection of
abnormal tissue and
bovine TSH. Bloods are taken at O and
recurrence
6 hours. Euthyroid cats show a 100% in-
Risk of damage to
crease in TT4; hyperthyroid cats minimal
recurrent laryngeal nerve
or no increase.
Endocrine and metabolic skin disease
143
Table 8.4  Advantages and disadvantages of medical
Canine hyperadrenocorticism
therapy for hyperthyroidism.
(Cushing's syndrome)
Advantages
Disadvantages
Canine Cushing syndrome has various causes, all
of which lead to increased concentration of cir-
Inexpensive therapy
Side effects of medication
culating cortisol.
include anorexia, vomiting.
anaemia, and
thrombocytopaenia
Cause and pathogenesis
Highly effective
Many hyperthyroid cats are
difficult to medicate with oral
Naturally occurring hyperadrenocorticism:
sanup
Pituitary-dependent
hyperadrenocorti-
Can be used on an
latrogenic hypothyroidism
cism (80-85%(
of naturally
occurring
outpatient basis 
cases):
Safe in high surgical
Monitoring is necessary of
Seen as al
 bilateral adrenocortical
risk patients
TT4 and FT4 levels every 2
hyperplasia due to micro- or macro-
weeks during induction
 adenoma/adenocarcinoma
of
pitu-
period and every 3 months
itary, which leads to defective negative
during maintenance
feedback of adrenocorticotrophic hor-
mone (ACTH)
Adrenal-dependent
with propanolol to treat the tachycardia.
They are used daily at this dose rate initially to
cism:
 Adrenocortical neoplasia (approx. 10-
decease TT4 than tapered down to the lowest
15% of naturally occurring
cases)
dose rate to maintain normal thyroid func-
caused by a functional adenoma or
tion.
adenocarcinoma.
Radioactive iodine can also be used to treat
Ectopic ACTH syndrome (very rare):
hyperthyroid cats. It also has advantages and
Neoplasia other than those of pituitary
disadvantages (see Table 8.5).
   iq s  
producing ACTH, e.g. lymphosarcoma,
Table 8.5   Advantages and disadvantages of radioactive
bronchial carcinoma.
iodine therapy for hyperthyroidism.
latrogenic hyperadrenocorticism:
 Chronic overuse of steroids by injection,
Advantages
Disadvantages
tablet or topical application (eyes, ears,
skin), especially in dogs with pruritic skin
disease and immune mediated disorders
Single treatment only
Sophisticated facilities
(Figure 8.10).
in 70-80% of cats
needed including 
hospitalisation and isolation
cages
Clinical signs
Anaesthesia and
Expensive
surgery not necessary
Middle-old age; no sex predilection.
safer for high risk
 Predisposed breeds include Boxers, poodles,
animals
dachshunds, small terriers (West Highland
Highly effective
Health and safety aspects of
white, Boston terrier, Scottish terrier).
risk of medication to human 
contacts
Non-cutaneous signs:
Lethargy, poor exercise tolerance, be-
latrogenic hypothyroidism
 Re-treatment necessary in
havioural changes, polydipsia, polyuria
20-30% of cats
(>100 ml/kg/day).
Polyphagia - only seen in 50% of cases.
144
4Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Figure 8.10  latrogenic Cushing's disease in a dog caused by
prolonged glucocorticoid usage.
Neuromuscular signs·
口
muscle atro-
Figure 8.12 Poor hair regrowth on the leg of a Labrador (after
phy, pot-bellied appearance (from hep-
 Cruciate surgery) secondary to hyperadrenocorticism.
atomegaly, fat redistribution and weak-
 ness of abdominal muscles) (Figure 8.11),
口
Ocular signs - exophthalmos, corneal ul-
osteomalacia, osteoporosis (rare), pseu-
cers, conjunctivitis.
domyotonia.
口
Pancreatic signs - acute pancreatitis, dia-
口
Urogenital 
signs -
(entire
betes mellitus.
bitches) testicular atrophy (entire dogs),
Cutaneous signs:
clitoral enlargement, recurrent urinary
口
Changes in coat condition and colour,
tract infections, urolithiasis.
slow hair regrowth after clipping (Figure
Respiratory signs - panting, bronchop-
8.12).
neumonia, coronary thrombosis, dys-
口
Alopecia usually bilaterally symmetrical
 trophic mineralisation and fibrosis.
of the flanks, sparing of the extremities.
口
Neurological signs - blindness, head
口
Thin skin with poor elasticity (Figure
 pressing, Horner's syndrome, seizures.
8.13).
Hyperpigmentation, easy bruising, poor
wound healing.
Seborrhoea.
口
口
Comedone formation especially on ven-
trum (Figure 8.14).
Calcinosis cutis is seen on dorsum espe-
cially neck and rump, axillary and in-
guinal areas. Appears as whitish, gritty,
firm bone-like papules and more extensive
plaques (Figure 8.15).
Striae - spontaneous or at site of scar
(Figure 8.16).
Secondary infection with bacteria, yeast,
 dermatophytes or demodex - response to
 therapy is poor in these cases unless hyper-
Figure 8.11 Bilateral alopecia and potbelly in dog with
hyperadrenocorticism.
adrenocorticism is treated concurrently.
Endocrine and metabolic skin disease 145
Figure 8.13 Thin skin with poor elasticity, prominent cuta-
Figure 8.15 Calcinosis cutis on the neck of a Staffordshire
neous blood vessels and haemorrhages due to trauma in dog
bull terrier.
with hyperadrenocorticism.
changes), notably elevations in SAP (90% of
Differential diagnosis
cases due to steroid-induced enzyme of hep-
atic origin, which is not specific for hypera-
Cutaneous lesions:
drenocorticism), also increases in cholesterol,
口
 Other endocrine diseases especially
alanine transaminase, aspartate transaminase
Hypothyroidism
and glucose.
Testicular tumour (Sertoli cell tu-
Thyroid levels, both TT4 and to a lesser de-
mours)
 gree FT4, are low; endogenous TSH is usually
Hair cycle arrest alopecia
normal.
 Urine sample usually has a low specific grav-
ity <1.012,often also proteinuria,glucosuria,
Diagnosis
bacteriuria.
 Imaging techniques:
History and clinical signs.
口
Radiography
reveals signs of hep-
Haematology and biochemistry show typi-
atomegaly,
, osteoporosis, osteomalacia,
cal ‘steroid’ pattern of a stress leucogram
dystrophic mineralisation, adrenocortical
(eosinopaenia, lymphopaenia, neutrophilia).
neoplasia (approximately 50% of adrenal
Seventy per cent of dogs show abnormali-
tumours are calcifed).
ties in biochemical parameters (30% show no
Figure 8.14 Comedone formation on the ventral abdomen
Figure 8.16 Cutaneous striae at site of old ovariohysterec-
of a dog with hyperadrenocorticism.
tomy scar in hyperadrenocorticism.
146
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Ultrasonography, computer tomography
口
Low dose dexamethasone suppression
and magnetic resonance imaging can be
test is the test of choice to diagnose nat-
used to identify adrenal or pituitary
urally occurring hyperadrenocorticism. It
masses.
is accurate in 90-95% of cases:
 Skin biopsy reveals signs of non-specific en-
 Protocol should be performed on a
docrine changes (see hypothyroidism); how-
starved dog. Plasma or serum corti-
ever, other changes more typical of hypera-
sol levels are measured before, 3 hours
drenocorticism include dystrophic minerali-
and 8 hours after intravenous injec-
sation, thin dermis and absence of erector pili
tions of 0.01 mg/kg of dexamethasone.
muscles.
 Cortisol levels suppressed consistently
 Adrenal function tests are important to make
throughout the 8 hour period in nor-
a diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism after a
 mal dogs. Levels that fail to suppress
high level of clinical suspicion has been raised
or escape at 8 hours (see different lab-
by clinical signs and other tests. They can
oratories for specific levels) are consis-
then be used to determine if it is adrenal or
tent with naturally occurring pituitary-
pituitary-dependent disease:
dependent hyperadrenocorticism.
Urinary cortisol: creatinine ratio is not
口
High dose dexamethasone
suppression
specific for hyperadrenocorticism and
test is not suitable as an initial diagnos-
there is overlap with other causes of
tic test. It should only be used to differ-
polyuria and polydipsia. False-positive
entiate pituitary- from adrenal-dependent
tests are very common.
disease:
口
Endogenous
plasma
ACTH
canbe
Protocol should be performed on a
used to differentiate between adrenal-
starved dog. Plasma or serum corti-
and pituitary-based disease. An elevated
sol levels are measured before, 3 and
ACTH level is suggestive of pituitary
8 hours after intravenous injection of
disease,a
 depressed level suggestive of
0.1-1.0 mg/kg dexamethasone.
The
adrenal disease. False negatives can Oc-
higher dose range is recommended by
cur as not all dogs with hyperadrenocorti-
some authors to ensure that maximum
cism have abnormal levels. Samples must
suppression occurs.
be collected into cooled tubes and frozen
Precise interpretation depends on the
immediately due to the short half life of
laboratory - generally cortisol should
ACTH then transported on ice to the lab-
suppress to less than 50% of basal
oratory.
level at time zero, by 4 hours in
口
ACTH stimulation test is useful to differ-
 pituitary-dependent cases, no suppres-
entiate naturally occurring hyperadreno-
sion is usually seen with adrenal
corticism from iatrogenic disease. It is ac-
neoplasia.
curate in 50-60% of cases to identify nat-
Corticotropin-releasing
factor
口
[CRF}
urally occurring hyperadrenocorticism:
stimulation test is not widely available
Protocol should be performed on a
commercially but could be used
to
starved dog. Plasma or serum cortisol
differentiate
 pituitary-dependent
from
levels are measured before and 1 hour
adrenal-dependent disease:
after intravenous injection of 0.25 mg
 Protocol involves the intravenous in-
of synthetic ACTH (Synacthen).
jection of CRF leading to hyper-
 Interpretation varies between labora-
responsiveness of ACTH and cortisol
 tories; usually exaggerated response to
in pituitary-dependent disease; no re-
ACTH is seen. Positive tests usually
 sponse is seen in adrenal disease.
have levels at 1 hour greater than three
Combined test using a combinations of
times the basal. In iatrogenic disease an
ACTH with dexamethasone suppression
inadequate or flat response is seen.
tests is inferior to each individual test.
Endocrine and metabolic skin disease 147
Treatment
diac disease. It is contraindicated in
pregnant/lactating animals and those
Naturally occurring disease:
with renal and hepatic disease. It is
Start therapy of other conditions when start
given at the following dose rate:
treatment for hyperadrenocorticism, e.g. diabetes
 For dogs <5 kg, give 30 mg po with
mellitus, urinary tract infection, pyoderma.
food sid.
For dogs 5-20 kg, give 60 mg po
Pituitary-dependent disease:
with food sid.
口冏
Surgical treatment:
 For dogs 20-40 kg, give 120 mg po
Bilateral adrenalectomy
ortrans-
with food sid.
sphenoidal hypophysectomy requires
 For dogs >40 kg, give 240 mg po
an experienced surgeon and a life-
with food sid.
time of replacement treatment. Post-
 Monitoring can be undertaken
operative complication can occur so
with ACTH stimulation tests at 10
specialist post-operative nursing facil-
days, 4 weeks and 12 weeks af-
ities are also important.
ter starting therapy then every 3
口
 Radiation therapy available in specialist
months. If a dog remains unstable
centres only.
then tests should be repeated ev-
Medical treatment:
ery 10 days until a stable level is
Trilostane (inhibits steroidogenesis) is
achieved. ACTH stimulation tests
currently the licensed drug of choice
should be done 4-6 hours after
for pituitary-dependent hyperadreno-
trilostane therapy. For interpreta-
corticism. It is well tolerated in most
tion see Table 8.6.
dogs but has been recorded to have
Mitotane (o,p'-DDD, adrenolytic agent)
caused sudden death in dogs with car-
has also been used successfully to
Table 8.6  Interpretation of ACTH test results in dogs on trilostane therapy.
 Post-ACTH levels and health of dog
Interpretation and action
<20 nmol/l
 Stop trilostane for 5-7 days and reinstitute at a lower dose rate; repeat
 Irrespective of dogs health
tests as per protocol
>20 nmol/l and <150 nmol/l
Good control maintain the dose and repeat tests as per protocol 
Dog well, normal thirst, appetite
>20 nmol/l and <150 nmol/l
Despite blood results animal health suggests poor control; dose rate
Dog unwell, polyuria, polyphagia, polydipsia
too low; switch to twice daily dosing and retest before increasing the
dose rate by 30 mg daily; repeat test as per protocol
>20 nmol/l and <150 nmol/l
Despite blood levels suggesting good control dog showing signs of
Dog unwell depression, inappetence, vomiting,
adrenal insufficiency; stop trilostane for 5-7 days and reinstitute at a
diarrhoea
lower dose rate; repeat tests as per protocol
>150 nmol/l and <250 nmol/l
Good control probable despite blood tests; maintain the dose and
 Dog well, normal thirst, appetite 
repeat tests as per protocol
>150 nmol/L and <250 nmol/L
Despite blood levels suggesting moderate/good control dog showing
Dog unwell depression, inappetence, vomiting.
signs of adrenal insufficiency Stop trilostane for5-7 days and reinstitute
diarrhoea
at a lower dose rate; repeat tests as per protocol
>150 nmol/l and <250 nmol/l
Poor control dose rate too low increase trilostane by 30 mg daily and
Dog unwell, polyuria, polyphagia, polydipsia
repeat test as per protocol; dog may achieve better control with twice
Suisop Al
148Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
treat pituitary-dependent hyperadreno-
Adrenal-dependent disease:
corticism. Two different protocols are
Surgical treatment:
available for stabilisation:
Unilateral adrenalectomy is the ther-
Low dose protocol should be used for
apy of choice. Post-surgery replace-
dogs with concurrent diabetes melli-
ment therapy is required until atrophic
tus where stabilisation should be un-
gland recovers.
dertaken more slowly:
Medical treatment:
Low dose Protocol 1: Mitotane
This is really only an option where
25-50 mg/kg po 7-10 days for in-
the adrenal mass is inoperable, where
duction. Prednisolone at a dose of
there are metastases or an owner will
0.2 mg/kg po can be given concur-
not consent for surgery. Medical drugs
rently to decrease signs of steroid
that may give some palliation include
withdrawal.S
Side effects during
the following:
induction include lethargy, vom-
Ketoconazole as
pituitary-
iting, diarrhoea, weakness. Mon-
dependent disease.
itor response to mitotane by wa-
Mitotane as for Protocol 2 for
ter consumption decreasing from
pituitary disease.
100 ml/kg daily, eosinophil count
returning and ACTH stimulation
latrogenic disease:
test (no steroids given on day of
Withdrawal of steroids essential but replace-
ment treatment indicated whilst hypothalamic-
bilised maintenance dosage of mi-
pituitary-adrenal cortex recovers.
totane 25-50 mg/kg orally
every
7-10 days can be instituted.
High dose Protocol 2 is used to create
Feline hyperadrenocorticism
a state of hypoadrenocorticism:
High dose Protocol 2:Mitotane
A rare disease in the cat caused by increased levels
50-100 mg/kg po. Start glucocor-
of circulating cortisol.
ticoids and mineralocorticoid
lre-
placement
treatment
on
AEp
3
Cause and pathogenesis
forming an ACTH after 25 days to
ensure flat response,
, i.e. complete
Naturally occurring hyperadrenocorticism:
destruction of adrenal cortex
口
Pituitary-dependent
hyperadrenocorti-
Ketoconazole (inhibits steroidogenesis) at
cism (80% of naturally occurring cases):
a dose of 10-30 mg/kg/day po until a
Seen as a bilateral adrenocortical hy-
response is seen. A useful but expensive
perplasia due to pituitary adenoma or
drug. Can be used to treat adrenal neo-
adenocarcinoma.
plasia
 Defective negative feedback of ACTH
 Other drugs that have not been shown to
at level of hypothalamus.
 be very effective include the following:
Adrenal-dependent
hyperadrenocorti-
Cyproheptadine hydrochloride (anti-
cism:
serotonin agent) at a dose of 0.3-
Adrenocortical neoplasia
due toa
3.0 mg/kg/day po.
functional adenoma or adenocarci-
Bromocriptine mesylate (dopamine
noma.
agonist) at a dose of 0.1 mg/kg/day po.
latrogenic hyperadrenocorticism:
 Selegiline hydrochloride (monoamine
口
Chronic overuse of steroids by injection
oxidase inhibitor) at a dose of 1-
or tablet. Rare in the cat due to its high
2 mg/kg po.
steroid tolerance.
Endocrine and metabolic skin disease 149
Figure 8.17 Pot-bellied appearance in naturally occurring
Figure 8.18 Thin alopecic skin on dorsum and flanks in cat
hyperadrenocorticism.
with hyperadrenocorticism.
Iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism:
Clinical signs
Any age, sex or breed.
Naturally occurring hyperadrenocorticism:
Typically cats with pruritic skin disease or
immune mediated disease. Rare to see this
disease induced by prednisolone, more com-
Middle-old age cat; females are predisposed.
monly more potent longer acting glucocorti-
No breed predisposition is recognised.
coids.
Non-cutaneous signs:
Clinical signs are similar to those for naturally
口
Depression, anorexia, weight loss.
occurring disease, except in addition typical
口
Polydipsia, polyuria, polyphagia.
medial curling of the ear tips is seen.
Ninety per cent of cats are prediabetic
or overtly diabetic (due to corticosteroid-
induced insulin antagonism).
Differential diagnosis
Neuromuscular signs - muscle atrophy,
pot-bellied appearance (Figure 8.17).
Cutaneous lesions especially where alopecia
Respiratory signs - recurrent respiratory
is present:
infections.
Traumatic alopecia (allergy, psychogenic
Cutaneous signs (in decreasing order of fre-
alopecia, parasites, etc.)
quency):
口
Alopecia - partial or complete, involving
dorsum, flanks or ventrum usually sym-
metrical (Figures 8.18 and 8.19)
Thin and fragile skin that tears often only
口
with routine handling.
口
Easy bruising (Figure 8.20).
口
Poor hair coat and seborrhoea sicca.
Secondary infection with bacteria, yeast
 or demodex - response to therapy is poor
in these cases unless hyperadrenocorti-
cism is treated concurrently. Recurrent ab-
scesses can be seen in some cases.
Comedones.
Figure 8.19 Same cat as in Figure 8.18 - skin remains tented
口
Hyperpigmentation.
after release, showing lack of elasticity.
150Manuai of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Protocol - two separate cortisol peaks
are seen in the cat after stimulation,
therefore blood samples are taken to
measure cortisol levels at time O, then
1 and 2 hours after the intravenous ad-
ministration of 125 μg synthacthen.
Most cats with naturally occurring hy-
 peradrenocorticism show an exagger-
ated response to ACTH. Cats with ia-
trogenic disease fail to stimulate ade-
quately.
Low dose(
 dexamethasone suppression
Figure 8.20 Bruising at the site of blood sampling in cat with
test:
hyperadrenocorticism.
Dexamethasone at a dose of 0.01-
0.015 mg/kg intravenously will often
Diabetes mellitus
not suppress cortisol in normal cats.
口
Hyperthyroidism
Essentially, this screening test is a high
口
Cutaneous asthenia
dose suppression test.
口
Pancreatic paraneoplastic alopecia
 Protocol - blood samples are taken
口冏
Acquired skin fragility
to measure cortisol levels at time 0
and 8 hours after the intravenous ad-
ministration of 0.1 mg/kg dexame-
Diagnosis
thasone.
Cortisol levels in most cats with hyper-
 History and clinical signs.
 adrenocorticism fail to suppress.
Haematology and biochemistry rarely show
 High dose dexamethasone suppression
any consistent findings other than hypergly-
test:
caemia. Other changes include elevations in
Protocol as the low dose dexametha-
cholesterol (~50%), serum alanine amino-
transferase [ALT] (~40%) and alkaline phos-
dexamethasone is used. Lack of corti-
phatase [ALP] (~20%).
sol suppression is suggestive of adrenal
 Urine sample often shows signs of glycosuria
neoplasia
where concurrent diabetes mellitus is present.
Combined test:
Urine cortisol: creatinine levels may be ele-
Protocol
collect a baseline blood
vated but stress leads to false positives.
sample for serum cortisol. Adminis-
Imaging techniques:
ter a high dose of dexamethasone (0.1
Radiography
shows
signs
ofhepato
mg/kg intravenously). Collect a post-
megaly.
dexamethasone sample for serum cor-
口
 Ultrasonography, computer tomography
tisol after 2 hours. At the same time
and magnetic resonance imaging can be
administer 125 μg synthacthen intra-
used to identify adrenal or pituitary
venously. Collect a third sample for
masses.
cortisol estimation a further 1 hour
 Skin biopsy reveals no specific changes other
later.
than a decrease in dermal collagen.
Cortisol levels in cats with
1hy-
 Adrenal function tests - poorly described, al-
peradrenocorticism usually do not
ways consult your laboratory for advice be-
suppress after dexamethasone admin-
fore performing these tests in the cat:
istration and overstimulate after syn-
ACTH stimulation test. Many different
thacthen.
protocols have been described:
口
 Endogenous ACTH measurement:
Endocrine and metabolic skin disease
151
This test is useful to differentiate be-
Adrenal-dependent disease caused by
tween adrenal neoplasia and pituitary-
adrenal neoplasia is best treated by
dependent disease. An elevated level
adrenalectomy (usually unilateral). This is
of ACTH suggests pituitary disease, a
usually curative.
depressed level suggested adrenal dis-
 Radiotherapy has been used with partial
ease.
success to treat some cats with pituitary-
Test not widely available and diffcult
dependent disease. It has only a limited avail-
technically as sample needs to be taken
ability.
into chilled blood tubes and trans-
 Prognosis is fair to poor. Provided the hy-
 ported immediately on ice to the labo-
peradrenocorticism is controlled, the diabetes
ratory.
should be manageable.
Treatment
Pituitary dwarfism
Naturally occurring disease:
Therapy of concurrent disease should be
Hereditary hypopituitarism leading to propor-
started at the same time as the treatment for the
tionate dwarfism.
hyperadrenocorticism. However, control of these
will be poor/incomplete until the hyperadreno-
corticism is controlled.
Cause and pathogenesis
Medical therapy:
Usually cyst of Rathke's cleft leading to varying
A poor response has been recorded to any
degrees of deficiency of anterior pituitary.
 medical therapy. Surgical management is
Clinical signs principally of growth hormone
deficiency. However, the disease can lead to a defi-
sible then:
ciency of any one or more of the other anterior pi-
Metyrapone - blocks adrenal synthesis of
tuitary hormones, that is TSH, prolactin, ACTH,
steroids. It can be given at a dose of 65
follicle-stimulating hormone and luteinising hor-
mg/kg po bid. The response to treatment is
mone. Very rare disease in cats and dogs, although
monitored by a reduction in ACTH stim-
more commonly seen in dogs especially German
ulation and improvement in clinical signs.
shepherd dogs as an autosomal recessive disease,
Other dri
such as ketoconazole (10-15
although also described in the Weimaraner, Car-
mg/kg po bid)
 trilostane
(15-30 mg/cat
nelian bear dog.
benefit in hyperadrenocorticism in the cat.
The use of other drugs such as bromocrip-
tine, cyproheptadine and selegiline has
1952
not been documented in the cat.
Surgical therapy:
口
Pituitary-dependent disease is best man-
aged by bilateral adrenalectomy followed
by life long therapy for hypoadrenocor-
ticism. Alternative therapy for pituitary-
dependent disease involves microsurgical
trans-sphenoidal hypophysectomy. This
can really only be undertaken by an ex-
perienced neurosurgeon with specialised
aftercare facilities.
Figure 8.21 Pituitary dwarf Boxer dog.
152Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Clinical signs
 Advanced imaging techniques with MRI or
CT scan may aid in detection of a pituitary
 Puppies and kittens are normal for the first
cyst.
2-3 months, then fail to grow. They present
 Basal growth hormone levels not reliable as a
as proportionate dwarfs (Figure 8.21). They
diagnostic test.
have a reduced life expectancy of 3-8 years.
 Dynamic function tests:
Cutaneous signs:
Clonidine/xylazine stimulation tests:
口冏
Early signs - hair coat shorter, lack of pri-
 Injection of clonidine or xylazine leads
mary hairs.
to increases in growth hormone and
口
 Puppy coat retains soft woolly, easily epi-
glucose in a normal dog; no response
lated hair, sparing of the extremities.
is seen in pituitary dwarfs.
Within first year - bilaterally symmetrical
These are poorly documented in the
口
alopecia with chronic hyperpigmentation.
cat, and are not widely available.
口冏
Skin thin and scaly with comedones.
Consult your local laboratory for de-
口
Often secondary pyoderma, Malassezia
tails.
and seborrhoea.
 Insulin-like growth factor - 1 (IGF-1):
Non-cutaneous signs:
 A single basal sample can be used
 Mental dullness; dogs have a high pitched
tO assess pituitary function indire-
bark.
ctly.
Signs associated with hypothyroidism, hy-
 In dogs the IGF-1 level parallels body
poadrenocorticism (although in German
size; small dogs have lower levels than
shepherd dogs ACTH secretion is not af-
big dogs so detailed knowledge of lab-
 fected) and gonadal abnormalities may be
oratory normal values is essential to
present.
make a diagnosis.
口
Muscular
skeletal  abnormalities
as
stunted growth, square chunky contour.
Reproduction - failure to cycle, testicular
Treatment
口
atrophy.
Therapy of any secondary infection is impor-
Differential diagnosis
tant.
Growth hormone replacement therapy with
porcine or bovine growth hormone has pro-
Congenital hypothyroidism
duced increased hair growth but not skeletal
 Juvenile diabetes mellitus
changes. Therapy carries a risk of hypersen-
Congenital cardiovascular disease
sitivity and diabetes mellitus.
Congenital
hepatic disease
(portacaval
Progestin therapy, which stimulates the mam-
shunts)
mary glands to produce growth hormone,
has been used in some cases. Medroxypro-
Diagnosis
gesterone acetate 2.5-5.0 mg/kg or pro-
ligesterone 10 mg/kg sq can be adminis-
History and clinical signs, especially com-
tered every 3-6 weeks. Risks include di-
pared to litter mates.
abetes mellitus, acromegaly and in entire
Laboratory tests to rule out thyroid and
 bitches reproductive abnormalities including
adrenocortical disease.
pyometra.
Skin biopsy reveals non-specific endocrine
Thyroid, steroid replacement therapy, if ap-
changes especially decreased dermal elastin.
propriate.
 Radiography mostly reveals skeletal abnor-
Castration or ovariohysterectomy are recom-
malities such as delayed closure of long bones,
mended.
delayed eruption of permanent teeth.
 Prognosis is poor.
Endocrine and metabolic skin disease
153
Growth hormone responsive
Increased size of extremities, paws and
dermatoses
skull.
 Organomegaly of heart liver, kidney and
tongue (cat).
See Chapter 12.
Polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, panting.
口
口
Prognathism, widening of interdental
spaces.
Acromegaly
口
Neurological signs may be present.
口
Renal and cardiac failure (common cat,
(6op a1e1
Rare disease caused by overproduction of growth
口荘
 Arthropathy common in the cat.
hormone in the mature dog and cat. In the cat,
Cutaneous signs:
it usually presents as poorly controlled diabetes
口冏
Myxoedema, hypertrichosis
mellitus.
Hard claws
Cause and pathogenesis
Differential diagnosis
Hypersecretion of growth hormone in the mature
animal leads to overgrowth of connective tissue,
Hyperadrenocorticism
 bones and viscera Causes include the following:
Hypothyroidism
Diabetes mellitus
 Progesterone-induced  acromegaly  through
 naturally occurring dioestrous in the bitch or
exogenous administrations of progestagens -
Diagnosis
very common cause in the dog:
Unlike in the dog, progestagens do not
口
 History and clinical signs.
stimulate excessive growth hormone se-
 Dog - haematology and biochemistry non-
cretion in the cat.
specifc changes; hyperglycaemia and increase
Pituitary
 neoplasia
functional
ade-
in SAP
noma/adenocarcinoma of anterior pituitary
Cat - more
e widespread changes including
gland - most common cause in the cat.
hyperglycaemia, hypercholesterolemia, mild
Hypothalamic dysfunction - neoplasia - in-
increases in ALT and ALP (alkaline phos-
creased release of growth hormone releasing
phatase). Associated renal failure may result
hormone.
in azotemia, isosthenuria, and proteinuria.
Ectopic growth hormone production - neo-
A tentative diagnosis of acromegaly may be
plastic lesions of lungs, ovaries, pancreas.
made in a cat with insulin-resistant diabetes
(requiring >2 IU/kg insulin).
 Skin biopsy reveals an increase in collagen
Clinical signs
and mucin in dermis; myxoedema may be
present.
Dogs middle-old age; no breed or sex
 Diagnostic imaging with CT scan or MRI may
predilection.
help to identify a pituitary lesion.
Cats male domestic short haired >10 years of
Basal growth hormone levels and insulin-like
 growth factor (IGF-1) are elevated.
age.
 Non-cutaneous signs:
Dynamic function tests:
 Inspiratory stridor - due to excessive soft
 Plasma growth hormone levels remain un-
tissue in the oropharyngeal area (common
changed in acromegalic dogs after intra-
dog, rare cat).
venous glucose administration.
154Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Treatment
Non-cutaneous signs:
口
Oestrous
cycle
abnormalities,
e.g
 Progesterone-induced  acromegaly  therapy
nymphomania
may be ovariohysterectomy or withdrawal of
 Endometritis or pyometra
 medication as appropriate.
Pituitary/hypothalamic neoplasia:
 Medical therapy with bromocriptine or
Differential diagnosis
口
octreotide unrewarding.
Hypothyroidism
口冏
Neurosurgery - hypophysectomy.
Radiation treatment of pituitary.
■
Hyperadrenocorticism
Prognosis dog is usually good as most cases
■
Hair cycle arrest alopecia
 are linked to excessive progestagen levels.
Follicular dystrophies
Prognosis cat is guarded to poor with survival
times of <4 years often <6 months. Most cats
Diagnosis
die from heart or renal failure.
History and clinical signs.
Haematology and biochemistry are unre-
Hyperoestrogenism in female dogs
markable except where oestrogen-induced
bone marrow occurs, in which case non-
Rare disease caused by excessive levels of oestro-
regenerative anaemia, thrombocytopaenia
 gen in female dogs.
and leukopaenia are seen. Haematology is
obligatory in all cases to identify bone mar-
row suppression.
Causeand
pathogenesis
Laboratory rule out of other endocrine dis-
eases.
Naturally occurring disease
Most commonly seenin intact females usually
docrine changes.
associated with ovarian cysts, less commonly
Elevated blood oestrogen levels may be mea-
with functional ovarian tumours (granulosa-
sured in some c
dogs; however, false-positive
theca cell in origin).
 and false-negative results are common.
 In neutered females, it is caused by ectopic
Exploratory
laparotomy
to
investigate
 production of sex hormones. Iatrogenic.
ovaries and ovariohysterectomy
together
Administration of oestrogen for misalliance
 or as treatment for incontinence after spaying.
Treatment
Clinical signs
Therapy for any concurrent infections to-
Cutaneous signs:
gether with supportive care if oestrogen-
Bilaterally symmetrical alopecia initially
induced myelosuppression is present, i.e fluid
口
affecting the perineum, inguinal and flank
 therapy and whole blood transfusion.
regions. In some cases, it is more gen-
 In intact bitches, ovariohysterectomy is the
eralised and can affect the whole of the
therapy of choice. Radiographs of thorax are
trunk only sparing the head and limbs.
useful prior to surgery to check that there is
 Alopecic skin is often hyperpigmented.
口
 no evidence of metastases in the case of neo-
口
Remaining hair can be easily epilated.
plasia.
口
Enlargement of nipples and vulva.
Prognosis is good in that most dogs show
口
Comedones on ventrum and vulval skin.
 an improvement in cutaneous disease in 3-6
口
 Secondary pyoderma can be present.
months.
Endocrine and metabolic skin disease 155
Oestrogen responsive alopecia
See Chapter 12.
Testosterone responsive alopecia
See Chapter 12.
Testicular neoplasia
Figure 8.22  Generalised alopecia in rough collie with a Ser-
toli cell tumour.
Testicular neoplasia only leads to skin changes
Palpable testicular tumour usually obvi-
when tumours are functional and are producing
ous in one testicle with concurrent atro-
hormones that can affect the skin. Clinical signs
phy of the other testicle.
are associated with excessive production of sex
Feminisation - gynaecomastia, pendulous
 hormones. Cryptorchid testes are 10 times more
prepuce (Figure 8.23), attraction of other
likely to become neoplastic than normal ones. The
male dogs, galactorrhoea.
 principal tumours that can affect the testicles are
Enlarged prostate and associated signs,
as follows:
e.g. faecal'urinary tenesmus.
 Sertoli cell tumours
Oestrogen-induced bone marrow sup-
Interstitial cell tumours
pression.
Seminomas
Cutaneous signs:
Alopecia starts on collar, rump and
All three tumours occur with approximately
√
perineum (Figure 8.24) and progresses
equal incidence.
slowly; head and limbs are generally
spared.
Hair coat is poor and hair can be easily
Sertoli celf tumour
epilated.
Cause and pathogenesis
About a third of all Sertoli cell tumours are func-
tional; most of these are found in cryptorchid
testicles. Cutaneous and systemic signs are at-
tributable to hyperoestrogenism. A hereditary
syndrome of Sertoli cell tumour and feminisation
has been recognised in miniature schnauzers.
Cinical signs
Signs are seen most commonly in middle
aged-old dogs.
 Predisposed breeds include the Boxer, Shet-
land sheepdog (Figure 8.22), Weimaraner,
Cairn terrier, Pekinese.
Figure 8.23  Sertoli cell tumour in a dog showing pendulous
Non-cutaneous signs:
prepuce.
156
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Haematology and biochemistry are unre-
markable except where oestrogen-induced
bone marrow occurs, in which case non-
regenerative anaemia, thrombocytopaenia
and leukopaenia are seen. Haematology is
obligatory in all cases to identify bone mar-
row suppression.
 Sex hormones assays may be useful in some
cases to assess oestrogen levels. However,
false-negative results are common.
Utrasonography of testicles to identify a tu-
mour is rarely needed as most are palpable.
 However, if clinical signs are present with ob-
vious mass, ultrasound may be useful.
Figure 8.24 Sertoli cell tumour in a dog showing perineal
 Skin biopsy reveals signs of a non-specific en-
hair loss.
docrine pattern.
Response to castration together with histo-
 Linear erythematous preputial dermatosis
pathology of neoplastic testicle after castra-
common (Figure 8.25).
tion is important to confirm a retrospective
 Pruritus often associated with generalised
diagnosis.
seborrhoea.
口
Secondary pyoderma and Malasszia in-
Treatment
fections are common.
Bilateral castration is the treatment of choice
in all cases.
Differential diagnosis
Assessment prior to surgery for t
therapy
Hypothyroidism
for any concurrent infections especially skin
：
Hyperadrenocorticism
and prostate together with supportive care
 Hair follicle cycle arrest
if oestrogen-induced  myelosuppression  is
present, i.e. fluid therapy and whole blood
Diagnosis
transfusion.
Prognosis is good in that most dogs show
 History and clinical signs.
 Laboratory rule out for other diseases.
months.
Seminoma
Cause and pathogenesis
Seminomas are found in about 30% of all cases
of testicular neoplasia. They are rarely functional
 so that most produce no dermatological signs.
Clinical signs
 Predisposed breeds include the Boxer, Ger-
man shepherd dog.
Figure 8.25 Linear erythematous preputial dermatosis in a
Oestrogen producing tumours have clinical
dog with a Sertoli cell tumour.
signs that mimic Sertoli cell tumour.
Endocrine and metabolic skin disease157
They are only locally invasive with a low rate
of metastases.
Differential diagnosis
As Sertoli cell tumour.
Diagnosis
As Sertoli cell tumour.
Treatment
As Sertoli cell tumour.
Figure 8.26  Tail gland hyperplasia due to a functional inter-
stitial cell tumour.
Interstitial cell tumour
Diagnosis
As Sertoli cell tumour except that testosterone
Cause and pathogenesis
levels should be checked. These are inconsistently
Interstitial cell tumours are found in about 30%
elevated and false negatives can occur.
of all cases but are uncommonly functional, most
produce no dermatological signs. Can be multi-
Treatment
ple tumours seen in some testicles. Malignancy
 Bilateral castration should be performed and
and metastases are rare. Clinical signs when they
occur are of hyperandrogenism.
 testicles should be submitted for histopathol-
ogy.
 Behavioural modification often needed for the
dinical signs
first few months after surgery.
Treatment of skin infection is important prior
No recognised breed predisposition.
Non-cutaneous signs:
to surgery. Shampoo therapy may be useful
post-operatively with sulphur, salicylic acid
Prostatic disease including signs of faecal
and urinary tenesmus
口
Perianal adenoma
Perineal hernia
 Hypersexual behaviour including aggres-
sion towards other dogs
Cutaneous signs:
Tail and perianal gland hyperplasia
(Figure 8.26)
口
Macular melanosis
口
Greasy seborrhoea often with secondary
 pyoderma and Malassezia infection
口
Symmetrical trunk hair loss sparing of the
extremities (Figure 8.27)
Differential diagnosis
Figure 8.27Alopecia on neck due to a functional interstitial
As Sertoli cell tumour.
cell tumour.
158Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
or tar shampoos to control the greasy seb-
orrhoea whilst the skin and coat recover.
Prognosis is good in that most dogs show
an improvement in cutaneous disease in 3-6
months.
Castration responsive dermatoses
See Chapter 12.
Adrenal sex hormone imbalance
Figure 8.28  Generalised alopecia in a dog with diabetes mel-
litus.
See Chapter 12.
Diagnosis
Diabetes mellitus
History and clinical signs.
Cause and pathogenesis
Rule out of other differential with routine
bloods and dynamic function tests where ap-
Diabetic dogs and cats have abnormal cell medi-
propriate.
ated immunity leaving them susceptible to infec-
Diabetic animals have hyperglycaemia and
tion and ectoparasite problems.
glucosuria.
Clinical signs
Treatment
Therapy of the diabetes is crucial to the man-
 Recurrent bacterial pyoderma is common
agement of the skin:
with Staphylococcus spp.
口
 A full discussion of the management of
Yeast infection can be 
seen with both
Malassezia spp. and Candida spp.
diabetes mellitus is beyond the scope of
 Diabetes mellitus can be an underlying cause
this book; the reader is referred to more
for adult onset demodicosis in both dogs and
specialised endocrine texts for guidance.
Dietary manipulation and insulin therapy
cats.
Generalised seborrhoea is common.
are necessary in most cases.
Symptomatic therapy of skin disease should
Thin hypotonic skin often with alopecia
be undertaken to control concurrent infec-
(Figure 8.28).
tions and ectoparasites.
Differential diagnosis
Necrolytic migratory erythema (NME;
Other causes of skin disease with polyuria and
hepatocutaneous disease)
polydipsia especially
 Hyperadrenocorticism - cat and dog
口冏
 Hyperthyroidism - cat
Cause and pathogenesis
Renal disease
 These diseases can occur concurrently with
A very rare skin disease that is a cutaneous man-
diabetes mellitus.
ifestation of an internal problem. This may be
Endocrine and metabolic skin disease 159
Figure 8.29 Ulceration and crusting on the face of a dog with
Figure 8.31   Severe ulceration of the external genitalia in a
NME.
young dog with NME secondary to a pancreatic carcinoma.
chronic liver disease or else a glucagon secreting
pancreatic tumour. It is thought that an increase
in gluconeogenesis triggered by the hyperglucago-
Lesions are erythematous with scaling,
naemia or increased hepatic catabolism of amino
crusting, erosions and ulcers.
acids produces low plasma amino acid concentra-
口
Areas of trauma on hocks, elbows, ven-
tion and epidermal depletion of protein leading to
rum, mucocutaneous junctions of face
cutaneous lesions. It is an uncommon disease in
(Figures 8.29 and 8.30), distal limbs and
the dog and a rare disease in the cat.
external genitalia (Figure 8.31).
口
Footpads are usually hyperkeratotic and
may be ulcerated and fissured (Figure
Clinical signs
8.32).
口
Variable degrees of pruritus.
Non-cutaneous signs:
No sex predilection.
Debilitating systemic disease leading to
Affects old animals. Predisposed breeds in-
clude Shetland sheepdog, West Highland
lethargy, inappetence and weight loss.
white terrier, cocker spaniel and Scottish
Polyuria and polydipsia may be present
and should stimulate checks for diabetes
terrier.
if recognised.
Cutaneous lesions:
Figure 8.30 Ulceration of the face of cat with NME.
Figure 8.32 Footpad hyperkeratosis in a dog with NME
160Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Differential diagnosis
Surgical intervention possible in some cases
to remove the neoplastic tissue.
Demodicosis
Medical treatment:
Dermatophytosis
Topical therapy:
Systemic lupus erythematosus
口
 Symptomatic shampoos with gentle mois-
Zinc deficiency
turising and soothing products.
Generic dog food dermatosis
Systemic therapy:
Pemphigus foliaceus
口
Treatment of any secondary bacterial and
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
yeast infection, based, where possible, on
culture and sensitivity.
Symptomatic therapy of liver disease
where it is identified together with cor-
Diagnosis
rection of any underlying liver pathology
where possible. Suitable drugs include the
 History and clinical signs.
following:
Haematology reveals a normocytic,
nor-
Vitamin E 400 IU po bid
mochromic, non-regenerative anaemia.
 Ursodil 10 mg/kg po sid
Biochemistry reveals a hyperglycaemia with
S-adenosylmethionine (s-AME) deno-
syl 18-22 mg/kg po sid
Treatment of liver cirrhosis where iden-
decreased blc
tified on biopsy can be undertaken with
colchicine 0.03 mg/kg po sid. This drug
Serum glucagon concentration is elevated if a
can cause gastrointestinal signs if used for
long periods.
Ultrasound
 of liver where chronic liver dis-
Amino acid supplementation can prolong
ease is present typically presents with a *hon-
survival time. Suitable products include
eycombed' pattern. Where pancreatic pathol-
the following:
ogy is present, this too should be visible on
10% crystalline amino acid solution
ultrasound scans.
25 ml/kg iv over 6-8 hours.
Liver biopsy in cases of chronic liver dis-
3% amino acid and electrolyte solu-
ease reveals a vacuolar hepatopathy with
tion 25 ml/kg iv over 6-8 hours.
parenchymal collapse, occasionally liver cir-
Treatment may need to be repeated af-
rhosis.
ter 7-10 days; improvement is usually
Skin biopsy (
 of early lesions reveals a very
seen within 1-3 weeks.
typical red, white and blue appearance. Blue
Alternative amino acid supplements can
is of the parakeratosis/hyperkeratosis of the
be made by feeding
3-6
raweggs
stratum corneum. White is of the oedema
 daily together with zinc and amino acid
of upper half of epidermis. Keratinocyte de-
therapy.
 generation with hyperplastic basal cells gives
 Anti-inflammatory doses of prednisolone
the low red band to complete the colour
 at 1 mg/kg po sid may give some tempo-
triad.
rary relief but due to the underlying liver
 or pancreatic pathology, side effects such
as diabetes or a deterioration of the ani-
mal's condition are possible.
Treatment
Prognosis is poor in all cases due to the
severity of the underlying disease. Death is
Poor prognosis as most cases die or eu-
rarely from skin lesions or complications
thanised.
thereof.
Endocrine and metabolic skin disease
161
Xanthoma
Treatment
Medical treatment:
Cause and pathogenesis
口
Therapy of underlying problem will re-
sult in spontaneous resolution of le-
Granulomatous lesions associated with abnor-
sions, i.e. stabilisation of diabetes melli-
malities in lipid metabolism including the follow-
tus, high fbre/low fat diet in idiopathic
ing:
cases.
Surgical treatment:
Hereditary hyperlipoproteinaemia
口
 Unsuccessful; only results in recurrence of
Diabetes mellitus (naturally occurring and
lesions.
drug induced)
Idiopathic disease
Selected references and further reading
Clinical signs
Byrne,  K.P.(1999) Metabolic
 epidermal
necrosis-hepatocutaneous
syndrome.
Vet
Cutaneous signs:
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract,29,1337-
口
 Lesions typically affect head, extremities
1355
and bony prominences.
Feldman, E.C. and Nelson, R.W. (1996) Hyper-
口
 Multiple white or yellow papules, nodules
adrenocorticism (Cushing's syndrome). In: Ca-
or plaques.
nine and FelineEndocrinology and Reproduc-
口冏
 Surrounding skin appears erythematous.
tion. 2nd edn. Pp. 187-265. WB Saunders,
口
Often painful and pruritic.
Philadelphia
Non-cutaneous signs:
Frank, L.A. (2004) Sex hormone dermatoses. In:
口
Associated with concurrent diabetes or
Campbell, K.L. (ed) Small Animal Dermatol-
hyperlipoproteinaemia.
ogy Secrets. pp. 280-288. Hanley and Belfus,
 Philadelphia
Medleau, L. and Hnilica, K. (2006) Alopecia. In:
Differential diagnosis
Small Animal Dermatology: A Color Atlas and
Therapeutic Guide.2nd edn. Pp. 229-273. WB
Eosinophilic granuloma complex
Saunders, Philadelphia
Cutaneous neoplasia (lymphoma, mast cell
Paradis, M. (2004) Thyroid dysfunction. In:
tumour)
Campbell, K.L. (ed) Small Animal Dermatol-
Cutaneous horn
ogy Secrets. pp. 260-268. Hanley and Belfus,
Callus
Philadelphia
Calcinosis cutis
Rosychuk, R.A. (1998) Cutaneous manifesta-
tions of endocrine disease in dogs. Compend
Small Anim, 20,287-302
Diagnosis
Scott, D.W. et al. (2001) Endocrine and metabolic
diseases. In: Muller and Kirk's Small Animal
History and clinical signs.
Dermatology.6thedn.pp. 780-885. WB Saun-
Skin biopsy reveals signs of multinucleate
ders, Philadelphia
giant cells with foamy macrophages.
Schulman, R.L. (2004) Adrenal dysfunction. In:
Investigation of underlying fault
t in lipid
Campbell, K.L. (ed). Small Animal Dermato!-
metabolism, i
 including biochemistry  and
ogy Secrets. pp. 269-279. Hanley and Belfus,
glucose levels.
Philadelphia
Otitis
s externa
Otitis externa is defined as inflammation of the
categories and diseases within each group are
ear canal (Figure 9.1) and is a common disease in
listed in Table 9.2.
the dog but less common in the cat. To treat otitis
successfully every effort should be made to iden-
tify the primary, predisposing and perpetuating
Perpetuating factors
factors for each case.
In many cases the primary trigger is low grade,
These factors are the pathogenic organisms that
meaning that when the perpetuating factor
1S
occur or pathological changes that progress when
tackled, e.g. bacterial infection, no recurrence is
 a potent primary trigger is not addressed and
seen.
the ear is treated symptomatically; for example,
Where the condition constantly relapses, the
Pseudomonas otitis externa is not a disease but
 primary trigger must be identified and treated.
 a perpetuating microbe secondary to another dis-
ease. These categories are listed in Table 9.3.
Primary causes
Primary causes are present in every case of otitis
Externa. In uncomplicated disease where it is oc-
curring on the first occasion they may not need
to be investigated and treated (see Table 9.1), but
where disease is recurrent or where a dog or cat
presents with chronic disease, it is essential to in-
vestigate.
Predisposing factors
These factors by themselves will not cause oti-
Figure 9.1  Normal eardrum showing soft fleshy pars flaccida
tis externa but will tend to make both dogs
and the opaque pars tensa below. The malleus can be seen
and cats more susceptible to disease. The main
behind the tensa.
Otitis externa
163
Table 9.1  Primary causes of otitis externa.
Category
Diseases within the category
Hypersensitivity
Atopy (Figure 9.2), food intolerance (Figure 9.3), contact hypersensitivity
Parasites
Otodectes cynotis, Demodex spp. (Figure 9.4) Sarcoptes scabiei (Figure 9.5), Notoedres cati,
pediculosis, Eutrombicula, fleas (Spifopsyffa cuniculi)
Fungal
Dermatophytes, Sporothrix schenckii
Endocrine disease
Immunological
Lupus erythematosus, pemphigus foliaceus (Figure 9.7), pemphigus erythematosus, erythema
disease
multiforme (Figure 9.8), cold agglutinin disease, vasculitis, bullous pemphigoid (Figure 9.9),
drug eruption (Figure 9.1 0)
Foreign bodies
Plant material, hair, soil, sand, ear medication
Keratinisation 
Vitamin A responsive dermatoses, primary seborrhoea (Figure 9.11), sebaceous adenitis
disorders
Miscellaneous
Juvenile cellulitis (Figure 9.12), glandular disorders (idiopathic hyperplasia of glands),
abnormalities of cerumen production (Figure 9.1 3)
Table 9.2Predisposing factors in otitis externa.
Category
 Diseases within the category
Anatomical configuration
Stenotic ear canals, e.g. shar-pei (Figure 9.14), hairy canals, e.g poodles
(Figure 9.15), pendulous pinnae, e.g. basset, hairy concave pinna, e.g. spaniel
Exc essive moisture
'Swimmer's ear' especially gun dogs, water-based cleaners, water-based 
antibiotics
Treatment effects
latrogenic trauma, over zealous ear cleaning
Ilritant ear preparations, e.g. strong acids,
Superinfection created by treatment effects on normal flora of ear, e.g.
chronic antibiotic therapy
Obstructive ear disease - this category
Polyps - derived from middle ear especially in cats and external ear canal
could be included in primary triggers;
both dogs and cats (Figures 9.16 and 9.17); neoplasia of external ear canal
however, many animals tolerate growths
in the ears until they obstruct
Systemic disease
Any disease leading to immunosuppression especially in cats FlV, FeLV, FIP
Table 9.3 Perpetuating factors in otitis externa.
Category
Diseases within the category
Bacteria
Gram positive, e.g. Staphylococcus spp. (Figure 9.18), Streptococcus spp.
Gram negative, e.g. Proteus spp., Pseudomonas spp. (Figure 9.1 9)
Yeast
Malassezia spp. (Figure 9.20) Candida albicans
Progressive pathological change
Hyperplasia, oedema, fibrosis (Figure 9.21), severe ceruminous gland hyperplasia,
 progressive changes will eventually
mineralisation of ear canals, failure of epithelial migration and formation of
become non-reversible
ceruminoliths (Figure 9.22)
Otitis media
Infection, excessive granulation tissue in tympanic bulla
164
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Figure 9.2Otitis externa in a dog with atopy showing typical
erythematous changes on medial aspect of ear pinnae.
Figure 9.5   Scabies affecting the ear showing erythema of ear
 pinna and crusting and scaling around the periphery of the ear.
Figure9.3
3 Chronic lichenification and hyperpigmentation in
a dog with food allergy.
Figure 9.6 Hypothyroidism showing marked crusting around
periphery of ear tip.
Figure 9.4 Boxer dog with demodicosis showing comedone
formation on ear pinna.
Otitisexterna
165
Figure 9.7 Pemphigus foliaceus affecting a Yorkshire terrier's
Figure 9.10  Otitis externa induced by topical medication.
ear showing primary pustules and papules.
Figure 9.11 Primary idiopathic seborrhoea affecting the
Figure 9.8 Erythema multiforme affecting the external ear
external ear canal of a cocker spaniel.
canal.
Figure 9.9 Otitis externa caused by bullous pemphigoid.
Figure 9.12  Juvenile cellulitis showing signs of otitis externa.
166
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Figure 9.13  Ceruminous otitis externa.
Figure 9.16 Polyp in external ear canal of Old English
sheepdog.
Figure 9.17 Oropharyngeal polyp in cat's ear.
Figure 9.14  Stenotic ear canal in a shar-pei.
Figure 9.18 Staphylococcal infection superimposed on
allergy.
Figure 9.15 Hairy ears in a cavalier King Charles spaniel.
Otitisexterna
167
Figure
9.19 Pseudomonas
otitis
secondary
to
hypothyroidism.
Figure 9.22 Ceruminolith in dog's ear.
Approach to otitis externa
History, physical and dermatological exami-
nation will usually give clues as to the primary
trigger for otitis externa, e.g. pruritus on other
areas of body with hypersensitivity.
Aural examination to check the ear pinnae,
vertical, horizontal canal plus skin around ex-
ternal auditory meatus.
Otoscopic examination - under sedation or
general anaesthetic if necessary.
Assessment of vertical and horizontal canals
Figure 9.20 Malassezia otitis secondary to allergy.
important plus integrity of tympanic mem-
brane and the middle ear if the eardrum is
ruptured (Figure 9.23).
Figure 9.21Chronic irreversible change in a dog with long-
standing atopic dermatitis.
Figure 9.23 Ruptured tympanic membrane in a dog's ear;
compare with Figure 9.1.
168Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Table 9.4 Basic diagnostic tests in otitis externa.
Diagnostic test
Clinical findings
Cotton woot swab of discharge
(a} Visual inspection
Moist brown exudate - Staphyfococcus, Malassezia
 Purulent yellow/green exudate - Gram negative especially Pseudomonas
Ceruminous brown black discharge - endocrine, keratinisation defects,
anaerobic infection
Dry coffee grounds - Otodectes cynotis
(b) Direct examination of earwax
Parasites - O. cynotis, Demodex spp.
(c} Examination of stained earwax
Inflammatory cells - neutrophils degenerate in infectious disease,
(Diff-Quik or Gram stain)
non-degenerate immune mediated disease
Bacteria
● Cocci -Staphylococcus spp ., Streptococcus spp.
 Rods -Proteus spp., Pseudomonas spp.
Yeast
● Malassezia spp.Candida spp. (rare)
Cufture and sensitivity
Where cocci present and not responded to appropriate empirical therapy
Where rods are present
Where mixed infection is present
Skin scrape of pinna into potassium
Parasites - Demodex spp. Sarcoptes scabiei, Notoedres cati, lice
hydroxide or liguid paraffin
Tape strip of pinna stained with
Cellular infiltrate
Diff-Quik
Neoplastic cells, e.g. lymphoma,
Parakeratotic keratinocytes in keratinisation disorder,
Infectious organisms - cocci, rods, yeasts as above
Biopsy of pinna or vertical ear cana!
'sngydwad Auap! on (sdoig yound jou) ladens ym uayen Asdoig lesdli
erythema multiforme, vasculitis, neoplasia
 Advanced diagnostic techniques - brain stem
Gram negative infection has been identified on
auditory evoked responses (BAER) assess-
cytology.
 ment, MRI, radiography.
 Basic diagnostic tests and possible clinical find-
ings are described in Table 9.4.
Diagnostic tests
More advanced diagnostic tests are often only
 possible in referral centres with the use of video-
otoscopic imaging:
See Chapter 3 on diagnostic tests for a more de-
tailed description of specific tests.
Myringotomy may be necessary if an eardrum
As an absolute minimum database all cases
is intact but there is a suggestion that the
should have cytology performed on ear dis-
eardrum is abnormal (Figure 9.24) or dis-
 charge. This allows an informed decision to be
charge (Figure 9.25) can be visualised behind
made regarding the selection of cleaning fluids
the eardrum. This is best achieved by video-
and antibiotic therapy. Culture of discharge
1s
otoscopic visualisation with either a fine uri-
only really necessary when animals have failed
nary catheter or by COz laser. Fluid can be as-
to respond to rational therapy for Gram pos-
 pirated from the middle ear for cytology and
itive infection or where a mixed infection or
culture. If the area appears ^dry' 2 ml of sterile
Otitis exterma
169
so that wax will accumulate inside
the canal of dogs leading to repeat
infection and ceruminolith formation.
Table 9.5 gives details of ear cleaning
agents and their mode of action.
Topical antibacterial products:
 Indications: Antibiotics and antibacte-
rial flushes should be based initially
on cytology. Where Gram positive in-
fection (cocci on cytology) is present,
drugs can usually be prescribed empir-
ically without cultures being necessary
(Table 9.6). Where Gram negative in-
fection (rods on cytology) is present,
Figure 9.24 Abnormal eardrum; compare with Figure 9.1.
empirical therapy can be used based on
drugs from Table 9.7 pending culture
saline can be instilled through the myringo-
results.
tomy incision and then aspirated back for
口
 Topical glucocorticoids:
analysis.
 Indications: Topical glucocorticoids
 Pinch biopsy of the horizontal canal or of
 can be used to produce a variety of
masses within the canal or middle ear can
also be performed by video-otoscopic guid-
benefits in the ear (see Table 9.8). Hy-
drocortisone and prednisolone have
ance with grasping tools
minimal cutaneous absorption. More
potent steroids such as dexamethasone
Treatment
and betamethasone have greater de-
grees of systemic absorption. Initial
therapy may be undertaken with a po-
Topical treatment:
tent steroid but topical drugs should
Ear cleaners:
口
be switched to the least potent topi-
Indications: - Ear cleaners are essen-
cal drug as possible to avoid pituitary
tial in all cases of otitis. In many cases
adrenal axis suppression. They should
epithelial migration has been altered
 not be used on a daily basis over long
periods.
Topical anti-yeasts:
Indications: Anti-yeast drugs and
flushes can be used on an empiri-
 cal basis after cytology. Yeast infec-
tion can occur concurrently with both
Gram positive and Gram negative in-
fections. Suitable drugs are detailed
in Table 9.9. In uncomplicated cases
where only yeast is identifed on cytol-
Ogy it is unusual to see the eardrum is
damaged.
 Topical anti-parasitic agents:
Indications:
Topical  anti-parasitic
drugs need to have activity against
Otodectes cynotis and Demodex spp.
Figure 9.25 Eardrum is bulging outwards. There is evidence
of fluid behind it.
Suitable drugs are listed in Table 9.10.
170Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Table 9.5Ear cleaners and their mode of action.
Agents with recognised
Agents with no recognised
Agents with an
ototoxicity when the
ototoxicity when the
Agent
unknown ototoxicity
eardrum is ruptured 
eardrum is ruptured'
Ceruminolytic
Dioctyl sodium/calcium
agents
sulphosuccinate
 Carbamate peroxide
Lubricants
Glycerine
 Triethanolamine polypeptide 
Squalene
 oleate condensate
 Propylene glycol 
Flushing
 Povidone iodine
Water
agents
>0.05% chlorhexidine
Sterile saline 
0.05% chlorhexidine
2.5% acetic acid
EDTA-tris
Drying
Lactic acid
Isopropyl alcohol
2.5% acetic acid
agents
Malic acid
Boric acid
Benzoic acid
Salicylic acid
Aluminium 
si licate/acetate
juaun iea aippiw ay ul asn ioj pasuas!l s! uoeipaw on dea alppiu ayi ui ajes Alaaiduos aq lana ues nup on
 recommendations are based on expert opinion and current veterinary literature.
Table 9.6Useful topical drugs in Gram positive infections.
Table 9.7
Useful topical drugs in Gram negative infections.
Topical drugs that should 
Topical drugs that may be
Topical drugs that may only
Topical drugs that may be
 only be considered if the
considered if the eardrum is
be used if the eardrum is
used if the eardrum is 
eardrum is intact
ruptured 1,2
intact
ruptured',2
Ciprofloxacin
Ciprofloxacin
Amikacin sulphate 
Enrofloxacin
Enrofloxacin
Enrofloxacin 
Ciprofloxacin
2.5% acetic acid
 Framycetin
Marbofloxacin
Colistin
EDTA-tris
Fusidic acid
Framycetin
Marbofloxacin
Gentamicin
Gentamicin 
Neomycin 
Neomycin
Polymyxin B
Ofloxacin
Tobramycin
Silver sulphadiazine
Polymyxin B sulphate
Ticarcillin
1See note above with Table 9.5.
Tobramycin
2 Injectable formulations of these antibiotics are preferable.
Where possible licensed drugs should be used.
I See note above with Table 9.5.
ZInjectable formulations of these antibiotics are preferable.
Where possible licensed drugs should be used.
Otitisexterna
171
Table 9.8 Uses of glucocorticoids in otitis externa.
Table 9.9
 Topical anti-yeast drugs for treatment of otitis
externa.
Acute otitis
Chronic otitis
Topical drugs that should 
Topical drugs that may
only be considered if the 
 be used if the eardrum is
Reduction of erythema
As acute otitis
eardrum is intact
ruptured1.2
Reduction of oedema
Reduction of hyperplasia
 Decreased inflammatory
Reduction of ceruminous
Ketoc onazole
Boric acid
cell infiltrate 
gland hyperplasia
Miconazole
Clotrimazole
Nystatin
Reduction in pain due to
Widening of lumen
Monosulfiram
reduce nerve entrapment
Thiabendazole
Zinc undecylenate
Systemic therapy:
Indications:
1,2See notes with Tables 9.5 and 9.6.
口
Antibiotics are rarely indicated in ei
ther otitis externa or media and it re-
mains controversial whether adequate
Glucocorticoids may be used in acute
levels enter the aural tissue to produce
 allergy in the form of prednisolone at
benefit (for dose rate of systemic ther-
a dose of l mg/kg once daily by mouth
apy, see Chapter 4).
for 2 weeks then tapering down to
Anti-yeast therapy appears to be more
lowest possible alternate day dosage.
successful than that for bacterial infec-
In immune mediated disease,
pred-
tion (for suitable drugs and dose rates 
nisolone is used at a dose of 2 mg/
for yeast infection, see Chapter 5).
      
Table 9.10 Topical anti-parasitic drugs for use in otitis externa.
Systemic drugs with
Drugs with 
Topical drugs should
Drugs with
Drugs with 
anti-mite activity available 
activity
Drugs with
only be used when the 
anti-demodex
anti-otod ectes 
in spot on formulation or
against 
 activity against
eardrum is intact!
activity
activity
po (see Chapter 7}
demodex
otodectes
Amitraz²
Ivermectin
Fiproni3
5,6
Milbemycin
Ivermectin4
/5,6
5,6
Moxidectin
Monosulfiram
,6
Selamectin 
Pyrethrins
Rotenone
Thiabendazole
IWhere any of the listed drugs are not found in licensed otic products, their usage corresponds to an extra label usage.
 ZAmitraz may be diluted with 2 ml of 5% solution added to 20 ml of mineral oil and used topically. It is also available as a
licensed spot on preparation.
3Fipronil spot on preparations have been used topically in ear canals.
4 Ivermectin may be used diluted 1: 9 with mineral oil and used topically.
5 Applies to use in the dog.
6Applies to use in the cat.
172
2Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
switching to alternate day medication
2nd edn. pp. 275-304. WB Saunders, Philadel-
 and then tapering to the lowest possi-
phia
ble maintenance dose.
Harvey, R. et al. (2001) Ear Disease of the
Surgery:
 Dog and Cat. Iowa University State Press,
口
Surgery should only be undertaken where
Ames
irreversible pathological changes have oc-
Logas, D. (2000) Appropriate use of gluco-
curred and the ear is no longer responsive
corticoids in otitis externa. In: Kirk's Cur-
to medical management.
rent Veterinary Therapy XIll. Small Ani-
口
This should not replace a thorough diag-
mal Practice. Pp. 585-586. WB Saunders,
nostic work-up.
Philadelphia
Medleau, L. and Hnilica, K. (2006) Otitis ex-
terna. In: Small Animal Dermatology: A Color
Atlas and Therapeutic Guide. 2nd edn. Pp.
Selected references and further reading
376-390. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
Morris, D.O. (2004) Medical therapy of otitis ex-
Angus, J.C. (2004) Diseases of the ear. In:
terna and otitis media. In: Matousek, J.L. (ed)
Campbell, K.L. (ed) Small Animal Dermatol-
Veterinary Clinics of North America,Small An-
ogy Secrets. pp. 364-384. Hanley and Belfus,
imal Practice, Ear Disease. Vol. 34. pp. 541-
Philadelphia
556. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
 Bensignor, E. (2003) An approach to otitis ex-
Scott, D.W. et al. (2001) Otitis externa. Muller
terna and media. In: Foster, A.P. and Foil,
and Kirk's Small Animal Dermatology.6th
C.S. (eds) BSAVA Manual of Small Animal
edn. pp. 1204-1232. WB Saunders, Philadel-
Dermatology. 2nd edn. Pp. 104-112. BSAVA
phia
Gloucester
White, P.D. (1999) Medical management of
Gotthelf, L. (ed) (2005) Diagnosis and treatment
chronic otitis in the dog. Compend Contin
of otitis externa. In: Small Animal Ear Disease.
Educ,21(8),716-728
Allergic skin diseas
Urticaria and angioedema
Generally benign, self-limiting disease but can
occur in waves as old lesions resolve and new
lesions appear.
Cause and pathogenesis
Angioedema:
Immunological or non-immunological de-
granulation of mast cells of basophils.
Localised or generalised area of large oedema-
Immunological trigger type I, III hypersensi-
tous swelling; usually involves the head (Fig-
tivity reaction.
ure 10.2).
Non-immunological:
 Pruritus and exudation variable.
May be fatal if oedema involves pharynx, lar-
 physical forces (pressure, sunlight, heat,
ynx or nasal mucosa leading to dyspnoea.
exercise)
Anaphylactic shock is rare.
 genetic abnormalities
口
 drugs and chemicals including foods and
food additives
Differential diagnosis
口
venomous insects
口冏
plants
Urticaria:
Uncommon disease in dogs and rare in cats
 Folliculitis especially with hair tufting (bacte-
ria, demodex, dermatophyte)
Vasculitis
Clinical signs
Erythema multiforme
 Neoplasia especially lymphoma, mast cell tu-
Urticaria:
mours
Angioedema:
Localised or generalised weals (Figure 10.1).
Pruritus and exudation variable.
 Juvenile cellulitis
 Hair tufts over areas of swelling.
Infectious cellulitis
174
4Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Skin biopsy reveals a variable, non-diagnostic
pattern often superficial perivascular dermati-
tis.
Treatment
 Elimination and avoidance of trigger factors
when they can be identified.
Treatment of symptoms:
Angioedema:
Adrenalin 1:10,000 0.5-1.0 ml iv in
severe reactions and 0.2-0.5 ml iv, sq
Figure 10.1  Urticarial weals in a dog with atopic dermatitis.
in mild reactions as single treatments.
 Dexamethasone sodium phosphate 1-
2 mg/kg iv or prednisolone sodium
Neoplasia especially lymphoma, mast cell tu
succinate 100-500 mg/dog iv as single
mour
treatments.
Myxoedema
Urticaria:
Lymphoedema
Glucocorticoids in the form of pred-
nisolone as a single treatment of 2
mg/kg po, iv, im in acute disease fol-
Diagnosis
lowed by antihistamine therapy.
Antihistamines work best as mainte-
nance therapy and in recurrent disease
History and clinical signs. Identification of an
especially hydroxyzine or chlorpheni-
underlying cause is not always possible but
time spent taking an extensive history is par-
ramine (see Table 10.1).
ticularly useful in cases of urticaria and an-
gioedema.
Diascopy of lesion (see Chapter 3). Urticaria
Canine atopy (atopic dermatitis)
lesions will blanch suggesting erythema is due
to vasodilation not haemorrhage as in vasculi-
This is defined as a genetic predisposition to de-
tis.
velop allergic skin disease mediated through a
type I hypersensitivity reaction to environmental
allergens.
Cause and pathogenesis
Atopy is thought to be genetically inherited
disease. Parasites, viral infection, and vacci-
nation are thought to augment the production
of IgE specific for environmental allergens.
The amount of allergen exposure appears
to be critical in determining development of
atopy.
Route of allergen still remains controver-
Figure 10.2 Angioedema in a Boxer due to a food
sial and may be percutaneous, inhaled or
intolerance.
ingested.
Allergic skin disease
175
Clinical signs
Approximately 10% of all dogs are affected
with atopy.
Age of onset 6 months to 7 years, although
more commonly 1-3 years of age.
Eighty per cent of dogs start with seasonal
disease during the summer months but many
eventually become non-seasonal.
Breed predilection is recognised, and the shar-
pei, West Highland white terrier, Scottish ter-
rier, English setter, Labrador retriever, Boxer,
breeds.
Cutaneous lesions:
口
 Pruritus moderate - severe involving face
(Figure 10.3), distal extremities (Figures
10.4 and 10.5), anterior elbows and ven-
trum (Figure 10.6).
Figure 10.4 Erythema and lichenification of the flexural
Atopic otitis externa is seen in more than
aspects of the carpus in an atopic German shepherd dog.
 50% of cases (Figure 10.7).
口
Conjunctivitis: approximately 50% af-
fected.
口
Ocular signs less well established but pos-
 Other signs include bacterial pyoderma,
sible links to cataract and keratoconjunc-
acute moist dermatitis, acral lick dermati-
tivitis sicca.
tis (65-70%).
 Urogenital disease in the form of abnor-
Malassezia infection seen in many as a sec-
mal cycling in bitches.
口
ondary factor.
Non-cutaneous signs are uncommon:
口
Respiratory
disease especially rhinitis,
asthma.
口
Gastrointestinal diseases intermittent di-
arrhoea, colitis.
Figure 10.3 Periocular pruritus and pyoderma in an atopic
Figure 10.5 Interdigital pedal saliva staining in an atopic
Dalmatian.
West Highland White terrier.
176
6Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
Diagnostic rule outs of other pruritic skin
disease especially ectoparasites, bacterial and
yeast infection. Atopy is a diagnosis of exclu-
sion.
Elimination food trial to rule out concurrent
food'allergy'.
Skin biopsy may be useful as part of the in-
vestigation to rule out other diseases but can-
not be used to make a diagnosis of atopy.
Histopathology reveals signs of a non-specific
superficial perivascular dermatitis.
 Specific allergy tests to investigate atopy may
be undertaken once a diagnosis has been
made to help in the management of the dis-
ease.
Figure 10.6 Chronic lichenification and hyperpigmentation
Allergy testing:
in a long-standing atopic dog.
口
 Intradermal skin testing thought to be the
'gold standard’ test for atopic dogs but
needs to be performed by an experienced
Differential diagnosis
clinician. Most useful tests are performed
 using individualised allergens rather than
Flea-allergic dermatitis
mixes (Figure 10.8).
 Food hypersensitivity/intolerance
 In vitro allergy tests also very useful in
many cases but should be submitted to a
Scabies
Contact dermatitis
laboratory with expertise in this area.
Malassezia dermatitis
Bacterial folliculitis
Treatment
Many of these diseases can occur concurrently in
 Treatment of concurrent disease, e.g. bacterial
atopic dogs.
and Malassezia infections, ectoparasite control
Figure 10.7 Erythema of the ear pinnae in an atopic German
shepherd dog.
Figure 10.8  Intradermal allergy test in a dog.
Allergic skin disease177
and food regulation are important as part of the
Cause and pathogenesis
overall management of atopy
Environmental modification:
Contact allergy - type IV hypersensitivity reac-
Natural desensitisation is rare.
tion; must be distinguished from contact irritants.
Approximately 1-5% of all canine dermatoses
Avocidance is not often possible but exposure
are caused by contact hypersensitivity. It is an
to specific allergens can be decreased signif-
icantly through environmental changes, e.g.
uncommon disease in dogs and is rare in cats.
house dust mite, allergic dogs may be housed
Prolonged contact with the offending allergen is
normally required (up to 2 years) to produce a
outside or bedding can be switched to avoid
reaction. It can be triggered by plants, e.g. poi-
natural fbres especially feathers. Dogs should
son ivy, poison oak; metals, e.g. cobalt, nickel;
be kept out of bedrooms and bedding can be
rubber, resins, carpet deodorisers, floor cleaners,
treated with sprays to decrease mite numbers
plastic dishes, chews, toys, etc. Hypersensitivity
or washed at high temperatures
reactions to topical drugs can also occur most
commonly with neomycin.
Topical therapy:
 Antipruritic agents may be useful in the form
Clinical signs
of creams, rinses, sprays and shampoos.
Cooling
solutions containing menthol,
No breed predilection has been recognised.
hamamelis extract, aloe vera and colloidal
oat meal are available.
Where only a single animal in a household is
affected it tends to suggest a hypersensitivity
Topical glucocorticoids may be used but long.
reaction, where several animals are affected
term use of potent topical products should be
 an irritant reaction is more likely.
avoided.
 Lesions confined to hairless or sparsely haired
Systemic therapy:
areas (except where signs caused by creams,
shampoos, etc.), e.g. ventral abdomen (Fig-
A range of systemic drugs can be used to con-
ure 10.9), thorax, neck, scrotum, perineum,
trol pruritus in atopic dogs. Table 10.1 details
ventral aspect of paws (not usually the pads).
some of the potential medications and dose
If the lips and muzzle are affected then the
rates.
 allergen is usually being chewed or is a feed
Allergen-specific immunotherapy:
bowl.
Useful in dogs where allergen avoidance
Lesions show variable degrees of pruritus:
is impossible and where topical and sys-
口
Acutely - erythema, macules, papules,
temic treatment is unsuccessful; produces
alopecia, pustules variable.
side effects or is prohibitively expensive.
 Dogs are injected with increasing amounts
of allergen to induce immune 'tolerance'.
Success rate 60-80%. Some dogs (60%)
can be controlled with vaccines alone,
others (80%) require concurrent medical
therapy.
Contact hypersensitivity
Rare dermatitis manifested as an allergic maculo-
papular reaction affecting sparsely haired contact
Figure 10.9 Erythema in axilla and groin in a dog with con-
areas.
tact hypersensitivity.
178Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Table 10.1
 Anti-inflammatory medication shown to have benefits in canine atopy.
Drug
Dose rate
Comments
Antihistamines
Success rates range from 1 to 30%; different drugs may be for 7-10 day therapeutic
trials to assess effic acy. They can be used in combination with other drugs
 Amitriptyline
1.0-2.0 mg/kg po bid
Astemizole
1.0 mg/kg po bid/sid
Cetirizine
0.5-1.0 mg/kg po sid 
Chlorpheniramine
0.2-3.0 mg/kg po tid/bid
May be used in atopy and urticaria
Clemastine
0.05-1.5 mg/kg po bid 
Clomipramine
1.0-3.0 mg/kg po sid 
Cyproheptadine
0. 1-2.0 mg/kg po tid/bid 
 Diphenhydramine 
1.0-4.0 mg/kg po tid
Doxepin
0.5-1.0 mg/kg pot id/bid 
Hydroxyzine
3.0-7.0 mg/kg po bid
May be used in atopy and urticaria
 or atadine
0.5 mg/kg po sid
Promethazine
1.0-2.5 mg/kg po bid
Terfenadine
0.25-1.5 mg/kg po bid/sid
Trimeprazine
0.5-5.0 mg/kg po tid/bid
Non-steroidal
Often not successful as sole form of therapy but drugs below can be used with
 anti-inflammatory
glucocorticoids in a steroid sparing capacity
sans
 Pentoxifylline
10-25 mg/kg po bid/tid
 Misoprostol
6.0 mg/kg po tid 
Chinese herbal
Clinical trials have shown these drugs to have benefit in about 30% of cases; they
medicines
can be used in conjunction with other drugs
Essential fatty acids
Clinical trials have shown these drugs to be beneficial in 20-50% of pruritic dogs:
benefits take 8-12 weeks; they have synergism with glucocorticoids and
antihistamines
Cyclosporine
 5.0 mg/kg po sid
Successful in 60-75% of dogs: initial dose given for
4-6 weeks then tapered to lowest possible
maintenance dose; should only be given to fit 
animals and should be regularly monitored by
routine blood samples and where appropriate urine
analysis
Glucocorticoids
Produce control in 75% of dogs: most suitable for animals with short pruritus season
(<4 months); side effects can be seen with long-term use; they should not be used on
 a daily basis for long-term maintenance and always tapered to lowest possible dose 
rate
Prednisolone
0.25-0.5 mg /kg po bid
Induction phase of 5-10 days to control pruritus 
0.5-1.0 mg/kg po eod
For maintenance tapering to lowest possible dose
rate
Methyl prednisolone
0.2-0.4 mg/kg po bid 
Induction phase of 5-10 days to control pruritus 
0.4-0.8 mg/kg po eod
For maintenance tapering to lowest possible dose
rate
Allergic skin disease179
hours reveals signs of hypersensitive reac-
tion.
 Open patched test is performed when a
test substance is rubbed into skin and then
observed over a 5 day period.
 Skin biopsy is of little value and reveals a non-
specific picture of superficial perivascular der-
matitis.
Ireatment
Topical treatment with hypoallergenic baths
Figure 10.10 Lichenification and erythema in a chronic
contact allergic dog.
to remove cutaneous allergens may be useful.
Secondary infection with bacteria or yeast
need to be treated.
 Chronically - alopecia, variable pigment
 Allergen avoidance is important but requires
changes (hypo- or hyperpigmentation),
identification of the offending allergen, which
lichenification (Figure 10.10).
can be difficult. Where avoidance is impossi-
Secondary infection with both bacterial pyo
 ble, a mechanical barrier may be useful with
derma and Malassezia are common.
socks or a t-shirt.
 Pentoxifylline is useful in some cases in dogs
at a dose of 10-25 mg/kg po tid.
Differential diagnosis
Glucocorticoids:
 Short-term therapy is useful if the of-
Irritant contact dermatitis
口
fending allergen is identified and removed
Atopy
Food hypersensitivity
from the animal's environment. Topical
Scabies
steroids may be used once or twice daily
for 7-10 days or systemic prednisolone
Pelodera dermatitis
may be used at a dose of 1.0 mg/kg po
Hookworm dermatitis
sid (dogs) or 2.0 mg/kg po sid (cats) for
Malassezia dermatitis
the same period.
Chronic therapy may be necessary when
the allergen cannot be identified 
Diagnosis
or
its removal from the animal's environ-
ment is not possible. Prednisolone or
History and clinical signs.
 Provocative exposure can be undertaken by
methyl prednisolone may be used un-
der the same treatment protocol as for
confining the animal to hypoallergenic en-
vironment for 14 days, e.g. stainless steel
atopy.
cage. Careful re-exposure to potential aller-
 Prognosis is good if the offending allergen can
 gens can then be undertaken to try and trigger
be identified and removed from the animal's
reaction.
environment.
 Patch testing is technically difficult to achieve.
as ro ado q op aq uo s
methods:
Canine food hypersensitivity (food
口
 Closed patch test is undertaken when a
intolerance/food allergy)
test substance is applied to clipped skin
on lateral thorax on gauze pad or in ster-
ile stainless steel chamber, secured in place
Non-seasonal pruritic skin disease associated
by a body bandage. Examination after 48
with ingestion of components of the diet
180Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Cause and pathogenesis
 Food allergy - type I reactions to food (Ill and
 IV may also occur); where true allergy occurs
the reaction is usually triggered by glycopro-
teins.
Food intolerance clinically indistinguishable
from allergy but is a non-immunological re-
action. Caused by food containing histamine
 or related substances, or histamine-releasing
factors.
Foods implicated in hypersensitivity include
beef, dairy products, chicken, wheat, eggs,
Figure 10.12 Self-inflicted trauma of elbow flexures in food-
 corn and soya. Additives and flavourings are
allergic puppy.
rare causes of allergy in dogs.
Can mimic both atopy and flea-allergic
dermatitis.
Clinical signs
Pruritus often
口
1poorly
responsive
to
steroids and is non-seasonal.
Cause of approximately 1 % of all canine skin
口
Lesions can be confined to the ears.
disease.
May present with signs of acral lick der-
matitis.
though often seen in young dogs. Thirty per
口
Secondary bacterial and Malassezia infec-
cent of affected dogs are <1 year old.
tions can occur.
No breed predilection is recognised.
Non-cutaneous signs:
Cutaneous signs:
口
Gastrointestinal signs seen in 30% of
口
Pruritus and erythema can cause a papular
cases as increase in faecal frequency, tenes-
eruption, but not a consistent finding.
mus, colitis, vomiting, poor appetite.
 Secondary lesions of self-inflicted trauma
口
Central nervous system signs are rare.
(Figure 10.11), often acute moist dermati-
Seizures have been reported, associated
tis.
with dietary reactions.
Distribution of lesions variable, often dis-
tal limbs (Figure 10.12), axilla, groin, per-
Differential diagnosis
ineum, face and neck.
Atopy
Contact allergy
 Flea-allergic dermatitis
Pediculosis
Scabies
Cheyletiellosis
Malassezia dermatitis
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
Elimination diets:
Figure 10.11 Generalised pruritus and erythema in a dog
口冏
Response to elimination diet is the best
with food allergy.
way to establish a diagnosis. The diet
Allergic skin disease
181
should be fed for 10-13 weeks where
exposure can be achieved by adding new chal-
possible; some improvement should be
lenge food to the hypoallergenic diet every 7--
seen in 4 weeks. Provocative challenge
10 days
should be undertaken if improvement
Selection of diet for long term can either be
is seen to establish a definitive diagno-
in the form of home-cooked diets with addi-
sis.
tional minerals, vitamins and essential fatty
：
Selection of diet is important and it should
 acid supplements or proprietary diets that do
be individualised for each dog to include
 not contain any of the identified allergens.
the following:
Symptomatic anti-inflammatory therapy
is
Novel
protein
and
1 carbohydrate
rarely beneficial unless the diet is managed
source.
concurrently.
Free of additives, colourants where
 Prognosis is good, provided the offending al-
possible.
lergens are identified and avoided on a long-
Suitable proteins include fish, rabbit,
term basis.
venison, turkey, kangaroo, chicken,
duck, soya.
Suitable carbohydrates include rice,
Feline atopy (atopic dermatitis)
potatoes, corn.
Types of diet:
Home cooked are ideal but owner
An exaggerated or inappropriate response to en-
compliance is often poor and these are
vironmental allergens.
unbalanced for young dogs.
Commercial hypoallergenic diets are
 not a ‘pure' diet but more convenient
Cause and pathogenesis
for busy owners and is nutritionally
complete.
Thought to be an immediate hypersensitivity
Hydrolysed diets are a new generation
 reaction to a heat labile antibody resembling
of commercial diets where the protein
IgE.
is hydrolysed to a size to render it non-
Route of allergen remains unclear; may be
allergenic, rendering the type of pro-
percutaneous absorption, inhaled or ingested.
tein less critical.
 Food allergy testing using both intrader-
mal and serological tests is currently unreli-
Cfinicaf signs
able.
Skin biopsy is non-diagnostic and reveals a
 No breed or sex predilection is recognised al-
non-specific superficial perivascular dermati-
though young cats appear to be predisposed.
tis.
 Pruritus is a consistent finding.
 Different cutaneous patterns can be seen:
Self-induced alopecia, usually ventral but
Treatment
also on caudal thighs, forelegs or lateral
thorax (Figures 10.13 and 10.14).
Treatment of secondary infection is essen-
 Eosinophilic granuloma complex.
tial. Where other allergies are present con-
口
Miliary dermatitis.
currently, e.g. flea allergy or atopy, these also
口
Facial (Figure 10.15) and pedal pruri-
'pau aq oi paa
tus (often secondary bacterial paronychia,
Once a diagnosis has been made and of-
Figure 10.16).
fending allergens have been identified by
口
 Pruritic ceruminous otitis externa.
provocative re-exposure, food allergen avoid-
 Many cats have concurrent food hypersensi-
ance should be maintained. Provocative re-
tivity, flea-allergic dermatitis.
182
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Figure 10.13 Ventral alopecia secondary to atopy.
Figure 10.15 Facial pruritus in an atopic cat.
 Respiratory signs of bronchitis and asthma
may also be seen in some cats.
cat as reactions are more subtle than in the
Differential diagnosis
:6op
口
Reactions often occur and fade rapidly
Flea-allergic dermatitis
within 10 minutes.
Food hypersensitivity
Systemic fluorescein may improve the di-
Cheyletiella
agnostic accuracy of intradermal allergy
 Ectopic otodectes
testing in cats.
Dermatophytosis
口
 Must be read by an experienced investiga-
 Psychogenic alopecia
tor.
Serology testing not adequately evaluated to
date.
Diagnosis
Skin biopsy reveals a non-specific picture of
superficial perivascular dermatitis and acts as
History and clinical signs.
a rule out rather than as a diagnosis.
Laboratory rule outs for other diseases espe-
Bloods unremarkable; however, a peripheral
cially flea/food allergy.
eosinophilia usually present unless glucocor-
Intradermal skin testing useful as an aid to
ticoids have been prescribed.
diagnosis but is difficult to undertake in the
Figure 10.14 Pedal alopecia secondary to atopy.
Figure 10.16 Bacterial paronychia secondary to atopy.
Allergic skin disease
183
Treatment
Cause and pathogenesis
Treatment of concurrent disease, e.g. bacterial
 Pathogenesis is poorly understood. A type I
and Malassezia infections, ectoparasite control
hypersensitivity (III and IV may also occur)
and food regulation are important as part of the
to food is thought to be present. Where true
 overall management of atopy.
allergy occurs the reaction is usually triggered
Environmental modification:
by glycoproteins.
Food intolerance clinically indistinguishable
Natural desensitisation is rare.
from allergy but is a non-immunological re-
Avoidance is not often possible but exposure
action. Caused by food containing histamine
to specific allergens can be decreased signif-
or related substances, or histamine-releasing
icantly through environmental changes; for
factors.
example, house dust mite cats may be moved
 Foods implicated in hypersensitivity include
to an outdoor cattery. Cats should be kept out
beef, pork, dairy products especially milk,
of bedrooms and bedding can be treated with
chicken, lamb, eggs and fish. Additives and
sprays to decrease mite numbers or washed at
flavourings are rare causes of allergy in cats.
high temperatures.
Topical therapy:
Clinical signs
Topical antipruritic agents are rarely useful
due to the problems with application in cats.
No age or sex predilection is reported al-
though often seen in cats 4-5 years of age.
Topical glucocorticoids may be used but long-
term use of potent topical products should be
Siamese cats may be predisposed.
avoided.
Cutaneous signs very variable:
口
Pruritus often poorly 
responsive to
Systemic therapy:
steroids and is non-seasonal.
口
Facial pruritus (Figure 10.17), including
A range of systemic drugs can be used to con-
pinnae and neck.
口
Ventral or flank alopecia (self-inflicted due
trol pruritus in atopic cats. Table 10.2 details
some of the potential medications and dose
to overgrooming).
口
Miliary dermatitis.
rates.
 Allergen-specific immunotherapy:
口
Eosinophilic granuloma complex (Figure
Useful in cats where allergen avoidance
10.18).
is impossible and where topical and sys-
口
Urticaria -- less common.
temic treatments are unsuccessful, pro-
口
Secondary bacterial and Malassezia infec-
duce side effects or are prohibitively ex-
tions can occur.
pensive. Cats are injected with increas-
Non-cutaneous signs:
ing amounts of allergen to induce immune
Gastrointestinal signs include diarrhoea
√
and vomiting.
"tolerance'. Suggested success rate is 50-
口冏
 Respiratory signs include sneezing.
70%.
Twenty-five per cent of cases have other con-
current allergies.
Feline food hypersensitivity (food
intolerance/food allergy)
Differential diagnosis
Non-seasonal pruritic skin disease associated
Atopy
with ingestion of components of the diet.
Contact allergy
184Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Table 10.2
2 Anti-inflammatory medication shown to have benefits in feline atopy.
Drug
Dose rate
Comments
Antihistamines
Success rates range from 40 to 70%; different drugs may be for 7-10 day therapeutic
 trials to assess effic acy; they can be used in combination with other drugs 
Amitriptyline
5.0-10.0 mg/cat po sid/bid
Chlorpheniramine
2.0-4.0 mg/cat po sid/bid 
May be used in atopy and urticaria
Clemastine 
0.68 mg/cat po bid
Cyproheptadine
2.0 mg/cat po bid 
 Diphenhydramine
2.0-4.0 mg/cat po bid
Hydroxyzine
5.0-10.0 mg/cat po tid/bid
May be used in atopy and urticaria
Essential fatty acids 
Clinical trials have shown these drugs to be beneficial in 20-50% of pruritic dogs:
benefits take 8-12 weeks; they have synergism with glucocorticoids and
 antihistamines
Cyclosporine
5.0 mg/kg po sid
Successful in many cats but each animal needs
careful assessment to ensure physically well and no
concurrent viral/toxoplasma immunosuppression; 
initial dose given for 4-6 weeks then tapered to
lowest possible maintenance dose; should be
regularly monitored by routine blood samples and
where appropriate urine analysis
Glucocorticoids
Produce control in most cases of feline atopy; most suitable for animals with short 
pruritus season (<4 months); side effects can be seen with long-term use; they should
not be used on a daily basis for long-term maintenance and always tapered to lowest
possible dose rate
Prednisolone
2.0 mg /kg po sid
Induction phase of 2-8 weeks to control pruritus and
lesions then taper
2.0 mg/kg po eod
Maintenance therapy initially for 2-4 weeks then
tapering to lowest possible dose rate
Methyl prednisolone
 20 mg/cat or 4.0 mg/kg sq or
 Should not be used more than 3-4 times a year
ac etate
im every 2-3 months
Triamcinolone
5.0 mg/cat sq or im every
Should not be used more than 3-4 times a year
acetonide
2-3 months
Figure 10.17Facial pruritus secondary to food allergy.
Figure 10.18 Indolent ulcer in a food-allergic cat.
Allergic skin disease
185
Flea-allergic dermatitis
Treatment
Pediculosis
Cheyletiellosis
Treatment of secondary infection is essen-
 Psychogenic alopecia
tial. Where other allergies are present con-
 Dermatophytosis
currently, e.g. flea allergy or atopy, these also
Ectopic otodectes
 need to be managed.
Once a diagnosis has been made and of-
fending allergens have been identified by
Diagnosis
 provocative re-exposure, food allergen avoid-
 ance should be maintained. Provocative re-
History and clinical signs.
exposure can be achieved by adding new chal-
Elimination diets:
lenge food to the hypoallergenic diet every 7-
 Response to elimination diet is the best
10 days.
way to establish a diagnosis. The diet
 Selection of diet for long term can either be
should be fed for 10-13 weeks where pos-
in the form of home-cooked diets with addi-
sible; some improvement should be seen
tional minerals, vitamins and essential fatty
in 4 weeks. Provocative challenge should
acid supplements or proprietary diets that do
be undertaken if improvement is seen to
 not contain any of the identified allergens.
establish a definitive diagnosis.
Symptomatic anti-inflammatory therapy is
Selection of diet is important and it should
rarely beneficial unless the diet is managed
be individualised for each cat to include
concurrently.
the following:
 Prognosis is good, provided the offending al-
Novel protein source.
lergens are identified and avoided on a long-
 Free of additives, colourants where
term basis.
possible.
Suitable proteins include venison, kan-
garoo, turkey, duck, soya.
Flea-allergic dermatitis
Types of diet:
Home
cooked are ideal but owner
compliance is often poor and these are
See Chapter 7.
unbalanced for cats and may need both
taurine and calcium supplements.
Commercial hypoallergenic diets are
Mosquito bite hypersensitivity
not a ^pure' diet but more
convenient
for busy owners and is nutritionally
complete.
See Chapter 7.
Hydrolysed diets are a new generation
of commercial diets where the protein
is hydrolysed to a size to render it non-
Eosinophilic furunculosis of the face
 allergenic, rendering the type of pro-
tein less critical.
Cats often have multiple feeding sta-
Acute sterile furunculosis of nose and muzzle.
 tions and are best kept inside during
the period of their food trial.
 Food allergy testing using both intradermal
Cause and pathogenesis
 and serological tests is currently unreliable.
Skin biopsy is non-diagnostic and reveals
2
The exact pathomechanism is unknown. It is
non-specific superficial perivascular dermati
tis.
omous insect or arthropod. Exposure to fleas or
186
Allergic skin disease
 e Si n 's   s Si sd
Diagnosis
to rare disease that has only been recognised in
ssop
History and clinical signs.
Diagnostic rule outs for other differentials,
e.g. fungal culture.
Clinical signs
Cytology reveals in the acute stages an
cosinophil-rich infltrate with no evidence of
Young dog usually medium to large outdoor
infectious organisms.
dogs.
Skin biopsy reveals signs of an eosinophilic
No breed or sex predilection.
perifolliculitis, folliculitis and furunculosis.
Acute onset of lesions, which develop within
Also a mixed inflammatory infiltrate with der-
 mal haemorrhage and collagen degeneration.
hours and progress rapidly.
Lesions appear as nodules, papules, ulcera-
tion, haemorrhage and crust.
Painful lesions with only minimal pruritus.
Treatment
Sites usually affected are the bridge of the
nose (Figure 10.19), also muzzle and perioc-
Good prognosis.
ular skin.
 Antibiotics based on culture and sensitivity
■
 In rare cases, the ventral abdomen chest and
where infection is present for 3-4 weeks.
ear pinnae are involved.
Systemic glucocorticoids in the form of pred-
Lesions often sterile; secondary infection is
nisolone 1-2 mg/kg po sid until a response 
uncommon in acute cases.
is seen (usually 7-10 days) then tapered to
- e ro Ap ro Aa ps od y z-1
ther 7-10 days. After this drugs can usually
Differential diagnosis
 be stopped.
Prognosis is good. Many dogs will improve
Nasal pyoderma - Staphylococcal infection
without glucocorticoids. However, therapy
Dermatophytosis - Trichophyton mentagro-
speeds the rate of resolution and makes the
phytes
dog more comfortable.
Burns
 Drug eruption
Autoimmune skin disease - pemphigus foli-
aceus, discoid lupus erythematosus
Selected references and further reading
Bloom, P. (2004) Symptomatic management of
pruritus. In: Campbell, K.L. (ed) Small Anima!
Dermatology Secrets. pp. 43-56. Hanley and
Belfus, Philadelphia
Bruner, S.R. (2004) Dietary hypersensitivity. In:
Campbell, K.L. (ed) Small Animal Dermatol-
ogy Secrets. pp. 196-201. Hanley and Belfus,
Philadelphia
Chesney, C.J. (2002) Food hypersensitivity in the
dog a quantitative study. J Small Anim Pract,
43,203-207
Guaguere, E. et al. (2004) Cyclosporin A: a new
Figure 10.19 Erythema with crusting and exudation in a dog
drug in the field of veterinary dermatology. Vet
with eosinophilic furunculosis of the face.
Derm, 15,61-74
Allergic skin disease 187
Medleau, L. and Hnilica, K. (2006) Hypersen-
Pp. 188-196. Hanley and Belfus, Philadel-
sitivity disorders. In: Small Animal Dermatol-
phia
Ogy: A Color Atlas and Therapeutic Guide.
Roudebush, P. (2000) Hypoallergenic diets for
2nd edn. pp. 159-188. WB Saunders, Philadel-
dogs. In: Bonagura, J.D. (ed) Kirk's Current
phia
Veterinary Therapy XIll Small Animal Prac-
Olivry, T. (ed) (2001) The ACVD task force on
tice. Pp. 530-535. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
atopic dermatitis (XXIIl). Vet Immunol Im-
Scott, D.W. et al. (2001) Skin immune system and
munopathol,81,143-385.
allergic skin disease. Muller and Kirk's Small
Prelaud, P. (2004) Atopy. In: Campbell, K.L.
Animal Dermatology. 6th edn. Pp. 543-666.
(ed)Small AnimalDermatologySecrets.
WB Saunders, Philadelphia
Immune mediated skin disease
Pemphigus complex
is the most severe form of pemphigus due to the
depth of the target antigen in the skin and its addi-
tional location in mucosa. It is rare amongst both
Very rare vesiculobullous pustular diseases of the
dogs and cats.
skin and mucous membranes.
 In the dog and cat five different forms are recog-
Clinical signs
nised:
Pemphigus vulgaris
No age, breed or sex predilection.
Pemphigus erythematosus
Cutaneous signs:
Pemphigus foliaceus
口冏
Vesicles, bullae, erosions, ulcers found in
 Panepidermal pustular pemphigus
oral cavity (90%, Figure 11.1) and muco-
Paraneoplastic pemphigus
cutaneous junctions (Figure 11.2).
Oral lesions lead to salivation and halito-
Pemphigus can be associated with drugs (includ-
sis.
ing food substances), chronic disease and immune
Occasionally lesions seen in groin, axilla
system related tumours.
and flanks.
 Ulcerative paronychia and onychomade-
Pemphigus vulgaris
sis.
口
 Nikolsky sign may be present.
Non-cutaneous signs:
Cause and pathogenesis
口冏
Anorexia, pyrexia
Autoantibodies are thought to react with cad-
herins (cell to cell adhesion molecules), which is
Differential diagnosis
 found in the suprabasilar epidermal layers and
may extend into the basal cell membrane. Anti-
 Bullous pemphigoid
body binding leads to loss of intercellular cohe-
■
 Systemic lupus erythematosus
sion and acantholysis at the suprabasilar level. It
■
 Cat flu - especially calici virus
Immune mediated skin disease
189
Skin biopsy of 
primary  lesion reveals
suprabasilar acantholysis ‘tombstones’ of
basement membrane, also perivascular inter-
stitial or lichenoid inflammation.
 Immunofluorescence or immunohistochem-
istry of skin biopsy specimens to detect inter-
cellular antibody deposition. False negative
and positive results can occur; positive results
should also have compatible histopathology.
Treatment
Very poor prognosis - without treatment this
disease is fatal.
 Difficult to achieve and maintain animals in
remission.
Symptomatic therapy with gentle keratolytic
shampoos such as sulphur may be useful.
Figure 11.1Ulceration ofthe mouth in a dogwith pemphigus
Antibacterial and anti-yeast therapy should
vulgaris.
be prescribed where appropriate and may
 need to be continued until the disease is under
Toxic epidermal necrolysis
control.
 Drug eruption
Immunosuppressive therapy is necessary; see
Erythema multiforme
Tables 11.1-11.3 for drugs, monitoring and
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
side effects in dogs and cats.
 In view of the severity of pemphigus vulgaris
several different immunosuppressive drugs
Diagnosis
may need to be used together. Glucocorti-
coids are usually used with a non-steroidal
History and clinical signs.
immunosuppressive drug.
Diagnostic rule outs of other differentials.
 Prognosis is poor in most cases and animals
Bacterial culture usually sterile.
 need long-term therapy and monitoring.
Pemphigus foliaceus
Cause and pathogenesis
Autoantibodies react with 150 kD glycoprotein
(desmoglein I) from cadherin group of adhesion
molecules. The binding of the antibody leads to
loss of intercellular cohesion and acantholysis at
the intragranular or subcorneal level.
Clinical signs
Figure 11.2 Ulceration of the mucocutaneous junctions in a
 The most common form of pemphigus com-
dog with pemphigus vulgaris.
plex disease in the dog and cat.
190Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Table 11.1
1 Therapy for autoimmune disease in dogs.
Drug
Induction dose
Maintenance dose
Glucocorticoids
Prednisolone
1-3 mg/kg po sid /bid
0.5-2 mg/kg po every 48 hours
Methylprednisolone
0.8-2.4 mg/kg po sid/bid
0.4-0.8 mg/kg po every 48 hours
Triamcinolone
0. 1-0.3 mg/kg po sid/bid
0.1-0.2 mg/kg po every 48 hours
Dexamethasone
0.1-0.2 mg/kg po sid/bid 
0.05-0.1 mg/kg po every 48-72 hours
Methylprednisolone sodium
1 mg/kg iv over 3-4 hours once daily
Alternate day oral glucocorticoids
succinate (pulse therapy)
for 2-3 consecutive days
Dexamethasone
1 mg/kg iv once or twice daily on two
Alternate day oral glucocorticoids
occasions 24 hours apart
Tetracycline/niacinamide
Dogs >10 kg 500 mg of each drug po
Dogs >10 kg 500 mg of each drug po
p!b
sid/bid
 Dogs <10 kg 250 mg of each drug po
Dogs <10 kg 250 mg of each drug po
qid
p!q/p!s
Doxycycline/niacinamide
 Niacinamide as above doxycycline
Niacinamide as above; doxycycline
 5-10 mg/kg bid 
taper to lowest effective dose rate
Cyclosporine
5.0-12.5 mg/kg po sid/bid until clinical
Taper to lowest possible dose rate; aim
remission
for 2.5-5.0 mg/kg po sid or every 48
hours
Vitamin E
400 IU po bid 
400 IU po bid
Azathioprine
1.5-2.5 mg/kg po sid or every 48 hours
1.5-2.5 mg/kg po every 48-72 hours
Chlorambucil
0.1-0.2 mg/kg po sid 
0.1-0.2 mg/kg po every 48 hours
Mycophenolate mofetil
22-39 mg/kg divided tid until clinical
Taper to lowest effective dose rate
remission 
Gold sodium thiomalate
1 mg/kg im weekly until clinical
Taper to monthly administration
remission 
Table 11.2
Therapy of autoimmune disease in cats.
Drug
Induction dose
Maintenance dose
Glucocorticoids
Prednisolone
2-2.5 mg/kg po sid /bid
2.5-5 mg/kg po every 2-7 days 
 Triamcinolone
0.3-1 mg/kg po sid/bid 
0.6-1 mg/kg po every 2-7 days
 Dexamethasone
0. 1-0.2 mg/kg po sid/bid 
0.05-0.1 mg/kg po every 48-72 hours
Methylprednisolone
1 mg/kg iv over 3-4 hours once daily
Alternate day oral glucocorticoids 
sodium succinate (pulse 
for 2-3 consecutive days
therapy)
 Dexamethasone
1 mg/kg iv once or twice daily on two
Alternate day oral glucocorticoids
occasions 24 hours apart
Chlorambucil
0. 1-0.2 mg/kg po sid 
0.1-0.2 mg/kg po every 48 hours
Immune mediated skin disease
191
Figure 11.5 Primary pustules and macules on the ventral
abdomen of a dog with pemphigus foliaceus.
Figure 11.3 Pemphigus foliaceus in an Akita.
 Non-cutaneous signs:
Anorexia, pyrexia
Dogs:
Cats:
No age or sex predilection.
Predisposed breeds - Akita (Figure 11.3),
 No age, sex or breed predilection.
chow, Doberman 
pinscher 
dachshund,
Cutaneous signs:
bearded collie.
Cutaneous signs:
口
 Most commonly sterile paronychia, with
a thick caseous discharge (Figure 11.7).
Initial signs usually face (Figure 11.4),
Primary lesions macules and pustules pro-
waxing and waning course often.
Mucocutaneous and oral signs rare.
gressing to severe crusting (Figure 11.8).
口
 Primary lesions macules and pustules pro-
Involvement of nipples and footpads com-
口
mon (Figure 11.9).
gressing to severe crusting (Figure 11.5).
口
Footpad and nasal hyperkeratosis seen in
90% of cases (Figure 11.6).
 Nose often depigmented chronically.
口
Claw abnormalities can occur but rare.
口
Nikolsky sign may be present.
Figure 11.4 Crusting on the nose and ears in a dog with
Figure 11.6 Footpad hyperkeratosis in a dog with pemphigus
pemphigus foliaceus.
foliaceus.
192
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
口
Nose often depigmented chronically.
口
Claw and oral signs rare.
Nikolsky sign may be present.
Non-cutaneous signs:
 Anorexic, depression, pyrexia
口
Differential diagnosis
 Bacterial impetigo-folliculitis
Dermatophytosis
Demodicosis
Lupus erythematosus
Subcorneal pustular dermatosis
Figure 11.7 Sterile paronychial in a cat with pemphigus
foliaceus.
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
 Cytology of primary lesions or nail bed ex-
udate reveals acanthocytes, non-degenerate
 neutrophils and/or eosinophils, no bacteria in
uncomplicated cases.
Antinuclear antibodies are negative but false
positives can be seen.
Skin biopsy reveals intragranular/subcorneal
acantholysis with cleft and pustule formation
(granular cells *cling-ons'). Variable numbers
of eosinophils.
Immunofluorescence or immunohistochem-
istry of skin biopsy specimens to detect inter-
cellular antibody deposition. False negative
Figure 11.8 Lesions on the face of a cat with pemphigus
and positive results can occur; positive results
foliaceus.
should also have compatible histopathology.
Bacteriology only isolates infection when it is
there as a secondary problem.
Treatment
Symptomatic therapy with gentle keratolytic
shampoos such as sulphur may be useful.
Antibacterial and anti-yeast therapy should
be prescribed where appropriate and may
need to be continued until the disease is under
control.
 Immunosuppressive therapy is necessary; see
Tables 11.1-11.3 for drugs, monitoring and
side effects in dogs and cats. In dogs the au-
thor's preferred combination of therapy is
Figure 11.9 Hyperkeratosis and pustular lesions of footpads
azathioprine with prednisolone. In cats the
of a cat with pemphigus foliaceus.
Immune mediated skin disease
193
Table 11.3  Side effects and monitoring drug therapy in autoimmune skin disease.
Drug
 Side effects
Monitoring
Glucocorticoids
Polyuria, polydipsia, weight gain,
Twice yearly blood counts, chemistry
behavioural changes, panting.
profile, urine analysis and urine cultures
increased risk of infection, poor hair
coat, scaly coat, muscle atrophy
gastrointestinal ulceration, pancreatitis,
steroid hepatopathy, diabetes mellitus 
Tetracycline/niacinamide
Vomiting diarrhoea, anorexia,
Not required 
increased liver enzyme levels
Doxycycline/niacinamide
As above
As above
Cyclosporine
Anorexia, vomiting and diarrhoea,
Twice yearly blood counts, chemistry
weight loss, nephrotoxicity, gingival
 profile, urine analysis and urine cultures
 hyperplasia, papillomatosis, hirsutism 
Vitamin E
Rarely reported 
Not required
Azathioprine
Myelosuppression, diarrhoea,
Blood counts with platelet count and 
increased susceptibi lity to infection,
chemistry profile every 2-3 weeks for
vomiting, hepatotoxicity, pancreatitis
the first 3 months then every 3 months
going to every 6 months once case is in
remission
Chlorambucil 
Myelosuppression, diarrhoea,
As azathioprine
increased susceptibi lity to infection,
vomiting
Mycophenolate mofetil
Myelosuppression, diarrhoea,
As azathioprine
increased susceptibility to infection,
vomiting
Gold sodium thiomalate
Skin rashes, oral ulceration,
As azathioprine but urine analysis
 proteinuria, myelosuppression
should be included 
author's preferred drug is prednisolone or
lupus erythematosus. It is rare in both dogs and
dexamethasone.
cats.
Prognosis is moderate to good in most cases.
Sunlight may play a part in pathogenesis.
Animals usually need long-term therapy and
 monitoring except where lesions are drug in-
duced, where therapy can be tapered
l and
Clinical signs
withdrawn.
 No age or sex predilection.
 Predisposed dog breeds include the Shetland
sheepdog, collie, German shepherd dog.
 No feline breed predisposition.
Pemphigus erythematosus
Affects face and ears - pustules, leading to
crusts, scale and erosions (Figure 11.10).
Cause and pathogenesis
Nikolsky signs may be present.
 Nose often depigmented chronically, uncom-
Benign form of pemphigus foliaceus and may
monly footpads affected.
 possibly be a crossover between pemphigus and
No oral signs.
194
4Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
need to be continued until the disease is under
control.
 Sunlight exposure should be reduced and sun
blocks should be used if animals spend time
outdoors during the warmest times of the day
(10.00 a.m. to 4.00 p.m.).
Mild cases:
In mild disease good levels of control can be
achieved with topical therapy (table 11.4).
Figure 11.10 Ulceration and crusting of the periocular skin
in a rough collie with pemphigus erythematosus.
Moderate to severe cases:
Differential diagnosis
 In more severe cases systemic medication is
 required. Due to the localised nature of the
As pemphigus foliaceus.
 problem the author will generally use the non-
steroidal drugs such as niacinamide, tetracy-
cline and vitamin E before using more potent
Diagnosis
medication; see Tables 11.1-11.3
Prognosis is good in most cases as lesions re-
 History and clinical signs.
main benign and localised. Animals that need
Cytology of primary lesions or nail bed ex-
systemic immunosuppressive therapy require
udate reveals acanthocytes, non-degenerate
long-term monitoring. Where lesions are sun-
neutrophils and/or eosinophils, no bacteria in
 light induced, more intensive therapy is re-
uncomplicated cases.
quired during the summer
r months and can
Antinuclear antibodies are often positive but
often be withdrawn during the winter.
only useful if other diagnostic signs are com-
Skin biopsy reveals subcorneal pustules that
Table 11.4Topical therapy in autoimmune skin disease.
contain acanthocytes, neutrophils and vari-
able numbers of eosinophils.
5. Also lichenoid
Drug
Use
infiltrate
with
mixed
mononuclear cells,
plasma cells and polymorphs
Immunofluorescence or i
immunohistochem
Glucocorticoid
Initial therapy should be
to detect inter
with a potent steroid, e.g.
cellular and dermal
betamethasone twice daily
epidermal
junction anti-
body deposition. False negative and positive
for 4-6 weeks to achieve
remission, then the
results can occur; positive results should also
frequency and the potency
have compatible histopathology.
of the cream should be
Bacteriology only isolates infection when it is
reduced to the lowest 
there as a secondary problem.
 possible levels
Tacrolimus 0.1%
 Initial therapy bid or tid for
4-6 weeks to achieve
Treatment
remission, then the
frequency can be reduced
Symptomatic therapy with gentle keratolytic
to lowest maintenance
shampoos such as sulphur may be useful.
levels
Antibacterial and anti-yeast therapy should
Cyclosporine 1-2%
As tacrolimus
Immune mediated skin disease 195
Panepidermal pustular pemphigus
A rare form of pemphigus that may be a variant
of pemphigus foliaceus, erythematosus and vul-
garis. Histopathologically, pustules are found at
all levels of the epidermis and follicular epithe-
lium.
Lesions are found predominantly on the face
but can generalise and take the form of fragile
 pustules that rupture to form a thick crust.
Paraneoplastic pemphigus
Figure 11.11 Oral vesicles in a dog with bullous pem-
phigoid.
A very rare form of pemphigus that is associ-
ated with neoplastic disease. Autoantibody bind-
 Predisposed breeds include collies and Dober
ing leads to acantholysis as well as necrosis and
man pinschers.
vacuolation of basal layer keratinocytes.
Cutaneous signs:
Lesions can mimic erythema multiforme, pem-
 Eighty per cent of cases have oral lesions
phigus vulgaris and bullous pemphigoid.
(Figure 11.11).
Associated neoplasms include malignant lym-
Other mucous membranes of anus, vulva,
phoma, leukaemia, thymoma and sarcoma
prepuce and conjunctiva also involved.
Vesicles and bullae are rarely seen but oc-
cur at mucocutaneous junctions (Figure
Bullous pemphigoid
11.12), skin especially axilla and groin.
 Usually secondary ulcerative lesions are
Rare vesiculobullous ulcerative canine skin dis-
present.
ease of skin, oral mucosa or both.
Cause and pathogenesis
Autoantibodies are directed against anti-
gen associated with epidermal basal cell
hemidesmosomes and lamina lucida of the
basement membrane. Antibody attack dis
rupts dermo-epidermal cohesion leading to
dermo-epidermal separation and vesicle for-
mation.
Two forms of the disease:
Spontaneous  occurring  bullous  pem-
phigoid.
 Drug-induced bullous pemphigoid espe-
口
cially due to sulphonamides.
Clinical signs
Very rare disease.
Figure 11.12  Ulceration at the mucocutaneous junctions in
 No age or sex predilection.
a German shepherd dog with bullous pemphigoid.
196
6Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Ulcerative paronychia, onychomadesis,
口
In view of the severity of bullous pem-
footpad ulceration also seen.
phigoid, several different immunosup-
True Nikolsky sign not present.
pressive drugs may need to be used to-
 Pruritus, pain variable.
 gether. Glucocorticoids are usually used
 Secondary pyoderma common:
with a non-steroidal immunosuppressive
口
Non-cutaneous signs.
drug.
口冏
Anorexia and pyrexia.
 Prognosis is moderate to poor in most
 cases and animals need long-term therapy
Differential diagnosis
and monitoring.
 Drug-induced bullous pemphigoid especially
 home-cooked exclusion diet and support-
Pemphigus vulgaris
Systemic lupus erythematosus
ive fluid therapy for 2 weeks before start-
Erythema multiforme
ing immunosuppressive treatment;
Toxic epidermal necrolysis
口冏
many dogs only require supportive ther-
 Drug eruption
apy;
口
 prognosis is good providing the drug is
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
withdrawn.
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
Cytology is not useful due to the depth of
the damage in the skin; acanthocytes are not
Rare multisystemic autoimmune disease.
present.
Skin or mucosal biopsy of primary lesion
if present reveals subepidermal clefting and
vesicles with a mild perivascular to lichenoid
Cause and pathogenesis
mononuclear and neutrophilic inflammation.
Immunofluorescence or immunohistochem-
Multifactorial disease; a variety of factors con-
tribute to its pathogenesis including genetic sus-
munoglobulin along the dermal-epidermal
ceptibility, immunological factors, drugs, viral
junction. False negative and positive results
infection, hormonal and ultraviolet light compo-
can occur; positive results should also have
nents; these are all thought to be important. Over
compatible histopathology.
reactive B cells produce antibodies against a va-
 Bacteriology only isolates infection when it is
riety of body tissues leading to immune complex
there as a secondary problem.
formation and a type II hypersensitivity reaction.
Skin lesions thought to be caused by autoantibod-
ies to antigens on epidermal basal cells inducing
Treatment
antibody-dependent cytotoxicity.
 Symptomatic therapy with gentle keratolytic
shampoos such as sulphur may be useful.
 Antibacterial and anti-yeast therapy should
Clinical signs
be prescribed where appropriate and may
 need to be continued until the disease is under
Dogs:
control.
 Spontaneous occurring bullous pemphigoid:
 No age or sex predilection.
Immunosuppressive therapy is necessary;
 Predisposed dog breeds include collies, Shet-
see Tables 11.1-11.3 below for drugs,
 land sheepdogs, and German shepherd dogs.
monitoring and side effects in dogs and
 Clinical signs are non-specifc and wax and
cats.
wane.
Immune mediated skin disease
197
Table 11.5 Major and minor clinical signs seen in SLE.
Major signs
Minor signs
Joint disease -
Pyrexia - steroid
non-infectious usually
responsive
non-erosive
Skin disease - variable,
Central nervous
most commonly
system signs -
symmetrical, diffuse scale
seizures
with scarring alopecia,
lesions usually involve
face, ears and distal limbs
Figure 11.14 Alopecia with associated crust and scale in a
(Figures 11.13 and 11.14}
dog with SLE.
Anaemia - Coomb's
Pleuritis - without
positive
evidence of infection
Multisystemic disease signs are seen in the ap-
Thrombocytopaenia
proximate order of incidence within each col-
Glomerulonephritis with
umn of Table 11.5.
proteinuria
Neutropaenia
Cats:
Polymyositis
No age or sex predilection.
 Predisposed breeds include Siamese, Persian,
Himalayan cats.
Cutaneous lesions seen in about 20% of cases
Skin lesions are frequently seen in SLE and
include the following:
most commonly are those described under
Generalised scaling disease
major signs in Table 11.5. Lesions though can
mimic many other different diseases including
Exfoliative erythroderma
口
Paronychia
口
cutaneous or mucocutaneous vesiculobul-
口
Erythematous, scaling and crusting alope-
lous disorders,
cia involving the face, pinnae and paws
footpad ulcers and hyperkeratosis,
Systemic signs that may be present include the
 refractory secondary bacterial pyoderma,
following:
口
panniculitis.
口
Weight loss
口
Glomerulonephritis
口
Haemolytic anaemia
口
Pyrexia
口
Polyarthritis
口
Neurological abnormalities
口
Myopathy
口
Oral ulceration (Figure 11.15)
Differential diagnosis
Almost any skin disease with multiple organ in-
volvement including
Figure 11.13 Inflammation of the planum nasale in a dog
drug eruption,
with SLE.
leishmaniasis,
198
3Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Immunofluorescence or immunohistochem-
istry of skin biopsy specimens can be used
to detect immunoglobulin or complement at
the basement membrane zone. False negative
and positive results can occur; positive re-
sults should also have other compatible clin-
ical findings.
Treatment
Symptomatic therapy with gentle keratolytic
shampoos such as sulphur may be useful.
Figure 11.15 Oral ulceration in a cat with systematic lupus.
(Source: Picture courtesy of J. Henfrey.)
Antibacterial and anti-yeast therapy should
be prescribed where appropriate and may
 need to be continued until the disease is under
 infection - bacterial, viral or fungal disease,
control.
neoplasia.
Success of treatment depends on the organ
systems affected. When concurrent anaemia,
thrombocytopaenia and neutropaenia are
Diagnosis
 present, then the prognosis is more guarded.
Topical therapy may be useful on localised
Systemic lupus is diagnosed by two major
nasal lesions (see Table 11.5).
diagnostic signs or two minor and one ma-
Systemic
immunosuppressive
therapy
IS
jor diagnostic sign with supporting serologi-
used in the form of glucocorticoids (see
cal evidence.
Table 11.1). Non-steroidal immunosuppres-
Haematology may show any one or com-
sive therapy may be used in combination with
bination of anaemia (that may be Coombs
glucocorticoids, provided side effects of med-
positive), thrombocytopaenia, leukopaenia,
ication,
,e.g. myelosuppression,
are
not
leukocytosis.
detrimental in therapy. All medication must
Urine analysis re veals proteinuria.
be carefully monitored (see Table 11.3).
Arthrocentesis in cases of polyarthritis re-
veals sterile purulent inflammation (positive
Rheumatoid factor is a variable finding).
Discoid lupus erythermatosus (DLE)
Serology reveals a positive antinuclear an-
tibody test (ANA) in 90% of cases. Useful
Uncommon cutaneous autoimmune disease with
supportive test but not diagnostic as false
no evidence of systemic involvement seen in both
positives can occur with many other chronic
dogs and cats.
diseases.
Positive lupus erythematosus (LE) test is fur-
ther diagnostic evidence but again by itself is
Cause and pathogenesis
not diagnostic.
Cutaneous LE diagnosed by clinical signs
Type II hypersensitivity is caused by au-
and histopathology. Skin biopsy can be non-
toantibodies to antigens on epithelial basal
diagnostic; however, changes of focal thicken-
cells.
ing of basement membrane zone, subepider-
Fifty per cent of cases are aggravated by ul-
mal vacuolation, hydropic or interface der-
 traviolet light. Lesions therefore often start
matitis or a leukocytoclastic vasculitis are
or are more severe in the summer/warm
highly suggestive of SLE.
climates.
Immune mediated skin disease 199
Figure 11.16 Ulceration and loss of normal architecture of
Figure 11.17 Facial lesions in DLE
nose in a collie with DLE.
Clinical signs
Dermatomyositis
 Pemphigus erythematosus/foliaceus
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
Dogs:
Drug reaction
Uveodermatologic syndrome
 No age or sex predilection.
Predisposed breeds include the S
 Shetland
sheepdog, German shepherd dog, collies and
German short-haired pointers.
Diagnosis
Lesions usually occur on the nose. Acute signs
reveal depigmentation and loss of normal ar-
History and clinical signs.
chitecture (Figure 11.16). Chronically these
Laboratory tests in the form of routine
are replaced by erosions, ulcers and crusting.
haematology and biochemistry are usually
Less commonly periocular, pinnal, distal
unremarkable. ANA commonly negative.
limbs, genitalia, lips and oral cavity affected.
1Skin biopsy reveals signs of hydropic or
 Footpad hyperkeratosis and oral ulcers are
lichenoid  interface dermatitis with focal
rare.
thickening of basement membrane zone. Pig-
 Deep ulcers can cause haemorrhage.
ment incontinence is a common finding with
apoptotic keratinocytes.
Cats:
 No sex, age or breed predisposition.
Lesions are confined usually to the face and
ear pinnae (Figure 11.17), nasal signs less
common.
Initial signs are of erythema, alopecia and
crusting, which will progress to ulceration.
Paronychia can be seen (Figure 11.18).
Pruritus variable.
Differential diagnosis
 Nasal pyoderma
Dermatophytosis
Figure 11.18 Ulcerative nail bed lesions with DLE.
200 Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Immunofluorescence or immunohistochem
istry of skin biopsy specimens can be used to
detect patchy deposits of immunoglobulin or
complement at the basement membrane zone.
 False negative and positive results can occur;
positive results should also have other com-
 patible clinical fndings.
Treatment
 Prognosis good due to the localised nature of
the disease.
Sun avoidance should be undertaken from
Figure 11.19  Serpiginous ulcers in the groin of a Sheltie with
vesicular cutaneous LE.
8.00 a.m. to 5.00 p.m. Where possible, the
animals should be taken out of the sun, or
where practical topical sunscreens can be
Clinical signs
used.
Symptomatic therapy with gentle keratolytic
 Predisposed breeds include Shetland sheep-
shampoos such as sulphur may be useful.
Antibacterial and anti-yeast therapy should
dog and rough collie.
be prescribed where appropriate and may
Disease commonly occurs in adult dogs with
 need to be continued until the disease is under
no previous history of skin disease.
Lesions show a marked seasonal incidence
control.
with most starting in the summer months.
Topical therapy is the treatment of choice (see
Many go into spontaneous remission in the
Table 11.5) in mild to moderate cases.
Systemic immunosuppressive therapy may
winter.
Vesiculobullous lesions are initially found in
also be used. In mild cases, non-steroidal im-
the groin and axilla. These are fragile and
munosuppressive therapy with drugs such as
rapidly develop into crateriform and serpig-
vitamin E or doxycycline and niacinamide
may be used before using glucocorticoids (Ta-
inous ulcers (Figure 11.19).
bles 11.1 and 11.2). All medication must be
Eyelids, pinnae, mouth, external genitalia,
anus and footpads occasionally involved.
carefully monitored (see Table 11.3).
Lesions tend not to be pruritic but are painful.
Affected dogs can develop secondary infec-
tion, which can lead to more severe gener-
Vesicular cutaneous lupus
alised disease.
erythematosus
Cyclical disease, which can make mainte-
nance difficult.
Vesicular variant of cutaneous LE.
Differential diagnosis
Cause and pathogenesis
■
 Bullous pemphigoid
Uncommon disease only recoded in dogs. Precise
■
Erythema multiforme
cause unknown but thought to be triggered by
■
SLE
exposure to ultraviolet radiation. The disease was
 Pemphigus vulgaris
previously described as ulcerative dermatosis of
 Drug eruptions
Shetland sheepdogs and rough collies.
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
Immune mediated skin disease  201
Diagnosis
and 11.2) or may be added in as secondary
drugs where glucocorticoids are needed at
 History and clinical signs especially in predis-
high doses and/or produce unacceptable side
posed breed.
effects.
Diagnostic rule outs of other differentials.
Prognosis is moderate in most cases; all ani-
Skin biopsy reveals signs of a lymphocytic in-
mals need long-term therapy and monitoring.
terface dermatitis and folliculitis with vesicu-
lation at dermo-epidermal junction.
Immunofluorescence or immunohistochem-
Cold agglutinin disease (CAD)
istry of skin biopsy specimens can be used
to detect deposits of immunoglobulin along
Cause and pathogenesis
 the dermo-epidermal junction. False negative
and positive results can occur; positive re-
CAD is a type II hypersensitivity reaction associ-
sults should also have other compatible clin-
ated with cold reacting autoantibodies to erythro-
ical findings.
cytes. Cryoglobulins and cryofibrinogens precip-
 ANA tests are usually negative using conven-
itate from serum and plasma, respectively,
tional laboratory techniques.
by
cooling leading to vascular damage and clinical
lesions. Autoantibodies are most active at tem-
peratures from 0 to 4°C. Formation of antibodies
Treatment
may be idiopathic or associated with lead poison-
ing in dogs plus respiratory disease in cats. Rare
Sun avoidance should be undertaken from
disease of dogs and cats.
8.00 a.m. to 5.00 p.m. Where possible the
animals should be taken out of the sun, or
where practical topical sunscreens can be
Clinical signs
used.
Antibacterial and anti-yeast therapy should
No age, sex or breed predilection.
be prescribed where appropriate and may
 Lesions are typically seen on the extremities
need to be continued until the disease is under
especially tips of ears, tail, nose and footpads.
control.
Initial lesions are painful and are erythe-
Topical therapy may be used to supplement
matous with acrocyanosis and ulceration
systemic medication but is rarely enough by
progressing to necrosis (Figures 11.20 and
itself (see Table 11.5).
11.21). Lesions have typical appearance of a
Systemic i
immunosuppressive
therapy
is
punched-out ulcer.
needed in most cases. The authors initial
combination of choice would be glucocorti-
coids with azathioprine (see Tables 11.1 and
11.3 for drug regimes, monitoring and side
effects in dogs). Prednisolone is initially used
at a full immunosuppressive dose rate and
 tapered down to the lowest maintenance dose
once clinical remission has been achieved
(2-8 weeks). It is not uncommon to have
to use several different immunosuppressive
drugs together.
 In mild cases, non-steroidal immunosuppres-
sive therapy with drugs such as vitamin E
or doxycycline and niacinamide may be used
before using glucocorticoids (Tables 11.1
Figure 11.20 Ear tip slough in CAD.
202
2Manuai of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Figure 11.21 Necrosis of tip of tail due to CAD.
Figure 11.22  EM caused by carbimazole in a hyperthyroid
Cat.
Seasonal disease seen in cold conditions in the
winter as signs are only associated with expo-
Immunosuppressive therapy with systemic
sure to cold
drugs is usually necessary to treat the vascular
damage (see Tables 11.1 and 11.2).
Differential diagnosis
Erythema multiforme (EM) and toxic
Vasculitis
epidermal necrolysis (TEN)
SLE
Frostbite
Dermatomyositis
Cause and pathogenesis
 Drug eruption
The precise aetiology of these two diseases is
unknown. They are thought to represent a cell
Diagnosis
mediated hypersensitivity reaction, which can be
triggered by a variety of antigens including the
History and clinical signs.
following:
Diagnostic rule outs of other diseases.
Typically autoagglutination is seen of blood
Infections (bacteria, viruses)
 in heparin or EDTA on slide at room temper-
Drugs (Figure 11.22)
ature from affected animals. The reaction is
Neoplasia
accentuated by cooling to OoC and reversed
Connective tissue disorders
on warming to 37°C.
Idiopathic
Typically a Coomb's test at 4°C is positive.
Skin biopsy reveals signs of necrosis and ul-
Antigens lead to alteration in keratinocytes struc-
ceration. In some cases vasculitis with throm-
ture making them targets for an aberrant immune
bosis and necrosis of blood vessels is seen.
attack. It is not clear if EM and TEN represent
separate diseases or TEN is a more severe form
of EM.
Treatment
Where underlying triggers are recognised
Clinical signs
these must be corrected.
Further exposure to cold should be avoided.
Erythema multiforme:
Immune mediated skin disease 203
Figure 11.23  Ulceration around the mouth in a dog with EM
Figure 11.25  Erosions and ulceration on the flank of a dog
due to potentiated sulphonamides.
with TEN.
Cutaneous lesions:
 Scaling, crusting and alopecia less
口
Lesions have an acute onset and are mul-
common.
tifocal to diffuse.
Non-cutaneous lesions:
口
They affect mucocutaneous  junctions
口
Depression, anorexia, pyrexia
(Figure 11.23), pinnae, axilla and groin.
Lesions can be variable in their presenta-
Toxic epidermal necrolysis:
tion:
Erythematous annular bullseyes' (Fig-
Cutaneous lesions:
ure 11.24).
口
Lesions can be found on any area of
Urticarial papules and plaques that
the body but especially mouth, mucocu-
spread peripherally.
taneous junctions and feet.
Vesicles and bullae.
口
Lesions tend to be painful.
口
Present as vesicles, bullae, erosions, ulcer-
ation and necrosis (Figure 11.25).
Non-cutaneous lesions:
口
 Depression, anorexia, pyrexia often lead-
ing to collapse and death (Figure 11.26).
Figure 11.24 Erythematous annular 'bullseyes' lesions of EM
on the flank of a dog.
Figure 11.26 TEN in a young dog.
204 Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Differential diagnosis
Table 11.6 Drug therapy for EM and TEN.
Thermal or chemical burn
Drug
Protocol
Pustular demodicosis
Deep infection (bacterial or fungal)
Urticaria
Prednisolone
1-2 mg/kg (dog) or 2-4 mg/kg
Vasculitis
(cat) po sid for 7-14 days;
 Drug eruption
therapy can be tapered once
 improvement is seen, aiming to
Other autoimmune vesicular and pustular
diseases
withdraw it
Human
 5-6% solution in 0.9% saline;
intravenous
0.5-1.0 g/kg given over 4-6
immunoglobulin
hours by slow iv infusion once
Diagnosis
or twice over 24 hours
History and clinical signs.
Laboratory rule out of other conditions.
Skin biopsy reveals a variable picture depend-
Vasculitis
ing on the type of lesion. In EM histopatho-
logical changes are confined to the epidermis
where typically apoptosis is present. Epithe-
Cause and pathogenesis
lial cells of outer root sheath and hair fol-
licle may be similarly affected. In TEN full
Type III hypersensitivity reaction leads to for-
thickness necrosis of the epidermis can be
mation of immune complexes and subsequent
seen.
blood vessel damage.
A variety of causes have been implicated in-
cluding the following:
Treatment
口冏
Infection - bacterial, rickettsial, viral, fun-
gal
Where possible an underlying cause needs to
口
Malignancy
be identified and treated.
口
Hypersensitivity to foods
 All drugs suspected of causing a reaction
口
Vaccination especially rabies vaccination
should be withdrawn. Substances in food
口
Connective tissue disease, e.g. rheumatoid
have also been implicated as causes, so the au-
arthritis
thor will generally put all animals on a home-
口
Metabolic disease, e.g. diabetes mellitus,
cooked low-allergy diet.
uraemia
Symptomatic
 and
口
sn
supportive
treatment
should be given with whirlpool baths, fluid
Idiopathic
 therapy and supportive nutrition.
Treatment of secondary bacterial
infection
It is an uncommon disease in dogs and rare in
should be undertaken where necessary, but
care should be taken not to use any drugs re-
cats.
lated to those previously administered.
 Mild cases of EM can spontaneously resolve
with only supportive care.
Clinical signs
 In severe cases of EM or TEN systemic ther-
 apy is needed using either glucocorticoids or
 No age or sex predisposition.
immunoglobulin therapy (see Table 11.6).
Predisposed breeds include Rottweilers and
Prognosis is good to fair for EM but poor for
dachshunds.
TEN.
Cutaneous lesions:
Immune mediated skin disease  205
Figure 11.27 Punched-out ulcers on the ear of a cat with
Figure 11.29 Punched-out ulcers on the footpads of a dog
vasculitis.
with vasculitis.
Extremities usually affected especially ear
Differential diagnosis
pinnae (Figures 11.27and 11.28) oralmu-
cosa, footpads (Figures 11.29 and 11.30),
SLE
tail and scrotum.
CAD
Typical lesions are purpura, haemorrhagic
 Frostbite
bullae with punched-out ulcers.
EM/TEN
Pain variable.
 Bullous pemphigoid
口
 In cases of vasculitis caused by rabies vac-
 Pemphigus vulgaris
cination, areas of alopecia develop at the
Dermatomyositis
site of the vaccination 1-5 months after
administration. This is often followed by
multifocal lesions caused by generalised
Diagnosis
ischaemic dermatopathy.
 Non-cutaneous lesions:
History and clinical signs.
口
Anorexia, lethargy, pyrexia.
 Diagnostic rule outs of other differentials.
Oedema of extremities.
Skin biopsy reveals signs of a neutrophilic,
口
Polyarthropathy, myopathy.
eosinophilic or lymphocytic vasculitis.  In
cases of rabies-induced vasculitis ischaemic
dermatopathy
with
1  moderate  follicular
Figure 11.28 Vasculitis of the ear pinna due to a drug
eruption.
Figure 11.30 Ulceration of footpads due to vasculitis.
206
6Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Table 11.7 Drugs for treatment of vasculitis.
Drug
Dosage regime
 Prednisolone
1-2 mg/kg po (dogs) or 2-4 mg/kg po (cats) every 12 hours until lesions resolve (may take
 2-4 weeks); then taper over next 8-10 weeks to the lowest possible alternate day dosage
Dexamethasone
0.05 mg/kg po every 12 hours until lesions resolve (2-4 weeks); then taper over next 8-10
weeks to the lowest possible alternate day dosage
Dapsone
(Dogs only) 1 mg/kg po qid until lesions resolve, which takes 2-4 weeks; once remission is
achieved the drug is cut to twice, then once, then alternate day dosing aiming to withdraw
Sulphasalazine
10-20 mg/kg (up to 3 g daily) po qid until remission is achieved (2-4 weeks); once
remission is achieved the dose rate is cut to twice, then once, then alternate days aiming
to withdraw the drug
Tetracycline/ niacinamide
See dose rates in Table 10.3; drugs are given qid to achieve remission (2-4 weeks), then 
tapered to at least daily medication
 Pentoxifylline
(Dogs only) 10-15 mg/kg po qid ± vitamin E 400 IU po bid
Other anti-inflammatory
Drugs such as azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, chlorambucil and cyclosporine may be
sanup
used for disease; see Table 11.1
atrophy, hyalinisation of collagen, cell poor
Reactions can occur after the first, second or
interface dermatitis and mural folliculitis can
several treatments with the drug. It is an uncom-
be seen.
 mon disease in both dogs and cats.
Type of reactions:
Treatment
Predictable - dose dependent, related to phar-
 Identification and treatment of underlying
malogical action of the drug.
 Unpredictable - idiosyncratic reaction or
cause where possible.
drug intolerance.
Therapy can be undertaken with a variety of
different drugs in both the dog and cat (see
Table 11.7)
Groups of drugs leading to reactions:
 In many cases after 4-6 months therapy can
be discontinued. The prognosis of this disease
 Antibiotics, especially potentiated sulphona-
■
depends on the underlying cause that precip-
saps
itates the immune reaction.
■
 Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
■
Anthelmintics
■
Vaccines
Cutaneous drug reactions
Clinical signs
 Uncommon cutaneous or mucocutaneous reac-
tion to a drug.
Many different cutaneous patterns can be as-
sociated with drug reactions, these include
Cause and pathogenesis
口
 papules and plaques,
口
urticaria, angioedema (Figure 11.31),
Route of administration is variable. Drugs may
scaling and exfoliation,
be administered orally, topically or injected.
口
EM,
Immune mediated skin disease  207
Figure 11.31 Periocular urticaria in a dog due to an allergic
Figure 11.33  Vasculitis of ear tip due to an ampicillin reac-
reaction to an anaesthetic agent.
tion.
Resolution 10-14 days after withdrawal of
口
TEN,
Snip
口
vesicles and bullae, e.g. bullous pem-
phigoid (Figure 11.32),
口
 pustular disease,e.g. pemphigus foliaceus,
vasculitis (Figure 11.33).
Differential diagnosis
 Drug reactions can mimic almost any disease
and can be localised, multifocal or diffuse.
Almost any other disease.
Onset of reaction is usually within 2 weeks of
the drugs administration.
Non-cutaneous signs can include
Diagnosis
口
pyrexia and depression,
lameness - polyarthropathy,
History is especially important in drug erup-
口
口
ocular  disease  -  keratoconjunctivitis
tions.
sicca.
Diagnostic rule outs of other differentials.
Haematology and biochemistry may show a
variety but inconsistent range of changes.
Biopsy reveals many different patterns. No
one specific pattern is diagnostic. However,
necrotic keratinocytes often seen throughout
the epidermis in drug eruptions.
Treatment
 Discontinuation of offending drug leads to
resolution of clinical signs within 2-3 weeks.
Symptomatic and supportive treatment for
clinical signs are important, e.g. fluid therapy,
Figure 11.32 Drug eruption in a Doberman due to poten-
whirlpool baths, etc.
tiated sulphonamides; histologically this appeared as bullous
Avoid chemically related drugs at any stage in
pemphigoid like.
the future.
208Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
 Drug therapy may be undertaken in severe
Immunofluorescence or immunohistochemi-
cases with either glucocorticoids in the form
cal testing reveals evidence of IgA deposited
of prednisolone or human intravenous im-
at basement membrane zone.
munoglobulin (see Table 11.6).
Treatment
Canine Linear IgA Derrmatosis
Symptomatic
therapy
with
mild
anti-
seborrhoeic shampoo, e.g. sulphur;
Cause and pathogenesis
 prednisolone 2.2-4.4 mg/kg po sid until re-
mission achieved then alternate days for
 Immunological disease leading to subcorneal pus-
maintenance; or
tules with IgA deposited at basement membrane
 dapsone 1 mg/kg po tid until remission then
zone. The precise cause of the clinical lesions is
 as required.
unknown.
Clinical signs
Amyloidosis
 No sex or age predisposition.
Only recognised in dachshunds.
Rare cutaneous manifestation of abnormal extra-
 Multifocal to generalised pustules usually on
cellular deposition of one of the family of unre-
the trunk.
lated amyloid proteins.
 Secondary lesions appear as annular areas of
alopecia, epidermal collarettes with some hy-
 perpigmentation, scaling and crusting.
Cause and pathogenesis
Pruritus is generally mild.
Amyloid can accumulate in both internal organs
and the skin produced due to a variety of
Differential diagnosis
different
 pathogenic  mechanisms  including
chronic inflammatory disease especially renal
Bacterial folliculitis
disease and neoplasia.
Dermatophytosis
Demodicosis
 Sterile pustular disease, e.g. pemphigus foli-
Clinical signs
aceus, subcorneal pustular dermatosis
Cutaneous signs:
Diagnosis
 Solitary or grouped dermal or subcuta-
neous nodules and plaques; any site but
History and clinical signs especially in predis-
especially the ears.
posed breeds.
口
Tongue, gingiva, footpads and pressure
 Diagnostic rule outs of other diseases.
points can be affected with whitish ooz-
Cytology of pustules reveals evidence of
 ing plaques and papules.
non-degenerate neutrophils, rare acantho-
口
Cutaneous haemorrhage has been re-
cytes and no evidence of bacterial infection.
 ported in some cases of amyloidosis when
Culture in uncomplicated cases is usually ster-
the skin is affected.
ile.
Non-cutaneous signs:
 Skin biopsy reveals signs of intraepidermal
 Clinical signs depend on the organ system-
口
pustules with numerous non-degenerate neu-
ically involved. Amyloid may be deposited
 trophils and occasional acanthocytes.
in kidneys, spleen and liver.
Immune mediated skin disease  209
Differential diagnosis
Skin in chronic areas of alopecia can become
hyperpigmented.
Neoplasia
 Leukotrichia can also be seen.
Infectious nodular granulomas
Sterile nodular granulomas
Differential diagnosis
Diagnosis
 Injection site reaction
Demodicosis
History, especially of chronic internal disease,
Dermatophytosis
plus clinical signs.
Superficial folliculitis
Diagnostic rule outs of other diseases.
Traction alopecia
Skin biopsy reveals deposition of eosinophilic
amorphous substance that is congophilic and
bifringent when polarised.
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
 Diagnostic rule outs of other differentials
Treatment
Trichography reveals signs of typical °excla-
mation point' hairs, which have a tapered end
Solitary nodules without internal disease best
and are dysplastic.
resolved by surgical incision.
Skin biopsy: typically early lesions reveals
Where associated with systemic disease or
signs of peribulbar and intrabulbar lympho-
where multiple nodules are identifed, treat-
cytes, histiocytes and plasma cells - ^swarm
 ment is rarely successful and the prognosis is
of bees'. Chronic lesions show signs of fol-
guarded.
licular atrophy and predominantly catagen
and telogen follicles, later lesions; hair fol-
licles are completely destroyed. Changes are
Alopecia areata
 not seen on all biopsies so that multiple biop-
sies are usually needed to find characteristic
histopathological findings.
Cause and pathogenesis
Thought to be immunological attack mediated by
Treatment
both humoral and cell mediated mechanisms on
antigens in the wall of the hair follicle leading to
 No specific treatment has been described.
non-inflammatory hair loss. It is a rare disease in
 Many cases will recover spontaneously in 6
both the dog and cat.
months to 2 years.
 Topical therapy can be undertaken with glu-
cocorticoids, cyclosporine or tacrolimus used
Clinical signs
daily on affected areas until hair growth
restarts.
No sex or breed predilection.
 Systemic glucocorticoids with immunosup-
 Most commonly occurs in adult animals.
 pressive doses of glucocorticoids (see Table
Focal or multifocal patches of asymp-
11.1) may be used but have a variable success
tomatic non-inflammatory alopecia especially
rate.
 on head (muzzle, periocular areas, ears, chin
 Prognosis for a complete hair regrowth is
and forehead) neck, trunk.
moderate. Hair loss is essentially cosmetic
 Facial lesions can be bilaterally symmetrical.
and does not affect the dog's general health.
210
0Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Neoplasia - squamous cell carcinoma
Hyperadrenocorticism
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
Diagnostic rule outs of other disease.
Skin biopsy of ear pinna reveals signs of lym-
phoplasmacytic inflammation with cartilage
necrosis.
Figure 11.34 Polychondritis showing deformity of the ear
pinna.
Treatment
Permanent deformity of the pinna occurs
Relapsing polychondritis
whether the cat is treated or not.
 Immunosuppressive therapy with either pred-
nisolone (see Table 11.2) or dapsone (1 mg/kg
Rare immune mediated disease caused by inflam-
sid po) may be effective.
mation and destruction of both articular and non-
articular cartilaginous structures.
Sterile nodular panniculitis
Cause and pathogenesis
Cause and pathogenesis
 Precise aetiology unknown; thought to be an
immune mediated attack on type II collagen.
An inflammatory disease of subcutaneous fat,
Rare disease only reported in cats. All re-
which is found in both the dog and cat. It is a
 ported cases have been either FeLV or FIV
rare disease in both species.
positive
Lesions can occur as
 solitary lesions, which can be associated
with trauma, foreign bodies or idiopathic;
Clinical signs
口
multiple lesions associated with immune
mediated disease such as SLE, pancreatic
 No age, sex or breed predisposition.
dysfunction or idiopathic.
 Lesions affect the ear pinnae.
Acutely painful, swollen,
erythematous/
violaceous pinnae becoming
 curled and
Clinical signs
deformed (Figure 11.34).
Systemic signs variable; cats may be quiet,
Cutaneous signs:
pyrexic and anorexic.
Solitary lesions:
 Deep-seated cutaneous nodule often
ulcerated with an oily/yellow of-
Differential diagnosis
ten haemorrhagic discharge (Figure
11.35). They are a few millimetres to
Trauma
centimetres in diameter and may be
 Aural haematoma
found on the flanks, neck, abdomen
 Actinic damage
(Figure 11.36).
immune mediated skin disease 211
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
 Cytology of direct smear and fine needle as-
pirate reveals signs of neutrophils and foamy
macrophages (which contain lipid). In un-
complicated cases no micro-organisms are
present.
Skin biopsy in the form of an excisional
biopsy of a nodule is the best way to es-
tablish a diagnosis. Special stains are usu-
 ally necessary to rule out infective organisms.
Figure 11.35 Deep-seated nodules producing a haemor-
Histopathology reveals signs of a suppura-
rhagic fluid on the dorsum of a dog with idiopathic sterile
tive, granulomatous to pyogranulomatous fi-
panniculitis.
brosing septal of diffuse panniculitis.
Microbial cultures if taken carefully are nega-
Multiple lesions:
tive for aerobic, anaerobic, mycobacterial and
As solitary lesions, but usually occur
fungal culture.
in crops on dorsum and flanks.
 Blood samples are necessary if underlying dis-
Non-cutaneous signs:
ease such as systemic lupus or pancreatic neo-
Inappetence, depression, lethargy.
plasia is thought to be present.
Abdominal pain, vomiting seen with pan-
creatic involvement.
Treatment
Differential diagnosis
Solitary lesions - surgical excision.
Multiple lesions (see Table 11.8).
Infectious panniculitis of bacterial, mycobac-
Prognosis is moderately good, provided that
terial, actinomycotic, fungal origin
there is no underlying disease present.
Foreign body/injection reaction
Sterile pyogranulomatous disease
Neoplasia
Vitamin E deficiency (steatitis in cats)
Proliferative arteritis of the nasal
philtrum
Cause and pathogenesis
Proliferative arteritis is a rare but distinctive skin
disease affecting the nasal philtrum in dogs.
Clinical signs
No sex predisposition.
Affected animals were 3-6 years of age.
Figure 11.36 Sterile idiopathic panniculitis showing the typ-
St Bernards, Newfoundlands as well as other
ical distribution pattern.
large dogs may be predisposed.
212
2Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Table 11.8   Drugs useful for the therapy of sterile nodular panniculitis.
Drug
Dosage
Details
Tetracycline/niacinamide
Dogs >10 kg 500 mg of each drug tid
Daily tid dosage up to 3 months to resolve
Dogs <10 kg 250 mg of each drug tid
lesions, then bid for 4-6 weeks then sid for
maintenance
Doxycycline/niacinamide
Niacinamide as above
Niacinamide as above
Doxycycline 10 mg/kg bid 
Doxycycline bid until response, then ta-
pered to lowest possible maintenance dose 
Cyclosporine
 5 mg/kg po sid 
Given daily until remission 6-8 weeks; then 
give eod for 4 weeks, then every 72 hours
for 4 weeks then withdrawn if possible
Prednisolone
2 mg/kg (dog) or 4 mg/kg (cat) po sid or
Dosage is given daily until remission 2-8
methyl prednisolone 1.6 mg/kg (dog)
weeks, then tapered slowly to lowest dose
po sid 
rate with a view to withdrawal
Vitamin E
400 IU twice daily
May not control disease but can be sued as
a steroid sparing medication
Lesions present as well-demarcated linear
Treatment
ulcers affecting the nasal philtrum (Figure
11.37).
Topical therapy:
 Ulcers variable in size from 3-5 cm in length
口
Tacrolimus may be useful if the animal
to 2-15 mm in width.
will tolerate application.
 Dogs develop signs of arterial haemorrhage
Systemic medication:
from the ulcers.
Glucocorticoids
at
anti-inflammatory
口
dose rates of 1-2 mg/kg po sid for 14
days, then cut to alternate days and taper
Differential diagnosis
as required.
Vasculitis
Frostbite
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
Skin biopsy using a small punch biopsy from
the periphery of the
e lesion. Histopathology
reveals large V-shaped ulcers with subepider-
mal fbrosis and pigmentary incontinence. Ex-
ocytosis of inflammatory cells into the epider-
mis. Deep dermal arteries beneath the ulcer
show subendothelial intimal proliferation of
spindle cells, which leads to thickening and
Figure 11.37 Proliferative arteritis of the planum nasale in a
stenosis of vessels.
Rhodesian ridgeback.
Immune mediated skin disease  213
Pentoxifylline given at a dose of 10-25
Therapeutic Guide.2nd edn. Pp. 189-228. WB
mg/kg po bid/tid may act as a peripheral
Saunders, Philadelphia
dilator and may also decrease production
Morris, D.O. (2004) Vasculitis and vasculopathy.
of fibrous tissue. May take 4 weeks to see
In: Campbell, K.L. (ed) Small Animal Derma-
full benefit.
tology Secrets. pp. 254-260. Hanley and Bel-
fus, Philadelphia
Nichols, P.R. et al. (2001) A retrospective study
Selected references and further reading
of canine and feline vasculitis. Vet Dermatol,
12,255-264
Rosenkrantz, W.S. (2004) Pemphigus: Current
Hall, J. (2004) Erythema multiforme and toxic
therapy. Vet Dermatol, 15, 90-98
epidermal necrolysis. In: Campbell, K.L. (ed)
Scott, D.W. et al. (2001) Immune mediated dis-
Small Animal Dermatology Secrets.Pp.243-
eases. Muller and Kirk's Small Animal Derma-
 250. Hanley and Belfus, Philadelphia
tology. 6th edn. pp. 667-779. WB Saunders,
Jackson, H.A. and Olivry, T. (2004) Ulcerative
Philadelphia
dermatosis of the Shetland sheepdog and rough
Torres, S. (2004) Immune mediated skin disease.
collies: Clinical management and prognosis.
In: Campbell, K.L. (ed) Small Animal Derma-
Vet Dermatol, 15, 37-41
tology Secrets. pp. 231-243. Hanley and Bel-
Marsella, R. (2000) Canine pemphigus complex,
fus, Philadelphia
diagnosis and therapy. Compend Contin Educ
White, S.D. (2000) Nonsteroidal immunosup-
Pract Vet,22,680-689
pressive therapy, Bonagura (ed) In: Kirk's Cur-
Medleau, L. and Hnilica, K. (2006) Autoim-
rent Veterinary Therapy XllI Small Animal
mune and immune-mediated skin disorders. In:
Practice.pp. 536-538. WB Saunders, Philadel-
Small Animal Dermatology:A ColorAtlasand
phia
Alopecia
Alopecia in the dog and cat will be discussed
口
Idiopathic cyclic flank alopecia
under four main headings detailed below:
口
 Telogen defluvium
口
Idiopathic bald thigh syndrome of
(1)  Follicular dystrophy
greyhounds
(a)Congenital
口
 Feline-acquired symmetrical alopecia
 Non-colour linked:
口
 Pancreatic paraneoplastic alopecia
口
Tardive onset
口
Feline
preauricular and
pinnal
口
 Congenital hypotrichosis
alopecia
 Pili torti
Hyperadrenocorticism
Colour linked:
(1)  Traumatic alopecia
口
Colour dilute alopecia
(a) Loss of normal hair
口冏
Black hair follicular dystrophy
(b)  Loss of abnormal hair
(b)Acquired
(2)  Scarring alopecia
 Anagen defluxion
(a)  Primary scarring
(2)  Hair cycle abnormalities
(b) Secondary scarring
(a) Alopecia associated with systemic dis-
ease, e.g. hyperadrenocorticism.
(b)  Alopecia of unknown cause, but where
cycle arrest occurs this is a large group
Follicular dystrophy
that includes the following:
口
 Post-clipping alopecia
口
Alopecia X/growth hormone respon-
Abnormal hairs or follicles are formed due
sive dermatosis/adrenal sex hormone
to abnormal development or growth of the
 responsive dermatosis/congenital ad-
hair.
renal hyperplasia/castration respon-
This does not necessarily cause an alopecia al-
sive dermatosis
though often does. It can be congenital or ac-
Pattern baldness
quired.
Alopecia  215
Congenital follicular dystrophy
Non-colour linked follicular dystrophy
Hair loss is caused by abnormal hair follicle de
velopment or else structural abnormalities. Hair
loss is not colour linked and shows no seasonal
pattern.
Tardive onset
Affects a variety of different breeds and pro-
 gresses slowly from puppyhood.
Figure 12.2 Close-up of Figure 12.1.
Clinical signs
 Doberman pinscher:
In females hair loss starts 6-8 weeks af-
 Black or red dogs affected.
ter first/second season and will regrow
口冏
Hair loss is often seen first at 1-4 years of
3-4 weeks later.
age. Alopecia starts on the flanks and will
Portuguese water dog dystrophic alopecia
spread caudodorsally (Figures 12.1 and
affects the flanks, caudodorsal trunk and
12.2).
periocularly (Figure 12.3).
Secondary bacterial infection is common.
 Hair loss waxes and wanes but will
Siberian husky, malamute:
 grow back in many dogs. New hair is
Hair loss is seen on trunks at 3-4 months
口
of poor quality and at each cycle less
of age.
 hair grows back leading to permanent
口
Coat turned reddish.
alopecia.
 Areas clipped for biopsies do not regrow.
Irish water spaniel, Portuguese water dog:
Differential diagnosis
口
Hair loss on the ventral neck and tail is
 Dermatophytosis
Demodicosis
Irish water spaniel dystrophic alopecia af-
Endocrine alopecia
fects neck, flanks, trunk and thigh:
Superficial bacterial folliculitis
 In males hair loss starts in middle age
 and is non-seasonal and progressive.
Figure 12.1 Follicular dystrophy on the flanks of a Dober-
Figure 12.3 Follicular dysplasia in a Portuguese water
man.
spaniel.
216
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
Trichography of plucked hairs mounted in
liquid paraffin reveals defects in cuticle, and
hair cortices and medulla contain numerous
large melanin clumps.
Skin biopsy reveals the presence of dilated
hair follicles filled with keratin, hair shaft
 fragments and melanin. Abnormal clumps of
 melanin are also apparent in follicular and
epidermal basal cell layer and hair matrix
cells.
Figure 12.4 Chinese crested dog: naturally hairless breed
Treatment
dlue to follicular dystrophy.
None.
Skin biopsy reveals a variety of changes rang-
Congenital hypotrichosis
ing from the presence of dystrophic hair fol-
Cause and pathogenesis
licles to complete lack of follicles often with
 Dogs and cats with congenital hypotrichosis are
similar changes in the adnexal glands.
born without hair. They do not have a follicular
dystrophy but an ectodermal defect.
Treatment
None.
Clinical signs
Most dogs and cats with congenital hypotri-
chosis are born with complete hair coat or
Pili torti
with only partial loss of hair, which progresses
Cause and pathogenesis
 Rare disease caused by curvature of the hair folli-
through dystrophic change to almost whole
body alopecia within 4 months. In some cases
cle leading to a flattening and rotation of the hair
whiskers, claws and papillae on the tongue
shaft.
can be affected.
Clinical signs
Predisposed dog breeds: poodles (toy and
No breed or sex predilection.
miniature), whippets, beagle, Rottweiler,
Yorkshire terrier, American cocker spaniel,
Young kittens are affected.
Generalised hair loss occurs by 10 days of age.
Belgian shepherd dog, Labrador retriever.
Chinese crested dog is a hairless breed where
alopecia is caused through follicular dystro-
phy (Figures 12.4 and 12.5).
Predisposed cat breeds
include
Birman,
 Burmese, Devon Rex and Siamese.
Differential diagnosis
Demodicosis
Nutritional deficiencies
Dermatophytosis
 Pili torti
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
Figure 12.5 Alopecia of legs of Chinese crested dog showing
 Diagnostic rule outs of other differential.
comedones.
Alopecia217
 Periocular and pedal dermatitis is commonly
seen as well as paronychia.
Differential diagnosis
As congenital hypotrichosis.
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
Trichography of plucked hairs mounted in
liquid paraffin reveals that all secondary hairs
are flattened and rotated.
Skin biopsy is not diagnostic. It reveals signs
Figure 12.6  Blue colour dilute Yorkshire terrier.
of hyperkeratosis and cystic dilatation of fol-
licles.
Differential diagnosis
Treatment
Dermatophytosis
None.
Demodicosis
Superficial bacterial folliculitis
 Endocrine skin disease especially hypothyroi-
Colour linked follicular dystrophy
dism
Colour dilution alopecia (colour mutant
alopecia)
Diagnosis
Associated with blue (dilute black) or fawn (dilute
History and clinical signs especially coat
brown) coat colours.
colour.
 Diagnostic rule outs of other differentials.
Cause and pathogenesis
Trichography of plucked hairs mounted in
Genetic factors appear to be important. Dys-
mineral oil reveals cortices and medullas con-
trophic change is associated with dilute-coloured
tain numerous large pigment granules of ir-
hair, which has defective hair pigmentation in the
 regular shape and size. Hair shafts are often
form of large pigment granules, which leads to the
fractured.
formation of abnormal hair. In some cases lethal
 Skin biopsy of colour dilute areas reveals di-
pigment changes cause hair loss due to shaft frac-
lated cystic keratin-filled follicles. Abnormal
tures.
clumps of melanin are present in hair and
Clinical signs
Predisposed
1breeds include Doberman,
dachshund, Great Dane, Yorkshire terrier
(Figure 12.6), whippet, greyhound, miniature
pinscher, Saluki, chow chow, Boston terrier,
Shetland sheepdog, Chihuahua, poodles and
Irish setter.
Tardive condition as dog's hair coat appears
 normal at birth but hair loss becomes notice-
 able from 6 months of age.
Lesions start dorsally as hypotrichosis, usu-
ally with bacterial folliculitis (Figure 12.7)
and can become generalised.
Figure 12.7 Dorsum of blue Doberman showing comedone
Non-colour dilute areas remain unaffected.
formation, diffuse alopecia and folliculitis.
218
3Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
peribulbar melanophages, and epidermal and
follicular basal cells with associated pigment
incontinence.
Treatment
No specific therapy is available other than
symptomatic treatment to make the dog feel
comfortable and prevent infection.
 Symptomatic treatment of secondary infec-
tion with appropriate antibiotics.
Avoid harsh shampoos and excessive groom-
ing as this increases hair loss due to shaft frac-
ture, but gentle shampoo therapy with mild
antiseborrhoeic and/or antibacterial product
Figure 12.8 Black-haired follicular dystrophy in a collie.
is useful.
 Prognosis is good in that this is only a cos-
metic problem albeit a lifetime condition.
Black/dark hair follicular dystrophy
Cause and pathogenesis
A familial disease that is only seen in bicoloured
or tricoloured puppies; only the black/dark hair
affected. A defect in hair growth is thought to be
 associated with disorder of pigment transfer.
Clinical signs
 Predisposed breeds include the bearded col-
lie, basset hounds, Saluki, beagle, dachshund,
 pointer, also bi- and tricoloured crossbreeds.
Dogs appear to have a normal hair coat at
birth; however, progressive loss of weaken
Figure 12.9 Black-haired follicular dystrophy affecting the
black hairs occurs due to shaft fracture from
legs in a collie.
4 weeks of age.
Alopecia areas can give appearance of com-
plete alopecia or short stubble (Figures 12.8-
12.10).
Differential diagnosis
Demodicosis
Dermatophytosis
Superficial bacterial foliculitis
Endocrine alopecia
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs especially the coat
colour.
 Trichography of plucked hairs mounted in
Figure 12.10 Black-haired follicular dystrophy affecting the
mineral oil reveals cortices, and medullas
dorsum in a collie.
Alopecia  219
contain numerous large melanin clumps. Hair
cuticles have defective shafts, which are often
fractured.
Skin biopsy of black-haired areas reveals di-
lated cystic keratin-filled follicles. Abnormal
clumps of melanin are present in epidermal
and follicular basal cells and hair matrix
cells. Samples from non-black-haired areas
 are completely normal.
Treatment
As colour dilution alopecia.
Figure 12.11 Anagen defluxion causing diffuse hair loss in a
cat on chemotherapy.
Acquired follicular dystrophy
Anagen defluvium
 Trichography of plucked hairs in mineral oil
reveals no sign of trauma to the tips, no shaft
Cause and pathogenesis
Anagen growth phase is temporarily halted lead-
abnormalities, and bulbs are exclusively in
ing to abnormalities of the hair. The hair is usu-
anagen.
 Skin biopsy is often normal and is only use-
ally lost within days of insult as the resulting dys-
ful before hair is lost completely. In the acute
trophic change is incompatible with normal hair
stages, abnormal hair matrix cells with dys-
growth. An uncommon disease in dogs and cats;
it can be caused by a range of factors including
 plastic hair shafts may be seen.
Treatment
 antimitotic drugs, e.g. cancer, chemotherapy,
 None is necessary, provided the inciting factor
infectious disease,
is identified and removed.
endocrine disease,
Prognosis is good and normal hair should
metabolic disease.
 grow back once the insult to the skin has re-
solved.
Clinical signs
Hair loss starts acutely within days of the in-
sult to the skin.
Hair cycle abnormalities
 Diffuse and widespread hair loss over most
of the body (Figure 12.11), often sparing the
Hair cycle abnormalities result in alopecia when
head.
the anagen phase of the hair cycle is shortened or
 Shed hair appears to be relatively normal.
 the telogen phase of the hair cycle is lengthened.
 No primary lesions are present.
In some cases, hair may be miniaturised due to
 changes in cycle length. Suspended animation can
Differential diagnosis
occur as hair cycle halts in telogen.
Endocrine alopecia
No further growth appears and hairs are re-
Superficial folliculitis
tained for long periods in some cases or may be
Demodicosis
lost due to normal wear and tear.
 Dermatophytosis
Causes
Diagnosis
History of previous insult to hair cycle and
 Alopecia associated with systemic disease,
clinical signs.
E.g. hyperadrenocorticism (see Chapter 8).
220
0Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Clipped areas appear alopecic due to the pres-
ence of short stubble; the coat, where present,
is normal.
Differential diagnosis
Endocrine diseases
Telogen defluvium
Follicular dystrophy
Demodicosis
Dermatophytosis
Figure 12.12 Post-clipping alopecia in a Labrador. All
Diagnosis
endocrine tests were normal in this dog. Hair grew back after
History and clinical signs.
approximately 12 months.
■
Diagnostic rule outs of other differentials.
Skin biopsy may fail to reveal signs of abnor-
Alopecia of unknown cause, but where cycle
mality. In some cases hairs appear to be in
arrest occurs this is a large group that includes
the following:
catagen arrest.
 Post-clipping alopecia
口
Alopecia X/growth hormone responsive
Treatment
dermatosis/adrenal sex hormone respon-
Hair will eventually regrow as hair cycle
sive dermatosis/congenital adrenal hyper-
restarts, but can take up to 24 months in the
plasia/castration responsive dermatosis
plush-coated breeds.
Pattern baldness
Hair growth stimulants have no proven ben-
口
Idiopathic cyclic flank alopecia
efit in therapy.
Telogen defluvium
Prognosis is good.
 Idiopathic bald thigh syndrome of grey-
口
hounds
Feline-acquired symmetrical alopecia
Alopecia X
口
口
Pancreatic paraneoplastic alopecia
Growth hormone responsive dermatosis/adrenal
 Feline preauricular and pinnal alopecia
口
sex hormone responsive dermatosis/congenital
adrenal hyperplasia/castration responsive der-
Post-clipping alopecia
matosis.
This disease represents a category of hair cycle
Cause and pathogenesis
 arrest alopecia that is poorly understood. Various
Hair fails to grow in areas that have been
treatment modalities have been used to restart the
clipped either due to a presurgical clip (Fig-
hair cycle.
wre 12.12) or part of the normal grooming
process.
Uncommon disease only found in dogs.
Cause and pathogenesis
Any breed can be affected but the chow chow
Cycle arrest occurs in all cases so that hairs stay
 and Siberian husky appear to be predisposed.
 in telogen in suspended animation. Several the-
Cycle arrest occurs at the time of clipping,
 ories exist for the pathogenesis including abnor-
hair will normally start to regrow after 3-4
mal adrenal sex hormone imbalance and a growth
months.
hormone deficiency. Most recent work suggests
that hair loss may be due to a local follicular
Clinical signs
receptor dysregulation. Uncommon disease only
 Unclipped areas of hair appear to be normal.
recognised in dogs.
Alopecia 221
Figure 12.13 Alopecia X in a chow chow.
Figure 12.15  Progressive hair loss in a miniature poodle with
Alopecia X.
Clinicalsigns
Head and neck tend to be spared but coat
 Reported in young dogs usually aged 2-5
is made of secondary hairs, which have the
years.
appearance of ^puppy coat' (Figure 12.16).
Predisposed breeds include the chow chow
Alopecic skin may become hyperpigmented
(Figure 12.13), Samoyed, keeshond, Pomera-
and thinned.
nian (Figure 12.14), Alaskan malamute,
Secondary seborrhoea and pyoderma can be
Siberian husky and miniature poodle.
present.
Hair coat becomes faded; truncal alopecia
often starts in perineum and inguinal areas.
Differential diagnosis
Hair loss is progressive leading to complete
alopecia of neck, tail, caudodorsal areas, per-
Endocrine alopecia
Telogen defluxion
ineum and caudal thighs (Figure 12.15).
Figure 12.16 Alopecia X in a Pomeranian showing loss of
Figure 12.14 Alopecia X in a Pomeranian.
dorsal hairs.
222
2Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Demodicosis
口
Methyl testosterone 1 mg/kg up to 30
Dermatophytosis
 g on dn rg ap ro Ara 
Maintenance levels may be given 1-2
Diagnosis
times weekly. Side effects of therapy in-
History and clinical signs especially in a pre-
clude liver cholestasis and aggression. Due
disposed breed.
to potential hepatotoxicity, liver function
 Diagnostic rule outs of other causes of alope-
should be monitored periodically.
cia.
 Cimetidine at a dose of 5-10 mg/kg po
口
 Skin biopsy reveals non-specific endocrine-
qid. Side effects are rare but if they occur
type changes
take the form of gastrointestinal signs.
ACTH stimulation test (sex hormone assay
 Prednisolone 1 mg/kg po sid for 7 days
 profle - SHAP) may be performed by mea-
then tapered to an alternate day regime of
suring cortisol and selected sex hormones be-
0.5 mg/kg po sid.
fore and after stimulation. Interpretation of
口
 Diethyl stilboestrol 0.1-1.0 mg by mouth
results can be difficult due to false positive
every other day or daily for 3 weeks. Side
and negative results and lack of breed data
effects of oestrogen therapy include severe
for normal parameters.
bone marrow depression.
口
 Porcine growth hormone has been used at
Treatment
 Observation without undertaking therapy is
a total of 6 weeks. Periodic retreatment
appropriate in many cases due to the fact that
may be necessary. Side effects include in-
hair loss is purely cosmetic and dogs are oth.
duction of
diabetes sothatl
bloodglu
erwise well.
 Neutering of intact male and female dogs may
therapy.
help with hair regrowth, but this is not a con-
口
Leuprolide
sistent finding.
48 weeks until hair regrowth is seen.
 Medical therapy has been shown to be capa-
口
Goserelin 60 mg/kg sq for 3 weeks until
 ble of producing some improvement but not
a consistent finding:
Not all dogs show a complete
 response to
口
Melatonin 3-12 mg/dog po sid-qid un
til maximum hair growth occurs. Levels
other regain hair only to lose it again.
3-6 mg daily, then alternate days, every
Pattern baldness
third day, then twice weekly. Side effects
Cause and pathogenesis
are rare.
An idiopathic hair cycle arrest that leads to alope-
口
Trilostane has been shown to be benefi-
cia. It is thought to be associated with miniatur-
cial in some dogs. Various protocols have
isation of hairs. Uncommon disease; only recog-
been suggested, including dogs <2.5 kg,
nised in dogs.
20 mg po sid, dogs 2.5-5.0 kg, 30 mg po
sid, dogs 5.0-10.0 kg, 60 mg po sid, which
Clinical signs
produced hair regrowth within 4-8 weeks
 In all cases, thinning of the hair progresses to com-
with most dogs. In diffcult cases, the
plete alopecia of the affected area. Hair loss is usu-
doses may be doubled but should be ta-
 ally symmetrical and hair in non-alopecic areas
pered to the lowest possible twice weekly
 does not tend to epilate easily. Three syndromes
dosage where possible once full hair re-
are commonly recognised.
growth has been achieved. Dogs should
be monitored for adrenal insufficiency in
 Male dachshunds:
the same way as those with hyperadreno-
Alopecia of the pinnae, which usually
corticism (see Chapter 8).
starts at 6-9 months of age (Figure 12.17).
Alopecia 223
Idiopathic cyclic flank alopecia (seasonal flank
alopecia, canine recurrent flank alopecia)
Cause and pathogenesis
year leading to alopecia on the flanks. The hair re-
growth can be triggered in some breeds by chang-
ing photo period leading to the assumption that
the pineal gland may be important in combina-
tion with prolactin production in stimulating hair
growth. No specific hormonal abnormalities have
been identified in animals. It is an uncommon con-
 dition in dogs and not recorded in cats.
Figure 12.17  Pattern baldness in a dachshund showing strik-
ing pinnal alopecia.
Clinical signs
 Predisposed
1breeds
sinclude
the
Boxer,
American water spaniels and Portuguese wa-
Airedale and bulldog, although signs can
ter dogs:
occur in any breed.
口
Alopecia of ventral neck, caudomedial
In the Northern hemisphere hair loss occurs
thighs and tail from 6 months of age.
between November and March. It will nor-
Female dachshund, Chihuahua, whippet,
mally regrow 3-8 months later.
greyhound:
 Dogs can lose and then regrow hair annually,
Alopecia of the post-auricular area, ven-
biannually or not at all.
rum and caudomedial thighs. Starts in
Hair is lost from the thoracolumbar re-
early adulthood.
gion and typically is bilaterally symmetrical
(Figure 12.18), although asymmetrical hair
Differential diagnosis
loss can occur.
Endocrine alopecia
Unlike endocrine hair loss the borders of
Dermatophytosis
alopecia tend to be well-demarcated and are
Demodicosis
often geometric in shape (Figure 12.19).
Superficial folliculitis
Skin is usually hyperpigmented but not in-
flamed, and there is no pruritus.
Diagnosis
 Dogs show no signs of systemic ill health
History and clinical signs especially in predis-
posed breeds.
Diagnostic rule outs of other diseases.
Skin biopsy reveals signs of miniaturisation
of the hair follicles.
Treatment
 No specific therapy has been shown to be use-
ful.
Hair may grow back spontaneously.
Anecdotal reports success that melatonin at
a dose of 3-12 mg/dog po sid-qid for 3-6
months may be useful.
Prognosis is good, this is only a cosmetic dis-
ease and animals are never systemically un-
Figure 12.18 Staffordshire bull terrier with seasonal flank
well.
alopecia.
224
4Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Telogen defluvium
Cause and pathogenesis
An abrupt stressful medical or surgical interven-
tion, e.g pyrexia, systemic illness, pregnancy, ma-
jor surgery leads to cessation of the anagen phase
of cycle. Hairs become synchronised in catagen,
then move through to telogen to be lost 1-3
months after the initial insult.
Clinical signs
Presents with sudden and widespread hair
loss that progresses rapidly over a period of a
few days (Figure 12.20). Hairs can be easily
Figure 12.19 Close-up of alopecic patch on a mastiff with
epilated.
 seasonal flank alopecia.
 Hair loss is generalised but tends to spare the
head.
Differential diagnosis
Skin is non-inflamed and there is no evidence
 Endocrine disease, e.g. hypothyroidism, hy-
of pruritus.
 peradrenocorticism
Superficial folliculitis
Differential diagnosis
Demodicosis
Endocrine disease, e.g. hypothyroidism, hy-
Dermatophytosis
peradrenocorticism
Alopecia areata
Superficial folliculitis
Demodicosis
Diagnosis
?
Dermatophytosis
Clinical signs and history, especially when
Alopecia areata
 dogs have a history of hair loss the previous
year.
Diagnostic rule outs of other differentials.
Skin biopsy reveals signs of dysplastic, at-
rophic and dilated keratin-flled follicles that
project down into the dermis like a “witches
foot'.
Treatment
Observation without therapy may be appro-
priate in many cases as hair will often grow
back without therapy.
 Medical therapy with either oral melatonin or
melatonin implants:
 Sustained release melatonin (1-4) 12 mg
口
implants/dog sc once only.
 Melatonin 3-12 mg/dog po sid-qid for 3-
4 months.
Prognosis is variable as some dogs will grow
back a normal hair coat; some never grow
back hair and others have incomplete growth
often with changes in quality and colour.
Figure 12.20  Telogen defluxion in a heavily pregnant queen.
Alopecia 225
Diagnosis
Differential diagnosis
Clinical signs and history especially when
Endocrine disease, e.g. hypothyroidism, hy-
dogs have a history of systemic ill health 1-
 peradrenocorticism
3 months prior to hair loss.
Superficial folliculitis
Diagnostic rule outs of other differentials.
Demodicosis
Skin biopsy reveals no specific signs of abnor-
 Dermatophytosis
mality. Often only changes that are present
Alopecia areata
are that most of the hairs in sections are in
telogen. Skin appears normal.
Diagnosis
 Clinical signs and history in greyhounds.
Treatment
 Diagnostic rule outs of other differentials.
 The underlying cause should be identified and
 Skin biopsy reveals non-specific changes con-
treated where possible.
sistent with an endocrine type of pattern.
Hair will grow back spontaneously once the
underlying trigger is corrected.
Treatment
 No specific therapy has been shown to be ef-
Idiopathic bald thigh syndrome in the
fective.
greyhound
Prognosis is good. Hair loss may be perma-
Cause and pathogenesis
 nent but this is only a cosmetic disease.
Alopecia of unknown origin reported to affect the
thigh of greyhounds.
Feline-acquired symmetrical alopecia
Cinical signs
A very rare bilaterally symmetrical alopecia of un-
Alopecia is first noticed during late puberty or
known origin. Originally called feline endocrine
late adulthood and will progress as the animal
alopecia, no true hormonal cause has been iden-
tified for this disease.
becomes older.
Hair loss is seen initially on the lateral and
caudal aspects of the thighs (Figure 12.21),
Cause and pathogenesis
often extending onto the ventral abdomen.
Thyroid function tests in these cats are nor-
 Underlying skin is not inflamed and the con-
mal. However, they may have a decreased
dition is non-pruritic.
thyroid reserve based on the fact many re-
 Animals appear to be systemically well
spond to thyroid supplementation with lio-
thyronine.
 Response to thyroxine may be non-specific
due to psychological factors rather than a de-
ficiency state.
Clinical signs
 No breed or sex predilection recognised. Cats
range in age from 2-12 years.
Bilaterally
alopecia.
Hair can be easily epilated.
Affected sites are the anogenital area, proxi-
mal tail, caudomedial thighs and ventral ab-
 dominal skin. Relative sparing of face and
feet.
Figure 12.21 Bald thigh syndrome in a greyhound.
 Non-pruritic.
226
6Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Differential diagnosis
Progestagens - megestrol acetate orally 2.5-
Traumatic alopecia
5.0 mg/cat once every other day until hair re-
Ectoparasites (fleas, cheyletiella, otodectes,
grows, then a maintenance dose of 2.5-5.0
lice, demodex)
mg/cat every 1-2 weeks, or intramuscular in-
 Allergy (atopy, food)
jection of medroxyprogesterone acetate 50-
 Psychogenic alopecia
175 mg/cat two injections 6 weeks apart.
Dermatophytosis
apis
effects
 -adrenal
suppression,
Non-pruritic alopecia
diabetes mellitus, mammary gland fi-
Hypothyroidism (very rare)
broadenomatous hyperplasia, which can
Hyperadrenocorticism (very rare)
progress to neoplasia.
Telogen defluxion
 Anagen defluxion 
 Pancreatic paraneoplastic alopecia
See Chapter 21.
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
Feline preauricular and pinnal alopecia
Diagnostic rule out of other differentials.
Routine blood samples including thyroid and
Cause and pathogenesis
adrenal function tests are normal.
Preauricular alopecia in cats is common and a
Trichography reveals no sign of trauma to the
normal finding. Pinnal alopecia is of unknown ae-
hair so that the distal hair tips are intact and
tiology and is characterised by periodic alopecia
 pointed; the bulb are telogenised.
of the ears.
Use of Elizabethan collar to establish if the
hair loss is spontaneous or traumatic. If the
Clinical signs
cats are licking out their hair the coat will
 Preauricular alopecia:
grow back with the use of a collar.
口冏
 Presents generally in short-coated breeds
Skin biopsy reveals a non-specific
pattern
as sparsely haired skin on the head be-
other than the presence of telogenised hairs.
tween the ears and eyes (Figure 12.22).
No sex or breed predisposition.
Treatment
口
 No skin lesions are present.
Therapy should only be considered once a diagno-
 Pinnal alopecia:
sis has been made. Empirical therapy for alopecia
口
 Presents as non-pruritic alopecia (Figure
is not appropriate.
12.23).
Drugs that have been used include the follow-
ing:
Liothyronine 20 μg/cat orally twice daily may
be increased to 50 μg/cat for 12 weeks.
口
Side effects - cardiac arrhythmia's.
 Androgen/cestrogen therapy - intramuscular
injections of testosterone 12.5 mg total testos-
 terone/cat with oestradiol 0.5 mg/cat. Injec-
tions of both are given on two occasions 6
weeks apart. Oestradiol is unlicensed for use
in the cat.
口
 Side effects - oestrous in females, urine
spraying and aggressiveness in males.
Hepatobiliary, renal and cardiac disease
in cases of overdosage.
Figure 12.22 Feline preauricular alopecia
Alopecia227
Figure 12.23 Patchy alopecia on the ear of a Siamese.
Figure 12.24 Flank alopecia secondary to flea allergy.
Cause and pathogenesis
 No sex predilection but Siamese appear to
口
be predisposed.
Cats are often secret groomers and due to their
Alopecia  typically
ybilateral;
may
be
fastidious nature overgrooming can produce ar-
口
patchy or more extensive.
eas of alopecia, as hair is either nibbled short or
口
Hair will spontaneously regrow after sev-
 pulled out. The animal's hair coat remains nor-
eral months.
mal. Any cause of overgrooming in dogs or cats
can lead to traumatic hair loss including
Differential diagnosis
Dermatophytosis
ectoparasites (fleas (Figure 12.24), cheyle-
tiella, otodectes, lice, demodex),
Demodicosis
 Superficial pyoderma
allergy (atopy (Figure 12.25), food),
 psychogenic alopecia,
Diagnosis
dermatophytosis,
History and clinical signs.
hyperthyroidism,
 Diagnostic rule outs of other differentials.
Treatment
 Preauricular alopecia:
口冏
 No therapy needed as this is a normal find-
ing.
Pinnal alopecia:
口
No therapy necessary as hair will regrow
after several months.
Traumatic alopecia
Pruritic/psychogenic alopecia
Hair is plucked out in association with underlying
pruritic dermatoses or due to psychological fac-
tors (see Chapter 16). Traumatic hair loss tends
to be much more important in cats than in dogs.
Figure 12.25 Alopecia on lower legs in a cat with atopy.
228
3Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Telogen defluxion
Paraneoplastic alopecia
Feline-acquired symmetrical alopecia
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
 Diagnostic rule out for non-traumatic alope-
cia.
Trichography.
Loss of normal hairs reveals that both anagen
and telogen hairs are represented. Hair shafts
appear normal but hair tips are barbered sug-
Figure 12.26Ventral alopecia secondary to flea allergy.
gesting overgrooming.
paraneoplastic pruritus,
Treatment
 localised pain, e.g. abdominal or orthopaedic
Identification of underlying cause of pruritus/
pain,
 Overgrooming essential where normal hair is lost.
seborrhoeic dermatitis.
Clinical signs
Iraction alopecia
Alopecia can be complete if the hair is pulled out,
Cause and pathogenesis
 or partial if the hairs have been barbered off to
give the impression of extensive hair loss.
Hair loss is seen on the top of the head of dogs that
Patterns of alopecia are variable. In the dog,
have rubber bands or bows to tie up their hair.
specific patterns of hair loss can give a clue to the
 If these are applied tightly for prolonged periods
underlying aetiology; for example, caudal dorsal
hair loss can occur. It is an uncommon condition,
traumatic hair loss is often associated with flea
only recognised in the dog.
 allergy. In cats, patterns of alopecia are not spe-
Clinical signs
cific to any one disease. Feline patterns that are
recognised include
Initial lesion is an erythematous plaque,
which progresses to hair loss.
bilaterally symmetrical flank alopecia,
Well-circumscribed areas of hair loss associ-
ventral abdominal alopecia (Figure 12.26),
alopecia of caudomedial thighs,
ated with area where hair was tied up, usually
on the top of the head.
alopecia of lower extremities,
diffuse generalised hair loss.
 Differential diagnosis
These patterns can occur concurrently and also in
 Dermatophytosis
combination with components of the eosinophilic
Demodicosis
granuloma complex in cats. Primary lesions are
Alopecia areata
not usually present in cats. Traumatic hair loss in
the dog is often accompanied by a papular erup
Diagnosis
tion.
History and clinical signs.
Differential diagnosis
Skin biopsy reveals signs of mononuclear cell
Hyperadrenocorticism
infltrate with oedema, vasodilation and a fi-
Hypothyroidism
brosing or scarring alopecia.
Alopecia229
Treatment
Proper use or else avoidance of bows.
Resection of alopecia if permanent hair loss
is seen.
Scarring alopecia
Cause and pathogenesis
Scarring alopecia occurs as a result of destruction
Figure 12.28 Scarring alopecia on the ear of a dog with der-
or distortion of hair follicles so that hair is lost
matomyositis.
but does not grow back. This type of alopecia
can occur in both the dog or cat but generally is
more common in the dog.
 Severe generalised cutaneous damage,
e.g. burns
(1) Primary
 Inflammatory reactions directed against hair
follicles or organisms in lumen:
 Bacterial folliculitis
Selected references and further reading
 Dermatophytic folliculitis (Figure 12.27)
Demodex folliculitis
Direct destruction of follicles, e.g. severe
Cerundolo, R. et al. (2000) An analysis of factors
burns
underlying hypotrichosis and alopecia in Irish
(2) Secondary
water spaniels in the United Kingdom. Vet Der-
Hair follicles damaged as a bystander:
matol, 11,107-122
 Infarcted hairs, e.g. vasculitis (Figure
Cerundolo, R. et al. (2004) Treatment of canine
12.28)
 alopecia X with Trilostane. Vet Dermatol, 15,
Perifollicular damage above hair bulb,
285-293
e.g. sebaceous adenitis
Diaz, S.F. et al. (2004) An analysis of canine hair
regrowth after clipping for a surgical proce-
dure. Vet Dermatol,15,25-30
Frank, L.A.et al. (2004) Adrenal steroid hormone
concentrations in dogs with hair cycle arrest
 alopecia (Alopecia X) before and after treat-
ment with melatonin and mitotane. Vet Der-
matol,15,278-284
Medleau, L. and Hnilica, K. (2006) Hereditary,
congenital and acquired alopecia. In: Small An-
imal Dermatology: A Color Atlas and Thera-
peutic Guide.2nd edn. pp. 229-273. WB Saun-
ders, Philadelphia
Morris, D.O. (2004) Disorders of hair and hair
growth. In: Campbell, K.L. (ed) Small Animal
Figure 12.27 Scarring alopecia post Trichophyton menta-
Dermatology Secrets. pp. 99-105. Hanley and
grophytes infection of the facial areas in a Jack Russell terrier.
Belfus, Philadelphia
230Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Paradis, M. (2000) Melatonin therapy in canine
Schoning, P.R. and Cowan, L.A. (2000) Bald
alopecia. In: Bonagura, E.D. (ed) Kirk's Cur-
thigh syndrome of Greyhound dogs: gross and
rent Veterinary Therapy Xlll Small Animal
microscopic findings. Vet Dermatol, 11, 49-
 Practice. pp. 546-549. WB Saunders, Philadel-
51
phia
Scott, D.W. et al. (2001) Acquired Alopecia
 Roperto, F. et al. (1995) Colour dilution alopecia
Muller andKirk's Small Animal Dermatology.
(CDA) in ten Yorkshire terriers. Vet Dermatol,
 6th edn. pp. 887-912. WB Saunders, Philadel-
6,171-178
phia
Nutritional skin disease
Dogs are by nature omnivorous and do not have
Deficiency is usually seen when inappropri-
the precise dietary requirements of the cat. Nu-
ately low-protein diets are fed. This can
tritional skin disease can occur through inade-
occur when kittens or cats are fed on
quate or unbalanced nutrition in either the dog
dog food, which has inadequate protein for
or cat. Cats have a protein requirement of 25-
cats.
30%, which is much higher than dogs, which is
18-20%. Cats unlike dogs require taurine in their
priately for renal/hepatic disease.
diets. Deficiency of taurine leads to retinal degen-
Systemic illness occurs, causing protein loss;
eration and blindness. Cats cannot convert the
diseases that may lead to this include protein-
fatty acid linoleic acid to arachidonic acid and
losing nephropathy, gastroenteropathy, hep-
must therefore consume preformed arachidonic
atopathy, chronic blood loss.
acid, which is found in animal tissue. Cats can-
not convert B carotene in plants to vitamin A
and so must therefore consume preformed vita-
Clinical signs
min A also found in animal tissue. Cats cannot
convert the amino acid tryptophan to the B vita-
min niacin leading them to have a high require-
Cutaneous signs will often precede weight
ment for niacin in their diets. Cats also have
loss.
 Generalised scaling and loss of hair pigment.
high requirement for vitamin B6 (pyridoxine)
 Poor hair growth and the hair is thinner, dry,
■
brittle (Figure 13.1).
Patchy alopecia can be seen but more com-
Protein Deficiency
monly the coat is diffusely thinned.
Cause and pathogenesis
Differential diagnosis
Normal hair growth requires 25-30% of the an-
imal's total daily protein intake:
Endocrine disease
232 Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
This is a rare disease in both the dog and cat.
When it occurs, it is caused through the following:
Inadequate diet especially poorly formulated
or preserved foods, especially seen in young
kittens; cats fed a vegetarian diet.
 Internal disease.
Gastrointestinal disease especially inflamma-
tory or neoplastic lesions leading to malab-
sorption and/or maldigestion.
Chronic renal or hepatic disease.
Clinical signs
Cutaneous signs:
口
Generalised scaling, loss of lustre of hair
Figure 13.1  Generalised hair loss and seborrhoea oleosa in
coat.
a protein-deficient kitten.
Chronic changes include a poor hair coat
with seborrhoea oleosa plus often a ceru-
minous otitis.
 Secondary infection with bacteria or yeast
Diagnosis
is common.
 History and clinical signs.
"Hot spot' areas of acute moist dermatitis
 Investigation of dietary deficiency or search
can be seen.
for source of protein loss.
口冏
Miliary dermatitis in cats.
 Impaired wound healing.
Non-cutaneous signs:
Abnormal reproductive function.
Treatment
Poor-quality diets should be replaced with
ones with improved protein levels in diet.
Differential diagnosis
Correction of underlying diseases should be
undertaken where possible.
Primary seborrhoea
Specific dietary supplementation can be given
Other causes of secondary seborrhoea
with the use of prescription diets.
Diagnosis
Fatty Acid Deficiency
History and clinical signs.
Diagnostic rule outs of other differentials.
Cause and pathogenesis
Skin biopsy reveals signs of orthokeratotic
hyperkeratosis with no underlying epidermal
Essential fatty acids should constitute at least 2%
hyperplasia.
of the caloric intake of the diet. Cats but not dogs
Routine haematology, biochemistry, FeLV,
require preformed linoleic acid and arachidonic
FIP, FIV may be useful to identify any under-
acid, both are omega 6 fatty acids.
lying disease.
Nutritional skin disease  233
Treatment
 Feeding a balanced diet is preferable to adding
in fatty acid supplements.
If supplements are given these should be bal-
anced containing both omega 6 and omega 3
fatty acids. If these are unavailable,
口
 natural sources of linoleic acid include
soya or corn oil;
口
natural sources of arachidonic acid in-
clude poultry fat or lard.
Identification of underlying disease and ther-
apy of this is useful.
Figure 13.2 Pansteatitis affecting the groin.
Pansteatitis
Nodular subcutaneous deposits of fat or
fbrous tissue can be seen, especially in the
 groin and on the ventral abdomen (Figure 
Cause and pathogenesis
13.2).
 Overlying skin usually appears normal
 Rare disease, caused by an excessive con-
口
unless traumatised by the cat.
sumption of unsaturated fatty acids with in-
adequate dietary intake of antioxidants. Diets
are usually high in oily fish especially tuna,
Differential diagnosis
sardines.
The accumulation of reactive peroxides (end
products of rancidification) in adipose tissue
 Infectious causes of nodular skin disease in-
produces yellow discolouration of body fat.
cluding the following:
So-called ‘yellow fat disease'. Rare disease;
Bacterial infections such as
>
only recognised in cats.
 Bacterial pseudomycetoma
Mycobacteria
Yersinia pestis (plague)
Clinical signs
Actinomycosis
Actinobacillosis
Young and obese cats appear to be predis-
 Nocardiosis
 Dermatophytic pseudomycetoma
posed.
Generalised signs:
Fungal mycetoma
 Cats appear to be depressive, febrile and
Sterile causes of nodular skin disease
Neoplasia
anorexic.
 Foreign body
freely.
 Ascites is an uncommon finding but raises
the suspicion of FIP as a major differential
Diagnosis
diagnosis.
Cutaneous signs:
Clinical signs and history, especially if a high-
口
Cutaneous pain is present when cats are
fat diet has been fed.
handled caused by the inflammation of
Skin biopsy reveals that fat is charac-
 subcutaneous fat. Usually generalised in-
teristically brown/yellow/orange with lobu-
flammation occurs of all fat deposits.
lar/septal panniculitis ± fat necrosis and
234Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
mineralisation. Due to the fact that many
Diagnosis
differentials are infectious special stains
should be put on histopathology samples to
History and clinical signs.
rule out infectious causes.
 Skin biopsy reveals signs of epidermal hyper-
plasia and follicular hyperkeratosis.
Treatment
Treatment
Dietary changes are essential to feed a bal-
anced cat food. Appetite stimulants/force
Single injection of vitamin A aqueous solu-
tion 6,000 IU/kg body weight is adequate for
feeding may be needed to encourage the cat
serious deficiency.
to eat the new diet:
Change of diet to a high-meat-based diet is
Cyproheptadine (2 mg po bid) or di-
 often suffcient. Toxicity can occur through
 azepam (1 mg po bid) can both be used
excess supplementation.
as appetite stimulants in cats.
Vitamin E supplementation (alpha toco-
pherol) 20-50 mg/kg body weight by mouth
Vitamin A responsive disease
once daily. Should be given for 1 month be-
yond clinical cure.
Glucocorticoids may be given as a short
See Chapter 17.
course at anti-inflammatory doses, which is
 prednisolone 1-2 mg/kg once daily by
mouth for 7 days, then every other day
Hypervitaminosis A
for 10 days.
Cause and pathogenesis
Vitamin A deficiency
A rare disease seen in cats that are fed a diet rich in
vitamin A. This may be due to oversupplementa-
tion especially with cod-liver oil or diets contain-
Cause and pathogenesis
ing large quantities of liver. This disease is very
rare in dogs, but has been reported.
 Rare disease caused through inadequate levels of
vitamin A in the diet. It is most commonly seen
Clinical signs
in cats fed a vegetarian diet. Cats cannot con-
vert B carotene in plants to vitamin A and need
preformed vitamin A from meat. Vitamin A is
Cumulative disease that tends to be seen in
 required for normal skin formation and ocular
elderly cats >8 years of age. Signs in dogs are
function.
similar to cats.
Generalised signs:
口
Anorexia, weight loss.
Clinical signs
口
Peri-articular exostoses especially fore-
limb and neck, leading to stiffness and
Cutaneous signs:
eventual cervical spondylitis.
 Poor coat, alopecia, generalised scale
Cutaneous signs:
口冏
 Marked follicular hyperkeratosis
Hyperaesthesia.
Generalised signs:
口
 Spondylitis leads to neck pain so that
Retinal degeneration, photophobia,
cats are reluctant to groom leading to
Weakness of hind legs
口冏
poor-quality unkempt coat and gener-
口
Reproductive failure
alised seborrhoea (Figure 13.3).
Nutritional skin disease 235
Force feeding and appetite stimulants may be
necessary (see treatment for pansteatitis).
 Prognosis very guarded; often changes are ir-
reversible.
Vitamin B deficiencies
 Rare disease caused through deficiency of biotin,
riboflavin, niacin (see Table 13.1).
Zinc responsive dermatosis
Figure 13.3  Unkempt coat in a cat with hypervitaminosis A.
Cat is unable to groom due to cervical spondylitis.
Cause and pathogenesis
Differential diagnosis
Three deficiency syndromes are recognised:
Cutaneous lesions:
Seborrhoea related to chronic systemic
Syndrome I - huskies, Alaskan malamutes.
disease
Contributory factors:
口
 Genetic defect leading to reduced zinc ab-
口
 Hyperthyroidism
 sorption from bowel in malamutes.
口冏
Diets high in calcium or cereal or soya
Diagnosis
protein prevent zinc absorption.
口
Chronic bowel problems - malabsorp-
History and clinical signs
tion.
 Radiographic signs of bony changes
 Syndrome I - rapidly growing puppies espe-
cially Great Danes, Dobermans, Labradors.
Treatment
Contributory factors:
Institution of a balanced diet.
口
Large breeds.
This can be difficult, as cats can become ob-
口
High levels of calcium supplementation of
sessive about liver-based food.
diet.
Table 13.1Vitamin B deficiencies: causes and clinical signs.
Vitamin B
deficiency
Causes
Clinical signs
Treatment
Biotin
 Diets high in uncooked eggs.
Periocular alopecia, crusting on
Therapy is the same in all cases
 chronic antibiotic therapy
face, neck, body
 Balanced commercial dog foods
 Lethargy, diarrhoea
Brewers yeast
Riboflavin
Diets without meat or dairy
 Periocular and ventral
B complex injection
products
seborrhoea, cheilosis
Niacin 
Diets low in protein/high in
 Pellagra - dermatitis, neuritis,
corn
glossitis
Ulceration of mucous
 membranes
236
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Figure 13.4 Periocular and aural erythema in a zinc-
Figure 13.6 Crusting over elbows in a zinc-deficient husky.
deficient husky.
High cereal levels of diet.
Secondary bacterial and yeast infec-
Syndrome III - English bull
1 terriers, lethal
tions common.
Hyperkeratosis of footpads.
acrodermatitis (see Chapter 14).
Mild to moderate pruritus.
Non-cutaneous signs:
Depression, anorexia
Clinical signs
Lymphadenomegaly
and
pitting
oedema of extremities.
 Syndrome I:
Severely affected puppies may have
口
Cutaneous signs:
stunted growth.
Erythema, crusting, scaling
around
Syndrome II:
mouth, chin, eyes, ears and genitalia
Cutaneous signs:
(Figures 13.4 and 13.5).
Crusting of pressure points (Figure
Generalised seborrhoea.
13.7).
Thick crusting over the pressure points
 Nasal and footpad hyperkeratosis of-
of elbows and stifles (Figure 13.6).
ten with secondary fissuring.
Figure 13.7 Zinc responsive disease in a collie showing
crusting on pressure points. Lesions were caused by an
Figure 13.5 Close-up of the dog in Figure 13.4.
unbalanced high-cereal diet.
Nutritionai skin disease 237
Oral essential fatty acid supplementation may
allow the zinc supplementation levels to be
reduced or withdrawn.
 Intact females should be neutered as oestrous
can lead to a deterioration in their skin.
Topical treatment:
口
Water soaks plus mild antiseborrhoeic
shampoos and application of ointments
may be useful.
Zinc supplementation:
 Syndrome I - essential and life long:
Zinc sulphate 10 mg/kg/daily with
Figure 13.8 Periocular crusting and scaling in a Doberman
food.
with zinc responsive dermatosis caused through high calcium
Severe cases intravenous injection of
supplementation feeding with cereal-based diet.
10-15 mg/kg weekly for 4 weeks then
maintenance as required.
Zinc methionine 1-7 mg/kg daily.
Crusting and scaling around eyes and
 Dogs should be removed from breed-
mouth (Figure 13.8).
Mild to moderate pruritus.
ing programmes.
 Side effects of zinc therapy include de-
pression, anorexia, vomiting and diar-
Differential diagnosis
rhoea.
Syndrome II:
Other cause of nasal/footpad hyperkeratosis
Zinc supplementation is adequate as a
 Primary and secondary seborrhoea
short course to speed resolution.
qnoue soop iso rog poo si sisouoio
 some breeds need lifetime therapy.
Diagnosis
 History and clinical signs especially in predis-
posed breeds.
Selected references and further reading
Skin biopsy reveals diffuse epidermal and fol-
licular parakeratosis and superficial perivas-
cular dermatitis. Evidence of secondary infec-
Medleau, L. and Hnilica, K. (2006) Keratin-
tion is common.
isation and seborrhoeic disorders. In: Small
Measurement of zinc in serum or hair is dif-
Animal Dermatology: A Color Atlas and Ther-
ficult and unreliable.
apeutic Guide. 2nd edn. Pp 295-326. WB
Response to zinc therapy.
Saunders, Philadelphia
Rosychuk, R.A. (2004) Zinc related dermatoses.
In: Campbell, K.L. (ed) Small Animal Der-
Treatment
matology Secrets. pp. 304-311. Hanley and
Belfus, Philadelphia
 In both syndromes I and II correction of the
Roudebush, P. and Wedekind, K.J. (2002) Zinc
 diet and treatment of any underlying disease
responsive dermatosis in dogs. Vet Dermatol,
where possible, e.g. malabsorption, are essen-
13,63
tial.
Scott,D.W. et al.(2001) Nutritional Skin Dis-
 Any secondary bacterial and yeast infection
ease Muller and Kirk's Small Animal Derma-
should be treated with appropriate medical
tology.6th edn. pp. 1112-1123. WB Saunders,
therapy for a minimum of 3-4 weeks.
Philadelphia
Congenital and hereditary
skin
I diseases
Disorders of epithelial formation
Predisposed breeds include those listed below.
Clinical signs differ between breeds. The ini-
tial signs are of mild scaling progresses to the
Primary seborrhoea
following:
 Irish setter and Doberman produce signs
Cause and pathogenesis
of dry generalised seborrhoea.
Canine:
Cocker spaniel, West Highland white ter-
Predisposed breeds include cocker spaniel, En-
rier, cavalier King Charles spaniel, bas-
glish springer spaniel, West Highland white ter-
set and shar-pei produce signs of greasy
rier, basset hound, Irish setter. It is thought to
malodorous skin, scaly and crusty pruritic
be primary cellular defect in the dog. In cocker
patches (Figures 14.1 and 14.2).
spaniels the epidermis, hair follicle infundibulum
Ceruminous otitis externa is common. Dogs
 and sebaceous gland have all shown to be hyper-
commonly have marked intertrigo.
proliferative.
Secondary staphylococcal and Malassezia
 pachydermatis infection common.
Feline:
A very rare disease in the cat. In most cats se-
Feline:
borrhoea is secondary to an underlying disease.
Every effort should be made to identify this be-
No sex predilection. Age of onset is variable.
fore a diagnosis of primary seborrhoea is made.
Severe cases are seen in young kittens by 2-3
Often clinical signs can be quite mild due to the
days of age. Mild cases become apparent by
fastidious grooming behaviour of the cat.
6 weeks of age.
 Predisposed breeds include the Persian:
Clinical signs
口
 In Persian cats it has been identified as an
autosomal recessive mode of inheritance.
Canine:
口
Cats present with signs of generalised se-
borrhoea oleosa (Figure 14.3), which is
 No sex predilection. It is seen in young dogs.
malodorous.
Congenital and hereditary skin diseases 239
Figure 14.1  Idiopathic seborrhoea on the face of a cavalier
King Charles spaniel.
Waxy debris accumulates in the face folds
and ears (Figure 14.4).
kitten.
Differential diagnosis
口
allergy with secondary Malassezia over-
Ichthyosis
growth
Sebaceous adenitis
Vitamin A responsive dermatosis
Diagnosis
Causes of secondary seborrhoea:
History and clinical signs especially in young
口
 ectoparasites, e.g. fleas, cheyletiella,
animals.
口
endocrine, e.g. hypothyroidism (dogs),
Diagnostic rule outs of other secondary
hyperthyroidism (cats)
causes of seborrhoea.
dermatophytosis
 Skin biopsy reveals non-specific signs of fol-
口冏
thymoma (cats)
licular keratosis and a hyperplastic superficial
perivascular dermatitis with orthokeratotic
Figure 14.2  Pedal changes present in the case of Figure 14.1.
Figure 14.4  Close-up of facial area in Figure 14.3.
240 Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
or parakeratotic hyperkeratosis. Secondary
1
There are few reports of use of retinoids
 infection with yeast and bacteria is common.
in cats.
Retinoids
should be dispensed with care, especially
 to female owners of childbearing age.
Treatment
口
 Monitoring of the canine patient should
Owners need to be made aware of the need
include routine haematology, biochem-
for long-term therapy.
istry, especially liver function, triglyc-
Good nutritional support is important with a
erides and cholesterol.
well-balanced, high-quality diet.
Glucocorticoids:
Symptomatic treatment can include the fol-
口
Glucocorticoids should be used as a last
lowing.
resort when other problems are con-
Topical therapy:
trolled.
Antiseborrhoeic shampoos:
口
 Prednisolone 1.0-2.0 mg/kg to reduce
Shampoo therapy for dogs is easily un-
greasiness for a maximum of 2 weeks then
dertaken; however, many cats will tol-
the lowest possible dose used on an alter-
erate regular shampoo therapy if they
nate day basis for maintenance.
are started at a young age.
Animal's coat should be
kept well
 groomed, clipping often helps.
Ichthyosis (fish scale disease)
initially, then as required for mainte-
Cause and pathogenesis
lored to the type of seborrhoea:
Very rare congenital disorder of keratinisation
Dry seborrhoea
sulphur, salicylic
identified in the dog and cat. It may be equiva-
acid.
lent to lamellar ichthyosis in man.
 Dry seborrhoea with secondary in-
fection
 acetic acid, ethyl lac-
tate, chlorhexidine,
miconazole,
Clinical signs
sulphur, salicylic acid.
Greasy seborrhoea - benzoyl per-
■
No sex predilection. Seen in young dogs and
oxide, selenium sulphide, tar.
(Tar
cats.
shampoos should not be used in
Animals
s are abnormal at birth. Several ani-
mals in a litter may be affected.
cats.)
Shampoos for greasy seborrhoea are
：
Predisposed canine breeds include the West
rarely needed for long-term mainte-
Highland white terrier, golden retriever, cav-
alier King Charles spaniel, Doberman pinsch-
nance.
 Topical rinses:
ers, Jack Russell terriers, Norfolk terriers and
 Suitable products contain essential fatty
Yorkshire terriers.
acids, moisturisers and humectants.
Animals
have
 generalised grey
yscales and
 Essential fatty acids:
roughened skin (Figures 14.5).
Omega 3, omega 6 fatty acids
s supple-
Scales will flake off in large sheets ( Figure 14.6
口
ments successful in some cases.
and 14.7) or can accumulate as scales on the
Retinoids:
skin surface.
Retinoids 
s are reported to be useful in
Malodorous seborrhoeic skin; secondary in-
口
dogs. Suitable drugs include isotretinoin
fection with Malassezia very common.
1.0-3.0 mg/kg po bid, etretinate 1.0
Hyperkeratosis of footpads (Figures 14.8 and
 mg/kg po bid or acitretin 0.5-1 mg/kg po
14.9) (especially at the periphery) and nasal
sid.
planum.
Congenital and hereditary skin diseases
241
Figure 14.5 Ventral abdomen of West Highland white terrier
with ichthyosis showing roughened scale.
Figure 14.8 Hyperkeratosis of the footpads in a West
Highland white terrier with ichthyosis.
Differential diagnosis
Seborrhoeic skin disease:
口
Primary seborrhoea
口
Other causes of secondary seborrhoea
 Footpad hyperkeratosis:
Figure 14.6Scaly skin in a retriever with ichthyosis.
Figure 14.7 Scale from the case in Figure 14.6.
Figure 14.9 Close-up of hyperkeratosis in Figure 14.8.
242
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
口
Distemper
The disease is characterised by multiple ery-
口
Zinc responsive dermatosis
thematous hyperkeratotic papules that coa-
口冏
Pemphigus foliaceus
lesce to form plaques.
 Lesions tend to be roughly symmetrical and
Diagnosis
found on inner aspect of pinnae, inguinal and
abdominal skin and prepuce.
 History and clinical signs, especially in pre-
Chronically the lesions can become gener-
disposed breeds.
alised.
 Diagnostic rule outs of other differentials.
Skin biopsy reveals signs of orthokeratotic
Differential diagnosis
hyperkeratosis and hypergranulosis. Ker-
atinocytes contain numerous mitotic figures.
Demodicosis
■
Follicular keratosis and plugging are com-
 Dermatophytosis
'uo
Neoplasia - lymphoma
■
Diagnosis
Treatment
 History and clinical signs, especially in pre-
 Incurable disease; needs aggressive long-term
disposed breed.
management.
Skin biopsy reveals signs of regular or papil-
Topical treatment:
late epidermal hyperplasia with the formation
Emollients:
 May be useful to soften the skin espe-
of blunt-ended rete ridges.
cially footpads.
Suitable products contain lactic acid
Treatment
 5% spray or ointment, propylene gly-
Topical therapy:
col 50% solution.
口
 Antibacterial shampoo using actives such
Antiseborrhoeic shampoo:
as acetic acid, benzoyl peroxide, chlorhex-
 See therapy of primary seborrhoea.
idine, ethyl lactate.
Systemic treatment:
Systemic therapy:
Essential fatty acid supplementation
口
Antibiotics should be prescribed on the
口冏
Retinoids (as primary seborrhoea)
basis of culture and sensitivity.
口
Glucocorticoids (as primary seborrhoea)
 Suitable drugs include the following:
口
 In cases where skin changes are severe, ani-
Cephalexin 20-25 mg/kg po bid
mals may be euthanised.
Clavamox 12.5-25 mg/kg po bid/tid
 Clindamycin 5.5 mg/kg po bid
 Enrofloxacin 5 mg/kg po bid
Lichenoid psoriasiform dermatosis of
 Marbofloxacin 2 mg/kg po bid
English springer spaniels
 Antibiotics should be prescribed for 3-6
weeks and at least 10 days beyond clinical
Cause and pathogenesis
cure.
A rare skin disease occurring in the English
springer spaniel. Occasionally it can be seen in
Schnauzer comedo syndrome
other breeds. It is thought to be an exaggerated
reaction to a superficial staphylococcal infection.
Cause and pathogenesis
Uncommon
1 disease, which has only been
Clinical signs
recorded in the miniature schnauzers (Figure
 No sex predilection; tends to be recognised in
14.10). It is thought to be an acne-like develop-
ssop Bunof
mental abnormality of hair follicles.
Congenital and hereditary skin diseases 243
Differential diagnosis
 Dermatophytosis
Demodicosis
 Endocrine disease especially hypothyroidism,
hyperadrenocorticism
Flea-allergic dermatitis
 Allergy with secondary infection
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs in predisposed
breed.
 Diagnostic rule outs of other differentials.
Skin biopsy reveals that the superficial por-
Figure 14.10 Schnauzer comedo syndrome. Note that there
tion of the hair follicle is dilated with keratin
are no generalised skin abnormalities.
with an almost “cyst-like’ appearance. Sec-
 ondary bacterial infection and follicular rup-
Cinical signs
ture producing areas of furunculosis are com-
mon.
No sex predilection. Seen usually in young
dogs.
Treatment
 Lesions are found almost exclusively on the
 Long-term control requires a combination of
dorsum.
topical and often systemic therapy.
 In mild cases there is diffuse thinning of the
Topical treatment:
hair coat.
 Shampoo therapy with antiseborrhoeic
 In severe cases there is alopecia with hyper-
口
shampoo. Benzoyl peroxide is particularly
 pigmentation of the skin and comedone for-
useful because it has follicular flushing ac-
mation (Figure 14.11).
tivity.
Hair can be easily epilated from affected area
Systemic treatment:
and commonly contains follicular casts.
Antibiotics for secondary infection based
Secondary bacterial folliculitis is very com-
on sensitivity for at least 3 weeks and 10
mon.
days beyond clinical cure. Some animals
Pruritus is mild in uncomplicated cases.
need to stay on long-term antibiotics pos-
sibly as pulse therapy to prevent recur-
rence. In these cases, a full therapeutic
dose of antibiotics is given twice weekly
to prevent reinfection.
Retinoids in the form of isotretinoin 1.0
mg/kg po bid or acitretin 0.5-1.0 mg/kg
 po sid. Response should be seen within
4 weeks. Dogs should be monitored for
liver dysfunction and owners should be
made aware of the teratogenic nature of
the drug.
>
Vitamin A 8,000-10,000 IU/10 kg po sid
may be beneficial.
Prognosis is good, but animals will need long-
term care. Disease is only of cosmetic consid-
Figure 14.11 Close-up of skin from dorsum in Figure 14.10.
eration.
244Manuai of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Dermoid sinus
Appropriate antibiotic therapy should be
 given to treat animals prior to surgery.
Cause and pathogenesis
Dermoid sinus is a rare congenital abnormality
Aplasia cutis
that has not been reported in the cat. It has been
recognised in many different breeds but most
 Cause and pathogenesis
 commonly recognised in the Rhodesian ridge-
back. It is a congenital defect due to incomplete
Rare inherited congenital abnormality in the dog
separation of skin and neural tube. This produces
and cat. Anomaly leads to a discontinuity of squa-
a blind ending sac or sinus that communicates
mous epithelium. Mode of inheritance in the cat
with the dura mater extending from the dorsal
and dog is unclear.
mid-line.
Clinical signs
Clinical signs
 No sex or breed predisposition. It is present
at birth.
 No sex predilection. Always seen in young
 Skin lesions consist of areas of skin ulceration
saop
due to loss of epithelium.
Tufts of hair protrude from single or multiple
May be seen at any site on the body and
openings on dorsum.
deficits may be small or cover an extensive
Can occur at any site on the dorsum but most
areas.
commonly over the cervical spine.
Cord of tissue can occasionally be palpated
Differential diagnosis
extending down to spine.
Mechanical trauma
The sinus may contain sebum, keratin debris
 Burns either mechanical, heat or chemical
or hair and can become secondarily infected.
Other congenital abnormalities especially epi-
dermolysis bullosa
Differential diagnosis
Diagnosis
Congenital nevus
Bacterial folliculitis
History and clinical signs in a young animal.
Foreign body
 Skin biopsy reveals signs of complete absence
Inclusion cyst
of epidermis, hair follicles and glands. Skin to
either side of the lesion is normal.
Diagnosis
Treatment
History and clinical signs, especially in pre-
Surgical repair:
disposed breed.
口冏
Primary closure or skin grafting may re-
 Fistulogram to delineate extent of tract.
pair small areas.
MRI or CT scan are non-invasive ways to as-
口
Where there is extensive skin loss, dehy-
sess the boundaries of the lesion.
dration and secondary infection is com-
mon, leading to death.
Treatment
Where the sac is blind ending and quiescent
Epidermolysis bullosa
it may be removed surgically, but treatment is
not usually necessary.
Cause and pathogenesis
For draining or cystic tracts complete surgical
removal of the sinus is necessary. There is a
 Rare congenital disease identifed in both dogs
risk of meningitis associated with surgery.
and cats. Hereditary mechanobullous disease
Congenital and hereditary skin diseases 245
Table 14.1 Different forms of epidermolysis bullosa.
Disease
Structure affected
Deficient protein
Epidermolysis simplex
Intermediate filaments
K5 or 14 
 Hemidesmosomes
 Plectin 
Junctional epidermolysis
Hemidesmosomes
Integrin α6 or 64
bullosa 
Anchoring filaments
Type XVill collagen 
 or laminin 5
Dystrophic epidermolysis
 Anchoring fibrils
Type Vll collagen 
bullosa 
caused through a variety of different faults at
abdomen (Figure 14.13) and over bony
the level of the basement membrane zone, which
prominences.
leads to separation of the epidermis from the der-
Bacterial paronychia common (Figure 14.14)
mis. The level of splitting cannot be identified
and claws often slough.
on normal histopathological sections but requires
Defects in tooth enamel and retarded growth
electron microscopy or immunohistochemistry.
can also be seen.
Three subtypes have been identified in man
based on the abnormality and the level of cleav-
age (see Table 14.1).
Differential diagnosis
■
Dermatomyositis
dinical signs
 Pemphigus vulgaris
+
 Signs become apparent at birth or soon after-
Bullous pemphigoid
Systemic lupus erythematosus
wards.
Typical lesions are vesicles and bullae. How-
Erythema multiforme
ever, these lesions may be transient and lesions
 Drug eruption
appear as areas of ulceration with crusting.
Vasculitis
Lesions typically seen at mucocutaneous
junctions, footpads (Figure 14.12), ventral
Figure 14.12 Ulceration on paws with epidermolysis bul-
Figure 14.13 Vesicles and ulceration on ventral abdomen of
losa.
a puppy with epidermolysis bullosa (E B).
246
6Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
may be a genetic predisposition that invokes an
immune mediated disease. Drug reactions, infec-
tions (especially viral) toxins, internal neoplasia
may contribute.
Clinical signs
No sex predilection. It is commonly seen in
dogs <6 months of age.
 Predisposed breeds include the collie and
Shetland sheepdog.
Cutaneous lesions:
 Lesion progression variable but dogs usu-
ally deteriorate up to the age of 12 months
Figure 14.14 Bacterial paronychia in a puppy with EB.
after which regression may occur.
口
Lesions occur at sites of mechanical
rauma (bony prominences), face (bridge
Diagnosis
of nose, lips, periocular, Figure 14.15), ear
and tail tips (Figure 14.16).
History and clinical signs, which are present
 Footpad ulcers can occur but are rare.
at birth or soon afterwards.
口
Primary lesions are papules and vesicles
Skin biopsy reveals signs of dermal/epidermal
but are uncommon.
separation, which extends to involve hair
follicles. There is no apoptosis or hydropic
口
Dogs usually present with alopecia, ery-
thema, scaling and crusting.
change of the basal layer.
 Electron microscopy and immunohistochem-
Lesions are aggravated by trauma and ul-
istry are required to determine the level of the
traviolet light.
 cleavage and therefore the subtype of the dis-
Non-pruritic lesions that wax and wane.
ease.
Treatment
No therapy is currently available.
Environmental management may be helpful
to minimise trauma to skin. The use of pro-
tective boots and coats may help minimise
trauma.
Antibiotics can be given to help with sec-
ondary infection.
Guarded prognosis: affected animals should
 not be used for breeding.
Dermatomyositis
Cause and pathogenesis
Uncommon disease only recognised in the dog.
Familial history is commonly seen. Aetiology is
Figure 14.15 Lesions of dermatomyositis on the face of a
not fully determined but it is thought that this
bop
Congenital and hereditary skin diseases 247
Muscle biopsy reveals signs of multifo-
cal accumulations of inflammatory cells,
myofbril degeneration and myofibre at-
rophy.
 Electromyography produces signs of fibril-
lation potentials and bizarre high-frequency
discharges.
Treatment
Symptomatic therapy to remove crust and
scale from the skin.
 Minimise trauma and exposure to ultraviolet
light.
Therapy of any secondary infection.
Neutering is advised as oestrous and preg-
nancy exacerbate the disease, and neither sex
should be used for breeding.
Moderate/mild cases:
Figure 14.16  Ulceration and alopecia of tail tip in a collie
Vitamin E 400-800 IU po sid; improve-
with dermatomyositis.
>
ment may take 2-3 months.
口
Essential fatty acids/cold marine oil sup-
plements.
Non-cutaneous lesions:
Prednisolone 1.0 mg/kg po sid initially to
Myositis variable, not always present.
口
 produce clinical improvement (7-10 days)
Most commonly asymptomatic atrophy
 and then cut to lowest possible alternate
of muscles of mastication and distal limbs.
day dosage.
 In Severe cases, problems with drinking,
口
Pentoxifylline 25 mg/kg po tid with food;
chewing, swallowing (megaoesophagus),
high stepping gait.
improvement may take 1-3 months.
 Prognosis is very variable. Dogs with mild to
 moderate disease can resolve spontaneously
Differential diagnosis
or be controlled with medication. They can
Demodicosis
be left with some scarring. Severe cases are
Staphylococcal folliculitis
often unresponsive to therapy and animals are
Dermatophytosis
euthanised.
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Epidermolysis bullosa
Hereditary fupoid dermatosis
Vasculitis
of German short-haired pointers
Diagnosis
Cause and pathogenesis
 History and clinical signs, especially in pre-
disposed breed.
A very rare disease, only seen in the German
Skin and muscle
short-haired pointer. Aetiology is unknown but
biopsy may be
non
diagnostic:
 a definite familial predisposition has been recog-
口
 Skin biopsy reveals signs of scattered epi-
nised.
 dermal basal cell degeneration, perifollic-
Clinical signs
ular lympho-histiocytic infltrates. Follic-
ular basal cell degeneration and follicular
 No sex predisposition. Affects young dogs ap-
atrophy faded follicles'.
proximately 6 months of age.
248
BManual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs, especially in pre-
disposed breed.
 Skin biopsy reveals signs of moderate acan-
thosis with orthokeratotic and parakera-
totic hyperkeratosis. Hydropic degeneration
of basal cells and individual keratinocytes
show signs of apoptosis.
Treatment
Disease is often poorly responsive to therapy.
Topical treatment:
Antiseborrhoeic
shampoos
Figure 14.17Crusting and scaling on the face of a German
especially
those containing ethyl lactate, salicylic
short-haired pointer with hereditary lupoid dermatosis.
acid, sulphur and tar.
Emollient and humectant sprays.
 Initial lesions are seen on the face (Figure
14.17), ears and dorsum.
Systemic treatment:
 Essential fatty acid supplementation; min-
Chronically the disease becomes more gener-
口
imal benefit.
alised.
 Crusting and scaling is seen on the dorsum
Glucocorticoids even at immunosuppres-
sive dosages of 2 mg/kg po sid daily pro-
(Figure 14.18).
duce poor results.
 Hyperkeratosis and ulceration of the planum
口
Other immunosuppressive therapy pro-
nasale commonly seen.
duces variable results, i.e. cyclosporine,
Cyclical disease whose clinical signs wax and
azathioprine, chlorambucil.
wane.
Congenital and hereditary disorders
Differential diagnosis
of hair and hair growth
Sebaceous adenitis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
See Chapter 12.
Pemphigus foliaceus
Dermatophytosis
Zinc responsive dermatosis
Congenital and hereditary disorders
of pigmentation
See also Chapter 15.
Chediak-Higashi syndrome
Cause and pathogenesis
Inherited autosomal recessive disease seen in blue
 Persian cats. Not been recorded in dogs.
Affected cats have giant lysosomes in the cells
of numerous tissues including neutrophils and
macrophages. Abnormal neutrophils exhibit de-
Figure 14.18 Crusting and scaling on the dorsum of a Ger-
layed intracellular killing, leading to increased
 man Shorthaired Pointer with hereditary lupoid dermatosis.
susceptibility to infection.
Congenital and hereditary skin diseases 249
dinical signs
No sex predilection. Affected animals tend to
be young kittens.
Breed incidence exclusively found in blue
smoke, yellow-eyed Persian cats.
Cutaneous signs:
口
 Dilute pigmentation of the coat, which is
a blue smoke colour.
Cats have an increased risk of bacterial
and fungal infection (especially dermato-
phytic pseudomycetoma).
Ocular signs:
Figure 14.19 Primary idiopathic acanthosis nigricans in a
口
Cats show signs of a partial ocular al-
dachshund.
binism; their iris is yellow compared to
the normal copper coloured iris typical of
blue Persians.
Acanthosis nigricans
口
 Animals show signs of photophobia.
There is reduced fundic pigmentation,
Cause and pathogenesis
which appears red compared to the nor-
Multiple causes exist for this disease, which can
mal yellow/green colour.
occur as a primary entity or secondary to other
An increased incidence
of congenital
inciting factors:
cataracts is seen.
Haematological signs:
 Primary idiopathic acanthosis nigricans is
口
Abnormal platelet function is seen leading
seen especially in dachshunds and is thought
to increased bleeding tendency.
to be genetically determined (Figure 14.19).
Secondary acanthosis nigricans can be seen
Differential diagnosis
in any breed and can be associated with the
Little else present with this range of clinical signs
following:
in this breed and colour of cat.
口
Conformation defects leading to inter-
trigenous disease.
Diagnosis
Allergy, especially self-inflicted trauma,
>
due to chronic pruritus (Figure 14.20).
History and clinical signs.
Endocrinopathy leading
to
pigment
Trichography of hairs reveals that hair shafts
change especially, e.g. hypothyroidism.
contain multiple large irregular clumps of
melanin (macromelanosomes).
Blood smear reveals that neutrophils and
macrophages contain large eosinophilic gran-
ules (giant lysosomes).
 Platelet counts are normal as this tends to be
a thrombocytopathy rather than thrombocy-
topaenia.
 Treatment
Nothing is available.
 In view of the heritability of the disease, af-
fected animals should be removed from any
breeding programme.
Figure 14.20 Secondary acanthosis nigri.
250Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Clinical signs
Antiseborrhoeic shampoos (see 'Pri-
 Primary acanthosis nigricans:
mary Seborrhoea’ section in this
chapter).
No sex predilection is seen in young dogs
less than 1 year of age.
Systemic treatment:
 Melatonin 2 mg/per dog po sid for 3-
Acute lesions present with hyperpigmen-
5 days, then weekly or monthly as re-
tation, bilaterally in the axilla.
quired.
Chronically lesions become lichenifica-
 Prednisolone 1 mg/kg po sid 7-10
tion with accompanying seborrhoea and
days, then lowest possible alternate
can spread to involve larger areas on the
day dosage.
ventral abdominal skin.
Vitamin E 200-400 IU po bid 30-60
口
Secondary infection with both yeast and
bacteria is common.
days, then as required; improvement is
variable and can take several months.
Secondary acanthosis nigricans presents with
similar signs on the ventrum plus signs asso-
Canine cyclic haematopoiesis (grey
ciated with any underlying disease, e.g. pedal
pruritus and otitis externa
a in cases of atopy
coflie syndrome)
or bilateral flank alopecia in hypothyroidism.
See Chapter 4.
Differential diagnosis
Acquired aurotrichia in miniature
Causes of secondary acanthosis nigricans for pri-
schnauzers
mary disease.
 Cause and pathogenesis
Diagnosis
Unknown aetiology, but there is thought to be a
History and clinical signs as well as predis-
genetic influence.
 posed breeds for primary acanthosis nigri-
Clinical signs
cans.
Laboratory rule outs of underlying causes.
No age or sex predilection.
Skin biopsy reveals a non-diagnostic picture
Primary guard hairs turn from silver or black
of hyperplastic superficial perivascular der-
to
 gold especially seen on the dorsal, thorax
 matitis with focal parakeratotic hyperkerato-
and abdomen (Figure 14.21).
sis. Epidermal melanosis is present with pig-
Hair coat is diffusely thinned.
mentary incontinence and follicular keratosis.
Non-pruritic disease.
Treatment
 Secondary acanthosis nigricans:
 Treatment of underlying disease and sec-
口
ondary infection is important. In many
cases the lesions will resolve often with-
out any other therapy. Where they per-
sist, treatment should be undertaken as
primary acanthosis nigricans.
Primary acanthosis nigricans:
Topical therapy:
口
 Antibacterial/antiyeast shampoos.
Glucocorticoid cream for short-term
Figure 14.21 Acquired aurotrichia in a miniature schnauzer.
use, provided infection is controlled.
Congenital and hereditary skin diseases 251
Differential diagnosis
Endocrine skin disease especially hypothy-
roidism
Follicular dystrophy
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs in a predisposed
breed.
Trichography of hair mounted in liquid paraf-
fin to demonstrate changes in pigment in
hairs.
 Skin biopsy reveals no signs of inflammatory
Figure 14.22 Hyperextensible skin in cat with Ehlers-
change in affected areas. Secondary hairs in
Danlos.
these sites are decreased and guard hairs show
signs of pigmentary changes.
 Often hangs loosely in folds especially legs
口
Treatment
and throat.
Tears easily
y to produce large gaping
Disease is a cosmetic only.
wounds (Figure 14.23) but heals quickly
No treatment is successful.
leaving ‘cigarette paper' scars; minimal
bleeding.
口
Widening of bridge of nose may be seen.
Congenital and hereditary disorders of
Non-cutaneous signs:
collagen
口
Joint laxity, dislocations and hygromas.
口
Ocular changes, e.g. lens luxations,
Ehlers-Danlos (cutaneous asthenia,
cataract.
dermatosparaxis)
Cause and pathogenesis
 Rare syndrome recorded in both the dog and cat.
Ehlers-Danlos is a group of inherited congenital
defect in collagen formation. The disease results
in a reduction of the tensile strength of the skin of
10-40-fold so that the skin will tear easily. Both
dominant and recessive modes ofinheritance have
been recognised. The disease has been reported in
many different breeds.
Clinical signs
No sex predilection. Seen in young animals.
Predisposed feline breeds include domes-
tic short-haired, long-haired and Himalayan
cats.
 No breed predisposition in the dog.
Cutaneous signs:
口冏
 Skin soft, hyperextensible (Figure 14.22),
Figure 14.23  Large gaping wounds on the neck of a cat with
usually thin.
Ehlers-Danlos.
252Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Differential diagnosis
 No real differentials in the dog.
 Feline-acquired skin fragility (cat) due to the
following:
Diabetes mellitus
口
Spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism
Hepatic lipidosis
Overadministration of glucocorticoids
Diagnosis
 History and clinical signs are very character-
istic.
Figure 14.25  Electron microscopy of disorganised abnormal
Extensibility index of dorsolumbar skin
collagen bundles from cat in Figure 14.22.
vertical height dorsal lumbar skin fold
body length occipital crest to tail base
Careful restraint of the animal is important
x100
to avoid tearing the skin.
 Affected cat greater than 19.0 %, affected dog
Cats should be declawed to prevent self-
greater than 14.5 %.
traumatisation.
Skin biopsy can appear normal. In some cases
Strict ectoparasite control should be practiced
 dermis may be thinned and collagen bundles
to eliminate any pruritic insults to the skin.
 may be abnormal; special collagen stains may
Vitamin C therapy may produce some possi-
be useful.
ble benefit: 50 mg/cat/dog po sid.
Electron microscopy is diagnostic, showing
disordered collagen bundles or else reduction
Focal metatarsal fistulation in German
in collagen (Figures 14.24 and 14.25).
shepherd dogs
Treatment
Cause and pathogenesis
Important that animals are prevented from
Rare disease, only recognised in the dog. It is al-
breeding.
most exclusively seen in German shepherd dogs
Environmental modification can help to re-
 and German shepherd dog crosses. The aetiology
duce trauma to the skin, e.g. padded beds, re-
is unknown but may be a familial disease of col-
moval of objects with sharp or rough edges.
lagen.
Clinical signs
 No sex predilection, commonly seen in young
dogs 2-4 years of age.
Well-demarcated fistulae seen on the area
proximal to the metatarsal/carpal pads (Fig-
ure 14.26).
Fibrous tract extends to deeper tissue.
Sero-sanguineus discharge is seen but can be-
 come purulent if secondary infection occurs.
Lesions confined exclusively to the lower legs
and no other sites on the body are involved.
Figure 14.24 Electron microscopy of well-ordered collagen
Lesions do not tend to be pruritic but can be
bundles from a normal cat.
painful.
Congenital and hereditary skin diseases  253
Lymphoedema
Cause and pathogenesis
Can occur as both a primary and secondary dis-
ease. It has been recorded in both the dog and
cat:
Primary disease is caused by developmental
defect in lymphatic system.
Secondary disease is caused through lym-
phatic obstruction due to inflammation,
Figure 14.26 Focal metatarsal fistula in a German shepherd
trauma or neoplasia.
bop
Clinical signs
Primary disease:
Differential diagnosis
口
 No breed predilection in cats; in dogs it
 Penetrating foreign body
has been described in the English bull-
Focal infection with bacteria or fungus
dog, German shepherd dog, Borzoi, Bel-
 gian Tervuren, Old English sheepdog,
Labrador retriever, Great Dane and poo-
Diagnosis
dle.
Young dogs <3 months of age.
History and clinical signs in a predisposed
口
Skin over hind limbs thickened and pits
breed.
on pressure (Figure 14.27).
Cytology of exudate reveals signs of pyo-
>
Can also affect front limbs, ventrum, tail
 granulomatous inflammation often with sec-
and pinnae.
ondary infection.
Skin biopsy for histopathology and tissue cul-
 ture are useful. Biopsy reveals signs of deep
nodular to diffuse dermatitis with fbrosis and
fistulous tracts.
Treatment
Surgical resection produces only temporary
remission.
Topical therapy:
 In non-infected lesions some response has
口
been seen with topical tacrolimus.
Systemic therapy:
口
Antibiotics for secondary infection based
 on culture and sensitivity.
 Prednisolone 1.0-2.0 mg/kg po sid then
tapering to alternate day or withdrawal if
possible.
Vitamin E 400-800 IU/dog po bid helps
in some cases.
Figure 14.27  Primary lymphoedema in a young collie.
254Manuai of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
 Secondary infection can occur in many
cases.
Secondary disease:
 Clinical signs similar to primary disease
but lesions will tend to localise to the area
of insult to the lymphatic.
Differential diagnosis
Oedema due to obstruction, inflammation or hy-
poproteinaemic causes.
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
Laboratory rule outs of other differentials.
Skin biopsy reveals signs of subcutaneous and
dermal oedema; lymphatics are usually di-
lated and hyperplastic. Chronic cases may
show signs of fibrosis and epidermal hyper-
Figure 14.28 Hyperkeratosis of footpads in an English bull
plasia.
terrier with lethal acrodermatitis.
Treatment
口
Secondary bacterial and yeast infections
 Mild cases often require no treatment.
common.
Moderate/severe cases:
Non-cutaneous signs:
 Bandages to reduce swelling
Weak puppies, diffculty chewing and
口
口
swallowing.
口
Surgical resection of oedematous tissue
Surgery to reconstruct lymphatics
口
 Retarded growth.
口
 Initially dogs are aggressive but become
口
Amputation of affected area if possible
口
lethargic, somnolent.
Diarrhoea, respiratory infections.
Average survival time 7 months.
Acrodermatitis
Cause and pathogenesis
Acrodermatitis is an inherited autosomal reces-
sive disease of bull terriers. The precise defect re-
mains unknown but is thought to be related to
abnormal zinc metabolism.
Clinical signs
Present from birth.
Cutaneous signs:
口
 Hyperkeratosis of footpads, leading to in-
terdigital pyoderma and paronychia then
onychodystrophy (Figure 14.28).
Figure 14.29 Ulcerative lesions on the face in an English bull
口冏
 Ulcerated exudative lesions on ears and
terrier with lethal acrodermatitis. (Source: Picture courtesy of
muzzle (Figure 14.29).
S. Shaw.}
Congenital and hereditary skin diseases  255
Differential diagnosis
Atopy
Distemper
Pemphigus foliaceus
 Primary keratinisation disorder
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs, especially in a pre-
disposed breed.
Skin biopsy reveals signs of diffuse paraker-
atotic hyperkeratosis with focal crusting and
intraepidermal pustules. The superficial epi-
dermis may show signs of laminar pallor
suggestive of necrolytic migratory erythema;
Figure 14.30 Acral mutilation syndrome in an English
however, keratinocytes in acrodermatitis are
pointer.
viable.
 Neurological examination shows normal pro-
 prioception, tendon reflex and motor and cu-
Treatment
taneous function.
 Symptomatic treatment for secondary infec-
tion is helpful, especially where yeast infec-
Differential diagnosis
tion is present. Ketoconazole has been re-
ported to be of good benefit.
Vasculitis
Zinc supplementation is unrewarding.
 Frost bite
No relatives of affected dogs should be used
for breeding.
Diagnosis
 History and clinical signs in predisposed
breeds.
Acral mutilation syndrome
 Histopathology of nerve tissue at necropsy.
Cause and pathogenesis
Treatment
Hereditary sensory neuropathy caused through
Attempts to stop the dogs self-mutilating with
inadequate development and slows progressive
either physical means (collars, muzzles) or
post-natal degeneration of sensory neurones. A
chemical restraints (sedatives) are of little
very rare disease, which has only been reported
benefit.
in dogs. It is thought to be inherited in an auto-
Euthanasia is usually the only option in severe
somal recessive manner.
cases.
 Relatives of affected pups should not be used
dinical signs
for breeding.
Predisposed breeds include German short-
haired pointer, English springer spaniel and
Canine Chiari-fike malformation and
English pointer. No sex predilection.
syringomyelia
Affected pups from 3 months of age.
As toes become cold and insensitive dogs start
Cause and pathogenesis
to bite and lick paws.
Severe self-mutilation occurs of toes, espe-
Chiari-like malformation (CM) is a condition
cially hind legs (Figure 14.30).
characterised by a disparity between the caudal
256
6Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
fossa volume and its contents, the cerebellum and
Treatment
brainstem. This results in neural structures being
Surgical therapy using cranial/cervical de-
displaced into the foramen magnum obstructing
compression.
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) movement. This leads
 Medical therapy has been undertaken with a
to syringomyelia (SM) where fluid-filled cavities
wide range of different medications. Often the
develop within the spinal cord. CM is most com-
best results are seen combining two drugs:
monly recognised in the cavalier King Charles
Furosemide 1.0-2.0 mg/kg po bid
spaniel but has been reported in other breeds and
 Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs,
cats.
口
e.g. carprofen 4 mg/kg po sid
Gabapentin 10-20 mg/kg po bid
Clinical signs
Prednisolone 0.5 mg/kg po sid
Cutaneous signs:
 Most dogs present with unilateral pruri-
tus.
Cutaneous mucinosis
 Itching commonly occurs when the dog is
walking and often without skin contact,
Cause and pathogenesis
so-called ‘phantom’ scratching.
Scratching can be triggered by excitement,
Can be seen as an idiopathic disease possibly re-
lated to overproduction of mucin, which is part
touching an area or wearing a collar.
Non-cutaneous signs:
of the normal dermal ground substance. It can
SM may cause thoracic limb weakness,
be seen in other diseases such as hypothyroidism,
muscle atrophy and pelvic limb ataxia and
acromegaly, dermatomyositis and systemic lupus.
weakness.
Seizures, facial nerve paralysis and deaf-
Clinical signs
ness may also be seen.
CM causes facial pain, especially ear and
No sex predilection. Most commonly seen in
facial rubbing/scratching.
young dogs.
Shar-peis have more mucin in their skin than
normal dogs and seem to be overpredisposed
Differential diagnosis
 to developing mucinosis.
Cutaneous signs:
Exaggerated swollen skin folds, especially
head (Figure 14.31) and extremities, appear
 Allergy - atopy, food intolerance, flea allergy
as wrinkles down the dog's legs (Figure 14.32)
Ectoparasitic disease
and on the ventrum.
Non-cutaneous signs:
 Intervertebral disc disease
Granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis
 Discospondylitis
Diagnosis
 History and clinical signs, especially in a pre-
disposed breed.
MRI, which reveals that the cerebellum and
medulla extend into or through the foramen
magnum, which is occluded with little or no
CSF around the neural structures.
Figure 14.31 Cutaneous mucinosis in a shar-pei
Congenital and hereditary skin diseases
257
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs, especially in a pre-
disposed breed.
 Mucin prick test can be performed by care-
fully pricking the skin with a fine sterile needle
and withdrawing it. A positive test produces
a thick sticky liquid exudes from vesicles.
Skin biopsy reveals non-specific and often
minimal changes in the skin except excessive
production of mucin.
Treatment
Where mucin production is secondary to an
underlying disease, the identification of con-
current disease, e.g. hypothyroidism needs to
be identified and treated.
 Natural resolution of lesions can occur in
Figure 14.32 Mucinosis of the legs of a shar-pei.
some shar-peis as they grow so that they rarely
need treatment.
 Recalcitrant cases or those with oropharyn-
geal signs may benefit from the following:
Mucinous vesiculation (Figure 14.33) can be
seen on affected areas often with secondary
Prednisolone 2.0 mg/kg 7-10 days then
infection.
tapered off over a month.
 Pentoxifylline 25 mg/kg po tid for 4-6
 Oropharyngeal involvement leads to snoring
weeks then tapered to the lowest possible
and snorting.
alternate day dose aiming to withdraw if
possible.
Differential diagnosis
Amyloidosis
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
Selected references and further reading
Cutaneous histiocytosis
Cummings, J.F. et al. (1981) Acral mutilation and
nociceptive loss in English Pointer dogs. Acta
Neuropathol, 53,119
Kwochka, K.W. (1993) Keratinisation abnormal-
ities: understanding the mechanisms of scale
formation. In: Ihrke, PJ. et al. (ed) Advances
in Veterinary Dermatology. Vol. 2. pp. 91-93.
Pergamon, New York
Matousek, J.L. (2004) Disorders of collagen and
elastin. In: Campbell, K.L. (ed) Small Ani-
mal Dermatology Secrets. pp. 105-111. Han-
ley and Belfus, Philadelphia
 Matousek, J.L. (2004) Miscellaneous congenital
and hereditary disorders. In: Campbell, K.L.
(ed) Small Animal Dermatology Secrets. PP
Figure 14.33   Close-up of mucinous blisters.
119-125. Hanley and Belfus, Philadelphia
258Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Medleau, L. and Hnilica, K. (2006) Congeni-
Paciello, O. et al. (2003) Ehlers Danlos-like syn-
tal disease. In: Small Animal Dermatology: A
drome in two dogs: clinical, histologic and ul-
Color Atlas and Therapeutic Guide. 2nd edn.
trastructural findings. Vet Clin Pathol, 32, 13-
Pp. 1275-283. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
18
Olivry, T. et al. (1997) Heterogenicity of canine
Rees, C.A. (2004) Inherited vesiculobullous disor-
autoimmune subepidermal blistering diseases:
ders. In: Campbell, K.L. (ed) Small Animal Der-
identification of target antigens defines novel
matology Secrets. Pp. 112-118. Hanley and
clinicopathological entities. Proc Annu Memb
Belfus, Philadelphia
Meet Am Acad Vet Dermatol Coll. Vet Derma-
Rushbridge, C. et al. (2000) Syringohydromyelia
tol, 13, 80-81
in Cavalier King Charles spaniels. J Am Anim
Olivry, T. and Mason, I.S.
.(1998) Genoder-
Hosp Assoc, 36, 34
matoses: inheritance and management.
In:
Scott, D.W. et al. (2001) Congenital and Hered-
Kwochka, K.W. et al. (ed) Advances
in
itary Defects Muller and Kirk's Small Ani-
Veterinary Dermatology Il. Pp. 365-367.
mal Dermatology.6th edn. Pp.913-1004. WB
Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston
Saunders, Philadelphia
Pigment abnormalitie
Increases in pigment
 Lentiginosis profuse is a hereditary form
of lentigo seen in pugs.
 Hyperpigmentation - increased pigment in
Cats:
口
Breeds affected include domestic short-
skin or hair
haired and long-haired orange cats.
 Melanoderma - excessive pigment in skin
口
Most commonly seen in cats <l year old.
 Melanotrichia - excessive pigment in hairs
口
Lesions found commonly on the lips,
also nose (Figure 15.1), gingiva and
eyelids.
口
Small uniformly black macules (1-10 mm
Cenetic causes of hyperpigmentation
in diameter) that enlarge and proliferate
with time.
Lentigo (pl. lentigines)
Asymptomatic, non-pruritic, do not ulcer-
Cause and pathogenesis
ate.
Asymptomatic flat macular areas of melanosis.
 Do not undergo neoplastic transformation.
Common disease of dogs; uncommon disease of
cats. Unknown aetiology.
Differential diagnosis
Pigmented neoplasms, e.g. melanoma, basal cell
Clinical signs
tumour.
Dogs:
No breed or sex predisposition but gener-
口
ally seen in middle aged to old dogs. Le-
Diagnosis
sions appear as macular to patchy areas of
 History and clinical signs especially in partic-
hyperpigmented skin usually on the ven-
ularly coloured cats.
trum.
 Skin biopsy reveals signs of epidermal hyper-
 Lesions can increase in numbers and size,
plasia with hyperpigmentation and increased
often spreading.
numbers of melanocytes.
260Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Figure 15.1 Macular melanosis of planum nasale in orange
Figure 15.3 Patchy hyperpigmentation on the abdomen of a
Cat.
dog with chronic bacterial infection.
Dogs commonly produce signs of hyperpigmen-
Treatment
tation. Different reaction patterns are recognised:
No treatment is necessary as this is a cosmetic
defect.
Lattice-like appearance seen with infection
(bacterial/fungal, Figure 15.3) and chronic al-
lergy (Figure 15.4).
Acquired causes of hyperpigmentation
Comedone formation can be seen as conflu-
ent comedones producing blue/grey patches
of hyperpigmentation in demodicosis (Figure
Post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation
15.5) and hyperadrenocorticism.
Cats uncommonly produce post-inflammatory
 Diffuse  hyperpigmentation/macular hyper-
hyperpigmentation.
pigmentation can be seen in endocrine
Can been seen secondary to
disease, e.g. hypothyroidism (Figure 15.6),
infection bacterial/fungal (Figure 15.2),
chronic pruritus secondary to allergy or ec-
toparasites,
endocrine imbalance.
Figure 15.4 Lattice-like hyperpigmentation in a dog with
Figure 15.2  Post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation on nose.
chronic atopy.
Pigment abnormalities  261
Figure 15.5 Blue-grey hyperpigmentation in squamous de-
Figure 15.7 Macular hyperpigmentation in a dog with hy-
modicosis.
peradrenocorticism.
Sertoli cell tumour and hyperadrenocorticism
Melanotrichia
(Figure 15.7).
Uncommon finding when the hair becomes hy-
perpigmented. It has been recognised in dogs. It
is associated with the following:
Acanthosis nigricans
Primary and secondary acanthosis nigricans; see
 Healing of deep inflammatory lesions, e.g.
Chapter 14.
vasculitis, panniculitis.
Resolution of endocrine or metabolic disease,
e.g. hyperadrenocorticism.
Tumour hypermelanosis
Many different tumours can appear as pigmented
Feline acromelanism
lesions including the following:
This is the naturally occurring coloration
of the extremities, and is seen in particu-
Melanoma
lar breeds such as the Siamese, Burmese,
 Basal cell tumour
Himalayan and Balinese.
Mastocytosis (Urticaria pigmentosa)
 A temperature-dependent enzyme involved in
Epidermal nevi
melanin synthesis, which controls the colour.
High environmental temperatures produce
light hair, and low temperatures dark hair.
Physiological factors such as inflammation
and alopecia can also influence colour (Fig-
ures 15.8 and 15.9).
 Many of these cats willregrow dark hair over
an area that has been clipped for surgery.
Hair will return to its normal colour after the
next hair cycle.
Decreases in pigmentation
Figure 15.6 Diffuse hyperpigmentation in a dog with
Hypopigmentation - decreased pigment in
hypothyroidism.
skin or hair coat
262
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Figure 15.8  Dark hair regrowth on the flanks after successful
Figure 15.10 Vitiligo in a Rottweiler.
therapy of flank alopecia due to atopy.
Clinical signs
Dogs:
 Leukoderma - lack of pigment in skin
No sex predilection; commonly seen in
Leukotrichia - lack of pigment in hair
young dogs.
Predisposed breeds include Belgian Ter-
vurens, German shepherd dogs, collies,
Cenetic causes of hypopigmentation
Rottweilers, Doberman pinschers, Giant
schnauzers.
Chediak-Higashi syndrome
 One or more areas of macular depigmen-
tation of the skin (leukoderma) or hair
See Chapter 14.
(leukotrichia, Figure 15.10).
口
Found especially on nose, lips (Figure
15.11), buccal mucosa and facial skin.
Vitiligo
 Depigmentation may be temporary or per-
Cause and pathogenesis
manent.
Rare autoimmune reaction thought to selectively
Cats:
destroy epidermal melanocytes leading to loss of
No sex predilection; commonly seen in
pigment in the affected areas. Uncommon disease
young animals.
in dogs and rare in the cat.
Figure 15.9  Close-up of hair in Figure 15.8.
Figure 15.11  Vitiligo of nose and lips of a Labrador.
Pigment abnormalities 263
Siamese cats appear to be predisposed.
口
Similar signs and distribution of lesions in
'sgop pue sies
Differential diagnosis
Uveo-dermatologic syndrome
 Discoid lupus erythematosus
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
 Skin biopsy reveals a lack of melanocytes in
lesional skin without inflammatory or degen-
Figure 15.12 Hypopigmentation of the nose in a Labrador.
erative changes.
Treatment
Treatment
 No therapy is available.
 Therapy is unsuccessful.
 Animal should not be used for breeding.
 The prognosis remains good for dogs and cats
as this is a benign disease. Occasionally some
animals will completely repigment.
Nasal depigmentation 'Dudley nose'
Cause and pathogenesis
Waardenburg-Klein syndrome (WKS)
This may be a localised form of vitiligo where the
depigmentation of skin is confined to the nose.
Cause and pathogenesis
WKS is caused by the failure of migration
and/or differentiation of melanoblasts. It is an
Clinical signs
autosomal-dominant mode of inheritance with
No sex predilection; young dogs affected.
incomplete penetrance.
Predisposed breeds include yellow Afghan
hound, Samoyed, Siberian husky, Labrador
retrievers, white German shepherd dog,
Cinical signs
golden retrievers, poodles, Dobermans, Irish
 No sex predisposition; occurs in young ani-
setters and pointers.
mals.
Pigment on the nose fades from black to
Overrepresented breeds include bull terriers,
chocolate brown/white from puppy hood
Sealyham terriers, collies and Dalmatians.
(Figure 15.12).
WKS has also been recorded in cats.
 Some animals will recover spontaneously.
Cutaneous lesions:
Complete lack of pigment in the hair and
skin (white animals).
Other lesions:
Differential diagnosis
口
Deafness
As vitiligo.
Blue or heterochromia of irides
Diagnosis
Differential diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
Albinism
 Skin biopsy is usually not necessary unless
crusting or ulceration present. Dudley nose
Diagnosis
is typically a non-inflammatory disease; if le-
History and clinical signs.
sions are present biopsies are indicated to rule
 Skin biopsy reveals lack of melanocytes.
out other differentials.
264Manuai of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Treatment
Clinical signs
Nothing is successful.
No sex predilection; young adult and middle-
aged dogs are overrepresented.
The Akita is a highly predisposed breed;
Canine cyclic haematopoiesis
however, the Samoyed, Siberian husky, chow
See Chapter 4.
chow, Irish setter, dachshund, fox terrier,
Shetland sheepdog, St Bernard and Old En-
Albinism
glish sheepdog are also commonly affected.
Non-cutaneous:
Cause and pathogenesis
Acute onset anterior uveitis.
Animals have normal numbers of melanocytes
Reduced or absent pupillary light reflex.
but lack ability to produce melanin and hence
Blepharospasm, photophobia, hyphaema.
pigment. Albinism is a hereditary defect, which
口
Conjunctivitis, ocular discharge.
is an autosomal recessive. Very rare disease seen
口
 Retinal detachment, glaucoma and blind-
in the dog.
ness.
口
Neurological signs - rare in dog.
Clinical signs
Cutaneous lesions:
No sex predilection; seen in young animals
口
 Depigmentation of nose, lips, eyelids
from birth.
(Figure 15.13).
The hair, skin and mucous membranes are un-
口
Occasionally footpads, palate, scrotum
pigmented.
and anus.
Ocular changes tend to be mild. Unlike hu-
口
Erosions; ulcerations can occur but rare.
mans where the iris in albinos is pink; in the
 In some dogs generalised depigmentation
口
dog it is usually blue
of hair coat can occur.
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
Differential diagnosis
 Skin biopsy reveals no signs of inflammation
Ocular lesions:
 in the skin. Melanocytes are present in the
skin but they appear as clear cells as they do
not contain any melanin.
Treatment
None available.
Affected animals should be removed from any
breeding programme.
Uveo-dermatologic syndrome
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome (VKH)
Cause and pathogenesis
The precise aetiology is unknown. VKH is
thought to be an immune mediated disease
with hereditary components. Autoantibodies pro-
duced to melanocytes in the skin and eye lead to
extensive cutaneous and ocular damage. It is a
rare disease in dogs and has not been recorded in
Figure 15.13  Depigmentation of the eyelids and periocular
cats.
 areas in an Akita with uveo-dermatologic syndrome.
Pigment abnormalities  265
1
Other causes of uveitis including infec-
tion, trauma, neoplasia, immune medi-
ated disease and toxins.
Cutaneous lesions:
Vitiligo
口
口
 Discoid lupus erythematosus
口
Pemphigus erythematosus/foliaceus
口
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs, especially in pre-
disposed breeds.
Diagnostic rule out of other differentials.
Figure 15.14  Periocular hypopigmentation in a poodle after
Ophthalmic signs in addition to cutaneous le-
crysosurgery for distichiasis.
sions.
Skin biopsy reveals signs of a lichenoid inter-
face dermatitis consisting of histiocytes, small
Acquired causes of hypopigmentation
mononuclear cells and multi-nucleate giant
cells.
Hypopigmentation can occur secondary to any
agent that destroys melanocytes or inhibits their
ability to produce pigment. It can occur as a se-
Treatment
Uveitis:
quela to any underlying skin disease. It is a com-
 Early aggressive treatment is essential to
 mon finding in the dog and rare in the cat.
口冏
Causes in the dog and cat include the following:
save dog's eyesight.
Topical  or  subconjunctival glucocor-
ticoids (prednisolone, dexamethasone,
Trauma.
triamcinolone) and cycloplegics (1% at-
Burns - chemical, heat, cold (especially
ropine ophthalmic solution) should be
cryosurgery (Figure 15.14, irradiation).
used until uveitis resolves.
Infection - fungal, bacterial (Figure 15.15,
 Eyes must be checked regularly for recur-
protozoal).
口
 Drugs - especially glucocorticoids.
rence.
Cutaneous lesions:
Nutritional deficiencies especially copper.
Neoplasia - epitheliotropic lymphoma (Fig-
Control of skin lesions easier than uveitis.
Variety of treatment protocol can be used:
ures 15.16 and 15.17), squamous cell carci-
Glucocorticoids according to Table
noma.
11.1 can be used as sole form of ther-
apy.
Combination treatment with pred-
nisolone or methyl prednisolone (see
Table 11.1) plus azathioprine (see
Table 11.1) is often successful. Inten-
sive therapy is usually required for
4-8 weeks to achieve remission, then
tapered down to lowest possible alter-
nate day maintenance dose.
Other non-steroid immunosuppressive
therapies that can be used alone or as
steroid sparing drugs include oxytetra-
cycline and niacinamide, cyclosporine
Figure 15.15  Patchy hypopigmentation of post-bacterial in-
and cyclophosphamide.
fection.
266
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Figure 15.16 Patchy hypopigmentation of the planum nasale
Figure 15.18 Post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation of pedal
in a dog with epitheliotrophic lymphoma.
hair after successful therapy for pemphigus foliaceus.
 Immune mediated disease, e.g. lupus erythe-
Clinical signs
matosus, uveo-dermatologic syndrome, pem-
No sex or age predisposition.
phigus foliaceus (Figure 15.18).
Siamese cats appear to be predisposed.
Most commonly seen in females.
Animals with nasal hypopigmentation will be pre-
 Patchy or complete loss of hair pigment is seen
disposed to solar dermatitis.
 around both eyes to produce a halo-like ap-
pearance.
Idiopathic periocular leukotrichia
Cause and pathogenesis
Differential diagnosis
Pigmentation is lost from the periocular area in
 Post-inflammatory hypopigmentation
cats. Its precise cause is unknown.
Vitiligo
 Precipitating factors include the following:
Aguirre syndrome
Systemic/discoid lupus erythematosus
Oestrous
Pregnancy
Dietary deficiency
Diagnosis
-sip ioen Aroendsai raddnl ssau oiss
History and clinical signs.
Skin biopsy non-diagnostic; reveals non-
ease)
specific signs but may be useful as a diagnostic
rule out.
Treatment
Therapy of any underlying systemic trigger.
No treatment of skin disease is necessary; the
hair will repigment within two hair cycles.
Aguirre syndrome
Cause and pathogenesis
A rare disease of unknown aetiology charac-
Figure 15.17  Hypopigmentation of the medial aspect of the
terised by unilateral periocular depigmentation It
hock in a dog with epitheliotrophic lymphoma.
is often associated with Horner's syndrome.
Pigment abnormalities  267
Cinical signs
Selected references and further reading
No age or sex predisposition.
Siamese cats appear to be predisposed.
Cutaneous lesions:
Guaguere, E. and Alhaidari, Z. (1991) Disorders
 Unilateral periocular depigmentation
of melanin pigmentation in the skin of dogs
and cats. Proc World Small Anim Vet Assoc,8,
 Non-cutaneous lesions:
Horner's syndrome
47
口
MacDonald, J.M. (1993) Uveodermatologic syn-
口
Corneal necrosis
drome in the dog. In: Griffin, C.E. et al. (eds)
口
Upper respiratory tract infections
CurrentVeterinary Dermatology Mosby-Year
book. pp. 217-218. Mosby, St Louis
Medleau, L. and Hnilica, K. (2006) Pigmentary
Differential diagnosis
abnormalities. In: Small Animal Dermatology:
As idiopathic periocular leukotrichia.
A Color Atlas and Therapeutic Guide. 2nd edn.
Pp. 287-293. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
Diagnosis
Scott, D.W. et al. (2001) Pigmentary Abnormal-
History and clinical signs in a predisposed
ities Muller and Kirk's Small Animal Derma-
breed.
tology. 6th edn. pp. 1005-1024. WB Saunders,
 Philadelphia
Treatment
Stokking, L.B. and Campbell, K.L. (2004) Disor-
 Symptomatic therapy of concurrent disease.
ders of pigmentation. In: Campbell, K.L. (ed)
Specific therapy of the periocular pigment loss
Small Animal Dermatology Secrets. pp. 352-
has not been described.
363. Hanley and Belfus, Philadelphia
Psychogenic skin
disease
Psychogenic skin disease is 
erdiagnosed in the
(1)  A vigorous search should be made for a pri-
cat and the dog. True psychogenic disease is rare.
mary trigger, which should be identifed and
Usually cats and dogs have a primary inciting trig-
treated.
however, a
(2)  Infection should be treated
stressful environmental or medical factor super-
(3)  Behavioural component of the disease should
imposed on the primary disease can lead to the
be treated using a combination of behaviour-
development of any one of a variety of different
modifying drugs and environmental modif-
 problems discussed in the following pages. Anx-
cation.
iety is usually the underlying psychogenic trigger
and can be induced by a variety of factors includ-
ing the following:
Acral lick dermatitis lick granuloma'
Introduction of a new pet, relative, baby to
Cause and pathogenesis
the house.
House move.
This is a common disease in the dog but rare
Boarding in cattery.
in the cat. Lesions are formed through repet-
Enforced
lconfinement due to
illness,
itive licking. Typical histopathological features
especially orthopaedic problems.
 Death of a companion human or another pet.
have been described (see diagnosis below). Le-
sions that mimic lick granuloma, i.e. resemble
'Bullying' by a dominant cat/dog in external
 it macroscopically but histopathologically, are
environment.
consistent with another primary disease pro-
 Overgrooming, where a chronic skin disease
cess that has subsequently been traumatised
or local area of pain/abnormal sensation is
are better described as pseudo lick granulomas.
left undiagnosed/untreated.
Although histopathologically these lesions are
different, e.g. neoplastic lesions or primary in-
To deal with any of these problems, three factors
fections such as mycetoma, they can still lead
need to be addressed:
to stereotypic behaviour. More than 90% of
Psychogenic skin disease
269
Table 16.1
I Dermatological triggers for lick granuloma.
Table 16.3 Neurological triggers for lick granuloma.
Dermatological triggers - may be localised or gener-
Neurological triggers - area of lick granuloma may
alised and true or pseudo lick granuloma lesions 
match the area of cutaneous innervation
Localised skin disease
True or pseudo 
1. Road traffic accident
lick granuloma 
2. Spinal or nerve root neoplasia
1  Traumatic injury (penetrating
an
 3. L/S degenerative stenosis
foreign body, bite wound?
4. Neuritis
 2 Neoplasia (mast celltumour,
 Pseudo
basal cell tumour?
3 Parasites (demodex, localised 
 Pseudo
tick reaction?
4 Infection (bacterial - atypical
 Pseudo
Clinical signs
mycobacteria, fungal infection,
e.g. dermatophytic kerion?
 5 Others (pressure point
 Pseudo
Most animals are <3 years of age; males are
granuloma, calcinosis cutis)
affected twice as frequently as females.
Predisposed  breeds  are  generally
large
Generalised skin disease - usually a primary inciting
factor, e.g. trauma leads to focusing of the generalised 
attention-seeking dog breeds, e.g. Dober-
disease
mans (Figure 16.1), Rottweilers, Labrador
1 Parasites (sarcoptes, demodex,
True
retrievers, German shepherd dogs 
and
cheyletiella, lice?
Irish setters, and when it occurs in cats
 2 Allergy (atopy, food 
True
(Figure 16.2) oriental breeds appear to be
intolerance/allergy, flea allergy?
 predisposed.
3 Endocrine disease
True
Lesions in the dog are usually 2-6 cm sin-
(hypothyroidism,
hyperadrenocorticism?
gle, unilateral, chronically thickened plaque
 or nodules often with ulcerated surface (Fig-
ure 16.3).
 A surrounding halo of hyperpigmentation is
lick granulomas are infected. Investigation in all
common.
cases should thus be aimed at identifcation of
 Usually seen over cranial carpal or metacarpal
the underlying cause, appropriate therapy for
area.
the infection based on cultures and behaviour
Usually a localised lymphadenopathy.
modification to break the obsessive-compulsive
cycle. Triggers may be dermatological (Table
16.1), orthopaedic (Table 16.2) or neurological
(Table 16.3).
Table 16.2  Orthopaedic triggers for lick granuloma.
 Orthopaedic triggers - animal will lick over an area
of pain; these tend to be true lick granulomas
1. Infection - osteomyelitis
 2. Joint pain - septic or immune mediated arthritis.,
OCD lesions
3. Reaction to orthopaedic implant or suture material
 4. Neoplasia - soft tissue or bone incl. metastatic dis-
ease
5.Trauma -fracture,dislocation
Figure 16.1  Lick granuloma in a Doberman with underlying
hypothyroidism.
270Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Diagnostic tests to investigate underlying or-
thopaedic, neurological and dermatological
disease where the history and clinical signs
are suggestive.
Basic core tests should be performed in ev-
ery case and include skin scrapings, hair
pluckings, fine needle aspirates and impres-
sion smears, biopsy and tissue culture. Biopsy
specimens should be obtained by punch
biopsy from non-ulcerated areas.
Skin biopsy reveals signs of compact hyper-
keratosis and multifocal parakeratosis with
severe irregular acanthosis of epidermal and
superficial follicular epithelium. Superficial
dermal fbrosis leads to a 'vertical streak-
 ing’ pattern between intact follicles. Distinc-
tive plasmacytic periadnexal inflammation is
seen. Hair follicles appear larger thickened
Figure 16.2 Lick granuloma on foot of flea allergic cat
and elongated.
(Source: Picture courtesy of D. Crossley.}
Treatment
Differential diagnosis
General treatment:
Important to differentiate a ‘true' lick granuloma
Therapy of any underlying orthopaedic, neu-
from a pseudo' lick granuloma.
rological or dermatological disease.
Antibiotic therapy based on culture and sensi-
tivity. Usually antibiotics for 3-4 months are
Diagnosis
needed as a minimum.
Environmental modification to reduce stress,
History and clinical signs, including a be-
decrease boredom.
havioural history.
 Behaviour-modifying therapy may be useful
(Table 16.4). A full description of all these
drugs is beyond the scope of this text. The
prescribing clinician should be aware of the
potential side effects of these drugs, together
with appropriate use of drugs via the veteri-
nary cascade. There is a lag phase with most
drugs before benefit is seen.
Other treatment modalities can be directed
 at specifc lesional treatment. This should never
replace a proper work-up but includes the
following:
 Physical prevention of licking with collars,
Figure 16.3 Lick granuloma in a Great Dane with underlying
socks, bandages, side braces, etc.
orthopaedic problem.
Topical treatment:
Psychogenic skin disease  271
Table 16.4 Drugs suitable for behavioural therapy in the dog and cat.
Drug
Oral dose rate
Tricyclic antidepressants - potential side effects include sedation, antimuscarinic and antihistaminic effect;
contraindicated in hepatic or renal disease
Amitriptyline
Dog final dose 1-4 mg/kg po bid, start 1-2 mg/kg bid and increase to full dose over 4 weeks
Cat final dose 0.5-1.0 mg/kg po bid, start 0.5 mg/kg bid and increase to full dose over
4 weeks
Doxepin
Dog final dose 1-5 mg/kg bid, start 1 mg/kg bid and increase to full dose over 4 weeks
 Clomipramine
Dog final dose 1-3.5 mg /kg po bid, start 1 mg/kg bid and increase to full dose over 4 weeks
 Cat final dose 0.5-1.0 mg/kg po bid, start 0.5 mg/kg bid and increase to final dose over
4 weeks
Fluoxetine
Dog and cat final dose 1 mg/kg po sid/bid; allow 4-6 weeks for clinical trial
 Sertraline
Dog final dose 1 mg/kg po sid; allow 4-6 weeks for clinical trial
Anxiolytics - potential side effects can include disinhibition, interference with memory, ataxia, depression and
 paradoxical excitement; phenobarbitone should not be used in animals with hepatic disease; hydroxyzine has 
 antihistaminic effects
Diazepam
Dog and cat 0.55-2.2 mg/kg po sid/bid as needed
Alprazolam
Dog 0.05-0.25 mg/kg po sid/bid
Lorazepam
Dog 0.025-0.25 mg/kg po sid/bid
Oxazepam
Dog 0.2-1.0 mg/kg po sid/bid 
Clonazepam
Dog 0.05-0.25 mg/kg po sid/bid
Phenobarbitone
Dog and cat 2.2-6.8 mg/kg po bid 
Hydroxyzine
Dog 2.2 mg/kg po tid
Endorphin blocker
Naltrexone
 Dog 2.2 mg/kg po sid 
Endorphin substitute
Hydrocodone
Dog 0.25 mg/kg po tid
 Topical glucocorticoids - short-term use
Tail biting
 only; never use when infection is present.
 Bad-tasting topical applications, e.g. bit-
口
Cause and pathogenesis
ter apple.
口
Topical analgesics.
Dogs that chase and bite their tails; thought to
Surgical removal - not recommended
as
be a behavioural problem but a rigorous search
it tends to produce short-term remission
 and lesions are often reproduced at same
should be made for underlying disease.
site.
 Radiation therapy has a limited usage.
Cryosurgery can be successful as it denervates
Clinical signs
the area.
Laser ablation is useful as it sterilises the area
 No sex predilection; generally seen in young
as well as denervates it.
dogs.
272
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Figure 16.4 Traumatisation of the tail tip due to psychogenic
Figure 16.5  Tail licking in a cat with chronic diarrhoea.
tail biting in an English bull terrier.
Hyperexcitable breeds such as Staffordshire
confinement, but rigorous steps should be taken
bull terriers and English bull terriers may be
to ensure that there is no underlying clinical con-
predisposed.
dition.
Self-inflicted trauma to the tail tip caused as
the animal circles to grab the tail (Figure
16.4).
Clinical signs
Differential diagnosis
No sex or age predilection.
Predisposed breeds include oriental breeds es-
Tail pruritus caused by allergy, parasites espe-
 pecially the Siamese.
cially fleas.
Distal 2-3 cm of the tail is wet due to sucking
Abnormal tail sensation due to lumbosacral
but no other clinical lesions are present.
disease or tail dock neuroma.
Diagnosis
Differential diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
 Conditions causing pruritus or pain to the tail
Diagnostic rule outs of other differentials.
Allergy
■
■
Parasites
Traumatic injury to tail base
Treatment
Anxiolytics or tricyclic antidepressants using
the same dosage regime as for acral lick der-
Diagnosis
matitis.
History and clinical signs.
Diagnostic rule outs of other conditions
Tail sucking
Cause and pathogenesis
Treatment
Cats that sit and suck their tails (Figure 16.5). It
Anxiolytics  or  tricyclic  antidepressants
is usually associated with boredom or enforced
dosage as for acral lick dermatitis.
Psychogenic skin disease  273
 Neoplasia especially metastatic bronchial car-
cinoma.
Similar triggers are recognised in the dog includ-
ing the following:
Infection - bacterial, Malassezia
Pododemodicosis
Allrgy especially atopy or food
Clinical signs
Figure 16.6 Foot licking secondary to atopy.
Wetness of the feet due to licking often with
associated hair loss.
Foot licking
 In white-haired animals brown pedal saliva
staining is obvious.
No primary lesions, no exudate from nail
Cause and pathogenesis
beds is seen in psychogenic disease.
Foot licking is a very common problem in both the
 dog and cat. However, it is rarely a psychogenic
Differential diagnosis
problem. In the cat, it is usually associated with
 paronychial problems. Underlying causes include
Medical causes of paronychia and pododermati-
the following:
tis.
 Infection especially bacteria, Malassezia.
Allergy especially atopy (Figures 16.6 and
Treatment
16.7) or food.
Autoimmune disease, e.g. pemphigus foli-
Treatment of underlying causes.
aceus.
Anxiolytic drug or tricyclic antidepressants as
acral lick dermatitis.
Flank suckers
Cause and pathogenesis
Animals that suck their flanks. May be associated
with comfort sucking' in dogs that have been sep-
arated from their dam at an early age.
Clinical signs
 No age or sex predilection.
Figure 16.7 Foot licking in an atopic dog. The unilateral na-
 Doberman pinscher may be predisposed.
ture of the lesion is suggestive of a possible behavioural com-
Dogs rarely cause obvious clinical signs other
ponent.
than wetting of the hair coat on the flanks.
274 Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Differential diagnosis
Differential diagnosis
Cause of pruritus of flanks especially allergy.
 Causes of ventral pruritus especially allergy
Mastitis
Diagnosis
Diagnosis
 History and clinical signs.
 Diagnostic rule out to ensure that the animal
History and clinical signs.
is not sucking due to an underlying painful or
 Diagnostic rule out to ensure that the animal
pruritic condition.
is not sucking due to an underlying painful or
pruritic condition.
Treatment
Anxiolytic or tricyclic antidepressant drugs as
Treatment
acral lick dermatitis.
Anxiolytic or tricyclic antidepressant drugs as
acral lick dermatitis.
Self-nursing
Anal licking
Cause and pathogenesis
Recognised in dogs (usually bitches) that suckle
Cause and pathogenesis
their own nipples. Not been reported in cats.
Thought to be a behaviour problem; may be as-
Animals that either lick or drag/scoot them-
sociated with premature removal from dam
selves along on their perianal skin. May be a be-
havioural problem but is more commonly associ-
ated with underlying disease. In the same way as
Clinical signs
 dermatological disease can lead on to lick granu-
loma, there is no doubt perianal irritation can de-
Dogs rarely cause obvious clinical signs other
velop into anal self-traumatisation with a strong
than wetting of the ventral abdominal skin
behavioural component. Seen in dogs (licking and
around their nipples (Figure 16.8).
scooting) and cats (licking only).
Clinical signs
No age or sex predilection.
Poodles seem to be predisposed.
Lesions vary from mild perianal saliva stain-
ing to chronic lichenification with self-
inflicted trauma of the perianal area.
Differential diagnosis
Figure 16.8 Lichenification and erythema dueto self-nursing
Causes of perianal irritation:
in a Labrador. The dog had induced a secondary malassezia
口
 Mucocutaneous pyoderma
dermatitis.
 Malassezia infection
Psychogenic skin disease 275
Allergy - flea allergic dermatitis, atopy,
food intolerance
口
Contact allergy/irritancy
Anal sac disease, colonic disease
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
Diagnostic rule out of concurrent disease.
Treatment
Identification and treatment of any underly.
Figure 16.9 Ventral psychogenic alopecia in a cat responded
ing trigger.
completely to improved flea control.
Anxiolytic drug and tricyclic antidepressants
 as acral lick dermatitis.
 Distribution patterns of alopecia:
口
Ventral alopecia (Figure 16.9)
Bilateral flank alopecia
口
Psychogenic dermatitis
口冏
Medial forelegs
(neurodermatitis)
Chronic lesions become lichenified and hyper-
pigmented.
Cause and pathogenesis
Differential diagnosis
Anxiety is the most common trigger for true
psychogenic dermatitis. Stress may lead to in-
Causes of traumatic alopecia:
creases in adrenocorticotrophic hormone and
Ectoparasites (fleas, cheyletiella, otodec-
melanocyte-stimulating
hormone
causing
in-
tes, lice, demodex)
creased endorphin production. Endorphins are
Allergy (atopy, food),
thought to protect the animal from stressful sit-
√
口
Dermatophytosis
uations, although their production may reinforce
Seborrhoeic dermatitis (malassezia)
the overgrooming activity. Obsessive grooming
Causes of non-pruritic alopecia:
may be an extension of overgrooming induced
Hypothyroidism (very rare)
口
by primary skin disease.
口
Hyperadrenocorticism (very rare)
口
 Telogen defluxion
口
Anagen defluxion
Clinical signs
口
 Acquired symmetrical alopecia
 No age or sex predilection is recognised.
Breed predisposition is seen most commonly
Diagnosis
in oriental breeds especially Siamese.
In mild cases, alopecia is the only finding often
These cases require an extensive work-up
with no associated inflammation.
to rule out both traumatic and non-pruritic
In severe cases, alopecia is accompanied by
 causes of alopecia.
marked self-inflicted trauma in the form
 Investigations should include the following:
of ulceration, often with the formation of
口
Skin scrapings.
eosinophilic plaques and secondary infection.
口
 Fungal cultures.
276
6Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Allergy work-up including exclusion di-
Doering, G.G. (1974) Acral lick dermatitis: med-
ets, intradermal testing.
ical management. Canine Pract, 55, 21-25
Blood count - if there is an eosinophilia
Luescher, A.U. (2003) Diagnosis and manage-
present then the condition is not psy-
ment of compulsive disorders in dogs and cats.
chogenic.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract,33,253-
 Skin biopsy of non-lesional areas reveals
267
口
normal skin.
Medleau, L. and Hnilica, K. (2006) Feline psy-
口
Ectoparasite therapy.
chogenic alopecia. In: Small Animal Dermatol-
口冏
Endocrine function tests.
Ogy: A Color Atlas and Therapeutic Guide.2nd
edn. pp. 271-273. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
Treatment
Patterson, A.P. (2004) Psychocutaneous disor-
ders. In: Campbell, K.L. (ed) Small Animal Der-
matology Secrets. Pp. 324-331. Hanley and
Therapy of any underlying diseases.
Belfus, Philadelphia
 Psychological drug therapy as acral lick der-
Scott, D.W. et al. (2001) Psychogenic Skin Dis-
matitis.
eases Muller and Kirk's Small Animal Derma-
tology.6th edn. pp. 1055-1071. WB Saunders,
Selected references and further reading
 Philadelphia
Virga, V. (2003) Behavioural dermatology. Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract, 33,
Dodman, N.D. et al. (1988) Use of narcotic an-
231-251
tagonists to modify and stereotypic self-licking,
White, S.D. (1990) Naltrexone for treatment of
self chewing and scratching behaviour in dogs.
acral lick dermatitis in dogs. J Am Vet Med
I Am Vet Med Assoc, 193,815-819
Assoc, 196, 1073-1076.
Keratinisation defects
Seborrhoea
Allergy such as flea (Figure 17.3), atopy, food
(Figure 17.4), contact allergy.
Environmental factors, e.g. central heating,
This is defined as abnormal formation of the
harsh shampoo therapy.
 cornified layer of the skin leading to scaling,
Infection with
bacteria
(Figure 17.5),
and abnormal sebum production.
Malassezia spp., dermatophytes, leishmania-
Seborrhoea oleosa describes greasy seborrhoea.
sis.
Seborrhoea sicca describes dry seborrhoea.
 Ectoparasitism including demodicosis, sar-
Neither term is a diagnosis but a description of a
coptes (Figure 17.6), cheyletiella, pediculosis.
clinical finding.
 Immune mediated disease such as pemphigus
Different diseases and breeds produce different
foliaceus (Figure 17.7), systemic lupus erythe-
types of seborrhoea.
matosus.
Neoplasia
especially
epitheliotropic lym-
Primary seborrhoea
phoma (Figure 17.8).
Rare disease; covered in Chapter 14. This is a
Systemic disease in the cat FeLV, FIV, FIP.
diagnosis of exclusion.
 Inability to groom especially in cats with den-
tal disease, hypervitaminosis A.
Secondary seborrhoea
Almost any skin disease can produce seborrhoea.
Clinical signs
Commonly seen with the following:
Abnormal scaliness of the coat; tends to be
Endocrine disease especially hypothyroidism
more pronounced in dogs than cats as cats
(dog, Figure 17.1), l
hyperthyroidism (cat,
grooming activity removes much of the scale.
Figure 17.2), hyperadrenocorticism.
Signs variable and can include dry, lustre-
Nutritional factors such as inappropri-
less hair coat with excessive scaling, follicular
ate diet (malabsorption, maldigestion syn-
casts, scaly seborrhoeic patches and plaques
dromes, zinc responsive dermatosis).
with greasy malodorous skin.
278
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Figure 17.1  Seborrhoea secondary to hypothyroidism.
Figure 17.4 Generalised scaling in a Labrador with food
intolerance.
Figure
17.2Generalisedseborrhoeaoleosa
lina
hyperthyroid cat.
Figure 17.5  Scaling due to superficial bacterial infection.
Figure 17.3Dorsal seborrhoea secondary to flea allergy
Figure 17.6  Generalised seborrhoea due to sarcoptic mange.
Keratinisation defects 279
Skin biopsy especially with allergic, endocrine
and systemic disease is often non-specific. In
the case of other differentials, histopathology
may be diagnostic, e.g. zinc responsive dis-
ease.
Treatment
Correction of underlying disease will allow
seborrhoea to control itself in 1-2 months.
Antibiotics or antiyeast treatment for sec-
Figure 17.7 Scaling on the dorsum of a dog with pemphigus
ondary infections.
foliaceus.
Topical treatment (see primary seborrhoea,
Chapter 14.)
Dogs and cats need to be continually re-
Ceruminous otitis externa common.
 assessed but skin condition will change as pri-
 Precise signs and distribution depend on un-
mary disease is controlled.
derlying diseases and species and breed.
Diagnosis
Ichthyosis
History and clinical signs.
See Chapter 14.
Identification of underlying disease. Investi-
gation of seborrhoea is time consuming and
expensive. It is important to run a basic screen
(see diagnostic tests) to include skin scrapes,
Canine acne
tape strips, hair plucks, impression smears,
cytology of any primary lesions and fungal
culture. A food trial, ectoparasite therapy and
See Chapter 4.
bloods including endocrine function tests may
also be indicated.
Feline acne
Cause and pathogenesis
Common idiopathic disorder of follicular kera-
tinisation and glandular hyperplasia seen in cats.
Contributory factors may include the follow-
ing:
Poor grooming habits.
Abnormal sebum production.
 Primary keratinisation defects.
Stress associated with illness especially viral
Figure 17.8 Thick crusting and scaling on the skin of a dog
effects.
with epitheliotrophic lymphoma.
 Immunosuppression.
280Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Figure 17.9 Comedones on chin with feline acne.
Figure 17.10 Chronic acne in a cat
Hormonal factors are not thought to be
important.
Diagnosis
Clinical signs
History and clinical signs.
Diagnostic rule out by skin scrapings, fungal
 No breed, sex or age predisposition.
culture, cytology.
 Lesions can occur as a single episode; appear
Skin biopsy reveals comedone formation with
glandular hyperplasia and perifolliculitis. Fol-
cyclical or are constant.
liculitis, furunculosis and cellulitis can be seen
Early lesions:
 Comedones on chin and lips (often asy-
when secondary infection is present.
Culture and sensitivity may be useful to iden-
mptomatic) (Figure 17.9).
tify secondary infection.
口冏
 Papules and pustules develop later.
 Pruritus mild in uncomplicated cases.
Chronic severe cases:
口冏
Secondary infection leads to folliculitis,
Treatment
furunculosis and cellulitis (Figure 17.10).
口冏
Pathogens include Pasteurella multocida,
Asymptomatic cases are essentially a cosmetic
B-haemolytic streptococcus and coagu-
lase positive staphylococcus.
 problem and can be left untreated.
Topical therapy may be used every 1-3 days
Chronic lesions are more pruritic.
口
Oedema with overlying skin thickened,
as required:
Antiseborrhoeic shampoos:
cystic and scarred.
口
 Mild degreasing products include
 those containing sulphur and salicylic
acid.
Differential diagnosis
Where additional antibacterial/yeast
action is required acetic acid, boric
Sebaceous adenitis
acid, chlorhexidine and ethyl lactate
 Eosinophilic granuloma complex
based products may be beneficial.
Dermatophytosis
 Benzoyl peroxide has excellent de-
Demodicosis
greasing and follicular flushing ac-
Allergy (food, atopy)
tivity but can be irritating to some
Malassezia
cats.
Keratinisation defects 281
Antibacterial creams/lotions containing
clindamycin, fucidin, erythromycin or
tetracycline may also be useful where sec-
 ondary infection is present.
Topical vitamin A as 0.01-0.025%
tretinoin cream or lotion may be useful
but irritancy can occur.
Systemic therapy:
Antibiotics based on culture and sensitiv-
ity for a minimum of 3 weeks.
 Essential fatty acid supplementation may
口
be useful in some cases.
Steroids rarely indicated but may be given
as a short course in sterile cases (1-2
mg/kg daily by mouth).
口
 Retinoid therapy can be given in severe
 cases - isotretinoin 1.0-2.0 mg/kg po sid
for up to 1 month, then every other day.
These drugs are potent teratogens and
Figure 17.11  Greasy seborrhoea on dorsum of tail 'stud tail'.
should be dispensed with care, especially
to female owners of childbearing age.
Monitoring of the feline patient should in-
Clinical signs
clude routine haematology, biochemistry
especially liver function, triglycerides and
Cats:
cholesterol.
 No breed or age predilection; entire males
may be overrepresented.
Tail gland hyperplasia
More commonly seen in catteries/cats that are
confined.
Greasy band of excessive secretions with scale
Cause and pathogenesis
and crust seen along dorsum of tail (Figure
17.11).
Cats:
Overlying hair coat may be thinned, skin of-
The tail gland in the cat is located along a dorsal
 ten hyperpigmented.
line on the tail; it is rich in sebaceous and apoc-
 Often asymptomatic and no other areas af-
rine glands. Hyperplasia of the gland leads to the
fected.
accumulation of waxy secretion on the surface of
Secondary infection is a rare complication.
the skin. It is a condition commonly seen in entire
males as *stud tail' but hormonal link is unclear
:sB0
as can be seen in neutered cats and females.
Oval bulging alopecic areas seen just below
Dogs:
the tail head on dorsum of tail.
Tail gland is an area 2.5-5.0 cm distal to the
 Overlying skin scaly, greasy and hyperpig-
anus on dorsal surface of the tail. Hair folli-
mented.
cles at this site are simple. The area contains
 Secondary infection can occur leading to pus-
both sebaceous and hepatoid glands. Hyperpla-
tular eruptions (Figure 17.12).
sia occurs secondary to other diseases, e.g. pri-
 Where the tail gland hyperplasia is seen asso-
 mary or secondary seborrhoea, ele vated androgen 
ciated with generalised seborrhoeic skin dis-
levels.
ease other lesions are present on distant sites.
282 Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Topical shampoo with salicylic acid, sulphur
or benzoyl peroxide based products.
Cats:
Self-grooming should be encouraged by
reduction of periods of confinement and
increased owner interaction. Owner may
have to groom cats that will not self-
groom.
口
Castration of entire males may only pro-
 duce partial improvement or only stop
further progression of the disease
Dogs:
Castration may be beneficial in entire
males to produce partial of complete re-
mission.
口
Where large unsightly lesions are present
surgery resection of the gland may be pos-
sible. This requires skilled surgery as the
area is difficult to close post-operatively.
Figure 17.12 Tail gland hyperplasia secondary  to
hypothyroidism.
However, regression lesions can be seen
with 18 months to 3 years.
Differential diagnosis
Vitamin A responsive derrmatosis
 Little else presents at this site with this clin-
ical appearance, unlikely differentials there-
fore include the following:
Cause and pathogenesis
Demodicosis
口冏
 Dermatophytosis
Vitamin A responsive dermatosis is a rare disease
 Superficial pyoderma
of dogs of unknown aetiology. Its response to vi-
口
口冏
 Neoplasia
tamin A does not indicate a deficiency state.
Clinical signs
Diagnosis
Occurs in any age of dog but young dogs of
 History and clinical signs.
 2-3 years appear to be overrepresented.
 Bacteriological culture, tape strippings where
Predisposed breed is the American cocker
secondary infection is present.
spaniel.
Skin biopsy reveals signs of sebaceous gland
 Follicular plugs and hyperkeratotic plaques
hyperplasia.
with crusting seen on ventral and lateral chest
and abdomen especially around the nipples
(Figure 17.13).
Treatment
Footpad hyperkeratosis may also be seen
(Figure 17.14).
Systemic antibiotics where secondary infec-
Pruritus is mild to moderate.
tion is present.
Ceruminous otitis common.
Where generalised seborrhoeic skin disease is
Hair coat easily epilated, malodorous rancid
 present, this needs to be addressed.
body smell.
Keratinisation defects  283
Trichography of hairs mounted in liquid
paraffin reveals prominent follicular casts.
Skin biopsy reveals signs of disproportionate
follicular orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis with
only minimal epidermal hyperkeratosis.
Response to vitamin A.
Treatment
Topical therapy:
Symptomatic relief is possible using an-
tiseborrhoeic shampoos, especially those
Figure 17.13 Vitamin A responsive dermatosis showing hy-
containing sulphur, salicylic acid, benzoyl
perkeratotic plaques around the nipples.
peroxide and tar.
Systemic therapy:
Differential diagnosis
Vitamin A (retinol) 8,000-10,000 IU
po/10 kg sid with a fatty meal. Improve-
Primary seborrhoea
ment should be seen within 4-6 weeks and
Secondary seborrhoea (multiple causes of
clinical remission within 8-10 weeks. Vi-
this)
tamin A toxicity is possible.
Sebaceous adenitis
>
Response to therapy is usually good but
Zinc responsive dermatosis
lifetime treatment is required.
Diagnosis
Nasodigital hyperkeratosis
 History and clinical signs, especially in pre-
Cause and pathogenesis
disposed breeds.
This disease is characterised by the formation of
excessive footpad and nasal keratin. Common
condition in old dogs. This can occur in two
forms:
Idiopathic disease in old dogs.
As a component of other disorders. In these 
diseases, it is uncommon for other clinical
signs not to be present in addition to the na-
sodigital lesions. Conditions include the fol-
lowing:
口
Ichthyosis
口
Distemper
口
Leishmaniasis
口
Pemphigus foliaceus
口
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Zinc responsive dermatosis
口
Generic food dermatosis
口
Cutaneous lymphoma
Figure 17.14 Footpad hyperkeratosis in a case of vitamin A
口
Superficial necrolytic migratory erythema
responsive cermatosis.
口
Familial footpad hyperkeratosis
284
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
growths cause pain by their pressure against
the other pads, making it difficult for the dog
to walk.
 If ulcers, erosions or fissures are present, it is
 suggestive of an immune mediated problem
such as vasculitis or pemphigus foliaceus.
Parasympathetic dysfunction can be seen con-
currently leading to loss of nasal gland secre-
 tions and exacerbating the problem.
In idiopathic disease dogs are otherwise fit.
Figure 17.15  Idiopathic nasal hyperkeratosis
Differential diagnosis
All of the other causes of nasodigital hyperker
Clinical signs
atosis listed above.
Idiopathic nasodigital hyperkeratosis:
Diagnosis
 Keratin builds up on the dorsum of the nose
and the edge of the footpads.
History and clinical signs.
Nasal planum is hard, dry, rough and hyper-
Diagnostic rule outs of other conditions.
keratotic (Figure 17.15).
Skin biopsy in cases of idiopathic disease
 Footpads show similar signs and are also
reveals signs of epidermal hyperplasia with
hard, cracked and hyperkeratotic (Figure
marked orthokeratotic or parakeratotic hy-
17.16). The signs are most pronounced at
perkeratosis.
the edges of weight-bearing pads where horny
Treatment
Mild asymptomatic cases:
Need little therapy only observation.
Moderate to severe cases:
口
Trim excessive keratin (scissors or razor
blade).
口
Hydration of pads is best achieved by
soaking them in water. The application of
compresses to the nose for 5-10 minutes
helps hydrate the planum nasale.
 Application of keratolytic/softening ag-
ent, e.g. 50% propylene glycol, petro-
leum jelly, lanolin, tretinoin gel, ichtham-
mol ointment after hydration.
 Intensive daily treatment for 7-10 days,
then maintenance once or twice weekly.
Benign disease with a good prognosis; dogs may
Figure 17.16  Idiopathic hyperkeratosis of footpads in an old
 need symptomatic therapy to keep them comfort-
sop
able.
Keratinisation defects 285
Hereditary nasal parakeratosis of
labrador retrievers
Cause and pathogenesis
Uncommon keratinisation problem seen in
Labrador retrievers and their crosses that causes
hyperkeratosis of the planum nasale. An autoso-
mal recessive mode of inheritance has been pro-
posed.
Clinical signs
Figure 17.17 Mild case of hereditary nasal parakeratosis.
 No sex predilection; the disease is seen in
young dogs 6-12 months of age.
Skin biopsy reveals signs of parakeratosis
Thick, hard, hyperkeratotic crust accumu-
with multifocal accumulations of proteina-
lates on the dorsal aspect of the planum nasale
ceous fluid between keratinocytes within the
(Figure 17.17).
od, umsouds ims pue mauon tumns
Crusts, erosions, ulcerations, fissures and de-
tein lakes'. Lymphocystic and neutrophilic ex-
pigmentation may develop (Figure 17.18).
Ocytosis with some pigment incontinence.
Lesions are not pruritic or painful.
The disease can wax and wane.
Rare to see any other signs of the animal's
Treatment
body.
Some reports have suggested that there can
 No specific therapy is recorded; therapy as for
be involvement of the haired dorsal planum
nasodigital hyperkeratosis is useful.
nasale as well as footpads.
Other topical treatment, which may produce
benefits if applied twice daily, includes the fol-
lowing:
Differential diagnosis
口
 Petroleum jelly.
口
Vitamin E cream.
Ichthyosis
Distemper
Leishmaniasis
Pemphigus foliaceus
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Zinc responsive dermatosis
Generic food dermatosis
Cutaneous lymphoma
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs in a predisposed
breed.
Diagnostic rule outs of other causes of nasal
hyperkeratosis.
Figure 17.18 Chronic case of heredlitary nasal parakeratosis.
286
6Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Propylene glycol 50:50 in water.
Dogs will become very lame due to the horny
口
 Frequency of application can be decreased
 growths putting pressure on adjacent pads
once a response has been seen.
and the infection.
 Prognosis is poor for a cure. However, dogs
 Irish terriers have accompanying nail abnor-
 can be kept comfortable for what is a benign
malities but no other skin changes are noted
disease with topical symptomatic therapy.
in cases.
Familial footpad hyperkeratosis
Differential diagnosis
Cause and pathogenesis
■
Ichthyosis
Distemper
A rare familial keratinisation disorder that results
Pemphigus foliaceus
■
 in severe hyperkeratosis of the footpads in young
■
Systemic lupus erythematosus
dogs of certain breeds. Disease has a tardive onset
Zinc responsive dermatosis
so that the dogs are born with normal pads but
Superficial necrolytic migratory erythema
the disease develops over the first 6 months of
age. An autosomal recessive mode of inheritance
is thought to exist in Irish terriers.
Diagnosis
Chinical signs
History and clinical signs.
Diagnostic rule outs of other differentials.
No sex predilection; the disease first becomes
Skin biopsy of footpads reveals signs of or-
 evident in dogs of 5-6 months of age.
thokeratotic hyperkeratosis with mild to se-
Predisposed breeds include Irish terriers,
vere epidermal hyperplasia.
 Dogue de Bordeaux and Kerry blue terriers.
 Footpads become thickened, hyperkeratotic,
hard and cracked (Figure 17.19).
Horny growths and expanding fissures de-
Treatment
velop as the disease becomes more chronic.
Secondary infection is very common.
No specific treatment regime has been de-
scribed but therapy as described for idio-
pathic nasodigital hyperkeratosis may be use-
ful.
Topical daily foot soaks with 50% propylene
glycol and filing of the excessive keratin from
the footpads can help to keep dogs comfort-
able.
Retinoid therapy with isotretinoin at a dose
of 1 mg/kg po sid may be beneficial in some
cases. Monitoring is necessary due to hepato-
toxicity and owners should be made aware of
teratogenicity of the drug.
The prognosis for a cure is poor but with a
dedicated owner the dogs can be kept com-
Figure 17.19 Familial footpad hyperkeratosis in a Dogue de
fortable. Owners should be made aware that
Bordeaux. (Picture courtesy Dr. S. Shaw.)
 animals will need lifetime therapy.
Keratinisation defects 287
Schnauzer comedone syndrome
See Chapter 14.
Sebaceous adenitis
Cause and pathogenesis
The precise aetiology of sebaceous adenitis is un-
clear. Different mechanisms may be responsible
for disease in different breeds. Uncommon dis-
ease in the dog and rare disease in the cat. Possible
Figure 17.21 Fine scale on the head of a springer spaniel
underlying triggers include the following:
with sebaceous adenitis.
 Developmental/inherited defects leading to
sebaceous gland destruction.
No sex predilection; affects young, middle-
Immune mediated attack against components
aged animals.
of sebaceous gland.
 Lesions may be focal, multifocal or gener-
Keratinisation disorder.
alised. Initial lesions found on head (Figure
 Abnormality of lipid metabolism.
17.21), pinnae and neck.
Cutaneous lesions depend on coat type. Scal-
ing usually affects the dorsum (Figure 17.22),
Clinical signs
top of head, face, ear pinnae and tail.
Cats:
Breed predilection Vizla, Akita, Samoyed,
Multifocal annular areas of crust and
standard poodle (Figure 17.20), springer
scale; hairs epilate easily and contain
spaniel. An autosomal recessive mode of in-
 prominent follicular casts on hairs.
heritance is recognised in the poodle and the
Short-haired dog:
Akita. No breed predilection is recognised in
口荘
 May be asymptomatic annular areas
the cat.
of alopecia with fine scale, which is
Figure 17.22 Sebaceous adenitis in a springer spaniel show-
Figure 17.20 Sebaceous adenitis in a poodle.
ing dliffuse fine scaling.
288 Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
non-adherent. Secondary infection with
Yeast infection can be managed using topical
bacteria and yeast can occur.
therapy. Shampoo containing miconazole or
Long coated:
boric acid or rinses containing enilconazole
Generalised scale is evident. Matted hairs
or lime sulphur may be used.
easily epilated and prominent follicular
Topical treatment:
casts with diffuse alopecia are seen. The
Mild cases:
 primary hairs are usually retained but the
Antiseborrhoeic shampoos containing
soft undercoat is lost. Secondary infection
salicylic acid, sulphur and ethyl lactate
 is common. Some Akitas are profoundly
plus emollient rinses (see treatment for
affected and be febrile with weight
primary seborrhoea, Chapter 14).
loss.
口
Severe cases:
 Pruritus variable in both cases.
 Potent antiseborrhoeic shampoos con-
 taining tar and benzoyl peroxide.
Propylene glycol 50-75% in water as
Differential diagnosis
a rinse as required.
Systemic treatment:
Bacterial folliculitis
Essential fatty acids as oral administra-
Demodicosis
tion of omega 6 and omega 3 containing
Dermatophytosis
fatty acids have been shown to be useful
Follicular dystrophy
in some cases.
 Endocrinopathy especially hypothyroidism
Prednisolone 1-2 mg/kg daily for 10-14
days, then alternate day tapering to lowest
possible dose.
Cyclosporine 5 1
mg/kg po sid for up
Diagnosis
to 4 weeks or until maximal benefit,
whichever occurs first. Then taper to low-
History and clinical signs, especially in pre-
est possible alternate or twice weekly dose
disposed breeds.
rate.
Laboratory rule outs of other conditions.
口
 Asparaginase 10,000 IU im weekly for 2-
Trichography of plucked hairs mounted in
3 treatments, then as required.
liquid paraffin reveals prominent follicular
Retinoids:
casts.
 Isotretinoin 1 mg/kg po sid/bid until
 Skin biopsy reveals signs of discrete granu-
improvement is seen (up to 6 weeks),
lomas in the areas of the sebaceous glands.
then 1 mg/kg po every other day for 6
In chronic lesions sebaceous glands are com-
weeks tapering down to lowest possi-
pletely lost and replaced with fibrosis.
ble maintenance dose rate. Monitoring
is necessary due to hepatotoxicity and
owners should be made aware of ter-
Treatment
 Acitretin 1 mg/kg po sid/bid until im-
 Response to treatment can be disappoint-
provement is seen (up to 6 weeks),
 ing and often difficult to assess as sebaceous
then 1 mg/kg po every other day for
adenitis can be cyclical in nature.
6 weeks tapering down to lowest pos-
Secondary bacterial infection needs to be
sible maintenance dose rate.
treated with systemic antibiotics based on
 Removal of dogs from breeding programmes
sensitivity. In many cases pulse therapy with
is important.
antibiotics, i.e. full therapeutic doses of an-
Prognosis is variable, but tends to be best
tibiotic therapy given twice weekly, is needed
for short-coated breeds and those diagnosed
to prevent re-infection.
early in the course of their disease.
Keratinisation defects 289
Figure 17.23 Thick adherent crust on the periphery of the
ear pinna in a dog with hypothyroidism.
Figure 17.24  Ear margin dermatosis in a flat coat retriever.
Ear margin dermatosis
Neoplasia especially squamous cell carci-
Cause and pathogenesis
noma
Hypothyroidism
Idiopathic seborrhoeic disease of the margins of
the pinna seen in dogs with pendulous ears.
Diagnosis
Clinical signs can be recognised as components
of other diseases including
History and clinical signs, especially in pre-
disposed breeds.
vasculitis,
Diagnostic rule outs of other differentials.
hypothyroidism (Figure 17.23),
 head flapping secondary to otitis externa or
Skin biopsy reveals signs of orthokeratotic or
parakeratotic hyperkeratosis with follicular
pinnal pruritus (scabies, atopy etc.).
keratosis.
Clinical signs
Treatment
 No sex or age predilection; dachshunds ap-
pear to be predisposed.
Topical therapy:
Early cases present with soft greasy sebor-
Antiseborrhoeic shampoos containing
口
rhoea with erythema (Figure 17.24) affecting
sulphur, salicylic acid, benzoyl peroxide
the margins of the pinnae.
may be used to remove crust and sebor-
In chronic cases, thick, hard crust accumu-
rhoeic discharge. Shampoos are applied
lates on the margins leading to a cracked, ul-
daily until crusts and scale removed then
cerated and fissured appearance.
decreased to maintenance levels.
The condition may be painful leading to head
 Topical moisturisers may be used after
shaking and further trauma.
shampoo therapy.
Systemic therapy:
 Pentoxifylline 10-15 mg/kg po tid may be
Differential diagnosis
√
 helpful in some animals. Drug is slow to
work, taking 4-12 weeks.
Scabies
口
Essential fatty acid supplementation may
Vasculitis
be useful in some cases.
290
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Therapy with tetracycline, niacinamide.
doxycycline or vitamin E has been shown
to produce improvement in some dogs
(for doses see Table 11.1).
口
Prednisolone may be used for severely in-
flamed pinnae at a dose of 1 mg/kg po
sid for 7-10 days then tapered down and
withdrawn where possible.
Surgical therapy:
 In cases where ear fissuring is severe and
 unresponsive to medical therapy, surgical
resection in the form of an ear crop may
be indicated.
Figure 17.25  Idiopathic facial dermatitis in a Persian.
Idiopathic facial dermatitis in
Differential diagnosis
Persians cats
Allergy (atopy, food, fleas)
Demodicosis
Cause and pathogenesis
Dermatophytosis
 Idiopathic sterile pyogranulomatous disease
 Uncommon variable pruritic facial disease seen
in the Persian cat. Aetiology is unknown but it is
thought this may represent a keratinisation dis-
order in that cats may have a sebaceous gland
Diagnosis
abnormality. A genetic basis of the disease may
be possible.
History and clinical signs in a predisposed
breed.
Clinical signs
Cultures for bacteria and yeasts are secondary
 problems but need to be treated.
Other findings include negative FeLV, FIV as-
Young Persian and Himalayan cats of either
says, dermatophyte cultures.
 sex appear predisposed.
Highest incidence in older kittens and young
adult cats.
Lesions confined to the head and neck.
Erythema, alopecia and marked self-inflicted
trauma.
Thick black exudation with crusting of hairs
around the eyes, mouth and chin (Figure
17.25).
 Ceruminous otitis seen as thick black waxy
 debris in the canals; seen in approximately
50% of cases.
Secondary bacterial and yeast infection com-
mon (Figure 17.26), which leads to increased
pruritus.
A mucoid ocular discharge is common and
herpetic eye disease may be present concur-
Figure 17.26 Periocular infection in a Persian with
rently.
idiopathic facial dermatitis.
Keratinisation defects 291
Occasional positive skin test reactivity but
pered to lowest possible maintenance
dose rate. Cats should be assessed
specific immunotherapy.
for suitability of cyclosporine therapy
Skin biopsy reveals signs of acanthosis, su-
with routine bloods including a viral
perficial crusting, hydropic degeneration of
screen.
basal cells with occasional dyskeratotic ker-
 Prognosis is guarded and many cats are
atinocytes. Sebaceous hyperplasia presents
euthanised due to lack of owner commit-
with a mixed superficial dermal infiltrate.
ment, resources or failure to respond to
therapy.
Treatment
Selected references and further reading
Guarded prognosis; mild to moderate cases
can be managed but therapy is usually labour
intensive and requires a dedicated owner.
Bond, R. et al. (2000) An idiopathic facial der-
Topical therapy:
matitis of Persian cats. Vet Dermatol, 11, 35-
口
Crusts and debris removal with antisebor-
41
rhoeic shampoos containing sulphur, sal-
Kuhl, K. (2004) Disorders of keratinisation. In:
icylic acid and ethyl lactate.
Campbell, K.L. (ed) Small Animal Dermatol-
Antibacterial/antiyeast washes and wipes
ogy Secrets. pp. 91-98. Hanley and Belfus,
containing acetic acid, boric acid, chlor-
Philadelphia
hexidine, ethyl 1
lactate, miconazole, EDTA
Medleau, L. and Hnilica, K. (2006) Keratin-
tris to help control secondary infection
isation and seborrhoeic disorders. In: Small
Ear treatment using ceruminolytic agents
Animal Dermatology: A Color Atlas and Ther-
to remove wax from the ears
plus topi-
apeutic Guide. 2nd edn. Pp. 295-325. WB
cal therapy based on cytology/culture of
Saunders, Philadelphia
discharge
Page, N. et al. (2003) Hereditary nasal paraker-
 Eye cleansers to remove the discharge and
atosis in Labrador retrievers. Vet Dermatol, 14,
then antibacterial agents if infection is
103-110
present.
Paradis, M. (1992) Footpad hyperkeratosis in a
 Anti-inflammatory therapy should only
family of Dogue de Bordeaux. Vet Dermatol,
口
be used once all infection has been ade-
3,75-78
quately treated. Topical glucocorticoids,
Paradis, M. (2001) Primary hereditary sebor-
cyclosporine and tacrolimus may be used
rhoea oleosa. In: August, J.R. (ed) Consulta-
sparingly for short periods to effect.
tions in Feline Internal Medicine 4. pp. 202-
Systemic therapy:
207. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
Antibiotics and antiyeast therapy where
Reichler, I.M. et al. (2001) Sebaceous adenitis in
口
the Akita: clinical observations, histopathol-
fection. Pulse therapy may be needed for
ogy and hereditary. Vet Dermatol, 12, 243-
maintenance, i.e. full therapeutic dosage
253
of drugs given twice weekly as preventa-
Rybnicek, J. et al. (1998) Sebaceous adeni-
tive therapy once infection has resolved.
tis: an immunohistological examination. In:
Anti-inflammatory therapy should only
Kwochka, K. et al. (eds) Advances in Vet-
be used once infection has been treated:
erinary Dermatology. Vol. 3. pp. 539-540.
Prednisolone 1-3 mg/kg po sid for 14-
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
21 days then tapered to lowest possible
Scott, D.W. et al. (2001) Keratinisation defects
alternate day maintenance dose rate.
Muller and Kirk's Small Animal Dermatol-
Cyclosporine 5-7 mg/kg po sid
1to
ogy 6th edn. Pp. 1025-1053. WB Saunders,
achieve clinical improvement then ta-
Philadelphia
Miscellaneous skin diseases
in the dog
Subcorneal pustular dermatosis
Differential diagnosis
Cause and pathogenesis
 Pemphigus foliaceus
Sterile eosinophilic pustulosis
Very rare sterile pustular disease identified in the
 Bacterial impetigo/folliculitis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
dog. No clear cause has been identified; it may
Superficial pyoderma
be an immune mediated disease. Some sources
 have suggested that it is a variant of pemphigus
foliaceus.
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
Clinical signs
Diagnosis by exclusion of other diseases.
Cytology of pustules reveals non-degenerate
 Has been identified in many different breeds
neutrophils, occasionally acanthocytes. In un-
 but miniature schnauzers appear to be predis-
complicated cases bacteria are not present.
posed.
Cultures, if taken carefully, are usually sterile.
 No age or sex predilection.
Skin biopsy reveals signs of subcorneal pus-
Lesions may be multifocal or generalised, ap-
tules containing non-degenerate neutrophils.
 pearing as non-follicular pustules especially
Acanthocytes are an inconsistent finding.
on the head and trunk (Figure 18.1).
Pustules transient so that secondary lesions
often more prominent as alopecia, scale,
Treatment
crust, epidermal collarettes (Figure 18.2).
Peripheral lymphadenopathy is an inconsis-
 Therapy as for pemphigus foliaceus may be
tent finding.
successful in some cases (see Chapter 11).
 Footpads, mucous membranes, mouth rarely
Dapsone 1 mg/kg po tid until a response is
affected.
seen, which can take 1-4 weeks. The dose is
 Dogs usually systemically well.
then tapered to daily treatment twice weekly.
Miscellaneous skin diseases in the dog293
Chronically lesions progress to annular ero-
sions with epidermal collarettes and target le-
sions.
 Distribution variable but often starts on the
trunk.
 Lesions are usually pruritic.
Dogs usually systemically well, but concur-
rent lymphadenopathy, depression, anorexia
or pyrexia may be seen.
Differential diagnosis
Figure 18.1  Subcorneal pustular dermatosis in a dog.
Bacterial folliculitis/impetigo
Pemphigus foliaceus
Haematology and liver enzymes levels should
Dermatophytosis
be monitored during trea tment.
Demodicosis
Sulphasalazine 10-20 mg/kg po tid until con-
Subcorneal pustular dermatosis
trolled, then as required. It is important to
 Ectoparasitic disease
 monitor tear function in these dogs.
 Drug eruption
Sterile eosinophilic pustulosis
Diagnosis
Cause and pathogenesis
History and clinical signs.
Haematology usually reveals signs of a pe-
Rare skin disease only recorded in the dog. It is
ripheral eosinophilia.
thought to be an immune mediated disease.
Cytology of pustule content reveals eosino-
phils, non-degenerate neutrophils, occasional
acanthocytes but no bacteria
Clinical signs
Cultures, if taken carefully, are sterile
Skin biopsy reveals signs of eosinophilic in-
No age, breed or sex predilection.
traepidermal pustules with folliculitis and fu-
Primary lesions are of follicular and non
runculosis.
follicular papules and pustules.
Treatment
Systemic glucocorticoids in the form of pred-
nisolone 2.0-4.0 mg/kg po sid until lesions
resolve, which can takes up to a month.
Once remission has been achieved then pred-
nisolone should be switched to an alter-
 nate day regime at the lowest possible dose
rate.
 Dapsone may be used as described under sub-
corneal pustular dermatosis.
The prognosis for these cases remains very
poor. Some animals can be kept comfortable
Figure 18.2 Subcorneal pustular dermatosis - close-up
showing scaling and crusting.
with low dose alternate day prednisolone.
294
4Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Idiopathic sterile granuloma and
pyogranulomas
Cause and pathogenesis
Uncommon skin disease only recognised in dogs.
It is thought to be an immune-mediated disease.
Clinical signs
Any age, sex or breed.
Figure 18.4 Ulcerated depigmented lesions on a collie with
 Predisposed breeds include the Boxer, golden
advanced idiopathic sterile pyogranulomas.
retriever collie, Great Dane and any other
large short-coated breed.
Diagnosis
 Lesions appear as multiple asymptomatic der-
 mal papules and nodules.
History and clinical signs.
 Lesions can be identified at any site but the
■
Laboratory rule out of other conditions.
head (bridge of nose, Figure 18.3, muzzle,
Cytological examination of fine needle as-
pinnae), paws, and scrotum appear to be ar-
pirate reveals a pyogranulomatous inflam-
eas commonly affected.
matory infltrate with no evidence of micro-
Chronic lesions can become alopecic, ulcer
organisms.
ated and secondarily infected (Figure 18.4).
 Microbial culture of tisue via biopsy or dis-
charge via swab is usually negative.
Skin biopsy reveals signs of nodular to dif-
fuse sterile granuloma/pyogranuloma. Special
Differential diagnosis
stains fail to reveal signs of micro-organisms.
Infectious granulomas, (bacteria, mycobacte-
ria, fungal)
Treatment
Parasites (leishmania, tick bites)
 Foreign body granulomas
Solitary lesions:
Neoplasia
 Surgical excision.
口
Multiple lesions:
Systemic treatments:
Prednisolone 2.0-4.0 mg/kg po sid.
Remission can take 2-6 weeks. How-
ever, dose rate should be tapered 10-
14 days into therapy to an alternate
day regime to prevent glucocorticoid
side effects due to long-term use. Once
remission has been achieved the ste-
roid dose rate should be tapered to the
 lowest possible alternate day regime.
Other therapeutic options include
azathioprine, L-asparaginase, doxy-
cycline/niacinamide, oxytetracycline/
 Figure 18.3 Idiopathic sterile pyogranulomas on the nose of
niacinamide; for dose rates, see Table
a German shepherd dog.
11.1.
Miscellaneous skin diseases in the dog295
Prognosis is good for the majority of dogs
pecially arthropod bites or stings, which leads to
 as remission can be achieved in most cases.
collagen degeneration.
However, many dogs need lifetime therapy.
Clinical signs
Localised scleroderma (morphea)
Usually dogs less than 3 years of age.
Males seem to be predisposed. Higher inci-
Cause and pathogenesis
dence of lesions seen in Siberian husky and
cavalier King Charles spaniel.
 Rare disease, identified in domestic species of
 Lesions are plaques and proliferative nodules
often ulcerated, found in oral cavity and on
dogs. It has an unknown aetiology but may be
the skin:
due to
口
Oral cavity lesions found on tonsils,
palate and tongue. Oral plaques can be
vascular damage,
 painful leading to halitosis as the present-
abnormal collagen metabolism,
ing complaint.
autoimmune disease.
口
Cutaneous lesions found on ventral ab-
domen, prepuce and flanks. Lesions on the
skin are usually asymptomatic. Dogs are
Clinical signs
systemically well.
 No age, sex or breed predilection.
Lesions tend to be asymptomatic and present
Differential diagnosis
as shiny alopecic sclerotic plaques.
Lesions are most commonly found on the
trunk and limbs.
 Infectious granulomas (fungal/bacterial)
 Animals are generally systemically well.
 Sterile granulomas
 Neoplasia
Diagnosis
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
 History and clinical signs, especially in pre-
 Skin biopsy reveals signs of a fbrosing der-
disposed breeds.
matitis.
 Skin biopsy reveals signs of eosinophilic/
histiocytic granulomas with collagen degen-
eration.
Treatment
 Haematology often unremarkable but on oc-
casions an eosinophilia may be present.
Benign disease often undergoes spontaneous re-
Carefully taken cultures submitted for both
mission and so does not generally require any
 aerobic and anaerobic plus mycobacterial cul-
specific therapy.
ture are sterile.
Treatment
Eosinophilic granuloma
Solitary lesions may undergo spontaneous re-
Cause and pathogenesis
gression and do not require therapy.
Glucocorticoids needed for multiple or oral
Unknown aetiology, but may represent a hyper-
lesions. Prednisolone 0.5-2.0 mg/kg po sid for
sensitivity reaction to environmental allergens es-
10-14 days or until clinical remission, then
296
6Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
tapered to lowest possible maintenance dose
rate aiming to withdraw.
 On the rare occasions where glucocorticoids
are unsuccessful  other anti-inflammatory
 medication suitable for therapy of atopy (see
 Chapter 10) can be employed.
In most cases complete remission is achieved
with therapy and no further treatment is re-
quired. Prognosis is good.
Juvenile cellulitis (puppy strangles, big
head disease)
Figure 18.5  Papules and pustules on the face of a puppy with
juvenile cellulitis.
Cause and pathogenesis
Differential diagnosis
A disease of unknown aetiology, which may be
immune mediated. A familial tendency is often
Angioedema
seen so that the disease can affect more than one
■
Demodicosis
puppy in a litter.
■
 Drug eruption
■
 Deep bacterial pyoderma
Distemper
Clinical signs
Diagnosis
Commonly seen in young puppies 3 weeks to
6 months of age.
History and clinical signs.
Predisposed breeds include the golden re-
Laboratory rule outs of other conditions.
 triever, dachshund, beagle, pointer and Gor-
Impression smears from the exudative lesions
don setter.
from skin or the ear reveal macrophages,
Cutaneous signs:
with non-degenerate neutrophils. Micro-
口
Acute onset swollen face, submandibular
organisms are not usually seen.
lymphadenopathy.
Vesicles, papules,
pustules
with
pu-
rulent exudate progressing to fistulae
(Figure 18.5).
Lesions are found on lips, muzzle and eye-
lids (Figure 18.6).
 Ear pinnae can be swollen and exudative
 and commonly a sterile discharge is pro-
duced from the ear canal.
口
In rare cases the anus and prepuce can be
involved.
口
Lesions are painful but not pruritic.
Non-cutaneous signs:
Lethargic, anorexic, pyrexic.
口
口冏
Joint pain due to a sterile suppurative
Figure 18.6 Juvenile cellulitis in a young springer spaniel
arthritis is seen in 25% of cases.
puppy.
Miscellaneous skin diseases in the dog 297
 Skin biopsy reveals diffuse granulomatous to
pyogranulomatous inflammation. Infectious
agents are rarely seen.
Culture, if taken carefully, are sterile. In
chronic cases secondary infection may be
identified but appropriate therapy based on
cultures or cytology rarely leads to a signif-
cant improvement.
Treatment
Early treatment is important to avoid scar-
ring.
Topical therapy:
Figure 18.7 Onychorrhexis and onychomalacia of nails in
Warm water soaks, and gentle emollient
symmetrical lupoid onychodystrophy.
口
baths to remove crust and scale.
Systemic therapy:
Predisposed breeds include German shep-
口
 Prednisolone 2 mg/kg po sid until remis-
herd dogs and Rottweilers although it can be
sion 7-28 days, then cut to an alternate
recognised in any breed.
day regime for a further 14-21 days, then
All four feet are affected but often front feet
taper further aiming to withdraw. If med-
most severe.
ication is decreased too quickly then re-
Initial signs are confined to one or two claws,
lapse will occur.
which are lost; however, the problem will
 Broad spectrum antibiotics therapy may
eventually affect all of the claws to some de-
be given during the treatment period in
gree.
the form of cephalexin 25 mg/kg po bid
No other cutaneous lesions.
or clavamox 22 mg/kg po bid/tid.
Onychomalacia and onychorrhexis (Figure
Although the disease is fatal if not treated, the
18.7) often followed by onychomadesis
 prognosis is good and recovery without scar-
(Figure 18.8). Nails that are shed are replaced
ring is possible if early treatment with appro-
with misshapen nails that are of a similar soft
priate antibiotics and glucocorticoid is under-
or brittle quality.
taken.
Symmetrical lupoid onychodystrophy
Cause and pathogenesis
 Condition of unknown aetiology, possibly an im-
mune mediated disease that leads to sloughing of
the claws. It is an uncommon disease in the dog.
Clinical signs
Principally affects young to middle-aged
Figure 18.8 Onychomadesis of nails in symmetrical lupoid
dogs.
onychodystrophy.
298
3Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Dogs feet are often swollen and painful.
Paronychia is uncommon.
Differential diagnosis
Other causes of onychodystrophy:
Onychomycosis
口
口
Systemic lupus erythematosus
 Pemphigus vulgaris
 Bullous pemphigoid
Vasculitis
Figure 18.9 Deformed nails removed under general anaes-
Diagnosis
thetic in a dog with lupoid onychodystrophy.
History and clinical signs.
undressed but should wear an Elizabethan
Laboratory rule outs of other diseases.
collar to prevent traumatisation.
Skin biopsy of skin around nail produces a
口
In recurrent cases or severe cases P3 am-
non-specific pattern. Diagnostic histopathol-
putation may be a useful surgical option
ogy is only possible if the nail is submitted
to medical therapy.
with the nail bed; however, in many cases the
Medical therapy:
third phalanx has to be removed and submit-
 Antibiotics for secondary infection based
ted to achieve this, unless the nail can be split
 on culture and sensitivity.
longitudinally. Biopsy reveals hydropic basal
口
Post nail removal a range of therapeutic
cell degeneration with apoptosis of individual
regimes have been described with varying
keratinocytes in the basal cell layer. Pigmen-
success (see Table 18.1). Drugs listed be-
 tary incontinence and a lichenoid infltrate are
low in the table may be used in isolation
also common.
 or as combinations. The author favours a
combination of biotin, GLA and pentoxi-
Treatment
fylline.
Surgical therapy:
Although medical therapy can be imple-
口
mented without the removal of all the
damaged nails, it is rarely successful. Re-
moval of all of the nails under general
anaesthetic is important to remove dam-
aged, deformed nails to allow new nails to
grow through (Figure 18.9).
Nail removal is undertaken by manual re-
moval using haemostats taking care not
to leave remnants of nails behind. The
 nail beds bleed profusely after removal
(Figure 18.10) and sterile dressing should
be applied for the frst 24-48 hours in
combination with antibiotic therapy and
Figure 18.10 Appearance of nail beds after removal of dam-
painkillers. After this the dog can be left
aged nails.
Miscellaneous skin diseases in the dog299
Table 18.1
I Drug therapies for onychodystrophy.
Drug
Dosage
Details
Essential fatty acid
Dosage differs with individuals
Improvement will take up to 3 months
EPA 400 mg/10 kg
GLA 100 mg/10 kg
Biotin
pis od sop/aw 5'z
Improvement as above
Tetracycline /niacinamide
Dogs <10 kg, 250 mg po tid of 
Give tid until noticeable nail growth is seen 3-6
each drug
months Then give bid for 2 months, then sid for
Dogs >10 kg, 500 mg po tid of 
maintenance
each drug
 Pentoxifylline
10-25 mg/kg po bid/tid
Improvement will take up to 3 months
 Prednisolone
1-2 mg/kg po bid 
Give bid for 2-4 weeks then sid for 2-4 weeks,
then taper to lowest possible alternate day dosage
Azathioprine
2 mg/kg po sid 
Improvement will take 2-3 months, then taper to
alternate day medication for maintenance; drug
needs to be monitored (see Chapter 11.)
Anal sac disease
 Dogs scoot along the floor or bite or lick their
perianal skin.
 Some animals can cause severe damage to the
Cause and pathogenesis
skin leading to lichenification, hyperpigmen-
tation and ulceration (Figure 18.11).
Anal sacs are two small structures located be-
Secondary infection with both yeast and bac-
tween the internal and external anal sphincter
teria are common.
muscles. They are found at the four and eight
o'clock positions. Each of the sacs in lined with
both sebaceous and apocrine glands. In a normal
Table 18.2 Causes of anal sac impaction.
the surface of the perianal skin on the edge of the
smelling brownish fluid. Recurrent anal sac dis-
Cause of
impaction 
Details
ease can be associated with abnormalities of anal
gland secretion, anatomical defects or underlying
disease (Table 18.2). It is a common disease, but
Abnormal anal
Dogs that produce thick or dry
it is principally seen in dogs.
gland secretion 
discharge that cannot be
 naturally expelled
Abnormal anal
 Dogs with congenitally narrow
gland ducts
ducts, dogs with acquired
Chinicaf signs
damage to the ducts due to
perianal infections, trauma,
 No age or sex predilection. Large breeds
allergies
 are underrepresented. Small breeds especially
 Perianal
Food allergy or atopy that 
 poodles, Chihuahuas, and Lhasa apsos have
disease
 causes perianal irritation 
an increased risk.
300Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Table 18.3 Anal sac contents.
Sac contents -
disease status 
Appearance of contents
Microscopic examination
Normal sac
 Clear or pale yellow straw/brown 
Corneocytes and basophilic material; bacteria
coloured fluid
predominantly Gram positive cocci, with a few
Gram positive rods and rare Gram negative rods;
rare neutrophils and yeast (Figure 18.1 2)
Impacted anal sac
Thick yellow or brown and pasty
As above
consistency
Anal sacculitis
Creamy yellow or yellow green
Corneocytes and basophilic bacteria as above;
exudate variable consistency
large numbers of bacteria of varying types;
neutrophils in large numbers often with 
intracytoplasmic bacteria (Figure 18.13)
Anal gland abscess
Reddish brown exudate - necrotic/
As above for anal sacculitis, often large numbers
(Figure 18.14)
purulent exudate
of erythrocytes and necrotic debris
Some dogs also show signs of faecal tenes-
Contact irritant/hypersensitivity
mus, tail chasing and areas of acute moist
Food allergy
■
dermatitis.
Differential diagnosis
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
Anal sac neoplasia
Digital palpation of distended anal sac.
■
Perianal fistula
 Expression of anal sac contents can reveal a
Tapeworms
variety of clinical findings (see Table 18.3).
Figure 18.11  Severe perianal damage due to self-inflicted
trauma.
Figure 18.12 Cytology of normal anal gland secretion.
Miscellaneous skin diseases in the dog301
on culture and sensitivity with an antibiotic
and glucocorticoid combination in the form
of a cream or ear drops. Systemic antibiotics
may be necessary for 10-14 days.
Anal sac abscess is treated in a similar way
to the sacculitis with flushing, topical instilla-
tion and systemic antibiotics on the basis of
culture and sensitivity.
For recurrent or severe disease, excision of the
affected gland may be necessary.
Prognosis is moderate, provided that the ini-
tial problem can be resolved and owners can
be educated as to how to express their pets'
glands on a long-term basis.
Figure 18.13 Cytology of abnormal anal gland secretion.
Treatment
Anal furunculosis
 Identification and therapy of any underlying
Cause and pathogenesis
disease.
Anal sac impaction manual evacuation may
Cutaneous disease affecting the perianal, anal and
be sufficient; owners can be instructed as to
perirectal skin. The precise aetiology of anal fu-
how to empty glands on future occasions.
runculosis is unknown but it is thought to be in
Anal sacculitis requires manual evacuation
part due to anatomical factors and also due to
and lavage of the sacs with either chlorhex-
immune mediated disease. In some cases food al-
idine (0.025%), povidone iodine (0.4%) or
lergy has been implicated as a contributory factor.
EDTA tris. The sacs can then be packed based
Uncommon disease of dogs.
Clinical signs
No sex predilection. Middle-aged German
shepherd dogs and their crosses seem to be
at increased risk.
 Lesions vary from small pinpoint draining si-
nuses with ulceration and fistula formation to
deep areas of ulceration and furunculosis.
Rectal examination reveals a thickened f-
brotic colonic mucosa.
Anal sacs are rarely involved.
Area is swollen and painful and animals re-
sent examination of the site.
Other signs include perianal licking, anorectal
discharge, faecal tenesmus, low tail carriage,
weight loss and decreased exercise tolerance.
Some animals may have concurrent inflam-
matory bowel disease.
Figure 18.14 Anal gland abscess.
302Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Differential diagnosis
function should be monitored in dogs
 on long-term therapy. Prednisolone 2
Anal gland neoplasia
mg/kg po sid for 2 weeks, then 1 mg/kg
Anal gland abscess
po sid for 4 weeks, then 1 mg/kg po
 Deep perianal bacterial or fungal infection
Every 48 hours for maintenance.
Azathioprine 1.5 mg/kg po sid with
metronidazole 11-13 mg/kg po sid
 may be used in refractory cases for 4-
Diagnosis
 8 weeks prior to surgery to debride le-
sions followed by similar therapy for a
 History and clinical signs.
further 3-6 weeks.
Skin biopsy reveals signs of hidradenitis,
Surgical treatment:
necrosis of the epithelium of the follicular in-
口
Surgery to debride ulcers and remove
fundibulum and a mixed inflammatory infl-
fistulae may be effective. Best results
trate.
are often seen when medical therapy is
combined with surgical intervention. Sur-
gical procedures include cryosurgery, laser
Treatment
surgery and chemical cautery. 
 Multiple
surgeries are usually required and post-
Treatment of any concurrent disease, e.g.
surgical complications include recurrence
food allergy or colitis.
of fistulae, anal stenosis and faecal incon-
Medical therapy:
tinence.
口
 Topical treatment:
 Clipping and cleansing of the area with
early in the course
of their disease.
A combi
chlorhexidine.
nation of cyclosporine and ketoconazole with
Topical
anti-inflammatory
therapy
laser debridement seems to offer the best suc-
should only be used where bacterial
cess rate.
infection has been adequately treated.
Glucocorticoid creams applied every
12-24 hours for 2-3 weeks then ta-
Selected references and further reading
pered aiming to withdraw.
Tacrolimus applied every
12hours to
achieve remission then tapered to ev-
Angus, J.C. (2004) Diseases of the claw and claw
ery 48-72 hours.
bed. In: Campbell, K.L. (ed) Small Animal Der-
Systemic treatment:
matology Secrets. Pp. 332-340. Hanley and
Antibiotic therapy should be used
Belfus, Philadelphia
based on culture and sensitivity to
Auxilia, S.T. et al. (2001) Canine symmetri-
resolve  infection for 
14-21
days
cal lupoid onychodystrophy: a retrospective
before  starting immunomodulating
study with particular reference to management.
therapy.
J Small Anim Pract, 42,82-87
Cyclosporine 5 mg/kg po sid for 3-5
Crow, D. (2004) Idiopathic sterile granuloma and
months and for at least 4 weeks be-
pyogranuloma syndrome. In: Campbell, K.L.
 yond clinical cure. Some dogs require
(ed) Small Animal Dermatology Secrets. pp.
lifetime therapy. In these dogs the cy-
227-230. Hanley and Belfus, Philadelphia
closporine should be cut to the lowest
-ng [eue jo Aooqedoum (6661) f Ke
possible dose to maintain remission.
runculosis in the dog. J Small Anim Pract, 34,
Ketoconazole at a dose of 5-10 mg/kg
381-389
po sid may be added to reduce the
Marks, S.L. (2004) Perianal fistula disease.
cost and dose of cyclosporine. Liver
In:
Campbell, K.L. (ed) Small 
Anima!
Miscellaneous skin diseases in the dog303
Dermatology Secrets. pp.
341-343.Han-
Mueller, R.S.and Olivry, T. (1999) Onychobiopsy
ley and Belfus, Philadelphia
without onychectomy: description of a new
Medleau, L. and Hnilica, K. (2006) Diseases of
 biopsy technique for canine claws. Vet Derma-
eyes, claws, anal sacs and ear canals. In: Small
tol,10,55-59
Animal Dermatology: A Color Atlas and Ther-
Patricelli, A.J. et al. (2002) Cyclosporine and ke-
apeutic Guide. 2nd edn. Pp. 359-392.WB
toconazole for the treatment of perianal fis-
 Saunders, Philadelphia
tulas in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc, 220,
Medleau, L. and Hnilica, K. (2006) Miscella-
1009-1016
 neous cutaneous disorders of the dog. In: Small
Scott, D.W. et al. (2001) Miscellaneous Skin Dis-
Animal Dermatology: A Color Atlas and Ther-
eases; Muller and Kirk's Small Animal Derma-
apeutic Guide. 2nd edn. pp.327-342. WB
tology.6th edn. pp. 1125-1185. WB Saunders,
Saunders, Philadelphia
Philadelphia
Miscellaneous skir
diseases in the ce
Feline plasma cell pododermatitis
 Pads feel soft and spongy.
口
 Severe signs:
口
Cats are lame and footpads become very
Cause and pathogenesis
painful.
 Pads may become ulcerated, often burst
Feline plasma cell pododermatitis is an inflam-
open (Figure 19.2).
matory disease of the footpads in cats charac-
Secondary infection is common.
terised by a plasma cell infltrate; the precise
Other signs:
aetiology is unknown. Clinical fndings, which
Plasmacytic dermatitis
affecting
口
the
include tissue plasmacytosis and hypergamma-
bridge of the nose.
globulinaemia, together with the cat's response
Plasma cell stomatitis.
to immune modulating drugs suggest an immune
口
口
Immune mediated glomerulonephritis
mediated cause. Some cases show a seasonal pat-
口
Renal amyloidosis.
tern. It is a rare disease in the cat.
Differential diagnosis
Clinical signs
 Infectious causes of pyogranulomatous dis-
 No breed, sex or age predilection is recog-
ease include the following:
nised.
口
Bacterial infections such as
Cutaneous signs.
Bacterial pseudomycetoma
Early/mild signs:
Mycobacteria
口
 Soft painless swellings of multiple foot-
Actinomycosis
pads on multiple paws (Figure 19.1).
Actinobacillosis
Central metatarsal or metacarpal pads
Nocardiosis
usually affected.
口
 Dermatophytic pseudomycetoma
口冏
Surface of pads often appears purple with
口
Fungal mycetoma
white cross-hatching.
Viral disease:
Miscellaneous skin diseases in the cat 305
Biopsy reveals signs of a perivascular to dif-
fuse dermatitis with heavy plasma cell infl-
trate and Mott cells (plasma cells that contain
immunoglobulin and stain pink).
Cultures usually negative.
Blood samples hypergammaglobulinaemia.
ANA, FeLV, FIV occasionally positive but in-
consistent finding.
Treatment
 Benign neglect in non-painful cases as regres-
Figure 19.1 Plasma cell pododermatitis showing purple
cross-hatching of pad.
sion can occur spontaneously.
Medical treatment can be used with the fol-
lowing:
Calici virus
口
 Prednisolone 2.0 mg./kg po bid:
 Herpes virus
Taper down to lowest possible alter-
Pox virus
nate day levels once clinical remission
Sterile causes of nodular skin disease:
has occurred. Usually takes about 2-
口
Neoplasia.
 3 weeks to see benefits; maximal im-
Foreign body.
provement is seen in 10-14 days.
口
These all usually only affect a single foot-
 Doxycycline 5-10 mg/kg po bid:
pad.
Can take 4-8 weeks for improvement
and should be continued until pads
have completely healed. It may be ta-
pered, withdrawn or continued indefi-
nitely depending on the cat's response
Diagnosis
and dependency on it.
History and clinical signs.
Cyclosporine 5-10 mg/kg sid po:
 Use in the same way as prednisolone,
Fine needle aspirates re veal numerous plasma
tapering once benefits are seen.
cells with small numbers of lymphocytes and
Surgical treatment:
neutrophils.
口
In severe cases that are unresponsive to
therapy badly affected footpads may have
to be amputated.
Prognosis is good in uncomplicated cases;
where stomatitis or renal disease is present
the outlook is more guarded.
Idiopathic sterile granuloma and
pyogranulomas
Cause and pathogenesis
Figure 19.2  Severe case of plasma cell pododermatitis after
Sterile granulomatous lesions usually found on
the pad has split.
the head of cats. Aetiology is unknown but it
306
6Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Figure 19.4 Sterile papulonodular lesions on head.
Figure 19.3 Preauricular plaques in a cat.
Eosinophilic granuloma
Granulomatous sebaceous adenitis
is thought to be an immune mediated disease.
 Underlying allergy especially flea hypersensitivity
has been identified in some cases.
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
Clinical signs
Tissue culture to include fungal; aerobic and
anaerobic bacteriological culture is negative.
Skin biopsy:
Two syndromes are recognised.
 Preauricular plaques biopsies reveal a dif-
 Preauricular plaques:
fuse granulomatous dermatitis with a nar-
 No breed predilection; older males may be
row Grenz zone containing multinucleate
predisposed.
 Papules coalesce to form orange yellow
giant cells.
 Papulonodular lesions biopsies reveal a
well-circumscribed plaques (Figure 19.3).
口
 perifollicular pyogranulomatous dermati-
口冏
 Pruritus variable; may be moderate to se-
tis.
vere.
口
 Palpation of lesions leads to red/purple
discoloration.
 Papulonodular lesions:
Treatment
口
No breed predilections; young females
may be predisposed.
Solitary lesions - surgical excision
口
 Pruritic papules and nodules on the head
Multiple lesions
and pinnae (Figure 19.4).
Prednisolone 2.0-4.0 mg/kg po sid un-
Lesions erythematous to violaceous; vari-
口
til regression occurs; usually 10-14 days.
able pruritus.
Prednisolone should then be tapered to
the lowest possible alternate day dose
with a view to withdrawal.
Differential diagnosis
 Cyclosporine 5 mg/kg po sid until regres-
sion, then as glucocorticoids.
 Infectious granulomas, (bacterial, fungal)
Many cats' lesions resolve spontaneously over
 Foreign body granulomas
69 months without therapy. Remission can
Neoplasia
be long lived.
Miscellaneous skin diseases in the cat 307
Hypereosinophilic syndrome
Treatment
 Poor prognosis; the disease is poorly respon-
Cause and pathogenesis
sive to therapy and systemic disease is rapidly
fatal.
A rare disease manifesting with persistent idio-
Where cutaneous lesions predominate, the
pathic eosinophilia with diffuse infiltration of
 prognosis is better and cats will survive 2-
the skin and internal organs. Aetiology is un-
4 years. In these cases high doses of steroids
known but it may be an immune mediated
may be beneficial.
disease.
Ulcerative dermatitis with linear
Clinical signs
subepidermal fibrosis
No age, breed or sex predilection.
Cutaneous lesions are uncommon:
Cause and pathogenesis
口冏
 Maculopapular eruptions with erythema,
severe pruritus, and excoriation at any
An idiopathic ulcerative skin disease of the cat of
site.
unknown aetiology. It is not thought to be caused
Systemic signs are common:
by trauma, injection reactions, infection or for-
口
Typically there is infltration of bone mar-
eign bodies. It may be some form of vascular in-
row, lymph nodes, liver spleen and gas-
sult that leads to the production of a non-healing
trointestinal tract.
ulcer.
 Diarrhoea, vomiting and weight loss fre-
 quent finding.
Clinical signs
 No sex, age or breed predilection.
Differential diagnosis
 Lesions are solitary and occur over the dorsal
neck and shoulder area (Figure 19.5).
Cutaneous lesions:
Non-painful; pruritus variable.
口
Eosinophilic granuloma complex
Non-healing ulcer initially 0.5-1.0 cm in di-
口
Idiopathic sterile granulomatous disease
ameter, enlarges over several weeks.
口
Ectoparasitic infestation
Allergy (food, atopy)
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
Haematology shows signs of a peripheral
cosinophilia; biochemical abnormalities will
be present depending on the degree of involve-
ment of internal organs.
Cytology of skin lesions reveals a large num-
ber of eosinophils with basophils.
Skin biopsy reveals signs of a superficial and
Figure 19.5  Idiopathic ulcerative dermatitis affecting the
deep eosinophilic perivascular dermatitis.
back of the neck.
308
3Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Thick adherent crusting over the surface with
Perforating dermatitis
 peripheral thickened skin.
Cats are systemically well.
Cause and pathogenesis
Differential diagnosis
Unusual rare hyperkeratotic condition of the cat
of unknown aetiology. In man these conditions
Injection reaction
are often associated with internal malignancy, di-
Trauma especially bite wound
abetes mellitus or chronic renal failure. No such
Panniculitis (infectious or sterile)
association has been identified in the cat. Lesions
 Neoplasia especially squamous cell carci-
thought to be caused by some abnormality in col-
noma
lagen metabolism.
Burn (cold, heat, chemical)
Clinical signs
Diagnosis
Any site can be affected but often on the dor-
History and clinical signs.
Carefully performed cultures are negative.
sum.
Lesions consist of multiple, frm, conical, hy-
Skin biopsy reveals signs of epidermal ul-
perkeratotic yellow/brown masses, 2-7 mm
ceration and superficial dermal necrosis with
in diameter.
only minimal dermal inflammation. A linear
Appear often in clusters, forming lines.
subepidermal band of superficial fbrosis is
 Non-pruritic, non-painful.
■
seen extending from the periphery of the ulcer
 Lesions cannot be scraped or pulled off.
in chronic lesions.
Treatment
Differential diagnosis
 Identification and therapy of any underlying
Cutaneous horn
disease is important.
Dermatophytosis
Restraint devices such as soft collars, ban-
dages etc. may be helpful to prevent the cat
mutilating the area.
Diagnosis
 Glucocorticoid therapy may be useful in some
cases:
History and clinical signs.
 Prednisolone 2-4 mg/kg po sid until clin-
Routine haematology and biochemistry to
ical remission, then tapering to alternate
check for internal disease.
day and withdrawal. If no response is seen
Skin biopsy reveals signs of a conical exo-
within 4 weeks surgical excision should be
phytic mass containing keratin and degener-
undertaken.
ate collagen. Transepidermal elimination of
Antihistamine therapy (see Chapter 10) or
collagen fibres is seen into the base of the
behaviour modifying drugs (see Chapter 16)
mass.
may be useful in some cases.
Wide surgical excision carries a moderate
prognosis; recurrence can occur.
Treatment
Laser ablation may be useful in some cases.
Prognosis is guarded to poor as many cases
Where concurrent disease such as allergy is
fail to respond to medical therapy and are too
present, management of this can lead to im-
extensive for surgical intervention.
provement in the perforating dermatitis.
Miscellaneous skin diseases in the cat  309
Ascorbic acid (vitamin C) 100 mg po bid may
Routine blood profile to check for in-
be useful leading to resolution within 30 days.
   e  s
Cats may need long-term therapy.
namic function tests to rule out endocrine
disease.
 Skin biopsy is difficult to achieve because of
the fragility of the skin. The dermis is severely
Acquired skin fragility
atrophic leading to folding and twisting of
the sample. Dermal collagen fibres are thin
Cause and pathogenesis
and disorganised. Panniculus is not normally
 present in biopsy samples.
Arare disease of the cat characterised by thin frag-
ile skin. It is a multifactorial disease and can be
associated with a range of underlying diseases:
Treatment
Hyperadrenocorticism
Even if an underlying cause is identified, skin
latrogenic Cushing's syndrome
changes appear to be irreversible.
Diabetes mellitus
Cats are impossible to handle without causing
Hepatic/renal disease
severe skin damage.
Overuse of progestational compounds
 Surgical repair unsuccessful.
Idiopathic
Very poor prognosis.
Clinical signs
Feline orofacial pain syndrome (FOPs)
-sipa1d aq 01 1eadde sieo PIo 01 pase-aIPPT
Cause and pathogenesis
posed.
Skin is thin and fragile and easily torn by only
An uncommon facial pain/mutilation syndrome
minor trauma.
recently recognised in the cat that shows similar-
 Irregular tears of the skin occur and large
ities to trigeminal neuralgia in people.
sheets of skin can be lost.
Partial alopecia often present; unlike cuta-
neous asthenia a major differential diagnosis
Clinical signs
the skin is not hyperextensible.
 No age or sex predilection.
 Predisposed breeds include the Burmese and
Differential diagnosis
occasionally domestic short-haired cats, Bur-
milla and Siamese.
Cutaneous asthenia
 Cats present with exaggerated licking and
Hyperadrenocorticism
chewing movements and pawing at their
Iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome
mouth and will often traumatise their face
Pancreatic paraneoplastic alopecia
(Figure 19.6).
Signs are usually unilateral and may be
episodic or continuous.
Diagnosis
 Episodic signs may be brought on by eating.
Cats often anorexic.
History and clinical signs.
Some cases seem to be associated with
Clinical signs.
oral disease and will improve when the
310Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
 Diagnostic rule outs especially of dental dis-
ease with good quality dental radiographs.
Neurological assessment including MRI scan
 and CSF analysis, which are normal in FOPS.
Treatment
Therapy of any underlying disease especially den-
tal disease, gingivitis.
Drugs that may be useful in FOPS are listed in
Figure 19.6 Suspected case of FOPS.
Table 19.1.
underlying disease process resolves. Four
asoar a sdon
Eosinophilic allergic syndrome
口
Mouth ulceration especially secondary to
calici virus infection or vaccination.
Cutting permanent teeth.
Eosinophilic allergic syndrome is not a specific
口
Dental disease.
disease entity but a spectrum of cutaneous reac-
口
 Routine dental procedures including ex-
tion patterns exhibited by the cat to a wide variety
traction.
of different disease processes.
There can therefore be no one drug that can be
used to control the clinical signs.
Differential diagnosis
Eosinophilic allergic syndrome
encompasses
both the eosinophilic granuloma complex and
 Allergy (atopy, food allergy)
also miliary dermatitis so that it can be subdi-
Sarcoptic mange
vided into four categories:
Dental disease
Epilepsy
(a)  Indolent ulcer (eosinophilic ulcer, rodent
Poisoning
ulcer)
Encephalitis
(b) Eosinophilic plaque
Table 19.1Drugs that may be useful in FOPS
Drug
Dose rate
Details
Phenobarbitone
 2-3 mg/kg po bid 
Life-long therapy may be needed; assess serum
levels: after 2 weeks levels should be 20-25
mg/l; regular hepatic assessment is needed
Carbamazepine
 25 mg po bid (1 00 mg/5 ml stock solution)
 Haematological monitoring is required
 Gabapentin
2.5-5.0 mg/kg po bid/tid 
Selegiline
1.0 mg/kg po sid
Note: None of these drugs are licensed for use in the cat.
Miscellaneous skin diseases in the cat 311
(c)  Allergic miliary dermatitis
(d) Eosinophilic granuloma (linear granuloma,
collagenolytic granuloma)
Miliary dermatitis has been included in the group-
Jo jed suaq se paidanse Aiapim mou si i se su
the same disease process. Histologically, lesions of
miliary dermatitis can be indistinguishable from
those of the eosinophilic plaques.
Any of the different lesions of the complex can
occur in the same cat concurrently.
Each disease will be described for cause and
pathogenesis, clinical signs, differential diagnosis
and diagnosis. Investigation of all four diseases
to determine the underlying cause is very similar
and will be dealt with in a separate section at the
end of the chapter, as will therapy.
Figure 19.8  Indolent ulcer on upper lip of cat.
Indolent ulcer
Cause and pathogenesis
Other lesions found in oral cavity.
Lesions are well circumscribed, red to brown
Cutaneous, mucocutaneous, or oral lesions.
 Many have underlying immune mediated aetiolo-
in colour.
 Alopecic with a raised border, 2 mm to 5 cm
gies including allergies; other lesions may be a
in size (Figure 19.8).
manifestation of excessive grooming leading to a
 Usually asymptomatic and are rarely pruritic
 purely mechanical trauma to the area.
or painful.
 Peripheral lymphadenopathy common.
dinical signs
No age, breed or sex predilection (females
Differential diagnosis
may be at higher risk).
aiun di adn au uo punog Aens
 Infectious ulcers (bacterial, viral, fungal)
(bilaterally less commonly, Figure 19.7).
Trauma
Neoplasia (squamous cell carcinoma, mast
cell tumour)
Diagnosis
This should initially be aimed at confirming
the lesion as an indolent ulcer.
Once this has been established investigation
should be as for all four diseases to identify
an inciting cause (see later in the chapter).
Impression smears stained with Diff-Quik to
assess degree of infection.
Cultures, if carefully performed, are sterile.
Haematology is usually unremarkable; eosi-
Figure 19.7  Bilateral indolent ulcers affecting the top lips.
 nophilia is a rare finding.
312
2Manuai of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Biopsies useful only as a diagnostic rule out.
 Biopsy should be taken as a deep wedge or
punch biopsy of margin of ulcer to include
normal skin if possible. Results reveal a non-
specific picture of a superficial perivascular to
interstitial dermatitis often with fibrosing der-
 matitis. Eosinophils an inconsistent finding.
Eosinophilic plaque
Cause and pathogenesis
Common cutaneous reaction pattern seen in cats.
Figure 19.10 Well-demarcated eosinophilic plaque on the
Most cats have underlying allergic conditions.
ventral abd omen.
Overlap occurs between miliary dermatitis lesions
and eosinophilic plaques. The former condition
Raised round to oval well-demarcated erythe:
can not be easily differentiated from the latter his-
matous lesions (Figure 19.10).
tologically. Miliary dermatitis represents a multi-
Lesions often exudative and ulcerated and
focal distribution of lesions. Eosinophilic plaques
may be secondary infected (Figure 19.11).
 represent the same disease process in a localised
Vary in size from 0.5-5.0 cm in diameter.
form.
Regional lymphadenopathy common.
Clinical signs
Differential diagnosis
 No breed predilection, females may be pre-
disposed.
Infectious granulomas (bacterial, viral, fun-
Can occur in any age but young adults to
gal).
middle-aged cats are predisposed.
Neoplasia (mast cell tumour, metastatic mam-
 Most occur on the ventral abdomen and me-
mary carcinoma, lymphoma).
dial thighs, although occasionally they can be
identified at mucocutaneous junctions.
Diagnosis
Lesions may be single or multiple (Figure
To confrm the lesion as an eosinophilic
19.9) and are usually highly pruritic.
plaque.
Figure 19.9  Eosinophilic plaque on the ventral abdomen of
a cat.
Figure 19.11  Infected plaque on the leg of a cat.
Miscelfaneous skin diseases in the cat 313
Impression smears may be stained with Diff-
Quik to assess cell infiltrate and degree of sec-
ondary infection. Usually eosinophil rich but
will contain neutrophils and bacteria if sec-
ondarily infected.
Cultures, if carefully performed, are sterile.
Haematology reveals eosinophilia as a con-
stant finding.
Biopsies are diagnostic. A biopsy should be
taken from an erythematous plaque with min-
imal erosion or self-inflicted trauma. Results
reveal a hyperplastic superfcial and deep
perivascular
dermatitis with
1 eosinophilia.
Figure 19.13  Miliary dermatitis showing the typical distribu-
Eosinophilic microabscesses may be seen.
tion on the dorsum.
Affergic mifiarydermatitis
 The crusted papules represent primary le-
sions, not the product of self-inflicted trauma;
Cause and pathogenesis
 often there is limited associated alopecia and
lesions are identified by feel.
Miliary dermatitis is a multifactorial cutaneous
Lesions  typically f
 found on dorsal lum-
reaction pattern. It is produced by cutaneous
bosacral area (Figure 19.13), caudo-medial
hypersensitivity reactions; these may be to en-
thighs and neck.
vironmental allergens, ectoparasites or drugs,
 Pruritus moderate to severe.
so-called allergic miliary dermatitis. Histopatho-
 Chronic resolving lesions may appear as small
logically there is overlap between this disease and
melanotic macules.
eosinophilic plaques, which are thought to be a
more localised form of the same disease. Com-
mon lesion in the cat.
Differential diagnosis
 Pemphigus foliaceus
dinical signs
Dermatophytosis
No breed, age or sex predilection has been
Staphylococcal folliculitis
identified.
Dietary
imbalances
(biotin,f
fatty acid
 Multiple discrete erythematous papules with
deficiency)
adherent brown/black crust (Figure 19.12).
Feline poxvirus
Diagnosis
To confirm the lesion as miliary dermatitis.
Impression smears may be stained with Diff-
Quik to assess cellular infiltrate, which is usu-
ally eosinophil rich, and degree of infection.
Cultures taken carefully for bacteria and
fungi are sterile.
Haematology reveals an eosinophilia as a
consistent finding, often with basophilia.
 Biopsies are non-diagnostic but help as a diag-
nostic rule out. A biopsy should be taken from
non-traumatised recently erupted papules, es-
Figure 19.12  Multiple discrete lesions of miliary dermatitis.
 pecially between the shoulder blades. Results
314Manuai of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Figure 19.14  Eosinophilic granuloma on the caudal thigh.
Figure 19.16  Eosinophilic granuloma showing typical con-
figuration on the neck.
 reveal a superficial and deep perivascular to
interstitial dermatitis with eosinophilic infil-
Appear as well-circumscribed, raised yellow
trate accompanied by mast cells.
to pink plaques with a linear configuration
(Figure 19.16).
 Ulcerated surface can be covered in pinpoint
Eosinophilic granuloma
white foci of collagen degeneration.
Peripheral lymphadenopathy variable.
Cause and pathogenesis
Pruritus usually mild.
Chin oedema, an asymptomatic swelling of
A common cutaneous, mucocutaneous and oral
the lower lip, is commonly caused by eosino-
mucosal lesion, which is thought to be a manifes-
philic granuloma (Figure 19.17).
tation of allergic disease.
Clinical signs
Differential diagnosis
 No age or breed predilection, although fe-
 Infectious granulomas (bacterial, viral, fun-
males may be at higher risk.
gal).
Lesions most commonly seen on caudal thighs
 Neoplasia (mast cell tumour, metastatic mam-
(Figure 19.14), face and oral cavity, but may
mary carcinoma, lymphoma).
be seen on any site (Figure 19.15).
Figure 19.17 Chin oedema caused by an eosinophilic
Figure 19.15 Eosinophilic granuloma on the footpad.
 granuloma.
Miscellaneous skin diseases in the cat 315
Diagnosis
 Empirical therapy for ectoparasites should be
undertaken even if no evidence is found on
To confirm the lesion as an eosinophilic gran-
samples. The fastidious grooming habits of
uloma.
the cat can effciently remove most parasites
 Impression smears may be stained with Diff-
Quik to assess the cellular infltrate, which
from the coat. For specific therapeutic agents,
see regimes under parasites in Chapter 7.
is eosinophil rich with occasional neutrophils
Minimally a rapid acting flea adulticide
and bacteria if secondary infection is present.
should be used, an acaricide and a trial pe-
Cultures, if carefully performed, are sterile.
riod with lime sulphur.
Haematology reveals an eosinophilia as a
consistent finding.
Food trial
Biopsies are(
 diagnostic. A wedge biopsy
should be taken from an ulcerated area with
This can be started at the same time as the ectopar-
white foci with minimal erosion or self-
asite control or after 1 month empirical therapy
inflicted trauma to include a normal margin
for parasites.
of skin. Results reveal a nodular to diffuse
Food should either be
granulomatous dermatitis with multifocal ar-
eas of collagen degeneration. Eosinophils and
home cooked to contain an unusual protein
multinucleated giant cells are common.
source not normally consumed by the cat, or
 proprietary selected protein hypoallergenic
diet (for a more detailed discussion of such
Investigation of eosinophilic allergic
diets, see section on food allergy in Chapter
syndrome
10), and
food trial should be for a minimum of 4-8
When the cat has been identified as having one or
weeks.
more of the following:
Drug withdrawal
Indolent ulcer
Where any drug has been prescribed prior to com-
 Eosinophilic plaque
mencement of the lesions these should, where pos-
Allergic miliary dermatitis
sible, be discontinued.
Eosinophilic granuloma
Allergy testing
The following protocol should be undertaken in
Where specific allergy testing is available this
all cases of eosinophilic allergic syndrome, but
should be undertaken as the next diagnostic step.
definitely in all cases that are
Intradermal allergy testing or in vitro serum al-
lergy testing may be undertaken. This allows
 poorly responsive to anti-inflammatory ther-
identification of environmental allergens such as
apy,
house dust mites, pollens, dust, animal danders,
 recurrent, and
and fungal moulds (for a more detailed discussion
severe/multiple (i.e. more than one compo-
of such tests, see section on atopy in Chapter 10).
nent of the syndrome is present).
Therapy of eosinophilic allergic
Ectoparasite assessment
syndrome
Wet paper test for fleas.
Acetate tape from coat for superficial para-
This ideally should not be undertaken until the
sites, e.g. Cheyletiella, Otodectes, Trombic-
 cat has had strict parasite control.
ula, lice, fur mites and flea faeces.
However, it can be used in combination with
Skin scrapings for parasites as above plus Sar-
parasite control when the cat is uncomfortable
coptes, Notoedres and Demodex.
on initial presentation.
316
6Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Therapy should not replace even the most basic
radiotherapy, cryotherapy, laser therapy, and
of work-ups. Inflammatory therapy can be started
surgical excision.
if the lesions are sterile, i.e. negative cultures and
Prognosis is variable depending on the under-
 no bacteria on impression smears.
lying trigger for the disease and whether it can
Medical therapy:
be identified and managed. Where an inciting
cannot be identified, cats may need long-term
Anti-inflammatory t
therapy should not be
 anti-inflammatory therapy.
given for more than 3-4 weeks at induction
dose rates. Therapy should be reassessed if
 no clinical improvement is seen by this stage.
Selected references and further reading
Once lesions have resolved, therapy should be
tapered and withdrawn.
Glucocorticoids should initially be given daily
Bevier D. (2004) Miliary dermatitis. In: Camp-
to achieve remission and then cut to an alter-
bell, K.L. (ed) Small Animal Dermatology
nate day regime and tapered:
Secrets. Pp. 214-219. Hanley and Belfus,
 Prednisolone 2.0 mg/kg po bid until le-
Philadelphia
sions have resolved
Guaguere, E. and Prelaud, P. (2000) Efficacy of
Dexamethasone 0.4 mg/kg po sid
cyclosporine in the treatment of 12 cases of
口
Triamcinolone 0.8 mg/kg po sid
eosinophilic granuloma complex. Vet Derma-
 Methylprednisolone acetate 20 mg/cat sq
tol, 11, 31
for two injections 2 weeks apart, then
Heath, S. et al. (2001) Orofacial pain syndrome
maximally every 3 months after that
in cats. Vet Rec, 149(21), 660
Where intradermal allergy testing identifies
Mason, K. and Burton, G. (2000) Eosinophilic
environmental allergens, specifc avoidance
granuloma complex. In: Guaguere, E. and
Prelaud, P. (eds) A Practical Guide to Feline
Immunomodulating therapy may be used in
Dermatology. Pp. 12.1-12.9. Blackwell Sci-
severe cases that are unresponsive to steroids.
ence, Oxford
For details on monitoring, see section on pem-
Medleau, L. and Hnilica, K. (2006) Miscella-
phigus:
neous cutaneous disorders of the Cat. In: Small
口
Chlorambucil 0.1-0.2 mg/kg every 24-48
Animal Dermatology: A Color Atlas and Ther-
hours
apeutic Guide. 2nd edn.Pp. 344-358.WB
Cyclosporine 5 mg/kg po sid
Saunders, Philadelphia
口
Doxycycline 5-10 mg/kg po bid
Rees, C. (2004) Feline eosinophilic granuloma
Progestational compounds such as megestrol
complex. In: Campbell, K.L. (ed) Small Ani-
acetate or medroxyprogesterone acetate are
mal Dermatology Secrets. pp. 220-223. Han-
effective in many cases but the side effects of
ley and Belfus, Philadelphia
such drugs outweigh any therapeutic benefits
Rosenkrantz, W.S. (1993) Feline eosinophilic
and should not therefore be used.
 granuloma complex. In: Griffin, C.E.et al. (eds)
 Essential fatty acid supplementation omega 3
Current Veterinary Dermatology: The Science
and omega 6 fatty acid containing products
and Art of Therapy. Pp. 319-324. Mosby, St
have been shown to be useful in some cases
Louis,
of miliary dermatitis and eosinophilic granu-
Scott, D.W. (1990) An unusual ulcerative der
lomas.
matitis associated with linear subepidermal fi-
brosis in eight cats. Feline Pract, 18, 8-11
Surgical therapy
Scott, D.W. et al. (2001) Miscellaneous Skin Dis-
eases Muller and Kirk's Small Animal Derma-
Other modes of therapy that have occa-
tology.6th edn. pp. 1125-1183. WB Saunders,
sionally been successful in therapy include
Philadelphia
Environmental skin disease
Solar dermatitis
Staffordshire bull terriers and German
short-haired pointer.
 Lesions can be found on the nose or on
Cause and pathogenesis
the trunk.
Nasal disease:
Phototoxic reaction seen in poorly pigmented
 Lesions can be found on the planum
skin of dogs and cats. Initially sun exposure leads
nasale especially in dogs with 
non-
to sunburn but with repeated exposure to ultra-
pigmented sparsely haired skin.
violet light pre-neoplastic lesions such as actinic
Truncal disease:
keratoses and squamous cell carcinoma in situ can
Affects the ventral and lateral aspects of
develop in addition to squamous cell carcinoma.
the abdomen and inner thighs.
口
 Lesions also seen on flanks, tail tip or dis-
tal extremities.
Clinical signs
Initial lesions in all cases consist of erythema
and scale.
Cats:
Chronic lesions show signs of alopecia, exu-
No sex predilection. Generally seen in
dation, crusting and ulceration.
older animals and those with poorly pig-
Lesions heal with scarring.
mented skin and hair, especially those that
Neoplastic transformation can occur to de-
like to sunbathe.
 Lesions are found most commonly on ear
velop to squamous cell carcinoma.
tips, eyelids, nose and lips (Figure 20.1).
Dogs:
Differential diagnosis
口
 No sex predilection. Skin disease seen on
older animals especially outdoor dogs and
Feline lesions:
those that sunbathe.
口
 Discoid lupus erythematosus
Predisposed breeds include white Box-
口
 Dermatophytosis
ers, bull terriers, beagles, Dalmatians,
Vasculitis
318
Manual of SkinDiseases of the Dog and Cat
Where secondary infection is present it needs
to be treated with appropriate antibiotics for
a minimum of 2-3 weeks.
Photoprotection:
Sunblock is useful using zinc oxide or ti-
口冏
tanium dioxide applied to affected areas
twice daily. Preparations should be at least
factor 30 and should be waterproof.
 Dogs with severe inflammation often require
steroids:
口
 Systemic prednisolone 1.0 mg/kg daily.
D
Topical betamethasone, dexamethasone,
Figure 20.1  Solar dermatitis affecting the nose and ears
 triamcinolone, prednisolone, hydrocorti-
sone creams, which are best suited for
short-term use only; may be used on lo-
Canine nasal lesions:
calised areas.
口
 Discoid lupus erythematosus
Systemic treatment can be employed with the
口
Dermatomyositis
following:
口
 Pemphigus foliaceus/erythematosus
口
Beta carotene 30 mg po bid for 30 days
 Drug eruption
then once daily for life.
口冏
Sterile eosinophilic furunculosis
Vitamin A 8,000-10,000 IU po sid or ac-
口冏
 Dermatophytosis
itretin 0.5-1.0 mg/kg po sid may be useful.
Neoplasia
Prognosis is very variable depending on le-
Canine truncal lesions:
sions and their chronicity. Where repeat ex-
口冏
Demodicosis
posure and damage occurs, sunlight-induced
口冏
 Dermatophytosis
neoplasms will develop either squamous cell
口冏
Superficial pyoderma
carcinoma or haemangioma/ haemangiosar-
口
 Drug eruption
coma.
口冏
 Neoplasia
Actinic keratosis
Diagnosis
See Chapter 21.
 Clinical signs and history of sun exposure.
Skin biopsy reveals in early lesions epider-
mal hyperplasia with non-specific superficial
Burns
 perivascular dermatitis. Vacuolated epider-
mal cells and dyskeratotic keratinocytes may
be seen together with basophilic degeneration
Burn management is often intensive and spe-
of elastin (solar elastosis). In chronic lesions
cialised.
the epidermis changes from hyperplastic to
Only a brief outline of clinical signs and treat-
dysplastic but there is no penetration of the
 ment will be provided here. The reader is referred
basement membrane zone.
to more detailed text for further information.
Cause and pathogenesis
Treatment
Types and extent of lesions depend on initial in-
 Avoid further sun exposure especially be-
sult. Burns are uncommon in dogs and rare in
tween 8.00 a.m. and 5.00 p.m.
cats.
Environmental skin diseases  319
Figure 20.2 Chemical burn on dog's tongue and face.
 Inciting factors:
Strong chemicals (Figure 20.2)
Figure 20.4  Close-up of Figure 20.3 showing tapering areas
Electricity
of coagulation necrosis.
Solar radiation
Microwave radiation
Heat (Figures 20.3 and 20.4)
Heals without scarring
 Full thickness burns - all cutaneous structures
Categories of burns:
damaged:
Partial  thickness burns involving epider-
口
Extensive scarring without surgical treat-
ment
mis/superficial dermis:
Clinical signs
Cutaneous lesions:
口
Often lesions not obvious for 24-48
hours.
Skin hard and dry, hair may hide full ex-
tent of lesions.
Secondary infection with Gram negative
organisms especially Pseudomonas aerug-
wosa occurs after 3-5 days leading to sup-
puration.
Typical lesions of a chemical or thermal
burn are tapering areas of coagulation
necrosis of epidermis.
 Non-cutaneous lesions:
口
These seen when greater than 25% of
body involved.
Figure 20.3  Full thickness burns on the ventral abdomen of
口
Septicaemia, shock, renal failure, anae-
a dog.
mia.
320Manuai of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Differential diagnosis
Clinical signs
 Drug eruption
Lesions tend to be seen on the extremities es-
Vasculitis
pecially ear and tail tips as well as the digits.
 Erythema multiforme/toxic epidermal necrol-
Skin is pale and cold whilst frozen; once
ysis
thawed, a progression of clinical signs are
recognised ranging from erythema and pain
to necrosis and sloughing in severe cases.
Diagnosis
 History and clinical signs.
Differential diagnosis
Vasculitis especially cold agglutinin disease.
Treatment
Diagnosis
Treatment of the animal:
口
 -Je Apoq %s< Aeiadsa) sas anaaas u
 History and clinical signs.
fected) general assessment of the animal
is essential with routine haematology and
biochemistry including electrolyte levels,
Treatment
renal function and hydrated status. Fluid
therapy and supportive nutritional sup-
Rapid thawing of frozen tissue should be per-
plements should be given on the basis of
formed with warm water to restore the blood
blood profiles.
supply to the area.
Treatment of the lesions:
Any areas of necrosis and sloughing will heal
 Clean with antiseptic agent preferably one
口
spontaneously.
with activity against Gram negative bac-
In severe cases surgical resection of necrotic
teria, e.g. EDTA tris.
tissue may be necessary.
口
Further exposure to cold should be avoided
necrotic skin.
 to prevent subsequent damage.
Topical and systemic antibacterials with
good activity against Gram negative bac-
teria, e.g. silver sulphadiazine topically
and fluorinated quinolones systemically.
Irritant contact dermatitis
Glucocorticoids are contraindicated in
most cases.
Cause and pathogenesis
Irritant contact dermatitis should be distin-
guished from contact hypersensitivity. Irritant
Frostbite
contact dermatitis causes signs in all exposed ani-
mals without a previous period of sensitisation. It
Cause and pathogenesis
is seen when cats have fallen into a chemical, e.g.
paints, disinfectants. Because cats are fastidious
Frostbite is caused through prolonged exposure
 groomers they often ingest large amounts of toxic
to low environmental temperature or contact
 or corrosive material in attempts to clean their
with frozen objects. The degree of damage to the
coats. Ingestion of the irritant may not only cause
skin is dependent on the insult to the skin and the
 gastrointestinal ulceration including the mouth
skin that is affected. Rare disease in domesticated
but may also show signs of systemic poisoning.
dogs and cats.
The reaction pattern that is seen depends on the
Environmental skin diseases  321
Figure 20.5  Severe contact irritation after application of flea
collar.
type of irritant as to whether it is solid, which is
less likely to penetrate the hair coat than a liquid.
Types of irritant include the following:
Figure 20.6 Severe contact irritant reaction on scrotal skin.
Corrosive in the form of a strong acid or al-
kaline:
intradermal penetration by parasites, e.g.
 Cause immediate damage, severe reaction
hookworm, Strongyloides,
often a chemical burn.
allergy (contact, atopy, food).
口
Soaps, detergents, topical insecticides (espe-
cially flea collars, Figure 20.5):
 Prolonged/repeated exposure is required.
Diagnosis
 History, especially where multiple animals are
Clinical signs
affected, and clinical signs.
 Skin biopsy is non-diagnostic except as a rule
out. There is overlap histopathologically be-
Irritation occurs on hairless or sparsely haired
tween contact irritation and hypersensitivity,
skin, especially the scrotal skin (Figure 20.6)
in entire males and the perianal area.
which produces a superficial perivascular der-
 Shampoos, creams and other liquids have the
matitis.
ability to penetrate the hair and can cause
irritation where they touch the skin (Figure
20.7).
Lesions consist of papules and erythema, se-
vere pruritus leading to self-inflicted trauma.
Differential diagnosis
Where the irritant is a liquid, it is usually still
present in the coat and there are therefore few
other likely causes.
Where the irritant is non-liquid and affects
hairless areas consider
Figure 20.7   Oil on legs of cat after falling into a drum of oil.
322
2Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Provocative testing should be avoided espe-
cially if there is potential for severe reactions.
Treatment
 Identification of irritant substances plus re-
moval from the animals environment.
Symptomatic relief with topical or systemic
glucocorticoids:
口
Systemic prednisolone 1 mg/kg once daily
7-10 days.
Topical steroid creams; short-term use .
Pentoxifylline at a dose of 10-25 mg/kg
Figure 20.8  Well-circumscribed hyperkeratotic plaque on
bid/tid is useful in cases where there is a hy-
the elbow of a Doberman typical of callus.
persensitivity component.
口
dermatophytosis
口
demodicosis
Callus
口
sarcoptes
neoplasia
Cause and pathogenesis
Diagnosis
Lesions develop over bony pressure points as
a protective response to pressure-induced is-
History and clinical signs.
chaemia and inflammation. Common in dogs,
Biopsy is inappropriate except where neo-
very rare in cats.
plasia is a potential differential diagnosis. It
Predisposing factors:
reveals signs of epidermal hyperplasia with
orthokeratotic to parakeratotic hyperkerato-
Giant/large breeds
sis, follicular keratosis and dilated follicular
 Hard bedding/wood, concrete
cysts.
Clinical signs
Treatment
 No sex predisposition. Seen in middle-aged to
old dogs especially those who are less ambu-
Padding either within the environment as a
latory. Dobermans may be predisposed.
soft bed or on dog as, e.g., elbow pads.
Callus forms over bony prominences espe-
Surgical removal inadvisable as often healing
 cially elbows, hocks and sternum in deep-
 is poor and lesions will reform.
chested dogs.
 Lesions form as oval hyperkeratotic plaques
with associated alopecia (Figure 20.8). In un-
Callus derrmatitis
complicated cases there is no ulceration or
exudation.
Cause and pathogenesis
 They are non-pruritic and not painful.
Callus formed over a pressure point is contin-
Differential diagnosis
ually traumatised leading to secondary infec-
tion.
 Localised areas of
 Predisposing factors as callus.
Environmental skin diseases  323
Figure 20.11 Callus dermatitis in a recumbent Great Dane.
Figure 20.9 Callus dermatitis over elbow.
Differential diagnosis
As callus as well as
Clinical signs
口
vasculitis
chronic scabies
No sex predisposition. Seen in middle-aged to
old dogs especially those who are less ambu-
latory.
Diagnosis
Callus forms over bony prominences espe-
History and clinical signs.
cially elbows (Figure 20.9), hocks and ster-
num (Figure 20.10) in deep-chested dogs.
Cytology of exudate reveals keratin debris,
Oval hyperkeratotic plaques become ulcer-
pyogranulomatous inflammatory infltrate,
ated (Figure 20.11), fistulated with exuda-
free hair shafts and bacteria are usually also
tion due to secondary infection. Lesions are
present.
Culture and sensitivity of exudate, collected
painful.
 Foreign body granulomas can form due to
by squeezing lesion.
Skin biopsy reveals signs as callus above.
embedded hair.
 In chronic cases that have been poorly respon-
sive to antibiotic therapy; tissue culture may
also be useful in case of anaerobic infection.
Treatment
As callus plus.
Systemic antibiotics based on culture and sen-
sitivity for 6-12 weeks atleast 10 days beyond
clinical cure, lesions reassessed by cytology
every 2 weeks.
Topical antibiotics without glucocorticoids
based on sensitivity, e.g. fusidic acid, may be
useful.
Antibacterial soaks with benzoyl peroxide gel
(2.5%) or salicylic acid; urea-based gels can
Figure 20.10 Callus dermatitis on sternum.
be useful to moisturise and clean the area.
324 Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
These products should not be used without
Diagnosis
additional environmental measures else soft-
ening the lesions may aggravate the condition.
History and clinical signs.
Surgical excision is not recommended.
 Cytology of uncomplicated lesions taken by
fine needle aspirate reveals a haemorrhagic
infltrate with no evidence of inflammatory
cells. Where lesions have become secondar-
Pyotraumatic dermatitis
ily infected, bacteria and a pyogranulomatous
inflammatory infiltrate are present.
See Chapter 4.
 Skin biopsy reveals signs of cystic struc-
tures surrounded by areas of granulation
tissue.
Intertrigo
Treatment
See Chapter 4.
Padding either within the environment as a
soft bed or on dog as, e.g., elbow pads, soft
Hygroma
bandages for 2-3 weeks can prevent further
trauma and can on occasions lead to resolu-
Cause and pathogenesis
tion of the lesions.
Systemic antibiotics based on culture and sen-
sitivity are necessary for infected lesions; these
Hygroma is a cyst-like bursa that develops over a
can be required for 4-6 weeks.
 pressure point especially the hock. It is caused by
Surgical drainage and removal may be nec-
repeated trauma to the site. Uncommon disease
 essary in cases that do not respond to medi-
in dogs, not recorded in cats.
 cal therapy and environmental modification.
Risk of wound breakdown is high and this ap-
Clinicaf signs
proach should only be employed when others
fail.
 No sex predilection. Commonly seen in large
and giant breeds.
 Lesions form as fluctuant areas of swelling
Selected references and further reading
over a bony prominence.
Their distribution is the sane as for callus over
the hocks, elbows and less commonly the ster-
Dunstan, R.W. et al. (1998) The light and the
num.
skin. In: Kwochka, K.W. et al. (eds) Advances
Where the lesions are continually trauma-
in Veterinary Dermatology. Vol. 3. pp. 3-36.
tised, they will become secondarily infected
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford
leading to the formation of granulation tissue
Medleau, L. and Hnilica, K. (2006) Miscella-
within the cyst' of abscessation and fistula-
neous cutaneous disorders of the Dog. In: Small
tion.
Animal Dermatology: A Color Atlas and Ther-
apeutic Guide. 2nd edn. Pp. 327-342. WB
Saunders, Philadelphia
Differential diagnosis
Rosychuk, R.A. (2004) Environmental der-
matoses. In: Campbell, K.L. (ed) Small Animal
Neoplasia
Dermatology Secrets. Pp. 312-323. Hanley
 Bacterial or fungal granuloma
and Belfus, Philadelphia
Environmental skin diseases  325
Scott, D.W. et al. (2001) Environmental skin dis-
Management. 2nd edn. pp. 87-141. Williams
Ease.Muller and Kirk's Small Animal Derma-
and Wilkins, Baltimore
tology. 6th edn. pp. 1073-1111. WB Saunders,
Walder, E.J. and Conroy, J.D. (1994) Con-
Philadelphia
tact dermatitis in dogs and cats: pathogen-
Swaim, S.F. and Henderson, R.A. (1997) Spe-
esis, histopathology, experimental induction
cific types of wounds. In: Swaim, S.F. and
and case reports. Vet Dermatol, 5, 149-
Henderson, R.A. (eds) Small Animal Wound
162
Neoplastic and non-neoplastic
tumours
This chapter is not designed to be a definitive
Epithelial neoplasia
 guide to neoplasia in the dog and cat. Only
commonly occurring skin tumours will be
Epithelial tumour can be categorised according
described.
to their origin and can be subdivided into differ-
The reader is referred to more specialised texts
 ent subgroups; see Table 21.1 below. The most
for further details.
common tumours in each group are described
in the dog in Tables 21.2-21.6 and in the cat in
Tables 21.7-21.9.
Table 21.1  Epithelial tumours in the dog and cat.
1) Epidermal tumours
 2) Hair follicle tumours
Papilloma
口
Fibroadnexal hamartoma
口
Viral plaques
口
Follicular cyst
口
Actinic keratosis
口
Infundibular keratinising acanthoma
口
Bowenoid in situ carcinoma
口
Tricholemmoma
口
Basal cell carcinoma
Trichoblastoma
口
 Basosquamous carcinoma
口
Pilomatrixoma
.
Squamous cell carcinoma
口
Trichoepithelioma
(continued)
Neoplastic and non-neopfastic tumours
327
Table 21.1 (continued)
3) Tumours of adnexal glands
Sebaceous gland ducts
Apocrine ducts
口
Sebaceous duct cyst
口
Apocrine ductal adenoma
口
Sebaceous ductal adenoma
口
Apocrine ductal adenocarcinoma
口
Sebaceous ductal adenocarcinoma 
Sebaceous gland
Apocrine glands
口
 Nodular sebaceous hyperplasia
口
Apocrine cyst
口
Sebaceous haematoma
口
Apocrine cystomitosis (canine)
口
Sebaceous nevus
口
Apocrine adenoma
口
Sebaceous adenoma
口
Complex and mixed apocrine adenoma
口
Sebaceous epithelioma
口
Apocrine carcinoma
口
Sebaceous carcinoma
口
Complex and mixed apocrine adenocarcinoma
Hepatoid gland
口
Hepatoid gland adenoma
口
 Hepatoid gland epithelioma
口
Hepatoid gland carcinoma
Table 21.2Epidermal tumours in dogs.
Epidermal tumour
Age incidence
 Breed predisposition 
Site/appearance
Therapy
Papilloma
 See chapter on viral skin disease
Actinic keratosis
Older dogs
Sunbathing dogs,
Single or multiple
Topical
 Common, epithelial 
 Dalmatians, pit bull 
plaques, papillate
 anti-inflammatory
plaques, not neoplastic
terriers, harlequin
lesions, crust, scale >1
snup
induced by solar radiation 
Great Dane, beagles
cm. Commonly
can progress to squamous
ventrum and thighs 
cell carcinoma (SCC)
Basal cell carcinoma
7-10 years
Cocker spaniel,
 Plaques and 
Surgical excision
Uncommon low grade
 Kerry blue terrier.
umbilicated nodules
Electrosurgery
 malignancy; incidence of 
Shetland sheepdog.
<1 cm in diameter 
Cryosurgery
recurrence and metastasis
springer spaniel,
ulcerated and 
low
miniature poodle,
alopecic. Often 
Siberian husky
pigmented black or
blue. Site - usually
truncal (Figure 21.1}
SCC
>9 years
 Scottish terrier,
 Proliferative -
Surgical excision 
 Locally invasive, slow to
Pekinese, Boxer,
papillomatous often
Cryosurgery
metastasise; sun and 
standard poodle,
ulcerated 
Electrosurgery
chronically damaged skin,
schnauzer,
Ulcerative -
Hyperthermia
papilloma virus all been 
 Dalmatians
 crateriform crusted
Radiotherapy
implicated; very common
Nail bed - large
ulcers (Figure 21.2)
breeds, black
Site - trunk, limbs,
coated esp.
digits, scrotum, lips
Labradors
and nose
328Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Table 21.3 Hair follicle tumours in the dog.
Hair follicle tumours
Age incidence 
 Breed predisposition 
Appearance/site
Therapy
Fibroadnexal hamartoma
Middle-aged
Large breeds
Solitary, firm,
Topical and 
 Scar tissue formed
to old dogs
especially Labrador
circumscribed
systemic
 post-inflammation
retrievers, basset
dome-shaped masses 1-4
retinoids; wide
 results in entrapment
hounds
cm in diameter
surgical excision
 and distortion of 
 Site - distal legs, pressure 
folliculosebaceous units;
 points and interdigital 
areas
Follicutarcyst
Middle-aged 
Boxer, Shih-Tzu,
Solitary, firm, intradermal
Benign neglect;
 Simple benign sac like
s8op plo 01
 miniature schnauzers
nodule 0.2-2.0 cm; cyst
surgical removal
structure with epidermal
and Old English
 contents semisolid,
lining: cell type 
sheepdogs
caseous, granular or
determined by level of 
doughy
follicle affected 
Infundibutarkeratinising
<5 years
Norwegian
Circumscribed dermal/sc
Surgical
acanthoma
elkhounds, keeshond,
masses
excision;
 Uncommon benign
Cerman shepherd
0.5-4.0 cm; pore opens
retinoids -
follicular neoplasm; not
dog, Old English 
onto surface containing
isotretinoin or
invasive or metastatic
sheepdog
keratinised plaque;
etretinate 1.0
 anywhere on body (Figure
mg/kg sid may
21.3}
need long-term 
Tricholemmoma
5-13 years
Afghan hounds
Firm, oval 1-7 cm;
Surgical excision 
 Rare benign follicular
head and neck
 neoplasm; rarely
invasive or metastatic
Trichoblastoma
6-9 years
 Poodles, cocker
 Solitary firm, alopecic,
Surgical excision 
 Replace most of tumour
spaniel, Kerry blue 
pigmented nodules
called basal cell
terrier, Bichon Frise,
dome-shaped, polypoid 
tumours; uncommon
Shetland sheepdog.
1-2 cm; head (base of
benign follicular
husky
ear), neck
 neoplasm, rarely
 metastatic
Pilomatrixoma
>5 years
Kerry blue terrier,
Well-circumscribed
Surgical excision 
Uncommon benign
poodle, Old English 
solid/cystic tumour 1-10 
 follicular neoplasm;
sheepdog
cm in diameter
 rarely invasive or
Site - shoulder, lateral 
 metastatic
thorax and dorsum
Trichoepithelioma
>5 years
Golden retriever,
Usually solitary, solid or
Surgical excision 
Uncommon benign
basset, German
cystic, circumscribed
 neoplasm; rarely
shepherd dog, cocker
0.5-15 cm in diameter;
invasive or metastatic
spaniel, Irish setter
 ulceration and alopecic
 common; site - dorsum,
thorax, limbs
Neoplastic and non-neoplastic tumours
329
Table 21.4 Adnexal gland tumours of the dog - sebaceous gland.
Adnexal gland tumours
(1} Sebaceous gland
Age incidence Breed predisposition
Site/appearance
Therapy
Nodutar sebaceous
>9 years
Cocker spaniel,
Solitary well-circumscribed 
Surgical excision; laser
hyperplasia
poodle, wheaten
yellow/white alopecia, firm,
ablation; cryosurgery:
 Common benign
terrier, beagle.
dome-shaped, papillate,
isotretinoin 1-2 mg/kg
hyperplastic lesions
dachshund,
plaque 3 mm to 1 cm; can 
po sid until lesion
Manc hester terrier.
be melanotic; limb, trunk,
regression; acitretin
miniature schnauzer
face (eyelids, ears)
0.5-1.0 mg/kg po sid
until regression;
monitor liver function
Sebaceous adenoma
>9 years
Cocker spaniel,
 Solitary or multiple,
Surgical excision;
Common benign
husky, miniature
dome-shaped, papillate,
 other treatment as
neoplasms; no
poodle, beagle 
yellow or opalescent <1 cm 
 nodular sebaceous
 metastatic potential
Samoyed, dachshund
 Eyelids and limbs (Figure
hyperplasia
21.4)
Sebaceous epithelioma
>9 years
Shih-Tzu, Lhasa apso,
 As sebaceous adenoma 2
Surgical excision
Fairly common, can be
malamute plus as
mm-3 cm. Eyelid and head
locally aggressive,
sebaceous adenoma
metastasis rare
Sebaceous carcinoma
>9 years
Cocker spaniel, 
Solitary nodules similar
Surgical excision;
Rare malignant
 cavalier King Charles 
 appearance to sebaceous
radiotherapy
 neoplasms, locally
spaniel, Scottish
adenoma but 2.5-7.5 cm
aggressive, metastasis
terrier, husky
ulceration common. Head
rare
and limbs (Figure 21.5)
Table 21.5 Adnexal gland tumours of the dog - hepatoid gland.
Adnexal gland tumours
(2} Hepatoid gland
Age incidence 
 Breed predisposition 
Site/appearance
Therapy
Mepatoid gland
Older intact
Cocker spaniel,
Multiple or solitary
Castration and tumour
adenoma
male dogs
Samoyed, husky.
 slow growing firm
 removal in intact
 Benign growths derived
>8 years
English bulldog and 
round to lobular
 males, removal alone 
from circumanal or
beagles
dermal nodules; vary
in others;
hepatoid glands; may be
from several mm to 10 
 cryosurgery; laser
secondary to androgen
cm; site - perianal skin
 ablation
stimulation;
common benign lesion
Hepatoid gland
Older male
Artic circle breeds
Similar to adenomas
 Not hormonal 
carcinoma
and female
and German
but larger at 2 cm + in
influenced;
Malignant neoplasm of
s8op
shepherd dogs
diameter; can be
no response to
hepatoid gland;
regardless of
aggressive poorly
 castration; wide
metastasis common in
 neuter status 
circumscribed and
 surgical excision
 poorly differentiated
ulcerated;
combined with
carcinoma, rare in
 site - perianal skin,
radiation or 
 well-differentiated
rare
chemotherapy if
lesions
excision incomplete
330Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Table 21.6 Adnexal gland tumours of the dog - apocrine gland.
Adnexal gland tumours
(3} Apocrine glands
Age incidence Breed predisposition
Site/appearance
Therapy
Apocrine cyst
>6 years
Old English
 Solitary, well-defined tense
Benign neglect;
Common non-neoplastic
sheepdogs,
 or fluctuant bullous nodules 
 surgical removal
lesion; do not
Weimaraner
 several mm-cm in diameter;
metastasise
cyst content clear and
watery; site - head, neck,
legs and dorsal trunk
Apocrine adenoma
Average
Golden retriever,
Solitary raised alopecic
 Benign neglect;
 Uncommon benign
9 years
German shepherd
 well-circumscribed dermal 
surgical removal
neoplasm derived from 
 dog, malamutes,
 or subcut tumours with
 apocrine glands; do not 
chow chows
bluish colour; may be
metastasise
ulcerated size 0.5-4.0 cm;
 site - head, neck, trunk and
legs
Apocrine carcinoma
Average
Golden retriever,
 Solitary growth similar to
Wide surgical excision
Uncommon malignant
10 years
German shepherd
adenoma; 0.5- 10 cm
tumour; locally invasive
dog, Norwegian 
diameter; site - head neck,
and recur; 20% go to
elkhound 
trunk and legs
lymph node and have
systemic spread
Table 21.7 Epidermal tumours in the cat.
Epidermal tumour
Age incidenceBreed predisposition 
Site/appearance
Therapy
Papilloma
See chapter on viral skin disease
Actinic keratosis
Older animals White cats
Single or multiple plaques,
Topical
Common, epithelial 
papillate lesions, crust,
anti-inflammatory
 plaques induced by solar
scale >1 cm; commonly
sanup
radiation can progress to
pinna, nose and eyelids
SCC
(Figure 21.6)
Basal celf carcinoma
Average age
No breed
 Plaques and umbilicated 
Surgical excision;
 Uncommon low grade
10 years
 predilection
nodules <0.5 cm in 
electrosurgery:
malignancy; incidence 
recognised
diameter ulcerated and
cryosurgery
 of recurrence and
alopecic; often pigmented
 metastasis low
black or blue; site - nose,
face and ears (Figure 21.7)
SCC
5 years +
White cats - risk is
Proliferative -
Surgical excision;
 Locally invasive, slow to 
average age
1 3x higher than
papillomatous often
cryosurgery;
 metastasise; sun and 
11  years
other coloured cats
ulcerated; ulcerative -
electrosurgery:
chronically damaged 
crateriform crusted ulcers
hyperthermia;
skin, papilloma virus all
(Figure 21.8); site - eyelids
radiotherapy
 been implicated 
(Figure 21.9), nasal planum 
and pinnae
Neoplastic and non-neoplastic tumours
166
Figure
21.1Solitary well-circumscribed basal
cell
Figure 21.4 Sebaceous adenoma on the foot of a dog
carcinoma.
Figure 21.5 Sebaceous carcinoma of the interdigital space
Figure 21.2
2 Ulcerative squamous cell carcinoma on the
of an English bull terrier.
ventral abdomen of a Staffordshire bull terrier.
Figure 21.3 Intracutaneous cornifying epithelioma in a
Figure 21.6  Actinic keratosis of ear tips.
Norwegian elkhound.
332
2Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Table 21.8 Adnexal gland tumours in the cat - sebaceous gland
Adnexal gland tumours 
(1) Sebaceous gland 
Age incidence
Breed predisposition 
Site/appearance
Therapy
Sebaceous adenoma
Average age
Persian cats
Solitary or multiple.
Surgical excision; laser
Common benign
10 years
dome-shaped,
ablation; cryosurgery
neoplasms; no metastatic
papillate, yelow or
potential
 opalescent <1 cm; 
eyelids and limbs
Sebaceous epithelioma
Average age
 Persian cats
As sebaceous
Surgical excision 
Fairly common, can be
10 years
adenoma 2 mm-3 cm;
locally aggressive,
 eyelid and head
metastasis rare
Sebaceous carcinoma
9-12 years
No breed
Solitary nodules
Surgical excision;
Rare malignant neoplasms,
 predisposition
 similar appearance to
radiotherapy
locally aggressive,
recognised
 sebaceous adenoma
metastasis rare
but 2.5-7.5 cm
ulceration common;
head and limbs
Table 21.9 Adnexal gland tumours in the cat - apocrine glands.
Adnexal gland tumours
(2} Apocrine glands
Age incidence
Breed predispositionSite /appearance
Therapy
Apocrine cyst
>6 years
Persian cats,
Solitary, well-defined 
 Benign neglect;
Common non-neoplastic
Himalayan
tense or fluctuant 
surgical removal
lesion
bullous nodules
several 2-10 mm in 
diameter; cyst content
clear and watery; site --
mostly head, especially
eyelids (Figure 21.10}
Apocrine adenoma
Average
None recognised 
Solitary raised alopecic
 Benign neglect;
Uncommon benign
11-12 years
well-circumscribed 
surgical removal
neoplasm derived from 
dermal or subcut
apocrine glands; do not
tumours with bluish
metastasise
colour; may be
ulcerated size 0.5-4.0
cm; site - head
Apocrine carcinoma
11-13 years
Siamese cats
Solitary growth similar
Wide surgical excision
to adenoma; 0.2-3 cm
diameter; site - head
especially lower lip
and chin 
Neoplastic and non-neoplastic tumours
666
Figure 21.7 Well-demarcated basal cell carcinoma on
Figure 21.9 Crusted ulceration caused by squamous cell
thorax.
carcinoma of eyelid.
Clinical signs
Mesenchymal and other tumours
Age incidence approximately 8 years.
Breed predisposition dogs include Boxer,
Mast cefl tumour
Boston terrier, English bulldog, pug, golden
retriever, Weimaraner (Figure 21.11). Cat
Cause and pathogenesis
predisposition includes the Siamese.
Dogs:
 Common malignant neoplasm derived from der-
 Mast cell tumours are very variable in ap-
mal tissue mast cells. It is most common cuta-
口
pearance and size:
neous tumour of the dog and second most com-
Dermal or subcutaneous oedema,
mon of the cat. Metastasis is common.
papules, nodules or pedunculated
masses.
Figure 21.8  Squamous cell carcinoma on nasal planum.
Figure 21.10  Apocrine cysts on the eyelid of a cat.
334
4Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Figure 21.11 Mast cell tumour on the perineum of a
Figure 21.13 Multiple mast cell tumours on the head.
Weimaraner.
Solitary intradermal nodule that can
Poorly or well circumscribed, soft or
be erythematous and alopecic or ulcer-
frm, alopecic or ulcerated (Figure
ated; size varies from 0.2 to 3 cm.
21.12).
Multiple clusters of subcutaneous nod-
Size of lesions varies from a few mil-
ules ranging in size from 0.5 to 1
limetres to several centimetres.
cm can be seen in young cats (<4
All tumours contain  vasoactive sub-
years); these lesions may regress spon-
stances t
that can produce
localised
taneously (Figure 21.13).
oedema, inflammation and rarely ana-
口
Tumours usually found on the head.
phylactic shock if palpated.
口
Most tumours are well differentiated and
Tumours usually found on caudal half of
benign.
body.
口
Systemic signs are rare.
口
Systemic signs gastro/duodenal ulcera-
tion, defective blood coagulation and
Diagnosis
thrombocytopaenia.
Cytology from an impression smear or fine
Cats:
needle aspirate taken with care reveals round
Mast cell tumours are very variable in
cells with round nuclei that contain promi-
appearance and size:
 nent basophilic granules. Granule staining de-
pends on the degree of differentiation of the
tumour (Figure 21.14).
Figure 21.12  Mast cell tumour.
Figure 21.14  Fine needle aspirate of mast cell tumour.
Neoplastic and non-neoplastic tumours
335
"wss upe syid woy uaen suod ay aun jo aos - upee inoun an is i'iz ae
Histological grade
三
Extent of tumour
Dermis
Dermis and subcutis
Invades subcutis and
deep tissues
Cellularity
Low to moderate
Moderate to high 
Highly cellular
 cellularity
cellularity
Cell morphology
Round monomorphic 
Moderately
Pleomorphic cells,
cells with distinct cell
pleomorphic cells,
indistinct cell borders
borders, medium
distinct cell borders,
fine granules or none
sized granules
 fine granules
Mitotic figures
Absent
0-2/HPF
3-6/HPF
 Skin biopsy reveals a non-encapsulated infl-
vincristine-prednisolone-hydro-
trative sheet or densely packed cords of round
xyurea.
cells with central nuclei, abundant cytoplasm
 Lomustine may produce some re-
and basophilic granules. Eosinophils are usu-
sponse.
ally numerous in the section. Histology is es-
Cimetidine can be used for animals
sential to grade the tumour (see Table 21.10)
with gastrointestinal ulceration at
and stage the disease to give indication for
a dose of 4 mg/kg po qid.
 treatment and prognosis.
Cats:
Surgical removal is curative in most cases.
Treatment
Urticaria pigmentosa
Dogs:
口
Single tumours (Grade I and II):
Cause and pathogenesis
Surgical excision with a wide exci-
 A benign proliferative mast cell disorder only seen
sion of 3 cm beyond palpable tumour.
This can be curative for Grade I and
in cats.
 II tumours. Post-operative follow up
should be performed every 3 months.
Clinical signs
Cryosurgery with premedication with
 No sex predilection; urticaria pigmentosa is
antihistamines.
■
seen in young cats <1 year of age.
Electrosurgery
with
premedication
 Himalayan cats appear to be overrepresen-
with antihistamines.
ted.
Injection of deionised water or triam-
Lesions appear as areas of macular erythema
cinolone.
and hyperpigmentation around the mouth,
Radiotherapy.
chin, neck and eyes.
Disseminated tumours:
Surgical excision even with a wide
Diagnosis
margin is rarely curative.
Chemotherapy:
 History and clinical signs.
Combination therapy with cyclo-
Skin biopsy reveals signs of mast cell pro-
phosphamide-vinblastine-predni-
liferation with areas of epidermal hyperme-
solone
or(
cyclophosphamide-
lanosis.
336Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Treatment
tumour where cells are arranged in solid lob-
ules. Cellular pleomorphism presents with a
No treatment is necessary as spontaneous regres-
moderate mitotic rate.
sion over a period of a few months.
Treatment
Plasmacytoma
Surgical excision is the treatment of choice;
most lesions can be completely excised.
Cause and pathogenesis
In dogs plasmacytomas have a low metastatic
potential and recurrence is rare so surgical re-
Tumour of plasma cell origin. It is uncommon in
moval offers a good prognosis for complete
dogs and rare in cats.
cure.
 In cats the risk of spread to lymph nodes and
Clinical signs
systemically is high so this tumour carries a
 No sex predilection; most commonly seen in
much more prognosis in this species.
older animals.
 Cocker spaniel may be predisposed; no breed
predisposition is recognised in the cat.
Transmissibfe venereaf tumour (TVT)
Lesions
are
usually
solitary
well-
circumscribed soft or firm, pedunculated or
Cause and pathogenesis
ulcerated dermal nodules.
A TVT is a variably malignant tumour of un-
Size variable, from a few millimetres to a few
known cell origin that may, due to its transmis-
centimetres in diameter.
sibility, be virally induced. Transplantation of tu-
Most common sites are external ear canal
mour cells is thought to occur during coitus but
(Figure 21.15), lip, trunks or digits.
can also occur during normal grooming activ-
ity. Some tumours can spontaneously regress as
Diagnosis
dogs develop an antitumour immunological re-
sponse. Disease found in tropical and subtropical
History and clinical signs.
 climates. Only recorded in the dog.
Cytology of a fine needle aspirate reveals
round cells with perinuclear halos or may
Clinical signs
have moderate amounts of dark basophilic
cytoplasm and a “clock-face' nucleus.
Intact bitches appear to be predisposed; can
 Excisional biopsy is preferable. Histopathol-
affect dogs of any age or breed.
 ogy reveals a well-circumscribed round cell
Lesions found most commonly on external
genitalia, but also on face and limbs.
Single to multiple, frm to friable, erythema-
tous, often haemorrhagic, dermal or subcuta-
neous nodules that may be papilliform.
Size ranges from 1 to 20 cm in diameter.
 Ulceration and secondary infection is com-
mon.
Metastasis is rare.
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
Cytology taken by fine needle aspirate reveals
round cells with moderate amounts of mid-
blue cytoplasm that contains characteristic
Figure 21.15 Plasmacytoma ear canal of dog.
vacuoles.
Neoplastic and non-neopfastic tumours
266
Table 21.11  Benign mesenchymal tumours of the dog and cat.
Benign mesenchymal tumours
Age incidence  B
 Breed predisposition  Appearance/site
T'herapy
Fibroma
Middle-aged 
 Boxer, Boston
Solitary, dome-shaped,
 Surgical excision;
Uncommon benign neoplasm 
s8op laplo 01
terrier, Doberman,
pedunculated
cryosurgery:
arising from fibroblasts;
and cats 
golden retriever, fox
 well-circumscribed 
electrosurgery; benign
 non-invasive and
terrier
nodules 1-5 cm may
neglect
 non-metastatic
 Not recorded in the 
 be melanotic; site: dog
cat
 and cat -head and legs
Nodutar dermatofibrosis
Middle-aged
German shepherd 
Multiple cutaneous
Ovariohysterectomy in
 Rare condition where dermal 
s8op p10 01 
Sop
 nodules, firm
females with uterine
fibrotic nodules are seen with 
 Not recorded in the
well-circumscribed,
lesions; nephrectomy
renal cystic disease and in
cat
dermal to subcut; size
in dogs with renal
intact females uterine
several mm - 4 cm;
lesions - renal disease
leiomyoma; poor prognosis
overlying skin
 often bilateral making
usually fatal
thickened, ulcerated 
surgery impossible
hyperpigmented; site
limb head and ears
Fibropruritic nodule
Older dog
German shepherd 
 Multiple firm alopecic
 Treatment of flea bite
 Uncommon benign nodular
 dogs and their
 nodules ranging from 
e28ns (81a11 
lesions associated with
crosses
0.5 to 2.0 cm may be
excision;
abnormal reaction to flea bites
Not seen in cats
erythematous and
anti-inflammatory
hyperpigmented; site --
 therapy with
dorsal lumbosacral
glucocorticoids 1.0
area
mg/kg po sid for 2
weeks then every 48
 hours tapering with a
view to withdrawal
Fetine sarcoid
Average age
Male cats
 Solitary or multiple
Wide surgical excision
Uncommon
12 months
 predisposed
nodules <2 cm
including amputation
papilloma-induced fibroblastic
Not recognised in 
 diameter; firm often
if possible (ears, tail);: 
proliferation; lesion slow
s8op
ulcerated; sites -
 cryosurgery; radiation
growing, infiltrative,
philtrum, nares, upper
therapy
recurrence after surgery
lip, digits, tail tip and 
uowwo
ears
Maemangioma
9years-dogs
 Boxer, golden
Solitary
 Surgical excision;
Uncommon benign neoplasm
9-11 years-
retriever, German 
well-circumscribed, 
cryosurgery:
from endothelial cells of blood 
Cats
shepherd dog.
round blue/red black
electrosurgery: benign
vessels; solar damaged
English springer
nodules 0.5-4.0 cm;
neglect; reduce
increased risk
spaniel, Airedale -
 site: dog - ventral
 subsequent sunlight 
any light skinned
abdomen, thorax; cat -
exposure
sunbathing dogs; no
head, legs and 
breed predilection
 abdomen
in cats
Lipoma
>8 years
Cocker spaniel,
Usually single
Surgical excision,
 Common benign neoplasms
dachshund,
well-circumscribed,
lesions will reduce in
 from subcutaneous lipocytes
Weimaraner,
soft fleshy
size with weight loss;
Doberman pinscher,
 dome-shaped tumours
intra-tumour injection
miniature
1-30 cm; over thorax,
 of 10% calcium
schnauzer,
 abdomen and 
chloride; benign
Labrad or, Labrador
 proximal limbs
neglect
retriever
Cats - Siamese
338Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Table 21.12 Soft tissue sarcomas in the dog and cat.
Soft tissue sarcomas
Age incidence   Breed  predisposi-  Appearance/site
T'herapy
tion
Fibrosarcoma
Older dogs
Cocker spaniel,
Dog - solitary, poorly 
Poor prognosis; wide
 Uncommon neoplasm
Cats FeSV
Doberman
circumscribed irregular
surgical excision;
fibroblast origin; often rapid
induced <5
 pinscher, golden 
variably sized nodules 
radiotherapy limited 
growth, frequent recurrence
years
retriever
1-15 cm often ulcerated
value; chemotherapy
 and metastases; in cats seen
Others >5
and alopecic; site - limbs
with doxorubicin,
spontaneously or associated
years
and trunk (Figure 21.16}
mitoxantrone may
with feline sarcoma virus
Cat - non-FesV lesions
 prolong survival
(FeSV} or vaccine induced
solitary; FesV-induced
firm nodular to irregular,
poorly circumscribed
0.5-15 cm; site - trunk,
distal limb, pinna; (Figure
21.17} FeSV at injection
sites
Haemangiosarcoma
>10 years
GSD golden
Solitary/multiple poorly
Poor prognosis; radical 
 Malignant neoplasm from
retriever BMD,
circumscribed red/dark
surgical excision, often 
endothelium of blood vessels;
 Boxer - any light 
blue plaques;
amputation;
solar damaged skin increased 
skinned
haemorrhage, ulceration
chemotherapy
risk; local recurrence and 
sunbathing dogs
common; dermal form <2 post-surgery with
 metastasis common; dermal
White cats
cm; subcut form <10 cm; 
 vincristine,
tumour better prognosis
dogs - ventral thorax,
doxorubicin,
 post-incision than subcut
abdomen, limbs (Figure
cyclophosphamide
tumour
21.18); cats - head and
ears (Figure 21.19)
Haemangiopericytoma
7-10 years
Boxer, GSD,
Solitary, firm multinodular Poor prognosis; radical 
Common neoplasms from
cocker spaniel,
well-circumscribed 
surgical excision often
vascular pericytes; locally
springer spaniel,
nodules <25 cm in
 amputation; radiation
invasive; local recurrence
 Irish setter
diameter; alopecia,
post-surgery may be
common despite surgery;
No cat 
ulceration is common.
beneficial
metastasis rare
predilection 
limbs (Figure 21.20)
(especially elbows and
stifles?
Liposarcoma
10 years
Dachshund,
Usually single, poorly
 Poor prognosis; radical 
 Rare malignant neoplasms 
Shetland
circumscribed firm/fleshy
 surgical excision often 
from subcutaneous lipoblasts;
sheepdog, Brittany
nodules 1-10 cm; ventral 
 amputation;
locally invasive, may
spaniel
abdomen, thorax,
chemotherapy with
metastasise
proximal limbs
doxorubicin may be
useful if excision is
incomplete
 Skin biopsy reveals sheets of uniform round
over 4-6 weeks. Doxorubicin may be used in
cells with a collagenous stroma interdis-
cases that respond poorly to vincristine.
 persed. Mitotic index is high.
Radiotherapy may be employed as these tu-
mours are very radiosensitive.
Surgical removal may be an option for small
Treatment
lesions but recurrence rates are high.
Chemotherapy is the treatment of choice. Le-
Prognosis is good; most tumours will regress
sions usually respond well to vincristine given
spontaneously or respond to chemotherapy.
Neoplastic and non-neoplastic tumours339
Figure 21.19 Dermal haemangiosarcoma on the ear of an
elderly cat.
Figure 21.16 Fibrosarcoma on the foot of a dog.
Benign mesenchymal tumours
These tumours all behave in a similar way. Ther-
apy is not always necessary, provided they do not
grow too large. The clinical presentation, age and
breed predilection as well as most common sites
are listed in Table 21.11.
Softtissuesarcomas
Soft tissue sarcomas can affect the skin. They all
behave in a similar way. The clinical presenta-
tion, age and breed predilection as well as most
common sites are listed in Table 21.12. Diagnosis
may be undertaken by fine needle aspirates of le-
sions and biopsy. These tumours respond poorly
Figure 21.17 Fibrosarcoma on face showing typical poorly
circumscribed alopecic ulcerated appearance.
Figure 21.18 Haemangiosarcoma on the elbow of a poodle.
Figure 21.20 Haemangiopericytoma on the leg of a dog.
340Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
to chemotherapy or radiotherapy and need surgi-
cal removal. The results of tissue biopsy to estab-
lish aetiology plus such techniques as MRI allow
the planning of adequate surgical margins for sur-
 gical removal, which needs to be extensive often
resulting in amputation of a limb where it is found
at this site.
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
(mycosis fungoides)
Cause and pathogenesis
Figure 21.22  Nodules and plaques on the abdomen of a dog
An uncommon neoplasm of T lymphocyte origin
with epitheliotropic lymphoma.
found in older dogs and cats.
Clinical signs
Differential diagnosis
Age incidence greater than 9 years of age in
Due to the wide range of different clinical pre-
both dogs and cats.
sentations, epitheliotropic lymphoma should be
No sex or breed predisposition.
considered in all skin diseases of older dogs and
Four clinical presentations:
cats.
口
Exfoliative erythroderma (erythema with
pruritus and scale).
Diagnosis
Mucocutaneous ulceration ± depigmen-
tation (Figure 21.21).
History and clinical signs.
Solitary or multiple plaques and nodules
Cytology as fine needle aspirate of nodules
(Figure 21.22).
and plaques or impression smears of ulcers
Infiltrative and ulcerative oral disease
stained with Diff-Quik. Samples reveal abun-
口
(usually misdiagnosed as chronic stomati-
dant round neoplastic lymphoid cells with ba-
tis) (Figure 21.23).
sophilic cytoplasm and an indented or lobular
 Most cases occur as slowly progressive dis-
nuclei.
ease.
Figure 21.21 Mucocutaneous ulceration in a case of
Figure 21.23 Ulcerative oral disease in a dog with
epitheliotropic lymphoma.
epitheliotropic lymphoma.
Neoplastic and non-neoplastic tumours341
Table 21.13 Histiocytic reactions in dogs.
Reactions (previous names)
Neoplastic
Subtype
Systemic involvement
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Yes
 Solitary cutaneous histiocytoma
No
Yes
 Multiple recurrent and persistent
No
histiocytoma
Yes
 Persistent histiocytoma with
No
lymph node involvement 
Yes
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Yes, from skin metastasis to
lymph nodes and internal organs
Histiocytic sarcoma
Yes
Disseminated histiocytic sarcoma
Yes, metastatic spread from
(malignant histiocytosis)
primary skin
Yes
Localised histiocytic sarcoma
Can occur in subcutaneous tissue
 or other organs
Reactive histiocytosis
No
Yes
(cutaneous and systemic
histiocytosis)
Skin biopsy reveals signs of a lichenoid infl-
Topical nitrogen mustard 10 mg of
trate of neoplastic lymphocytes that infiltrate
nitrogen mustard in 50 ml water or
the superficial dermis and surface of follicu-
propylene glycol. Not for use in cats.
lar and sweat gland epithelium. Small intra-
Apply 2-3 times weekly until remis-
epidermal clusters of cells called Pautrier's
sion then every 2-4 weeks for mainte-
microabscesses are typical of epitheliotropic
nance. Operators should wear gloves
lymphoma.
when applying and dogs should wear
collar to prevent ingestion of solution.
Treatment
Tumours of histiocytic origin
Whatever treatment is used the disease car-
ries a very poor prognosis; therapy may give
Histiocytic lesions are relatively common in the
short-term remission.
dog, although rare in the cat. Lesions may be
Solitary lesions:
localised or generalised in the skin and may be
口
Surgical excision
confined to the skin or have concurrent systemic
Multiple lesions:
involvement. The different forms of reaction pat-
Chemotherapy:
terns in the dog are detailed in Table 21.13 and
Combinations of prednisolone, cy-
the signalment, breed and age predisposition as
clophosphamide,
vincristine
and
well as brief notes on therapy are detailed in
methotrexate.
Table 21.14.
Lomustine (CCNU), peg - asparagi-
nase or pegylated liposomal doxoru-
bicin may be useful.
Melanocytic neopfasms
Retinoids, e.g. isotretinoin, for dogs 3-
4 mg/kg po sid, and for cats 10 mg/cat
Melanocytoma/melanoma
 po sid may improve clinical signs in
some animals.
Cause and pathogenesis
Interferon 1-1.5 million U/m? sq three
Benign or
malignant
proliferation
of
times weekly produces some success.
melanocytes in the skin. Eighty-five per cent
342
Manualof SkinDiseases of theDog andCat
Table 21.14 Signalment for most common histiocytic disease in the dog and cat.
Histiocytic lesions
Age incidence
Breed predisposition Appearance/site
Therapy
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
 Solitary cutaneous
Dogs <2 years
gop juaap Au
Solitary, *button-shaped’
Surgical excision;
histiocytoma
Rare disease in
breeds
dermal tumour, often
ayosurgery;
 Common benign neoplasm
the cat
ulcerated. 0.5-4.0 cm in 
electrosurgery; benign
 derived from Langerhans cells
diameter (Figure 21.24); site
 neglect - most lesions
-head, ear pinnae and legs
 snoauejuods oe.apun 
 remission in <3 months
Mu ltiple recurrent and 
Any age,
Shar-pei and shar-pei
Multifocal nodular lesions -
As cutaneous
persistent histiocytoma
usually young
s8op sson
a1s Aue 1e uaas
histiocytoma
Benign neoplasm derived 
58op
inmunosuppressive
from Langerhans cells 
 drugs contraindicated 
Histiocytic sarcoma
 (malignant histiocytosis)
Histiocytic sarcomas of
dendritic cell origin
 Disseminated histiocytic
Middle-aged to  Rare in the dog
 Most common ly causes 
Treatment of no benefit;
sop PIO
BMD, also 
malignancy of internal
rapidly progressive fatal
Rottweilers, golden
 peads-ap!m ym suealo
a5ea5!p
Jopeqen pue
 metastasis; skin can be
retrievers
involved with mu ltiple firmn
Not recorded in cat
dermal to subcut nodules 
that mmay be ulcerated
Localised histiocytic sarcoma
 0l pae-al PP!W 
 Common in dog.
Lesions in subcut tissue, as
Early wide excision of
sop PIO
BM Rottweilers,
well as spleen, tongue,
 tumour often including
Cats 8-11 years
Jopeqel pue uaplog
lung, vertebral bone; firm
 amputation of extremity 
retrievers
nodules up to several cm;
Rare in cat
 site -dogs when in skin --
extrermities (Figure 21.25)
Reactive histiocytosis 
 (cutaneous and systemic
histiocytosis)
 Reactive proliferation of
dermal dendritic cells 
Cutaneous histiocytosis
2-11 years
Canine breed
Appearance - mu ltiple
Chemotherapy -
Rare benign proliferative
predilection
dermal/subcut, plaques and
Prednisolone 1-2 mg/kg
disorder of histiocytes where
alq!ssod :alqeleqap
nodules 1-5 cm; site -
 po sid until remission
lesions are confined to the
collies, Shetland 
anywhere on body - head,
~7-10 days then taper
wg 'shopdaaus
neck, perineum, scrotum 
and stop; cyclosporine
Rottweilers, shar-pei,
and extremities are
has been used in some
retrievers, Irish
common ly affected (Figures
cases with success;
wolh ounds,
21.26 and 21.27); nodules
lifetirne therapy often 
Not seen in cats
can be numerous up to 50
 papaau
Systemic histiocytosis
28 years
 Many breeds
Cutaneous signs
Treatment as cutaneous
ad  a
especially BMD
Plaques, nodules and ulcers 
histiocytosis
disorder of histiocytes where
Not seen in cats
over whole body especially
 lesions are found in skin and 
muzzle (Figure 21.28),
internal organs
nasal planum, eyelids and
scrotum
Systemic signs
weight loss, dyspnoea,
lameness; disease waxes
alldsap sauem pue
treatment
Neoplastic and non-neopfastic tumours 343
Figure 21.24 Histiocytoma in a young dog.
Figure 21.27 Close-up of Figure 21.26.
of cases are benign. Sunlight is not a causative
agent. Genetic susceptibility may be a factor.
Common tumour in old dogs, rare in cats.
Tumour location is prognostic, most oral,
and mucocutaneous lesions except (eyelid)
are malignant. Fifty per cent of nail bed tu-
mours are malignant.
Breed is prognostic in that 75% of
melanocytic neoplasms in the Doberman
and miniature schnauzer are benign; 85 % of
those in miniature poodles are malignant.
Clinical signs
Age incidence approximately 9 years.
Figure 21.25 Histiocytic sarcoma in the scrotum of a Bernese
Breed predisposition in dogs includes Scot-
mountain dog.
tish terrier, Airedale, Boston terrier, cocker
spaniel, springer spaniel, Boxer, golden re-
triever, Irish setter.
Figure 21.26 Cutaneous histiocytosis in a Doberman.
Figure 21.28 Systamic histiocytosis in a Bernese mountain
Bop
344
4Manuai of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
neoplastic spindle, epithelial or round cells
with variable degrees of pigmentation.
Treatment
 Radical surgical excision.
If excision is incomplete adjunctive therapy
 may include chemotherapy with intralesional
cisplatin, radiation therapy, local hyperther-
mia and photodynamic therapy.
Response to systemic chemotherapy with
drugs such as mitoxantrone, doxorubicin, cis-
platin often disappointing; may prolong sur-
vival but response otherwise poor.
Figure 21.29 Melanoma on the toe of a dog.
Secondary skin
Breed predisposition in cats is not noticed.
neoplasms/paraneoplastic disease
Melanocytoma:
口
Appearance
usually solitary, well-
Cause and pathogenesis
circumscribed, dome-shaped,
alopecic
brown/black pedunculated or wart-like
Secondary skin neoplasia results by metastatic
growths 0.5-10.0 cm in diameter.
spread of primary neoplasms in other organs
口
Site - head (especially eyelid and muzzle),
to the skin, e.g. metastatic bronchial carcinoma.
trunk and paws.
Paraneoplastic disease is where a distant tumour
Melanoma:
leads to evidence of cutaneous disease, which
Appearance
- usually solitary, variable
is non-neoplastic. Examples of this include thy-
shape and colour (grey/brown/black or
moma or thoracic lymphoma and feline parane-
non-pigmented) 0.5-10 cm in diameter;
oplastic alopecia.
often ulcerated and grow more quickly
than melanocytoma (Figure 21.29)
Dog lesions are found on the head, limbs, dig
Metastatic bronchia!
its (including claw bed), scrotum, lip, trunk
Cat lesions most commonly seen on the head
carcinoma/squamous cefl carcinoma of
the lungs
Diagnosis
 Cause and pathogenesis
 Fine needle aspirate of lesion reveals round,
 Primary pulmonary lesions, which may be asymp-
oval, stellate or spindle-shaped cells with
tomatic at the time of development of the sec-
moderate amounts of cytoplasm that con-
ondary lesions produce metastatic disease to the
 tains brown to green/black pigment. Malig-
nail beds. Seventy-five per cent of all pulmonary
 nant melanomas may contain fewer pigment
carcinomas in the cats metastasise to the nail beds.
cells and show greater pleomorphism. Differ-
 ence between benign and malignant very dif-
Clinical signs
ficult on the basis of cytology.
Skin biopsy will identify the mass as a
No sex predilection; old cats and dogs are at
melanocytic neoplasm but will not reliably
increased risk, average age 12 years but can
differentiate melanocytoma from melanoma.
be seen in as young as 4 years.
Histopathology reveals accumulations of
No evidence of a breed predilection.
Neoplastic and non-neoplastic tumours
345
Feline thymoma associated exfoliative
dermatitis
Cause and pathogenesis
Rare paraneoplastic syndrome seen in the cat. Ex-
foliative skin disease precedes the development of
systemic disease. It has only been reported in cats.
As thymoma has not been recognised in all cases
it is thought that in some circumstances this syn-
 drome may represent an immunological reaction
pattern.
Figure 21.30  Metastatic bronchial carcinoma producing de-
Clinical signs
structive paronychial lesions.
 No sex predilection or breed predisposition.
Animals present with lameness and swelling
Middle-aged to old cats are at an increased
risk of developing disease.
of more than one digit.
Lesions start on the head, pinnae and neck
Lesions are seen on multiple digits but not
all digits on one particularly paw need to be
but rapidly generalise (Figure 21.31).
affected.
Initially cats present with non-pruritic scaling
lesions that lead to exfoliative erythroderma
 Paronychial lesions are ulcerative and erosive
(Figure 21.30) and may be pruritic; nails can
and alopecia (Figure 21.32) with oozing ero-
be lost.
sions and ulcers.
Brown waxy keratosebaceous debris accumu-
 Respiratory signs are not usually present.
lates between the toes and claw beds.
Malassezia may be seen as a secondary infec-
Differential diagnosis
tion.
Bacterial or fungal paronychial infection.
Systemic signs include coughing and dysp-
 Primary neoplasia, e.g. squamous cell carci-
noea, lethargy and anorexia.
noma.
Differential diagnosis
Diagnosis
Dermatophytosis
History and clinical signs.
Cheyletiellosis
 Skin biopsy of lesions on digits reveals signs
of a poorly circumscribed neoplasm associ-
ated with bone lysis. The tumour morphol-
ogy corresponds to the subtype of primary
pulmonary tumour.
Thoracic radiographs will identify the pri-
mary lesions in the cat's chest.
Ultrasonography will identify pulmonary le-
sions.
Treatment
The prognosis for this disease is grave. Mean
survival time is 1-2 months.
Treatment is unsuccessful.
Figure 21.31 Scaling on the neck of a cat with thymoma.
346
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Figure 21.32 Typical exfoliative erythroderma seen sec-
ondary to thymoma. (Source: Picture courtesy of H O' Dair.)
Figure 21.33 Ventral alopecia and 'shiny skin' in a cat with
Primary keratinisation disorder
paraneoplastic alopecia.
：
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
 Pemphigus foliaceus
Lesions develop rapidly over 2-3 months.
口
 Acute onset; rapidly progressive alopecia
Diagnosis
involving the ventrum and legs initially
but will generalise to involve the whole
History and clinical signs.
body (Figure 21.33).
Skin biopsy of skin reveals signs that are very
Hair is easily epilated in non-alopecic
similar to erythema multiforme. There is mild
areas.
apoptosis and an interface reaction.
Alopecic skin often smooth and 'glisten-
Thoracic radiographs to identify a thymic
ing’ (Figure 21.34).
mass, which is found in most but not all cases.
 Pruritus usually minimal.
Painful footpads, often thin, occasionally
Treatment
fissured; may have multiple concentric cir-
Thymomas are generally benign and thus success-
cular rings of scale that give a targetoid
ful surgical excision of the thoracic mass has been
appearance.
shown to lead to resolution of the skin disease.
Secondary Malassezia infection is com-
mon.
Feline paraneoplastic alopecia
Cause and pathogenesis
Feline paraneoplastic alopecia is a rare but highly
characteristic skin disease that is a marker for un-
derlying visceral neoplasia. Most reported cases
have had a pancreatic carcinoma of either the aci-
nar cell or pancreatic duct origin. Metastasis to
the liver appears to be common.
Clinical signs
Old cats are affected: age 9-16 years.
 No breed or sex predilection.
Figure 21.34 ‘Shiny skin' in a cat with paraneoplastic
Cutaneous signs:
alopecia.
Neoplastic and non-neoplastic tumours  347
Non-cutaneous signs:
Vascular nevi - cavernous dilatation of
 Inappetence, lethargy
blood vessels
口
Weight loss
口
 Sebaceous gland nevi
 Apocrine sweat gland nevi
Differential diagnosis
口
Epidermal nevi
口
Hair follicle nevi
Hyperadrenocorticism
Comedo nevi
Cutaneous fragility syndrome
口
口冏
 Pacinian corpuscle nevi
Telogen defluxion
Traumatic  alopecia 
1 (allergy, ectoparasites,
Diagnosis
psychogenic)
 Metabolic epidermal necrosis
 History and clinical signs.
 Skin biopsy or excisional biopsy of the mass.
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
Treatment
Skin biopsy reveals signs of exfoliation of
Small lesions can be monitored.
stratum corneum with laminated orthoker-
Large, unsightly lesions may be removed sur-
atosis alternating with focal parakeratosis.
gically.
Follicular atrophy is a consistent finding.
 Prognosis is good as tumours are not neoplas-
 Diagnostic rule outs, i.e. haematology,
bio-
tic.
chemistry, ACTH usually unremarkable.
Abdominal diagnostic imaging such as radio-
graphs and ultrasonography to look for neo-
Calcinosis cutis
plasia.
Causes and pathogenesis
some to look for suspected neoplastic lesions.
 Uncommon disease manifested as calcification of
the skin.
Treatment
None currently available.
Dystrophic calcification:
Grave prognosis; cats deteriorate rapidly and
口
 Calcinosis circumscripta - localised area
die.
of calcification due to
inflammatory lesions -
foreign body
 granuloma, pyoderma, bite wounds
degenerative lesions - cysts
Non-neoplastic tumours
neoplastic lesions
Calcinosis universalis -
 generalised calci-
Nevi
fication due to
hyperadrenocorticism (Figure 21.35),
Cause and pathogenesis
especially dorsum, axilla and groin
 (naturally occurring or iatrogenic), di-
Uncommon developmental defect characterised
abetes mellitus
by hyperplasia of one or more skin components.
 percutaneous absorption of calcium
Metastatic calcification:
Types of nevi:
Chronic renal failure -- lesions affect foot-
口
Collagenous nevi - hyperplasia of colla-
sped
gen
 Idiopathic calcification:
 Organoid nevi - hyperplasia of two or
口
Calcinosis circumscripta of large breeds
口
more skin components
口
Calcinosis universalis of young dogs:
348
Manual of Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat
Figure 21.35  Calcinosis cutis on the dorsum of a dog with
iatrogenic Cushing's disease.
Figure 21.36 Cutaneous horn on the foot of a dog.
Appearance
yellow/white
firm
plaques and nodules usually gritty.
mours, squamous cell carcinomas, or actinic ker-
Often ulcerates can become secondar-
atoses.
ily infected.
Clinical signs
Diagnosis
No age or sex predilection.
History and clinical signs.
No breed predisposition.
■
Cytology is often not diagnostic but the gritty
Lesions may be single or multiple. They ap-
feel of calcium as the needle is inserted into the
pear as frm horn-like projections up to 5 cm
lesion is very characteristic. Cytological find-
in length (Figure 21.36).
 ings reveal amorphous white grity material
Solitary or multiple lesions on the footpads
that becomes basophilic when it is stained.
have been associated with FeLV infections.
Skin biopsy reveals areas of finely or coarsely
The lesions may occasionally be seen on the
ground amorphous basophilic material in the
face.
deep dermal or subcutaneous tissue. It is often
surrounded by granulation tissue.
Diagnosis
History and clinical signs.
Treatment
Skin biopsy reveals signs of a well-demarcated
 Therapy of underlying causes where present
area of papillomatous epidermal hyperplasia
will lead to spontaneous resolution of the le-
from which an extensive compact column of
sions.
hyperkeratosis protrudes. Biopsies should al-
 In cases of idiopathic calcification surgical re-
ways include the base of the horn.
moval is curative.
Cats with footpad lesions should be screened
 Prognosis is good.
for FeLV.
Treatment
Cutaneous horn
Surgical excision is the treatment of choice
where it is deemed necessary that these are
Cause and pathogenesis
removed.
 Uncommon cutaneous lesion in the dog and cat.
 Prognosis is dependent on the underlying
It may originate from papillomas, basal cell tu-
cause.
Neoplastic and non-neoplastic tumours  349
Selected references and further reading
Gross, T.L.et al. (2005) Skin Diseases of the Dog
and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagno-
sis. 2nd edn. Blackwell Science, Oxford
Affolter, V. and Moore, P. (2000) Canine cuta-
London, C.A. and Seguin, B. (2003) Mast cell tu-
neous histiocytic diseases. In: Kirk's Current
mours in the dog. Vet Clin N Am Small Anim
Veterinary Therapy XllI Small Animal Prac-
Pract,33,473-489
tice. p. 588. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
Medleau, L. and Hnilica, K. (2006) Neoplastic
Angus, J.C. and de Lorimier, L.P. (2004) Lympho-
and nonneoplastic tumours In: Small Animal
histiocytic neoplasms. In: Campbell, K.L. (ed)
Dermatology: A Color Atlas and Therapeutic
Small Animal Dermatology Secrets. pp. 425-
Guide. 2nd edn. pp. 393-447. WB Saunders,
442. Hanley and Belfus, Philadelphia
Philadelphia
Beale, K.M. and Bolton, B. (1993) Canine cu-
Pulley, L.T. and Stannard, A.A. (1990) Tumours 
taneous lymphosarcoma: epitheliotropic and
of the skin and soft tissue. In: Moulton,
non epitheliotropic, a retrospective study. In:
J.E. (ed) Tumours in Domestic Animais. 3rd
Ihrke, P.J. et al. (eds) Advances in Veterinary
edn. pp. 75-82. University of California Press,
Dermatology. Vol. 2. pp. 273-284. Pergamon,
Berkeley
PIoxO
Scott, D.W. et al. (2001) Neoplastic and non-
Fan, T.M. (2004) Cutaneous mast cell neopla-
neoplastic tumours. In: Muller and Kirk's Small
sia in the dog and cat. In: Campbell, K.L. (ed)
Animal Dermatology. 6th edn. pp. 1236-1414.
Small Animal Dermatology Secrets. pp. 418-
WB Saunders, Philadelphia
424. Hanley and Belfus, Philadelphia
Stokking, L.B. (2004) Epithelial neoplasms. In:
Goldshmidt, M.H. and Shofer FS. (1998) Skin
Campbell, K.L. (ed) Small Animal Dermatol-
Tumours of the Dog and Cat. Butterworth-
ogy Secrets. pp. 393-401. Hanley and Belfus,
Heinemann, Oxford
Philadelphia
A
serology 24
abscesses 38
alopecia 214-230
Acanthosis nigricans 249-250
alopecia areata 209
 acetate tape impression smear 14
alopecia X 220-222
acne 279-281
amyloidosis 208-209
acquired aurotrichia in miniature schnauzers
anaerobic cellulitis 46
250-251
anal furunculosis 301-302
acquired skin fragility 309
anal licking 274-275
 acquired symmetrical alopecia (feline)
anal sack disease 299-301
225-226
ancylostomiasis 133
acral lick granuloma 46, 268-271
angioedema 173-174
acral mutilation syndrome 255
antibiotic therapy (table 4.2) 33
Acremonium spp.70
(see also under individual
acrodermatits 254-255
diseases)
acromegaly 153-154
 anti-inflammatory medication 
acromelanism 261
canine (table 10.1) 178
actinobacillosis S1
feline (table 10.2) 184
actinomycosis 50
aplasia cutis 244-246
acute moist dermatitis 26-28
argasid ticks 120
adrenal gland tumours
arrector pili muscle 4
canine (table 21.1, 21.4, 21.5, 21.6) 327, 329,
aspergillosis 79-80
330
Aspergillus fumigatus 80
feline (table 21.8, 21.9) 332
atopy
adult onset impetigo 31
canine 174-176
Aguirre syndrome 266-267
feline 181-183
albinism 264
aurotrichia (acquired in miniature schnauzer)
allergic miliary dermatitis 313-314
250-251
allergic skin disease 174-187
 autoimmune disease therapy
allergy testing 23-24
canine (table 11.1) 190
intradermal 24
feline (table 11.2) 190
index 351
B
coat brushing 13
babesiosis 96-97
Coccidiodes immitis 76
bacterial culture 21
coccidiodomycosis 76-77
bacterial folliculitis 34
cold agglutinin disease (CAD) 201
bacterial pseudomycetoma 46-47
collagenous fibres 3
bacterial skin disease 26-56
colour dilution (mutant) alopecia 217-218
 associated with primary immunodeficiency
colour linked follicular dystrophy 217-219
54-55
congenital follicular dystrophy 215
deep pyoderma 38-46
congenital hypotrichosis 216
superficial pyoderma 31-38
congenital skin disease 238-258
surface pyoderma 26-31
contact dermatitis {irritant) 230-231
 uncommon pyogra nulomatous bacterial
contact hypersensitivity 177
infection 46-54
contagious viral pustular dermatitis (Orf) 83
basement membrane 2
cryptococcosis 77-79
biopsy 22
Cryptococcus neoformans 77
black/dark hair follicular dystrophy 218-219
Ctenocepbalides felis felis {table 7.10) 122-123
Blastomyces dermatitidis 75
culture
blastomycosis 75-76
bacterial 21
blood vessels 4
fungal 19-20,61
Borrelia burgdorferi 54
Curvularia geniculata 70-71
borreliosis 54
cutaneous asthenia 251
botryomycosis 46
cutaneous ecololgy 7
bullous pemphigoid 195-196
cutaneous horn 348
burns 318-320
cutaneous mucinosis 256-257
Cuterebriasis 131-132
C
cyclic flank alopecia 223-224
C3 deficiency SS
cyclic haematopoiesis S5
calcinosis cutis 347-348
cytology 18-19
calici virus (feline) 91
callus 322
D
callus dermatitis 322-323
deep pyoderma 38-41
Candida albicans 66
xapouap
candidiasis 66-67
canis (table 7.3) 104-105
canine
cati (ta ble 7.4) 110
atopy 174-177
cornei (table 7.3) 104-105
caryosporosis 94-95
gatoi (table 7.4) 110
Chiari-like malformation 255-256
imja: (table 7.3) 104-105
distemper 82-83
demodicosis 104-112
ehrlichoisis 94
canine 104-109
food hypersensitivity 179-281
feline 109-112
hyperadrenocorticism 143-148
Dermanyssus gallinae (table 7.8) 118
hypothyroidism 136-139
dermatological examination 12
leproid granuloma syndrome 50
dermatomyositis 246-247
linear IgA dermatosis 208
dermatophilosis 37
Rocky Mountain spotted fever 93-94
dermatophyte test medium (DTM) 61-62
cattery management of dermatophytosis 62-65
dermatophytosis 57-65
cellulitis {anaerobic) 45
dermatosporaxis 251-252
Chediak-Higashi syndrome 248-249
dermis
Cheyletiella (blakei, parasitovorax, yasguri) (table
collagenous fibres 3
7.2) 102
elastin fibres 4
cheyletiellosis 102-104
t sasepuadde reuuapida
Chiari-like malformation 255-256
ground substance 4
chin pyoderma 42
dermoid sinus 244
352Index
diabetes mellitus 157-158
acromelanism 261
diagnostic tests 13-25
atopy 181-183
diascopy 14
calicivirus 91
diroflariasis (heart worm) 135
facial dermatitis in Persians 290-291
discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE)
food hypersensitivity 183-185
198-200
her pes virus 90
distemper (canine) 82-83
hyperadrenocorticism 148-151
dracunculiasis 134
hyperthyroidism 140-143
drug eruption 206-208
hypothyroidism 139-140
Dudley nose 263-264
immunodeficiency virus 88
infectious peritonitis (FIP) 90
E
leprosy syndrome 49-50
ear cleaners (table 9.5) 169
leukaemia virus 86-87
ear margin dermatosis 289-290
 orofacial pain syndrome (FOP) 309-310
ear wax-examination 20-21
paraneoplastic alopecia 346-347
ehlers-Danlos {cutaneous asthenia) 251-253
plasma cell pododermatitis 304-305
ehrlichiosis - canine 94
pox virus 88
elastic fibres 4
preauricular and pinnal alopecia 226-227
endocrine skin disease 135-161
rhinotracheitis 90
environmental skin disease 317-325
scabies 115-116
eosinophilic allergic syndrome 310-316
thymoma associated exfoliative dermatitis
investigation 315
345-346
therapy 315-316
fibropruritic nodules 123-124
eosinophilic furunculosis of the face 18s-186
fine needle aspirate 19
tosinophilic granuloma
flank suckers 273-274
canine 295-296
feas 121-126
feline 314-315
flies 129-132
eosinophilic plaque 312-313
fly dermatitis 129
epidermal appendages 4
fly strike 130
epidermal structure 2
focal metatarsal fistulation in the German shepherd
epidermal tumours
dog 252-253
canine (table 21.2) 327
follicular dystrophy 215-219
feline (table 21.7) 330
folliculitis
epidermis
bacterial 34
keratinocytes 2
nasal 41
Langerhans cells 2
pyotraumatic 41
melanocytes 2
food hypersensitivity
Merkel cells 2
canine 179-181
structure 1-3
feline 183-185
epithelial neoplasia 326-333
foot licking 273
epitheliotropic lymphoma 340-341
footpad hyperkeratosis (familial) 286
erythema multiforme 202-204
frostbite 320
eumycotic mycetoma 70-71
fungal culture 19, 61
Eutrombicula spp. 116
fungal skin disease 57-81
examination of the animal 11
furunculosis
bacterial 39
F
nasal 41
familial footpad hyperkeratosis 286
G
fatty acid deficiency 232-233
Felicola subrostratus (table 7.11) 126
 German shepherd dog pyoderma 44-45
feline
giant cell dermatosis 87-88
acne 279-281
granulocytopathy syndrome S5
acquired symmetrical alopecia 225-226
 ground substa nce 4
Index 353
H
adult onset 31
hair 5
juvenile onset 31
hair matrix 5
impression smear 18-19
hair papilla 5
indolent ulcer 311-312
inner root sheath 5
infectious peritonitis (feline) 90
outer root sheath 6
inner root sheath 5
hair cycle 6
insects 121-132
hair cycle abnormalities 219-227
interdigital cyst (pyoderma) 43
hair follicle tumours (table 21.3) 328
interstitial cell tumour 156-159
hard pad 82-83
intertrigo complex 28
heartworm 135
irritant contact dermatitis 320-322
helminth parasites 132-135
ixodid ticks 120
hepatocutaneous disease 158-160
T
hereditary lupoid dermatosis of the German
juvenile cellulitis 296-297
short-haired pointer 247-248
hereditary nasal parakeratosis of the labrador
juvenile impetigo 31
retriever 285-286
K
herpes virus (feline) 90-91
histiocytic tumours (table 21.13, 21.14)
keratinisation defects 277-291
keratinocytes 2
341-342
Histoplasma capsulatum 79
kerion 59
histoplasmosis 79-80
history taking 9
lagenidiosis 74
hookworm dermatitis 132-134
Langerhans cells 2
hygroma 324
leishmaniasis 97-99
Hymenoptera 132
lentigo 259-270
hypera drenocorticism
canine 143-148
leproid granuloma syndrome 50
leprosy syndrome 49-50
feline 148-151
leukaemia virus (feline) 86-87
hypereosinophilia syndrome 307
L-form bacteria 54
hyperoestrogenism 154
lichenoid psoriasiform dermatosis of the English
hyperthyroidism (feline) 140-143
springer spaniel 242
hypervitaminosis A 234-235
linear IgA dermatosis 208
hypothyroidism
Linognathus setosus (table 7.11) 126
canine 136-139
localised scleroderma 295
feline 139-140
Lyme borreliosis 54
T
lymph oedema 253-254
ichthyosis (fish scale disease) 240-242
lymph vessels 4
idiopathic bald thigh syndrome in the greyhound
Lynxacarus radosky 119
225
M
idiopathic cyclic flank alopecia 223-224
Madurella spp. 70
idiopathic facial dermatitis in Persian cats
290-291
malasseziasis 67-69
idiopathic periocular leukotrichia 266
M. globosa 67
idiopathic sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma
M.pachydermatis 67
canine 294
M. sympodialis 67
feline 305-306
mast cell tumour 333-335
IgA deficiency 55
melanocytes 2
immune mediated disease 188-213
melanomas 341-344
immunodeficiencies - bacterial skin disease 54
melanotrichia 261
immunodeficiency virus (feline) 88
Merkel cells 2
impetigo
mesenchymal tumours 333-340
354Index
metastatic bronchial carcinoma of the lungs
P
344-345
panepidermal pustular pemphigus 195
methicillin resistant Stapbylococcus aureus (MRSA)
panniculitis (sterile nodular) 210-211
36-37
pansteatitis 233-234
Microsporum spp. 57-59
papillomavirus 84-85
M. canis {table 5.1) 57-58
 cutaneous exophytic 84
M.gypseum (table 5.1) 57-58
footpad 85
M.persicolor (table S.1) 59
genital 85
miliary dermatitis 313-314
inverted 85
morbillivirus 82
multiple pigmented epidermal plaques 85
morphea (localised scleroderma) 295
multiple viral 85
mosquito bite hypersensitivity 129-130
oral 84, 85
mucinosis (cutaneous)256-257
solitary cutaneous 86
mucocutaneous pyoderma 32-33
paraneoplastic alopecia (feline) 346-347
mycobacterial infection 47
parasitic skin disease 100-135
opportunistic 48-49
pattern baldness 222-223
Mycobacterium lepraemurium49
pediculosis 126-128
mycoses
pelodera dermatitis 133
subcutaneous 69-75
pemphigus complex 188-195
superficial 57-69
 panepidermal pustular pemphigus 195
systemic 75-81
paraneoplastic 195
Myiasis (fly strike) 130-131
pemphigus erythematosus 193-195
pemphigus foliaceus 189-193
N
pemphigus vulgaris 188-189
nasal depigmentation (Dudley nose) 263-264
perforating dermatitis 308-309
nasal folliculitis 41
phaeohyphomycosis 71
 nasal parakeratosis of labrador retrievers
pigment abnormalities 259-267
285-286
pili torti 216-217
nasodigital hyperkeratosis 283-284
pituitary dwarfism 151-152
necrolytic migratory erythema 158-160
plague 53
 neoplastic and non-neoplastic tumours 326-349
plasma cell pododermatitis (feline) 304-305
neosporosis 95-96
plasmacytoma 336
Neotrombicula autumnalis (table 7.7) 116
pododermatitis 43
nerves 4
post-clipping alopecia 220
neurodermatitis 275-276
post-inflammatory hyper pigmentation 260
nevi 347
pox virus (feline) 88-89
nocardiosis 52
pre-auricular and pinnal alopecia 225-226
notoedric mange 115-116
primary seborrhoea 238-240
nutritional skin disease 231-237
proliferative arteritis of the nasal philtrum
0
211-213
protein deficiency 231-232
onychomycosis 59
Prototheca wickerhamii 80
opportunistic mycobacterial infections 48-49
protothecosis 80-81
Orf 83
protozoal disease 94-99
orofacial pain syndrome (feline) 309-310
pruritic alopecia 227-228
otitis externa 162-172
Pseudoallescheria boydii 70
diagnostic tests 168-169
pseudomycetoma
perpetuating factors (table 9.3) 162-163
bacterial 46-47
predisposing factors (table 9.2) 162-163
fungal 59-60, 69-70
primary causes (table 9.1) 162-163
pseudorabies (mad itch') 83-84
treatment 169-172
psychogenic alopecia 227-228
Otodectes cynotis (table 7.1) 100-102
psychogenic dermatitis 275-276
outer root sheath 6
psychogenic skin disease 268-276
index 355
pyoderma
granulosum 3
chin 42
lucidum 3
deep 38-46
spinosum 2
German shepherd dog 44-45
structure of skin 1
superficial 31-38
subcorneal pustular dermatosis 292-293
surface 26-31
subcutaneous abscesses 38
pyogranulomatous bacterial infection
subcutis 7
46-54
superficial pyoderma 31-38
pyotraumatic folliculitis 41
surface pyoderma 36-41
pythiosis 72-73
sweat gland 6
Pythium insidiosum 72
atrichial 6
epitrichial 6
R
symmetrical lupoid onychodystrophy 297
relapsing polychondritis 210
syringomyelia 255
reticular fibres 4
rhinotracheitis (feline) 90-91
Rickettsia rickettsii 93
T
rickettsial disease 93-94
tail biting 271-272
Rocky Mountain spotted fever 93-94
tail gland hyperplasia 281-282
tail sucking 272
S
telogen defluvium 224-225
sarcocystosis 96
testicular neoplasia 155-158
Sarcoptes scabiei {table 7.5) 112
interstitial cell tumour 156-158
sarcoptic mange 112-114
seminoma 156
scarring alopecia 229
sertoli cell tumour 155-156
schnauzer comedo syndrome 242-243
thymoma associated exfoliative dermatitis (feline)
scleroderma (localised) 295
345-346
seasonal flank alopecia 223-224
ticks
sebaceous adenitis 287-288
argasid ticks 120
sebaceous gland 6
ixodid ticks 120
seborrhoea 277-279
toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) 202-204
selective IgA deficiency S5
traction alopecia 228-229
self-nursing 274
transient hypogammaglobulinaemia 55
seminoma 156
transmissible venereal tumour (TVT) 336-338
Sertoli cell tumour 15s-156
traumatic alopecia 227-229
severe combined immunodeficiency S4-55
trial therapy 24
skin fold pyoderma 28
Trichodectes canis (table 7.11) 126
skin scraping 15
trichography (hair plucks) 16-18
deep 15-16
Trichophyton mentagrophytes (table 5.1) 47-48
superficial 15
trombiculiasis 116-117
soft tissue sarcomas {table 21.12) 338-339
tumour hypermelanosis 261
solar dermatitis 317-318
Sporothrix schenckii74
U
sporotrichosis 73-74
ulcerative dermatitis with linear sub-epidermal
sterile eosinophilic pustulosis 293
fbrosis 307-308
sterile granuloma and pyogranulomas (idiopathic)
uncinariasis {hookworm) 132-133
canine 294
urticaria 173
feline 305-306
urticaria pigmentosa 335-336
sterile nodular panniculitis 210
uveodermatologic syndrome 264-265
strangles (puppy) 296-297
stra tum
V
basale 2
vasculitis 204-206
corneum 3
vesicular cutaneous lupus 200-201
356
Index
viral disease 82-93
Wood's lamp examination 60
vitamin A deficiency 234
vitamin A responsive dermatosis (table 13.1)
X
282-283
xanthoma 161
vitamin B deficiencies 235
vitiligo 262-263
Y
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome (VKH) 264
Yersinia pestis 53
W
Z
Waardenburg-Klein syndrome (WKS) 263
zinc-responsive dermatosis 235-237
wet paper test 13
zygomycosis 73