SKINDISEASES
OFTHE
DOG
ANDCAT
Clinicaland
Histopathologic
Diagnosis
SECOND EDITION
Thelma Lee Gross
PeterJ.lhrke
EmilyJ.Walder
Blackwell
VerenaK.Affolter
Pubishing
SKIN DISEASES OF
THE DOG ANDCAT
Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis
Second Edition
First published as Veterinary Dermatopathology
THELMA LEE GROSS DVM
Director, California Dermatopathology Service, and
Consultant, IDEXX Veterinary Services, West Sacramento, California
PETER J. IHRKE VMD
Professor of Dermatology, Department of Medicine and Epidemiology,
School of Veterinary Medicine,University of California, Davis
EMILY J. WALDER VMD
Director, An independent biopsy service, Venice, California
VERENA K. AFFOLTER DrMedVet, PhD
Lecturer and Assistant Researcher, Department of Patbology, Microbiology, and
Immunology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California, Davis
Blackwell
Science
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.co m
@ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
a Blackwell Publishing company
Editorial offices:
Blackwell Science Ltd, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK
Tel: +44 (0) 1865 776868
Blackwell Publishing Professional, 2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014-8300, USA
Tel: +1 515 292 0140
Blackwell Science Asia Pty Ltd, 550 Swanston Street, Carlton, Victoria 3053, Australia
Tel: +61 (0)3 8359 1011
The right of the Author to be identified as the Author of this Work has been asserted in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and
Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval systerm, or transmitted, in any forrm or by any
1988, without the prior permission of the publisher.
First edition published under the title Veterinary Dermatopathology by Mosby 1992
Second edition retitled as Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat published by Blackwell Science 2005
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Skin diseases of the dog and cat: clinical and histopathologic diagnosis / Thelma Lee Gross.. . [et al.]. - 2nd ed.
p.cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-632-06452-8 (hardback : alk. paper)
SF992.S55S563 2005
636.7'089′65-dc22
2004012191
ISBN-10: 0-632-06452-8
ISBN-13: 978-0-632-06452-6
A catalogue record for this title is available frorm the British Library
Set in 9.5/12 pt Sabon
by SNP Best-set Typesetter Ltd, Hong Kong
Printed and bound in Denmark
by Narayana Press, Odder
cover board used have met acceptable environmental accreditation standards.
No authors were injured in the rmaking of this textbook.
For further information on Blackwell Publishing, visit our website:
www.blackwellpublishing.com
Cover artwork provided by Emily J. Walder
For those who put us on our path:
Richard Halliwell, Valerie Fadok, Robert Schwartzman,
Michael Goldschmidt, Ronald Barr, Claudia von Tscharner, and Peter Moore
Preface and acknowledgements
Much has occurred in the world of veterinary dermatol-
 chapters covering neoplastic diseases, including the addi-
ogy and veterinary dermatopathology since the publi-
tion of immunohistochemical diagnosis. Much of the
cation of Veterinary Dermatopathology: A Macroscopic
enhanced precision with which neoplastic lesions are cat-
and Microscopic Evaluation of Canine and Feline Skin
egorized as to cell of origin or path of differentiation
Disease in 1992. Since then, four additional world con-
reflects the application of immunohistochemistry for cell
gresses devoted to our specialty discipline, many text-
markers. This is especially true for single cytokeratin
books, an exponential explosion of publications in
markers and hematopoietic cell markers, many of which
refereed journals, and international listservs have added
have become readily available for use on formalin-fixed
substantially to the body of knowledge.
tissue only in the past few years. The failure of many
We elected to change the name of this book to Skin Dis-
immunohistochemical reagents developed for use in
eases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic
humans to stain specimens from other animal species con-
Diagnosis to more accurately reflect the scope of the
tinues to be a source of frustration; the authors are
content and the goals of this text. Pathogenesis, clinical
 hopeful that the development of additional clones or
and histopathologic description, and clinical and 
 animal-specific clones will allow continued advances.
histopathologic differential diagnosis have all been 
 This new book also expands relevant information on
expanded to reflect the growth of our discipline. This 
 analogous tumors from the human dermatopathology
book sees the addition of over three dozen new inflam-
 literature. The authors believe that comparative der-
matory diseases alone, as well as numerous neoplastic
 matopathology is an invaluable tool for the understand-
entities. We also introduce our new co-author Verena
 ing of pathogenesis, the recognition of new diseases, and
Affolter the principal author of the chapters describing
the advance of research.
mesenchymal neoplasia.
 It is well to remember that nomenclature is man-made
 As in the frst book, inflammatory diseases are grouped
and diseases are biologic aberrations; there will always be
by histologic pattern. However, since histopathologic
lesions that refuse to ft neatly into any given classification
classification usually reflects changes observed clinically,
a s  s r u a sr s 
clinically relevant groupings often result. The authors
It is precisely those gaps that the authors hope will serve
have striven to present information in a diagnostically rel-
as inspiration for current and future colleagues to engage
evant way for clinicians and pathologists alike. Etiopatho-
in continued critical thinking, clinical studies, and research
genesis (where known), clinical features, and the
 in the feld of dermatology and dermatopathology.
histopathologic lesions are described for each disease;
We owe David Lloyd a special tribute as we consider
methods of optimal biopsy are included for inflammatory
him to be the initial force behind this book. His constant
diseases as well.
encouragement and early contact with Blackwell Publish-
Classification systems for skin tumors were established
ing helped initiate the launch of this project. The authors
early in veterinary pathology with sporadic additions of
thank Danny Scott, Bill Miller, and Craig Griffin for pro-
newer entities over the years. Standardized international
viding the 6th edition of Muller C Kirk's Small Animal
nomenclature was adopted over 25 years ago, and the
long-awaited, revised World Health Organization classi-
available such a complete and well-referenced textbook.
fcations were published in 1998. The authors are grati-
The authors also thank Michael Goldschmidt and Fran
fed that these new WHO fascicles incorporated many of
 Shofer for providing numeric data in such an easily acces-
the changes in terminology proposed in the frst edition
sible format in Skin Tumors of the Dog Or Cat.
of Veterinary Dermatopathology. New information has
As for the frst edition, we thank M. Donald McGavin
warranted the extensive revision and expansion of the
for his role as photomicrographic mentor. His talents are
vi
Preface and acknowledgements
unequaled and we can hope to have achieved only some
for material about uncommon, rare, or regional skin
semblance of his proficiency in these pages.
diseases.
We are indebted to the dermatologists and pathologists
The authors thank IDEXX Veterinary Services for
from around the world who gave generously of their
support through funding of slide preparation for pho-
 clinical photographs, tissue blocks, and knowledge on 
 tomicrography and Ron Hedriek and his laboratory for
our behalf. We offer special thanks to Thierry Olivry,
d r  sne s 
Jan Declercq, and Ann Hargis for their unselfish gifts
equipment. We thank Laura Wilson for technical excel-
of time, case material, and opinions. Thierry Olivry
lence and artistry in the digitization of all of the
 contributed substantially as a reviewer of Chapter 2 in 
clinical slides used in the preparation of this book, and
his capacity as expert in the feld of autoimmune subepi-
Tom De Lucia and Ben Wong for black and white
 dermal bullous diseases, and Jan Declercq provided
photographic support. We thank Eric Elerath, Penny
excellent clinical photographs for many diseases as well
Atkinson, Karl and Sarah Schwendinger, and Jana
as blocks and slides of uncommon diseases for histo-
Jefferson for technical histopathologic support. We thank
 Jeremy Johnson for his able assistance in proofreading.
out Zeineb Alhaidari, Kim Boyanowski, Didier Carlotti,
Lastly, we thank Blackwell Publishing and Antonia
Jacques Fontaine, Amy Grooters, Richard Malik, Peter
Seymour for believing that there continues to be a place
Moore, Claudia Nett, Manon Paradis, Helen Power,
for specialty books such as this.
Michelle Rosenbaum, Danny Scott, Sheila Torres, Carlo
Vitale, and Stephen White for their invaluable assistance.
Thelma Lee Gross
In addition, we thank our many other colleagues,
Peter J. Ihrke
too numerous to mention individually, who responded
Emily J. Walder
graciously via the VetDerm listserv to our global plea
Verena K. Affolter
contents
SECTION ONE: INFLAMMATORY, DYSPLASTIC,
Feline thymoma-associated exfoliative
AND DEGENERATIVE DISEASES
dermatitis
68
Lupoid onychitis
70
PART 1 DISEASES OF THE EPIDERMIS
3
4
 Necrotizing Diseases of the Epidermis
75
 Pustular Diseases of the Epidermis
4
Erythema multiforme
75
Impetigo
4
 Feline thymoma-associated exfoliative
Superficial spreading pyoderma
dermatitis
78
Candidiasis
9
 Proliferative necrotizing otitis of kittens
79
Superficial pustular dermatophytosis
11
 Toxic epidermal necrolysis
80
 Pemphigus foliaceus
13
 Toxic shock syndrome of dogs
84
 Pemphigus erythematosus
18
Superficial necrolytic dermatitis
86
Subcorneal pustular dermatosis
19
Generic dog food dermatosis
91
Sterile pustular erythroderma of
Split pawpad disease
92
Miniature Schnauzers
20
Burns
94
Superficial pustular drug reactions
23
 Irritant contact dermatitis
98
2 Bullous and Acantholytic Diseases of
5
 Spongiotic and Vesicular Diseases of
the Epidermis and the Dermal-Epidermal
the Epidermis
105
 Junction
27
 Allergic contact dermatitis
105
 Bullous pemphigoid
27
 Feline eosinophilic plaque
109
 Mucous membrane pemphigoid
30
 Psoriasiform dermatitis of the pawpads
111
 Pemphigus vulgaris
32
Facial dermatitis of Persian and
 Paraneoplastic pemphigus
36
Himalayan cats
112
Hereditary epidermolysis bullosa
38
Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita
40
6
 Ulcerative and Crusting Diseases of
Canine Darier's disease
43
the Epidermis
116
Linear IgA disease
45
 Pyotraumatic dermatitis
116
Feline allergic miliary dermatitis
118
 3  Interface Diseases of the Dermal-Epidermal
 Feline eosinophilic plaque
121
Junction
49
 Feline mosquito bite hypersensitivity
122
 Ischemic dermatopathy/canine
 Feline herpesvirus ulcerative dermatitis
124
dermatomyositis
49
 Feline cowpox virus infection
127
 Discoid lupus erythematosus
52
Feline indolent ulcer
128
Systemic lupus erythematosus
55
 Feline idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis
130
Pemphigus erythematosus
57
Canine pyoderma gangrenosum
132
 Exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus
of the German Shorthaired Pointer
59
7
Hyperplastic Diseases of the Epidermis
136
Vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Chronic hyperplastic dermatitis
136
of the Shetland Sheepdog and Collie
61
Fibropruritic nodules
138
Erythema ab igne
63
Acral lick dermatitis
140
Erythema multiforme
65
Malassezia dermatitis
142
vi
vii
Contents
Hyperplastic dermatosis of the West
Vasculopathy of Greyhounds
251
Highland White Terrier
146
Proliferative thrombovascular necrosis
Actinic keratosis
148
of the pinnae
253
 Acanthosis nigricans of Dachshunds
151
Proliferative arteritis of the nasal philtrum
255
Psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis
152
Solar vasculopathy
256
Lichenoid keratosis
154
11
 Lichenoid Diseases of the Dermis
261
 Inflamed linear epidermal nevus
155
Mucocutaneous pyoderma
261
Giant cell dermatosis in FeLV-positive cats
157
Discoid lupus erythematosus
263
8Diseases with Abnormal Cornification
161
 Pemphigus foliaceus
B
265
 Primary seborrhea and seborrheic dermatitis
161
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome
266
Vitamin A-responsive dermatosis
165
 Psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis
269
Canine ear margin seborrhea
167
Lichenoid keratosis
271
Nasodigital hyperkeratosis
169
12
 Infectious Nodular and Diffuse
Nasal parakeratosis of Labrador Retrievers
170
 Granulomatous and Pyogranulomatous
172
Diseases of the Dermis
272
Ichthyosis
174
Actinomycosis and nocardiosis
272
 Familial pawpad hyperkeratosis
179
Bacterial pseudomycetoma
275
Schnauzer comedo syndrome
181
 Feline leprosy syndrome
276
Actinic comedones
183
Canine leproid granuloma
281
Callus
184
 Opportunistic mycobacterial infection
Sebaceous adenitis
186
caused by rapidly growing mycobacteria
 Zinc-responsive dermatosis
283
188
191
Opportunistic mycobacterial infection
Superficial necrolytic dermatitis
caused by Mycobacterium avium complex
287
 Inflamed linear epidermal nevus
191
 Dermatophytic pseudomycetoma
288
Acrodermatitis of Bull Terriers
193
Cutaneous blastomycosis, histoplasmosis,
 and coccidioidomycosis
291
PART II DISEASES OF THE DERMIS
199
Cutaneous cryptococcosis
295
Sporotrichosis
298
9 Perivascular Diseases of the Dermis
200
Cutaneous infections of other opportunistic
Superficial spreading pyoderma
200
200
fungi
301
Atopic dermatitis
 Food allergy
 Cutaneous pythiosis, lagenidiosis, and
206
entomophthoromycosis
303
Canine flea allergy dermatitis
208
 Cutaneous protothecosis
309
Feline allergic miliary dermatitis
211
Cutaneous leishmaniasis
312
 Urticarial allergic eruption
212
 Allergic contact dermatitis
214
13
 Noninfectious Nodular and Diffuse
Canine sarcoptic acariasis
216
Granulomatous and Pyogranulomatous
Feline notoedric acariasis
219
Diseases of the Dermis
320
Cheyletiellosis
220
 Sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma
 Feline superficial demodicosis
222
syndrome
320
Cutaneous microflariasis
225
Reactive histiocytosis
323
Hookworm dermatitis
228
 Juvenile sterile granulomatous dermatitis and
Cutaneous anatrichosomiasis
229
lymphadenitis
327
Vitiligo
231
Cutaneous xanthoma
330
Canine sarcoidosis
333
10
Vascular Diseases of the Dermis
238
Foreign body reactions
334
Septic vasculitis
238
Palisading granuloma
337
Urticaria and angioedema
239
Telangiectasia, phlebectasia, and cutaneous
14
 Nodular and Diffuse Diseases of the Dermis
flushing
241
with Prominent Eosinophils, Neutrophils, or
Cryoglobulinemia and cryofbrinogenemia
243
Plasma Cells
342
 Neutrophilic immunologic vasculitis
244
 Arthropod bite reactions
342
Cell poor vasculitis
247
 Feline mosquito bite hypersensitivity
345
Familial cutaneous vasculopathy of German
Spider bites
347
Shepherd Dogs
250
Fire ant bites
349
Contents
ix
Feline herpesvirus ulcerative dermatitis
351
18 Mural Diseases of the Hair Follicle
460
Feline eosinophilic plaque
352
Alopecia areata
460
Feline indolent ulcer
353
Mural folliculitis due to demodicosis and
 Feline eosinophilic granuloma
355
dermatophytosis
464
Canine eosinophilic granuloma
358
 Pseudopelade
466
Canine eosinophilic dermatitis
360
 Eosinophilic mucinotic mural folliculitis
 Feline hypereosinophilic syndrome
362
in dogs
469
 Plasma cell pododermatitis
363
 Degenerative mucinotic mural folliculitis
 Familial cutaneous vasculopathy of German
in cats
472
 Shepherd Dogs
364
Granulomatous mural folliculitis in dogs
474
Canine sterile neutrophilic dermatosis 
 Follicular mucinosis
477
(Sweet's syndrome)
366
 Sterile pustular erythroderma of Miniature
19
 Atrophic Diseases of the Adnexa
480
Hypothyroidism
481
Schnauzers
369
 Canine hyperglucocorticoidism
484
15
 Degenerative, Dysplastic and Depositional
 Feline hyperglucocorticoidism
487
Diseases of Dermal Connective Tissue
373
 Canine Sertoli cell tumor-associated skin
Calcinosis cutis
373
disease
490
Calcinosis circumscripta
378
Canine female hyperestrogenism
492
Cutaneous mucinosis
380
Alopecia X
494
Cutaneous amyloidosis
383
 Postclipping alopecia
497
 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
386
 Feline paraneoplastic alopecia
498
Feline acquired skin fragility syndrome
389
Acquired pattern alopecia
501
 Topical corticosteroid reaction
392
 Ischemic dermatopathy/canine
Perforating dermatitis
394
dermatomyositis
503
Morphea
396
 Post-traumatic alopecia
505
Cicatricial alopecia
397
Traction alopecia
507
Solar elastosis and fbrosis
399
 Telogen effluvium
509
Doxorubicin-induced alopecia
510
 Excessive physiological shedding
512
PART III DISEASES OF THE ADNEXA
405
 Feline psychogenic alopecia
513
16
 Pustular and Nodular Diseases without
20
 Dysplastic Diseases of the Adnexa
406
518
Adnexal Destruction
 Color dilution alopecia and black hair
 Superficial bacterial folliculitis
406
 Feline dermatophytosis
410
follicular dysplasia
518
Canine follicular dysplasia
522
Canine dermatophytosis
413
 Cyclical flank alopecia
525
Pemphigus foliaceus
415
Congenital hypotrichosis
528
Sterile eosinophilic pustulosis
417
Follicular lipidosis
530
17
 Pustular and Nodular Diseases with
Sebaceous gland hyperplasia
531
Adnexal Destruction
420
 Sebaceous gland dysplasia
533
Deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis
420
German Shepherd Dog pyoderma
424
PART IV DISEASES OF THE PANNICULUS
537
 Postgrooming furunculosis
427
Acral lick dermatitis
429
21
Diseases of the Panmiculus
538
Actinic furunculosis
429
 Postrabies vaccination panniculitis
538
Interdigital furunculosis
431
 Postinjection panniculitis
541
 Callus pyoderma
433
Sterile abscess of repositol injection
542
Canine acne
435
Traumatic panniculitis
545
Feline acne
437
Vasculitic panniculitis of thermal burns
547
Kerion
440
 Idiopathic sterile nodular panniculitis
548
Canine demodicosis
442
Vasculitic septal panniculitis
551
 Feline follicular demodicosis
447
 Feline pansteatitis
552
Pelodera dermatitis
449
Metatarsal fistulation of the German
Eosinophilic furunculosis of the face
450
 Shepherd Dog
553
Sebaceous adenitis
453
 Pancreatic panniculitis
555
X
Contents
SECTION TWO: NEOPLASMS AND
Apocrine secretory adenocarcinoma
677
OTHER TUMORS
Apocrine ductular carcinoma
681
Eccrine carcinoma
689
PART 1
EPITHELIAL NEOPLASMS AND
26  Nailbed Epithelial Tumors
695
OTHER TUMORS
561
Nailbed epithelial inclusion cyst
695
22
 Epidermal Tumors
562
 Nailbed inverted squamous papilloma
696
 Cutaneous horn of feline pawpad
562
Nailbed keratoacanthoma
698
Pawpad keratoma
562
Nailbed squamous cell carcinoma
700
 Linear epidermal hamartoma
564
Nailbed basal cell carcinoma
702
Dermoid cyst
566
 Metastatic pulmonary carcinoma in cats
703
Squamous papilloma
567
Viral papilloma
567
 Canine pigmented viral plaque
PART II
 MESENCHYMAL NEOPLASMS
571
AND OTHER TUMORS
709
Feline viral plaque
574
Actinic keratosis
575
27
Fibrous Tumors
710
Bowenoid in situ carcinoma
578
Collagenous hamartoma
710
Squamous cell carcinoma
581
Canine nodular dermatofbrosis
711
Basal cell carcinoma
589
Acrochordon and acrochordonous plaque
713
 Basosquamous carcinoma
597
Dermatofbroma
716
Nodular fasciitis
717
23 Follicular Tumors
604
Fibroma
719
 Follicular hamartoma
605
Canine keloidal fbroma
 Fibroadnexal hamartoma
721
605
Fibrosarcoma
722
 Follicular cyst
607
Myxoma
727
 Dilated pore
612
Myxosarcoma
728
Warty dyskeratoma
612
 Feline sarcoid
Trichofolliculoma
730
614
Trichoepithelioma
616
28
Vascular Tumors
735
 Infundibular keratinizing acanthoma
619
Angiomatosis
735
Tricholemmoma
621
Hemangioma
741
Pilomatricoma
624
Lymphangiomatosis
748
Trichoblastoma
625
Hemangiosarcoma
749
Malignant trichoepithelioma
634
 Lymphangiosarcoma
753
 Malignant pilomatricoma
637
29
Perivascular Tumors
759
24
 Sebaceous Tumors
641
Glomus tumor
759
Sebaceous duct cyst
641
Hemangiopericytoma
762
Nodular sebaceous hyperplasia
641
30
0 Lipocytic Tumors
766
Sebaceous hamartoma
643
Lipomatosis
766
Sebaceous nevus
643
Lipoma
766
Sebaceous adenoma
645
Spindle cell lipoma
770
 Sebaceous epithelioma
647
 Infltrative lipoma
771
Sebaceous carcinoma
650
Liposarcoma
772
Nodular perianal gland hyperplasia and
 perianal gland adenoma
655
31
 Smooth Muscle and Skeletal Muscle Tumors
778
Perianal gland epithelioma
658
Leiomyoma
778
Perianal gland carcinoma
659
Leiomyosarcoma
779
Canine skeletal muscle hamartoma
782
25 Sweat Gland Tumors
665
Rhabdomyosarcoma
783
Apocrine cyst
666
Canine apocrine cystomatosis
667
32
 Neural and Perineural Tumors
786
 Feline ceruminous cystomatosis
667
Traumatic neuroma
786
Apocrine cystadenoma
668
Merkel cell tumor
786
Apocrine secretory adenoma
670
 Benign peripheral nerve sheath tumor
789
Apocrine ductular adenoma
672
Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor
792
Contents
xi
33 Other Mesenchymal Tumors
797
 Feline progressive dendritic cell histiocytosis
845
Vaccine-induced sarcoma
797
Histiocytic sarcoma
848
Transmissible venereal tumor
800
36 Mast Cell Tumors
853
Ganglion
803
Canine mast cell tumor
853
Granular cell tumor
804
Feline mast cell tumor
858
 Anaplastic sarcoma with giant
Cutaneous mastocytosis
861
cells
806
Lymphocytic Tumors
866
34
 Melanocytic Tumors
813
Cutaneous plasmacytoma
866
Lentigo
814
Cutaneous lymphocytosis
Melanocytoma
872
815
 Epitheliotropic lymphoma
876
 Melanocytoma-acanthoma
822
 Nonepitheliotropic lymphoma
882
Melanoma
825
 Chronic lymphocytic leukemia with
35  Histiocytic Tumors
837
cutaneous lesions
888
 Reactive fibrohistiocytic nodule
837
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma
840
Index
895
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affoltet
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
SECTIONONE
INFLAMMATORY, DYSPLASTIC
ANDDEGENERATIVEDISEASES
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright  2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
PART I
Diseases of the Epidermis
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 1
Pustular diseases of the epidermis
Pustular diseases are characterized by the formation of
may be the primary pathogens in bullous impetigo (Ihrke,
pustules in the epidermis and may range from subcorneal
1996).
to panepidermal. Pustules result from breakdown in the
 The primary lesions of canine impetigo in young dogs
-e ro sisids aq so a jo ai
are nonfollicular pustules. Pustular contents vary from
sis, as well as the accumulation of inflammatory cells
creamy white to yellow. Since intact pustules are fragile
that migrate from the underlying dermal vasculature in
 and rupture readily, yellowish crusts adherent to mildly
response to superficial infectious agents or epidermal
erythematous papules may be the predominant clinical
damage. Pustules may be discrete or poorly defined, and
feature. Peripheral epidermal collarettes may remain as an
may contain neutrophils, eosinophils, and acantholytic or
additional “footprint’ of pyoderma. Follicular pustules
 apoptotic keratinocytes.
have central protruding hairs in contrast to the inter-
follicular pustules of impetigo; a hand lens is useful for
differentiation.  Differentiation  is  important  clinically
IMPETIGO
since impetigo responds more readily to therapy than
superficial folliculitis. Occasionally, a small number of fol-
Clinical features (Figures 1.1 and 1.2)
licular pustules (folliculitis) may coexist with impetigo;
Impetigo is a common canine bacterial skin disease char-
however either impetigo or folliculitis will predominate
acterized by superficial nonfollicular pustules. As in other
forms of canine pyoderma, Staphylococcus intermedius is
or sparsely-haired regions of the groin and axillae in
 the primary pathogen. Underlying causes usually are not
 young dogs. Partial bilateral symmetry is common. Pru-
 documented in the most common form of impetigo pre-
ritus, if present, is mild and lesions are non-painful and
senting in prepubescent and pubescent dogs. However,
otherwise asymptomatic.
inflammation secondary to fecal debris, urine scalding.
 In bullous impetigo of older dogs due to underlying
hair coat matting, and ectoparasitism may enhance sus-
immune suppression, pustules are larger and range from
ceptibility; poor environmental hygiene or poor nutrition
5 to 15 mm in diameter. These pustules are faccid and
may be contributory. A much less common bullous form
may span multiple follicles. Pustular contents can vary
of impetigo, sometimes seen in conjunction with under-
from white to yellow or even light green. Unusual color
lying immunosuppression, is most frequently observed in
in a pustule indicates the likelihood of a less common
older dogs.
Gram-negative bacterial infection, and thus warrants bac-
The pathogenesis of impetigo may involve staphylo-
terial culture. Bullous impetigo is seen most frequently
coccal exfoliative toxins, as seen in human bullous
with naturally occurring or iatrogenic hyperglucocorti-
impetigo (Prevost et al., 2003). These toxins may also
coidism, but has also been seen in conjunction with dia-
be involved in  exfoliative staphylococcal infections
 betes mellitus, hypothyroidism, lymphoid neoplasia, and
 d as) od ds lrdns se un
other debilitating diseases associated with immunosup-
 Exfoliative toxins have recently been identified in dogs
pression. This subgroup of impetigo usually begins in the
with staphylococcal pyoderma (Terauchi et al., 2003).
glabrous regions of the groin and axillae, but is much
Interestingly, desmoglein 1 is the target of both exfolia-
 more likely to generalize than the impetigo seen in young
tive toxins of staphylococci and the antibodies of pem-
dogs. Pruritus is uncommon.
phigus foliaceus in humans (Amagai et al., 2000),
Canine impetigo is seen most commonly in prepubes
which explains morphologic similarities  in  lesions.
 cent and pubescent dogs. Impetigo of adult or senile onset
Other nonstaphylococcal bacteria such as Pseudomonas
 is uncommon and suggests underlying disease. Breed or
spp., Enterobacter spp., and Escherichia coli occasionally
sex predilections have not been noted.
4
Pustular diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 1.1 Impetigo of the ventral abdomen of a pubescent dog. Note
Fig. 1.2 Bullous impetigo of the ventral abdomen of a Boxer with
the multiple crusted papules and the sparse intact pustules.
hyperadrenocorticism. A single large, intact, asymmetrical pustule is
surrounded by an erythermatous halo. The nipple exhibits calcinosis
cutis.
Fig. 1.3 Impetigo in a dog. Note the
large, discrete subcorneal pustule with
subjacent rmild spongiosis.
Clinical differential diagnoses for impetigo of young
Biopsy site selection
dogs include early onset flea allergy dermatitis and super-
Skin biopsy specimens should be obtained from intact
fcial folliculitis. Pruritus should be evident even with mild
flea allergy dermatitis, in contrast to the relatively mild or
pustules, if available. Crusted papules are not ideal as they
absent pruritus of impetigo. In folliculitis, the pustules are
represent pustules in advanced stages of degeneration.
oriented around hairs and their follicles, rather than
between them as in impetigo of young dogs. An uncom-
Histopathology (Figure 1.3)
mon variant of pemphigus foliaceus characterized by
intermittent waves of truncal pustules, ranging from 2 to
The typical microscopic lesion is a discrete subcorneal or
10 mm in diameter, can mimic bullous impetigo of adult 
intragranular pustule that is composed predominantly of
dogs.
neutrophils. Generally, pustules are elevated above the
Diseases of the epidermis
epidermal surface and are located between hair follicles.
In bullous impetigo, broader pustules span one or two
hair follicles. Spongiosis often occurs beneath pustules;
mild separation of keratinocytes (acantholysis) may be
present at the base, or there may be a few intrapustular
acantholytic cells. Rarely, there is marked acantholysis,
mimicking pemphigus foliaceus (see p. 13). Pustules
become crusts as inflammatory cells degenerate, and new
stratum corneum often develops at the base of these older
lesions. The epidermis is mildly to moderately acanthotic.
A bacterial stain often reveals Gram-positive cocci within
pustules. Stains are useful diagnostically only if the
pustule is intact, as any ruptured pustule may develop sec-
ondary bacterial colonization.
The dermis has superficial perivascular to interstitial,
Fig. 1.4 Superficial spreading pyoderma in a dog. Two asymmetri-
mixed inflammation with neutrophils predominating.
cal erythematous rmacules have slight peripheral collarettes.
 Mild to moderate dermal edema is common. There may
be concurrent folliculitis (see Chapter 16).
The principal differential diagnosis is pemphigus foli-
lo onadu snq jo as a u ad sne
when acantholysis is prominent. Acantholysis usually is
absent or minimal in impetigo and intact pustules reveal
bacteria, in contrast to the sterile intact pustules of pem-
phigus foliaceus. In pemphigus foliaceus, immunoglobu-
lin and frequently C3 may be found in the intercellular
spaces of the epidermis and often superficial follicular
epithelium with immunofluorescence or immunohisto-
be required if acantholysis is severe and/or if immunohis-
tochemical or immunofluorescence testing is negative or
not performed.
Fig. 1.5 Superficial spreading pyoderma in the glabrous skin of the
SUPERFICIAL SPREADING PYODERMA
ventral abdormen of a dog. A large collarette peels peripherally from
the border of the erythermatous macule.
(Synonym: exfoliative pyoderma)
allergic skin diseases. In humans, there is a high preva-
Clinical features (Figures 1.4 and 1.5)
lence of certain staphylococcal superantigens on the skin
Superfcial spreading pyoderma is a superficial bacterial
 of patients with atopic dermatitis (Mempel et al., 2003).
skin disease seen commonly in the dog and rarely in the
 Recently, staphylococcal superantigens with marked T
cat. Staphylococcus intermedius is the primary pathogen,
 cell blastogenesis potential have been isolated from
as in other forms of pyoderma. Superfcial spreading pyo-
Stapbylococcus intermedius strains obtained from canine
derma may be seen alone or more commonly in conjunc-
pyoderma (Hendricks et al., 2002). The marked inflam-
tion with superficial bacterial folliculitis (see Chapter 16).
mation and pruritus seen with canine superficial spread-
Exfoliative toxin has been isolated from strains of Staphy-
ing pyoderma in the setting of atopic dermatitis may be
lococcus intermedius from dogs with pyoderma; the iso-
due to superantigen production from inappropriate
lated toxin caused exfoliation of the skin of dogs and
staphylococcal bacterial colonization in susceptible dogs.
other species (Terauchi et al., 2003). Similar toxins have
Frequent localization of lesions to the glabrous intertrig-
also been recovered from pigs with exudative epidermitis,
inous regions of the groin and axillae suggests that
an exfoliative Stapbylococcus byicus infection (Tanabe et
anatomic factors leading to moisture, heat retention, and
al., 1996), and are recognized in staphylococcal scalded
frictional micro-trauma may be contributory to bacterial
skin, a severe form of exfoliative staphylococcal infection
 overgrowth and infection (Ihrke, 1996).
in humans (Prevost et al., 2003). Superfcial spreading
The more florid form of superficial spreading pyo-
pyoderma frequently occurs secondary to other underly-
 derma, seen most commonly in the Shetland Sheepdog.
ing diseases such as canine atopic dermatitis and other
usually is idiopathic; a breed predisposition to coloniza-
Pustular diseases of the epidermis
tion by exfoliative toxin-producing staphylococci is pos-
herds, and Collies may be predisposed to exceptionally
sible. A cat with chronic feline immunodeficiency virus
florid lesions.
(FIV) infection  presented  with  antibiotic-responsive
 The expanding macules with peripheral coalescing col-
lesions that clinically were strikingly similar to canine
larettes of superficial spreading pyoderma are distinctive
superfcial spreading pyoderma (Radowicz, S., personal
 and visually striking. Generalized truncal exfoliation may
communication, 2003).
be seen initially with thyroid hormone supplementation,
Erythematous macules enlarge centripetally from tiny
but is not accompanied by macules, papules, erythema, or
fransient pustules and create expanding coalescing ery-
collarettes. Clinical differential diagnoses for lesions with
thematous rings. At the margins of the expanding macules,
 peripheral epidermal collaretes include superficial bacte-
superficial keratin layers lift and peel peripherally forming
rial folliculitis, pemphigus foliaceus, erythema multi-
distinctive collarettes with well-demarcated borders. Indi-
forme, and sterile eosinophilic pustulosis. If pruritus and
vidual macules commonly achieve diameters of 1 to 2.5
self-trauma are marked, lesions may be considerably less
cm. Subtle central crusting may be present. Expanding
diagnostic and may resemble flea allergy dermatitis or
 dermatophytosis. History, clinical features, distribution of
other creating irregular arciform patterns that resemble
lesions, and often response to appropriate therapy allow
interconnecting ripples. In well-haired areas, alopecia
definitive diagnosis.
may occur in ring-like patterns within the confines of the
macules. Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation marks the
Biopsy site selection
site of previously active lesions. Lesions often are confined
to the glabrous skin of the ventrum, but may be more gen-
eralized on the trunk. Pruritus is variable and may not
advancing edge of the collarette. Biopsy of the central
region of an erythematous macule is less likely to yield
correlate with the magnitude of erythema. Superficial bac-
diagnostic results. If pustules are present, they also should
terial folliculitis may occur in conjunction with superficial
be sampled. When performing the skin biopsy, care
spreading pyoderma; one of the two syndromes usually
should be taken not to dislodge the scale present at the
predominates (Ihrke & Gross, 1994) (see Chapter 16). A
margin of the epidermal collarerte since this material is
particularly striking subgroup of combined superfcial
most likely to yield a definitive diagnosis.
spreading pyoderma and superficial folliculitis occurs
predominantly in Shetland Sheepdogs. In this highly char-
Histopathology (Figures 1.6 through 1.8)
acteristic subgroup, individual coalescing collarettes ema-
nating from sheet-like exfoliation may reach 5cm in
The microscopic appearance is variable and is highly
diameter, leading to widespread truncal alopecia.
dependent on the stage and site of lesions obtained for
Age, breed, or sex predilections have not been reported.
biopsy. Because lesions evolve rapidly in an outward
Shetland Sheepdogs, Border Collies, Australian Shep-
 direction, it may be difficult to obtain a diagnostic biopsy.
Fig. 1.6 Superficial spreading pyo-
derma in a dog. A large spongiotic
pustule is loosely organized in the
superficial epiderrmis.
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 1.7 Dunstan's blue line charac-
terized by dark subcorneal deposits
of degenerating cellular debris. Note
lifting of straturn corneum.
Fig. 1.8 Dunstan's blue line. Degen-
erating nuclear debris, fragments of
keratin, and numerous small cocci
(arrows) are intermingled at the
advancing edge of a pustule. Note the
elevated straturm corneum.
In less optimal specimens, such as those obtained from
mation is subtle; however, a close search usually reveals
small crusts within the stratum corneum. The lifted
lesions may be absent, making differentiation from
 stratum corneum is generally of basketweave appearance.
chronic dermatitis diffcult.
Gram-positive cocci may be seen within superficial
The most characteristic epidermal lesions, obtained
layers of keratin and may be accompanied by granular
from the periphery of an advancing collarette, consist of
basophilic cellular debris, collctively referred to as
small, loosely organized and spongiotic, superfcial epi-
"Dunstan's blue line'. In cases of minimal inflammation,
dermal pustules that rapidly form crusts, accompanied by
staphylococci may be distributed in exfoliating keratin in
lifting of the overlying stratum corneum from the epider-
a looser pattern. Lifting of keratin is evident above or just
mal surface. Occasionally, the lifting of the stratum
adjacent to the blue line, and this corresponds to the
corneum predominates and subjacent epidermal inflam-
peripheral scaling, or advancing epidermal collarette, seen
Pustular diseases of the epidermis
clinically. In this respect, lesions of superficial spreading
pyoderma resemble those of very early exudative epider-
mitis, a Stapbylococcus byicus infection seen in pigs. Early
macroscopic skin lesions of scaling in gnotobiotic pigs
correspond to microscopic splitting of the keratin layer
and superficial colonization by staphylococci (Lloyd,
D.H., Allaker R.A. & Gross, T.L., unpublished data,
1986). The exfoliative lesions also resemble those of
staphylococcal scalded skin in man, from which staphy-
lococcal exotoxins have been isolated, although the
canine lesions are clinically not as severe.
The dermis has a superficial perivascular to interstitial
admixture of neutrophils, plasma cells, lymphocytes,
eosinophils and mast cells. Neutrophils may predominate
in some lesions. Mild to moderate dermal edema is
Fig. 1.9 Perioral candidiasis in an elderly Poodle with superficial
common (see Chapter 9).
necrolytic dermatitis.
 In the cat with clinical lesions resembling superficial
spreading pyoderma (see above) there were large sub-
corneal pustules that dipped into superficial hair follicles.
Mild acantholysis was seen, as in impetigo (see p. 4). The
stratum corneum was lifted, but blue line formation was
not observed. Dermal inflammation was more severe than
observed in dogs, and neutrophils and eosinophils were
prominent.
 Differential diagnoses include impetigo and impetig-
inization due to self-trauma from pruritus. Ichthyosis and
exfoliation due to thyroid hormone supplementation also
must be considered for lesions in which inflammation is
subtle. Pustules of superfcial spreading pyoderma are
rarely as discrete as those of impetigo and do not confne
themselves as neatly to the subcorneal space. Lesions of
impetiginization found in chronic hyperplastic dermatitis
Fig. 1.10 Closer view of Fig 1.9. Dark crusts and tenacious mucoid
due to allergy (see Chapter 7) are compact neutrophilic
deposits adhere to erosions and mat the surrounding hair.
crusts, often admixed with parakeratosis or hyperkerato-
sis, and sometimes accompanied by erosion; frank pus-
tules usually are not seen and lifting of the stratum
reported pathogen, many other species have been identi-
corneum is not a feature. Lifting of the stratum corneum
fed as causative agents in individual cases. Candidiasis
is a feature of ichthyosis and thyroid hormone supple-
usually is seen as an opportunistic infection secondary to
mentation; the lifted keratin is of lamellar rather than
basketweave appearance in ichthyosis, but of normal bas-
 disease (Greene & Chandler 1998). Reported initiators
-udns auo prr u aueredde aam
 include hyperadrenocorticism, diabetes mellitus, hypothy-
tion. Careful searching usually will reveal small crusts
roidism, cancer inherited defects of the immune system,
within the stratum corneum of lesions of superfcial
and immunosuppressive drug therapy. Disruption of
spreading pyoderma, in contrast to the noninflamed
normal barrier function and factors that disturb the
stratum corneum of ichthyosis and exfoliation due to
normal endogenous microflora may contribute.
thyroid hormone supplementation.
 Ulcers and erosions are coated with adherent, tena-
cious, foul-smelling gray exudate. The oral mucosa,
mucocutaneous junctions and distal extremities are the
CANDIDIASIS
most frequently involved sites. Lesions also may be seen
in the external ear, perineum, nares, vulva, scrotum, and
Clinical features (Figures 1.9 and 1.10)
glabrous intertriginous skin. Pruritus and pain are vari-
Candidiasis is a very rare fungal disease reported in dogs
able but may be intense. Canine Candida pododermatitis
and cats that is caused by species of the genus Candida.
may involve single or multiple paws and is characterized
Although Candida albicans is the most commonly
by erythema, oozing, pruritus, and pain (Carlotti & Pinn,
10
Diseases of the epidermis
1999). In all forms of candidiasis, secondary bacterial
Histopathology (Figures 1.11 and 1.12)
invasion may contribute to morbidity, pruritus, and pain.
Microscopic fndings consist of moderate to severe,
Sex or breed predilections have not been noted. Can
superfcial epidermal pustulation, generally composed of
didiasis may be seen more frequently in adult and elderly
neutrophils. Large areas of surface pustulation and
animals with immunosuppression or debilitation as con-
serocellular crusting with parakeratosis may be present;
tributing factors.
discrete small pustules generally are not seen. Subjacent
Clinical differential diagnoses reflect the site affected.
spongiosis is often prominent. Secondary erosion and
Mucosal and mucocutaneous lesions may mimic auto-
ulceration are common. Intact epidermis is moderately
immune skin disease (pemphigus vulgaris, bullous
acanthotic
pemphigoid, systemic lupus erythematosus), other im-
 Discovery of yeast and pseudohyphae or hyphae of
munologic diseases (erythema multiforme, epidermolysis
Candida species in superficial crusts or pustules is critical
bullosa acquisita), epitheliotropic lymphoma (mycosis
diagnostically. Organisms may be found on routine exam-
fungoides), uremic stomatitis, and superficial necrolytic
ination with hematoxylin and eosin (HE), but are more
 dermatitis. Cutaneous lesions may mimic pyotraumatic
 obvious with the use of periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) stain
dermatitis, and intertriginous candidiasis must be differ-
which reveals brilliant magenta, oval-shaped, budding
entiated from bacterial intertrigo. As a further complica-
yeast, measuring 3 to 4 μm in diameter, as well as tangled
tion, candidiasis may occur secondary to any of the
pseudohyphae. Inflammation and yeast colonization may
diseases mentioned above, especially if immunosuppres-
extend to superfcial hair follicles (Scott et al., 2001).
sion is present. Stained smears from exudate demonstrat-
Dermal  inflammation  is superficial perivascular to
ing blastoconidia and pseudohyphae are a diagnostic aid,
 interstitial, and mixed, and includes a prominent com-
but defnitive diagnosis cannot be made without biopsy
ponent of neutrophils, with mixtures of lymphocytes,
and culture.
plasma cells and macrophages. Dermal edema is variable
but is usually mild to moderate.
The pustular and crusting inflammation of candidiasis
Biopsy site selection
is reminiscent of superficial spreading pyoderma but is
Intact crusted lesions should be selected. Care should be
 generally more severe. Discovery of yeast is required for
taken to leave crusts attached to the specimens. The
definitive diagnosis. Superficial pustular dermatophytosis
pathology service should be instructed to include any sep-
may resemble candidiasis. It may be diffcult to differen-
arated crusts in the slide preparation. Ulcers should not
tiate pseudohyphae and hyphae of candidiasis from
be sampled alone since an intact epidermis or mucosa may
hyphae of dermatophytic origin. The concurrent presence
be essential for the identifcation of organisms in tissue.
of budding yeast indicates likely candidiasis; however,
Fig. 1.11 Candidiasis in a dog. A
large superficial pustule is accompa-
nied by marked epidermal edema.
Pustular diseases of the epidermis
11
Fig. 1.12 Candida sp. in superficial
keratin (periodic acid-Schiff).
culture is required for definitive differentiation. Candidi-
asis can complicate superfcial necrolytic dermatitis;
lesions compatible with superfcial necrolytic dermatitis
(see Chapter 4) should be searched for in specimens with
superficial yeast colonization.
SUPERFICIAL PUSTULAR
DERMATOPHYTOSIS
(Synonym: keratin-colonizing dermatophytosis)
Clinical features (Figure 1.13)
Superficial pustular dermatophytosis is an uncommon,
predominantly facially-oriented skin disease seen occa
sionally in the dog. It is caused by keratin-colonizing der-
matophytes that affect the surface stratum corneum or
superfcial follicular keratin preferentially over hair. A
similar but even more rare syndrome is seen in cats. The
zoophilic dermatophyte Trichophyton mentagrophytes is
isolated in most reported cases. Trichopbyton mentagro-
pbytes var. erinacei may be the most common ker-
atinophilic dermatophyte seen in the dog (Fairley, 2001).
Fig. 1.13 Superficial pustular dermatophytosis in a dog. Lesions are
The European hedgehog is the natural host for Tri-
bilaterally syrnmetric affecting both the haired skin and the planum
chophyton mentagrophytes var. erinacei, which has been
nasale of the muzzle. (Photograph courtesy A.A. Stannard.)
reported to cause facially-oriented dermatophytosis in
dogs in Europe, Great Britain, and New Zealand (Fairley,
2001). However, other dermatophytes (Trichopbyton ter-
acantholysis. It has been theorized that in humans and in
restre,Microsporum persicolor, and Epidermophyton
dogs, acantholysis results from complement-mediated,
floccosum) also have been culrured less frequently.
 transepidermal neutrophilic chemotaxis, as well as prote-
This syndrome is distinct from most cases of dermato-
olytic enzymes secreted by the dermatophyte (Poisson
phytosis. Clinically it mimics facially oriented autoim-
et al., 1998). Also, these dermatophytes may be less well
mune skin disease, and histologically it is characterized in
 adapted to canine and feline hosts, and thus induce a
part by superfcial neutrophilic pustules, sometimes with
 more florid cell-mediated response (Parker & Yager,
12
Diseases of the epidermis
1997). Superficial pustular dermatophytosis has also been
phytosis usually does not violate the planum nasale and
seen occasionally as a more generalized disease in dogs
alter the normal cobblestone appearance. Facial superf-
with severe systemic illness that may have been immuno-
cial pustular dermatophytosis is much more likely to be
suppressed: these dogs have shown a poor response to
bilaterally symmetric than demodicosis. Dermatophyte
 therapy. Severe, generalized superfcial pustular dermato-
culture and skin biopsy are recommended for definitive
phytosis has been reported secondary to pituitary depend-
diagnosis.
ent hyperadrenocorticism (Chen & Su, 2002).
Clinical features include pustules that rapidly rupture,
Biopsy site selection
giving rise to inflamed erythematous papules and plaques
with copious adherent crusts. Intact pustules, when
Intact pustules should be sampled if present. If only
present, vary in size from 1 to 5 mm. Larger pustules may
chronic crusted lesions remain, care should be taken to
be asymmetric and not completely circular. Erosions and
include the crusts. The pathology service should be
ulceration may be present. Lichenification, alopecia, and
 instructed to process any nonadherent crusts.
hyperpigmentation occur rapidly with chronicity. Lesions
gradually extend into adjacent normal skin. Rarely,
Histopathology (Figures 1.14 and 1.15)
similar lesions have been seen in cats.
The most common site of involvement is the face,
This form of dermatophytosis is characterized by super-
including the dorsal and lateral muzzle, and the perior-
bital region. Unlike other facial dermatophyte infections,
may be large and broad, resembling those of pemphigus
 the planum nasale may occasionally be affected. Bilateral
foliaceus. The degree of acantholysis is relatively mild in
symmetry is common with facial orientation. Other
most cases, but in some canine cases it may be prominent.
regions of the body may be affected. Pawpads and the
Superficial pustular dermatophytosis with minimal to no
margins of pawpads may be affected in dogs with super-
acantholytic cells has been seen in cats. There is variable,
ficial necrolytic dermatitis (see Chapter 4).
sometimes severe, hyperkeratosis of the epidermis and
        
superfcial hair follicles; keratin is colonized by dermato-
increased risk. Three of four affected dogs reported
phytic spores and hyphae. Organisms may be diffcult to
recently from New Zealand were Bull
Terriers
identify with hematoxylin and eosin (HE), and are best
(Fairley, 2001). Age and sex predilections have not been
found using periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) or Gomori's
noted.
methenamine silver (GMS) stains. These demonstrate
 Clinical differential diagnoses include facially-oriented
typical magenta (PAS) or black (GMS) dermatophytic
autoimmune skin diseases such as pemphigus foliaceus
hyphae and spores within keratin of the epidermis and
 and pemphigus erythematosus, demodicosis, and other 
hair follicles, sometimes in small numbers, but often
dermatophyte infections. In contrast to facially-oriented
numerous. In dogs, the dermatophytes very rarely invade
autoimmune skin disease, superfcial pustular dermato-
hair shafts, leading to the alternate designation of this
Fig. 1.14 Superficial pustular der-
matophytosis in a cat. Note broad
subcorneal pustule.
Pustular diseases of the epidermis
13
Fig. 1.16 Pemphigus foliaceus in a cat. Note symmetrical crusting
and alopecia. (Photograph courtesy A.C. Mundell; case material
University of California, Davis.)
folliculitis or pyogranulomatous furunculosis may be
observed.
Differential diagnoses include pemphigus foliaceus,
superficial spreading pyoderma, and candidiasis. Pemphi-
gus foliaceus features more acantholysis than most cases
of  superficial  pustular  dermatophytosis.  Superficial
spreading pyoderma demonstrates blue line formation
(see p. 6), which is absent in superfcial pustular der-
Fig. 1.15 High magnification of superficial pustular dermatophy-
matophytosis. Pustular folliculitis, when present, is sug-
tosis in a cat. Keratin-colonizing dermatophytes are within a follic-
ular ostiurm adjacent to the edge of a superficial pustule (periodic
gestive of dermatophytosis, particularly in cats. The
acid-Schiff).
presence of concomitant mural follicular inflammation
also is a feature of this type of dermatophyte infection
(see Chapter 18). In all cases demonstration of fungi is
form of dermatophytosis as keratin-colonizing dermato-
required for definitive diagnosis. Culture may be required
phytosis'. In cats, typical invasion of hair shafts usually is
 to differentiate superficial pustular dermatophytosis from
present and organisms are generally easier to see, even on
candidiasis.
HE evaluation (see Chapter 16).
There may be hyperkeratosis without inflammation in
PEMPHIGUS FOLIACEUS
rare biopsy specimens, notably in cats. Dermatophytes
may be sparse in these cases; careful search using a PAS
Clinical features (Figures 1.16 through 1.18)
or GMS stain, if necessary, should always be made, par-
ticularly when obtained from a cat with scaling or alope-
Pemphigus foliaceus (PF) is an uncommon bullous
cia reported as clinical fndings.
autoimmune skin disease of dogs and cats that affects the
Superficial dermal inflammation is perivascular to inter-
epidermis and hair folicles. Desmoglein 1 (Dsg 1) is the
stitial, and includes neutrophils and mixed mononuclear
suuq ui se dd auues u uaaiueone paaren kreund
cells. In some canine cases there may be a band-like
(Suter et al., 1993; Iwasaki et al., 1997); other antigens
pattern of dermal inflammation, including lymphocytes
 in addition to Dsg 1 may be targeted. Autoantibodies bind
and plasma cells, that may be either lichenoid (without
 to Dsg 1, which is a prominent component of the desmo-
basal cell damage) or interface (with basal cell damage; 
somes in the superficial layers of the epidermis and hair
see Chapters 3 and 11) (Parker & Yager, 1997). Inflam-
 follicles. In humans, the clinical phenotype of the pem
mation often extends to the wall of the hair follicles 1
 phigus group of diseases is defined by the antidesmoglein
(mural folliculitis; see Chapter 18). In addition, pustular 
autoantibody profle; mucosal-dominant pemphigus
14
Diseases of the epidermis
apoptosis  following cellular detachment  (termed
‘anoikis') characterizes pemphigus, and may be related to
increased Fas ligand (FasL) in patients’ sera; FasL/Fas
        
extrinsic apoptotic pathway (Puviani et al., 2003). Apop-
tosis is characteristic of PF in animals as well (see
below).
 Drug-related, PF-like disease can occur. The term 'pem-
phigus foliaceus-like drug reaction’ may be used when
clinical, histopathologic, and immunopathologic features
mirror naturally occurring PF, and the disease disappears
when the offending drug is discontinued. The term 'drug-
induced pemphigus foliaceus may be used when clinical,
histopathologic, and immunopathologic features mirror
Fig. 1.17 Pemphigus foliaceus in a dog. Multiple intact and recently
naturally occurring PF, and the disease continues after
ruptured vesicopustules are rmore irregular in contour than most pus-
 drug withdrawal. Drug-related PF (both PF-like drug
tules caused by bacterial pyoderma.
reaction and drug-induced PF) is reported as a sequela to
the administration of various antibiotics (trimethoprim-
potentiated sulfonamides, cephalexin) (White et al.,
 2002). The authors have seen methimazole initiate drug-
related PF in cats. To qualify for categorization as
drug-related PF, the skin disease must closely mimic the
naturally occurring disease, clinically, histopathologically,
 and immunopathologically. However possible markers
Araa 'asuo piden Aensnun apnou Id peneia-nap ro
early age of onset, oral lesions, and any other features
atypical for naturally occurring disease. Some overlap
Occurs between drug-related PF and superficial pustular
onosi ie  et d ss s 
and immunopathological parameters stray too far from
those seen with naturally occurring PF, then the term
‘superfcial pustular drug reaction' may be more
Fig. 1.18 Canine pemphigus foliaceus restricted to the pawpads.
appropriate.
demonstrating the wave-like progression of the disease.
Transient  superficial pustules  (or  vesicopustules)
develop in waves. Individual pustules may be large (2 t0
6mm in diameter) and vary in color from translucent,
yulgaris, mucocutaneous pemphigus vulgaris, and PF all
t0 gray-white, to yellow. Coalescence of pustules leads to
have different and distinctive antidesmoglein autoanti-
visually distinct intact pustules or vesicopustules with
body profles (Amagai et al., 1999). A similar circum-
irregular asymmetric, polycyclic borders. Pustules fre-
stance probably exists in the dog. Pemphigus foliaceus is
  p    s 
likely a heterogeneous immunological disease, which may
may protrude from individual pustules. Animals may
explain the clinical and histological variations observed
progress from absence of lesions to sudden development
(Olivry, T.O., personal communication, 2001).
of dozens of pustules. Pustules quickly eventuate in thick,
The exact pathomechanism of vesicle and bulla forma-
adherent crusts with marked exfoliation. These exfolia-
tion is not known. However, loss of intercellular cohesion
tive crusts are the most common clinical lesions of PF.
leads to acantholysis resulting in superfcial vesicles and
Rarely, erosions from ruptured pustules may exhibit
 bullae. Plakoglobin may conceivably play a role, as has
targetoid or polycyclic patterns. Alopecia is variable.
been demonstrated in the similarly acantholytic disease,
Generalized erythroderma may be seen. Characteristic
pemphigus vulgaris, in dogs (Calhedari et al., 2001).
pawpad lesions in dogs consist of erythematous swelling
Antikeratinocyte IgG4 autoantibodies may be relevant to
at the pad margins, and cracking and villous hypertrophy
the pathogenesis of PF in dogs, as circulating IgG4 anti-
of the pads. Whitish discoloration beneath the surface of
bodies were noted in 80% of dogs with the disease and
the pad may indicate an intact subcorneal pustule. Pruri-
decreased in 67% of dogs in remission due to immuno-
tus is noted in less than one-half of affected dogs. Photo.
suppressive therapy (Hogan et al., 2002). In humans,
phobia may be noted but is unexplained. In contrast to
Pustular diseases of the epidermis
15
canine lesions, feline lesions usually are much milder in
skin diseases, such as superficial pustular dermato-
severity. In the cat, pustules and vesicles eventuate very
phytosis, (follicular) dermatophytosis, lupus erythemato-
rapidly in erosions with adherent yellowish crusts.
sus, demodicosis, zinc-responsive dermatosis, sebaceous
 The most common sites of involvement in the dog are
adenitis, and mycosis fungoides (epitheliotropic malig-
the dorsal muzzle, planum nasale, pinnae, periorbital
nant T cell lymphoma; see Chapter 37). However the fre-
skin, and pawpads. Pawpad lesions vary considerably in
 quent bilateral symmetry and periodic ‘waves' of pustules
severity but almost always are present. Truncal lesions are
observed in PF are important differentiating features.
variable but may be diffuse. Striking bilateral symmetry
When bilaterally symmetric facial lesions are present, the
is a common and key feature. Occasionally, the disease
involvement of both haired skin and the non-haired
may be predominantly confined to the face (see below) or
planum nasale is a key differentiating feature of PF.
pawpads. Less commonly, mucocutaneous junctions can
Drug-induced PF may be indistinguishable from classic
be affected. One author (P.J.I.) has seen two dogs with
-oisiu nou) suonnan anip rensnd jeioyadns rao id
lesions of PF confined to the lip folds; another dog had
logically compatible with PF) may partially resemble PF
lesions confned to the medial surface of both pinnae. In
(see p. 23). Superficial pustular dermatophytosis may be
cats, lesions are less widespread and often are restricted
the most diffcult disease to distinguish from canine PF,
to the muzzle, planum nasale, ear pinnae, around
the
and dermatophytosis also may be the most problematic
nipples, and the distal extremities, especially affecting the
 differential diagnosis in the cat. Positive Tzanck prepara-
ungual folds of the claws and pawpad margins. As in
tions from intact vesicopustules or pale central regions on
dogs, one author (T.L.G.) has seen perioral lesions just at
pawpads may document the presence of individual acan-
the juncture of the lips. The authors have also seen two
tholytic cells or rafts of acantholytic cells. Histopathology
is required to confrm the diagnosis.
extremity.
A clinically distinctive subset of PF, termed “facially-
Biopsy site selection
predominant pemphigus foliaceus', is seen in the Chow
Chow, Akita, and occasionally in other breeds. One 
 Because of the fragile and transient nature of primary
author (E.J.W.) has observed several cases in Siberian
lesions in PF, early lesions (pustules and vesicopustules)
Huskies. Bilaterally symmetric facial lesions are charac-
 should be obtained promptly. Diagnostic histopathology
terized by increased severity with ulceration. Lesions of
may not be forthcoming from older crusted lesions. If
lesser severity may be seen on the trunk and elsewhere.
 only crusted lesions are available, these should be pro-
An additional clinically distinctive subset characterized by
cured carefully, and the pathology service should be
widespread truncal pustules with or without facial or
instructed to include any dissociated crusts in the slide
pedal involvement may occur more commonly in the
preparation. Sites directly adjacent to early pustules
Cocker Spaniel and the Chihuahua.
should be sampled for direct immunofluorescence or
The Bearded Collie, Akita, Chow Chow, Newfoundland,
immunohistochemical testing.
Schipperke, and Doberman Pinscher are genetically pre-
disposed. More recently, the English Springer Spaniel,
Histopathology (Figures 1.19 and 1.20)
Chinese Shar Pei, and Collie also have been shown to be
at increased risk (Kuhl et al., 1994). Facially-predominant
Broad, discrete, subcorneal or intragranular pustules
PF is seen more commonly in the Chow Chow and Akita.
within a variably acanthotic epidermis are the typical
Canine PF usually is a disease of middle age, but dogs of
histopathologic lesions of PF. Pustules often span several
any age may be affected. The mean age of onset is 4 years
follicles and may extend into the follicular infundibula.
with two-thirds of dogs developing lesions at or before 5
Mural pustular follicular inflammation may occur (see
years of age (Ihrke et al., 1985). Sex predilections have
 Chapter 16). Pustules are composed of neutrophils and
not been noted. Age, sex, or breed predilections have not
often eosinophils. Individualized, rounded, often brightly
been reported for the cat. Some cases of PF may occur as
eosinophilic, acantholytic keratinocytes are present in
a consequence of chronic, on-going inflammatory skin
small to large numbers within pustules. Free foating
disease; dogs that developed PF often had a history of
'rafts’ of partially adherent acantholytic cells and ad-
long-term inflammatory skin disease (Pascal et al., 1995).
herence of acantholytic cells to the overlying stratum
Superficial bacterial folliculitis is the major clinical dif-
corneum are both characteristic histopathologic features
ferential diagnosis for PF. Pustules seen with PF usually
of PF. Neutrophils may encircle and cling to individual
are larger and more irregular in contour than the pustules
acantholytic cells. Active acantholysis, characterized by
seen with superficial bacterial folliculitis, which tend to
 rounding up of keratinocytes, which appear to be 'spring-
be more circular. Permphigus foliaceus also can appear
ing’ from the underlying epidermis, are found beneath
visually similar to other crusting, pustular and exfoliative
 pustules. Rarely, acantholysis without pustule formation
16
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 1.19 Canine pemphigus foli-
aceus. A subcorneal pustule contains
acantholytic cells.
Fig. 1.20 High magnification of
subcorneal pustule from a dog with
pemphigus foliaceus. Prominent acan-
tholytic cells are free-floating; partially
acantholytic cells are adhered to the
roof of the pustule.
may be seen in the superfcial epidermis; these lesions
underlying epidermis, and their ultimate shedding into
resermble a ‘crumbling brick wall. In these lesions,
crusts. Keratinocytes that are disconnected via spongiotic
affected keratinocytes are hypereosinophilic, slightly
mechanisms may appear less rounded and more ragged or
rounded, and separated from the underlying epidermis.
angular than typical acantholytic cells in early stages, but
Because pustules are transient, active acantholysis and
may be indistinguishable once they are within aged crusts.
pustulation often are not present in biopsy specimens; the
As a further complication, spongiosis rather than acan-
diagnosis may then depend upon the demonstration of
tholysis may be prominent at the base of otherwise typical
degenerated free keratinocytes in crusts. Some caution is
pustules of PF.
warranted in relying on free keratinocytes alone for the
Facially-predominant PF, as seen in Chow Chows,
diagnosis of PF since spongiosis, as seen in superficial pyo-
Akitas, and other breeds, is a deeper inflammatory
derma and other inflammatory diseases of the epidermis,
 process that frequently involves the wall of hair follicles,
can also result in separation of keratinocytes from the
often in full thickness distribution ('panfollicular pem-
Pustular diseases of the epidermis
17
phigus'; see Chapter 16). Similarly, pustules may extend
11). Lichenoid inflammation is most likely a reflection of
through the epidermis and be found at all levels rather
anatomic location rather than a specifc feature of PF;
than just superficially. In addition to acantholysis, brightly
chronic lesions of the planum such as mucocutaneous
eosinophilic, contracted, apoptotic keratinocytes
are
pyoderma and discoid lupus erythematosus also feature
 often prominent in this form of PF, particularly in deeper
lichenoid dermatitis (see Chapter 11). Pigmentary incon-
epidermal or mural follicular pustules. Confrmation of
tinence, or the accumulation of melanophages in the
apoptosis in PF lesions in dogs was performed using
superficial dermis, may be prominent.
immunohistochemistry for the detection of free 3' DNA
IgG, frequently C3, and less commonly IgM, may be
ends (resulting from endonuclease activity in apoptosis)
found in the intercellular spaces of the epidermis and
(Noli et al., 1998). These apoptotic cells are surrounded
often superficial follicular epithelium with immunofluo-
by neutrophils and sometimes a few lymphocytes or his-
rescence or immunohistochemical testing (Ihrke et al.,
tiocytes. Early lesions are often characterized by one or
1985). Findings in drug-related PF were similar (White
two apoptotic keratinocytes surrounded by a few neu-
12
al., 2002). In contrast to pemphigus vulgaris,
trophils; these lesions may be subtle, but are nevertheless
immunoglobulin deposition may be confined to the super-
diagnostic.
ficial epidermis. Only 40-50% of random biopsy speci-
Deep follicular pustulation in hair follicles may mimic
mens are positive for immunoglobulin deposition, but
lesions of pemphigus vegetans because the pustules may
sequential biopsy specimens from affected animals may
lie in a suprabasilar location, thus mimicking suprabasi-
increase the likelihood of a positive result.
lar clefting of pemphigus vegetans (a variant of pemphi-
 In a recent report, immunohistochemical staining for
 gus vulgaris). The case in the frst edition of this textbook
desmoglein 1 in 62% of dogs with PF demonstrated al-
was most likely panfollicular PF (see Chapter 16) and not
teration of expression of this molecule from the uniform
pemphigus vegetans. The authors have not seen a con-
fnely granular delineation found in normal keratinocytes,
vincing case of pemphigus vegetans in the dog or cat.
as observed in some human cases. Alterations included
Drug-related PF may be indistinguishable histologically.
 clumped staining at the periphery of keratinocytes and/or
Transepidermal apoptosis, as seen in erythema multi-
dark cytoplasmic staining characterized by streaked or
forme (see Chapter 4), with or without neutrophilic satel-
perinuclear deposits (Steeves et al., 2002).
litosis was reported in two of four cases of drug related
 The principal histopathologic differential diagnoses
PF in dogs (White et al., 2002). Those cases may repre-
for PF include bullous impetigo, superficial pustular
sent collision of two distinct immunoreactive, drug-
drug reactions, and superficial pustular dermatophytosis.
related processes rather than PF with excessive apoptosis.
Intact pustules of impetigo may contain cocci, and vari-
Pemphigus foliaceus of the pawpads often
shows
able free keratinocytes; however active acantholysis is
degenerating pustules and crusts entrapped in thick layers
usually absent. Drug-related PF is essentially indistin-
of dense hyperkeratotic or focally parakeratotic keratin.
guishable histologically; in addition, other clinically
Acantholytic keratinocytes are easily demonstrated within
superfcial pustular drug reactions may resemble PF
lesions. The thick keratin layer of the pawpad is more dif-
histologically. Clinical differentiation may be required.
fcult to disrupt, and acts as a sturdier roof over the pus-
Superfcial pustular dermatophytosis should be carefully
tules; thus, they are maintained intact for longer periods
considered, particularly for those lesions that have epi-
of time than in lesions elsewhere.
dermal and follicular hyperkeratosis or folliculocentric
A rare variant of PF is characterized by prominent
pustular or mural inflammation. A periodic acid-Schiff
spongiotic eosinophilic pustulation of the epidermis or
(PAS) stain is required for differentiation and should be
superficial hair follicles. Acantholysis is not a feature.
utilized liberally in all cases for which even slight suspi-
Affected animals develop typical histopathologic lesions
cion for dermatophytosis exists.
 of PF in later stages of the disease.
Combined interface dermatitis and superficial pustular
Dermal inflammation is superfcial, mixed, and peri-
lesions characterize pemphigus erythematosus, a rare
vascular to interstitial, and is accompanied by edema,
variant of pemphigus (see p. 18). These fndings are
vascular ectasia and congestion. Neutrophils and eosino-
 similar to facially-predominant PF, but basal cell damage,
phils usually are prominent, and are intermingled with
 Or true interface dermatitis, is a feature of pemphigus
macrophages, lymphocytes or plasma cells. In the cat,
erythematosus, whereas lichenoid inflammation (with
eosinophils may be absent or sparse in dermal inflamma-
absent to minimal interface change) is generally more
tion; neutrophilic predominance in dermal inflammation
prominent in facially-predominant PF. The principal
is characteristic of feline PF. In facially predominant PF
 microscopic method for diferentiating these two diseases
of dogs, lesions of the dorsal muzzle and planum nasale
is through immunofluorescence or immunohistochemical
usually have band-like or lichenoid dermal inflammation
techniques; pemphigus erythematosus exhibits deposition
with absent or minimal interface damage (see Chapter
of immunoglobulin along the basement membrane in
18
Diseases of the epidermis
are confined to the dorsal muzzle, planum nasale, periorbital region,
Fig. 1.22 Pemphigus erythematosus in a Spitz-crossbreed. Adher-
and the pinnae. {From Ihrke, PJ. et al. (1985) Pemphigus foliaceus
ent, thick crusts symmetrically cover the dorsal muzzle and planum
in dogs: a review of 37 cases. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 186, 59-66.
nasale.
Reprinted with permission.)
aggravation, are possible differentiating features. Clinical
addition to the intercellular spaces of the epidermis. Clin-
features coupled with a positive antinuclear antibody
 ical differentiation (including a positive antinuclear anti-
(ANA) test suggest a diagnosis of PE.
body (ANA) test) is also required. Prominent apoptosis in
The Collie and the German Shepherd Dog may be at
facially-predominant PF may be confused with erythema
increased risk (Scott et al., 1987). Canine age or sex
multiforme (see Chapter 4). However apoptotic cells in
predilections have not been noted. Statistical predilections
facially-predominant PF are surrounded by neutrophils,
have not been reported for the cat.
while in erythema multiforme they are surrounded by
Clinical
differential
diagnoses
should
 include
lymphocytes (satellitosis).
facially-predominant
pemphigus
foliaceus,
discoid
lupus erythematosus, superfcial pustular dermatophyto-
PEMPHIGUS ERYTHEMATOSUS
sis, epitheliotropic T cell lymphoma (mycosis fungoides),
and Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like disease. Careful exami-
nation of dogs with facially-predominant pemphigus
Clinical features (Figures 1.21 and 1.22)
foliaceus generally reveals lesions at other sites. Facially-
Pemphigus erythematosus (PE) is a very rare variant of
predominant pemphigus foliaceus is a more severely
pemphigus foliaceus reported in the dog and cat. This
ulcerative disease than PE. A positive ANA test and direct
disease has been characterized as either a benign form of
immunofluorescence testing are prerequisites for a confr-
pemphigus foliaceus or a crossover syndrome between
matory diagnosis of PE in the dog.
pemphigus foliaceus and systemic lupus erythematosus
(see Chapter 3). Lesions have been exacerbated in a dog
Biopsy site selection
by ultraviolet light, both in vivo and in vitro (Iwasaki &
Maeda, 1997).
See Pemphigus foliaceus, p. 13.
Clinical signs are very similar to those of pemphigus
foliaceus, but usually are less severe. The lesions of PE are
Histopathology (Figure 1.23)
confned to the face. Bilaterally symmetric crusting,
exudation, and alopecia of the face are as seen with pem-
In man, PE is indistinguishable from pemphigus foliaceus.
phigus foliaceus. Depigmentation of the dorsal muzzle
In dogs, lesions of PE, although similar to facially.
and planum nasale, with attendant marked photo-
predominant pemphigus foliaceus (see p. 13), are less
Pustular diseases of the epidermis
19
Fig. 1.23 Canine pemphigus erythe-
matosus. Two small intraepidermal
pustules contain acantholytic cells.
Note interface infiltrate with basal cell
vacuolation.
severe. Lichenoid, or band-like, inflammation is not as
prominent as it is in facially-predominant pemphigus foli-
aceus. Also, basal cell damage (interface dermatitis)
Occurs prominently in PE, and resembles the interface der-
matitis of lupus erythematosus (see Chapter 3). However,
in order to make a definitive diagnosis of PE, immuno-
fluorescence  or  immunohistochemical  testing  should
demonstrate deposition of IgG in the intercellular spaces
of the epidermis as well as at the basement membrane
zone. This represents a combination of the patterns of
immunoglobulin deposition seen in both pemphigus foli-
aceus and lupus erythematosus.
 The differential diagnosis is facially-predominant pem-
phigus foliaceus and its attendant differential diagnoses
(see p. 13). Interface degeneration is a feature of PE, but
Fig. 1.24 Subcorneal pustular dermatosis in a dog. Yellow pustules,
generally is absent in facially-predomimant pemphigus
crusting, and collarettes are present on the ventral abdomen.
foliaceus. Without confrmatory immunologic fndings,
(Photograph courtesy S.D. White; case material University of Cali
fornia, Davis.)
assignment of a diagnosis of PE may be diffcult. Adher-
ence to the immunologic criteria of PE requires that the
diagnosis be made only when immunohistochemical or
immunofluorescence testing is compatible, and when
superfcial pustular drug reactions or superficial pustular
other clinical testing (including a positive ANA test) is
dermatophytosis. The etiology of subcorneal pustular
supportive.
dermatosis is not known.
Affected dogs are reported to have a generalized or
multifocal, pustular and exfoliative dermatitis (McKeever
& Dahl, 1977; Kalaher & Scott, 1990; Scott et al., 2001).
SUBCORNEAL PUSTULAR DERMATOSIS
The face and ears are commonly involved. The pustules
may be green or yellow (Scott et al., 2001). Pustules
Clinical features (Figure 1.24)
are transient and are accompanied by crusting, scaling.
Subcorneal pustular dermatosis is a very rare, controver-
alopecia, erythema, and epidermal collarettes. Pruritus is
sial superficial pustular skin disease in the dog. It is the
variable but may be extreme.
authors' belief that this syndrome has been over-diag-
Miniature Schnauzers are reported as a breed at high
nosed in the past; some reported cases may represent
risk (McKeever & Dahl, 1977). Age or sex predilections
20
Diseases of the epidermis
have not been noted. Some affected dogs have been
 Immunofluorescence or immunohistochemical testing
puppies (under 6 months of age). One author (T.L.G.) has
for IgG is negative. It is unknown if some cases of sub-
seen several cases of nonantibiotic-responsive subcorneal
corneal pustular dermatosis are IgA-associated, as in
 pustular skin disease in Dachshunds.
humans, since IgA testing is not routinely performed in
 Major clinical differential diagnoses include superfcial
diagnostic laboratory settings. IgA assays on several cases
bacterial folliculitis, pemphigus foliaceus, superficial pus-
observed by t
the authors, and others (Olivry, T.O.,
tular dermatophytosis, or pruritic skin disease with sec-
personal communication, 2001) have been negative. In
 ondary superficial bacterial folliculitis. Repeated bacterial
general, subcorneal pustular dermatosis has been diag-
cultures of intact pustules and dermatophyte cultures of
nosed histopathologically by exclusion; results of clinical
crusts are negative in subcorneal pustular dermatosis.
response to therapy have been as important as histopatho-
 Subcorneal pustular dermatosis should be considered a
logic fndings in obtaining a diagnosis. Subcorneal pustu-
diagnosis of exclusion based on both clinical and
lar dermatosis may represent a heterogeneous group of
histopathologic parameters.
diseases, including pustular drug reactions (see p. 23).
Subcategorization awaits further investigation.
Differential diagnoses include impetigo and pemphigus
Biopsy site selection
foliaceus, both of which are more common than sub-
Care should be taken to biopsy new intact pustules.
corneal pustular dermatosis. Pustules of pemphigus
The differentiating
features of subcorneal
pustular
 foliaceus demonstrate prominent acantholysis; intact pus-
diseases cannot be distinguished in disrupted or aged
tules of impetigo should contain bacteria.
lesions.
STERILE PUSTULAR ERYTHRODERMA
Histopathology (Figures 1.25 and 1.26)
OF MINIATURE SCHNAUZERS
Subcorneal pustules without bacterial or dermatophytic
(Synonyms: superficial suppurative necrolytic dermatitis
colonization or signifcant acantholysis are the principal
 of Miniature Schnauzers, Schnauzer syndrome)
histopathologic prerequisites for the diagnosis. Pustules
range from small to broad; some pustules are greatly
Clinical features (Figures 1.27 and 1.28)
elevated above the adjacent epidermal surface. Pustules
are usually accompanied by underlying spongiosis.
Sterile pustular erythroderma of Miniature Schnauzers is
Neutrophils and variable eosinophils compose the pus-
a rare, severe cutaneous and visceral reaction pattern
tules. Acantholysis is absent or very mild.
seen exclusively in Miniature Schnauzers. The syn-
The dermis has superficial perivascular to interstitial,
drome was frst noted by Walder and Rosenkrantz and
mixed inflammation with neutrophils predominating.
occurred within 48 hours after the use of various
Mild to moderate dermal edema is common.
shampoos (Gross & Schick, 1993). Multiple cases have
Fig. 1.25 Subcorneal pustular
dermatosis demonstrating broad
superficial pustule.
Pustular diseases of the epidermis
21
Fig. 1.26 Pustule of subcorneal pus-
tular dermatosis. Note elevation above
surface of epiderrmis.
Fig. 1.28 Sterile pustular erythroderrma of Miniature Schnauzers in
the sarme dog as in Fig 1.27 photographed later in the course of
disease. Note that macular erythema, erosion, and ulceration have
increased in severity. (Photograph courtesy L.P. Schmeitzel; case
material University of California, Davis.)
The etiology is unknown, but is suspected to be asso-
Fig. 1.27 Sterile pustular erythroderma of Miniature Schnauzers.
ciated with an adverse drug reaction or exposure to other
Note erytherma and focal areas of erosion and ulceration.
(Photograph courtesy L.P. Schmeitzel; case material University of 
unusual allergens or immunogens, including, possibly,
California, Davis.)
systemically absorbed components of certain shampoos
 or other chemical products. The presence of pyrexia and
depression, neutrophilic leukocytosis, as well as heart,
been seen after the use of various “herbal shampoos.
lung, and liver lesions in some cases, indicates systemic
However a seemingly identical clinical syndrome has
involvement. Marked clinical and histopathologic simi-
been noted in several dogs with no confrmatory history
larities to canine sterile neutrophilic dermatosis (Sweet's
of recent shampooing (Vitale, C. B., personal communi-
syndrome; see Chapter 14) suggest that this syndrome
cation, 2003).
may be a related phenomenon.
22
Diseases of the epidermis
The characteristic clinical features include erythema
Histopathology (Figures 1.29 and 1.30)
tous papules and macular erythema which coalesce to
In sterile pustular erythroderma of Miniature Schnauzers,
form highly erythematous edematous plaques with sup
the epidermis often contains extensive broad pustules
purative crusts. The magnitude of erythema may be visu-
evolving to crusts; these may be more apparent in late-
ally striking. Concurrent small pustules or vesicles may be
stage fully formed lesions of this syndrome. Pustules may
present transiently. Expanding areas of marked erythema
 be subcorneal to panepidermal. There may be ulceration
and erosion can rapidly lead to profound ulceration with
and exudation. Pustular inflammation may extend to
exfoliation. Lesions initially may be localized, but rapidly
superficial hair follicles. In some specimens there is
generalize. Alopecia develops in conjunction with ulcera
acanthosis and variable spongiosis with only small pus-
tion. The trunk is affected preferentially, but lesions may
occur anywhere. The authors are aware of several cases
shrunken and brightly eosinophilic may be observed rarely
in which pinnal lesions were prominent. Lesional areas
in some lesions, and may be secondary to ischemia from
are markedly painful, even before ulceration occurs.
vascular damage (Binder, S., personal communication,
Fever, depression, and leukocytosis are common. Visceral
2002). Dermal lesions include neutrophilic and eosino-
lesions have been observed (see below). Very low serum
albumin levels may be present (Vitale, C.B., personal com-
philic inflammation with variable edema; vasculopathic
munication, 2003). Many affected dogs die.
and vasculitic changes may be observed (see Chapter 14).
 As in some dogs with sterile neutrophilic dermatosis
Sterile pustular erythroderma of Miniature Schnauzers
(see Chapter 14), pulmonary interstitial neutrophilic infl-
occurs only in this breed. Affected dogs have been adults;
trates may occur. Myocardial and hepatic necrosis has
sex predilections have not been noted.
been observed; hepatic lesions suggest terminal dissemi-
Clinical differential diagnoses are few; the syndrome is
nated intravascular coagulation (DIC).
highly characteristic, largely due to its confinement to the
Differential  diagnoses  for the  epidermal pustular
Miniature Schnauzer.  Most likely clinical differential
lesions of this syndrome include severe impetigo, sub-
diagnoses include toxic epidermal necrolysis, severe
corneal pustular dermatosis, and superficial pustular drug
erythema multiforme, toxic shock syndrome, and canine
reactions that do not feature acantholysis. In contrast to
sterile neutrophilic dermatosis (Sweet's syndrome). The
 the other diseases, the dermal inflammatory lesions of
recognition of rapid onset, generalizing ulcerative skin
disease in a Miniature Schnauzer heightens suspicion, as
toxic pustular erythroderma may be more intense, more
eosinophilic, and include vasculitic change (see Chapter 
does a history of shampooing within 24 to 48 hours.
14). Clinical differentiation may be required. Apoptosis
with epidermal neutrophilic infltrates are seen in toxic
Biopsy site selection
anel u asngp pue anaaas aq Aeu pue suoapuks yoos
 Multiple areas of erythema, papules and plaques without
stages of that disease. Pustules are generally larger and
evidence of ulceration should be sampled. Well-developed
epidermal apoptotic necrosis much milder in sterile pus-
lesions may show more characteristic histopathologic
tular erythroderma of Miniature Schnauzers than in late
changes.
stage toxic shock syndrome.
Fig. 1.29 Large superficial pustule of
sterile pustular erythroderma. Note
extension to follicles and severe dermal
inflammation.
Pustular diseases of the epidermis
23
Fig. 1.30 High magnification of
pustule in sterile pustular erythro-
derma. Pustulation is accompanied by
extensive spongiosis; note extension to
follicular infundibula.
SUPERFICIAL PUSTULAR
DRUG REACTIONS
Clinical features (Figure 1.31)
Superficial pustular drug reactions occur as adverse reac-
tions to various drugs. Some overlap occurs between
superfcial pustular drug reactions and drug-related
adns, un a (er 'd sss) snanng snudd
pustular drug reaction? is advisable if clinical, histopatho-
logical, and immunopathological parameters stray too
far from those seen with naturally occurring pemphigus
foliaceus. Superfcial pustular drug reactions, clinically
divergent from classical pemphigus foliaceus, have been
-siuupe aui oi ejanbas e se (Ifd) roune auo Kq panou
Fig. 1.31 Superficial pustular drug reaction in a dog due to amoxi-
tration of various drugs, including antibiotics (trimetho-
cillin. Individual pustules are markedly pleomorphic. (Photograph
prim-potentiated sulfonamides, cephalexin, ampicillin,
courtesy M. Rosenbaum.)
amoxicillin, ormetoprim-potentiated sulfonamides) and
antihistamines (diphenhydramine). The authors have seen
superficial pustular drug reactions to methimazole in
pustules seen with superficial pustular drug reactions tend
cats.
to be less bilaterally symmetric than those seen with pem-
Clinical features include transient superficial pustules
phigus foliaceus. Oral cavity lesions may be seen.
or vesicopustules. Similar to pemphigus foliaceus, pus-
 Major clinical differential diagnoses include superficial
tules may occur in waves. Individual pustules may be
bacterial folliculitis, pemphigus foliaceus, and superfcial
markedly pleomorphic, and vary considerably in size and
 pustular dermatophytosis. Clinical features not compat-
shape, being either circular or irregular. As in other canine
ible with these diseases (oral ulceration, unusual patterns
and feline pustular skin diseases, primary lesions may
of distribution) should alert the clinician to the possibil.
eventuate rapidly in adherent crusts with marked ex-
ity of a superfcial pustular drug reaction. Pemphigus foli-
foliation. Alopecia may be present. Pruritus is variable
aceus may be the most diffcult disease to differentiate
Sites of involvement vary considerably; lesions may local-
from superficial pustular drug reactions. In cases that
ize to discrete regions such as the head or pinnae, or may
clinically, histologically, and immunologically mimic pem
be more generalized. In general, the pustules or vesico-
phigus foliaceus exactly, the designation of 'drug-related
24
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 1.32 Superficial pustular drug
reaction in a dog due to trimethoprim-
sulfa.
pemphigus foliaceus’ rather than superficial pustular drug
reaction may be more appropriate.
Biopsy site selection
As in other superfcial pustular disease, intact pustules are
 fragile and should be sampled promptly. Early lesions are
more likely to yield diagnostically helpful results. Sites
directly adjacent to early pustules should be sampled
for direct immunofluorescence or immunohistochemical
testing.
Histopathology (Figures 1.32 and 1.33)
nid sis edrd a si tnsnd iians
of this type of drug eruption. If acantholysis is a promi-
nent feature, then drug-related pemphigus foliaceus is the
preferred diagnosis (see above). In other cases, superfcial
 pustulation without prominent acantholysis is observed in
association with variable crusting. There may be variable
apoptosis, as seen in erythema muliforme (see Chapter
4). Apoptosis of keratinocytes has been reported in drug-
related pemphigus foliaceus in dogs (White et al., 2002).
Those cases may represent collision of two immuno-
reactive drug-related processes rather than pemphigus
foliaceus with excessive apoptosis.
The dermis has superficial perivascular to interstitial,
mixed inflammation with neutrophils predominating.
Eosinophils may be prominent. Mild to moderate dermal
edema is common.
Fig. 1.33
High magnification of pustule from the same dog as in
 Differential diagnoses include non drug-induced pem-
Fig. 1.32. Note rmild acantholysis at base of pustule (arrow).
phigus foliaceus, superficial pustular bacterial infections
(impetigo and superficial spreading pyoderma), and
Pustular diseases of the epidermis
25
subcorneal pustular dermatosis. Microscopic delineation
Superficial Pustular Dermatophytosis
often is not possible; instead response to drug withdrawal
Chen, C. & Su, B. (2002) Case report: Cushing's syndrome con-
may be required for definitive diagnosis.
current with severe Trichophyton mentagrophytes infection
in a Miniature Schnauzer. In: Proceedings of the 17th
AAVD/ACVD Meeting, New Orleans, p. 9.
Fairley, R.A. (2001) The histopathological lesions of Tri-
REFERENCES
chopbyton mentagrophytes var. erinacei infection in dogs. Vet
Dermatol 12,119-22.
Impetigo
Parker, W.M. & Yager, JA. (1997) Trichopbyton dermatophy-
Amagai, M., Matsuyoshi, N., Wang, Z.H. et al. (2000) Toxins
aia snrdad ym pasuo Asea aseasip e - sio
in bullous impetigo and staphylococcal scalded-skin syndrome
sus. Can Vet J 38, 502-5.
target desmoglein 1. Nat Med 6, 1275-7.
Poisson, L., Olivry, T. & Lemons, C. (1998) Subcorneal neu-
Ihrke, PJ. (1996) Bacterial Skin Disease in the Dog: A Guide to
trophilic acantholytic pustular dermatitis: an unusual mani-
Canine Pyoderma, pp. 1-97. Veterinary Learning Systems,
festation of dermatophytosis resembling canine pemphigus
Trenton.
foliaceus. In: Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 3 (eds
Prevost, G., Couppie, P & Monteil, H. (2003) Staphylococcal
K.W. Kwochka, T. Willemse & C. von Tscharner), pp. 456-7.
epidermolysins. Curr Opin Infect Dis 16, 71-6.
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
Terauchi, R., Sato, H., Hasegawa, T. et al. (2003) Isolation of
exfoliative toxin from Stapbylococcus intermedius and its
Pemphigus Foliaceus
local toxicity in dogs. Vet Microbiol 94, 19-29.
Amagai, M., Tsunoda, K., Zillikins, D. et al. (1999) The
clinical phenotype of pemphigus is defined by the anti-
Superficial Spreading Pyoderma
desmoglein autoantibody profle. J Am Acad Dermatol 40,
Hendricks, A., Schuberth, H.J., Schueler, K. et al. (2002)
167-70.
Frequency of superantigen-producing Stapbylococcus inter-
Calhedari, R., De Bruin, A., Baumann, D.et al. (2001) A central
medius isolates from canine pyoderma and proliferation-
role for the armadillo protein plakoglobin in the autoimmune
inducing potential of superantigens in dogs. Res Vet Sci 73,
disease pemphigus vulgaris. J Cell Biol 153, 823-34.
273-7.
Hogan, R.M., Dunston, S.M. & Alhaidari, Z. (2002) Immuno-
Ihrke, PJ. (1996) Bacterial Skin Disease in the Dog: A Guide to
fluorescent determination of the isotype of serum anti-
Canine Pyoderma, pp. 1-97. Veterinary Learning Systems,
'snaseioy snayduad yim shop u saipoqnueoine anasouea
Trenton.
In: Proceedings of the 17th AAVD/ACVD Meeting, New
Ihrke, PJ. & Gross, T.L. (1994) Clinico-pathologic conferences
Orleans, p. 17.
in dermatology. 1: Superficial spreading pyoderma, Vet Der-
Ihrke, PJ., Stannard, A.A., Ardans, A.A. et al. (1985) Pemphi-
matol4,33-6.
gus foliaceus in dogs: a review of 37 cases. J Am Vet Med
Mempel, M., Lina, G., Hojka, M. et al. (2003) High prevalence
Assoc 186, 59-66.
of superantigens associated with the egc locus in Stapbylo-
Iwasaki, T., Shimizu, M., Obata, H. et al. (1997) Detection of
coccus aureus isolates from patients with atopic eczema. Eur
canine pemphigus foliaceus autoantigen by immunoblotting.
J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 22, 306-9.
Vet Immunot Immunopathol 59, 1-10.
Prevost, G., Couppie, P & Monteil, H. (2003) Staphylococcal
Kuhl, K.A., Shofer, F.S. & Goldschmidt, M.H. (1994) Com-
epidermolysins. Curr Opin Infect Dis 16, 71-6.
parative histopathology of pemphigus foliaceus and superfi-
Tanabe, I., Sato, H., Sato, H. et al. (1996) Correlation between
cial folliculitis in the dog. Vet Pathol 31, 19-27.
occurrence of exudative epidermitis and exfoliative toxin-
Noli, C., von Tscharner, C. & Suter, M.M. (1998) Apoptosis in
producing ability of Stapbylococcus byicus. Vet Microbiol 48,
selected skin diseases. Vet Dermatol 9, 221-9.
9-17.
Pascal, A., Scheibert, J. & Ihrke, P.J. (1995) Seasonality and envi-
Terauchi, R., Sato, H., Hasegawa, T. et al. (2003) Isolation of
ronmental risk factors for pemphigus foliaceus in animals: a
exfoliative toxin from Stapbylococcus intermedius and its
retrospective study of 83 cases presented to the Veterinary
local toxicity in dogs. Vet Microbiol 94, 19-29.
Medical Teaching Hospital, University of California, Davis
from 1976-1994. In: Proceedings of the 11th AAVD/ACVD
Candidiasis
Meeting, Santa Fe, pp. 24-5.
Carloti, D. & Pinn, D. (1999) Candida pododermatitis in
Puviani, M., Marconi, A., Cozzani, E. et al. (2003) Fas ligand
the dog: a report of 5 cases. In: Proceedings of the 15th
in pemphigus sera induces keratinocyte apoptosis through the
AAVD/ACVD Meeting, Maui, pp. 55-6.
activation of caspase-8. J Invest Dermatol 120, 164-7.
Greene, C.E. & Chandler, F.W. (1998) Candidiasis, torulopso-
Steeves, E.B., Chelack, B.J., Clark, E.G. et al. (2002) Altered
sis, and rhodotorulosis. In: Infectious Diseases of the Dog and
immunohistochemical staining for desmoglein in skin biopsies
Cat, 2nd edn (ed. C.E. Greene), pp. 414-17. W.B. Saunders,
in canine pemphigus foliaceus. J Vet Diagn Invest 14, 53-6.
Philadelphia.
Suter, M.M., Ziegra, C.J., Cayette, S.M. et al. (1993) Identifica-
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
tion of canine pemphigus antigens. In: Advances in Veterinary
Smal Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 361-3. W.B.
Dermatology, Vol. 2. (eds P.J. Ihrke, I.S. Mason & S.D.
Saunders, Philadelphia.
White), pp. 367-80. Pergamon, Oxford.
26
Diseases of the epidermis
White, S.D., Carlotti, D.N., Pin, D. et al. (2002) Putative drug-
McKeever, P.J. & Dahl, M.V. (1977) A disease in dogs resem-
related pemphigus foliaceus in four dogs. Vet Dermatol 13,
bling human subcorneal pustular dermatosis. J Am Vet Med
195-202.
Assoc 170, 704-8.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller 6 Kirk's
Pemphigus Erythematosus
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 1125-8. W.B.
Iwasaki, T. & Maeda, Y. (1997) The effect of ultraviolet (UV)
Saunders, Philadelphia.
on the severity of canine pemphigus erythematosus. In:
Proceedings of the 13th AAVD/ACVD Meeting, Nashville,
Toxic pustular erythroderma of Miniature Schnauzers
p. 86.
Gross, TL. & Schick, R.O. (1993) Dermatopathology of newly
Scott, D.W., Walton, D.K. Slater, M.R. et al. (1987) Immune-
described skin diseases (workshop report). In: Aduances in
mediated dermatoses in domestic animals: ten years after
Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 2 (eds P.J. Ihrke, I.S. Mason &
Part I, Comp Cont Ed 9, 423-35.
S.D. White), pp. 417-20. Pergamon, Oxford.
Subcorneal Pustular Dermatosis
Superficial Pustular Drug Reactions
Kalaher, K.M. & Scott, D.W. (1990) Subcorneal pustular der-
White, S.D., Carlotti, D.N., Pin, D. et al. (2002) Putative drug-
matosis in dogs and in human being: comparative aspects. J
related pemphigus foliaceus in four dogs. Vet Dermatol 13,
Am Acad Dermatol 22, 1023-8.
195-202.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 2
Bullous and acantholytic diseases of
the epidermis and the dermal-epidermal
lunct1on
Bullous and acantholytic diseases are characterized by
180kDa bullous pemphigoid antigen (BP180/BPAG2)
the formation of clefts, leading to vesicles or bullae.
which is a constitutive transmembrane glycoprotein
In bullous diseases, separation most commonly occurs
 present in basal keratinocytes. IgG autoantibodies target
between the dermis and epidermis, and results from loss
antigenic epitopes located in the NC16A ectodomain of
of structural integrity of the basement membrane zone.
type XVII collagen, similar to bullous pemphigoid in
In acantholytic disease, adhesion between keratinocytes is
humans (Iwasaki et al., 1995; Olivry et al., 1999). Since
degraded, resulting in separation and cleft formation.
the lesion is subepidermal, intact vesicles or bullae are
Some diseases in this chapter may not be characterized by
seen more commonly than with other bullous autoim-
obvious clinical vesicles or bullae; for simplicity and
mune skin diseases such as pemphigus vulgaris, in which
clarity, diseases that show microscopic bullous or acan-
lesions form intraepidermally and are thus more fragile.
tholytic degeneration of the epidermis, or of the basement
The wide variation in clinical presentation of formerly
membrane zone, are included regardless of clinical pres-
reported cases probably indicates that multiple subepi-
entation. Bullous and acantholytic diseases frequently are
dermal bullous diseases were identified incorrectly as BP.
the result of autoimmune processes which create auto-
Definitive differentiation among the subepidermal bullous
antibodies that damage the basement membrane zone,
diseases requires the identification of the antigen targeted
basal cells, or the intercellular adhesion structures of the
by the pathogenic antibodies. Consequently, case data
keratinocytes. Genetic defects in the structural integrity of
 published prior to the documentation of canine and feline
these regions also characterize some diseases of this
autoantibodies directed against the BP antigen (1995 and
group.
1999, respectively) are suspect, and may represent various
 Subepidermal bullous diseases have variable clinical
subepidermal bullous diseases. In a recent study, BP
presentations, as well as differences in histologic charac-
accounted for 12% of 59 dogs and 50% of eight cats
teristics. These include the shape of bullae, the degree and
 diagnosed as having antibasement membrane circulating
type of accompanying dermal inflammation, and the pres-
autoantibodies (Olivry, T, personal communication,
ence or absence of immunoglobulin or complement at the
2004).
basement membrane zone. However, it is not usually pos-
Erythematous macules eventuate in multifocal vesicles
sible histologically to specify individual diseases beyond
'subepidermal blistering or bullous'. Immunologic studies 
borders. Smaller vesicles and bullae may remain intact in
for detection of in situ and circulating autoantibodies
protected sites such as the pinnae, axillae, and buccal
directed against basement membrane components, as well
gingiva. Since canine and feline epidermis is relatively
as immunoblotting, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
 thin, most bullae rupture, leading to multifocal ulceration
(ELISA) testing, and other studies to characterize the tar-
as the most common clinical sign. Generally, the ulcers do
 geted antigens specifically are required.
not coalesce and spread, and tend to remain the same size
as the previous bullae. Scarring is common, but variable
in severity. New vesicles and bullae frequently develop
BULLOUS PEMPHIGOID
within scarred lesions. Secondary bacterial infection is fre-
Clinical features (Figures 2.1 and 2.2)
quent. The typical clinical course of true BP seems to be
chronic but relatively mild (Olivry & Chan, 2001).
Bullous pemphigoid (BP) is a very rare vesiculobullous
Even though the diagnosis of BP has been confirmed
subepithelial autoimmune skin and mucosal disease of
immunologically in only seven canine patients, the review
 the dog and cat. Autoantibodies are directed against the 
 of this small case series permits useful clinical observa-
27
28
Diseases of the epidermis
one-half of the dogs with well characterized disease
(Olivry & Chan, 2001). Other sites include mucocuta-
neous junctions of the anus, as well as the skin of the
clawbeds. In the cat, the lips, pinnae, and both the hard
and soft palate may be predilection sites.
Subepidermal bullae arising in and restricted to scar
tissue from presumptively traumatic etiology (including
burns) have been observed rarely in dogs by the authors.
Immunologic studies confrming BP have not been per-
formed for these lesions, and thus the true nature of this
phenomenon has yet to be determined. In humans, physi-
Annd da paoaond seu 'sunq Aqenou een ie
by exposing BP antigen in the basement membrane
(Wagner & Paraskevopoulos, 1995). However, bullous 
Hig. 2.1 Bullous pemphigoid affecting the buccal mucosa of a
lesions usually spread to other cutaneous sites due to
Doberman Pinscher. Multiple intact bullae are present ammid well-
the presence of circulating autoantibodies (Wagner &
demarcated ulcers resulting from ruptured bullae. (Photograph cour-
Paraskevopoulos, 1995).
tesy L.P. Schmeitzel; case material University of California, Davis.)
 Previously published signalment predilections may be
inaccurate, as previously reported cases may have been
other subepidermal bullous diseases. The Doberman
 Pinscher and Collie are reported to be at increased risk.
 However, at least some of the Collies reported as having
 BP may have had vesicular cutaneous lupus erythemato-
sus of Collies and Shetland Sheepdogs (see Chapter 3).
The Dachshund also may be at increased risk. Unlike the
human homologue, canine and feline BP may affect
animals of any age (Olivry & Chan, 2001). Genetic
factors have been postulated to explain the occurrence of
autoimmune skin disease in younger domestic animals
(Olivry, 2002). Sex predilections are not reported.
Major clinical differential diagnoses include epider-
molysis bullosa acquisita, mucous membrane pem-
phigoid,
, vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus of
Fig. 2.2 Bullous pemphigoid of the inner surface of the pinna of
Collies and Shetland Sheepdogs, pemphigus vulgaris, ery-
the dog seen in Fig 2.1. Note the centrally located large, intact bulla
 thema multiforme, and bullous drug eruptions. In dogs
and multiple smaller bullae. (Photograph courtesy L.P Schmeitzel;
case material University of California, Davis.)
with BP, there are usually no systemic signs associated
with blistering episodes and pawpads are rarely affected,
in marked contrast to canine epidermolysis bullosa
tions (Olivry, 2003). In this series, skin lesions of canine
acquisita (Olivry, 2003). Differentiation from genetic dis-
BP consisted of erythematous macules, patches or plaques
eases of structural integrity such as hereditary epidermol-
(4/7; 57%); tense vesicles or bullae (3/7; 43%); ulcers
ysis bullosa usually should not be problematical since
(6/7; 86%); as well as crusts (5/7; 71%). In these dogs,
these occur either at birth or in very young animals. In
lesions of BP occurred frst on the head, ears, or trunk.
comparison to pemphigus vulgaris, the ulcers of BP do
At the time of diagnosis, lesions could be seen on the back
not coalesce and spread, and tend to remain the same size
(4/7; 57%), axillae (2/7; 29%), and abdomen (2/7; 29%).
as the previous bullae; furthermore, oral lesions are less
Pawpads were rarely affected in dogs with BP. Lesions at
common in BP than in pemphigus vulgaris (Olivry, 2003).
mucosal or mucocutaneous junctional sites were detected
Compatible histopathology and further immunologic
in four dogs (57%), with a median number of one such
testing, including target antigen identifcation, are re-
site being affected. Lesions involved primarily the oral
quired for defnitive diagnosis.
cavity (3/7; 43%), lip margins (4/7; 57%), and sparsely-
haired skin of the concave pinnae (4/7; 57%). In most
Biopsy site selection
patients, there were no systemic signs associated with blis-
tering episodes. Although some dogs have oral and peri-
 I present, an intact bulla or vesicle should be removed in 
oral involvement, oral lesions may occur in less than
 its entirety, preferably by excisional biopsy.
Bullous and acantholytic diseases of the epidermis and the dermal-epidermal junction
29
 Shearing forces created during punch biopsy may
more intense dermal edema and inflammation that is
rupture fragile lesions. Biopsy should be performed as
eosinophil rich (Iwasaki et al., 1995). Secondary ulcera-
soon as possible, because intact lesions may be transient
tion results in severe neutrophilic dermatitis and fbri
and ruptured lesions are less likely to yield diagnostic
nosuppurative exudation.
specimens. If an intact lesion is not available, tissue from
 Antigen immunomapping with a collagen IV-specifc
the immediate margin of a recently ruptured bulla may be
monoclonal antibody demonstrates vesiculation above
adequate for histopathologic interpretation.
collagen IV (a major component of the lamina densa),
confrming cleavage through the lamina lucida (Olivry et
al., 2000). Direct immunofluorescence (or immunohisto-
Histopathology (Figures 2.3 and 2.4)
chemistry) detects fine linear deposition of IgG in dogs
A small to large, often turgid vesicle or bulla develops at
and cats. In rare instances, faint staining extends around
the dermal-epidermal junction. In early lesions there is
basal keratinocytes, representing recycled BP180 antigen
intact epidermis above a clean separation between dermis
(Olivry et al., 1999). IgM and C3 also have been demon-
and epidermis. Cleft formation may extend to follicular
strated in dogs (Iwasaki et al., 1995).
infundibula. Within and along the base of the bullae there
Indirect immunofluorescence testing identified circulat-
are eosinophils and neutrophils, often intermingled with
ing IgG antibodies that were directed to the epidermal
fbrin. There may be a relative lack of inflarmmatory cells
side of salt-split skin (the artifcial split occurs through the
within bullae of the feline disease (Olivry et al., 1999).
lamina lucida of the basement membrane) (Iwasaki et al.,
As the lesion ages, the epidermal roof of the bulla may
1995; Olivry et al., 1999). Immunoblotting identified the
be spongiotic; degeneration eventuates in ulceration.
targeted antigen in dogs and cats as a 180kDa protein,
Eosinophilic spongiosis has been described (Tomlinson 
BP antigen 2 (BPAG2), which was further characterized
et al. 2001}
as type XVlI collagen (Olivry et al., 1999).
 o  o  s  
Differential diagnoses principally include epidermolysis
inflamed  
beneath early
bullae.
 Characteristically,
bullosa acquisita,
 inherited
 epidermolysis bullosa,
although not consistently, eosinophils line up in rows and
mucous membrane pemphigoid, and linear IgA dermato-
clusters just beneath the basement membrane of intact
sis. Inherited epidermolysis bullosa is generally sparsely
skin as well as beneath blisters. Eosinophils may
be
inflamed, as may be linear IgA dermatosis. When present,
degranulated (Iwasaki et al., 1995), requiring demonstra-
intense accumulations of eosinophils at the base of a
tion with a Luna stain in some cases. Eosinophils,
bulla, or along the basement membrane in intact skin,
neutrophils, and mixed mononuclear cells may be found
favor a diagnosis of BP, while numerous neutrophils in
superficially in a perivascular and interstitial pattern.
the same location favor epidermolysis bullosa acquisita.
Edema usually is present. Advanced lesions may have
Mucous membrane pemphigoid may feature lichenoid
Fig. 2.3 Subepidermal bulla of canine
bullous pemphigoid. (Case material
courtesy R.W. Dunstan.)
30
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 2.4Higher magnification of Fig.
2.3. Note red blood cells and small
numbers of granulocytes in bulla.
dermatitis, which is not generally seen in other subepi-
dermal vesicular diseases. Although a tentative histologic
diagnosis may be possible, confrmatory immunologic
studies are required for definitive diagnosis. Clinical
features may be supportive, including breed and sites
affected, and clinical severity. Knowledge of clinical dis-
tribution of lesions is particularly important in the dif-
ferential diagnosis of this entity from mucous membrane
 pemphigoid, which is immunologically similar (see below).
MUCOUS MEMBRANE PEMPHIGOID
(Synonym: cicatricial pemphigoid)
Clinical features (Figures 2.5 and 2.6)
Fig. 2.5 Mucous membrane pemphigoid in a dog. Ulceration is
partially bilaterally symmetric and restricted to the planum nasale.
Mucous membrane pemphigoid (MMP) is a rare, chronic
(Photograph courtesy T. Olivry.)
vesicobullous subepithelial autoimmune disease affect-
ing mucous membranes, mucocutaneous junctions, and
haired skin in the dog and cat. Circulating basement
 membrane-specifc IgG autoantibodies are present (Olivry
Previously, cases of MMP probably were published as
& Chan, 2001). In MMP of dogs and cats (as also seen
 bullous pemphigoid. In a recent study, MMP accounted 
in humans), the targeted autoantibodies are more hetero-
for 53% of 59 dogs and 50% of eight cats diagnosed with
geneous than in bullous pemphigoid (Olivry et al., 2001; 
antibasement membrane circulating autoantibodies,
Olivry et al., 2002). The circulating autoantibodies target
making MMP the most common autoimmune disease of
different antigenic epitopes, including the NC16A seg-
 the basement membrane zone in the dog and cat (Olivry,
 ment of collagen XVII and the 30 kDa carboxy-terminal
2003). One cat initially reported as having bullous pem-
segment of collagen XVII (Olivry et al., 2001). In one dog.
phigoid was later determined to have MMP (Olivry et al.,
autoantibodies were shown to recognize the three chains
1999; Olivry, T., personal communication, 2002).
of purifed human laminin-5 instead (Olivry, 2003); anti-
Erosive and ulcerative lesions are the predominant clin-
bodies against the alpha-3 chain of laminin-5 only were
ical features, although intact flaccid or turgid vesicles may
identified in a cat (Olivry et al., 2002).
be present in protected areas. Adherent crusts may be
Bullous and acantholytic diseases of the epidermis and the dermal-epidermal junction
31
found, especially when lesions are located on haired skin.
A reference population was not available for statistical
Scarring, when present, may be atrophic. Hypopigmented
comparison, l
but the German Shepherd Dog may be
macules are seen periorbitally in a minority of dogs
at increased risk, as it comprised 12 of 42 reported
(Olivry et al., 2001). In one study the most commonly
cases (Olivry, 2003). Siberian Huskies, Border Collies,
affected sites included, in descending order the oral
Dachshunds, Poodles, and Cocker Spaniels also may be
cavity, lips, planum nasale, perinasal skin, periorbital
 Over-represented as more than one case per breed has been
region, concave pinnae, genitalia, and anus (Olivry et al.,
diagnosed with this rare disease (Olivry, 2003). The
2001). Oral lesions most commonly affect the gums, hard
median age for the initial development of lesions was 5
palate, and tongue. The bulbar conjunctiva is affected in
years (Olivry, 2003). One-third more males than females
only a small number of dogs, and pawpad lesions are
were affected (Olivry, 2003).
similarly uncommon (Olivry et al., 2001). Similar lesions
 Clinical differential diagnoses for MMP include bullous
have been seen in six cats to date (Olivry et al., 2002;
pemphigoid, epidermolysis bullosa acquisita, vesicular
Olivry, T., personal communication, 2003). One author
cutaneous lupus erythematosus of Collies and Shetland
(E.J.W.) has seen esophageal lesions in a cat with MMP.
Sheepdogs, pemphigus vulgaris, erythema multiforme,
and bullous drug eruptions. Clinical distribution may be
useful diagnostically, due to the marked mucocutaneous
predilection of MMP. Histopathology and immunologic
studies, including identifcation of targeted antigens, are
required for differentiation.
Biopsy site selection
As in bullous pemphigoid, intact vesicles, if present,
should be removed entirely, preferably by excisional
biopsy. If an intact lesion is not available, tissue from the
margins of recently ruptured bullae may be sampled.
Histopathology (Figures 2.7 and 2.8)
A bulla develops at the dermal-epidermal junction
beneath an intact epidermis, as seen in bullous pem-
Fig. 2.6 Mucous membrane pemphigoid in a cat. Ulceration is
phigoid (see p. 27). Some bullae may feature retention of
present on the lips, philtrum, and planum nasale. (Photograph cour-
the irregular or peg-like lower contour of the epidermis.
tesy T. Olivry.)
Bullae are usually devoid of inflammatory cells but may
Fig. 2.7 Mucous membrane perm-
 phigoid in a dog demonstrating large
77
subepidermal bulla.
32
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 2.8 High magnification of early
phigoid. Note granulocytes in early cleft
and subjacent superficial dermis.
contain red blood cells, eosinophils, or neutrophils.
phigoid, and linear IgA dermatosis. Inherited epidermol-
Intravesicular eosinophils, neutrophils, and mononuclear
aq Au se 'pu Anasids Arau si esnq sis
cells have been reported in dogs; 52% of 66 skin biopsies 
linear IgA dermatosis. When present, intense accumula-
contained uninflamed vesicles (Olivry, 2003).
tions of eosinophils at the base of a bulla, or along the
In dogs, the superfcial dermis contains neutrophils,
basement membrane in intact skin, favor a diagnosis of
eosinophils, and often lymphocytes and plasma cells.
bullous pemphigoid, while intense neutrophils in the same
Inflammation is usually lichenoid in putatively chronic
 location support epidermolysis bullosa acquisita. MMP in
lesions and may be found in the absence of subepidermal
dogs may feature lichenoid dermatitis, which is not gen-
bulla formation. This pattern of inflammation is attrib-
erally seen in other subepidermal vesicular diseases.
uted to the anatomic location of the mucocutaneous
Chronic lesions with lichenoid inflammation only may
lesions, and is as observed in other lichenoid dermatoses
 not be distinguishable from mucocutaneous pyoderma.
of mucous membranes or mucocutaneous junctions, such
Although a tentative histologic diagnosis may be possible,
as mucocutaneous pyoderma (see Chapter 11). There may
confrmatory immunologic studies are required for defin-
be a fbrovascular reaction beneath some bullae, suggest-
itive diagnosis. Knowledge of clinical distribution of
ing that they are redeveloping at the site of previous
lesions is important in the differential diagnosis of this
lesions. Ulceration is accompanied by more intense neu-
entity from bullous pemphigoid, which is immunologi-
 trophilic inflammation and fbrinosuppurative exudation.
cally similar (see p. 27).
In cats, minimal subvesicular inflammation is reported
(Olivry et al., 2002).
PEMPHIGUS VULGARIS
 In dogs, direct immunofluorescence testing detects IgG
at the basement membrane of skin or mucosa, and less
(Synonym: suprabasilar pemphigus)
consistently, C3, IgM, and IgA (Olivry et al., 2001).
Direct immunofluorescence testing was negative in one
Clinical features (Figures 2.9 and 2.10)
cat reported (Olivry et al., 2002). Indirect immunofluo-
rescence testing identifes circulating  IgG antibodies
Pemphigus vulgaris (PV) is a very rare, severe vesicobul-
directed to the epidermal side of salt-split skin in most
 lous and ulcerative autoimmune disease reported in the
cases in dogs (the artificial split occurs through the lamina
dog and cat. Desmoglein 3 (Dsg3), a 130kDa, trans-
lucida of the basement membrane). In addition, IgG
membrane desmosomal cadherin of keratinocytes, is more
autoantibodies were directed to the dermal aspect of the
strongly expressed in the suprabasilar keratinocytes of the
split in one dog and one cat (Olivry et al., 2001, 2002).
oral mucosa, and has been identifed as the targeted
Differential diagnoses include epidermolysis bullosa
antigen in canine PV, as occurs in humans (Olivry et al.,
acquisita, inherited epidermolysis bullosa, bullous pem-
2003). However, when lesions of PV affect the haired skin
33
Ad uun u uhne pre a 'sie un siia
is Dsg3 (Foster & Olivry, 2001; Olivry et al., 2003). Tar-
geted autoantigens in the case of alopecic PV were Dsg1
and Dsg3 (Olivry & Jackson, 2001).
 Drug-induced PV may occur in humans; removal of
the offending drug leads to reversal of the lesions
(Brenner et al., 1998). PV-like skin reactions putatively
due to drug therapy (including sulfasalazine) have been
observed sporadically in both dogs and cats. Also, tran-
sient, often orally confined, cases not explained by
adverse drug reactions have been seen by the authors in
these species.
The exact pathomechanism of vesicle and bulla forma-
tion is not known. Autoantibodies in the epidermis or
mucosal epithelium bind to Dsg3, leading to suprabasilar
acantholysis. However, it has recently been shown that
Fig. 2.9 Pemphigus vulgaris in an adult Great Dane. Extensive
autoantibody binding to Dsg3 alone is insuffcient for
erosion and secondary ulceration are present on the tongue, oral
lesion formation; plakoglobin, a submembranous plaque
mucous membranes, and muzzle.
protein in the desmosomal complex, appears critical
for the formation of lesions, as demonstrated in mice
(Calhedari et al., 2001). Further, upregulation of P-
cadherin, an important Ca²t dependent adhesion molecule
in the epidermis, occurs in both autoimmune and hered-
itary acantholytic disorders in humans, and is suggested
to be involved in the development of acantholysis
(Hakuno et al., 2001).
Suprabasilar acantholysis creates fragile, transient vesi-
cles and bullae that rapidly progress to ulcers. Partial
bilateral symmetry, especially facial, can be striking.
Fragile, irregularly shaped vesicles and bullae develop in
groups. Erythema may precede vesicle formation, espe-
cially in haired skin areas (Olivry, 2003). Rupture of vesi-
cles and bullae rapidly leads to erosions; secondary
surface bacterial overgrowth then results in widespread
ulceration. Crusting is a feature of nonmucosal ulcera-
tions. Ulcers expand, creating lesions that are substan-
tially larger than the previously existent intact bullae.
These ulcers are irregularly shaped and may coalesce
Fig. 2.10 Permphigus vulgaris involving the pawpad of the dog in
Fig. 2.9. Note the pad epithelium has been shed to expose dermal
of a blister or ulcer induced by digital pressure to adja-
tissue.
cent mucous membrane or skin) may be elicited. In a
Ad m sop pund e jo sisk- n
trauma to eroded areas resulted in deeper ulceration in
as well as mucous membranes, other antigens such as
71% of cases (37/52) (Olivry, 2003).
desmoglein 1 (Dsg1), which is more strongly expressed in 
Most dogs and cats have lesions affecting the oral
superficial keratinocytes of haired skin, may be targeted.
cavity and mucocutaneous junctions. Coalescing ulcers on
 pauap si sueunq u Ad jo adiouaud jenu aun 'snu
 the tongue, palate, and gingiva which are not contiguous
by the antidesmoglein autoantibody profle (Amagai et 
with the teeth should increase clinical suspicion for PV.
al., 1999). This variation in or progression of the clinical
Lip involvement usually is seen with extensive oral
phenotype may be explained by the phenomenon of 
 disease. Thick, ropy, tenacious, odorous saliva is an addi-
'epitope spreading', in which the primary autoimmune
tional feature.
inflammatory process exposes previously sequestered
 Pemphigus vulgaris commonly evolves from a mucosal
antigens, resulting in a secondary autoimmune response 
predominant to a mucocutaneous phenotype (Olivry,
(Chan et al., 1998). A similar circumstance probably
 2003). Affected body regions in the dog include the oral
34
Diseases of the epidermis
cavity (31/40; 78%), concave pinnae and auditory orifices
Biopsy site selection
(20/40; 50%), nasal planum (18/40; 45%), lip margins
Intact vesicles or margins of recent ulcers should be
(14/40; 35%), genitalia (13/40; 33%), anus (10/40; 25%)
removed for biopsy. In general, specimens from the lips 
or periocular skin (9/40; 23%) (Olivry, 2003). Erosive
or other cutaneous sites are more likely to yield diagnos-
perionyxis/paronychia can occur (6/40; 15%), usually in
tic results, because lesions of the oral mucosa are
conjunction with onychomadesis (shedding of claws)
(5/40; 13%) (Olivry, 2003).(
extremely fragile. Rapid natural degradation of vesicles or
Corneal ulcers
and
bullae also makes sampling difficult. Due to the frailty of
esophageal involverment may be present. Haired skin
the lesions, wedge biopsy more commonly yields diag-
lesions occur most commonly (18/35; 51%) in regions of
nostic specimens than does punch biopsy.
friction and trauma such as the axillae, groin, and lateral
pressure points of the limbs (hocks, stifles, and digits)
(Olivry, 2003). Pawpads may slough in a minority of
Histopathology (Figures 2.11 and 2.12)
cases. Lethargy, anorexia and depression may be seen in
more severe cases (Carlotti et al., 2000). Transient cases,
The typical lesion of PV is a suprabasilar cleft or separa-
whether drug-induced or idiopathic, may be clinically
tion due to acantholysis, leading to formation of a bulla.
atypical in distribution and severity; for example, oral
Often the roof of the bulla detaches from a specimen,
involvement may be lacking and the affected animal may
leaving a row of basal cells attached to the basement
not show signs of systemic ill health.
membrane. This row of plump or rounded basal cells,
A variant affecting only the planum nasale and
commonly called ‘tombstone' cells, remains at the base of
the adjacent haired muzzle has been reported (Olivry
 the cleft. Active acantholysis may be seen above the cleft,
et al., 1992; Foster & Olivry, 2001). Well demarcated,
and free acantholytic cells may be present within the
severe erosions and ulcerations characterize this sub-
lumen. Bubble-like vacuoles may occur in basal and
group. A single case of a dog affected with an alopecic
suprabasilar locations, and delineate the sites of future
 phenotype of PV, characterized by multifocal predomi-
clefts. Inflammation is absent from intact bullae. Neu-
nantly truncal alopecia, has been reported (Olivry &
trophils and acantholytic cells intermingle on the surface
Jackson, 2001).
of deroofed bullae. Secondary ulceration and fbrinosup-
Although reference populations are lacking,
the
purative exudation are common sequelae.
German Shepherd Dog and the Collie appear to be over-
 Lesions involve the mucosal epithelium or epidermis,
represented by meta-analysis of data from 52 dogs
 and frequently extend to superficial and sometimes deep
(Olivry, 2003). The median age at onset is 6 years, with
hair follicles. Follicular lesions are often characterized by
48% developing the disease at more than 7 years of age
drop-out of follicular root sheath cells beyond the
(Olivry, 2003). Dogs less than 1 year of age may be
retained outermost cell layer, creating 
a striking
affected (Carlotti et al., 2000). Males outnumbered
suprabasilar cleft or space that does not disturb the
" ) oi on  e kq s
central hair shaft. In the alopecic form of PV, suprabasi-
Age, breed, or sex predilections have not been noted for 
lar cleft formation was confined to the isthmus and infe-
the cat.
rior segments of the hair follicle. The epidermis was not
Major clinical differential diagnoses include paraneo-
affected (Olivry & Jackson, 2001).
plastic pemphigus, mucous membrane pemphigoid,
Deep follicular pustulation in hair follicles, as seen
bullous pemphigoid, epidermolysis bullosa acquisita, ery-
 in “panfollicular pemphigus foliaceus (see Chapter 16),
thema multiforme, and mycosis fungoides, all of which
 may mimic lesions of pemphigus vegetans (a variant
 may cause similar oral ulcers. If lesions are limited to the
of PV) because the pustules may lie in suprabasilar
oral cavity, the many causes of feline and canine ulcera-
location, thus mimicking the suprabasilar clefting of
tive stomatitis must also be considered. Superficial
 pemphigus vegetans. The case in the frst edition of this
necrolytic dermatitis and mucocutaneous candidiasis can
textbook was most likely panfollicular pemphigus foli-
present with perioral skin disease; however frank oral
aceus and not pemphigus vegetans. The authors have not
ulceration is not a feature. Differentiation from genetic
 seen a convincing case of pemphigus vegetans in the dog
-raida Arepanu se uns i ens jo sieas
or cat.
molysis bullosa, should not be problematical since those
Superficial dermal inflammation is variable, and
conditions occur either at birth or in very young animals.
 includes lymphocytes, plasma cells, and neutrophils.
Most dogs that develop PV are adult or aged. In contrast
Extension around hair follicles may be present. The
to bullous pemphigoid, the ulcers of PV coalesce and
 composition and severity of the infltrate are contingent
expand, leading to lesions that are substantially larger
 partly upon the presence of deroofed bullae or ulcers,
than previously existent intact bullae. Histopathology
the latter of which are associated with more intense
should allow differentiation.
neutrophilic inflammation. In nasally predominant PV,
Bullous and acantholytic diseases of the epidermis and the dermal-epidermal junction
35
Fig. 2.11 Suprabasilar cleft in canine
pemphigus vulgaris. Note involvement
of superficial hair follicle. {Case mate-
rial courtesy M.B. Calderwood Mays.)
Fig. 2.12
Canine pemphigus vulgaris.
Residual basal cells are in tombstone-
like configuration along the base of the
cleft.
inflammation is often lichenoid, reflecting mucocutaneous
sequential specimens  for  immunohistologic  evaluation
(planum) location.  Pigmentary  incontinence may be
may increase the chances of a positive result. Indirect
present.
immunofluorescence testing has identifed circulating IgG
antikeratinocyte antibodies (Olivry et al., 2003); these
are transepidermal and superficial follicular intercellular
 antibodies mostly target Dsg3.
deposition of immunoglobulin, usually IgG, and occa-
Differential diagnosis is uncomplicated in cases where
sionally C3. Direct immunofluorescence testing of nasally
characteristic suprabasilar clefting is found. Paraneoplas-
predominant PV revealed IgG (Foster & Olivry, 2001).
tic pemphigus often has the suprabasilar cleft formation
As in pemphigus foliaceus, a positive result is not always
of PV, but is more profoundly pustular (see p. 36), and
forthcoming from random biopsy.  Obtaining multiple
includes apoptosis of keratinocytes.
36
Diseases of the epidermis
1998). Immunologically, the disease was characterized
PARANEOPLASTIC PEMPHIGUS
by autoantibodies directed against envoplakin and
periplakin (de Bruin et al., 1999). Interestingly, the frst
Clinical features (Figures 2.13 and 2.14)
of three dogs reported with pemphigus foliaceus by
Paraneoplastic pemphigus (PNP) is a very rare, severe
Stannard et al. (1975) had clinical and histological fea-
autoimmune blistering disease affecting the mucosa and
tures more commensurate with a diagnosis of PNP; a
mucocutaneous junctions that is seen in conjunction
 thymoma was discovered in that patient. Recently, PNP
with neoplasia. Lesions resemble pemphigus vulgaris. In
has been documented in a dog with a splenic sarcoma
humans with PNP, a mixed and variable panel of targeted
(Elmore et al., 2003). In that dog, antibodies targeted
antibodies includes multiple plakin family proteins
bullous pemphigoid antigen 1 (BPAG1), desmoplakins I
(such as multiple recombinant proteins of envoplakin
and II, envoplakin, and periplakin, as well as extracellu-
and periplakin) and various antidesmoglein antibodies
lar segments of human desmoglein 3 (Dsg 3) and canine
(Nagata et al., 2001; Ohyama et al., 2001). A dog with
desmoglein 1 (Dsg 1) (Elmore et al., 2003). Dsg 1 is the
thymic lymphoma and skin lesions homologous to
usual targeted autoantigen in pemphigus foliaceus (see
"  s)  aq s s  dnd
Chapter 1), but also has been identified in an alopecic
form of pemphigus vulgaris (see p. 32). Dsg 3 is the usual
targeted autoantigen in pemphigus vulgaris (see p. 32). As
plakin autoantibodies also have been found in human
cases of pemphigus foliaceus and pemphigus vulgaris,
they are not considered unique or specifc for the identi-
fcation of PNP (Nagata et al., 2001; Ohyama et al.,
2001). The exact immunologic mechanism for this entity
remains undiscovered. T cell mediated keratinocyte apop-
tosis has been demonstrated in human PNP (Reich et al.,
1999), and likely is a major contributor to the disease.
An additional published case shares many clinical,
histopathologic and immunologic features of PNP, in-
cluding autoantibodies directed  against  envoplakin,
 periplakin, Dsg1, and Dsg3; however underlying neopla-
sia was not identifed (Olivry et al., 2000). This case may
 be a variant of pemphigus vulgaris that mimics PNP both
clinically and histologically (Olivry, T., personal commu-
Fig. 2.13 Paraneoplastic pemphigus in a dog. Bilaterally symmet-
nication, 2003). The authors have observed a dog in
ric facial ulceration is present on the dorsal muzzle and periorbitally.
 which typical clinical and histological features of PNP
(Photograph courtesy T. Olivry.)
were transient; this dog had no evidence of neoplasia
upon systemic evaluation. Thus, other syndromes with
mixed immunologic features exist, and caution is war-
ranted regarding automatic association with occult
neoplasia. Drug reaction should be ruled out and was
suspected in the case observed by the authors.
Paraneoplastic pemphigus was reported in a 7-year-old
female Bouvier des Flandres (Lemmens et al., 1998).
 Severe ulceration of the oral cavity and mucocutaneous
junctions of the planum nasale, vagina, and anus, plus
severe cutaneous ulceration of the muzzle, pinnal margins
and clawbeds, was observed. Skin lesions were partially
bilaterally symmetric. Postmortem revealed thymic lym-
phoma with hepatic metastases (Lemmens et al., 1998).
In the additional dog with immunopathologic features of
 PNP, but without confrmed neoplasia, similar clinical fea-
tures plus pressure-point involvement were noted (Olivry
 et al., 2000). In the putative case reported by Stannard et
Fig. 2.14 Paraneoplastic pemphigus in a dog. Multifocal severe
al. (1975), there was severe ulcerative stomatitis and
ulceration is present. (Photograph courtesy T. Olivry.)
cheilitis, accompanied by weight loss, lethargy, purulent
Bullous and acantholytic diseases of the epidermis and the dermal-epidermal junction
37
nasal discharge, and a cough; post mortem examination
Suprabasilar acantholysis may not always be tidily
revealed a thymoma.
above the basal cell layer, as in classic pemphigus vulgaris
 Major clinical differential diagnoses include pemphigus
(see p. 32), but can affect the lower spinosum, leaving
vulgaris, epidermolysis bullosa acquisita, mucous mem-
multiple layers of keratinocytes on the floor of the cleft.
brane pemphigoid, bullous pemphigoid, vesicular cuta-
Neutrophils fll the cleft to form variably sized, often
neous lupus erythematosus of Collies and Shetland
 panepidermal pustules. Suprabasilar clefting without sig-
nificant pustule formation has been reported (Lemmens
thema multiforme, toxic epidermal necrolysis,
and
et al., 1998). Individual keratinocytes at all levels of the
bullous drug eruptions. Histopathology and immunologic
epidermis are apoptotic and are contracted and brightly
 studies, including identifcation of targeted antigens, as 
eosinophilic. There may be lymphocytic satellitosis of
well as the documentation of underlying neoplasia, are
apoptotic keratinocytes. The putative case of PNP
required for definitive diagnosis.
reported by Stannard et al. (1975) featured acantholysis
of salivary ducts and the esophagus, with bulla formation
Biopsy site selection
in the latter.
The dermis or submucosa contains a mixed mon-
See Pemphigus vulgaris, p. 32
onuclear infltrate of lymphocytes, macrophages, and
plasma cells. Neutrophils are variably present and may be
Histopathology (Figures 2.15 and 2.16)
numerous.
 Direct immunofluorescence testing showed intercellular
Epidermal
10
mucosalé
epithelial features
include
 deposition of only IgG at all levels of mucosal epithelium
suprabasilar acantholysis, variable intraepidermal pustu-
in the case without underlying neoplasia (Olivry et al.,
lation with free (apoptotic) keratinocytes,
.and ker-
2000), and in the epidermis and follicles in the case with
atinocyte apoptosis. Thus, the lesions present features of
splenic sarcoma (Elmore et al., 2003). Indirect immuno-
pemphigus vulgaris (suprabasilar clefting), erythema mul-
fluorescence testing revealed high titers of IgG auto-
tiforme (apoptosis), and to a lesser extent pemphigus
antibodies (Lemmens et al., 1998; Olivry et al., 2000;
foliaceus (intraepidermal pustulation with free
 Elmore et al., 2003). Specific targeted antigens are multi-
atinocytes). It is this confounding mixed morphologic
 ple and variable (see clinical features, above).
presentation that is the key to the diagnosis of PNP.
Differential diagnoses include erythema multiforme,
However based on the reported case for which underly-
 pemphigus foliaceus, and pemphigus vulgaris. As stated,
ing neoplasia was not discovered (Olivry et al., 2000), and
features of all three typify PNP. Erythema multiforme and
the putative drug-associated case observed by the authors,
pemphigus foliaceus do not feature suprabasilar acan-
other immunologic triggers  besides neoplasia
may
 tholysis. Classical pemphigus vulgaris is not characterized
produce a similar morphologic pattern in the skin.
by apoptosis. Facially predominant pemphigus foliaceus
2.15 Canine
paraneoplastic
pemphigus,
featuring
an irregular,
suprabasilar cleft with lifting of the
overlying
epidermis.
{Photograph
courtesy T. Olivry.)
38
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 2.16 Higher magnification of
canine paraneoplastic pemphigus. There
is apoptosis of keratinocytes of the epi
dermis overlying the cleft (at right).
Note residual basal cells at base of cleft
(at left). (From Lermmens, P., De Bruin,
A., De Meulermeester, J. et al. {1998)
Paraneoplastic pemphigus in a dog.
Vet Dermatot 9, 127-34. Reprinted
with permission.)
may include apoptosis, but generally apoptotic ker
atinocytes are surrounded by neutrophils to form small
pustules. Due to the observed and reported cases that
mimic PNP both clinically and histologically, definitive
linking of this entity to neoplasia may not be prudent.
Other underlying causes, including drug reaction, should
be considered. Other similar histological overlap syn-
rog paielai-anip aq Aeu pue paarasqo aq Aeu sauonp
example, in some cases of drug related pemphigus foli-
aceus, apoptosis may be severe, suggesting concurrence of
both pemphigus foliaceus-like immunoreaction and ery-
thema multiforme (see Chapter 1).
HEREDITARY EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA
Fig. 2.17 Hereditary junctional epiderrmolysis bullosa in a German
(Synonyms: congenital epidermolysis bullosa, epidermol-
Shorthaired Pointer. Note tiny vesicles and ulcers of the inner pinna.
ysis bullosa congenita)
(Photograph courtesy B. Gay-Bataille.)
Clinical features (Figure 2.17)
EB simplex, fragility and clefting occur through the basal
Epidermolysis bullosa (EB) is a term used to describe a
 cell layer of the epidermis. Convincing evidence of EB
group of mechanobullous diseases of variable etiology
simplex has not been published for the dog or cat. Junc-
that are recognized in humans, dogs, and cats. In the
 tional and dystrophic EB have been reported in the dog
hereditary form, structural defects occur in the basal cell
and cat (Dunstan et al., 1988; Koch & Walder, 1990;
layer or at various levels of the basement membrane zone,
Johnstone et al., 1992; White et al., 1993; O'Dair &
resulting in loss of epithelial integrity, blister formation,
Henderson, 1994; Nagata et al., 1995; Rakich et al.,
and clinical disease of variable severity. Acquired EB
1996; Guaguere et al., 1997; Olivry et al., 1997, 1999;
is due to antibody targeting of these same structures (see
Olivry & Mason, 1998; Palazzi et al., 2000; Guaguere et
p. 40). Hereditary (congenital) forms have been described
al., 2002; Olivry, 2002).
in humans, dogs, and cats, and acquired forms (EB
 Fragility and cleavage within the lamina lucida of the
 acquisita) have been described in humans and dogs.
basement membrane zone characterize junctional EB. In
Hereditary EB in humans is divided into three subcat-
humans, this junctional fragility is due to defective expres-
egories (based on depth of defect moving from superficial
sion of hemidesmosome/anchoring flament proteins,
to deep): EB simplex (epidermolytic EB), junctional EB,
including collagen XVll (bullous pemphigoid antigens
and dystrophic EB (dermolytic EB) (Fine et al., 2000). In
BPAG2, BP180), integrin alpha-6, and laminin-5 (Uitto &
Bullous and acantholytic diseases of the epidermis and the dermal-epidermal junction
39
Pulkkinen, 2001). An absence of collagen XVII was frst
Lesions of dystrophic EB are more severe than the junc-
demonstrated in German Shorthaired Pointers with non-
tional form of the disease. Ulcerations are deeper and may
lethal junctional epidermolysis bullosa (Guaguere et al.,
be more widespread. More extensive oral and oropha-
1997; Olivry et al., 1997), but normal secretion of this
ryngeal lesions are seen. Skin lesions occur on the
protein was found in vitro. A mutation in the gene encod-
pawpads, clawbeds, pressure points, and areas overlying
ing laminin-5 has been shown to be the defect underlying
 bony prominences such as the metacarpal and metatarsal
junctional EB in this breed (Spirito et al., 1999). Dys-
 joints, and the tail tip. Claws may be sloughed. Defective
trophic EB is characterized by fragility and separation
tooth enamel and growth retardation may be seen. The
beneath the lamina densa. Dystrophic EB occurs from
syndrome has been noted in Akitas, Golden Retrievers,
defects in the anchoring fbrils that include diminished or
and in a Persian cat (White et al., 1993; Nagata et al.,
"  Ao) u l adi jo issaxa qe
1995; Olivry et al., 1999; Palazzi et al., 2000). Age of
1999).
onset is before 2 months.
 In junctional EB, multiple oral and cutaneous vesicles
Clinical differential diagnoses include bullous auto-
and bullae lead to ulceration. Skin over bony prominences
immune skin diseases such as epidermolysis bullosa
of the face and legs, pawpads, pinnae, intertriginous skin,
acquisita, toxic epidermal necrolysis, and chemical or
and other frictional sites are affected preferentially. Ulcers
thermal burns. Differentiation usually should not be
may occur in the oral cavity, and dystrophic claws may
problematic since inherited EB occurs either at birth or in
be present. Friction may produce lesions iatrogenically.
very young animals. A history of probable exposure gen-
Lethal and nonlethal variants have been seen; severity is
erally accompanies chemical or thermal burns. Toxic
proportionate to the body area affected.
epidermal necrolysis and bullous autoimmune diseases
Published cases of junctional EB include a Toy Poodle,
commonly occur in adult or older animals.
Beaucerons, German Shorthaired Pointers, a mixed breed
dog and Siamese cats (Dunstan et al., 1988; Rakich et al.,
Biopsy site selection
1996; Guaguere et al., 1997, 2002; Olivry et al., 1997;
Olivry & Mason, 1998; Olivry, 2002). Autosomal reces-
Bullae or vesicles should be obtained carefully by wedge
sive inheritance was hypothesized in the Beaucerons and
biopsy to preserve the integrity of these fragile lesions.
German Shorthaired Pointers (Dunstan et al.,
1988;
Margins of early ulcers may show diagnostic changes at
Guaguere et al., 1997, 2002; Olivry et al., 1997; Olivry,
the dermal-epidermal junction.
2002). Putative junctional EB has been reported only
twice in the cat in related Siamese cats and in a domestic
Histopathology (Figures 2.18 and 2.19)
longhaired cat (Johnstone et al., 1992; O'Dair & Hen-
derson, 1994). Age of onset is early, with affected animals
Three general categories of inherited EB have been iden-
presenting between birth and 2 months of age.
tifed in humans; only junctional and dystrophic forms
Fig. 2.18 Canine junctional epider-
molysis bullosa. Note the large subepi-
dermal bulla. (Case material courtesy
R.W. Dunstan.)
40
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 2.19 Higher magnification of
canine junctional epiderrmolysis bullosa
in the dog of Fig. 2.18. Basal cells
remain intact in the roof of the bulla.
have been convincingly identifed in dogs and cats (see
with dystrophic EB, immunostaining of collagen VlI was
clinical features, above). In both junctional and dys-
reduced in skin (Palazzi et al., 2000). Conversely to dys-
trophic EB, the epidermis is cleanly separated from the
trophic EB, immunomapping showed the separation
underlying dermis to form a bulla or vesicle. Inflamma-
above the lamina densa in dogs with junctional EB,
tion is not present within early bullae, and dermal inflam-
indicative of cleavage through the lamina lucida (Olivry
mation is sparse. The earliest lesions of junctional EB in
et al., 1997).
a Poodle occurred as vacuoles along the basement mem-
Histopathologically, inherited EB resembles epidermol-
brane (Dunstan et al., 1988). A periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)
 ysis bullosa acquisita, bullous pemphigoid, mucous mem-
stain may color the lamina densa along the floor of the
 brane pemphigoid, and linear IgA disease. Knowledge of
bulla in junctional EB and on the roof of the bulla in the
an early age of onset is important in the differentiation of
dystrophic form. As the bullae evolve to ulcers there is
inherited EB from the other three diseases. Inflammation
secondary severe fbrinosuppurative exudation and neu-
within and beneath the intact cleft of inherited EB is gen-
trophilic dermal inflammation, often accompanied by a
erally sparse in comparison to the other subepidermal
fbrovascular reaction in the dystrophic form. A clean sep-
H8i reau jo saseo suos rog idaoxa sasoieuap snonq
aration of the epidermis from an underlying bed of gran-
disease (see p. 45). Autoantibodies are not present
ulation tissue has also been observed, suggesting that
ini
inherited EB, in contrast to the other diseases.
 there may be new splitting at the site of previous lesions.
Immunomapping studies are required for definitive
Direct and indirect immunofluorescence testing for auto-
diagnosis.
antibodies is negative.
Electron microscopy demonstrated the formation of
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA ACQUISITA
clefts below the lamina densa of the basement membrane
zone in Golden Retrievers with dystrophic EB (Palazzi
(Synonym: acquired epidermolysis bullosa)
et al., 2000). Antigen immunomapping with a collagen
 IV-specific monoclonal antibody demonstrated collagen
Clinical features (Figure 2.20)
[V {a major component of the lamina densa) above sites
of dermal-epidermal separation in feline dystrophic EB,
Epidermolysis bullosa is a term used to describe a group
 also indicative of clefting below the lamina densa (Olivry
 of mechanobullous diseases of variable etiology that are
et al., 1999). Electron microscopy and immunostaining
recognized in humans, dogs and cats. In the hereditary
identified a decrease in anchoring fbrils, due to reduction
form, structural defects occur in the basal cell layer or at
in their main component collagen Vll, in cats with dys-
various levels of the basement membrane zone, resulting
trophic EB (Olivry et al., 1999). Although anchoring
 in loss of epithelial integrity and blister formation (see
fbrils were ultrastructurally normal in Golden Retrievers
p.38).
Bullous and acantholytic diseases of the epidermis and the dermal-epidermal junction
41
phadenopathy is common (Olivry, 2003). Sepsis second-
 ary to widespread ulceration may be seen.
A solitary case of mild, localized EBA similar to the
“Brunsting-Perry’ form of EBA in humans has been
reported (Olivry et al., 2000). Vesicles and ulcers gave rise
to scarring. Lesions affected predominantly the head,
including the pinnae; lesser lesions occurred on the trunk
(Olivry et al., 2000).
Young adult Great Danes appear to be predisposed to
the development of generalized EBA (6/12; 50%) (Olivry
et al., 2002). Inbreeding has been proposed as the reason
for this predilection (Olivry & Chan, 2001). The male to
female ratio in reported dogs is 2 : 1 (Olivry, 2003). In this
Fig. 2.20 Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita in a Great Dane. Multi
same study, the age of onset was surprisingly young with
focal ulcers are coalescing. (Photograph courtesy T. Olivry.)
a median of 1 year; 8 of 12 dogs developed the disease
by 15 months of age (Olivry, 2003).
Major clinical differential diagnoses for generalized
EBA include bullous pemphigoid, mucous membrane
Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita (EBA), an autoimmune
 pemphigoid, vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus of
blistering disease due to antibody targeting of these same
 Collies and Shetland Sheepdogs, pemphigus vulgaris,
-i e ro pazr e re im ssrd u ss
 severe erythema multiforme, and bullous drug eruptions.
ized phenotype. EBA has been described only in humans
Hereditary epidermolysis bullosa should be easily differ-
and dogs. In humans, EBA is a very rare disease. Formerly,
entiated from EBA based on age of onset, as lesions are
canine EBA also was thought to be very rare. However,
noted before 2 months of age. EBA is more likely to have
according to Olivry (2003), generalized inflammatory
pawpad involvement and systemic signs than bullous or
 mucous membrane pemphigoid. Histopathology and
bullous form observed in humans) is among the most
further immunological testing, including identification of
common subsets of subepidermal autoimmune blistering
 targeted antigens, are required for differentiation.
diseases, and represents up to 25% of autoimmune blis-
tering dermatoses associated with antibasement mem-
Biopsy site selection
brane autoantibodies. Only one dog has been reported
with localized disease (Olivry et al., 2000).
See Hereditary epidermolysis bullosa, p. 38.
In EBA,
 autoantibodies are directed
against the
aminoterminal, noncollagenous (NC1) domain of type
Histopathology (Figures 2.21 through 2.23)
VIl collagen, a major component of dermal anchoring
fbrils that bind to the basement membrane zone (Olivry
In EBA, usually large and flat subepidermal bullae are
et al., 1998). In a series of 12 dogs, IgG serum autoanti-
present, and these may be filled with blood. A few strands
bodies targeted recombinant human NC1 (12/12) and
of dermal collagen may cling to the roof of the bulla. Neu-
NC2 segments (3/12) of collagen VII (Olivry et al., 2002).
 trophils accumulate along the base or within the cleft,
Two additional dogs with indistinguishable clinical fea-
sometimes intensely. Eosinophils may be observed but are
tures had autoantibodies directed against laminin-5
less common. Noninflammatory blisters may be seen.
(Olivry, 2002), making them the acquired counterpart of
Neutrophils often line up beneath the basement mem-
junctional epidermolysis bullosa.
brane and may degenerate, resulting in the presence of
 In   generalized   inflammatory
EBA,
,  erythematous
nuclear fragments in this location (leukocytoclasia). Small
macules and urticarial plaques and patches eventuate in
subepidermal vesicles flled with polymorphonuclear cells,
transient tense vesicles that evolve rapidly into wide-
 or subepidermal microabscesses, may be reminiscent of
spread  well-demarcated ulcers. Epithelial sloughing
human dermatitis herpetiformis.
occurs in the oral cavity, mucocutaneous junctions, and
Neutrophils, fewer eosinophils, lymphocytes and
intertriginous or frictional regions such as the face,
plasma cells are found in the superficial and occasionally
axillae, and abdomen (Olivry & Chan, 2001; Olivry,
the periadnexal dermis. Inflammation is usually mild to
2003). Oral involvement results in severe halitosis, hyper-
moderate and is accompanied by some dermal edema.
salivation, and anorexia (Olivry, 2003). The nasal planum
Ulceration is common and is accompanied by more
and pawpads also may be affected (Olivry, 2003).
intense neutrophilic inflammation and fbrinosuppurative
Affected dogs are lethargic, depressed and febrile. Lym-
exudation.
42
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 2.21 Epidermolysis bullosa acqui-
sita in a dog. Note hermorrhage in
flaccid subepidermal bulla.
Fig. 2.22 Epiderrmolysis bullosa acquj-
sita in a German Shorthaired Pointer.
Fibrin and neutrophils are in a large
flaccid bulla.
Antigen immunomapping with a collagen IV-specific
and IgG and IgA antibodies in the generalized form
monoclonal antibody demonstrates collagen IV (a major
(Olivry et al., 1998). These autoantibodies are directed to
component of the lamina densa) on the epidermal side of
the dermal side of salt-split skin (the artificial split occurs
the split, indicating cleavage below the basement mem-
through the lamina lucida of the basement membrane).
brane (Olivry et al., 1998, 2000). Direct immunofluores-
Immunogold electron microscopy of one case showed
cence studies predominantly identify IgG in a linear
autoantibodies targeting the extremity of anchoring fbrils
pattern along the basement membrane zone; fewer dogs
in the sublamina densa (Olivry et al., 1998).
have IgA, IgM, and C3 (Olivry et al., 1998). Deposition
Differential diagnoses include bullous pemphigoid,
of IgG is more intense and thick than in other autoim-
mucous membrane pemphigoid, inherited epidermolysis 
mune blistering skin diseases (Olivry et al., 2002). In
bullosa, linear IgA dermatosis, and type I bullous systemic
 blistered skin, IgG often segregates with the epidermis;
lupus erythematosus. Bullous pemphigoid may feature
 remnants of stained basement membrane may be seen on
eosinophilic infltrates along the basement membrane
the floor of the blister or within it (Olivry et al., 2002).
zone; in contrast, neutrophilic infltrates may characterize
Only IgG was found in the localized form (Olivry et al.,
EBA. Intact lesions of inherited epidermolysis bullosa and
2000).
linear IgA dermatosis often are only minimally inflamed.
 Indirect immunofluorescence testing detected circulat-
Immunologic studies are required for definitive differen-
ing IgG in the localized form of EBA (Olivry et al., 2000),
 tiation. Type I bullous systemic lupus erythematosus may
Bullous and acantholytic diseases of the epidermis and the dermal-epidermal junction
43
Fig. 2.23 Higher magnification of
early subepidermal vesicle of epider-
molysis bullosa acquisita with accumu-
lations of neutrophils in a dermatitis
herpetiformis-like morphology.
be histologically and immunologically identical to EBA;
which codes for the SERCA2 pump located in the endo-
identification of criteria compatible with systemic lupus
plasmic reticulum, is mutated, while in HH disease the
erythematosus is required for differentiation (see Chapter
mutation affects the SPCA1 (ATP2C1) gene for the pump
3).
located in the Golgi apparatus (Shull et al., 2003). Both
pumps restore the calcium stores within the endoplasmic
reticulum and Golgi apparatus, respectively, after a tran-
CANINE DARIER'S DISEASE
sient increase of intracellular free calcium occurs after
(Previous name: canine Hailey-Hailey disease)
multiple signals. The drug thapsigargin inhibits the
SERCA2, but not the Golgi pump. Using thapsigargin,
Suter has demonstrated that the SERCA2 pump and not
Clinical features
the Golgi pump was affected in dogs with this syndrome
A rare genodermatosis characterized by a defect of epithe-
(Suter, M., personal communication, 2002). Subsequent
lial cohesion was originally reported in three related
cloning of the SERCA2 gene did not reveal a specifc
English Seters as a canine counterpart of Hailey-Hailey
mutation; however, this failure to reveal a specifc muta-
(HH) disease (benign familial chronic pemphigus), as seen
tion has occurred in 50% of the human Darier's patients
in humans (Shanley et al., 1993). Subsequent breeding
tested as well (Suter, M., personal communication, 2004).
experiments with an affected English Setter and a Beagle
Upregulation of P-cadherin, an important Ca?+ dependent
bitch indicated the likelihood of autosomal dominant
adhesion molecule in the epidermis, occurs in both
inheritance with incomplete expression (Sueki et al.,
autoimmune and hereditary acantholytic disorders in
1997). The syndrome showed many similarities to human
humans, and is suggested to be involved in the develop-
HH disease, an uncommon hereditary defect of epithelial
ment of acantholysis of both HH disease and Darier's
cell cohesion due to the formation of weak desmosomal
disease (Hakuno et al., 2001).
connections (Metze et al., 1996). The defect leads to
 In English Setters distinctive, well-demarcated, erythe-
recurrent vesicles and bullae, and has an autosomal dom-
matous, crusted, alopecic, and hypertrophic plaques
inant mode of inheritance. Recent unpublished work by
formed on the trunk, head, and extremities, including at
Aqeqoid saop asaui ieul saneoipus dnona iau pue rans
 pressure points. The lesions remained localized and did
have a canine counterpart to Darier's disease of humans
not seem to enlarge over time. Pruritus or pain were not
instead (Suter, M., personal communication, 2002).
obvious features (Shanley et al., 1993; Sueki et al., 1997).
 In humans, HH disease and Darier's disease are clini-
A similar disease was noted in a young Doberman
cally and histologically similar genodermatoses that result
Pinscher but details were not provided (Scott et al.,
from different, but similar, genetic mutations in Ca2t
 2001). Lesions developed at approximately 6 months of
pumps. In Darier's disease, the SERCA2 (ATP2A2) gene,
 age in the English Setters.
 Diseases of the epidermis
Clinical differential diagnoses may include multifocal
keratin which extends to superfcial hair follicles. The
demodicosis, superfcial pyoderma, or dermatophytosis.
granular layer is prominent. There is severe epidermal and
Skin biopsy is required for definitive diagnosis.
follicular infundibular hyperplasia, and frequently super
fcial pustulation and crusting. Dermal inflammation
is mild except in areas with secondary superficial
Biopsy site selection
pustulation, and includes neutrophils, lymphocytes and
Representative specimens should be acquired from multi-
macrophages.
ple lesions. Care should be taken in procuring the speci-
 Direct immunofluorescence testing for autoantibodies
men as affected tissue is easily damaged.
was negative (Sueki et al., 1997). Monoclonal antibody
studies of affected English Setters demonstrated a lack of
E cadherin within intercellular adhesion structures in
Histopathology (Figures 2.24 and 2.25)
some reports (Shanley et al., 1993; Suter et al., 1996), but
Loss of keratinocyte cohesion, or acantholysis, occurring
not in a later report of the same group of dogs (Sueki et
throughout the epidermis and follicular infundibula,
al., 1997).
creates the image of the so-called 'crumbling brick wall'.
The principal differential diagnosis is pemphigus vul-
Affected keratinocytes are more densely staining, and as
garis, which in some cases may demonstrate numerous
they progress to the surface, become flattened and corni-
acantholytic cells within epidermal clefts. In pemphigus
fed. Increased mean size of suprabasal keratinocytes in
vulgaris there is often loss of the roof of the bullae leaving
lesional sites was reported (Sueki et al., 1997). There is
a characteristic row of prominent basal cells. In contrast
often a thick layer of parakeratotic or orthokeratotic
to pemphigus vulgaris, canine Darier's disease features
Fig. 2.25 Higher magnification of Darier's disease in the dog off
Fig. 2.24 Canine Darier's disease. Acantholysis and premature
Fig. 2.24. Note flattening of cornified acantholytic keratinocytes as
cornification of keratinocytes creates a *crumbling brick wall.
they approach the surface.
Bullous and acantholytic diseases of the epidermis and the dermal-epidermal junction
45
cornification of dissociated keratinocytes, as well as
severe epidermal and follicular infundibular hyperplasia.
Immunofluorescence studies reveal  antikeratinocyte
autoantibodies in pemphigus vulgaris but not in canine
Darier's disease.
LINEAR IgA DISEASE
Clinical features
Linear IgA disease (LAD) is a very rare, vesiculobullous
subepithelial blistering autoimmune disease affecting
mucous membranes, mucocutaneous junctions, and skin
of humans and dogs. Both skin-fixed and circulating IgA
autoantibodies target LAD-1, the processed extracellular
segment of type XVII collagen (Olivry et al., 2000; Olivry
& Chan, 2001). This disease is not similar to the disease
previously reported by Scott et al. (1982).
 In the two dogs reported by Olivry et al. (2000), ulcers
were present in the oral cavity, face, and extremities;
pawpads and the intertriginous regions of the axillae and
groin also were affected; intact vesicles were not seen
grossly. In humans, either children or adults may be
affected. Signalment predilection data are not available
for the dog.
 Clinical differential diagnoses include mucous mem-
brane pemphigoid, bullous pemphigoid, epidermolysis
bullosa acquisita, vesicular cutaneous lupus erythemato-
sus of Collies and Shetland Sheepdogs, pemphigus vul-
garis, systemic lupus erythematosus, severe erythema
Fig. 2.26 Linear IgA disease in a dog. A subepidermal bulla con-
multiforme, toxic epidermal necrolysis, and other bullous
tains fibrin and small numbers of neutrophils.
drug eruptions. As in all of the subepithelial bullous der-
matoses, histopathology a
 and further  immunological
testing, including identification of targeted antigens, are
Ulceration is accompanied by severe fbrinosuppurative
required for differentiation.
exudation.
 Dermal inflammation beneath intact bullae is generally
 mild and includes neutrophils, lymphocytes, plasma cells,
Biopsy site selection
and macrophages. Eosinophils may be present in small
 As in all bullous dermatoses affecting the basement mem-
numbers, but do not line up along the basement mem-
brane zone, intact vesicles, if present, should be removed
brane of intact skin or beneath bullae. A fbrovascular
in their entirety, preferably by excisional biopsy. If an
proliferation may be present in the superfcial dermis
intact lesion is not available, tissue from the margins of
beneath ulcers or intact skin.
recently ruptured bullae may be sampled.
Antigen immunomapping with a collagen IV-specifc
monoclonal antibody demonstrated collagen IV (a major
Histopathology (Figure 2.26)
component of the lamina densa) on the dermal side of
the split, indicating cleavage through the lamina lucida
There is subepidermal  vesiculation  leading  to  the
(Olivry et al., 2000). Direct immunofluorescence studies
formation of large bullae. Bullae may be somewhat
identifed IgG, IgA, IgM, and C3 in a continuous linear
flaccid, resulting in retention of the irregular or peg-like
 pattern along the basement membrane zone (Olivry et al.,
lower contour of the epidermis. Turgid bullae are
2000). Indirect immunofluorescence testing detected
also observed. Bullae are either devoid of luminal
circulating IgG and IgA antibodies (Olivry et al., 2000).
inflammation, or contain fbrin and small numbers of 
 These autoantibodies were directed to the epidermal side
neutrophils. Eosinophils are not observed within
 of salt-split skin (the artificial split occurs through the
bullae and have not been reported (Olivry et al., 2000).
lamina lucida of the basement membrane). Immunoblot-
46
Diseases of the epidermis
 ting identifed the target as a 120kDa antigen consisting
pemphigoid, an autoimmune blistering disease affecting
of the processed extracellular domain of collagen XVII,
mucosae and mucocutaneous junctions. J Autoimmun 16,
also called LAD-1 (Olivry et al., 2000).
411-21.
Differential diagnoses include bullous pemphigoid,
Olivry, T., Dunston, S.M., Zhang, G. et al. (2002) Laminin-5 is
mucous membrane pemphigoid, inherited epidermolysis
 targeted by autoantibodies in feline mucous membrane (cica-
bullosa, and epidermolysis bullosa acquisita. Bullous
tricial) pemphigoid. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 88, 123-9.
pemphigoid may feature intense eosinophilic infltrates
Pemphigus Vulgaris
along the basement membrane zone; intense neutro-
Amagai, M., Tsunoda, K., Zillkens, D. et al. (1999) The clinica]
philic infltrates may characterize epidermolysis bullosa
phenotype of pemphigus is defined by the anti-desmoglein
acquisita. Intact lesions of inherited epidermolysis bullosa
autoantibody profle. J Am Acad Dermatol 40, 167-70.
and linear IgA dermatosis often are only minimally
Brenner, S., Bialy-Golan, A. & Ruocco, V. (1998) Drug induced
inflamed. Immunologic studies are required for definitive
 pemphigus. Clin Dermatot 16, 393-7.
differentiation.
Calhedari, R., De Bruin, A., Baumann, D. et al. (2001) A central
role for the armadillo protein plakoglobin in the autoimmune
disease pemphigus vulgaris. J Cell Biol 153, 823-34.
REFERENCES
Carlotti, D.N., Terrier, S., Bensignor, E. et al. (2000) Pemphigus
vulgaris in the dog: a report of 8 cases. Prat Med Chir Anim
Bullous Pemphigoid
Comp 35, 309-15.
Iwasaki, T., Olivry, T., Lapiere, J.C. et al. (1995) Canine bullous
Chan, L.S., Vanderlugt, C.J., Takashi, H. et al. (1998) Epitope 
pemphigoid (BP): identification of the 180-kd canine BP
spreading: lessons from autoimmune skin diseases. J Invest
antigen by circulating autoantibodies. Vet Pathol 32, 387-93.
Dermatol 110, 103-9.
Olivry, T. (2002) Dermo-epidermal junction: animal pathology.
Foster, A.P. & Olivry, I. (2001) Nasal dermatitis as a manifes-
In: Proceedings of the 18th ESVD/ECVD Meeting, Nice, pp.
tation of canine pemphigus vulgaris. Vet Record 148, 450-1.
67-75.
Hakuno, M., Akiyama, M., Shimuzu, H. et al. (2001) Upregu-
Olivry, T. (2003) Natural bullous pemphigoid in companion
 lation of P-cadherin expression in the lesional skin of pem-
animals. In: Animal Models of Immune Dermatoses (ed. L.S.
phigus, Hailey-Hailey disease and Darier's disease. J Cutan
Chan), pp. 201-11. CRC Press, Boca Raton.
Pathol 28, 277-81.
Olivry, T. & Chan, L.S. (2001) Autoimmune blistering der-
Olivry, I. (2003) Spontaneous canine model of pemphigus
matoses in domestic animals. Clin Dermatol 19, 750-60.
vulgaris. In: Animal Models of Immune Dermatoses (ed. L.S.
Olivry, T., Chan, L.S., Xu, L. et al. (1999) Novel feline autoim-
Chan), pp. 265-75. CRC Press, Boca Raton.
mune blistering disease resembling bullous pemphigoid in
Olivry, T. & Jackson, H.A. (2001) An alopecic phenotype of
humans: IgG autoantibodies target the NC16A ectodomain of
canine pemphigus vulgaris? Br J Dermatol 145, 169-92.
type XV1I collagen (BP180/BPAG2). Vet Patbol 36, 328-35.
Olivry, T., Ihrke, PJ. & Atlee, B.A. (1992) Pemphigus
Olivry, T., Dunston, F.M., Fahey, M. et al. (2000) Autoantibod-
vulgaris lacking mucosal involvement in a German shepherd
jes against the processed ectodomain of collagen XVII
dog: possible response to heparin therapy. Vet Dermatol 3,
(BPAG2, BP180) define a canine homologue of linear IgA
79-84.
disease of humans. Vet Pathol 37, 302-9.
Olivry, T., Joubeh, S., Dunston, S.M. et al. (2003) Desmoglein-
Tomlinson, L., Linder, K.E. & Olivry, T. (2001) Histologic char-
3 is the target autoantigen in spontaneous canine pemphigus
acterization of canine subepidermal vesicular diseases: bullous
vulgaris.Exp Dermatol 12,198-203.
pemphigoid, epidermolysis bullosa acquisita, and mucous
membrane pemphigoid. Vet Pathol 38, 584 (abstract).
ParaneoplasticPemphigus
Wagner, G.H. & Paraskevopoulos, S. (1995) Bullous pem-
de Bruin, A., Miller, E., Wyder, M. et al. (1999) Periplakin and
phigoid and burns: the unveiling of the attachment plaque?
envoplakin are target antigens in canine and human paraneo-
Australas J Dermatol 36, 17-20.
plastic pemphigus. J Am Acad Dermatol 40, 682-5.
Elmore, S.A., Basseches, J, Anhalt, G. et al. (2003) Paraneo-
Mucous Membrane Pemphigoid
plastic pemphigus in a dog with splenic hematopoietic
Olivry, T. (2003) Spontaneous canine model of mucous mem-
neoplasia. Vet Pathol 40, 609 (abstract).
brane pemphigoid. In: Animal Modeis of Immune Dermatoses
Lemmens, P, de Bruin, A., De Meulemeester, J. et al. (1998)
(ed. L.s. Chan), pp. 241-9. CRC Press, Boca Raton.
Paraneoplastic pemphigus in a dog. Vet Dermatol 9, 127-34.
Olivry, T. & Chan, L.S. (2001) Autoimmune blistering der-
Nagata, Y., Karashima, I., Watt, FM. et al. (2001) Paraneo-
matoses in domestic animals. Clin Dermatol 19, 750-60.
plastic pemphigus sera react strongly with multiple epitopes
Olivry, I., Chan, L.S., Xu, L. et al. (1999) Novel feline autoim-
on the various regions of envoplakin and periplakin, except
mune blistering disease resembling bullous pemphigoid in
for the C-terminal homologous domain of periplakin. J Invest
humans: IgG autoantibodies target the NC16A ectodomain of
Dermatol 116, 556-63.
type XVII collagen (BP180/BPAG2). Vet Pathol 36, 328-35.
Ohyama, M., Amagai, M., Hashimoto, T. et al. (2001) Clinical
Olivry, I., Dunston, S.M., Schachter, M. et al. (2001) A spon-
phenotype and anti-desmoglein autoantibody profle in para-
taneous canine model of mucous membrane (cicatricial)
neoplastic pemphigus. J Am Acad Dermatol S5, 593-8.
47
Olivry, I., Alhaidari, Z. & Ghohestani, R.F. (2000) Anti-plakin
Palazzi, X., Marchal, T., Chabanne, L. et al. (2000) Inherited
and desmoglein autoantibodies in a dog with pemphigus vul-
dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa in inbred dogs: a sponta-
garis. Vet Pathol 37, 496-9.
neous animal model for somatic gene therapy J Invest
Reich, K., Brinck, U., Letschert, M. et al. (1999) Graft-versus-
Dermatol 11s, 135-7.
host disease-like immunophenotype and apoptotic ker-
Rakich, P., Latimer, K., Suter, M. et al. (1996) Junctional epi-
atinocyte death in paraneoplastic pemphigus. Br J Dermatol
 dermolysis bullosa in two Australian Cattle Dog puppies. Vet
141, 73946.
Pathol 33, 607 (abstract).
Stannard, A.A., Gribble, D.H. & Baker, B.B. (1975) A mucocu-
Spirito, F, Ortonne, J.P., Guaguere, E. et al. (1999) Genetic basis
taneous disease in the dog, resembling pemphigus vulgaris in
of canine junctional epidermolysis bullosa. J Irwest Dermatol
man. J Am Vet Med Assoc 166, 575-82.
113, 1139 (abstract).
Uitto, J. & Pulkkinin, L. (2001) Molecular genetics of heritable
HereditaryEpidermolysis Bullosa
blistering disorders. Arch Dermatol 11, 1458-61.
Dunstan, R.W, Sills, R.C., Wilkinson, J.E. et al. (1988) A disease
White, S.D., Dunstan, R.W., Olivry, I. et al. (1993) Dystrophic
resembling junctional epidermolysis bullosa in a toy poodle.
(dermolytic) epidermolysis bullosa in a cat. Vet Dermatol 4,
Am J Dermatopathol 10, 442-7.
91-5.
Fine, J.-D., Eady, R.A., Bauer, E.A. et al. (2000) Revised classi-
fication system for inherited epidermolysis bullosa: Report of
Epidermolysis Bullosa Acquisita
 the Second International Consensus Meeting on diagnosis and
Olivry, T. (2002) Dermo-epidermal junction: animal pathology.
classification of epidermolysis bullosa. J Am Acad Dermatol
In: Proceedings of the 18th ESVD/ECVD Meeting, Nice,
42,1051-66.
pp.67-75.
Guaguere, E., Olivry, T., Poujade-Delverdier, A. et al. (1997)
Olivry T. (2003) Spontaneous canine model of epidermolysis
Epidermolyse bulleuse jonctionnelle familiale associée a une
bullosa acquisita. In: Animal Models of Immune Dermatoses.
absence d'expression de collagene XVII (BPAG2, BP180) chez
(ed. L.S. Chan), pp. 227-37. CRC Press, Boca Raton.
le Braque Allemand: a propos de deux cas. Prat Med Chir
Olivry, T. & Chan, L.S. (2001) Autoimmune blistering
Anim Comp 32, 471-80.
dermatoses in domestic animals. Qin Dermatol 19, 750-
Guaguere, E., Spirito, F, Capt, A. et al. (2002) Hereditary junc-
60.
tional epidermolysis bullosa in the German Shorthaired
Olivry, T., Fine, J.-D., Dunston, S.M. et al. (1998) Canine epi-
Pointer: an epidemiological and clinical prospective study of
dermolysis bullosa acquisita: circulating autoantibodies target
21 cases. In: Proceedings of the 18th ESVD/ECVD Meeting,
 the aminoterminal non-collagenous (NC1) domain of collagen
Nice, p. 236.
VIll in anchoring fibrils. Vet Dermatol 9, 19-31.
Johnstone, I., Mason, K. & Sutton, R. (1992) A hereditary junc-
Olivry, T., Petersen, A., Dunston, S.M. et al. (2000) Novel local-
tional mechanobullous disease in the cat. In: Proceedings
ized variant of canine epidermolysis bullosa acquisita. Vet
of the 2nd World Congress of Veterinary Dermatology,
Record 146, 193-4.
Montreal, p. 111.
Olivry, I., Dunston, S.M., Favrot, C. et al. (2002) Canine epi-
Koch, H.J. & Walder, E.J. (1990) Epidermolysis bullosa dys-
 dermolysis bullosa acquisita is an autoimmune blistering skin
trophica in Beaucerons. In: Advances in Veterinary Derma-
disease directed against collagen VlI (12 cases). In: Proceed-
tology, Vol. 1 (eds C. von Tscharner & R.E.W. Halliwell),
ings of the 18th ESVD/ECVD Meeting, Nice, p. 232.
p. 441. Bailliere Tindall, London.
Nagata, M., Shimizu, H., Masunaga, I. et al. (1995) Dystrophic
Canine Darier's Disease
form of inherited epidermolysis bullosa in a dog (Akita Inu).
Hakuna, M., Akiyama, M., Shimuzu, H. et al. (2001) Upregu-
Br J Dermatol 133, 1000-3.
lation of P-cadherin expression in the lesional skin of pem-
O'Dair, H.A. & Henderson, J.P. (1994) Suspected mechanobul-
phigus, Hailey-Hailey disease and Darier's disease. J Cutan
lous skin disease in a cat. J Small Anim Pract 35, 24-7.
Pathol 28, 277-81.
 Olivry, T. (2002) Dermo-epidermal junction: animal pathology.
Metze, D., Hamm, H., Schorat, A. et al. (1996) Involvement of
In: Proceedings of the 18th ESVD/ECVD Meeting, Nice, pp.
the adherens junction-actin filament system in acantholytic
67-75.
dyskeratosis of Hailey-Hailey disease. J Cutan Pathol 23,
Olivry, T. & Mason, I.S. (1998) Genodermatoses: inheritance
211-22.
and management. In: Advances in Veterinary Dermatology,
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
Vol. 3 (eds K.W. Kwochka, T. Willemse & C. von Tscharner),
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn., Pp. 947-8. WB.
pp. 365-368. Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford.
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Olivry, T., Poujade-Delverdier, A., Dunston, S.M. et al. (1997)
Shanley, K.J., Goldschmidt, M.H., Sueki, H. et al. (1993) Canine
Absent expression of collagen XVII (BPAG2. BP180) in canine 
benign familial chronic pemphigus. In: Advances in Veterinary
familial localized junctional epidermolysis bullosa. Vet
Dermatology, Vol. 2 (eds PJ. Ihrke, I.S. Mason & S.D. White),
Dermatol 8, 203-12.
pp. 353-65. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Olivry, T., Dunston, S.M. & Marinkovich, M.P (1999) Reduced 
Shull, G.E., Okanade, G., Liu, L.H. et al. (2003) Physiological
anchoring fibril formation and collagen Vll immunoreactivity
functions of plasma membrane and intracellular Ca²t pumps
in feline dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa. Vet Pathol 36,
revealed by analysis of null mutants. Ann NY Acad Sci 986,
616-18.
453-60.
48
Diseases of the epidermis
Sueki, J., Shanley, K., Goldschmidt, M.H. et al. (1997) Domi-
Olivry, T. & Chan, L.S. (2001) Autoimmune blistering der-
nantly inherited epidermal acantholysis in dogs, simulating
matoses in domestic animals. Cin Dermatol 19, 750-60.
human benign familial chronic pemphigus (Hailey-Hailey
Olivry, I., Dunston, S.M., Fahey, M. et al. (2000) Autoanti-
disease). Br J Dermatol 136, 190-6.
bodies against the processed ectodomain of collagen XVII
Suter, M., De Bruin, A., Goldschmidt, M. et al. (1996) A canine
(BPAG2, BP180) define a canine homologue of linear IgA
model for Hailey-Hailey disease shows altered expression of
disease of humans. Vet Pathol 37, 302-9.
E-cadherin in lesional skin. Vet Pathol 33, 606 (abstract).
Scott, D.W, Manning, TO. & Lewis, R.M. (1982) Linear
 IgA dermatoses in the dog: bullous pemphigoid, discoid lupus
Linear IgA Disease
 erythematosus and a subcorneal pustular dermatitis. Cornell
 Olivry, T. (2002) Dermo-epidermal juncion: animal pathology.
Vet 72, 394-402.
 In: Proceedings of the 18th ESVD/ECVD Meeting, Nice, pp.
67-75.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwel1 Science Ltd
Chapter 3
Interface 
d1seases
the dermal-epidermal junction
The terms “lichenoid’ and “interface' are often used inter-
with adult-onset generalized ischemic dermatopathy but
changeably by others. For descriptive clarity, the authors
 without a correlative history indicating the likelihood of
prefer to define interface dermatitis as generally minimal
vaccine reaction induction. The last group (5) is termed
to mild superfcial dermal inflammation that is oriented
'generalized idiopathic ischemic dermatopathy” (GIID).
tightly to and often obscures the dermal-epidermal junc-
 Some Group 2 dogs have temporal association with mul-
tion. Interface diseases affect the epidermis and usually the
tivalent puppy vaccines (not rabies).
infundibulum of hair follicles. Basal cell damage, usually
Clinical and histopathologic similarities unite these
apoptosis (see introduction to Chapter 4), is a consistent
five syndromes. Groups 1 and 2 develop as juvenile-onset
feature of interface dermatitis; in some diseases interface
disease and are clinically indistinguishable from each
damage occurs, but without signifcant interface inflam-
other. Group 3 develops as focal skin disease (see Chapter
mation. Interface change with minimal to mild inflam-
21). Groups 4 and 5 develop as generalized, more severe,
mation is considered écell poor’ interface dermatitis; most
and usually adult-onset skin disease. The lesions noted in
of the diseases of this chapter conform to this pattern.
Groups 4 and 5 may be generalized beyond the expected
Vacuolar degeneration of basal cells may be a feature of
distribution pattern of DM (Group 1) and DM-like
interface change, but is only significant when pronounced;
 r e r po asd a ( do) asss
scattered and mild basal cell vacuolation is normal.
an individual predisposition, coupled with a secondary
Intense, band-like subepidermal inflammation defines
 environmental trigger has long been hypothesized for DM
lichenoid dermatitis. Lichenoid dermatitis may occur with
in humans (Kovacs & Kovacs, 1998; Sontheimer 1999).
or without interface change. Lichenoid inflammation with
It is likely that similar factors are operant in canine
interface damage may be termed lichenoid-interface′ der-
ischemic dermatopathy.
matitis. Lichenoid dermatoses are described in Chapter
The term ^canine familial dermatomyositis' currently is
11.
reserved for those dogs with clinical and histopathologic
evidence of a juvenile onset heritable inflammatory
disease affecting skin and muscle in a breed at known
ISCHEMIC DERMATOPATHY/CANINE
increased risk. The etiopathogenesis is not known.
DERMATOMYOSITIS
Autoimmune and viral etiologies in conjunction with
hereditary predilection have been postulated for DM in
Clinical features (Figures 3.1 and 3.2)
humans (Sontheimer, 1999).
Ischemic dermatopathy is a general designation for
Both the clinical and histopathologic features of
multiple vasculopathic syndromes that are unifed by
ischemic dermatopathies correlate with lesions likely to
similar clinical and histopathologic features (Ihrke &
result from long-term lack of cutaneous vascular suste-
Gross, 1993). This group includes: (1) canine familial der-
nance (Vitale et al., 1999). Indeed, a cell poor vasculitis
matomyositis (DM) (seen predominantly in the Collie and
unites the syndromes (see Chapter 10). Cutaneous
Shetland Sheepdog, but also reported in other breeds);
hypoxia leads to follicular atrophy and, clinically, alope-
(2) dogs with a juvenile-onset ischemic dermatopathy
cia and associated chronic skin changes. Lesions occur
that is identical to DM but without proven breed predilec-
over bony prominences due to susceptibility to trauma,
 tion and therefore without known familial predisposition;
and on distal extremities where collateral circulation does
(3) postrabies vaccination panniculitis (see Chapter 21);
 not allow appropriate vascular sustenance.
(4) dogs with more severe generalized postrabies vacci-
 The unifying clinical features of all fve subgroups of
nation-associated disease, termed ‘generalized vaccine-
canine ischemic dermatopathy include alopecia with
induced ischemic dermatopathy’ (GVIID); and (5) dogs 
 crusting and post-inflammatory, mottled pigmentary
49
50
Diseases of the epidermis
 Dogs with DM and DM-like disease (Groups 1 and 2)
present with identical clinical features. Earliest lesions
include rare transient papules, pustules, and vesicles even-
uating in the more commonly noted crusted erosions,
ulcers, and alopecia. Scarring is a feature of chronicity;
some lesions may become atrophic. Pigmentary aberra-
tions give rise to poikilodermatous change with either
hyper- or hypopigmentation, or both. Initial lesions
usually occur over bony prominences (sites of mild
 [rauma), especially on the muzzle, in periorbital and peri-
oral locations, and on the dorsum of the distal phalanges.
Later, similar lesions are seen on distal extremities with
poor collateral circulation, and on pressure points that are
susceptible to shearing injury and trauma. The pinnae
Fig. 3.1 Canine familial dermatomyositis in a young Shetland
(especially the tips), pinnal folds, claw folds, tip of the
Sheepdog. Alopecia and scaling are present on the dorsal muzzle and
tail, plus other bony prominences of the distal extremities
periorbitally over bony prominences.
 and other pressure points may be affected. Inflammation
of the clawbed may lead to claw dystrophy and claw
sloughing. Familial cutaneous vasculopathy of German
Shepherd Dogs is characterized by swelling of the
pawpads and histopathologic features distinct from
ischemic dermatopathy (see Chapter 10), but also may
feature signs of juvenile-onset ischemic dermatopathy.
This suggests a close relationship between these two dis-
eases, particularly as similar pawpad lesions consistent
with familial cutaneous vasculopathy have been observed
in Fox Terriers with otherwise typical juvenile-onset
ischemic dermatopathy. In contrast, lesions histologically
compatible with ischemic dermatopathy have been seen
by the authors in the pawpads only in two Welsh Corgis.
 Pain and pruritus are not common unless ulceration or 
secondary  pyoderma is present.  Photo-aggravation
 Occurs, and trauma or estrus may trigger relapse.
Muscle involvement often is subtle, and may be limited
 to temporal and masseter muscle atrophy. Diffculties
with mastication and swallowing may occur. Severely
 affected dogs show growth retardation, megaesophagus,
lameness, and widespread muscle atrophy. Muscles of the
tongue may fasciculate causing dificulty in prehension.
Infertility is an additional feature of severe DM. Mildly
affected dogs may achieve clinical remission with time.
Fig. 3.2 Chronic canine familial dermatomyositis in an adult
Severely affected dogs with generalized disease exhibit
Shetland Sheepdog. Extensive alopecia and crusting are present
lifelong disease with cyclical recrudescence.
on the face and pinnae.
The clinical and histopathologic features of dogs with
GVIID (Group 4) and GIID (Group 5) are very similar.
However, vaccine-induced ischemic dermatopathies also
change. Hyperpigmentation may be seen in breeds
often have a focal lesion at the vaccine site compatible
predisposed to enhanced pigmentation as a sequela to
with postrabies vaccination panniculitis (see Chapter 21).
inflammation; in other breeds, hypopigmentation
 Even dogs without a correlative history of recent rabies
can occur. Erosion and ulceration may occur in more
vaccination should have likely vaccination sites checked
severe cases, especially if trauma or secondary pyo-
for compatible lesions, as the focal lesions may have been
derma is present. Scarring may or may not be apparent
previously missed, particularly in long-haired dogs. Spe.
clinically. Lesions of skin and muscle vary markedly in
cific lesions are those of DM and DM-like disease (see
severity.
above), but may be more severe and more widespread in
Interface diseases of the dermal-epidermal junction
51
distribution. The most severe lesions are located over
a focal lesion at a prior vaccine site. Skin biopsy is
bony prominences and on distal extremities; this distri-
required for definitive diagnosis.
bution mirrors that of DM. However similar but usually
less severe lesions are seen over much of the skin surface.
Varying degrees of muscle atrophy are noted. Generalized
Biopsy site selection
vaccine-induced ischemic dermatopathy may gradually
Lesions showing erythema and alopecia are preferred
diminish in severity over time. Dogs with GIID usually
sites for biopsy. If skin biopsy is performed on the face,
exhibit lifelong disease with some cyclical recrudescence.
there may be fortuitous inclusion of lesional skeletal
Canine familial DM is seen most commonly in Shetland
muscle. Secondarily infected or scarred lesions are sub-
Sheepdogs,(
Collies, and their related
1  crossbreeds.
optimal for the demonstration of typical microscopic
DM-like disease (Group 2) has been reported occasion-
lesions.
ally in the Chow Chow, Beauceron Shepherd, Welsh
Corgi, Lakeland Terrier, German Shepherd Dog, and
Kuvasz, as compiled by Scott (Scott et al., 2001), and
Histopathology (Figure 3.3)
has been seen by the authors in Miniature Schnauzers,
Miniature Dachshunds, Fox Terriers, and other breeds.
Histopathologic features of all forms of ischemic der-
Both groups are juvenile-onset diseases; initial lesions
matopathy are similar. Lesions overlying postrabies vac-
usually occur by 6 months of age. Sex predilection has
cination panniculitis are identical to those of ischemic
not been noted.
dermatopathy, as they represent a localized form of the
 Signalment predilections for GVIID (Group 4) and
same condition (see Chapter 21).
GIID (Group 5) are not available. Clinical impressions
Scattered degeneration of individual basal cells is the
suggest that the Miniature and Toy Poodle, Shih Tzu,
 typical epidermal feature, but may be sparsely evident in
Shetland Sheepdog, Lhasa Apso, Pomeranian, and York-
many cases. Follicular basal cell degeneration to the level
shire Terrier may be at increased risk for adult-onset
 of the isthmus is generally more consistently observed
 generalized ischemic dermatopathy. As in post-rabies
 than basal cell lesions of the epidermis (see Chapter 19).
vaccination panniculitis (see Chapter 21), long-haired toy
 Affected basal cells may be either vacuolated, or shrunken
or miniature breeds seem to be at greater risk. However,
and brightly eosinophilic, consistent with apoptosis. Sec-
the syndromes can be seen in any breed. Age or sex
 ondary dermal-epidermal vesiculation is present occa-
predilections have not been noted.
sionally, particularly in severely affected animals. In the
The authors believe that a syndrome reported in fve
authors’ experience, Collies are more likely to demon-
Jack Russell Terriers is, in fact, canine ischemic der-
strate prominent basal cell degeneration and subepider-
matopathy (Parker & Foster 1996); however, the wide
mal vesicles. Vesicles often contain red blood cells and
range of age of onset and clinical features do not allow
occur above the basement membrane, as demonstrated
further subcategorization. The most prominent histologic
by laminin staining of the basement membrane along
feature of these cases was a cell-poor vasculitis
(see
the floor of the separation. Also, artifactual dermal-
Chapter 10). Restriction of the syndrome to Jack Russell
epidermal separation (due to basal cell damage) may
Terriers likely indicates familial predisposition.
occur at the margin of the specimen. Only tissue weak-
Major clinical differential diagnoses for canine DM and
ened through the dermal-epidermal junction will separate
DM-like disease (Groups 1 and 2) include juvenile-onset
 in this manner during processing and consequently this
demodicosis, dermatophytosis, facial pyoderma, and dis-
"usable artifact of Stannard’ is valid evidence of interface
coid lupus erythematosus. Concurrent clinical, electro-
damage (Stannard, A.A., personal communication, 1986).
myographic, or histologic evidence of muscle disease is
Secondary ulceration may occur if vesicular lesions are
suggestive of DM. Skin scrapings should be performed to
extensive. Superficial crusting is variable.
rule out demodicosis, and fungal culture should be per-
 Dermal inflammation is generally diffuse and very mild,
formed to rule out dermatophytosis. If small numbers of
and often loosely encircles follicles. Lymphocytes and
Demodex mites are found on scrapings, skin biopsy
histiocytes predominate; mast cells, plasma cells, and
should still be performed as the authors have seen mites
neutrophils also may be observed. Intense inflamma-
localized to DM lesions. Breed predilections and associa-
tion, which includes prominent neutrophils, may be seen
tion with a prior vaccination site simplify the diagnosis
accompanying ulceration in severe lesions. Dermal scar-
of post-rabies vaccination panniculitis (Group 3) (see
ring leading to cicatricial alopecia is rare, but can occur
Chapter 21). GVIID and GIID (Groups 4 and 5) must be
in the wake of severe ulceration and inflammation.
differentiated from many other inflammatory diseases
Increased prominence of the connective tissue of the
where extensive alopecia and pigmentary changes are
external root sheath of the atrophic hair follicle should
seen. Most vaccine-induced ischemic dermatopathies have
 not be misinterpreted as perifollicular scarring.
52
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 3.3 Canine familial dermato-
myositis. Basal cells are mildly vacuo-
lated and occasionally shrunken and
apoptotic {arrows); the outer follicle
also is affected.
There is typically diffuse pallor of the dermis, charac-
ischemic change of dermal collagen is also generally
terized by pale-staining, 'smudged', or rarified collagen
 absent unless there is accompanying vascular disease, as
that has lost its fbrillar character. This change is believed
may occur in systemic lupus erythematosus.
to result from tissue ischemia. There may be mild to
moderate mucin deposition and/or edema. Lymphocytes
DISCOID LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS
and/or macrophages may surround collagen fibers to form
small putatively ischemic granulomas as seen in cell poor
Clinical features (Figures 3.4 through 3.6)
vasculitis (see Chapter 10). Blood vessels show features of
cell-poor vasculitis (see Chapter 10). Complement has
Discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE) is a relatively common 
been demonstrated intravascularly in the muscle of dogs
autoimmune skin disease of the dog. It is likely that some
with GVIID (Vitale et al., 1999). Hair follicles are severely
 dogs previously diagnosed as having nasal solar dermati-
atrophic or “faded'; this atrophy may represent a combi-
tis or “Collie nose’ actually had DLE. However solar
nation of direct ischemia and basal cell degeneration
vasculopathy may complicate depigmenting skin diseases
 Deeper biopsies, particularly in periocular or perioral
of the dorsal muzzle such as DLE (see Chapter 10). In
location, occasionally will show inflammation of skeletal
 humans, actinic radiation is postulated to be instrumental
muscle. Myositis is characterized by mixed inflammation,
in altering the antigenic nature of keratinocytes, thus
including lymphocytes, macrophages, plasma cells, and
 inducing an autoimmune response. Since canine DLE is at
sparse neutrophils, myofber degeneration (fragmenta-
least photo-aggravated if not photo-induced, lesions often
tion, vacuolation, increased eosinophilia), regeneration,
are more severe in the summer and in parts of the world
fbrosis, and atrophy. In general, random biopsy of clini-
with high solar intensity. The authors do not believe that
cally affected muscle groups, such as the temporal or mas-
DLE has been diagnosed convincingly in the cat.
seter muscles, may not show lesions. Electromyography is
 Lesions are commonly restricted to the face (Griffn
a more reliable method of documenting muscle disease
et al., 1979). Early lesions, characterized by depigmenta-
 and locating appropriate sites for muscle biopsy.
tion, erythema, and scaling, frequently are confined to the
Systemic, discoid, and cutaneous lupus erythematosus
planum nasale and occur in a bilaterally symmetrical
are the principal differential diagnoses. Epidermal basal
pattern. The planum often exhibits a loss of the normal
cell degeneration is generally more severe in all forms of
*cobblestone' architecture. Alopecia, crusting, erosion,
lupus erythematosus, with the exception of DM (ischemic
ulceration, and scarring occur in more severe cases.
dermatopathy) in Collies. Lichenoid dermal inflamma-
 Chronic scarred and atrophic lesions are fragile and may
tion, as seen predominantly in discoid lupus erythemato-
be abraded easily, resulting in episodic hemorrhage.
sus, is not a feature of DM. Most forms of lupus
Lesions may be present on the dorsum of the muzzle, lips,
erythematosus do not feature follicular atrophy; further,
 periorbitally, and on the ears. Loss of pigmentation also
Interface diseases of the dermal-epidermal junction
53
Fig. 3.6 Severe canine discoid lupus erythematosus in an Old
English Sheepdog. Ulceration and scarring deface the entire dorsal
muzzle.
The Collie, Shetland Sheepdog, German Shepherd
 Dog, and Siberian Husky exhibit a breed predilection for
DLE. As a subgroup, white German Shepherd Dogs are
Fig. 3.4 Mild canine discoid lupus erythermatosus in a Bearded
 at greater risk and may exhibit especially severe lesions.
Collie. The distal dorsal muzzle and planum are depigmented and
These dogs may have coexistent solar vasculopathy (see
erythematous.
Chapter 10). Affected siblings and mother-daughter
cohorts have been recognized. Sex or age predilections
have not been substantiated.
Major clinical differential diagnoses include syste-
mic lupus erythematosus, mucocutaneous pyoderma,
dermatophytosis,
 pemphigus  foliaceus, 
pemphigus
erythematosus, vitiligo, trauma, and Vogt-Koyanagi-
Harada-like syndrome. An antinuclear antibody (ANA)
 test and a chemistry screening profle should be performed
to aid in differentiation from systemic lupus erythemato-
sus. Lesions usually do not violate the planum nasale in
dermatophytosis. Poliosis and uveitis usually are promi-
nent coexistent features of Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like
syndrome. Histopathology is useful in differentiating all
of these diseases except for systermic lupus erythematosus
since the histopathology of systemic lupus erythematosus
and DLE may be identical. ANA testing and further sys-
temic evaluation may be performed to rule out systemic
lupus erythematosus.
Fig. 3.5 Closer view of Fig 3.4. Note the depigmentation and
erosion of the planum nasale.
Biopsy site selection
has been noted within the oral cavity. Rarely, focal oral
 Recent sites of depigmentation, characterized by graying
ulcers, and lesions on the genitals and distal extremities
 Or partial loss of pigment, are optimal sites for skin biopsy.
have been reported. This phenomenon could result from 
Traumatized lesions, or lesions with severe crusting, ulcer-
epitope spreading in the autoimmune process, as in pem-
 ation, or scarring should be avoided. Lesions of the lip and
phigus vulgaris (see Chapter 2). On very rare occasions,
dorsal muzzle are more likely to yield diagnostic results.
squamous cell carcinoma may develop in chronic lesions
 Potential diffculties with hemostasis and scarring are
of the dorsal muzzle (Scott & Miller 1995) (see Chapter
reasons to avoid the planum nasale or pinnae, unless other
22).
 more suitable sites for biopsy are not affected.
54
Diseases of the epidermis
Histopathology (Figures 3.7 and 3.8)
histologic features of DLE. The signifcance of this feature
is not known. It may represent ‘spillover’ lymphocyte-
Basal cell apoptosis, characterized by shrinkage and
mediated damage beyond the basal cell layer. Suprabasi-
eosinophilia of basal keratinocytes, is a highly character-
lar apoptosis also may represent direct solar damage to
istic, but sometimes sparse, lesion of DLE. Basal cell
keratinocytes ('sunburn’ cells).
degeneration, both apoptotic and vacuolar, creates an
 Artifactual dermal-epidermal separation may occur
irregular and indistinct dermal-epidermal junction that is
at the margin of the specimen. Only tissue weakened
further obscured by interface inflammation. Apoptosis of
through the dermal-epidermal junction will separate in
keratinocytes of the stratum spinosum with variable lym-
this manner during processing, and consequently this
-ads asdoq u ar parasqo si sisos aaod
‘usable artifact of Stannard’ is valid evidence of interface
imens from dogs with otherwise typical clinical and
damage (Stannard, A.A., personal communication, 1986).
Fig. 3.7Lichenoid-interface inflamma-
tion of discoid lupus erythematosus.
The sharp demarcation between epi-
 dermis and dermis is partially obscured
by interface inflammation, seen most
 prominently at the left.
Fig. 3.8 Higher magnification of inter-
face dermatitis in discoid lupus erythe-
matosus. There is prominent basal cell
degeneration, creating an indistinct
dermal-epidermal junction.
Interface diseases of the dermal-epidermal junction
55
Secondary erosion or ulceration, and superficial pustu-
Discoid lupus erythematosus exhibiting suprabasilar
lation and crusting are observed in severe cases. Moder-
apoptosis may resemble erythema multiforme. Apoptosis
ate acanthosis usually occurs; epidermal atrophy may be
is generally more severe in erythema multiforme than in
present, particularly in areas of previous ulceration that
DLE, and features satellitosis more prominently (see p.
have re-epithelialized. The basement membrane may be
65). Chronic lesions of DLE in which basal cell degener-
markedly thickened in some cases; this is a nonspecific
ation is lacking resemble other lichenoid conditions,
fnding, however and can be observed in other chronic
notably mucocutaneous pyoderma. Clinical differentia-
inflammatory dermatoses.
tion is required (see Chapter 11).
 The dermis usually has a lichenoid, or band-like, mild
to moderate inflammatory infltrate that includes lym-
SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS
phocytes, macrophages, plasma cells, and fewer
neu-
rophils (see Chapter 11). Inflammation often obscures
Clinical features (Figures 3.9 and 3.10)
the dermal-epidermal junction, and thus is best termed
"lichenoid-interface', when accompanied by basal cell
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a rare, multisys-
degeneration. Mild interface and/or superficial perivascu-
temic autoimmune disease reported in the dog and cat.
lar inflammation, without a lichenoid band, may be
Both organ-specifc and nonorgan-specifc circulating
observed in some cases, particularly in early lesions. Pig-
autoantibodies are directed against a wide variety of
mentary incontinence usually is present and reflects loss
of melanin by damaged basal cells and its incorporation
into macrophages in the superficial dermis. Chronically
inflamed lesions with prominent plasma cell infltrates
often lack obvious basal cell damage and are more purely
lichenoid. In some putative chronic lesions, there may be
a zone of superfcial laminar hypocellularity with or
without laminar fbrosis. This is subtended by a deeper
zone of lichenoid inflammation. Superficial neutrophilic
vasculitis and fbrinoid vasculopathy may be present in
some of these hypocellular lesions, suggesting secondary
solar vasculopathy in the face of chronic depigmentation
and alopecia (see Chapter 10).
 Direct immunofluorescence or immunohistochemistry
shows deposition of granular deposits of immunoglobu-
lin, usually IgG (occasionally IgM), and often comple-
ment, at the dermal-epidermal junction (positive lupus
band). One reported case demonstrated circulating
Fig. 3.9 Canine systemic lupus erythermatosus. Widespread focal
autoantibody; indirect immunofluorescence 
 showed
erosions and ulcerations of the ventral abdomen have erythematous,
linear deposition at the basement membrane zone
thickened margins and necrotic crusts.
(Iwasaki et al., 1995). Positive results are not automati-
cally forthcoming in random biopsy specimens, and a neg-
ative result should not exclude the diagnosis if clinical
fndings and histopathology are characteristic.
Other forms of lupus erythematosus are the principal
differential diagnoses in cases with obvious basal cell
apoptosis. Discoid lupus erythematosus may have a more
intense, band-like or lichenoid dermal infltrate and less
severe basal cell degeneration than systemic lupus erythe-
matosus; however these two diseases can be indistin-
guishable histologically, and  clinical differentiation,
including adjunctive testing for ANA, may be required.
Discoid lupus erythematosus with prominent basal cell
degeneration must also be distinguished from exfoliative
cutaneous lupus erythematosus of the German Short-
haired Pointer, and vesicular cutaneous lupus erythe-
matosus of the Shetland Sheepdog and Collie. Knowledge
Fig. 3.10 Closer view of Fig. 3.9. Adherent crusts entrap remain-
of signalment is therefore important in differentiation.
ing hair in the lesions.
56
Diseases of the epidermis
tissue antigens. The antinuclear antibody (ANA) test
A single dog (Bichon Frise) has been reported with
should be positive. Tissue damage may be due to immune
bullous ulcerative skin disease that met the criteria for the
complex deposition (Gel and Combs Type II), direct cyto-
SLE subgroup in humans designated “bullous systemic
toxic action (Type II), or even cell-mediated immunity
lupus erythematosus' (Olivry et al., 1999). Immunologic
(Type IV) as in lupus-induced autoimmune thyroiditis. A
findings mirrored those of epidermolysis bullosa acqui-
wide spectrum of disease is associated with multifactorial
sita, with IgG autoantibodies directed against the non-
immunologic injury to a variety of organ systems (Olivry
collagenous amino terminus (NC1 domain) of type VII
& Chan, 2001). Reported abnormalities in the dog
collagen (see Chapter 2). Erosions and ulcers affected
include fever of unknown origin, polyarthritis, glomeru-
 mucocutaneous junctions, pawpads, and areas of friction
lonephritis and proteinuria, anemia, thrombocytopenia,
(Olivry et al., 1999).
skin disease, neutropenia, and central nervous system
The Spitz, Collie, Shetland Sheepdog, German Shep-
disease (Fournel et al., 1992; Chabanne et al., 1995).
herd Dog, and Poodle are at increased risk. Purebred cats 
 Fever of unknown origin, weight loss, glomerulonephri-
in general, and Siamese, Persian and Himalayan cats
tis, hemolytic anemia, and skin disease are signs of SLE
specifcally, may be over-represented (Scott et al., 2001).
in the cat (Pedersen & Barlough, 1991; Vitale et al.,
Age or sex predilection has not been reported in the dog
1997). Leukocytoclastic vasculitis is reported as an
or cat.
uncommon fnding in SLE (Scott et al., 2001). Recogni-
 Clinical differential diagnoses are legion based on the
tion of multisystemic disease should increase the index of
protean nature of the disease. Multisystemic disease in
suspicion for SLE.
conjunction with widespread erythematous exfoliative
The frequency of lupus-related skin disease in the dog
dermatitis should increase suspicion for SLE. Discoid
is controversial. The opinion of the authors is that skin
lupus erythematosus, bullous autoimmune diseases,
disease is seen in less than 20% of dogs with SLE. The
cornification disorders, vasculitis, and idiopathic sterile
diagnosis of skin disease due to SLE should be reserved
nodular panniculitis probably are the most important dif-
for animals with compatible cutaneous signs, a positive
 ferential diagnoses. Lupoid drug reactions may mimic the
ANA test, and evidence of additional organ system
cutaneous signs of SLE such that only response to drug
involvement in addition to skin lesions.
. The authors
termination allows the diagnosis. Bullous SLE must be
reserve the term ‘discoid lupus erythematosus with a
differentiated from epidermolysis bullosa acquisita and
positive ANA for the rare problematic cases in dogs
other autoimmune diseases that cause ulceration at fric-
exhibiting only cutaneous signs consistent with discoid
tional sites (Olivry et al., 1999).
lupus erythematosus but with positive serology consistent
with SLE. However evidence of other organ systerm
Biopsy site selection
involvement may occur later in the course of disease.
Cases demonstrating histologic features of lupus erythe-
Care should be taken to avoid ulcers or erosions, since
matosus may be drug-related (lupoid’ drug reactions),
an intact epidermis is necessary to substantiate the diag-
 and also have been observed by the authors in close tem-
nosis. Erythematous areas adjacent to ulcers may yield
poral association with visceral malignancy. Thus, defini-
diagnostic results. Oral specimens rarely are beneficial,
tive diagnosis of SLE in these cases is contingent upon
since ulcers, which are inherently not diagnostic, are
response to drug withdrawal, and evaluation for under-
common in this location. In addition, the mucosa may be
lying diseases.
disrupted easily from the submucosa in apparently intact
The dermatologic clinical features of SLE are pleomor-
lesions.
phic. Erythema, scaling, crusting, depigmentation, and
alopecia may be seen. Ulcers may eventuate from bullae
Histopathology (Figure 3.11)
in the skin, mucocutaneous junctions, and mucous mem-
branes. Generalized exfoliative dermatitis, ulcers of the
The histopathologic fndings of SLE may be variable, a
pawpads, panniculitis, and lesions closely mimicking
dilemma which also is encountered in human medicine.
discoid lupus erythematosus have been noted. The face,
Those cases may elude histopathologic diagnosis and
 ears, and distal extremities are common sites of involve-
require clinical and immunologic confrmation. Ideally,
ment. Partial symmetry, especially facial, is an important
basal cell vacuolation and apoptosis of basal cells occur,
diagnostic clue. Photo-aggravation may be seen. Lym-
leading to dermal-epidermal separation and ulceration.
phadenopathy is common. A rare variant characterized by
Superfcial hair follicles to the level of the isthmus may be
widespread, polycyclic, psoriasiform, and
ulcerative
similarly affected. Direct immunofluorescence of skin
lesions similar to subacute or chronic cutaneous lupus
biopsies in a large series of dogs with SLE revealed gran-
erythematosus in humans, has been seen in the dog by one
ular deposits of IgG in 74.5% of cases (Fournel et al.,
author (P.J.I.)
1992). Vasculitis may occur (Scott et al., 2001).
Interface diseases of the dermal-epidermal junction
57
Fig. 3.11 Systemic lupus erythemato-
sus in a cat demonstrating degenera-
tion of the basal cell layer. Note severe
apoptosis of basal cells and interface
dermatitis. {Case material courtesy
W.S. Rosenkrantz.)
 Bullous SLE has been described in a dog (Olivry et al.
Type I bullous SLE may be histologically and immuno-
1999). Interface dermatitis was lacking; instead there
 logically identical to epidermolysis bullosa acquisita (see
were subepidermal vesicles that were variably filled with
Chapter 2). Identification of criteria compatible with SLE
neutrophils and histiocytic cells. There was a mixed
is required for differentiation.
dermal infltrate and secondary ulceration. Direct and
indirect immunofluorescence detected IgG targeting the
PEMPHIGUS ERYTHEMATOSUS
basement membrane zone.
 Other forms of lupus erythematosus and erythema mul-
Clinical features (Figures 3.12 and 3.13)
tiforme are the principal differential diagnoses for SLE.
Lupoid drug reactions of essentially identical appearance
See Chapter 1.
to the classical interface reactions of lupus erythematosus
have been observed, particularly secondary to topical otic
Biopsy site selection
medications. Clinical differentiation may be required. If
the breed is not known, differentiation of cutaneous
See Pemphigus foliaceus, Chapter 1.
lesions of SLE from vesicular cutaneous lupus erythe-
matosus of the Shetland Sheepdog and Collie, and exfo-
Histopathology (Figure 3.14)
liative cutaneous lupus erythematosus of the German
Shorthaired Pointer may be problematic, as all may be
The epidermal lesions of pustulation with acantholysis are
characterized by significant basal cell damage. Discoid
essentially those of pemphigus foliaceus, and have been
lupus erythematosus may have a more intense, band-like
described (see Chapter 1). Dermal lesions consist of a
dermal infltrate, and less severe basal cell degeneration
superfcial infltrate composed of lymphocytes, histio-
than SLE; however these two diseases can be indistin-
 cytes, and plasma cells. Inflammation usually obscures the
guishable histologicaly, and clinical differentiation may
dermal-epidermal interface, and resembles that of discoid
be required. Erythema multiforme shows prominent
and systemic lupus erythematosus. Pigmentary inconti-
       s
nence is mild to moderate.
epidermis, in addition to basal cell degeneration.
The histopathologic changes of facial lesions of
Dermatomyositis (ischemic dermatopathy) of  Collies
pemphigus foliaceus are similar to those of pemphigus
in particular may be profoundly interface and thus
erythematosus. Pemphigus erythematosus (PE) has an
histopathologically resemble SLE; the ischemic dermal
interface component, as would be expected with pemphi-
and follicular changes may not permit differentiation, as
gus-lupus crossover disease, rather than simple lichenoid
SLE may be potentially vasculopathic. Clinical differenti-
inflammation, as in facial pemphigus foliaceus (see
ation may be required.
Chapter 11). Without confrmatory immunologic fnd-
58
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 3.13 Pemphigus erythematosus in a cat. Partially bilaterally
symmetric vesicopustules, accompanied by later stage erosions, and
ulcerations with adherent crusts affect the planum nasale, dorsal
muzzle, ears, and temporal region. (Photograph courtesy A.C.
Fig. 3.12 Pemphigus erythematosus in a Spitz-crossbreed. Adher-
Mundell; case material University of California, Davis.)
ent, thick crusts symmetrically cover the dorsal muzzle and planum
nhasale.
Fig. 3.14 Pemphigus erythematosus
in a dog. Interface derrmatitis is accom-
panied by a small intraepidermal
pustule containing free keratinocytes.
ings, assignment of a diagnosis of PE may be impossible.
The principal microscopic method of differentiating these
Adherence to the immunologic criteria of PE requires
two diseases is through immunofluorescence or immuno-
that the diagnosis be made only when immuno-
histochemical techniques;  PE exhibits deposition of
histochemical or immunofluorescence testing is compati-
immunoglobulin along the basement membrane in addi-
ble, and when other clinical testing is supportive,
 tion to the typical intercellular deposition of pemphigus
particularly a positive antinuclear antibody (ANA) test.
foliaceus.
Interface diseases of the dermal-epidermal junction
59
Fig. 3.15 Exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus of the German
Shorthaired Pointer. Adherent scale and crusting are present on the
muzzle and pinna.
EXFOLLATIVE CUTANEOUS LUPUS
ERYTHEMATOSUS OF THE GERMAN
SHORTHAIRED POINTER
(Synonym: lupoid dermatosis of the German Shorthaired
Pointer)
Fig. 3.16 Exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus of the German
Clinical features (Figures 3.15 and 3.16)
Shorthaired Pointer. Note scaling involving the caudal lower leg.
(Photograph courtesy S.D. White.)
The term hereditary lupoid dermatosis of the German
Shorthaired Pointer was initially used to characterize a
unique scaling, exfoliative skin disease seen in the German
 phadenopathy may be observed. Severity may wax and
Shorthaired Pointer (Gross & Ihrke, 1992; Vroom et al.,
wane.
1995; White & Gross, 1995). Recognition of this
The syndrome has been seen only in the German Short-
syndrome to date exclusively in this breed suggests a
haired Pointer. Age of onset is between 5 and 7 months.
strong hereditary component. A case in which three
Sex predilection has not been noted, but few cases have
of ten siblings, as well as one half-sibling, were reputedly
been observed.
affected has been observed (White, S.D., personal com-
 Clinical differential diagnoses should include primary
munication, 1990). Recent work suggests that this
cornification disorders such as primary seborrhea and
syndrome resembles an exfoliative form of cutaneous
ichthyosis, as well as sebaceous adenitis. The young age
lupus erythematosus seen in humans (Olivry et al., 1999).
of onset is considered atypical for sebaceous adenitis.
Humoral and cell-mediated immune responses directed
Occurrence to date is exclusively in the German Short-
against basal epithelial cells putatively are involved in the
haired Pointer and the distinct histopathologic appear-
pathogenesis, thus supporting the use of the new name,
ance will allow differentiation from primary cornification
“exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus’ (Olivry et al.,
disorders.
1999).
 Adherent scale and crusting are the most prominent
Biopsy site selection
clinical features. Fronds of keratin may surround and
entrap hair shafts (White & Gross, 1995). Thickening of
Multiple specimens should be selected from lesions of
 the skin may be evident. Lesions commonly begin on the
varying stages. If early lesions can be identied, these may
head and back, but usually generalize. The muzzle and
 more reliably reveal typical basal cell damage.
ear pinna may be markedly affected. In dogs with gener-
alized disease, the hocks, other pressure points and
Histopathology (Figures 3.17 and 3.18)
scrotum may be severely involved. Pruritus and pain are
variable. Secondary pyoderma and Malassezia dermatitis
The most characteristic lesions are severe vacuolar degen-
may be present. Pyrexia, lethargy and peripheral lym-
 eration of the basal cell layer of the epidermis, accompa-
60
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 3.17 Mild interface dermatitis in
exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythe-
matosus of the German Shorthaired
Pointer. Note follicular hyperkeratosis.
Fig. 3.18 High magnification of exfo-
liative cutaneous lupus erythermatosus.
Note prominent basal cell vacuolation
 and occasional apoptosis (arrow).
nied by apoptosis. Mild dermal-epidermal separation is
Similar vacuolar and necrotic lesions also affect the
present, and is often seen at the margins of specimens
superficial hair follicles to the level of the adnexal glands.
as useable artifact (see ischemic dermatopathy, p. 49).
There may be marked accompanying follicular and seba-
Apoptotic cells are shrunken and rounded or angular;
ceous gland atrophy. Progressive sebaceous atrophy was
nuclei are pyknotic. Occasionally, apoptosis may extend
identified in a dog over a 3-month period in a previous
throughout the epidermis, and in rare cases becomes
study (Olivry et al., 1999). Sebaceous gland atrophy may
focally confluent, resulting in superficial epidermal necro-
explain the presence of hyperkeratosis, as seen in seba-
sis. Frank ulceration may occur. The epidermis is mildly
ceous adenitis (see Chapter 8).
to moderately acanthotic, and may have multifocal para-
Pigmentary incontinence is often prominent in the
keratosis and serocellular crusting. There is moderate
superficial dermis, and is the result of basal cell damage.
hyperkeratosis.
Lymphocytes, macrophages, neutrophils, and plasma cells
Interface diseases of the dermal-epidermal junction
61
accumulate in mild or moderate numbers around super-
fcial vessels, and form a thin discontinuous or continu-
ous band (lichenoid pattern) in close proximity to the
epidermis and superfcial hair follicles. Mononuclear cells
infltrate the lower epidermis, the wall of superfcial hair
follicles to the isthmus, and occasionally are grouped in
nodules in lopsided orientation at the site of putative
sebaceous glands.
A previous study identified the epitheliotropic lympho-
cytes as CD8+ T cells. In that study, IgG, IgA, IgM, and
C3 were detected at the basement membrane zone in
97%, 3%, 18%, and 13% of cases, respectively (Olivry
et al., 1999).
Histopathologic differential diagnoses include seba-
ceous adenitis (due to the sebaceous atrophy observed in
Fig. 3.19 Vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus of the Shetland
some cases), other forms of lupus erythematosus, and
Sheepdog and Collie. Extensive ulcers on the ventral abdormen
erythema multiforme. Sebaceous adenitis is not charac-
exhibit undulating, serpiginous borders.
terized by interface dermatitis. Lupus-like (lupoid) drug
reactions of similar appearance have been observed, par-
ticularly secondary to topical otic medications. Knowl-
edge of breed affected and young age of onset may be
most helpful in differentiating exfoliative cutaneous lupus
erythematosus from other forms of lupus erythematosus
as well as drug reactions. Discoid lupus erythematosus
may have a more intense, band-like dermal infltrate. Ery-
thema multiforme will closely mimic those cases of exfo-
liative cutaneous lupus erythematosus dermatosis in
which apoptosis is seen at all levels of the epidermis.
 Clinical differentiation may be required, specifically the
characteristic breed affected. Further erythema multi-
forme usually does not occur in dogs less than 1 year
of age.
Fig. 3.20 Closer view of the dog in Fig. 3.19. Coalescing ulcers
VESICULAR CUTANEOUS LUPUS
with well-demarcated, undulating serpiginous borders are present.
ERYTHEMATOSUS OF THE SHETLAND
SHEEPDOG AND COLLIE
2002). Demonstration of autoantibodies that target
(Synonym: ulcerative dermatosis of the Shetland Sheep-
nuclear antigens supports the hypothesis that this syn-
dog and Collie)
drome is a unique variant of cutaneous lupus erythe-
matosus featuring lymphocyte-mediated toxicity that
Clinical features (Figures 3.19 and 3.20)
targets basal epidermal keratinocytes (Berget et al., 2002).
Routine antinuclear antibody (ANA) testing has been
Ulcerative dermatosis of the Shetland Sheepdog and
consistently negative in this syndrome.
Collie was the name initially given to a poorly understood
Transient vesicobullous eruptions develop in areas of
syndrome postulated to represent a subgroup of canine
fgurate erythema and lead to coalescing ulcers with well-
familial dermatomyositis (Gross & Ihrke, 1992; Ihrke &
demarcated, undulating serpiginous borders. The inter-
Gross, 1995). Recent work now suggests that this syn-
 triginous areas of the groin and axillae are most often
drome resembles a photosensitive vesicular form of sub-
affected. Lesions may involve the mucocutaneous junc-
acute cutaneous lupus as seen in humans (Jackson &
tions of the eyes, mouth, external genitalia, and anus.
Olivry, 2001; Jackson, 2004). IgG autoantibodies directed
Partial bilateral symmetry may be seen. Solar exposure
against nuclear antigens were noted in sera from 9 of 11
 may exacerbate the disease. Pain may be evident if ulcer-
affected dogs using immunoblotting and enzyme-linked
ation is widespread or secondary pyoderma is present. A
immunosorbent assay (ELISA), but indirect immunofluo-
concomitant myositis has been documented by electro-
rescence testing was consistently negative (Berget et al.,
myography in several affected dogs.
62
Diseases of the epidermis
This syndrome has been recognized only in the adult
stratum spinosum. Apoptotic cells in these areas may be
Shetland Sheepdog, Rough Collie, and their crossbreeds.
surrounded by lymphocytes (satellitosis).
 Middle-aged and older dogs are affected. Sex predilection
The superficial dermis contains a mixed mononuclear
has not been noted.
infltrate that is closely applied to the dermal-epidermal
In the past, this syndrome probably was misdiagnosed
 interface, sometimes in a band or lichenoid confguration;
 as bullous pemphigoid or *hidradenitis suppurativa'.
in combination with the interface damage this results in
 Other clinical differential diagnoses should include severe
a lichenoid-interface pattern. Lymphocytes migrate into
erythema multiforme, systemic lupus erythematosus,
the overlying basal cell layer and obscure the dermal-epi-
and pemphigus vulgaris. Histopathology, the specifc
dermal junction. Superficial dermal edema and congestion
breeds affected, and immunologic studies should aid in
may be intense. Neutrophils are prominent in ulcerated
differentiation.
lesions and may also collect in subepidermal vesicles.
 Superficial dermal fbrosis follows ulceration and may be
Biopsy site selection
severe. Direct immunofluorescence testing with IgG may
demonstrate staining of basal cells, as well as variable
 Foci of erythema at the margins of crusting or ulcerated
 baserment membrane staining.
lesions are preferred sites for the demonstration of char-
The principal differential diagnoses include erythema
acteristic histopathologic lesions. Due to the fragility of
multiforme, and other forms of lupus erythematosus. Der-
the dermal-epidermal junction in lesions of ulcerative der-
matomyositis (ischemic dermatopathy) of Collies may
 matosis, wedge biopsy is recommended for sampling.
 feature striking basal cell degeneration, but also demon-
strates variable ischemic alteration of the dermis and
follicles, in contrast to vesicular cutaneous lupus erythe-
Histopathology (Figures 3.21 and 3.22)
matosus. Lupus-like (lupoid) drug reactions of essentially
 Interface vacuolation and basal cell apoptosis are present
identical appearance have been observed, particularly
and are often severe. Subepidermal vesiculation is
secondary to topical otic medications. Knowledge of
common and leads to severe ulceration and exudation.
signalment may be critical in the differentiation of these
Damage to basal cells also allows weakening of the
diseases.
 Erythema multiforme may be very similar,
dermal-epidermal junction, and the “usable artifact’ of
[euapidasuen arour e u sisondode aneaj on spuan inq
 dermal-epidermal separation may be seen at the margins
pattern, rather than predominantly in the basal or
of specimens (see ischemic dermatopathy, p. 49). Apop-
suprabasal regions. Discoid lupus erythematosus will
tosis and vacuolation affect the outer cells of superfcial
most often have a more intense, band-like dermal infl-
hair follicles to the level of the isthmus. Apoptosis may
trate than vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus, as
also be seen suprabasally, predominantly within the lower
well as less severe basal cell degeneration. Vesicular cuta-
Fig. 3.21 Vesicular cutaneous lupus
erythermatosus in a Shetland Sheepdog.
An ulcer is covered by a serocellular
crust. The intact epidermis shows
basilar vacuolation; note interface
inflammation.
Interface diseases of the dermal-epidermal junction
63
Fig. 3.22 Higher magnificationof
vesicular cutaneous lupus erythemato-
sus in a Shetland Sheepdog. Basal cells
are apoptotic.
neous lupus erythematosus does not feature sebaceous or
follicular atrophy, as seen in exfoliative cutaneous lupus
erythematosus.
ERYTHEMA AB IGNE
(Synonyms: chronic moderate heat dermatitis, chronic
radiant heat dermatitis)
Clinical features (Figure 3.23)
auipau ueunq ul pasn sl auai qe euaaia, ural au
to describe a skin disease initiated by repetitive and pro-
longed exposure to chronic radiant or conductive heat.
This syndrome is characterized by erythema and mottled
Fig. 3.23 Erythema ab igne affecting the lateral and ventral trunk
pigmentary changes. Commonly reported radiant and
of a dog. Note the strikingly linear and intersecting lattice-like alope-
conductive heat sources include open fres (stoves),
cia with hyperpigmentation.
heating pads, steam radiators, and hot water bottles.
Venous stasis and aging are thought to be predisposing
factors. After many years, precancerous thermal keratoses
television boxes, and the informal designation of ^cable
and, eventually, thermal carcinomas may arise in humans 
box kitty syndrome’ has been applied to those cases.
(Schwartz & Stoll, 1999)
Other electronic devices that commonly are left turned on
Lesions similar to erythema ab igne have been seen in
and radiate or conduct moderate heat also could initiate
dogs and cats, and most often result from exposure to
the condition.
conductive heat sources; thus the term *chronic moderate
 The clinical presentation is variable and reflects the type
heat dermatitis’ is used (Walder, 1994; Declercq &
and site of chronic thermal damage. Alopecia is the most
Vanstapel 1998; Walder & Hargis, 2002). Reported heat
 frequent clinical feature. Mottled erythematous scaly or
sources in the dog and cat include heating pads, heated
 crusted macules and plaques give rise to hyperpigmenta-
kennel mats, electric blankets, plant warmers, metal heat
tion with chronicity. Strikingly linear and intersecting
register covers, infrared lamps and sun-heated driveways
lattice-like hyperpigmentation  with 
alopecia, when
(Walder & Hargis, 2002). One author (T.L.G.) has seen 
present, is a highly characteristic feature (Walder &
this syndrome in cats secondary to sleeping on cable
Hargis, 2002). Lesions acquired during recumbency occur
64
Diseases of the epidermis
on the ventral or lateral chest, abdomen, and fank and
ence of eosinophilic, wavy elastin fbrils in the superficial
neck (Walder & Hargis, 2002). Other sites may be
dermis ('red spaghetti of Walder'). These fibers may stand
involved, contingent on the site exposed to the chronic
out against a background of edema or mucin, and are
radiant heat source.
accentuated with Verhoeff-van Gieson stain for elastin
 Breed, age or sex predilections have not been reported.
(Walder & Hargis, 2002). These fbers appear fne, irreg-
 Differential diagnosis may be problematic, as areas of
ular, and grayish black with this staining method. The
macular pigmentary alteration and alopecia are not clini-
superficial dermis has variable laminar fbrosis (scarring).
cally distinctive. The site affected and a history of chronic
'panus ro papey readde osie Ke uenos pa
 moderate heat exposure are the most helpful aids to diag-
Superficial to deep dermal edema is observed, and mucin
nosis. Skin biopsy is usually confrmatory; however, subtle
has been reported (Walder & Hargis, 2002). Increased
microscopic lesions may be difficult to discern. A high
acid mucopolysaccharide in the superfcial dermis was
index of clinical suspicion is therefore of benefit.
demonstrated in affected dogs with alcian blue stain (pH
not stated) (Declercq & Vanstapel, 1998). There is subtle
Biopsy site selection
vasculopathy characterized principally by loss of endothe-
lial cells; affected vessels may have slightly thickened or
Areas of maximum alopecia with different ranges of pig-
smudged walls. Hair follicles are atrophic, and appear
 mentary change should be sampled. If present, plaque-like
telogenized or, in some cases, more severely atrophic or
as well as macular regions should be sampled.
“faded'. Association of follicular and adnexal atrophy
with heat-related vascular damage (ischemic dermatopa-
 (oz 'si1e 2 raie) pasd uaaq s (
Histopathology (Figures 3.24 and 3.25)
fact, the blood vessels of erythema ab igne resemble
Erythema ab igne features a cell poor interface reaction
the cell poor vasculitis of ischemic dermatopathy (see
 that features mild apoptosis of basal cells. Viable basal
Chapter 10). Further, the faded collagen is typical for
cells may be mildly dysplastic, characterized by enlarged
that entity.
and more deeply staining nuclei (karyomegaly). Apopto-
There is moderate acanthosis with hyperkeratosis
sis and karyomegaly may extend suprabasally, and may
(basket weave and compact), and variable serocellular
affect superficial hair follicles. Subepidermal bubbling
parakeratotic crusting. Epidermal thinning is reported as
vacuolation just beneath the basement membrane is an
's  re) ai qe 1 jo ay a1 e
occasional fnding. Subepidermal vesiculation may be
2002). Concurrent thermal burns, characterized by focal
observed. Damage to basal cells also allows weakening of
ulceration, crusting, and necrosis of the epidermis or
the dermal-epidermal junction, and the “usable artifact'
adnexal glands, were reported in three of nine animals in
of dermal-epidermal separation may be seen at the
a recent review (Walder & Hargis, 2002). There is pig-
margins of specimens (see ischemic dermatopathy, p. 49).
mentary incontinence, likely secondary to basal cell
A characteristic but variably subtle feature is the pres-
 damage, which is accompanied by usually mild infltra-
Fig. 3.24 Erythema ab igne in a dog.
Cell poor interface dermatitis is accom-
panied by subepiderrmal bubbling vacuo-
Jation and smudging of dermal collagen.
Interface diseases of the dermal-epidermal junction
65
Fig. 3.25 Higher magnification of Fig.
3.24. Note ‘red spaghetti” of Walder
(arrow) and mild  karyomegaly  of
keratinocytes.
tions of lymphocytes, macrophages, and plasma cells.
Macrophages often contain hemosiderin and/or melanin
pigment, reflecting both basal cell and endothelial cell
damage. Neutrophils or eosinophils are rare.
 Erythema ab igne is differentiated from other cell poor
interface dermatoses by the presence of dysplastic
keratinocytes with karyomegaly, or the presence of
eosinophilic elastic fbers (red spaghetti'). If these are
lacking, the lesions may resemble ischemic dermatopathy
of dogs or feline thymoma-associated exfoliative der-
matitis of cats. Ischemic dermatopathy features more
prominent and consistent ischemic collagen (faded, pale
staining, or smudged), as well as more obvious cell poor
vasculitis (see Chapter 10). Feline thymoma-associated
dermatitis has a more pronounced interface cellular
Fig. 3.26 Erythema multiforme in a dog caused by a drug reaction
infltrate.  Clinical differentiation  is often of prime
to trimethoprirm-sulfa. Coalescing erythematous target lesions are
present on the ventral abdomen.
importance; lesions of erythema ab igne are typically
asymmetrical and limited in distribution, suggesting
thermal exposure.
lymphocyte satellitosis. Clinicians and pathologists both
agree that EM is a cutaneous reaction pattern of multi-
ERYTHEMA MULTIFORME
factorial etiology that is seen uncommonly in the dog and
Clinical features (Figures 3.26 and 3.27)
rarely in the cat. Erythema multiforme is believed to be a
host-specific T cell-mediated hypersensitivity phenome-
The varied use of the term ^erythema multiforme' (EM)
non in which the cellular immune response is directed
has lead to considerable confusion in both veterinary and
against various keratinocyte-associated antigens, includ-
human dermatology. This confusion stems from the fact
ing those associated with drug administration, infection,
that the term is used by clinicians to connote clinically
neoplasia, and connective tissue disease. Lymphocytes
distinctive targetoid lesions characterized by concentric
 bind to the antigenically altered keratinocytes and trigger
circular zones of varying color and textural change.
cell death via apoptosis (Affolter et al., 1998).
Conversely, pathologists tend to use the term whenever
 The subcategorization of EM adopted by veterinarians
implosive keratinocyte death (apoptosis) occurs with
from the human literature also is confusing and contro-
66
Diseases of the epidermis
common initiators. Most links to underlying neoplasia
are anecdotal. Confrmed association between EM and
neoplasia in humans is rare. One author (T.L.G.) has seen
localized oral EM overlying a deeper squamous cell
carcinoma.
Scott and Miller (1999) reported that 26 of 44 (59%)
cases in dogs probably were drug-induced while six of
siX cases in cats were drug-induced. Trimethoprim-
 potentiated sulfonamides, penicillins, and cephalosporins
have been the drugs incriminated most commonly (Ihrke,
1996; Scott & Miller, 1999). Rarely, dyes, preservatives
and stabilizers in pet foods may act as drugs and induce
EM. Data utilizing the newer classification described
above indicated that causative drug exposure was likely
Fig. 3.27 Severe erythema multiforme in a dog caused by a drug
in only 19% of dogs with EM minor and major but dogs
reaction to ampicillin. Widespread coalescing erosions and ulcers
with SJS, SJS-TEN overlap syndrome, or TEN were likely
with serpiginous borders involve most of the ventral abdomen and
to have been drug-induced in 92% of cases (Hinn et al.,
inner thighs. (From Ihrke, PJ. (1980) Derrmatologic therapy. Part I,
Topical therapy. Comp Contin Edu Prac Vet 1, 28-36. Reprinted
1998).
with permission.)
Herpesvirus is a common trigger for EM in humans
(Fritz & Ruiz-Maldonado, 2003). It has been hypothe-
sized that epitheliotropic viruses may be a more common
versial. In 1993, an attempt was made to standardize
initiator of EM minor in dogs also (Olivry, T., personal
nomenclature in human dermatology (Bastuji-Garin et al.,
communication, 2001). The only well-substantiated case
1993). Recently, this nomenclature was adapted for vet-
 of viral induced EM in a dog was triggered by canine par-
erinary dermatology (Hinn et al., 1998). The terms, éery-
vovirus-2 (Favrot et al., 2000). Recently a series of five
thema multiforme minor’ (EM minor) and ‘erythema
puppies with skin lesions reportedly characterized by
multiforme major’ (EM major) formerly have been used
apoptosis and satellitosis had positive immunohisto-
 to describe syndromes with substantial variations in per-
chemistry and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing
for canine distemper virus, canine parvovirus, and canine
nomenclature, EM minor is reserved for patients with
herpesvirus (Hubert et al., 2002). Drugs (especially the
target lesions, no more than one mucosal surface affected,
same three antibiotics as listed for dogs above), and her-
and less than 10% of body surface affected; EM major
pesvirus infection have been implicated in feline EM
refers to a clinically similar syndrome but with more than
(Scott et al., 2001).
one mucosal surface affected, between 10% and 50% of
 A subgroup of chronic and persistent, idiopathic EM is
body surface affected, and with less than 10% epithelial
seen in older dogs (old dog EM') without a history com-
detachment. The eponym Stevens-Johnson syndrome
 patible with known triggers. Lesions are more exudative
(SJS) should be reserved for those patients with severe EM
and proliferative, and often predominantly involve
that exhibit greater than 50% body surface affected, and
the face and ears. The authors have identified occult
epithelial detachment varying from 10% to 30%. Toxic
leukemia, and Pneumocystis pneumonia (probably indi-
epidermal necrolysis (TEN), considered by the authors to
cating immune dysfunction) in two dogs with this syn-
be a separate syndrome, is reserved for patients with gen-
drome; however often investigation for systemic disease
eralized disease and more than 30% epithelial detachment
is fruitless.
(see Chapter 4). An SJS-TEN overlap syndrome is diag-
Erythema multiforme is characterized clinically by a
nosed in patients with clinical features of both syndromes
remarkably pleomorphic eruption considering the com-
but with berween 10% and 30% epithelial detachment
monality of the histopathologic changes. In dogs, typi-
(Bastuji-Garin et al., 1993; Hinn et al., 1998). The clini-
cally there is an acute onset of erythematous annular
cal usefulness of this new classification scheme in veteri-
macules, elevated circular plaques, and papules that
 nary medicine has yet to be determined
develop rapidly in partially symmetrical patterns. Early
Categorization of the most common induction triggers
lesions may appear urticarial. As lesions evolve, crusting
of EM also is controversial. In contrast to current
 becomes more noticeable. Some lesions become strikingly
thoughts on the pathogenesis of EM in humans, popular
and distinctively targetoid with multiple concentric circu-
belief still holds that most documented cases of EM in
 lar zones of erythema, blanching, and exfoliation. Adja-
small animals are associated with drug hypersensitivity.
cent lesions may coalesce to form distinctive arciform
Neoplasia and infection are viewed as considerably less 
 and serpiginous patterns. Epidermal collarettes may be
Interface diseases of the dermal-epidermal junction
67
present. In subgroups of severity beyond EM minor,
multiforme major and SJS must be differentiated from
lesions are more severe and ulceration may be substan-
necrotizing syndromes such as TEN, burns, systemic
tial. Mucosal lesions may begin as vesicles and bullae and
lupus erythematosus, vasculitis, toxic pustular erythro-
eventuate in widespread ulceration. Severely affected
derma of Miniature Schnauzers, or other causes of
animals may be febrile, depressed and anorectic. Pain is
ischemic necrosis. Superficial necrolytic dermatitis, zinc-
associated with more severe disease.
responsive dermatosis, and generic dog food-associated
Although lesions may be seen anywhere, truncal lesions
dermatosis are  additional differential diagnoses 
for
are more frequent and especially involve the glabrous skin
chronic EM of older dogs due to the proliferative and
of the groin and axillae. Other common sites of involve-
exudative nature of these lesions. Histopathology usually
ment include the mucocutaneous junctions, oral mucosa,
will allow differentiation of EM from the aforementioned
ears, and axillae. The ventrum, mucocutaneous junctions,
diseases.
oral cavity, pinnae, and pawpads were reported as the
four most common sites in order of diminished frequency
 Biopsy site selection
(Scott & Miller 1999). Clawbed and perianal lesions have
been seen less commonly.
Areas of erythema without crusting or ulceration are ideal
 Feline EM is reported to exhibit predominantly vesicu-
sites for skin biopsy. An intact epidermis or mucosa is
lar bullous, and ulcerative lesions involving the trunk and
crucial for the diagnosis of EM.
mucocutaneous junctions (Scott & Miller 1999). Gener-
alized exfoliative dermatitis with alopecia also has been
Histopathology (Figure 3.28)
seen.
German Shepherd Dogs and Pembroke Welsh Corgis
Although apoptosis with lymphocyte satellitosis is the
were reported to be at increased risk in one study (Scott
most characteristic feature of EM (see Chapter 4), an
& Miller 1999). Other signalment predilections have not
interface dermatitis is invariably present. Lesions extend
been reported for the dog or cat.
to superfcial hair follicles. A few cases of EM pre-
Clinical differential diagnoses are legion due to the
dominantly affecting the hair follicles have been observed
pleomorphic nature of EM. Milder cases (EM minor) may
(see Chapter 4). Lymphocytes and macrophages are
resemble urticaria, urticarial allergic eruption, superfcial
 grouped along the dermal-epidermal junction, and par-
spreading pyoderma, bacterial folliculitis, dermatophyto-
tially obscure it. Inflammation is usually mild, but can
sis, demodicosis and early lesions of bullous autoimmune
 approach a band-like, or lichenoid confguration occa-
skin diseases. Cases that feature prominent erythema with
sionally. Neutrophils, eosinophils, and plasma cells may
plaques may resemble canine sterile neutrophilic der-
be present, particularly if there is ulceration. Pigmentary
matosis (Sweet's syndrome; see Chapter 14). Erythema
incontinence is variable. There is vacuolation of the base-
Fig. 3.28 Interface inflammation of
canine erythema multiforme. Note pro-
minent pigmentary incontinence and
apoptosis of keratinocytes in overlying
epidermis.
68
Diseases of the epidermis
ment membrane zone, often in a bubbling pattern, and
individual basal cell apoptosis may be present.
Differentiation of the interface lesions of EM from all
forms of lupus erythematosus is required, as all may show
 apoptosis of basal cells and an interface dermal inflam-
 matory infltrate. In EM, apoptosis is more prominent and
is seen at all levels of the epidermis. Lupus erythemato-
sus has apoptosis that is principally confined to the basal
cell layer. Feline thymoma-associated dermatitis features
interface dermatitis, but has milder transepidermal
apoptosis than typical EM. Differentiation is probably
artificial as feline thymoma-associated dermatitis may
represent a variant of graft-versus-host disease or EM;
these diseases differ principally in the source of the anti-
epithelial T cells (see below).
Fig. 3.30 Feline thymoma-associated exfoliative dermatitis. Large
sheets of exfoliated straturm corneum are entrapped in the hair coat.
(Photograph courtesy T. Olivry.)
FELINE THYMOMA-ASSOCIATED
EXFOLIATIVE DERMATITIS
(Synonym: paraneoplastic exfoliative dermatitis)
 In humans, it has been shown that thymomas generate
new and possibly aberrant populations of autoantigen-
responsive, CD4+ T cells (Nenninger et al., 1998). In
Clinical features (Figures 3.29 and 3.30)
paraneoplastic myasthenia gravis, for example, naive T
Feline thymoma-associated exfoliative dermatitis is a rare
cells are produced and exported from the neoplastic
paraneoplastic syndrome seen in the cat (Scott et al.,
thymic milieu; this is uncommon in thymoma patients
1995). Exfoliative skin disease often precedes the devel-
without myasthenia gravis (Strobel et al., 2002). Diverse
opment of any systemic signs. Many paraneoplastic
pathogenic mechanisms involving cytotoxic T cell attack
syndromes of putative immunologic basis are seen in
 on keratinocytes are central to the pathogenesis of graft-
conjunction with thymomas in humans. The paraneo-
versus-host disease and erythema multiforme (Affolter
plastic nature of feline thymoma-associated exfoliative
et al., 1998). Similar development of autoreactive T
dermatitis has been proven by the regression of clinical
cell populations may be involved in the pathogenesis of
signs after surgical removal of the neoplasm (Forster-Van
feline thymoma-associated exfoliative dermatitis, as the
Hijfte et al., 1997; Rivierre & Olivry, 1999; Rottenberg
histopathology of these three syndromes shares marked
et al., 2004).
similarity (Rivierre & Olivry, 1999; Walder & Kornet,
1999; Heripret, 2000). Differentially, the source of the
antiepithelial T cells is exogenous in graft-versus-host
disease, pre-existing in erythema multiforme, and newly
generated in thymoma-associated exfoliative dermatitis.
One author (T.L.G.) has observed two cases with skin
lesions that were histologically identical, but had no
underlying evidence of neoplasia or other internal disease
upon postmortem examination. This further supports the
 contention that this disease is a reaction pattern indica-
tive of T cell-driven immunity and is not specifc for
thymoma. The syndrome may be most common with
thymoma as this may be the most likely setting for induc-
tion of autoreactive T cells in the cat.
Regions of erythema and exfoliation develop with grad-
ually increasing severity. Alopecia is noted secondary to
exfoliative erythroderma. The head, neck, and pinnae
commonly are affected first before the syndrome general-
Fig. 3.29 Feline thymoma-associated exfoliative dermatitis. Adher-
izes. As the syndrome progresses, large visually striking
ent keratinous debris is present on the pinna. (Photograph courtesy
sheets of exfoliated stratum corneum develop, often
T. Olivry.)
greater than 1 cm in diameter and may become entrapped
Interface diseases of the dermal-epidermal junction
69
in the remaining haircoat. Keratosebaceous debris may
Histopathology (Figures 3.31 and 3.32)
accumulate in claw folds and interdigital regions (Scott
 Mild transepidermal and follicular apoptosis and hyper-
et al., 1995). Pruritus usually is absent, unless second-
keratosis are consistent features of feline thymoma-
ary yeast or bacterial infection is present. Secondary
associated dermatitis (see Chapter 4), but may be subtle
Malassezia dermatitis may markedly exacerbate the skin
lesions (Forster-Van Hijfte et al., 1997). Frequently, skin
in some cases. Interface dermatitis is invariably present,
and extends to superficial hair follicles to the level of the
lesions are the only manifestation. Coughing and dyspnea
isthmus. Follicular interface inflammation with scattered
may occur as systemic signs; less diagnostic systemic signs
basal cell apoptosis is striking, and sebaceous glands are
of anorexia and lethargy may be present in advanced
often absent. Their absence may contribute to hyperker
cases.
atosis (Rivierre & Olivry, 1999); as also seen in sebaceous
 Feline thymoma-associated exfoliative dermatitis pri-
adenitis (see Chapter 8). Vacuolation occurs along the
marily affects middle-aged to older cats. Breed or sex
dermal-epidermal interface as well, and there may be
predilections have not been reported.
scattered basal cell and spinous layer apoptosis. Lym-
Clinical differential diagnoses include other feline
phocytes and macrophages predominate and there is pig-
exfoliative dermatoses such as epitheliotropic T cell
mentary incontinence. Malassezia colonization has been
lymphoma (mycosis fungoides), pemphigus foliaceus,
reported (Forster-Van Hijfte et al., 1997; Mauldin et al.,
systemic lupus erythematosus, erythema multiforme, der-
2002).
matophytosis, superfcial demodicosis, or underlying dis-
 The diagnosis of feline thymoma-associated dermati-
eases such as hyperglucocorticoidism or diabetes mellitus
tis is centered upon identification of a thymic mass.
with secondary bacterial or dermatophyte infection. Tho-
However, two cases have been observed by one author
racic radiographs, ultrasonography, and fine needle aspi-
(T.L.G.) that did not have underlying thymoma; this sug-
rates of thymic masses, along with skin biopsy, will
 gests that this is not a disease exclusive to thymoma asso-
support the diagnosis.
ciation but instead is an immunologic reaction pattern
that is most common in that context.
 Feline thymoma-associated dermatitis has milder trans-
Biopsy site selection
epidermal apoptosis than typical erythema multiforme,
Multiple regions of exfoliation and erythroderma should
but is similar in other respects, particularly to the hyper-
be sampled. Care should be taken to include exfoliative
keratotic form. Differentiation is probably artifcial as
material.
feline thymoma-associated dermatitis may represent a
Fig. 3.31 Feline thymoma-associated
dermatitis demonstrating interface in-
flammation and hyperkeratosis.
70
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 3.32 Higher magnification of Fig.
3.32. Note interface inflammation and
occasional apoptosis (arrow).
variant of graft-versus-host disease or erythema multi-
forme; these diseases differ principally in the source of the
antiepithelial T cells (see above). Erythema multiforme
and graft-versus-host disease are histologically indistin-
guishable and have a similar cell mediated pathogenesis
(Affolter et al., 1998).
The interface lesions of feline thymoma-associated der-
matitis resemble all forms of lupus erythematosus. As
apoptosis in feline thymoma-associated dermatitis is often
mild, differentiation from lupus erythematosus may be
diffcult based on histopathology alone; clinical differen-
tiation is required. Feline sebaceous adenitis might be con-
sidered for cases in which sebaceous glands are absent;
however the inflammation of sebaceous adenitis is con-
fined more exclusively to the follicular isthmus, and apop-
tosis is not a feature of that dermatosis.
LUPOID ONYCHITIS
Fig. 3.33 Lupoid onychitis in a Rhodesian Ridgeback. Affected
claws are dry, brittle, and crurmbling. One claw has avulsed.
(Synonym: symmetrical lupoid onychodystrophy)
(Photograph courtesy T.E. Bonenberger; case rmaterial University of
California, Davis.)
Clinical features (Figures 3.33 and 3.34)
Lupoid onychitis is a canine syndrome of probable mul-
tifactorial etiology. Lupoid onychitis is characterized by
separation of the claw from the clawbed, sloughing of
Most cases of this syndrome are idiopathic, but adverse
claws, and the regrowth of misshapen, dry, brittle, short
reaction to food and drug administration are reported
claws. Usually, all claws are affected on all feet. The term
(Mueller et al., 2000; Scott et al., 2001). One textbook
‘symmetrical lupoid onychodystrophy' has been used
lists this syndrome as an immune-mediated disease (Scott
(Scott et al., 1995). The authors prefer the term “lupoid
 et al., 2001). A similar clinical presentation with similar
onychitis' because it emphasizes that the changes in the
histopathology has been associated with canine leishman-
claw are due to underlying inflammation of the clawbed.
iasis (Koutinas et al., 2002).
Interface diseases of the dermal-epidermal junction
71
Initially, claw abnormalities develop simultaneously on
either Stapbylococcus or Staphylococcus plus Gram-
several digits of multiple paws. Within 3 months, all claws
negative organisms.
on all four paws usually are affected. Claws separate from
 Large breed dogs, such as German Shepherd Dogs, Rot-
the underlying clawbed, and more severely affected claws
tweilers, and possibly Giant Schnauzers and Standard
slough. Hemorrhage is an inconsistent feature of claw
Schnauzers may be at increased risk (Scott et al., 1995,
sloughing. Regrowth of markedly abnormal claws is char-
2001; Bergvall, 1998). However this syndrome has been
acterized by dryness, brittleness and crumbling. Wide
 seen in a wide variety of breeds. Affected dogs commonly
variability occurs in the changes seen in individual dogs.
are young adults to middle-aged.
Pain and resultant lameness varies from minimal to
There are few known diseases that affect only the claws
severe, with approximately one half of the dogs exhibit-
of all four paws. While diseases such as vasculitis, sys-
ing some lameness and pain (Scott et al., 2001). Sec-
temic lupus erythematosus, pemphigus vulgaris, or
ondary bacterial infection is common, and may be due to
bullous pemphigoid can affect the clawbeds, the authors
have not seen these diseases limited to this site.
Biopsy site selection
Biopsy of the clawbed is not easily accomplished. Tradi-
tionally, biopsy has been via the amputation of a third
phalanx (P3). If present and affected, a dewclaw may be
sacrifced. Specimens must include the clawbed to estab-
lish a diagnosis. A new punch biopsy technique allowing
onychobiopsy  without onychectomy  was published
recently (Mueller & Olivry, 1999). However, the authors
d jo uoneindue au Aq pansond uuads au rajand
as it delivers a less disrupted specimen. Further partial
removal of the clawbed epithelium may result in a per-
manently disfigured claw.
Histopathology (Figures 3.35 and 3.36)
Fig. 3.34 Lupoid onychitis in a Rottweiler. All claws are dry, brittle,
 Interface inflammation obscuring the junction between
and cracked.
clawbed epithelium and adjacent dermis is the hallmark
Fig. 3.35 Clawbed of dog with lupoid
onychitis demonstrating variable inter-
face inflammation.
72
Diseases of the epidermis
fbrosis. Inflammation and fbrosis may spread to sur-
rounding tissue after the claw is lost and osteomyelitis of
the distal phalangeal bone may develop. Reactive new
bone proliferation may be observed. The adjacent skin of
 the claw bed may have superficial perivascular dermatitis
of similar inflammatory cell composition, accompanied
by acanthosis.
There are no signifcant differential diagnoses for
lupoid onychitis as the lesions of the affected tissue are
characteristic. However it should be kept in mind that
 this diagnosis is not specific; lupoid onychitis is a reac-
tion pattern and is likely multifactorial in etiology. For
example, lichenoid mononuclear infammation without
basal cell apoptosis (lichenoid but not interface onychitis)
characterized dogs with leishmaniasis that had concurrent
clawbed disease (Koutinas et al., 2002). Erythema multi-
 forme of the clawbed has been observed, but although the
 interface dermatitis is similar berween these two entities,
 erythema multiforme features transepithelial apoptosis
and lymphocytic satellitosis, not found in lupoid onychi-
 tis. The chronic and diffuse fbrosing inflammation, with
osteomyelitis of P3, is nonspecific, and also can occur as
a sequel to onychitis of infectious or traumatic origin.
REFERENCES
Ischemic Dermatopathy/Canine Dermatomyositis
Ihrke, PJ. & Gross, T.L. (1993) New thoughts on the patho-
physiology, diagnosis, and treatment of alopecia in the dog.
Fig. 3.36 Higher magnification of interface dermatitis in clawbed
In: Proceedings of the William Dick Bicentenary 1793-1993,
of dog with lupoid onychitis; P3 is at lower left.
University of Edinburgh, pp. 89-94.
Kovacs, S.O. & Kovacs, S.C. (1998) Dermatomyositis. J Am
feature of lupoid onychitis. In rare cases, inflammation
Acad Dermatol 39,899-920.
may be severe and more band-like, or lichenoid. There is
Parker, W.M. & Foster, R.A. (1996) Cutaneous vasculitis in five
 pigmentary incontinence. Inflammation consists of lym-
Jack Russell Terriers. Vet Dermatot 7, 109-15.
phocytes and macrophages intermingled with fewer neu-
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
Small Animal Dermatotogy, 6th edn, pp. 940-6. WB
trophils and plasma cells. Plasma cells may predominate
in chronic lesions.
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Sontheimer, R.D. (1999) Dermatomyositis. In: Dermatology in
Apoptosis and vacuolation of basal cells are common.
General Medicine (eds I.W. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff,
-eonsea reseq Pn rnsso Keu sisoidode reliseqeidns
K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & T.B. Fitzpatrick), pp. 2009-22.
tion only is not diagnostic, as this is a normal fnding in
McGraw-Hill, New York.
the canine clawbed (Mueller et al., 1993). There is fre-
Vitale, C.B., Gross, T.L. & Magro C.M. (1999) Vaccine-induced
quently subepithelial vesiculation. Damage to basal cells
ischemic dermatopathy in the dog. Vet Dermatol 18, 131-42.
allows weakening of the dermal-epidermal junction, and
thus ‘usable artifact' of dermal-epidermal separation
Discoid Lupus Erythematosus
Griffin, C.E., Stannard, A.A., Ihrke, P.J. et al. (1979) Canine
may occur during processing (see ischemic dermatopathy,
p. 49).
79-87.
Congestion and hemorrhage of the corium may accom-
Iwasaki, T., Shimizu, M., Obata, H. et al. (1995) A canine case
pany separation. Secondary ulceration of the clawbed
of discoid lupus erythematosus with circulating autoantibody.
epithelium is common and is accompanied by suppura-
J Vet Med Sci 57, 1097-9.
tive exudation. Laminar areas of fbrosis beneath the
Scott, D.W. & Miller, WH. (1995) Squamous cell carcinoma
clawbed epithelium are not uncommon and are relatively
arising in chronic discoid lupus erythematosus nasal lesions in
uninflamed; inflammation may subtend these areas of
two German Shepherd Dogs. Vet Dermatol 6, 99-104.
Interface diseases of the dermal-epidermal junction
73
SystemicLupus Erythematosus
Ihrke, PJ. & Gross, T.L. (1995) Ulcerative dermatosis of Shet-
Chabanne, L, Fournel, C. & Monier, J.-Cl. (1995) Diagnostic du
land sheepdogs and collies. In: Kirk's Current Veterinary
lupus erythemateux systemique canin. Prat Med Chir Anim
Therapy XII (ed. J.D. Bonagura), pp. 639-40. W.B. Saunders,
Comp 30, 115-29.
 Philadelphia.
Fournel, C., Chabanne, L., Caux, C. et al. (1992) Canine sys-
 Jackson, H.A. (2004) Eleven cases of vesicular cutaneous lupus
temic lupus erythematosus. I: A study of 75 cases. Lupus 1,
erythematosus in Shetland sheepdogs and rough collies: clini-
133-9.
 cal management and prognosis. Vet Dermatol 15, 37-41.
Olivry, T. & Chan, L.S. (2001) Autoimmune blistering der-
Jackson, H.A. & Olivry, T. (2001) Ulcerative dermatosis of the
matoses in domestic animals. Clin Dermatol 19, 750-60.
 Shetland sheepdog and rough collie dog may represent a novel
Olivry, I., Savary, K.C.M., Murphy, K.M. et al. (1999) Bullous
vesicular variant of cutaneous lupus erythematosus. Vet Der-
systemic lupus erythematosus (type 1) in a dog. Vet Record
matol 12, 19-27.
145, 165-9.
Pedersen, N.C. & Barlough, J.E. (1991) Systemic lupus erythe-
Erythema Ab Igne
matosus in the cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 19, 5-13.
Declercq, J. & Vanstapel, M.-J. (1998) Chronic radiant heat
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
dermatitis (erythema ab igne) in two dogs. Vet Dermatol 9,
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 704-11. WB.
269-75.
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Schwartz, R.A. (1996) Premalignant keratinocytic neoplasms.
Vitale, C., Ihrke, PJ., Gross, T.L. et al. (1997) Systemic lupus
J Am Acad Dermatol 35, 223-42.
erythematosus in a cat: fulfillment of the American Rheuma-
Schwartz, R.A. & Stoll, H.L. (1999) Epithelial precancerous
tism Association criteria with supportive skin histopathology.
lesions. In: Dermatology in General Medicine (eds IW.
Vet Dermatol 8, 133-8.
Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith
& T.B. Fitzpatrick), pp. 823-39. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Pemphigus Erythematosus
Walder, E.J. (1994) Chronic radiant heat dermatitis in a dog. In:
See Chapter 1.
Proceedings of the 10th AAVD/ACVD Meeting, Charleston,
p.70.
Exfoliative Cutaneous Lupus Erythematosus of the German
Walder, E.J. & Hargis, A.M. (2002) Chronic moderate heat
Shorthaired Pointer
dermatitis (erythema ab igne) in five dogs, three cats and one
Gross, T.L. & Ihrke, PJ. (1992) Bullous and vesicular diseases
silvered langur. Vet Dermatol 13, 283-92.
of the epidermis and the dermal-epidermal junction. In: Vet-
erinary Dermatopathology: A Macroscopic and Microscopic
Erythema Multiforme
Evaluation of Canine and Feline Skin Disease (T.L. Gross, P.J.
Affolter, V., Moore, PF. & Sandmaier, B.M. (1998) Immunohis-
Ihrke & E.J. Walder), pp. 26-8. Mosby, St Louis.
tochemical characterization of canine acute graft-versus-host
Olivry, T., Luther, P.B., Dunston, S.M. et al. (1999) Interface der-
disease and erythema multiforme. In: Advances in Veterinary
matitis and sebaceous adenitis in exfoliative cutaneous lupus
Dermatology, Vol. 3 (eds K.W. Kwochka, T. Willemse &
erythematosus (lupoid dermatosis'′) of German Short-Haired
C. von Tscharner), pp. 103-115. Butterworth-Heinemann,
Pointers. In: Proceedings of the 1Sth AAVD/ACVD Meeting,
Oxford.
Maui, p. 41.
Bastuji-Garin, S., Rzany, B., Stern, R.S. et al. {1993) Clini-
Vroom, M.W., Theaker, M.J., Rest, J.R. et al. (1995) Lupoid der-
cal classification of cases of toxic epidermal necrolysis,
matosis in five German Short-haired Pointers. Vet Dermatol
Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and erythema multiforme. Arch
6,93-8.
Dermatol 129, 92-6.
White, S.D. & Gross, T.L. (1995) Hereditary lupoid dermatosis 
Favrot, C., Olivry, I., Dunston, S.M. et al. (2000) Parvovirus
of the German Shorthaired Pointer. In: Kirk's Current Veteri-
infection of keratinocytes as a cause of canine erythema mul-
" '9-s09 dd (e1n8euog 'af pa) x <4na1 Aum
tiforme. Vet Pathol 37, 647-9.
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Fritz, P.O. & Ruiz-Maldonado, R. (2003) Erythema multiforme,
Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and toxic epidermal necrolysis.
Vesicular Cutaneous Lupus Erythematosus of the Shetiand
In: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General Medicine, 6th edn
Sheepdog and Collie Dog
(eds I.M. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A.
Berget, F., Jackson, H., Olivry, T. et al. (2002) Antigen specificity
Goldsmith & S.1. Katz), pp. 543-57. McGraw-Hill, New
of antinuclear autoantibodies in vesicular cutaneous lupus ery-
York.
thematosus (idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis) of collies and
Hinn, A.C., Olivry, T., Luther, P.B. et al. (1998) Erythema mul-
Shetland sheepdogs. In: Proceedings of the 18th ESVD/ECVD
tforme, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and toxic epidermal
Meeting, Nice, p. 233.
necrolysis in the dog. Clinical classification, drug exposure,
Gross, TL. & Ihrke, PJ. (1992) Bullous and vesicular dis-
and histopathological correlations. Vet Aller Clin Immunol 6,
eases of the epidermis and dermal-epidermal junction. In:
13-20.
Veterinary Dermatopathology:A Macroscopic and Micro-
Hubert, B., Soubagne, B., Boucraut, C. et al. (2002) Immuno-
scopic Evaluation of Canine and Feline Skin Disease (T.L.
histochemical and molecular analysis of cutaneous lesions in
Gross, P.J. Ihrke & E.J Walder), pp. 36-8. Mosby Year Book,
distemper, parvovirosis and canine herpes virosis. In: Pro-
St. Louis.
ceedings of the 18th ESVD/ECVD Meeting, Nice, p. 241.
74
Diseases of the epidermis
Ihrke, PJ. (1996) Cutaneous adverse drug reactions. Comp
Rottenberg, S., von Tscharner, C. & Roosje, PJ. (2004)
Contin Edu Prac Vet 19, 87-92.
Thymoma-associated exfoliative dermatitis in cats. Vet Patho!
Scott, D.W. & Miller, W.H. (1999) Erythema multiforme in dogs
41, 429-33.
and cats: literature review and case material from the Cornell
Scott, D.W., Yager, JA. & Johnston, K.M. (1995) Exfoliative
University College of Veterinary Medicine (1988-96). Vet
dermatitis in association with thymoma in three cats. Fel Pract
Dermatol 10, 297-309.
23, 8-13.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller 6 Kirk's
Strobel, P, Helmreich, M., Menioudakis, G. et al. (2002)
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 729-40. W.B.
Paraneoplastic myasthena gravis correlates with generation
Saunders, Philadelphia.
mature naive CD4(+) T cells in thymomas. Blood 100, 159-
66.
Feline Thymoma-Associated Exfoliative Dermatitis
Walder, E.J. & Kornet, M.E. (1999) Necrolytic dermatitis in a
Affolter, VK., Moore, PF. & Sandmaier, B.M. (1998) Immuno-
cat with sclerosing thymoma. Vet Pathol 36, 507 (abstract).
histochemical
characterization  of canine acute  graft-
versus-host disease and erythema multiforme. In: Advances in
Lupoid Onychitis
Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 3 (eds K.W. Kwochka, T.
Bergvall, K. (1998) Treatment of symmetrical onychomadesis
Willemse & C. von Tscharner), pp. 103-15. Butterworth-
and onychodystrophy in five dogs with omega-3 and omega-
Heinemann, Oxford.
6 fatty acids. Vet Dermatol 9, 263-8.
Forster-Van Hijfte, M.A., Curtis, C.F. & White, R.N. (1997)
Koutinas, A.F., Carlotti, D.N. & Saridomichelakis, M.N. (2002)
Resolution of exfoliative dermatitis and Matassezia pacbyder-
Claw histopathology in canine leishmaniasis (L. infantum). In:
matis overgrowth in a cat after surgical thymoma resection.
Proceedings of the 18th ESVD/ECVD Meeting, Nice, p. 214.
J Small Anim Pract 38, 451-4.
Mueller, R.S. & Olivry, T. (1999) Onychobiopsy without ony-
Heripret, D. (2000) Dermatological manifestations of systemic
chectomy: description of a new biopsy technique for canine
disease. In: A Practical Guide to Feline Dermatology (eds E.
claws. Vet Dermatol 10, 55-9.
Guaguere & P. Prélaud), pp. 14.1-14.10. Blackwell Science,
Mueller, R.S., Sterner-Kock, A. & Stannard, A.A. (1993)
Oxford.
Microanatomy of the canine-claw. Vet Dermatol 4, 5-11.
Mauldin, E.A., Morris, D.O. & Goldschmidt, M.H. (2002) Ret-
Mueller, R.S., Friend, S., Shipstone, M.A. et al. (2000) Diagno-
rospective study: the presence of Malassezia in feline skin
sis of canine claw disease 
2 - a prospective study of 24 dogs.
biopsies. A clinicopathological study. Vet Dermatol 13, 7-13.
Vet Dermatol 11, 133-41.
Nenninger, R., Schultz, A., Hoffacker, V. et al. (1998) Abnormal
Scott, D.W., Rouselle, S. & Miller, WH. (1995) Symmet-
thymocyte development and generation of autoreactive T cells
sisAleue anadsonar e ssop u Aydonsapoyohuo piodn [e
in mixed and corical thymomas. Lab Invest 78, 743-53.
of 18 cases (1989-1993). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31, 194-
Rivierre, C. & Olivry, T. (1999) Dermatite exfoliative paraneo-
201.
plasique associée a un thymoma chez un chat: resolution des
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffn, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
symptomes apres thymectomie. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 1195-1200. W.B.
34, 531-7.
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 4
Necrotizing diseases of the epidermis
Necrotizing diseases of the epidermis are characterized by
late. Necrotizing diseases may have prominent ulceration
keratinocyte cell death. Death of the cell may be due to
as devitalized keratinocytes are sloughed.
necrosis or apoptosis. While these are separate processes,
there may be biochemical overlap (Zeiss, 2003). Although
ERYTHEMA MULTIFORME
apoptosis and necrosis are distinct, it is conventional (and
convenient) to group diseases demonstrating either form
Clinical features (Figures 4.1 and 4.2)
of cell death as *necrotizing’ until a new broader term is
designated. It may not always be possible for the patholo-
See Chapter 3.
gist to recognize morphologic differences between necro-
sis and apoptosis at the light microscopic level. However,
Biopsy site selection
single cell death is often the result of apoptosis (Fadok,
VA., personal communication, 2004). In diseases of this
See Chapter 3.
chapter for which the underlying mechanism of ker-
atinocyte cell death is not yet known, the authors will
Histopathology (Figures 4.3 through 4.6)
assign “apoptosis’ to lesions that initiate with individual
death of keratinocytes (accompanied by other features
Apoptosis of keratinocytes is the most characteristic his.
described for apoptosis; see below), and ‘necrosis’ to
 tologic lesion of erythema multiforme (EM). Solitary or
processes dominated by severe and confluent death and
grouped, brightly eosinophilic and shrunken apoptotic
disintegration of keratinocytes.
keratinocytes are present at all levels of the epidermis.
Apoptosis is generally the result of a genetically driven
 Apoptosis extends throughout superficial hair follicles
cellular signal that induces a preprogrammed pathway to
to the level of the isthmus. Lymphocytes, which have
cell death (Noli et al., 1998). Apoptosis is triggered by
induced apoptosis, surround the affected keratinocytes
Fas/Fas ligand interaction (Puviani et al., 2003). Stimuli
('satellitosis').
to apoptosis may be viral, drug-induced, or autoimmune
 The authors have seen cases of EM featuring large his-
in origin, among others. An apoptotic keratinocyte is 
tiocytic round cells (putative Langerhans cells) in clusters
brightly eosinophilic and shrunken due to condensation,
within the epidermis. These lesions may mimic epithe-
and has a rounded or angular contour; apoptotic cells do
 liotropic lymphoma with apoptosis. The presence of
not rupture. Necrosis is associated with cellular swelling
 intraepithelial aggregates of Langerhans cells has been
pue uoengos i(.sisoouo, paan osie) ardnn pue
referred to by some authors as 'pseudo-Pautrier abscesses
caseation necrosis falls in this category. External
(Candiago et al., 2000; Burkert et al., 2002).
 stimuli, such as trauma or infection, will induce this type
Secondary neutrophilic infltration and exudative crust-
of necrosis.
 ing are observed, particularly if there is ulceration. There
Necrolysis has been used occasionally as a synonym for
may be superfcial pustulation as well. Interface dermati-
necrosis. Technically, necrolysis is defined as disintegra-
tis, which also extends to superficial follicles, is invariably
tion, separation, or exfoliation ocurring secondary to cell
 present (see Chapter 3).
death.
Progressive keratinocyte apoptosis may lead to ulcera
 Diseases involving death of the keratinocyte may be
tion or hyperkeratosis; the latter morphology has been
diffuse, or affect individual keratinocytes throughout the
 informally termed hyperkeratotic EM'. Which secondary
epidermis or superficial hair follicles; the latter is most
lesion occurs (ulceration versus hyperkeratosis) may
often the result of apoptosis. There may be surface or fol-
 depend upon the rapidity, location, and severity of apop-
licular hyperkeratosis as apoptotic keratinocytes accumu-
tosis. Severe transepidermal apoptosis often becomes
75
76
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 4.1 Erythema multiforme due to a drug reaction to trimetho-
Fig. 4.2 Erythema multiforme in the same dog as in Fig. 4.1 pho-
prim-sulfa in a dog. Note well-dermarcated, erythemmatous, coalesc-
tographed 6 hours later. Note that the magnitude of ulceration has
ing target lesions with erythematous borders surrounding central
intensified.
crusts.
Fig. 4.3 Erythema multiforme in a
dog dermonstrating widespread individ-
ual keratinocyte apoptosis; confluence
of apoptotic cells is apparent.
confluent, and is more likely to progress to ulceration.
phohistiocytic, and includes a prominent component of
Hyperkeratosis, which usually occurs with milder and
neutrophils. A nodular pattern of inflammation with
persistent apoptosis, is orthokeratotic and parakeratotic;
 granuloma formation may be observed in severe lesions,
however parakeratosis usually is more prominent.
resembling granulomatous mural folliculitis (see Chapter
Keratin is increased both epidermally and within superfi-
18). Sebaceous glands may be degenerate or absent and
cial follicles. Hyperkeratotic EM may be more common
there is concurrent follicular keratosis, as seen in seba-
in cats.
ceous adenitis (see Chapter 8). In a case of EM due to
Isolated cases of EM involving predominantly the hair
E. coli otitis media, massive isthmus follicular necrosis
follicles have been observed in both dogs and cats. Severe
and degeneration were accompanied by severe vacuolar
interface folliculitis and striking apoptosis result in folli-
degeneration of sebaceous glands. Sebocytes were
cular destruction and/or moderate to severe atrophy. Hair
replaced by round vacuoles of variable size. This vacuo-
follicles may become severely attenuated as lesions
lar glandular change has been observed in other cases of
advance. Perifollicular and follicular inflammation is lym-
EM in which severe follicular damage has occurred.
Necrotizing diseases of the epidermis
77
Fig. 4.4 Erythema multiforme in a
dog. Note pale apoptotic keratinocytes
and occasional lymphocytic satellitosis
{arrows).
Fig. 4.5 Follicular erythemma multiforme in a dog secondary to
Fig. 4.6 Higher magnification of follicular erythema multiforme in
Escherichia cofi otitis media. There is extensive destruction of
the dog of Fig. 4.5. Partially destroyed sebaceous glands are severely
the follicular wall; residual sebaceous glands are inflamed and
vacuolated; the inner portion of the subjacent primary follicle is
vacuolated.
degenerated.
78
Diseases of the epidermis
Confluent areas of cell death in lesions of EM may
a highly diagnostic feature of epitheliotropic lymphoma
 resemble toxic epidermal necrolysis (see p. 80). Although
but is not a prominent feature of EM. Clinical as well as
the two diseases may be etiopathogenically related, severe
immunohistochemical differentiation may be required for
EM is clinically and histopathologically distinct from
problematic cases (see Chapter 37).
toxic epidermal necrolysis. Confluent cell death in EM
always is associated with dermal and often epidermal
FELINE THYMOMA-ASSOCIATED
inflammation; lesions of toxic epidermal
necrolysis
EXFOLIATIVE DERMATITIS
consist of diffuse epidermal necrosis without obvious
associated inflammation, at least in the earliest lesions.
(Synonym: paraneoplastic exfoliative dermatitis)
Other differential diagnoses include  the various
syndromes of lupus erythematosus, feline thymoma-
Clinical features
associated dermatitis, and some forms of epitheliotropic
lymphoma that feature prominent apoptosis (see Chapter
See Chapter 3.
-dode reseqerdns area Aeu snsoeuauaia sndni (e
-dode ieapidasun 'sases iso un '(e andeu aas) siso
Biopsy site selection
tosis is more severe in EM. Feline thymoma-associated
dermatitis has interface dermatitis and mild transepider-
See Chapter 3.
mal 2
apoptosis  with often striking
hyperkeratosis.
 Differentiation from EM is probably artificial, as feline
Histopathology (Figure 4.7)
thymoma-associated dermatitis may represent a variant of
graft-versus-host disease or EM; these three diseases differ
 Mild transepidermal and superfcial follicular apoptosis,
principally in the source of the antiepithelial T cells (see
and mild to severe hyperkeratosis are present. In some
thymoma-associated exfoliative dermatitis, Chapter 3).
 cases apoptosis may be diffcult to identify and interface
Erythema multiforme and graft-versus-host disease are
dermatitis may predominate (see Chapter 3). The keratin
histologically indistinguishable and have a similar cell
layer may be lifting or flaking from the surface of the skin,
mediated pathogenesis (Affolter et al., 1998). Erythema
resulting in actual decrease in the thickness of the normal
 multiforme that features accumulations of large intraepi-
keratin layer in some areas. Although apoptosis may be
mild and sporadic, its presence in the context of hyper-
resenting Langerhans cells) may be particularly difficult
keratosis is highly characteristic. Lymphocytes may
to distinguish from epitheliotropic lymphoma with apop-
closely surround the apoptotic keratinocytes ('satellito-
tosis. Lymphocytic infltration of apocrine sweat glands is
sis'). Increased keratin is of ortho- and parakeratotic
Fig. 4.7 Feline thymoma-associated
exfoliative derrmatitis. Scattered basilar
and suprabasilar apoptosis (arrows) is
accompanied by hyperkeratosis.
Necrotizing diseases of the epidermis
79
types, and there may be neutrophilic pustules and crusts.
Malassezia colonization has been reported (Forster-Van
Hijfte et al., 1997; Mauldin et al., 2002).
The diagnosis of feline thymoma-associated dermatitis
is centered upon identification of a thymic mass. How-
ever two cases have been observed by one author (T.L.G.)
that did not have underlying thymoma; this suggests that
this is not a disease exclusive to thymoma association, but
instead is an immunologic reaction pattern that is most
common in that context.
Feline thymoma-associated dermatitis has milder
transepidermal apoptosis than typical erythema multi-
forme, but is similar in other respects, particularly to the
hyperkeratotic form. Differentiation is probably artificial
as feline thymoma-associated dermatitis is similar
immunologically to graft-versus-host disease or erythema
Fig. 4.8 Proliferative necrotizing otitis of kittens. Severe, prolifer-
multiforme; these diseases differ principally in the source
ative inflarmmation is present on the pinna. Note well dermarcated
of the antiepithelial T cells (see thymoma-associated
 plaques with adherent keratinous debris. (Photograph courtesy T.E.
exfoliative dermatitis, Chapter 3). Erythema multiforme
Bonenberger; case material University of California, Davis.)
and graft-versus-host disease are histologically indistin-
guishable and have a similar cell mediated pathogenesis
(Affolter et al., 1998).
some cats, the preauricular region of the face. Lesions
Cutaneous lesions of lupus erythematosus may feature
 develop very rapidly and coalesce, sometimes creating
suprabasilar apoptosis, as well as interface dermatitis, and
annular or serpiginous borders. Adherent crusts are
should be differentiated from feline thymoma-associated
 trapped in the hair coat. As the lesions progress, erosion
dermatitis. As apoptosis in feline thymoma-associated
and ulceration occur. Most affected cats appear indiffer-
dermatitis is often mild, differentiation from lupus ery-
ent to the lesions. Mild pruritus or discomfort may be
thematosus may be difcult based on histopathology
 noted when ulceration is present.
alone. A positive lupus band test may be of beneft, but
Lesions develop in kittens between 2 months and 6
is not consistently present in randomly selected biopsies
months of age and regress, apparently spontaneously, by
of cats with lupus erythematosus. Clinical differentiation
12 to 24 months. Although other signalment data are not
may be required.
available, most cases have occurred in domestic short-
haired cats.
 Proliferative necrotizing otitis of kittens is visually
PROLIFERATIVE NECROTIZING OTITIS
distinctive. The authors have not seen lesions with these
OF KITTENS
clinical characteristics in the context of other diseases.
 Diagnosis is confrmed by skin biopsy.
Clinical features (Figure 4.8)
Proliferative necrotizing otitis of kittens is a rare, highly
 Biopsy site selection
characteristic syndrome of uncertain etiology. As the
name implies, the syndrome is seen only in cats less than
 Erythematous plaques should be sampled, taking care
1 year of age. Since the syndrome bears some resemblance
that adherent keratinous crusts are obtained. If lesions are
histopathologically to hyperkeratotic erythema multi-
present in the preauricular zone, sampling from this
forme, an immunologic basis is suspected. Currently,
 region is less diffcult than biopsy of the medial surface of
there is no evidence to link this syndrome to any infec-
the pinnae or the entrance to the auditory canal.
tious viral diseases. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
testing for feline herpesvirus 1 using primers for thymi-
-u aq su uoka arod pe as a
Histopathology (Figures 4.9 through 4.11)
tive in five cats (Foley, J.E., personal communication,
The raised plaques are often sharply demarcated from
2002). Papillomavirus immunohistochemistry has also
adjacent normal skin. Scattered apoptotic-appearing
been negative.
keratinocytes are present within severely hyperplastic
Well-demarcated erythematous plaques with adherent
epidermis and superficial follicular epithelium. There is
thick keratinous debris are present on the medial aspect
striking parakeratotic hyperkeratosis with intermingled
of the pinnae, the entrance to the auditory canal, and in
neutrophilic crusts, often in layers. The process extends
80
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 4.9 Proliferative necrotizing otitis of kittens. The inflarmmatory
Fig. 4.10 High magnification of proliferative necrotizing otitis in
the kitten of Fig. 4.9. Note surface and follicular infundibular neu-
matory debris; there is laminar pallor of the epidermis and follicu
trophilic parakeratosis and intense superficial dermatitis.
Jar infundibulurm. Aural cartilage is at bottorm.
may indicate a dyskeratotic rather than apoptotic process;
to superfcial hair follicles, which are dilated, sometimes
these two processes are indistinguishable morphologically
massively, with keratin and neutrophils. Active superfcial
and must be analyzed in the context in which they are
and luminal follicular pustulation may be present. Neu-
found. At this time, it is unclear whether these abnormal
trophils, eosinophils, and lymphocytes migrate through
keratinocytes result from dyskeratosis or apoptosis; the
mildly spongiotic epidermis and superfcial hair follicles.
severity of associated inflammation suggests the latter.
There may be somewhat laminar epidermal and follicular
Differential diagnoses are few as the condition is strik
infundibular pallor adjacent to the parakeratotic accu-
ing histopathologically as well as clinically. Hyperkera-
mulations. Lymphocytes or eosinophils may lie adjacent
totic erythema multiforme may be similar, but generally
to apoptotic-appearing cells, but true satelliosis (lym-
 does not feature the same degree of neutrophilic crusting
phocytes encircling affected keratinocytes) is not seen.
and parakeratosis, the prominent eosinophil infltrates,
The superfcial and perifollicular dermis is moderately
nor the degree of hyperplasia observed with proliferative
to severely inflamed. Eosinophils and neutrophils are
necrotizing otitis.
numerous and are intermingled with lymphocytes,
 macrophages, and plasma cells.
TOXIC EPIDERMAL NECROLYSIS
Affected keratinocytes, which are brightly eosinophilic
and shrunken, may be in diffuse distribution, but often
Clinical features (Figures 4.12 and 4.13)
are present adjacent to areas of increased keratin, i.e. just
beneath the epidermal keratin layer or surrounding the
Toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) is a very rare, severe,
follicular lumen. The pattern and proximity of these cells
life-threatening syndrome. The word 'necrolysis’ denotes
Necrotizing diseases of the epidermis
81
Fig. 4.13 Toxic epidermal necrolysis in a cat due to a repositol
injection of penicillin. Confluent ulcers are present on the head.
(Photograph courtesy G.A. Kunkle.)
separation or exfoliation of tissue due to necrosis. Bullous
detachment of the epithelium rapidly progresses to wide-
spread ulceration, resembling scalding burns. Toxic epi-
dermal necrolysis is recognized in the dog and cat.
Toxic epidermal necrolysis is a highly controversial syn
drome in both veterinary and human medicine (Bastuji-
Garin et al., 1993; Ihrke, 1996; Garcia-Duval et al., 2000;
Fig. 4.11 High magnification of proliferative necrotizing otitis in
Scott et al., 2001). Diffculties with nomenclature abound,
a kitten. Darkly staining keratinocytes, clustered at the right, are
as some authors (these authors included) view TEN as
apoptotic.
clinically and histopathologically distinct from erythema
multiforme. Controversy still exists as to whether TEN
represents a pathophysiologically similar, but more severe
and fulminating, form of erythema multiforme. Irrespec-
tive of this controversy, it is of clinical importance to sep-
arate erythema multiforme and TEN, as the biological
behavior of these rwo disorders is dissimilar. The rapid
spread and dramatic severity of TEN aid in differentiat-
ing this syndrome from severe erythema multiforme.
Toxic epidermal necrolysis is always a potentially life-
threatening disease, while erythema multiforme most
chronic, course. Some authors consider TEN to be the
most severe manifestation of a continuum that stretches
from mild cases of erythema multiforme (EM minor)
through severe forms of erythema multiforme (EM major
and Stevens-Johnson syndrome [SJS]), to SJS-TEN over-
lap syndrome, and TEN (Bastuji-Garin et al., 1993;
Fritsch & Ruiz-Maldonado, 2003).
Although TEN is a polyetiologic reaction pattern, over
80% of TEN seen in humans is associated with an adverse
Fig. 4.12 Toxic epidermal necrolysis in a Collie associated with a
splenic fibrosarcoma. Note the confluent ulcers covering most of the
drug reaction (Fritsch & Ruiz-Maldonado, 1999). Similar
face. (Case material courtesy R.E.W. Halliwell.)
fndings have been reported for the dog (Hinn et al.,
82
Diseases of the epidermis
1998). Toxic epidermal necrolysis also may be seen sec-
for incidence. Age, breed, or sex predilections have not
ondary to infection, vaccination, as a sequela to graft-
been noted with drug-associated TEN. Toxic epidermal
versus-host disease, or accompanying diseases of enhanced
necrolysis secondary to visceral neoplasia would be
immune activation such as collagen vascular diseases and
 expected to occur more frequently in older animals.
 neoplasia. Sulfonamides, anticonvulsives, and nonster-
Major clinical differential diagnoses include thermal
oidal anti-inflammatory drugs are the prime initiators in
burns, severe erythema multiforme, pemphigus vulgaris,
humans (Fritsch & Ruiz-Maldonado, 2003). Most data
bullous pemphigoid, systemic lupus erythematosus, epi
for cases of TEN in animals indicate the likelihood of
dermolysis bullosa acquisita, toxic shock syndrome,
drug induction; visceral neoplasia has been noted in a
sterile pustular erythroderma of Miniature Schnauzers,
small number of cases.
and vasculitis or other causes of ischemic necrosis. The
While the exact pathomechanisms initiating TEN are
rapid spread and dramatic severity of TEN aid in differ-
 N    n   
entiating this syndrome from severe erythema multiforme;
represents induction of an overwhelming apoptosis of
differentiation is important due to the life-threatening
keratinocytes, mediated by cytotoxic T cells
and
nature of TEN. On rare occasion, dogs may present with
mononuclear cells (Fritsch & Sideroff, 2000). Although
erythema multiforme that progresses to TEN, or with ery-
thema multiforme and TEN simultaneously (SJS-TEN
 mented in TEN, their numbers are sparse in comparison
overlap). Biopsy is required to diagnose TEN.
to erythema multiforme (Fritsch & Ruiz-Maldonado,
1999). Currently, many authorities believe that lesions
Biopsy site selection
result in part from a drastic overexpression of toxic
cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α).
Areas of erythema without evidence of ulceration should
The source of the TNF-α may be both macrophages and
 be selected. Intact epidermis is vital to the histopathologic
keratinocytes (Paquet et al., 1994; Fritsch & Ruiz-
diagnosis of this syndrome.
Maldonado, 1999).
 Initially, widespread macular erythema progresses to
Histopathology (Figures 4.14 and 4.15)
confluent erythema. The animal may be tender to palpa-
tion. Full thickness confluent epidermal death results in
Toxic epidermal necrolysis is characterized by diffuse
ulceration as the epidermis is shed (necrolysis). A positive
devitalization of the epidermis in the setting of sparse
aq A a a 'sd s an is ro
inflammation. Superficial hair follicles may be involved.
lost in translucent sheets resembling moist tissue paper.
The nuclei of affected keratinocytes lose detail and
Sloughing may result from even gentle contact during
are pale or hyperchromatic; the cytoplasm is hyper-
handling. Facial skin, mucocutaneous junctions, and
eosinophilic. In early lesions, keratinocytes retain their
footpads commonly are involved, but lesions
may
be
normal confguration and inter-relationship, and the
widespread. The pharynx, esophagus, trachea, and main-
 overall architecture of the epidermis is intact. In older
stem bronchus may be affected. Concurrent hemorrhagic
lesions, the devitalized epidermis separates from the
subjacent dermis in large sheets, forming flaccid bullae.
mucosa also may be targeted. Toxic epidermal necrolysis
Necrolysis refers to this separation of tissue due to con-
always is a life-threatening syndrome.
fluent cell death. Bullae rupture, which results in ulcera-
 In humans, TEN almost always is preceded by systemic
 tion. After separation from the dermis, the epidermis may
prodromal signs including “fever, malaise, 
headache,
 lose all architectural detail and severe ballooning degen-
rhinitis, cough, sore throat, chest pain,
yomiting,
eration may occur.
diarrhea, myalgia and arthralgia'
(Fritsch
1&Ruiz-
Superfcial dermal inflammation is scant in pre-
Maldonado, 2003). Many of these clinical features
ulcerative lesions, and includes lymphocytes and macro-
(such as headache, sore throat, chest pain and myalgia)
phages. Ulceration provokes severe secondary dermatitis
may be diffcult to determine in domestic animals. Fever
that includes prominent neutrophils. Because of the
and malaise have been noted as prodromal signs in the
potentially fatal nature of this disease, it is vital that the
dog.
pathologist immediately alerts the clinician to the likeli-
 In humans, an increased incidence of drug-induced
hood of TEN so that any potentially causative drugs may
TEN observed in certain major histocompatibility
be stopped and aggressive therapy instituted.
complex (MHC) antigen groups has led to the suggestion
 Toxic epidermal necrolysis and severe erythema multi-
Yearq oi Aioedes panedu ue aaeu Aeu sdnoia asal iel
forme are distinct histopathologically; however, erythema
down reactive intermediate drug metabolites (Friedmann
multiforme may progress to confluent epidermal death
et al., 1994). The paucity of published cases of TEN in
similar to that seen in TEN. Toxic epidermal necrolysis
domestic animals has not allowed any statistical analyses
may also follow or accompany erythema multiforme, con-
Necrotizing diseases of the epidermis
83
Fig. 4.14 Toxic epidermal necrolysis
in a dog. Diffusely necrotic epidermis
 separating from the underlying
5
dermis to forrm a large bulla.
fusing the morphologic picture. Apoptosis is the underly.
ing mechanism of cell death in TEN in humans (Fritsch
& Sideroff, 2000), as it is in erythema multiforme (see p.
75). Interestingly, a recent study in animals identifed
apoptotic cells using immunohistochemistry for the detec.
tion of free 3' DNA ends (resulting from endonuclease
activity in apoptosis) in lesions of erythema multiforme
but not in TEN (Noli et al., 1998); these results suggest
the pathogenetic mechanisms may be different in some
clinical contexts. Toxic epidermal necrolysis may repre-
sent an immunologic milieu in which toxic cytokines,
such as TNF-α (Paquet et al., 1994), or drug metabolites
(Friedmann et al., 1994) predominate. The confluent cell
death of end stage erythema multiforme, in contrast, may
be dominated by progressive cytotoxic cell-mediated
destruction of keratinocytes. Although the two diseases
may be etiopathogenically related, severe erythema mul-
tiforme is histopathologically distinct from TEN. Conflu-
ent necrosis in erythema multiforme always is associated
with dermal and often epidermal inflammation; lesions
of TEN consist of diffuse epidermal necrosis without
obvious associated inflammation, at least in the earliest
lesions.
Toxic epidermal necrolysis may appear similar to first-
degree burn, which is manifested by coagulation necrosis
of the epidermis and follicles. Clinical differentiation,
specifcally knowledge of lesion distribution, which tends
to be patchy, asymmetric, or localized in thermal trauma,
may be required. Burns may feature deep vasculitis, which
Fig. 4.15 Toxic epidermal necrolysis in a dog. Diffuse necrosis
is absent in TEN. Late stage toxic shock syndrome may
and early separation from the adjacent dermis extend to the hair
feature massive necrosis of the epidermis with separation
follicles.
from the dermis, as in TEN. However neutrophils should
84
Diseases of the epidermis
be prominent within the devitalized epidermis of toxic
dromes, localized severe infection releases bacterial toxins
shock syndrome, in contrast to TEN.
that produce severe secondary systemic toxic reactions
including disseminated intravascular coagulation, but
without specifcally targeting the skin.
TOXIC SHOCK SYNDROME OF DOGS
Toxic shock syndrome, confrmed by histopathology,
has been observed by the authors in ten dogs. Clinical
Clinical features
 lesions are generalized macular erythema of the trunk and
Toxic shock syndrome (TSS) of dogs is a very rare skin
legs, often accompanied by marked edema, particularly of
disease with marked clinical and cutaneous histopatho-
the legs. Vesicles and ulcers are sometimes observed;
logic similarities to staphylococcal TSS in people. Staphy-
ulcers are generally seen in advanced lesions. There is
lococcal TSS in people is a life-threatening multisystemic
variable crusting. Presenting constitutional signs include
disease caused by the staphylococcal exotoxin, toxic
fever severe malaise, and anorexia. Hypoalbuminemia
shock syndrome toxin-1 (TSST-1), enterotoxin B, entero-
was found in all six dogs for which hematologic evalua-
toxin C, or TSST-1 combined with enterotoxin C (Lee et
tion was performed; leukocytosis was present in three
al., 2003). This syndrome is distinct from staphylococcal
dogs. One dog had severe cellulitis and deep pyoderma of
scalded skin syndrome (SSSS), a syndrome seen in infants
one rear leg and foot, which may have represented the
and children that is characterized by severe exfoliation
 primary site of infection. Skin culture in an additional dog
resulting from a different staphylococcal exotoxin. De-
recovered Pseudomonas aeruginosa and a hemolytic
fnitive diagnosis of TSS in people requires fever diffuse
coagulase negative Stapbylococcus sp. The role of these
macular erythroderma, desquamation, hypotension, and
organisms in the generation of the skin lesions is not
evidence of the involvement of three or more visceral
known; secondary infection may have been present, as
organ systems including the muscular system (myalgia
 this dog developed severe ulceration. The remaining dogs
and rhabdomyolysis), central nervous system (toxic
did not have a primary source of infection discovered.
encephalopathy), kidney (azotemia), liver (elevated aspar-
 Five dogs succumbed to TSS; postmortem examination
tate transaminase and serum bilirubin), or hematologic
was available in three dogs only. Disseminated intravas-
system (thrombocytopenia) (Feldman, 1993; Lee et al.,
cular coagulopathy (DIC) was a consistent fnding and
1999, 2003). Causes in humans include the use of super-
 affected various organ systems, including the liver, lung.
absorbent tampons in menstruating women, staphylococ-
and kidneys.
cal wound infections, abscesses, mastitis, osteomyelitis,
Too few cases of TSS in dogs have been seen to assess
burns, and visceral infections. Cutaneous lesions in people
signalment predilections clearly; however three of ten
are characterized by blanching, confluent, macular ery-
dogs were Pugs. Also, all dogs but one were 6 years of
thema without pruritus (Feldman, 1993). Dogs with puta-
age or younger; five dogs, including allof the Pugs, were 
 tive TSS have exhibited remarkably similar cutaneous and
3 years or younger.
constitutional signs, and some have responded to broad-
Clinical differential diagnoses include generalized vas-
spectrum systemic antibiotics (cephalexin). However,
culitis, canine sterile neutrophilic dermatoses (see Chapter
neither the primary sites of infection nor the presence of
14), toxic epidermal necrolysis, and erythema multiforme.
staphylococcal exotoxin production have yet 
been
The primary source of infection and putative toxin pro-
documented.
duction should be sought, but may be elusive. Evaluation
Toxic shock syndrome in humans appears to be caused
should include hematology, as well as radiographs and
by both the direct action of the exotoxin plus cytokine
ultrasound evaluation in an attempt to discern clinically
induction coupled with as yet undetermined host factors
occult infection.
(Feldman, 1993; Lee et al., 1999). Staphylococcal toxins
stimulate the release of tumor necrosis factor alpha
Biopsy site selection
(TNF-α) and shock correlates with the synergistic action
of TNF-α and interleukin-1 (Lee et al., 2003). T cell-
 Regions of macular erythema should be obtained. Sus-
dependent cytokine release may be crucial in the produc-
pected primary sites of infection should be sampled as
tion of mucocutaneous lesions (Kamel et al., 2002).
well. An intact epidermis is important for the histopatho-
Toxic shock syndrome of dogs is distinct from the
logic diagnosis of this syndrome.
reported syndromes of streptococcal toxic shock syn-
drome in dogs and streptococcal necrotizing fascitis
Histopathology (Figures 4.16 through 4.19)
(Miller et al., 1996; Yager et al., 1997), as well as cel-
lulitis and toxic shock in a dog due to Stapbylococcus
Toxic shock syndrome is histopathologically identical to
intermedius (Girard & Higgins, 1999), even though path-
the human condition that is associated with toxin pro
 omechanisms may be similar. In these other reported syn-
duction by Stapbylococcus aureus (Hurwitz & Ackerman,
Necrotizing diseases of the epidermis
85
Fig. 4.16 Toxic shock syndrome in a
dog. Neutrophils are migrating through
the epidermis to form a surface crust.
Note superficial dermal inflammation.
1985; Vuzevski et al., 1989). In early lesions, there is mild
spongiosis. Presumptive apoptosis of keratinocytes of the
epidermis and superficial hair follicles is associated with
migration of neutrophils and occasional eosinophils,
which may lie adjacent to devitalized cells. Apoptotic cells
and neutrophils may occur in random clusters, resembling
a ‘scatter-shot’ pattern. Neutrophils may form small epi-
dermal pustules that progress to surface crusts. As lesions
progress, apoptosis becomes confluent, resulting in lifting
 of the devitalized and inflamed epidermis to form large
ulcers. Devitalized epidermal tissue is riddled with degen-
erating neutrophils.
The superfcial to middle dermis is moderately edema-
tous. Blood vessels are dilated and have swollen endothe-
lia. Extravasation of red blood cells may be observed.
Mild to moderate numbers of neutrophils and fewer
eosinophils surround blood vessels, and are loosely dis-
tributed interstitially. Inflammation is often prominent,
surrounding middle hair follicles where blood vessels are
  s  so 
mingled in smaller numbers. Dermal inflammation is
more intense in advanced necrotic lesions.
 Early epidermal lesions of TSS resemble erythema mul-
tiforme, except that inflammatory cells surrounding the
apoptotic epithelial cells are neutrophils rather than lym-
phocytes, and the apoptotic cells in TSS tend to cluster
rather than being more diffusely distributed. Late stage
TSS may feature massive devitalization of the epidermis
with separation from the dermis, as in toxic epidermal
Fig. 4.17 Higher magnification of toxic shock syndrome in a dog.
necrolysis. However neutrophils should be prominent
A focal pustule is surrounded by apoptotic keratinocytes {arrow).
within the devitalized epidermis of TSS, in contrast to
toxic epidermal necrolysis.
86
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 4.18 High magnification of toxic
shock syndrome demonstrating neu-
trophils amidst darkly staining apop-
totic keratinocytes.
Fig. 4.19 Confluent epidermal necro-
sis of late lesion of toxic shock syn-
drome.  The devitalized epidermis is
riddled with neutrophils.
al., 1993; Byrne, 1999). Superficial necrolytic dermatitis
SUPERFICIALNECROLYTICDERNATITIS
is very rare in the cat; only four cases have been reported
(Synonyms: metabolic epidermal necrosis, hepatocuta-
to date (Patel et al., 1996; Day, 1997; Mauldin et al.,
neous syndrome, necrolytic migratory erythema)
2002; Kimmel et al., 2003).
The unifying feature of most of the reported canine
-sap oedau oeiu auapun q on sreadde sas
Clinical features (Figures 4.20 through 4.22)
function driving cutaneous nutritional deprivation, which
Superficial necrolytic dermatitis (SND) is an uncommon,
results in necrotizing skin disease. When serum amino
necrotizing skin disorder of dogs associated with incom-
acids are measured, profound hypoaminoacidemia is a
pletely characterized metabolic hepatic disease (Gross et
 consistent feature. Plasma amino acid profles reveal up
Necrotizing diseases of the epidermis
87
to 80% reduction in several amino acids (Gross et al.,
1993). A recent large study in 36 dogs showed that mean
plasma amino acid values were significantly lower than
values from dogs with either acute or chronic hepatitis.
The authors hypothesized that the causative defect is a
i  n ri a r
of amino acids (Outerbridge et al., 2002). A recent report 
 of SND in dogs receiving phenobarbital suggested that
drug induction of hepatic microsomal enzymes may result
 in excessive utilization of amino acids by the liver, leading
to deficiency (March et al., 2004).
It is tempting to consider glucagon derangement as the
trigger for this metabolic disease because of the striking
similarities to necrolytic migrating erythema in humans
Fig. 4.20 Superficial necrolytic dermatitis in an aged mixed breed
(hypoaminoacidemia, diabetes mellitus, and histolo-
dog. Perioral and mucocutaneous erosions, ulcers, and crusts are
gically identical skin lesions) which often results from
present. (Photograph courtesy I.J. Ameti.)
glucagonoma syndrome. This syndrome most commonly
is associated with a pancreatic endocrine tumor that
secretes high levels of glucagon. However elevated
glucagon levels in conjunction with glucagon-producing
pancreatic endocrine tumors are seen in only a minority
of canine cases of SND (Bond et al., 1995; Torres et al.,
1997; Allenspach et al., 2000).
Superficial necrolytic dermatitis in dogs is most often
associated with severe vacuolar hepatopathy with or
without accompanying diabetes mellitus (hepatopathic
SND). Identical cutaneous lesions have been seen rarely
secondary to glucagon-producing pancreatic endocrine
tumors (pancreatic SND) (Gross et al., 1990; Bond et al.,
1995; Cerundolo et al., 1999); this suggests that cuta-
neous pathogenic mechanisms probably are similar in
 these two forms of SND. Severe hepatopathy is absent in
pancreatic SND, suggesting a different metabolic subtype
Fig. 4.21 Superficial necrolytic dermatitis in an aged mixed breed
dog. The pads of all four paws are heavily crusted. Fissures with exu-
(Gross et al., 1990; Bond et al., 1995). Although most
dation are evident on and at the margins of the pads.
cases of vacuolar hepatopathy occurring in SND are
idiopathic, SND has been seen in conjunction with the
ingestion of a mycotoxin (Little et al., 1991), long-term
anticonvulsant therapy with phenobarbital and phenytoin
(Bloom et al., 1992; March et al., 2004), and other meta-
bolic liver disease (Taboada & Merchant, 1997). Regard-
less of the initiating mechanism, the histologic pattern of
epidermal damage is similar. Resolution of the cutaneous
signs of canine SND was reported to follow excision
 of a glucagon-secrering pancreatic tumor (Torres et al.,
1997).
Superficial necrolytic dermatitis in cats has been
reported in conjunction with pancreatic carcinoma, prob-
ably of endocrine origin (Patel et al., 1996), thymic amy-
loidosis (Day, 1997), pancreatic carcinoma, hepatopathy,
and intestinal lymphoma (Mauldin et al., 2002), and
hepatopathy and probable unrelated squamous cell carci-
Fig. 4.22 Superficial necrolytic dermatitis in an aged Poodle. Sec-
noma in situ (Kimmel et al., 2003). Two additional
ondary suppurative crusting is evident on the fissured carpal pad and
feline cases observed by the authors have been hepato-
at the periphery of the pads.
pathic in origin.
88
Diseases of the epidermis
 In dogs, erosions and ulcers, with exudation, alopecia,
depression of serum amino acids or other nutrients.
and thick adherent crusts are seen on and surrounding the
 Elevation of serum hepatic enzymes (especially serum
pawpads, and around the mucocutaneous junctions of the
alkaline phosphatase and alanine aminotransferase) is
lips, eyes, clawbeds, and anus. Similar lesions also may
 supportive of SND (Byrne, 1999). If other criteria are met,
 Occur on the pinnae, pressure points including the elbows 
ultrasonographic evaluation of the liver should be per-
and hocks, ventral thorax, and the scrotum and vulva.
formed to assess for the presence of the unique and
Adherent crusts without underlying erosion may be seen
pathognomonic “honeycomb’ pattern seen with SND
in very early lesions. Facial and pedal lesions may exhibit
(Nyland et al., 1996), as well as to rule out the possibil-
striking bilateral symmetry. Skin lesions may be more
ity of underlying pancreatic neoplasia.
severe in regions of pressure trauma or self-trauma, as
 Clinical differential diagnosis of feline SND is more
 these sites are prone to the increased cutaneous fragility
problematic based on small case sampling. Prime differ-
that results from loss of epithelial integrity. Secondary
ential diagnoses should include exfoliative feline skin dis-
infection with dermatophytes or bacteria, or colonization
eases such as erythema multiforme, thymoma-associated
by Malassezia is common. Pruritus and pain frequently
exfoliative dermatitis, and cutaneous epitheliotropic lym-
are evident.
phoma. The presence of elevated serum hepatic enzymes
Considerably less information is available for the
in an older cat should enhance suspicion for SND.
clinical features of feline SND. Scaling and alopecia of
 Abdominal ultrasonographic evaluation and skin biopsy
the trunk and limbs were the only cutaneous features
 are needed for diagnosis.
noted in two cats (Patel et al., 1996, Mauldin et al.,
2002). Pruritus was noted in two cats, but may not
Biopsy site selection
have been associated with SND (Mauldin et al., 2002;
Kimmel et al., 2003). Bilateral ventral truncal alopecia
Erythematous plaques with mild to moderate adherent
 progressing down the medial thighs, ulceration and crust-
crusts are ideal sites. Care should be taken not to disturb
ing of the oral mucocutaneous junction and interdigital
the crusts when taking the biopsy. Pawpad margins
regions was reported recently in a well-documented case
should be sampled as these specimens create less lameness
(Kimmel et al., 2003). Secondary Malassezia dermatitis
and are still likely to yield a definitive diagnosis. Ulcers
has been reported in conjunction with feline SND
 should be avoided. Multiple biopsy specimens are rec-
(Mauldin et al., 2002) and also has been noted by the
 ommended, as characteristic lesions may not be present
authors.
 in every specimen.
Canine SND is seen primarily in older dogs. In one
large study, both the mean and median age of affected
Histopathology (Figures 4.23 through 4.26)
dogs was 10 years (Outerbridge et al., 2002). Although
population-corrected data on breed predilections are
On low power, the distinctive epidermal feature of SND
not available, the authors suspect that small breed
 is the pink, white and blue layering, referred to by some
dogs are over-represented. In one recent study, 61%
as the French flag'. Parakeratosis and neutrophilic crust-
(22/36) of the dogs were of only six breeds: West High-
ing comprise the top eosinophilic layer striking pallor of
land White Terriers (6), Shetland Sheepdogs (5), Cocker
keratinocytes creates the pale middle layer, and hyper-
Spaniels (4), Scottish Terriers (3), Lhasa Apsos (2) and
plastic basal and suprabasal keratinocytes compose the
Border Collies (2) (Outerbridge et al., 2002). Retrospec-
deepest basophilic layer In some chronic lesions, the pale
tive data indicates that males may be over-represented
middle layer is absent or minimal, and parakeratosis with
(Byrne, 1999). In a recent study, 75% (27/36) of the
 crusting predominates. The parakeratotic cells may have
dogs were male (Outerbridge et al., 2002). Too few cats
plump rather than the traditionally markedly flattened
have been seen with SND to determine signalment
nuclei, mimicking diseases of abnormal cornification (see
 predilections.
Chapter 8). Superficial pustulation may be seen. Bacteria,
Clinical differential diagnoses for canine SND include
dermatophytes, or yeast may be present within crusts,
chronic erythema multiforme of older dogs, drug erup-
often abundantly. Cells of the middle pale layer lack dis-
tion, pemphigus foliaceus, systemic lupus erythematosus,
crete borders, and pallor is due to diffuse intracellular and
zinc-responsive dermatosis, and generic dog food-
intercellular edema. Secondary splitting through this
associated dermatosis. Histopathology is useful in the dif-
 devitalized layer may be observed; this combination of
ferentiation of most of these diseases. Generic dog food
changes is consistent with true ‘necrolysis'. Epidermal
dermatosis, which is histologically very similar to SND,
splitting may be accompanied by pustular inflammation
is seen most often in younger animals. The morphologic
within the cleft; erosion and ulceration may follow. The
similarity may be due to a partially common pathogene-
subjacent epidermis is hyperplastic, and is basophilic due
sis for SND and generic dog food dermatosis, possibly via
 to an increased nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio and cyto-
Necrotizing diseases of the epidermis
89
Fig. 4.23 Superficial necrolytic der-
matitis in a dog. Note layering of
superficial parakeratotic crust, edema,
and hyperplastic keratinocytes.
Fig. 4.24 Higher magnification of
Fig. 4.23. The middle layer of the epi-
derrmis shows the prominent laminar
pallor of swollen keratinocytes.
plasmic immaturity. Changes mildly affect the superficial
multiforme in old dogs may be due to protein
hair follicle, but generally do not extend beyond the
deficiency/imbalance and thus could be very similar
superficial infundibulum.
pathogenetically to SND.
In some cases, there may be mild to severe individual
 Dermal inflammation is mixed and is generally super-
cell death, suggesting apoptosis. Apoptosis may be
fcial and perivascular to interstitial. Neutrophils may be
accompanied by lymphocytic satellitosis, resembling ery-
prominent, depending on the degree and stage of overly-
thema multiforme (see p. 75). It is not known whether
 ing epidermal degeneration. Macrophages, lymphocytes,
these latter cases represent erythema multiforme super-
plasma cells, eosinophils, and mast cells may be observed.
imposed upon SND. Alternatively, one author (E.J.W.)
Lymphocytes and neutrophils may migrate into the over-
has proposed that the hyperkeratotic form of erythema
lying epidermis.
90
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 4.25 Secondary splitting or *necro-
lysis' of the epidermis in superficial
necrolytic dermatitis in a dog. Note
loose pustular inflammation within the
split.
Hepatic lesions in dogs with hepatopathic SND consist
 of severe metabolic vacuolar hepatopathy. Hepatocytes
are severely ballooned in a pattern of both water and lipid
accumulation, and progress to frank degeneration. Areas
of severe parenchymal collapse result in a condensation
of the reticulin fber network. Foci of nodular hepatocel-
 lular regeneration are prominent. This combination of
parenchymal collapse, condensation of reticulin, and
nodular regeneration has been confused with hepatic cir-
rhosis by many authors. An increase in collagen deposi-
tion may occur in some cases of anticonvulsant-associated
SND in which portal inflammation and accompanying
portal fbrosis are identifed (chronic-active or chronic-
persistent hepatitis). Severe vacuolar hepatopathy is not
present in dogs with pancreatic SND.
Superficial necrolytic dermatitis is identical histopatho
-ued paneiosse peu sases panrodar om 'ses u Aleio
creatic carcinoma (Patel et al., 1996; Mauldin et al.,
2002). In the former report a pancreatic endocrine tumor
was found; glucagon staining was inconclusive. The liver
was minimally affected, which is similar to the absence of
hepatopathy in dogs with SND and pancreatic endocrine
tumors. In the latter report there was also follicular
rde ass eiadoe snsedosid jo jeidh rudone
19). The pancreatic tumor of that report was not
described as exocrine or endocrine; acute hepatocellular
swelling and necrosis were described, and were similar to
the hepatopathy of canine SND. This second feline case
Fig. 4.26 Apoptosis in superficial necrolytic dermatitis in a dog.
neoplastic alopecia due to a pancreatic exocrine carci-
Note typical parakeratotic layer at top.
 noma, and not SND due to a pancreatic endocrine tumor.
A third reported feline case had typical hepatopathy as
Necrotizing diseases of the epidermis
91
Fig. 4.28 Closer view of Fig. 4.27. Thick, adherent crusts entrap
Fig. 4.27 Generic dog food derrmatosis in an adult Chesapeake Bay
the remaining hair near the mucocutaneous junction of the upper
Retriever. Crusting, scaling, and alopecia are present around the
mouth and eye. {From Sousa, C.A. et al. (1988) Derrmatosis associ-
lip.
ated with feeding generic dog food: 13 cases {1981-1982). J Arm Vet
Med Assoc 192, 676-80. Reprinted with permission.)
outbreak was seen in North America during the mid and
late 1980s. To the authors knowledge, this syndrome has
well as concurrent multifocal bowenoid in situ carcinoma
not been reported in North America since then. Refor-
of the skin, or Bowen's disease (Kimmel et al., 2003). The
mulation of generic dog foods probably was responsible
authors have seen two cases of SND in cats with associ-
for the dramatic decrease in cases. Nutritional skin dis-
-o rizasw araass peu asau jo auo uiedoiedau pane
eases are uncommon in geographical locales where dogs
onization. Malassezia colonization also has been reported
are fed either good quality dog food or balanced human
in one case of feline SND (Mauldin et al., 2002)
diets.
 The reaction pattern of SND is unique in cats and not 
In circumstances where rations are deficient in
shared by other recognized entities to the authors' know-
nutrients, vitamins, or trace minerals, this dermatosis
ledge. Superfcial necrolytic dermatitis in cats should
probably is more common. The systemic signs of fever,
prompt a search for secondary Malassezia colonization,
depresion, dependent edema, and lymphadenopathy
and vice versa. Differential diagnoses in dogs include zinc-
(coupled with histopathologic findings beyond those seen
responsive dermatosis and generic dog food dermatosis.
with zinc-responsive dermatosis) lead to speculation that
Zinc-responsive dermatosis is differentiated from SND by
a deficiency of multiple trace minerals, vitamins, or amino
 the lack of laminar epidermal edema and degeneration;
acids may be occurring. Since both copper and zinc
chronic lesions of SND without laminar epidermal degen-
are required for proper cornification, conceivably this
eration may require clinical differentiation. Clinical dif-
syndrome could be associated with a combined zinc and
ferentiation between generic dog food dermatosis and
 copper defciency. Also, since all bivalent cations compete
SND also may be needed, as both diseases are character-
for common binding sites in the intestine, any severe
ized by laminar epidermal edema and degeneration, in
imbalance could be problematic.
Clinical signs closely parallel those of dogs that exhibit
 there may be a partially common pathogenesis for SND
the more severe manifestations of zinc-responsive der-
and generic dog food dermatosis, possibly via depression
matosis, syndrome II (see Chapter 8). Eroded and ulcer-
of serum amino acids or other nutrients. Finally, some
ated, fissured, well-demarcated annular plaques with
pinnal irritant reactions to plastics may be similar to
thick, adherent crusts and erythematous borders are
SND. Clinical differentiation is required (see p. 98).
noted. Lesions are seen most commonly on the muzzle,
mucocutaneous junctions, pressure points, 
flexure
surfaces, and distal extremities. Pain is evident. Lym-
GENERIC DOG FOOD DERMATOSIS
phadenopathy is common.
Clinical features (Figures 4.27 and 4.28)
 Most affected dogs are young, rapidly growing, and less
than 1 year of age. Adult dogs also have been seen occa-
Generic dog food dermatosis is an uncommon to rare syn-
sionally with this syndrome. In some cases all dogs in a
drome seen in association with the exclusive feeding of
multiple-dog household being fed the same ration have
poor quality (generic) dog food (Sousa et al., 1988). An
developed generic dog food dermatosis; in other cases,
92
Diseases of the epidermis
only some dogs of a group sharing identical environment
stratifcation and uneven size of keratinocyte nuclei.
and diet have been affected. Breed or sex predilections
There may be individual cell death of keratinocytes
have not been noted.
suggesting apoptosis. Mild to moderate deep spongiosis
Clinical differential diagnoses should include zinc-
may be accompanied by exocytosis of lymphocytes,
responsive dermatosis, superfcial necrolytic dermatitis,
 macrophages, and neutrophils. Epidermal lesions often 
demodicosis, dermatophytosis, and pyoderma, as well as
 extend to superficial hair follicles. Intraluminal accumu-
autoimmune skin diseases such as pemphigus foliaceus.
 lation of degenerating neutrophils and frank pustular fol-
Generic dog food dermatosis usually is seen in puppies
liculitis are seen. The superfcial dermis contains plasma
during their rapid growth phase. Differentiation may
cells, lymphocytes, neutrophils, mast cells, macrophages,
require skin scrapings, chemistry screening profles,
 and melanophages.
fungal culture, and histopathology.
The major histopathologic differential diagnoses are
superficial  necrolytic dermatitis and  zinc-responsive
dermatosis. Lesions most closely resemble superficial
Biopsy site selection
Skin biopsy specimens should be obtained from annular,
 common pathogenesis for the developrment of the epider-
crusted plaques. Areas of erosion and ulceration should
 mal lesions, possibly via depression in serum amino acids
 be avoided since an intact epidermis is necessary to estab-
or other nutrients. Zinc-responsive dermatosis does not
lish the diagnosis.
show epidermal laminar edema and degeneration, and
apoptosis is rare.
Histopathology (Figures 4.29 and 4.30)
SPLIT PAWPAD DISEASE
The epidermis is moderately to severely acanthotic.
 Parakeratosis is moderate and may be interspersed with
Clinical features (Figures 4.31 and 4.32)
layers of hyperkeratosis and crusting. In some cases, there
is abrupt transition of the superfcial epidermis to a
Split pawpad disease is a highly characteristic syndrome
uniform, eosinophilic layer of compact parakeratosis;
of unknown etiology. It is seen very rarely in the dog, and
hypogranulosis is evident in these areas. Prominent
was observed by one author (T.L.G.) in a cat. Both clini-
laminar edema, and keratinocyte swelling and degenera-
cal and histologic features are suggestive of an anatomic
tion, as seen in superficial necrolytic dermatitis (see p. 86)
defect in the cornification of the pawpads. It is possible
affect the superficial epidermis. The epidermis also may
that a primary degenerative process leads to the charac-
appear slightly dysplastic, characterized by loss of normal
teristic splitting and peeling of the pawpad keratin layer.
Fig. 4.29 Generic dog food derrmato-
sis in a dog demonstrating superficial
 parakeratosis with neutrophilic crust-
ing, subjacent epidermal pallor and
degeneration, and deep spongiosis.
Necrotizing diseases of the epidermis
93
Hig. 4.30 Higher magnification of
generic dog food derrmatosis. Superfi-
cial parakeratosis and crusting overlie
laminar edema and ballooning degen
eration of keratinocytes. Deep spon-
giosis is prominent.
Fig. 4.31 Split pawpad disease in a dog. Splitting of the pawpad
Fig. 4.32 Split pawpad disease in a dog. Chronic thickening with
has occurred in an axis parallel to the contact surface. (Photograph
cracking is affecting multiple pawpads. (Photograph courtesy A.G.
courtesy A.G. Cannon.)
Cannon.)
Qualitative cytokeratin studies were performed on one
layers in an axis parallel to the contact surface. Areas of
case; none of the expected cytokeratins were missing
seemingly normally cornifed pawpads split and peel.
(Cannon, A., personal communication, 2002). The syn-
Adjacent haired skin is not affected. The syndrome is
drome bears some resemblance clinically, but not
greatly aggravated by self-rauma. Pain or pruritus may
histopathologically, to epidermolytic palmoplantar kera-
provoke the dog to rip off the torn fragments of the
toderma and other devastating heritable defects of corni-
pawpads with its teeth. In severe cases, aggressive self-
fcation that occur on the skin of the soles and palms in
trauma can lead to almost complete denuding of corni-
humans. However current data do not suggest that this
fed tissue. Curiously, dogs can appear normal between
syndrome is an analog to any of the described human
episodes of splitting and peeling. Lameness is variable but
pedal syndromes. Several owners have believed that expo-
may be moderate. Dogs with repeated episodes may
sure to moisture (rain, mud) may precipitate individual
display irregular pad cornification with lumpy keratinous
events.
proliferations and chronic inflammation. However, initial
 The initial clinical feature of this syndrome in the dog
lesions do not exhibit obvious inflammation. Affected
is splitting of the pawpad followed by loss of superficial
animals are otherwise healthy.
94
Diseases of the epidermis
Initially, only one pawpad may be affected, followed by
development of similar lesions in other pads. Usually, all
pawpads eventually are involved.
The lesions seen in a cat by one author (T.L.G.) mirror
those seen in the dog. The affected cat was lame and had
diffculty using the litterbox. Grossly, there was lifting
of dry epidermal tissue from underlying pink tissue
(Wedemeyer, S.M., personal communication, 2003). All
pads were affected. There was no history of trauma.
Young adult dogs are affected. Other signalment data
 are not available. The affected cat was 4 years of age at
disease onset.
 Clinical differential diagnoses are few as the syndrome
is highly characteristic. Somewhat similar clinical lesions
can be seen with early cases of canine pemphigus foliaceus
restricted to the pawpads. Chronic lesions also can
resemble those seen with zinc-responsive dermatosis,
generic dog food dermatosis, and superficial necrolytic
dermatitis. However, the lesions seen with all of these
diseases should not be confned to the pawpads.
Histopathology is required for definitive diagnosis.
Biopsy site selection
Tissue from the advancing margin of a split should be
sampled. Punch biopsy of affected tissue along the margin
of a pad may be most easily accomplished.
Histopathology (Figures 4.33 and 4.34)
Hig. 4.33 Split pawpad disease in a dog. A massive split has
The superfcial epidermis of the pawpad has a brightly
occurred through the devitalized superficial epidermis.
eosinophilic, coagulated or ‘cooked’ appearance that
extends through the keratin layer to the underlying super-
fcial viable layer. The lesions resemble severe coagulation
dermatitis might be made. Clinical differentiation may be
necrosis of a burn. The deep edge of abnormal keratin
required.
-sip peaen ui sapida aunapun aui ou puaixa keu
 tribution, with varying depth of penetration. Retention of
BURNS
nuclei in the coagulated layer is variable and is sometimes
prominent. The surface is disrupted and infltrated by
Clinical features (Figures 4.35 through 4.39)
degenerating neutrophils to form crusts. There is often a
visible separation between the deep viable epidermis and
Thermal and chemical burns are relatively common
 the abnormal necrotic layer which may be pronounced in
injuries in the dog and cat. Burns may be due to either
some lesions. Splitting leads to erosions and occasionally
thermal injury or the direct toxic action of a noxious sub-
ulcers that are accompanied by suppurative exudation.
stance on the skin or mucous membranes. Thermal burns
Marginal areas or chronic lesions are parakeratotic and
are seen more frequently than chemical burns, and often
crusted. The superficial dermis has variable inflammation
 cause deeper injury. Partial-thickness thermal and chemi-
consisting of lymphocytes, macrophages, plasma cells,
cal burns may be clinically indistinguishable unless
neutrophils, and eosinophils.
residue of the chemical agent is present on the haircoat
Differential diagnosis is uncomplicated due to the char-
or underlying skin. Less commonly, electrical current or
acteristic histopathologic changes of this dermatosis.
microwave radiation can cause lesions that are clinically
Lesions resemble those of severe thermal trauma, but the
and histopathologically indistinguishable.
location is atypical for thermal burns. If parakeratosis 
 Boiling liquids, electric heating pads, animal-drying
predominates and separation is not observed, as in 
 cages, fres, and heated metal (automobile muflers and
chronic lesions, consideration of superficial necrolytic
wood stoves) are the most common causes of thermal
Necrotizing diseases of the epidermis
95
Fig. 4.34  Higher magnification of Fig.
4.33 showing severe coagulative necro-
sis of the superficial epidermis.
Fig. 4.36 Closer view of Fig. 4.35, demonstrating wound contrac
Fig. 4.35 Partially healed thermal burn in a Doberrman Pinscher
tion at the margins of the ulcer.
puppy. Islands of less affected tissue are surrounded by ulceration.
burns (Scott et al., 2001). Electric heating pads remain the
anesthesia and prolonged recumbency in conjunction
least predictable source of thermal burn (Swaim et al.,
with normally functioning circulating water heating pads.
1989). The critical determinants in the severity of a burn
Under unusual circumstances, even intense sunlight
are the temperature of the heat source and the length of
may cause thermal injury in black-haired dorsal skin
exposure. One author (T.L.G.) has seen seemingly identi-
(Hargis & Lewis, 1999). This syndrome has been termed
cal skin lesions in conjunction with heat exhaustion and
'dorsal thermal necrosis' by the authors, and is seen in
a markedly elevated core body temperature of 107°F
dogs with short, dark hair coats exposed to outdoor, high
(41.7°C).
intensity summer sun and heat. In one instance, an entire
 In human medicine, combinations of pressure, sheering
litter of dark haired puppies that could not ambulate
forces, ischemia, diminished perfusion due to underlying
well to avoid excessive sun exposure were affected
disease, and heat may closely mimic the lesions of
(Vandenabeele, S.C., personal communication, 2003).
what are traditionally called “burns' (Stewart, 1998).
The authors have seen similar lesions in a dark brown
Pressure/ischemia/thermal complex injury is seen in vet-
Shar Pei, a Rottweiler, and a black and tan Dachshund,
erinary medicine, often unexpectedly in the setting of 
and have heard anecdotal reports of similar cases from
96
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 4.37 Chemical burn in a German Shepherd Dog due to the
application of a nondiluted flea and tick dip. Punctate areas of
ulceration are present on the swollen, erythematous affected area.
Fig. 4.39 Closer view of Fig. 4.38 with the affected area clipped.
The haircoat has been clipped from the lesion.
The scar is contracting. (Photograph courtesy S.C. Vandenabeele.)
Erosion and ulceration vary depending on the depth of
injury. In full-thickness burns, the damaged skin becomes
frm and dry due to avascular necrosis and eventually may
slough. Secondary bacterial infection due to necrosis of
tissue and impairment of local defense mechanisms is
common. Life-threatening sepsis may be seen, especially
if large body surfaces are involved. Pain may be the initial
presenting complaint. As expected, age, breed, or sex
predilections are not noted.
 Clinical differential diagnoses include toxic epidermal
necrolysis, severe erythema multiforme, pemphigus vul-
garis and other bullous autoimmune diseases, vasculitis,
and other causes of ischemic or pressure necrosis. Lack of
Hig. 4.38 Dorsal thermal necrosis in a chocolate Labrado
progression of lesions after the initial 5 days is an impor-
Retriever puppy. This puppy and its littermates could not escape
California midsummer sunlight. Photographs were taken several
tant differentiating feature of burns, unless the insult is
weeks after the insult. (Photograph courtesy S.C. Vandenabeele.)
repetitive. Biologically abnormal patterns such as straight
or angular borders, *drip’ configurations, or unusual sym-
metry may increase the index of suspicion of a burn.
others. Presumably, the dark, short hair coats of these
dogs provide a heat sink that concentrates the effects of
Biopsy site selection
solar and/or thermal radiation. Typically, irregular, well-
demarcated lesions develop dorsally, and otherwise
Areas of erythema without ulceration are preferred sites
resemble other thermal burns (see below).
for skin biopsy. Chronic or severe lesions comprising
Burns in domestic animals are categorized as partial
ulcers, deeply necrotic tissue, severe secondary inflamma-
thickness or full-thickness, based on depth of involve-
tion, and scarring may not yield a definitive diagnosis.
ment. The full extent of tissue damage following a burn
may not be readily assessable for 4 to 5 days, as pro-
Histopathology (Figures 4.40 through 4.43)
gression may be insidious. Burns may be more obvious in
nonhaired areas. In haired regions, the overlying haircoat
Coagulation necrosis of the epidermis is present. In most
may conceal the severity and extent of damage for as long
thermal burns, necrosis typically extends through the epi-
as a week before the owner notices thick adherent crusts
dermis to hair follicles, sometimes including the bulb, and
embedded in the hair coat or the odor of necrosis. Well-
 may affect adnexal glands (second degree burn). Dermal
 demarcated erythema, if noted, is the earliest clinical sign.
 collagen may be affected, but usually is comparatively less
Necrotizing diseases of the epidermis
97
Fig. 4.40 Diffuse coagulation necrosis
of skin in thermal burn of a cat, char-
acterized by generalized pallor of the
tissue.
necrotic than epithelial structures in all cases save the
most severe and deep thermal burns. The exception is
dorsal thermal necrosis, which often is characterized by
more intense superficial necrosis to include all tissue.
In contrast, most chemical burns (as well as milder
thermal burns) may be of partial epidermal thickness (frst
degree burn), particularly in areas of thick epidermis, and
may not penetrate follicular epithelium beyond the depth
to which the adjacent dermis is affected. Chemical burns
may be bordered by zones of parakeratosis, indicative
of a milder and chronic response to a superficial irritant
(see p. 98). This may result from dilution of the offend-
ing chemical in the peripheral areas of exposure.
 Both chermical and thermal burns may be full-thickness,
resulting in severe obliterative acellular necrosis of all
dermal structures. This necrosis may extend to the pan-
niculus or even the deeper subcutis (third degree burn).
 Dermal-epidermal separation occurs, as cohesion is
lost between nonviable and viable tissue. In deep second
or third degree burns, separation can occur within the
dermis; condensation and desiccation of the devitalized
zone results in a thick eschar. Erosion and ulceration
are common in advanced lesions, and are accompanied
by crusts composed of exuded serum and neutrophils.
Severe dermal inflammation, including large numbers of
neutrophils, is the result of ulceration and secondary bac-
terial infection. Full thickness third degree burns often
result in massive neutrophilic inflammation, and are
accompanied by marked fibrosis of subjacent viable
Fig. 4.41 High magnification of therrmal burn from the cat of
tissue. Neutrophilic panniculitis with vasculitis and
Fig. 4.40. Devitalized epidermis is lifting from the dermis; note
thrombosis may be a sequel of both chemical and thermal
extreme pallor of follicular walls.
burn trauma (see Chapter 21). Accompanying granulo-
matous panniculitis is more suggestive of thermal injury.
98
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig.4.42
Thermal burn from a dog
dermonstrating diffuse necrosis and bal-
ooning degeneration of the epiderrmis.
Toxic epidermal necrolysis is an important differential
diagnosis for superficial burns; knowledge of clinical dis-
ribution may be important as most burns are asym-
metrically distributed  or localized.  Toxic epidermal
necrolysis, in contrast, affects large portions of the skin
in a relatively symmetrical pattern. Primary vasculitis is a
differential diagnosis for thermal burns that have sec-
ondary vascular inflammation of the panniculus. His-
torical and clinical information may be required to
differentiate vasculitis from thermal burns. Vascular
damage from vasculitis suffcient to create tissue damage
resembling a burn (infarction) usually is associated with
severe systemic illness. Dogs with thermal burns are
usually remarkably well.
IRRITANT CONTACT DERMATITIS
Clinical features (Figures 4.44 and 4.45)
Irritant contact dermatitis (ICD) is a rare to uncommon
inflammatory skin disease seen in dogs and cats that is
caused by direct contact with an irritating concentration
of an offending substance. Immune mechanisms are not
involved. The irritating substance damages the skin by
direct toxic action causing cellular damage. Irritant
contact dermatitis can be viewed as a milder version of
chemical burn, discussed above. Causes include corrosive
substances such as strong acids and alkalis, as well as less
potent irritants such as soaps, detergents, solvents, and
Fig. 4.43 Dorsal thermal necrosis in a brown Shar Pei left in direct
various other chemicals. One author (T.L.G.) has seen two
sun in an unshaded outdoor pen. Extensive necrosis has resulted in
cases of pinnal contact reaction to plastics (dog door and
a thick eschar of necrotic tissue.
lawn chair); lesions regressed when access to plastic was
Necrotizing diseases of the epidermis
99
“universality of irritant reactions’ (Rietschel, 1997). It is
now known that potent contact allergens can initiate
 induction and elicitation simultaneously, thus mimicking
ICD. Consequently, differentiation currently is considered
to be predominantly conceptual (Rietschel, 1997). The
authors believe that much of the clinical veterinary
literature describing ICD should be viewed with skepti-
cism. Others share this view (Scott et al., 2001).
Erythema and papules are the most common initial
lesions. Exudation, scaling and crusting follow. General-
ized erythroderma with variable exfoliation may be seen
with irritant contact reactions to substances such as sham-
poos or rinses that are dispersed over an entire animal.
Lichenifcation, hyperpigmentation, alopecia, and gradual
 expansion of the lesions result from chronic exposure.
The hair coat normally is protective against most con-
Fig. 4.44 Irritant contact dermatitis on the pawpad of a cat. The
pads are diffusely swollen, focally eroded, and necrotic.
tactants. Thus, most environmental irritants that initiate
ICD are more likely to affect glabrous skin or areas where
the hair coat is either naturally thin or missing due to skin
disease or clipping (Scott et al., 2001). Lesions may be
strikingly well demarcated at the margins of nonhaired
and haired skin. The abdomen, perianal region, external
genitalia (especially in the male dog), axillae, medial
surface of the pinnae, ventral surface of the tail, pawpads,
and interdigital space are affected most commonly. The
plastic reactions in two dogs were limited to the inner
pinnae. Liquid contactants can cause lesions with either
splash or drip confgurations or a more generalized dis-
tribution. Reactions to topical medications commonly are
restricted to the sites of application. Pruritus is variable
in intensity but usually is present. Irritant contact der-
matitis may be less likely than allergic contact dermatitis
to become chronic, since identifcation and elimination of
the offending substance may be more readily accom-
Fig. 4.45 Irritant contact dermatitis in a Siammese cat 3 weeks after
accidental emersion in motor oil. The cat was cleansed immediately
plished. Breed, age, or sex predilections have not been
after emersion. The affected axilla is alopecic, hyperpigmented, and
noted and would not be expected.
lichenified.
Allergic contact dermatitis is the primary clinical dif-
ferential diagnosis. In most circumstances, the lesions of
ICD are clinically indistinguishable from allergic contact
prevented. Moisture, which decreases the normal skin
dermatitis. Single episodes may be more common with
barrier function and increases the effective contact area by
ICD, since the cause may be more readily determined than
allowing diffusion of the iritant, predisposes to irritant-
 in allergic contact dermatitis. Clinical signs compatible
induced skin damage. Tissue maceration resulting from
with contact dermatitis in multiple animals in the same
environment favor irritant rather than allergic contact
ingredient. As seen in human medicine, previously existing
dermatitis. Chronic contact dermatitis can mimic many
inflammatory skin diseases may increase susceptibility to
other chronic inflammatory dermatoses, since the grossly
ICD. Contact time, concentration, and the total dose of the
visible chronic reaction patterns of the skin are limited.
agent are additional determinative factors.
However, clear limitation of lesions to glabrous or rela-
Previously, differentiation between irritant and allergic
 tively hairless skin is suggestive of a contact etiology.
contact dermatitis was not considered problematic in
human or veterinary medicine. Differentiation hinged on
Biopsy site selection
allergic contact dermatitis requiring induction prior to
elicitation, as well as the concept of ^uniqueness of aller-
 Erythematous macules or papules represent early stages
 gens involved in allergic contact dermatitis' versus the
 of contact dermatitis and, if present, should be sampled
100
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 4.46 Irritant contact dermatitis in
a dog secondary to bathing and dipp-
ing. Parakeratosis is accompanied by
mild intraepidermal inflammation and
serum accumulation.
Fig-
4.47 Higher magnification of
Fig. 4.46 dermonstrating parakeratosis,
neutrophilic inflammation, and serum
accumulation.
for biopsy. Newer lesions should be chosen over chronic
Recent evidence indicates much immunologic overlap
lesions, as lesions characterized by hyperpigmentation
between the two contact reactions in humans (Rietschel,
and lichenifcation are less likely to provide useful diag-
1997). Thus there may be expected variation in contact
nostic information. Self-traumatized lesions also should
reactions as they are presented to the pathologist, par-
be avoided.
ticularly in the setting of a patch test biopsy (see allergic
 contact dermatitis, Chapter 5). Ideally, irritant reactions 
can be considered as those inflicting direct cellular
Histopathology (Figures 4.46 through 4.49)
damage to the keratinocyte, and thus should generally
Irritant and allergic contact reactions have been report-
demonstrate some degree of epidermal degeneration
edly diffcult to definitively distinguish histologically,
histopathologically.
based on patch test analysis in dogs with spontaneous
Acute ICD usually is transient in the natural setting,
allergic contact dermatitis (Thomsen & Thomsen, 1989).
and consequently lesions of chronic ICD are more com-
Necrotizing diseases of the epidermis
101
Fig. 4.48 Chronic irritant contact der-
matitis in a dog. Note acanthosis and
dense parakeratosis.
monly presented to the pathologist. Experimental ICD
in dogs was characterized by epidermal necrosis with
subepidermal  separation  and   neutrophilic  dermatitis
(Krawiec & Gaafar 1975; Walder & Conroy, 1994).
Changes extended to hair follicles in severe lesions
(Krawiec & Gaafar, 1975). Earliest lesions were epider-
mal spongiosis and spongiotic vesicles containing neu-
trophils (Walder & Conroy, 1994).
Chronic lesions are not considered diagnostic of an irri-
tant reaction, as self-traumatic lesions predominate. A
confluent layer of parakeratosis is suspicious for an irri-
tant reaction, particularly if it occurs in glabrous skin. In
this context, parakeratosis likely reflects hastened epider-
mal maturation secondary to direct keratinocyte injury.
Parakeratosis also characterizes the reaction to some
irritants in humans (Rietschel, 1997). Parakeratosis is
accompanied by variable acanthosis, and there may be
accompanying serous and neutrophilic inflammation,
leading to crusts. Severe ulceration and exudation of
glabrous skin may be suspicious for severe irritant-
induced epidermal necrosis. Variable superficial perivas-
cular infltrations of lymphocytes, neutrophils, and
macrophages are present; inflammation is more severe
 and suppurative if there is ulceration.
 Rare cases of pinnal disease due to plastic exposure
(plastic dog doors and plastic lawn chairs) have been
observed in dogs, and may represent an exaggerated irri-
tant contact reaction. Marked laminar epidermal edema
and degeneration are accompanied by severe parakerato-
Fig. 4.49 Irritant contact reaction to a plastic lawn chair. Note
sis and variable crusting, resembling superfcial necrolytic
massive parakeratosis and intraepiderrmal edema and degeneration
dermatitis (see p. 86); the reason for this striking resem-
resembling superficial necrolytic derrmatitis.
blance is not known. Severe epidermal vesiculation may
102
Diseases of the epidermis
be present, and there may be small accumulations of
morphologic diversity, diagnostic implications and patho-
serum throughout the parakeratotic layer. There may
 genetic mechanisms. J Cutan Pathot 29, 511-6.
be individual  cell death of epidermal and follicular
Candiago, E., Marocolo, D., Manganoni, M.A. et al. (2000)
keratinocytes resembling apoptosis. Spongiosis may be
Nonlymphoid intraepidermal mononuclear cell collections
pronounced in the lower intact layers of the epidermis
(pseudo-Pautrier abscesses): a morphologic and immunophe-
notypical characterization. Am J Dermatopathot 22, 1-6.
Or outer hair follicles. Perivascular accumulations of
lymphocytes, macrophages, plasma cells, and neutrophils
Feline Thymoma-associated Dermatitis
are mild to severe.
Affolter, V.K., Moore, PF & Sandmaier, B.M. (1998) Immuno-
Chronic putative ICD was observed in a cat with a
histochemical characterization of canine acute graft-versus-
history of thrice weekly shampooing. Compact orthoker-
host disease and erythema multiforme. In: Advances
in
atotic hyperkeratosis, mimicking ichthyosis (see Chapter
Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 3 (eds K.W. Kwochka, T.
8) was found. The lesions were presumed to be a hyper-
Willemse & C. von Tscharner), pp. 103-15. Butterworth-
keratotic reaction to chronic and persistent low-level irri-
Heinemann, Oxford.
tant exposure, but may also represent a reaction to the
Forster-Van Hijfte, M.A., Curtis, C.F. & White, R.N. (1997)
 mechanical removal of lipids and other surface compo-
Resolution of exfoliative dermatitis and Malassezia pacbyder-
nents of the epidermis.
matis overgrowth in a cat after surgical thymoma resection. J
Acute irritant reactions may resemble superficial chemi-
Small Anim Pract 38, 451-4.
Mauldin, E.A., Morris, D.O. & Goldschmidt, M.H. (2002)
cal burns if they are severe. In fact, chemical burns are
 Retrospective study: the presence of Malassezia in feline
considered to fall at the most severe end of the spectrum
skin biopsies. A clinicopathological study. Vet Dermatol 13,
of irritant contact dermatitis (Walder & Conroy, 1994).
7-13.
It may be difficult (and unimportant) histopathologically
to separate a superfcial chemical burn from an irritant
Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis
reaction, since both imply a noxious contactant that must
Bastuji-Garin, S., Rzany, B., Stern, R.S. et al. (1993) Clinical
be removed. Chronic ICD resembles chronic superfcial
classification of cases of toxic epidermal necrolysis, Stevens-
dermatitis of any cause. The diffuse parakeratosis seen in
Johnson syndrome, and erythema multiforme. Arch Dermatol
some cases of ICD is suggestive of zinc-responsive der-
129, 92-6.
matosis, but is clinically distinct. Pinnal irritant reactions
Friedmann, PS., Srickland, I., Pirmohamed, M. et al. (1994)
to plastics may be similar to the lesions of superficial
Investigation of mechanisms in toxic epidermal necrolysis
induced by carbamazine. Arch Dermatol 130, 598-604.
necrolytic dermatitis, and clinical differentiation may be
Fritsch, PO. & Ruiz-Maldonado, R. (1999) Stevens-Johnson
required in these cases. In cases of orthokeratotic hyper-
syndrome - toxic epidermal necrolysis. In: Dermatology in
keratosis resembling ichthyosis (see Chapter 8), but
General Medicine, 5th edn (eds I.W. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen,
occurring in an atypical clinical setting, ruling out a reac-
K. Wolff, K.F Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & T.B. Fitzpatrick),
tion to persistent mechanical and/or chemical irritation
pp. 644-54. McGraw-Hill, New York.
may be required.
Fritsch, PO. & Ruiz-Maldonado, R. (2003) Erythema multi-
forme, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and toxic epidermal
necrolysis. In: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in Generat Medicine,
REFERENCES
6th edn. (eds I.M. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F.
Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.1. Katz), pp. 543-57. McGraw-
Introduction
Hill, New York.
Noli, C., von Tscharner, C. & Suter, M.M. (1998) Apoptosis in
Fritsch, PO. & Sideroff, A. (2000) Drug-induced Stevens-
selected skin diseases. Vet Dermatol 9, 221-9.
Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis. Am J Clin
Puviani, M., Marconi, A., Cozzani, E. et al. (2003) Fas ligand
Dermatol 1, 349-60.
in pemphigus sera induces keratinocyte apoptosis through the
Garcia-Duval, 1., LeCleach, L., Bocquet, H. et al. (2000) Toxic
activation of caspase-8. J Invest Dermatol 120, 164-7.
epidermal necrolysis and Stevens-Johnson symdrome: does
Zeiss, C.J. (2003) The apoptosis-necrosis continuum: insights
early withdrawal of causative drugs decrease risk of death?
from genetically altered mice. Vet Pathol 40, 481-95.
Arch Dermatol 136,323-7.
Hinn, A.C., Olivry, T., Luther, PB. et al. (1998) Erythema
Erythema Multiforme
multiforme, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and toxic epidermal
Affolter, V., Moore, PF. & Sandmaier, B.M. (1998) Immunohis-
necrolysis in the dog. Clinical classification, drug exposure,
tochemical characterization of canine acute graft-versus-host
and histopathological correlations. Vet Aller Clin Immunol 6,
disease and erythema multiforme. In: Advances in Veterinary
13-20.
Dermatology, Vol. 3, (eds K.W. Kwochka, T. Willemse & C.
 Ihrke, PJ. (1996) Cutaneous adverse drug reactions. Comp
von Tscharner), pp. 103-15. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
Contin Edu Prac Vet 19, 87-92.
Burkert, K.L., Huhn, K., Menezes, D.W. et al. (2002) Langer-
Noli, C., von Tscharner, C. & Suter, M.M. (1998) Apoptosis in
han's cell microgranulomas (pseudo-Pautrier abscesses):
selected skin diseases. Vet Dermatol 9, 221-9.
Necrotizing diseases of the epidermis
103
Paquet, P., Nikkels, A., Arrese, J.E. et al. (1994) Macrophages
Cerundolo, R., McEvoy, F., McNeil, PE. et al. (1999) Ultra-
and tumor necrosis factor alpha in toxic epidermal necrolysis.
sonographic detection of a pancreatic glucagon-secreting
Arch Dermatol 130, 605-8.
multihormonal islet cell tumour in a dachshund with meta-
Roujeau, J.C. (1994) The spectrum of Stevens-Johnson syn-
bolic epidermal necrosis. Vet Record 145, 662-6.
drome and toxic epidermal necrolysis: a clinical classification.
Day, M.J. (1997) Review of thymic pathology in 30 cats and 36
J Invest Dermatol 102, S28-S30.
dogs. J Small Anim Pract 38, 396-7.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
Gross, T.L., O'Brien, TI.D., Davies, A.P. et al. (1990) Glucagon-
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn. pp. 740-2. WB.
producing pancreatic endocrine tumors in two dogs with
Saunders Philadelphia.
superficial necrolytic dermatitis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 197,
1619-22.
Toxic Shock Syndrome of Dogs
Gross, T.L., Song, M.D., Havel, PJ. et al. {1993) Superficial
 Feldman, S.R. (1993) Bullous dermatoses associated with sys-
necrolytic dermatitis (necrolytic migratory erythema) in dogs.
temic disease. Dermatol Clin 11, 597-602.
Vet Pathol 30, 75-81.
Girard, C. & Higgins, R. (1999) Staphylococcus intermedius ce]-
Kimmel, S.E., Christiansen, W. & Byrne, K.P. (2003) Clinico-
lulitis and toxic shock in a dog. Can Vet J 40, 501-2.
pathologicial, ultrasonographic and histopathological findings
Hurwitz, R.M. & Ackerman, A.B. (1985) Cutaneous pathology
of superficial necrolytic dermatitis with hepatopathy in a cat.
of the toxic shock symdrome.Am J Dermatopath 7, 563-78.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 39, 23-7.
Kamel, N.S., Banks, M.C. & Dosik, A. (2002) Lack of muco-
Little, C.J.L., McNeil, P.E. & Robb, J. (1991) Hepatopathy and
cutaneous signs of toxic shock syndrome when T cells are
dermatitis in a dog associated with the ingestion of mycotox-
absent: S. aureus shock in immunodeficient adults with
ins. J Small Anim Pract 32, 23-6.
multiple myeloma. Clin Exp Immunol 128, 131-9.
March, P.A., Hillier, A., Weisbrode, S.E. et al. (2004) Superficial
Lee, PK., Weinberg, A.N., Swartz, M.N. et al. (1999) Pyoder-
necrolytic dermatitis in 11 dogs with a history of phenobar-
mas: Stapbylococcus aureus, Streptococcus, and other Gram-
bital administration (1995-2002). J Vet Intern Med 18,
positive bacteria. In: Dermatology in General Medicine, 5th
65-74.
edn (eds I.W. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen,
Mauldin, E.A., Morris, D.O. & Goldschmidt, M.H. (2002)
L.A. Goldsmith & T.B. Fitzpatrick), pp. 2182-2207.
Retrospective study: the presence of Malassezia in feline skin
McGraw-Hill, New York.
biopsies. A clinicopathological study Vet Dermatol 13, 7-13.
Lee, PK., Zipoli, M.I., Weinberg, A.N. et al. (2003) Pyodermas:
Nyland, T.G., Barthez, PY., Ortega, T.M. et al. (1996) Hepatic
Stapbylococcus aureus, Streptococcus, and other Gram-
 ultrasonographic and pathologic findings in dogs with canine
positive bacteria. In: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General
superficial necrolytic dermatitis. Vet Radiol Ultra 37, 200-5.
Medicine, 6th edn (eds I.M. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff,
Outerbridge, C.A., Marks, S.L. & Rogers, Q.R. (2002) Plasma
K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.1. Katz), pp. 1856-1878.
amino acid concentrations in 36 dogs with histologically con-
McGraw-Hill, New York.
frmed superficial necrolytic dermatitis (SND). Vet Dermatol
Miller, C.W., Prescott, J.F, Mathews, K.A. et al. (1996) Strep-
13, 177-86.
tococcal toxic shock syndrome in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
Patel, A., Whitbread, IJ. & McNeil, P.E. (1996) A case of meta-
209,1421-6.
bolic epidermal necrosis in a cat. Vet Dermatol 7, 221-6.
Yager, JA., Baker, B. & Prescott, J.F. (1997) Streptococcal
Taboada, J. & Merchant, S.R. (1997) Superficial necrolytic der-
necrotizing fascitis and toxic shock syndrome in dogs. In:
matitis and the liver. In: Proceedings of the 15th ACVIM, Lake
Proceedings of 13th AAVD/ACVD Meeting, Nashville,
Buena Vista, p. 534.
pp. 122-123.
Torres, S.M.F, Caywood, D.D., O'Brien, T.D. et al. (1997)
Vuzevski, V.D., Van Joost, Th., Wagenvoort, J.H.T. et al. (1989)
 Resolution of superfcial necrolytic dermatitis following exci-
Cutaneous pathology of toxic shock syndrome. Int J Derma-
sion of a glucagon-secreting pancreatic neoplasm in a dog. J
tol 28, 94-7.
Am Anim Assoc 33, 313-9.
Superficial Necrolytic Dermatitis
Generic Dog Food Dermatosis
Allenspach, K., Arnold, P., Glaus, T. et al. (2000) Glucagon-
Sousa, C.A., Stannard, A.A., Ihrke, P.J. et al. (1988) Dermatosis
producing
neuroendocrine
tumor
associated
with
associated with feeding generic dog food:
13cases
hypoaminoacidemia and skin lesions. J Small Animat Practice
{1981-1982). J Am Vet Med Assoc 192, 676-80.
41,402-6.
Bloom, P, Rosser, E.J. & Dunstan, R. (1992) Anti-convulsant
Burns
hepatitis-induced necrolytic migratory erythema. In: Proceed-
Hargis, A.M. & Lewis, T.P. {1999) Full-thickness cutaneous
ings 2nd World Congress Veterinary Dermatology, Montreal,
burn in black-haired skin on the dorsum of the body of a
p.56.
 Dalmatian puppy. Vet Dermatol 10, 39-42.
Bond, R., McNeil, P.E., Evans, H. et al. (1995) Metabolic epi-
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
dermal necrosis in two dogs with different underlying diseases.
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 1083-7. WB.
Vet Record 136, 466-71.
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Byrne, K.P. (1999) Metabolic epidermal necrosis-hepatocuta-
Stewart, TP. (1998) When a burn is not a burn. Int J Dermatol
neous syndrome. Vet Clin North Am 29, 1337-46.
37,729-32.
104
 Diseases of the epidermis
Swaim, S.F., Lee, A.H. & Hughs, K.S. (1989) Heating pads and
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffn, C.E. (2001) Muller 6 Kirk's
thermal burns in small animals. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 25,
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 608-15, 1081-3.
156-62.
W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Thomsen, M.K. & Thomsen, H.K. (1989) Histopathological
Iritant Contact Dermatitis
changes in canine allergic contact dermatitis patch test reac-
Krawiec, D.R. & Gaafar, S.M. (1975) A comparative study of
tions. A study on spontaneously hypersensitive dogs. Acta Vet
allergic and primary irritant contact dermatitis with DNCB in
Scand 30, 379-84.
dogs. J Invest Dermatol 65, 248-51.
Walder, E.J. & Conroy, J.D. (1994) Contact dermatitis in dogs
Rietschel, R.L. (1997) Irritant contact dermatitis: mechanisms in
 and cats: pathogenesis, histopathology, experimental induc-
irritant contact dermatitis. Clin Dermatol 1s, 557-9.
ton and case reports. Vet Dermatol 5, 149-62.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 5
I vesicular diseases of
pong1otic and
the epidermis
Spongiotic dermatitis is characterized by edema of the
clinical veterinary literature describing ACD should be
intercellular spaces of the epidermis and superficial
viewed with skepticism. Others share this view (Scott
follicular wall. Severe spongiosis may lead to breakdown
et al., 2001}.
in the integrity of the architecture, resulting in vesi-
 Previously, lymphocytes were viewed as the predomi-
culation. Generally, inflammatory cell influx accompanies
 nant cell type in ACD, which supported the view of ACD
spongiotic change. Spongiotic foci usually eventuate
as a “pure’ type IV hypersensitivity reaction. However,
in focal parakeratosis due to reactive increased epidermal
turnover and incomplete keratinocyte differentiation.
involving eosinophils may play a role in ACD, especially
Parakeratosis  may  intermingle  with  inflammatory
 in dogs with concomitant atopic dermatitis (Walder &
exudate; the term “parakeratotic scale-crust’ signifies this
 Conroy, 1994). This participation of eosinophils in ACD
combined event.
nie) Asuasiadau al ad arnd, e is seads
Many diseases, not described in this chapter are char-
et al., 1997). Eosinophils have been reported as playing a
acterized by mild spongiosis. Allergic skin diseases, for
 role in canine atopic dermatitis along with percutaneous
example, produce multifocal spongiosis. The diseases
 penetration of allergens (Olivry et al., 1997), thus blur-
included in this chapter are those in which spongiosis is
ring the distinction between ACD and atopic dermatitis.
characteristically a significant and predominant diagnos-
 Currently, the sequence of events leading to the develop-
tic feature. Not all stages of these diseases will show spon-
 ment of ACD is thought to involve the binding of a hapten
 giosis; obtaining the earliest lesions possible is critical to
to a protein to form a complete antigen. According to
the diagnosis.
the classical view of the pathogenesis, interaction of the
hapten-protein  conjugate with epidermal  Langerhans
cells leads to T lymphocyte activation and the release
ALLERGIC CONTACT DERMATITIS
of multiple cytokines, especially tumor necrosis factor
Clinical features (Figures 5.1 and 5.2)
alpha (TNF-o). The role of eosinophils in ACD is as yet
unexplained.
Allergic contact dermatitis (ACD) is a rare inflammatory
Most well-documented cases of ACD reported in
skin disease of dogs and cats caused by an adverse im-
domestic animals are reactions to sensitizing plants such
munologic reaction to a nonirritating concentration of the
as wandering Jew plant (Tradescantia fluminensis and
offending substance. Classically, ACD is believed to be a
 other Tradescantia species), spreading dayflower (Com-
type IV or delayed hypersensitivity reaction mediated by
melina diffusa), doveweed (Eremocarpus setigerus), and
lymphocytes that occurs in previously sensitized individ-
dandelion (Taraxacum officinale) (Scott et al., 2001).
uals. Previously, differentiation between irritant contact
Topical medications (especially otic products) also may
dermatitis and ACD was not considered problematic in
 produce reactions. Danish studies have confirmed a wide
human or veterinary medicine. Differentiation hinged on
variety of offending chemicals by patch testing (Thomsen
ACD requiring induction prior to elicitation, as well as
& Kristensen, 1986; Thomsen & Thomsen, 1989). The
the concept of ‘uniqueness of allergens involved in ACD'
review of McGovern & Barkley (1998) gives an excellent
versus the “universality of irritant reactions' (Rietschel,
overview of the plants and plant products that can initi-
1997). It is now known that potent allergens can initiate
ate both immunologic and nonimmunologic reactions in
induction and elicitation simultaneously, thus mimicking
humans. One author (P.J.I.) has observed cedar chips and
irritant contact dermatitis. Consequently, differentiation
 the aminoglycoside component of topical medications as
currently is considered to be predominantly conceptual
among the most common inducers of ACD. Offending
(Rietschel, 1997). The authors believe that much of the
contactants may be in the environment for as short a
105
106
Diseases of the epidermis
 to the sites of application. Cats are more likely than dogs
to spread contactants by grooming. Licking can result in
extension of lesions to the oral mucosa. Pruritus is vari
able in intensity but usually present. Positive patch tests
may be more papular and vesicular than typical clinical
lesions, since very early lesions are rarely seen in clinical
cases.
Signalment predilections are controversial since older
data may not reflect true ACD. Allergic contact dermati-
tis usually is seen in adult animals. A Danish study
reported the German Shepherd Dog to be at increased risk
(Thomsen & Kristensen, 1986). Wirehaired Fox Terriers,
Scottish Terriers, West Highland White Terriers, French
Poodles and Golden Retrievers may be at increased risk
Fig. 5.1 Allergic contact derrmatitis in a mixed breed dog due to
(Olivry et al., 1990). Sex predilection has not been noted.
cedar chip bedding. The nonhaired area of the ventral abdomen is
 Irritant contact dermatitis is the primary clinical dif-
diffusely erythematous. Lesions do not extend into haired areas.
ferential diagnosis. In most circumstances, the lesions of
irritant contact dermatitis are clinically indistinguishable
from ACD. Clinical signs compatible with contact der-
matitis in a single animal within a multiple animal house-
hold favor ACD over irritant contact dermatitis. Allergic
contact dermatitis may be more papular than irritant
contact dermatitis and is more likely to be chronic. Atopic
 dermatitis and food allergy also may resemble ACD clin-
ically. Lesions of contact dermatitis in glabrous skin may
subside strikingly at the junction with haired skin, in con-
rast to other allergic diseases. Chronic ACD can mimic
many other chronic inflammatory dermatoses, since reac-
tion patterns of the skin are limited. Closed patch testing
may be the best diagnostic test for ACD, but currently
rarely is performed.
Fig. 5.2 Closer view of Fig. 5.1. Small papules are seen against a
Biopsy site selection
background of diffusely erythematous, exudative skin.
 Erythematous macules or papules represent early stages
of contact dermatitis and, if present, should be sampled
time as 1 month to as long as 2 years before initiating
for biopsy. Newer lesions should be chosen, as lesions
disease.
characterized by hyperpigmentation and lichenification
The clinical signs and affected sites of ACD are virtu-
are less likely to provide useful diagnostic information.
ally identical to those of irritant contact dermatitis (see
 Self-traumatized lesions also should be avoided. The most
Chapter 4). Allergic contact dermatitis may be more likely
diagnostic specimens may be obtained from positive patch
than irritant contact dermatitis to become chronic, since
tests at 24 to 48 hours.
identification and elimination of the offending substance
may be more diffcult to accomplish. Macular erythema
Histopathology (Figures 5.3 through 5.6)
and papules are the most common initial lesions. Rarely,
vesicles may be seen. Exudation leads to crusting. Licheni-
Allergic contact dermatitis does not always conform to
fication,
hyperpigmentation, alopecia, and gradual
the classical type IV delayed hypersensitivity reaction in 
expansion result from chronic exposure. Since the normal
which lymphocytes predominate, and a component of
haircoat usually is protective, lesions may be strikingly
type I hypersensitivity may play a role, particularly in
well-demarcated at the margins of nonhaired and haired
atopic dogs (Walder & Conroy, 1994). Histopathologic
skin. The abdomen, perianal region, external genitalia
changes of naturally occurring ‘allergic' contact dermati-
(especially in the male dog), axillae, ventral surface of the
 tis are inconsistent; a range of lesions, even in patch test
tail, and interdigital space are affected most commonly.
sites, may reflect a variable immunologic basis and
Reactions to topical medications generally are restricted
cytokine milieu, as well as immunologic differences in the
Spongiotic and vesicular diseases of the epidermis
107
Fig. 5.3 Allergic contact dermatitis
in a dog {positive patch test at 48
hours). Locally extensive spongiosis is
accompanied by exocytosis of mono-
nuclear cells.
Fig. 5.4 Higher magnification of Fig.
5.3. Severe spongiosis is progressing to
vesiculation. Note exocytosis of mono-
M uclear cells.
host (atopic versus nonatopic patient). For example,
dominates, resembling urticarial allergic eruption (see
patch test reactions to known contactants such as Trades-
Chapter 9). Previous reports of positive patch test re-
cantia fluminensis can vary among individual dogs (see
actions in dogs with naturally occurring ACD have
below).
described eosinophilic epidermal pustules or eosinophilic
 Lesions of ACD may be best exemplified by biopsy of
spongiosis in patch test sites (Merchant et al., 1993;
- s t in t ie ssn d ad a
Marsella et al., 1997). Epidermal necrosis with neu-
trophilic inflammation, similar to irritant contact reac-
progress to vesiculation, but spongiosis may be mild in
tions (see Chapter 4), also has been reported in patch test
some clinically positive sites. Some patch test reactions
sites of dogs with ACD (Thomsen & Thomsen, 1989);
demonstrate lymphocytic migration into epidermal and
this has not been observed by the authors to date, and
follicular spongiotic foci, including patch test reactions to
putatively might have been due to too high a concentra-
plants such as Tradescantia fluminensis. In others, includ-
tion of the test substance, resulting in a true irritant re-
ing some to Tradescantia fluminensis, spongiosis is mild
action. In dogs with experimentally induced ACD to
and an edematous dermal inflammatory reaction pre-
0.1% 2,4-dinitrochlorobenzene, patch test sites revealed
108
 Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 5.5 Eosinophilic allergic contact
dermatitis to wool in a dog demon-
strating inflammation and spongiosis of
the epidermis.
Fig. 5.6 Higher magnification of a dog
with allergic contact dermatitis due to
wool. Note exocytosis of eosinophils.
a mononuclear dermatitis with edema and marked mural
may migrate into spongiotic foci, but this is a sparse
folliculitis (see Chapter 18). This variation may be due t0
feature in most cases. Spongiosis and intraepidermal
 the technique of induction used that may have targeted
inflammation evolve to superficial crusts with focal
deeper follicular epithelium primarily (Krawiec & Gaafar,
parakeratosis. Most biopsy specimens are obtained from
1975).
chronic lesions. In those cases the epidermis is acanthotic
In random biopsies from nonpatch-tested skin of
and there may be ulceration and exudation due to severe
dogs with patch test-confrmed ACD, there is often
 self-trauma attending pruritus.
eosinophilic and/or neutrophilic migration into epidermal
Dermal inflammation is variable and mixed both in
and superficial follicular spongiotic foci (eosinophilic or 
natural lesions and in patch test reactions (see Chapter 9).
neurophilic spongiosis). Eosinophilic or neutrophilic
   d d  r 
intraepidermal pustules may be observed. Lymphocytes
reactions.
Spongiotic and vesicular diseases of the epidermis
109
Fig. 5.7 Feline eosinophilic plaques on the hindleg of a cat. Indi-
Fig. 5.8  Multiple brightly erythermatous eosinophilic plaques on the
vidual plaques are raised, well-emarcated, alopecic, eroded, and
ventral abdormen, perianal region, and ventral tail of a cat. {Photo-
intensely erythermatous. Larger plaques show the partial contours of
graph courtesy B.A. Atlee; case material University of California,
lesions that have coalesced.
Davis.)
Allergic contact dermatitis mimics allergic dermatitis
manifest as feline allergic miliary dermatitis, and have
of any cause; thus, histopathology alone often does not 
 all been recognized as occurring in conjunction with
allow definitive diagnosis of ACD. In fortuitous cases,
eosinophilic plaques. Further feline eosinophilic plaques
lymphocytic exocytosis and spongiosis may be prominent
are reported to have responded to flea control, allergen
features of ACD, especially in early lesions. Eosinophilic 
specifc immunotherapy, and elimination diets. The
intraepidermal pustulation or eosinophilic spongiosis also
 authors view flea allergy dermatitis as the prime initiator
may be suggestive if the clinical presentation is appropri-
 of feline eosinophilic plaque in regions of the world where
ate. Intraepidermal eosinophilic pustules also have been
fleas are present. Feline eosinophilic plaques commonly
Apnis auo ui saop sidoie jo saeiuiad eurs e u paodai
have been grouped as part of the ^eosinophilic granuloma
(see Chapter 9); since percutaneous penetration of aller-
complex' (Mason & Burton, 2000; Scott et al., 2001).
gens also is involved in atopic dermatitis, its distinction
The authors prefer the term “feline eosinophilic skin dis-
from ACD may be impossible in some clinical settings.
 eases' as some of the conditions are not granulomatous
Differentiation between irritant and allergic contact der-
and also do not seem to form a cohesive disease complex
matitis may be requested by the clinician due to the
when etiologic factors are considered (Power & Ihrke,
similar clinical distribution of these conditions. Necrosis
1995).
of the epidermis usually is not a feature of ACD, but may
Well demarcated, circular to oval, intensely erythema-
be found in irritant contact dermatitis. Diffuse paraker-
tous, eroded or ulcerated, oozing, alopecic plaques are
atosis is characteristic of some irritant contact reactions
noted most commonly on the abdomen and medial thighs,
(see Chapter 4) but not ACD.
but can occur in almost any location that the cat can self-
traumatize. Lesions may have steep margins similar to
wheals. Plaques vary between 0.5 and 5 cm in diameter,
FELINE EOSINOPHILIC PLAQUE
 and may be single or multiple. They may coalesce, leading
Clinical features (Figures 5.7 and 5.8)
to polycyclic shapes. Rarely, dozens of coalescing plaques
may be present. Constant licking of the affected area is a
d a o e s ad o 
common feature and is indicative of the severity of pru-
and localized skin disorder of cats. The highly abrasive,
ritus. Regional lymphadenopathy usually is present.
frm papillae present on the tongue of the cat probably
Age or breed predilections have not been reported.
play an integral part in the progression of the syndrome.
 Females may be at increased risk (Scott et al., 2001).
An underlying allergic hypersensitivity is suspected fre-
Clinical differential diagnoses should include neo-
quently, but is less commonly definitively documented.
plasms such as lymphoma, mast cell tumor, metastatic
Evidence that a heat-stabile cytophilic antibody is in-
 mammary adenocarcinoma, and squamous cell carci-
volved in the pathogenesis lends further credence to an
noma. The fnding of eosinophils on impression smears
allergic etiology (Roosje & Willemse, 1995). Flea allergy
supports the diagnosis of eosinophilic plaque. Since
dermatitis, atopic dermatitis, and food allergy all may
     
110
Diseases of the epidermis
eosinophilic plaques visually, skin biopsy is indicated if
Histopathology (Figures 5.9 and 5.10)
lesions are not typical or initial response to therapy is not
as expected.
Epidermal changes consist of severe acanthosis and gen-
erally moderate to severe spongiosis with eosinophilic
exocytosis. Spongiosis may be mild in some otherwise
Biopsy site selection
typical lesions. Spongiosis is diffuse in distribution, and
 Erythematous plaques with minimal erosive or exudative
often involves follicular infundibula. Epidermal and fol-
   e s n  s
licular mucinosis is common and may be severe. Spaces
severely crusted lesions should be avoided. If multiple
between epidermal and follicular epithelial cells become
lesions are present, the clinician should select a site that
widened by deposition of pale gray or gray-blue mucin,
will be less readily self-traumatized after surgery.
often to the point of vesiculation. Mucin may extend
Fig. 5.9 Feline eosinophilic plaque.
Marked acanthosis is accompanied by
spongiosis; superficial hair follicles also
are affected.
Fig. 5.10 Higher magnification of
feline eosinophilic plaque. Note pro-
minent spongiosis and exocytosis of
eosinophils.
Spongiotic and vesicular diseases of the epidermis
111
around follicles in severe cases. There usually is severe
suggest a hypersensitivity reaction pattern targeting the
secondary erosion or ulceration in advanced lesions (see
shoueiniad ieul azisaunodaq on aunduai st il spedmed
Chapter 6).
penetration of environmental allergens or contactants
 Dermal inflammation consists of variably intense,
may initiate this syndrome. Psoriasiform dermatitis of the
usually diffuse infltrations of eosinophils. These extend
 pawpads may be an additional manifestation of canine
to the middle (follicular) dermis, but also commonly reach
atopic dermatitis in which percutaneous penetration of
the superficial panniculus (see Chapter 14). Mast cells,
allergens is considered central to the etiopathogenesis (see
lymphocytes, histiocytes and neutrophils are identified in
Chapter 9).
smaller numbers, particularly in resolving or ulcerated
 Affected dogs have proliferative, fissured central,
lesions.
carpal, and tarsal pawpads. Smaller digital pawpads are
Histopathologically, the profound  spongiotic and
affected less frequently. Self-trauma to the pads and the
mucinotic lesions of typical eosinophilic plaque are
pad margins may exacerbate lesions, as the syndrome is
unique. Eosinophilic plaque is qualitatively similar to
pruritic. Some affected dogs may have coexistent self-
allergic miliary dermatitis, but is more dramatically spon-
 rauma in other sites suggestive of allergic skin disease
giotic, mucinotic, inflamed, and ulcerated, and involves a
such as atopic dermatitis. Breed, age or sex predilections
larger expanse of skin (Gross et al., 1986). Since
have not been noted.
eosinophilic plaque and miliary dermatitis both may be
Clinical differential diagnoses may include pemphigus
manifestations of allergic skin disease in the cat (and can
foliaceus restricted to the pawpads, early cases of super-
fcial necrolytic dermatitis, zinc-responsive dermatosis,
lesions of miliary dermatitis from lesions of eosinophilic
split pawpad disease, and irritant contact dermatitis.
plaque may not be critical diagnostically.
Affected dogs should be evaluated for allergic skin disease
and skin biopsy should be performed.
PSORIASIFORM DERMATITIS OF
THE PAWPADS
Biopsy site selection
Pawpad biopsy is best accomplished using a punch to
Clinical features (Figure 5.11)
sample an active area of disease near the margin of a pad.
 Psoriasiform dermatitis of the pawpads is a syndrome or
 Best used on pawpads are 6 mm and 4 mm biopsy punches
reaction pattern of uncertain etiology that has been seen
as the defects created with 8 mm punches may cause dif-
in the dog. Some of the histologic features of these lesions
ficulties with hemostasis and healing.
Histopathology (Figures 5.12 through 5.14)
Psoriasiform dermatitis of the pawpads is characterized
by prominent conical peaks, or ^church spires' of parak-
eratosis interlayered with serum. These are subtended by
epidermal foci of often subtle spongiosis. Cytoplasmic
swelling of keratinocytes can be seen, and fortuitous foci
of mild vesiculation may be observed. In active lesions,
the dermis at the base of conical projections has dilated
superficial blood vessels and variable edema. Mixed
inflammatory cells (neutrophils, eosinophils, and/or lym
 the peaked keratin layer. In some cases the parakeratotic
layer is more diffuse and dense. Intact neutrophils, or
occasionally eosinophils, are entrapped in the parakera-
totic layer, often sparingly. Rarely, an intracorneal pustule
 is observed. Erosion with more intense exudative crusting
may occur. Adjacent haired skin is similarly affected, but
less severely.
The dermis has a perivascular to diffuse, mild to mod-
Fig. 5.11 Psoriasiform dermatitis of the pawpads in a dog. Affected
pawpads are thickened and fssured. (Photograph courtesy C.B.
 erate, mixed infltrate of lymphocytes, macrophages, neu.
Vitale.)
trophils, and eosinophils. Eosinophils may be prominent.
112
Diseases of the epidermis
Inflammation may be superficial, or may extend around
subjacent eccrine glands or adnexal appendages in haired
skin.
 Psoriasiform dermatitis of the pawpads featuring
peaked parakeratosis is unique. In cases with diffuse
parakeratosis, differentiation from chronic superficial
necrolytic dermatitis or zinc-responsive dermatosis may
be necessary. Superfcial necrolytic dermatitis usually
features laminar epidermal pallor due to ballooning
degeneration of keratinocytes. Clinical differentiation
from zinc-responsive dermatosis may be required.
FACIAL DERMATITIS OF PERSLAN AND
HIMALAYAN CATS
Clinical features (Figures 5.15 and 5.16)
An uncommon, progressive, idiopathic facial dermatitis 
of presumed hereditary origin has been reported in young
 Persian cats (Bond et al., 2000). An apparently identical
syndrome has been noted in Himalayan cats (Power,
1998). The adherent debris is presumed to be a sebaceous 
gland product (Bond et al., 2000).
that mats the facial hair is the first abnormality noted. As
the syndrome becomes chronic, erythema and exudation
occur. Although lesions may be more severe in the facial
folds, they also are present in nonintertriginous locations.
A bilaterally symmetric ceruminous otitis externa was
Fig. 5.12 Psoriasiforrm dermatitis of the pawpads. Large parakera-
seen in seven of 13 affected Persian cats (Bond et al.,
totic peaks or spires overlie an inflamed derrmis.
2000). The muzzle, periorbital regions, and chin are
Fig. 5.13 Higher magnification of
psoriasiforrm derrmatitis of the paw-
pads. Parakeratotic spires contain
degenerating inflammatory cells; note
leuk ocytic exocytosis.
Spongiotic and vesicular diseases of the epidermis
113
Fig. 5.16 Facial dermatitis of Persian cats. Less adherent debris is
present than in the cat in Fig. 5.15. Traumatic excoriations and
alopecia are present, indicating pruritus. (Photograph courtesy
J. Fontaine.)
affected most commonly. Less severe lesions less com-
monly affect body regions beyond the head. Second-
ary pyoderma or secondary Malassezia dermatitis may
enhance the severity of clinical signs. Although pruritus
Fig. 5.14 High magnification of parakeratotic spire in psoriasiforrm
may not be a feature of early disease, pruritus commonly
dermatitis of the pawpads. Note vascular dilatation and edema of
becomes intense with chronicity. Submandibular lym-
*derrmal papilla'.
phadenopathy was noted in fve of 13 Persian cats (Bond
et al., 2000).
Affected Persian cats are generally between 10 months
and 6 years of age (median 2.5 years) at frst presentation
(Bond et al., 2000). Eight males and five female Persian
cats were reported (Bond et al., 2000). The authors are
aware of multiple other Persian and Himalayan cats seen
with this syndrome by various dermatologists on a world-
wide basis.
Facial dermatitis of Persian and Himalayan cats is
visually distinctive. Clinical differential diagnoses are
few. Adherent dark facial debris occasionally is seen
with severe feline acne. A primary seborrhea of Persian
cats has been reported, but other body regions beyond
the face frequently are affected (Paradis & Scott,
1990).
Biopsy site selection
Fig. 5.15 Facial derrmatitis of Persian cats. Dark, waxy adherent
Representative specimens should be obtained from the
debris mats the facial hair. Inflammation is relatively moderate,
muzzle. The adherent debris should be left attached to the
despite copious debris. (Photograph courtesy L.P. Schmeitzel.)
hairs.
114
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 5.17 Facial dermatitis in a Persian
cat featuring acanthosis and serocellular
crusting.
Histopathology (Figures 5.17 through 5.19)
The epidermis and follicular infundibula usually are
severely acanthotic and moderately, often diffusely, spon-
giotic. Neutrophils and eosinophils migrate into the
epithelium, sometimes heavily, and occasionally form
small pustules. Luminal folliculitis has been reported
(Bond et al., 2000). There is often mild to severe superf-
cial parakeratotic and neutrophilic scale/crusting, often
with serum exudation and bacterial colonization. Erosion
may be seen. Malassezia have been identified cytologically
(Bond et al., 2000), and thus should be theoretically
present in tissue section in some cases.
Individual degeneration of keratinocytes resembling
apoptosis occurs throughout the epidermis and superficial
follicular epithelium, and is a characteristic but usually
sparse feature of facial dermatitis. Occasional pustules
may incorporate apoptotic cells.
Vacuolation of basal cells may represent, at least in
part, regional spongiotic change. Although there may be
scattered basal cell apoptosis, true interface dermatitis
is not observed. The superficial and middle dermis con-
tains a moderate infltrate of varying proportions of neu-
trophils, macrophages, eosinophils, lymphocytes, plasma
 cells, and often numerous mast cells. Melanophages are
often abundant. Sebaceous glands are large, but seba-
ceous glands may be prorminent in facial skin of normal
cats.
The histopathologic features of facial dermatitis of
Persian and Himalayan cats are not highly specific, and
Fig. 5.18 Higher magnification of facial dermatitis in a Persian cat.
diagnosis generally requires consideration of the clini-
Note extensive crusting and exocytosis of granulocytes.
cal context. A spongiotic allergic reaction may appear
similar; most of these do not feature apoptosis, however.
Spongiotic and vesicular diseases of the epidermis
115
Fig. 5.19 Higher magnification of
facial dermatitis in a Persian cat. Note
spongiosis, exocytosis, serocellular crust
(right), and single apoptotic keratinocyte 
{arrow). Lesions extend to the follicle.
The absence of lymphocytic satellitosis of apoptotic
Thomsen, M.K. & Kristensen, F (1986) Contact dermatitis in
keratinocytes differentiates facial dermatitis from feline
the dog. Nord Vet Med 38, 129-47.
thymoma-associated exfoliative dermatitis, in which
Thomsen, M.K. & Thomsen, H.K. (1989) Histopathological
apoptosis may also be mild. Spongiosis also is not a
changes in canine allergic contact dermatitis patch test re-
actions. A study on spontaneously hypersensitive dogs. Acta
 prominent feature of feline thymoma-associated exfolia-
Vet Scand 30, 379-84.
tive dermatitis.
Walder, E.J. & Conroy, J.D. (1994) Contact dermatitis in dogs 
and cats: pathogenesis, histopathology, experimental induc-
tion and case reports. Vet Dermatol 5, 149-62.
REFERENCES
Feline Eosinophilic Plaque
Allergic Contact Dermatitis
Gross, T.L., Kwochka, K.W, & Kunkle, G.A. (1986) Correla-
Krawiec, D.R. & Gaafar, S.M. (1975) A comparative study of
tion of histologic and immunologic findings in cats with
allergic and primary irritant contact dermatitis with DNCB in 
miliary dermatitis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 189, 1322-5.
dogs. J Invest Dermatol 65, 248-51.
Mason, K. & Burton, G. (2ooo) Eosinophilic granuloma
Marsella, R., Kunkle, G.A. & Lewis, D.T. (1997) Use of pen-
complex. In: A Practical Guide to Feline Dermatology (eds E.
toxifylline in the treatment of allergic contact reactions to
Guaguere & P. Prélaud), pp. 12.1-12.9. Blackwell Science,
plants of the Commelinceae family in dogs. Vet Dermatol 8,
Oxford.
121-6.
Power, H.T. & Ihrke, PJ. {1995) Feline eosinophilic skin dis-
McGovern, T.W. & Barkley, P.M. (1998) Botanical dermatology.
eases. Vet Clin North Am 25, 833-50.
Int J Dermatol 37,321-34.
Roosje, PJ. & Willemse, T. (1995) Cytophilic antibodies in cats
Merchant, S.R., Hodgin, E.C. & Lemarie, S.L. (1993)
with miliary dermatitis and eosinophilic plaques: passive
Eosinophilic pustules and eosinophilic dermatitis secondary to
 patch testing a dog with Asian jasmine. In: Proceedings of the
66-9.
9th AAVD/ACVD Meeting, San Diego, p. 64.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
Olivry, T., Prélaud, P., Héripret, D. et al. (1990) Allergic contact
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 1148-52, W.B.
dermatitis in the dog: principles and diagnosis. Vet Clin North
 Saunders, Philadelphia.
Am 20, 1443-56.
Olivry, I., Nayden, D.K. & Moore, PF. (1997) Characterization
Facial Dermatitis of Persian and Himalayan Cats
of the cutaneous inflammatory infiltrate in canine atopic der-
Bond, R., Curtis, C.F., Ferguson, E.A. et al. (2000) An idiopathic
matitis. Am J Dermatopathol 19, 477-86.
facial dermatitis of Persian cats. Vet Dermatol 11, 35-41.
Rietschel, R.L. (1997) Irritant contact dermatitis: mechanisms in
Paradis, M. & Scott, D.W. (1990) Hereditary primary seborrhea 
irritant contact dermatitis. Clin Dermatol 15, 557-9.
oleosa in Persian cats. Feline Pract 18, 17-20.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
Power, H.T. (1998) Newly recognized feline skin diseases. In:
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 608-15, 1081-3.
Proceedings of the 14th AAVD/ACVD Meeting, San Antonio,
WB. Saunders, Philadelphia.
pp. 27-32.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 6
Ulcerative and crusting diseases of
the epidermis
Ulcerative dermatitis is a primary feature of skin diseases
pyotraumatic dermatitis, while surprisingly minimal
characterized by prominent self-trauma, such as pyotrau-
self-trauma will create lesions in others. Most canine
matic dermatitis. Ulceration may also be a key character-
 pyotraumatic dermatitis is seen secondary to flea allergy
istic of diseases in which there is marked inflammation
dermatitis. In cats, pyotraumatic lesions, clinically and
and necrosis, such as some viral infections. Crusting or
histopathologically resermbling those of dogs, have been
exudative dermatitis is characterized by the accumulation
seen secondary to flea allergy dermatitis, especially in the
of inflammatory cells on the surface of the epidermis,
 dorsal lumbosacral region. Other allergic skin diseases,
leading to the formation of crusts. Ulcerative diseases also
otitis externa, and anal sacculitis occasionally have been
are crusting; self-trauma or other tissue injury leads to
implicated in dogs. Pyotraumatic furunculosis, which is
erosion or ulceration, which induces subsequent surface
pyotraumatic dermatitis overlying deep bacterial folli-
migration of inflammatory cells, usually
neutrophils.
culitis and furunculosis, occurs in some breeds (Reinke
Crusting also may be primary, as in nontraumatized
et al., 1987) (see Chapter 17).
lesions of miliary dermatitis in which allergy-induced
 The clinically characteristic lesion of pyotraumatic der-
transepithelial migration of neutrophils and eosinophils
matitis is a rapidly developing, self-traumatized, erythe-
 results in their accumulation and degeneration on the epi-
matous, exudative, alopecic, sharply-demarcated and
dermal surface.
slightly elevated plaque. Erosion and ulceration occur,
 Many skin diseases are characterized by some crusting
and viscid proteinaceous debris adheres to the surface and
and epidermal damage, particularly allergic skin diseases
 mats the surrounding hair. Lesions are rapidly progressive
that may produce erosion and crusting secondary to
and may coalesce. Pyotraumatic furunculosis may also
intense inflammation and through self-trauma from pru-
feature smaller satellite lesions characterized by intense
ritus. Any disease characterized by surface pustulation,
erythema, exudation and patches of erect hairs.
such as superficial pyoderma or pemphigus foliaceus, also
Since the lesions of pyotraumatic dermatitis usually are
can lead to crusting as pustules degenerate. The diseases
associated with flea allergy dermatitis, most lesions are
in this chapter include those for which ulceration and exu-
seen primarily in the dorsal lumbosacral region and on
dation are the predominant pathologic processes occur-
the lateral thighs. Lesions also may be seen near the ears
ring in the skin.
or anal sacs. Pyotraumatic furunculosis occurs most com-
monly on the face ventral to the ear and on the neck. Pain
 Or pruritus is a consistent feature.
PYOTRAUMATIC DERMATITIS
 Canine breed predilections have been noted for large,
(Synonyms: acute moist dermatitis, hot spot')
 dense-coated breeds such as the German Shepherd Dog:.
Golden Retriever, Labrador Retriever Collie, and the
 Saint Bernard. Pyotraumatic dermatitis also is seen over-
Clinical features (Figures 6.1 and 6.2)
lying focal deep pyoderma in breeds such as the Golden
Pyotraumatic dermatitis is a self-induced traumatic skin
 Retriever and the Saint Bernard. Age or sex predilections
disease seen commonly in the dog and rarely in the cat.
have not been noted. A marked seasonality is recognized;
It is believed to be initiated by a vicious itch-scratch cycle
pyotraumatic dermatitis is seen most frequently in warm,
secondary to underlying pruritic (especially allergic) skin
humid weather.
disease. The characteristic lesions appear to result from
Pyotraumatic dermatitis is visually distinctive and
licking, chewing, and scratching. The sharply demarcated
differential diagnoses are few. Occasionally, ulcerated
nature of this disease is unexplained. Confusingly,
neoplasms (apocrine gland carcinomas), or focal deep
extreme self-trauma in some dogs will not initiate
bacterial infections may resemble or initiate pyotraumatic
116
Ulcerative and crusting diseases of the epidermis
117
Fig. 6.1 Pyotraumatic dermatitis in a German Shepherd Dog sec-
ondary to flea allergy dermatitis. The well-demarcated lesion is ery-
thematous, swollen, and alopecic.
Fig. 6.2 Pyotraumatic derrmatitis on the ventral neck of a German
Shepherd Dog. Hair from the periphery is matted in the dried
ex udate.
Fig. 6.3 Pyotraumatic dermatitis in
perianal skin of a dog. A large discrete
cellular crust. Note subjacent large
 perianal glands.
dermatitis. The pain and self-rauma that are consistent
thematous lesions should be sampled in these cases. If
features of pyotraumatic dermatitis aid in differentiation.
deep pyoderma is suspected then peripheral, small, exuda-
tive lesions are most likely to yield diagnostic results.
Biopsy site selection
Histopathology (Figures 6.3 and 6.4)
Skin biopsy commonly is not employed to obtain a diag-
nosis. However skin biopsy should be performed in recur-
Epidermal lesions predominate and consist of severe
 erosion to ulceration and exudation. Superficial crusts
Or underlying deep pyoderma is suspected. Newer ery-
 contain degenerating neutrophils and serum, in addition
118
Diseases of the epidermis
Hig. 6.4 Higher magnification of
Fig. 6.3. Note sharp line of dermarca-
tion of the ulcer frorm the intact
epidermis.
to necrotic epidermal debris. Colonization of crusts by
Gram-positive staphylococci is common. Lesions are
usually sharply demarcated from the adjacent epidermis,
which may be spongiotic. Epidermal borders may have
mild to moderate acanthosis in chronic lesions.
Necrosis may extend into the superficial dermis in
severe cases. The dermis often contains mild to moderate
neutrophilic and lymphohistiocytic inflammation, con-
fned to the base of the erosion or ulcer. There may be
edema or early fbroplasia. Eosinophils may be found at
the intact skin margins.
Differential diagnoses are few, as lesions are distinc-
tive. In cats, idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis and the
histopathologically (see pp. 128, 130); clinical differenti-
ation may be required. Pyotraumatic dermatitis with deep
pyoderma is a distinct diagnostic entity, and is differenti-
ated by the presence of deep folliculitis and furunculosis
(see Chapter 17).
Fig. 6.5 Feline allergic miliary dermatitis featuring grouped, ery-
FELINE ALLERGIC MILIARY
thematous, crusted papules on the back of the neck.
DERMATITIS
Clinical features (Figures 6.5 and 6.6)
dermatitis, food products, and drugs. Evidence that a
heat-stable cytophilic antibody is involved in the patho-
Feline allergic miliary dermatitis is a multifactorial cuta-
genesis also is supportive of an allergic etiology (Roosje
neous reaction pattern seen in cats. The older looser
& Willemse, 1995). In locales where fleas are common,
term ^miliary dermatitis’ was used previously to describe
miliary dermatitis should be considered the result of
clinically similar lesions initiated by a wide variety of skin
hypersensitivity to fleas until proven otherwise. Other
diseases. Histopathology readily differentiates allergic
parasitic infestations capable of inducing allergic miliary
 miliary dermatitis from other feline crusting skin diseases.
dermatitis include cheyletiellosis, otodectic acariasis,
 Feline allrgic miliary dermatitis may be due to hyper-
rombiculiasis, pediculosis, and superfcial demodicosis 
sensitivity to ectoparasites (especially fleas), atopic
due to Demodex gatoi.
Ulcerative and crusting diseases of the epidermis
119
Feline allergic miliary dermatitis is more often palpable
present. Pruritus with attendant self-trauma leads to
rather than visible in cats with intact haircoats. Multiple,
excoriation, and increased erythema and crusting. Self-
discrete, erythematous papules with adherent red-brown
traumatic alopecia is seen in severe cases, and results in
crusts are present. The crusted papule seen in feline
increased visibility of miliary lesions. Somewhat bilaterally
allergic miliary dermatitis is a primary lesion and not
symmetric localization of lesions to the neck, dorsum, or
the result of self-trauma. Pruritus is variable but usually
tail base is noted in cats with flea allergy dermatitis.
Lesions may be generalized in severe cases. Allergic miliary
dermatitis affecting predominantly the face and neck may
be the initial or only sign of food hypersensitivity in cats.
Breed, age, or sex predilections have not been noted.
However, predilections may match those of the initiating
underlying allergic skin disease. Clinical differential
diagnoses include the rare, nonallergic causes of similar
miliary lesions such as dermatophytosis, and bacterial
impetigo or superfcial folliculitis. Impression smears
demonstrating eosinophils support a tentative diagnosis
of feline allergic miliary dermatitis.
Biopsy site selection
Nontraumatized, recently erupted, crusted papules are
ideal for biopsy. If pruritus is extreme, special care should
be taken to avoid traumatized lesions. The region of the
dorsum of the neck between the shoulder blades is not
recommended as a biopsy site, as any manipulation or the
creation of inflammation in this region may lead to the
development of feline idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis
(see p. 130).
Histopathology (Figures 6.7 through 6.9)
Fig. 6.6 Severe feline allergic miliary dermatitis. Hair has been
clipped from the dorsal lumbosacral area to show confluent, ery-
Primary epidermal lesions consist of discrete foci of super-
thermatous, crusted papules.
fcial serocellular crusting, accompanied by a variable
Fig. 6.7 Feline allergic miliary der-
matitis. The moderately acanthotic
epidermis is covered by discrete sero-
cellular crusts.
120
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig-
6.8 Higher magnification of
feline allergic miliary dermatitis fea-
turing an eosinophilic vesicopustule.
degree of spongiosis of the subjacent epidermis and super-
ficial hair follicles. Serum may be abundant within the
crusts. There is accompanying erosion to focal ulceration.
The epidermis may be focally necrotic beneath the crust
and have a brightly eosinophilic, coagulated appearance.
Small numbers of intact neutrophils and eosinophils
accumulate within the subjacent or adjacent intact epi-
dermis or in superfcial follicular epithelium. Occa-
sionally, there is marked epidermal vesiculation with
eosinophilic exocytosis (eosinophilic vesicopustulation).
 Mild to moderate acanthosis, and mild spongiosis of the
adjacent epidermis and hair follicles may be present.
More severe lesions exhibit extensive spongiosis and
broader foci of erosion and ulceration. Dermal inflam-
 mation is superficial to mid-dermal, perivascular to inter-
stitial, and consists predominantly of eosinophils and
mast cells (see Chapter 9).
 The epidermal lesions of allrgic miliary dermatitis are
fairly characteristic; however, the diagnosis of allergic
miliary dermatitis is not etiologically specifc as many
allergic causes can produce this pattern. Severely spongi-
otic and eroded or ulcerated lesions of allergic miliary der-
 matitis may resemble those of eosinophilic plaque. Since
eosinophilic plaque and allergic miliary dermatitis both
 may be manifestations of allergic skin disease in the cat
(and can exist concurrently), histopathologic separation
of severe lesions of miliary dermatitis from lesions of
Fig. 6.9 Extensive ulceration and surface exudative crusting in
eosinophilic plaque may not be critical diagnostically.
feline allergic miliary dermatitis.
Eosinophilic plaque may have striking epidermal and
follicular mucinosis, which is generally not a feature
of miliary dermatitis. Superfcial pustular pyoderma
(impetigo) is rare in cats, but crusts formed from chronic
Ulcerative and crusting diseases of the epidermis
121
pustules may be reminiscent of miliary dermatitis. Miliary
Biopsy site selection
dermatitis features dermal eosinophilic  inflammation
See Chapter 5.
more prominently than most cases of impetigo, and also
can exhibit transepithelial migration of eosinophils, a rare
occurrence in pyoderma.
Histopathology (Figure 6.12)
Severe erosion or ulceration usually is seen in advanced
lesions of eosinophilic plaque. The ulcer bed is covered by
a crust that is brightly eosinophilic, due to the presence
FELINE EOSINOPHILIC PLAQUE
 of degenerating eosinophils. There is severe acantho-
Clinical features (Figures 6.10 and 6.11)
sis. Mild to severe spongiosis and/or mucinosis with
eosinophilic exocytosis also extends to the superficial
See Chapter 5.
follicular epithelium (see Chapter 5).
Fig. 6.10 Early feline eosinophilic plaque characterized by multi-
focal erythematous, erosive, alopecic plaques in a cat with allergic
Fig. 6.11 Severe feline eosinophilic plaque. Multiple, well-demar-
miliary dermatitis. (Photograph courtesy A.H. Werner; case material.
cated, ulcerated, erythermatous plaques are present on the ventral
abdomen of a cat with allergic miliary derrmatitis.
University of California, Davis.)
Fig. 6.12 Feline eosinophilic plaque.
Diffuse severe derrmal inflammation
lies beneath extensive ulceration and
exudation. Pallor of the remaining
superficial follicular epithelium is due
to spongiosis and mucinosis.
122
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 6.14 Acute feline mosquito bite hypersensitivity demonstrat-
Fig. 6.13 Feline rmosquito bite hypersensitivity. A striking, well-
ing focal swelling, erosion, and ulceration of the dorsal muzzle and
demarcated, erythermatous lesion with swelling, alopecia, erosion,
planum nasale accompanied by alopecia.
ulceration, and exudation has developed rapidly on the dorsal
muzzle. Note that the planurm nasale is affected.
been documented to occur at the exact site of previous
mosquito bites (Mason & Evans, 1991). It is not known
Dermal inflammation consists of variably intense,
if the same reaction pattern can be seen with the bite of
usually diffuse infltrations of eosinophils, which extend
other flying insects. The clinical and histologic features of
to the middle (follicular) dermis, but also commonly reach
 this syndrome were described before the etiology was
the superfcial panniculus (see Chapter 14).
known (Wilkinson & Bates, 1982).
The severe ulceration and depth of eosinophilic inflam
Similar to mosquito bite allergy in humans, allergy in
mation of some eosinophilic plaques may resemble
cats likely involves both immediate and delayed hyper-
feline mosquito bite hypersensitivity, feline indolent ulcer
sensitivity. Intradermal testing and Prausnitz-Kustner
(eosinophilic type), and feline herpesvirus ulcerative der-
(PK) testing (injecting serum from a putatively allergic
matitis (eosinophilic type). The diffuse prominent spon-
animal intradermally into a test animal and then per-
giosis and mucinosis of typical eosinophilic plaque are
forming intradermal skin testing at that specific site) have
not observed in these other conditions. Eosinophilic
confirmed immediate hypersensitivity in affected cats
degranulation, or flame fgure formation, is not observed
(Nagata & Ishida, 1997). Concomitant delayed hyper-
in eosinophilic plaque, as in the other diseases (see
sensitivity has been inferred by the clinical reaction
Chapter 14).
pattern (Nagata & Ishida, 1997).
Eosinophilic plaque is qualitatively similar to allergic
The syndrome follows the classic seasonal pattern of
miliary dermatitis, but is more dramatically spongiotic,
mosquito bite hypersensitivity in humans, characterized
mucinotic, inflamed, and ulcerated, and involves a larger
by development of lesions in the summer and regression
expanse of skin. Since eosinophilic plaque and miliary
during autumn (Wilson & King, 1999). Further the syn-
dermatitis both may be manifestations of allergic skin
drome has been seen predominantly in cats allowed out-
disease in the cat (and can exist concurrently), histopatho-
doors, and lesions resolve when srict indoor confnement 
logic separation may not be critical diagnostically
is instituted (Mason & Evans, 1991). Diagnosis of feline
mosquito bite hypersensitivity is highly regional; fre-
FELINE MOSQUITO
quency of occurrence varies from uncommon in most
areas to endemic in some locales. Highly variable fre-
BITE HYPERSENSITIVITY
quency of occurrence among different geographic regions
(Synonym: feline insect bite hypersensitivity)
Auo ieu sisaans suonenndod onbsou inoddns ieu
sd a a os o sds ssn
Clinical features (Figures 6.13 and 6.14)
 In humans, mosquitoes display preference for darker
skin over lighter skin, younger over older skin, warmer
 Feline mosquito bite hypersensitivity is a visually distinc-
over cooler skin, and scented over unscented victims
tive, relatively uncommon, predominantly facial, allergic
(Wilson & King, 1999). Similarly, preference for darker
skin disease associated with mosquito bites. Lesions have
hair coat or skin color occurs in cats (Nagata & Ishida,
Ulcerative and crusting diseases of the epidermis
123
1997). This color preference may determine site predilec-
tageous for the muzzle or pinnae of cats. Care should be
tions. In one study in Japan, many more cats displayed
taken not to damage underlying carilage if the pinna is
darker coat coloring on the pinnae than the muzzle; the
sampled. Periorbital lesions should not be sampled to
pinnae were affected more frequently (Nagata & Ishida,
avoid scarring at the lid margins.
1997). The affected body regions also are relatively less
haired and thus presumably are attractive targets for
Histopathology (Figure 6.15)
flying insects.
 The most common clinical feature of feline mosquito
There is moderate acanthosis with variable erosion, ulcer-
bite hypersensitivity may be miliary dermatitis affecting
ation, and exudation. Serum exudation and crusting may
both pinnae (Nagata & Ishida, 1997). However, this clin-
be severe. The intact epidermis and superficial hair folli-
ical presentation is less visually distinctive, and clinicians
 cles are acanthotic and mildly spongiotic. Epidermal and
are less likely to biopsy pinnae. A partially symmetrical,
follicular mucinosis rarely is observed. The dermis has
erythematous facial eruption with papules and crusting
severe eosinophilic  inflammation; eosinophils often
may precede the more severe and characteristic lesions of
degranulate to form flame figures, sometimes within fol-
rapidly progressive, strikingly well-demarcated, bilater-
licular walls, or rarely, lumens (see Chapter 14).
ally symmetric facial swelling, alopecia, erosion, ulcera-
Differential diagnoses for the ulcerative lesions of feline
tion, and exudation (Ihrke & Gross, 1995). Fistulation
mosquito bite hypersensitivity, occurring in the context
may develop. Hyperpigmentation or hypopigmentation
 of eosinophilic dermatitis, include eosinophilic plaque,
may be sequela to active disease, and frm, hyperpig-
eosinophilic indolent ulcer, and feline herpesvirus ulcera-
mented nodules may be present in chronic cases. The
tive dermatitis (eosinophilic type). Eosinophilic plaque
planum nasale, periorbital region, and pinnae may be
features more profound spongiosis and mucinosis of
affected. Disease may be more widespread, and may affect
intact epidermis and superfcial hair follicles; indolent
the flexor surfaces of the carpi and the junction of
pawpads and adjacent skin (Power & Ihrke, 1995). Bilat-
eral symmetry is marked.
 Regional lymphadenopathy is common. Pruritus usu-
ally is moderate, but may be severe. Occurrence of the
disease coincides with the mosquito season of the region,
and lesions may increase in severity over subsequent years
of exposure.
 Short-coated, free-roaming cats seem to be predisposed,
which probably correlates with increased opportunity for
exposure and easier mosquito access to the skin of short-
haired animals (Nagata & Ishida, 1997). Age or sex
predilections have not been noted.
Clinical differential diagnoses for the milder papular
and crusting form of pinnal and facially-oriented der-
matitis mirror those of feline allergic miliary dermatitis
(see p. 118). More severe, classical mosquito bite hyper-
sensitivity affecting the muzzle and pinnae is visually
highly distinctive. The major clinical differential diagno-
sis is feline herpesvirus ulcerative dermatitis (see p. 124).
Some cases may resemble pemphigus foliaceus or squa-
mous cell carcinoma. Histopathology will often suggest
the diagnosis, but definitive diagnosis is based on the res
olution of clinical signs following elimination of exposure
to mosquitoes.
Biopsy site selection
Multiple specimens should be taken from affected areas.
Because lesions are mostly confined to sparsely haired,
highly vascular facial areas that bleed easily and readily
show scars, small specimens should be procured carefully.
Fig. 6.15 Feline mosquito bite hypersensitivity demonstrating
Four millimeter biopsy punches are cosmetically advan-
severe ulceration and exudation above intense dermal inflarmmation.
124
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 6.16 Feline herpesvirus ulcerative dermatitis. Ulcers covered
by an adherent thick crust are present on the dorsal muzzle. Note
Fig. 6.17 View of the cat in Fig. 6.16 with adherent crust rermoved.
that the planurm nasale is affected. (Photograph courtesy C.A. Out-
(Photograph courtesy C.A. Outerbridge; case material University of
erbridge; case material University of California, Davis.)
California, Davis.)
ulcer often has eosinophilic degranulation in or just
hypothesized as possible triggers in eight of ten cats eval-
beneath the ulcer bed. Herpesvirus ulcerative dermatitis
uated (Hargis et al., 1999). Although skin disease as-
may be indistinguishable from mosquito bite hypersensi-
sociated with herpesvirus infection has been reported
tivity if inclusion bodies cannot be identifed. These cases
previously, this syndrome is distinct in that lesions are
 may require clinical differentiation or immunohistochem-
focal, seen predominantly on the face, and are usually
ical or polymerase chain reaction (PCR) detection of viral
characterized by marked tissue eosinophilia (Hargis et al.,
infection.
1999).
 Clinical lesions are striking, but vary greatly in sever-
ity. The disease is most commonly characterized by
FELINE HERPESVIRUS
erosion and ulceration of the face. Erythema, swelling.
ULCERATIVE DERMATITIS
exudation, and erosion or ulceration occur to variable
Clinical features (Figures 6.16 and 6.17)
degrees. Adherent crusts may mat the haircoat. Vesicles
have been reported (Hargis & Ginn, 1999). The dorsal
 Feline herpesvirus ulcerative dermatosis is an uncommon,
and lateral muzzle, and the periorbital regions most com-
predominantly facial feline skin disease caused by her-
monly are involved. The planum nasale may be affected.
pesvirus infection. Testing by polymerase chain reaction
  x  siin p sd  
(PCR) and DNA sequencing recently showed that the
metric facial lesions mimicking autoimmune skin disease.
virus recovered from cats with this facial skin disease was
Although most cats have lesions confned to the face,
indistinguishable from feline herpesvirus 1 (Hargis et al.,
other body regions including the distal extremities and the
1999). Feline herpesvirus 1 is known to cause upper res-
trunk may be affected in some cases. Lesions on the distal
piratory tract disease, including rhinotracheitis and con-
forelegs may reflect direct contact during grooming of the
junctivitis. Similar to other species, feline herpesvirus 1 is
face.
believed to establish latency in the trigeminal ganglia
 Regional lymphadenopathy may be seen. Lesions may
(Hargis et al., 1999). Affected cats may have a history of
be painful or pruritic. One of ten cats initially reported
upper respiratory disease and/or show chronic signs such
 exhibited coexistent proliferative and ulcerative stomati-
as sneezing or excess tearing. Both stress and immuno-
tis (Hargis et al., 1999).
suppression commonly have been implicated as triggers 
The age range of cats reported is between 4 months and
for herpesvirus infection. Associations with feline
16 years, with an average age of 4.5 years. Sex or breed
leukemia virus (FeLV) or feline immunodefciency virus
 predilections were not noted (Hargis et al., 1999).
(FIV) infection were not noted, although preceding
 Clinical differential diagnoses include mosquito bite
glucocorticoid therapy and environmental stresses were
hypersensitivity, food allergy with facial predominance,
Ulcerative and crusting diseases of the epidermis
125
pemphigus foliaceus, and neoplasia such as squamous cell
cally advantageous for the muzzle of cats. Periorbital
carcinoma. Previously, cats with feline herpesvirus ulcer-
lesions should not be sampled to avoid scarring at the lid
ative dermatitis may have been misdiagnosed as having
margins.
mosquito bite hypersensitivity or other eosinophilic feline
skin diseases. Exacerbation of lesions following gluco-
Histopathology (Figures 6.18 through 6.20)
corticoid therapy due to erroneous diagnosis may, in fact,
be an important clue as to the true etiology.
Severe necrosis and ulceration of the epidermis with
extension of necrosis into the underlying dermis typifes
feline herpesvirus ulcerative dermatitis. There is gener-
Biopsy site selection
ally massive exudation to form large superficial crusts.
Both nonulcerated erythematous lesions and ulcers should
The epidermis adjacent to the ulcer is acanthotic. There
be sampled. Four millimeter biopsy punches are cosmeti-
may be severe spongiosis, and occasionally superficial
Fig. 6.18 Feline herpesvirus ulcerative
dermatitis featuring a large, deep ulcer
with extensive crusting.
6.19 Higher magnification of
feline herpesvirus ulcerative dermatitis.
Eosinophils are abundant within the
ulcer bed; note necrosis and degenera-
tion of marginal epitheliurm.
126
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 6.20 Higher magnification of feline
herpesvirus ulcerative dermatitis. Note
intranuclear inclusions (arrow) within
epithelial island in sea of necrosis.
vesiculation is seen. Necrosis and spongiosis extend
Immunohistochemistry for feline herpesvirus is also com-
into superficial follicles, often to the level of the isthmus.
mercially available, but is not as sensitive as PCR.
 Intact follicular infundibular epithelium is hyperplastic.
The dermis is intensely and diffusely inflamed, usually
Necrotic epithelium is brightly eosinophilic and coagu-
with eosinophils. Occasionally, neutrophils predominate.
lated. Eosinophils often migrate into necrotic epithelium
There may be foci of eosinophilic degranulation (flame
 of the follicular wall and degranulate there. This may
fgures) within the dermis (see Chapter 14).
result in linear follicular ‘casts’ surrounding central
Differential diagnoses for the ulcerative lesions of
hairs.
eosinophilic feline herpesvirus dermatitis in which in-
Intranuclear inclusion bodies may not be present in
clusion bodies are not recognized include eosinophilic
 all cases. These are best identifed in intact epithelium
plaque, mosquito bite hypersensitivity, and eosinophilic
immediately adjacent to foci of necrosis, including
indolent ulcer. Eosinophilic plaque features more pro-
within superficial hair follicles. In foci of deeper necrosis,
found spongiosis and mucinosis of intact epidermis
inclusions may be striking within sebaceous glands. Inclu-
and superficial hair follicles. Indolent ulcer often has
sions in these glands are easy to identify as they are
eosinophilic degranulation in or just beneath the ulcer
brought into relief by the highly contrasting, pale cyto-
bed, a feature not found in herpesvirus ulcerative der-
plasm of the affected sebocytes. Islands of intact,
matitis. Herpesvirus ulcerative dermatitis may be in-
inclusion-bearing adnexal epithelial cells within a sea of
distinguishable from mosquito bite hypersensitiviry if
necrosis may be observed. Inclusions are lightly basophilic
 inclusion bodies cannot be identified. These cases may
to amphophilic and have a smudged or homogenous
require clinical differentiation or immunohistochemical
 appearance. There is margination of nuclear chromatin.
or PCR detection of viral infection.
Electron microscopic examination revealed virions com-
Differential  diagnoses  for  neutrophilic  herpesvirus
patible with herpesvirus within inclusions (Hargis et al.
ulcerative dermatitis are few. The inflammatory pattern
1999).
could be indicative of chronic bacterial infection or
Since herpesvirus inclusion bodies may be difficult to
trauma with infection. Inclusion bodies allow definitive
identify with routine histopathology, testing by PCR
diagnosis; if these are absent, correlation with clinical
may be useful (Hargis et al., 1999; Suchy et al., 2000);
fndings, immunostaining, or testing by PCR may be
however access to this test may be limited in some areas.
required. The lesions of feline cowpox virus infection are
 Polymerase chain reaction testing targeting the thymidine
superficially similar to those of neutrophilic herpesvirus
kinase gene is positive for feline herpesvirus 1 in fortu-
ulcerative dermatitis, particularly on low power exami-
itous samples. DNA sequencing indicated a polymerase
nation. The presence of typical inclusion bodies of
gene identical to feline herpesvirus 1 (Hargis et al., 1999).
poxvirus infection are diagnostic.
Ulcerative and crusting diseases of the epidermis
127
Fig. 6.23 Closer view of the cat in Fig. 6.21. Disseminated ulcer
Fig. 6.21 Feline cowpox virus infection. Ulcers are visible on the
ated plaques affect the groin and ventral abdomen. (Photograph
face, tip of the pinna, and in the groin. {Photograph courtesy
courtesy J. Declercq.)
J. Declercq.)
rodents and presumably receive bite wounds (Bennett
et al., 1998). Summer and autumn seasonal occurrence is
especially marked in the United Kingdom (Guaguere &
Declercq, 2000). Cowpox is a rare zoonosis that can
cause severe systemic illness including death (Bennett
et al., 1998).
Cutaneous clinical signs in the cat include an initial
primary lesion, usually an ulcerating, erythematous,
crusted macule or plaque that occurs most frequently on
 the head, neck or forelegs. Secondary lesions develop
within 10 days following viremia, and include dissemi-
nated macules, papules, and nodules (Guaguere &
 Declercq, 2000). Ulcers of the mouth and tongue develop
in a minority of cats (Guaguere & Declercq, 2000). Sec-
 ondary bacterial infection may occur. Systemic signs can
include pyrexia, inappetence, and depression (Bennett
Fig. 6.22 Closer view of the cat in Fig. 6.21. Ulcerated plaques
et al., 1998). Breed, age, or sex predilections have not
affect the dorsal muzzle, planum nasale, philtrum, and tip of the
been reported (Bennett et al., 1998).
pinna. (Photograph courtesy J. Declercq.)
Clinical differential diagnoses include bacterial and
fungal infections, and neoplasia such as mast cell tumors,
lymphoma, or feline progressive dendritic cell histiocyto-
sis (see Chapter 35). Impression smears of ulcerated
FELINE COWPOX VIRUS INFECTION
lesions may reveal intracytoplasmic eosinophilic inclusion
bodies (Guaguere & Declercq, 2000); histopathology is
Clinical features (Figures 6.21 through 6.23)
generally diagnostic. Viral isolation may be performed
Feline cowpox virus infection is an uncommon to rare
on dried crusts, but this test is available only in speci-
regional viral dermatosis caused by the cowpox poxvirus
alized laboratories. Electron microscopy also may be
(Bennett et al., 1998). This disease is diagnosed most com-
confrmative.
monly in the United Kingdom, but has been reported in
The Netherlands, Belgium, Austria, Germany, Italy, and
Biopsy site selection
France (Guaguere & Declercq, 2000). The disease is very
rare in North America. Reservoir hosts in Europe include
Biopsy specimens should be obtained from within the
voles, wood mice, ground squirrels, and gerbils (Bennett 
margins of recent lesions (Guaguere & Declercq, 2000).
et al., 1998). Consequently, feline cowpox virus infection
Early, intact lesions are more likely to yield a defnitive
is seen predominantly in rural outdoor cats that hunt
diagnosis.
128
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 6.24 Severe ulceration and serocellular exudation of feline
Fig. 6.25 Higher magnification of feline cowpox virus infection.
cowpox virus infection. Inclusion bodies are in a hair follicle at the
base of the ulcer (arrow). (Case rmaterial courtesy J. Declercq.)
follicle at center. (Case material courtesy J. Declercq.)
Histopathology (Figures 6.24 and 6.25)
matitis, particularly on lower magnification. The presence
of typical inclusion bodies of poxvirus infection is
Feline cowpox infection is characterized by severe ulcer-
diagnostic.
ation. There is moderate to severe serocellular crusting.
Ballooning degeneration of keratinocytes affects the adja-
cent intact epidermis and superficial hair folicles. There
FELINE INDOLENT ULCER
eosinophilic inclusions of variable size (type A inclusion
(Synonyms: feline eosinophilic ulcer, rodent ulcer)
bodies). These vary from round to elongated and even
angular, and have a somewhat refractile staining quality.
Clinical features (Figures 6.26 and 6.27)
Ballooning leads to frank necrosis of epidermal and super-
ficial follicular epithelium accompanied by infltration of
Feline indolent ulcer is a common feline syndrome or
neutrophils. Necrotic tissue, including within surface
reaction pattern of uncertain etiology. An underlying
exudate, may contain ghosts of inclusion bodies.
allergic hypersensitivity is suspected frequently, but is less
The dermis has neutrophilic inflammation, accom-
commonly documented. Flea allergy dermatitis, atopic
panied by macrophages, lymphocytes and scattered
dermatitis, and food allergy have been linked to the devel-
eosinophils. Inflammation extends to the deep dermis,
opment of feline indolent ulcer. Further feline indolent
and in severely ulcerated lesions, to the panniculus.
ulcers have responded to flea control, allergen specific
 The lesions of feline cowpox virus infection are super-
immunotherapy, and elimination diets. Five of eight cats
ficially similar to those of feline herpesvirus ulcerative der-
with experimentally-induced flea allergy dermatitis devel-
Ulcerative and crusting diseases of the epidermis
129
Well-demarcated, concave ulcers with an elevated
margin develop from focal areas of intense erythema. The
elevated margins are frm and have an unusual orange-tan
color, while the central ulcerated area is granular and
colored whitish-yellow or salmon. Lesions vary in size
from 2mm to 5cm. The most common site is the junc-
ture of the skin and mucous membrane of the upper lip
apposing the lower canine tooth, just lateral to the
philtrum. Lesions usually are solitary and unilateral, but
may be bilateral. They occasionally become confluent to
involve most of the upper lip. Rarely, similar lesions may
develop at other sites, especially the hard palate. Palatine
lesions may cause tissue desruction with arteriole damage
leading to hemorrhage (Mason & Burton, 2000). One
 author (T.L.G.) has seen histologically identical interdig-
ital lesions of one foot, occurring concurrently with clas-
sical lip ulceration.
Indolent ulcers usually are asymptomatic, although
regional lymphadenopathy may be present. Malignant
transformation to squamous cell carcinoma has been
noted (Scott et al., 2001), but the authors have not
observed this phenomenon. Breed or age predilections
Fig. 6.26 Feline indolent ulcer. A well-demarcated, dish-like ulcer
have not been reported. Females may be at increased risk
with an elevated margin is present at the mucocutaneous junction of
(Scott et al., 2001).
the upper lip just lateral to the philtrum.
Although indolent ulcers are usually visually distinc-
tive, clinical differential diagnoses should include neo-
plasms such as squamous cell carcinoma or mast cell
tumor, as well as ulcers associated with underlying fungal
granulomas. Since malignant tumors or fungal granulo-
mas may mimic indolent ulcers, skin biopsy is indicated
for clinically atypical lesions.
 Biopsy site selection
 Deep punch biopsy is recommended in order to include
deep tissue beneath the ulcer. General anesthesia usually
is advisable since hemostasis may be problematic in this
location.
Histopathology (Figure 6.28)
Sequential sampling of feline indolent ulcers from a
Fig. 6.27 Severe feline indolent ulcer. Bilateral ulcers have become
related group of specific pathogen-free cats showed vari-
confluent to involve most of the upper lip.
ation in the histopathologic appearance over time, as sub-
sequently reported (Power & Ihrke, 1995). Acute lesions
m pnrn irs n Aio are (s  oi t)
oped feline indolent ulcers of the lip in one recent study
minimal underlying necrosis. Chronic lesions exhibit
(Colombini et al., 2001). Feline indolent ulcers were
severe ulceration of the epidermis or mucosa with under-
shown to commonly coexist with feline eosinophilic gran-
lying necrosis and eosinophilic degranulation. The intact
uloma in a closed, inbred colony of cats (Power & Ihrke,
epidermis is hyperplastic at all stages, and is variably
1995). Those cats had not had exposure to fleas or other 
 spongiotic. Dermal inflammation is deep and eosinophil-
ectoparasites, and could not be documented with either 
rich (see Chapter 14).
atopic dermatitis or food allrgy by intradermal skin
 Random specimens from cats affected with classical
testing and elimination diets.
upper lip ulcers are similar to those of the specifc
130
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 6.29 Feline idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis in a kitten. An
oval, well demarcated ulcer developed rapidly between the shoulder
blades.
being very rare in cats. Idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis is
much less inflamed than indolent ulcer.
Fig. 6.28 Feline indolent ulcer. Severe exudation, ulceration, and
necrosis overlie deep inflarmmation.
FELINE IDIOPATHIC
ULCERATIVE DERMATOSIS
(Synonym: chronic ulcerative dermatitis with linear
pathogen-free cats observed. Field cases demonstrate
subepidermal fbrosis)
similar severe ulceration and exudation as well as deep
and severe eosinophilic inflammation (see Chapter 14).
Clinical features (Figures 6.29 and 6.30)
Superficial eosinophilic degranulation may occur, creating
a brightly eosinophilic band in the ulcer bed. Neutrophilic
Feline idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis is an uncommon
inflammation reportedly may predominate (Colombini
syndrome of unknown etiology. A hypersensitivity reac-
et al., 2001); however this variation is extremely rare in the
tion to subcutaneously injected medication or vaccine has
authors’ experience; only a single case has been observed.
been proposed because of site predilection for the region
Differential diagnoses for eosinophilic indolent ulcers
between the scapulae and adjacent dorsal neck, which are
include herpesvirus ulcerative dermatitis (eosinophilic
popular injection sites in cats (Mason & Rosser, 1990).
type), mosquito bite hypersensitivity, or severely ulcerated
However, the syndrome has been seen in cats that appar-
eosinophilic plaque. Eosinophilic plaque features promi-
ently have never received injections in these locations. The
 nent epidermal and follicular spongiosis and mucinosis
dorsal neck of cats is a region with unusually dense aggre-
that are absent in indolent ulcers. Indolent ulcers gener-
gations of sensory nerves. It is tempting to speculate that
ally exhibit eosinophilic degranulation within or beneath
overstimulation of these nerve endings due to multiple
ulcer beds, rather than the deeper often folliculocentric
and various causes may initiate this syndrome. A behav-
degranulation observed with mosquito bite hypersensitiv-
ioral component may be present.
ity or herpesvirus ulcerative dermatitis (see Chapter 14);
The prime clinical feature is a focal area of alopecia
herpesvirus inclusions also may allow differentiation.
containing a well-demarcated ulcer with adherent
Neutrophilic indolent ulcers resemble idiopathic ulcera-
necrotic debris. Peripheral swelling and erythema may be
tive dermatosis or pyotraumatic dermatitis, the latter
present. Chronic lesions exhibit a frm elevated border.
Ulcerative and crusting diseases of the epidermis
131
Lesions usually are solitary and range from 2 to 5 cm in
diameter. The site is highly characteristic; the lesions are
is visually highly distinctive. A thermal or chemical burn
seen almost exclusively on the dorsal thoracic midline
 or other physical trauma at this site might appear similar.
between the scapulae, or on the dorsal neck.
 The presence of pain or pruritus is variable and dif-
Biopsy site selection
cult to determine. Cats intermittently maniacally self-
traumatize  the lesion.  Regional lymphadenopathy
is
Since surgical ablation may be curative, complete and
noted occasionally, but systemic signs are not present.
deep resection always should be considered. Wedge
Age, breed, or sex predilections have not been noted.
biopsy is preferred over punch biopsy since wedge speci-
mens obtained from the margins of ulcers will more easily
include both the ulcer and adjacent skin. Subcutaneous
tissue should be included since a reaction to vaccine or
other subcutaneously injected medications has been
hypothesized.
Histopathology (Figures 6.31 and 6.32)
The epidermis is extensively ulcerated, and necrosis
extends to the superficial dermis. The intact epidermis at
the borders of the ulcer is acanthotic. The necrotic dermis
paq rn au pue rasuereadde panenngeos e aaey keu
often contains a layer of devitalized epidermal or super-
ficial dermal tissue embedded with degenerating neu-
trophils. Characteristically, the adjacent and subjacent
viable dermis is minimally inflamed. Low numbers of neu-
trophils and a few mixed mononuclear cells may be
present. Eosinophils are rare.
There may be subepidermal superfcial and laminar
fbrosis in lesions of several months' duration. This fbro-
sis extends as a band beneath the adjacent acanthotic epi-
Fig. 6.30 Closer view of Fig. 6.29. The ulcerated lesion is alopecic,
dermis. Subepidermal laminar (linear) fbrosis was frst
erythematous, and crusted.
reported as a consistent feature of idiopathic ulcerative
Fig. 6.31 Feline idiopathic ulcerative
derrmatosis. Extensive ulceration is
accompanied by prominent exudative
crusting.
132
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 6.32 Higher magnification of
feline idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis.
Note deep extension of necrosis to the
level of the isthrmus of hair follicles.
dermatosis (Scott, 1990), but those cats had longstanding
lesions of 6 months to a year. Subepidermal laminar fbro-
sis has not been observed in earlier lesions.
 Idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis should be differenti-
ated from pyotraumatic dermatitis (very rare in cats), or
the neutrophilic form of indolent ulcer. In general, the
 inflammation of idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis is milder
 that these. Clinical differentiation may be required.
CANINE PYODERMA GANGRENOSUM
Clinical features (Figures 6.33 and 6.34)
Canine pyoderma gangrenosum is a very rare, destructive,
idiopathic sterile inflammatory disease that has been
Fig. 6.33 Canine pyoderma gangrenosum in a Boxer Multifocal,
observed rarely in dogs. It is characterized by painful pus-
moderately well-circumscribed ulcerated lesions are present on the
tules or nodules that become necrotic, ulcerate, and drain.
trunk. (Photograph courtesy K. Fostvedt.)
Highly similar clinical and histopathologic features,
including association with underlying systemic disease,
are shared between canine and human pyoderma
erative disorders (Wolff & Stingl, 2003; Crowson et al.
gangrenosum.
2003). More rarely, pyoderma gangrenosum in humans
The etiopathogenesis of pyoderma gangrenosum is
has been linked with laparotomy, other surgery, insect
unknown in both the dog and in humans. Growing evi-
bites, and various drugs including potassium iodide
 dence in human medicine suggests a disturbance of cellu-
(Wolff & Stingl, 2003). Canine pyoderma gangrenosum
lar immune function, including impaired neutrophil
has been tentatively and putatively associated with ovar-
function (Wolff & Stingl, 2003). Response to a variety of
iohysterectomy in an obese dog, myelogenous leukemia,
immunomodulatory and immunosuppressive treatments
and to presumptive emerging lymphoma. The cause has
lends credence to this theory. In humans, pyoderma gan-
not been discovered in other cases.
grenosum may either be idiopathic and confned to the
Clinical features include multifocal, moderately well-
skin (50-60% of cases) or associated with underlying sys-
circumscribed, large, dark, boggy subepidermal pustules
temic disease such as Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis,
and nodules that ulcerate, fstulate, and drain seropuru-
polyarthritis, monoclonal gammopathy, and myeloprolif-
lent exudate. Well-defined ulcers centralize on less distinct
Ulcerative and crusting diseases of the epidermis
133
nodules. Lesions may be indolent or gradually progres-
sive, and have been predominantly truncal in distribution.
Affected dogs may be febrile and have malaise.
Signalment predilections have not been noted to date in
the small number of cases seen. In humans, autosomal
 dominant inheritance has been described in some patients
(Wolff & Stingl, 2003).
Clinical differential diagnoses include infectious ulcer-
ative skin disease, such as deep bacterial foliculitis and
furunculosis, deep fungal infection, and lesions caused by
necrotoxins such as the venom of brown recluse spiders.
Reactive histiocytosis may present with similar crateri-
form ulcers. Canine pyoderma gangrenosum is diagnosed
Fig. 6.34 Closer view of Fig. 6.33. Lesions ulcerate, fistulate, and
Fig. 6.35 Canine pyoderma gangrenosum demonstrating early
drain seropurulent exudate. (Photograph courtesy K. Fostvedt.)
rupture of a large derrmal pustule to form an ulcer.
Fig. 6.36 Large crateriforrm ulcer
ablating the dermis in an advanced
lesion of canine pyoderma gangreno-
sum. Note inflamed fat of the pannicu-
lus in the ulcer bed.
134
Diseases of the epidermis
jacent panniculus frequently. A few eosinophils, lympho-
cytes, and macrophages are intermingled. There may be
pronounced hemorrhage, edema, and fbrin exudation.
The adjacent epidermis is acanthotic and may be spongi-
otic. Early lesions may be predominantly large, loosely
 organized dermal pustules with hemorrhage.
The crateriform ulcers of pyoderma gangrenosum are
unique, and highly characteristic. Secondary deep ulcera-
tion and inflammation due to a spider bite might be
considered as a differential diagnosis for pyoderma gan-
grenosum (see Chapter 14). Spider bite reactions are
usually solitary, whereas lesions of pyoderma gangreno-
sum are multicentric in distribution. Early lesions may be
very diffcult to differentiate from bacterial pyoderma.
Clinical differentiation may be important, including poor
response to prolonged antibiotic therapy.
REFERENCES
Pyotraumatic Dermatitis
Reinke, S.1., Stannard, A.A., Ihrke, PJ. et al. (1987) Histopatho-
logic features of pyotraumatic dermatitis. J Am Vet Med Assoc
190, 57-60.
Feline Allergic Miliary Dermatitis
Roosje, PJ. & Willemse, I. (1995) Cytophilic antibodies in cats
with miliary dermaitis and eosinophilic plaques: passive
transfer of immediate-type hypersensitivity. Vet Quart 17,
66-9.
Fig. 6.37 Higher magnification of ulcer of canine pyoderma gan-
grenosum. Note intense neutrophilic inflammation and exudation.
Feline Eosinophilic Plaque
See Chapter 5.
by compatible clinical features, supportive histopathol-
Feline Mosquito Bite Hypersensitivity
ogy plus ruling out ulcerative disease of infectious etiol-
Ihrke, PJ. & Gross, T.L. (1995) Clinico-pathologic conferences
ogy. Links to underlying systemic disease in the majority
a anisuasiay anq ombsou aal iz aoona u
Dermatol 5, 33-6.
of dogs seen to date dictates a thorough medical evalua-
Mason, K.V. & Evans, A
A.G. (1991) Mosquito bite-caused
tion in all suspected cases of pyoderma gangrenosum.
eosinophilic dermatitis in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 198,
2086-8.
Biopsy site selection
Nagata, M. & Ishida, T. (1997) Cutaneous reactivity to mos-
quito bites and its antigens in cats. Vet Dermatol 8, 19-26.
 Multiple biopsy specimens should be taken from ulcerated
Power, H.T. & Ihrke, PJ. (1995) Selected feline eosinophilic skin
and intact nodules or pustules. Additionally, specimens 
diseases. Vet Clin North Am 25, 833-50.
should be obtained with sterile technique for aerobic and
Wilkinson, G.T. & Bates, M.J. (1982) A possible further clini-
anaerobic bacterial culture and fungal culture.
cal manifestation of the feline eosinophilic granuloma
complex. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20, 325-31.
Wilson, D.C. & King, L.E. (1999) Arthropod bites and stings.
Histopathology (Figures 6.35 through 6.37)
 In: Dermatology in General Medicine (eds I.W. Freedberg,
Microscopically, there are large crateriform ulcers that
A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & T.B.
Fitzpatrick), pp. 2685-95. McGraw-Hill, New York.
frequently penetrate to the deep dermis or panniculus.
The ulcer bed may be covered with a crust of necrotic
Feline Herpesvirus Ulcerative Dermatitis
debris and neutrophils. Massive infltrations of neu-
Hargis, A.M. & Ginn, PE. (1999) Feline herpesvirus 1-
trophils are present throughout the remaining dermis
associated facial and nasal dermatitis and stomatitis in
beneath and adjacent to the ulcer, and extend into the sub-
domestic cats. Vet Clin North Am 29, 1281-9.
Ulcerative and crusting diseases of the epidermis
135
Hargis, A.M., Ginn, P.E., Mansell, J.E.K.L. et al. (1999)
Guaguere & P. Prelaud), pp. 12.1-12.9. Blackwell Science,
Ulcerative facial and nasal dermatitis and stomatitis in cats
Oxford.
associated with feline herpesvirus 1. Vet Dermatol 10, 267-
Power, H.T. & Ihrke, PJ. (1995) Feline eosinophilic skin dis-
74.
eases. Vet Clin North Am 25, 833-50.
Suchy, A., Bauder, B., Gelbmann, W. et al. (2000) Diagnosis of
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller 6 Kirk's
feline herpesvirus infection by immunohistochemistry, poly-
Small Animal Dermatology,6th edn,pp. 1148-9, W.B. Saun-
merase chain reaction, and in situ hybridization. J Vet Diagn
ders, Philadelphia.
Invest 12, 186-91.
Feline Idiopathic Ulcerative Dermatosis
Feline Cowpox Virus Infection
Mason, K. & Rosser, E.J. (1990) Cutaneous drug eruptions. In:
Bennett, M., Gaskell, R.M. & Baxby, D. (1998) Feline poxvirus
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 1 (eds C. Von
infection. In: Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 2nd edn
Tscharner & R.E.W. Halliwell), p. 426-33. Bailliere Tindall,
(ed. C.E. Greene), pp. 110-1. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
London.
Guaguere, E. & Declercq, J. (2000) Viral dermatoses. In: A Prac-
Scott, D.W. (1990) An unusual ulcerative dermatitis associated
tical Guide to Feline Dermatology (eds E. Guaguere &
with linear subepidermal fibrosis in eight cats. Feline Pract 18,
P. Prelaud), pp. 7.1-7.2. Blackwell Science, Oxford.
8-11.
Feline Indolent Ulcer
Canine Pyoderma Gangrenosum
Colombini, S., Hodgin, E.C., Foil, C.S. et al. (2001) Induction
Crowson, A.N., Mihm, M.C. & Magro, C. (2003) Pyoderma
of feline fea allergy dermatitis and the incidence and
gangrenosum: a review. J Cut Pathol 30, 97-107.
histopathological characteristics of concurrent indolent lip
Wolff, K. & Stingl, G. (2003) Pyoderma gangrenosum. In: Fitz-
ulcers. Vet Dermatol 12, 155-61.
patrick's Dermatology in General Medicine, 6th edn (eds I.M.
Mason, K. & Burton, G. (2000) Eosinophilic granuloma
Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith
complex. In: A Practical Guide to Feline Dermatology (eds E.
& S.1. Katz), pp. 969-76. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 7
Hyperplastic diseases of the epidermis
Hyperplastic skin diseases are characterized by the pro-
lichenification and hyperpigmentation can be seen in
liferation of epidermal and follicular infundibular kera-
response to similar amounts of self-trauma.
tinocytes. Epithelial hyperplasia, or acanthosis, may be
Clinical history and pattern of distribution often are
due to internal factors (metabolic, hereditary) or external
helpful in differentiating amongst allergic skin diseases.
injury (self-trauma). Changes in the keratin layer may
Flea allergy dermatitis may be the most likely considera-
occur and in the case of chronic external trauma, it may
tion if the dorsal lumbosacral area, groin, and caudal
undergo transition from a normal basketweave appear-
thighs are most severely affected. If chronic hyperplastic
ance to the denser laminated or compact patterns, with
skin disease is most conspicuous on the head and distal
or without an increase in thickness (hyperkeratosis).
extremities, underlying atopic dermatitis or food allergy
The diseases of this chapter are those in which
should be suspected. Chronic allergic contact dermatitis,
hyperplasia is a primary and predominant pathologic
a rare disease, tends to involve the glabrous, exposed
feature. However, epidermal and follicular infundibular
areas such as the muzzle, groin, axillae, ventral inter
hyperplasia is a common and pervasive characteristic of
digital webs, and the perineum. The clinical differences
chronic skin diseases of all causes. Thus, in general, its
between allergic skin diseases blur with chronicity, since
diagnostic specifcity is limited. Differentiation among
the distribution pattern may become generalized.
hyperplastic dermatoses requires the presence of other
Breed and age predilections may aid in the clinical
distinguishing features.
differentiation of chronic hyperplastic dermatitis due
to allergy. The reader is referred to the specific sections
detailing allergic skin diseases (see Chapters 5 and 9).
CHRONIC HYPERPLASTIC DERMATITIS
Clinical features (Figures 7.1 and 7.2)
Biopsy site selection
Chronic hyperplastic dermatitis is seen primarily in the
 Biopsy site selection is not critical since clinical features
dog. Pruritus with attendant self-trauma is the unifying
of this histopathologic reaction pattern are uniform. Mul-
feature of many of the diseases characterized by chronic
tiple specimens should be procured.
hyperplastic  dermatitis  histopathologically.   Chronic
allergy is the most common cause. The most beneficial
Histopathology (Figure 7.3)
reason for skin biopsy of suspected chronic hyperplastic
dermatitis is to rule out other diseases with a more spe-
Chronic hyperplastic dermatitis, sometimes referred to as
cifc histopathologic appearance, such as occult neoplasia
the “dermatitis reaction', is a very common histopatho-
or endocrinopathy. Other chronic skin diseases such as
logic pattern in dermatopathology. Epidermal lesions of
pyoderma and cornifcation disorders, which frequently
hyperplastic dermatitis include moderate to severe ir-
have pruritus as a component, may exhibit features of
regular acanthosis as well as thickening of the follicular
hyperplastic dermatitis.
infundibulum. Scalloping of the lower epidermal and
Clinical changes in response to chronic self-trauma
outer follicular border may be present; in some cases this
include alopecia, lichenification, and hyperpigmentation.
 may signal accompanying Malassezia dermatitis (see p.
Crusting is a common additional feature. Secondary
142). There is often transformation of normal bas-
surface bacterial overgrowth or Malassezia dermatitis
ketweave keratin to compact keratin, and an overall
may complicate chronic hyperplastic dermatitis. Breed
increase in the keratin layer or hyperkeratosis, may occur.
and individual animal variation in the severity of lesions
 In hyperplastic dermatitis due to allergy there may be
is considerable, as dramatically different degrees of
-nu 'saoodu jo sisonxa pue sisonuods Auid
136
Hyperplastic diseases of the epidermis
137
Fig. 7.1 Chronic hyperplastic dermatitis in a dog with flea allergy
Fig. 7.2 Chronic hyperplastic dermatitis in the axillae of a dog
dermatitis. Lichenification, hyperpigmentation, and mottled ery-
with atopic dermatitis. Alopecia and lichenification alone are
thema are present in the perivulvar region and the adjacent ventral
indicative of chronicity in a dog without the genetic propensity to
abdomen. Note the cobblestone appearance of the lichenified, chron-
hyperpigment.
ically traumatized lesions.
Fig. 7.3 Chronic hyperplastic der-
matitis in a dog with flea allergy
derrmatitis. Irregular hyperplasia of the
epidermis is accompanied by focal mild
spongiosis at right.
trophils, or rarely eosinophils. This focal spongiosis and
matory infltrate is highly variable, both in cell type and
exocytosis may result in discrete parakeratotic scale with
severity. In chronic hyperplastic dermatitis of allergic
small, intermingled crusts of degenerated inflammatory
origin, suggestion of the specific allergic disease can some-
cells (parakeratotic scale/crusts). Variable erosion, as well
times be made based on the predominant types of inflam-
as discrete foci of superficial epidermal pustulation
matory cells observed (see Chapter 9). Hyperplastic
and crusting, also termed “impetiginization', may be
lesions of self-trauma also feature sebaceous hyperplasia
observed, and these lesions may be imbedded with
and apocrine dilatation. Enlarged and proliferative seba-
colonies of staphylococci.  Malassezia may colonize
ceous glands may be diffusely distributed in the inter-
the keratin layer and are often best discovered within
follicular dermis in severe cases. Squamous metaplasia of
follicular ostia.
sebaceous gland epithelium, which may leave only small
Dermal inflammation is perivascular to interstitial in
residual clusters of fully lipidized sebocytes in the centers
most cases of chronic hyperplastic dermatitis. The inflam-
of the lobules, is a frequent feature. Dilated apocrine
138
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 7.4 Multiple fibropruritic nodules in the dorsal lumbosacral
area of a dog with chronic flea allergy dermatitis. The affected area
Fig. 7.5 Closer view of the dog in Fig. 7.4. Some of the nodules
is partially clipped to enhance the visibility of the lesions.
are hyperpigmented while others are nonpigmented. The largest
nodule is ulcerated from self-traurma. The skin beneath the nodules
is uniformly hyperpigmented and lichenified.
glands are generally flled with secretory material and may
be lined by hyperplastic epithelium.
Many chronic dermatoses have some features of
risk for fbropruritic nodules) commonly present with
chronic hyperplastic dermatitis and thus this reaction
atypically severe flea allergy dermatitis. In addition,
pattern is not highly specific. Often, chronic hyperplastic
German Shepherd Dogs as well as some retriever breeds
dermatitis is a diagnosis of exclusion that is rendered
may be predisposed to develop excessive fbroblastic
when other diagnoses have been eliminated. The pathol-
responses to inflammation or trauma. Perhaps the devel-
- e uo Aq nsn sn ys nou pos isio
opment of fbropruritic nodules requires the combination
nosis of ‘chronic nonspecific dermatitis'. In fact, the
of the propensity for severe flea allergy dermatitis plus the
elimination of other causes for the clinical lesions in ques-
tendency to develop an exuberant fibroblastic response.
 tion is a specifc function and is diagnostically important
 Solitary or multiple, frm, sessile or pedunculated,
in these cases.
alopecic nodules develop, which vary in size from 0.5
to 2cm in diameter. Individual nodules may be non-
pigmented and erythematous, or hyperpigmented.
FIBROPRURITIC NODULES
Hyperpigmented nodules may be visually striking if the 
Clinical features (Figures 7.4 and 7.5)
surrounding skin remains normally pigmented. Erosions
and ulcers may affect larger lesions. As many as 50
Fibropruritic nodules are uncommon lesions seen in con-
nodules may be seen in long-standing cases. Smaller
junction with chronic fea allergy dermatitis and self-
lesions may be subtle and may go unnoticed, especially if
 trauma. These lesions appear to be specifc for flea allergy
 alopecia is not complete. Fibropruritic nodules are located
dermatitis and have not been seen in conjunction with
predominately in the bilaterally symmetrical, alopecic
other allergic skin diseases of dogs.
wedge seen in the dorsal lumbosacral area of dogs with
The etiology of fbropruritic nodules is not known. It
long-standing flea allergy dermatitis.
rail au st Aaisuasiadaq iel aeoads o ouduai si
Fibropruritic nodules may be more common in German
for the initiation of these lesions, as eosinophils frequently
Shepherd Dogs, Labrador Retrievers, Golden Retrievers,
are found in surface cytological preparations. In the ex-
and their related crossbreeds. An informal case popula-
perience of one author (P.J.I.), German Shepherd Dogs and
tion survey performed recently by one author (E.J.W.)
Golden Retrievers (two breeds believed to be at increased
indicated that eight of 12 affected dogs fitted into these
Hyperplastic diseases of the epidermis
139
Fig. 7.6 Fibropruritic nodule in a
dog with flea allergy derrmatitis. Note
irregular epidermal  hyperplasia  and
subjacent fibrosis.
breed categories. Fibropruritic nodules are seen most
commonly in dogs greater than 8 years of age. Sex
predilections have not been noted.
 Clinical differential diagnoses are few, since the lesions
are visually characteristic. Cutaneous neoplasms should
be considered, paricularly in dogs of advancing age.
Nodular sebaceous hyperplasia and sebaceous adenomas
are the most likely differential diagnoses; melanocytic
neoplasia is a consideration for pigmented fbropruritic
nodules. Cytology performed on ulcerated lesions may
reveal eosinophils, which increases the likelihood of a
diagnosis of fbropruritic nodules. Skin biopsy is required
to confrm the diagnosis.
Biopsy site selection
Sample selection is not critical as long as lesions are not
severely ulcerated. Usually, wedge resection biopsy of an
entire nodule is performed for cosmetic purposes.
Histopathology (Figures 7.6 and 7.7)
Fibropruritic nodules protrude in a tumor-like fashion
above the surface of the skin. The epidermis is severely
hyperplastic and may be papillomatous. The keratin layer
is thickened and compact, as seen in other lesions of
chronic, severe self-trauma; parakeratosis may be present.
Ulceration and crusting may occur.
Dermal fbrosis is variable and may result in oblitera-
tion of adnexa. In general, coarse, thick bundles of
collagen proliferate haphazardly in the dermis, creating
Fig. 7.7 Higher magnification of Fig. 7.6 dermonstrating dense
a fbroma-like mass. A variation that is occasionally
fibrosis beneath acanthosis.
observed is characterized by prominent hyperplasia of
140
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 7.8 Early acral lick dermatitis on the foreleg of a Doberman
Fig. 7.9 Severe acral lick dermatitis on the foreleg of a Golden
Pinscher. The lesion is well demarcated, alopecic, and focally
Retriever. The crateriform ulcer has peripheral hyperpigmentation
and thickening. {Photograph courtesy H.T. Power; case material Uni-
ulcerated.
versity of California, Davis.)
smooth muscle, presumably derived from arrector pili
traumatic component to the syndrome and may be resist-
muscles, in addition to fbrosis. There may be moderate
ant to this suggestion.
vascularization. Inflammation within the collagenous
 sao isd pe (r) isd 
tissue is usually scant and mixed, but may include promi-
been postulated; organic triggers have been emphasized
nent neutrophils if there is ulceration. Mild accumulations
during the past decade (Scott et al., 2001). It has been rec-
of lymphocytes, macrophages, and plasma cells may be
ommended that organic triggers such as allrgy, bacterial
present just beneath the epidermis, and mild pigmentary
or fungal disease, demodicosis, previous trauma, and
incontinence may be evident. The adjacent intact (nonfi-
underlying joint disease be ruled out before entertaining
brotic) dermis has perivascular accumulations
of
psychogenic causes as the initiator (Scott et al., 2001).
eosinophils, mast cells, lymphocytes, and macrophages as
The authors believe that most, if not all, cases of acral
seen in flea allergy dermatitis (see Chapter 9).
lick dermatitis have a strong psychogenic component,
 The principal differential diagnosis is a fbroma of the
even if a putative organic trigger, acting as an inflamma-
dermis (see Chapter 27). A fbropruritic nodule tends to
 tory or psychic nidus, is identifed. In essence, individual
be less discrete than a fbroma and the epidermis is gen-
 animals may be predisposed to develop stereotypic behav-
erally more hyperplastic. Inflammation is not a feature of
ior in response to pruritus or pain. Boredom, separation
a nonulcerated fbroma but is typical for a fbropruritic
 anxiety, and obsessive-compulsive behavior all probably
nodule.
contribute to the genesis of a vicious itch-lick cycle.
Chronic inflammation created by traumatic furunculosis
ACRAL LICK DERMATITIS
probably also contributes to persistence. The success of
endorphin blockers in the treatment of this syndrome
(Synonym: lick granuloma)
 indicates that endogenous opiate release may encourage
habituation (White, 1990).
Clinical features (Figures 7.8 and 7.9)
Typical lesions are well-circumscribed, frm, alopecic
plaques. Lesions usually are solitary, oval, and vary in
Acral lick dermatitis is a relatively common syndrome in
diameter from 2 to 6cm. Adjacent lesions may merge to
the dog that is characterized by self-trauma to a focal
form larger foci with irregular outer contours. A central,
area, usually a dorsal distal extremity. This results in an
irregular crateriform ulcer with a scalloped, elevated
alopecic, frm, oval plaque. A subgroup of deep bacterial
border surrounded by a characteristic hyperpigmented
folliculitis and furunculosis, termed “fraumatic furuncu-
halo is present in active lesions. Surface exudate rarely is
losis', is common in acral lick dermatitis (see Chapter 17).
seen, since licking removes debris. In light coat-colored
It is the opinion of the authors that secondary deep bac-
dogs, peripheral salivary staining may be present. Sec-
terial folliculitis and furunculosis in acral lick dermatitis
ondary deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis is
is the direct result of self-trauma, which leads to follicu-
common, but may not be visually obvious. A hand lens is
lar rupture and hair displacement into the deep dermis
useful in identifying minute fistulous tracts indicative of
(traumatic furunculosis). Self-mutilation may be per-
secondary bacterial infection. The dorsal carpal and
formed in private. The owner may be unaware of any self-
metacarpal areas are the most common sites. Other sites
Hyperplastic diseases of the epidermis
141
include the cranial radial, metatarsal, and tibial regions.
Rarely, similar lesions may be created on the tail, stifle,
or hip.
Large, active, attention-demanding breeds such as the
Doberman Pinscher, Great Dane, German Shepherd Dog,
Labrador Retriever, and Irish Setter are at increased risk.
However, acral lick dermatitis may be seen in any breed
or in mixed breed dogs. Adult dogs over 3 years of age
are most commonly affected. Males are thought to be pre-
disposed (Scott et al., 2001).
Clinical differential diagnoses include neoplasms,
kerion dermatophytosis, focal bacterial furunculosis, and
other infectious granulomas. Lesions affecting the hip or
stile may grossly resemble pressure calluses, but calluses
should not be crateriform with distinctive hyperpig-
mented peripheral halos. Location of the lesion, breed,
and history of persistent licking also assist in differentia-
tion. Histopathology will aid in ruling out visually similar
diseases and determining if secondary deep pyoderma is
present.
Biopsy site selection
Punch biopsy specimens should be obtained from nonul-
cerated areas if possible. Care must be taken to obtain
deep dermal tissue (to investigate the possibility of sec-
ondary pyoderma) without damaging delicate underlying
structures of the distal extremities, such as flexor tendons,
blood vessels, or nerves.
Fig. 7.10 Acral lick dermatitis in a dog. Irregular hyperplasia of the
Histopathology (Figures 7.10 through 7.12)
epidermis and follicular infundibula is accompanied by dilatation of
apocrine sweat glands and periglandular inflammation; note
Compact hyperkeratosis and multifocal parakeratosis
compact hyperkeratosis.
accompany severe irregular acanthosis of epidermal and
Fig. 7.11 Higher magnification of
acral lick dermatitis demonstrating epi-
dermal hyperplasia, compact hyperker-
atosis, and vertical streaking fibrosis.
142
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 7.13 Malassezia derrmatitis secondary to atopic derrmatitis
affecting the skin folds of the axillae and ventral neck of a Cocker
Spaniel. Acute inflammation is superimposed on the chronic changes
of alopecia, lichenification, and hyperpigmentation.
licular elongation, plasmacytic periadnexal inflammation,
and vertical streaking fbrosis are observed. Because the
pazn kiid o sso on es are sis
skin of any cause, knowledge of location of the lesion is
often helpful in differentiation.
MALASSEZIA DERMATITIS
Fig. 7.12 Periglandular plasmacytic inflammation in acral lick
dermatitis.
Clinical features (Figures 7.13 and 7.14)
Malassezia dermatitis is a very common canine and com-
paratively rare feline skin disease caused by the lipophilic,
superficial follicular epithelium. The skin surface may
nonmycelial yeast Malassezia pachydermatis (Pityrospo-
have a papillated or digitated confguration. Small neu-
rum pachydermatis, Pityrosporum canis) or other
trophilic serocellular crusts often are trapped in the
Malassezia species. Malassezia pachydermatis has long
keratin layer. Erosion or focal to extensive ulceration with
been known as a ubiquitous commensal organism in
exudation is often present.
the dog. Since the early 1990s, Malassezia has been rec-
Superfcial dermal fbrosis, often in a 'vertical streak-
ognized as an opportunistic secondary pathogen respon-
ing? pattern, is seen between intact hair follicles. Hair fol-
sible for many cases of pruritic canine skin disease
licles appear larger and are both thickened and elongated.
(Mason & Evans, 1991). Pityrosporum ovale, a related
Mixed dermal inflammation is perivascular perifollicular,
organism, is considered to be both a commensal and
or diffuse, and includes lymphocytes, neutrophils,
common opporrunistic cutaneous pathogen in humans
macrophages, and plasma cell. There is often prominent
(Coffer et al., 1990). Malassezia pachydermatis of canine
and distinctive plasmacytic inflammation around dis-
origin was reported as an opporrunistic nosocomial
tended apocrine sweat glands (perihidradenitis). Rupture
of hair follicles and displacement of hairs into the deep
1998).
dermis or panniculus may accompany deep folliculitis and
 The pathogenesis of Malasszia dermatitis remains con-
furunculosis. This displacement may be the direct result
 troversial. It has been hypothesized that alterations in
of licking which pushes a stiff hair shaft through the fol-
host defense mechanisms and skin surface microclimate
licular wall (traumatic furunculosis).
allow the organism to become a facultative pathogen.
Although the hyperplastic changes are nonspecifc,
Excessive sebum production, moisture accumulation, and
acral lick dermatitis is distinctive if typical features of fol-
disruption of normal barrier function may lead to yeast
Hyperplastic diseases of the epidermis
143
recurrent inflammatory skin disease. Rarely, Malassezia
 dermatitis may be a primary event in the dog.
The finding of Malassezia in feline skin disease of suf-
ficient severity to require skin biopsy may be a grave
prognostic sign of underlying life-threatening disease
(Mauldin et al., 2002). Feline skin diseases seen in con-
junction with secondary Malassezia dermatitis include
feline thymoma-associated exfoliative dermatitis (see
Chapter 3), paraneoplastic alopecia (see Chapter 19), and
superficial necrolytic dermatitis (see Chapter 4) (Forster-
Van Hijfte et al., 1997; Godfrey, 1998; Mauldin et al.,
2002).
The most common initial clinical signs of canine
 Malassezia dermatitis are erythema, either greasy or waxy
adherent scales and crusts, and hair loss. Chronicity yields
lichenification in most affected dogs. Breeds of dogs that
Terriers, Cairn Terriers, Dachshunds, Newfoundlands,
etc.) will dramatically hyperpigment. A 'musty seborrheic
odor commonly is noted. Lesions may be sharply and
strikingly demarcated from adjacent normal skin and
gradually increase in size via peripheral expansion (Ihrke,
Fig. 7.14 Matassezia dermatitis secondary to allergic skin disease
 2000). Concurrent colonization or infection with Staphy-
affecting the skin folds of the groin in a Basset Hound. Note that
 lococcus intermedius may enhance the inflammation seen
this breed does not hyperpigment in response to chronic inflamma-
with Malassezia. The lesions of canine Malassezia der-
tion. {Photograph courtesy A. Hargis & H.T. Power; case material
matitis may be focal, multifocal, or generalized. Localized
University of California, Davis.)
lesions may begin as macules, but become plaques with
chronicity. Multifocal lesions coalesce to affect increasing
body areas. Generalized disease can affect much of the
body.
proliferation, inflammation, and pruritus (Mason &
Site predilections include the ventral neck, ventral
Evans, 1991). Enzymes elaborated by the yeast induce
abdomen, axillae, face, pinnae, feet, forelegs, and skin
host immune and inflammatory responses (Bond, 2002).
folds including facial folds. Partial bilateral symmetry
 Recent work strongly supports the role of hypersensi-
may be noted and commonly reflects the distribution
tivity in the pathogenesis of Malassezia dermatitis. Both
pattern of the underlying and predisposing skin disease.
immediate and delayed hypersensitivity reactions to
Pruritus is a unifying clinical feature. Most cases are
Malassezia antigen, as evidenced by intradermal skin
not visually distinctive as affected skin resembles
testing, have been noted in dogs with focal inflammatory
chronic hyperplastic dermatitis of any cause, and
skin disease (Nagata & Ishida, 1995). Atopic dogs with
 lesional distribution reflects the underlying skin disease
Malassezia dermatitis developed an IgE-mediated, type
rather than inherent specificity of distribution of
1 hypersensitivity to intracellular protein extracts of
Malassezia.
Malassezia pachydermatis (Morris et al., 1998; Bond et
Generalized feline Malassezia dermatitis exacerbates
al., 2002). Other recent work indicates that cell-mediated
 underlying skin disease. Diffuse erythema, greasy or waxy
as well as humoral response to Malassezia probably con-
adherent scales and crusts, and alopecia are the most
tributes to the pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis (Morris
common clinical features. Locally more severe lesions
et al., 2002). The number of organisms required to cause
may affect the chin, entrance to the ear canal, and
clinical disease is not defined. However, since clinical
clawbeds. Pruritus is variable, but commonly present.
disease may be the result of hypersensitivity to Malassezia
 Cats diagnosed as having Malassezia dermatitis should be
organisms, the density of organisms required may be
evaluated for underlying systemic diseases. Retrovirus
highly variable.
status (feline immunodefciency virus, FIV, and feline
Most cases of canine Malassezia dermatitis probably
leukemia virus, FeLV) should be evaluated. Although,
-apun se qons siaain aussodsipand oi Arepuosas rnooo
 generalized feline Malassezia dermatitis may be a marker
ing allergic skin disease (especially atopic dermatitis), dis-
of grave, underlying disease, the authors have seen
eases with abnormal cornification, and other chronic or
cats with generalized Malassezia dermatitis without
144
Diseases of the epidermis
identifable underlying triggers. Also, localized feline
Biopsy site selection
Malassezia dermatitis in otherwise healthy cats may be
Multiple representative lesions should be sampled, taking
seen occasionally
Although Malassezia dermatitis may be seen in any
care to retain scale and crusts during procurement.
breed of dog, repored predilections include the West
Ideally, the clinician should select both acute and chronic
lesions, since histopathologic diagnosis may be difficult.
Highland White Terrier, Basset Hound, German Shepherd
Dog, American Cocker Spaniel, Shih Tzu, Silky Terrier,
Maltese, Chihuahua, Poodle, Springer Spaniel, Shetland
Histopathology (Figure 7.15 through 7.18)
Sheepdog, and Dachshund. In the opinion of one author 
(P.J.1.) the Newfoundland has developed markedly
Malassezia dermatitis of dogs features moderate to severe,
increased risk over the past decade. Sex or age predilec-
irregular acanthosis and spongiosis, extending to the fol-
tions have not been noted. Predilection information is not
licular infundibula. Prominent scalloping or festooning of
available for cats.
the lower epidermal and outer follicular margin has been
Clinical differential diagnosis is difficult, as Malassezia
observed (Atlee's sign) and was previously reported in
dermatitis can mimic most generalized chronic inflamma-
61% of cases studied (Guaguere & Prélaud, 1996). Spon-
tory skin diseases. Since canine Malassezia dermatitis
giotic intraepidermal neutrophilic pustules occur. Eosino-
commonly is secondary, it must be suspected in any dog
philic pustules have been reported in approximately 15%
exhibiting signs of allergic skin disease, diseases with
of cases in two studies (Guaguere & Prélaud, 1996;
abnormal cornification, and virtually all other chronic or
Mauldin et al., 1997). Mild compact or lamellar hyper-
recurrent inflammatory skin diseases. Other infectious
keratosis is interspersed with mounds or plaques of para-
skin diseases such as dermatophytosis and demodicosis
keratosis or parakeratotic crusts. There also may be
are the prime differential diagnoses for the typical well
diffuse parakeratosis; this pattern predominated in a
demarcated  and  peripherally expansile lesions
of
report by Mauldin et al. (1997).
Malassezia dermatitis. Skin cytology is the diagnostic
 Budding oval or peanut-shaped yeasts are imbedded in
procedure of choice. Usually, cytology has revealed
keratin or crusts, but may be more easily visualized in
Malassezia before skin biopsy is performed; in addition,
keratin. Malassezia pachydermatis usually is not present
skin biopsy is often falsely negative in canine Malassezia
diffusely in the stratum corneum, but may be seen in ran-
dermatitis (see below). Skin biopsy and complete systemic
domly distributed focal accumulations within superficial
evaluation are required in cases of generalized feline
keratin, often in follicular ostia. Follicular yeasts may
Malassezia dermatitis to assess for the presence of under-
have more diagnostic specifciry for clinical Malassezia
lying life-threatening disease.
infection than surface yeasts, at least in West Highland
Fig. 7.15 Matassezia dermatitis in a
dog showing hyperkeratosis  and  a
parakeratotic crust. Numerous yeasts
are accumulating within the keratin
(arrows).
Hyperplastic diseases of the epidermis
145
Fig. 7.17 Malassezia dermatitis in a dog demonstrating prominent 
Fig. 7.16 Malassezia sp. within superficial keratin {periodic
acid-Schiff).
scalloping of epidermis and follicles (Atlee sign). Note prominent
spongiosis.
Fig. 7.18 Matassezia dermatitis in a
cat. Organisms are numerous in the
surface keratin; note mild epidermal
scalloping and spongiosis.
146
Diseases of the epidermis
White Terriers with hyperplastic dermatosis (see below)
1996; Mauldin et al., 1997); however, these pustules may
(Scott, 1992a).
occur in atopic dermatitis and parasitic dermatoses such
 Previous canine studies indicated a false negative rate
as sarcoptic acariasis (see Chapter 9), as well as in aller
of approximately 30% using histopathology alone to
o asna (s ride as sap iouo 
identify these organisms (Guaguere & Prélaud, 1996;
 cytic exocytosis in a spongiotic and parakeratotic milieu
Mauldin et al., 1997). Yeasts are often more easily iden-
has been proposed to be highly suggestive of Malassezia
tifed in follicular keratin where they are perhaps pro-
dermatitis in dogs, whether or not organisms are observed
tected during routine processing for histopathology.
(Mauldin et al., 1997). Differential diagnosis is not prob-
Preparation of the skin prior to biopsy, or scratching, both
lematic if large numbers of yeast are seen in association
of which would reduce the yeast-colonized keratin layer,
with correlative inflammatory changes. Note that in dogs
as well as poor site selection, also have been suggested as
and cats, yeasts may be seen in small numbers, not only
causes for low numbers of yeasts in some canine cases of
in cases of clinically confrmed Malassezia dermatitis, but
Malassezia dermatitis (Mauldin et al., 1997). A periodic
also in other clinical and histological contexts that may
acid-Schiff (PAS) stain will accentuate the presence of
not relate etiologically to these organisms (Scott, 1992a,
these organisms and allow easier assessment of their
b). In cats with generalized skin disease and Malassezia,
numbers.
associated lesions of paraneoplastic alopecia, superfcial
Dermal inflammation usually is mild to moderate and
necrolytic dermatitis, and feline thymoma-associated
is composed of a variable mixture of lymphocytes,
exfoliative dermatitis must be ruled out.
eosinophils, neutrophils, sometimes prominent mast cells,
and fewer plasma cells and macrophages. Linear subepi
HYPERPLASTIC DERMATOSIS OF THE
dermal alignment of mast cells has been reported in dogs
WEST HIGHLAND WHITE TERRIER
(Mauldin et al., 1997). Lymphocytic exocytosis is present,
sometimes prominently. In the dog, the majority of epi-
(Synonyms: epidermal dysplasia and Malassezia pachy-
 dermal lymphocytes were identified as T cells (Mauldin
dermatis infection in West Highland White Terriers,
et al., 1997). Occasionally, there is mild inflammation
around adnexa. Sebaceous glands may be hyperplastic,
 probably due to attendant self-trauma from pruritus.
Clinical features (Figures 7.19 and 7.20)
Histologic fndings in cats are similar to dogs; hyper-
keratosis and parakeratosis are variable and may be mild
Hyperplastic dermatosis of the West Highland White
to severe. Hyperkeratosis was the only histologic change
Terrier is an uncommon, severe, chronic hyperplastic skin
common to all biopsy specimens in 15 cats with
disease with clinical features similar to primary seborrhea
 Malassezia dermatitis (Mauldin et al, 2002). Festooning
or scalloping of epidermal and superficial follicular
margins, as seen in dogs, has not been observed in cats.
Spongiosis and lymphocytic exocytosis may be promi-
nent, and neutrophils may also migrate through the epi-
dermis, sometimes forming smallsuperficial pustules. The
dermis contains lymphocytes, mast cells, and neutrophils
predominantly; eosinophils may be present. One author 
(T.L.G.) has seen a single feline case of Malassezia
dermatitis characterized by diffuse severe superficial
neutrophilic  dermatitis and  epidermal pustulation,
accompanied  by  secondary epidermal  degeneration,
erosion, and parakeratosis. Staphylococcal colonization
accompanied the yeasts and may have contributed to the
 marked pustular reaction observed (pyoderma).
The spongiotic and hyperplastic patterns of Malassezia
dermatitis are not specifically diagnostic, and are as seen
 in chronic allergic dermatitis, at least in dogs. Festooning
or scalloping of the epidermal and superfcial follicular
margins is suggestive for Malassezia dermatitis, but may
be present in other hyperplastic conditions. Similarly,
Fig. 7.19 Hyperplastic derrmatosis of the West Highland White
intraepidermal eosinophilic pustules may be evocative of
Terrier. Partial alopecia of the ventral neck and a generally disheveled
Malassezia dermatitis in dogs (Guaguere & Prélaud,
coat are present.
Hyperplastic diseases of the epidermis
147
probable frequent coexistence of allergic skin diseases
such as flea allergy dermatitis, atopic dermatitis, and food
allergy. Thus, differentiation of hyperplastic dermatosis of
the West Highland White Terrier from chronic allergic
dermatoses may be challenging, since the severely affected
West Highland White Terrier often is the end product of
multiple, coexistent skin diseases.
Affected dogs have generalized erythema with licheni-
fication, hyperpigmentation, and alopecia. The skin is
often malodorous with adherent, brownish-gray, greasy
exfoliative debris. Alopecia may be extreme. Pruritus and
accompanying self-trauma vary in intensity, but are con-
sistent features. Thickened skin folds with interrigo
develop on the legs and on the trunk. Malassezia der-
matitis and surface bacterial overgrowth or superficial
 pyoderma are common. Owners report that lesions often
begin on the trunk but rapidly generalize. In advanced
cases, lesions may involve virtually all haired or previ-
ously haired body surfaces plus the comparatively less
well haired abdomen. There is often almost total alope-
cia, which sometimes spares the head, distal limbs, and
distal tail. Regional or generalized lymphadenopathy is a
Fig. 7.20 Closer view of the dog in Fig. 7.19. Alopecia, erythema,
consistent feature.
lichenification, and hyperpigmentation are present on the ventral
The syndrome, as described here, is seen only in West
neck. Note the thickened skin folds.
Highland White Terriers. Age of onset may be from less
than 1 year to middle age. Clinical signs commonly com-
 mence at less than 1 year of age in severely affected dogs.
and seborrheic dermatitis (see Chapter 8). The restriction
Sex predilections have not been noted.
of this syndrome to the West Highland White Terrier,
Clinical  differential  diagnoses include  generalized
coupled with evidence of familial involvement, indicates
demodicosis, sarcoptic acariasis, atopic dermatitis, food
the probability of a hereditary disease.
allergy, and flea allergy dermatitis; however, the docu-
Epidermal dysplasia with secondary Malassezia pachy-
mentation of any of these diseases should not preclude
dermatis infection has been described in West Highland
the coexistence of hyperplastic dermatosis of the West
White Terriers (Scott & Miller 1989; Scott et al., 2001).
Highland White Terrier Impression smears should be
The authors have not noted histopathologic features
performed to determine if yeast infection or bacterial
compatible with epidermal dysplasia in the breed. Because
 overgrowth is present.
of this diffculty, the term “hyperplastic dermatosis’ is
preferred.
Biopsy site selection
The authors believe this syndrome to be a breed-
specifc  hyperproliferative  reaction  pattern initiated
 Multiple biopsy specimens should be taken from affected
by various inflammatory stimuli and infectious agents
areas showing minimal self-trauma. Sites which have no
(usually Malassezia). Recently a dramatic response of two
evidence of secondary pyoderma are preferred.
sibling West Highland White Terriers with putative hyper-
plastic dermatosis to treatment for Malassezia dermatitis
Histopathology (Figures 7.21 and 7.22)
was reported; underlying atopic dermatitis potentially
acted as a trigger for secondary infection and induction
 Epidermal features principally consist of severe acanthosis
of the clinical signs (Nett et al., 2001).
that also affects superficial hair follicles. Budding or scal-
Clinically, the distinction between this syndrome and
loping of the lower border of the epidermis and outer
all other chronic hyperplastic skin diseases affecting the
border of hair follicles may be seen, as observed in
breed is blurred. One author (PJ.I.) is reluctant to make
Malassezia dermatitis (see p. 142). There may be slight
this diagnosis unless all other causes are eliminated and
crowding of basilar keratinocytes. These proliferative
biopsy results are compatible; thus, hyperplastic der-
changes collectively do not indicate epithelial dysplasia, as
matosis of the West Highland White Terrier is a diagno-
considered conventionally by pathologists. The authors
sis of exclusion. This is complicated further by the 
have not recognized typical indications of epithelial
148
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 7.21 Hyperplastic dermatosis of the West Highland White
Fig. 7.22 Higher magnification of hyperplastic dermatosis of the
Terrier. Severe irregular hyperplasia of the epiderrmis and follicular
West Highland White Terrier, demonstrating irregular acanthosis,
 infundibular epithelium is accompanied by prominent sebaceous
spongiosis, and mild superficial dermal inflammation.
glands.
dysplasia, such as uneven nuclear size, increased mitotic
mis. Squamous metaplasia of sebaceous glands may be
 index, or premature keratinization. Affected dogs likely are
present. These glandular changes may be due to attendant
predisposed to an abnormal hyperproliferative response to
self-trauma from pruritis.
colonization by organisms such as staphylococci or
Histopathologically, lesions of hyperplastic dermatosis
Malassezia, as has also been suggested by Nett et al. (2001).
of the West Highland White Terrier are not specific. They
There is patchy or diffuse mild spongiosis with lym-
resemble chronic hyperplastic dermatitis due to allergy or
phocytic exocytosis. Parakeratosis often is present as mul-
other causes, and, if yeasts are present, chronic Malassezia
tifocal mounds accompanied by serocellular crusting
dermatitis. Since these conditions may be concurrent in
(parakeratotic scale/crusts). Colonization of the keratin
 this breed, differentiation may be challenging.
layer by Malassezia pacbydermatis may be observed;
however a negative result on biopsy does not exclude the
ACTINIC KERATOSIS
etiologic importance of this yeast (see p. 142). Clinical
assessment via cytology is superior for the quantification
(Synonyms: solar keratosis, squamous cell carcinoma in
of these organisms.
situ)
Perivascular to interstitial inflammation is seen in
 the superficial dermis. Neutrophils, macrophages, plasma
Clinical features (Figures 7.23 and 7.24)
cells, and lymphocytes are present in varying proportions.
Sebaceous glands are often markedly hyperplastic and
Actinic keratoses are solar-induced hyperplastic and dys-
may be distributed loosely throughout the middle der-
plastic epidermal lesions that occur in both the dog and
Hyperplastic diseases of the epidermis
149
totic plaques and nodules. Erosions or ulcers have adher-
ent hemorrhagic crusts. Palpation of visually normal skin
ss  pe ss ran np ae
 that dysplastic change is more widespread than is visually
apparent. Difference in skin thickness may be striking
in dogs with colored spots; unaffected pigmented skin
appears thinner than surrounding affected nonpigmented
skin. Actinic comedones may be present (see Chapter 8).
Larger, ulcerated, nodular, or infltrative lesions are most
suggestive of squamous cell carcinoma.
Canine lesions are restricted to sun-exposed, relatively
nonpigmented skin in sparsely haired regions. The gla-
brous skin of the ventral and lateral abdomen, flank folds,
and inner thighs is most frequently affected. One side
Fig. 7.23 Actinic keratoses on the relatively nonpigrmented and
of the abdomen and the opposite inner thigh may be
hairless abdomen of a Bull Terrier. Note the multifocal erythema and
more prominently affected, indicating favoring of one
crusted papules and plaques.
side during recumbency while sunbathing (Mason, 1987,
1999). The dorsal muzzle and periorbital regions also
 may be affected. Secondary pyoderma with follicular
rupture (actinic furunculosis) is a common concurrent
fnding (see Chapter 17); actinic furuncles may generate
from actinic comedones (see Chapter 8). Secondary
 pyoderma may make diagnosis more diffcult by blurring
classical lesions.
In cats, lesions consist of erosions, ulcers, or erythe-
matous, slightly elevated plaques. Hemorrhagic crusts
may overlie ulcers or erosions. Severe ulceration may be
indicative of squamous cell carcinoma; however, ulcera-
tion cannot be used as a marker of occult squamous cell
U en-s aie Ae snd aus eorn
actinic keratoses. Actinic keratoses of cats are seen most
commonly on the margins of the pinna, planum nasale,
Fig. 7.24 Actinic keratoses on the sparsely pigmented abdomen of
and face, especially in the comparatively less haired
a Pit Bull Terrier. Actinic damage, characterized by blotchy erythema
preauricular regions. Bilateral symmetry may be surpris-
and irregular thickening, is confined to the nonpigmented areas. The
ingly prominent.
 Lightly pigmented and sparsely haired animals are
to the irregularly thickened solar-affected nonpigmented areas.
more likely to develop actinic lesions. Dalmatians,
Whippets, Italian Greyhounds, Greyhounds, American
mented areas indicate secondary pyoderrma.
Staffordshire Terriers, Bull Terriers, Beagles, and Basset
Hounds are at increased risk for actinic lesions. Most
cat. Lesions develop in nonpigmented and lightly haired
feline actinic keratoses are seen in white haired areas of
skin exposed repetitively to excessive ultraviolet light.
short-haired cats. Animals spending substantial time out-
Many affected dogs are known sunbathers. Multiple
doors in areas of the world with increased solar exposure
stages of malignant transformation may be present con-
 are at greater risk. Many affected dogs are reported to be
currently (Hargis et al., 1992). Actinic keratoses of both
sunbathers and spend long periods of time in dorsal or
  snouenbs aaiseaul oi ssaraoid Keu sieo pue saop
lateral recumbency in direct sunlight. Lesions occur most 
carcinoma (see Chapter 22). The reader is referred to
commonly in older animals, but have been seen in dogs
Chapter 22 for a detailed discussion on the pathogenesis
as young as 2 years of age.
of actinic keratosis.
Early canine actinic keratoses must be differentiated
Clinical appearance in dogs is highly variable. Rough-
from psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis and lichenoid
ened, erythematous patches characterize early lesions.
keratosis by skin biopsy. Clinical differential diagnoses for
With chronicity, lesions range from focal erythema and
severe, deep, and infltrative lesions in the dog include
crusting to scaly, red to red-brown, ill-defned exfoliating
 deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis, and squamous
macules and papules, to darkly crusted, indurated, kera-
cell carcinoma. In the cat, clinical differential diagnoses
150
Diseases of the epidermis
include bowenoid in situ carcinoma (see Chapter 22),
matous confguration. Parakeratosis in parallel layers, so-
squamous cell carcinoma, and severe facial autoimmune
called ‘stacked parakeratosis', is seen most commonly in
disease. Lesions of bowenoid in situ carcinoma are gen-
the dog. See Chapter 22 for a more detailed description
erally multifocal and also are located in nonsun-exposed
of the epidermal lesions of actinic keratosis.
sites. Since it is impossible clinically to differentiate actinic
 In the dog, dermal inflammation is perivascular to
keratosis (an in situ carcinoma) from invasive solar-
band-like (lichenoid), and may be accompanied by solar
 induced malignancies, biopsy of suspected actinic kerato-
elastosis and laminar fbrosis (see Chapter 15). When
sis is mandatory.
laminar fbrosis of the dermis is intense, inflammation
may lie immediately below the fbrotic layer. Plasma cells
Biopsy site selection
and lymphocytes predominate and are accompanied
by variable numbers of macrophages, neutrophils, and
Specimens for biopsy should be obtained from different
 occasional eosinophils. Pigmentary incontinence may be
stages of the disease. If present, samples should include
present. Superfcial dermal vessels may be proliferative
discolored macules, areas of erythema, crusted plaques,
and ectatic; frank solar vasculopathy may be seen (see
nodules, and margins of ulcers in order to reveal the full 
Chapter 10). In some dogs with actinic keratosis there
spectrum of disease present and to uncover possible neo-
may be actinic comedones (see Chapter 8) or actinic
plasia. If feasible, solitary lesions should be resected in
furunculosis (see Chapter 17).
their entirety to prevent progression to overt neoplasia. In
 Lichenoid dermatitis generally is not present in actinic
dogs, it is highly advantageous to delay skin biopsy until
lesions of cats; inflammation is mild and perivascular.
 the dog has received appropriate systemic antibiotics for
 However, some feline cases of actinic keratosis have more
 at least 3 weeks so that secondary pyoderma will resolve.
intense dermal inflammation with fbrosis. Solar elastosis
also is observed in the cat, but is often subtle (see Chapter
Histopathology (Figure 7.25)
15).
 As epidermal lesions are characteristic (see also Chapter
Epidermal changes of actinic keratosis vary in severity,
22), differential diagnoses are few. Lichenoid keratoses
 depending on the stage of the disease. The principal diag-
may have a similar low power appearance, but are not
nostic feature is epidermal hyperplasia with dysplasia.
characterized by epidermal dysplasia. Some actinic ker-
Hyperplasia and dysplasia without invasion through the
atoses may be identical histopathologically to lesions of
basement membrane indicate actinic keratosis (carcinoma
bowenoid in situ carcinoma (multicentric squamous cell
in situ); penetration into the dermis signifies squamous
carcinoma in situ; see Chapter 22), and have been referred
cell carcinoma, which may occur in advanced lesions.
to as *bowenoid' actinic keratoses. In fact, these probably
-ded e aaeu pue aaad Aiu aq ke suis
represent bowenoid in situ carcinoma (caused by persist-
Fig. 7.25 Actinic keratosis in a dog
demonstrating epidermal hyperplasia
and early dysplasia with stacked
parakeratosis. Note lichenoid inflam-
mation and fibrosis.
Hyperplastic diseases of the epidermis
151
ent papillomavirus infection) arising in sun-exposed skin;
Symmetrical hyperpigmentation, lichenification, and
ultraviolet radiation has a synergistic effect on the pro-
alopecia characterize the disease. The cause is not known.
duction of these lesions. The epidermis and superficial
 o  si,   
hair follicles of bowenoid lesions may have a more
 been used generically to describe a multifactorial, clinical
cutaneous reaction pattern (secondary acanthosis nigri-
typical actinic keratoses, and the dysplastic keratinocytes
cans), which is characterized by visually similar lesions
may be more vacuolated (see Chapter 22). Clinical dif-
and is seen in a variety of different breeds (Scott et al.,
ferentiation may be of benefit.
2001).
Acanthosis nigricans of Dachshunds begins with sub-
tle, bilaterally symmetric axillary hyperpigmentation.
ACANTHOSIS NIGRICANS
Lesions progress slowly to lichenification and alopecia.
OF DACHSHUNDS
Accumulation of greasy, odoriferous, keratinous debris is
Clinical features (Figures 7.26 and 7.27)
common in severely affected dogs. Many cases involve
only the axillae and groin. In advanced cases, bilaterally
Acanthosis nigricans is, most specifcally, a rare idiopathic
symmetric lesions affect the abdomen, groin, perineum,
primary genodermatosis seen exclusively in Dachshunds.
hocks, chest, axillae, neck, forelegs, and periocular
region. Secondary interrigo (see mucocutaneous pyo-
derma, Chapter 11) with superfcial pyoderma and/or
Malassezia dermatitis are common sequelae. Pruritus is
variable, and can be absent in early stages.
Acanthosis nigricans of Dachshunds commonly devel-
ops initially in dogs less than 2 years of age. Sex predilec-
tions have not been reported.
Even in the Dachshund, acanthosis nigricans should be
a diagnosis of exclusion. Superficial bacterial folliculitis,
superficial spreading pyoderma, Malassezia dermatitis, as
well as the numerous other causes of axillary intertrigo
and pruritus, including atopic dermatitis and food allergy,
should be investigated and ruled out before the diagnosis
of primary acanthosis nigricans of Dachshunds is made.
Allergic skin diseases usually involve sites in addition to
the axillae and groin, but chronic and severe cases of
Fig. 7.26 Acanthosis nigricans in a Dachshund. The affected axillae
acanthosis nigricans have a similar appearance and
and sternal region are alopecic, hyperpigmented, and lichenified.
distribution. Unlike pyoderma, true acanthosis nigricans
Primary lesions suggestive of other diseases mimicking acanthosis
should not have erythematous, exfoliative margins with
nigricans are absent.
papules or collarettes.
Biopsy site selection
Multiple samples should be taken from both hyperpig-
mented and lichenifed central lesions, as well as from the
advancing border. Marginal specimens are most useful in
ruling out other visually similar diseases.
Histopathology (Figures 7.28 and 7.29)
In clinically typical cases of acanthosis nigricans, the epi-
dermis is mildly to moderately and irregularly acanthotic.
There may be mild to moderate hyperkeratosis, and focal
parakeratosis often is observed. Follicular keratosis may
be striking in some cases. Keratinocytes, especially those
Fig. 7.27 Acanthosis nigricans in a Dachshund. Lichenification and
in the basal cell layer, are heavily pigmented.
hyperpigmentation in the umbilical region were preceded by axillary
The dermis has mild to moderate superficial perivascu
lesions in this animal.
lar to interstitial infltrates of lymphocytes, macrophages,
152
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 7.28 Acanthosis migricans in a
Dachshund.  Irregular acanthosis is
accompanied by mild hyperkeratosis.
Fig. 7.29 Higher magnification of
Fig. 7.28. Note sparse dermal inflarm-
mation.
and a few neutrophils or plasma cells. Pigmentary incon-
PSORIASIFORM-LICHENOID
 tinence sometimes is prominent.
DERMATOSIS
Histopathologically, the lesions of acanthosis nigricans
are not specifically diagnostic, and do not permit defini-
Clinical features (Figures 7.30 and 7.31)
tive diagnosis of this entity. Acanthosis nigricans is similar
to chronic hyperplastic dermatitis, particularly due to
 Psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis is a distinctive, rare,
allergy, but may be less inflamed. Correlation with the
asymptomatic skin disease seen most often in Springer
breed affected and the clinical distribution of lesions, in
Spaniels (Gross et al, 1986; Mason et al., 1986). The
addition to systematic clinical exclusion of other possible
 marked breed predilection suggests heritability. The etiol-
causes, is required for the definitive diagnosis of acan-
ogy is not known. However, it has been proposed that this
thosis nigricans.
syndrome represents a genetically programmed and dis-
Hyperplastic diseases of the epidermis
153
Pruritus is not noted. The clinical course is chronic but
lesions may wax and wane.
Psoriasiform-lichenoid  dermatosis occurs  predomi-
nantly in the Springer Spaniel. The syndrome also has
been seen in English Pointers, Irish Setters, Poodles, and
a West Highland White Terrier. Initial lesions usually
Occur during the frst 1/ years of age. Sex predilections
have not been noted.
Clinical differential diagnoses should include lichenoid
(see p. 148). Severe and more generalized cases may re-
semble primary seborrhea. Most cases of psoriasiform-
lichenoid dermatosis are seen in Springer Spaniels and are
multicentric. Lichenoid keratoses occur without breed
Fig. 7.30 Psoriasiforrn-lichenoid derrmatosis in a Springer Spaniel
predilection and are most often solitary. Actinic keratoses
Erythematous papules and coalescing plaques are present on the
Occur in sun-exposed, lightly pigmented, sparsely haired
ventral abdomen.
skin.
Biopsy site selection
Well-developed solitary plaques are preferred sites for
 biopsy. Multiple specimens from lesions in varying stages
of development are ideal. If lesions are present both on
the ventral abdomen and on the pinna, biopsy of abdom-
inal lesions is more readily accomplished as pinnal biopsy
may damage fragile underlying cartilage.
Histopathology (Figures 7.32 and 7.33)
The epidermis is irregularly acanthotic, often with deep
projections into the dermis. This form of epidermal
hyperplasia is similar to ‘psoriasiform’ hyperplasia, as
described in humans with hyperplastic diseases that
resemble psoriasis. Mild hyperkeratosis with focal
Fig. 7.31 Psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis in a Springer Spaniel.
sisrd aq  ar sd si siried
Waxy, crusted, erythematous, coalescing plaques and papules are
seen on the medial surface of the pinna. {Photograph courtesy W.
(increase in thickness of the granular layer). Characteris-
McDougal.)
tically, there are discrete, often round, intraepidermal pus-
tules which contain eosinophils, neutrophils, or a mixture
of both. Pustules progress to well-demarcated, mound-
shaped parakeratotic crusts, which resemble “Munro
tinctive reaction to superficial staphylococcal infection
microabscesses', as described for psoriasis in humans.
(Burrows & Mason, 1994).
Necrosis of individual basal keratinocytes is seen rarely.
 Psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis is characterized clin-
Specimens from areas of generalized scaling may show
hyperkeratosis and follicular keratosis, similar to primary
that coalesce to form multiple well-demarcated lichenoid
seborrhea (see Chapter 8). Dermal inflammation is
plaques. With chronicity, adherent keratinous debris
lichenoid and predominantly lymphocytic and plasma-
covers the plaques. Advanced lesions may appear papil-
cytic (see Chapter 11).
lomatous (Scott et al., 2001). Lesions occur predomi-
 The discrete intraepidermal pustules in the context of
nantly on the medial surface of the pinnae, external ear
psoriasiform hyperplasia are diagnostic. Psoriasiform-
canal, ventral abdomen, prepuce, and perineal region.
lichenoid dermatosis may histopathologically parallel
With time lesions may become more numerous in affected
lichenoid keratosis. Differentiating clinical features are
areas. Generalized scaling may be present but probably
 required for a defnitive diagnosis; lichenoid keratoses are
represents concurrent primary seborrhea (see Chapter 8).
generally focal.
154
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 7.32 Psoriasiform-lichenoid der-
matosis in a Springer Spaniel. Irregu-
lar acanthosis is accompanied by
discrete, round intraepidermal pus-
tules. Note lichenoid derrmatitis.
Fig. 7.33 Higher magnification of Fig.
7.32, demonstrating intraepidermal
pustules.
 Mound-shaped  superficial
parakeratosis contains a degenerating
pustule (Munro microabscess).
unknown etiology, resembling lichen planus, and are
LICHENOID KERATOSIS
characterized by a T-cell-rich infltration (Smith et al.,
2002).
Clinical features (Figure 7.34)
Lichenoid dermatoses are scaly or crusted plaques that
Lichenoid keratosis is a rare canine skin disease charac-
may appear papillomatous. Erythema is variable, and
terized by usually solitary well-circumscribed plaques
 hyperpigmentation may occur. Lesions usually are solitary
with adherent keratinous debris (Anderson et al., 1989;
and occur on the pinnae (Anderson et al., 1989). Less
Gross & Ihrke, 1992). The etiology is unknown. Individ-
commonly, similar lesions may occur on the groin or
ual lesions closely resemble those seen in psoriasiform-
 elsewhere. Lichenoid keratoses are asymptomatic. Most
lichenoid dermatosis (see p. 152). In humans, benign
lesions have been seen in adult dogs. Breed or sex
lichenoid keratoses are common solitary lesions  of
predilections have not been noted.
Hyperplastic diseases of the epidermis
155
Lichenoid keratosis must be differentiated from psori
Histopathology (Figure 7.35)
asiform-lichenoid dermatosis and actinic keratosis, as well
The epidermis is irregularly acanthotic. In some cases
as uncommon variants of viral warts (see Chapter 22).
 there may be prominent psoriasiform hyperplasia, as in
Psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis is the more probable
psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis (see p. 152). There is
diagnosis in the Springer Spaniel. Actinic keratoses usually
are multicentric and occur only in sun-exposed, relatively
severe, parakeratosis. There may be hypergranulosis
nonpigmented skin in sparsely haired regions. Histopatho-
logy is required for the identifcation of viral warts.
(increase in thickness of the granular layer). Serocellular
crusting may be present. Intraepidermal pustules similar
to those of psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis are less
Biopsy site selection
common but may be identifed in some cases. Dermal
 Excisional biopsy is recommended for solitary plaques. If
inflammation is lichenoid and is predominantly lympho-
lesions are present only on the pinnae, care should be
cytic and plasmacytic (see Chapter 11).
taken not to damage fragile underlying cartilage.
Histopathologic lesions may be strikingly similar
to psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis, which is seen pre-
pn se 'saop u snna asn jo toredas mo
keratoses are usually solitary and are found in many
breeds.
INFLANED LINEAREPIDERMALNEVUS
(Synonym: inflammatory linear verrucous epidermal
nevus}
Clinical features (Figures 7.36 and 7.37)
The word ‘nevus’ refers to birthmarks or other localized
defects of the skin presumed to be caused by an embry.
onic failure of normal development. Lesions are charac-
Fig. 7.34 Lichenoid keratosis in a Gerrman Shorthaired Pointer.
terized by hyperplasia involving one or more components
Grouped scaly, crusted plaques are present. (Photograph courtesy T.
of the skin. “Hamartoma’ is a more inclusive term than
Olivry; case material University of California, Davis.)
nevus and is the preferred veterinary nomenclature for
Fig. 7.35  Lichenoid keratosis in a dog
demonstrating marked irregular acan-
thosis and hyperkeratosis. Note promi-
nent hypergranulosis.
156
Diseases of the epidermis
& Scott, 2001), also appears to follow Blaschko's lines,
 and could conceivably be another form of blaschkitis in
the dog
Clinically, inflamed linear epidermal nevi are charac-
terized by partially to completely alopecic linear bands
of verrucous, hyperkeratotic, usually hyperpigmented,
lichenifed skin. The surface of the lesions may resemble
papillomas. Keratin-plugged hair follicles may lead to
enhanced susceptibility to secondary pyoderma. Lesions
may be solitary or multiple. They have been seen most
commonly on the lateral trunk, but also occur on the face,
pinnae, and footpads (White et al., 1993). Lesions
 increase in size as the animal grows. Chronic lesions may
be pruritic. Bacterial overgrowth and Malassezia der-
Fig. 7.36  Inflamed linear epidermal nevus on the trunk of a Cocker
matitis may exacerbate inflammation and cause addi-
Spaniel. Lesions follow the strikingly symmetric patterns of parallel
tional pruritus.
often curved lines, termed Blaschko's lines. {Photograph courtesy
Three of four dogs reported with this syndrome were
S.D. White.)
related Cocker Spaniels (White et al., 1993). The authors
have seen this syndrome in a variety of different breeds,
including the Cocker Spaniel, Dachshund, and Miniature 
'I ia a Aq panodan sop mog ne a razneus
(1993) were female, it is not known if a sex predilection
exists. All dogs of that report had lesions occurring before
6 months of age. Epidermal nevi should be present from
birth, but may not be noted in well haired dogs until
lesions increase in size.
Clinical differential diagnoses are few. Similar lesions
can be seen with congenital follicular parakeratosis (see
disease in addition to linear lesions.
Biopsy site selection
Small lesions should be excised in their entirety. Multiple
Fig. 7.37 Closer view of an inflamed linear epidermal nevus from
the dog in Fig. 7.36, showing an alopecic linear band of verrucous,
punch biopsy specimens can be taken from larger lesions.
hyperkeratotic, hyperpimented, lichenifed skin. (Photograph cour-
tesy S.D. White.)
Histopathology (Figures 7.38 and 7.39)
 Inflamed linear epidermal nevus has severe irregular acan-
most lesions that are believed to be congenital or acquired
thosis accompanied by generally severe parakeratosis (see
malformations. However *nevus' is already established in
Chapter 8). The proliferative and parakeratotic changes
 the human and canine literature for this entity. The unin-
extend to superficial follicles, which are often massively
flamed linear malformation of the epidermis will remain
 dilated. Frank neutrophilic pustules may be present super-
"linear epidermal hamartoma? (see Chapter 22).
ficially and within follicular infundibula. Acantholytic
 Inflamed linear epidermal nevi are rare, apparently
keratinocytes may be seen at the base of occasional
developmental, skin lesions reported in the dog (White
pustules. Colonies of staphylococci are prominent within
et al., 1993). The syndrome bears striking resemblance
crusts. Surface colonization by Malassezia sp. has been
 to inflamed linear verrucous epidermal nevus (ILVEN) in
reported (White et al., 1993). Idiopathic linear pustular
humans. Epidermal nevi in humans (Bolognia et al., 1994)
acantholytic dermatosis also features epidermal and fol-
and in dogs tend to follow the strikingly symmeric pat-
licular epithelial hyperplasia and follicular pustules with
terns of parallel often curved lines, termed Blaschko's
acantholysis (Beningo & Scott, 2001), and may be a
lines; thus, ILVEN can be considered a form of "blaschki-
related phenomenon (blaschkitis).
tis'. Interestingly, a recently recognized similar entity,
Dermal inflammation is most prominent beneath areas
inflamed linear pustular acantholytic dermatosis (Beningo
of pustulation and crusting, and is minimal to mild in
Hyperplastic diseases of the epidermis
157
Fig. 7.38 Inflamed linear epiderrmal nevus demonstrating severe
Fig. 7.39 Higher magnification of inflamed linear epidermal nevus
irregular acanthosis with massive parakeratosis and crusting. Note
Note rmarked irregular acanthosis and parakeratosis.
extension to hair follicles.
detected in affected keratinocytes using immunohisto-
other locations. Mild areas have lymphocytes and some
chemistry (Gross et al., 1993). It was hypothesized that
macrophages, while more inflamed foci show neutrophils,
infection with FeLV may have initiated early neoplastic
plasma cells, and occasional eosinophils. Sebaceous
alteration of the keratinocytes through recombination
glands may be hyperplastic.
with host oncogenes. Three of six cats in the study had
The hyperplastic changes of inflamed linear epidermal
previously received FeLV vaccination (Gross et al., 1993).
nevi are relatively nonspecifc. However, in the context of
The authors have seen only one additional confrmed case
severe hyperplasia, the intense crusting and massive
 of this highly distinctive dermatosis since that report.
parakeratosis are highly suggestive. Clinical features are
Clinical features include exfoliative dermatitis with
important in the ultimate diagnosis of these lesions.
adherent crusts and alopecia. Erythema and focal erosions
are seen in more severely affected regions. Distribution is
variable, but all reported cats had involvement of the
GLANT CELL DERMATOSIS IN
FeLV-POSITIVE CATS
muzzle or head (Gross et al., 1993). The more recently
 observed case had lesions of the pinnae that progressed
to affect nasal and perioral sites, as well as the ventral
Clinical features (Figures 7.40 and 7.41)
 neck, mammary region, and toes. Lips and perioral skin
A variety of different cutaneous signs have been seen in
were involved in four of six reported cats. Other muco-
conjunction with infection by the feline leukemia virus
cutaneous junctions and the trunk were affected in some
(FeLV), an immunosuppressive, oncogenic retrovirus. In
cats. Pruritus was present in five of six cats (Gross et al.,
the early 1990s, a rare, distinctive giant cell dermatosis
1993). Age, breed, or sex signalment predilections have
was reported in FeLV-positive cats; FeLV antigen was
not been noted.
158
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 7.40 Giant cell dermatosis in an FeLV-
positive cat. The cat exhibited severe, general-
ized exfoliative dermatitis. {From Gross, T.L.,
Clark, E.G., Hargis, A.M., et al. (1993) Giant
cell derrmatosis in FeLV-positive cats. Vet Der-
mato! 4, 117-22. Reprinted with permission.)
Fig. 7.41 Closer view of the cat shown in Fig. 7.40. Extensive
alopecia with adherent crusts is present. (Photograph courtesy E.G.
Clark.)
Clinical differential diagnoses should include any crust-
ing, exfoliative skin disease including pemphigus foli-
aceus, generalized dermatophytosis, notoedric acariasis,
feline thymoma-associated exfoliative dermatitis, epi-
theliotropic T cell lymphoma (mycosis fungoides), mural
folliculitis, and erythema multiforme. Giant cell dermato-
sis in FeLV-positive cats is not visually distinctive; histo-
pathology is required.
Biopsy site selection (Figures 7.42 through 7.44)
Fig. 7.42 Giant cell dermatosis in an FeLV-positive cat. Irregular
Areas of maximal exfoliative skin disease should be
acanthosis is accompanied by numerous, often darker-staining giant
selected. Minimally eroded skin is more likely to display the
cells throughout the epiderrmis and hair follicles. (Case material cour-
histopathologic features necessary to make the diagnosis.
tesy E.G. Clark.)
Histopathology
There is moderate to severe irregular acanthosis accom-
panied by striking formation of giant cells. Syncytial giant
Hyperplastic diseases of the epidermis
159
Fig. 7.43 Higher magnification of giant cell dermatosis in FeLV-
positive cat showing massive multinucleated giant cells in the epi-
Fig. 7.44 Immunohistochemistry for FeLV gp70 antigen; FeLV-
derrmis and follicular infundibulurm. Note intraepithelial pustules.
laden cells are darkly colored (chromogen diaminobenzidine [DAB])
{Case material courtesy E.G. Clark).
cells of keratinocytic origin contain up to 30 nuclei and
REFERENCES
are distributed throughout the epidermis and follicular
infundibula. There is accompanying loss of orderly mat-
Acral Lick Dermatitis
uration of keratinocytes in areas of pronounced giant
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
cell formation. Scattered keratinocytes are individually
Small Animat Dermatology, 6th edn, p. 1058-64. WB.
shrunken and degenerate, suggesting apoptosis. Feline
Saunders, Philadelphia.
leukemia virus gp70 antigen was demonstrated in numer-
White, S.D. (1990) Naltrexone for treatment of acral lick
ous keratinocytes within areas of giant cell formation and
dermatitis in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 196, 1073-76.
in adjacent skin using immunohistochemistry (Gross
et al., 1993), and in the recently observed case.
Malassezia Dermatitis
There may be hyperkeratosis and crusting with sec-
Bond, R. (2002) Pathogenesis of Malassezia dermatitis. In:
ondary colonization by staphylococci. Superficial pustu-
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 4 (eds K.L.
lation of both the epidermis and hair follicles may be seen.
Thoday, C.S. Foil & R. Bond), p. 69-75. Blackwell Science,
The superfcial and periadnexal dermis contains a mixed
Oxford.
inflammatory cell population of lymphocytes, macro-
Bond, R., Curtis, D.F., Hendricks, A. et al. (2002) Intradermal
test reactivity to Malassezia pachydermatis in atopic dogs. Vet
phages, neutrophils, eosinophils, and mast cells.
Record 150, 448-9.
The histological fndings of striking giant cell formation
Chang, H.J, Miller, H.L., Watkins, N. et al. (1998) An epidemic
are diagnostically unique for this entity. Theoretically,
s a ai ue  sd s jo
anpond pinon suonoen anrp ro suoanu lea ra
associated with colonization of health care worker's pet dogs.
 giant cell formation of this type.
New Eng J Med 338,706-11.
160
Diseases of the epidermis
Coffer, M., Bergbrant, I.M., Faiergemann, J. et al. (1990)
Actinic Keratosis
Immune reactions to Pityrosporum ovale in adult patients
Hargis, A.M., Ihrke, PJ., Spangler, W.L. et al. (1992) A retro-
with atopic and seborrheic dermatitis. J Am Acad Dermatol
spective clinico-pathologic study of 212 dogs with heman-
22,73942.
giomas and hemangiosarcomas. Vet Pathol 29, 316-28.
Forster-Van Hijfte, M.A., Curtis, C.F. & White, R.N. (1997)
Mason, K.V. (1987) The pathogenesis of solar induced
Resolution of exfoliative dermatitis and Malassezia pacbyder-
skin lesions in Bull Terriers. In: Proceedings of the 7th
matis overgrowth in a cat after surgical thymoma resection.
AAVD/ACVD Meeting, Phoenix, p. 12.
J Small Anim Pract 38,451-4.
Mason, K.V. (1999) Solar (actinic) dermatoses of animals.
Godfrey, D.R. (1998) A case of feline paraneoplastic alopecia
In: Proceedings of the 1Sth AAVD/ACVD Meeting, Maui,
with secondary Malassezia-associated dermatitis. J Small
p. 117-21.
Anim Pract 39, 394-6.
Guaguere, E. & Prélaud, P. (1996) Etude rétrospective de 54 cas
Acanthosis Nigricans of Dachshunds
de dermite a Malassezia pacbydermatis chez le chien: resultats
Scot, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffn, C.E. (2001) Muller 6 Kirk's
epidemiologiques, cliniques, cytologiques et histopathologi-
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, p. 975-7. W.B. Saunders,
ques. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 31, 309-23.
Philadelphia.
Ihrke, PJ. (2000) Malassezia dermatitis. In: Proceedings of
the 4th World Congress of Veterinary Dermatology, San
Psoriasiform-lichenoid Dermatosis
Francisco, p. 175-81.
Burrows, A. & Mason, K.V. (1994) Observations on the patho-
Mason, K.V. & Evans, A.G. (1991) Dermatitis associated with
 genesis and treatment of lichenoid-psoriasiform dermatitis of
Malassezia pacbydermatis in eleven dogs. J Am Anim Hosp
Springer Spaniels. In: Proceedings of the 10th AAVD/ACVD
Assoc 27, 13-20.
Meeting, Charleston, p. 81.
Mauldin, E.A., Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. et al. (1997) Malassezia
Gross, T.L., Halliwell, R.E., McDougal, B.J. et al. (1986)
dermatitis in the dog: a retrospective histopathological and
 Psoriasiform lichenoid dermatitis in the Springer Spaniel. Vet
immunopathological study of 86 cases (1990-95). Vet Der-
Pathol 23, 76-8.
matol 8, 191-202.
Mason, K.V., Halliwell, R.E.W. & McDougal, B.J. (1986) Char-
Mauldin, E.A., Morris, D.O. & Goldschmidt, M.H. (2002) Ret-
acterization of lichenoid-psoriasiform dermatosis of Springer
rospective study: the presence of Malassezia in feline skin
Spaniels. J Am Vet Med Assoc 189, 897-901.
biopsies. A clinicopathological study. Vet Dermatol, 13, 7-13.
Scott, D.W, Miller, W.H. & Griffn, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
Morris, D.O., Olivier, N.B. & Rosser, E.J. (1998) Type-1 hyper-
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, p. 929-31. W.B.
sensitivity reactions to Malassezia pachydermatis extracts in
 Saunders, Philadelphia.
atopic dogs. Am J Vet Res 59, 836-41.
Morris, D.O., Clayton, D.J., Drobatz, K.J. et al. (2002)
Lichenoid Keratosis
Response to Malasszia pacbydermatis by peripheral blood
Anderson, W.1., Scott D.W. & Luther PB. (1989) Idiopathic
mononuclear cells from clinically normal and atopic dogs.
benign lichenoid keratosis on the pinna of the ear in four dogs.
Am J Vet Res 63, 358-62.
Cornell Vet 79, 179-84.
Nagata, J. & Ishida, T. (1995) Cutaneous
sreactivity to
Gross, T.L. & Ihrke, PJ. (1992) Hyperplastic diseases of the epi-
Malassezia pachydermatis in dogs with seborrheic dermatitis.
dermis. In: Veterinary Dermatopathology: A Macroscopic and
In: Proceedings of the 11th AAVD/ACVD Meeting, Santa Fe,
Microscopic Evaluation of Canine and Feline Skin Disease
p.11.
(T.L. Gross, P.J. Ihrke & E.J. Walder), p. 85-6. Mosby Year
Scott, D.W. (1992a) Bacteria and yeast on the surface and within
Book, St Louis.
non-inflamed hair follicles of skin biopsies from dogs with
Smith, D.I., Vnencak-Jones, C.L. & Boyd, A.S. (2002) T-
non-neoplastic dermatoses. Cornell Vet 82, 379-86.
lymphocyte clonality in benign lichenoid keratoses. J Cutan
Scott, D.W. (1992b) Bacteria and yeast on the surface and within
Pathol 29, 623-4.
non-inflamed hair follicles of skin biopsies from cats with non-
neoplastic dermatoses. Cornell Vet 82, 371-7.
Inflamed Linear Epidermal Nevus
Beningo, K.E. & Scott, D.W. (2001) Idiopathic linear pustular
Hyperplastic Dermatosis of the West Highland White Terrier
Nett, C.S., Reichler, I, Grest, P et al. (2001) Epidermal dyspla-
Dermatol 12, 209-13.
sia and Malassezia infection in two West Highland White
Bolognia, J.L., Orlow, S.J. & Glick, S.A. (1994) Lines of
Terrier siblings: an inherited skin disorder or reaction to severe
Blaschko. J Am Acad Dermatol 31, 157-90.
Malassezia infection? Vet Dermatol 12, 285-90.
White, S.D., Rosychuk, R.A.W., Scott, K.V. et al. (1993) Inflam-
Scott, D.W. & Miller, WH. (1989) Epidermal dysplasia and
matory linear verrucous epidermal nevus in four dogs. Vet
Matassezia pacbydermatis infection in West Highland White
Dermatol 3, 107-14.
Terriers. Vet Dermatol 1, 25-36.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
Giant Cell Dermatosis in FeLV-positive Cats
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, p. 928-9. W.B. Saunders,
Gross, T.L., Clark, E.G., Hargis, A.M. et al. (1993) Giant cell
Philadelphia.
dermatosis in FeLV-positive cats. Vet Dermatol 4, 117-22.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 8
Diseases with abnormal cornification
The broad term ‘cornification’ encompasses all of the
 nuclei within the stratum corneum. The granular layer, or
processes that lead to the formation of the horny layer of 
 stratum granulosum, may be thickened (hypergranulosis)
the epidermis. These include keratinization, which is a
 or thinned (hypogranulosis).
series of genetically programmed events by which ker-
 Hyperkeratosis is defined as an increase in the cornified
atinocytes in the epidermal basal cell layer mature and 
layer, and technically may be orthokeratotic (nuclei not
die, producing the stratum corneum. Cornification also
retained) or parakeratotic. Conventionally, “hyperkera-
includes the formation of all of the other constituent parts
tosis’ is often used synonymously with ‘orthokeratotic
of the lipid-rich intercellular domain that provide the
hyperkeratosis'. Diseases of cornification are not neces-
glue’ that aids in binding terminally differentiated cor-
sarily hyperkeratotic.
neocytes to maintain a relatively impermeable barrier
Other diseases not included in this group may have
(Williams & Elias, 1993; Scott et al., 2001; Chu et al.,
hyperkeratosis or parakeratosis. For example, as occurs
2003; Kimyai-Asadi et al., 2003). Thus, keratinization is
prototypically in sebaceous adenitis, some infectious
but one part of the process of cornification; the terms are
inflammatory diseases may destroy sebaceous glands
not synonymous.
(exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus, demodicosis,
 Disorders of cornification may be subdivided into dis-
leishmaniasis), which can lead to secondary hyperkera-
orders of desquamation (retention hyperkeratosis)
10
tosis. Diseases of abnormal follicular growth and dif-
hyperproliferative disorders (Williams & Elias, 1993).
ferentiation, such as endocrine alopecia and follicular
Hyperproliferative disorders can be further subdivided
dysplasia, can result in follicular hyperkeratosis (follicu-
into diseases with a ‘primary defect in the regulation of
 lar keratosis). Diffuse parakeratosis may be a feature of
epidermal growth or, more commonly, secondary to a
allergic conditions such as canine sarcoptic acariasis, irri-
defect in barrier formation, resulting from one or more
tant reactions, apoptotic necrosis as in erythema multi-
abnormal epidermal structural components' (Williams &
forme, or any disease with significant spongiosis. The
Elias, 1993). Categorization of the defect leading to an
 diseases included in this chapter have abnormal develop-
abnormality of cornification requires molecular studies
 ment of the cornifed layer as a predominant and primary
beyond clinical and routine histopathological evaluations.
pathologic feature.
If molecular studies supporting a specific defect are not
available, the broad term ‘disorder of cornification’ is
preferred as the more narrow term; “disorder of kera-
PRIMARY SEBORRHEA AND
tinization’ connotes only a defect in keratinocyte differ-
SEBORRHEIC DERMATITIS
entiation. Most diseases of cornification have a hereditary,
metabolic, or nutritional cause.
Clinical features (Figures 8.1 through 8.4)
 Diseases with abnormal cornification are usually char-
acterized by the accumulation of abnormal keratin on the
Seborrhea is a confusing, nonspecifc name that has been
epidermal surface and within superficial hair follicles. The
used to describe the clinical signs of excessive scaling,
appearance of the keratin layer is not of the normal bas-
crusting, and greasiness. Seborrhea has connoted specifc,
kerweave type and may be compact, lamellar (laminated),
heritable disorders of cornification as well as, more gener-
or parakeratotic. Basketweave keratin has regular layers
ically, the scaling and greasiness associated with a number
with clear spaces, resembling scalloped lace. Lamellar or
of unrelated skin diseases such as hypothyroidism,
laminated keratin is condensed but still separates slightly
 demodicosis, sarcoptic acariasis, and flea allergy dermati-
into layers. Compact keratin is very dense and tends not
 tis (secondary seborrhea). A relationship between the
to separate. Parakeratosis is persistence of keratinocyte
term ‘seborrhea' and sebaceous gland function has not
161
162
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 8.1 Primary seborrhea in a black Cocker Spaniel. The area has
Fig. 8.4 Seborrheic dermatitis on the lateral thorax of a blond
been clipped to allow better visualization of scales and crusts.
Cocker Spaniel. Candle wax-like keratinous deposits mat the
haircoat.
been shown, despite ‘seborrhea’ meaning the excessive
flow of sebum.
 Primary seborrhea and seborrheic dermatitis are used
more narrowly to describe inherited abnormalities char-
acterized by exfoliation that are seen in specifc breeds of
dogs. Cornification is the entire process of the formation
of the horny envelope, including keratinization plus the
development of the lipid-rich interstitium (see p. 161).
Defects in these complicated processes can lead to differ-
ent exfoliative skin diseases with variable clinical expres-
sion. Epidermal hyperproliferation has been proven to be
present in primary seborrhea (Kwochka & Rademakers,
1989). However, evidence is not conclusive as to whether
Fig. 8.2 Severe primary seborrhea in a blond Cocker Spaniel
 primary seborrhea is caused by a true defect in cornifica-
Adherent keratinous deposits mat the hair rermaining within the par-
tially alopecic lesion.
tion, such as occurs in ichthyosis (see p. 174). Primary
seborrhea currently is separated from ichthyotic disor-
ders. Clarification based on further molecular evidence
awaits further studies. Secondary pyoderma or Malassezia
dermatitis may be involved in the pathogenesis of sebor-
rheic dermatitis.
The etiopathologic relationship between vitamin A-
u si ns red e sisp aaisan
known. The similarity of affected breeds and histologic
features suggests a fnal common pathway for the two
entities. Further studies are needed.
The terms ‘seborrhea sicca', ‘seborrhea oleosa', and
'seborrheic dermatitis' have been used to describe dry and
waxy, oily, and focal more inflamed lesions, respectively.
These terms remain useful in the clinical characterization
of primary seborrhea. Seborrheic dermatitis usually
Occurs focally in dogs with seborrhea oleosa.
Fig. 8.3 Seborrheic dermatitis on the ventrum of a blond Cocker
Clinical signs commonly associated with primary seb-
orrhea include variable scaling, crusting, dryness, waxi-
Spaniel. Erythermatous, well-demarcated, circular plaques with
adherent keratinous debris are accompanied by lichenification and
ness, and oiliness of the skin and haircoat. A ceruminous
hy per pigmentation.
or waxy otitis externa often is a concomitant feature. A
Diseases with abnormal cornification
163
rancid odor is a consistent fnding in the oily forms of
hypothyroidism, or less commonly, gonadal hormone
primary seborrhea. Erythema and alopecia are present in
aberrations. Rarely, clinically similar lesions may be asso-
varying degrees. Lesions are most commonly located on
ciated with dietary fat deficiency, or malabsorption or
the trunk. Focally severe lesions also may be present on
maldigestion. Scaling and crusting ('secondary sebor-
the pinnae and preen gland (caudal gland). Pruritus is
rhea') can be seen with many other dermatoses, including
variable. Secondary pyoderma and Malassezia dermatitis
 ectoparasitism, pyoderma, dermatophytosis, autoimmune
are common. Regional or generalized lymphadenopathy
disease, neoplasia, and environmental influences such as
may be present in more severe cases.
dry heat.
 Seborrheic dermatitis is characterized by erythematous,
well demarcated to coalescing, somewhat circular
Biopsy site selection
plaques. Adherent keratinous debris mats the surround-
ing hair and varies in color from yellow to brown, and in
Care should be taken to sample lesions with ample adher-
texture from greasy to candle wax-like. Alopecia, licheni-
ent scales and crusts. Uninflamed lesions should be pref-
fcation, and hyperpigmentation may be evident in older
erentially sampled, as secondary inflammatory changes
lesions. Lesions are located primarily on the thorax, espe-
may obscure the diagnosis of primary seborrhea. If
cially ventrally.
 inflammation is severe, it may be helpful to delay biopsy
An unexplained a
adult-onset phenomenon
1closely
until secondary pyoderma or Malassezia dermatitis is
resembling primary seborrhea can occur occasionally,
controlled.
especially in Cocker Spaniels. Dogs without a prior
history of primary seborrhea may develop visually and
Histopathology (Figures 8.5 through 8.7)
histopathologically identical skin disease, seemingly trig-
 gered by an acquired, severe inflammatory dermatosis.
Difficulty in the histopathologic evaluation of primary
After successful management of the triggering disease,
seborrhea arises from the presence of secondary inflam-
symptoms of primary seborrhea remain long-term.
The
mation, or seborrheic dermatitis. Seborrheic dermatitis
mechanisms of how severe inflammatory skin disease can
can mimic chronic dermatitis of varying etiology, partic-
alter the long term course of cornifcation are not known;
ularly chronic allergic dermatitis or chronic superfcial
s r rao r se sn sdr
pyoderma. Since these diseases may be present concur-
 r a   
rently in dogs with seborrhea, the histopathologic picture
in this condition.
can be very confusing. Thus, the most convincing evi-
Breeds affected with primary seborrhea include
the
dence of primary seborrhea is often best obtained from
uninflamed skin lesions.
Shar Pei (usually seborrhea oleosa); and the Doberman
Hyperkeratosis is the principal feature of uninflamed
Pinscher, Irish Setter German Shepherd Dog, Miniature
 primary seborrhea. Keratin is somewhat amorphous and
Schnauzer and Dachshund (usually seborrhea sicca). Seb-
loosely layered; the typical basketweave appearance of
orrhea oleosa is seen most frequently and most severely
normal keratin is absent. In lesions typified by the disease
  ,     
in spaniels, there is often prominent keratin plugging of
reported in the Cavalier King Charles Spaniel (see p. 174),
superficial follicles, which may result in distension of the
the histologic findings more closely resemble those of
infundibula. This creates a pseudopapillomatous or digi-
primary seborrhea of the Cocker Spaniel and other
tated confguration to the epithelial surface, as well as a
spaniel breeds; molecular studies are required to identify
 predominantly vertical rather than horizontal distribution
which classification is most appropriate for this condition.
of keratin. The epidermis may be normal or slightly acan-
Clinically similar lesions are seen in hyperplastic der-
thotic in uninflamed lesions and dermal inflammation is
matosis of the West Highland White Terrier; however, dif-
 minimal to absent.
ferences in the histopathology of this disease preclude its
Most cases of primary seborrhea also have concurrent
inclusion in the primary seborrhea group (see Chapter 7).
lesions of seborrheic dermatitis. There is moderate to
Most dogs with primary seborrhea have a history of
severe acanthosis and hyperkeratosis, accompanied by
developing lesions during the frst year of life; the syn-
discrete, mound-shaped areas of parakeratosis and crust-
drome increases in severity with age. Sex predilections
ing. These parakeratotic caps or spikes form commonly
have not been noted.
at the openings ('shoulders') of follicular ostia, parti-
Clinical differential diagnoses for primary seborrhea
cularly in the Cocker Spaniel and other spaniel breeds,
are legion and include any disease that can initiate exfo-
and have been termed “follicular epaulettes'. The forma-
liative dermatitis. Early age of onset is a clue in the diag-
tion of follicular epaulettes may be the most distinc-
nosis of primary seborrhea. Visually similar clinical signs
tive histopathologic feature of seborrheic dermatitis, at
are associated with endocrine abnormalities such as
least in these breeds. Follicular keratosis is often less
164
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 8.5 Primary seborrhea in a Cocker
Spaniel. Loosely organized keratin is
distending follicular infundibula.
Fig. 8.6 Higher 　 magnification of
primary seborrhea in a Cocker Spaniel
demonstrating fronds of keratin widen-
ing follicular ostia.
pronounced than in uninflamed primary seborrhea and
Uninflamed primary seborrhea resembles a reported
may be accompanied by infundibular parakeratosis.
form of ichthyosis in the Cavalier King Charles Spaniel
Dermal inflammation of seborrheic dermatitis is mixed
(see p. 174). The mild keratinocyte vacuolation in con-
and variable. Superfcial perivascular to interstitial in-
junction with enlarged irregular keratohyalin granules, as
flammation is composed of a mixed population of cells,
seen in ichthyosis of the Cavalier King Charles Spaniel,
including lymphocytes, plasma cells, macrophages, and
is not present in primary seborrhea; however, the two
variable neutrophils. Eosinophils and mast cells may also
conditions are otherwise identical. In severe lesions of
be found, particularly in cases further complicated by
primary seborrhea that have pronounced follicular ker-
concurrent hypersensitivity disorders or Malassezia der-
atosis, differentiation between primary seborrhea and
matitis. Inflammation often extends around adnexal
vitamin A-responsive dermatosis may be diffcult but is
appendages.
clinically unimportant. Histologic and clinical similarities
Diseases with abnormal cornification
165
Fig. 8.8 Vitarmin A-responsive derrmatosis in a black Cocker
Spaniel. Multifocal, well-demarcated, alopecic plaques are present
on the ventral abdomen. Note severe frond-like accumulations of
keratinous debris ("follicular fronds’ or “follicular casts"). {From
Ihrke, PJ. & Goldschmidt, M.H. (1983) Vitamin A responsive der-
matosis in the dog. J Arm Vet Med Assoc 182, 687-90. Reprinted
with permission.)
Fig. 8.7 Seborrheic dermatitis in primary seborrhea. Note parak
eratosis in a mound at the edge of a follicular ostium, acanthosis,
and superficial dermal inflammation.
suggest etiopathogenic overlap of these two syndromes.
Sebaceous adenitis with severe follicular keratosis (follic-
ular fronds) may appear similar; however, sebaceous
adenitis features a generalized absence of sebaceous
Fig. 8.9 Closer view of the dog in Fig. 8.8. Keratinous follicular
glands. Ear margin seborrhea may be identical to primary
fronds are ermerging from dilated hair follicles. {Frorm Ihrke, PJ. &
seborrhea, but is confined to the ear margins.
Goldschmidt, M.H. (1983) Vitamin A responsive dermatosis in the
The diagnosis of seborrheic dermatitis should not be
dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 182, 687-90. Reprinted with permission.)
diffcult if concurrent lesions of primary seborrhea are
found. If epidermal and follicular hyperkeratosis, as
expected in primary seborrhea, is mild in the specimens
Spaniel (Ihrke & Goldschmidt, 1983; Scott, 1986).
available, it may be impossible to separate the lesions of
Marked breed predilection and features in common with
seborrheic dermatitis from those of other chronic der-
other primary cornification defects suggest a hereditary
matitides, particularly chronic allergic dermatitis.
    e si  jo a si
vitamin A-responsive dermatosis from primary seborrhea.
Vitamin  A-responsive dermatosis is an adult-onset
VITAMIN A-RESPONSIVE DERMATOSIS
disease, while primary seborrhea usually begins in
Clinical features (Figures 8.8 and 8.9)
young dogs, generally before 1 year of age. Vitamin A-
responsive dermatosis in dogs bears resemblance to
Vitamin A-responsive dermatosis is a rare abnormality of
phrynoderma in humans, which is linked to vitamin A
cornification that is seen predominantly in the Cocker
deficiency (Nieves & Goldsmith, 2003).
166
Diseases of the epidermis
The etiopathologic relationship between vitamin A-
Biopsy site selection
responsive dermatosis and primary seborrhea is not
A plaque with prominent follicular casting should be
known. The similarity of affected breeds and histologic
features suggests a fnal common pathway for the two
sampled. Care must be taken so that adherent keratinous
 debris is not dislodged from the specimen during biopsy.
entities. Further studies are needed.
Multifocal, alopecic, well-demarcated, erythematous
plaques characterize vitamin A-responsive dermatosis.
Histopathology (Figures 8.10 and 8.11)
Severe follicular plugging with tenacious frond-like ker-
atinous debris (follicular fronds’ or “follicular casts') is a
Severe follicular keratosis is the histopathologic hallmark
characteristic feature. Follicular papules with varying
of vitamin A-responsive dermatosis. Similar follicular
degrees of scaling, crusting, and alopecia are seen in the
 lesions occur in vitamin A deficiency in humans (phryno-
surrounding skin. Lesions are most prominent on the
derma). Distention of follicular ostia and protrusion of
ventral and lateral chest and abdomen. Most affected
massive plugs of keratin (follicular fronds) are seen. Con-
dogs have a dry, dull, disheveled haircoat that may epilate
tiguous dilated follicular infundibula may be mistaken for
easily. A concomitant ceruminous otitis with a rancid
 an uneven or papillated epidermal surface. Dilated folli-
'seborrheic’ odor commonly is present.
cles may rupture, leading to pustular follicular and peri-
This syndrome is seen almost exclusively in Cocker
follicular inflammation (furunculosis).
Spaniels. Similar lesions have been seen in several Minia-
 Epidermal hyperkeratosis accompanies the folicular
ture Schnauzers. Vitamin A-responsive dermatosis is an
changes. The epidermis is mildly to moderately acan-
adult-onset disease. Sex predilections have not been
thotic. Dermal inflammation varies from minimal to mod-
noted.
erate and may resemble the dermal component of
The major clinical differential diagnosis is primary
seborrheic dermatitis (see p. 161).
seborrhea with seborrheic dermatitis, as seen in Cocker
 Differential diagnosis is relatively uncomplicated due to
Spaniels. Vitamin A-responsive dermatosis presents as a
 the severity of follicular keratosis observed in this syn-
 predominantly ventral, more focal disease, and has more 
drome. Follicular plugging is seen in primary seborrhea
prominent follicular keratinous deposits than does
and late stage sebaceous adenitis, as well as ear margin
primary seborrhea. The adult onset of this syndrome aids
seborrhea. Ear margin seborrhea is confned to pinnal
in the differentiation from primary seborrhea, which is
edges. Sebaceous glands are predominantly or diffusely
generally a juvenile-onset disease.
absent in sebaceous adenitis. Keratin accumulation in
Fig. 8.10 Vitamin A-responsive der-
matosis in a Schnauzer. Note massive
distention of  follicular infundibula
with keratin.
Diseases with abnormal cornification
167
Fig. 8.11 Higher magnification of
Fig. 8.10.
superfcial follicles is qualitatively similar but is signif-
cantly more severe than in primary seborrhea (see p. 161).
Differentiation between severe primary seborrhea and
vitamin A-responsive dermatosis may be difficult but
unimportant; histologic similarity suggests etiopathogenic
overlap of these two syndromes.
CANINE EAR MARGIN SEBORRHEA
(Synonym: canine ear margin dermatosis)
Clinical features (Figures 8.12 and 8.13)
Canine ear margin seborrhea is a relatively common pre-
sumed abnormality in cornification. Lesions are confned
Fig. 8.12 Canine ear margin seborrhea in a Doberman Pinscher.
to the margins of the pinnae. Marked breed predilection
Adherent keratinous deposits are present on the partially alopecic
for the Dachshund and features in common with other
margin of the pinna. {Photograph courtesy H.T. Power; case mate-
rial University of California, Davis.)
cornification abnormalities suggest a hereditary basis for
most cases. Ear margin seborrhea also may present as a
clinical feature of hypothyroidism.
 Adherent keratinous deposis are present on both the
cases (Scott et al., 2001). Most dogs with ear margin seb-
lateral and medial margins of the pinna. Considerable
orrhea have lesions confned to the pinnae. When ear
variation occurs in the character and color of the kerati-
margin seborrhea is seen secondary to hypothyroidism,
nous accumulations, which vary from greasy to waxy,
other skin lesions suggestive of hypothyroidism usually
tenacious to exfoliative, and yellow to brown. Follicular
are present (see Chapter 19).
casts or plugs sometimes entrap hair. Partial alopecia of
 Canine ear margin seborrhea is seen most commonly in
the pinnal margin is common, and keratin mats the
Dachshunds, although it may be seen in other breeds of
remaining hair. A waxy, seborrheic odor often is present.
dogs with pendulous ears. Ear margin seborrhea second-
Aggressive removal of tenacious debris may cause erosion
ary to hypothyroidism may be seen in any breed. Age or
or ulceration. The syndrome usually is asymptomatic,
sex predilections have not been noted.
although pruritus may be seen. Fissuring and secondary
Clinical differential diagnoses for ear margin seborrhea
bacterial infection can occur in unusually severe, chronic
are few. The syndrome may resemble early vasculitis of
168
Diseases of the epidermis
the pinnal margin (which is initially characterized by
Biopsy site selection
scaling and hair loss), and early, localized canine sar-
A small portion of the margin of the pinna with adherent
coptic acariasis. With the exception of ischemic derma-
topathy/canine dermatomyositis (see Chapter 3), overt
keratinous deposits should be sampled. Cosmetically
acceptable as well as representative biopsy specimens may
vasculitis of the pinnae causes gross tissue destruction
be obtained using a single-edged razor blade or a scalpel
 in all but the very earliest clinical stages. Ischemic der-
 blade to amputate a small portion of the rounded margin 
matopathy/canine dermatomyositis does not preferen-
of the pinna. Care should be taken not to dislodge
tially affect the margins of the pinnae. Canine sarcoptic
attached keratinous material.
acariasis is very pruritic, in contrast to ear margin
seborrhea.
Histopathology (Figure 8.14)
Ear margin seborrhea is characterized by severe hyper-
keratosis, predominantly manifested by follicular kerato-
sis. Keratin distends follicular ostia and may give the
epidermal surface a pronounced pseudopapillomatous
appearance. Keratin encircles protruding hair shafts to
produce follicular ^fronds'. Parakeratosis and neutrophilic
serocelular crusting are variable. Acanthosis is mild to
moderate and may not be present diffusely within the
specimen.
Superfcial and periadnexal mixed dermal inflammation
is variable and may be absent. The inflammatory infltrate
 may include lymphocytes, plasma cells, macrophages, and
neutrophils.
Lesions of ear margin seborrhea closely resemble
vitamin A-responsive dermatosis or severe primary seb-
 orrhea. Knowledge of site affected is important diagnos-
Fig. 8.13 Closer view of the pinna of the dog in Fig. 8.12. Follic-
ular casts entrap hair on the margin of the partially alopecic pinna.
tically and may be revealed if pinnal cartilage is included
(Photograph courtesy H.T. Power; case material University of
 in the specimen. Follicular frond formation in ear margin
California, Davis.)
seborrhea also is similar to sebaceous adenitis; delineation
Fig. 8.14 Ear margin seborrhea in a
 dog dermonstrating pronounced follic-
ular keratosis.
Diseases with abnormal cornification
169
Fig. 8.15 Nasal hyperkeratosis in a middle-aged Basset Hound.
The planum nasale exhibits prominent, dry, adherent keratinous
tmaterial.
is based on the general absence of sebaceous glands in
Fig. 8.16 Digital hyperkeratosis in a 9-year-old Cocker Spaniel.
Excess keratin has been worn off the weight-bearing surfacesleaving
sebaceous adenitis. Differentiation of these two entities
proliferative frond-like material at the periphery of the pawpads.
Asdonq ureu iea ien ioey au Aq paieduos aq Keu
specimens may be superficial, resulting in lack of visible
sebaceous glands.
haired skin are not seen with this syndrome and affected
dogs are otherwise healthy.
NASODIGITAL HYPERKERATOSIS
 Nasal hyperkeratosis is rare in the cat and digital hyper-
(Synonym: idiopathic nasodigital hyperkeratosis)
keratosis is uncommon. A case observed by one author
(T.L.G.) had isolated callus-like lesions on three individ-
seo leuag omi uaas s (Ta) roqne auo 'sped ien
Clinical features (Figures 8.15 and 8.16)
with hyperkeratosis that partially occluded the nares,
Nasodigital hyperkeratosis is an idiopathic disorder of
resulting in respiratory diffculty.
cornification affecting the planum nasale and pawpads.
The syndrome usually begins either in late middle-aged
The syndrome is common in the older dog and uncom-
or elderly dogs. Although some sources indicate that
mon to rare in the cat. Nasodigital hyperkeratosis
breed predilections are not seen (Scott et al., 2001), the
increases in occurrence and severity with age and proba-
authors believe this syndrome to be much more common
bly represents a senile change. Lesions may involve either 
in Cocker Spaniels, Beagles, and Basset Hounds. Sex
the planum nasale, the pawpads, or both.
predilections have not been noted. Bengal cats may be at
The normally smooth, pliable, shiny planum nasale
increased risk.
becomes dry, frm, and hyperplastic. Wide variation
Nasodigital hyperkeratosis of older dogs is visually dis-
occurs in surface changes. Prominent, adherent, dry ker-
 tinctive and is generally not confused with other diseases.
atinous material may accentuate the normal cobblestone
 Early discoid lupus erythematosus or pemphigus erythe
pattern of the planum nasale. Conversely, either frond-
matosus involving only the planum nasale may mimic
like keratinous proliferations or verrucous, ridged pro-
 nasal hyperkeratosis if these diseases have only minimally
liferations with feather-like splitting may obscure the
disturbed the normal planum architecture. Similarly,
normal cobblestone architecture. Inflammation is not a
digital hyperkeratosis could be confused with pemphigus
feature of uncomplicated nasal hyperkeratosis. However,
foliaceus that is restricted to the pawpads. Nasal para-
fissuring can lead to secondary inflammation, and bacte-
q A (or 'd ss) s rt Jo si
rial and Malassezia infection. Although digital hyper-
similar, but occurs in dogs less than 1 year of age. Famil-
keratosis affects the entire surface of all pawpads, excess 
keratin is worn off weight-bearing surfaces leaving pro-
 has specifc breed predilections and earlier age of onset
liferative debris predominantly at the pad margins (Scott
(see p. 179). “Hard pad disease’ may be seen in conjunc-
et al., 2001). Abnormalities in cornification involving 
tion with distemper virus infection; associated systemic
170
Diseases of the epidermis
iq 'spedaed ioae Aeu sisusiat 'uasaid are suis
on the degree of disruption of the keratin layer. Neu-
lesions also should be present elsewhere.
trophils are intermingled with lymphocytes, plasma
cells, and macrophages; pigmentary incontinence may be
present. In the single feline case observed by one author
Biopsy site selection
(T.L.G.) there was orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis with
Lesions are best sampled by 4 mm punch biopsy of the
subjacent hypergranulosis, similar to dogs. Hyperkerato-
lateral planum nasale or the margins of the less weight-
 m ('a) s p Po    5
bearing pawpads. Cosmetically, less obvious deformation
and severe.
of the planum nasale results from lateral biopsy. Hemo-
 Differential diagnoses are few, as the hyperkeratotic
stasis may be difficult at these locations.
features in skin from the pad or nasal planum are fairly
typical. Familial pawpad hyperkeratosis may be indistin-
guishable (see p. 179) and consideration of age and breed 
Histopathology (Figure 8.17)
affected may be important in differentiation. In cases with
The primary lesion of uninflamed nasodigital hyperker-
secondary diffuse parakeratosis, zinc-responsive skin
atosis is irregular mild to moderate acanthosis accompa-
disease and nasal parakeratosis of Labrador Retrievers
nied by moderate to severe orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis.
may need to be considered (see p. 188 and below). Nasal
There is variable hypergranulosis. Fissuring of the keratin
and pedal lesions only are not generally expected in zinc-
layer is associated with secondary neutrophilic serocellu-
 responsive dermatosis. Clinical differentiation from nasal
lar crusting and parakeratosis. Crusting and parakerato-
 parakeratosis of Labrador Retrievers may be required.
sis may be distributed in columns or may become diffuse
and severe. Dermal inflammation is variable and depends
NASAL PARAKERATOSIS OF
LABRADOR RETRIEVERS
Clinical features (Figure 8.18)
Nasal parakeratosis of Labrador Retrievers is a rare
syndrome characterized by proliferative changes of the
planum nasale. The strong breed predilection supports
the likelihood of a hereditary basis, and an autosomal
Hig. 8.17 Nasodigital hyperkeratosis. The orthokeratotic and
Fig. 8.18 Nasal parakeratosis of Labrador Retrievers. Rough, pro-
parakeratotic layer is fragmented or fissured.
liferative keratinous debris is present on the planurm nasale.
Diseases with abnormal cornification
171
recessive mode of inheritance has been hypothesized (Page
Differential diagnosis is not problematic, as nasal
et al., 2003). Although electron microscopic features indi-
parakeratosis of Labrador Retrievers is visually dis-
cated an altered cornification process, it is not known if
tinctive, develops at less than 1 year of age, and occurs
the syndrome is a primary defect in cornifcation or an
exclusively in Labrador Retrievers and their related cross-
inflammatory disease that affects the cornification process
breeds. Nasal parakeratosis of Labrador Retrievers shares
adversely (Page et al., 2003).
some clinical features with nasodigital hyperkeratosis.
 Affected dogs develop dry, rough, proliferative, adher-
However, nasodigital hyperkeratosis occurs in middle
ent keratinous debris on their planum nasale. In the early
aged or elderly dogs and may be seen in a variety of
stages the process does not ablate the normal cobblestone
breeds. Lesions seen with zinc-responsive dermatosis
appearance; later severe lesions may be ablative. Lesions
rarely are limited to the planum nasale and are seen pre-
are more severe on the dorsal surface of the planum. A
dominantly in northern breed dogs. In contrast to nasal
color change from black to gray or brown may accom-
parakeratosis, autoimmune diseases that affect the
pany the proliferation. In severely affected dogs, fssuring
planum, such as discoid lupus erythematosus and pem-
can lead to secondary inflammation and bacterial infec-
 phigus foliaceus, alter the normal cobblestone architec
tion. Several owners have noted that the surface of the
ture of the planum nasale early in the progression of the
planum nasale becomes a paler shade of grey or brown
disease. Skin biopsy is required for defnitive diagnosis.
after the surface is wet (Page et al., 2003). Affected dogs
are otherwise healthy.
Biopsy site selection
 Grossly similar lesions affected the pawpads in two of
18 reported dogs; histopathologic analysis was not avail-
Biopsy specimens are best acquired with punch biopsy
able and thus it is unknown whether those lesions repre-
technique. A 4mm punch can be used to sample the
sent the same condition (Page et al., 2003). Familial
lateral aspects of the planum nasale. Cosmetically, less
 obvious deformation of the planum nasale is noted when
p. 179), but the relationship of these two conditions is not
specimens are taken laterally.
known.
The syndrome has been seen exclusively in Labrador
Histopathology (Figures 8.19 and 8.20)
Retrievers or their crossbreeds. Black, yellow, and choco-
late Labrador Retrievers are affected (Peters et al., 2003).
 There is mild to severe parakeratosis with moderate acan-
Dogs develop lesions between 6 months and 1 year of age
thosis. The keratin layer may be arranged in peaks. Serum
(Page et al., 2003). Thirteen of 18 affected dogs were
lakes and smaller vacuoles accumulate in the keratin layer,
males (Page et al., 2003).
often strikingly, and are accompanied by degenerating
Fig. 8.19 Nasal parakeratosis of
Labrador Retrievers. Note peaked
parakeratosis, foci of epidermal pallor,
and large serurm lakes at left.
172
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 8.21 Congenital follicular parakeratosis in a Rottweiler.
Adherent keratinous debris surrounds the planurm nasale. (Photo
graph courtesy D.W. Scott.)
ferent clinical presentations (see p. 188 and Chapter 4),
knowledge of lesion distribution and breed affected will
Fig. 8.20 Higher magnification of nasal parakeratosis demonstrat-
 allow differentiation. Serum lakes may be found in zinc-
ing large serurm lakes within parakeratosis. There is acanthosis and
responsive dermatosis, but are often organized in colum-
superficial dermatitis.
nar or peaked confguration. Lakes of serum are not a
typical feature of superfcial necrolytic dermatitis. Small
vacuoles within the parakeratotic layer are a common
neutrophils. There are rare, brightly eosinophilic anc
feature of many parakeratotic conditions and are not
shrunken (apoptotic or dyskeratotic) keratinocytes in the
specifically diagnostic (Senter et al., 2002; Peters et al.,
spinosum, often contiguous to the overlying parakeratotic
2003). However, the numbers of vacuoles seen in nasal
layer. There may be a zone of epidermal pallor just
parakeratosis of Labrador Retrievers are, in general,
beneath the parakeratotic layer, characterized by bal-
greater than in other parakeratotic conditions (Peters
looning cytoplasmic vacuolation of keratinocytes. Neu-
et al., 2003).
trophils and lymphocytes migrate through the epidermis
The dermis features superfcial perivascular to band-
CONGENITAL FOLLICULAR
like inflammation consisting of lymphocytes, macro-
PARAKERATOSIS
phages, plasma cells, and scattered neutrophils. There is
moderate to severe superficial dermal edema, and pig
Clinical features (Figures 8.21 through 8.24)
 mentary incontinence, particularly in severe lesions of the
nasal planum. Fibrosis was reported (Page et al., 2003).
Congenital follicular parakeratosis is a rare disorder of
Immunoperoxidase staining for IgG was negative in four
cornification (Lewis et al., 1998; Scott & Miller, 2000).
dogs tested (Page et al., 2003).
The syndrome is presumed to be heritable, as six of seven
The principal differential diagnosis for nasal paraker-
cases reported in the literature are Rottweilers. An X-
atosis is zinc-responsive dermatosis. If epidermal pallor is
linked mode of inheritance is suggested by the fact that
present beneath parakeratosis, then superficial necrolytic
all cases reported to date have been in female dogs (Scott
dermatitis may be considered. As zinc-responsive skin
et al., 2001). Two Labrador Retrievers seen by the authors
disease and superficial necrolytic dermatitis have very dif-
responded to vitamin A therapy.
Diseases with abnormal cornification
173
Fig. 8.22 Closer view of the dog in Fig. 8.21. Keratinous debris
adheres to the skin and ensheathes the hair of the pinna. (Photo-
graph courtesy D.W. Scott.)
Fig. 8.24 Closer view of the dog in Fig. 8.23. Thick, keratinous
debris adheres to the skin. (Photograph courtesy S. Radowicz.)
Malassezia dermatitis is common and, when present,
increases pruritus. Affected puppies may be stunted. Mul-
tiple, noncutaneous congenital defects have been seen in
both affected dogs and their littermates (Lewis et al.,
1998; Scott & Miller, 2000).
Lesions are present at birth but rapidly increase in
severity. Six of seven cases reported have been Rottweil-
ers; the seventh was a Siberian Husky. Two cases were
observed by the authors in young Labrador Retrievers. All
 known affected dogs have been female.
 Clinical differential diagnoses are few as this is a highly
characteristic, early onset genodermatosis. Ichthyosis
shares some clinical features, but commonly also affects
Fig. 8.23 Congenital follicular parakeratosis in a Labrador
the planum nasale and pawpads. The linear hyperplastic
Retriever. In this view there is the illusion of subtle partial alopecia
lesions seen with congenital follicular parakeratosis also
caused by clumping of the hair. (Photograph courtesy S. Radowicz.)
may be similar to those seen in inflamed linear epidermal
nevus (see Chapter 7); however, dogs with the latter syn-
Affected dogs have a generalized exfoliative dermatitis.
drome do not exhibit generalized exfoliative disease.
Thick keratinous debris adheres to the skin and
ensheathes and clumps the hair in yellow, brown, or
Biopsy site selection
black, waxy follicular casts. Lesions may frst develop on
the muzzle and pinnae but rapidly generalize. Hair loss
Multiple areas with maximum involvement should be
may be present at sites of focal adherent debris. Relatively
sampled. Care should be taken that adherent keratinous
glabrous regions such as the groin and axillae may be less
deposits are not dislodged during procurement.
severely affected. Linear hyperplastic lesions on the trunk
following the lines of Blaschko (a visually sriking, repet-
Histopathology (Figures 8.25 and 8.26)
itive, curvilinear pattern seen with certain heritable skin
diseases in humans; Bolognia et al., 1994) were present 
There is moderate to severe acanthosis of the epidermis
in two of the six Rottweilers (Lewis et al., 1998; Scott &
 and superficial hair follicles, and severe parakeratosis
Miller, 2000). The planum nasale and pawpads are strik-
(Lewis et al., 1998; Scott & Miller, 2000). Parakeratosis
ingly spared (Lewis et al., 1998; Scott & Miller 2000).
affects the hair follicles predominantly and distends
Affected Labrador Retrievers may give the visual appear-
infundibula; conical projections may be seen (Scott &
ance of greater hair loss than actually is present, as debris 
 Miller, 2000). Severe folliculitis or furunculosis may
ensheathes and clumps the hair. Secondary pyoderma or
 occur. There may be milder parakeratosis of the interfol-
174
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 8.25 Congenital follicular parakeratosis in a Labrador
Fig. 8.26 Higher magnification of congenital follicular parakerato
Retriever. There is accompanying folliculitis.
sis in a Labrador Retriever with accompanying inflarmmatory debris
and dermatitis.
licular epidermis (Lewis et al., 1998) or the interfollicular
which it closely resembles (see p. 191). There are also clin-
epidermis may have orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis (Scott
ical similarities and careful clinical differentiation may be
& Miller 2000). Laminar intracellular edema of the
required. The parakeratotic lesions of congenital follicu-
stratum spinosum and granulosum may be present. The
 lar parakeratosis are too massive and too predominantly
granular layer is variable in prominence. Variably sized
folliculocentric to be confused with most other parakera-
vacuoles are present throughout the parakeratotic layer,
totic conditions such as zinc-responsive dermatosis,
and were identifed as lipid on ultrastructural evaluation
generic dog food dermatosis, acrodermatitis, or superf-
(Lewis et al., 1998). Although vacuoles are a common
cial necrolytic dermatitis.
feature of parakeratotic diseases in general, very large
vacuoles (>5μm) are reportedly seen only in congenital
ICHTHYOSIS
follicular parakeratosis (Senter et al., 2002). Malassezia
were found in one case which also featured bacterial fol-
Clinical features (Figures 8.27 through 8.30)
liculitis (Scott & Miller 2000).
Dermal inflammation varies from perivascular to
Ichthyosis is a very rare hereditary skin disease that has
lichenoid, and consists of lymphocytes and plasma cells.
been reported in the dog and, more recently, in the cat.
A similar band-like infltrate may encircle hair follicles.
Although both clinical and histopathologic similarities
Sebaceous hyperplasia may be followed by squamous
 exist between ichthyosis in dogs and cats and a heteroge-
metaplasia of glands in later stages of the disease (Lewis
neous group of heritable skin diseases in humans termed
et al., 1998).
ichthyosis or ichthyosiform dermatoses, reported cases in 
The principal differential diagnosis of congenital follic
animals do not completely match the human syndromes
ular parakeratosis is inflamed linear epidermal nevus,
(Helman et al., 1997; Credille et al., 1998; Lewis et al.,
Diseases with abnormal cornification
175
Fig. 8.27 Canine ichthyosis in a yellow Labrador Retriever. Tightly
adherent scales entrap hairs.
Fig. 8.30 Ichthyosis in a Norfolk Terrier. Tightly adherent, light
brown scales cover the abdomen.
1998; Olivry & Mason, 1998). Many subgroups of
a dozen have been most extensively
characterized
(DiGiovanna, 2003).
In veterinary medicine, classification of ichthyosis into
epidermolytic and nonepidermolytic subtypes has gained
favor (Credille et al., 1998; Olivry & Mason, 1998). Most
reported cases of canine ichthyosis are nonepidermolytic;
some of these have features in common with human lamel-
lar ichthyosis. The causes of nonepidermolytic ichthyoses
are heterogeneous. Defects in any component of the
stratum corneum, such as intercellular lipids, cornifed
envelope and, in rare cases, keratins or internal desmoso-
mal components, may result in this phenotype in humans 
(Kelsell et al., 1995; Sako et al., 1998; Norgett et al., 2000;
Fig. 8.28 Closer view of the dog seen in Fig. 8.27. The affected
Yang et al., 2001). Few specifc etiologies have been docu-
area was clipped to show the adherent dark, keratinous deposits.
mented. A Jack Russell Terrier with nonepidermolytic
ichthyosis has been described (Lewis et al., 1998). An
additional Jack Russell Terrier with an identical phenotype
 had an attenuated cornifed envelope and low transgluta-
minase 1 expression and activity, similar to forms of
autosomal recessive (lamellar) ichthyosis in humans
(Credille, K.M. & Dunstan, R.W, personal communica-
tion, 2003); transglutaminase 1 is key in the formation and
stabilization of the cornifed envelope (Credille et al.,
2001). Electron microscopic data further underscore the
heterogeneity  of  ichthyosiform  dermatoses  in  small
animals (Helman et al., 1997; Credille et al., 1998; Lewis
et al., 1998; Olivry & Mason, 1998).
Epidermolytic ichthyoses are invariably associated with
a defect in keratin synthesis. This leads to an impaired
cytoskeleton and lysis of keratinocytes. Norfolk Terriers
with epidermolytic ichthyosis have a defect in keratin 10
due to a splice site mutation (Credille et al., 2003); this
Fig. 8.29 Ichthyosis in an Australian Terrier. Dark keratinous
keratin is paired with keratin 1 in the upper epidermis and
debris is adherent to the skin.
stratum corneum (DiGiovanna, 2003).
176
Diseases of the epidermis
The cases of nonepidermolytic ichthyosis identifed to
wax and wane with periods of relative normalcy. Adher-
date are heterogeneous in their clinical presentation. In
ent scale plus dry powdery scale that is loose in the
 a jo sisi re Aq pd sase aras
haircoat may go unnoticed. Other breeds such as the
 Russell Terrier, there are tightly adherent, parchment-like,
American Bulldog may also be mildly affected.
 gray or light brown scales over most body regions includ-
Norfolk Terriers and others with epidermolytic
ing pawpads and the planum nasale. Keratinous debris
ichthyosis have cobblestoned hyperpigmented skin. Pro-
 may adhere to the haircoat and remain entrapped during
minent hyperkeratosis has been reported (Mecklenburg
hair growth, resulting in parallel rafts of keratin layered
et al., 2000); however scaling is not a prominent feature
throughout the haircoat. Coarse, thick scales with elevated
 in all cases (Credille et al., 2003; Credille, K.C., personal
margins give the skin a rough, irregular texture that may
communication, 2003). The skin of the muzzle, periocu-
enhance the normal skin surface architecture. These coarse
lar and perianal regions, pawpads, elbows, axillae, and
scales may appear similar visually to dried, cracked mud
 groin were preferentially affected in the reported mixed
in an empty riverbed. The haircoat is sparse and the
breed dog (Mecklenburg et al., 2000). Erosions may be
remaining hair is bound in keratinous deposits, which
 initiated by mild trauma due to increased keratinocyte
A sul puu t eioadone jo auiedde an suii
fragility; in the reported Norfolk Terriers, drying with a
show crateriform enlargements of follicular ostia. Lamel-
towel produced blisters (Credille et al., 2003).
lar keratinous projections are prominent, especially on
 Accompanying erythema is more likely to be seen in
flexural surfaces. Fissures develop in the areas of thickest
young animals and may diminish with age. Ectropion is
scale accumulation. Keratinous deposits are shed con-
an occasional complication of severe facial disease. Lym-
tinuously. In more severe cases of pawpad involvement,
phadenopathy may occur especially if secondary infection
 thick, dry keratinous proliferations build up, fissure, and
is present.
crumble from the pad margins. Excess keratinous material
Feline ichthyosis may be even rarer than canine
may extend outward and upward from the margins of the
ichthyosis. One Abyssinian kitten with ichthyosis has
 pads forming bizarre projections. The keratin of the claws
been reported, and had diffuse erythema and shiny
may be affected. Fisuring of the pawpads and elsewhere
abdominal skin (Credille et al., 1998).
leads to secondary infection with bacteria or Malassezia.
Breeds that have been noted to develop nonepider-
Severity of disease is extremely heterogeneous, and
molytic ichthyosis include the West Highland White
ranges from subtle to severe, and local to generalized.
 Terrier, Golden Retriever, Doberman Pinscher, Irish Setter,
Although most cases are generalized, one author (P.J.I.)
Collie, American Bulldog, Pit Bull Terrier Boston Terrier,
has seen clinicaly subtle ichthyosis affecting predomi-
Labrador Retriever, Jack Russell Terrier, Manchester
nantly the relatively glabrous ventral abdomens of young
Terrier Australian Terrier Cairn Terrier, Norfolk Terrier,
Australian Terriers, Cairn Terriers, Norfolk Terriers, and
Yorkshire Terrier, Soft Coated Wheaten Terrier, as well as
 Jack Russell Terriers. Golden Retrievers usually have mild
mixed-breed dogs. Epidermolytic ichthyosis has been
generalized scaling with facial involvement, which may
observed in a Rhodesian Ridgeback and Labrador
Fig. 8.31 Canine nonepidermolytic
ichthyosis. Laminated hyperkeratosis
extends to follicles.
Diseases with abnormal cornification
177
Fig. 8.32 Higher magnification of
Fig. 8.31. Note layered keratin, mild
acanthosis, and mild hypergranulosis.
Retriever cross (Hargis, A. M., personal communication,
2002; Mecklenburg et al., 2000), as well as in Norfolk
Terriers (Credille et al., 2003). Most cases of canine
ichthyosis have been reported as present from birth or
shortly thereafter. Sex predilections have not been noted.
Although “ichthyosis' has been reported in the Cavalier
King Charles Spaniel (Alhaidari et al., 1994), histologic
fndings closely resemble those of primary seborrhea of
the Cocker Spaniel and other spaniel breeds (see p. 161).
Appropriate classification awaits further study.
Ichthyosis is visually distinctive. If clinical signs are
reported to have been present since birth, or the presented
animal is very young, diagnosis is not diffcult. If prior
clinical history is not available, differential diagnoses
should include other diseases characterized by prominent,
adherent keratinous debris such as primary seborrhea,
sebaceous adenitis, and demodicosis. If an adult dog is
examined without benefit of historical information, diag-
nostic evaluation should include skin scrapings, fungal
cultures, and skin biopsy. Histopathology is necessary to
confrm a diagnosis of ichthyosis.
Biopsy Site selection
Areas with the most prominent adherent scaling should
be selected. Care should be taken not to dislodge the
keratin during procurement of the specimen for biopsy.
Multiple specimens should be taken.
Histopathology (Figures 8.31 through 8.36)
Fig. 8.33 Epidermolytic ichthyosis in a Rhodesian Ridgeback,
demonstrating characteristic ballooning of keratinocytes throughout
Nonepidermolytic ichthyosis is the most commonly rec-
the epidermis and follicular infundibula. (Case material courtesy
A.M. Hargis.)
ognized form of ichthyosis in dogs, often of terrier breeds,
178
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 8.34Higher magnification of epi-
dermolytic ichthyosis in the dog of Fig.
8.33. Note coarse and irregular kerato-
hyalin  granules
within ballooned
keratinocytes.
Fig. 8.35 Ichthyosis in a Cavalier King Charles Spaniel. Follicular
Fig. 8.36 Higher magnification of Fig. 8.35 showing severe follic-
infundibula are distended with keratin. (Case material courtesy A.M.
ular keratosis. Note linear, thin parakeratotic spires at edges of
Hargis.)
follicular ostia.
Diseases with abnormal cornification
179
and is characterized by a lamellar or laminated to
Multifocal and very mild swelling of superficial ker-
compact stratum corneum that is disproportionately
atinocytes is associated with a few coarse and irregular
thicker than the underlying nucleated epidermis. There
keratohyalin granules. Keratin is loose and distends folli-
are several phenotypic subtypes of ichthyosis, particularly
cles. This pattern of keratin accumulation is highly remi-
evident on electron microscopy (Credille et al., 1998;
niscent of primary seborrhea of the Cocker Spaniel (see
Olivry & Mason, 1998). In general, the epidermis is
 p. 161). Secondary inflammation (usually absent in other
mildly to moderately acanthotic, and laminated hyper-
identified types of ichthyosis) may mimic seborrheic der-
keratosis is mild to severe. Follicular infundibula are
matitis, and includes the presence of parakeratotic and
affected, but usually are not greatly distended with
serocellular caps, epaulets, or thin spires at the edges of
keratin; hair shafts remain normal. Laminated keratin is
follicular ostia. The superficial dermis has mild infam-
relatively compact, but has spaces or clefts visible between
mation composed of lymphocytes, plasma cells, and neu-
layers (flo dough effect). In phenotypically mild cases,
 trophils. This entiry may be better classifed with primary
such as in Golden Retrievers, the presence of abnormal
seborrhea until further study.
keratin, rather than an overall increase in thickness of the
In 1
the single cat reported with nonepidermolytic
keratin layer is most common. Focal parakeratosis has
ichthyosis, histologic features were laminated to compact
been described (Helman et al., 1997; Credille et al.,
orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis with involvement of super-
1998). A characteristic fnding is lifting or flaking of the
fcial infundibula. Acanthosis was mild. Refractile vac-
abnormal keratin layer from the surface. The granular
uoles were present in the thickened stratum corneum.
layer of the epidermis is often variable, even within indi-
 Keratohyalin granules were found only in the lower follic-
vidual cases, and ranges from normal, to increased or
ular epithelium (Credille et al., 1998). Rare keratohyalin
decreased.
granules, dispersed tonoflaments, and lamellar bodies
Epidermolytic ichthyoses are generally characterized
were observed with electron microscopy (Credille et al.,
 by lysis of the upper spinous and granular layers with
1998). The ultrastructural features suggested possible sim-
concurrent hypergranulosis and a laminated to compact
ilarity to human ichthyosis vulgaris (Credille et al., 1998).
stratum corneum that is hyperkeratotic. In epidermolytic
ichthyosis, as observed in a Labrador Retriever cross
change, are characteristic histologically, and differential
and a Rhodesian Ridgeback, there is diffuse ballooning of
diagnosis is usually uncomplicated. Differential diagnosis
keratinocytes above the basal layer accompanied by
 of nonepidermolytic ichthyosis principally includes primary
numerous irregular keratohyalin granules, including giant
seborrhea. In general, the hyperkeratosis of ichthyosis is
and irregular forms. Eosinophilic intracytoplasmic bodies
 more compact and laminated than that of primary sebor-
were described which correlated with aggregated tono-
rhea. In cases of orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis resembling
flaments ultrastructurally (Mecklenburg et al., 2000).
ichthyosis but occurring in an atypical clinical seting,
There are occasional small foci of parakeratosis. A milder
ruling out a reaction to persistent contact iritants may be
and more superfcial form of epidermolytic ichthyosis,
required, specifically frequent shampooing (see Chapter
characterized by mild acanthosis, orthokeratotic hy-
4). Persistent contact irritation usually features at least
perkeratosis, superfcial epidermolysis with separation
some parakeratosis, in contrast to ichthyosis.
primarily of the granular layer and numerous large ker-
atohyalin granules, was described in a family of Norfolk
Terriers (Credille et al., 2003).
FAMILIAL PAWPAD HYPERKERATOSIS
Electron microscopic features of ichthyosis in dogs have
been variable. The ultrastructural fndings of nonepider-
(Synonym: palmoplantar hyperkeratosis)
molytic ichthyosis include numerous lamellar bodies
(Credill et al., 1998), irregular tonoflaments (Lewis
Clinical features (Figure 8.37)
et al., 1998), and curvilinear structures (Credille et al.,
1998). Cytolysis and decreased tonoflaments (Credille et
 Familial pawpad hyperkeratosis is a rare canine cornif-
al., 2003), as well as perinuclear clumped tonoflaments
cation defect with lesions restricted to and involving all
with decreased tonoflaments in the remaining cytoplasm
 pawpads of all feet. This clinically distinctive but hetero-
(Mecklenburg et al., 2000) have been reported in epider-
geneous genodermatosis probably is a subgroup of
molytic ichthyosis.
ichthyosis. An autosomal recessive mode of inheritance
 Ichthyosis of Cavalier King Charles Spaniels has very
 u un aas a ro piau uq s
mild histologic evidence of epidermolysis; further, the
(Binder et al., 2000). Familial pawpad hyperkeratosis
electron microscopic finding of intact tonoflament-
clinically resembles human hereditary palmoplantar ker-
desmosome attachments is in contrast to the epider-
atodermas (Stevens et al., 2003). This is a complex of
molytic ichthyoses in humans (Alhaidari et al., 1994).
diseases resulting from various mutations in proteins
180
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 8.37 Familial pawpad hyperkeratosis in a Dogue de Bordeaux.
Keratinous proliferations give the appearance of irregular cutaneous
horns. (Photograph courtesy M. Paradis.)
involved in the terminal differentiation of the cornifed
envelope, including several different keratins, desmoso-
 mal proteins, loricin, connexins, and cathepsins (Kimyai-
Asadi et al., 2002). In a recent report, evaluation of
lesions of Irish Terriers by polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) analysis did not causally implicate mutations
in keratins 2 and 9, or desmoglein 1 (Schleifer et al.,
2003).
All surfaces of all pawpads develop dramatic and severe
keratinous proliferation. Lesions may be preceded by the
Fig. 8.38 Familial pawpad hyperkeratosis in a Labrador Retriever
development of ‘smooth, parchment-like’ pawpads that
demonstrating marked ballooning and parakeratosis in layers and
rapidly give rise to severe keratinous proliferations with
columns.
“lateral cone-like protrusions’ (Binder et al., 2000). Ker-
atinous proliferation may take the form of irregular cuta-
neous horns (Paradis, 1992). Fissuring and splitting give
temper virus-associated skin disease (hard pad disease)
rise to secondary bacterial and Malassezia infection.
must be considered. Systemic signs are not a feature of
Claws grow more rapidly than normal, and cross-sections
familial pawpad hyperkeratosis.
may be circular rather than U-shaped (Binder et al.,
2000). Lameness is common. Other skin lesions or sys-
Biopsy site selection
temic signs are not present.
 Familial pawpad hyperkeratosis has been seen pre-
Punch biopsy specimens should be obtained from the
dominantly in several families of Dogues de Bordeaux
margin of the accessory carpal or tarsal pads. Biopsy of
(French Mastiffs) and Irish Terriers (Paradis, 1992; Binder
 the central pads is more likely to initiate lameness.
et al., 2000). Kerry Blue Terriers, Labrador Retrievers,
Golden Retrievers, and mongrels also have been identi-
Histopathology (Figures 8.38 and 8.39)
fed (Scott et al., 2001). Lesions develop before 6 months
of age. Sex predilection has not been noted.
Familial pawpad hyperkeratosis may vary in pattern and
Clinical differentiation is not difficult if lesions are seen
appearance depending on the breed affected. In Irish Ter-
 by 6 months of age in an otherwise healthy puppy, par-
riers the epidermis is reportedly moderately acanthotic
ticularly of a previously reported breed. If compatible
and has severe orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis (Binder
lesions are seen in a healthy adult dog with an unknown
et al., 2000). There is hypergranulosis. The stratum
history, diseases such as nasodigital hyperkeratosis, pem-
corneum appears ruptured and lacks normal cohesion.
phigus foliaceus restricted to the pawpads, and canine dis-
Electron microscopic abnormalities are not found (Binder
Diseases with abnormal cornification
181
Fig. 8.40 Schnauzer comedo syndrome. Dark keratinous material
in comedones creates pixel-like hyperpigmentation. (Photograph
courtesy
 T. DeManuelle; case material University of California,
Davis.)
Pawpad hyperkeratosis of the Labrador Retriever
superficially resembles epidermolytic ichthyosis (see p.
174). However the increase in number and size of kera-
tohyalin granules occurring in epidermolytic ichthyosis is
more severe. Also, swelling of keratinocytes is generally
superficial in pawpad hyperkeratosis of the Labrador
Retriever, in contrast to the transepidermal alteration seen
in more classical epidermolytic ichthyosis. Further studies
are required.
Fig. 8.39 Higher magnification of familial pawpad hyperkeratosis
 Orthokeratotic pawpad hyperkeratosis, as seen in Irish
in a Labrador Retriever. Note retention of balloon change within
Terriers and Dogues de Bordeaux, resembles nasodi-
massive parakeratotic layer.
gital hyperkeratosis of older dogs (see p. 169). Consid-
eration of age and breed affected may be important in
differentiation.
et al., 2000). In Dogues de Bordeaux papillated epider-
SCHNAUZER COMEDO SYNDROME
mal hyperplasia and diffuse orthokeratotic hyperkerato-
sis are present (Paradis, 1992).
Clinical features (Figure 8.40)
 In cases of pawpad hyperkeratosis of the Labrador
Retriever observed by the authors (perhaps better termed
Schnauzer comedo syndrome is a relatively common,
'pawpad parakeratosis’ in this breed), superfcial ker-
predorminantly asymptomatic skin disease seen almost
atinocytes are massively swollen and mostly retain their
exclusively in Miniature Schnauzers. The marked breed
nuclei, resulting in severe parakeratosis. Massive bal-
s s  no r  e s 
looning change often is retained within the cornified layer.
drome probably represents a developmental follicular dis-
Vacuolated keratin may be strikingly layered, and in
order of cornification (Paradis & Scott, 1989). Schnauzer
columnar arrangement, with areas of severely ballooned
 comedo syndrome bears some resemblance to a develop-
keratin interspersed among dense parakeratosis. There is
mental hair follicle dysplasia seen in humans, termed
usually an increased granular layer and granules may be
nevus comedonicus (Silver & Ho, 2003).
somewhat variable in size. The relationship of this disor-
 Comedones develop in a band along the dorsal spine.
der to nasal parakeratosis of Labrador Retrievers is not 
 Substantial variation in character and severity of clinical
known; it is of interest that two of the reported dogs with
 lesions is seen among individual dogs. Lesions may be pal-
o1 d ass) suisn ped pey ose aprosp ie
pable rather than visual. Occasionally, the principal
change is a dorsal band of darkly colored or diffusely
182
Diseases of the epidermis
erect hair. In more typical cases, crusted papules, small
Histopathology (Figures 8.41 and 8.42)
nodules, or frank comedones are observed. Lesions may
 not appear grossly follicular if the follicular ostia are not
Distension of superficial hair follicles with keratin is the
dilated; this leads to the visual impression of dense, dark
diagnostic feature of Schnauzer comedo syndrome.
The size of the follicular ostium may remain nearly
material accumulating in discrete foci beneath the epi-
dermis. Comedones may be small, and require use of a
normal, resulting in a cystic (comedonal) appearance
of the keratin-dilated infundibulum. Other affected
hand lens for identification. More obvious comedones are
characterized by peripherally inflamed, dilated hair folli-
follicles may have dilated ostia. The follicular infundi-
bular wall is generally of normal thickness to mildly
cles which contain inspissated, dark, keratinous or
acanthotic. Epidermal hyperkeratosis usually is mild.
caseous debris that may be extruded with digital pressure.
Superfcial crusting, originating from secondary pyo-
 Hair is lost from severely affected follicles. Mild scaling
derma, may be prominent. Acanthosis is moderate to
and erythema may be seen with more severe lesions. Con-
fluence of comedones creates the illusion of hyperpig-
severe, and varies with the degree of secondary inflam-
 mentation. Secondary bacterial folliculitis accompanied
 mation present.
 Most specimens submitted for skin biopsy are in-
by erythema and scarring is noted in more severe cases.
flamed. Folliculitis, or furunculosis with comedonal
Lesions occur along the midspinal area from the shoul-
rupture may be observed. Pustular inflammation may
ders to the sacrum, usually within 5 cm of the spine. Pru-
be loosely distributed in the superfcial dermis, and
ritus may be present if lesions are severe or secondary
 infection is present.
may involve apocrine sweat glands in severe cases.
Chronic lesions have mixtures of neutrophils, macro-
Schnauzer comedo syndrome is seen almost exclusively
phages, and plasma cells in superfcial and periadnexal
in Miniature Schnauzers and their related crossbreeds.
distribution.
However, a seemingly identical syndrome is seen occa-
Comedo formation in Schnauzer comedo syndrome is
sionally in Cairn Terriers and other rough-coated terriers.
in contrast to the follicular keratosis of primary
Age or sex predilections have not been reported. Differ-
ential diagnosis is not problematical as Schnauzer comedo
seborrhea. In primary seborrhea, follicular ostia are uni-
formly dilated by infundibular engorgement with keratin,
syndrome is a visually distinctive disease.
whereas in Schnauzer comedo syndrome, follicular
ostia often remain relatively closed. Other skin diseases
 Biopsy site selection
with comedo formation include hyperglucocorticoidism
(including to topical corticosteroids), and actinic come-
Multiple specimens should be taken from the most severe
dones. In diseases of glucocorticoid excess, there is
lesions. Skin biopsy of larger persistent comedones may
accompanying follicular atrophy as well as thinning of the
be curative for these more troublesome lesions. If present,
infundibular wall. In actinic comedones, a pale concen-
pustules should be obtained to confrm the presence of
tric layer of collagen usually surrounds the distended
secondary pyoderma.
follicle.
Clinical   features   also   will   differentiate
Hig. 8.41 Schnauzer comedo syn-
drome showing diffuse distention of
follicular infundibula with keratin.
Diseases with abnormal cornification
183
Fig. 8.43 Actinic comedones on the abdomen of a Bull Terrier
crosshreed with a history of long-term sunbathing. Dark, inspissated
material plugs hair follicles armid erythematous, scaly solar keratoses
in the solar-damaged nonpigrmented areas. A cutaneous horn
growing from an actinic squarmous cell carcinoma is seen in the
upper left.
nous, or caseous debris. Lesions may not appear follicular
and may appear as discrete pigmented subepidermal foci
or small nodules. Actinic comedones often occur in con-
junction with the roughened, crusted, indurated plaques
that characterize actinic keratoses (see Chapters 7 and
Fig. 8.42 Higher magnification of comedone in Fig. 8.41. Note
22). Palpation of comedones in apparently normal skin
normal cornification of the epidermis.
 more widespread solar-induced change. Actinic furuncu-
losis may arise directly from ruptured actinic comedones
(see Chapter 17); coexistent pyoderma may diminish the
Schnauzer comedo syndrome from other skin diseases
clinician's ability to recognize comedones. Hemorrhagic
with histopathologic similarities.
crusts may be present if lesions fistulate.
Lesions are restricted to sun-exposed, relatively non-
pigmented skin in sparsely haired regions such as the
ACTINIC COMEDONES
glabrous skin of the abdomen, flank folds, inner thighs,
Clinical features (Figure 8.43)
dorsal muzzle, and periorbital region. Most actinic come-
dones are seen in dogs with visually obvious lack of epi-
Actinic comedones are distinctive, solar-induced come-
dermal pigmentation.
dones that occur in conjunction with chronic solar der-
Dalmatians, Whippets,
Italian Greyhounds, Grey-
matitis, actinic keratoses (see Chapters 7 and 22), and
hounds, American Staffordshire Terriers, Bull Terriers,
other solar skin lesions. The syndrome is uncommon, but
Beagles, and Basset Hounds are at increased risk for
is seen much more frequently in environments with
 developing actinic lesions. Lesions occur most commonly
enhanced solar exposure. Comedones and other actinic
 in older animals, but have been seen in dogs as young as
lesions occur in nonpigmented, lightly haired skin.
2 years of age. Animals spending substantial time out-
Affected dogs may be known to sunbathe (Mason, 1999).
doors in tropical, subtropical, desert, or mountainous
In addition to preneoplastic and neoplastic changes of
regions of the world are at greater risk.
keratinocytes, solar irradiation induces dermal damage,
Differential diagnoses for actinic comedones include
including fbrosis and elastosis (see Chapter 15). Actinic
other comedogenic disorders such as demodicosis (espe-
comedones follow follicular occlusion secondary to
cially in the German Shepherd Dog), hyperglucocorti-
dermal fbrosis.
Actinic comedones most commonly comprise inflamed,
application of glucocorticoids), and Schnauzer comedo
dilated hair follicles containing inspissated, dark, kerati-
syndrome. The presence of comedones in a lightly pig-
184
Diseases of the epidermis
mented breed with habitual access to sun exposure, with
Chapters 7 and 22). Superficial hair follicles are distended
or without evidence of other solar-induced lesions, should
with keratin. Follicular ostia are relatively closed, creat-
increase suspicion for actinic comedones. Prompt skin
biopsy of lesions suggestive of actinic comedones is
acanthotic, and keratinocyte cytoplasm often appears
strongly recommended, since awareness of solar damage
pale. Usually concentric, compressed layers of pale
to the skin may prevent more serious disease.
slightly basophilic collagen surround affected follicles.
Interestingly, elastic stains are negative for solar elastosis
Au sauopuoo ss (i rdu aas) uoo s u
Biopsy site selection
rupture, leading to actinic furunculosis (see Chapter 17).
If secondary pyoderma is present, it may be advantageous
The surrounding dermis is variably inflamed and usually
to delay skin biopsy until the dog has received appropri-
features solar fbrosis and elastosis.
ate systemic antibiotics for at least 3 weeks so that inflam-
Actinic comedones generally occur in the context of
mation will not complicate the diagnosis. Multiple
other actinic changes such as actinic keratosis, squamous
cormedones should be sampled. If other lesions suggestive
cell carcinoma, solar elastosis and solar fbrosis, or actinic
of solar damage are present, they should be obtained as
furunculosis. This usually allows easy differentiation of
well.
actinic comedones from other comedonal lesions such as
those occurring in callus, hyperglucocorticoidism, topical
Histopathology (Figure 8.44)
corticosteroid reactions, or Schnauzer comedo syndrome.
Actinic comedones and occasional canine callus lesions
The epidermis is variably acanthotic and may demon-
may share pericomedonal pale fbrosis; however the
strate actinic keratosis or squamous cell carcinoma (see
severe epidermal and follicular infundibular hyperplasia
(without dysplasia) that is seen in most cases of callus is
lacking in actinic comedones.
CALLUS
(Synonym: pressure point granuloma)
Clinical features (Figure 8.45)
A callus is a thickened plaque that develops over bony
prominences or pressure points in response to repeated
pressure or frictional trauma. Lesions termed ^calluses’ in
Fig. 8.45 Canine callus on the lateral elbow of a Labrador
Retriever. The callus is lichenified and alopecic. Secondary callus
Fig. 8.44 Actinic comedone. Note circumferential pale fibrosis.
pyoderma is present near the upper central margin.
Diseases with abnormal cornification
185
dogs and cats are visually similar but histopathologically
Canine and feline calluses are visually distinctive due
distinct from calluses in humans, the latter of which are
to their characteristic location at prominences under
localized thickenings of the epidermal cornified layer. Cal-
pressure. Acral lick dermatitis visually may superfcially
luses are common in dogs and rare in cats. Noninfected
resemble canine callus pyoderma, but has different site
calluses act as a normal protective response to perpetual
predilections (see Chapter 7). Plaques of coalescing actinic
environmental trauma, especially from habitual contact
comedones also may resemble calluses, but are not asso-
with hard, rough surfaces such as cement, wood, or
ciated with pressure points. Histopathology will allow
brick. Callus pyoderma develops as a sequela to repeated
differentiation, if needed, and also is useful in detecting
rauma to the callus (see Chapter 17). Histopathologic
clinically occult pyoderma.
evidence indicates that uninflamed canine calluses fre-
quently contain dilated, keratin-filled hair follicles.
Biopsy site selection
Rupture of these dilated hair follicles and traumatic
implantation of hairs induces secondary bacterial furun-
Risk versus potential benefit must be weighed when con-
culosis and a foreign body response to the displaced hairs
templating biopsy of a callus. Classical lesions over bony
and keratinous debris, creating callus pyoderma.
 prominences or pressure points ordinarily should not be
Thickened plaques with circular or oval smooth
sampled, as healing may be diffcult and prolonged at
borders form over bony prominences or other pressure
these sites. Surgical removal of an entire callus may be
points. Partial to complete alopecia occurs with chronic-
fraught with potential diffculties such as poor wound
ity. Developing early calluses usually are erythematous.
healing. Dehiscence is a common sequel to elbow callus
Noninflamed chronic calluses appear gray or white due
removal unless special surgical techniques are employed.
to poorly vascularized fbrous tissue, whereas continu-
 In contrast, wedge or excisional biopsy may be performed
ously traumatized calluses often are hyperpigmented.
on sternal calluses and may be curative.
Wrinkles occur with chronicity. Follicular dilatation and
comedo formation are common, and multiple hairs may
Histopathology (Figures 8.46 and 8.47)
emanate from the enlarged follicles. Frank pustules,
furuncles, or fstulas may be visible, but secondary pyo-
The epidermis is moderately to severely acanthotic, and
derma may not be obvious clinically. It is not known how
hyperplasia usually extends to follicular infundibula, cre-
often subtle or mild callus pyoderma occurs, as calluses
ating an undulating or papillated surface to the lesion. In
rarely are biopsied. Ulceration may be observed with
most cases, follicular infundibula are severely acanthotic,
severe and persistently traumatized callus pyoderma. One
but may be only mildly to moderately affected in some
author (P.J.1.) has seen topical corticosteroid reaction (see
lesions. There is variable epidermal hyperkeratosis and
Chapter 15) superimposed on canine calluses. Feline
parakeratosis, and crusting or ulceration may be a feature
calluses may have adherent mats.
of inflamed lesions.
The elbow and hock are the most common sites, but
 Uninflamed callus is most specifically characterized by
calluses may be seen on the sternum, stifle, lateral digits,
prominent, often cystic, follicular keratosis of multiple
over bony prominences of the pelvis, and on the dorsal
contiguous follicles. Rarely, there may be pale encircling
muzle. Deformities, partial amputation of legs, or other
 fbrosis, as seen in actinic comedones (see p. 183). Dilated
locomotor problems may lead to callus and callus pyo-
cystic follicles contain fragments of hair in addition to
derma on unusual sites in either dogs or cats. Untreated
keratin. Rupture of these cysts leads to release of hair and
calluses tend to enlarge as the dog ages. The hock is the
keratin which provokes severe traumatic furunculosis
most common site for feline callus. Obesity predisposes
(callus pyoderma; see Chapter 17).
to callus formation in both dogs and cats.
Actinic comedones as well as other comedonal diseases,
Large and giant breed dogs such as Doberman Pins-
 notably Schnauzer comedo syndrome and hypergluco-
chers, Great Danes, Saint Bernards, Newfoundlands,
corticoidism, are characterized by prominent follicular
and Irish Wolfhounds are at greater risk. Short-legged
keratosis as seen in canine callus. Multiple contiguous
dogs with short haircoats such as smooth-coated
 follicular cysts can also occur as a developmental anomaly
 Dachshunds and Basset Hounds, and deep-chested dogs
on the head of young dogs (see Chapter 23). Actinic
such as Boxers, pointers, and setters are at increased
comedones and occasional canine callus lesions may share
risk for sternal calluses. The Bull Terrier is at increased
pericystic pale fbrosis. These other comedonal syndromes
risk for developing callus on the dorsum of the muzle
usually do not have the severe epidermal and follicular
due to the peculiar dorsilexed sleeping position of many
infundibular hyperplasia that is seen in most calluses.
members of the breed. Age or sex predilections have
Clinical differentiation may be required for callus in
not been noted. No breed predilection has been seen in
which severe follicular infundibular hyperplasia is not
cats.
pronounced.
186
 Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 8.46 Canine callus featuring large comedones beneath irregu-
Fig. 8.47 Higher magnification of comedones in Fig. 8.46. Note
lar acanthosis.
thickening of follicular epithelium.
SEBACEOUS ADENITIS
(Synonym: granulomatous sebaceous adenitis)
Clinical features (Figures 8.48 and 8.49)
Sebaceous adenitis is an uncommon canine and rare feline
skin disease of uncertain etiology (Scott, 1986, 1989;
Rosser et al., 1987; White et al., 1995). Recently, a similar
disease has been described in humans (Martins et al.
1997). Strong canine breed predilections suggest a genetic
basis. An autosomal recessive mode of inheritance has
been proposed in the Standard Poodle (Dunstan &
Hargis, 1995) and in the Akita (Reichler et al., 2001).
Fig. 8.48 Sebaceous adenitis in an adult Samoyed. The remaining
Hypotheses for the pathogenesis of sebaceous adenitis
haircoat is short and matted due to keratinous deposits.
include heritable and developmental ('predetermined')
inflammatory destruction of the sebaceous glands, cell-
mediated immunologic destruction, a cornification abnor-
response, and a defect in lipid metabolism leading to a
mality leading to sebaceous duct and sebaceous gland
cornification abnormality and sebaceous gland destruc-
inflammation and atrophy, an anatomic defect in seba-
tion (Scott, 1986; Rosser et al., 1987; Guaguere et al.
ceous glands leading to lipid leakage and a foreign body
1990; Gross & Ihrke, 1992; Dunstan & Hargis, 1995;
Diseases with abnormal cornification
187
is seen in a predominantly dorsal distribution. Frond-like,
protruding, keratinous casts may emanate from dilated
hair follicles, and tenacious keratinous debris ensheathes
hairs. Lesions similar to those of the Standard Poodle, but
with a greater tendency towards more discrete plaque for-
mation, are seen in the Samoyed.
In Akitas, typical lesions are similar to those of Stan-
dard Poodles, with the additional feature of more
complete alopecia, especially of the secondary hairs.
Secondary superfcial bacterial folliculitis or deep bacter-
ial folliculitis and furunculosis, manifested as papules,
pustules, or nodules, is a prominent feature of sebaceous
adenitis in this breed. Fever, malaise, and weight loss may
be present as additional, as yet unexplained, systemic fea-
Fig. 8.49 Closer view of the dog in Fig. 8.48, demonstrating adher-
tures of this disorder.
ent scale and crusts. Note the coarse dry appearance of the rermain-
Sebaceous adenitis in German Shepherd Dogs may
ing haircoat.
begin on the tail and progress up the trunk (Scott et al.,
 2001). Belgian Sheepdogs with sebaceous adenitis com-
"e ia arann) exa so uaro aae ao
Reichler et al., 2001). Immunohistological studies reveal
1997).
 a preponderance of antigen-presenting dendritic cells and
A strikingly different clinical presentation is noted in
T cells in inflamed lesions. These fndings coupled with
the Vizsla and occasionally in other short-coated breeds,
 the absence of detection of autoantibodies further suggest
such as the Dachshund. One author (T.L.G.) has
a cell-mediated immunopathogenesis for sebaceous gland
 observed this presentation in Miniature Pinschers and
destruction (Rybnicek et al., 1998). The salient clinical
 Plott Hounds. Focal coalescing, frm nodular lesions and
features of scaling and follicular plugging probably occur
 annular plaques with alopecia and adherent scale develop
as nonspecifc sequelae to the cessation of sebum flow
predominantly on the trunk. Scale is less adherent than in
resulting from sebaceous gland inflammation and abla-
 other forms of the disease. Follicular casting is prominent.
tion. Similar secondary hyperkeratosis is associated with
Facial lesions also may be seen. Unexplained, cyclical,
sebaceous gland destruction in generalized demodicosis,
edematous swellings of the dorsal muzzle, periorbital
cutaneous leishmaniasis, exfoliative cutaneous lupus ery-
region, and lips have been noted (Power & Ihrke, 1990;
thematosus, and others. It is not clear if there also is a
White et al., 1995). These pronounced clinical differences
causal relationship between loss of sebaceous glands and
suggest that this form of sebaceous adenitis is a separate
abnormal follicular maturation, or if these are simply
disease.
coexistent features of a common inherited process.
 Feline sebaceous adenitis is characterized by multifocal,
Clinical signs, distribution, and severity of the disease
annular areas of alopecia with scaling, crusting, and fol-
vary substantially among different breeds of dogs. Adher-
licular casting (Scott, 1989; Scott et al., 2001). Irregularly
ent scaling, forming follicular casts or fronds, is the
broken hairs may be noted. Pruritus is variable, but may
unifying clinical feature. Coat quality diminishes as the 
be present. One author (T.L.G.) has observed transient
disease progresses, leaving dull, dry, brittle, broken hairs.
feline sebaceous adenitis.
Lesion distribution is bilaterally symmetric. In general,
 Strong breed predilections for sebaceous adenitis have
the dorsal trunk, temporal region, face, and pinnae are
 been noted for Standard Poodles, Samoyeds, Akitas, and
often frst and ultimately most severely affected. Over
Vizslas. Dachshunds also may be at increased risk (Scott
40% of affected dogs had secondary pyoderma in one 
et al., 2001). However many other purebred dogs (Old
study (White et al., 1995). Occasionally, striking alopecia
and adherent scale on the tail (rat-tail) can be a clinical
Apso, Boxer, Chow Chow, and Collie), as well as mixed
marker of sebaceous adenitis (White et al., 1995). Pruri-
breed dogs have been documented with sebaceous adeni-
tus usually is not substantial unless secondary pyoderma
tis. Young adult dogs most commonly are affected. Sex
is present.
 predilections have not been noted.
 In Standard Poodles, silvery to white keratinous
 Clinical differential diagnoses for canine sebaceous 
deposits resembling candle-wax drippings most often
adenitis characterized by generalized scaling include
develop frst on the dorsal muzzle, temporal region, and
 primary seborrhea and seborrheic dermatitis, ichthyosis,
the dorsal neck and thorax. Adherent scale of variable
 and vitamin A-responsive dermatosis. Demodicosis and
severity with progressive alopecia and poor coat quality
188
Diseases of the epidermis
adenitis. The more nodular form of sebaceous adenitis
Random sampling of affected dogs (which are most
seen in the Vizsla, Dachshund and other short-coated
often presented for biopsy with late stage disease) indi-
breeds may resemble nodular demodicosis or deep bacte-
cates that diffuse absence of sebaceous glands is the most
rial folliculitis and furunculosis. Dermatophytosis is the
common histopathologic feature of chronic sebaceous
prime differential diagnosis for feline sebaceous adenitis.
 adenitis. Isthmus perifollicular inflammation is highly
 Skin biopsy is required for definitive diagnosis.
variable, depending on the breed affected and the stage of
the disease, but is usually mild, occurring in the vicinity
of previous glands (see Chapter 17).
Biopsy site selection
In cats, sebaceous adenitis has mild to severe ortho-
Multiple specimens are recommended so that adequate
keratotic hyperkeratosis with variable serocellular crust-
 numbers of adnexal units may be observed. Subtle early
ing. Follicular fronds are not as common as in dogs, but
lesions characterized by adherent scale without alopecia
 may be observed. Sebaceous glands are absent and there
are most useful for documenting active sebaceous gland
is perifollicular inflammation and mural folliculitis (see
inflammation. Chronic, extensively alopecic lesions com-
Chapter 17).
monly show an absence of sebaceous glands without
Differential diagnosis of the hyperkeratotic lesions of
significant inflammation; multiple specimens are then
sebaceous adenitis includes primary seborrhea, vitamin A-
essential to confrm that the absence of sebaceous glands
responsive dermatosis, as well as ear margin seborrhea.
is widespread, and therefore diagnostic of sebaceous
Associated absence of sebaceous glands is the prime dif-
adenitis.
ferential feature of sebaceous adenitis. A definitive diag-
nosis of sebaceous adenitis should not be offered if many
sebaceous glands are intact and/or uninflamed.
Histopathology (Figure 8.50)
The nodular form of sebaceous adenitis, as seen in Vizslas
ZINC-RESPONSIVE DERMATOSIS
and others, is discussed in Chapter 17. Most other cases of
sebaceous adenitis exhibit mild to moderate acanthosis
Clinical features (Figures 8.51 and 8.52)
and generally moderate to severe hyperkeratosis with fol-
licular plugging. Keratin ensheathes hair shafts as they
Zinc-responsive dermatosis is an uncommon to rare
emerge from follicular ostia, often most notably in the
canine skin disease. The term ‘nutrient-responsive der-
Standard Poodle. These protruding follicular casts of
matosis' is used to designate syndromes characterized by
keratin, or follicular fronds, may be variably severe, but
nutrient defciency, nutrient imbalances, or the genetic
when present should always be a signal to search for seba-
       
ceous glands.
responsive dermatosis may encompass all three etiologic
Fig. 8.50 Sebaceous adenitis in a dog.
Hair shafts are engulfed by keratin to
forrm follicular fronds.
Diseases with abnormal cornification
189
occur in other breeds (White et al., 2001). In the opinion
of one author (PJ.I.), accounts of this syndrome in Bull
Terriers may represent heterozygous expression of acro-
dermatitis of Bull Terriers (see p. 193). Syndrome I is seen
in dogs of all ages and occurs in dogs fed a balanced diet
(White et al., 2001).
Syndrome II has become rarer in developed countries
during the past decade due to an increased knowledge of
the appropriate formulation of pet food. It is seen in
rapidly growing large-breed puppies receiving either a diet
high in plant phytates that may prevent appropriate zinc
absorption, a commercial or home prepared diet that is
zinc-deficient, or a diet that is over-supplemented with
calcium and other vitamins or minerals that may impact
zinc absorption. In the past, producers of inexpensive
dog food did not take into account the differences in
Fig. 8.51 Zinc-responsive dermatosis in a Siberian Husky. Alope-
digestibility among various rations (Huber et al., 1986).
cia, scaling, and crusting are present near the mucocutaneous junc-
Considerable range in severity is seen in dogs from the
tions of the eye, the mouth, and the planum nasale.
same litter eating the same diet. This may indicate indi-
vidual variation in the ability to absorb zinc.
Syndrome I is characterized clinically by erythema,
thick adherent scaling, crusting, alopecia, and lichenifca-
tion. Mucocutaneous junctions, genitals and pressure
points are commonly affected. Lesions commonly are well
demarcated from adjacent apparently normal skin. More
severe erythema, exudation, suppuration, crusting, and
fissuring may be seen in dogs with secondary pyoderma
or Malassezia dermatitis. In order of diminished fre-
quency, lesions are seen in the periorbital region, perioral
region, pawpads, pinnae, nasal planum, genital region,
distal legs, perianal region, and elbows (White et al.,
2001). In the majority of dogs, lesions are somewhat
bilaterally symmetric (White et al., 2001). In severe cases,
 the muzzle, genitals, and legs can be encased in thick ker-
Fig. 8.52 Closer view of the dog in Fig. 8.51. Crusts adhere to the
atinous debris.
skin beneath the eye.
 The clinical features seen with Syndrome I mimic
 those seen with Syndrome I; however severity commonly
is greater. Thick, well-demarcated crusted, lichenifed
categories. Zinc plays an integral role in metabolism as a
plaques with erosions or ulcers are noted. Some dogs
component of many metalloenzymes (Watson, 1998).
have constitutional signs such as anorexia and depression,
Although it has been speculated that relative zinc def-
while others have only skin disease; this range of clinical
ciency might impact many skin diseases, more recent
signs might be explained by variability in the severity
"e na seo) sisodau sn inoddns nou saop yrm
of zinc defciency, or the presence of a combined trace
1993).
mineral deficiency. Clinical features of zinc-responsive
Clinically, zinc-responsive dermatosis has been subdi-
dermatosis coupled with constitutional signs may warrant
vided into two groups (Kunkle, 1980). Syndrome I is
a diagnosis of generic dog food dermatosis (see Chapter
an uncommon skin disease seen almost exclusively in
4).
Siberian Huskies and Alaskan Malamutes, and most
 Syndrome Iis seen almost exclusively in northern-breed
likely is due to an inherited impairment in the absorption 
dogs. Clinical signs develop in early adulthood, usually
or metabolism of zinc (Kunkle, 1980). Some Malamutes
between 1 and 3 years of age. Sex predilections have not
have been shown to have diminished capability to absorb
been noted but estrus may exacerbate lesions (White
zinc from the gastrointestinal tract (Kunkle, 1980). Other 
et al., 2001). One study showed that most dogs in North
 q  o p an e s so p
 America developed lesions between autumn and winter
affected (White et al., 2001). Occasional isolated cases
(September to January); this fnding is unexplained
190
Diseases of the epidermis
(Colombini & Dunstan, 1997). Syndrome II is seen in
hyperplastic follicular  infundibula is a characteristic
pe saiddnd panq re kuuuopand cumona kpide
histopathologic feature of zinc-responsive dermatosis.
young adult dogs.
There may be absence of the underlying granular layer
The  clinical  differential  diagnoses of Syndrome
(hypogranulosis). Parakeratosis may form peaks or spikes
include dermatophytosis and  demodicosis for  mild
at the edges of follicular ostia, resulting in a digitated
disease. More severe cases of Syndrome I and Syndrome
confguration to the skin surface. Serum may be present
 II may mimic superfcial necrolytic dermatitis, generic dog
food dermatosis, autoimmune skin diseases such as pem-
'squirting’ from the underlying superfcial dermis. There
phigus foliaceus and systemic lupus erythematosus,
may be slight multifocal pallor of the superficial epider-
demodicosis, dermatophytosis, or mild cases of acroder-
mis. Associated orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis has been
matitis of Bull Terriers. The occurrence of Syndrome I in
reported (White et al., 2001).
 northern breeds is useful diagnostically. The young age
 Serocellular crusting with erosion is variable and may
of onset of Syndrome II and higher occurrence in large-
be severe, resulting in effacement of the parakeratotic
breed dogs should increase the index of suspicion
1for
layer. Occasionally, shrunken, eosinophilic keratinocytes
are seen just beneath parakeratosis, suggesting dysker-
surface cytology, chemistry screening profles, dermato-
atosis. Mild to moderate diffuse spongiosis is present
phyte culture, an antinuclear antibody (ANA) test, and
and may also affect superficial follicles. Dermal inflam-
histopathology.
mation is superficial, perivascular to interstitial, and is
comprised of lymphocytes, macrophages, eosinophils,
and neutrophils. Inflammation may extend around subja-
Biopsy site selection
 cent adnexal appendages.
Areas of most severe crusting and scaling should be
Parakeratosis may be a feature of spongiotic inflam-
obtained. Care should be taken to avoid areas of erosion
mation in general, such as that provoked by allergic or
or ulceration, since an intact epidermis is necessary to
irritant skin diseases. Parakeratosis usually is diffuse in
establish a diagnosis.
zinc-responsive dermatosis, but this feature may not
always allow differentiation from other skin disease. For
Histopathology (Figures 8.53 and 8.54)
example, some cases of irritant contact dermatitis are dif-
Moderate to severe acanthosis is present. Parakeratosis is
tion may be required.
a consistent feature and varies from mild and multifocal
Lesions of zinc-responsive dermatosis may resemble
to diffuse and moderate. Extension of parakeratosis into
chronic lesions of superficial necrolytic dermatitis when
Fig. 8.53 Zinc-responsive dermatosis
in a Siberian Husky. Parakeratosis
overlies an acanthotic and spongiotic
epidermis; note extension to superficial
follicles and dermal inflammation.
Diseases with abnormal cornification
191
Fig. 8.54 Higher magnification of
zinc-responsive dermatosis in a Siber-
ian Husky dermonstrating spongiosis
and parakeratosis.
necrolysis is absent. Clinical evidence of diffuse pawpad
Histopathology (Figure 8.55)
involvement or hepatic disease may be required to differ-
 On low power, the distinctive epidermal feature of super-
entiate chronic superficial necrolytic dermatitis from zinc-
ficial necrolytic dermatitis (SND) is the pink, white and
responsive dermatosis.
 Zinc-responsive
dermatosis
resembles generic dog food dermatosis; however, generic
blue layering, referred to by some as the French flag'. The
'necrolytic' and variable apoptotic changes that charac-
dog food dermatosis generally has superficial epidermal
terize this entity have been described (see Chapter 4). In
edema or necrolysis (similar to superficial necrolytic der-
some chronic lesions, the pale middle layer is absent or
matitis) in addition to parakeratosis. Zinc-responsive der-
matosis also resembles lethal acrodermatitis; however,
minimal, and parakeratosis with crusting predominates.
Unusually large parakeratotic nuclei may be observed.
parakeratosis in lethal acrodermatitis usually is more
severe. Nasal parakeratosis of Labrador Retrievers is
Superficial necrolytic dermatitis is identical histopatho-
similar histologically, but includes larger and more
logically in cats and may be accompanied by Malassezia
numerous serum lakes within the parakeratotic layer;
 colonization (see Chapter 4).
columnar or peaked configurations of these serum accu-
The reaction pattern of SND is unique in cats and not
shared by other recognized entities, to the authors' knowl-
mulations, as seen in zinc-responsive skin disease, are not
found. Zinc-responsive skin disease is generally not con-
edge. Superficial necrolytic dermatitis in cats should
 prompt a search for secondary Malassezia colonization.
fned to the planum nasale as is nasal parakeratosis of
The differential diagnosis for chronic lesions of SND in
Labrador Retrievers.
dogs in which laminar epidermal edema and degeneration
and/or apoptosis are absent is zinc-responsive dermatosis.
SUPERFICIAL NECROLYTIC DERMATITIS
If the lesions are occurring on the skin of the pad and in
the context of appropriate clinical distribution, then SND
(Synonyms: metabolic epidermal necrosis, hepatocuta-
should be strongly considered even if laminar degenera-
neous syndrome)
tion is absent. The presence of unusually large parakera-
totic nuclei is a useful clue in lesions of SND.
 Clinical features
See Chapter 4.
INFLAMED LINEAR EPIDERMAL NEVUS
Biopsy site selection
Clinical features (Figure 8.56)
See Chapter 4.
See Chapter 7.
192
Diseases of the epidermis
Fig. 8.55 Superficial necrolytic der-
 matitis in a dog demonstrating promi-
nent parakeratosis. Laminar epidermal
pallor is subtle in this lesion.
hypogranulosis in which keratohyalin granules are
absent.
The thickened keratin layer is embedded with neu-
 trophilic crusts, often in layers. Frank neutrophilic pus-
ules may be present superficially and within follicular
infundibula (folliculitis). Acantholytic and slightly dysker-
atotic keratinocytes may be seen at the base of occasional
pustules. Colonies of staphylococci are prominent within 
crusts. Surface colonization by Malassezia sp. has been
reported (White et al., 1993). Idiopathic linear pustular
acantholytic dermatosis also features epidermal and fol-
icular epithelial hyperplasia and follicular pustules with
acantholysis (Beningo & Scott, 2001), and may be a
related phenomenon of blaschkitis (see Clinical features,
Fig. 8.56 Inflarmed linear epidermal nevus displaying severe prolif-
Chapter 7).
eration and lichenification; note the partially linear pattern of dis-
Dermal inflammation is most prominent beneath areas
tribution. (Photograph courtesy S.D. White.)
of pustulation and crusting, and is minimal to mild in
other locations. Mild areas have lymphocytes and some
macrophages, while more inflamed foci show neutrophils,
 Biopsy site selection
plasma cells, and occasional eosinophils. Sebaceous
glands may be hyperplastic.
See Chapter 7.
 The principal differential diagnosis of inflamed linear
epidermal nevus is congenital follicular parakeratosis,
which it closely resembles (see p. 172). Careful clinical
Histopathology (Figures 8.57 and 8.58)
differentiation may be required. The parakeratotic lesions
Inflamed linear epidermal nevus has severe irregular acan-
of inflamed linear epidermal nevus are too massive to
thosis (see Chapter 7), accompanied by generally very
be confused with most other parakeratotic conditions,
severe parakeratosis. The proliferative and parakeratotic
such as zinc-responsive dermatosis or chronic superficial
changes extend to superficial follicles, which are often
necrolytic dermatitis. Also, the severe irregular acantho-
massively dilated. Areas of hypergranulosis, featuring
sis in inflamed linear epidermal nevus should allow dif-
coarse keratohyalin granules, alternate with areas of
ferentiation from these.
Diseases with abnormal cornification
193
Fig. 8.57 Inflamed linear epiderrmal nevus in a dog demonstrating
Fig. 8.58 Higher magnification of inflamed linear epidermal nevus
massive follicular parakeratosis and neutrophilic intrafollicular
in the dog of Fig. 8.57. Note neutrophils accompanying follicular
crusting.
parakeratosis.
ACRODERMATITIS OF BULL TERRIERS
(Synonym: lethal acrodermatitis of Bull Terriers)
Clinical features (Figures 8.59 through 8.61)
Acrodermatitis of Bull Terriers is a rare, inherited auto-
somal recessive metabolic disease (Jezyk et al., 1986;
McEwan, 1993; McEwan et al., 2000). The term “lethal
acrodermatitis' has been advocated since homozygously
affected dogs have a median survival age of 7 months and
rarely live beyond 18 months of age (Jezyk et al., 1986).
However the authors have seen several affected dogs
reach 3 years of age without intensive therapy. The syn-
drome is seen exclusively in white Bull Terriers.
Previously, this syndrome was thought to be associated
Fig. 8.59 Acrodermatitis in a Bull Terrier puppy. An erythematous,
solely with defects in zinc absorption and metabolism
exfoliative dermatitis is seen on the distal extrermities and surround-
(Jezyk et al., 1986; Mundell, 1988). Since affected
ing the rmucocutaneous junctions of the mouth, eyes, and ears. Note
puppies have concurrent pigment dilution, copper defi-
characteristic splaying of the feet. {Photograph courtesy A.C.
Mundell; case material University of California, Davis.)
ciency also has been suspected; serum copper and zinc
194
Diseases of the epidermis
(AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT), increased
cholesterol, nonregenerative anemia, leukocytosis with
neutrophilia, dysgammaglobulinemia, and decreased
lymphocyte blastogenesis reflect the widespread effects of
this disease (Jezyk et al., 1986). Not surprisingly, some of
the cutaneous and systemic clinical signs are similar to
those of other metabolic skin diseases such as severe zinc-
responsive dermatitis and generic dog food dermatosis.
A hereditary disease seen in humans, termed acroder-
matitis enteropathica, shares multiple clinical, histo-
pathologic  and presumed pathophysiologic  features
with acrodermatitis of Bull Terriers (Jezyk et al., 1986).
 Recently, it has been suggested that mutations in a group
of mammalian zinc transporter genes may be responsible
for initiating acrodermatitis enteropathica in humans
(Neldner 2003).
 Acrodermatitis is characterized clinically by progressive
dermatitis, growth retardation, abnormal behavior, diar-
rhea, and bronchopneumonia. Often by 8 weeks of age,
affected Bull Terriers develop an erythematous, exfolia-
 tive, papular or pustular dermatitis of the distal extremi-
ties,
 skin surrounding the mucocutaneous junctions,
Fig. 8.60 Closer view of mouth of the dog in Fig. 8.59. An abnor
and sometimes the mucous membranes at the muco-
mally arched hard palate is characteristically impacted with decayed,
cutaneous junctions. Ulcerated and crusted lesions are
malodorous food. (Photograph courtesy A.C. Mundell; case mate-
prominent on the muzzle and ears. Generalized superf-
rial University of California, Davis.)
cial bacterial folliculitis and ceruminous otitis may be
present. Secondary infection with Malassezia or Candida
is common (McEwan, 2001). Splayed feet show abnor-
mal cornifcation of the pawpads, characterized by
villous hypertrophy, fissures, and exfoliation. There is
concurrent paronychia, and claws may be dystrophic. An
abnormally arched hard palate impacted with decayed,
 malodorous food is a characteristic clinical marker for the
disease.
Chronic diarrhea and bronchopneumonia are the most
 serious systemic signs, and bronchopneumonia is the most
common cause of death. Sires, dams, and siblings of
affected dogs may exhibit an increased frequency of sec-
 ondary pyoderma and Malassezia dermatitis, suggesting
 that heterozygote expression of this genetic disease may
increase the risk for secondary skin infections. In the
opinion of one author (P.J.I.), accounts of zinc-responsive
Fig. 8.61 Closer view of paws of the dog in Fig. 8.59. The feet
skin disease in Bull Terriers may represent heterozygous
show abnormal keratinization of the pawpads, characterized by
villous hypertrophy, fssures, and exfoliation. (Photograph courtesy
expression of acrodermatitis.
A.C. Mundell; case material University of California, Davis.)
The syndrome is seen only in white Bull Terriers and
ou ar srd xas n re ios sdoia
been noted. Acrodermatitis of Bull Terriers is clinically
 concentrations are significantly lower than those in dogs
distinctive; clinical differential diagnoses are few. Theo-
without this syndrome, indicating likely abnormalities in
retically, generic dog food dermatosis and zinc-responsive
both zinc and copper metabolism (Uchida et al., 1997).
dermatosis in Bull Terrier puppies might be similar clini-
These trace minerals are integral components of over 300
cally. Lesions may resemble those seen with superficial
metalloenzymes that participate in many metabolic
necrolytic dermatitis, but age and breed predilections
processes. Decreased serum aspartate aminotransferase
facilitate differentiation.
Diseases with abnormal cornification
195
Biopsy site selection
There is hypogranulosis. Small to moderately-sized sero-
cellular crusts may be imbedded in the keratin layer, and
Multiple biopsy specimens should be taken from affected
entrapped colonies of staphylococci are prominent. Neu-
areas. Care must be taken not to dislodge adherent crusts.
 trophils may migrate through the epidermis to form small
intraepidermal spongiotic pustules that become confluent
superficial pustules and crusts. Erosion and ulceration
Histopathology (Figures 8.62 and 8.63)
may be present. Laminar pallor of the superficial epider-
Acrodermatitis is characterized by massive parakeratosis,
mis is sometimes observed, but keratinocytes generally
organized in compact layers. The epidermis is moderately
appear viable. Rarely, there is loss of nuclear defnition
to severely acanthotic and occasionally mildly spongiotic.
or cellular outline; intracytoplasmic vacuolation may be
Fig. 8.62 Acrodermatitis in a Bull
Terrier. Massive parakeratosis shows
abrupt transition with the subjacent
acanthotic epidermis. Epidermal pallor
is in laminar distribution, and neu-
trophils are migrating to form small
pustules.
Hair
follicles  are also
affected.
Fig. 8.63 High magnification
ot
acrodermatitis in the Bull Terrier of
Fig. 8.62. Severe parakeratosis over-
lies pale epidermis.
196
Diseases of the epidermis
seen.
 Shrunken, brightly eosinophilic, presumptively
K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.1. Katz), pp. 1399-1411.
dyskeratotic  keratinocytes  may occur  occasionally
McGraw-Hill, New York.
beneath the parakeratotic layer. The deeper keratinocytes
Scott, D.W. (1986) Vitamin A-responsive dermatosis in the
may have a slightly gray cast and may appear slightly
Cocker Spaniel. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 22, 125-9.
disordered. Similar histopathologic changes extend to
Canine Ear Margin Seborrhea
dilated follicular infundibula.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller 6 Kirk's
Dermal inflammation is absent, or mild to moderate,
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 1043-5. W.B.
and is composed of lymphocytes, macrophages, plasma
Saunders, Philadelphia.
cells, and neutrophils, the latter accumulating beneath
overlying foci of pustulation.
Nasodigital Hyperkeratosis
 Differential diagnosis is generally not diffcult if the
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
characteristic breed occurrence and clinical signs of
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 1038-41. WB.
acrodermatitis are known. Zinc-responsive dermatosis,
Saunders, Philadelphia.
generic dog food dermatosis, and superfcial necrolytic
dermatitis are characterized by parakeratosis, but not to
Nasal Parakeratosis of Labrador Retrievers
Page, N., Paradis, M., Lapointe, J.-M. et al. (2003) Hereditary
the degree observed in acrodermatitis. Generic dog food
dermatosis and superfcial necrolytic dermatitis tend to
 nasal parakeratosis in Labrador Retrievers. Vet Dermatol 14,
103-10.
 have more prominent laminar necrolytic epidermal degen-
Peters, J., Scott, D.W., Erb, H.N. et al. (2003) Hereditary nasal
eration than the laminar pallor seen in acrodermatitis.
 parakeratosis in Labrador Retrievers: 11 new cases and a ret-
Congenital follicular parakeratosis is similar, but has not
rospective study on the presence of accumulations of serum
been reported in Bull Terriers. Also, parakeratosis is fol-
('serum lakes') in the epidermis of parakeratotic dermatoses
liculocentric in congenital follicular parakeratosis, but is
and inflamed nasal plana in dogs. Vet Dermatot 14, 197-
diffuse in acrodermatitis.
203.
Senter, D.A., Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. et al. (2002) Intracorneal
vacuoles in skin diseases with parakeratotic hyperkeratosis in
REFERENCES
the dog: a retrospective light-microscopy study of 111 cases
(1973-2000). Vet Dermatol 13, 43-7.
Introduction
Chu, D.H., Haake, A.R., Holbrook, K. et al. (2003) The struc-
Congenital Folicular Parakeratosis
ture and development of skin. In: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology
Bolognia, J.L., Orlow, S.J. & Glick, S.A. (1994) Lines of
in General Medicine, 6th edn (eds I.M. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen,
Blaschko. J Am Acad Dermatol 31, 157-90.
K. Wolff, K.F Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.1. Katz),pp. 58-88.
Lewis, D.T., Messinger, L.M., Ginn, P.E. et al. (1998) Hereditary
MeGraw-Hill, New York.
 disorder of cornifcation and muliple congenital defects in five
Kimyai-Asadi, A., Jih, M.H. & Freedberg, I.M. (2003) Epider-
Rottweiler dogs. Vet Dermatol 9, 61-72.
mal cell kinetics, epidermal differentiation, and keratinization.
Scott, D.W. & Miller, W.H. (2000) Congenital follicular para-
In: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General Medicine, 6th edn
keratosis in a Rottweiler and a Siberian Husky. Canine Pract
(eds I.M. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A.
25, 16-9.
Goldsmith & S.1. Katz), pp. 89-98. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller 6 Kirk's
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller 6 Kirk's
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 92s-7. W.B.
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 1-70. W.B. Saunders,
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Philadelphia.
Senter, D.A., Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. et al. (2002) Intracorneal
Williams, M.L. & Elias, PM. (1993) From basket weave to
vacuoles in skin diseases with parakeratotic hyperkeratosis in
barrier: unifying concepts for the pathogenesis of the disor-
sas il jo aps oso- asai e iop a
ders of cornification. Arch Dermatol 129, 626-9.
(1973-2000).Vet Dermatol 13,43-7.
Primary Seborrhea and Seborrheic Dermatitis
Ichthyosis
Kwochka, K.W. & Rademakers, A.M. (1989) Cell proliferation
Alhaidari, Z., Ortonne, J.-P. & Pisani, A. {1994) Congenital
kinetics of epidermis, hair follicles, and sebaceous glands of
ichthyosis in two Cavalier King Charles Spaniel littermates.
Cocker Spaniels with idiopathic seborrhea. Am J Vet Res 50,
Vet Dermatol 5, 117-213.
1918-22.
Credille, K.M., Petersen, A.D., Song, M.D. et al. (1998)
Heterogeneity in non-epidermolytic ichthyosis in a cat and
Vitamin A-Responsive Dermatosis
two dogs. In: Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 3
Ihrke, P.J. & Goldschmidt, M.H. (1983) Vitamin A-responsive
(eds K.W. Kwochka, T. Willemse & C. von Tscharner),
dermatosis in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 182,687-90.
pp. 529-530. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
Nieves, D.S. & Goldsmith, L.A. (2003) Cutaneous changes in
Credille, K.M., Venta, PJ., Breen, M. et al. (2001) DNA
nutritional disease. In: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General
sequence and physical mapping of the canine transglutaminase
Medicine, 6th edn (eds I.M. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff,
1 gene. Cytogenet Cell Genet 93, 73-6.
Diseases with abnormal cornification
197
Credille, K.M., Barnhart, K.F., Minor, J.S. & Dunstan, R.W.
Schnauzer Comedo Syndrome
Paradis, M. & Scott, D.W. (1989) Naevi recemment reconnus
with a keratin 10 donor splice site mutation in a family of
chez le chien. Point Vet 21, 5-9.
Norfolk Terrier dogs. J Invest Dermatol 121, (abstract 601).
Silver, S.G. & Ho, VC.Y. (2003) Benign epithelial tumors.
DiGiovanna, JJ. (2003) Ichthyosiform dermatoses. In: Fitz-
In: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General Medicine, 6th
patrick's Dermatology in General Medicine, 6th edn (eds I.M.
edn (eds I.M. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen,
Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith
L.A. Goldsmith & S.1. Katz), p. 774. McGraw-Hill, New
& S.1. Katz), pp. 481-505. McGraw-Hil, New York.
York.
Helman, R.G., Rames, D.S. & Chester, D.K. (1997) Ichthyosi-
form dermatosis in a Soft-Coated Wheaten Terrier. Vet Der-
Actinic Comedones
matol8,53-8.
Mason, K.V. (1999) Solar (actinic) dermatoses of animals. In:
Kelsell, D.P, Stevens, H.P., Ratnavel, R. et al. (1995) Genetic
Proceedings of the 1Sth AAVD/ACVD Meeting, Maui, pp.
linkage studies in non-epidermolytic palmoplantar kerato-
117-21.
derma: evidence for heterogeneity. Hum Mol Genet 4,
1021-5.
Lewis, D.T., Ford, M.J. & Kwochka, K.W. (1998) Characteri-
Sebaceous Adenitis
zation and management of a Jack Russell terrier with con-
Dunstan, R.W. & Hargis, A.M. (1995) The diagnosis of seba-
genital ichthyosis. Vet Dermatol 9, 111-18.
ceous adenitis in Standard Poodle dogs. In: Kirk's Current Vet-
Mecklenburg, L., Hetzel, U. & Ueberschar, S. (2000) Epider-
erinary Therapy Xll (ed. J.D. Bonagura), pp. 619-22. W.B.
molytic ichthyosis in a dog: clinical,
, histopathological,
 Saunders, Philadelphia.
immunohistochemical and ultrastructural findings. J Comp
Gross T.L. & Ihrke P.J. (1992) Hypekeratotic diseases of the epi-
Pathol 122, 307-11.
dermis. In: Veterinary Dermatopathology: A Macroscopic and
Norgett, E.E., Hatsell, S.J., Carvajal-Huerta, L. et al. (2000)
Microscopic Evaluation of Canine and Feline Skin Disease
Recessive mutation in desmoplakin disrupts desmoplakin-
(T.L. Gross, PJ. Ihrke & E.J. Walder), pp. 100-2. Mosby Year
intermediate flament interactions and causes dilated car-
Book, St Louis.
diomyopathy, wooly hair and keratoderma. Hum Mol Gen 9,
Guaguere, E., Alhaidari, Z.& Magnol, J-P. (1990) Adénite
2761-6.
sebacée granulomateuse a propos de trios cas. Prat Med Chir
 Olivry, T. & Mason, I.S. (1998) Genodermatoses: inheritance 
Anim Comp 25, 169-75.
and management. In: Advances in Veterinary Dermatology,
Guaguere, E., Nogues, J.P., Degorce, F. et al. (1997) Granulo-
Vol. 3 (eds K.W. Kwochka, T. Willemse & C. von Tscharner),
matous sebaceous adenitis in 7 Belgian Sheepdogs. In:
pp. 365-8. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
Proceedings of the 14th ESVD/ECVD Meeting, Pisa,
Sako, J., Denda, M., Nakanishi, J. et al. (1998) Cholesterol
p.191.
sulfate inhibits proteases that are involved in desquamation of
Martins, C., Tellechea, M.D., Mariano, A. et al. (1997) Seba-
the stratum corneum. J Invest Dermatol 111, 189-93.
ceous adenitis. J Am Acad Dermatol 36, 845-6.
Yang, J.M., Ahn, K.S, Cho, M.O. et al. (2001) Novel mutations
Power, H.T. & Ihrke, P.J (1990) Synthetic retinoids in veterinary
of the transglutaminase 1 gene in lamellar ichthyosis. J Invest
dermatology. Vet Clin North Am 20, 1525-39.
Dermatol 117, 214-18.
Reichler, I.M., Hauser, B., Schiller, I. et al. (2001) Sebaceous
adenitis in the Akita: clinical observations, histopathology and
FamilialPawpad Hyperkeratosis
heredity. Vet Dermatol 12, 243-53.
Binder, H., Arnold, S., Schelling, C. et al. (2000) Palmoplantar
Rosser, E.J., Dunstan, E.J., Breen, P.T. et al. (1987)
hyperkeratosis in Irish Terriers: evidence of autosomal reces-
Sebaceous adenitis with hyperkeratosis in the Standard
sive inheritance. J Small Anim Pract 41, 52-5.
Poodle: a discussion of ten cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23,
Kimyai-Asadi, A., Kotcher, B. & Jih, M.H. (2002) The molecu-
3415.
lar basis of hereditary palmoplantar keratodermas. J Am Acad
Rybnicek, J., Affolter, VK. & Moore, PF. (1998). Sebaceous
Dermatol 47, 327-43.
adenitis: an immunohistological examination. In: Advances in
Paradis, M. (1992) Footpad hyperkeratosis in a family of Dogues
Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 3 (eds K.W. Kwochka, T.
de Bordeaux. Vet Dermatol 3, 75-8.
Willemse & C. von Tscharner), pp. 539-40. Butterworth-
Schleifer, S.G., Versteeg, S.A., van Oost, B. et al. (2003) Famil-
Heinemann, Oxford.
jal footpad hyperkeratosis and inheritance of keratin 2,
Scott, D.W. (1986) Granulomatous sebaceous adenitis in dogs.
keratin 9, and desmoglein 1 in two pedigrees of Irish Terriers.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 22, 631-4.
Am J Vet Res 64, 715-20.
Scott, D.W. (1989) Adénite sebacée pyogranulomateuse sterile
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
chez un chat. Point Vet 21, 7-11.
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 935-6. WB.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 1140-6. W.B.
Stevens, H.P, Kelsell, D.P. & Leigh, I.M. (2003) The inherited
Saunders, Philadelphia.
keratodermas of palms and soles. In: Fitzpatrick's Dermatol-
White, S.D., Rosychuk, R.A.W., Scott, K.V. et al. (1995)
ogy in General Medicine, 6th edn (eds I.M. Freedberg, A.Z.
 Sebaceous adenitis in dogs and results of treatment with
Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.I. Katz), pp.
isotretinoin and etretinate: 30 cases {1990-1994). J Am Vet
505-14. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Med Assoc 207, 197-200.
198
 Diseases of the epidermis
Zinc-Responsive Dermatosis
Acrodermatitis of Bull Terriers
Colombini, S. & Dunstan, R.W. (1997) Zinc-responsive der-
Jezyk, PF., Haskins, M.E., MacKay-Smith, W.E. et al. (1986)
matosis in northern-breed dogs: 17 cases 1990-96. J Am Vet
Lethal acrodermatitis in Bull Terriers. J Am Vet Med Assoc
Med Assoc 211, 451-3.
188,833-9.
Huber, T.L., Wilson, R.C. & McGarity, S.A. (1986) Variations
McEwan, N.A. (1993) Confrmation and investigation of lethal
on digestibility of dry dog foods with identical label guaran-
acrodermatitis of bull terriers in Britain. In: Advances in
teed analysis. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 22, 571-5.
Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 2 (eds P.J. Ihrke, I.S. Mason &
Kunkle, G.A. (1980) Zinc-responsive dermatoses in dogs. In:
S.D. White), pp. 151-6. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Current Veterinary Therapy Vl1 (ed. R.W. Kirk), pp. 472-6.
McEwan, N.A. (2001) Malassezia and Candida infections in bull
WB. Saunders, Philadelphia.
terriers with lethal acrodermatitis. J Small Anim Pract 42,
Logas, D., Kunkle, G.A. & McDowell, L. (1993) Comparison
291-7.
of serum zinc levels in healthy, systemically ill and dermato-
McEwan, N.A., McNeil, PE., Thompson, H. et al. (2000) Diag-
logically diseased dogs. Vet Dermatol 4, 61-4.
nostic features, confrmation and disease progression in 28
Watson, TD. {1998) Diet and skin disease in dogs and cats. J
 cases of lethal acrodermatitis of bull terriers. J Small Anim
Nutr 128(suppl), 2783-9s.
Pract 41, 501-7.
White, S.D., Bourdeau, P., Rosychuk, R.A.W. et al. (2001) Zinc-
Mundell, A.C. (1988) Mineral analysis in Bull Terriers with
responsive dermatosis in dogs: 41 cases and literature review.
lethal acrodermatitis. In: Proceedings of the 1lth AAVD/
Vet Dermatol 12, 101-9.
ACVD Meeting, Washington DC, p. 22.
Neldner, K.H. (2003) Acrodermatitis enteropathica and other
Superficial Necrolytic Dermatitis
zinc-deficiency disorders. In: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in
See Chapter 4.
Generat Medicine, 6th edn (eds I.M. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K.
Wolff,K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.1. Katz), pp. 1412-8.
Inflamed Linear Epidermal Nevus
McGraw-Hill, New York.
Beningo, K.E. & Scot, D.W. (2001) Idiopathic linear pustular
Uchida, Y., Moon-Fanelli, A.A., Dodman, N.H. et al. (1997)
acantholytic dermatosis in a young Brittany spaniel dog. Vet
Serum concentrations of zinc and copper in bull terriers with
Dermatol 12, 209-13.
lethal acrodermatitis and tail-chasing behavior. Am J Vet Res
White, S.D., Rosychuk, R.A.W., Scott, K.V. et al. (1993) Inflam-
58, 808-10.
matory liner verrucous epidermal nevus in four dogs. Vet Der-
matol 3, 107-14.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright  2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Part Il
Diseases of the Dermis
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 9
Perivascular diseases of the dermis
Perivascular dermatitis  is  a relatively  nondiagnostic
numerous as neutrophils; this may be due not only to
pattern in the skin characterized by inflammatory cells
around vessels of the dermis. Inflammation does not
influence of bacterial superantigens. Mast cells may also
remain strictly perivascular but also spreads to the adja-
be increased in number. Plasma cells are seen in chronic
cent dermal interstitium. Diseases of this group tend to
lesions. Mild to moderate edema may be present. Vessels
have inflammation that appears perifollicular or peri-
may be mildly to moderately dilated and congested. There
adnexal because blood vessels are numerous in that loca-
may be marginating neutrophils and swollen endothelial
tion. The majority of the diseases in this group have an
cells. Inflammation may extend to surround the middle
allergic cause; histopathologic differentiation among
(isthmus) portion of hair follicles and associated glands.
 them is often very diffcult. Identifcation of the primary
 The perivascular inflammation of superfcial spreading
inflammatory cell present may allow partial differentia-
pyoderma may be indistinguishable from chronic hyper-
tion; however, definitive diagnosis will depend heavily
plastic dermatitis, more specifically allergic dermatitis, if
upon clinical assessment, including response to therapy.
typical epidermal lesions are lacking in the specimen for
Most of these diseases also are characterized by hyper-
biopsy. A predominance of neutrophils and/or plasma cells
plasia of the epidermis and superficial follicular epithe-
 may suggest superficial pyoderma, but dermal inflamma-
lium, and were discussed in Chapter 7 under the general
tion alone is not sufficient to indicate the diagnosis. Clin-
heading of Chronic hyperplastic dermatitis.
ical differentiation is required.
Most inflammatory diseases of the skin are character-
ized by perivascular infltrates at some stage in the histo-
ATOPIC DERMATITIS
 genesis of the lesions, as blood vessels are the source of
all inflammation in tissue. The diseases included in this
Clinical features (Figures 9.5 through 9.7)
chapter are those which have perivascular inflammation
as a principal and predominant pattern.
Atopic dermatitis is a common, genetically predisposed
allergic skin disease (Olivry et al., 2001; Sousa & Marsella,
2001). It occurs in animals with atopy, a hereditary ten-
SUPERFICIAL SPREADING PYODERMA
dency to develop IgE-mediated allergic reactions to various
Clinical features (Figures 9.1 and 9.2)
environmental allergens. These may include house dust
mite proteins, plant pollen, mold spores, and various other
See Chapter 1.
allergens. Atopic dermatitis may begin either as a seasonal
 or nonseasonal disease; seasonal cases frequently progress
t0 perennial (Griffn & DeBoer 2001). Atopic dermatitis
Biopsy site selection
 is reasonably well characterized in the dog and consider-
See Chapter 1.
 ably less well characterized in the cat.
Current evidence suggests that genetically predisposed
Aisnosunrad kuuuand keu sueuq pue sieue
Histopathology (Figures 9.3 and 9.4)
absorb allergens that provoke specifc immunological
Epidermal lesions have been described (see Chapter 1).
 events (Leung, 1999; Olivry & Hill, 2001a). Langerhans 
Dermal inflammation consists of superficial perivascular
cells probably play a central role in antigen procesing
neutrophils that predominate in early lesions and usually
 and presentation. Immunostaining of skin biopsy speci-
are intermingled with macrophages and lymphocytes.
 mens from atopic dogs shows proliferation of Langerhans
Some eosinophils are invariably present and may be as
 cells and enhanced expression of tissue bound IgE in
200
Perivascular diseases of the dermis
201
Fig. 9.1 Superficial spreading pyoderma in a Border Collie. Multi-
Fig. 9.2 Closer view of the dog in Fig. 9.1. Collarettes peel periph-
ple coalescing erythermatous macules with peripheral collarettes
erally from the margins of the macules. Pustules are not present.
cover the glabrous skin of the ventral abdomen. The macular hyper-
pigmentation is the sequela to prior infection.
Fig. 9.3 Superficial spreading pyo-
derma in a dog. Superficial dermal
neutrophilic inflammation is accom-
 panied by acanthosis, spongiosis, and
crusting.
lesional skin (Olivry et al., 1996; Olivry & Hill, 2001b).
fed (DeBoer et al., 1993; Gilbert & Halliwell, 1998).
Two distinct patterns of cytokine production have been
However, conclusive links have not been established
demonstrated in a variety of mammalian species; the
between the existence of heterogeneous IgE and clinical
T-helper 1 (TH1) and Thelper 2 (TH2) response. A
disease in cats.
polarization of cytokine response from a TH1- to a TH2-
The diagnosis of canine atopic dermatitis requires
skewed response may be responsible for the development
exclusion of diseases causing similar clinical symptoma-
of atopic dermatitis (Hill & Olivry, 2001). These
 tology, as pathognomonic clinical features of atopic der-
immunologic events lead to the release of pharmacologi-
 matitis are not present ( Willemse, 1986; DeBoer & Hillier,
cally active compounds from mast cells (Marsella &
2001). The modification of Willemse's criteria by Prélaud
Olivry, 2001). Considerable evidence exists that the inter-
et al. (1998) states that the clinical criteria for the diag-
action of the relevant antigen with allergen-specific IgE
 nosis of canine atopic dermatitis be the fulfllment of three
initiates the events leading to canine atopic dermatitis
of the following five features: (1) corticosteroid-sensitive
(Halliwell & DeBoer, 2001). Feline IgE has been identi-
pruritus, (2) erythema of pinnae, (3) bilateral cranial
202
 Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 9.4 Higher magnification of
superficial  dermal  inflammationin
superficial spreading pyoderma. Neu-
trophils are intermingled with fewer
mixed mononuclear cells. Note migra-
tion of inflammatory cells into the
spongiotic epidermis.
Fig. 9.6 Closer view of the dog in Fig. 9.5. Extensive excoriations
 are present on the elbow and lateral thorax. Note the absence of
primary lesions.
erythematous pododermatitis, (4) cheilitis, and (5)
appearance of first signs between the ages of 6 months
and 3 years.
 Feline atopic dermatitis remains controversial (Gilbert
et al., 1999; Scott et al., 2001). Estimates of the frequency
 of occurrence vary widely, genetic predilection has not
 been proven, and a unifying description of expected clin-
Fig. 9.5 Atopic dermatitis in a Dalmatian. Areas of erythema, exco-
 ical features is not available for cats. The strongest evi-
riation, and self-traumatic alopecia are seen periorally, and on the
 dence to date in support of heritability is the presence of
forelegs, distal extremities, lateral thorax, and ventral abdomen.
a disease closely resembling atopic dermatitis in three
feline littermates (Moriello, 2001).
Pruritus is the unifying clinical feature of atopic der-
matitis. Primary skin lesions are rare in canine atopic
dermatitis; most skin lesions are due to secondary self-
Perivascular diseases of the dermis
203
that owners deny its existence. In those cases, pruritus
may need to be deduced clinically via indirect evidence
such as trichograms revealing barbered hairs, tufts of hair
in the cat's hiding places, vomiting of hair balls, and
excess hair in the feces. Self-traumatized areas may be rel-
atively localized or generalized. Similar to dogs, the face,
neck, pinnae, forelegs, and ventrum may be more severely
affected.
 The majority of affected dogs (70%) present with signs
of atopic dermatitis between 1 and 3 years of age (Scott
et al., 2001). A large recent study indicates a mean of 1.66
years of age and a range from 2 to 3 months to 8 years
of age (Zur et al., 2002). Clinical signs of atopic der-
matitis rarely begin before 6 months of age or after 7
years of age. Many studies have noted breed predilections,
with multiple small terrier breeds at increased risk.
Labrador Retrievers, Golden Retrievers, and West High-
land White Terriers were at highest risk in a recent study
(Zur et al., 2002). Springer Spaniels, Chinese Shar Peis,
Bull Terriers, Bichon Frises, and Tibetan Terriers were
also at increased risk (Zur et al., 2002). Another recent
Fig. 9.7 Atopic dermatitis in a Bull Terrier. Pruritus has prompted
 study in Golden Retrievers and Labrador Retrievers using
excoriations and self-traumatic alopecia on the dorsum of a forepaw.
quantitative estimation of heritability as a tool confrmed
a strong genetic component to canine atopic dermatitis
in these breeds (Shaw et al., 2004). Although multiple
frauma. Self-trauma leads to variable degrees of ery-
studies have mentioned a female predilection, this was
thema, alopecia, and excoriation. Lichenification and
not observed in the recent large study (Zur et al., 2002).
hyperpigmentation are observed in chronically affected
Initialy, many dogs manifest atopic dermatitis as
dogs. Greasiness or hyperhidrosis also may be present.
summer-autumn pruritus, with the time of involvement
 Salivary staining of the haircoat occurs in dogs with light
tending to lengthen each year.
coat color. The face, paws, caudal carpi, distal extremi-
 Few signalment data are available for the cat. One
ties, ears, and ventrum are affected most commonly. The
source indicates that the clinical signs of miliary dermati-
caudal aspect of the carpus may be the most diagnosti-
tis due to atopic dermatitis are more likely to occur
cally useful site for increasing index of suspicion for
between 6 and 24 months of age (Scott et al., 2001).
canine atopic dermatitis. Lesions may be generalized. In
 The most common canine clinical differential diagnoses
 a previous report, pruritus of the distal extremities was
include flea allergy dermatitis, food allergy, sarcoptic
noted in 76% of dogs and otitis externa was noted in
acariasis,
recurrent:
 pruritic superficial  pyoderma,
60% of dogs (Zur et al., 2002). Less commonly, pinnal
Malassezia dermatitis, allergic contact dermatitis, and
inflammation characterized by erythema and swlling
 generalized pruritic skin disease associated with intestinal
may be the only feature of canine atopic dermatitis and
 parasite hypersensitivity in the young dog. Differential
may be seen in conjunction with otitis externa. Secondary
diagnosis of atopic dermatitis may be hampered by the
pyoderma and Malassezia dermatitis are common and
frequent coexistence of flea allergy dermatitis. Flea allergy
 dermatitis has a primary papular eruption with prominent
 Feline atopic dermatitis is less well characterized clini-
 dorsal lumbosacral distribution. The pruritus of flea
cally. Reported presentations include pruritus and self-
 allergy dermatitis frequently is limited to the caudal one-
induced alopecia; pruritus and self-trauma centered on
half of the body in contrast to atopic dermatitis. Food
the head, neck, and pinnae; miliary dermatitis 
(see
allergy is nonseasonal and less corticosteroid-responsive
Chapter 6); and feline eosinophilic skin diseases such as
than is canine atopic dermatitis. Both pyoderma and
feline eosinophilic plaque, feline eosinophilic granuloma,
Malassezia dermatitis can be differential diagnoses for
and feline indolent ulcer (Scott et al., 2001). Respiratory
atopic dermatitis and also can occur secondary to atopic
disease, especially asthma, may be seen alone or in con-
dermatitis. Primary lesions, such as papules and pustules,
junction with skin disease. Self-trauma varies from mild
are seen with pruritic pyoderma. Allergic contact der-
to severe. Cats may conceal evidence of milder pruritus
 matitis is a rare type IV cell-mediated delayed hypersen-
by engaging in clandestine self-trauma to such an extent
sitivity, usually limited to ventral, sparsely haired skin.
204
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 9.8 Atopic dermatitis in a dog.
Irregular acanthosis  overlies  mild
superficial dermal inflammation. Note
mild vascular ectasia.
Feline principal clinical differential diagnoses include
flea allergy dermatitis and food allergy. Miliary dermati-
 tis predominantly localized to the neck and dorsal rump
is seen with flea allergy dermatitis. Food allergy is non-
seasonal, regularly less corticosteroid-responsive, and
often affects the head and neck primarily. Feline psycho-
genic alopecia is a less common differential diagnosis;
inflammation is not a feature of feline psychogenic
alopecia.
 Biopsy site selection
Biopsy is employed primarily to rule out other more
histopathologically specifc skin diseases in animals with
compatible history and physical fndings. Areas of ery-
thema with minimal self-trauma should be selected.
 Chronic areas of lichenifcation and hyperpigmentation,
which are frequently complicated by secondary pyoderma
and Malassezia dermatitis, should be avoided.
Histopathology (Figures 9.8 through 9.10)
 Difficulty in characterizing atopic dermatitis in dogs arises
disorders including flea allergy or food allergy, as well as
secondary superfcial pyoderma (folliculitis or superficial
spreading pyoderma). Inflammation caused by concurrent
allergic conditions may obscure the frequently subtle
inflammation of atopic dermatitis. In uncomplicated cases
of atopic dermatitis, epidermal lesions are those of
chronic hyperplastic dermatitis due to allergy (see
Fig. 9.9 Higher magnification of atopic dermatitis in a dog. Mild
accumulations of mononuclear cells are oriented around blood
Chapter 7). Mild to severe acanthosis, which also involves
vessels.
follicular infundibula, is present. The epidermis may have
Perivascular diseases of the dermis
205
antigen presenting dendritic cells (Olivry et al., 1997).
Perivascular mast cells are frequently increased in
number. Eosinophils are rarely detected in routine hema-
toxylin and eosin (HE)-stained sections, but may be more
numerous in sites of direct recent aeroallergen contact,
particularly the feet. Eosinophils were reported in small
numbers in atopic dogs; increased sensitivity of detection
was likely related to the use of Luna's and Giemsa stains,
 n    
eosinophilic granules (Olivry et al., 1997). Neutrophils
and plasma cells are seen in small numbers, and their
presence may depend on the extent of secondary epider-
mal pustulation and crusting induced by self-trauma
(impetiginization), and/or secondary pyoderma. Superf-
cial dermal blood vessels often are dilated and may be
congested. Edema is variable but usually mild.
Sebaceous gland hyperplasia may occur in any long-
standing pruritic skin disease of dogs, including atopic
dermatitis. Sebaceous glands enlarge and proliferate
loosely in the dermis, and this alteration may correlate
directly with the degree of oily seborrhea observed. There
also may be squamous metaplasia of sebaceous glands
which is characterized by replacement of glands by squa-
mous epithelium, usually expanding outward from the
ductular region. Apocrine sweat glands may be dilated
and lined by hyperplastic epithelium; this feature is also
associated with chronic pruritus and may correlate clini-
cally with hyperhidrosis.
Atopic dermatitis in cats is not well characterized, most
Fig. 9.10 Atopic dermatitis in a cat. Atypically severe larminar
likely because it is less common. Lesions may resemble
fibrosis from persistent self-trauma is rmixed with mild superficial
 allergic miliary dermatitis (see p. 211). Acanthosis, sero-
inflammation.
cellular crusting, and mild spongiosis are as seen in dogs.
 Eosinophils predominate in superfcial and perifollicular
-u Aq paueduose are pue 'saenyu Kroeueu
patchy, mild spongiosis with exocytosis of lymphocytes,
phocytes and mast cells; this inflammatory patern also
identifed previously as T cells (Olivry et al., 1997).
has been reported in clinically confrmed cases of feline
Intraepidermal eosinophils, sometimes forming small pus-
atopy (Moriello, 2001). Fewer histiocytes and neutrophils
tules, were observed in a small percentage of lesions in
are found. There may be mild sebaceous hyperplasia but
that study (Olivry et al., 1997). Clusters of intraepider-
apocrine dilatation is uncommon. In contrast to dogs,
mal mononuclear cells have been identifed as Langerhans
mild to prominent laminar superfcial dermal fbrosis
cells (Olivry et al., 1997). Focal parakeratosis and crust-
may be present in atopic cats with pruritus-induced
ing are variable but usually mild.
. Dense, brightly
self-trauma.
eosinophilic, compact keratin is observed and occasion-
Differential diagnoses in dogs include other allergic
 o n s se  iia in sxa 
skin diseases or skin diseases that evoke persistent self-
atinization usually reflects persistent self-trauma, and
trauma. Identifcation of primary lesions, such as pustules
occurs in chronic lesions.
in pruritic superficial spreading pyoderma, is helpful;
The dermis is characterized by a superfcial perivascu-
Aueduosse Aeur euapokd Supeaids leioyradns raaamou
lar infltrate. Inflammation generally is mild in lesions of
atopic dermatitis. Atopic dermatitis may be the tentative
atopic dermatitis that are not complicated by superficial
histopathologic diagnosis for the pruritic dog when
pyoderma or other allergic conditions. Inflammation may
superfcial perivascular inflammation is minimal and
extend to surround the middle (isthmus) portion of hair
does not include many detectable eosinophils with routine
follicles and their associated glands. The inflammatory
HE staining. If intraepidermal eosinophilic pustules are
infltrate principally consists of mixtures of lymphocytes
found, consideration of allergic contact dermatitis may be
and histiocytic cells; the latter have been identifed as
required (see Chapter 5). Intraepidermal eosinophilic
206
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 9.11 Food allergy in a cat. Severe self-trauma of the head and
neck has created extensive alopecia with excoriations and ulcers.
 pustules also have been reported in a small percentage
of atopic dogs in one study (Olivry et al., 1997); since
Fig. 9.12 Food allergy in a Dalmatian. Self-traumatic alopecia and
percutaneous penetration of allergens also is involved
erythema are noted on the dorsurm of a forepaw.
in atopic dermatitis, histologic distinction from allergic
contact dermatitis may be impossible in some clinical
settings. In cats, the differential feature of a predo-
estimated by most authors that fewer than 20% of
minantly mononuclear cell inflrate is not present, as
animals with dermatologic signs of food allergy have
eosinophils prevail in most allergic diseases in this species.
coexistent gastrointestinal signs, and vice versa.
Clinical correlation and appropriate confrmatory testing
The authors view food allergy as the third most
always are required in cats and dogs, as histopathologic
 common allergic skin disease in the dog after flea allergy
o r  a ou a s
dermatitis and atopic dermatitis. Feline food allergy may
dermatitis.
be second in frequency to flea allergy dermatitis. Since
food allergy is seen more frequently in animals with other
 allergic diseases, disparate information on the reported
FOOD ALLERGY
incidence of food allergy may be associated with the
(Synonyms: adverse food reactions (AFR), food hyper-
prioritization of diagnostic tests for allergic disease, as
sensitivity, food intolerance)
well as the threshold phenomenon.
Clinically, food allergy is one of the most pleomorphic
skin diseases encountered in clinical veterinary practice.
Clinical features (Figures 9.11 and 9.12)
Nonseasonal pruritus with self-trauma is the most
Food allergy is a controversial skin disease of the dog
common clinical sign. In both dogs and cats, primary skin 
and cat. It is presumed to be a hypersensitivity reaction
lesions frequently are not present, as is seen in atopic
to ingested allergens. Some cases may be examples of true
 dermatitis. When present, primary lesions may include
hypersensitivity, while others may simply be food intoler-
erythema, erythematous papules, wheals, and pustules
ances due to nonimmunologic idiosyncratic reactions, or
with crusts. Pruritus leads to the secondary changes of
physiologic reactions to vasoactive substances in food.
erosion,l
ulceration, and excoriation with alopecia.
Since the underlying pathomechanism of adverse food
Lichenification and hyperpigmentation are seen with
reaction is rarely proven, “food allergy’ is a term of
chronic food allergy in the dog. Face, ears, extremities,
convenience. The immunologic basis of food allergy in
and the ventrum are the most frequently involved sites.
domestic animals is not well characterized. In humans,
Secondary pyoderma and Malassezia dermatitis may con-
anan isou panuaunop si Aisussiadau I ad
tribute greatly to both pruritus and lesions. Secondary
but type III and IV hypersensitivities also have been
infections are less common in the cat than in the dog.
implicated.
 Otitis externa is a common feature of canine food allergy.
 Dermatologic and gastrointestinal signs of food allergy
Feline food allergy may be more pruritic and unremit-
 may coexist both in animals and in humans. It has been
 ting than canine food allergy. In cats, pruritus centered on
Perivascular diseases of the dermis
207
the head, neck, and pinnae may be severe. Miliary der-
matitis may be present (see Chapter 6). Pruritus leading
to self-traumatic alopecia only, as in feline psychogenic
alopecia (see Chapter 19), is sometimes dramatically
bilaterally symmetric (Guaguere, 1996). The coexistence
of many eosinophilic skin diseases (feline eosinophilic
plaque, feline eosinophilic granuloma, and feline indolent
ulcer) with feline food allrgy is controversial but has
been described (Scott et al., 2001).
 Signalment predilections also are controversial. Many
breed predilections have been reported; however, food
allergy can occur in any breed. In dogs, between one-third
and one-half of food allergy cases occur in dogs less than
1 year of age (White, 1986; Carlotti et al., 1990; Harvey,
1993; Rosser, 1993a, 1998). However, food allergy may
occur at any age. A breed predilection for Siamese cats
and their related crossbreeds may exist (Carlotti et al.,
1990; Rosser, 1993b). Age predilections have not been
documented for cats. Sex predilections have not been
reported in either dogs or cats.
 The principal differential diagnosis for canine food
allergy is atopic dermatitis. Other clinical differential
diagnoses include additional highly pruritic skin diseases
such as flea allergy dermatitis, and sarcoptic or notoedric
acariasis. Feline mosquito bite hypersensitivity may
resemble feline food allrgy; however, mosquito bite
hypersensitivity is more narrowly focused on the dorsal
 muzzle and ears, and is markedly seasonal. Food allergy
is nonseasonal and may be considerably less glucocorti-
coid responsive than other allergic skin diseases. Food
Fig. 9.13 Food allergy in a dog demonstrating mild superficial
allergy is diagnosed by appropriate elimination diet
perivascular and interstitial inflammation; note mild edema.
followed by rechallenge after improvement has been
obtained.
Inflammation is mixed and variable in both cell type and
intensity. Some cases include predominantly lympho-
Biopsy site selection
cytes and histiocytes, while others may feature many
Primary lesions and lesions with minimal self-trauma are
eosinophils, sometimes in striking perivascular arrange-
preferred sites. In the cat, it is especially important to
ment. Mast cells may be numerous. The presence of
avoid ulcers. In cats the dorsum of the neck berween the 
neutrophils and plasma cells may depend on the degree
shoulder blades is not recommended as a biopsy site,
of self-trauma-induced epidermal damage or pyoderma.
as any traumatic or inflammatory manipulation in this
Inflammation may extend around subjacent adnexal
region may lead to the development of feline idiopathic
appendages. Chronic lesions may be characterized by
ulcerative dermatosis (see Chapter 6).
sebaceous gland and sweat gland hyperplasia, as seen in
atopic dermatitis (see p. 200).
Histopathology (Figures 9.13 and 9.14)
In cats, lesions may be manifested as allergic miliary
dermatitis (see Chapter 6 and p. 211). Moderate to severe
The lesions of food allergy are highly variable in both
acanthosis may be accompanied by extensive ulceration
dogs and cats. In dogs, epidermal lesions include those
and exudation in more severe lesions. Eosinophilic
of chronic hyperplastic dermatitis due to allergy (see
plaque-like changes of severe epidermal and superficial
Chapter 7). Acanthosis may be severe and there may be
follicular spongiosis and mucinosis may be present in
patchy spongiosis. Dermal lesions include superficial
areas not typically expected to develop plaque, such
perivascular inflammation that may be diffuse in more
as the head. Dermal inflammation often includes
severe lesions. Vessels are dilated and congested, and there
eosinophils, intermingled with histiocytes, lymphocytes
may be mild to moderate superficial dermal edema.
and variable neutrophils, the latter dependent upon the
208
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 9.14 High magnification of food
allergy in a cat. Severe eosinophilic and
mastocytic inflammation is diffusely
present in the dermis.
degree of ulceration. Mast cells may be present in large
hypersensitivity, and sarcoptic and notoedric acariasis.
numbers throughout the superfcial and middle dermis,
Flea allergy may be indistinguishable. Uncomplicated
and are often clustered around blood vessels or in rows
canine atopic dermatitis is generally less inflamed and
between collagen fbers. In some instances, lesions of
does not include significant numbers of eosinophils, as do
feline food allergy have been confused with cutaneous
most cases of canine food allergy. In the cat, a predomi-
mast cell neoplasia. Eosinophilic and mixed infltrates
nance of mast cells or severe and deep extension of
may extend to surround vessels of the deep dermis and
eosinophilic inflammation is suggestive for food allergy.
upper layers of the panniculus; this deep extension of
particularly when lesions are known to be confined to the
inflammation is very suggestive of food allergy, particu-
head and neck. However the deep eosinophilic inflam-
larly when occurring in the context of lesions confned
mation of feline mosquito bite hypersensitivity may be
to the head and neck. In occasional cases, there may be
virtually identical. Feline mosquito bite hypersensitivity
small foci of eosinophil degranulation around collagen
may have prominent eosinophil degranulation, in contrast
fbers (flame fgures) in a milieu of severe eosinophilic
to feline food allergy in which these lesions are less
dermatitis. Eosinophilic (luminal) folliculitis has been
common and mild. In feline cases of food allergy that
observed. Eosinophilic mural folliculitis, characterized by
mimic psychogenic alopecia, scattered eosinophils may
the degranulation of eosinophils in the follicular wall and
suggest an underlying allergic cause. Defnitive histo-
around follicles, may be present rarely. Neutrophils
pathologic identifcation of food allergy in dogs and cats 
 may be clustered around and within superfcial to middle
is not possible, and clinical differentiation is required.
hair folicles, constituting putative secondary bacterial
folliculitis.
CANINE FLEA ALLERGY DERMATITIS
Mild to moderate mononuclear cell dermatitis without
eosinophils has been reported in cats with clinically
(Synonyms:
 FAD, flea bite hypersensitivity, fea bite
confrmed food allergy (White & Sequoia, 1989). Also,
dermatitis)
inflammation is minimal in the rare food allergic cat that
 presents for alopecia only. These cases clinically and his-
Clinical features (Figures 9.15 through 9.17)
tologically mimic feline psychogenic alopecia (see Chapter
19), but generally include a few scattered eosinophils as
Canine flea allrgy dermatitis is an extremely common
evidence of an underlying allergic stimulus to hair pulling.
pruritic skin disease caused by hypersensitivity to salivary
 Differential diagnoses in the dog and cat include other
antigens of the flea. Flea allergy dermatitis is the most
allergic skin diseases, particularly those characterized by
common cause of canine skin disease globally in envi-
eosinophils. These include canine flea allergy dermatitis,
ronmental regions supportive of flea populations. Type I
feline allergic miliary dermatitis, feline mosquito bite
Perivascular diseases of the dermis
209
Fig. 9.15 Acute canine flea allergy dermatitis. Salivary staining, ery-
Fig. 9.17 Closer view of the lateral tail fold of the dog in Fig. 9.16.
thema, and papules are present bilaterally symrmetrically on the
The erythematous papules of acute fea allergy dermatitis are super-
ventral abdomen. Note characteristic involvement of the umbilicus.
imposed on chronic skin lesions.
{Photograph courtesy M.D. Song; case material University of Cali-
fornia, Davis.)
bosacral region, tailbase, perineum, and the medial and
caudal thighs. Lesions and pruritus are predominantly
localized to the caudal one-half of the dog. The umbilical
 fold commonly is affected in male dogs. Lesions vary from
subtle to severe. Alopecia, lichenifcation, and hyperpig-
 mentation indicate chronicity, and are contingent on the
degree of self-trauma. Fibropruritic nodules may form
in susceptible individuals (see Chapter 7). Occasionally,
pruritus may be generalized. The wearing down of the
incisors and hair embedded beneath the gum line are
other visual indicators of the pruritus seen with flea
allergy dermatitis. Secondary pyoderma and Malassezia
dermatitis are common; fea allergy can predispose to
recurrent infection.
 Flea allergy dermatitis can occur in any breed. How-
ever, breed predilections have been reported for the Chow
Chow, Labrador Retriever, Fox Terrier, Pekingese,
Brittany Spaniel, and setters in France (Carlotti &
Costargent, 1992). In an unpublished study performed in
the United States, the Airedale, Irish Setter, Lhasa Apso,
and Golden Retriever were at statistically significant
increased risk for being diagnosed with flea allergy der-
Fig. 9.16 Chronic flea allergy dermatitis in a Samoyed crossbreed.
 matitis at North American schools of veterinary medicine
Classic lesions consisting of bilaterally symrmetric alopecia, hyper-
(Sischo, W.M. & Ihrke, PJ., unpublished data, 1989).
pigmentation, and severe lichenification are seen in the dorsal lum-
Similar to sarcoptic acariasis (see p. 216), breed predilec-
bosacral region.
tions could reflect the propensity to develop the intensity
of hypersensitivity required to yield highly characteristic,
Ares on Asusiadau ldoseq snouno pue Kiial
readily diagnosable clinical disease. Flea allergy develops
antigens all have been documented as immunologic par-
 most often in dogs between 1 and 3 years of age, but may
ticipants (Gross & Halliwell, 1985; Halliwell & Schem-
commence later in life in dogs that have had minimal pre-
mer, 1987). A late-phase IgE-mediated reaction also may
vious flea exposure. Rarely, signs may be seen in dogs
contribute to the pathogenesis.
younger than 6 months of age. A definite seasonality
Pruritus is the single most important clinical sign of flea
(summer and autumn) is seen with flea allergy dermatitis
allergy dermatitis. Crusted papules occur in a somewhat
 in areas of the world with cold winters. Sex predilection
bilaterally symmetric pattern and involve the dorsal lum-
has not been noted.
210
Diseases of the dermis
Major clinical differential diagnoses include pruritic
Biopsy site selection
superficial spreading pyoderma, superfcial bacterial folli-
culitis, canine atopic dermatitis, and food allergy. Coex-
Areas of papular eruption and erythema with minimal
self-trauma are preferred sites for skin biopsy. Sites of
istence of some of these diseases may hamper differential
diagnosis. In pyoderma, pustules are the primary lesion,
obvious secondary infection should be avoided.
the axillae and groin commonly are involved, and lesions
spread peripherally and form collarettes. Atopic dermati-
Histopathology (Figures 9.18 and 9.19)
tis and food allergy both have more facial and pedal
involvement, and pruritus is not localized to the caudal
Epidermal lesions are those of chronic dermatitis due to
one-half of body.
allergy (see Chapter 7). These include irregular acantho-
Fig. 9.18 Canine flea allergy dermati-
tis. Irregular acanthosis accompanies
superficial perivascular inflammation.
Note discrete  spongiotic foci  with
crusting.
Fig. 9.19 Higher magnification of
canine flea allergy dermatitis. Eosino-
phils and mononuclear cells are accu-
mulating around superficial dermal
blood vessels.
Perivascular diseases of the dermis
211
sis with patchy spongiosis, serocellular crusting, and
patchy parakeratosis.
 In experimentally induced flea allergy dermatitis in
dogs, eosinophils and edema predominated in the im-
mediate response (15 minutes to 4 hours); eosinophils
persisted and were accompanied by mononuclear cells in
late reactions (24 to 48 hours) (Gross & Halliwell, 1985).
This biphasic pattern of inflammation supports both type
I and type IV hypersensitivity. Additionally, Halliwell &
Schemmer (1987) showed that cutaneous basophils are a
significant component of the delayed response to flea bites
in dogs, implicating cutaneous basophil hypersensitivity.
Basophils are not identifable by routine fixation, pro-
cessing, and staining of skin biopsy specimens.
Fig. 9.20 Feline allergic miliary dermatitis. Minute, discrete, ery-
 In specimens from natural cases of canine flea allergy
thematous, crusted papules are seen where the haircoat is parted.
 dermatitis, dermal inflammation is superficial, perivascu-
lar to diffuse, and generally mild to moderate. Eosinophils
and mast cells are mixed with lymphocytes and
Histopathology (Figure 9.21)
macrophages. Neutrophils and plasma cells also may be
prominent, and the presence of these cells may depend
 Epidermal lesions have been described (see Chapter 6)
on the degree of secondary self trauma and pyoderma.
and include discrete serocellular crusts or spongiotic
Melanophages may be observed. There are variable super-
eosinophilic pustules associated with variable erosion,
ficial edema and vascular ectasia. Inflammation frequently
ulceration, and acanthosis. The dermal inflammatory
extends around adnexal appendages. There may be sec-
infltrate is mild to moderate, and consists of eosino-
ondary superfcial bacterial folliculitis (see Chapter 16).
phils, lymphocytes, mast cells, and fewer histiocytes.
As in atopic dermatitis, sebaceous gland hyperplasia and
Dermal inflammation is perivascular to interstitial and
apocrine gland ectasia are present in chronic lesions (see
extends from the superficial to the middle (follicular)
p. 200, atopic dermatitis). Mild to moderate dermal fbro-
dermis. Perivascular inflammation of the deep dermis also
sis occurs with chronicity. Rarely, fbropruritic nodules
may be present, and when severe, may be suggestive of
are present (see Chapter 7); however these lesions are not
food allergy (see p. 206), although confrmed flea allergy
routinely obtained for histopathologic confirmation of
has been seen occasionally in these cases. Neutrophils
flea allergy. Feline flea allergy dermatitis is discussed in the 
may be prominent beneath epidermal erosion or
context of feline allergic miliary dermatitis (see below).
ulceration.
Lesions of flea allergy dermatitis closely resemble those
Edema and mucinosis of the superficial dermis may
of other allergic dermatitides. Eosinophils may be a key
 occur in conjunction with inflammation, and vessels may
feature in separating flea allergy from atopic dermatitis, as
be dilated. Superficial dermal fbrosis is a feature of chron-
specimens from cases of uncomplicated atopic dermatitis
ically or severely self-traumatized lesions. Eosinophilic
usually do not exhibit eosinophils on routine evaluation
luminal folliculitis is an occasional fnding in some cats
with hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining. Food allergy
with severe allergic miliary dermatitis and may be associ-
may be indistinguishable. Other parasitic allergic diseases,
ated with food allergy in some cases (see p. 206). Neu-
such as sarcoptic acariasis or hookworm dermatitis, also
 trophilic superficial folliculitis is not uncommon (see
will closely resemble flea allergy dermatitis if parasites are
Chapter 16), and may be secondary to bacterial infection
 not found in tissue. Clinical differentiation is required.
following ulceration.
Histopathologic differential diagnoses are few, but the
diagnosis of allergic miliary dermatitis is not etiologically
FELINE ALLERGIC
specifc, as many allergic skin diseases of cats can mani-
MILIARY DERMATITIS
fest this pattern of dermatitis. Eosinophilic plaque is qual-
Clinical features (Figure 9.20)
itatively similar to allergic miliary dermatitis, but is more
dramatically spongiotic, mucinotic, inflamed, and ulcer-
See Chapter 6.
ated, and involves a larger expanse of skin. Since
eosinophilic plaque and miliary dermatitis both may be
Biopsy site selection
manifestations of allergic skin disease in the cat (and can
exist concurrently), histopathologic separation may not
See Chapter 6.
be critical diagnostically.
212
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 9.21 Feline allergic miliary der-
matitis. Moderate numbers of eosino-
phils are infiltrating the superficial
dermis.
arthropods, and food allergy. However this reaction
pattern also could be initiated by contact allergens, vac-
cines, bacteria or other immunologic stimuli.
Clinical features are diverse and include erythroderma
with or without a papular eruption or visually obvious
edema. Frank wheals may be present, as in urticaria
(see Chapter 10). Erythematous lesions may not blanch
with diascopy, which indicates extravasated red blood
cells due to vascular damage. Petechial hemorrhage
may be noted. Lesions may be visually more obvious and
striking in comparatively glabrous regions and in short-
coated dogs. Pruritus is variable and, if present, may
induce self-trauma that can obscure primary lesions. As
 in urticaria, site involvement may be contingent on cause
Fig. 9.22 Urticarial allergic eruption in a crossbreed dog. Erythema
 (see Chapter 10). Signalment predilections have not been 
and a papular eruption are present, but dermal edema is not visu-
noted.
ally obvious.
Clinical differential diagnoses include urticaria, if
wheals are present, and other hypersensitivity reactions,
if wheals are not present. If lesions do not blanch with
diascopy, other causes of vasculopathy, as well as vas-
URTICARIAL ALLERGIC ERUPTION
culitis, must be considered. Superfcial pyoderma (espe-
cially in short-coated dogs) may closely mimic urticarial
Clinical features (Figure 9.22)
allergic eruption grossly. Folliculocentric inflammation 
Urticarial allergic eruption is a canine reaction pattern
 and accompanying edema can cause groups of hairs to
characterized clinically by macular erythema, erythema-
stand upright, resembling urticaria.
tous papules, wheals, or edema. This reaction pattern is
a distinct histopathologic diagnosis, but is not recognized
Biopsy site selection
as a distinct clinical entity. Urticarial allergic eruptions are
assumed to be associated with hypersensitivity reactions.
Representative lesions uncomplicated by  self-trauma
A similar reaction pattern has been reported in human
should be selected. If both wheals and papules are present,
medicine (Ackerman, 1978). Initiating causes most com-
both lesions should be selected. Nonblanching erythema
monly have been adverse drug reactions, stinging or biting
always should be sampled to rule out vasculitis.
Perivascular diseases of the dermis
213
Histopathology (Figures 9.23 through 9.25)
In cases with nonblanching erythema, vasculopathic
change may be indicated by swollen endothelial cells and
Superficial to mid-dermal, moderate to severe edema, and
perivascular hemorrhage ('microhemorrhage'). There
superficial vascular congestion are consistent features of
may be margination of neutrophils and/or eosinophils
urticarial allergic eruption in dogs. Blood vessels may be
within blood vessels, but there is an absence of vascular
prominently dilated in some cases. Perivascular to inter-
inflammation (vasculitis). There is mild acanthosis. Fea-
stitial inflammation often is very mild but may be mod-
tures of persistent self-trauma, such as parakeratotic
erate, and extends from the superficial to the midfollicular
crusting, severe acanthosis, and sebaceous hyperplasia,
 dermis. Inflammation may appear periadnexal due to the
generally are lacking.
high density of blood vessels in this location. Eosinophils,
Other allergic dermatitides, including atopic dermatitis,
lymphocytes, histiocytes, and variable neutrophils are
may be considered in the differential diagnosis of urticar-
observed.
ial allergic eruption. Mild reactions to ticks or other
Fig. 9.23 Urticarial allergic eruption
in a dog featuring diffuse moderate
edema and mild superficial inflammation.
Fig. 9.24 Higher magnification of
urticarial allergic eruption in a dog.
Both inflammation and edema are more
severe than in Fig. 9.23. Note vascular
dilatation.
214
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 9.26 Acute allergic contact dermatitis of the ear of a Dalmat-
ian due to the neomycin in a topical otic preparation. An exudative
 and vesicular papular eruption extends beyond the confines of the
ear canal.
Fig. 9.25 High magnification of urticarial allergic eruption. Note
perivascular neutrophils and rmarked edema.
 r s rs re  s
However, urticarial allergic eruption tends to demonstrate
more prominent dermal edema in proportion to the
degree of dermal inflammation than most other allergic
dermatitides. Ultimately, specifc etiological differentia-
different allergic stimuli probably can initiate urticarial
allergic eruption. Urticarial allergic eruption with pro-
nounced vasculopathic change is similar to neutrophilic
immunologic vasculitis (see Chapter 10) but lacks true
vascular inflammation.
Fig. 9.27 Allergic contact derrmatitis in a dog. Note erythema,
ALLERGIC CONTACT DERMATITIS
alopecia, and hyperpigmentation of the muzzle.
Clinical features (Figures 9.26 through 9.28)
Histopathology (Figures 9.29 and 9.30)
See Chapter 5.
Acute and chronic lesions of the epidermis have been
Biopsy site selection
described (see Chapter 5), and consist of spongiotic vesi-
cles which progress to crusting and acanthosis. In some
 See Chapter 5.
cases of confrmed allergic contact dermatitis, including
Perivascular diseases of the dermis
215
within patch tests, dermal inflammation predominates
and epidermal spongiosis and inflammation are not
observed.
 Dermal inflammation of allergic contact dermatitis is
 superficial to mid-dermal, and can be mild to multifocally
severe, the latter particularly in lesions with severe self-
trauma. Perivascular distribution usually is observed, but
interface reactions have been reported in natural cases
(Calderwood Mays, 1993; Olivry, 1993). In a single case
of allergic contact dermatitis to wool, confrmed by patch
Fig. 9.28 Chronic allergic contact dermatitis involving the ventral
interdigital web of a Labrador Retriever. Lichenification, alopecia,
and erythema are present. {Photograph courtesy C.E. Griffin; case
Fig. 9.30 High magnification of allergic contact dermatitis to wool
material University of California, Davis.)
in a dog. Note perivascular eosinophils.
Fig. 9.29 Allergic contact dermatitis
in a dog. Superficial perivascular
inflammation consists principally of
mixed mononuclear cells. Note epider-
mal spongiosis with migration of lym-
phocytes at right.
216
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 9.31 Canine sarcoptic acariasis in a German Shepherd Dog.
Fig. 9.32 Close view of the lesions of sarcoptic acariasis on the
 Alopecia and crusting are present on the pinna.
ventral abdomen of a dog. A diffuse, erythematous, maculopapular
rash is present.
testing, inflammation was superfcially diffuse and band-
like in distribution.
Lymphocytes and histiocytes may be most prominent,
but fewer neutrophils and eosinophils often are seen
Mast cells may be numerous. Neutrophils are more
intense when there is severe erosion or ulceration due to
secondary self-trauma. Eosinophils may be prominent in
some cases; a single case was observed by one authon
(T.L.G.) due to Tradescantia fluminensis in which both
the natural lesions and positive patch test reaction fea-
tured eosinophils. The intensity and variable distribution
of individual inflammatory cell types may vary between
natural lesions and patch test sites in the same animal.
Edema is variable and is probably consistently most
 prominent in patch test reactions.
Allergic contact dermatitis mimics allergic dermatitis of
Fig. 9.33. Pinna of an Akita with severe, chronic sarcoptic acaria-
any cause. Histopathologic changes, unless from a known
sis. Thick, adherent crusts cover the almost totally alopecic pinna.
positive patch test site, do not allow defnitive diagnosis.
Epidermal features, including lymphocytic exocytosis
with spongiosis, or eosinophilic intraepidermal pustula-
mite is relatively host specific but can cause at least tran-
tion, may be suggestive if the clinical presentation is
sient pruritic disease in other host species including cats
appropriate (see Chapter 5). Differentiation usually is dif-
and humans. Scabies of canine origin is the most common
fcult and will require clinical demonstration of contact
 pruritic zoonosis. Canine scabies appears to be increasing
exposure.
 in frequency in geographic regions where modern insect-
specifc, low-volume application parasiticides that do not
reliably kill acarids are used for flea control.
CANINE SARCOPTIC ACARIASIS
A preponderance of evidence in all mammalian species
(Synonyms: canine scabies, sarcoptic mange)
 studied indicates that sarcoptic acariasis is a complex
hypersensitivity reaction (Bornstein & Zakrisson, 1993;
Clinical features (Figures 9.31 through 9.33)
Arlian et al., 1995; Lower et al., 2001; Scott et al., 2001).
Dogs with clinical signs of sarcoptic acariasis seroconvert
Canine sarcoptic acariasis is a highly contagious, intensely
to various mite antigens 4 to 5 weeks post infection;
pruritic, transmissible skin disease caused by the burrow-
exposed dogs that do not develop the clinical lesions of
ing epidermal mite Sarcoptes scabei var. canis. Recent data
sarcoptic acariasis do not seroconvert (Bornstein &
suggest that the genus Sarcoptes is composed of a single
Zakrisson, 1993). Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays
heterogeneous species (Zahler et al., 1999). The canine
(ELISAs) show IgG response to scabies antigens (Lower
Perivascular diseases of the dermis
217
et al., 2001). A biphasic increase and decrease of CD1a+
Generalized dermatopathic lymphadenopathy often is
Langerhans cells has been documented in the epidermis
 present. Secondary pyoderma and Malassezia dermatitis
of dogs sensitized and then challenged with scabies mites
may occur especially in chronic cases. Corticosteroid
(Stemmer et al., 1996). T-lymphocytes (CD3 epsilon +),
administration in anti-inflammatory dosages may impede
CD11c+, major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class
the clinical diagnosis by decreasing the severity of lesions.
II+, and CD1a+ cells in the dermis play a major role in a
However, the mites may be more readily found on skin
 scrapings in dogs receiving corticosteroids. Immunocom-
mentally infested dogs (Stemmer et al., 1996). Similarly,
 promised dogs with so-called Norwegian scabies' exhibit
scabies in humans is believed to be a complex hypersen-
much more florid clinical signs in conjunction with large
sitivity reaction involving both humoral and cell-mediated
 mite populations. Affected dogs have severe generalized
hypersensitivity, and circulating immune complexes.
thick, adherent crusts with marked alopecia.
 Most of the clinical features (including exreme pruri-
The Labrador Retriever Cocker Spaniel, and Dober-
tus) that characterize sarcoptic acariasis in all species
man Pinscher are at statistically significant increased risk
probably are associated with a hypersensitivity reaction
for being diagnosed with canine sarcoptic acariasis at
to various mite antigens including proteins in the cuticle
 North American schools of veterinary medicine (Sischo,
and the feces. Allergic crossreactivity between various
W.M. & Ihrke, PJ., unpublished data, 1989). The great
mite species is likely, as shared antigens exist in mite cuti-
majority of dogs of all breeds exposed to sarcoptic acari-
cles and feces. The majority of dogs with sarcoptic acari-
asis probably develop a clinically apparent hypersensitiv.
asis in one study displayed both positive intradermal
ity reaction. Marked breed predilections (with assumed
testing and serological reactivity to house dust mites that
uniform risk for acquiring the disease) might be due to
disappeared  after  successful  treatment
for scabies
(Prélaud & Guaguere, 1995). Crossreactivity between
ity reaction required to yield highly characteristic, readily
scabies mite antigens and dust mites complicates serologic
diagnosable clinical disease. One author (P.J.I.) believes
testing: IgE directed at 17 different scabies mite proteins
the Cocker Spaniel may be at increased risk for the devel-
has been documented in the sera of atopic dogs without
opment of *Norwegian scabies'. This apparent predilec-
known exposure to scabies mites (Schumann et al., 2001).
tion might be explained by a breed-based tendency for an
Variation in the intensity of the immunologic reaction
immunologic defect fostering  intense replication of
to scabies mite antigens probably fosters variability in
 scabies mites, similar to demodicosis. An age predilection
severity of clinical signs, the development of asympto-
for young dogs is seen and may correlate with increased
matic carriers, and a decrease in mite numbers as the
lad pue suej Supaanq srel ui ansodxe ioj Aiunioddo
disease progresses. One author (P.J.I.) and other derma-
 stores. Immunologic factors also could favor young dogs
 tologists have documented scabies mites on asymptomatic
 developing overt clinical disease. Sex predilections are not 
dogs living in households with dogs with clinically appar-
seen.
ent disease. Dogs with compromised immune systems
Clinical differential diagnoses should include pruritic
(due to coexistent immunosuppressive disease or therapy
skin diseases such as flea allergy dermatitis and pruritic
with corticosteroids or cytotoxic drugs) may harbor much
superfcial pyoderma, both of which may present with
mnn, pnn-os un sau jo sudod rar
similar crusted papules. Other pruritic canine skin dis-
scabies'. Similarly, high mite counts are seen most com-
eases such as atopic dermatitis and food allergy usually
monly in human patients who are immunocompromised
 do not exhibit primary lesions. The typical site predilec-
with diseases such as acquired immunodefciency syn-
 tions for canine sarcoptic acariasis (margins of the pinnae,
drome (AIDS) (Stone, 2003).
ventral abdomen and chest, and lateral elbows) will aid
 Pruritus is the prime clinical feature of canine sarcop-
in the differentiation from other pruritic skin diseases.
tic acariasis. An erythematous maculopapular eruption
Skin scrapings and fecal flotation for ingested mites and
with crusting and alopecia is accompanied by secondary
eggsa
 are recommended diagnostic procedures. Since
self-traumatic excoriations. The crusts are often thick and
scabies mites may be difficult to demonstrate in skin
yellowish white. Extensive alopecia, lichenification, and
 scrapings, empirical treatment for canine sarcoptic acari-
hyperpigmentation may be seen in chronic cases. The
asis based on clinical impression is a useful diagnostic
margins of the pinnae are most often affected and may be
tool. Skin biopsy is helpful to reveal mites where skin
the initial site of involvement, especially in young dogs.
scrapings have proved negative.
The ventral truncal abdomen, chest, lateral elbows and
face also are involved commonly. The preference of mites
Biopsy site selection
for sparsely haired skin results in a predominantly ventral
truncal distribution; the dorsum of the trunk remains rel-
Erythematous papules from sparsely haired areas, such as
atively spared.
the ventrum, are ideal biopsy sites. Biopsy site selection
218
Diseases of the dermis
also should include crusted lesions, since these may be
migrate through the epidermis in the vicinity of the mites
 more likely to reveal the offending parasite. Multiple
and may form small discrete pustules. These foci may
specimens should be obtained to increase the potential for
have a fat surface or may appear slightly indented
fnding mites in tisue section. Excoriated lesions or frank
('nibbles').
pustules indicative of secondary pyoderma should be
 The epidermis of lesional skin that does not contain
 avoided. Ear margins should not be selected for biopsy,
mites resembles chronic allergic dermatitis of any cause.
unless exclusively affected, since sampling may result in
There is acanthosis, but spongiosis is minimal to mild.
scarring and distortion of the pinna
Compact hyperkeratosis may predominate over paraker-
atosis and probably reflects persistent self-trauma.
 Eosinophilic intraepidermal pustules were reported as
Histopathology (Figure 9.34)
rare in lesional skin that did not contain mites (Morris &
Histologic features vary depending upon whether mites
Dunstan, 1996).
are fortuitously present in section; this variability has
Dermal inflammation consists of eosinophils and mast
been previously reported (Morris & Dunstan, 1996).
cells intermingled with mild to moderate superfcial
That report postulated that variability of spongiosis and
perivascular infltrates of lymphocytes and histiocytes.
inflammation in the immediate vicinity of individual mites
There may be mild to moderate edema. Neutrophils and
was indicative of the stage of the inflammatory reaction
plasma cells may be prominent in specimens obtained
from sites of epidermal erosion and crusting. Inflamma-
minimal in assumed early lesions, became intense in fully
 tion is milder and less proportionately eosinophilic in sec-
developed lesions, and waned in late lesions (Morris &
 tions without mites. Sebaceous hyperplasia and apocrine
Dunstan, 1996).
dilatation, features of chronic self-trauma, are often
present (see atopic dermatitis, p. 200).
imens where mites are present than in specimens where
 Large numbers of mites embedded in thick crusts may
 they are absent, although the reaction to individual mites
be present in dogs that have severe infestation due to
may vary. In mite-associated specimens the epidermis has
immunologic compromise (*Norwegian scabies'). In these 
moderate to severe acanthosis and variable spongiosis,
cases layers of parakeratotic and serocellular crusts are
accompanied by parakeratosis and serocellular crusting.
intermingled with numerous mites. The thickness of the
Parakeratotic crusting may be distributed in mounds; in
crust may be six to eight times that of the underlying
some lesions mild to moderate parakeratosis is diffuse.
acanthotic epidermis. Other inflammatory changes are
Cross-sections of mites (200 to 400 μm) or their oval eggs
similar to standard sarcoptic acariasis.
(100 to 150pμm) are embedded in the keratin layer or
The histopathologic appearance of sarcoptic acariasis
superficial cell layers of the epidermis. Eosinophils may
without mites present is nonspecifc diagnostically. Dif-
Fig. 9.34 Canine sarcoptic acariasis.
Mites are imbedded in the superficial
epidermis and overlying crust. Note
superficial inflammatory infiltrate.
Perivascular diseases of the dermis
219
ferential diagnoses principally include other allergic dis-
Pruritus is the prime clinical feature of feline notoedric
eases that feature eosinophils, including flea allergy der-
acariasis. An erythematous papular rash rapidly eventu
matitis or food allergy. If mites are not present in tissue
ates in thick, adherent, yellow-gray crusts. Severe self-
section, clinical differentiation by discovery of the offend-
 trauma produces excoriation. Alopecia is progressive and
'pnbar si Adeiaui aiedondde oi asuodsr ro sau o
 may be severe. Lichenifcation varies with chronicity.
If mites are present, cheyletiellosis may be considered.
Similar to canine sarcoptic acariasis, the margins of the
On average, adult sarcoptic mites are smaller and of a
pinnae are most often affected initially. Lesions spread
more round confguration than the elongated mites of
rapidly over the entire pinnae, face, eyelids, neck, and
Cheyletiella spp.
forelegs as areas of involvement increase by peripheral
extension. Cats that remain untreated may develop
generalized disease. Generalized dermatopathic lym-
FELINE NOTOEDRIC ACARIASIS
phadenopathy is a consistent feature. Breed, age, or sex
(Synonyms: feline scabies, notoedric mange, head mange)
 predilections have not been noted.
Clinical differential diagnoses should include other
Clinical features (Figure 9.35)
severely pruritic skin diseases with a predilection for the
face and ears. Otodectic acariasis, food allergy, pemphi-
Feline notoedric acariasis is a highly contagious, intensely
 gus foliaceus, and atopic dermatitis should be considered.
pruritic, transmissible skin disease caused by the burrow-
Skin scrapings and fecal flotations for ingested mites and
ing epidermal mite Notoedres cati. The disease is rare in
eggs should be performed. Skin scrapings may be a more
most parts of North America but may be found in local-
useful diagnostic tool than in canine sarcoptic acariasis,
ized enzootic areas, especially in larger cities with sub-
since notoedric mites may be more prevalent on affected
stantial feral cat populations. As with canine sarcoptic
cats. Empirical treatment based on clinical impression
acariasis, the mite is relatively host-specific but can cause
also is a useful diagnostic tool.
pruritic disease in other host species including dogs and
humans (Scott et al., 2001). A complex hypersensitivity
 Biopsy site selection
reaction similar to that proposed in canine sarcoptic
acariasis is suspected (see p. 216). Feline notoedric acari-
Biopsy site selection should include severely crusted
asis appears to be increasing in frequency in geographic
lesions, since they may reveal the offending parasite. Mul-
regions where modern insect-specific, low-volume appli-
tiple sites should be sampled to increase the potential for
cation parasiticides that do not reliably kill acarids are
fnding mites in tissue. Severe excoriations should be
used for flea control.
avoided. Ear margins should not be selected for biopsy,
 unless exclusively affected, since sampling may result in
scarring and distortion of the pinna.
Histopathology (Figure 9.36)
Orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis and parakeratosis overlie
moderate acanthosis. Parakeratosis with serocellular
crusting is often distributed in mounds or caps. Mild
spongiosis is present. Histopathologically, parasites are
discovered more readily in feline notoedric acariasis than
in canine sarcoptic acariasis. Notoedres cati may be seen
 in variable numbers embedded in the superficial layers of
the epidermis. Notoedres cati are slightly smaller than
Sarcoptes scabei (see p. 216).
The dermis has superficial, perivascular to diffuse, mild
to moderate inflammation composed of eosinophils, his-
tiocytes, mast cells, neutrophils, and lymphocytes. Mild
edema and vascular ectasia may be present.
 In the absence of mites the lesions of notoedric acaria-
sis are not specifically diagnostic and resemble other aller-
gic skin diseases. Dermal inflammation of food allergy is
Fig. 9.35 Feline notoedric acariasis. Note the adherent crusts,
often more severe and deeply extensive than the inflam-
alopecia, and excoriations. (Photograph courtesy I.J. Ameti.)
mation of notoedric acariasis. Discovery of mites in tissue
220
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 9.36 Feline notoedric acariasis.
Mites are imbedded in the superficial
acanthotic epidermis and  within
keratin. Mild superficial dermal in-
flammation is evident.
Fig. 9.37 Cheyletiellosis in a Cocker Spaniel demonstrating severe
Fig. 9.38 Cheyletiellosis in a dog. Mild scaling without erythema
scaling and crusting on the trunk.
affects the dorsal trunk.
is the key differential feature. If mites are present,
Cheyletiella yasguri, cats by Cheyletiella blakei, and
cheyletiellosis may be considered. On average, adult
rabbits by Cheyletiella parasitovorax. However, multiple
notoedric mites are smaller and of a more round config
mammalian species (including humans) in the same envi-
uration than the elongated mites of Cheyletiella spp.
ronment may be parasitized by the same species of
Cheyletiella mites. Cheyletiellosis is an under-reported
zoonosis (Wagner & Stallmeister 2000). Although the
CHEYLETIELLOSIS
entire life cycle is completed on the host, adult female
(Synonym: Cheyletiella dermatitis)
mites may be able to survive in the environment tran-
 siently, thus increasing the likelihood of transmission to
other animals. Infestations may be enzootic in catteries.
Clinical features (Figures 9.37 and 9.38)
Cheyletiellosis is seen most commonly in areas of the
Cheyletiellosis is a mild, variably pruritic, transmissible
world where vigorous flea control is either not necessary
skin disease caused by surface-living mites of the genus
or not practiced, as the mites usually are sensitive to many
Cheyletiella. The mite appears to be only partially host-
 parasiticides. Cheyletiellosis may be increasing in fre-
specifc. Dogs are thought to be parasitized primarily by
 quency in geographic regions where modern insect-
Perivascular diseases of the dermis
221
specifc, low-volume application parasiticides that do not
esized by the authors and in a previous report (Moriello,
reliably kill all Cheyletiella mites are used for flea control.
1993). Clinical disease is noted most commonly in dogs
The immunology of cheyletiellosis is largely unex-
and cats less than 6 months of age. Infested adults are
plored. The host access to mite antigens may be less
more likely to be inapparent carriers. Sex predilections
than seen with burrowing sarcoptic mites, since the
have not been reported.
Cheyletiella mite does not invade the living epidermis.
Clinical differential diagnoses for cheyletiellosis vary
However it is probable that Cheyletiella mites can induce
according to the predominant clinical signs. In cats, if
a complex hypersensitivity reaction in some animals,
scaling with little or no pruritus is the presenting com-
which is similar to that seen with the sarcoptiform mites
plaint, then differential diagnoses should include poor
(see p. 216). Variations in the tendency to develop a
coat quality due to poor nutrition or systemic illness such
hypersensitivity response could explain the marked
as diabetes melltus or liver disease. If pruritus is sub-
variability in clinical signs and pruritus seen with
stantial, differential diagnoses should include notoedric
cheyletiellosis. Recently, allergic crossreactivity between
acariasis and the causes of allergic miliary dermatitis (see
Cheyletiella mite antigens and both common house dust
Chapter 6). In dogs, if exfoliation with minimal or no pru-
-siadau ien aaa rd ous uaq s sa
ritus is the presenting complaint, then disorders of corni-
sitivity to Cheyletiella mite products may be part of the
fication such as primary seborrhea or ichthyosis should
pathogenesis of the disease (White et al., 2001). Mite
be considered (see Chapter 8). Multiple affected animals
counts and severity of the disease are commonly reported
of one or more species in a household should increase the
to be increased in kittens and puppies less than 3 months
 index of suspicion. If pruritus is severe, sarcoptic acaria-
 of age. The lack of a mature immune system could
sis, flea allergy dermatitis, food allergy, and atopic der-
account for greater mite counts; the increased severity of
 matitis are possible differential diagnoses. Flea combing,
disease is unexplained.
superfcial skin scrapings, acetate tape preparations, and
 The clinical features of cheyletiellosis are highly vari-
fecal flotations are useful in fnding the mites. Generally,
able. Cheyletiellosis of both dogs and cats can be subdi-
Cheyletiella mites are found more readily than the
vided into those cases with exfoliation as a principal
causative organisms of most other contagious ectopara-
feature with little or no prurius, and those with sub-
sitic skin diseases. Response to therapy may be used as a
stantial pruritus and inflammation. Cheyletiella spp. mites
diagnostic tool if cheyletiellosis is suspected but mites are
are large; adult mites and their eggs may be visible to the
not found.
naked eye or with the use of a hand lens. Entrance and
egress of the mites from the nostrils of cats has been noted
Biopsy site selection
(Stein, B.P.,
personal communication, 1982; Power,
H.T, personal communication, 1988). The activity of
Areas of maximal scaling and crusting should be selected.
Cheyletiella mites may increase in the evening, as they are
Care should be taken not to dislodge surface crust as that
best observed crossing the muzzle of the cat at that time
is the habitat of the mite.
(Power, H.T., personal communication, 1988).
The most common canine presentation of cheyletiel-
Histopathology (Figures 9.39 through 9.41)
losis is predominantly truncal scaling and mild crusting.
Lesions may generalize with chronicity. Pruritus usually is
The epidermis is irregularly acanthotic and has moderate
mild to absent. Mild lymphadenopathy may be noted.
 to severe orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis. Variable numbers
Rarely, dogs may develop a more generalized exfoliative
of mites, measuring 350 to 500μum in length, are
erythroderma and severe pruritus.
entrapped in the keratin. Eggs are observed rarely and
 Feline cheyletiellosis usually is characterized clinically
 measure 200μm. In clinically more severe, pruritic cases
by mild scaling and crusting. Inapparent carriers are
 there may be extensive serocellular crusting and erosion.
common. The dorsal trunk most commonly is affected but
Mite numbers may be reduced in these more severe
lesions may be generalized. Alopecia and poor haircoat
lesions, presumably due to removal by scratching.
quality may be subtle but progressive. Pruritus usually is
 The superfcial dermis has a mixed inflammatory infl-
mild to nonexistent. However florid cases with severe
trate that is perivascular to interstitial and includes
pruritus occasionally are seen in cats (Power H.P., per-
eosinophils, lymphocytes, histiocytes, and plasma cells.
sonal communication, 2003). Clinical signs and pruritus
 Inflammation ranges from mild to severe; intensity prob-
may increase with chronicity. Truncal miliary dermatitis
ably varies with clinical severity and degree of pruritus.
(see Chapter 6) is noted in conjunction with more severely
Variable edema is observed.
pruritic cases.
Differential diagnoses principally include sarcoptic
Although any breed may become affected, a marked
acariasis in dogs and notoedric acariasis in cats. Hyper-
breed predilection for Cocker Spaniels has been hypoth-
keratosis may be more prominent in cheyletiellosis than
222
Diseases of the dermis
in sarcoptic or notoedric acariasis. On average, adult
sarcoptic and notoedric mites are smaller and of a
more round confguration than the elongated mites of
Cheyletiella spp. Additionally, large numbers of mites 
characterize cheyletiellosis in dogs, as mites are rare in
random specimens from dogs with sarcoptic acariasis.
FELINE SUPERFICIAL DEMODICOSIS
(Synonyms: demodectic mange, demodectic acariasis)
Clinical features (Figures 9.42 and 9.43)
Feline demodicosis is a rare or regional parasitic skin
disease caused by an overpopulation of one of at least
three different species of the host-specific mites, Demodex
spp. Demodex cati is a feline follicular mite with mor-
phologic features resembling Demodex canis in dogs
(Scott et al., 2001). Demodex gatoi is a considerably
shorter nonfollicular species of demodicid mite that
predominantly inhabits the stratum corneum (Desch &
Stewart, 1999). A third as yet unnamed species of mite
that resembles Demodex gatoi, but is larger also has been 
identified (Chesney, 1988; Desch & Stewart, 1999). Wide
clinical variability is noted; feline demodicosis may be
localized and follicular, or generalized and follicular
with features resembling canine generalized demodicosis
(Demodex cati; see Chapter 17). Alternatively, feline
demodicosis may be generalized and contagious with
the mites inhabiting predominantly the surface stratum
Fig. 9.39 Cheyletiellosis in a dog. Note mite within abundant
keratin.
corneum (Demodex gatoi) (Morris & Beale, 1997; Beale,
Fig. 9.40 Higher power magnifica-
tion of mite in Fig. 9.39.
Perivascular diseases of the dermis
223
Fig. 9.41  Inflamed cheyletiellosis in a
pruritic cat demonstrating severe crust-
ing, acanthosis, and dermatitis. Note
single large rmite within crust at left.
Fig. 9.42 Feline superficial demodicosis in a Siamese cat. The cat
exhibits bilaterally symmetric, partially self-traumatic alopecia
affecting the caudal trunk, lateral thighs, and shoulder regions.
(Photograph courtesy K.M. Beale.)
Fig. 9.43 Feline superficial demodicosis in a Siamese cat. Note the
patterned partial alopecia. The cat was mildly pruritic.
1998; Guaguere, 2000; Scott et al., 2001). Feline superf-
Aq Aueuopard pasnen aq on sreadde sisonpouap i
Demodex gatoi.
ceived to be rare in most of North America, but may be
Demodicosis due to Demodex gatoi is markedly differ-
 found more commonly in localized enzootic regions of the
ent from other forms of demodicosis as it is a contagious,
southern and southeastern USA. Feline demodicosis due
transmissible, frequently pruritic skin disease (Morris &
-0sg ul Aouanban ui Buiseaioui aq Aeu jon xapouaq 01
Beale, 1997; Beale, 1998). Marked variability in pruritus
graphic regions where modern insect-specific, low-volume
from nonexistent to severe suggests a role for hypersens-
 application parasiticides that do not reliably kill acarids
itivity in the pruritic cats. Feline demodicosis due to
are used for flea control.
od  5 s As s xo
The clinical features of feline superficial demodicosis
reminiscent of nonfollicular sarcoptiform mites (Beale,
vary from asymptomatic alopecia alone, to alopecia with
K.M., personal communication, 2002). The disease is per-
self-trauma due to pruritus (Morris & Beale, 1997; Beale,
224
Diseases of the dermis
1998). The presence or absence of pruritus dictates the
Biopsy site selection
clinical features. If pruritus is absent, affected cats can
present with diffuse, bilaterally symmetric alopecia,
Areas that are less inflamed or sites where the cat is less
with or without associated scaling, usually affecting the
able to lick are ideal for biopsy. Multiple lesions should
be sampled to increase the likelihood of discovering the
ventral and lateral trunk and caudal legs. If pruritus is
present, usually it is intense; affected cats present with
mites histologically.
similar lesions plus erythema, crusting, and excoriation
(Morris & Beale, 1997; Beale, 1998). Owners 0r veteri-
Histopathology (Figures 9.44 through 9.46)
 narians may not be aware of excessive feline groorming.
since grooming behavior may occur when an animal
In some cases of feline superficial demodicosis there is
is alone. Additionally, some pruritic cats may present
minimal inflammation, accompanied by acanthosis and
with multifocal erythematous plaques with broken hair
lamellar hyperkeratosis. Mites are dispersed amongst the
stubble and hyperpigmentation. Siamese and Burmese
keratin layers. Demodex gatoi is a shorter and fatter mite
cats may be predisposed to feline generalized demodico-
 than Demodex cati of feline follicular demodicosis (see
sis caused by Demodex gatoi (Guaguere, 2000; Scott
Chapter 17). This mite resembles Demodex criceti of
et al., 2001).
hamsters. Demodex gatoi measure 80 to 115 μm in length
Clinical differential diagnoses for feline generalized
(Desch & Stewart, 1999). Demodex gatoi accumulate in
demodicosis should include virtually all feline skin dis-
the stratum corneum and are not found within hair folli-
eases characterized by pruritus (allergic skin diseases,
 cles, with the possible exception of follicular ostia.
feline notoedric acariasis), alopecia due to excessive
 In other cases, probably those that corelate with clin-
grooming (feline psychogenic alopecia), and all other
ical pruritus, there is epidermal erosion and ulceration
causes of alopecia that are not due to self-trauma. Skin
 -sd anaur on pur aq puedue  um
scrapings of pruritic cats may not yield mites or eggs
cular to diffuse infltrations of lymphocytes, histiocytes,
of Demodex gatoi since excessive grooming removes
eosinophils, and mast cells. Neutrophils are prominent if
the surface-living mites (Beale, 1998). Conversely, skin
 there is overlying epidermal damage and inflammation. In 
qu aae  ans sinn du jo sd
correlation with the fnding of reduced mites on skin
of mites and eggs (Beale, 1998). If mites are not found,
scrapings from pruritic cats, mite numbers are decreased
Api A Asdonq us ppun si Asdoq u
to absent in inflamed specimens, particularly in areas of
unsuspected feline demodicosis, as many clinicians
epidermal erosion or ulceration.
have a low index of suspicion for all varieties of feline
Definitive diagnosis is easy to accomplish if mites are
demodicosis.
identifiable in tissue. In severely inflamed specimens that
Fig. 9.44 Feline superficial demodico-
sis. Note numerous small superficial
mites and mild inflammation.
Perivascular diseases of the dermis
225
lack mites, severely self-traumatized allergic dermatitis of
other causes may be considered.
CUTANEOUS MICROFILARIASIS
Clinical features (Figures 9.47 and 9.48)
Cutaneous microflariasis is a group of rare skin diseases
caused by a host response to the microflariae of a number
of species of nematodes of the superfamily Filaroidea. To
date, cutaneous microflariasis has been reported in
the dog, but not in the cat. Microflariae migrate to
the dermis and subcutaneous tissues, and are presumed to
elicit a hypersensitivity reaction. In addition, solitary cav-
itating nodules harboring aberrant migrating adult heart-
worms have been reported in dogs, cats, and humans
(Scott et al., 2001; Cornegliani, 2003). Described syn-
dromes of microflariasis include two forms of cutaneous
diroflariasis due to Diroflaria immitis, microflarial
skin disease caused by an unnamed species of Acan-
thocheilonema, and a disease resembling the papular
pruritic form of diroflariasis caused by Acanthocbeil-
onema reconditum (Scott, 1979; Gross & Ihrke, 1992;
Mozos et al., 1992; Hargis et al., 1999). Histopathologic
confrmation is lacking in some of the published case
reports.
Two distinct syndromes of cutaneous diroflariasis
have been reported (Scott, 1979; Scott & Vaughn, 1987;
Mozos et al., 1992). The first subgroup of cutaneous diro-
Fig. 9.45 Higher magnification of feline superficial demmodicosis
flariasis is characterized by a multifocal nodular der-
demonstrating mites in superficial keratin.
matitis with erosions and ulcerations. Previous reports
Fig. 9.46 Inflamed superficial demod-
icosis in a pruritic cat; note erosion and
crusting due to self trauma. A small
superficial mite fragrment is at right
{arrow).
226
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 9.47 Shoulder and neck of a Collie with cutaneous micro-
Fig. 9.48 Caudal thighs of the dog in Fig. 9.47. Note hyperpig
flariasis due to Diroflaria mmmitis. A finely papular eruption with
mentation as a manifestation of chronic pruritic self-trauma.
 alopecia is present.
described prominent facial involvement (Scott, 1979;
and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). An
Scott & Vaughn, 1987). Erythematous papules coalesce
additional dog seen by the authors for generalized
and eventuate in frm alopecic nodules. The lesions are
pruritic, erythematous, and papular skin disease was posi-
chronic, slowly progressive, and mildly pruritic. The
tive for Acanthocheilonema reconditum (Dipetalonema
dorsum of the muzzle, lips, and pinna are affected most
reconditum) (Gross & Ihrke, 1992). Biopsy was not per-
frequently, but lesions also are seen on the trunk and
mitted. This second dog bore closest clinical resemblance
limbs (Scott, 1979; Scott & Vaughn, 1987). A second sub-
to the highly pruritic form of cutaneous diroflariasis rem-
 group of cutaneous diroflariasis is described as a highly
iniscent of scabies.
pruritic papular dermatitis clinically resembling canine
Case sampling for the various forms of cutaneous
sarcoptic acariasis (Mozos et al., 1992). This syndrome is
microflariasis is too small to infer signalment data.
characterized by a generalized, maculopapular, erythema-
However, many of the reported cases of all syndromes
tous eruption with severe pruritus. In both reported
have been in mature, large-breed dogs, perhaps with
syndromes, complete resolution of the skin disease in
 greater environmental access to infective larvae.
 response to therapy for heartworms was used as a method
Clinical differential diagnoses for multifocal nodular
of validating the diagnosis.
microflarial dermatitis should include diseases character-
The microflarial skin disease associated with
1an
ized by multifocal nodules, such as infectious granulomas,
sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma syndrome, and reac-
Hargis et al. (1999) was characterized by solitary or
tive histiocytosis. Clinical differential diagnoses for the
multifocal, erythematous, alopecic, crusted papules or 
highly pruritic papular dermatitis caused by either Diro-
plaques with ulceration and scarring. Most dogs were
filaria immitis or Acanthocheilonema reconditum should
pruritic (Hargis et al., 1999). The authors have seen a
 include sarcoptic acariasis, pruritic superfcial pyoderma,
microflariae-related skin disease in a dog with a pruri-
and other pruritic skin diseases of similar distribution.
tic plaque on the head that exhibited many similarities
The diagnosis of cutaneous microflariasis is supported
with these reported dogs. The observed dog tested nega-
by compatible clinical and histopathological fndings
tive for Diroflaria immitis infection using direct assay
 coupled with response to therapy.
Perivascular diseases of the dermis
227
Fig. 9.49 Cutaneous microfilariasis
due to Diroflaria immitis in a dog. In-
flammatory cells are accumulating in a
tightly perivascular pattern.
{Case
material courtesy J.R. Hill.)
Biopsy site selection
Multiple specimens should be obtained from well-devel-
oped nodular lesions or generalized papular eruptions.
Lesions of all stages should be sampled.
Histopathology (Figures 9.49 through 9.51)
In lesions of cutaneous diroflariasis the epidermis is mod-
erately acanthotic or ulcerated. Epidermal pustulation
and crusting may be present. The dermis is characterized
by superfcial and deep perivascular infltrations (
of
macrophages, eosinophils, neutrophils, lymphocytes, and
plasma cells. Macrophages predominate and often form
nodular or granulomatous confgurations around or near
vessels. Segments of microflariae are seen, usually in
small numbers, within vessels as well as within extravas.
cular inflammatory foci. Deeper sectioning of these
granulomas may be required to identify the organisms.
Granulomatous hidradenitis with microflariae has been
reported (Mozos et al., 1992).
In the reported cases of dermatitis associated with an
unnamed species of Acanthocheilonema, lesions were
similar to those of cutaneous diroflariasis. Inflammation
was often intense, and was superfcial and deep, perivas-
cular to interstitial, and predominantly eosinophilic and
plasmacytic (Hargis et al., 1999). Neutrophils, lympho-
cytes, and macrophages were variable. Inflammation
extended to the panniculus, and deep scarring was
reported. Small granulomas were found in association
Fig. 9.50 Higher magnification of microfilariasis due to Diroflaria
with the eosinophilic and plasmacytic inflammation and
mitis in the dog of Fig. 9.49. Note mononuclear cells in a nodular
scarring in the dermis or panniculus, and often but not 
pattern around superficial dermal vessels. (Case material courtesy
invariably contained portions of microflariae. Deeper
J.R. Hill.)
228
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 9.51 Cutaneous microfilariasis.
Note fragment of microfilaria within
mixed inflammatory infiltrate that
includes eosinophils. (From Hargis,
A.M., Lewis, T.P., Duclos, D.D. et al.
(1999)  Derrmatitis  associated   with
microfilariae (Filaroidea) in 10 dogs.
Vet Dermatof 10, 95-107. Reprinted
with permission.)
sections identified the organisms in several cases. Micro-
flariae also were free within the dermis or panniculus but
were not seen within blood vessels (Hargis et al., 1999).
Differential diagnoses include other skin diseases char-
acterized by eosinophilic perivascular dermatitis. The deep
extension of the inflammation is atypical for most other
allergic dermatitides, and the formation of extravascular
 or perivascular granulomas is suspicious for cutaneous
microflariasis. Discovery of microflariae in tissue may be
difficult. Identification of organisms in intravascular
spaces only is not diagnostic; intravascular microflariae
may be incidental fndings in dogs living in enzootic areas
of Diroflaria immitis and Dipetalonema reconditum
infestation. Microflariae must be found at the centers
of inflammatory foci. Response to therapy, involving erad-
ication of all stages of heartworms or other flarid para-
sites, is the best method of definitive diagnosis in these
cases.
Fig. 9.52 Hookworrm derrmatitis on the dorsurm of the paw of a
Doberman Pinscher. Erosions and ulcers are present around the
margins of the nailbeds. (Photograph courtesy G.A. Kunkle.)
HOOKWORM DERMATITIS
(Synonyms: cutaneous ancylostomiasis and uncinariasis)
 greatly increased. Hookworm dermatitis is presumed to
be due to a hypersensitivity reaction to migrating larvae;
Clinical features (Figures 9.52 and 9.53)
coexistent arthritis suggests a more complex immunologic
Hookworm dermatitis is an uncommon to rare skin
etiopathogenesis (Baker, 1981). Third-stage larvae enter
disease incidental to larval migration associated with the
the skin in soil-contact areas, principally the distal
normal life cycle of the hookworms Ancylostoma
extremities. Hookworm dermatitis is reported to occur
braziliense,Ancylostoma caninum, and Uncinaria steno-
more frequently in association with Uncinaria steno-
cephala in the dog. Hookworm dermatitis has been seen
cephala and is more common in Ireland, southwestern
in cats (Scott et al., 2001), but is rare. The syndrome is
England (Baker & Grimes, 1970; Baker, 1981), the south-
more common in local enzootic areas and is a disease
eastern United States, and other humid areas of the world
associated with poor sanitation where larval numbers are
where hookworms are common.
Perivascular diseases of the dermis
229
Fig. 9.54 Cutaneous anatrichosomiasis in a dog living in Arizona
in the southwestern United States. The pawpads of all four feet
exhibited proliferation of white-grey keratin. Note secondary fissur-
Fig. 9.53 Ventral paw of the Doberrman Pinscher in Fig. 9.52. Note
ing and ulceration. (Photograph courtesy M.D. Song.)
the ulcers of the pawpads and the surrounding skin. (Photograph
courtesy G.A. Kunkle.)
mens to a parasitologist for maceration and examination
Clinical features include erythematous papules and
 is ideal for identifying hookworms.
early erythema and swelling followed by alopecia and
lichenification. Characteristic changes in the texture of the
Histopathology
pawpads occur. The pad margins become soft and friable,
and sometimes separate from the underlying dermis. Claw
The epidermis is acanthotic and may be eroded. Multi
deformation and paronychia with loss of the claw are seen
focal spongiosis, parakeratosis, and serocellular crusts are
in chronic cases. The distal extremities often are most
common features. Tracts caused by migration of larvae
severely affected, but other areas of soil contact such as
have been characterized by linear accumulations of neu-
the xiphoid, posterior sternal region, ventral abdomen,
 trophils and eosinophils that extend through the epider-
and the skin over bony prominences may be affected
mis to the dermis (Scott et al., 2001).
(Baker & Grimes, 1970; Baker 1981). Pruritus is mild to
 The dermis is characterized by superfcial, mild to mod-
moderate. Concomitant arthritis of the distal interpha-
erate, perivascular to interstitial eosinophilic inflamma-
langeal joints has been reported (Baker, 1981).
tion. Neutrophils, lymphocytes, and macrophages are
Breed, age, and sex data are not available. However,
 present in variable numbers. Larvae rarely are discovered
hookworm dermatitis is predominantly a disease of sport-
in tissue section, but may be recovered via maceration
ing dogs kenneled on poorly sanitized earth or grass runs.
and dissection of skin specimens, best undertaken by a
As expected, there is a marked seasonal incidence in
parasitologist.
spring and summer.
 Differential diagnoses include allergic dermatitides that
 Clinical differential diagnoses include other ectopara-
feature eosinophils, such as other parasitic skin diseases
sitic diseases such as demodicosis, pelodera (rhabditic)
(flea allergy dermatitis, sarcoptic acariasis), and food
dermatitis, and canine sarcoptic acariasis. Irritant or aller-
allergy. Geographic location and opportunity for expo-
 gic contact dermatitis could present with similar clinical
sure must be considered in the diagnosis of hookworm
features. A history of poor housing and sanitation in an
dermatis if etiologic agents cannot be demonstrated in
enzootic area should increase suspicion of hookworm
tissue.
dermatitis.
CUTANEOUS ANATRICHOSOMIASIS
Biopsy site selection
Clinical features (Figure 9.54)
Affected sites in constant contact with soil that exhibit
erythema, papules, alopecia, and lichenification should be
 Anatrichosomiasis is a rare, but possibly under-reported,
selected for skin biopsy. Multiple samples will increase the
regional feline and canine skin disease caused by the
likelihood of diagnosis. Submission of fresh tissue speci-
aphasmid nematode Anatrichosoma sp. (Lange et al.,
230
Diseases of the dermis
1980; Ramiro-Ibanez et al., 2002). Adult Anatrichosoma
pawpad. Canine differential diagnoses should include
sp. inhabit the mucosal epithelium of the nasal passages,
pemphigus foliaceus, superficial necrolytic dermatitis,
stomach, eye, skin, and oral cavity of a variety of differ-
familial footpad hyperkeratosis, nasodigital hyperkerato-
ent species of mammals and reptiles; their life cycle is
sis, and canine distemper virus-associated skin disease
incompletely understood (Ramiro-Ibanez et al., 2002). In
(hard pad). Index of suspicion should be increased in oth-
North America, the opossum (Didelphis virginiana) is
erwise healthy animals living in the southwestern United
the natural reservoir host for Anatrichosoma buccalis
States. Cytology of the exudate may reveal multiple ova.
(Ramiro-Ibanez et al., 2002). This organism is postulated
Histopathology is required for defnitive diagnosis.
to be the cause of aberrant infestations seen in domestic
animals in North America (Ramiro-Ibanez et al., 2002)
Biopsy site selection
Since all reported cases of anatrichosomiasis in North
America have been from the southwestern United States,
Punch biopsy specimens should be obtained from the
this may imply ideal geographic or climactic conditions
margin of affected accessory carpal or tarsal pads, as
favorable for aberrant infestation (Ramiro-Ibafez et al.,
biopsy of the central pads is more likely to initiate lame-
2002). Both the cat reported by Ramiro-Ibanez et al.
ness. Ulcers should be avoided as parasites are mostly
(2002) and a dog seen by Song (Song, M., personal com-
found in the epidermis.
munication, 2002) presented with pododermatitis and
resided in Arizona.
Histopathology (Figures 9.55 through 9.57)
Ulcerative pododermatitis involving the pawpads of all 
four feet was described in a cat (Ramiro-Ibanez et al.,
Based on a single canine case observed, there is mild to
2002). Swelling and exfoliation was followed by vesicle
moderate acanthosis accompanied by mild to moderate
 formation, erosion and ulceration. Depression was noted,
erosion and crusting. A superficial perivascular mixed
probably in response to pain. Similar lesions were noted
infltrate is mild to moderate and includes lymphocytes,
in the dog seen by Song (Song, M., personal communica-
plasma cells, macrophages, and neutrophils. Embedded
tion, 2002). Affected pawpads were proliferative and had
in the epidermis are numerous cross-sections of nema-
adherent excessive white-gray keratinized material and
todes, measuring 250-300μm in diameter. These have
fissures. Focal ulceration was noted. The dog was in pain
prominent hypodermal bacillary bands, typical of the
and reluctant to stand.
genus Anatrichosoma. Imbedded in the stratum corneum,
Clinical differential diagnoses for feline anatrichosomi-
and sometimes surrounded by neutrophilic debris, are
asis should include pemphigus foliaceus, plasma cell
bioperculated, yellow, oval eggs, measuring 75μm X
pododermatitis, and eosinophilic granuloma of the
40μm.
Hig. 9.55 Cutaneous anatrichosomia-
sis in a dog. Numerous dark parasitic
 ova are present in thickened pawpad
keratin. Note superficial dermatitis.
Perivascular diseases of the dermis
231
Fig. 9.56 Higher magnification of Fig.
9.55 demonstrating ova of Anatricho-
soma sp. within pawpad keratin.
Fig. 9.57 High magnification of cross
sections of Anatrichosoma sp. nema-
todes in epidermis from the dog in Figs
9.55 and 9.56
In the reported feline case, inflammation was more
VITILIGO
intense and extended perivascularly to the deep dermis as
well. Parasites colonized the superficial dermis as well as
Clinical features (Figure 9.58 through 9.61)
the epidermis, and were associated with intense dermal
inflammation that included eosinophils (Ramiro-Ibafez
Vitiligo is an acquired melanocytopenic hypomelanosis
et al., 2002).
characterized by progressive, well-circumscribed loss of
Differential diagnosis is uncomplicated due to the
highly characteristic appearance and location of the
rare in the cat. Marked breed predilections seem to indi-
Organisms. Pelodera dermatitis, also due to a nematode,
cate that vitiligo in the dog is heritable. The term vitiligo
is folliculocentric (see Chapter 17).
in human medicine is used rather specifically to denote a
232
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 9.58 Vitiligo in a Belgian Tervuren. Note the depigmentation
of the planum nasale, muzzle, lips, and periorbital skin, as well as
the pigment loss from the facial haircoat. (Photograph courtesy B.A.
Atlee; case material University of California, Davis.)
Fig. 9.60 Depigmentation affecting only the planum nasale and the
adjacent rmuzzle in a Labrador Retriever. This subgroup of vitiligo
has been terrmed *Dudley nose' by dog breeders.
Fig. 9.59 Vitiligo of the pawpads in the Belgian Tervuren in Fig
9.58. A mottled loss of pigmentation has occurred on all pawpads.
(Photograph courtesy B.A. Atlee; case material University of Cali-
fornia, Davis.)
common, heritable, acquired disorder characterized by
Fig. 9.61 Vtiligo affecting only the planum nasale in a Siberian
'milky-white', well circumscribed macules that are devoid
Husky. Focal loss of pigmentation was the only abnormality noted.
of any melanocytes on histopathology (Mosher et al.,
This subgroup of vitiligo has been terrmed ‘snow nose' by dog
1999). The diagnosis of vitiligo in humans carries with it
breeders.
the signifcant risk for ocular abnormalities, thyroid
disease, diabetes mellitus, Addison's disease, and perni-
cious anemia (Mosher et al., 1999). Concurrent vitiligo
Perivascular diseases of the dermis
233
and juvenile-onset diabetes mellitus has been reported in
be partially bilaterally symmetric, especially lesions
a Dachshund (Scott et al., 2001).
involving the face and distal extremities. Nonhaired pre-
In veterinary medicine, the term 'vitiligo' has been used
disposed sites include the planum nasale, lips, buccal
sadi sn ssedua on aa aou aqeapiso
mucosa, and pawpads. Depigmentation of the claws may
of leukoderma and leukotrichia. The authors have chosen
occur. The muzzle, elsewhere on the face, and the distal
to use vitiligo more narrowly to delineate animals with fea-
extremities are common predisposed haired sites; this
tures similar to vitiligo in humans. The cardinal difference
pattern of involvement is termed “acrofacial'. Lesions may
between vitiligo in humans and domestic animals is that
be strikingly periorificial and surround the mouth, nares,
concomitant leukotrichia is a common feature in domestic
eyes, anus, and genitals, as is seen in humans. Transient
animals. Leukotrichia may be seen in vitiligo in humans,
erythema and scaling have been described rarely in vitiligo
but humans are glabrous in comparison to domestic
both in the veterinary and human literature. The evolu-
animals, affording less opportunity for leukotrichia.
tion of vitiligo is unpredictable. Affected areas may repig-
Vitiligo in humans was long thought to be a heritable
ment, remain unchanged, or wax and wane. Usually, the
disease of autosomal dominance and variable expression.
full extent of hypopigmentation occurs within 3 to 6
Similar heritability has been hypothesized in the Belgian
months of onset. Lesions are asymptomatic.
Tervuren Dog (Mahaffey et al., 1978). However, current
A marked breed predilection exists for the Belgian Ter-
human literature indicates that the heritability pattern is
vuren. Other breeds at increased risk include the Rot-
incompletely characterized (Mosher et al., 1999; Ortonne
tweiler, German S
 Shepherd Dog, Doberman Pinscher,
et al.,2003}.
German Shorthaired Pointer, Old English Sheepdog, and
 The etiopathogenesis of vitiligo in humans and domes-
 Dachshund (Alhaidari et al., 1999). Vitiligo has been seen
tic animals is unclear. Composite research data from
occasionally as an isolated event in a variety of other
human medicine indicate that vitiligo may have a complex
breeds. Vitiligo has been described in Siamese cats
pathogenesis, involving the lack of normal protective
(Alhaidari et al., 1999). Vitiligo develops most frequently
mechanisms that eliminate toxic melanin precursors
 in animals less than 3 years of age. Sex predilections have
(self-destruct hypothesis), neurochemical mediators that
not been published, although reported Siamese cats all
inhibit melanogenesis or destroy melanocytes (neural
have been female.
hypothesis), and the induction of autoantibodies against
 Idiopathic depigmentation restricted to the planum
various antigens in the melanogenic system (autoimmune 
nasale in dogs also has been termed ‘vitiligo', “Dudley
hypothesis) (Mosher et al., 1999; Ortonne et al., 2003).
nose', and 'snow nose'. The etiology of this syndrome is
 sd s  r d 
not known.E
Breeds at increased risk include Golden
depigmentation. If the macules occur in haired regions,
Retrievers, yellow Labrador Retrievers, and arctic breeds
leukotrichia usually occurs simultaneously. Lesions may
such as the Siberian Husky and Alaskan Malamute.
Fig. 9.62 Vtiligo in a Rottweiler.
Note uneven distribution of epidermal
pigment and pigmentary incontinence.
234
 Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 9.63 Higher magnification of
vitiligo in a Rottweiler. Mild superficial
lymphocytic inflammation migrates into
the overlying epidermis.
Facially oriented vitiligo affecting the planum nasale
The dermis is often normal except for small to moder-
and muzzle must be differentiated from Vogt-Koy-
ate numbers of melanophages. However, there also may
anagi-Harada-like syndrome, discoid lupus erythemato-
be minimal to mild superficial perivascular accumulations
sus, and systemic lupus erythematosus. Vitiligo is a
of lymphocytes and fewer histiocytes and plasma cells.
syndrome seen during young adulthood and is asympto-
Lymphocytes often migrate into the overlying epidermis.
matic. Diagnostic aids include detection of uveitis by
Inflammation is presumed to characterize early stages of
ophthalmological examination (Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-
vitiligo, but temporal correlation with clinical lesions has
like syndrome), or a positive antinuclear antibody (ANA)
not been made.
test (systemic lupus erythematosus). Histopathology
 Differential diagnosis is not diffcult for specimens
will aid in differentiation. Vitiligo with accompanying
characterized by obvious loss of epidermal melanin in
leukotrichia is clinically striking and highly characteristic
the face of minimal to absent inflammation. Since
of vitiligo. If vitiligo is suspected, a general physical exam-
 these lesions can mimic normal nonpigmented skin (in
ination, complete blood count, and chemical screening
which melanocytes are inapparent), knowledge of the
 profle are recommended to rule out concurrent disease.
clinical lesions is critical to the histopathologic diagnosis.
Vitiligo with more obvious perivascular inflammation
may need to be distinguished from mild atopic dermati
Biopsy site selection
tis or other allergic diseases with postinflammatory
Skin biopsy is recommended as early as possible in the
depigmentation.
development of the disease. Ideal sites are from junctions
 of lesions, and should include adjacent normally pig-
mented skin. Larger punch biopsy (8 mm) or wedge tech-
nique will best allow the evaluation of the lesion,
REFERENCES
transition zone, and adjacent normal skin.
Superficial Spreading Pyoderma
See Chapter 1.
Histopathology (Figures 9.62 and 9.63)
Atopic Dermatitis
The affected epidermis is characterized by a marked
DeBoer, D.J. & Hillier, A. (2001) The ACVD task force on
reduction to complete absence of epidermal melanocytes
canine atopic dermatitis (XV): fundamental concepts of clini-
and melanin. Comparison with adjacent pigmented
cal diagnosis. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 81, 271-6.
skin is often striking. Other epidermal lesions are not
DeBoer, D.J., Saban, R., Schultz, K.T. et al. (1993) Feline IgE:
observed.
preliminary evidence of its existence and crossreactivity with
Perivascular diseases of the dermis
235
canine IgE. In: Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 2
Zur, G., Ihrke, PJ., White, S.D. et al. (2002) Canine atopic der-
(eds PJ. Ihrke, I.S. Mason & S.D. White), pp. 51-62. Perga-
matitis: a retrospective study of 266 cases examined at the
mon Press, Oxford.
University of California, Davis (1992-1998) Part I. Clinical
Gilbert, S. & Halliwell, R.E. (1998) Feline immunoglobulin E:
features and allergy testing results. Vet Dermatol 13, 89-
induction of antigen-specifc antibody in normal cats and
102.
levels in spontaneously
allergic cats. Vet Immunol
Immunopathol 63, 235-52.
Food Allergy
Gilbert, S., Prélaud, P & Guaguere, E. (1999) L'atopie feline.
Carlotti, D.N., Remy, I. & Prost, C. (1990) Food allergy in dogs
Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 34, 15-31.
and cats. A review and report of 43 cases. Vet Dermatol 1,
Griffin, C.E. & DeBoer, D.J. (2001) The ACVD task force on
55-62.
canine atopic dermatitis (XIV): clinical manifestations of
Guaguere, E. (1996) Food intolerance in cats with cutaneous
canine atopic dermatitis. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 81,
manifestations: a review of 17 cases. Vet Allergy Clin
255-69.
Immunol 4, 89-98.
Halliwell, R.E.W. & DeBoer, D.J. (2001) The ACVD task force
Harvey, R.G. (1993) Food allergy and dietary intolerance in
on canine atopic dermatitis (Ill): the role of antibodies in
dogs: a report of 25 cases. J Small Anim Pract 33, 175-9.
canine atopic dermatitis. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 81,
Rosser, E.J. (1993a) Diagnosis of food allergy in dogs. J Am Vet
159-67.
Med Assoc 203, 259-62.
Hill, P.B. & Olivry, I. (2001) The ACVD task force on canine
Rosser, E.J. (1993b) Food allergy in the cat: a prospective study
atopic dermatitis (V): biology and role of inflammatory cells
of 13 cats. In: Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 2
in cutaneous allergic reactions. Vet Immunol Immunopathol
(eds P.J. Ihrke, I.S. Mason & S.D. White), pp. 33-9. Perga-
81,187-98.
mon Press, Oxford.
Leung, D.YM. (1999) Pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis. J
Rosser, E.J. (1998) Food allergy in dogs and cats: a review. Vet
Allergy Clin Immunol 104, S99-108.
Allergy Clin Immunol 6, 21-4.
Marsella, R. & Olivry, T. (2001) The ACVD task force on canine
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
atopic dermatitis (Vll): mediators of cutaneous inflammation.
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 624-7. WB.
Vet Immunol Immunopathol 81, 205-13.
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Moriello, K.A. (2001) Feline atopy in three littermates. Vet
White, S.D. (1986) Food hypersensitivity in 30 dogs. J Am Vet
Dermatol 12, 177-81.
Med Assoc 188, 695-8.
Olivry, T. & Hill, PB. (2001a) The ACVD task force on canine
White, S.D. & Sequoia, D. (1989) Food hypersensitivity
atopic dermatitis (IX): the controversy surrounding the route
in cats: 14 cases (1982-1987). J Am Vet Med Assoc 194,
of allergen challenge in canine atopic dermatitis. Vet Immunot
692-5.
Immunopathol 81, 219-25.
Olivry, T. & Hill, P.B. (2001b) The ACVD task force on canine
Canine Flea Allergy Dermatitis
atopic dermatitis (XVIl): histopathology of skin lesions. Vet
Carlotti, D. & Costargent, F. (1992) Analyse statistique de tests
Immunol Immunopathol 81, 305-9.
cutanés positifs chez 449 chiens atteints de dermatite
Olivry, I., Moore, PF., Affolter, V.K. et al. (1996) Langerhans
allergique. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 27, 53-68.
cells hyperplasia and IgE expression in canine atopic dermati-
Gross, TL. & Halliwell, R.E.W. (1985) Lesions of experi-
tis. Arch Dermatol Res 288, 579-85.
mental flea bite hypersensitivity in the dog. Vet Pathol 22,
Olivry, T., Nayden, D.K. & Moore, PF. (1997) Characterization
78-81.
of the cutaneous inflammatory infltrate in canine atopic der-
Halliwell, R.E.W. & Schemmer, K.R. (1987) The role of
matitis. Am J Dermatopathol 19, 477-86.
 basophils in the immunopathogenesis of hypersensitivity to
Olivry, I., DeBoer, D.J. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) The ACVD task
fleas (Ctenocephalides felis)in dogs.
VetImmunot
force on canine atopic dermatitis: forewords and lexicon. Vet
Immunopathol 15, 203-15.
Immunol Immunopathol 81, 143-5.
Prélaud, P, Guaguere, E., Alhaidari, Z. et al. (1998) Reevalua-
Feline Allergic Miliary Dermatitis
tion of diagnostic criteria of canine atopic dermatitis. Rev Med
See Chapter 6.
Vet 149, 1057-64.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
Urticarial AllergicEruption
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 574-608. WB.
Ackerman, A.B. (1978) Histologic Diagnosis of Inflammatory
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Skin Diseases: A Method of Pattern Analysis, p. 305. Lea &
Shaw, S.C., Wood, J.L.N., Freeman, J. et al. (2004) Estimation
Febiger, Philadelphia.
of heritability of atopic dermatitis in Labrador and Golden
Retrievers. Am J Vet Res 65, 1014-20.
Allergic Contact Dermatitis
Sousa, C.A. & Marsella, R. (2001) The ACVD task force on
Calderwood Mays, M.B. (1993) Carpet deodorant contact der-
canine atopic dermatitis (Il): genetic factors. Vet Immunol
matitis in a cat. In: Proceedings of the 9th AAVD/ACVD
Immunopathot 81, 155-7.
Meeting, San Diego, p. 67.
Willemse, A. (1986) Atopic skin disease: a review and a recon-
Olivry, T. (1993) Allergic contact dermatitis to cement: a delayed
sideration of diagnostic criteria. J Small Anim Pract 27,
hypersensitivity to dichromates and nickel. In: Proceedings of
771-8.
the 9th AAVD/ACVD Meeting, San Diego, p. 63.
236
Diseases of the dermis
Canine Sarcoptic Acariasis
Desch, C.E. & Stewart, T.B. (1999) Demodex gatoi: new species
Arlian, L.G., Rapp, C.M. & Morgan, M.S. (1995) Resistance
of hair follicle mite (Acari: Demodecidae) from the domestic
and immune response in scabies-infested hosts immunized
cat (Carnivora: Felidae). Entomol Soc Amer 36, 167-70.
with Dermatophagoides mites. Am J Trop Med Hyg 52,
Guaguere, E. (2000) Ectoparasitic skin diseases. In: A Practical
539-45.
Guide to Feline Dermatology (eds E. Guaguere & P Prélaud),
Bornstein, S. & Zakrisson, G. (1993) Humoral antibody
pp. 3.8-3.9. Blackwell Science, Oxford.
response to experimental Sarcoptes scabiei var vulpes infec-
Morris, D.O. & Beale, K.M. (1997) Feline demodicosis: a
tion in the dog. Vet Dermatol 4, 107-10.
retrospective of 15 cases. In: Proceedings of the 13th
Lower, K.S., Medleau, L.M., Hnilica, K. et al. (2001) Evaluation
AAVD/ACVD Meeting, Nashville, pp. 127-8.
of an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for the
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffn, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
serological diagnosis of sarcoptic mange in dogs. Vet Derma-
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 474-6. W.B.
tol12, 315-20.
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Morris, D.O. & Dunstan, R.W. {1996) A histomorphological
study of sarcoptic acariasis in the dog: 19 cases. J Am Anim
Cutaneous Microfilariasis
Hosp Assoc 32, 119-24.
Cornegliani, L., Vercelli, A., Bo, S. et al. (2003) Two cases of
Prélaud, P.& Guaguere, E.(1995) Sensitization to the house dust
cutaneous nodular dirofilariasis in the cat. J Small Anim Pract,
mite, Dermatophagoides farinae, in dogs with sarcoptic
44, 316-18.
mange. Vet Dermatol 6, 205-9.
Gross, T.L. & Ihrke, PJ. (1992) Perivascular diseases of the
Schumann, R.J., Morgan, M.S., Glass, R. et al. (2001) Charac-
dermis. In: Veterinary Dermatopathology: A Macroscopic and
terization of house dust mite and scabies mite allergens by use
Microscopic Evaluation of Canine and Feline Skin Disease
of canine serum antibodies. Am J Vet Res 62, 1344-8.
(T.L. Gross, PJ. Ihrke & E.J. Walder), pp. 128-30. Mosby
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
Year Book, St Louis.
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 476-83. W.B. Saun-
Hargis, A.M., Lewis, T.P., Duclos, D.D. et al. (1999) Dermatitis
ders, Philadelphia.
associated with microflariae (Filaroidea) in 10 dogs. Vet Der-
Stemmer, B.L., Arlian, L.G., Morgan, M.S. et al. (1996) Char-
matol 10, 95-107.
acterization of antigen presenting cells and T-cells in pro-
Mozos, E., Ginel, P.J., Lopez, R. et al. (1992) Cutaneous lesions
gressing scabietic skin lesions. Vet Parasitol 31, 247-58.
associated with canine heartworm infection. Vet Dermatol 3,
Stone, S.P. (2003) Scabies and pediculosis. In: Fitzpatrick's Der-
191-6.
matology in General Medicine, 6th edn (eds IM. Freedberg,
Scott, D.W. (1979) Nodular skin disease associated with Dirof-
AZ. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.I.
laria immitis infection in the dog. Cornell Vet 69, 233-40.
Katz), pp. 2283-9. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Scott, D.W. & Vaughn, T.C. (1987) Papulonodular dermatitis in
Zahler, M., Essig, A., Gothe, R. et al. (1999) Molecular analy-
a dog with occult filariasis. Comp Anim Pract 1, 31-5.
ses suggest monospecificity of the genus Sarcoptes (Acari: Sar-
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller 6 Kirk's
coptidae). Int J Parasitol 29, 759-66.
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 439-40. WB.
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Feline Notoedric Acaniasis
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
Hookworm Dermatitis
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 483-4. W.B.
Baker, K.P (1981) Clinical aspects of hookworm dermatitis. Br
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Vet Dermatol Study Group Newstetter 6, 69-74.
Baker, K.P. & Grimes, T.D. (1970) Cutaneous lesions in dogs
Cheyletiellosis
associated with hookworm infestations. Vet Record 87,
Moriello, K.A. (1993) Cheyletiellosis. In: Current Veterinary
376-9.
Dermatology: The Science and Art of Therapy (eds C.E.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
Griffn, D.W. Kwochka & J.M. MacDonald), pp. 90-5.
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 431-2. W.B. Saun-
Mosby Year Book, St Louis.
ders, Philadelphia.
Wagner, R. & Stallmeister, N. (2000) Cheyletiella dermatitis in
humans, dogs and cats. Brit J Dermatol 143, 1110-2.
Cutaneous Anatnichosomiasis
White, S.D., Rosychuk, R.A.W. & Fieseler, K.V. (2001) Clinico-
Lange, A.L., Verster, A., Van Amstel, S.R. et al. (1980) Anatri-
pathologic fndings, sensitivity to house dust mites and eff-
chosoma sp. in the footpads of a cat. J South Afr Vet Assoc
cacy of melbemycin oxime treatment of dogs with Cheyletiella
51, 227-9.
sp. infestation. Vet Dermatol 12, 13-8.
Ramiro-Ibafiez, F., Winston, J., O'Donnell, E. et al. (2002) Ulcer-
ative pododermatitis in a cat associated with Anatrichosoma
Feline Superficial Demodicosis
sp. J Vet Diagn Invest 14, 80-3.
Beale, K.M. (1998) Contagion and occult demodicosis in a
family of 2 cats. In: Proceedings of the 14th AAVD/ACVD
Vitiligo
Meeting, San Antonio, p. 99.
Ahaidari, Z., Olivry, T. & Ortonne, J.-P. (1999) Melanocytoge-
Chesney, C.J. (1988) An unusual species of demodex mite in a
nesis and melanogenesis: genetic regulation and comparative
cat. Vet Record 123,671-3.
clinical diseases. Vet Dermatol 10, 3-16.
Perivascular diseases of the dermis
237
Mahaffey, M.B., Yarbrough, K.M. & Munnell, J.F (1978) Focal
Ortonne, J-P., Bahadoran, P, Fitzpatrick, T.B. et al. (2003)
loss of pigment in the Belgian Tervuren Dog. J Am Vet Med
Hypomelanoses and hypermelanoses. In: Fitzpatrick's Derma-
Assoc 173, 390-6.
tology in Generat Medicine, 6th edn. (eds I.M. Freedberg, A.Z.
Mosher, D.B., Fitzpatrick, T.B., Ortonne, J-P. et al. (1999)
Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.1. Katz), pp.
Hypomelanoses and hypermelanoses. In: Dermatology in
836-81. McGraw-Hill, New York.
General Medicine, 5th edn (eds I.W. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & T.B. Fitzpatrick), pp.
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 1015-6. W.B.
945-1017. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 10
Vascular diseases of the dermis
Vascular diseases of the dermis, as classified here, include
pyoderma in dogs, especially when the bacterial infection
n ed a are saa snon um ui so
is secondary to generalized demodicosis or a defect in the
Some vascular diseases are grouped by histomorphologic
 host immune response. Cutaneous septic vasculitis may
characteristics and not by clinical appearance. Tight
occur from *bacterial shower’ derived from internal infec-
histopathological classification is difficult because inflam-
tions such as bacterial endocarditis. Rocky Mountain
mation may vary by stage, as reported (Nichols et al.,
spotted fever a cause of septic vasculitis in humans (Kao
2001). Most cutaneous vasculitides recognized in dogs
et al., 1997), is an uncommon etiology in dogs. Septic vas-
 and cats are of small vessel type.
culitis associated with ehrlichiosis and vasculitis due to
Most cutaneous vasculitides of animals may be attrib-
systemic infection with Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae has
uted to immunoreactive mechanisms that are, as yet,
been described in the dog (Crawford & Foil, 1989).
poorly characterized. These may be triggered by drugs
  s s d aid s 
(including vaccines), hereditary factors, infectious agents,
causes of vasculitis. Swelling, erythema, purpura, erythe-
solar exposure, or, most commonly, undiscovered stimuli.
matous plaques, hemorrhagic bullae, necrosis, and ulcer
Vasculitis is characterized by inflammation directed to
ation may be generalized or localized to areas of less
the vessel wall, as well as vascular lesions that include
extensive collateral circulation such as the distal extrem-
frank necrosis, fibrinoid change, endothelial swelling, and
ities and pinnae.
. Affected regions may vary in firmness
 thrombosis. Microhemorrhage is common. Leukocyto-
and texture. Necrotizing ulcers may be crateriform. The
clasia, a feature of small vessel vasculitis, is fragmentation
erythema seen with septic vasculitis does not blanch with
of granulocytic nuclei as they exit affected vessels, and is
diascopy (see above). Coexistent cellulitis and deep folli-
typifed by nuclear fragments or dust in perivascular dis-
culitis and furunculosis may be present, especially if septic
tribution. In some cases, leukocytoclastic debris is the
 vasculitis is secondary to demodicosis. Fistulous tracts
prime feature of vasculitis, as vascular lesions may be
may form. Devitalized tissue may be frm and discolored.
subtle in random samples. “Cell poor’ vasculitis or more
Pain is variable but usually is present if tissue necrosis is
precisely, ‘vasculopathy” is characterized by vascular
marked. Systemic signs, including fever, malaise, and
damage and often vascular depletion, but with sparse
anorexia, are common and may indicate coexistent vis-
inflammation. Typical vasculopathic features include loss
ceral vasculitis. Septic vasculitis always is life threatening;
of endothelial cells and thickening of the vessel wall.
coma and death are possible sequelae.
Diascopy, the pressing of a clear microscope slide on
 Breed, age, or sex predilections have not been noted for 
erythematous skin to determine if erythema is due to
septic vasculitis. Septic vasculitis secondary to severe gen-
dilated blood vessels or hemorrhage into the skin, is a
eralized demodicosis probably shares the breed and age
useful clinical tool in the diagnosis of vascular diseases
predilections for that condition.
of the skin. Erythema that does not blanch with dias-
 Clinical differential diagnoses should include all other
copy confrms hemorrhage and suggess vasculitis or
yasculitides, including neutrophilic immunologic vasculi-
vasculopathy.
tis, severe cell poor vasculitis, and cryopathies, as well as
deep pyoderma and disseminated intravascular coagula-
 tion. Generalized lesions and documentation of sepsis by
SEPTIC VASCULITIS
 blood culture are suggestive of septic vasculitis.
Clinical features (Figure 10.1)
Biopsy site selection
Septic vasculitis is a rare disorder seen secondary to
catastrophic bacterial infection in both dogs and cats.
 Early lesions, characterized by erythema or petechial hem-
Septic vasculitis may occur as a sequela to severe deep
 orrhage, are preferred over advanced lesions with exten-
238
Vascular diseases of the dermis
239
Fig. 10.1 Septic vasculitis of the ventral abdomen of a dog sec-
Fig. 10.2 Urticaria due to insect bites on the ventral abdomen of
ondary to septicemia. Firm and darkly discolored devitalized tissue
an English Bulldog. Multiple, erythematous, well-demarcated wheals
is surrounded by a margin of erythema, swelling, and ulceration.
are present.
sive tissue necrosis and ulceration. Larger punch biopsy
(8 mm) or wedge biopsy specimens are more likely to yield
a diagnosis, as smaller punch biopsy may result in dis-
ruption of friable, devitalized tissue. If distal extremities
are sampled, collateral circulation must be adequate to
 nourish distal tisue and provide for healing of the biopsy
site.
Histopathology
Necrosis and ulceration of the epidermis are common in
advanced lesions as hypoxic tissue damage proceeds in the
skin. There may be fbrinosuppurative or sanguinopuru-
lent exudation. Dermal vascular lesions resemble those of
Fig. 10.3 Closer view of the dog in Fig. 10.2. Several steep-walled
neutrophilic immunologic vasculitis (see p. 244) but
wheals have coalesced.
usually are more severe and deeper. Neutrophilic inflam-
mation occurs murally and around vessels, and there may
be mild to severe leukocytoclasia (see introduction, p.
coagulative necrosis resembling a burn usually is more
238). Vascular fbrinoid necrosis and fbrin thrombi may
severe than vasculitis associated with even the most severe
be prominent, including in large vessels. Severe hemor-
burns. Also, septic vasculitis often is associated with
rhage, edema, and dermal necrosis (infarction) may be
 i  s s s s r
found. Mixed mononuclear inflammation is variable and
usually are clinically normal. Historical and clinical infor-
is perivascular to interstitial depending on chronicity and
mation may be required for differentiation.
degree of secondary tissue damage. The inflammatory
process often extends into the subcutis. Bacterial emboli
URTICARIA AND ANGIOEDEMA
may be present in florid cases.
 The lesions of septic vasculitis may resemble severe
(Synonym: hives)
neutrophilic immunologic vasculitis (see p. 244); hyaline
thrombi are observed more often in septic vasculitis, with
Clinical features (Figures 10.2 through 10.4)
the exception of severe neutrophilic immunologic vas-
culitis in Shar Peis. Infarcted tissue suggests sepsis over
 Urticaria and angioedema are edematous cutaneous reac-
immunologic vasculitis, particularly when bacteria are
tions characterized by the formation of wheals. Urticaria
identifed within tissue. Deep septic vasculitis with infarc-
is distinguished by edema that is limited to the dermis.
tion may resemble vasculitis of thermal burns (see
 Extension of edema to the subjacent subcutaneous tissue
Chapter 21). However, septic vasculitis suffcient to create
creates angioedema. Both reaction patterns are uncom-
240
Diseases of the dermis
monly on the face and on the comparatively glabrous
areas such as the groin. Cold- or water-induced urticaria
occurs at the sites of contact.
 Angioedema is physically similar to, but considerably
less well demarcated than urticaria, since the edema is not
confined to the dermis. Poorly defined areas of swelling
are present. Angioedema from an injection usually occurs
 at the site of injection, but may extend to surrounding
areas. Angioedema from causes other than injection seems
to be most common on the face.
Breed, age, or sex predilections have not been substan-
tiated for either urticaria or angioedema. Short-coated
breeds such as the English Bulldog, Bull Terrier,
Doberman Pinscher, and Dalmatian may be at increased
risk for urticaria. However, this clinical impression may
be due to the increased visibility of urticaria in these
short-coated dogs that also have comparatively glabrous
abdomens.
Fig. 10.4 Angioedema of the face of a Doberman Pinscher puppy
The predominant  clinical differential diagnoses for
caused by a stinging insect. The eyes are swollen shut and the muzzle
is severely distorted by edema.
( d      
 and superficial folliculitis. Superfcial folliculitis (espe-
cially in short-coated dogs) may closely mimic urticaria
mon in the dog and rare in the cat. Urticaria may be ini-
 grossly. Folliculocentric inflammation and accompanying
tiated by immunologic or nonimmunologic factors (Soter
edema can cause groups of hairs to stand upright, resem-
& Kaplan, 2003). Angioedema is almost always associ-
bling wheals. In addition, wheals or wheal-like lesions
ated with hypersensitivity reactions.
may characterize early erythema multiforme, neutrophilic
The most frequently reported immunologic causes of
immunologic vasculitis, mast cell tumors, cutaneous mas-
urticaria and angioedema include drug reactions, food
tocytosis, and focal mucinosis. Differential diagnoses for
allergy, stinging or biting arthropods, vaccines, bacterins,
angioedema include early juvenile cellulitis, early bacter-
blood transfusions, infections, contact with certain plants,
 ial cellulitis, and neutrophilic immunologic vasculitis.
and atopic dermatitis (Scott et al., 2001; Soter & Kaplan,
Histopathology will allow differentiation.
2003). One author (PJ.1.) has seen angioedema due to
buffalo gnat bites. Nonimmunologic or physical causes
Biopsy site selection
include heat, cold, sunlight, and water (Soter & Kaplan,
 2003). Dermatographism is a rare form of urticaria in
Expeditious skin biopsy is recommended, since wheals are
which pressure to the skin produced by a blunt instru-
ransient lesions. If pruritus is present, wheals may be
 ment initiates wheals.
obscured by secondary self-trauma. The inclusion of a
A wheal is a discrete, erythematous, edematous circu
biopsy specimen from adjacent normal skin may be
 pm-das p don ie e wm ums 1
helpful, since the dermal edema of urticaria may be subtle.
Wheals vary from less than 1 cm to 3 cm in diameter. Mul-
tiple wheals may coalesce and form unusual arcuate pat-
Histopathology (Figure 10.5)
terns. Rarely, bizarre geographic (map-like) patterns may
be seen in the dog. The number of wheals varies consid-
 Urticaria manifested by pure edema is rare in biopsy spec-
erably and may range from less than five to hundreds.
 imens; most lesions conform to urticarial allergic eruption
Urticaria is most visible in comparatively glabrous body
(see Chapter 9). In one author's opinion (P.J.1.), this may
regions such as the ventral abdomen and the axillary
be due to lack of sampling of clinically obvious urticarial
region. Similar lesions may be present in haired regions,
wheals, which are purely edematous microscopically.
but are often much less apparent. Urticaria is more
Rather, atypical edematous lesions that characterize
obvious in short-coated dogs, as edema results in groups
urticarial allergic eruption are more likely to be biopsied;
of hairs standing erect over the wheals. Pruritus is vari-
these may be more likely to reveal an inflammatory
able and, if present, may induce self-trauma that can
component.
obscure primary lesions.
Epidermal changes usually are not present in untrau-
Sites of involvement are contingent upon the cause.
matized wheals. Dermal histopathologic changes may be
Urticaria from venomous arthropods is seen more com-
subtle. Edema may widen spaces between collagen fbers
Vascular diseases of the dermis
241
管
Fig. 10.6 Idiopathic telangiectasia in an aged Golden Retriever.
Diffuse intense erythema is present on the antebrachial region.
(Photograph courtesy T.C. DeManuelle; case material University of
California, Davis.)
Fig. 10.5 Urticaria in a dog. Edema is widening spaces between col-
lagen fibers. Note absence of inflammation.
neous flushing) syndromes that give the appearance of
localized, poorly blanching erythema. They are grouped
in the dermis, but can be missed if not severe. Urticaria
for convenience as they resemble each other clinically and
should be suspected in any case for which no obvious
putatively appear similar histopathologically. Telangiecta-
sia is defined as a permanent dilatation of pre-existing
dermatosis'). In more severe urticaria, prominent edema
blood vessels and is very rare in the dog (DeManuelle et
may expand the superficial dermis and result in second-
al., 1999). Cutaneous phlebectasia, a type of telangiecta-
ary dermal-epidermal separation. Angioedema is charac-
sia, is defned as a focal abnormal dilation, extension, or
terized by severe ederma that extends to the subcutis.
reduplication of small veins and is seen most commonly
Urticaria is distinctive, although its detection can be
diffcult in the absence of inflammation. In cases where
(Scott, 1985). Similar lesions are observed in topical
edema is subtle, correlation with appropriate clinical pres-
corticosteroid reactions (see Chapter 15). Cutaneous
entation of wheals or hives is required for definitive diag-
flushing is due to the dilatation of apparently normal
nosis. Urticarial allergic eruption varies only by the
cutaneous blood vessels and can either be persistent or
inclusion of perivascular inflammation.
paroxysmal (Miller, 1992).
 Cutaneous flushing in humans can be caused by a wide
variety of phenomena including neoplasia (especially car-
TELANGIECTASIA, PHLEBECTASIA.
cinoid syndrome), endocrinopathy, mastocytosis, meno-
AND CUTANEOUS FLUSHING
pause, and drugs (Hurst & Heffernan, 2003). In dogs,
Clinical features (Figure 10.6)
persistent flushing has been seen with adverse drug reac-
tions and mast cell tumors (Miller, 1992). Flushing has
Telangiectasia, phlebectasia, and cutaneous flushing are
been induced experimentally in the dog via the intrader-
uncommon (phlebectasia) to rare (telangiectasia, cuta-
mal injection of fluoroquinolones; increased histamine
242
Diseases of the dermis
release is the probable mechanism (Kurata et al., 1995).
Paroxysmal flushing has been seen with pheochromocy-
tomas and mast cell tumors (Miller, 1992).
 Idiopathic telangiectasia in an aged Golden Retriever
was characterized by diffuse erythema affecting both
antebrachial regions (DeManuelle et al., 1999). Other
clinical signs, including pruritus, were not noted.
Cutaneous phlebectasias are asymptomatic, usually
multifocal, erythematous macular to papular lesions
commonly less than 6 mm in diameter (Scott, 1985). They
occur most frequently on the ventral and medial thighs.
They are a cutaneous marker of canine hyperadrenocor-
ticism and are seen in up to 40% of affected dogs (Scott,
1985). Lesions blanch partially with diascopy (see intro-
duction, p. 238).
Cutaneous flushing is characterized clinically by either
regional or generalized erythema (Miller, 1992). Lesions
blanch partially with diascopy. Pruritus may or may not
be a feature depending on underlying cause. Paroxysmal
flushing due to mast cell tumors and paroxysmal or per-
 sistent flushing due to an adverse drug reaction may be
pruritic.
Signalment predilections are contingent upon the
 underlying cause of the vascular abnormality. Cutaneous
flushing due to underlying neoplasia should occur more
commonly in older dogs. Cutaneous phlebectasia second-
ary to hyperadrenocorticism should share breed and age
predilections for that disease (see Chapter 19).
Clinical differential diagnoses for cutaneous phlebecta-
sia are few, but include very early sun-induced telangiec-
Fig. 10.7 Telangiectasia in a dog. Vascular dilatation gives the
tasia or hemangioma (see Chapter 28). Certain types of
appearance of vascular proliferation.
early progressive angiomatosis may mimic phlebectasia
(see Chapter 28). Dogs exhibiting persistent, widespread
cutaneous flushing must be differentiated from the myriad
q  s    r
causes of generalized erythroderma; these include
proven and the impression may result from increased
generalized demodicosis, thallium toxicosis, early epithe-
vascular prominence due to dilatation and congestion.
liotropic lymphoma, and cutaneous mastocytosis. The
Alkaline phosphatase staining was reportedly negative in
 presence or absence of pruritus may aid in differentiation.
dilated vessels, indicating venular rather than arteriolar
Of the above-mentioned diseases, all but thallium toxi-
origin (DeManuelle et al., 1999); alkaline phosphatase
cosis may be pruritic. The differential diagnosis of gener-
activity is a normal fnding in endothelium of arterioles,
alized erythroderma requires routine hematology and
but is lacking in venules. There may be mild to moderate
other procedures more specific for each disease.
acanthosis. Inflammation, edema and necrosis are absent.
Phlebectasia (telangiectasia) due to Cushing's disease is
uncommonly sampled for histology. As reported, early
Biopsy site selection
lesions had dilatation of superfcial vessels; older papular
A lesion or region of maximum erythema should be
lesions had a lobular proliferation of dilated vessels, often 
selected for skin biopsy. Multiple specimens should be
with partial 'collaring? by the overlying epidermis (Scott,
obtained to ensure that unusual differential diagnoses are
1985). Similar telangiectasia is a common accompani-
ruled out.
ment to topical corticosteroid reactions (see Chapter 15).
Telangiectasia also may be seen with chronic solar
damage, and is often accompanied by solar vascular
Histopathology (Figure 10.7)
neoplasms (see Chapter 28).
Idiopathic telangiectasia is characterized by superfcial
The histopathology of cutaneous flushing is unknown.
dermal vascular ectasia. There may be the appearance of
 Based on a previous report that documented increased
Vascular diseases of the dermis
243
blood flow in cutaneous flushing secondary to fuoro-
et al., 1998). The names *cold agglutinin disease', ^cold
quinolones, vascular dilatation is likely (Kurata et al.
hemagglutinin disease' and ^cryopathic hemolytic anemia'
1995).
have been used to describe autoimmune disease associated
The histologic features of telangiectasia or phlebectasia
with cold-reacting autoantibodies (usually IgM) that are
are characteristic. Differentiation between  idiopathic
directed against erythrocytes (Scott et al., 2001).
telangiectasia and cutaneous flushing probably requires
Cryoglobulins are defined as circulating immuno-
correlation with clinical findings. Phlebectasia (telangiec-
      
tasia) associated with chronic solar damage, topical
immunoglobulins or other proteins (Cornelius & Lawley,
corticosteroids, and Cushing's disease should have accom-
2003). Cryofbrinogens are cryoproteins composed of
panying morphologic changes compatible with those enti-
fbrinogen that are present in noncoagulated blood
ties (see Chapters 15 and 19). Progressive angiomatosis
or plasma. Both cryoglobulins and cryofbrinogens reversi-
should not be confused with telangiectasia due to the
bly precipitate with exposure to cold (Cornelius & Lawley,
more proliferative nature of the condition and the depth
 2003). The accepted classification of cryoglobulinemia
of involvement (see Chapter 28).
used in veterinary medicine parallels the scheme used in
human medicine (Scott et al., 2001; Cornelius & Lawley,
2003). Type I cryoglobulins are composed of a single,
CRYOGLOBULINEMLA AND
monoclonal immunoglobulin, and are most commonly
CRYOFIBRINOGENEMIA
associated with B cell malignancies such as multiple
(Synonym: cutaneous cryopathies)
myeloma or B cell lymphoma (Cornelius & Lawley,
2003). Type II cryoglobulins are immune complexes com-
Clinical features (Figure 10.8)
 posed of both monoclonal and polyclonal immunoglobu-
lins, and are most commonly associated with autoimmune
Cryoglobulinemia and cryofbrinogenemia are rare dis-
Or connective tissue diseases (Cornelius & Lawley, 2003).
eases affecting multiple organ systems. They are charac-
Type II cryoglobulins are immune complexes composed
odiord au o anp Auinsu rssa Aq pa
of polyclonal immunoglobulins, and are associated either
of immunoglobulins or immune complexes within 
the
with autoimmune and connective tissue diseases, or infec-
peripheral vasculature. The skin is a prime organ for cry-
tions (especially viral hepatitis in humans) (Cornelius &
opathic disease (Cornelius & Lawley, 2003). Cutaneous
Lawley, 2003). Cryoglobulins precipitate over a wide tem-
cryopathies are rarely reported as a cause of skin diseases
perature range between 32°F and 86°F (0°C and 30°C)
in the dog and cat (Green et al., 1977; Godfrey &
and can precipitate as a gel, flocculent precipitate, or as
Anderson, 1994; Bridle & Littlewood, 1998; Nagata
crystals (Cornelius & Lawley, 2003). Cutaneous and vis-
ceral signs are associated with various types of vascular
insuffciency leading to ischemic damage.
Cutaneous lesions include purpura, erythema, tissue
necrosis, and ulceration. Acrocyanosis, a bluish or whitish
discoloration of the skin of the extremities associated with
diminished blood supply, may be noted. Gangrenous
necrosis may occur in more severe cases. Pain is variable,
but may be an important feature. Distal exremities
including the pinnae, tip of the tail, pawpads, planum
nasale, and adjacent haired skin are most commonly
affected. Anemia may be seen. Extracutaneous signs of
- Aruaa un podn-rapn aq Au sedon
cine; serious extracutaneous signs seen in humans can
include renal disease and peripheral polyneuropathies
(Cornelius & Lawley, 2003).
Clinical differential diagnoses include all other causes
of vasculitis, as well as vasculitic autoimmune skin dis-
eases such as systemic lupus erythematosus, ischemic
necrosis associated with vasoconstrictive toxins, dis-
seminatedi
intravascular coagulopathy and, where
Fig. 10.8 Cold agglutinin disease in a Chihuahua. Infarction has
appropriate, frostbite. Hematologic evaluation for cryo-
severely damaged the margins of the pinnae; note severe bilaterally
globulins or cryofbrinogens is required for a defnitive
symmetric crusting. (Photograph courtesy T. Olivry.)
diagnosis.
244
 Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 10.11 Neutrophilic immunologic vasculitis in another Chinese
Shar Pei. Multifocal, crateriforrm full-thickness necrotic ulcers are
present on the trunk. (Photograph courtesy R. Malik.)
Histopathology
Fig. 10.9 Neutrophilic immunologic vasculitis affecting the pinna
As reported, diffuse vascular thrombosis occurs, accom-
of a Chihuahua. Necrosis and ulceration have led to loss of tissue
panied by acute coagulation necrosis of the epidermis and
along the pinnal margin; note accompanying crusting.
dermis (Nagata et al., 1998). Blood vessels throughout the
dermis are dilated and contain an amorphous eosinophilic
substance. This is either fbrinogen or immunoglobulin,
and is periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-positive (Barnhill &
Busam, 1997). Inflammation including vasculitis is not
reported (Nagata et al., 1998). Chronic lesions of one
early report were ulceration and edema, perivascular
mixed inflammatory cells, macrophages containing iron
and erythrocytes, hyaline thickening of vessel walls, and
an absence of intravascular fbrin; in vivo fbrinolysis was
postulated (Green et al., 1977).
Differential diagnoses for the necrotic and thrombotic
lesions of cryoglobulinemia and cryofbrinogenemia may
include severe thermal burn, and infarctive severe vas-
culitis, such as septic vasculitis. These syndromes usually
feature vascular inflammation and generally do not have
the widespread intravascular fibrin of typical cryopathies.
In the absence of intravascular fbrin, differentiation from
lesions of thermal burn or ischemic necrosis from severe
Fig. 10.10 Neutrophilic immunologic vasculitis in a Chinese Shar
vasculitis may be more difficult. Clinical differentiation is
Pei. This breed-based ‘acute febrile neutrophilic vasculitis’ has
created extensive, full thickness cutaneous necrosis. {Photograph
required.
courtesy R. Malik.)
NEUTROPHILIC IMMUNOLOGIC
VASCULITIS
Biopsy site selection
Clinical features (Figures 10.9 through 10.11)
Care must be taken when sampling affected tissue
Neutrophilic immunologic vasculitis is a rare subgroup of
to ensure that healing will occur after biopsy. If pos-
nonseptic vasculitis seen in dogs and cats. Inflammatory
sible, affected tissue of a distal extremity should be
changes in the walls of blood vessels lead to swelling.
resected such that remaining tissue has an adequate blood
purpura, and necrosis. The etiology is multifactorial; most
supply.
neutrophilic immunologic vasculitis probably is due to
Vascular diseases of the dermis
245
immune-complex disease (type III hypersensitivity), but
Clinical differential diagnoses should include other
type I hypersensitivity also may effect its initiation.
causes of vascular disease, including septic vasculitis, dis-
Immunologic vasculitis may be leukocytoclastic or non-
seminated intravascular coagulation, cryoglobulinemia
leukocytoclastic (see below). Viral disease, adverse reac-
and cryofbrinogenemia, and frostbite. History, environ-
 Keu aseasip anssnl aaoauos pue sanip on suon
be
 ment, laboratory fndings and evidence of systemic disease
precipitating factors (McEwan et al., 1987; Gross, 1999).
 may aid in differentiation of these clinically similar dis-
Systemic vasculitis with skin involvement in association
eases. Skin biopsy is required for diagnosis.
with leishmaniasis has been reported in a dog (Pumarola
et al., 1991). Most cases are idiopathic. Coexistent vis-
ceral lesions may be seen and vary with the underlying
Biopsy site selection
cause. In humans, vasculitis can range from a self-
Early lesions of hemorrhage and swelling are preferred
limiting single-organ disorder to life-threatening multiple-
over chronic lesions of ulceration. Multiple specimens
organ failure and death (Fiorentino, 2003); a similar spec-
should be submitted, if possible, as diagnostic lesions of
trum of severity is seen in veterinary medicine.
vasculitis may be diffcult to fnd in tissue.
Clinical signs parallel those of other vasculitides.
Swelling, erythema, purpura, erythematous plaques, ulcer-
Histopathology (Figures 10.12 through 10.15)
ation, and necrosis are noted. Crateriform necrotic ulcers
may be present. The erythema seen with vasculitis does not
Most cases of neutrophilic vasculitis involve small vessels
blanch with diascopy (see introduction, p. 238). Devital-
of the dermis. Rarely, vasculitis also may affect vessels of
ized tissue may be frm and discolored. Lesions may be
the panniculus (superficial subcutis); vasculitides of the
localized to distal extremities or areas of less extensive col-
lateral circulation including the tip of the tail, pawpads,
pinnae, lips, or planum nasale. The lips and oral mucosa
also may be affected. Generalized disease may be present.
 Pain is variable, but usually is present in conjunction
with marked tissue necrosis. Systemic signs can include
fever, malaise, and anorexia, and should alert the clini-
cian to the possibility of coexistent visceral vasculitis. In
humans, paraesthesia, fever, and the absence of cutaneous
pain are risk factors for systemic involvement and a less
favorable prognosis (Sais et al., 1998).
 A markedly severe subgroup of neutrophilic immuno-
logic vasculitis has been reported in Chinese Shar Pei dogs
(Malik et al., 2002) Clinically, the affected Shar Peis
developed widespread skin discoloration characterized by
hemorrhagic papules, macules or plaques, and edema that
lead to life-threatening full-thickness cutaneous necrosis
(Malik et al., 2002).
Firm, erythematous truncal papules and nodules with
variable ulceration were seen in conjunction with leuko-
cytoclastic immunologic vasculitis due to feline infectious
peritonitis in a Sphinx cat (Gross, 1999). The cat was
icteric due to vasculitis-induced hemolysis. Lesions were
transient and likely were detected due to the hairlessness
of the breed affected; thus the true incidence of vasculitis
in cats with this infection is unknown. Vasculitis, most
likely as a severe adverse reaction to cimetidine, initiated
exfoliative lesions of the pinnae, face, and distal legs in
another cat (McEwan et al., 1987).
A breed-based acute, febrile neutrophilic vasculitis was
reported in young Chinese Shar Pei dogs in Australia
(Malik et al., 2002). This syndrome also has been seen
Fig. 10.12 Neutrophilic immunologic vasculitis in a dog featuring
recently in Costa Rica (Berrocal & Alfaro, 2003). Other
prominent leukocytoclastic debris surrounding periadnexal vessels.
breed and age predilections have not been reported.
Inflamed blood vessels are not observed in this view.
246
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 10.13 Neutrophilic immunologic
vasculitis in a cat with feline infectious
peritonitis (FIP). A small blood vessel to
the left of a follicle is necrotic and sur-
rounded by leukocytoclastic neutrophils
and fibrin.
Fig. 10.14 Neutrophilic immunologic
vasculitis in a dog. A severely affected
vessel is necrotic and inflamed; note
marked perivascular fibrin.
panniculus (vasculitic septal panniculitis and vasculitic
affected Shar Peis, the epidermis is often diffusely necrotic
panniculitis of thermal burns) are discussed in Chapter
and secondarily separated from the dermis; deep cavitat-
21. Deeply extensive lesions and large vessel involvement
ing ulceration develops as lesions progress (Malik et al.
are characteristic of Shar Peis with neutrophilic vasculitis
2002).
(Malik et al., 2002), and also characterized systemic vas-
Neutrophilic inflammation usually centers upon post-
culitis with cutaneous involvement in a dog with leish-
capillary
venules and may be leukocytoclastic or
maniasis (Pumarola et al., 1991).
nonleukocytoclastic. Leukocytoclasia is manifested by
Primary epidermal lesions are not a feature of neu
fragmented neutrophilic debris around vessels ('nuclear
trophilic immunologic vasculitis. Exudation, crusting,
dust') and may be subtle to severe. In some cases, leuko-
and ulceration may develop secondary to hypoxic tissue
cytoclasia may be the principal evidence of vascular
damage induced by loss of subjacent vascular integrity. In
inflammation. Neutrophilic inflammation cuffs vessels
Vascular diseases of the dermis
247
participation of specific immunologic reactions, such as
 cell-mediated immunity.
A Sphinx cat with feline infectious peritonitis developed
leukocytoclastic vasculitis with granulomatous inflamma-
tion. Neutrophils surrounded and often obscured small
blood vessels throughout the dermis, particularly in the
perifollicular plexus. There was marked leukocytoclasia.
Neutrophils were accompanied by numerous large macro-
phages. Perivascular hemorrhage and fbrin exudation
was observed; red blood cells appeared fragmented.
Immunohistochemistry demonstrated coronavirus (feline
 infectious peritonitis virus) antigen within macrophages
(Gross, 1999).
Histopathologic evidence of vascular inflammation and
necrosis may be difficult to document in cases of clinically
suspected vasculitis. Suspicion for vasculitis may be based
on histopathologic evidence of ischemic necrosis, pro-
minent and closely oriented perivascular neutrophilic
 inflammation, subtle leukocytoclasia, and dermal hemor-
rhage and edema.
Histopathologic differential diagnoses for neutrophilic
immunologic vasculitis are few if vascular inflammation
and necrosis are found. Septic vasculitis is comparable,
but often produces more severe attendant necrosis (infarc-
tion). In particular neutrophilic vasculitis of Shar Peis
closely resembles septic vasculitis (Malik et al., 2002).
 Urticarial allergic eruption with vasculopathic change is
similar to neutrophilic vasculitis (see Chapter 9) but lacks
true vascular inflammation.
Fig. 10.15 Severe neutrophilic vasculitis of a Shar Pei. A large deep
vessel is thrombosed; note perivascular neutrophils. {Case material
courtesy K.L. Bosward.)
CELL POOR VASCULITIS
(Synonyms:
cell
100d
vasculopathy,
ischemic
dermatopathy)
and spreads variably to the adjacent dermis. Fibrinoid
necrosis of vessels is common, and intravascular fbrin
Clinical features (Figures 10.16 and 10.17)
thrombi may occur. Endothelial cells are swollen. Perivas-
See also Chapters 3 and 21.
cular hemorrhage (microhemorrhage) and fbrin are often
present. Edema is severe in some cases. Deep ischemic
Cell poor vasculitis is a term used to group multiple
necrosis with severe and diffuse neutrophilic inflamma-
clinical syndromes in dogs that are unified by similar
tion has been reported in conjunction with neutrophilic
histopathologic features. Ischemic dermatopathy/canine
vasculitis of Shar Peis (Malik et al., 2002); large vessel
dermatomyositis, 
which includes five clinical
sub-
thrombosis may occur.
groups, is the prototype for canine cell poor vasculitis
Neutrophilic vasculitis is rarely a purely neutrophilic
(see Chapter 3). The vasculitis reported in Jack Russell
process. Eosinophils may be intermingled, and lympho-
Terriers (Parker & Foster 1996) is a manifestation of
cytic, histiocytic, and plasmacytic infltrates are not
ischemic dermatopathy in that breed (see Chapter 3). Cell
uncommon. Mixed mononuclear inflammation may over-
poor vasculitis has not been observed in cats to the
shadow the neutrophilic infltrates. However, mixed
authors knowledge.
inflammatory infltrates are largely perivascular to inter-
Although severity and anatomic sites vary, clinical fea-
stitial; the neutrophil remains the primary inflammatory
tures correlate with those expected with long-term lack
cell that is directed to the vessel wall. Variation in the pro-
of cutaneous vascular sustenance (Vitale et al., 1999).
portion and intensity of various inflammatory cell types
Presumably, multifocal immunologic damage to blood
may have as much to do with the stage of lesion exam-
vessels results in ischemic damage to the skin and other
ined and the presence of ulceration and necrosis, as with
susceptible organs. Cutaneous hypoxia leads to follicular
248
Diseases of the dermis
occur in more severe cases, especially if trauma or sec-
ondary infection is present. Scarring is a feature of
chronicity. Lesions occur over bony prominences due to
susceptibility to trauma, and on distal extremities where
collateral circulation does not allow appropriate vascular
sustenance, such as the pinnae, tail tip, and distal legs.
 Several older dogs with chronic unilateral leg swelling.
sometimes extending to the inguinal region, have exhib-
ited cell poor vasculitis of the panniculus and subcutis; a
variant of rabies vaccine reaction is suspected by one
author (T.L.G.) (see Chapter 21); however, the relation-
'ond uaaq nou siu saiis asa u uooalun daap oi dis
Lesions in another dog with cell poor vasculitis were
limited to periorbital swelling.
Fig. 10.16 Cell poor vasculitis in an Irish Terrier with generalized
 Clinical differential diagnoses should include other
idiopathic ischemic dermatopathy. Patchy alopecia and macular
causes of vascular disease, such as septic vasculitis, cryo-
hyperpigmentation are present. (Photograph courtesy T. Olivry; case
globulemia and cryofbrinogenemia, and frostbite. Alope-
material University of California, Davis.)
cia and other characteristic lesions occurring in a region
Susceptible to ischemic damage should increase the index
of suspicion for cell poor vasculitis. Biopsy is generally
confrmatory.
Biopsy site selection
Early lesions showing alopecia in conjunction with skin
changes are preferred sites for biopsy. Secondarily infected
or scarred lesions are less optimal for demonstration of
typical histopathologic changes.
Histopathology (Figures 10.18 through 10.20)
The vascular lesions of cell poor vasculitis in ischemic
 dermatopathy/canine dermatomyositis are often subtle.
Fig. 10.17 Closer view of truncal lesions of the dog in Fig. 10.16.
There may be loss of endothelial cells, mummification,
Alopecic macules are hyperpigmented. (Photograph courtesy T.
or mild hyaline mural alteration in small vessels. These
Olivry; case material University of California, Davis.)
changes are often easiest to identify in the superfcial
dermis, but occur throughout the lesional area. Density
of small vessels may be decreased (Vitale et al., 1999)
atrophy and, clinically, alopecia and associated chronic
similar to obliterative microangiopathy of human der-
skin changes. In human dermatomyositis, complement-
matomyositis (Crowson & Magro, 1996).
associated microvascular injury leading to ischemia is
 Occasionally, active mural inflammation includes frag-
considered to be the pathophysiologic basis of skin lesions
mented degenerating nuclear debris of neutrophils (leuko-
(Crowson & Magro, 1996). Similarly, complement C5b-
cytoclasia), or infrequently, mononuclear cells. Fibrinoid
9 membrane attack complex was demonstrated in small
degeneration is rare, but may be striking in some cases.
blood vessels within muscle from one dog with vaccine-
Larger blood vessels are uncommonly affected. Although
induced  ischemic dermatopathy  featuring cell  poor 
perivascular lymphocytes may be present in some cases of
vasculitis (Vitale et al., 1999). This supporrs a role for
ischemic dermatopathy, there is no morphologic evidence
complement-mediated microangiopathy, as seen in the cell
that primary lymphocytic vasculitis is present. Comple-
poor vasculitis of human dermatomyositis (Crowson &
ment C5b-9 membrane attack complex was demonstrated
Magro, 1996).
in small blood vessels within muscle from a dog with
The unifying clinical features of cell poor vasculitis
vaccine-induced cell poor vasculitis, supporting a role for
include alopecia with crusting and postinflammatory
complement-mediated microangiopathy, as seen in human
dermatomyositis (Crowson & Magro, 1996; Vitale et al.,
hypopigmentation (see Chapter 3). Erosions or ulceration
1999).
Vascular diseases of the dermis
249
Fig. 10.18 Cell poor vasculitis in a
Gerrman Shepherd Dog. Blood vessels
have decreased endothelial cells. Note
subtle leukocytoclastic debris  around
 some blood vessels at right (arrow), and
ischemic pallor of collagen.
Fig. 10.19 Cell poor vasculitis in a dog. Many blood vessels have 
Fig. 10.20 Cell poor vasculitis in a dog with a chronically swollen
decreased endothelial cells; note microhemorrhage. Normal vessels
 hindleg. Small granulomas are forming around collagen fibers, most
for comparison are visible at bottom edge.
prominently at center (arrow).
250
 Diseases of the dermis
Evidence of cell poor vasculitis, or ^vasculopathy', often
 s  o e    
the skin (ischemic dermatopathy). These include pale-
staining, mucinous, or 'smudged’ collagen, and marked
"fading' atrophy of hair follicles (see Chapters 3 and 19).
Interface dermatitis and mural folliculitis are often
evident, and are likely further manifestations of the
immunologic reaction occurring in the skin
Cell poor vasculitis accompanies postrabies vaccination
panniculitis in dogs (see Chapter 21). Affected vessels in
the panniculus are often tightly cuffed by lymphocytes
and plasma cells. Cell poor vasculopathy is evident in the
overlying dermis as well; dermal lesions are identical to
ischemic dermatopathy (see Chapter 3).
Cell poor vasculitis occurs in the clinical syndrome of
-rad e siads ('T) rone ao ms  s
sistent reaction to deep rabies vaccination at this site. In
addition to typical features of cell poor vasculitis, blood
Fig. 10.21 Familial cutaneous vasculopathy of German Shepherd
vessels of the deep dermis and superfcial subcutis (pan-
Dogs. Widespread ulceration occurs on swollen pawpads. (Photo-
niculus) are often cuffed with lymphocytes, histiocytes,
 graph courtesy J. Declerq.)
and variable plasma cells, as seen in classic postrabies vac-
cination panniculitis (see Chapter 21). This inflammation
extends to the deep subcutis and there is generally severe
diffuse edema. Lymphocytes and/or macrophages may
surround collagen fbers to form small granulomas. The
formation of these granulomas, which may be palisading
in conformation, may be striking in some cases, and has
been observed sporadically in other types of cell poor vas-
culitis (including classical canine familial dermatomyosi-
tis) as well as in typical postrabies vaccine panniculitis.
This phenomenon is believed to represent an ischemic
sequel to localized vascular disease, as described in
humans (Magro et al., 1996).
Cell poor vasculitis encompasses a large clinical group
of diseases. Few differential diagnoses exist, but it is
important to correlate the fndings of cell poor vasculitis
Fig. 10.22 Closer view of ulcerated pads of the dog in Fig. 10.21.
with the appropriate clinical context, if possible. Neu-
(Photograph courtesy J. Declerq.)
trophilic immunologic vasculitis may be cell poor in
chronic stages, but this form of vasculitis generally fails
to induce the associated ischemic dermal and follicular
inheritance (Weir et al., 1994). The majority of published 
changes observed with cell poor vasculitis. This may be
cases (26 dogs) have been seen in Canada. One case was
due to the slow and gradual obliteration of vessels in cell
from the United States, and a dog with similar sympto-
poor vasculitis which permits more gradual effects of per-
matology was reported from Italy (Weir et al., 1994;
sistent hypoxia over time.
Fondati et al., 1998).
A  hypersensitivity  reaction  involving immunologic
attack on collagen has been hypothesized (Weir et al.,
FAMILIAL CUTANEOUS VASCULOPATHY
1994). Interestingly, a temporal association with multi-
OF GERMAN SHEPHERD DOGS
valent puppy vaccine and recrudescence with repeat vac-
Clinical features (Figures 10.21 and 10.22)
cination has been noted in some dogs, similar to Group
2 ischemic dermatopathy (see Chapter 3) (Weir et al.,
Familial cutaneous vasculopathy of German Shepherd
1994). One author (T.L.G.) has seen identical lesions in
Dogs is a rare vascular disease affecting predominantly
the pawpads of a young Fox Terrier and Miniature
the pawpads of puppies (Weir et al., 1994). Pedigree
Schnauzer both of which had lesions of ischemic der-
analysis indicates the likelihood of an autosomal recessive
matopathy involving the muzzle and ears. The authors
Vascular diseases of the dermis
251
suspect that pawpad vasculopathy may be simply one
manifestation of ischemic dermatopathy in some breeds
(possibly overlooked in milder cases); vaccine association
lends credence to that supposition.
The characteristic clinical feature is depigmented,
swollen pawpads. Erosions and ulceration with adherent
crusting occur. The pads may lose pigment prior to ulcer-
ating. Although the pawpads are the predominantly
affected tissues, similar lesions (as in other ischemic vas-
cular diseases) may be present on the pinnae, tail tip, and
nasal planum. Alopecia is noted around the pad margins
and in other affected regions.
Lymphadenopathy is variable. Reported systemic signs
include pain, lethargy, and pyrexia (Weir et al., 1994).
Lethargy may be associated with pain on ambulation.
All reported cases to date have been in German Shep-
herd Dogs. However, the authors have recently observed
an identical syndrome in a 5-month-old Fox Terrier and
7-month-old Miniature Schnauzer. Since these are two
breeds that are affected with juvenile onset ischemic der
matopathy (Group 2; see Chapter 3), and since German
Shepherd Dogs with this disorder may have other signs
commensurate with juvenile onset ischemic dermatopa-
thy, this suggests that pawpad involvement is simply a
manifestation of juvenile onset ischemic dermatopathy
that is most commonly seen in German Shepherd Dogs.
Clinical signs frst appear between 4 and 7 weeks of age
(Weir et al., 1994). Sex predilections have not been noted.
Clinical differential diagnoses are few, as other vascu-
lar diseases do not predominantly affect the pawpads and
Fig. 10.23 Familial cutaneous vasculopathy in a Fox Terrier puppy.
do not have a predilection for young German Shepherd
featuring nodular to diffuse inflammation of the skin of the muco-
 Dogs or puppies in general. Lesions compatible with this
cutaneous junction of the pawpad.
syndrome in a young German Shepherd Dog conceivably
could be caused by septic vasculitis (for example, in
conjunction with generalized demodicosis), disseminated
Vascular lesions are subtle in some cases, and may be
intravascular coagulation, cryopathies, and frostbite.
best seen in arterioles of the deep dermis and panniculus.
These have swollen endothelial cells and mural infltra-
tion by lymphocytes, macrophages, and occasional neu.
Biopsy site selection
trophils. As reported, vascular changes also may be seen
Biopsy of affected tissue near the margin of the pawpad
in postcapillary venules as well as large arteries (Weir
is recommended, as pawpad biopsies can heal slowly,
et al., 1994). Occasionally large numbers of neutrophils
especially if there is vascular compromise. Marginal
are seen murally (Weir et al., 1994).
biopsy may provoke less pain.
 Differential diagnoses relate predominantly 
tothe
diffuse dermatitis (see Chapter 14), as vascular lesions
are subtle. Vascular inflammation of this type may be
Histopathology (Figures 10.23 and 10.24)
observed in several forms of cell poor vasculitis (see p.
Parakeratosis and mild serocellular crusting accompany
247), but those vascular lesions do not occur in the
moderate acanthosis and variable ulceration. There is
context of diffuse dermatitis and panniculitis or with the
nodular to diffuse, superficial and deep dermatitis and
 prominent degenerate foci centered on collagen.
panniculitis, with degenerate neutrophils intensely ori-
ented around collagen (see Chapter 14). Leukocytoclastic
VASCULOPATHY OF GREYHOUNDS
debris may be abundant and there may be mild edema
or fbrin exudation. Mild interface dermatitis has been
(Synonyms: cutaneous and renal glomerular vasculopa-
described in depigmented lesions (Weir et al., 1994).
thy, “Alabama rot', Greenetrack disease)
252
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 10.25 Early vasculopathy of Greyhounds. The groin is dif-
fusely erythermatous; these lesions precede sloughing of the skin.
(Photograph courtesy S. Torres.)
thy in a 9-week-old German Shepherd Dog. Neutrophils are partially
leukocytoclastic within nodular foci; note mild edema and fibrin.
Clinical features (Figures 10.25 and 10.26)
Vasculopathy of Greyhounds is a highly characteristic
Fig. 10.26 Closer view of the dog in Fig. 10.25. Diffuse erythema
regional cutaneous and renal disease that is observed
extends to the distal hindleg. (Photograph courtesy S. Torres.)
almost exclusively in young adult Greyhounds from a
racing environment (Carpenter et al., 1988; Cowan et al.,
1997). A shiga-like toxin produced by Escberichia coli
seen occasionally on the trunk or inguinal region, but not
O157:H7 has been implicated in a similar renal disease
on the head or mucocutaneous junctions (Cowan et al.,
 in humans (hemolytic uremic syndrome) after ingestion of
1997). Most dogs exhibit seven to more than ten ulcers
contaminated undercooked meat (O'Brien et al., 1993;
that range from 1 to 5cm in diameter (Cowan et al.,
Waters et al., 1994). Although skin lesions are uncommon
1997). Usually, new lesions do not develop after the initial
in the human syndrome, a similar pathogenesis in the
lesions begin to heal. Pitting edema of the distal leg is
setting of breed predilection has been proposed for the
 common. The associated renal glomerular vasculopathy
canine disease, as racing Greyhounds in the United States
d r s t s  
are fed a diet composed predominantly of raw, con-
polyuria, vomiting, diarrhea, and acute renal failure may
demned ground beef (Cowan et al., 1997).
be noted to variable degrees in severely affected dogs
Cutaneous lesions consist of coalescing welldemarcated
(Cowan et al., 1997).
deep ulcers. The earliest reported changes are areas of ery-
This syndrome has been observed predominantly in
thema that rapidly eventuate to dark red to black lesions;
Greyhounds involved in the racing industry. Recently, this
these slough, leaving deep ulcers (Cowan et al., 1997).
syndrome was also reported in a Great Dane (Rotermund
The majority of the lesions occur on the legs. Ulcers are
et al., 2002). Most affected dogs are between 1 and 5
Vascular diseases of the dermis
253
years of age. Sex predilection has not been noted (Cowan
et al, 1997).
Clinical differential diagnosis is not difficult, as vascu-
lopathy of Greyhounds is highly distinctive clinically.
Concomitant renal disease increases the clinical suspicion
for this syndrome. If the geographic location is appropri-
ate, venomous snakebite must be considered for cases
with few ulcers.
Biopsy site selection
Multiple punch biopsy specimens should be obtained
from newly developing lesions. Older ulcerative lesions
are less likely to yield diagnostic results. Care should be
taken not to biopsy the digits or lesions over joints or
pressure points, as these regions may heal slowly.
Fig. 10.27 Proliferative thrombovascular necrosis of the pinnae in
a dog. Swelling, erythema, discoloration, and exudation are present
Histopathology
on the distal pinna. Note dark areas of necrosis at the tip of the
pinna and at the extremity of a tortuous blood vessel. (Photograph
As reported, skin lesions in vasculopathy of Greyhounds
courtesy I. Fillecia.)
include thrombosis and necrosis of arterioles, venules,
and capillaries (Carpenter et al., 1988). The vascular
lesions often extend into the subcutis, where arteries are
acteristic proliferative changes in the small dermal arteri-
strikingly affected. Deep dermal and subcutaneous arter-
 oles may be diffcult to find, leading to underdiagnosis.
ies show evidence of necrosis (pyknosis, karyorrhexis, and
Swelling, erythema, and discoloration of the center of
occasional fbrinoid necrosis). There is accompanying
the apex on the medial aspect of the pinnae is the initial
hemorrhagic infarction; the severity and depth of tissue
clinical sign. Early lesions of erythema fail to blanch with
destruction vary with the degree of vascular damage and
diascopy (see introduction, p. 238) confrming the pres-
the size and number of blood vessels affected. Hemor-
 ence of dermal hemorrhage. As vasculopathy progresses,
rhage, edema, and necrosis are associated with severe
 erosion and ulceration begin centrally and then extend in
craterous, cavitating ulceration, often reaching to the sub-
a wedge-shaped "V' expanding peripherally in the direc-
cutis. There is variable fbrosis in chronic lesions. Ulcer
 tion of the ear tip (Griffin, 1994). Beginning at the ear tip.
beds are covered by suppurative exudate containing
there may be necrosis and loss of tissue. In short-coated
colonizing staphylococci (Carpenter et al., 1988). Essen-
dogs or if the pinnae are clipped, trans-pinnal illumina-
tially identical lesions were reported in a Great Dane
tion with a powerful light source reveals lack of vascular
(Rotermund et al., 2002).
supply distal to the initial area of necrosis. Mottled
 Differential diagnosis is uncomplicated if the breed
hypopigmentation occurs with chronicity. Although the
affected is known and if concurrent renal glomerular
lesions commonly occur bilaterally, unilateral involve-
pathology is present (Carpenter et al., 1988). Histologi-
ment has been seen. The lesions are painful. Systemic
signs are not evident. The syndrome is slowly progressive
or septic vasculitis (see pp. 243 and 238) if considered out
and chronic. Age, breed, or sex predilections have not
 of the clinical context.
 been reported.
Clinical differential diagnosis should not be difficult as
this syndrome is highly characteristic. However, appreci-
PROLIFERATIVE THROMBOVASCULAR
ation of the distinctive lesions requires careful obser-
NECROSIS OF THE PINNAE
vation. Most other vasculopathic diseases affecting the
pinnae should also affect other distal extremities such as
Clinical features (Figure 10.27)
the tail tip and the distal legs.
Proliferative thrombovascular necrosis is an uncommon
or underdiagnosed syndrome of unknown etiology that
Biopsy site selection
is seen in the dog. It is characterized by wedge-shaped
devitalization and necrosis of the distal pinnae. Although
Biopsy of the affected regions of the pinna is not easily
Griffin frst mentioned this syndrome in 1985, little addi-
accomplished. The pinna may be trimmed back to unaf-
tional information is available (Griffn, 1994). The char-
fected tissue under general anesthesia to provide surgical
254
 Diseases of the dermis
biopsy specimens as well as a clinical cure. Alternatively,
a smaller margin of transitional tissue can be cut from the
pinna under tranquilization.
Histopathology (Figures 10.28 through 10.30)
The walls of small dermal arterioles are thickened, often
markedly. Concentric spindle cell proliferation is observed
in some vessels while others are expanded due to acellu-
lar sclerosis. Fibrinoid degeneration is present, and fbrin 
thrombi may be seen. Vasculitis is not evident. Intimal and
subintimal proliferation with infolding into the lumina is
evident in fortuitous samples, but is not a uniform feature
of random samples; some of these lesions may represent
end stage recanalization of a previously thrombosed
vessel.
There are secondary changes of ulceration, inflamma-
tion, hemorrhage, and dermal fbrosis. In severe lesions
there may be total infarction of the distal pinna. Pinnal
cartilage may be segmentally necrotic and may protrude
through the ulcer defect. Neutrophils cluster within the
ulcer bed and necrotic tissue. Melanophages and hemo-
siderophages are present in small to moderate numbers.
Fibrosis extends loosely throughout the dermis, inter-
spersed amongst affected vessels, and is not confined to
 the ulcer. A mixed infltrate of neutrophils, lymphocytes,
and plasma cells is present. Inflammation and fbrosis are
more severe when secondary tissue damage is extensive,
and may largely obscure underlying vascular lesions.
Fig. 10.28 Proliferative thrombovascular necrosis of the pinna with
infarction in a dog. There is a central full-thickness defect contain-
Differential diagnosis of proliferative thrombovascular
ing hemorrhage and inflammatory debris; devitalized pale tissue is
necrosis is facilitated by the presence of typical prolifera-
at top. Note thrormbus in large vessel at lower right
tive changes of arterioles and the site affected. Chronic
Fig. 10.29 Higher magnification of
Fig. 10.28 demonstrating an organizing
thrormbus within a dilated vessel; note
necrosis and ulcer of adjacent epidermis.
Hemorrhage is severe.
Vascular diseases of the dermis
255
Fig. 10.31 Proliferative arteritis of the nasal philtrum in a Saint
Bernard. A well-demarcated deep ulcer is present in the center of the
philtrum. (Photograph courtesy S. Torres.)
As reported, clinical features shared by all five dogs
were solitary, well-demarcated linear ulcers affecting the
nasal philtrum (Torres et al., 2002). Ulcers ranged in size
from 3 to 5 cm in length, 2 to 15 mm in width, and 2 to
5mm in depth. Adherent hemopurulent crusts were
noted. All dogs experienced either mild or severe episodes
of arterial hemorrhage from the ulcers. Other cutaneous
Or noncutaneous abnormalities were not noted (Torres
et al., 2002).
 Four of five dogs were Saint Bernards, and the ffth dog
reported was a Giant Schnauzer (Torres et al., 2002). The
authors observed a case in a 4-year-old Newfoundland.
tially filling the lumen.
si suoapuas aul 'pasodsipad aq Keu saop paanq saret
tardive in onset and affects adult dogs between 3 and 6
years of age (Torres et al., 2002).
ulceration and fbrosis may obscure typical vascular
Proliferative arteritis of the nasal philtrum is highly dis
lesions in some cases, making differentiation from exter-
 tinctive visually. The authors have not seen any other syn-
nal trauma diffcult.
drome that causes solitary well-demarcated linear ulcers
affecting the nasal philtrum. Skin biopsy confrms the
diagnosis.
PROLIFERATIVE ARTERITIS OF
THE NASAL PHILTRUM
Biopsy site selection
(Synonym: arteritis of the nasal philtrum)
 Punch biopsy of the margin of the ulcer should be per-
formed. A 4 mm biopsy punch is recommended, as larger
Clinical features (Figure 10.31)
biopsy sites of the planum nasale may not heal as readily.
Proliferative arteritis of the nasal philtrum is a rare
and distinctive vascular disease affecting the nasal
Histopathology (Figures 10.32 and 10.33)
philtrum, details of which have been published to date in
only five dogs (Torres et al., 2002). The etiology is
As reported by Torres et al. (2002) and recently observed
unknown. However since four of the five dogs were
in a Newfoundland, large, sometimes V-shaped ulcers are
e s  e e   s r
accompanied by subjacent necrosis, hemorrhage, and
an inherited disorder is suspected (Torres et al., 2002).
 neutrophilic inflammation. There may be surface exudate.
The authors have recently seen similar lesions in a
Peripheral to the ulcer lymphocytes and plasma cells
Newfoundland.
predorminate, and there is subepidermal fbrosis and
256
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 10.32 Proliferative arteritis of the nasal philtrurm. A large ulcer
Fig. 10.33 Higher magnification of the blood vessel in Fig. 10.32.
is covered by a large partially detached crust. The affected vessel is
There is homogeneous subintimal material interrmingled with a few
seen in the deep dermis {arrow).
spindle cells. Note narrowing of the lumen.
pigmentary incontinence. The epidermis bordering the
The histologic fndings of proliferative arteritis of the
ulcer is severely hyperplastic and parakeratotic, and
nasal philtrum are striking. There are some similarities to
 demonstrates exocytosis of neutrophils and lymphocytes.
proliferative thrombovascular necrosis of pinnae; however,
Deep dermal arteries and arterioles beneath the ulcer
thrombi, mural fbrinoid degeneration, and acellular scle-
show distinctive subendothelial intimal proliferation of
rosis are not features of proliferative arteritis. Knowledge
spindle cells. Amongst the spindle cells is prominent
 of site affected, which is usually apparent in the section
extracellular mucinous collagenous matrix, which report-
(aural cartilage and haired skin of the pinna versus non-
edly stained blue with alcian blue stain (pH not given) and
haired skin of the planum), also will allow differentiation.
blue with Masson's trichrome stain for collagen (Torres
 et al., 2002). The proliferative changes result in marked
SOLAR VASCULOPATHY
 intimal thickening and variable stenosis of the affected
vessels. Spindle cells are positive for smooth muscle actin
Clinical features (Figures 10.34 and 10.35)
and vimentin, and occasionally positive for desmin, con-
sistent with myofbroblastic or smooth muscle origin
Solar vasculopathy is an uncommon but probably under-
(Torres et al., 2002). Although ^arteritis' is not a consis-
diagnosed canine skin disease of suspected solar and
tent or profound feature, and was not seen in the New-
immunologic cause. Solar vasculopathy may be an impor-
foundland observed, some affected vessels reportedly
tant feature of cases previously clinically diagnosed with
have mural hemorrhage, neutrophilic and lymphocytic
canine ‘nasal solar dermatitis'. However the subtlety of
inflammation, and leukocytoclastic debris of probable
vascular lesions may have led to a lack of recognition of
neutrophilic origin (Torres et al., 2002).
solar vasculopathy in the past.
Vascular diseases of the dermis
257
all with diascopy (see introduction, p. 238). Skin disease
is restricted to sparsely haired or nonhaired, nonpig-
mented, sun-exposed skin. As adjacent regions lose pig-
mentation and hair due to inflammation, newly exposed
skin becomes affected. The dorsal muzzle and planum
nasale are preferentially affected sites. Pruritus and pain
may be seen with chronic lesions. Solar vasculopathy may
accompany and complicate discoid lupus erythematosus
 or other depigmenting diseases.
 Breed, age, or sex predilections are not available.
Breeds at risk for depigmenting diseases, such as discoid
lupus erythematosus, are likely at increased risk. Addi-
tionally, breeds with lightly pigmented skin and sparse
hair coats may be preferentially affected.
Fig. 10.34 Solar vasculopathy affecting the dorsal and lateral
muzzle, planum nasale, and lips of a Doberman Pinscher Mottled
Clinical differential diagnoses include discoid lupus
loss of pigmentation, erythema, and crusting are present. (Photo-
graph courtesy A.G. Cannon.)
foliaceus, pemphigus (
erythematosus, ischemic der-
matopathy/canine dermatomyositis, and infectious follic-
ular diseases such as dermatophytosis, demodicosis, and
bacterial pyoderma. However, since discoid lupus erythe-
matosus can coexist with solar vasculopathy and the two
diseases may complicate each other all dogs suspected of
having either disease should be biopsied. Solar vascu-
lopathy is a more likely diagnosis in dogs exhibiting the
triad of lack of pigmentation, sparse hair coat, and solar
exposure. Lesions should not extend into surrounding
normally pigmented skin or planum nasale.
 Biopsy site selection
Multiple punch biopsy specimens should be obtained
from nonulcerated affected sites. If the planum nasale
and adjacent skin are affected, both regions should be
sampled.
Fig. 10.35 Closer view of the dog in Fig. 10.34. Bilateral symme-
Histopathology (Figures 10.36 through 10.38)
try of the lesions on the dorsal muzzle and planum nasale is marked;
note erosions. (Photograph courtesy A.G. Cannon.)
The epidermis is variably acanthotic and may be eroded
or ulcerated. Scattered shrunken, eosinophilic, presump-
tively apoptotic keratinocytes may be present. Degenerate
Solar vasculopathy may occur in either naturally lightly
keratinocytes may be true ‘sunburn’ cells, or may result
or nonpigmented skin, or in previously pigmented skin
from ischemia due to underlying vasculopathy.
that has become depigmented. More specifically, the syn-
Superficial blood vessels have thickened, smudged, or
 drome may be seen in conjunction with underlying depig-
sclerotic walls. There may be endothelial swelling or loss 
menting diseases, such as discoid lupus erythematosus
 of endothelia. Neutrophils cluster around and occasion-
or vitiligo. Some cases occurring in naturally lightly
 ally within the wall of blood vessels, and mild leukocy
pigmented or nonpigmented skin have been linked
toclasia (fragmentation of neutrophilic nuclei indicative
temporally to adverse chemical reactions that may be
of vascular damage and inflammation) usually is evident.
photoactivated (photoactivated vasculitis)
Lymphocytes and macrophages are intermingled. Hemor-
 Solar vasculopathy is characterized clinically by vari-
rhage may be observed. The inflammatory, leukocytic
able degrees of erythema, swelling, exudation, crusting.
 process 'spills over’ to the adjacent basement membrane
alopecia, erosion, and ulceration. Well-demarcated ery-
where neutrophils and their fragments are distributed,
thematous plaques may develop and coalesce. Scarring
often sparsely but occasionally more intensely, just be-
occurs with chronicity. Lesions blanch partially or not at
 neath and along the membrane. There is accompanying
258
 Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 10.36 Solar vasculopathy in a
white Boxer. Note sclerotic, pale appear-
ance of supericial dermal collagen.
Fig. 10.37 Solar vasculopathy in the
clinical setting of discoid lupus erythe-
matosus. A superficial hypocellular zone
of altered collagen is subtended by a
lichenoid band of inflammation. Note
sclerotic blood vessels (arrow).
fbrin deposition in the basement membrane region, and
matous, similar to ischemic dermatopathy (see Chapter
the basement membrane zone may be smudged or poorly
3). This creates a superfcial laminar zone of pallor. Solar
defined. Scattered basal cell degeneration and vacuolation
elastosis may be present (see Chapter 15) and may abut
 often are observed. Theoretically, low oxygen tension due
the basement membrane. Older lesions show laminar
to vascular damage may result in secondary degeneration
superficial dermal fbrosis, which may represent concur-
of the basement membrane zone. Alternatively, the
rent solar fbrosis (see Chapter 15) and/or may be the
inflammatory process may target vessels and the basement
result of local ischemic damage. Lymphocytes, histiocytes,
membrane zone alike.
and plasma cells are variable and may extend around
The superfcial dermis is pale and hypocellular in
adnexal appendages. If occurring in the context of discoid
appearance. Superficial dermal collagen may appear
lupus erythematosus, the superficial dermal zone of pallor
wispy, homogeneous, and sclerotic, or mucinous and ede-
may be subtended by lichenoid and periadnexal inflam-
Vascular diseases of the dermis
259
Fig. 10.38 Higher magnification of
Fig.
10.37 demonstrating sclerotic
blood vessels. Leukocytoclastic debris is
present subtly within some affected
vessels {arrow) as well as just below the
basement membrane.
mation of that condition (see Chapter 11), creating a two-
Soter, N.A. & Kaplan, A.P. (2003) Urticaria and angioedema.
toned effect of light over dark.
In: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General Medicine, 6th edn
 Differential diagnosis of solar vasculopathy may be dif-
(eds I.M. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A.
fcult because superficial vascular changes often occur in
Goldsmith & S.1. Katz), pp. 1129-39. McGraw-Hill, New
the milieu of an underlying inflammatory depigmenting
York.
disease, such as discoid lupus erythematosus. The lesions
Telangiectasia, Phlebectasia, and Cutaneous Flushing
are somewhat similar to cell poor vasculitis of ischemic
DeManuelle, T.C., Gross, T.L. & Carlson, R.A. (1999) Idio-
dermatopathy (see p. 2
247); however, the vascular and
pathic telangiectasia in a Golden Retriever. Vet Dermatol 10,
ischemic changes of solar vasculopathy are very superficial
311-5.
and consistently are associated with neutrophilic inflam-
Hurst, E.A. & Heffernan, M.P (2003) Cutaneous changes in
mation. Neutrophilic immunologic vasculitis (see p. 244)
the flushing disorders and the carcinoid syndrome. In: Fitz-
should not have accompanying ischemic changes of the
patrick's Dermatology in General Medicine, 6th edn (eds I.M.
collagen, nor elastosis or fbrosis. The clinical context is
Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith
important in the definitive diagnosis of solar vasculopathy.
& S.1. Katz), pp. 1671-6. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Kurata, M., Kasuga, V., Nanba, E. et al. (1995) Flush induced
by fluoroquinolones in canine skin. Inflamm Res 44, 461-5.
REFERENCES
Miller, WH., Jr (1992) Cutaneous flushing associated with
intrathoracic neoplasia in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 28,
Introduction
217-9.
Nichols, PR., Morris, D.O. & Beale, K.M. (2001) A retrospec-
Scott, D.W. (1985) Cutaneous phlebectasias in Cushingoid dogs.
tive study of canine and feline cutaneous vasculitis. Vet Der-
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 21, 351-4.
matol 12, 255-64.
Cryoglobulinemia and Cryofibrinogenemia
SepticVasculitis
Barnhill, R.L. & Busam, K.J. (1997) Vascular diseases. In:
Crawford, M.A. & Foil, C.S. (1989) Vasculitis: clinical syn-
Lever's Histopathology of the Skin, 8th edn, (eds D.E. Elder,
R.E. Elenitsas, C. Jaworsky, et al.), pp. 196-7. Lippincott-
Kao, G.F., Evancho, C.D., Ioffe, O. et al. (1997) Cutaneous
Raven, Philadelphia.
histopathology of Rocky Mountain spotted fever. J Cutan
Bridle, K.H. & Littlewood, J.D. (1998) Tail tip necrosis in two
Pathol 24, 604-10.
litters of Birman kittens. J Small Anim Pract 39, 88-9.
Cornelius, L.A. & Lawley, T.J. (2003) Cryoglobulinemia and
Urticaria and Angioedema
cryofibrinogenemia. In: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
Medicine, 6th edn (eds I.M. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff,
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 571-4. W.B.
K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.1. Katz), pp. 1740-4.
Saunders, Philadelphia.
MeGraw-Hill, New York.
260
Diseases of the dermis
Godfrey, D.R. & Anderson, R.M. (1994) Cold agglutinin disease
Vitale, C.B., Gross, T.L. & Magro, C.M. (1999) Vaccine-induced
in a cat. J Small Anim Pract 35,267-70.
ischemic dermatopathy in the dog. Vet Dermatol 18, 131-42.
Green, C.E., Kristensen, F, Hoff, E.J. et al. (1977) Cold hemag-
glutinin disease in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 170, 505-
Familial Cutaneous Vasculopathy of German Shepherd Dogs
10.
Fondati, A., Fondevila, M.D., Minghelli, A. et al. (1998) Famil-
Nagata, M., Nanko, H., Hashimoto, K. et al. (1998) Cryoglob-
jal cutaneous vasculopathy and demodicosis in a German
ulinaemia and cryofbrinogenaemia: a comparison of canine
shepherd dog. J Small Anim Pract 39, 137-9.
and human cases.Vet Dermatol 9,277-81.
Weir, J.A., Yager, JA., Caswell, J.L. et al. (1994) Familial cuta-
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
neous vasculopathy of German shepherds: clinical, genetic and
Small Animat Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 717-9. W.B.
preliminary pathological and immunological studies. Can Vet
Saunders, Philadelphia.
35,763-9.
Neutrophilic Immunologic Vasculitis
Vasculopathy of Greyhounds
Berrocal, A. & Alfaro, A. {2003) Acute febrile neutrophilic
Carpenter, J.L., Andelman, N.C., Moore, F.M. et al. (1988) Idio-
vasculitis and necrotic dermatitis in two Shar Pei dogs. In:
pathic cutaneous and renal glomerular vasculopathy of Grey-
Proceedings of the 2nd ISVD Meeting, Monterey, p. 15.
hounds. Vet Pathol 25, 411-7.
Fiorentino, D.F (2003) Cutaneous vasculitis. J Am Acad Der-
Cowan, L.A., Hertzke, D.M., Fenwick, B.W. et al. (1997)
matol 48, 311-40.
Clinical and clinicopathologic abnormalities in Greyhounds
Gross, TL. (1999) Pyogranulomatous vasculitis and mural fol-
with cutaneous and renal glomerular vasculopathy: 18 cases
liculitis associated with feline infectious peritonitis in a sphinx
(1992-1994). J Am Vet Med Assoc 210, 789-93.
cat. Vet Pathol 36, 507 (abstract).
O'Brien, A.D., Melton, A.R., Schmitt, C.K. et al. (1993) Profle
Malik, R, Foster, S.F., Martin, P. et al. (2002) Acute febrile neu-
of Escberichia coli O157:H7 pathogen responsible for
trophilic vasculitis of the skin of young Shar-Pei dogs. Aust
Vet J 80, 200-6.
hemolytic uremic syndrome in Washington. J Clin Microbiol
McEwan, N.A., McNeil, PE., Kirkham, D. et al. (1987) Drug
10,2799-801.
eruption in a cat resembling pemphigus foliaceus. J Small
Rotermund, A., Peters, M., Hewicker-Trautwein, M. et al.
Anim Pract 28,713-20.
(2002) Cutaneous and renal glomerular vasculopathy in a
Pumarola, M., Brevik, L., Badiola, J. et al. (1991) Canine leish-
Great Dane resembling *Alabama rot of greyhounds. Vet
maniasis with systemic vasculitis in two dogs. J Comp Pathol
Record 151, 510-2.
105,279-86.
Waters, J.R., Sharp, J.C. & Dev, VJ. (1994) Infection caused
Sais, G., Vidaller, A, Jucgla, A. et al. (1998) Prognostic factors
by Escherichia coli O157:H7 in Alberta, Canada, and in
in leukocytoclastic vasculitis. Arch Dermatol 134, 309-15.
Scotland: a five-year review, 1987-1991. Clin Infect Dis 19,
834-43.
Cell Poor Vasculitis
Crowson, A.N. & Magro, C.M. (1996) The role of microvas-
Proliferative Thrombovascular Necrosis of the Pinnae
cular injury in the pathogenesis of cutaneous lesions of der-
Griffin, C.E. (1994) Pinnal diseases. Vet Clin North Am Sm
matomyositis. Hum Pathol 27, 15-9.
Anim Pract 24, 897-904.
Magro, C.M., Crowson, A.N. & Regauer, S. (1996) Granuloma
annulare and necrobiosis lipoidica tissue reactions as a mani-
Proliferative Arteritis of theNasal Philtrum
festation of systemic disease. Hum Pathol 27, 50-6.
Torres, S.M., Brien, T.O. & Scott, D.W. (2002) Dermal arteritis
Parker, W.M. & Foster, R.A. (1996) Cutaneous vasculitis in five
of the nasal philtrum in a Giant Schnauzer and three Saint
Jack Russell Terriers. Vet Dermatol 7, 109-15.
Bernard dogs. Vet Dermatol 13, 275-81.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 11
Lichenoid diseases of the dermis
Lichenoid diseases of the dermis are characterized by
a diagnosis of mucocutaneous pyoderma may be applied
dense superfcial band-like or laminar dermal inflamma-
inappropriately by pathologists. For example, chronic
tion that is oriented just beneath the dermal-epidermal
secondary bacterial inflammation that occurs as a sequel
junction. The terms “lichenoid’ and “interface' are often
to ulceration of the planum nasale caused by diseases such
used interchangeably by others.
as discoid lupus erythematosus or pemphigus foliaceus is
 For descriptive clarity, the authors prefer to define inter-
histopathologically identical to mucocutaneous pyo-
face dermatitis as mild, superfcial dermal inflamma-
 derma. Mucocutaneous pyoderma and bacterial intertrigo
tion that is oriented tightly to and often obscures the
(skin-fold pyoderma) are clinically distinct from each
dermal-epidermal junction. Basal cell damage is a con-
other; lesions of mucocutaneous pyoderma do not origi-
sistent feature of interface dermatitis. Interface dermati-
 nate in and are not confined to folded skin. However, bac-
tides are discussed in Chapter 3. In contrast, lichenoid
 terial intertrigo also shares histopathologic features with
inflammation may occur with or without interface
 mucocutaneous pyoderma.
 change; lichenoid infammation with interface damage
 Intertrigo is a relatively common, usually minor inflam-
may be termed “lichenoid-interface'. Lichenoid inflamma-
matory disease that develops as a result of deep, tightly
tion without interface change often evolves from a
 apposed skin folds that create a moist, warm environment
perivascular pattern; both patterns are generally evident
allowing retention of secretions or excretions and intense
in tissue.
surface bacterial overgrowth which initiates inflamma-
 Lichenoid dermatitides often have a persistent immuno-
tion. Malassezia may contribute to this inflammation.
Bacterial intertrigo most commonly affects the lip folds,
mechanism. Lichenoid dermatitis (generally with interface
but also can affect deep facial folds, perivulvar folds
change) occurs in the context of several autoimmune skin
and tail folds. Bacterial intertrigo rarely extends beyond
diseases, for example (see Chapter 3). Lichenoid der-
the intertriginous zone formed by the anatomic “defect'
matitis without interface change may be most common at
leading to the skin fold. Clinical diagnosis is uncompli-
Or near mucocutaneous junctions. Histopathologic differ-
cated; lesions are rarely biopsied.
entiation of the diseases of this group often will depend
The pathogenesis of mucocutaneous pyoderma is not
upon differences in any epidermal lesions, as well as vari-
understood. Response to combined systemic and topical
ation in the composition of the dermal infltrate.
antibacterial therapy supports the role of bacterial infec-
tion in the etiology of the disorder. However response
to antibacterial therapy is often slow, and repetitive
MUCOCUTANEOUS PYODERMA
relapses are common. The authors speculate that muco-
Clinical features (Figures 11.1 and 11.2)
cutaneous pyoderma may have a more complex immuno-
logic pathogenesis.
Mucocutaneous pyoderma is a relatively uncommon syn-
Classically, mucocutaneous pyoderma of the lips and
drome characterized clinically by erythema, swelling, and
perioral skin is characterized by erythema, swelling.
adherent crusts around mucocutaneous junctions (Ihrke
and crusting. Crusts entrap hairs. Affected lips become
& Gross, 1995). Mucocutaneous pyoderma affecting the 
markedly erythematous and uniformly swollen. The
lips and perioral skin is clinically highly distinctive, but 
lateral commisures frequently are severely affected. Fis-
at other sites is considerably less so.
suring, erosion and ulceration with adherent crusting may
Problems occur in the melding of clinical and
occur in more severe cases. Depigmentation of the lips can
histopathologic classifcations of mucocutaneous pyo-
occur with chronicity and may be clinically striking. Sali-
derma. The histopathologic features are nonspecific, and
vary staining may be present surrounding the lip lesions,
261
262
Diseases of the dermis
that are identical histopathologically but clinically dis-
similar to mucocutaneous pyoderma.
German Shepherd Dogs and their related crossbreeds
may be at increased risk (Ihrke & Gross, 1995). Age 0r
 sex predilections have not been noted.
Canine mucocutaneous pyoderma affecting the lips
and perioral skin is visually distinctive. Possible clinical
differential diagnoses include early discoid lupus ery-
thematosus, 2
advanced
lipfold intertrigo, localized
demodicosis, zinc-responsive dermatosis, 
and early
lesions of generic dog food skin disease. The swelling of
- e ou si eapod snosunonu wm uas sd a
ical feature of canine discoid lupus erythematosus. In
discoid lupus erythematosus, partially bilaterally sym-
Fig. 11.1 Mucocutaneous pyoderrma in a Brittany. Note erythema,
metric lesions usually are present on the dorsum of the
swelling, and crusting involving the lips and adjacent skin of the
muzzle and the planum nasale. Perioral demodicosis gen-
muzzle. Salivary staining is present on the haircoat ventral to the
 erally is seen in younger dogs and has a more rapid onset.
Jower lip.
Lipfold pyoderma also may mimic (and can accom-
 pany) mucocutaneous pyoderma. Lesions of lipfold pyo-
derma are confned to a triangular fold on either side of
 the lower lip; lipfold pyoderma is seen primarily in
spaniels.
Biopsy site selection
Areas of inflammation and crusting without ulceration
are recommended sites for biopsy. Punch biopsies no
larger than 6 mm are preferred to minimize scarring in
visible mucocutaneous regions.
Histopathology (Figures 11.3 and 11.4)
The epidermis or mucosal epithelium is hyperplastic.
There is exocytosis of lymphocytes with variable spon-
Fig. 11.2 Closer view of the dog in Fig. 11.1. Swelling is extensive
giosis. These changes extend to superfcial hair follicles.
where the upper canine tooth contacts the lower lip. Inflammatory
There may be scattered brightly eosinophilic, shrunken
debris mats the hair surrounding the lesions.
keratinocytes, consistent with apoptosis, usually above
the basal cell layer. Variable, often severe neutrophilic
serocelular crusting is observed in lesions complicated
and tenacious exudate may mat surrounding hair. Lip and
by self-trauma, erosion, or ulceration. Neutrophils may
perioral lesions commonly are bilaterally symmetric. The
migrate in large numbers through the damaged epidermis
adjacent philtrum also may be affected. Pruritus is mild
 to form superficial exudative crusts, sometimes subtended
to moderate, and pain may be present. Affected dogs may
or capped by parakeratosis.
rub their faces on carpeting or furniture. Dogs with more
The dermis contains a perivascular to lichenoid infl-
severe lesions resent palpation. Mild odor may be present.
rate. Perivascular orientation often is seen in milder or
Regional lymphadenopathy may be present.
 peripheral lesions, but has been observed occasionally in
Similar, but less distinctive lesions can affect the planum
severely exudative and ulcerated lesions as well. The infl-
nasale, prepuce, and perianal region. The mucocutaneous
trate is composed predominantly of plasma cells, and
junction of one or both nares of the planum nasale may
there are mixtures of lymphocytes, neutrophils, and
be affected, creating fissuring with adherent keratinous
macrophages. Eosinophils may be observed in some cases.
crusts. Somewhat surprisingly, bilateral symmetry is not
 There is close approximation to the overlying epidermis
 seen in lesions involving the nares. Bacterial involvement 
by the inflammatory infltrate, but the dermal-epidermal
      
 interface is not obscured. Blood vessels may be dilated.
planum nasale can create antibiotic-responsive lesions
 Pigmentary incontinence may be mild to severe. If speci-
Lichenoid diseases of the dermis
263
Fig. 11.3 Mucocutaneous pyoderma.
A lichenoid band of inflammation in
the superficial dermis contains promi-
nent plasma cells.
mens are obtained from haired skin, similar inflammation
often surrounds subjacent adnexal appendages. In some
lesions the superficial dermal and periadnexal inflamma-
tion is confluent, creating a continuous and deep lichenoid
band to the level of the deep adnexal dermis
Chronic inflammation of any mucocutaneous junction
(as observed in mucous membrane pemphigoid, facial
pemphigus foliaceus, discoid lupus erythematosus, etc.)
may have features similar to mucocutaneous pyoderma.
This may be due to the stereotypic response of these
regions to persistent antigenic stimuli such as from
chronic bacterial infection. Primary lesions such as
subepidermal clefting in mucous membrane pemphigoid,
acantholytic pustules in facial pemphigus foliaceus, and
basal cell degeneration in discoid lupus erythematosus
should allow differentiation, but these may be lacking or 
subtle in chronic lesions. Clinical differentiation may be
required.
Interrigo (skinfold pyoderma) that is located near
mucocutaneous junctions (lip fold and vulvar fold) is
histopathologically identical to mucocutaneous pyo-
derma. Clinical separation of these entities is needed.
DISCOID LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS
Clinical features (Figures 11.5 and 11.6)
See Chapter 3.
Fig. 11.4 Higher magnification of mucocutaneous pyoderma,
Biopsy site selection
demonstrating plasma cells in the superficial derrmal infiltrate; note
apoptotic keratinocytes {arrow).
See Chapter 3.
264
Diseases of the dermis
(apoptosis) and deposition of immunoglobulin and often
complement at the basement membrane zone.
The dermis usually has a moderate lichenoid inflam-
 matory infltrate that includes lymphocytes, macrophages,
 plasma cells, and fewer neutrophils. Mild interface change
features basal cell degeneration and inflammation that
obscures the dermal-epidermal interface; this combined
pattern is best termed “lichenoid-interface'. In haired skin
there is often a nodular pattern of inflammation around
hair follicles and adnexal glands. Pigmentary incontinence
usually is present and reflects loss of melanin by damaged 
basal cells and its incorporation into macrophages in the
superfcial dermis. Plasma cells may be prominent if
lesions from the lip are examined or if lesions are long-
standing and/or chronically ulcerated; these lesions resem-
 ble mucocutaneous pyoderma (see p. 261). There may be
exocytosis of lymphocytes into the overlying epidermis.
Neutrophils are variable and their numbers reflect the
Fig. 11.5 Discoid lupus erythematosus in a Border Collie. Depig-
degree of overlying epidermal erosion or ulceration and
mentation, ulceration, and crusting involve only the planum nasale.
superficial crusting.
 In putative chronic lesions, there may be a zone of
laminar fbrosis and/or edema. This is subtended by a
 deeper zone of otherwise typical lichenoid inflammation.
 Fibrosis may be severe in some lesions, preventing hair
regrowth (cicatricial alopecia). Superficial neutrophilic
vasculitis and fbrinoid vasculopathy may be present in
 these hypocelular regions, suggesting secondary solar
vasculopathy in the face of chronic depigmentation and
alopecia (see Chapter 10). Squamous cell carcinoma
 arising in chronically depigmented lesions of DLE also has 
been reported (Scott & Miller 1995).
 Increased intraepithelial and intradermal mucin depo-
sition (acid mucopolysaccharide) was demonstrated in
dogs with DLE over dogs with other skin diseases
(Rosenkrantz et al., 1986). Caution in the use of mucin
deposition as a diagnostic aid is advised; strict adherence
to the pH requirements of routine mucin stains (Alcian
blue at pH 2.5) is critical. In addition, other inflamma-
 tory skin diseases may show significant mucin deposition,
and thus mucinosis may not be diagnostically specific.
Differential diagnoses for the lichenoid inflammation of
DLE include mucocutaneous pyoderma and Vogt-Koy-
anagi-Harada-like syndrome. Chronic inflammation of
Fig. 11.6 Chronic, severe discoid lupus erythematosus in a Collie.
mucocutaneous junctions, such as occurs in DLE, may
Depigrmentation, ulceration, and crusting affect the dorsal muzzle as
have features of mucocutaneous pyoderma. This may be
well as the planurm nasale. Severe tissue necrosis has altered the con-
due to the stereotypic response of these regions to per-
formation of the planum nasale.
sistent antigenic stimuli such as from secondary bacterial
infection. Plasma cells usually are not as prominent in
Histopathology (Figure 11.7)
DLE as they are in mucocutaneous pyoderma, but differ-
entiation may be difficult for chronic lesions of DLE
Epidermal lesions of discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE)
in which plasma cells predominate and basal cell
have been discussed previously (see Chapter 3). These
 degeneration is less obvious. Basal cell degeneration,
principally  include  interface  basal  cell  degeneration
 as usually seen in DLE, is rare in mucocutaneous pyo-
Lichenoid diseases of the dermis
265
Fig. 11.7 Canine discoid lupus ery-
thematosus with lichenoid infiltrate
and
pigmentary incontinence; note
mild interface degeneration of basal
cells.
Fig. 11.9 Pemphigus foliaceus in a dog. Intact and ruptured asym-
Fig. 11.8 Pemphigus foliaceus in a dog. Intact vesicopustules span
multiple hair follicles on the elbow. Note the asymmetrical shape of
 metric pustules are present on the neck.
the vesicopustules.
Biopsy site selection
derma and Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome. Vogt-
See Chapter 1.
Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome generally will have a
Histopathology (Figure 11.10)
dermal infltrate than will DLE. Finer melanin granula-
tion is seen within macrophages in Vogt-Koyanagi-
Epidermal lesions have been described (see Chapter 1)
Harada-like syndrome in comparison to the heavy clump-
and are principally those of superficial epidermal pustu-
ing of melanin usually observed in DLE.
lation with acantholysis, and intercellular deposition of
immunoglobulin and often complement.
In some lesions of pemphigus foliaceus (PF), par-
PEMPHIGUS FOLLACEUS
ticularly those from the face and mucocutaneous junc-
 tions, a lichenoid infltrate of lymphocytes, macrophages,
Clinical features (Figures 11.8 and 11.9)
and plasma cells is present. Eosinophils are generally
See Chapter 1.
observed. Inflammation may partially obscure the
266
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 11.10 Lichenoid inflammation
in canine pemphigus foliaceus. Note
intraepidermal pustule with acan-
tholytic cells to right of center.
dermal-epidermal interface, but basal cell degeneration
immunohistochemical techniques;  pemphigus erythe-
is absent to rare. Pigmentary incontinence is mild to mod-
matosus exhibits deposition of immunoglobulin along
erate. Inflammation extends in a nodular pattern around
the basement membrane in addition to the typical inter-
subjacent adnexal appendages.
cellular deposition of PF.
Lichenoid inflammation is most likely a reflection of
anatomic location rather than a specific feature of PF;
VOGT-KOYANAGI-HARADA-LIKE
chronic lesions of the planum as in mucocutaneous
SYNDROME
pyoderma and discoid lupus erythematosus also feature
similar lichenoid dermatitis. This may be due to the
(Synonyms: VKH, uveodermatologic syndrome)
stereotypic response of these regions to persistent anti-
genic stimuli such as from bacterial infection. Thus,
Clinical features (Figures 11.11 through 11.13)
biopsy specimens from nonpustular facial lesions of PF
 may yield a false diagnosis for those entities. Eosinophils
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome (VKH) is a rare
may be more consistently present in the dermal inflam-
canine disease of probable autoimmune etiology. It is
mation of facial PF than in discoid lupus erythematosus,
characterized by concurrent granulomatous uveitis and
and discoid lupus erythematosus should feature more
 symmetric facial depigmenting skin disease (Bussanich et
interface damage than PF. Clinical differentiation may be
al., 1982; Kern et al., 1985). Both cell-mediated hyper-
of beneft in these cases.
sensitivity and antibodies directed against melanin and
The histopathologic lesions, including lichenoid der-
related proteins have been demonstrated in humans with
matitis, that are observed in facial lesions of PF are similar
VKH (Yamaki et al., 2002). Similar mechanisms have
 to those of pemphigus erythematosus. Pemphigus erythe-
been postulated for the dog. Although similar, substantial
matosus features interface dermatitis, 
as would
be
differences occur between the human and canine disease
expected with pemphigus-lupus crossover disease (see
(MacDonald, 1993). In humans, a meningoencephalitic
Chapter 3). Without confrmatory immunologic fndings,
phase precedes an ophthalmic-auditory phase (uveitis,
assignment of a diagnosis of pemphigus erythematosus
deafness, dysacousia) and the final convalescent, or der-
to facially-predominant PF may be diffcult. Adherence to
matologic phase (Mosher et al., 1999; Ortonne et al.,
 the immunologic criteria of pemphigus erythematosus
2003). In dogs, clinical signs compatible with a menin-
requires that the diagnosis be made only when immuno-
goencephalitic phase are rarely reported (Scott et al.,
histochemical or immunofluorescence testing is compati-
2001); ophthalmic disease and dermatologic disease both
ble and when other clinical testing is supportive (positive 
commonly occur, although skin lesions usually occur later
antinuclear antibody [ANA] test). The principal method
in the course of the disease. Deafness has not been docu-
of differentiation  is  through  immunofluorescence  or
mented in the dog; dysacousia could go unnoticed.
Lichenoid diseases of the dermis
267
Fig. 11.13 Closer view of the rmuzzle of the dog in Fig. 11.11.
Diffuse erythema and crusting are present. The depigmented lips
were uniforrmly black prior to the onset of disease.
and aggressive, the ophthalmologic component of the
disease usually holds far greater portent than the cuta-
neous component. Skin disease may be largely asympto-
matic and  is predominantly cosmetically disfiguring.
 Consequently, diagnosis of the skin disease bears greatest
importance as a marker for the ophthalmologic disease.
Bilaterally
 symmetric  facial   leukoderma
and
leukotrichia are accompanied by variable erythema and
Fig. 11.11 Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome in an Alaskan
crusting. Alopecia is less common. The dorsal muzzle,
Malamute. Partially bilaterally symmetric leukotrichia and vitiligo
periorbital region, planum nasale, and lips are the pre-
are accompanied by erythema, crusting, and alopecia.
dominant sites of involvement. Male dogs commonly
have scrotal lesions and female dogs may have vulvar
lesions. Lesions also may be seen on the pawpads,
perianally, and on the pinnae. Claw disease with
onychomadesis was reported in one Siberian Husky
(Tachikawa et al., 1995). Depigmentation, erythema, and
erosion may occur in the oral cavity, especially on the
palatal vault (Vercelli & Taraglio, 1990). On rare occa-
sion, depigmentation of the skin and haircoat may
become generalized (Campbell et al., 1986; Herrera &
Duchene, 1998). Pruritus is variable but may be marked.
Regional lymphadenopathy is common. Photoaggrava-
tion of skin lesions has been observed.
Akitas, Samoyeds, Siberian Huskies, Alaskan Mala-
mutes, Chow Chows, and their related mixed breeds
are at increased risk. Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syn-
drome also has been seen in the Shiba Inu, Shetland
Fig. 11.12 Closer view of periorbital area of the dog in Fig. 11.11.
Note swelling, and squinting indicative of uveitis-associated
Sheepdog, white German Shepherd Dog, Old English
Sheepdog, Irish Setter, and Dachshund, as well as a
photophobia.
number of other breeds. The syndrome may be seen
most frequently in dogs between 6 months and 6 years of
Ophthalmic signs include anterior and posterior uveitis
age (MacDonald, 1993). Sex predilection has not been
manifested clinically by photophobia, blepharospasm,
noted.
conjunctival inflammation, and corneal edema. Since
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome clinically most
blindness may occur if treatment is not expeditious
closely resembles other facially-oriented autoimmune skin
268
Diseases of the dermis
diseases (discoid lupus erythematosus, systemic lupus ery-
lium was reported in a dog that had sloughing of the
claws in conjunction with confrmatory clinical and
 matosus), epitheliotropic lymphoma, and vitiligo. If VKH
histopathological lesions of VKH syndrome (Tachikawa
is suspected, a complete ophthalmologic examination
et al., 1995).
should be performed immediately. An anti-nuclear anti-
 In early lesions, dermal inflammation is pronounced
body (ANA) test will aid in ruling out systemic lupus ery-
and is characterized by perivascular to dense lichenoid
thematosus and pemphigus erythematosus. Skin biopsy
inflammation that lies immediately subjacent to the
will allow differentiation from the above-mentioned dif-
epidermis, touching but only occasionally obscuring the
ferential diagnoses.
overlying basal cell layer. Inflammatory cells consist of
large, often pale macrophages and fewer neutrophils, lym-
phocytes, and plasma cells. Macrophages often contain
Biopsy site selection
very fne, dust-like, granular melanin pigment. Coarsely
Areas of depigmentation, erythema, and scaling, prefer-
clumped melanin also may be observed. Occasionally
ably of recent development, are beneficial sites for skin
 there may be similar inflammation in a nodular pattern
biopsy. The lips and dorsal muzzle are preferred sites,
around adnexa; this pattern may predominate in some
an jo uoosp on pea Aeu Asdonq renoad aous
lesions. Chronic lesions of VKH may show only minimal
eyelid. Secondarily infected or self-traumatized lesions
dermal inflammation in the face of decreased or absent
should be avoided.
epidermal melanin.
Lichenoid inflammation of VKH must be differentiated
Histopathology (Figures 11.14 through 11.16)
principally from discoid lupus erythematosus. The pre-
dominance of large macrophages and the fnely granular
The epidermis is acanthotic and there may be secondary
superfcial crusting with variable erosion or ulceration.
ferentiating features from discoid lupus erythematosus. In
There may be mild parakeratosis in mounds. Melanin in
addition, basal cell apoptosis is typical of discoid lupus
the basal layer may be decreased or absent in chronic
erythematosus, but rare in VKH. Periadnexally predomi-
lesions; decreased numbers of epidermal melanocytes
nant lesions may be confused with sterile granuloma
have been reported (Kern et al., 1985). Exocytosis of
and pyogranuloma syndrome (see Chapter 13) or with
mononuclear cells may be evident, and neutrophils may
leishmaniasis (see Chapter 12). Caution is advised, as
migrate transepidermally into areas of epidermal damage
failure to diagnose VKH may result in untreated sight-
and crusting. Basal cell degeneration (apoptosis) is rare.
threatening uveitis. Correlation with clinical fndings may
Lymphocytic infltration of the dorsal claw fold epithe-
be critical in these cases.
Fig. 11.14 Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-
like syndrome featuring a lichenoid
band  of  predominantly histiocytic
inflammation.
Lichenoid diseases of the dermis
269
Fig. 11.15 Higher magnification of
Fig. 11.14. Note predominance of
large epithelioid macrophages, many
of which contain a fine, dust-like scat-
tering of intracytoplasmic melanin
{arrow).
11.16 Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-
like syndrome. Melanin granules are
distributed a bundantly in macrophages.
PSORIASIFORM-LICHENOID
Histopathology (Figure 11.18)
DERMATOSIS
Epidermal lesions have been described and consist of
Clinical features (Figure 11.17)
psoriasiform hyperplasia with intraepidermal pustulation
(see Chapter 7). The dermis contains a dense superficial
See Chapter 7.
band consisting primarily of plasma cells. Fewer lympho-
cytes, histiocytes, neutrophils, and eosinophils are
present. Inflammation tends to obscure the dermal-
Biopsy site selection
epidermal interface, but basal cell degeneration (apopto-
See Chapter 7.
sis) is rare. Mild pigmentary incontinence may be present.
270
 Diseases of the dermis
Principal differential diagnoses include discoid lupus
 dermal lesions are similar amongst these diseases, the epi-
dermal lesions of psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis are
distinctive and allow differentiation. Lichenoid keratosis
is similar to psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis and shares
its histopathologic differential diagnoses (see p. 271).
Clinical differentiation is required; most lichenoid ker-
atoses are solitary.
Fig. 11.17 Psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis in a Springer Spaniel.
Waxy, crusted, lichenoid plaques are present on the medial surface
Fig. 11.19  Lichenoid keratosis in a dog. Note dense lichenoid band
of the pinnae. (Photograph courtesy R.E.W. Halliwell.)
 of mixed inflammation with prominent plasma cells.
Fig.
11.18 Psoriasiform-lichenoid
dermatosis. Lichenoid dermatitis is
accompanied by irregular acanthosis
and discrete intraepidermal pustules.
Lichenoid diseases of the dermis
271
Pemphigus Foliaceus
LICHENOID KERATOSIS
See Chapter 1.
Clinical features
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like Syndrome
Bussanich, M.N., Rootman, J. & Dolman, C.L. (1982) Granu-
See Chapter 7.
lomatous pan uveitis and dermal depigmentation in dogs. J
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 18, 131-8.
Biopsy site selection
Campbell, K.L., McLaughlin, S.A. & Reynolds, H.A. (1986)
Generalized leukoderma and poliosis following uveitis in a
 See Chapter 7.
dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 22, 121-4.
Herrera, H.D. & Duchene, A.G. (1998) Uveodermatological
syndrome (Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome) with gen-
Histopathology (Figure 11.19)
eralized depigmentation in a Dachshund. Vet Opbthalmol 1,
47-51.
plasia, sometimes accompanied by intraepidermal pus-
Kern, I.J., Walton, D.K., Ris, R.C. et al. (1985) Uveitis associ-
tules similar to those of psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis
sossy paw ias uy f 'shop xis ui osata pue sisood ym pane
(see Chapter 7). Lichenoid dermal inflammation
187,408-14.
is
MacDonald, J.M. (1993) Uveodermatologic syndrome in the
predominantly lymphocytic and plasmacytic. Variable
dog. In: Current Veterinary Dermatology: The Science and Art
numbers of macrophages and neutrophils are present.
of Therapy (eds C.E. Griffn, K.W. Kwochka & J.M. Mac-
Inflammation may obscure the dermal-epidermal inter-
Donald), pp. 217-22. Mosby Year Book, St Louis.
face, and may extend around subjacent adnexal
Mosher, D.B., Fitzpatrick, T.B., Ortonne, J.-P. et al. (1999)
appendages, or deep dermal vessels. Basal cell degenera-
Hypomelanoses and hypermelanoses. In: Dermatology in
tion (apoptosis) is rare.
General Medicine, 5th edn (eds I.W. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K.
 Lichenoid keratosis is similar to psoriasiform-lichenoid
Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & T.B. Fitzpatrick), pp.
dermatosis and shares its histopathologic differential
945-1017. McGraw-Hill, New York.
diagnoses, discoid lupus erythematosus and mucocuta-
Ortonne, J-P., Bahadoran, P, Fitzpatrick, T.B. et al. (2003)
neous pyoderma (see pp. 263 and 261). Differences in epi-
Hypomelanoses and hypermelanoses. In: Fitzpatrick's Derma-
tology in General Medicine, 6th edn (eds I.M. Freedberg, A.Z.
dermal lesions as well as clinical distinctions will allow
Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.1. Katz), pp.
separation from discoid lupus erythematosus and muco-
836-81. McGraw-Hill, New York.
cutaneous pyoderma. Differentiation from psoriasiform-
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
lichenoid dermatosis may require knowledge of clinical
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 756-9. W.B. Saun-
 features; most lichenoid keratoses are solitary.
ders, Philadelphia.
Tachikawa, S, Tachikawa, T. & Nagata, M. (1995) Uveoder-
matologic (Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like) s
REFERENCES
syndrome
with
sloughing of the nails in a Siberian Husky. J Vet Med (Tokyo)
48, 559-61.
Mucocutaneous Pyoderma and Intertrigo
Vercelli, A. & Taraglio, S. (1990) Canine Vogt-Koyanagi-
 Ihrke, PJ. & Gross, T.L. (1995) Canine mucocutaneous pyo-
 Harada-like syndrome in rwo Siberian Husky Dogs. Vet Der-
derma. In: Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy Xll (ed. J.D.
matol 1, 151-8.
Bonagura), pp. 618-9. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Yamaki, K., Gocho, K. & Sakuragi, S. (2002) Pathogenesis
of Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada. Int(
Ophthatmol Clin 42,
Discoid Lupus Erythematosus
13-23.
Rosenkrantz, W.S., Griffn, C.E., Barr, R.J. et al. (1986)
Histopathological  evaluation  of  acid  mucopolysaccaride
Psoriasiform-lichenoid Dermatosis
(mucin) in canine discoid lupus erythematosus. J Am Anim
See Chapter 7.
Hosp Assoc 22, 577-84.
Scott, D.W. & Miller, WH. (1995) Squamous cell
car-
Lichenoid Keratosis
cinoma arising in chronic discoid lupus erythematosus nasal
See Chapter 7.
lesions in two German Shepherd dogs. Vet Dermatol 6, 99-
104.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 12
Infectious nodular and diffuse
granulomatous and pyogranulomatous
diseases of the dermis
Nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranuloma-
Actinomyces odontolyticus, and Actinomyces meyeri are
tous diseases of the dermis are characterized by multifo-
commensal inhabitants of the oral cavity and gastroin-
cal nodular inflammation that tends toward confluence,
 testinal tract in many mammalian species. Actinomycetes
 Or a diffuse pattern. Diffuse inflammatory infltrates often
also may exist as saprophytes. Nocardia asteroides,
obscure normal dermal architecture and may extend to
Nocardia braziliensis, and Nocardia caviae are common
the underlying subcutis as well. Granulomatous inflam-
saprophytes found in soil and fresh water. Recently, organ-
mation is composed principally of macrophages, with or
isms previously classifed as members of the Nocardia
without giant cells, which may or may not form discrete
asteroides complex (Nocardia asteroides, Nocardia nova,
 granulomas. Pyogranulomatous inflammation has a more
and Nocardia farcinica) have been separated (Hirsh &
prominent component of neutrophils that may be dif
Jang, 1999). Nocardia nova is believed to be the most
fusely intermingled with macrophages; discrete pyogran-
common cause of nocardiosis in cats (Hirsh & Jang, 1999).
ulomas are composed of central neutrophils and rimmed
 Actinomycosis and nocardiosis are opportunistic infec-
by macrophages. By convention, the presence of discrete
tions initiated most commonly by wound contamination.
granulomas or pyogranulomas is not a requisite for a
Differentiation between the two diseases may be difficult
'granulomatous' or 'pyogranulomatous’ pattern. Diseases
both clinically and histopathologically. In the past, nocar-
included in this chapter are those in which infectious
diosis may have been overdiagnosed; newer methods
agents incite the inflammatory reaction. Differential diag-
of  microbiologic differentiation most often identify
nosis is facilitated through identification of the offending
 Actinomyces spp. in cases where both clinical and histo-
agent in tissue.
pathologic characteristics do not allow differentiation
(Kirpensteijn & Fingland, 1992).
 Infection with higher bacteria can produce “tissue
ACTINOMYCOSIS AND NOCARDIOSIS
grains’ or granules composed of aggregates of bacteria
imbedded in amorphous eosinophilic material that is
Clinical features (Figures 12.1 through 12.4)
presumed to consist of antigen-antibody complexes;
Actinomycosis and nocardiosis are rare cutaneous/subcu-
this material is known as ‘Splendore-Hoeppli reaction'.
taneous and visceral diseases of the dog and cat, caused
Splendore-Hoeppli reaction forms only in circumstances
by various actinomycetes classified as higher' (more evo-
characterized by a unique, dynamic balance between or-
lutionarily advanced) bacteria. Actinomycosis is subdi-
ganism virulence and host response. In humans, the
vided clinically into thoracic, abdominal, retroperitoneal,
Splendore-Hoeppli phenomenon occurs most commonly
and cutaneous/subcutaneous actinomycosis  (Edwards,
in cutaneous and subcutaneous sites; similar lesions can
1998). Nocardiosis may be subdivided clinically into
occur in viscera such as the spleen in conjunction
pulmonary, systemic or disseminated, and cutaneous/
with coexistent immunosuppressive disease (Rodig &
subcutaneous nocardiosis (Edwards, 1998).
Dorfman, 2001). Tissue grains formed in actinomycosis
 Actinomycosis and nocardiosis share substantial clini-
commonly are called ‘sulfur granules' or *sulfur grains'.
cal and histopathologic similarities. Actinomyces spp.
Tissue grains are seen less frequently in nocardiosis.
are Gram-positive, nonacid-fast, flamentous, anaerobic
Nocardia caviae and Nocardia braziliensis are more likely
 Or microaerophilic rods, and Nocardia spp. are Gram-
 than Nocardia asteroides to produce grains.
positive, partially acid-fast, flamentous, aerobic rods.
Actinomycosis results from contamination of penetrat
Actinomyces viscosus, Actinomyces hordeovulnaris,
ing wounds, such as those caused by grass awns, quills,
272
Infectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
273
Fig. 12.1 Actinomycosis secondary to interdigital grass awn
implantation in a dog. A fstulous tract drains sparse purulent
exudate.
Fig. 12.3 Nocardiosis in a Doberman Pinscher. A draining nodule
is accompanied by severe soft tissue swelling.
Fig. 12.2 Nocardiosis in a cat. Large craterous cavitations,
fistulous tracts, and nodules are present on the ventral abdomen.
(Photograph courtesy L.P. Schmeitzel.)
Fig. 12.4 Abdominal skin of the dog in Fig. 12.3. Note the large
irregular nodule with multifocal ulceration. The overlying intact skin
is erythematous to bluish.
cactus spines, and other foreign bodies. Canine interdigi-
tal actinomycosis is especially likely to result from foxtail
foreign body penetration (Brennan & Ihrke, 1983). Actin-
 nocardiosis may be seen more frequently in immunosup-
omycosis may occur through the creation of an anaero-
pressed animals.
bic inflammatory environment that is conducive to the 
The most common clinical features of cutaneous and
replication of previously existent commensal organisms.
subcutaneous actinomycosis and nocardiosis  include
Alternatively, organisms may be acquired with a pene-
abscess formation, cellulitis, draining fistulous tracts, and
trating foreign body or introduced into the wound sec-
ulcerated dermal and subcutaneous nodules. The charac-
ondarily by grooming. Nocardiosis may be associated
 ter of the exudate is highly variable, and may range from
with wound contamination, inhalation, or ingestion.
serosanguinous to sanguinopurulent. Yellow *sulfur gran-
Although both actinomycosis and nocardiosis are facili-
ules' or grains in the exudate are suspicious for actino-
tated in animals with impaired host defense mechanisms,
mycosis since the most common agent of nocardiosis,
274
Diseases of the dermis
Nocardia asteroides, usually does not form granules
However, on rare occasion, Nocardia asteroides may
cause the Splendore-Hoeppli phenomenon in tissue, thus
giving rise to visible grains (Rodig & Dorfman, 2001).
[enpene kq si uoissargoid spadnona aq on puan suoisa
local extension. The head, neck, thorax, ventral abdomen,
and distal extremities are the most common sites in the
dog. Paralumbar lesions may indicate retroperitoneal
actinomycosis. Feline lesions most commonly affect the
distal extremities and ventral abdomen.
Regional lymphadenopathy is common with both
actinomycosis and nocardiosis. Actinomycotic osteomy-
elitis and pulmonary nocardiosis are the most frequent
concurrent noncutaneous infections (Kirpensteijn &
Fingland, 1992; Edwards, 1998). Systemic signs may be
seen with either disease contingent on portal of entry and
the coexistence of visceral infection.
Active large dog breeds are reported to be at greater
risk, presumably due to increased risk for penetrating
wounds and foreign body implantation as a result of ram-
bunctious behavior. The largest study to date indicates
a mean age at referral of 3.6 years (Kirpensteijn &
Fingland, 1992). Early reports indicated a possible sex
predilection for males, perhaps linked to behavioral risk;
however recently sex predilections were not reported in
hunting dogs (Edwards, 1998).
Clinical differential diagnoses should include crypto-
coccosis, other systemic fungi, cutaneous infections of
opportunistic fungi and algae, opportunistic mycobac-
terial infection, bacterial pseudomycetoma, foreign body
Fig. 12.5 Actinomycosis in a cat. Large tissue grains are within
reactions, and infection by other aerobic or anaerobic
pyogranulomatous inflammation.
bacteria. Differentiation is accomplished by routine and
special culture techniques; cytologic examination with
special staining of exudates, impression smears, or aspi-
rates; and histopathology. Fungal culture should not be
pattern, or in confluent pyogranulomas. Pyogranulomas
performed until the systemic mycoses blastomycosis,
are generally large and are formed by extensive accumu-
histoplasmosis, and coccidioidomycosis are ruled out by
lations of neutrophils surrounded by cuffs of large epithe-
impression smear and histopathology since attempted
 culture may be dangerous (see p. 291).
present at the periphery of chronic lesions, and there is
variable fbrosis surrounding the inflammatory foci.
Adipocytes in the panniculus and subcutis may be rup-
Biopsy site selection
tured to form large cysts.
Identification of organisms histopathologically is con-
 Organisms are diffcult to identify as they are often not
tingent upon obtaining adequate tissue specimens from
 in abundance. Step sections on punch biopsies or multi-
affected areas. Aggressive wedge technique or large punch
ple sections from large wedge biopsies may aid in detec-
biopsy (8 mm) is recommended to obtain deep nodules, and
tion of a characteristic bacterial colony. Colonies were
tissue surrounding and beneath fistulous tracts. Radical
identifed in biopsy specimens of only 11 of 22 dogs in 
surgical ablation of solitary lesions may be curative.
one study (Kirpensteijn & Fingland, 1992). Small to large,
often radiating clusters or colonies of tangled, flamen-
 tous, and branched bacteria may be found at the centers
Histopathology (Figures 12.5 and 12.6)
of pyogranulomas, sometimes in clear spaces. Occasion-
The epidermis is variably acanthotic, and may be ulcer-
ally, colonies are present within surface suppurative
ated. The dermis and usually the subcutis are heavily infl-
exudate. Tissue grains (or sulfur granules), seen com-
trated with neutrophils and macrophages in a diffuse
 monly in actinomycosis, are formed by the deposition of
Infectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
275
Fig. 12.7 Bacterial pseudomycetoma in a dog. Multiple nodules,
both intact and fistulated, are present. Irregular contours indicate
scarring and induration. (Photograph courtesy D.W. Scott.)
hematoxylin and eosin-stained section may be decolorized
and stained.
 Differential diagnoses include foreign body reactions,
 infection due to rapidly growing opporrunistic mycobac-
teria, or bacterial pseudomycetoma (botryomycosis).
 Foreign body reactions are considered if organisms are
not visible in biopsy specimens; differentiation may
require careful culture or probing the lesion for foreign
material.
 Bacterial pseudomycetoma, which is nodular clinically,
is characterized by the accumulation of Splendore-
Fig. 12.6 Nocardiosis in a cat. High magnification of colony reveals
Hoeppli material around nonbranching bacteria (usually
tangled, filamentous and beaded bacteria that were culturally iden-
tified as Nocardia asteroides (Brown-Hopps).
staphylococci) to form tissue grains, thus resembling
actinomycosis. The characteristic morphology and stain-
 ing characteristics of Nocardia spp. and Actinomyces spp.
in tissue usually allow differentiation from most other
brightly eosinophilic, radiating and clubbed deposits,
infectious agents. Nocardia spp. may resemble oppor-
called Splendore-Hoeppli reaction. This represents an
tunistic mycobacteria in tissue section, particularly when
antigen-antibody reaction around infectious agents or
colonies are found in large tissue spaces created from rup-
parasites that occurs at the periphery of organized aggre-
tured adipocytes (see p. 283). However, Nocardia spp.
gates of organisms. Large colonies of organisms alone do
accumulate in larger tangled colonies, are only partially
not constitute tissue grains. The most commonly impli-
or weakly acid-fast, and elicit a more prominent neu-
cated organism in nocardiosis, Nocardia asteroides,
 trophilic response than do opportunistic mycobacteria.
uncommonly is associated with tissue grains.
Actinomyces spp. are Gram-positive and nonacid-fast;
BACTERIAL PSEUDOMYCETOMA
Nocardia spp. are Gram-positive, partially or weakly
acid-fast, and may be beaded. A Fite-Faraco modifcation 
(Synonyms: cutaneous bacterial granuloma, botryo-
of the acid-fast stain (Fite's stain) is helpful in the tissue
mycosis)
identifcation of Nocardia spp. and its differentiation
o nd shodua uns su ds s u
Clinical features (Figure 12.7)
to prevent excesive decolorization of organisms during
the staining process. Caution is advised when additional
Bacterial pseudomycetoma is a rare (or underdiagnosed)
sectioning for special staining is performed; sectioning
pyogranulomatous skin disease characterized by an
that is too deep may pass through available colonies. If
unusual, presumed immunologic, reaction to nonbranch-
bacteria are not present in deeper tissue, the original
ing bacteria. Dogs and cats may be affected. Stapbylo-
276
Diseases of the dermis
coccus spp., Pseudomonas spp., Proteus spp., or Strepto-
Histopathology (Figures 12.8 and 12.9)
cOccus spp. bacteria elicit nodular skin disease character-
ized by the Splendore-Hoeppli reaction in tissue (Scott et
The epidermis is acanthotic and may be ulcerated. The
dermis and often the panniculus and deeper subcutis
al., 2001). Splendore-Hoeppli reaction (an antigen-anti-
contain diffuse pyogranulomatous inflammation com-
body complex) is also seen in conjunction with higher
bacteria such as the actinomycetes (see p. 272), as well as
posed of neutrophils and macrophages. In addition, dis-
other infectious agents.
crete or confluent pyogranulomas are present. At the
Clinical features include solitary or multiple frm
centers of the pyogranulomas are discrete and generally
 nodules with or without obvious fistulation. Nodules may
large accumulations of bacteria (usually staphylococci)
 imbedded in brightly eosinophilic, radiating, and clubbed
fistulate and drain purulent exudate containing white
deposits of homogeneous material, constituting tissue
 granules or grains. Scarring and induration are seen with
 grains or granules. The brightly eosinophilic material is
chronicity. Lesions have been seen in the context of canine
Splendore-Hoeppli
reaction,
which
1  represents an
acne (see Chapter 17). Lymphadenopathy may be present.
Clinical differential diagnoses should include actino-
antigen-antibody reaction around infectious agents or
-arae paziuero jo Kaudiad aui ie sinsoo ieq sasered
mycosis or nocardiosis, foreign body reactions, crypto-
gates of organisms. If staphylococci are not obvious,
coccosis and other systemic mycoses, fungal mycetomas,
Gram's staining for bacteria can be used to further char-
cutaneous infections of opportunistic fungi and algae,
acterize the organisms; staphylococci or streptococci are
and dermatophytic pseudomycetoma. Differentiation is
accomplished by routine and special culture techniques,
Gram-positive; Pseudomonas and Proteus spp. are Gram-
cytologic examination with special staining of exudates,
negative.
impression smears, or aspirates and histopathology.
Differential diagnoses are few due to the typical
 Fungal culture should not be performed until the sys-
appearance of tissue grains, and principally include
actinomycosis (or rarely nocardiosis; see p. 272). Identif-
temic mycoses blastomycosis, histoplasmosis, and coccid-
cation of staphylococci (the usual infectious agent of
ioidomycosis are ruled out by impression smear and
bacterial pseudomycetoma), or other nonbranching, non-
histopathology, since attempted culture may be dangerous
flamentous bacteria, will allow differentiation.
(see p. 291).
FELINE LEPROSY SYNDROME
Biopsy site selection
Clinical features (Figures 12.10 and 12.11)
An entire nondraining nodule should be removed using
wedge resection technique. If the lesion is solitary, this has
Feline leprosy syndrome is a group of uncommon to rare
the added benefit of providing a surgical cure.
granulomatous mycobacterial skin diseases caused by
Fig. 12.8 Bacterial pseudomycetoma
in a dog with canine acne. A large dark
tissue grain is surrounded by a disrupted
pustule.
Infectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
277
Fig. 12.11 Closer view of the cat in Fig. 12.10. A well-demarcated,
ulcerated nodule with slightly elevated margins drains a sparse
ex udate.
various acid-fast bacteria that either cannot be cultured
or are not easily cultured using routine laboratory
methods. Recent data suggest that the lack of ability to
culture Mycobacterium leprae, the causative organism of
in this organism leaving it with few respiratory enzymes
in comparison to other mycobacteria (Rea & Modlin,
2003). The terms “lepromatous’ and “tuberculoid' leprosy
are used traditionally in human medicine for leprosy
0l asids, a no u suno, ane ie snpuns
moderate organisms',
respectively (Rea & Modlin,
Fig. 12.9 High magnification of bacterial pseudomycetoma in a
2003). “Paucibacillary’ and ‘multibacillary’ are additional
dog. Granular clusters of staphylococci at center are surrounded by
terms in use in human medicine (Rea & Modlin, 2003).
Splendore-Hoeppli reaction.
However, recent classification schemes used in human
 medicine subdivide leprosy into at least six groups (Rea
&Modlin, 2003).
Polymerase chain
reaction
(PCR)-amplifed  gene
sequencing has lead to an explosion of new information
about feline leprosy during the past few years (Hughes et
al., 1997; Appleyard & Clark, 2002; Malik et al., 2002).
Molecular biology-based analyses have proven conclu-
sively that some cats diagnosed with feline leprosy
syndrome have  infection  caused  by  Mycobacterium
lepraemurium, the rat leprosy bacillus (Hughes et al.,
1997). Currently, at least two histomorphologic forms of
feline leprosy have been recognized, “lepromatous’ and
“tuberculoid’ (Malik et al., 2002). Cats identifed as
having the tuberculoid form of feline leprosy have had
Mycobacterium lepraemurium identifed by PCR testing
and DNA sequencing (Malik et al., 2002); similar cases
have been confrmed by PCR in the northwestern USA
and Hawai (Foley, J.E., personal communication, 2003).
Regional differences likely exist. Cats identified by Malik
Fig. 12.10 Feline leprosy in a young, male, outdoor cat from the
et al. (2002) in Australia as having the organism-rich,
San Francisco seaport. Two well-demarcated, ulcerated nodules are
lepromatous form of feline leprosy have infection caused
present on the right foreleg.
by a distinct, as yet unnamed mycobacterial species.
278
Diseases of the dermis
However, another distinct mycobacterial species (sug-
of affected cats, suggest that diminished immunologic sur-
gested name, Mycobacterium visibilis) has been identifed
veillance may be required for this disease.
by Appleyard & Clark (2002) as the causative agent of
Tuberculoid leprosy is less common in Australia and
organism-rich lepromatous feline leprosy in Canada, and
New Zealand and probably the USA as well, and is caused
 also in cats with lepromatous leprosy in California (Foley,
by the rat leprosy bacillus, Mycobacterium lepraemurium
JE., personal communication, 2003).
(Malik et al., 2002). Clinically tuberculoid leprosy is most
Other species have been identifed in cutaneous lesions,
 often characterized by localized nodular disease. Most
including Mycobacterium szulgai (Davies et al., 2003)
 cats are in suburban or rural environments. Cats are
and Mycobacterium kansasi, the latter from tuberculoid
young, usually less than 4 years of age (Malik et al.,
leprosy (Foley, JE., personal communication, 2003).
2002). In one study lesions progressed rapidly, ulcerated,
Lastly, Rhodococcus erythropolis was identified by PCR
and reportedly displayed an aggressive clinical course
in a cat with tuberculoid leprosy (Foley, J.E., personal
(Malik et al., 2002). Widespread cutaneous and subcuta-
communication, 2003). The significance of this fnding is
neous lesions developed within a few weeks. Despite
not known; this organism (and other Rhodococcus spp.)
widespread lesions, available evidence did not support
are common contaminants that have been identified by
visceral dissemination in that study. Regional epidemio-
PCR in uninflamed skin and internal viscera of dogs
logic differences may exist globally, however. In a recent
and cats, as well as in other inflammatory dermatoses
study from the Pacifc Northwest and Hawaii, six cats
(Ramiro-Ibanez, F, personal communication, 2003).
with  microscopically  confrmed tuberculoid  leprosy
The frequent localization of lesions to the head and
usually had small numbers of lesions that did not recur
neck has led to speculation that the organism may be
 following excision and/or miscellaneous broad-spectrum
 transmitted by bite wounds from either rats or other cats
antibiotics (Foley, J.E., personal communication, 2003).
(McIntosh, 1982; Schiefer & Middleton, 1983). Credence
 In general, in feline leprosy syndrome, single, or multi-
is given to the theory of transmission of Mycobacterium
ple, grouped, well-circumscribed, alopecic nodules (5-
lepraemurium from rats by the predominant occurrence
20 mm in diameter) develop slowly in the skin or the sub-
of feline leprosy syndrome in seaport cities of western
jacent subcutis. Larger nodules ulcerate and scant exuda-
North America, Australia, France, and The Netherlands.
tion occurs. The margins of the ulcers usually are frm and
The leprosy bacillus of humans has been identifed in
slightly elevated. Less commonly, fistulas may present.
fleas, mosquitoes, and ticks. Consequently, these vectors
The face, forelegs, and trunk are the most common sites.
also could be involved in the transmission of feline leprosy
Rarely, lesions involve the facial mucocutaneous junc-
syndrome. Leprosy in humans commonly is associated
tions. Typically, lesions are asymptomatic. However, cats
with immunodeficiency. Data reflecting the status of the
groom ulcerated nodules, especially on the forelegs.
immune system of affected cats are mixed.
 Regional lymphadenopathy is present, and regional
 Lepromatous leprosy is caused by a novel but as yet
lymph node invasion has been noted in cats with lepro-
unnamed mycobacterial  species or  another distinct
matous leprosy by one author (T.L.G.). Young adult cats
 mycobacterial species with the suggested name Mycobac-
predominate, particularly roaming intact male cats from
terium visibilis (Malik et al., 2002; Appleyard & Clark,
the seaport cities. Breed predilections have not been
2002). Lepromatous leprosy is more common than tuber-
reported.
culoid leprosy in Australia and New Zealand, and may
Clinical differential diagnoses include cryptococcosis
be in the USA as well. Clinically, lepromatous leprosy
and other systemic mycoses, opporrunistic fungal infec-
usually is characterized by multifocal, slowly progressive
tions, sporotrichosis, sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma
 nodular and infltrative skin disease. Based on one report
syndrome, and neoplasia. Differentiation is accomplished
 the clinical course is much less aggressive than most cases
by routine and special culture techniques; cytologic exam-
of tuberculoid leprosy, at least in Australia (Malik et al.,
ination with special staining of exudates, impression
2002). This is in contrast to the more severe clinical
smears, or aspirates; and histopathology. Fungal culture
course observed in cats with lepromatous leprosy in the
should not be performed until the systemic mycoses blas-
western USA and Hawai (Foley, J.E., personal commu-
tomycosis, histoplasmosis, and coccidioidomycosis are
nication, 2003); affected cats are more likely to have mul-
ruled out by impression smear and histopathology, since
ticentric lesions, recurrence and concurrent disease. Most
attempted culture may be dangerous (see p. 291). Signs
affected cats reside in rural and semirural environments.
referable to disseminated disease usually are seen with sys-
Affected cats are older usually more than 9 years of age.
temic mycoses, but usually are absent in feline leprosy syn-
Of four cats tested for immunosuppressive viral infection,
 drome. The nodules of feline sporotrichosis have draining
[wo were positive for feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV),
fistulous tracts (containing abundant organisms easily
but all were negative for feline leukemia virus (FeLV)
identified by direct smears) in contrast to the scantily
(Malik et al., 2002). These data, as well as the greater age
 exudative lesions of feline leprosy syndrome.
Infectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
279
Fig. 12.12 Feline lepromatous leprosy. Diffuse granulomatous
Fig. 12.13 Higher magnification of feline lepromatous leprosy.
inflammation is characterized by foamy, vacuolated macrophages.
Note pale vacuolated macrophages; the large, clear spaces contain
numerous organisms which are faintly visualized with hematoxylin
anideosini.
Biopsy site selection
If feline leprosy syndrome is suspected, an intact nodule
inflammation may be nodular in perivascular and periad-
should be excised surgically using wedge technique.
nexal orientation. Inflammation obscures normal dermal
 Gloves should be worn when examining and performing
architecture, but often a thin zone of the superficial
skin biopsies on all cats with ulcerative nodular skin
dermis is spared (Grenz zone). Large vacuoles may be
disease, as clinically similar sporotrichosis is a zoonosis
present armong macrophages. Smaller numbers of neu-
(see p. 298). If a solitary lesion is present, complete exci
-o sasi q  so ro son
sion may provide the added beneft of surgical cure.
cytes may be in nodules.
 Filamentous pale gray organisms may be visible with
hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining, and can be observed
Histopathology (Figures 12.12 through 12.16)
in stacked arrangement. Using a routine acid-fast stain,
Two principal forms of feline leprosy syndrome have been
such as Ziehl-Neelsen, numerous acid-fast bacilli are
recognized, lepromatous and tuberculoid (see above). For
identified within macrophages or dermal vacuoles; organ-
the lepromatous form of feline leprosy (organism-rich),
isms are also silver-positive. The presence of these organ-
the epidermis is mildly to moderately acanthotic. The
isms in the face of a negative mycobacterial culture
dermis and often the panniculus and subcutis contain
confrms the diagnosis of feline leprosy, as cultural isola-
nodular to diffuse infltrates of predominantly large, pale,
tion of this organism is not possible under routine labo-
foamy, or epithelioid macrophages. There may be large
ratory conditions.
multinucleated giant cells. Giant cells usually are sparse
 In the tuberculoid form of feline leprosy (organism-
but may be numerous (Malik et al., 2002). In mild lesions,
poor), lesions are distinctly different. There are often large
280
Diseases
of thedermis
Fig. 12.14 Higher magnification of feline lepromatous leprosy
Fig. 12.15 Feline tuberculoid leprosy. Confluent pale granulomas
are interspersed with acellular foci of necrosis at left and bottorm
and are seen densely in extracellular spaces (Ziehl-Neelsen).
right.
foci of necrosis surrounded by diffuse pyogranulomatous
Differential diagnoses for the lepromatous form of
inflammation. Giant cells are seen occasionally. Peripher-
feline leprosy include cutaneous xanthoma, opportunistic
ally, there may be lymphocytes in nodular arrangement,
Mycobacterium avium infection, some late lesions of
accompanied by fewer plasma cells. Small numbers of
feline progressive dendritic cell histiocytosis (see Chapter
acid-fast organisms are generally confned to the necrotic
35), and opportunistic fungal infection, all of which may
foci and are not visible with HE. The polyclonal anti-
feature foamy macrophages. If pale mycobacterial organ-
Mycobacterium bovis (BCG) stain is superior in labeling
isms are identified on HE staining, differentiation is not
mycobacteria (Bonenberger et al., 2001), and may be of
problematic. Cutaneous xanthomas usually have deposi-
beneft in suspected cases with scant organisms. This
tion of more obvious extracellular lipid, seen as pale lakes
stain may also detect partially degraded bacteria within
within tissue or cholesterol clefts. In feline Mycobac-
macrophages.
 terium avium infection with cutaneous involvement, large
Differential diagnosis for the tuberculoid form of feline
numbers of organisms may be seen in tissue section,
leprosy usually is not diffcult due to the unique large foci
similar to lepromatous feline leprosy (Kaufman et al.,
of necrosis. However morphologically similar ‘sterile'
1995; Stevenson et al., 1998; Miller et al., 1999).
pyogranulomas have been observed in cats for which
However, unlike the mycobacterium of feline leprosy,
organisms could not be identifed by staining or PCR.
Mycobacterium avium can be identifed by culture.
Opportunistic fungal infection should be ruled out by
Additionally, a fbrovascular network may be present
appropriate staining; however, ghosts of fungi are often
within the inflammatory infltrate (Buergelt et al., 1982;
visible on HE staining, while mycobacteria of the tuber-
Kaufman et al., 1995), sometimes in a sarcomatous
culoid form of leprosy are not.
pattern (Miller et al., 1999). Opportunistic fungal infec-
Infectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
281
Fig. 12.17 Canine leproid granuloma on the pinna of a Boxer. A
solitary, well-demarcated, alopecic nodule is ulcerated. (Photograph
courtesy R. Malik.)
Foley et al., 2002). The organism probably is a sapro-
phyte with ubiquitous distribution. Culture has been
unsuccessful to date, indicating that the organism has fas-
tidious in vitro growth requirements (Malik et al., 1998;
Hughes et al., 2000; Foley et al., 2002).
Presumably, the organism enters the skin and subcuta-
Fig. 12.16 Higher magnification of feline tuberculoid leprosy
neous tissues via a traumatic breach in the epidermal
demonstrating sparse acid-fast bacilli within a necrotic focus (arrow)
barrier (Malik et al., 1998). Based on colder weather
{Fite-Faraco).
seasonality, Malik et al. (1998) postulated that low
ambient temperature may enhance the likelihood of
growth in tissue. This theory also could explain the
tions often are characterized by numerous foamy
marked site predilection for extremities such as the
macrophages, similar to feline leprosy. However, ghosts
pinnae and distal legs. The disease commonly is self-
of fungal organisms are visible on close examination with
limiting in immunocompetent dogs (Malik et al., 1998).
HE staining and are abundant with special stains for fungi
 Spontaneous regression is common and probably leads
(see p. 301).
t0 under-reporting. Marked breed predilections (see
immunoincompetence.
CANINE LEPROID GRANULOMA
Single or multiple nodules are confned to the subcuta-
Clinical features (Figure 12.17)
neous tissue and skin. Lesions vary from solitary to few
to numerous. The nodules are frm and painless, and
Canine leproid granuloma is an uncommon but probably
range in size from 2mm to 5cm (Malik et al., 2001).
underdiagnosed mycobacterial disease of the subcutis and
 Larger lesions are alopecic and ulcerated (Malik et al.,
skin caused by a novel and as yet unnamed mycobac-
2001). The dorsal surface of the pinna is a strongly pre-
terium that is phylogenetically related to Mycobacterium
disposed site. In the largest study to date (Malik et al.,
tilburgii, Mycobacterium simiae, and Mycobacterium
1998), the ears were involved in 64% (25/39) of dogs and
genavense (Hughes et al., 2000; Foley et al., 2002). Analy-
the head (including the ears) was affected in 85% (33/39)
sis by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and DNA
of dogs; the pinnae only were affected in 54% (21/39) of
sequencing showed no variability and 99% to 100%
these dogs. Less commonly, the distal extremities, espe-
homology among organisms obtained from Australia,
cially the forelegs, may be affected. Lymph node enlarge-
New Zealand, and the United States (Hughes et al., 2000;
ment, visceral organ involvement, or systemic signs have
282
 Diseases of the dermis
not been noted (Malik et al., 1998). The lesions usually
aq  aso i a q ssan snos
several months in duration.
Short-coated dogs account for over 90% of those
affected, with either Boxers or Boxer crossbreeds account-
ing for half of the cases (Malik et al., 1998). Other short-
coated breeds such as the Staffordshire Terrier and
Doberman Pinscher also were affected in that report.
Interestingly, the German Shepherd Dog, a long-coated
breed, was over-represented in a recent study (Foley et al.,
2002). The Boxer, German Shepherd Dog, and Doberman
Pinscher are believed by one author (PJ.1.) to be over-
represented in a variety of cutaneous as well as systemic
infectious diseases caused by bacteria and fungi, suggest-
ing diminished immune surveillance. The median age at
development was 5 years in Australia (Malik et al., 1998);
slightly older dogs were seen in a report from North
America (Foley et al., 2002). Sex predilection has not been
reported.
Clinical differential diagnoses should include focal
nodular neoplasms, kerion, and sterile granuloma and
pyogranuloma syndrome. Localization to the pinnae and
occurrence in a Boxer enhance clinical suspicion for
leproid granuloma. Lesional sites and the discrete nature
of the nodules make systemic and opportunistic fungal
infections less likely. However, if systemic fungal infection
is suspected, culture should not be performed until the
systemic mycoses blastomycosis, histoplasmosis, and coc-
cidioidomycosis are ruled out by impression smear and
histopathology, since attempted culture may be dangerous
Fig. 12.18 Canine leproid granuloma demonstrating nodular to
(see p. 291). Differentiation is accomplished by cytologic
diffuse inflammation.
examination with special staining of aspirates or impres-
sion smears; histopathology; and, if needed, routine and
special culture techniques.
arrangement. Small numbers of Langhans multinucleated 
giant cells are observed as reported (Charles et al., 1999).
Biopsy site selection
These giant cells may be difficult to detect due to lack of
sharp cell borders within the epithelioid infltrate. In some
An intact nodule should be excised surgically using wedge
lesions, putatively those that are regressing, there are
technique. If a solitary lesion is present, complete excision
diffuse and more intense accumulations of lymphocytes
may provide the added beneft of surgical cure.
throughout or along the outer margins of the lesion. Lym-
phocytic nodules may be observed. Occasionally, there is
prominent fbrosis interspersed amongst multinodular
Histopathology (Figures 12.18 through 12.20)
inflammation.
The epidermis is moderately acanthotic and ulceration
 In the authors' experience, the acid-fast organisms of
may be present. Coagulative necrosis was found beneath
E Aq pauapi Asa Ay are euonua piorda auu
ulcers in four of 37 cases in a report by Charles et al.
modified acid-fast stain such as Fite-Faraco (Fite's stain).
(1999). The dermis and often the panniculus contain
The bacteria can also be visualized with silver stains such
nodular to diffuse accumulations of macrophages and
as Gomori's methenamine silver (GMS). They generally
 neutrophils (pyogranulomatous inflammation) intermin-
are unevenly distributed, sparse overall, but can be
gled with prominent clusters of lymphocytes and/or
regionally moderate. They are discovered in macrophages
plasma cells. Discrete pyogranulomas are rare. Neu-
as clusters of pleomorphic rods, varying from short
trophils are in small clusters or in larger pustular accu-
and coccoid to long, flamentous and variably beaded.
mulations. Macrophages are large and have pale
Large numbers of organisms may be seen in individual
cytoplasm; they are often in sheet-like or epithelioid
macrophages.
 Diffusely numerous organisms  were
Infectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
283
reported in six of 37 animals studied (Charles et al.,
1999); in that study organisms were ‘very low to low'
in 22 of 37 cases. The polyclonal anti-Mycobacterium
bovis (BCG) stain is superior in labeling mycobacteria
(Bonenberger et al., 2001), and may be of beneft in sus-
pected cases with scant organisms. This stain may also
detect partially degraded bacteria within macrophages.
Differential diagnoses include sterile granuloma and
pyogranuloma syndrome, or other solitary histiocytic
lesions such as palisading granuloma and reactive fbro-
histiocytic nodules (se Chapter 35). Sterile granuloma
 and pyogranuloma syndrome produces multifocal lesions 
(less common in leproid granuloma} which tend to track
along hair follicles, in contrast to the more diffuse pattern
of leproid granuloma. Leproid granulomas generally
include more neutrophils than reactive fibrohistiocytic
nodules and palisading granulomas. Further, careful
 examination with acid-fast stains will reveal the organ-
isms. Other opportunistic mycobacterial infections in
 dogs are uncommon; those of the rapidly growing group
(Runyon Group IV) demonstrate mycobacteria in central
clear spaces of pyogranulomas (see below), this pattern
 being distinct from canine leproid granuloma.
OPPORTUNISTIC MYCOBACTERIAL
INFECTION CAUSED BY RAPIDLY
3
GROWING MYCOBACTERIA
(Synonyms: opportunistic mycobacterial granulomas,
Fig. 12.19 Higher magnification of confluent pyogranulomas of
atypical mycobacteriosis, nontuberculous mycobacterial
canine leproid granuloma. Note giant cell at center.
infection)
Fig. 12.20 High magnification of
canine leproid granuloma demon-
strating
acid-fast
bacteria{Fite-
Faraco).
284
Diseases of the dermis
Clinical features (Figures 12.21 and 12.22)
dogs, Mycobacterium fortuitum, Mycobacterium smeg-
matis, and Mycobacterium chelonei-abscessus are the
Opportunistic  infections caused by rapidly growing
most frequently isolated facultative and opportunistic
mycobacteria (based on in vitro growth rates) are uncom
mycobacterial pathogens. A recent study performed in
mon in cats and rare in dogs. Causative organisms include
northern California indicated Mycobacterium fortuitum
the rapidly growing Runyon Group IV mycobacteria
to be the most commonly isolated species (Jang & Hirsh,
(Mycobacterium fortuitum,Mycobacterium chelonei-
2002), while Mycobacterium smegmatis is much more
abscessus, Mycobacterium smegmatis, Mycobacterium
common than Mycobacterium fortuitum in Australia
phlei, Mycobacterium flavescens, Mycobacterium ther-
(Malik et al., 2000).
moresistable). These mycobacteria exist worldwide in wet
Infections probably are caused by traumatic implanta-
environments, and commonly can be isolated from soil or
tion of facultatively pathogenic mycobacteria. In humans,
bodies of fresh water. Runyon Group IV mycobacteria
disseminated opportunistic mycobacterial infection occurs 
exhibit growth on solid media in less than 7 days.
 in  immunocompromised individuals,  while localized
Mycobacterium fortuitum and Mycobacterium chelonei-
skin and subcutaneous infection is seen in normal
abscessus exhibit growth in less than 3 days. In cats and
individuals
Most cats infected with Runyon Group IV mycobacte-
 ria are presumed to have acquired the infection via
contaminated wounds (cat fghts), other trauma, or con-
taminated injections. Runyon Group IV mycobacteria
 exhibit a marked tropism for tissues rich in lipids, leading
 to site predilection in the feline inguinal fat pad and
disease predilection in obese individuals (Malik et al.,
2000).
 Feline lesions usually consist of predominantly asymp-
tomatic cutaneous and subcutaneous abscesses. Multiple
fstulas develop, but drainage is minimal. When visible,
the exudate is watery. Thinning of the epidermis leads to
clinically characteristic focal depressions that appear
purple due to subjacent accumulations of pus (Malik
et al., 2000). Abscesses progress to nonhealing ulcers
Fig. 12.21 Opportunistic mycobacterial infection in a cat caused
with well-demarcated margins and undermined adjacent
by Mycobacteriurm fortuitum. Abscesses in the inguinal region have
 normal-appearing skin. Skin lesions are not as prolifera-
progressed to nonhealing craterous ulcers with thickened margins.
tive as those seen with many other infectious feline skin
{Photograph courtesy A.H. Werner; case material University of
diseases, and the skin flaps at the margins of ulcers remain
California, Davis.)
surprisingly thin. If prior surgery has been performed,
irregular scarring may obscure more characteristic
lesions.
The groin overlying the inguinal fat pad is the most
commonly affected site. Lesions may be in the axillae,
elsewhere on the trunk, or less commonly on the head or
neck. Lesions develop slowly over weeks or months.
Excessive grooming of the affected area may be noted.
Regional lymphadenopathy is variable, but constitutional
signs are absent or rare. One author (T.L.G.) has observed
splenic dissemination in a cat that initially had chronic
ventral abdominal skin lesions.
 In dogs, focal or grouped cutaneous and subcutaneous
nodules or larger frm swellings ulcerate and drain. The
undermining of peripheral skin that is characteristic
of feline opportunistic mycobacterial infection is not
Fig. 12.22 Severe opportunistic mycobacterial infection in a cat
caused by Mycobacteriurm fortuitum. Nonhealing ulcers have well-
observed.
 All affected cats were between 3 and 10 years of age,
demarcated margins and undermine adjacent normal-appearing skin.
(Photograph courtesy A.C. Mundell; case material University of
and were predominantly female (31 of 41 cats) in one
California, Davis.)
large study (Malik et al., 2000). Breed predilections are
 Infectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
285
not noted and have not been reported. No predilections
gical extirpation offers the best chance of cure. After the
are known for dogs.
lesion is resected, a fnal peripheral excision well into
 Feline opporrunistic mycobacterial infection caused
unaffected tissue should be performed using fresh sterile
by rapidly growing mycobacteria frequently is visually
instruments.
distinctive due to the typical inguinal location, charac-
teristic undermining of adjacent skin, and the purple
Histopathology (Figures 12.23 through 12.25)
depressions overlying accumulations of pus. Differential
diagnoses in the cat should include bite wound abscesses,
The epidermis is usually acanthotic or ulcerated. Typi-
deep mycotic infections, and sterile nodular panniculitis.
cally, multinodular to diffuse pyogranulomatous derma-
Greater local tissue swelling, pain, or signs of systermic
titis and panniculitis are present; inflammation usually
illness are more common with bite wound abscesses and
extends to the deeper subcutis as well. Isolated subcuta-
systemic mycoses. Sterile nodular panniculitis is extremely
neous nodules have been seen. A thin rim of neutrophils
rare in the cat and must be differentiated by histopathol-
and a wider outer zone of epithelioid macrophages com-
ogy and culture.
prise pyogranulomas, which surround variably sized,
Differential diagnosis in the dog may be more prob-
central clear zones. These clear spaces correspond to
lematic, since the clinical presentation in this species is not
residual lipid from degenerating adipocytes (lipocysts).
visually distinctive. The nodules of canine opportunistic
Pyogranulomas without central spaces may be observed
mycobacterial infections may mimic other bacterial or
as well. Pyogranulomas often are confluent and are
fungal infectious diseases of the skin, including actino-
interspersed
with diffuse inflammation composed
of
mycosis or nocardiosis, deep folliculitis and furunculosis,
macrophages and neutrophils. Additionally, there may be
cryptococcosis and other systemic fungal infections, 
10
cutaneous infections of opportunistic fungi and algae.
However if systemic fungal infection is suspected, culture
should not be performed until the systemic mycoses blas-
tomycosis, histoplasmosis, and coccidioidomycosis are
ruled out by impression smear and histopathology, since
attempted culrure may be dangerous (see p. 291).
 Differentiation is accomplished by cytologic exami
nation with special staining of exudates or aspirates,
histopathology, and routine and special culture tech-
niques. Direct smears of exudate and bacterial culture
may be more rewarding than histopathology in identify-
ing the etiologic agent in opportunistic mycobacterial
infections. According to Malik et al. (2000), needle aspi-
rations of affected tissue most frequently provide diag-
nostic specimens. Touch preparations from freshly incised
biopsy specimens or smears of exudate also may be use-
ful in identifying organisms. Acid-fast stains should be
requested for all microbiological or cytological specimens
submitted to the laboratory.
Biopsy site selection
Specimens should be taken by wedge technique from
dermal and subcutaneous tissue at the deep advancing
margins of a lesion. Care must be taken not to seed the
surgical site with organisms during the biopsy process.
daap unqo oi nugns iou si Aquouuo Asdonq yound
tissue. Overlying skin alone may not contain character-
istic inflammation and organisms, particularly if the
specimen is removed from the devitalized margin. If
opportunistic mycobacterial infection caused by rapidly
Fig. 12.23 Opportunistic mycobacterial infection caused by rapidly
growing mycobacteria is suspected in resectable lesions,
growing mycobacteria in a cat. Pyogranulomas surround central
lesions should be removed with wide margins since sur-
clear zones.
286
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 12.24 Higher magnification of opportunistic mycobacterial
Hig. 12.25 High magnification of atypically numerous, tangled,
infection caused by rapidly growing mycobacteria in a cat. Clear
filamentousacid-fastmycobacteriainthe catofFig.12.23
spaces contain organisms that are faintly stained with hematoxylin
{Fite-Faraco).
and eosin.
large lakes of neutrophils. Plasma cells and lymphocytes
vents used during routine processing of tissue) are cir-
may be numerous amongst the pyogranulomatous infl-
 cumvented except for brief immersion following staining
trates. Lymphoid nodules often are observed, sometimes
and before application of the coverslip. The polyclonal
at the periphery of the lesion. Fibrosis may subdivide the
anti-Mycobacterium bovis (BCG) stain is superior in
infltrate into lobules as well as encompass the lesion.
labeling mycobacteria (Bonenberger et al., 2001), and
Giant cells usually are not present; rare or scattered giant
 may be of beneft in suspected cases with scant organisms.
cells previously have been reported (Lewis et al., 1994;
The stain may also detect partially degraded bacteria
Fox et al., 1995). Giant cells may be difficult to detect
within macrophages. Very small to occasionally large
due to lack of sharp cell borders within the epithelioid
numbers of flamentous, sometimes tangled, and slightly
infltrate.
beaded, acid-fast rods are found usually in the clear
 Rapidly growing opportunistic mycobacteria are often,
centers of pyogranulomas where staining may be pre-
 but not invariably, diffcult to fnd in tissue section. When
served due to the presence of protective fat of the pan-
 they are numerous, they may be partially visible in hema-
niculus. Organisms also may be found in small numbers
toxylin and eosin (HE) stained tissue. A Fite-Faraco
within macrophages.
modifcation of the acid-fast stain (Fite's stain) is useful in
Differential diagnoses of opportunistic mycobacterial
identification of these organisms. The staining process
infection caused by rapidly growing mycobacteria include
employs peanut oil to prevent excessive decolorization.
foreign body reactions and other deep infections due
Frozen sections of formalin-fixed specimens may enhance
to bacteria or fungi. Pyogranulomas surrounding clear
discovery of the bacteria, as xylene and alcohol (lipid sol-
central spaces are very suggestive of rapidly growing
Infectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
287
Fig. 12.27 Same cat as in Fig. 12.26, 10 weeks later. Note pro-
gression to severe ulceration. {From Stewart, L.J., White, S.D.,
Fig. 12.26 Opportunistic mycobacterial infection caused by
Kennedy, FA. et al. (1993) Cutaneous Mycobacterium aviurm infec
Mycobacterium avium complex. A firm, alopecic nodule is deforrm-
ing the right side of the muzzle and involves haired skin and the
tion in a cat. Vet Derrmatol 4, 87-90. Reprinted with perrmission.)
planurm nasale. {From Stewart, L.J., White, S.D., Kennedy, FA. et al.
{1993) Cutaneous Mycobacteriurm avium infection in a cat. Vet
Dermatol 4, 87-90. Reprinted with permission.)
zoonotic potential or to be contagious from cat to cat.
However, since the visceral “tubercular’ granulomas
caused by MAC organisms are virtually indistinguishable
opportunistic mycobacterial infection with HE stain, but
can be featured in other deep infections, including those 
producing mycobacteria, Mycobacterium tuberculosis
of higher bacteria (see p. 272). Demonstration of acid-fast
 and Mycobacterium bovis, differentiation is important
organisms in these central clear spaces is highly support-
because of public health concerns (Greene & Gunn-
ive of the diagnosis, but should be confrmed by culture.
Moore, 1998). Mycobacterium avium complex organisms
These opportunistic mycobacteria may closely resemble
 exhibit slow growth on specialized solid media and may
Nocardia spp. in tissue. Larger clusters or longer chains
require 4 to 6 weeks.
of bacteria characterize nocardiosis and these organisms
Mycobacterium avium complex organisms are sapro-
are generally only partially acid-fast; however culture
phytic mycobacteria found in acidic soil with a high con-
may be required for ultimate differentiation.
centration of organic matter (Greene & Gunn-Moore,
1998). These environmental conditions are best met in
OPPORTUNISTIC MYCOBACTERIAL
acidic swamps and brackish coastal waters. Feces of
infested birds harbor large numbers of MAC organisms
INFECTION CAUSED BY
MYCOBACTERIUM AVIUM
(Greene & Gunn-Moore, 1998). Feline and canine infec-
tion most likely occurs as a result of contact with infected
COMPLEX
soil, contamination with bird carcasses or feces, or inges-
(Synonyms: feline  Mycobacterium  avium  infection,
tion of contaminated meat (Greene & Gunn-Moore,
opportunistic mycobacterial infection caused by Myco-
1998). Presumed portals of entry include the skin, ali-
bacterium avium-Mycobacterium intracellulare)
mentary tract, and the respiratory tract.
 Single or multiple dermal or subcutaneous nodules may
be seen (Buergelt et al., 1982, Stewart et al., 1993). Larger
Clinical features (Figures 12.26 and 12.27)
nodules may fistulate and ulcerate (Miller et al., 1999).
Opportunistic infection caused by the Runyon Group III
 Regional lymphadenopathy is noted. Visceral mycobacter-
mycobacteria, Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC), is
r, sid     i
a rare cause of skin or visceral disease in the cat and dog.
granulomas and preferentially targets lymphoid tissue,
Of all the opportunistic mycobacteria, MAC organisms
but may affect virtually any visceral organ (Greene &
are most likely to produce bacteremia and systemic
Gunn-Moore, 1998).
disease involving multiple visceral organs (Greene &
 Siamese cats, Basset Hounds, and Miniature Schnau-
Gunn-Moore, 1998). The paucity of reported cases of
 zers are over-represented in case populations of animals
feline and canine infection probably reflects intrinsic
 with visceral disease due to MAC organisms, perhaps
species resistance to the MAC organism. Mycobacterium
 indicating selective absence of immune surveillance
avium complex organisms are not reported to have either
(Greene & Gunn-Moore, 1998). Breed predilections
288
Diseases of the dermis
are not available for opportunistic cutaneous infections
caused by MAC organisms. Age or sex predilections are
not reported for either cutaneous or visceral disease.
Clinical differential diagnoses for cutaneous infection
with MAC organisms should primarily include nodular
neoplasms, and sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma
syndrome. If systemic fungal infection is suspected,
culture should not be performed until the systemic
mycoses blastomycosis, histoplasmosis, and coccid-
ioidomycosis are ruled out by impression smear and
histopathology, since attempted culture may be dangerous
(see p. 291). Diagnosis is accomplished by cytologic
examination with special staining of exudates, impression
smears, or needle aspiration of nodules, and histopathol-
ogy. If necessary, MAC organisms can be differentiated
from tuberculosis by nucleic acid testing (Greene &
Gunn-Moore, 1998).
Biopsy site selection
An intact nodule should be excised surgically using wedge
technique. If a solitary lesion is present, complete excision
is recommended, as it may provide the added beneft of a
surgical cure.
Histopathology (Figure 12.28)
Mycobacterium avium complex infections in the skin and
subcutis of cats are characterized by granulomatous or
 pyogranulomatous inflammation, accompanied by a vari-
Fig. 12.28 Opportunistic mycobacterial infection caused by
able fbroblastic reaction (Buergelt et al., 1982; Kaufman 
Mycobacterium avium, demonstrating prominent spindle cell pro-
et al., 1995; Stevenson et al., 1998). In one morphologic
 liferation amidst pale macrophages and scattered neutrophils.
presentation, large foamy or granular macrophages and
(Case material courtesy M.A. Miller.)
multinucleated giant cells are accompanied by fewer neu-
trophils and lymphocytes (Stewart et al., 1993). Small
bands of fbroblasts may subdivide the infltrate into
1995). Also, unlike the mycobacterium of feline leprosy,
lobules (Buergelt et al., 1982). In the second morphologic 
MAC organisms can be identifed by culture. In the
presentation, spindle cells predominate as interlacing
spindle cell predominant sarcomatous pattern, other
bundles (Miller et al., 1999). Neutrophils and histiocytic
inflamed sarcomas should be considered; acid-fast stains
cells are interspersed among the spindle cell population.
allow differentiation (Miller et al., 1999).
 This severe and dominant fbroblastic-like reaction may
 mimic a sarcoma. Therefore, unusual inflamed spindle cell
DERMATOPHYTIC PSEUDOMYCETOMA
lesions in cats need to be stained routinely for mycobac-
teria. Organisms are invariably numerous in both forms
(Synonym: dermatophytic mycetoma)
of MAC infection (Stewart et al., 1993), and are found
within macrophages as well as spindle cells (Miller et al.,
1999).
Clinical features (Figures 12.29 and 12.30)
In feline MAC infection without severe spindle cell pro-
Dermatophytic pseudomycetomas are uncommon to rare,
liferation, the fnding of large numbers of organisms
deep cutaneous to subcutaneous fungal infections that
in foamy macrophages is similar to feline lepromatous
produce tissue grains or granules. These tissue grains are
leprosy (Kaufman et al., 1995; Stevenson et al., 1998). A
composed of fungal aggregates imbedded in amorphous
fbrovascular network is present within the inflammatory
eosinophilic material presumed to be antigen-antibody
infltrate of Mycobacterium avium infection, in contrast
complexes (Splendore-Hoeppli reaction), as seen in
to feline leprosy (Buergelt et al., 1982; Kaufman et al.,
higher bacterial infections (see p. 272). The syndrome is
Infectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
289
MacKay et al., 1997; Abramo et al., 2001; Bond et al.,
2001). Additionally, Trichophyton mentagrophytes has
been reported to cause dermatophytic granulomas, but
these do not have the typical histologic features of
dermatophytic pseudomycetoma as grains are lacking
(Bergman et al., 2002).
-ond uaaq seq ioyp anui aansas e 'sunq 
posed as a relatively common cause of chronic dermato-
phytosis (Jones, 1993). Persian cats are predisposed to
conventional dermatophytosis (Scott et al., 2001) as well
as dermatophytic pseudomycetoma. This marked breed
selective immunodefciency may play a role in the devel-
opment of dermatophytic pseudomycetoma in this breed.
Fig. 12.29 Feline dermatophytic pseudomycetoma due to Micro-
 Dermatophytic pseudomycetoma has been reported in
sporurm canis in the scapular region of a Persian cat. Crusted and
two Yorkshire Terriers (MacKay et al., 1997; Abramo et
hyperpigmented nodules have an irregular contour.
al., 2001). Granulomatous skin disease caused by Tri-
chophyton mentagrophytes has been reported in a Man-
chester Terrier (Bergman et al., 2002). One author (P.J.I.)
 has the strong clinical impression that both the Yorkshire
 Terrier and the Manchester Terrier are over-represented
 breeds for generalized dermatophytosis as well as for poor
response to antifungal therapy, both of which may pre-
dispose them to dermatophytic pseudomycetoma.
 Presumably, pseudomycetomas begin with more typical
follicular dermatophyte colonization. Frequent localiza-
tion of pseudomycetomas to the dorsal thorax in outdoor
O susno jo uoidu sn sisans si
the dermis and subcutis from colonized hairs. This trau-
matic implantation of organisms could result from fghts
 Or mating behavior. Positive dermatophyte cultures from
 normal-appearing areas distant from the dermatophytic
pseudomycetoma indicate that affected cats may pre-
Fig. 12.30 Feline dermatophytic pseudomycetoma
dueto
viously have been inapparent carriers. Inapparent car-
Microsporurm canis on the dorsal trunk of a Persian cat. Note
riage of Microsporum canis is common in Persian and
irregularly shaped, coalescing, subcutaneous and derrmal nodules.
{Photograph courtesy A.C. Mundell; case material University of
Himalayan cats.
California, Davis.)
Firm, irregularly shaped nodules (5 to 20 mm in diam-
dermis or the underlying subcutaneous tissue. Larger
uncommon in cats and rare in dogs. In cats, the syndrome
lesions may ulcerate and discharge a seropurulent to
is seen almost exclusively in Persian cats.
granular  material. I
 Hyperpigmentation  may  overlie
The term ‘pseudomycetoma’ for dermatophytic gran-
chronic lesions. Concomitant alopecia may be a feature if
ulomatous skin disease has gained acceptance over myce-
 the syndrome coexists with more typical feline dermato-
toma (Ajello et al., 1980; Rinaldi et al., 1983). Although
Keos aq Ae nq padnona are Aenn suoisat sisoiud
dermatophytic granulomatous skin disease fulfills most of
Lymphadenopathy may be present, but systemic signs are
the criteria for true mycetomas (nodular inflammation
uncommon. One author (T.L.G.) has seen dermatophytic
with fibrosis, fstulae draining from deep tissue, presence
 pseudomycetoma in a lymph node. Intra-abdominal der-
of tissue grains), fewer hyphal elements are present, and
matophytic granulomatous peritonitis sharing many
the lesions apparently lack the cement substance that
features with pseudomycetoma has been reported in a
holds true mycetoma grains together.
Persian cat (Black et al., 2001). Recurrence after seem-
Microsporum canis has been isolated in all well-
 ingly successful therapy is common.
substantiated and histologically typical cases of dermato-
 Feline dermatophytic pseudomycetoma is seen almost
phytic pseudomycetomas published to date where fungal
exclusively in Persian cats, and to a lesser extent in
culture was performed (Medleau & Rakich, 1994;
Himalayan cats. Age and sex predilections have not been
290
Diseases of the dermis
noted. Published cases of granulomatous dermatophytic
skin disease in dogs to date include a Manchester
Terrier, two Yorkshire Terriers, and a Chow Chow (MacKay
et al., 1997; Abramo et al., 2001; Bergman et al., 2002).
Clinical differential diagnoses should include crypto-
coccosis and other systemic mycoses, sporotrichosis,
cutaneous infections of other opportunistic fungi, and
neoplasia. The marked breed predilection for Persian cats
is helpful in increasing the index of suspicion for der-
 matophytic pseudomycetoma. Histopathology and sepa-
rate fungal culrure of a tissue specimen are required
for differentiation. If systemic fungal infection is sus-
pected, culture should not be performed until the sys-
temic mycoses blastomycosis, histoplasmosis, and coccid-
ioidomycosis are ruled out by impression smear and
histopathology, since attempted culture may be dangerous
(see p. 291). Positive fungal culture from distant sites,
positive fluorescence with a Wood's lamp, or a positive
trichogram (microscopic hair analysis) for dermato-
phytosis increases the likelihood of dermatophytic
pseudomycetoma.
Biopsy site selection
An entire nodule should be removed using wedge resec-
tion technique. If the lesion is solitary, as in early cases,
this may afford the added beneft of a potential surgical
cure. If dermatophytic pseudomycetoma is suspected clin-
ically, a deep portion of the lesion should be submitted
for dermatophyte culture, after the overlying epidermis
Fig. 12.31 Feline dermatophytic pseudomycetoma due to
has been removed using sterile technique. Care must be
Microsporum canis. Granules composed of discrete colonies of der-
taken not to seed the surgical site with organisms during
matophytes are surrounded and interspersed by granulomatous
the biopsy process.
inflammation.
Histopathology (Figure 12.31 and 12.32)
ion, which represents an antigen-antibody reaction
Lesions are most often encountered in cats and are report-
around infectious agents or parasites that occurs at the
edly identical in dogs (Abramo et al., 2001). The overly-
periphery of organized aggregates of organisms. Granules
ing  epidermis 
and
superficial  dermis
may
be
are cuffed by and intermingled with large macrophages,
unremarkable, except for mild to moderate acanthosis, or
giant cells, and variable, sometimes numerous neu-
minimal perivascular or periadnexal mixed inflammation.
trophils. Macrophages have abundant, granular cyto-
Ulceration may be present. Often there is some coloniza-
plasm. In some cases, fragments of hyphae are present
 e ss o q ss  go o
within individual macrophages beyond the boundaries of
Diagnostic lesions are found in the subfollicular dermis
tissue grains or granules. Proliferating fbroblastic tissue
and subcutis. Large amorphous aggregates are composed
 may surround the outer aspect of the lesions but also
of tight clusters of somewhat refractile, pleomorphic
 courses amongst the granules, often creating lobules com-
       
posed of multiple granules and their attendant inflamma-
contain numerous large, clear bulbous, thick-walled
tion. Lymphocytes and plasma cells may be present in
dilatations, resembling spores. Smaller swellings within
small numbers at the margins of the lobules or at the outer
the hyphae create a vacuolated or bubbly appearance to
edges of the mycetoma. Peripheral lymphocytic nodules
these structures. The fungal aggregates are imbedded in
or follicles have been observed.
amorphous eosinophilic material to form large tissue
Organisms are strongly positive using periodic
grains, or granules that are also visible grossly. The
acid-Schiff (PAS) and Gomori's methenamine silver
brightly eosinophilic material is Splendore-Hoeppli reac-
(GMS)  stains. Periodic acid-Schiff and  GMS-positive
Infectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
291
Fig. 12.33 Cutaneous blastomycosis in a dog. Well-demarcated
nodules of the muzzle have coalesced and ulcerated. {Photograph
courtesy V.A. Fadok.)
gates of organisms were not identified (Bergman et al.,
2002).
 The histopathologic appearance of dermatophytic
pseudomycetoma is distinctive, but may need to be dif-
ferentiated from other fungal infections. Most of the sys-
Fig. 12.32 Higher magnification of a granule of derrmatophytic
temic and opportunistic fungi affecting cats and dogs are
pseudomycetoma. Irregular hyphae with bulbous, spore-like dilata-
 smaller and more uniform in appearance in tissue section,
tions are imbedded in Splendore-Hoeppli reaction. Note the thin
and do not accumulate in tissue grains or granules. In con-
rim of neutrophils surrounding the granule and large epithelioid
trast, the diffuse distribution of Trichophyton menta-
macrophages in the outer zone of inflammation.
gropbytes in dermatophytic granulomas is similar to
opportunistic fungal infection (Bergman et al., 2002).
Concurrent identifcation of Trichophyton mentagro-
amorphous material may also be found within the large
phytes in the keratin of hair follicles and epidermis
macrophages that encircle the granules. This material may
(typical of this organism) will allow diagnosis.
be breakdown debris from ingestion of fungal organisms.
This is suggested by the presence of intact portions of
CUTANEOUS BLASTOMYCOSIS,
hyphae in many macrophages that lie beyond the bound-
HISTOPLASMOSIS, AND
aries of tissue granules. Culture confrms dermatophyte
COCCIDIOIDOMYCOSIS
infection, generally Microsporum canis. Immunohisto-
chemistry using rabbit anti-Microsporum canis antiserum
Clinical features (Figures 12.33 through 12.37)
identifed this etiologic agent in two canine cases by
specifcally staining the fungal organisms in tissue
Blastomycosis, histoplasmosis, and coccidioidomycosis
(Abramo et al., 2001).
are systemic mycoses that occasionally disseminate sec-
 q  s o  pd a
ondarily to the skin. The dog is a natural host for these
chopbyton mentagropbytes in a dog differed histo-
 three systemic mycoses. Canine blastomycosis is the most
pathologically from dermatophytic pseudomycetomas.
common systemic mycosis seen in small animal practice;
Organisms, which also heavily colonized the keratin of
skin lesions are seen in up to 40% of affected dogs
hair follicles and the epidermis, were diffusely organized
(Legendre, 1998). Cutaneous involvement is uncommon
within granulomatous inflammation of the dermis,
 in histoplasmosis and coccidioidomycosis (Greene, 1998;
panniculus, and subcutis. Tissue grains containing aggre-
Wolf, 1998). The systemic mycoses are considered
292
 Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 12.36 Histoplasmosis in a cat. Soft tissue swelling and ulcer-
ation are severe. The cat is wearing an Elizabethan collar. (Photo-
graph courtesy M. Rosenbaum.)
Fig. 12.34 Multiple nodules and soft tissue swelling on the hindleg
of the dog in Fig. 12.33. (Photograph courtesy VA. Fadok.)
Fig. 12.37 Different view of the cat in Fig. 12.35. {Photograph
courtesy M. Rosenbaum.)
conjunction  with debilitating underlying disease Oor
Fig. 12.35 Closer view of an ulcerated nodule on the hindleg of the
 immunosuppression (see p. 295).
dog in Fig. 12.33. Drainage is rminimal. (Photograph courtesy V.A.
The organisms that cause these systemic mycoses,
Fadok.)
Blastomyces dermatitidis,Histoplasma capsulatum,and
Coccidioides immitis, are able to invade the normal
regional dermatoses  with geographic restrictions to
immunocompetent host, usually via inhalation of conidia,
certain endemic areas globally (see Table 12.1). Histo-
and are thus differentiated from the opportunistic sys-
plasmosis is seen in the cat as frequently as it is in the dog
temic mycosis, cryptococcosis, plus other opportunistic
(Wolf, 1998). Blastomycosis and coccidioidomycosis are
fungal infections. In most cases, cutaneous infection with
both rare in the cat. Cryptococcosis, another systemic
these three systemic fungi should be considered a mani-
mycosis caused by an encapsulated yeast-like fungus, is
festation of underlying disseminated visceral disease. Very
discussed separately as the organism is viewed as
 rarely, direct wound inoculation with these fungal organ-
an opportunist with infection predominantly seen in
 isms may produce solitary primary skin lesions; this may
Infectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
293
Table 12.1 Ecology of the systemic mycoses.
Disease
 Ecologic niche
Endemic areas
Blastomycosis
Moist soil enriched with organic debris,
Mississippi-Missouri-Ohio River Valleys, mid-Atlantic states
waterways, water
{USA), Africa, Central America
Histoplasmosis
Bird or bat excrerment
Mississippi-Missouri-Ohio River Valleys, temperate and sub-tropical
regions globally
Coccidioidomycosis
Desert soil, high temperature, low
 Southwestern USA, Mexico, Central and South America {lower
rainfall, dust storms
 Sonoran life zone)
be most common in coccidioidomycosis. Skin lesions seen
Coonhounds, Walker Hounds, Pointers, and Weimaran-
with systemic mycoses are generally of much less conse-
ers are reportedly at highest risk (Rudmann et al., 1992).
quence than the underlying, often life-threatening, vis-
Doberman Pinschers also are at increased risk (Legendre,
ceral disease.
1998). Male dogs, possibly due to behavioral character-
A commonality of skin lesions among the systemic
istics, are at greater risk (Legendre, 1998). The highest
mycoses is observed. Variability is contingent on the host
disease prevalence for blastomycosis is reportedly in 2-
species, organism, portal of entry, and anatomic site of
year-old dogs (Legendre, 1998).
infection. Papular to nodular lesions progress to absces-
 Breed predilections for histoplasmosis include pointers,
sation or ulceration, and draining fistulous tracts may
Weimaraners, and Brittanys (Wolf, 1998). Histoplasmo-
develop. Draining fuid may be either serosanguinous
sis is seen most commonly in young dogs and cats less
 Or purulent. Other lesions may be proliferative without
than 4 years old (Wolf, 1998). Female cats appear to be
drainage.
over-represented, but sex predilection has not been noted
Ulceration with drainage of serosanguinous or purulent
in dogs (Wolf, 1998).
fluid is typical of cutaneous blastomycosis (Legendre,
A greater prevalence of disserminated coccidioidomyco-
1998). Well-defined subcutaneous abscesses may
be
sis following respiratory infection has been reported in
present (Legendre, 1998). The planum nasale, face,
Boxers and Doberman Pinschers in the older literature
and clawbeds may be preferred sites (Legendre, 1998).
(Maddy, 1958). A possible predilection for male dogs has
The hard palate and scrotum also may be preferentially
been reported (Selby et al., 1981)
affected (Grooters, 2002).
Cutaneous histoplasmosis causes dermal and subcuta-
tococcosis, sporotrichosis, cutaneous infections of other
neous nodules similar to blastomycosis; lesions may ulcer-
opportunistic fungi and algae, feline leprosy syndrome,
ate and develop fistulous tracts (Wolf, 1998; Grooters,
opportunistic mycobacterial infection, canine leproid
2002).
granuloma, sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma syn-
Cutaneous coccidioidomycosis causes similar dermal
drome, reactive histiocytosis, and neoplasia. Travel his-
and subcutaneous nodules, usually localized over sites of
tory to or residence in endemic areas is important in
subjacent infected bone (Greene, 1998). Ulceration and
raising the index of suspicion. Cytology of impression
drainage is common with coccidioidomycosis. Ulcerated
smears and exudate, and/or histopathology are required
nodules, subcutaneous abscesses, and draining fistulous
for definitive diagnosis.
tracts are the most frequently seen skin lesions (Grooters,
 Fungal culture is not recommended for veterinary prac-
2002). Rarely, skin lesions have been seen without evi-
tices or most diagnostic laboratories because of substan-
dence of systemic involvement (Plotnick et al., 1997).
tial danger of infection from the mycelial forms of these
Noncutaneous signs of systemic mycoses include
fungal organisms (Legendre, 1998). Primary pulmonary
anorexia, weight loss, fever depression, cough, dyspnea,
blastomycosis continues to be reported occasionally in
ocular disease, and lameness. The lungs are often the
laboratory workers exposed to cultures of the mycelial
primary site of infection in systemic mycoses. The reader
form of Blastomyces dermatitidis (Cote et al., 1997).
is referred to standard texts of infectious diseases and
 A veterinarian died of disseminated coccidioidomycosis
mycology for further information (Greene, 1998).
after transporting necropsy material from a horse with
Reported breed predilections for blastomycosis include
disseminated infection; physicians postulated that trans-
sporting dogs and hounds, as well as larger breed dogs in
mission occurred by inhalation of aerosolized tissue-phase
general (Rudmann et al., 1992; Legendre, 1998). Bluetick
endospores (Kohn et al., 1992). This further emphasizes
294
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 12.38 Cutaneous coccidioido-
mycosis demonstrating diffuse pyo-
granulomatous inflammation of the
dermis.
that strict caution should be exercised in the handling
of all specimens from suspected or confrmed systemic
fungal infection.
Biopsy site selection
Intact nodules, when present, should be surgically excised
for histopathology Impression smears for cytology should
be made from freshly cut biopsy specimens and exudates.
tive gloves when handling fresh specimens, if systemic
mycoses are suspected. Although systemic mycoses are
not considered to be contagious diseases, localized skin
lesions have been reported in humans in conjunction with
the direct inoculation of infective material via contami-
nated needles or scalpels (Legendre, 1998). Blastomyco-
sis has been seen secondary to bites from an infected dog
(Legendre, 1998). Fortunately, systemic dissermination of
these accidental skin infections has not been reported.
Histopathology (Figures 12.38 through 12.40)
The epidermis may be acanthotic, or ulcerated and exuda-
tive. The dermis, panniculus, and sometimes the deeper
subcutis contain a nodular to diffuse infltration of large
 macrophages, admixed with variable neutrophils, lym-
phocytes, and plasma cells. Discrete granulomas or pyo-
granulomas often are present. Necrosis may be observed
and there may be abundant deep and/or peripheral fbro-
sis. Organisms are found in tissue as yeasts, often at the
Fig. 12.39 High magnification of Coccidioides immitis in a dog.
center of pyogranulomas or granulomas. The yeast phase
featuring atypically large nurmbers of spherules with endospores.
Infectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
295
Fig. 12.41 Cutaneous cryptococcosis in a cat. Large ulcerated
dermal nodules efface and disfigure the dorsal muzzle, planum
nasale, and periorbital regions. {Photograph courtesy N. Gulbas &
C. Foil.)
Differential diagnoses include foreign body reactions (if
organisms are not easily seen) and other pyogranuloma-
tous infections due to bacteria or fungi. Differential diag-
nosis is not diffcult if organisms are identifed, as the
morphologic characteristics of these generally are diag-
nostic, particularly for coccidioidomycosis. Histoplasmo-
sis and sporotrichosis are similar in size and distribution;
Fig. 12.40 High magnification of Blastomyces dermatitidis in a
skin lesion from a dog.
      
chosis and the increased prevalence of this infection in
cats should allow separation. In dogs, sporotrichosis may
Table 12.2 Histopathologic features of the systermic mycoses.
be similar to blastomycosis; organisms are similarly
sparse and display budding. Blastomyces dermatitidis is
 Org anism
Morphology
Location
larger than Sporothrix schenckii.
Blastomyces
Spherical; 5-20 μm; double
Free and in
dermatitidis
wall; broad based budding
CUTANEOUS CRYPTOCOCCOSIS
macrophages
Coccidioides
Spherules with endospores;
Free
Clinical features (Figure 12.41)
20-80μm; double wall
Histoplasma
 Egg-shaped; 2-4μm; clear
In macrophages
Cryptococcosis is a systemic and opportunistic mycosis
caused by the encapsulated yeast-like fungus, Cryptococ-
capsutatum
halo within single wall
cus neoformans. The causative organism is a ubiquitous
saprophyte found in nitrogen-rich, alkaline debris, but the
organism is isolated most commonly from soil contami-
of these organisms has single or double-contoured walls;
nated with pigeon excrement. Two variants and fve
fungal stains such as periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) or
serotypes of Cryptococcus neoformans have been identi-
Gomori's methenamine silver (GMS) will selectively stain
fed. Marked differences in virulence are noted. The het-
the wall. Tissue identifcation depends on recognition of
eropolysaccharide capsule, consisting predominantly of
typical morphologic features of the individual organisms
glucuronoxlomannan, confers virulence and resistance to
(see Table 12.2). Numbers of organisms vary from scarce
desiccation (Jacobs & Medleau, 1998).
to moderate in coccidioidomycosis and blastomycosis,
Cryptococcosis is global in distribution. However, the
and numerous in histoplasmosis.
disease is seen most frequently in humid, subtropical
296
Diseases of the dermis
regions of the world. Although uncommon, cryptococco-
Although cryptococcosis is seen in all breeds of cats,
sis is the most frequently diagnosed systemic mycosis in
one report indicates that Siamese cats may be over-
the cat. Skin lesions are seen in approximately 40% of
represented (Jacobs & Medleau, 1998). Male cats
cats with cryptococcosis (Jacobs & Medleau, 1998). The 
accounted for 66% of cases in one recent study (Gerds-
respiratory tract, skin, central nervous system, and eyes
Grogan & Dayrell-Hart, 1997). Although cryptococcosis 
 are affected most commonly in the cat. Cutaneous cryp-
has been seen in cats of all ages, middle-aged cats may be
tococcosis is very rare in the dog.
predisposed (Gerds-Grogan & Dayrell-Hart, 1997).
 Inhalation of airborne organisms into the upper respi-
 The American Cocker Spaniel is reported to be predis-
ratory tract is thought to be the usual portal of entry
 posed in North America, and the Doberman Pinscher and
(Jacobs et al., 1997; Jacobs & Medleau, 1998). Intranasal
Great Dane are reported to be at greater risk in Australia
 granulomatous disease is the most common initial infec-
(Jacobs & Medleau, 1998). Young adult dogs are affected
tion and accounts for more than 80% of the cases of feline
most frequently (Jacobs & Medleau, 1998). Canine sex
cryptococcosis (Grooters, 2002). Feline cutaneous cryp-
 predilections have not been reported.
tococcosis most often occurs as a sequela to nasal involve-
Clinical differential diagnoses should include the
ment. Spread to the skin of the muzzle may occur simply
other
cutaneous:
systemic
mycoses  (blastomycosis,
by local extension. Experimental direct inoculation has 
histoplasmosis, and coccidioidomycosis), sporotrichosis,
produced localized disease; this is not reported as occur-
 infections caused by other opportunistic fungi and algae,
ring spontaneously (Jacobs & Medleau, 1998).
feline leprosy syndrome, sterile granuloma and pyogran-
The organism generally is considered to be an oppor-
uloma syndrome, reactive histiocytosis, and neoplasia.
tunist, as cryptococcosis may be seen in association with
Diagnosis is confrmed by impression smears of exudate
coexistent debilitating or immunosuppressive C
diseases
 or biopsy specimens, histopathology, culture, or crypto-
such as neoplasia and diabetes mellitus. However, since
coccal antigen latex agglutination test. Culture should
underlying disease commonly is not identifed, predispos-
not be performed until the systemic mycoses blasto-
ing factors remain elusive (Jacobs & Medleau, 1998).
mycosis, histoplasmosis, and coccidioidomycosis are
Cryptococcosis is seen as a sequela to iatrogenic im-
ruled out by impression smear and histopathology, since
munosuppression due to glucocorticoids or cytotoxic
a (iez 'd aas) snoiaue aq keu anns paiduane
chemotherapy (Jacobs & Medleau, 1998). The associa-
culture of Cryptococcus neoformans is not a public
tion berween feline cryptococcosis and feline leukemia
health hazard because only the yeast form is routinely
virus (FeLV) or feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) infec-
isolated.
tion is controversial, with some data supporting a link
and other data discounting association (Gerds-Grogan
Biopsy site selection
& Dayrell-Hart, 1997; Jacobs et al., 1997; Jacobs &
Medleau, 1998). However treatment outcome is affected
 Wedge or punch biopsy specimens should be taken from
markedly by the status of immunosuppressive viral
intact or recently ulcerated nodules. Impression smears
infection (Jacobs et al., 1997).
for cytology should be made from freshly cut biopsy spec-
Cats develop well-circumscribed, usually
grouped,
imens. Newer lesions should be sampled, as extensive
dermal, or subcutaneous, frm or fuctuant 
nodules.
necrosis may complicate the histopathologic diagnosis in
Lesions ulcerate and drain a scant to copious, serous to
older lesions. In contrast to the other systemic fungi,
mucoid exudate. Less commonly, lesions may be solitary
contact with infected tissue is not a risk to clinicians or
or widely disseminated. The head, neck, and ears are
 laboratory personnel since the yeast form is not infective
affected most frequently. Firm subcutaneous swellings of
and does not aerosolize from tissue.
the dorsal muzzle are a characteristic presentation (Jacobs
& Medleau, 1998). Regional lymphadenopathy
is
Histopathology (Figures 12.42 and 12.43)
common. Visceral and nasal cavity disease can cause a
variety of systemic signs including fever, inappetence,
The epidermis is normal, slightly acanthotic, or ulcerated
weight loss, general malaise, and neurological
and
and exudative. Nodules composed of diffuse infltrates
ophthalmologic signs.
affect the dermis, panniculus, and sometimes the subcutis.
The rare cases of canine cryptococcosis usually
pre-
Abundant organisms surrounded by confluent unstained
ferentially affect the central nervous system and the
capsules create a pale, foamy or *soap bubble' low-power
eyes (Jacobs & Medleau, 1998). Rare canine cutaneous
Jo osanr iu si in anss a oi auede
cryptococcosis  results  from  disseminated
 systemic
cryptococcosis. Inflammation often is scant, but may
disease, and presents as ulcers and fistulas affecting the
be mild to moderate. Diffusely amongst the infltrating
muzzle, oral cavity, lips, and clawbeds (Jacobs &
organisms there are large prominently vacuolated, foamy
Medleau, 1998).
 macrophages, accompanied by variable numbers of neu-
Infectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
297
Fig-
12.42 Feline cryptococcosis
demonstrating diffuse accumulation
of yeast-like organisms. Scant inflarm-
mation and prominent capsulation
of the organisms create a foamy or
bubbly appearance.
trophils. Capsular debris is the likely source of cytoplas-
mic engorgerment. Intact yeasts may also be visible within
macrophages. Discrete pyogranulomas are uncommon.
Neutrophils, lymphocytes, and plasma cells may be
prominent around blood vessels within the lesions.
Rare cases exhibit abundant granulomatous or pyogran-
ulomatous inflammation, often with eosinophils, and few
organisms.
Refractile, round to oval organisms measure 3.5 to
20 μm, and are surrounded by a wide clear capsule that
increases the overall diameter to a maximum of about
40μum. Narrow-based budding often is visible. Muci-
carmine staining will defne the capsule. There may be
 artifactual loss or collapse of capsular material, leaving a
 dense, mucicarmine-positive zone immediately surround-
ing the central body and an outer unstained zone where
 the capsule existed prior to tissue processing. In rare
 cases, poor capsule formation may be present and smaller
 organisms may predominate, sometimes grouped in clear
spaces.
Cryptococcosis generally is typical histopathologically.
Occasionally, differentiation from blastomycosis may be
required, particularly in infections caused by strains
exhibiting poor capsulation. Blastomyces dermatitidis
lacks a capsule, has broad-based rather than narrow-
based budding, and usually evokes more inflammation in
tissue than does Cryptococcus neoformans. Feline lesions
pnsden kood ns o siaqu are aq pzieie
organisms grouped in clear spaces may resemble sporotri-
Fig. 12.43 High magnification of Cryptococcus neoformans in a
chosis. A few larger and more typically encapsulated
skin lesion from a dog.
Cryptococcus neoformans are generally easily identifed,
however.
298
Diseases of the dermis
suunq on aseasip au usun Apean anou Keu sien
SPOROTRICHOSIS
(Dunstan et al., 1986b). Extreme caution should be exer-
cised by all handlers of infected animals or fresh tissue. If
Clinical features (Figure 12.44)
sporotrichosis is suspected, all handlers should wear
Sporotrichosis is an uncommon, subacute or chronic
gloves and limit the time of contact. Motile organisms
cutaneous disease seen in the cat and dog that is caused
 may penetrate intact human skin (Dunstan et al., 1986b).
by the dimorphic fungus, Sporothrix schenckii. The
 To the authors' knowledge, canine to human transmission
organism is worldwide in distribution and grows as a
 of sporotrichosis has not been proven; transmission is
saprophytic mycelial fungus in moist organic debris,
unlikely due to the paucity of organisms present in drain-
sphagnum moss, and hay (Dunstan et al., 1986a; Sykes
ing fluid or tissue from infections of that species.
et al., 2001). Risk factors in humans include rose gar-
 Skin lesions develop at the site of percutaneous inocu-
dening, topiary production, Christmas tree farming, and
 pazeol pue padnona aq on puai suisal 'uo
hay baling (Sykes et al., 2001). Access to the host is
alopecic, nonpainful nodules ulcerate and fstulate to
accomplished by puncture wound contamination. Specifc
discharge a light brown serosanguinous fluid. Satellite
puncture risk factors in animals include rose and barberry
lesions may form near the primary puncture wound. Indi-
thorns and pruned fr trees (Rosser & Dunstan, 1998;
pue peaq au 'uonaa seadde Keu sannpou len
Sykes et al., 2001).
legs are the most common sites of infection. Autoinocu
 The organism establishes opporrunistic infection as
lation may initiate new lesions when cats groom ulcerated
yeast at body temperature. Infection of the dermis and
lesions and then groom previously unaffected sites on the
subcutis may extend to regional lymph nodes. Animals
extremities, face, and pinnae (Rosser & Dunstan, 1998).
may develop either cutaneous/cutaneolymphatic or vis-
Regional lymphadenopathy is common in the cat and
cerally disseminated disease (Rosser & Dunstan, 1998).
affected lymph nodes may fistulate. Systemic clinical signs
Most cats with cutaneous/cutaneolymphatic disease
associated with disseminated sporotrichosis may not be
also have disseminated disease (Rosser & Dunstan,
 obvious in cats, despite visceral involvement.
1998). In contrast, disseminated disease is extremely rare
Roaming outdoor male cats are at increased risk
in the dog and is seen most commonly in conjunction with
(Rosser & Dunstan, 1998). Sporotrichosis is seen most
immunosuppression such as from the excessive use of
frequently in hunting dog breeds (Rosser & Dunstan,
corticosteroids.
1998). Age and sex predilections are not reported. The
Sporotrichosis in cats, unlike in other host species, is
authors have the strong clinical impression that Dober-
characterized by large numbers of organisms in draining
man Pinschers are at increased risk for the development
fluids and in tissue. For this reason, feline sporotrichosis
of multicentric and severe cutaneous sporotrichosis.
represents a substantial public health hazard, as infected
Sporotrichosis must be differentiated clinically from
other opportunistic fungal infections, cryptococcosis,
other systemic mycoses, feline leprosy syndrome, leproid
 granulomas, bacterial abscesses, foreign body reactions,
sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma syndrome, reactive
histiocytosis, and neoplasms. Multicentric lesions, as seen 
in the Doberman Pinscher, may resemble deep folliculitis
 and furunculosis. Impression smears of biopsy specimens
and exudate, and histopathology should be performed.
Fungal culture from tissue specimens may be required to
establish a diagnosis in dogs. Culture should not be per-
formed until the systemic mycoses blastomycosis, histo-
plasmosis, and coccidioidomycosis are ruled out by
impression smear and histopathology, since attempted
 culture may be dangerous (see p. 291).
Biopsy site selection
q pious suds Asdoq spm no qound d
obtained, preferably from newer, intact, nondraining
Fig. 12.44 Sporotrichosis in a cat. An alopecic nodule on the lateral
lesions. Since feline sporotrichosis has marked zoonotic
muzzle has ulcerated and fistulated, discharging a light brown
serosanguinous fuid which contained large numbers of organisms
potential, veterinarians or laboratory personnel handling
on direct smear.
affected cats or fresh specimens from cats should wear
Infectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
299
gloves and wash thoroughly with fungicidal antiseptics
Macrophages are diffusely present and are intermingled
such as povidone-iodine or chlorhexidine.
with neutrophils; the latter sometimes form small clusters.
Neutrophils are sometimes more abundant and congre-
gate in necrotic foci. Discrete pyogranulomas may be
Histopathology (Figures 12.45 through 12.48)
The epidermis in both feline and canine sporotrichosis is
cells are variably present, and may be prominently
acanthotic to ulcerated. There is variable exudation and
 perivascular or more intense and nodular in distribution.
crusting. Inflammation is diffuse throughout the superf-
 Feline sporotrichosis differs from canine sporotrichosis
cial and deep dermis and panniculus, and may extend to
in that organisms usually are abundant and easily visible,
the deeper subcutis. There may be large foci of necrosis.
even on routine staining with hematoxylin and eosin.
Blood vessels may be prominent within the inflrate.
 Culture-verified sporotrichosis in a cat with sparse organ-
Fig. 12.45 Feline sporotrichosis.
Severe diffuse pyogranulomatous in-
flammation is interspersed by hypo-
cellular, gray zones which contain
numerous organisms {not visible at
this power).
Fig. 12.46 Higher magnification of
feline sporotrichosis. Note myriads of
small, elongated or dot-like Sporothrix
schenckii.
300
Diseases of the dermis
Hig. 12.47 High magnification of Sporothrix schenckii in a cat
Fig. 12.48 High magnification of canine sporotrichosis. Focal oval
demonstrating oval to cigar-shaped organisms best delineated in
clear spaces.
tous infiltrate (periodic acid-Schiff).
isms in tissue has been reported (Kennis et al., 1994).
When demonstration of organisms in tissue is not suc-
-s  ) sio ds-r, 
cessful, the diagnosis may be problematic unless cytolog-
section), 3 to 10μm in length and 1 to 2 μm in diameter,
ical evaluation of smears of exudate reveals the fungus.
usually are present in profusion, both free and within
In the experience of one author (V.K.A.) the polyclonal
macrophages. Contraction of the cytoplasm creates clear
anti-Mycobacterium bovis (BCG) stain (Bonenberger
spaces around central nuclei. Discrete organisms may be
et al., 2001) may help to identify organisms in suspected
observed; more often the cytoplasmic spaces appear con-
cases. Fluorescent antibody testing to detect organisms in
fluent due to poorly visible cell walls. These confluent
biopsy specimens also has been used; however, this test
spaces create large clear pockets inside macrophages that
may not be widely available.
are crowded with organisms. The nucleus of the engorged
Differential diagnosis is more diffcult in the dog than
macrophage often is not visible.
in the cat, due to the relative paucity of organisms in
 In canine sporotrichosis usually very small numbers of
 canine cases. Histopathologic differential diagnoses in the
organisms are scattered throughout the inflammatory
dog include infections by opportunistic or systemic fungi,
 infltrate. Organisms may be numerous in dogs that have
foreign body reactions, and sterile granuloma and pyo-
received recent corticosteroid therapy. Visible organisms
 granuloma syndrome. Clinical differentiation and culture
may be absent in some cases. Sporothrix schenckii is best
may be required. In the cat, organisms are highly charac-
visualized in dogs using a periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) or
teristic in tissue and allow definitive diagnosis. Confusion
Gomori's methenamine silver (GMS) stain. Organisms
with cryptococcosis might be encountered for organisms
in tissue are pleomorphic, round or oval, occasionally
within clear spaces, mimicking the capsule formation of
budding yeasts which measure 3 to 8μm in diameter.
Cryptococcus neoformans. Sporothrix schencki are gen-
Infectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
301
Fig. 12.51 Widespread opportunistic fungal infection (phaeohy-
phomycosis) in a Viszla. Multiple ulcerated plaques and nodules are
present on the rump and tail.
Fig. 12.49 Opportunistic fungal infection (phaeohyphomycosis) in
a cat due to Alternaria sp. Ulcerated, firrm nodules are present on the
planum nasale, muzzle, and pinna.
Fig. 12.52 Closer view of the tail of the dog in Fig. 12.51. Alopecic
nodules have coalesced and ulcerated.
infections seen in the dog and cat. They are grouped
together for discussion because of shared histopathologic
and clinical features. Defnitive diagnosis of any oppor-
tunistic infection caused by saprophytic fungi requires the
isolation of the organism from tissue rather than exudate,
plus histologic demonstration of tissue invasion by organ-
isms with compatible morphologic characteristics (Foil,
Fig. 12.50 Side view of the cat in Fig. 12.49. A large nodule is
1998). The term 'zygomycosis' is avoided as it refers to
deforming the planurm nasale.
fungal diseases: mucormycosis, discussed here, and ento-
mophthoromycosis (see p. 303).
erally smaller and more elongated in shape than Crypto-
Hyalohyphomycosis (previously termed paecilomyco-
coccus neoformans.
sis) refers to opporrunistic fungal infections caused by
ubiquitous saprophytic soil fungi that produce nonpig-
mented (nondematiaceous)  hyphal  elements in  tissue.
CUTANEOUS INFECTIONS OF
The organisms reported to cause cutaneous or dissemi-
OTHER OPPORTUNISTIC FUNGI
nated hyalohyphomycosis include Paecilomyces spp.,
Pseudoallescheria spp., Acremonium spp., Fusarium spp.,
Clinical features (Figures 12.49 through 12.52)
and Geotrichum spp. (Foil, 1998).
Cutaneous hyalohyphomycosis, phaeohyphomycosis,
Phaeohyphomycosis  describes opportunistic  fungal
mucormycosis, eumycotic mycetoma, aspergillosis, and
infections caused by a number of ubiquitous molds that
are either saprophytes or plant pathogens, and that
302
Diseases of the dermis
produce pigmented (dematiaceous) hyphal elements in
local extension. Ulceration results in chronic nonhealing
mammalian tissue. The organisms that cause cutaneous
abscesses, draining fistulous tracts, or, less commonly, coa-
or disseminated phaeohyphomycosis include Alternaria
lescing shallow ulcers. Eumycotic mycetomas additionally
spp., Bipolaris spp., Cladosporium spp., Curvularia
are characterized by tissue grains or granules. For undeter-
spp, Drechslera spp, Exophiala spp., Moniliella spp..
mined reasons, feline phaeohyphomycosis most commonly
Ochroconis spp., Phialemonium spp., Phialophora spp.,
affects the planum nasale in cats (Abramo et al., 2002).
Pseudomicrodochium
Scolecobasidium
 Most reported cases of mucormycosis have gastroin-
"-dds
 spp.,
Staphylotrichum spp.,Stemphyllium spp.,
Fonsecaea
 testinal or respiratory tract infection; mucormycosis is
spp., and Cladophyalophora spp. (Foil, 1998; Fondati et
highly suggestive of a defective immune response (Foil,
al., 2001; Abramo et al., 2002).
1998). In comparison to other infections caused by sapro-
Mucormycosis refers to opportunistic fungal infections
phytic fungi, mucormycosis usually is characterized by
caused by organisms of the order Mucorales. The organ-
acute, rapidly-progressive disease (Grooters, 2002).
isms that cause disseminated disease leading to skin infec-
Variation in associated clinical signs caused by oppor-
tion include Mucor spp., Rhizopus spp., Rhizomucor
tunistic fungal infection is substantial, and is contingent
spp, Absidia spp, and Saksenaea spp. (Foil, 1998;
on the host species, organism, and the site of entry. The
Grooters, 2002). Organisms of the order Mucorales are
reader is referred to standard texts of infectious diseases
ubiquitous saprophytic fungi widely distributed in nature.
and mycology for further information.
They are common contaminants in fungal cultures
 Few data are available on breed, age, or sex predilec-
obtained from animal skin and hair.
tions; this may reflect the comparative infrequency of
Eumycotic mycetomas are opporrunistic fungal infec-
 these diseases. Since acquired immunologic incompetence
 tions that form variably pigmented tissue grains or gran-
is more common in older animals, older animals may be
ules composed of dense aggregates of organisms plus
 at greater risk for opportunistic fungal infection. German
host-derived material. Similar to the tissue grains seen
Shepherd Dogs appear to be predisposed to aspergillosis
with actinomycosis (see p. 272), and dermatophytic and
(Day, 1998; Sharp, 1998). In addition, nine of ten dogs
bacterial pseudomycetomas, these tissue grains are com-
described with various opportunistic fungal diseases were
posed of fungal aggregates imbedded in amorphous
German Shepherd Dogs, indicating likelihood 
of
eosinophilic material presumed to be antigen-antibody
 increased susceptibility (Watt et al., 1995).
complexes formed as a result of the Splendore-Hoeppli
 Clinically, cutaneous infections of opportunistic fungi
reaction. White-grain (eumycotic) mycetomas are caused
 must be differentiated from neoplasms, cryptococcosis
by Pseudoallescberia boydii and Acremonium byalinum
 and other systemic mycoses, feline leprosy syndrome,
and black-grain (eumycotic) mycetomas are caused by
opportunistic mycobacterial infection, sterile granuloma
Curvularia geniculata, Madurela grisea, and Phaeococ-
and pyogranuloma syndrome, reactive histiocytosis, and
cus spp. (Foil, 1998).
foreign body reactions. Impression smears from biopsy
Aspergillosis and penicilliosis are opportunistic fungal
specimens and exudate may demonstrate the offending
infections caused by ubiquitous saprophytic fungi that
agent. Fungal culture from tissue and histopathology are
have predominantly nasal, pulmonary, or disseminated
required to establish a diagnosis. Culture should not be
involvement (Day, 1998; Sharp, 1998). Nasal disease is
performed until the systemic mycoses blastomycosis,
caused predominantly by Aspergillus spp, which can extend
histoplasmosis, and coccidioidomycosis are ruled out by
 to involve adjacent skin and mucocutaneous junctions.
impression smear and histopathology, since attempted
Skin infections develop either secondary to dissemi-
culture may be dangerous (see p. 291).
nated disease or as a result of trauma to the skin. A defec-
tive immunologic response probably is present in most
Biopsy site selection
animals with systemic opportunistic infection.
 Skin
disease secondary to systemic infection occurs with
 Both intact and ulcerated nodules should be excised using
aspergillosis and white-grain eumycotic mycetomas. Skin
sterile wedge technique or punch biopsy. The subjacent
infection in hyalohyphomycosis can be primary, or sec-
panniculus should be included in the specimen. If oppor-
ondary to systemic infection. Primary cutaneous or sub-
tunistic fungal infection is suspected for a solitary lesion,
cutaneous
infection most commonly
characterizes
wide surgical extirpation is recommended, and offers the
phaeohyphomycosis  and
 mucormycosis.
.Black-grain
 additional advantage of a potential cure. If only fistulated
eumycotic mycetomas usually develop at the site of a
 nodules or chronic abscesses are present, care should be
superfcial wound.
taken to obtain a deep, representative sample. Clinicians
Similar to the systemic mycoses (see p. 291) there is a
and laboratory personnel should wear protective gloves
commonality of clinical lesions seen with opportunistic
when handling infected tissue. These organisms can cause
fungal diseases. Grouped papules or nodules, located
 opportunistic infections in humans by direct inoculation,
either in the dermis or subcutis, coalesce and enlarge by
similar to the systemic fungi (see p. 291).
Infectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
303
Fig. 12.54 Phaeohyphomycosis in a cat. Pigmented hyphae are
Fig. 12.53Opportunistic fungal infection in a cat. Irregular, septate
hyphae have bulbous swellings (Gomori's methenamine silver).
clearly evident with hematoxylin and eosin.
Histopathology (Figures 12.53 and 12.54)
of fungus present; the reader is referred to standard text-
books of medical mycology. Histopathology cannot spe-
The epidermis is acanthotic and may be ulcerated. In
ciate these organisms; fungal culture is required.
opportunistic fungal infection, the dermis and usually the
Opportunistic fungal infections as a group are usually
underlying panniculus are diffusely infiltrated with large
diagnosed with little diffculty due to the presence of
epithelioid or foamy macrophages. Variable numbers of
organisms or their ghosts on HE examination. Differen-
neutrophils and lymphocytes are present, and multinu-
tial etiologic diagnosis principally involves definitive iden-
cleated giant cells may be found.
tification of the causative agent, and is not possible with
 Basophilic fungal organisms may be identifed on hema-
histopathology alone. Fungal culture is required. In cats,
toxylin and eosin (HE) stained sections. Most often,
 the opportunistic fungal infections that are characterized
examination reveals predominantly clear ^ghosts' of fungi
by infltration of foamy macrophages may resemble cuta-
within or armong macrophages. These fungal ghosts help
neous xanthoma or feline lepromatous leprosy. Again, the
to create the vacuolated or foamy appearance of the
observation of fungal structures allows differentiation.
cytoplasm. Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) or Gomori's
methenamine silver (GMS) staining will delineate these
CUTANEOUS PYTHIOSIS, LAGENIDIOSIS,
organisms; the number identifed with special stains is
AND ENTOMOPHTHOROMYCOSIS
always more profuse than suggested by HE examination.
In phaeohyphomycosis, organisms are pigmented in HE
stained sections and do not require additional staining
Clinical features (Figures 12.55 through 12.58)
for identifcation. Many of the opportunistic fungi have
Cutaneous pythiosis,
lagenidiosis, and entomoph-
branching, septate hyphae, sometimes with spore-like
thoromycosis are markedly regional opportunistic skin
swellings. Morphology will vary depending on the species
infections seen in the dog and cat. These infections are
304
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 12.57 Cutaneous lagenidiosis affecting the lower leg and foot
Fig. 12.55 Cutaneous pythiosis affecting the leg of a dog. Coa-
of a dog. These areas are irregularly swollen. Nodules have become
lescing nodules on the left foreleg are necrotic and ulcerated.
necrotic and ulcerated, and drain a serosanguinous material.
(Photograph courtesy A.M. Grooters.)
(Photograph courtesy A.M. Grooters.)
Fig. 12.56 Cutaneous pythiosis affecting the foot of a dog. Little
of the normal anatomy ofthe foot is recognizable. (Photograph cour-
tesy A.M. Grooters.)
not seen in most parts of North America, but are seen
Fig. 12.58 Close view of cutaneous lagenidiosis on the chest of a
rarely in localized enzootic areas. They are caused by
dog. A large slightly crateriforrm ulcer with a well-dermarcated rim
saprophytic water molds and fungi. All three diseases
exhibits multiple draining fistulous tracts. (Photograph courtesy
have the potential to cause cutaneous or systemic granu-
A.M. Grooters.)
lomatous disease, and are grouped here because they
share strong histopathologic and clinical similarities.
 Defnitive diagnosis of any opportunistic infection caused
Infectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
305
by saprophytic organisms requires the isolation of the
The clinical features of the cutaneous form of all three
organism from tissue rather than exudate, plus histologic
diseases are very similar in both dogs and cats. Most
demonstration of tissue invasion by organisms with com-
initial lesions consist of poorly circumscribed dermal
patible morphologic characteristics (Foil, 1998).
nodules. Progression is moderate to rapid as the lesions
Cutaneous pythiosis is a rare, ulcerative, pyogranulo-
expand peripherally and subcutaneously, leading to the
matous skin disease in the dog and cat caused by Pythium
formation of satellite nodules. Nodules become necrotic,
insidiosum (Duncan et al., 1992; Foil, 1998; Dykstra
ulcerate, and develop fistulous tracts which drain puru-
et al., 1999; Grooters, 2002). Pythium insidiosum is a
lent or serosanguinous exudate.
fungus-like, aquatic, dimorphic, flagellate water mold
Canine cutaneous pythiosis occurs most commonly
protoctistid oomycete. The natural habitat of Pythium
on the extremities, muzzle, inguinal region, and lum-
insidiosum is warm stagnant water with a high content of
bosacral area (Grooters, 2002). Dorsal lumbosacral
organic debris (Foil, 1998). Animals that develop pythio-
pythiosis may be seen secondary to self-trauma associated
sis probably have previously existing trauma and acquire
with flea allergy dermatitis. Pruritus may be marked with
the organism when swimming or wading in infested
 pythiosis, and commonly initiates severe self-rauma. Vis-
water. Pythiosis is seen primarily in warm humid climates
cerally
 disseminated canine pythiosis has been noted
such as along the gulf coast of the United States, and in
rarely (Foil, 1998). Feline cutaneous pythiosis is reported
multiple Pacific Rim countries (Foil,
1998). Pythiosis
 to affect the inguinal region, tailhead, periorbital region,
affects predominantly the gastrointestinal tract and the
ventral neck, perineum, and medial thighs (Grooters,
skin in the dog and cat, with gastrointestinal disease seen
2002).
most frequently (Foil, 1998).
Canine lagenidiosis has a distribution pattern similar to
Cutaneous lagenidiosis is a rare disease with marked
pythiosis (Grooters, 2002; Grooters et al., 2003). In con-
similarities to pythiosis, reported recently only in dogs
 trast to pythiosis and entomophthoromycosis, lagenidio-
(Grooters, 2002; Grooters et al., 2003). Lagenidiosis is
sis commonly is characterized by the development of
caused by an as yet unnamed species of Lagenidium,
lesions at distant visceral sites such as the lungs, esopha-
which is another fungus-like, aquatic, dimorphic, flagel-
gus, trachea, and mediastinum, plus lymph nodes
late water mold protoctistid oomycete (Grooters, 2002;
(Grooters, 2002; Grooters et al., 2003).
Grooters et al., 2003). Lagenidium spp. probably occupy
 Entomophthoromycosis may cause more widely dis-
a similar ecologic niche and cause skin disease via wound
 tributed draining nodules in the dog (Hillier et al., 1994;
contamination (Grooters et al., 2003). Skin disease and
Grooters, 2002). Lesions of the hard palate also have been
reported (Bauer et al., 1997; Grooters, 2002). Ento-
Lagenidiosis may be a more clinically aggressive disease
 mophthoromycosis seems to be a less locally aggressive
than pythiosis, as affected dogs have lesions at distant
 disease clinically than either pythiosis or lagenidiosis.
sites including the great vessels, lungs, esophagus,
Active, young adult large-breed dogs may be
at
trachea, and mediastinum (Grooters, 2002; Grooters
increased risk for all three diseases. German Shepherd
et al., 2003).
sisonud snoaueno on pasodsipand aq Aeu shod
 Cutaneous entomophthoromycosis is a rare, ulcerative,
(Foil, 1998). Other signalment predilection data are not
pyogranulomatous, fungal skin disease (Hillier et al.,
available.
1994; Foil, 1998; Greene et al., 2002). Entomoph-
Clinically, pythiosis, lagenidiosis, and entomophthoro-
thoromycosis is caused by ubiquitous saprophytic soil
mycosis may resemble deep folliculitis and furunculosis,
fungi in the order Entomophthorales and genera Conid-
opportunistic mycobacterial infection, actinomycosis,
iobolus or Basidiobolus (Hillier et al., 1994; Foil, 1998;
nocardiosis, cryptococcosis and other systemic mycoses,
Greene et al., 2002). Entomophthorales are soil sapro-
infections of other opportunistic fungi, neoplasms, or
phytes seen predominantly in humid tropical and sub-
 canine acral lick dermatitis (if involving a distal extrem-
 tropical regions. In the past, entomophthoromycosis has
ity). Histopathology is the most effcient method of ruling
been grouped with mucormycosis (see p. 301) as zygomy-
 Out the diseases listed above. Culture should not be per-
cosis. In the opinion of the authors, the term zygomyco-
formed until the systemic mycoses blastomycosis, histo-
sis should be avoided as it refers to two groups of
plasmosis, and coccidioidomycosis are ruled out, since
histopathologically disparate saprophytic fungal diseases.
attempted culture may be dangerous (see p. 291). Nested
The portal of entry for cutaneous disease is likely
to
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays to detect oomy-
be either wound contamination, or by extension from
cotic DNA, and immunoblot analyses are the tests of
gastrointestinal or  respiratory  disease 
(Foil,
1998;
choice to differentiate these three diseases from each other
Grooters, 2002). Entomophthoromycosis can either
be
(Grooters, 2002; Grooters & Gee, 2002; Znajda et al.,
restricted to the skin or can disseminate viscerally (Foil,
2002). It is likely that some previous cases diagnosed
1998).
 as pythiosis prior to the development of newer testing
306
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 12.59 Cutaneous pythiosis in a dog. Darkly staining lakes of
Fig. 12.60 Cutaneous pythiosis in a dog demonstrating a large
degranulated, eosinophilic debris are accompanied by hemorrhage
inflarmed and thrombosed blood vessel. (Case material courtesy A.M.
and inflammation.
Grooters.)
procedures may have been lagenidiosis or entomoph-
deeper subcutis are diffusely and severely inflamed.
thoromycosis (Grooters, 2002; Grooters et al., 2003).
Necrosis is present, and may be extensive. Pyogranulo-
 matous inflammation may be multifocal to diffuse, and is 
punctuated by indiscrete and irregular, large foci of
Biopsy site selection
degenerating, degranulating eosinophils. Intact eosinophils,
 Both intact and ulcerated nodules should be excised using
neutrophils, macrophages, and rare multinucleated giant
sterile wedge technique or punch biopsy. The subjacent
cells surround these eosinophilic foci. Mucin may border
panniculus should be included in the specimen. If these
 these foci as well, and there is encircling or intervening
diseases are suspected for a solitary lesion, wide surgical
fbrosis. In hematoxylin and eosin (HE) stained sections,
extirpation is recommended and offers the additional
organisms may be seen as clear ghosts within eosinophilic
advantage of a potential cure. The zoonotic potential of
degenerate foci or in other areas of necrosis and inflam-
pythiosis, lagenidiosis, and entomophthoromycosis is not 
 mation, but generally are not visible without special stain-
known, but probably is minimal in healthy individuals
ing. Pythium insidiosum-infected tissue tends to be rich in 
with competent immune systems. However reasonable
hyphae, often clustered within areas of necrosis or inflam-
caution such as the wearing of gloves is recommended.
mation (Grooters, A., personal communication, 2003).
Occasional vascular necrosis and thrombosis are present,
and may be attended by hyphae within devitalized vessel
Histopathology (Figures 12.59 through 12.70)
walls. Edema and hemorrhage are variable.
For pythiosis, acanthosis or severe ulceration of the epi-
The inflammatory reaction pattern of Lagenidium sp.
dermis is seen. The dermis, panniculus, and often the
is very similar to that of pythiosis. Giant cells may be
Infectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
307
Fig. 12.61 Pythium insidiosum from the dog of Fig. 12.60. Large
Fig. 12.62 Entomophthorormycosis due to Conidiobolus sp. infec-
silver-positive irregularly branching hyphae are evident; septations
tion in a dog, demonstrating diffuse pyogranulomatous inflamma-
are poorly visible {Gomori's methenamine silver). {Case material
tion. {Case material courtesy R. Bauer & A.M. Grooters.)
courtesy A.M. Grooters.)
numerous (Grooters et al., 2003), in contrast to pythio-
All four organisms have broad, irregularly branching.
sis. Eosinophilic inflammation is often intense, but may
poorly septate hyphae with nonparallel walls. Pythium
be outshone by pyogranulomatous infltrates in some
insidiosum usually are not visible in HE-stained sections
cases (Grooters et al., 2003). Organisms are usually
other than as occasional ghosts. Periodic acid-Schiff
numerous. Vascular invasion by fungi and thrombosis
(PAS) stain also usually will not detect Pythium insidio-
may be prominent, as in pythiosis.
sum very clearly in tissue; this stain is superior in detect-
Microscopic lesions of cutaneous entomophthoromy-
ing living organisms, and Pythium insidiosum often is
d  a r   o 
devitalized in specimens obtained for histopathology.
(Hillier et al., 1994; Foil, 1998). Organisms tend to be
Gomori's methenamine silver (GMS) will stain the wall of
less abundant, in contrast to pythiosis (Grooters, A., per-
living or dead fungi and must be utilized in any suspected
sonal communication, 2003). Pyogranulomatous inflam-
case of pythiosis, or the diagnosis may be overlooked.
mation with prominent eosinophils and degenerate foci
Pythium insidiosum has broad, occasionally septate,
with eosinophilic degranulation were reported in a dog
irregularly branching hyphae, which range from 2.5 to
with skin and subcutaneous infection with Conidiobolus
8.9μm in diameter (Foil, 1998).
Conidiobolus spp., and Basidiobolus spp. are similarly
in pythiosis (Hillier et al., 1994). Basidiobolus ranarum
diffcult to visualize on HE examination, in comparison
infection in a dog was associated with diffuse mixed
to Lagenidium sp. (Grooters et al., 2003). Conidiobolus
inflammation with giant cells, necrosis, and fbrosis 
sp. in one reported dog were identified as 'non-branching
(Greene et al., 2002).
and clearly septate’ (Hillier et al., 1994), but were
308
 Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 12.63 High magnification of Conidiobolus sp. infection in the
Fig. 12.64
Higher magnification of Fig. 12.63. {Case material cour
dog of Fig. 12.62. Eosinophilic sleeves of Splendore-Hoeppli mate-
tesy R. Bauer & A.M. Grooters)
rial bring ghosts of hyphae into relief. (Case material courtesy R.
Bauer & A.M. Grooters.)
appear round or bulbous, with occasional right angle
branching observed (Grooters et al., 2003).
described as 'rarely septate and rarely branched' in a dog
The entomophthoromycotic organisms, Conidiobolus
with oral infection (Bauer et al., 1997). Hyphal width
a on kall anou aq keu dds snpogopisa pue dds
varied from 5 to 11μm in the dog with skin and subcu-
prominent   encircling S
 Splendore-Hoeppli  material
taneous infection (Hillier et al., 1994), and averaged 8μm
(eosinophilic sleeves') than Pythium insidiosum (Foil,
in the dog with oral infection (Bauer et al., 1997). Basid-
1998) or Lagenidium sp. (Grooters et al., 2003); this
iobolus ranarum hyphae were 7 to 20 μm in diameter,
se jn oi siso ied q on spn i
deeply basophilic, thin-walled, rarely branching, and
the brightly eosinophilic deposits. However eosinophilic
Occasionally septate; spore-like bulbous enlargements at
sleeves were not reported in the dog with skin and
the tips of hyphae were described (Greene et al., 2002).
subcutaneous Conidiobolus sp. infection (Hillier et al.,
As reported, in contrast to Pythium insidiosum,
1994), nor described in the dog with Basidiobolus
Lagenidium sp. hyphae are usually recognizable on HE
ranarum infection (Greene et al., 2002). They were iden-
stained sections and may be within giant cells or in extra-
tifed in the dog with oral Conidiobolus sp. infection
cellular location (Grooters et al., 2003). Hyphal diameter
(Bauer et al., 1997), and observed by the authors in a case
ranges from 7 to 25 μm, with an average of 12μm, and
of oropharyngeal infection in a dog (case material cour-
they are thus larger than Pythium insidiosum as well as
tesy A. Grooters, 2003). Different species of Conidiobo-
Conidiobolus spp. and Basidiobolus spp. Scant to thin
lus may be involved in cutaneous versus oral infection.
eosinophilic sleeves of Splendore-Hoeppli reaction may
Immunohistochemistry, originally developed for equine
surround hyphae of Lagenidium sp. Some hyphae may
cases (Brown et al., 1988), has been utilized to identify
Infectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
309
Fig. 12.65 Entomophthoromycosis due to Basidiobolus ranarum
Fig. 12.66 Basidiobotus ranaru infection in the dog of Fig. 12.65.
Numeroussilver-positive
organismsarepresent{Gomori's
intense inflammation. {Case material courtesy C.W. Brockus & K.
methenamine silver). {Case material courtesy C.W. Brockus & K.
Latimer.)
Latimer.)
pythiosis in tissue (Duncan et al., 1992). However, weak
of this group within eosinophilic degenerate foci will
staining of Lagenidium hyphae has been documented, and
 allow differentiation from other infectious diseases, but
is likely due to antigenic similarities. Testing by poly-
not from each other. Identification of the specific etiologic
merase chain reaction (PCR) has successfully identified
 organism by immunohistochemistry, testing by PCR, or
both Pythium insidiosum and Lagenidium sp. in tissue
culture of clinical specimens is required for definitive
(Znajda et al., 2002), and is considered most reliable in
diagnosis.
their ultimate differentiation. Immunohistochemistry will
allow definitive identification of Pythium insidiosum and
CUTANEOUS PROTOTHECOSIS
permit its  differentiation  from  the  morphologically
Clinical features (Figure 12.71)
et al., 1994), as well as Lagenidium sp.
Differential diagnoses in the dog include deep bacterial
Protothecosis is an uncommon to very rare disserminated
or fungal infections, or foreign body reactions, particu-
visceral or cutaneous/subcutaneous opportunistic infec-
larly those characterized by severe necrosis. In cats,
tion caused by the ubiquitous saprophytic achlorophyl-
lesions may resemble eosinophilic granuloma, but inflam-
lous algae of the genus Prototheca. Reproduction is by
mation is much deeper. Necrotizing inflammation due to
endosporulation. Primary cutaneous and subcutaneous
deep arthropod trauma (spider bites) also may be con-
sidered (see Chapter 14). Demonstration of the organisms
and the cat and is caused by Prototheca wickerhamii.
310
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 12.67 Higher magnification of Basidiobotus ranarum infection
Fig. 12.68  Lagenidiosis in a German Shepherd Dog demonstrating
in the dog of Fig. 12.65, demonstrating irregular, poorly branching
diffuse inflammation with giant cells {arrow). (Case material cour-
and occasionally septate hyphae (Gormori's methenamine silver).
tesy A.M. Grooters.)
(Case material courtesy C.W. Brockus & K. Latimer.)
Cutaneous protothecosis in humans is caused by the same
isolated most commonly from sewage and animal waste.
organism (Chao et al., 2002). Only three cases of primary
Contamination of water systems, soil, and food probably
canine cutaneous protothecosis have been reported (Ginel
initiates infection via contact with injured skin or mucosa
et al., 1997). Feline primary cutaneous and subcutaneous
(Greene, 1998).
protothecosis is uncommon, but is the most frequently
Depressed cell-mediated immunity commonly is incrim-
seen form of protothecosis in that species (Greene, 1998).
inated in canine disseminated visceral disease, and is sus-
Canine disseminated visceral protothecosis is uncom-
pected in canine cutaneous and subcutaneous prothecosis
mon, but is the most frequent form of protothecosis
(Greene, 1998). In comparison, primary cutaneous pro-
observed (Greene, 1998). Disseminated visceral protothe-
tothecosis in cats seems to occur in healthy animals with
cosis is very rare in the cat. Prototheca zopfi is most
no evidence of a compromised immune system (Greene,
frequently isolated from canine disseminated visceral pro-
1998). Primary or acquired lack of cell mediated immu-
tothecosis (Greene, 1998). Although secondary skin
nity predisposes to protothecosis in humans; defects in
lesions may be seen with disserminated visceral protothe-
neutrophil function also have been documented (Chao
 cosis, they are not a prominent feature. Thus, the rest of
et al., 2002).
this discussion will center on primary cutaneous and sub-
Crusted nodules with fistulation are the most common
cutaneous protothecosis.
clinical features of canine primary cutaneous prototheco-
Protothecosis in animals and humans is worldwide in
 sis. Affected sites include the external nares, pinnae, distal
distribution. Most North American cases are diagnosed
legs, and scrotum (Ginel et al., 1997). One author (P.J.1.)
in the southeastern United States. Prototheca spp. are
has seen primary cutaneous protothecosis involving a
Infectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
311
Fig. 12.69 Lagenidiosis in the dog of Fig. 12.68 demonstrating
Fig. 12.70 Silver staining of the same field as in Fig. 12.69. Irreg-
large thrombosed vessel. Note prominent adjacent hyphal
ular branching and partially septate hyphae are prominent (Gomori's
ghosts, characteristic of this infection. {Case material courtesy A.M.
methenamine silver). {Case material courtesy A.M. Grooters.
Grooters.)
lateral alar wing of the planum nasale. Depigmentation
foreign body reactions, and neoplasia. Impression smears
was a prominent additional feature.
as e suads Asdoq pue sanpnxa wo
 Feline cutaneous protothecosis is characterized by grad.
organisms.
 Histopathology and culture from  sterile
ually enlarging, frm nodules. Lesions are noted most
biopsy specimens are required for definitive diagnosis.
commonly on the legs and paws, although nodules have
Culture should not be performed until the systemic
been reported to affect the planum nasale, muzzle, pinnae,
mycoses blastomycosis,
histoplasmosis, and coccid-
and base of the tail (Greene, 1998).
ioidomycosis are ruled out by impression smear and
Breed predilections are not available for canine cuta-
histopathology, since attempted culture may be dangerous 
neous protothecosis. Collies may be predisposed to dis-
(see p. 291).
seminated visceral protothecosis (Greene, 1998). The only
case of canine protothecosis seen by one author (P.J.I.)
Biopsy site selection
also was in a Collie. Female dogs seem to be preferentially
affected with visceral disease; age predilections have not
 Nonulcerated nodules should be removed in their entirety
been noted (Greene, 1998). Signalment predilections have
using wedge resection technique or larger punch biopsies.
not been identified in cats.
If only ulcerated nodules are present, care should be taken
 Protothecosis must be differentiated from opportunis-
to obtain a deep representative sample. Clinicians and
tic fungal infections, feline leprosy syndrome, cryptococ-
laboratory personnel should wear protective gloves when
cosis, other systemic fungal diseases, sterile granuloma
handling infected tisue, since systemic fungal infections
s r rs d p
clinically may mimic protothecosis. Animal protothecosis
312
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 12.71 Cutaneous protothecosis in a Collie. A mass deforrming
the left alar wing of the planurm nasale has ulcerated.
is not a health risk for humans with competent immune
systems as the organisms are ubiquitous.
sive inflammation and necrosis. Clear spaces contain mumerous
Histopathology (Figures 12.72 and 12.73)
degenerate organisms.
The epidermis is acanthotic and ulcerated. Variable
diffuse inflammation affects the dermis, panniculus, and
often the deeper subcutis, and is accompanied by heavy
recently treated with ketoconazole showed relatively
colonization by irregular organisms. There is often severe
more intense inflammation and fewer organisms than
necrosis resulting in degeneration and fragmentation
untreated lesions (Perez et al., 1997).
of organisms. Inflammation may be minimal. Large
Cutaneous  protothecosis produces  a characteristic
macrophages are accompanied by fewer neutrophils, lym-
histopathologic picture, as the organisms are numerous,
phocytes, and plasma cells. Neutrophils may form small
unique, and easily identifed. Refractile organisms con-
clusters, but discrete pyogranuloma formation is uncom-
taining pie wedge-shaped endospores are diagnostic.
mon. There is often fbrosis throughout the lesions.
Organisms are found within and among macrophages.
CUTANEOUS LEISHMANIASIS
Viable Prototheca spp. in tissue are round to oval, have
 thin highly refractile walls and a light to darkly basophilic
(Synonym: leishmaniosis)
internal structure, and measure 8 to 30 μm in diameter.
Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) or Gomori's methenamine
Clinical features (Figures 12.74 and 12.75)
silver (GMS) staining will delineate these organisms. They
are often degenerated, resulting in loss of internal struc-
Leishmaniasis is a chronic cutaneous and visceral, insect-
ture but retention of the refractile wall that is collapsed,
transmitted, infectious protozoan disease with worldwide
folded, shrunken, or iregular. Careful examination will
distribution (Slappendel, 1988). Clinically apparent leish-
reveal four to eight characteristic daughter cells, Or
maniasis is uncommon in the dog and rare in the cat, even
endospores, that create a subdivided or 'cut pie' appear-
in enzootic areas. It is very rare outside endemic areas.
ance to the organism. In one reported case, lesions
The disease is caused by obligatory intracellular diphasic
Infectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
313
Fig. 12.75 Cutaneous leishmaniasis in a dog. Distinctive silvery-
white, asbestos-like adherent scales are distributed in the haircoat.
(Photograph courtesy Z. Alhaidari.)
protozoa of the genus Leishmania which usually are
transmitted by sandflies. Canine cutaneous and visceral
disease is most often caused by Leishmania infantum,
the organism primarily responsible for causing visceral
leishmaniasis in humans (Marsella & de Gopegui, 1998;
Slappendel & Ferrer, 1998). The insect vectors in North
America are the blood-sucking sandflies of the genus Lut-
 zomyia, while the European vectors are Phlebotomus spp.
Dogs, wild canids, and rodents are the natural reservoirs.
 Differences between leishmaniasis in dogs and leish-
Fig. 12.73 Cutaneous protothecosis in a dog. Numerous irregular
maniasis in humans have created confusion in classifica-
organisms are present throughout the field; many lack internal struc-
tion. In humans, leishmaniasis commonly is subdivided
ture and are likely nonviable.
into cutaneous leishmaniasis, mucocutaneous leishmania-
sis, and visceral leishmaniasis (Klaus et al., 2003). Canine 
leishmaniasis usually is classified as 'visceral leishmania-
sis’ since the causative organism, Leishmania infantum,
causes visceral leishmaniasis in people (Slappendel &
Ferrer, 1998). However, the syndrome seen in dogs almost
always combines cutaneous and visceral disease.
Although Leishmania spp. are worldwide in distribu-
tion, canine leishmaniasis is diagnosed most commonly
near the Mediterranean basin, particularly in southern
France, Portugal, Spain, Greece, and Italy (Denerolle,
1996; Ciaramella et al., 1997; Koutinas et al., 1999).
Canine leishmaniasis still is rare in North America;
enzootic foci are located in Oklahoma, Texas, and Ohio.
However, with increased pet mobility, autochthonous
cases are being seen in nonendemic areas worldwide after
pets return from or are imported from distant locales.
Canine visceral' leishmaniasis has now been reported in
Fig. 12.74 Cutaneous leishmaniasis in a dog. As is typical, scaling
21 states in the USA; incidence is low but seems to be
is more severe on the muzzle, periorbital region, and the pinnae.
increasing (Grosjean et al., 2003). Seroprevalence is still
(Photograph courtesy Z. Alhaidari.)
very low in the USA as only two of 957 serum samples
collected in a recent study were positive for antibodies
against Leishmania spp. (Grosjean et al., 2003).
314
Diseases of the dermis
The pathogenesis of leishmaniasis is complex as the
adult dogs, usually 3 to 7 years of age (Ciaramella et al.,
host immune response plays a key role in the evolution
1997; Koutinas et al., 1999). Multiple sources indicate
of infection, morbidity, and mortality. Using modern
that male dogs are at slightly increased risk (Slappendel,
1988; Ciaramella et al, 1997; Slappendel & Ferrer, 1998;
is now known that the prevalence of canine infection
Koutinas et al., 1999). Canine breed predilections have
is greater than 50% in endemic areas (Ferrer, 2002).
not been reported in countries where canine leishmania-
However, most infected dogs do not develop clinical
sis is relatively common. However one report noted a
disease; disease prevalence ranges only from 3% to 10%
'saoa praudus ueua ui saseo jo raqurnu Sursdins 
(Ferrer 2002). Antibody-mediated immune response is
although hospital population-corrected data were not
nonprotective and is, in fact, detrimental, as massive anti-
given (Ciaramella et al., 1997).
body production leads to organ damage from circulating
The link between leishmaniasis and Foxhounds in
immune complexes (Slappendel & Ferrer, 1998). Con-
North America is signifcant and worrisome. Visceral
versely, cell-mediated immune response is protective and
leishmaniasis has been identifed in Foxhounds in hunting
genetically predetermined (Ferrer, 2002). Underlying
kennels and in Foxhounds used as blood donors at a uni-
occult immunosuppressive disease may trigger overt
versity teaching hospital (Owens et al., 2001; Gaskin
clinical leishmaniasis. Leishmaniasis is seen, presumably
et al., 2002). The identifcation of leishmaniasis in Fox-
secondary to suppressed cell-mediated immune surveil-
 hounds but not in co-housed Beagles and Basset Hounds
lance, in conjunction with visceral neoplasia, autoimmune
 in the former study suggests striking breed predilection
disease, other infectious diseases, and immunosuppressive
for susceptibility to infection. This link is of concern as
drug therapy (Ferrer, 2002).
Foxhounds commonly are used as canine blood donors.
Typical clinical features include a nonpruritic, general-
It is likely that Foxhounds exhibit diminished immune
ized, exfoliative dermatitis with alopecia. Silvery-white,
surveilance against Leishmania, thus allowing infection
asbestos-like adherent scales are a distinctive feature.
to occur more frequently.
Nodules and multifocal ulceration may occur in concert
Clinical differential diagnoses for canine cutaneous
with exfoliation as the disease progresses. More general-
leishmaniasis characterized by exfoliative dermatitis with
ized nodular skin disease is seen much less commonly.
alopecia should include autoimmune skin diseases with
In general, the phenotype of generalized exfoliative der-
frequent facial involvement (discoid lupus erythematosus,
 matitis with alopecia probably results from a more effec-
systemic lupus erythematosus, pemphigus foliaceus, pem-
tive immune response than the less common phenotype of
phigus erythematosus), epitheliotropic lymphoma, der-
 generalized nodular skin disease, which is seen with more
matophytosis, and zinc-responsive dermatosis. Sebaceous
severe immunosuppression (Slappendel & Ferrer, 1998).
adenitis is an additional differential diagnosis. Vesicles
Three recent large retrospective studies have increased
 or pustules characterize pemphigus; involvement of the
our knowledge of the range of clinical disease (Denerolle,
pawpads is common in pemphigus foliaceus, but rare in 
1996; Ciaramella et al., 1997; Koutinas et al., 1999).
leishmaniasis. Systemic or discoid lupus erythematosus
All three groups concur that generalized, dry exfoliative
may closely mimic leishmaniasis, particularly when depig-
dermatitis is the prime clinical sign; ulcers, nodules, and
mentation is present, but scaling usually is a less striking
both sterile and bacterial pustules also occur frequently
feature. Antinuclear antibody (ANA) positivity must not
(Denerolle, 1996; Ciaramella et al., 1997; Koutinas et al.,
be used as the sole criteria for diagnosing systemic lupus
1999). Onychogryphosis (misshapen, dysplastic brittle
%0 oi %oz un so ss ss Ai e (
itive ANA tests in almost 50% of cases (Ciaramella,
of affected dogs (Ciaramella et al., 1997; Koutinas et al.,
 et al., 1997). Zinc-responsive dermatosis exhibits more
1999). Lingual ulcers have been reported (Font et al.,
frequent 
mucocutaneous
 involvement.  Leishmaniasis
1996; Blavier et al., 2001). The muzzle, periorbital region,
presenting as nodules with exfoliation may mimic epithe-
and pinnae commonly are preferentially and more
liotropic lymphoma. Skin biopsy is mandatory for the dif-
severely:
 affected. Facial bilateral symmetry may be
ferentiation of these diseases. Other useful diagnostic
marked. Periorbital rings of alopecia (lunettes) and
procedures include serology, testing by polymerase chain
scaling are common. Depigmentation of the planum
reaction (PCR), culture, and the identifcation of Leish-
nasale and muzzle may be seen. Keratinous proliferation
mania amastigotes by cytology.
of the pawpads rarely may occur. Generalized peripheral
lymphadenopathy is common. Systemic signs include
Biopsy site selection
weight loss, inappetence, emaciation, fever, malaise,
muscle atrophy, 
exercise intolerance, coagulopathies,
Biopsy specimens should be taken from multiple areas of
polyarthritis, and immune-complex renal failure.
adherent scale. Nodules, if present, should be sampled.
Perhaps due to likelihood of exposure to the vector,
Chronic lesions are more likely to yield diagnostic
 cutaneous leishmaniasis is more common in active young
results. Cytology of bone marrow or lymph node aspi-
Infectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
315
12.76 Cutaneous leishmaniasis
n a dog. The dermis is diffusely and
rates, or biopsy of lymph node may aid in establishing the
diagnosis.
Histopathology (Figures 12.76 and 12.77)
Moderate acanthosis and moderate to severe orthokera
totic or parakeratotic hyperkeratosis with crusting char-
acterize the epidermis. Ulceration may occur. Dermal
patterns of inflammation are highly variable (Koutinas
et al., 1992), and inflammation may extend to the pan-
niculus. Most commonly, there are perivascular infltra-
tions of pale granular or foamy macrophages and fewer
lymphocytes and plasma cels. Discrete granulomas may
be present. Neutrophils are uncommon, but occasionally
may be present as small clusters. Neutrophils, lympho-
cytes, and plasma cells may be more abundant in ulcer-
ated lesions; this fnding also has been reported by Ferrer
et al. (1988). Intense perivascular inflammation may be
oriented nodularly around adnexal appendages (perifolli-
culitis), diffusely in the superficial dermis as a lichenoid
band, or may be interstitial to diffuse. Sebaceous glands
may be swept up and obliterated by the inflammation,
which may explain the development of hyperkeratosis
This ^sebaceous adenitis' pattern of leishmaniasis also has
been reported by Denerolle (1996). Less commonly, large
discrete nodules are composed of diffuse inflammation, as
described above (Ferrer et al., 1990). Intraepidermal pus-
tulation and pustular folliculitis are reported (Ferrer et al.
1988; Koutinas et al., 1992), and necrotizing vasculitis
has been described (Ferrer et al., 1990; Pumarola et al.,
1991).
Variable numbers of amastigotes, which are round to
within macrophages
oval, 1 to 2μm in width, and 2 to 4μm in length, may be
316
Diseases of the dermis
present either within macrophages or extracellularly.
Bacterial Pseudomycetoma
Organisms are visible with hematoxylin and eosin but
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffn, C.E. (2001) Muller 
are accentuated with Giemsa staining; they are negative
Kirk's Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 311-2. W.B.
with periodic-acid Schiff (PAS) staining and Gomori's
Saunders, Philadelphia.
methenamine silver (GMS) (Morgan et al., 1997). A round
Feline Leprosy Syndrome
basophilic nucleus and typical rod-shaped kinetoplast are
Appleyard, G.D. & Clark, E.G. (2002) Histologic and genotypic 
 clustered near one end of the amastigote. Organisms have
characterization of a novel Mycobacterium species found in
been identifed within fbroblasts (Ferrer et al., 1988;
three cats. J Clin Microbiol 40, 2425-30.
Hervas Rodriguez et al., 1996). Organisms may be scant
Bonenberger, TE., Ihrke, P.J., Naydan, D.K. et al. (2001) Rapid
and were discovered in only 50% of dogs examined in one
identification of tissue microorganisms in skin biopsy speci-
study (Koutinas et al., 1992). The ulcerated lesions of
mens from domestic animals using polyclonal BCG antibody.
leishmaniasis are associated with scant organisms (Ferrer
Vet Dermatol 12, 41-7.
et al., 1988). Immunohistochemisry for Leishmania spp.
Buergelt, C.D., Fowler, J.L. & Wright, P.J. (1982) Disseminated
has been used in the definitive diagnosis of amastigote-
avian tuberculosis in a cat. Calif Vet 10, 13-5.
poor lesions (Ferrer et al., 1988; Font et al., 1996), but is
Davies, J.L., Sibley, J., Clark, E.G. et al. (2003) Feline leprosy
not routinely available in most parts of the world
syndrome is associated with several mycobacterial species: a
histologic and genotypic retrospective study on formalin-fixed
Periadnexal inflammation in cutaneous leishmaniasis
and paraffin embedded tissues. Vet Patbol 40, 613 (abstract).
may be confused with periadnexally-oriented granuloma-
Hughes, M.S., Ball, N.W., Beck, L.-A. et al. (1997) Determina-
tous lesions of sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma syn-
tion of the etiology of presumptive feline leprosy by 16S rRNA
drome (see Chapter 13) or with the granulomatous forms
gene analysis. J Clin Microbiol 35, 2464-71.
of sebaceous adenitis as seen in Vizslas (see Chapter 17).
Kaufman, A.C., Greene, C.G., Rakich, PM. et al. (1995) Treat-
To complicate the picture, 12 of 21 European cases of
ment of localized Mycobacterium avium complex infection
sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma syndrome were pos-
with clofazimine and doxycycline in a cat. J Vet Med Assoc
itive for Leishmania sp. using PCR testing and immuno-
207, 457-9.
histochemistry; this indicated infection with the organism
Malik, R., Hughes, M.S., James, G. et al. (2002) Feline leprosy:
was present (Cornegliani et al., 2002). Superfcially
two different clinical syndromes. J Feline Med Surg 4, 43-59.
diffuse lichenoid and periadnexal inflammation may
McIntosh, D.W. (1982) Feline leprosy: a review of forty-four
cases from western Canada. Can Vet J 23, 291-5.
Miller, M.A., Fales, W.H., McCracken, W.S. et al. (1999) Inflam-
Harada-like syndrome (see Chapter 11). Differential
matory pseudotumor in a cat with cutaneous mycobacterio-
diagnosis is not difficult when typical organisms are iden-
sis. Vet Pathol 36, 161-3.
tiffed in tissue; however, organisms may be difficult to find
Rea, T.H. & Modlin, R.L. (2003) Leprosy. In: Fitzpatrick's Der-
 in skin biopsy specimens. When clinical and historical sus-
matology in General Medicine, 6th edn (eds I.M. Freedberg,
 picion is high, lymph node biopsy and bone marrow aspi-
A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.I.
rates may be needed to establish proof of leishmaniasis.
Katz), pp. 1962-71. McGraw-Hill, New York.
 If available, immunohistochemistry may be invaluable in
Schiefer, H.B. & Middleton, D.M. (1983) Experimental trans-
these cases.
mission of a feline mycobacterial skin disease (feline leprosy).
Vet Patbol 20, 460-71.
Stevenson, K., Howie, F.E., Low, J.C. et al. (1998) Feline skin
granuloma associated with Mycobacterium avium. Vet Record
REFERENCES
143, 109-10.
Actinomycosis and Nocardiosis
Canine Leproid Granuloma
Brenman, K.E. & Ihrke, PJ. (1983) Grass awn migration in dogs
 Bonenberger, T.E., Ihrke, PJ., Naydan, D.K. et al. (2001) Rapid
and cats: a retrospective study of 182 cases. J Am Vet Med
identifcation of tssue microorganisms in skin biopsy speci-
Assoc 182, 1201-4.
mens from domestic animals using polyclonal BCG antibody.
Edwards, D.F. (1998) Actinomycosis and nocardiosis. In: Infec-
Vet Dermatol 12, 41-7.
tious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, Znd edn (ed. C.E. Greene),
Charles, J., Martin, P., Wigney, D.1. et al. (1999) Cytology and
pp. 303-13. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
histopathology of canine leproid granuloma syndrome. Aust
Hirsh, D.C. & Jang, S.S. (1999) Antimicrobial susceptibility of
Vet } 77,799-803.
Nocardia nova isolated from five cats with nocardiosis. J Am
Foley, J.E, Borjessoon, D., Gross, T.L. et al. (2002) Clinical,
Vet Med Assoc 215, 815-7.
microscopic, and molecular aspects of canine leproid granu-
Kirpensteijn, J & Fingland, R.B. (1992) Cutaneous actinomy-
loma in the United States. Vet Patbol 39, 234-9.
cosis and nocardiosis in dogs: 48 cases (1980-1990). J Am Vet
Hughes, M.S., James, G., Ball, N. et al. (2000) Identification by
Med Assoc 201, 917-20.
16S rRNA gene analyses of a potential novel mycobacterial
Rodig, S.J. & Dorfman, D.M. (2001) Splendore-Hoeppli phe-
species as an etiological agent of canine leproid granuloma
nomenon. Arch Pathol Lab Med 12s, 1515-6.
syndrome. J Clin Microbiol 38, 953-9.
Infectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
317
Malik, R., Love, D.N., Wigney, D.1. et al. (1998) Mycobacter-
Bergman, R.L., Medleau, L., Hnilica, K. et al. (2002) Dermato-
ial nodular granulomas affecting the subcutis and skin of
phyte granulomas caused by Tricbopbyton mentagropbytes in
'9 f iaa isny (auoupuas euomuei pioidal aunues) sho
a dog. Vet Dermatol 13, 49-52.
403-7.
Black, S.S., Abernethy, T.E., Tyler, J.W. et al. (2001) Intra-
Malik, R., Martin, P., Wigney, D. et al. (2001) Treatment of
abdominal dermatophytic pseudomycetoma in a Persian cat.
canine leproid granuloma syndrome: preliminary findings in
J Vet Intern Med 15,245-8.
seven dogs. Aust Vet J 79, 30-6.
Bond, R., Pocknell, A.M. & Tozet, C.E. (2001) Pseudomycetoma
caused by Microsporum canis in a Persian cat: lack of response
Opportunistic Mycobacterial Infection caused by Rapidly
to oral terbinafine. J Small Anim Pract 42, 557-60.
Growing Mycobacteria
Jones, H.E. (1993) Immune response and host resistance of humans
Bonenberger, T.E., Ihrke, PJ., Naydan, D.K. et al. (2001) Rapid
to dermatophyte infection. J Am Acad Dermatol 28, S12-8.
identification of tissue microorganisms in skin biopsy speci-
MacKay, B.M., Johnstone, I., O'Boyle, D.A. et al. (1997) Severe
mens from domestic animals using polyclonal BCG antibody.
dermatophyte infections in a dog and cat. Aust Vet Pract 27,
Vet Dermatol 12, 41-7.
86-90.
Fox, L.E., Kunkle, G.A., Homer, B.L. et al. (1995) Disseminated
Medleau, L. & Rakich, PM. (1994) Microsporum canis
subcutaneous Mycobacterium fortuitum infection in a dog. J
pseudomycetomas in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 30, 573-6.
Am Vet Med Assoc 206, 53-5.
Rinaldi, M.G., Lamazor, E.A., Roeser, E.H. et al. (1983) Myce-
 Jang, S.S. & Hirsh, D.C. (2002) Rapidly growing members of
toma or pseudomycetoma. Mycopathologia 81, 41-8.
the genus Mycobacterium affecting dogs and cats. J Am Anim
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
Hosp Assoc 38, 217-20.
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, p. 347. W.B. Saunders,
Lewis, D.T., Hodgin, E.C., Foil, C.S. et al. (1994) Experimental
Philadelphia.
reproduction of feline Mycobacterium fortuitum panniculitis.
Vet Dermatol 5, 189-95.
Cutaneous Blastomycosis, Histoplasmosis,
Malik, R., Wigney, D.1., Dawson, D. et al. (2000) Infection of
and Coccidioidomycosis
the subcutis and skin of cats with rapidly growing mycobac-
Cote, E., Barr, S.C. & Allen, C. (1997) Possible transmission of
teria: a review of microbiological and clinical findings. J Feline
Blastomycosis dermatitidis via culture specimen. J Am Vet
Med Surg 2, 35-48.
Med Assoc 210, 479-80.
Greene, R.T. (1998) Coccidioidomycosis. In: Infectious Diseases
Opportunistic Mycobacterial Infection caused by
of the Dog and Cat, 2nd edn (ed. C.E. Greene), pp. 391-398.
Mycobacterium avium Complex (MAC)
WB. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Buergelt, C.D., Fowler, J.L. & Wright, PJ. (1982) Disseminated
Grooters, A.M. (2002) Systemic mycoses with dermatologic
avian tuberculosis in a cat. Calif Vet 10, 13-5.
manifestations. In: Proceedings of the 17th AAVD/ACVD
Greene, C.E. & Gunn-Moore, D.A. (1998) Mycobacterial infec-
Meeting, New Orleans, pp. 73-8.
tions: tuberculous mycobacterial infections. In: Infectious
Kohn, G.J., Linne, S.R., Smith, C.M. et al. (1992) Acquisition
Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 2nd edn (ed. C.E. Greene),
pp. 313-25. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
joidal endospores. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 15, 527-30.
Kaufman, A.C., Greene, C.E., Rakich, P.M. et al. (1995) Treat-
Legendre, A.M. (1998) Blastomycosis. In: Infectious Diseases of
ment of localized Mycobacterium avium complex infection
the Dog and Cat, 2nd edn (ed. C.E. Greene), pp. 371-7. W.B.
with clofazimine and doxycycline in a cat. J Am Vet Med
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Assoc 207, 457-9.
Maddy, K.T. (1958) Disseminated coccidioidomycosis of the
Miller, M.A., Fales, W.H., McCracken, W.S. et al. (1999) Inflam-
dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 132, 483-9.
matory pseudotumor in a cat with cutaneous mycobacterio-
Plotnick, A.N., Boshoven, E.W. & Rosychuk, R.A.W. (1997)
sis. Vet Pathol 36, 161-3.
 Primary cutaneous coccidioidomycosis and subsequent drug
Stevenson, K., Howie, FE., Low, J.C. et al. (1998) Feline skin
eruption to itraconazole in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33,
granuloma associated with Mycobacterium avium. Vet Record
13943.
143, 109-10.
Rudmann, D.G., Coolman, B.R., Perez, C.M. et al. (1992) Eval-
Stewart, L.J., White, S.D. Kennedy, F.A. et al. (1993) Cutaneous
uation of risk factors for blastomycosis in dogs: 857 cases
Mycobacterium avium infection in a cat. Vet Dermatol 4,
(1980-1990). J Am Vet Med Assoc 201, 1754-9.
87-90.
Selby, L.A., Becker, S.V. & Hayes, H.W. (1981) Epidemiologic
risk factors associated with canine systemic mycoses. Am J
Dermatophytic Pseudomycetoma
Epidemiol 113, 133-9.
Abramo, F., Vercelli, A., & Mancianti, F {2001) Two cases of
Wolf, A.M. (1998) Histoplasmosis. In: Infectious Diseases of the
dermatophytic pseudomycetoma in the dog: an immunohisto-
Dog and Cat, 2nd edn (ed. C.E. Greene), pp. 378-83. W.B.
chemical study. Vet Dermatol 12, 203-7.
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Ajello, L., Kaplan, W. & Chandler, F.W. (1980) Dermatophyte 
mycetomas: fact or fiction? In: Proceedings of the Sth
Cutaneous Cryptococcosis
 International Conference on Mycoses, pp. 135-140. Publica-
Gerds-Grogan, S. & Dayrell-Hart, B. (1997) Feline cryptococ-
tion 396, Pan American Health Organization, Washington
cosis: a retrospective evaluation. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33,
DC.
118-22.
318
Diseases of the dermis
Grooters, A.M. (2002) Systemic mycoses with dermatologic
Duncan, D., Hodgin, C., Bauer, R. et al. (1992) Cutaneous
manifestations. In: Proceedings of the 17th AAVD/ACVD
pythiosis in four cats. Vet Pathol 29,429 (abstract).
Meeting, New Orleans, pp. 73-8.
Dykstra, M.J., Sharp, N.J.H., Olivry, I. et al. (1999) A descrip-
Jacobs, G.J. & Medleau, L. (1998) Histoplasmosis. In: Infectious
tion of cutaneous-subcutaneous pythiosis in fifteen dogs. Med
Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 2nd edn (ed. C.E. Greene),
Mycol 37, 427-33.
pp. 383-90. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Foil, C.S. (1998) Miscellaneous fungal infections. In: Infectious
Jacobs, GJ., Medleau, L., Calvert, C. et al. (1997) Cryptococ-
Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 2nd edn (ed. C.E. Greene),
cal infection in cats: factors influencing treatment outcome,
pp. 420-30. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
and results of sequential serum antigen titers in 35 cats. J Vet
Greene, C.E., Brockus, C.W. Currin, M.P. et al. (2002) Infection
Int Med 11, 1-4.
with Basidiobolus ranarum in two dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
221,528-31.
Sporotrichosis
Grooters, A.M. (2002) New developments in oomycosis and
Bonenberger, T.E., Ihrke, P.J., Naydan, D.K. et al. (2001) Rapid
Zygomycosis. In: Proceedings of the 17th AAVD/ACVD
identification of tissue micro-organisms in skin biopsy speci-
Meeting, New Orleans, pp. 63-71.
mens from domestic animals using polyclonal BCG antibody.
Grooters, A.M. & Gee, M.K. (2002) Development of a nested
Vet Dermatol 12, 41-7.
PCR assay for the detection and identification of Pythium
Dunstan, R.W., Reimann, K.A. & Langham, R.F (1986a) Feline
insidiosum. J Vet Intern Med 16, 147-52.
sporotrichosis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 189, 880-3.
Grooters, A.M., Hodgin, C., Bauer, R.W. et al. (2003) Clinico-
Dunstan, R.W, Langham, R.F, Reimann, K.A. et al. (1986b)
pathologic findings associated with Lagenidium sp. infection
Feline sporotrichosis: a report of five cases with transmission
in 6 dogs: initial description of an emerging oomycosis. J Vet
to humans. J Am Acad Dermatol 15, 37-45.
Intern Med 17,637-46.
Kennis, R.A., Rosser, E.J. & Dunstan, R.W. (1994) Difficult der-
Hillier, A., Kunkle, G.A., Ginn, P.E. et al. (1994) Canine subcu-
matologic diagnosis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 204, 51-2.
asen e rds snjoqoipuo Aq pasneo sisooiuoaiz snoaue
Rosser, E.J. & Dunstan, R.W. (1998) Sporotrichosis. In: Infec-
report and review of Conidiobolus infections in other species.
tious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, Znd edn (ed. C.E. Greene),
Vet Dermatol 5, 205-13.
pp. 399-402. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Znajda, N.R., Grooters, A.M. & Marsella, R. (2002) PCR-based
Sykes, J.E., Torres, S.M., Armstrong, P.J. et al. (2001) Itracona-
detection of Pythium and Lagenidium DNA in frozen and
zole for treatment of sporotrichosis in a dog residing on a
ethanol-fixed animal tissues. Vet Dermatol 13, 187-94.
Christmas tree farm. J Am Vet Med Assoc 218, 1440-3.
Cutaneous Protothecosis
Cutaneous Infections of Other Opportunistic Fungi
Chao, S.C., Hsu, M.M. & Lee, JY. (2002) Cutaneous
Abramo, F, Bastelli, F, Nardoni, S. et al. (2002) Feline cuta-
protothecosis: report of five cases. Br J Dermatol 146, 688-
neous phaeohyphomycosis due to Cadopbyalophora ban-
93.
tiana. J Feline Med Surg 4, 157-63.
Ginel, P.J., Perez, J., Molleda, J.M. et al. (1997) Cutaneous pro-
Day, M.J. (1998) Canine disseminated aspergillosis. In: Infec-
tothecosis in a dog. Vet Record 140, 651-3.
tious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 2nd edn (ed. C.E. Greene),
Greene, C.E. (1998) Protothecosis. In: Infectious Diseases of the
 pp. 409-13. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Dog and Cat, 2nd edn (ed. C.E. Greene), pp. 430-5. W.B.
Foil, C.S. (1998) Miscellaneous fungal infections. In: Infectious
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 2nd edn (ed. C.E. Greene),
Perez, J., Ginel, P.J., Lucena, R. et al. (1997) Canine cutaneous
pp. 420-30. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
 protothecosis: an immunohistochemical analysis of the inflam-
Fondati, A., Gallo, M.G., Romano, E. et al. (2001) A case of
matory cellular infiltrate. J Comp Pathol 117, 83-9.
feline phaeohyphomycosis due to Fonsecaea pedrosoi. Vet
Dermatol 12, 297-301.
Cutaneous Leishmaniasis
Grooters, A.M. (2002) New developments in oomycosis and
Blavier, A., Keroack, S. Denerolle, P et al. (2001) Atypical forms
zygomycosis. In: Proceedings of the 17th AAVD/ACVD
of canine leishmaniasis. Vet J 162, 108-20.
Meeting, New Orleans, pp. 63-71.
Ciaramella, P., Oliva, G., De Luna, R. et al. (1997) A retro-
Sharp, N,J.H. (1998) Canine nasal aspergillosis-penicilliosis. In:
specive clinical study of canine leishmaniasis in 150 dogs
Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 2nd edn (ed. C.E.
naturally infected by Leishmania infantum. Vet Record 141,
Greene), pp. 404-9. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
53943.
Watt, PR., Robins, G.M., Galloway, A.M. et al. (1995) Dis-
Cornegliani, L., Fondevila, D., Vercelli, A. et al. (2002) Immuno-
seminated opportunistic fungal disease in dogs: 10 cases
 histochemical and PCR detection of Leishmania organisms in
{1982-1990). J Am Vet Med Assoc 207, 67-70.
canine cutaneous sterile pyogranuloma/granuloma syndrome
(SPGS). In: Proceedings of the 18th ESVD/ECVD Meeting,
Cutaneous Pythiosis, Lagenidiosis,
Nice, p. 213.
and Entomophthoromycosis
 Denerolle, P. (1996) Leishmaniose canine: diffcultés du diag-
Bauer, R.W., Lemarie, S.L., & Roy, A.F (1997) Oral conid-
nostic et du traitement (125 cas). Prat Med Chir Anim Comp
jobolomycosis in a dog. Vet Dermatol 8, 115-20.
31, 137-45.
Browm, C.C., McClure J.J., Triche, P. et al. (1988) Use of
Ferrer, L. (2002) Canine leishmaniasis: update on diagnosis and
immunohistochemical methods for diagnosis of equine pythio-
therapy. In: Proceedings of the 18th ESVD/ECVD Meeting,
sis. Am J Vet Res 49, 1866-8.
Nice, pp. 101-3.
 Infectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis 
319
Ferrer, L., Rabanal, R., Fondevila, D. et al. (1988) Skin lesions
logical study on 22 spontaneous cases in Greece. Vet Derma-
in canine leishmaniasis. J Small Anim Pract 29, 381-8.
tol 3, 121-30.
Ferrer, L., Fondevila, D., Marco, A. et al. (1990) Atypical
Koutinas, A.F, Polizopoulou, Z.S., Saridomichelakis, M.N. et al.
nodular leishmaniasis in two dogs. Vet Record 126, 90.
(1999) Clinical considerations on canine visceral leishmania-
Font, A., Roura, X., Dondevila, D. et al. (1996) Canine mucosal
sis in Greece: a retrospective study of 158 cases (1989-1996).
leishmaniasis. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32, 131-7.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35, 376-83.
Gaskin, A.A., Schantz, P., Jackson, J. et al. (2002) Visceral leish-
Marsella, R. & de Gopegui, R.R. (1998) Leishmaniasis: a re-
maniasis in a New York foxhound kennel. J Vet Intern Med
emerging zoonosis. Int J Dermatol 37, 801-14.
16, 34-44.
Morgan, L.W., Kerlin, R.L. & DeBoer, D.J.(1997) Diffcult der-
Grosjean, N.L., Vrable, R., Murphy, AJ. et al. (2003) Sero-
matologic diagnosis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 210, 181-2.
 prevalence of antibodies against Leishmania spp. among dogs
Owens, S.D., Oakley, D.A., Marryott, K. et al. (2001) Trans-
in the United States. J Am Vet Med Assoc 222, 603-6.
mission of visceral leishmaniasis through blood transfusions
Hervas Rodriguez, J., Mozos, E., Méndez, A. et al. (1996) Leish-
from infected English foxhounds in anemic dogs. J Am Vet
mania infection of canine skin fibroblasts in vivo. Vet Pathol
Med Assoc 219, 1076-83.
33,469-73.
Pumarola, M., Brevik, L., Badiola, J. et al. (1991) Canine leish-
Klaus, S.N., Frankenburg, S. & Damian Dhar, A. (2003) Leish-
maniasis and other protozoan infections. In: Fitzpatrick's Der-
105, 279-86.
matology in General Medicine, 6th edn (eds I.M. Freedberg,
Slappendel, R.J (1988) Canine leishmaniasis: a review based on
A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.I.
95 cases in The Netherlands. Vet Quart 10, 1-16.
Katz), pp. 2215-24. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Slappendel, R.J. & Ferrer, L. (1998) Leishmaniasis. In: Infectious
Koutinas, A.F., Scott, D.W., Kantos, V. et al. (1992) Skin lesions
Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 2nd edn (ed. C.E. Greene),
 in canine leishmaniasis (Kala-Azar): a clinical and histopatho-
pp. 450-8. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 13
Noninfectious nodular and diffuse
granulomatous and pyogranulomatous
diseases of the dermis
Nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranuloma-
studies may uncover a wide range of potential immunos-
tous diseases of the dermis are characterized by multifo-
timulatory antigens that underlie these diseases in
cal nodular inflammation that tends toward confluence or
animals.
a diffuse pattern. Granulomatous inflammation is com-
posed principally of macrophages, with or without giant
STERILE GRANULOMA AND
cells, which are often but not exclusively organized as dis-
PYOGRANULOMA SYNDROME
crete granulomas. Pyogranulomatous inflammation has a
prominent component of neutrophils that may be dif-
(Synonyms: sterile pyogranuloma and granuloma syn-
fusely intermingled with macrophages; pyogranulomas
drome, SPGS)
are formed by central accumulations of neutrophils that
are surrounded by macrophages. By convention, the pre-
Clinical features (Figures 13.1 and 13.2)
sence of discrete granulomas or pyogranulomas is not a
requisite for a 'granulomatous' or “pyogranulomatous"
Sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma syndrome (SGPS) is
pattern.
a somewhat heterogenous group of nodular skin lesions
 A third morphologic category, typifed by reactive his-
united by similar histopathologic features. The syndrome
tiocytosis, is characterized by nodular to diffuse infltra-
is uncommon in dogs and rare in cats. The histiocytic
tions of dermal dendritic cells that accumulate in
nature of the inflammation, coupled with the often dra-
 tumor-like confgurations. Histiocyte is the general term
matic response to glucocorticoids or other immunosup
for a CD45+, CD18+ mononuclear leukocyte that ori-
pressive agents, suggests the likelihood of immune
ginates from a CD34+ precursor cell in the bone marrow.
dysfunction, perhaps associated with persistent antigenic
 Upon differentiation, guided by a variery of cytokines and
drive. It has long been speculated by the authors and
stem cell factors, the precursor cells develop into separate
others that infectious agents present in small numbers, or
lineages with different phenotypes, tissue distributions,
incomplete clearing of antigens associated with infectious
and functions (see Chapter 35). Macrophages are prima-
agents, could initiate this process in domestic animals and
rily involved with phagocytosis and intracellular digestion
humans. These theories gained credence when mycobac.
of foreign antigens. Dendritic antigen presenting cells are
terial DNA was identifed in cutaneous sarcoidosis
poorly phagocytic; they specialize in processing and pre-
in humans, which is a ‘sterile’ histiocytic proliferative
senting antigens.
disorder (Li et al., 1999). Recently, the presence of
Diseases included in this chapter are not the result of
Leishmania spp. DNA has been documented by immuno-
readily identifable infectious agents, but occur due to
histochemistry and testing by polymerase chain reaction
foreign body penetration, metabolic aberrations, or idio-
(PCR) and DNA sequencing in 20 of 35 specimens in 
pathic factors. Differentiation from infectious processes 
lesions of canine SGPS in Spain and Italy (Cornegliani et
of similar appearance may be required through the use of
al., 2003); however, one would expect these results to
special stains and culture. However, some of these 'sterile'
reflect the limited geographic distribution of Leisbmania
processes may be due to antigenic fragments of infectious
spp. infection in the dog. In that study, testing by PCR for
pe aiddden ue iie iei sue rao ro s
mycobacteria was negative. Detection of other frag-
prolonged inflammatory reaction; these are beginning to
mented or incomplete infectious agents in SGPS may be
be identified by analysis by polymerase chain reaction
forthcoming, as sensitive techniques become more widely
(PCR) and DNA sequencing or other techniques. Future
available.
320
Noninfectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
321
pinnae, and periorbital skin. Lesions also may occur on
the neck, trunk, and, occasionally, on the extremities.
Larger lesions may ulcerate and become secondarily
infected. Lesions may remain indolent, regress sponta-
neously, or wax and wane.
A single case of cutaneous erythrophagocytosis in a 13-
year-old dog was manifested clinically by multifocal
alopecia and hyperpigmentation; the dog was otherwise
asymptomatic and the lesions resolved spontaneously
(Galvin, C., personal communication, 2003). Although
this lesion may be associated with T cell lymphoma in
humans, viral association has also been observed (Magro,
C.M., personal communication, 2003).
Firm, well demarcated to coalescing, hairless nodules,
2 to 10mm in diameter, have been observed in cats.
Fig. 13.1 Sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma syndrome in a cat.
Lesions are often restricted to the muzzle, but also may
Well-demarcated, coalescing, hairless nodules are present on the
affect the pinnae, extremities, or regions adjacent to the
muzzle.
pawpads. Feline SGPS may be pruritic and initiate self-
trauma (Scott et al., 1990).
Sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma syndrome may be
seen more frequently in the Great Dane, Boxer Golden
Retriever, Collie, and Weimaraner (Panich et al., 1991;
Scott et al., 2001). The English Bulldog and Dachshund
 also may be at increased risk. However, SGPS may affect
any breed. Age or sex predilections have not been noted
in dogs. Breed, age, or sex predilections have not been
documented for cats.
Clinical differential diagnoses of SGPS include neopla-
sia, other sterile granulomatous or pyogranulomatous dis-
eases (reactive histiocytosis, cutaneous xanthoma, canine
sarcoidosis), and granulomatous and pyogranulomatous
disorders caused by infectious agents (see Chapter 12).
Clinical features cannot be relied upon to differentiate
Fig. 13.2 Sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma syndrome in a
among most of these diseases. Differentiation from cuta-
neous lymphoma, multiple canine cutaneous histiocy-
Great Dane. Multiple alopecic nodules are present on the lateral
thorax. Several nodules have had surrounding hair clipped to
tomas, feline progressive dendritic cell histiocytosis (see
enhance visibility.
Chapter 35), and multiple mast cell tumors is especially
important.  Provisional  differential  diagnosis can  be
accomplished by routine histopathology and special stains
It is not surprising that the clinical features and biologic
for infectious agents. Impression smears obtained from
behavior of SGPS vary in both the dog and the cat, as
 fresh biopsy specimens also should be stained to search
there may be multiple initiators of this syndrome. Clini-
for organisms. Fungal culture should not be performed
cal appearance in dogs may differ even with the breed
 until the systemic mycoses blastomycosis, histoplasmosis,
affected. As more information is gained, subtypes may
and coccidioidomycosis are ruled out by impression
emerge that are based on breed affected, distribution 
smear and histopathology, since attempted culture may
of lesions, response to therapy, specifc histopathologic
 present a health hazard (Legendre, 1998) (see Chapter
features, and antigenic trigger based on molecular
 12). After systemic fungi of zoonotic significance are ruled
investigation.
out, vigorous efforts to culture bacteria, fungi, molds, or
The most typical skin lesions recognized in the dog
consist of multiple, frm, well-demarcated, variably
 be made contingent on biopsy results, since some organ-
alopecic dermal plaques or nodules. These usually
isms may be diffcult to identify histopathologically.
measure between 0.5 and 2cm in diameter. The lesions
 Immunohistochemistry and PCR testing may be used to
are clinically asymptomatic. Lesions most commonly
further assess for specific infectious agents, as available.
affect the head, particularly the dorsal and lateral muzzle,
Additional support of the diagnosis of SGPS is obtained
322
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 13.3 Sterile granuloma and pyo-
granuloma syndrome in a dog. Pale
and discrete granulomas and pyogran-
ulomas are disseminated throughout
the dermis.
 retrospectively if the syndrome responds to glucocorticoid
therapy.
Biopsy site selection
Multiple biopsy specimens should be obtained from intact
lesions. Early nonulcerated lesions may provide more
 characteristic findings.
Histopathology (Figures 13.3 and 13.4)
The common element of ‘sterile’ granulomatous or
pyogranulomatous inflammation currently unites the
histopathologically variable diseases within this group.
The hallmark feature is an inflammatory reaction that
   si son    s
Epidermal features of SGPS include a normal to moder-
ately acanthotic epidermis with occasional ulceration.
Granulomatous and pyogranulomatous inflammation
with discrete to confluent granulomas and/or pyogranu-
lomas extends from the dermis to the panniculus and
often to the deeper subcutis. Early inflammation may be
most prominent perivascularly, and may be strikingly
oriented along adnexa where blood vessels are dense,
 nodular pattern. Pyogranulomas contain central neu-
 trophils and peripheral cuffs of macrophages. Granulo-
mas, which are less common, have sparse neutrophils.
Lymphocytes and plasma cells are seen in small numbers
and both surround granulomas or pyogranulomas and
Fig. 13.4 Higher magnification of Fig. 13.3. Granulomas are sur-
partially infltrate them. There may be mild vacuolation
rounded by darkly staining lymphocytes and fewer neutrophils.
of macrophages.
Noninfectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
323
 The inflammatory infltrate is devoid of foreign mate-
identifed in puppies. Some lesions of juvenile sterile gra-
rial or infectious agents that can be detected by currently
 nulomatous dermatitis and lymphadenitis are more pus-
utilized routine techniques, including polarization and
tular to suppurative, which should allow differentiation
special staining. Special stains are always indicated due to
 from SGPS; however clinical differentiation may be
the resemblance of this syndrome to infectious diseases.
required in some cases. Early lesions of SGPS that are
A recent study in Europe demonstrated Leishmania sp. by
localized around hair follicles may resemble the nodular
immunohistochemistry  and PCR testing (Cornegliani
form of sebaceous adenitis, as seen most often in Vizslas
et al., 2003).
(see Chapter 17). Clinical differentiation may be required.
In the single case of cutaneous erythrophagocytosis in
a dog (see above) the dermis and panniculus were dif-
REACTIVE HISTIOCYTOSIS
fusely infltrated with histiocytic cells that frequently
contained intracytoplasmic, entire, or fragmented ery-
Clinical features (Figures 13.5 through 13.9)
throcytes. There were fewer neutrophils intermingled.
Mature lymphocytes were oriented primarily around hair
Reactive histiocytosis is a relatively uncommon, poorly
follicles and within the panniculus. Diffuse edema was
understood disorder characterized by the reactive proli-
noted.
 Variation in the microscopic pattern may depend on the
species and breed in which the disorder is expressed or on
what potential antigen is implicated. Further clinical and
molecular subdivision of this complex is required so that
the pathologist may determine which morphologic varia-
tions may be used to obtain more specific diagnoses.
Sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma syndrome has
been confused with reactive histiocytosis, including in
sents as diffuse sheet-like infltrations of large histiocytes,
often with vasoinvasion, rather than as confluent granu-
lomas or pyogranulomas. In histiocytosis, a “bottom
heavy’ infltrate predominates from the middle dermis to
a variable depth in the subcutis. Furthermore, immuno-
histochemistry will identify the histiocytes of cutaneous
histiocytosis as dendritic cells, whereas macrophages are
 the predominant large mononuclear cell of sterile granu-
Hig. 13.5 Cutaneous reactive histiocytosis in a Chesapeake Bay
Retriever. Multiple, partially alopecic nodules are present on the
loma and pyogranuloma syndrome. However, late stage
face. (Photograph courtesy A.C. Mundell; case material University
lesions of reactive histiocytosis may have increased
of California, Davis.)
numbers of macrophages (distinguished by immunohisto-
chemistry), as well as significant infltrations of neu-
trophils secondary to ischemic necrosis. Differentiation
may be problematic in these cases.
Other differential diagnoses principally include granu-
lomatous and pyogranulomatous inflammation due to
infectious agents such as opportunistic myobacterial
infection or fungal infections in dogs and cats, and feline
leprosy syndrome in cats. In contrast to SGPS, infectious
granulomatous diseases may be composed of histiocytes
with severely vacuolated and/or granular cytoplasm with
hematoxylin and eosin staining, often due to a high
density of unstained or poorly stained infectious agents
teria). Special staining allows differentiation from infec-
tious diseases in most cases.
Fig. 13.6 Cutaneous reactive histiocytosis in a Shetland Sheepdog.
Discrete perifollicular and subcutaneous pyogranulo-
An alopecic nodule on the dorsal digit has ulcerated. (Photograph
mas should be differentiated from juvenile sterile granu-
courtesy A.C. Mundell; case material University of California,
lomatous dermatitis and lymphadenitis, particularly when
Davis.)
324
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 13.9 Systermic reactive histiocytosis in the Bernese Mountain
Fig. 13.7 Cutaneous reactive histiocytosis in Labrador Retriever-
Dog. Chronic ulcers on the ventral abdomen have characteristic
crossbreed. Diffuse infiltration of the planurm nasale has resulted in
peripheral thickening, creating a crateriforrm appearance.
a *clown nose' appearance.
isisuo uaaq s sius sno ron onaa se
negative. Clinical course and response to immunosup-
Marked breed predilections indicate an at least partial
genetic basis for systemic histiocytosis. Breed predilec-
tions have not been verified for cutaneous histiocytosis
(Affolter & Moore, 2000). Reactive histiocytosis has not
been conclusively documented in cats to date.
 Skin lesions of canine reactive histiocytosis are charac-
terized by usually multiple, nonpruritic and nonpainful,
haired or partially alopecic, cutaneous nodules and
plaques. They are predominantly located on the head,
neck, perineum, scrotum, and extremities. Occasionally,
 nodules occur in a linear fashion, indicating the possibi-
Fig. 13.8 Systemic reactive histiocytosis in a Bernese Mountain
lity of arrangement along lymphatics or blood vessels.
Dog. Multiple dermal nodules are present on the muzzle and in the
As further indication of vascular involvement, larger
conjunctiva.
nodules often ulcerate centrally, cavitate, and become
necrotic. Secondary bacterial infection subsequent to
deep ulceration is common. A visually distinctive sub-
feration of activated, perivascular interstitial dendritic
group of cutaneous histiocytosis with lesions limited to
antigen presenting cells, also referred to as dermal den-
the nasal mucosa and planum nasale presents as marked
dritic cells (see introduction, p. 320) (Affolter & Moore,
enlargement of the planum nasale resembling a “clown
2000). Canine reactive histiocytosis includes rwo separate
nose'.
forms, cutaneous and systemic, which both primarily
 Clinical features of systemic histiocytosis in dogs are
target the skin and subcutaneous tissue (Moore, 1984;
contingent on the organ systems affected. Nodular or
Mays & Bergeron, 1986; Affolter & Moore, 2000).
diffuse swelling of the mucous membranes of the nares
Lesions of cutaneous histiocytosis are limited to the skin,
 and nasal cavity is associated with respiratory stertor. The
while systemic histiocytosis affects the skin and other
 eyes are often affected; bilateral conjunctivitis and scleri-
Organ systems, including lymph nodes, eyelids, sclera,
 tis are common, but intrabulbar and retrobulbar lesions
nasal cavity, lungs, spleen, and bone marrow (Moore,
also may occur. Ocular lesions have occasionally incor-
1984; Affolter & Moore, 2000).
rectly been referred to as nodular fascitis (Bellhorn &
The etiology and pathogenesis of reactive histiocytosis
Henkind, 1967; Gwinn et al., 1977). Lymphadenopathy
are unknown. Lesions are consistent with a reactive
may be observed, and scrotal lesions may be accompanied
inflammatory process in response to persistent antigen.
by orchitis. Additional clinical evaluation for the presence
 The nature of the antigen or antigens remains unknown,
 of pulmonary, splenic, or bone marrow involvement is
Noninfectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
325
warranted. In most instances, complete blood counts and
the second half, permits morphologic evaluation of paraf-
serum blood chemistry results are within normal ranges.
fin-embedded tissues and immunophenotypic evaluation
 Canine reactive histiocytosis presents with a waxing
of frozen tissue of paired samples. These specimens
and waning clinical course. Spontaneous regressions
should be shipped separately as formalin fumes will spoil
Occur, especially early in the disease process; some lesions
 the integrity of frozen fresh tissue.
may disappear while new lesions develop concurrently.
The majority of cases follow a slowly progressive course.
Histopathology (Figures 13.10 through 13.12)
The epidemiology of canine reactive histiocytosis is
controversial. Some data indicate that cutaneous histio-
Skin lesions of cutaneous and systemic histiocytosis
cytosis is seen with equal frequency throughout the entire
present with identical morphologic features. A nodular to
dog population (Affolter & Moore, 2000); others indicate
diffuse infltrate predominates from the middle dermis
a breed predilection for Collies and Shetland Sheepdogs
through the superficial subcutis, often referred to as a
(Scott et al., 2001). Bernese Mountain Dogs, Rottweilers,
"bottom-heavy’ infltrate. The infltrate is markedly angio-
Golden Retrievers, Labrador Retrievers, and 
Irish
centric and may be vasoinvasive. Nodular lesions are
Wolfhounds appear over-represented in systemic histiocy-
often observed involving the mid-dermal vascular plexus
tosis, indicating probable genetic predilection (Moore,
which is concentrated around adnexal structures. The
1984; Affolter and Moore, 2000). The age of dogs with
infltrate may track along adnexa to the superficial der-
reactive histiocytosis ranges from 2 to 11 years; well-
mis in a linear or tubular confguration. These nodular
defined age predilections have not been reported.
to linear forms coalesce to form a diffuse pattern in
Clinical differential diagnoses for reactive histiocytosis
advanced lesions. Vasoinvasion is associated with degen-
include neoplasia, other sterile granulomatous or
pyogranulomatous diseases  (sterile granuloma and
pyogranuloma syndrome, cutaneous xanthoma, canine
sarcoidosis), and granulomatous and pyogranulomatous
(l iadeu aas) siuae snooanui kq pasnes siapros
Clinical features cannot be relied upon to differentiate
most of these diseases. Differentiation from cutaneous
lymphoma, multiple canine cutaneous histiocytomas, and
multiple mast cell tumors is especially important. As with
other noninfectious histiocytic skin diseases, provisional
differential diagnosis can be accomplished by routine
histopathology and special stains to identify infectious
agents. Impression smears obtained from fresh biopsy
specimens may also be stained to search for organisms.
Culture for infectious organisms may be indicated con-
tingent on histopathology. Fungal culture should not be
performed until the systemic mycoses blastomycosis,
histoplasmosis, and coccidioidomycosis are ruled out by
impression smear and histopathology since attempted
culture may present a health hazard (see Chapter 12).
Immunohistochemistry and testing by polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) for specifc infectious agents may be
useful, as available. Immunohistochemistry is key to the
documentation of reactive histiocytosis and the separa-
tion from other histiocytic processes (see below).
Biopsy site selection
Early lesions with intact surface epithelium are preferred
for histologic evaluation. Lesions with prominent areas of
necrosis and surface ulceration may become secondarily
infected and severely inflamed, which may obfuscate the
Fig. 13.10 Cutaneous reactive histiocytosis. Note the bottom
diagnosis. Bisection of each biopsy specimen, with subse-
heavy infiltrate extending to the underlying subcutis; dark areas are
quent formalin-fixation of one half and snap-freezing of
lymphocytic infiltrates.
326
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 13.11 Higher magnification of reactive histiocytosis. Large,
Fig. 13.12 Reactive histiocytosis demonstrating marked vascular
invasion {arrows). Note pale areas of necrosis containing fragmented
sional neutrophils.
cellular debris.
eration of vascular walls and vascular obstruction or
lomas or pyogranulomas. Furthermore, immunohisto-
obliteration, which results in multifocal areas of ischemic
chemistry will identify the histiocytes of cutaneous histio-
tissue necrosis. Large, punched-out acellular areas of
cytosis as dendritic cells; whereas macrophages are the
necrosis are noted with involvement of larger vessels.
predominant large mononuclear cell of sterile granuloma
The infltrate is composed of mainly histiocytes, small
and pyogranuloma syndrome. However, late stage lesions 
lymphocytes, and neutrophils. The histiocytes have large,
of reactive histiocytosis may have increased numbers of
round to oval, indented or folded and twisted, vesicular
macrophages (distinguished by immunohistochemistry),
 nuclei. Their abundant, pale eosinophilic cytoplasm has
as well as significant infiltrations of neutrophils second-
variable numbers of small cytoplasmic vacuoles. Small
 ary to ischemic necrosis. Differentiation may be prob-
lymphocytes may contribute up to 50% of the infiltrating
lematic in these cases.
cell population. The number of neutrophils varies and
Differentiation between reactive histiocytosis and mul-
increases with necrosis. Eosinophils are occasionally seen
tiple canine cutaneous histiocytomas in regression 
is
and plasma cells are rare. Histologic lesions in other
crucial, as immunosuppressive therapy is not warranted
organ systems present as angiocentric nodules, as
in the latter condition. Immunohistochemistry may be
described; ischemic necrosis as a result of vascular inva-
required (see below). In general, regressing histiocytomas
sion is common.
as) uoyu u don, r uu mn pu
Sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma syndrome has
Chapter 35). The reactive lymphoid infltrate is predomi-
been confused with reactive histiocytosis, including in
nantly at the base of the tumor and intraepidermal histio-
previously published reports. Reactive histiocytosis pre-
cytes may be observed. In contrast to histiocytomas,
sents as diffuse sheet-like infltrations of large histiocytes,
lesions of reactive histiocytosis are characterized by pri-
often with vasoinvasion, rather than as confluent granu-
marily deep dermal to subcutaneous infltrates, intraepi-
Noninfectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
327
dermal histiocytic cells are not seen, and the pleocellular
infltrate is markedly angiocentric.
Further differential diagnoses for early periadnexal
lesions of reactive histiocytosis include nodular forms of
sebaceous adenitis, as seen most often in Vizslas (see
Chapter 17), and juvenile sterile granulomatous dermati-
tis and lymphadenitis (juvenile cellulitis). Reactive histio-
cytosis also can mimic a variety of inflammatory disease
processes, including infectious diseases. In contrast to
reactive histiocytosis, the inflammation of nodular seba-
ceous adenitis is less extensive and is centered on seba-
ceous glands and sebaceous gland ducts. Discrete
perifolicular and subcutaneous pyogranulomas are sug-
gestive of juvenile sterile granulomatous dermatitis and
lymphadenitis, particularly in puppies. In contrast to reac-
tive histiocytosis, infectious granulomatous diseases may
Fig. 13.13 Juvenile sterile granulormatous dermatitis and lym-
be composed of histiocytes with severely vacuolated
phadenitis in a Labrador Retriever. Pustules and nodules accormpa-
nied by ederma and crusting have developed rapidly on the muzzle
and/or granular cytoplasm on hematoxylin and eosin
in a partially bilaterally symmetric pattern.
staining, often due to a high density of unstained or
-da ng snsudoi sus snsau pais kood
 ss id no a o s
confrm the presence of infectious agents in many of these
cases.
A limited panel of antibodies currently is available for
immunophenotyping histiocytic cells in formalin-fixed,
paraffn-embedded tissues (see Table 35.1). Immuno-
phenotypic diferentiation berween macrophages and
dendritic cells, and among dendritic cell types, requires
 fresh-frozen tissue samples. The proliferating histiocytic
cells of reactive histiocytosis consistently express CD45,
CD18, CD1c, CD11c, MHC II, CD90, and CD4, but lack
expression of E-cadherin; this phenotype is characteristic
 of activated perivascular interstitial dendritic antigen pre-
senting cells (dermal dendritic cells; Affolter & Moore,
2000). The majority of the lymphocytic population con-
Fig. 13.14 Closer view of the dog in Fig. 13.13. Perioral lesions are
sists of CD3+, CD8+ T cells, which express the T cell
draining copious purulent hemorrhagic material.
receptor alpha, beta (TCR cβ).
In contrast to reactive histiocytosis, regressing histio-
cytomas are composed of CD1+, CD11c+, MHC II+,
almost exclusively in puppies. Dramatic response to
CD4-, CD90-, E-cadherin+ Langerhans cells. Infectious
immunosuppressive dosages of glucocorticoids supporrs
granulomatous lesions are characterized by numerous
the likelihood of an underlying immune dysfunction.
CD45+, CD18+, CD1-, CD11c-, CD11b+ macrophages,
Suppression  of  in vitro  lymphocyte blastogenesis
and fewer admixed CD1+, CD11c+, MHCII+ dendritic
 secondary to a serum factor has been documented by one
cells.
author (PJ.I.) and others (Scott et al., 2001). Bacterial
involvement, when present, is secondary; l
bacterial
culture, special stains, and electron microscopy do not
JUVENILE STERILE GRANULOMATOUS
reveal causative microorganisms (Reimann et al., 1989).
DERMATITIS AND LYMPHADENITIS
 The likelihood of heritability is supported by increased
(Synonyms: juvenile celulitis, juvenile pyoderma, puppy
occurrence in certain breeds and a genetic  study of
strangles)
an affected family of Dachshunds (Prieur & Hargis,
1982).
 Commonly, the initial clinical feature noted by owners
Clinical features (Figures 13.13 and 13.14)
is acute swelling of the face, especially affecting the
Juvenile  sterile granulomatous dermatitis and lym-
eyelids, lips, and muzzle (Scott et al., 2001). The swelling
phadenitis is an uncommon, fulminant canine disease seen
 is markedly bilaterally symmetric. Extreme submandibular
328
Diseases of the dermis
lymphadenopathy develops in concert with the facial
 Poodles, Rottweilers, and mixed breed dogs. Sex predilec-
swelling, but is less likely to be recognized by owners.
tions have not been noted.
-ra sins Aaq Aq po Apide si am
Juvenile sterile granulomatous dermatitis and lym-
thema, papules, nodules, and transient pustules and vesi-
phadenitis is characteristic, especially in puppies. In very
cles, usually within 24 hours. Epidermal fragility may be
early cases, juvenile sterile granulomatous dermatitis and
marked. Crusting results from rupture of the pustules and
lymphadenitis must be diferentiated from angioedema
 vesicles. Lesions may fstulate and drain copious purulent
(Scott et al., 2001). After 24 to 48 hours, the syndrome
material. The muzzle, periorbital region, chin, and pinnae
must be differentiated from fulminating generalized
are affected most commonly. Bilaterally symmetric alope-
demodicosis, severe pyoderma secondary to immunodef-
cia involves the rostral muzzle surrounding the planum
ciency, and drug eruption. Multiple skin scrapings to rule
nasale and the periorbital region, and may be visually
out demodicosis, and smears from intact pustules or vesi-
striking. The medial surfaces of the pinnae commonly are
cles to rule out primary bacterial infection should be per-
edematous and covered by pustules, as a highly purulent
formed. Histopathology of early lesions is necessary for
otitis externa develops. Occasionally, the prepuce and
definitive diagnosis.
perianal area may be affected. Once lesions fstulate.
secondary bacterial  infection is common.  Cicatricial
Biopsy site selection
alopecia may occur if treatment is delayed. Lethargy and
 general malaise are common. Fever, anorexia, and joint
( un w g ro t) suds Asdo yund ad
pain are less consistent fndings, and sterile suppurative
should be taken from early, nontraumatized intact pus-
arthritis may occur (White et al., 1989).
tules, vesicles, or nodules. Wedge biopsy technique or
Juvenile sterile granulomatous dermatitis and lym-
8mm biopsy punches are not recommended since the
phadenitis usually is seen in dogs older than 3 weeks but
devitalized tissue is quite friable and sutures may not
less than 4 months of age. Single or multiple puppies in
maintain tissue integrity if the biopsy creates defects
a litter may be affected. On rare occasion, clinically and
larger than 6 mm in diameter.
histopathologically identical disease has been noted in
adult dogs by the authors and others (Jeffers et al., 1995).
Histopathology (Figures 13.15 through 13.17)
Breed predilections probably exist for Golden Retrievers,
Dachshunds, Gordon Setters, Labrador Retrievers, and
The epidermis may be normal, acanthotic, or ulcerated in
Lhasa Apsos. However juvenile sterile granulomatous
severe lesions. Superfcial exudation may be severe. The
dermatitis and lymphadenitis also has been seen in
dermis is most often characterized by multiple discrete or
many other breeds, including Brittanys, English Pointers,
confluent granulomas and pyogranulomas, comprising
Chesapeake Bay Retrievers, Weimaraners, Miniature
5
Fig. 13.15 Juvenile sterile granulo-
matous dermatitis and lymphadenitis
revealing diffuse pale-staining granu-
lomas and pyogranulomas in the peri-
adnexal dermis of the rmuzzle.
Noninfectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
329
Fig. 13.16 Higher magnification of juvenile sterile granulomatous
Fig. 13.17 Juvenile sterile
granulomatous dermatitis and lym
dermatitis and lymphadenitis. The large granuloma at right sur-
rounds the deep aspect of a follicle.
tion is diffuse and contains a prominent component of neutrophils.
variably sized cores of neutrophils. Pyogranulomas are
sis. Affected lymph nodes have obliterative pyogranulo-
often oriented around follicles, at least in part, and in
matous inflammation with variable fbrosis (Reimann
some lesions, may be more discretely perifollicular at
et al., 1989).
the level of the isthmus. Inflammation does not invade
Differential  c
diagnoses include other infectious and
follicular walls, but often obliterates sebaceous glands.
noninfectious
granulomatous and pyogranulomatous
Pyogranulomas often extend to the panniculus and
 diseases, including sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma
subcutis.
syndrome. Discrete perifollicular and subcutaneous pyo-
 In some lesions, inflammation is predominantly pustu-
granulomas, without evidence of infectious agents with
lar and suppurative, and large lakes of neutrophils may
special stains, are suggestive of juvenile sterile granulo-
be present in the superficial dermis, in and around rup-
matous dermatitis and lymphadenitis, particularly in
tured follicles, and in the subjacent subcutis. Follicular
 puppies. Without knowledge of clinical features and age
 degeneration may be accompanied by dermal edema and
affected, differentiation from sterile granuloma and pyo-
hemorrhage. It is not known whether these lesions repre-
granuloma syndrome may be impossible. However, pus-
sent secondary bacterial pyoderma, or if they simply
tular and suppurative lesions are more suggestive of
reflect the inflammatory spectrum of this disease. Since
juvenile sterile granulomatous dermatitis and lym-
pustules also are often observed as transient clinical
phadenitis. The subcutaneous pyogranulomas of juvenile
lesions (see above), it is more likely that pustules repre-
sterile granulomatous dermatitis and lymphadenitis
sent a primary manifestation of this syndrome.
closely resemble those of idiopathic sterile nodular
Chronic lesions may be scarred, particularly within the
panniculitis (see Chapter 21). It is of interest that the
subcutis, which may display prominent interlobular fbro-
Dachshund is at increased risk for both diseases.
330
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 13.18 Feline cutaneous xanthoma localized to the preauricu-
Fig. 13.20 Severe multicentric cutaneous xanthomas in a cat.
lar and periorbital regions. The bilaterally symmetric dark plaques
Larger masses, resermbling neoplasms, are ulcerated and exudative.
contain hermorrhage; these lesions are friable and bruise readily.
(Photograph courtesy C.B. Vitale; case material University of
California, Davis.)
lipoproteinemias'. Lipoproteins are lipid-protein conju-
gates that transport lipids, including cholesterol and
triglycerides, in the blood. Lipoproteins are classifed by
 both size and density, which is contingent on both the type
and ratio of constitutive proteins and fats. Lipoproteins
are divided into five major classes including chylomic-
rons (largest, least dense), very low density lipoproteins
(VLDLs), intermediate density lipoproteins (IDLs), low-
suaodod isuap-uau pue (si) suaoidod Aisua
(HDLs) (smallest and most dense). An elevation of serum
lipid levels is termed hyperlipidemia or hyperlipopro-
teinemia. The infltration and deposition of lipoproteins
into tissue secondary to elevated serum lipid levels pro-
duces xanthomas. The exact mechanisms are not known;
"ie ia ssuof) uoneunoy naq oi asodspard Keu eunen
1985; Vitale et al., 1998).
Xanthomatosis in humans is a histiocytic disease char-
Fig. 13.19 Closer view of the cat in Fig. 13.18. Erythematous
acterized by the deposition of lipids in the skin, tendons,
 nodules and plaques may be seen among darker areas of dermal herm-
and subcutaneous tissue (Grundy, 1999). Different species
orrhage. {Photograph courtesy C.B. Vitale; case rmaterial University
of lipoproteins produce clinically different subgroups of
of California, Davis.)
xanthomas in humans (Grundy, 1999). Xanthomas in 
humans are associated with fasting hyperlipoproteinemia
caused by either defects in lipid metabolism such as a deff-
ciency in lipoprotein lipase (LPL), or reduction in LPL
CUTANEOUS XANTHOMA
activity due to insulin defciency, as seen in diabetes mel-
(Synonym: xanthomatosis)
or may not be present. Lipid deposits may create xan-
thomas in a variety of different organs including the skin.
Clinical features (Figures 13.18 through 13.20)
In contrast, cutaneous xanthomas are usually absent in
Cutaneous xanthomas are benign, typically multifocal
 cats with familial hyperlipoproteinemia due to LPL defi-
granulomatous  skin  lesions containing lipoprotein-
ciency (Jones et al., 1986; Johnstone et al., 1990).
derived deposits. Cutaneous xanthomas are rare in the cat
Most feline cutaneous xanthomas are linked to the
and very rare in the dog. In all species, formation of
feeding of a high fat diet and fasting hyperlipoproteine-
xanthomas reflects abnormal plasma concentrations of
mia (Vitale et al., 1998; Vogelnest, 2001). Presumably,
cholesterol, triglycerides, or lipoproteins, termed “dys-
these cats have an underlying abnormality in lipid meta-
Noninfectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
331
bolism, and therefore cannot tolerate fat-laden food;
 age, or sex predilections for cutaneous xanthomas have
however, the specific metabolic defect has not been eluci-
not been established.
dated. Affected cats have substantially elevated fasting
Clinical differential diagnoses should include other
triglycerides, cholesterol, or LDLs (Vitale et al., 1998).
noninfectious granulomas and pyogranulomas as well as
Feline cutaneous xanthomas can develop secondary to
neoplasms. Infectious granulomas may need to be con-
naturally occurring and megesterol acetate-induced dia-
sidered for large, necrotic xanthomas. Preauricular xan-
betes mellitus with hypertriglyceridemia (Chastain &
thomas in cats are clinically distinctive. Histopathology is
Graham, 1978; Jones et al., 1985). This is presumably due
required for defnitive diagnosis. A preliminary chemical
to decreased LPL activity from insulin deficiency as in
screening panel should be performed to evaluate for dia-
humans, and was documented in one cat (Jones et al.,
betes mellitus, or elevated lipids. Fasting 24-hour lipid
1985). However, the occurrence of cutaneous xanthoma
 profles and apoprotein electrophoresis should be per-
in cats with diabetes mellitus is at odds with the relative
formed to determine the origin of xanthomas. Trigly-
absence of xanthomas in cats with familial LPL deficiency
cerides, cholesterol, HDLs, LDLs, and VLDLs should be
(see above). Other metabolic factors may be operant in
measured or calculated, as well as LPL activity (Vitale
diabetic cats with cutaneous xanthomas. One cat deve-
et al., 1998).
loped cutaneous xanthomatosis and atherosclerosis in
conjunction with prolonged use of corticosteroids; the
Biopsy site selection
may have been complicated by long-term corticosteroid
Punch or wedge biopsy specimens should be taken from
usage (Wisselink et al., 1994).
plaques or nodules prior to ulceration, since secondary
Dietary-related
lcutaneous
xanthomas have 
been
inflammation or necrosis may impede evaluation. If pos-
reported in a dog secondary to an experimental high cho-
sible, pawpad lesions should be avoided, since healing
lesterol diet (Reedy, 1986). Cutaneous xanthomas have
may be prolonged if the underlying reason for dys-
also been reported in a dog with diabetes melltus-associ-
lipoproteinemia is not medically manageable.
ated hypertriglyceridemia (Chastain & Graham, 1978). A
dog with cutaneous xanthomas due to hypertrigly-
Histopathology (Figures 13.21 through 13.24)
ceridemia (without diabetes mellitus) has been observed
by one author (T.L.G.).
The epidermis may be normal to moderately acanthotic.
Multiple, pale, yellow to white papules, plaques, or
Ulceration is rare. There is diffuse granulomatous inflam-
nodules with erythematous borders are the most common
 mation composed of large macrophages containing
clinical presentation of feline xanthomas. Rarely, larger
abundant, foamy cytoplasm. Foamy macrophages may
- s     ss
diffusely percolate between collagen fbers, or may be in
phous, necrotic material. Erythematous, yellowish
to
diffuse sheets that obliterate normal architecture. In some
brownish-red or purple plaques are seen most commonly
cases, 1
 macrophages and giant cells are individualized
in the preauricular location and may extend periorbitally.
in tissue and are separated by clear spaces. In other
Preauricular xanthomas are friable and bruise readily; the
cases, macrophages are compactly organized and may
dark color change represents hemorrhage in various
abut residual collagen fbers in a slightly palisaded
stages of resolution. Bilateral symmery is typical. Feline
arrangement. Giant cells are seen and may be massive
xanthomas occur most commonly in the preauricular and
(containing up to 20 nuclei) and numerous. Eosinophils
periorbital region, and to a lesser extent elsewhere on the
 are observed and may be abundant. Neutrophils are spo-
head, pinnae, or neck (Vitale et al., 1998). Lesions also
radic and usually are present in small numbers. Lympho-
have been seen affecting the legs, with more severe lesions
cytes and plasma cells are variable and may be focally
occurring over bony prominences and in the pawpads.
numerous. There may be prominent hemorrhage, parti-
Very rarely, feline xanthomas, seen in conjunction with
 cularly in preauricular lesions. Superfcial dermal fbrosis
inherited hyperchylomicronemia, may cause peripheral
is present in some putatively chronic or traumatized
neuropathy believed to be due to nerve compression from
lesions.
lipid deposits (Jones et al., 1986). Similar cutaneous
There are often small to occasionally large lakes of
lesions at or near the eyelid margins usually are chalazions
extracellular, amorphous and pale-staining lipid deposits.
and not cutaneous xanthomas.
 Acicular cholesterol clefts may be present. Demonstration
Yellow papular skin lesions in one dog were noted on
 of extracellular lipid is not present in all lesions, however,
the face, ears, and ventrum (Chastain & Graham, 1978).
and should not be relied upon for definitive diagnosis. Oil
Lesions in a second dog were on the face, neck, feet,
red O staining of frozen tissue confrms lipid within
elbows, and tips of the ears and tail (Reedy, 1986). Breed,
macrophages and giant cells and in extracellular lakes
332
 Diseases of the dermis
(Chastain & Graham, 1978).  A hypertriglyceridemic
(nondiabetic) dog with cutaneous xanthomas, observed
by one author (T.L.G.), had small basophilic foci of
 saponified-like mineral deposits amongst the extracellular
lipid.
 In some feline cutaneous xanthomas the inflammation
 is more discretely nodular or tumor-like. It is composed 
 of large foamy macrophages intermingled with prominent
lymphoid nodules and accumulations of eosinophils.
Giant cells may be massive. Extracellular lakes and aci-
cular deposits may be present or absent.
The rare multifocal cutaneous xanthomas in dogs
are distinctive and unique. Solitary reactive fbrohisticytic
nodules in dogs may contain lipidized histiocytic cells,
and thus appear xanthomatous (see Chapter 35).
However, these usually have a spindle cell component,
and lack extracellular lipid. Palisading granulomas may
 appear somewhat similar histologically, but are more dis-
tinctly aligned along collagen fbers and do not contain 
lipidized cytoplasm; these are also generally solitary.
Principal differential diagnoses for cutaneous xan-
thomas in cats must include cutaneous infection by
opportunistic fungi or lepromatous feline leprosy, both of
which may have diffuse infltrations of pale or foamy
macrophages. Demonstration of organisms will allow
differentiation; the prominence of eosinophils in some
cutaneous xanthomas tends to discount these infectious
lular deposits of lipid or cholesterol clefts, whereas infec-
Fig. 13.21 Cutaneous xanthoma in a cat with diabetes mellitus.
tious granulomas do not. Tumor-like, nodular xanthomas 
 Diffuse pyogranulomatous infammation is interspersed with large,
 are vaguely reminiscent of mast cell neoplasms; a Giemsa
pale, acellular lakes of lipid.
 stain for mast cell metachromatic granules is negative.
Fig. 13.22 Higher magnification of
Fig. 13.21. Note diffuse distribution of
neutrophils, foamy macrophages, and
gianit cells.
Noninfectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
333
Feline progressive dendritic cell histiocytosis in cats
may resemble cutaneous xanthoma since foamy macro-
phage infltration may occur in long standing lesions, as
confrmed by immunohistochemistry (see Chapter 35).
 Extracellular lipid deposits are not found in feline pro-
 gressive dendritic cell histiocytosis. An absence of dietary
or blood lipid abnormalities suggests progressive den-
dritic cell histiocytosis for generalized xanthomatous
lesions.
 Focal or multifocal lesions of the eyelid margins may
closely resemble xanthomas, particularly in cats. These
 eyelid lesions are due to rupture of regional meibomian
glands (chalazions) and include more neutrophils, result-
isou ueql anuereadde snoeuonuenokd anou e un su
cutaneous xanthomas. Clinical differentiation may be
required.
CANINE SARCOIDOSIS
Clinical features (Figure 13.25)
Canine sarcoidosis is a very rare, idiopathic, predomi-
nantly nodular skin disease characterized histologically by
'naked’ granulomas (Scott & Noxon, 1990). These granu-
lomas lack the lymphocytic component that characterizes
other granulomatous and pyogranulomatous skin dis-
eases. The histopathologic features of canine sarcoidosis
mirror those of sarcoidosis in humans (Scott & Noxon,
1990). Despite the confusing nomenclature, canine sar-
Fig. 13.23 Preauricular xanthoma in a cat. Compactly organized
coidosis is not related to ‘sarcoid’ in the cat (see Chapter
macrophages are partially aligned along collagen fibers.
27).
Fig. 13.24 Preauricular xanthoma in
cat. Large histiocytic cells and
numerous giant cells diffusely fll the
dermis. Note hemorrhage.
334
Diseases of the dermis
and one dog seen by one author (T.L.G.) were Shetland
Sheepdogs.
Clinical differential diagnoses should include neoplasia,
other sterile granulomatous or pyogranulomatous dis-
eases (sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma syndrome,
reactive histiocytosis, cutaneous xanthoma), in addition
to granulomatous and pyogranulomatous disorders
 caused by infectious agents (see Chapter 12). Cytology of
aq A suads Asdonq nn o sres uoissadi
useful. Clinical features cannot be relied upon to differ-
entiate most of these conditions. As with other noninfec.
tious histiocytic skin diseases, provisional differential
 diagnosis can be accomplished by routine histopathology
and special stains to rule out infectious agents, as well as
Fig. 13.25 Canine sarcoidosis. Erythematous papules, plaques, and
culture, if indicated.
nodules are present on the trunk of a dog. (Photograph courtesy
D.W. Scott.)
 Biopsy site selection
 Multiple biopsy specimens should be obtained from intact
Sarcoidosis in humans is a multisystemic granuloma-
lesions. A range of lesions, including papules and nodules,
tous disorder of uncertain and likely complex etiology
should be sampled.
commonly affecting the lungs, lymph nodes, skin, and
eyes (Braverman, 2003). To date, only cutaneous involve-
Histopathology (Figures 13.26 and 13.27)
 ment has been seen with canine sarcoidosis. Modern tech-
 niques indicate that T cells of the CD4+ helper-inducer
Lesions of canine sarcoidosis, resembling the granulomas
-res ueunq ul saunl a u pasaiou are (lH) adhouaud
in human cutaneous sarcoidosis, are characterized by
coidosis and a peripheral T cell lymphopenia is present
 multifocal ‘naked’ granulomas. These are granulomas
(Braverman, 2003).
that  are composed  predominantly  of  epithelioid
As in other sterile granulomatous and pyogranuloma-
macrophages without a peripheral cuff of lymphocytes.
tous skin diseases, persistent antigenic drive directed
Peripheral palisading, as in palisading granuloma (see
against unknown antigens, or incomplete clearing of anti-
337) is absent. Granulomas are oriented within the super-
gens associated with infectious agents is suspected.
ficial to deep dermis; subcutaneous involvement has been
Recently, DNA from Mycobacterium tuberculosis and
reported (Scott & Noxon, 1990). Individual granulomas
unidentifed nontuberculous mycobacteria was identifed
are generally contiguous, but not often confluent. Pale,
in cutaneous sarcoidosis in humans (Li et al., 1999;
slightly vacuolated macrophages comprise the granulo-
Braverman, 2003). In canine sterile granuloma and
mas; cell borders are difcult to discern. Small accumu-
 pyogranuloma syndrome, another sterile granulomatous
lations of lymphocytes intervene. Neutrophils are rare.
skin disease, Leishmania spp. DNA has been documented
The epidermis is normal to mildly acanthotic.
via immunohistochemistry and PCR in 20 of 35 dogs;
 Differential diagnosis principally includes sterile gran-
mycobacterial DNA was not discovered (Cornegliani et
uloma and pyogranuloma syndrome. Although pyogran-
al., 2003). To the authors' knowledge, tissue from canine
ulomas are not a feature of sarcoidosis, separation of
sarcoidosis has not yet been examined by molecular and
 these two entities may be artificial as both likely represent
immunohistochemical techniques.
'sterile’ inflammation derived from circulating macro-
Described clinical features are derived from a very small
 phages in response to undetected antigen.
case sample, which includes three dogs in the published
report (Scott & Noxon, 1990) and one additional dog
FOREIGN BODY REACTIONS
observed by one author (T.L.G.). Clinical lesions include
erythematous papules, plaques, and nodules. Neither pru-
(Synonym: foreign body granuloma)
ritus nor pain has been linked to this syndrome. Affected
sites include the trunk, neck, face, and ears.
Clinical features (Figures 13.28 and 13.29)
Case numbers are too small to infer signalment
predilections. All affected dogs have been between 4 and
Cutaneous and subcutaneous foreign body reactions are
7 years of age. Of possible interest is that one of three
common in dogs and uncommon in cats. The lesser fre-
dogs in the sole published report (Scott & Noxon, 1990)
quency in cats probably is attributable to more effective
Noninfectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
335
Fig. 13.26 Sarcoidosis in a Shetland
Sheepdog. Confluent granulomas form a
discrete nodule in the dermis.
Fig. 13.28 Interdigital foreign body reaction in a dog caused by
grass awns. A firm nodule in the dorsal interdigital web has fistu-
lated and another grass awn has begun penetration of the fistula.
and meticulous self-grooming. Penetrating foreign bodies
commonly pass through the epidermis and lodge in the
dermis, panniculus, or the subcutis. Pyogranulomatous or
granulomatous inflammation results from host response
directed against the foreign material plus contaminant
infectious agents carried into the wound. These organisms
include bacteria that commonly cause secondary infection
(such as Staphylococcus intermedius), actinomycetes or
Nocardia spp., opportunistic mycobacteria, saprophytic
fungi that may act as opportunists, organisms that cause
Fig. 13.27 Higher magnification of Fig. 13.26. *Naked’ granulo-
subcutaneous or systemic fungi, dermatophytes, sapro-
mas are composed of epithelioid macrophages.
phytic water molds (Pythium insidiosum and Lagenidium
336
Diseases of the dermis
licles rupture and release hair and keratin into the dermis,
leading to additional foreign body response. Rapidly
penetrating foreign bodies may also carry hair and envi
ronmental debris into deep tissues. Multiple lesions are
common.
The external ear canal is the most common orificial
portal of grass awn entry (Brennan & Ihrke, 1983). The
dorsal interdigital webs are the most common cutaneous
location of grass awn penetration, although penetra-
tion can occur at any site. Lesions associated with
other foreign bodies usually do not exhibit distinct site
predilections.
Young dogs of hunting and working breeds are at
greater risk, probably indicating that an active outdoor
Fig. 13.29 Severe foreign body reaction due to a grass awn in the
lifestyle enhances the opportunity for exposure in these
sheath of the prepuce of a Miniature Poodle. The lesion has fistu
breeds (Brennan & Ihrke, 1983). Grass awns are trapped
lated and sloughed necrotic inflamed tissue, discharging the grass
more readily in the hair coats of long-coated breeds. Sex
awn, and resulting in a deep cavity.
predilections have not been noted. Grass awn foreign
bodies exhibit a seasonal incidence in late summer and
spp.), and saprophytic achlorophyllous algae (Prototheca
autumn during dry weather.
spp). Specific infectious diseases caused by the above-
Puncture wounds without retention of foreign material
mentioned organisms are discussed separately  (see
may mimic foreign body reactions. Other clinical differ-
Chapter 12).
ential diagnoses should include deep folliculitis and
Common penetrating foreign bodies such as wood
furunculosis without foreign bodies (particularly inter-
slivers, suture material, road gravel, fberglass fbers, and
digital pyoderma or interdigital pyoderma secondary to
air gun pellers share worldwide distribution. Various
demodicosis), deep fungal infection, ruptured follicular
species of grass awns (foxtails), cactus spines, burdock
cysts, or neoplasms. Cytology of impression smears or
burrs, seeds, and porcupine quills have regional distribu-
exudate may be useful. Deep pyoderma without associ-
tion (Georgi et al., 1982; Brennan & Ihrke, 1983; Scott
ated foreign body penetration usually is more dissemi-
et al., 2001). Foreign bodies of plant origin are the most
nated in distribution. Fistulous tracts associated with
commonly implanted (Brennan & Ihrke, 1983). In addi-
grass awns commonly are deeper (as determined by
tion, endogenous foreign bodies such as free hair shafts
probing) and more well-defned than the cavitating or
commonly incite foreign body reactions.
necrotizing lesions caused by deep pyoderma or ruptured
The foxtail, Hordeum jubatum, is the most common
follicular cysts that fistulate. Site and clinical features aid
foreign body seen in North America. Other barbed awns
identifcation, but clinical or histologic identifcation of
from the genera Hordeum, Stipa, and Setaria are distrib-
 foreign material is required for definitive diagnosis.
uted worldwide. Grass awns usually penetrate the skin or
a body orifice after being retained in the haircoat of the
Biopsy site selection
 animal. Distinctive sharply barbed anterior florets on the
surface of the grass awn prevent retrograde migration;
Solitary lesions should be removed in their entirety, if sur-
anterograde motion is encouraged by muscular movement
gically feasible. If multiple lesions are present, represen-
(Brennan & Ihrke, 1983). Secondary bacterial infection
tative specimens should be taken from multiple sites.
with Staphylococcus intermedius or actinomycetes (see
Ideally, both closed and open lesions should be sampled.
Chapter 12) is a common sequela.
 Deep wedge resection is recommended since the foreign
Clinically, the initial site of penetration may not
 bodies may be located in the subcutis.
be obvious until inflammation progresses.
Localized
erythema and swelling are often the initial signs. As the
Histopathology (Figure 13.30)
foreign body migrates inward, frm nodules or abscesses
form, fistulate, and drain seropurulent or serosanguinous
The epidermis is often severely acanthotic and exudative.
exudate. Nonbarbed foreign bodies and some grass awns
There may be ulceration present, and inflammation may
may be shed by this proces. Nodular areas of scar tissue
fstulate through the epidermal defect. The dermis, sub-
surround the fistulas as the lesions progress. Deep folli-
cutis, and occasionally underlying skeletal muscle, are
culitis and furunculosis aggravate the process as hair fol-
diffusely and severely inflamed, and often fbrotic. Large
Noninfectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
337
ration when viewed in cross-section, and individual plant
cells have little internal structure. Colonies of bacteria are
often present within the plant material. Free hair and
 n       
tory process.
Differential diagnoses  include penetrating  wounds
without foreign body retention, deep folliculitis and
furunculosis with ruptured hair follicles, or ruptured fol-
licular cysts. Puncture wounds without penetration of
foreign material may produce a similar lesion, particularly
if bacteria or follicular tissue are introduced. Ruptured
furuncles or follicular cysts may also lead to a similar
pattern of inflammation, since keratin and hair essentially
act as endogenous foreign bodies when released from hair
follicles.
PALISADING GRANULOMA
Clinical features
Palisading granulomas are solitary nodules seen occasion-
ally in dogs. Distinctive, discrete, granulomas center on
putatively degenerate or devitalized collagen fbers. Blunt
trauma may be an initiator of palisading granuloma.
 Palisading granulomas usually present clinically as soli-
tary dermal nodules located over pressure points such as
the zygomatic arch or hip, or sites possibly prone to local-
ized blunt trauma such as the lips or tongue. A palisad-
 ing granuloma also has been seen by one author (T.L.G.)
Fig. 13.30 Foreign body reaction in a dog. A cross-section of plant
on the pinna in conjunction with an underlying arterio-
material is surrounded by fibrinosuppurative exudate which extends
venous malformation, suggesting that local ischemia may
into a fistulous tract above.
play a role in the development of these lesions.
A distinctive presentation of palisading granuloma,
central or multicentric foci of frank suppuration or pyo-
microscopically resembling Churg Strauss granuloma of
granulomatous inflammation are observed. Eosinophils
humans, has been observed in a dog that presented with
are variable and may be prominent. Necrosis may be
oval, alopecic plaques on the dorsum of the muzzle
severe and can be accompanied by cavitation due to
(Gallant, W.P., personal communication, 2003). There
liquefaction and loss of devitalized tissue. At the periph-
was mild scaling and crusting. The lesions were asymp-
ery, there are mixed mononuclear cells which usually
tomatic. This type of granuloma has been associated
include many plasma cells. Granulation tissue prolifera-
with systemic immunoreactive or autoimmune diseases in
tion and mature areas of fbrosis often subtend and sur-
people (Lee et al., 1999). The affected dog had inappro-
round the inflammatory core or cores. Fistula formation
priate secretion of antidiuretic hormone (ADH) but no
is frequent and is characterized by linear or curvilinear
 other systemic disease process was discovered.
spaces, lined with neutrophils and surrounded by fbro-
Dogs of any age, sex, or breed may be affected.
 sis. Fibrosis may predominate in chronic lesions.
However, most of the dogs noted with this syndrome have
Foreign material, usually of plant origin, occasionally
 01 Aall aro sdeiad are ieqi shop paarq rare uaaq
may be found superficially or deeply within fistulas or
incur trauma during vigorous activity.
suppurative foci, but its presence is not required
to
Clinical differential diagnoses include solitary dermal
suggest the diagnosis. Plant foreign bodies usually appear
neoplasms  or solitary  infectious granulomas  such  as
in tissue section as polygonal or linear structures, which
 canine leproid granuloma (see Chapter 12). Other sterile
have very pale eosinophilic or amphophilic staining prop-
or infectious granulomatous diseases are less likely
erties. The plant fragment may contain yellow or brown
differential diagnoses, as they rarely present as solitary
pigment. Plant cell walls have a honeycomb-like configu-
lesions. Histopathology is diagnostic.
338
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 13.31 Palisading granuloma in a dog. Prominent palisading
Fig. 13.32 Higher magnification of palisading granuloma in the
along collagen fibers by macrophages is producing a *starburst"
dog of Fig. 13.31. Macrophages are aligned in a radiating palisaded
pattern.
pattern along collagen fibers; fewer neutrophils, lymphocytes, and
plasma cells are intermingled.
Biopsy site selection
Nodules should be removed by excisional biopsy. This
collagenous foci or the outer amorphous layer; some
provides the added benefit of a surgical cure, since lesions
larger foci of frank pustulation occur. Large numbers
usually are solitary.
 of pale epithelioid macrophages encircle the centers, and
are partially linearly aligned in a palisading pattern
Histopathology (Figures 13.31 through 13.35)
along fbers. This palisading arrangement is striking in
some lesions, creating a radiating, or 'starburst' pattern.
The epidermis is normal to moderately acanthotic.
Lymphocytes and plasma cells variably separate the
Nodular lesions are of variable depth, and affect the
 granulomas. These may be abundant and more diffuse in 
dermis and/or the panniculus and deeper subcutis. The
some lesions, resulting in wide partitioning of individual
nodules are composed of diffuse granulomatous inflam-
-edoui a kq uonno ied o rsn
mation that replaces normal architecture. Individual gran-
 macytic inflammation. Large foci of acellular necrosis,
ulomas are discrete to confluent, and are round to often
suggesting ischemia, also may obliterate portions of the
elongated and tubular. At the centers of these granulomas
 lesion. There may be mucin amongst granulomas in some
are collagen fbers with altered tinctorial quality and
cases.
appearance. These fbers are brightly eosinophilic and
 Masson's trichrome stain often colors collagen fbers
 may appear fragmented or smudged. Occasionally they
at the centers of granulomas bright red, in contrast to
 may be mineralized (basophilic). Central collagen may be 
 normal blue or blue-green. Staining is inconsistent,
surrounded by zones of eosinophilic, paler, amorphous
however and red cores can be demonstrated in normal
material. A few neutrophils are intermingled in the central
collagen fbers as well; thus, the use of this stain is con-
Noninfectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis 
339
Fig. 13.33 Churg Strauss granuloma in a dog. Dark foci through-
Fig. 13.34 Higher magnification of Fig. 13.33.
out the dermis and panniculus comprise inflammation organized
around collagen.
Lesions that are similar to palisading granuloma have
sidered diagnostically unreliable. Red staining of collagen,
been seen on the chin of cats. Macrophages and fewer
although not highly specific, may be a sign of degenera-
giant cells are aligned linearly amongst collagen fbers.
tion or abnormal development; it has been reported in
Central discrete foci of collagen and amorphous material
thermal trauma of collagen (Chvapil et al., 1984) and in
are not seen. Plasma cells and lymphocytes may be numer
some cats with cutaneous asthenia or skin fragility (see
ous. Eosinophils are seen sporadically and in small
Chapter 15) (Fernandez et al., 1998).
numbers. It is likely that these lesions represent late stage
 In the single dog with palisading granulomas resem
eosinophilic granulomas from which eosinophils have
bling Churg Strauss granuloma of humans (see above),
faded, rather than true palisading granuloma. Similarly,
multiple small, often necrotic appearing granulomas
 palisading lesions around collagen have been observed
were present. These were characterized by central foci of
within noneosinophilic foci of canine eosinophilic granu-
degenerate neutrophils with prominent leukocytoclasia
lomas that are putatively due to arthropod insult (see
 organized around collagen. A few eosinophils were inter-
Chapter 14). If the unifying feature of palisading granu-
mingled. Peripheral palisading of histiocytic cells was
loma is previous damage to collagen that elicits a sec-
accompanied by fewer lymphocytes. Early foci were char-
ondary granulomatous response, then palisading in the
acterized by leukocytoclastic debris and/or histiocytic
context of some eosinophilic granulomas may be patho-
cells aligned along individual collagen fibers. The granu-
genically similar.
lomas extended to the panniculus and underlying skeletal
The principal differential diagnoses for palisading
muscle. Mild multifocal interstitial inflammation of skin
granulomas are sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma syn-
and muscle featured lymphocytes, histiocytes, neutrophils
drome, cutaneous sarcoidosis, and reactive fbrohistio-
and fewer eosinophils.
cytic nodules (see Chapter 35). The two former conditions
340
Diseases of the dermis
REFERENCES
Sterile Granuloma and Pyogranuloma Syndrome
Cornegliani, L., Fondevila, D., Vercelli, A. et al. (2003) PCR
detection of Leishmania and Mycobacterium organisms in
canine cutaneous sterile pyogranuloma/granuloma syndrome
(SPGS). In: Proceedings of the 19th ESVD/ECVD Meeting,
Tenerife, p. 172.
Legendre, A.M. (1998) Blastomycosis. In: Infectious Diseases of
the Dog and Cat, Znd edn (ed. C.E. Greene), pp. 371-7. W.B.
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Li, N., Bajoghli, A., Kubba, A. et al. (1999) Identification of
mycobacterial DNA in cutaneous lesions of sarcoidosis. J
Cutan Pathol 26,271-8.
Panich, R., Scott, D.W. & Miller, W.H. (1991) Canine cutaneous
sterile pyogranuloma/granuloma syndrome: a retrospective
analysis of 29 cases (1976-1988). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27,
519-28.
Scott, D.W., Buerger, R.G. & Miller, W.H. (1990) Idiopathic
sterile granulomatous and pyogranulomatous dermatitis in
cats. Vet Dermatol 1, 129-37.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 1136-40. W.B.
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Reactive Histiocytosis
Affolter, VK. & Moore, PF. (2000) Canine cutaneous and sys-
temic histiocytosis: a reactive histiocytosis of dermal dendritic
origin. Am J Dermatopathot 22, 40-8.
Bellhorn, R.W. & Henkind, P. (1967) Ocular nodular fasciitis in
a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 150, 212-3.
Fig. 13.35 High magnification of Churg Strauss granuloma in the
Gwin, R.M., Gelatt, K.N. & Peiffer, R.L, Jr (1977) Ophthalmic
dog of Fig. 13.33. Neutrophils and lymphocytes are palisading along
nodular fascitis in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 170, 611-4.
collagen fibers at left; note dark fragrments of leukocytoclastic neu-
Mays, M.B. & Bergeron, J.A. (1986) Cutaneous histiocytosis in
trophilic debris, best visualized at left.
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 188, 377-81.
Moore, PF. (1984) Systemic histiocytosis of Bernese mountain
dogs. Vet Pathol 21, 554-63.
present with multiple lesions, rather than the solitary
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
Small Animat Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 1346-57. W.B.
lesions that typify palisading granuloma. Fibrohistiocytic
Saunders, Philadelphia.
nodules are similarly solitary. Pyogranulomatous inflam-
mation is a more consistent feature of the sterile granu-
Juvenile Sterile Granulomatous Dermatitis and
loma and pyogranuloma syndrome than of palisading
Lymphadenitis
 granuloma. Palisading granulomas feature typical pali-
Jeffers, J.G., Duclos, D.D. & Goldschmidt, M.H. (1995) A der-
sading linear alignment of macrophages along central foci
matosis resembling juvenile cellulitis in an adult dog. J Am
of collagen, a feature that is absent in the other three
Anim Hosp Assoc 31, 204-8.
lesions.
Prieur, D.J. & Hargis, A.M. (1982) A severe form of juvenile
Very small palisading granulomas may develop around
pyoderma with an inherited component. Fed Proc Am Soc Exp
individual collagen fbers in lesions of cell poor vasculitis
Biol 41, 696.
(see Chapter 10); differentiation is not problematic due to
Reimann, K.A., Evans, M.G., Chalifoux, L.V. et al. (1989).
Clinicopathologic characterization of canine juvenile cellulitis.
the occurrence of the latter in the context of ischemic der-
Vet Pathol 26, 499-504.
matopathy. The leukocytoclastic degenerate foci of the
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
Churg Strauss-like variant of palisading granuloma some-
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 1163-7. WB.
what resemble those of familial cutaneous vasculopathy
Saunders, Philadelphia.
       
White, S.D., Rosychuk, R.A.W., Stewart, L.J. et al. (1989)
mation is generally more diffuse and severe in the latter;
Juvenile cellulitis in dogs: 5 cases (1979-1988). J Am Vet Med
clinical differentiation may be required.
Assoc 195, 1609-11.
Noninfectious nodular and diffuse granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases of the dermis
341
Cutaneous Xanthoma
Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.1. Katz), pp.
Chastain, C.B. & Graham, C.L. (1978) Xanthomatosis second-
1777-83. McGraw-Hill, New York.
ary to diabetes mellitus in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 172,
Cornegliani, L., Fondevila, D., Vercelli, A. et al. (2003) PCR
1209-11.
detection of Leishmania and Mycobacterium organisms in
Grundy, S.M. (1999) Xanthomatoses and lipoprotein disorders.
canine cutaneous sterile pyogranuloma/granuloma syndrome
In: Dermatology in Generat Medicine, Sth edn (eds I.W.
(SPGS). In: Proceedings of the 19th ESVD/ECVD Meeting,
Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith
Tenerife, p. 172.
& T.B. Fitzpatrick), pp. 1804-1811. McGraw-Hill, New
Li, N., Bajoghli, A., Kubba, A. et al. (1999) Identification of
York.
mycobacterial DNA in cutaneous lesions of sarcoidosis. J
Johnstone, A.C., Jones, B.R., Thompson, J.C. et al. (1990) The
Cutan Pathol 26,271-8.
pathology of an inherited hyperlipoproteinaemia of cats.
Scott, D.W., & Noxon, J.O. (1990) Sterile sarcoidal granulo-
J Comp Pathol 102, 125-37.
matous skin disease. Canine Pract 15, 11-8.
Jones, B.R., Wallace, A., Hancock, W. et al. (1985) Cutaneous
xanthomata associated with diabetes mellitus in a cat. J Small
Foreign Body Reactions
Anim Pract 26, 33-41.
Brennan, K.E. & Ihrke, PJ. (1983) Grass awn migration in dogs
Jones, B.R., Johnston, A.C., Hancock, W.S. et al. (1986) Inher-
and cats: a retrospective study of 182 cases. J Am Vet Med
ited hyperchylomicronemia in the cat. Fet Pract 16, 7-12.
Assoc 182, 1201-4.
Reedy, L.M. (1986) Xanthomatosis in a dog on a high choles-
Georgi, M.E., Harper, P., Hyypio, PP et al. (1982) Pappus
terol diet. In: Proceedings of the Znd AAVD/ACVD Meeting,
bristles: the cause of burdock stomatitis in dogs. Cornell Vet
New Orleans, p. 7.
72, 43-8.
Vitale, C.B., Ihrke, P.J. & Gross, T.L. (1998) Diet-induced altera-
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
tions in lipid metabolism and associated cutaneous xanthoma
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 1091-4. W.B.
formation in 5 cats. In: Advances in Veterinary Dermatology,
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Vol. 3 (eds K.W. Kwochka, T. Willemse & C. von Tscharner),
pp. 243-9. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
Palisading Granuloma
Vogelnest, L.J. (2001) Cutaneous xanthomas with concurrent
Chvapil, M., Speer, D.P., Owen, J.A. et al. (1984) Identification
demodicosis and dermatophytosis in a cat. Aust Vet J 79,
of the depth of burn injury by collagen stainability. Plast
470-5.
Reconstr Surg 73, 438-41.
Wisselink, M.A., Koeman, J.P., Wensing Th. et al. (1994) Hyper-
Fernandez, C.J., Scott, D.W, Erb, H.N. et al. (1998) Staining
lipoproteinaemia associated with atherosclerosis and
cuta-
abnormalities of dermal collagen in cats with cutaneous asthe-
neous xanthomatosis in a cat. Vet Quart 16, 199-202.
nia or acquired skin fragility as demonstrated with Masson's
trichrome stain. Vet Dermatol 9, 49-54.
Canine Sarcoidosis
Lee, M.W., Jang, K.A., Lim, YS. et al. (1999) Cutaneous
Braverman, I.M. (2003) Sarcoidosis. In: Fitzpatrick's Dermatol-
extravascular granuloma (Churg Strauss granuloma). Clin
ogy in General Medicine, 6th edn (eds I.M. Freedberg, A.Z.
Exp Dermatol 24, 193-5.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright  2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 14
Nodular and diffuse diseases of the dermis
with prominent eosinophils, neutrophils.
or plasma cells
This group of diseases is characterized by prominent
Type IIl and IV hypersensitivity reactions are the
eosinophils, neutrophils, or plasma cells in a diffuse
most commonly proposed pathogenesis of arthropod
dermal pattern. The inflammation tends to obscure
bite reactions in humans (Doros, 1988; Wilson & King.
normal dermal architecture and may compress or replace
1999). Urticaria and angioedema probably represent type
adnexal appendages. Degranulation of eosinophils 
to
I reactions.
form flame fgures around collagen fbers often accom-
Focal erythema and swelling are the usual initial clini-
panies eosinophilic inflammation of this type. Several
cal signs of many arthropod bites. These initial lesions
of these diseases are suspected of having an allergic or
may be the sole clinical signs in many cases and may
immunologic basis, and some may be triggered by expo-
not progress to chronic granuloma formation. Early
sure to arthropod bites or stings.
lesions vary from 5 to 20 mm in diameter and usually are
circular.
The clinically typical arthropod bite reaction is a frm,
ARTHROPOD BITE REACTIONS
palpable dermal nodule that forms as a chronic sequela
(Synonym: insect bite granuloma)
be pruritic, painful, or asymptomatic. Less commonly,
acute erythematous lesions may eventuate rapidly in
Clinical features (Figure 14.1)
 necrosis with ulceration, alopecia, and crusting. Scarring
Arthropod bite reaction occurs in the dog and cat as a
with striae, permanent alopecia, and either hyperpig-
sequel to the bite or sting of various arthropods (Walder
mentation or hypopigmentation may efface the normal
& Howard, 1982). Arthropod bite reactions rarely are
surface architecture of the affected cutaneous site. Most
repored in animals due to the diffculty in establishing
commonly, arthropod bite granulomas are solitary. Site
cause and effect. Consequently, the true frequency is
predilections mirror the biting habits of the various
unknown. Ticks are the most commonly documented
arthropods. For example, tick bite reactions are seen most
cause in dogs; this may be the result of the propensity of
frequently on the muzzle, periorbital region, ears, and
the tick to remain attached to the host after the initial
interdigital webs.
insult, thus aiding in causal identifcation. Besides ticks,
Fly strike caused by stable flies (Stomoxys calcitrans) is
other aggressively biting and stinging arthropods proba-
a very common regional skin disease in outdoor dogs
bly produce similar reactions in dogs and cats. Fly-strike
(Scott et al., 2001). Severe erythema, ulceration, and hem-
on the ears of dogs is very common. Black fies (Scott
orrhagic crusts are the most common lesions. Dog breeds
et al., 2001) and buffalo gnats (both Simulidae spp.) are
with erect ears (such as the German Shepherd Dog) are
under-recognized regional causes of skin lesions and pru-
attacked predominantly on the tips of the pinnae; breeds
ritus in dogs. In humans, hundreds of species of arthro-
with folded ears (such as the Shetland Sheepdog) com-
pods, encompassing fve of nine classes (Arachnida,
monly are attacked at the folds of the pinnae. Lesions also
Chilopoda, Diplopoda, Crustacea, Insecta) can cause bite
occur on the face and occasionally elsewhere. Pruritus and
reactions of varying severity (Wilson & King, 1999;
pain are common. The disease is seasonal.
Wilson et al., 2003). Canine eosinophilic granuloma and
Black flies and buffalo gnats can initiate highly distinc-
eosinophilic furunculosis of the face are likely additional
 tive erythematous, macular targetoid lesions. These are
manifestations of arthropod insult in dogs and are dis-
characterized by central hemorrhage and necrosis and cir-
cussed separately below and in Chapter 17.
cumferential blanching, surrounded by an additional ring
342
Nodular and diffuse diseases of the dermis with prominent eosinophils, neutrophils, or plasma cells
343
of erythema that may not blanch with diascopy (direct
roopino rog Aoddo raiao qm sieo pue sog
pressure with a glass slide). Lesions may vary from a few
access, particularly in rural or semirural areas, are likely
to dozens. Urticaria may be a feature of more severely
to be more frequently affected. Animals lacking dense,
hypersensitive dogs after multiple episodes. One author
protective haircoats may be at greater risk.
(P.J.I.) has seen angioedema due to buffalo gnat bites. The
Clinical differential diagnoses for early arthropod bite
glabrous abdomen, axilla, pawpad margins, philtrum,
reactions (swelling and erythema) are legion, but should
and perioral and periorbital regions may be predisposed
include drug eruption, kerion dermatophytosis, and
due to a relative lack of hair at these sites in many dogs.
trauma. The various causes of angioedema may need to
Pruritus varies from moderate to severe. Severity of
 be considered if that is the principal presenting sign (see
reaction seems to increase with additional exposure.
Chapter 10). The later stage, or true arthropod bite gran-
Skin disease initiated by black flies and buffalo gnats is
uloma, must be differentiated from infectious and nonin-
 markedly seasonal, commonly occurring in the spring.
fectious granulomatous or pyogranulomatous diseases,
 Breed, age, or sex predilections have not been noted.
including foreign body reactions, as well as neoplasms.
Differentiation of arthropod bites from many of these
other inflammatory lesions is aided by the fact that
arthropod bite granulomas often are solitary. Clinical
history and histopathology may be required for differen-
tiation. Lesions caused by black flies or buffalo gnats are
visually very distinctive and usually confined to less well
haired body regions.
Biopsy site selection
Solitary nodules should be removed in their entirety. If
multiple lesions are present, punch or wedge specimens
should be taken from representative lesions.
Histopathology (Figures 14.2 through 14.4)
Fig. 14.1 Chronic arthropod bite reaction caused by a tick in a
The epidermis is necrotic, ulcerated, and exudative in
Labrador Retriever. The well-demarcated nodule has a small central
acute lesions. Acanthosis or ulceration occurs in chronic
ulcer.
lesions.
Fig. 14.2 Acute arthropod bite reac-
tion in a cat. Note prominent wedge-
shaped necrosis
and superficial
exudate.
344
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 14.3 Chronic arthropod bite reaction {insect bite granuloma)
Fig. 14.4 Higher magnification of arthropod bite granuloma in the
in a dog. Mixed inflammation fills the derrmis and subcutis.
dog of Fig. 14.3, revealing dense population of rmixed mononuclear
cells and fewer eosinophils. Eosinophils are organizing around col-
lagen fibers at lower left.
Early arthropod bite reactions, as typified by tick bites,
are focally severe but poorly circumscribed. At the site of
arthropod trauma there is extensive necrosis and inflam-
tissue often is intermingled with inflammatory cells
mation that may occasionally occur in the classic trian-
amongst the lymphoid follicles. In some cases, discrete
granulomas composed of large macrophages may be
the subcutis. Inflammation is perivascular to diffuse
observed within the larger lesion. Eosinophils may be
surrounding the necrotic foci, and includes numerous
numerous and may degranulate around scattered collagen
eosinophils, macrophages, and lymphocytes. F
Edema,
fbers. Localized arthropod bite reactions in dogs also
 mucin, and hemorrhage may be prominent. Milder lesions 
may be manifested by more flagrant eosinophilic granu-
from cases of confrmed tick or other arthropod exposure
lomas with eosinophil degranulation (see p. 358).
may be characterized by superfcial and deep, perivascu-
"Fly strike’ lesions have moderate irregular acanthosis
lar to diffuse infltrates of eosinophils and lymphocytes,
with compact orthokeratotic or parakeratotic hyperker-
 accompanied by variable edema and/or mucin.
atosis. There is variable erosion and serocellular or san-
Chronic arthropod bite ‘granulomas’ tend to have
guinocellular crusting. The dermis has fbrosis that varies
sharper margins, and are composed of dense infltrates of
from mild to marked. Superficial hair follicles are hyper-
macrophages, lymphocytes, mast cells, eosinophils, and
plastic, but more severe or chronic lesions can have
plasma cells. The inflammation is predominantly in
adnexal atrophy and dropout due to advanced dermal
the dermis and sometimes the superfcial subcutis, and
fbrosis. The dermal infltrate is deep, moderate to severe,
obscures normal architecture. Nodular accumulations
interstitial and perivascular, and comprises plasma cells
of lymphocytes, resembling lymphoid follicles, may be
and eosinophils primarily. Smaller numbers of pigmented
 prominent but are not invariably present. Fibrovascular
 macrophages, neutrophils, and lymphocytes are present.
Nodular and diffuse diseases of the dermis with prominent eosinophils, neutrophils, or plasma cells
345
Differential diagnoses are few for acute arthropod bite
reactions, particularly if typical wedge-shaped confgura-
tion is seen. The intense eosinophilic and neutrophilic
inflammation with necrosis of the acute reaction resem-
 bles other recognized arthropod insults, including spider 
bites and fre ant bites (see pp. 347 and 349). Milder
insect bite reactions resemble allergic reactions of many
types, including urticarial allergic eruption (see Chapter
9). Chronic fy strike lesions also suggest allergic der-
matitis with self-trauma; knowledge of site affected is
diagnostic, however. The presence of a deep component
of perivascular eosinophilic inflammation suggests insect
or other arthropod exposure, at least in dogs. The diff-
culty in confrming histologic reactions in response to
insects comes from the poor correlation with clinical
exposure in most cases.
 Discrete chronic granulomas may resemble sterile gran-
uloma and pyogranuloma syndrome, reactive fbrohistio-
cytic nodule (see Chapter 35), or palisading granuloma.
Arthropod insult may be suggested by inflammation that
includes lymphocytes, often in follicular arrangement,
Fig. 14.5 Mild feline mosquito bite hypersensitivity. Lesions are
confined to the dorsal muzzle and do not affect the pinnae.
and eosinophils; there is a relative absence of prominent
pyogranulomas and palisading is not a feature. Reactive
fbrohistiocytic nodules and palisading granulomas gen-
erally do not feature many eosinophils, in contrast to
most arthropod bite reactions.
FELINE MOSQUITO BITE
HYPERSENSITIVITY
(Synonym: feline insect bite hypersensitivity)
Clinical features (Figures 14.5 and 14.6)
See Chapter 6.
Biopsy site selection
Fig. 14.6 Closer view of the cat in Fig. 14.5. Mild erytherma, partial
See Chapter 6.
alopecia, and adherent crusts are present.
Histopathology (Figures 14.7 through 14.9)
(eosinophilic mural folliculitis) or within and surround-
There is moderate to severe acanthosis with variable but
ing blood vessels. In some cases, eosinophilic follicular
frequently severe erosion, ulceration, and exudation (see
lesions are striking and are manifested by free hair shafts
Chapter 6). The superficial and the deep dermis 
are
surrounded by amorphous eosinophilic debris and, more
usually severely and diffusely inflamed, and inflammation
peripherally, by macrophages. Degranulating eosinophils
may extend to the panniculus. Eosinophils predominate
may develop along the length of the follicle, creating an
and are accompanied by lymphocytes, mast cells,
eosinophilic follicular *cast' surrounding the residual hair.
macrophages, and neutrophils in variable numbers.
Hairs may drop out of these foci, leaving hair-shaped
Edema and sometimes hemorrhage are present.
clear spaces at their center.
 Small to moderately sized foci of eosinophil degranu-
 Differential diagnoses for the eosinophilic dermatitis of
lation may form flame fgures around collagen fbers,
 mosquito bite hypersensitivity in cats include food allergy,
as seen in eosinophilic granuloma. There may be 
eosinophilic plaque, indolent ulcer, eosinophilic granu-
similar degranulating eosinophils in the folicular wall
loma, and the eosinophilic form of herpesvirus ulcerative
346
 Diseases of the dermis
PT
Fig. 14.7 Feline mosquito bite hyper-
sensitivity.  Diffuse inflammation is
punctuated by degranulating eosino-
philic mural folliculitis.
Fig. 14.8 Feline mosquito bite hypersensitivity. Several foci of
Fig. 14.9 Higher magnification of feline mosquito bite hypersensi-
eosinophil degranulation around collagen fibers (flame figures)
tivity. Large numbers of eosinophils are accumulating around vessels
{arrow) are intermingled with diffuse eosinophilic inflammation.
of the deep dermis.
Nodular and diffuse diseases of the dermis with prominent eosinophils, neutrophils, or plasma cells
347
dermatitis. Food allergy, eosinophilic plaque, and indo-
 threatening tissue necrosis. Spider bites rarely are reported
lent ulcer may have similar deep, eosinophil-rich inflam-
in veterinary medicine. This may be because spider bites
mation. Eosinophilic plaque usually does not demonstrate
are confrmed infrequently due to the secretive behavior
eosinophilic degranulation. Although small flame fgures
of spiders. In human medicine, the diagnosis of spider
may be seen in indolent ulcers, eosinophilic degranulation
bites also is considered challenging unless the spider is
 generally occurs in or just beneath the ulcer bed. Both
seen or captured (Wong et al., 1987; Carbonaro et al.,
food allergy and mosquito bite hypersensitivity may show
1995; Wilson et al., 2003). Woodpiles and undisturbed
eosinophilic mural folliculitis as well as dermal flame
areas of older buildings are favorite habitats of spiders.
fgure formation; however these lesions are more
Species of the genus Latrodectus (widow spiders)
common and generally more prominent in mosquito bite
 produce primarily systemic effects via neurotoxins such
hypersensitivity. Flame figures around collagen fbers are
as alpha-latrotoxin (Wilson et al., 2003). Species of
much larger in feline eosinophilic granuloma than in mos-
the genus Loxosceles (recluse spiders) mainly produce
quito bitel
 hypersensitivity.  Additionally, eosinophilic
local tissue damage via protein necrotoxins with sphin-
mural folliculitis, as seen in mosquito bite hypersensitiv-
 gomyelinase D activity (Wilson et al., 2003). The necro-
ity, is not a typical feature of eosinophilic granuloma. The
toxin produced by the brown recluse spider causes the
eosinophilic form of feline herpesvirus ulcerative der-
 most severe tissue damage. Other North American spiders
matitis may be nearly indistinguishable from mosquito
capable of producing necrotic skin lesions include the
bite hypersensitivity (see p. 351) if inclusion bodies
running spiders (Chiracanthium spp.), black jumping
cannot be found. In general, however, herpesvirus ulcer-
spiders (Phidippus spp.), golden orb weavers (Argiope
ative dermatitis is more necrotizing. These cases may
require immunohistochemical analysis or testing by poly-
(Peucetia viridans), and funnel-web spiders (Atarx spp.)
merase chain reaction (PCR) for the detection of viral
(Wong et al., 1987). The spiders most often implicated in
infection. Knowledge of seasonality and response to
spider bites in North America include the brown recluse
therapy may be required for ultimate differentiation
(Loxosceles reclusa), the black widow (Latrodectus
 It is important to stress that severe eosinophilic inflam-
mactans), the red widow (Latrodectus bishopi), and the
mation of any kind can evoke secondary degranulation
common brown spider ( Loxosceles unicolor) (Wong et al.,
and flame fgure formation. Clinical features often are
1987). Regional differences in species distribution are
required to  differentiate  among  histopathologically
profound (Wong et al., 1987).
similar eosinophilic diseases of the cat.
 The brown recluse spider produces inapparent punc-
ture marks followed by a central papule with surround-
ing erythema; blister formation and skin necrosis occur
SPIDER BITES
within 6 to 12 hours in humans (Wilson & King, 1999).
Clinical features (Figure 14.10)
A similar sequence of events probably occurs in domestic
animals. Tissue damage is extensive and results in a dark,
Spider bites cause a wide spectrum of skin lesions in
necrotic, indolent, nonhealing ulcer with sloughing. Grav-
the dog and cat, ranging from local swelling to life-
itational drip confgurations may be striking, and are due
to the high molecular weight of the necrotoxin. The
muzzle and forelegs most commonly are affected, proba-
bly due to the inquisitive behavior of the animal victim.
 Necrotic spider bite lesions of distal extremities present a
problem of more extensive sloughing due to decreased
collateral circulation of this anatomic region. The black
widow spider produces minimal skin damage, usually
limited to localized erythema.
Pain or pruritus rarely is present. In humans, systemic
effects can include disseminated intravascular coagulo-
pathy, renal failure, and death (Carbonaro et al., 1995;
Wilson et al., 2003). Systemic signs occur within 1 to 8
hours after envenomation in all species.
 Breed, age, or sex predilections are not available.
However, active and inquisitive young animals with
Fig. 14.10 Putative spider bite in a dog. Note drip-like configura-
access to spider habitats should be at increased risk.
tion of necrotic lesion which characterizes a heavy molecular weight
 Brown recluse spider bites occur primarily between spring
necrotoxin. (Photograph courtesy C.s. Foil.)
and autumn since this spider hibernates in the winter.
348
Diseases of the dermis
Fig.14.11
 Putative spider bite in a dog. Note diffuse necrosis with
Fig.14.121
Higher magnification of Fig. 14.11. The epidermis and
dermis are necrotic and there is marked fibrin accurmulation mixed
with neutrophils.
Clinical differential diagnoses for necrotizing spider
bites should include lesions caused by other venomous
diffuse and extends into the subcutis. Necrosis of the
arthropods such as tropical centipedes, in addition to
dermis may be severe and deep, and usually is accompa-
 poisonous snake bites, and localized cutaneous vasculitis
 nied by edema, fbrin, and/or hemorrhage, and sometimes
of any cause. The iatrogenic perivascular deposition
cavitation. If present, localized vasculopathy is character-
of potentially irritating intravenous medications can
ized by swelling of endothelial cells, necrosis, and throm-
produce similar lesions. Differentiation depends upon a
bosis, and may involve large deep vessels in some cases.
history of exposure and the clinical course.
Inflammatory cells are mixed and include large numbers
of neutrophils and macrophages. Eosinophils may not
Biopsy site selection
reactions.
Wedge specimens should be taken from the borders of
Differential diagnoses include deep vessel vasculitis
necrotic ulcers. Specimens sampled should be small (less
with secondary necrosis, and severe foreign body reac-
than 6 mm) since the inflammation and necrosis produced
tions. Deep vessel neutrophilic immunologic or septic vas-
by the venom inhibit healing of the biopsy site. Care must
culitis may appear similar if significant tissue damage is
be taken not to diminish the remaining vascular supply
present, requiring clinical differentiation (multicentric dis-
when sampling distal extremities.
ribution for vasculitis but focal for spider bite). Severe
foreign body reactions generally do not have a vascular
Histopathology (Figures 14.11 through 14.14)
component; however, vascular changes may not always be
evident in random specimens from spider bite reactions.
The epidermis is often necrotic and usually is ulcerated;
A highly virulent bacterial infection could potentially
superficial exudate may be prominent. Inflammation is
cause tissue necrosis mimicking spider envenomation.
349
Fig. 14.13 Large deep vessel thrombosis in a dog with putative
Fig. 14.14 Putative spider bite in a cat. Note pale acellular zone of
spider bite. Neutrophilic inflammation is intense.
necrosis ringed by intense inflarmmation.
Correlation with the clinical features of a nonhealing
phospholipase and hyaluronidase (Rakich et al., 1993).
severe ulcer on the face or distal extremity is essential for
The allergens in fre ant venom that lead to severe imme-
the diagnosis of spider bites, as histopathologic fndings
are not specifically diagnostic.
characterized. Fire ants and vespids (wasp family) share
at least one common allergen (King & Spangfort, 2000).
Hypersensitivity to the bite of the fre ant is an increas-
FIRE ANT BITES
ingly important cause of morbidity and mortality in
Clinical features (Figure 14.15)
humans in newly endemic regions of the southeastern
United States (Tankersley et al., 2002). In addition to
The imported fre ant Solenopsis invicta is an increasing
the intense cutaneous inflammatory reaction at the site
cause of skin disease in enlarging endemic regions of the
of bites, fre ants have become the major cause of
world. The fre ant was introduced into the southeastern
hymenopteran hypersensitivity, including systemic ana-
United States during the 1930s or 1940s, probably from
phylaxis (Freeman, 1997; Wilson & King, 1999). Anec-
Argentina, since when it has established a niche in at least
dotal reports have come from South America of
ten southeastern states both in rural and urban areas
anaphylaxis in dogs attributed to fre ants. Fire ants also
(Rakich et al., 1993). Experimental localized, highly
have been documented as a cause of inoculation of
inflammatory canine skin disease has been documented in
sporotrichosis in humans (Miller & Keeling, 2002).
the dog (Rakich et al., 1993).
Erythema and swelling are the earliest signs of experi-
One of the major components of the venom of fre ants
mental fre ant bites in the dog and occur within 5 to 10
is solenopsin D, a nonproteinaceous hemolytic factor,
minutes (Rakich et al., 1993). Transient sterile pustules or
identifed  as  a  dialkylpiperidine  alkaloid   derivative
vesicles may be seen. Based on multiple photographs of
(Wilson & King, 1999). Protein components include a
dogs that were attacked in endemic areas, observed by
350
 Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 14.15 Fire ant bites. Distinctive white vesicles or pustules are
noted in a bilaterally symmetric pattern on the rostral muzzle, indi-
cating points of attack. (Photograph courtesy C. Nett.)
one author (P.J.1.), the pustules and vesicles have a dis-
tinctive white coloration. The initial lesion measures less
 than 1 cm in diameter and enlarges to a maximum of 1.5
Fig. 14.16 Fire ant bite in a dog, demonstrating darkly staining
derrmal foci of obliterative inflammation. {Case material courtesy
to 2cm within 6 hours (Rakich et al., 1993). Lesions
PM. Rakich.)
subside within 24 to 48 hours. The most common site of
attack is the rostral muzzle, and lesions are distributed in
a remarkably bilaterally symmetric pattern. Dogs also
vesicles, or from the outer aspect of necrotic ulcers. Until
may be bitten on their feet.
 more information is available on the healing process after
Surprisingly, considering that fre ant bites are very
multiple bites, specimens sampled should be small (less
painful in humans, pain or pruritus were not noted fol-
lowing experimental bites in four dogs (Rakich et al.,
1993). Some pruritus was noted with delayed reactions
Histopathology (Figures 14.16 and 14.17)
(Rakich et al., 1993). However, in clinical cases, discom-
fture manifested by jumping back, running away, head
Discrete foci of necrosis may have accompanying full
shaking and rubbing of the muzzle with the paws has been
thickness ulceration and severe surface exudation. The
noted (Nett, C., personal communication, 2004).
necrotic foci extend into the deep dermis and contain
Signalment predilections are not reported. However,
degenerating eosinophils and fewer neutrophils. Identifi-
active and inquisitive young animals should be at
cation of cells within necrotic foci is diffcult due to fre-
increased risk. Fire ant attack on the rostral muzzle is
quent advanced degeneration. Intact cells are present
visually distinctive. Clinical differential diagnoses should
interstitially in the adjacent non-necrotic dermis, and
include the stings or bites of other arthropods. Historical
include eosinophils, neutrophils, and a few lymphocytes
 information such as geographic location and identifca-
and plasma cells. There may be mild vascular necrosis.
 tion of fre ants in the environment aids in diagnosis.
As reported in experimental cases of fre ant stings in
dogs (Rakich et al., 1993), full thickness dermal coagula-
tive necrosis develops 6 hours after stinging. These
Biopsy site selection
necrotic lesions are vertically oriented and involve dermal
Biopsy specimens should be taken within the confnes of
collagen and adnexa. Extension of necrosis to the subcutis
the erythematous inflammatory reaction, from pustules or
 is identified in lesions sampled 24 to 48 hours after biting.
Nodular and diffuse diseases of the dermis with prominent eosinophils, neutrophils, or plasma cells
351
Intense inflammation bordering necrotic areas is com-
posed largely of eosinophils, which are predominantly
degenerated. The surrounding dermis is edematous and
 contains perivascular eosinophils and fewer neutrophils,
lymphocytes, and macrophages. Interestingly, the epider-
mis usually is only mildly acanthotic; these reactions are
likely too rapid to be associated with marked epidermal
change. The epidermis is sometimes necrotic in later
lesions.
Differential diagnoses are few. The severe necrosis is
reminiscent of spider bite reactions, but spider bite reac-
tions are generally deeper and locally more extensive. Fire
ant bites are smaller and more compact in orientation.
FELINE HERPESVIRUS
ULCERATIVE DERMATITIS
Clinical features
See Chapter 6
Biopsy site selection
See Chapter 6.
Histopathology (Figure 14.18)
Epidermal and  superficial follicular epithelial lesions
include severe ulceration, necrosis, and exudation; necro-
Fig. 14.17 Higher magnification of Fig. 14.16. Degenerating gran-
sis may extend to sebaceous glands (see Chapter 6).
ulocytes predominate in inflammatory foci.
Intranuclear inclusions are best found in intact epithelium
Fig. 14.18 Feline herpesvirus ulcera-
tive dermatitis featuring diffuse eosino-
philic inflammation and  follicular
epithelial necrosis and obliteration.
Note scattered inclusions {arrow).
352
Diseases of the dermis
adjacent to necrotic foci. Since herpesvirus inclusion
trauma with secondary infection. Inclusion bodies allow
bodies may be diffcult to identify with routine
definitive diagnosis; if these are absent, correlation with
histopathology, immunohistochemistry or testing by
clinical fndings and results of immunohistochemistry, or
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) may be of beneft, if
testing by PCR may be required.
available (Hargis et al., 1999; Suchy et al, 2000).
The dermis is intensely and diffusely inflamed, usually
FELINE EOSINOPHILIC PLAQUE
with eosinophils predominating. Eosinophils are inter
mingled with lymphocytes, neutrophils, plasma cells, and
Clinical features (Figures 14.19 and 14.20)
macrophages. Mast cells may be prominent. There may
be foci of eosinophil degranulation around collagen fbers
See Chapter 5.
(flame fgures) or more commonly, within follicular walls
(eosinophilic mural folliculitis). Linear foci of degranu-
Biopsy site selection
lated eosinophils organized within degenerated follicular
walls (eosinophilic “casts') surround central hairs, which
See Chapter 5.
sometimes drop out to leave clear hair-shaped spaces.
Suppurative luminal folliculitis may occur.
Some lesions are predominantly neutrophilic and are
nearly devoid of eosinophils. Increasing numbers of neu-
trophil-predominant lesions (with typical intranuclear
inclusions) have been recognized recently by the authors.
Neutrophils may be accompanied by numerous plasma
cells. The cause of this histologic bimorphism is unclear.
Differential diagnoses for eosinophil-rich herpesvirus
ulcerative dermatitis, in which inclusion bodies are not
found, include eosinophilic plaque, eosinophilic feline
indolent ulcer eosinophilic granuloma, and mosquito bite
hypersensitivity. Eosinophilic plaque features more pro-
found spongiosis and mucinosis of intact epidermis and
superficial hair follicles. Indolent ulcer generally does not
feature prominent eosinophilic degranulation, except in
or just beneath the ulcer bed. Foci of eosinophil degran-
ulation (flame figures) are generally more abundant and
Fig. 14.19 Feline eosinophilic plaque. Early lesions on the medial
thigh are characterized by small eroded and ulcerated plaques that
individually larger in feline eosinophilic granuloma than
are coalescing. {Photograph courtesy T. Olivry; case material
in herpesvirus ulcerative dermatitis. Also, eosinophilic
University of California, Davis.)
degranulation within hair follicles is more prominent
in herpesvirus ulcerative dermatitis than in eosinophilic
granuloma. Mosquito bite hypersensitivity may be indis-
tinguishable if inclusion bodies cannot be identified;
however in general, herpesvirus ulcerative dermatitis is
more necrotizing. These cases may require clinical differ-
entiation, or detection of viral infection by immunohisto-
chermical analysis or testing by PCR. Knowledge of season
affected and response to therapy may be of additional
benefit.
 It is important to stress that severe eosinophilic inflam-
mation of any kind can evoke secondary degranulation
and flame fgure formation. Clinical features often are
required to differentiate among histopathologically
similar eosinophilic diseases of the cat.
Differential diagnoses  for  neutrophilic  herpesvirus
ulcerative dermatitis are few, as the extent of necrosis and
ulceration of this entity is unusual in the context of neu-
Fig. 14.20 Feline eosinophilic plaque. Two well-developed eosino-
trophilic inflammation. This pattern of inflammation
philic plaques are contiguous (Photograph courtesy C.B. Vitale; case
could be indicative of chronic severe bacterial infection or
material University of California, Davis.)
Nodular and diffuse diseases of the dermis with prominent eosinophils, neutrophils, or plasma cells
353
Fig. 14.21 Feline eosinophilic plaque
demonstrating diffuse eosinophils and
fewer rmast cells. Adjacent epithelium
is spongiotic and mucinotic.
Histopathology (Figure 14.21)
Epidermal lesions have been described (see Chapters 5
and 6), and most characteristically include widespread
spongiosis and mucinosis of the epidermis and follicular
infundibular epithelium, often with severe ulceration. In
the dermis, typical eosinophilic plaque is characterized
by perivascular to diffuse, moderate to severe infltrations
of
eosinophils. Inflammation often extends to the
deep dermis, and may be present in the panniculus in
severe lesions. Lymphocytes, mast cells, and macro-
phages are present in smaller numbers. Neutrophils also
may be prominent beneath areas of severe erosion or
ulceration.
Differential diagnoses for eosinophilic plaque include
severe allergic miliary dermatitis, mosquito bite hyper-
Fig. 14.22 Feline indolent ulcer. Early lesions are present bilater-
sensitivity, food allrgy, eosinophilic feline herpesvirus
ally near the upper canine teeth.
ulcerative dermatitis in which inclusions are not found,
and eosinophilic indolent ulcer. Epidermal lesions of
spongiosis and mucinosis are more severe in eosinophilic
ulation and flame fgure formation are not characteristic
plaque than in these other eosinophilic diseases. The
 of eosinophilic plaque.
lesions of eosinophilic plaque histopathologically resem-
ble those of severe allergic miliary dermatitis, but are
FELINE INDOLENT ULCER
more intensely and deeply inflamed. Since eosinophilic
plaque and miliary dermatitis both may be manifestations
(Synonyms: feline eosinophilic ulcer, rodent ulcer)
of allergic skin disease in the cat (and can exist concur-
rently), histopathologic separation of these may not be
Clinical features (Figures 14.22 and 14.23)
critical diagnostically. Lesions of mosquito bite hypersen-
sitivity, occasionally food allergy, and herpesvirus ulcera-
See Chapter 6.
tive dermatitis may show flame figure formation or
eosinophilic mural folliculitis. Eosinophilic indolent ulcer
Biopsy site selection
may have eosinophilic degranulation beneath the ulcer
bed, or more sparsely in deeper tissue. Eosinophil degran-
See Chapter 6.
354
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 14.23 Feline indolent ulcer. A chronic lesion involves the upper
lip, philtrum, and planum nasale. (Photograph courtesy R. Mueller;
case material University of California, Davis.)
Histopathology (Figure 14.24)
Sequential sampling of feline indolent ulcers from a
related group of specific pathogen free cats showed vari-
ation in the histopathologic appearance over time; this
variation also has been reported (Power & Ihrke, 1995).
Epidermal lesions consist of variable ulceration with
subjacent necrosis (see Chapter 6). These deep necrotic
ulcers contain masses of degenerating eosinophils and
neutrophils, and are imbedded superficially with colonies
of bacteria.
 Acute indolent ulcer of the pathogen free cats contains
Fig. 14.24 Feline indolent ulcer. Ulcer with exudate at top is sub-
predominantly eosinophils, mast cells, and macrophages
tended by severe subjacent eosinophilic inflammation.
in the dermis. Neutrophils are seen in the acute phase
and remain at all stages in concert with ulceration.
Eosinophils and macrophages persist as the lesion ages,
just beneath ulcers or less commonly in deeper areas of
and plasma cells and lymphocytes, frequently in nodular
 the lesion. Superficial eosinophilic degranulation may
clusters, frst become evident at 5 to 7 days. Lesions of
 create a brightly eosinophilic band in the ulcer bed. Deep
several months’ duration may contain predominantly
eosinophilic flame fgures, as in eosinophilic granuloma
eosinophils and macrophages; plasma cells and lympho-
(see p. 355), are usually not prominent. Plasma cells and
cytes are variable. Fibrovascular tissue proliferates with
 macrophages are variable.
chronicity, and capillaries are prominent amongst inflam-
Neutrophil-predominant ulcers were reported in cats
 matory cells. Mature fbrous connective tissue is conspic-
with indolent ulcer occurring in association with experi-
uous in lesions of 4 to 6 months' duration. Inflammation
mentally induced flea allergy dermatitis (Colombini et al.,
extends deeply at all stages of indolent ulcer and often
2001). They have been described previously in naturally
    e    
occurring cases (Scott, 1975). Neutrophilic indolent
fbers may be swollen and myocyte nuclei pyknotic or
ulcers are extremely rare in the authors’ experience; only
fragmented.
a single case has been observed.
Random specimens from cats affected with classical
Differential diagnoses for eosinophilic indolent ulcer
upper lip ulcers are similar to chronic lesions of specifc
 include eosinophilic herpesvirus ulcerative dermatitis in
pathogen free cats. In the authors’ experience, feld cases,
which inclusions are not found, mosquito bite hypersen-
including those of several years’ duration, demonstrate
sitivity, or severely ulcerated eosinophilic plaque. Indolent
diffuse, severe, and deep, predominantly eosinophilic
ulcers tend to have eosinophilic degranulation predomi-
inflammation, with fewer neutrophils, and variable fbro-
nantly within or just beneath the ulcer bed, rather than
sis. Inflammation and fbrosis usually obliterate normal
the deeper, often folliculocentric foci (eosinophilic mural
architecture. There may be eosinophilic degranulation
folliculitis) seen in mosquito bite hypersensitivity and
Nodular and diffuse diseases of the dermis with prominent eosinophils, neutrophils, or plasma cells
355
Fig. 14.25 Feline eosinophilic granuloma (linear granuloma? sub-
Fig. 14.26 Feline oral eosinophilic granuloma. A well-demarcated
group) onthe caudal hindleg. The affected area has been clippedto
erythematous plaque containing white, caseous, necrotic foci is
enhance visualization of the crusted, erythematous and yellowish-
present on the soft palate. Note somewhat symmetric, linear ulcers
pink, linear plaque. (Photograph courtesy H.T. Power; case material,
of the hard palate.
University of California, Davis.)
herpesvirus ulcerative dermatitis. Eosinophilic plaque
features prominent epidermal and follicular spongiosis
and mucinosis that are generally absent in indolent ulcers.
Neutrophilic indolent ulcers may resemble pyotraumatic
dermatitis, which is very rare in cats. Clinical differentia-
tion may be required.
FELINE EOSINOPHILIC GRANULOMA
(Synonyms: feline collagenolytic granuloma, feline linear
granuloma)
Clinical features (Figures 14.25 through 14.27)
Feline eosinophilic granuloma is a common, clinically het-
erogeneous syndrome affecting skin, mucocutaneous
junctions, and oral mucosa; clinical presentations are
unifed by a similar histopathologic pattern. Underlying
Fig. 14.27 Feline eosinophilic granuloma. This subgroup is char-
hypersensitivity (atopic dermatitis, food allergy, flea
acterized by a protruding, alopecic thickening of the rostral portion
allergy) often is suggested, but rarely is documented defin-
of the lower lip and adjacent haired skin, which gives the cat a
itively. Eosinophilic granulomas were studied in an
'pouting’ appearance. (Photograph courtesy H.T. Power; case mate-
inbred, specifc pathogen free colony of cats without
rial, University of California, Davis.)
exposure to ectoparasites or endoparasites, and without
indications of either concomitant atopic dermatitis or
 food allergy as documented by intradermal skin testing
 The clinical presentations of feline eosinophilic granu-
and elimination diets (Power 1990). This suggests that
 lomas may be subdivided based on clinical characteristics
some cats with eosinophilic granulomas may have an
and site predilections. Peripheral lymphadenopathy may
inherited disorder of eosinophil proliferation or dysfunc-
be present with any form of feline eosinophilic granu-
tion (Power &Ihrke, 1995). Major basic protein, a
loma. Concomitant indolent ulcers or eosinophilic
product of eosinophils identifed in eosinophilic diseases 
 plaques may be observed (see Chapter 6).
of humans such as Wells' syndrome (Nutman et al.,
The most common cutaneous presentation is that of
1988), probably is involved in the pathogenesis of
"linear granuloma'. In this form, distinctive, hairless, well
eosinophilic granuloma in animals.
circumscribed, frm, pink-yellow or salmon-colored, ele-
356
Diseases of the dermis
vated plaques develop in a strikingly linear pattern on the
caudal thighs, lateral thighs, forelegs, or less commonly
 the neck or thorax. Occasionally, similar frm plaques and
nodules, but without a linear pattern, may occur on the
pinnae. A second cutaneous pattern is characterized by
asymptomatic pink-yellow swelling of the lower lip
("pouting cat') or chin ("chin edema*, “fat chin'). Lesions
are asymptomatic. Much less commonly, eosinophilic
granulomas of the pawpads present with crusting and
ulceration accompanied by interdigital alopecia, ery-
 thema, crusting, and inflammation. The syndrome may
involve multiple pawpads concurrently or sequentially.
 Digital as well as metacarpal or metatarsal pads may be
affected. Lesions on weight-bearing pads may cause lame-
ness. Eroded cutaneous eosinophilic granulomas may
have characteristic pinpoint, white to pink foci, corre-
sponding to foci of eosinophil degranulation seen micro-
scopically. Mucocutaneous eosinophilic granulomas are
considerably less common, occur predominantly at the
junctures of facial mucous membranes, and may be
papular or nodular.
Oral eosinophilic granulomas are uncommon, and are
characterized by a more severe and aggressive clinical
 course. Solitary or multiple, frm, white-pink to yellow-
orange nodules affect the tongue, tonsilar region, frenu-
lum, or soft palate. Ulceration is common and gritty,
pinpoint, white foci may be seen grossly; as in the skin,
these correspond to foci of eosinophil degranulation.
Necrosis and secondary infection lead to a foul odor. Oral
eosinophilic granulomas usually are painful and interfere
Fig. 14.28 Feline eosinophilic granuloma of the pawpad. Diffusely
with prehension and swallowing.
inflarmed tissue contains large, lake-like, darkly staining zones of
 Female cats may be predisposed to eosinophilic granu-
eosinophil degranulation.
loma. Age or breed predilections have not been docu-
mented; however cats under 2 years of age appear to have
increased incidence of eosinophilic granuloma of the
Histopathology (Figures 14.28 through 14.30)
pawpads.
 Clinical differential diagnoses vary considerably among
The epidermis is normal to moderately acanthotic, and
the various clinical forms of feline eosinophilic granu-
occasionally may be eroded, ulcerated, and exudative.
loma. Cutaneous linear granulomas and cutaneous
The dermis is diffusely inflamed and contains generally
eosinophilic granulomas involving the lower lip and chin
large, irregular, acellular foci of eosinophilic degranula-
are visually distinctive. Oral eosinophilic granulomas
 tion around collagen fbers (flame figures). True collagen
must be differentiated from neoplasms (squamous cell
fber degeneration, or ‘collagenolysis', as evidenced
carcinoma, fbrosarcoma, and tonsilar lymphoma), pro-
by Masson's trichrome staining, is not a consistent or
liferative plasma cell stomatitis, foreign body reactions, or
predictable fnding in feline eosinophilic granulomas
proliferative traumatic lesions (inflamed granulation
(Fernandez et al., 2000; Fondati et al., 2001). Random
 tissue). Lesions of the pawpads may resemble plasma cell
abnormally staining collagen fbers, characterized by red
pododermatitis (see p. 363). Histopathology is required
cores (versus normal blue staining), are just as likely to
for definitive diagnosis.
be found in other areas of the biopsy as within the
eosinophilic degranulated foci (Fernandez et al., 2000).
Furthermore, electron microscopy of flame fgures
Biopsy site selection
demonstrates degenerating and degranulating eosinophils
A deep punch or wedge specimen should be obtained to
around otherwise
 normal-appearing collagen fibers
establish a diagnosis. A maximum punch size of 4mm
(Bardagi et al., 2003).
should be used for chin lesions as healing may be pro-
 Flame figures may be girdled by macrophages and giant
longed at this site.
cells, often in palisading array. The intervening dermis is
Nodular and diffuse diseases of the dermis with prominent eosinophils, neutrophils, or plasma cells
357
14.29Feline
eosinophilic
granuloma. Diffuse inflammation is
punctuated  by discrete  granulomas
containing dark areas of eosinophilic
degranulation.
diffusely inflamed with eosinophils, macrophages, mast
cells, and fewer lymphocytes. Dermal mucin and/or
 edema may be observed. Eosinophils are not as promi-
nent in chronic lesions, and macrophages and giant cells
may predominate around discrete foci of collagen, or
interpolate diffusely among collagen fbers. Eosinophil-
poor lesions resembling palisading granuloma
(see
Chapter 13) may occur at sites for which eosinophilic
granulomas are expected, and likely represent late stage
lesions from which eosinophils have faded.
Oral eosinophilic granulomas are similar, except that
lesions are more frequently and severely ulcerated.
Eosinophil degranulation may be limited in some cases to
 the craterous ulcer beds. Occasionally, particularly in oral
lesions, deeply imbedded hair shafts are seen. It has been
suggested that hair foreign bodies may have an inciting
role in these cases; the authors believe that hairs may
aggravate eosinophil degranulation, but factors initiating
the influx of eosinophils are likely pre-existent.
 Differential diagnoses are few, particularly in lesions
that have large and numerous flame fgures. Eosinophilic
degranulation is seen in indolent ulcers, but usually
is most prominent just beneath ulcers. Small foci of
eosinophilic degranulation around collagen fbers may be
seen in feline mosquito bite hypersensitivity and in some
cases of feline food allergy, as well as in feline herpesvirus
ulcerative dermatitis. Eosinophilic degranulation within
hair follicles (eosinophilic mural folliculitis) is more
prominent in herpesvirus ulcerative dermatitis and often
mosquito bite hypersensitivity, than in eosinophilic gran-
Fig. 14.30 Higher magnification of feline eosinophilic granuloma
demonstrating multinucleated giant cells around foci of eosinophilic
uloma. Identifcation of intranuclear inclusion bodies
degranulation. Note the somewhat palisaded pattern of granuloma-
also  will  allow  separation  of  herpesvirus ulcerative
tous inflammation along collagen fibers.
dermatitis.
358
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 14.31 Canine eosinophilic granuloma on the frenulum of the
Fig. 14.33 Canine eosinophilic granuloma on the face of a
tongue of a dog. The nodule is ulcerated and has a yellowish-pink 
Doberrman Pinscher. An arthropod bite was suspected to have caused
appearance. (Photograph courtesy D.-N. Carlotti.)
this lesion.
 of major basic protein, a product of eosinophils identifed
 in eosinophilic diseases of humans such as Wells' syn-
drome (Nutman et al., 1988) probably is involved in the
pathogenesis of eosinophilic granuloma in animals.
 Canine eosinophilic granulomas probably are of multi-
factorial allergic etiology. Hypersensitivity is supported
by tissue eosinophilia, occasional blood eosinophilia,
marked response to corticosteroids, and occasional sea-
sonal recurrence (Scott et al., 2001). The authors suspect
that many eosinophilic granulomas of the canine skin are
 the result of arthropod insult. This observation is based
upon their often solitary or limited number, lesional dis-
 tribution to relatively glabrous and/or cranial regions,
Fig. 14.32 Canine eosinophilic granuloma on the tongue of a dog.
and lack of recurrence following excision. One author
(Photograph courtesy B.R. Madewell.)
(T.L.G.) has seen axillary eosinophilic granuloma develop
concomitantly with eosinophilic furunculosis of the face
(see Chapter 17), a syndrome induced by arthropod stings
It is important to stress that severe eosinophilic inflam-
or bites.
mation of any kind can evoke secondary degranulation
 An arthropod-initiated reaction is less likely to trigger
and flame fgure formation. Clinical features often are
eosinophilic granulomas of the mouth. Marked breed
required to differentiate among histopathologically
 predilections for oral eosinophilic granulomas suggest a
similar eosinophilic diseases of the cat.
 genetic predilection (Madewell et al., 1980; Joffe & Allen,
1995; Bredal et al., 1996). It is possible that familial forms
of oral eosinophilic granuloma in dogs represent an idio-
CANINE EOSINOPHILIC GRANULOMA
 pathic, genetically driven eosinophil dysfunction, as seen
(Synonym: canine collagenolytic granuloma)
in some cats (see p. 355). It also is conceivable that some
oral eosinophilic granulomas in nongenetically suscepti-
ble breeds might be linked to biting at bees, wasps,
Clinical features (Figures 14.31 through 14.33)
hornets, or other arthropods. Unknown antecedent events
Canine eosinophilic granuloma is a relatively rare, het-
such as trauma or foreign body embedment also might
erogeneous skin disease; clinical presentations are unifed
explain oral lesions. The rare polypoid plaques reported
by a similar histopathologic pattern. It is characterized by
in the external ear canal are unexplained (Poulet et al.,
nodules or plaques affecting the skin, oral mucosa, or
1991).
external ear canal. Clinical and histopathologic features
Cutaneous eosinophilic granulomas present as solitary
both suggest a hypersensitivity reaction. The elaboration
or grouped erythematous plaques, nodules, or papules.
Nodular and diffuse diseases of the dermis with prominent eosinophils, neutrophils, or plasma cells
359
Larger plaques or nodules may ulcerate. Commonly
ian Huskies less than 3 years of age are at increased risk
affected sites include the pinnae, muzzle, neck, axillae,
for lingual eosinophilic granulomas (Madewell et al.,
flank, prepuce, and scrotum. Pain or pruritus usually is
1980; Scott et al., 2001). Breed predilections have not been
not noted.(
On rare occasion, asymptomatic domed
noted for cutaneous or pinnal eosinophilic granulomas.
papules and nodules of the tips of the pinnae, clinically
Clinical
differential
diagnoses
for
cutaneous
reminiscent of granuloma annulare in humans, have been
 eosinophilic granulomas include foreign body reactions,
observed by the authors. The rare eosinophilic granulo-
 infectious and noninfectious granulomatous or pyogran-
mas of the external ear canal present as pale, polypoid
ulomatous diseases (see Chapters 12 and 13), and neo-
granular masses attached to the ear epithelium by a
plasms. Oral eosinophilic granulomas are visually
slender stalk (Poulet et al., 1991); one author (T.L.G.) has
distinctive, have marked breed predilections, and hence
observed more sessile masses that replaced much of the
have few
 differential diagnoses. Histopathology  is
pinna.
required for diagnosis. Canine cutaneous eosinophilic
 The clinical features of oral eosinophilic granuloma
granulomas are not clinically distinctive, and conse-
include well-demarcated, yellow to green-brown, vegeta-
quently this is most often an unexpected histopathologic
tive, granulomatous plaques or nodules that develop pre-
diagnosis.
dominantly on the lateral or ventral surface of the tongue
 Or the commisures of the mouth. Ulceration is common.
Biopsy site selection
Ulcers with a slightly elevated border may be present on
the soft or hard palate, either coexistent with lingual
The clinician should not attempt to completely excise pro-
lesions or alone. Lingual lesions have a friable surface and
liferative lingual lesions in at risk breeds, since large spec-
bleed readily. The oral cavity commonly has a necrotic,
imens are not necessary for diagnosis. Deformation may
fetid odor. Pain is marked; affected dogs usually are par-
result, and the lesions are readily responsive to glucocor-
tially anorectic and reluctant to prehend and chew dry
ticoids. Solitary cutaneous nodules should be removed in
Dog food. Discomfort and odor are not noted in dogs
their entirety.
with lesions confined to the palate.
Siberian Huskies and Cavalier King Charles Spaniels
Histopathology (Figures 14.34 and 14.35)
are markedly predisposed to oral eosinophilic granulomas
(Madewell et al., 1980; Joffe & Allen, 1995; Bredal et al.,
 For cutaneous eosinophilic granulomas, the epidermis is
1996). A recent report in two unrelated German Shepherd
variably acanthotic and may be necrotic or ulcerated in
Dogs may indicate an additional breed
d predilection
some cases. Superficial to deep, perivascular to diffuse
(Vercelli & Cornegliani, 2002). A mixed breed dog and a
 accumulations of numerous eosinophils are accompanied
 Bullmastiff also were reported (Walsh, 1983). Male Siber-
by   variable
e edema and/or mucin. Degranulating
Fig. 14.34 Canine eosinophilic gran-
uloma. Darkly staining degranulating
eosinophils are accumulating along
collagen fibers. Large pale macro-
phages surround these foci to forrm
granulomas in a slightly palisaded
pattern.
360
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 14.36 Canine eosinophilic dermatitis in a Labrador Retriever
due to an adverse drug reaction to diethylcarbamazine. Erytherma-
tous coalescing plaques are present on the face and muzzle. {From
Vitale, C., Ihrke, PJ. & Gross, T.L. {1995) Putative diethylcarba-
mazine-induced urticaria with eosinophilic dermatitis in a dog. Vet
Dermato! 5, 197-203. Reprinted with permission.)
Huskies, flame fgures are prominent and are seen
 throughout the submucosa or muscle of the tongue.
Severe eosinophilic dermatitis with flame fgure forma-
tion has been observed on the pinnae of dogs by the
authors and others (Poulet et al., 1991). These polypoid
eosinophilic lesions are composed of severely inflamed
granulation tissue containing flame figures. Lymphocytes,
plasma cells, and macrophages are numerous. Mast
cells are prominent; one author (T.L.G.) has observed
Fig. 14.35 Higher magnification of canine eosinophilic granuloma
Eosinophils are degranulating along collagen fibers.
progressive lesions on the ear of a dog that eventuated
in diffuse mast cell infltration resembling mast cell
neoplasia.
eosinophils often orient around individual collagen fbers
 Canine eosinophilic granuloma is distinctive. Canine
to form flame fgures of variable size and prominence.
eosinophilic dermatitis also features variable flame fgure
 These flame fgures may have peripheral radiating pro-
formation (see below); clinical differentiation may be
jections, and are surrounded by intact eosinophils, as well 
required. Eosinophilic furunculosis of the face, suspected
as macrophages, and occasional giant cells to form gran-
to be arthropod-related, also may have foci of eosinophil
ulomas. Granulomas may be slightly palisaded in their
degranulation  and collagen  degeneration;  however,
arrangement along collagen fbers. Similar inflammation
 typical furunculosis allows differentiation (see Chapter
courses among the flame fgures, accompanied by mast
17).
cells, lymphocytes, and plasma cells. Fibrosis may be
prominent in chronic lesions. As in cats with eosinophilic
CANINE EOSINOPHILIC DERMATITIS
granuloma, true collagen degeneration or lysis likely is
not present (see p. 355).
(Synonym: eosinophilic dermatitis with edema; eosino-
Oral eosinophilic granulomas are more frequently
philic cellulitis)
ulcerated, often severely. Eosinophils are diffusely ori-
ented within an edematous submucosa, and are inter-
Clinical features (Figures 14.36 and 14.37)
mingled with lymphocytes, macrophages, and plasma
cells. There may be variable fbrovascular proliferation
Canine eosinophilic dermatitis is a relatively rare reaction
with endothelial swelling. In Cavalier King Charles
pattern of probable multifactorial allergic etiology united
Spaniels, degranulating eosinophils may be absent or con-
by a similar histopathologic pattern. Most affected dogs
fined to the ulcer beds; mild deep flame figure formation
present with erythematous, coalescing macules and
has been reported (Bredal et al., 1996). In Siberian
plaques with edema, involving the pinnae and the ventral
Nodular and diffuse diseases of the dermis with prominent eosinophils, neutrophils, or plasma cells
361
A distinctive severe syndrome with close clinical and
histopathologic similarities to Wells' syndrome in humans
was observed in a Beagle. The dog presented with multi-
ple, discrete dermal and subcutaneous nodules of the
head, accompanied by diffuse swelling (Power, H.T., per-
sonal communication, 2003).
Breed predilection for Labrador Retrievers is suspected
since four of ten dogs were Labrador Retrievers and one
was a retriever crossbreed (Vitale et al., 1994; Holm
et al., 1999). Age and sex predilections have not been noted.
Canine eosinophilic dermatitis is visually distinctive.
Arciform and serpiginous wheals, macules, and plaques
with edema are highly unusual lesions in the dog. Clini-
cal differential diagnoses include erythema multiforme
Fig. 14.37 Closer view of the ventral abdomen of the dog in
and canine sterile neutrophilic dermatosis (see p. 366).
Fig. 14.36. Note eroded, erythermatous plaques with urticaria.
Histopathology is required for diagnosis.
(Frorm Vitale, C., Ihrke, PJ. & Gross, TL. {1995) Putative
diethylcarbamazine-induced urticaria with eosinophilic dermatitis in
a dog. Vet Dermatol 5, 197-203. Reprinted with permission.)
Biopsy site selection
-aen uon kea pauqo aq pnos suuads adn
abdomen and thorax. Clinical and histopathologic fea-
toid macules, wheals, or plaques. If present, less well-
dos  siad ss oq sa
 defined areas of edema also should be sampled, making
more closely resembles eosinophilic cellulitis of humans
sure that specimens are of full thickness and include the
(Wells' syndrome) than the clinical manifestations. Wells'
deep dermis.
sensitivities (Leiferman, 1999). The elaboration of major
Histopathology (Figures 14.38 through 14.40)
basic protein, a product of eosinophils identifed in mul-
 tiple eosinophilic diseases of humans including Wells syn-
The epidermis is mildly to moderately acanthotic, vari-
drome (Nutman et al., 1988), probably is involved in the
ably spongiotic, and sometimes ulcerated. There is
pathogenesis of this distinctive canine dermatitis.
moderate to severe, superfcial and deep, eosinophilic
Multiple factors support allergic hypersensitivity as the
dermatitis in a perivascular to diffuse distribution. Fewer
trigger. This syndrome has an increased occurrence in late
 neutrophils, macrophages, lymphocytes, and plasma cells
summer and early autumn, plus late winter to early spring
may
 be present. Perivascular mast cells have been
(Holm et al., 1999). This marked seasonality could indi-
reported (Holm et al., 1999). Edema is variable and there
cate an arthropod or other seasonal allergic etiology for
may be mucin deposition. Eosinophils are frequently
some cases. Lesions in one dog were initiated by a drug
degranulating around collagen fbers to form flame
reaction to diethylcarbamazine (Vitale et al., 1994).
fgures. Flame fgures were not present in all affected dogs
The predominant clinical features of canine eosino-
of a previous report (Holm et al., 1999). There may be
philic dermatitis include targetoid erythematous macules
occasional vascular intramural eosinophils and/or fbrin
or wheals that eventuate in arciform and serpiginous 
thrombi (Vitale et al., 1994), suggesting some vascular
macules and plaques (Vitale et al., 1994; Holm et al.,
involvement; however lesions are not severe or wide-
1999). Some lesions appear purpuric as they do not
 spread enough to suggest a primary vasculitis. Variable
blanch with diascopy (direct pressure with a glass slide)
hemorrhage is observed. The lesions resemble eosino-
(Holm et al., 1999). Lesions are generalized, but may
philic cellulitis of humans (Wells' syndrome).
preferentially affect the ventral abdomen and thorax,
 In the severely affected Beagle described above there
face, and pinnae. Edema may have either a facial or a gen-
was predominant subcutaneous  involvement, more
eralized distribution and may be pitting. Pruritus usually
 closely representing true eosinophilic “celulitis'. Inflam-
is moderate. Lymphadenopathy is common. Peripheral
mation in that case extended to the deep skeletal muscle.
eosinophilia, which is common in Wells’ syndrome in
Mucin deposition and edema were prominent and flame
people, was not noted in the seven of nine dogs in which
fgures were numerous and striking.
complete blood counts were performed in one study
 Eosinophilic dermatitis probably represents a reaction
(Holm et al.,1
 1999), while peripheral eosinophilia
 pattern of variable causation, including drug and arthro-
and basophilia were present in one dog (Vitale et al.,
pod reactions, and likely is not a single entity. Histol-
1994).
ogically, distinguishing eosinophilic dermatitis from
362
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 14.38 Canine eosinophilic dermatitis demonstrating diffuse
inflammation and superficial edema. The small dark focus at right
is a fame figure (arrow).
Fig. 14.39 Higher magnification of eosinophilic inflammation and
edema of canine eosinophilic dermatitis. Note central flame figure.
eosinophilic granuloma may be difficult; clinical differen-
tiation may be required as eosinophilic granulomas
usually are papular to nodular.
leading to peripheral eosinophilia and the invasion of
multiple organs (Huibregtse & Turner, 1994). Eosino-
philic leukemia is characterized by persistent eosinophilia,
FELINE HYPEREOSINOPHILIC
bone marrow hyperplasia of eosinophilic precursors, and
SYNDROME
organ infltration; however the overproduction and infl-
 tration include more frequent and higher proportions of
Clinical features (Figure 14.41)
immature eosinophils than in hypereosinophilic syndrome
Feline hypereosinophilic syndrome is a rare, multisys-
(Huibregtse & Turner, 1994). Clear division between
temic disease that is characterized by the sustained pro-
these two diseases may not always be possible (Huibregtse
duction and tissue infltration of mature eosinophils. The
& Turner 1994). To the authors' knowledge, cutaneous
bone marrow, lymph nodes, gastrointestinal tract, liver,
involvement with eosinophilic leukemia has not been
and spleen are the most commonly affected organs (Muir
reported.
et al., 1993; Huibregtse & Turner 1994). Skin involve-
The most common clinical signs are associated with
ment is rare (Scott et al., 1985; Harvey, 1990). Dissemi-
infltration of the gastrointestinal tract and include weight
nated eosinophilic disease was recently reported in a dog
loss, anorexia, diarrhea, and vomiting (Huibregtse &
with involvement of the heart, lungs, liver spleen, lymph
Turner 1994). Rare skin lesions include generalized ery-
nodes, and skeletal muscles; skin was not affected (Aroch
thematous macules and papules, wheals, and edema
et al., 2001}
(Scott et al., 1985; Harvey, 1990). Pruritus is marked and
The cause or causes of feline hypereosinophilic syn-
initiates excoriations (Scott et al., 1985; Harvey, 1990).
drome are unknown. Bone marrow hyperplasia and
Middle-aged domestic shorthaired cats are most com-
 the overproduction of mature eosinophils are triggered,
monly affected (Huibregtse & Turner 1994). The skin
Nodular and diffuse diseases of the dermis with prominent eosinophils, neutrophils, or plasma cells
363
Fig. 14.40 Intense and deep eosino
philic inflammation of subcutis {eosino
philic *cellulitis") with numerous darkly
staining flarme figures in a Beagle.
Histopathology
As reported, the dermis contains predominantly
eosinophils (Scott et al., 1985; Harvey, 1990; Muir et al.,
1993). The distribution is perivascular to diffuse and
superficial to deep. Mature mast cells are intermingled.
There is accompanying superficial crusting, likely as a
result of self-trauma. Visceral eosinophilic infltration is
invariably present; skin lesions are rare.
The appearance of the rare cutaneous lesions of feline
hypereosinophilic syndrome is similar to other eosinophil-
predominant dermatoses. Thus, definitive diagnosis will
 always require correlation with appropriate clinical fnd-
ings, including eosinophilia and eosinophilic infltration
of other organs.
Fig. 14.41 Feline hypereosinophilic syndrome. A crusted macu-
lopapular rash is present. (Photograph courtesy H.T. Power.)
PLASMA CELL PODODERMATITIS
Clinical features (Figure 14.42)
lesions seen with feline hypereosinophilic syndrome must
be differentiated from other feline eosinophilic dermatoses
Plasma cell pododermatitis is a disease exclusively affect-
Definitive diagnosis requires the exclusion of other causes
ing the pawpads. It is rare in cats, and very rare in dogs.
of cutaneous eosinophilic lesions (flea allergy dermatitis,
All published cases to date have been in cats; the authors
other ectoparasitic skin diseases, food allergy, and endo-
have seen several dogs with similar clinical and histo-
parasitic infections), the presence of peripheral eosino-
pathologic features.
philia, evidence of infltration of other organs, and the ruling
The etiology of plasma cell pododermatitis is unknown,
out of eosinophilic leukemia (Huibregtse et al., 1994).
but the marked plasma cell infltrate, consistent hyper-
gammaglobulinemia, and response to immunomodulating
therapy suggest an immune-mediated basis (Gruffydd-
Biopsy site selection
Jones et al., 1980; Scott et al., 2001). Recurrence in warm
Multiple biopsy specimens should be obtained from
macules, papules, and wheals. If putative edema is
et al., 1980). The status of feline retrovirus infection is
present, these lesions also should be sampled.
controversial. While most reports indicate that affected
364
Diseases of the dermis
 only one pawpad is affected, neoplasia or foreign body
granulomas must be ruled out. Exfoliative cytology from
aspiration should reveal plasma cells, and hypergamma-
globulinemia should be demonstrable on immunoelec-
 trophoresis. Histopathology is necessary to confrm the
diagnosis.
Biopsy site selection
A wedge specimen or 6mm punch biopsy should be
obtained from a pawpad near the pad margin. Smaller
punch biopsy specimens often are unsuitable as they do
not provide a sample of adequate depth. If multiple pads
are affected, a moderately rather than severely affected
Fig. 14.42 Plasma cell pododerrmatitis in a cat affecting predomi-
 pad should be selected, since severely affected pads may
nantly the metacarpal pad. The affected pad is noticeably swollen,
not heal well after biopsy.
purplish-red, and exfoliating. The white, silvery, crosshatched
appearance results fror the exfoliation.
Histopathology (Figures 14.43 and 14.44)
The epidermis is acanthotic with variable erosion, ulcer-
cats are feline leukemia virus (FeLV) negative and feline
ation, and exudation. The dermis and often the underly-
immunodeficiency virus (FIV) negative, others report an
ing adipose tissue of the pawpad are diffusely infltrated
incidence of FIV positivity as high as 50% (Guaguere &
with plasma cells, obscuring normal architecture. Milder
Declercq, 2000; Scott et al., 2001).
lesions may show dermal inflammation only. Russell
 The highly characteristic clinical feature is soft, spongy
body-containing plasma cells (Mott cells) are often con-
swelling affecting multiple pawpads. The swelling is
spicuous. Fewer 1
lymphocytes  and macrophages are
uniform such that normal pad symmetry usually is not
present and randomly distributed among the plasma cells.
disturbed. The central larger metacarpal and metatarsal
Neutrophils vary, but may comprise up to 50% of the
d pas t po ass iso ane spd
infltrate; their presence is not dependent upon ulceration.
nence of normal surface architecture, probably due to
Eosinophils are observed in small numbers in rare cases.
stretching, results in a white, scaly, silvery, crosshatched
Edema of the dermis, deep perivascular tissue, or inter-
appearance with striae. Although multiple pads usually
lobular septa of the fat pad may be seen. In some cases,
are affected, the syndrome may affect a single pad. Some-
mucin is observed. Blood vessels are often prominently
what surprisingly, lesions usually are asymptomatic. If
dilated and congested, and hemorrhage may be present.
ulceration of more severely affected pawpads occurs,
Chronic lesions may feature fbrosis which may course
 q  sn    
among lobules of inflamed tissue. Feline and canine
Highly characteristic “deflated', spongy pawpads that
lesions are identical.
resemble partially empty balloons may develop with
 Differential diagnosis is not diffcult, as the site of
d  n s s- a 
the biopsy generally is known. Anatomic location,
surface silvery crosshatched appearance. A minority of
type, and deep distribution of the inflammation are
cats have coexistent plasma cell stomatitis, immune-
typical. If inflammation is mild and dermal only, differ-
mediated glomerulonephritis, or renal amyloidosis (Scott
entiation from chronic dermatitis of any origin may be
et al., 2001). Skin lesions in dogs mirror those of cats;
difficult.
associated diseases have not been observed.
Breed, age, or sex predilections have not been noted in
FAMILIAL CUTANEOUS VASCULOPATHY
cats with feline plasma cell pododermatitis. Not enough
OF GERMAN SHEPHERD DOGS
dogs have been seen with this condition to note potential
signalment predilections.
Clinical features
Differential diagnosis of plasma cell pododermatitis
generally is not problematic as the disease is visually dis-
See Chapter 10.
tinctive. Rarely, eosinophilic granulomas of the pawpads
 may appear similar. However, in eosinophilic granulomas,
Biopsy site selection
crusting and ulceration of the pawpads are accompanied
by interdigital alopecia, erythema, and inflammation. If
See Chapter 10.
Nodular and diffuse diseases of the dermis with prominent eosinophils, neutrophils, or plasma cells
365
Fig. 14.43 Plasma cell pododerrmati-
tis in a cat. Diffuse inflammation is
partially replacing the adipose tissue
of the pawpad.
Histopathology (Figures 14.45 and 14.46)
 Parakeratosis and mild serocellular crusting accompany
moderate acanthosis and variable ulceration. Mild inter-
face dermatitis has been described in depigmented lesions
(Weir et al., 1994). Vascular lesions are subtle in some
cases, and may be best seen in arterioles of the deep
dermis and panniculus; these are cell poor in type, and
are described in Chapter 10.
There is nodular to diffuse, superficial and deep der-
matitis and panniculitis, composed of lymphocytes,
macrophages, and fewer neutrophils. Mucin and/or
edema are intermingled throughout. Blood vessels may
be dilated. A diagnostic feature is aggregation of inflam-
matory cells around collagen fbers. Lymphocytes,
macrophages, and neutrophils form small to large, degen-
erate foci around collagen. Nuclear degeneration creates
a basophilic cast to these foci on low power examination;
in particular nuclear debris from neutrophils (leukocyto-
clastic debris) is abundant. Collagen-focused inflamma
tion is as seen in other cases of cell poor vasculitis that
feature interstitial dermatitis and panniculitis (see
Chapter 10), but is more flagrant and neutrophilic in this
condition.
Differential diagnoses for familial cutaneous vascu-
lopathy of German Shepherd Dogs are few if the typical
degenerate foci around collagen are found within skin of
电话
 the pawpad. The leukocytoclastic foci somewhat resem-
ble those of the Churg Strauss-like variant of palisading
granuloma, observed in a single dog (see Chapter 13), but
Fig. 14.44 Higher magnification of plasma cell pododermatitis in
occur in a setting of more intense mixed inflammation as
a cat. Note the predominance of plasma cells in the diffuse inflarm-
well as a different clinical context. The granulomas of
matory infiltrate.
cutaneous vasculopathy of German Shepherd Dogs are
366
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 14.45 Familial cutaneous vasculopathy in a Miniature Schnau-
Fig. 14.46 Higher magnification of familial cutaneous vasculopa-
zer. Note deep, nodular to diffuse inflarmmation.
thy in a Fox Terrier. Note characteristic degenerate neutrophilic
inflammatory focus around a small central collagen fiber.
superficially similar to those of eosinophilic granulomas,
but do not feature eosinophils. The degenerate foci of
familial cutaneous vasculopathy are basophilic on low
power examination, in contrast to the eosinophilic cast of
flame figures of eosinophilic granulomas. If diffuse inflam-
mation only is found, the lesions might be confused with
the rare plasma cell pododermatitis of dogs (see p. 363).
Clinical differentiation may be required.
CANINE STERILE NEUTROPHILIC
DERMATOSIS (SWEET'S SYNDROME)
Clinical features (Figures 14.47 through 14.49)
Canine sterile neutrophilic dermatosis is a rare disease,
Fig. 14.47 Canine sterile neutrophilic dermatosis (Sweet's syn-
observed to date only in dogs. There is marked clinical
drome) in a dog. In this view macular erythema predominates;
and histopathologic resemblance to acute febrile neu-
papules are subtly evident. (Photograph courtesy C.B. Vitale.)
trophilic dermatosis (Sweet's syndrome) in humans. As in
human Sweet's syndrome, dogs display clinical features of
extracutaneous disease, including fever arthritis, pneu-
Nodular and diffuse diseases of the dermis with prominent eosinophils, neutrophils, or plasma cells
367
has been made in several dogs (Vitale et al., 1999).
However, it is possible that the drug was administered in
response to malaise or lameness that actually represented
early signs of prodromal disease.
Clinical features include severe macular erythema with
multiple erythematous papules, and circular or irregular
plaques. Minute pustules may occur on the surface of
larger lesions (Vitale, C.B., personal communication,
2003). These pustules may represent the characteristic
"illusion of vesiculation’ noted in humans (Honigsmann
et al., 2003). Lesions commonly coalesce. The head, neck,
trunk, or extremities may be affected. Oral lesions may
occur alone or in conjunction with skin lesions; this is
similar to some human patients.
Fig. 14.48 Closer view of the dog in Fig. 14.47. Erythermatous
Extracutaneous clinical features include fever and
papules are visible; intact pustules were noted with a handlens. (Pho-
leukocytosis. Absolute neutrophilia in the range 15 000 t0
tograph courtesy C.B. Vitale.)
25 000 is common. General malaise may precede canine
sterile neutrophilic dermatosis. Lameness and depression
have been noted to precede skin lesions in dogs (Vitale,
C.B., personal communication, 2003). Neutrophilic pol-
yarthritis may be present. Respiratory signs, seen in some
dogs, correlate with neutrophilic pneumonia. The pres-
ence of pyrexia and depression, neutrophilic leukocytosis,
as well neutrophilic cutaneous and pulmonary lesions are
similar to sterile pustular erythroderma of Miniature
Schnauzers, suggesting that that syndrome may be a
related phenomenon (see p. 369 and Chapter 1).
 Breed, age or sex predilection have not been noted in
the small number of dogs seen with this syndrome.
Marked signalment predilections  (women,
Japanese
ethnicity) do occur in humans (Fitzgerald et al., 1996;
Honigsmann et al., 2003).
 Clinical differential diagnoses include a wide variety of
Fig. 14.49 View of the clipped tail of the dog in Fig. 14.47. Mul-
tiple small erythermatous pustules are evident. (Photograph courtesy
erythematous dermatoses characterized by papules, pus-
C.B. Vitale.)
tules, and plaques. These include erythema multiforme,
canine eosinophilic dermatitis, toxic shock syndrome, and
sterile pustular erythroderma of Miniature Schnauzers.
monia, and circulating neutrophilia; all signs may not be
Complete blood counts and chemistry screening profles
present in individual cases.
shouid be performed to evaluate for the presence of neu-
The etiology of Sweet's syndrome is not known in
 trophilia. Histopathology in conjunction with supportive
humans (Fitzgerald et al., 1996; Honigsmann et al.,
clinical features is confrmatory.
2003). It has been postulated that it may represent an
unusual hypersensitivity reaction to bacterial, viral, or
 Biopsy site selection
[umor antigen (Honigsmann et al., 2003). Skin disease is
preceded by febrile upper respiratory infection, tonsillitis,
Multiple papules, pustules, plaques, or nodules should be
or influenza-like clinical signs in the majority of human
sampled. Care should be exercised when taking the
patients (Honigsmann et al., 2003). Up to 20% of cases
biopsy, as these lesions may be fragile.
in humans are seen in conjunction with malignancy, espe-
cially hematologic malignancy (Fitzgerald et al., 1996;
Honigsmann et al., 2003), but this association has not 
Histopathology (Figures 14.50 and 14.51)
been observed in dogs. Drug and vaccine-induced Sweet's
The epidermis is generally mildly acanthotic only. Occa-
syndrome also is reported in humans (Fitzgerald et al.,
 sionally, neutrophilic infltration of the epidermis forms
1996; Honigsmann et al., 2003). A putative association 
 small superficial pustules, as described in humans (Cohen
with the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug carprofen
& Kurzrock, 2003). Ulceration and exudation may occur.
368
Diseases of the dermis
The dermis contains a moderate to severe neutrophil-
rich infltrate in which variable eosinophils may be inter-
mingled. The disribution is superfcial to deep and
perivascular to diffuse, often with clustering along folli-
cles. Lymphocytes and macrophages may be present.
Edema is generally prominent. Leukocytoclasia (frag-
typifed by perivascular fragments or dust) is uncommon
 and generally very mild, but dermal hemorrhage often is
observed. There may be vascular transmural migration
of neutrophils, but without vascular necrosis or fbrin
 thrombosis. Vascular damage of this condition is second-
ary to toxic metabolites released by activated neutrophils,
as described in humans (Malone et al., 2002), and has
been termed an ‘innocent bystander epiphenomenon'
(Cohen, 2002).
As in humans with Sweet's syndrome, interstitial neu-
trophilic infltration of the lung with alveolitis may be
present. Sterile neutrophilic arthritis/synovitis has been
documented.
Differential diagnoses include sterile pustular erythro-
derma of Miniature Schnauzers and infectious dermati-
tides. Infectious neutrophilic inflammation tends to target
follicles or form discrete dermal or follicular pustules.
In contrast, the neutrophils of sterile neutrophilic der-
matosis tend to be perivascular to diffuse. The lesions of
sterile pustular erythroderma of Miniature Schnauzers
more consistently feature severe epidermal pustulation
and crusting (see Chapter 1) and usually are more
Fig. 14.50 Canine sterile neutrophilic dermatosis featuring diffuse
eosinophilic.
neutrophilic dermatitis. Note mild neutrophilic infiltration of over-
ying epiderrmis.
Fig. 14.51 Higher magnification of
canine sterile neutrophilic dermatosis.
Neutrophils are abundant in the super-
ficial dermis.
Nodular and diffuse diseases of the dermis with prominent eosinophils, neutrophils, or plasma cells
369
R
Fig. 14.52 Sterile pustular erythroderma in a Miniature Schnauzer.
Fig. 14.53 Higher magnification of sterile pustular erythroderma.
Diffuse neutrophilic inflammation is accompanied by edema.
Neutrophils are diffusely abundant; note leukocytoclasia (arrow).
and lymphocytes may be present. The distribution is
STERILE PUSTULAR ERYTHRODERMA
perivascular to interstitial and is often most concentrated
OF MINIATURE SCHNAUZERS
in the superficial dermis where confluence in severe lesions
(Synonyms: superficial suppurative necrolytic dermatitis
creates a band-like effect. Inflammation is usually mod-
of Miniature Schnauzers, Schnauzer syndrome)
erate to severe, but may be mild, particularly in cases with
prominent epidermal lesions.
Eosinophils are often numerous. In cases where sequen-
Clinical features
tial biopsy is performed, lesions from earlier in the course
See Chapter 1.
of the disease contain predominantly neutrophils;
eosinophils are prominent and may outnumber neu-
Biopsy site selection
trophils in later-stage lesions. Eosinophils infltrate the
epidermis and also may contribute to epidermal pustula-
See Chapter 1.
tion. Rare foci of eosinophilic degranulation around
collagen (flame fgures) may be observed.
 Early lesions may show neutrophilic leukocytoclasia
Histopathology (Figures 14.52 and 14.53)
(fragmentation of granulocytic nuclei as they exit affected
Epidermal lesions include acanthosis, spongiosis, and
-sad un isnp io siuuenj reaonu Aq payidi 'slassa
broad pustules that are often present in late stage, fully
 cular distribution). There may be vasculopathic/vasculitic
formed lesions (see Chapter 1). The dermis is edematous
changes of endothelial swelling, mild mural neutrophilic
and often contains a neutrophil- and/or eosinophil-rich
 inflammation, and perivascular hemorrhage. Vascular
infltrate. Macrophages are intermingled, and plasma cells
 necrosis and fbrin thrombosis are not observed. Vascular
370
Diseases of the dermis
damage is secondary to toxic metabolites released by acti-
Wilson, D.C., Smith, M.L. & King, L.E. (2003) Arthropod bites
vated neutrophils, as described in humans (Malone et al.,
and stings. In: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General Medicine,
2002), and has been termed an “innocent bystander
6th edn (eds I.M. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen,
epiphenomenon’ (Cohen, 2002).
L.A. Goldsmith & S.1. Katz), pp. 2289-98. McGraw-Hill,
As in some dogs with sterile neutrophilic dermatosis
New York.
Wong, R.C., Hughes, S.E. & Voorhees, J.J. (1987) Spider bites.
(see p. 366), pulmonary interstitial neutrophilic infltrates
Arch Dermatol 123, 98-104.
may occur. Myocardial and hepatic necrosis has been
observed; hepatic lesions support terminal disseminated
Fire Ant Bites
intravascular coagulation.
Freeman, TM. (1997) Hymenoptera hypersensitivity in an
Dermal lesions closely resemble those of canine sterile
imported fire ant endemic area. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol
neutrophilic dermatosis.  Epidermal pustular 
r inflam-
78, 369-72.
mation generally is more striking in sterile pustular ery-
King, T.P & Spangfort, M.D. (2000) Structure and biology of
throderma of Miniature Schnauzers than in sterile
stinging insect venom allergens. Int Arch Allergy Immunol
 neutrophilic dermatosis, and eosinophils are more promi-
123, 99-106.
nent. Clinical differentiation may be required. In lesions
Miller, S.D. & Keeling, J.H. (2002) Ant sting sporotrichosis.
of sterile pustular erythroderma in which eosinophils pre-
Cutis 69, 439-42.
dominate, canine eosinophilic dermatitis may be consid-
Rakich, P.M., Latimer, K.S., Mispagel, M.E. et al. (1993) Clini-
cal and histologic characterization of cutaneous reactions to
ered (see p. 360), particularly if flame fgures are seen.
stings of the imported fire ant (Solenopsis invicta) in dogs. Vet
However, eosinophil degranulation is generally a more
Pathol 30, 555-9.
striking feature of eosinophilic dermatitis, and commonly
Tankersley, M.S., Walker, R.L., Butler, W.K. et al. (2002) Safety
is not present in eosinophilic lesions of toxic pustular
and efficacy of an imported fre ant rush immunotherapy pro-
erythroderma.
tocol with and without prophylactic treatment. J Alergy Clin
Immunol 109, 556-62.
Wilson, D.C. & King, L.E. (1999) Arthropod bites and
REFERENCES
stings. In: Dermatology in General Medicine, Sth edn
(eds I.W. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A.
Arthropod Bite Reactions
Goldsmith & T.B. Fitzpatrick), p. 2685-95. McGraw-Hill,
Doros, D.L. (1988) Hypersensitivity granulomas. In: Allergy:
New York.
Principles and Practice, 3rd edn (eds E.M. Middleton, C.E.
Reed, E.F. Ellis, N.F. Adkinson & J.W. Yunginger), pp. 275-
Feline Herpes Virus Ulcerative Dermatitis
94. CV Mosby, St Louis.
Hargis, A.M., Ginn, PE., Mansell, J.E.K.L. et al. (1999)
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
Ucerative facial and nasal dermatiis and stomatitis in cats
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 500-7. WB.
associated with feline herpesvirus 1. Vet Dermatol 10, 267-
Saunders, Philadelphia.
74.
Walder, E.J. & Howard, E.B. (1982) Persistent insect bite gran-
Suchy, A., Bauder, B., Gelbmann, W. et al. (2000) Diagnosis of
uloma in a dog. Vet Pathol 19, 839-41.
feline herpesvirus infection by immunohistochemistry, poly-
Wilson, D.C. & King, L.E. (1999) Arthropod bites and stings.
merase chain reaction, and in situ hybridization. J Vet Diagn
In: Dermatology in General Medicine, Sth edn (eds I. W. Freed-
Invest 12, 186-91.
berg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith &
T.B. Fitzpatrick), pp. 2685-95. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Feline Eosinophilic Plaque
Wilson, D.C., Smith, M.L. & King, L.E. (2003) Arthropod bites 
See Chapters 5 and 6.
and stings. In: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in Generat Medicine,
6th edn (eds by I.M. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F.
Feline Indolent Uicer
Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.1. Katz), pp. 2289-98. McGraw-
Colombini, S., Hodgin, E.C., Foil, C.S. et al. (2001) Induction
Hill, New York.
of feline flea allergy dermatitis and the incidence and histo-
pathological characteristics of concurrent indolent lip ulcers.
Feline Mosquito Bite Hypersensitivity
Vet Dermatol 12, 155-61.
See Chapter 6.
Power, H.T. & Ihrke, PJ. (1995) Selected feline eosinophilic skin
diseases. Vet Clin North Am 25, 833-50.
Spider Bites
Scott, D.W. (1975) Observations on the eosinophilic granuloma
Carbonaro, PA., Hanniger, C.K. & Schwartz, R.A. (1995)
complex in cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 11, 261-70.
Spider bite reactions. Cutis 56, 256-9.
Wilson, D.C. & King, L.E. (1999) Arthropod bites and stings.
Feline Eosinophilic Granuloma
In: Dermatology in General Medicine, Sth edn (eds I. W. Freed-
Bardagi, M., Fondati, A., Fondevila, D., Ferrer, L. (2003) Ultra-
berg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith &
structural study of cutaneous lesions in feline eosinophilic
T.B. Fitzpatrick), pp. 2685-95. McGraw-Hill, New York.
granuloma complex. Vet Dermatol 14, 297-303.
Nodular and diffuse diseases of the dermis with prominent eosinophils, neutrophils, or plasma cells
371
Fernandez, C.J., Scott, D.W. & Erb, H.N. (200o) Staining
Practice (eds E.M. Middleton, C.E. Reed, E.F. Ellis, N.F.
abnormalities of dermal collagen in eosinophil- or neutrophil-
Adkinson & J.W. Yunginger), pp. 861-90. CV Mosby, St
rich inflammatory dermatoses of horses and cats as demon-
Louis.
strated with Masson's trichrome stain. Vet Dermatol 11,
Vitale, C.B., Ihrke, P.J. & Gross, T.L. (1994) Putative diethyl-
43-8.
carbamazine-induced urticaria with eosinophilic dermatitis in
Fondati, A., Fondevila, D. & Ferrer, L. (2001) Histopathologi-
a dog. Vet Dermatol 5,197-203.
cal study of feline eosinophilic dermatoses. Vet Dermatol 12,
333-8.
Feline Hypereosinophilic Syndrome
Nutman, T.B., Ottesen, E.A. & Cohen, S.G. (1988) Eosinophilia
Aroch, I., Perl, S. & Markovics, A. (2001) Disseminated
and eosinophil-related disorders. In: Allergy: Principles and
eosinophilic disease resembling idiopathic hypereosinophilic
Practice (eds E.M. Middleton, C.E. Reed, E.F. Ellis, N.F.
syndrome in a dog. Vet Record 149, 386-9.
Adkinson & J.W. Yunginger) pp. 861-90. CV Mosby, St
Harvey, R.G. (1990) Feline hypereosinophilia with cutaneous
Louis.
lesions. J Small Anim Pract 31, 453-6.
Power, H.T. (1990) Eosinophilic granuloma in a family of
Huibregtse, B.A. & Turner, J.L. (1994) Hypereosinophilic
specific pathogen-free cats. In: Proceedings of the 6th
syndrome and eosinophilic leukemia: a comparison of 22
AAVD/ACVD Meeting, San Francisco, p. 45.
hypereosinophilic cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 30, 591-
Power, H.T. & Ihrke, PJ. (1995) Selected feline eosinophilic skin
9.
diseases. Vet Clin North Am 25, 833-50.
Muir, P.,Gruffydd-Jones, TJ. & Brown, PJ. (1993)
Hypereosinophilic symdrome in a cat. Vet Record 132,
Canine Eosinophilic Granuloma
358-9.
Bredal, W.P., Gunnes, G., Vollset, I. & Ulstein, T.L. (1996) Oral
Scott, D.W.,F
Randolph, J.F. &Walsh,
K.M.
(1985)
eosinophilic granuloma in three Cavalier King Charles
Hypereosinophilic syndrome in a cat. Fel Pract 15, 22-
spaniels. J Small Anim Pract 37, 499-504.
30.
Joffe, D.J. & Allen, A.L. (1995) Ulcerative eosinophilic stom-
atitis in three Cavalier King Charles spaniels. J Am Anim Hosp
Plasma Cell Pododermatitis
Assoc 31, 34-7.
Gruffydd-Jones, T.J., Orr, C.M. & Lucke, V.M. (1980) Foot pad
Madewell, B.R., Stannard, A.A., Pulley, L.T. et al. (1980) Oral
swelling and ulceration in cats: a report of five cases. J Small
eosinophilic granuloma in Siberian Husky dogs. J Am Vet Med
Anim Pract 21, 381-9.
Assoc 177, 701-3.
Guaguere, E. & Declercq, J. (2000) Viral dermatoses. In: A
Nutman, T.B., Ottesen, E.A. & Cohen, S.G. (1988) Eosinophilia
Practical Guide to Feline Dermatology (eds E. Guaguere
and eosinophil-related disorders. In: Allergy: Principles and
& P. Prélaud), pp. 7.1-7.11. Blackwell Science, Oxford.
Practice (eds E.M. Middleton, C.E. Reed, E.F. Ellis, N.F.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
Adkinson & J.W. Yunginger) pp. 861-90. CV Mosby, St
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 1129-32. W.B. Saun-
Louis.
ders, Philadelphia.
Poulet, EM., Valentine, B.A. & Scott, D.W. (1991) Focal prolif-
erative eosinophilic dermatitis of the external ear canal in four
Familial Cutaneous Vasculopathy of
dogs. Vet Pathol 28, 171-3.
German Shepherd Dogs
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffn, C.E. (2001) Mutter  Kirk’s
Weir, JA., Yager, J.A., Caswell, J.L. et al. (1994) Familial cuta-
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 1153-5. WB.
neous vasculopathy of German shepherds: clinical, genetic and
Saunders, Philadelphia.
preliminary pathological and immunological studies. Can Vet
Vercelli, A. & Cornegliani, L. (2002) Oral eosinophilic granu-
35,763-9.
loma in two German Shepherd dogs. In: Proceedings of the
18th ESVD/ECVD Meeting, Nice, p. 243.
Canine Sterile Neutrophilic Dermatosis
Walsh, K.M. (1983) Oral eosinophilic granuloma in two dogs.
(Sweet's Syndrome)
J Am Vet Med Assoc 183, 323-4.
Cohen, P.R. (2002) Skin lesions of Sweet syndrome and its dorsal
hand variant contain vasculitis: an oxymoron or an epiphe-
Canine Eosinophilic Dermatitis
nomenon? Arch Dermatol 138,400-3.
Holm, K.S., Morris, D.O., Gomez,
S.M. et al. (1999)
Cohen, PR. & Kurzrock, R. (2003)
)Sweet's syndrome
Eosinophilic dermatitis with edema in nine dogs, compared
revisited: a review of disease concepts. Int J Dermatol 42,
with eosinophilic cellulitis in humans. J Am Vet Med Assoc
761-78.
215,649-53.
Fitzgerald, R.L., McBurney, E.1. & Nesbitt, L.T. (1996) Sweet's
Leiferman, K.M. (1999) Cutaneous eosinophilic
diseases.
syndrome. Int J Dermatol 35, 9-15.
In: Dermatology in General Medicine, Sth edn (eds I.W.
Honigsmann, H.,(
Cohen, PR., Wolff, K. (2003) Acute
Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith
febrile neutrophilic dermatosis (Sweet's syndrome)
In:
& TB.Fitzpatrick), pp. 1129-37. McGraw-Hill,
New
Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General Medicine, 6th edn
York.
(eds I.M. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A.
Nutman, T.B., Ottesen, E.A. & Cohen, S.G. (1988) Eosinophilia
Goldsmith & S.1. Katz), pp. 949-55. McGraw-Hill, New
and eosinophil-related disorders. In: Allergy: Principles and
York.
372
 Diseases of the dermis
Malone, J.C., Slone, S.P, Wills-Frank, L.A. et al. (2002) Vascu-
Sterile Pustular Erythroderma of Miniature Schnauzers
lar inflammation (vasculitis) in Sweet Syndrome. Arch Der-
Cohen, PR. (2002) Skin lesions of Sweet syndrome and its dorsal
matol 138, 345-9.
hand variant contain vasculitis: an oxymoron or an epiphe-
Vitale, C.B., Zenger, E. & Hill, J. (1999) Putative Rimadyl-
nomenon? Arch Dermatol 138, 400-3.
 induced neutrophilic dermatosis resembling Sweet's syndrome
Malone, J.C., Slone, S.P., Wills-Frank, L.A. et al. (2002) Vascu-
in 2 dogs. In: Proceedings of the 1Sth AAVD/ACVD Meeting,
lar inflammation (vasculitis) in Sweet Syndrome. Arch Der-
Maui, p. 69.
matol 138, 345-9.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 15
Degenerative, dysplastic and depositional
diseases of dermal connective tissue
Degenerative diseases are characterized by an acquired
calcification occurring with natural or iatrogenic hyper-
breakdown, atrophy, or other alteration in structural
glucocorticoidism. Calcinosis cutis is most commonly
integrity of dermal connective tissue. The dysplastic dis-
seen with iatrogenic hyperglucocorticoidism. The term
eases are those in which the structure of the dermal tissue
'calcinosis circumscripta’ is used predominantly for focal
is altered through hereditary abnormalities. Degenerative
    o,  o 
and dysplastic dermal changes usually result in skin
 The mechanism of calcium salt deposition in skin is
fragility and dermal splitting, but can also result in ex-
highly complex and poorly understood. In vivo solutions
trusion of the affected collagen, as in perforating
of calcium phosphate are composed of a number of salts
collagenosis.
differing in their calcium to phosphate ratio. Normally,
Depositional diseases are characterized by production
calcium and phosphate ions exist in solution in extracel-
or deposition of substances not normally found in the
lular fluid in a metastable equilibrium. Phase transforma-
dermis, such as mineral or amyloid, or production of sub-
tion from ions in solution to the solid phase may be
stances in excess of normal, such as mucin. Differentia-
induced by changes in collagen fbrils. Phosphate ions
au aq pausduosne si suopuo asa ishuoe uo
may initiate the transformation by the formation of
identification of specifc histomorphologic features of
crystal nuclei upon organic matrices. Abnormally elevated
these substances, which often is aided by the use of special
 mitochondrial calcium phosphate levels apparently result
stains.
 in crystal deposition and cell death (Touart & Sau, 1998).
 In dystrophic calcification it has been hypothesized that
tissue damage allows increased intracellular calcium
CALCINOSIS CUTIS
influx (Touart & Sau, 1998). In metastatic calcification,
elevated serum levels of calcium or phosphate initiate the
Clinical features (Figures 15.1 and 15.2)
precipitation of crystals in soft tissue (Touart & Sau,
Calcinosis cutis is an uncommon physiological process
1998). Metastatic calcification is most commonly associ-
characterized by inappropriate mineral deposition in the 
ated with disorders of calcium and phosphorus home-
dermis, epidermis, or subcutis. Tissue mineralization is
ostasis leading to an elevated solubility product obtained
defined as the deposition of insoluble, inorganic mineral
by multiplying the serum calcium level by the serum phos-
salts. This process requires deposition of a cation (usually
phorus level (Ca x P) (Bertazzolo et al., 2003). Both dys-
calcium) and an anion, typically phosphate or carbonate
trophic and metastatic factors may coexist in certain
(Walsh & Fairley, 1999); when calcium is the predomi
syndromes, such as calcification due to renal failure (see
nant cation, the more specific term ^calcification’ may be
calcinosis circumscripta, p. 378). Calcification is idio-
applied. Usually, cutaneous mineral is deposited upon the 
pathic in the absence of antecedent trauma and in the
collagen or elastin matrix of the dermis.
absence of abnormal serum calcium levels (Touart & Sau,
Calcinosis cutis, as broadly used in human medicine,
1998). Iatrogenic calcification is due to direct exposure to
encompasses all forms of calcification including the four
calcium-containing substances.
major categories of dystrophic, metastatic, idiopathic,
 In humans, dystrophic calcifcation occurs secondary to
and iatrogenic calcification (Touart & Sau, 1998; Walsh
 connective tissue disorders, panniculitis, various inherited
& Fairley, 1999). Although this classification scheme is
disorders, benign and malignant neoplasms, infections
theoretically useful, individual syndromes of cutaneous
(especially parasitic), and focal trauma (Walsh & Fairley,
mineralization may have etiopathogenic overlap. The
1999). In dogs, dystrophic calcifcation most commonly
term ^calcinosis cutis’ most commonly is used in veteri-
 s s m o  s
nary medicine to denote the specifc type of dystrophic
cinosis cutis, or in response to focal trauma as calcinosis
373
374
Diseases of the dermis
amphotericin B therapy in three dogs with blastomycosis
(Gortel et al., 1999).
Iatrogenic calcification in humans, dogs, and cats is
seen as a rare complication of intravenous or subcuta-
 neous calcium chloride or calcium gluconate therapy for
hypoparathyroidism (Walsh & Fairley, 1999; Ruopp,
2001; Schaer et al., 2001). Calcinosis cutis of the thinly
haired skin of the ventrum of dogs has been reported in
association with the percutaneous penetration of calcium
chloride powder and calcium-containing bone meal
present in landscaping products (Schick et al., 1987;
Paradis & Scott, 1989).
Ossifcation, or the formation of bone by the deposi-
 tion of calcium and phosphorus as hydroxyapatite crys-
Fig. 15.1 Calcinosis cutis in an aged Shih Tzu with naturally oc-
tals in a proteinaceous matrix, occurs rarely in the skin
curring hyperglucocorticoidism. Somewhat bilaterally symmetric,
in all species studied. The term ^osteoma cutis' has been
ulcerated plaques are present in the flexural surfaces of the ventral
used to describe the dermal deposition of metaplastic
abdomen.
bone. All cases of osteoma cutis seen by the authors have
occurred in conjunction with multifocal calcinosis cutis
caused by iatrogenic or endogenous hyperglucocorti-
 coidism; most cases involved multiple injections of long-
acting glucocorticoids. However osteoma cutis in the
absence of calcinosis cutis is reported (Frazier et al.,
1998).
Clinically, chalky, white-to-pink material with a feath-
ery or blurry margin can be seen through the intact epi-
dermis of early nonulcerated lesions and is most easily
observed with a hand lens. Firm, gritty yellowish-tan to
dark red plaques evolve from coalescing erythematous
papules. Ulceration and crusting occur as gritty mineral
salts are extruded from older lesions (transepidermal or
 [ransfollicular elimination). On palpation, this grittiness
 may resemble sand. The lesions may be aggravated by
self-trauma. Calcinosis cutis may be either focal or wide-
Fig. 15.2 Chronic calcinosis cutis in an aged Boston Terrier with
spread. Skin regions subject to repetitive flexure are pre-
naturally occurring hyperglucocorticoidism.  A well-demarcated
plaque is seen in a flexural surface of the ventral abdomen. Whitish-
disposed; calcinosis cutis occurs most commonly in the
brown foci correspond to areas of transepidermal elimination of
flexural surfaces of the groin, back of the neck, and
mineralized debris.
axillae.
Contrary to popular belief, chronic lesions may be pru-
ritic, especially if transepidermal elimination of calcium
circumscripta (see p. 378). Metastatic calcification occurs
occurs. Dogs with accompanying hyperglucocorticoidism
s a un sop pn su oq u on sso
usually show other characteristic clinical features of this
of chronic renal failure, and in dogs and cats is manifested
syndrome (see Chapter 19). Calcinosis cutis may be
 as calcinosis circumscripta.
clinically inapparent in very early cases. The range of
Idiopathic calcification  in humans most frequently
severity and percentage of the body affected may vary
 involves the genitals, or surrounds major joints in ado-
markedly; in general, more severe calcinosis cutis occurs
lescents (tumoral calcinosis) (Walsh & Fairley, 1999). In
secondary to iatrogenic hyperglucocorticoidism, espe-
 domestic animals, idiopathic calcifcation predominantly
cially with the use of long-acting injectable glucocorti-
occurs as idiopathic calcinosis circumscripta. Rarely,
coids. Interestingly, long term ventral application of high
widespread idiopathic calcinosis cutis has been seen in
potency topical corticosteroids has not been associated
puppies, most frequently as a sequela to severe systemic
with calcinosis cutis (see p. 392).
illness. The etiopathogenesis is unknown, and lesions
Calcinosis cutis in association with the percutaneous
usually regress spontaneously. Unexplained severe calci-
penetration of calcium products is characterized by
nosis cutis also has been reported in conjunction with
 papular to nodular indurated, ulcerated, and exudative
Degenerative, dysplastic and depositional diseases of dermal connective tissue
375
lesions; sites affected reflect those of contact and absorp-
 deposits may impede clean incision by the skin biopsy
tion (Schick et al., 1987; Paradis & Scott, 1989). Calci-
punch, specimens obtained with smaller punches (4 mm)
nosis  cutis  secondary  to  administration  of  calcium
may be damaged during sampling. Consequently, larger
gluconate solution in a hyperphosphatemic dog with
biopsy punches (6 or 8 mm) or wedge specimens are rec-
primary hypoparathyroidism presented as severe ventral
ommended. Pressure points should not be sampled, as
disease affecting the groin, despite administration of the
healing may be prolonged in these locations.
calcium gluconate in the thoracolumbar region (Schaer et
al., 2001).
Histopathology (Figures 15.3 through 15.7)
Calcinosis cutis seen in conjunction with naturally
occurring canine hyperglucocorticoidism will exhibit the
Although there may be etiopathogenic overlap, for
age and breed predilections of hyperglucocorticoidism
descriptive purposes calcinosis cutis is histologically dif-
(see Chapter 19); sex predilections are not reported. Cal-
ferentiated from calcinosis circumscripta (see p. 378).
Calcinosis cutis is characterized by diffuse involvement of
coidism may be more common in English Bulldogs.
the dermal collagen and adnexal appendages; diffuse
Idiopathic calcinosis cutis following severe illness has
calcinosis may extend to deeper tissues with some
been seen only in puppies; breed or sex trends have not 
etiologies.
.In contrast,
calcinosis circumscripta  is
been observed. Calcinosis cutis due to contact absorption
‘tumoral’ and forms focal or multifocal large masses of
of calcium-containing material may be more likely in
 mineral that often totally efface soft tissue, including the
young active dogs, due to their propensity for mischief.
subcutis.
Calcinosis cutis secondary to hyperglucocorticoidism
In calcinosis cutis, the epidermis often is severely acan-
is visually distinctive. Differential diagnoses are few.
 thotic and may be ulcerated or exudative depending on
Erythermatous papules seen in early cases may resemble
the degree of accompanying self-trauma, transepidermal
superficial pyoderma.  Exceptionally severe ulcerated
 elimination of mineral, or pyoderma. The dermis is char-
lesions may resemble deep bacterial or fungal infection.
acterized by variable mineralization of collagen fbers.
Calcinosis cutis secondary to percutaneous absorption
There may be superficial dermal edema. Superficial folli-
reflects sites of contact and also may resemble severe, deep
cles are markedly hyperplastic, and sometimes tortuous;
bacterial or fungal infections.
there may be infundibular hyperkeratosis. Telogen-type
atrophy may be apparent if there is concurrent hyperglu-
Biopsy site selection
cocorticoidism (see Chapter 19), but is usually more
evident in adjacent noncalcified dermis.
Areas of affected skin without concurrent self-trauma or
Affected
collagen ranges from slightly
hyper-
ulceration are preferred sites for biopsy. Since the mineral
eosinophilic and mildly fragmented to deeply basophilic
Fig. 15.3 Severe calcinosis cutis
demonstrating replacement of dermal
collagen fibers by darkly staining
mineral.
376
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 15.4 Higher magnification of
calcinosis cutis. Collagen fibers appear
fractured due to early mineralization.
Fig. 15.5 Transepithelial elimination
of mineral in calcinosis cutis. Mineral
is being extruded through the epider-
 mis and follicular infundibula
and severely disrupted. Macrophages accumulating along
accumulate berween affected fbers and around larger
slightly fragmented collagen fbers may be the earliest
 confluent foci of mineralization; neutrophils may be inter-
histopathologic feature of calcinosis cutis. Von Kossa
mingled. Lymphocytes and plasma cells may be present.
stain reveals deposition of mineral (dark brown to black)
Severe dermal fbrosis may develop in chronic lesions.
 in subtle early lesions. Frank deposition of smallto large
Osteoma cutis (metaplastic bone) is a late stage feature
foci of dark blue mineral in the superficial and middle
and may predominate in some cases. Random samples
dermis is a more common finding; severe mineralization
from individual cases may show osteoma cutis only, while
effaces normal dermal collagen. There may be mineral-
others feature ossification and mineralization concur-
ization of the external root sheaths of hair follicles as well.
rently. Osteoma cutis in the absence of apparent calcinosis
Rarely, hyperglucocorticoidism may result in widespread
cutis has been reported (Frazier et al., 1998). Dermal ossi-
and prominent mineralization of the external root sheath,
fication occurs as irregular spicules of osteoid or lamellar
without dermal calcinosis. Macrophages and giant cells
bone. These often surround and engulf foci of calcinosis,
Degenerative, dysplastic and depositional diseases of dermal connective tissue
377
Fig. 15.6 Osteoma cutis featuring discrete dark islands of bone in
Fig. 15.7 Higher magnification of Fig. 15.6. Note fibrosis around
the dermis.
island of bone.
or may have calcinosis at the periphery. There may be
Calcinosis cutis due to percutaneous penetration of
marrow-like spaces containing spindle cells. Haversian
calcium chloride-containing substances may be charac-
bone and bone marrow have been reported (Frazier et al.,
terized additionally by severe epidermal and dermal
1998). Osteoblasts and osteoclasts surround ossifed foci.
necrosis, likely as a direct caustic effect of the con-
There is variable fbrosis surrounding and separating
tactant. In calcinosis cutis due to injection of calcium
bone. Inflammation is mixed and variable; lesions with
gluconate for the treatment of hypoparathyroidism,
bone only are associated with little if any inflammatory
mineralization and degeneration of blood vessels may
reaction, as bone deposition is nonreactive.
result in secondary severe tissue necrosis. Widespread
Transepidermal or transfollicular (transepithelial) elim-
calcinosis cutis of this type has been reported in a dog
ination of mineral is characterized by extrusion of mineral
that had been treated with calcium gluconate solution
through the epidermis or into the lumen of hair follicles,
for hypoparathyroidism in the setting of hyperphos-
and is a common feature of calcinosis cutis. In typical
phatemia (Schaer et al., 2001). Calcinosis due to injecta-
transepithelial elimination, foci of mineral are within
bles may affect deeper tissues including skeletal muscle
the epidermis or follicular infundibular epithelium, and
fbers.
break through to the epidermal surface or the follicular
Differential diagnosis of calcinosis cutis is not
lumen. An unusual and probably late-stage variant is
difficult if mineralization is obvious in tissue. Von Kossa
the accumulation of mineral primarily within luminal
staining may aid in the rare subtle or early lesions. Mild
follicular keratin, accompanied by perifollicular fbrosis.
mineralization of the external root sheath of hair follicles
Transepithelial elimination is  accompanied by neu-
may occasionally be encountered in older normal dogs,
frophilic pustular inflammation in some lesions, and
classically in Miniature Poodles but in other breeds as
ulcers may occur.
well.
378
 Diseases of the dermis
example, the tendency for trauma-induced calcinosis cir-
CALCINOSIS CIRCUMSCRIPTA
cumscripta may be enhanced by the active calcium and
(Synonym: tumoral calcinosis)
phosphate metabolism of large, rapidly growing dogs.
Dystrophic factors may play a role in metastatic calcifi-
Clinical features (Figures 15.8 and 15.9)
cation seen in cats with renal failure, as lesions occur in
the pads where there is repeated trauma (Bertazzolo et al.,
Calcinosis circumscripta is a clinically distinctive sub-
2003). The mechanism of calcium salt deposition in tisue
group of calcinosis cutis characterized by the focal depo-
is incompletely understood (see calcinosis cutis, p. 373).
sition of mineral salts in tumor-like nodules, usually in the
 In dogs, focal trauma is probably responsible for most
subcutaneous tissue. The syndrome is uncommon in dogs
dystrophic cases of calcinosis circumscripta. Metastatic
and very rare in cats. Lesions classified as calcinosis cir-
calcification occurs in humans, dogs, and cats as a sequela
cumscripta in the dog span all etiologic classifications
Aos q e jo ss n ui an ien s o
for calcinosis cutis and include dystrophic, metastatic,
product (Ca x P) (see p. 373) and may be tumoral in dogs
idiopathic, and iatrogenic mineralization. Many cases of
 and cats (Scott & Buerger, 1988; Gross, 1997; Jackson &
calcinosis circumscripta are deemed idiopathic in the dog
Barber, 1998; Touart & Sau, 1998; Walsh & Fairley,
and cat, but may in fact be dystrophic due to focal
1999; Bertazzolo et al., 2003). Most reported pad lesions
frauma, as lesions occur over pressure points, or at sites
of calcinosis circumscripta are due to renal failure (Scott
of previous trauma, such as that incurred during ear crop-
& Buerger, 1988; Gross, 1997; Jackson & Barber, 1998;
ping. There may be overlap of etiopathogeneses. For
Bertazzolo et al., 2003). Idiopathic calcinosis circum-
scripta of the pawpads also may occur (Stampley &
Bellah, 1990; Alhaidari, 1995; Joffe, 1996). Iatrogenic
nodular mineralization is reported in conjunction with the
 injection of progestational compounds in both the dog
and cat (Ginel et al., 1992; O'Brien & Wilkie, 2001).
 Calcification seen in conjunction with benign or malig-
nant neoplasms and severe infections (especially parasitic)
is grouped under calcinosis circumscripta in humans
(Walsh & Fairley, 1999). Mineralization occurs in these
contexts in animals as well, but is considered a secondary
feature and is not classified separately.
Clinically, calcinosis circumscripta usually presents as
frm, well-circumscribed, domed nodules in the subcuta-
 neous tissue. The overlying skin may be freely moveable
or fixed, and may be ulcerated in larger lesions with more
superficial extension or with repeated trauma, such as pad
Fig. 15.8 Calcinosis circumscripta on the tongue of a dog charac-
terized by a raised and irregular yellowish-pink nodule. (Photograph
lesions. The consistency of the nodules varies from frm
courtesy J.-P. Magnol.)
ax  p sd ro o  i o
from ulcerated lesions. Inflammation is minimal in intact
lesions. Erythema, swelling, and bacterial infection may
occur secondary to ulceration and drainage. Most lesions
are solitary, due to their suspected traumatic origin. Cal-
cinosis due to renal failure often affects multiple pawpads;
discovery of multiple pad involvement should prompt
investigation for underlying renal disease. Most lesions of
calcinosis circumscripta are not painful, except for those
of the pawpads, which can be severely so. Concurrent
disease usually is not a feature of dystrophic or idiopathic
calcinosis circumscripta in domestic animals; however,
calcinosis circumscripta has been reported in conjunction
with hypertrophic osteodystrophy and polyarthritis in
young dogs (Scott & Buerger 1988).
Fig. 15.9 Calcinosis circumscripta involving a lateral digit of a
Site predilection is diagnostically and prognostically
German Shepherd Dog. An ulcer is present in the center of the lesion.
important in calcinosis circumscripta. Calcinosis circum
(Photograph courtesy S.D. White.)
scripta is seen most commonly at sites of potential trauma
Degenerative, dysplastic and depositional diseases of dermal connective tissue
379
such as pressure points or other bony prominences such
as the spine. It has also been observed in the tongue, and
at the site of prior ear cropping. One author (TL.G.)
observed multiple lesions on the pinnae of a dog which
occurred at the sites of previous cat bites. Cheek lesions
have been described in Boston Terriers (Scott & Buerger,
1988). Metastatic calcification secondary to renal failure
in dogs and cats localizes to the pawpads (Scott &
Buerger 1988; Gross, 1997; Jackson & Barber, 1998;
Bertazzolo et al., 2003). Iatrogenic calcinosis circum-
scripta due to injection will be located at common sites
of injection, especially the dorsal scapular area and else-
where on the dorsal or lateral thorax.
 Dystrophic and idiopathic calcinosis circumscripta
occur most frequently in young, rapidly-growing large
breed dogs. In one large study, 93% were large breed
dogs; 48% were German Shepherd Dogs (Scott &
Buerger 1988). Brachycephalic dogs such as Boston Ter-
riers and Boxers also are predisposed (Scott & Buerger,
1988). In over half of the dogs in one study, lesions devel-
oped at less than 1 year of age (Scott & Buerger 1988).
Metastatic calcification as a sequela to chronic renal
failure would be expected to occur predominantly in older
dogs, but also has been described in a young dog with
congenital renal dysplasia and renal failure (Gross, 1997).
Sex predilections have not been noted.
The clinical differential diagnoses of calcinosis circum-
scripta are other nodular lesions, including those in which
mineralization may be a secondary feature. The latter
include some cysts, neoplasms, and some nodular inflam-
Fig. 15.10 Calcinosis circumscripta in a dog. Note irregular pale
matory lesions such as those due to parasites or foreign
islands of mineral with darker foci interrmingled.
body penetration. Obvious inflammation usually is not
a feature of calcinosis circumscripta. Sectioning of calci-
nosis circumscripta after surgical removal will show the
subcutis contain large irregular foci of basophilic granu-
characteristic pasty or chalky foci of calcinosis. Fibroad-
lar mineral which replace normal tissue. Smaller but
 s    )  a
 similar mineral deposits are randomly scattered amongst
calcinosis circumscripta due to its elevated dome shape,
the large foci. Appearance of the mineral varies from
frequent pressure-point location on the legs, and pasty
lightly basophilic and slightly granular to deeply
keratin content.
basophilic and dense. Mineralized foci are surrounded
 p  jo sz a a q
cells. Lymphocytes, neutrophils, and plasma cells may be
Biopsy site selection
observed in small numbers among foci. Fibrosis sur-
Solitary lesions should be resected completely using
rounds and separates lakes of mineral, and may predom-
wedge technique, if this is an appropriate surgical proce-
 inate in late lesions. Osseous metaplasia may occur.
dure for the site. Removal of lesions from pressure points
In calcinosis circumscripta secondary to renal disease,
may be problematical because of poor postoperative
mineralization extends to the superficial dermis of the
healing.
 pawpad and involves ulcer beds. The mineral deposition
of calcinosis circumscripta due to renal disease may be
more uniformly granular and looser in distribution than
Histopathology (Figures 15.10 through 15.12)
the classical form. Calcinosis circumscripta due to injec-
The epidermis or mucosal epithelium is normal to slightly
tions may be confined to the subcutis.
acanthotic, or severely ulcerated and hyperplastic. In clas-
In apocrine cystic calcinosis, a very rare variant of cal-
sical calcinosis circumscripta (as typifed by focal lesions
cinosis cutis, generation of the mineralized lesions from
in young otherwise healthy dogs), the deep dermis and
apocrine sweat glands is evident. Cystic but nonmineral-
380
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 15.12 Calcinosis circumscripta of the pawpads in a cat with
renal failure. Mineralized foci are less discrete and more granular
dog. Large lakes of darkly staining mineral are surrounded by a thin
than in classical calcinosis circumscripta (see Figs 15.10 and 15.11).
zone of granulomatous inflammation.
ized apocrine glands are found at the edges of the lesions.
CUTANEOUS MUCINOSIS
Similar lesions have been encountered in conjunction with
cystic eccrine glands in the scrotum of humans (Ito et al.,
Clinical features (Figures 15.13 and 15.14)
2001). Generation of calcinosis cutis from cystic apocrine
sweat glands has been over-diagnosed in the past; disor-
Cutaneous mucinosis is a syndrome caused by the exces-
dered clusters of cells at the margins of mineralized foci
sive accumulation or deposition of mucin in the dermis.
believed to be epithelial in origin were more likely epithe
Mucinosis is relatively common in the Chinese Shar
lioid macrophages. Although one author (T.L.G.) has seen
 Pei, rare in other breeds of dogs, and very rare in the cat
lesions which appeared compatible with apocrine cystic
(Dillberger & Altman, 1986; Rosenkrantz et al., 1987;
calcinosis, confrmation of true apocrine origin would
Delverdier et al., 1995). Abnormal deposition of mucin
require CAM5.2 or CK13 expression in the marginal cells
may be focal, multifocal, or diffuse, and may vary from
(see Chapter 25).
mild to severe. The clinical presentation of cutaneous
Typical  calcinosis
circumscripta  is  distinctive his-
mucinosis in dogs is highly variable, except in the Chinese
topathologically. Milder and less organized dystrophic
Shar Pei. Mucinosis in humans also is a highly heteroge-
 mineralization occasionally may accompany inflamma-
nous disorder (Wilk & Schmoeckel, 1994).
tory lesions. Abundant mineralization may occur in
Mucin, a jelly-like, clear, viscid glycosaminoglycan, is
pilomatricoma (see Chapter 23), but is found in the
an acid mucopolysaccharide produced in the skin by
context of diagnostic features of that neoplasm (see
dermal fbroblasts. The nonsulfated, carboxylated gly-
Chapter 23).
cosaminoglycan, hyaluronic acid is the most common
Degenerative, dysplastic and depositional diseases of dermal connective tissue
381
by immunohistochemistry for specifc enzyme products, is
significantly different in Shar Peis with mucinosis, in con-
frast to normal dogs with no skin disease. This suggests
a role for specific mast cell subtypes in the pathogenesis
of mucinosis, at least in this breed (Welle et al., 1999).
Clinically, primary mucinosis can be divided into hered-
itary mucinosis, which may be generalized or multifocal
(including tumor-like) in distribution, myxedema, papular
mucinosis, and nodular mucinosis. The term 'myxedema'
is used specifically to denote primary mucinosis observed
with hypothyroidism; myxedema is very rare in the dog
(Miller & Buerger 1990). Papular and plaque-like
 primary mucinotic lesions have been reported in a puppy
(Beale et al., 1991). Focal nodular mucinosis is reported
Fig- 15.13
3Cutaneous mucinosis in a Chinese Shar Pei. Multil-
in dogs (Dillberger & Altman, 1986). One dog reported
oculated vesicles or bullae on the caudal thighs have the appearance
auo kq uaas sop auo pue (s661) 1e ia 1aipiaaeq Kq
of bubbles.
author (T.L.G.) had generalized papular mucinosis with
abnormal serum gamma globulin profle (restricted poly-
clonal spike) similar to that noted in humans with papular
mucinosis (Wu et al., 1997; Fleischmajer, 2003).
In secondary mucinosis, excessive dermal deposition
 of mucin occurs in a variery of different inflammatory
skin diseases, including pyoderma, allergic skin disease,
eosinophilic skin disease, and lupus erythematosus.
Dermal mucin deposition also may occur in neoplastic
diseases such as mast cell tumors (Delverdier et al., 1995).
Mucinosis occurring in conjunction with these diseases
usually is not clinically evident.
Generalized hereditary mucinosis, as seen predomi-
nantly in the Chinese Shar Pei, most often is manifested
as thickened, nonpitting, puffy skin; vesicles and bullae
may be seen. Subtle lesions may be noted in some dogs.
Normal skin integrity is not compromised in generalized
Fig. 15.14 Close-up of cutaneous mucinosis on the ventral chest
of a Chinese Shar Pei. Turgid mucinous bullae span multiple hair
hereditary mucinosis. Severe multifocal mucinosis is asso-
ciated with some degree of generalized mucinosis, and
follicles.
 also occurs predominantly in the Chinese Shar Pei. Clin-
ically, multifocal distinctive multiloculated vesicles or
glycosaminoglycan noted to accumulate in diseases of
bullae have the appearance of bubbles or blisters, and
both dogs and humans (Dillberger & Altman, 1986; Beale
may form plaques or ill-defined swellings. If multifocal
et al., 1991; Delverdier et al., 1995; Doliger et al., 1995; 
mucinosis is severe, skin integrity is compromised and
Fleischmajer, 2003). Sulfated and carboxylated gly-
increased skin fragility results. Mucin may exude from
cosaminoglycans, such as chondroitin 4-sulfate and 6-
abraded plaques, vesicles, or bullae to leave a sticky,
sulfate and dermatan sulfate, also can contribute to
viscid fluid on the skin surface. Primary hereditary muci-
mucinosis (Delverdier et al., 1995; Doliger et al., 1995).
 nosis may be clinically asymptomatic unless secondary
Mucinosis may occur as a primary condition, presum-
 pyoderma or Malassezia dermatitis creates inflamma-
ably due to hereditary or acquired metabolic or endocrine
tion and pruritus. Mucinosis in the Chinese Shar Pei
defects, or may be seen as a clinically silent histopatho-
frequently coexists with allergic skin disease. In those
logic abnormality in association with other diseases (sec-
circumstances, the clinical severity of visible mucinosis
ondary mucinosis).  Although histologically prominent
 may increase.
mucin contributes to the unusual 'normal folding seen in
 Myxedema, a rare manifestation of canine hypothy-
the Chinese Shar Pei, this breed may also demonstrate
 roidism, presents as a symmetrical thickening of the facial
clinically relevant mucinosis, presumed to be hereditary
skin resulting in folds, the so-called ‘tragic facies'. Muci-
in origin. The profle of mast cell subtypes, as indicated
nous vesiculation without generalized myxedema has
382
Diseases of the dermis
been reported as an unusual manifestation of canine
in the Chinese Shar Pei and curative for other solitary
hypothyroidism (Miller & Buerger, 1990).
lesions.
Rarely, focal or multifocal primary mucinosis, some-
times termed papular mucinosis, may be seen in any
Histopathology (Figures 15.15 and 15.16)
breed. In this form of mucinosis, solitary or occasionally
 multiple, white or yellow papules or clear blisters are
The epidermis is variably acanthotic in nodular or
 noted, and most frequently are localized to the head and
 papular mucinosis. Some lesions of papular mucinosis
 neck as incidental fndings. Solitary or, rarely, multifocal
may have irregular epidermal hyperplasia, creating a
nodular mucinosis also can occur; lesions may be frm or
polypoid surface contour. Epidermal changes also will
rubbery (Dillberger & Altman, 1986).
Generalized
vary based on the presence of any concurrent disease. For
 papular lesions may be associated with abnormal serum
example, moderate acanthosis usually will be present in
gamma globulin profles (Delverdier et al., 1995).
myxedema due to hypothyroidism. Inflammatory lesions,
Cutaneous mucinosis is rare in every breed except the
creating acanthosis, often accompany mucinosis of
Chinese Shar Pei. Age or sex predilections are not noted.
Chinese Shar Peis.
Clinical differential diagnoses for mucinosis may
The dermis has widening of spaces between collagen
include vesicular and bullous skin diseases. Unlike other
fbers by a pale gray or gray-blue substance, as seen in
vesicular skin diseases, digital pressure is required tO
hematoxylin and eosin (HE) stained sections. Mucin is
extract the fluid from intact mucinous vesicles and bullae.
blue or blue-green using Alcian blue stain (pH 2.5); con-
Mucinosis (especially of the Chinese Shar Pei) is clinically
current periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) staining enhances inter-
distinctive. Cytology of intact vesicles should be per-
pretation as the background is colored pink (Doliger et
formed and will reveal an acellular, clear, viscid, sticky
al., 1995). Mucin separates collagen in the superficial to
 material. Histopathology is confrmatory.
deep dermis, and may form lakes in severe lesions. Super-
ficial dermal deposition may predominate. Deposition of
  ss a o px a o 
Biopsy site selection
primary mucinosis of Chinese Shar Peis.
 Biopsy specimens should be procured from areas of most
Variable fbrocytic proliferation may accompany mucin
obvious thickening or from vesicles or bullae, since muci-
deposition, particularly in generalized papular mucinosis
nosis may be microscopically subtle in mild lesions.
or focal nodular mucinosis of dogs (Dillberger & Altman,
The use of larger biopsy punches (6 or 8 mm) or exci-
1986; Delverdier et al., 1995). Cutaneous focal mucinosis
sional wedge biopsy is recommended if mucinotic vesicu-
in man is considered to be a fbroblastically-derived lesion
lation is severe, since the lesions are exceedingly fragile.
(Wilk & Schmoeckel, 1994). Dilated lymphatic vessels,
Excisional biopsy of severe focal lesions may be palliative
which may have incomplete endothelial linings, often
Fig. 15.15 Generalized papular muci-
nosis in a dog with a restricted poly-
clonal immunoglobulin spike. Collagen
fibers are separated by lightly staining
mucin; note mild diffuse fibrocytic
proliferation.
Degenerative, dysplastic and depositional diseases of dermal connective tissue 
383
Fig. 15.16 Focal cutaneous mucino-
sis in a dog. Note ederma-like widen-
ing of spaces between collagen fibers
by pale staining mucin.
are observed in Shar Peis with mucinosis, as reported
(Mauldin et al., 1998), but are not invariably present.
Moderately dilated blood vessels also may be present in
papular mucinosis as well as in Shar Pei mucinoses.
 Mucinosis may be accompanied by mild mixed dermal
inflammation; however, inflammation usually is not a
prominent feature of nodular or papular mucinosis or of
myxedema. In contrast, specimens obtained from the
Chinese Shar Pei often have concurrent inflammatory skin
disease such as allergic dermatitis. Mucinosis is rarely the
 primary reason for skin biopsy in this breed, unless severe
mucinosis creates a mass.
Clinically inapparent mucinosis has been reported as a
histopathologic feature of discoid lupus erythematosus
(Rosenkrantz et al., 1986). However in the authors' and
Fig. 15.17 Cutaneous amyloidosis affecting a pawpad in a dog
others’ experience, microscopic evidence of mucin is an
demonstrating multiple, pale, papular and plaque-like lesions.
incidental feature of a variety of inflammatory conditions,
(Photograph courtesy Z. Alhaidari.)
including severe pyoderma (Delverdier et al., 1995), as
well as eosinophilic diseases such as eosinophilic furun-
culosis of the face (see Chapter 17). Visualization of
CUTANEOUS AMYLOIDOSIS
mucin in routine HE stained sections may depend on the
staining technique used, and may vary from laboratory to
Clinical features (Figures 15.17 and 15.18)
laboratory.
Differentiation of mucinosis from urticaria may be nec-
Cutaneous amyloidosis is characterized by the abnormal
essary when the water content of the dermal mucin is high
accumulation  and  deposition  of pathologic  fibrillar
(resulting in pale staining with HE). Mucin stains are
protein in the skin. It is very rare in the dog and cat.
helpful; differentiating clinical features also may allow
Amyloidosis refers to a wide variety of syndromes united
clear separation of these two entities. Correlation of his-
by the extracellular deposition of any of a number of
tologic mucin deposition with clinical findings such as size
unrelated proteinaceous products in various organ
and distribution of lesions, affected breed, or endocrine
systems (Touart & Sau, 1998; Breathnach, 1999).
status may be required, as mucin deposition may be seen
Regardless of the original nature of the protein, all
in many unrelated contexts, mostly inflammatory in origin.
forms of amyloid are united by a highly stable, insoluble,
384
Diseases of the dermis
cats probably is derived from immunoglobulin light
chains (AL).
Classification may not always be easy. A cat was
reported with cutaneous nodular amyloidosis that devel-
oped within an extramedullary plasmacytoma; there were
internal metastases with amyloid deposition and a mono-
clonal gammopathy (Carothers et al., 1989). Diffuse cuta-
neous  immunoglobulin-derived  amyloidosis has been
diagnosed in a Cocker Spaniel (Schwartzman, 1984), a
second Cocker Spaniel seen by one author (T.L.G.),
 and a Brittany (Alhaidari et al., 1991). Multiple myeloma
was not found in any of the three dogs; the reported
Cocker  Spaniel had
1  a  monoclonal  gammopathy
(Schwartzman, 1984).
Fig. 15.18 Amyloidosis affecting the tongue of the dog shown in
Clinically, primary nodular cutaneous amyloidosis
Fig. 15.17. Multiple pale nodules, some of which are ulcerated, are
presents most typically as solitary, or rarely, grouped
present. (Photograph courtesy Z. Alhaidari.)
frm nodules of the dermis and/or subcutis. The nodules
are asymptomatic, unless larger masses outgrow their
blood supply
resulting in necrosis and ulceration.
beta-pleated sheet confguration. Although amyloid
 Sites mirror those that favor plasmacytomas (see Chapter
appears hyaline or amorphous microscopically, it is com-
37).
 posed of fbrils with distinctive ultrastructural character-
The Cocker Spaniel with diffuse cutaneous immuno-
istics. The deposition of amyloid in tissue leads to a wide
globulin-derived amyloidosis seen by one author (T.L.G.)
variety of tissue dysfunction depending on the organ or
had diffuse wrinkling and bullous lesions involving the
organ system affected.
ventrum and axillae. Mucocutaneous and cutaneous amy-
Much confusion abounds in the current literature with
-nu Aq pazee sem Aug e u podar sio
regard to the nomenclature of amyloidosis. Simplistically,
 tiple pale, papular and plaque-like lesions affecting the
amyloidosis may be categorized into systemic amyloido-
tongue, oral mucosa, pawpads, interdigital areas, and
sis and localized (organ-limited) amyloidosis. Systemic
pressure points (Alhaidari et al., 1991). Some of the
amyloidosis (the most common form of amyloidosis seen
lesions ulcerated (Alhaidari et al., 1991).
 in humans and domestic animals) is a visceral disease that
The Cocker Spaniel reported with diffuse cutaneous
most commonly affects the kidney, spleen, and liver
immunoglobulin-derived  amyloidosis  and  monoclonal
(DiBartola & Benson, 1989; Touart & Sau, 1998; Breath-
gammopathy exhibited purpura upon flicking the skin (as
nach, 1999). The two most common subgroups of sys-
in “pinch purpura’ in humans) and after traumatic hair
s , a s n  sion n
epilation (Schwartzman, 1984). Purpura occurs through
amyloidosis' seen in conjunction with occult plasma cell
involvement of cutaneous blood vessels, which leads to
dyscrasias and ‘myeloma-associated systemic amyloido-
vascular fragility. Although papules and plaques may be
sis'. Although cutaneous involvement can be seen with
observed, amyloid often is not visible clinically, since
systemic amyloidosis, involvement of visceral organs
deposits may be distributed diffusely in the dermis and
holds much greater import for the patient.
dermal blood vessels. Unexplained purpura is the major
Localized, organ-limited amyloidosis can affect a wide
cutaneous manifestation of primary systemic amyloidosis
variety of(
 organs in humans, including the skin
seen in humans (Breathnach, 1999). Systemic signs were
(Breathnach, 1999). Primary nodular cutaneous amyloi-
not seen in any of the three dogs, although the Brittany
dosis is the most common subgroup of localized, organ-
was euthanized due to diffculties in managing the pedal
limited amyloidosis, and also is the most common
ulcers (Alhaidari et al., 1991).
subgroup of cutaneous amyloidosis diagnosed in humans,
 Age or sex predilections have not been reported for
dogs, and cats. Primary nodular cutaneous amyloidosis in
primary cutaneous amyloidosis. However due to the
dogs and cats occurs most often within cutaneous
association with multiple myeloma and extramedullary
extramedullary plasmacytomas (see Chapter 37). The
plasmacytoma, immunoglobulin-associated amyloidosis
same is true in humans (Touart & Sau, 1998; Breathnach,
should be seen more frequently in older animals (see
1999). Primary nodular amyloidosis probably results
Chapter 37). Although most surveys do not report a breed
from an abnormal production of amyloidogenic immuno-
predilection  for cutaneous extramedullary plasmacy-
globulin light chains by locally proliferating plasma cells.
tomas, the Cocker Spaniel may be more commonly
Most cutaneous amyloidosis observed to date in dogs and
affected based on some reports (see Chapter 37). Inter-
Degenerative, dysplastic and depositional diseases of dermal connective tissue
385
estingly, two of three dogs with diffuse cutaneous
teinaceous deposits in cross-beta, antiparallel, beta-
immunoglobulin-derived amyloidosis also were Cocker
pleated sheets.
Spaniels.
Primary nodular amyloidosis of dogs and cats occurs
Clinical differential diagnoses for primary nodular
within  amyloid-producing  extramedullary  plasmacy-
cutaneous amyloidosis should include solitary neoplasms,
tomas (see Chapter 37). Plasmacytomas of the skin
and infectious and noninfectious granulomas and pyo-
of dogs are common, but amyloid is found only occa-
granulomas (see Chapters 12 and 13). Diffuse cutaneous
sionally; thus, apparently, only a subset of plasma cell
amyloidosis should be considered in the differential diag-
 tumors possess the ability to elaborate immunoglobulin-
nosis of unexplained cutaneous hemorrhage. Skin biopsy
associated amyloid (AL). Amyloid may overwhelm
is confrmatory.
 the lesion and an association with plasma cell prolifera-
tion or neoplasia may be impossible to prove in some
cases.
Biopsy site selection
 Primary nodular amyloidosis is characterized by accu-
If possible, solitary nodular lesions should be removed in
mulations of amorphous-appearing eosinophilic deposits
their entirety by excisional biopsy, in order to provide a
that may extend to the subcutis. Well-differentiated to
surgical cure. Partially removed masses do not heal well,
 Occasionally atypical plasma cells accumulate in clusters
due to the lack of integrity of amyloid-laden tissue which
Or sheets amongst foci of amyloid, and are sometimes
physically interferes with healing. Diffuse cutaneous amy-
sparse. Fewer
lymphocytes are intermingled. Macro-
loidosis may be confrmed by either punch or wedge skin
 phages and giant cells are seen in association with nodular
biopsy. Site selection is not critical, but areas of intense
amyloid, and frequently surround amyloid deposits.
hemorrhage probably should be avoided.
 There may be cartilaginous metaplasia within amyloid
deposits. Congo red staining is retained after oxidation
Histopathology (Figures 15.19 through 15.21)
with potassium permanganate (Rowland et al., 1991;
Platz et al., 1997), which is indicative of AL. Immuno-
Amyloid  is  amorphous and  lightly eosinophilic
to
histochemistry demonstrated amyloid derived from the
amphophilic on hematoxylin and eosin examination, and
lambda light chain of immunoglobulin (A lambda) in
is birefringent and dichroic (changing from apple green to
extramedullary plasmacytomas containing amyloid in
orange and back to apple green as the lens is rotated)
dogs and cats (Rowland & Linke, 1994; Platz et al.,
using Congo red stain and a polarizing lens. Application
1997). This dominant lambda light chain expression is
of thioflavin T stain will result in fluorescence of amyloid
likely due to the preponderance of lambda light chain
using fluorescent microscopy. Ultrastructurally, amyloid
immunoglobulin in plasma cells of these species (Platz
has a highly organized fbrillar structure composed of pro-
et al., 1997}.
Fig-
15.19 Diffuse
cutaneous
amyloidosis in a dog. Pale irregular
deposits of amyloid are distributed
throughout the dermis; dark areas are
hemorrhage.
386
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 15.20 Nodular cutaneous amy-
loidosis in a dog. Congo red-positive
amyloid is homogenous and darkly
staining. Most of the cellular infiltrate
is cormposed of plasma cells.
In diffuse cutaneous immunoglobulin-derived amyloi-
dosis, amyloid is deposited in a laminar fashion in the
superfcial dermis, as well as around blood vessels. Hem-
orrhage is observed. The reported Cocker Spaniel had no
accompanying plasma cell infltrates, the Brittany had a
sprinkling of lymphocytes and plasma cells, and the
observed Cocker Spaniel had focal accumulations of
macrophages and plasma cells in extravascular foci of
amyloid only. Multiple myeloma was not found in any
of the three dogs. A monoclonal gammopathy in the
reported Cocker Spaniel, and resistance of amyloid to
potassium permanganate oxidation in the observed
Cocker Spaniel and reported Brittany, confrmed AL in
these three dogs (Schwartzman, 1984; Alhaidari et al.,
1991).
 Amyloid has a distinctive histopathologic appearance,
but occasionally may be confused with serum or fbrin in
inflammatory lesions. Appropriate staining and polariza-
tion will distinguish amyloid. Localized, nodular amyloi-
dosis should be considered indicative of extramedullary
plasmacytoma.
EHLERS-DANLOS SYNDROME
(Synonyms: cutaneous asthenia, dermatosparaxis)
Clinical features (Figures 15.22 through 15.24)
 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a genetically and bio-
Fig. 15.21 Higher magnification of nodular cutaneous amyloidosis
chemically diverse disorder that encompasses multiple
in a dog. Pale amorphous amyloid is accumulating amongst dark,
heritable, congenital defects of dermal connective tissue.
 monomorphous plasma cells
These congenital defects lead to variable degrees of skin
Degenerative, dysplastic and depositional diseases of dermal connective tissue
387
hyperextensibility and fragility. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
is rare in both the dog and cat. In humans, at least eleven
distinct subgroups of EDS have been documented
(Wenstrup & Zhao, 2003).
The molecular basis of EDS in humans involves muta-
tions that code either for fibrillar collagen genes or for the
enzymes that catalyze intracellular or extracellular post-
translational modifcations (Wenstrup & Zhao, 2003).
Defects include diminished collagen synthesis, intra-
cellular collagen accumulation, improper 
collagen
 packing, procollagen structural mutations, and abnormal
fbronectin formation. Molecular documentation is avail-
able for only some of the defects documented in the dog
and cat (Scott et al., 2001). Considerable clinical vari-
Fig. 15.22 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in a Boxer. Marked hyper-
ability in EDS of dogs and cats suggests that multiple
extensibility of the skin is demonstrated. (Photograph courtesy A.A.
defects exist in these species.
Stannard.)
Autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, and X-
linked recessive modes of inheritance have been docu-
mented in humans (Wenstrup & Zhao, 2003). Most
well-documented cases in the dog and cat exhibit auto-
somal dominance which probably is lethal for homozy-
gous animals (Scott et al., 2001). Recessively inherited
skin hyperextensibility and fragility have been best docu-
mented in cats in several reports, as compiled by Scott et
al. (2001).
There is a continuum of clinical severity from mild to
severe. Hyperextensibility and decreased tensile strength
of the skin are the unifying clinical features, and may be
 present individually or in concert. Hyperextensibility is
characterized clinically by the ability of the skin to stretch
far beyond normal limits, and seemingly loose attachment
of the skin to subjacent tissue. The skin is of normal thick-
ness. Decreased tensile strength leads to lacerations result-
Fig. 15.23 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in a Dachshund showing
severe hyperextensibility of the facial skin. (Photograph courtesy S.1.
ing from minimal trauma. Large, gaping wounds have
Reinke; case material University of California, Davis.)
been likened visually to “fish mouths'. Surprisingly little
bleeding occurs from these clinically striking lesions.
Rapid healing ensues, although the scars that form are
thin, abnormally pigmented, and commonly lack the
tensile strength normally associated with scar tissue; thus
new lesions may form at the site of previous lesions. The
term 'cigarette paper scars' has been used to describe these
distinctive atrophic scars. Subcutaneous hematomas are a
 sis aiisnxardu o ns uo sss
most obvious on the trunk and head. Joint hyperextensi-
bility, a common coexistent feature of some subgroups of
EDS in humans, has been noted anecdotally rarely in the
dog. Stannard observed a litter of Dachshunds with severe
concomitant skin and joint hyperextensibility (Stannard,
A.A., personal communication, 1990). Diaphragmatic
 n un pindan uq aau seu lead pu
(Benitah et al., 2004).
 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome has been seen in many breeds
Fig. 15.24 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in a cat. The skin of the thorax
is grossly hyperextensible. (Photograph courtesy G.A. Kunkle and
including the Boxer Dachshund, English Springer Spaniel,
J. Kunkle.)
 English and Irish Setters, Keeshond, Greyhound, Beagle,
388
Diseases of the dermis
Saint Bernard, German Shepherd Dog, Manchester
Terrier Welsh Corgi, Red Kelpi, Soft-coated Wheaten
Terrier, Toy Poodle, Garafiano Shepherd, Fila Brasiliero,
 and mixed-breed dogs, as compiled and reported by Scott 
et al. (2001). Affected cats reported include domestic
shorthaired cats, unspecifed longhaired cats, and
Himalayans (Scott et al., 2001). As a congenital disease,
signs of EDS should be noted shortly after birth. Sex
predilections have not been noted in dogs or cats.
Clinical differential diagnoses for EDS are few; the
disease is highly distinctive. Affected animals present
with a lifelong history of skin hyperextensibility and
fragility, gaping wounds resulting from minor trauma,
and multiple scars. In contrast, feline skin fragility syn-
drome occurs as an adult onset disease and affected
 i s    
reactions in the dog may feature skin fragility, but the
lesions are localized and other differentiating clinical fea-
tures are present (see p. 392). Skin biopsy may or may
not be defnitively diagnostic for EDS; ultrastructural and
biochemical analysis may be required for definitive
documentation.
Biopsy site selection
Skin specimens from markedly hyperextensible sites or
adjacent to tears may be procured by either punch or
wedge technique. Care should be taken in choosing sites
such that self-trauma or normal activity does not extend
the defect created by the biopsy. For this reason areas near
Fig. 15.25 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in a cat. Note torn lower edge
pressure points should be avoided.
of dernmis accompanied by mild hemorrhage.
Histopathology (Figures 15.25 and 15.26)
et al., 1999). Abnormal collagen fbers are characterized
The epidermis is unremarkable. In the authors’ experi-
by shortening, disarray, curling, uneven size and width,
ence, skin biopsies from young cats and dogs with clini-
and widening of interfbrillar spaces. Interstitial mucin
cal histories of fragile and hyperextensible skin usually
has been reported (Hegreberg et al., 1970). Increased
demonstrate distinct histologic abnormalities of dermal
eosinophilia of some fbers may be observed. In some
collagen fbers. These alterations are also commonly
cases, the abnormal fbers appear outlined by increased
reported in the literature. However, normal histology
 numbers of fbroblasts. Others may have diffuse thin and
using hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining has been
wispy fbers. Reported electron microscopic features are
described in affected cats (Fernandez et al., 1998) and
somewhat variable, but characteristically include collagen
dogs (Minor et al., 1983). In one reported cat, histologi-
fbril disorganization (rather than the parallel arrange-
cally obvious collagen fber abnormalities were present in
 ment of normal collagen fbrils), as well as abnormal fbril 
some sections, while collagen in other skin sites appeared
contour (Holbrook et al., 1980; Minor et al., 1983;
normal (Sequeira et al.,
1999). The variability of
Sequeira et al., 1999).
histopathologic lesions may be due to the existence of
In dogs and cats with EDS, moderate numbers of
multiple syndromes, characterized by unique biochemical
putatively abnormal collagen fbers are demonstrated by
 defects that have variable disribution and expression in
staining with Masson's trichrome (Minor et al., 1983;
the skin.
Fernandez et al., 1998). This abnormality occurs even
 In some repors, the overall thickness of the dermis is
when there is a normal histologic appearance of collagen
reduced in comparison to control animals (Hegreberg et
with HE staining. Affected fbers demonstrate red cores,
al., 1970; Holbrook et al., 1980; Minor et al., 1983);
 in contrast to the diffuse blue staining of normal collagen
normal dermal thickness has also been reported (Sequeira
(Fernandez et al., 1998; Sequeira et al., 1999). Ten control
Degenerative, dysplastic and depositional diseases of dermal connective tissue
389
Fig. 15.26 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
in a dog. Dermal collagen fibers are
markedly variable in size and shape.
(Case material courtesy E.G. Clark.)
cats in one study did not display similar staining abnor-
malities of dermal collagen (Fernandez et al., 1998). This
is not a qualitatively specific fnding as similarly severe
 staining abnormalities have been reported in a cat with
perforating dermatitis, and mild staining abnormalities
were reported in feline skin fragility as well (see below).
Scattered abnormally stained fibers also may be seen
in other infammatory conditions, including within
eosinophilic granulomas and their  adjacent normal
dermis (see Chapter 14). Thus, results of Masson's stain-
ing in the diagnosis of EDS should be interpreted with
caution.
 Biopsy of tears or lacerations may reveal splitting
within the derrmis. In these lesions, the dermis ends
abruptly and granulation tissue is evident at the deep
Fig. 15.27 Feline acquired skin fragility syndrome. Skin friability
margin, suggesting a recent separation in this location.
has lead to irregular tears on the chest. (Photograph courtesy G.A.
Fibrosis may percolate up to surround collagen fbers
Kunkle.)
above the tear. This finding may be used as a marker for
skin fragility, and should prompt investigation for colla-
gen fiber abnormalities.
FELINE ACQUIRED SKIN
Due to the occasional normal appearance of biopsy
FRAGILITY SYNDROME
specimens, histopathologic diagnosis may be problem-
atic in some cases. The striking fber abnormalities
Clinical features (Figures 15.27 and 15.28)
usually observed will allow defnitive diagnosis. Shearing
trauma, such as that caused by degloving injury, may
Feline acquired skin fragility syndrome is a very rare syn-
mimic the tears of EDS. Absence of collagen
fber
drome of multifactorial etiology. It is characterized by
abnormalities should suggest trauma over EDS, but cor-
markedly fragile and thin skin, but without evidence of
relation with clinical fndings may be required. Feline skin
hyperextensibility. Minimal trauma leads to extensive
fragility syndrome, also characterized by intradermal
tearing and shedding of the affected skin.
spliting, is distinct histopathologically in that severe
The pathogenesis is not known, but the syndrome most
dermal atrophy with marked thinning of collagen fbers
commonly is associated with iatrogenic and naturally.
is present.
Occurring hyperglucocorticoidism, diabetes mellitis, or
390
Diseases of the dermis
Biopsy site selection
If possible, intact skin rather than skin fragments
from lacerations or tears should be selected. Due to the
extreme thinness of the skin, skin biopsy generally is per-
formed with great difficulty. The tissue often folds and
twists similar to wet tissue paper resulting in inferior
specimens for histopathology. Care to include underlying
adipose tissue and to maintain its attachment to the over-
lying dermis by gentle handling should be attempted.
 Placement of the specimen on a portion of a wooden
applicator or tongue depressor should allow the shape
to be retained for optimum tissue processing by the
laboratory.
Fig. 15.28 Feline acquired skin fragility syndrome. Marked skin fri-
Histopathology (Figures 15.29 and 15.30)
ability has lead to shedding of sheets of skin. (Photograph courtesy
M.D. Song; case material University of California, Davis.)
The epidermis is thin and may consist of only a single
layer of keratinocytes. The dermis also is severely
atrophic. The biopsy specimen may be curled or irregular
 the excessive usage of progestational compounds. Even
due to a lack of substantive dermis and twisting of the
less commonly, it has been seen in conjunction with severe
delicate specimen during fxation and processing. The
liver disease (hepatic lipidosis, cholangiohepatitis, cholan-
subcutis usually is not represented in biopsy specimens,
giocarcinoma), phenytoin administration, feline dysau-
but when obtained, the comparative thickness of the
tonomia, and nephrosis (Barthold et al., 1980; Regnier &
adipose tissue layer above the panniculus muscle accen-
Pieraggi 1989; Diquelou et al., 1991; Canfeld et al.,
tuates the remarkable dermal atrophy. Adipocytes of the
1992; Fernandez et al., 1998; Zur, 1998). Feline acquired
deep dermis, if present, are also comparatively prominent
skin fragility syndrome also has been idiopathic in a small
in relation to the marked collagen fber attenuation. This 
number of cats seen by the authors and others. These cats
appearance may be accentuated by obesity (Canfeld et
have had normal hemograms, serum biochemical profles,
 al., 1992). The base of the specimen may have strands of
and adrenal function tests, and have not had a history of
collagen fbers which appear torn or stretched due to
administration of coricosteroids, progestational com-
separation of the dermis from the underlying subcutis
pounds, or phenytoin. Iatrogenic and naturally-occurring
during procurement of the specimen.
hyperglucocorticoidism and diabetes mellitis should be
Dermal collagen fbers are extremely attenuated and
ruled out before acquired skin fragility is considered to be
pale staining, often nearly to the point of extinction, and
idiopathic.
generally have a wispy appearance. Secondary inflamma-
The skin of affected cats becomes markedly thin and is
tion and scarring may be present if older lesions have been
readily severely damaged by minor trauma. Skin friabil-
selected. Elastin staining is normal (Canfeld et al., 1992).
ity leads to irregular tears and the shedding of large sheets
Hair follicles may be uniformly small, short, and thin, as
O q A s au rdd anss m s s jo
in feline hyperglucocorticoidism (see Chapter 19), but
attenuated that it acquires a translucent quality, allowing
dermal atrophy usually is more striking than adnexal
visualization of subjacent structures. Partial alopecia
atrophy. In some cases, hair follicles are normal and con-
occurs in the most atrophic regions. For unknown
trast startlingly with dermal attenuation. Relatively enor-
reasons, lesions are seen most commonly on the dorsum
mous arrector pili muscles may be seen.
of the trunk. Attempted repair often leads to more exten-
 Mild numbers of putatively abnormal collagen fbers
sive damage, since the surrounding skin shares the same
 are demonstrated by staining with Masson's trichrome;
defect.
three of four cats in one study showed this staining alter-
The majority of affected cats are middle-aged or older.
ation (Fernandez et al., 1998). Affected fbers demon-
 Breed or sex predilections have not been noted.
strate red cores, in contrast to the diffuse blue staining of
 Clinical differential diagnosis is not problematic due to
 normal collagen (Fernandez et al., 1998). Ten control cats
the striking nature of the lesions. In comparison to
in one study did not display similar staining abnormali-
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, cats with acquired skin fragility
ties (Fernandez et al., 1998). This is not a qualitatively
syndrome have abnormally thin skin and develop the syn-
specifc finding, as similar but more severe staining abnor-
drome as older adults.
malities have been reported in cats with Ehlers-Danlos
Degenerative, dysplastic and depositional diseases of dermal connective tissue
391
Fig. 15.29 Feline acquired skin
fragility syndrome. The epiderrmis and
derrmis are severely atrophic; residual
arrector pili muscles are prominent.
Fig. 15.30 Feline acquired skin fragi-
lity syndrome.  The epidermis and
dermis are severely atrophic. Note
contrast of normal panniculus.
syndrome (see p. 386) and in one cat with perforating der-
matitis (see p. 394). Scattered abnormally stained fbers
phenytoin (Barthold et al., 1980). Electron microscopic
also may be seen in other inflammatory conditions,
studies have not been performed in affected cats with
including within eosinophilic granulomas and their adja-
hyperglucocorticoidism. Some of these ultrastructural
cent normal dermis (see Chapter 14).
fndings resemble those of cats with Ehlers-Danlos
Electron microscopic studies showed collagen micro-
syndrome (see p. 386).
fbrils of variable diameter and disorganized orienta-
 The histopathology of feline skin fragility syndrome is
tion in a cat with skin fragility and hepatic lipidosis
distinctive. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, although mani-
(Diquelou et al., 1991), loosely packed and twisted fbrils
fested histopathologically by tears or splits in the dermis,
forming spindly and haphazard fbers in a cat with
generally has a dermis of normal thickness and lacks
cholangiocarcinoma (Regnier & Pieraggi, 1989), and
severe and diffuse attenuation of dermal collagen.
392
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 15.31 Topical corticosteroid reaction on the umbilicus of a
female Corgi-crossbreed. The skin is noticeably thinned and the linea
Fig. 15.33 Topical corticosteroid reaction on the groin of a female
Golden Retriever with superficial folliculitis. The owner was treat-
alba is visible at the center. Striking comedones are present.
ing the pyoderma with a potent topical corticosteroid-containing
cream. Note thin, shiny, translucent quality of the skin and multiple
comedones. Superficial folliculitis is still present.
 Clinical features include mottled erythema, hyperpig-
mentation, and hypopigmentation overlying variable
irregular atrophy and scarring. Focal areas may appear
transparent, allowing enhanced viewing of subjacent
structures. Striae (linear depressed, atrophic, discolored,
scar-like lesions due to weakened elastic tissues) and
comedones may be present. In areas of marked cutaneous
atrophy, comedones may appear as bluish-black, tiny, pal.
pable, sausage-shaped nodules in the dermis. Mottled
areas of hemorrhage and discrete hemorrhagic blisters are
seen in more severe cases. Increased fragility may lead
Fig. 15.32 Closer view of the dog in Fig. 15.31. Affected skin
to erosions, focal ulceration, and scarring, prompting
appears almost transparent between the comedones. Diminished
elasticity is evidenced by prominent folds in the attenuated skin.
the vicious cycle of renewed, concerted topical over-
Hemorrhage indicates fragility.
medication (Gross et al., 1997).
The comparatively glabrous S
skin of the ventral
abdomen is most commonly affected. This may be due to
easy visualization of the lesions that initiate therapy,
TOPICAL CORTICOSTEROID REACTION
O1 lupeai sdeuad uoin Apoq su u suapida rau
Clinical features (Figures 15.31 through 15.33)
enhanced absorption, and the facile application of topical
products to this area. Owners probably are less likely to
Topical corticosteroid reaction is a relatively common,
apply topical corticosteroids repetitively to more well-
but markedly under-diagnosed syndrome that is associ-
haired areas. One author (P.J.I.) has noted that the
ated with the inappropriate, localized use of potent
most common initiators of the overuse of topical corti-
topical corticosteroid-containing creams, ointments, gels,
costeroid-containing products appear to be fea allergy
and sprays. The syndrome is seen almost exclusively on
dermatitis and superficial pyoderma.
Signalment predilections are not known. However, the
 A wide variety of corticosteroid-containing products
German Shepherd Dog may be at increased risk. Affected
can induce these changes. However, certain corticos-
dogs usually present with concomitant allergic or other
teroids such as triamcinolone and betamethasone may be
inflammatory skin disease. Consequently, breed predilec-
more likely to produce this adverse reaction. The authors
tions may follow those predisposed to allergic and other
also speculate that there may be individual and breed-
inflammatory skin diseases that affect the ventrum.
related variation in susceptibility for the development of
Topical corticosteroid reactions are visually distinctive.
this syndrome.
 However, since they occur in conjunction with underly.
Degenerative, dysplastic and depositional diseases of dermal connective tissue
393
Fig.15.34 Topical
corticosteroid
reaction in a dog with attenuation and
homogenization of the dermis. Note
intradermal cleft.
ing inflammatory skin disease, they may be confused with
areas of exacerbating flea allergy dermatitis and superf-
cial pyoderma. Comedones may resemble those of actinic
origin or as seen in demodicosis. Clinicians should
determine  if  prescribed  or  nonprescribed topical
to the lesions. Skin biopsy may be needed for definitive
differentiation.
Biopsy site selection
The clinician should harvest multiple specimens, attempt-
ing to sample comedones, erosions, and areas of atrophy.
Atrophic regions must be sampled carefully as the lesions
may be very fragile.
Histopathology (Figures 15.34 and 15.35)
The epidermis is mildly to moderately acanthotic and has
a scalloped appearance to the lower border in surprising
contrast to the marked epidermal atrophy of classical
canine hyperglucocorticoidism (see Chapter 19). Subepi-
 dermal dermal collagen is highly attenuated, resulting in
a pale, often transparent or edema-like appearance.
Beneath this superficial zone, the collagen is slightly pale,
homogeneous, or 'smudged', often in a laminar pattern of
distribution. Splitting through the attenuated superfcial
dermis is common and in some cases may be an artifact
of handling and processing the extremely fragile tissue.
Fig. 15.35 Higher magnification of left edge of Fig. 15.34, featur
  id    r 
ing vascular proliferation and phlebectasia. Note delicate scalloping
splits. There is proliferation of small superfcial dermal
of epidermis, marked attenuation and homogenization of derrmal col.
blood vessels and phlebectasia (dilatation of venules);
lagen, and intradermal cleft.
394
 Diseases of the dermis
neovascularization may be marked in areas of collagen
depletion, and may be accompanied by fresh and resoly-
ing hemorrhage.
 Ulcers with exudation and subjacent granulation tissue
occur with more severe tissue disruption. Areas of previ-
ous splitting may be replaced by fbrosis. There is vari-
able inflammation, including superfcial pustules and
 pustular folliculitis (bacterial pyoderma). Chronic mixed 
inflammation may encircle blood vessels and adnexae,
and is composed of neutrophils, histiocytes, lymphocytes,
and plasma cells.
 Hair follicles may have telogen type atrophy and vari-
able comedones, as seen in hyperglucocoricoidism (see
Chapter 19); this is not a consistent finding, however.
Hig. 15.36 Perforating dermatitis in a cat. Parallel lesions are visible
 Individual comedones may be larger than those occurring
along the left caudal thigh. (Photograph courtesy J. Fontaine.)
in 
hyperglucocorticoidism  and  may  be   grouped
Infundibular epithelium lining the comedones ranges
from atrophic, as seen in hyperglucocorticoidism, to mod-
erately hyperplastic. Follicular atrophy (with or without
comedones) may occur in the absence of dermal attenua-
tion and splitting in some lesions, thus resembling hyper-
glucocorticoidism but lacking the characteristic epidermal
atrophy of that disease.
Histologic findings are distinctive, particularly the pro-
nounced dermal collagen attenuation with splitting. In
lesions lacking these features, the scalloped epidermal
border in the seting of follicular atrophy and/or come-
dones is highly sugestive. The laminar homogenization
of the dermis is similar to solar fbrosis (see p. 399);
however superficial collagen attenuation, splitting, and
vascular proliferation are not features of solar disease.
Because of the ventral abdominal location for both
conditions, combined lesions may be observed. Topical
corticosteroid-induced
1comedonesresemble actinic
Fig. 15.37 Closer view of the cat in Fig. 15.36. Two well-
comedones; the latter generally do not occur in the setting
demarcated linear plaques exhibit multiple tenaciously adherent
of epidermal scalloping and dermal attenuation. Actinic
brownish horn-like crusts; note red erosions and ulcers where crusts
have been pulled away. (Photograph courtesy J. Fontaine.)
comedones may be surrounded by a pale zone of fbrosis
(see Chapter 8), which is lacking in the comedones of
topical corticosteroid reactions.
The etiology of perforating dermatoses in humans and
in cats is not understood (Scott et al., 2001; Wolff-
PERFORATING DERMATITIS
 Schreiner, 2003). Genetic susceptibility appears to be inte-
(Synonym: perforating collagenosis)
gral to some of the perforating dermatoses in humans
(Wolff-Schreiner 2003). It is tempting to speculate that
 feline perforating dermatitis is an unusual and severe
Clinical features (Figures 15.36 and 15.37)
 tissue reaction occurring in genetically susceptible indi-
Perforating dermatitis is a rare, distinctive reaction
viduals. In the first reported case, no evidence of pruritus,
pattern reported to date only in two cats (Scott & Miller,
pain, or chronic skin disease was noted (Scott & Miller,
1991; Haugh & Swendrowski, 1995). The syndrome
1991). In the second reported case, the lesions seemed to
bears some clinical and histopathologic similarities to
be initiated and exacerbated by inflammation associated
some of the perforating dermatoses in humans (Scott &
with self-trauma secondary to pruritic skin disease, and
Miller, 1991; Wolff-Schreiner, 2003). Firm, exophytic,
as a reaction to suture material (Haugh & Swendrowski,
horn-like lesions represent the extrusion of degenerated
1995). The majority of the cases of perforating dermati-
collagen fbers and accompanying intense inflammation.
tis known to the authors seem to resemble the second
Degenerative, dysplastic and depositional diseases of dermal connective tissue
395
Fig. 15.38 Perforating dermatitis in a cat showing the characteris-
Fig. 15.39 Intermediate magnification of Fig. 15.38. Note vertical
tic vertical columnar crust of inflammatory debris and extruded
arrangerment of collagen fibers as they enter the crust at its base.
collagen.
Biopsy site selection
reported case and occur in the context of self-rauma sec-
Care should be taken not to dislodge or damage the pro-
ondary to allergic skin disease.
jecting material during skin biopsy. If possible sites should
Clinically, perforating dermatitis is characterized by
not include regions that can be easily self-traumatized.
multiple, visually distinctive, conical, brownish, horn-like
projections arising from the skin. Multiple projections
Histopathology (Figures 15.38 through 15.40)
may be arranged in a striking linear confguration (Scott
& Miller, 1991). The projections are tenaciously adhered
Massive columnar or conical crusts are confluent with the
to the underlying skin and cannot be readily pulled or
underlying dermis and contain cellular debris and numer-
scraped off (Scott & Miller 1991). Visible inflammation
Ous degenerate-appearing collagen fbers, largely oriented
is variable and is noted at the base of the lesions. Alope-
perpendicularly to the adjacent intact epidermal surface.
cia may be present. Affected sites have included the shoul-
Hyperplastic epidermis borders these foci and may be
der, neck axilla, flank, and hip (Scott & Miller 1991;
spongiotic or mucinotic. There may be single foci or
Haugh & Swendrowski, 1995). Laboratory abnormalities
 several adjacent foci with intervening epidermis separat-
and systemic signs have not been noted. Signalment
ing them. Early lesions may have a cap of necrotic over-
predilections have not been reported.
lying epidermis.
 The lesions are visually striking. Few differential diag-
The underlying superficial to deep dermis contains
noses are known, but may include cutaneous horns (see
moderate to severe inflammation that is often, but
Chapter 22). Histopathology is required for defnitive
 not invariably, eosinophilic. Neutrophils may predomi-
diagnosis.
nate less commonly. Lymphocytes, macrophages, and
396
Diseases of the dermis
Fig. 15.41 Morphea in a dog. A well-demarcated, depigmented,
alopecic, smooth, sclerotic plaque is present. (Photograph courtesy
D.-N. Carlotti.)
MORPHEA
(Synonym: localized scleroderma)
Clinical features (Figure 15.41)
Morphea is a rare, idiopathic, sclerosing skin disease
reported in the dog and cat. It is characterized by a fbros-
ing dermatitis involving the dermis and/or subcutis (Scott,
Fig. 15.40 High magnification of Fig. 15.39. Eosinophils and mast
1986; Scarampella & Noli, 1997; Bensignor et al., 1998).
cells are clustered along the base of the crust.
 Reported cases bear resemblance to localized morphea, a
subgroup of scleroderma seen in humans involving only
the skin; either solitary or small numbers of lesions are
seen (Yu & Eisen, 2003). The diagnosis of morphea is
plasma cells are present in varying proportions as well.
more controversial in domestic animals than it is in
Mast cells may be prominent in eosinophilic dermatitis.
humans, since animals cannot communicate a history of
There may be subepidermal fbrosis in intact adjacent
antecedent trauma and resultant scarring. Since morphea
areas.
and cicatricial alopecia have many histopathologic fea
Masson's trichrome staining of affected collagen fibers
ures in common, some reports in the veterinary literature
demonstrates segmental red cores, in contrast to the
 may represent post-traumatic scarring and not morphea.
diffuse blue staining of normal collagen fbers (Scott &
The etiology of morphea and scleroderma is not
 Miller, 1991). This staining abnormality is not diagnosti-
known. In humans, scleroderma and morphea are viewed
cally specific and may be seen in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
as chronic obliterative, fbrosing diseases that affect the
and feline acquired skin fragility (see pp. 386 and 389);
microvasculature and loose connective tissue (Yu & Eisen,
further random abnormal staining of collagen fbers has
2003). Vascular abnormalities and damage, abnormal col-
been observed in inflamed and uninflamed areas of feline
lagen metabolism, autoimmunity, adverse drug reactions,
eosinophilic granuloma (se Chapter 14).
     's 
 The appearance of perforating dermatitis is striking and
spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi all have been implicated
unique histologically. Perforating dermatitis may be a
 in humans; however there is no identifable rigger in
severe tissue reaction, traumatic in origin, occurring in the
most cases (Yu & Eisen, 2003).
context of allergic dermatitis or other pruritic conditions,
 Reported clinical features include well-demarcated,
at least in some cases. In these lesions, the massive focal
alopecic, smooth, sclerotic plaques. The surface may
 a s a n  n 
appear shiny, similar to cicatricial alopecia (see p. 397).
imposed upon otherwise typical allergic dermatitis.
Hypopigmentation may occur. Either solitary or small
Degenerative, dysplastic and depositional diseases of dermal connective tissue
397
numbers of lesions may be seen. Spontaneous resolution
(similar to humans) in some cases supports a true equiv-
alent of morphea, rather than scarring alopecia of
unknown cause. One author (T.L.G.) has received anec-
dotal reports of slow expansion of lesions over time in
carefully observed house cats. Signalment predilections
have not been noted.
The prime clinical differential diagnosis for morphea is
cicatricial alopecia secondary to previous trauma. A
history of previous trauma or site-associated likelihood of
trauma may aid in differentiation. Skin biopsy may reveal
sequela of a traumatic cause, such as foreign material;
 r    
of these two lesions. Spontaneous resolution or slow
expansion of a focal lesion supports a diagnosis of true
morphea.
Biopsy site selection
An area with maximal alopecia should be chosen for
biopsy. If surface irregularities suggest a focus of possible
trauma, that site should be sampled as well.
Histopathology (Figure 15.42)
As reported in dogs (Scott, 1986; Scarampella & Noli,
1997), the dermis is replaced by collagenous connective
tissue. The subcutis was affected in one reported canine
case (Scott, 1986). The epidermis is normal. The fbrous
tissue excludes essentially all normal architecture and may
Fig. 15.42 Morphea in a cat. Note complete replacement of normal
be moderately cellular resembling scar tissue (Scott,
dermal structures by mature collagen in fairly norrmal arrangement.
1986), or composed of dense cell-poor collagen bundles
in fairly normal arrangement (Scarampella & Noli, 1997;
Bensignor et al., 1998). Thin walled vessels arranged per-
pendicular to the epidermis were found in one putative
CICATRICIAL ALOPECIA
case observed by the authors. Inflammation is very mild
and consists of a superficial and deep perivascular infl-
(Synonyms: cicatrix, scarring alopecia)
tration of lymphocytes and macrophages. This inflamma-
tory pattern has been seen in the superfcial dermis at the
Clinical features (Figure 15.43)
margins of fbrotic lesions as well.
Morphea is characteristic histopathologically. How-
Cicatricial alopecia is a clinical syndrome characterized
ever this lesion should be differentiated from cicatricial
by permanent replacement of dermal structures, includ-
alopecia, e.g. localized scarring that follows identifable
ing hair follicles, such that hair regrowth does not occur.
causes, including trauma and localized infection. Differ-
The causes of cicatricial alopecia are varied and include
entiation between these two entities may be impossible,
physical, chemical, or thermal injury, severe bacterial
particularly in cases of chronic cicatrices. If foreign mater-
furunculosis (especially secondary to demodicosis and
ial or traumatic residua cannot be identifed, clinical dif-
actinic disease), neoplasia, sterile nodular panniculitis,
ferentiation may be required. However, morphea is more
and rarely other diseases such as discoid lupus erythe-
likely to feature a fairly normal arrangement of collagen
matosus and  ischemic dermatopathy/canine dermato-
fbers; in contrast, dense collagen of cicatricial alopecia is
myositis. Clinical absence of regrowth of hair may not
often laminar. Morphea reportedly is reversable (Scott,
necessarily correlate histologically with the classical oblit-
1986; Bensignor et al., 1998), but other forms of trau-
erative fbrosis of a cicatrix. The authors prefer limiting
matic scarring may not be; slow progression also may be
the use of the term, ‘cicatricial alopecia’ to cases where a
supportive of morphea over a traumatic scar.
true fbrous scar is found microscopically.
398
Diseases of the dermis
canine familial dermatomyositis, alopecia areata, and
canine traction alopecia must be ruled out by history,
clinical presentation, and histopathology. Both traction
alopecia and ischemic dermatopathy may have compo-
nents of cicatricial alopecia in severe or chronic cases.
Histopathology is the single most valuable tool in differ-
entiating cicatricial alopecia from nonscarring hair loss
and in differentiating the multiple causes of cicatricial
alopecia.
Biopsy site selection
Specimens from areas of most complete alopecia should
be obtained in order to sample the most advanced changes
Fig. 15.43 Cicatricial alopecia in an Old English Sheepdog due to
present in the skin. Chronic lesions may be preferred to
a heating pad burn. Notethe irregular margins, loss of pigment, and
document fbrous tissue replacement of normal hair foll-
 prominent linear markings associated with scarring.
icles. The skin biopsy is a prognostic tool in this regard
as it can predict whether hair loss will be permanent.
Permanent alopecia results from irreversible injury to
Histopathology (Figures 15.44)
 and ablation of adnexal units with replacement by scar
tissue. The documentation of cicatricial alopecia is im-
Scarring alopecia may be seen focally in many diseases,
portant clinically, since it proves conclusively that the
both inflammatory and traumatic. In general, the epider-
hair loss is permanent, regardless of possible therapy.
 mis is acanthotic or ulcerated, depending on the stage and
Although dermatologists and pathologists certainly are
severity of the insult.
aware of ^cicatricial alopecia', to the authors’ knowledge
Hair follicles are absent due to replacement by fbrous
it is not directly reported in the literature.
connective tissue. Collagen may be laminar in distribution
 Permanent hair loss is the unifying clinical feature. Loss
and will extend to a variable depth of the dermis or even
 of the normal surface cutaneous architecture including
the subcutis, depending on the severity of the previous
follicular ostial openings may be seen with physical,
tissue damage. Rudimentary persistent follicles may be
chemical, or thermal injury; visualization of these features
entrapped by scar tissue, thus effectively preventing
is aided by the use of a hand lens. Lesions are shiny, vari-
regrowth of hair. Scattered ‘orphaned’ sweat glands,
ably frm, and often irregular in contour. Prominent criss-
 ie. lacking their associated folliculosebaceous units, may
crossing linear markings may be visible in severe lesions.
 be seen. In very late stage lesions, a more normal mesh-
 Mottled hyperpigmentation or hypopigmentation may
work pattern of dermal collagen may be present, accom-
occur and is partially breed dependent. The skin surface
panied by complete absence of adnexal tissue. Dermal
may be irregular and nodular irregularities may be
inflammation is variable, based on the origin of the
palpable in the dermis or subcutis. The distribution of trau-
process that is inducing the dermal damage, and is
matic cicatricial alopecia is asymmeric. The distribution of
dependent also upon the stage of the process at the time
 other cicatricial alopecias reflects the initiating disease.
of biopsy.
Breed, age, or sex predilections are not seen with injury-
Differential diagnoses for cicatricial alopecia without
related cicatricial alopecia. Signalment predilections for
identifiable accompanying inflammatory diseases include
other causes of cicatricial alopecia follow those of the spe-
severe and chronic lesions of traction alopecia, and
cific underlying disease.
morphea. Differentiation of traction alopecia from cica-
Morphea, as reported, is a differential diagnosis for
tricial alopecia may be moot, as severe forms of traction
cicatricial alopecia. Morphea reportedly occurs without
alopecia are essentially cicatricial. Complete absence of
apparent antecedent trauma, but the absence of language
follicles and adnexal glands, and laminar deposition of
in dogs and cats makes confrmation difficult. Cicatricial
collagen, are less common in traction alopecia than in
alopecia also can mimic any disease with visually non-
cicatricial alopecia. Morphea may be impossible to dis-
inflammatory alopecia. Suspicion of cicatricial alopecia is
tinguish from cicatricial alopecia, particularly chronic
aided by a history of physical, chemical, or thermal insult.
cicatrices; clinical differentiation may be helpful (see
Trauma-related cicatricial alopecia generally is focal and
p. 396). However morphea is more likely to feature a
symmetry is lacking. Other alopecic diseases such as
fairly normal arrangement of collagen fbers; in contrast,
postrabies vaccination alopecia, ischemic dermatopathy/
 dense collagen of cicatricial alopecia is often laminar.
Degenerative, dysplastic and depositional diseases of dermal connective tissue 
399
Fig. 15.44 Cicatricial alopecia fea-
turing replacerment of norrmal derrmis
by fibrosis. Note laminar arrangement
of dense collagen.
sis and fbrosis is not made; fbrosis may produce frm
texture of the affected skin.
Biopsy site selection
It is highly advantageous to delay skin biopsy of any
suspected actinic lesions until the dog has received
appropriate systemic antibiotics for at least 3 weeks in
order to resolve secondary pyoderma. This may increase
the likelihood of targeting solar-induced lesions for
biopsy. Specimens for biopsy should be obtained from dif-
ferent types of lesions, or different stages of the disease,
if known.
Fig. 15.45 Solar elastosis and fibrosis in a Bull Terrier-crossbreed
Histopathology (Figures 15.46 through 15.48)
with a history of recumbent sunbathing. All biopsy specimens taken
from affected glabrous skin showed solar elastosis and fibrosis.
Epidermal lesions of actinic origin (actinic keratosis) are
Fibrosis manifested clinically as a textural change on palpation. The
described elsewhere, and principally include hyperplasia
large ulcerated plaque is a solar induced squamous cell carcinoma.
and dysplasia (see Chapters 7 and 22). Solar elastosis and
fbrosis may also be seen in the setting of actinic come-
dones and actinic furunculosis (see Chapters 8 and 17)
 as well as solar-induced vascular neoplasia (see Chapter
SOLAR ELASTOSIS AND FIBROSIS
 28). Solar vasculopathy may be seen in some dogs (see
(Synonym: solar dermatitis)
Chapter 10).
In dogs, the dermis may contain perivascular to
lichenoid inflammation. Plasma cells and lymphocytes
Clinical features (Figures 15.45)
predominate and are accompanied by variable numbers
Solar fbrosis and elastosis are associated microscopic
of neutrophils, macrophages, and occasional eosinophils.
features of multiple sun-associated clinical syndromes,
Pigmentary incontinence may be present. Lichenoid der-
including actinic keratosis (see Chapters 7 and 22), actinic
 matitis generally is not observed in actinic lesions of cats;
comedones (see Chapter 8), and actinic furunculosis (see 
 inflammation is mild and perivascular. However, some
Chapter 17). A separate clinical diagnosis of solar elasto-
feline cases of actinic keratosis have more intense dermal
400
Diseases of the dermis
inflammation. Superficial dermal vessels may be prolifer-
ative and ectatic.
 In dogs, laminar alteration of collagen begins superf-
cially and may extend deeply to replace hair follicles in
rare cases. In general, the affected collagen is pale,
hypocellular, and homogeneous in appearance, and is seen
just beneath the epidermis. This altered layer of ‘solar
fbrosis is not truly fbrotic. It consists of poorly staining
collagen fbers separated by a pale ground substance,
which is mucin-positive (blue-green) with Alcian blue
periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) staining (pH 2.5). There also
may be superficial true laminar fbrosis of varying depth,
resembling traditional scar tissue, subtended by the pale
hypocellular collagen layer. In other cases, true laminar
fbrosis and inflammation predominate, and the layer of
abnormal pale collagen is not seen. When scarring fbro-
sis of the dermis is intense, inflammation may lie imme-
diately below the fbrotic layer. True laminar fbrosis
sometimes is observed in cats. In cats, the pale, altered
collagen of canine lesions is not common.
-e relos sies 1o saop un uass aq ke sisosne 1enog
ation of collagen without elastosis is common in dogs.
Elastotic material is generally found in the pale collagen 
layer in dogs, and may be seen with or without fibrosis in
cats. Degeneration of collagen and elastic fbers of the
superficial dermis leads to replacement by distinctive thick-
ened, wavy, basophilic fbers of elastotic material. Van
Gieson's silver staining will accentuate subtle elastotic
changes as foci of tangled, silver-dense elastotic fibers.
Fig. 15.46
Solar fibrosis in a dog. Note strikingly laminar zone of
Solar elastosis and “fbrosis' are histologically char-
altered pale collagen.
acteristic; other concurrent lesions of actinic origin (see
Fig. 15.47 Higher magnification of
solar fibrosis in a dog. Note true
laminar fibrosis above pale staining
zone of altered collagen in the lower
half of the photograph.
Degenerative, dysplastic and depositional diseases of dermal connective tissue
401
Ruopp, J.L. (2001) Primary hypoparathyroidism in a cat com-
plicated by suspect iatrogenic calcinosis cutis. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 37, 370-3.
Schaer, M., Ginn, PE., Fox, L.E. et al. (2001) Severe calcinosis
cutis associated with treatment of hypoparathyroidism in a
dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 37, 364-9.
Schick, M.P., Schick, R.O. & Richardson, J.A. (1987) Calcinosis
cutis secondary to percutaneous penetration of calcium chlo-
ride in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 191, 207-11.
Touart, D.M. & Sau, P (1998) Cutaneous deposition diseases.
Part I1. J Am Acad Dermatol 39, 527-44.
Walsh, J.S. & Fairley, J.A. (1999) Cutaneous mineralization and
ossification. In: Dermatology in General Medicine, Sth edn
(eds I.W. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F Austen, L.A.
Goldsmith & T.B. Fitzpatrick), pp. 1829-35. McGraw-Hill,
New York.
Calcinosis Circumscripta
Alhaidari, Z. (1995) La calcinose circomscrite du chien a propos
de deux cas. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 30, 339-43.
Bertazzolo, W., Toscani, L., Calcaterra, S. et al. (2003) Clinico-
pathologicial findings in five cats with paw calcifications. J Fel
Med Surg 5, 11-7.
Ginel, P., Perez, J., Rivas, R. et al. (1992) Calcinosis circum-
scripta associated with medroxyprogesterone in two poodle
bitches. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 28, 391-4.
Gross, T.L. (1997) Calcinosis circumscripta and renal dysplasia
in a dog. Vet Dermatol 8, 27-32.
Ito, A., Sakamoto, F. & Ito, M. (2001) Dystrophic scrotal
calcinosis originating from benign eccrine epithelial cysts.
Br J Dermatol 144, 146-50.
Jackson, H.A. & Barber, P.J. (1998) Resolution of metastatic cal-
Fig. 15.48 Solar elastosis in a dog. Wavy, dark fibers of elastotic
cification in the paws of a cat with successful dietary man-
material are seen within altered, homogeneous collagen.
agement of renal hyperparathyroidism. J Small Anim Pract 39,
495-7.
Joffe, D.J. (1996) Calcinosis circumscripta in the footpad of a
above) may aid in the diagnosis. The laminar homo-
dog. Can Vet J 37, 161-2.
genization of the dermis is somewhat similar to topical
O'Brien, C.R. & Wilkie, J.S. (2001) Calcinosis circumscripta
corticosteroid reaction (see p. 392); however, superfcial
following an injection of proligestone in a Burmese cat. Aust
collagen attenuation with splitting is not a feature of solar
Vet J 79, 187-9.
 disease. Because of the ventral abdominal location for
Scott, D.W. & Buerger, R.G. (1988) Idiopathic calcinosis
both conditions, combined lesions may be observed.
circumscripta in the dog: a retrospective analysis of 130 cases.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24, 651-8.
Stampley, A. & Bellah, J.R. (1990) Calcinosis circumscripta of
REFERENCES
the metacarpal pad in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 196, 113-4.
Touart, D.M. & Sau, P (1998) Cutaneous deposition diseases.
Calcinosis Cutis
Part I1. J Am Acad Dermatol 39, 527-44.
Bertazzolo, W., Toscani, L., Calcaterra, S. et al. (2003) Clinico-
Walsh, J.S. & Fairley, J.A. (1999) Cutaneous mineralization and
pathologicial findings in five cats with paw calcifications. J Fet
ossification. In: Dermatology in General Medicine, 5th edn
Med Surg 5, 11-7.
(eds by I.W. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A.
Frazier, K.S., Hullinger, G.A., Liggett, A.D. et al. (1998) Multi-
Goldsmith & T.B. Fitzpatrick), pp. 1829-35. McGraw-Hill,
ple cutaneous metaplastic ossification associated with iatro-
New York.
genic hyperglucocorticoidism. J Vet Diag Invest 10, 303-7.
Gortel, K., McKiernan, B.C., Johnson, J.K. et al. (1999) Calci-
Cutaneous Mucinosis
nosis cutis associated with systemic blastomycosis in three
Beale, K.M., Calderwood-Mays, M.B. & Buchanan, B. (1991)
dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35, 368-74.
Papular and plaque-like mucinosis in a puppy. Vet Dermatol
Paradis, M. & Scott, D.W. (1989) Calcinosis cutis secondary
2, 29-36.
to percutaneous penetration of calcium carbonate in a Dal-
Delverdier, M., Seltensperger, T., Amardeilh, M.F. et al. (1995)
matian. Can Vet J 30, 57-9.
Les mucinoses cutanees du chien et du chat: étude histologique
402
Diseases of the dermis
et histochimique a partir de 106 cas. Rev Med Vet 146,
Schwartzman, R.M. (1984) Cutaneous amyloidosis associated
333-9.
with a monoclonal gammopathy in a dog. J Am Vet Med
Dillberger, J.E. & Alman, N.H. (1986) Focal mucinosis in dogs:
Assoc 185, 102-4.
seven cases and review of cutaneous mucinoses of man and
Touart, D.M. & Sau, P. (1998) Cutaneous deposition diseases.
animals. Vet Patbol 23, 132-9.
Part I. J Am Acad Dermatol 39, 149-71.
Doliger, S., Delverdier, M., More, M. et al. (1995) Histochemi-
cal study of cutaneous mucins in hypothyroid dogs. Vet Pathot
Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome
32, 628-34.
Benitah, N., Matousek, J.L., Barnes, R.F. et al. (2004) Diaphrag-
Fleischmajer, R. (2003) Papular mucinosis. In: Fitzpatrick's Der-
matic and perineal hernias associated with cutaneous asthenia
matology in Generat Medicine, 6th edn (eds I.M. Freedberg,
in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 224, 706-9.
AZ. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.1.
Fernandez, C.J., Scott, D.W., Erb, H.N. et al. (1998) Staining
Katz), pp. 1803-5. McGraw-Hill, New York.
abnormalities of dermal collagen in cats with cutaneous asthe-
Mauldin, E.A., McMahon, L.J., Johns, K.M. et al. (1998) More
nia or acquired skin fragility as demonstrated with Masson's
than mucin? In: Proceedings of the 14th AAVD/ACVD
trichrome stain. Vet Dermatol 9, 49-54.
Meeting, San Antonio, p. 67.
Hegreberg, G.A., Padgett, G.A. & Henson, J. (1970) A heritable
Miller, W.H. & Buerger, R.G. (1990) Cutaneous mucinous vesic-
connective tissue disease of dogs and mink resembling the
ulation in a dog with hypothyroidism. J Am Vet Med Assoc
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome of man: III. Histopathologic changes
196, 757-9.
of the skin. Arch Pathol 90, 159-66.
Rosenkrantz, w.s.,(
Griffn, C.E., Barr, R.J. et al. (1986)
Holbrook, K.A., Byers, PH., Counts, D.F. et al. (1980) Der-
Histopathological evaluation of acid
mucopolysaccaride
matosparaxis in a Himalayan cat: II. Ultrastructural studies of
(mucin) in canine discoid lupus erythematosus. J Am Anim
dermal collagen. J Invest Dermatol 74, 100-4.
Hosp Assoc 22, 577-84.
Minor, R.R., Lein, D.H., Patterson, D.F. et al. (1983) Defects in
Rosenkrantz, W.S., Griffin, C.E., Walder, E.J. et al. (1987) Idio-
collagen fibrillogenesis causing hyperextensible, fragile skin in
pathic cutaneous mucinosis in a dog. Comp Anim Pract 1,
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 182, 142-8.
39-42.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffn, C.E. (2001) Muller 
Welle, M., Grimm, S., Suter, M. et al. (1999) Mast cell density
Kirk's Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 979-84. W.B.
and subtypes in the skin of Shar Pei dogs with cutaneous muci-
Saunders, Philadelphia.
nosis. J Vet Med A 46, 309-16.
Sequeira, J.L., Rocha, N.S., Bandarra, E.P et al. (1999) Collagen
Wilk, M. & Schmoeckel, C. (1994) Cutaneous focal mucinosis
dysplasia (cutaneous asthenia) in a cat. Vet Pathol 36, 603-6.
-a histopathological and immunohistochemical analysis of 11
Wenstrup, R.J. & Zhao, H. (2003) Heritable disorders of con-
cases. J Cutan Pathol 21, 446-52.
nective tissue with skin changes. In: Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology
Wu, M.T., Chang, C.H., Yu, H.S. et al. (1997) Scleromyxoedema
in Generat Medicine, 6th edn (eds I.M. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen,
K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.1. Katz), pp.
Clin Exp Dermatol 22, 110-1.
1496-507. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Cutaneous Amyloidosis
Feline Acquired Skin Fragility Syndrome
Alhaidari, Z., Fouque, M.C. & Magnol, J.P. (1991) Amylose
Barthold, S.W., Kaplan, B.J. & Schwartz, A. (1980) Reversible
cutaneomuqueuse chez un chien. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp
 dermal atrophy in a cat treated with phenytoin. Vet Pathol 17,
26, 341-5.
469-76.
Breathnach, S.M. (1999) Amyloidosis of the skin. In: Derma-
Canfeld, P.J., Hinchliffe, J.M., & Yager, J.A. (1992) Probable
tology in General Medicine, 5th edn (eds I.W. Freedberg, A.Z.
steroid-induced skin fragility in a cat. Aust Vet Pract 22,
Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith &
T.B.
164-70.
Fitzpatrick), pp. 1756-65. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Diquelou, A., Delverdier, M., Delverdier, A. et al. (1991)
Carothers, M.A., Johnson, G.C., DiBartola, S.P.
et al.
Lipoidose hepatique et syndrome de fragilité cutanée chez un
(1989) Extramedullary plasmacytoma and immunoglobulin-
chat. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 26, 151-8.
associated amyloidosis in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 195,
Fernandez, C.J., Scot, D.W., Erb, H.N. et al. (1998) Staining
1593-7.
abnormalities of dermal collagen in cats with cutaneous asthe-
DiBartola, S.P & Benson, M.D. {1989) The pathogenesis of
nia or acquired skin fragility as demonstrated with Masson's
reactive systemic amyloidosis. J Vet Int Med 3, 31-41.
trichrome stain. Vet Dermatol 9, 49-54.
Platz, S.J., Breuer, W., Geisel, O. et al. (1997) Identification
Regnier, A. & Pieraggi, M.T. (1989) Abnormal skin fragility in
of lambda light chain amyloid in eight canine and two
a cat with cholangiocarcinoma. J Sm Anim Pract 30, 419-23.
feline extramedullary plasmacytomas. J Cutan Patbol 116,
Zur, G. (1998) Feline skin fragility syndrome in a cat with
45-54.
hepatic lipidosis. In: Advances in Veterinary Dermatology,
Rowland, PH. & Linke, R.P. (1994) Immunohistochemical char-
Vol. 3 {eds K.W. Kwochka, T. Willemse & C. von Tscharner),
pp. 495-6. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
feline and five canine plasma cell tumors. Vet Pathol 31,
390-3.
Topical Corticosteroid Reaction
Rowland, PH., Valentine, B.A., Stebbins, K.E. et al. (1991)
Gross, T.L., Walder, E.J. & Ihrke, PJ. {1997) Subepidermal
Cutaneous plasmacytomas with amyloid in six dogs. Vet
 bullous dermatosis due to topical corticosteroid therapy in
Pathol 28, 125-30.
dogs. Vet Dermatol 8, 127-31.
Degenerative, dysplastic and depositional diseases of dermal connective tissue
403
Perforating Dermatitis
Morphea
Haugh, PG. & Swendrowski, M.A. (1995) Perforating dermati-
Bensignor, E., Carlotti, D.N. & Pin, D. (1998) Morphea-like
tis exacerbated by pruritus. Fel Pract 23, 8-12.
lesions in a cat. J Small Anim Pract 39, 538-40.
Scott, D.W. & Miller, WH. (1991) Unusual perforating der-
Scarampella, F. & Noli, C. (1997) A case of localized sclero-
matitis in a Siamese cat. Vet Dermatol 2, 173-7.
derma (morfea). In: Proceedings of the 14th ESVD/ECVD
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
Meeting - Resident's Proceedings, Pisa.
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 1168-70. W.B.
Scott, D.W. (1986) Localized scleroderma (morphea) in two
Saunders, Philadelphia.
dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 22, 207-11.
Wolff-Schreiner, E.Ch. (2003) Kyrle disease and other perforat-
Yu,B.D.&Eisen,A.Z.(2003)
Scleroderma.
In:
ing disorders. In: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General Med-
Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology in General Medicine, 6th edn
icine, 6th edn (eds I.M. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F.
(eds I.M. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A.
Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.1. Katz), pp. S37-42. McGraw-
Goldsmith & S.1. Katz), pp. 1709-18. McGraw-Hill,
Hill, New York.
New York.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright  2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Part Iml
Diseases of the Adnexa
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 16
Pustular and nodular diseases without
adnexal destruction
 The diseases of this chapter are characterized by pustular
disposing factors include pruritus of any origin, defects in
or nodular adnexal inflammation without prominent
 the immune response, and poor grooming. Frequently, the
destruction and effacement of these structures. Clearcut
specifc initiating factors are not known. Canine superf-
delineation of this pattern from inflammation with struc-
cial bacterial folliculitis may be seen in conjunction with
tural damage to adnexa (see Chapter 17) is not always
superficial spreading pyoderma (see Chapter 1); deep fol-
possible, as most adnexal inflammation may disrupt
liculitis and furunculosis may evolve from more superf-
integrity to some degree. In general, the inflammation of
cial lesions (see Chapter 17).
the diseases of this chapter is less severe, less obliterating
Cats that develop clinically obvious superficial bacter-
to normal tissue, and/or more superfcial in location.
ial folliculitis may be immunosuppressed, especially if
Histopathologic differentiation among these diseases is
pustules are clearly evident. The authors have seen super-
 generally accomplished by identification of an agent (der-
fcial bacterial folliculitis in the cat secondary to feline
matophytosis), recognition of an associated histopatho-
immunodeficiency virus (FIV) infection. Mild feline super-
logic feature such as acantholysis (pemphigus foliaceus),
ficial bacterial folliculitis may be seen secondary to aller-
or by the predominance of eosinophils (sterile eosino-
gic skin disease, ectoparasitic skin disease, and the
philic pustulosis).
overuse of glucocorticoids
The clinical presentation of canine bacterial folliculitis
is highly variable due to differences in breed response,
SUPERFICIAL BACTERIAL FOLLICULITIS
individual host response, and possibly, intrinsic differ-
(Synonym: superficial pyoderma)
ences in bacterial virulence. The unifying clinical feature
 in bacterial folliculitis is the formation of follicular pus-
tules. Pustules are transient due to their fragile nature and
Clinical features (Figures 16.1 and 16.2)
rupture easily, eventuating in crusted papules. Conse-
Superfcial bacterial folliculitis is a bacterial skin infection
quently, crusted papules are the most common lesion seen
affecting the hair follicle. It is seen commonly in the dog
 in superficial bacterial folliculitis. Pustules vary greatly in
(Ihrke, 1996) and rarely in the cat (White, 1991). The
size and often may be difficult to identify with the naked
only canine skin disease seen globally with greater fre-
eye. Less commonly, larger, frm papules, pustules, or
quency is fea allergy dermatitis. Both feline and canine
 nodules are seen; these lesions may represent superficial
bacterial folliculitis may be underdiagnosed, as superficial
perforating folliculitis or may be indicative of accom-
pustules rupture readily giving rise to less diagnostic
 panying furunculosis (see Chapter 17).
crusted papules. However, the even more transient nature
Intact pustules have an erythematous base and usually
of feline pustules may foster a greater magnitude of
 contain white or creamy yellow purulent material. A hand
underdiagnosis. Staphylococcus intermedius is the pri-
lens may be useful in determining if intact pustules are
follicular rather than between follicles (as seen in pem-
most feline pyoderma as well.
phigus foliaceus, impetigo, and other superfcial pustular
Most bacterial folliculitis is seen secondary to coexis-
diseases of the epidermis; see Chapter 1). Follicular pus-
tent disease or other predisposing factors. Triggering dis-
tules will have central protruding hairs unless the hair has
eases or syndromes in the dog include atopic dermatitis,
been shed. Erythema and swelling are highly variable.
flea allergy dermatitis, food allergy, primary seborrhea,
After pustules rupture, collarettes may form peripherally
hypothyroidism, demodicosis, naturally occurring and
as surrounding superfcial keratin layers lift and peel. This
iatrogenic hyperglucocorticoidism, and genodermatoses
such as color dilution alopecia (Ihrke, 1998). Other pre-
pyoderma (see Chapter 1) coexisting with folliculitis.
406
Pustular and nodular diseases without adnexal destruction
407
 underlying skin disease. Lesions may generalize, especially
cocorticoidism. Pruritus may vary from nonexistent to
severe, but some pruritus is common. Pruritus and atten-
dant self-trauma may not correlate with the degree of ery-
thema. Regional lymphadenopathy is a common finding.
The clinical features of feline superficial bacterial folli-
culitis are generally less obvious. This may be due the very
fransient nature of feline pustules. The most frequently
identifed lesion is a nondescript crusted papular eruption,
commonly referred to as ^miliary dermatitis', a feline reac-
tion pattern of multifactorial etiology. Similar to folli-
culitis in the dog, collarettes may be noted (White, 1991).
The face and ventrum may be preferentially affected
(White, 1991). Pruritus is variable but usually is present.
Fig. 16.1 Superficial bacterial folliculitis on the abdomen of a
Keeshond. Frank pustules, crusted papules, and mottled hyperpig-
Breed predilections in dogs probably parallel those of
mentation are present.
 any coexisting skin disease. Age or sex predilections have
not been noted in the dog. Feline superfcial folliculitis
may be more common in older cats (White, 1991).
S    s 
Superficial bacterial folliculitis may be mimicked by other
causes of superficial folliculitis such as demodicosis and
dermatophytosis. Superficial spreading pyoderma may
coexist with superfcial folliculitis, if pustules are accom-
panied by prominent collarette formation. Superficial
spreading pyoderma may actually originate from superfi-
cial follicular pustules (see Chapter 1), but has more
prominent collarette formation and less obvious pustula-
tion than does superficial folliculitis. Clinically, other
superfcial pustular skin diseases such as bacterial
impetigo, pemphigus foliaceus, subcorneal pustular der-
matosis, and sterile eosinophilic pustulosis may resemble
superficial bacterial folliculitis. Differentiation is accom-
Fig. 16.2 Superficial bacterial folliculitis on the abdomen of a Bull
plished by the microscopic examination of smears from
Terrier. Brightly erythematous follicular pustules and crusted papules
pustules, skin scrapings, dermatophyte culture, bacterial
are seen in a partially intertriginous location. Inflammation is visu-
culture, and histopathology. If only crusted papules are
ally enhanced by the nonpigmented skin.
present, superficial bacterial folliculitis also must be dif-
ferentiated from predominantly papular dermatoses such
Rings of postinflammatory hyperpigmentation may form
 as flea allergy dermatitis.
within the boundaries of the collarette, or small, hyper-
 Feline superficial bacterial folliculitis manifesting as
pigmented punctate foci may directly mark the sites of
miliary dermatitis must be differentiated from feline aller-
previously affected hair follicles and serve as additional
gic miliary dermatitis. If intact pustules are present,
diagnostic clues for superficial folliculitis.
 bacterial folliculitis also must be differentiated from pem-
Alopecia is variable, but is a common feature if sub-
phigus foliaceus. Both types of lesions also may resemble
stantial inflammation is present. Distinct circular patches
dermatophytosis. Dermatophyte culture is advisable in all
of transient, nonscarring alopecia may form around pre-
cases. Histopathology is required for the diagnosis of
viously affected hair follicles and are more obvious in
feline superficial bacterial folliculitis.
short-coated breeds. These patches of alopecia may be
due to focal postinflammatory telogen arrest.
Biopsy site selection
 Many cases of canine superfcial bacterial folliculitis
initially develop in the comparatively glabrous inguinal
Skin biopsy specimens should be obtained from intact
and axillary regions. The dorsal and ventral interdigital
 pustules, if available. Crusted papules are not ideal as they
webs are additional predisposed sites. Superficial bacter-
represent pustules in advanced stages of degeneration.
ial folliculitis can mirror the distribution pattern of any
Lesions with excessive crusting should be avoided. Speci-
408
 Diseases of the adnexa
mens that have been punctured for smears or culture
 alternative term “luminal folliculitis’ may be applied to
should not be used as specimens for skin biopsy. If intact
this pattern of inflammation. Pustules are composed of
pustules are not present, sampling a collarette may be
neutrophils and variable eosinophils. Pustules may extend
helpful in determining probable bacterial etiology. In cats,
 from openings of hair follicles into the infundibular wall,
regions of miliary dermatitis lacking self-trauma are more
the adjacent superficial epidermis, or onto the epidermis
likely to lead to definitive diagnosis.
 n    
may have accompanying vesiculation (vesicopustulation).
A subcorneal pustule that is perched within a follicular
Histopathology (Figures 16.3 through 16.6)
ostium is characteristic of superficial folliculitis. These
The formation of pustules within the infundibulum or
 pustules may extend beneath the stratum corneum nearly
ostium of superficial follicles characterizes folliculitis. The
to the adjacent follicle. As pustules age, superficial follic-
Fig. 16.3 Superficial bacterial folli-
culitis in a dog. A pustule distends a
follicular ostium.
Fig. 16.4 Superficial folliculitis in a
dog. Neutrophils are closely apposed
to the outer wall of a superficial folli-
cle and are infiltrating the epithelium
of the ostium at top to form early
vesicopustules.
Pustular and nodular diseases without adnexal destruction
409
Fig. 16.5 Perforating superficial folli-
culitis in a dog. A superficial luminal
pustule has just broken through the fol-
licular infundibulum.
ular and/or epidermal crusts occur. Bacteria (staphylo-
cocci) may be found in crusts or in superfcial follicular
keratin, but are less obvious within pustules.
In some cases, particularly in young dogs, eosinophils
may be prominent. Purely eosinophilic folliculitis may be
seen in allergic miliary dermatitis of cats, most notably in
food allergy. Eosinophils may reflect hypersensitivity to
bacterial superantigens or other products.
The epidermis is mildly to moderately acanthotic. The
dermis is variably edematous and inflamed. Loosely
organized accumulations of neutrophils, eosinophils, and
fewer mixed mononuclear cells are perivascular to inter-
stitial. Near foci of folliculitis, dermal inflammation
closely surrounds follicles, and often trails to the isthmus
where it encircles adnexal glands. Eosinophils may pre-
dominate in some cases. The superficial dermis in other
areas of the specimen may have milder superficial accu-
mulations of neutrophils, eosinophils, plasma cells,
macrophages, and lymphocytes. In chronic lesions, peri-
follicular and perivascular infltrations of plasma cells,
macrophages, and a few neutrophils are present, rather
than active pustular inflammation. Mild perifollicular
fbrosis may be present.
"Superficial perforating folliculitis’ is a common phe-
nomenon characterized by focal rupture of a superficial
pustule through the infundibulum of a follicle. This lesion
is in contradistinction to furunculosis, since the process
remains superficial and does not efface the entire follicle
(see Chapter 17). Superficial dermal pustules containing
keratin or hair may be present in one level of sectioning.
follicular pustule has extended to the adjacent superficial dermis.
while the disrupted follicle itself may not be apparent
unless deeper sections are examined. Thus, superficial per-
410
Diseases of the adnexa
Fig. 16.7 Feline dermatophytosis affecting rmultiple kittens in a
litter. Patchy alopecia and scaling are present on the pinna, temporal
Fig. 16.8 Generalized dermatophytosis in an adult Persian cat.
region, and dorsal muzzle of the centrally located kitten.
Extensive alopecia, scaling, and hyperpigmentation are somewhat
bilaterally symmetrical.
forating folliculitis can be inferred in specimens where no
actual follicular inflammation is present, if pustules are
found in the general vicinity of the hair follicle and if they
contain follicular debris.
 Differential diagnoses are few if follicular pustules or
superficial dermal pustules with follicular debris are found.
Dermatophytosis should always be ruled out by culture in
cats with folliculitis, even if organisms are not seen in
tissue, since this is the more common cause of follicular
 pustulation in this species. Sterile eosinophilic pustulosis
of dogs is characterized in part by follicular pustules, and
thus eosinophil-predominant folliculitis may appear
similar. Care should be taken not to rely exclusively on
the type of inflammatory cell present, since antibiotic-
responsive eosinophilic folliculitis may be encountered,
particularly in the young dog. Clinical differentiation is
Fig. 16.9 Severe dermatophytosis affecting three Persian kittens.
required. Superficial spreading pyoderma of dogs may gen-
Note the extensive crusting and facial alopecia.
erate from superficial follicular pustules of the infundibu-
lum or ostium, but folliculitis is difficult to observe in
random biopsy specimens of that condition (see Chapter
Microsporum canis. The species designation ^canis’ actu-
1). In contrast, superficial follicular or dermal pustulation
ally is a misnomer since the cat is the natural host for this
(secondary to follicular perforation) is obvious in most
organism. Since this well-adapted dermatophyte induces
biopsy specimens of superficial folliculitis.
minimal host response in the cat, inapparent carriers are
common, especially in the Persian cat and other long-
haired breeds. Trichophyton mentagrophytes, Microspo-
FELINE DERMATOPHYTOSIS
rum gypseum, and various other keratinophilic fungi may,
(Synonym: feline ringworm)
on occasion, cause feline dermatophytosis.
Keratinophilic fungi invade actively growing hair fol-
Clinical features (Figure 16.7 through 16.9)
licular keratin, and less frequently, the stratum corneum
of the epidermis. Transmission is achieved via direct
Feline dermatophytosis is a common skin disease caused
 contact with infected hair and scale or fomites. Cats with
by infection of the hair follicle and hair with ker-
compromised immune function, as seen with naturally
atinophilic fungi. Wide variation in incidence exists glob-
 occurring or iatrogenic hyperglucocorticoidism, feline
ally; warm temperatures and high humidity encourage
 leukemia virus (FeLV) infection, or feline immunodef.
dermatophyte infection. The great majority of cases of
 ciency virus (FIV) infection, are at greater risk for acquir-
feline dermatophytosis worldwide probably are caused by
 ing dermatophytosis, as well as for developing more
Pustular and nodular diseases without adnexal destruction
411
h )   r d s
Clinical differential diagnoses are contingent upon clin-
Feline dermatophytosis is the most common zoonotic skin
ical
 presentation.
Dermatophyte-associated  alopecia
disease.
without other obvious skin changes must be differenti-
Clinical features of feline dermatophytosis vary con-
ated from pruritic self-traumatic alopecia, psychogenic
siderably. Classically, ring
 lesions characterized by
alopecia, and dermodicosis. A history of self-grooming (a
expanding circular patches of alopecia with central
manifestation of any of these diseases) may not be forth-
healing and peripheral small papules may be seen. Follic-
coming, as excessive grooming may be clandestine in the
ular pustules, when present, are very transient in the cat.
cat. Feline dermatophytosis presenting as miliary der-
Follicular papules are much more frequent. However,
 matitis must be differentiated from feline allergic miliary
irregular, patchy alopecia is more frequently the only
 dermatitis (see Chapter 6), and the rare other nonallergic
obvious clinical abnormality. Affected hairs are irregu-
causes of miliary lesions such as bacterial impetigo or fol-
larly broken, leading to shorter disheveled haircoats. Hair
liculitis. Rarely, cases of severely exfoliative, crusting, Or
stubble may appear thickened. Subtle alopecia with
 pustular dermatophytosis may resemble pemphigus foli-
minimal other signs is seen more frequently in long-haired
 aceus. However bilateral symmetry usually is a feature of
cats. Scaling and crusting can vary from absent to severe.
 pemphigus foliaceus (see Chapter 1), in contrast to feline
The face, ears, and forelegs are the most common initial
dermatophytosis. Skin scrapings, dermatophyte cultures,
sites, but infection may generalize.
and skin biopsy should be performed to differentiate
Crusted papules with minimal alopecia also can be a
among these diseases.
feature of feline dermatophytosis. This rather generic
feline reaction pattern is termed 'miliary dermatitis', and
Biopsy site selection
is of multifactorial etiology.
Inapparent carriage of Microsporum canis is noted,
 Biopsy specimens should be obtained from areas exhibit-
particularly in cats from large catteries and in long-haired
ing broken hairs or exfoliation. Sites just within the outer
breeds (Scott et al., 2001). Feline dermatophytic
boundaries of expanding foci of alopecia are most bene-
pseudomycetoma (see Chapter 12) and claw infection
ficial. Centers of alopecic foci may not be as helpful in
(onychomycosis) are rare clinical variants. Pruritus is vari-
establishing a diagnosis since dermatophytes may no
able but not common with feline dermatophytosis.
longer be present in these healing lesions.
Long-haired cats such as Persians may be at increased
risk for both asymptomatic and symptomatic dermato-
Histopathology (Figures 16.10 through 16.12)
phytosis (Scott et al., 2001). Overt dermatophytosis is
seen most commonly in kittens and in adult cats in asso-
The epidermis may be mildly to moderately acanthotic
ciation with stresses such as queening. Sex predilections
and hyperkeratotic. In some cases, superfcial epidermal
are not noted.
pustules predominate (superficial pustular dermatophyto-
Fig. 16.10 Feline derrmatophytosis.
Darkly-staining spores surround hair
shafts, many of which protrude from
follicular ostia. Note scant inflamma-
tion around hair follicles and in the
superficial dermis {(periodic acid-
Schiff).
412
Diseases of the adnexa
Fig. 16.11 Higher magnification of
feline dermatophytosis. Spores and
hyphae heavily colonize hairs. Note
scant inflammation.
sis; see Chapter 1). Crusts composed of degenerating neu-
trophils may be present around protruding hairs or free
in superfcial keratin. Hair follicles as well as superficial
vessels are surrounded by lymphocytes, macrophages, and
neutrophils. Neutrophils are variable in number and dis-
ribution, and may be accompanied by fewer eosinophils.
Neutrophils may closely surround and abut hair folli-
cles in tight clusters, but true luminal neutrophilic folli-
culitis often is not evident. When found, folliculitis in cats
is highly suspicious for dermatophytosis. Neutrophils and
fewer eosinophils are present within follicular pustules.
Follicular pustules may rupture, giving way to furuncles
in which macrophages intermingled with neutrophils and
eosinophils surround free hair shafts.
Surface as well as intrafollicular hairs usually are colo
nized by large numbers of refractile or slightly basophilic
dermatophytic spores and hyphae. These are colored
bright magenta with periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) stain or
black with Gomori's methenamine silver (GMS) stain.
Colonized hairs may be scant; it is not uncommon for
only a single hair to be affected in a given biopsy speci-
men. Deeper sectioning may be required to locate the
organisms and provide an etiologic diagnosis.
In some cases of feline dermatophytosis, epidermal
hyperkeratosis is the only histopathologic feature other
than the presence of dermatophytes. Dermatophytes may
be sparse in these cases; careful search using a PAS stain,
 if necessary, should always be made in any uninflamed
specimen of skin obtained from a cat, particularly if
Fig. 16.12 Luminal folliculitis in feline dermatophytosis. Organ-
scaling or alopecia is reported. Infltration of the wall of
isms are not present in this field.
 the middle follicle, generally by lymphocytes (mural fol-
Pustular and nodular diseases without adnexal destruction
413
Fig. 16.14 Dermatophytosis of the head and neck of a blue Toy
Fig. 16.13 Dermatophytosis in a Dalmatian. Erythema and crust-
Manchester Terrier with color dilution alopecia. Note crusting and
ing are within well-demarcated alopecic plaques. (Photograph cour-
erythema. Some hair regrew on the head following therapy for
tesy A.C. Mundell; case material University of California, Davis.)
dermatophytosis.
liculitis) may also be a feature of feline dermatophytosis
organism may more commonly cause superfcial pustular
(see Chapter 18).
dermatophytosis (see Chapter 1).
 Differential diagnoses of feline dermatophytosis with
Transmission occurs via direct contact or by fomites
folliculitis principally include demodicosis and superfcial
contaminated with hair or scale from affected cats or
bacterial folliculitis, both of which are rare in the cat.
 other dogs. Dermatophytes invade actively growing hair,
Identification of dermatophytes is diagnostic in these 
follicular keratin, and less frequently, the stratum
cases, but even in the absence of histopathologically iden-
 corneum of the epidermis (see superficial pustular der-
tifable organisms, pustular folliculitis is a strong indica-
 matophytosis, Chapter 1). Well-adapted dermatophytes
tion for dermatophytosis and should be pursued via
(usually  Microsporum canis)  induce minimal host
dermatophyte culture. Tightly arranged, perifollicular
 response, and affected dogs may become inapparent
neutrophilic inflammation is also suspicious for dermato-
carriers. Infection with Trichophyton mentagrophytes,
phytosis in this species.
are poorly adapted to the dog elicits a greater inflamma-
CANINE DERMATOPHYTOSIS
tory reaction. Dermatophytosis usually is self-limiting in
healthy dogs because the normal host inflammatory
(Synonym: canine ringworm)
response eliminates infection. Dogs with compromised
immune systems are at greater risk for chronic and gen-
Clinical features (Figures 16.13 and 16.14)
eralized disease. Canine dermatophytosis is a zoonotic
disease.
Canine dermatophytosis is a relatively common skin
 Dermatophytosis is one of the most pleomorphic canine
disease caused by infection with keratinophilic fungi.
skin diseases. Classically, canine dermatophytosis presents
Wide variation exists globally for the incidence of
 as an expanding circular patch of alopecia with an ery
dermatophytosis in general and for the prevalence of 
thematous active crusted border and an area of central
 -u uiu pue sdn e 'sioads aasnn
 clearing and healing. Lesions may be well circumscribed
dity encourage dermatophyte infection. Canine dermato-
with a slowly expanding border. Afected hairs at the
phytosis is caused most frequently by Microsporum
 margin or remaining within the alopecic patch are thick-
canis, Trichophyton mentagrophytes, and Microsporum
 ened and broken creating short stubble. Follicular papules
gypseum (Foil, 1998; Carlotti & Bensignor, 1999).
 or frank pustules may be seen. Scaling and crusting vary
Microsporum canis is the most commonly isolated organ-
 from minimal to severe, and may be generalized. Hyper-
ism in most parts of the world (Scott et al., 2001). Less 
pigmentation occurs with chronicity in dog breeds pre-
commonly, Microsporum persicolor and other species
 disposed to inflammatory pigmentation.
may be seen (Carlotti & Bensignor, 1999). Trichophyton
The face and forelegs are common sites for initial infec-
mentagrophytes var. erinacei has been reported in con-
tion, since these sites on dogs interface most prominently
junction with exposure to hedgehogs (Fairley, 2001). This
with the environment. The planum nasale is involved
414
Diseases of the adnexa
rarely, despite active infection in adjacent haired skin.
Onychomycosis usually is manifested by chronic infection
of the ungual fold (Foil, 1998). Somewhat bilaterally sym-
metric  facial involvement (especially involving
the
muzzle) with marked exfoliation and crusting may be seen
with Trichophyton mentagrophytes, and Microsporum
gypseum; many of these cases may correspond micro-
scopically to superficial pustular dermatophytosis (see
Chapter 1). Pruritus or pain may be seen with more florid
inflammation. An uncommon and distinctive subgroup
termed “kerion’ is characterized by intense focal inflam-
mation and follicular destruction (see Chapter 17).
 Breed or sex predilections have not been determined
statistically. However, one author (P.J.1.) suspects that the
Dalmatian, Poodle, Jack Russell Terrier Manchester
Terrier, and Yorkshire Terrier may be at increased risk for
generalized disease. Dogs less than 1 year of age are at
greater risk for dermatophytosis (Scott et al., 2001).
Older dogs with decreased immune function also may be
at increased risk for generalized dermatophytosis.
Clinical differential diagnoses are legion for this
 protean disease. Canine dermatophytosis is greatly over-
diagnosed; conversely, bona fide cases often are misdiag-
nosed. Superficial bacterial folliculitis and superficial
spreading pyoderma are the major differential diagnoses,
since they may present with rings of alopecia and crust-
ing. Frank pustules and peripheral collarettes are sub-
stantially less common with dermatophytosis than with
bacterial folliculitis. Seborrheic dermatitis in dogs with
primary seborrhea may mimic dermatophytosis, espe-
Fig. 16.15
5  Canine dermatophytosis. Dark spores surround hair
cially in the Cocker Spaniel. Severe exfoliative and crust-
shafts at top; luminal folliculitis is at bottom (arrow).
ing dermatophytosis (especially bilaterally s
symmetric
lesions involving the muzzle) may be visually similar to
facially-oriented autoimmune skin disease such as pem-
shafts may be entrapped by keratin and crusts. Dermato-
phigus foliaceus or pemphigus erythematosus. Unlike
phytes may be seen in or around protruding hairs, or
facially-oriented autoimmune skin disease, the planum
occasionally free within epidermal keratin. Canine der-
nasale is rarely violated in facial dermatophytosis. Der-
matophytosis involving keratin-colonizing organisms,
matophyte culture is critical in the differential diagnosis;
such as Trichopbyton spp. (superficial pustular dermato-
histopathology also will allow differentiation.
phytosis or keratin-colonizing dermatophytosis) may be
manifested predominantly as superficial epidermal pustu-
lar inflammation, sometimes with acantholysis (see
Biopsy site selection
Chapter 1). However, mixed patterns are common, and
Biopsy specimens should be obtained from areas of
may include mural folliculitis (see Chapter 18).
 broken hairs or exfoliation. Areas just inside the margins
Mild or moderate neutrophilic folliculitis is sometimes
of expanding foci of inflammation and alopecia are most
accompanied by follicular rupture. Discrete granulomas
beneficial. Centers of alopecic foci may not be as helpful
surrounding central free hair may be seen. A nodular
in establishing a diagnosis, since fungal organisms may no
lesion of focally extensive furunculosis due to dermato-
longer be present in these healing lesions.
phytes is referred to as a kerion (see Chapter 17). There
may be follicular acantholysis in some cases, resembling
pemphigus foliaceus (see p. 415). Neutrophils, lympho-
Histopathology (Figures 16.15 and 16.16)
cytes, and macrophages mildly to moderately infltrate the
The epidermis and follicular infundibula are variably
superfcial to middle dermis and surround hair follicles.
acanthotic and may be hyperkeratotic. In some cases,
In other cases, inflammation is minimal and predomi-
surface serocellular crusting is evident. Protruding hair
nantly perifollicular. Hair shafts are variably infltrated
Pustular and nodular diseases without adnexal destruction
415
Fig. 16.17 Canine pemphigus foliaceus in a Labrador Retriever-
 crossbreed. Bilaterally symmetric alopecia and adherent crusting are
present onthe dorsal andlateral muzzle, periorbitally, onthe pinnae,
and on the temporal region. The planurm nasale also is affected.
Fig. 16.16 Canine derrmatophytosis demonstrating heavy coloniza-
tion of hairs by numerous dermatophytic spores and wavy, poorly
stained hyphae.
and surrounded by dermatophytic spores and hyphae,
the latter of which are orange-pink and refractile
with hematoxylin and eosin. A periodic acid-Schiff
(PAS) stain will accentuate dermatophytes as bright
Fig. 16.18 Side view of the same dog as in Fig. 16.17. Diffuse
magenta; Gomori's methenamine silver (GMS) colors
erythema is present in the affected areas.
them black.
The folliculocentric inflammation of dermatophytosis
may be similar to bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis
Histopathology (Figures 16.20 and 16.21)
and to demodicosis. Differential diagnosis is facilitated by
identification of the offending agent.
Epidermal features of this disease have been previously
described (see Chapter 1), and principally include sub-
corneal pustules with acantholysis. In some cases of
PEMPHIGUS FOLLACEUS
Clinical features (Figures 16.17 through 16.19)
localized to the face, pustules with acantholysis also form
within follicular infundibula, or less commonly as deeply
See Chapter 1.
as the isthmus of the hair follicle. These follicular pustules
often form in ‘subcorneal location, i.e. beneath the
Biopsy site selection
keratin lining the outer root sheath, and may extend
through the entire wall of the follicle ('panfollicular pem-
See Chapter 1.
phigus'). Small, early pustules may form within the center
416
Diseases of the adnexa
Fig. 16.19 Canine pemphigus foliaceus in an aged Spitz-crossbreed.
Bilateral symmetry is striking in the lesions of the face and distal
extremities.
of the follicular wall. In some cases, larger pustules may
Fig. 16.20 Follicular pemphigus foliaceus in a dog. The follicular
rupture into the follicular lumen. Pustules contain neu-
 pustule at top contains acantholytic cells.
trophils, variable eosinophils, and acantholytic and/or
apoptotic keratinocytes.
Variable admixtures of lymphocytes, macrophages,
plasma cells, neutrophils, and eosinophils surround folli-
aceus and not pemphigus vegetans. The authors have not
cles. Follicular rupture with release of clusters or 'rafts'
seen a convincing case of pemphigus vegetans in the dog
of acantholytic cells into the surrounding dermis may be
or cat.
associated with severe suppurative and pyogranuloma-
Differential diagnoses principally include deep bacter
tous dermal inflammation, as seen in deep folliculitis and
ial folliculitis and furunculosis, and dermatophytosis.
furunculosis (see Chapter 17). Folliculitis and furunculo-
Active acantholysis is a differential feature of follicular
sis without evidence of acantholysis has been documented
pemphigus foliaceus, but may be absent from foci of
 in biopsy specimens from cases of otherwise histopatho-
severe follicular  inflammation observed in  isolated
logically typical pemphigus foliaceus; presumably these
lesions. Conversely, secondary acantholysis due to the
cases had concurrent deep pyoderma. Immunofluores-
 proteolytic action of neutrophils may be a feature of bac-
cence or immunohistochemistry may reveal deposition of
terial folliculitis and dermatophytosis. This diffculty may
IgG in intercellular spaces of the superfcial portions of
be accentuated by the coexistence of pemphigus foliaceus
hair follicles in addition to the epidermis.
and bacterial foliculitis and furunculosis in some dogs.
Deep follicular pustulation in hair follicles, as seen in
Clinical data may be critical in these cases. Examination
panfollicular pemphigus foliaceus, may be comparable
of multiple specimens will increase the chances of locat
U a ke sasnd aui asnesaq suaa snuduad o
ing diagnostic histopathologic features of pemphigus
suprabasilar location, thus mimicking suprabasilar cleft-
foliaceus. A positive result from immunofluorescence
ing of pemphigus vegetans (a variant of pemphigus vul-
or immunohistochemistry is supportive, but is not 
garis in humans). The case in the frst edition of this
always forthcoming in random specimens obtained for
 d   o sa o
biopsy.
Pustular and nodular diseases without adnexal destruction
417
Fig. 16.21 Higher magnification of
follicular pemphigus foliaceus. Note
large ‘subcorneal’ follicular pustule
containing acantholytic cells.
Fig. 16.22 Sterile eosinophilic pustulosis on the abdomen of a
dog. Multiple intact pustules are seen. (Photograph courtesy D.-N.
Carlotti.)
Fig. 16.23 Closer view of the dog in Fig. 16.22. A hair protruding
from the central intact pustule indicates follicular orientation. (Pho-
tograph courtesy D.-N. Carlotti.)
STERILE EOSINOPHILIC PUSTULOSIS
tion and the formation of peripheral epidermal collarettes
lead to distinctive target lesions. Annular erosions may
Clinical features (Figures 16.22 and 16.23)
form within the confnes of the collarettes. Reported cases
Sterile eosinophilic pustulosis is a very rare, idiopathic
have primarily involved the ventral abdomen or have been
canine skin disease characterized by sterile eosinophilic
 more generalized. The head is affected uncommonly. Pru-
pustules and peripheral eosinophilia (Scott, 1984, 1987;
ritus is marked and self-trauma may lead to excoriation.
Carlotti et al., 1989). Marked tissue and peripheral
 Fever, anorexia, depression, and regional lymphadenopa-
eosinophilia coupled with response to immunosuppres-
thy have been reported as inconsistent findings (Scott,
sive dosages of glucocorticoids suggest immune dysfunc-
1984, 1987; Carlotti et al., 1989).
tion as the pathogenesis of this disease (Scott, 1987).
Breed, age, or sex predilections have not been noted.
 Erythematous follicular and nonfollicular pustules and
Clinical differential diagnoses should include superfcial
papules develop rapidly. Pustules may be circular or
spreading pyoderma, superfcial bacterial folliculitis, and
irregular in outline. Central healing with hyperpigmenta-
pustular drug reactions. Dermatophytosis, demodicosis,
418
Diseases of the adnexa
contain predominantly eosinophils and fewer neutro-
phils. There may be accompanying mild to moderate
spongiosis. Frank vesiculation was reported (Carlotti
et al., 1989). Occasional acantholytic keratinocytes were
described (Scott, 1987).
Pustules may be confined to the subcorneal epidermis
(Craig, 1993); in other cases eosinophilic folliculitis
may affect superficial and sometimes deep hair follicles.
There may be rupture to form eosinophilic furuncles.
Eosinophils also may surround affected follicles in a
nodular confguration and may be distributed diffusely
throughout the superficial and middle dermis. Mixed infl-
trations of neutrophils, lymphocytes, and macrophages
also are present. In some cases seen by Scott, eosinophilic
degranulation to form flame figures was observed (Scott,
D.W., personal communication, 1990).
Differential diagnoses include eosinophilic furunculosis
of the face, or superficial bacterial folliculitis in which
eosinophils are predominant. Pemphigus foliaceus may
need to be considered for lesions that are confined to
the subcorneal epidermis and which feature acantho-
 lytic keratinocytes. Eosinophilic pustulosis tends to be a
more superficial process than eosinophilic furunculosis
of the face; although eosinophilic furuncles occur in
both, the furuncles of the latter are often much more
explosively destructive to hair follicles. Pemphigus foli-
aceus should feature more acantholysis and fewer
eosinophils than sterile eosinophilic pustulosis. Clinical
 differentiation may be required. Response to appropriate
Fig. 16.24 Sterile eosinophilic pustulosis in a dog. A large
eosinophilic pustule has ruptured the affected hair follicle.
sterile eosinophilic pustulosis from pyoderma with promi-
nent eosinophils.
pemphigus foliaceus, and subcorneal pustular dermatosis
also may resemble sterile eosinophilic pustulosis. Smears
REFERENCES
of pustular contents, bacterial culture from intact pus-
tules, skin scrapings, and dermatophyte cultures should
SuperficialBacterialFolliculitis
be performed to differentiate among these diseases. Sterile
Ihrke, PJ. (1996) Bacterial Skin Disease in the Dog: A Guide to
eosinophilic pustulosis must be diagnosed by ruling out
Canine Pyoderma, pp. 1-97. Veterinary Learning Systems,
the above-mentioned  diseases and by  supportive
Trenton.
histopathology.
Ihrke, PJ. (1998) Bacterial infections of the skin. In: Infectious
Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 2nd edn (ed. C.E. Greene), pp.
541-7. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Biopsy site selection
White, S.D. {1991) Pyoderma in five cats. J Am Anim Hosp
Skin biopsy specimens should include multiple intact pus-
Assoc 27, 141-7.
tules. Care must be taken in sampling not to disrupt
Feline Dermatopbytosis
fragile pustules.
Foil, C.S. (1998) Dermatophytosis. In: Infectious Diseases of the
Dog and Cat, 2nd edn (ed. C.E. Greene), pp. 362-70. W.B.
Histopathology (Figure 16.24)
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller 6 Kirk's
Acanthosis is mild to moderate. The epidermis has deli
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 339-61. WB.
cate, superficial and often subcorneal pustules that
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Pustular and nodular diseases without adnexal destruction
419
Canine Dermatophytosis
Pemphigus Foliaceus
Carlotti, D.N. & Bensignor, E. (1999) Dermatophytosis due 
See Chapter 1.
to Microsporum persicolor (13 cases) or Microsporum
gypseum (20 cases) in the dog. Vet Dermatol 10, 17-
Sterile Eosinophilic Pustulosis
27.
Carlotti, D., Prost, C., Magnol, J.-P. et al. (1989) La maladie
Fairley, R.A. (2001) The histological lesions of Trichopbyton
d'Ofugi (pustulose eosinophilique sterile). Prat Med Chir
mentagropbytes var. erinacei infection in dogs. Vet Dermatot
Anim Comp 24, 131-8.
12,119-22.
Craig, J.M. (1993) A case of sterile eosinophilic pustulosis in a
Foil, C.S. (1998) Dermatophytosis. In: Infectious Diseases of the
dog. Vet Dermatol Newst 15, 11.
Dog and Cat, 2nd edn (ed. C.E. Greene), pp. 362-70. W.B.
Scott, D.W. (1984) Sterile eosinophilic pustulosis in the dog. J
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20, 585-9.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
Scott, D.W. (1987) Sterile eosinophilic pustulosis in dog
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 339-61. W.B.
and man: comparative aspects. J Am Acad Dermatol 16,
Saunders, Philadelphia.
1022-6.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 17
Pustular and nodular diseases with
adnexal destruction
The diseases of this chapter mostly are characterized by
lick dermatitis, interdigital furunculosis, callus pyoderma,
prominent pustular inflammation of the adnexa, leading 
postgrooming furunculosis, and canine acne; these enti-
to rupture and destruction of these structures. Subsequent
ties also are discussed separately in this chapter. Briefly,
 inflammation at the site of a destroyed adnexal appendage
traumatic furunculosis in acral lick dermatitis probably is
is often nodular in distribution; a granulomatous infltrate
precipitated by self-inflicted follicular trauma resulting
is common as a foreign body' response to released hair 
 from persistent licking. Interdigital furunculosis probably
and keratin, as well as glandular secretion. Most of the
is initiated by short, bristly hairs rubbing against the skin
diseases have an infectious or parasitic cause that is often
of apposing digits, creating trauma in the dorsal inter-
apparent in tissue (demodicosis, kerion, and rhabditic
digital webs, leading to folicular rupture and secondary
dermatitis); arthropod insult is implicated in eosinophilic
infection. Callus pyoderma develops as a sequela
1 to
furunculosis. Furunculosis may also be secondary to
repeated trauma to the callus; the comedones of
trauma (postgrooming furunculosis and furunculosis
callus likely are predisposed to trauma-induced rupture.
occurring in acral lick dermatitis). In several diseases,
characteristics of the follicle or hair shafts, including
furunculosis', probably is partially precipitated in some
primary accumulation of keratin in the infundibulum,
cases by back-combing, back-clipping, or overly aggres-
lead to secondary rupture and pyoderma; some of these
sive bathing against the direction of hair growth.
 are also aggravated by trauma (canine callus, feline acne,
 Deep pyoderma may be seen without evidence of prior 
actinic comedones, and interdigital furunculosis). Seba-
-aeq ieiyradns on eanbas e se ro euapoad jeioyadns
ceous adenitis is included here due to its basic pattern of
rial folliculitis (see Chapter 16). Deep bacterial folliculi-
inflammatory-mediated effacement of sebaceous glands
 tis and furunculosis commonly coexist, as deep folicular
inflammation leads to follicular rupture creating furun-
cles. In furunculosis, traumatically released hair frag-
DEEP BACTERIAL FOLLICULITIS
ments and remnants of follicular keratin accentuate
AND FURUNCULOSIS
inflammation via a foreign body response, which may
(Synonym: deep pyoderma)
lead to scarring.
As in other canine pyoderma, Staphylococcus inter-
medius is the primary pathogen. However secondary
Clinical features (Figures 17.1 through 17.3)
invaders such as Proteus sp., Pseudomonas sp., and
Deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis is a relatively
Escherichia coli are seen more frequently in deeper in-
common, somewhat heterogeneous group of canine bac-
fections. Pseudomonas sp. also has been isolated from
terial skin diseases united by similar histopathologic fea-
dorsal f
furunculosis
following shampooing (post-
tures (Ihrke, 1996, 1998). It is convenient to separate
grooming furunculosis; see p. 427).
some forms of deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis
where either clinical or histopathologic features are dis-
Generalized demodicosis is one of the most common trig-
tinctive. German Shepherd Dog pyoderma, for example,
gers and must be ruled out in any case of deep pyoderma.
is a unique clinical entity and is discussed separately (see
Other predisposing causes include hyperadrenocorticism,
p. 424).
the injudicious use of glucocorticoids (iatrogenic hyper-
Deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis may be man-
glucocorticoidism), widespread actinic disease (see actinic
ifested in skin diseases with a traumatic component, and
furunculosis, p. 429), and immunologic defects. Come-
may be termed ‘traumatic furunculosis' in that context.
donal diseases such as calluses, actinic comedones, and
Diseases featuring traumatic furunculosis include acral
 Schnauzer comedo syndrome (see Chapter 8) also predis-
420
Pustular and nodular diseases with adnexal destruction
421
pose to deep pyoderma via rupture of the abnormal fol-
licle. Triggers are not always identifed in deep pyoderma.
 Since deep pyoderma may develop from superficial pyo-
derma, the lesions of superficial pyoderma may precede
and coexist with deeper infection. The pustules of deep
bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis tend to be larger and
vary in color from white to yellow-gray; additionally, frm
nodules usually are present. Pustules and nodules rupture,
forming fistulas and hemorrhagic crusts. Erosions and
ulcers develop secondary to inflammation, necrosis, and
self-trauma initiated by pain or pruritus. Alopecia is a
sequel to follicular inflammation and destruction. Hyper-
pigmentation and lichenifcation also are common. Scar-
ring may be present.
Fig. 17.1 Deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis on the
Hemorrhagic bullae are a distinctive clinical feature in
abdomen of a dog. An intact hemorrhagic bullae is surrounded by
 some cases of canine deep pyoderma. Hemorrhagic bullae
intact and ulcerated pustules.
are seen most often in the German Shepherd Dog (see
p. 424), but may be present occasionally in many breeds
including Bull Terriers and Dalmatians. Hemorrhagic
bullae may be seen with deep pyoderma secondary
to demodicosis and in actinic furunculosis. Well-
circumscribed, frm nodules exhibit a deep red to dark
blue hue. Newer lesions are brightly red, signifying fresh
hemorrhage. Hemorrhagic rings sometimes are present 
surrounding the bullae.
Regularly affected sites include the comparatively
glabrous intertriginous zones of the groin, axillae, and
interdigital webs, plus pressure points. Lesions may be
generalized in some dogs, particularly the German Shep-
herd Dog (see p. 424). Severity of infection and magni-
tude of spread commonly relate to the severity of
underlying disease. As an example, dogs with more severe
immunosuppressive disease tend to develop deeper and
Fig. 17.2  Deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis with attendant
more widespread infection. Regional and generalized
self-trauma ('pyotraumatic furunculosis") in a Golden Retriever. A
lymphadenopathy is common. Pain and pruritus are
well-demarcated eroded plaque is present ventral to the ear.
frequent features. Constitutional signs such as fever,
lethargy, and inappetence may be seen contingent on the
severity and extent of infection.
An additional subgroup of deep pyoderma clinically
mimics pyotraumatic dermatitis (see Chapter 6). Deep
pyoderma is not secondary to classical pyotraumatic
 dermatitis in this syndrome, but instead deep pyoderma
initiates a similar clinical appearance through relentless
self trauma superimposed over subjacent deep infection
(Ihrke, 1996). This syndrome, termed ‘pyotraumatic
furunculosis', begins with painful, focal erythema and
swelling overlying areas of developing deep pyoderma.
Presumably, pain induces self-rauma, leading to severe
ulceration, exudation, and the lesions of pyotraumatic
dermatitis. The lesions occur predominantly on the head
 and neck regions. Pyotraumatic furunculosis is seen pri-
marily in the Golden Retriever but also in other large
Fig. 17.3 Deep pyoderma affecting the pressure points of the stifle
breeds including the Saint Bernard and Bernese Mountain
in a Boxer. Multiple fistulous tracts with hemorrhage are present.
Dog.
422
Diseases of the adnexa
Breed predilections have been observed for deep bacte
rial  folliculitis and  furunculosis.  Predisposed  long-
coated dogs include the German Shepherd Dog, Golden
Retriever, and Irish Setter. The German Shepherd Dog is
 predisposed to develop deep rather that superficial pyo-
derma (Denerolle et al., 1998). Among the short-coated
breeds, the Bull Terrier, Dalmatian, Doberman Pinscher,
and Great Dane are at apparently increased risk. Deep
pyoderma secondary to demodicosis or other diseases
follows the predilections of the underlying disease. Age or
sex predilections have not been noted.
Clinical differential diagnoses for deep bacterial folli
culitis and furunculosis should include cutaneous infec-
tions of systemic fungi, opportunistic fungi or algae, and
opportunistic mycobacterial infection. Differentiation is
accomplished by the microscopic examination of smears
of exudate, bacterial and fungal cultures, and histopathol-
ogy. Culture should not be performed until the systemic
mycoses blastomycosis, histoplasmosis, and coccid-
ioidomycosis are ruled out by impression smear and
histopathology, since attempted culture may be dangerous 
(see Chapter 12). Once deep pyoderma is diagnosed, the
clinician must assess for underlying triggers.
Biopsy site selection
 Early intact pustules, nodules, or bullae are recommended
lesions for biopsy. Ulcerated or scarred lesions may be less
likely to yield diagnostic follicular inflammation due to
loss of normal tissue architecture. If most of the available
Fig. 17.4 Furunculosis in a Golden Retriever with pyotraumatic
affected tissue is friable due to severe inflammation or
dermatitis. Severe pustular inflarmmation is replacing most of a deep
hemorrhage, larger punch biopsy or wedge resection is
follicle.
preferable, since smaller punch biopsy creates traumatic
 artifact in fragile tissue.
macrophages, and plasma cells. Free hair shafts may
Histopathology (Figures 17.4 through 17.7)
remain within large furuncles. Neutrophils, eosinophils,
and macrophages tend to localize at the center of these
The epidermis usually is acanthotic and may be ulcerated.
inflammatory foci, whereas plasma cells are found at the
Superficial serocellular or sanguinocellular crusting is
periphery. Granulomas with giant cells may organize
common. Features of pyotraumatic dermatitis (see
around displaced hair fragments to form trichogranulo-
Chapter 6) may be present in breeds such as the Golden
mas or around free keratin to form keratogranulomas
 Retriever and Saint Bernard that are prone to pyotrau-
(foreign body reactions). Mixed and variably intense
matic furunculosis.
infammatory infltrates of neutrophils, lymphocytes,
Deep folliculitis is characterized principally by neu-
macrophages, eosinophils, and plasma cells extend to sur-
trophilic inflammation that accumulates within the con-
round adjacent intact hair follicles and adnexal glands.
fnes of the follicular wall, generally at and below the level
There is variable edema and usually mild to occasionally
of the isthmus. Deep folliculitis invariably leads to fol-
moderate hemorrhage. Bacteria (staphylococci) may be
licular rupture and the formation of a furuncle as the
present in the keratin of superficial follicles, but are rarely
 integrity of the follicular wall breaks down due to inflam-
obvious in severely inflamed foci.
matory mediators, proteolytic enzymes, and the physical
Inflammation may become diffuse in the deep dermis
disruption of expanding inflammation. Follicles may be
as adjacent furuncles coalesce. Extension of inflammation
completely effaced and replaced by severe nodular
to the subcutis is not uncommon; frank cellulitis (diffuse
accumulations of neutrophils, variable eosinophils,
inflammation of the subcutis) occasionally may be
Pustular and nodular diseases with adnexal destruction
423
Fig. 17.6 Follicular bridging in a Pitt Bull Terrier-crossbreed with
Fig. 17.5 Furunculosis in a dog. A severely inflamed follicle
has ruptured; free follicular keratin is surrounded by extensive
chronic deep pyoderma. A deep partially inflamed cyst is formed by
interconnecting follicles.
pustulation.
observed, but is more commonly secondary to demodi
Suppurative hidradenitis in dogs is characterized by
cosis (see p. 442). Cavitation of the severely inflamed
dilatation and intraluminal neutrophilic inflammation
tissue may occur, and hemorrhage may be severe in these
of sweat glands. Neutrophils and variable eosinophils
lesions. Granulation tissue and fbrosis arise deep and
distend the walls of sweat glands and may extend beyond
peripheral to lesions in the later stages. In some cases
 the wall to surround the glands as large pustules. Often,
laminar full- or partial-thickness mature fbrous scars
 there is concurrent evidence of folliculitis or furunculosis;
(cicatrices) replace previously inflamed tissue.
furunculosis is more common in the authors’ experience.
 In some cases of deep follicular pyoderma there is
Concurrent follicular inflammation may be lacking in
"bridging? of follicular infundibula such that adjacent fol-
random biopsies from dogs with clinical pyoderma that
licles connect by a common, large flattened or irregular
demonstrate suppurative hidradenitis. However, as sup-
cyst formed by the lower infundibulum. These may be
purative  sweat 
gland inflammation has
necessarily
distended with keratin and/or large pustules. Rupture of
extended directly from the hair follicle, hidradenitis sup-
these lesions leads to formation of large, sometimes flat-
ports the presence of follicular pyoderma in these cases
tened, horizontally-oriented cavities flled with neu-
(Scott, 1995).
 trophils and hemorrhage. Most lesions of this type occur
 Deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis are compli-
in a chronic clinical seting and in breeds predisposed to
cations of skin diseases with a traumatic component
deep folliculitis and furunculosis, such as Bull Terriers.
(raumatic furunculosis) such as acral lick dermatitis,
However it is unknown whether defective follicles result
interdigital furunculosis, canine callus pyoderma, post-
from or contribute to severe pyoderma in these dogs.
grooming furunculosis, and canine acne. Specific features
424
Diseases of the adnexa
Fig. 17.8 German Shepherd Dog pyoderma. Affected areas have
been clipped to show the extent of the disease. {Photograph cour-
tesy B.A. Atlee; case material University of California, Davis.)
Fig. 17.7 Suppurative hidradenitis in a dog with chronic deep pyo-
derma. The lumen of a gland at center is filled with neutrophils.
Fig. 17.9 Closer view of German Shepherd Dog pyoderma. Coal-
of those conditions, including anatomic site, should allow
escing plaques of ulcerated, friable, devitalized tissue are present on
diagnosis in most cases (see elsewhere in chapter).
the ventral abdomen. {Photograph courtesy T. DeManuelle; case
Other differential diagnoses include folliculitis 
material University of California, Davis.)
or
furunculosis resulting from dermatophytosis or demodi-
cosis, juvenile sterile granulomatous dermatitis and lym-
phadenitis, and eosinophilic furunculosis of the face.
GERMAN SHEPHERD DOG PYODERMA
Identifcation of organisms is required for differentiation
of dermatophytosis and demodicosis. Chronic furunculo-
Clinical features (Figures 17.8 through 17.10)
sis due to dermatophytosis (kerion) may not have appar-
ent organisms, which may make differentiation difficult
German Shepherd Dog pyoderma (GSDP) is a clinically
on histopathologic grounds alone. In some lesions of
distinctive, chronic, aggressive, and severe deep bacterial
juvenile sterile granulomatous dermatitis and lym-
infection of the skin. It occurs predominantly in the
phadenitis, inflammation is predominantly pustular and
German Shepherd Dog and related crossbreeds ( Wisselink
suppurative. However, luminal pustular follicular inflam-
et al., 1985; Krick & Scott, 1989; Denerolle et al., 1998;
 mation is not a typical feature of juvenile sterile granulo.
Rosser, 1998; Ihrke & DeManuelle, 1999). The syndrome
matous dermatitis and lymphadenitis, which features
perifollicular pyogranulomas instead. Eosinophilic furun-
and the lumbosacral region, and then progresses to
culosis of the face is superficially similar, but has a pre
more generalized distribution (Krick & Scott, 1989). A
dominance of eosinophils, as well as more striking dermal
familial predisposition has been documented, and
edema, hemorrhage, and mucin.
an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance has been
Pustular and nodular diseases with adnexal destruction
425
eroded, friable and devitalized skin. The skin lesions of
GSDP may be disproportionately severe in comparison to
 most other forms of pyoderma with the exception of deep
pyoderma secondary to generalized demodicosis. Tena-
ciously adherent crusting occurs in heavily haired regions,
and may shield the extent and severity of the lesions.
Hyperpigmentation occurs with chronicity.
The distribution pattern is distinctive; the lateral thighs,
rump, back, ventral abdomen, elbows, and distal extrem-
ities are most frequently affected. The syndrome may gen-
eralize. The chest wall and neck are additional severely
affected sites, and the perioral region also may be
affected. Partial bilateral symmetry is common. Pruritus
and pain usually are present and may be severe. Severely
Fig. 17.10 Closer view of German Shepherd Dog pyoderma. Acute
affected dogs may be anorectic, cachectic, and lethargic.
infection is superimposed on chronic lesions. {Photograph courtesy
Regional lymphadenopathy is common. Occasionally,
C.B. Vitale; case material University of California, Davis.)
GSDP is seen in conjunction with perianal fistulas or
 metatarsal fistulation of the German Shepherd Dog (see
Chapter 21).
German Shepherd Dog pyoderma is seen predomi-
hypothesized (Wisselink et al., 1989). It should be empha-
nantly in the German Shepherd Dog and related cross-
sized that German Shepherd Dogs can develop other
breeds; however it has been observed in similar breeds
 forms of bacterial pyoderma, both superfcial and deep
such as the Belgian Malinois, Belgian Sheepdog, and the
(see p. 420 and Chapter 16), that do not meet the crite-
Belgian Tervuren (Rosser 1998). One of the authors
ria for GSDP.
(PJ.I1.) also has seen this syndrome in Belgian herding
The etiology of GSDP remains unclear. Defects in cell-
breeds. Rarely, similar lesions are seen in the Dalmatian
mediated immunity, aberrations in serum immunoglobu-
and Bull Terrier. A marked predilection for males has been
lins, and lymphocyte subset abnormalities have been
noted in two studies (Koch & Peters, 1996; Denerolle et
reported (Wisselink, 1988; Miller 1991; Chabanne et al.,
al., 1998). German Shepherd Dog pyoderma occurs pre-
1995; Rosser 1997). It is not known if these defects lead
dominantly in middle aged dogs.
to pyoderma or occur as sequelae to persistent, severe
German Shepherd Dog pyoderma is clinically distinc-
bacterial infection. The striking and inappropriate mag-
tive, and clinical diagnosis is generally not problematic.
nitude of inflammation suggests that an exaggerated
Clinical differential diagnoses may include deep pyo-
tissue response to staphylococci in these dogs might initi-
derma secondary to demodicosis, and cutaneous infec-
ate an inappropriate release of cytokines and other medi-
ators of inflammation (Ihrke & DeManuelle, 1999). Some
including pythiosis and entomophthoromycosis. Physical
cases of GSDP are linked to underlying flea allergy der-
 examination, cytology from fistulous tracts, and negative
matitis, hypothyroidism, atopic dermatitis, and food
skin scrapings should confrm deep pyoderma without
allergy (Wisselink et al., 1985, Krick & Scott, 1989;
 underlying demodicosis. Skin biopsy may be indicated to
Chabanne et al., 1995; Rosser 1997). Chronic ehrlichio-
rule out other diseases. Culture should not be performed
n aos  s s e  da pa si
 until the systemic mycoses blastomycosis, histoplasmosis,
(Cerundolo et al., 1998). A larger study of GSDP also per-
 and coccidioidomycosis are ruled out by impression
formed in an endemic area for ehrlichiosis (southern
 smear and histopathology, since attempted culture may be
France) did not identify any dogs with coexistent ehrli-
 dangerous (see Chapter 12).
chiosis (Denerolle et al., 1998). Rather than viewing
GSDP as a disease of multifactorial etiology, it may be
Biopsy site selection
more useful to view it as a characteristic clinical syndrome
that can be triggered by a variety of other diseases in sus-
Multiple specimens should be taken from intact early
ceptible individuals (Ihrke & DeManuelle, 1999).
lesions and areas of more advanced inflammation to
Clinical features of GSDP include erythematous
 provide prognostic as well as diagnostic information. If
papules, pustules, furuncles, hemorrhagic bullae, and fis-
 most of the available affected tissue is friable due to severe
tulous tracts. Early lesions may be surrounded by strik-
 inflammation or hemorrhage, larger punch biopsy or
ingly circular erythematous halos. Lesions may develop
 wedge resection is preferable, since smaller punch biopsy
rapidly, forming confluent plaques of ulcerated and
creates traumatic artifact in fragile tissue.
426
Diseases of the adnexa
Fig. 17.11 German Shepherd Dog
pyoderma featuring extensive derrmal
pustulation with disruption of a hair
follicle at center.
Histopathology (Figures 17.11 and 17.12)
There is variable acanthosis with ulceration and exuda-
tion. Hemorrhagic bullae, the hallmark feature of GSDP,
consist of large pustules in the superfcial to middle
dermis, accompanied by severe hemorrhage. Early hem-
orrhagic bullae may exclude follicular involvement and
are often localized strikingly in interfollicular spaces.
However, flakes of keratin have been observed by one
author (E.J.W.) within pustules, suggesting superfcial
follicular perforation may occur. Larger pustules may
severely disrupt and replace dermal architecture, often
creating “lakes’ of neutrophils in the skin. Neutrophils
predominate, but small numbers of eosinophils and
macrophages may be present within pustules; keratin and
hair shaft fragments may be intermingled if there is fol-
licular destruction. Frank folliculitis and furunculosis are
less commonly observed. Granulation tissue and fbrosis
occur deep and peripheral to lesions in the later stages. In
some cases, laminar, full- or partial-thickness mature
fbrous scars (cicatrices) replace previously inflamed
tissue.
 Differential diagnosis is not problematic if typical hem-
orrhagic bullae are present. Interfollicular location of
lesions tends to separate this syndrome from classical
deep bacterial foliculitis and furunculosis (see p. 420);
late fibrosing lesions or lesions with furuncles may be dif-
ficult to distinguish, however. Clinical differentiation may
Fig. 17.12 Higher magnification of Fig. 17.11. Neutrophils,
be required.
erythrocytes, keratin, and hair shafts are intermingled.
Pustular and nodular diseases with adnexal destruction
427
grooming furunculosis of this type may be more likely to
POSTGROOMING FURUNCULOSIS
occur in dog breeds with short, stiff haircoats. The dorsal
midline of the trunk often is most severely affected, sup-
Clinical features (Figures 17.13 and 17.14)
porting back-grooming as a trigger, as larger dorsal hairs
Postgrooming furunculosis is an uncommon, distinctive
 may perforate hair follicles more readily.
subgroup of deep pyoderma believed to be precipitated by
 Bacterial contamination of shampoo or bathing equip-
bathing or grooming. The syndrome is dramatically acute,
ment may be pivotal in the development of many cases
fulminant, and markedly painful.
of postgrooming furunculosis. Shampoo is frequently
Grooming activities  such 
1 as back-combing, back-
applied to the dorsal trunk before bathing begins, reflect-
- a s, q s o  
ing the dorsal midline distribution of subsequent lesions.
coat’ may traumatically displace hairs through the walls
Self-serve dog washing facilities and grooming parlors
of hair follicles, creating follicular perforation. Post-
using large communal containers of shampoo, made by
ndn q aay 'i e o rim di p
historically by the authors as a source of postgrooming
furunculosis. Communal grooming instruments may also
play a role. Typically, lesions occur acutely and fulmi-
nantly within 24 to 48 hours after attending these facil-
ities, suggesting cause and effect.
Various bacteria, including Staphylococcus inter-
medius, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Proteus sp., and
Escherichia coli, have been grown in pure or mixed
culture from pustules. Some of the recently reported
cases of acute, dorsal truncal deep pyoderma due to
Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection (Hillier et al., 2003)
may, in fact, be examples of postgrooming furunculosis.
Recently, various bacteria including Pseudomonas spp.
were cultured from shampoo implicated in a case of post-
grooming furunculosis.
Localized foci of intense erythema and swelling rapidly
eventuate in the formation of erythematous pustules and
hemorrhagic bullae. Punctate foci of erosion or ulceration
lead to fstulation and drainage. Early in the clinical
Fig. 17.13 Postgrooming furunculosis in a Dogo. The dog had been
course, edema may cause the hairs in affected areas to
bathed at a self-service dog washing facility. Alopecia and inflarm-
stand straight up. As severity of infection increases, hairs
mation are noted predorminantly along the dorsurm.
are shed from affected hair follicles. Lesions begin as well-
demarcated foci, but may generalize if not treated. The
dorsal trunk is most commonly affected, and lesions may
be in a dorsal stripe down the neck and back, particularly
in cases due to putative contaminated shampoo. Lesions
are markedly painful. Severely affected dogs may be
febrile.
 Postgrooming furunculosis can occur in any breed. Dog
breeds with short, stiff, bristly hairs probably may be at
increased risk for postgrooming furunculosis, primarily
due to ease of traumatic follicular rupture. The authors
have seen this syndrome in Boxer Dogs, Doberman
Pinschers, Rottweilers, and Great Danes. Long-coated
breeds such as Cocker Spaniels, English Setters, Siberian
Huskies and Chesapeake Bay Retrievers have been seen
with postgrooming furunculosis linked to dog washing
Fig. 17.14 Closer view of the dorsal midline region of the dog in
facilities or shampooing.
Fig. 17.13. Patchy partial alopecia with scattered erythermatous
Postgrooming furunculosis is visually distinctive. Clin
papules is present. Nodular inflarmmation was palpable.
ical differential diagnoses include deep bacterial follicul-
428
 Diseases of the adnexa
Fig. 17.16 Higher magnification of Fig. 17.15. Note abundant,
the furuncle.
(near bottom).
itis and furunculosis due to other triggers (see p. 420). A
edema, extends to the surrounding dermis and in some
correlative history of recent grooming or the use of a self-
cases to the panniculus as well. Often furuncles are sur-
service dog washing facility increases the likelihood of the
prisingly superfcial in location, given their severity, and
diagnosis. In that historical seting, typical physical and
may project slightly above the epidermis. Free hair shafts
histopathologic fndings confrm the diagnosis.
lie at the centers of large pustules. Fewer eosinophils and
macrophages are intermingled. Edema, congestion, and
mild inflammation extend to the regional nonpustular
Biopsy site selection
dermis. Chronic lesions of furunculosis, including granu-
pue sannsnd uon pannoid aq pinous suauads Asdo
loma formation and scarring, are rarely presented,
hemorrhagic bullae. Larger punch biopsy is preferable,
perhaps due to the acute and severe nature of this entity,
since smaller biopsy may create artifact in friable tissue.
which results in early biopsy.
 Differential diagnoses principally include nongroom-
ing-associated bacterial furunculosis and eosinophilic
Histopathology (Figures 17.15 and 17.16)
furunculosis of the face. The former tends not to feature
The epidermis is generally acanthotic. There may be
severe hemorrhage unless lesions are deep and severe; the
attenuation or ulceration over areas of pustule formation.
latter is prominently eosinophilic. The pustules of post-
There is generally massive neutrophilic pustulation in and
grooming furunculosis are often more superficial. Deep
around destroyed hair follicles. Hemorrhage is often
bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis are complications
abundant, but nonhemorrhagic furuncles are also evident
 of other skin diseases with a traumatic component such
Pustular inflammation, mingled with hemorrhage and
as acral lick dermatitis, interdigital furunculosis, canine
Pustular and nodular diseases with adnexal destruction
429
Fig. 17.17 Acral lick dermatitis on the medial aspect of a foreleg.
The lesion is raised and well-dermarcated, and has several fistulas
associated with deep secondary bacterial infection. {Photograph
courtesy A. Werner; case material University of California, Davis.)
callus pyoderma, and canine acne. Specific features,
 including anatomic location, should allow defnitive diag-
nosis in most cases.
ACRAL LICK DERMATITIS
Clinical features (Figure 17.17)
See Chapter 7.
Biopsy site selection
See Chapter 7.
Fig. 17.18 Furunculosis in acral lick derrmatitis. A large pustule has
exploded through the wall of the central hair follicle.
Histopathology (Figures 17.18 and 17.19)
Acral lick lesions demonstrate severe acanthosis, ulcera-
tion, vertical streaking fbrosis, and perihidradenitis (see
Differential diagnosis includes traumatic furunculosis
Chapter 7). In addition there may be traumatic furuncu-
in other settings, such as canine callus pyoderma, inter-
losis. Free keratin and hair shafts are often displaced well
digital furunculosis, canine acne, and postgrooming
beneath the level of the hair follicles. Hair may be found
furunculosis. The anatomic location of the lesions and
in the superficial subcutis. Inflammation is generally deep
concurrent histologic features of acral lick dermatitis
as well, and may progress to cellulitis (diffuse inflamma-
usually allow differentiation.
tion of the subcutis) in severe cases. Foreign body granu-
lomas or pyogranulomas with giant cells may form
ACTINIC FURUNCULOSIS
around fragments of hairs (trichogranulomas), or around
keratin (keratogranulomas). There is often fbrosis deep
Clinical features (Figure 17.20)
and peripheral to inflammatory foci. Fibrous connective
tissue may surround displaced hair shafts.
Actinic furunculosis is a relatively uncommon, solar-
Displaced hairs imply pressure or frictional trauma,
induced, deep bacterial pyoderma that is seen most fre-
but are not necessarily specifc to a traumatic etiology.
quently in environments with enhanced solar exposure.
Severe follicular inflammation alone may be suffcient to
Actinic furunculosis usually occurs in conjunction with a
‘explode’ hair follicles and result in displaced hair shafts.
spectrum of other solar-induced preneoplastic and neo-
However very deep embedment of hair shafts is highly
plastic changes, including actinic keratosis (see Chapters
suggestive of trauma. Traumatic furunculosis sometimes
7 and 22), actinic comedones (see Chapter 8), solar elas-
is inferred from the clinical setting in cases where furun-
tosis and fbrosis (see Chapter 15), and squamous cell car-
culosis is not accompanied by displaced hairs.
cinoma (see Chapter 22). Actinic furunculosis can develop
430
Diseases of the adnexa
 in any hair follicle located in regions of solar damage, or
can arise directly from actinic comedones.
Crusted, erythematous nodules and hemorrhagic bullae
are the most common lesions seen with actinic furuncu-
losis. Nodules may be intact or fistulated. Adherent crusts
usually are hemorrhagic. The clinical features of actinic
furunculosis occur in the context of other solar-induced
lesions; for example, actinic furuncles may develop in
conjunction with the roughened, exfoliating, indurated
erythematous plaques of actinic keratosis. Affected
regions exhibit varying degrees of irregular frmness and
thickening, suggesting more widespread solar-induced
change. The glabrous skin of the ventral and lateral
abdomen, inner thighs, and dorsal muzzle is most fre-
quently affected. Lesions may be painful or pruritic,
eliciting self-grooming of exudate and crusts.
 As for other actinic lesions, lightly pigmented, sparsely
haired animals are more likely to develop actinic furun-
culosis. Dalmatians, Whippets, Italian Greyhounds, Grey-
hounds, American Staffordshire Terriers, Bull Terriers,
Beagles, and Basset Hounds are at increased risk for all
actinic lesions. Actinic furunculosis occurs most com-
monly in older animals, but has been seen in dogs as
young as 2 years of age. Animals spending substantial
time outdoors in areas of the world with increased solar
exposure are at greater risk. Many affected dogs are
reported to be sunbathers and spend long periods of time
in dorsal or lateral recumbency in direct sunlight.
Clinical differential diagnoses for actinic furunculosis
Fig. 17.19 Traumatic furunculosis in acral lick dermatitis. A deeply
include other causes of deep bacterial folliculitis and
displaced hair shaft (near bottom) lies in a sea of suppurative inflarm-
furunculosis, demodicosis with secondary deep pyo-
 mation. A broken hair shaft is extruding from a hair follicle near the
derma, and infections of systemic fungi or opportunistic
top right.
fungi or algae (see Chapter 12). Diagnosis is aided by a
correlative history of breed, coat color and length, long-
term solar exposure, and lesion localization to body sites
commonly affected by solar damage. The presence of
other lesions (especially comedones) suspicious for solar
damage also is useful. Skin biopsy is necessary to confirm
actinic furunculosis.
Biopsy site selection
Multiple nodules or hemorrhagic bullae should be surgi-
cally excised. Intact as well as fistulated nodules should
be sampled. If present, erythematous macules, crusted
plaques, areas of induration, and margins of ulcers also
should be obtained in order to reveal the spectrum of
 disease present and to uncover possible coexistent solar-
induced neoplasia.
Fig. 17.20 Actinic furunculosis amid widespread actinic damage
on the ventrum of a Dalmatian prone to sunbathing. Erythematous
nodules and papules have developed in the setting of actinic damage.
Histopathology (Figure 17.21)
Rupture of affected follicles leads to severe inflammation
as seen in bacterial furunculosis (see p. 420). Actinic
Pustular and nodular diseases with adnexal destruction
431
        
nodular inflammation is present both interdigitally and on the
margins of the pawpads, accompanied by alopecia, exudative
crusting, and erosion.
Schnauzer comedo syndrome. The presence of solar
changes in the superficial dermis (see Chapter 15) sup-
ports an actinic cause for the comedones observed. The
concentric accumulation of pale staining collagen around
the distended follicle is suggestive for actinic comedones,
but is not always present. Also, this pattern of fbrosis is
occasionally seen in the comedones of callus (see Chapter
8). Correlation with clinical features such as site or breed
affected may be required; actinic furunculosis in the
absence of actinic comedones or other solar changes
Fig. 17.21 Actinic furunculosis. A furuncle at left is occurring in a
always requires clinical differentiation.
noncomedonal follicle. An actinic comedone is at right
INTERDIGITAL FURUNCULOSIS
furunculosis often occurs in the context of actinic come-
(Synonym: pedal folliculitis and furunculosis, interdigital
dones (see Chapter 8). Affected follicles are distended
pyoderma)
with keratin and are surrounded by pale, slightly
basophilic layers of collagen. The inflammation may be
Clinical features (Figure 17.22)
more consistently deep dermal and diffuse than in classi-
cal deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis (see p. 420),
Interdigital furunculosis is a common subgroup of canine
as if the bottom had ‘dropped out'’ of the comedones.
 deep pyoderma. Lesions occur predominantly in the inter-
Severe folliculitis and furunculosis also may be found in
digital webs, but may affect the digits as well. Although
specimens obtained from sun-exposed skin of white dogs 
interdigital furunculosis is multifactorial, trauma to hair
without histopathologic evidence of comedo formation.
 follicles probably is a common precipitating cause. Inter-
Actinic comedones may have been destroyed by inflam-
digital furunculosis that occurs without initiating inflam-
mation in these specimens; alternatively, there may be
 matory skin disease may be induced by short, bristly hairs
another solar-related mechanism, other than formation of
 rubbing against the skin of apposing digits. This directly
comedones with rupture, which induces severe pyoderma
promotes follicular trauma and rupture leading to sec-
in these animals. Concurrent features of other solar
 ondary pyoderma in the dorsal interdigital webs. Inter-
lesions such as actinic keratosis, solar fbrosis, or solar
digital pyoderma also may be promoted by rupture of
elastosis may be present (see Chapters 7, 15, and 22).
obstructed, keratin-flled follicles that are produced from
 Differential diagnoses for actinic furunculosis occurring
chronic friction or other trauma, as seen in callus pyo-
with actinic comedones include other comedonal diseases
derma (see p. 433). Dogs with abnormal foot conforma-
in which secondary furuncles occur. These include callus
tion (fat feet') may have increased friction of this type
pyoderma, some lesions of interdigital furunculosis, and
and therefore may be predisposed.
432
Diseases of the adnexa
Trauma or self-trauma enhances susceptibility to inter-
feet to varying degrees. If lesions occur elsewhere in addi-
digital furunculosis. Various foreign bodies such as fox-
tion to the interdigital webs, than all other causes of deep
tails, other grass awns, slivers, and thorns may initiate
bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis must be investigated
inflammation and licking. Damage also may be initiated
(see p. 420). Multiple, deep skin scrapings should always
by running on irregular or sharp terrain, bruising contact
be performed to rule out underlying demodicosis. If scar-
with nonpenetrating foreign bodies (vegetation stubble,
ring is severe, skin biopsy may be required to rule out
gravel), and contact with irritant substances. Repetitive,
demodicosis; skin biopsy commonly is required to rule
interdigital self-rauma caused by pruritus probably is an
out other causes of interdigital skin disease.
additional trigger; thus, allergic skin disease such as
canine atopic dermatitis and food allergy may initiate this
Biopsy site selection
syndrome. Congenital or acquired immunodeficiency can
 promote interdigital as well as generalized pyoderma.
Early intact pustules, nodules, or bullae are recommended
The clinical features seen with interdigital furunculosis
lesions for biopsy. Ulcerated or scarred lesions may be less
are varied, but nodular inflammation is the unifying
desirable as they are less likely to yield diagnostic follic-
element. Erythema, edema, and pustules are common fea-
ular lesions due to loss of normal tissue architecture. If
tures. Hemorrhagic bullae may be present. Erosions and
isolated lesions are present, complete excision may offer
ulceration with fistulation and alopecia occur with advanc-
 the best method of clinical management.
ing disease. Constant licking leads to maceration, chronic
moistness, and surface bacterial and Malassezia over-
Histopathology (Figure 17.23 and 17.24)
growth. Self-grooming usually removes purulent or serosan-
 guinous crusts. Secondary paronychia is common. Scarring
The epidermis is severely acanthotic and may demonstrate
may be severe in chronic cases. Chronicity fosters increased
erosion or ulceration. There is variable suppurative to
pruritus and pain, and commonly leads to lameness.
 The dorsal interdigital webs most commonly
are
affected frst in cases not initiated by ventral foreign
bodies or trauma associated with running on irregular or
rough surfaces. Involvement of the ventral interdigital
webs usually occurs after dorsal disease is present. Pene-
trating foreign bodies lead to nonsymmetric disease; one
foot may initially be affected or may be more severely
affected. Isolated lesions due to follicular keratin accu-
mulation and rupture (interdigital “cysts') are also
 observed. The front feet are most commonly and usually
most severely affected, particularly with underlying aller-
gic disease, due to increased ease of self-trauma at these
sites; however frequently all four feet are affected.
Regional lymphadenopathy is common.
Marked breed predilections offer clues to pathogenesis
Brachycephalic breeds such as Boxers, English Bulldogs.
Mastiffs, and Bull Mastiffs may be predisposed in con-
junction with having short, bristly interdigital hairs and
poor foot conformation. Other affected dogs with similar
hair coat characteristics include Bull Terriers, Dachs-
hunds, Great Danes, Dalmatians, Weimaraners, and
German Shorthaired Pointers. Predisposed breeds with
different hair coat characteristics include the Pekingese,
Golden Retriever, Labrador Retriever, German Shepherd
Dog, and Irish Setter (Scott et al., 2001). Hunting breeds
may be predisposed due to lifestyles that encourage pedal
[rauma (Scott et al., 2001). Age or sex predilections have
not been reported.
Clinical differential  diagnoses include  interdigital
furunculosis secondary to demodicosis (pododermodico-
sis), deep fungal infections, and hookworm dermatitis.
Fig. 17.23 Interdigital follicular cyst with furunculosis. Note
Many cases of interdigital furunculosis involve all four
inflarmmation and free keratin beneath the dilated follicle.
Pustular and nodular diseases with adnexal destruction
433
Fig. 17.25 Severe callus pyoderma affecting the lateral stifle region
of a Beagle-crossbreed. Draining tracts are present within the lobular
call us.
Fig. 17.24 Higher magnification of Fig. 17.23. Free keratin is
surrounded by neutrophils and larger macrophages.
Fig. 17.26 Chronic callus pyoderma on the dorsal muzzle of a Bull
pyogranulomatous inflammation with follicular rupture,
Terrier that habitually slept in a dorsiflexed position.
as described for furunculosis (see p. 420). Fibrosis is
severe in chronic lesions. A consistent feature of interdig-
ital furunculosis is the presence of keratin-plugged folli-
cles; however this is not present in all cases (or in all
CALLUS PYODERMA
lesions selected for biopsy). Extreme follicular keratosis
with comedo or cyst formation may occur. There may be
(Synonym: pressure-point pyoderma)
features of traumatic furunculosis, including deep dis-
placement of hair shafts well below the level of hair fol.
Clinical features (Figure 17.25 through 17.27)
licles. Foreign body granulomas or pyogranulomas with
giant cells may form around fragments of hairs (tri-
Callus pyoderma is a subset of traumatic furunculosis
chogranulomas), or around keratin (keratogranulomas).
that occurs from repeated trauma to calluses over bony
Differential diagnoses include other syndromes of
prominences and other pressure points. Callus pyoderma
furunculosis with follicular keratosis, specifically actinic
is common in dogs and rare in cats. Uninflamed calluses
furunculosis with actinic comedones, Schnauzer comedo
syndrome, and canine callus pyoderma. Deep bacterial fol-
 trauma, especially from habitual contact with hard and
liculitis and furunculosis are complications of other skin
rough surfaces (see Chapter 8). Rupture of the follicular
diseases with a traumatic component (traumatic furuncu-
cysts that are a frequent component of “calluses' in dogs
losis) such as acral lick dermatitis, and canine acne; these
and cats leads to release of hair and keratin, which pro-
differential diagnoses may be considered for lesions in 
vokes secondary bacterial furunculosis and a foreign body
which follicular plugging is not found. Knowledge of the 
response to the displaced hairs and keratinous debris, cre-
site and breed affected is the key to differentiation.
ating callus pyoderma.
434
 Diseases of the adnexa
Visible inflammation occurring in a callus is the clini-
cal hallmark of callus pyoderma. Inflammation may affect
the entire callus, or be localized. Frank pustules and
nodules with or without obvious fistulation confrm callus
 pyoderma. Erosion or ulceration may be present. It is gen-
erally assumed that visually noninflamed gray or white
calluses do not exhibit callus pyoderma. However since
these calluses rarely are biopsied, subtle or mild callus
pyoderma may be more common than assumed currently.
Multiple hairs emanating from abnormally enlarged hair
follicles may indicate previous episodes of callus pyo-
derma with recanalization after severe furunculosis.
Lesional distribution and breed predilections are as for
callus (see Chapter 8).
Canine and feline callus pyoderma is visually dis-
tinctive. Canine acral lick dermatitis may superfcially
resemble callus pyoderma, but has different site predilec-
tions. Plaques of coalescing actinic comedones may
resemble calluses with pyoderma, but usually are not
associated with pressure points. Specifcally, sternal callus
pyoderma may resemble actinic comedones with actinic
furunculosis.
Fig. 17.27 Closer view of the dog in Fig. 17.26. Note dramatic
thickening, erythema, and comedones. However, grossly visual con-
Biopsy site selection
firmation of active secondary pyoderma is lacking. Severe scarring
associated with previous infection has deformed the norrmal contour
See Callus, Chapter 8.
of the rmuzzle.
Histopathology (Figures 17.28 and 17.29)
The epidermis is severely acanthotic, and hyperplasia
usually extends to follicular infundibula, creating an
undulating or papillated surface to the lesion. In most
Fig. 17.28 Canine callus pyoderma.
Thickened and keratin-distended hair
follicles are surrounded by severe
inflammation.
Pustular and nodular diseases with adnexal destruction
435
Fig. 17.30 Canine acne affecting the ventral muzzle of a Doberman
Pinscher. Active, erythematous furuncles are present amid alopecia
and scarring from previous inflammation.
syndrome, or in interdigital furunculosis in which follic-
ular plugging is featured. These other syndromes usually
do not have the severe epidermal and follicular infundibu-
Fig. 17.29 Higher magnification of Fig. 17.28. Pustular inflamma
tion surrounds free keratin from a ruptured hair follicle.
lar hyperplasia that is seen in most cases of canine callus.
The concentric accumulation of pale staining collagen
around the distended follicle is suggestive of actinic come-
cases, follicular infundibula are severely acanthotic, but
dones; however, this pattern of fbrosis occasionally is
may be only mildly to moderately affected in some
seen in callus (see Chapter 8). Knowledge of the site and
lesions. There is variable superficial hyperkeratosis and
breed affected may be required for differentiation. Feline
parakeratosis, and crusting or ulceration may be a feature
acne may resemble feline callus pyoderma; however the
of inflamed lesions.
large sebaceous glands of the chin allow differentiation in
Superficial hair follicles are greatly distended with
most cases.
keratin to form cysts as in uninflamed callus (see Chapter
8). Rupture of these cysts leads to release of hair and
CANINE ACNE
keratin which provokes severe suppurative and pyogran-
ulomatous inflammation in the dermis and the subcutis
(Synonym: muzzle folliculitis and furunculosis)
(callus pyoderma). There may be cavitation of severely
inflamed tissue. Trichogranulomas, or the accumulation
Clinical features (Figures 17.30 and 17.31)
of macrophages, giant cells, and neutrophils around free
hair, may form around deeply imbedded hair shafts (trau-
Canine acne is a common inflammatory skin disease of
matic furunculosis). Foreign body granulomas may also
young dogs characterized by deep folliculitis and furun-
form around free keratin (keratogranulomas). Granula-
culosis affecting the chin and haired skin adjacent to the
tion tissue and mature fbrosis may be prominent in severe
lips. The cause of canine acne is not known. However,
and chronic lesions.
it is seen almost exclusively in young dogs of short
 Differential diagnoses for callus pyoderma include dis-
haircoated breeds. Similarities to ‘acne' in humans are
eases with comedones in which secondary furunculosis
 minimal. Bacterial involvement, when present, probably
occurs, such as actinic comedones, Schnauzer comedo
is secondary.
436
Diseases of the adnexa
Mastiff (Scott et al., 2001). However, many members of
these breeds do not develop canine acne, leading to spec-
ulation of variable genetic susceptibility (Scott et al.
2001). The onset of disease generally occurs at less than
6 months of age and persists through the frst year of life.
Sex predilections have not been noted.
Canine acne usually is visually distinctive; clinical
differential diagnoses are few. Occasionally, localized
demodicosis, dermatophytosis, and early, mild juvenile
sterile granulomatous dermatitis and lymphadenitis may
mimic canine acne. Negative skin scrapings for demodi-
cosis, dermatophyte culture, and the lack of more gener-
alized or systemic signs should aid in ruling out these
 diseases. Early stages of canine acne rarely are biopsied
 as they are clinically pathognomonic. Consequently, most
cases that are biopsied are more severe and characterized
by more obvious furunculosis.
Biopsy site selection
Fig. 17.31 Severe canine acne affecting the ventral muzzle of a blue
Doberman Pinscher. Coalescing nodules and severe scarring are
Punch biopsy specimens should be obtained from char-
accompanied by ulceration and occasional small fistulae.
acteristic lesions. Cosmetic results are best achieved by
sampling the ventral chin. Sampling of larger comedones
or furuncles using a 4 mm punch may be curative for indi-
It is speculated that genetic predilection coupled with
vidual lesions.
localized trauma initiate the lesions of canine acne (Scott
et al., 2001). The short, bristly haircoats of affected
Histopathology (Figures 17.32 and 17.33)
breeds afford little protection for the underlying skin
during aggressive play (Scott et al., 2001). Hair follicle
The epidermis is generally moderately acanthotic and
trauma may initiate follicular keratin accumulation,
 may be crusted. Ulceration is rare and limited to very
inflammation, and traumatic furunculosis; the histo-
severely inflamed lesions that have been aggravated by
 pathology of canine acne supports this hypothesis.
self-trauma.
Prominent papules centered on hair follicles are the
 Early lesions occasionally may show intact comedones
initial lesion of canine acne. Papules enlarge, form pus-
surrounded by mixed inflammatory cells, including neu-
tules, rupture, shed the central hair and evolve to frm
 trophils, macrophages, and plasma cells. However, lesions
 nodules. Nodules may fistulate and drain. Variable degrees 
of canine acne submitted for histopathology most often are
of erythema and alopecia accompany the primary lesions.
those of folliculitis and furunculosis only, without evidence
Fistulous racts may occur as sequelae to follicular rupture,
of follicular comedones. There may be traumatic furuncu-
leading to scarring. Erosion or ulceration may be seen in
losis, characterized by hair shafts that are displaced below
unusually severe cases. Much less commonly, comedones
the level of inflamed hair follicles. These extruded hairs are
containing dark, inspissated material may develop from
-weui snoieuoinueraord oi aaemnddns Aq papunoinns
affected hair follicles and, when present, are most promi-
mation  (trichogranulomas); keratogranulomas around
nent centrally on the rostral portion of the chin.
 keratin fragments may also be present. Bacteria (staphylo-
Canine acne is seen on the chin and less commonly in
 cocci) may be present in superfcial follicles. A single case
the skin surrounding the lower lip. The haired skin adja-
 of bacterial pseudomycetoma (see Chapter 12) occurring
cent to the upper lip and lateral muzzle may be affected
in the setting of canine acne was observed by the authors.
in more severe cases. Partial bilateral symmetry is
Sebaceous glands are large, as is expected for the chin;
common. Pruritus, if present, usually is mild. Pain may
sebaceous ducts may be dilated.
occur with severe secondary deep bacterial folliculitis and
Canine acne usually is indistinguishable from classical
furunculosis. Affected dogs are otherwise normal.
deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis. Deep bacterial
Canine acne is seen most frequently in large short-
folliculitis and furunculosis are complications of other
coated breeds with short, bristly haircoats such as the
skin diseases with a traumatic component (traumatic
Doberman Pinscher, Great Dane, English Bulldog.
furunculosis) such as acral lick dermatitis and interdigital
German Shorthaired Pointer, Boxer Weimaraner and
furunculosis. If comedones are present, differential diag-
Pustular and nodular diseases with adnexal destruction
437
Fig. 17.32 Canine acne. Severe diffuse inflammation includes folli-
culitis and furunculosis.
Fig. 17.33 Higher magnification of Fig. 17.32. A furuncle contains
central hair shafts.
noses include those diseases characterized by comedones
and complicated by furunculosis, such as Schnauzer
comedo syndrome, interdigital furunculosis with follicu-
lar plugging, canine callus pyoderma, and actinic furun-
sebaceous glands of the chin will allow differentiation of
canine acne from these other diseases.
FELINE ACNE
Clinical features (Figures 17.34 and 17.35)
Feline acne is a relatively common feline skin disease char-
acterized by comedo formation and secondary inflam-
mation on the chin and skin adjacent to the lips. The
etiopathogenesis of feline acne is not understood. Unlike
acne in humans and dogs, feline acne is not associated
with young age.
 Poor grooming habits and defects in follicular kera-
tinization have been suggested as causes (Scott et al.,
Fig. 17.34 Severe feline acne. Extensive crusting with alopecia is
2001). The cyclical or periodic nature of the disease may
present on the ventral muzzle. (Photograph courtesy E.M. Sleeper.)
relate to the inability of the new anagen hairs to extrude
the developing keratosebaceous plugs. A localized corni-
438
Diseases of the adnexa
Fig. 17.35 Severe feline acne with chronic and deep inflammation.
Note swelling and fistulous tracts.
fcation defect might be exacerbated by altered sebum
composition or production from the large sebaceous
glands in the chin. Bacterial involvement, when present,
probably is secondary and associated with follicular
rupture. A variety of bacteria including Staphylococus
spp., Streptococcus spp., and Pasteurella muitocida have
been isolated (White et al., 1997). Malassezia spp. may
be revealed by cytology. Unexplained, seemingly conta-
gious feline acne may occur within multicat households
on rare occasion. Occasionally, there may be severe and
diffuse inflammation, histologically reminiscent of sterile
granuloma and pyogranuloma syndrome (see Chapter
Fig. 17.36 Feline acne. Pustular inflarmmation surrounding a
13). The relationship of this presentation to classical
ruptured follicle lies adjacent to a dilated follicle; note prominent
feline acne is not known; the authors suspect an exag-
sebaceous glands of the chin.
 gerated immunologic reaction.
Early and mild feline acne is characterized by come-
dones, mildly erythematous crusted papules, and pustules
that develop on the chin, and less commonly on the skin
Paradoxically and infrequently, clinical disease may be
adjacent to both the upper and lower lips. Swelling of the
limited to a single episode or small numbers of episodes.
chin is variable and may be diffuse. Solitary comedones
The clinical features of feline acne are visually distinc.
 containing dark, inspissated material are most prominent
tive such that clinical differential diagnosis rarely is a
around the lateral commissures of the mouth and the
problem. Occasionally, dermatophytosis, feline demodi-
margins of the lower lip. Multiple small flakes of discol-
cosis, Malassezia dermatitis, or canine tooth root
ored keratinous debris may be distributed through the
abscesses leading to regional cellulitis may mimic feline
haircoat of the chin, creating the appearance of sprinkled
acne. Bilateral symmetry and frank comedone formation 
 black pepper. Firm nodules and less distinct diffuse frm
are helpful differentiating features of feline acne. Skin
swelling indicate progression to furunculosis. Diffuse frm 
scrapings, dermatophyte culture, cytology, and histopath-
swelling, severe crusting, variable erythema, and alopecia
ology will also allow differentiation. Histopathology gen-
characterize severe and chronic cases. Individual lesions
erally is performed in severe refractory cases only.
 may fistulate, leading to focal abscessation and scarring.
Partial bilateral symmetry is common. Feline acne usually
Biopsy site selection
is asymptomatic; pruritus or pain is uncommon unless
severe deep pyoderma is present.
Punch biopsy specimens should be obtained from discrete
 Breed or sex predilections have not been noted. Feline
comedones. Cosmetic results are best achieved by sam-
acne often commences at less than 1 year of age and
pling the ventral chin. Sampling of larger comedones using
remains a lifelong disease, cyclically varying in severity.
a 4mm punch may be curative for individual lesions.
Pustular and nodular diseases with adnexal destruction
439
Fig. 17.38 Apical abscess of lower canine tooth rmimicking feline
Fig. 17.37 Higher magnification of feline acne. A keratin filled
follicle has ruptured creating a furuncle.
acne.The inflammation is extensive and cavitating; however, note
that an adjacent folliculosebaceous unit demonstrates only mild
dilatation.
Histopathology (Figures 17.36 through 17.38)
furunculosis and its attendant inflammatory changes (see
The epidermis is acanthotic and occasionally eroded and
p.420).
crusted. Typically, superficial hair follicles are distended
 Some clinically refractory lesions feature diffuse pyo-
with keratin (comedones), occasionally to the point of
granulomatous inflammation. In these cases, the inflam-
frank cyst formation. Portions of this follicular keratin,
mation is severe throughout the dermis and is often
as well as overlying epidermal keratin, may exhibit light
obliterative; it is not folliculocentric as in classical feline
brown to dark brown, agranular discoloration, the nature
acne. The mechanism of generation of these lesions is not
of which is not known. It resembles ceroid or lipofuscin
known. Pyogranulomatous inflammation resembles that
pigment (but is acid-fast negative) and may possibly
of sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma syndrome or
represent oxidized lipid or other products of sebaceous
 opporunistic fungal or mycobacterial diseases (see Chap-
gland origin. Bacterial degradation of sebum and/or
ters 12 and 13) and diffusely surrounds dilated sebaceous
keratin may also be a factor. Occasionally, Malassezia
ducts or hair follicles, without evidence of rupture or
are seen within comedones, and staphylococci are not
furunculosis. Special stains for fungi and mycobacteria
uncommon. Affected follicles may be uninflamed and
 are negative. Diffuse pyogranulomatous dermatitis of the
are surrounded by large sebaceous glands that identify
chin may be a separate syndrome in cats.
the skin of the chin. Sebaceous ducts are commonly dis-
 Early lesions are diagnostic for feline acne, particularly
tended with sebum. There may be mild encircling inflam-
when the typically prominent sebaceous glands of this
mation of lymphocytes, plasma cells, and neutrophils.
area of skin are identifed. Diffuse pyogranulomatous
Rupture of keratin-filled follicles is common, leading to
 lesions may mimic those of sterile granuloma and pyo-
440
Diseases of the adnexa
Fig. 17.39 Kerion dueto Microsporum canis on the ventral muzzle
of a Keeshond. Characteristic minute oozing fistulas are visible
within the alopecic nodule.
granuloma syndrome, or fungal or mycobacterial infec-
tions. Special stains will not reveal agents in feline acne,
other than staphylococcal bacteria or occasional intra-
follicular yeasts. Focal fistulating, pustular lesions of the
Fig. 17.40 Kerion on the dorsal muzzle of a Golden Retriever. Note
chin (without evidence of follicular keratosis) occasion-
foci of hemorrhagic fistulation. The adjacent (nonhaired) planum
ally have been seen in cats with confrmed apical root
nasale is not affected.
abscesses of the lower canine teeth. Clinical differentia-
tion via dental radiography is critical in these cases.
to 5 cm. A hand lens may reveal broken hairs studding the
boggy nodule, as well as minute fstulous tracts on the
KERION
surface of the nodules; gentle pressure expresses beads of
serous fluid from the tracts. Erosion or ulceration may
occur. Peripheral scale is common, and crusting may be
Clinical features (Figures 17.39 and 17.40)
evident if the lesion is located where the dog cannot
Kerion is an uncommon florid variant of canine der-
groom away the exudate.
matophytosis characterized by intense focal inflammation
Most kerion are solitary, but occasionally multifocal
with swelling. The cause of kerion formation is not
lesions may be seen. Most kerion develop on the face or
known. However, since kerion dermatophytosis is associ-
forelegs, but lesions may occur at any site. Regional lym-
ated with marked inflammation and commonly leads
phadenopathy is a common feature. Pruritus or pain is
to spontaneous resolution, one may speculate that an
minimal, but may occur with larger lesions. Spontaneous
enhanced host immune response may be responsible.
regression occurs in the majority of cases followed by the
Kerion is reportedly seen most frequently in conjunction
authors.
with Microsporum gypseum infection (Foil,
1998).
Breed, 2
age, or sex predilections have not been
However, kerion may be seen with a variety of dermato-
established. However the Boxer may be at increased
phytes, including Trichophyton mentagrophytes
and
risk for solitary lesions and the Golden Retriever may
Microsporum canis. In humans, kerion dermatophytosis
be   at  i
increased
risk for widespread, multifocal
is seen most often with organisms that are maladapted to
lesions.
human skin and thus cause more florid inflammation
 Clinical differential diagnoses include neoplasms that
(Martin & Kobayashi, 1999). The zoonotic potential of
may be nodular erythematous, and alopecic (such as mast
kerion seems to be less than for other varieties of canine
cell tumors or histiocytomas), foreign body reactions, and
dermatophytosis; this may be due to the depth of infec-
infectious nodules such as canine leproid granulomas (see
tion and the paucity of viable organisms present on the
Chapter 12). Dermatophyte culture may not be helpful
 surface of these highly inflamed lesions.
as kerion may yield negative results. Early skin biopsy is
Kerion develop acutely as erythematous, exudative,
recommended for differentiation, since neoplasia is a
alopecic, domed nodules. Kerion vary in diameter from 1
differential diagnosis.
Pustular and nodular diseases with adnexal destruction
441
Fig. 17.41 Kerion in a dog. A large pyogranuloma surrounds a free
Fig. 17.42 Higher magnification of Fig. 17.41. Note wavy, pale.
dermatophyte-colonized hair fragment.
somewhat refractile dermatophytic hyphae within hair shaft.
Remnants of hair shafts at the centers of inflammatory
Biopsy site selection
foci may contain dermatophytic spores and hyphae;
Since kerion are usually solitary lesions, complete resec-
occasional colonization of surface hairs is seen. Heavy
tion is indicated, as the added benefit of a surgical cure 
colonization results in a pink-peach, slightly refractile
will be obtained. In addition, wedge resection is advisable
appearance of hairs upon low power examination; this
diagnostically, as kerion can mimic cutaneous neoplasia
pigmentary alteration is most obvious in colonized hairs
clinically.
as scattered, almost clear linear, or wavy hyphae within
 the hair fragments. Dermatophytes may not be evident in
Histopathology (Figures 17.41 and 17.42)
severely inflamed lesions, since organisms cannot persist
The epidermis is acanthotic and may be ulcerated or
in these conditions. A periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) or
crusted. Severe furunculosis is present throughout. Hair
Gomori's methenamine silver (GMS) stain will color der-
follicles are ruptured and replaced by tightly oriented,
 matophytes magenta or black, respectively.
nodular pyogranulomas, or less often, granulomas. Pyo-
Differential diagnosis, if organisms are not located,
granulomas are large, often very discrete, and contain
 principally includes deep bacterial folliculitis and furun-
central neutrophils surrounded by macrophages, and
culosis. However, the often strikingly discrete pyogranu-
sometimes giant cells. Moderate to large numbers of
lomatous inflammation around free hairs in kerion is
eosinophils are often present, but can be sparse or absent.
different from most cases of bacterial furunculosis, in
These lesions may suround hair fragments. Inflammation
which inflammation tends to be more pustular and loosely
may become confluent, resulting in a diffuse distribution
organized. If eosinophils are abundant, eosinophilic
in the dermis.
furunculosis of the face may be considered. Eosinophilic
442
Diseases of the adnexa
Fig. 17.43 Juvenile-onset generalized demodicosis in a blue merle
Shetland Sheepdog. Note the partial, patchy alopecia. Crusting is
present on the exposed, erythermatous skin.
furunculosis generally features more explosive furunculo-
sis with extensive hemorrhage and mucin.
CANINE DEMODICOSIS
(Synonym: demodectic mange, demodectic acariasis)
Clinical features (Figures 17.43 through 17.45)
Hig. 17.44 Juvenile-onset generalized dermodicosis in a Shih Tzu
Canine demodicosis is a noncontagious parasitic skin
characterized by scarred erythermatous plaques. Note that wide-
disease caused by an overpopulation of the host-specifc
spread alopecia is not a feature of demodicosis in this breed; the dog
follicular mite of various Demodex species. The great
has been clipped to enhance visualization of the lesions.
majority of cases of canine demodicosis are caused by
Demodex canis, although two other species of demodicid
mites are seen. Canine demodicosis may be divided into
juvenile-onset and the less common, adult-onset forms;
both forms may be localized or generalized. Localized 
demodicosis, a mild and benign self-limiting disease, is
 very common in dogs. Generalized demodicosis, a serious
and potentially life-threatening disease, is seen less fre-
quently, but is relatively common. Since demodectic mites
are part of the normal canine fauna, very small numbers
of mites may be present in the hair follicles of most
mission to the newborn puppy is achieved by direct
contact with the bitch during the frst few days after birth
(Scott et al., 2001).
 Demodex canis is the species identifed in most cases of
canine demodicosis and as a commensal in normal canine
Fig. 17.45 Generalized demodicosis affecting the ventral abdomen
skin. Much less commonly, a short-bodied demodicid
of a German Shepherd Dog. Erythematous nodules and plaques are
mite is identified in conjunction with canine skin disease
indicative of secondary bacterial furunculosis.
(Chen, 1995; Chesney, 1999; Saridomichelakis et al.,
1999). A third longer-bodied demodicid mite, residing
in either hair follicles or sebaceous glands, was recently
Pustular and nodular diseases with adnexal destruction
443
named Demodex injai (Hillier & Desch, 2002; Desch &
inheritance in dogs with generalized demodicosis (Scott
Hillier 2003).
et al., 2001). Based on the heritability of this disease, the
 Although all species of demodectic mites are catego-
American Academy of Veterinary Dermatology (AAVD)
rized as hair follicle mites 
(Order:Acari;
Genus:
adopted a resolution in 1981 sponsored by Robert Kirk
Demodex) (Desch & Hillier, 2003), the only canine
-au peu aae oum sop le aanau, aupu
species that are true follicular mites are Demodex canis
ized demodicosis so that the incidence of the disease is
and Demodex injai. Current data suggest that the as yet
 decreased and not perpetuated'.
unnamed short-bodied species of canine demodicid mite
 Localized demodicosis is characterized by the develop-
is predominantly a surface dweller in the stratum
ment of one to six patchy, moderately well-demarcated,
corneum (Chen, 1995; Chesney, 1999; Saridomichelakis
partially alopecic macules or subtle plaques in one body
et al., 1999). However, caution should be exercised in
area. Lesions are occasionally nodular. Erythema and
drawing definitive conclusions regarding the ecologic
mild micaceous scaling are common features. Follicular
niche of various canine demodicid mites: there may be
plugging and comedo formation may be present, particu-
variation in the size and location of mite life stages.
larly in the German Shepherd Dog and related cross-
 Localized demodicosis is a benign, predominantly cos-
breeds. Mild pruritus may be observed, but is not a
metic skin disease characterized by intense focal colo-
consistent feature. The periorbital region, lateral com-
nization by demodicid mites. It is usually juvenile in onset
missures of the mouth, other areas of the face, and the
-ounuui ae jo suuou g ueqi ssal saiddnd ui uaas s! pue
forelegs are the most common sites. Rarely, localized
logic abnormalities have not been noted in dogs with
demodicosis may present as a bilateral ceruminous otitis
localized demodicosis (Scort et al., 2001). The great
 externa (Scott et al., 2001). Regional lymphadenopathy is
majority of dogs self-cure by 12 to 18 months of age.
common.
Rarely, localized demodicosis may be a transient phe-
Generalized demodicosis usually begins with multifo-
nomenon in adult dogs.
cal, erythematous, partially alopecic, crusted macules that
 In contrast, generalized demodicosis is a severe and
eventuate in plaques. As these original lesions enlarge,
potentially life-threatening skin disease. Most cases are
coalesce, and thicken, multiple new lesions develop. As
juvenile in onset and develop in dogs less than 1 year of
inflammation becomes more severe, lesions evolve into
age. Generalized demodicosis requires a cutaneous envi-
boggy, crusted plaques, and hair loss is more extensive.
ronment that is ecologically or immunologically favorable
 Exfoliation may be severe. Follicular openings may be
for extreme colonization by demodectic mites. A geneti-
markedly dilated and visually accentuated in the forma-
cally preprogrammed immunologic defect probably is
tion of comedones. Conical plugs of keratinous debris
responsible for the unchecked replication of demodectic
may fll hair follicles, and follicular casting may be present
 mites in dogs with juvenile-onset, generalized demodico-
(Scott et al., 2001). Similar to localized demodicosis,
sis; however, to date, immunologic studies have not doc-
occasionally generalized demodicosis may be nodular.
umented clear-cut evidence of a specifc defect. Suppressed
Hyperpigmentation, lichenification, and scarring occur
T cell function, specifically cytotoxic T cells activated by
with chronicity. Secondary pyoderma is common and
alterations in T helper cell function, is implicated (Scott
may be characterized by generalized deep folliculitis and
et al., 2001). The immunologic origin of generalized
furunculosis, and in some cases cellulitis. Hemorrhagic
demodicosis is further supported by the induction of
bullae may be present. Tissue devitalization may be
adult-onset dermodicosis by immunosuppressive therapy.
 marked in regions of boggy inflammation, and affected
such as antilymphocyte serum, glucocorticoids, or cyto-
sites may be friable.
toxic drugs. Immunosuppressive diseases such as canine
 The head, trunk, and legs usually are affected in the
hyperglucocorticoidism,
iatrogenic
hyperglucocorti-
 early stages of generalized demodicosis. Less commonly,
coidism, neoplasia (especially lymphoma), leishmaniasis,
lesions begin diffusely, affecting most body regions. Ear
and hypothyroidism also can induce adult-onset demodi-
canal and medial pinnal involvement may occur in con-
cosis (Scott et al., 2001). However immunosuppression is
junction with facial disease. The paws often are severely
not always documented in adult-onset demodicosis.
affected. Severe involvement of the feet (pododemodico-
Marked breed predilections and familial involvement
sis) may occur alone, in conjunction with generalized
 support a hereditary basis for juvenile-onset generalized
demodicosis, or as a sequel to generalized demodicosis
demodicosis. A similar, although focally expressed defect
 after other body sites have responded to miticidal therapy.
may be present in localized, juvenile-onset canine demo-
 Erythema, swelling, and secondary deep pyoderma with
dicosis, based on identical breed predilections and the
marked scarring are noted on the digits, in the inter-
progression from localized to generalized disease in a
digital webs, between the pawpads ventrally, and sur-
small number (less than 5%) of dogs (Scott et al., 2001).
rounding the clawbeds. Breed based variability in
Incidence data suggests an autosomal recessive mode of
clinical features may be prominent. Pruritus, pain, and
444
Diseases of the adnexa
generalized lymphadenopathy are frequent features of
generalized demodicosis. In severe cases of generalized
as localized demodicosis and canine familial dermato-
demodicosis, septicemia may occur.
 myositis may coexist (see Chapter 3). Negative skin scrap-
Rarely, localized or generalized ‘occult demodicosis'
ings do not preclude a diagnosis of dermodicosis; skin
 may present as very small nodules (2 to 3 mm in diame-
biopsies may be required to rule out demodicosis in at-
ter), or as patchy alopecia with variable scale. Occult
risk breeds.
demodicosis is usually correlated microscopically with
 The prime clinical differential diagnosis for generalized
 parafollicular granulomas and mural folliculitis, or both
demodicosis is deep folliculitis and furunculosis due to
(see below and Chapter 18). Mites are difficult to demon-
other causes. Unexplained pyoderma should always
strate by skin scraping in this presentation. Occult
initiate deep skin scraping. Demodicosis presenting as
demodicosis is seen most frequently in the Chinese Shar
Pei. Skin biopsy is required to rule out demodicosis in this
differentiated from primary seborrhea. Demodicosis may
breed.
be especially diffcult to diagnose by skin scrapings in the
In contrast to short-coated breeds, alopecia may be sur-
Chinese Shar Pei and in other breeds with ^occult demod-
prisingly minimal in long-coated breeds with long anagen
icosis'. Mites also may be especially diffcult to demon-
hair cycles such as the Maltese, Shih Tzu, Lhasa Apso,
 strate in dogs with severe pododemodicosis with extensive
and Miniature Poodle. This may lead to a decreased index
 scarring, since mites may be more deeply located and thus
of suspicion for demodicosis in those breeds. Severe exfo-
less available for diagnosis by skin scraping. Demodico-
liation may be the paramount sign of generalized demod-
sis can never be ruled out entirely without skin biopsy.
icosis in breeds such as the West Highland White Terrier,
Scottish Terrier and Cairn Terrier.
Biopsy site selection
Purebred dogs are at greater risk for developing
juvenile-onset  localized  and generalized demodicosis.
Generally, clinicians do not submit skin biopsy specimens
Shorthaired breeds at increased risk include the Dober-
man Pinscher, Pit Bull Terrier Chinese Shar Pei, Ameri-
since skin scraping is the most efficient diagnostic method.
can Staffordshire Terrier Dalmatian, English Bulldog.
Despite negative skin scrapings, skin biopsy specimens
Great Dane, Boston Terrier, Chihuahua, Boxer, and Pug
should be taken from unexplained foci of alopecia, and
(Scott et al., 2001). Commonly affected medium-haired
plaques and nodules of unknown origin. If pododemodi-
breeds include the West Highland White Terrier Scottish
 cosis is suspected but cannot be confrmed by skin scrap-
Terrier and Airedale. Long-haired breeds at increased risk
ings, multiple specimens should be obtained from
include the Old English Sheepdog, German Shepherd
maximally affected sites that are normally well-haired,
Dog, Collie, and Afghan Hound. Acquired adult-onset
such as the dorsum of the digits.
 generalized demodicosis without demonstrable underly-
ing immunosuppressive disease may be seen more fre-
Histopathology (Figures 17.46 through 17.50)
quently in the Cocker Spaniel. The subgroup of “occult
demodicosis’ characterized by multiple, well-demarcated
The epidermis is acanthotic, crusted, or ulcerated. Hyper-
nodules or alopecia with scale is seen most frequently in
keratosis may be severe and affects follicular infundibula.
brachycephalic breeds such as the English Bulldog, Boxer,
Single or small numbers of mites without associated
and Pit Bull Terriers, as well as Chinese Shar Peis. Juve-
inflammation may be seen in skin biopsies from the face
 nile-onset demodicosis is seen most commonly in dogs
 and are of no significance.
between 3 and 12 months of age, before sexual maturity
Three principal patterns of inflammation exist in canine
has been reached. Sex predilections are not noted with
demodicosis due to Demodex canis: folliculitis and furun-
canine demodicosis.
 culosis, parafollicular granulomas, and mural folliculitis 
 Diagnosis is not difficult in the vast majority of dogs
(see Chapter 18). All three patterns may coexist, or indi-
with either localized or generalized demodicosis, as skin
vidual patterns may predominate. Although some degree
scrapings readily demonstrate mites. However, skin scrap-
 of mural folliculitis is present in all cases (Caswell et al.
se sisosipouap jo saseo Aueu ul pauojnad iou are soui
1995), in most cases the predominant histologic lesions
the index of suspicion is low. Clinical differential diag-
are as seen with deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculo-
noses for juvenile-onset localized canine demodicosis
sis (see p. 420). Eosinophils are variable. Large numbers
include dermatophytosis, focal trauma, and less com-
of plasma cells and lymphocytes surround follicles and
monly, canine familial dermatomyositis in Collies and
apocrine sweat glands in chronic cases, and there may be
Shetland Sheepdogs. Skin scrapings should be performed
perifollicular pigmentary incontinence. F
Hair follicles
in all cases if focal alopecia is a salient feature. The finding
usually are colonized by moderate to large numbers of
of demodectic mites in a Shetland Sheepdog or Collie with
elongated Demodex canis mites (150 to 300μm in length)
Pustular and nodular diseases with adnexal destruction
445
Fig. 17.46 Demodicosis in a dog.
Dilated follicles contain elongated
Demodex mites; there is scant peri-
follicular inflammation. Note adjacent
large pyogranuloma.
Fig. 17.47 Furunculosis in canine demodicosis. A furuncle contains 
Fig. 17.48 Higher magnification of canine demodicosis demon
an escaped rmite and mite fragments.
strating an extrafollicular mite within a large pyogranuloma.
446
Diseases of the adnexa
Fig. 17.49 Parafollicular pyogranuloma in canine demodicosis.
Fig. 17.50 Higher magnification of parafollicular granuloma in
Mites are not observed in this view.
canine demodicosis. Note rmite fragment (arrow) and large multinu-
cleated giant cell.
with six or eight legs in two rows (larvae versus nymphs
cases that are negative for mites on skin scrapings (^occult
and adults). Demodex injai, measuring 334 to 368 μm,
demodicosis'). Early lesions are characterized by degen-
may be identifed in some cases (Hillier & Desch, 2002).
eration of the wall of the isthmus, often near sebaceous
 In cases of heavy infestation, mites may protrude from the
glands, accompanied by histiocytes and giant cells. These 
follicular ostia or be extruded onto the surface of the spec-
foci evolve to sharply demarcated nodules that lie adja-
imen. Ruptured hair follicles (furuncles) result in release
 s '(red, sl s  on s
of free mites into the dermis, which are surrounded by
frequently diffcult to locate in these lesions; occasional
extensive pustular or pyogranulomatous infammation.
scattered fragments may be seen within sebaceous gland
In rare cases, mites may greatly distend superfcial hair
ducts or associated hair follicles, as well as in the centers
 follicles to form comedone-like lesions.
 of the granulomas. When infammatory lesions of this
A short form of Demodex sp., as yet unnamed,
type are found in the skin biopsy, demodicosis should be
may cohabitate with Demodex canis in some cases
suspected until proven otherwise, and step-sectioning of
(Chen, 1995; Chesney, 1999; Saridomichelakis et al.,
the specimen should be performed to search for the mites.
1999). These mites, which range from 90 to 148 μm in
Differential diagnoses for demodicosis in dogs include
length (Chesney, 1999), apparently inhabit the surface
other causes of folliculitis and furunculosis. In most cases,
keratin layer of the follicular ostium or epidermis
 the relative ease of identification of the offending mites
(Saridomichelakis et al., 1999).
allows easy diagnosis. Clinically occult demodicosis with 
 Discrete parafollicular granulomas or pyogranulomas,
parafollicular granulomas is the notable exception;
often containing giant cells, may organize adjacent to or
however this pattern is distinctive and highly suggestive
beneath hair follicles, or within sebaceous glands or ducts.
for demodicosis. Dermatophytosis may rarely feature
In some cases this pattern is dominant, notably in those
similar parafollicular granulomas (as well as mural folli-
Pustular and nodular diseases with adnexal destruction
447
culitis; see Chapter 18); step-sectioning and appropriate
Stewart, 1999). A third, as yet unnamed, species of mite
special staining may be required for differentiation.
 that resembles Demodex gatoi, but is larger, also has been
identified (Chesney, 1988; Desch & Stewart, 1999).
Wide clinical variability is noted; feline demodicosis
FELINE FOLLICULAR DEMODICOSIS
may be localized and follicular, or generalized and follic-
(Synonym: demodectic mange, demodectic acariasis)
ular with features resembling canine generalized demodi-
cosis. Feline follicular demodicosis seems to be caused
Clinical features (Figures 17.51 and 17.52)
predominantly by Demodex cati. However, diffculties
may arise in the delineation and differentiation of skin
Feline demodicosis is a rare or regional parasitic skin
 diseases due to these three species of demodicid mites, as
disease caused by an overpopulation of one of at least
reports may not all accurately reflect appropriate mor-
three different species of host-specific mites, Demodex
phologic differentiation of species and life stages of the
spp. Demodex cati is a feline follicular mite with mor-
 mites. Feline superficial demodicosis, which is generalized
phologic features resembling Demodex canis in dogs
and contagious, involves mites (Demodex gatoi) that
(Scott et al., 2001). Demodex gatoi is a considerably
inhabit the surface stratum corneum only; that disease
shorter, nonfollicular species of demodicid mite that
'aet  sro) (e raideu aas) krneredas passos st
predominantly inhabits the stratum corneum (Desch &
1997; Beale, 1998; Guaguere, 2000; Scott et al., 2001).
Feline demodicosis due to Demodex cati is a rare
disease. The pathogenesis, transmission, and immunology
Demodex cati resemble those seen with Demodex canis
in dogs (see p. 442).
Demodex cati is responsible for both localized and gen-
eralized demodicosis in cats. Feline localized demodicosis
is a mild and self-limiting disease. Similar to canine gen-
eralized demodicosis, feline generalized demodicosis due
to Demodex cati infection seems to require a cutaneous
favorable for intense colonization by demodectic mites.
Alteration in the host immune system is likely responsi-
ble. The immunologic origin of feline generalized demod-
icosis due to Demodex catis supported by the association
of acquired adult-onset demodicosis with immuno-
suppressive diseases such as feline immunodefciency
virus infection (FIV), feline leukemia virus (FeLV),
Fig. 17.51 Feline demodicosis localized to the muzzle in a white
diabetes mellitus, hyperglucocorticoidism, and neoplasia
Persian cat. (Photograph courtesy I. Feleccia.)
(Guaguere, 2000; Scott et al., 2001). As in adult-onset
Fig. 17.52 Generalized feline demodicosis.
Alopecia, crusting, and hyperpigmentation are 
subtly present on the legs, shoulder, neck,
and face. Note the linear lesion of the foreleg.
(Photograph courtesy C. Collinot.)
448
Diseases of the adnexa
canine generalized demodicosis, immunosuppression or
imens to a pathologist expecting a diagnosis of follicular
underlying disease is not always documented in adult-
demodicosis. The exception is pruritic feline superficial
 onset feline generalized demodicosis.
demodicosis in which mites may be absent in scrapings
The clinical features of localized demodicosis due to
due to excessive grooming (see Chapter 9).
Demodex cati include patchy alopecia with variable ery-
 thema, scaling, and crusting. The disease most frequently
Histopathology (Figures 17.53 and 17.54)
affects the eyelids, periorbital region, and perioral
regions, and usually is limited to the head and neck. Mild
The epidermis is mildly to moderately acanthotic. There
 ceruminous otitis may be the only clinical sign or may be
may be follicular keratosis and mild crusting. Feline
present in conjunction with other facial lesions. Clinical
demodicosis due to Demodex cati is manifested as mild
features resemble those seen with mild, localized canine
perifollicular inflammation generally composed of lym-
demodicosis.
phocytes, macrophages, and neutrophils. Mural inflam-
mation of variable degree accompanies the perifollicular
Demodex cati is a less severe disease than its canine coun-
 inflammation (see Chapter 18). Follicular mural spongio-
terpart. In most affected cats, the skin disease is relatively
sis or mucinosis may be present. There may be occasional
asymptomatic.
Subtle
erythema,
variable
alopecia,
 luminal pustular folliculitis or granulomatous degenera-
scaling, and crusting are the predominant features.
tion of follicles or sebaceous glands. The mites are of
 r s q  si
similar length but are slimmer than Demodex canis (see
 may be seen with chronicity. Coat coloration changes may
 p. 442). Demodicosis may be found in association with
occur. The hair in lesional skin may become darker in
bowenoid in situ carcinoma (see Chapter 22). Often, only
breeds in which haircoat pigmentation may be tempera-
ture dependent, such as Siamese cats. Secondary pyo-
derma is rare. Lesions are noted most commonly on the
face, neck, trunk, or extremities. Pruritus is variable, but
rarely prominent. Clinical signs referable to underlying
immunosuppressive systemic diseases such as FIV or FeLV
infection, diabetes mellitis, hyperglucocorticoidism, and
neoplasia may be noted. Signalment predilection data for 
feline follicular demodicosis are not available.
 Dermatophytosis is the prime clinical differential diag-
noses for feline localized demodicosis caused by Demodex
cati. Clinical differential diagnoses for feline generalized
demodicosis caused by Demodex cati are legion, since the
clinical features are pleomorphic and variable. Dermato-
phytosis, superficial pyoderma, and cutaneous epithe-
liotropic lymphoma are possible differential diagnoses in
nonpruritic cats. In pruritic cats, the above-mentioned
diseases, plus diseases associated with excessive grooming
such as allergic dermatitis and psychogenic alopecia
should be considered. Skin scrapings should be performed
to fnd the mites. All cats with unidentifed skin disease
exhibiting subtle skin or haircoat changes should be
scraped for demodicosis. If scrapings do not afford a
definitive diagnosis, then skin biopsy should be per-
formed. Since generalized demodicosis due to Demodex
cati is seen most frequently in conjunction with underly-
ing immunosuppressive systemic diseases, affected cats
should be assessed for FIV or FeLV infection, diabetes
mellitus, hyperglucocorticoidism, and neoplasia.
Biopsy site selection
Fig. 17.53 Feline follicular demodicosis. Perifollicular inflamma-
Since skin scraping is the most effcient diagnostic
tion extends slightly to the outer follicular wall {mural folliculitis);
method, clinicians usually do not submit skin biopsy spec-
note moderate numbers of mites within follicles.
Pustular and nodular diseases with adnexal destruction
449
Fig. 17.55 Pelodera dermatitis in an English Pointer. Note the
ventral contact distribution pattern affecting the extremities and
ventral trunk. {Photograph courtesy D.W. Angarano, C.E. Griffin,
and J.M. MacDonald.)
Fig. 17.54 Higher magnification of feline follicular demodicosis.
hair follicles within the lesion are colonized; adjacent skin
is normal.
 Definitive diagnosis is easy to accomplish as mites are
identifable in tissue. In cats, luminal pustular folliculitis
Fig. 17.56 Closer view of the dog in Fig. 16.55. Extensive alope
is most often due to dermatophytosis rather than demod-
cia and a fine papular rash are present. (Photograph courtesy D.W.
Angarano, C.E. Griffin, and J.M. MacDonald.)
icosis. As concurrent demodicosis and dermatophytosis
may occur in this species, dermatophytosis should be
ruled out by appropriate staining (periodic acid-Schiff
[PAS] or Gomori's methenamine silver [GMS]] if folli-
Horton, 1980). Sporadic individual cases also have been
culitis is observed.
reported in France and Germany (Bourdeau, 1984;
Morisse et al., 1994). Cattle, horses, and sheep also may
be affected. Three cases of the disease are reported in the
PELODERA DERMATITIS
human literature (Jones et al., 1991). The actual fre-
(Synonyms: rhabditic dermatitis)
quency of occurrence of Pelodera dermatitis is unknown.
Rhabditic dermatitis is seen in conjunction with flthy,
Clinical features (Figures 17.55 and 17.56)
contaminated environmental conditions.
 As in most parasitic dermatoses, hypersensitivity to the
Pelodera dermatitis is a rare canine skin disease caused
invading parasite is the presumed mechanism of disease
by invasion of the skin by larvae from the free-living
 production. The free-living adult nematode is thought
nematode, Pelodera strongyloides. The disease has been
 to have a direct life cycle, and is found most frequently
reported rarely, predominantly from the midwestern  i
 in longstanding, decaying organic debris, especially straw,
United States (Schwartzman, 1964; Willers, 1970;
rice hulls, or hay stored in long-term contact with the
450
 Diseases of the adnexa
ground in damp conditions. Dogs and other mammals
Histopathology (Figures 17.57 through 17.59)
presumably become infected by contact with contami-
The epidermis is severely and irregularly acanthotic.
nated organic debris that is used as bedding (Scott et al.
2001).
Hyperkeratosis is accompanied by keratin accumulation
Clinical  features include an erythematous,
in follicular infundibula.
 macu-
Large numbers of elongated nematode larvae up to 600
lopapular rash with crusting. Alopecia is variable, but
often profound. The magnitude of self-rauma is depend-
μm in length are seen free within superficial keratin as
ent upon the degree of pruritus, which frequently
well as within superficial to middle hair follicles. Smaller
is
numbers of organisms are found deeper within follicles.
severe. Extreme pruritus usually is reported, but classical
Large and often discrete pyogranulomas replace deep
lesions in the absence of pruritus have also been described
follicles or are subjacent to ruptured follicles. Pyogranu-
(Bourdeau, 1984). Intact and ruptured pustules indicate
lomas frequently contain fragments of nematodes. Folli-
 secondary pyoderma. Affected body sites correlate with
sites of contact with contaminated bedding. The ventral
culitis and furunculosis with hemorrhage may be evident.
paws, distal legs, perineum, tail, and comparatively
Moderate to large numbers of eosinophils, lymphocytes,
 macrophages, and mast cells are accumulated around fol.
glabrous skin of the ventral abdomen and thorax are most
licles, sometimes in a nodular pattern, and are present
commonly affected.
loosely throughout the superficial and middle dermis.
Most reported canine cases have been in short-coated
Mural foliculitis, characterized by migration of lympho-
dogs (Schwartzman, 1964; Willers, 1970; Horton, 1980;
 Bourdeau, 1984; Morisse et al., 1994), perhaps indicating
cytes into the isthmus of hair follicles, is observed in some
lesions.
greater ease of parasitic exposure. Signalment predilec-
 Because of the presence of characteristic nematodes,
tions have not been reported.
 the histopathologic appearance of rhabditic dermatitis is
Clinical differential diagnoses should include canine
 diagnostic. The patterns of inflammation seen (folliculitis
sarcoptic acariasis, demodicosis, canine diroflariasis,
hookworm dermatitis, contact dermatitis, and superfcial
and furunculosis, pyogranulomas, and mural folliculitis)
are, interestingly, essentially those of canine demodicosis.
bacterial folliculitis. Skin scrapings should readily reveal
 motile nematode larvae measuring approximately 600 μm
in length. Histopathology also is diagnostic.
EOSINOPHILIC FURUNCULOSIS
OF THE FACE
Biopsy site selection
Clinical features (Figures 17.60 and 17.61)
Multiple biopsy specimens should be submitted from new
Eosinophilic furunculosis of the face is an uncommon
 papular lesions. Excoriated skin should be avoided.
canine skin disease of peracute onset and a rapidly ful-
Fig. 17.57 Petodera dermatitis in a
dog. Superficial hair follicles are
distended with elongated larvae of
Pelodera strongylaides. (Case materia]
courtesy D.W. Scott.)
Pustular and nodular diseases with adnexal destruction
451
Fig. 17.58 Petodera dermatitis in the dog of Fig. 17.57, demon-
Fig. 17.59 Higher magnification of Fig. 17.58. A deep follicular
strating numerous deep follicular pyogranulomas. Note larvae
within superficial follicles.
minating course. It is characterized by predominantly
facial hemorrhagic ulcers with edema (Gross, 1993). The
syndrome may be underdiagnosed; some dogs diag-
nosed in the past with ‘nasal pyoderma’ probably had
eosinophilic furunculosis of the face.
proposed based on history, sie, clinical course, and
histopathologic features (Gross, 1993). Defnitive docu-
mentation of arthropod insult is diffcult to obtain (Gross,
1993; Curtis et al., 1995; Guaguere et al., 1996; Fondati
& Mechelli, 1998). In the initial case series, the common
inciting feature was a history of exposure to stinging
insects, including wasps, hornets, and bees (Gross, 1993).
Recent exposure to outdoor, relatively undeveloped envi-
ronments where arthropod stings were possible was noted
Fig. 17.60 Eosinophilic furunculosis of the face in a mixed-breed
in 11 of 12 additional cases (Guaguere et al., 1996), and
dog. Multiple hemorrhagic nodules have coalesced on the dorsal
has been consistently noted by the authors. A recent
tmuzzle.
history of exposure to ants (digging in ant hills) and
spiders was present in several cases seen by one author
(P.J.I.). Although the majority of reported cases have
452
Diseases of the adnexa
is tempting to speculate that young, inquisitive dogs are
more likely to provoke arthropod assault. Most reported
cases have been in large or moderately large breeds with
abundant access to the outdoors, also adding credence
to an environmental arthropod attack. German Shepherd
Dogs and Rottweilers may be at increased risk. Toy and
miniature breeds have not been reported (Scott et al.,
2001). Sex predilections are not noted.
Clinical differential diagnoses include nasal deep
bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis, tick bite hypersen-
sitivity, and severe dermatophytosis. None of these dis-
eases share the fulminant rapid onset of eosinophilic
furunculosis of the face. Surface cytology from draining
fistulous tracts reveals numerous eosinophils. History,
likelihood of exposure to arthropods, cytology,.
a
complete blood count (CBC) to detect eosinophilia,
dermatophyte culture, and histopathology will aid in dif-
ferentiation. Clinicians commonly mistake eosinophilic
furunculosis of the face for facially-oriented autoimmune
skin diseases such as pemphigus foliaceus. Eosinophilic
 furunculosis is a fulminant, peracute dermatosis, whereas
autoimmune skin diseases commonly develop gradually
Fig. 17.61 Eosinophilic furunculosis of the face in a white German
from subtle beginnings.
Shepherd Dog. Ulcerated, coalesced nodules are present on the
dorsal muzzle. Lesions are more chronic than those in Fig. 17.60.
Biopsy site selection
Biopsy specimens should be taken from intact papules,
occurred in warmer months, some cases have been noted
pustules, or nodules; areas of frank ulceration should
in indoor dogs in the winter (Scott et al., 2001). In one
be avoided. If newer primary lesions are not evident,
notable case, an indoor dog, affected in winter in the
areas of maximal erythema and swelling should be
midwestern United States, was observed playing with
sampled. General anesthesia is recommended for skin
bees that had escaped from a hive in the wall of the home
biopsy, since dogs commonly are in pain and resist
(Hargis, A., personal communication, 1999). The syn-
manipulation.
drome bears marked clinical and histopathologic similar-
ities to feline mosquito bite hypersensitivity (see Chapter
Histopathology (Figures 17.62 and 17.63)
14).
Severely erythematous or hemorrhagic papules and
The epidermis is moderately to severely acanthotic and
pustules, as well as edematous nodules and plaques
may be covered with a serocellular crust. Spongiosis is
develop acutely and ulcerate to form a hemorrhagic crust.
often present and varies from mild to moderately severe.
Pustules, nodules, and plaques rapidly fistulate and drain
Erosion or ulceration may be severe.
serosanguinous exudate. Lesions commonly are localized
The dermis is characterized by intense, predominantly
in a somewhat bilaterally symmetric pattern on the dorsal
eosinophilic and destructive folliculocentric inflamma-
and lateral muzzle and periorbitally. However, similar
tion. In some cases, neutrophils are prominent. Typically,
lesions may be seen on the comparatively glabrous skin
there is accompanying severe dermal edema and/or mucin 
of the axillae and ventral abdomen, thoracic wall, distal
deposition. Hemorrhage is variable but sometimes severe.
legs, lips, and pinnae. Severe, acute lesions commonly are
Explosive follicular rupture is characteristic, although not
 exquisitely painful and affected dogs resist examination.
universal. Large numbers of eosinophils and variable neu-
 Pruritus is variable, but may be severe. Severely affected
trophils fll intact hair follicles, and surround free hair
dogs may be febrile, lethargic, and anorectic (Curtis
shafts from ruptured hair follicles. Eosinophils often
et al., 1995; Guaguere et al., 1996). Peripheral blood
degranulate within follicular walls (eosinophilic mural
eosinophilia is seen in the majority of cases (Guaguere
 folliculitis) or around free hairs, which may be displaced
et al., 1996).
below the level of the damaged follicle. Hair follicle
The age of onset is less than 2 years in approximately
walls may be replaced entirely by degenerated eosinophils
50% of affected dogs (Gross, 1993; Scott et al., 2001). It
to form follicular ‘casts’ or ‘molds' which may surround
Pustular and nodular diseases with adnexal destruction
453
Fig. 17.62 Eosinophilic furunculosis
in a dog. Follicles are ruptured by
darkly staining eosinophilic pustules.
residual hairs or hair-shaped spaces left by drop out of
these fragments. Smaller foci of eosinophil degranulation
are seen around collagen fbers (flame fgures). Mixed
infltrations of mononuclear cells, eosinophils and fewer
neutrophils often fll the dermis in later lesions. Inflam-
mation and edema may extend to the panniculus.
Differential diagnoses principally include deep bacter-
ial folliculitis and furunculosis, and sterile eosinophilic
 pustulosis. Although furunculosis with a predominance of
eosinophils can be seen with bacterial infections, neu-
 trophils usually are a more signifcant component. Flame
fgures and eosinophilic mural foliculitis are much more
characteristic of eosinophilic furunculosis than of bacter-
ial infections. Sterile eosinophilic pustulosis is similar to
 eosinophilic furunculosis in that eosinophils predominate
in both diseases and flame fgures may be seen. Overall,
eosinophilic pustulosis tends to be a more superfcial and
milder process than eosinophilic furunculosis of the face.
Although eosinophilic furuncles occur in both, the
furuncles of the latter are often much more explosively
 destructive to hair folicles. Clinical differentiation may
be required.
SEBACEOUS ADENITIS
Clinical features (Figures 17.64 and 17.65)
See Chapter 8.
Fig. 17.63 Higher magnification of eosinophilic furunculosis
Biopsy site selection
demonstrating follicular ‘explosion’ by severe inflammation. Note
residual follicular fragments (arrows).
See Chapter 8.
454
Diseases of the adnexa
Fig. 17.64 Sebaceous adenitis in a black Standard Poodle. Matted
keratinaceous debris is present diffusely in a dry, poor quality
haircoat. {Photograph courtesy H.T. Power; case material University
of California, Davis.)
Fig. 17.66 Sebaceous adenitis in a Standard Poodle. This early
lesion demonstrates prominent periadnexal inflammation at the site
of previous sebaceous glands.
Fig. 17.65 Closer view of the dog in Fig. 17.64. Keratin debris
ensheathes hairs. {Photograph courtesy H.T. Power; case material
Random biopsy specimens from affected dogs, notably
University of California, Davis).
but not exclusively Standard Poodles, often have scant
inflammation at the follicular isthmus in the vicinity of
Histopathology (Figures 17.66 through 17.71)
previous sebaceous glands. Inflammation consists of
minimal to mild, loosely organized accumulations
Lesions of the epidermis have been discussed and consist
of lymphocytes, macrophages, plasma cells, and variable
principally of severe hyperkeratosis that also flls superfi-
neutrophils. Eosinophils are rare. Lymphocytes and
cial hair follicles to form follicular fronds (see Chapter 8).
macrophages may infltrate the wall of the follicular
In sebaceous adenitis of dogs, sebaceous glands usually
isthmus (mural folliculitis). Inflammation may not be
are diffusely absent from all specimens, particularly in
 present at every follicle.
late, relatively uninflamed lesions. Identification of hyper-
In some putative early lesions, inflammation may be
keratosis, particularly in a breed known to be commonly
moderate and more nodular. Dermal inflammation often
affected, warrants careful search for sebaceous glands;
is lopsided, since it parallels the unilateral location of
absence of these structures can be overlooked easily.
sebaceous glands in the pilosebaceous unit. Macrophages
One author (T.L.G.) has seen specimens from typical
 are prominent in these lesions, and are intermingled
canine breeds with typical clinical lesions, and correlative
with neutrophils and lymphocytes with fewer plasma
histopathologic changes, in which a few sebaceous glands
cells. Some lesions are distinctly pyogranulomatous. In
were present. It is unknown whether these lesions are very
 the rare severely inflamed lesions, the lopsided distribu-
early, or whether sebaceous gland regeneration has
 tion may not be obvious, and the inflammation may sur-
occurred.
round hair follicles at the isthmus.
Pustular and nodular diseases with adnexal destruction
455
Immunohistologic examination of dogs with seba-
ceous adenitis revealed a preponderance of antigen-
presenting dendritic cells and T lymphocytes in inflamed
lesions. These findings in the face of negative circulating
autoantibodies, as studied by indirect immunoperoxidase
testing on normal skin, suggested a cell-mediated im-
munopathogenesis for sebaceous gland destruction (Ryb-
nicek et al., 1998).
Late stages of the disease in Standard Poodles or other
breeds may be characterized by follicular atrophy or
dysplasia, or normal follicular growth activity. Secondary
folliculitis or furunculosis is common in affected Akitas,
and has been described in Belgian Sheepdogs (Guaguere
et al., 1997).
Vizslas and other short-coated breeds may have
sebaceous adenitis that is characterized by more discrete,
usually large foci of nodular lopsided granulomatous
or pyogranulomatous periadnexal inflammation that is
centered at the site of previous sebaceous glands.
Extension to deeper tissue has been described (Scott, et
al., 2001). Inflammation is more consistently prominent
in this subgroup of sebaceous adenitis, and is present at
all stages of the disease. There may be perifollicular fbro-
sis occasionally.
In cats with sebaceous adenitis, hyperkeratosis and
crusting are present (see Chapter 8). The inflammatory
lesions may be less lopsided in distribution, and include
a major component of mural folliculitis (see Chapter 18).
Inflammation generally is mild overall. Lymphocytes
 migrate into the follicular wall from the lower infundibula
Fig. 17.67 Sebaceous adenitis in a dog demonstrating scant
periadnexal, mixed mononuclear inflammation typical of chronic
through the isthmus, and in some lesions are centered at
lesionis.
the site of previous sebaceous glands as small nodular
Fig. 17.68 Late stage sebaceous
adenitis in a dog. Note complete
absence of sebaceous glands.
456
Diseases of the adnexa
Fig.17.70
Fig.17.69Highmagnification
granulomatous
sebaceous
fusely absent; not
lymphocytes is seen at the site of a previous sebaceous gland.
sebaceous glands are nonspecifcally destroyed as they are
foci. Putative early lesions are more inflamed and have
swept up by periadnexal infltrates. Inflammation in gran-
lymphocytes, macrophages, and fewer neutrophils
ulomatous sebaceous adenitis localizes particularly to the
adjacent to follicles at the isthmus. Perifollicular pyo-
isthmus, even when severe. Sterile granuloma and pyo-
granulomas have been reported (Scott, 1989). Sebaceous
granuloma syndrome and reactive histiocytosis tend to
glands are uniformly absent in most specimens. Follicular
surround entire adnexal units, including hair follicles and
atrophy may be present in late lesions. Lymphocytes,
apocrine sweat glands, and often track along the complete
plasma cells, macrophages, and neutrophils mildly infl-
length of the follicle in a sausage-shaped pattern. Clinical
trate the superficial and perifollicular dermis.
differentiation may be required.
 For dogs, the diagnosis for the sparsely inflamed late
Less often in dogs, demodicosis, Vogt-Koyanagi-
lesions of sebaceous adenitis is straightforward. The
Harada-like syndrome, or leishmaniasis also may be
absence of sebaceous glands in at least two 6 or 8 mm
considered. In some lesions of demodicosis parafollicular
punch biopsy specimens, accompanied by minimal peri-
granulomas (or pyogranulomas) occur in and around
adnexal inflammation, is confrmatory. Differential diag-
sebaceous glands and hair follicles (see p. 442). Identif-
nosis for the severely inflamed forms of sebaceous adenitis
cation of mites (which may be scarce in this form of
principally includes sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma
demodicosis) may be diffcult, and step sectioning may be
syndrome or reactive histiocytosis (see Chapter 13).
required. Absence of sebaceous glands throughout the
Inflamed lesions of sebaceous adenitis may be easily
specimen supports sebaceous adenitis; this is not a fea
confused with these inflammatory disorders, in which
 ture of parafollicular granulomas in canine demodicosis.
Pustular and nodular diseases with adnexal destruction
457
isthmus-directed  inflammation;  clinical  differentiation
may be required in these cases.
REFERENCES
Deep Bacterial Folliculitis and Furunculosis
Denerolle, P, Bourdoiseau, G., Magnol, J-P. et al. (1998)
German Shepherd dog pyoderma: a prospecive study of 23
cases. Vet Dermatol 9, 243-8.
Ihrke, PJ. (1996) Bacterial Skin Disease in the Dog: A Guide to
Canine Pyoderma, pp. 1-97. Veterinary Learning Systems,
Trenton.
Ihrke, PJ. (1998) Bacterial infections of the skin. In: Infectious
Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 2nd edn (ed. C.E. Greene), pp.
541-7. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Scott, D.W. (1995) Suppurative inflammation of apocrine sweat
gands (suppurative hidradenitis) in the dog: a retrospective clin-
icopathological analysis of 110 cases. Vet Dermatol 6, 75-8.
German Shepherd Dog Pyoderma
Cerundolo, R., de Capraris, D., Manna, L. et al. (1998) Recur-
rent deep pyoderma in German Shepherd Dogs with concur-
rent ehrlichiosis. In: Advances in Veterinary Dermatology,
Vol. 3 (eds K.W. Kwochka, T. Willemse & C. von Tscharner),
pp. 556-7. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
Chabanne, L., Marchal, T., Denerolle, P et al. (1995) Lympho-
cyte subset abnormalities in German Shepherd dog pyoderma
(GSP). Vet Immunol Immunopathol 49, 189-98.
Denerolle, P, Bourdoiseau, G., Magnol, J-P. et al. (1998)
German Shepherd dog pyoderma: a prospecive study of 23
Fig. 17.711
Higher magnification of sebaceous adenitis in a cat.
cases. Vet Dermatol 9, 243-8.
Note lopsided inflammation at putative sites of sebaceous glands
Ihrke, PJ., & DeManuelle, I.C. (1999) German Shepherd Dog
(glands are absent).
pyoderma: an overview and
1  antimicrobial management.
Comp Contin Educ 21, 44-9.
Koch, H.-J. & Peters, S. (1996) Antimicrobial therapy in
German Shepherd dog pyoderma (GSP). An open clinical
Nodular periadnexal histiocytic inflammation may be
study. Vet Dermatol 7, 177-81.
Krick, S.A. & Scott, D.W. (1989) Bacterial folliculitis, furuncu-
prominent in some cases of Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada like
 losis and cellulitis in the German Shepherd Dog: a retrospec-
syndrome and may obscure sebaceous glands; however,
tive analysis of 17 cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 25, 23-30.
asn ton jo pq pouu ieid an 
Miller, W.H. Jr. (1991) Deep pyoderma in two German Shepherd
is also present to allow differentiation from sebaceous
dogs associated with a cell-mediated immunodeficiency J Am
adenitis. Sebaceous gland inflammation in cutaneous
Anim Hosp Assoc 27, 513-17.
leishmaniasis might be confused with more severely
 Rosser, E.J (1997) German Shepherd Dog pyoderma: a prospec-
inflamed forms of sebaceous adenitis; identifcation of
tive study of 12 dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33, 355-63.
organisms in tissue allows differentiation of this disease.
Rosser, E.J. (1998) German Shepherd pyoderma. Comp Contin
In cats, sebaceous adenitis is similar to mural folliculi-
Educ Pract Vet 20, 831-40.
tis secondary to dermatophytosis, drug reaction, or food
Wisselink, M.A., Willemse, A. & Koeman, J.P. (1985) Deep
pyoderma in the German Shepherd Dog. J Am Anim Hosp
allergy, or may resemble pseudopelade (see Chapter 18).
Assoc 21, 773-6.
Critical diagnostic features of sebaceous adenitis include
Wisselink, M.A., Bernadina, W.E., Willemse, A. et al. (1988)
Immunologic aspects of German shepherd dog pyoderma
sis. Inflammation that is lopsided or directed to the site
(GSP). Vet Immunol Immunopathol 19, 67-77.
of previous glands is also diagnostic, but less consistently
Wisselink, M.A., Bouw, S., der Weduwen, S.A. et al. (1989)
present. Some syndromes of feline mural folliculitis will
German Shepherd dog pyoderma: a genetic disorder. Vet
result in haphazard sebaceous atrophy secondary
to
Quart 11, 161-4.
458
Diseases of the adnexa
Postgrooming Furunculosis
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffn, C.E. (2001) Muller 6 Kirk's
Hillier, A., Alcorn, J.R., Cole, L.K. et al. (2003) Pyoderma due
Small Animat Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 457-74. W.B.
to Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection in dogs: 15 cases. In:
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Proceedings of the 18th AAVD/ACVD Meeting, Monterey,
p.222.
Feline Follicular Demodicosis
Beale, K.M. (1998) Contagion and occult demodicosis in a
Acral Lick Dermatitis
family of 2 cats. In: Proceedings of the 14th AAVD/ACVD
See Chapter 7.
Meeting, San Antonio, p. 99.
Chesney, C.J. (1988) An unusual species of demodex mite in a
InterdigitalFurunculosis
cat. Vet Record 123, 671-3.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller 6 Kirk's
Desch, C.E. & Stewart, T. B. (1999) Demodex gatoi: new species
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 304-6. WB.
of hair follicle mite (Acari: Demodecidae) from the domestic
Saunders, Philadelphia.
cat (Carnivora: Felidae). Entomol Soc Amer 36, 167-70.
Guaguere. E. (2000) Ectoparasitic skin diseases. In: A Practical
Callus Pyoderma
Guide to Feline Dermatology (eds E. Guaguere & P Prélaud),
See Chapter 8.
pp. 3.8-3.9. Blackwell Science, Oxford.
Morris, D.O. & Beale, K.M. (1997) Feline demodicosis: a
Canine Acne
retrospective of 15 cases. In: Proceedings of the 13tb
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
AAVD/ACVD Meeting, Nashville, pp. 127-8.
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 303-4. W.B.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 474-76. W.B.
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Feline acne
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
Pelodera Dermatitis
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 1042-3. WB.
Bourdeau, P. (1984) Cas de dermatite a rhabditides (Pelodera
Saunders, Philadelphia.
strongyloides) chez un chien. Point Vet 16, 5-10.
White, S.D., Bordeau, P.B., Blumstein, P. et al. (1997) Feline acne
Horton, M.L. (1980) Rhabditic dermatitis in dogs. Mod Vet
and results of treatment with mupirocin in an open clinical
Pract 61, 158-9.
trial: 25 cases (1994-96). Vet Dermatol 8, 157-64.
Jones, C.C., Rosen, I. & Greenberg, C. (1991) Cutaneous larva
migrans due to Pelodera strongyloides. Cutis 48, 123-6.
Kerion
Morisse, B., Stoye, M. & Pfleghaar, S. (1994) Pelodera dermati-
Foil, C.S. (1998) Dermatophytosis. In: Infectious Diseases of the
tis in a Staffordshire Terrier. Kleintierpraxis 39, 11-13.
Dog and Cat, 2nd edn (ed. C.E. Greene), pp. 362-70. W.B.
Schwartzman, R.M. (1964) Rhabditic dermatitis in the dog.
Saunders, Philadelphia.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 145, 25-8.
Martin, A.G. & Kobayashi, G.S. (1999) Superficial fungal infec-
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller 6 Kirk's
tions: dermatophytosis, tinia nigra, piedra. In: Dermatology
Small Animat Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 432-34. W.B.
in General Medicine, 5th edn (eds I.W. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen,
Saunders, Philadelphia.
K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & T.B. Fitzpatrick), p.
Willers, W.B. (1970) Pelodera strongyloides in association with
2337-57. McGraw-Hill, New York.
canine dermatitis in Wisconsin. J Am Vet Med Assoc 156,
319-20.
Canine Demodicosis
Caswell, J.L., Yager, JA., Ferrer, L. & Malcolm Weir, JA. (1995)
Eosinophilic Furunculosis of the Face
Canine demodicosis: a re-examination of the histopathologic
Curtis, C.F, Bond, R., Blunden, A.S. et al. (1995) Canine
lesions and description of the immunophenotype of infltrat-
eosinophilic folliculitis and furunculosis in three cases. J Small
ing cells. Vet Dermatol 6, 9-19.
Anim Pract 36, 119-23.
Chen, C. (1995) A short-tailed demodectic mite and Demodex
Fondati, A. & Mechelli, L. (1998) Cutaneous arthropod reac-
canis infestation in a Chihuahua dog. Vet Dermatol 6, 227-9.
tions in the dog: 6 cases. In: Advances in Veterinary Derma-
Chesney, C.J. (1999) Short form of Demodex species mite in the
tology, Vol. 3 (eds K.W. Kwochka, T. Willemse & C. von
dog: occurrence and measurements. J Small Anim Pract 40,
Tscharner), pp. 576-7. Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford.
58-61.
Gross, TL. (1993) Canine eosinophilic furunculosis of the face.
Desch, C.E. & Hillier, A. (2003) Demodex injai: a new species
In: Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 2 (eds P.J. Ihrke,
of hair follicle mite (Acari: Demodecidae) from the domestic
IS. Mason & S.D. White), pp. 23946. Pergamon Press,
dog (Canidae). J Med Entomol 40, 146-9.
Oxford.
Hillier, A. & Desch, C.E. (2002) Large-bodied Demodex mite 
Guaguere, E., Prélaud, P., Peyronnet, L. et al. (1996) Furuncu-
infestation in 4 dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 5, 623-7.
 lose eosinophilique chez le chien: étude retrospective de 12 cas.
Saridomichelakis, M., Koutinas, A., Papadogiannakis, E. et al.
Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 31,413-19.
(1999) Adult-onset demodicosis in two dogs due to Demodex
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
canis and a short-tailed demodectic mite. J Small Anim Pract
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 641-2. W.B.
40, 529-32.
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Pustular and nodular diseases with adnexal destruction
459
Sebaceous Adenitis
Willemse & C. von Tscharner), pp. 539-40. Butterworth
Guaguere, E., Nogues, J.P., Degorce, F. et al. (1997) Granulo-
Heinemann, Oxford.
matous sebaceous adenitis in 7 Belgian Sheepdogs. In: Pro-
Scott, D.W. (1989) Adenite sebacée pyogranulomateuse sterile
ceedings of the 14th ESVD/ECVD Meeting, Pisa, p. 191.
chez un chat. Point Vet 21, 7-11.
Rybnicek, J., Affolter, V.K. & Moore, PF. (1998). Sebaceous
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
adenitis: an immunohistological examination. In: Advances
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 1140-6. W.B.
in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 3 (eds K.W. Kwochka, T.
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 18
Mural diseases of the hair follicle
Mural diseases of the hair follicle are characterized by
diffcult. Until the clinical divisions of mural folliculitis
inflammation that is directed to the follicular wall. Inflam-
are better understood, this difficulty will remain.
mation involving only the infundibular portion of the
follicle generally is associated with adjacent epidermal
 inflammation. Although also technically ^mural, diseases 
ALOPECIA AREATA
with only infundibular inflammation are covered in Part
Clinical features (Figures 18.1 and 18.2)
I, Diseases of the Epidermis. The diseases here primarily
target the follicular isthmus (the middle portion of the
Alopecia areata (AA) is an uncommon, or perhaps under-
follicle) or the follicular bulb (the deepest portion of the
recognized, putative autoimmune skin disease seen in the
follicle) (see Chapter 23 for more detailed follicular
dog characterized by nonscarring alopecia. As in humans
microanatomy). Many of these diseases are putatively
(Olsen, 2003), canine AA is a benign cosmetic disease.
allergic or immunoreactive in origin, and may involve fol-
Alopecia areata is common in humans (Madani &
licular presentation of foreign antigen or immunologic
Shapiro, 2000; Tobin et al., 2003), and most commonly
 targeting of follicular host antigens.
affects the scalp and face, causing patients rapidly to seek
Mural folliculitis may be seen in the context of other
diagnosis and treatment. Some dogs with AA may not
inflammatory reaction patterns, including spongiotic and
have skin biopsies performed since the prime clinical
perivascular allergic dermatitis (see Chapters 5 and 9).
feature of canine AA commonly is mild, subtle, and visu-
Clinically confrmed food allergy in cats may have lym-
ally innocuous noninflammatory hair loss.
phocytic mural folliculitis, but this is seen in concert with
 Clinical, histopathologic, and immunopathologic simi-
perivascular and spongiotic dermatitis; 
concomitant
larities berween AA in dogs and humans are well docu-
epidermal inflammation and apoptosis also have been
mented (Olivry et al., 1996; Tobin et al., 1998; Tobin
reported (DeClercq, 2000). Seasonal lymphocytic mural
et al., 2003). As in humans (Olsen, 2003) dogs with AA
 folliculitis with spontaneous resolution was reported in a
may self-cure, respond to immunosuppressive therapy, or
 cat, suggesting seasonal triggering by allergens (Marignac
  s  o iisr q s
et al., 2002). Some drug reactions may have a profound
subsets of AA, perhaps reflecting variations in antigen
lymphocytic mural component. Experimental allergic
targeting or severity and extent of inflammation (see
- lnu odu ap a sp i
below). In humans, a high frequency of occurrence
culitis at patch test sites (Krawiec & Gaafar 1975) (see
within families sharing certain human leukocyte antigens
Chapter 5). Although this may be due to induction tech-
(HLA) indicates genetic predilection (Madani & Shapiro,
niques that reach deeper epithelium, the presence of mural
2000). Too few dogs with AA have been reported from
folliculitis in this context reflects the role of the hair fol-
institutions where comparisons can be made with
licle as an allergic target.
hospital populations to determine if statistically signif-
 The diseases of this chapter are largely those in which
 cant breed predilections and thus genetic predispositions
mural inflammation is the central feature histopathologi
exist.
cally, i.e. 'primary’ mural folliculitis. Some may have con-
 Alopecia areata in dogs results from selective and
current dermatitis, but mural folliculitis is the striking
reversible damage to anagen hair follicles (Tobin &
pathologic change. Due to incomplete clinical categoriza-
Olivry, 2004). Although AA is a mild disease, the syn-
tion of some of these morphological entities, multiple
drome exhibits many features highly suggestive of an
etiopathogeneses may exist for individual diseases that
autoimmune etiology. Inflammatory cells consist princi-
are described. There are many individual cases in which
pally of cytotoxic T lymphocytes, helper T cells, and den-
microscopic delineation of primary mural folliculitis is
dritic antigen-presenting cells (Olivry et al., 1996). Direct
460
Mural diseases of the hair follicle
461
Morphologic changes in follicular melanocytes, indi-
cating that melanocytes may be one of the targets of
immunoreactivity, have been reported in acute AA in
humans (Tobin et al., 1990). A similar phenomenon in
dogs could explain the occasionally striking restriction of
the disease to hair of one coat color as well as the occa-
sional concomitant leukotrichia. The melanocytic target-
ing in dogs may be more severe than that seen in humans,
since the hair regrowth that occurs as the result of either
spontaneous remission or immunosuppressive therapy
 may remain nonpigmented for multiple hair cycles (Tobin
& Olivry, 2004).
 Presenting initial lesions include alopecia (92%) and
leukotrichia (8%) (Tobin et al., 2003). Focal or multifo-
cal areas of well-circumscribed alopecia develop. The
alopecic skin has minimal or no visible inflammation.
Areas of alopecia may expand gradually as waves of fol-
licular damage move centrifugally. Hyperpigmentation of
exposed skin may occur in chronic cases in breeds likely
to hyperpigment. Short, stubby ^exclamation-mark hairs'
Fig. 18.1 Alopecia areata in a German Shepherd Dog-crossbreed
with dystrophic tapered proximal portions and frayed
dog. Hair loss is confined to one coat color and is strikingly bilat-
erally symmetric.
damaged distal portions have been described in humans
with AA. One author (P.J.I.) has seen hairs consistent with
this description in a dog. Trachyonychia, or nail dyspla-
sia, may be seen concomitantly with AA in humans;
trachyonychia affecting all of the claws, characterized by
ridging, striations, and an irregular surface, has been
reported in dogs with AA (Jonghe et al., 1999; Madani
& Shapiro, 2000). Prognosis varies with canine AA;
 some cases self-cure, others seemingly respond to mildly
immunosuppressive dosages of corticosteroids, while
others do not regrow hair.
Alopecia occurred initially on the face in 92% of dogs
in one large study (Tobin et al., 2003). The dorsal and
lateral muzzle, temporal region, chin, periorbital region,
and ears may be affected. Less commonly, lesions also
may involve the legs and trunk. In multicolored breeds,
AA may be restricted to hair of one color. In 24% of dogs
with multiple hair colors, dark brown or black hairs were
Fig. 18.2 Closer view of the dog in Fig 18.1. The affected area is
almost totally alopecic.
affected preferentially (Tobin et al., 2003). Facial bilateral
symmetry was noted in 80% of affected dogs (Tobin
et al., 2003). In breeds with symmetric bicolor facial pat-
immunofluorescence detects hair follicle-specific IgG,
terns such as the German Shepherd Dog or Dachshund,
indirect immunofluorescence reveals circulating antihair
restriction of the disease to facial hair of one color may
follicle IgG autoantibodies to various follicular proteins,
create dramatic mask-like patterns of hair loss.
and immunoblorting reveals IgG reactivity to multiple
 Breed predilections are not statistically proven, as ref-
o p   sd  
erence populations are lacking in studies pooled from
inner root sheath proteins (Tobin et al., 1998, 2003). This
multiple sources. In the largest study of canine AA to
documentation of antibodies directed towards hair
 date, which gathered data from many sources, 19 of 25
follicle-specifc target proteins is shared with AA in 
 dogs were purebreds, with German Shepherd Dogs,
humans (Tobin et al., 2003). Trichohyalin is necessary for
 Dachshunds, Beagles, Labrador Retrievers, and ‘setters"
inner root sheath differentiation, and defects or damage 
 all having more than one dog affected (Tobin et al., 2003).
may result in defective hair follicle formation (Tobin et 
However, owners of purebred dogs may be more willing
al., 2003).
to pursue a cosmetic disease through referral to a spe-
462
Diseases of the adnexa
cialist. Based on additional cases seen by the authors,
German Shepherd Dogs and Dachshunds may be at
increased risk. The age of onset varies greatly, ranging
from 1 to 11 years of age (median of 5 years) (Tobin et
al., 2003). Sex predilection is not apparent (Tobin et al.,
2003).
Clinical differential diagnoses of AA include virtually
any skin disease characterized by relatively noninflam-
matory, asymptomatic alopecia, especially affecting the
face. Possible differential diagnoses include acquired
pattern alopecia, follicular dysplasia, traction alopecia,
pseudopelade, endocrinopathies, demodicosis, and der-
 matophytosis. Skin scrapings and dermatophyte culture
should be performed to rule out demodicosis and der-
matophytosis which occasionally may not exhibit clini-
cally visible inflammation. If darker haired regions are
affected preferentially and symmetrically, the index of
suspicion for AA increases. Skin biopsy is required for
diagnosis.
Biopsy site selection
Multiple specimens should be obtained from sites located
advancing margin of alopecia. In human dermatology, a
s si edoe jo ue rao ai w uds Ado
useful than a specimen obtained slightly more centrally.
The outer or advancing margin may demonstrate abnor-
mal anagen hairs, but with only minimally evident follic-
ular inflammatory insult. Specimens should include only
Fig. 18.3  Alopecia areata in a dog demonstrating inflammation of
abnormal tissue, particularly if a biopsy punch is used.
small bulbs at the base of a hair follicle {arrow). Note dystrophic
hair shafts (double arrows).
Histopathology (Figures 18.3 through 18.5)
The epidermis is normal to mildly acanthotic in lesions
(11/13), and the bulb in 100% of dogs studied; the
of AA. In early lesions, lymphocytes and variable neu-
infundibulum was not affected (Tobin et al., 2003).
trophils invade the anagen hair bulb (bulbitis'). Inflam-
 In some cases, inflammation of the bulb and the wall to
mation may be mild to severe. Keratinocytes of the bulb
the level of the isthmus are both severe. It is unknown if
sisod ranu aq k ana pe uloms readde uao
these cases represent a distinct clinical subtype of AA.
or karyorrhexis. Neutrophils may migrate preferentially
Correlation with clinical outcome may be useful. It is of
into foci of marked swelling and degeneration. Similar
interest that some dogs with AA recover hair growth,
mild to moderate inflammation, accompanied by histio-
while others do not; however, the relationship of these
cytic cells and plasma cells, encircles the affected bulb,
 outcomes to histopathologic features has not been studied
often in a tight nodular pattern. Eosinophils may be
to date.
present around follicles and can be numerous. Perifol-
In some, probably late-stage lesions, hair follicles are
  p sno q   r
be
small, sometimes distorted in contour (dysplastic), and
perifollicular pigmentary incontinence characterized by
have a telogen confguration. Hair shafts may be dys-
accumulations of melanin-laden macrophages around the
plastic as well ('trichodysplasia'), characterized by diffuse
hair bulb.
eosinophilic staining, lack of internal detail, and variable
 a  ars srd  n
fragmentation. Mild and predominantly lymphocytic
isthmus, but generally does not prominently affect that
 inflammation persists within some bulbs and around the
level of the follicle. Sebaceous glands are normal. In a
 deep hair follicles. There may be follicular keratin plug-
recent study, T cell lymphocytic inflammation affected the 
 ging. Mild, concentrically-layered perifollicular fbrosis
isthmus in 54% (7/13), the inferior segment in 85%
may be observed.
Mural diseases of the hair follicle
463
Fig. 18.4 Higher magnification of
alopecia areata in a dog. A heavily
inflamed anagen follicular bulb at right
(bulbitis) is adjacent to an uninflamed
bulb at left.
Immunohistochemistry  identifies intrafollicular  lym-
phocytes as predominantly CD3+, CD8+ cytotoxic T cells
(Olivry et al., 1996). Dendritic cells are increased in
number surrounding affected hair follicles (Olivry et al.,
1996). There is prominent apoptosis of bulbar ker-
atinocytes, as demonstrated by in situ labeling of nicked
DNA (Olivry et al., 1996). Direct immunofluorescence for
IgG showed deposition within lower hair follicle struc-
tures in 11 of 15 dogs tested (Tobin et al., 2003). Indirect
immunofluorescence reveals autoantibodies reactive to
multiple hair follicle structures (Tobin et al., 2003). Mul-
tiple follicular antigens of 40-60 kDa, and a 200-220 kDa
doublet (a double band) are targeted, as demonstrated
by immunoblotting; immunoprecipitation shows that this
targeting included an intense, specifc reactivity to tri-
chohyalin (Tobin et al., 2003).
Differential diagnosis for AA is uncomplicated if bul-
bitis is found. Although inflammation of AA may progress
superficially toward the isthmus, and isthmus mural fol-
liculitis of many syndromes may progress deeply towards
the bulb, the bulb itself is not affected in these latter syn-
dromes. Late lesions of AA that dermonstrate predomi-
nantly follicular atrophy and residual mild inflammation
may be confused with late stage pseudopelade, or other
forms of isthmus mural folliculitis. This diagnostic diff-
culty is due to the relatively inapparent hair bulbs in the
atrophic follicles of late stage AA, and may be aggravated
 by lack of proper linear orientation of the follicle in pro-
cessing. Differential diagnosis is prognostically important,
Fig. 18.5 Higher magnification of alopecia areata. An anagen bulb
specifically from pseudopelade, as hair loss in AA often is
is infiltrated with lymphocytes which also closely surround it. At the
transient, while the alopecia of pseudopelade is usually
left is an elongated apocrine sweat gland.
permanent (see p. 466). Step-sectioning or reorientation
464
Diseases of the adnexa
of the specimen may be required to detect subtle bulbitis
Mural folliculitis may be the predominant feature of
in suspected cases.
some cases of feline dermatophytosis. These cases are
characterized by patchy, partial alopecia. Trichograms
may be ineffective as a diagnostic procedure, as only very
MURAL FOLLICULITIS DUE TO
small numbers of organisms may be present. Dermato-
DEMODICOSIS AND
phyte culture is most likely to confrm dermatophytosis.
DERMATOPHYTOSIS
The relative lack of organisms occurring in the context of
mural folliculitis suggests that the few organisms present
Clinical features
may be provoking an inappropriate immunologic reaction 
Mural folliculitis may be a histopathologic feature of
which is targeting antigens of the hair follicles as well as
either demodicosis or dermatophytosis in the dog and
 the organisms themselves.
the cat. Presumably, this reaction pattern occurs as an
For diseases in which mural folliculitis is one com-
immunologic response to follicular infection with either
ponent of a mixed inflammatory pattern, such as super-
demodicid mites or surface or follicular dwelling der-
ficial  pustular (
 dermatophytosis,  pustular  follicular
matophytes. Mural folliculitis due to demodicosis or der-
dermatophytosis, and classical demodicosis, the reader is
matophytosis is a histopathologic and not a clinical entity.
referred to the appropriate sections for differential diag-
Thus, the clinical diagnosis of demodicosis and dermato-
noses (see Chapters 1, 16, and 17). Clinical differential
phytosis exhibiting a mural pattern of inflammation
 diagnoses for feline dermatophytosis with predominant
usually is diffcult, as there are no specific clinical features
 mural folliculitis include pruritic self-traumatic alopecia,
 that are seen in concert with mural folliculitis that are not
psychogenic
alopecia,
demodicosis,
and cutaneous
also seen with other inflammatory forms of demodicosis
epitheliotropic lymphoma. Clinical differential diagnoses 
and dermatophytosis. The reader is referred to sections
for
canine demodicosis with predominant mural
describing the general clinical features of superficial pus-
folliculitis include dermatophytosis, canine familial
tular dermatophytosis (Chapter 1), canine and feline
 dermatomyositis/ischemic dermatopathy, alopecia areata,
dermatophytosis (Chapter 16), and canine and feline
and pseudopelade.
demodicosis (Chapter 17).
 Mural folliculitis is a common feature of canine demod-
Biopsy site selection
icosis; 100% of dogs with clinical demodicosis exhibited
this histopathologic reaction pattern in one study
Multiple skin biopsies from areas of maximum alopecia
(Caswell et al., 1995). In a small percentage of cases
 should be sampled. Sectioning of multiple specimens may
of demodicosis, mural folliculitis may be the prime
 be crucial as organisms may be sparse. It should be
histopathologic pattern. Clinically, these cases of mural
emphasized that demodectic or dermatophytic mural fol-
folliculitis due to demodicosis are characterized by mild
liculitis rarely is an expected diagnosis because organisms
to moderate, predominantly asymptomatic patchy alope-
are difficult to demonstrate clinically.
cia, without secondary bacterial infection. Skin scraping
may not be effective as a diagnostic procedure, as mites
Histopathology (Figures 18.6 through 18.8)
either may be present in small numbers or may be absent.
This form of ^occult demodicosis’ with mural folliculitis
Lesions of folliculitis, furunculosis, and parafollicular
 q   's     q 
granulomas have been described for canine demodicosis
history of treatment for demodicosis but with persistent
(see Chapter 17). In demodicosis of dogs, mural folliculi-
alopecia despite negative skin scrapings. One author
tis is common. One hundred percent of dogs with clini-
(T.L.G.) has observed a single case of mural folliculitis due
cal demodicosis demonstrated this pattern in one large
to localized demodicosis in a cat. Demodectic mites were
study (Caswell et al., 1995). In some lesions of canine
few to moderate. Clinically, a linear lesion was present on
demodicosis, often clinically occult, mural folliculitis is
the ventral neck.
 the only pattern observed; in most cases it accompanies
Mural foliculitis in canine dermatophytosis is seen
other patterns (see Chapter 17).
most often in conjunction with superficial pustular der-
Typically in canine demodectic mural folliculitis, lym-
matophytosis due to keratin-colonizing dermatophytes
phocytes and fewer histiocytes infltrate the isthmus
(see Chapter 1). Crusted papules and pustules are located
portion of the hair follicle. Infltrating lymphocytes were
predominantly on the face, and especially involve the
reported to be primarily CD3+, CD8+ cytotoxic T cells
 muzzle and periorbital region. Mural folliculitis also may
(Caswell et al., 1997). Lymphocytes, histiocytes, plasma
be a feature of follicular canine dermatophytosis
(see
cells, and usually eosinophils tightly encircle the follicles.
Chapter 16), but does not correlate with any unique or
Inflammation often obscures the follicular-dermal inter-
specific clinical features.
face, and thus can be more specifically characterized as
Mural diseases of the hair follicle
465
Fig. 18.6 Mural folliculitis in canine demodicosis. Mononuclear
Fig. 18.7 Mural folliculitis in feline dermatophytosis. Small
inflarmmatory cells infiltrate the wall of a rmite-infested hair follicle.
numbers of lymphocytes infiltrate the wall of a hair follicle; note
derrmatophytic spores surrounding the hair shaft.
interface mural folliculitis (interface folliculitis). As
observed in interface dermatitis (see Chapter 3) there is
required. Eosinophilic mucinotic mural folliculitis, a dis-
vacuolation and variable apoptosis of keratinocytes of the
tinctive reaction follicular pattern in dogs with some
outer layer of the external root sheath with occasional
similar features (see p. 469), also may be associated with
apoptosis of suprabasilar keratinocytes as well. T cells
 persistent dermodicosis in which mites are nearly absent.
One author (T.L.G.) has observed mural folliculitis due
sis) (Caswell et al., 1995). Perifollicular pigmentary
to localized demodicosis in a cat. Moderate acanthosis
incontinence is common and reflects damage to the fol-
extended to the follicular isthmus. Inflammation sur-
licular wall. There may be mild to occasionally moderate
rounded the superficial and middle portion of hair
mucin accumulation around follicles with occasional mild
follicles and adnexal glands, and included lymphocytes,
extension to the follicular wall. Mild perifollicular fbro-
histiocytes, plasma cells, and occasional neutrophils and
sis is seen occasionally. Sebaceous glands are normal. The
eosinophils. Lymphocytes and fewer histiocytes infltrated
follicular infundibula are plugged with keratin. Inflam-
the follicular isthmus. Mild spongiosis accompanied the
mation extends to the superficial and middle dermis in a
mural inflammation. Occasionally there was pyogranulo-
perivascular to interstitial pattern, even in cases in which
matous degeneration of the follicular wall with giant cells.
mural folliculitis is the only pattern observed.
 Follicular mites were present in few to moderate numbers.
Mural folliculitis may be the sole pattern in chronic
Like demodicosis, canine mural folliculitis due to
cases which persist with alopecia despite negative skin
dermatophytosis may be accompanied by other patterns
scrapings (*occult demodicosis'). Mural inflammation in 
of   inflammation  including  luminal  folliculitis
Isee
these cases may be mild overall. Mite numbers may be 
Chapter 16) and superficial pustular dermatitis (see
very low and careful searching of step sections may be 
Chapter 1). Mural folliculitis is associated more often
466
Disea ses of the adnexa
plasma cells surround the follicles. Inflammation may
extend to the superficial dermis. Less often, there is
mild interface folliculitis characterized by inflammation
concentrated to the follicular-dermal interface, with
vacuolation and rare shrinking and increased eosinophilia
(apoptosis) of outer follicular cells. Lymphocytic interface
or spongiotic dermatitis affecting the epidermis accom-
 panies this pattern, the latter suggesting an allergic reac-
tion to dermatophytes that is targeting the epidermis and
hair follicles alike. There may be concurrent superficial
(1 rad as) s i asies ro 
Neutrophils may tightly surround hair follicles in some
lesions. Organisms are usually scant to absent; discovery
of dermatophytosis only via culture is not uncommon.
Differential diagnosis of mural folliculitis in dogs due
 to demodicosis is not relevant if mites are present. In cases
 of mural folliculitis of unexplained cause, particularly
in young dogs, step sectioning to search for mites is
most prudent. Eosinophilic mucinotic mural folliculitis
 is similar, and in fact, may be due to clinically occult
demodicosis in some cases. Idiopathic eosinophilic
 mucinotic mural folliculitis generally features more
 prominent intrafollicular mucin than mural folliculitis
due to demodicosis.
Differential diagnosis of mural folliculitis in dogs due
to dermatophytes is not difficult as organisms are usually
 demonstrable. However keratin-colonizing Trichopbyton
spp. are diffcult to detect on hematoxylin and eosin
evaluation; special staining is required, as has also been
Fig. 18.8 Mural folliculitis in canine derrmatophytosis. Lympho-
reported (Poisson et al., 1998). Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)
cytes are migrating into the folicular wall; darkly staining der-
and Gomori's methenamine silver (GMS) will color
matophytic spores and hyphae are within the keratin surrounding
organisms magenta and black, respectively. The concur-
the hair shaft (keratin-colonizing derrmatophytes)(periodic
rence of superficial pustules and/or pustular folliculitis
acid-Schiff).
with mural and interface folliculitis is highly suspicious
for dermatophytosis and warrants special staining if
organisms are not obvious.
with keratin-colonizing Trichophyton spp. infection that
Differential diagnosis of mural folliculitis in cats with
features superficial pustulation (see Chapter 1) (Parker &
dermatophytosis often is problematic. Organisms may be
Yager, 1997). There are isthmus mural infltrations of
scant or absent; subsequent culture may provide the defin-
lymphocytes accompanied by mild spongiosis. Inflamma-
itive diagnosis. Concurrent pustular folliculitis or perifol-
tion may obscure the follicular-dermal interface, and
licular neutrophilic inflammation is highly suspicious for
often is accompanied by vacuolation of outer follicular
dermatophytosis in this species. Lymphocytic mural folli-
keratinocytes or apoptosis (interface folliculitis). Lym-
culitis may occur in other contexts in the cat, including
phocytic spongiotic or interface inflammation may extend
drug eruption, food allergy, or idiopathic cases, some of
to the epidermis. Lymphocytes, plasma cells, and fewer
which are transient and self-limiting. Ultimately, clinical
 neutrophils surround follicles, often densely, and extend
differentiation may be required.
to the surrounding dermis and around adnexal glands.
Organisms are scant to numerous.
PSEUDOPELADE
Mural folliculitis in cats with dermatophytosis is
similar but less severely inflamed. Mural folliculitis may
Clinical features (Figures 18.9 through 18.12)
be the sole or predominant pattern in some cases of feline
dermatophytosis, particularly when organisms are rare.
Pseudopelade is a rare immune-mediated skin disease
Lymphocytes migrate into the follicular isthmus. Lym
reported in the dog and cat. It is characterized by a novel
phocytes, histiocytes, and sometimes neutrophils and
lymphocytic isthmus mural folliculitis which manifests
Mural diseases of the hair follicle
467
Fig. 18.9 Pseudopelade in a Maltese. Generalized truncal, visually
noninflammatory alopecia is present. (From Gross, T.L., Olivry, T.
& Tobin, D.J. (2000) Morphologic and immunologic characteriza-
tion of a canine isthmus mural folliculitis resermbling pseudopelade
of humans. Vet Dermato! 11, 17-24. Reprinted with perrmission.)
Fig. 18.11 Closer view of the dog in Fig. 18.10. Alopecia, macular
hyperpigmentation, and mild scaling are present. (Photograph cour-
tesy H.T. Power.)
Fig. 18.12 Pseudopelade in a cat. Extensive alopecia is present on
the legs, flanks, and abdomen. (Photograph courtesy H.T. Power.)
clinically as a visually noninflammatory alopecia (Gross
et al., 2000; Olivry et al., 2000). Hair loss usually is per-
manent. Immunologic studies performed in dogs and one
cat revealed predominantly CD3+, CD8+ cytotoxic T
lymphocytes in the follicular wall; indirect immunofluo-
Fig. 18.10 Pseudopelade in a Border Collie. Note focal alopecia on
the right shoulder. (From Gross, T.L., Olivry, T. & Tobin, D.J. (2000)
rescence and immunoblotting studies identifed circulat-
Morphologic and immunologic characterization of a canine isthmus
ing IgG autoantibodies that targeted lower hair follicle
mural folliculitis resembling pseudopelade of humans. Vet Dermatof
 proteins including keratins and trichohyalin (Gross et al.,
11, 17-24. Reprinted with permission.)
2000; Olivry et al., 2000).
Marked similarities are shared between canine and
feline pseudopelade, and with pseudopelade in humans,
including similarly targeted proteins. However, pseudo-
468
Diseases of the adnexa
pelade in humans always is permanent (Sahl, 1996). One
Histopathology (Figures 18.13 and 18.14)
author (T.L.G.) is aware of dogs with alopecic skin disease
histopathologically compatible with pseudopelade where
lymphocytes migrate into the wall of the hair follicle at
some hair regrowth occurred. Similarly, hair of dimin-
ished quality has regrown partially in two affected cats
the level of the isthmus. Mural inflammation may be mild
to severe. Infammation may extend to the infundibular
that were treated with cyclosporine (Power, H.T., per-
wall and slightly below the isthmus; inflammation of the
sonal communication, 2001); one was the case previously
hair bulb is not observed. Follicular keratinocytes may
reported by Olivry et al. (2000). Cotsarelis and cowork-
appear degenerated or swollen. Lymphocytes, histiocytes,
ers showed in their seminal papers that the source of hair
and plasma cells compactly surround the follicle at the
follicle regeneration resided not in the matrix region but
 isthmus. There may be perifollicular pigmentary inconti
in the “bulge region', an outer root sheath protrusion at
nence. Milder inflammation may extend to the superficial
the level of the attachment of the arrector pili muscle
 dermis. In putative late lesions, follicular atrophy pre-
(Cotsarelis et al., 1990; Paus & Cotsarelis, 1999). Cell-
labeling studies in the dog did not reveal the presence of
dominates and inflammation is relatively sparse. Seba-
ceous glands are retained in some adnexal units and
a localized anatomic region analogous to the “bulge' doc-
 absent from others.
mented in mice and humans (Credille et al., 1999). If the
source of follicular regeneration is more dispersed in the
Hair follicles are shrunken and telogenized in late
lesions of pseudopelade, sometimes remarkably so, and
canine and feline hair follicle, this could explain occa-
 mild to moderate distortion may also be present. The con-
sional hair regrowth seen with an isthmus-destructive
disease such as pseudopelade.
nective tissue of the external root sheath is prominent,
Clinically, canine pseudopelade is characterized by
well-demarcated, generally visually noninflammatory,
usually patchy alopecia. Scaling and hyperpigmentation
are present in some dogs. Affected areas vary from focal
or multifocal lesions that are 2 to 8 cm in diameter, to
more diffuse alopecia affecting the trunk and legs (Gross
et al., 200o). Pruritus or systemic signs have not been
reported (Gross et al., 2000).
Feline pseudopelade, as observed in one cat, presented
similarly as patchy, visually noninflammatory alopecia
(Olivry et al., 2000). Hair loss was gradually progressive.
Hyperpigmentation was present. Onychorrhexis and
onychomadesis were noted. Partial bilateral symmetry
was also reported. The muzzle, ventrolateral trunk, legs,
and paws were affected. To date, signalment predilections
have not been noted in either dogs or cats.
Clinical differential diagnoses include virtually any skin
disease characterized by relatively noninflammatory,
asymptomatic alopecia. Possible differential diagnoses 
include alopecia areata, acquired pattern alopecia, folli-
cular dysplasia, traction alopecia, psychogenic alopecia,
endocrinopathies, demodicosis, and dermatophytosis.
Absence of hair regrowth or poor hair regrowth suggests,
but does not confrm, pseudopelade over alopecia areata
(see p. 460); alopecia areata also is more likely to be
facially predominant. Skin scrapings and dermatophyte
culture should be performed to rule out demodicosis and
dermatophytosis. Skin biopsy is required for diagnosis
Biopsy site selection
Multiple specimens should be obtained from regions of
Fig. 18.13 Canine pseudopelade demonstrating severe inflamma
maximal alopecia. Specimens should include only abnor
tion of the mid portion of the follicular wall. Note that the deeper
mal tissue, particularly if punch biopsy technique is used.
follicle is unaffected.
Mural diseases of the hair follicle
469
Fig. 18.15 Eosinophilic mucinotic mural folliculitis in a Labrador
is present on the head and neck. (Photograph courtesy K.J.
Boyanowski.)
targets the follicle only is suggestive for pseudopelade,
as drug and other immunologic reactions often include
prominent dermatitis and/or other features such as spon-
giosis and apoptosis. Perhaps the division is artifcial in
some cases, as the underlying trigger of pseudopelade gen-
erally is unknown. For example, some lesions histopatho-
logically typical of pseudopelade may be focal over the
Fig. 18.14 Late lesion of canine pseudopelade. Note severe follic-
neck and shoulders, suggesting a reaction to local anti-
ular atrophy and mild residual inflammation of the middle follicle.
gens such as vaccines or other injected substances.
 Late lesions of pseudopelade in dogs that demonstrate
m pasnn aq Au Auone ren aand
and there may be a fbrous root sheath tract or 'stele'
lesions of late stage alopecia areata and granulomatous
(after Headington) at the site of previous hair follicles if
mural folliculitis. If inflamed hair bulbs of alopecia areata
atrophy is severe. In the authors’ opinion, this does not
are not apparent, clinical differentiation may be required
constitute true scarring; increased prominence of connec-
(see above). The degree of atrophy in granulomatous
tive tissue is a necessary end result of severe atrophy in
mural folliculitis is generally more diffuse and severe than
this context. A similar case for the nonscarring nature of
in pseudopelade; residual granulomatous versus predom-
pseudopelade in humans has recently been made (Sahl,
inantly lymphocytic inflammation may allow differentia-
1996).
tion. Feline sebaceous adenitis may appear similar to
 In the single cat reported (Olivry et al., 2000), lesions
pseudopelade, but in contrast, inflammation usually
were similar. Lymphocytes infltrate the wall of the
targets the sebaceous gland, and glands are uniformly
isthmus and are accompanied by variable neutrophils.
absent (see Chapter 17).
There may be frank degeneration of the follicular wall.
Free hair shafts ejected from degenerate follicles are
EOSINOPHILIC MUCINOTIC MURAL
within small granulomas. Lymphocytes, histiocytes, and
FOLLICULITIS IN DOGS
neutrophils encircle the follicle at the isthmus. Hair folli-
cles become markedly atrophic, and follicular connective
Clinical features (Figures 18.15 and 18.16)
tissue is prominent. Sebaceous glands are retained.
 In the authors′ opinion, pseudopelade is diffcult to dif-
Eosinophilic mucinotic mural folliculitis of dogs is a rare,
ferentiate histologically from other lymphocytic isthmus
 presumed immunologic skin disease characterized clini-
mural folliculitides, such as those due to drugs or aller-
cally by alopecia. The highly variable clinical presentation
 gens (see introduction, p. 460). Inflammation that closely
 may indicate that multiple antigenic riggers may initiate
470
Diseases of the adnexa
Fig. 18.16 Closer view of the legs of the dog in Fig. 18.15. Patchy
alopecia and mottled hyperpigmentation are present on the legs.
(Photograph courtesy K.J. Boyanowski.)
 a similar follicular reaction pattern. Persistent antigenic
drive associated with occult demodicosis may be one pos-
sible etiology, as small numbers of mites or mite fragments 
are found histologically in some cases. Eosinophilic
mucinotic mural folliculitis has been observed in con-
junction with T cell lymphoma of the lymph node in
a dog (case material courtesy M.B.C. Mays, 1999). Fol-
licular mucinosis is not a specifc fnding, and may be the
effect of certain T cell milieus, as described in humans
(Fanti et al., 1992). Eosinophilic inflammation with fol-
licular mucinosis has been reported in humans with either
cutaneous epitheliotropic T cell lymphoma ('mycosis fun-
Fig. 18.17 Eosinophilic mucinotic mural folliculitis. Severe inflam
 goides') or in conjunction with several inflammatory dis-
mation of the middle follicular walls spares the deep follicles at
eases (Wood,
 2003). Eosinophilic mucinotic mural
bottom.
folliculitis resembles folicular mucinosis in dogs and cats;
 eosinophils are not featured in the latter (see p. 477).
Clinical differential diagnoses include other skin dis-
Clinically, as in most other syndromes characterized by
eases characterized by variable patterns of alopecia. Pos-
mural folliculitis, alopecia is the predominant clinical
sible differential diagnoses include alopecia areata,
presentation. The alopecia usually is patchy, often roughly
pseudopelade, acquired pattern alopecia, follicular dys-
circular, and moderately well-demarcated. Erythema,
plasia, traction alopecia, demodicosis, and dermatophy-
crusting, hyperpigmentation and ‘greasines’ of the hair-
tosis. Frank demodicosis is an important differential
coat have been noted. Distribution patterns of alopecia
diagnosis, especially in younger dogs. Skin scrapings and
also are highly variable; lesions affect the face, periorbital
dermatophyte culture should be performed to rule out
region, pinnae, neck, trunk, or legs. Generalized, partial,
frank demodicosis and dermatophytosis. Skin biopsy is
patchy alopecia may be seen. Marked facial bilateral
required for diagnosis.
 symmetry similar to alopecia areata also has been noted.
In severe cases, focal ulceration may be present within
Biopsy site selection
alopecic areas. Pruritus and attendant self-trauma are
inconsistent features.
Multiple specimens should be obtained from regions of
Retrievers and their crossbreeds appear to be over-
 maximal alopecia. Specimens should include only abnor-
represented in cases seen to date by the authors and
mal tissue, particularly if punch biopsy technique is used.
others; however breed predilections have not been
shown. Sex and age predilections have not been noted.
Histopathology (Figures 18.17 through 18.19)
Older dogs may be predisposed to idiopathic eosinophilic
 mucinotic mural folliculitis, while younger dogs may be
There is mild to moderate acanthosis, sometimes with
more likely to develop the form associated with occult
parakeratotic scaling and/or serocellular crusting. Hair
demodicosis.
follicles may be superficially plugged with keratin. There
Mural diseases of the hair follicle
471
Fig. 18.18 Higher magnification of Fig. 18.17. Lymphocytes infil-
Fig. 18.19 High magnification of eosinophilic mucinotic mural fol
trate the follicular walls; pale intercellular spaces in the follicles
liculitis demonstrating marked intercellular accumulation of mucin
{clear spaces).
contain mucin.
is tightly encircling, mild to moderate inflammation at
sectioning is required. In some cases, only mineralized
the level of the isthmus. Perifollicular inflammation
fragments of putative organisms are identifed. Because
includes lymphocytes, histiocytes, plasma cells, and
the lesions are similar to the mural folliculitis of demod-
eosinophils. In more highly inflamed lesions, similar
icosis, which also includes eosinophils and variable
inflammation extends to the perifollicular and superfcial
mucin, it is probable that this subtype of eosinophilic
dermis. Mural inflammation is predominantly lympho-
mucinotic mural folliculitis represents a continuum or
cytic and usually mild. There may be associated mural
variation upon the theme of mural immunoreactivity
spongiosis.
secondary to persistent mites. In general, mites are easier
 Mucin deposition is both perifollicular and mural; the
to fnd histologically in typical mural folliculitis due to
former is generally more prominent than the latter. Mucin
demodicosis.
deposition may be mild and patchy in distribution, but
The lesions of follicular mucinosis in dogs are histo-
often is focally striking and severe. In some lesions the fol-
logically similar to those of eosinophilic mucinotic mural
licular wall is greatly distended with mucin, and may
folliculitis in dogs, except for the presence of eosinophils
appear degenerate. In those follicles, keratinocytes are dis-
 in the latter. Many cases of canine eosinophilic mucinotic
sociated and may appear necrotic. Rarely, granulomas,
mural folliculitis feature more prominent perifollicular
including giant cells, are seen in the degenerated follicu-
(rather than intrafollicular) mucin than hitherto observed
lar wall.
(t 'd sos) sison ren a un pnnodan 1
Lesions of eosinophilic mucinotic mural folliculitis
Mucin accumulation may be subtle in some cases of
may occasionally be seen in the setting of occult demod-
eosinophilic mucinotic mural folliculitis, but is a central
icosis; parasites are diffcult to fnd and often step-
feature of follicular mucinosis. However the possibility
472
Diseases of the adnexa
Fig. 18.20  Degenerative mucinotic mural foiculitis in a cat. Severe
generalized alopecia is present. {From Gross, T.L., Olivry, T., Vitale,
C.B. et al. (2001) Degenerative mucinotic rmural folliculitis in cats.
Vet Dermatof 12, 279-83. Reprinted with permission.)
Fig. 18.21 Closer view of the head of the cat in Fig. 18.20 showing
the highly characteristic bilaterally symmetric thickening and
that these two entities actually represent one disease
swelling with alopecia. Note narrowing of the eye openings (Photo-
 process cannot be ruled out. In humans, follicular muci-
graph courtesy H.T. Power.)
nosis, which often features eosinophils, is a reaction
pattern with several clinical settings or outcomes, includ-
ing epitheliotropic T cell lymphoma (Wood, 2003). It has
been reported that eosinophil-predominant forms are
more likely to have a benign outcome (Mehregan et al.,
1991).
DEGENERATIVE MUCINOTIC MURAL
FOLLICULITIS IN CATS
Clinical features (Figures 18.20 through 18.22)
 Degenerative mucinotic mural folliculitis is a rare, unique,
presumptively immunological skin disease of cats. It is
characterized clinically by generalized alopecia, striking
thickening of the facial skin, and varying degrees of
lethargy (Gross et al., 2001). Despite suspicion of an
immunoreactive pathogenesis, affected cats do not
respond to vigorous immunomodulatory  therapy.
Lethargy and lack of response to immunosuppression
Fig. 18.22 Degenerative mucinotic mural folliculitis in a cat. Note
 may sugest underlying visceral disease, but necropsy was
the striking resemblance to the cat in Fig. 18.21. (From Gross, T.L.
not permitted in six of seven cats (Gross et al., 2001).
Olivry, T., Vitale, C.B. et al. (2001) Degenerative mucinotic mural
Three of seven reported cats were positive for feline
folliculitis in cats. Vet Dermatot 12, 279-83. Reprinted with per-
immunodeficiency virus (FIV), and all cats were negative
mission.)
for feline leukemia virus (FeLV) (Gross et al., 2001).
 Clinical features include diffuse, generalized alopecia of
variable severity. Facial skin, and especially the muzzle,
and crusting may be present. Alopecia commonly begins
becomes alopecic, thickened, and swollen in a bilaterally
on the muzzle and neck, and after generalization, becomes
symmetric manner. This leads to highly characteristic
most pronounced on the head, neck, and shoulders.
thickening of the lid margins and narrowing of the space
Pruritus was observed in four of seven cats and was
between the eyelids. The affected skin of the muzzle
severe in one cat (Gross et al., 2001). Lethargy is a
 becomes shiny and waxy, and has a rubbery feel. Scaling
common feature and some cats experience weight loss.
Mural diseases of the hair follicle
473
Fig. 18.23 Degenerative mucinotic mural folliculitis dermonstrating
Fig. 18.24 Higher magnification of degenerative mucinotic mura]
intense intramural and perifollicular inflarmmation in the isthmus
folliculitis. The walls of two adjacent follicles are expanded and par
region of the hair follicles.
tially destroyed by pale mucin and mixed inflarmmation featuring
many lymphocytes and histiocytes.
General health screening tests do not show consistent
 include only abnormal tissue, particularly if punch biopsy
abnormalities.
technique is used.
All affected animals to date have been domestic short-
haired or domestic longhaired cats. Cats have been middle
Histopathology (Figures 18.23 through 18.25)
aged or older. Six of seven cats reported were males
(Gross et al., 2001).
Moderate iregular acanthosis extends to  follicular
Clinical differential diagnoses for early cases of degen-
 infundibula and is often accompanied by mild spongiosis.
erative mucinotic mural folliculitis in cats may include
There may be parakeratotic scale/crusts that are some-
demodicosis,
dermatophytosis,
sebaceous
 adenitis,
times extensive. Moderate to severe inflammation is
pseudopelade, and cutaneous epitheliotropic lymphoma.
centered upon the follicular isthmus, but extends to the
Clinical diagnosis is not problematic if the highly charac-
infundibulum. Lymphocytes, histiocytes, and neutrophils
teristic symmetric facial thickening with alopecia and nar-
are present in variable numbers and proportions with the
rowing of the eyelid openings is present. Testing for FIV
wall. Mucin widens the follicular epithelial intercellu-
should be performed. Skin biopsy is confrmatory.
lar spaces; it is light gray or gray-blue with hematoxylin
and eosin staining, and turquoise blue with Alcian blue-
periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) staining at pH 2.5. Rarely,
Biopsy site selection
nu Aq irde umo, readde san lniap
Multiple specimens should be obtained from regions of
Mucin may also surround hair follicles.
maximal alopecia and skin thickening. Specimens should
In severely inflamed follicles there may be neutro-
474
Diseases of the adnexa
Fig. 18.26 Granulomatous mural folliculitis in a dog. Striking
patchy alopecia, as observed on the head and neck in this view,
affects the entire dog. (Photograph courtesy C.A. Sousa.)
a variation of the same condition. Follicular mucinosis is
not a specific finding, and may be the effect of certain T
cell milieus, as described in humans (Fanti et al., 1992).
 Follicular mucinosis in cats (see p. 477) may be similar
to degenerative mucinotic mural folliculitis. A clinical
photograph of one of two reported cats with follicular
mucinosis showed clinical features indistinguishable from
degenerative
 mucinotic mural folliculitis,  including
narrowed eye openings (Scott, 1987). However, both
reported cases of follicular mucinosis developed cuta-
Fig. 18.25 Higher magnification of degenerative mucinotic mural
neous lymphoma (Scott, 1987), which has not been
folliculitis. Note pale pyogranuloma at site of follicular inflamma-
observed in cases of degenerative mucinotic mural folli
tion and degeneration.
culitis seen by the authors. Further, a feline case of folli-
cular mucinosis observed by one author (T.L.G.) had
clinical and histological features that were distinct from
philic luminal folliculitis. Degeneration of the severely
degenerative mucinotic mural folliculitis.
inflamed follicular wall occurs, and may eventuate in
complete effacement by large pyogranulomas, which
GRANULOMATOUS MURAL
may include giant cells. Hair shafts may remain in
FOLLICULITIS IN DOGS
 these degenerate, inflamed foci. Follicular atrophy is mod-
erate to severe and multifocal; normal anagen hair folli-
Clinical features (Figures 18.26 through 18.28)
cles may be interspersed, particularly in less inflamed or
putatively early lesions. Sebaceous glands are conserved
Granulomatous mural folliculitis is a rare, presumed
in general, but may be small or absent in some regions.
immunological syndrome of dogs that is characterized
 Lymphocytes, histiocytes, neutrophils, and plasma cells
clinically by highly variable alopecia. The wide range in
surround hair follicles and infltrate the superficial dermis
in moderate numbers. Eosinophils are rare. There may be
logically suggests a possible multifactorial etiology. Most
mild to moderate edema.
cases described in the literature to date have been seem-
 Degenerative mucinotic mural folliculitis is striking his-
ingly associated with adverse drug reactions (Scott, 1999;
 tologically. However, occasionally, similar folliculitis with
Scott et al., 2001). Drugs reported to induce granuloma-
mucinosis is seen in cats that lack correlative clinical fea-
tous mural folliculitis in dogs include amitraz, cefadroxil,
tures (particularly complete alopecia of the head and
L-thyroxin, and various topical agents (Scott, 1999; Scott
narrowing of eye openings). The significance of these clin-
et al., 2001). Some dogs have regrown hair after the
ically different cases is not yet known; they may represent
offending drug is terminated, while others have not. Some
Mural diseases of the hair follicle
475
scarring is not a feature, the alopecic skin of advanced
cases feels very smooth, as virtually no hair remains in
affected areas. Pruritus usually is not present. Secondary
bacterial folliculitis may occur. Signalment predilections
have not been noted.
Clinical differential diagnoses  for  granulomatous
mural folliculitis in dogs include other skin diseases
Possible differential diagnoses include alopecia areata,
pseudopelade, follicular dysplasia, endocrinopathies,
demodicosis, and dermatophytosis. Skin scrapings and
dermatophyte culture should be performed to rule out
demodicosis and dermatophytosis. Skin biopsy is required
for diagnosis.
Fig. 18.27 Granulomatous mural folliculitis in a dog. Nearly total
alopecia is present; note mottled leukoderma.
Biopsy site selection
Multiple biopsy specimens should be obtained from
regions of maximal alopecia. Specimens should include
 only abnormal areas, particularly if punch biopsy tech-
nique is used.
Histopathology (Figures 18.29 and 18.30)
There is mild to severe acanthosis. In some cases, erosion
to ulceration, and marked exudation and crusting are
seen. Occasionally, hair follicles may be plugged with
parakeratotic and inflammatory debris; parakeratosis was
prominent in a reported case (Scott, 1999).
In mature lesions, many hair follicles are completely
effaced by granulomatous to pyogranulomatous inflam-
mation that also extends along follicles to form large
linear or less often, nodular foci. Hair shafts may remain
Fig. 18.28 Closer view of the head of the dog in Fig. 18.27. Fol
centrally, but are often obliterated. Inflammation includes
licular plugging with whitish inspissated keratinous debris gives a
histiocytes, lymphocytes, and neutrophils. Multinucleated
stippled appearance, and accompanies almost complete alopecia and
giant cells may be present and can be numerous. Follicu-
strikingly patterned leukoderma.
lar inflammation centers on the isthmus, but may extend
from the ostium to the bulb. There may be pale linear or
nodular centers due to degeneration of follicular epithe-
cases observed by the authors had received various medi-
lium and a predominance of large histiocytes in that loca-
cations, including antibiotics, prior to the onset of skin
tion. Sebaceous glands often are obliterated, but apocrine
lesions.
sweat glands usually remain. Secondary pustular folli-
Clinical features include variable alopecia that may be
culitis and dermatitis have been observed. In some loca-
tions, inflammation tightly surrounds the follicular wall
thema, scaling and crusting may be present. Erosion or
but effaces only the follicular-dermal interface. Perifol-
ulceration with exudation may occur in regions of alope-
licular nodular inflammation may be prominent in some
cia in more severe cases. Consistent patterns of hair loss
locations. Scattered individual shrinkage and increased
have not been noted; patchy lesions may involve the
 eosinophilia (apoptosis) of follicular keratinocytes may be
trunk, head, and extremities. One dog seen by one author
seen.
(P.J.1.) lost over 90% of truncal hair over a period of 6
Associated dermal inflammation is variable and may be
months. Follicular plugging may be noted with chronic-
absent or minimal. In some cases, there may be super-
ity. In long-standing cases, irregular mottled leukoderma
fcial perivascular to diffuse inflammation, sometimes
and leukotrichia can be visually striking. Although true
forming a loose lichenoid band. Intense lichenoid and
476
Diseases of the adnexa
Fig. 18.29 Granulomatous mural folliculitis in a dog. Hair follicles
are effaced by linear granulormas. Note ulceration.
tis. Central residual follicular epithelium is surrounded by expansive
granulomatous inflammation.
interface inflammation may be associated with epidermal
degeneration and ulceration. Milder interface inflamma-
dermatitis, and the occurrence of apoptosis in some cases.
tion with rare basal cell apoptosis may be present. In
Some lesions of granulomatous mural folliculitis, parti-
other cases, superfcial lymphocytic dermatitis is accom-
cularly those in which nodular perifollicular inflammation
panied by exocytosis and mild spongiosis.
predominates, may be easily confused with sterile granu-
Chronic lesions are characterized by striking and often
loma and pyogranuloma syndrome (see Chapter 13) or
diffuse atrophy of hair follicles. This sometimes is mani-
severely inflamed sebaceous adenitis (see Chapter 17). In
fested by complete drop-out of follicles and often seba-
cases with lichenoid dermatitis, Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-
ceous glands, leaving only arrector pili muscles and
like syndrome may be considered. The diferentiating
apocrine sweat glands. There may a few clusters or
feature of granulomatous mural folliculitis is severe pan-
cords of follicular epithelial cells intermingled with
follicular mural inflammation.
melanophages and a few lymphocytes and histiocytes.
Granulomatous mural folliculitis also may resemble
Follicular infundibula sometimes remain and are dilated
severe follicular erythema multiforme (see Chapter 4).
with keratin. Obliterative scarring is not found; external
 In the latter pustular to pyogranulomatous inflamma-
root sheath connective tissue may form a fbrous tract that
 tion follows confluent follicular apoptosis, and results in 
remains as a place-holder or 'stele (after Headington) for
ultimate destruction of the hair folicle. Apoptosis is
the previous follicle.
uncommon and generally mild in granulomatous mural
Like other forms of mural folliculitis, granulomatous
folliculitis. Differentiation from follicular erythema mul-
 mural folliculitis may be a reaction pattern with variable
 tiforme may be unimportant in some cases, as both con-
causation. This is suggested by the range in severity of
ditions may be drug-induced. It is also possible that both
lesions, the variable pattern and intensity of associated
reaction patterns may coexist in some cases.
Mural diseases of the hair follicle
477
End-stage lesions of granulomatous mural folliculitis,
be performed to rule out dermodicosis and dermatophy-
in which severe follicular atrophy and drop-out pre-
tosis. Skin biopsy is required for diagnosis.
dominate, may need to be distinguished from chronic
pseudopelade. The degree of atrophy in granulomatous
Biopsy site selection
mural folliculitis is generally more diffuse and severe
than in pseudopelade; residual granulomatous versus
Multiple biopsy specimens should be obtained from
predominantly lymphocytic  inflammation  may  2
allow
regions of maximal alopecia. If punch biopsy technique is
differentiation.
used, specimens should include only abnormal tissue.
FOLLICULAR MUCINOSIS
Histopathology (Figure 18.31)
(Synonym: alopecia mucinosa)
A single canine case has been observed by one author
(T.L.G.) and is similar to the case reported by Bell &
Clinical features
Oliver (1995). Acanthosis is mild, and may be associated
with focal spongiosis (Bell & Oliver 1995). Mixed
Follicular mucinosis is a very rare, presumed immuno-
inflammation  surrounds and  variably infltrates  the
logically-mediated, alopecic skin disease of the dog and
isthmus portion of the hair folicle. This includes lym-
cat. It has been reported in one dog (Bell & Oliver 1995)
phocytes, histiocytes, plasma cells, and neutrophils. Simi-
and two cats (Scott, 1987). It has also been observed in
lar inflammation extends to the surrounding and super-
an additional dog and cat by one author (T.L.G.). Multi-
fcial dermis. Mild interface dermatitis with apoptosis
ple triggers may initiate lymphocytic immunologic attack
on hair follicles. In the single canine case seen by one
author (T.L.G.), immunohistochemistry revealed CD3+ T
P
lymphocytes prominently within and surrounding hair
follicles. Histopathologic and clinical similarities exist
between this disease and eosinophilic mucinotic mural
folliculitis in dogs (see p. 469); the lack of eosinophils in
follicular mucinosis is the prime distinguishing feature.
Mural inflammation and follicular mucinosis (with or
without eosinophils) has been reported in humans with
either cutaneous epitheliotropic lymphoma (mycosis
fungoides') or in conjunction with several inflammatory
diseases (Wood, 2003). Follicular mucinosis has been
reported in conjunction with epitheliotropic lymphoma in
two cats (Scott et al., 1987).
Clinical features of follicular mucinosis in dogs include
alopecia and scaling. Lesions vary from patchy to diffuse
and are widespread, affecting the head, trunk, and legs
(Bell & Oliver, 1995). Hyperpigmentation may be noted.
Pruritus has not been reported or observed. Affected dogs
are otherwise normal. Both dogs were older retrievers; the
observed dog was a Labrador Retriever and the reported
dog a Golden Retriever (Bell & Oliver 1995).
Clinical features of follicular mucinosis in cats, as
described, include well-demarcated alopecia with fine
T
scaling involving the head, ears and neck (Scott, 1987).
The two affected adult cats were otherwise healthy at
presentation, but developed epitheliotropic lymphoma
and were subsequently lost to follow-up (Scott, 1987).
Clinical differential diagnoses include other causes of
relatively noninflammatory alopecia. Differential diag-
noses include alopecia areata, pseudopelade, follicular
Fig. 18.31 Follicular mucinosis. The follicular walls are expanded
dysplasias, endocrinopathies, demodicosis, and dermato-
by pale intercellular mucin. Note intramural and perifollicular
phytosis. Skin scrapings and dermatophyte culture should
lymphocyte-rich inflammation.
478
Diseases of the adnexa
and pigmentary incontinence was reported by Bell &
Krawiec, D.R. & Gaafar, S.M. (1975) A comparative study of
Oliver (1995).
allergic and primary irritant contact dermatitis with DNCB in
Mucin accumulation is variable but often striking.
dogs. J Invest Dermatol 65, 248-51.
Follicles are not equally affected and many are spared.
Marignac, G., Barlerin, L., Guillot, J. et al. (2002) A case of sea-
Pools of mucin may contain free follicular keratinocytes
sonal lymphocytic mural folliculitis with spontaneous resolu-
tion in a cat. In: Proceedings of the 18th ESVD/ECVD
and lymphocytes. Central cystic degeneration due to
Meeting, Nice, p. 220.
       
Immunohistochemistry showed CD3+ T lymphocytes
Alopecia Areata
prominently within and surrounding follicles in the
Jonghe, S.R., Ducatelle, R.V. and Mattheeuws, R. (1999) Tra-
author's case.
chyonychia associated with alopecia areata in a Rhodesian
As reported in cats (Scott, 1987), acanthosis was mod-
Ridgeback. Vet Dermatol 10, 123-6.
erate to severe and was accompanied by mild lymphocytic
Madani, S. & Shapiro, J. (2000) Alopecia areata update. J Am
exocytosis. There was perivascular mixed mononuclear
Acad Dermatol 42, 549-66.
dermatitis. Mucin accumulation in hair follicles was
Olivry, I., Moore, P.F, Naydan, D.K. et al. (1996) Antifollicu-
lar cellmediated and humoral immunity in canine alopecia
the follicular wall with lymphocytic infltration. A similar
areata. Vet Dermatol 7, 67-79.
Olsen, E.A. (2003) Hair. In: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in
case has been observed by one author (T.L.G.).
General Medicine, 6th edn (eds I.M. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K.
The lesions of follicular mucinosis in dogs are histo-
Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.1. Katz), pp. 633-55.
logically similar to those of eosinophilic mucinotic mural
McGraw-Hill, New York.
folliculitis in dogs (see p. 469), except for the presence of
Tobin, D.J. & Olivry, T. (2004) Spontaneous canine homologue 
eosinophils in the latter. Many cases of eosinophilic
of human alopecia areata. In: Animal Models of Inflammatory
mucinotic mural folliculitis feature more prominent peri-
Skin Diseases (ed. L.S. Chan), pp. 469-81. CRC Press, Boca
follicular (rather than intrafollicular) mucin accumulation
Raton.
 than hitherto observed or reported in follicular mucinosis.
Tobin, D.J., Fenton, D.A. & Kendall, M.D. (1990) Ultrastruc-
Mural mucin accumulation may be subtle in eosinophilic
tural observations on the hair bulb melanocytes and melano-
mucinotic mural folliculitis, but is a central feature of fol-
somes in acute alopecia areata. J Invest Dermatol 94, 803-7.
Tobin, D.J., Olivry, T. & Bystryn, J-C. (1998) Anti-trichohyalin
licular mucinosis. Still, the possibility that these two enti-
 ties actually represent one disease process cannot be ruled
antibodies in canine alopecia areata. In: Advances in Veteri-
nary Dermatology, Vol. 3 {eds K.W. Kwochka, T. Willemse &
out at this time. In humans, follicular mucinosis, which
C. von Tscharner), pp. 355-64. Butterworth-Heinemann,
often features eosinophils, is a reaction
pattern with
Oxford.
several clinical settings or outcomes, including epithe-
Tobin, DJ., Gardner, S.H., Luther, P.B. et al. (2003) A natural
liotropic T-cell lymphoma (Wood, 2003). It has been
canine homologue of alopecia areata in humans. Br J Derma-
reported that eosinophil-predominant forms are more
tol 149, 1-13.
likely to be benign (Mehregan, 1991).
 Follicular mucinosis in cats may be similar to degener-
Munal Folliculitis due to Demodicosis and Dermatopbytosis
ative mucinotic mural folliculitis in cats. A clinical pho-
Caswell, J.L., Yager, J.A., Ferrer, L. & Malcolm Weir, J.A. (1995)
tograph of one of two reported cases showed clinical
Canine demodicosis: a re-examination of the histopathologic
lesions and description of the immunophenotype of infiltrat-
features indistinguishable from degenerative mucinotic
mural folliculitis, including narrowed eye openings (Scott,
ing cells. Vet Dermatol 6, 9-19.
Caswell, J.L., Yager, J.A., Parker, W.M. et al. (1997) A prospec-
1987). However both reported cases of feline follicular
tive study of the immunophenotype and temporal changes in
mucinosis developed cutaneous lymphoma, which has not
the histologic lesions of canine demodicosis. Vet Dermatol 34,
 been observed in cases of degenerative mucinotic mural
279-87.
folliculitis seen by the authors. Further the feline case of
Parker W.M. & Yager JA. (1997) Trichophyton dermatophytosis
follicular mucinosis observed by one author (T.L.G.) had
- a disease easily confused with pemphigus erythematosus.
clinical and histological features that were distinct from
Can Vet J 38, 502-5.
 degenerative mucinotic mural folliculitis; follow-up clini-
Poisson, L., Olivry, T. & Lemons, C. (1998) Subcorneal neu-
cal information was not available.
trophilic acantholytic pustular dermatitis: an unusual mani-
festation of dermatophytosis resembling canine pemphigus
foliaceus. In: Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 3 (eds
K.W. Kwochka, T. Willemse & C. von Tscharner), p. 456-7.
REFERENCES
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
Introduction
Pseudopelade
DeClercq, J. (2000) A case of diet-related lymphocytic mural fol-
Cotsarelis, G., Sun, T.T. & Lavker, R.M. (1990) Label-retaining
liculitis in a cat. Vet Dermatol 11, 75-80.
cells reside in the bulge area of pilosebaceous unit: implica-
Mural diseases of the hair follicle
479
tions for follicular stem cells, hair cycle, and skin carcino-
Degenerative Mucinotic Mural Folliculitis in Cats
genesis. Cell 61, 1329-37.
Fanti, PA., Tosti, A., Morelli, R. et al. (1992) Follicular muci-
Credille, K.M., Butler, K.L. & Nachreiner, R.F. (1999) Canine
nosis in alopecia areata. Am J Dermatopathot 14, 542-5.
hair follicle regeneration: Do dogs have a *bulge region'? Vet
Gross, T.L., Olivry, T., Vitale, C.B. et al. (2001) Degenerative
Pathol 36, 506 (abstract).
mucinotic mural folliculitis in cats. Vet Dermatol 12, 279-83.
Gross, T.L., Olivry, T. & Tobin D.J. (2000) Morphologic and
Scott, D.W. (1987) Feline dermatology 1983-1985: *The secret
immunologic characterization of a canine isthmus mural fol-
sits'. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23, 255-74.
liculitis resembling pseudopelade of humans. Vet Dermatol
11, 17-24.
Granulomatous Mural Folliculitis in Dogs
Olivry, T, Power, H.T., Woo, J.C. et al. (2000) Anti-isthmus
Scott, D.W. (1999) Folliculite murale granulomateuse chez le
autoimmunity in a novel feline acquired alopecia resembling
chien: manifestation d'un accident medicamenteux cutane?
pseudopelade of humans. Vet Dermatol 11, 261-70.
Med Vet Quebec 29, 154-6.
Paus, R. & Cotsarelis, G. (1999) The biology of hair follicles.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
New Engl J Med 341, 491-7.
Small Animat Dermatology, 6th edn, p. 725. W.B. Saunders,
Sahl, W.J. (1996) Pseudopelade: an inherited alopecia. Int J
Philadelphia.
Dermatol 3s, 715-9.
Follicular Mucinosis
Eosinophilic Mucinotic Mural Folliculitis in Dogs
Bell, A. & Oliver, F. (1995) Alopecia mucinosa (follicular muci-
Fanti, PA., Tosti, A., Morelli, R. et al. {1992) Follicular
nosis) in a dog. Vet Dermatol 6, 221-6.
mucinosis in alopecia areata. Am J Dermatopathol 14,
Mehregan, D.A., Gibson, L.E. & Muller, S.A. (1991) Follicular
542-5.
mucinosis: histopathological review of 33 cases. Mayo Clin
Mehregan, D.A., Gibson, L.E. & Muller, S.A. (1991) Follicular
Proc 66, 387-90.
mucinosis: histopathological review of 33 cases. Mayo Clin
Scott, D.W. (1987) Feline dermatology 1983-1985: *The secret
Proc 66, 387-90.
sits'. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23, 255-74.
Wood, G.S. (2003) Inflammatory diseases that simulate lym-
Wood, G.S. (2003) Inflammatory diseases that simulate lym-
phomas: cutaneous pseudolymphomas. In: Fitzpatrick's Der-
phomas: cutaneous pseudolymphomas. In: Fitzpatrick's Der-
matology in General Medicine, 6th edn (eds I.M. Freedberg,
matotogy in General Medicine, 6th edn (eds I.M. Freedberg,
A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.I.
A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.I.
Katz), pp. 1567-80. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Katz), pp. 1567-80. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 19
Atrophic diseases of the adnexa
Atrophic diseases of the adnexa include those in which
The diffculty in evaluating hair cycle arrest in dogs
the follicle has undergone hair cycle arrest. True follicular 
arises from the marked breed variation in hair cycles and
atrophy (reduction in follicular size over what would be
follicular morphology (Credille et al., 2001). That study
expected for the given stage of the follicular growth
 suggests that determining the presence or absence of
cycle), may exist alone, or occur in conjunction with cycle
hairs within telogen follicles (haired or hairless telogen,
arrest. These diseases may have an endocrine or other
respectively) may be of greater value in the assessment
metabolic stimulus, or an inflammatory cause. Dysplasia,
of alopecia, as haired telogen predominance may occur
or malformation of the follicular unit, is not a uniform
normally in many dog breeds (Credille et al., 2001).
feature of diseases of this chapter; however a recent study
Haired telogen phase may be prolonged in many breeds
has shown that occasional follicular dysplasia is observed
of dogs as an energy saving feature to retain the insulat-
in the setting of endocrine follicular disorders (Rothstein
ing coat without frequent shedding. Hairless telogen fol-
et al., 1998).
licles form a small percentage of total follicles observed
 In the hair cycle, the catagen or regression phase is
 in normal dogs; these may function as follicles in reserve,
characterized by involution of the hair bulb and dermal
 perhaps as a method of increasing coat density during
follicular papilla, upward migration of the follicle and
periods of cold (Dunstan, R.W., personal communication,
papilla, and disintegration of the inner root sheath. The
2004). In contrast, a predominance of hairless telogen
outer root sheath continues to keratinize as it regresses;
follicles characterizes many of the diseases of this
the outer root sheath keratin may merge with the keratin
chapter.
of the hair cortex, resulting in a brush-like mass of
 Exaggerated forms of regressing hair follicles, in which
brightly eosinophilic tricholemmal keratin. This promi-
yanorui apnnoid on readde uneray pasny jo sayids aa1e
nent cornifed layer may help to anneal the hair shaft to
the outer root sheath to the vitreous layer occur in the
the outer root sheath during the prolonged telogen phase
setting of some atrophic adnexal diseases. These have
that follows (Dunstan, R.W., personal communication,
been dubbed “flame follicles' by Dunstan. The flame fol-
2004). The telogen or resting phase of the hair follicle is
licle may result from an abnormal or accentuated catagen
characterized by a widened infundibulum and narrow
phase in which there has been over-abundant deposition
base of outer root sheath that terminates at the level of
of tricholemmal keratin, with subsequent passage into
the sebaceous glands. Hair shafts usually are retained.
telogen, or the resting phase. Thus some argument may
There is some breed variation in the appearance of the
be made for consideration of the flame follicle as an
telogen phase, which is partly due to variation in the
abnormal or exaggerated telogen follicle. However, it
amount of annealing keratins deposited during the
is also reasonable to consider the flame follicle as an
 catagen phase around the hair shaft. A thin cord or cluster
“arrested’ catagen follicle, since the “flames’ morphologi-
 of hair germ cells lies beneath the outer root sheath above
cally reflect an exaggeration of the keratin pattern which
the quiescent dermal folicular papilla. The telogen hair
upe un (aaoqe aas) aseqd usien aun ul saraua
shaft is extruded (shed) when the new emerging anagen
there is retention of the pale pink outer root sheath
hair pushes it out. Evaluation and designation of stages
keratinocytes from the isthmus region that gives normal
of the hair cycle are currently based on morphologic
catagen follicles their predominant tinctorial properties.
parameters originally adapted from mice and humans.
 ai jo au an a ap oi sanis n
 Definite identification of hair follicle stages in dogs and
follicle are needed. True flame folicles may be most
cats will involve further studies, for example, TUNEL
prominent in plush-coated breeds, and may be a mani-
staining for the presence of apoptosis that is central to the
festation of hair growth cycle arrest, regardless of type of
catagen regression phase.
endocrine stimulus.
480
Atrophic diseases of the adnexa
481
Fig. 19.2 Closer view of the dog in Fig. 19.1. Alopecia, lichenifi-
cation, and hyperpigmentation are present on the ventral neck and
chest.
hormone physiology and the noncutaneous signs of
hypothyroidism are beyond the scope of this book; the
reader is referred to standard textbooks (Scott-Moncrieff
& Guptill-Yoran, 2000; Scott et al., 2001; Feldman &
Nelson, 2004).
The frequency of occurrence of cutaneous signs in
Fig. 19.1 Canine hypothyroidism in a German Shepherd Dog-
crossbreed, demonstrating somewhat symmetric alopecia, hyperpig-
hypothyroidism is controversial. The most common cuta-
mentation, and lichenification.
neous signs, when present, include alopecia and poor
haircoat quality. Paradoxically, although acquired canine
hypothyroidism is common, it also is one of the most
Diffculty in the defnitive diagnosis of many of the
overdiagnosed canine diseases. Since thyroid hormone
atrophic adnexal diseases arises from a variation in
promotes cycling into the active anagen phase of hair
clinical presentation. Biopsy of cases with poor hair coat
growth (Credille et al., 2001), other skin diseases charac-
quality and an absence of complete alopecia may not yield
terized by alopecia may be partially thyroid-hormone-
diagnostic results. Areas of advanced or long-standing 
responsive. This encourages overdiagnosis.
hair loss should provide the optimal lesions. Further, 
 Most documented cases of canine hypothyroidism are
differentiation among the uninflamed atrophic adnexal
caused by either lymphocytic thyroiditis or idiopathic
diseases on histopathologic grounds alone may be very
thyroid necrosis and atrophy (Feldman & Nelson, 2004).
diffcult because adnexal atrophy has limited morphologic
Lymphocytic thyroiditis is thought to be due to a complex
variation. Other adjunctive features such as epidermal or 
autoimmune process involving derangements in both cel-
sebaceous gland atrophy or proportion of flame follicles,
lular and humoral immunity (Feldman & Nelson, 2004).
for example, may be helpful. However clinical data,
 Idiopathic thyroid necrosis and atrophy may be an end-
such as sexual status, endocrine assays, etc., usually are
stage result of lymphocytic thyroiditis. Thyroid hormone
required for defnitive diagnosis.
is necessary for normal cellular metabolic functions in all
organ systems. l
Major mechanisms of action include
stimulation of amino acid ransport, mitochondrial
HYPOTHYROIDISM
 Oxygen consumption, and protein synthesis (Feldman &
Clinical features (Figures 19.1 and 19.2)
Nelson, 2004). Deficiency of thyroid hormone affects
metabolic processes throughout the body.
Hypothyroidism is the most common endocrinologic skin
The most common cutaneous clinical features of canine
disease of the dog. In comparison, naturally occurring:
hypothyroidism include bilaterally symmeric truncal
spontaneous hypothyroidism has been reported con-
alopecia, poor coat quality, coat color change, hyperpig-
vincingly in only one cat (Rand et al., 1993). Naturally
 mentation, and lichenifcation. Retarded regrowth of hair
occurring deficiency of thyroid hormones initiates a wide
 after clipping may be noted. These signs may be present
variety of noncutaneous and cutaneous signs. Thyroid
in any combination and may be subtle. Enhanced
482
Diseases of the adnexa
susceptibility to solar and other environmental damage to
ures include other endocrinopathies, follicular dysplasia,
hair, giving rise to lightening of the haircoat and dimin-
postclipping alopecia, acquired pattern alopecia, telogen
ished hair coat quality, may be due to abnormally pro-
effluvium, and excessive physiological shedding. Differen-
longed retention of telogen hairs in hypothyroidism.
 tiation is based on ruling out these diseases and laboratory
Alopecia and broken hairs leading to stubble occur frst
evaluation of the thyroid gland; histopathology may not
in frictional regions such as the neck (under a collar), the
be supportive in all cases. Thyroid testing can include
tail, and pressure points such as the elbows, lateral thighs,
resting thyroid hormone levels, thyroid function testing.
and lateral hocks. In general, truncal alopecia is much
 and assays for thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) (Scott-
more common than hair loss of the distal extremities or
Moncrieff & Guptill-Yoran, 2000; Scott et al., 2001;
head. As an exception, pinnal alopecia and scaling pre-
Feldman & Nelson, 2004). Clinical differential diagnoses
senting as ear margin seborrhea (see Chapter 8) is rela-
for feline hypothyroidism include diseases characterized
tively common. Rarely, large or giant breed dogs may
by alopecia, such as feline psychogenic alopecia and
exhibit a reversed pattern of alopecia affecting the distal
hyperglucocorticoidism.
extremities and head.
Skin thickening due to cutaneous mucinosis and
Biopsy site selection
myxedema can be a feature of hypothyroidism (see
Chapter 15). Secondary pyoderma or bacterial over-
 It is important in all cases of suspected endocrine disease
growth is common, and secondary Malassezia dermatitis
to obtain skin from areas of most advanced hair loss for
also may be present. Secondary seborrhea, characterized
 optimal identification of atrophic follicular changes. Skin
by scaling and crusting, may occur Otitis externa may be
from the junctional zone between normal and alopecic
present with or without associated seborrheic changes or
skin should be avoided, as should lesions with obvious
secondary pyoderma. Pruritus is uncommon, unless
secondary pyoderma.
secondary infection is present.
 In addition to the classical cutaneous signs of hypothy-
Histopathology (Figures 19.3 and 19.4)
roidism, common breed-based characteristics such as
hypertrichosis and haircoat lightening in Irish Setters
 In dogs, epidermal and follicular infundibular hyperpla-
may be noted. A striking 'zebra-striped’ pattern of alope-
sia usually is present, and variable hyperpigmentation
cia in multiple Rhodesian Ridgebacks with hypothy-
may be observed. In some cases, the epidermis and fol-
roidism has been observed (White, S.D., personal
licular infundibula thickness may be normal. There is
communication, 2003). Classical noncutaneous signs of
often mild to occasionally severe follicular infundibular
hypothyroidism, including lethargy, obesity, mental dull-
orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis.
 ness, and heat-seeking, may not be present in dogs with
 Skin biopsy often is not diagnostic in cases of hypothy.
skin disease.
roidism. However, if specimens are obtained from areas
As reported in one cat, spontaneously occurring adult-
of advanced alopecia, hair follicles may be in growth cycle
onset acquired feline hypothyroidism led to a dull, dry,
arrest (physiologic atrophy) and are predominantly in
seborrheic haircoat, lightening of the haircoat, and poor
telogen phase, generally without hair shafts (hairless
hair regrowth after clipping (Rand et al., 1993). Hair
telogen). Secondary follicles may be preferentially affected
loss was predominantly truncal. Systemic clinical signs
 in some specimens. The thickened follicular infundibulum
included lethargy, heat-seeking, obesity, and loss of
often tapers to the cord-like deep follicle, creating a 'v'-
appetite (Rand et al., 1993).
shaped (toe-dancing hippo') confguration. Sebaceous
 Breeds at probable increased risk include the Chinese
glands are normal or slightly hyperplastic if there is
Shar Pei, Chow Chow, Great Dane, Irish Wolfhound,
secondary inflammation.
Boxer English Bulldog, Dachshund, Afghan Hound,
 In Beagles with experimentally induced hypothy-
Newfoundland, Alaskan Malamute, Doberman Pinscher,
roidism, telogen follicles predominated in both normal
Brittany Spaniel, Standard Poodle, Golden Retriever,
and affected dogs; however hairless telogen follicles were
Miniature Schnauzer Airedale Terrier, and Irish Setter.
more numerous in hypothyroid dogs (Credille et al.,
However, hypothyroidism may affect any breed. Most
2001). The diffculty in evaluating telogen arrest in dogs
dogs are between 6 and 10 years of age, but dogs of any
arises from the marked breed variation in hair cycles and
age may be affected (Scott et al., 2001). Sex predilections
follicular morphology (Credille et al., 2001). The study
are not noted, although neutered dogs may be at increased
suggests that derermining the presence or absence of hairs
risk (Scott et al., 2001). Signalment data are not available
within telogen follicles may be of greater value in the
for cats.
assessment of alopecia, as haired telogen predominance
Clinical differential diagnoses of canine hypothyroidism
may occur normally in many breeds (Credille et al.,
with alopecia and poor haircoat as the prime clinical fea-
2001).
Atrophic diseases of the adnexa
483
Fig. 19.3 Canine hypothyroidism.
Hair follicles are in hairless telogen;
note hyperplasia of the epidermis and
follicular infundibula.
Flame follicles (see introduction, p. 480) have been
reported to occur in some cases of canine hypothyroidism,
particularly in the plush-coated breeds (Scott, 1989;
Credille et al., 2001). Flame follicles are likely a manifes-
tation of an abnormal growth cycle in these dogs regard-
less of type of endocrine stimulus. In some cases there are
occasional “dysplastic’ follicles characterized by irregular
or wavy outer contours. A recent study has shown that
occasional follicular dysplasia is observed in the setting of
endocrine follicular disorders (Rothstein et al., 1998).
Affected dogs frequently have secondary pyoderma,
and variable numbers of lymphocytes, macrophages,
plasma cells, and neutrophils may be present in the super-
fcial dermis or around hair follicles. Frank folliculitis or
superfcial epidermal pustulation may be seen. Myxedema
(cutaneous mucinosis) uncommonly  is present (see
Chapter 15), but may be striking in rare cases. Ear margin
seborrhea (orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis) (see Chapter 8)
 may be a manifestation of hypothyroidism in some dogs.
 Pyoderma, mucinosis, and hyperkeratosis may occur in
 the absence of follicular atrophy.
In the single reported case of adult-onset hypothy-
roidism in a cat, histologic fndings were as observed in
dogs. There was moderate acanthosis of the epidermis
and follicular infundibula, as well as diffuse telogeniza-
tion of hair follicles. Inflammation was not observed.
Dermal mucinosis (myxedema) was reported (Rand et al.,
1993).
 Differential diagnoses for the follicular lesions of
Fig. 19.4 Higher magnification of canine hypothyroidism, demon-
hypothyroidism principally  include  other  endocrine
strating thin cord-like remnants of the hairless telogen follicle
alopecias and telogen effluvium. When hair growth cycle
beneath hyperplastic superficial follicular epithelium.
arrest is observed, all other endocrine-related alopecias
484
Diseases of the adnexa
Fig. 19.5 Naturally occurring hyperglucocorticoidism in a
Labrador Retriever-crossbreed. Extensive bilaterally symmetric
alopecia is present. A markedly pendulous abdomen and muscle
wasting are obvious nondermatologic clinical signs.
must be considered, including Sertoli cell tumor-
associated skin disease, alopecia X, female hyperestro-
Fig. 19.6 Naturally occurring hyperglucocorticoidism in an aged
genism, and hyperadrenocoricism. Acanthosis and
Dachshund. Increased prominence of subcutaneous blood vessels
hyperplasia of the follicular infundibulum in the face of
indicates thinning of the skin. Focal erythematous areas on the groin
follicular growth cycle arrest are suggestive for hypothy-
and legs represent secondary pyoderma.
roidism, but Sertoli cell tumor-associated skin disease or,
occasionally, canine female hyperestrogenism may present
with similar changes. Clinical differentiation is required.
Endogenous canine hyperadrenocorticism is associated
Hyperglucocorticoidism  features  epidermal  and  seba-
with aberrations in the adrenal-pituitary-hypothalamic
ceous atrophy, in contrast to hypothyroidism. Telogen
axis. Overproduction of glucocorticoids is due to either
effluvium is uncommon, and hair follicles are often
 bilateral adrenocortical hyperplasia as a result of pituitary
returning to anagen phase by the time of biopsy, in con-
stimulation (functional tumors of the pituitary gland are
trast to endocrine alopecia.
not always recognized) or a functional tumor of the
adrenal cortex which induces contralateral adrenocortical
atrophy. Corticosteroid hormone physiology and the
CANINE HYPERGLUCOCORTICOIDISM
etiopathogenesis of Cushing's disease are beyond the
(Synonyms:
canine
hyperadrenocorticism,
canine
scope of this book. The reader is referred to standard text-
Cushing's disease, canine Cushing's syndrome)
books (Feldman, 2000; Scott et al., 2001; Feldman &
Nelson, 2004).
Exogenous
Clinical features (Figures 19.5 and 19.6)
iatrogenic
hyperglucocorticoidism
usually results from the injudicious administration of cor-
Canine hyperglucocorticoidism encompasses both natu-
ticosteroids either given systemically, or given topically
rally occurring, endogenous canine hyperadrenocorticism
 and then percutaneously absorbed. However, some dogs
and iatrogenic hyperglucocorticoidism resulting  from
are unpredictably exquisitely sensitive to glucocorticoids.
excessive administration. Both syndromes are common.
Most cases of iatrogenic hyperglucocorticoidism are
 The frequency of occurrence and the severity of iatrogenic
caused by either injectable or orally administered corti-
hyperglucocorticoidism vary with the quality of veteri-
 costeroids. However, the parenteral absorption of topical
nary care; the number of dogs seen with severe iatrogenic
corticosteroid-containing preparations used on the skin or
hyperglucocorticoidism may have diminished over the
 in the ears or eyes may produce clinical signs, especially
 past decade. The term iatrogenic hyperglucocorticoidism'
 in dogs weighing less than about 16lb (7.25 kg). In addi-
is preferred to ‘iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism', since
tion, topically applied or injectable corticosteroids can
this nomenclature does not imply overproduction of
produce localized effects at the site of application similar
glucocorticoids by the adrenal gland.
to those seen with naturally occurring or iatrogenic hyper-
Atrophic diseases of the adnexa
485
glucocorticoidism. In other cases, the topical application
glucocorticoid therapy. In the experience of the authors,
of high-potency corticosteroids can produce fragile, thin
-radau saonii po sis donap Ae so u
skin with dramatic comedone formation (see Chapter 15).
glucocorticoidism, including calcinosis cutis, more readily
Characteristic
C clinical features
 include bilaterally
than other breeds. Age or sex predilections have not been
symmetric alopecia (often sparing the head and distal
 noted with iatrogenic hyperglucocorticoidism.
extremities), thinning and decreased elasticity of the skin,
Clinical  differential  diagnoses  of  hyperglucocorti-
aberrations in pigmentation (changes in coat color, hyper-
coidism are contingent upon the presenting clinical
pigmentation, or depigmentation of the skin), bleeding
features. If symmetric alopecia is present, differential
and vascular abnormalities (petechiae, hematomas, phle-
 diagnoses should include other endocrine dermatoses, as
bectasia), delayed wound healing, scaling, comedones,
well as follicular dysplasia and acquired pattern alopecia.
and calcinosis cutis (see Chapter 15). Hair loss often
 Nondermatologic signs of hyperglucocorticoidism and
begins over bony prominences and other areas of friction
laboratory evaluation aid in differentiation. Initial testing
such as under collars. Diminished cutaneous elasticity
includes a complete blood count (CBC), serum biochem-
may be noted. Thinning of the skin allows enhanced visu-
ical profle, and endocrine testing. The adrenocorti-
alization of subcutaneous blood vessels. Thinning of the
cotrophic hormone (ACTH) stimulation test, low-dose
skin may be especially obvious at the umbilicus and at the
dexamethasone screening test, and urine cortisolcreatinine
site of scarring from prior ovariohysterectomy. Delayed
ratio are the most commonly employed screening tests to
and inadequate wound healing is manifested by the for-
diagnose canine hyperglucocorticoidism (Feldman &
mation of thin scar tissue and striae (stretch marks).
Nelson, 2004). The ACTH stimulation test is the only test
Decubital ulcers may occur on pressure points in larger 
 that readily identifes iatrogenic hyperglucocorticoidism.
dogs. Comedones (blackheads) are common, and are
 Endogenous ACTH and the low-dose dexamethasone
especially prominent around the nipples and genital
suppression tests are used as discrimination tests to dif-
region. Large, visually distinctive comedones are seen
 ferentiate pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism once
most frequently with iatrogenic hyperglucocorticoidism
iatrogenic disease has been ruled out (Feldman, 2000;
resulting from the injudicious use of topical glucocorti-
 Feldman & Nelson, 2004). Histopathology also may be
coids (see Chapter 15). Phlebectasias appear grossly as
useful in the diagnosis of hyperglucocorticoidism.
erythematous macules or papules on the trunk (Scott,
1985). Secondary pyoderma, especially impetigo (see
Biopsy site selection
Chapter 1), commonly results from immune suppression.
Secondary Malassezia dermatitis also may be seen. Less
It is important in all cases of suspected endocrine alope-
o r   r 
cia to obtain skin biopsy specimens from areas of most
sis may occur.
advanced hair loss for optimal identification of atrophic
 Polydipsia, polyuria, polyphagia, hematologic abnor-
 follicular changes. Specimens from the junctional zone of
malities, pendulous abdomen (pot-belly), muscle weak-
normal and alopecic skin commonly are less helpful diag-
ness and atrophy, lethargy, hepatomegaly, and neurologic
nostically and should be avoided. If frm plaques sugges-
abnormalities are common nondermatologic signs of
tive of calcinosis cutis are present, they also should be
hyperglucocorticoidism. The reader is referred to internal
sampled.
medicine texts for further discussion of the noncutaneous
manifestations   of  hyperglucocorticoidism 
(Feldman,
Histopathology (Figures 19.7 through 19.9)
2000; Feldman & Nelson, 2004).
The Boxer, Boston Terrier, Dachshund, and Miniature
In dogs, the epidermis and the epithelium of the follicu-
Poodle are at increased risk for naturally occurring
 lar infundibulum frequently are atrophic (fewer than
hyperadrenocorticism (Scott et al., 2001). However,
three nucleated cell layers); however random biopsy
hyperadrenocorticism may be seen in any breed. Hypera-
specimens from affected animals may show normal
drenocorticism is seen more frequently in older dogs.
 epithelial thickness. The exception is in specimens from
Defnitive sex predilections have not been reported for
dogs with calcinosis cutis; the epidermis from affected
pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism, but females
areas is usually acanthotic and may be exudative (see
may be at increased risk for corticosteroid-producing
Chapter 15). There may be mild to moderate orthokera-
adrenocortical tumors (Scott et al., 2001). Although iatro-
totic hyperkeratosis.
genic hyperglucocorticoidism may be seen in any breed,
 Hair follicles are in hairless telogen phase, and are also
this syndrome should occur more frequently in breeds
 truly atrophic. They may be reduced to an exaggerated
predisposed to allergic skin disease and immunologic dis-
state of telogen as a single thin cord of epithelium. Seba-
orders, such as inflammatory bowel disease or immune-
ceous glands often are moderately to severely atrophic,
mediated arthritides, that are likely to receive prolonged
which is highly diagnostic; however, glands may not be
486
Diseases of the adnexa
Fig. 19.7 Canine hyperglucocortj-
coidism showing diffuse follicular ker-
atosis and diffuse follicular atrophy of
hairless telogen type.
Fig. 19.8 Canine hyperglucocortji-
coidism dermonstrating typical thin-
walled follicular comedones, epi-
dermal atrophy, and diffuse follicular
atrophy.
uniformly affected in all cases. Flame follicles (see intro-
 Follicular hyperkeratosis is moderate to severe. Frank
duction, p. 480) are rare, and are most often featured in
comedone formation is a variable but characteristic
plush-coated breeds, such as the Pomeranian. Flame fol-
feature of canine hyperadrenocorticism. Comedones are
licles may be a manifestation of an abnormal hair growth
characterized by marked accumulation of keratin within
cycle in plush-coated dogs, regardless of the type of
 thin-walled follicular infundibula. These may approach
endocrine stimulus. In some cases, there are occasional
cystic proportions in some cases. Comedones are often
dysplastic', often primary hair follicles characterized by
most severe in iatrogenic hyperglucocorticoidism induced 
 s r  's  m ro r
by topical application of corticosteroids (see Chapter 15).
shown that occasional follicular dysplasia is observed in
 Dermal calcinosis cutis may be present (see Chapter
the setting of endocrine follicular disorders (Rothstein et
15), and is most common in dogs with iatrogenic hyper-
al., 1998).
glucocorticoidism. Follicular growth cycle arrest and
Atrophic diseases of the adnexa
487
Fig. 19.10 Feline hyperglucocorticoidism in a 12-year-old cat. Note
the disheveled haircoat and focal areas of secondary infection on the
shoulder {From Feldman, E.C. & Nelson, R.W. (2004) Canine αnd
Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction, 3rd edn, pp. 358-93. W.B.
Saunders, Philadelphia. Reprinted with permission.)
endocrine-related alopecias must be considered, including
hypothyroidism, canine Sertoli cell tumor-associated skin
disease, alopecia X, and female hyperestrogenism. Pro-
nounced follicular and sebaceous gland atrophy with
epidermal and follicular infundibular atrophy strongly
suggests  hyperadrenocorticism.   Although  follicular
keratosis is a nonspecifc feature of many atrophic (as well
as dysplastic) follicular diseases, comedo or keratin cyst
formation within a thin-walled follicular infundibulum is
C
generally restricted to hyperglucocorticoidism. Calcinosis
cutis, when present, also is diagnostic. Telogen effluvium
Fig. 19.9 Higher rmagnification of canine hypergluco
is characterized by telogen arrest, but true follicular
Dcorticoidism
atrophy is not present. Telogen effluvium is uncommon,
at left, severely atrophied follicles at bottom, and typical thin-walled
and hair follicles are often returning to anagen phase by
comedone at top.
the time of biopsy, in contrast to endocrine alopecias.
FELINE HYPERGLUCOCORTICOIDISM
atrophy may not be present in lesions of calcinosis cutis.
Although mineralization of the external follicular root
(Synonyms: feline hyperadrenocorticism, feline Cushing's
sheath is a senile feature found sparingly in normal older
disease)
dogs (particularly Poodles), extensive external root sheath
mineralization also may accompany the dermal calcifca-
Clinical features (Figures 19.10 and 19.11)
tion of calcinosis cutis (see Chapter 15). Additionally,
natural or iatrogenic hyperglucocorticoidism occasionally
Hyperglucocorticoidism is a rare disease in the cat. The
may result in widespread and prominent mineralization
syndrome can either be endogenous due to hyperadreno-
of the external root sheath in the absence of dermal
corticism or iatrogenic in association with the injudicious
calcinosis.
use of corticosteroids. It is diffcult to create iatrogenic
 Phlebectasia occurs in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism
hyperglucocoricoidism in the cat; frequent use of long-
(Scott, 1985). Superficial vessels are dilated and congested,
acting, high potency injectable corticosteroids usually is
and may become proliferative. The epidermis may extend
required. Over 75% of cats with hyperadrenocorticism
downward and partially enclose the vascular lesion. Phle-
have pituitary-dependent disease, and over 20% have
bectasia is a more consistent and prominent feature of
a functioning adrenocortical tumor (Feldman, 2000).
topical corticosteroid reactions in dogs (see Chapter 15).
The etiopathogenesis of feline hyperglucocorticoidism is
Histopathologic  differential (
diagnoses  principally
beyond the scope of this book. The reader is referred to
include other endocrine alopecias or telogen efluvium.
standard textbooks (Feldman, 2000; Feldman & Nelson,
When hair growth cycle arrest is observed, all other
2004).
488
Diseases of the adnexa
The marked association between hyperglucocorti-
Cutaneous signs vary greatly and include alopecia, skin
coidism and diabetes mellitus in the cat makes it diffcult
 fragility, and easy bruising. Both severity and pattern of
to differentiate clinical signs attributable to each. Approxi-
hair loss are highly variable (Scott et al., 2001). Poor hair-
 mately 90% of cats with hyperadrenocorticism are either
coat quality may be seen. Feline skin fragility syndrome,
diabetic or are prediabetic due to the insulin-antagonistic
when present, is the most characteristic clinical dermato-
effect of corticosteroids (Scott et al., 2001). Polydipsia,
logic feature of feline hyperglucocorticoidism, and may
polyuria, and polyphagia are the most common present-
occur with endogenous or exogenous disease. Affected
ing clinical features (Feldman, 2000; Feldman & Nelson,
skin becomes dramatically thin, appearing translucent,
2004). Weight loss, anorexia, and depression also can
and can be severely damaged by very minor trauma,
occur (Scott et al., 2001). Muscle wasting and the pres-
including careful handling (see Chapter 15). Easy
ence of a pendulous abdomen (pot-belly) may be seen
bruiseability may be seen with or without skin fragility.
(Feldman, 2000).
Breed predilection is not seen with naturally occurring
It is estimated that only 50% of cats with hypergluco-
feline hyperglucocorticoidism. Most affected cats are
corticoidism display cutaneous signs (Scott et al., 2001).
middle-aged or older with an average age of 11 years;
70% are female (Feldman, 2000).
Clinical differential diagnoses are contingent on the pre-
senting cutaneous signs. Differential diagnoses if alopecia
is the prime presenting sign include self-traumatic alope-
cia, telogen effluvium, and early feline paraneoplastic
alopecia. Skin fragility, when present, is a highly charac-
teristic clinical feature (see Chapter 15). Inherited defects
in cutaneous tensile strength and elasticity such as
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome occur from birth, while acquired
skin fragility syndrome develops in older adult cats.
Skin biopsy is confrmatory for skin fragility due to
hyperglucocorticoidism.
Fig. 19.11 Ventral view of the cat in Fig. 19.10. The abdomen has
Biopsy site selection
been clipped for ultrasound evaluation. The abdomen is hugely dis-
Areas of maximum alopecia should be sampled. If the cat
tended and superficial blood vessels are prominent due to thinning
of the skin. {From Feldman, E.C. & Nelson, R.W. (2004) Canine
presents with feline skin fragility syndrome, skin biopsy
and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction, 3rd edn, pp. 358-93.
is difficult to perform due to the extreme thinness and
W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia. Reprinted with permission.)
friability of the skin.
Fig. 19.12 Feline hyperglucocorticoi-
dism  demonstrating diffuse  follicular
atrophy of hairless telogen type; the epi-
derrmis is normal.
Atrophic diseases of the adnexa
489
Histopathology (Figures 19.12 through 19.14)
Hair growth cycle arrest in telogen phase is accom-
panied by variable true follicular atrophy, which may be
In cats, feline skin fragility syndrome is the most common
severe in some cases. Hair shafts are often absent (hair.
cutaneous manifestation  of  hyperadrenocorticism  or
less telogen). Sebaceous glands may be mildly to severely
iatrogenic hyperglucocorticoidism (see Chapter 15), and
atrophic, but are not always affected. There is exces-
may occur with or without obvious follicular atrophy.
sive tricholemmal keratinization, creating a brightly
Lesions from cats with alopecia mirror those of dogs. The
eosinophilic core to the atrophic follicle; this feature is
epidermis and epithelium of the follicular infundibula are
considered highly characteristic of feline hyperglucocorti-
normal to severely atrophic. There is moderate to severe
osn p s r  a r 
epidermal and follicular orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis.
clusters of secondary hair germ observed at the base of
Small comedones may be observed.
the atrophic hair follicles. Phlebectasia, as seen in dogs
19.13 Feline hyperglucocorti-
coidism featuring severe epidermal,
sebaceous gland, and follicular atrophy.
Fig. 19.14 Higher magnificationof
prominent tricholemmal keratin within
telogen follicles (arrows). Sebaceous
glands are mildly atrophic.
490
 Diseases of the adnexa
Fig. 19.15 Canine Sertoli cell tumor-associated skin disease in a
Shetland Sheepdog. Note relative lack of hair ventrally.
(see p. 484), has been described in a cat with iatrogenic
hyperglucocorticoidism (Schaer & Ginn, 1999).
The principal differential diagnosis for cats with
 alopecia (in the absence of skin fragility) is paraneoplas-
tic alopecia. In contrast, paraneoplastic alopecia often
Fig. 19.16 Caudal view of the dog in Fig. 19.15. Bilaterally sym-
features parakeratosis in lesions that have not had the
metric alopecia, macular hyperpigmentation, and gynecomastia are
stratum corneum removed by licking. Also, acanthosis
present.
may be pronounced in paraneoplastic alopecia. Hair
follicles are similarly atrophic, and both conditions
 m i   s a
tricholemmal keratin is a consistent feature of hypera-
drenocorticism, but not of paraneoplastic alopecia.
Sebaceous glands and dermal collagen are normal in para-
 neoplastic alopecia, but may be atrophic in feline hyper-
glucocorticoidism.
CANINE SERTOLI CELL
TUMOR-ASSOCIATED SKIN DISEASE
(Synonym: male feminizing syndrome)
Clinical features (Figures 19.15 through 19.17)
Canine Sertoli cell tumor-associated skin disease is an
Fig. 19.17 Ventral abdomen and prepuce of the dog in Fig. 19.15.
uncommon endocrine skin disease. The syndrome is seen
Note linear band of erythema and comedones {Griffin's linear
 more frequently in regions of the world where canine neu-
 preputial erythema) on the prepuce.
 tering remains less common. It is seen in conjunction with
 functional endocrine testicular neoplasia leading to femi-
 nization and characteristic skin lesions. Male feminizing
(Feldman & Nelson, 2004). Much less commonly, testi-
syndrome usually is associated with cryptorchidism and
cular seminomas and interstitial cell tumors are able to
Sertoli cell tumor.
initiate male feminizing syndrome and identical skin
Sertoli cell tumors develop from the Sertoli cells of the
disease (Scott et al., 2001; Feldman & Nelson, 2004).
seminiferous tubules. Approximately 25% of dogs with
However multiple testicular tumors of different origins
Sertoli cell tumors develop male feminizing syndrome
may be present, and small tumors may not be found. Male
Atrophic diseases of the adnexa
491
feminization probably results from either increased pro
Cairn Terriers, and Collies may be predisposed (Scott
duction of estrogens by the tumor, increased conversion
et al., 2001). Male dogs that are either middle-aged or
of various male sex hormones to estrogens, or abnormal-
older are most commonly affected.
ities in the balance of multiple sex hormones (Feldman &
Clinical differential diagnoses include other endocrino-
Nelson, 2004). Although it is convenient to view male
feminizing syndrome simply as a “hyperestrogenism',
 and flank alopecia (see Chapter 20). However, the collage
there are conflicting data on estrogen levels; elevated
of clinical features, including any combination of linear
estrogen levels often are not found (Feldman & Nelson,
preputial erythema, cryptorchidism, palpable testicular
2004).
tumors, prostatitis, and the atraction of other male dogs,
 Subtle symmetrical alopecia or coat color change in the
greatly increases the likelihood of a diagnosis of Sertoli
lateral flanks may be the earliest presenting sign. Bilater-
cell tumor-associated skin disease. Histopathologic con-
ally symmetrical alopecia characteristically begins in the
frmation of a Sertoli cell tumor and subsequent reversal
perineal and genital region, and may progress to the
of cutaneous signs following castration are diagnostic.
abdomen, chest, flanks, and neck. Coat color may lighten,
and black or dark brown hairs may develop a fox-red hue,
Biopsy site selection
possibly due to prolonged retention of telogen hair.
Hyperpigmentation is uncommon in early cases. Focal,
 It is important in all cases of suspected endocrine alope-
macular hyperpigmentation (macular melanosis)
com-
cia to obtain skin from areas of most advanced hair loss
monly begins in the perineal region and on the neck.
 for optimal identifcation of atrophic follicular changes;
Diffuse hyperpigmentation may affect the lateral thighs,
skin from the junctional zone between normally haired
and in advanced cases the medial thigh and perineal area.
areas and areas of alopecia should be avoided. Multiple
Lichenification, always in conjunction with hyperpig-
biopsy specimens should be obtained. If lichenified and
mentation and alopecia, may occur in chronic and severe
hyperpigmented areas are present, they should be sampled
cases, and may be accompanied by greasy keratinous
in addition to areas of maximum alopecia.
deposits. Secondary superfcial pyoderma and Malassezia
dermatitis may occur in advanced cases, and probably
Histopathology (Figure 19.18)
contribute to hyperpigmentation and lichenification.
Gynecomastia, nipple enlargement, galactorrhea, and a
 The epidermis may demonstrate variable acanthosis, and
pendulous prepuce are common. Linear preputial ery-
the follicular infundibula also may be hyperplastic. Not
thema, as described by Griffn (1986), is a well-demar-
all specimens show acanthosis, and random biopsies may
cated linear band of macular erythema with mottled
reveal normal epidermal thickness. Increased melanin
hyperpigmentation or comedones on the ventral prepuce
pigmentation of the epidermis is often observed, and is
of some dogs, and is an important cutaneous marker of
characterized by deposition of pigment at all viable levels
male feminizing syndrome when present. Unlike most
of the epidermis.
endocrinopathies, pruritus can occur in dogs with Sertoli
There is follicular growth cycle arrest with hairless
cell tumor-associated skin disease, and may or may not
 telogen follicles predominating. True follicular atrophy,
correlate with secondary infections.
as seen in hyperadrenocorticism, is variable and may be
Nondermatologic signs of functional endocrine testicu-
 absent. Flame follicles (see introduction, p. 480) are rare,
lar tumors include sexual atraction of other male dogs,
but may be featured in affected dogs of plush-coated
urination from a female stance, and prostatitis. Rarely,
 breeds. Sebaceous glands are generally normal or may be
life-threatening estrogen-induced bone marrow dysfunc-
mildly atrophic in some cases. The dermis shows variable
tion may occur.
inflammation, including mild to moderate, superfcial,
Male feminizing syndrome occurs most frequently in
perivascular to interstitial accumulations of lymphocytes,
cryptorchid dogs that develop Sertoli cell tumors.
macrophages, plasma cells, and neutrophils. Inflamma-
Abdominally-located tumors  are more
elikely
than
tion may also extend around adnexal appendages. This
inflammation may reflect the presence of secondary
scrotal tumors to produce male feminizing syndrome.
superficial pyoderma.
Sertoli cell tumors are frm and nodular, and frequently
Differential
 diagnoses principally
include
other
are palpable. Tumor size and duration of tumor presence
endocrine alopecias. These include
 hypothyroidism,
and function correlate with the severity of clinical signs.
alopecia X, and hyperadrenocorticism. In particular, the
Fewer than 10% of Sertoli cell tumors are malignant;
common features of epidermal acanthosis and follicular
metastasis is uncommon.
atrophy may make distinguishing Sertoli cell tumor-
Boxers, Shetland Sheepdogs, Pekingese, Weimaraners,
associated skin disease from hypothyroidism diffcult.
492
Diseases of the adnexa
Fig. 19.19 Naturally occurring canine female hyperestrogenism in
a sexually intact adult Miniature Poodle. Bilaterally symmetric
 perineal-genital region and on the abdomen.
Fig. 19.18 Canine Sertoli cell tumor-associated skin disease. The
epidermis is mildly acanthotic; note diffuse follicular atrophy of
hairless telogen type. Sebaceous glands are normal.
Hypothyroidism is more common and therefore a more
likely diagnosis; however Sertoli cell tumor-associated
skin disease should be suggested by these histopathologic
po ou si arn wm non saop aeu u su
history of removal of two descended testes, particularly
those with gross physical signs of feminization or testic-
ular enlargement.
CANINE FEMALE HYPERESTROGENISM
(Synonym: ovarian imbalance type I)
Fig. 19.20 Iatrogenic hyperestrogenisrm in a spayed female Shetland
Sheepdog due to administration of diethylstilbesterol. Note hyper-
Clinical features (Figures 19.19 through 19.21)
 pigmented macules in the area of bilaterally symmetric alopecia on
the neck.
Canine female hyperestrogenism is a rare endocrine skin
disease seen as a consequence of excess estrogens or
for urinary incontinence. Both naturally occurring and
altered sex hormone ratios. The syndrome is naturally
occurring in intact bitches with cystic ovaries or, even
male feminizing syndrome caused by estrogen-producing
more rarely, in conjunction with functional ovarian neo-
testicular tumors (see p. 490).
plasms. A physiologically identical disease may be seen in
Bilaterally symmetric alopecia characteristically begins
spayed female dogs, induced by estrogen supplementation
 in the perineal-genital region and may progress to the
Atrophic diseases of the adnexa
493
abdomen, caudal and medial thighs, chest, flanks, and
lichenifcation and hyperpigmentation in a minority of
        
cases. Markedly abnormal estrous cycles characterized by
develop a fox-red hue. Diffuse hyperpigmentation in the
prolonged and frequent estrus, plus false pregnancies, are
areas of alopecia may be seen in advanced cases, espe-
seen in naturally occurring canine female hyperestro-
cially in naturally occurring disease. Macular hyperpig-
genism.
mentation occurs in both naturally occurring and
Naturally occurring hyperestrogenism may be more fre-
iatrogenic disease, but may be more common in iatrogenic
quent in English and French Bulldogs. This syndrome
hyperestrogenism. Increased pigmentation may be accom-
occurs more commonly in older female dogs; these also
panied by lichenification and greasy, keratinous, sebor-
are more likely to be receiving estrogen supplementation
rheic deposits, as well as seborrheic odor. Comedones on
for urinary incontinence.
and surrounding the vulva greatly increase the index of
Clinical differential diagnoses should include other
suspicion for hyperestrogenism. Gynecomastia, enlarged
endocrinopathies such as hypothyroidism and hypera-
nipples, and vulvar enlargement are common. Secondary
drenocorticism, plus follicular dysplasia. Diagnosis is
 pyoderma and Malassezia dermatitis may contribute to
based on history, clinical fndings, laboratory evaluations
for other endocrinopathies, histopathology and, occa-
sionally, response to ovariohysterectomy or the termina
tion of estrogen supplementation.
Biopsy site selection
It is important in all cases of suspected endocrine skin
disease to obtain skin from areas of most advanced hair
loss for optimal identification of atrophic follicular
changes; skin from the junctional zone between normal
and alopecic skin should be avoided. Multiple specimens
should be taken and should include areas of lichenifica-
tion or hyperpigmentation, if present.
Histopathology (Figures 19.22 and 19.23)
Fig. 19.21 Lateral thorax of the dog in Fig. 19.20, demonstrating
Canine female hyperestrogenism resembles Sertoli cell
symmetric alopecia and macular hyperpigmentation.
tumor-associated skin disease in male dogs. The epider-
Fig. 19.22 Canine female hyper-
estrogenism. Diffuse follicular atrophy
of hairless telogen type is present.
Note norrmal thick ness of epidermis.
494
Diseases of the adnexa
Fig. 19.24 Alopecia X in a male Pomeranian. Note bilaterally
symmetric alopecia with hyperpigmentation. The head and distal
extrermities are spared.
Fig. 19.23 Higher magnification of canine female hyperestrogenisnr
demonstrating follicular atrophy.
mis and superfcial follicular epithelium may be moder-
Fig. 19.25 Closer view of the dog in Fig. 19.24. Note “islands"
ately acanthotic to slightly atrophic, but are often normal.
of normally haired skin within the regions of alopecia and
Acanthosis may be a more prominent feature of naturally
hyperpigmentation.
present and is characterized by deposition of pigment at
all viable levels of the epidermis.
ALOPECIA X
Follicles are in growth cycle arrest; hairless telogen
follicles predominate. True follicular atrophy, as seen in
(Synonyms: adrenal sex hormone imbalance, follicular
hyperadrenocorticism, is variable and may be absent.
dysfunction of plush-coated dogs, adrenal hyperplasia-
Flame follicles (see introduction, p. 480) are rare, but may
like syndrome, growth hormone/castration-responsive
be featured in affected dogs of plush-coated breeds. Some
dermatosis)
cases have mixed inflammation, including neutrophils,
lymphocytes, histiocytes, eosinophils, and plasma cells.
Clinical features (Figures 19.24 and 19.25)
 This inflammation may reflect the presence of secondary
pyoderma; in some cases folliculitis is identifed (see
Alopecia X is an uncommon canine skin disease with dis-
Chapter 16).
 tinct breed predilections characterized by progressive,
Differentiation of canine female hyperestrogenism from
 markedly bilaterally symmetric, noninflammatory alope-
other endocrine alopecias, particularly hypothyroidism, is
cia with hyperpigmentation. Strong breed predilections
problematic. Canine female hyperestrogenism is rare, but
should be considered in intact females or those known to
by Olivry in an attempt to underscore that putative
be on estrogen supplementation.
endocrine etiologies had not been proven (Olivry, T., per-
Atrophic diseases of the adnexa
495
sonal communication, 1996). In the
neck and proximal legs, sparing the head, distal legs, and
distal tail. Islands of apparently normal haircoat and
mal growth hormone response
underlying skin occasionally may be present on the
of the term ‘hyposomatotropism'. However,
frequent
thorax. Less commonly, a sparse, wooly coat composed
anomalous growth hormone response test results, lack of
of poor quality secondary hairs remains. Hair may regrow
response to growth hormone, and response to castration
focally at the sites of skin scrapings, biopsy, focal trauma,
indicate that true hyposomatotropism is likely
not
sunburn, or other inflammatory processes. Affected dogs 
present. Some dogs that have initially
responded to
 are otherwise healthy; all available evidence indicates that
growth hormone therapy have recrudesced and then
alopecia X is a cosmetic disease only.
responded to castration. Adding to the confusion,
Marked breed predilections have been noted for the
mitotane, a derivative of the insecticide DDT that causes
Pomeranian, Keeshond, Chow Chow, and Samoyed.
necrosis and atrophy of the adrenal cortex and is used for
Related crossbreeds also may be affected. The syndrome
the management of canine Cushing's disease, can cause
is seen both in male and female dogs, but the preponder-
hair regrowth in dogs with alopecia X, suggesting a role
ance of dogs seen by the authors have been male. Most
for adrenal hormones. Further the inflammation created
affected dogs develop alopecia X between 9 months and
by skin biopsy, trauma, or sunburn is known to cause
2 years of age, often around the onset of puberty.
local regrowth of hair.
However, dogs as old as 12 years at initial onset of
Studies by Schmeitzel and Lothrop (1990) indicated
alopecia have been seen. Since clinical signs of alopecia
that the syndrome, at least in Pomeranians, might be
X are more common in Pomeranians bred by successful
caused by disregulation of adrenal hormone synthesis
breeders emphasizing ‘plush-coated’ dogs, current breed-
ing plans actually may be accentuating the problem
genism, similar to congenital adrenal hyperplasia
in
(Schmeitzel, L.P, personal communication, 1990).
humans. It was hypothesized that affected Pomeranians
Clinical
differential C
diagnoses
should
 include
might have a nonclassic, late-onset 21-hydroxylase defi-
endocrinopathies such as hypothyroidism, hyperadreno-
ciency leading to progestin and androgen excess at the
corticism, and Sertoli cell tumor-associated skin disease,
onset of puberty.  Interestingly, clinically 
unaffected
as well as follicular dysplasia. Breed predilections should
Pomeranians have similar hormonal
abnormalities;
increase the index of suspicion. Endocrinologic function
Schmeitzel and Lothrop (1990) speculated that unaffected
tests, serum biochemical profles, history, clinical course
Pomeranians have a cryptic form of the same enzyme defi-
of the alopecia, and histopathology may be helpful in
ciency. In humans, nonclassic late-onset 21-hydroxylase
differentiating among these diseases.
deficiency and the cryptic form of the enzyme deficiency
also are biochemically indistinguishable, despite clinical
Biopsy site selection
differentiating features (Schmeitzel & Lothrop, 1990). A
recent larger retrospective study examined levels of sex
It is important in all cases of suspected endocrine disease
hormones and their intermediates in dogs suspected of
to obtain skin from areas of most advanced hair loss for
having ‘alopecia X', but discovered no 
consistent
optimal identifcation of atrophic follicular changes. Skin
hormonal abnormality that could explain the alopecia in
from the junctional zone between normal and alopecic
these dogs (Frank et al., 2003). The authors suspect that
skin should be avoided. Multiple specimens should be
this disorder may, in fact, be hormonal, but may derive 
obtained.
from abnormalities in local estrogen or other hormone
 receptors at the level of the hair follicle.
Histopathology (Figures 19.26 through 19.28)
 Alopecia X is a slowly progressive disease. Commonly,
 the initial clinical feature is bilaterally symmeric alope-
 The epidermis and superfcial follicular epithelium gener-
cia originating in frictional areas beneath a collar, on the 
ally are of normal thickness; slight atrophy or slight acan-
caudal thighs, or in the perineum. Early lesions may be
thosis may be present. F
 Epidermal hyperpigmentation
subtle. Primary hairs are lost, followed by a variable loss
 usually is evident and is characterized by accumulation of
of secondary hairs. Lack of hair regrowth after clipping
 pigment in all viable layers of the epidermis.
may be noted before frank alopecia. Hyperpigmentation
Hair follicles are diffusely in hair cycle arrest. Telogen
usually develops concomitantly with alopecia in the
hair follicles have prominent tricholemmal keratin in a
affected areas, but may be absent, especially in white
brush-like pattern and often retain their hair shafts
Poodles.  Alopecia  and hyperpigmentation  gradually
(haired telogen). These follicles do not diverge morpho-
progress, resulting in a striking pattern of nearly complete
logically from normal telogen follicles of plush-coated
alopecia bordered by normal adjacent hairs. End-stage
dogs. Interspersed are striking “flame follicles' which may
disease may result in nearly total alopecia of the trunk,
 sometimes be diffuse within a biopsy specimen. Interme-
496
Diseases of the adnexa
Fig. 19.26 Alopecia X. Diffuse fol-
licular atrophy of catagen type pre-
dominates. The epidermis is normal.
Fig. 19.27 Higher magnification of
Fig. 19.26. Arrested hairless telogen
follicles demonstrate prominent tricho-
lemmal keratin in a brush-like pattern
and are developing the appearance of
flame follicles {see Fig. 19.28.).
diate forms (early flame follicles) are common. Flame fol-
study has shown that occasional follicular dysplasia is
licles (see introduction, p. 480) are characterized by large
observed in the setting of endocrine follicular disorders
spikes of fused keratin which appear to protrude through
(Rothstein et al., 1998). Hair follicles are generally of
the outer root sheath to the vitreous layer, creating a fery
normal size for the stage of the cycle, but may be atrophic
effect. Hair shafts are often, but not exclusively, absent
 in long-standing cases. Sebaceous glands are normal.
from flame follicles. Flame follicles should not be con-
When hair growth cycle arrest is observed, all other
fused with normal resting telogen hair follicles of plush-
endocrine-related alopecias must be considered. Among
coated breeds, which are characterized by prominent
the endocrine alopecias however prominent and diffuse
tricholemmal keratin and retained hair shafts, as in a
flame follicle production is most compatible with alope-
recent report (Ordeix et al., 2002).
cia X. This may be a self-fulflling observation, since
There also often are dysplastic-appearing follicles char-
alopecia X is most common in plush-coated breeds. Flame
acterized by irregular or wavy outer contours. A recent
follicles may be a manifestation of an abnormal hair
Atrophic diseases of the adnexa
497
Fig. 19.29 Postclipping alopecia in a Keeshond. Hair regrowth has
not commenced 4 months after the dorsal lumbosacral area was
clipped.
Fig. 19.28 High magnification of typical flame follicles. The keratin
of this exaggerated telogen follicle is extending through the wall in
a fiery pattern.
POSTCLIPPING ALOPECIA
Clinical features (Figure 19.29)
growth cycle in plush-coated dogs, regardless of type of
endocrine or metabolic stimulus. Thus, dogs such as the
 Postclipping alopecia is a relatively common syndrome of
Chow Chow or Pomeranian can develop flame follicles as
the dog characterized by lack of hair regrowth following
a result of other atrophic influences on the hair follicle,
close clipping. Marked breed predilections (sled-dog
breds and other plush-coated breeds) suggest genetic
ferentiation amongst endocrine alopecia affecting plush-
predisposition. Dogs of plush-coated and other breeds
coated breeds may be made from other features such as
commonly have prolonged telogen with retention of hairs
acanthosis and inflammation in hypothyroidism, and epi-
(haired telogen); this may be an energy-saving feature to
dermal atrophy and marked reduction in size of follicles
retain the coat without frequent shedding (Credille et al.,
and sebaceous glands in hyperglucocorticoidism.
2001). In postclipping alopecia, the affected follicles are
The prominent tricholemmal keratin of resting telogen
in synchronous haired telogen; however, these follicles are
hair follicles, as seen in postclipping alopecia (and a
 otherwise normal. This synchrony of haired telogen was
normal fnding in random biopsy of normal plush-coated
-ioads Asdoq a u (xTa) nouine auo Aq paiasqo 1ou
dogs), should not be confused with true flame follicle for-
mens of 50 plush-coated dogs with non-alopecic condi-
mation. In postclipping alopecia, hair shafts are retained
 tions. Thus, it is possible that clipping creates synchrony;
in contrast to most flame follicles; further, the tricholem-
perhaps by alterations in cutaneous thermoregulation as
mal keratin is not as exaggerated as in the flame follicle.
a result of denuding. Postclipping alopecia is most fre-
The histologic features of follicular dysplasia of the
quently a sequel to close clipping for venipuncture,
Siberian Husky are very similar to those of alopecia X (see
souap no 'uuaeueu punom jeaouan ieu Kiaains
Chapter 20); the significance of this fnding is unknown.
 procedures such as myelography.
498
 Diseases of the adnexa
 r  d a  i
Histopathology (Figures 19.30 and 19.31)
regrowth after close clipping. The site of clipping looks
The epidermis and dermis are usually normal; mild hyper-
recently clipped, even months after clipping has occurred.
keratosis may be present. Hair follicles are of normal size,
Alopecia usually remains complete, but occasionally a few
but are diffusely in telogen phase. Hair shafts are retained
primary hairs (guard hairs) may regrow. Secondary hair
throughout (haired telogen). Pronounced tricholemmal
(undercoat) regrowth is not seen. Mild scaling may be
keratinization may be prominent, as expected in the
seen occasionally. The syndrome occurs most often on
plush-coated hair follicles, but true flame follicles (see
well-haired body regions such as the dorsal or lateral
introduction, p. 480) are rare. Small clusters of second-
trunk, the neck, or the legs. Haircoat may not return for
as long as 6 to 12 months after clipping. Newly regrown
ary hair germ may be present at the base of some of the
follicles. Occasionally, these are curved, resembling a
hair may initially be darker in breeds with “pointed’ hair-
coat coloring (acromelanism) such as the Siberian Husky
small blunt hook'.
and the Alaskan Malamute.
Differential 
diagnosis is problematic based
on
histopathology alone, since “lesions' (other than synchro-
Postclipping alopecia is seen predominantly and most
nous haired telogen) do not occur. The diffuse absence of
dramatically in plush-coated breeds such as the Siberian
Husky, Alaskan Malamute, Samoyed, American Eskimo,
anagen hair follicles is useful diagnostically, but clinical
 correlation with clipping is required. Alopecia X features
Chow Chow, Keeshond, and Pomeranian. The syndrome
striking flame follicles, as well as variable follicular dis-
 may occur sporadically in any breed. Age or sex predilec-
 tortion and atrophy. Clinical lesions and history should
tions have not been noted.
help to delineate this disorder from alopecia X; however,
Clinical differential diagnoses should include failure of
hair regrowth after clipping in the context of underlying
early signs of the latter may include poor hair regrowth
after clipping.
iatrogenic
or
endogenous
hyperglucocorticoidism,
therapy with cytotoxic drugs, hypothyroidism, and alope-
cia X. Differentiation is based on history, breed affected,
FELINE PARANEOPLASTIC ALOPECIA
supporting clinical or biochemical evidence of specifc
underlying diseases, and compatible histopathology.
(Synonym: pancreatic paraneoplastic alopecia)
Biopsy site selection
Clinical features (Figures 19.32 through 19.34)
Multiple  biopsy  specimens  S
should be selected from
Feline paraneoplastic alopecia is a rare and highly char-
regions of complete alopecia. Adjacent normal skin can
acteristic skin disease that is a marker for underlying
be marked as normal and sampled separately as a
visceral, usually pancreatic, neoplasia. This syndrome
comparison.
conforms to the criteria recently established for a para-
Fig. 19.30 Postclipping alopecia in a
dog. Hair follicles are in haired
telogen phase. Note small clusters of
secondary hair germ at the base of
some follicles {arrows).
Atrophic diseases of the adnexa
499
neoplastic syndrome, i.e. the dermatosis must occur after
 The great majority of published cases have had neo-
the development of a malignant tumor and the skin
plasia of pancreatic origin (Brooks et al., 1994; Pascal
disease and the tumor must follow a parallel course
et al., 1997; Godfrey, 1998; Tasker et al., 1999; Heripret,
(McLean & Haynes, 2003). Resolution of feline parane-
2000; Scott et al., 2001; Mauldin et al., 2002). Often,
oplastic alopecia was noted in conjunction with partial
metastatic disease of the liver is present at the time of
pancreatectomy in two cats (Tasker et al., 1999; Scott
diagnosis. Although bile duct carcinoma is reported as
et al., 2001).
having induced the syndrome in two cats (Pascal et al.,
1997; Scott et al., 2001), the seeming high specifcity of
induction by pancreatic neoplasia in all other cases calls
into question the diagnosis of the triggering tumor in this
minority.
Precipitous alopecia is the prime presenting clinical
feature. Alopecia usually commences on the ventral
abdomen, thorax, and legs, and then generalizes. The
pinnae and periorbital regions also may be affected pref-
erentially in some cases. In some cats, excessive groom-
ing also contributes to the alopecia. Remaining hair
epilates easily. The regions of alopecia have a peculiar and
highly distinctive smooth, shiny, and glistening appear-
ance, even in areas that have not been groomed. There
may be adherent crusts or scale in cats that have not
groomed. The pawpads are dry, scaly, and shiny, with
multiple, concentric, circular rings of scale that give
a striking targetoid appearance. Secondary Malassezia
dermatitis may occur.
Cats commonly excessively self-groom. Some cats
experience pawpad pain. Signs of underlying visceral neo-
plasia include lethargy, inappetence, and weight loss.
Constitutional signs may develop in concert with skin
disease or may precede it. Lesions generally evolve rapidly
over a course of 1 to 3 months. Metastasis of the tumor
to the liver or lungs has generally occurred by the time of
diagnosis of the skin disease. Most cats die or are eutha-
 nized within a month of diagnosis.
Feline paraneoplastic alopecia occurs in older cats.
 Breed or sex predilections are not available. Clinical
differential diagnoses are few, as the syndrome is highly
visually distinctive. Endogenous or iatrogenic hyperglu-
cocorticoidism with extensive alopecia may resemble
feline paraneoplastic alopecia. Pawpad lesions may be
Fig. 19.31 Higher magnification of Fig. 19.30 demonstrating
haired telogen follicle. Note slight *hook' at base.
similar to superficial necrolytic dermatitis (SND);
Fig. 19.32 Feline paraneoplastic alopecia in an aged
cat. Striking hair loss is evident in the axillae and the
ventral abdormen. {From Pascal, A., Olivry, T., Gross,
T.L. et al. (1997) Paraneoplastic alopecia associated
with internal malignancies in the cat. Vet Dermatot 8,
47-52. Reprinted with permission.)
500
Diseases of the adnexa
Fig. 19.33 Closer view of the axilla of the cat in Fig. 19.33. The
region of alopecia has a peculiar and distinctive smooth, shiny, glis-
Fig. 19.34 Ventral paw of the cat in Fig. 19.32. Affected pawpads
tening appearance. {From Pascal, A., Olivry, T., Gross, T.L. et al.
have a dry, scaly, shiny appearance with distinctive targetoid, con-
{1997) Paraneoplastic alopecia associated with internal malignancies
centric circular rings of scale. {Photograph courtesy A. Pascal; case
in the cat. Vet Dermatol 8, 47-52. Reprinted with perrmission.)
material University of California, Davis.)
Fig-
19.35 Feline
paraneoplastic
alopecia. Note contrast between promi-
nent acanthosis and severe diffuse fol-
licular atrophy of hairless telogen type.
however SND is not extensively alopecic. Superficial
Pawpad biopsy is not recommended since the lesions
necrolytic dermatitis has been diagnosed in conjunction
are painful, and biopsy results will not alter the grave
with paraneoplastic alopecia in one cat (see Chapter 4).
prognosis.
Surprisingly, routine hematology and serum biochemical
profles do not aid in diagnosis. Radiography rarely is
Histopathology (Figures 19.35 through 19.37)
useful, but ultrasonography or computed tomography
(CT) scanning are of diagnostic beneft. Histopathology
There is moderate to severe acanthosis. The stratum
confirms the diagnosis.
corneum often is absent, but when found is either dif-
fusely parakeratotic or less often orthokeratotic. The
cornified layer is often seen lifting from the underlying
Biopsy site selection
epidermal surface. Affected skin of the pawpads may have
Regions of maximal alopecia with the characteristic
 a fractured or flaky keratin layer. In some cases, erosion
shiny surface should be sampled for histopathology.
 and neutrophilic scale/crusting are prominent. There may
Atrophic diseases of the adnexa
501
Fig. 19.36 Higher magnification of paraneoplastic alopecia. A
Fig. 19.37 Paraneoplastic alopecia demonstrating parakeratosis
norrmal sebaceous gland lies adjacent to highly attenuated follicles.
and severe acanthosis; note normal sebaceous glands and atrophic
Note acanthosis and absence of a distinct keratin layer.
hair follicles.
be secondary colonization by Malassezia in conjunction
nounced acanthosis, and often features parakeratosis in
with orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis; this association also
lesions that have not had this layer removed by licking.
has been reported (Godfrey, 1998; Mauldin et al., 2002).
Hair follicles are similarly atrophic, and both conditions
 Hair follicles are diffusely in telogen and appear minia-
feature small basophilic clusters of secondary hair germ;
turized. Superficial follicles are occasionally plugged with
however increased tricholemmal keratin is a consistent
parakeratotic debris. Petite basophilic clusters of second-
feature of hyperadrenocorticism, but not of paraneoplas-
ary hair germ frequently are present at the base of these
tic alopecia. Sebaceous glands are normal in paraneo-
attenuated
1 follicles. Sebaceous glands usually are
plastic alopecia, but may be atrophic in feline
unaffected and may appear large in relation to the severe
hyperglucocorticoidism.
follicular attenuation. Sebaceous atrophy is occasionally
observed.
ACQUIRED PATTERN ALOPECIA
Dermal inflammation is absent to moderate, and is
more intense when occurring in conjunction with erosion
(Synonyms: canine pinnal alopecia, pattern baldness,
and crusting. Inflammatory cells include lymphocytes,
 Dachshund pattern baldness)
histiocytes, and fewer neutrophils; the latter are most
prominent in areas of erosion and crusting. Mast cells are
Clinical features (Figures 19.38 and 19.39)
often numerous.
The principal differential diagnosis for paraneoplastic
Acquired pattern alopecia is a relatively common canine
alopecia is hyperglucocorticoidism. In contrast to hyper-
skin disease characterized by partially bilaterally sym-
glucocorticoidism, paraneoplastic alopecia has pro-
metric, gradual hair loss. Specific breed predilections
502
Diseases of the adnexa
The principal clinical feature of pattern baldness in
humans is slowly progressive thinning of the scalp hair
coupled with a conversion of normal primary hairs to
diminutive, fne vellus hairs (miniaturized hairs that
resemble the fne, nonpigmented hair of neonates) (Olsen,
2003). Similarly, the principal clinical feature of acquired
pattern alopecia in dogs is slowly progressive thinning of
the haircoat in affected areas with conversion of normal
primary hairs to vellus-like hairs. Inflammation is not seen
clinically. Some hyperpigmentation and mild scaling may
Occur, especially in long-standing cases. The pinnae and
skin just caudal to the pinnae are affected most frequently,
but similar hair loss also may be noted on the ventral
neck, chest, and abdomen, perianally, and affecting the
Fig. 19.38 Acquired pattern alopecia in a Dachshund. Note that
caudal thighs.
the pinnae are almost completely alopecic.
 Acquired pattern alopecia is seen most commonly in
Dachshunds, but the syndrome also has been identified in
 a variety of other small dogs with fne haircoats includ-
ing the Boston Terrier Chihuahua, Whippet, and Italian
Greyhound. The syndrome generally develops in dogs less
than 1 year of age. Sex predilections have not been noted.
Acquired pattern alopecia must be differentiated from
endocrinopathies such as hypothyroidism, iatrogenic or
endogenous hyperadrenocorticism, and sex hormone-
associated alopecia. Occurrence in Dachshunds or other
small breeds with a lack of other clinical signs should
increase the index of suspicion. Differentiation is accom-
plished by endocrinologic testing and histopathology.
Pinnal hair loss also is seen in Dachshunds with canine
ear margin seborrhea (see Chapter 8). However scaling
and crusting is the predominant clinical feature of ear
margin seborrhea and alopecia is mostly marginal.
Biopsy site selection
Areas of complete alopecia should be selected for biopsy
and an additional specimen should be obtained from as
normal an area as possible for comparison. This selection
technique will allow detection of potentially subtle follic-
ular changes in size and density by comparison with a
 normal control. If hair loss is present on regions besides
Fig. 19.39 Caudal region of the dog in Fig. 19.38. Hair has been
the pinnae, sites other than the pinnae should be sampled
lost in a partially bilaterally symmetric pattern.
 as pinnal biopsy commonly leads to damaged carilage,
 prominent scarring, and distortion.
coupled with both clinical and histopathologic similari-
ties to pattern baldness in humans suggests a genetic basis.
Histopathology (Figures 19.40 and 19.41)
Selection for extremely fne haircoats in these breeds may
predispose them to this presumptive genetic alopecia
The epidermis and dermis are normal. Hair follicles are
(Rest, J., personal communication, 2004). In men, pattern 
characterized by moderate to occasionally severe diminu-
 uape Kreaiau si (sssieq uaid aie) so 
tion in size; overall numbers of adnexal units are not
dependent, and specifically related to dihydrotestosterone
reduced. Follicles are both moderately shorter and thinner
metabolism and receptors; the role of androgens is less 
 than normal, and residual hair shafts present are fne.
clear in female pattern hair loss (Olsen, 2003). Similar 
 There is no follicular distortion or irregularity of contour,
hormonal associations have not been reported in dogs.
and arrest of the hair growth cycle is not seen. Small
Atrophic diseases of the adnexa
503
Fig. 19.40 Acquired pattern alopecia
in a Dachshund. Note diminution of
hair follicles and petite anagen hair
bulbs.
anagen hair follicles with petite hair bulbs generally are
present.
The characteristic histopathologic changes of acquired
pattern alopecia should not be confused with endocrine
alopecia. Hair follicles are small in acquired pattern
alopecia, but are not in growth cycle arrest, as seen in
endocrine alopecia. Both petite hair bulbs and retention
of fne hair shafts are not features of canine endocrine
alopecia. Other specifc histologic features of endocrine
alopecia, such as epidermal atrophy and comedones
in hyperglucocorticoidism, and acanthosis and muci-
nosis (myxedema) of hypothyroidism, will also allow
differentiation.
ISCHEMIC DERMATOPATHY/CANINE
DERMATOMYOSITIS
Clinical features (Figures 19.42 and 19.43)
See Chapters 3, 10, and 21.
Biopsy site selection
See Chapter 3, 10, and 21.
Histopathology (Figures 19.44 through 19.46)
Ischemic follicular atrophy occurs most prominently in
ischemic dermatopathy/canine
dermatomyositis (see
Fig. 19.41 Higher magnification of Fig. 19.40. Note petite anagen
Chapter 3) and postrabies vaccination panniculitis (see
hair bulbs.
Chapter 21) and may be most severe in the latter condi-
tion. Both of these feature cell poor vasculitis which is
504
Diseases of the adnexa
Fig. 19.42 Severe canine derrmatomyositis in a Shetland Sheepdog
puppy. Note extensive alopecia, erythema, and scaling affecting the
face, paws, and tail.
Fg. 19.44 Severe follicular atrophy overlying postrabies vaccina
tion panniculitis. Panniculitis is mild in this view. Hair follicles are
remarkably attenuated; note ischemic pallor and smudged appear-
ance of collagen.
Basal cells of the outer root sheath hair follicle have
variable and sometimes pronounced vacuolation and
 apoptosis to the level of the isthmus. This follicular basal
cell degeneration is more consistently observed than basal
cell lesions of the epidermis (see Chapter 3). Hair follicles
Fig. 19.43 Closer view of the foreleg of the puppy shown in Fig.
typically are moderately to severely atrophic or *faded.'
19.42. Erythema, alopecia, scaling, and crusted erosions are more
There is telogen predominance of affected follicles. Sec-
severe over bony prominences.
ondary hair follicles are often not apparent. Primary hair
follicles are devoid of hair shafts and are often small,
narrow, and short. In some cases, only a thin shaft of
suspected to be the principal cause of the marked adnexal
external root sheath remains at the site of a previous fol-
atrophy of these conditions (see Chapter 10). Epidermal
licle. Distortion of the hair follicle to a wavy confgura-
and dermal lesions of ischemic dermatopathy have
tion may be seen. There may be pigmentary incontinence
been described in detail (see Chapter 3) and include
around hair bulbs as well as diffuse distribution of
basal cell degeneration and dermal-epidermal vesicula-
melanophages in the surrounding dermis. Perifollicular
tion, with homogenization and ‘smudging? (rarefaction)
mucin may occur. Prominence of the connective tissue of
of dermal collagen. There also is prominent nodular
 the external root sheath plus smudging and homo-
lymphocytic panniculitis  in  postrabies  vaccination
genization of surrounding collagen may give the false
panniculitis.
impression of perifollicular fbrosis; this connective tissue
Atrophic diseases of the adnexa
505
Fig. 19.45 Canine dermatomyositis
with diffuse follicular atrophy accom-
panied by scant inflammation. Promi-
nent perifollicular pallor and smudging
of collagen should not be confused
with fibrosis.
Xey paziussooq ro aled paapnus readde Aeu rake
hair follicles are surrounded by or completely replaced by
true fbrosis.
Follicular atrophy similar to the type observed in
ischemic dermatopathy and postrabies vaccination pan-
niculitis (see Chapter 21) occasionally has been observed
overlying subcutaneous injection reactions from other
types of vaccine products or other severe inflammatory
lesions of the panniculus (see Chapter 21). Inflammation
of the panniculus that disrupts vascular integrity, through
immunologic or other mechanisms, may produce mor-
 phologically similar ischemic follicular atrophy.
 Differential diagnoses for ischemic follicular atrophy
are few as lesions are unique and characteristic. Canine
 traction alopecia shows follicular atrophy and distortion,
but may have prominent perifollicular fbrosis, a feature
that usually is absent from ischemic follicular atrophy.
Accompanying lesions of cell poor vasculopathy (see
Chapter 10) and ischemic changes of the dermis (homog-
enization and ‘smudging', see Chapter 3) are not features
of traction alopecia.
POST-TRAUMATIC ALOPECIA
Clinical features
Post-traumatic alopecia is a recently recognized syndrome
in cats (Noli, 1999; Declercq, 2004). Alopecia 0ccurred
within several weeks after pelvic fracture in all four cats
Fig. 19.46 Canine dermatomyositis. Atrophic follicles are sur-
reported. The proposed pathogenesis is shearing trauma
rounded by lymphocytes and macrophages. Note vacuolar degener-
to highly elastic skin, resulting in partial separation from
(moe s iet rano jo siodode pue uoe
its underlying blood supply (Declercq, 2004). This type
506
Diseases of the adnexa
of trauma may produce changes similar to other ischemic
Histopathology (Figures 19.47 and 19.48)
events such as traction alopecia (see p. 507) and ischemic
dermatopathy (see Chapter 3). In contrast to those enti-
The epidermis is normal to mildly acanthotic; interest-
ties which involve low grade impedance of vascular sus-
ingly, the stratum corneum is thin to absent; remnants
may flake from the surface. This loss of stratum corneum
tenance over time, post-traumatic ischemia is a sudden
likely correlates with the shiny appearance reported
event and leads to more exaggerated changes accompa-
nied by fbrosis (scarring alopecia). Similar alopecic
(Declercq, 2004).
lesions have not been reported in humans which is likely
Hair follicles are atrophic, slightly distorted, and invari-
 ably in hairless telogen phase. There is a striking linear
due to the relative lack of pelage in that species.
pattern of perifollicular fbrosis that extends from the
As reported by Declercq (2004), cats develop well-
 demarcated alopecia affecting the lower back. The hair is
superficial isthmus to the depth of the follicle. The arrec-
tor pili muscles extend at an angle into these linear fbrous
easily epilated from the margins of affected areas. Hair
 bands and often merge imperceptibly. Sometimes only the
loss may be defined as ‘sudden’ by the owners. Newly
exposed skin is shiny, and there may be accompanying 
follicular infundibulum remains, which ends abruptly at
erosions and crusts. Secondary hyperpigmentation may
the linear band. Adnexal glands are usually lost; remnants
 may persist. There is also mild laminar subepidermal
develop. Partial regrowth of hair at the borders may
fbrosis. Similar laminar fbrosis may be seen at the junc-
occur but central areas of alopecia remain even after
many months. Affected cats are otherwise normal.
tion of the dermis and superfcial subcutis (panniculus);
the latter may be the site of previous separation due to
 Breed and sex predilections would not be expected. All 
 shearing forces. Large and small blood vessels may be sur-
four cats were 2 to 3 years of age; this may correlate with
rounded by fibrosis, sometimes strikingly. This perivascu-
lack of experience in younger cats for which the vagaries
 of the outdoor urban life have not yet taken their toll and
lar distribution sugests a response to previous vascular
trauma. Inflammation is minimal and includes a few
produced the wariness so natural to many members of
diffuse lymphocytes and histiocytes.
this species.
The panniculus demonstrates variable degeneration of
adipocytes. Adipocytes are variably ruptured to form
small cysts; the walls of these cysts appear slightly
Biopsy site selection
thickened
do  o   pue 
Specimens should be taken from the centers of alopecic
Macrophages and lymphocytes are clustered among
foci. Areas of erosion and crusting should be sampled, if
adipocytes. This change of adipocytes is reminiscent of
present.
"lipomembranous change' that has been seen in the
Fig. 19.47 Post-traumatic alopecia in a
cat. Severe follicular atrophy is accom-
panied by linear fibrous bands. Note
adipocyte degeneration. {Case material
courtesy J. Declercq.)
Atrophic diseases of the adnexa
507
Fig. 19.48  Higher magnification of
Fig. 19.47. Note lipomembranous-like
change of adipose tissue.
context of ischemia in humans, including in the setting of
dermatomyositis (Magro, C., personal communication,
2003). Similar changes have been observed occasionally
by one author (T.L.G.) in ischemic dermatopathy/canine
dermatomyositis.
Post-traumatic alopecia is visually unique. There may
be similarities to ischemic dermatopathy/canine dermato-
myositis and to traction alopecia. Post-traumatic alopecia
does not feature ischemic dermal changes such as pallor
and smudging as seen in ischemic dermatopathy. This may
be because the ischemia of ischemic dermatopathy is
microangiopathic (see Chapter 10) and therefore more
gradual. Ischemic dermatopathy does not include laminar
 Or prominent perivascular fbrosis. Traction alopecia has
extreme follicular atrophy, as seen in post-traumatic
Fig. 19.49 Canine traction alopecia on the temporal region of a
Shih Tzu due to chronic tension from a rubber band. (Photograph
alopecia, and may feature perifollicular fbrosis. However,
the laminar and perivascular fbrosis is lacking in traction
courtesy A.M. Hargis; case material University of California, Davis.)
alopecia, and ischemic changes of the panniculus have not
been observed.
with traction alopecia (Rosenkrantz et al., 1989); this per-
manent type of hair loss is similar to that found in cicatri-
TRACTION ALOPECIA
cial alopecia (see Chapter 15). Rosenkrantz et al. (1989)
(Synonym: mechanical alopecia)
 theorized that the difference in prognosis berween humans
and dogs may be associated with anatomic differences in
 the perifollicular vascular bed of dogs leading to greater
Clinical features (Figure 19.49)
ischemia, coupled with more prolonged and more severe
Traction alopecia is a rare mechanical hair loss associated
trauma, since dogs cannot communicate that undue hair
with grooming procedures that repetitively utilize hair-
tension is producing pain. Some of the hair loss seen in
retaining devices (such as rubber bands or barrettes). Trac-
animals with traction alopecia also may reflect traumatic
tion alopecia in humans is believed to be due to
damage to hair during repeated removal and replacement
interference with the blood supply to the hair root
of grooming devices. One author (P.J.I.) has seen defects in
(Hantash & Schwartz, 2003). Traction alopecia in humans 
 remaining hairs similar to trichorrhexis nodosa in humans.
usually is reversible. Hair regrowth was not seen in dogs
Trichorrhexis nodosa is a hair shaft defect characterized
508
Diseases of the adnexa
by breaching of the cuticle and the separation and fraying
of exposed cortical fbers, probably initiated by physical or 
chemical trauma (Olsen, 2003).
Complete, or almost complete, alopecia is seen in the
affected area. Hair follicle ostia dilated with keratotic
debris may be observed with a hand lens. Early in the
course of damage, an erythematous plaque may be noted
at the site of maximum tension. Mild scaling may be
present.
The pattern of alopecia is contingent on the device used
to apply tension to the hair. Circular rings of alopecia
center on the site where the rubber band has entrapped
the hair. The lesion may be “doughnut shaped’ with a
central area of normal hair growth surrounded by a ring
of alopecia, as rubber bands do not apply tension to
the center of the ring. Linear bands of alopecia reflect
barrette placement. Canine traction alopecia is seen
primarily over the temporal region of the head, where
devices are used either to keep hair out of the eyes or as
decoration.
U uaas aq Aeu uaed eiqez, jensnun ue u eioadoy
areas under hair mats in both dogs and cats (Declercq, J.,
personal communication, 2003); however this alopecia
was not comparable to traction alopecia histologically in
the single case examined by one author (T.L.G.). Hair loss
in these cases is undoubtedly mechanical, but may involve
less severe tension and trauma than in traction alopecia.
Breed predilections correlate with long-haired dog
breeds for which rubber bands and barrettes commonly
are used. The syndrome is seen predominantly in the
Fig. 19.50 Canine traction alopecia. Severe follicular attenuation
Poodle, Maltese, Yorkshire Terrier Shih Tzu, and Bichon
has reduced deep follicles to a single cord of epithelium. Note mild
Frise. Recently, the syndrome was reported in an Old
follicular keratosis.
English Sheepdog (Ordeix et al., 2001). Age or sex
 predilections would not be expected.
Traction alopecia associated with grooming devices is
in size and are in exaggerated telogen phase, often char-
visually distinctive. Usually there is historical correlation
acterized by reduction to a single cord of epithelium.
by the pet owner with the previous use of a rubber band
There may be folicular drop-out; a thin cord of connec-
or barrette. If historical information is not available, cica-
tive tissue ('stele', after Headington) may be all that
 tricial alopecia, alopecia areata, pseudopelade, and other
remains to mark the location of previous follicles. Less
focal atrophic or dysplastic follicular diseases could
severely atrophic follicles may have trichomalacia, char-
mimic traction alopecia. Histopathology is useful both to
acterized by distorted or fragmented hair shafts within
confrm the diagnosis and to offer a prognosis for poten-
amorphous tricholemmal keratin. The malacic hair shafts
tial hair regrowth.
 may be marked by clumps of melanin. Residual follicles
may appear as small cysts. Sebaceous glands are also
Biopsy site selection
atrophic. Increased, dense fbrous connective tissue is
present around and between atrophic follicles. In some
Skin biopsy specimens should be obtained from regions
cases, complete cicatricial alopecia is present, character-
of most pronounced and complete hair loss. Such speci-
ized by laminar bands of connective tissue which replace
mens may be of prognostic as well as diagnostic value.
all normal dermal structures (see Chapter 15).
 Mild mixed mononuclear inflammation may be seen,
and melanophages may be present at the site of previous
Histopathology (Figure 19.50)
follicles. Occasionally, there is more severe chronic
The epidermis is normal. Superficial follicular keratosis is
inflammation composed primarily of foamy macrophages
 present. Hair follicles are typifed by extreme diminution
and fewer lymphocytes and neutrophils. There may be
Atrophic diseases of the adnexa
509
free lipid vacuoles or “lipocysts’ in the dermis. These
 widespread alopecia in response to severe metabolic
changes suggest that entrapment and destruction of seba-
stress. Mild cases of telogen effluvium probably go undi-
ceous and apocrine glands by the hair-retaining device has
agnosed. Serious illness, high fever, pregnancy, lactation,
occurred at these sites. Deep focal arteriolitis has been
anesthesia, surgery, and shock are all potential inducers
reported (Ordeix et al., 2001).
of telogen effluvium (Scott et al., 2001). One author
Cicatricial alopecia is featured in severe late lesions of
(P.J.I.) has seen telogen effluvium in conjunction with
traction alopecia. Cicatricial alopecia from nontraction
severe anemia in feline leukemia virus (FeLV)-positive
causes may be characterized by more severe and complete
cats. In humans, broad etiologic categories of telogen
replacement of the normal dermis by laminar fbrosis than
effluvium include endocrine abnormalities, nutritional
is seen in most cases of traction alopecia; in addition,
deprivation, adverse drug reactions, physical stress
marked diminution of follicles in the midst of increased
(including anemia), and psychological stress (Olsen,
dermal fbrosis is more suggestive of traction alopecia
2003). Doxorubicin (Adriamycin′) toxicity probably is
than a classical cicatrix.
the most common drug-induced cause of telogen efflu-
 Differential diagnoses principally include ischemic fol-
vium in veterinary medicine (see p. 510).
licular atrophy of ischemic dermatopathy/canine der-
 Rapid, premature cessation of anagen growth leads to
matomyositis and post-traumatic alopecia (see pp. 503
abrupt synchronization of the follicular cycle such that
and 505). Ischemic follicular atrophy features similarly
hair follicles proceed in unison through catagen and
      
telogen. This leads to hair loss of variable severity
However ischemic follicular atrophy occurs in the
when old telogen hairs are forced out by new, synchro-
context of ischemic dermatopathy/dermatomyositis in
nous anagen hairs. Hair loss usually occurs within 3 to
which immunologic attack of hair follicles and cell poor
4 weeks after the insult, but may occur as long as 3
vasculopathy occur (see Chapters 3 and 10). Vasculo-
 months later. Alopecia resolves spontaneously, if the ini-
pathic lesions and ischemic changes of the dermis
 tiating factor is no longer present, and new anagen hairs
(homogenization and ‘smudging') are not features of trac-
grow.
tion alopecia. Post-traumatic alopecia has consistent
 Rapid, progressive alopecia develops over much of the
laminar and perivascular fbrosis, as well as ischemic
body, partially sparing the face. Hair loss is the only cuta-
changes of the panniculus.
neous abnormality noted. Careful examination of shed
hairs reveals characteristics of telogen: uniform shaft
diameter, a nonpigmented and slightly clubbed root end,
TELOGEN EFFLUVIUM
and the absence of an attached root sheath (Scott et al.,
(Synonym: telogen defluxion)
2001). Once hair loss begins, it generally continues for
less than a week. Systemic signs, if present, reflect the pre-
Clinical features (Figure 19.51)
existent or coexistent metabolic stress that induced the
 telogen effluvium.
Telogen effluvium is a rare, or at least rarely diagnosed,
 Breed, age, or sex predilections are not noted. The 
reaction pattern seen in dogs and cats characterized by
rarer syndrome characterized by shedding during anagen
arrest secondary to catastrophic disease or high-dose
-u si (nxn) e u Xda srxoo
tioned in a general reference textbook, but details were
not given (Scott et al., 2001). Microscopic examination
of hair and histopathology aid in differentiation between
anagen and telogen effluvium. Characteristic clinical fea-
tures linked to a stressful event are requisite for a clinical
diagnosis of telogen efluvium.
Biopsy site selection
It is essential to perform a skin biopsy as soon as possi-
ble after the hair loss has occurred. If specimens are taken
later in the course of the syndrome, histopathology may
demonstrate normal anagen hair follicles indicative of the
Fig. 19.51 Telogen effluvium due to pregnancy and parturition in
recovery phase. As in other causes of alopecia, regions of
a Labrador Retriever. (Photograph courtesy PB. Vasseur.)
maximal hair loss should be sampled.
510
 Diseases of the adnexa
Histopathology (Figure 19.52)
telogen follicle is of normal size for that phase of the
growth cycle. The recovery phase of telogen efluvium is
The epidermis and dermis are normal. Random sampling
indistinguishable from normal haired skin in anagen
of affected animals is often done in late stages. Thus,
growth phase.
anagen hair follicles often predominate, and signal recov.
ery to active cycling. In early lesions, hair follicles are pre-
dominantly in hairless telogen; true atrophy is not
DOXORUBICIN-INDUCED ALOPECIA
present. There is no overall diminution in follicular size.
(Synonym: Adriamycin?-induced alopecia)
Adnexal glands are unaffected.
Doxorubicin-induced alopecia is a form of telogen
effluvium and thus histopathologic differentiation is
Clinical features (Figures 19.53 and 19.54)
impossible; clinical differentiation is required. Other dif-
Doxorubicin-induced alopecia is a common side-effect of
ferential diagnoses include endocrine  alopecia  with
the use of Adriamycin as an anticancer therapeutic agent
telogen predominance, notably those in which true
in humans and dogs. Although alopecia may be seen with
atrophy does not occur. Adjunctive features of various
a variety of chemotherapeutic agents in dogs, alopecia is
endocrine diseases such as acanthosis or atrophy of the
epidermis, sebaceous atrophy, or mucinosis (myxedema)
should allow differentiation. Also, in some forms of
endocrine alopecia there is often true follicular atrophy,
i.e. the telogen hair follicles are reduced in size over what
is expected for telogen phase. In telogen effluvium, the
Fig. 19.53 Doxorubicin-induced alopecia in a West Highland
White Terrier. The dog has generalized thinning of the haircoat plus
regions of more extensive alopecia on the neck, muzzle, and distal
extremities. (Photograph courtesy R. Ayl.)
Fig. 19.54 Closer view of the muzzle of the dog in Fig. 19.53.
Extensive alopecia with hyperpigmentation is visible on the lateral
Fig. 19.52 Telogen effluvium. Elongated cords of follicular epithe-
and ventral muzzle adjacent to the planum nasale and lips.
lium characterize the hairless telogen phase.
(Photograph courtesy R. Ayl.)
Atrophic diseases of the adnexa
511
 Hyperpigmentation of the skin in affected areas in con-
protocols than with any other agent (Chun et al., 2001;
junction with alopecia is a singular feature of doxorubicin
Kisseberth & MacEwen, 2001). Hair regrowth occurs
toxicity (Van Vleet & Ferrans, 1980; Kisseberth &
after the patient has completed the therapeutic protocol
MacEwen, 2001). Hair regrowth after doxorubicin
and the use of doxorubicin has terminated. Doxorubicin-
 therapy is terminated may be a different color or texture
induced alopecia has long been recognized clinically by
(Kisseberth & MacEwen, 2001); curly haircoats may
veterinary oncologists, but the syndrome rarely is seen by
transform to straight haircoats, and vice versa. Severe
dermatologists and is rarely biopsied. In humans,
and chronic doxorubicin toxicity may cause erythro-
cyclophosphamide and vincristine are the two other most
derma, eventuating in widespread erosions and ulcers
common inducers of chemotherapy-induced alopecia
within the regions of alopecia (Van Vleet & Ferrans,
(Fitzpatrick, 2003).
1980).
 Doxorubicin has multiple mechanisms of action includ-
 Poodles, Old English Sheepdogs, and terrier breeds are
ing intercalation of DNA, which inhibits protein synthe-
described as being at increased risk (Chun et al., 2001).
sis, increases the formation of free radicals, and causes the
Other long hair-coated dog breeds with a prolonged
inhibition of topoisomerase enzymes (Chun et al., 2001).
anagen hair phase such as Shih Tzus, and various wire-
 In humans, chemotherapy-induced alopecia has been
haired terriers probably also are of increased susceptibil-
studied extensively and primarily is an anagen effluvium
ity to doxorubicin-induced alopecia. Age or sex
 due to toxic effects on the rapidly dividing hair matrix
 predilections have not been noted.
cells (Fitzparick, 2003). Toxic effect is contingent on
 Clinical differential diagnoses include telogen effluvium
agent, dose, schedule and even route of administration; in
(se p. 509), and endocrinopathies that produce wide-
 general, intravenous infusions produce more alopecia
spread alopecia. Differentiation should not be problem-
than oral medications (Fitzpatrick, 2003).
atic as affected animals should have a history of
Data on the cause of doxorubicin-induced alopecia in
doxorubicin administration. Skin biopsy will not deter-
dogs and cats are sparse. To the authors' knowledge, the
 mine the specifc cause of hair loss; differentiation among
histopathology of this syndrome has not been wel studied.
various effluviums by clinical or histopathologic features
Current information suggests that, in contrast to the alope-
is diffcult (Olsen, 2003).
cia seen in humans, most cases of doxorubicin-induced
alopecia in dogs and cats are examples of drug-induced
Biopsy site selection
telogen effluvium. The basis for this discrepancy is not
clear, but might relate to marked differences in hair cycle
 As in other causes of alopecia, regions of maximal hair
and hair cycle length seen between humans and dogs and
loss should be sampled. Multiple specimens should be
cats. Alternatively, differences in hair follicle response to
procured to ensure that multiple follicular units can be
chemotherapeutic agents might relate to the anatomic (and
examined.
presumed functional) differences in the source of hair fol-
licle regeneration and hair cycle control between the local-
Histopathology (Figures 19.55 and 19.56)
ized follicular *bulge region' in humans (Cotsarelis et al.,
1990) and the more diffuse source of follicular regenera-
The epidermis is of normal thickness. There may be
tion noted in the dog (Credille et al., 1999).
 prominent epidermal pigmentation with concentration of
 Doxorubicin-induced alopecia is clinically striking.
 melanin in the lower layers of the epidermis.
Hair loss may be complete or may involve just the
Hair follicles are in telogen and are devoid of hair shafts
primary (guard) hairs, resulting in a fuzzy 'puppy’ coat
(hairless telogen), and thus are identical to those of
consisting exclusively of secondary (undercoat) hairs.
telogen effluvium (see p. 509). There may be slight dis-
Other animals may exhibit a generalized thinning of the
tortion of these telogen follicles. True atrophy is not
haircoat (Kisseberth & MacEwen, 2001). Facial sensory
present. An occasional residual anagen hair follicle may
hairs (whiskers) commonly are lost in both dogs and cats
be interspersed. Sebaceous glands are not affected. The
(Chun et al., 2001; Kisseberth & MacEwen, 2001). Initial
connective tissue of the external root sheath is relatively
reports indicated that alopecia almost always began on
 prominent and should not be confused with perifollicular
the head and over the site of intravenous injection, with
fbrosis. Severe ulcerative and suppurative dermatitis also
subsequent extension to the ventral neck, thorax,
saop jeuou jo Apns jenuauadxa ue ul paodan sem
abdomen, and the inner surface of the legs (Van Vleet &
 that received high doses and prolonged therapy (Van Vleet
Ferrans, 1980). It is now recognized that hair loss may
& Ferrans, 1980).
develop in a variety of patterns. Partially bilaterally sym-
Histological changes do not digress from those of other
metric alopecia of the face may be visually dramatic.
telogen effluviums and differential diagnoses are identical.
Delayed hair regrowth after clipping also is noted.
Clinical differentiation is required.
512
Diseases of the adnexa
Fig. 19.55 Doxorubicin-induced alopecia in a dog. Hair follicles
Fig. 19.56 Higher magnification of Fig. 19.55. Typical hairless
are diffusely in hairless telogen.
telogen follicles are surrounded by normal apocrine and sebaceous
glands.
EXCESSIVE PHYSIOLOGICAL SHEDDING
Clinical features (Figure 19.57)
Excessive physiological shedding is a very common owner
concern that must be differentiated from pathological
alopecia. Shedding may be defined as the genetically pro-
 grammed cyclical and natural loss of telogen hairs. Dogs
and cats replace their shed hairs in a continuous, mosaic
pattern. Dogs and cats maintained outdoors in parts of
the world with well-defined seasons predominantly shed
and then replace their haircoat in the spring and the
autumn. Domesticated dogs and cats maintained indoors
in an environment without marked cyclical changes in
photoperiod and temperature tend to shed more contin-
uously year around.
Fig. 19.57 Excessive physiological shedding in a Siberian Husky.
Haircoat loss may be divided into physiological shed-
Large numbers of telogen undercoat have shed giving the remaining
ding and pathological alopecia. In pathological alopecia,
haircoat a sparse flat appearance. (Photograph courtesy J. Declercq.)
large numbers of hairs can be manually extracted to
produce nearly complete alopecia when minimal tension
is applied; entire areas may be easily denuded in some
Atrophic diseases of the adnexa
5 13
cases.  Excessive physiological shedding is a normal
FELINE PSYCHOGENIC ALOPECIA
proces; gentle digital extraction should remove some
telogen hairs, but leave many remaining hairs frmly
(Synonym: self-induced psychogenic feline hair loss)
rooted in the hair follicles.
Causes of physiological excessive shedding are pur-
Clinical features (Figure 19.58)
portedtobe
 photoperiod alteration, temperature
alteration, nutritional deficits, and nervousness or hyper-
Feline psychogenic alopecia is a relatively uncommon skin
excitability (Scott et al., 2001). In some cases these dis-
disease characterized by self-raumatic hair removal that
ruptions may induce a synchronous or sudden shed. Some
is not associated with identifable underlying causes. It is
cases may be idiopathic.
thought to be an obsessive/compulsive disorder or an
 The clinical features of excessive physiological shedding
anxiery neurosis associated with displacement phenom-
include owner reports of excessive loss of hair into the
ena in nervous cats. Incriminated precipitating events
animal's environment. Excessively plush-coated breeds
include competition for social hierarchy, a new environ-
may preferentially shed their undercoat. Complete alope-
 ment, change in a cat's pecking order', displacement phe-
se aq iou pinos sso i yue jo suad io ei
nomenon such as a new baby or pet in the household, or
of excessive physiological shedding.
loss of a favorite owner or other pet. Feline psychogenic
 Breed predilections for excessive physiological shedding
alopecia is a diagnosis of exclusion requiring the elimi-
are controversial. Owner reported concerns of excessive
nation of pruritic causes of self-traumatic alopecia. Loss
shedding occur most frequently with excessively plush-
of hair is the result of removal by excessive grooming or
coated breeds such as northern breeds, Chow Chows,
chewing; damage to the underlying skin does not occur.
Golden Retrievers, Australian Shepherds, and dogs with
Since cats may be markedly secretive in this endeavor,
short dark hairs such as black Labrador Retrievers and
owners may be unaware of excessive grooming and thus
Doberman Pinschers.
resistant to the acceptance of this diagnosis.
Clinical differential diagnoses for excessive physiologi
Well-demarcated, partial or almost complete alopecia is
cal shedding include all the atrophic and dysplastic fol-
noted in the affected areas. Partial bilateral symmetry is
licular diseases that lead to pathological alopecia. Failure
a common feature. Lesions are not found in the exposed
to create alopecia by gently attempting to remove the hair
skin. Short stubble may be palpable or visible with a hand
from a defined area should increase suspicion of excessive
lens, giving the visual impression of careful clipping or
physiological shedding. Skin biopsy, usually prompted by
shaving. An examination of feces should show excessive
the owner and not the veterinarian, should reveal normal
hair, and may aid in proving to the owner that self-groom-
skin.
ing is the root of the hair loss.
 The distribution of feline psychogenic alopecia is dis-
tinctive. Commonly affected sites include the lateral
Biopsy site selection
trunk, caudal and medial thighs, abdomen, and dorsal
If desired, skin biopsies may be obtained from regions
forelegs. Some hair regrowth may occur if the cat aban-
where the owner suspects that abnormal shedding has
dons a region and refocuses its attention on other
occurred. Multiple specimens should be obtained to
increase the likelihood of discovering a cause of patho-
logical alopecia.
Histopathology
d padxa ann u aa si s pi
portions of anagen and telogen hairs, with anagen often
predominating. Objective criteria for normal anagen/
catagen/telogen ratios in the various breeds are not widely
available, so interpretation may be highly subjective. No
lesions are observed.
Differential diagnoses principally include the recovery
phase of telogen efluvium; however, this condition should
have synchronous anagen, so would be more monopha-
sic than a normal coat. Clinical differentiation is required.
The definitive diagnosis of a physiologically excessive
Fig. 19.58 Feline psychogenic alopecia. Markedly bilaterally sym-
shed cycle may be one of clinical exclusion.
metric alopecia is present on the trunk.
514
Diseases of the adnexa
Fig. 19.59 Feline psychogenic alope-
cia. All skin components, including
hair follicles, are norrmal.
previously unaffected sites. In Siamese cats, new hair
growth may be darker in color since heat-labile enzymes
that enhance melanization in cool body regions are acti-
vated (acromelanism).
Breed predilections have been noted in Siamese and
Abyssinian cats, but the syndrome may be seen in any
breed. Age or sex predilections have not been reported.
A diagnosis of feline psychogenic alopecia should not
be made until all possible pruritic and nonpruritic causes
of alopecia have been eliminated from consideration.
Alopecia secondary to excessive grooming (due to pruritic
or psychogenic causes) is best demonstrated by utilizing
 an Elizabethan collar; hair will regrow if excessive groom-
ing is prevented by the collar. Underlying pruritic causes
of self-induced feline hair loss include flea allergy der-
matitis, atopic dermatitis, and food allergy. Self-induced
feline hair loss due to low grade allergy may be exceed-
ingly diffcult to differentiate from feline psychogenic
alopecia. Distribution of self-induced alopecia may offer
a clue to etiology. Self-induced feline hair loss due to flea
allergy is most likely to involve the caudal abdomen and
medial and caudal thighs. Self-induced feline hair loss due
 to atopic dermatitis and food allergy is more likely to have
a more generalized distribution and be less bilaterally
symmetric than feline psychogenic alopecia. Stringent flea
control, intradermal testing, in vitro allrgy testing, and
elimination diets are useful in documenting an allergic
cause for feline self-induced hair loss. Feline demodicosis
is an additional rare variably pruritic cause of alopecia in
cats; skin scrapings allow differentiation. Histopathology
Fig. 19.60 Mild rmural folliculitis {arrow) in feline psychogenic
is required to substantiate feline psychogenic alopecia.
alopecia; hair follicles are otherwise normal for the ventral location.
Atrophic diseases of the adnexa
515
phocytes or macrophages may encircle and invade the
middle portion of widely scattered hair follicles (mural
folliculitis) in cases that are dermatophyte culrure nega-
 tive and otherwise clinically compatible with psychogenic
alopecia.
Differential diagnosis generally is not problematic for
psychogenic alopecia. Normal histology (or trichomala-
cia) in the clinical setting of alopecia is highly supportive.
Differential diagnosis may include mild allergic dermati-
tis, generally characterized by a superficial lymphohistio-
cytic and eosinophilic infltrate. It is important to
distinguish mild allergy that is producing excessive
grooming from true psychogenic alopecia. In the authors'
opinion, even rare eosinophils support allergy-induced
excessive grooming in the cat.
REFERENCES
Introduction
Credille, K.M., Slater, M.R., Moriello, K.A. et al. (2001) The
effects of thyroid hormones on the skin of Beagle dogs. J Vet
Int Med 15, 539-46.
Rothstein, E., Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. Jr et al. (1998) A retro-
spective study of dysplasic hair follicles and abnormal
melanization in dogs with follicular dysplasia syndromes or
endocrine skin disease. Vet Dermatol 9, 235-41.
Hypothyroidism
Credille, K.M., Slater, M.R., Moriello, K.A. et al. (2001) The
Fig. 19.61 High magnification of *twanged’ hair in feline psy-
effects of thyroid hormones on the skin of Beagle dogs. J Vet
chogenic alopecia. The hair has fractured, and there is distorted and
Int Med 15, 539-46.
 prominent tricholemmal keratin in a comma-shaped configuration.
Feldman, E.C. & Nelson, R.W. (2004) Canine and Feline
Endocrinology and Reproduction, 3rd edn, pp. 86-151. W.B.
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Rand, J.S., Levine, J., Best, S
S.J. et al. (1993) Spontaneous
Biopsy site selection
adult-onset hypothyroidism in a cat. J Vet Int Med 7,
272-6.
Specimens for biopsy should be obtained from an area of
Rothstein, E., Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. Jr et al. (1998) A retro-
most complete hair loss. Any foci of erythema or crust-
spective study of dysplastic hair follicles and abnormal
ing also should be sampled in order to rule out the pres-
melanization in dogs with follicular dysplasia syndromes or
ence of allergy-induced hair removal by the cat.
endocrine skin disease. Vet Dermatol 9, 235-41.
Scott, D.W. (1989) Excessive trichilemmal keratinisation (flame
Histopathology (Figures 19.59 through 19.61)
follicles) in endocrine skin disorders of the dog. Vet Dermatol
1, 37-40.
 Notable histopathologic findings usually are not present
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
in feline psychogenic alopecia. Hair folicles usually are
Small Animat Dermatology, 6th edn, p. 782-9, 851-66. W.B.
normal. Trichomalacia is a prominent feature of some
Saunders, Philadelphia.
cases, and is characterized by twisted or broken
Scott-Moncrieff, J.C.R. & Guptill-Yoran, L. (2000) Hypothy-
('twanged') hair shafts within amorphous tricholemmal
roidism. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 5th
edn (eds S.J. Ettinger & E.C. Feldman), pp. 1419-29, W.B.
keratin, sometimes in distorted position within the folli-
Saunders, Philadelphia.
cle. Variation in the appearance of the hair shafts may be
related to the type of trauma inflicted, i.e. vigorous pulling
Canine Hyperglucocorticoidism
versus chewing or barbering. Occasionally there may be
Feldman, E.C. (2000) Hyperadrenocorticism. In: Textbook of
slightly increased numbers of mast cells or macrophages
Veterinary Internal Medicine, 5th edn (eds S.J. Ettinger & E.C.
in the superficial dermis. Rarely, small numbers of lym-
Feldman), pp. 1460-88. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
516
Diseases of the adnexa
Feldman, E.C. & Nelson, R.W. (2004) Canine and Feline
Feline Paraneoplastic Alopecia
Endocrinology and Reproduction, 3rd edn, pp. 251-357. W.B.
Brooks, D.G., Campbell, K.L., Dennis, J.S. et al. (1994) Pancre-
Saunders, Philadelphia.
atic paraneoplastic alopecia in three cats. J Am Anim Hosp
Rothstein, E., Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. Jr et al. (1998) A retro-
Assoc 30, 557-63.
spective study of dysplastic hair follicles and abnormal
Godfrey, D.R. (1998) A case of feline paraneoplastic alopecia
melanization in dogs with follicular dysplasia syndromes or
with secondary Malassezia-associated dermatitis. J Small
endocrine skin disease. Vet Dermatol 9, 235-41.
Anim Pract 39, 394-6.
Scott, D.W. (1985) Cutaneous phlebectasias in Cushingoid dogs.
Heripret D. (2000) Dermatological manifestations of systemic
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 21, 3514.
disease. In: A Practical Guide to Feline Dermatology (eds
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muler  Kirk's
E. Guaguere & P. Prélaud), pp. 14.1-14.10. Blackwell Science,
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 789-94, 798-815.
Oxford.
WB. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Mauldin, E.A., Morris, D.O. & Goldschmidt, M.H. (2002)
Retrospective study: the presence of Malassezia in feline
FelineHyperglucocorticoidism
skin biopsies. A clinicopathological study. Vet Dermatol 13,
Feldman, E.C. (2000) Hyperadrenocorticism. In: Textbook of
7-13.
Veterinary Internal Medicine (eds S.J. Ettinger & E.C.
 McLean, D.1. & Haymes, H.A. (2003) Cutaneous manifestations
Feldman), pp. 1485-8. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
 of internal malignant disease: cutaneous paraneoplastic syn-
Feldman, E.C. & Nelson, R.W. (2004) Canine and Feline
dromes. In: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General Medicine,
Endocrinology and Reproduction, 3rd edn, pp. 358-93. W.B.
6th edn (eds I.M. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen,
Saunders, Philadelphia.
L.A. Goldsmith & S.1. Katz), pp. 1783-96. McGraw-Hill,
Schaer, M. & Ginn, PE. (1999) Iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome
New York.
and steroid hepatopathy in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc, 35,
Pascal, A., Olivry, T., Gross, TL. et al. (1997) Paraneoplastic
48-51.
alopecia associated with internal malignancies in the cat. Vet
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
Dermatol 8, 47-52.
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 815-9. WB. Saun-
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller 6 Kirk's
ders, Philadelphia.
Small Animatl Dermatology,6th edn, p. 902-904. W.B. Saun-
ders, Philadelphia.
Canine Sertoli Cell Tumor-associated Skin Disease
Tasker, S., Griffon, D.J., Nuttall, T.J. et al. (1999) Resolution of
Feldman, E.C. & Nelson, R.W. (2004) Canine and Feline
paraneoplastic alopecia following surgical removal of a pan-
Endocrinology and Reproduction, 3rd edn, pp. 967-70. W.B.
creatic carcinoma in a cat. J Small Anim Pract 40, 16-9.
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Griffin, C.E. (1986) Linear preputial erythema. In: Proceedings
Acquired Pattern Alopecia
of the 2nd AAVD/ACVD Meeting, New Orleans, p. 35.
Olsen, E.A. (2003) Disorders of epidermal appendages and
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
related disorders. In: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 840-3. W.B. Saun-
Medicine, 6th edn. (ed. I.M. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff,
ders, Philadelphia.
K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.1. Katz), pp. 633-55.
McGraw-Hill, New York.
Alopecia X
Frank, L.A., Hnilica, K.A., Rohrbach, B.W. et al. (2003) Retro-
Ischemic Dermatopathy
spective evaluation of sex hormones and steroid hormone
See Chapters 3, 10, and 21.
intermediates in dogs with alopecia. Vet Dermastol 14,
91-7.
Post-traumatic Alopecia
Ordeix L., Fondevila D., Ferrer L. et al. (2002) Quantitative
Declercq, J. (2004) Alopecia and dermatopathy of the lower
study of ^flame follicles' in skin sections of Shar-Pei dogs. Vet
back following pelvic fractures in three cats. Vet Dermatol 15,
Dermatol 13, 261-5.
42-6.
Rothstein, E., Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H., Jr et al. (1998)
Noli, C. (1999) Localized atrophic alopecia on the dorsum fol-
A retrospective study
of dysplastic
hair
follicles and
lowing pelvic fracture in a cat. In: Proceedings of the 15th
abnormal melanization in dogs with follicular dysplasia
AAVD/ACVD Meeting, Maui, p. 67.
syndromes or endocrine skin disease. Vet Dermatol 9,
235-41.
Canine Traction Alopecia
Schmeitzel, L.P. & Lothrop, C.D. (1990) Hormonal abnormali-
Hantash, B.M. & Schwartz, R.A. (2003) Traction alopecia in
ties in Pomeranians with normal coat and in Pomeranians with
children. Cutis 71, 18-20.
growth hormone-responsive dermatosis. J Am Vet Med Assoc
Olsen, E. A. (2003) Hair. In: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in
197, 1333-41.
General Medicine, 6th edn (eds I.M. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K.
Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.1. Katz), pp. 636-45.
Postclipping Alopecia
McGraw-Hill, New York.
Credille, K.M., Slater, M.R., Moriello, K.A. et al. (2001) The
Ordeix L., Fondevila M.D., Ferrer L. et al. (2001) Traction
effects of thyroid hormones on the skin of Beagle dogs. J Vet
alopecia with vasculitis in an Old English sheepdog. J Small
Int Med 15,539-46.
Anim Pract 42, 304-5.
Atrophic diseases of the adnexa
517
Rosenkrantz, W.S., Griffin C.E. & Walder, E.J. (1989) Traction
Fitzpatrick, J.E. (2003) Mucocutaneous complications of anti-
alopecia in the canine: four case reports. Calif Vet 43, 7-12.
neoplastic therapy. In: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General
Medicine, 6th edn (eds I.M. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff,
Telogen Effluvium
K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.1. Katz), pp. 1337-47.
Olsen, E.A. (2003) Hair. In: Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology in
McGraw-Hill, New York.
General Medicine, 6th edn. (eds I.M. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen,
Kisseberth, W.C. & MacEwen, E.G. (2001) Complications of
K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.1. Katz), pp. 640-1.
cancer and its treatment. In: Small Animal Clinical Oncology,
McGraw-Hill, New York.
3rd edn (eds S.J. Withrow & E.G. MacEwen), pp. 208-10.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
WB. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 8934. W.B. Saun-
Olsen, E.A. (2003) Hair. In: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in
ders, Philadelphia.
General Medicine, 6th edn. (eds I.M. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen,
K. Wolff, K.F Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.I. Katz), pp.
Doxorubicin-induced Alopecia
633-55. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Chun, R., Garrett, L.& MacEwen, I.G. (2001） Cancer
Van Vleet, J.F & Ferrans, VJ. (1980) Clinical observations,
chemotherapy. In: Small Animal Clinical Oncology, 3rd edn
cutaneous lesions, and hematologic alterations in chronic
(eds S.J. Withrow & E.G. MacEwen), p. 95. W.B. Saunders,
 Adriamycin intoxication in dogs with and without Vitamin
Philadelphia.
E and selenium supplementation. Am J Vet Res 41,
Cotsarelis, G., Sun, T.T. & Lavker, R.M. (1990) Label-retaining
691-9.
cells reside in the bulge area of pilosebaceous unit: implica-
tons for follicular stem cells, hair cycle, and skin carcinogen-
Excessive Physiological Shedding
esis. Cell 61, 1329-37.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
Credille, K.M., Butler, K.L., & Nachreiner, R.F. (1999) Canine
Small Animat Dermatology,6th edn. pp. 4-8, 894. W.B. Saun-
hair follicle regeneration: Do dogs have a bulge region'? Vet
ders, Philadelphia.
Pathol 36, 506.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 20
Dysplastic diseases of the adnexa
Dysplastic diseases of the hair follicle and associated
similar lesions that are restricted to the dark haired areas
glands are characterized, most broadly, by abnormal
of light colored dogs with darker spots. Color dilution
 growth and development of these structures. Dysplasia in
alopecia shares  clinical and histopathologic features
this chapter is not used to define a preneoplastic condi-
with BHFD and in the opinion of the authors, probably
tion, as in the epidermis for example (see Chapter 22).
represents localized expression of a similar color-related
Considered literally, dysplastic diseases may be acquired;
genetic defect. Black hair follicular dysplasia may be
for example, the cycle arrest of the hair follicle in
viewed simply as localized CDA. Color dilution alopecia
endocrine alopecia technically is a type of abnormal
also has been seen in blue- or cream-colored cats that
growth (see introduction, Chapter 19). By convention,
express the Maltese dilution gene (Scott et al., 2001). One
however many of the dysplastic adnexal diseases dis-
author (T.L.G.) observed putative CDA in a dilute tor-
cussed here are of suspected or proven hereditary cause.
toiseshell-colored cat. Color dilution alopecia and BHFD
Thus, these diseases often are breed-specific and have a
are discussed separately from other follicular dysplasias
relatively early onset of expression. Clinical and micro-
as these syndromes are clinically and histopathologically
scopic features are variable, and reflect the diversity of the
distinctive, and have marked breed predilections.
affected canine breeds. Microscopic features of dysplasia
The relationship between coat color and CDA remains
of adnexal structures include distortion, abnormal
confusing. In general, lighter coat color-dilute animals
deposits, attenuation, absence, proliferation, or degener-
will develop more severe skin disease than their darker
ation. Dysplastic diseases are manifested usually by
dilute brethren as they age. While Weimaraners have a
permanent and often progressive alteration in adnexal
coat that varies in color between light silver-blue and dark
 structure and integrity. However permanence is not a pre-
 gray, true CDA is extremely rare in this breed. It is not
requisite; some diseases such as cyclical flank alopecia
known why most Weimaraners, regardless of color, do not
may be intermittent and discontinuous in expression.
develop color dilution skin disease. Interestingly, follicu-
Recognition of individual diseases is often based as
lar dysplasia was recently described in five Weimeraners;
much on characteristic clinical features as on diagnostic
 the pigmentary abnormalities were similar to CDA but
histopathology. The authors recognize that much of the
were less severe, as seen in other forms of follicular dys-
information currently available for dysplastic diseases is
plasia in noncolor-dilute breeds (see p. 522) (Laffort-
incomplete and that further study is needed.
Dassot et al., 2002).
Color dilution alopecia is associated with a color dilu-
tion gene, probably at the D locus (Miller, 1990). Under
COLOR DILUTION ALOPECLA AND
the influence of coding from multiple genes, “dilute’ hairs
BLACK HAIR FOLLICULAR DYSPLASIA
form with larger, abnormal pigment granules due to
(Synonyms: blue dog disease, color mutant alopecia)
abnormalities in melanin transfer and storage (Scott et al.,
2001). This pigment clumping in color-dilute animals
leads to unusual ^washed-out’ or dilute colors. It is not
Clinical features (Figures 20.1 through 20.3)
known if the color dilution gene is directly responsible for
Color dilution alopecia (CDA) is a relatively uncommon
initiating the skin disease, or if a linked gene codes for the
hereditary skin disease seen in dogs with color-diluted
associated follicular changes (Miller, 1990, 1991). Color
coats, such as “blue' or “fawn'. It is characterized by fol-
dilution alopecia may reflect a defect in follicular matu-
licular dysplasia, leading to poor hair coat quality and
ration that is most severely manifested in the dilute coat
variable alopecia. Black hair follicular dysplasia (BHFD)
 color, or alternatively, a multifactorial epithelial matura-
is a rare canine hereditary skin disease characterized by
tion defect (Brignac et al., 1988). Attempts to breed for
518
Dysplastic diseases of the adnexa
519
color dilution without expression of the associated skin
disease have not been successful. Unfortunately these
efforts may have produced more tardive onset of clinical
disease, thus encouraging continued breeding.
Selmanowitz et al. (1977) speculated that in BHFD,
melanocytes might be involved in faulty morphogenetic
 induction of the follicular appendages in the areas of
follicular dysplasia. Breeding studies further suggest that
BHFD is due to an autosomal gene with an as yet unde-
termined dominant or recessive characteristic (Sel-
manowitz et al., 1977).
Differences in melanin distribution between CDA and
BHFD were noted by direct microscopic examination of
hair shafts (Hargis et al., 1991). However, variation in
melanin distribution among dogs with CDA may be a
Fig. 20.1 Color dilution alopecia in a dark blue Doberman
feature of breed differences (Miller 1990; Roperto et al.,
Pinscher. Note the diffuse partial loss of hair, especially on the dorsal
trunk.
1995). Thus, to extrapolate, differences between CDA
and BHFD may reflect variation in breed expression of a
common defect, but not distinct entities.
The initial clinical feature of CDA is the gradual onset
of a dry, dull, brittle, poor quality haircoat. Hair shafts 
fragment and hair regrowth is poor, resulting in a pro-
gressive, partial, patchy (motheaten) alopecia and broken
stubble that proceeds to more complete hair loss. Hair
loss usually is most severe on the trunk, especially dor-
sally. Hyperpigmentation may occur with chronicity. The
alopecia areas become dry and scaly. Follicular papules
develop and may progress to frank pustules, indicating
secondary bacterial infection. The skin disease is limited
to the color-diluted (usually blue) hair with sparing of the
differently-colored points, if present. This clinical feature
is highly characteristic of CDA. In general, the more
color-dilute the dog is clinically, the greater the magnitude
Fig. 20.2 Color dilution alopecia in a light blue Doberman
Pinscher. Hair loss is more extensive than in the dark blue dog in
of alopecia that develops. Truncal alopecia may be almost
Fig. 20.1.
complete in lighter colored dogs by 6 years of age. Recur-
rent secondary pyoderma is common in moderately to
severely affected dogs. Secondary pyoderma is less
common and more subtle in dogs with mild CDA. Cats
with CDA reportedly exhibit varying degrees of symmet-
ric truncal alopecia without evidence of excessive groom-
ing (Scott et al., 2001).
In BHFD, extensive alopecia develops in the affected
dark-haired spots. Adjacent white-haired areas are
normal. Owners report that darker haired body regions
often appear washed out, gray or “bluish' before hair is
lost. Similar to generalized CDA, hairs are lost from
affected areas, leaving broken stubble and markedly
abnormal remaining hairs with fractured dry, dull shafts.
The alopecic areas become dry and scaly. Secondary pyo-
derma is common in the affected alopecic areas.
Color dilution alopecia is seen most frequently in the
Fig. 20.3 Black hair follicular dysplasia in a Beagle-crossbreed.
blue Doberman Pinscher; hence the original name, “blue
Hair loss and secondary pyoderma are confined to the darker
 Doberman syndrome'. The syndrome also is seen in other
pigmented area.
breeds with blue color dilution including the Dachshund,
520
Diseases of the adnexa
Great Dane, Whippet, Italian Greyhound, Chow Chow,
Histopathology (Figures 20.4 through 20.6)
Standard Poodle, Yorkshire Terrier Miniature Pinscher,
Chihuahua, Bernese Mountain Dog, Shetland Sheepdog.
In CDA and BHFD, the epidermis is usually normal, but
may be acanthotic if secondary pyoderma is present.
Silky Terrier Boston Terrier Saluki, Newfoundland,
German Shepherd Dog, Bernese Mountain Dog, Schip-
Characteristic clumping of melanin in the epidermis indi-
cates color dilution is present.
perke, plus crossbreed dogs (as compiled by Scott et al.,
Atrophy, variable distortion, and abnormal melanin
2001 and Laffort-Dassot et al., 2002). In addition, CDA
pigmentation characterize hair follicles. Follicles have
has been seen in the fawn Doberman Pinscher, fawn Irish
keratin-plugged infundibula and have varying degrees of
Setter and the red Doberman Pinscher. Color dilution
dysplasia, characterized by an irregular misshapen
alopecia also has been reported in *blue and tan' Dachs-
 contour. Many follicles are in telogen phase, but anagen
hunds that changed coat color during puppyhood to
“deadleaf” or “gray and tan' (Beco et al., 1996). Most
hair follicles are usually interspersed, and dominate in
some specimens. Hair shafts are often absent or markedly
affected dogs develop the syndrome between 4 months
attenuated, and may be fractured, or malacic and frag-
and 3 years of age. However, the authors have seen the
mented. Clumped melanin pigment accumulation is
syndrome develop as late as 5 to 6 years of age. Sex
 predilections have not been noted.
massive and is present at all levels of the hair follicle,
including the bulb, outer root sheath and hair shafts.
Black hair follicular dysplasia was frst documented in
Pigment is prominent within follicular keratin, and extru-
mongrels (Selmanowitz et al., 1977), but the syndrome
also has been seen in many other breeds. Black hair fol.
sion of pigment from the follicular infundibulum to the
licular dysplasia is reported to occur in the Bearded
Collie, Border Collie, Beagle, Basset Hound, Papillon,
Saluki, Jack Russell Terrier, American Cocker Spaniel,
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel, Dachshund, Gordon
Setter large Munsterlander and in pointers (as compiled
by Scott et al., 2001). One author (P.J.1.) has seen BHFD
most commonly in spotted purebred dogs such as the
Beagle and Basset Hound. Skin lesions usually develop
within the frst few weeks after birth. Sex predilections
have not been noted.
In markedly dilute animals the diagnosis of advanced
CDA is not difficult. Otherwise, differential diagnoses for 
 u   
coidism, other canine follicular dysplasias (see p. 522),
and acquired pattern alopecia. Breed predilections and
coat color should increase clinical suspicion. Differentia-
tion is accomplished by clinical history and features,
thyroid and adrenal hormone function tests to rule out
endocrine disease, and histopathology.
Clinical diagnosis of BHFD usually is not diffcult
as it is a visually striking disease. Observation of hair loss
and haircoat quality changes restricted to the black-
haired areas of otherwise light-coated dogs is highly
suggestiveof BHFD.
 Differential  diagnoses  could
include other dysplastic follicular diseases. I
Definitive
diagnosis is based upon compatible clinical fndings and
histopathology.
Biopsy site selection
Specimens should be selected from maximally affected
areas with complete alopecia. Papules or pustules,
Hig. 20.4 Black hair follicular dysplasia. Follicular atrophy is
usually indicative of a secondary pyoderma, also may be
accompanied by clumped melanin deposition in and around hair
sampled.
follicles. Note similarity to color dilution alopecia (Fig. 20.5).
Dysplastic diseases of the adnexa
521
Fig. 20.5 High magnification of color dilution alopecia. Heavily
Fig. 20.6 High magnification of black hair follicular dysplasia.
clumped melanin is within distorted hair follicles.
Clumped pigment is distributed in and around deep follicles.
surface keratin may be observed. Heavily clumped
Some of the features of CDA are not of pathologic sig-
melanin is present within melanophages around the base
nificance, but instead indicate dilute coat color, specif-
 of hair follicles. Secondary inflammation, as in chronic 
cally melanin clumping in the basilar epidermis, hair
 pyoderma, consists of neutrophils and plasma cells that
bulbs, and hair shafts. These features are less severe in
surround superficial vessels and hair follicles. Active fol-
normal color-dilute dogs than in dogs with CDA (Miller,
liculitis or furunculosis may be present.
1990). Clumped melanin is visible in plucked hair shafts
Scanning electron microscopy of plucked hairs demon-
of clinically normal color-dilute dogs, but does not form
strates swelling with cuticular ruptures and craters
large masses that distort the cuticle (Miller, 1990). Severe
(Guaguere, 1991; Hargis et al., 1991; Roperto et al.,
accumulations of melanin, particularly within follicular
1995; Beco et al., 1996). Fractures have been identifed
keratin, coupled with follicular dysplasia and fractured
(Guaguere, 1991; Hargis et al., 1991; Roperto et al.,
hair shafts, are indicative of CDA. Massive melanin
1995). Transmission electron microscopy of hairs reveals
clumping within free keratin in CDA may result from
large vacuoles containing melanosomes of variable size,
fracture of the hair shaft (Miller, 1990).
including “macromelanosomes’ formed from the fusion
Black hair follicular dysplasia is considered indistin-
 of smaller melanosomes (an ultrastructural designa-
guishable from CDA histologically. Direct examination of
tion) (Roperto et al., 1995; Beco et al., 1996). The
hair shafts showed larger and more numerous melanin
clumped foci of melanin seen with light microscopy are
granules on light microscopy and more severe cuticular
not macromelanosomes, but a collection of melanosomes
defects on scanning electron microscopy when comparing
of varying size accumulating within vacuoles (Beco et al.,
CDA in a blue Doberman to BHFD in black and white
1996).
Salukis (Hargis et al., 1991). However, since the lesions
522
Diseases of the adnexa
Fig. 20.7 Follicular dysplasia in a Siberian Husky. Most primary
hairs are lost from thetrunk and secondary hairs appear wooly and
Fig. 20.8 Closer view of the dorsurm of the dog in Fig. 20.7. A few
reddish-brown or *rusty'. {Photograph courtesy A.M. Hargis; case
primary hairs remain along the midline surrounded by *wooly"
secondary hairs. (Photograph courtesy A.M. Hargis; case rmaterial
material University of California, Davis.)
University of California, Davis.)
of these two syndromes are qualitatively the same, there
The clinical features of canine follicular dysplasia vary
may simply be individual breed variation in the severity
with the breed affected, but usually are distinctive for that
of expression of abnormal pigment distribution and hair
breed. Current breed predilection data are most striking
shaft defects. Alternatively, the expression may be less
for the Siberian Husky, Irish Water Spaniel, Portuguese
severe in cases that still retain phenotypically intense
Water Dog, and Curly-Coated Retriever. A distinctive and 
(black) pigmentation of the haircoat. In the authors'
more common follicular dysplasia with marked breed
opinion, differentiation between BHFD from CDA
predilections, termed 'cyclical flank alopecia', is discussed 
Lsually is of no consequence except where genetic infor-
separately (see p. 525).
 mation is being sought.
The etiology of canine follicular dysplasia is not
One author (T.L.G.) has observed some of the histo-
known, although marked breed predilections strongly
logic lesions of CDA in an alopecic tortoiseshell cat that
imply hereditary factors. Curiously, abnormalities in
was reportedly of dilute color. Clumped melanin within
steroidogenesis and apparent improvement related to
all levels of the follicle (including within keratin), as well
dietary changes were noted in affected Irish Water
 as pigmentary incontinence in the perifollicular dermis
Spaniels (Cerundolo et al., 2000).
were observed. However, hair shafts were normal and fol-
 Altered haircoat quality in canine follicular dysplasia
licular dysplasia was not observed; thus, the cause of the
relates to both abnormal retention of the haircoat fol-
alopecia could not be directly assigned to color dilution.
lowed by natural environmental damage of retained hairs,
No further clinical studies were performed.
as well as structural weakening of putatively dysplastic
The differential diagnosis of CDA and BHFD princi-
hairs leading to secondary breakage. Breakage is most
pally includes other forms of follicular dysplasia. Some
abnormal clumping of melanin within the hair follicle
practices, the use of harsh shampoos, and presumed fric-
occurs in the context of other follicular dysplasias (see
tion on the neck under collars (Scott et al., 2001).
below). In general, abnormal melanin accumulation is
 The unifying clinical features of canine follicular dys-
e         
plasia include poor haircoat quality, coat color change,
dysplasias.
and progressive alopecia. In general, primary (guard)
hairs are affected more frequently and severely, leading
CANINE FOLLICULAR DYSPLASIA
to selective loss of guard hairs and some retention of
(Synonym: hair follicle dysplasia)
secondary (undercoat) hairs. Truncal haircoat is affected
most prominently and most commonly. Most forms of
canine follicular dysplasia reported to date seem to spare
Clinical features (Figures 20.7 and 20.8)
the face and distal extremities. Interestingly, this same
Canine follicular dysplasia designates a group of uncom-
pattern of alopecia is seen with most endocrine skin dis-
mon canine skin diseases characterized clinically by
eases and with alopecia X (see Chapter 19); the signif-
altered haircoat quality and varying degrees of alopecia.
cance of this finding is not known. Occasionally, partial
Dysplastic diseases of the adnexa
523
hair regrowth may be noted transiently, giving false hope
alopecia X. Similarly, in one report of follicular dysplasia
for recovery; however the syndrome usually is progres-
in Irish Water Spaniels, there was both clinical and
sive and unremitting.
 The syndrome in the Siberian Husky is characterized by
p. 525; Cerundolo et al., 2000). However complete hair
loss of primary hairs and a distinctive color change in the
loss, as observed in alopecia X and flank alopecia, does
remaining secondary hairs to a reddish-brown or ‘rusty'
not occur with follicular dysplasia of the Siberian Husky.
color. Secondary hairs are dry, disheveled, damaged, and
"wooly'. Patches of more complete alopecia may be
Biopsy site selection
evident in wear areas such as pressure points and under
collars. A similar form of canine follicular dysplasia, but
Specimens should be taken from areas of maximum
usually more tardive in onset, is seen in Malamutes.
alopecia or haircoat change. It is critical that normally
Similar clinical features are seen in the Irish Water
haired skin be obtained for comparison. In breeds other
Spaniel, Portuguese Water Dog, and Curly-Coated
 than those mentioned above, control specimens ideally
Retriever. Variable numbers of primary hairs are lost and
should be obtained from an age-matched dog of the same
the undercoat changes to a dull, lighter color. Some
 breed, preferably from the same site as the abnormal spec-
remaining primary hairs on the trunk may be abnormally
imen. This comparison sampling is integral to character-
long. Affected Irish Water Spaniels exhibit a coat color
izing new forms of hereditary alopecia in individual
change from reddish brown to grayish brown. The coat
breeds of dogs. Clinicians should exercise caution and
reddish brown. Distinctive from most follicular dys-
areas in preparation for skin biopsy, as hair regrowth may
plasias, alopecia may be noted in periorbital location in
not occur.
Portuguese Water Dogs (Miller & Scott, 1995). Curious
"'islands' of normal hair in areas of almost complete alope-
Histopathology (Figures 20.9 and 20.10)
cia, similar to that seen in alopecia X (see Chapter 19),
are observed in all three of these breeds. Pedigree analy-
The canine follicular dysplasias are incompletely charac-
 sis in four families of Irish Water Spaniels suggests a
terized. Further histopathologic distinctions amongst
dominant mode of inheritance (Cerundolo et al., 1999).
the various follicular dysplasias will hopefully emerge
Interestingly, a well-demarcated patch of marked hair-
through systematic study of large groups of affected
lessness on the throat region plus a comparatively poorly
animals. Knowledge of the breed affected and distribution
haired ‘rat tail' are defned breed standard in the Irish
of hair loss are crucial in the diagnosis of these conditions.
Water Spaniel; breeders may have unwittingly selected for
In general, the epidermis and dermis are usually
more widespread follicular dysplasia. Clinical distribution
normal, although variable hyperkeratosis may be present.
of the alopecia may depend on coexistent factors like sex
Follicular infundibular hyperkeratosis is a common
hormone receptor density or function (Miller, 1990).
feature, as it is in many diseases of abnormal hair follicle
Data on canine follicular dysplasia is most extensive
growth. Pigmentary incontinence around deep portions of
and convincing for the above-mentioned breeds. Visually
hair follicles may be evident, and there may be mild
similar progressive, diffuse truncal alopecia due to canine
pigment clumping within follicular sructures as well.
follicular dysplasia has been noted in black and red
Hair follicles are variably distorted, and may be truly
Doberman Pinschers and in Weimaraners (Miller, 1990;
atrophic and/or in telogen phase without overall reduc-
Laffort-Dassot et al., 2002).
tion in size. Anagen hair follicles also may appear abnor-
Age of onset is variable and somewhat contingent on
mal in size and contour.
affected breed. However, the syndrome commonly begins
In Portuguese Water Dogs, hair follicles are variably
at less than 3 years of age. Sex predilections have not been
affected, often within the same specimen. Affected hair
noted.
follicles are superfcially plugged with orthokeratotic
Clinical differential diagnoses for canine follicular
 keratin. They may have a wavy or irregular outer contour.
dysplasia should include endocrinopathies such as hy-
Hairs are absent from hair follicles or may appear frag-
pothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, and sex hormone
mented and thin. There may be scattered clumps of
alterations. The marked breed predilections of canine fol-
melanin within follicular keratin and within follicular
licular dysplasia, plus endocrinologic evaluation and
epithelium. Distorted follicles are generally but not uni-
histopathology will aid in differentiation. The authors 
 formly in telogen phase; misshapen and small anagen hair
have seen Siberian Huskies with alopecic skin disease that
bulbs are observed. Some deep follicles may exhibit
seems to blur the lines of differentiation between follicu-
lar dysplasia, cyclical flank alopecia, and alopecia X;
shafts and melanin accumulation superficially. A large
interestingly, histologic features most closely resemble
study also reported dissolution of the hair matrix of the
524
Diseases of the adnexa
Fig. 20.9 Follicular dysplasia in a
Portuguese Water Dog. Hair follicles
are atrophic and mildly misshapen in
this view; note relative prominence of
arrector pili muscles. There is mild
intrafollicular clumping of melanin
(arrow).
anagen bulb and vacuolar alteration of the inner root
sheath (Miller & Scott, 1995). An occasional abnormal
hair follicle may be found in normal coated adults or
 puppies; these follicles demonstrate intraluminal rmelanin 
or dysplastic hair shafts (Miller & Scott, 1995).
As reported in a study of 20 affected dogs, follicular
dysplasia of Irish Water Spaniels is manifested in areas of
alopecia by atrophy of the lower follicle and dilated
hyperkeratotic infundibula. Similar but milder changes
are seen in hypotrichotic (partially haired) sites (Cerun-
dolo et al., 2000). Pigment clumping of the hair shaft or
hair follicular epithelium and perifollicular pigmentary
incontinence are encountered in all affected dogs, even in
the normally haired areas; normal dogs of the breed were
not examined (Cerundolo et al., 2000). Pigment clump-
ing may be normal for the breed, or may be a feature only
of dogs with potential for hair loss.
Follicular dysplasia in adult black and red Doberman
Pinschers is characterized by follicular atrophy, follicular
infundibular hyperkeratosis, and pigment clumping
throughout the hair follicle. Melanin aggregates are
observed in hair shafts, hair matrix cells, and intralumi-
nally. There is perifollicular pigmentary incontinence. The
pigment abnormalities are reportedly less than seen in
color dilution alopecia (Miller 1990). Similarly, follicular 
dysplasia of Weimeraners also features pigmentary clump-
ing, but not to the extent or severity of color dilution
alopecia (Laffort-Dassot et al., 2002). Since color dilution
alopecia is technically also a follicular dysplasia, differ-
Fig. 20.10 Higher magnification of follicular dysplasia in a
entiation may be unimportant.
Portuguese Water Dog. Note highly distorted hair follicle at center,
Interestingly, although the clinical presentation is dis-
which contains an abnormal hair shaft.
tinct from alopecia X, the histopathologic features of
Dysplastic diseases of the adnexa
525
Fig. 20.11 Cyclical flank alopecia in a Boxer characterized by
partially bilaterally symmetric patches of hair loss and marked
hyperpigrmentation on the lateral trunk.
follicular dysplasia of the Siberian Husky are strikingly
Fig. 20.12 Cyclical flank alopecia in a Miniature Schnauzer. A
similar to that syndrome (see Chapter 19). Flame follicles
roughly triangular patch of almost cormplete alopecia with hyper-
pigmentationis present in the flank region Hair lossin thisog pr-
are diffusely present. Pigment clumping within hair folli-
cles is not seen. The prominent tricholemmal keratin of
sisted and was not cyclical.
haired telogen follicles, as seen in post-clipping alopecia
(and a normal fnding in random biopsy of normal plush-
coated dogs), should not be confused with true flame fol-
northern California. Thus, the authors also use the term
licle formation.
“flank alopecia', as cyclical hair loss and hair regrowth are
 Differentiation of follicular dysplasia from endocrine
not consistent features in some geographic areas.
alopecia may be required. Individual dysplastic hair folli-
The etiology of CFA is not known, although marked
cles are seen in endocrine alopecia, as reported by Roth-
 breed predilections strongly imply hereditary factors. The
stein et al. (1998). However dysplastic follicular changes
 syndrome is seen most commonly in northern regions of
are more diffuse and severe in follicular dysplasia syn-
North America giving rise to speculation that photo-
 dromes than in endocrine alopecia. Clumping of melanin 
 period and seasonal climactic variations heavily influence
and dysplastic hair shafts are also specific for follicular 
 pathogenesis (Paradis, M., personal communication,
dysplasia (Rothstein et al., 1998). Follicular dysplasia
 1997; Rosser E., personal communication, 1997; Scott et
may also feature abnormalities of the anagen hair follicle,
al., 2001). Hair loss commonly occurs in late autumn to
in contrast to endocrine alopecia in which hair cycle arrest
early spring followed by partial to complete resolution in
in telogen phase occurs.
late spring (Miller & Dunstan, 1993; Scott et al., 2001).
Confusingly, a reversed clinical course with hair loss in
summer followed by regrowth in winter has been seen in
CYCLICAL FLANK ALOPECIA
a smaller percentage of cases (Miller & Dunstan, 1993;
(Synonyms: seasonal flank alopecia, recurrent flank alope-
Scott et al., 2001). Although patterns of alopecia are rem-
cia, flank alopecia)
iniscent of an endocrinopathy, available data, including
thyroid evaluations, do not indicate the presence of
Clinical features (Figures 20.11 through 20.14)
endocrine disease (Darminet & Paradis, 2000). Thera-
peutic response in some cases to either melatonin or
Canine cyclical flank alopecia (CFA) is a visually striking.
increased exposure to light implies the importance of pho-
but relatively uncommon disease, characterized by altered
 toperiod and seasonal climactic variations on the patho-
haircoat quality and alopecia, predominantly of the
genesis of CFA.
lateral flank folds. Geographic variation in this localized
 The prime clinical feature of CFA is somewhat bilater-
follicular dysplasia is profound. Seasonal hair loss and
ally symmetric altered haircoat quality and alopecia.
hair regrowth may be most prominent in regions of the
  ro n r r     
world with well-defined differences in seasons, while
dull, dry, and disheveled. Distinctive, serpiginous, well-
cycling may be much less notable or even nonexistent in
demarcated borders to the regions of alopecia lend a strik.
regions with little seasonal climactic alteration, such as
ingly geographic image. Both primary and secondary
526
Diseases of the adnexa
hairs are lost. Hyperpigmentation usually occurs in
concert with coat quality change and alopecia. Most
lesions are less than 15 cm in maximum diameter. Lesions
predominate in the lateral flank folds, but may involve the
dorsal midline, cranial ribcage, and axillary regions
less commonly. Partial to complete hair regrowth may
  e as) d pa e  
is often dry, dull, and discolored, and may display
alteration in texture. Affected dogs are otherwise
normal.
 A somewhat different, distinctive, and more generalized
clinical pattern of alopecia is seen in the Airedale
Terrier. Hair loss is partially symmetric and restricted
predominantly to the dorsal and lateral thorax in a
distinctive saddle-like or H pattern. Hyperpigmentation
is noted. The authors have seen other Airedales with
alopecic skin disease that seems to blur the clinical
lines of differentiation between follicular dysplasia and
alopecia X. In these dogs, hair loss may be profound
and affect much of the trunk, with sparing of the head,
 neck, distal legs, and distal tail. Areas of total alopecia
are present with occasional, visually striking, well-
demarcated “islands’ of normal hair similar to that
seen in alopecia X (see Chapter 19). Cyclical hair
or without apparent seasonality.
Flank alopecia can occur in any breed, but is seen most
commonly in the Boxer (Miller & Dunstan, 1993; Scott,
1990; Scott et al., 2001). Breed predilection data is also
striking for the English Bulldog, French Bulldog, Minia-
ture Schnauzer, and Airedale Terrier. Other breeds at
probable increased risk include the Chesapeake Bay
Fig. 20.13 Closer view of the dog in Fig. 20.13 viewed dorsally.
 Partially bilaterally symmetric patches of complete alopecia are
Retriever, Doberman Pinscher Scottish Terrier, Stafford-
 present on the flanks.
shire Terrier German Shorthaired Pointer, German Wire-
haired Pointer, Rhodesian Ridgeback, Rotrweiler, Kuvasz,
and Miniature Poodle. The authors and others (Scott et
al., 2001) have seen flank alopecia in many other breeds,
 including the Bouvier des Flandres, Affenpinscher, Chi-
huahua, Pekingese, and Shetland Sheepdog.
Clinical differential diagnoses for CFA could include
endocrinopathies  such as hypothyroidism and  sex
hormone alterations. However, CFA in most breeds is
visually distinctive. Breed predilections, endocrinologic
evaluation, and histopathology will facilitate the diagno-
sis. As stated, CFA in some Airedale Terriers resembles
 alopecia X (see Chapter 19); histopathology should allow
differentiation.
Biopsy site selection
Specimens should be taken from areas of maximum
Fig. 20.14 Cyclical fank alopecia in a Chesapeake Bay Retriever.
alopecia or haircoat change. Multiple specimens allow the
This dog experienced hair loss every winter and regrew hair each
examination of multiple follicular units and enhance the
summer.
likelihood of achieving a diagnosis.
Dysplastic diseases of the adnexa
527
Fig. 20.15 Cyclical flank alopecia in a
Standard Schnauzer. Note massive
follicular keratosis and foot-like con-
figuration of keratin above small and
distorted lower follicles.
Histopathology (Figures 20.15 through 20.17)
A normal to mildly acanthotic epidermis is often uniformly
hypermelanotic throughout all layers, including the
stratum corneum. There is variable, often striking follicu.
lar plugging with orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis. Abnor-
mal follicles of allstages of the hair cycle (anagen, catagen,
and telogen) are present. Both primary and secondary hair
follicles are distorted and narrowed, particularly at the
base. Often, a widened keratin-flled follicular infundibu.
lum is perched on a truncated follicle with an atrophic
base, creating a ‘dwarfed’ appearance. “Witch's feet’ are
due to the appearance of keratin within the dilated
infundibula overlying a group of toe-like, shortened,
and irregular primary and secondary follicles (Miller &
Dunstan, 1993). Hair bulbs, if present, are often greatly
misshapen, and may be seen at the base of distorted, some-
times thin and “dangling' anagen or catagen follicles. Often
follicles have a marked wavy or undulating outline. Late
stage telogen hair follicles, reduced to a narrow cord of
cells, may be prominent in some lesions. Hair shafts are
generally absent. There may be rare folliculitis.
Sebaceous glands are diffusely melanized, and apocrine
glands are variably pigmented, as reported (Scott, 1990;
Miller & Dunstan, 1993). Plugs of melanin form in seba-
ceous ducts and lie free within the keratin of superfcial
follicles. Sebaceous gland melanosis reportedly is a non-
specifc feature of both endocrine and dysplastic diseases
of hair follicles (Bagladi et al., 1996). Also, random and
occasional sebaceous gland melanosis may be a normal
Fig. 20.16 Higher magnification of hair follicles of the dog in
fnding in the skin of dogs (Bagladi et al., 1996).
Fig. 20.16. A foot-like keratin configuration lies above atrophic ir-
The microscopic appearance of active lesions of cycli-
regular deep follicles.
cal flank alopecia is distinctive. Some hypothyroid dogs
528
 Diseases of the adnexa
have follicles that taper to an atrophic base, but *witch's
of flank alopecia. Thus, depending on the stage in which
feet’ and marked distortion of the follicular contour,
biopsy specimens are obtained, hair follicles may have a
as seen in flank alopecia, do not occur. Diffculty in
relatively normal appearance and anagen hairs may be
histopathologic diagnosis arises from the cyclical nature
prominent. A predominance of normal anagen hairs and
more normally contoured hair follicles (within a non-
marginal specimen) may herald a return to a cycle of
regrowth in affected dogs.
CONGENITAL HYPOTRICHOSIS
(Synonym: congenital alopecia)
Clinical features (Figures 20.18 and 20.19)
Congenital hypotrichosis is a lack of adnexa (and there-
fore hair) in regions of the body where they normally are
expected for the species. The so-called “alopecic breeds'
are simply the result of the wilful breeding of animals
with spontaneously occurring genetic mutations, in order
to perpetuate the hairless trait. Consequently, “alopecic
breeds' can be viewed as examples of *normal or accept-
able congenital hypotrichosis. These breeds include the
Mexican Hairless and Chinese Crested dogs, and the
Sphinx cat. For clarity, the authors consider hypotrichosis
to be any congenital lack of hair. Alopecia signifies loss
iooed pabre aerl e oi np r asixa-rd go
process
Spontaneously occurring congenital hypotrichosis is a
rare disease of the dog and cat that is characterized by
varying degrees of hypotrichosis present from birth, or
shortly thereafter. Affected animals are born with a dimin-
ished number of adnexal structures in affected areas. A
spontaneous genetic mutation is believed to be the cause
(Scott et al., 2001). Sex-linked inheritance of the genetic
trait is suspected for most affected dogs, since most
Fig. 20.17 High magnification of hair follicles in cyclical flank
reported cases have been in males. Curiously, animals
alopecia. A primary follicle is markedly distorted (arrow).
with congenital hypotrichosis may be born with hair that
Fig. 20.18 Congenital hypotrichosis in four
of seven puppies in litter of Labrador Retriev-
ers. Varying sized patches of cormplete hair loss
are seen on the muzzle and forehead of affected
puppies. (Photograph courtesy G.A. Kunkle.)
Dysplastic diseases of the adnexa
529
Cocker Spaniel, Belgian Shepherd, German Shepherd
Dog, Whippet, French Bulldog, Yorkshire Terrier and
Lhasa Apso, as compiled by Scott et al. (2001). Most
reports of this syndrome have been in male dogs, with the
exceptions of a female Labrador Retriever and a female
Rottweiler (Kunkle, 1984; Ihrke et al., 1994). Congenital
hypotrichosis is evident at birth, or within the frst month
thereafter.
 Clinical differential diagnoses for congenital hypotri-
chosis are few if a correlative history is available. Con-
genital hypotrichosis is not a progressive skin disease.
Progression should not be confused with natural enlarge-
ment of the area of hairlessness as the animal grows. If
history is not available, then congenital hypotrichosis
must be differentiated in the adult animal from diseases
capable of producing widespread bilaterally symmetric
alopecia, including hyperglucocorticoidism, hypothy-
Fig. 20.19 Generalized congenital hypotrichosis in a young female
roidism, sex hormone endocrinopathies, alopecia X, and
Rottweiler. Small tufts of hair are present only along the dorsal
acquired pattern alopecia. Histopathology is required to
midline in a pattern similar to the Chinese Crested dog. (From Ihrke,
confirm the diagnosis.
P.J., Mueller, R.S. & Stannard, A.A. {1994) Generalized congenital
hypotrichosis in a female Rottweiler. Vet Dermatol 4, 65-9.
Reprinted with permission.)
Biopsy site selection
Multiple areas of complete alopecia should be selected for
skin biopsy. An additional specimen should be obtained
falls out during the first month of life (Scott et al., 2001).
from as normal an area as possible for comparison. This
Presumably, hair follicle involution occurs after birth in
selection technique will allow detection of subtle folli
some of these animals.
  d   s  s rs
In congenital hypotrichosis, hairlessness may be the
comparison of follicular size and density with a normal
only abnormality noted, or hairlessness may be seen con-
control.
comitantly with other genetic ectodermal defects such as
abnormal dentition and abnormal tear production. The
Histopathology (Figure 20.20)
 extent of hairlessness may vary from partial to nearly
complete. Marked bilateral symmetry commonly is noted.
The epidermis and dermis are normal in congenital
Some dogs may exhibit only focal areas of hairlessness,
hypotrichosis. Follicular changes principally include an
usually near the dorsal midline. The temporal regions,
overall decrease in the density of hair follicles per unit
pinnae, entire ventrum, and caudal dorsum are most fre-
area of dermis; this may be variable case to case. Sec-
quently affected (as compiled by Scott et al., 2001). The
ondary hair follicles may be markedly reduced in number
tail also is affected commonly. Facial sensory hairs (vib-
in the remaining adnexal units. Hair follicles that are
rissae) may be distorted, curly, or absent. In animals with
present may be small and/or in telogen phase, but usually
more generalized hairlessness, remaining hairs most com-
are not distorted. Follicular distortion was reported in
monly are located on the dorsal midline of the head and
hypotrichotic Birman kittens (Casal et al., 1994). Resid-
 thorax, mimicking the pattern seen in alopecic breds.
ual hair shafts, if any, are thin. Follicular keratosis may
Initially, the exposed skin is visually normal in the
be present and may be severe, forming comedones, par-
hairless areas, but subsequently, hyperpigmentation and
ticularly in the Mexican Hairless and other hypotrichotic
scaling occur. Mottled hyperpigmentation and hypopig-
breeds of dogs. There may be variable reduction in the
mentation occur as the animal ages. Affected dogs and
size of sebaceous glands as well, but they may be normal
cats lacking protective pigmentation are at increased risk
in size and distribution. Complete absence of hair folli-
for solar dermatoses. Secondary bacterial folliculitis and
cles and adnexal glands has been reported and repre-
comedones are common, and frequently become more 
sents a more extensive ectodermal defect of the skin
extensive with advancing age.
(Grieshaber et al., 1986; Ihrke et al., 1994). In hairless
Congenital hypotrichosis has been reported in many
breeds of dogs with comedone formation, there may
breeds including the Poodle, Basset Hound, Beagle,
be accompanying pyoderma and chronic hyperplastic
Labrador Retriever, Bichon Frise, Rottweiler, American
dermatitis.
530
Diseases of the adnexa
Fig. 20.20 Congenital hypotrichosis
in a dog demonstrating nearly com-
plete loss of follicles. A rudimentary
follicular remnant remains near the
epidermis (arrow).
Differential diagnosis includes acquired pattern bald-
ness for cases of mild hypotrichosis, or follicular dyspla-
sia if follicular distortion is present. The overall density
of hair follicles is normal in pattern baldness and follicu-
lar dysplasia, and is decreased in hypotrichosis. Clinical
differentiation may be required.
FOLLICULAR LIPIDOSIS
Clinical features (Figures 20.21 and 20.22)
 Follicular lipidosis is a rare, presumed hereditary follicu-
lar dysplasia, published to date in only four Rottweiler
puppies. Three dogs were seen in the United States and
 one dog was seen in Belgium (Gross et al., 1997; Fontaine
Fig. 20.21 Follicular lipidosis in a young Rottweiler. Note that
diffuse partial alopecia affects only the mahogany points.
& Olivry, 1999).
The pathophysiology of this syndrome is not under-
stood. Affected puppies have ballooning of the matrical
cells of the hair bulb of primary anagen hair follicles,
Follicular lipidosis has been reported to date only in
apparently due to lipid deposition (Gross et al., 1997).
 Rottweilers. Reported puppies were diagnosed as having
 The presenting clinical feature is hair loss affecting only
the disease at 5, 6, 9, and 11 months of age; both male
the mahogany or tan points of the face and feet. Diffuse
and female dogs were represented (Gross et al., 1997;
partial alopecia of the affected points is accompanied by
Fontaine & Olivry, 1999).
subtle loss of normal pigment, leaving the remaining point
Diagnosis of follicular lipidosis in Rottweilers should
hairs mouse-gray. Other skin or haircoat abnormalities
not be problematic. The authors are aware of no other
are not noted. One affected puppy had concomitant
disease with these clinical features. Histopathology is
chronic renal disease suggestive of atrophic glomerulopa-
required to confrm the diagnosis.
thy, a syndrome also reported in Rotrweilers, and was
found at necropsy to be hypothyroid (Gross et al., 1997).
Biopsy site selection
The other three reported dogs with follicular lipidosis
had no evidence of systemic disease (Gross et al., 1997;
Multiple areas exhibiting alopecia and coat-color change
Fontaine & Olivry, 1999).
should be selected for skin biopsy. Care should be taken
Dysplastic diseases of the adnexa
531
Fig. 20.22 Closer view of the distal forelegs of the dog in Fig. 20.21
dermonstrating partial hair loss.
to avoid delicate underlying structures when skin biopsy
is performed on the distal extremities of puppies.
Histopathology (Figure 20.23)
The epidermis and dermis of affected mahogany-haired
skin are normal. Primary anagen phase hair follicles
demonstrate ballooning of the matrical cells of the hair
bulb. Secondary anagen hairs are affected less often. Rare
vacuoles are seen in hair shafts. Scattered hairs within
 follicles may appear irregular in contour with a frayed
Fig. 20.23 Follicular lipidosis in a Rottweiler. Note ballooning of
cuticle. Black-haired skin is normal.
matrical cells of anagen hair bulb.
 In a previous report of three affected dogs, oil-red-O
staining of frozen specimens from one dog demonstrated
red-staining lipid within the follicular matrical cytoplasm
genetic basis for this disease also is supported by juvenile
(Gross et al., 1997). Electron microscopy demonstrated
onset. The etiopathogenesis of sebaceous gland hyper-
intracytoplasmic, homogeneous to granular deposits con-
plasia is not known.
sistent with lipid.
 The prime clinical feature of sebaceous gland hyper-
No known differential diagnoses exist for follicular
plasia in both dogs and cats is excessive and relentless
lipidosis. Although alopecia areata may feature cyto-
greasiness, resulting in clumping of the haircoat. The
plasmic swelling of matrical cells, lymphocytic in-
 underlying skin may appear greasy, but scaling or crust-
flammation of the bulb and surrounding dermis are dif-
ing is not present. Severity of disease seems to increase
ferentiating features. Immunohistochemistry for CD3+ T
with advancing age. Pruritus has not been noted. Occa-
lymphocytes within affected hair bulbs was negative in a
sionally, secondary Malassezia dermatitis may exacerbate
reported case of follicular lipidosis (Fontaine & Olivry,
the greasiness and initiate pruritus. Affected dogs and cats
1999).
are otherwise normal.
 Border Terriers and Briards may be at increased risk for
 the development of sebaceous gland hyperplasia as well
SEBACEOUS GLAND HYPERPLASIA
as Persian cats. One author (P.J.I.) has seen the syndrome
in several Golden Retrievers. The syndrome has also been
Clinical features
observed in a Devon Rex cat. Others have noted this
Sebaceous gland hyperplasia is a rare disease of both the
syndrome in various unspecifed dog breeds (Scott et al.,
dog and the cat. It is characterized clinically by extreme
2001). Greasiness is frst noted in puppies and kittens at
greasiness of the haircoat and underlying skin. Breed
 less than 6 months of age. Sex predilections have not been
predilections are suggestive of a hereditary basis. A
noted.
532
Diseases of the adnexa
Fig. 20.24 Sebaceous gland hyper-
plasia in a Persian cat. Sebaceous gland
lobules are increased in size but not in
fumber.
Sebaceous gland hyperplasia is clinically striking. Other
diseases, such as chronic allergic dermatitis causing greasy
haircoats have associated inflammatory changes in the
underlying skin. Early age of onset should increase
clinical suspicion. Skin biopsy is required to confrm the
diagnosis.
Biopsy site selection
Multiple skin biopsy specimens should be acquired from
areas of maximal greasiness. If possible, an unaffected
region from the same animal should be sampled for com-
parative purposes.
Histopathology (Figures 20.24 and 20.25)
The epidermis is normal to mildly acanthotic in unin-
flamed lesions of sebaceous gland hyperplasia. Sebaceous
glands are uniformly enlarged. Individual lobules are two
to three times larger than expected for location. There
 may be an increase in the number of sebaceous glands per
follicular unit, but this is a not a consistent fnding in
Persian cats. In a Border Terrier observed by one author
(T.L.G.), there was an increase in both the size and
number of sebaceous lobules. These extended beyond the
hair follicle to the adjacent interfollicular dermis.
Hair follicles are normal in size and distribution. There
may be accompanying mild pleocellular dermatitis of
superficial and periadnexal distribution, sometimes with
increased acanthosis.
Fig. 20.25 Sebaceous gland hyperplasia in a Border Terrier. Seba
No known differential diagnoses exist for sebaceous
ceous gland lobules are increased in size and number; note normal
hyperplasia. Correlation with location may be required as
epiderrmis.
Dysplastic diseases of the adnexa
533
Signalment predilections are not available; the syn-
drome is very rare. Juvenile onset is a prominent feature.
Sex predilections have not been noted.
Sebaceous gland dysplasia is clinically distinctive,
particularly in the clinical context of juvenile onset. Juve-
alopecia. Skin biopsy is required to confrm diagnosis.
Biopsy site selection
Multiple skin biopsy specimens should be acquired from
regions of maximal poor haircoat quality and alopecia. If
possible, a relatively unaffected region from the same
 animal should be sampled for comparative purposes.
Fig. 20.26 Sebaceous gland dysplasia in a cat. Progressive
alopecia, a rough poor quality haircoat, and fine adherent scale
are present. {Photograph courtesy L. and S. Hertzel, and S.C.
Histopathology (Figures 20.27 through 20.29)
Vandenabeele.)
There is mild acanthosis accompanied by mild to moder-
ate epidermal and follicular infundibular orthokeratotic
some sites normally feature large sebaceous glands,
hyperkeratosis. In one dog observed, there was patchy
notably the chin of cats. Sebaceous hyperplasia may not
parakeratotic and neutrophilic scale/crusting as well.
be obvious in skin that is otherwise normal; gross find-
In cats, sebaceous glands appear to be undergoing pre-
ings of greasy skin should alert the pathologist to its dis-
mature involution, as there is marked eosinophilia and
covery in tissue. Sebaceous hyperplasia in the setting of
shrinkage of sebocytes, suggestive of apoptosis. However,
inflammatory skin disease is likely reactive. Sebaceous
 complete atrophy does not occur even in lesions obtained
gland hyperplasia may be seen in any long-standing pru-
at a later age. Biopsy performed three times in one cat
ritic skin disease of dogs, including atopic dermatitis (see
from 4 months to 2 years of age showed similar changes.
Chapter 9).
Sebaceous glands were reduced in size in the final biopsy
when compared to the early specimens.
Residual sebocytes, which are variably reduced in size,
SEBACEOUS GLAND DYSPLASIA
are outnumbered by epithelial cells of ductular or reserve
Clinical features (Figure 20.26)
cell origin. Often, only a small collection of undifferenti-
ated epithelial cells and small sebocytes remains at the site
Sebaceous gland dysplasia is a rare dysplastic disease of
of previous glands. Orderly centripetal progression from
the adnexa seen in both the dog and the cat. Clinically, it
reserve cells to mature sebocytes usually is lost. Sebocytes
is characterized by adherent keratinous debris, and pro-
 that remain may have irregular cytoplasmic vacuolation;
gressive alopecia. A genetic basis for sebaceous gland dys-
 others appear normal except for reduced size.
le paiensod si il iasuo auanl Aq panoddns si eiseid
Early specimens from cats show normal follicular
a genetic defect causes abnormal sebaceous development.
 density and appearance. Later biopsy specimens show fol-
Normal sebaceous gland differentiation and function
licular atrophy and dysplasia. Some normal anagen hair
   l n Arss si Aqod
follicles may be observed. Small hair shafts often remain
et al., 2003).
in the atrophic or dysplastic follicles. Some hair follicles
 The predominant clinical features are adherent scale,
show mild perifollicular fbrosis at the isthmus in the
a poor quality haircoat, and progresive alopecia. The
vicinity of previous glands, accompanied by distortion of
normal architectural markings of the skin surface may be
the follicular wall. Occasional trichomalacia is observed.
accentuated, but the skin is not thickened. The haircoat
These changes suggest that hair follicles develop abnor-
is dull, rough, and dry. The dorsum of the head and dorsal
mally in the face of sebaceous gland dysplasia, but still
neck may be the initial sites affected. Poor coat quality
attempt to cycle. The apparent effect is an overall decrease
and alopecia progress to involve much of the animal. In
in the size of adnexal units with time. A few mixed
the few cases seen to date, cats seerm to develop more
mononuclear cells are present superfcially and around
severe alopecia with this syndrome than dogs. The preen
hair follicles and occasionally infltrate the follicular wall
region on the dorsum of the tail was spared in one
(mural folliculitis; see Chapter 18).
observed cat. Pruritus is not a feature of sebaceous gland
 In dogs, there is more severe and pervasive follicular
dysplasia.
dysplasia as compared to cats. Affected follicles have
534
 Diseases of the adnexa
Fig. 20.27 Sebaceous gland dysplasia
in a cat. Note diffuse alteration of
glands; at this power individual lobules
are poorly defined and sebocytes appear
stmall.
Fig. 20.28 Higher magnification of sebaceous gland dysplasia in a
Fig. 20.29 Sebaceous gland dysplasia in a dog. The normal lobular
cat, demonstrating residual small numbers of clear sebocytes and
increased proportion of small reserve cells; centripetal progression 
vacuoles.
from reserve cells to mature sebocytes is not seen. There is active
sebocytic degeneration {arrow).
Dysplastic diseases of the adnexa
535
irregular, wavy contours and often twisted lower seg-
Selmanowitz, VJ., Markofsky, J. & Orentreich, N. (1977) Black-
ments. In one dog observed, hair follicles were nearly
hair follicular dysplasia in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 171,
uniformly in telogen stage, but retained hair shafts. Seba-
1079-81.
ceous gland degenerative and 
dysplastic changes
are as observed in cats. Mixed inflammation, includ-
Canine Follicular Dysplasia
ing lymphocytes, plasma cells, and fewer neutrophils
Cerundolo, R., Lloyd, D.H. & Pidduck, H.G. (1999) Studies on
and histiocytes, encircle, and partially infltrate some
the inheritance of hair loss in the Irish water spaniel. Vet
 follicular walls at the isthmus as well as some of the seba-
Record 145,542-4.
ceous glands. Similar inflammation may extend perivas-
Cerundolo, R., Lloyd, D.H., McNeil, P.E. et al. (2000) An analy-
cularly in the superfcial dermis. Focal superficial dermal
sis of factors underlying hypotrichosis and alopecia in Irish
 pyogranulomatous inflammation was identifed in one
Water Spaniels in the United Kingdom. Vet Dermatol 11,
107-22.
dog.
Laffort-Dassot,
C.,
Beco, L.& Carlotti， D.N. (2002)
There are no known differential diagnoses
for
Follicular
dysplasia in five Weimaraners. Vet Dermatol
sebaceous gland dysplasia. Late stage lesions might be
13,253-60.
confused with sebaceous adenitis, but the replacement of
Miller, W.H. (1990) Follicular dysplasia in adult black and red
normal sebaceous glands by undifferentiated epithelial
 Doberman Pinschers. Vet Dermatol 1, 181-7.
cells and small sebocytes in sebaceous gland dysplasia
Miller, W.H. & Scott, D.W. (1995) Follicular dysplasia of the
allows differentiation. Sebaceous gland vacuolation
Portuguese Water Dog. Vet Dermatol 6, 67-74.
and atrophy have been observed with hair follicle-
Rothstein, E., Scott, D.W, Miller, W.H. et al. (1998)
predominant erythema multiforme  (see (
Chapter
4);
A retrospective study of dysplastic hair follicles and
however, apoptosis of sebocytes was not a feature.
abnormal melanization in dogs with follicular dysplasia
syndromes or endocrine skin disease. Vet Dermatol 9,
235-41.
REFERENCES
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller 6 Kirk's
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 890-3, 970-3. W.B.
Color Dilution Alopecia and Black Hair Follicular Dysplasia
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Beco, L., Fontaine, J., Gross, T.L. et al. (1996) Color dilution
alopecia in seven Dachshunds: a clinical study and the he-
Cyclical Flank Alopecia
reditary, microscopical and ultrastructural aspect of the
Bagladi, M.S., Scott, D.W. & Miller, W.H. (1996) Sebaceous
disease. Vet Dermatol 7, 91-7.
gland melanosis in dogs with endocrine skin disease or
Brignac, M.M., Foil, C.S.,A
Al-Bagdadi, K. et al. (1988)
follicular dysplasia: a retrospective study. Vet Dermatol 7,
Microscopy of color mutant alopecia. In: Proceedings of the
85-90.
4th AAVD/ACVD Meeting, Washington DC, pp. 14-5.
Darminet, S. & Paradis, M. (2000). Evaluation of thyroid func-
Guaguere, E. (1991) Aspects histopathologiques et ultrastruc-
tion in dogs suffering from recurrent flank alopecia. Can Vet
turaux de l'alopecie des robes diluées: a propos d'un cas chez
41,699-703.
un Doberman Pinscher bleu. Prat Med Chir Anim Comp 26,
Miller, M.A. & Dunstan, R.W. (1993) Seasonal flank alopecia
537-46.
in Boxers and Airedale Terriers: 24 cases (1985-1992). J Am
Hargis, A.M., Brignac, M.M., Al-Bagdadi, FA.K. et al. (1991)
Vet Med Assoc 203, 1567-72.
Black hair follicular dysplasia in black and white Saluki Dogs:
Scott, D.W. (1990) Seasonal flank alopecia in ovariohysterec-
differentiation from color mutant alopecia in the Doberman
tomized dogs. Cornell Vet 80, 187-95.
Pinscher by microscopic examination of hairs. Vet Dermatol
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
2,69-83.
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 890-3, 970-3. W.B.
Laffort-Dassot, C., Beco, L. & Carlotti, D.N. (2002) Follicular
Saunders, Philadelphia.
dysplasia in five Weimaraners. Vet Dermatol 13, 253-60.
Miller, WH. (1990) Colour dilution alopecia in Doberman
Pinschers with blue or fawn coat colours: a study on the inci-
Congenital Hypotrichosis
dence and histopathology of this disorder. Vet Dermatol 1,
Casal, M.L., Straumann, U., Sigg, C. et al. (1994) Congenital
113-22.
hypotrichosis with thymic aplasia in nine Birman kittens. J Am
Miller, W.H. (1991) Alopecia associated with coat color dilution
Anim Hosp Assoc 30, 600-2.
in two Yorkshire Terriers, one Saluki, and one mix-breed dog.
Grieshaber, T.L., Blakemore, J.C. & Yaskulski, S. (1986)
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27, 39-43.
Congenital alopecia in a Bichon Frise. J Am Vet Med Assoc
Roperto, F, Cerundolo, R., Restucci, B. et al. (1995) Colour
188, 1053-4.
dilution alopecia (CDA) in ten Yorkshire terriers. Vet Derma-
Ihrke, PJ, Mueller, R.S. & Stannard, A.A. (1994) Generalized
tol 6, 171-8.
congenital hypotrichosis in a female Rottweiler. Vet Dermatol
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
4, 65-9.
Small Arimal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 959-70. W.B. Saun-
Kunkle, G.A. (1984) Congenital hypotrichosis in two dogs. J Am
ders, Philadelphia.
Vet Med Assoc 185, 84-5.
536
Disea ses of the adnexa
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffn, C.E. (2001) Muler 6 Kirk's
Sebaceous Gland Hyperplasia
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 956-9. W.B. Saun-
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
ders, Philadelphia.
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, p. 1179. W.B. Saunders,
Philadelphia.
Follicular Lipidosis
Fontaine, J. & Olivry, T. (1999) Alopécie évoquant une lipidose 
Sebaceous Gland Dysplasia
folliculaire chez un Rottweiler. Prat Méd Chir Comp 34,
Yager, J., Best, S.J., Gross, T.L. et al. (2003) Scaling alopecic der-
681-4.
matoses in three kittens and one puppy associated with seba-
Gross, T.L., Pascal-Tenorio, A., Munn, R.J. et al. (1997) Folli-
ceous gland dysplasia. In: Proceedings ISVD Meeting,
cular lipidosis in three Rottweilers. Vet Dermatol 8, 33-40.
Monterey, p. 14.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright  2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Part IV
Diseases of the Panniculus
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 21
Diseases of the panniculus
The term 'panniculitis' denotes a group of diseases of mul-
minimal gross inflammation. It is considered to be one
tifactorial etiology unified by the localization of the major
of the vasculopathic syndromes under the heading of
focus of inflammation to the fat of the subcutis. The
"ischemic' dermatopathy/canine dermatomyositis (see
 panniculus and subcutis are considered to be synonymous
 Chapters 3 and 10). The syndrome is presumed to be due
in reviews of human panniculitis (Requena & Sanchez Yus,
to an idiosyncratic immunologic reaction to rabies
2001), and are used interchangeably. The panniculus may
 antigen that partially targets vessels. Rabies viral antigen
also be considered the superfcial subcutis, above the
was documented in the walls of dermal blood vessels
 panniculus carnosus muscle. Lipocytes, fbrous trabeculae
and in the epithelium of hair follicles via immunofluores-
or septa, and blood vessels are the major components of
cence testing (Wilcock & Yager 1986). The marked
the panniculus. Panniculitis results from direct or indirect
predilection for Toy or Miniature Poodles, as well as other
 damage to these tissues. A wide variety of pathologic pro-
long-haired small breeds, indicates probable enhanced
cesses affect the panniculus. Panniculitis from any cause is
genetic susceptibility for this syndrome, possibly due
enhanced by lipid release from damaged lipocytes, since
to the long anagen hair growth cycle in these breeds.
lipids are vigorous stimulators of inflammation. Once free
 It is tempting to speculate that this syndrome may be par-
lipids are liberated into tissue, hydrolysis and saponifica-
 tially linked to the increased antigenic load per body size,
tion occur releasing proinflammatory fatty acids.
since the same aliquot of rabies vaccine is given to all
 Inflammation of the panniculus may be septal and prin-
dogs. In cats, rabies vaccine reactions are those of post-
cipally involve the interlobular septa that are composed
injection panniculitis (see p. 541) and do not resemble
of collagen and vessels, or may be lobular and principally
those of dogs.
affect the adipocytes. In essence, inflammation of the
 Classically, an alopecic macule or, less commonly, an
panniculus shows predominance rather than pure render-
 alopecic plaque develops at the site of prior subcutaneous
 ing of one pattern; this has been described in humans as
rabies vaccine deposition. The time interval between vac-
enba sed sendas asou, no rnqoi ksou,
cination and observation of the lesion usually is 2 to 3
& Sanchez Yus, 2001). Mostly lobular? panniculitis is the
months, but may be longer. Most lesions vary between
2 and 10cm in diameter. Subtle satellite lesions may
observed in the dog and cat, and is characterized by
be present. A few hairs may remain within the boundaries
mixed inflammation accompanied by degeneration of
of the lesion. Erythema and visible inflammation are
adipocytes. *Mostly septal' panniculitis is considered to be
 minimal or absent. Hyperpigmentation may be an occa-
 e   p ss    A
sional sequela, especially in black Miniature Poodles
component. Panniculitis may be localized or generalized.
and other breeds that tend to pigment in response to
 Localized panniculitis is initiated most commonly by local
inflammation.
trauma or injection of foreign material. Generalized or
 Most lesions develop in the neck and shoulder region
multifocal panniculitis reflects metabolic or systemic
near the scapula where most subcutaneous rabies vacci-
disease; some of these remain idiopathic to date.
nations are given. Putative gravitational drift can result in
the development of lesions ventral to the site of adminis-
tration; thus the lateral or even the ventral thorax may be
POSTRABIES VACCINATION
affected.
PANNICULITIS
The lesions usually are asymptomatic. A small sub-
Clinical features (Figures 21.1 through 21.3)
Sd a ssod  si po d
display lethargy and depression, and may be febrile.
Postrabies vaccination panniculitis is a relatively common
Elevated liver enzymes have been noted. Usually, it is not
canine skin disease characterized by focal alopecia with
known if further rabies vaccination has a deleterious
538
Diseases of the panniculus
539
Fig. 21.3 Postrabies vaccination panniculitis over the left scapula
in a black Miniature Poodle. The affected area is nearly totally
alopecic.
Fig. 21.1 Postrabies vaccination panniculitis in an apricot colored
Miniature Poodle. Alopecia and hyperpigmentation have developed
Chapter 3). Revaccination with subcutaneous rabies
at the site of a prior subcutaneous rabies vaccination above the right
vaccine is not recormmended, as the syndrome may exac-
axillary region.Probable gravitational drifthas resulted in extension
of the lesions ventrally into the axilla and the triceps region of the
erbate in response to further antigenic exposure. If alope-
right foreleg.
cia and other ischemic skin lesions begin subtly and
gradually, a temporal link with rabies vaccine may not be
noted. In these cases, it may not be possible to differenti-
o sn ro  d a ss 
ischemic dermatopathy (see Chapter 3).
Chronic rear leg swelling with pitting edema and a tem-
 poral association with rabies vaccination has been noted
by the authors in a small number of cases. This syndrome
may represent another variant of postrabies vaccination-
induced immunoreactive disease, as some histologic
features are similar (see below).
 Postrabies vaccination panniculitis is predominantly a
disease of long-haired toy or small breed dogs with long
 anagen hair cycles. In the opinion of the authors, Poodles
and Bichon Frises are at markedly increased risk.
Although reports did not note the size of Poodle affected,
all affected Poodles seen by the authors have been either
Fig. 21.2 Closer view of the dog in Fig. 21.1. The lesions have
Miniature or Toy. The syndrome also has been seen by
extended from the more dorsal vaccination site to the axilla and
the authors in the Shih Tzu, Lhasa Apso, Maltese, Silky
triceps region.
Terrier, Yorkshire Terrier, Chihuahua, Toy Manchester
Terrier, American Eskimo, Poodle crossbreeds,
and
Miniature Dachshunds. The authors have observed only
effect, as most dogs are not revaccinated. However, the
a single case of postrabies vaccination panniculitis in a
authors have observed exacerbation or recrudescence of
large breed dog, a Samoyed. Age or sex predilections have
prior lesions of postrabies vaccination panniculitis by
not been noted.
revaccination. Recrudescence occurred concurrently with
 Postrabies vaccination panniculitis is visually distinc-
the induction of new lesions.
tive. Clinical differential diagnoses could include other
 In addition to focal vaccine reactions, a small subgroup
causes of focal, visually noninflammatory alopecia, such
of dogs develop more severe, widespread alopecia and
 as demodicosis and dermatophytosis, alopecia areata,
skin lesions, commonly in conjunction with lethargy
cicatricial alopecia, and erythema ab igne. These must be
and depression. The term 'generalized vaccine-induced 
 ruled out by history, clinical presentation, skin scrapings,
ischemic dermatopathy' has been used for these dogs (see 
 culture, and histopathology.
540
Diseases of the panniculus
Fig. 21.4 Subgross view of postrabies vaccination panniculitis.
Fig. 21.5 Higher magnification of postrabies vaccination panni-
Severely atrophic follicles overlie multinodular inflammation of the
culitis. Atrophic follicles are above intense lymphocytic panniculitis.
panniculus.
Note the ischemic smudging and pallor of the dermal collagen.
Biopsy site selection
vaccine product. Panniculitis may be sparse, most often
 Biopsy specimens should be obtained from affected skin
in advanced lesions. Cell poor vasculitis of small vessels
and subcutis just within the outer margin of the plaque
of the panniculus is common and may be subtle (see
or macule. Specimens from near the margin may show
Chapter 10). Blood vessels may have swollen endothelia,
more diagnostic histopathologic changes than the central
thickened walls, or may be infltrated by lymphocytes,
chronic area where typical inflarmmation may be scant.
sometimes heavily. Larger blood vessels may be affected.
Variable cell poor vasculitis of the overlying dermis is as
Histopathology (Figures 21.4 through 21.6)
seen in ischemic dermatopathy/canine familial dermato-
myositis (see Chapter 10). Immunofluorescence testing
The ischemic lesions of the overlying dermis and hair fol-
with antibody to rabies viral antigen revealed deposition
licles have been discussed, and principally include dermal
in and around vessels as well as in the epithelium of hair
pallor and smudging, and follicular atrophy (see Chapters 
follicles (Wilcock & Yager 1986).
3 and 19). Similar diffuse smudging and pallor of colla-
 A morphologically similar but more extensive panni-
gen characterize the panniculus. Edema and/or mucin
culitis occurs in the context of chronic rear leg swelling.
may be prominent.
 and also may represent a putative vaccine reaction. Blood
Moderate to severe, nodular accumulations of lym-
vessels of the deep dermis and panniculus are often cuffed
phocytes, fewer histiocytes, and occasional plasma cells
with lymphocytes, histiocytes, and variable plasma cells,
are present in the lower dermis and panniculus, and often
as seen in classic postrabies vaccination panniculitis. This
tightly surround vessels. There may be amorphous
inflammation often extends to the deep subcutis, and
basophilic  foreign  material  presumably  constituting
there is generally severe diffuse edema. Macrophages,
Diseases of the panniculus
541
Fig. 21.6 Higher magnification of
postrabies  vaccination  panniculitis.
Characteristic nodules of lymphocytes
are adjacent to fibrin and other amor-
phous debris. Note the somewhat
hyalinized large vessel at the center of
the lymphocytic nodule at right.
with or without lymphocytes, may surround collagen
fbers, forming small granulomas. The formation of these
granulomas may be striking in some cases and have been
observed sporadically in other types of cell poor
vasculitis (see Chapter 10), as well as in typical postrabies
vaccine panniculitis. This phenomenon is believed to rep-
resent an ischemic sequel to localized vascular disease, as
described in humans (Magro et al., 1996).
Lesions of postrabies  vaccination  panniculitis are
unique. Eosinophils are usually present in reactions due
-isod ui snonoidsuosul are inq 'sauiooea jo sadki raqo ol
rabies vaccination alopecia. Granulomas and pyogranu-
lomas dominate reactions due to many other injected
medications. Although follicular atrophy may follow
repositol injections (see p. 542), ischemic changes of
Fig. 21.7 Postinjection panniculitis in a dog. A solitary subcuta-
neous nodule is visible right of center in the clipped region at the
collagen (smudging and pallor), as seen in postrabies
putative site of a rmultivalent vaccine injection. Focal hemorrhage
vaccination panniculitis, are not present; further the
was caused by a subcutaneous injection of lidocaine given in prepa-
inflammatory reaction of repositol injections is over-
ration for skin biopsy.
whelmingly neutrophilic.
panniculitis is caused predominantly by vaccines, and
POSTINJECTION PANNICULITIS
less commonly by other injected medications, including
antibiotics such as long-acting benzathine penicillin and
Clinical features (Figure 21.7)
tylosin. Potassium bromide may produce similar lesions.
Postinjection panniculitis is diagnosed uncommonly in
Combination vaccines have initiated the reaction in both
the cat and rarely in the dog (Schmeitzel et al., 1986;
dogs and cats. Rabies vaccines can induce this reaction
Hendrick & Dunagan, 1991). This syndrome probably is
pattern in the cat but not, in the authors’ experience, in
underdiagnosed, since lesions may not be obvious clini-
dogs; a separate vasculopathic syndrome of postrabies
cally or may be deemed inconsequential and hence not
vaccination panniculitis is seen in dogs (see p. 538).
A solitary subcutaneous nodule, varying in diameter
proven, the histopathologic pattern suggests a combined
from 5 mm to 3 cm, is noted at the site of a previous sub.
foreign body and hypersensitivity reaction. Postinjection
cutaneously administered vaccine or other medication.
542
Diseases of the panniculus
Nodules may be either freely moveable or fixed to the
overlying dermis, and vary in texture from soft and fluc-
tuant to frm. The overlying skin is normal, but some
alopecia may be an occasional feature. Rarely, pain can
be elicited on palpation. Systemic signs have not been
reported or noted by the authors.
Breed, age, or sex predilections have not been noted.
Postinjection panniculitis must be differentiated from
other nodular diseases affecting the subcutaneous
tissue, such as neoplasms, cysts, sterile abscesses of
repositol injections, and traumatic panniculitis. Occur-
rence at the site of a previous injection increases the index
of suspicion. Skin biopsy confrms the diagnosis, and
commonly is made after the removal of a suspected
neoplasm.
Biopsy site selection
 Excisional biopsy of the entire nodule is preferred, as
surgical excision also is curative. Wide excision often
is performed as cutaneous neoplasia is frequently
suspected.
Histopathology (Figure 21.8 through 21.13)
The epidermis and dermis are usually normal. Inflamma.
tion may encroach on the deep dermis, depending upon
the level of injection. Occasional more superfcial dermal
lesions may evoke overlying ulceration. Follicular atrophy
as seen in postrabies vaccination reactions is rare;
Fig. 21.8 Postinjection panniculitis in a cat due to rabies vaccina-
however ischemic alteration of collagen is absent (see
tion. The large pale central zone of necrosis is surrounded by an
p.538).
intense inflammatory cuff.
The panniculus contains a discrete nodule that often
has a necrotic hypocellular center. This center is amor-
phous and stains lightly eosinophilic or amphophilic;
Differential diagnoses are few, as the reaction pattern
necrotic adipocytes are present. In some cases, smaller
of postinjection panniculitis is unique and diagnostic.
grouped central foci of necrosis may be observed.
Postrabies vaccination panniculitis in dogs does not
Granular to elongated flecks of basophilic debris often are
resemble other postinjection reactions, including rabies
present in the central zone, particularly in reactions due
vaccine reactions in cats. In canine postrabies vaccination
to vaccines, and are presumably derived from vaccine
panniculitis the lesions are not discrete, the central
product (adjuvant or other). Surrounding the core is a
necrotic zone is absent, and eosinophils are not found.
layer of macrophages and often giant cells. There may be
Traumatic panniculitis has necrosis, but generally lacks
discrete granulomas or pyogranulomas; in the authors
lymphocytic and eosinophilic inflammation.
experience these are more numerous in reactions to non-
vaccine medications. The macrophages may be markedly
STERILE ABSCESS OF
xanthomatous in reactions to lipid-rich medications. A
REPOSITOL INJECTION
zone of intense lymphocytic and eosinophilic inflamma-
tion composes the outer layer; merging of the granulo-
Clinical features (Figure 21.14)
matous and lymphocytic zones is common. Lymphocytes
may be arranged in prominent follicular aggregates
Sterile abscess of repositol injection  is a relatively
along the perimeter of the lesion. The inflammatory
common, likely underdiagnosed syndrome of the dog and
pattern suggests a combination of foreign body (granulo-
cat. Skin lesions have been seen most frequently second-
ary to repositol corticosteroidpreparations, especially
and eosinophilic) reactions to the deposited vaccine or
medication.
authors have seen this reaction pattern only in response
Diseases of the panniculus
543
Fig. 21.9 Higher magnification of postinjection panniculitis in a
Fig. 21.10 Higher magnification of postinjection panniculitis in a
 e s uo u sne e ed   e
cat, demonstrating necrotic central zone containing characteristic
lymphoid nodules are at the outer edge at bottom.
very darkly staining, floccular foreign deposits. Note mixed inflam-
mation with macrophages and lymphoid nodule in outer zone of
inflammation at bottom.
Fig.  21.11  Postinjection panniculitis
due to antibiotic in a dog. The central
pale necrotic zone at top is outlined
by an intense cuff of lymphocyte-
rich inflammation, as seen with vaccine
reactions.
544
Diseases of the panniculus
Fig. 21.12 Higher magnification of Fig. 21.11. Note discrete
Fig. 21.13 High magnification of postinjection panniculitis due
granuloma at lower left.
to potassium bromide (KBr). Granulomas and pyogranulomas are
abundant.
to repositol injections of corticosteroids or progestational
hormones.
Solitary, frm subcutaneous nodules are the most
 common clinical presentation. Well-demarcated, some-
what circular areas of partial to complete alopecia may
occur at the site of injection; however, alopecia is not
always present. Occasionally, ventral extensions of a more
dorsal circular focus suggest gravitational 'drip confgu-
rations'. Most lesions are less than 3cm in diameter.
Careful palpation may reveal that the overlying skin is
depressed due to atrophy. The location of these lesions
reflects common sites of administered subcutaneous
repositol injections, such as the region of the neck
between the scapulae or over the lateral thorax.
Information on signalment predilections is not avail-
Fig. 21.14 Sterile abscess of repositol injection in a white Minia-
able. However one author (P.J.I.) suspects that Miniature
ture Poodle. A nodule in the panniculus with a surrounding reason-
Poodles may be over-represented.
ably well-demarcated area of alopecia has occurred at the site of an
Clinical differential diagnoses may include other focal
injection of a repositol corticosteroid preparation containing methyl
panniculitides including postrabies vaccination panniculi-
prednisolone acetate.
tis, postinjection panniculitis, traumatic panniculitis, and
Diseases of the panniculus
545
Fig. 21.15 Sterile abscess of repositol injection in a cat. A large
Fig. 21.16 Higher magnification of Fig. 21.15. Note the pale gray
dark zone of degenerated neutrophils obliterates the subcutaneous
amorphous zone of necrosis surrounding a central darker zone of
fat. Note fibrous encapsulation encroaching into adjacent adipose
recognizable, degenerated neutrophils. Fibrosis is at bottorm.
tissue along the lower edge of the lesion.
neoplasia. Differentiation is accomplished by history of
trophils. There may be zones of frank necrosis adjacent
type of injection or trauma, as well as skin biopsy.
 to zones of more viable cells. Recognizable adipocytes are
not present within the nodule. There is a thin peripheral
zone composed of foamy macrophages and there may be
Biopsy site selection
variable peripheral fbrosis, forming a thin capsule, which
Excisional biopsy of the lesion is preferred, as surgical
 may radiate into surrounding fat.
excision also is curative. Wide excision often is performed
 Repositol injection reactions are unique, and differen-
 as cutaneous neoplasia may be suspected.
tiation is not problematic. Clinical inquiries consistently
yield a history of repositol injection for these lesions.
However, other medications could technically produce a
Histopathology (Figures 21.15 and 21.16)
similar reaction pattern.
The overlying skin is frequently normal. Occasionally
 there may be follicular atrophy, resembling that of hyper-
TRAUMATIC PANNICULITIS
glucocorticoidism (see Chapter 19). The thickness of the
dermis may be reduced; in most cases this is a subjective
Clinical features
and thus nondefinitive evaluation, as normal adjacent
skin rarely is provided.
Traumatic panniculitis is a relatively common, but prob-
 There is a relatively discrete nodule in the panniculus
ably underdiagnosed lesion of cats and dogs. Etiologies
that comprises amorphous, uniformly degenerated neu-
include focal ischemia caused by blunt trauma, chronic
546
Diseases of the panniculus
pressure, or decreased blood supply. The authors specu-
Biopsy site selection
late that sites overlying bony prominences may be
 Anlul Suddei, Sueais eunen unq 01 pasodsipaid
Wedge removal of the entire nodule usually is performed,
to the adipose tissue overlying bone. Ischemic injury
due to suspicion of neoplasia. Occasionally, the ischemic
due to decreased blood supply may be more common
process extends beyond the site of palpable lesion; local
 in obese cats and dogs in which increased fat deposition
recurrence may be prevented by obtaining reasonable
margins of normal tissue during procurement, provided
is accompanied by a disproportionate, lesser increase
 that the site is no longer subjected to the trauma that may
in vascularity, predisposing to ischemia from slight
have initiated it.
insult.
 The most common presenting clinical feature is a focal,
frm subcutaneous nodule. The skin overlying the nodule
Histopathology (Figures 21.17 and 21.18)
is normal. Lesions are seen predominantly on the trunk,
especially dorsally over the dorsal spinous processes, and
The epidermis and dermis are normal, but often are
over the sternum ventrally. Less commonly, lesions also
excluded from the specimen submitted for histopathology.
may be seen over the wing of the ilium, the lumbar emi-
The adipose tissue of the panniculus or deep subcutis
nences in dogs, and over other pressure points. Dorsal
contains a large central focus of lobular fat necrosis.
lesions have been associated anecdotally with trauma
Adipocytes lack nuclei but retain their normal shape, cre-
from dog doors and given the informal designation of
ating ^ghosts' or 'shells' of fat cells. Ruptured adipocytes
“doggie door syndrome'. Lesions are asymptomatic; pain
form large, cystic spaces. Interspersed and surrounding
is not noted.
 the devitalized fat cells are foamy macrophages contain-
Breed, age, or sex predilections have not been noted.
ing lipid debris. Other types of inflammatory cells are
Obese animals probably are predisposed.
rare. Cholesterol clefts may occasionally be observed.
Clinical differential diagnoses should include neo-
There may be accompanying hemorrhage or hermosidero-
plasms, organizing hematomas or seromas, foreign body
sis. Frequently, marginal fbrosis encroaches upon and
reactions, infectious granulomas, postinjection panniculi-
interposes among devitalized adipocytes; older lesions
tis, and sterile abscess of repositol injections. Foreign
may be predominantly fbrotic, and fbrocytes may be
body reactions often fistulate and drain, and commonly
markedly proliferative (fibrosing steatitis).
are painful. Infectious diseases usually are multicentric,
Differential diagnoses are few, as the extensive necrosis
inflammation may be obvious, and lesions often are
 and scant inflammation of affected adipose tisue are very
painful. Skin biopsy is required for diagnosis.
characteristic of traumatic panniculitis. Late stage lesions
Fig. 21.17 Traumatic panniculitis. A
large central zone of necrotic adipose
tissue is surrounded by a dense zone
of fibrosis.
Diseases of the panniculus
547
Fig. 21.18 Higher magnification of
traumatic panniculitis. Note foamy.
lipid-bearing macrophages among
ruptured adipocytes.
Histopathology (Figures 21.20 through 21.22)
The overlying dermis and epidermis generally display
some degree of coagulation necrosis, as seen in thermal
burns (see Chapter 4). In most second degree burns
(involving the epidermis and dermis), there are multifocal
lesions of the panniculus. Perivascular hemorrhage is
accompanied by variable fbrin exudation. Hemorrhage
may surround and delineate individual adipocytes in
a ring. Neutrophils are intermingled with macrophages
and lymphocytes around vessels; foamy macrophages and
neutrophils percolate amongst individual adipocytes.
Adipocytes are sometimes ruptured. There is rare saponi-
fication of adipocytes which creates an amorphous lightly
Fig. 21.19 Vasculitic panniculitis of thermal burns in a German
basophilic material within expanded or ruptured cells.
Shepherd Dog-crossbreed. Note areas of full thickness necrosis
Perivascular and septal fbrosis are common in chronic
accompanied by widespread hemorrhage and erythema.
lesions.
 Mild to moderate leukocytoclasia (nuclear fragmenta-
tion of neutrophils observed in the setting of vascular
with predominant fbrosis may resemble chronic scarring
damage and inflammation) occurs variably in conjunction
panniculitis of any cause.
with perivascular hemorrhage and fbrin. There may be
frank fbrinoid degeneration of the wall of small or
medium-sized arterioles, as well as occasional fbrin
VASCULITIC PANNICULITIS OF
thrombi. Interestingly, similar vascular changes have
THERMAL BURNS
been described in miniature swine with severe frostbite
Clinical features (Figure 21.19)
(Schoning & Hamlet, 1987).
 In some lesions vascular walls may appear coagulated;
See Chapter 4.
 this is most prominent in deeper burns, and thus may be 
a direct effect of heat. In deep burns, severe secondary
Biopsy site selection
inflammation may obscure vascular changes. In some
cases, there is diffuse coagulation necrosis of the
See Chapter 4. Deeper biopsy will be required to docu-
panniculus, characterized by a diffuse ‘washed out’ and
ment involvement of the panniculus.
acellular appearance (third degree burns).
548
Diseases of the panniculus
Fig. 21.20 Vasculitic panniculitis of thermal burn in a cat. Coagu
Fig. 21.21 High magnification of vasculitic panniculitis of thermal
lated skin overlies inflamed fat of the panniculus. Note ring-shaped
burn in a dog. A centrally inflamed and degenerated blood vessel is
hemorrhage {arrow).
surrounded by fibrin; note leukocytoclasia (arrows).
The vascular lesions of vasculitic septal panniculitis are
inflammatory diseases of the panniculus that are of
similar to those of thermal burns. However, vasculitic
unknown etiology (Schanley & Miller 1985). However,
e uannd u jidas Auns aou si snnud peidas
 popular usage has narrowed the meaning of this term to
least in early lesions, in contrast to the random distribu-
reflect a more specifc disease subgroup (or subgroups)
tion of vasculitic panniculitis of thermal burns. Also, the
seen rarely in the dog and very rarely in the cat. A marked
coagulation necrosis accompanying thermal burns is not
breed predilection for the Dachshund suggests genetic
present in vasculitic septal panniculitis. Deep septic vas-
factors. Although a number of idiopathic panniculitides
culitis with infarction may resemble vasculitis of thermal
are seen in human (subcutaneous granuloma annulare,
burns. However, septic vasculitis sufficient to create tissue
idiopathic lobular panniculitis, erythema nodosum)
damage resembling a burn usually is more severe than
(Phelps & Shoji, 2001; Camilleri & Su, 2003), none of
vasculitis associated with even the most severe burns.
 these diseases share prominent similarities with idiopathic
Clinical differentiation may be required; most burn
sterile nodular panniculitis.
victims remain well in contrast to animals with sepsis.
 Multiple firm to fluctuant, deep-seated nodules develop
in the panniculus. Nodules may protrude above the
surface of the skin. Larger nodules ulcerate or fistulate,
IDIOPATHIC STERILE
draining an oily, clear to yellow-brown liquid. Occasion-
NODULAR PANNICULITIS
ally, the discharge is hemorrhagic. Well-demarcated ulcers
Clinical features (Figures 21.23 through 21.26)
with fistulae, less than 2 cm in diameter typify the disease.
Fistulation or ulceration is accompanied by irregular scar-
Idiopathic sterile nodular panniculitis, in its broadest
ring which fixes the subcutaneous lesion to the overlying
sense, is a descriptive term encompassing all of the sterile
dermis.  Variable hyperpigmentiation  and  scarring
 Diseases of the panniculus
549
Fig. 21.24 Closer view of the dog in Fig. 21.23. A well-demarcated
deep ulcer is seen on the shoulder.
Fig. 21.22 High magnification of vasculitic panniculitis of thermal
burn in a cat. Central coagulation of a blood vessel may be the result
of direct thermal trauma. Note abundant leukocytoclastic debris.
Fig. 21.25 Idiopathic sterile nodular panniculitis in a Collie
pa nniculitis.
Fig. 21.23 Idiopathic sterile nodular panniculitis in a Miniature
 Dachshund. Multiple nodules have ulcerated.
Fig. 21.26 Idiopathic sterile nodular panniculitis in a cat demon-
strating deep exudative ulcers.
550
Diseases of the panniculus
alopecia are seen with healing. Chronic lesions may be
ioidomycosis are ruled out by impression smear and
depressed, irregularly frm, and nodular on palpation. The
 histopathology, since attempted culture may be dangerous
 trunk is most commonly affected, although lesions may
(see Chapter 12).
occur anywhere.
Systemic signs include fever, anorexia, and general
malaise. Commonly, recrudescence occurs in waves, fre-
Biopsy site selection
quently with prodromal systemic signs. An additional
Punch biopsy is not recommended if idiopathic sterile
-idki isou (rfd) noqne auo Aq uaas dnoigqns arei Kra
 nodular panniculitis is suspected. Large and deep biopsy
cally in the Collie, has a greater propensity towards coa-
 specimens should be obtained by wedge section to ensure
lescing ulcerations with extensive drainage, and resembles
that the sample includes epidermis, dermis, and subcuta-
liquefying panniculitis of humans.
neous tissue. Multiple specimens are desirable. Lesions
The Dachshund is at increased risk for idiopathic sterile
which are cavitated, ulcerated, or necrotic should be
nodular panniculitis. The authors have the impression
 avoided if other earlier lesions are present.
that the Miniature Poodle and the Collie also probably
are over-represented. Age and sex predilections are not
noted. Feline idiopathic sterile nodular panniculitis has
Histopathology (Figures 21.27 and 21.28)
been seen only in adult cats.
Clinical differential diagnoses should include nodular
The epidermis is normal to acanthotic and may be ulcer-
diseases with cutaneous and subcutaneous involvement,
ated if secondary necrosis and exudation to the surface
such as opporrunistic mycobacterial infections, cutaneous
has occured. The inflammation of the panniculus is
 and subcutaneous infections of both systemic and oppor-
mostly lobular in the early stages, but progresses to
tunistic fungi, deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis,
 diffuse involvement. The deep dermis often is inflamed as
foreign body reactions, and neoplasms. Clinically, foreign
lesions expand from the underlying panniculus. Neu-
body reactions are more likely to be focal or grouped
 trophils and macrophages predominate in initial lesions,
in comparison to the multifocal distribution of sterile
and discrete pyogranulomas may be present. Adipocytes 
nodular panniculitis. Aerobic and anaerobic bacterial cul-
may appear necrotic, as ghosts, or may be inflrated with
tures, fungal cultures, and histopathology should be per-
foamy macrophages. Diffuse inflammation is generally
formed to rule out infectious causes before a diagnosis
mixed and includes macrophages, neutrophils, lympho-
of idiopathic sterile nodular panniculitis is made. Fungal
cytes, and plasma cells in varying distribution. Special
culture should not be performed until the systemic
stains for infectious organisms, such as fungi and acid-
mycoses blastomycosis, histoplasmosis, and coccid-
fast bacteria, are negative. Chronic lesions have scant neu-
Fig. 21.27 Idiopathic sterile nodular
panniculitis in a Poodle. Confluent
 pyogranulomas and mixed granulo-
matous inflammation replace adipose
tissue of the panniculus.
Diseases of the pa nniculus
551
VASCULITIC SEPTAL PANNICULITIS
(Synonym: subcutaneous leukocytoclastic vasculitis)
Clinical features
Vasculitic septal panniculitis, or subcutaneous leukocyto-
clastic vasculitis, is a very rare canine skin disease pos-
sibly linked to a systemic hypersensitivity reaction. In
humans, subcutaneous leukocytoclastic vasculitis presents
clinically as erythematous, subcutaneous nodules resem-
bling other inflammatory diseases of the panniculus
(Requena & Sanchez Yus, 2001). Vasculitis is restricted
to the panniculus; the mechanism by which subcutaneous
leukocytoclastic vasculitis occurs without concomitant
vasculitis of the overlying dermis is not known (Requena
& Sanchez Yus, 2001). Withdrawal of medication or
treatment of underlying diseases seemingly has initiated
resolution in human cases (Requena & Sanchez Yus,
2001).
Clinical presentation is similar to other forms of pan-
niculitis in that multiple nodules develop in the subcuta-
neous tissue; these may be quite subtle on palpation.
Lesions may be erythematous or in some cases, hemor-
rhagic. Fistulation and drainage do not occur. Variable
hyperpigmentation is seen with healing. Scarring may fix
 the subcutaneous lesion to the overlying dermis. Chronic
lesions may feel irregularly frm. Fever, joint or muscle
pain, and general malaise may accompany skin changes.
Breed, age, or sex predilections have not been noted.
Fig. 21.28 Higher magnification of idiopathic sterile nodular pan-
niculitis in a Dachshund demonstrating discrete pyogranulomas.
Clinical differential diagnoses should include other
forms of panniculitis and neoplasms. If vasculitic septal
panniculitis is documented histopathologically, the possi-
bility of systemic infection or drug reaction must 
be
evaluated. Vasculitic septal panniculitis must not be
 deemed idiopathic unless all likely possible causes are
 trophils and variable fbrosis that replaces the panniculus
investigated.
and often extends to the overlying dermis.
Differential diagnoses for sterile nodular panniculitis
include infectious panniculitis, particularly due to oppor-
Biopsy site selection
tunistic mycobacteria, and deep lesions of juvenile sterile
 Punch biopsy is not recommended if vasculitic septal pan-
granulomatous dermatitis and lymphadenitis. As the
niculitis is suspected. Wedge section should be used to
organisms in some mycobacterial infections may be scant,
ensure that the specimen includes epidermis, dermis, and
careful searching using a Fite's modification of an acid-
subcutaneous tissue. Multiple specimens are desirable.
fast stain is warranted. Clinical differentiation may be
required. Juvenile sterile granulomatous dermatitis may
Histopathology (Figures 21.29 and 21.30)
have accompanying panniculitis that is indistinguishable
from sterile nodular panniculitis; however, characteristic
The epidermis and dermis generally are normal in most
periadnexal pyogranulomatous inflammation usually is
lesions of vasculitic septal panniculitis. In the panniculus,
present. Juvenile sterile granulomatous dermatitis begins
 septal hemorrhage and fbrin exudation may be mild to
in the dermis and extends to the panniculus in severe
 prominent and may extend to lobules in a pattern char-
lesions; the reverse is true for sterile nodular panniculitis.
acterized as ‘mostly septal panniculitis’ (Requena &
It is of interest that the Dachshund may be predisposed
Sanchez Yus, 2001). Septal blood vessels demonstrate
to both diseases.
variable endothelial swelling, mild fbrinoid change, and
552
Diseases of the panniculus
Fig.21.29
Vasculitic septal panniculitis. Blood vessels are sur-
Fig. 21.30 Higher magnification of vasculitic septal panniculitis. A
rounded by hemorrhage and inflammation. Note mild septal fibro-
blood vessel is swollen with fibrinoid degeneration; there is perivas-
sis extending into adiacent fat.
cular microhemorrhage and fine leukocytoclastic debris {arrow)
occasional thrombosis. Overt inflammation of the vessel
vasculitis is not apparent, lesions may not be easily dif-
walls (true vasculitis) is often subtle or absent. Leukocy-
ferentiated from chronic panniculitis of any cause.
toclasia (fragmentation of neutrophils) is generally at
least mildly evident, and is indicative of vascular damage
and inflammation. The panniculus shows diffuse
FELINE PANSTEATITIS
septal inflammation of neutrophils and mixed mononu-
(Synonyms: feline vitamin E deficiency, vitamin E def-
clear cells, including macrophages, lymphocytes, and a
few plasma cells. Inflammation spreads secondarily to
ciency steatitis)
the surrounding lobules. Foamy macrophages percolate
Clinical features (Figure 21.31)
-dnu io pazeiiaap readde Aeu qom saiood isuoue
tured. Variable septal and lobular fbrosis occurs in
 Feline pansteatitis is a rare nutritional skin disease caused
chronic lesions.
by a severe deficiency of vitamin E and lack of its antiox-
Differential diagnosis of early lesions is limited if vas-
idant properties (White, 2000). The syndrome is world-
cular inflammation or vasculopathic effects (fbrin, hem-
wide in distribution, but the frequency is contingent upon
orrhage) are visualized. Some of the vascular changes are
feeding practices. Feline pansteatitis is rare in North
as seen in vasculitic panniculitis of thermal burns. In dif-
 America and most of Europe.
ferentiation, burns generally demonstrate coagulation
Vitamin E deficiency and pansteatitis may be caused by
necrosis of the overlying skin; further the pattern of vas-
 the feeding of food deficient in vitamin E, either through
culitic panniculitis of burns is not as distinctly septal. If
natural deficiency or deficient formulation, or food with
Diseases of the pa nniculus
553
Biopsy site selection
An intact nodule should be removed by wedge section
to ensure that the specimen includes epidermis, dermis,
and subcutaneous tissue. Index of suspicion for feline
pansteatitis is enhanced if yellow, discolored fat is seen
during surgical biopsy.
Histopathology
The epidermis and dermis are normal. The fat of the sub
cutis may demonstrate deposition of yellow or yellow-
brown, acid-fast ceroid pigment between and within
adipocytes. Ceroid deposits approach the size of a normal
fat cell, and similar pigment may also be found within
macrophages and giant cells. Ceroid may not be present
 in biopsy specimens from all cases: one of four previously
reported cats with pansteatitis did not demonstrate ceroid
microscopically (Koutinas et al., 1993). In early stages of
Fig. 21.31 Feline pansteatitis in a cat. The area is thickened due to
the disease there are infltrations of neutrophils, but pyo-
multiple, firm nodules that are present diffusely in the subcutaneous
granulomatous or granulomatous inflammation soon
tissue; lesions were also present in the mesenteric fat. (Photograph
predominates. Giant cells may be of the Langhans type
courtesy S.D. White.)
(containing a peripheral ring of nuclei). Adipocytes may
be necrotic, and there may be saponification and choles-
excess highly unsaturated fatty acids which may destroy
terol cleft formation in some cases. Mineralization has
been reported (Koutinas et al., 1993). There may be septal
vitamin E. Foods with excess highly unsaturated fatty
acids are more susceptible to peroxidation during pro-
fbrosis.
 Differential diagnosis is not diffcult if typical ceroid
longed storage without refrigeration, which causes gener-
ation of free radicals and results in depletion of the
pigment deposition is present. In lesions without ceroid
but with saponifcation and mineralization, differentia-
vitamin. The most commonly reported causes of feline
tion from pancreatic panniculitis may be required. Acid-
pansteatitis are associated with the feeding of canned red
fast stains may be applied to differentiate acid-fast ceroid
tuna as an exclusive diet or excessive cod liver oil sup-
from the nonacid-fast hemosiderin seen in some lesions of
plementation. Widespread cellular damage results in the
deposition of ceroid pigment (a variant of lipofuscin and
traumatic panniculitis.
an intermediate metabolite of various lipids) derived pre-
dominantly from cell membranes.
METATARSAL FISTULATION OF
Multiple, irregularly frm nodules of variable density
THE GERMAN SHEPHERD DOG
develop diffusely in the subcutis and the abdominal
mesenteric fat. Nodules are sensitive to palpation
(Synonyms: sterile pedal panniculitis of the German
(Koutinas et al., 1993). Fistulation is rare. Firm lumps
Shepherd Dog, deep metatarsal/metacarpal toritis in
also can be palpated in the abdominal cavity. Systemic
German Shepherd Dogs)
signs include fever, malaise, pain (elicited by palpation),
reluctance to move, anorexia, lethargy (sometimes alter-
Clinical features (Figures 21.32 through 21.34)
nating with hyperexcitability), hyperesthesia, and depres-
sion (Koutinas et al., 1993). Systemic signs may precede
Metatarsal fistulation of the German Shepherd Dog is
or occur simultaneously with the development of subcu-
an uncommon canine skin disease characterized by well
taneous and visceral nodules. Death is a frequent sequela.
demarcated, frequently symmetric, deep fstulous tracts
All four cats in one report were between 4 and 8
located dorsal to the midline of single or multiple
months of age (Koutinas et al., 1993). However, cats of
pawpads (Gross & Ihrke, 1992; Kunkle et al., 1993). The
 any age may be affected. As would be expected, breed or
strong breed predilection for the German Shepherd Dog
sex predilections have not been noted.
suggests heritability (Gross & Ihrke, 1992; Kunkle et al.,
Feline pansteatitis is a highly characteristic disease
1993; Paterson, 1995; Kristensen, 1997). The etiology is
clinically. However, clinical differential diagnoses could
unknown. Antibodies directed against type I and type II
include other causes of panniculitis as well as neoplasia.
collagen have been noted, suggesting a familial disorder
554
 Diseases of the panniculus
Fig. 21.32 Metatarsal fistulation of the German Shepherd Dog.
Fistulous tracts are present dorsal to both carpal pads.
Fig. 21.34 Metatarsal fistulation of the German Shepherd Dog.
Scar tissue deforrms the dorsal aspect of the carpal pad.
tion elicits pain. Secondary bacterial infection is common.
Lymphadenopathy is variable, but usually is mild unless
secondary bacterial infection is severe. Scarring is seen
with chronicity. Moderately to severely affected dogs are
lame.
 The syndrome is seen primarily in German Shepherd
Dogs; a small number of German Shepherd Dog cross-
breeds also have been seen. Some reports suggest a
marked predilection for male dogs (Kristensen, 1997;
Scott et al., 2001). This suggestion is intriguing, as male
dogs usually are heavier and taller supporting the theory
given above regarding increased strain on soft tissue of
Fig. 21.33 Closer view of the dog in Fig. 21.32. Fistulous tracts
the distal extremities. Dogs with more direct German
exude a milky fluid.
ancestry may be over-represented (Scott et al., 2001).
Adult dogs between the ages of 2 and 8 years predomi-
nate (Scott et al., 2001).
of collagen although details were not given (Scott et al.,
Clinically, this syndrome is quite distinctive; differential
2001). German Shepherd Dogs have been bred increas-
diagnosis is not problematic. Fistulous tracts initiated by
ingly for a low, crouching rear stance; the authors specu-
foreign bodies should be considered; however, sites dorsal
late that increased strain on soft tissue of the distal
to the pawpads, particularly the large tarsal pads, would
extremities (tendons, pawpads, underlying fat pads) may
 be atypical for foreign body penetration.
be involved in the pathogenesis.
Some affected dogs have concomitant interdigital bac-
Biopsy site selection
terial furunculosis, and some have perianal fstulas
(Kristensen, 1997); the German Shepherd Dog is predis-
Specimen collection is difficult since the tissue needed
 posed to all three. Genetic linkage between the syndromes 
is the deep dermis and subcutis directly dorsal to a
may or may not be present.
pawpad. Wedge technique performed under general anes-
Focal, deep fistulous tracts with well demarcated,
 thesia is recommended, since local anesthesia is diffcult
slightly swollen, erythematous borders sparingly exude a
in this location and hemostasis may be problematic. At
serous to milky, viscid fluid. Lesions may be either single
least part of the fistula should be included in the speci-
or multiple. The most common site is dorsal to the
men. If multiple biopsy specimens are taken, they should
midline of the tarsal pad, but lesions may be dorsal to the
be acquired from the same paw to minimize postbiopsy
carpal pads, and very rarely, other pawpads. Deep palpa-
lameness.
Diseases of the panniculus
555
Histopathology (Figure 21.35)
Differential diagnosis based on histopathology alone
is problematic, as the microscopic lesions of metatarsal
The epidermis is moderately to severely acanthotic. If the
fistulation are not distinctive. Any foreign body reaction
specimen is obtained from the edge of the fistula, there is
Or puncture-induced traumatic lesion that extends to the
a focal area of severe ulceration.
panniculus may appear similar as may deep bacterial or
The panniculus is severely inflamed. Inflammation also
fungal infections. Special stains for infectious agents may
may extend through the overlying dermis along one edge
be required. Knowledge of the breed and site affected are
of the specimen, if the specimen is obtained from the edge
key to the definitive diagnosis of this syndrome.
of a fstula. In other specimens, the dermis may be rela-
tively uninflamed and overlie cavitation and inflammation
of the panniculus. In earlier lesions, neutrophils and
PANCREATIC PANNICULITIS
macrophages predominate, and discrete pyogranulomas
may be observed. In the more commonly received
Clinical features (Figures 21.36 and 21.37)
advanced lesions there are diffuse infltrations of neu-
 Pancreatic panniculitis is a very rare skin disease reported
trophils, macrophages, plasma cells, and lymphocytes.
in the dog and cat that is seen in conjunction with under-
Inflammation grades into areas of variable peripheral
lying pancreatic disease. Judging by publications and the
fbrosis, depending on the stage. Fibrosis is generally strik-
experience of the authors, pancreatic panniculitis is noted
ing and deep, and often is most severe just beyond the
most intense region of inflammation. Fibrous tissue
emanates into adjacent areas, where it is accompanied
by milder chronic inflammation consisting primarily of
plasma cells.
cutaneous purple nodules ulcerate and drain purulent oily material.
(Photograph courtesy C.B. Vitale.)
Fig. 21.37 Closer view of the dog in Fig. 21.36. One large fistu-
Fig. 21.35 Metatarsal fistulation of the German Shepherd Dog.
lous ulcer is surrounded by devitalized tissue. {Photograph courtesy
Note the large central fistula within intense panniculitis.
C.B. Vitale.)
556
Disea ses of the pa nniculus
more frequently in the dog (Mason, 1989; Brown et al.
 tion, cutaneous and subcutaneous infections of both sys-
1994; Paterson, 1994; Campbell et al., 2000; Mellanby
temic and opportunistic fungi, and other forms of panni-
et al., 2003) than in the cat (Ryan & Howard, 1981;
culitis. Clinical differentiation is aided by the presence
Campbell et al., 2000). A similar very rare and frequently
of systemic as well as cutaneous signs of pancreatic
fatal pancreatic panniculitis is seen in humans (Dahl
 panniculitis. Determination of pancreatic enzyme levels
et al., 1995).
(amylase and lipase) and ultrasonographic or magnetic
 In humans, pancreatic panniculitis is caused by the
imaging of the pancreas are recommended. Skin biopsy is
 release of the activated pancreatic enzymes lipase, phos-
confirmative.
pholipase, trypsin, and amylase (Phelps & Shoji, 2001).
 The mechanism by which inactive precursor pancreatic
Biopsy site selection
enzymes are activated is not known. However, it has been
speculated that increased levels of circulating activated
Large, deep biopsy specimens should be obtained by
  na ss    
wedge section to ensure that the sample includes epider-
increased vessel permeability allowing the active enzymes
mis, dermis, and subcutaneous tissue. Multiple specimens
to escape blood vessels, enter fat lobules, and induce
are desirable. Lesions which are cavitated, ulcerated or
necrosis (Phelps & Shoji, 2001). In humans, pancreatic
necrotic should be avoided if other earlier lesions are
panniculitis is rare and occurs in only 2% to 3% of all
present.
patients with pancreatic disorders (Camilleri & Su, 2003).
Similarly, most dogs and cats with either inflammatory or
Histopathology (Figures 21.38 and 21.39)
neoplastic pancreatic disease do not exhibit skin lesions.
 Pancreatic panniculitis in the dog has been seen in con-
In dogs with pancreatic panniculitis, the epidermis may
junction with pancreatic adenocarcinoma, pancreatic
be ulcerated in lesions that extend through the dermis.
carcinoma, bile duct carcinoma, and pancreatitis
(Mason, 1989; Brown et al., 1994; Paterson, 1994;
Mellanby et al., 2003). Pancreatic panniculitis in the cat
has been reported in conjunction with pancreatitis
(Ryan & Howard, 1981). Pancreatic panniculiis
in
 Dearoued raua on eanbes e se uss si Aensn sun
carcinoma or pancreatitis (Dahl et al., 1995).
Clinically, pancreatic panniculitis in dogs is character-
ized by either localized subcutaneous nodules or ill-
defined soft tissue swellings (Mason, 1989; Brown et al.,
1994). Purulent, oily material occasionally discharges
from fistulating masses. Lesions predominantly are
truncal. However one author (T.L.G.) has seen two dogs
with pancreatic panniculitis causing nodules on the legs
and well as the trunk. Lesions may be tender on palpa-
tion. Localized subcutaneous nodules that fistulate and
drain a milky, oily fluid have been reported in cats (Ryan
& Howard, 1981). Both dogs and cats present with
depression, vague signs of abdominal distress, pyrexia,
pain on palpation, and vomiting (Brown et al., 1994;
Campbell et al., 2000).
Interestingly, considering the rareness of the syndrome,
four Cocker Spaniels and one Cavalier King Charles
Spaniel have been reported (Brown et al., 1994; Mellanby
et al., 2003). The authors have seen two other Cocker
Spaniels with this syndrome, thus indicating the likeli-
hood of breed predilection. Age or sex predilections have
not been noted, but pancreatic neoplasia initiating pan-
niculitis should be seen more frequently in older animals.
 Possible clinical differential diagnoses could include
infectious diseases with cutaneous and subcutaneous
Fig. 21.38 Pancreatic panniculitis in a Cocker Spaniel featuring
involvement, such as opportunistic mycobacterial infec-
dense and obliterative inflammation of adipose tissue.
Diseases of the panniculus
557
matory, uniformly include massive peripancreatic omental
fat necrosis, saponifcation, and inflammation, as seen in
the skin.
 The lesions of pancreatic panniculitis are striking and
highly diagnostic. There are no known differential diag-
noses in the dog; the pattern of severe fat necrosis with
saponifcation should warrant a careful search for pan-
creatic disease. In the cat, lesions of vitamin E deficiency
(feline pansteatitis) that do not contain ceroid but have
saponification and mineralization may need to be differ-
entiated from pancreatic panniculitis.
REFERENCES
Introduction
Requefia, L. & Sanchez Yus, E. (2001) Panniculitis. Part I.
Mostly septal panniculitis. J Am Acad Dermatol 45, 163-83.
Postrabies Vaccination Panniculitis
Magro, C.M., Crowson, A.N. & Regauer, S.(1996) Granuloma
annulare and necrobiosis lipoidica tissue reactions as a mani-
festation of systemic disease. Human Pathol, 27, 50-6.
Wilcock, B.P. & Yager, J.A. (1986) Focal cutaneous vasculitis
and alopecia at sites of rabies vaccination in dogs. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 188, 1174-7.
Postinjection Panniculitis
Hendrick, M.J. & Dunagan, C.A. (1991) Focal necrotizing gran-
ulomatous panniculitis associated with subcutaneous injection
Fig. 21.39 Higher magnification of pancreatic panniculitis in the
of rabies vaccine in cats and dogs: 10 cases (1988-1989). J
dog of Fig. 21.38. Diffuse suppurative inflammation is accompanied
Am Vet Med Assoc 198, 304-5.
by saponification of fat {arrow).
Schmeitzel, L.P, Loefler, D. & Bass, M.C. (1986) Focal cuta-
neous reactions at vaccination sites in a cat and four dogs. In:
Proceedings of the 2nd AAVD/ACVD Meeting, New Orleans,
The panniculus contains severe, nodular or diffuse sup-
p.39.
purative to pyogranulomatous inflammation. There may
be severe hemorrhage and fbrin exudation. Adipocytes
Vasculitic Panniculitis of Thermal Burns
Schoning, P. & Hamlet, M. (1987) Histopathologic changes of
within these foci are necrotic, sometimes in sharply
experimental third degree frostbite in Hanford miniature
defined foci, which may be extensive. Necrotic fat
swine. In: Proceedings of 38th ACVP Meeting, Monterey,
often is saponifed, which creates an amorphous lightly
p. 42.
basophilic  material  within  expanded
or ruptured
adipocytes. Birefringent saponified fatty acid crystalloids,
Idiopathic Sterile Nodular Panniculitis
as seen in fat necrosis of the mesentery of humans, have
Camilleri, M.J. & Su, W.P.D. (2003) Panniculitis. In: Fitz-
not been observed in skin lesions in humans (Phelps &
patrick's Dermatology in General Medicine, 6th edn (eds I.M.
Shoji, 2001) or in dogs. Secondary cystic alteration of
Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith
inflamed and necrotic foci may be seen. Smaller foci of
& S.1. Katz), pp. 1047-63. McGraw-Hill, New York.
saponification within severely inflamed and hemorrhagic
Phelps, R.G. & Shoji, T. (2001) Update on panniculitis. Mt Sinai
J Med 68, 262-7.
adipose tissue may characterize some lesions. Small foci
Schanley, K.J. & Miller, W.H. (1985) Panniculitis in the dog: a
of deeply basophilic, amorphous mineralization also may
report of five cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 21, 545-50.
be present. Chronic lesions show replacement of inflam-
matory foci by granulation tissue. Similar lesions have
Vasculitic SeptalPanniculitis
been reported in a cat (Ryan & Howard, 1981).
Requena, L. & Sanchez Yus, E. (2001) Panniculitis. Part
Affected animals have pancreatic disease of varying
1. Mostly septal panniculitis. J Am Acad Dermatol 45,
causes. Pancreatic lesions, whether neoplastic or inflam-
163-83.
558
Diseases of the panniculus
Feline Pansteatitis
Pancreatic Panniculitis
Koutinas, A.F., Miller, W.H., Kritsepi, M. et al. (1993) Pansteati-
Brown, P.J., Mason, K.V., Merrett, D.J. et al. (1994) Multifocal
tis (steatitis, *yellow fat disease') in the cat: a review article
necrotizing steatitis associated with pancreatic carcinoma in
and report of four spontaneous cases. Vet Dermatol 3,
three dogs. J Small Anim Pract 35, 129-32.
101-6.
Camilleri, M.J. & Su, W.PD. (2003) Panniculitis. In: Fitz-
White, S.D. (2000) The skin as a sensor of internal medical dis-
patrick's Dermatology in General Medicine, 6th edn (eds I.M.
orders. In: Textbook of Veterinary Internat Medicine, Sth edn
Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith
(eds S.J. Ettinger & E.C. Feldman), pp. 26-9, W.B. Saunders,
& S.1. Katz), pp. 1047-63. McGraw-Hill, New York.
 Philadelphia.
Campbell, K.L., Matousek, J.L. & Lichtensteiger, C.A. (2000)
Cutaneous markers of hepatic and pancreatic diseases in dogs
MetatarsalFistulation of the GermanShepherd Dog
and cats. Vet Med 95, 306-14.
Gross TL. & Ihrke PJ. (1992) Diseases of the panniculus.
Dahl, PR., Su, W.PD., Cullimore, K.C. et al. (1995) Pancreatic
In:Veterinary Dermatopathology:A Macroscopic and
panniculitis. J Am Acad Dermatol 33, 413-17.
Microscopic Evaluation of Canine and Feline Skin Disease
Mason, K.V. (1989) Disseminated necrotizing panniculitis asso-
TL. Gross, PJ. Ihrke & E.J. Walder), pp. 324-6. Mosby, St
ciated with pancreatic carcinoma in a dog. In: Proceedings of
Louis.
the Sth AAVD/ACVD Meeting, St Louis, p. 61.
Kristensen, F. (1997) Deep metatarsal/metacarpal toritis in
Mellanby, R.J., Stell, A., Baines, E. et al. (2003) Panniculitis
German Shepherds. In: Proceedings of the 14th ESVD/ECVD
associated with pancreatitis in a cocker spaniel. J Small Anim
Meeting, Pisa.
Pract 44, 24-8.
Kunkle, G.A., White, S.D., Calderwood Mays, M. et al. (1993)
Paterson, S. (1994) Panniculitis associated with pancreatic
Focal metatarsal fistulas in five dogs.J Am Vet Med Assoc 202,
necrosis in a dog. J Small Anim Pract 35, 116-18.
756-7.
 Phelps, R.G. & Shoji, TI. (2001) Update on panniculitis. Mt Sinai
Paterson, S. (1995) Sterile idiopathic pedal panniculitis in the
J Med 68, 262-7.
 German shepherd dog - clinical presentation and response to
Ryan, C.P & Howard, E.B. (1981) Systemic lipodystrophy asso-
treatment of four cases. J Small Anim Pract 36, 498-501.
ciated with pancreatitis in a cat. Fet Pract 11, 31-4.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller 6 Kirk's
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 985-6. W.B.
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright  2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
SECTIONTWO
NEOPLASMSAND
OTHERTUMORS
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright  2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Part I
Epithelial Neoplasms and
other Tumors
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat:Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 22
Epidermal tumors
totic cells may also be present within the keratin column.
CUTANEOUSHORN OF FELINE PAWPAD
 Epidermal stratifcation of the underlying hyperplastic
Cutaneous horn is a general clinical term describing a
epidermis is well-maintained. FeLV-associated lesions
circumscribed, conical, or cylindrical mass of acellular
have scattered brightly eosinophilic and shrunken (apop-
a a ti e si ni a ya un ui
totic), multinucleated, and/or vacuolated keratinocytes;
The etiology of the horn cannot be determined without
nonFeLV-associated pawpad horns lack these specific epi-
histologic evaluation of the epithelium beneath it. Cuta
dermal features (Komori et al., 1998). Atypia or increased
neous horns are rare in dogs and cats, and may arise from
mitotic activity is not present. Secondary inflammation
viral papillomas, actinic keratoses, bowenoid n situ car-
may be present, particularly in lesions of long standing
cinoma, or invasive squamous cell carcinomas (see pp.
that have become fissured.
567, 575, 578 and 581), or from dilated pores or
Cutaneous horn of feline pawpad is clinically and
infundibular keratinizing acanthomas (see Chapter 23).
histopathologically distinctive; differential diagnoses are
 n  s i   ka
described on feline pawpad, but could have similar his-
Clinical features
tologic appearance.
Cutaneous horn of feline pawpad is a very rare, specific
entity that was frst described by Center (Center et al.,
Immunohistochemistry
1982). The affected cat was feline leukemia virus (FeLV)-
positive, and only FeLV was found on viral isolation of
Immunostaining for FeLV should be performed on
the lesions. The lesions recurred despite multiple surgical
pawpad horns, as its presence has significant implications
excisions, and the cat eventually developed similar lesions
for prognosis and therapy. Papillomavirus immunohisto-
on nasal planum and eyelids. A group of similar cases has
chemistry should also be considered.
been described (Scott, 1984). There is also one case report
of multiple cutaneous horns in FeLV-negative cats
(Komori et al., 1998).
PAWPAD KERATOMA
The lesions are single or multiple, conical or cylindri-
cal masses of hard keratin up to several millimeters in
(Synonyms: pawpad corn, callus)
diameter and up to 2cm in height. The viral-associated
cutaneous horns occur in the centers of digital, central, or
Callus (or callosity) is a general term defined as a local-
 metacarpal/metatarsal pawpads. The nonFeLV-associated
ized hyperplasia of the stratum corneum due to chronic
horns occurred only on digital pads just below the nails
 pressure or friction. Synonyms include keratoma, kerato-
(Komori et al., 1998). There is no known age or breed
derma, tyloma, and tylosis (Anderson, 1994). A corn in
predisposition.
human pathology is a callus on the dorsal, lateral, or
interdigital aspect of the toes; clavus and heloma are more
Histopathology (Figures 22.1 and 22.2)
antiquated names for this common entity. The exuberant
stratum corneum of the corn forms a conical mass that
Cutaneous horn of feline pawpad is characterized by a
protrudes downward toward the dermis. Interestingly,
well-demarcated zone of moderate to marked papilloma-
Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dictionary (Anderson,
tous hyperplasia of the epidermis from which emanates a
1994) also defnes corn as 'a circumscribed hyperkerato-
column of compact keratin. The shape and homogenous 
 sis on the pawpad of dogs, sensitive to pressure'. Corns
quality of the keratin column resemble a nail. Parakera-
 and calluses in humans are due to inappropriate or
562
Epidermal tumors
563
Fig. 22.1 Cutaneous horn of feline
pawpad. A column of pale, compact
keratin arises from moderately hyper-
plastic epiderrmis.
Fig. 22.2  Higher magnification of Fig.
22.1. The epidermis shows papilloma-
tous hyperplasia and mild vacuolation
 of the stratum granulosum.
poorly-fitting shoes, anatomic deformity resulting in
 Pawpad keratomas occur almost exclusively in racing
abnormal foot mechanics, or high levels of activity. The
Or retired Greyhounds. Small inorganic foreign bodies
lesions usually regress once the abnormal stress has been
(sand, glass) and papillomavirus infection are often
removed or corrected (Singh et al., 1996; Freeman, 2002).
 mentioned as causes of pawpad keratomas by breeders,
Increased epidermal proliferation and increased corneo-
trainers, and clinicians (Rosenbaum, M., personal com-
cyte volume have been demonstrated, indicating that the
munication, 2002). However it is more likely that the
lesions represent a ransient disorder of cornifcation
lesions have a similar etiology to their human counter-
(Thomas et al., 1985).
parts and result from mechanical abnormalities associated
564
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
with the physical stresses of racing and subsequent digital
osteoarthritis, which exacerbates the problem as a result
of altered or uneven gait, and/or misshapen digits.
Clinical features
The exact incidence of pawpad keratomas is diffcult to
assess, as the majority of lesions are probably not sub-
mitted for histologic evaluation. They appear as circular,
frm to hard plaques or short cutaneous horns that are
less than 1 cm in diameter. They may be solitary or mul-
tiple and nonpigmented or deeply pigmented. The major-
ity of keratomas occur on the centers of the digital
pads, usually on the areas that bear the most weight.
The metacarpal or metatarsal pads may be affected
(Rosenbaum, M., personal communication, 2002).
 Pawpad keratomas are seen primarily in middle-aged to
older racing or retired Greyhounds. Underlying foreign
material is rarely found (Bettenay, S., personal communi-
cation, 2002). Recurrence after traditional surgical exci-
sion is common (Lorch, W., Ness, M. & Rosenbaum, M.,
personal communications, 2002). Laser surgery (Schick,
R., personal communication, 2002) or physical extrusion/
curettage of the central keratin core (Bettenay, S. & Olivry,
T., personal communications, 2002) may be beneficial.
Histopathology (Figure 22.3)
Pawpad keratomas are characterized by well-defined,
dome-shaped, conical, or cylindrical mounds of compact
Hig. 22.3 Pawpad keratoma (corn) in a Greyhound. Marked,
hyperkeratosis that project above the skin surface. Most
of the keratin lacks the translucent appearance of normal
mis. At left, the keratin also protrudes downward, forming an epi-
pawpad stratum corneum. The subjacent epithelium may
dermal depression.
be mildly hyperplastic with an exaggerated digitated
surface confguration. Delicate epidermal papillae may
project for a short distance into the keratin mass. Other
LINEAR EPIDERMAL HAMARTOMA
lesions have mild epidermal atrophy and depression; this
is associated with downward expansion of the keratin,
(Synonyms: linear epidermal nevus, verrucous epidermal
forming a discrete core. This endophytic growth pattern
nevus)
 may represent a later stage of development. The epider-
mis does not show viral cytopathology, as in viral papil-
Regarding terminology, the current World Health Orga-
loma (see p. 567). Inflammation is absent unless there is
nization nomenclature avoids the use of ‘nevus’ entirely
fssuring or self-trauma. Immunohistochemical staining
(Goldschmidt et al., 1998). Its original defnition, from
for papillomavirus is negative (Olivry, T., personal com-
the Latin naevus, is a mole or birthmark, implying a con-
munication, 2002).
genital melanocytic neoplasm. Although the secondary
Pawpad keratoma with epidermal depression is histo-
 definition of nevus is any congenital malformation of the
logically unique. Pawpad keratomas with papillomatous
skin' (Anderson, 1994), confusion is likely unless it is
epidermal hyperplasia are differentiated from viral papil-
combined with qualifiers, such as sebaceous, apocrine,
lomas by the absence of thick, closely-grouped fronds of
melanocytic, etc. Benign melanocytic tumors in humans
are often referred to only as *congenital nevi' or 'acquired 
567). In addition, true viral papillomas rarely occur on
nevi', depending on age of onset; the latter term is an
pawpads, although involvement of haired pedal skin is
oxymoron based on either of the foregoing definitions.
fairly common. Papillomavirus immunohistochemistry is
Additionally, in veterinary medicine, congenital origin is
recommended for equivocal lesions.
often extremely diffcult to confrm, as many owners do
Epidermal tumors
565
not have their pets from birth. Early lesions may be
Histopathology (Figure 22.4)
obscured by pelage or may be assumed to be a normal
Epidermal hamartomas show an abrupt transition from
component of a variegated skin/coat color and not
become clinically apparent until later in life.
normal skin to irregular acanthosis that can vary from
mild to moderately severe. Epidermal maturation is
Hamartoma is defined as “a benign tumor-like nodule
 normal. Epidermolytic hyperkeratosis, as seen in epider-
composed of an overgrowth of mature cells and tissues
that normally occur in the affected part but with disor-
molytic ichthyosis (see Chapter 8), is a feature of many
ganization and often with one element predominating'
of the more extensive human lesions. This has not been
observed by the authors, but is described by Scott et al.
(Anderson, 1994). Hamartoma is thus a more inclusive
(1984) as ^granular degeneration' in some cases. There is
term than nevus and is the preferred nomenclature for
 marked, laminated hyperkeratosis. The skin surface has a
most lesions that are believed to be malformations, either
digitated or slightly papillated confguration due to con-
congenital or acquired.
current hyperplasia and keratotic plugging of follicular
 Linear epidermal 'nevus' is a well documented entity in
infundibula. Adnexa are otherwise unremarkable. The
humans and has localized unilateral, bilateral, and gener-
alized variants. It appears to be analogous to canine linear 
dermis is normal.
 The clinical appearance of epidermal hamartoma is
epidermal hamartoma. Although the majority of human
considerably more distinctive than its histologic picture.
cases are present early in life, some are not clinically
 Lesions on the legs may need to be distinguished from
apparent until adulthood (Murphy & Elder, 1991).
acral lick dermatitis; the latter has compact hyperkerato-
sis, epithelial hyperplasia affecting all three segments of
Clinical features
the follicle, and ‘streaming’ dermal fbrosis with vertical
orientation of superficial capillaries. Pigmented viral
Linear epidermal hamartoma is a rare lesion in dogs, pre-
plaque is a differential diagnosis, particularly for lesions
senting as scaly or waxy, sometimes coalescent plaques
 on the abdomen. These plaques generally do not form
and/or papules forming one or more linear arrays on the
linear arrays and are much more deeply pigmented. Their
trunk or legs (Scott et al., 2001). The lesions may be pig-
epidermis is only mildly hyperplastic but has a unique
mented. Too few veterinary cases have been reported to
scalloped confguration. Hypergranulosis without granu-
determine the typical age of onset; the authors have seen
 lar degeneration is present in pigmented viral plaque, and
cases in older adult dogs, although the duration of the
mild koilocytosis, as seen in viral papilloma (see p. 567),
lesions was unknown. The original case report was in a
may be detected; koilocytosis could possibly be misinter-
2-month-old Schnauzer (Scott et al., 1984). An inflam-
 preted as early epidermolytic hyperkeratosis. Immunos-
matory variant also occurs in dogs (see Chapters 7 and
taining or testing by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for
8).
 papillomavirus may be required for defnitive diagnosis.
Fig. 22.4 Linear epidermal hamar-
toma in a dog. Epidermis and follicular
infundibula show mild, irregular acan-
thosis and moderate hyperkeratosis.
Note the prominent digitated appear-
ance to the skin surface.
566
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
DERMOID CYST
(Synonym: dermoid sinus, pilonidal cyst)
Clinical features
Dermoid cysts are observed rarely in dogs and cats, and
are identical to the human lesion with the same name.
These cysts are developmental anomalies manifested by
focal reduplication of the entire skin structure, including
dermis and adnexa. Dermoid cysts are usually solitary
and appear clinically similar to follicular cysts. The cysts
are dermal or subcutaneous in location and are less than
2cm in diameter. A small pore often connects the cyst to
 the skin surface, and hair may protrude through the pore.
As would be predicted by embryology, dermoid cysts
often occur along the dorsal midline, which is the site
where ectoderm was continuous with neuroectoderm
 prior to neural tube closure. Lesions occasionally extend
into the spinal canal where they are attached to dura
mater. However they may also be found at other
anatomic sites, such as the lateral neck or shoulder, par-
ticularly in cats.
The Rhodesian Ridgeback has a propensity for devel-
opment of single or multiple dorsal midline dermoid cysts,
which is believed to be inherited via a simple recessive
gene (Mann & Stratton, 1966). Boxers and Kerry Blue
Terriers also are reported to have an increased incidence
(Scott et al., 2001). Because these are congenital anom-
 alies, affected animals are usually young.
Fig. 22.5 Derrmoid cyst in a dog. Small folliculosebaceous units
radiate outward from a cyst lined by squamous epitheliurm with a
 prominent granular cel layer.
Histopathology (Figure 22.5)
Dermoid cysts have a spherical or tubular central cyst
hamartoma. A small dermoid cyst may resemble a tri-
lined by epidermal stratified squamous epithelium, which
chofolliculoma with predominantly mature secondary fol-
keratinizes through a prominent granular cell layer The
licles, particularly if hair shafts and sebaceous glands are
cyst cavity is often filled with hair in addition to lamellar
present. The follicles that radiate from the central cyst of
keratin, and may also contain sebaceous secretions.
a trichofolliculoma are more numerous and also show
Dermoid cysts are surrounded by a zone of collagen
secondary branching. The central cyst of a trichofollicu-
bundles that tend to parallel the cyst wall; this represents
loma may contain epithelial segments resembling isthmus
the dermal component of the cutaneous invagination
and/or matrical portions of a hair follicle, while the
from which a dermoid cyst is derived. Within the dermal
 central cyst of a dermoid cyst is lined entirely by epider-
collagen surrounding the cyst are well-developed small
mal-type
squamous
epithelium.
Differentiation
of
hair follicles (folliculettes'), sebaceous glands and, occa-
dermoid cyst from infundibular cyst may be problematic.
sionally, apocrine sweat glands; the follicles are attached
Dermoid cysts have diminutive folliculosebaceous units
to and radiate from the cyst wall, resembling the normal
radiating from the cyst wall and oriented perpendicular
relationship of folliculosebaceous units to the epidermis.
to it. Infundibular cysts occasionally have one or two
 The hair follicles are usually compound, and delicate hair
clusters of sebaceous glands attached to the wall; any
shafts are often present. The folliculosebaceous units are
adjacent hair follicles show a normal perpendicular ori-
sparse or moderate in number and tend to be evenly
entation to the epidermis. Infundibular cysts lack a
spaced within the dermal collagen.
concentric arrangement of the surrounding collagen.
Differential
 diagnoses
include
trichofolliculoma,
Folliculosebaceous hamartomas almost always have mul-
follicular infundibular cyst, and folliculosebaceous
tiple tortuous infundibular cysts with multiple randomly
Epidermal tumors
567
arranged sebaceous lobules and no anagen follicles
 Inflammation is usually minimal or mild. Trauma may
whereas dermoid cysts have a single epithelial cystic struc-
result in spongiosis, ulceration, and more severe inflam-
ture with a few miniature but complete folliculosebaceous
 mation. Viral cytopathic effect, such as giant keratohyalin
units radiating from it.
granules, koilocytosis (keratinocytes with clear cytoplasm
and pyknotic nuclei), blue-grey cytoplasmic pallor, or
inclusion bodies, is not evident.
SQUAMOUS PAPILLOMA
Differentiation between viral and nonviral squamous
Clinical features
papillomas is based largely on the absence of cytopathic
effect in the latter. Nonviral squamous papillomas gener-
Papillomatous lesions in which viral cytopathic effects are
ally have less epithelial proliferation and hyperkeratosis
not evident occur uncommonly in dogs and rarely in cats.
than viral warts. Immunohistochermistry or testing by
They are probably non-neoplastic and may be traumatic
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for papillomavirus is
in etiology. To avoid confusion, the term fbropapilloma',
indicated for equivocal lesions. Distinction between squa-
although accurately descriptive, is probably best reserved
mous papilloma and acrochordon (see Chapter 27) is
for the lesion on the penis of bulls that is caused by bovine
based on the predominance of epithelium in the former
papillomavirus.
and fbrous connective tissue in the latter. However, this
Squamous papillomas are delicate, fmbriated masses
distinction may be moot, as the squamous papilloma may
that are usually pedunculated. These papillomas are gen-
actually represent one end of the spectrum of acrochor-
erally smaller than viral warrs; they are of the order of 1
don in which the ratio of epithelium to connective tissue
to 5 mm in diameter. Lesions are most often observed on
is unusually high (Murphy & Elder, 1991).
the face, eyelids, feet, and conjunctiva. There is no known
age or breed predisposition.
VIRAL PAPILLOMA
Histopathology (Figure 22.6)
(Synonyms: wart, verruca)
The overall architecture of squamous papilloma is similar
Papillomaviruses (PVs) are small, double-stranded DNA
to viral papilloma (see p. 567). The epithelium forming
viruses that infect many different animal species; they are
the papillary projections is moderately hyperplastic,
usually species-specific, and show strong tropism for cuta-
mildly hyperkeratotic, and mature. The collagenous cores
neous or mucosal squamous epithelium (Sundberg et al.,
of the fnger-like projections are bland and delicate.
1994). More than 130 different strains of PVs have been
Fig. 22.6 Squamous papilloma in a
dog. Hyperplastic, hyperkeratotic epi-
thelium covers papillary projections of
fibrous tissue with a mild inflammatory
infiltrate. Hypergranulosis and koilocy-
tosis are not present.
568
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
identifed in humans, but only two genetically distinct PV
be severe enough to form a cutaneous horn. Exophytic
types have been sequenced thus far in dogs (Nicholls &
Stanley, 1999). However, there are at least six different
and extremities. Although facial mucocutaneous involve-
PV syndromes in dogs (Campbell et al., 1988; Nagata et
ment is common, pedal lesions do not involve the pads.
al., 1995; Le Net et al., 1997; Nicholls & Stanley, 1999)
 Isolated lesions can also occur on other parts of the body.
and at least three in domestic cats (Carpenter et al., 1987;
 Exophytic papillomas occur at any age but are most
Carney et al., 1990; Sundberg et al., 2000) that are dis-
often seen in dogs less than 2 years of age. Many but not
tinguished by anatomic distribution, histologic features,
 all exophytic viral papillomas spontaneously regress over
immunohistochemistry, polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
 a period of weeks to months. Spontaneous malignant
and/or in situ DNA hybridization; this suggests that many
transformation of exophytic viral papillomas is extremely
 more strains do exist. Exophytic and inverted viral papil-
rare; one of the authors (T.L.G.) observed a neoplasm
lomas are discussed in this section (Carpenter et al., 1987;
resermbling basosquamous carcinoma (see p. 597) arising
Campbell et al., 1988; Le Net et al., 1997; Nicholls &
from a classical papilloma in an 11-year-old Labrador
Stanley, 1999); canine and feline viral plaques are dis-
Retriever.
"ie ia Aaue) (ts pue Is dd sos) kaneredas passn
Cutaneous inverted papilloma is a rare endophytic
1990; Nagata et al., 1995; Sundberg et al., 2000). In
variant in dogs originally described by Campbell et al.
humans, the more common PV syndromes are grouped into
(1988); it is very rare in cats. Papillomavirus was
five categories based on clinical presentation as well as the
detected in these lesions by both electron microscopy
viral strains that most often cause them: verruca vulgaris
and immunohistochemistry. In situ DNA hybridization
or common wart (HPV types 2, 4 and 7), verruca plana or
demonstrated that inverted papilloma is also caused by a
flat wart (HPV type 3), mosaic-type palmoplantar wart
PV that is distinct from COPV (Campbell et al., 1988).
(HPV types 2 and 4), deep palmoplantar wart (HPV type
 Inverted papillomas usually appear as multiple, raised,
1), and condyloma accuminatum or anogenital wart (HPV
frm, umbilicated masses that are less than 2 cm in diam-
types 6, 11, 16, 18, 31, 33, and 51) (Penneys, 1997).
eter. Most cutaneous inverted papillomas arise on the
 ventral abdomen. In contrast to exophytic papillomas, the
 inverted lesions do not undergo spontaneous regression.
Clinical features
A single case of pigmented inverted papillomatosis was
Classic exophytic cutaneous papillomas induced by PV
described in an immunosuppressed Boxer (Le Net et al.,
   n  o  o 
1997). The lesions in this case also had a ventral distri-
reported incidence ranges from less than 1% to 2.5% of
bution but were one-tenth the size of the more common
all canine skin tumors (Bevier & Goldschmidt, 1981;
 inverted papilloma. A unique strain of PV was confrmed
Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992). One of 444 skin tumors in
by immunohistochemistry and DNA hybridization using
a large feline survey was a papilloma, and one case of
Southern blotting (Le Net et al., 1997). A solitary lesion
papillomatosis was also cited (Carpenter et al., 1987).
with identical morphology to these distinctive, diminutive
Two young cats with multiple lesions were described by
papillomas has been observed in a young healthy dog by
Abramo et al. (1997).
one of the authors (E.J.W.).
Most exophytic papillomas on haired skin are caused
 Inverted viral papillomas generally affect dogs less than
by a PV that appears to be different from canine oral
3 years of age (Campbell et al., 1988). Whippets, Bernese
papillomavirus (COPV) based on in situ DNA hybridiza-
Mountain Dogs, Irish Setters, Beagles, Great Danes,
tion (Campbell et al., 1988). Dogs with COPV-induced
Cocker Spaniels, and Kerry Blue Terriers are reported to
 mucosal lesions also may have warts that involve the lips,
 be predisposed to develop viral papillomas (Goldschmidt 
eyelids, or nasal planum. Immunosuppression has been
& Shofer, 1992; Scott et al., 2001; Goldschmidt &
 reported to induce extensive COPV lesions on haired skin
Hendrick, 2002).
in a dog with concurrent oral papillomatosis (Sundberg
et al., 1994). Oral and cutaneous viral papillomas
Histopathology
occurred in the clinical seting of cyclosporine adminis-
tration in a middle-aged dog (Power H.T., personal com-
Exopbytic papilloma (Figures 22.7 and 22.8)
munication, 2003),
These are identical to verruca vulgaris or common warts
Classical, fully-developed, exophytic warts are single or
  s   s 
multiple papillated masses that may be sessile or pedun-
fnger-like projections of thickened squamous epithelium
culated. Multiple or numerous lesions are referred to as
that generally exhibits normal maturation. The peripheral
cutaneous papillomatosis. Lesions are typically less than
papillary structures tend to be angled inward at their base;
1 cm in diameter. They have a fimbriated surface that may
this is referred to as a ^toed-in' confguration. The epithe-
 i    a 
lial fronds are heavily keratinized, and the keratin is
Epidermal tumors
569
Fig. 22.7 Exophytic viral papilloma
in a dog. Hyperplastic, hyperkeratotic
epitheliurn
 papillary projections. Note prominent 
keratohyalin granules and cells with
expanded, pale gray cytoplasm in the
stratum granulosum. Scattered koilo-
cytes are evident (arrow).
arranged in peaks and spires. Some lesions have hyper-
 trophy and hyperplasia of basal cells with a concomitant
increase in mitotic fgures; this most likely represents an
early, proliferative phase of the lesion and should not be
mistaken for malignant transformation. Ectatic blood
vessels and mild to moderate infltrates of mixed inflam-
matory cells are generally present in the connective tissue
cores of the papillae, and serous or serosanguinous crusts 
are present at their tips.
Papillomavirus infection is manifested in all species by
distinctive changes in the cytoplasm and/or nucleus; these
are considered collectively as viral cytopathic effect or
- s knsn unsonna umns a aooedo
lections of giant keratohyalin granules with rounded
edges. The upper stratum spinosum or stratum granulo-
sum may exhibit koilocytosis. Koilocytes (literally,
"hollow cells') are altered keratinocytes characterized by
clear cytoplasm and pyknotic nuclei. More commonly,
moderate numbers of superficial keratinocytes have
expanded blue-gray cytoplasm and enlarged nuclei with
marginated chromatin. Occasionally, pale basophilic
intranuclear inclusion bodies can be found at the junction
of keratinized and nonkeratinized epithelium.
Regression of exophytic papillomas is manifested by a
moderate, interface infltrate, consisting primarily of
lymphocytes. These are known to be T lymphocytes,
reflecting a cell-mediated immune response in dogs as
well as many other species (Nicholls & Stanley, 1999).
There is also progressive individual cell death consis-
Fig. 22.8 Regressing exophytic viral papilloma in a dog. Marked
lichenoid inflammation is associated with keratinocyte apoptosis and
tent with apoptosis, manifested by shrinkage, angularity,
lymphocyte satellitosis (arrow).
and  increased eosinophilia. Confluent epithelial  cell
570
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 22.9 Inverted viral papilloma in a dog. Papillary structures
Fig. 22.10 Higher magnification of inverted viral papilloma of Fig.
project from a cup-shaped wall of mature squamous epithelium into
a keratin core; epidermis is at top.
22.9. Viral cytopathic effect is characterized by rmultiple clusters of
enlarged cells with cytoplasmic pallor. Some giant keratohyalin gran
ules are also present.
death, ulceration, and subacute inflammation are seen
occasionally.
papillary projections. The cells may exhibit either koilo-
Differentiation between viral papillomas and nonviral
cytosis (see above) or blue-gray cytoplasmic pallor. Giant
squamous papillomas is based largely on the absence of
keratohyalin granules and, less frequently, eosinophilic
cytopathic effect in the latter. Nonviral squamous papil-
intranuclear inclusions are present.
lomas generally have less epithelial proliferation and
 In the rare pigmented endophytic papillomas in dogs,
hyperkeratosis than viral warts. Pawpad keratomas in
the endophytic epithelial nodules are very small, hyper-
dogs and cutaneous horns on feline pawpads do not have
pigmented, and lack papillary proliferations (Le Net et al.,
papillary fronds of epithelium, and PV cytopathic effect
1997). Their viral cytopathology is unusual in that it
is absent. Immunohistochemistry (or testing by PCR) or
includes large, angular, basophilic intranuclear viral
in situ hybridization, if available) for PV is indicated for
 inclusions and deeply eosinophilic, perinuclear inclusions
equivocal lesions.
composed of condensed keratin filaments (Le Net et al.
1997).
Inverted papilloma (Figures 22.9 through 22.11)
Inverted
 papilloma must  be differentiated  from
Inverted papillomas are morphologically similar to deep
infundibular keratinizing acanthoma, which is also a
palmoplantar warts in humans (Penneys, 1997), although
cup-shaped, keratin-flled, squamous epithelial mass.
their clinical distribution is different. They are cup-shaped
Infundibular keratinizing acanthoma has small cysts and
lesions with a central core of keratin or parakeratotic cells
anastomosing trabeculae of keratinocytes comprising its
leading to an umbilicated surface. The cup is usually lined
epithelial wall, in comparison to the papillary structures
by hyperplastic squamous epithelium with centripetal
of an endophytic wart. Viral-induced inclusion bodies and
Epidermal tumors
571
Fig. 22.11 Unusual inverted vira]
 papilloma in a dog, featuring a diminu-
tive cup-shaped structure with large,
angular, nuclear and cytoplasmic inclu-
sions in the stratum granulosum.
other viral cytopathic alterations are not present in
which is a requisite feature of lentigines (see Chapter 34).
infundibular acanthoma, and keratohyalin granules are
Kaoqouuan Ael u! sods 1el, se 0n pairjan ane Aau
small and sparse.
 It has been suggested that canine pigmented viral
plaques are analogous to epidermodysplasia verruci-
formis in humans (see feline viral plaque, p. 574) (Nagata
Immunohistochemistry
et al., 1995; Walder 1997). However, despite certain sim-
Immunostaining can be a useful diagnostic and research
ilarities, the authors now believe that there are substan-
tool for lesions of suspected PV etiology in dogs and
 tial differences berween canine pigmented viral plaques
cats. Bovine PV antibody and other polyclonal anti-PV
and epidermodysplasia verruciformis. These include facial
reagents crosreact with PVs of multiple species and are
and extremity distribution, lack of consistent and marked
readily available commercially. Because these antibodies
hyperpigmentation, absence of true koilocytosis (ker-
target whole virus, which is assembled in fully-differenti-
atinocytes with cytoplasmic clearing and pyknotic nuclei),
ated squamous epithelial cells only, positive reactions are
and a much higher rate of malignant transformation in
limited to superficial epidermis and stratum corneum.
epidermodysplasia verruciformis in contrast to canine
More specifc reagents for canine and feline PVs are not
pigmented viral plaques (Penneys, 1997; Nuovo & Ishag.
yet available.
2000). The canine lesions, at least in Pugs, appear to have
an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance (Briggs,
1985); the hereditary form of epidermodysplasia verruci-
CANINE PIGMENTED VIRAL PLAOUE
formis in humans is autosomal recessive (Penneys, 1997).
(Synonym: verruca plana)
 The majority of the canine lesions have several features
in common with human flat warts (verruca plana); the
Canine pigmented viral plaque was not recognized as
human lesions can have a familial occurrence, extensive
being of viral etiology until recently (Nagata et al., 1995).
anatomic distribution and hyperpigmentation (Penneys,
In the older veterinary literature, identical lesions were
1997). However, human flat warts do not undergo malig
erroneously described as lentigines or lentiginosis profusa
nant transformation.
Papillomavirus-associated carcinogenesis, in general,
and multifocal distribution. Some confusion in terminol-
requires integration of viral genome into host cell DNA.
ogy still exists in current reference texts. In Veterinary
These viral genes, at least in humans, target the p53 tumor
Dermatopathology (Walder & Gross, 1992) they were
 suppressor gene and other host cellular regulatory mech-
reclassified as pigmented epidermal nevi based on certain
 anisms, resulting in a favorable environment for per-
similarities to verrucous or linear epidermal nevus in 
 sistent viral replication and destabilization of the host
humans and the absence of melanocyte hyperplasia,
 genome (Munger 2002). Similar events may ocur in dogs
572
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
with malignant transformation of viral plaques. Further
trusion resembling a skin tag. The lesions occur most
clarification of the relationship between the canine and
 often on the ventral abdomen, ventral thorax, and medial
human disease awaits identification of the specifc
proximal legs. Involvement may be bilateral or unilateral.
strain(s) of canine PV responsible for banal versus car-
Distal legs may also be involved.
cinogenic variants of pigmented viral plaque; two clini-
 Affected animals are usually young adults. There is
cally similar but biologically distinct syndromes may
a strong breed predilection for Pugs and Miniature
exist.
Schnauzers, supporting a genetic contribution to a cuta-
neous immunologic milieu that permits persistent PV
hypoglobulinemia, and hypothyroidism, respectively, was
infection. Boston Terriers and French Bulldogs also have
suggested as a contributing factor to viral plaque devel-
an increased incidence of pigmented viral plaques.
opment in three dogs; in one of these, an 8-year-old
 The plaques develop progressively over a period of time
Pomeranian, the lesions showed malignant transforma-
and then become stable. The vast majority have no unto-
tion (Stokking et al., 2002). Profound immunosuppres-
ward sequelae. In rare instances, pigmented viral plaques
sion in humans, particularly associated with human
undergo malignant transformation to squamous cell car-
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection or organ trans-
cinoma (Nagata et al., 1995; Walder, 1997); the metasta-
plantation, is associated with an increased incidence of a
tic potential is unknown. In contrast, 30% to 50% of
variety of PV-induced lesions, including epidermodys-
human patients with epidermodysplasia verruciformis
plasia verruciformis (Penneys, 1997).
develop in situ and invasive squamous cell carcinomas,
usually on sun-exposed skin, which may be metastatic
Clinical features
and fatal (Kaspar et al., 1991; Penneys, 1997; Nuovo &
Ishag, 2000).
Pigmented viral plaques are rare or uncommon lesions of
dogs. The actual incidence is diffcult to determine, as
Histopathology (Figures 22.12 through 22.14)
 most are probably not submitted for dermatologic or his-
tologic evaluation.  Pigmented  viral plaques usually
Pigmented viral plaques are discrete foci of mild to
present as multiple, deeply pigmented, ovoid, or circular
moderate acanthosis and hyperkeratosis. Keratinocyte
plaques that are less than 1cm in diameter. Lesions may
maturation is normal. The epidermis has a distinctively
be numerous or, occasionally, are solitary. They have
scalloped configuration, resulting in widely-spaced,
scaly, irregular slightly papillated surfaces. Rarely, the
shallow papillations or digitations. The lower layers of
hyperplastic epidermis covers a filiform collagenous pro-
 the epidermis have moderate to marked hyperpigmenta-
Fig. 22.12 Canine pigmented viral
plaque. The epidermis shows acantho-
sis, marked hyperpigmentation, and
hyperkeratosis. Note the distinct,
broadly-scalloped architecture.
Epidermal tumors
573
Fig. 22.13 Higher magnification of
Fig. 22.12. Viral cytopathology is man-
ifested by an increase in the mumber and
size of keratohyalin granules.
Fig. 22.14 Canine pigmented viral
plaque. Papillomavirus immunostain
decorates small numbers of nucleated
cells in the stratum granulosum and
moderate mumbers of squames in the
stratum corneum (chromogen amino-
ethylcarbazole [AEC]).
 tion, but melanocyte proliferation is not present. Melanin
 cytoplasmic clearing and pyknotic nuclei, but this feature
pigment may extend into the upper cell layers of the epi-
is usually subtle. The underlying dermis may contain
dermis including the stratum corneum. Mild to moderate,
increased numbers of melanophages, particularly in
patchy or diffuse hypergranulosis with enlarged kerato-
heavily-pigmented plaques.
hyalin granules is usually present. Small numbers of cells
 Malignant transformation of pigmented viral plaques
in the stratum spinosum or granulosum may demonstrate
occurs rarely and is essentially the same as bowenoid or
papillomavirus-induced koilocytosis, characterized by
other in situ squamous cell carcinoma, with progression
574
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
to invasive squamous cell carcinoma; the carcinoma may
virologic features to classical human epidermodysplasia
retain some melanin pigment and may have areas of
verruciformis occurs secondary to immunosuppression,
'windblown’ architecture resembling bowenoid in situ
particularly due to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
carcinoma (see p. 578). Bizarre giant nuclei may be present.
infection or organ transplantation (Penneys, 1997; Mor-
 Pigmented viral plaque is distinguished from lentigo
rison et al.,
 2002). Similarities between feline viral
clinically by the thickened, slightly irregular, scaly appear-
plaques and epidermodysplasia verruciformis include a
ance of the former. Histologically, lentigines contain
clinical and histologic resemblance to verruca plana, a
 increased numbers of deeply-pigmented, bland melano-
distribution that includes face and extremities, variability
cytes in the basal cell layer clustered at the tips of elon-
 of pigmentation, a high rate of malignant transformation
gated rete pegs; these are not present in viral plaques.
to in situ and invasive carcinoma, and likely cocarcino-
genicity of ultraviolet radiation (Kaspar et al., 1991;
Linear epidermal hamartoma, if melanized, may be a dif-
Penneys, 1997; Harwood, et al., 1999; Nuovo & Ishag,
ferential diagnosis. Viral plaques generally do not form
2000; Morrison et al., 2002).
linear arrays and are much more deeply pigmented.
The frst step in HPV-associated carcinogenesis, in
Hypergranulosis without granular degeneration is present
general, is integration of viral genome into host cell DNA.
in viral plaques, although koilocytosis could be misinter-
The viral genes that are consistently retained after inte-
preted as early epidermolytic hyperkeratosis seen in some
Aenn rn iso d aas iarn ua
lesions of linear epidermal hamartoma. Neither lentigines
 mechanisms, such as the p53 tumor suppressor gene. This
nor linear epidermal hamartomas exhibit the unique
results in a favorable environment for persistent viral
pattern of scalloped epidermal hyperplasia seen in pig-
replication and
destabilization of the host genome
mented viral plaques. Immunostaining, or testing by in
(Munger 2002). In humans, specifc in situ polymerase
situ DNA hybridization or polymerase chain reaction
chain reaction (PCR) technique identifes epidermodys-
(PCR) for PV (if available) may be required for definitive
plasia verruciformis-HPV DNA within lesional skin only
diagnosis in equivocal cases.
 and can also demonstrate, by a change from diffuse to
punctate nuclear staining, integration of viral genome into
-rs pue sionona mai siroddns kiuons su (na iso
FELINE VIRAL PLAQUE
cinogenic role (Nuovo & Ishag, 2000; Morrison et al.,
(Synonyms:
verruca
plana,
epidermodysplasia
2002). Similar events are likely occurring in cats with
verruciformis)
malignant transformation of viral plaques.
 Skin lesions caused by papillomavirus (PV) in cats were
Clinical features
documented fairly recently, after immunohistochemical
stains for the virus became readily available. These
 The true incidence of feline viral plaques is difficult to esti-
reports were of flat rather than typical exophytic warts
mate; they are most likely uncommon. Lesions that are
and were designated as papillomavirus infection of aged
not on glabrous or sparsely-haired skin are probably not
cats (Carney et al., 1990), papillomavirus associated skin
-suen nuuaeu orapun Aa un suanedde Aeiu
lesions (Egberink et al., 1992), and persistent papillo-
formation to bowenoid or other in situ squamous cell car-
mavirus infection (Lozano-Alarcon et al.,
1996).
cinoma, invasive squamous cell carcinoma, or basal cell
Although the specific PV causing these lesions has not
carcinoma
been identified, comparative immunostaining using a
Feline viral plaques present as multiple, ovoid or elon-
 panel of monoclonal antibodies against various bovine PV
gated, slightly raised lesions that are usually less than
epitopes indicates that it is distinct from the PVs causing
 8 mm in greatest dimension. The plaques may be either
similar cutaneous lesions in snow leopards, oral papillo-
pigmented or nonpigmented. They have a scaly, slightly
mas in domestic cats and several different species of wild
 irregular surface; gross papillation is not apparent. There
felids, and canine oral papillomas (Sundberg et al., 2000).
is no preferential anatomic distribution.
In contrast to canine viral plaques (see p. 571), feline
 Three of the four cats in the frst case reports were Per-
viral plaques are very similar clinically and histopatho-
sians (Carney et al., 1990; Lozano-Alarcon et al., 1996),
logically to epidermodysplasia verruciformis in humans.
but this may be coincidence as the majority of infected
Classical epidermodysplasia verruciformis is a rare hered-
animals are the common domestic breeds. The reported
itary human disorder caused by a specifc group of more
age range is 7 months to 15 years (Sundberg et al., 2000),
than 20 different strains of oncogenic human papillo-
but the i
majority of affected cats are older adults.
mavirus (HPV) in genetically susceptible individuals
 Immunosuppression may be a contributing factor as it is
(Penneys, 1997). An acquired variant of epidermodyspla-
in humans; two of the Persian cats in one report had
sia verruciformis with identical clinicopathologic and
received long-term corticosteroid treatment (Carney et al.,
Epidermal tumors
575
upper layers of the epidermis. The koilocytes may contain
feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) (Lozano-Alarcon et al.,
amphophilic pseudoinclusions formed by condensation of
1996), and a domestic cat was seropositive for feline
keratin fbrils (Carney et al., 1990; Sundberg et al., 2000).
immunodeficiency virus (FIV) (Egberink et al., 1992).
 Inflammation is not observed.
The incidence of carcinogenesis in feline viral plaques
Malignant transformation of feline viral plaques occurs
is also unknown, but is probably fairly high given the fre-
commonly and generally resembles bowenoid in situ car-
quency of squamous cell carcinoma in this species. The
cinoma (see p. 578), but may also have features of actinic
immunohistochemical identification of PV in 45% of
bowenoid in situ carcinomas (see p. 578) as reported by
malignant transformation is manifested by increased epi-
Clark (Gross & Affolter 1998) supports the hypothesis
 dermal thickness, nuclear enlargement and anisokaryosis,
that many of the in situ carcinomas arise in pre-existing
variable nucleolar enlargement, and loss of orderly ker-
viral plaques. If, as in human epidermodysplasia verruci-
atinocyte maturation. In situ carcinoma may eventuate in
formis, multiple strains of feline PV were found to be
 invasive squamous cell carcinoma or basal cell carcinoma.
associated with viral plaques, the prognosis may be
Feline viral plaques are subtle but distinctive lesions.
dependent upon the relative carcinogenicity of the strain
The primary differential diagnosis is nonspecific acantho-
affecting a particular cat.
sis, spongiosis, and/or hypergranulosis secondary to an
inflammatory dermatopathy. Papillomavirus immuno-
staining, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing (if
Histopathology (Figure 22.15)
available), or electron microscopy is helpful in equivocal
Feline viral plaques are characterized by mild to moder-
cases. If abnormal maturation or atypical keratinocyte
ate acanthosis and laminated hyperkeratosis with an
morphology is present, a diagnosis of carcinoma in situ
abrupt transition from normal epidermis. The thickened
should be rendered. Defnitive histologic diagnosis of
epidermis may have an undulating confguration, but
feline viral plaques may allow early therapeutic interven-
frank papillomatous hyperplasia is not present. Melanin
 tion with antiviral compounds, possibly preventing malig-
pigment varies from absent in some lesions to abundant
nant transformation.
in others. The hyperplasia and hyperkeratosis also affect
follicular infundibula within the plaques. Keratinocyte
ACTINIC KERATOSIS
maturation is normal; dysplasia or atypia is not present.
The granular cell layer is thickened and irregular, and
(Synonyms: actinic carcinoma in situ, solar keratosis)
the keratohyalin granules are frequently enlarged. Small
numbers of PV-induced koilocytes, characterized by cyto-
The term “keratosis is nonspecific and refers to a “horny
plasmic clearing and pyknotic nuclei, are present in the
or warty growth or callosity’ (Anderson, 1994); actinic
Fig. 22.15 Feline viral plaque. Dis-
crete zone of mildly irregular acantho-
sis  with hyperpigmentation. Note
scattered koilocytes (small clear cells)
and absence of cytologic atypia.
576
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
keratoses are epithelial plaques of solar induction. It is
and humans. In the colony of Beagle dogs in Colorado in
well documented that ultraviolet (UV) radiation causes
which concurrent solar dermatitis, keratosis, and frank
direct damage to DNA molecules, in addition to indirect 
 squamous cell carcinoma was frst described, approxi-
damage via free radicals, and those mutations have a
 mately 25% of the animals were affected (Hargis et al.,
specific pattern of C to T and CC to TT nucleotide base
1977).
substitutions (Dunstan et al., 1998). Ultraviolet radiation-
Actinic keratoses are single or multiple, plaque-like or
induced mutations in the tumor suppressor gene p53,
 papillated lesions that are usually 1cm in diamerer or
which is critical in inducing apoptosis and controlling cell
 smaller. Lesions have prominent scales, crusts, or scabs;
division, results in clones of altered basal keratinocytes
in small numbers of cases, hyperkeratosis is so dramatic
 that are resistant to apoptosis and DNA repair (Dunstan 
that the lesion presents clinically as a cutaneous horn (see
et al., 1998). If the mutated keratinocyte population
p. 562). Actinic keratoses occur most commonly on the
expands sufficiently, an actinic keratosis (AK) will
pinnae, nose, and eyelids of white-faced cats. In dogs, they
develop. Immunohistochemical detection of abnormal
are found primarily on the ventral abdomen, ventral
p53 gene product in feline AK has been recently reported
flanks, and medial thighs of short-coated, white-haired or
(Albaric et al., 2001).
piebald breeds. Dalmatians, Pit Bull Terriers, Beagles,
One study estimated that 0.25% to 1% of AKs per year
 Basset Hounds, and other dogs with similar coat charac-
 in humans progress to frank invasive squamous cell car-
teristics have an increased incidence of AK as well as other
cinoma (Jeffes & Tang, 2000). Another report found that
solar-induced neoplasia. (Also see Chapter 7 for further
more than 80% of squamous cell carcinomas were either
clinical discussion of actinic keratoses.)
arising directly from or were in close proximity to an AK
(Mittelbronn et al., 1998). Similar data do not exist for
Histopathology (Figures 22.16 through 22.18)
dogs or cats, although it is common to fnd AK in the
vicinity of squamous cell carcinoma in large biopsy spec-
The epidermis in AK shows irregular hyperplasia that can
 imens, such as canine inguinal excisions, suggesting that
vary from mild to marked. There is moderate to severe
 progression of AK to invasive squamous cell carcinoma is
 laminated or compact hyperkeratosis and/or parakerato-
likely.
 d aled e sis uo do aioi sis
Recent confrmation of numerous genetic and molecu-
that of the adjacent epidermis. There is mild to moderate
lar similarities between AK and squamous cell carcinoma
architectural distortion resulting from loss of polarity
(Krunic et al., 1998; Tsukifuji et al., 1999; Ishida et al.,
of variable numbers of keratinocytes in the basal and
2001; Xu et al., 2001; Hodges & Smoller 2002; Ashton
spinous layers; the earliest changes occur in the basal ker-
et al., 2003) have prompted some investigators to suggest
atinocytes. Irregular rete ridge formation may be present;
abandoning the clinical term ^actinic keratosis' in favor of
 these epidermal trabeculae often have angular profles and
a more biologically realistic nomenclature such as “ker-
are not perpendicular to the skin surface. The basement
atinocytic intraepidermal neoplasia', citing the close
membrane zone is intact; there is no dermal invasion
analogy to the evolution of carcinoma of the human
by atypical squamous epithelial cells unles the lesion
cervix (Yantsos et al., 1999). Others feel that the histo-
progresses to frank squamous cell carcinoma. Mild to
logical and molecular features are sufficiently alike to
moderate nuclear atypia, characterized by nuclear
confirm that AK represents the earliest recognizable form
enlargement and pleomorphism, nucleolar prominence,
of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (Lober & Lober,
and occasional hyperchromasia is observed. Mitotic activ-
2000). The authors concur that AK is best regarded as
ity may be slightly increased, and mitotic figures can occur
one form of squamous cell carcinoma in situ, and suggest
above the basal cell layer. Scattered brightly eosinophilic
the term 'actinic carcinoma in situ' over actinic keratosis
and shrunken apoptotic cells may be present. Hyperpla-
for its superior scientific accuracy. The reluctance to
sia and dysplasia usually also affect the peripheral layers
change the terminology may be based not only on his-
of superficial hair follicles.
 torical precedent, but also on the psychological impact for
Dermal inflammation and degenerative changes are as
the patient/owner when a diagnosis includes ^carcinoma'.
previously described for solar elastosis and fbrosis (see
Chapter 15), and support the presence of chronic solar
damage. Occasionally, there is a dense band of lympho-
Clinical features
cytes and plasma cells below the AK accompanied by
 The only commonly occurring keratosis in dogs and cats 
interface damage; these may be referred to as “lichenoid
 is AK. The incidence varies substantially with geographic
actinic keratoses', as they are in human dermatopathol-
location, climate, and behavior; lower latitude, higher
ogy (Kirkham, 1997).
altitude, arid or semi-arid environment, and prolonged
An acantholytic variant of AK, which also occurs in
sun exposure are all predisposing factors in both animals
humans (Kirkham, 1997), is occasionally observed in cats
Epidermal tumors
577
Fig. 22.16 Early actinic keratosis in a
cat.Moderatelythickened irregular
 dermis and follicular infundibula forrm a
 discrete plaque. Note marked hyperker-
atosis.
Fig. 22.17 Actinic keratosis on the
abdomen of a dog, demonstrating a
plaque of moderate, irregular epiderrmal
thickening and keratinocyte dysplasia
that starts in the basal cell layer and
proceeds upward. Marked, smudgy
solar fibrosis is present in the subjacent
derrnis.
and dogs. Clefts or lacunae develop above dysplastic basal
significant apoptosis, and ^windblown' loss of polarity are
epithelial cells. The clefts contain groups of individualized
most consistent with the latter. Viral cytopathology may
keratinocytes  exhibiting  round,  brightly eosinophilic 
 also be discernible in bowenoid in situ carcinoma (see p.
cytoplasm and pleomorphic, hyperchromatic nuclei.
578) but would be absent in AK. Although the human lit-
 Actinic keratosis is differentiated from squamous cell
erature has a subtype called “bowenoid actinic keratosis'
carcinoma by the absence of dermal invasion; serial sec-
(Kirkham, 1997), it is more likely that these lesions are,
tions are helpful in ruling out early invasive squamous cell
in fact, bowenoid in situ carcinoma with concurrent AK.
carcinoma. Actinic keratosis needs to be distinguished
Exacerbation of viral-induced DNA damage by UV radi-
from lesions of bowenoid in situ carcinoma involving
 ation is well documented in human epidermodysplasia
sun-exposed, lightly-pigmented areas of the skin; full-
verruciformis (see feline viral plaque, p. 574). The fnding
thickness epidermal dysplasia, marked nuclear atypia,
of bowenoid features in a lesion that is clinically an AK
578
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 22.18 Actinic keratosis progress-
ing to squamous cell carcinoma in a
dog. In situ carcinoma characterized by
thickened epidermis with cytoplasmic
pallor and disorderly stratification at
left rmerges into invasive carcinoma at
right. Note laminar solar fibrosis and
elastosis below the actinic keratosis.
warrants immunohistochemistry for papillomavirus and a
 Bowen's disease is usually a solitary lesion that may occur
search for additional lesions on nonsun-exposed skin, as
 on sun-exposed or unexposed skin and often affects the
the therapeutic approach is different.
anogenital regions (Kirkham, 1997; Penneys, 1997); thus
Acantholytic AK may resemble both pemphigus vul-
 many cases represent a sexually-fransmitted disease.
garis and canine Darier's disease. It is differentiated from
Direct animal-to-animal transmission has not been
pemphigus vulgaris partly on clinical grounds; larger
reported. Many of the cases of extragenital Bowen's
numbers of lesions, bilateral symmetry, and involvement
 disease in older literature are due to chronic arsenic expo-
of nonsun-exposed areas are consistent with autoimmune
sure from antiquated medications or more recently, from
disease. Keratinocyte cytoplasmic pallor; nuclear enlarge-
environmental contamination (Kirkham, 1997). In con-
ment, atypia, and loss of polarity, particularly in the basal
trast, no evidence of arsenic exposure was found in the
cell layer; and laminar fbrosis and solar elastosis in the
reported canine and feline cases.
superfcial dermis are features of AK that would not occur
 It is well-accepted that anogenital Bowen's disease is
in either pemphigus vulgaris or canine Darier's disease
associated with infection by strains from the mucosal
(see Chapter 2).
cancer (Kawashima et al., 1990; Kettler et al., 1990;
Collina et al., 1995; Derancourt et al., 2001). Documen-
BOWENOID IN SITU CARCINOMA
tation in the literature of any type of papillomavirus in-
(Synonyms: Bowen's disease, multicentric papillomavirus-
fection in extragenital Bowen's disease in humans is
induced squamous cell carcinoma in situ)
inconsistent, even utilizing sophisticated viral identifca-
tion techniques. Several human studies identifed only
This entity in humans was originally reported by Bowen
mucosal papillomavirus strains in approximately one-
in 1912 as a 'precancerous dermatosis'. It has long been
third of patients tested using in situ DNA hybridization
known as Bowen's disease, and the adjective “bowenoid’
and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) (Collina et al.,
is often used to connote the distinctive epithelial features
1995; Deguchi et al., 1998); in situ DNA hybridization,
of the lesions. An analogous condition has been docu-
Southern blot hybridization, and PCR (Lampert et al.,
mented in the veterinary literature in one dog (Gross &
2000); or in situ DNA hybridization alone (Derancourt et
Brimacomb, 1986) and multiple cats (Turrel & Gross,
al., 2001). All of the lesions in the largest human retro-
1991; Miller et al., 1992; Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992;
spective study were papillomavirus-negative using in situ
Baer & Helton, 1993; Rees & Goldschmidt, 1998;
DNA hybridization and PCR (Lu et al., 1999). Only two
Guaguere et al., 1999).
reports identified papillomaviruses of the epidermodys-
There are some important clinical and etiologic differ-
plasia verruciformis group in one of three (Tieben et al.,
ences between the human and veterinary diseases. Human
1994) and two of fve (de Jong-Tieben et al., 1995)
Epidermal tumors
579
 Bowen's lesions in immunosuppressed human renal trans-
skin may be affected, and pigmented as well as nonpig-
plant patients via a nested PCR technique. In contrast,
mented areas may be involved. Bowenoid in situ carci-
28/63 feline cases were found to be immunohistochemi-
noma on pigmented skin is often heavily melanized. This
cally positive for papillomavirus as described by Clark
phenomenon also occurs occasionally in humans and can
(Gross & Affolter 1998). Papillomavirus was also con-
confound the clinical diagnosis (Papageorgiou et al.,
frmed in an identical canine lesion observed by one
1998; Krishnan et al., 2001).
author (T.L.G.) (Clark, E.G., personal communication
Almost all of the animals reported with BISC are 10
2003). Strain typing of feline and canine papillomaviruses
years of age or older (Miller et al., 1992; Baer & Helton,
is not yet available, but the common detection of papil-
1993; Guaguere et al., 1999); the dog in the single case
lomavirus and the extragenital location of the vast major-
report was 5 years old (Gross & Brimacomb, 1986).
ity of bowenoid lesions in these species is more suggestive
There is no known breed or sex predilection. Bowenoid
of an epidermodysplasia verruciformis-type viral etiology
in situ carcinoma lesions may become locally invasive as
(see feline viral plaque, p. 574). Lesions were present on
squamous cell carcinoma; 17% of feline cases and the one
oral and genital mucous membranes in the one reported
canine case described in the literature developed invasive
dog (Gross & Brimacomb, 1986); investigation for papil-
squamous cell carcinoma. That is considerably higher
lomavirus was not done in that case, but the mucosal
than the incidence in humans, but may reflect the rela-
involvement suggests the possibility of a different type of
 tively small number of animals reported. The majority of
papillomavirus infection from the more typical cases with
lesions probably remain as in situ carcinomas. Metastasis
cutaneous lesions only.
has not been observed. The authors have also seen basal
The reported incidence of progression of human
cell carcinomas arise in feline BISC (see p. 589).
 Bowen's disease to invasive squamous cell carcinoma
ranges from 3% to 11%, but is usually less than 5%
Histopathology (Figures 22.19 through 22.21)
(Kirkham, 1997). In contrast, frank squamous cell carci-
noma developed in an average of 17% of cats in the
Bowenoid in situ carcinoma is characterized by a discrete
above-cited studies. Due to these differences between
plaque of moderate to severe, irregular epidermal hyper-
human and animal lesions, the term “bowenoid in situ
plasia with formation of broad rete ridges; follicular
carcinoma' (BISC) is preferred by the authors
infundibula within the plaque are similarly affected. Mod-
 Human renal transplant patients develop papilloma-
erate to marked hyperkeratosis and/or parakeratosis
virus-associated Bowen's disease due to iatrogenic
is present, and serocellular crusting is often observed.
immunosuppression (Tieben et al., 1994; Collina et al.,
Rarely, hyperkeratosis is of suffcient severity to produce
1995; de Jong-Tieben et al., 1995; Lampert et al., 2000).
a cutaneous horn (Rees & Goldschmidt, 1998). Lesions
Impaired immune surveillance may also be a factor in
 on pigmented areas typically show marked hyperpigmen-
animals; 22% of the reported feline cases were positive
tation extending into the stratum corneum.
for either feline immunodefciency virus (FIV) or feline
There is full-thickness dysplasia manifested by marked
leukemia virus (FeLV) (Miller et al., 1992; Baer & Helton,
loss of nuclear polarity and disruption of normal epithe-
1993; Guaguere et al., 1999). In one small case series, all
lial
stratification.  Dysplastic 
 epithelium frequently
of the cats had concurrent demodicosis (Guaguere et al.,
descends around follicular infundibula as an irregularly-
1999). Older reports suggested that Bowen's disease may
be a marker for internal malignancy in humans,
but
licular epithelium. In the reported cases with concurrent
several more recent large retrospective studies have ruled
 demodicosis, the mites were found in hair follicles within
out any statistically significant link (Chuang et al., 1990;
the BISC lesions only (Guaguere et al., 1999). Ker-
Kovacs et al., 1996; Jaeger et al., 1999). Thus, it is likely
atinocyte size and appearance are highly variable and
that the concurrent myxosarcoma in the canine case
range from small with ovoid, hyperchromatic nuclei to
report (Gross & Brimacomb, 1986) and the mediastinal
large with pale, glycogenated cytoplasm and bizarre,
lymphoma in one cat in a case series (Baer & Helton,
multilobular nuclei. Multinucleated tumor cells may be
1993) were incidental.
present in small numbers. Groups of cells often have
dorsoventrally elongated nuclei that are tilted in one
Clinical features
direction; this produces the classically described “wind-
 blown? pattern. Occasionally, large atypical keratinocytes 
Bowenoid in situ carcinoma is uncommon in cats and very
are grouped into nests within relatively less dysplastic
rare in dogs. Lesions of BISC usually present as multi-
epidermis.
focal, heavily-crusted plaques and verrucous lesions
The nucleoplasm may have a hyalinized, pale
occurring in any location on the body. Solitary lesions are
 basophilic appearance. Nucleoli are variable. Mitotic
seen infrequently. Sun-exposed and/or nonsun-exposed
activity is low to moderate, and mitotic fgures may be
580
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 22.19 Early bowenoid in situ car-
cinoma in a cat. The epidermis has mild
thickening, nuclear enlargement, and
some loss of normal stratification. Note
the group of koilocytes showing clear
cytoplasm and shrunken nuclei in the
stratum spinosum.
Fig. 22.20 Bowenoid in situ carci-
noma in a cat. Irregularly thickened
epidermis  and  follicular  infundi-
bula have full-thickness disruption of
normal  stratification  and  nuclear
polarity. Note enlarged, hyperchro-
matic nuclei.
present in all cell layers. Scattered shrunken, brightly
dermis. The underlying dermis exhibits vascular dilata-
eosinophilic (apoptotic) cells are often seen. Papilloma-
ion and nonspecific perivascular inflammation; solar
viral cytopathic effect, manifested by koilocytosis (ker-
fbrosis and elastosis may also be seen in sun-exposed
atinocytes with clear cytoplasm and pyknotic nuclei) and
lesions (see Chapter 15).
clusters of large round keratohyalin granules, may be
detected within the plaque or in immediately adjacent epi-
tinctive clinical and histologic features, and diagnosis is
dermis. The basement membrane zone is intact until very
straightforward. If lesions are limited to sun-exposed skin
late in the course of the disease, when frank squamous
in a light-colored animal, differentiation from actinic ker-
cell carcinoma or basal cell carcinoma may invade the
 atosis may be required. Uncomplicated actinic keratosis
Epidermal tumors
581
Fig. 22.21 Bowenoid in situ carci-
noma in a dog. Papillomavirus im-
munostain colors small numbers of
cells in the upper stratum spinosum,
stratum granulosum, and cornified
layer; pigmented cellsin the dermis are
melanophages (chromogen  diamino-
benzidine [DAB]).
has the majority of atypical cells in the basal and lower
immunocompromised patients, have a high incidence
spinous layers; full-thickness epithelial dysplasia with
of metastasis (Kirkham, 1997). Additional prognostic
"windblown' abnormal nuclear polarity, giant pale ker-
factors include histologic grade, histologic subtype, and
atinocytes, or papillomavirus cytopathology warrant a
perineural invasion (Khanna et al., 2002). In one retro-
diagnosis of BISC. The subtype in humans designated
spective study, the 5-year survival dropped from 86% to
"bowenoid actinic keratosis′ is virtually indistinguishable
50% when perineural invasion was present in SCC and
from Bowen's disease (Kirkham, 1997). It is likely that
basal cell carcinoma (Williams et al., 2001).
lesions of BISC occurring on sun-exposed skin are com-
The most common SCCs are usually separated into
plicated by chronic actinic damage, considering that the
well-differentiated, moderately-differentiated and poorly-
synergistic oncogenic effect of papillomavirus infection
 differentiated categories; uncommon subtypes include
and UV radiation is well-documented in human epider-
acantholytic  (adenoid, 
,pseudoglandular), clear cell,
modysplasia verruciformis (see feline viral plaque, p.
spindle cell, keratoacanthoma-like, desmoplastic (neu-
 574). Immunohistochemistry for papillomavirus may aid
rotropic), verrucous, mucin-producing (adenosquamous,
 in confrming the etiology.
mucoepidermoid), and carcinoma arising in Bowen's
disease (Nappi et al., 1989; Kirkham, 1997; Petter &
Haustein, 2000; Khanna et al., 2002). The well-
SQUAMOUS CELL CARCINOMA
differentiated, moderately-differentiated, poorly-differen-
Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is common
tiated, acantholytic, clear cell, spindle cell, and Bowen's-
in humans, and its frequency is increasing worldwide
associated types are also seen in dogs and/or cats (Gross
(Wassberg et al., 2001). More than 80% of cutaneous
& Brimacomb, 1986; Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992;
-id aso u ro u Aoa ase on pun am s
Miller et al., 1992; Baer & Helton, 1993; Goldschmidt et
imity to an actinic keratosis (Mittelbronn et al., 1998);
al., 1998; Scott et al., 2001). Acantholytic, spindle cell,
 similarly, actinic keratoses and SCCs often coexist in dogs
 desmoplastic, and mucin-producing variants are reported
and cats. Thermal injury may also be a predisposing
to be more aggressive than common-type SCC in humans
factor as it is in humans; there is a single case report of
(Nappi et al., 1989; Kirkham, 1997; Petter & Haustein,
SCC arising in a burn scar in a dog (Gourley et al., 1982).
2000; Khanna et al., 2002). Similar data are not available
The most significant predictive histologic factor for
in animals. Verrucous SCC has been recognized by the
metastasis of SCC in humans is tumor depth; lesions less
 authors and is a new addition to this chapter. As the name
than 2 mm thick do not metastasize, while those greater
implies, it resembles a wart and has an indolent biologic
than 5 to 6 mm in depth, or invading muscle, cartilage, or
behavior both in humans (Kirkham, 1997) and dogs.
bone have an average metastatic potential of 20% based
The causal factors and pathogenetic mechanisms for
on several retrospective studies (Khanna et al., 2002).
the majority of cutaneous invasive SCC in all mammalian
Tumors associated with chronic inflammatory or degen-
species are very similar to those for actinic keratosis,
erative dermatoses, such as burn scars, as well as those in
which represents SCC in situ (see p. 575). UV-specific
582
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
mutations in the pS3 tumor suppressor gene are well-
carcinoma occurs most frequently in sun-damaged skin
documented and have been reported in 54% to 75% of
and may be preceded by actinic keratosis; the incidence
SCC in humans (Nagano et al., 1993; Kerschmann et al.,
 is, therefore, partially dependent upon geography and
1994; Coulter et al., 1995; Shimizu et al., 1997). In addi-
climate.
tion, mutation of p16, another tumor suppresor gene,
 Squamous cell carcinomas present as plaque-like, cra-
was found in 100% of actinic keratoses and cutaneous
teriform, papillary, or fungiform masses that vary from
 SCC in one study, but the immunohistochemical staining
several millimeters to several centimeters in diameter.
 of the abnormal gene product in the SCC was stronger
 Alopecia, erythema, ulceration, and crusting are present.
and more diffuse (Hodges & Smoller 2002). Mutations
Lesions may be single or multiple. There is usually a tem-
 in the p53 tumor suppressor gene, which can be demon-
poral progression from small plaques to larger ulcerative,
strated immunohistochemically due to overexpression of
or exophytic lesions.
the abnormal gene product, have been identifed in an
Nasal planum, pinnae, and eyelids are the most 
average of 53% and 32% of cutaneous SCCs in cats and
common sites in cats. Spindle cell SCC is found most often
dogs, respectively, although the total case numbers in the
on the pinnae in cats. In dogs, the most frequently affected
three reported studies was small (Teifke & Lohr, 1996;
areas are ventral abdomen, ventral fanks, and medial
Murakami et al., 2000; Albaric et al., 2001). A variety of
stifles. Tumors on canine ventrum are often indurated due
 cell surface and matrical biochemical changes, such as
to associated solar fbrosis (see Chapter 15). Nonsolar-
overexpression of epidermal growth factor receptor or
associated SCC can occur anywhere on the body. Verru-
matrix metalloproteinases, have also recently been found
cous SCC is more common in the oral cavity. Tumors
 to be infuential in determining the aggressiveness of SCC
 involving the nasal planum in dogs are rare and may be
in humans (Koseki et al., 1999; Tsukifuji et al., 1999;
associated with chronic inflammation rather than chronic
Shimizu et al., 2001; Xu et al., 2001).
solar damage (Rogers et al., 1995; Scott & Miller, 1995).
The etiologic role of papillomavirus in human SCC
Rarely in humans, SCCs arise in follicular cysts (Lopez-
is still controversial. Some studies have found random
Rios et al., 1999; Wong et al., 2000). The authors have
strains of papillomavirus ubiquitously, suggesting that it
seen occasional cases in dogs, and there is one report of
is not of pathogenic signifcance (Harwood et al., 2000;
 malignant transformation of multiple cysts in a dog (Scott 
Meyer et al., 2001; Forslund et al., 2003), while other
& Teixeira, 1995).
reports have demonstrated an increased frequency of anti-
Cats with white facial or pinnal fur and short-coated
bodies against specific oncogenic strains in patients with
 dogs with white or piebald ventral coat color have the
actinic keratosis and SCC, suggesting that it could be a
highest incidence of SCC. The risk for white cats is 13
cofactor in tumor development (Bouwes Bavinck et al.,
times higher than for cats of other coat colors (Ruslander
2000; Masini et al., 2003). Papillomavirus was identifed
et al., 1997). Dalmatians, Pit Bull Terriers, harlequin
by immunohistochemistry in 27 of 100 canine SCCs from
Great Danes, and Beagles are typical high-risk breeds.
various anatomic locations including skin by Schwegler et
Affected cats are usually 5 years of age or older with an
al. (1997), but no viral antigen was found in a similar
average age of 11 (Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992). Dogs
study by Sironi et al. (1990). Clark found papillomavirus
may develop squamous cell carcinoma as early as 3 years
via immunohistochemistry in four of 17 invasive SCCs
 of age but the average is 10 years (Goldschmidt & Shofer,
arising from feline bowenoid in situ carcinoma (Gross &
1992).
Affolter, 1998). Papillomaviruses have been identifed in
The tumors may be highly invasive and locally destruc-
some cases of verrucous SCC in humans by electron
tive with a gradual loss of tissue of the pinna or nose.
microscopy or in situ hybridization (Kirkham, 1997). No
Metastasis of SCC is reported in most references as rare
papillomavirus was found in canine oral verrucous SCC
or occurring late in the course of disease; however,
(Head et al., 2003).
 numeric data are generally not provided. Similarly, statis-
tics on histologic grade or subtype are rarely given in
Clinical features
factors such as perineural invasion and fne gradation of
Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common malignant
tumor depth have not been addressed; such studies in the
neoplasm of the skin in cats and the second most common
 future may allow more appropriate prognosis and thera-
in dogs, following mast cell tumor. The reported incidence
 peutic approaches for dogs and cats with SCC. In the orig-
in cats ranges from 15% to 49% (Burrows et al., 1994;
inal study of solar-associated skin lesions in a Beagle
Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992; Miller et al., 1991) and in
colony in Colorado, two of 18 dogs with invasive SCC
dogs from 3% to 20% (Bevier & Goldschmidt, 1981;
had metastases to lymph node or lung (Hargis et al.,
Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992); these wide variations are
1977). Of 15 cats available for necropsy in a large study
largely a reflection of geographic location. Squamous cell
on nasal planum SCC, seven had regional and one had
Epidermal tumors
583
distant metastasis (Théon et al., 1995). Thirteen of 61 cats
erosive, plaque-like lesions comprising islands and tra-
with nasal or pinnal SCC died or were euthanized due to
beculae of squamous cells that originate from the epider-
local disease progression; of these, only one had lymph
mis and extend into the dermis. The authors have seen
node metastasis (Lana et al., 1997). The majority of dogs 
rare examples of well-differentiated SCC arising from
with nasal planum SCC were euthanized due to extensive
superfcial hair follicles or follicular cysts without involve-
or recurrent local disease, and necropsies were not
ment of the epidermis. The intact overlying epidermis
performed (Rogers et al., 1995; Scott & Miller 1995).
generally has parakeratosis and crusting; occasionally,
The dog with multicentric SCC in follicular cysts had
marked hyperkeratosis may produce a cutaneous horn.
metastasis to lung and bone (Scott & Teixeira, 1995).
An overlying or adjacent actinic keratosis or, less fre-
These data suggest that late and/or clinically inapparent
quently, viral plaque may be identifed.
metastasis may be more prevalent than previously
 There is fairly orderly progression from polyhedral,
suspected.
nonkeratinized basal cells at the periphery of the neo-
Histologic grade per se was not found to be of prog-
plastic epithelial structures to large, polygonal, kera-
nostic significance in the study on radiation therapy of
tinized cells at the centers. The polyhedral basal cells may
feline nasal SCC, although higher proliferative fraction
be only one layer thick in very well differentiated neo-
(percentage of nuclei  staining  immunohistochemically
m sa ui sial an asdo ke ai io 'sused
with proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), which
differentiated SCC. Central accumulations of compact
tends to parallel histologic grade) and tumor size did cor-
laminated keratin, or keratin pearls, are present in
relate with less favorable outcome (Théon et al., 1995).
variable size and numbers. Large masses of parakeratotic
Unfortunately, the current World Health Organization
cells may also occur. Keratinization progresses through
veterinary staging system has no categories between T:
a granular cell layer as in normal epidermis
or
(carcinoma in situ) and T, (<2cm), precluding compari-
  s   n 
son between superficial invasive SCC and those extend-
lobules may undergo necrosis and become infltrated by
ing into deep dermis.
neutrophils.
 The cytoplasm of the peripheral basaloid cells is scant
Histopathology
and amphophilic; the more central keratinized cells have
moderate to abundant, eosinophilic cytoplasm. Some
Well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma
SCCs show moderate to abundant cytoplasmic glyco
(Figures 22.22 through 22.24)
genation manifested by clear, fnely-reticulated cytoplasm;
This is the most common histologic variant in both dogs
the more extreme examples are analogous to the human
and cats; the authors include moderately-differentiated
clear cell subtype. Nuclei are usually large and vesicular;
tumors in this category. Well-differentiated tumors are
nucleoli are variable in size and are usually single.
Fig. 22.22 Well-differentiated squa-
mous cell carcinoma in a cat. Islands
and trabeculae of squamous epithelium
show orderly differentiation from
nonkeratinized to keratinized cells.
Note central keratin pearls infiltrated
by neutrophils.
584
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 22.23 Well-differentiated squa-
mous cell carcinoma with perineural
invasion in a cat. A segment of a nerve
in the lower center of the field is sur-
rounded by a narrow cuff of neoplastic
epithelium (arrow).
Squamous cell carcinomas occasionally display groups of
dorsoventrally elongated nuclei that are tilted in one
direction, producing a ‘windblown’ pattern. Bizarre,
multilobular nuclei with smudgy chromatin may also be
seen. Neoplasms with these latter two features may be
described as *bowenoid'; this should prompt a search for
additional lesions of bowenoid in situ carcinoma and viral
plaques (see pp. 578, 571, and 574). Mitotic activity
usually higher in dogs than in cats.
Stromal fbroplasia is usually moderate to abundant,
and the stroma often contains small clusters and strands
of partially-keratinized tumor cells. Stromal infltration
by a variety of inflammatory cells is generally present.
 Foci of perineural infltration by small aggregates of neo-
plastic cells may be identified within or adjacent to the
neoplasm; this phenomenon is most commonly observed
 in feline pinnal and nasal SCC, and may be responsible
for local recurrence after apparent complete excision.
Lymphatic or vascular invasion is occasionally detected.
 Diagnosis of well-differentiated SCC should not be
problematic.
Poorly-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma
(Figure 22.25)
This is a less common subgroup with similar overall archi-
tecture to well-differentiated SCC. Epithelial structures
tend to be smaller; cords and nests rather than large
islands of squamous epithelial cells often predominate.
Fig. 22.24 Submandibular lymph node with metastatic well-differ-
 Alternatively, large sheets of cells may be present. Stromal
entiated squamous cell carcinoma in a cat.
collagen production is generally less prominent. The
majority of the neoplastic cells exhibit amphophilic cyto-
Epidermal tumors
585
Fig. 22.25 Poorly-differentiated squa-
mous cell carcinoma in a cat. Islands
and nests of pleomorphic epithelial
cells with haphazard partial keratiniza-
tion infiltrate an inflammatory stroma.
 Nasal cartilage is at bottom.
Hig. 22.26 Acantholytic squamous
cell carcinoma in a cat. Individualized
keratinocytes are present within clefts
in the superficial aspects of this plaque-
like neoplasm. Orderly maturation and
some keratin pearls are still present.
plasm, variably hyperchromatic nuclei, and prominent
diagnosis of SCC. Sebaceous carcinomas usually have at
nucleoli, which may be multiple. There is moderate to
least small numbers of cells with smooth-edged vacuoles.
high mitotic activity and frequent mitotic atypia. Keratin
Lipid stain, e.g. oil red O, performed on wet tissue would
 pearls are not observed, but individual dyskeratotic cells
be negative in SCC and positive in sebaceous carcinoma.
 Or clusters of partially-keratinized cells may be present.
Immunohistochemistry also may be helpful (see below).
Poorly-differentiated SCC may be difficult to distin-
guish from other anaplastic carcinomas, such as those of
Acantholytic squamous cell carcinoma
sebaceous and perianal gland origin, which may show
(Figures 22.26 through 22.28)
extensive squamous metaplasia. Multifocal contiguity of
Acantholytic (adenoid, pseudoglandular) SCC is an
neoplastic tissue with dysplastic epidermis supports a
uncommon variant. Small areas of acantholysis may be
586
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 22.27 Acantholytic squamous
cell carcinoma in a dog. In this example
many of the cells have very pale cyto-
plasm due to glycogen accumulation.
present in otherwise banal SCC, but a diagnosis of acan-
tholytic SCC requires that this be the dominant pattern.
The pseudoglandular structures are formed by drop-out
of partially-keratinized cells from the centers of epithelial
islands and trabeculae due to loss of intercellular junc-
tions. Residual keratinized cells float in the pseudolumens
or are attached to the peripheral cell layer by elongated
intercellular bridges. Foci of well-differentiated SCC are
often identifiable in some areas of the neoplasm.
Differentiation of acantholytic SCC from glandular
 neoplasms, particularly apocrine ductular adenocarcino-
mas, may be problematic. Absence of classical apocrine
decapitation secretion, absence of accumulations of
secretory protein, and presence of active acantholysis
characterized by individualized keratinized cells within
pseudolumens support a diagnosis of SCC. The epidermal
contiguity of SCC can be very diffcult to distinguish from
acrosyringial differentiation and/or follicular contiguity in
apocrine ductular adenocarcinoma; adjacent epidermal
dysplasia is a useful marker for SCC but is not always
 present. Immunohistochemistry will allow defnitive diag-
nosis in equivocal cases (see below).
Spindle cell squamous cell carcinoma
(Figures 22.29 and 22.30)
This is a rare variant of poorly-differentiated SCC and is
composed of large, pleomorphic spindle and polygonal
cells that have abundant, pale or amphophilic cytoplasm.
Fig. 22.28 Acantholytic squamous cell carcinoma in a dog.
Areas of malignant transformation may be discernible in
Pseudoglandular structures contain individualized keratinocytes
the overlying epidermis with loss of a distinct basement
within their lumens. Note that occasional acantholytic cells are still
membrane zone, and atypical spindle cells appear to
stream downward from these areas into the dermis. Foci
Epidermal tumors
587
Fig. 22.29 Spindle cell squamous cell
carcinoma in a cat. Pleomorphic
spindle and polygonal cells
are
arranged in loose bundles and nests.
Note small areas of contiguity with
hyperplastic and dysplastic foci of the
epiderrmis.
Hig. 22.30 Higher magnification of
Fig.
22.29. Spindle cells appear
stream downward from a focus
of
malignant
transformation of
keratinocytes.
of partial keratinization characterized by polygonal cells
SCC; serial sectioning may be required to locate these fea-
with moderate, glassy, eosinophilic cytoplasm may be
tures. Amelanotic malignant melanomas often abut the
present in limited areas of the mass. Nuclei are large and
dermal-epidermal junction and can have a lentiginous
vesicular and have prominent nucleoli. The mitotic index
intraepidermal component (multiple individual neoplastic
is high.
melanocytes infltrating the basal cell layer) that may be
Spindle cell SCC must be distinguished from high-grade
diffcult to differentiate from atypical basal keratinocytes.
spindle cell sarcomas; the primary differential diagnosis is
Other mesenchymal tumors, such as leiomyosarcoma
amelanotic melanoma. Contiguity with overlying dys-
and malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor usually
plastic epidermis and/or small foci of more typical epithe-
have a small zone of uninvolved superfcial dermis, but
lial morphology confirm a diagnosis of spindle cell
this may not be apparent in ulcerated lesions. Definitive
588
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 22.31 Verrucous squamous cell
carcinoma in a dog. The lesion has a
papillomatous architecture, but epithe-
lial aggregates are more irregular and
mildly invasive at the deep margin.
diagnosis often requires immunohistochemical studies
(see below).
Verrucous squamous cell carcinomd
(Figures 22.31 and 22.32)
This rare variant of SCC has been observed by the authors
only in dogs; it appears to be closely analogous to human
verrucous SCC and is of very low-grade malignancy. Ver-
rucous SCC has both exophytic and endophytic architec-
ture characterized by broad papillary proliferations,
trabeculae with rounded ends, and large tubular invagi-
nations. The rabeculae and tubular structures invade
downward and anastomose; large lesions may have the
appearance of branching tunnels resembling a rabbit
warren, giving rise to the antiquated Latin synonym car-
cinoma cuniculatum (Kirkham, 1997). The tumor com-
prises fairly small, polyhedral keratinocytes, resembling
the lower stratum spinosum of the epidermis, and a
peripheral  basal  cell  layer.  Complete cornification
through a granular cell layer does not occur in the
endophytic component, and keratin pearls are absent.
     
atinocytes, small amounts of amorphous keratin and
inflammatory cells. The cells have scant to moderate,
pink cytoplasm. The nuclei are mildly to moderately
 aa a  e r 
small nucleoli that may be multiple. Mitotic activity is
low, but atypical mitoses and mitotic fgures above the
basal cell layer are present. Apoptosis, characterized by
shrinkage  and hypereosinophilia of individual  ker-
Fig. 22.32 Higher magnification of Fig. 22.31. Epithelial trabecu
atinocytes, may be present and may contribute to the
lae with smooth borders have mild nuclear pleomorphism and fairly
debris in the tunnels.
Jow mitotic activity that is not confined to the basal cel layer.
Epidermal tumors
589
Verrucous SCC can be diffcult to recognize as a malig-
nodular (noduloulcerative), micronodular superficial,
nancy, and the exophytic component may be confused
infltrative, and morpheaform (fbrosing). Common and
with squamous papilloma, viral papilloma, or even papil-
uncommon histologic variants, most of which can occur
lomatous epidermal hyperplasia in small or superficial
 in any of the aforementioned patterns, include but are not
incisional biopsies. Viral cytopathology (see viral papil-
 limited to pigmented BCC, solid (undifferentiated) BCC,
loma, p. 567) is absent in verrucous SCC, and the lesions
BCC with sebaceous differentiation, BCC with follicular
are usually larger than papillomas. Invasion below the
differentiation (keratotic BCC), BCC with matrical dif-
basement membrane zone, atypical mitotic fgures, and
ferentiation, fbroepithelioma, BCC with amyloid stroma,
mitotic activity above the basal cell layer support a diag.
adenoid BCC, adamantinoid BCC, clear cell BCC, and
nosis of SCC, but these features may not be present in
granular cell BCC (Murphy & Elder 1991; Kirkham,
superficial specimens. If a sample from a nonviral papil-
1997). Neoplasms corresponding to solid, keratinizing
lomatous epithelial lesion does not contain uninvolved
(keratotic), and clear cell BCC are recognized by the
subjacent dermis, it is prudent to request a deeper biopsy.
authors in dogs and/or cats. The terms nodular, superfi-
The branching tunnel architecture of the invasive endo-
cial, or infltrative are generally not applied to canine and
phytic component of verrucous SCC is distinctive, and
feline BCC, although any of these architectural patterns
identification of atypical mitotic fgures and mitotic activ-
can occur in the context of solid, keratinizing, or clear cell
ity above the basal cell layer confirms the diagnosis.
variants. Solid BCC and, rarely, keratinizing BCC may be
pigmented.
Immunohistochemistry
The exact nature of BCC in humans has been a source
 of controversy for many years. Architecturally, it appears
The majority of SCCs are positive with any of the
to originate from the lower layer of the epidermis. Some
commercially available pancytokeratin stains, such as
pathologists before 1980, using only light and electron
AE1/AE3, as are most other epithelial tumors; however,
microscopy, believed BCC to be adnexal rather than
some spindle-celled SCCs are negative (Sigel et al., 2001).
epidermal; since the mid 1980s, as primitive follicular
An immunostain for the high molecular weight cytoker-
neoplasms have become better characterized morpho-
atins (CK5/6) has recently become available for formalin-
 logically and immunohistochemically in humans, benign
fixed tissue and has been shown to be a sensitive marker
follicular entities such as desmoplastic trichoepithelioma
for all SCC types (Sigel et al., 2001). Papillomavirus
and trichoblastoma have been culled from the overly-
immunostain should be considered if bowenoid features or
inclusive “basal cell carcinoma’ category (Murphy &
koilocytosis are present. Distinction of poorly-differenti-
Elder, 1991; Kirkham, 1997; Cribier et al., 2000). Simi-
ated SCC from carcinomas of sebaceous/perianal gland
larly in veterinary pathology, trichoblastomas (see
origin may be possible with certain immunostaining tech-
 Chapter 23) and several ductular sweat gland neoplasms
niques for certain clones of CD79a, the pan-B lymphocyte
(see Chapter 25) replace most of the old “basal cell tumor'
marker, but the veracity of this staining reaction is uncon-
-dan oi sieadde ien iasqns leus aun Aiuo sunaeal "dnona
frmed and requires additional investigation (see sebaceous
resent true BCC. The majority of the feline lesions
carcinoma, Chapter 24). The utility of immunostains for
described as solid BCC in Veterinary Dermatopathology
androgen and/or estrogen receptors in dogs and cats as
(Walder & Gross, 1992) were erroneously believed to be
markers of sebaceous/perianal gland differentiation has
malignant and have been reclassified as solid-cystic duc.
yet to be determined. Negative staining for CK8, CK13 or
tular sweat gland adenoma; the remainder comprise both
CAM5.2 (CK7/8) readily distinguishes acantholytic SCC
 BCC and solid-cystic ductular sweat gland carcinoma (see
from adenocarcinomas. Immunostains for vimentin, S100,
Chapter 25).
microphthalmia transcription factor, melanoma isoform
 Since the mid 1990s, as increasing numbers of individ-
(MITF-M), and smooth muscle actin are useful adjuncts
ual keratin markers have become available, multiple
for differentiating spindle cell SCC from melanoma, malig-
studies comparing human BCC to normal hair follicles
nant peripheral nerve sheath tumor, leiomyosarcoma, and
or benign hair follicle tumors, particularly trichoepithe-
sarcomas in general.
lioma and trichoblastoma, have shown a very similar
cytokeratin (CK) profle (Schirren et al., 1997; Yoshikawa
et al., 1998; Jih et al., 1999; Kruger et al., 1999;
BASAL CELL CARCINOMA
Yamamoto & Asahi, 1999; Kurzen et al., 2001). An
(Synonym: basal cell epithelioma)
overview of these reports reveals that the mutual markers
in most cases are cytokeratins 5, 6, 10, 14, 15, 16, 17,
Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is the most common malig-
and 19 in various combinations. These results point to
nancy in humans. The major architectural patterns are
follicular outer root sheath, possibly the bulge region
590
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
where the stem cells are located, as the common differ-
in humans, a significant proportion of BCCs in cats
entiation pathway. However staining of BCCs for some
coexist with actinic keratoses and squamous cell carcino-
of these cytokeratins, particularly two of the three puta-
mas, but others occur in nonsun-exposed locations. Some
tive follicular stem cell markers CK15 and CK19, was
of these arise from bowenoid in situ carcinoma (see p.
 negative in some studies and limited in distribution in
 578) and are thus likely of papillomaviral etiology. Basal
others. It is possible that the negative-staining tumors
 cell carcinomas in dogs are rarely seen in conjunction with
derive from alternate stem cell populations located in epi-
other solar lesions, and their pathogenesis is largely
dermis, sweat glands or sebaceous glands; this may help
unknown.
to explain the wide variety of morphologic variations
reported for human BCC (Jih et al., 1999). In addition,
Clinical features
the antiapoptotic protein bcl-2 can be immunohisto-
chemically identified in most BCCs, and BerEP4, an
The authors believe that true BCCs are uncommon in cats
epithelial membrane glycopolypeptide antigen, is positive
and rare in dogs. Regretfully, there is little reliable inci-
in all BCCs; these two markers also stain many tricho-
dence data in the veterinary literature, as most of these
epitheliomas/trichoblastomas to some degree but are vir-
neoplasms have either been included in the old general
tually negative in squamous cell carcinomas, thus lending
category of “basal cell tumor’ or have been confused with
support to the follicular nature of BCC (Tellechea et al.,
 the solid-cystic variant of apocrine ductular adenoma or
1993; Swanson, et al., 1998).
carcinoma (see Chapter 25). One source reports that
Although the preponderance of recent evidence in
BCCs comprise 1.25% and less than 0.3% of skin tumors
humans suggests that the majority of BCCs are primitive
in cats and dogs, respectively (Goldschmidt & Shofer,
follicular carcinomas, it has been traditional to include
1992). In the only journal report of BCC in two cats,
them with tumors of epidermal origin in reference texts
extremely large, deeply invasive, anaplastic tumors were
because of their multifocal connections to the basal cell
described; this is a very unusual presentation for BCC and
layer of the epidermis; this may need to be changed in the
 these cases may have represented another type of small
 near future. Based on their close histologic and biologic
cell carcinoma (Day et al., 1994).
similarities, there is no reason to suspect that the histo-
The authors recognize three major histopathologic
genesis of canine and feline BCC is significantly different
variants of BCC in dogs and cats: solid, keratinizing
from that in humans; however it is not known which of
(keratotic), and clear cell. Solid BCC is the most common
 the more specifc immunohistochemical markers will be
variant in cats, and keratinizing BCC is the most frequent
beneficial in confrming this hypothesis.
in dogs. Pure clear cell BCC has been observed almost
As in actinic keratoses and squamous cell carcinomas
exclusively in cats. It is currently controversial whether
(see pp. 575 and 581), chronic exposure to ultraviolet
follicular or any other adnexal differentiation is permis-
(UV) radiation is a key factor in the induction of many
 sible in neoplasms designated as BCCs in animals. Some
BCCs in humans; however lesions also occur on nonex-
authors may choose to place keratinizing BCC in the
posed skin. Mutations in the p53 tumor suppressor gene,
"infiltrative'
? or malignant trichoepithelioma category
usually identifed immunohistochemically by overexpres-
based on patterns of cornification that resemble these
sion of gene product, are reported in 33% to 56% of
panfollicular tumors (see Chapter 23) (Goldschmidt &
human BCCs; mutations with the “UV signature’ of spe-
Shofer, 1992; Goldschmidt et al., 1998).
cifc DNA pyrimidine base substitutions occurred in 32%
 Basal cell carcinomas usually present as indurated
to 65% of those (Auepemkiate et al., 2002; Kim et al.,
plaques or umbilicated nodules measuring several mil-
2002; Lacour, 2002; Weihrauch et al., 2002; Bolshakov
limeters to several centimeters in diameter. Lesions in cats
et al., 2003). An additional highly complex signaling
are usually considerably smaller than those in dogs, but
 pathway, which is normally involved in embryonic devel-
 are much more likely to be multicentric. The overlying
opment of hair follicles as well as many other structures,
epidermis is commonly alopecic, crusted, and ulcerated.
has recently been found to be of primary significance in
The skin may have a black or blue tint due to melanin
 BCC induction in mice and humans, and its details are
pigment within the neoplasm. Feline BCCs occur most
still being elucidated (Dahmane et al., 1997; Fan et al.,
commonly on the nose, face, and ears, but may arise in
1997; Parisi & Lin, 1998; Tojo et al., 1999, 2002, 2003;
other locations, particularly when associated with
Sheng et al., 2002; Teh et al., 2002; Wetmore, 2003); of
bowenoid in situ carcinoma. Basal cell carcinomas in dogs
import is the identifcation of UV-signature mutations in
are usually truncal, but only occasionally affect glabrous
one of the genes, known as 'patched', within this pathway
skin. One author (E.J.W.) has seen a single example of
in many BCCs (Kim et al., 2002; Lacour, 2002).
BCC in canine nailbed (see Chapter 26).
A causal relationship between chronic sun exposure
The average age of cats with “basal cell tumors', which
and BCCs in dogs and cats has not been established. As
would include BCCs, was 10 years in several large surveys
Epidermal tumors
591
(Carpenter et al., 1987; Miller et al., 1991); the tumors
surface of the epidermis, which is generally eroded or
reported separately as BCCs occurred in cats from 5
ulcerated. Primarily in cats, the overlying epidermis may
to 17 years old with an average age of 12 years
also show cytologic changes consistent with viral plaque,
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992). The large majority of
 actinic keratosis, or bowenoid in situ carcinoma (see pp.
BCCs seen by the authors occur in cats at least 10 years
574, 575 and 578). Basal cell carcinomas comprise mul-
old and in dogs at least 8 years old.
tiple, discrete, epithelial aggregates that vary in size and
The incidence of recurrence and metastasis of BCC in
shape within and among the tumors. The margins of
cats is very low; numeric data are not available. The
the epithelial aggregates may be smooth, angular, 
10
reported rate of metastasis of human BCC to lymph node
markedly jagged or spiky. Lesions composed largely of
and/or lung is only 0.003% to 0.55% and usually occurs
anastomosing or retiform cords of cells, as in human
in chronic tumors that have recurred after excision
adenoid and fbroepithelioma BCC subtypes, have not
(Robinson & Dahiya, 2003). Carpenter et al. (1987)
 been recognized in dogs or cats.
reported one instance of lymph node metastasis out of ten
The neoplastic cells of solid BCC resemble basal cells
feline “basal cell tumors’ that appeared histologically
of the epidermis or hair follicles. They are polyhedral or
malignant. One of the two putative cases of BCC reported
prismatic and have scant, pale cytoplasm without obvious
by Day et al. (1994) metastasized to regional lymph node
intercellular bridges. Their nuclei are large, ovoid to elon-
and lung. The lower recurrence rate in comparison to
 gate, and variably hyperchromatic. Mild anisokaryosis
human BCC is most likely a reflection of more aggressive 
 may be present, but nuclear pleomorphism is usually not
initial surgical excision for animal tumors in general.
a prominent feature. The high nuclear to cytoplasmic
Metastasis of canine BCC has not been documented.
ratio results in a lesion that appears dark blue at scanning
 magnification. Nucleoli are generally small. Mitotic activ-
 idaie i in a   sa a
Histopathology
may be present. Palisading of cells around the periphery
uoiod e iseal ie u iuasaid si saieaaiae peaqda au jo
Solid basal cell carcinoma (Figures 22.33 through
of the neoplasm. Polarity of the internal cells is haphaz-
22.37)
ard. Small areas of spindling may be present. The tumor
 Basal cell carcinomas (BCCs) in general are circumscribed
 cells may be melanized by dendritic melanocytes interca-
but unencapsulated, asymmetrical, superficial dermal
lated among them.
masses that have a horizontal orientation. Most lesions
Caseation necrosis, sometimes with cystic degenera-
have a plaque-like architecture. Larger BCCs extend into
tion, is often present in the centers of larger epithelial
the deep dermis and may have a nodular architecture.
islands. Solid BCCs may also have small foci of squamous
There is extensive or multifocal contiguity with the lower
 differentiation characterized by zones of larger, polygonal
Fig. 22.33 Solid basal cell carcinoma
in a cat. This is an irregular, plaque-like
neoplasm  with multifocal epidermal
contiguity and ulceration. Note marked
variability in size and shape of the
epithelial aggregates.
592
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 22.34 Higher magnification of
solid basal cell tumor of Fig. 22.33. The
epithelial cells are small and angular
with scant, pale cytoplasm and slightly
elongated nuclei. Note patchy periph-
eral palisading.
cells with more abundant, eosinophilic cytoplasm; their
nuclei are large and vesicular and may have prominent
nucleoli. Advanced keratinization with frank extracellu-
lar keratin production in the squamoid foci is rarely
observed.
The epithelial aggregates are embedded in a moderate
stroma of fbrous or fbromyxoid tissue of moderate to
high cellularity. The stroma generally extends beyond the
boundaries of the epithelial component of the neoplasm
and is not well demarcated from the adjacent dermis.
Stromal infltrates of lymphocytes and plasma cells are
often seen, and melanophages may be present in heavily
melanized lesions. Cleft formation between the epithelial
aggregates and the stroma is an important diagnostic
feature of human BCC, and is generally regarded as post-
fixation artifactual retraction secondary to mucin pro-
duction by tumor cells or stromal fbroblasts. It has
also been suggested that these clefts may be due to
defective basement membrane production within the
neoplasm; loss of collagen XVII (bullous pemphigoid
   r srd q s i
(Kirkham, 1997). Stromal-epithelial clefts can be found
 in canine and feline BCC; however, this does not appear
to be as consistent or specific a phenomenon as it is in
humans.
 Differential diagnoses for solid BCC comprise other
epithelial  neoplasms  with  a  small cell-predominant
composition; these include solid-cystic ductular sweat
gland adenoma and carcinoma, sebaceous epithelioma
Fig. 22.35 High magnification of solid basal cell carcinoma in a
cat. This example is pigmented, and clumps of melanin are present
and epitheliomatous sebaceous carcinoma, and tri-
in zones of cystic degeneration. Note prominent clefts between
choblastoma. Silhouette (the outline of a tumor section
epithelial aggregates and stroma.
viewed with the naked eye or at scanning magnification)
Epidermal tumors
593
Fig. 22.36 Solid basal cell carcinoma
in a dog. Small, markedly irregular
aggregates of epithelial cells form an
ulcerated, horizontally-oriented mass.
Note multifocal  contiguity  with  the
basal cell layer of the epidermis at right.
Fig. 22.37 Higher magnification of
Fig. 22.36. In this example, some of the
epithelial aggregates have prominent
cytoplasmic glycogenation resermbling
clear cell basal cell carcinoma (see Fig.
22.40). Note reactive collagenous
stroma with plasmacytic inflammation.
is a key diagnostic feature: BCC is almost always hori-
surface. Small or early BCCs are confined to the superf-
zontally oriented and irregular while solid-cystic sweat
cial dermis.
gland adenoma and trichoblastoma appear smooth, sym-
In further(
differentiation, the cells of solid-cystic
metrical, and vertically oriented or round. The racemi-
ductular sweat gland adenoma are often cuboidal or
form (resembling a bunch of grapes) appearance of
rounded, in contrast to the polyhedral or prismatic cells
solid-cystic ductular sweat gland adenoma, as well as the
of BCC. Short ducts and cells with intracytoplasmic
limited extent of its epidermal contiguity, further distin-
lumens are usually discernible in the sweat gland adeno-
guish it from BCC at low power Trichoblastomas infre-
mas, but are absent in BCC. In addition, the stroma of
quently have focal epidermal connections. Sebaceous
BCC is more abundant and more cellular than that of duc-
epitheliomas and carcinomas are irregular, but typically
tular sweat gland adenoma. The cells of trichoblastoma
have a fungiform architecture rising above the skin
closely resemble those of BCC, as would be expected in
594
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
light of the recent studies indicating a common origin (see
Keratinizing (keratotic) basal cell carcinoma
above); however, trichoblastomas lack anisokaryosis,
(Figures 22.38 and 22.39)
nuclear hyperchromasia, frequent mitotic activity, and
Keratinizing BCC has a similar architecture to solid BCC,
mitotic atypia, as would be seen in most BCCs.
Tri-
but most lesions are thicker plaques greater than 1 cm in
choblastomas often comprise numerous, winding epithe-
diameter. Angular islands and trabeculae predominate in
lial cords and narrow trabeculae; this pattern is not
most tumors. The epithelial structures have multifocal
recognized in canine or feline BCC. In addition, both tri-
contiguity with the epidermis, which is usually ulcerated.
choblastomas and solid-cystic ductular sweat gland car-
Central zones of caseation necrosis are frequently
cinomas may show spindling of most of the cells or
observed, but melanization and cystic degeneration are
 groups of cells, respectively; this phenomenon is rare in
uncommon. Some tumors may inflrate into the deep
BCC. The stroma of trichoblastomas has minimal to low
dermis.
cellularity and often contains follicular papillary mes-
The epithelial aggregates are composed predominantly
enchymal bodies, which are not found in BCC (Brooke
of small polyhedral cells identical to those of solid BCC.
et al., 1989).
Mitotic activity in the small cell population is moderate
Sebaceous epitheliomas and epitheliomatous sebaceous
 to high, and mitotic atypia can usually be detected. Patchy
carcinomas usually contain at least occasional tumor cells
melanization of the basal cells is a feature of some tumors.
with lipidized cytoplasm. The predominant reserve cells
Many of the epithelial islands contain central or periph-
of epitheliomas  and  epitheliomatous carcinomas  are
eral foci of abrupt squamous differentiation with or
slightly larger and more eosinophilic than those of BCC
without extracellular keratin deposition. The patterns
and do not exhibit peripheral palisading. Oil red O or
of keratinization may be epidermal/infundibular (lamellar
 other lipid stain may be required to differentiate a poorly-
keratin via a keratohyalin granular cell layer), isthmus
differentiated, small cell-predominant, epitheliomatous
type (compact or amorphous keratin without a granular
sebaceous carcinoma from BCC.
cell layer), or less frequently, matrical (direct formation
Larger solid BCC may not be distinguishable from
of keratinized ‘ghost’ or ‘shadow' cells without an inter-
solid-cystic ductular sweat gland carcinomas based on sil-
vening zone of viable squamous epithelium). The squa-
houette or cytologic features. A basaloid malignancy, par-
 mous cells have larger, vesicular nuclei with small nucleoli
ticularly in a cat, that appears unusually aggressive or
and rare mitotic fgures. The stroma is similar to that of
has obvious lymphatic invasion warrants a thorough
solid BCC, and infltrates of plasma cells, neutrophils, and
search for small tubular structures or intracytoplasmic
lymphocytes are common.
lumens consistent with sweat gland origin. Immunohisto-
Keratinizing BCC must be differentiated from tri-
 chemistry often is required for defnitive diagnosis (see
choepithelioma, malignant trichoepithelioma, malignant
below).
pilomatricoma, and basosquamous carcinoma. Diagnosis
Fig. 22.38 Keratinizing basal cell
carcinoma in a dog. Irregular agg-
regates of predominantly basaloid
epithelial cells are intermingled with
scattered nests of pale squamous cells.
Note rmultifocal epidermal contiguity
and
1highly cellular collagenous
stroma.
Epidermal tumors
595
Fig. 22.39 Higher magnification of
keratinizing basal cell carcinoma in a
dog. The foci of squamous differentia-
tion contain small aggregates of lami-
nated and amorphous keratin (arrow).
of benign trichoepithelioma is usually straightforward; in
tinizing BCC represents a distinct, low-grade variant of
silhouette, most trichoepitheliomas are nodular and cir-
malignant trichoepithelioma.
cumscribed, whereas BCCs are generally plaque-like,
Keratinizing BCC is differentiated from malignant
irregular, and have multifocal epidermal contiguity. Tri-
pilomatricoma primarily by its superfcial, plaque-like
choepitheliomas have one or more of the following fea-
architecture and multifocal connections to the epidermis.
tures that are not seen in keratinizing BCC: discrete cystic
 Malignant pilomatricomas are usually larger, deeper neo-
structures lined by isthmus or infundibular-type epithe-
plasms. Keratinizing basal carcinoma can have small clus-
lium, cysts filled with keratinized ghost cells, epithelial
ters of shadow cells; large, irregular zones of matrical
clusters resembling hair bulbs, and small aggregates of
keratinization are a more typical feature of malignant
stromal mesenchymal cells resembling follicular papillae.
pilomatricoma, and foci of inner root sheath differentia-
Unlike trichoepitheliomas, keratinizing BCCs have epithe-
tion may also be present. Stromal-epithelial clefts are
lial aggregates with angular margins, multifocal necrosis,
typical for BCC, but may not be as consistent a feature
moderate to high mitotic activity, and nuclear and mitotic
as they are in human BCC. Basosquamous carcinoma (see
atypia. The stroma of BCC is usually more cellular, and
p. 597), which was formerly included in the BCC cate-
stromal-epithelial clefts may be present.
 gory, is architecturally indistinguishable from keratinizing
Distinction from malignant trichoepithelioma is much
BCC; however, its squamous epithelial component also
more problematic, as both are horizontally oriented, infl-
has cytologic features of malignancy and resembles squa-
rative neoplasms with an admixture of basaloid and
mous cell carcinoma.
squamous cells, and cytologic features of malignancy. The
epithelium of malignant trichoepithelioma has features of
Clear cell basal cell carcinoma (Figure 22.40)
hair matrix(
(keratinized ghost cells),
inner
root
This rare variant has an architecture that is identical to
sheath (trichohyalin granules and glycogen), outer root
solid BCC. Most of the epithelial cells of clear cell BCC
sheath (agranular, with or without glycogenation), and
are larger than those of solid BCC and have water-clear
infundibulum (keratohyalin granules) in varying pro-
or fnely granular cytoplasm. The nuclei are large, ovoid,
portions. Inner root sheath differentiation is not seen in
and fairly uniform. The nucleoli are small, and mitotic
BCC, and matrical differentiation is limited. Hyalinized
activity varies from low to moderate. Atypical mitoses can
collagen cuffs around epithelial aggregates and overt lym-
usually be detected. Palisading at the periphery of the
phatic invasion are common fndings in malignant tri-
epithelial aggregates is less consistently present than in
choepithelioma but not in BCC. However because it has
solid BCC. Necrosis is a common secondary feature. The
recently been demonstrated that BCCs have a very similar
stroma of clear cell BCC is often sparser than in the solid
cytokeratin profle to trichoepithelioma and trichoblas-
or keratinizing variants. Stromal-epithelial clefts are dis-
toma (see above), one could reasonably argue that kera-
cernible in most lesions.
596
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 22.40 Clear cell basal cell carci-
noma in a cat. Irregular epithelial
aggregates are cormposed of larger
polygonal cells with clear cytoplasm.
Note clefts between epitheliurm and
stroma at bottom.
 Differential diagnoses are limited to other neoplasms
lium (see Chapter 25); they are, therefore, important tools
with marked cytoplasm vacuolation, and include clear cell
for distinguishing solid-cystic ductular sweat gland
apocrine ductular carcinoma, balloon cell melanoma,
adenoma and solid-cystic apocrine ductular carcinoma
bulb-type tricholemmoma, and sebocytic sebaceous car-
from solid BCC, and for distinguishing clear cell apocrine
cinoma. None of these has the irregular horizontal sil-
ductular carcinoma from clear cell BCC. These stains
houette of BCC, but epidermal or superficial follicular
highlight short tubular structures or larger groups of cells 
contiguity is often present in clear cell apocrine ductular
in the solid-cystic tumor types and decorate most or all
carcinoma and sebocytic sebaceous carcinoma. Clear
of the cells in clear cell apocrine ductular carcinoma,
cell BCC is distinguished from both clear cell apocrine
but are negative in BCC. A panel of multiple poly- and 
ductular carcinoma and balloon cell melanoma by
monoclonal CK markers may be required to rule out
smaller cell size, predominance of angular cell aggregates,
sebaceous origin; certain clones of CD79a (the pan-B
and stromal-epithelial clefts. In addition, tubular struc-
lymphocyte marker) may stain sebocytes, but the verac-
tures are found only in clear cell apocrine ductular
ity of this staining reaction is unconfrmed and requires
carcinoma, and epidermal contiguity is not seen in
additional 
investigation (see sebaceous（
carcinoma,
balloon cell melanoma or bulb-type tricholemmoma.
Chapter 24). A pancytokeratin stain would readily dif-
Clear cell BCC has larger cells and larger cell aggregates
ferentiate clear cell BCC from balloon cell melanoma,
than does tricholemmoma and lacks its exaggerated
which is CK negative, vimentin positive, and also positive 
basement membranes; in addition, tricholemmoma 
is
for more specifc markers such as S100a or melanoma
cytologically benign. Most sebocytic sebaceous carcino-
isoform of microphthalmia transcription factor (MITF-
mas contain at least some cells with multiple round
M). As previously discussed, human BCCs demonstrate
vacuoles or foamy cytoplasm indicative of lipid content;
CKs 5, 6, 10, 14, 15, 16, 17, and 19; this staining pattern
 these are usually admixed with squamoid cells and large
is also found in trichoblastomas and some trichoepithe-
 polyhedral cells in varying proportion. Immunohisto-
liomas, so immunohistochemical differentiation from
chemistry may be required for definitive diagnosis (see
these benign folicular neoplasms may not be possible
below).
utilizing cytokeratin profles in canine and feline tissue.
Complete monoclonal keratin profles have not been
Immunohistochemistry
established for canine or feline BCC. Neither has the
validity of immunostains for the anti-apoptotic protein
Immunostains for cytokeratins (CKs) 8, 13, and 7/8
 bcl-2 and the membrane glycopolypeptide BerEP4, which
(CAM5.2) utilizing routine methodology for formalin-
are diagnostically useful for human BCCs, been docu-
fixed paraffin embedded tissue appear to be quite specifc
mented in the veterinary literature; studies in this regard
in canine and feline skin biopsies for sweat gland epithe-
 may yield valuable information.
Epidermal tumors
597
 1997). Similar studies have not been performed in dogs
BASOSQUAMOUS CARCINOMA
and cats.
(Synonym: basal-squamous cell carcinoma)
Clinical features
Cutaneous basosquamous carcinoma (BSCC) is a neo-
plasm with bimorphic histologic features that has been
Neoplasms that appear analogous to human BSCCs occur
bounced back and forth between classification 2
rarely in cats and very rarely in dogs. Actual incidence
asa
basal cell carcinoma (BCC) variant ('metatypical basal
data are not available. In the previous World Health
cell carcinoma') and a squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)
  m  s s 
variant. It is now regarded as a distinct entity more
 the basal cel tumor group, but were described as locally
frequently, although its existence is still not univer-
aggressive (Weiss & Frese, 1974). In the current World
sally accepted (Kirkham, 1997). It is generally considered
Health Organization veterinary nomenclature, BSCC has
to be a rare tumor in the skin of humans {Jones et al.,
a category all of its own as a malignant tumor of epider-
1997; Beer et al., 2000; Martin et al., 2000; Bowman,
mal origin (Goldschmidt et al., 1998). Conroy (1983) also
et al., 2003), but has been reported in older literature
described BSCC as a distinct clinicopathologic entity
to represent 3% to 12% of all BCCs (Kirkham, 1997).
in dogs that is locally aggressive and has a metastatic
The clinical presentation of BSCC in humans is similar
capacity approaching that of squamous cell carcinoma,
to both basal and squamous cell carcinoma, and it
although specific numeric data were not given. The
authors believe that the entity described as BSCC in one
reference text (Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992) is most
than either (Martin et al., 2000; Bowman, et al.,
likely an uncommon variant of trichoblastoma that
2003).
exhibits prominent outer root sheath differentiation (see
 Basosquamous carcinoma in humans has intermediate
Chapter 23).
histological and immunohistochemical properties of BCC
 BSCCs are clinically indistinguishable from SCCs and
and SCC, and may have a zone of gradual transition
 BCCs (see pp. 581 and 589). Site, age and breed predis-
between these two types. BerEP4, an epithelial membrane
positions are probably also similar but too few cases have
glycopolypeptide that is present in almost all BCCs, was
been seen to draw frm conclusions. The biologic behav-
present in at least some areas in 50% to 100% of BSCCs
ior is also unknown.
in two studies, while the SCCs were uniformly negative
(Jones et al., 1997; Beer et al., 2000). In addition, epithe-
Histopathology (Figures 22.41 and 22.42)
lial membrane antigen was detected in all SCCs, none of
the BCCs, and one BSCC (Beer et al., 2000). Staining pat-
 Basosquamous carcinoma has a similar silhouette to its
terns for the anti-apoptotic protein bcl-2 (identified in
two close relatives, BCC and SCC. It presents as a hori-
most BCCs) was similar in BCC and BSCC (Jones et al.,
zontally oriented, usually superfcial, plaque-like mass
Fig. 22.41 Basosquamous carcinoma in
a cat. An ulcerated, plaque-like neo
plasm at right is closely associated with
bowenoid in situ carcinoma at left.
598
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 22.42 Higher magnification of
Fig. 22.41. The neoplasm comprises
atypical basaloid and squamous epithe-
lial cells in approximately
equal
proportions.
that is connected multifocally to the epidermis. Crusting,
continuum, there may be specific cases that are impossi-
erosion or ulceration is usually present. The epithelial
ble to assign confidently to either the BCC or BSCC cat-
aggregates comprise islands, trabeculae, and nests that
egory. Immunohistochemistry studies, which may allow
often have angular, irregular profles. Many epithelial
further elucidation, have not yet been undertaken.
aggregates have typical features of BCC peripherally and
well-differentiated SCC centrally; keratin pearls are often
present. The tumors may also contain adjacent zones of
REFERENCES
solid BCC and pure SCC with areas of gradual transition
between them. As in both SCC and BCC, a moderate
Cutaneous Horn of Feline Pawpad
stroma of moderate cellularity surrounds the epithelial
Center, S.A., Scott, D.W. & Scott, F.W. (1982) Multiple cuta
structures.
neous horns on the footpads of a cat. Feline Pract 12, 26-30.
 A neoplasm with histologic features virtually identical
Komori, S., Ishida, T. & Washizu, M. (1998) Four cases of cuta-
neous horns in the footpads of feline leukemia virus-negative
to BSCC was observed by one of the authors (T.L.G.)
invading into the dermis from the deeper aspects of an
cats. J Jpn Vet Med Assoc 51, 27-30.
 otherwise classical canine exophytic viral papilloma. The
Scott, D.W. (1984) Feline dermatology 1979-1982: introspecive
papilloma had an increased proportion of basal and
retrospections. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20, 537-64.
suprabasal keratinocytes, and these exhibited nuclear
Pawpad Keratoma
enlargement, loss of nuclear polarity, and moderately high
Anderson, D.M. (ed.) (1994) Dorland's Hllustrated Medical Dic-
mitotic activity. The infltrating epithelial aggregates of
tionary, 28th edn, pp. 249, 378. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
the malignant component were relatively small and had
 Freeman, D.B. (2002) Corns and calluses resulting from mechan-
 basal and squamous components in varying proportions.
ical hyperkeratosis. Am Fam Physician 65, 2277-80.
The squamous component of BSCC has histologic
Singh, D., Bentley, G. & Trevino, S.G. (1996) Callosities, corns,
features of malignancy and does not differentiate toward
and calluses. Br Med J 312, 1403-6.
 follicular isthmus or bulb; this distinguishes it from ker
Thomas, S.E., Dykes, PJ. & Marks, R. (1985) Plantar hyper-
atinizing BCC as well as follicular neoplasms with com-
keratosis: a study of callosities and normal plantar skin. J
Invest Dermatol 85, 394-7.
bined basaloid (or matrical) and squamous epithelium, in
which the squamous component is cytologically bland
Linear Epidermal Hamartoma
 and shows complete cornification, often with multiple fol-
Anderson, D.M. (ed.) (1994) Dorland's Illustrated Medical Dic-
licular patterns. Solid BCCs may have small foci of squa-
tionary,28th edn, pp. 731, 1335. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
mous metaplasia, whereas the squamous component of
Goldschmidt, M.H., Dunstan, R.W., Stannard, A.A. et al. (1998)
BSCC comprises a substantial portion of the tumor.
Histological Classification of Epithelial and Melanocytic
However, since it is likely that these lesions represent a
Tumors of the Skin of Domestic Animals, 2nd series, Vol. 3,
Epidermal tumors
599
p. 35. Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, Washington,
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffn, C.E. (2001) Muler 6 Kirk's
DC.
 Smal Animatl Dermatology, 6th edn, p. 1240. W.B. Saunders,
Murphy, G.F. & Elder, D.E. (1991) Atlas of Tumor Pathology:
Philadelphia.
Non-melanocytic Tumors of the Skin, p. 11. Armed Forces
Sundberg, JP., Smith, E.K., Herron, A.J. et al. (1994) Involve-
Institute of Pathology, Washington, DC.
ment of canine oral papillomavirus in generalized oral and
Scott, D.W., Yager-Johnson, J.A., Manning, T.O. et al. (1984)
cutaneous verrucosis in a Chinese Shar Pei dog. Vet Pathol 31,
Nevi in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20, 505-12.
183-7.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
Sundberg, J.P., Van Ranst, M., Montali, R. et al. (2000) Feline
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 1388-9. W.B. Saun-
 papilloma and papillomaviruses. Vet Pathol 37, 1-10.
ders, Philadelphia.
Canine Pigmented Viral Plaque
Dermoid Cyst
Briggs, O.M. (1985) Lentiginosis profusa in the pug: three case
Mann, G.E. & Stratton, J. {1966) Dermoid sinus in the
reports. J Small Anim Pract 26, 675-80.
Rhodesian ridgeback. J Small Anim Pract 7, 631-3.
Kaspar, T.A., Wagner, R.F. Jr, Jablonska, S. et al. (1991) Prog-
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
nosis and treatment of advanced squamous cell carcinoma
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 936-7. W.B. Saun-
secondary to epidermodysplasia verruciformis: a worldwide
ders, Philadelphia.
analysis of 11 patients. J Dermatol Surg Oncol 17, 23740.
Munger, K. (2002) The role of human papilomaviruses in
Squamous Papilloma
human cancers. Front Biosci 7, 641-9.
Murphy, G.F. & Elder, D.E.(1991) Atlas of Tumor Pathology:
Nagata, M., Nanko, H., Moriyama, A. et al. (1995) Pigmented
Non-melanocytic Tumors of the Skin, p. 19. Armed Forces
 plaques associated with papillomavirus infection in dogs: is
Institute of Pathology, Washington DC.
this epidermodysplasia verruciformis? Vet Dermatol 6,
179-86.
ViralPapilloma
Nuovo, G.J. & Ishag, M. (2000) The histologic spectrum of epi-
Abramo, F, Ratto, A., Ferrari, E. et al. (1997) Papillomatous
dermodysplasia verruciformis. Am J Surg Pathol 24, 1400-6.
skin proliferations in two cats; clinical and histopathological
Penneys, N. (1997) Diseases caused by viruses. In: Lever's
features. In: Proceedings of 14th ESVD/ECVD Meeting, Pisa,
Histopathology of the Skin, 8th edn (eds D.E. Elder, R.E.
Italy.
Elenitsas, C. Jaworsky et al.), pp. 582-3. Lippincott-Raven,
Bevier, D.F. & Goldschmidt, M.H. (1981) Skin tumors in the
Philadelphia.
dog. Part I: Epithelial tumors and tumor-like 
lesions.
Stokking, L.B., Campbell, K.L., Ehrhart, E.J. et al. (2002) Papil-
Compend Contin Ed 3, 389-98.
lomavirus-associated pigmented plaques in three immuno-
Campbell, K.L., Sundberg, J.P., Goldschmidt, M.H. et al.
suppressed dogs. In: Proceedings of the 17th Annual
(1988) Cutaneous inverted papillomas in dogs. Vet Pathol 25,
AAVD/ACVD Meeting, New Orleans, p. 31.
67-71.
Walder, E.J. (1997) Malignant transformation of a pigmented
Carney, H.C., England, J.J., Hodgin, E.C. et al. (1990) Papillo-
epidermal nevus in a dog. Vet Pathol 34, 505 (abstract).
mavirus infection of aged Persian cats. J Vet Diagn Invest 2,
Walder, EJ. & Gross, TL. {1992) Epidermal tumours. In:
294-9.
Veterinary Dermatopathology: A Macroscopic and Micro-
Carpenter, J.L., Andrew, L.K. & Holzworth, J. (1987) Tumors
Scopic Evaluation of Canine and Feline Skin Disease (T. L.
and tumor-like lesions. In: Diseases of the Cat (ed. J.
Gross, PJ. Ihrke, & E.J. Walder), p. 331. Mosby, St Louis.
Holzworth), p. 413. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, FS. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
FelineViralPlaque
Dog and Cat, pp. 2, 12. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Carney, H.C., England, JJ., Hodgin, E.C. et al. (1990) Papillo-
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Hendrick, M.J. (2002) Tumors of the skin
 mavirus infection of aged Persian cats. J Vet Diagn Invest 2,
and soft tissues. In: Tumors in Domestic Animals, 4th edn (ed.
294-9.
D.J. Meuten), pp. 47-50. Iowa State Press, Ames.
Egberink, H.F. & Horzinek, M.C. (1998) Feline viral papillo-
Le Net, J-L., Orth, G., Sundberg, J.P et al. (1997) Multiple pig-
matosis. In: Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 2nd edn
mented cutaneous papules associated with a novel canine
(ed. C.E. Greene), pp. 113-4. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
papillomavirus in an immunosuppressed dog. Vet Pathol 34,
Egberink, H.F, Berrocal, A., Bax, H.A.D. et al. (1992) Papillo-
8-14.
mavirus associated skin lesions in a cat seropositive for feline
Nagata, M., Nanko, H., Moriyama, A. et al. (1995) Pigmented
immunodeficiency virus. Vet Microbiol 31, 117-25.
plaques associated with papillomavirus infection in dogs: is
Gross, T.L. & Affolter, V.K. (1998) Advances in skin oncology
this epidermodysplasia verruciformis? Vet Dermatol 6,
(workshop report). In: Advances in Veterinary Dermatology,
179-86.
Vol. 3 (eds K.W. Kwochka, T. Willemse & C. von Tscharner),
Nicholls, PK. & Stanley, M.A. (1999) Canine papillomavirus -
 pp. 383-4. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford,
a centenary review. J Comp Pathol 120, 219-33.
Harwood, C.A., McGregor, J.M., Proby, C.M. et al. (1999)
Penneys, N. (1997) Diseases caused by viruses. In: Lever's
Human papillomavirus and the development
f
non
Histopathology of the Skin, 8th edn (eds D.E. Elder, R.E.
melanoma skin cancer. J Clin Pathol 52, 249-53.
Elenitsas, C. Jaworsky, et al.), pp. 578-86. Lippincott-Raven,
Kaspar, T.A., Wagner, R.F. Jr, Jablonska, S. et al. (1991) Prog-
Philadelphia.
nosis and treatment of advanced squamous cell carcinoma sec-
600
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
ondary to epidermodysplasia verruciformis: a worldwide
neous squamous cell carcinoma. Int J Dermatol 37,
analysis of 11 patients. J Dermatol Surg Oncol 17, 237-40.
677-81.
Lozano-Alarcon, F, Lewis, T.P 2nd, Clark, E.G. et al. (1996)
Tsukifuji, R., Tagawa, K., Hatamochi, A. et al. (1999) Expres-
Persistent papillomavirus infection in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp
sion of matrix metalloproteinase-1, -2 and -3 in squamous cell
Assoc 32, 392-6.
carcinoma and actinic keratosis. Br J Cancer 80, 1087-91.
Morrison, C., Eliezri, Y., Magro, C. et al. (2002) The histologic
Xu, X.C., Wong, W.Y., Goldberg, L. et al. (2001) Progressive
spectrum of epidermodysplasia verruciformis in transplant
decreases in nuclear retinoid receptors during skin squamous
and AIDS patients. J Cutan Pathol 29, 480-9.
carcinogenesis. Cancer Res 61, 4306-10.
Munger, K. (2002) The role of human papillomaviruses in
Yantsos, VA., Conrad, N., Zabawski, E. et al. (1999) Incipient
human cancers. Front Biosci 7, 641-9.
intraepidermal cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma: a pro-
Nuovo, G.J. & Ishag, M. (2000) The histologic spectrum of epi-
posal for reclassifying and grading solar (actinic) keratoses.
dermodysplasia verruciformis. Am J Surg Pathol 24, 1400-6.
Semin Cutan Med Surg 18,3-14.
Penneys, N. (1997) Diseases caused by viruses. In: Lever's
Histopathology of the Skin, 8th edn (eds D.E. Elder, R.E.
Bowenoid in situ Carcinoma
Elenitsas, C. Jaworsky et al.), pp. 582-3. Lippincott-Raven,
Baer, K.E. & Helton, K. (1993) Multicentric squamous cell car-
Philadelphia.
cinoma in situ resembling Bowen's disease in cats. Vet Pathol
Sundberg, J.P., Van Ranst, M., Montali, R. et al. (2000) Feline
36, 53543.
 papilloma and papillomaviruses. Vet Pathol 37, 1-10.
Chuang, T.Y, Tse, J. & Reizner, G.T. (1990) Bowen's disease
(squamous cell carcinoma in situ) as a skin marker for inter-
Actinic Keratosis
nal malignancy: a case-control study. Am J Prev Med 6,
Albaric, O., Bret, L., Amardeihl, M. et al. (2001) Immunohisto-
238-43.
chemical expression of p53 in animal tumors: a methodolog-
Collina, G., Rossi, E., Bettelli, S. et al. (1995) Detection of
ical study using four ant-human p53 antibodies. Histof
 human papillomavirus in extragenital Bowen's disease using
Histopathol 16, 113-21.
in situ hybridization and polymerase chain reaction. Am J
Anderson, D.M. (ed.) (1994) Dorland's Hustrated Medical
Dermatopathol 17, 236-41.
Dictionary, 28th edn, p. 879. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
de Jong-Tieben, L.M., Berkhout, R.J., Smits, H.L. et al. (1995)
Ashton, K.J., Weinstein, S.R., Maguire, D.J. et al. (2003) Chro-
High frequency of detection of epidermodysplasia verruci-
mosomal aberrations in squamous cell carcinoma and solar
formis-associated human papillomavirus DNA in biopsies
"ueziqy ooua aaneedos Aq paleaaai sasonena
from malignant and premalignant skin lesions from renal
Arch Dermatol 139,876-82.
transplant recipients. J Invest Dermatol 105, 367-71.
Dunstan, R.W., Credille, K.M. & Walder, E.J. (1998) The light
Deguchi, M., Tomioka, Y., Mizugaki, M. et al. (1998) Detection
and the skin. In: Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 3.
of human papilomavirus type 33 DNA in extragenital
(eds K.W. Kwochka, T. Willemse & C. von Tscharner), pp.
Bowen's disease with the polymerase chain reaction.
3-36. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
Dermatology 196, 292-4.
Hargis, A.M., Thomasson, R.W. & Phemister, R.D. (1977)
Derancourt, C., Mougin, C., Chopard Lallier, M. et al. (2001)
Chronic dermatosis and cutaneous squamous cel carcinoma
[Oncogenic human papillomaviruses in extra-genital Bowen
in the Beagle dog. Vet Pathol 14, 218-28.
disease revealed by in situ hybridization.] Ann Dermatol
Hodges, A. & Smoller, B.R. (2002) Immunohistochemical com-
Venereol 128, 715-8 (in French).
 parison of p16 expression in acinic keratoses and squamous
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, FS. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
cell carcinomas of the skin. Mod Pathol 15, 1121-5.
 Dog and Cat, p. 48. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Ishida, H., Kumakiri, M., Ueda, K. et al. (2001) Comparative
Gross, T.L. & Affolter, VK. (1998) Advances in skin oncology
histochemical study of Bowen's disease and actinic keratosis:
(workshop report). In: Advances in Veterinary Dermatology,
preserved normal basal cells in Bowen's disease. Eur J
Vol. 3 (eds K.W. Kwochka, T. Willemse & C. von Tscharner),
Histochem 45, 177-90.
 pp. 383-4. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
Jeffes, E.W. 3rd & Tang, E.H. (2000) Actinic keratosis. Current
Gross, TL. & Brimacomb, B.H. (1986) Multifocal intraepider-
treatment options. Am J Clin Dermatot 1, 167-79.
mal carcinoma in a dog histologically resembling Bowen's
Kirkham, N. (1997) Tumors and cysts of the epidermis. In:
disease. Am J Dermatopathol 8, 509-15.
Lever's Histopathology of the Skin, 8th edn (eds D.E. Elder,
Guaguere, E., Olivry, T., Delverdier-Poujade, A. et al. (1999)
RE. Elenitsas, C. Jaworsky et al.), pp. 703-5, 710.
Demodex cati infestation in association with feline cutaneous
Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia.
squamous cell carcinoma in situ: a report of five cases. Vet
Krunic, A.L., Garrod, D.R., Madani, S. et al. {1998) Immuno-
Dermatol 10, 61-7.
histochemical staining for desmogleins 1 and 2 in ker-
Jaeger, A.B., Gramkow, A., Hjalgrim, H. et al. (1999) Bowen
atinocytic neoplasms with squamous phenotype: actinic
 disease and risk of subsequent malignant neoplasms: a popu-
keratosis, keratoacanthoma and squamous cell carcinoma of
Jation-based cohort study of 1147 patients. Arch Dermatol
the skin. Br J Cancer 77, 1275-9.
135, 790-3.
Lober, B.A. & Lober, C.W. (2000) Actinic keratosis is squamous
Kawashima, M., Favre, M., Obalek, S. et al. (1990) Premalig-
cell carcinoma. South Med J 93, 650-5.
nant lesions and cancers of the skin in the general population:
Mittelbronn, M.A., Mullins, D.L., Ramos-Caro, FA. et al.
evaluation of the role of human papillomaviruses. J Invest
(1998) Frequency of pre-existing actinic keratosis in cuta-
Dermatol 95, 537-42.
Epidermal tumors
601
Kettler, A.H., Rutledge, M., Tschen, JA. et al. (1990) Detection 
Coulter, L.K., Wolber, R. & Tron, V.A.(1995) Site-specific com
of human papillomavirus in nongenital Bowen's disease by in
parison of ps3 immunostaining in squamous cell carcinomas.
situ DNA hybridization. Arch Dermatol 126, 777-81.
Hum Pathol 26,531-3.
Kirkham, N. (1997) Tumors and cysts of the epidermis. In:
Forslund, O., Ly, H., Reid, C. et al. (2003) A broad spectrum of
Lever's Histopathology of the Skin, 8th edn (eds D.E. Elder,
human papillomavirus types is present in the skin of
R.E. Elenitsas, C. Jaworsky et al.), pp. 708-12. Lippincott-
Australian patients with non-melanoma skin cancers and solar
Raven, Philadelphia.
keratosis. Br J Dermatol 149, 64-73.
Kovacs, A., Yonemoto, K., Katsuoka, K. et al. (1996) Bowen's
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, F.S. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
disease: statistical study of a 10 year period. J Dermatol 23,
Dog and Cat, pp. 2, 37-49. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
267-74.
Goldschmidt, M.H., Dunstan, R.W., Stannard, A.A. et al. (1998)
Krishnan, R., Lewis, A., Orengo, I.F. et al. (2001) Pigmented
Histological Classification of Epithelial and Melanocytic
Bowen's disease (squamous cell carcinoma in situ): a mimic of
Tumors of the Skin of Domestic Animals, 2nd series, Vol. 3,
malignant melanoma. Dermatol Surg 27, 6734.
 p. 21. Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, Washington DC.
Lampert, A., Pauwels, C., Duboucher, C. et al. (2000) [Detec-
Gourley, I.M., Madewell, B.R., Barr, B. et al. (1982) Burn scar
tion of human papillomavirus in cutaneous extragenital
malignancy in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 180, 1095-6.
Bowen's disease in immunocompetent patients.]
Ann
Gros, T.L. & Affolter, V.K. (1998) Advances in skin oncology
Dermatol Venereol 127, 40-5 {in French).
(workshop report). In Advances in Veterinary Dermatology,
Lu, S., Syrjanen, K., Havu, V.K. et al. (1996) Failure to demon-
Vol. 3 (eds K.W. Kowchka, T. Willemse & C. von Tscharner),
strate human papillomavirus (HPV) involvement in Bowen's
 pp. 383-4. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
disease of the skin. Arch Dermatot Res 289, 40-5.
Gross, T.L. & Brimacomb, B.H. (1986) Multifocal intraepider-
Miller, W.H., Affolter, V, Scott, D.W. et al. (1992) Multicentric
mal carcinoma in a dog histologically resembling Bowen's
squamous cell carcinoma in situ resembling Bowen's disease
disease. Am J Dermatopathol 8, 509-15.
in five cats. Vet Dermatol 3, 177-82.
Hargis, A.M., Thomasson, R.W. & Phemister, R.D. (1977)
Papageorgiou, PP, Koumarianou, A.A. & Chu, A.C. (1998)
Chronic dermatosis and cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma
Pigmented Bowen's disease. Br J Dermatol 138, 515-8.
in the Beagle dog. Vet Pathol 14, 218-28.
Penneys, N. (1997) Diseases caused by viruses. In: Lever's
Harwood, C.A., Surentheran, I, McGregor, J.M. et al. (2000)
Histopathology of the Skin, 8th edn (eds D.E. Elder, R.E.
Human papillomavirus infection and non-melanoma skin
Elenitsas, C. Jaworsky et al.), pp. 578-86. Lippincott-Raven,
cancer in immunosuppressed and immunocompetent individ-
Philadelphia.
uals. J Med Virol 61, 289-97.
Rees, C.A. & Goldschmidt, M.H. (1998) Cutaneous horn and
Head, K.W., Cullen, J.M., Dubielzig, R.R. et al. (2003) Histo-
squamous cell carcinoma in situ (Bowen's disease) in a cat. J
logical Classification of Tumors of the Alimentary system of
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 34, 485-6.
Domestic Animals, 2nd series, Vol. 10, p. 32. Armed Forces
Tieben, L.M., Berkhout, R.J., Smits, H.L. et al. (1994) Detec-
 Institute of Pathology, Washington DC.
tion of epidermodysplasia verruciformis-like human papil-
Hodges, A. & Smoller, B.R. (2002) Immunohistochemical com-
lomavirus types in malignant and premalignant skin lesions
 parison of p16 expression in actinic keratoses and squamous
of renal transplant recipients. Br J Dermatol 131, 226-
cell carcinomas of the skin. Mod Pathol 15, 1121-5.
30.
Kerschmann, R.L., McCalmont, T.H. & LeBoit, PE. (1994) p53
Turrel, J.M. & Gross, T.L. (1991) Multicentric squamous cell
oncoprotein expression and proliferation index in keratoa-
carcinoma in situ (Bowen's disease) of cats. Proc Annu Conf
canthoma and squamous cell carcinoma. Arch Dermatol 130,
Vet Cancer Soc 11, 84 (abstract).
181-6.
Khanna, M., Fortier-Riberdy, G., Smoller, B. et al. (2002)
Squamous Cell Carcinoma
Reporting tumor thickness for squamous cell carcinoma. J
Albaric, O., Bret, L., Amardeihl, M. et al. (2001) Immunohisto-
Cutan Patbol 29,321-3.
chemical expression of p53 in animal tumors: a methodolog-
Kirkham, N. (1997) Tumors and cysts of the epidermis. In:
ical study using four anti-human pS3 antibodies. Histol
Lever's Histopathology of the Skin, 8th edn (eds D.E. Elder,
Histopathol 16, 113-21.
R.E. Elenitsas, C. Jaworsky et al.), pp. 712-17. Lippincott-
Baer, K.E. & Helton, K. (1993) Multicentric squamous cell car-
 Raven, Philadelphia.
cinoma in situ resembling Bowen's disease in cats. Vet Pathof
Koseki, S., Aoki, T, Ansai, S. et al. (1999) An immunohisto-
36, 535-43.
 chemical study of E-cadherin expression in human squamous
Bevier, D.F. & Goldschmidt, M.H. (1981) Skin tumors in the
cell carcinoma of the skin: relationship between decreased
dog. Part I: Epithelial tumors and tumor-like lesions.
expression of E-cadherin in the primary lesion and regional
Compend Cont Ed 3, 389-98.
lymph node metastasis. J Dermatol 26, 416-22.
Bouwes Bavinck, J.N., Stark, S., Petridis, A.K. et al. (2000) The
Lana, S.E., Ogilvie, G.K., Withrow, S.J. et al. (1997) Feline cuta-
presence of antibodies against virus-like particles of epider-
 neous squamous cell carcinoma of the nasal planum and the
modysplasia verruciformis-associated humanpapillomavirus
pinnae: 61 cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33, 329-32.
type 8 in patients with actinic keratoses. Br J Dermatol 142,
Lopez-Rios, F., Rodriguez-Peralto, J., Castanio, E. et al. (1999)
103-9.
Squamous cell carcinoma arising in a cutaneous epidermal
Burrows, A.K., Lee, E.A., Shaw, S.E. et al. (1994) Skin neo-
cyst. Case report and literature review. Am J Dermatopatho!
plasms of cats in Perth. Aust Vet Practit 24, 11-15.
21, 174-7.
602
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Masini, C., Fuchs, PG., Gabrielli, F. et al. (2003) Evidence for
Teifke, J.P. & Lohr, C.V. (1996) Immunohistochemical detection
the association of human papillomavirus infection and cuta-
 of p53 overexpression in paraffn wax-embedded squamous
neous squamous cell carcinoma in immunocompetent indi-
cell carcinomas of cattle, horses, cats and dog. J Comp Pathol
viduals. Arch Dermatol 139, 890-4.
114, 205-10.
Meyer, T., Arndt, R., Christophers, E. et al. (2001) Importance
Théon, A.P, Madewell, B.R., Shearn, V.I. et al. (1995) Prog-
of human papillomaviruses for the development of skin cancer.
nostic factors associated with radiotherapy of squamous cell
Cancer Detect Prev 25, 533-47.
carcinoma of the nasal plane in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 206,
Miller, M.A., Nelson, S.L., Turk, J.R. et al. (1991) Cutaneous
991-6.
neoplasia in 340 cats. Vet Patbol 28, 389-95.
Tsukifuji, R., Tagawa, K., Hatamochi, A. et al. (1999) Expres-
Miller, W.H., Affolter, V., Scott, D.W. et al. (1992) Multicentric
sion of matrix metalloproteinase-1, -2 and -3 in squamous cell
squamous cel carcinomas in situ resembling Bowen's disease
carcinoma and actinic keratosis. Br J Cancer 80, 1087-91.
in five cats. Vet Dermatol 3, 177-82.
Wassberg, C., Thorn, M., Johansson, A.M. et al. (2001) Increas-
Mittelbronn, M.A., Mullins, D.L., Ramos-Caro, FA. et al.
ing incidence rates of squamous cell carcinoma of the skin in
(1998) Frequency of pre-existing actinic keratosis in cutaneous
Sweden. Acta Derm Venereol 81, 268-72.
squamous cell carcinoma. Int J Dermatol 37, 677-81.
Williams, L.S., Mancuso, A.A., Mendenhall, W.M. et al. (2001)
Murakami, Y., Tateyama, S., Rungsipipat, A. et al. (2000)
Perineural spread of cutaneous squamous and basal cell car-
Immunohistochemical analysis of cyclin A, cyclin D1 and p53
cinoma: CT and MR detection and its impact on patient man-
in mammary tumors, squamous cell carcinomas and basal cell 
agement and prognosis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Pbys 15,
tumors of dogs and cats. J Vet Med Sci 62, 743-50.
1061-9.
Nagano, T., Ueda, M. & Ichihashi, M. (1993) Expression of
Wong, T.H., Khoo, A.K., Tan, P.H. et al. (2000) Squamous cell
pS3 protein is an early event in ultraviolet light-induced cuta-
carcinoma arising in a cutaneous epidermal cyst - a case
neous squamous cell carcinogenesis. Arch Dermatol 129,
report. Ann Acad Med Singapore 29, 757-9.
1157-61.
Xu, X.C., Wong, W.Y., Goldberg, L. et al. (2001) Progressive
Nappi, O., Pettinato, G. & Wick, M.R. (1989) Adenoic (acan-
decreases in nuclear retinoid receptors during skin squamous
tholytic) squamous cell carcinoma of the skin. J Cutan Pathol
carcinogenesis. Cancer Res 61, 4306-10.
16, 114-21.
Petter, G. & Haustein, U.F. (2000) Histologic subtyping and
Basal Cell Carcinoma
malignancy assessment of cutaneous squamous cell carci-
Auepemkiate, S., Boonyaphiphat, P & Thongsuksai, P. (2002)
noma. Dermatol Surg 26, 521-30.
 pS3 expression related to the aggressive infltrative histopatho-
Rogers, K.S., Helman, R.G. & Walker, M.A. (1995) Squamous
logical feature of basal cell carcinoma. Histopathology 40,
cell carcinoma of the canine nasal planum. J Am Arim Hosp
568-73.
Assoc 31, 373-8.
Bolshakov, S., Walker, C.M., Strom, S.S. et al. (2003) p53 muta-
Ruslander, D., Kaser-Holtz, B. & Sardinas, J.C. (1997) Cuta-
tons in human aggressive and nonaggressive basal and squa-
neous squamous cel carcinoma in cats. Comp Cont Educ
mous cell carcinomas. Clin Cancer Res 9, 228-34.
Pract Vet 19, 1119-29.
Brooke, J.D., Fitzpatrick, J.E. & Golitz, L.E. (1989) Papillary
Schwegler, K., Walter, J.H. & Rudolph, R. (1997) Epithelial
mesenchymal bodies: a histologic finding useful in differenti-
neoplasms of the skin, the cutaneous mucosa and the transi-
ating trichoepitheliomas from basal cell carcinomas. J Am
tional epithelium in dogs: an immunolocalization study for
Acad Dermatol 21, 523-8.
 papillomavirus antigen. J Vet Med A 44, 115-23.
Carpenter, J.L., Andrew, L.K. & Holzworth, J. (1987) Tumors
Scott, D.W. & Miller, W.H. Jr. (1995) Squamous cell carcinoma
and tumor-like lesions. In: Diseases of the Cat (ed. J.
arising in chronic discoid lupus erythematosus nasal lesions in
Holzworth), pp. 407-11. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
two German Shepherd dogs. Vet Dermatol 6, 99-103.
Cribier, B., Scrivener, Y. & Grosshans, E. (2000) Tumors arising
Scott, D.W. & Teixeira, E.A. (1995) Multiple squamous cell car-
in nevus sebaceus: a study of 596 cases. J Am Acad
cinomas arising from multiple cutaneous follicular cysts in a
Dermatol 42, 263-8.
dog.Vet Dermatol 6, 27-31.
Dahmane, N., Lee, J., Robins, P et al. (1997) Activation of the
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
transcription factor Gli1 and the Sonic hedgehog signalling
Small Animat Dermatology, 6th edn, p. 1256. W.B. Saunders,
pathway in skin tumours. Nature 23, 876-81.
Philadelphia.
Day, D.G., Couto, C.G., Weisbrode, S.E. et al. (1994) Basal cell
Shimizu, I., Izumi, H., Oga, A. et al. (2001) Epidermal growth
carcinoma in two cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 30, 265-9.
factor receptor overexpression and genetic aberrations in
Fan, H., Oro, A.E., Scott, M.P. et al. (1997) Induction of basal
 metastatic squamous-cell carcinoma of the skin. Dermatology
cell carcinoma features in transgenic human skin expressing
202,203-6.
Sonic Hedgehog. Nat Med 3, 788-92.
Sigel, J.E., Skacel, M., Bergfeld, W.F. et al. (2001) The utility of
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, FS. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
cytokeratin 5/6 in the recognition of cutaneous spindle cell
Dog and Cat, pp. 2, 29-32. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
squamous cell carcinoma. J Cutan Pathol 28, 520-4.
Goldschmidt, M.H., Dunstan, R.W., Stannard, A.A. et al. (1998)
Sironi, G., Caniatti, M. & Scanziani, E. (1990) Immunohisto-
Histological Classification of Epithelial and Melanocytic
chemical detection of papilomavirus structural antigens in
Tumors of the Skin of Domestic Animals, 2nd series, Vol. 3,
animal hyperplastic and neoplastic epithelial lesions. J Vet
pp. 18-9. Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, Washington
Med A 37, 760-70.
DC.
Epidermal tumors
603
Jih, D.M., Lyle, S., Elenitsas, R. et al. (1999) Cytokeratin 15
Tojo, M., Kiyosawa, H., Iwatsuki, K. et al. (2002) Expression
expression in trichoepitheliomas and a subset of basal cell car-
 of a sonic hedgehog signal transducer, hedgehog-interacting
cinomas suggests they originate from hair follicle stem cells. J
protein, by human basal cell carcinoma. Br J Dermatol 146,
Cutan Pathol 26, 113-8.
69-73.
Kim, M.Y., Park, H.J., Baek, S.C. et al. (2002) Mutations of the
Tojo, M., Kiyosawa, H., Iwatsuki, K. et al. (2003) Expression
pS3 and PTCH gene in basal cell carcinomas: UV mutation
of the GLI2 oncogene and its isoforms in human basal cell car-
signature and strand bias. J Dermatol Sci 29, 1-9.
cinoma. Br J Dermatol 148, 892-7.
Kirkham, N. (1997) Tumors and cysts of the epidermis. In:
Walder, E.J. & Gross, T.L. (1992) Epidermal tumours. In:
Lever's Histopathology of the Skin, 8th edn (eds D.E. Elder,
Veterinary Dermatopathology:A Macroscopic and Micro-
R.E. Elenitsas, C. Jaworsky et al.), pp. 719-31. Lippincott-
scopic Evaluation of Canine and Feline Skin Disease (T.L.
Raven, Philadelphia.
Gross, PJ Ihrke, & E.J. Walder), pp. 343-7. Mosby, St Louis.
Kruger, K., Blume-Peytavi, U. & Orfanos, C.E. (1999) Basal cell
Weihrauch, M., Bader, M., Lehnert, G. et al. (2002) Carcinogen-
carcinoma possibly originates from the outer root sheath
specific mutation pattern in the p53 tumour suppressor gene
and/or the bulge region of the vellus hair follicle. Arch
in UV radiation-induced basal cell carcinoma. Int Arch Occup
Dermatol Res 291, 253-9.
Environ Health 75, 272-6.
Kurzen, H., Esposito, L., Langbein, L. et al. (2001) Cytokeratins
Wetmore, C. (2003) Sonic hedgehog in normal and neoplastic
are markers of follicular differentiation: an immunohisto-
proliferation: insight gained from human tumors and animal
chemical study of trichoblastoma and basal cell carcinoma.
models. Curr Opin Genet Dev 13, 34-42.
Am J Dermatopathol 23, 501-9.
Yamamoto, O. & Asahi, M. (1999) Cytokeratin expression in
Lacour, JP. (2002) Carcinogenesis of basal cell carcinomas:
trichoblastic fibroma (small nodular type trichoblastoma), tri-
genetics and molecular mechanisms. Br J Dermatol 146(Suppl
choepithelioma and basal cell carcinoma. Br J Dermatol 140,
61), 17-19.
8-16.
Miller, M.A., Nelson, S.L., Turk, J.R. et al. (1991) Cutaneous
Yoshikawa, K., Katagata, Y. & Kondo, S. {1998) Biochemical
neoplasia in 340 cats. Vet Pathol 28, 389-95.
 and immunohistochemical analyses of keratin expression in
Murphy, G.F. & Elder, D.E. (1991) Atlas of Tumor Pathology:
basal cell carcinoma. J Dermatol Sci 17, 15-23.
Non-melanocytic Tumors of the Skin,pp. 47-58. Armed
Forces Institute of Pathology, Washington DC.
Basosquamous Carcinoma
Parisi, M.J. & Lin, H. (1998) The role of the hedgehog/patched
Beer, T.W., Shepherd, P. & Theaker, J.M. (2000) Ber EP4 and
signaling pathway inepithelil stem cell proliferation: from fly
epithelial membrane antigen aid distinction of basal cell,
to human. Cell Res 8, 15-21.
squamous cell and basosquamous carcinomas of the skin.
Robinson, J.K. & Dahiya, M. (2003) Basal cell carcinoma with
Histopathology 37,218-23.
pulmonary and lymph node metastasis causing death. Arch
Bowman, P.H., Ratz, J.L., Knoepp, T.G. et al. (2003) Basosqua-
Dermatol 139, 643-8.
mous carcinoma. Dermatol Surg 29, 830-3.
Schirren, C.G., Ritten, A., Kaudewitz, P. et al. (1997) Tri-
Conroy, J.D. (1983) Canine skin tumors. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
choblastoma and basal cell carcinoma are neoplasms with fol-
19, 91-114.
licular differentiation sharing the same profile of cytokeratin
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, FS. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
intermediate filaments. Am J Dermatopathol 19, 341-50.
Dog and Cat, pp. 2, 33-6. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Sheng, H., Goich, S., Wang, A. et al. (2002) Dissecting the onco-
Goldschmidt, M.H., Dunstan, R.W., Stannard, A.A. et al. (1998)
genic potential of Gli2: deletion of an NH(2)-terminal frag-
Histological Classification of Epithelial and Melanocytic
ment alters skin tumor phenotype. Cancer Res 62, 5308-16.
Tumors of the Skin of Domestic Animals, 2nd series, Vol. 3,
Swanson, PE., Fitzpatrick, M.M., Ritter, J.H. et al. (1998)
p. 21. Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, Washington
Immunohistologic differential diagnosis of basal cell carci-
DC.
noma, squamous cell carcinoma, and trichoepithelioma in
Jones, M.S., Helm, K.F. & Maloney, M.E. (1997) The immuno-
small cutaneous biopsy specimens. J Cutan Pathol 25, 153-9.
histochemical characteristics of the basosquamous cell carci-
Teh, M.T., Wong, S.T., Neill, G.W. et al. (2002) FOXM1 is a
noma. Dermatol Surg 23, 181-4.
downstream target of Gli1 in basal cell carcinomas. Cancer
Kirkham, N. (1997) Tumors and cysts of the epidermis. In:
Res 62, 4773-80.
Lever's Histopathology of the Skin, 8th edn (eds D.E. Elder,
Tellechea, O., Reis, J.P, Domingues, J.C. et al. (1993) Mono-
R.E. Elenitsas, C. Jaworsky et al.), pp. 728-9. Lippincott-
clonal antibody Ber EP4 distinguishes basal-cell carcinoma
Raven, Philadelphia.
from squamous-cell carcinoma. Am J Dermatopathol 15,
Marin, R.C. II, Edwards, M.J., Cawte, T.G. et al. (2000)
452-5.
 Basosquamous carcinoma analysis of prognostic factors influ-
Tojo, M., Mori, T., Kiyosawa, H. et al. (1999) Expression of
encing recurrence. Cancer 15, 1365-9.
sonic hedgehog signal transducers, patched and smoothened,
Weiss, E. & Frese, K. (1974) Tumours of the skin. Bull World
in human basal cell carcinoma. Pathol Int 49, 687-94.
Health Org 50, 79-100.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 23
Follicular tumors
 Follicular histology and physiology are highly complex,
At the base of telogen hair follicles, there is a cluster or
and a thorough review is beyond the scope of this text.
column of small adnexal keratinocytes known as second-
However, since a logical nomenclature of follicular
ary hair germ; this is presumably a direct descendant of
tumors must be based on normal sructure, a brief
primary hair germ. Primary hair germ is the epithelial
description is included. Hair follicles are divided trans-
anlage of the folliculosebaceous unit. It appears early in
versely into three levels. The upper portion, or infundibu-
embryonic life as a dense ball of basaloid cells with
lum, of the follicle extends from the entrance of the
 peripheral palisading that projecrs downward from the
sebaceous duct to the follicular ostium. This segment
epidermis.
of the follicle is composed predominantly of outer
The subsequent growth of both the frst hair follicles
root sheath epithelium that is continuous with and
in the fetus and successive generations of hair follicles
histologically indistinguishable from the epidermis. The
 throughout life are a result of complex signaling between 
middle portion, or isthmus, of the hair follicle
hair germ epithelium and the subjacent clusters of highly
extends from the insertion of the arrector pili muscle
specialized mesenchymal cells known as dermal papillae
to the level of the sebaceous duct. The outer root
or follicular
 papillae. It is now fairly well accepted that a
sheath epithelium of the follicular isthmus comprises
 population of multipotential, slow-cycling follicular stem
smaller keratinocytes that keratinize without a granular
cells resides, at least in humans and mice, in a small area
cell layer. This tricholermmal pattern of keratinization
of outer root sheath near the insertion of the arrector pili
produces amorphous keratin, in contrast to
the
muscle known as ^the bulge' (Sun et al., 1991). Follicular
lamellar keratin arising via the keratohyalin granular cell
stem cells in the dog may have a more diffuse distribution
layer of infundibular epithelium. The keratinocytes of
(Credille et al., 1999). In an elegant synthesis of recent
the isthmus generally have homogeneous, pale pink
discoveries in molecular biology and old observations
cytoplasm.
based on light and electron microscopy, Panteleyev et al.
The lower, or inferior segment of the follicle extends
(2001) provide convincing evidence for the existence of a
from the mesenchymal papilla to the insertion of the
second aggregate of follicular stem cells at the base of the
arrector pili muscle. The inferior segment of the follicle
outer root sheath adjacent to the hair bulb in mice; these
during anagen phase contains the outer root sheath, inner
migrate from the bulge cells during anagen and have been
root sheath, and hair bulb. The outer root sheath at this
dubbed the “lateral disc'. The lateral disc cells are the sec-
 level shows marked cytoplasmic glycogenation. The inner
ondary hair germ; they become activated at the end of
root sheath is composed of small cells with clear cyto-
telogen, they are in close contact with follicular papilla,
plasm that keratinize through distinctive, bright red
and their progeny form the hair bulb, hair shaft, and inner
 trichohyalin granules. Inner root sheath epithelium pro-
root sheath. In contrast, the progeny of the bulge region 
 duces large plates of keratin that have a laminated appear-
give rise to the outer root sheath (Panteleyev et al., 2001).
ance in tissue sections. The hair bulb is composed of the
Apocrine and sebaceous glands arise embryologically as
multipotential basaloid matrix cells that give rise to the
unilateral protrusions from the upper and mid portion,
inner root sheath, hair shaft, and lower outer root sheath.
respectively, of the developing hair peg (Meyer & Gorgen,
 Keratinization of matrix cells leaves the cytoplasmic and
1986; Panteleyev et al., 2001). Because of this close onto-
nuclear membranes intact, producing sheets of 'ghost’ or
genetic relationship, it is not surprising that primarily
'shadow' cells. The isthmic outer root sheath becomes the
follicular tumors occasionally display foci of divergent
predominant component of the lower half of the follicle
differentiation toward adnexal glands, usually sebaceous
during catagen and telogen phases after the hair bulb
since their precursor cells are in closer proximity to the
undergoes involution.
 putative follicular bulge region. Where this phenomenon
604
 Follicular tumors
605
is relatively frequent, the variant has a compound title,
such as 'sebaceous trichofolliculoma'. In instances of rare,
unclassifed divergent differentiation, descriptive nomen
ceous differentiation'.
FOLLICULAR HAMARTOMA
(Synonym: follicular nevus)
Clinical features
Follicular hamartoma is an uncommon, non-neoplastic
lesion in dogs.
The etiopathogenesis  is unknown.
Numeric incidence data are not reported. Follicular
hamartoma typically presents as multiple, grouped
plaques or small nodules. The affected skin has an irreg-
ularly thickened texture resembling orange peel. Hairs
arising from the hamartoma are thick and brush-like. The
number of nodules gradually increases, and the lesion
expands over time, sometimes necessitating multiple sur-
 gical excisions. Most lesions are several centimeters in
size; some may be more extensive and may rarely involve
an entire leg or large portions of the trunk. Follicular
hamartoma may also present as a single small nodule
measuring 0.3 to 1 cm in diameter. There is no known age,
breed or site predilection.
Histopathology (Figure 23.1)
Fig. 23.1 Follicular hamartoma in a dog. Clusters of giant anagen
Follicular hamartoma contains one or more clusters
hairs and associated adnexal glands surrounded by increased colla-
of architecturally normal anagen hair follicles that are
gen encroach on the panniculus. Note interspersed normal-sized hair
distinctly larger and extend more deeply than adjacent
follicles.
normal follicles. In the majority of cases, all follicles
within a cluster are uniform and have the appearance of
Diagnosis of this unique lesion is usually not problem-
primary follicles. Hair shafts are proportionately thick-
atic. If only punch biopsies of lesional tissue are submit-
ened. Follicular infundibular hyperkeratosis, as would be
ted, it may be difcult to appreciate the relative size of
expected in reactive hyperplasia of hair follicles, is not
the abnormal follicles. Solitary follicular hamartomas are
observed. The sebaceous glands within the lesions are
readily distinguished from fbroadnexal hamartoma by
slightly enlarged, increased in number and frequently
 the presence of anagen hair bulbs and normal anatomic
extend proximally and distally beyond their normal
orientation of the follicles and adnexal glands. When dys-
location at the follicular isthmus. Sweat glands maintain
plastic changes are present in folicular hamartoma, they
their normal anatomic distribution, but are often dilated
are much milder than in fbroadnexal hamartoma.
and occasionally attain cystic proportions. In small
numbers of follicular hamartomas, one or several follicu-
FIBROADNEXAL HAMARTOMA
losebaceous units exhibit mild to moderate dysplasia
and tortuosity. The follicles are embedded in hyalinized
(Synonyms:
fbroadnexal dysplasia, focal adnexal
collagen, and a zone of mucin is located peripheral to
dysplasia)
the vireous sheaths. The collagenous stroma extends
into the hypodermal fat, which may also be increased in
Fibroadnexal hamartoma (formerly focal adnexal dyspla-
depth. The overlying epidermis is mildly hyperplastic and
sia) is a hamartomatous lesion of controversial etiology.
often has an undulating confguration. Hyperpigmenta-
Scar tissue formation following the resolution of an
tion may be present. Secondary folliculitis is infrequently
inflammatory process could result in entrapment and
observed.
subsequent distortion of folliculosebaceous units. The
606
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
authors frequently see both hyperplasia and significant
distortion of hair follicles in areas of reactive dermal
fbroplasia, for example in surgical re-excision specimens.
Chronic trauma may result in reactive proliferation and
distortion of adnexal units with subsequent rupture,
inflammation, and scarring. The typical location over
pressure points supports this traumatic pathogenesis.
However, lesions also occur on the trunk and head.
Smaller masses frequently have no evidence of inflamma-
tion, but still show marked distortion of adnexal struc-
tures. Thus, it is likely that many of these lesions are
primary malformations of folliculosebaceous units and,
possibly, dermal collagen. In humans, similar lesions have
been reported as foliculosebaceous cystic hamartomas
(Kimura et al., 1991). A giant variant has also been
described (Yamamoto et al., 1994).
Clinical features
Fibroadnexal hamartoma is a common non-neoplastic
lesion of adnexal appendages occurring in dogs. It is
reported to comprise 2.7% of all canine skin tumors
(Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992). Another survey found an
incidence of 1.7% of all canine skin biopsies (Abramo et
al., 2003).
Fibroadnexal hamartomas are typically solitary, frm,
circumscribed, and dome-shaped to polypoid masses that
Fig. 23.2 Fibroadnexal hamartorma in a dog. This small derrmal
 t ui anou oi  n Axdde o o
nodule comprises multiple distorted folliculosebaceous units sur-
diameter. Smaller lesions have partial alopecia. Larger
rounded by dense collagen.
lesions frequently exhibit alopecia and ulceration.
Fibroadnexal hamartoma occurs most commonly on the
distal legs; pressure points and interdigital areas are fre-
plastic, cystically dilated, and tortuous. Infundibular
quently affected. The lesions are found less frequently on
epithelium predominates; hair bulbs are not found. Ori-
head and trunk. This anatomic distribution is in agree-
entation of the follicles is severely askew; they often
ment with published data (Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992;
appear to run tangential or parallel to the skin surface.
Abramo et al., 2003).
Contiguity of the abnormal follicular structures with
 Animals are generally middle-aged or older, and a range
overlying epidermis is rare. The follicles are distended
of 2 to 16 years was recently reported (Abramo et al.,
with lamellar keratin, and occasional hair shafts are
2003). Large breed dogs, particularly Labrador Retriev-
present. Multiple mature sebaceous gland lobules of
ers, appear to be predisposed (Goldschmidt & Shofer,
varying size are distributed haphazardly around the hair
1992). Basset Hounds, Maremma Sheepdogs, and Bracco
follicles, often without obvious ductal connections. Occa-
 Dogs may also be at increased risk (Abramo et al., 2003).
sionally, lesions contain delicate, arching strands of small
keratinocytes interconnecting the follicles to one another
Histopathology (Figures 23.2 through 23.4)
or to sebaceous lobules. When apocrine glands are
 present, they are dilated and abnormally distributed.
Fibroadnexal hamartoma is a circumscribed nodule com-
The adnexa are surrounded by and interspersed with
prising malformed folliculosebaceous units, collagen and,
 abundant, mature collagen. The collagen bundles in larger
occasionally, apocrine sweat glands. Smaller lesions are
lesions are thick and resemble scar tissue. Some fbro-
confined to the dermis; larger masses extend into subcutis.
adnexal hamartomas also contain islands of mature
The hamartomas are usually spherical, although some
adipose tissue admixed with the collagen. The stroma is
have a fliform conformation. Superfcial ulceration may
sharply demarcated from the adjacent dermis or subcutis
be present. Intact epidermis covering larger masses is
 in uninflamed lesions, but blends into the reactive fbrous
acanthotic, sometimes resembling acral lick dermatitis
 tissue around inflamed nodules. Larger lesions frequently
(see Chapter 7) or an acrochordon (fbroepithelial polyp;
have rupture of cystic hair follicles, resulting in severe
-  s   s   r s
suppurative or pyogranulomatous inflammation. Patchy,
 Follicular tumors
607
Fig. 23.3 Higher magnification of
fibroadnexal hamartoma in a dog. Hair
follicles are hyperplastic and markedly
tortuous. The sebaceous lobules are
distributed haphazardly.
chronic inflammatory infltrates of plasma cells and
macrophages may also be present around the periphery
of these lesions regardless of size. Cystic follicles some-
times contain large colonies of staphylococci; Malassezia
are detected occasionally.
Diagnosis of fbroadnexal hamartoma is generally
straightforward. Small fibroadnexal hamartomas are
readily distinguished from solitary follicular hamartomas
by the absence of anagen hair bulbs and the markedly
distorted orientation of the follicles and adnexal glands.
Dermoid cysts (see Chapter 22) have a single epithelial
cystic structure with a few miniature but complete
folliculosebaceous units radiating from it; fbroadnexal
hamartomas almost always have multiple tortuous
infundibular cysts with multiple randomly arranged seba
ceous lobules and no anagen follicles. Trichofolliculoma,
a rare lesion in dogs, classically shows a central dilated
follicular infundibulum and ostium from which multiple
secondary anagen follicles radiate. Trichofolliculoma may
have a sebaceous component, and some authors believe
that human folliculosebaceous cystic hamartoma (resem-
bling fbroadnexal hamartoma in dogs) is the same entity
as trichofolliculoma in a late stage of evolution (Schulz &
Hartschuh, 1998). Considering the relative frequency of
fbroadnexal hamartoma versus classic trichofolliculoma,
this does not appear to be the case in dogs.
FOLLICULAR CYST
Fig. 23.4 Fibroadnexal hamartoma in a dog. This exammple has
A cyst may be defined as a non-neoplastic, simple sac-like
marked hepatoid metaplasia of the sebaceous lobules.
structure with an epithelial lining. Classification of cysts
 depends on identification of the lining epithelium or the
608
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
pre-existing structure from which the cyst arose. The
Breeds of dogs that are reported to be predisposed to
 majority of cysts in the skin of dogs and cats are of fol-
develop solitary cysts include Boxers, Shih Tzus, Minia-
licular origin and can be further categorized based upon
ture
Schnauzers,
and
Old
English
Sheepdogs
the level of the follicle from which they develop.
. The
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992). Clustered follicular cysts of
categories include infundibular, isthmus, matrical,
and
presumed congenital etiology occur on the dorsal midline 
hybrid; the last is composed of trwo or three types of lining
of the head of young dogs; Boxers and Rhodesian Ridge-
epithelium. Because of the histopathologic similarity
backs are predisposed (Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992).
 between infundibular and epidermal keratinization pat-
Multiple follicular cysts also develop on pressure points
terns, some cysts are still classifed as epidermal cysts or
 in large breed dogs; these are probably secondary to
epidermal inclusion cysts in both human and veterinary
chronic frictional trauma leading to obstruction of follic-
literature (Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992; Rosai, 1996;
ular ostia (see callus, Chapter 8). Cysts may also develop
Jones et al., 1997; Kirkham, 1997). This nomenclature
in surgical scars secondary to follicular entrapment.
suggests that the cysts are formed as a result of traumatic
embedding of epidermal fragments or a congenital
Histopathology
anomaly of epidermal development, both of which are
probably very rare phenomena. Congenital and familial
Infundibular cyst (Figures 23.5 and 23.6)
cases of multiple follicular cysts, such as tricholemmal
 Infundibular cysts are lined by squamous epithelium with
cysts and eruptive vellus cysts, occur in humans
an obvious granular cell layer as in the upper portion of
(Kirkham, 1997). Multiple follicular cysts are occasion-
the normal follicle. The keratin contents are laminated
 ally seen in dogs, although they are usually not numer-
and are often concentrically arranged. The keratin may
 ous, as in the human disorders. The clinical misnomer
'sebaceous cyst’ is frequently applied to follicular cysts
because of the grumous nature of their keratinaceous con-
tents; this is a holdover from older human and veterinary
literature. Sebum is actually a white, milky fluid.
Clinical features
Infundibular and isthmus cysts are common in dogs. In
cats, infundibular cysts are fairly common, while isthmus
cysts are uncommon. In a large survey, all cysts classified
as *epidermal' or *follicular' accounted for 3.5% of canine
skin tumors and 4.4% of feline skin tumors (Goldschmidt
& Shofer, 1992). Exclusively matrical cysts are rare in
dogs and cats. Hybrid cysts are common in dogs and rare
in cats.
 Follicular cysts usually present as solitary, frm, intra-
dermal or, occasionally, subcutaneous nodules ranging
from 0.2 to 2cm in diameter. Larger lesions occur infre-
quently. Follicular cysts can be multiple either synchro-
 nously or metachronously, suggesting a developmental
 and/or environmental basis for their formation. They are
 Occasionally numerous. The overlying epidermis is intact
unless cyst rupture or self-trauma has occurred. The
lesions may have a blue, white, or yellow hue depending
on the depth of the cyst and color of its contents. Partial
 or total alopecia may be present. A pore, representing
residual follicular ostium, may connect the cyst to the
overlying epidermis; this occurs more often in cats.
Keratin from the cyst lumen may protrude through the
 pore, occasionally forming a frank cutaneous horn. The
cyst contents have a semisolid, caseous, granular,
or
Fig. 23.5  Infundibular cyst from the head of a dog. The cyst is lined
doughy consistency; the color may be yellow-white, light
by a thin layer of squarmous epithelium. The cyst cavity contains
brown, or gray.
flaky keratin and numerous hair fragments.
Follicular tumors
609
Fig. 23.6 Infundibular cyst in a cat. The cyst wall has a prorminent
Fig. 23.7 Isthmus cyst in a dog. The epithelium lining the cyst does
granular cell layer, and the cyst cavity contains lamellar, flaky
not have a granular cell layer. Note the keratin contents are paler
keratin.
and more amorphous than in the infundibular cyst (Fig. 23.6).
appear as loose flakes within the cyst lumen. Hair frag-
interlacing collagen bundles that tend to parallel the cyst
ments are usually absent in solitary idiopathic cysts, but
wall; this represents the dermal component of the cuta-
may be numerous in congenital cysts on the head or in
 neous invagination from which a dermoid cyst is derived.
callus cysts. In occasional cysts there may be one or two
The collagen around infundibular cysts has a normal
clusters of sebaceous glands attached to the wall.
dermal pattern, although it may be thickened due to
Rupture of any type of keratinous cyst results in
chronic pressure or inflammation.
a marked foreign-body-type inflammatory reaction in
the dermis. Free keratin fragments are surrounded by
Istbmus cyst (tricholemmal cyst) (Figures 23.7
macrophages, neutrophils, plasma cells and multinucle-
through 23.9)
ated giant cells. Cholesterol cleft formation is frequently
The lining epithelium and keratinization pattern of this
observed. Fibroplasia occurs with eventual encapsulation
type of cyst closely resemble the outer root sheath of the
of the residual cyst wall and keratinous debris. Inflamed
middle segment of anagen follicles and the middle and
lesions may fistulate or ulcerate.
lower portions of catagen phase follicles. These were thus
 Differentiation of infundibular cyst from dermoid cyst
previously described in Veterinary Dermatopathology as
(see Chapter 22) may be problematic, particularly for the
"isthmus-catagen cyst’ (Walder & Gross, 1992). This
occasional infundibular cyst with sebaceous glands. In
 i    q s s 
contrast, dermoid cysts have multiple diminutive follicu-
Health Organization classification (Goldschmidt et al.,
losebaceous units radiating from the cyst wall and
s e m a  p  sis s 
oriented perpendicular to it. Dermoid cysts and their
 Or absent granular cell layer. The keratinocytes have pale
associated adnexa are surrounded by a broad zone of
pink, slightly glassy cytoplasm. Tricholemmal keratiniza-
610
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 23.8 “Flame follicle^ isthmus cyst
in a Siberian Husky. The cyst lining is
convoluted and agranular, and the cyst
cavity is filled with brightly eosino-
philic, amorphous keratin (the cracks
are processing artifact).
tion predominates, and the cyst contents are paler and
more homogeneous than in infundibular cysts. Occa-
sional hair fragments may be present.
A rare variant of isthmus cyst observed by the authors
resembles a markedly enlarged, exaggerated catagen fol-
licle similar to ^flame follicles’ of alopecia X (see Chapter
19) and follicular dysplasia in Siberian Huskies (see
Chapter 20). These cysts are relatively small and have
epithelium with a wrinkled outline and prominent vitre-
ous membrane. The keratin within the cyst is amorphous
and brightly eosinophilic. The cyst contents have a spiked
or brush-like perimeter formed by the fusion of the hair
cuticle and tricholemmal keratin (flame follicle). These
unusual flame folicle cysts have been observed only in
Siberian Huskies and may be multiple. Any association
between flame follicle cysts and alopecic disorders in this
breed is as yet undetermined.
In an uncommon variant of isthmus cyst, the epithe-
lum at the deep aspect of the cyst wall develops short
rabecular projections into the surrounding dermis. These
are designated ‘proliferating isthmus cysts'. Small sec-
ondary cysts filled with subtly laminated keratin eventu-
ally form. Small numbers of keratohyalin granules are
often present. As proliferation continues and cystic struc-
tures increase in number the lesion begins to resemble
infundibular keratinizing acanthoma (see p. 619). Weiss
and Frese (1974) also proposed that “follicular cyst with
epithelial proliferation’ was an early stage of ‘intracuta-
neous cornifying epithelioma'.
Fig. 23.9 Proliferating isthmus cyst in a dog. Short trabeculae and
occasional small horn cysts project outward from thecyst wall. Note
Matrical cyst (Figure 23.10)
the sparse keratohyalin granules and amorphous keratin contents.
This type of cyst appears to be derived from the lower or
inferior segment of the anagen hair follicle. Matrical cysts
Follicular tumors
611
Fig. 23.10 Matrical cyst in a dog. The cyst wall is composed pri-
Fig. 23.11 Hybrid cyst in a dog, isthmus-matrical variant. The cyst
marily of small, dark, basaloid epithelial cells. Keratinized 'ghost'
wall is lined by a mixture of basaloid and agranular squamous
cells fill the cyst cavity.
epithelial zones. The cyst cavity contains amorphous keratin in addi-
tion to *ghost' cells.
are lined by small basaloid epithelial cells with scant cyto-
plasm and hyperchromatic nuclei, resulting in a dark
Hybrid cyst (Figure 23.11)
blue color to the cyst wall on low power examination.
As further evidence of the follicular origin of most cuta-
The epithelium keratinizes abruptly, forming ‘ghost’ or
neous cysts, two or all three levels of follicular epithelium
shadow' cells. Keratinized ghost cells are pale and refrac-
may be represented in a single lesion. The following
tile and have delicate eosinophilic outlines demarcating
combinations have been described in humans: infundibu-
cell membranes and nuclear envelopes. Matrical cysts
lar-tricholemmal (isthmic), infundibular-matrical, tricho-
often contain small areas of inner root sheath differentia-
lemmal-matrical, infundibular-sebaceous duct (Requena &
tion characterized by glycogenated cells with trichohyalin
Sanchez Yus, 1991), and matrical-lower outer root sheath
granules. This association is not unexpected, as inner root
(Satoh et al., 1989). The most common combination in
sheath is normally produced by the hair matrix. Interest-
dogs as well as humans is infundibular-isthmic. These are
ingly, cysts composed mostly of glycogen-rich, anagen-type,
 lined by infundibular epithelium with a prominent gran-
ular cell layer and isthmic outer root sheath epithelium
 Some lesions resembling matrical cysts have a few
with no granular layer in varying proportions. The
smaller cystic structures adjacent to the primary cyst;
infundibular epithelium is usually, but not always, in the
these secondary cysts are lined predominantly by basaloid
superfcial aspect of the cyst. The keratin content is a
epithelial cells, but may also contain isthmus-
more reliable indicator of cyst origin than its epithelium,
infundibular-type epithelium. Tumors of this type may be
which may be severely degenerate or nonrepresentative
designated as 'proliferating matrical cysts’ and may rep-
due to examination of only a single level of sectioning.
resent precursors to fully developed trichoepithelioma or
In addition to the expected laminated and amorphous
pilomatricoma (see pp. 616, 624).
keratin in cysts of presumed infundibular-isthmic type,
612
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
small aggregates of keratinized ghost cells may be found;
central dome-shaped protrusion of dense keratin. A frank
 o i  r r  s
cutaneous horn is present in some cases. Lesions are most
present somewhere in the cyst wall.
often located on the head and neck. Dilated pore of Winer
 The current World Health Organization nomenclature
in humans also has a predilection for the head and neck.
uses the term 'panfollicular’ or ‘trichoepitheliomatous’ to
Dilated pore occurs primarily in older cats; there is no
describe cysts with two or more follicular components
breed or sex predilection reported (Scott et al., 2001).
(Goldschmidt et al., 1998); however the authors feel that
'panfollicular should refer only to lesions with tripartite
Histopathology (Figures 23.12 and 23.13)
features, i.e. infundibular, outer root sheath and matrical
areas. Panfollicular cysts may also become proliferative
Dilated pore is a cup-shaped or pyriform, dilated, follicu-
and progress to trichoepithelioma (see p. 616). Prolifer-
 lar infundibulum lined by hyperplastic squamous epithe-
ating panfollicular cysts show small numbers of small
lium. The cyst cavity is flled with compact, laminated
secondary cysts budding from the main cystic structure.
keratin which projects above the skin surface through the
The secondary cysts are also lined by variable admixtures
central pore. The pore is a distended follicular ostium. The
of matrical, outer root sheath, and infundibular epithe-
epithelium of the cyst wall of a dilated pore has a promi-
lium and contain their respective keratin types.
nent granular cell layer consistent with infundibular
origin. The majority of the cyst wall has marked irregular
hyperplasia frequently  with a scalloped configuration
DILATED PORE
along its outer edge. The epithelium becomes thinner at the
(Synonym: dilated pore of Winer)
rim of the pore where it merges with adjacent epidermis.
Dilated pores are histologically unique but may be con-
Dilated pore is a distinctive proliferative variant of
fused with follicular infundibular cysts. Patent follicular
infundibular follicular cyst in the cat that is similar but
ostia are rarely present in routine follicular infundibular
not identical to dilated pore of Winer in humans (Scott
cysts.
& Flanders, 1984). The lesions in humans are narrower
and have a more vertical orientation than those in cats
WARTY DYSKERATOMA
(Murphy & Elder, 1991).
Warty dyskeratoma is an uncommon benign tumor in
Clinical features
humans that typically presents as a solitary papule or small
 nodule, often with an umbilicated center. Multiple lesions
Dilated pore occurs uncommonly in cats. It presents as a
Occur infrequently (Azuma & Matsukawa, 1993; Griffths
solitary, frm mass, less than 1 cm in diameter with a
et al., 1997; Kaddu et al., 2002). These tumors have long
Fig. 23.12 Dilated pore in a cat.
Cystically-dilated follicular infundibu-
lum has a keratin-filled central pore
that communicates with the skin
surface. Note the irregular hyperplasia
of the squamous epithelium lining the
deeper aspects of the cyst.
 Follicular tumors
613
Fig. 23.13 Higher magnification of
dilated pore of Fig. 23.12. The
squamous epithelium at the base of
the cyst is markedly thickened, and
the peripheral margin has a scalloped
configuration.
Fig. 23.14 Warty dyskeratoma in a
dog. This small, multilocular cystic
follicular infundibula. Note epithelial
 proliferation and early acantholytic cleft
formation along the floor of the cyst
{arrow).
been presumed to be of follicular origin based on the archi-
be identical to the human lesion of the same name. The
tecture of young lesions. Positive immunohistochemical
two cases described in dogs were solitary. Larger lesions
staining of warty dyskeratomas with hair-specific keratins
comprising clusters of nodules have occasionally been
has been reported (Griffths et al., 1997). The pathogene-
observed by one of the authors (E.J.W.); several of these
sis of similar tumors that occur infrequently in the oral
involved the pinna. Too few cases have been identified to
cavity in humans is unclear (Harrist et al., 1980).
indicate age or breed predilections.
Clinical features
Histopathology (Figures 23.14 through 23.17)
Warty dyskeratoma is a very rare, benign tumor of dogs
Warty dyskeratoma is a dermal mass with a cup-shaped
that was originally described by Hill (1987). It appears to
or cystic architecture. Cup-shaped lesions resemble dis-
614
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 23.15 Higher magnification of Fig. 23.14. There is an area of
Fig. 23.16 Warty dyskeratoma in a dog. This example comprises
acantholysis with clefts involving hyperplastic straturm spinosum
large cysts in the deep dermis. Note zones of irregular hyperplasia
sometimes extending to the straturm basale. Note several shrunken,
and large cleft in the wall of the cyst at right.
dyskeratotic cells in overlying straturm granulosurm (arrow).
tended follicular infundibula and open to the skin surface.
tive and differential diagnoses are limited. Differentiation
The superfcial portion of the cup or cyst is lined by
from an acantholytic variant of squamous cell carcinoma
 mature squamous epithelium. The base of the structure
arising in a follicular cyst is a potential problem. Infltra-
has a markedly convoluted lining of stratified squamous
tion beyond the basement membrane does not occur in
epithelium supported by fliform projections of dermal
warty dyskeratoma, and extensive apoptosis is uncom-
collagen; these are often described as resembling intestinal
mon in squamous cell carcinoma.
villi. There is extensive acantholysis of this epithelium,
sometimes leaving only the basal cell layer. Individual ker-
TRICHOFOLLICULOMA
atinocyte condensation, representing either apoptosis or
dyskeratosis (premature cornifcation of individual cells),
Trichofolliculoma is likely a hamartoma, as it resembles
is also observed in the thicker portions of the cyst epithe-
the entire follicular or folliculosebaceous unit and main-
lium. The lumen of the cup or cyst is flled with ortho-
tains fairly normal interrelationships between the various
keratoticand
parakeratotic
debris,
acantholytic
keratinocytes, and sloughed apoptotic cells with markedly
-Iu jo asuansoo aui Aq pairoddns kiauons si angoieue
condensed cytoplasm and nuclei. The viable epithelial
licular cycling through anagen, catagen, and telogen
cells exhibit moderate nuclear enlargement, variable
phases, as well as a stable population of Merkel cells in
nucleoli, and low mitotic activity. Cytologic atypia is not
the different stages of tumor evolution (Schulz &
present. Inflammation secondary to epithelial degenera-
Hartschuh, 1998; Hartschuh & Schulz, 1999). In human
tion and release of keratin into the dermis may occur.
trichofolliculomas, tufts of fluffy hair frequently emerge
The architecture of warty dyskeratoma is quite distinc-
 aq o 1eadde iou saop siun aiod genu e qnor
Follicular tumors
615
feature of the tumor in dogs or cats. The variant known
as sebaceous trichofolliculoma in humans, which contains
numerous sebaceous lobules, also occurs in dogs or cats.
Clinical features
Trichofolliculoma is uncommon in dogs and rare in cats.
Trichofoliculoma usually presents as a solitary, dome-
shaped nodule less than 2 cm in diameter. The overlying
epidermis is intact, but there may be a central pore or
 depression. There is no known age, breed, or site predis-
position.
Histopathology (Figures 23.18 and 23.19)
Trichofolliculoma is a well-circumscribed but unencapsu-
lated dermal nodule composed of one or several primary
follicles that are large, dilated, and keratinize through a
 granular cell layer. Hair shafts may also be present. The
primary follicles may open onto the skin surface, creating
the pores observed clinically. Variable numbers of sec-
ondary follicular structures radiate outward from the
primary follicles in an arborizing pattern. Lesions may
be small and superficial with few secondary follicles, or
they may be large and have a complex architecture with
numerous secondary follicles. The secondary follicles
exhibit various stages of maturation from predominantly
basaloid hair germ to fully-developed follicles containing
delicate hair shafts. The follicular epithelium may be
Fig. 23.17 Higher magnification of warty dyskeratoma of Fig.
heavily melanized. The anagen-phase follicles have
23.16. The cyst wall shows hyperplasia and dyscohesion, and the
normal hair bulbs with well-developed mesenchymal
cyst lurmen is filled with acantholytic keratinocytes that are often
 papillae. There is a well-demarcated collagenous stroma
condensed or dyskeratotic.
Fig. 23.18 Small, superficial sebaceous
trichofolliculoma in a dog. A cluster of
keratin-plugged follicles communicates
with the skin surface via small pores.
Multiple small sebaceous lobules and
some small secondary follicles branch
from the deep aspects of the dilated
follicles.
616
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
telogen stage and has a prominent sebaceous component.
It has been proposed, in fact, that late-stage trichofol-
liculoma and folliculosebaceous cystic hamartoma in
humans are one and the same (Schulz & Hartschuh,
1998). Considering the relative frequency of fbroadnexal
hamartoma versus classic anagen trichofolliculoma in
dogs, this does not seem likely. An arborizing pattern
occurs occasionally in trichoepitheliomas, but trichofol-
iculomas have only one or several primary cysts, and the
follicular structures show much more advanced tricho-
genesis than those of trichoepithelioma.
TRICHOEPITHELIOMA
Clinical features
Trichoepithelioma is a benign neoplasm that is fairly
common in dogs and uncommon in cats. It differentiates
-o     jo s   p
duction, p. 604) and is analogous to the human neoplasm
 of the same name. Incidence estimates range from approx-
imately 0.4% to 4.0% of canine skin tumors (Scott &
Anderson, 1991; Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992; Abramo
et al., 1999) and 0.3% to 0.8% of feline skin tumors
(Miller et al., 1991; Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992;
Abramo et al., 1999).
Trichoepitheliomas are round to ovoid dermal masses
 that are usually less than 2cm in size. Larger masses up
to 15 cm occur less frequently. They vary from superficial,
Fig. 23.19 Trichofolliculoma in a cat. Numerous well-differenti
dome-shaped nodules to deep dermal and subcutaneous
ated secondary anagen follicles radiate from irregular cystic primary
 r  q  s ss
follicles filled with keratin and hair fragments.
chronously or metachronously. There is partial or com-
plete alopecia, and ulceration is common in larger lesions.
In dogs, these tumors occur most often on the dorsal
of low cellularity separating the mass from adjacent
trunk and legs, but may affect other parts of the body.
dermis.
'n aui roj uonoapaid e aaeu on readde sies ui suoisi
Small numbers of sebaceous glands also may be con-
There is a breed predisposition for Basset Hounds, Bull
nected to the primary follicles. The glands may be rudi
Mastiffs, English Springer Spaniels, Golden Rerievers,
mentary or fully developed, and probably parallel the
Gordon Setters, Irish Setters, and Standard Poodles
degree of differentiation of the secondary follicles. A tri-
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992). Multiple trichoepithe-
chofolliculoma with dominant sebaceous glands is termed
liomas occur most often in Basset Hounds. Most affected
'sebaceous trichofolliculoma'.
animals are 5 years of age or older.
A trichofolliculoma with predominantly mature sec-
 ondary follicles may resemble a dermoid cyst, particularly
Histopathology (Figures 23.20 through 23.22)
if hair shafts and sebaceous glands are present (see
Chapter 22). The follicles which radiate from the central
Trichoepithelioma is usually a well-circumscribed but
cyst of a trichofolliculoma are more numerous, larger and
unencapsulated dermal nodule comprising a random
often show tertiary branching. The central cyst of a
admixture of budding epithelial islands and cystic struc-
trichofolliculoma may contain epithelium resembling
tures of variable size. Cystic structures may predominate,
isthmus and/or lower segments of a hair follicle, while
 and some lesions are characterized by a large main cyst
the central cyst of a dermoid cyst is lined entirely by
and small numbers of progeny cysts around it. Neoplas-
epidermal-type
squamous
epithelium.
Distinction
tic epithelium may be focally contiguous with the overly-
between trichofolliculoma and fbroadnexal hamartoma
ing epidermis or follicular infundibulum. The epithelial
may be problematic if the trichofolliculoma is in late
aggregates are encompassed in a moderate, well-
Follicular tumors
617
Hig. 23.20 Trichoepithelioma in a
dog. This well-circumscribed dermal
mass comprises numerous small cystic,
tubular, and trabecular epithelial struc-
tures within a fibromyxoid stroma.
Fig. 23.21 Higher magnification of
trichoepithelioma in a dog. Large cystic
structure (bottom) and small secondary
cysts are lined primarily by matrical
phous keratin and keratinized ghost
cells.
demarcated fbrous, fbromyxoid, or myxoid stroma of
lial aggregates may be invested by thickened basement
low cellularity. Mucinosis of the epithelial aggregates has
membrane zones or vitreous sheaths. The matrical cells
been described in tumors with myxoid stroma (Scott &
have scant, pale cytoplasm and uniform, ovoid, euchro-
Anderson, 1991).
matic nuclei. Nucleoli are small, and mitotic activity is
The epithelial islands are predominantly composed of
Aq p ad are ss s a m ann
basaloid epithelial cells that have prominent peripheral
similar matrical cells and are flled with keratinized
palisading and resemble the matrical cells of follicular 
'ghost’ or ‘shadow' cells. The matrical and shadow cells
bulbs. Advanced trichogenesis (recognizable hair shafts)
may be melanized. Mineralization of the keratinized
is uncommon, and papillary mesenchymal bodies (mes-
material is rare. The matrical cells transition into zones
enchymal bodies derived from the dermal papillae; also 
of larger cells with glycogenated cytoplasm consistent
see trichoblastoma, p. 625) are few in number. The epithe-
with lower segment outer root sheath. Small foci of inner
618
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 23.22 Higher magnification of
trichoepithelioma in a dog. Cystic
structures of varying size are lined by
squamous epithelium showing infundi-
bular and isthmus patterns.
root sheath differentiation with trichohyalin granules may
chronic inflammation also may be misinterpreted as focal
be found. Mitotic activity is not present in the nonbasa-
malignant transformation. Inflamed trichoepitheliomas
loid zones. Cords and trabeculae of small basaloid ker-
often have higher mitotic rates than noninflamed tumors,
atinocytes may radiate outward from cyst walls and may
interconnect multiple cysts.
Predominantly basaloid trichoepithelioma without sig-
Variable numbers of cysts are partially or fully lined
nifcant inflammation may need to be differentiated from
by squamous epithelium with or without a granular cell
pilomatricoma. The cystic structures of pilomatricoma
 layer, resembling infundibular and/or isthmus segments of
are generally large and fewer in number than in tri-
the hair follicle. These are accompanied by their expected
choepithelioma. Keratinized ghost cells are present in
 patterns of keratinization: infundibular or tricholemmal.
clusters in trichoepithelioma and in broad sheets in pilo-
The squamous epithelial cells have moderate eosinophilic
matricoma, often resulting in pressure atrophy of the
cytoplasm with round, vesicular nuclei, and small nucle-
matrical epithelium. Intracystic calcification and granulo-
oli. Mitotic activity is also absent in the squamous
matous inflammation are common in pilomatricoma and
zones. Cystic structures with combined epithelial features
rare in trichoepithelioma. Also, the majority of predomi-
resemble hybrid or panfollicular cysts (see p. 607).
nantly basaloid trichoepitheliomas will contain occa-
Trichoepithelioma with primarily infundibulo-isthmic dif-
ad renqpuu io sruqs Aq pau siss lus jeuons
ferentiation is rare.
epithelium, a feature that is absent in pilomatricoma.
 Secondary inflammatory changes are common in tri-
Differential diagnoses for predominantly basaloid,
choepitheliomas, particularly large lesions of long dura-
 inflamed trichoepithelioma include malignant trichoep-
tion, due to degeneration of cyst epithelium and release
ithelioma and keratinizing basal cell carcinoma. Kera-
-aopa jedi e su s 'ens a oiu ui jo
tinizing basal cell carcinoma has a superficial, plaque-like
nous foreign body reaction with inflammation ranging
confguration, and malignant trichoepithelioma is 
a
from suppurative to granulomatous, depending on its
 poorly-circumscribed, asymmeric neoplasm; both often
duration. Dystrophic calcification of released keratinized
have multifocal epidermal contiguity and ulceration.
material may occur occasionally. Ulceration is often
Inflamed benign trichoepitheliomas have a more compact,
present. Trichoepitheliomas with chronic inflammation
spherical silhouette, and multifocal epidermal contiguity
frequently exhibit sclerosis, with short cords of small
 is uncommon. Both basal cell carcinoma and malignant
adnexal keratinocytes radiating from cyst walls into
trichoepithelioma have multifocal necrosis, moderate to
stromal collagen; this may mimic an infltrative growth
high mitotic activity, and nuclear and mitotic atypia.
pattern associated with malignancy. Reactive squamous
Multifocal epithelial necrosis and atypical mitoses are not
metaplasia and hyperplasia of epithelium in areas of
seen in inflamed benign trichoepithelioma, and areas of
Follicular tumors
619
increased proliferative activity and reactive squamous
Clinical features
metaplasia are always associated with the inflammatory
 Infundibular keratinizing acanthoma is an uncommon,
infltrate. Discrete large cystic structures are not present
in basal cell carcinoma, and the keratin microcysts are
benign follicular neoplasm of dogs. Infundibular kera
usually lined by squamous epithelium, as opposed to
tinizing acanthomas accounted for 1.4% to 2.3% of all
canine skin tumors in several surveys (Stannard & Pulley,
matrical epithelium  in  trichoepitheliomas.  However,
because it has recently been demonstrated that basal cell
1975; Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992; Abramo et al., 1999).
  d  ii   
Infundibular keratinizing acanthomas present as soli-
choepithelioma and trichoblastoma (see Chapter 22),
tary or multiple, partially alopecic nodules ranging from
keratinizing basal cell carcinoma may represent a distinct,
0.5 to 4.0 cm in diameter. The nodules usually have a
central pore or larger opening which is 1 mm to several
low-grade variant of malignant trichoepithelioma (see
centimeters in diameter. Larger openings may contain
p.634).
conical or club-shaped, protruding masses of keratin that
The
rare
trichoepitheliomas
with
primarily
form cutaneous horns. Some tumors are more deeply
infundibulo-isthmic differentiation may have an arboriz-
ing architecture reminiscent of trichofoliculoma, but
located within the dermis and do not open onto the skin
surface. Infundibular keratinizing acanthomas are located
trichoepitheliomas have more numerous cysts and less
primarily on the dorsal neck and trunk, although any part
advanced trichogenesis. They are distinguished from deep
infundibular keratinizing acanthomas by larger cysts of
of the body can be affected.
The median age of affected animals in the report of
more variable size. Infundibular keratinizing acanthomas
Stannard and Pulley (1975) was less than 5 years, while
have a predominance of cells with pale, glassy cytoplasm
and small keratohyalin granules, in （
the mean age in the larger survey of Goldschmidt and
contrast
to
 s1  A 511 () 1o
trichoepitheliomas.
Elkhounds, Lhasa Apsos, Pekingese, Yorkshire Terriers,
and German Shepherd Dogs have a marked predisposi-
INFUNDIBULAR KERATINIZING
tion to develop IKAs (Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992).
ACANTHOMA
Lesions are often multiple in Norwegian Elkhounds and
 Lhasa Apsos (Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992) and may also
(Synonym: intracutaneous cornifying epithelioma)
be multiple in German Shepherd Dogs and Old English
Sheepdogs (Scott et al., 2001). Spontaneous regression
Infundibular keratinizing acanthoma has had a histori-
 does not occur in contrast to human keratoacanthoma.
cally varied nomenclature in the veterinary literature.
Although the term ‘intracutaneous cornifying epithe-
lioma*, proposed in the frst World Health Organization
Histopathology (Figures 23.23 through 23.26)
classification system (Weiss & Frese, 1974), provides an
accurate distillation of the histopathologic features, it
Infundibular keratinizing acanthoma  is a well-
gives no indication of the origin of the tumor. In addition,
circumscribed dermal nodule which is oriented around a
the authors believe that the designation ‘epithelioma'
 central cyst flled with laminated keratin. The upper
should be reserved for neoplasms composed primarily of
portion of the cyst wall is usually open, forming a C-
basaloid reserve cells, such as sebaceous epithelioma (see
shaped or cup-shaped structure that connects with the
Chapter 24). The name “keratoacanthoma' is also inap-
epidermis, creating the central opening observed clini-
propriate, as the lesion is signifcantly different, both bio-
cally. Serial sectioning may be required to demonstrate
logically and histologically, from keratoacanthoma in
smaller pores histologically. The earliest lesions show
humans (see Chapter 26).
broad trabecular projections of epithelium extending
A follicular origin for the canine neoplasm was frst
downward from a cyst wall that closely resermbles follic-
proposed by Seiler (1981) based on careful observation of
 ular infundibulum. Later lesions develop small keratinous
histologic features. Although there is no exact human
cysts within the trabeculae; the cysts become intercon-
analogue for canine infundibular keratinizing acanthoma
nected by delicate cords of epithelial cells. Mature
(IKA), it bears some resemblance, especially in its early
infundibular keratinizing acanthomas have a complex
 stages, to pilar sheath acanthoma. Human pilar sheath
epithelial wall comprising multiple small horn cysts inter-
acanthoma is a tubular lesion with a central pore and a
connected by a reticular network of cords and trabeculae
fairly simple wall of infundibular and isthmic epithelium
 of small adnexal keratinocytes.
(Murphy & Elder, 1991). The etiology of IKA is
The central cyst and secondary cysts are lined by pale
unknown; immunohistochemical staining for papillo-
pink, characteristically glassy squamous epithelium that
mavirus has been consistently negative (Sironi et al.,
keratinizes through a sparse granular cell layer The
1990; Schwegler et al., 1997).
keratin varies from laminated to amorphous. This mor-
620
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
phology is identical to the lower portion of the normal
follicular infundibulum where it joins the isthmus. Nuclei
are vesicular and uniform, with inconspicuous nucleoli
and minimal mitotic activity. The cords between the sec-
ondary cysts generally comprise a double row of uniform
basaloid cells. Broader trabeculae contain peripheral
basaloid and central squamous cells.
A sparse to moderate stroma is present that contains
abundant mucin and few mesenchymal cells, creating a
distinctive pale blue background for the epithelial struc-
tures. Adjacent dermal collagen is slightly compressed,
forming a pseudocapsule. Occasionally, metaplastic carti-
lage or bone may be found in the stroma. In rare cases,
extensive cartilaginous metaplasia results in pressure
atrophy of the secondary epithelial structures. Pyogranu-
lomatous or chronic suppurative inflammation secondary
to breakdown of cyst epithelium is relatively common.
A small percentage of IKAs show no connection to the
epidermis, even when serially sectioned, and are located
in the deeper dermis. Architecture and morphology of
these lesions are virtually identical to the typical superf-
cial tumors, but the central cyst more closely resembles
an isthmus follicular cyst. Proliferating isthmus follicular
cyst (see p. 607) probably represents an early form of this 
deeper type of IKA.
 Infundibular keratinizing acanthoma has some similar-
ities to invered viral papilloma, which is also a cup-
shaped,
keratin-flled,
squamous  epithelial mass.
 Infundibular keratinizing acanthoma has small cysts and
Fig. 23.23 Infundibular keratinizing acanthoma in a dog: very early
anastomosing trabeculae of keratinocytes comprising its
lesion. Broad trabeculae of pale keratinocytes proliferate downward
epithelial wall, in comparison to the papillary structures
from the junction of the infundibulum and isthmus.
of an endophytic wart. Viral-induced inclusion bodies and
Fig. 23.24 Infundibular keratinizing
acanthoma in a dog: early lesion. Small
horn cysts and short cords and trabec-
ulae of epithelial cells project outward
from a central keratin-filled cyst. Note
the patchy granular cell layer and well-
demarcated tumor margin.
 Follicular tumors
621
Fig. 23.25 Infundibular keratinizing
acanthoma in a dog: mature lesion.
Numerous small horn cysts are inter-
connected by a reticular network of
cords of epithelial cells. Note pale,
mucinous stroma.
Fig. 23.26 Infundibular keratinizing
acanthoma in a dog. This example
has marked chondroid metaplasia and
expansion of the stroma, resulting in
atrophy of the epithelial component.
viral cytoplasmic alterations are not present in infundibu-
wider range of follicular epithelial morphology. Isthmus
lar keratinizing acanthoma, and keratohyalin granules are
tricholemmomas have few cysts, and the epithelial cells
 small and sparse.
are brighter pink and agranular.
 Infundibular keratinizing acanthomas in which a
central pore is not obvious may need to be differentiated
TRICHOLEMMOMA
from trichoepitheliomas with predominantly squamous
epithelium, and from isthmus tricholemmomas. The pale,
Clinical features
glassy epithelial cytoplasm, the reticular network of
epithelial cords and trabeculae, and the pale blue, muci-
 Tricholemmomas are, by defnition, benign neoplasms of
nous stroma of IKAs are prominent differential features.
 the outer root sheath of the hair follicle. Two types have
Trichoepitheliomas have cysts of varied size and show a
been observed in dogs and one in cats; neither type has
622
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
an exact human analogue. The frst type recapitulates the
inferior segment of the tricholemma, or outer root sheath
of the hair bulb and is designated as the “inferior' or *bulb
type’ tricholemmoma. These are rare neoplasms in dogs;
the incidence is probably between 0.05% and 0.2%
(Abramo et al., 1999). A small number of cases have been
described in the literature (Diters & Goldschmidt, 1983;
Walsh & Corapi, 1986; Scott & Anderson, 1991). These
lesions present as frm, circumscribed nodules, ranging
from 1 to 7cm in diameter that are most often located
on the head and neck. The overlying epidermis is intact
and slightly thickened. The average age of affected
animals is 10 years, and there does not appear to be any
breed predisposition.
A second type of tricholemmoma resembles the outer
root sheath of the isthmus segment of the follicle, partic.
ularly as it appears during catagen phase. This type of
tricholemmoma was originally described in Veterinary
Dermatopathology as “isthmus-catagen tricholemmoma
(Walder & Gross, 1992); the name was subsequently
altered to ‘isthmic tricholemmoma’ (Goldschmidt et al.,
1998). These tumors are uncommon in dogs and rare
in cats. Lesions are dome-shaped alopecic nodules
usually less than 2cm in diameter. Larger lesions may
be ulcerated. There is no known age, breed or site
predilection.
Histopathology
Fig. 23.27 Bulb tricholermmoma in a dog. Islands and nests of very
Bulb type (inferior) tricholemmoma (Figure 23.27
pale epithelial cells forrm a large dermal mass with a pale fibrous
and 23.28)
stroma.
Tricholemmomas of this type are well-circumscribed,
unencapsulated  dermal nodules  comprising  lobular
groupings of small polyhedral cells. Within each lobule
small clear cells are uncommon. The rare clear cell variant
epithelial cells are arranged in islands, nests, and delicate
of basal cell carcinoma generally has larger cels and
trabeculae. There is no contiguity with the overlying epi-
larger cell aggregates than tricholemmoma. Multifocal
dermis. The epithelial aggregates are cuffed by thick,
connection to the epidermis, cytologic features of malig-
glassy, basement membrane zones reminiscent of the vit-
nancy, cellular stroma, and stromal-epithelial clefts are
reous sheath of normal hair follicles. There is a sparse to
usually present in basal cell carcinomas. Granular cell tri-
moderate stroma of pale collagen with minimal cellular-
choblastoma has more cords and nests than islands and
ity. Mucinous stroma may also be present.
 trabeculae, although the granular cells may appear almost
The majority of cells have clear cytoplasm, and there
 clear. The nuclei of tricholemmoma are not peripherally
is prominent peripheral palisading. The small clear cells
displaced as they are in granular cell trichoblastoma.
are analogous to the glycogen-rich, periodic acid-Schiff
Tumors that are otherwise typical for ribbon trichoblas-
(PAS) stain-positive, outer root sheath cells of the hair
toma occasionally have areas resembling bulb tricholem-
bulb. The cells in the centers of the islands may have more
moma with transition between hair germ and outer root
abundant, eosinophilic cytoplasm, and there may be small
sheath morphology.
foci of keratinization without keratohyalin or trichohyalin
granules. Nuclei are small, ovoid, and euchromatic; nucle-
Istbmic type tricholemmoma (Figures 23.29 through
oli are inconspicuous, and mitotic activity is low.
23.31)
Differential diagnoses for inferior tricholemmoma are
Isthmus-derived tricholemmomas are well-circumscribed.
limited, as cutaneous tumors composed predominantly of
unencapsulated dermal nodules composed of epithelial
Follicular tumors
623
Fig. 23.28 Higher magnification of bulb tricholemmoma in a dog.
Fig. 23.29 Isthmus tricholemmoma in a dog. Islands and trabec
The small epithelial cells show peripheral palisading and clear cyto-
lae of small, pale keratinocytes in a bland fibrous stroma forrm a well-
plasm. Note prorminent baserment membranes resermbling vitreous
circurmscribed dermal mass. This example is oriented around a
sheaths around some of the epithelial aggregates {arrow).
central cyst.
aggregates that vary markedly in size and shape. There is
cytoplasm and small hyperchromatic nuclei may be
usually focal contiguity with the epidermis. Cords and
-sp ro sisdode re nsrdr u asn isad
trabeculae of epithelial cells radiate outward from large
atosis (premature cornification of individual cells). Mild
epithelial islands and often interconnect adjacent islands.
melanization of the epithelial cells may be present; occa-
The centers of the islands have small foci of tricholem-
sional lesions are heavily melanized.
mal-type keratinization (without formation of kerato-
Differential diagnoses for isthmic tricholemmoma are
hyalin or trichohyalin granules). Large true keratin cysts
limited, as few known tumors are composed almost
are occasionally observed. Larger islands may have a
entirely of small, pink epithelial cells. Infundibular kera-
pseudocystic appearance due to drop-out of all of the
tinizing acanthoma has some similar features, but is dis-
central keratin. There is a moderate collagenous stroma
 tinguished from isthmic tricholemmoma by the presence
of low cellularity; small amounts of mucin may be
of a well-defined central cyst, multiple secondary cysts
present. The stroma is well-demarcated from adjacent
 and abundant stromal mucin. Its cells have paler, glassy
dermis.
cytoplasm than those of isthmic tricholemmoma. Trabec-
Neoplastic cells are fairly small, cuboidal to rounded,
ular trichoblastoma may have a similar overall architec-
and have moderate, pink, often glassy cytoplasm. Nuclei
ture, but is differentiated from isthmic tricholemmoma by
are small, ovoid, and euchromatic with inconspicuous
the presence of prominent peripheral palisading, some
nucleoli and low mitotic activity. Peripheral palisading is
spindling of epithelial cells, and predominance of smaller,
not prominent. Scattered shrunken cells with condensed
prismatic keratinocytes.
624
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Hig. 23.30 Isthmic tricholemmoma in a dog. Multiple islands
Fig. 23.31 Higher magnification of isthmus tricholemmoma in a
of pale keratinocytes contain central cysts flled with armorphous
dog. Islands and trabeculae are composed of small keratinocytes
keratin and melanin pigrment. Melanophages are present in the
with glassy cytoplasm. Cystic structures are flled with amorphous,
stroma.
tricholemmal-type keratin. Note that a granular celayer is absent.
alopecic. Pilomatricomas occur most commonly on the
PILOMATRICOMA
proximal legs and dorsal trunk, particularly over the
(Synonyms: pilomatrixoma, calcifying epithelioma)
rump and shoulders.
The average age of affected animals is 6 years. Poodles,
Kerry Blue Terriers, Old English Sheepdogs, Soft-coated
Clinical features
Wheaten Terriers, Airedale Terriers, Bouviers des Flan-
 Pilomatricoma is an uncommon, benign neoplasm of dogs
dres, Bichons Frises, Standard Schnauzers, and Basset
that arises from the germinative cells of the follicular
Hounds were over-represented in a large survey, and
matrix, or hair bulb. It is the exact analogue of the human
tumors may be multiple in some of these breeds
 tumor of the same name. It represents approximately 1%
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992). The majority of these
of all canine skin and subcutaneous tumors (Goldschmidt
breeds have in common a continuously-growing coat,
& Shofer, 1992; Abramo et al., 1999). Pilomatricoma is
which requires greater numbers of mitotically active
very rare in cats; single cases are reported in several
anagen folicles. Increased hair matrix cell division may
surveys (Carpenter et al., 1987; Abramo et al., 1999;
provide a larger cell pool for neoplastic transformation in
Scott et al., 2001).
breeds with these coat characteristics.
Lesions usually present as solitary, frm to hard, well-
circumscribed masses. The tumors are dome-shaped to
Histopathology (Figure 23.32)
plaque-like and vary in size from 1 to 10 cm. Some lesions
have a gritty or bony consistency and may be chalky when
Pilomatricoma is a well-circumscribed dermal and/or sub-
sectioned. The overlying epidermis is often atrophic and
cutaneous tumor composed of multiple cystic structures
 Follicular tumors
625
cells and bone, and litle residual epithelium can be iden-
tifed. Epithelial degeneration and release of keratinized
and mineralized material frequently evoke a granuloma-
tous inflammatory response characterized by macro-
phages, multinucleated giant cells, and formation of
cholesterol clefts.
The multilocular architecture of pilomatricoma distin-
guishes it from simple matrical cyst, which is a unilocu-
lar lesion. Proliferating matrical cyst may represent an
early form of pilomatricoma, and the division between
these two entities may be arbitrary. Differentiation of
pilomatricoma  from variants of trichoepithelioma  in
which basaloid cells predominate may be diffcult. The
cystic structures of pilomatricoma are larger than tri-
choepithelioma, and zones of nonmatrical squamous
epithelium are absent or very limited. Most trichoepithe-
liomas have at least occasional cysts that are lined pri-
marily by squamous epithelium. Mineralization of cyst
contents in trichoepithelioma is rare. The small, basaloid
epithelial cells of malignant pilomatricoma, malignant tri-
choepithelioma, and keratinizing basal cell carcinoma are
cytologically similar to those of pilomatricoma, but the
carcinomas contain a much higher proportion of cellular
areas in comparison to keratinized zones, in contrast to
pilomatricoma. In addition, the epithelial aggregates of
the carcinomas are more irregular in size and shape, and
 the borders are infltrative. Epidermal contiguity, exten-
sive caseation necrosis, nuclear atypia, and mitotic atypia
are additional features of these tumors that would be
Fig. 23.32 Pilomatricoma in a dog. Large cystic structures are lined
inconsistent with a diagnosis of benign pilomatricoma.
predominantly by dark, matrical keratinocytes and are filled with
keratinized ghost cells. Note rmineralization of cyst contents at right.
TRICHOBLASTOMA
of varying size, lined predominantly by small, basaloid
(Previously: basal cell tumor)
keratinocytes which resemble the matrix cells of the
anagen hair bulb. The tumor is not contiguous with the
Trichoblastoma refers to a group of neoplasms that are
overlying epidermis. There is a sparse stroma of collagen
derived from or recapitulate primitive hair germ (see
and mucin with moderate cellularity.
introduction, p. 604). Complicated classification schemes
The basaloid epithelial cells have scant cytoplasm and
 for neoplasms of trichoblastic epithelium in humans were
hyperchromatic, large, ovoid nuclei. Nucleoli are small,
proposed by Headington (Headington & French, 1962;
and mitotic activity is fairly high. Nuclear or mitotic atypia
Headington, 1976), to include trichoblastoma, tri-
is not present. The neoplastic cells undergo matrical-
chogenic trichoblastoma, trichogenic myxoma, and tri-
O1 uosuen idnqe Aq pazaisereuo uoneziueiey ad
 chogenic fbroma. A broader range of patterns comprised
large masses of keratinized ^ghost' or ‘shadow' cells that
a later scheme of trichoblastomas, to include small
fll the cyst lumens. Small zones of squamous epithelium,
nodular, large nodular, cribriform, retiform, racemiform
with or without a granular cell layer, may also be present.
and adenoid cystic types (Ackerman et al. 1993). Recent
Small foci of inner root sheath differentiation (glyco-
immunohistochemical studies using highly specific mono-
genated cells with trichohyalin granules) can usually be
 clonal antibodies, particularly the three putative stem cell
detected on the inner surface of the cyst lining. Melaniza-
markers cytokeratins 15, 17, and 19, confrm that human
tion of neoplastic matrix cells and ghost cells may be
 trichoblastomas are of follicular stem cell origin (Schirren
present, and is sometimes quite prominent.
et al., 1997; Jih et al., 1999; Kanitakis et al., 1999;
Ghost cells often become mineralized, and osseous
Yamamoto & Asahi, 1999).
metaplasia may occur, particularly in later stages. Some
 The biologic behavior and histopathologic patterns of
tumors of chronic duration have a predominance of ghost
these human hair germ tumors conform very closely to
626
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
many of the cutaneous neoplasm in dogs and cats that
root sheath (ORS) differentiation'. This variant has
were designated “basal cell tumors’ in older veterinary
 prominent outer root sheath features but does not resem-
literature. Unfortunately, although initial immunohisto-
ble either bulb or isthmus tricholemmoma (see p. 621).
chemical results suggest hair germ origin for canine or
The entity described as basosquamous carcinoma by
feline trichoblastomas, defnitive confrmation is not yet
Goldschmidt & Shofer (1992) appears to be the same
 possible because the new monoclonal markers for human
neoplasm. These lesions are usually circumscribed masses
or murine trichoblasts do not appear to cross-react with
on the dorsal trunk that are 1 to 3 cm in diameter. Ulcer-
canine or feline tissue (Walder & Haines, 1998; Walder,
ation is not present. Heavily pigmented lesions may
2000; Goldschmidt et al., 2002) Additional immunostain
appear gray or blue through overlying skin. Age and
clones of keratins 15 and 19 are becoming available,
breed predilections are as yet undetermined.
 and some of these may map to areas of those keratin mol-
 In cats, trichoblastomas are usually solitary, dome-
ecules that are homologous to the same proteins in dog
shaped, frm nodules less than 2cm in diameter; larger
and cat. Despite these technical difculties, the term ‘tri-
lesions occur occasionally. Polypoid or pedunculated
choblastoma’ has been given official recognition in the
lesions are uncommon. Alopecia and secondary ulcera-
revised World Health Organization classification system
tion are frequent. The lesions are often pigmented and
(Goldschmidt et al., 1998). Although the majority of tri-
may be confused clinically with melanocytic neoplasms.
choblastomas in animals can be separated into several
Tumors occur most often on the head and cranial half of
major histologic subtypes (see below), lesions with over-
the trunk. There is no known age or breed predilection.
lapping patterns are not infrequent, and hair germ tumors 
with new patterns are likely to be identifed in the future.
Histopathology
Clinical features
Ribbon type trichoblastoma (Figures 23.33 through
 Trichoblastomas are benign neoplasms that occur com-
23.38)
 monly in dogs and fairly commonly in cats. The incidence
The classical canine “basal cell tumors' have been desig-
in dogs is probably very close to the total incidence of
nated as ‘ribbon', ‘garland’ or ‘medusa-head’ variants.
neoplasms in the old basal cell tumor category; this ranges
These tumor subtypes also are mentioned in several
from 3.7% to 12% in several surveys (Bevier & Gold-
surveys of feline skin tumors (Macy & Reynolds, 1981;
schmidt, 1981; Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992). The inci-
Carpenter et al., 1987), but in the authors’ experience
dence in cats is harder to estimate, as cats develop several
they are rare in cats. Most canine tumors contain a
different types of neoplasms that are composed predom-
    m sn   
inantly of small basaloid epithelial cells. Tumors which
 architecture. They are virtually identical to the trichogenic
have previously been incorporated in the feline basal cell
trichoblastoma variant in the original nomenclature of
tumor’ group include benign and malignant apocrine
Headington (1976) as well as some variants of tri-
ductular sweat gland neoplasms, basal cell carcinomas,
choblastic fbroma (Requena et al., 1990).
and trichoblastomas. An incidence of trichoblastomas of
 Ribbon trichoblastomas are well-demarcated dermal
2.6% in dogs and 2% in cats was found in a recent ret-
nodules that do not have contiguity with the epidermis.
rospective study (Abramo et al., 1999).
Larger tumors may extend into the subcutis. They are
 In dogs, trichoblastomas present as solitary, frm,
composed predominantly of small, basaloid keratinocytes
alopecic nodules that are dome-shaped or polypoid. Most
arranged in branching, winding, and radiating columns,
tumors are 1 to 2 cm in diameter, but much larger lesions
 generally two cells in width. Islands of cells with radiat-
(exceeding 30 cm in rare instances) may occur. Larger
ing columns at their periphery create the ‘medusa-head'
masses may be ulcerated. There is a site predilection for
r  ss ss au e
the head and neck; the base of the ear is a typical
 containing amorphous keratin. Occasional small but well-
location.
organized hair follicles, rarely containing delicate hair
Most affected animals are 6 to 9 years of age. Poodles,
shafts, are detected; these are generally located at the
Cocker Spaniels, and mixed breed dogs were reported to
periphery of the neoplasm, but do not appear to repre-
have an increased frequency of “basal cell tumor', i.e. tri-
sent residual follicles that have been entrapped by the
choblastoma (Bevier & Goldschmidt, 1981); additional
mass.
strong predispositions have also been found in Kerry Blue
The epithelial structures are embedded in a paucicellu-
Terriers, Bichons Frises, Cockapoos, Shetland Sheepdogs,
lar fbrous stroma that is often hyalinized. In dogs, the
and Siberian Huskies (Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992)
stroma is moderate to abundant; in cats, it is sparse. The
The authors recognize an additional rare variant of tri-
 o Shn s s sn o jo o
choblastoma in dogs, termed ‘trichoblastoma with outer
concentrated around the epithelial columns. Moderate to
Follicular tumors
627
Fig. 23.34 Ribbon trichoblastoma in a dog. This example shows a
Fig.23.33 Early ribbon trichoblastoma in a dog. Delicate branch
cavernous cyst and abundant, hyalinized stroma.
ing cords and trabeculae of small, basaloid keratinocytes are con-
tiguous with the base of a hair follicle.
 peripherally. Melanization is uncommon. Small numbers
abundant mucin may be distributed diffusely through the
of canine ribbon trichoblastomas have areas of slightly
stroma in canine ribbon trichoblastomas. Scattered tight
larger glycogenated cells that often form nests and
clusters of small mesenchymal cells are present in the
islands; these closely resemble bulb tricholemmomas and
stroma in close association with epithelial aggregates;
probably represent foci of maturation of the trichoblasts
these represent diminutive follicular papillae (follicular
 into outer root sheath epithelium. The follicular papillary
papillary mesenchymal bodies).
 mesenchymal bodies in all of the richoblastoma subtypes
The neoplastic trichoblasts have scant, pale eosino-
are characterized by closely-packed cells with indis-
philic cytoplasm with uniform, ovoid, euchromatic nuclei
 cernible cytoplasm. Their nuclei are hyperchromatic and
and small nucleoli. Nuclei are oriented perpendicular to
ovoid, teardrop-shaped or slightly spindled. Nucleoli are
the long axis of the columns. Feline ribbon trichoblas-
inconspicuous, and mitotic activity is not present. The
tomas typically have palisades of spindled cells with elon-
diagnosis of ribbon trichoblastoma is straightforward due
gated nuclei, creating a caterpillar-like appearance in the
to its unique architectural pattern.
cell columns. Mitotic figures are usually infrequent, but
may be found in moderate numbers in some lesions.
Trichoblastoma with outer root sheath
Occasional tumors with larger nuclei, moderate mitotic
differentiation (Figures 23.39 and 23.40)
activity, and scattered atypical mitoses occur; it is
This rare variant of trichoblastoma has extensive ORS
unknown at the present time if this indicates a potential
differentiation, but the more differentiated areas are dis-
for aggressive biologic behavior. The medusa-head islands
 tinct from both bulb and isthmus tricholemmomas (see p.
of cells generally have cells with slightly more abundant
621). The lesions are well-circumscribed dermal masses,
cytoplasm centrally and one or two layers of basaloid cells
often involving the deep dermis and subcutis, with multi-
628
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 23.35 Ribbon trichoblastoma in a dog. This unusual variant
Hig. 23.36 Higher magnification of classic ribbon trichoblastoma
has arcuate cords of trichoblasts and trabeculae of larger ker-
in a dog. Double rows of trichoblasts are arranged in branching
atinocytes enmeshed in a loose fibrous stroma resembling follicular
and winding patterns. Note the groups of small mesenchymal
fibrous sheaths.
cells, resembling primitive dermal papillae (follicular papillary
bodies) (arrows), within the fibromyxoid stroma.
lobular and trabecular architecture, and large areas of
quently melanized, but otherwise have similar cytologic
cystic degeneration. Epidermal contiguity or ulceration is
features to those in common ribbon trichoblastoma.
not seen. The tumor margins are smooth and noninva-
Nuclei in all of the epithelial cells are larger than those of
sive. The epithelial aggregates contain small, polyhedral
typical trichoblastomas; they are ovoid, vesicular and
epithelial cells (trichoblasts) in anastomosing cords
have small nucleoli. Mitotic activity varies from moder-
similar to classic ribbon trichoblastoma; these merge into
ately low to moderately high.
small islands of cells with markedly glycogenated cyto-
The primary differential diagnosis for trichoblastoma
plasm, resembling anagen suprabulbar ORS, or broad tra-
with ORS differentiation is canine apocrine ductular
beculae of pale pink, isthmic-type keratinocytes that line 
the cystic zones. The glycogenated cells do not show
adnexal neoplasm that may have brisk mitotic activity.
peripheral palisading, and no trichohyalin granules are
The small epithelial cells of ductular adenoma form
present. The isthmic-type areas have moderate apoptosis
tubular structures lined by double rows of cells, whereas
manifested by individual cells with discrete, condensed
the small cells of trichoblastoma form anastomosing
cytoplasm and nuclei; other cells in these areas appear
cords. The foci of squamous differentiation in ductular
truly dyskeratotic and are characterized by discrete,
adenoma produce keratin deposits via a granular cell
brightly eosinophilic cytoplasm and viable nuclei. The
layer; neither keratohyalin granules nor keratin lakes
cystic zones appear to be a result of apoptosis, acanthol-
are found in trichoblastoma with ORS differentiation.
ysis, and keratinocyte drop-out. The stroma is similar to
Neither bulb tricholemmoma nor isthmus tricholem-
classic ribbon trichoblastoma. The trichoblasts are fre-
moma has a significant population of small, trichoblastic
Follicular tumors
629
Fig. 23.37 Higher magnification of ribon trichoblastoma in a dog.
Fig. 23.38 High magnification of ribbon trichoblastoma in a cat.
A medusoid island is composed of slightly larger keratinocytes. Note
Winding cords of spindled cells with elongate nuclei create a pal-
small central cyst exhibiting tricholemmal keratinization.
isaded appearance resembling caterpillars.
Fig. 23.39Trichoblastoma with outer
root sheath differentiation in a dog
comprised of  a circumscribed  mass
of small keratinocytes forming lobules
and trabeculae. Note large areas of
cystic degeneration.
630
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 23.40 Higher magnification of
trichoblastoma of Fig. 23.39. The
epithelial aggregates comprise typical
trichoblasts in serpiginous cords that
merge into small islands of cells with
markedly glycogenated cytoplasm {left)
or broad trabeculae of pale glassy,
isthmic-type keratinocytes that line the
cysts (right).
epithelial cells. The absence of multiple keratin-filled cysts
distinguishes trichoblastoma with ORS differentiation
from trichoepithelioma and pilomatricoma.
Trabecular type trichoblastoma (Figures 23.41 and
23.42)
The most common variant of trichoblastoma in cats
appears analogous to the simple trichoblastoma of Head-
ington (1976). This type of trichoblastoma also occurs
occasionally in dogs. These are well-circumscribed dermal
 nodules comprising islands and broad trabeculae of small
keratinocytes with prominent peripheral palisading. Con-
nection to the overlying epidermis is focal or absent
Keratin microcysts may be present; advanced trichogene-
sis is not observed. There is a sparse stroma of pale col-
lagen and mucin with low cellularity. Follicular papillary
above) can be readily detected in the stroma of most
lesions. The peripheral cell layer of the epithelial struc-
tures shows scant, pale cytoplasm with uniform, ovoid.
euchromatic nuclei and low mitotic activity. The internal
cells have slightly more abundant, pale eosinophilic cyto-
plasm, and nuclei are often more elongate. Spindling of
keratinocytes is often a prominent feature in feline
tumors. The epithelial cells of trabecular trichoblastoma
 may be mildly or moderately melanized; the pigmentation
 usually has a patchy distribution.
Trabecular  trichoblastoma  is differentiated  from
isthmic tricholemmoma by the presence of prominent
peripheral palisading, absence of foci of tricholemmal
Fig. 23.41 Trabecular trichoblastoma in a cat. Small islands
keratinization, and a paucity of plump, glassy, pink,
and branching trabeculae are composed of small, polyhedral ker-
isthmus-type keratinocytes.
atinocytes with prominent peripheral palisading.
 Follicular tumors
631
Fig. 23.42 Trabecular trichoblastoma
in a cat. Spindling of some of the
epithelial cells is prominent. Note
sparse, slightly cellular stroma and
well-demarcated tumor margins.
Fig. 23.43 Spindle cell trichoblastoma
in a cat characterized by a well-
circumscribed derrmal mass with a
sparse，f
fibromyxoid stroma  and
shallow crateriforrm ulcer. Small, basa-
loid cells are grouped into islands and
trabeculae; spindled morphology is not
obvious at low magnification.
Spindle cell type trichoblastoma (Figures 23.43
markers available thus far, are identical to other tri-
through 23.46)
choblastomas (Walder, 2000; Goldschmidt et al., 2002)
Spindle cell trichoblastoma was provisionally designated
(see below).
"benign feline basal tumor' in Veterinary Dermato-
Spindle cell trichoblastoma  is a well-circumscribed
pathology (Walder & Gross, 1992). As implied by
dermal nodule that generally has a fairly broad zone of
the old nomenclature, this subtype is seen only in
connection to the overlying epidermis. Ulceration is
cats. Transitional lesions with ribbon or trabecular
common. The tumor frequently has a lima-bean-shaped
morphology adjacent to typical spindle cell zones have
silhouette with the central indentation at the tumor
been recognized, indicating that this is yet another variant
surface. The neoplasm is composed of basaloid epithelial
of hair germ tumor. Immunostaining patterns, using
cells arranged in islands, nests, and short trabeculae
632
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
without prominent peripheral palisading. Larger islands
may have central foci of caseation necrosis. There is a
sparse collagenous stroma of low cellularity; moderate
amounts of stromal mucin are often present at the center
of the neoplasm.
The epithelial cells have scant, pale cytoplasm and
bland nuclei. Nucleoli are inconspicuous, and mitotic
activity is low. There are large zones of spindling char-
acterized by elongation of cytoplasm and nuclei, pro-
ducing a whorled configuration that often affects entire
 epithelial aggregates. Squamous differentiation or kera-
tinization is infrequently observed. Many spindle cell
trichoblastomas have mild to moderate melanization of
the epithelial cells, and stromal melanophages may be
present. Follicular papillary mesenchymal bodies (see
ribbon type trichoblastoma, above) are present in small
numbers, often at the periphery of the tumor in associa-
 tion with aggregates of more typical trichoblasts.
 Differential diagnoses for spindle cell trichoblastoma
include basal cell carcinoma and solid-cystic ductular
sweat gland adenoma, both of which have similar epi-
dermal contiguity and may be pigmented. Epithelial cell
spindling may occur in basal cell carcinoma and solid-
cystic sweat gland adenoma, but is rarely as extensive as
in spindle cell trichoblastoma. Basal cell carcinoma gen-
erally has an asymmetrical, irregular silhouette and a
plaque-like architecture. The stroma of basal cell carci-
noma is more abundant, more cellular and generally
extends beyond the boundaries of the epithelial compo-
Fig. 23.44 Higher magnification of spindle cell trichoblastoma in
nent. Mitotic activity is usually higher, and atypical
a cat. Aggregates of elongatedtrichoblasts often have a whorled con-
mitoses are present. Solid-cystic ductular sweat gland
figuration, and peripheral palisading is not evident. Note the two
 adenoma typically has a small central focus of epidermal
Small follicular papillary mesenchymal bodies at right center andtop
contiguity that is not umbilicated, cystic degeneration is
right.
Fig. 23.45 Spindle cell trichoblas-
toma in a cat. Vimentin immunostain
highlights the follicular papillary mes-
enchymal bodies, noted particularly at
center and upper left (chromogen new
fuchsin).
Follicular tumors
633
Fig. 23.46 Spindle cell trichoblastoma in a cat. This variant is
Fig. 23.47 Granular cell trichoblastoma in a dog. The overall archi-
melanized and contains squamous epithelial cysts with pigmented
tecture is identical to classic ribbon trichoblastoma.
keratin pearls.
common and often extensive, and small ducts or intra-
Granular cell trichoblastoma is distinguished from
cellular lumina can usually be identified.
granular cell basal cell carcinoma by its ribbon-like archi-
tecture, absence of epidermal contiguity and lack of cyto-
Granular cell type trichoblastoma (Figures 23.47
logic features of malignancy. The cells of granular cell
and 23.48)
trichoblastoma may appear almost clear, requiring differ-
This rare variant of hair germ tumor in dogs was frst
entiation from bulb type tricholemmoma. Tricholem-
reported by Seiler (1981) as a subtype of basal cell tumor.
moma has more islands and trabeculae than cords and
Histopathologically, the architecture is identical to the
 nests, and the nuclei of tricholemmoma are not peripher-
canine ribbon-type trichoblastoma described above, but
ally displaced as they are in granular cell trichoblastoma.
some or all of the epithelial aggregates are composed
entirely of larger cells with abundant, fnely granular or
Immunohistochemistry
vacuolated cytoplasm. Nuclei of the granular cells are
small, angular and eccentric.
Although immunostains for cytokeratins (CK) would
 Ultrastructurally, the granules are lysosomes containing
rarely be required in a practical sense in the diagnosis of
numerous intact and fragmented vesicles of undetermined
 trichoblastomas, they have been utilized to investigate the
origin. Similar degenerative changes may also be observed
 origin of these neoplasms and are occasionally of benefit
in granular cell schwannoma, granular cell ameloblas-
in differential diagnosis. Canine and feline ribbon and
toma, and granular cell basal cell carcinoma; the latter
trabecular trichoblastomas were found to have strong.
two entities have been reported in humans only (Barr &
diffuse staining with the polyclonal reagent 34βE12 (CKs
Graham, 1979).
1, 5, 10, 11) and fairly strong, patchy staining with the
634
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
as both neoplasms have a similar cytokeratin profle
that includes CKs 15, 17 and 19, the putative follic-
ular stem cell markers. Only limited monoclonal CK
ul sadai roun asul uo paunorad uaaq aaeu shaud
animals.
MALIGNANT TRICHOEPITHELIOMA
(Synonym: matrical carcinoma)
Trichoepitheliomas with biologic or histologic features of
malignancy are briefly described in two reference texts
(Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992; Goldschmidt & Hendrick,
2002) and are included in the current World Health Orga-
nization classifcation (Goldschmidt et al., 1998). Malig-
nant trichoepithelioma is not a formally recognized
category in human dermatopathology, although a single
case report exists (Hunt & Abell, 1991). Malignant tri-
choepitheliomas are defined in the current World Health
Organization classification system as malignant tumors
with only matrical and inner root sheath features.
 However, the authors believe that these tumors should
meet the nosological requirements of their benign coun-
terparts, i.e. infundibular, isthmus and matrical segments
of the hair follicle should be represented. Distinction from
malignant pilomatricoma (see p. 637) may not always be
possible. Until more cases are documented and consistent
clinicopathologic parameters become established, it may
be prudent to use a more general term, such as matrical
Fig. 23.48 Higher magnification of Fig. 23.47. The cells have more
carcinoma or follicular carcinoma.
abundant, granular cytoplasm and eccentric, angular nuclei.
Clinical features
monoclonal marker CK14; both of these markers were
Malignant trichoepitheliomas are rare and have been
also positive in, but not limited to, secondary hair germ
described in dogs only (Goldschmidt & Hendrick, 2002);
of telogen follicles in control tissue (Walder & Haines,
neither have the authors seen any feline examples.
1998). CAM5.2 (CK7/8) was negative in these tumors
Clinical features have not been documented in the
(Walder & Haines, 1998). All trichoblastomas, including
literature. Based on a small number of cases, malignant
 the spindle cell type, were diffusely and strongly stained
trichoepitheliomas tend to be larger and less well-
with CK5/6 and were negative with CK13 (Walder 2000).
circumscribed than their benign counterparts. The tumors
Additional polyclonal preparations that uniformly stained
 are often ulcerated and may have an irregular, plaque-like
trichoblastomas are AE1 (CKs 1-8) and LP34 (CKs 1, 5,
confguration. The dorsal trunk appears to be a common
6, 8, 10, 14, 18) (Goldschmidt et al., 2002). Immuno-
location. Age distribution and breed predilection are
staining for the mesenchymal intermediate flament
unknown.
vimentin highlights follicular papillary mesenchymal
 Local recurrence and lymphatic metastasis may occur.
bodies in the stroma (Walder, 2000).
The cases originally described by Goldschmidt and Shofer
In problematic cases of spindle cell trichoblastoma,
(1992) had lymphatic invasion and disseminated metas-
immunostaining with CAM5.2 or CK13 can be used to
tasis; less aggressive subsets of malignant trichoepithe-
exclude sweat gland origin. All sweat gland neoplasms
lioma probably also exist. The entity designated as
evaluated to date have at least some areas of strong
"infltrative trichoepithelioma’(Goldschmidt & Shofer,
CAM5.2 or CK13 positivity, and staining with CK5/6
1992; Goldschmidt et al., 1998) is histologically nearly
is patchy (Walder, 2000). Immunohistochemistry does
identical to malignant trichoepithelioma and is reported
not appear to be benefcial in distinguishing trichoblas-
to recur in 10% of cases; the authors believe this is con-
tomas from basal cell carcinomas, at least in humans,
sistent with a low-grade malignancy.
Follicular tumors
635
Fig. 23.49 Well-differentiated malignant trichoepithelioma in 2
Fig.23.50
 Higher magnification of well-differentiated malignant
dog. Architecture is similar to benign trichoepithelioma (Fig. 23.20),
but epithelial aggregates are more irregular in size and shape.
basaloid and squamous epithelium represent matrical, root sheath.
margins are ill-defined, and zones of necrosis are present.
and infundibular differentiation. Note large, hyperchromatic nuclei
and multiple patterns of keratinization.
Histopathology (Figures 23.49 through 23.52)
The matrical cells have scant cytoplasm, large ovoid
Malignant trichoepitheliomas are asymmetrical, poorly-
nuclei, one or more nuclei, and moderate to high mitotic
circumscribed, nodular, or plaque-like dermal masses that
activity. Nucleoli are usually small, but nuclear hyper
may extend into subcutis. Focal or multifocal contiguity
chromatism may be present. Atypical mitotic fgures
with epidermis or follicular epithelium is often observed.
can usually be identified. Peripheral palisading is often
The tumors comprise islands of variable epithelial aggre-
observed in the larger epithelial aggregates. The foci of
gates, including trabeculae, cords, and nests of basaloid
inner root sheath, outer root sheath, and infundibular dif-
matrical keratinocytes with sparse to moderate transition
 ferentiation lack cytologic features of malignancy.
to squamous epithelium. The islands exhibit variable size,
There is a moderate to abundant collagenous stroma
shape, and circumscription. The squamous epithelium has
with moderate cellularity. The epithelial aggregates often
features of inner root sheath (trichohyalin granules and
have cuffs of hyalinized collagen. Nests of tumor cells
glycogen), outer root sheath (agranular with or without
may be found within stromal lymphatic vessels. Sec-
glycogenation), and infundibulum (keratohyalin granules)
ondary inflammation is often present due to ulceration or
in varying proportions. Complete keratinization is usually
 release of keratin from degenerate epithelial aggregates.
present in some of the epithelial aggregates, but is not as
Malignant trichoepitheliomas with a minimal squamous
extensive as in benign trichoepitheliomas. Frank cysts are
component and relatively small islands of matrical epithe-
usually present but infrequent. The islands of matrical
lium widely spaced through the stroma appear to be more
cells often have central caseation necrosis in lieu of or in
commonly associated with lymphatic invasion; this is the
addition to sheets of keratinized ghost cells.
 p ps a pnn a dn
636
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 23.51 Poorly-differentiated malignant trichoepithelioma in a
Fig. 23.52 Higher magnification of poorly-differentiated malignant
dog. Small, irregular epithelial aggregates separated by an abundant
trichoepithelioma in a dog. Neoplastic epithelial cells show prima-
stroma infiltrate deeply into the subcutis. Note foci of lymphatic
rily rmatrical and outer root sheath features with limited keratiniza-
invasion at bottom right (arrows).
tion. Note highly cellular stroma forming dense cuffs around the
tumor aggregates.
(1992). Other malignant trichoepitheliomas show larger
matrical cells and large zones of keratinized ghost cells,
areas of advanced trichogenesis and have less intervening
but foci of squamous epithelium and keratin pearls, occa-
stroma between islands and trabeculae of epithelium;
sionally with features of malignancy, are described in
these are architecturally similar to benign trichoepithe-
most of the reports in human and veterinary literature.
liomas and appear to be less aggressive; however, long-
The epithelial aggregates of malignant pilomatricoma are
term retrospective studies are required to substantiate
usually larger than those of malignant trichoepithelioma.
this.
The more general term ‘matrical carcinoma’ may be
Differential diagnoses for malignant trichoepithelioma
preferable for borderline lesions. Keratinizing basal cell
include inflamed benign trichoepithelioma, malignant
carcinomas have a superficial, plaque-like configuration
pilomatricoma, and keratinizing basal cell carcinoma.
with multifocal epidermal contiguity and ulceration.
Inflamed benign trichoepitheliomas have a more compact,
Their margins are angular and show an inflrative growth
spherical silhouette, and multifocal epidermal contiguity
pattern. Discrete large cystic structures are not present,
is uncommon. Areas of increased proliferative activity
and keratin microcysts, if present, are usually lined by
and reactive squamous metaplasia are always associated
bland squamous epithelium. Inner root sheath differenti-
with the inflammatory infltrate. Multifocal epithelial
ation is not expected in keratinizing basal cell carcinoma.
necrosis and atypical mitoses are not seen in benign
Stromal-epithelial clefts are often present in basal cell car-
trichoepithelioma. Differentiation between malignant
cinoma, but may not be as consistent a feature as they are
trichoepithelioma and malignant pilomatricoma is prob-
in human basal cell carcinoma. However, because it has
lematic and sometimes impossible; malignant pilomatri-
recently been demonstrated that basal cell carcinomas
comas usually have a marked predominance of atypical
have a very similar cytokeratin profle to trichoepithe.
 Follicular tumors
637
lioma and trichoblastoma (see Chapter 22), one could
Clinical features
reasonably argue that keratinizing basal cell carcinoma
Malignant neoplasms exhibiting primarily hair matrix
represents a distinct, low-grade variant of malignant tri-
choepithelioma.
differentiation are rare in dogs and have not been
reported in cats. They are plaque-like or dome-shaped,
alopecic masses that are frequently ulcerated. They are
MALIGNANT PILOMATRICOMA
within the same size range as their typical benign coun-
terparts. The tumors reported in the literature occurred
(Synonyms: matrical carcinoma, pilomatrix carcinoma)
on the neck, dorsal trunk, and tail (Sells & Conroy, 1976;
Johnson et al., 1983; Van Ham et al., 1990; Rodriguez et
The frst documentation of malignant pilomatricoma in
al., 1995). There is a wide range of reported ages and
dogs was in 1976 (Sells & Conroy, 1976). The frst case
breeds; no predilections are known.
report in a human appeared in 1969, and the term *malig-
 The reported cases had multifocal distant metastasis to
nant pilomatrixoma’ was coined in 1980 (Prandetsky
a variety of organs, including bone and central nervous
& Yuzvinkevich, 1969; Lopranski & Mihm, 1980).
system, and local recurrence also was sometimes
Although the new World Health Organization veterinary
classification defnes malignant pilomatricomas as having
described (Sells & Conroy, 1976; Johnson et al., 1983;
Van Ham et al., 1990; Rodriguez et al., 1995). In humans,
exclusively matrical differentiation, reports in both dogs
local recurrences develop in nearly half of the cases,
(Sells & Conroy, 1976; Johnson et al., 1983; Van Ham et
and there is a 16% incidence of metastasis (Hardisson
al., 1990; Rodriguez et al., 1995) and humans (Hardisson 
et al., 2001). While some human malignant pilomatrico-
et al., 2001; De Galvez-Aranda et al., 2002) also describe
mas arise de novo, others are believed to represent
limited inner root sheath, outer root sheath and infundibu-
 malignant transformation of pre-existing pilomatricomas
,       
(De Galvez-Aranda et al., 2002). It is uncertain if this
carcinoma’ is currently controversial, since it is used
phenomenon occurs in dogs. One canine case report des
synonymously with either malignant trichoepithelioma
(Goldschmidt et al., 1998) or malignant pilomatricoma.
cribed disseminated metastasis from a primary tumor
consistent with benign pilomatricoma (Rodriguez et al.,
Because benign pilomatricomas often show small areas of
1995).
inner root sheath differentiation and occasionally have foci
resembling outer root sheath, the authors believe it is rea-
sonable to accept scattered areas of nonmatrical epithe-
lium as features of their malignant counterparts as well.
Histopathology (Figure 23.53)
Matrical carcinoma may be a more practical nosology that
Malignant  pilomatricomas are J
poorly-circumscribed
would encompass all high-grade follicular malignancies
dermal neoplasms that often extend into the subcutis.
with a predominance of matrical histologic features.
They are composed primarily of basaloid matrical epithe-
Fig. 23.53 Malignant pilomatricoma
in a dog. Large, irregular cystic struc-
tures lined predorminantly by basaloid
matrical epithelial cells are filled with
keratinized ghost cells. Note numerous
mitotic figures in the matrical  cell
population (arrow).
638
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
lial cells arranged in large, iregular islands and trabecu-
REFERENCES
lae. Peripheral palisading is generally absent. Some neo-
plasms have multifocal contiguity with the epidermis.
Uceration is frequently observed, and there are multiple
Introduction
Credille, K.M., Butler, K.L., Nachreiner, R.F et al. (1999) Canine
large zones of necrosis. There is a moderate desmoplastic
hair follicle regeneration: do dogs have a bulge region'? Vet
stroma that often contains clusters and cords of infltrat-
Pathol 36, 506 (abstract).
ing tumor cells at the periphery of the lesion. Intralym-
Meyer, W. & Gorgen, S. (1986) Development of hair coat and
 phatic aggregates of neoplastic cells may be identifed.
skin glands in fetal porcine development. J Anat 144, 201-
The stroma usually has an inflammatory infltrate, which
20.
may include a granulomatous foreign body-type reaction
Panteleyev, A.A., Jahoda, C.A.B. & Christiano, A.M. (2001)
to the keratinized ghost cells.
Hair follicle predetermination. J Cell Sci 114, 3419-31.
The majority of the tumor cells have minimal cyto-
Sun, T-T., Cotsarelis, G. & Lavker, R.M. (1991) Hair follicular
plasm, hyperchromatic and ovoid nuclei, one or more
nucleoli of varying size, and moderate to high mitotic
96, 77-8S.
activity. Mitotic atypia is present. There are multiple
Fibroadnexal Hamartoma
zones of matrical keratinization manifested by abrupt for-
Abramo, F, Guido, P., Davide, L. et al. (2003) Canine fibroad-
 mation of shadow cells. The shadow cell aggregates are
nexal hamartoma (focal adnexal dysplasia): an epidemiologi-
often large, irregular and incompletely surrounded by
cal survey. In: Proceedings of the 9th ESVD Meeting, Tenerife,
matrical cells. Calcifcation or ossification of the shadow
p. 154 (poster).
cells may be present. The basaloid cells may also show
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, F.S. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
small foci of transition to inner root sheath, outer root
Dog and Cat, pp. 3, 284-8. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
sheath, and nonspecific squamous types of epithelium.
Kimura, T., Miyazawa, H., Aoyagi, T. et al. (1991) Folliculo-
The inner root sheath keratinocytes are larger than the
sebaceous cystic hamartoma: a distinctive malformation of the
matrical cells and have clear cytoplasm with brightly
skin. Am J Dermatopathol 13, 213-30.
Schulz, T. & Hartschuh, W. (1998) Folliculo-sebaceous cystic
eosinophilic trichohyalin granules. The outer root sheath
hamartoma is a trichofolliculoma at its very late stage. J Cutan
epithelial cells are pale pink and lack a granular layer. The
Pathol 25, 354-64.
nonmatrical epithelial cells generally do not have cyto-
Yamamoto, O., Suenaga, Y. & Bhawan, J. (1994) Giant follicu-
-enbs uqasn iog inq Kouu jo saig oo
losebaceous cystic hamartoma. J Cutan Pathol 21, 170-2.
mous cell carcinoma may be present.
 Malignant pilomatricoma is distinguished from its
Follicular Cyst
 benign counterpart by an increased ratio of basaloid cells
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, F.S. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
to keratinized ghost cells, poor circumscription with infl-
Dog and Cat, pp. 3, 271-91. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
trative borders, increased mitotic activity, and nuclear
Goldschmidt, M.H., Dunstan, R.W., Stannard, A.A. et al. (1998)
and mitotic atypia of the basaloid cells. Differentiation
Histological Classification of Epithelial and Metanocytic
between malignant trichoepithelioma and malignant
Tumors of the Skin of Domestic Animals, 2nd series, Vol. 3,
pilomatricoma is problematic and sometimes impossible.
p. 34. Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, Washington
DC.
Malignant pilomatricomas usually have larger epithelial
Jones, T.C., Hunt, R.D., King, N.W. (1997) Veterinary Pathol-
aggregates, a marked predominance of atypical matrical
ogy, 6th edn, p. 861. Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore.
 cells, and larger zones of keratinized ghost cells; foci of
Kirkham, N. (1997) Tumors and cysts of the epidermis. In:
inner and outer root sheath differentiation are more
Lever's Histopathology of the Skin, 8th edn (eds D.E. Elder,
prominent in malignant trichoepithelioma, but do not
R.E. Elenitsas, C. Jaworsky et al.), pp. 694-700. Lippincott-
preclude a diagnosis of malignant pilomatricoma. Calci-
Raven, Philadelphia.
fcation and ossification are not usually found in malig-
Requena, L. & Sanchez Yus, E. (1991) Follicular hybrid cysts.
nant trichoepithelioma. The more general term 'matrical
Am J Dermatopathol 13,228-33.
carcinoma' may be preferable for borderline lesions.
Rosai, J. (1996) Ackerman's Surgicat Pathology, 8th edn, p. 135.
Keratinizing basal cell carcinoma is differentiated from
Mosby, St Louis.
Satoh, T., Mitoh, Y., Katsumata, M. et al. (1989) Follicular cyst
malignant pilomatricoma primarily by its superficial,
derived from hair matrix and outer root sheath. J Cutan
plaque-like architecture and multifocal connections to the
Pathol 16, 106-8.
epidermis. Keratinizing basal cell carcinoma can
have
Walder, E.J. & Gross, T.L. (1992) Follicular tumors. In: Veteri-
small clusters of shadow cells; large zones of matrical ker-
nary Dermatopathology: A Macroscopic and Microscopic
 atinization are a more typical feature of marrical carci-
Evaluation of Canine and Feline Skin Diseases (Gross, T.L.,
 noma. Stromal-epithelial clefts are typical for basal cell
Ihrke, PJ. & Walder, E.J.), pp. 351-5. Mosby, St Louis.
carcinoma, but may not be as consistent a feature as they
Weiss, E. & Frese, K. (1974) Tumours of the skin. Bull World
are in human basal cell carcinoma.
Health Org 50, 79-100.
Follicular tumors
639
Dilated Pore
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffn, C.E. (2001) Muller 6 Kirk's
Murphy, G.F. & Elder, D.E. (1991) Atlas of Tumor Pathology:
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, p. 1248. W.B. Saunders,
Non-melanocytic Tumors of the Skin, p. 132. Armed Forces
Philadelphia.
Institute of Pathology, Washington DC.
Seiler, R.J. (1981) Intracutaneous cornifying epithelioma in the
Scott, D.W. & Flanders, J.F. (1984) Dilated pore of Winer in a
dog: evidence for origin in the hair follicle. In: Proceedings of
cat. Feline Pract 14, 33-6.
the 32nd ACVP Meeting, Monterey, p. 104.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
Sironi, G., Caniatti, M. & Scanziani, E. (1990) Immunohisto-
Small Animal Dermatology,6th edn, p. 1265. W.B. Saunders,
chemical detection of papillomavirus structural antigens in
Philadelphia.
animal hyperplastic and neoplastic epithelial lesions. J Vet
Med A 37, 760-70.
Warty Dyskeratoma
Stannard, A.A. & Pulley, L.T. (1975) Intracutaneous cutaneous
Azuma,Y. & Matsukawa, A. (1993) Warty dyskeratoma with
 cornifying epithelioma (keratoacanthoma) in the dog: a retro-
multiple lesions. J Dermatol 20, 374-7.
spective of 25 cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 167, 385-8.
Griffiths, T.W., Hashimoto, K., Sharata, H.H. et al. (1997) Mul-
Weiss, E. & Frese, K. (1974) Tumours of the skin. Bull World
tiple warty dyskeratomas of the scalp. Clin Exp Dermatol 23,
Health Org 50, 79-100.
189-91.
Harrist, T.J., Murphy, G.F. & Mihm, M.C., Jr. (1980) Oral warty
Tricholemmoma
dyskeratoma. Arch Dermatol 116, 929-31.
Abramo, F, Pratesi, F., Cantile, C. et al. (1999) Survey of canine
Hill, J.R. (1987) Warty dyskeratoma in two dogs. In: Proceed-
and feline follicular tumours and tumour-like lesions in central
ings of the 3rd AAVD/ACVD Meeting, Phoenix, p. 40.
Italy. J Small Anim Pract 40, 479-81.
Kaddu, S., Dong, H., Mayer, G. et al. (2002) Warty dyskeratoma
Diters, R.W. & Goldschmidt, M.H. (1983) Hair follicle
- follicular dyskeratoma': analysis of clinicopathologic fea-
umors resembling tricholemmomas in six dogs. Vet Pathol
tures of a distinctive follicular adnexal neoplasm. J Am Acad
20,123-5.
Dermatol 47, 423-8.
Goldschmidt, M.H., Dunstan, R.W., Stannard, A.A.et al. (1998)
Histological Classification of Epithelial and Melanocytic
Trichofolliculoma
Tumors of the Skin of Domestic Animals, 2nd series, Vol. 3,
Hartschuh, W. & Schulz, T. (1999) Immunohistochemical inves-
p. 22. Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, Washington DC.
tigation of the different developmental stages of trichofollicu-
Scott, D.W. & Anderson, W.1. (1991) Canine hair follicle neo-
loma with special reference to the Merkel cell. Am J
plasms: a retrospective analysis of 80 cases (1986-1987). Vet
Dermatopathol 21, 8-15.
Dermatol 2, 143-50.
Schulz, T. & Hartschuh, W. (1998) The trichofolliculoma under-
Walder, E.J. & Gross, TL. (1992) Follicular tumours. In: Vet-
goes changes corresponding the the regressing normal hair fol-
erinary Dermatopatbology: A Macroscopic and Microscopic
licle in its cycle. J Cutan Pathol 25, 341-53.
Evaluation of Canine and Feline Skin Disease (Gross, T.L.,
Ihrke, PJ. & Walder, E.J.), pp. 364-5. Mosby, St Louis.
Trichoepithelioma
Walsh, K.M. & Corapi, WV. (1986) Tricholemmoma in three
Abramo, F., Pratesi, F, Cantile, C. et al. (1999) Survey of canine 
dogs. J Comp Pathol 96, 115-7.
and feline follicular tumours and tumour-like lesions in central
Italy. J Small Anim Pract 40, 479-81.
Pilomatricoma
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, FS. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
Abramo, F, Pratesi, F., Cantile, C. et al. (1999) Survey of canine
Dog and Cat, pp. 2, 115-21. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
and feline follicular tumours and tumour-like lesions in central
Miller, M.A., Nelson, S.L., Turk, J.R. et al. (1991) Cutaneous
Italy. J Small Anim Pract 40, 479-81.
neoplasia in 340 cats. Vet Pathol 28, 389-95.
Carpenter, JL., Andrew, L.K. & Holzworth, J. (1987) Tumors
Scott, D.W. & Anderson, W.I. (1991) Canine hair follicle neo-
and tumor-like lesions. In: Diseases of the Cat {ed. J. Holz-
plasms: a retrospective analysis of 80 cases (1986-1987). Vet
worth), pp. 416-7. WB Saunders, Philadelphia.
Dermatol 2, 143-50.
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, F.S. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
Dog and Cat, pp. 2, 125-30. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Infundibular Keratinizing Acanthoma
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller 6 Kirk's
Abramo, F., Pratesi, F, Cantile, C. et al. (1999) Survey of canine
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, p. 1267-9. W.B. Saun-
and feline follicular tumours and tumour-like lesions in central
ders, Philadelphia.
Italy. J Small Anim Pract 40, 479-81.
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, FS. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
Trichoblastoma
Dog and Cat, pp. 2, 109-14. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Abramo, F, Pratesi, F., Cantile, C. et al. (1999) Survey of canine
Murphy, G.F. & Elder, D.E. (1991) Atlas of Tumor Pathology:
and feline follicular tumours and tumour-like lesions in central
Non-melanocytic Tumors of the Skin, p. 134. Armed Forces
Italy. J Small Anim Pract 40, 479-81.
Institute of Pathology, Washington DC.
Ackerman, A.B., Briggs, PL. & Bravo, F. (1993) Differential
Schwegler, K., Walter, J.H. & Rudolph, R. (1997) Epithelial neo-
Diagnosis in Dermatopathology ll, pp. 94-101. Lea &
plasms of the skin, the cutaneous mucosa and the transitional
Febiger, Philadelphia.
epithelium in dogs: an immunolocalization study for papillo-
Barr, R.J. & Graham, J.H. (1979) Granular basal cell carcinoma:
mavirus antigen. J Vet Med A 44, 115-23.
a distinct histopathologic entity. Arch Dermatol 115, 1064-7.
640
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Bevier, D.F & Goldschmidt, M.H. (1981) Skin tumors in the
& C. von Tscharner), pp. 384-5. Butterworth-Heinemann,
dog. Part I: Epithelial tumors and tumor-like lesions.
Oxford.
Compend Contin Educ 3, 389-98.
Yamamoto, O. & Asahi, M. (1999) Cytokeratin expression in
Carpenter, J.L., Andrew, L.K. & Holzworth, J. (1987) Tumors
trichoblastic fibroma (small nodular type trichoblastoma),
and tumor-like lesions. In: Diseases of the Cat (ed. J. Holz-
trichoepithelioma and basal cell carcinoma. Br J Dermatol
worth), pp. 406-596. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
140, 8-16.
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, F.S. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
Dog and Cat, pp. 2, 16-28. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Malignant Trichoepithelioma
Goldschmidt, M.H., Dunstan, R.W., Stannard, A.A. et al. (1998)
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Hendrick, M.J (2002) Tumors of the skin
Histological Classification of Epitbelial and Melanocytic
and soft tissues. In: Tumors in Domestic Animals, 4th edn (ed.
Tumors of the Skin of Domestic Animals, Znd series, Vol. 3.
D.J. Meuten), p. 60. Iowa State Press, Ames.
 Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, Washington DC.
Goldschmidt, M.H.& Shofer, FS. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
Goldschmidt, M.H., Schneider, A.C. & Ferracone, J.D. (2002)
Dog and Cat, pp. 120-2. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Use of monoclonal antibodies as an adjunct to the diagnosis
Goldschmidt, M.H., Dunstan, R.W., Stannard, A.A. et al. (1998)
of epithelial skin tumors of the dog and cat using the EnVi-
Histological Classification of Epithelial and Melanocytic
sion Plus(R) system for the immunohistochemical detection
Tumors of the Skin of Domestic Animals, 2nd series, Vol 3.
of tissue antigens. In: Advances in Veterinary Dermatology,
p. 24. Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, Washington DC.
Vol. 4 (eds K.L. Thoday, C.S. Foil & R. Bond), pp. 142-9.
Hunt, S.J. & Abell, E. (1991) Malignant hair matrix tumor
Blackwell Science, Oxford.
('malignant trichoepithelioma') arising in the setting of multi-
Headington, J.T. (1976) Tumors of the hair follicle. Am J Pathol,
ple hereditary trichoepithelioma. Am J Dermatopathol 13,
85, 480-514.
275-81.
Headington, J.T. & French, AJ. (1962) Primary neoplasms of
the hair follicle. Arch Dermatol 86, 430-41.
Malignant Pilomatricoma
Jih, D.M., Lyle, S., Elenitsas, R. et al. (1999) Cytokeratin 15
De Galvez-Aranda, M.V.,
,Herrera-Ceballos, E., Sanchez-
expression in trichoepitheliomas and a subset of basal cell car-
Sanchez, P. et al. (2002) Pilomatrix carcinoma with lymph
cinomas suggests they originate from hair follicle stem cells. J
node and pulmonary metastasis. Am J Dermatopathol 24,
Cutan Pathol 26, 113-8.
13943.
Kanitakis, J., Bourchany, D., Faure, M. et al. (1999) Expression
Goldschmidt, M.H., Dunstan, R.W., Stannard, A.A. et al. (1998)
of the hair stem cell-specific keratin 15 in pilar tumors of the
Histological Classification of Epithelial and Metanocytic
skin. Eur J Dermatol 9, 363-5.
Tumors of the Skin of Domestic Animals, 2nd series, Vol. 3,
Macy, D.W. & Reynolds, H.A. (1981) The incidence, character-
pp. 24-5. Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, Washington,
isics and clinical management of skin tumors of cats. J Am
D.C.
Anim Hosp Assoc 17, 1026-34.
Hardisson, D., Linares, M.D., Cuevas-Santos, J. et al. (2001)
Requenia, L., Renedo, G., Sarasa, J. et al. (1990) Trichoblastic
 Pilomatrix carcinoma: a clinicopathologic study of six cases
fibroma. Am J Dermatopathol 17, 381-4.
and review of the literature. Am J Dermatopathol 23,
Schirren, C.G., Rutten, A., Kandewitz, P. et al. (1997) Tri-
394401.
choblastoma and basal cell carcinoma are neoplasms with
Johnson, R.P, Johnson, J.A., Groom, S.C. et al. (1983) Malig-
follicular differentiation sharing the same profle of cyto-
nant pilomatrixoma in an Old English Sheepdog. Can Vet J
keratin intermediate filaments. Am J Dermatopathol 19,
24, 3924.
341-50.
Lopranski, S. & Mihm, M.C., Jr (1980) Pilomatrix carcinoma
Seiler, R.J. (1981) Granular basal cell tumor in the skin of three
 or calcifying epitheliocarcinoma of Malherbe. Cancer 45,
dogs. Vet Pathol 18, 23-9.
2368-73.
Walder, E.J. (2000) Neoplasms of small adnexal keratinocytes:
Prandetsky, A.P. & Yuzvinkevich, A.K. (1969) Malherbe's epi-
new developments, new questions. In: Proceedings of the 51st
thelioma with signs of malignization. Arch Pathol 31, 64-6.
ACVP Meeting, Amelia Island, pp. 165-9.
Rodriguez, F, Herraez, P., Rodriguez, E. et al. (1995) Metasta-
Walder, E.J. & Gross, T.L. (1992) Epidermal tumours. In: Vet-
tic pilomatrixoma associated with neurologic signs in a dog.
erinary Dermatopathology: A Macroscopic and Microscopic
Vet Record 137,247-8.
Evaluation of Canine and Feline Skin Disease, pp. 341-3.
Sells, D.M. & Conroy, JD. (1976) Malignant epithelial neopla-
Mosby, St Louis.
sia with hair follicle differentiation in dogs (malignant pilo-
Walder, EJ. & Haines, D. (1998) Immunohistochemical stain-
matrixoma). J Comp Pathol 86, 121-9.
ing patterns in canine and feline basal cell carcinomas,
Van Ham, L., van Bree, H. Maenhout, T. et al. (1990) Metasta-
trichoblastomas and trichoepitheliomas. In: Advances in Vet-
us f op e u eladeied se hunuasand euoxuod on
erinary Dermatology, Vol. 3 (eds K.W. Kwochka, T. Willemse,
Anim Pract 32, 27-30.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 24
Sebaceous tumors
procesing, but some delicate, lamellar keratin generally
SEBACEOUS DUCT CYST
adheres to the cyst lining.
O padde kuanba s! iso snoaseqas, rou a
Sebaceous duct cysts may need to be differentiated from
follicular cysts because of the grumous nature of their ker-
follicular cysts, particularly the isthmus type (see Chapter
atinaceous contents. Sebum, in fact, is a white, milky
23). Follicular cysts can occasionally have small numbers
fluid. Cysts of sebaceous ductal origin in humans are
of sebaceous gland lobules attached to their walls. Numer-
usually multifocal and hereditary. They are still referred
ous sebaceous glands or multiple enlarged sebaceous
lobules indicate a diagnosis of sebaceous duct cyst. Further,
nomenclature, steatocystoma multiplex, or steatocystoma
the inner surface of a follicular cyst does not have a corru-
simplex for the uncommon solitary variant (Murphy &
gated appearance or an eosinophilic cuticular lining.
Elder 1991).
NODULAR SEBACEOUS HYPERPLASIA
Clinical features
(Synonym: senile sebaceous hyperplasia)
Cysts that involve sebaceous structures are rare in dogs
and extremely rare in cats. Sebaceous duct cysts present
Clinical features
as solitary, frm dermal nodules that are usually less than
0.5 cm in size. This is much smaller than the analogous
 Nodular sebaceous hyperplasia is a common, focal or mul-
lesion in humans. The cysts contain small amounts of
ticentric, non-neoplastic lesion of dogs. In one large series,
keratin and sebum. Lesions occasionally involve the spe-
nodular sebaceous hyperplasia comprised 23% of all non-
cialized sebaceous glands of the eyelid and are termed
neoplastic canine skin masses (Goldschmidt & Shofer,
meibomian cysts. There is no known age, breed, or site
1992). Nodular sebaceous hyperplasia is less common
predisposition in animals.
in cats, accounting for 11% of non-neoplastic cutaneous
tumors (Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992). Lesions are yellow-
white, alopecic, frm, and dome-shaped or papillated
Histopathology (Figure 24.1)
nodules that are less that 5 mm in diameter. Some lesions
Sebaceous duct cysts are lined by a thin layer of stratifed
appear as small plaques. A waxy or pearly quality aids in
squamous epithelium that has a sparse granular cell layer
clinical differentiation of nodular sebaceous hyperplasia
and a corrugated or undulating inner surface. Essentially,
from papillomas despite their wart-like confguration.
these cysts closely resemble the normal sebaceous duct.
Lesions may arise anywhere on the body, but are most
A thin, brightly-eosinophilic cuticle may be seen on the
 common on the dorsal head, ears, face, and legs.
inner surface of the cyst. A thin collagenous capsule
 Nodular sebaceous hyperplasia is most common in
usually surrounds the epithelium. Projecting outward
senior animals. Poodles, Cocker Spaniels, Manchester
from the wall of most sebaceous cysts are multiple,
Terriers, and Wheaten Terriers appear to be predisposed
atrophic, but architecturally normal, sebaceous gland
(Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992), although the lesion can be
lobules composed of central lipidized cells and a single
 seen in all breeds of dogs.
layer of peripheral basaloid reserve cells. Occasional cysts
are accompanied by moderately hyperplastic sebaceous
Histopathology (Figure 24.2)
glands; these lesions may represent cystic dilatation of the
ductal component of nodular sebaceous hyperplasia (see
Nodular sebaceous hyperplasia is characterized by multi-
below). Most of the cyst contents are lost during tissue
 ple, enlarged, but otherwise normal sebaceous lobules
641
642
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 24.1 Sebaceous duct cyst in a
dog. Note the delicate undulating
epithelium lining the cyst lurmen.
Fig. 24.2 Nodular sebaceous hyper-
plasia in a dog. Enlarged sebaceous
lobules are grouped around duct-like
structures lined by keratinizing squa-
mous epithelium.
clustered around one or more dilated sebaceous ducts
margins of sebaceous gland adenomas and epitheliomas,
and hair follicles. The architectural relationships of the
'isedosu on eiseidiada uorg uoissanaoid sunseans 
folliculosebaceous units are generally well-maintained.
Secondary erosion and inflammation are frequent
Affected folliculosebaceous units may be grouped hori-
features of larger lesions. The ducts and follicles in trau-
zontally, forming a plaque. The sebaceous lobules have
matized or inflamed lesions may contain colonies of
central fully-lipidized cells and a single peripheral layer of
staphylococci. Rupture of ducts or follicles may result in
basaloid reserve cells. The ducts are lined by thickened
severe, pyogranulomatous inflammation extending into
squamous epithelium that keratinizes through a sparse
 the deep dermis.
granular cell layer and contain loosely-laminated keratin
Occasionally, primarily in male dogs, some of the
and small amounts of sebum. Hair follicles are also often
sebaceous lobules exhibit a metaplastic transformation
hyperplastic and dilated. Lesions in which a markedly
to hepatoid gland cells (perianal gland type), character-
dilated duct becomes the predominant feature can be clas-
ized by abundant, glassy, eosinophilic cytoplasm. The bio-
sifed as sebaceous duct cysts (see p. 641). Foci of nodular
chemical or hormonal basis for this change has not
sebaceous hyperplasia are occasionally identified at the
 been documented. Hepatoid metaplasia may represent a
Sebaceous tumors
643
perianal gland in puppies. Berween 20 and 152 days of
age in both male and female dogs, some of the perianal
sebaceous glands that were present since birth develop
groups of hepatoid acini in their deep aspects; these have
been designated “transitional hepatoid glands’ and are
adjacent to but distinct from the primary hepatoid glands
(Isitor & Weinman, 1979).
Nodular sebaceous hyperplasia should be differentiated
from sebaceous adenoma and in some cases from seba-
ceous nevus. Nodular hyperplasia retains the normal ori-
entation of sebaceous glands around ducts or follicular
infundibula, in contrast to simple sebaceous adenoma.
Degeneration and drop-out of central zones of mature
sebocytes are common in sebaceous adenoma, but
are not observed in nodular sebaceous hyperplasia.
Nodular sebaceous hyperplasia and compound sebaceous
adenoma are differentiated by the increased number of
basaloid reserve cells and immature sebocytes in the latter.
The ductular structures of compound sebaceous adenoma
are usually more numerous and more varied in size than
those of nodular sebaceous hyperplasia. In addition, both
simple and compound sebaceous adenomas are usually
larger than sebaceous hyperplasia; however, there is con-
siderable overlap in the size of these lesions. The plaque
Aeua ues eiseidradq snossqes renpou jo adai
be distinguished from sebaceous nevus by the larger size
of the sebaceous lobules, lack of multiple follicular
infundibula contiguous with epidermis, and absence of
Fig. 24.3 Sebaceous hamartoma in a dog demonstrating multiple
former.
large sebaceous lobules randomly grouped around tortuous, dis-
tended ducts. This example has abundant fat in the stroma.
SEBACEOUS HAMARTOMA
Clinical features
mature collagen; mature adipose tissue may also be
present. As in small fbroadnexal hamartomas, inflam-
Sebaceous hamartoma is an uncommon variant of
mation or ulceration is rarely observed.
fbroadnexal hamartoma (see Chapter 23) and is a mal-
Differentiation between sebaceous hamartoma and
formation of presumed congenital origin. This nomencla-
fbroadnexal hamartoma is based on an obvious pre-
ture is a new addition to the World Health Organization
dominance of sebaceous lobules in the former. Lesions
classification    of (
domestic
animal
 skin
tumors
with a predominance of follicular structures or an
(Goldschmidt et al., 1998). Lesions present as alopecic
approximately equal admixture of follicular and seba-
solitary nodules less than 1 cm in diameter, most often on
ceous elements should be classifed as fbroadnexal
extremities or trunk. There is no known age or breed
hamartomas. Sebaceous hamartoma is distinguished from
predisposition.
nodular sebaceous hyperplasia and sebaceous adenoma
by the abundant connective tissue surrounding individual
lobules.
Histopathology (Figure 24.3)
Sebaceous hamartoma is a circumscribed dermal nodule
SEBACEOUS NEVUS
composed predominantly of large sebaceous lobules with
a random distribution. Maturation patterns within the
(Synonyms: nevus sebaceus, organoid nevus)
lobules are normal. The sebaceous lobules may be con-
tiguous with and interconnected by tortuous sebaceous
 Non-neoplastic cutaneous lesions of adnexal (principally
ducts and small but malformed hair follicles. The adnexal
sebaceous gland) origin that have histologic features
structures are surrounded by moderate to abundant
similar to nevus sebaceus of Jadassohn in humans occur
644
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
 in dogs and cats. Nevus sebaceus of Jadassohn in humans 
Most lesions are detected in middle-aged or older
is present at birth, becomes fully developed in adoles-
 animals, but some have been identifed in puppies. Soli-
cence, and can eventuate in a variety of benign and malig-
tary lesions in older dogs are often located on distal limbs
nant epithelial neoplasms (Elder et al., 1997). The
 or feet. One of the authors (T.L.G.) has seen solitary
analogous lesions in dogs and cats have been observed
lesions on the dorsal head of two puppies. One case of
too infrequently to determine if they evolve similarly or
multiple and focally extensive sebaceous nevi has been
progress to neoplasia; in addition, lesions are typically
reported
 10-month-old  Standard  Schnauzer
excised completely rather than biopsied and then fol-
(Scarampella et al., 2000); this type of clinical presenta-
lowed clinically. Neoplastic transformation seems
tion is rare in humans and may be associated with mental
unlikely in animals, as the authors have not observed this
retardation and other developmental anomalies (Elder et
phenomenon in any sebaceous nevi excised from older
al., 1997). There is no known breed predisposition.
the authors in the designation of growth abnormalities
Histopathology (Figures 24.4 and 24.5)
(see Chapter 22 for definitions of hamartoma and nevus);
nevertheless, the nomenclature has been retained prima-
 Sebaceous nevus is a plaque-like, fungiform, or polypoid
rily to distinguish it from sebaceous hamartoma (see
lesion covered by hyperplastic, hyperkeratotic epidermis
p. 643) and secondarily to acknowledge its similarity to
that has a papillated confguration. Hypergranulosis is
the human lesion. Although the term “organoid’ is valid
also present and may be marked. Hair follicles are present
because the lesions include several different cutaneous
in a normal orientation, but are truncated and
tissue types, it is not used in the majority of human ref-
incompletely developed; they have thickened, dilated
   rd sr  si 
infundibula contiguous with the epidermis, but usually
the predominant tissue found in the fully developed
 lack obvious bulbs. Dilated hair follicles predominate in
lesions.
nevus sebaceus in children and in the few cases observed
in puppies (Scarampella et al., 2000; Scott et al., 2001).
The sebaceous glands in fully developed lesions are mildly
Clinical features
to moderately enlarged, numerous and randomly distrib-
Sebaceous nevi are seen uncommonly in dogs and rarely
uted through the superfcial dermis. Ductal connections
  as  s r    
may be evident between the sebaceous glands and follic-
circular or linear plaques less than 2 cm in diameter. They
ular structures. Sweat glands are generally present and
have irregular or papillated surfaces and may occasion-
are histologically normal. Some lesions contain increased
ally be polypoid. A yellow or orange hue may be evident.
 n      rn  s
Fig. 24.4 Sebaceous nevus in a
dog. Nurmerous, fairly small seba-
ceous lobules form a plaque below
hyperplastic epidermis. Note distinc-
tive
 papillomatous  hyperplasia and
hypergranulosis.
Sebaceous tumors
645
SEBACEOUS ADENOMA
Nomenclature of sebaceous neoplasms in human der-
matopathology is currently in a state of flux, and it is thus
more diffcult to make interspecies comparisons. The
newer human classification stresses the concept of a con-
tinuum of benign sebaceous neoplasms, collectively
termed ‘sebaceoma' (Troy & Ackerman, 1984). Classi-
cally, human sebaceomas have moderate to large numbers
of basaloid reserve cells, and thus incorporate lesions that
resemble both compound sebaceous adenoma and seba-
ceous epithelioma in animals. Some authors recently have
recommended an expansion of the original criteria for
human sebaceoma to include simple sebaceous adenoma
as well; these are identified as 'sebaceoma with advanced
sebaceous differentiation' (Misago et al., 2002). Until the
dust settles, the authors will continue to employ the more
traditional nomenclature for these neoplasms in animals.
Clinical features
Sebaceous adenomas are benign cutaneous neoplasms of
glandular or combined ductal and glandular origin; these
 are designated simple and compound adenomas, respec-
tively. Histologically identical lesions on eyelid margins
arise from specialized tarsal sebaceous glands, the mei-
bomian glands, and are thus designated meibomian gland
adenomas. Sebaceous adenomas accounted for approxi-
mately 6% of all canine skin and subcutaneous tumors in
Fig. 24.5 Sebaceous nevus in a dog. This variant has a filiforrm
a survey of 1141 neoplasms by one author (E.J.W.). Four
architecture resermbling an acrochordon.
percent of 340 feline skin tumors were reported to be
sebaceous adenomas in one study (Miller et al., 1991). A
larger series of tumors yielded a 7% incidence of seba-
 ceous/meibomian neoplasms in dogs and a 2% incidence
the adjacent dermis. Other lesions, particularly in cats,
in cats (Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992); however, these
contain moderate amounts of adipose tissue within the
data included both sebaceous and meibomian adenomas
dermis. Mild infltrates of plasma cells and lymphocytes
and epitheliomas. Compound sebaceous adenomas are
are common. Ulceration secondary to self-trauma may be
 more common than simple sebaceous adenomas in dogs;
observed, particularly in acral lesions.
compound adenomas are rare in cats. Meibomian gland
Sebaceous nevus can usually be distinguished from
lesions are rare in cats.
nodular sebaceous hyperplasia by its involvement of
Sebaceous adenomas are solitary or multiple, dome-
larger numbers of folliculosebaceous units and the smaller 
shaped or papillated tumors which usually measure less
size of the sebaceous lobules. Sebaceous nevus does
than 1cm in diameter. The overlying skin is usually
not show the uninodular architecture that is typical for
alopecic and sometimes ulcerated. The tumors may
nodular sebaceous hyperplasia; however plaque-like vari-
appear yellow or opalescent. They may be melanized,
ants of nodular hyperplasia may be diffcult to differenti-
imparting a brown to black color; pigmentation occurs
ate from sebaceous nevus (see p. 643). Reactive epidermal
most often in meibomian gland tumors and may lead to
hyperplasia with compact hyperkeratosis may occur in
clinical confusion with melanocytic neoplasia. Sebaceous
nodular hyperplasia if traumatized. However, in seba-
adenomas may occur anywhere on the body, but are
ceous nevus, irregular acanthosis is a consistent feature
found most commonly on the head.
and is accompanied by hypergranulosis and laminated
The average age of affected animals is 10 years, but
hyperkeratosis. Nodular sebaceous hyperplasia generally
 lesions occasionally occur in dogs less than 1 year of age.
lacks multiple follicular infundibula contiguous with the
Cocker Spaniels, Siberian Huskies, Miniature Poodles,
epidermis, as seen in sebaceous nevus.
Coonhounds, Samoyeds, Beagles, Dachshunds, and
646
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Persian cats are reported to have a marked predisposition
 in a severe infltrate composed of distended macrophages
(Bevier & Goldschmidt, 1981; Goldschmidt & Shofer,
containing large lipid vacuoles, in contrast to the delicate
1992).
lipid droplets of a xanthogranulomatous reaction; this
lipogranulomatous reaction occurs most often on the
Histopathology
eyelids.
 In contradistinction to nodular sebaceous hyperplasia,
Simple sebaceous/meibomian adenoma (Figure
the lobules in simple adenoma are not oriented around
24.6)
hyperplastic ducts or follicular infundibula. Cystic degen-
These adenomas typically comprise multiple large lobules
eration and lipogranulomatous inflammation are uncom-
of sebaceous cells that show normal maturation from the
mon in nodular sebaceous hyperplasia.
basaloid peripheral reserve cell layer to large, pale, lipid-
laden central cells. Hepatoid metaplasia, characterized by
Compound sebaceous/meibomian adenoma (Figure
24.7)
eosinophilic polygonal cells resembling normal perianal
This variant of sebaceous adenoma contains glandular
(hepatoid) glands, is observed rarely (also see nodular
lobules and ducts in varying proportions. This neoplasm
sebaceous hyperplasia, p. 641). The overlying epidermis
designated
as ‘ductal adenoma’ in the current
is usually intact. Ducts are not a prominent feature.
World
Health
Organization   histologic  classification
Mature sebocytes have moderate, clear cytoplasm with
(Goldschmidt et al., 1998), but this is somewhat inaccu-
numerous, delicate, lipid vacuoles and centrally-located
 rate since both lobular and ductal components are always
 nuclei with crenated margins and small nucleoli. Reserve
present.
cells have scant, eosinophilic cytoplasm and slightly
The sebaceous lobules are grouped in radiating clusters
hyperchromatic, ovoid nuclei with inconspicuous nucle-
around ductal structures. F
Basaloid reserve cells and
oli. Mitotic activity is low and is confined to the reserve
partially-lipidized cells are more frequent than mature
 cell layer. Melanization is uncommon.
sebocytes in some or all of the lobules. Reserve cells have
Cystic degeneration, characterized by zones of acellu-
scant, eosinophilic cytoplasm and slightly hyperchro-
lar, brightly eosinophilic, lacy material, often is present in
matic, ovoid nuclei with inconspicuous nucleoli. Mature
the centers of the lobules and is analogous to the normal
sebocytes have moderate, clear cytoplasm with numerous,
holocrine secretory pattern of sebaceous glands. As would
delicate, lipid vacuoles and centrally-located nuclei with
be expected from the high lipid content of the de-
crenated margins and small nucleoli. Cells with interme-
generating cells, any accompanying inflammation is pre-
diate differentiation have less abundant cytoplasm than
dominantly xanthogranulomatous. Occasionally, extensive
mature sebocytes; it is pale eosinophilic, often finely gran-
degenerative changes in a sebaceous adenoma will result
ular, and may contain small numbers of delicate lipid
Fig. 24.6 Simple sebaceous gland
adenoma in a dog. Tightly grouped
lobules of sebocytes demonstrate
normal maturation and a predomi-
nance of fully-lipidized cells. Note
cystic degeneration of mature sebocytes
in the center.
Sebaceous tumors
647
Fig. 24.7 Compound sebaceous gland
adenoma in a dog. Small sebaceous
lobules radiate from numerous kera-
tinizing
ductal
structures.
Note
increased proportion of reserve cells in
many of the lobules.
vacuoles. Intermediate cell nuclei are ovoid, slightly larger
ducts, and low mitotic activity in the former. However,
than those of reserve cells, and are not crenated. Hepa-
meibomian epitheliomas, in particular are often small
toid metaplasia (see above) is observed rarely. The basa-
and well-circumscribed, and differentiation from com-
loid reserve cells sometimes form anastomosing cords and
 pound adenomas is based primarily on a higher mitotic
trabeculae that may interconnect the ductal structures
rate and a larger proportion of basaloid to mature cells.
or merge into overlying epidermis; this pattern is more
 The compound sebaceous adenoma and sebaceous epithe-
common in meibomian adenomas. Mitotic activity is low
lioma are in reality part of a continuum of sebaceous
to moderate and is confined to the reserve cells. Atypical
neoplasia, and objective criteria to distinguish between
nuclei or mitoses are not present. The ductal component
 them have not been fully established. Lesions composed
is characterized by multiple cysts of varying size that
predominantly of reserve cells with approximately 10%
are lined by mature squamous epithelium; a typical cor-
or fewer mature sebocytes are currently regarded as
rugated eosinophilic cuticle may be detected on the inner
epitheliomas.
surface of the cysts. Most of the cysts are small. Melaniza-
tion of the reserve cells is common in eyelid lesions, and
SEBACEOUS EPITHELIOMA
uncommon for compound adenomas in other anatomic
locations. The stroma is frequently infltrated by plasma
Sebaceous epitheliomas are neoplasms that differentiate
cells, lymphocytes, neutrophils and, particularly in mei-
primarily toward the basaloid reserve cells of sebaceous
bomian adenomas, melanophages.
glands. Nomenclature for this type of neoplasm in human
Differential diagnoses for compound sebaceous ade-
dermatopathology is currently confusing and controver-
noma include nodular sebaceous hyperplasia for those
sial. The newer classification stresses the concept of a
lesions that have fewer basophilic reserve cells, and seba-
continuum of benign sebaceous neoplasms, collectively
ceous epithelioma for those lesions with a large reserve
termed ‘sebaceoma' (Troy & Ackerman, 1984). Classi-
cell population. Compound sebaceous adenoma is differ-
cally, human sebaceomas have moderate to large numbers
a oq eisedradsu snoasqes rennpou uon panea
 of basaloid reserve cells and thus incorporate lesions that
comparatively higher number of basaloid reserve cells and
resemble both compound sebaceous adenoma (see p. 645)
immature sebocytes in the former. The ductular structures
and sebaceous epithelioma in animals.
of compound sebaceous adenoma are smaller and more
In contrast to the 'sebaceoma' nomenclature, one recent
numerous than those of nodular sebaceous hyperplasia.
case review in the human literature defnes “low-grade
Distinction between compound sebaceous adenoma and
sebaceous carcinoma’ by characteristics that are virtually
sebaceous epithelioma is usually based on smaller size,
identical to ‘sebaceous epithelioma’ as defined by veteri-
better circumscription, retention of lobular architecture,
nary pathologists, and indicates that differentiation
fairly large proportion of mature sebocytes, frequent
between reserve-cell-rich, benign sebaceoma and low-
648
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
grade sebaceous carcinoma may not be possible for all
melanized:
and
may
be confused clinically
with
lesions. In fact, apparently benign sebaceous tumors in
melanocytic neoplasms. Sebaceous epitheliomas occur
humans may demonstrate overt features of malignancy in
most often on head, ears, and dorsum.
 recurrent lesions and do occasionally metastasize (Misago
 Affected animals are middle-aged or older. Breeds that
et al., 2002). For this reason, some human dermato-
 are reported to be at increased risk for sebaceous tumors 
in general, particularly Cocker Spaniels, also have a
separate category from sebaceomas with fewer reserve
higher incidence of sebaceous epitheliomas (see sebaceous
cells, based on the similarity of its locally invasive
adenoma, p. 645).
biologic behavior to basal cell carcinoma (Dinneen &
 Sebaceous epitheliomas, as defined in dogs in most
Mehregan, 1996).
existing references, can be locally aggressive, may recur
A recent human study using several markers for cellu-
deeply after surgical excision, but exhibit lymphatic inva-
lar proliferative activity revealed no significant differences
sion or regional lymph node metastasis only in rare cases.
for silver-positive nucleolar organizer regions (AgNOR)
Meibomian epitheliomas may recur after incomplete exci-
counts, proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) label-
sion, but deep recurrence or metastasis has not been
ing, and Ki67 (another proliferating nuclear antigen
observed. The current World Health Organization classi-
expressed during all active phases of the cell cycle)
fication also regards sebaceous epithelioma as a low-grade
labeling between sebaceoma and basal cell carcinoma,
malignancy (Goldschmidt et al., 1998). Nevertheless, the 
is  r n a s  e 
 true malignant potential, if any, of sebaceous epithelioma
sebaceous carcinomas (Ansai et al., 1995). S
Similar
is still unknown; the possibility that both completely
studies comparing compound sebaceous
sadenomas,
 benign tumors (compound sebaceous adenomas) and low.
 epitheliomas, and ‘epitheliomatous’ carcinomas in dogs
 grade malignancies (epitheliomatous sebaceous carcino-
 oq uryuo on 1ndiaq Aaa aq pinm (os d sos)
 mas) are being inadvertently included in this category
differences among these entities and to determine if
 must be considered. Histologic parameters such as large
certain morphologic  subsets of epithelioma
might
size, irregular tumor margins, and high mitotic rate may
warrant reclassification. The authors believe that the des-
be of negative prognostic significance. More careful eval-
ignation ‘epithelioma', in contrast to sebaceoma, is still
uation for features such as mitotic atypia may reveal a
nosologically useful, at least temporarily, as it specifies
higher incidence of sebaceous carcinoma than previously
a histologic pattern that may possess low malignant
suspected.
 Retrospective studies on large case series
potential.
and application of cell proliferation markers (see above)
would aid in determining if compound sebaceous
adenoma needs to be assigned a broader morphologic
Clinical features
range to include some lesions currently classified as
 Sebaceous epitheliomas are fairly common neoplasms in
epithelioma, and if stricter criteria for diagnosis of seba-
dogs. They are rare in cats. Analogous neoplasms deve-
ceous carcinoma can be established.
lop from the specialized sebaceous glands of the eyelid
and are designated meibomian epitheliomas. Reported
Histopathology (Figures 24.8 and 24.9)
incidence is difficult to ascertain, as some authors have
regarded sebaceous epithelioma as a variant of sebaceous
Sebaceous epitheliomas are composed of multiple, large,
adenoma (Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992), similar to the
iregular islands of epithelial reserve cells. Some anasto-
human sebaceoma classifcation system, while others, par-
mosing trabeculae and cords of reserve cells may be
ticularly in older literature, do not clearly separate it from
present. The margins of the neoplasm vary from well-
sebaceous carcinoma (Nielsen, 1981; Conroy, 1983). In
circumscribed in smaller lesions to irregular and infltra-
the authors’ experience, the ratio of sebaceous epithe-
tive in larger masses. Similar to basal cell carcinoma (see 
liomas to sebaceous adenomas is approximately 1: 2.
Chapter 22), multifocal contiguity with the overlying
  s q  e     
epidermis is present. Ulceration is common, and is often 
(2001), who found that 37% of canine sebaceous tumors
diffuse in larger sebaceous epitheliomas. There is a sparse
were epitheliomas.
to moderate stroma of reactive collagenous tissue.
Sebaceous epitheliomas are frm, nodular fungiform,
The majority of cells of the neoplasm resemble the
or plaque-like masses ranging from several millimeters
basaloid reserve cells at the periphery of normal seba-
to several centimeters in diameter. Eyelid lesions rarely
ceous glands. These are fairly small, polyhedral cells with
exceed 5 mm. The tumors may be multiple, either syn-
scant, eosinophilic cytoplasm and ovoid, vesicular fairly
chronously or metachronously. Ulceration is frequent
uniform nuclei. Nucleoli are small and may be multiple.
Some tumors, particularly those on the eyelids, are heavily
Peripheral palisading is not present. Mitotic activity varies
Sebaceous tumors
649
Fig. 24.8 Sebaceous epithelioma in a
dog. Lobules and anastormosing trabe-
culae of reserve cells predominate.
Note the individual and clustered
mature sebocytes and small keratiniz-
ing ducts.
Fig.
24.9 Pigmented
meibomian
epithelioma in a dog. Clusters of pale
mature sebocytes are scattered among
sheets and lobules of homogeneous
basaloid reserve cells. Note melaniza-
tion of the epithelial cells and large.
dark melanophages in the stroma.
lesions also have small ducts lined by mature squamous
usually higher than expected for a normal reserve cell
epithelium and containing small amounts of keratin;
population. There are multiple small foci of distinct seba-
 these resemble normal sebaceous gland ducts. Secondary
ceous differentiation characterized by individual cells or
inflammation, ranging from subacute to granulomatous,
clusters of cells with expanded, lipidized cytoplasm.
is often present.
Nuclei of the mature sebocytes are often crenated. Atyp-
Meibomian epitheliomas have a much greater tendency
ical nuclei are not found, and the mature sebocytes are
to melanize than sebaceous epitheliomas in other loca-
not mitotically active. Larger foci of mature sebocytes
tions. Pigmented tumors have variable numbers of
may have necrosis and/or cystic degeneration. Most
 melanin granules within the basaloid epithelial cells as
650
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
well as many dendritic melanocytes and melanophages in
SEBACEOUS CARCINOMA
the stroma.
 Rare sebaceous epitheliomas contain small numbers of
Clinical features
glandular structures with apocrine features, characterized
by columnar cells with eosinophilic or glycogenated cyto-
Sebaceous carcinomas are rare malignant neoplasms in
plasm. This so-called ‘sebo-apocrine' pattern has also
cats and dogs. Histologically identical lesions of the
 been observed in human sebaceous epithelioma, as well
 specialized sebaceous glands of the eyelids are designated
as in a variety of other adnexal tumor types (Okuda
meibomian gland carcinomas. Sebaceous carcinoma was
 et al., 1995). This divergent differentiation is not surpris-
diagnosed in 0.8% of all canine skin and subcutaneous
ing considering that both adnexal glands arise embry-
tumors in a large survey in the older veterinary literature
ologically from adjacent foci of partially committed stem
(Strafuss, 1976), although histologic criteria were not
cells of hair follicles (see introduction, Chapter 25).
 specifed. More recently, the incidence of sebaceous car-
Differentiation of sebaceous or meibomian epithelioma
cinoma was found to be 0.7% in dogs and 0.9% in cats
with relatively numerous mature sebocytes from com-
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992). In the authors’ experience
pound sebaceous adenoma is problematic. Smaller size,
 the occurrence seems to be considerably less frequent,
better circumscription, retention of lobular architecture,
probably less than 0.1% based on an informal survey of
larger proportion of mature sebocytes, frequent ducts,
data from one author (E.J.W.); the cause for this discrep-
and low mitotic activity support a diagnosis of compound
ancy is unclear. It is possible that a variety of neoplasms
sebaceous adenoma. However, meibomian epitheliomas
comprising large, pale, fnely vacuolated cells were
are often small and well-circumscribed, and differentia-
 assumed to be of sebaceous origin in previous surveys.
tion is based primarily on higher mitotic rate and
Sebaceous carcinomas are usually solitary, frm nodules
increased proportions of basaloid to mature cells in
up to 7.5 cm in diameter (Scott et al., 2001). Alopecia and 
epitheliomas. Compound sebaceous adenomas and seba-
ulceration are common. The majority of cases in both
ceous/meibomian epitheliomas are in reality part of a con-
 dogs and cats occur on the head. Interestingly, the eyelid
tinuum of sebaceous neoplasia, and objective criteria to
is not reported as a site for sebaceous carcinoma in
distinguish between them have not been fully established.
animals and is observed only rarely by the authors,
Lesions with approximately 90% or more reserve cells
although this is the most common location in humans.
and 10% or fewer mature sebocytes are currently
The average age of affected animals ranges from 9 to
regarded as sebaceous epitheliomas.
12 years (Strafuss, 1976; Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992).
Distinction
between sebaceous
 epithelioma
and
Cocker Spaniels, Cavalier King Charles Spaniels, Scottish
‘epitheliomatous’ sebaceous carcinoma (see below) is
Terriers, and Siberian Huskies appear to be predisposed
similarly problematic  and currently  controversial, 
as
to develop sebaceous carcinomas (Goldschmidt & Shofer,
reproducible criteria to differentiate these two closely-
1992).
related entities are still being evaluated. Both are charac-
 Sebaceous carcinomas can be locally aggressive, but
terized by a marked predominance of basaloid reserve
reports of distant metastasis are rare in both dog and cat.
cells, but carcinomas show increased nuclear size and
 Deep local recurrence and regional lymph node metasta-
higher mitotic activity with atypical mitotic fgures.
sis occur occasionally in tumors of this type. In contrast,
The authors believe that the presence of mitoses in
 eyelid sebaceous carcinomas in humans frequently recur
intermediate cells and fully-lipidized sebocytes warrants a
 and metastasize, and more recent reviews of extraocular
diagnosis of carcinoma. Epitheliomatous sebaceous carci-
sebaceous carcinomas also indicate a higher incidence of
nomas are often larger and have increased peripheral
metastasis than previously suspected (Jensen, 2000;
invasiveness in comparison to the majority of sebaceous
Moreno et al., 2001).
epitheliomas.
The authors have elected to separate sebaceous carci-
Solid basal cell carcinoma may need to be differentiated
nomas that are predominantly sebocytic ('sebocytic'
from sebaceous epithelioma. S
Sebaceous
S epitheliomas
sebaceous carcinoma) from lesions that are composed
usually contain at least occasional tumor cells with
predorminantly of reserve cells, resermbling sebaceous
lipidized cytoplasm, whereas true basal cell carcinoma
epitheliomas (epitheliomatous' sebaceous carcinoma).
with sebaceous differentiation is not a recognized entity
This division is somewhat artifcial, as the neoplasms
in animals. The predominant reserve cells of epitheliomas
u idiau aq A inq ruds sioqd e mos
are slightly larger and more eosinophilic than those of
refning diagnostic criteria and assessing relative biologic
basal cell carcinoma and do not exhibit peripheral pal-
behavior in the future. It is unclear at the present time
isading or cytologic atypia. In addition, the architecture
what proportion of neoplasms usually interpreted as
of basal cell carcinoma is typically plaque-like, while
sebaceous/meibomian epitheliomas (see p. 647) might be
sebaceous epithelioma tends to be fungiform.
 more appropriately placed in the epitheliomatous carci-
Sebaceous tumors
651
Fig. 24.10 Sebocytic sebaceous carci
noma in a dog. Multiple epithelial
lobules form a large, ulcerated, plaque-
like mass.
noma category. Application of cell proliferation markers
(see sebaceous epithelioma, p. 647) may assist in further
differentiation, as will long term clinical studies relating
morphology and outcome.
Histopathology
Sebocytic sebaceous carcinoma (Figures 24.10
through 24.13)
Sebocytic sebaceous carcinomas are irregular but circum-
scribed, multilobular dermal neoplasms composed of
islands of epithelial cells that are usually larger than basa-
loid reserve cells. Ulceration may be present in larger
lesions. There may be invasion of the underlying subcutis.
The tumor lobules are delineated by a sparse to moder-
ate collagenous stroma without stromal-epithelial cleft
formation. Necrosis and cystic degeneration may be
present in the centers of the lobules. Orderly centripetal
progression from basaloid reserve cells to intermediate
cells to obvious sebocytes is markedly distorted or absent.
Squamous differentiation, with or without keratin pearl
formation, is often present and may be extensive. Small
numbers of sebaceous carcinomas contain occasional
glandular structures lined by columnar epithelial cells that
may show decapitation secretion; this sebo-apocrine
pattern is also described in sebaceous carcinomas in
humans (Misago & Narisawa, 2001).
Neoplastic cells have eosinophilic cytoplasm with vari-
able vacuolation. Sebocytic sebaceous carcinomas have
Fig. 24.11 Higher magnification of Fig. 24.10. Somme of the large,
small to moderate numbers of cells with finely-dispersed
round to polygonal cells contain one or more lipid vacuoles of
lipid droplets resermbling normal mature sebocytes. Lipid
varying size; the majority are undifferentiated or squamoid. Note
vacuoles may be larger in size and fewer in number than
moderately high mitotic activity.
652
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Fig.24.12Sebocytic sebac
a arisingwithin sebaceou
Fig.24.13 Higher magnification of Fig.24.12. The sebaceous car
adenorma in a dog. Pale lobules of benign, mature sebocytes contrast
cinoma cormprises a haphazard admixture of enlarged reserve cells,
with large dark islands of highly cellular carcinoma.
intermediate cells, and squamous cells. Note the giant fully-lipidized
sebocyte in the center.
in normal sebocytes. Bizarre, lipidized giant cells are occa-
sionally present. Poorly-differentiated tumors have seba-
diagnoses for sebocytic sebaceous carcinoma, as well as
ceous features limited to small numbers of cells that have
anaplastic carcinomas containing clear or vacuolated
clear or finely-granular cytoplasm without obvious lipid
cells. Most sebaceous carcinomas contain at least some
content. Other cells in sebocytic sebaceous carcinoma
cells with multiple round vacuoles or foamy cytoplasm
vary from polyhedral to polygonal and have moderate to
indicative of lipid content; these are usually admixed with
abundant, pale eosinophilic cytoplasm. In areas of squa-
squamoid cells and large polyhedral cells in varying pro-
mous metaplasia, the cells resemble well-differentiated
portions. Clear cell basal cell carcinomas generally have
squamous cell carcinoma (see Chapter 22); complete
more uniform cytologic features and diffuse glycogenic
cornification with extracellular deposits of keratin may
vacuolation.
Sebaceous
carcinoma does not have
represent attempts at duct formation. Occasional tumors
stromal-epithelial cleft formation as observed in most
have zones of hepatoid-type cells (see nodular sebaceous 
 clear cell basal cell carcinomas. The epithelial aggregates
hyperplasia, p. 641). Nuclei are large and have prominent
of squamous cell carcinoma show a more orderly transi-
nucleoli and variable chromatin patterns. Crenation
tion from basal cells peripherally to fully-keratinized cells
of nuclear membranes is often observed in better-
and keratin deposits centrally. Differentiation from
differentiated sebocytes. Mitotic activity varies from mod-
poorly-differentiated carcinomas may not be possible at
erately low to moderately high, and atypical mitotic
the light microscopic level. A positive lipid stain, e.g. oil
fgures can usually be detected.
red O, performed on wet tissue distinguishes sebaceous
Clear cell basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell car-
carcinoma from clear cell basal cell carcinoma and squa-
cinoma with significant glycogen content are differential
mous cell carcinoma as well as from anaplastic carcino-
Sebaceous tumors
653
Fig. 24.14 Epitheliomatous sebaceous
carcinoma in a dog. The small cell pre-
dominance is reminiscent of sebaceous
epithelioma, but the aggregates are
more pleomorphic. Note that the
tumor extends into the panniculus, and
there is one focus of vascular invasion
(arrow).
mas with clear or vacuolated cells. Sebaceous carcinomas
rarely, if ever, show a diffusely-vacuolated large cell popu-
lation; thus, clear cell apocrine ductular carcinoma and
balloon cell melanoma would not need to be considered
as differential diagnoses.
Liposarcoma rarely involves dermis but may need to be
distinguished from  sebaceous carcinoma  in these
instances. Although both sebaceous carcinomas and
liposarcomas have lipid-laden cells, most sebaceous carci-
nomas have a multilobular architecture, which is absent in
liposarcomas. The majority of liposarcomas contains at
least some cells with single large lipid vacuoles and periph-
erally displaced nuclei very similar to mature lipocytes.
Immunohistochemistry also may be helpful (see below)
Epitheliomatous sebaceous carcinoma (Figures
24.14 through 24.16)
Epitheliomatous sebaceous carcinoma is an irregular but
circumscribed dermal neoplasm composed predominantly
of basaloid reserve cells in islands, cords, and trabeculae;
the islands generally have angular profles. Small duct-like
structures lined by mature squamous epithelium and con-
taining small amounts of keratin and sebocytic debris are
seen in some lesions. The tumors often have a fungiform
architecture, and multifocal epidermal contiguity is 
observed. Ulceration is present and frequently extensive.
These neoplasms have infltrative margins, and there may
be invasion of the underlying subcutis. Foci of caseation
necrosis and cystic degeneration are common. Rarely,
Fig. 24.15 Higher magnification of Fig. 24.14. The predominant
lymphatic invasion is identified. The tumor has a sparse
reserve cells are fairly homogeneous but show brisk mitotic activity.
to moderate collagenous stroma  without stromal-
Several fully-differentiated sebocytes also have mitotic figures
epithelial cleft formation.
{arrow).
654
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
fully-differentiated sebaceous cells is, therefore, indicative
of malignancy.
Distinction between sebaceous epithelioma and epithe-
liomatous sebaceous carcinoma is problematic and cur-
rently controversial. These two entities are probably
closely adjacent in the continuum of sebaceous neoplasia.
 Both are characterized by a marked predominance of
basaloid reserve cells, but the carcinomas show increased
nuclear size and higher mitotic activity with atypical
mitotic fgures. The authors believe that the presence of
mitoses in intermediate cells and fully-lipidized sebocytes
warrants a diagnosis of carcinoma. Epitheliomatous seba-
ceous carcinomas are often larger, have more pleomorphic
cellular aggregates, and have increased peripheral inva-
siveness in comparison to the majority of sebaceous
epitheliomas. Retrospective studies on large case series
and application of proliferation markers would be of
great beneft in determining if these histologic criteria cor-
relate well with cellular kinetics and biologic behavior
(see sebaceous epithelioma, p. 647).
Solid basal cell carcinoma may need to be differentiated
from epitheliomatous sebaceous carcinoma. Sebaceous
carcinomas usually contain at least occasional sebocyte
tumor cells with lipidized cytoplasm, whereas true basal
cell carcinoma with sebaceous differentiation is not a rec-
ognized entity in animals. The predominant reserve cells
of epitheliomatous sebaceous carcinomas are slightly
larger and more eosinophilic than those of basal cell car-
cinoma and do not exhibit peripheral palisading. In addi-
Fig. 24.16 Regional lymph node metastasis of epitheliomatous
tion, the architecture of basal cell carcinoma is typically
sebaceous carcinoma of Fig. 24.14.
plaque-like, while sebaceous carcinoma tends to be fungi-
form. Oil red O or other lipid stain may be required
to
differentiate  a  poorly-differentiated,  small cell-
 The basaloid reserve cells are polyhedral and have scant
predominant sebaceous carcinoma from basal cell
 to moderate, pale eosinophilic to amphophilic cytoplasm;
carcinoma.
they tend to be slightly larger than those in sebaceous
epitheliomas. Peripheral palisading and melanization are
Immumohistochemistry
generally not seen. Nuclei are large, ovoid, and vesicular;
nucleoli are small and multiple. As in sebaceous epithe-
Immunohistochemical staining with multiple individual
lioma, there are scattered small foci of advanced seba-
cytokeratins (CKs) and cytokeratin cocktails can differ-
ceous differentiation characterized by individual cells or
entiate sebaceous carcinoma from most other epithelial
clusters of cells with expanded, lipidized cytoplasm.
cell types, although the number of stains required seems
Nuclei of the mature sebocytes may be small and cre-
cumbersome and impractical (Murata et al., 1993; Ansai
nated, or they may be large and vesicular with prominent
et al., 1994; Goldschmidt et al., 2002). In humans, the
 nucleoli. Aggregates of intermediate cells, which have
majority of sebaceous carcinomas stain with AE1 (CKs
moderate, pale eosinophilic, fnely-granular cytoplasm,
10, 14, 15, 16, 19), LP34 (CKs 1, 5, 6, 8, 10, 14, 18),
may be present between the basaloid cells and differenti-
CK8, and CK19 but are negative with CK1 and CK13;
ated sebocytes. The mitotic activity of the basaloid reserve
differences in staining with one or more of these reagents
cells is moderate to high. Atypical mitotic fgures are
allow distinction from squamous cell carcinoma, basal
present, and some of the mitotic fgures are located in dif-
 cell carcinoma, malignant tricholemmoma, and some but
ferentiated sebocytes in addition to the reserve cell popu-
not all types of sweat gland carcinomas (Murata et al.,
lation. Mature sebocytes in normal glands, hyperplastic
1993; Ansai et al., 1994). In dogs and cats, normal and
glands, and adenomas are terminally differentiated and
neoplastic sebocytes (but not reserve cells) were found to
should not be mitotically active; the fnding of mitoses in
stain only with the polyclonal reagent 34βE12 (CKs 1, 5,
Sebaceous tumors
655
10, 11) and were negative with AE1, AE3 (CKs 1-8),
intact male dogs and regression of a large percentage of
CAM5.2 (CK7/8) and CK10; the latter markers, in addi-
tion to 34βE12, stained one or more of all of the epider-
(Wilson & Hayes, 1979).
mal, follicular and sweat gland tumors that were
evaluated, allowing diagnosis of sebaceous origin by
Clinical features
exclusion (Goldschmidt et al., 2002). Positive CK
immunostaining of any type will rule out a diagnosis of
 Benign perianal (hepatoid) gland proliferations, including
liposarcoma.
hyperplasia and adenoma, are common lesions in dogs
Goldschmidt's group also found that CD79a, the pan-
and account for 8% to 18% of all canine skin tumors as
B lymphocyte marker lightly stained canine sebocytes
indicated in several surveys (Bevier & Goldschmidt, 1981;
when used with a modifed streptavidin-biotin technique
Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992). Perianal gland hyperpla-
(Goldschmidt et al., 2002). The biochemical basis for this
sia/adenoma generally has a nodular or polypoid confgu-
phenomenon is as yet unknown; however the signaling
ration, but hyperplasia may also present as an annular
molecule of B lymphocytes, against which the CD79 anti-
perianal growth. The size of hyperplastic nodules and
body was specifically developed, is not expressed in sebo-
benign neoplasms varies from several millimeters to
cytes. Spurious staining of several tissue types is known
10 cm. Lesions are often multiple, and ulceration is
 to occur with at least one commercially available clone of
common in larger masses. The nodules have a rubbery
CD79a, and nonspecifc endogenous avidin binding can
 consistency and tan coloration.
be a technical problem in sebaceous glands as well as
 Because of the widespread normal distribution of hepa-
other tissue types when an avidin-biotin methodology is
toid glands, hyperplastic and neoplastic lesions are not
employed. Investigation into the nature of these chemical
limited to the classical perianal or ventral tailbase loca-
interactions would be required to determine if there is any
tion, but can be found anywhere on the tail or trunk.
diagnostic validity in the use of CD79a staining in seba-
Other aberrant sites, including the head and feet, also
ceous neoplasms.
have been observed.
 It has recently been demonstrated that androgen recep-
 Hepatoid gland proliferations of all types occur more
tors can be detected immunohistochemically in formalin-
frequently in intact males than in females or neutered
fxed paraffn-ermbedded tissue from a wide range of
males. Wilson's data indicate a ratio of males to females
sebaceous tumor types in humans (Bayer-Garner et al.,
of 6:1; the ratio in neutered females to intact females is
1999). Adaptation of this technique for use in veterinary
3:1 (Wilson & Hayes, 1979). A more recent large-scale
biopsy material may allow definitive diagnosis of equivo-
survey found only a 3 : 1 ratio of affected males to females
cal cases with a single marker.
and almost equal proportions of neutered females to
intact females (Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992). This shift
may reflect decreased numbers of intact male dogs as well
NODULAR PERLANAL GLAND
as a trend to neutering at a younger age; both of these
HYPERPLASLA AND PERIANAL
factors would contribute to altered proportions of
GLAND ADENOMA
gonadal hormone levels. Most animals with perianal
(Synonyms: nodular hepatoid gland hyperplasia and
gland tumors are 8 years of age or older. Breed predilec-
hepatoid gland adenoma)
tions are reported in Cocker Spaniels, Samoyeds, Siberian
Huskies, English Bulldogs, Beagles, and mixed breeds
Hepatoid glands are modified sebaceous glands in canids
(Wilson & Hayes, 1979; Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992).
located primarily in perianal skin. They can also be found
circumferentially around the proximal third of the tail, in
Histopathology
the dorsal lumbosacral area, lateral to the prepuce, and
along the ventral midline as far cranial as the neck.
Nodular perianal gland byperplasia (Figure 24.17)
Although they are present at birth in both males and
Perianal gland hyperplasia comprises multiple enlarged
females, hepatoid glands are larger and more extensive in
lobules of well-differentiated hepatoid cells with a single
adult males, suggesting stimulation by androgenic hor-
peripheral layer of basaloid reserve cells. The lobules may
mones (Isitor & Weinman, 1979). They are not found in
form a spherical mass or thick plaque. Spherical masses
cats. The etiology of perianal gland hyperplasia and neo-
are sometimes pedunculated. Overall glandular architec
plasia has not been definitively proven, but gonadal hor-
ture is well-maintained; lobules are discernible as discrete
mones appear to play an important role. Androgen
units that are frequently centered around small ductal
binding sites were identified in perianal adenomas in an
structures. Lobules within an individual lesion are of
early report (Wilson & Hayes, 1979). A causal relation-
approximately equal size. Stromal collagen is sparse.
ship is also implied by the more frequent occurrence in
Mature hepatoid cells are characterized by abundant,
656
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 24.17 Nodular perianal gland hyperplasia in a dog. Well-
Hig. 24.18 Perianal gland adenoma in a dog. Well-differentiated
demarcated lobules of hepatoid glands and scattered ducts are still
hepatoid cells are arranged in anastomosing trabeculae.
discernible.
polygonal, eosinophilic cytoplasm, resembling hepatocytes
Perianal gland adenoma (Figures 24.18 through
(thus, hepatoid'). Nuclei are centrally located, ovoid, and
24.21)
vesicular and have small nucleoli. Mitotic activity is low
Perianal adenoma is a well-circumscribed nodular or
and is confned to the reserve cell layer which has typical
multinodular mass usually comprising broad, anastomos-
basaloid morphology. The small interlobular ducts are
ing trabeculae of well-differentiated hepatoid cells and a
lined by flattened, keratinizing epithelial cells.
single peripheral layer of basaloid reserve cells. Small
Nodular perianal gland hyperplasia is distinguished
islands of cells may also occur and are occasionally the
from perianal gland adenoma by persistence of uniform
predominant architecture. The island confguration is
lobular architecture, in contrast to the trabeculae or
more common in females. Discrete glandular lobules are
islands of hepatoid cells found in adenomas. Necrosis is
not evident within the mass, and there is frequently
uncommon in hyperplastic lesions, and sinusoidal vascu-
compression of adjacent hepatoid glands. A thin fbrous
lature is not present. Several parameters associated with
capsule may be present. Most lesions have a delicate
silver-positive nucleolar organizer regions (AgNORs),
fbrovascular stroma. Some perianal adenomas, particu-
which are indicators of proliferative activity, show signif-
larly those with a predominance of small epithelial
icant differences among perianal gland lesions. Mean
islands, have a moderate to abundant stroma of mature
AgNOR count and relative AgNOR area are lower in
collagen. Other tumors have mature adipose tissue as the
nodular hyperplasia than in adenomas (1.6 versus 1.88
primary stromal component. Perianal gland adenomas
and 4.41% versus 5.18%, respectively). This is associated
 may be highly vascular and have dilated sinusoidal blood
with a signifcant decrease in mean nuclear area from
vessels separating the epithelial trabeculae. When the
      
sinusoidal vessels are markedly dilated and hyperemic,
(Preziosi et al., 1995).
this pattern is referred to as an ‘angiomatoid' variant.
Sebaceous tumors
657
Fig. 24.19 Perianal gland adenoma in a dog. Well-differentiated
Fig. 24.20Perianal gland adenoma in a dog. This variant has an
hepatoid cells are often arranged in small islands and clusters.
abundant stromal component of mature fat.
Ulceration is common in larger perianal gland adeno-
ation in histologic criteria offered by various investiga-
mas, and infarction may also occur. Infarcted perianal
tors. The authors believe that neoplasms with more than
gland adenomas have a distinct pattern of inflammation
90% reserve cells, which have uniform nuclei, small
characterized by caseation necrosis, granulomatous
nucleoli, and no mitotic atypia, should be classifed as
inflammation, fbrosis and cholesterol cleft formation.
epitheliomas. Neoplasms exhibiting mildly disorganized
Most or all of the tumor tissue may be obliterated by this
architecture, irregular margins, scattered foci of seba-
degenerative process. Hyperplastic glands are often found
ceous and/or squamous differentiation, prominent nucle-
adjacent to perianal adenomas.
 oli, and mitotic activity in large hepatoid cells represent
Cytologic features are identical to those of nodular
well differentiated carcinomas. Numbers of reserve cells
perianal gland hyperplasia (see above). The hepatoid cells
   sn  m 
have uniform, eosinophilic cytoplasm, vesicular nuclei,
decreased to moderately increased, and atypical mitoses
and small nucleoli. Mitotic activity is low and is confined
may be present. Perianal adenomas, in contrast, show
to the reserve cell layer. There are frequently small foci of
relative uniformity of epithelial aggregates with a narrow
squamous metaplasia with keratin pearl formation; this is
rim of reserve cells at the periphery of the aggregates. The
consistent with abortive ductal differentiation. Occa-
differentiated hepatoid cells in adenomas are not mitoti-
sional small zones of sebaceous differentiation, charac-
cally active.
terized by cells with multiple small lipid vacuoles, may be
The study of Preziosi et al. (1995) found that mean
present.
AgNOR count, mean AgNOR area, and relative AgNOR
 Distinction berween perianal adenoma and nodular
area are all signifcantly lower in adenomas than in car-
hyperplasia is described above. Consistent identification
cinomas (1.88 versus 2.41, 4.88 versus 6.47μm', and
of perianal adenoma, epithelioma, and well-differentiated
5.18% versus 8.37%, respectively). This was associated
carcinoma is problematic, in large part due to wide vari-
with a significant decrease in mean nuclear area from
658
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
revised
WorldHealthOrganization
1classification
(Goldschmidt et al., 1998). Epitheliomas were included
with low-grade perianal gland carcinomas in Veterinary
Dermatopathology (Walder & Gross, 1992), but the
authors now believe that they are distinctive enough to
warrant separate classifcation. Additional retrospective
studies, and application of cell proliferation markers (see
perianal gland adenoma, p. 655) will help to clarify their 
proper nosologic placement and determine if they possess 
any metastatic potential.
Clinical features
 Perianal epitheliomas are rare neoplasms of dogs that are
either benign or of low-grade malignancy. They are clini-
cally similar to adenomas, but are usually ulcerated. Age
and breed profles have not been established for this par-
ticular tumor type, but are probably similar to both
adenoma and carcinoma.
Recurrence is seen occasionally, but the authors have
not observed metastasis. Six of 23 perianal gland tumors
 adenomas recurred but did not metastasize in one study;
h sa p d da s ras
well as well-differentiated carcinomas (Berrocal et al.,
1989).
Histopathology (Figure 24.22)
Fig. 24.21 Perianal gland adenoma in a dog featuring abundant
Perianal gland epitheliomas are composed primarily of
fibrous stroma, and small epithelial aggregates as in Fig. 24.19.
basaloid reserve cell arranged in sheets, islands, and
anastomosing trabeculae. There is a sparse collagenous
stroma. The margins of epitheliomas tend to be irregular
94.1 μm? in adenoma to 76.6 μm? in carcinoma, although
and mildly infltrative. The basaloid reserve cells have
perianal gland epithelioma (see below) may have been
scant, amphophilic cytoplasm, and ovoid, vesicular
included in the carcinoma group (Preziosi et al., 1995).
nuclei. Nucleoli are small. Mitotic activity varies from
Application of other markers of cellular proliferative
moderately low to moderately high. Scattered clusters of
activity, such as Ki67 (a proliferating nuclear antigen
cells exhibit typical hepatoid features characterized by
expressed during all active phases of the cell cycle) and
abundant, eosinophilic cytoplasm and larger, vesicular
proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), may help
nuclei. Mitotic activity is not observed in the mature
to substantiate these differences and refine diagnostic
hepatoid cells. Small foci of ductular differentiation may
criteria.
be present.
Distinction berween perianal gland epithelioma and
adenoma is straightforward using the above-stated crite-
PERLANAL GLAND EPITHELIOMA
 ria; adenomas contain small numbers of reserve cells that
(Synonym: hepatoid gland epithelioma)
 are limited to the periphery of the epithelial aggregates.
The differentiated hepatoid cells in adenomas are not
Perianal gland epithelioma is histologically analogous
mitotically active. The authors believe that neoplasms
to sebaceous epithelioma, but its biologic behavior may
with more than 90% reserve cells, which have uniform
not be identical. Lesions consistent with perianal gland
nuclei, small nucleoli, and no mitotic atypia, should be
epitheliomas have been combined with perianal gland
classifed as epitheliomas. Perianal gland epithelioma is
adenomas by several authors (Conroy, 1983; Pulley &
 differentiated from carcinoma by the absence of nuclear
Stannard, 1990; Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992). Perianal
atypia, absence of mitotic atypia, and absence of mitotic
epitheliomas are listed as a separate category in the
activity within differentiated hepatoid cells.
Sebaceous tumors
659
Poorly-differentiated carcinomas are large lesions that are
frm, poorly circumscribed, and usually ulcerated.
The majority of perianal gland carcinomas occur
in older male dogs. Arctic Circle breeds and German
Shepherd Dogs showed a predisposition in one study (Vail
et al., 1990)
Recurrence was observed in six of 23 neoplasms desig-
nated as ‘moderately- or poorly-differentiated perianal
gland adenomas'; however, this group probably included
epitheliomas as well as low-grade carcinomas based on
the histologic description given (Berrocal et al., 1989).
Metastasis was not reported, although follow-up on the
cases in that report was limited. In the retrospective study
of Vail et al. (1990), 14 of 41 dogs had recurrence of their
perianal carcinomas and 15% had regional and/or distant
metastasis; unfavorable outcomes were closely correlated
with an advanced clinical stage of disease at time of pres-
entation. The authors believe that metastasis is common
in poorly-differentiated perianal carcinomas, but infre-
quent in well-differentiated lesions, although this specifc
variable has not been addressed in the literature.
According to the review of Wilson and Hayes (1979),
perianal gland carcinomas are not influenced by gonadal
hormones and do not respond to castration; however, no
histologic information was provided, and the reported
clinical description of deep perirectal location and aggres-
sive biologic behavior suggests that anal sac gland carci-
nomas may have been included in the study. Although, it
seems reasonable that at least well-differentiated perianal
Fig. 24.22 Perianal gland epithelioma in a dog. Anastomosing
carcinomas would retain gonadal hormone receptors, and
trabeculae are cormposed predominantly of homogeneous basaloid
 therefore demonstrate sensitivity to hormonal manipula-
reserve cells; mature hepatoid cells are rmore nurmerous at the left.
-su aedoidde aussn aaadsonar nuasan arou e 'suo
tologic criteria found that castration indeed had no effect
 on the outcome of dogs with perianal carcinomas (Vail et
al., 1990). Additional studies to quantify plasma gonadal
PERIANAL GLAND CARCINOMA
hormone levels and cell surface hormone receptors in
(Synonym: hepatoid gland carcinoma)
perianal gland carcinomas may help determine a bio-
chemical basis for this unexpected phenomenon.
Clinical features
Histopathology (Figures 24.23 through 24.27)
Perianal gland carcinomas are uncommon malignant neo-
plasms of dogs that occur almost exclusively in a perianal
Perianal gland carcinomas vary from well-differentiated
location. The authors have seen rare examples on the
 to poorly differentiated. The majority are well differenti-
dorsal tail and prepuce. Perianal gland carcinomas
ated. Well-differentiated perianal gland carcinomas have
accounted for 2.6% of 1141 canine skin and subcuta-
similar architecrure and morphology to perianal gland
neous neoplasms in a survey by one author (E.J.W.). In
adenomas, but variable infltrative growth is present at
contrast, these tumors accounted for a mere 0.25% of all
the tumor margins. The tumor cells generally form solid
skin and soft tissue tumors in a very large series (Gold-
islands and tightly-packed trabeculae. At low magnifica-
schmidt & Shofer 1992). This discrepancy is undoubt-
tion, well differentiated carcinomas show partial to total
edly a reflection of different histologic criteria used to
loss of the typical adenoma pattern, characterized by dis-
determine malignancy in these neoplasms.
crete, repetitive trabeculae or islands of hepatoid cells
Well-differentiated carcinomas are clinically indistin-
cuffed by single layers of reserve cells; this imparts a
 guishable from adenomas. Most carcinomas are 2 cm or 
'sloppy’ or crowded appearance to the lesion. Stromal
greater in diameter but smaller nodules also occur.
collagen is usually sparse. Small foci of squamous
660
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 24.23 Well-differentiated perianal gland carcinoma in a dog
Fig. 24.24 Well-differentiated perianal gland carcinoma in a dog
At scanning magnification this tumor is indistinguishable from a
comprising irregular lobules and trabeculae of smaller cells. Note the
perianal gland adenoma, but the lobule in the center is located within
central crateriforrm ulcer.
a large blood vessel {note vascular fibromuscular wall; arrow).
hepatoid cells exhibit variable fatty vacuolation reminis-
metaplasia with keratin pearl formation may be present.
cent of their sebaceous gland origin. Nuclei tend to be
Ulceration, hemorrhage, and necrosis are common sec-
larger than in benign perianal gland tumors. These are
ondary features. Small foci of well-differentiated carci-
slightly pleomorphic and have multiple or prominent
noma may occur within adenomas, particularly large
nucleoli. Mitotic activity is low to moderate, and mitotic
multilobulated lesions; this may represent carcinoma in
fgures are found in differentiated cells as well as in
situ.
reserve cells. Atypical mitotic fgures are usually dis-
 In well-differentiated carcinomas, maturation patterns
cernible in small numbers.
from reserve cells to hepatoid cells are somewhat hap-
The rare poorly-differentiated variants of perianal
hazard, although a bimorphic population is still evident.
gland carcinoma are poorly-circumscribed, invasive
Reserve cells show considerable variation in number
masses comprising trabeculae and cords of large, poly.
between neoplasms and frequently within a given neo-
gonal cells. There is a moderate stroma of reactive col-
plasm. The majority of lesions have a mild to moderate
pue spros kq panenuu uao si ieun anssi snouan
 increase in numbers of reserve cells in comparison to ade-
clusters of neoplastic epithelial cells. The origin of the
nomas; these are concentrated at the periphery of the
neoplasm may be recognizable only by its location. The
hepatoid cell aggregates, but may also occur in more
cells have eosinophilic or amphophilic cytoplasm with
central locations. Occasional tumors show primarily large
variable vacuolation. Smaller cytoplasmic vacuoles may
hepatoid cells and cells of intermediate differentation,
appear to contain lipid material, while larger vacuoles
with few or no basaloid reserve cells. Scattered groups of
often have a mucinous appearance. Nuclei are large and
Sebaceous tumors
661
Fig. 24.25 Higher magnification of
well-differentiated perianal
Fig. 24.26 Higher magnification of well-differentiated perianal
gland carcinoma in a dog. Reserve cells are increased in number, and
gland carcinoma in a dog. Relatively mature hepatoid cells predomi-
maturation patterns are haphazard. Note scattered pale sebaceous
nate in this field. Note mitotic figure in center and zone of sebaceous
differentiation at left.
cells.
vesicular with prominent nucleoli. Mitotic activity is high,
of reserve cells with a haphazard distribution. Mature
and mitotic atypia is commonly observed. Intermediate
hepatoid cells in normal glands, hyperplastic glands,
variants also exist, which have zones of discernible hepa-
and adenomas are terminally differentiated and should
toid differentiation as well as anaplastic zones.
not be mitotically active; the fnding of mitoses in fully-
Differentiation between  well-differentiated perianal
differentiated hepatoid cells is, therefore, indicative of
carcinoma and perianal adenoma may be diffcult, in part
 malignancy. Perianal epitheliomas are distinguished from
because specific diagnostic criteria for hepatoid malig-
low-grade carcinomas by their marked predominance of
nancies are not well-documented in the literature. Peri-
reserve cells, absence of mitotic activity in mature hepa-
anal adenomas are bland,
monotonous neoplasms;
toid cells, and absence of mitotic atypia.
well-differentiated carcinomas show partial to total loss
The study of Preziosi et al. (1995) using silver-stained
of discrete, repetitive trabeculae or islands of hepatoid
nucleolar organizer regions (AgNORs) found that mean
AgNOR count, mean AgNOR area, and relative AgNOR
Although foci of sebaceous differentiation are occasion-
area are all significantly higher in carcinomas than in ade-
ally found in otherwise typical perianal gland adenomas,
nomas (see perianal gland adenoma, p. 655). This was
their presence warrants more careful investigation for
associated with a signifcant decrease in mean nuclear
other features of malignancy. Adenomas have small
area from adenoma to carcinoma, although epithelioma
numbers of reserve cells in a consistent, peripheral distri-
 may have been included in the carcinoma group (Preziosi
bution; carcinomas have increased or decreased numbers
et al., 1995). Application of other markers of cellular pro-
662
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemistry may be helpful in the differentia-
tion of poorly-differentiated perianal gland carcinoma
from other undifferentiated carcinomas. It has recently
been shown that CD79a, the pan-B lymphocyte marker,
lightly stains canine sebocytes and hepatoid cells when
used  with  a modified  streptavidin-biotin technique
(Goldschmidt et al., 2002); however this may be a spuri-
ous staining phenomenon, and its diagnostic validity
remains to be proven (see sebaceous carcinoma, p. 654).
Negative immunohistochemical staining for specific ker-
atins (CKs), particularly CAM5.2 (CK7/8) or CK13,
would probably rule out an apocrine origin. Detailed
immunophenotyping of perianal carcinomas has not been
reported.
REFERENCES
Sebaceous Duct Cyst
Goldschmidt, M.H., Dunstan, R.W., Stannard, A.A. et al. (1998)
Histological Classification of Epithelial and Melanocytic
Tumors of the Skin of Domestic Animals, 2nd series, Vol. 3,
p. 34. Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, Washington DC.
Murphy, G.F. & Elder, D.E. (1991) Atlas of Tumor Pathology:
Non-melanocytic Tumors of the Skin, p. 131. Armed Forces
Institute of Pathology, Washington DC.
Nodular Sebaceous Hyperplasia
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, F.S. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
Fig. 24.27 Poorly-differentiated perianal gland carcinoma in a dog.
 Dog and Cat, pp. 3, 62. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Clusters and cords of vacuolated epithelial cells without obvious
Isitor, G.N. & Weinman, D.E. (1979) Origin and early develop-
hepatoid features are distributed through a hyalinized collagenous
ment of canine circumanal glands. Am J Vet Res, 40, 487-92.
stroma.
Sebaceous Hamartoma
Goldschmidt, M.H., Dunstan, R.W., Stannard, A.A. et al. (1998)
liferative activity, such as Ki67 (a proliferating nuclear
Histological Classification of Epithelial and Melanocytic
Tumors of the Skin of Domestic Animals, 2nd series, Vol. 3,
antigen expressed during all active phases of the cell cycle)
p. 35. Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, Washington DC.
and proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), may help
to substantiate these differences and refine diagnostic
Sebaceous Nevus
criteria, particularly for well-differentiated perianal gland
Elder, D., Elenitsas, R. & Ragsdale, B.D. (1997) Tumors of the
carcinomas.
epidermal appendages. In: Lever's Histopathology of the Skin,
 Differential diagnoses for the poorly-differentiated peri-
8th edn (eds D. Elder, R. Elenitsas, C. Jaworsky, et al.), pp.
anal gland carcinoma include poorly-differentiated vari-
 763-5. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia.
ants of squamous cell carcinoma, sebocytic sebaceous
Scarampella, F, von Tscharner, C. & Noli, C. (2000) Linear
carcinoma, and apocrine sweat gland carcinoma. Absence
organoid nevus in a dog. Vet Dermatol 11, 69-73.
of contiguity with the overlying epidermis is a useful
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
feature in ruling out squamous cell carcinoma, and may
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 1384-7. W.B.
Saunders, Philadelphia.
also help to exclude some apocrine ductular carcinomas,
such as the solid-cystic variant (see Chapter 25). Tubular,
Sebaceous Adenoma
acinar, or cribriform structures would be suggestive of
Bevier, D.F. & Goldschmidt, M.H. (1981) Skin tumors in the
apocrine origin. Differentiation from sebocytic sebaceous
dog. Part I: Epithelial tumors
and tumor-like lesions.
carcinoma may not be possible on a histologic basis, in
Compend Contin Ed 3,389-98.
part due to the close embryologic and physiologic rela-
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, F.S. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
tionship of these two cell types.
Dog and Cat, pp. 2, 50-8. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Sebaceous tumors
663
Goldschmidt, M.H., Dunstan, R.W., Stannard, A.A. et al. (1998)
detection of tissue antigens. In: Advances in Veterinary Der-
Histological Classification of Epithelial and Melanocytic
matology, Vol. 4 (eds K.L. Thoday, C.S. Foil & R. Bond), pp.
Tumors of the Skin of Domestic Animals, 2nd series, Vol. 3,
142-9. Blackwell Science, Oxford.
p. 26. Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, Washington DC.
Jensen, M.L. (2000) Extraocular sebaceous carcinoma of the
Miller, M.A., Nelson, S.L., Turk, J.R. et al. (1991) Cutaneous
skin with visceral metastases: case report. J Cutan Pathol 17,
neoplasia in 340 cats. Vet Pathot 28, 389-95.
117-21.
Misago, N., Mihara, I, Ansai, S. et al. (2002) Sebaceoma
Misago, N. & Narisawa, Y. (2001) Sebaceous carcinoma with
and related neoplasms with sebaceous differentiation. Am J
apocrine differentiation. Am J Dermatopathol 23, 50-7.
Dermatopathol 24, 294-304.
Moreno, C., Jacyk, W.K., Judd, M.J. et al. (2001) Highly aggres-
Troy, JL. & Ackerman, A.B. (1984) Sebaceoma: a distinctive
sive extraocular sebaceous carcinoma. Am J Dermatopathol
benign neoplasm of adnexal epithelium differentiating toward
23,450-5.
sebaceous cells. Am J Dermatopathol 6, 7-13.
Murata, T., Nakashima, Y., Takeuchi, M. et al. (1993) The diag-
nostic use of low molecular weight cytokeratin expression in
Sebaceous Epithelioma
sebaceous carcinoma. Patbol Res Prac 189, 888-93.
Ansai, S., Koseki, S., Hozumi, Y. et al. (1995) Assessment of ce]-
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
lular proliferation of sebaceous neoplasms by AgNOR counts
Smalt Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, p. 1271. W.B. Saunders,
and immunohistochemical demonstrations of PCNA and
Philadelphia.
Ki-67. J Dermatol 22, 238-48.
Strafuss, A.C. (1976) Sebaceous carcinoma in dogs. J Am Vet
Conroy, J.D. (1983) Canine skin tumors. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
Med Assoc 169, 325-6.
19, 91-114.
Dinneen, A.M. & Mehregan, D.R. (1996) Sebaceous epithe-
Nodular Perianal Gland Hyperplasia and
lioma: a review of twenty-one cases. J Am Acad Dermatol 34,
Perianal Gland Adenoma
47-50.
Bevier, D.F & Goldschmidt, M.H. (1981) Skin tumors in the
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, F.S. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
dog. Part I: Epithelial tumors and tumor-like lesions.
 Dog and Cat, pp. 56-8. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Compend Cont Ed 3, 389-98.
Goldschmidt, M.H., Dunstan, R.W., Stannard, A.A. et al. (1998)
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, F.S. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
Histological Classification of Epitbelial and Melanocytic
 Dog and Cat, p. 2, 66-71. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Tumors of the Skin of Domestic Animals, 2nd series, Vol. 3,
Isitor, G.N. & Weinman, D.E. (1979) Origin and early devel-
 p. 26. Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, Washington DC.
opment of canine circumanal glands. Am J Vet Res 40,
Misago, N., Mihara, I, Ansai, S. et al. (2002) Sebaceoma
487-92.
and related neoplasms with sebaceous differentiation. Am J
Preziosi, R., della Salda, L., Ricci, A. et al. (1995) Quantifica-
Dermatopathol 24, 294-304.
tion of nucleolar organiser regions in canine perianal gland
Nielsen, S.W. (1981) Classification of tumors in dogs and cats.
tumors. Res Vet Sci 58,277-81.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 17, 13-60.
Wilson, G.P & Hayes, H.M. (1979) Castration for the treatment
Okuda, C., Ito, M., Fujiwara, H. et al. (1995) Sebaceous epithe-
of perianal gland neoplasms in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
lioma with sweat gland differentiation. Am J Dermatopathot
174, 1301-3.
17,523-8.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
Perianal Gland Epithelioma
Small Animal Dermatology,6th edn, p. 1271. W.B. Saunders,
Berrocal, A., Vos, J.H., van den Ingh, T.S.G.A.M. et al. (1989)
Philadelphia.
Canine perineal tumors. J Vet Med A 36, 739-49.
Troy, JL. & Ackerman, A.B. {1984) Sebaceoma: a distinctive
Conroy, J.D. (1983) Canine skin tumors. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
benign neoplasm of adnexal epithelium differentiating toward
19, 91-114.
sebaceous cells. Am J Dermatopathol 6, 7-13.
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, F.S. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
Dog and Cat, p. 67. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Sebaceous Carcinoma
Goldschmidt, M.H., Dunstan, R.W., Stannard, A.A. et al. (1998)
Ansai, S., Katagata, Y, Yoshikawa, K. et al. (1994) An immuno-
Histological Classification of Epitbelial and Melanocytic
histochemical study of sebaceous carcinoma with anti-keratin
Tumors of the Skin of Domestic Animals, 2nd series, Vol. 3,
monoclonal antibodies: comparison with other skin cancers.
p. 28. Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, Washington DC.
J Dermatot 21, 553-9.
Pulley, L.T. & Stannard, A.A. (1990) Tumors of the skin and
Bayer-Garner, I.B., Givens, V. & Smoller, B. (1999) Immunohis-
soft tissues. In: Tumors in Domestic Animals, 3rd edn (ed J.E.
tochemical staining for androgen receptors: a sensitive marker
Moulton), p. 71. University of California Press, Berkeley.
for sebaceous differentiation. Am J Dermatopathol 21,
Walder, E.J. & Gross, T.L. (1992) Sebaceous tumours. In: Vet-
426-31.
erinary Dermatopathology:A Macroscopic and Microscopic
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, F.S. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
Evaluation of Canine and Feline Skin Disease (T.L. Gross, P.J.
Dog and Cat, pp. 2, 59-64. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Ihrke, & E.J. Walder), pp. 3845. Mosby, St Louis.
Goldschmidt, M.H., Schneider, A.C. & Ferracone, J.D. (2002)
Use of monoclonal antibodies as an adjunct to the diagnosis
Perianal Gland Carcinoma
of epithelial skin tumors of the dog and cat using the
Berrocal, A., Vos, J.H., van den Ingh, T.S.G.A.M. et al. (1989)
EnVision Plus(R) system for the immunohistochemical
Canine perineal tumors. J Vet Med A 36, 739-49.
664
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, FS. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
Preziosi, R., della Salda, L., Ricci, A. et al. (1995) Quantifica
 Dog and Cat, p. 67. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
tion of nucleolar organiser regions in canine perianal gland
Goldschmidt, M.H., Schneider, A.C. & Ferracone, J.D. (2002)
tumors. Res Vet Sci 58, 277-81.
Use of monoclonal antibodies as an adjunct to the diagno-
Vail, D.M., Withrow, S.J., Schwarz, P.D. et al. (1990) Perianal
sis of epithelial skin tumors of the dog and cat using the
adenocarcinoma in the canine male; a retrospective study of
EnVision Plus(R) system for the immunohistochemical detec-
41 cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26, 329-34.
tion of tissue antigens. In: Advances in Veterinary Dermatol-
Wilson, G.P. & Hayes, H.M. (1979) Castration for the treatment
ogy, Vol. 4 (eds K.L. Thoday, C.s. Foil & R. Bond), pp. 142-9.
of perianal gland neoplasms in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
Blackwell Science, Oxford.
174, 1301-3.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 25
Sweat gland tumors
Although an in-depth review of sweat gland anatomy and
 somes') are formed by the cytoskeleton, and apocrine-
physiology is beyond the scope of this text, a brief dis-
released proteins use serum albumin as a carrier and
cussion related to terminology is warranted. Sweat glands
move through the cell without participation of the
have traditionally been divided into apocrine or eccrine
endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, or secretory
(or merocrine) based on mode of secretion, morphology,
granules (Aumuller et al., 1999; Wilhelm et al., 1999).
and anatomic distribution. Apocrine glands are charac-
f an on  on us aa sre 
terized by decapitation secretion, in which the apical part
eccrine terminology because these two glandular types are
of the cell is pinched off and released into the lumen
histologically distinct in dogs and cats, because the
(Scrivener & Cribier 2002); eccrine glands do not show
microanatomy of their ductal terminations is not always
cytological changes at the light microscopic level during
a differentiating factor and because these recent studies
secretion. Some research has suggested that unequivocal
support physiologic differences between their two
apocrine/eccrine  distinction  is  not  possible either
secretory modes.
morphologically or physiologically, and an epitrichial/
 Apocrine glands arise embryologically as a unilateral
atrichial classification is more accurate and applies to a
 protrusion from the upper portion of the developing hair
wider range of species (Jenkinson, 1989). Epitrichial
peg. Just below this is the sebaceous gland anlage and, at
refers to glands that terminate in the follicular infundibu-
least in some species, the follicular bulge region, in which
lum; atrichial describes glands with distal ducts that enter
 one group of stem cells is now known to be located in
directly into the epidermis and lack a follicular connec-
humans and mice (Meyer & Gorgen, 1986; Panteleyev
tion. The intraepidermal eccrine duct in humans is com-
et al., 2001). Eccrine glands, in contrast, develop from
monly referred to as the acrosyringium, although this
fetal epidermal buds in a manner very similar to hair
term could probably also be applied to the intrafollicular
follicles (Murphy, 1997).
portion of apocrine ducts.
All sweat glands contain secretory and ductular com-
 In general, apocrine glands are microanatomically
ponents. The secretory portion is lined by a single layer
epitrichial, and eccrine glands are atrichial, but this is not
of columnar epithelial cells and a peripheral layer of
always true (Jenkinson, 1989). Typical epitrichial apoc-
myoepithelial cells; the ductular portion is lined by a
rine glands are present throughout haired skin in dogs and
 double layer of cuboidal epithelial cells over most of its
cats; atrichial eccrine glands are limited to the pawpads.
 length and by squamous epithelium where it terminates
However ceruminous glands, the specialized apocrine
in the follicular infundibulum or epidermis (acrosy-
sweat glands of the inner pinna and ear canal, have both
ringium). These morphologic patterns are often recapitu-
epitrichial and atrichial units (Goldschmidt & Shofer,
lated in sweat gland neoplasms, creating tumor types
1992). Anal sac apocrine glands, circumanal apocrine
 that are either predominantly secretory or predominantly
glands, and mammary glands, which are modified apoc-
 ductular in appearance.
rine structures, are exclusively atrichial (Jenkinson, 1989;
Human nomenclature for sweat gland tumors retains
Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992).
many archaic and redundant terms, and it will generally
 It has recently been demonstrated that human eccrine
be avoided. In addition, there is continued controversy
and apocrine sweat glands have very different enzyme
 regarding ecrine versus apocrine origin for some entities
sensitivity and localization of anionic sites (Saga, 2002).
in humans, while other lesions have both apocrine and
Additional research has shown that apocrine secretion
 eccrine variants with the same name. Close analogues to
is not a histologic artifact but rather a specific, alterna-
human tumors in dogs and cats are infrequent, but will
tive extrusion mechanism. The apocrine blebs ('apo-
be described when pertinent.
665
666
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
APOCRINE CYST
(Synonyms: sweat gland cyst, epitrichial sweat gland
cyst)
Clinical features
Apocrine cysts are non-neoplastic lesions that are fairly
common in dogs and uncommon in cats. There is no
human analogue for simple apocrine cysts. In a large-scale
survey, apocrine cysts comprised 0.9% of all canine skin
masses and 1.1% of all feline skin masses (Goldschmidt
& Shofer 1992); however another reference text
describes them as rare in cats (Carpenter et al., 1987).
Data from the diagnostic pathology service of one the
authors (E.J.W.) yield a canine to feline incidence ratio of
approximately 5:1. The cause of the discrepancy in these
data is undetermined; cystadenomas may have been
included in the former statistics.
Ceruminous glands of the inner pinna or ear canal,
which have modified apocrine secretory components with
atrichial or epitrichial ducts, occasionally give rise to soli-
tary cysts in cats. Apocrine cysts may be a result of
obstruction of sweat gland ducts in some cases, but an eti-
ology is usually not apparent. Interestingly, cysts derived
from eccrine sweat glands have not been observed in dogs
or cats.
Apocrine cysts present as well-defined, tense or fluctu-
 ant, bullous nodules ranging from several millimeters to
several centimeters in diameter. The cysts are usually soli-
Fig. 25.1 Apocrine cyst in a dog. A single layer of atrophic epithe-
lial cells lines the cyst.
tary, but several lesions may be present in the same
patient. The masses often have a blue tint when viewed
through the overlying skin, which is frequently atrophic
activity, manifested by apical blebbing of the cytoplasm,
and alopecic. Cyst contents are usually clear and watery,
may be apparent in smaller cysts. Apocrine cyst contents 
but they are occasionally brown and gelatinous due to
are usually not visible in tissue sections, but occasional
inspissation. Sweat gland cysts in dogs occur most fre-
quently on the head, legs, neck, and dorsal trunk. In cats,
cysts will contain inspissated secretory material that stains
a deep pink. Inflammation associated with apocrine cysts
the majority are on the head. Ceruminous cysts in cats
have red-brown contents and appear dark brown to dark
is uncommon; mild infltrates of plasma cells and
macrophages containing light brown pigment derived
blue through overlying skin.
from the iron content of apocrine secretion may be
Old English Sheepdogs, Weimaraners, and Persian cats
present in the surrounding dermis.
are reported to be predisposed (Goldschmidt & Shofer,
The contents of ceruminous cysts appear light brown
1992). Affected animals are usually 6 years of age or
to red-brown in tissue sections. Inflammation is more
older.
common and may be somewhat more severe than in
Histopathology (Figure 25.1)
macrophages and some neutrophils may be present within
 the cyst lumen and in the surrounding dermis.
Apocrine cysts are unilocular or multilocular structures
 Differential diagnoses are limited. Large, multilocular
lined by a single layer of cuboidal to columnar epithelial
 sweat gland cysts may need to be distinguished from
cells with small, uniform, basally-located nuclei. The
cystadenomas. Cystadenomas have a predominance of
epithelial cells of larger cysts are usually flattened due to
columnar cells, and at least occasional foci of acinar or
pressure atrophy. Apocrine decapitation-type secretory
papillary proliferation can be identified.
Sweat gland tumors
667
CANINE APOCRINE CYSTOMATOSIS
(Synonym: cystic hyperplasia of sweat glands)
Clinical features
Apocrine cystomatosis is a rare, non-neoplastic condition
in dogs characterized by multiple clusters of cystically.
 oe s  s s ras 
referred to as cystic hyperplasia in older texts (Pulley &
Stannard, 1990). The lesions appear as numerous, soli-
tary or grouped nodules, bullae or vesicles, usually less
than 5mm in diameter distributed over the head and
neck. Rarely, a more generalized distribution is present.
The overlying skin is generally atrophic and alopecic. The
cysts often have a translucent appearance, and a blue tint
may be present.
 Affected animals are middle-aged or older. There is no
known breed predisposition. The etiology of this condi-
tion is unknown; it may be a senile degenerative change.
Histopathology (Figure 25.2)
Apocrine cystomatosis is characterized by clusters of
dilated apocrine glands which are grouped among hair
follicles in the middle and deep dermis. The cysts within
a given lesion are usually of similar size, but single large
 q e  s s s  
The cysts are lined by low cuboidal epithelial cells. Apical
blebbing is observed infrequently; this is probably a
Fig. 25.2 Apocrine cystomatosis in a dog. Clusters of dilated sweat
reflection of pressure atrophy of the lining epithelial cells.
glands are present around hair follicles. Note that follicular archi-
Adjacent dermal architecture shows minimal perturba-
tecture and adnexal interrelationships are normal.
tion; mild fbrosis may be present. If cyst rupture occurs,
there is moderate inflammation comprising plasma cells,
neutrophils, and lymphocytes; some pale siderophages
sequela to otitis externa, which is often reported in the
containing pigment derived from the iron content of apoc-
clinical history of affected cats. It may also be a senile
rine secretions may also be present.
degenerative change or, in some cases, a congenital
Differential  diagnoses  are  very  limited.  Apocrine
condition. The category ‘ceruminous cyst/hyperplasia
cystomatosis may need to be distinguished from a rare
accounted for 1.7% of all feline skin tumors in a large
case of multicentric cystadenomas. As in their solitary
survey (Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992).
counterparts, cystadenomas are true neoplasms with
evidence of cellular proliferation. They have a predomi-
punctate nodules or vesicles, usually less than 2mm in
nance of columnar cells, and at least occasional acinar or
 diameter, in the external ear canal and inner pinna. They
papillary structures can be identifed. In contrast, simple
are dark blue, brown, or black, and may be mistaken
cysts are lined by a monolayer of cuboidal or flattened
clinically for melanocytic or vascular neoplasms.
cells.
The average age is 8 to 9.5 years, although animals
as young as 1 year of age may be affected (Carpenter
et al., 1987; Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992). Goldschmidt
FELINE CERUMINOUS CYSTOMATOSIS
and Shofer (1992) report a slight male predominance
and an over-representation in Abyssinian and Persian
Clinical features
cats; domestic shorthaired cats comprise the majority of
Feline ceruminous cystomatosis is an uncommon non-
 ao jo ars d oso a  s
neoplastic disorder of uncertain etiology. It may be a
(E.J.W.)
668
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Histopathology (Figure 25.3)
pressure atrophy of epithelial cells. Human apocrine cys-
tadenomas are usually solitary and also may involve the
Feline ceruminous cystomatosis is characterized by cystic
specialized adnexa on the eyelids known as Moll's glands.
glands that are often grouped into clusters. Most of the
Multiple lesions are rare in humans and most often affect
cysts contain red-brown, inspissated secretory product
the face and eyelids (Alessi et al., 1997; de Eusebio et al.,
that may be admixed with small numbers of pigmented
1996; Farina et al., 1995).
macrophages and neutrophils. The secretory material
Occasionally undergoes mineralization. The distended
ceruminous glands are lined by a single layer of epithelial
Clinical features
cells that vary from attenuated to cuboidal to columnar.
Apocrine cystadenoma is uncommon in dogs and rare in
The cytoplasm may contain light brown iron granules.
cats in the authors’ experience. Specifc incidence data are
Nuclei are small and uniform, and no mitotic fgures are
not available in the literature, as cystadenoma is not
present. The surrounding dermis often exhibits mild
quantifed separately from other adenomas. All variants
fbrosis with mild infltrates of mast cells, lymphocytes,
of apocrine secretory adenoma accounted for 1.7% of
neutrophils and pigmented macrophages. Differentiation
canine skin tumors and 3% of feline skin tumors in a large
is not problematic as this entity is diagnostically unique.
survey (Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992).
Apocrine cystadenomas in dogs are usually solitary
 and range from 1 to 4cm in diameter although some
APOCRINE CYSTADENOMA
attain sizes of 10cm or more. The tumors in cats are
(Synonyms:
sweat
gland
cystadenoma,
apocrine
usually 1 cm or smaller. The overlying skin is generally
hidrocystoma)
atrophic and alopecic, and ulceration is uncommon. As
in apocrine cysts (see p. 666), a blue or purple hue may
“Apocrine hidrocystoma’ is the classical human nomen-
be observed through the skin surface. Small cystadeno-
clature for the simple cystic neoplasm arising from the
mas contain clear liquid; the secretory product within
secretory portion of the apocrine sweat gland. This term
larger neoplasms is often brown and gelatinous due to
is confusing, as eccrine hidrocystoma is considered a true
inspissation.
The head, neck, and dorsal trunk are the most frequent
nation ‘apocrine cystadenoma’ is preferred by some
locations in dogs. The majority of feline apocrine adeno-
authors (Murphy & Elder, 1991). The neoplastic nature
mas are on the head (Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992) and
of the lesion is indicated by the presence of up to five
in Persian and Himalayan cats may also affect other
cell layers lining the cyst wall, small tufts or fronds of
anatomic sites, such as the pinna. Lesions may be numer-
epithelium projecting into the cyst lumen, and absence of
ous in Persian and Himalayan cats. Multiple cystadenomas
Fig. 25.3 Feline ceruminous cystom-
atosis featuring multiple clusters of
dilated ceruminous glands, often con-
Dermal fibrosis and irregular acanthosis
reflect chronic otitis externa.
Sweat gland tumors
669
have been described on the eyelid margins and distal ear
middle-aged. Persian cats may develop eyelid and pinnal
canals of Persian and Himala
suggestingahered
lesions as young adults (Marignac et al., 2002).
these cas
designated as apocrine
1999; Marignac et al.,
Histopathology (Figures 25.4 and 25.5)
2002). A recently described lesion in a young cat had some
similarities to apocrine cystadenomatosis, but more closely
Apocrine cystadenoma is a circumscribed dermal neo-
resembled
human syringocystadenoma
papilliferum,
plasm composed of one or more cystic structures of
which is considered to be a type of apocrine hamartoma
varying size that are generally lined by a single layer of
and typically arises in nevus sebaceus; the lesion presented
cuboidal to columnar epithelial cells. Multiple layers of
as an inflamed plaque on the temporal region (Heimann,
lining cells are present in some lesions. Small glandular
M., personal communication, 2004). There is one case
structures may be present between the cysts or protrud-
-si pazeruaa e qim seuouapeisho snoraunu jo rodan
 ing inward from cyst walls. Some cysts contain simple or
tribution in an Old English Sheepdog; these were desig-
branching papillary aggregates of columnar epithelial
nated erroneously as apocrine cystomatosis, but were
cells. If papillary proliferations are numerous and begin
demonstrated to be true neoplasms both by routine his-
to fill some of the cyst cavities, a diagnosis of papillary
tology and epidermal growth factor receptor immuno-
histochemistry (Vilafranca et al., 1994).
within cyst lumens frequently stains rose-pink in tissue
Great Pyrenees, Chow Chows, Malamutes, Old English
sections. The sparse collagenous stroma and surrounding
Sheepdogs, and Persian cats are reported to be predis-
dermis are
:frequently infltrated by macrophages con-
posed to sweat gland secretory tumors (Goldschmidt &
taining light brown pigment, which likely represents iron
Shofer 1992). The majority of affected animals are
from escaped, iron-rich apocrine secretion
Fig. 25.4 Apocrine cystadenoma in a dog. Note small papillary
a dog. Note apical blebbing of cytoplasm, particularly along top
projections lined by uniform cuboidal cells.
margin.
670
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
The epithelial cells have scant to moderate, clear to
dogs and cats. Apocrine adenomas, including cystadeno-
eosinophilic cytoplasm with variable apical blebbing.
 mas, accounted for 1.7% of canine skin neoplasms
Nuclei are generally small and bland. They may be mod-
and 3% of feline skin neoplasms in a large-scale survey
erately enlarged and contain small nucleoli, but loss of
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992). An additional review of
polarity or atypia is not present. Small cells with dark,
feline neoplasms found a 2.9% incidence of apocrine
basaloid nuclei may predominate in some feline lesions.
adenoma (Miller et al., 1991). Complex apocrine adeno-
 Mitotic activity is absent or minimal. Tumors that have
 mas appear to occur exclusively in dogs.
ulceration and/or degeneration of cyst walls exhibit
Apocrine adenomas are well-circumscribed, frm or
stromal and peripheral fbroplasia with moderate to
fluctuant dermal nodules that are usually solitary. The
marked infltrates of plasma cells, neutrophils, and
lesions in dogs are typically 0.5 to 4 cm in diameter; in
pigmented macrophages.
cats, they are usually less than 2cm. The overlying skin
Differentiation of apocrine cystadenoma from apocrine
 is often alopecic, and ulceration is common in larger
cyst requires the identification of cellular proliferation
canine lesions. The head, neck, and dorsal trunk are the
characterized by multiple layers of lining cells and/or
most frequent locations in dogs. The most common
acinar or papillary aggregates of cells projecting into cyst
anatomic location in cats is the head (Carpenter et al.,
lumens. Large, inflamed, or more proliferative lesions
1987; Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992).
may need to be distinguished from cystadenocarcinoma
Great Pyrenees, Chow Chows, Malamutes, and Old
 of low-grade malignancy. Cystadenocarcinomas 
have
 English Sheepdogs are reported to be predisposed to
larger nuclei, nuclear pleomorphism, and loss of nuclear
sweat gland secretory tumors (Goldschmidt & Shofer,
polarity. Mitotic activity is generally low, but atypical
1992). The average age in dogs is 9 years (Goldschmidt
mitoses may be detected.
& Shofer, 1992); in cats, the average is 11 to 12 years
(Carpenter et al., 1987; Miller et al., 1991; Goldschmidt
& Shofer 1992). There is no known breed predilection
APOCRINE SECRETORY ADENOMA
in cats.
(Synonyms: sweat gland adenoma, epitrichial sweat gland
adenoma)
Histopathology
Simple apocrine secretory adenomas are observed in dogs
and cats; simple apocrine adenomas differentiating
Simple apocrine adenoma (Figure 25.6)
toward the secretory portion of the gland are rare in
Adenomas that differentiate primarily toward the secre-
humans. The complex adenoma subtype in dogs is very
similar to chondroid syringoma in humans, also known
 unencapsulated dermal masses exhibiting acinar tubular,
as ‘mixed tumor of the skin’ (Murphy & Elder, 1991;
 or papillary patterns; combinations of architectural pat-
Elder et al., 1997). This was originally classifed as an
terns may occur within the same tumor. Large masses may
eccrine neoplasm in humans, but may arise from either
extend into superficial subcutaneous fat. The majority of
eccrine or apocrine glands. The proportion of apocrine-
neoplastic epithelial structures are lined by a single layer
origin chondroid syringomas in humans is controversial,
of cuboidal to columnar cells with moderate to abundant,
and the results of numerous immunohistochemical and
eosinophilic cytoplasm. The cytoplasm may also be clear
ultrastructural studies also leave questions as to whether
due to glycogen accumulation. Decapitation secretion is
 the stroma and stromal cells are of epithelial or myoep-
discernible in most lesions, and eosinophilic secretory
ithelial origin (Hassab-El-Naby et al., 1989; Mihara,
material is often present in glandular lumens. Nuclei are
1989; Murphy & Elder, 1991; Tsuji, 1996; Elder et al.,
moderately enlarged and vesicular and have small nucle-
1997; Bates & Baithun, 1998; Nakayama et al., 1998).
oli. Mitotic activity is very low or absent. Nuclear or
The use of newer markers for smooth muscle, such as
mitotic atypia is not observed. Most neoplasms have a
calponin, has yielded convincing evidence for a myoep-
sparse collagenous stroma, and there is variable infltra-
 ithelial component in mixed salivary gland tumors; appli-
tion by plasma cells and macrophages containing light
Keuu siouni paxiu snoaueins oi siaxreu asaul jo uonnn
brown pigment derived from the iron content of apocrine
allow resolution of this issue in sweat gland tumors as
secretion. Secondary ulceration and more intense inflam-
well (Savera et al., 1997).
mation may occur in larger tumors.
Complex (mixed) apocrine adenoma (Figure 25.7)
Clinical features
Some apocrine adenomas have multifocal or diffuse,
Apocrine adenomas arising from the secretory component
myxoid and/or chondroid differentiation. These lesions
of the gland are benign neoplasms that are uncommon in
are analogous to complex mammary adenomas and
Sweat gland tumors
671
Fig. 25.6 Simple secretory apocrine adenoma in a dog. The glan-
Fig. 25.7
Complex secretory apocrine adenoma in a dog. Small
dular structures are lined by a single layer of low cuboidal epithelial
glandular structures are distributed through an abundant, well
cells.
differentiated chondroid stroma.
benign mixed mammary tumors, and it is presumed that
of epithelial cells without obvious lumens may also be
the stroma is a myoepithelial product. The exact nature
present. This small cell pattern is typical for eccrine-origin
of the stromal component in these tumors has never been
chondroid syringomas in humans; however, the few
addressed in veterinary pathology.
examples observed in dogs were not located on the
The epithelial component of complex sweat gland
pawpads and, thus, are more likely apocrine in origin.
adenoma is usually identical to that of simple adenoma.
Simple or complex apocrine sweat gland adenomas on
The stromal component has small spindle and stellate
 the ventrum may need to be differentiated from mammary
cells with pale cytoplasm and bland, ovoid to fusiform
gland adenomas. Mammary adenomas, with the excep-
nuclei. The stromal cells are separated by a pale
tion of neoplasms arising in major mammary ducts, are
basophilic, mucopolysaccharide ground substance, or are
 entirely subcutaneous in location and are usually encap-
entrapped in lacunar spaces within a more deeply
sulated. The epithelial cells of mammary adenomas tend
basophilic chondroid matrix. Infrequently, the mesenchy-
to be smaller than those of apocrine sweat gland adeno-
 mas and rarely display apical blebbing. Mammary lobules
terized by bundles of elongated cells with eosinophilic
and/or ducts can usually be identifed adjacent to
cytoplasm and no surrounding stroma. Unlike benign
mammary neoplasms. Distinction between apocrine
mixed mammary tumors, osseous metaplasia in complex
adenoma and low-grade adenocarcinoma may be prob-
sweat gland adenomas is uncommon.
lematic. Asymmetry, inflrative borders, piling up of
 Rarely, neoplasms are composed primarily of pale
 cells within lumens, nuclear pleomorphism, prominent
chondroid matrix with small, scattered acinar structures
 nucleoli, increased mitotic activity, or atypical mitoses are
lined by small cuboidal epithelial cells. Nests and cords
indicators of malignancy.
672
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
lumped into the “basal cell tumor’ category in veterinary
APOCRINE DUCTULAR ADENOMA
pathology, and they are the only remaining entity classi-
(Synonyms: ductular sweat gland adenoma, basaloid
fed as such in the World Health Organization fascicle
sweat gland adenoma, nodular hidradenoma)
(Goldschmidt et al., 1998). The authors had previously
regarded them as basal cell carcinomas (Walder & Gross,
When basaloid mammary adenoma was reported in the
1992) based on their contiguity with the epidermis, the
veterinary literature in 1984, it became apparent that
overall asymmetrical architecture, variability in size
canine apocrine ductular tumors had a distinctive and
 and shape of the epithelial aggregates, moderate mitotic
consistent morphology (Esplin et al., 1984). However,
activity, frequent melanization, necrosis and cystic
ductular sweat gland adenomas of the skin were not
degeneration, and very limited foci of recognizable
named as specific entities in animals until 1992 (Walder
 adnexal differentiation. However, these tumors have
& Gross, 1992; Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992). Spirade-
convincing indicators of benignity, including a vertical
 noma, reported in dogs in the previous version of the
orientation within the dermis, only focal epidermal
World Health  Organization histologic  classification
contiguity, usually sparse stroma, and a lack of stromal-
(Weiss & Frese, 1974) as the analogue of the ductular
epithelial clefts. Further smalltubular structures sugges-
  n sn s n o 
tive of sudoriferous differentiation have previously been
,  's node ren a
reported as frequent findings in descriptions of feline
variant of *basal cell tumor' described by Weiss and Frese
"basal cell tumors' (Diters & Walsh, 1984; Carpenter
(1974) probably also represents an apocrine ductular
et al., 1987).
adenoma.
 Immunostains for low molecular weight cytokeratins
 The authors recognize two types of apocrine ductular
(CKs), particularly CAM5.2 (CK7/8) and CK13, are rel-
adenomas in dogs and cats, classical ductular adenoma,
 atively specifc markers for glandular epithelia, including
and a recently recognized subtype, the ‘solid-cystic'
sweat glands; they highlight the small tubular structures
variant. This variant is believed by the authors to repre-
of solid-cystic ductular adenomas, but are absent in all
sent the veterinary analogue of nodular hidradenoma in
trichoblastoma variants tested to date (see Chapter 23)
humans. This is generally regarded in humans as an
(Walder & Haines, 1998; Walder 2000; Goldschmidt
et al., 2002). These immunohistochemical studies, in con-
encompasses several ductular tumor types. Poroma per se
 junction with the many histologic similarities to human
is an intraepidermal neoplasm differentiating toward the
nodular hidradenoma, strongly support the transfer of
most distal portion of eccrine or apocrine sweat gland
the last “basal cell tumor' into the sweat gland tumor
duct; its distinctive morphology (see below) is referred to
category.
in the human literature as 'poroid'. Poroid hidradenoma'
is a recently coined term to define human nodular
Clinical features
hidradenomas that have these distinct poroid features; it
 also separates them from the clear cell variant of human
Apocrine ductular adenomas in dogs are uncommon
 nodular hidradenoma (Requena & Sanchez, 1992; Cho et 
benign neoplasms accounting for only 0.3% of skin
al., 2001).
tumors in one large survey (Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992).
Although apocrine versus eccrine origin is virtually
Solid-cystic ductular adenomas (nodular hidradenomas)
impossible to prove by immunohistochemistry, the apoc-
occur occasionally in dogs. The incidence of apocrine duc-
rine origin of some poromas in humans is implied by the
tular adenomas in cats is more diffcult to estimate, as
presence of sebaceous and, rarely, follicular elements; only
many have been included in the former basal cell tumor
apocrine glands have a close embryologic and anatomic
 group or with secretory adenomas. They are common
association with the folliculosebaceous unit (Harvell et
neoplasms in cats, comprising 2% of skin tumors in the
al., 1996; Lee et al., 2000; Kamiya et al., 2001). Variants
survey of Goldschmidt and Shofer (1992), which did not
 of nodular hidradenoma with histologic evidence of apoc-
include the solid-cystic subtype. Basal celtumors" have
rine differentiation are described (Ackerman et al., 1993;
traditionally accounted for an average of 20% of feline
 Elder et al., 1997). Multiple immunohistochemical studies
skin tumors (Carpenter et al., 1987; Diters & Walsh,
have shown nodular hidradenomas to be primitive but
1984; Miller et al., 1991; Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992).
complex neoplasms that have features of the acrosy-
Based on observations from one of the authors (E.J.W.),
ringium, intradermal duct, and secretory coil in varying 
approximately 60% of “basal cell tumors’ in cats repre-
proportions (Murphy & Elder 1991; Demirkesen et al.,
sent solid-cystic apocrine ductular adenomas; the other
1995; Ohnishi & Watanabe, 1997).
40%are
trichoblastomas. Thus, apocrine ductular
Solid-cystic apocrine ductular adenomas (nodular
adenomas actually appear to account for around 14% of
hidradenomas) in cats and dogs have previously been
skin tumors in cats.
Sweat gland tumors
673
Apocrine ductular adenomas in dogs are solitary, cir-
cumscribed, multinodular, deep dermal and subcutaneous
masses that are usually 2cm in diameter or larger. The
solid-cystic adenomas of dogs are intradermal and are
typically 0.5 to 1 cm. The epidermis may be alopecic, but
ulceration is infrequent. Most tumors are truncal in loca-
tion, but limbs and head are also commonly affected.
 Feline apocrine ductular adenomas of both types are
usually solitary, frm nodules 0.2 to 1 cm in size. The neo-
plasms are often alopecic and have a blue to brown
hue. Small foci of ulceration may be present in the solid-
cystic variant. They occur most often on the head and
neck.
The average age of incidence is the same as for secre-
tory apocrine adenomas (see p. 670). Pit Bull Terriers, Old
English Sheepdogs, and English Springer Spaniels are
reported to have a marked predisposition (Goldschmidt
& Shofer 1992). There is no known breed predilection in
cats.
Histopathology
Canine apocrine ductular adenoma (Figure 25.8)
These circumscribed but unencapsulated, multilobular
neoplasms are usually located in the deep dermis and sub-
cutis. Epidermal contiguity is not seen. Each of the lobules
is composed of winding trabeculae and tightly-packed
tubular structures lined by a double layer of cuboidal
cells. There are multiple, patchy foci of squamous meta-
Fig.25.8
8 Canine apocrine ductular adenoma demonstrating double
plasia with formation of irregular keratin lakes but
layers of small cuboidal epithelial cells lining winding tubular struc-
without discrete cystic structures. Infundibular-type kera-
tures. Note keratin lakes at bottom.
tinization occurs via a granular cell layer. The lobules of
tumor tissue are separated by a moderate stroma of
mature collagen. There may be a mild stromal infltrate
tumor types can be large, deep, and have a combination
of plasma cells and histiocytes.
 of mitotically active basaloid cells and larger keratinized
The luminal epithelial cell layer has scant, clear cyto-
cells. The small epithelial cells of trichoblastoma form
plasm and small, hyperchromatic nuclei. The outer cell
anastomosing cords rather than double-layered tubular
layer has moderate, eosinophilic cytoplasm and slightly
structures. The foci of squamous differentiation in duc-
larger, euchromatic nuclei. Apocrine secretory activity is
 tular adenoma produce keratin deposits via a granular cell
not observed. Nucleoli are inconspicuous. Mitotic
layer; neither keratohyalin granules nor keratin lakes are
activity is moderate.
found in trichoblastoma with outer root sheath differen-
 The histologic appearance of this neoplasm is virtually
 tiation. Trichoepithelioma also has a compound basaloid
identical to basaloid mammary gland adenoma, which is
and squamous epithelial population, but tubular struc-
also believed to be of ductal origin. In a ventral location,
tures are absent, and there are true keratin cysts exhibit-
apocrine ductular adenoma would be distinguishable
ing a variety of follicular cornification patterns.
from basaloid mammary adenoma only by the absence of
Distinction between canine ductular apocrine adenoma
identifiable mammary glands. Differentiation of ductular
and some ductular adenocarcinomas can be problematic,
apocrine adenoma from ribbon trichoblastoma is based
largely because of the relatively high mitotic rate of the
upon numerous tubular structures lined by double rows 
benign neoplasm. Adenocarcinomas generally have more
of cells, and irregular deposits of infundibular-type
irregular, infltrative borders and larger nuclei with promi-
keratin in the former. Distinction of ductular apocrine
nent nucleoli. Atypical mitotic fgures, larger foci of squa-
adenomas from trichoblastomas with outer root sheath
 mous metaplasia and zones of necrosis may be present in
differentiation is more problematic, as both of these 
adenocarcinomas.
674
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Feline apocrine ductular adenoma (Figure 25.9)
lumens and cyst cavities often contain pale secretory
These tumors are well-circumscribed, small and often
 product. Melanization of the epithelial cells is rare. The
multilobular. They are generally situated in the deep
proportions of cysts, tubules and solid zones are quite
dermis. The centers of the lobules have irregular cystic
variable; at one end of the spectrum are neoplasms that
structures that are lined by cuboidal epithelial cells in
are similar to apocrine cystadenomas (see p. 668), while
some areas, but appear to represent cystic degeneration in
those with a predominance of solid sheets of cells resem-
others. Epidermal contiguity is uncommon, and ulcera-
 ble solid-cystic ductular adenomas (see below).
 tion is rare. The lobules are separated by a sparse col-
 Feline ductular apocrine adenomas may need to be dif-
lagenous stroma.
ferentiated from other tumors of small adnexal ker-
The tumor is composed partially of solid sheets of
atinocytes. Multiple tubular structures are absent in
small, polygonal keratinocytes that have pale eosinophilic
trichoblastomas. If tubular structures are relatively few in
cytoplasm and ovoid, euchromatic nuclei. Nucleoli are
 comparison to solid zones, the lesion may resemble solid-
small, and mitotic activity is low. Distributed through the
cystic apocrine ductular adenoma, and, in fact, tumors
solid cellular background are multiple, small, often
with overlapping features do occasionally occur. Solid-
branching, tubular structures lined by a distinct double
cystic ductular adenoma typically has few or no tubules,
layer of cuboidal cells indicative of ductal differentiation.
solid lobules with foci of necrosis, racemiform architec-
The cells lining the tubules have minimal, clear cytoplasm
ture with a vertical orientation, and contiguity with the
and small, hyperchromatic nuclei. Nucleoli are incon-
epidermis. They are distinguished from basal cell carci-
spicuous, and mitotic fgures are not observed. Tubular
nomas and apocrine ductular adenocarcinomas by the
absence of mitotic atypia, necrosis, melanin pigment,
broad epidermal contiguity, and stromal invasion.
Solid-cystic apocrine ductular adenoma (nodular
bidradenoma) (Figures 25.10 through 25.14)
Solid-cystic apocrine ductular adenomas are circum-
scribed dermal neoplasms with unilobular multilobular
or racemiform (resembling a bunch of grapes) architec-
ure. The multilobular and racemiform lesions are often
slightly asymmetric, but are vertically oriented within the
dermis. Focal epidermal contiguity is often present and
may be associated with ulceration.
pe m psradsi aq a sii eda r
interconnected by short epithelial trabeculae. The larger
islands of cells often exhibit central necrosis and cystic
degeneration that varies from punctate to extensive. Dys-
trophic mineralization of necrotic debris may occur.
Unilobular lesions may have only a narrow rim of intact
epithelium and were referred to in older literature as
"basal cell cysts' (Stannard & Pulley, 1978).
The stroma of solid-cystic ductular adenoma is typi-
cally sparse and of low cellularity. The collagen may be
hyalinized and often forms a narrow pseudocapsule
around the tumor. Trabeculae of stroma may protrude
into the epithelial lobules, creating a deeply-notched or
scalloped profle around the periphery; this is referred to
as a ‘pseudoinvasive' pattern (Murphy & Elder, 1991).
Stromal inflammation is uncommon, although melano-
phages are often present in pigmented lesions.
The keratinocytes of solid-cystic ductular adenoma
comprise two distinct but overlapping cell populations in
varying proportions, constituting a bimorphic ‘poroid'
Fig. 25.9 Feline apocrine ductular adenoma. Tubular structures
cell population (Requena & Sanchez, 1992). One cell type
lined by a double cuboidal cell layer are distributed through a more
solid background of basaloid epithelial cells. Note margin of central
(poroid) is small, cuboidal and has a basaloid appearance.
cystic structure at left.
The second cell type (cuticular) is somewhat larger and
Sweat gland tumors
675
Fig. 25.11 Solid-cystic apocrine ductular adenoma in a cat. The
Fig. 25.10 Solid-cystic apocrine ductular adenoma in a cat. The
Jargest lobule has severe cystic change.
mass has a circumscribed, vertically-oriented, racemiforrm silhouette.
Note the cystic degeneration in the deeper lobules and focal epider-
mal contiguity.
ductal differentiation (Requena & Sanchez, 1992; Cho
et al., 2001). This morphology closely resembles that
polygonal; cytoplasmic outlines tend to be soft and
of human poroma and ‘poroid’ hidradenomas (see
rounded rather than angular. Spindling of either of two
above).
epithelial cell types may be present to variable extent. The
Melanization is common in solid-cystic ductular ade
smaller poroid cells tend to be concentrated around the
nomas and varies from sparse to moderate, and free
periphery of the islands, but palisading is not a prominent 
 melanin granules may be present in necrotic and/or cystic
feature. The smaller cells also comprise the trabecular
foci. Rarely, small groups of cells with clear cytoplasm are
structures and form scattered, short, double rows with or
present; tumors composed primarily of clear cells, resem
without discernible lumens. At least occasional ductular
 bling classic human clear cell hidradenoma, have not been
structures are present in most lesions, but may be 
 recognized. Small numbers of well-differentiated sebo-
extremely subtle. The larger cuticular cells form solid
cytes are present in occasional tumors, usually just below
sheets in the centers of the islands. Occasionally, they line
 the epidermal connection. As indicated above, small foci
small, round ducts with a delicate, eosinophilic cuticle
 of divergent adnexal differentiation help to confrm apoc-
resembling acrosyringium.
rine origin due to the close proximity within the follicu-
The small basaloid poroid cells have scant, clear cyto-
lar wall of the precursor cells for apocrine and sebaceous
glands.
The larger cuticular cells have smudgy, pale eosinophilic
 Differentiation of solid-cystic ductular adenoma from
cytoplasm with round, euchromatic nuclei. Some of the 
 trichoblastoma and basal cell carcinoma can be difficult;
cuticular cells may contain single intracytoplasmic vac-
 this is emphasized by the inclusion of all three tumor types
uoles with smooth borders consistent with intracellular
in the “basal cell tumor' category for many years.
676
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 25.12 Higher magnification of the solid-cystic apocrine
Fig. 25.13 High magnification of solid-cystic apocrine ductular
ductular adenoma of Fig. 25.11. Many of the epithelial cells in this
adenoma in a cat. The lobules comprise small to medium-sized,
ex ample are spindled.
cuboidal to polygonal cells; the larger cells have pale eosinophilic
cytoplasm with scattered intracellular ductules {arrows).
Solid-cystic ductular adenomas are distinguished from tri
choblastomas by the presence of ductular structures
features do occasionally occur. The later typically has
and/or intracellular ductular differentiation, frequent
numerous tubules, fluid-flled cysts rather than foci of
focal epidermal contiguity, extensive necrosis and/or
necrosis, a deeper dermal location, and absence of conti-
cystic degeneration, and a predominance of large nodular
guity with the epidermis.
epithelial aggregates. Follicular papillary mesenchymal
bodies, as seen in trichoblastomas (see Chapter 23), are
Immunohistochemistry
not found in ductular adenomas. Solid-cystic ductular
adenomas can usually be differentiated from basal cell
Sweat glands in dogs and cats are strongly decorated by
carcinomas by their localized epidermal connection, ver-
markers for simple epithelial CKs, such as CAM5.2
tical orientation, sparse stroma of low cellularity, and
(CK7/8) and CK13. These markers are also positive in all
absence of stromal-epidermal retraction clefts. Most vari-
 well-differentiated sweat gland tumors and are negative
ants of trichoblastomas and basal cell carcinomas are
 in trichoblastomas studied thus far (Walder & Haines,
composed primarily of small, prismatic keratinocytes
1998; Walder, 2000; Goldschmidt et al., 2002). For duc-
with frequent nuclear palisading; solid-cystic ductular
tular adenomas, particularly the solid-cystic variant,
adenomas show a poroid morphology characterized by a
CAM5.2 or CK13 immunostaining marks the tubular
bimorphic population of cells with infrequent palisading.
structures that may be subtle or indiscernible, allowing
 If tubular structures are relatively numerous, solid-cystic
differentiation of these sweat gland tumors from other
ductular adenoma may resemble regular feline apocrine
neoplasms of small adnexal keratinocytes. CAM5.2 also
ductular adenoma, and, in fact, tumors with overlapping
stains follicular inner root sheath and may be positive in
Sweat gland tumors
677
25.14 Higher magnification
10
solid-cystic apocrine ductular
adenoma in a cat. Short tubular struc-
tures lined by small cuboidal cells are
highlighted with an immunostain for
CK13 (chromogen new fuchsin).
small areas in follicular tumors that have inner root
sistency, and complex tumors may be frmer than simple
sheath differentiation (Walder & Haines, 1998; Gold-
types due to the presence of cartilage or bone. The
schmidt et al., 2002); however, these foci also have tri-
overlying skin is frequently alopecic, and ulceration
chohyalin granules, which do not occur in sweat gland
 may be present. Poorly-differentiated carcinomas may
neoplasms. CK5/6 diffusely stains all trichoblastoma vari-
 appear as frm, poorly-circumscribed, diffusely-ulcerated
ants and the small number of solid basal cell carcinomas
masses.
evaluated to date, but demonstrates only a patchy stain-
The majority of apocrine malignancies in general in
ing pattern in ductular sweat gland neoplasms (Walder,
dogs occur on the legs; the most frequent sites in cats are
2000).
head, legs, and abdomen (Carpenter et al., 1987; Miller
et al., 1991; Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992). The lower lip
 and chin appear to be preferential sites for apocrine ade-
APOCRINE SECRETORY
nocarcinomas on the head in cats.
ADENOCARCINOMA
 The average age for most apocrine tumor subtypes is
(Synonyms: sweat gland adenocarcinoma, epitrichial
10 years in dogs and 11 to 13 years in cats (Carpenter et
al., 1987; Miller et al., 1991; Goldschmidt & Shofer,
adenocarcinoma)
1992). Breed predispositions are
reported
in
Coonhounds, Norwegian Elkhounds, and Siamese cats 
Clinical features
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992).
Malignant neoplasms of apocrine sweat glands in general
Numeric data on recurrence and metastasis of apocrine
occur uncommonly in dogs and cats. Apocrine adenocar-
adenocarcinomas are sparse. One small retrospective
cinomas, which presumably included ductular carcinomas
study found 8% local recurrence and no metastases in
(p. 681) represented 2.2% of canine skin tumors in one
dogs, and no recurrence or metastasis in cats, although
survey (Bevier & Goldschmidt, 1981) but only 0.6% in
 clinical follow-up was poor or incomplete (Kalaher et al.,
another (Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992); the basis for this
1990). In contrast, Goldschmidt and Shofer (1992) report
substantial discrepancy is unclear. The incidence in cats
lymph node and pulmonary metastasis in *many' apocrine
ranges from 2.5% to 3.6% (Carpenter et al., 1987; Miller
adenocarcinomas. It is the authors opinion that biologic
et al., 1991; Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992).
behavior of the common apocrine adenocarcinomas is
Apocrine adenocarcinomas are usually solitary, cir-
very similar to that of their mammary counterparts; the
pue shop ui raiaurep un uo l oi S'o sasseu paqiiosuns
metastatic rate probably ranges from low to high and is
0.2 to 3 cm in cats (Carpenter et al., 1987). The clinical
 closely tied to histologic subtype and grade of malignancy.
 n  d   d
 Highly aggressive sweat gland malignancies appear to be
subtype. Cystadenocarcinomas may have a fluctuant con-
infrequent.
849
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 25.15 Apocrine cystadenocarcinoma in a dog. Delicate papil-
Fig. 25.16
Higher magnification of apocrine cystadenocarcinoma
lary structures project into the large cyst lurmens, and several more
in a dog. The epithelial cells lining this papillary structure have
cellular turmor lobules are present at the base of the mass.
pleomorphic nuclei, prominent nucleoli, and loss of polarity.
Histopathology
apocrine cystadenocarcinoma would be distinguishable
Apocrine cystadenocarcinoma (Figures 25.15 and
 from mammary cystadenocarcinoma only by the absence
25.16)
of identifiable mammary glands.
The cystic subtype of apocrine adenocarcinoma is a dis-
crete, multilocular dermal neoplasm resembling cystade-
Simple apocrine adenocarcinoma (Figures 25.17
noma (see p. 668), but cytologic features of malignancy
and 25.18)
are present. There is patchy piling up of cells around cyst
This is the most frequent variant of sweat gland adeno-
lumens with formation of small tufts, cribriform struc-
 carcinoma and is architecturally similar to apocrine secre-
tures, or papillary projections. Nuclei are larger and more
tory adenomas with acinar and/or papillary patterns (see
pleomorphic than in adenomas, nucleoli may be promi-
p. 670). Most lesions are well-differentiated and comprise
nent, and mitotic fgures are present in small numbers.
neoplastic glandular structures lined by one or more
 There may be loss of nuclear polarity. Secretory activity
layers of plump, cuboidal to columnar cells that have
and apical blebbing may be absent. Invasion beyond the
moderately enlarged, vesicular nuclei, and small nucleoli.
basement membrane is rare.
Decapitation secretion and luminal accumulation of
Differential diagnoses  for apocrine cystadenocar-
secretory material are common. Mitotic activity is low to
cinoma are apocrine cystadenoma and mammary
moderate, and atypical mitoses may be identifed. There
cystadenocarcinoma. In contrast to cystadenomas, cys-
 is a sparse to moderate collagenous stroma of low cellu-
tadenocarcinomas have larger nuclei, nuclear pleomor-
larity. Secondary ulceration and inflammation may be
phism, and loss of nuclear polarity. In a ventral location,
 present in larger lesions. Lymphatic invasion is rare.
Sweat gland tumors
679
Fig. 25.18 Apocrine adenocarcinoma in a dog. Irregular glandular
Fig.25.17
Well-differentiated apocrine ad
structures are distributed through an abundant collagenous stroma
Epithelial cells have enlarged, vesicular nuclei and small mucleoli.
Note stromal invasion by clusters of tumor cells.
Poorly-differentiated variants of apocrine adenocarci-
differentiated adenocarcinoma  may be  problematic.
noma are infltrative neoplasms with ill-defined borders.
 Asymmetry, infltrative borders, piling up of cells within
Ulceration is frequent. They are composed of large
lumens, nuclear pleomorphism, prominent nucleoli,
cuboidal to polygonal cells arranged in glandular and
increased mitotic activity, or atypical mitoses are indica
solid aggregates in varying proportions. Small areas of
tors of malignancy.
squamous metaplasia may occur. Zones of caseation
The differential diagnoses of poorly differentiated
necrosis are frequently observed. The neoplastic cells gen-
erally have amphophilic cytoplasm, large vesicular nuclei,
as well as other poorly differentiated carcinomas, which
prominent nucleoli, and moderate to high mitotic
may be primary or metastatic in the skin. Histologic dis-
activity. Mitotic atypia is frequent. Poorly-differentiated
 tinction is often not possible. Careful search for residual
apocrine adenocarcinomas have a moderate to abundant
mammary lobules or ducts is required for neoplasms
stroma of reactive collagenous tissue. Stromal invasion by
located on the ventrum. Hemorrhage and/or abundant
cords and clusters of neoplastic epithelial cells is common;
fbroplasia and neovascularization extending peripheral
tumor cells may be detected within lymphatic vessels in
to the mass are suggestive of metastatic disease. Distinc-
stroma and adjacent dermis.
tion from acantholytic (pseudoglandular) squamous cell
Differential diagnoses for well-differentiated apocrine
carcinoma (see Chapter 22) can be difficult in apocrine
adenocarcinoma are apocrine adenoma and mammary
adenocarcinomas with squamous metaplasia. Multifocal
adenocarcinoma. Mammary lobules and/or ducts can
epidermal contiguity and active acantholysis, character-
usually be identified adjacent to mammary neoplasms.
ized by individualized keratinized cells and elongated
Distinction between  apocrine  adenoma and  well-
intercellular bridges within pseudolumens, support a
680
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 25.19 Complex apocrine adenocarcinoma in a dog. Irregular
Fig. 25.20 Apocrine carcinosarcoma in a dog. Papillary structures
acinar structures containing secretory material and necrotic debris
lined by pleomorphic epithelial cells blend into a large island of
are lined by one or more layers of epithelial cells. Note islands of
 plump, spindle-shaped myoepithelial cells Enlarged, hyperchromatic
myxoid myoepithelial tissue at bottom.
nuclei are present in both glandular and myoepithelial components.
diagnosis of squamous cell carcinoma. Immunohisto-
basophilic mucinous stroma or are entrapped in lacunar
chemistry can defnitively distinguish between adenocar-
spaces within a more deeply basophilic chondroid matrix.
cinoma and squamous cell carcinoma, but distinction of
Occasionally, the myoepithelial component is diffuse and
apocrine from other glandular origin may not be feasible
predominates over the epithelial aggregates. In rare
with these technigues (see below).
instances, when the mesenchymal cells demonstrate
nuclear atypia and mitotic activity, a designation of apoc-
Complex (mixed) apocrine adenocarcinoma
rine carcinosarcoma or malignant mixed sweat gland
(Figures 25.19 and 25.20)
tumor is appropriate. Small numbers of poorly-
 The majority of complex apocrine adenocarcinomas have
differentiated apocrine adenocarcinomas show multifocal
an epithelial component resembling well-differentiated
myoepithelial proliferation with myxoid, chondroid or
simple adenocarcinoma (see above). The myoepithelial
osseous features.
portion of the tumor usually has a benign histologic
 Differential diagnoses of complex apocrine adenocarci-
appearance with myxoid or chondroid features, as in
nomas are essentially limited to complex mammary ade-
complex sweat gland adenomas (see p. 670) and complex
nocarcinomas and carcinosarcomas. Thus, distinction is
and mixed mammary neoplasms. Osseous metaplasia is
based on anatomic location and presence or absence of
rare. The mesenchymal component is usually character-
identifiable residual mammary tissue. Other glands, such
ized by multiple nodules of small spindle and stellate cells
as salivary and thyroid, can give rise to neoplasms with
with pale cytoplasm and bland, ovoid to fusiform nuclei.
mixed epithelial and mesenchymal components, but
The mesenchymal cells are separated by a lightly-
metastasis to skin has not been reported in dogs or cats.
Sweat gland tumors
681
Immunohistochemistry
nated follicular stem cell carcinoma’ ( Mikaelian & Wong.
2003). Although the neoplasm may show some divergent
For lesions of questionable glandular origin, application of
adnexal differentiation, a phenomenon that occurs in a
cytokeratins (CKs) that mark simple epithelia (particularly
wide variety of tumors of the folliculosebaceous-apocrine
CAM5.2 (CK7/8) and CK13) usually allows differentiation
unit, the authors believe that the morphologic and
of apocrine carcinomas from purely follicular sebaceous,
immunohistochemical appearance confrm a predomi-
or epidermal carcinomas, which are generally negative
nance of sweat gland features (see below).
with these stains. CAM5.2 also stains follicular inner root
sheath and may be positive in small areas of neoplasms
that have inner root sheath differentiation (Walder &
Clinical features
Haines, 1998; Goldschmidt et al., 2002); however, these
Malignant neoplasms of apocrine sweat glands in general
foci also have trichohyalin granules, which do not occur in
occur uncommonly in dogs and cats. Apocrine carcino-
sweat gland neoplasms. Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA),
which has long been known to stain human apocrine and
mas of ductular origin were not named as specific entities
in animals until 1992 (Walder & Gross, 1992), making
eccrine sweat glands and many of their neoplasms, is rarely
application of numeric data somewhat diffcult. Apocrine
[epe ue aq Aeu inq Kaonod Areuaa un pasn
useful marker. A pilot study found positive CEA staining
adenocarcinomas, which presumably included ductular
carcinomas, represented 2.2% of canine skin tumors in
       
one survey (Bevier & Goldschmidt, 1981) but only 0.6%
normal glands and two of two benign tumors were nega-
in another (Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992); the basis for
tive (Ferrer et al., 1990). The authors have been unsuc-
this substantial discrepancy is unclear. The incidence in
cessful in utilizing CEA immunostaining. Differentiation
cats ranges from 2.5% to 3.6% (Carpenter et al., 1987;
between sweat gland and mammary gland origin remains
Miller et al., 1991; Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992). Solid-
problematic; no markers have been found to be consis-
cystic apocrine ductular carcinoma appears to occur
tently beneficial in making this distinction.
exclusively in cats, and is rare; true incidence is obscured
by its likely previous inclusion with basal cell carcinomas.
Clear cell apocrine ductular carcinoma in dogs is rare.
APOCRINE DUCTULAR CARCINOMA
Apocrine ductular carcinomas are usually solitary
(Synonyms: ductular sweat gland adenocarcinoma, malig-
masses 2 to 10 cm in diameter in dogs and 0.5 to 3 cm in
nant nodular hidradenoma, hidradenocarcinoma)
cats. The clinical appearance may vary depending on the
histologic subtype. The overlying skin is frequently
This section includes two new entities, which parallel the
alopecic, and ulceration may be present. Poorly-
expanded nomenclature in the benign ductular sweat
differentiated carcinomas may appear as frm, poorly-
-os s au "(a d ass) Ar no pe
circumscribed, diffusely-ulcerated masses.
apocrine ductular carcinoma, is a newly-recognized
The majority of apocrine malignancies in general are
subtype in cats. This entity was most likely previously
reported to occur on the legs in dogs and on the head,
 included in the basal cell carcinoma category in veterinary
legs, and abdomen in cats (Carpenter et al., 1987; Miller
pathology. It is similar to human malignant nodular
et al., 1991; Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992). However, sep-
hidradenoma (nodular hidradenocarcinoma) but without
arate data for ductular carcinomas are not provided.
classical clear cell morphology (Murphy & Elder 1991).
Solid-cystic ductular carcinomas in cats occur most often
Clear cell apocrine ductular carcinoma is the second new
 on the extremities. No site predilections were apparent for
and controversial entity that is recognized in dogs. The
clear cell apocrine ductular carcinoma in dogs (Mikaelian
neoplasm has many features in common with human
& Wong, 2003).
malignant nodular hidradenoma (nodular hidradeno-
 The average age for most apocrine tumor subtypes is
carcinoma, clear cell hidradenocarcinoma)  with
10 years in dogs and 11 to 13 years in cats (Carpenter et
a
predorminance of large clear cells (Hernandez-Pérez &
al., 1987; Miller et al., 1991; Goldschmidt & Shofer,
Cestoni-Parducci, 1985; Murphy & Elder, 1991; Touma et 
1992).
Breed
predispositions
are
reported
in
al., 1993). Neoplasms with similar morphology have often
Coonhounds, Norwegian Elkhounds, and Siamese cats
been  misinterpreted  as sebaceous
carcinomas
in
(Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992). Dogs with clear cell apoc-
veterinary reference texts, including
Veterinary
yDer-
rine ductular carcinoma had a mean age of 7 years; there
matopathology (Walder & Gross, 1992). Four cases of
was no breed predilection (Mikaelian & Wong, 2003).
 clear cell hidradenocarcinoma in dogs were reported many
 Numeric data on recurrence and metastasis of apocrine
years ago, although only two of these cases were convinc-
malignancies in general are sparse. It is the authors'
ingly of sweat gland origin (Jabara & Finnie, 1978). The
opinion that highly aggressive sweat gland malignancies
entity has recently been rediscovered and has been desig-
are infrequent. Ductular carcinomas in dogs and solid-
682
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 25.21
Apocrine ductular carcinoma in a dog. The irregular
Fig. 25.22 Apocrine ductular carcinoma in a dog. An area
tubular structures are frequently lined by a distinct double layer of
resermbling ductular adenoma at the top merges into a poorly.
plump cuboidal cells.
differentiated neoplasm with extensive squamous rmetaplasia.
cystic ductular carcinomas in cats are the most likely to
hyperplasia, characterized by small tufts of polygonal
have lymphatic invasion or regional lymph node involve-
cells, may be present within tubular lumens. Nuclear to
 ment at time of initial biopsy. The recent retrospective
cytoplasmic ratios are increased. Chromatin patterns and
study of clear cell apocrine ductular carcinomas had a
nucleolar features are variable. Cells with large cytoplas-
13% rate of metastasis (Mikaelian & Wong, 2003)
mic mucin vacuoles are sometimes present. Mitotic activ-
ity is moderate to high, and atypical mitoses can usually
be detected. Tumor cells within stromal lymphatic vessels
Histopathology
may be seen.
 Multiple foci of squamous epithelium, sometimes with 
Apocrine ductular carcinoma (Figures 25.21 through
complete keratinization via a granular layer, occur in
25.25)
some canine apocrine ductular carcinomas and probably
 This subtype resembles a ductular adenoma (see p. 672)
represent differentiation toward acrosyringium (terminal
but is usually larger and less circumscribed than its benign
sweat gland duct). The squamous foci may be randomly
counterpart. Ulceration and necrosis are frequent fea-
scattered through the tumor in a pattern resembling
tures, and tumor margins are infltrative. There is a sparse
canine apocrine ductular adenoma. The squamous epi-
to moderate collagenous stroma that is often highly cel-
thelium may have atypical nuclei, mitotic fgures, and
lular. The neoplastic tubules of apocrine ductular carci-
disordered cornification, resembling well differentiated
noma are generally lined by a double layer of cuboidal
squamous cell carcinoma.
epithelial cells, as in ductular adenoma. However, the
Other lesions, particularly on the elbow in dogs, show
epithelial cells are larger and more pleomorphic. Papillary
 prominent squamous metaplasia limited to the superficial
Sweat gland tumors
683
Fig. 25.23 Apocrine ductular carci-
noma on the elbow of a dog. Low
magnification
reveals a poorly-
circumscribed mass  with a fissured
surface caused by neoplastic ducts
merging into and disrupting follicular
infundibula.
Fig. 25.24 Higher magnification of Fig. 25.23. Small tubuloacinar
Fig. 25.25 Higher magnification of Fig. 25.23. Superficial neoplas-
structures are undergoing squarmous rmetaplasia superficially where
tic ducts often have ragged lumens due to mild papillary hyperpla-
they are contiguous with hair follicles. Note inflamed desmoplastic
sia. Small neoplastic tubuloacinar structures at bottom right blend
stroma.
with hyperplastic sweat glands at bottom left.
684
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 25.26 Solid-cystic apocrine duc-
tular carcinoma in a cat. A large cystic
lobule resembling solid-cystic ductular
adenoma on the right is contiguous
with an invasive neoplasm resembling
basal cellcarcinoma.
aspects of the tumor in association with multifocal follic
ular infundibular contiguity. Papillary hyperplasia of the
ductular epithelium in conjunction with squamous meta-
plasia may produce a ragged appearance, resembling
acantholysis, to the lining of the duct lumen. It is often
difficult to distinguish these neoplastic apocrine ducts
 from surrounding hyperplastic folicular infundibula and
epidermis. Rarely, small clusters of undifferentiated cells
are found within follicular  infundibular epithelium,
resembling extramammary Paget's disease in humans
(Kirkham, 1997); this phenomenon is also described in
ceruminous gland neoplasms (Goldschmidt & Shofer,
1992). The deeper aspects of the elbow carcinomas com-
prise tubuloacinar structures lined by one or more layers
 of cuboidal epithelium; these suggest that this particular
tumor type may represent both ductular and secretory
portions of the sweat gland apparatus.
Differential diagnoses include benign apocrine ductular
adenoma, basaloid mammary adenocarcinomas  (for
ventral neoplasms), and acantholytic (pseudoglandular)
squamous cell carcinoma. The double layer of cells lining
most of the neoplastic structures is the salient feature of
apocrine ductular origin. In contrast with adenomas, duc-
tular adenocarcinomas generally have more irregular,
infltrative borders and larger nuclei with prominent
nucleoli. Atypical mitotic figures, larger foci of squamous
metaplasia with cytologic atypia, and zones of necrosis
are not expected in benign ductular adenomas. The epi-
dermal contiguitry of squamous cell carcinoma can be dif-
fcult to distinguish from acrosyringial differentiation
Fig. 25.27 Higher magnification of Fig. 25.26. The bimorphic cell
and/or follicular contiguity in apocrine ductular carci-
 population of solid-cystic ductular adenoma is still discernible, and
noma; active acantholysis, characterized by individualized
several intracellular ductules are present (arrow).
Sweat gland tumors
685
Fig. 25.28 Solid-cystic apocrine
ductular carcinoma in a cat. CK13
immunostain reveals ductular differen
tiation in a neoplasm with solid archi-
tecture (chromogen new fuchsin).
 rr   n 
plasm; a diffuse bimorphic poroid cell population or clus-
within pseudolumens, and necrosis and drop-out of ker-
ters of large clear cells, as seen in solid-cystic apocrine
atinized cells from the centers of epithelial aggregates,
 ductular adenoma (see p. 672), are not observed. Small
support a diagnosis of squamous cell carcinoma.
numbers of cells have single round vacuoles consistent
Immunostaining may be required for definitive diagnosis
with intracytoplasmic lumens. Nuclei are large, ovoid and
(see below).
variably hyperchromatic. Nucleoli are generally small,
and mitotic activity is moderate to high. The stroma
Solid-cystic apocrine ductular carcinoma
usually shows moderate cellularity, and clusters of tumor
(Figures 25.26 through 25.30)
cells are frequently present within dilated lymphatic
This variant usually appears as an ulcerated, endophytic,
vessels at the margins of the mass.
asymmetric dermal mass that tends to be horizontally-ori-
Solid-cystic apocrine ductular carcinoma is distin-
ented. Larger lesions may extend into the subcutis. Solid-
guished from its benign counterpart by its obvious asym-
cystic carcinoma comprises multiple lobules of large,
 metry, horizontal orientation, and angular rather than
basaloid cells that may be focally or multifocally con-
 rounded profles in the majority of epithelial aggregates.
tiguous with the epidermis. The lobules are often large
 A typical bimorphic poroid cell population is absent, and
and have angular or jagged profles. Caseation necrosis
 mitotic activity is higher in carcinomas. Solid-cystic apoc-
may be extensive, but large cystic spaces are uncommon.
rine ductular carcinoma must also be differentiated from
Well-defined tubular structures are usually absent, but 
 basal cell carcinoma, which is a less aggressive malig-
scattered acinar or cribriform patterns may occur. Rarely,
 nancy. This is problematic not only because of their cyto-
one may see areas of typical solid-cystic ductular
logic similarities, but also because the histologic criteria
adenoma adjacent to a carcinoma, suggesting malignant
 of the former have not yet been well defned. Features that
transformation. Squamous metaplasia is a common
appear to be more supportive of basal cell carcinoma are
feature in the human analogue (malignant nodular
peripheral palisading and stromal-epithelial retraction
hidradenoma) and may be extensive (Park et al., 2000);
clefts. If the lesion is deeply invasive and has lymphatic
too few cases have been identified to determine if this also
infltration, solid-cystic apocrine ductular carcinoma
occurs in the feline neoplasms.
should be more strongly considered, and careful search
 The neoplastic cells have scant to moderate, pale cyto-
for extra- or intracellular luminal structures is warranted.
686
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 25.29 Solid-cystic apocrine ductular carcinoma in a dog. A
large, multilobular mass of pale cells has architecture resembling
Fig. 25.30 Higher magnification of solid-cystic apocrine ductular
carcinoma of Fig. 25.29. Tumor tissue pushes into and partially
solid-cystic apocrine ductular adenoma. Note necrosis and cystic
replaces follicular infundibular epitheliurm at the level of insertion of
degeneration in the centers of many lobules and several foci of
epidermal/follicular contiguity
normal apocrine duct.
Immunohistochemical staining is required for defnitive
tubules lined by one to three layers of cells can be identi-
diagnosis (see below).
fed in the majority of cases. Occasional apical blebbing
along tubular lumens is reported (Mikaelian & Wong.
Clear cell apocrine ductular carcinoma (clear cell
2003).
nodular hidradenocarcinoma) (Figures 25.31
The neoplastic cells have moderate to abundant, pale
through 25.34)
eosinophilic or clear cytoplasm. The cytoplasm frequently
This is usually a sessile, expansile dermal mass that may
appears feathery, reticulated, or fnely-vacuolated. Peri-
extend into the subcutis. The lesions are often ulcerated
 odic acid-Schiff (PAS) staining is positive in variable
and occasionally pedunculated. Focal contiguity with epi-
numbers of the cells. Diastase-sensitive material predom-
 dermis or follicular infundibulum is often present; rarely,
inates; this is indicative of glycogen. Small amounts of
multifocal contiguity is observed. Clear cell apocrine duc-
diastase-resistant PAS positive material are also described;
tular carcinomas comprise large, polygonal cells in
this is consistent with mucin (Jabara & Finnie, 1978;
lobules and nests. Zones of cystic degeneration may be
Mikaelian & Wong, 2003). Nuclei are moderately to
present within large lobules. Sparse to moderate melanin
markedly enlarged and vesicular with single, central
nucleoli. Most tumors contain multinucleated cells with
mately half of the cases of clear cell apocrine ductular
up to ten nuclei (Mikaelian & Wong, 2003). Some cases
carcinoma. Spindling of the epithelial cells and peri-
have marked nuclear pleomorphism with intranuclear
pheral palisading may be present in limited areas. Subtle
cytoplasmic invaginations. Mitotic activity ranges from
Sweat gland tumors
687
Fig. 25.31 Clear cell apocrine ductular carcinoma in a dog. The
Fig. 25.32 Higher magnification of Fig. 25.31. As in Fig. 25.30,
tumor cormprises large lobules and broad anastomosing trabeculae
tumor tissue pushes into follicular infundibular epithelium.
of large cells with clear cytoplasm. Note small areas of cystic change
in the centers of some of the aggregates (lower left). The darker
stroma is infiltrated by numerous lymphocytes and plasma cells.
balloon cell melanoma. Melanin pigment and spindle
cells can be present or absent in both of these tumor
types, and are therefore not useful distinguishing pro-
absent to moderately high (Jabara & Finnie, 1978;
perties. Balloon cell melanomas also have a positive
Mikaelian & Wong, 2003).
PAS reaction (Nowak et al., 1998). Clear cell apocrine
The tumors have a sparse to moderate fbrous stroma
ductular carcinoma often has architectural features that
that occasionally contains nests of diminutive mesenchy-
are similar to benign solid-cystic ductular adenoma,
mal cells consistent with follicular papillary bodies (see
namely, focal epidermal or follicular infundibular conti-
trichoblastoma, Chapter 23); it is undetermined if these
guity and subtle tubular structures; these characteristics
indicate neoplastic follicular differentiation or represent
aid in confrming sweat gland origin and are not seen in
pre-existing papillae of follicles that have been diffusely
balloon cell melanoma. The detection of follicular papil-
infltrated by tumor cells. Large tubular structures inter-
lary mesenchymal bodies may be helpful in ruling out a
preted as remnants of hair follicles progressively replaced
diagnosis of balloon cell melanoma. Immunohistochem-
by apocrine ductular epithelium have been reported in
istry is ultimately required for defnitive diagnosis (see
human clear cell hidradenomas (Gianotti & Alessi, 1997).
below).
Chondroid metaplasia of the stroma, possibly indicating
Clear cell basal cell carcinoma can be differentiated
 a myoepithelial component, is also reported (Mikaelian
from clear cell apocrine ductular carcinoma by its multi-
& Wong, 2003).
focal epidermal contiguity, horizontal orientation, infl-
Correct diagnosis of clear cell apocrine ductular carci-
 trative margins, stromal-epithelial retraction clefts, and
noma is often problematic due to its rarity and unusual
smaller cell size. Although a malignant variant of bulb
morphology.  The  primary  differential  diagnosis  is 
type tricholemmoma has not been reported, theoretically
889
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
e aq pinos ieqn adan roun yo-ugoskg raoue si s
differential diagnosis for clear cell apocrine ductular car-
cinoma. Distinguishing features of tricholemmal carci
noma potentially would be nests and cords of cells
bordered by exaggerated vitreous membranes, more
abundant stroma, and absence of tubular structures.
does not have a pure large cell variant and, therefore,
should not be confused with clear cell apocrine ductular
carcinoma.
Immunohistochemistry
For lesions of questionable glandular origin, application
of specific cytokeratins (CKs) that mark simple epithelia
(CAM5.2 (CK7/8), CK13) usually allows differentiation
from purely follicular sebaceous, or epidermal carcino-
mas, which are generally negative with these stains.
CAM5.2 also stains follicular inner root sheath and may
be positive in small areas in malignant trichoepitheliomas
and malignant pilomatricomas that have inner root
sheath differentiation (Walder & Haines, 1998; Gold-
schmidt et al., 2002); however these foci also have tri-
chohyalin granules, which do not occur in sweat gland
neoplasms. All clear cell apocrine ductular carcinomas
stained by the authors with CAM5.2 exhibited strong
diffuse or multifocal positiviry (6/6); this provides strong
support for sweat gland origin. Although pan-cytokeratin 
immunostaining was positive, monoclonal cytokeratin
Fig. 25.33 Higher magnification of clear cell apocrine ductular
panels were not performed in the previous report on 'fol-
carcinoma in a dog. Many tumor cells have abundant, markedly
licular stem cell carcinomas' (Mikaelian & Wong, 2003).
vacuolated, foamy cytoplasm and pleomorphic, eccentric nuclei.
Until reliable markers specific for hair follicle epithelium
Fig. 25.34 Clear cell apocrine ductu-
lar carcinoma in a dog. CAM5.2
immunostain decorates the majority of
cells in these tumors, as seen in this
example (chromogen aminoethylcar-
bazole [AEC]).
Sweat gland tumors
689
become available in veterinary pathology, a follicular
Clinical features
component in clear cell apocrine ductular carcinoma
Malignant neoplasms of eccrine sweat glands are
cannot be verified or excluded. Trichoblastomas in
humans have recently been demonstrated to be tumors of
extremely rare in dogs and cats. Eccrine carcinomas have
 been observed occasionally by the authors in the pawpads
follicular stem cells based on immunohistochemical stain-
of cats and dogs, and they are described in the current
ing with CKs 15, 17, and 19; they are negative for CK8
and CK13. This CK profle is shared by most human
World Health Organization fascicle (Goldschmidt et al.,
basal cell carcinomas, suggesting that they also have the 
1998). One case is reported in a dog (Kusters et al., 1999)
and another is described in a cat (Carpenter et al., 1987).
immunophenotype of follicular stem cell carcinomas (see
Chapters 22 and 23), unlike apocrine ductular tumors.
There are no other convincing reports of neoplasms
Complete monoclonal keratin profles have not been
originating from the pawpad.
 Eccrine carcinoma presents as a solitary, poorly-defined
established for canine or feline basal cell carcinoma, but
swelling of pawpad and may also involve the digit or
cases evaluated to date are negative for CK13 (Walder,
distal leg. Ulceration is present, and lysis of adjacent
2000).
phalangeal or metatarsal bone may be observed radio-
The mesenchymal intermediate flament vimentin, the
graphically. Breed and age predilections have not been
melanoma-associated
antigen
(Melan-A),
and
the
determined.
 melanoma antigen recognized by T lymphocytes (MART-
Eccrine carcinomas are aggressive neoplasms that
1) can be identified immunohistochemically in signifcant
recur locally or exhibit rapid metastasis to regional
quantities in some sweat gland tumors, particularly clear
 cell apocrine ductular carcinoma (Mikaelian & Wong.
lymph nodes and subcutaneous tissues of the affected
2003), and therefore cannot be employed as single
leg. The single reported canine case also had metastasis
markers for ruling out balloon cell melanoma. However,
to the ipsilateral internal iliac lymph node (Kusters et al.,
1999).
S100a was reported to decorate only scattered dendritic
cells in clear cell apocrine ductular carcinoma (Mikaelian
& Wong, 2003), in contrast to its staining of tumor cells
Histopathology (Figures 25.35 through 25.37)
in balloon cell melanomas as well as common types of
melanoma. This discrepancy suggests that the Melan-A
Eccrine carcinoma is a poorly-circumscribed, infltrative
positivity in clear cell apocrine ductular carcinomas may
neoplasm involving the pawpad fat, overlying dermis and,
represent staining of subcellular melanocyte structures
 in some cases, associated bone. Bone invasion by tumor
phagocytized by epithelial cells. This possibility is sup-
tissue is accompanied by marked desmoplasia (prolifera-
ported by recent evidence that the Melan-A/MART-1
tive fbroblastic reaction) and secondary lysis. Ulceration
antigen is concentrated in the Golgi region, melanosomes,
with secondary inflammation is usually found. Most
premelanosomes, and cytoplasmic vesicles in melanocytes
lesions are adenocarcinomas characterized by irregular
(De Maziere et al., 2002).
tubular, acinar cribriform, or papillary structures in
variable combinations, lined by one or more layers
of cuboidal to polygonal epithelial cells. Small foci of
squamous metaplasia may be present, but orderly
ECCRINE CARCINOMA
keratinization with keratin pearl formation is not seen.
(Synonym: atrichial sweat gland carcinoma)
The glandular lumens often contain small numbers of
necrotic cells; secretory product is occasionally observed.
There are more than ffteen categories of non-neoplastic,
 Stromal collagen is moderate to abundant and variably
benign, and malignant eccrine tumors in humans. Despite
cellular.
the fact that their anatomic distribution in dogs and cats
The neoplastic cells have pale amphophilic 
or
is limited to the pawpads, it is still surprising that non-
eosinophilic cytoplasm and large, hyperchromatic nuclei.
neoplastic and benign tumors of eccrine sweat glands are
Nucleoli are usually prominent, and mitotic activity is
virtually nonexistent in these species. Eccrine adenomas
high. Atypical mitotic fgures are often present. Aggre-
are described but not illustrated in the current World
gates of tumor cells may be visible within lymphatic
Health Organization fascicle (Goldschmidt et al., 1998).
vessels in the stroma, adjacent pawpad fat, or dermis. The
A single case of eccrine adenoma in a dog is illustrated
canine case was unique in that myoepithelial proliferation
but not described in a previous edition of Small Animal
with chondroid and osseous metaplasia was present
Dermatology (Muller et al., 1989). There are no other
(Kusters et al., 1999); it would thus be classified as a
known reports. The authors have not observed examples
complex eccrine carcinoma. Rarely, a neoplasm composed
 of eccrine adenoma.
of solid lobules of polygonal cells with pale cytoplasm
690
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 25.36 Eccrine carcinoma in the pawpad of a dog. This unusual
Irregular glandular structures infiltrate the fat of the pawpad. Note
solid, clear cell variant has very similar architecture to clear cell
residual eccrine glands at lower right {arrow)
apocrine ductular carcinoma (Fig. 25.31).
and minimal tubular differentiation is observed; this is
for establishing contiguity with eccrine sweat glands
 similar to solid-cystic apocrine ductular carcinoma (see
and excluding connection to nailbed epithelium or
p. 681).
apocrine glands in haired skin at the pawpad margins. If
Differential diagnoses for eccrine carcinoma are apoc-
bone involvement is absent or minimal, primary nailbed
rine adenocarcinoma, the acantholytic variant of nailbed
neoplasia and  metastatic pulmonary neoplasia are
squamous cell carcinoma (digital lesions only), acan-
unlikely. Thoracic radiographs in addition to pedal
tholytic squamous cell carcinoma arising from pawpad
radiographs should always be recommended for cats.
epidermis, and metastatic pulmonary adenocarcinoma
Careful search for ciliated epithelium is also warranted if
(cats only). For the rare solid eccrine carcinoma, the only
metastatic pulmonary adenocarcinoma is being consid-
differential diagnosis would be solid-cystic apocrine
ered. It is not known if periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) reac-
ductular carcinoma. Distinction between eccrine and
tion or other stains for mucin, which are positive
apocrine tumors is often not possible either by light
in pulmonary adenocarcinoma, would be negative in
microscopy or immunohistochemistry. If decapitation-
eccrine carcinoma in animals; one human study found
type secretion can be identified in tubular structures,
mucin in two-thirds of a variety of benign eccrine and
this supports an apocrine origin. If foci of divergent
apocrine neoplasms (Fitzgibbon & Googe, 1996). Active
differentiation with sebaceous or follicular features are
acantholysis, characterized by individualized, fully-
found, this is also an indicator of an apocrine neoplasm,
keratinized cells and elongated intercellular bridges
based on the close anatomic and embryologic relation-
within pseudotubules, supports a diagnosis of squamous
ships among the three components of the folliculoseba-
cell carcinoma. However, distinction from squamous
ceous-apocrine unit. Adequate tissue sectioning is critical
metaplasia occurring in poorly-differentiated adenocarci-
Sweat gland tumors
691
REFERENCES
Introduction
Aumuller, G., Wilhelm, B. & Seitz, J. (1999) Apocrine secretion
-fact or artifact? Anat Anz 181, 437-46.
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, FS. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
Dog and Cat, p. 96. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Jenkinson, D.M. (1989) Sweat and sebaceous glands and their
function in domestic animals. In: Advances in Veterinary Der-
matology, Vol. 1 (eds C. von Tscharner & R.E.W. Halliwell),
 pp. 229-51. Balliere Tindall, London.
Meyer, W. & Gorgen, S. (1986) Development of hair coat
and skin glands in fetal porcine development. J Anat 144,
201-20.
Murphy, G.F (1997) Histology of the skin. In: Lever's
Histopathology of the Skin, Sth edn (eds D. Elder, R.
Elenitsas, C. Jaworsky et al.), pp. 24-5. Lipincott-Raven,
Philadelphia.
Panteleyev, A.A., Jahoda, C.A.B. & Christiano, A.M. (2001)
Hair follicle predetermination. J Cell Sci 114, 3419-31.
Saga, K. (2002) Structure and function of human sweat glands
studied with histochemistry and cytochemistry. Prog His-
tochem Cytochem 37,323-86.
Scrivener, Y. & Cribier, B. (2002) [Morphology of sweat glands.]
Morphologie 8, 5-17 (in French).
Wilhelm, B., Meinhardt, A., Renneberg, H. et al. (1999) Serum
albumin as a potential carrier for the apocrine secretion of
proteins in the rat coagulating gland. Eur J Cell Biol 78,
256-64.
Apocrine Cyst
Fig. 25.37 Higher magnification of eccrine carcinoma of Fig.
Carpenter, J.L., Andrew, L.K. & Holzworth, J (1987) Tumors
25.36. The tumor cells have abundant glycogenated cytoplasm and
and tumor-like lesions. In: Diseases of the Cat (ed. J.
are arranged in solid lobules.
Holzworth), p. 414. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, F.S. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
Dog and Cat, pp. 2, 3, 278-82. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
nomas may be diffcult; immunohistochemistry may be
Canine Apocrine Cystomatosis
beneficial.
Pulley, L.T. & Stannard, A.A. (1990) Tumors of the skin
and soft tissues. In: Tumors in Domestic Animals, 3rd edn
Immunohistochemistry
(ed. J.E. Moulton), p. 66. University of California Press,
Berkeley.
As with adenocarcinomas of apocrine origin, positive
staining with specific simple epithelial cytokeratins (CKs),
Feline Ceruminous Cystomatosis
such as CAM5.2 (CK7/8) or CK13, can distinguish
Carpenter, J.L., Andrew, L.K. & Holzworth, J. (1987) Tumors
 eccrine carcinoma from squamous cell carcinoma. Unfor-
and tumor-like lesions. In: Diseases of the Cat (ed. J.
tunately, there is no reliable immunohistochemical tech-
Holzworth), p. 566. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
nique for separating eccrine carcinoma from apocrine
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, FS. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
adenocarcinoma at present. Immunohistochemical differ-
Dog and Cat, pp. 3, 280-3. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
entiation of metastatic pulmonary adenocarcinoma from
Apocrine Cystadenoma
eccrine carcinoma has not been investigated in animals.
Alessi, J, Gianoti, R. & Coggi, A. (1997) Multiple apocrine
In humans, the majority of pulmonary adenocarcinomas
hidrocystomas of the eyelids. Br J Dermatol 137, 642-5.
are reported to be negative for CKs 5/6, 14 and 18 (Moch
Chaitman, J., van der Woerdt, A. & Bartick, T.E. (1999) Multi-
et al., 1993; Lyda & Weiss, 2000; Carella et al., 2001;
aa u seosasopy auode uquasan ss paa ad
Chu & Weiss, 2002), while these markers are positive in
Persian cats and one Himalayan cat. Vet Pathol 36, 474-6.
many other epithelial neoplasms, including most sweat
de Eusebio, E., Lopez-Bran, E., Rojo, S. et al. (1996) Multiple
gland tumors.
hidrocystomas. Dermatology 193, 152-3.
692
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Farifia, M.C., Pique, E., Olivares, M. et al. (1995) Multiple
Apocrine Ductular Adenoma
hidrocystoma of the face: three cases. Clin Exp Dermatol 20,
Ackerman, A.B., Brigs, PL. & Bravo, F. (1993) Differential
323-7.
Diagnosis in Dermatopathology Ill, pp. 106-9. Lea &
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, F.S. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
Febiger, Philadelphia.
Dog and Cat, pp. 2, 80-102. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Carpenter, J.L., Andrew, L.K. & Holzworth, J. (1987) Tumors
Marignac, G., Barlerin, L., Meunier, V. et al. (2002) Apocrine
and tumor-like lesions. In: Diseases of the Cat (ed. J.
cystadenomatosis in three related Persian cats. In: Proceedings
Holzworth), pp. 408-16. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
of the ISVD Meeting, Nice, p. 30.
Cho, S., Kim, S., Shin, J.H. et al. (2001) Poroid hidradenoma.
Murphy, G.F. & Elder, D.E. (1991) Atlas of Tumor Pathology:
Int J Dermatol 40, 62-4.
Non-melanocytic Tumors of the Skin, pp. 109-10. Armed
Demirkesen, C., Hoede, N. & Moll, R. (1995) Epithelial
Forces Institute of Pathology, Washington DC.
markers and differentiation in adnexal neoplasms of the skin:
Vilafranca, M., Domingo, M., Roura, X. et al. (1994) General-
an immunohistochemical study including individual cytoker-
ized apocrine cystomatosis in an Old English Sheepdog. Vet
atins. J Cutan Pathol 22, 518-35.
Dermatol 5, 83-7.
Diters, R.W. & Walsh, K.M. (1984) Feline basal cell tumors: a
review of 124 cases. Vet Pathol 21, 51-6.
Apocrine Secretory Adenoma
Elder, D., Elenitsas, R. & Ragsdale, B.D. (1997) Tumors of the
Bates, A.W. & Baithun, S.1. (1998) Atypical mixed tumor of the
epidermal appendages. In: Lever's Histopathology of the Skin,
skin: histologic, immunohistochemical, and ultrastructural
8th edn (eds D. Elder, R. Elenitsas, C. Jaworsky et al.), pp.
features in three cases and a review of the criteria for malig-
786-9. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia.
nancy. Am J Dermatopathol 20, 35-40.
Esplin, D.G., Bernstein, N.M. & McLaughlin, H. (1984)
Carpenter, J.L., Andrew, L.K. & Holzworth, J. (1987) Tumors
Basaloid adenoma of the mammary gland in two dogs. J Am
and tumor-like lesions. In: Diseases of the Cat (ed. J.
Vet Med Assoc 184, 855-7.
Holzworth), p. 416. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, F.S. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
Eckert, F, Betke, M., Schmoeckel, C. et al. (1992) Myoepithe-
Dog and Cat, pp. 2, 85-9. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
lial differentiation in benign sweat gland tumors. Demon-
Goldschmidt, M.H., Dunstan, R.W., Stannard, A.A. et al.
strated by a monoclonal antibody to alpha-smooth muscle
(1998)HistologicalClassification(
of
Epitbelialand
actin. J Cutan Pathol 19,294-301.
Metanocytic Tumors of the Skin of Domestic Animals, 2nd
Elder, D., Elenitsas, R. & Ragsdale, B.D. (1997) Tumors of the
series. Vol. 3, p. 18. Armed Forces Institute of Pathology,
epidermal appendages. In: Lever's Histopatbology of the Skin,
Washington DC.
 Sth edn (eds D. Elder, R. Elenitsas, C. Jaworsky et al.), pp.
Goldschmidt, M.H., Schneider, A.C. & Ferracone, J.D. (2002)
789-91. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia.
Use of monoclonal antibodies as an adjunct to the diagnosis
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, FS. (1992) Skin Tumors of
of epithelial skin tumors of the dog and cat using the
the Dog and Cat, pp. 2, 80-102. Pergamon Press,
EnVision Plus(R) system for the immunohistochemical detec-
Oxford.
tion of tissue antigens. In: Advances in Veterinary Dermatol-
Hassab-El-Naby, H.M., Tam, S., White, W. et al. (1989) Mixed
ogy, Vol. 4 (eds K.L. Thoday, C.s. Foil & R. Bond), pp. 142-9.
tumors of the skin: a histologic and immunohistochemical
Blackwell Science, Oxford.
study. Am J Dermatopathol 11, 413-28.
Harvell, J.D., Kerschmann, R.L. & LeBoit, PE. (1996) Eccrine
Mihara, M. (1989) Chondroid syringoma associated with
 or apocrine poroma? Six poromas with divergent adnexal dif-
hidrocystoma-like changes. Possible differentiation 
into
ferentiation. Am J Dermatopathol 18, 1-9.
eccrine gland. A histologic, immunohistochemical and elec-
Kamiya, H., Oyama, Z. & Kitajima, Y. (2001) ^Apocrine'
tron microscopic study. J Cutan Pathol 16, 281-6.
poroma: review of the literature and case report. J Cutan
Miller, M.A., Nelson, S.L., Turk, J.R. et al. (1991) Cutaneous
Pathol 28, 101-4.
neoplasia in 340 cats. Vet Pathol 28, 389-95.
Lee, N.H., Lee, S.H. & Ahn, S.K. (2000) Apocrine poroma with
Murphy, G.F. & Elder, D.E. (1991) Atlas of Tumor Pathology:
sebaceous differentiation. Am J Dermatopathol 22, 261-3.
Non-melanocytic Tumors of the Skin, pp. 74-8. Armed Forces
Miller, M.A., Nelson, S.L., Turk, J.R. et al. (1991) Cutaneous
Institute of Pathology, Washington DC.
neoplasia in 340 cats. Vet Patbot 28, 389-95.
Nakayama, H., Miyazaki, E., Hiroi, M. et al. (1998) So-called
Murphy, G.F. & Elder, D.E. (1991) Atlas of Tumor Pathology:
neoplastic myoepithelial cells in chondroid syringomas/mixed
Non-melanocytic Tumors of the Skin, pp. 83-6. Armed Forces
tumors of the skin: their subtypes and immunohistochemical
Institute of Pathology, Washington DC.
analysis. Pathot Int 48, 245-53.
Ohnishi, T. & Watanabe, S. (1997) Histogenesis of clear cell
Savera, A.T., Gown, A.M. & Zarbo, R.J. (1997) Immunolocal-
hidradenoma: immunohistochemical study of keratin expres-
ization of three novel smooth muscle-specific proteins in
sion. J Cutan Pathol 24, 30-6.
salivary gland pleomorphic adenoma: assessment of the
Requenia, L. & Sanchez, M. (1992) Poroid hidradenoma: a
morphogenetic role of myoepithelium. Mod Pathol 10, 1093-
light microscopic and immunohistochemical study. Cutis 50,
100.
43-6.
Tsuji, T. (1996) Chondroid syringoma: an immunohistochemi-
Stannard, A.A. & Pulley, L.T. (1978) Tumors of the skin and
cal study using antibodies to Ca 15-3, KA-93, Ca 19-9, CD44
soft tissues. In: Tumors in Domestic Animals, 2nd edn (ed. J.E.
and BM-1. J Cutan Pathol 23, 530-6.
Moulton), p. 50. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Sweat gland tumors
693
Walder, E.J. (2000) Neoplasms of small adnexal keratinocytes:
(2002) The melanocytic protein Melan-A/MART-1 has a
new developments, new questions. Proceedings of the S1st
ACVP Meeting, Amelia Island, pp. 165-9.
proteins. Traffc 3, 678-93.
Walder, E.J. & Gross, TL. (1992) Epidermal tumours; Sweat
Gianotti, R. & Alessi, E. (1997) Clear cell hidradenoma associ-
gland tumours. In: Veterinary Dermatopathology: A Macro
ated with the folliculo-sebaceous-apocrine unit. Histologic
scopic and Microscopic Evaluation of Canine and Feline Skin
study of five cases. Am J Dermatopathol 19, 351-7.
Disease (T.L. Gross, PJ. Ihrke & E.J. Walder), pp. 343-9,
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, FS. (1992) Skin Tumors of
389-95. Mosby, St Louis.
the Dog and Cat, pp. 2, 89-95, 99-102. Pergamon Press,
Walder, E.J. & Haines, D. (1998) Immunohistochemical stain-
Oxford.
ing patterns in canine and feline basal cell carcinomas, tri-
Goldschmidt, M.H., Schneider, A.C. & Ferracone, J.D. (2002)
choblastomas and trichoepitheliomas. In: Advances
Use of monoclonal antibodies as an adjunct to the diagnosis
Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 3 (eds K.W.
Kwochka, T.
 of epithelial skin tumors of the dog and cat using the EnVi-
Willemse & C. von Tscharner), pp. 384-5. Butterworth-
sion Plus(R) system for the immunohistochemical detection of
Heinemann, Oxford.
tissue antigens. In: Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol.
Weiss, E. & Frese, K. (1974) Tumours of the skin. Bull World
4 (eds K.L. Thoday, C.S. Foil & R. Bond), pp. 142-9. Black-
Heaith Org 50, 79-100.
well Science, Oxford.
Hernandez-Pérez, E. & Cestoni-Parducci, R. (1985) Nodular
Apocrine Secretory Adenocarcinoma
hidradenoma and hidradenocarcinoma. A 10-year review. J
Bevier, D.F. & Goldschmidt, M.H. (1981) Skin tumors in the
Am Acad Dermatol 12, 15-20.
dog. Part I: Epithelial tumors and tumor-like
lesions.
Jabara, A.G. & Finnie, J.W. (1978) Four cases of clear-cell
Compend Contin Ed 3, 389-98.
hidradenocarcinoma in the dog. J Comp Pathol 88, 525-32.
Carpenter, J.L., Andrew, L.K. & Holzworth, J. (1987) Tumors
Kirkham, N. (1997) Tumors and cysts of the epidermis. In:
and tumor-like lesions. In: Diseases of the Cat (ed. J.
Lever's Histopathology of the Skin, 8th edn (eds D. Elder, R.
Holzworth), pp. 408-16. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
 Elenitsas, C. Jaworsky et al.), pp. 736-7. Lippincott-Raven,
Ferrer, L., Rabanal, R.M., Fondevila, D. et al. (1990) Immuno-
Philadelphia.
cytochemical demonstration of intermediate filament proteins,
Mikaelian, I. & Wong, V. (2003) Follicular stem cell carcinoma:
s-100 protein and CEA in apocrine sweat glands and apocrine
histological, immunohistochemical, ultrastructural and clini-
gland derived lesions of the dog. Zentralbt Veterinarmed A 37,
cal characterization in 30 dogs. Vet Pathol 40, 433-44.
569-76.
Miller, M.A., Nelson, S.L., Turk, J.R. et al. (1991) Cutaneous
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, FS. (1992) Skin Tumors of
neoplasia in 340 cats. Vet Pathol 28, 389-95.
the Dog and Cat, p. 2, 89-95. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Murphy, G.F. & Elder, D.E. (1991) Atlas of Tumor Pathology:
Goldschmidt, M.H., Schneider, A.C. & Ferracone, J.D. (2002)
Non-melanocytic Tumors of the Skin, pp. 96-9. Armed Forces
Use of monoclonal antibodies as an adjunct to the diagnosis
Institute of Pathology, Washington DC.
of epithelial skin tumors of the dog and cat using the EnVi-
Nowak, M.A., Fatteh, S.M. & Campbell, T.E. (1998) Glycogen-
sion Plus(R) system for the immunohistochemical detection of
rich malignant melanomas and glycogen-rich balloon cell
tissue antigens. In: Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol.
malignant melanomas: frequency and pattern of PAS positiv-
4 (eds K.L. Thoday, C.S. Foil & R. Bond), pp. 142-9. Black-
ity in primary and metastatic melanomas. Arch Pathol Lab
well Science, Oxford.
Med 122, 353-60.
Kalaher, K.M., Anderson, W.1. & Scott, D.W. (1990) Neoplasms
Park, H.J., Kim, Y.C. & Cinn, Y.W. (2000) Nodular hidradeno-
of the apocrine sweat glands in 44 dogs and 10 cats. Vet
carcinoma with prominent squamous differentiation: case
Record 127,400-3.
report and immunohistochemical study. J Cutan Pathol 27,
Miller, M.A., Nelson, S.L., Turk, J.R. et al. (1991) Cutaneous
423-7.
neoplasia in 340 cats. Vet Pathol 28, 389-95.
Touma, D., Laporte, M., Goossens, A. et al. (1993) Malignant
Walder, E.J. & Haines, D. (1998) Immunohistochemical stain-
clear cell hidradenoma. Dermatology 186, 284-6.
ing paterns in canine and feline basal cell carcinomas, tri-
Walder, E.J. (2000) Neoplasms of small adnexal keratinocytes:
choblastomas and trichoepitheliomas. In: Advances
new developments, new questions. In: Proceedings of the S1st
Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 3 (eds K.W. Kwochka, T.
ACVP Meeting, Amelia Island, pp. 165-9.
Willemse & C. von Tscharner), pp. 384-5. Butterworth-
Walder, EJ. & Gross, T.L. (1992) Sebaceous tumours; Sweat
Heinemann, Oxford.
gland tumors. In: Veterinary Dermatopathology: A Macro-
scopicand Microscopic Evaluation of Canine and Feline Skin
Apocrine Ductular Carcinoma
Disease (T.L. Gross, PJ. Ihrke & EJ. Walder), p. 380-81,
Bevier, D.F. & Goldschmidt, M.H. (1981) Skin tumors in the
392-6. Mosby, St Louis.
dog. Part I: Epithelial tumors and tumor-like
elesions.
Walder, EJ. & Haines, D. (1998) Immunohistochemical stain-
Compend Contin Ed 3, 389-98.
ing patterns in canine and feline basal cell carcinomas, tri-
Carpenter, J.L., Andrew, L.K. & Holzworth, J. (1987) Tumors
choblastomas and trichoepitheliomas. In: Advances
in
and tumor-like lesions. In: Diseases of the Cat (ed. J. Holz-
Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 3 (eds K.W. Kwochka, T.
worth), pp. 408-16. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Willemse & C. von
Tscharner), pp. 384-5. Butterworth-
De Maziere, A.M., Muehlethaler, K., van Donselaar, E. et al.
Heinemann, Oxford.
694
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
Eccrine Carcinoma
p. 32. Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, Washington
Carella, R., Deleonardi, G., D'Errico, A. et al. (2001) Immuno-
DC.
histochemical panels for differentiating epithelial malignant
Kusters, A.H., Peperkamp, K.H. & Hazewinkel, H.A. (1999)
mesothelioma from lung adenocarcinoma: a study with logis-
Atrichial sweat gland adenocarcinoma in the dog. Vet
tic regression analysis. Am J Surg Pathol 25, 43-50.
Dermatol 10, 51-4.
Carpenter, J.L., Andrew, L.K. & Holzworth, J. (1987) Tumors
Lyda, M.H. & Weiss, L.M. (2000) Immunoreactivity for epithe-
and tumor-like lesions. In: Diseases of the Cat (ed. J. Holz-
lial and neuroendocrine antibodies are useful in the differen-
worth), p. 416. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
tial diagnosis of lung carcinomas. Hum Pathol 31, 980-7.
Chu, P.G. & Weiss, L.M. (2002) Expression of cytokeratin 5/6
Moch, H., Oberholzer, M., Dalquen, P. et al. (1993) Diagnostic
in epithelial neoplasms: an immunohistochemical study of 509
 tools for differentiating between pleural mesothelioma and
cases. Mod Pathol 15,6-10.
lung adenocarcinoma in paraffin embedded tissue. Part I:
Fitzgibbon, J.F & Googe, PB. (1996) Mucinous differentiation
Immunohistochemical findings. Virchous Arch A Pathot Anat
in adnexal sweat gland tumors. J Cutan Pathol 23, 259-63.
Histopathol 423, 19-27.
Goldschmidt, M.H., Dunstan, R.W., Stannard, A.A. et al. (1998)
Muller, G.M., Kirk, R.W. & Scott, D.W. (1989) Snall Animal
Histological Classification of Epitbelial and Melanocytic
Dermatology, 2nd edn, p. 873. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Tumors of the Skin of Domestic Animals, 2nd series, Vol. 3,
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 26
Nailbed epithelial tumors
The Latin word unguis is defined in all versions of
NAILBED EPITHELLAL INCLUSION CYST
Webster's dictionaries as a *nail, claw, talon, or hoof of a
fnger, toe, or other appendage'. Additionally, the frst
Nailbed cysts are most likely a result of trauma leading
definition of the word claw is “the sharp hooked nail of a
to embedment of portions of cuticular epidermis or
mammal, bird or other animal. The third definition in
 germinative nailbed epithelium in subjacent connective
Collins English Dictionary for the word nail is 'the horny
tissue. Thus, the term *epithelial inclusion cyst' is appro-
plate covering part of the dorsal surface of the fngers
priate. A congenital malformation of ungual or periun-
or toes'; the fourth is “the claw of a mammal, bird, or
 gual epithelium is also a possible pathogenesis. Subungual
reptile'. Roget's Thesaurus includes claws, talons, ungues,
epidermoid cysts are reported rarely in the human
nails, fngernails, chelae, and pincers as synonyms in the
literature, although this may not reflect their actual inci-
category of prehensile organs. Based on the foregoing, the
dence. Many but not all cases are associated with previ-
authors have chosen to regard nail and claw as synony-
ous trauma (Yung & Estes, 1980; Fanti & Tosti, 1989;
mous. The authors prefer the nomenclature 'nailbed’ over
Saez de Ocariz et al., 2001).
the human term 'subungual because, due to species dif-
ferences in anatomy, lesions in dogs and cats typically
Clinical features
start proximal or caudal to the relatively cylindrical,
horizontally-oriented nail, rather than beneath a flat
 Epithelial cysts occur infrequently in the nailbed of dogs
nailplate.
and cats. The primary presenting sign is a single swollen
 Primary nailbed (subungual) tumors of all types are
digit. The nail may be cracked or irregular. Previous
uncommon in dogs and rare in cats. Relative incidence of
onychectomy sites and dewclaws are affected most often.
the different tumor types is difficult to estimate, as epithe-
Radiographically, there is a circumscribed zone of partial
lial lesions other than squamous cell carcinoma are not
to total bone loss in the third phalanx with little periosteal
usually described in this anatomic location in the veteri-
response.
nary literature. Non-neoplastic lesions, benign tumors,
 The cysts are generally less than 0.5 cm but can be as
and malignant tumors of the nailbed have many clinical
large as 2cm in diameter. Size is diffcult to assess accu-
features in common because of the restrictive nature of
rately until midsagittal section of the digit is made in
the anatomy of distal digits and nails. Any expansile mass
 preparation for histologic processing. The cysts contain
at this site can result in lameness, digital enlargement,
semifluid, caseous or dry, granular material that is often
replacement or lysis of the third phalanx, and in many
pigmented. There is no known age or breed predilection.
cases, disruption of normal nail growth.
 Although epithelial inclusion cysts are non-neoplastic
Because of the similarity in clinical appearance of
lesions, neoplastic transformation may occur in rare
benign and malignant tumors, as well as the diffculty in
instances. The authors have observed a single case of squa-
 obtaining adequate biopsy material by soft tissue surgical
mous cell carcinoma arising from a nailbed epithelial inclu-
techniques, amputational biopsy of one or more pha-
sion cyst in a dog. A similar phenomenon occurs rarely in
langes is the most accurate diagnostic technique for
follicular cysts in humans and dogs (see Chapter 23).
nailbed masses. This procedure is also curative in many
cases. Parasagittal soft tissue sections and midsagittal,
Histopathology (Figure 26.1)
decalcifed sections are required in almost all cases for
complete evaluation of the gross architecture and histo-
Nailbed inclusion cysts have a similar histologic appear-
morphology of the lesions.
 ance to follicular cysts of infundibular origin (see Chapter
695
696
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
NAILBED INVERTED
SQUAMOUS PAPILLOMA
(Synonym: subungual inverted squamous papilloma)
Nailbed inverted squamous papilloma is a benign neo-
plasm of dogs arising from the germinative epithelium of
 the nail. This lesion appears to be analogous to inverted
papilloma arising in haired skin (see Chapter 22). The
etiology of the nailbed variant of papilloma is unknown,
but it is likely that it also is virally-induced. Special prepa-
ration techniques required for nail biopsies, i.e. decalcif-
cation or dekeratinization, seriously limit the efficacy of
immunohistochemical staining for papillomavirus anti-
gens. Ultrastructural studies or testing by polymerase
may provide further evidence for a viral cause.
Clinical features
Nailbed inverted papilloma may be rare. Incidence data
are not published. It is possible that this lesion was pre-
viously presumed to be a low-grade variant of nailbed
squamous cell carcinoma. The frequency ratio of in-
verted papillomas to nailbed squamous cell carcinomas is
approximately 1:4 based on incidence data from one of
the authors (E.J.W.).
Nailbed inverted squamous papilloma presents as a
single swollen digit, usually with a thickened, abnormally
Fig. 26.1 Nailbed epithelial inclusion cyst in a dog. Squamous
soft nail. The increase in diameter of the nail may be dra-
epithelial-lined cyst filled with lammellar keratin is at top, phalangeal
matic, and longitudinal ridges are often visible. The nail
bone is at bottom.
may be broken or absent. Secondary ulceration sometimes
is present. Radiographs usually show moderate to marked
 destruction of the third phalanx; periosteal proliferation
23). The cyst is lined by a thick wall of architecturally
 of the second phalanx also may be observed.
normal squamous epithelium that keratinizes through a
 Midsagittal section of the toe reveals a well-delineated,
sparse granular cell layer. The cyst lumen contains lami-
cup-shaped mass filled with dense keratin, which usually
nated keratin; occasionally, the keratin is densely-packed
measures less than 1 cm in diameter. In some cases, the
and translucent, resembling normal ungual keratin. The
entire nailbed is diffusely expanded and replaced by the
epithelium and cyst contents are often melanized in
papilloma. There is no known age or breed predisposi-
animals with dark haircoats and nails. The surrounding
tion. Distal digital amputation is curative.
connective tissue often has mild infltration by lympho-
cytes and plasma cells. There may be degeneration of the
Histopathology (Figures 26.2 and 26.3)
cyst wall accompanied by a granulomatous or pyogranu-
lomatous inflammatory response to released keratin.
The nailbed inverted squamous papilloma is a well-
There is pressure-induced lysis and replacement of
circumscribed, cup-shaped mass filled with compact
 01 uoodoid un ishs aupuedxa aun Aq xueleud pui al
keratin. Much of the keratin retains the translucent
its size. Periosteal fbrosis and periosteal bone prolifera-
appearance of normal ungual keratin. The wall of the cup
tion may be observed in association with more severe
is a thick layer of squamous epithelial cells that form del-
inflammation.
icate conical or papillary projections extending cen-
Diagnosis of nailbed inclusion cyst is straight-
ripetally into the keratin core. The epithelial papillae are
forward. There are no known differential diagnoses
frequently sectioned tangentially and appear as ovoid or
for a mature squamous epithelial cyst in this anatomic
circular structures entrapped in compact keratin. The
location.
 papillae have narrow cores of bland connective tissue. In
Nailbed epithelial tumors
697
Fig. 26.2 Nailbed inverted squa-
mous papilloma in a dog. Conical
structures project into the central
compact keratin core. Note well-
circumscribed margin of tumor at
lower right.
lesions in which the nailbed is diffusely replaced by pro-
liferative epithelium, the conical papillae have a more par-
allel orientation to one another and the columns of soft
keratin produced by the tumor papillae project into and
partially replace the hard keratin of the nail.
The majority of epithelial cells have moderate, pale
pink, glassy cytoplasm. Keratinization proceeds in an
orderly pattern through a sparse granular cell layer.
Nuclei are small and  vesicular with inconspicuous
nucleoli. Occasional epithelial cells may exhibit cytoplas-
mic vacuolation resembling koilocytosis, which is a
l sd    r  
Chapter 22). Nuclear inclusions observed in cutaneous
viral papillomas are not found (see Chapter 22). Mitotic
activity is low, and mitotic fgures are limited to the basal
cell layer at the periphery of the mass.
The third phalanx exhibits pressure-induced lysis and
replacement in proportion to the size of the neoplasm.
Periosteal fbrosis, periosteal bone proliferation, and
secondary inflammation may be observed.
Distinction between nailbed inverted squamous papil-
loma and nailbed keratoacanthoma may be required.
Keratoacanthoma does not possess the central conical
epithelial projections of the inverted papilloma. Kerato-
acanthoma has islands, sheets, and peripheral trabeculae
of epithelial cells, in contrast to the uniform wall of cells
 characterizing the inverted squamous papilloma. Promi-
 nent apoptosis can be seen in keratoacanthoma but not
in nailbed papilloma. Differentiation between inverted
Fig. 26.3  Higher magnification of nailbed inverted squamous papil-
squamous papilloma and squamous cell carcinoma of the
loma of Fig. 26.2. Note glassy cytoplasm, sparse granular celayer,
nailbed may be required, but diagnosis is usually straight-
and slight cytoplasmic vacuolation.
forward. Inverted squamous papilloma has smooth
698
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
margins with no invasive tendencies. Nuclei are uniform,
 in diameter. There is no apparent breed or sex predilec-
and mitotic fgures are infrequent. There is no nuclear or
tion. Affected animals are adults. Digital amputation is
mitotic atypia, as observed in squamous cell carcinoma.
curative.
NAILBED KERATOACANTHOMA
Histopathology (Figures 26.4 through 26.6)
(Synonym: subungual keratoacanthoma)
Nailbed KAs are symmetrical, circumscribed, but unen-
capsulated masses with a cup-shaped, tubular, or inverted
Nailbed keratoacanthoma (KA) is a benign neoplasm of
ane siaproq nou au uonengyuon padeus-iauury
dogs that arises from the nailbed epithelium. This neo-
irregular or scalloped. The mass has a central core of
plasm appears to be identical to human subungual KA. It
keratin that may open onto the skin surface directly
is not analogous to canine infundibular keratinizing acan-
ventral or adjacent to the nail. The epithelial wall of
thoma (see Chapter 23), which has previously been
the neoplasm is contiguous with the nailbed epithelium.
referred to as keratoacanthoma in the veterinary litera-
The wall is composed of large squamous epithelial cells
ture. Human cutaneous KA is a fairly common, rapidly-
arranged in sheets, islands, and broad trabeculae. There
evolving crateriform nodule with a central keratin plug
is orderly keratinization that proceeds centripetally and
that usually occurs in sun-exposed skin (Murphy & Elder,
without a granular cell layer, resulting in a central core of
1991). The development and spontaneous regression of
 amorphous keratin. Many tumors also have large lakes of
the lesion take place in weeks to months (Murphy &
parakeratotic cells without nuclear atypia admixed with
Elder, 1991). In contrast to common cutaneous KA in
the amorphous keratin in the central zone.
humans, the rare subungual variant in humans does not
 ns (iel Xenese) uooai snosuuods oiapun
& Ackerman, 1980; Keeney et al., 1988; Lovett et al.,
1995).
It is currently highly controversial whether human cuta-
neous KA is a benign entity that may undergo malignant
transformation, or a biologically distinct variant of
low-grade squamous cell carcinoma; many cytologic,
immunophenotypic and molecular parameters have been
investigated in this regard (Binder et al., 1998; Cribier
et al., 1999; Sanchez Yus et al., 2000; Melendez et al.
2003). Despite the fact that the dilemma remains unre-
solved, none of the studies has dealt with subungual KA,
nor has any suggestion been made that the subungual
lesions have malignant potential.
Clinical features
Nailbed KAs are rare in dogs. Incidence data are not
published. Nailbed KA in dogs may be misdiagnosed as
well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma, resulting
in underestimation of occurrence. The frequency ratio
of nailbed KA to nailbed squamous cell carcinoma is
approximately 1:4 based on incidence data from one
author (E.J.W.).
Nailbed KA presents as a single, often severely swollen
digit. Focal ulceration may be present. Affected digits may
have deformed or broken nails. Almost all cases have
radiographic evidence of lysis of the third phalanx. Lysis
of the second phalanx and periosteal bone proliferation
are observed less commonly.
Midsagittal section of the toe reveals a circumscribed,
Fig. 26.4 Nailbed keratoacanthoma in a dog featuring broad sheets
but unencapsulated mass with an irregular central zone
and trabeculae of pale, glassy keratinocytes. Note circummscribed but
of caseous keratin. Lesions are generally less than 1.5 cm
irregular margin of the tumor at bottom.
Nailbed epithelial tumors
699
The majority of neoplastic epithelial cells have abun-
dant, pink cytoplasm with a ground glass appearance.
This is a manifestation of high glycogen content, which
can be confrmed with positive periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)
staining. There are small to moderate numbers of
apoptotic  keratinocytes 
characterized by rounded,
brightly eosinophilic cytoplasm, and pyknotic nuclei.
Occasional KAs are composed predominantly of these
apoptotic cells; the significance of this degenerative alter-
ation is unknown. Most nuclei are moderately enlarged
 and vesicular with small nucleoli. Small numbers of atyp-
ical epithelial cells with amphophilic cytoplasm, enlarged
nuclei, and prominent nuclei are present at the periphery
of most tumors. Mitotic activity is low and is also con-
fned to this proliferating peripheral zone.
The third phalanx exhibits pressure lysis in proportion
to the size of the expansile neoplastic mass. Tumor tissue
 does not invade into the interstitium of the bone. Large
KAs may cause complete pressure destruction of the third
phalanx, but tumor tissue does not cross the interpha-
langeal joint space. Periosteal fbrosis and bone prolifera-
tion are often present. Secondary osteomyelitis may be
observed. The connective tissue surrounding the mass has
a moderate to marked infltrate of plasma cells and neu-
 trophils. Chronic proliferative and inflammatory changes
may be present in the synovial tissue of the interpha-
langeal joint, particularly in larger tumors.
Differentiation
between
nailbed
KA
1andwell-
differentiated squamous cell carcinoma is often problem-
Fig. 26.5 Nailbed keratoacanthoma in a dog showing two cores of
atic. This is especially true if specimens are too small or
 parakeratotic cells within irregular epithelial islands.
tangential to allow adequate visualization of tumor
Fig. 26.6 Higher magnification of
nailbed  keratoacanthoma  showing
glassy cytoplasm and scattered apop-
totic keratinocytes {arrow). Note mild
cytologic atypia and infiltrative growth
at the tumor margin at bottom.
700
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
architecture. Low-power features of a symmetrical but
Periosteal bone proliferation is common and may extend
complex cellular wall and central keratin core are critical
to the proximal phalanges.
diagnostic features of KA. Soft tissue sections from the
The appearance on midsagittal section of the digit
margin of a KA will often contain short trabeculae with
varies considerably, depending on the size and degree of
atypical cells and mitotic fgures, leading to an erroneous 
histologic differentiation. Tumor diameter varies from
diagnosis of malignancy. Bone invasion is not observed in
0.3cm to more than 3cm. Some lesions are well-
KA, but is a classic feature of squamous cell carcinoma.
circumscribed, while others are diffusely infltrative.
Positive PAS staining has been proposed as an aid in dis-
Small, early lesions may be confned to the nail pulp and
tinguishing between cutaneous KA and squamous cell
distal third phalanx. Keratin production, manifested
carcinoma in humans based on the high glycogen content
 grossly by deposits of caseous yellow-white material, may
 of the former (King & Barr 1980). Unfortunately, many
be focal and centrally located in small, well-differentiated
well-differentiated nailbed squamous cell carcinomas also
sauoz leus snorsunu aaeq uanjo siou iaeT 'siou
show strong PAS positivity, although the staining pattern
 of keratinization. Poorly-differentiated SCCs may have no
may be irregular. If histologic distinction is not possible,
gross evidence of keratin production.
it is preferable to err on the side of caution and render a
The majority of affected animals are 7 years of age or
diagnosis of well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma.
older, although dogs as young as 4 years of age are
 Differentiation of nailbed KA from nailbed inverted squa-
reported (O'Brien et al., 1992; Marino et al., 1995). There
 pue Aixalduos ianeana au uo paseq si euonded snou
is a marked predilection for large breed dogs with
irregularity of the epithelial wall, apoptosis, and absence
 black coats, particularly Labrador Retrievers, Standard
of uniform, central papillary projections in KA.
Poodles, Rottweilers, Giant Schnauzers, Gordon Setters,
and Kerry Blue Terriers. This curious relationship of body
size and coat color to the incidence of nailbed SCC is still
NAILBED SQUAMOUS
enigmatic.
CELL CARCINOMA
The reported metastatic incidence of these neoplasms
(Synonym: subungual squamous cell carcinoma)
varies widely. Marino et al. (1995) found a 29% occur-
rence of pulmonary metastasis, but both nailbed and
primary epidermal SCCs were included in this fgure. The
Clinical features
study of O'Brien et al. (1992) had a less than 5% inci-
Nailbed squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is uncommon in
dence of pulmonary metastasis; 20 of 21 dogs had no
dogs and very rare in cats. One report on canine nailbed
metastasis to the regional lymph nodes or the lungs. Ten
SCC indicated an incidence of 0.2% of all canine neo-
dogs in a small survey by one of the authors (E.J. W.) were
plasms (Madewell et al., 1982). However, they are also
followed for 9 months to 2 years; only one developed
reported to be the most frequent canine digital tumor,
regional lymph node metastasis following digital ampu-
comprising 38% of cases in one study (Marino et al.,
tation. Reports of primary feline nailbed SCC are too few
1995). Nailbed SCC is not as common overall as cuta-
to provide meaningful data. In the largest series, one of
neous SCC in this species, but the frequency ratio may be
eight cats developed regional lymph node metastasis (van 
higher in geographic locations that have a low overall
der Linde-Sipman & van den Ingh, 2000).
incidence of solar-induced skin disease. A large survey
from the University of Pennsylvania found 328 nailbed
Histopathology (Figures 26.7 through 26.9)
SCCs in a total of 592 non-visceral SCCs (Goldschmidt
& Shofer 1992). In contrast, only one of 52 SCCs in a
Nailbed SCCs are unencapsulated, asymmetrical neo-
large survey on feline cutaneous tumors was found in a
plasms with focal or multifocal connection to nailbed
periungual location (Miller et al., 1991). In a study of
epithelium. Tumor margins are irregular and infltrative.
bone tumors in cats, only one of 25 SCCs involved pha-
The architecture and morphology of the neoplastic
langeal bone (Quigley & Leedale, 1983).
epithelial cell aggregates are usually similar to well-
Nailbed SCC is usually solitary, but may affect multi-
differentiated or poorly-differentiated variants of SCC in 
ple digits either synchronously or metachronously in
other anatomic locations (see Chapter 22). Acantholytic
dogs, or two adjacent digits in cats (Madewell et al.,
features, characterized by dyscohesion, rounding up, and
1982; van der Linde-Sipman & van den Ingh, 2000). The
drop-out of cells in the centers of the aggregates, may be
presenting signs are similar to benign nailbed tumors and
present in some lesions; if these features are extensive, a
include lameness, digital swelling, and deformity or loss
diagnosis of acantholytic SCC is appropriate (see Chapter
 of the nail. Ulceration is more common and generally
22). The majority of nailbed SCC is of the well-
more extensive than is observed with benign tumors.
 r p   s   p
There is radiographic evidence of phalangeal lysis.
tinization. The cytoplasm is often more pale and glassy
Nailbed epithelial tumors
701
Fig. 26.7 Nailbed squamous cell carcinoma in a dog. Islands of
Fig. 26.8 Poorly-differentiated nailbed squamous cell carcinoma in
well-differentiated squamous epithelial cells invade phalangeal bone.
a dog. Epithelial cells arranged individually and in clusters diffusely
Note early acantholysis in the centers of the tumor islands.
infiltrate phalangeal bone.
than in cells of the cutaneous counterpart, and a granu-
proliferation due to inflammation and/or infltration by
lar cell layer may be sparse or absent. Rarely, the verru-
neoplastic epithelial cells from adjacent connective tissue
cous variant of SCC (see Chapter 22) arises in nailbed
or joint. More proximal portions of the second phalanx
epithelium. This is a low-grade malignancy characterized
are rarely involved.
by broad, blunt-ended, anastomosing trabeculae of poly-
Theprimary
differential  diagnosis 
 for well-
hedral keratinocytes. The trabeculae have central tunnels
differentiated nailbed SCC in dogs is nailbed keratoacan-
flled with keratin and cellular debris. All tumor types are
thoma. Keratoacanthomas are recognizable in most cases
accompanied by a desmoplastic stromal response. Infl-
by their symmetry, central keratin cores, and absence of
trates of plasma cells and neutrophils are present and may
bone invasion. The epithelial cells of keratoacanthomas
be severe in extensively ulcerated lesions.
usually contain more abundant, uniformly-distributed
The third phalanx shows some degree of lysis and
glycogen than those of SCC. Mitotic activity is usually
periosteal bone proliferation, and the medullary spaces
 higher in SCC, and prominent nucleoli are more prevalent.
are infltrated by aggregates of neoplastic squamous
The rare acantholytic variant of nailbed SCC may need
epithelial cells. Early lesions may be confned to the distal
to be differentiated from eccrine carcinoma arising from
tip of the bone. Osteomyelitis may be present. The inter-
 the pawpad (see Chapter 25); foci of keratinocyte dysco-
phalangeal joint may show tumor invasion in addition to
hesion and drop-out (pseudoglandular change) can mimic
chronic synovitis. More commonly, neoplastic tissue does
true glandular lumens. However, acantholysis usually
not violate the joint space but extends along the perios-
occurs only in limited areas of the tumor, and the pseudo-
teum and infltrates periarticular connective tissue. The
lumens may contain some residual individualized cells.
distal second phalanx may also show lysis and periosteal
Serial sections to establish connection to ungual epithe-
702
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
discernible in metastatic carcinomas, although its pres-
 d ss  e  r s 
noma. Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) stain may highlight
small foci of luminal mucin secretion (van der Linde-
Sipman & van den Ingh, 2000) that are often present even
in predominantly squamoid pulmonary carcinoma.
Immumohistochemistry
Immunohistochemical stains  for  specific  cytokeratins
(CKs), particularly CAM5.2 (CK7/8) and CK13, are
limited in their distribution in canine and feline tissue
to simple epithelia and thus are useful markers for
glandular neoplasms. CAM5.2 or CK13 will be positive
in a pawpad eccrine carcinoma and negative in an acan-
tholytic SCC. Similarly, CAM5.2 immunostaining aids in
detecting subtle features of glandular differentiation (van
der Linde-Sipman & van den Ingh, 2000) in metastatic
pulmonary carcinoma.
NAILBED BASAL CELL CARCINOMA
(Synonym: subungual basal cell carcinoma)
Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) in a subungual location is rare
in humans; only about a dozen cases have been reported
(Bhagchandani et al., 1995; Mikhail, 1985; Rudolph,
1987). Melanonychia (streaks of dark pigmentation in
one or multiple nails) was a feature of one of these cases
Fig. 26.9 Verrucous nailbed squamous cell carcinoma in a dog.
(Rudolph, 1987). The prognosis for subungual BCC in
Broad, blunt-ended trabeculae of well-differentiated keratinocytes
humans is favorable, as it is for BCC in other locations.
have central tunnels containing keratin and cellular debris. The neo-
plasm has effaced the entire third phalanx except for the articular
cartilage.
Clinical features
Nailbed BCC is an extremely rare entity; only a single
example has been seen by the authors. It occurred in an
lium may be required in rare instances. Immunohisto-
11-year-old domestic shorthaired cat that had apparent
chemical stains are often helpful (see below). Adequate
chronic paronychia and a thickened nail affecting a single
soft tissue and decalcified sections are required to distin-
digit. The nail had focal, asymmetric, dark brown discol-
guish primary nailbed carcinoma from digital SCC arising
oration. Midsaggital section through the amputated
from epidermis of haired skin or pawpad that has
distal digit revealed a neoplasm less than 3mm in
secondarily infltrated phalangeal bone.
diameter that was contiguous with the nailbed epithelium
In cases of multicentric digital SCC, primarily in cats,
and extended proximally.
a differential diagnosis of metastatic carcinoma must be
To the best of the authors' knowledge, nailbed BCC has
considered, particularly the mucoepidermoid (adenosqua-
not been previously described in the veterinary literature.
mous) and SCC (epidermoid) variants of pulmonary
The prognosis in animals remains to be determined. The
carcinomas. Metastatic pulmonary carcinomas are much
sentinel case developed recurrence around and within
more common than primary carcinomas in the distal pha-
 the second phalanx 2 years following distal digital
langes in cats (see p. 703); thoracic radiography should
amputation.
be recommended in all cases of feline digital carcinomas.
Metastatic lesions should not exhibit contiguity with
Histopathology (Figures 26.10 and 26.11)
epidermis or ungual epithelium, and bone lysis is often
not accompanied by a periosteal proliferative response
The single nailbed BCC observed was composed of
(Pollack et al., 1984). Vascular invasion is often
polyhedral, basaloid cells arranged in small islands,
Nailbed epithelial tumors
703
Fig. 26.10 Nailbed basal cell carci-
noma in a cat. This plaque-like mass is
focally contiguous with nailbed epithe-
liurm at the left.
Fig. 26.11 Higher magnification of
nailbed basal cell carcinoma of Fig.
26.10. Trabeculae of small, polyhedral
tumor cells show peripheral palisading
and numerous mitoses. Ungual keratin
is at the left.
nests, and trabeculae. The cells had scant, pale cyto-
culty in diagnosis would be largely due to the rarity of the
plasm and large, ovoid nuclei with small nucleoli and
lesion.
moderate mitotic activity. There  was prominent
peripheral palisading. Several foci of squamous metapla-
METASTATIC PULMONARY
S       
CARCINOMA IN CATS
Some of the epithelial cells were moderately pigmented,
and melanophages were present in the moderate collage-
Distant metastases from internal malignant neoplasms
nous stroma. There was slight invasion and lysis of the
 rarely present predominantly as cutaneous disease in dogs
third phalanx.
and cats. In humans, 5-10% of patients with visceral
The appearance of this neoplasm is virtually identical
carcinoma have cutaneous metastases (Johnson, 1997).
to BCC occurring in the skin (see Chapter 22). Any diff-
Metastases to distal digits are very rare in humans; only
704
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
 about 120 cases are reported in the literature (Baran &
with bone lysis. Epithelial aggregates infltrate bone and
Tosti, 1994). Subungual metastases in one retrospective
soft tissue; one or more phalanges may be involved, and
survey in humans occurred most often from the lung.
the tumor may cross interphalangeal joint spaces. Conti-
and the frequency was greater than the next three most
nuity with epidermis, ungual epithelium, or sweat glands
common primary sites combined (Cohen, 2001). One or
should not be present; however this may be impossible
multiple digits may be affected. The lesions present with
to verify if there is ulceration, loss of nail or extensive
pain, swelling, and erythema, and are often misdiagnosed
infltration into pawpad. Aggregates of tumor cells can
 as infection. In 44% of the human patients in that survey,
usually be detected within vascular lumens, including
visceral neoplasia was not suspected until the digital
arterioles. There is a moderate to marked desmoplastic
metastasis was identifed (Cohen, 2001). The cause for
reaction in soft tissue, but periosteal bone proliferation is
the predilection of pulmonary carcinomas for phalangeal
usually mild or absent.
bone or digital soft tissue is unknown.
 The tumor morphology corresponds to the subtype of
The syndrome of digital metastasis of pulmonary
the primary lung tumor; the majority arise from the more
carcinomas in cats is well documented in case reports,
aggressive adenosquamous (mucoepidermoid) and SCC
retrospective surveys, and reference texts (Pollack et al.,
variants of bronchial carcinoma. Pure adenocarcinomas
1984; Carpenter et al., 1987; Gottfried et al., 2000; van
are more unusual, but present less of a diagnostic
der Linde-Sipman & van den Ingh, 2000). Recognized
challenge.
subtypes of metastatic pulmonary carcinoma in cats
 include adenosquamous (mucoepidermoid) carcinomas,
Adenosquamous (mucoepidermoid) carcinoma
squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs), and adenocarcinomas.
(Figure 26.12)
 Phalangeal metastasis has not been reported in dogs with
 In this subtype the epithelial cells form small islands,
pulmonary carcinoma.
 nests, and cords, and create variable tubular and cribri-
form patterns. Glandular lumens may contain mucin,
and goblet cells may be present. Larger islands often
Clinical features
exhibit necrosis and drop-out of cells. The epithelial cells
The overall metastatic rate of pulmonary carcinoma in
are columnar to polygonal and have moderate, pale
cats is 75% (Hahn & McEntee, 1997). In one survey
eosinophilic or amphophilic cytoplasm. There may be
covering a period of 5 years, 56 of 64 cats with digital
prominent glycogenic vacuolation of the cytoplasm. Cilia
carcinomas had primary pulmonary carcinoma (van der
can sometimes be detected on the surface of some of the
Linde-Sipman & van den Ingh, 2000). Another review
luminal cells. There are scattered foci of squamous dif-
found 116 pulmonary carcinomas in cats, 36 cases of
ferentiation characterized by glassy, brightly eosinophilic
digital metastatic carcinoma, and nine cases of primary
cytoplasm and faint intercellular bridges. Complete corni-
digital SCC in a 6 year period (Gottfried et al., 2000).
fication is infrequent. Nuclei are large and pleomorphic
Affected cats present with lameness and one or more
with prominent nucleoli. Mitotic activity is highly vari-
swollen, painful digits. The toes are often erythematous
able, and nuclear polarity is poorly preserved.
 and ulcerated, and there may be loss of nails. Respiratory
Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) staining accentuates the
signs are usually absent, despite the fact that lung masses
intracellular and extracellular mucin in these neoplasms.
are identified radiographically or ultrasonographically.
 In the glandular lumens, the mucin is condensed along
Gross sectioning of the digit reveals diffuse soft tissue
the surface of the lining epithelium, forming a thin band
swelling and osteomalacia. Because of the poorly circum-
referred to as a luminal cuticle; this stains a deep magenta
scribed and nonkeratinizing nature of these lesions, no
(z qan tap u  uds-p p t) sd m
discrete mass or keratin deposits are visible.
Differentiation
 from poorly-differentiated
digital
 There is no breed or sex predilection. The average age
epidermal or nailbed SCC can be problematic, and this
is 12 years, although cats as young as 4 years have been
 distinction is of utmost importance for the patient's prog-
reported. The prognosis for these patients is grave; the
nosis. Poorly-differentiated SCCs can have few or no
average survival time is 1 to 2 months, and many have
keratin pearls, and pseudoglandular change due to acan-
disseminated metastases at the time of presentation
tholysis (acantholytic SCC) can be present, thus mimick-
(Gottfried et al., 2000; van der Linde-Sipman & van den
ing the appearance of a metastatic adenosquamous
Ingh, 2000).
pulmonary carcinoma. If ciliated cells or obvious mucin-
producing glandular structures are identified, the diagno-
Histopathology
sis of metastatic pulmonary adenosquamous carcinoma is
straightforward. If nailbed or epidermal contiguity can be
Metastatic pulmonary carcinoma of the digit is charac-
demonstrated, the neoplasm is most likely primary in the
terized by a poorly-circumscribed neoplasm associated
digit. Intra-arterial tumor emboli will also confrm a
Nailbed epithelial tumors
705
Fig. 26.13 Digital metastasis of pulmonary squamous cell carci
Fig.26.12
noma in a cat. Some of the infiltrating epithelial structures have
noma in a cat. Irregular aggregates of squamous epithelial cells dif-
fusely infltrate phalangeal bone and soft tissue; many aggregates
have small cystic spaces containing necrotic debris. Note absence of
forrm patterns.
reactive periosteal bone proliferation.
metastatic lesion. Step sections may be required to search
out of central cells may result in pseudoglandular foci.
for these features. Periodic acid-Schiff staining may be
There may be areas of marked glycogenic vacuolation of
helpful, but must be interpreted with caution as glyco-
 the cytoplasm. Because squamous differentiation in these
genated squamous cell carcinomas will also yield positive
neoplasms represents a metaplastic change, it is often pos-
cytoplasmic staining. Alcian blue stain would be an alter-
sible to identify small areas of residual glandular features.
native histologic technique to confirm the presence of
Poorly differentiated tumors may lack extracellular
mucin. Thoracic radiographs should be requested for
keratin deposits and glandular structures.
all cases in which histologic fndings are equivocal.
Differentiation of metastatic pulmonary SCC from
Involvement of multiple digits is strongly suggestive of
primary epidermal or nailbed SCC can be extremely
metastatic disease.
diffcult and is of great prognostic significance. Residual
glandular structures indicate a diagnosis of metastatic
Squamous cell carcinoma (Figure 26.13)
pulmonary carcinoma. Intra-arterial tumor tissue will
The histologic appearance of this subtype of metastatic
also confrm a metastatic lesion. If unequivocal nailbed or
 piouapida, pauai Aisnoaand) ruouren Areuournd
epidermal contiguity can be demonstrated, the neoplasm
carcinoma) is similar to cutaneous SCC, although very
is most likely primary in the digit. Step sections may be
well differentiated variants, as seen in skin, are uncom-
required to search for these features. Periodic acid-Schiff
mon. Intercellular bridges and keratin pearls or lakes
staining may aid in the detection of subtle secretory mate-
are usually present. Mitotic activity is usually high, and 
rial, but must be interpreted with caution; glycogenated
caseation necrosis is often extensive. Necrosis and drop-
squamous cell carcinomas  will also yield positive
706
Epithelial neoplasms and other tumors
cytoplasmic staining. Alcian blue stain would be an alter-
majority of pulmonary adenocarcinomas are reported to
native histologic technique to confrm the presence of
be negative for CKs 5/6, 14 and 18 (Moch et al., 1993;
secretory mucin.
Lyda & Weiss, 2000; Carella et al., 2001; Chu & Weiss,
One retrospective study states that many of the pre-
2002), while these markers are positive in many other
 viously reported cases of feline digital SCC were proba-
epithelial neoplasms, including most sweat gland tumors.
bly metastases from pulmonary SCC, based on their
biologic behavior (Gottfried et al., 2000). Involvement of
multiple digits is strongly suggestive of metastatic disease.
REFERENCES
Thoracic radiographs are probably warranted for all cases
of digital SCC in cats.
Naiibed Epitbelial Inclusion Cyst
Fanti, PA. & Tosti, A. (1989) Subungual epidermoid inclusions:
Adenocarcinoma
report of 8 cases. Dermatologica 178, 209-12.
 In this subrype of pulmonary carcinoma, columnar to
Saez de Ocariz, M.M., Dominguez Cherit, J., Garcia Corona, C.
polyhedral epithelial cells form acinar, tubular papillary,
(2001) Subungual epidermoid cysts. Int J Dermatol 40, 524-6.
and cribriform structures in varying proportions. Ciliated
Yung, C.W. & Estes, S.A. (1980) Subungual epidermal cyst. J
Am Acad Dermatol 3, 599-601.
cells, goblet cells, or luminal mucin deposits can usually
be detected. Lumens may contain necrotic cellular debris.
Naiibed Keratoacanthoma
Small foci of incomplete squamous differentiation may be
Binder, M., Steiner, A., Mossbacher, U. et al. (1998) Estimation
present. The cells typically have pale, eosinophilic cyto-
of the volume-weighted mean nuclear volume discriminates
plasm and large nuclei with one or more nucleoli. Mitotic
keratoacanthoma from squamous cell carcinoma. Am J
activity is variable.
Dermatopathol 20, 453-8.
 Differential diagnoses for this variant are limited; digital
Cribier, B.,Asch, P & Grosshans, E. (1999) Differentiating squa-
metastasis of other types of adenocarcinomas is exceed-
mous cell carcinoma from keratoacanthoma using histopatho-
ingly rare in cats (Walters et al., 1998). Primary cutaneous
ogical criteria.
.Is it possible? A study of 296 cases.
 apocrine or eccrine carcinoma should be a consideration if
Dermatology 199, 208-12.
ciliated epithelium is not present and if contiguity with
Keeney, G.L., Banks, P.M. & Linscheid, R.L. (1988) Subungual
sweat glands cannot be ruled out. Eccrine carcinomas are
keratoacanthoma. Report of a case and review of the litera-
ture. Arch Dermatol 124, 1074-6.
very rare, so this diagnosis should be made with caution.
King, D.F. & Barr, R.J. (1980) Intraepithelial elastic fibers and
Some of the cases previously interpreted as feline eccrine
intracytoplasmic glycogen: diagnostic aids in differentiating
carcinomas in Veterinary Dermatopathology (Walder &
keratoacanthoma from squamous cell carcinoma. J Cutan
Gross, 1992) are likely, in retrospect, to have been metasta-
Pathol 7,140-8.
 tic pulmonary neoplasms. Bone invasion by an apocrine
Lovett, J.E., Haines, T.A., Bentz, M.L. et al. (1995) Subungual
adenocarcinoma is highly unlikely. Involvement of mul-
keratoacanthoma masquerading as a chronic paronychia. Ann
tiple digits will support a diagnosis of metastatic disease.
Plast Surg 34, 84-7.
Macaulay, WL. (1976) Subungual keratoacanthoma. Arch
Dermatol 112, 1004-5.
Immunohistochemistry
Melendez, N.D., Smoller, B.R., Morgan, M. (2003) VCAM (CD-
Immunohistochemical stains for specific cytokeratins
106) and ICAM (CD-54) adhesion molecules distinguish
 keratoacanthomas from cutaneous squamous cell carcinomas.
(CKs), particularly CAM5.2 (CK7/8) and CK13, are
Mod Pathol 16, 8-13.
limited in their distribution in canine and feline tissue to
Murphy, G.F. & Elder, D.E. (1991) Atlas of Tumor Pathology:
simple epithelia, and thus are useful markers for glandu-
Non-melanocytic Tumors of the Skin, pp. 21-2. Armed Forces
lar neoplasms. CAM5.2 immunostain should be positive
Institute of Pathology, Washington, DC.
in metastatic pulmonary adenosquamous carcinoma and
Sanchez Yus, E., Simon, P, Requenia, L., et al. (2000)
 negative in primary digital squamous cell carcinoma (van
Solitary keratoacanthoma: a self-healing proliferation that
der Linde-Sipman & van den Ingh, 2000). It is unknown
frequently becomes malignant. Am J Dermatopathol, 22,
if immunostaining with markers for simple epithelium
305-10.
(CAM5.2, CK13) is of beneft for SCC of pulmonary
Stoll, D.M. & Ackerman, A.B. (1980) Subungual keratoacan-
thom. Am J Dermatopathot 2, 265-71.
origin; the case series in which immunohistochemistry
was utilized included only adenocarcinomas and adeno-
Nailbed Squamous Cell Carcinoma
squamous carcinomas (van der Linde-Sipman & van den
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, FS. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
Ingh, 2000).
Dog and Cat, pp. 37-9. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Immunohistochemical differentiation of metastatic pul-
Madewell, B.R., Pool, R.R., Theilen, G.H. et al. (1982) Multi-
monary adenocarcinoma from other adenocarcinomas
ple subungual squamous cell carcinomas in five dogs. J Am
has not been investigated in animals. In humans, the
Vet Med Assoc 180, 731-4.
Nailbed epithelial tumors
707
Marino, D.J.M., Matthiesen, D.T., Stefanacci, J.D. et al. (1995)
Chu, P.G. & Weiss, L.M. (2002) Expression of cytokeratin 5/6
Evaluation of dogs with digit masses: 117 cases (1981-1991).
 in epithelial neoplasms: an immunohistochemical study of 509
J Am Vet Med Assoc 207, 726-8.
cases. Mod Pathol 15, 6-10.
Miller, M.A., Nelson, S.L., Turk, J.R. et al. (1991) Cutaneous
Cohen, PR. (2001) Metastatic tumors to the nail unit: subun-
neoplasia in 340 cats. Vet Pathot 28, 389-95.
gual metastases. Dermatol Surg 27, 280-93.
O'Brien, M.G., Berg, J. & Engler, S.J. (1992) Treatment by
Gottfried, S.D., Popovitch, C.A., Goldschmidt, M.H. et al.
digital amputation of subungual squamous cell carcinoma
(2000) Metastatic digital carcinoma in the cat: a retrospective
in dogs: 21 cases (1987-1988). J Am Vet Med Assoc 201,
study of 36 cats (1992-1998). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 36,
759-61.
501-9.
Pollack, M., Martin, R.A. & Diters, R.W. (1984) Metastatic
Hahn, K.A. & McEntee, M.F (1997) Primary lung tumors in
squamous cell carcinoma in multiple digits of a cat: a case
cats: 86 cases (1979-1984). J Am Vet Med Assoc 211,
report. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20, 835-6.
1257-60.
Quigley, PJ. & Leedale, A.H. (1983) Tumors involving bone in
Johnson, W.C. {1997) Metastatic carcinoma of the skin. In:
the domestic cat: a review of fifty-eight cases. Vet Pathol 20,
Lever's Histopathology of the Skin, 8th edn (eds D. Elder, R.
670-86.
Elenitsas, C. Jaworsky, et al.), p. 1011. Lippincott-Raven,
van der Linde-Sipman, J.S. & van den Ingh, T.S. (2000) Primary
Philadelphia.
and metastatic carcinomas in the digits of cats. Vet Q 22,
Lyda, M.H. &
Weiss, L.M. (2000) Immunoreactivity for
141-5.
epithelial and neuroendocrine antibodies are useful in the
differential diagnosis of lung carcinomas. Hum Pathol 31,
Nailbed Basal Cell Carcinoma
980-7.
Bhagchandani, L., Sanadi, R.E., Sattar, S. & Abbott, R.R. (1995)
Moch, H., Oberholzer, M., Dalquen, P. et al. (1993) Diagnostic
 Basal cell carcinoma presenting as finger mass. A case report.
tools for differentiating between pleural mesothelioma and
Am J Clin Oncol 18, 176-9.
lung adenocarcinoma in paraffin embedded tissue. Part I:
Mikhail, G.R. (1985) Subungual
basal cell carcinoma. J
Immunohistochemical findings. Virchows Arch A Pathot Anat
Dermatol Surg Oncol 11, 1222-3.
Histopathol 423, 19-27.
Rudolph, R.1. (1987) Subungual basal cell carcinoma presenting
Pollack, M., Martin, R.A. & Diters, R.W. (1984) Metastatic
as longitudinal melanonychia. J Am Acad Dermatol 16,
squamous cell carcinoma in multiple digits of a cat: a case
229-33.
report. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20, 835-836.
van der Linde-Sipman, J.S. & van den Ingh, T.S. (2000) Primary
Metastatic Pulmonary Carcinoma in Cats
and metastatic carcinomas in the digits of cats. Vet Q 22,
Baran, R. & Tosti, A. (1994) Metastatic carcinoma to the ter-
141-5.
minal phalanx of the big toe: report of two cases and review
Walder, EJ. & Gross, T.L. (1992) Sweat gland tumors. In:
of the literature. J Am Acad Dermatol 31, 259-63.
Veterinary Dermatopathology: A Macroscopic and Micro-
Carella, R., Deleonardi, G., D'Errico, A. et al. (2001) Immuno-
scopic Evaluation of Canine and Feline Skin Disease (T.L.
histochemical panels for differentiating epithelial malignant
Gross, PJ. Ihrke & E.J. Walder), pp. 396-7. Mosby, St
mesothelioma from lung adenocarcinoma: a study with logis-
Louis.
tic regression analysis. Am J Surg Patbot 25, 43-50.
Walters, D.J., Honeckman, A., Cooley, D.M. et al. (1998)
Carpenter, J.L., Andrews, L.K. & Holzworth, J. (1987) Tumors
Skeletal
l metastasis in feline mammary carcinoma: case
and tumor-like lesions. In: Diseases of the Cat (ed. J.
report and literature review. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 34,
Holzworth), pp. 460-74. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
103-8.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright  2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Part Il
Mesenchymal Neoplasms and
other Tumors
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 27
Fibrous tumors
Similar to fbrous tumors in humans, canine and feline
for most lesions that are believed to be malformations,
fbrous tumors are diverse and include reactive lesions and
 both congenital and acquired.
hamartomas, as well as benign and malignant neoplasms
Canine collagenous hamartomas were frst described by
(Weiss & Goldblum, 2001a-c). Fibrous connective tissue
Scott et al. (1984) and previously were most likely iden-
is composed of fbroblasts and extracellular matrix. The
tifed as fbromas. These intradermal collagenous nodules
latter comprises fbrillar components, including collagen
u seoo, ro u anssh aaauo, aqasa
and elastin, and nonfbrillar components, also referred to
humans (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001). The late onset of
as ground substance. Immature fbroblasts and mature
clinically evident collagenous hamartomas in dogs may be
fbrocytes consistently express the intermediate flament
explained by the fact that thick pelage makes early small
vimentin (Folpe & Gown, 2001). Some fbroblastic pro-
or nonelevated lesions difficult to detect. However, the
liferations have numerous admixed histiocytes (Weiss &
pathogenesis of collagenous hamartoma has not been
Goldblum, 2001d-f). Many of the recognized fbrous pro-
proven, and lesions occurring in adult animals may be
liferations may be reactive rather than neoplastic in origin
acquired rather than congenital.
(Weiss & Goldblum, 2001a,d).
In some instances the proliferating fbroblasts undergo
Clinical features
differentiation to myofbroblasts. These have morpho-
logic features of both fibroblasts and smooth muscle cells
Collagenous hamartomas are relatively common lesions
(Weiss & Goldblum, 2001a). Similar to muscle cells,
in dogs. Incidence data have not been reported. They
myofbroblasts exhibit a partial basement membrane and
usually present as a solitary, dome-shaped or gumdrop-
bundles of parallel-arranged microflaments (Weiss &
shaped, frm nodule measuring less than 1cm in
Goldblum, 2001a,b). They express C-smooth-muscle
 actin and occasionally also desmin. Myofbroblasts were
pigmented and may be alopecic. The overlying skin is
first recognized in granulation tissue, and their presence
usually intact, except for lesions located in areas of con-
has been associated with injury and local trauma
stant friction. Lesions occur most commonly on the head,
(Gabbiani et al., 1972).
neck, and proximal legs.
 Affected animals are middle-aged or older. There are no
 breed or sex predilections. Surgical excision is curative.
COLLAGENOUS HAMARTOMA
(Synonym: collagenous nevus)
Histopathology (Figure 27.1)
The concepts of ‘nevus' and “hamartoma’ tend to be
Collagenous hamartomas are noncircumscribed nodules
elusive and confusing in most pathology texts. Through-
of the dermis that are composed of redundant dermal
out the veterinary literature both are used essentially
collagen. The fber pattern is similar to the arrangement
interchangeably, and are often selected more by con-
of normal dermal collagen bundles. Lesional collagen
vention or preference rather than by strict adherence to
bundles may be slightly thicker, more eosinophilic, or
defnition.
. The current World Health Organization
more compact than in the adjacent normal dermis.
nomenclature avoids the use of nevus entirely, a principal
Adnexa within the lesion are decreased in number or
reason being that nevus has connotations of melanocytic
absent. As the collagenous hamartomas expand, the
origin in human nomenclature (also see linear epidermal
 adnexal structures become variably distorted as they are
hamartoma, Chapter 22). Thus, whenever possible, the
pushed marginally; folliculosebaceous enlargement at
authors prefer to use the more inclusive term *hamartoma'
the base is not uncommon. Fibroblasts are not obviously
710
Fibrous tumors
711
Fig. 27.1 Collagenous hamartoma in
a dog characterized by a nodule of
redundant collagen within the dermis.
increased in size or number. The overlying epidermis is
uterine muscular tumors. It was frst reported in German
usually intact and may be hyperpigmented. Inflammation
Shepherd Dogs, but has since been described in other
is not observed, except for traumatized and secondarily
breeds (Suter et al., 1983; Lium & Moe, 1985; Atlee
infected nodules.
et al., 1991; Marks et al., 1993; White et al., 1998).
Differential diagnoses for collagenous hamartoma
The predominance of lesions in German Shepherd Dogs
include fbroma, nodular dermatofbrosis, and nodular
supports a hereditary predisposition; pedigree analysis
-  r   s a  s 
revealed that nodular dermatofibrosis is an inherited
lagenous hamartomas and often encroach on the subcutis.
 disease with an autosomal recessive pattern in this breed
Fibromas generally are more cellular and have a repeti-
(Moe & Lium, 1997). The Birt-Hogg-Dube human syn-
tive, swirled or interlacing pattern of collagen fbers.
drome, which is characterized by a variety of organ
Although the appearance of the collagen is similar to col-
 defects and neoplasms, shares the development of renal
lagenous hamartoma, nodular dermatofbrosis is a multi-
neoplasia and benign skin tumors (trichofolliculomas)
centric condition, while collagenous hamartoma is almost
with canine nodular dermatofbrosis (Vincent et al.,
always solitary. The lesions of nodular dermatofbrosis
2003). Recently, gene mapping localized the suspected
are often larger than collagenous hamartomas; the bulk
gene of canine nodular dermatofibrosis to a small region
of those lesions is in the deep dermis and may encroach
of canine chromosome 5 that overlaps the human
on the subcutis. Hair follicles are usually not displaced by
 Birt-Hogg-Dube locus, suggesting that the same gene
the collagen of nodular dermatofbrosis and are hyper-
may be responsible for both conditions; subsequently a
plastic and elongated. Nodular dermatofbrosis lesions
disease-associated mutation in exon 7 was identifed
are often secondarily inflamed. In contrast to collagenous
(Lingaas et al., 2003). Overexpression of transforming
hamartomas, nodular scars are characterized by marked
growth factor B1 (TGF-B1) has been observed in human
acanthosis, and the lesional collagen
bundlesare
patients with several cancers, including renal carcinomas
markedly thickened and often hyalinized.
(Ananth et al., 1999). In a recent small study, TGF-β1, a
potent stimulator of fbrosis, showed increased expression
in the skin and kidney (hair follicles and renal tubules) of
a German Shepherd Dog with nodular dermatofbrosis
CANINE NODULAR DERMATOFIBROSIS
and renal cystadenocarcinoma, when compared to two
Several familial syndromes of multiple cutaneous tumors
normal German Shepherd Dogs (Vercelli et al., 2003).
associated with specific internal malignancies exist in man
Serum levels were similar among all three dogs of that
(McLean & Haynes, 2003). Nodular dermatofbrosis is
study, suggesting a role for local production of this
the frst such entity to be documented in animals and is
cytokine. The cutaneous, renal, and uterine lesions may
associated with renal epithelial and, less commonly,
develop independently from each other but may be
712
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
 induced by a common genetic defect that is partially medi-
ated by abnormalities in production and/or expression of
fibrosis-stimulating cytokines.
Clinical features
The incidence of cutaneous nodular dermatofibrosis
has not been documented; it is probably rare. Firm,
dermal and subcutaneous, well-circumscribed nodules
develop that vary in size from several millimeters to 4 cm
in diameter. The overlying skin may show irregular thick-
ening and hyperpigmentation. In areas of friction, the
nodules are often ulcerated. Larger lesions are often
alopecic. Lesions are found primarily on legs, head,
and ears.
Nodular dermatofbrosis mostly occurs in middle-aged
and older dogs, but animals as young as 2 years of age
may be affected. The lesions have been reported in
German Shepherd Dogs (Suter et al., 1983; Lium & Moe,
1985; Atlee et al., 1991; Vilafranca, 1994), a Golden
Retriever, a Boxer and mixed-breed dogs (Marks et al.,
1993; White et al., 1998); one author (T.L.G.) has seen a
case in a German Shorthaired Pointer. Sex predilection
 has not been reported.
Renal lesions associated with nodular dermatof-
brosis  include 
renal
cysts, cystadenomas
and
cystadenocarcinomas. A chromophilic-eosinophilic onco-
cytoma-like renal cell carcinoma has been documented
(Vilafranca et al., 1994). Renal lesions are often multi-
centric and bilateral. The metastatic rate of the renal
Fig. 27.2 Subcutaneous nodular dermatofibrosis in a German
tumors is approximately 20%. Urerine leiomyomas are
Shepherd Dog characterized by replacerment of subcutaneous
less common, which may be due to the ovariohysterec-
adipose tissue by dense rmature collagen.
 tomized state of most of the affected bitches reported in
the literature.
not inflamed. Larger lesions often ulcerate, and second-
ary folliculitis and furunculosis may develop.
Histopathology (Figures 27.2 through 27.4)
The histologic appearance of nodular dermatofbrosis
The cutaneous lesions of nodular dermatofbrosis are
may be subtle, and differentiation from collagenous
characterized by focal dermal thickening due to increased
hamartomas, fbromas, and nodular scars may be difficult
numbers of slightly thickened collagen bundles. Cellular-
in incisional or punch biopsy specimens unless an appro-
ity is not increased and the collagen is ultrastructurally
priate clinical history increases the index of suspicion.
normal (Suter et al., 1983; Lium & Moe, 1985). There is
Multiple excisional biopsies provide the most useful diag-
no obvious demarcation of the lesions from the adjacent
nostic material. Fibromas and collagenous hamartomas
normal dermis. However, the deep margins of the dermal
are usually solitary lesions. Collagenous hamartomas
lesions often encroach upon and are well demarcated
affect primarily the superfcial dermis and have peripher-
 from the subjacent subcutaneous fat. The subcutaneous
alized adnexa. Fibromas are somewhat more cellular than
lesions are wellcircumscribed nodules and plaques of
nodular dermatofbrosis and have a more complex
 mature collagen that are usually contiguous with the deep
pattern of collagen bundles; adnexa are rarely incorpo-
dermal collagen.
rated. In nodular scars the collagen bundles are hyper-
The collagen bundles surround and isolate adnexal
 trophic and hyalinized, while collagen bundles in nodular
 dermatofbrosis are increased in number but morpholog-
normal, or hair follicles may be hyperkeratotic, and
ically normal. Moreover the presence of epidermal
hyperplastic and elongated. The overlying epidermis has
hyperplasia in nodular scars separates them from nodular
mild to moderate acanthosis. Smaller lesions are usually
dermatofbrosis.
Fibrous tumors
713
ACROCHORDON AND
ACROCHORDONOUS PLAQUE
(Synonyms: skin tag, fbroepithelial polyp, fbromatous
polyp, fbromatous plaque)
Acrochordons are common hyperplastic lesions of the
dermis and overlying epidermis in humans (Heenan,
1997; Mehregan et al., 1995). The etiology of acrochor-
dons or fbroepithelial polyps is not clear. Some may be
a proliferative response to trauma or resolving focal
furunculosis.
Acrochordons, often referred to as skin tags, have been
recognized in dogs and cats. Numerous closely associated
small acrochordons, creating a plaque, have been seen in
dogs and are referred to as acrochordonous plaques
(Bidaut et al., 2003).
Clinical features
Acrochordons
These lesions, also referred to as skin tags, are fairly
common in dogs and uncommon in cats. Solitary or
multiple, polypoid or fliform masses are usually several
millimeters in diameter and less than 1 cm in length. The
overlying epidermis is thickened, alopecic and often
hyperpigmented. Larger lesions may be focally eroded or
ulcerated due to self-trauma or frictional damage. Lesions
Fig. 27.3 Dermal nodular dermatofibrosis in a Gerrman Shepherd
are usually truncal, but may also occur at pressure points
Dog. A poorly demarcated zone of dermal expansion by mature
 on the legs or sternum. Sternal and leg lesions may be up
collagen separates, but does not disturb, adnexa.
to 3 cm in length and 1 cm in diameter.
Fig.  27.4 Higher magnification of
nodular
 dermatofibrosis
showing
thickened collagen bundles and low
cellularity.
714
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Affected animals are middle-aged or older. There are no
known breed predilections. Acrochordons are benign
lesions and excision is curative.
Acrochordonous plaques
These lesions, also referred to as fbromatous plaques, are
nonpruritic and nonpainful (Bidaut et al., 2003). They are
composed of small fliform polyps, resembling villi, which
are clustered closely together to form a plaque. Each
polyp resembles a small acrochordon. The entire plaque
may have a linear confguration and may measure up to
5 cm. Acrochordonous plaques occur on the dorsal neck
or on the head.
The plaques have been reported in English Bulldogs and
a Pug (Bidaut et al., 2003) and have been observed in a
Pit Bull Terrier as well. This suggests that these lesions
may preferentially develop in bulldog type breeds with
heavy necks and redundant skin. Most lesions are seen in
young dogs, but have been reported in dogs up to 6 years
of age (Bidaut et al., 2003). Based on the few cases
observed, acrochordonous plaques are benign and
surgical excision is curative.
Histopathology
Acrochordons (Figures 27.5 and 27.6)
These filiform or polypoid lesions generally are composed
of mature collagen arranged as in normal dermis, but
Fig. 27.5 Acrochordon in a dog. A small polypoid mass is com-
often with slightly increased vascularity. In some cases
posed of mature collagen.
the dermal component is markedly vascular. Collagen
Fig. 27.6 Acrochordon in a dog.
There is a sprinkling of inflammatory
cells between the mature collagen
bundles; note digitated configuration
of overlying epidermis.
Fibrous tumors
715
Fig. 27.7 Acrochordonous plaque in a
dog.  Multiple small acrochordons form
villous structures; note prominent pale
edema.
bundles in the larger polyps may be thicker and more
tightly packed than those of the normal dermis. The over-
lying epidermis is acanthotic, hyperkeratotic, and often
has a digitated confguration. Epidermal hyperpigmenta-
tion is frequently observed. Larger lesions often have a
sprinkling of mononuclear inflammatory cells below the
epidermis. Focal erosions or ulcers are common, and are
accompanied by serocellular crusting and infltration of
neutrophils and plasma cells. Hair follicles and adnexal
glands are not present within the polyp, but may be
hyperplastic and/or dysplastic at its base. Hair follicles
may exhibit hyperplasia of the follicular epithelium,
hyperkeratosis, and/or degeneration accompanied by
trichogranuloma formation.
Differential diagnosis of acrochordons is limited due to
 the distinctive fliform or cylindrical conformation of the
-p aq oi paau Aeu suoproqooroe piodkjod 1aaret 'uoisa
ferentiated from polypoid fbromas. Acrochordons are
more fliform, tend to have increased vascularity, and lack
the repetitive swirled or bundled collagen fbers of fibro-
mas. Markedly vascular acrochordons may resemble
polypoid hemangiomas, granulation tissue-type heman-
giomas, or small lymphangiomas; however, vessels are not
as numerous or uniform as in these vascular neoplasms
(see Chapter 28).
Acrochordonous plaques (Figures 27.7 and 27.8)
These are characterized by a discrete area of numerous
small acrochordonous lesions with litle intervening
normal skin. Each individual villus-like structure is com-
posed of normal appearing collagen. The collagen bundles
may be separated by marked edema or focal mucin
Fig. 27.8 Higher magnification of acrochordonous plaque in a dog.
limited to the superfcial aspect. The dermal vessels in the
Secondary changes include focal erosion, severe congestion with
enlarged papillae are dilated, and microhemorrhage may
hemorrhage, and diffuse inflammation due to surface perturbation.
716
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
be observed. The overlying epidermis may be normal or
moderately hyperplastic with formation of rete ridges,
basketweave hyperkeratosis, and focal plaques of parak-
eratosis or compact keratin. The tips of some papillae are
eroded or ulcerated, and there is subjacent neutrophilic
inflammation. Intralesional follicles at the base of larger 
papillae are dilated and have an increased amount of
keratin. There is a pleocellular perivascular to interstitial
dermatitis predominantly around these adnexa. The sur-
rounding dermis may be fbrotic. Differential diagnosis of
acrochordonous plaque is not problematical as these
lesions have a unique morphologic appearance.
DERMATOFIBROMA
 In humans, dermatofbromas are listed under the group
of fibrohistiocytic processes (Rosai, 1996; Weiss & Gold-
blum, 2001). Controversy exists as to whether these
lesions are reactive or neoplastic. Human dermatofbro-
mas do not undergo involution, which supports 
a
neoplastic etiology (Heenan, 1997; Weiss & Goldblum,
2001). Alternatively, some dermatofbromas have been
interpreted as a form of fbrosing dermatitis with slow
regression; a reactive process in response to trauma or
arthropod bites has been suggested (Ackerman et al.,
1982). Analyzing lesions in female patients for clonality
by assessing the methylation of the androgen receptor
gene on the X chromosome (HUMARA) reveals conflict-
ing results; both clonal and polyclonal proliferations have
been observed (Chen et al., 2000; Hui et al., 2002).
Fig. 27.9 Dermatofibroma in a cat. Fibrocytic cells and collagen
 Dermatofbromas have been recognized in dogs and
fibers are arranged in haphazard bundles and small whorls; note
cats. The natural progression of dermatofbroma in
moderate cellularity.
animals has not been studied as biopsies of these lesions
are invariably excisional rather than incisional. Hence, no
conclusive data are available to indicate whether canine
and feline dermatofbromas should be considered reactive
arranged in haphazard bundles and small whorls. The
lesions or benign neoplasms.
lesion extends to the dermal-epidermal junction and
often has a base-narrow architecture. The spindle cells are
interspersed with a moderate stroma composed of colla-
Clinical features
gen fbers and bundles of varying thickness, some of
Dermatofbroma occurs uncommonly in cats, and is seen
which may represent pre-existing dermal collagen.
rarely in dogs. Dermatofbromas present as solitary, frm,
Whorls of spindle cells are frequently oriented around
circumscribed dermal nodules that are generally less than
thick collagen bundles seen in cross-section. Mineraliza-
 2cm in diameter. There is alopecia and the overlying epi-
tion of collagen bundles is occasionally observed. The
dermis is thickened. Lesions occur most often on the head,
central porion of the nodule may have decreased cellu-
but other sites may be affected.
larity as compared to the periphery, suggesting centrifu-
Affected animals are usually less than 5 years of age.
gal maturation or possibly regression. The margins of
There are no known breed or sex predispositions.
dermatofbroma often have a ragged appearance due to
 Dermatofbromas are benign lesions and surgical excision
dissection of collagen bundles of the adjacent dermis by
is curative.
the spindle cells.
The spindle and stellate cells have scant, pale cytoplasm
and fusiform, hyperchromatic nuclei. Nucleoli are incon-
Histopathology (Figures 27.9 through 27.11)
spicuous, and mitotic fgures are rare. The overlying epi-
Dermatofbroma is a circumscribed but unencapsulated
dermis is acanthotic. In some cases there is variable
dermal mass comprising spindle and stellate cells
reactive inflammation, predominantly along the margins.
Fibrous tumors
717
Fig. 27.10 Higher magnification of derrmatofibroma of Fig. 27.9,
Fig. 27.11 Dermatofibroma in a cat. Note patchy darkly staining
showing thick collagen bundles entrapped by whorls of proliferat-
mineralization of collagen fibers.
ing fibrocytes and delicate collagen fibers.
Lymphocytes, mast cells, histiocytes, and occasional
Immunohistochemistry
eosinophils and neutrophils are observed. In contrast to
Dermatofbromas are positive for vimentin, but lack
human dermatofbromas, xanthomatous macrophages
 expression of additional markers that would assist in con-
are rarely seen.
frming the diagnosis and differentiating it from fbroma
Differential diagnoses  for dermatofbroma include
or
well-differentiated fbrosarcoma. Canine dermato-
fbroma, keloidal fbroma, well-differentiated fbrosar-
fibromas also are characterized by admixed spindle shaped
coma, and superficial benign peripheral nerve sheath
and/or round histiocytes that express CD45 and CD18.
tumor. Fibroma has lower cellularity, uniform collagen
fber diameter, and a more repetitive bundled or swirled
Negative staining for S100 and neuron-specific enolase
(NSE) may help to exclude a nerve sheath neoplasm.
patterning of the fbrocytic cells when compared to
dermatofbroma. Keloidal fbroma has characteristic
markedly enlarged hyalinized collagen bundles and
NODULAR FASCIITIS
usually lacks the reactive inflammatory component
seen in dermatofbroma. The cellularity of dermatof-
Nodular fasciitis in humans has often been referred to as
broma may be similar to that of well-differentiated
 a ‘pseudosarcomatous' proliferation (Weiss & Goldblum,
fbrosarcoma and peripheral nerve sheath tumor, but
2001), as some lesional cells exhibit anisocytosis and
 the haphazard fbrocytic arrangement, minimal mitotic 
anisokaryosis. Nodular fascitis is considered a benign
activity, entrapment of thickened collagen bundles, and
reactive lesion, as it is composed of a mixture of fbro-
secondary inflammation are differentiating features of
blasts, myofibroblasts, and inflammatory cells (Coffin
dermatofbroma.
et al., 1998), and displays benign clinical behavior.
718
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
The etiology of nodular fascitis has not been con-
frmed, but underlying trauma has been suggested in
humans (Heenan, 1997; Weiss & Goldblum, 2001).
Involvement of myofbroblasts in tissue repair and wound
healing has been well established (Gabbiani et al., 1972);
the presence of myofbroblasts may support the hypothe-
sis of a traumatic etiology.
Nodular fascitis has been recognized in dogs, but
unfortunately the term has been used to designate diverse
proliferative processes in  veterinary medicine.  The
authors will limit the use of the term *nodular fascitis’ to
a lesion characterized by a poorly demarcated mass
attached to subcutaneous fascia (Hendrick et al., 1998),
Or, occasionally, involving deep dermis. This lesion is most
consistent with nodular fasciitis described in humans
(Heenan, 1997; Weiss & Goldblum, 2001). Other lesions
previously documented as nodular fascitis include gran-
ulomatous episcleritis and conjunctivitis, and retrobulbar
infltrating tumor masses in dogs (Bellhorn & Henkind,
1967; Gwin et al., 1977). The clinical behavior, response
 to immunosuppressive therapy, morphologic features, and
phenotypic characteristics of granulomatous episcleritis
and conjunctivitis are consistent with the systemic form
of reactive histiocytosis (Affolter & Moore, 2000) (see
Chapter 13). The reported retrobulbar masses were
markedly infltrative and exhibited aggressive behavior,
which suggests a fbrosarcoma or 1
myofbroblastic
fbrosarcoma rather than a reactive process.
Clinical features
Fig. 27.12 Nodular fascitis in a dog. This poorly demarcated mass
is composed of irregularly arranged spindle cells. Note the promi-
Nodular fascitis is fairly uncommon in dogs; the exact
nent interstitial hemorrhage and congestion in the right half and
incidence, however, is unknown. Some animals have a
incorporation of adipose tissue at upper right.
history of previous trauma to the area. However marked
tenderness or pain in the affected area, as seen often in
humans with nodular fascitis, is not a consistent finding.
resembling a mixture of fbrocytes and immature
Canine nodular fasciitis usually presents as a solitary, sub-
fbroblasts. The margins of the lesion are typically
cutaneous, poorly demarcated mass that is less than 2 cm
jagged or spiked, and may incorporate adjacent skeletal
but may measure up to 5 cm in diameter. The location
muscle fibers. The proliferative tissue is highly vascular-
may be anywhere in the subcutis. Rarely, lesions involve
ized and in some areas resembles an organizing
the deep dermis and are less than 1 cm in diameter.
hematoma.
Only
J scant amounts of collagen are
 Nodular fascitis is often observed in young dogs. Breed
present, and the extracellular matrix may be rich in
predilections have not been reported, although large
 mucopolysaccharides.
breed dogs with rambunctious temperaments seem to be
The spindle cells have a moderate amount of cytoplasm
most often affected, which supporrs a role for trauma.
 and oval, elongated, and pointed nuclei. Moderate aniso-
 The lesions are benign and complete surgical excision is
cytosis and anisokaryosis may be present and, occasion-
curative.
ally, mitotic fgures are numerous. Admixed are small
numbers of lymphocytes, macrophages, and plasma cells.
 Extravasated erythrocytes are often present.
Histopathology (Figures 27.12 and 27.13)
Nodular f
fascitis  should be(
differentiated from
Nodular fascitis is characterized by a subcutaneous,
fbrosarcoma, myofbroblastic fbrosarcoma, spindle cell
poorly demarcated mass attached to fascia. Rarely, lesions
lpoma, granulation tissue, and a reactive nodular process
involve the deep dermis and are significantly smaller. The
that also has been referred to as “inflammatory pseudo-
mass is composed of irregularly arranged spindle cells
tumor’ in humans (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001). With
Fibrous tumors
719
numerous aggregates of lymphocytes and plasma cells,
and fewer granulocytes. In contrast to nodular fascitis,
which is characterized by jagged edges, “inflammatory
pseudotumors? are well circumscribed.
Immunohistochemistry
Evaluation of nodular fasciitis in humans indicates that
the majority of the proliferating spindle cells express
vimentin, consistent with fbroblasts. In humans some
cells coexpress α-smooth-muscle actin, indicating that
 they are of myofbroblastic origin (Zuber & Finley, 1994;
Coffn et al., 1998; Weiss & Goldblum, 2001). Similar
observations have been made in dogs. Thus, immunohis-
tochemistry is of limited assistance in the separation of
nodular fasciitis from fbrosarcoma, myofbroblastic
fbrosarcoma, and spindle cell lipoma. The differential
diagnosis of these lesions relies upon histomorphologic
features (see above).
FIBROMA
Fibromas are benign fbrocytic neoplasms that may arise
in the dermis or subcutis (Mehregan et al., 1995; Weiss
& Goldblum, 2001). Fibromas include moderately cellu-
lar masses with scant collagen as well as masses with few
fbroblasts embedded in abundant collagen. Similar to
humans, the etiology of canine and feline fbromas is not
Fig. 27.13 Higher magnification of nodular fascitis of Fig. 27.12.
known.
Note the prominent vascularization and multifocal inflammation.
Clinical features
fbrosarcomas and myofbroblastic fbrosarcomas, the
Dermal or subcutaneous fbromas are relatively uncom-
cells are less haphazardly arranged, and repetitive inter-
mon in dogs and cats, accounting for fewer than 2% of
lacing bundles and whorls are often present. Moreover,
 all canine skin tumors in one large survey (Goldschmidt
reactive inflammation, neovascularization, and hemor-
& Shofer, 1992) and for 1% to 3% of feline skin tumors
rhage are either absent or less pronounced in the sarco-
in two retrospective studies (Carpenter et al., 1987; Miller
mas. In some cases, clinical differentiation is required.
et al., 1991). Fibromas present as solitary, frm or rubbery,
Lesions of nodular fasciitis are usually smaller than soft
circumscribed r
masses with an ovoid, dome-shaped, or
tissue sarcomas. Nodular fascitis is benign and self-
polypoid conformation. Fibromas usually range from 1 to
limiting, while fbrosarcoma and myofbroblastic fbrosar-
5cm in diameter but are occasionally much larger. The
coma are characterized by local infltration, marked ten-
 overlying epidermis is often alopecic and atrophic. Ulcer-
dency for recurrence, and a potential for metastasis. In
ation may be present in larger lesions. Common sites in
spindle cell lipomas, the fusiform cells are more regularly
the dog are the head and legs (Goldschmidt & Shofer,
arranged and are admixed with mature lipocytes; the
1992). Although reported feline cases are few, legs and
borders of the mass are well circumscribed. Regular gran-
head are also typical sites (Carpenter et al., 1987; Miller
ulation tissue shows a transition from large, pleomorphic
et al., 1991).
cells centrally to more mature fbrocytes peripherally, and
Affected animals are middle-aged or older. There is no
a central hematoma cavity is often present. Nodular fasci-
sex predilection (Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992). Although
itis has a more irregular admixture of the spindle cells.
breed incidence may be obfuscated by inclusion of
The process referred to as ^inflammatory pseudotumor’ in
multiple fbrous proliferations in the data, Doberman
humans, which is seen by the authors in dogs, is a dis-
Pinschers, Boxers, and Golden Retrievers are likely pre-
crete mass composed of reactive mesenchymal cells with
disposed (Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992).
720
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 27.14 Fibroma in a dog. The predominantly subcutaneous,
Fig. 27.15 Higher magnification of fibroma in a dog. Collagen
well-dermarcated nodule is composed of dense mature collagen.
fibers and fibrocytes are arranged in a repetitive pattern of interlac-
ing bundles and swirls. Note low cellularity.
Histopathology (Figures 27.14 and 27.15)
 Nucleoli are inconspicuous, and mitotic fgures are rarely
Dermal fbromas are small and circumscribed but unen-
observed.
capsulated masses that often blend gradually into adja-
 Differential diagnoses for fbroma include collagenous
cent dermal collagen. Subcutaneous fbromas are very
hamartoma, nodular dermatofbrosis, nodular scar,
well circumscribed and usually larger than their dermal
keloidal fbroma, dermatofbroma, large acrochordons,
counterparts. Fibromas are composed of bundles of col-
and benign peripheral nerve sheath tumor (for cellular
lagen that are generally thicker and have more repetitive
fbromas). Differentiation of dermal fbroma from col-
patterns than those of the normal dermis. The collagen of
 lagenous hamartoma and nodular dermatofbrosis can be
a fbroma is often arranged in interlacing bundles with a
problematic, particularly when adnexal entrapment is
slightly undulating confguration. Broad swirls or waves
present in the fbroma. However, fbromas are more
of collagen may also be observed. The stroma may
discrete, tend to be more cellular, and have a repetitive,
contain small amounts of mucin. The overlying epidermis
swirled or interlacing pattern of collagen fbers. Nodular 
is generally normal or atrophic. Adnexal structures are
dermatofibrosis is a multicentric syndrome, while fbroma
usually completely displaced by the collagen of dermal
is almost always solitary. The collagen bundles of hyper-
fbromas, but adnexal entrapment is occasionally noted.
 trophic scars are thicker and denser than those in fbroma,
Cellularity is usually low and uniform throughout the
 and there is usually residual evidence of an inflammatory
mass; occasional tumors show moderate cellularity dif-
etiology. Keloidal fbromas are characterized by large
fusely. Small, well-differentiated fbrocytes are distributed
and markedly hyalinized collagen fbers and numerous
between the collagen bundles. The fbrocyte nuclei may
admixed  spindle-shaped  or round histiocytic  cells.
be slightly enlarged and are fusiform and euchromatic.
Dermatofbromas are more cellular have irregular
Fibrous tumors
721
borders and collagen fber arrangement, and may have
in dogs 2 to 12 years of age, with a higher incidence in
mineralization of collagen bundles. The presence of
 male dogs. Shorthaired breeds (Rhodesian Ridgeback, Pit
inflammatory cells is common in dermatofbromas and
Bull Terrier, American Staffordshire Terrier Boston
rare in fbromas. Large acrochordons are differentiated
 Terrier, and Boxer) were over-represented in this study of
from polypoid fbromas by the presence of increased vas-
16 dogs; however, the small number of reported cases
cularity and absence of a repetitive swirled or bundled
does not permit an accurate assessment of breed
collagen fber pattern in the former. In comparison to
 predisposition.
benign peripheral nerve sheath tumors, fbromas are less 
The vast majority of keloidal fbromas are benign and
cellular and lack palisading and whorling of cells. The
surgical excision is curative. Rare transformation into
stromal collagen is coarser and often abundant in
 keloidal fibrosarcomas has been recognized (Mikaelian &
fbroma, while peripheral nerve sheath tumors have a del-
Gross, 2002).
icate collagenous matrix.
Histopathology (Figures 27.16 and 27.17)
Immunohistochemistry
Keloidal fbromas may be limited to the dermis or extend
Fibromas are composed of vimentin+ fbroblasts. In con-
into the subcutis. They usually protrude above the skin
 trast to fbromas, canine dermatofbromas are character-
surface. Alternatively, keloidal fbromas may arise from
ized by admixed spindle-shaped and/or round histiocytes
the subcutaneous tissue. Most keloidal fbromas are
that express CD45 and CD18. Some benign peripheral
poorly demarcated and gradually blend into the sur-
nerve sheath tumors are posiive for S100 and glial fb-
rounding tissue. Occasionally, well demarcated, discrete
rillary acidic protein (GFAP), which assists in differenti-
nodules are observed. The nodules comprise streams
ating them from more cellular cutaneous fbromas.
of markedly thickened,
,hyalinized collagenf
fibers
CANINE KELOIDAL FIBROMA
The term “keloid’ refers to marked overgrowth of scar
tissue in the skin associated with deposition of large
hyalinized collagen bundles (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001).
Keloidal fbromas resemble regular fbromas, but they are
characterized by the presence of large keloid-like collagen
bundles (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001). Keloidal fbromas
have been recognized in dogs (Goldschmidt & Shofer,
1992; Mikaelian & Gross, 2002), but have not been
documented in cats.
 The exact etiology of keloidal fbromas is not known,
but they are considered to emerge from an inflarmmatory
process. The lesions consistently contain various numbers
of reactive histiocytes, which supports this hypothesis.
Occasionally, foci of resolving hemorrhage resembling
organizing hematomas are also seen, suggesting a trau-
matic etiology.
Clinical features
Keloidal fbromas in dogs are rare (Goldschmidt &
Shofer, 1992; Mikaelian & Gross, 2002). They present
usually as poorly demarcated nodules or plaques, which
measure 6 to 18 mm in diameter. Most lesions have an
intact surface, but occasionally ulcerate. Keloidal fbro-
mas may develop at any site and have been reported to
occur on the thorax, thighs, shoulder flank, and perineal
regions (Mikaelian & Gross, 2002).
Keloidal fbromas may develop at any age. The study
Fig. 27.16 Keloidal fibroma in a dog. The subcutaneous nodule is
of Mikaelian & Gross (2002) reported keloidal fbromas
composed of streams of markedly thickened collagen.
722
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
growth separate keloidal fbrosarcomas from their benign
counterparts.
Keloidal fbromas may need to be distinguished from
dermatofbromas, fbromas, nodular hyperplastic scars,
and keloidal change of collagen within mast cell tumors.
With the exception of mast cell tumors with keloidal
change of the lesional collagen, the other proliferative dis-
eases lack the presence of the distinctive, large hyalinized
 collagen bundles. The absence of proliferating mast cells
separates keloidal fbromas from mast cell tumors.
Immunohistochemistry
Similar to regular fbromas, keloidal fbromas are com-
posed of vimentin-positive fbroblasts. The admixed reac-
tive fusiform or rounded histiocytes express the common
leukocyte antigens CD45 and CD18.
FIBROSARCOMA
Fibrosarcoma, a malignant neoplasm arising from fbro-
blasts, can mimic various other spindle cell tumors in
humans, and hence has become a diagnosis of exclusion
(Weiss & Goldblum, 2001). As mesenchymal cells, the
neoplastic fbroblasts retain their expression of vimentin.
 Fibrosarcomas occur in dogs and cats. Variants recog-
nized include fbrosarcoma of follicular papillary origin,
keloidal fbrosarcoma, and myofbroblastic sarcoma.
Fig. 27.17 Higher magnification of keloidal fibroma in a dog. The
Fibroblasts in culture tend to form adherent sheets of
markedly thickened and irregular, hyalinized collagen bundles are
long, stellate, haphazardly arranged cells, while dermal
surrounded by proliferating fibrocytes.
papillary cells in culture form structures very similar to
the hair follicle papillae (Bratka-Robia et al., 2002). These
fndings support the hypothesis that the cells of the unique
surrounded by spindled fbroblastic cells arranged in fas-
fbrosarcoma of alleged follicular papillary origin do arise
cicles and packets. Fibers are often irregular in shape;
from the dermal papilla. This neoplasm has no known
aiuds aui Aq juauaseidar suoiapun aq oi readde suos
human analogue.
cell population. The center generally is less cellular than
In some spindle cell tumors the proliferating cells
the periphery of the nodule, and variable numbers of
 express C-smooth-muscle actin, which indicates differen-
thinner collagen fbers are intermingled with the large,
tiation to myofbroblasts, a cell type most commonly
hyalinized collagen fbers.
associated with granulation tissue secondary to trauma in
The spindle cells are characterized by pale cytoplasm,
humans (Gabbiani et al., 1972). Tumors of myofbrob-
 indistinct cell borders, and centrally located, elongated,
lasts have been referred to as myofbroblastic sarcoma,
pointed, normochromic nuclei with small basophilic
myofbrosarcoma, and myofbroblastic fbrosarcoma. A
 nucleoli. Mitotic fgures are rare. Admixed there are large,
direct association with previous trauma has not been
round to oval cells with vacuolated cytoplasm, and oval,
 proven in most cases of canine and feline myofbroblastic
slightly elongated or occasionally indented nuclei. These
fbrosarcoma.
cells are consistent with histiocytes. Numerous micro-
The causal relationship between feline sarcoma virus
hemorhages are dispersed throughout the nodules.
 (FeSV) and multicentric fbrosarcoma in young cats is well
Rarely, transformation into keloidal fbrosarcomas
established (Hardy, 1981). Vaccine-induced fbrosarcoma,
occurs (see below); the reported case showed gradual
a subtype of vaccine-induced sarcoma in cats, is a
transition beginning in the deep subcutaneous portion of
 complication of rabies and feline leukemia virus (FeLV)
the fbroma (Mikaelian & Gross, 2002). The presence of
vaccines primarily (Macy & Hendrick, 1996). Vaccine-
cellular atypia, increased mitotic rate, and infltrative
 induced sarcomas display multiple morphologies, often
Fibrous tumors
723
within a single tumor, and may originate from different
The overall recurrence rate of feline fbrosarcomas is
cell types other than fbroblasts. This complex neoplasm
more than 70% for most anatomic locations, and multi-
will be discussed separately (see Chapter 33).
ple recurrences are common (Brown et al., 1978; Bostock
& Dye, 1979). Metastatic rates of 11% to 14% have been
reported; the lung is the most common site (Brown et al.,
Clinical features
1978; Bostock & Dye, 1979). According to Bostock and
Fibrosarcoma has been considered the most common
Dye (1979), fbrosarcomas on the pinna and flank of cats
malignant mesenchymal neoplasm in cats and represents
had no recurrence or metastasis compared with those on
15% to 17% of all feline skin and subcutaneous tumors
the head, thorax, or legs; this may be a reflection of
in several surveys (Carpenter et al., 1987; Miller et al.,
relative ease of wide surgical excision at those sites. A
1991; Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992). Fibrosarcomas are
mitotic index of less than 5 per 10 high power felds (40x)
uncommon in dogs and represent about 1.5% of all skin
and subcutaneous tumors i
inone
large
survey
times, but was unrelated to the rate of recurrence
(Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992). Fibrosarcomas of follicu-
(Bostock & Dye, 1979).
lar papillary origin are rare in the authors' experience.
Currently, there is no documentation specifically
Fibrosarcomas are frm, poorly circumscribed, often
regarding the behavior of canine and feline myofbro-
multilobular masses that measure from less than 1 cm to
blastic fbrosarcoma; these were probably grouped with
more than 15 cm in diameter. Alopecia and ulceration
 other fbrosarcomas previously. The biologic behavior
commonly are observed.
of fbrosarcoma of follicular papillary origin is also
Most fbrosarcomas arise in the subcutis and may occur
unknown; local recurrence(
developed in one case
 at any anatomical site. Intradermal fbrosarcomas are
observed by the authors.
uncommon in cats and rare in dogs. The majority of both
canine and feline subcutaneous fbrosarcomas are located
Histopathology
on the trunk and legs. Pinnae and digits appear to be pref-
erential sites for dermal fbrosarcoma in cats. The authors
Fibrosarcoma (Figures 27.18 to 27.20)
have observed keloidal fbrosarcoma arising within a
Fibrosarcomas are irregular, often multilobular neo-
vaccine-induced sarcoma (see Chapter 33).
plasms involving the subcutis, occasionally the dermis, or
The average age of animals with fbrosarcoma
both. Occasionally, tumors are circumscribed and may be
approximately 9 years in cats and 8.5 years in dogs; there
partially encapsulated, but most tumors have ill-defined,
is no sex predilection in either species (Goldschmidt &
 infltrative margins. Fibrosarcomas are composed of large
Shofer 1992). Feline sarcoma virus-induced multicentric
spindle cells arranged predominantly  in  interlacing
fbrosarcomas occur in cats as young as a few months of
bundles of varying size. The individual bundles are
age (Goldschmidt & Hendrick, 2002). Fibrosarcoma also
usually fairly broad, and the angles of intersection are
is occasionally observed in dogs less than 1 year of age.
highly variable. Some undulating or swirled cell arrange-
Gordon Setters, Irish Wolfhounds, Brittany Spaniels,
ments may occur The classically described chevron or
Golden Retrievers, and Doberman Pinschers appear to be
 herringbone pattern of small bundles intersecting at con-
at higher risk (Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992).
sistent angles is uncommon. Cellularity varies consider-
Fibrosarcomas are generally of low to moderate malig-
ably among individual tumors and often from field to feld
Aq pis si m sis a are  
within a given tumor. The major component of the stroma
frequent postexcisional local recurrence. The incidence of
is mature collagen. In highly cellular variants with scant
distant metastasis is low and tends to occur late in the
stroma, the presence of intercellular collagen may be con-
course of the disease. A recurrence rate of 34% and an
frmed by Masson's trichrome stain. Small amounts of
incidence of pulmonary metastasis of 9% have been
mucin may be admixed with the collagen. Chondroid or
reported for canine fbrosarcomas (Bostock & Dye,
osseous metaplasia is occasionally observed.
1980); tumors with a high mitotic rate (>9 per 10 high
The tumor cells have pale, poorly defined, scant cyto-
power fields) had a significantly higher rate of metastasis.
plasm. Nuclei are oval to fusiform and vesicular, and have
The study of Kuntz et al. (1997) described local recur-
one or more prominent nucleoli. Some neoplasms have a
 rence of 15% for canine soft tissue spindle cell sarcomas,
mixture of vesicular and hyperchromatic nuclei. Variable
including fbrosarcomas; the lower recurrence rate in this
numbers of dispersed multinucleated giant cells may be
study may reflect more sophisticated or aggressive surgi-
 present; poorly differentiated fibrosarcomas with abun-
cal techniques. The combined rate of metastasis for all
dant giant cells may present as anaplastic sarcoma with
sarcomas in this retrospective study was
17%and
giant cells (see Chapter 33). Nuclear hyperchromatism
occurred primarily in high-grade tumors (mitotic index 20
and multinucleation are more commonly observed in
or greater) (Kuntz et al., 1997).
feline fbrosarcomas. The mitotic rate of fbrosarcomas is
724
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 27.18 Fibrosarcoma in a cat.
Spindle cells are arranged in tight inter-
weaving bundles; note a focal aggre-
 gate of small lymphocytes.
Fig-
27.19 High magnificationof
fbrosarcoma in a cat. Spindle cells are
arranged in broad interlacing bundles
in moderate collagenous stroma.
highly variable. A median of 14 mitotic fgures per 10
necrotic foci. The presence of a dispersed reactive inflam-
high power felds (40x) has been reported (Kuntz et al.,
matory infltrate varies; it may be more prominent in
1997). Atypical, bizarre mitotic fgures may be present.
FeSV-induced fbrosarcomas of young cats. H
However,
 Nuclear morphology and mitotic index do not correlate
feline fbrosarcomas often have mild to moderate periph-
well with degree of stromal collagen production.
eral lymphoplasmacytic inflammation, even in those with
Fibrosarcomas with abundant, sclerotic stroma can
no known vaccine association. Occasionally, there are
have highly malignant cytologic features, while very
admixed large round and spindle-shaped histiocytes and
cellular neoplasms can be composed of relatively mature
intralesional reactive multinucleated giant cells of histio-
fbroblasts.
cytic origin, as seen in anaplastic sarcoma with giant cells
Ulceration, necrosis and hemorrhage are common
(see Chapter 33). Identification of these reactive histio-
secondary features. Neutrophils may predominate in
cytic cells requires immunohistochemistry (see below).
Fibrous tumors
725
Fig. 27.20 Higher magnification of
feline fibrosarcoma of Fig. 27.19,
showing
pleomorphic
Oval-to-
fusiform nuclei, variable chromatin
patterns, and prominent nucleoli.
Differential diagnoses for fbrosarcoma include spindle
of red blood cells may be seen. The cellularity of der-
cell predominant histiocytic sarcoma, malignant periph-
 matofbroma may be similar to that of a low-grade dermal
eral nerve sheath tumor leiomyosarcoma, nodular
fbrosarcoma, but the nonrepetitive meshwork arrange-
fasciitis, anaplastic sarcoma with giant cells of other mes-
 ment of fbrocytes, minimal mitotic activity, and entrap-
enchymal cell origin, and, for intradermal lesions only,
ment of thickened collagen bundles are indicative of
dermatofbroma and spindle-cell squamous cell carci-
 dermatofbroma. Differentiation from spindle-cell squa-
noma. Histiocytic sarcomas composed largely of spindle
mous cell carcinoma is particularly important for dermal
cells may be indistinguishable from fbrosarcomas featur-
fbrosarcomas in cats. Spindle-cell squamous cell carci-
ing giant cells; immunohistochemistry is required for dif-
noma usually shows contiguity with the epidermis and
ferentiation (see below). Peripheral nerve sheath tumors
may have foci of keratinization. Immunohistochermistry
may have a more complex architecture characterized by
may be required (see below). Anaplastic sarcoma with or
palisades, whorls, and neuroid structures. Long, serpen-
without giant cells may originate from various mes-
tine or twisted nuclei are more suggestive of neural origin.
enchymal cells, not only fbroblasts. Thus, immunohisto-
In contrast to fbrosarcomas, the tumor cells in peripheral
 chemistry is required to separate anaplastic sarcomas of
nerve sheath tumors have a basement membrane, which
fbroblastic origin from other anaplastic sarcomas (see
can be demonstrated by electron microscopy. Leiomyosar-
Chapter 33).
coma is distinguished from fbrosarcoma by minimal or
absent collagenous stroma, abundant cytoplasm with per-
Fibrosarcoma of follicular papillary origin
inuclear vacuoles, and frequent nuclear chromatin cross-
(Figures 27.21 and 27.22)
bars. Although leiomyosarcomas are composed of spindle
These tumors are characterized by poorly-circumscribed
cells with oval blunt-ended nuclei, and fbrosarcomas
dermal masses that often entrap multiple dysplastic hair
typically feature spindle cells with pointed nuclei, clear
follicles and may extend into the subcutis. Embedded
differentiation using nuclear morphology is often prob-
within a dense proliferation of long spindle cells arranged
lematic. Leiomyosarcomas usually lack intercellular col-
in broad bundles, as seen in regular fbrosarcoma (see
lagen, while the tumor cells of fbrosarcomas produce
above), there are small islands and nests of tightly-packed
variable amounts of collagen. Masson's trichrome stain
ovoid or short spindle cells with minimal, poorly-defined
may allow detection of small amounts of collagen in ques-
 cytoplasm and slightly elongated, small nuclei with con-
tionable cases, but immunohistochemistry is preferable
densed chromatin. These nests of cells resemble dermal
for defnitive diagnosis. Nodular fascitis may mimic a
 papillae of hair follicles. The small cell aggregates tend to
well-differentiated fbrosarcoma associated with fascia.
 be located below residual hair follicles, and transitional
However it tends to be highly vascularized and in some
zones between the large and small cell populations are
areas resembles an organizing hematoma. Extravasation
occasionally observed. Fibrosarcoma of follicular papil-
726
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 27.21 Fibrosarcoma of follicular
 papillary origin in a dog. Numerous
small nests of tightly packed cells are
embedded in bundles of larger spindle
cells.
Fig. 27.22 Higher magnification of
fibrosarcoma of follicular papillary
origin of Fig. 27.21, demonstrating
dermal papilla-like nests of small round
cells embedded in interlacing fascicles
of fibroblasts.
lary origin is distinct; differential diagnosis is uncompli-
Admixed are moderate numbers of CD18+ histiocytic
cated if papillary structures are recognized.
cells, which may represent dendritic cells or macrophages
(Mikaelian & Gross, 2002). Keloidal fbrosarcomas are
Keloidal fibrosarcoma
differentiated from other fbrosarcomas by the presence
 Rarely, keloidal fbromas progress to keloidal fbrosarco-
of keloidal change.
mas. While the dermal portion often resembles keloidal
fbroma (see p. 721), the subcutaneous portion of the
Myofibroblasticfibrosarcoma
tumor may develop invasive growth. These deeper
In general, myofbroblastic fbrosarcomas have morpho-
 nodules are characterized by closely packed, interlacing
logic features similar to fbrosarcomas (see above) and
bundles of spindle cells accompanied by a fbrovascular 
share their differential diagnoses. In myofbroblastic
stroma with entrapped large hyalinized collagen fbers.
fbrosarcoma, tumor cells may be more haphazardly
There is mild anisokaryosis and a mitotic index of 1 to 2.
arranged, larger, more pleomorphic and variably stellate.
Fibrous tumors
727
The mitotic rate varies markedly. Occasionally, myof-
myxomas out of 1143 total cutaneous and subcutaneous
broblastic fbrosarcomas may tightly encircle small vessels
tumors in dogs. Most myxomas are subcutaneous but
and hence, may mimic hemangiopericytomas. The latter
may involve the dermis secondarily. Occasionally, purely
lacks the haphazardly arranged spindle cell pattern often
intradermal myxomas are observed. Myxomas are soft,
seen in myofbroblastic fbrosarcoma. However, immuno-
ill-defined masses of variable size; dermal myxomas can
histochemistry is often required to confrm myofibroblas-
be smaller than 1 cm, while subcutaneous tumors often
tic origin (see below).
attain large proportions. There may be partial alopecia.
The cut surface of a myxoma oozes clear viscous fluid.
Immunohistochemistry
The majority of myxomas arise on the trunk or legs.
Affected dogs and cats are middle-aged or older. The
 All fbrosarcomas consistently express vimentin only, and
mean age in dogs is 9 years (Goldschmidt & Shofer,
thus immunohistochemical diagnosis is by exclusion of
1992). There is no known breed predilection. In dogs
other neoplasms. The intralesional reactive multinucle-
myxomas are more common in females than in males
ated giant cells, seen within some fbrosarcomas, express
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992). Myxomas may recur
the common leukocyte markers CD45 and CD18, while
locally due to diffculty in surgical assessment of tumor
multinucleated tumor giant cells of fbroblastic origin
margins.
express vimentin but lack leukocyte markers. Myofbro-
blastic fbrosarcomas express C-smooth-muscle actin and,
Histopathology (Figures 27.23 and 27.24)
on rare occasions, also desmin.
In contrast to fbrosarcomas, K
histiocytic sarcomas
 Myxomas are unencapsulated tumors that arise in the sub-
diffusely express the common leukocyte markers CD45
cutis and, occasionally, the dermis. Overall cellularity is
and CD18 together with CD1, CD11c, and MHC II.
low. Myxomas are composed of small stellate and spindle
 Leiomyosarcomas are consistently positive for α-smooth-
muscle actin as well as desmin. Differentiation of
leiomyosarcomas from desmin-positive myofbroblastic
fbrosarcoma may, therefore, not be possible based on
immunophenotyping.
 Some peripheral nerve sheath
tumors express S100 and glial fbrillary acidic protein
(GFAP), which will allow differentiation from fbrosarco-
mas. In contrast to fbrosarcomas, peripheral nerve sheath
tumors are surrounded by a laminin+ and collagen IV+
basement membrane. Immunohistochemistry for interme-
diate flaments will differentiate between cytokeratin+
spindle-cell squamous cell carcinoma and vimentin+
fbrosarcoma. In contrast to myofbroblastic fbrosarco-
mas, hemangiopericytomas consistently lack expression
of α-smooth-muscle actin and desmin.
MYXOMA
(Synonym: myxofbroma)
Myxomas arise from fbrocytes or other primitive mes-
enchymal cells that produce an abundant amount of
extracellular matrix composed of mucin rather than col-
lagen (Graadt van Roggen et al., 1999). Mucin is com-
posed of acid mucopolysaccharide rich in hyaluronic acid,
and stains blue with Alcian blue (pH 2.5). Positive stain-
ing disappears after pretreatment with hyaluronidase.
Clinical features
Myxomas are rare in dogs and cats (Bevier &
&
Goldschmidt, 1981; Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992). A
Fig. 27.23 Myxoma in a dog. Bundles and whorls of spindle cells
survey by one of the authors (E.J.W.) revealed six
are arranged in a pale mucinous stroma.
728
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
tion. Cytologic features of malignancy in myxosarcomas
are increased nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio, nuclear pleo-
 sd a pn rs  o
atypical mitotic figures.
Immunohistochemistry
 Similar to fbromas, myxomas express vimentin, but have
no known specifc protein markers that phenotypically
separate them from other mesenchymal tumors. Some
 peripheral nerve sheath tumors are positive for S100 and
glial fbrillary acidic protein (GFAP).
MYXOSARCOMA
(Synonym: myxofibrosarcoma)
 Similar to their benign counterparts, myxosarcomas arise
 from fbrocytes or other primitive mesenchymal cells that
produce an abundant amount of extracellular matrix,
a ipeer) ueeo ue ren unu jo pasoduon
Roggen et al. 1999). Mucin, composed of acid
mucopolysaccharide rich in hyaluronic acid, stains blue
with Alcian blue (pH 2.5); this positive staining disap-
 pears after pretreatment with hyaluronidase.
Clinical features
Myxosarcomas are rare in dogs and cats (Bevier &
Hig. 27.24 Higher magnification of myxoma in a dog. Large
Goldschmidt, 1981; Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992). A
amounts of mucin separate the narrow spindle and stellate cells.
survey by one of the authors (E.J.W.) revealed two myxo-
sarcomas out of 1143 total cutaneous and subcutaneous
tumors in dogs. The clinical features are essentially the
cells embedded in an abundant stroma of acid mucopoly-
same as for myxoma. Myxosarcomas are soft, ill-defned
saccharide rich in hyaluronic acid. Distribution may be
masses of variable size. Subcutaneous masses are usually
diffuse, or cells may be arranged in bundles. The mucinous
larger than dermal tumors. There may be partial alope-
 matrix generally has a slightly basophilic tint with hema-
cia, and secondary ulceration may be present in larger
toxylin and eosin (HE) stain and appears blue with Alcian
lesions. The cut surface of myxosarcomas oozes clear,
blue (pH 2.5). The stroma may also contain scant, wavy
viscous fluid. The majority of myxosarcomas arise on the
collagen fbers. The tumor cells have discrete, eosinophilic
trunk or legs.
cytoplasm and small, ovoid to fusiform nuclei. Nucleoli
 Mean age in dogs and cats is approximately 9 years
are inconspicuous and mitotic fgures are rare.
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992). Basset Hounds and
 Differential diagnosis for myxoma is limited due to its
Doberman Pinschers are reported to be predisposed
distinctive stromal characteristics. Myxomas may need to
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992). There is no known sex
be differentiated from myxoid peripheral nerve sheath
 predilection.
tumors and myxosarcomas. In contrast to myxomas,
 Myxosarcoma is a low-grade malignancy characterized
myxoid peripheral nerve sheath tumors have a multi-
by frequent local recurrence and invasion, but rare distant
 lobular confguration, and the tumor cells are arranged in
metastasis. The lung has been reported as the most
concentric whorls or form palisades. Peripheral nerve
common metastatic site (Pulley & Stannard, 1990).
sheath tumor cells have a basement membrane that can
be demonstrated by electron microscopy. Differentiation
Histopathology (Figures 27.25 and 27.26)
between myxoma and myxosarcoma can be problematic,
  s      
 Myxosarcomas are unencapsulated, poorly circumscribed
abundant stroma, low cellularity, and poor circumscrip-
neoplasms involving the subcutis and/or dermis. Myxo-
Fibrous tumors
729
Fig. 27.25 Myxosarcoma in a dog. Stellate and spindle cells are dis-
Fig. 27.26 Myxosarcoma in a cat. Spindle cells are arranged in
tributed through an abundant stroma of mucin and collagen fibers.
broad fascicles in a moderate stroma of mucin and collagen. Note
matic muclei, scattered binucleated cells, and mitotic figures (arrow).
fbrosis. Ulceration and secondary inflammation may be
sarcomas are composed of pleomorphic stellate and
present.
spindle cells distributed haphazardly through an abun-
 Differentiation between myxoma and myxosarcoma
dant stroma of acid mucopolysaccharide rich in
 can be diffcult as most benign and malignant variants have
hyaluronic  acid.
The mucinous stroma is lightly
abundant stroma, low cellularity, and poor circumscrip-
basophilic with hematoxylin and eosin and is Alcian blue-
tion. Cytologic features of malignancy in myxosarcomas
positive (pH 2.5); positive staining disappears after pre-
are increased nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio, nuclear pleo
     m rn
o asnd a pe su pe d
small amounts of collagen. Overall cellularity is moder-
 atypical mitotic fgures. Myxosarcoma may need to be dis-
ately low, as in myxomas, but many tumors contain areas
tinguished from myxoid liposarcoma and myxoid periph-
of increased cellulariry, resembling poorly differentiated
eral nerve sheath tumors. In contrast to myxosarcomas,
fbrosarcomas.
The neoplastic fbroblasts have scant, eosinophilic cyto-
ferentiated lipocytes admixed with the spindle cell popu-
plasm and pleomorphic nuclei, which are slightly larger
lation. Lipid stain, such as oil red O, on nonparaffinized
than those of myxomas. Nuclei are often hyperchromatic 
 tissue is useful in confrming adipocyte origin. In contrast
and may contain cytoplasmic invaginations. Nucleoli are
 to myxosarcoma, myxoid peripheral nerve sheath tumors
inconspicuous, and mitotic activity is low. Occasional
 are composed of spindle cells arranged in concentric
atypical mitotic fgures can usually be detected. Larger
 whorls or palisades; the tumor cells have a basement mem-
neoplasms may have areas of hemorrhage, necrosis and
 brane demonstrable by electron microscopy.
730
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Immunohistochemistry
Yager, lesions mainly affect young cats; the median age is
about 12 months and male cats are predisposed (Gross &
Myxosarcomas express vimentin, but no additional spe-
Affolter 1998).
cific proteins that allow separation from other mesenchy-
The lesions have virtually identical behavior to equine
mal tumors. Some peripheral nerve sheath tumors are
sarcoids. The nodules are slowly growing and may show
positive for S100 and glial fbrillary acidic protein
infltrative growth. Recurrence after surgery is common
(GFAP). This phenotype separates them from myxosar-
and is usually characterized by a markedly increased
comas. Occasionally, myxoid liposarcomas may express
growth rate. As reported by Yager better therapeutic
S100, but in general immunohistochemistry is not useful
results are seen with cryosurgery, radiation therapy, or
in the differentiation of these tumors from myxosarcoma.
amputation of lesions located on the tail or ears (Gross
& Affolter, 1998). Metastasis has not been observed.
FELINE SARCOID
Histopathology (Figures 27.27 and 27.28)
(Synonym: fbropapilloma)
Feline sarcoids are characterized by nonencapsulated,
Papillomavirus-induced fbroblastic proliferations, re-
poorly demarcated dermal nodules that may extend into
ferred to as ‘sarcoids', have been well documented in
the underlying subcutis. The nodules are composed of
horses (Lory et al., 1993; Marti et al., 1993; Goodrich et
 densely packed spindle cells and stellate cells that are hap-
al., 1998; Carr et al., 2001). The lesions are induced by
 hazardly arranged or whorled to form variably dense fas-
bovine papillomavirus-1 and -2 (BPV1 and BPV2) located
cicles. The tumor cells tend to abut the epidermis and may
within the proliferating fbroblasts. This is in contrast to
be perpendicularly arranged along the dermal-epidermal
species-specifc papillomaviral infections, which are char-
junction. The overlying epidermis is hyperplastic and
acterized by intraepithelial papillomavirus.
forms long spikes resembling rete pegs. A small amount
Yager described lesions similar to equine sarcoid in cats
of collagen is deposited berween the tumor cells.
in rural areas (Gross & Affolter, 1998). These lesions also
The tumor cells have indistinct borders, a small to mod-
have been referred to as fbropapillomas (Gumbrell,
erate amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm, and oval to elon-
1998). The involvement of papillomavirus in these feline
gated nuclei. There is fnely stippled chromatin and
lesions has been confrmed by Schulman et al. (2001). In
usually one small nucleolus. The mitotic rate varies from
 that report, testing of affected tissues by polymerase chain
1 to 5 per 10 high power felds (40x) (Schulmann et al.,
reaction (PCR) and DNA analysis revealed sequences con-
 2001). Small numbers of inflammatory cells may be dis-
sistent with papillomavirus (Schulman et al., 2001). The
persed throughout the mass and occasionally include a
sequence of the papillomavirus has relatively high iden-
moderate number of mast cells.
 tity with bovine and ovine papillomavirus (82%) as well
Feline sarcoid should be differentiated from other
as papillomavirus from deer and European elk (Teifke et
spindle cell tumors, including fbrosarcomas, spindle cell
al., 2002; Teifke et al., 2003). Similar to equine sarcoid,
predominant histiocytic sarcomas, peripheral nerve
in situ hybridization or testing by PCR is required to
sheath tumors, and amelanotic melanomas. Fibrosarco-
 demonstrate intralesional papillomavirus; Yager reported
mas, histiocytic sarcomas, and peripheral nerve sheath
that immunohistochemical identification of the virus is
tumors mostly arise in the subcutis or deep dermis. They
not possible (Gross & Affolter, 1998).
are characterized by a prominent tumor-free space, or
*Grenz zone', berween the tumor tissue and the overlying
Clinical features
epidermis, while feline sarcoid cells closely interact
with the hyperplastic epidermis. Fibrosarcomas and histi-
 The incidence of feline sarcoid is not known. It has been
 Ocytic sarcomas may have a variable number of multinu-
mostly seen in cats in rural areas, and “barn' cats are pre-
cleated tumor cells; stellate cells are not a primary feature.
disposed. Feline sarcoids occur as solitary or multiple
 Moreover histiocytic sarcomas are often composed of
 nodules that may measure up to 2cm in diameter. The
mixed spindle cell and round cell populations. Amelan-
nodules are frm and often have an ulcerated surface.
otic dermal melanomas extend to the epidermis, and
Yager described lesions that tended to develop on the
hence may mimic feline sarcoid; however, dermal
philtrum, nares, upper lip, digits, the tip of the tail, and
melanomas tend to have a mixed spindle and epithelioid
ears (Gross & Affolter 1998) and it was suggested that
morphology.
feline marking behavior may be involved in the induction
of these neoplasms. Occasionally, lesions also may occur
Immunohistochemistry
in the oral cavity.
Feline sarcoids are predominantly seen in domestic
Immunohistochemistry  does  not  allow  differentiation
shorthaired or domestic longhaired cats. As reported by
between fbrosarcoma and feline sarcoid as both tumors
Fibrous tumors
731
Fig. 27.27 Feline sarcoid. A dense
proliferation of spindle cells through
out the dermis abuts the epidermis,
which is hyperplastic and forms long
rete peg-like spikes.
Fig. 27.28 Higher magnification of
Fig.
27.27 showing
haphazardly
arranged spindle and stellate cells,
which occasionally form bundles. Note
intimate  association  with  overlying
epidermis.
express vimentin only. In contrast to feline sarcoids,
factor (MITF-M) may assist in separating amelanotic
peripheral nerve sheath tumors are characterized by a
melanomas from feline sarcoids.
laminin+, and collagen IV+ basement membrane sur-
rounding the tumor cells. Peripheral nerve sheath tumors
REFERENCES
may also express S100 and glial fbrillary acidic protein
(GFAP). Histiocytic sarcomas consistently express the
leukocyte markers CD45 and CD18, and expression of
Introduction
Folpe, A.L. & Gown, A.M. (2001) Immunohistochemistry for
CD1, CD11c, and MHC II confrms their dendritic
analysis of soft tissue tumors. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Sofft
cell origin. Immunohistochemistry for S100, melanoma-
Tissue Tumors, 4th edn (eds S.W. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum),
associated
 antigen
(Melan-A),
 melanoma-associated
pp. 199-201. Mosby, St Louis.
antigen recognized by T cells (MART-1), tyrosinase,
Gabbiani, G., Hirschel, B.J., Ryan, G.B. et al. (1972) Granula-
HMB45/gp100, tyrosinase-related protein-2 (TRP-2), or
tion tissue as a contractile organ. A study of structure and
melanoma isoform of microphthalmia transcription
function, J Exp Med 135, 719-34.
732
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001a) Benign fibrous tissue
Suter, M., Lott-Stolz, G. & Wild, P. (1983) Generalized nodular
tumors. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn
dermatofbrosis in six Alsatians. Vet Pathol 20, 632-4.
(eds S.W Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 247-307. Mosby, St
Vercelli, A., Bellone, G., Abate, O. et al. (2003) Expression of
Louis.
transforming growth factor-beta isoforms in the skin, kidney,
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001b) Fibrosarcoma. In:
pancreas and bladder in a German shepherd dog affected by
Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn (eds S.W.
renal cystadenocarcinoma and nodular dermatofibrosis. J Vet
Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 409-40. Mosby, St Louis.
Med A Pbysiol Pathol Clin Med 50, 506-10.
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001e) Fibrous tumors of infancy
Vilafranca, M., Fondevila, D., Marlasca, M.J. et al. (1994)
and childhood. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors,
Chromophilic-eosinophilic (oncocyte-like) renal cell carcinoma
4th edn (eds S.W. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 347-408.
in a dog with nodular dermatofibrosis. Vet Pathol 31, 713-6.
Mosby, St Louis.
Vincent, A., Farley, M., Chan, E. et al. (2003) Birt-Hogg-Dube
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001d) Benign fibrohistiocytic
syndrome: a review of the literature and the differential
umors. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn
diagnosis of firm facial papules. J Am Acad Dermatol 4,
(eds S.W. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 441-90. Mosby, St
698-705.
Louis.
White, S.D., Rosychuk, R.A.W., Schultheiss, P. et al. (1998)
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001e) Fibrohistiocytic tumors
Nodular dermatofbrosis and cystic renal disease in three
of intermediate malignancy. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft
mixed-breed dogs and a Boxer dog. Vet Dermatol 9, 119-26.
Tissue Tumors, 4th edn (eds S.W. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum),
pp. 491-534. Mosby, St Louis.
Acrochordon and Acrochordonous Plaque
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001f) Malignant fibrohistiocytic
Bidaut, A.P, Gross, T.L., Noli, C. et al. (2003) Acrochordonous
tumors. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn
plaques in two Bulldogs and a Pug dog. Vet Dermatol 14,
(eds S.W. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 535-69. Mosby, St
177-9.
Louis.
Heenan, PJ. (1997) Tumors of the fibrous tissue involving the
skin. In: Lever's Histopathology of the Skin, 8th edn (eds D.
Collagenous Hamartoma
Elder, R. Elenitsas, C. Jaworsky & B. Johnson, Jr), pp. 872-3.
Scott, D.W, Yager-Johnson, JA., Manning, T.O. et al. (1984)
Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia.
Nevi in the dog, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20, 505-12.
Mehregan, A.H., Hashimoto, K., Mehregan, D.A. et al. (1995)
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001) Benign fibrous tissue
Pinkus' Guide to Dermatohistopathotogy,6th edn, pp.675-6.
tumors. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn
Appelton & Lange, Worwalk.
(eds S.W. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 249-50. Mosby, St
Louis.
Dermatofibroma
Ackerman, A.B., Niven, J. & Grant-Kels, J.M. (1982) Differen-
Canine Nodular Dermatofibrosis
tial Diagnosis in Dermatopathology, pp. 170-3. Lea and
Ananth, S., Knebelmann, B., Guning, W. et al. (1999) Trans-
Febiger, Philadelphia.
forming growth factor beta 1 is a target for the von
Chen, T.C., Kuo, T. & Chan, H.L. (2000) Dermatofibroma is a
Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor and a critical growth factor
clonal proliferative disease. J Cutan Pathol 27, 36-9.
for clear cell renal carcinoma. Cancer Res 59, 2210-6.
Heenan, PJ. (1997) Tumors of the fbrous tissue involving the
Atlee, B.A., DeBoer, D.J., Ihrke, P.J. et al. (1991) Nodular der-
skin. In: Lever's Histopathology of the Skin, 8th edn (eds D.
matofibrosis in German Shepherd dogs as a marker for renal
Elder, R. Elenitsas, C. Jaworsky & B. Johnson, Jr), pp.
adenocarcinoma. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 21, 481-7.
847-53. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia.
Lingaas, F, Comstock, K.E., Kirkness, E.F et al. (2003) A muta-
Hui, P., Glusac, E.J., Sinard, JH. et al. (2002) Clonal analysis
tion in the canine BHD gene is associated with hereditary mul-
of cutaneous fibrous histiocytoma {dermatofibroma). J Cutan
tifocal renal cystadenocarcinoma and nodular dermatofibrosis
Pathol 29, 385-9.
in the German Shepherd dog. Hum Mol Genet 12, 3043-53.
Rosai, J. (1996) Skin. In: Ackerman's Surgical Pathology, Vol.
Lium, B. & Moe, L. (1985) Hereditary multifocal renal cys-
1, 8th edn (ed. J. Rosaij), p. 170. Mosby, St Louis.
tadenocarcinomas and nodular dermatofibrosis in the German
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, JR. (2001) Benign fibrohistiocytic
shepherd dog: macroscopic and histopathologic changes. Vet
tumors. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn
Pathol22,447-55.
(eds S.W. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 441-55. Mosby, St
Marks, S.L., Farman, C.A. & Peaston, A. (1993) Nodular der-
Louis.
matofibrosis and renal cystadenocarcinoma in a Golden
Retriever. Vet Dermatol 4, 133-7.
Nodular Fascitis
McLean, D.1. & Haynes, H.A. (2003) Cutaneous manifestations
Affolter, VK. & Moore, PF. (20o0) Canine cutaneous and sys-
of internal malignant disease. In: Ftzpatrick's Dermatology in
temic histiocytosis: a reactive histiocytosis of dermal dendritic
General Medicine, Vol. 2, 6th edn (eds I.M. Freedberg, A.Z.
origin. Am J Dermatopathol 22, 40-8.
Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.1. Katz), pp.
Bellhorn, R.W. & Henkind, P. (1967) Ocular nodular fascitis in
1783-96. McGraw-Hill, New York.
a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 150, 212-3.
Moe, L. & Lium, B. (1997) Hereditary multifocal renal cys-
Coffin, C.M., Dehner, L.P. & Meis-Kindblom, J.M. (1998)
tadenocarcinomas and nodular dermatofbrosis in 51 German
shepherd dogs. J Small Anim Pract 38, 498-505.
coma, and related lesions: an historical review with differen-
Fibrous tumors
733
tial diagnostic considerations. Semin Diagn Pathol 15,
canine dermal papilla cells and dermal fbroblasts. Vet Der-
102-10.
matol 13,1-6.
Gabbiani, G., Hirschel, B.J., Ryan, G.B. et al. (1972) Granula-
Browm, N.O., Patnaik, A.K., Mooney, S. et al. (1978) Soft tissue
tion tissue as a contractile organ. A study of structure and
sarcomas in the cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 173, 744-9.
function. J Exp Med 13s, 719-34.
Carpenter, JL., Andrew, L.K. & Holzworth, J. (1987) Tumors
Gwin, R.M., Gelatt, K.N. & Peiffer, R.L., Jr. (1977) Oph-
and tumor-like lesions. In: Diseases of the Cat (ed. J.
thalmic nodular fascitis in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 170,
Holzworth), pp. 408, 418-21. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
6114.
Gabbiani, G., Hirschel, B.J., Ryan, G.B. et al. (1972) Granula-
Heenan, PJ. (1997) Tumors of the fibrous tissue involving the
tion tissue as a contractile organ. A study of structure and
skin. In: Lever's Histopathology of the Skin, 8th edn (eds D.
function. J Exp Med 13s, 719-34.
Elder, R. Elenitsas, C. Jaworsky & B. Johnson, Jr), p. 875.
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Hendrick, M.J. (2002) Tumors of the
Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia.
skin and soft tissues. In: Tumors of the Domestic Animatls,
Hendrick, M.J., Mahaffey, E.A., Moore, FM. et al. (1998) His-
4th edn (ed. D.J. Meuten), p. 84-5. Blackwell Publishing,
tologic classification of mesenchymal tumors of skin and soft
Ames.
tissues of domestic animals. In: World Health Organization
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, FS. (1992) Skin Tumors in the
International Histologic Classification of Tumors of Domes-
Dog and Cat, pp. 2-3, 158-67. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
tic Animals, Vol. 2, p. 16. Armed Forces Institute of Pathol-
Hardy, W.D.J. (1981) The feline sarcoma virus. J Am Anim Hosp
ogy, American Registry of Pathology, Washington DC.
Assoc 17, 981-97.
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001) Benign fbrous tissue
Kuntz, C.A., Dernell, W.S., Powers, B.E. et al. (1997) Prognos-
tic factors for surgical treatment of soft-tissue sarcomas in
(eds S.W. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 250-6, 299-300
dogs: 75 cases (1986-1996). J Am Vet Med Assoc 211,
Mosby, St Louis.
1147-51.
Zuber, T.J. & Finley, J.L. (1994) Nodular fasciitis. South Med J
Macy, D.W. & Hendrick, M.J. (1996) The potential role of
87, 842-4.
 inflammation in the development of postvaccinal sarcomas in
cats. In: Controversies in Clinical Oncology, Vol. 26 (eds R.C.
Fibroma
Rosenthal & K.A. Jeglum), pp. 103-9. W.B. Saunders,
Carpenter, J.L, Andrew, L.K. & Holzworth, J. (1987) Tumors
Philadelphia.
and tumor-like lesions. In: Diseases of the Cat (ed. J.
Mikaelian, I. & Gross, T.L. (2002) Keloidal fibromas and
Holzworth), pp. 408, 417-8. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
fbrosarcoma in the dog. Vet Pathol 39, 149-53.
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, F.S. (1992) Skin Tumors in the
Miller, M.A., Nelson, S.L., Turk, J.R. et al. (1991) Cutaneous
Dog and Cat, pp. 2-3, 152-7. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
neoplasia in 340 cats. Vet Patbol 28, 389-95.
Mehregan, A.H., Hashimoto, K., Mehregan, D.A. et al. (1995)
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001) Fibrosarcoma. In:
Pinkus' Guide to Dermatohistopathology, 6th edn, pp. 672-4.
Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn (eds S.W.
Appelton & Lange, Worwalk.
Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 409-35. Mosby, St Louis.
Miller, M.A., Nelson, S.L., Turk, J.R. et al. (1991) Cutaneous
neoplasia in 340 cats. Vet Pathol 28, 389-95.
Myxoma
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001) Benign fibrous tissue
Bevier, D.E. & Goldschmidt, M.H. (1981) Skin tumors in dogs.
tumors. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn
 Part Il: Tumors of the soft (mesenchymal) tissue. Comp Cont
(eds S.W. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), p. 249. Mosby, St Louis.
Ed 3, 506-14.
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, FS. (1992) Skin Tumors in the
Canine Keloidal Fibroma
 Dog and Cat, p. 179-83. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, FS. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
Graadt van Roggen, J.F, Hogendoorn, P.C. & Fletcher, C.D.
Dog and Cat, pp. 152-7. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
(1999) Myxoid tumours of soft tissue. Histopathology 35,
Mikaelian, I. & Gross, T.L. (2002) Keloidal fibromas and
291-312.
fibrosarcoma in the dog. Vet Pathol 39, 149-53.
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001) Benign fbrous tissue
Myxosarcoma
tumors. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn
Bevier, D.E. & Goldschmidt, M.H. (1981) Skin tumors in dogs.
(eds S.W. Weiss & JR. Goldblum), pp. 295-9. Mosby, St
 Part II: Tumors of the soft (mesenchymal) tissue. Comp Cont
Louis.
Ed3,506-14.
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, FS. (1992) Skin Tumors in
Fibrosarcoma
the Dog
and Cat, pp. 2-3, 179-83. Pergamon Press,
Bostock, D.E. & Dye, M.T. (1979) Prognosis after surgical exci-
Oxford.
sion of fibrosarcomas in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 175,
Graadt van Roggen, J.F, Hogendoorn, PC. & Fletcher, C.D.
727-8.
(1999) Myxoid tumours of soft tissue. Histopathology 35,
Bostock, D.E. & Dye, M.T. (1980) Prognosis after surgical exci-
291-312.
sion of canine fibrous connective tissue sarcomas. Vet Pathol
Pulley, L.T. & Stannard, A.A. (1990) Tumors of the skin
17, 581-8.
and soft tissues. In: Tumors in Domestic Animals, 3rd edn
Bratka-Robia, C.B., Mitteregger, G., Aichinger, A. et al. (2002)
(ed. J.E. Moulton), pp. 33-4. University of California Press,
Primary cell culture and morphological characterization of
Berkeley.
734
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Feline Sarcoid
Marti, E., Lazary, S., Antczak, D.F. et al. (1993) Report of the
Carr, E.A., Théon, A.P., Madewell, B.R. et al. (2001) Bovine
first international workshop on equine sarcoid. Equine Vet J
 papillomavirus DNA in neoplastic and nonneoplastic tissues
25, 397407.
obtained from horses with and without sarcoids in the western
Schulman, F.Y, Krafft, A.E. & Janczewski, T. (2001) Feline
United States. Am J Vet Res 62, 741-4.
cutaneous fibropapillomas: clinicopathologic findings and
Goodrich, L., Gerber, H., Marti, E. et al. (1998) Equine sarcoids.
association with papillomavirus infection. Vet Pathol 38,
Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 14, 607-23.
291-6.
Gross, T.L. & Affolter, V.K. (1998) Advances in skin oncology
Teifke, J.P., Kidney, B.A., Lohr, C.V. et al. (2002) In: Proceed-
(workshop report). In: Advances in Veterinary Dermatology,
ings for Tagung der Fachgruppe Pathologie in der Deutschen
Vol. 4 (eds K.W. Kwochka, T. Willemse & C. von Tscharner),
Veterinaermedizinischen Gesellschaft, Wien.
 pp. 382-5. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
Teifke, J.P, Kidney, B.A., Lohr, C.V. et al. (2003) Detection of
Gumbrell, R.C., Rest, JR., Bredelius, K. et al. (1998) Dermal
 papillomavirus-DNA in mesenchymal tumour cells and not in 
fibropapillomas in cats. Vet Record 142, 376.
the hyperplastic epithelium of feline sarcoids. Vet Dermatol
Lory, S., von Tscharner, C. & Marty, E. (1993) In situ hybridiza-
14, 47-56.
tion of equine sarcoids with bovine papilloma virus. Vet
Record 132, 133-4.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
 Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 28
Vascular tumors
Vascular tumors in humans are composed of vascular
ANGIOMATOSIS
endothelial cells, endothelial cells lining lymphatics, or
a mixture of the two (Breiteneder-Geleff et al., 1999;
Angiomatosis is the term used to encompass a heteroge-
Weiss & Goldblum, 200la-d). Endothelial cell pro-
neous group of vascular proliferations in humans, and
liferations include vascular hamartoma, angiomatosis,
includes both vascular malformations and hyperplasia
hemangioma, lymphangioma, l
hemangiosarcoma,
and
(Requena & Sangueza, 1997; Breugem et al., 2001). The
lymphangiosarcoma. Hemangiosarcomas and lymphan-
human lesions comprise infantile hemangiomas, angioma
giosarcomas are often collectively referred to as angiosar-
serpiginosum, acral arteriovenous hemangioma, cherry
comas in the human literature (Weiss & Goldblum,
angioma, nevus flammeus, diffuse hemangioma, bacillary
2001a,b). The proliferating endothelial cells may 
be
angiomatosis, hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia,
accompanied by fbroblasts, pericytes, and smooth muscle
 Sturge-Weber syndrome, and Klippel-Trenaunay syn-
cells, as seen in some forms of angiomatosis. Vascular
drome (Harwood & Mortimer, 1995; Ramirez et al.,
proliferations in dogs and cats range from benign
1995; Requena & Sangueza, 1997; Breugem et al., 2001;
hamartomatous lesions to sarcomas with very aggressive
Weiss & Goldblum, 2001). Some of these processes have
behavior.
a tendency to regress; others have progressive behavior.
Vascular and lymphatic endothelial cells are indistin-
 A variety of factors appear to affect vascular prolifera-
guishable based on hematoxylin and eosin evaluation.
tion in humans. The importance of vascular endothelial
 Electron microscopy reveals a continuous basement mem-
growth factors (VEGF) and endothelial cell expression of
brane associated with vascular endothelial cells, while
receptors for VEGF has been documented (Breugem et al.,
lymphatic endothelial cells have a discontinuous or absent
2001). In addition, the influence of adhesion molecules
basement membrane (Swayne et al., 1989; Weiss & Gold-
and their receptors, as well as fbroblast growth factor
blum, 2001a-d). Moreover lymphatic endothelial cells
(FGF) and coagulation factors have been reported in these
contain numerous pinocytotic vesicles (Weiss & Gold-
processes, and are still under investigation (Breugem et
blum, 2001a}
al., 2001). The Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome in humans
CD31, the clotting factor VllI, and several lectins
is considered a vascular proliferation secondary to tissue
(Ulex europaeus, soybean, and hairy vetch) are helpful
lymphedema resulting from hypoplastic lymphatics and
markers for endothelial cells of both vascular and lym-
lymph nodes (Harwood & Mortimer 1995). Some lesions
phatic origin (Folpe & Gown, 2001). Moreover, CD34,
 of angiomatosis are associated with an infectious etiology;
a protein expressed by embryonic cells of the hemato-
bacillary angiomatosis has been observed with Bartonella
poietic system, is also expressed by both lymphatic and
bacilliformisi
infections (Ramirez et al., 1995). Some
vascular endothelial cells (Cerilli & Wick, 2002). The
angiomatoses in humans are considered reactive as they
expression of lymphatic vessel endothelial receptor-1
appear to develop after vascular occlusion of various
(LYVE-1), vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-3
causes (Rongioletti & Rebora, 2003).
(VEGFR-3), and podoplanin is a feature of lymphatic
Cutaneous angiomatosis occurs in dogs and cats. In
endothelial cells only (Banerji et al., 1999; Weiss &
contrast to the lesions in humans, spontaneous regression
Goldblum, 2001a). LYVE-1, a receptor for the extracel-
of canine and feline angiomatosis has not been docu-
lular matrix glycosaminoglycan hyaluron, is the equiva-
 mented. Some of these lesions develop in young animals;
lent of CD44 on vascular endothelia. Instead
of
 this supports a hamartomatous derivation rather than a
podoplanin, vascular endothelial cells express podoca-
 true neoplastic origin. However, the proliferative process
lyxin (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001b).
often mimics reactive neovascularization, which supports
735
736
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
a secondary proliferation that is driven by angiogenic
2001), and the authors have observed lesions of
growth factors, perhaps in response to trauma. As a
angiomatosis in Labrador Retrievers, Shar Peis, and
general rule, progressive angiomatosis is a lesion that
mixed breed dogs. The dogs with generalized cutaneous
cannot be removed by simple soft tissue excision. Some
angiomatosis were a Boxer and a Doberman Pinscher
of the canine and feline lesions are progressive and tend
(Roccabianca, P., personal communication, 2004). The 
t0 expand into surrounding tissues, mimicking the behav-
 [Wo reported cases of feline angiomatosis were observed
ior of low-grade malignancies, and are hence best referred
in male neutered domestic shorthaired cats, 6 years and
 ooudro to paser sisoiiaue aissaord, se 0
10 years of age (Peavy et al., 2001); most cases observed
variations, location of the lesions, and clinical behavior,
by the authors also have been in domestic shorthaired
feline and canine angiomatoses can be categorized as pro-
cats.
gressive angiomatosis and scrotal-type vascular hamar-
Digital angiomatosis exhibits progressive and destruc-
toma. Angiomatosis secondary to lymphedema (also
tive behavior. Phalangeal bone lysis may be observed,
referred to as Klippel-Trenaunay-like syndrome) also has
and rapid progression to the proximal extremity may
been observed (DeCock, H.E.V., personal
 communica-
occur. In one canine case of pedal angiomatosis observed
tion, 2003). Most of the canine and feline angiomatoses
 by the authors, there was relentless and rapid progression
are newly recognized or newly documented syndromes,
of lesions from the distal extremity to the shoulder. An
and nomenclature and classification may need to be mod-
extensive monomelic distribution is also a typical presen-
ifed as more cases are gathered.
the entity referred to as diffuse hemangioma (Requena
& Sangueza, 1997). Angiomatosis of other locations,
Clinical features
 although progressive, appears less destrucive. The rwo
Angiomatosis is rare in dogs and cats. In general, canine
dogs with generalized cutaneous angiomatosis developed
and feline lesions are characterized by dark red macules
progressive lesions over several years (Roccabianca, P.,
and patches, similar to the 'port-wine stains' described in
personal communication, 2004). Metastasis has not been 
humans, or may present as multiple plaques and nodules.
 observed or reported with progressive angiomatosis.
 The lesions have irregular margins, and partial blanching
with diascopy (pressure over the lesion using a glass slide)
Scrotal-type vascular bamartoma
is common. Nodules and plaques are prone to periodic
Scrotal-type vascular hamartoma is uncommon in dogs
hemorrhaging due to irritation. Hemorrhages are less
and has not been described in cats. The lesion begins as
common with macular lesions and patches. Macular
 single or multiple, hyperpigmented macules that progress
lesions may remain unnoticed in a dense, long haircoat.
to frm plaques. Most lesions are 1 to 2 cm in diameter.
 Some lesions may appear as a poorly defned thickening
The overlying epidermis becomes thickened and is fre-
of the skin with a normal skin surface.
quently
ulcerated due to chronic licking. Periodic
hemorrhage may occur. Occasionally, similar vascular
Progressive angiomatosis
hamartomas may occur in other nonscrotal, caudal loca-
This type of angiomatosis occurs in dogs and cats. It most
tions including the caudal trunk and tail base; one author
often affects the digits and feet (digital progressive
(E.J.W.) has observed a lesion on the medial carpus.
angiomatosis), but has been seen in other areas, such
 In contrast to other types of angiomatosis, scrotal-type
as the face, tongue, neck, and axillary region. It may
vascular hamartoma is mainly seen in middle-aged or
present as macules, patches, plaques or small nodules.
older dogs. Early reports indicated prevalence in breeds
The reported cases of feline angiomatosis were located
with pigmented scrotal skin; however the pathogenetic
on the face and on the front leg; the canine case was
basis for this fnding is unclear and unsubstantiated to
located on the face (Peavy et al., 2001). Generalized
date.
cutaneous angiomatosis has been observed in two dogs
(Roccabianca, P, personal communication, 2004). Both
Angiomatosis secondary to lympbedema
dogs C
developed widespread,
 predominantly
truncal
(Klippel-Trenaunay-like syndrome)
lesions with subsequent traumatically induced cutaneous
This syndrome was observed in a Border Collie puppy
and subcutaneous hematomas and seromas.
that presented with a lesion on the proximal foreleg
Progressive angiomatosis usually develops in young to
(DeCock,
，H.E.V, personal communication, 2003).
 middle-aged animals; however, it has been documented in
Similar to the condition in humans (Hardwood &
older animals as well (Peavy et al., 2001). No breed or
Mortimer 1
1995), the cutaneous macular lesions were
sex predilections have been established in cats or dogs.
associated with marked progressive swelling of the leg.
The reported case of canine angiomatosis was observed
and formation of skin nodules. Similar cases of angio-
in a 7-year-old mixed breed terrier dog (Peavy et al.,
matosis secondary to lymphedema have been observed by
Vascular tumors
737
the authors in a 6-year-old female Siberian Husky involv.
ing one hock, and a 5-year-old female Maine Coon cat.
 In contrast to Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome in humans
and the canine cases, the cat presented with bilateral
lesions of the hocks.
Histopathology
In general, angiomatosis is characterized by numerous
dermal and/or subcutaneous, variably circumscribed,
unencapsulated nodules composed of blood-filled vascu-
lar structures; the vessels are separated by normal mes-
enchymal tissue components. Some nodules have irregular
margins, and small vessels extend peripherally among
surrounding collagen bundles or adipocytes. Adjacent
nodules are often connected by blood-filled channels,
forming an anastomosing network of vascular spaces. In
other areas there may be a diffuse, seemingly unconnected
pattern of vascular structures, characterized by dilated
vessels distributed loosely within the dermis and subcutis.
The vascular channels may have large lumens or alterna-
tively, may resemble capillaries. Thrombosis may be
present. There may be intraluminal, partially occlusive,
papillary endothelial hyperplasia, characterized  by
endothelial cells proliferating as delicate fmbria along
compact fbrous or organizing fbrinous trabeculae. The
endothelial lining is either composed of normal, mature
endothelial cells or slightly enlarged endothelial cells with
hyperchromatic nuclei. Mitotic figures are absent or very
rare. Myxomatous extracellular matrix may be deposited
Fig. 28.1 Progressive angiomatosis in a dog demonstrating diffuse
in the surrounding tissue. The overlying skin may be
proliferation of thin-walled vessels throughout the dermis and
ulcerated.
subcutis.
 The walls of the branching vascular structures vary in
their composition and thickness. Many resemble capillary
walls, and hence have no admixed fbrocytes or smooth
occasionally, slightly plump endothelial cells. Most of the
muscle cells, as in humans (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001).
vessels are fully enclosed, but occasional clusters of anas-
However the proliferating endothelial cells may be
tomosing, sinusoidal spaces may be present. There is
accompanied by variable amounts of smooth muscle and
papillary endothelial hyperplasia. Some of the vascular
fbrous tissue, creating vascular structures that resemble
structures may have admixed smooth muscle and fbrous
small arterioles and veins. These latter lesions have also
tissue in their walls.
been referred to as ‘arteriovenous angiomatosis’ in
The authors have seen rare cases of angiomatosis that
humans (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001). Occasionally, a tran-
sition from an arteriolar to a venous-type vascular
have been in nondigital locations. These lesions are char-
channel can be seen, suggesting that arteriovenous shunt-
 acterized by diffuse proliferations of regular, large or
ing may be occurring.
medium-sized vascular channels that are diffusely distrib-
uted in normal dermal and subcutaneous tissue. Occa-
Progressive angiomatosis (Figures 28.1 through 28.5)
sionally, these vascular channels are arranged in groups,
Typically, these lesions are characterized by variably sized
which may or may not be interconnected. The vascular
vascular channels that may contain luminal thrombi.
channels are lined by flat, well-differentiated endothelial
Often there are central cavernous vessels surrounded by
cells. Papillary endothelial hyperplasia and thrombi have
small, capillary-type vascular structures. The expansive 
not been observed.
and progressive growth pattern of the vascular structures
The generalized form of cutaneous angiomatosis, as
may result in destruction of bone in digital locations. The
 observed in two dogs (Roccabianca, P., personal commu-
vascular channels are lined by well differentiated and,
nication, 2004), was characterized by a proliferation of
738
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 28.2 Higher magnification of progressive
angiomatosis in a
Fig.28.3
angiomatosis in a digit of a dog predorminated
dog. The vascular structures are lined by flat, well-differentiated
by arteriolar structures.
endothelial cells.
specimen; clinicopathologic correlation is required to
arterioles and venules in one dog and included arterio-
confrm  the extensive distribution of angiomatosis.
venular shunts. The second dog developed lesions
Angiomatosis in sparsely haired, nonpigmented areas
composed of primarily small, capillary type vascular
of the skin should be differentiated from solar-induced
structures.
telangiectasia (see Chapter 10), particularly for superfcial
 The principal differential diagnosis for typical progres-
biopsy samples. The latter, however, is associated with
sive angiomatosis is low-grade hemangiosarcoma, and in
 additional solar-induced lesions such as actinic keratosis,
some cases, angiolipoma, infltrative angiolipoma, or infl-
actinic comedones, solar vasculopathy, or solar fbrosis
trative hemangioma. The loose infltration of blood
and elastosis (see Chapters 7, 8, 10, 15).
vessels and the presence of papillary endothelial hyper-
plasia support angiomatosis. The lack of cellular atypia
Scrotal-type vascular bamartoma (Figures 28.6
and mitotic fgures also separates progressive angiomato-
through 28.8)
sis from hemangiosarcoma. Angiolipomas are character-
Scrotal vascular hamartomas are characterized by poorly
ized by a proliferation of thin-walled vascular channels
 circumscribed dermal plaques containing multiple clusters
within a lipoma. In contrast, while progressive angio-
or lobules of redundant vascular structures that surround
matosis may affect the subcutis, the fatty tissue is other-
pre-existing dermal blood vessels. In most lesions, hyper-
wise normal. The second pattern of angiomatosis, seen
plastic vessels in the center are larger and dilated. The
less commonly, is distinctive in that invading vessels are
vessels at the periphery comprise capillary buds with
more regular and uniform throughout the lesion. Such a
barely discernible lumens. The vascular structures are
lesion may be extremely difficult to differentiate from
lined by a single layer of endothelial cells with plump,
angiolipoma or infltrative hemangioma in a single biopsy
dark, uniform nuclei. Mitotic fgures are very rare, and
Vascular tumors
739
Fig. 28.4 Progressive angiomatosis in a digit of a dog. Extensive
Fig.28.5
infiltrative and expansile growth of the vascular structures is result-
ing in resorption of P3 at left.
Jar lumens.
mitotic atypia is not present. Proliferation of spindle cells
and lobules of vascular structures, spindle cell heman-
with narrow elongated nuclei may accompany the blood
giomas are solitary tumor nodules with rather haphaz-
vessels. These spindle cells may be fibroblasts or pericytes.
ardly arranged spindle cells and vascular channels. The
Dermal fbrosis may be observed. The overlying epider-
small vessels of scrotal-type hamartoma may resemble
mis is characterized by acanthosis and hyperpigmenta-
capillary hemangioma, but the latter does not show ori-
tion. Traumatic ulceration, hemorrhage, and secondary
entation of the small vascular structures around larger,
inflammation are frequently present.
distended blood vessels. In addition, the capillaries of
Scrotal-type vascular hamartomas have a fairly charac-
scrotal-type hamartoma are interspersed with other
teristic morphology. However, they may be confused
spindle cell elements.
with well-differentiated hemangiosarcomas, spindle cell 
hemangiomas, or capillary hemangiomas. Scrotal type
Angiomatosis secondary to lymphedema
vascular hamartomas  and  well-differentiated heman-
(Klippel-Trenaunay-like syndrome)
giosarcomas are both poorly circumscribed and charac-
(Figures 28.9 and 28.10)
d  o  ru  n
This is a mixed vascular anomaly. The two cases of canine
developing capillaries. However, lack of mitotic fgures
 angiomatosis secondary to lymphedema were character-
and the maintenance of normal architectural relation-
ized by marked hypoplasia of the deep lymphatic vessels,
ships between the redundant vascular structures and the
as demonstrated by immunohistochemistry (see below),
admixed proliferating fbroblasts and pericytes support
 while the remaining superficial lymphatics were markedly
the benign nature of vascular hamartoma. While scrotal-
dilated. There was a marked increase in extracellular
type vascular hamartomas are characterized by clusters 
 matrix and inflammation was noted. Prominent vascular
740
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 28.7 Scrotal-type vascular hamartoma in a dog. Irregular cav-
capillaries lined by plump endothelial cells are
admixed with cellu-
ernous vascular structures are present in the center of the lesion.
ndfibro
.Note scrotal
Residual scrotal blood vessels, such as the one at bottom, are rec-
smooth muscle bundles at bottorm.
ognizable by the presence of a muscularis {arrow).
proliferation resembling neovascularization was present,
The hypoplasia of deep lymphatics and the presence of
 often in clusters or aggregates. Electron microscopic eval
-sas sisoneiaue aneredas sneudl ieiyadns pan
uation of the lesions in one dog revealed that the prolif-
ondary to lymphedema from other vascular prolifera-
erating vascular structures had a continuous basement
tions, particularly granulation tissue-type hemangioma
membrane; this finding is consistent with blood vessels
(see p. 741). Granulation tissue-type hemangiomas are
rather than lymphatics (DeCock, H.E.V., personal com-
typically small, polypoid lesions, and the inflammatory
munication, 2003). Over time the edematous tissue sur
component may be more pronounced when compared to
rounding the vascular structures was infltrated
1by
angiomatosis secondary to lymphedema. In contrast to
fbroblasts resulting in marked fbrosis. The deeper tissues 
 Klippel-Trenaunay-like syndrome,
lymphangiomatosis
of the affected extremity were characterized by lack of
lacks proliferation of vascular structures.
lymphatic vessels.
The feline case observed by the authors was character-
Immunohistochemistry
ized by multiple, irregular thick-walled vascular struc-
tures of varying size in the dermis and subcutis. These
Immunophenotyping is usually not an important tool in
were admixed with numerous clusters of hyperemic capil-
the diagnosis of angiomatosis. In humans, differentiation
laries and venules. Also present were dilated superficial
of vascular from lymphatic proliferations can be achieved
lymphatics surrounded by edema, hemorrhage, variable
by evaluating the lesions for expression of CD44 and
inflammation, and reactive fbroplasia. Unfortunately, the
podocalyxin versus lymphatic vessel endothelial receptor-
deeper tissues were not available for evaluation of poten-
1 (LYVE-1), podoplanin, and vascular endothelial growth
tial hypoplasia of deep lymphatics.
factor receptor-3 (VEGFR-3) (see introduction, p. 735).
Vascular tumors
741
Fig. 28.8 Scrotal-type vascular hamartoma in the tail of a dog.
Fig. 28.9 Angiomatosis secondary to lymphedema {Klippel-Tre
Proliferating capillaries surround sweat glands; note similarity to
naunay-like syndrome) in a cat. The dermal tissue is markedly ede
Fig.28.6.
matous. Prominently dilated lymphatics are accompanied by
aggregates of proliferating vascular structures.
The latter are expressed only by lymphatic endothelial
this lesion is still controversial (Requena & Sangueza,
cells, and not by vascular endothelial cells. LYVE-1
1997; Breugem et al., 2001; Weiss & Goldblum, 2001).
expression in neoplastic lymphatics but not in blood
 Based on the indolent course of spindle cell hemangiomas
vessels also has been documented in cats (Galeotti et al.,
in humans (originally termed spindle cell hemangioen-
2004).
dothelioma and considered a low-grade malignancy), it
has been suggested that they may represent a reactive con-
dition in response to repeated episodes of intravascular
HEMANGIOMA
thrombosis and recanalization (Requena & Sangueza,
 In humans, hemangioma is the most frequent tumor of
1997).
infancy and childhood (Calonje & Wilson-Jones, 1997;
 Hemangiomas occur in both dogs and cats. Subtypes
Weiss & Goldblum, 2001). There are numerous sub-
include cavernous, infltrative, capillary, arteriovenous,
types, many of which (cherry, glomeruloid, targetoid,
granulation tissue type, spindle cell, and solar-induced
microvenular or verrucous) are not recognized in dogs
hemangioma, as well as angiokeratoma. As in humans,
and cats.
some of these may be more consistent with vascular
Hemangiomas are considered benign neoplasms; but
malformations than true neoplasms. In contrast to
distinction between a true neoplasm, vascular hyperpla-
humans, chronic solar damage has been identifed as an
sia, and vascular malformation may not be possible in
important etiologic factor for canine dermal heman-
some cases. An infectious etiology or previous penetrat-
giomas (solar induced hemangioma) of light-skinned
ing injuries have been suggested as causes of granulation
breeds with thin haircoats (Hargis et al., 1992). The eti-
tissue-type hemangioma (pyogenic granuloma, lobular
ology of feline hemangiomas and canine hemangiomas of
capillary hemangioma) in people; the neoplastic nature of
nonsolar origin is unknown. C-type virus particles have
742
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
mass with poorly defined boundaries. The lesions are dark
red to purple, and hemorrhage may occur.
Spindle cell hemangioma in dogs are usually solitary
nodules and may originate within a blood vessel. Large
lesions may be grouped with smaller satellite lesions in
the same location.
Dermally-located hemangiomas, which include angio-
keratomas and solar-induced hemangiomas, present as
well-circumscribed, dome-shaped, or polypoid masses
with red or red-black coloration. Granulation tissue-type
hemangiomas are small, dome-shaped or polypoid dermal
masses, as described in humans (Weiss & Goldblum,
2001). Solar-induced hemangiomas may be multiple. Very
early solar-induced hemangiomas may be flat and mimic
telangiectasia. Dermal hemangiomas are smaller than
those of the subcutis, and range from several millimeters
to 1 cm in size. With larger solar-induced hemangiomas,
the overlying epidermis is usually alopecic; ulceration and
hemorrhage are frequent findings.
Solar-induced dermal hemangiomas have a predilection
for glabrous skin (ventral abdomen, inguinal region,
medial thighs, and axillae) in dogs with nonpigmented
skin and short haircoats (Hargis et al., 1992). Nonsun-
 induced dermal hemangiomas can occur at any anatomic
site. Canine nonsun-induced hemangiomas of the subcutis
often favor the caudal dorsum or tailhead region. Feline
cutaneous hemangiomas may occur at any site, but the
head, legs, and abdomen have been listed as preferential
locations (Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992). Interestingly,
Fig. 28.10 Angiomatosis secondary to lymphedemma {Klippel-Tre-
cutaneous hemangiomas in the feline study of Miller et al.
naunay-like syndrome) in a dog. Clusters of thin walled dermal vas-
(1992) tended to occur in sites with pigmented hair, in
cular structures are associated with markedly dilated, interconnected
contrast to hemangiosarcomas (see p. 749).
superficial lymphatics.
 In one study, Whippets, Bloodhounds, Salukis, and
English Pointers had signifcantly increased prevalence of
been found in a subcutaneous hemangioma in a cat (Scott,
cutaneous vascular neoplasia in general (Hargis et al.,
1980).
1992). Another survey (Goldschmidt and Shofer 1992)
found Airedale Terriers, Gordon Setters, Boxers, Soft-
Clinical features
coated Wheaten and Wirehaired Fox Terriers, Golden
Retrievers, Old English Sheepdogs, English Springer
Canine hemangiomas in dogs account for 4.5% of all skin
Spaniels, and German Shepherd Dogs to be at increased 
neoplasms; in cats the incidence is approximately 1.5%
risk for all hemangiomas. Short-haired dogs with lightly
to 2% (Carpenter et al., 1987; Goldschmidt & Shofer,
pigmented skin, notably Whippets, Beagles, Dalmatians,
1992). Hemangiomas may arise in the dermis or subcutis.
American Bull Terriers, and Basset Hounds are likely pre-
Hemangiomas of the subcutis are usually solitary, well-
disposed to the development of solar-induced vascular
circumscribed, meaty, ovoid, or discoid masses that range
neoplasms; this was supported by the tendency of these
 from 0.5 to 4 cm in diameter. Deep subcutaneous lesions
 breeds to develop superficial (dermal) rather than subcu-
adns an n pauguos aso ueul rarel Anaua ane
taneous vascular tumors, as well as a tendency to develop
subcutis or panniculus (above the panniculus carnosus).
these tumors in sun-exposed regions (Hargis et al., 1992).
The overlying skin is elevated and often partially alopecic,
A marked male predominance in cats was found in one
and the lesions have a blue or purple tint through intact
study (Miller et al., 1992), but this was not confrmed in
skin. Secondary ulceration is uncommon.
the larger retrospective of Goldschmidt and Shofer
Infltrative hemangioma is usually found in areas of
(1992). There are no feline breed predispositions.
subcutaneous fat on the trunk or proximal extremities.
The average age of incidence for all cutaneous heman-
Grossly it may present as a nodule or locally extensive
 giomas in dogs is approximately 9 years (Goldschmidt &
Vascular tumors
743
Shofer 1992). Infltrative hemangiomas occur in middle-
infltration by mast cells, lymphocytes, and hemo-
aged to older dogs; no breed predilections are known.
siderophages. The proliferating endothelial cells have
The average age for hemangioma in cats is 9 to 11 years
scant cytoplasm and flattened, dark, uniform nuclei.
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992; Miller et al., 1992).
 Nucleoli and mitotic fgures are not evident.
Hemangiomas have been observed in dogs and cats as 
The vascular spaces may be occluded by organized
young as 1 year (Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992). Heman-
thrombi. Thrombosis is accompanied by fbroplasia
giomas in young animals may represent vascular malfor-
and deposition of hemosiderin. The overlying epidermis
mations rather than true neoplasms.
 of both dermal and subcutaneous hemangiomas often is
mildly to moderately acanthotic. Secondary ulceration
and hemorrhagic crusting are observed more often in
Histopathology
 dermal hemangiomas.
Major differential diagnoses for cavernous heman-
Cavernous bemangioma (Figure 28.11)
gioma include lymphangioma or lymphangiomatosis, and
Cutaneous hemangiomas, as typified by the so-called 'cav.
angiolipoma. The vascular spaces of lymphangioma
ernous’ hemangioma, are well circumscribed but nonen-
contain no or only sparse erythrocytes, while heman-
capsulated tumors involving the dermis or subcutis. They
giomas usually have numerous red blood cells. Moreover,
are composed of vascular spaces flled with erythrocytes.
 the stroma of lymphangioma exhibits edema and lym-
Each vascular structure is enclosed and lined by a single
phoplasmacytic infltrates. Subcutaneous angiolipomas
layer of normal-appearing endothelial cells. The endothe-
are
 characterized by proliferating vascular structures
lial cells are aligned on collagenous septa, which are
within an otherwise typical lipoma, while subcutaneous
usually thin. The septal collagen frequently shows mild
hemangiomas  are generally  well-demarcated  nodules
within normal subcutaneous fat.
Infiltrative bemangioma (Figure 28.12)
These tumors are primarily located in the subcutaneous
adipose tissue. At the center there is a relatively discrete
mass composed of large vascular channels, resembling
cavernous hemangioma. Thrombosis and occasional
infarction may be observed. Surrounding this central
lesion there are numerous medium to small-sized vascu-
lar channels, sometimes branching, and of fairly regular
appearance.
These are lined by well differentiated
endothelium and are loosely distributed throughout
adipose tissue, often to specimen margins.
Infltrative hemangiomas should be differentiated from
angiolipomas. The latter contain clusters of small vascu-
lar structures that are enclosed and dispersed within an
otherwise typical lipoma. In contrast, infltrative heman-
gioma usually has a central more mass-like proliferation
of vessels, surrounded by vascular structures infltrat-
ing normal fat. Some lesions of angiomatosis may be
extremely  difficult
to differentiate  from  infltrative
hemangioma in a single biopsy specimen if adipose tissue
is predominantly sampled; clinical differentiation may be
required.
Capillary hemangioma (Figure 28.13)
This is an uncommon histopathologic pattern of heman-
gioma. Pure capillary hemangiomas occur only in the
 dermis. The vascular spaces are small and are lined by a
single layer of slightly plump endothelial cells that may
Fig. 28.11 Cavernous hemangiomma in a dog. Tightly packed, large
protrude into vessel lumens. These vascular channels
vascular structures form a well-circumscribed nodule. Note that al
resemble capillaries with a reactive endothelium. As
vascular spaces are completely enclosed.
in cavernous hemangioma, the vascular structures are
744
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 28.12 Infiltrative hemangioma in a dog. There is thrombosis
Fig. 28.13 Capillary hemangioma in a dog. The dermal nodule is
of the central large vessel at the bottom; small vessels infiltrate the
cormposed of small, thin-walled vascular structures lined by well-dif-
surrounding connective and fatty tissue.
ferentiated endothelial cells.
completely enclosed by their endothelial lining. A distinct
humans, the branching blood-filled channels of arterio-
collagenous supporting network is not present. Nucleoli
venous hemangiomas are lined by endothelial cells accom-
are not evident, but mitotic fgures can be observed.
panied by variable amounts of fibrous tissue and smooth
Subcutaneous hemangiomas may have a combination of
muscle cells (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001). Occasionally, a
capillary and cavernous vascular structures.
transition from an arteriolar wall to a venous wall can be
The major differential diagnosis for capillary heman-
 observed, representing probable arteriovenous shunting.
gioma is well-differentiated hemangiosarcoma. Circum-
In contrast to angiomatosis with a prominent arterio-
scription of tumor margins, complete enclosure of
venous component, which is a poorly demarcated process
vascular spaces, nuclear uniformity, and absence of atypi-
 that exhibits progressive and infltrative behavior, arterio.
cal mitotic fgures are important features for differentia-
venous hemangiomas are well demarcated masses.
tion of capillary hemangioma from hemangiosarcoma.
The small vessels of scrotal-type hamartoma may resem-
Angiokeratoma (Figure 28.15)
ble capillary hemangioma, but the latter does not show
This is an uncommon variant of dermal hemangioma
 orientation of the small vascular structures around larger,
that involves the superficial dermis (Vala & Esteves,
distended blood vessels. In addition, the capillaries of
2001). Angiokeratoma is characterized by a small, well-
 the hamartoma are interspersed with other spindle cell
circumscribed, elevated dermal mass. The vascular com-
elements.
ponent is essentially the same as in dermal (cavernous)
hemangioma. The epidermis exhibits irregular hyperpla-
Arteriovenous bemangioma (Figure 28.14)
sia without dysplasia, and epithelial trabeculae (rete peg
This rare variant is composed of proliferating vascular
 like) extend downward to separate and partially surround
structures resembling small arterioles and venules. As in
some of the vascular structures. Ulceration and hemor-
Vascular tumors
745
rhage are commonly present. The close association of the
vascular proliferation with the hyperplastic epidermis is
characteristic for angiokeratoma and allows differentia-
tion from other vascular tumors.
Granulation tissue-type bemangioma
(Figures 28.16 and 28.17)
 In humans, this lesion is also referred to as pyogenic gran-
uloma or lobular capillary hemangioma (Calonje &
Wilson-Jones, 1997; Weiss & Goldblum, 2001). The mass
may be multilobulated and is mostly composed of small,
branching, dilated capillary-type vessels; larger dilated
vessels may also be present in some lesions, particularly
in the center of lobular aggregates of capillaries. Vascular
structures are lined by well-differentiated endothelial cells
and filled with numerous red blood cells. The vascular
spaces are separated by a fbrous stroma that is often
edematous and contains variable numbers of mixed
inflammatory cells; the degree of inflammation may be
dependent upon the stage of evolution of the tumor
and/or secondary ulceration. The overlying epidermis
may be hyperplastic and variably ulcerated.
Granulation tissue-type hemangioma should be differ-
entiated from true granulation tissue, from angiomatosis,
particularly secondary to  lymphedema  (Klippel-
Trenaunay-like syndrome), and from highly vascularized
acrochordon (see Chapter 27). In dermal granulation
tissue, the vessels are typically arranged perpendicularly
to the skin surface. Angiomatosis secondary to lym-
Fig. 28.14 Arteriovenous hemangioma in a dog comprising thick-
phedema is not as circumscribed as granulation tissue-
walled arterial and thin-walled venous structures.
type hemangiomas. Moreover the hypoplasia of deep
Fig. 28.15 Angiokeratoma in a dog.
The vascular component of the lesion is
identical to cavernous hemangioma.
Note that the hyperplastic epidermis
forms rete peg-like extensions, which
appear to partially surround vascular
structures in the superficial dermis.
746
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Fig.28.16
Granulation tissue-type hemangioma in a dog. Larger
Fig.28.17
Higher magnification of granulation tissue-type heman
vascular structures are interspersed with very small capillary-type
gioma in a dog. Small capillaries surrounding larger vessels are often
vessels.
collapsed. Note the dispersed pleocellular inflammatory infiltrate.
lymphatics and the presence of dilated superficial lym-
Based on studies of human tumors, these spindle cells are
phatics separate angiomatosis secondary to lymphedema
not of endothelial origin, but may represent fbroblasts or 
from granulation tisue-type hemangioma. The inflam-
pericytes. Occasionally, the vascular spaces are collapsed,
matory component may be more pronounced in granula-
which results in areas of solid spindle cell proliferation.
tion  tissue-type
 hemangioma when
1 compared
The spindle cell nuclei may be hyperchromatic, but
angiomatosis secondary to lymphedema. In granulation
mitotic fgures are rare.
tissue-type hemangioma, the vascular structures are
 Spindle cell hemangiomas should be distinguished from
arborizing and grouped into lobules. The vessels are not
hemangiosarcomas
6 and scrotal-type vascular hamar-
as numerous or uniform in highly vascularized acrochor-
tomas. The endothelial cells lining the vascular channels
don when compared to the proliferative vascular channels
of hemangiomas are well-differentiated, while heman-
in granulation tissue-type hemangioma.
giosarcomas are characterized by cytologic atypia of
endothelial cells and the presence of mitotic fgures.
Spindle cell bemangioma (Figures 28.18 and 28.19)
Moreover as immunohistochemistry may demonstrate
In humans, this lesion is also referred to as spindle cell
 (see below), the solid areas of proliferating spindle cells
hemangioendothelioma (Requena & Sangueza, 1997;
 are not of endothelial cell origin, in contrast to the solid
Weiss & Goldblum, 2001). Lesions are characterized by
areas of hemangiosarcomas (Requena & Sangueza,
variably sized blood-filled channels lined by fairly well
1997). Both spindle cell hemangiomas and scrotal-type
differentiated endothelial cells. The vascular channels are
vascular hamartomas contain numerous spindle cells,
Aiasup sunsiduon eidas Aq rao qoea uo paneedas
which are either fbroblasts or pericytes. However, spindle
packed spindle cells with elongated, blunt ended nuclei.
cell hemangiomas are solitary nodules with haphazardly
Vascular tumors
747
Fig. 28.18 Spindle cell hemmangioma in a dog. Small slit-like vas
Fig. 28.19 Spindle cell hemangioma. Immunohistochemical stain
cular structures are embedded in a dense proliferation of spindle
with anti-CD31 colors endothelial cells; these are surrounded by neg-
cells.
bazole [AEC]).
arranged spindle cell bundles and vascular channels, while
scrotal-type vascular hamartomas are composed of mul-
tosis are often seen in the surrounding dermis, lending
tiple nests and lobules of vascular structures accompanied
support for solar induction (see Chapter 15). Squamous
by spindle cells tightly associated with the vascular
cell carcinoma (in situ or invasive) may occasionally occur
channels.
in the vicinity of solar-induced hemangioma (see Chapter
22).
Solar-induceddermalbemangioma
 The accompanying solar lesions permit differentiation
With persistent sun exposure, solar-induced hemangiomas
of solar-induced hemangioma from other vascular prolif-
likely progress along a continuum from vascular ectasia
erations. Nuclear uniformity and absence of atypical
to benign and malignant neoplasia. These tumors tend to
mitotic fgures are important features for differentiation
be less well circumscribed than other hemangiomas. Cyto-
of solar-induced hemangioma from solar-induced heman-
logic features resemble those of idiopathic hemangiomas,
 giosarcoma; however, transitional lesions are not uncom-
although vascular structures are more uneven in size and
mon. The separation between benign and malignant
may not be completely enclosed. There may be early tran-
forms of solar-induced vascular tumors may be diffcult,
sition to a more aggressive appearance, characterized by
as this condition likely represents a continuum.
atypia of endothelial cells and a tendency to form smaller
vascular structures or solid clusters. The dermis adjacent
Immunohistochemistry
to the neoplastic mass may contain clusters and plaque-
like aggregates of proliferative, non-neoplastic blood
The proliferating spindle cells between the vascular struc.
vessels that may be telangiectatic. Solar fbrosis and elas-
 tures of spindle cell hemangiomas are vimentin-positive,
748
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
but lack typical endothelial expression of CD31, CD34
 lesions in young animals suggests a congenital malforma-
and factor VIlI. These cells thus are not of endothelial
origin, but most likely represent fbroblasts or pericytes.
lesions are usually poorly delineated and may be the
In humans, differentiation of vascular from lymphatic
result of constriction or lack of communication with
proliferations can be achieved by evaluating the lesions 
more central lymphatic vessels. Some of the reported lym-
for expression of CD44 and podocalyxin versus lym-
phangiosarcomas (see p. 753) in actuality also may rep-
phatic vessel endothelial receptor-1 (LYVE-1), podoplanin,
resent lymphangiomatosis, as histologic differentiation is
and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-3
difficult.
(VEGFR-3). The latter are expressed only by lymphatic
endothelial cells, and not by vascular endothelial cells.
 Clinical features
LYVE-1 expression in neoplastic lymphatics but not in
blood vessels also has been documented in cats (Galeotti
Lymphangiomatosis is rare in both dogs and cats. Cuta-
et al., 2004).
neous and subcutaneous lesions present as fluctuant
 un wngh on dn anse A ieun shums
Ulcers and tracts often drain serous fluid. Leakage of fluid
LYMPHANGIOMATOSIS
may result in cutaneous vesiculation. Occasionally,
(Synonym: lymphangioma)
smaller and more discrete lesions occur and may repre-
sent true “lymphangiomas'. Some lesions may be poly-
-no jo snalaand e aaeq su un sonuudu
poid. The small number of reported cases suggests
rence in infants and are believed to arise from a congen-
a predilection for intertriginous areas, in particular
ital failure of primitive lymphatic sacs to develop
 the groin and rear leg (Stambaugh et al., 1978; Turrel
communications with the venous system (Weiss &
et al., 1988; Belanger et al., 1999). Beagles were con-
Goldblum, 2001a). Hence, human lymphangiomas are
sidered at risk in one small survey of lymphangiomas
   s rrn  
(Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992). Based on several reports,
neoplasms. The presence of malformed lymphatics, or a
most affected animals are less than 5 years of age
lack of communication with more central (downstream)
(Stambaugh et al., 1978; Turrel et al., 1988; Belanger et
vessels, leads to subsequent compensatory dilation
1of
al., 1999) and many have had a prolonged clinical course
blocked lymphatic vessels. This process tends to support
prior to presentation.
the presence of a malformation rather than neoplasia. To
Lymphangiomatosis, although composed of banal lym-
indicate the non-neoplastic etiology of these lesions, the
phatics, is often recurrent and progressive. In one case,
term “lymphangiomatosis’ may be more accurate than
radiotherapy was used to successfully manage the condi-
lymphangioma. De novo dominant mutations have been
tion (Turrel et al., 1988). In a puppy with multiple lym-
suggested as an underlying cause for lymphatic malfor-
phangiomas, associated lymph node involvement was
mations in humans (Breugem et al., 2001).
speculated to be a concurrent lymphatic malformation
Histologically,  lymphatic  endothelial cells resemble
rather than metastasis; the animal survived after local sur-
vascular endothelial cells (Folpe & Gown, 2001; Weiss
gical intervention (Belanger et al., 1999).
& Goldblum, 2001a,b). However in contrast to blood
vessels, lymphatic vessels have a discontinuous basement
Histopathology (Figure 28.20)
membrane when evaluated by electron microscopy. While
lymphatic capillaries are lined by endothelial cells only,
Lymphangiomatosis is generally characterized by a poorly
the collecting vessels are composed of endothelial cells
circumscribed mass involving the dermis, subcutis, or
with an incomplete layer of smooth muscle cells. The
both. The lymphatic channels in lymphangiomatosis are
expression of lymphatic vessel endothelial receptor-1
composed of angular, dilated, and partially intercon-
(LYVE-1), vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-3
nected vascular structures lined by a single layer of
(VEGFR-3), and podoplanin is a feature of lymphatic
uniform endothelial cells. The vascular channels contain
endothelial cells only (Banerji et al., 1999; Weiss &
small amounts of proteinaceous fluid and mixed mono-
Goldblum, 2001a). LYVE-1, a receptor for the extracel-
nuclear cells; erythrocytes are rarely observed. The endo-
 lular matrix glycosaminoglycan hyaluron, is the equiva-
 thelial cells lining the channels have minimal cytoplasm,
lent of CD44 on vascular endothelia; vascular endothelia
elongated hyperchromatic nuclei, and inconspicuous
 also express podocalyxin (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001c).
 nucleoli. Mitotic activity is minimal to absent. The con-
 Lymphangiomas have been described in dogs and cats
nective tissue septa supporting the vascular structures fre-
(Stambaugh et al., 1978; Turrel et al., 1988; Belanger et
 s ro s   
al., 1999). However the occurrence of many of these
and contain a mild infltrate of lymphocytes, plasma cells.
Vascular tumors
749
in young dogs may reflect this diffculty (see p. 753). The
 presence of pleomorphic lymphatic endothelial cells lining
the vascular channels, focal lack of endothelial cells, some
mitotic activity, blindly ending trabeculae, as well as
markedly infltrative growth, separate lymphangiosar-
coma from lymphangiomatosis.
Smaller and discrete lesions of lymphangiomatosis
(lymphangiomas)  should be differentiated from rela-
tively bloodless cavernous hemangiomas and markedly
vascular acrochordons (see Chapter 27). Lymphangiomas
are architecturally similar to cavernous hemangiomas,
-onaia jo Ained au Aq pausinusp are Aensn inq
cytes in the vascular spaces. Stromal edema and mucin,
as well as lymphoplasmacytic infltration, are promi-
nent in lymphangiomas, while these features are not
commonly observed in hemangiomas. The vessels in vas-
cular acrochordons are less numerous when compared to
lymphangiomas, and generally contain some red blood
cells.
Immunohistochemistry
Lymphatic  endothelial cell proliferations  in humans
expres LYVE-1, podoplanin, and VEGFR-3; vascular
endothelial cells lack the expression of these molecules,
but express CD44 and podocalyxin instead. LYVE-1
expression in neoplastic lymphatics but not in blood
vessels also has been documented in cats (Galeoti et al.,
2004).
Fig. 28.20 Lymphangiomatosis in a dog. Cavernous, angular vas-
cular spaces are lined by a single layer of small endothelial cells and
do not contain erythrocytes. Note lymphoplasmacytic stromal infil-
HEMANGIOSARCOMA
trate at top.
(Synonym: angiosarcoma)
Hemangiosarcomas, also referred to as hemangio-
and small numbers of mast cells. The overlying epidermis
endotheliomas in humans, are malignant neoplasms of
may show acanthosis, spongiosis and, in some cases,
vascular endothelial cells (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001a,b).
spongiotic vesiculation due to chronic leakage of plasma
Poorly differentiated hemangiosarcomas and lymphan-
proteins. Ulceration is a frequent secondary feature and
giosarcomas often cannot be differentiated based on
results in marked granulation tissue formation.
their morphologic features. In such cases the tumors are
 Smaller lesions of lymphangiomatosis are occasionally
referred to as angiosarcomas. Hemangiosarcomas occur
seen. These are more discrete, often polypoid, and resem-
in both dogs and cats. Recognized variants include solar-
ble erythrocyte-poor cavernous hemangiomas.  These 
induced haemangiosarcoma, and anaplastic and epithe-
lesions likely represent true lymphangiomas'.
lioid (histiocytoid) angiosarcomas.
 Lymphangiomatosis should be differentiated from pro-
The etiology of hemangiosarcomas in humans is not
known. Interestingly, many human angiosarcomas arise
contrast to lymphangiomatosis, progressive angiomatosis
on the scalp and face of elderly patients, but a possible
is characterized by numerous red blood cells within
solar etiology is not discussed in reference texts. Similar
the proliferating channels; the accompanying extracellu-
 to hemangiomas, canine hemangiosarcomas of glabrous
lar
matrix
x  lacks  the mucinous appearance
of
 and lightly pigmented skin appear to be solar induced
lymphangiomatosis. It may be diffcult to distinguish
(Hargis et al., 1992). Miller et al. (1992) suggested pos-
well-differentiated lymphangiosarcoma from lymphan-
sible solar association for hemangiosarcomas in cats;
giomatosis. Indeed, some reports of lymphangiosarcoma
these often occurred on white-haired regions of the ears
750
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
and face, in contrast to hemangiomas (see p. 741). Most
was supported by the tendency of these breeds to develop
hemangiosarcomas arise de novo, but malignant trans-
formation within hemangiomas occurs in solar-associated
tumors, as well as a tendency to develop these tumors in
lesions in dogs (Hargis et al., 1992).
sun-exposed regions (Hargis et al., 1992).
The average age of dogs and cats with all types of
dermal and subcutaneous hemangiosarcomas in most
Clinical features
surveys is 9 to 11 years (Pulley & Stannard, 1990; Gold-
Hemangiosarcomas account for slightly less than 1% of
schmidt & Shofer, 1992; Ward et al., 1994). Heman-
 cutaneous and subcutaneous tumors in dogs and 2.8% in
giosarcomas were reported in cats between 9 and 17 years
cats (Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992). Hemangiosarcomas
of age by Miller et al. (1992). A sex predilection has not
Occur less frequently in dogs than hemangiomas. In cats,
been observed in cats or dogs (Goldschmidt & Shofer,
however hemangiosarcomas are more frequent than their
1992; Hargis et al., 1992; Ward et al., 1994).
benign counterparts.
Some reports of the biologic behavior and metastatic
The majority of dermal hemangiosarcomas in dogs and
rate of hemangiosarcomas in dogs fail to separate tumors
cats present as ill-defined, red to dark blue plaques or
by primary anatomic site, thus implying that cutaneous
nodules that are usually less than 2cm in diameter.
 s  e  s
 Hemangiosarcomas in chronically sun-exposed sites are
behavior to their visceral counterparts. Mortality rates up
 -rsoiuuau snoaueinqns sop u adnu Auanban
to 96% within 1 year have been reported (Brown et al.,
comas, which often involve the dermis secondarily, are
1985). Other reports do not distinguish superficial from
poorly-circumscribed, dark red or blue-black, spongy
 deep or solar from nonsolar induction. A study focusing
 masses that can measure up to 10 cm in diameter. Partic-
on cutaneous and glossal hemangiosarcomas reported
ularly in cats, hemangiosarcomas may resemble large
metastatic lesions in two out of ten dogs (Culbertson,
ecchymoses or bruises that blanch transiently with pres-
1982). In the study of Hargis et al. (1992), approximately
sure. Solid hemangiosarcomas may lack the typical
30% of dogs with solar-associated dermal or subcuta-
purple-red color, due to their paucity of vascular channels
neous hemangiosarcoma died as a result of their tumors;
and thus lower content of blood. Alopecia, thickened
euthanasia as a result of recurrent or additional skin
skin, hemorrhage, and ulceration are common features
tumors was common, but the clinical course of disease
regardless of dermal or subcutaneous location.
was long and extended up to 3 years. Confrmed meta-
Predilection sites for solar-induced hemangiosarcomas
in dogs are the glabrous skin of the caudal ventral
study; the lungs were most often affected (Hargis et al.,
abdomen, inguinal region, medial thighs, and axillae, as
1992). Another report used a staging system based on
seen with solar-induced hemangiomas and other sun-
increasing depth of the neoplasm (stages I to Il) in 25
induced neoplasms. Nonsolar-induced canine heman-
dogs, but did not distinguish solar versus nonsolar origin
giosarcomas may develop at any site.
(Ward et al., 1994). Stage I tumors (confned to the
 Feline hemangiosarcomas are frequently seen in the
dermis) were associated with signifcantly longer survival
abdominal region; lesions also occur on the ears and head,
 times than stage II and II tumors (subcutaneous and deep
as well as on the legs and paws (Miller et al., 1992; Gold-
muscular invasion, respectively). Metastatic lesions in
schmidt & Hendrick, 2002). Hemangiosarcomas in one
that study were seen in the draining lymph nodes and
study were located in nonpigmented skin of the head and
lungs.
ears of cats, suggesting a relationship with solar exposure
 Feline cutaneous hemangiosarcomas exhibit frequent
(Miller et al., 1992). It is possible that some of the feline
local recurrence, but in most reports have a much lower
hemangiosarcomas reported on legs and feet were actu-
 incidence of metastasis than those of dogs (Carpenter et
 ally progressive angiomatosis (see p. 735).
al., 1987; Miller et al., 1992). However, metastatic disease
In the study of Hargis et al. (1992), Whippets, Blood-
was reported in fve cats with cutaneous hemangiosar-
hounds, Salukis, and English Pointers had significantly
coma in one study (Kraje et al., 1999).
increased prevalence of cutaneous vascular neoplasia in
general; the survey of Goldschmidt and Shofer (1992)
Histopathology
found Italian Greyhounds, Whippets, Irish Wolfhounds,
Vizslas, American Bull Terriers, Beagles, and Golden
Hemangiosarcoma (Figures 28.21 and 28.22)
 Retrievers to be at increased risk for all hemangiosarco-
Hemangiosarcomas of the skin and subcutis show a con-
mas. Short-haired dogs with lightly pigmented skin,
tinuum from well-differentiated lesions which are difficult
notably Whippets, Beagles, Dalmatians, American Bull
to distinguish from hemangiomas, to highly anaplastic
Terriers, and Basset Hounds are likely predisposed to the
tumors (angiosarcomas) which require immunohisto-
development of solar-induced vascular neoplasms; this
chemistry to confrm their endothelial cell origin (see
Vascular tumors
751
Fig.28.21Hemangiosa1
oma in a dog. Endothelial cell nuclei are
Fig.28.22Herr
a dog.In this less well-differenti
hyperchromatic and often protrude into vascular lumens. Note
layers of endothelial cells. Note solid area of tumor cells at bottom
below). Most cutaneous hemangiosarcomas have mild to
nence, increased mitotic index, and partial loss of obvious
severe acanthosis of the overlying epidermis. Ulceration,
vascular structures are features of hemangiosarcomas of
thrombosis, necrosis, and hemorrhage are common sec-
 increasing malignancy (or decreasing differentiation).
ondary features of larger hemangiosarcomas in dogs and
These histopathologic features are observed more com-
cats regardless of location.
monly in subcutaneous tumors.
The majority of cutaneous hemangiosarcomas are well-
Differential diagnoses for well-differentiated heman-
differentiated neoplasms characterized by plump end-
giosarcoma include capillary hemangioma and progres
othelial cells aligned on delicate collagen trabeculae or
sive angiomatosis. Lymphangiosarcoma also may be
pre-existing dermal collagen bundles. The trabeculae
considered for relatively bloodless hemangiosarcomas. In
form an anastomosing meshwork of blood-filled channels
 contrast to capillary hemangioma, the vascular spaces of
of varying size. The vascular spaces of hemangiosarcoma
hemangiosarcoma are not uniformly enclosed by endothe.
are not uniformly enclosed by endothelial cells, and blind-
lial cells. The progressive angiomatoses have multifocal
ended trabeculae are observed. Ragged peripheral tumor
to diffuse proliferations of infltrating but well-defned
margins are created by infltration and dissection of col-
vascular channels lined by well-differentiated endothelial
lagen bundles by the neoplasm. Tumor cells have minimal
cells. The presence of papillary endothelial hyperplasia
cytoplasm and enlarged hyperchromatic nuclei with
 supports a diagnosis of progressive angiomatosis; digital
inconspicuous nucleoli. Mitotic activity is low to moder-
location is also highly suggestive. Infltrative tumor
ate; atypical mitoses can usually be detected.
margins with dissection of collagen bundles, large
Piling up of tumor cells along basal laminae, epithelioid
numbers of blindly-ending trabeculae, atypical mitoses,
morphology, nuclear pleomorphism, nucleolar promi-
 and cellular and nuclear pleomorphism are useful indica-
752
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
tors for hemangiosarcoma. Stromal edema, lymphoplas-
Angiosarcoma of vascular origin
 macytic inflammation, and a paucity of red blood cells
These tumors are also referred to as anaplastic heman-
support a diagnosis of a lymphangiosarcoma 
over
giosarcomas. They are more frequent in the subcutis, but
hemangiosarcoma.
dermal masses may occasionally be seen. Angiosarcomas
of vascular origin are poorly demarcated tumors, charac-
Solar-induced bemangiosarcoma (Figure 28.23)
terized by pleomorphic cells that pile up along basal
These largely exhibit features identical to nonsolar-
lamina. Spindle cells arranged in interlacing bundles may
induced hemangiosarcomas (see above) and share their
be admixed with polygonal cells to form solid sheets.
differential diagnoses. The dermis adjacent to the neo-
plastic mass often contains clusters and plaque-like aggre-
which may be manifested only by slit-like spaces that
gates of proliferative or ectatic, non-neoplastic blood
contain small numbers of erythrocytes. The tumor cells
vessels (telangiectasia); concurrent solar-induced heman-
 exhibit nuclear pleomorphism and nucleolar prominence.
gioma may be present (see p. 741). There are often features
Mitotic activity is high and atypical mitotic fgures are
of solar damage (elastosis and fbrosis) in the surround-
observed.
ing dermis (see Chapter 15). Squamous cell carcinoma (in
Angiosarcoma of vascular origin is diffcult to separate
situ or invasive) may occasionally occur in the vicinity of
from angiosarcoma of lymphatic origin. Stromal edema,
solar-induced hemangiosarcoma (see Chapter 22).
lymphoplasmacytic infltration, as well as electron micro-
scopic demonstration of a discontinuous basement mem-
brane, support a diagnosis of lymphatic origin. Anaplastic
 angiosarcomas with spindle cell predominance also need
 to be differentiated from fibrosarcomas and other spindle
5
cell malignancies. Mixed spindle-polygonal angiosarco-
mas can resemble histiocytic sarcomas or even anaplastic
carcinomas.
Clefts containing rows of erythrocytes
between the neoplastic cells are suggestive of vascular
endothelial cell origin. Immunohistochemistry is often
required for defnitive differentiation of angiosarcoma
(see below).
Epithelioid (histiocytoid) angiosarcoma
(Figures 28.24 through 28.26)
Some angiosarcomas in dogs may be composed predom-
 inantly of polygonal or plump spindle cells. These lesions
 resemble epithelioid or histiocytoid angiosarcomas in
humans (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001a). The cells have
abundant, pale eosinophilic cytoplasm and large
vesicular nuclei with prominent nucleoli. The presence of
blood-filled channels lined by these histiocytoid cells
may mimic glandular structures with central hemorrh-
age. The endothelial origin of the tumor cells often
needs to be confrmed by immunohistochemistry (see
below). Mitotic activity is moderate to high, and occa-
sional multinucleated tumor giant cells are present.
Usually there are small foci of more typical endothelial
differentiation.
Epithelioid  angiosarcoma  should be differentiated
from anaplastic carcinomas, particularly those that
feature hemorrhage. There are usually foci of cyto-
logically more typical endothelial cells, facilitating
Fig. 28.23 Solar-induced hemangiosarcoma in a dog. Irregular vas-
the diagnosis of angiosarcoma. Also, the presence of
cular spaces dissect dermal collagen bundles resulting in ragged
 blood is uncommon in luminal structures of carcinomas.
tumor margins. Note laminar homogenization of collagen indicative
of solar fibrosis and elastosis as well as reactive vascular prolifera-
Immunohistochemistry assists in confrming endothelial
tion in the superficial dermis.
origin.
Vascular tumors
753
     (   
Fig. 28.25 Higher magnification of epithelioid (histiocytoid)
majority of the neoplasm is composed of nests of pale, polygonal
angiosarcoma in a dog, demonstrating diffuse sheets of pale epithe-
and spindle cells. Vascular differentiation is most evident at the
lioid cells that resemble histiocytes.
margin of the neoplasm at lower right.
Immunohistochemistry
for cytokeratins but do not express vimentin, CD31, or
factor VIII.
Poorly differentiated neoplastic vascular endothelial cells
usually maintain their expression of CD31 and lectins; the
expression of factor Vlll may vary, and expression of
LYMPHANGIOSARCOMA
CD34 is inconsistent (Augustin-Voss et al., 1990; Poblet
et al., 1996; Arber et al., 1997). Differentiation of
(Synonym: angiosarcoma)
angiosarcoma of vascular origin from angiosarcoma of
lymphatic origin in humans is based on expression of
Lymphangiosarcomas are malignant neoplasms of lym-
CD44 and podocalyxin by the former versus lymphatic
phatic endothelial cells (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001a).
vessel endothelial receptor-1 (LYVE-1), podoplanin, and
Poorly differentiated lymphangiosarcoma often cannot
vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-3 (VEGFR-3)
be differentiated from hemangiosarcomas based on mor-
by the latter. LYVE-1 expression in neoplastic lymphatics
phologic features, and are therefore referred to as
but not in blood vessels also has been documented in cats
angiosarcomas (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001a,b). Histolog-
(Galeotti et al., 2004). Expression of CD31 and factor
ically,  lymphatic endothelial cells resemble  vascular
VlII separates the hemangiosarcomas and poorly differ-
endothelial cells (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001a,b; Folpe &
entiated angiosarcomas from fbrosarcomas (vimentin+)
Gown, 2001); immunohistochemistry is required for
and   histiocytic
sarcomas (CD18+,
CD45+,
CD1+,
definitive differentiation  in problematic lesions  (see
CD11c+, MHC II+). Anaplastic carcinomas are positive
lymphangiomatosis, p. 748).
754
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 28.26 Epithelioid (histiocytoid)
angiosarcoma of Fig. 28.25. Immuno-
histochemical stain with anti-CD31
colors the histiocytoid cells of endothe-
lial origin (chromogen aminoethylcar-
bazole [AEC]).
Lymphangiosarcomas occur in dogs and cats. Feline
cats with lymphangiosarcoma is 7 to 10 years (Walsh &
ventral abdominal angiosarcoma has not been entirely
Abbot, 1984; Carpenter et al., 1987; Swayne et al., 1989;
characterized to date, but electron microscopic evalua-
Hinrichs et al., 1999; Galeotti et al., 2004). No breed or
tions suggest lymphatic origin (Hendrick et al., 1998).
 sex predispositions are reported.
The etiology of lymphangiosarcomas in humans and
 Lymphangiosarcomas in cats exhibit frequent local
animals is not known. A congenital predisposition has
recurrence (Carpenter et al., 1987). Metastasis to drain-
been suggested in dogs. Although some reported cases of
ing lymph nodes or distant organs such as the lungs may
lymphangiosarcoma in young dogs actually may have
be found (Carpenter et al., 1987; Swayne et al., 1989;
represented lymphangiomatosis (see p. 748), metastatic
Hinrichs et al., 1999). In dogs, postsurgical recurrence
Addnd e u podar uaq s euoresoudu
and widespread visceral metastasis are common (Kelly
(Sagartz et al., 1996). Thus differentiation of lymphan-
et al., 1981; Franklin et al., 1984; Rudd et al., 1989). In
giosarcoma from lymphangiomatosis may be diffcult,
 the reported puppy, metastatic lesions to the draining
particularly in young animals.
lymph node and subsequently to a distant node
occurred (Sagartz et al., 1996). However, it may be diff-
Clinical features
cult to distinguish lymphangiosarcoma from lymphan-
giomatosis based on clinical and histological features if
Lymphangiosarcoma is rare in dogs and cats, although
metastatic disease is not present. Some of the previously
several reports of small numbers of cases are present in
described cases of nonmetastatic lymphangiosarcomas
the literature (Kelly et al., 1981; Franklin et al., 1984;
 may represent lymphangiomatosis (Shiga et al., 1994),
Walsh & Abbot, 1984; Rudd et al., 1989; Swayne et al.,
particularly when found in young dogs (Fossum et al.,
1989; Shiga et al., 1994; Sagartz et al., 1996; Fossum et
1998).
al., 1998; Hinrichs et al., 1999; Galeotti et al., 2004).
Lymphangiosarcomas present as large, diffuse, poorly
Histopathology (Figure 28.27)
demarcated, fluctuant swellings. Ulceration and serous
 drainage may be present. Reported locations are legs,
Most lymphangiosarcomas are ill-defined but well
ventral neck, and caudoventral abdomen; this is similar
differentiated neoplasms of the dermis and subcutis. The
to the distribution pattern of lymphangiomatosis (see
tumors are composed of plump spindle cells aligned in
p. 748).
one or more layers along edematous collagenous trabec-
 Lymphangiosarcomas have been diagnosed in young
ulae or pre-existing dermal collagen bundles. The trabec-
dogs as well as older animals (Kelly et al., 1981; Franklin
ulae form an anastomosing meshwork of large, angular
et al., 1984; Rudd et al., 1989; Shiga et al., 1994; Fossum
vascular spaces. Blindly ending trabeculae are frequently
et al., 1998). The youngest reported case was in an 8-
observed. Vascular structures dissect between dermal col-
week-old puppy (Sagartz et al., 1996). The average age of
lagen bundles, subcutaneous lobules of adipocytes, and
Vascular tumors
755
Fig. 28.27 Lymphangiosarcoma in a
cat. The dermis is diffusely infiltrated
by irregular vascular spaces lined by a
single layer of plump endothelial cells
with hyperchromatic muclei.  Note
paucity of erythrocytes and dissection
of  neoplastic  endotheliurm  between
dermal collagen bundles.
fascial planes at the periphery, creating ragged tumor
tumor cells lacked a continuous basement membrane
margins. The vascular spaces contain few to no erythro-
(Hendrick et al., 1998; Goldschmidt & Hendrick, 2002).
cytes, except in areas of ulceration and secondary hem-
These neoplasms are characterized by a diffuse infltration
orrhage. The sparse edematous stromal tissue is usually
 of endothelial cells, predominantly within the subcutis.
infltrated by lymphocytes and plasma cells, and occa-
 Intraluminal red blood cells are sparse or absent. Often
sional hemosiderophages may be observed. The neoplas-
the masses lack obvious vascular differentiation. Spindle
tic endothelial cells may bulge into the vascular lumens.
cells, arranged in interlacing bundles, may be admixed
The tumor cells have pleomorphic, oval nuclei with vari-
with polygonal cells to form solid sheets. The tumor cells
able nucleoli. The number of mitotic fgures varies but
exhibit nuclear pleomorphism and nucleolar prominence.
they may be frequent (Sagartz et al., 1996). Lymphan-
Mitotic activity is high. The stroma in feline ventral
giosarcomas on the caudal abdomen may incorporate and
 abdominal angiosarcomas contains variable numbers of
infltrate inguinal lymph nodes.
inflammatory cells and hemosiderophages (Hendrick et
 The presence of pleomorphic lymphatic endothelial
al., 1998; Goldschmidt & Hendrick, 2002)
cells lining the vascular channels, focal lack of endothe-
Angiosarcomas of lymphatic origin lack a basement
lial cells, blindly ending trabeculae, as well as markedly
membrane or alternatively, exhibit the presence of a dis-
infltrative growth, separates lymphangiosarcoma from
 continuous basement membrane on electron microscopic
lymphangiomatosis. Lymphangiosarcoma also must be
evaluation. Ultrastructurally, the pleomorphic tumor cells
differentiated from erythrocyte-poor hemangiosarcoma.
 pile up along discontinuous basal lamina (Hendrick et al.,
The lack of red blood cells or very few red blood cells and
 1998). These observations in conjunction with immuno-
presence of stromal edema with lymphoplasmacytic infl-
histochemistry (see below) have identifed the lesions as
tration suggests lymphangiosarcoma over hemangiosar-
lymphatic in origin.
coma. Evaluation of lymphangiosarcomas by electron
 Angiosarcomas of lymphatic origin are diffcult to sep-
microscopy reveals a discontinuous or absent basement
arate from angiosarcoma of vascular origin. Stromal
membrane and numerous pinocytotic vesicles, while
edema, lymphoplasmacytic infltration, and electronic
hemangiosarcomas are characterized by a continuous
 micrographic demonstration of a discontinuous basement
basement membrane.
membrane support the diagnosis of lymphatic origin;
immunohistochemistry may also be of beneft. Anaplastic
Angiosarcoma of lympbatic origin
angiosarcomas with solid aggregates of spindle cells
These tumors are also referred to as poorly differentiated
should   be  differentiated   f
from fbrosarcomas and
lymphangiosarcomas. Lesions reported as feline ventral
other spindle cell malignancies; this often requires
abdominal angiosarcoma are included in this group, as
immunohistochemistry.
756
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Immunohistochemistry
Angiomatosis
Breugem, C.C., van Der Horst, C.M. & Hennekam, R.C. (2001)
Similar to neoplastic vascular endothelial cells, neoplastic
 Progress toward understanding vascular malformations. Plast
lymphatic endothelial cells usually maintain their expres-
Reconstr Surg 107, 1509-23.
sion of CD31 and lectins; the expression of factor VIII may
Galeotti, F, Barzagli, F, Vercelli, A. et al. (2004) Feline lym-
vary and expression of CD34 is inconsistent (Augustin-
phangiosarcoma - definitive identification using a lymphatic
Voss et al., 1990; Poblet et al., 1996; Arber et al., 1997).
vascular marker. Vet Dermatol 15, 13-18.
 In humans, differentiation of angiosarcoma of vascular
Harwood, C.A. & Mortimer, PS. (1995) Causes and clinical
 origin from angiosarcoma of lymphatic origin is based on
manifestations of lymphatic failure. Clin Dermatol 13,
expression of CD44 and podocalyxin by the former versus
459-71.
Peavy, G.M., Walder, E.J., Nelson, J.S. et al. (2001) Use of
lymphatic vessel endothelial receptor-1 (LYVE-1), podo-
laser photocoagulation for treatment of cutaneous angio-
planin, and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-3
matosis in one dog and two cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 219,
(VEGFR-3) by the latter. LYVE-1 expression in neoplastic
1094-7.
lymphatics but not in blood vessels also has recently been
Ramirez, C.R., Saavedra, S. & Ramirez Ronda, C. (1995) Bacil-
 documented in cats (Galeotti et al., 2004). Expression of
CD31 and factor VII separates angiosarcomas of lym-
entation, diagnosis and management. Bol Assoc Med P R 87,
phatic origin from fbrosarcomas (vimentin+,
CD31-,
140-6.
factor VIII-) and histiocytic sarcomas (CD18+, CD45+,
Requenia, L. & Sangueza, O.P. (1997) Cutaneous vascular pro-
CD1+, CD11c+, MHC II+).
 liferation. Part II. Hyperplasias and benign neoplasms. J Am
Acad Dermatol 37, 887-919.
Rogioletti, F. & Rebora, A. (2003) Cutaneous reactive
angiomatoses: patterns and classification of reactive vascular
REFERENCES
proliferation. J Am Acad Dermatol 49, 887-96.
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001) Benign tumors and tumor-
Introduction
like lesions of blood vessels. In: Enzinger and Weis Soft
Banerji, S., Ni, J., Wang, S.X. et al. (1999) LYVE-1, a new homo-
Tissue Tumors, 4th edn (eds S.W. Weiss & JR. Goldblum),
logue of the CD44 glycoprotein, is a lymph-specific receptor
pp. 873-86. Mosby, St Louis.
for hyaluronan. J Cell Biol 144, 789-801.
Breiteneder-Geleff, S., Soleiman, A., Horvat, R. et al. (1999)
Hemangioma
Podoplanin - a specific marker for lymphatic endothelium
Breugem, C.C., van Der Horst, C.M. & Hennekam, R.C. (2001)
expressed in angiosarcoma. Verh Deutsch Ges Pathol 83,
 Progress toward understanding vascular malformations. Plast
270-5.
Reconstr Surg 107, 1509-23.
Cerilli, L.A. & Wick, M.R. (2002). Immunohistology of soft
Calonje, E. & Wilson-Jones, E. (1997) Vascular tumors: tumors
tissue and osseous neoplasms. In: Diagnostic Immunobisto-
and tumor-like conditions of blood vessels and lymphatics. In:
chemistry (ed. D.J. Dabbs), pp. 71-2. Churchill Livingstone,
Lever's Histopathology of the Skin, 8th edn (eds D. Elder, R.
New York.
Elenitsas, C. Jaworsky & B. Johnson, Jr.), pp. 901-8.
Folpe, A.L. & Gown, A.M. (2001) Immunohistochemistry for
Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia.
analysis of soft tissue tumors. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft
Carpenter, J.L., Andrew, L.K. & Holzworth, J. (1987) Tumors
Tissue Tumors, 4th edn (eds S.W. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum),
and tumor-like lesions. In: Diseases of the Cat (ed. J. Holz-
pp. 222-6. Mosby, St Louis.
worth), pp. 408, 479-80. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Swayme, D.E., Mahaffey, E.A. & Haynes S.G. (1989) Lymphan-
Galeoti, F, Barzagli, F, Vercelli, A. et al. (2004) Feline lym-
giosarcoma and haemangiosarcoma in a cat. J Comp Pathol
phangiosarcoma - definitive identification using a lymphatic
100, 91-6.
vascular marker. Vet Dermatol 15, 13-18.
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum J.R. (2001a) Tumors of lymph vessels.
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, FS. (1992). Skin Tumors of the
In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn (eds S.W.
 Dog and Cat, pp. 2-3; 204-16. Pergamon, Oxford.
Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 955-84. Mosby, St Louis.
Hargis, A.M., Ihrke, PJ., Spangler, W.L. et al. (1992) A retro-
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, JR. (2001b) Malignant vascular
spective clinicopathologic study of 212 dogs with cutaneous
tumors. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn
hemangiomas and hemangiosarcomas. Vet Pathol 29, 316-28.
(eds S.W. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 917-54. Mosby, St
Miller, M.A., Ramos, J.A. & Kreeger, J.M. (1992) Cutaneous
Louis.
vascular neoplasia in 15 cats: clinical, morphological and
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, JR. (2001c) Benign tumors and
immunohistochemical studies. Vet Pathol 29, 329-36.
tumor-like lesions of blood vessels. In: Enzinger and Weiss's
Requefia, L. & Sangueza, O.P. (1997) Cutaneous vascular pro-
Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn (eds S.W. Weiss & JR. Gold-
liferation. Part Il. Hyperplasias and benign neoplasms. J Am
blum), p. 837-90. Mosby, St Louis.
Acad Dermatol 37, 887-919.
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001d) Hemangioendothelioma
Scott, D.W. (1980) Feline dermatology. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
- vascular tumors of intermediate malignancy. In: Enzinger
16, 419-25.
and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn (eds S.W. Weiss &
Vala, H. & Esteves, F. (2001) A case of angiokeratoma. Vet
J.R. Goldblum), pp. 891-916. Mosby, St Louis.
Pathol 38, 324-5.
Vascular tumors
757
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R.(2001) Benign tumors and tumor-
Galeotti, F, Barzagli, F., Vercelli, A. et al. (2004) Feline lym-
like lesions of blood vessels. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft
phangiosarcoma - definitive identification using a lymphatic
Tissue Tumors, 4th edn (eds S.W. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum),
vascular marker. Vet Dermatol 15, 13-18.
pp. 839-68. Mosby, St Louis.
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Hendrick, M.J. (2002) Tumors of the skin
and soft tissues. In: Tumors of the Domestic Animals, 4th
Lymphangiomatosis
edn (ed. D.J. Meuten), pp. 99-101. Blackwell Publishing,
Banerji, S., Ni, J., Wang, S.X. et al. (1999) LYVE-1, a new homo-
Ames.
logue of the CD44 glycoprotein, is a lymph-specifc receptor
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, F.S. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
for hyaluronan. J Cell Biol 144, 789-801.
Dog and Cat, p. 2-3. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Belanger, M.C., Mikaelian, I., Girard, C. et al. (1999) Invasive
Hargis, A.M., Ihrke, PJ., Spangler, W.L. et al. (1992) A retro-
multiple lymphangiomas in a young dog. J Am Anim Hosp
spective clinicopathologic study of 212 dogs with cutaneous
Assoc 35, 507-9.
hemangiomas and hemangiosarcomas. Vet Pathol 29, 316-28.
Breugem, C.C., van Der Horst, C.M. & Hennekam, R.C. (2001)
Kraje, A.C., Mears, E.A., Hahn, K.A. et al. (1999) Unusual
Progress toward understanding vascular malformations. Plast
metastatic behavior and clinicopathologic findings in eight
Reconstr Surg 107, 1509-23.
cats with cutaneous or visceral hemangiosarcoma. J Am Vet
Folpe, A.L. & Gown, A.M. (2001) Immunohistochemistry for
Med Assoc 214, 670-2.
analysis of soft tissue tumors. In: Enzinger and Weiss Soft
Miller, M.A., Ramos, JA. & Kreeger, JM. (1992) Cutaneous
Tissue Tumors, 4th edn (eds S.W. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum),
vascular neoplasia in 15 cats: clinical, morphological and
pp. 22-6. Mosby, St Louis.
immunohistochemical studies. Vet Pathol 29, 329-36.
Galeotti, F., Barzagli, F., Vercelli, A. et al. (2004) Feline lym-
Poblet, E., Gonzalez-Palacios, F. & Jimenez, FJ. (1996) Differ-
 phangiosarcoma - definitive idenification using a lymphatic
ent immunoreactivity of endothelial markers in well and
vascular marker. Vet Dermatol 15, 13-18.
poorly differentiated areas of angiosarcomas. Virchows Arch
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, FS. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
428,217-21.
Dog and Cat, pp. 217-21. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
 Pulley, L.T. & Stannard, A.A. (1990) Tumors of the skin and
Stambaugh, J.E., Harvey, C.E. & Goldschmidt, M.H. (1978)
soft tissues. In: Tumors in Domestic Animals, 3rd edn (ed. J.E.
Lymphangioma in four dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 173,
Moulton), pp. 47-8. University of California Press, Berkeley.
759-61.
Ward, H., Fox, L.E., Calderwood-Mays, M.B. et al. (1994)
Turrel, J.M., Lowenstine, L.J. & Cowgill, L.D. (1988) Response 
Cutaneous hemangiosarcoma in 25 dogs: a retrospective
to radiation therapy of recurrent lymphangioma in a dog. J
study. J Vet Intern Med 8, 345-8.
Am Vet Med Assoc 193, 1432-4.
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001a) Malignant vascular
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001a) Tumors of lymph vessels.
tumors. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn
In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn (eds S.W.
(eds S.W. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 917-54. Mosby, St
Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 955-68. Mosby, St Louis.
Louis.
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, JR. (2001b) Benign tumors and
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001b) Hemangioendothelioma:
tumor-like lesions of blood vessels. In: Enzinger and Weiss's
vascular tumors of intermediate malignancy. In: Enzinger and
Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn (eds S.W. Weiss & J.R. Gold-
Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn (eds S.W. Weiss & J.R.
blum), pp. 837-90. Mosby, St Louis.
Goldblum), pp. 891-916. Mosby, St Louis.
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, JR. (2001c) Malignant vascular
Lymphangiosarcoma
(eds S.W. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 917-54. Mosby, St
Arber, D.A., Strickler, J.G., Chen, Y.Y. et al. (1997) Splenic vas-
Louis.
cular tumors: a histologic, immunophenotypic, and virologic
study. Am J Surg Pathol 21, 827-35.
Hemangiosarcoma
Augustin-Voss, H.G., Smith, C.A. & Lewis, R.M. (1990) Phe-
Arber, D.A., Strickler, J.G., Chen, Y.Y. et al. (1997) Splenic vas-
notypic characterization of normal and neoplastic canine
cular tumors: a histologic, immunophenotypic, and virologic
endothelial cells by lectin histochemistry. Vet Pathol 27,
study. Am J Surg Patbot 21, 827-35.
103-9.
Augusin-Voss, H.G., Smith, C.A. & Lewis, R.M. (1990) Phe-
Carpenter, J.L., Andrew, L.K. & Holzworth, J. (1987) Tumors
notypic characterization of normal and neoplastic canine
and tumor-like lesions. In: Diseases of the Cat (ed. J. Holz-
endothelial cells by lectin histochemistry. Vet Pathol 27,
worth), pp. 483-6. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
103-9.
Folpe, A.L. & Gown, A.M. (2001) Immunohistochemistry for
Brown, N.O., Patnaik, A.K. & MacEwen, E.G. (1985) Canine
analysis of soft tissue tumors. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft
hemangiosarcoma: retrospective analysis of 104 cases. J Am
Tissue Tumors, 4th edn (eds S.W. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum),
Vet Med Assoc 186, 56-8.
pp. 222-6. Mosby, St Louis.
Carpenter, J.L., Andrew, L.K. & Holzworth, J. (1987) Tumors
Fossum, T.W., Miller, M.W. & Mackie, J.T. (1998) Lymphan-
and tumor-like lesions. In: Diseases of the Cat (ed. J. Holz-
aau pue peaq aaisseu ym bunuasaid gop e ui euoieso
worth), pp. 480, 481-3. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
swelling. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 34, 301-4.
Culbertson, M.R., Jr. (1982) Hemangiosarcoma of the canine
Franklin, R.T., Robertson, J.J. & Thornburg, L.P. (1984) Lym-
skin and tongue. Vet Pathol 19, 556-8.
phangiosarcoma in a dog- J Am Vet Med Assoc 184, 474-5.
758
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Galeotti, F, Barzagli, F., Vercelli, A. et al. (2004) Feline lym-
poorly differentiated areas of angiosarcomas. Vircbows Arch
phangiosarcoma - definitive identification using a lymphatic
428,217-21.
vascular marker. Vet Dermatol 15, 13-18.
Rudd, R.G., Veatch, J.K., Whitehair, J.G. et al. (1989) Lym-
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Hendrick, M.J. (2002) Skin tumors of the
phangiosarcoma in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 25, 695-8.
skin and soft tissues. In: Tumors of the Domestic Animals, 4th
Sagartz, J.E., Lairmore, M.D., Haines, D. et al. {1996) Lym-
edn (ed. D.J. Meuten), pp. 101-2. Blackwell Publishing,
phangiosarcoma in a young dog. Vet Pathot 33, 353-6.
Ames.
Shiga, A., Shirota, K., Une, Y. et al. (1994) Lymphangiosarcoma
Hendrick, M.J., Mahaffey, E.A., Moore, FM. et al. (1998) His-
in a dog. J Vet Med Sci 56, 1199-202.
tologic classification of mesenchymal tumors of skin and soft
Swayne, D.E., Mahaffey, E.A. & Haynes S.G. (1989) Lymphan-
tissues of domestic animals. In: World Health Organization
pod duo f en e u eosiesoauaey pue euoieso
International Histologic Classification of Tumors of Domes-
100, 91-6.
tic Animals, pp. 24-5. Armed Forces Institute of Pathology,
Walsh, K.M. & Abbott, D.P. (1984) Lymphangiosarcoma in two
American Registry of Pathology, Washington DC.
cats. J Comp Pathol 94, 611-14.
Hinrichs, U., Puhl, S., Rutteman, G.R. et al. (1999) Lymphan-
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001a) Tumors of lymph vessels.
giosarcoma in cats: a retrospective study of 12 cats. Vet Pathol
In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn (eds S.W.
36, 164-7.
Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 970-81. Mosby, St Louis.
Kelly, WR., Wilkinson, G.T. & Allen, P.W. (1981) Canine
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001b) Malignant vascular
angiosarcoma (lymphangiosarcoma). Vet Pathol 18, 224-7.
tumors. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn
Poblet, E., Gonzalez-Palacios, F. & Jimenez, FJ. (1996) Differ-
(eds S.W. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 917-54, 970. Mosby,
ent immunoreactivity of endothelial markers in well and
St Louis.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat:Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 29
Perivascular tumors
Perivascular tumors are also referred to as nonendothe-
isoforms. Glomus cells also have a basal lamina that is
lial vascular tumors and arise from cells that support or 
positive for laminin and collagen IV (Folpe & Gown,
invest blood vessels (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001). Perivas-
2001; Weiss & Goldblum, 2001).
cular tumors in humans include glomus tumors, heman-
Glomus tumors observed and reported in dogs and cats 
giopericytomas, and solitary fbrous tumors (Weiss &
mostly resemble ‘glomus tumor proper’ in humans
Goldblum, 2001). These tumors are uncommon and they
(Shinya et al., 1997; Uchida et al., 2002) and are
may be easily misinterpreted as other mesenchymal pro-
composed of round cells. Spindle cell glomus tumors
liferations. Solitary fbrous tumors and hemangioperi-
(glomangiomyomas) have also been observed. A recently
cytomas may be part of a common family, and further
reported intravascular leiomyosarcoma in a cat (Jacobsen
studies are required to enable reliable differentiation
& Valentine, 2000) exhibited clinical and morphologic
(Weiss & Goldblum, 2001).
features supportive of glomus cell origin and most likely
Glomus tumors have been reported in dogs and cats,
represents an intravascular glomus tumor.
 and hemangiopericytomas have been recognized in dogs.
Leiomyomas and  leiomyosarcomas 
 originating from
Clinical features
vascular smooth muscle (angioleiomyoma, angioleiomyo-
sarcoma) will be discussed with muscular tumors in
Glomus tumors are rare in dogs and cats (Shinya et al.,
Chapter 31.
1997; Uchida et al., 2002). Only a few cases have been
recognized by the authors. Glomus tumors are character-
ized by a solitary small nodule or mass, measuring up to
GLOMUS TUMOR
2cm in diameter, and arising from the dermis or subcutis.
Glomus tumors in humans include glomus tumor proper,
o us as rdde  sno s 
glomangioma, glomangiomyoma, intravascular glomus
purple in lightly pigmented skin. Unlike lesions in
tumors, and glomangiomatosis (Weiss & Goldblum,
humans, glomus tumors in dogs and cats have not been
-ond aui ui Area siouni snuol jo sadkqns asauL (l007
reported to be painful. In humans, these nerve fbers
-s renssa pue sen sno aod jo uood
contain substance P, which may explain the tenderness
tures. Glomus tumors mostly develop on digits and are
and paroxysmal pain reported (Weiss & Goldblum,
often painful. With the exception of glomangiomatosis,
2001). Canine and feline glomus tumors tend to arise
glomus tumors in humans are considered benign.
on lower extremities and digits (Shinya et al., 1997;
Glomus tumors are neoplasms that arise from glomus
Jacobsen & Valentine, 2000; Uchida et al., 2002).
cells, which are normally found in specialized arterio-
Multiple glomus tumors resembling glomangiomatosis in
venous shunts or anastomoses (Requena & Sangueza,
humans have not been observed in dogs or cats.
1997). These arteriovenous anastomoses are numerous in
 The small numbers of cases observed do not reveal any
distal acral areas where the majority of the glomus tumors
breed or sex predilections in dogs or cats. Complete
occur in humans (Requena & Sangueza, 1997; Weiss &
surgical excision appears curative based on the limited
Goldblum, 2001). Glomus cells are controlled by the sym-
follow-up available (Shinya et al., 1997; Uchida et al.,
pathetic nervous system and regulate the flow within these
2002).
cutaneous arteriovenous shunts, thereby influencing tem-
perature regulation. Glomus cells are modifed smooth
Histopathology (Figures 29.1 through 29.4)
muscle cells (Palungwachira et al., 2001). Thus, these
vimentin-positive cells are rich in myoflaments and
Most canine and feline glomus tumors are characterized
express C-smooth muscle actin and other muscle actin
by well-demarcated, subcutaneous, or dermal masses
759
760
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 29.2
mor proper)in
defined nuclei and a moderate amount of pale eosinophilic cyto-
plastn.
extending into the mass.
surrounded by compressed fbrous tissue. Some tumors
palisade along the vascular space. A slightly mucinous
have a fbrous capsule. Typically, there are numerous
stroma is occasionally seen.
small nerve fbers and vessels associated with the mass, in
The round tumor cells have scant to moderate pale
particular at the tumor margin, and in the capsule
eosinophilic cytoplasm and large round to oval, clearly
surrounding the tumor. The nerve fbers tend to penetr-
 defined nuclei. Spindle cells contain large elongated oval
ate surrounding compressed fbrous tissue or the tumor
nuclei. Mitotic fgures are rare. Each tumor cell or small
capsule. The majority of the mass is usually composed of
groups of tumor cells are surrounded by a basement mem-
variable numbers of densely arranged round cells, and
brane, which can be demonstrated by periodic acid-Schiff
hence resembles glomus tumor proper in humans (Weiss
(PAS) stain or electron microscopy. Electron microscopic
& Goldblum, 2001) (round cell type). Admixed there may
evaluation of a canine glomus tumor revealed actin-like
 be variable numbers of slightly elongated, plump spindle
flaments, cytoplasmic dense bodies, pinocytotic vesicles,
cells. Rarely, the nodule is primarily composed of some-
and glycogen granules (Shinya et al., 1997). Occasionally
what plump spindle cells resembling glomangiomyoma in
multinucleated giant cells may be present.
humans (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001) (spindle cell type).
 Glomus tumor proper, or round cell type, may need to
Within the tumor mass there are numerous entrapped vas-
be distinguished from Merkel cell tumors, and leukocytic
cular structures, which may be compressed and appear as
round cell tumors (plasma cell tumors, nonepitheliotropic
 narrow cleft-like structures flled with red blood cells. The
lymphomas, histiocytomas, mast cell tumors, and trans-
endothelial lining is not always obvious; some blood-filled
 missible venereal tumors). In contrast to glomus tumors.
channels may, in fact, be lined by the glomus cells, which
Merkel cell tumors and leukocytic round cell tumors lack
Perivascular tumors
761
the association with larger vessels and nerve fbers.
Merkel cell tumors and plasma cell tumors have densely
packed cell aggregates, often referred to as *packeting’ of
tumor cells, separated by fne collagenous stroma. While
glomus tumors are characterized by a PAS-positive base-
ment membrane surrounding the tumor cells, leukocytic
round cell tumors lack a basement membrane. Plasma cell
tumors usually are characterized by moderate pleomor-
phism of the tumor cells and tend to have eccentric nuclei,
while round cell glomus tumors have centrally located,
clearly defned nuclei. The dense cytoplasmic RNA in
 plasma cells stains magenta with methyl green pyronine
(MGP) stain. Histiocytomas have a “top heavy’ confgu-
ration and in contrast to glomus cell tumors, often exhibit
intraepidermal aggregates of tumor cells. Mast cells have
cytoplasmic metachromatic granules, which can be
identifed by toluidine blue or Giemsa stains. Cytologic
features of lymphomas and transmissible venereal tumors
may be more difficult to differentiate from round cell
glomus tumors and immunohistochemistry is required
(see below).
 Glomus tumors of spindle cell type may need to be dif-
 ferentiated  from  well-differentiated  leiomyosarcoma,
 including piloleiomyosarcoma and angioleiomyosarcoma,
as  well as hemangiopericytoma. Piloleiomyosarcomas
originate from the arrector pili muscles and, in contrast
to glomus tumors, tend to entrap hair follicles and other
adnexal structures, but lack the close association with
vascular structures and nerve fbers. Angioleiomyosarco-
Fig. 29.3 Glomus tumor in a dog. In this example, occasional
 mas originate from the media of dermal blood vessels, and
slightly elongated cells with oval nuclei are admixed with the round
the tumors tend to blend into the muscle layer of the vas-
tumor cell population.
cular walls. They lack the presence of numerous nerve
Fig. 29.4 Glomus tumor of Fig. 29.3.
Immunohistochemistry
withanti-
collagen IV colors the baserment rmerm-
brane which surrounds single cells and
groups of cells (chromogen amino-
ethylcarbazole [AEC]).
762
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
fbers, which is a common feature of glomus tumors.
that hemangiopericytomas have been overdiagnosed in
While glomus tumors tend to have a capsule, heman-
both humans and in dogs, as the diagnostic term “heman-
giopericytomas are nonencapsulated and rather infltra-
giopericytoma’ is often used to denote the histologic
tive tumors, and lack the presence of a basement
 pattern created by a variety of spindle cell tumors with a
membrane.
whorling pattern, rather than a specifc tumor of pericytes
(Perez et al., 1996; Williamson & Middleton, 1998; Weiss
Intravascular glomus tumor
& Goldblum, 2001). The controversy derives from the
Some glomus tumors are surrounded by a large vascular
diffculty in identifying pericytes by their morphology
structure, which may form a coherent endothelial lined
and immunophenotype. Hence, the diagnosis of heman-
channel at the periphery (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001).
 giopericytoma should only be made if extensive immuno-
These features mimic the appearance of a large intra-
s o jo  n no e  
vascular sarcoma. The recently reported intravascular
below). It is therefore considered more accurate to use the
leiomyosarcoma in a cat is consistent with an intra-
vascular glomus tumor (Jacobsen & Valentine, 2000), as
morphologic and immunophenotypic features indicate
 been performed.
glomus cell origin (see below).
 Pericytes are spindle cells surrounding blood vessels.
Their morphologic features are virtually indistinguishable
from endothelial cells, fbroblasts, and other spindle cells.
Immunohistochemistry
 Electron microscopic evaluation reveals a close associa-
Glomus tumors retain the cytoplasmic expression of
tion of pericytes with the periendothelial basement mem-
vimentin, α-smooth-muscle actin, and pan-muscle-specific
 brane, but the pericytes themselves are not surrounded by
actin of the normal glomus cell (Requena & Sangueza,
 a basal lamina and hence are negative for laminin and
1997; Breiteneder-Geleff et al., 1999). Single tumor cells
collagen IV (Requenia & Sangueza, 1997; Weiss &
or groups of tumor cells are surrounded by a collagen
Goldblum, 2001). Similar to other mesenchymal cells,
IV+ and laminin+ basement membrane. In contrast to
 pericytes expres vimentin. However, they lack a charac-
glomus tumors, leiomyosarcomas consistently
express
 teristic immunophenotype, as additional proteins specifc
oth-muscle
actin,
for pericytes have not been identifed to date (Requena
and pan-muscle-specific actin. The 
eviously
reported
& Sangueza, 1997; Folpe & Gown, 2001; Weiss &
intravascular leiomyosarcoma was desmin-negative, sup-
Goldblum, 2001).
porting glomus cell origin (Jacobsen & Valentine, 2000).
Only on rare occasions do glomus tumor cells express
Clinical features
desmin as well (Requena & Sangueza, 1997; Breiteneder-
Geleff et al., 1999).
The lack of expression of α-smooth-muscle actin and
Goldschmidt (1985) to comprise 13.3% of all mesen-
the lack of a collagen IV+ and laminin+ basement
chymal neoplasms in a large review. Additionally, they
 membrane separates hemangiopericytomas from glomus
account for 7% of all canine skin tumors (Goldschmidt
tumors. Neuroendocrine tumors such as Merkel cell
& Shofer 1992). However, as in other reviews, the peri-
tumors lack the expression of c-smooth-muscle actin and
cytic origin of this neoplasm has never been convincingly
desmin, but are positive for chromogranin A and synap-
proven, despite ultrastructural studies (Xu, 1986). The
tophysin. Merkel cell tumors also express cytokeratin,
high reported incidence may be the result of using the
especially CK20. Leukocytic round cell tumors (lym-
 term “hemangiopericytoma’ to denote a histologic pattern
phoma, mast cell tumors, histiocytomas,
, plasma cell
rather than a specific tumor of pericytes (Perez et al.,
[umors, and transmissible venereal tumors) lack expres-
1996; Affolter & Moore, 2002; Mazzei et al., 2002).
sion of c-smooth-muscle actin and desmin, and the tumor
Thus, the true incidence of canine hemangiopericytoma
cells are not surrounded by a laminin+ and collagen
may be considerably lower.
 IV+ basement membrane. Instead the leukocytic tumors 
"Canine spindle cell tumors with whorling pattern',
 express the common leukocyte antigens CD18 and CD45.
which include hemangiopericytomas, are solitary, deep
dermal and subcutaneous, multilobular fairly well cir-
cumscribed masses with a frm or a slightly fatty consis-
HEMANGIOPERICYTOMA
tency. The masses are frequently adhered to underlying
Hemangiopericytoma has been a controversial neoplasm
soft tissue. Overlying skin may be alopecic, ulcerated, and
 in humans as well as in dogs (Perez et al., 1996; Weiss &
hyperpigmented. Neoplasms of this type often favor the
Goldblum, 2001; Mazzei et al., 2002). These neoplasms
trunk or legs. The previously reported preference of
have not been identifed in cats. Recent studies indicate
hemangiopericytoma for the periarticular region of the
Perivascular tumors
763
legs must be re-evaluated, as some of the previously diag-
Histopathology (Figures 29.5 and 29.6)
nosed hemangiopericytomas were, in fact, histiocytic
sarcomas (Affolter & Moore, 2002).
Using morphologic guidelines from descriptions of human
The average age of affected animals is 7 to 10 years
hemangiopericytomas,
canine
hemangiopericytomas
(Bostock & Dye, 1980; Graves et al., 1988; Postorino
are multilobular, unencapsulated subcutaneous and/or
et al., 1988). Large breed dogs are in general at greater
dermal masses comprising small spindle and polygonal
risk; one survey included Siberian Huskies, Irish Setters,
cells. The cells are arranged as interlacing bundles, sheets,
and German Shepherd Dogs, as well as mixed breeds
and concentric whorls in varying proportions. Heman-
(Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992). A 2:1 female to male pre-
 giopericytomas with large numbers of whorls have a clas-
dominance has been observed (Goldschmidt & Shofer,
sical “fngerprint’ pattern (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001). The
1992).
whorls generally have a single capillary blood vessel at
Hemangiopericytomas have been reported to exhibit
 their centers. Spindle cells surrounding branching vascu-
frequent local recurrence with increasing invasiveness
lar structures, arranged in an “antler-like? confguration,
following successive surgeries; recurrence rates reported
are a feature considered typical for hemangiopericytomas
range from 26 to 38%, with recurrence intervals of 1 to
in humans (Requena & Sangueza, 1997); this pattern
56 months (Graves et al., 1988; Postorino et al., 1988).
has not been reported in dogs. Occasionally, the central
This variation in reported incidence of recurrence may be
vascular structures in canine hemangiopericytomas are
due to inclusion of neoplasms of different cell origins and
collapsed and no longer recognizable as endothelial lined
thus different biological behavior. In the authors experi-
structures. The presence of these collapsed capillaries
ence, the metastatic rate is very low; one study observed
less than 1% metastases (Goldschmidt, 1985).
Fig. 29.6 Higher magnification of hemangiopericytoma in a dog.
Central vessels are surrounded by spindle cells, which have identical
Fig. 29.5 Hemangiopericytoma in a dog. Proliferating spindle cells
morphology to the cells irmmediately surrounding the vascular struc
with elongated nuclei encircle small capillaries.
tures (putative pericytes).
764
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
can only be identified by immunohistochemistry (see
exhibit infltrative growth and a lack of capsule formation;
below).
the vascular structures within the tumor may be collapsed.
 At the periphery of most hemangiopericytomas, ten-
drils of tumor cells extend along fascial planes, berween
Immunohistochemistry
lipocytes, and around tendon sheaths. These small infl-
trative extensions make clinical surgical assessment of
Immunohistochemistry is not useful in the definitive diag-
tumor margins diffcult. Zones of necrosis, hemorrhage,
nosis of hemangiopericytoma, as specifc markers for
and fbrosis are common secondary features. Cellularity
pericytes do not exist. Instead immunohistochemistry may
varies from moderately low to high, depending upon the
be useful in ruling out other ‘spindle cell tumors with
quantity of stromal collagen and mucin. Stromal collagen 
whorling pattern' that have a more characteristic immuno-
is usually sparse and fbrillar. Lesions with abundant
phenotype. Hemangiopericytomas in humans express vi-
 stromal mucin often appear as widely separated lobules
mentin and CD34 (Rosai, 1996; Weiss & Goldblum, 2001).
and isolated islands of tumor tissue.
 However, CD34 is seen only on a small subpopulation of
cells, and most positive cells in the lesions are endothelial
eosinophilic or amphophilic cytoplasm.
. The nuclei are
cells lining the small vascular channels (Rosai, 1996). The
oval to elongated, and uniformly pale
ewithfnely
central collapsed capillaries can be demonstrated by the
dispersed chromatin and small central nucleoli. Mitotic
 presence of factor VIII+, CD34+ endothelial cells.
activity is usually low. Nuclear pleomorphism and mitotic
 Other diverse proteins occasionally documented in
index may be increased in recurrent lesions.
 in od  so 
 Differential diagnoses for true hemangiopericytoma
hemangiopericytoma are factor XIIa, MHC II, Q-
 sr  ds, ps rao a
 smooth-muscle actin, and desmin (Rosai, 1996). These
whorling pattern', such as peripheral nerve sheath
observations indicate that the diagnosis of hemangi-
tumors, fbrosarcomas, myofbroblastic fbrosarcomas,
opericytoma is more commonly used to denote a pattern
spindle cell histiocytic sarcomas, and spindle cell glomus
of tumor cell arrangement rather than a specific tumor;
tumors (glomangiomyomas). Differentiation of heman-
this is further supported by the fact that these molecules
 giopericytoma from peripheral nerve sheath tumors can
have not been documented in normal pericytes. Similar to
be difficult, as cytologic features may be strikingly similar.
results in humans, retrospective phenotypic studies of pre-
However, peripheral nerve sheath tumor cells are sur-
viously diagnosed canine hemangiopericytomas indicate
rounded by a basement membrane, while the pericytes of
that a vast majority of these tumors originated from cells
hemangiopericytomas are not. Whorls present in periph-
other than pericytes (Perez et al., 1996; Affolter &
eral nerve sheath tumors are not centered on vascular
Moore, 2002; Mazzei et al., 2002).
structures. In contrast to hemangiopericytomas, most
 Fibrosarcomas, peripheral nerve sheath tumors, and
peripheral nerve sheath tumors have interlacing wavy
hemangiopericytomas all express vimentin. In the absence
bundles of tumor cells (Antoni type A pattern), fusiform
of other identifiable proteins, these tumors cannot be dif-
and serpentine nuclei, and variable palisading of tumor
ferentiated using immunohistochemistry. Peripheral nerve
cells. Fibrosarcomas and myofbroblastic fbrosarcomas
sheath tumors may express S100, glial fbrillary acidic
have similar cytoplasmic and nuclear features to heman-
protein (GFAP), and neuron-specific enolase (NSE). Both
giopericytomas. The former may exhibit whorling of
peripheral nerve sheath tumors and glomus tumors have
tumor cells around a collagenous center but lack con-
a basal lamina, which can be identifed by antilaminin
centric perivascular whorls.
and anticollagen IV antibodies. Glomus tumors express
Spindle cell predominant histiocytic sarcomas are often
C-smooth muscle actin and may occasionally express
 composed of a mixture of spindle cells and round large
desmin as well. ]
Myofbroblastic  fibrosarcomas  also
individualized cells. Whorling of tumor cells may be seen,
express C-smooth muscle actin in addition to vimentin.
Histiocytic sarcomas are consistently positive for common
cell
leukocyte antigen CD45 and CD18, and they also express
glomus tumors are characterized by tumor cells surround-
CD1, CD11c and MHC II.
ing vascular structures, but may have a more prominent
component of plumper spindle cells than hemangiopericy-
tomas. In most instances the glomus tumor cells
are
REFERENCES
rounder and have a central round nucleus; the tumor cells
are also surrounded by a basement membrane. Glomus
Introduction
tumors also have numerous nerves and larger vascular
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001) Perivascular tumors. In:
structures, both within the tumor and in the capsule sur
Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn (eds S.W.
rounding the mass. In contrast, hemangiopericytomas
Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 985-1036. Mosby, St Louis.
Perivascular tumors
765
Glomus tumor
Tissue Tumors, 4th edn (eds S.W. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum)
Breiteneder-Geleff, S., Soleiman, A., Horvat, R. et al. (1999)
pp. 199-201. Mosby, St Louis.
Podoplanin - a specific marker for lymphatic endothelium
Goldschmidt, M.H. (1985) Dermal mesenchymal neoplasms of
expressed in angiosarcoma,. Verh Deutsch Ges Pathol 83,
domestic animals. In: Proceedings of the AAVD/ACVD
270-5.
Meeting, Orlando, pp. 10-11.
Folpe, A.L. & Gown, A.M. (2001) Immunohistochemistry for
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, F.S. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
analysis of soft tissue tumors. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft
Dog and Cat, pp. 2-3, 168-74. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Tissue Tumors, 4th edn (eds S.W. Weiss & JR. Goldblum) p.
Graves, G.M., Bjorling, D.E. & Mahaffey, E. (1988) Canine
226. Mosby, St Louis.
hemangiopericytoma: 23 cases (1967-1984). J Am Vet Med
Jacobsen, M.C. & Valentine, B.A. (2000) Dermal intravascular
Assoc 192, 99-102.
leiomyosarcoma in a cat. Vet Pathol 37, 100-3.
Mazzei, M., Millanta, F, Citi, S. et al. (2002) Hemangiopericy-
Palungwachira, P, Palungwachira, P. & Yaguchi, H. (2001)
toma: histologic spectrum, immunohistochemical characteri-
Ultrastructural study of glomus tumor. J Med Assoc Thai 84,
zation and prognosis. Vet Dermatol 13, 15-21.
1619-23.
Perez, J., Bautista, M.J., Rollon, E. et al. (1996) Immunohisto-
Requenia, L. & Sangueza, O.P. (1997) Cutaneous vascular
chemical characterization of hemangiopericytomas and other
proliferation. Part Il. Hyperplasias and benign neoplasms.
spindle cell tumors in the dog. Vet Pathol 33, 391-7.
J Am Acad Dermatol 37, 887-919.
Postorino, N., Berg, J., Powers, B. et al. (1988) Prognostic vari-
Shinya, K., Uchida, K., Nomura, K. et al. (1997) Glomus tumor
ables for canine hemangiopericytoma: 50 cases (1979-1984).
in a dog. J Vet Med Sci 59, 949-50.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24, 501-9.
Uchida, K., Yamaguchi, R. & Tateyama, S. (2002) Glomus
Requenia, L. & Sangueza, O.P (1997) Cutaneous vascular
tumor in the digit of a cat. Vet Pathol 39, 590-2.
proliferation. Part Il. Hyperplasias and benign neoplasms.
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, JR. (2001) Perivascular tumors.
J Am Acad Dermatol 37, 887-919.
In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn
Richardson, R.C., Render, JA., Rudd, R. G. et al. {1983)
{eds S.W. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 985-1001. Mosby,
 Metastatic canine hemangiopericytoma. J Am Vet Med Assoc
St Louis.
182,705-6.
Rosai, J. (1996) Ackerman's Surgical Pathology, 8th edn,
Hemangiopericytoma
pp. 2065-8. Mosby, St Louis.
Affolter, VK. & Moore, PF. (2002) Localized and disseminated
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, JR. (2001) Perivascular tumors. In:
histiocytic sarcoma of dendritic cell origin in the dog. Vet
Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn (eds S.W.
Pathol 39, 74-83.
Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 1001-21. Mosby, St Louis.
Bostock, D.E. & Dye, M.T. (1980) Prognosis after surgical exci-
Williamson, M.M. & Middleton D.J. (1998) Cutaneous soft
sion of canine fibrous connective tissue sarcomas. Vet Pathol
dssue tumors in dogs classfcation, differentiation, and
17,581-8.
histogenesis. Vet Dermatol 9, 43-8
Folpe, A.L. & Gown, A.M. (2001) Immunohistochemistry for
Xu, F.N. (1986) Ultrastructure of canine hemangiopericytoma.
analysis of soft tissue tumors. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft
Vet Pathol 23, 643-5.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 30
Lipocytic tumors
Lipocytic tumors include benign proliferations such as
pendulous, fatty skin folds involving the neck and trunk
lipomatosis and lipomas, as well as malignant neoplasms
bilaterally (Gilbert et al., 1990). The skin was atrophic,
such as liposarcomas (Messick & Radin, 1989; Gold-
partially alopecic, and multifocally ulcerated due to
schmidt & Shofer, 1992; Hendrick et al., 1998; Weiss &
trauma. The feline case of lipomatosis was described in a
Goldblum, 2001a,b; Liggett et al., 2002). Infltrative lipo-
4-year-old cat; fatty skin folds were present symmetrically
mas and infltrative angiolipomas, although characterized
on the caudal thighs (Carpenter et al., 1987).
by morphologic well-differentiated fatty tissue, have vari-
able locally aggressive behavior (Goldschmidt & Shofer,
Histopathology
1992; Weiss & Goldblum, 2001a; Liggett et al., 2002).
Mature lipocytes, or adipocytes, are large and have
Lipomatosis in the canine case was characterized by
small nuclei that are compressed against the cell mem-
diffuse thickening of the subcutis by mature adipose tissue
branes by the abundant cytoplasmic stores of neutral lipid
(Gilbert et al., 1990). The overlying epidermis and dermis
(Banks, 1993). Lipoblasts, the lipocyte precursor cells, are
were mildly atrophic. The subcutaneous fat had a normal
small and have large, centrally located nuclei and few or
complement of fbrous septa, blood vessels, and nerves.
multiple small cytoplasmic vacuoles (Banks, 1993); these
The interlobular septa showed mild mucin deposition.
cells may be indicative of malignant transformation. The
The majority of lipocytes were cytologically normal. A
cytoplasmic lipid can be demonstrated on frozen section
small  number  of primitive mesenchymal cells and
using Sudan black or Sudan red stains. Lipocytes, like
lipoblasts (lipocyte precursor cells) were present around
other mesenchymal cells, express vimentin. However, they
blood vessels. The primitive mesenchymal cells were small
lack expression of other known proteins specific for
and stellate and had dark, ovoid nuclei; the lipoblasts
lipocytes, which makes defnitive identification of poorly
were stellate or polygonal and contained multiple small
differentiated lipocytic neoplasms diffcult.
lipid vacuoles. The lipoblast nuclei were ovoid and hyper-
chromatic. The affected cat had infltrations of benign
adipose tissue with concurrent pansteatitis (Carpenter
LIPOMATOSIS
et al., 1987).
Lipomatosis refers to the multicentric proliferation of
The primary differential diagnosis for lipomatosis is
architecturally normal adipose tissue. Several syndromes
lipoma or normal adipose tissue, particularly for needle
have been described in humans, including nevus lipo-
biopsy specimens. Lipomas are characterized by the
matosus superficialis, diffuse lipomatosis, pelvic lipo-
absence of large vessels and nerve trunks, while lipo-
matosis, adiposis dolorosa (Dercum's disease), familial
matosis generally has a normal complement of fbrous
multiple lipomatosis, and multiple symmetric lipomatosis
septa, blood vessels, and nerves. Clinicopathologic corre-
(Madelung's disease) (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001). Lipo-
lation is essential in the diagnosis of lipomatosis.
matosis is extremely rare in dogs and cats. A single case
of canine lipomatosis has been documented that resem-
bled multiple symmetric lipomatosis in humans (Gilbert
LIPOMA
et al., 1990). One case of lipomatosis has also been
described in a cat (Carpenter et al., 1987).
Benign tumors of lipocytes include lipomas, fbrolipomas,
chondrolipomas, angiolipomas, and angiofbrolipomas
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992; Hendrick et al., 1998;
Clinical features
Weiss & Goldblum, 2001; Liggett et al., 2002). In addi-
 The canine case of lipomatosis was reported in a 5-year
tion, spindle cell lipomas have been rarely observed in
old female Dachshund that had progressively enlarging,
dogs and are discussed separately (see p. 770).
766
Lipocytic tumors
767
Lipomas largely resemble normal adipose tissue. It has
lesions. Occasionally, lipomatous tumors develop in the
deep dermis or superficial subcutis, especially in cats.
sent foci of nodular hyperplasia or altered lipocyte metab-
These superficial lipomas usually measure less than 2cm
olism rather than true neoplasms (Pulley & Stannard,
in diameter.
1990).
The majority of canine and feline lipomas occur on the
 trunk and legs (Pulley & Stannard, 1990; Goldschmidt
& Shofer, 1992). Fibrolipomas in dogs often occur on
Clinical features
 temporal or intermandibular regions. Chondrolipomas in
Lipomas are common in dogs and fairly common in cats
(Bevier & Goldschmidt, 1981; Goldschmidt & Shofer,
-d uuq ym sop piae po ae araae a
1992). They account for approximately 9% of canine
tous tumors is 8 to 9 years, and females are at increased
skin and subcutaneous tumors, based on a survey by one
risk (Pulley & Stannard, 1990; Goldschmidt & Shofer,
author (E.J. W.). The incidence in cats was approximately
1992). Lipomas occur in all breeds of dogs. Labrador
5% (Carpenter et al., 1987; Goldschmidt & Shofer,
 Retrievers, Doberman Pinschers, and Miniature Schnau-
1992). The incidence rate of fbrolipoma and angiolipoma
zers are reported to be at increased risk based on one
has not been documented; a single case of feline angiof-
survey (Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992), while additional
brolipoma has been described (Liggett et al., 2002). Rare
breeds at risk, as compiled by Scott et al. (2001), include
a aq saop u paaqo uaq aa sedp
Cocker 
 Spaniels,
 Dachshunds,
and
Weimaraners.
authors and are also described by Goldschmidt and
Lipomas in cats occur most often in 7 to 13-year-old
Shofer (1992).
animals; Siamese cats are at increased risk based on
Lipomatous
 tumors present as  well-circumscribed,
 one large survey, and there is no sex predilection (Gold-
ovoid, or discoid masses with a soft or rubbery con-
schmidt & Shofer, 1992).
 sistency. Most masses are well circumscribed and have
delicate fbrous capsules. In about 5% of cases multiple
lipomas are observed (Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992).
Histopathology
Fibrolipomas and chondrolipomas may have a somewhat
frmer consistency, and angiolipomas often have a red
Lipoma (Figures 30.1 and 30.2)
or blue hue when viewed through overlying skin. The
majority of benign lipomatous tumors arise in the subcu-
are well-circumscribed dermal or subcutaneous nodules
taneous tissue and can attain sizes greater than 20 cm in
characterized by a proliferation of mature lipocytes that
diameter. The overlying skin is freely movable. Partial
are virtually indistinguishable from their counterparts in
alopecia and epidermal atrophy may occur with larger
normal fat. Lipomas often have a delicate capsule and a
Fig. 30.1 Lipoma in a cat. A relatively
discrete nodule of mature lipocytes
involves the dermis and subcutis.
768
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Fig.30.3
Fibrolipoma in a dog. The mass of mature lipocytes
note that nuclei are barely discernible in most of the cells.
dissected by cell poor fibrous tissue composed of arborizing colla-
genbundles.
delicate capillary vasculature supported by thin strands
encapsulation by mature granulation tissue is more
 of collagen. Lipocytes sometimes appear larger or have
indicative of a primary inflammatory or traumatic lesion
more variability in size than those of adjacent normal fat.
of fat than an inflamed lipoma. In addition, mildy
Nuclei are small and compressed against the cell mem-
inflamed lipomas should be differentiated from atypical
branes by the abundant cytoplasmic stores of lipid.
lipomas (see liposarcoma, p. 772). Inflamed fat contains 
Mitotic fgures are not observed. Ischemic degenerative
lesional foamy macrophages, which may be diffcult to
h o or 'ss  n   
differentiate from lipoblasts (lipocyte precursor cells).
generally accompanied by hemorrhage, fbrosis, and a
Occasional cellular atypia in the lipoblastic population of
variable inflrate of foamy macrophages. Saponification
atypical lipomas may allow differentiation.
of necrotic fat is occasionally seen, characterized by light
 basophilic material within damaged lipocytes.
Fibrolipoma (Figure 30.3)
The primary differential diagnosis for uninflamed
 Fibrolipomas are characterized by the presence of sparse
lipoma is normal adipose tissue, particularly for needle
to moderate amounts of dissecting fbrous tissue within
biopsy specimens. The absence of large vessels and nerve
an otherwise typical lipoma. The fbrous component is
trunks is useful in distinguishing a lipoma from normal
cell poor and primarily characterized by accumulations of
fat. Inflamed lipomas should be differentiated from foci
 thick to finely fbrillar, arborizing collagen bundles.
of traumatic panniculitis or steatitis (see Chapter 21), par-
The differential diagnosis is principally fbrotic adipose
ticularly in cats, as these may resemble areas of ischemic
tissue occurring as an end-stage reaction to trauma or
degeneration in lipomas. Both have numerous foamy
severe inflammation. In general, the fbrosis of scarring
macrophages dispersed throughout the lesion. Peripheral
steatitis is more cellular than fbrolipoma, and contains
Lipocytic tumors
769
Fig. 30.4 Angiolipoma in a dog. The
well-demarcated subcutaneous mass is
composed of mature fatty tissue and
variably sized, partially branching,
thin-walled vascular structures
evidence of current or chronic hemorrhage (hemosidero-
sis). In addition, atypical lipoma has areas of increased
cellularity,  and  may  require  differentiation  from
fbrolipoma. The atypical lipoma has admixed lipoblasts,
which, in contrast to fbroblasts, are round with round,
centrally or slightly eccentrically located nuclei and cyto-
plasmic fat vacuoles.
Angiolipoma (Figure 30.4)
These tumors contain clusters of branching blood vessels
that are enclosed and dispersed within an otherwise
typical lipoma (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001). The blood
vessels are lined by well-differentiated endothelial cells
and embedded in a delicate fbrous stroma, which dissects
the proliferating fatty tissue.
 Angiolipoma must be differentiated from inflrrative
hemangioma (see Chapter 28). The latter is characterized
by a relatively discrete mass composed of large vascular
channels, resembling cavernous hemangioma, surrounded
by numerous small to medium-sized vascular channels
that are dispersed within normal fatty tissue of the
subcutis. In contrast, angiolipomas have multifocal, ran-
domly distributed, branching vascular structures within a
well-demarcated lipomatous mass.
Angiofibrolipoma (Figure 30.5)
This variant represents a combination of fbrolipoma and
angiolipoma (Liggett et al., 2002). Angiofbrolipomas are
characterized by bands of collagenous connective tissue
accompanied by clusters of branching vessels, both of
Fig. 30.5 Angiofibrolipoma in a dog composed of mature fatty
which dissect well-differentiated adipose tissue. This
tissue, branching collagen bundles, and admixed variably sized, thin-
compound neoplasm is unique and diagnostically distinc-
walled vascular structures.
tive; differential diagnoses are not known.
770
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Chondrolipoma (Figure 30.6)
Clinical features
This rare variant is characterized by the presence of
Spindle cell lipomas are rare in dogs and have not been
scattered islands of well-differentiated cartilage within
recognized in cats. Similar to lipomas, spindle cell lipomas
an otherwise typical lipoma. Small amounts of mucin
present as well-circumscribed, ovoid, or discoid masses
and collagen are often found adjacent to the chondroid
with a soft or rubbery consistency. Canine spindle cell lipo-
islands. This compound neoplasm is unique and diagnos-
mas have been seen on the hip, elbow, ventral abdomen,
tically distinctive; differential diagnoses are not known.
inguinal region, mid-dorsal trunk, and on the forehead.
The tumor masses evaluated were excised from a
SPINDLE CELL LIPOMA
Golden Retriever, a Golden Retriever mix, a Labrador
Retriever, an Australian Shepherd mix, an Australian
Spindle cell lipomas in humans are characterized by
Heeler, an Airedale Terrier a Boxer and a Great Dane.
replacement of mature fat by collagen-forming spindle
The average age was 9 years, with a range of 5 to 14
cells (Enzinger & Harvey, 1975). Clinical features do not
years. Canine spindle cell lipomas, similar to their coun-
deviate from those of usual lipomas. Despite the dense cel-
lularity, they are considered benign. Spindle cell lipomas
terpart in humans, appear to be benign lesions, and com-
lack expression of receptors for insulin growth factors I
plete surgical excision is curative.
and II, which are usually seen in liposarcomas (Duve et
al., 1995). This observation supports the benign behavior
Histopathology (Figure 30.7)
of these lesions. Spindle cell lipomas have not been
reported in the veterinary literature; a few have been
Spindle cell lipomas are well-circumscribed tumor masses
observed in dogs by the authors.
that vary in their composition of mature adipose tissue
Fig. 30.6 Chrondrolipoma in a dog. This otherwise typical lipoma
Hig. 30.7 Spindle cell lipoma in a dog. Mature lipocytes are sur-
has rmultiple coalescing foci of proliferating chondrocytes embedded
rounded by fairly uniforrm spindle cells accompanied by a colla
in cartilaginous matrix.
genous stroma.
Lipocytic tumors
771
and spindle cells. Spindle cells are mostly arranged in
the fusiform cells in spindle cell lipoma should express
short parallel bundles. Occasionally, palisading of the
vimentin and CD34, and occasionally S100. CD34 is a
spindle cells is noted. These cells are admixed with well-
protein primarily expressed by embryonic cells of the
differentiated proliferating adipocytes, which sometimes
hematopoietic system and vascular endothelial cells (see
an r azis  Aqa ar  ro rr rede
Chapter 28); however, it has been reported in a variety of
of adjacent normal fat. The nuclei of the adipocytes are
spindle cell neoplasms, including spindle cell lipomas of
small and compressed against the cell membranes by the
humans (Cerelli & Wick, 2002). Spindle cell lipomas lack
abundant cytoplasmic stores of neutral lipid.
expression of the muscle proteins actin and desmin. In
The spindle cells are fairly uniform and have narrow
contrast to spindle cell lipoma, peripheral nerve sheath
cytoplasmic processes. The nuclei are narrow and elon-
tumors have a basal lamina surrounding each tumor
gated, and the nucleoli are inconspicuous. Rarely, giant
cell that can be demonstrated by immunohistochemistry
cells may be present. The spindle cells deposit variable
 for laminin and collagen IV. Moreover, peripheral nerve
amounts of collagen and mucinous matrix. Blood vessels
sheath tumors occasionally demonstrate glial fbrillary
may be inconspicuous or prominent and arborizing
acidic protein (GFAP). Some cells in nodular fascitis
(branched). Spindle cells may surround dilated, branch-
express C-smooth-muscle actin, indicating that they are
ing vascular structures, resulting in a pseudoangiomatous
 of myofbroblastic origin. Leiomyosarcomas express Q-
pattern. Osseous and cartilaginous metaplasia, features
smooth-muscle actin and desmin.
occasionally seen in spindle cell lipomas in humans (Weiss
& Goldblum, 2001), have not been recognized in canine
tumors
INFILTRATIVE LIPOMA
 Most spindle cell lipomas have a fair amount of fatty
tissue and thus are not difficult to separate from other
 Infltrating lipomas in humans, which include infltrating
spindle cell tumors. Differential diagnoses for spindle cell
angiolipomas, chiefly present as subcutaneous and intra-
lipoma with a minimal amount of adipose tissue are other
muscular lesions (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001). Similar
spindle cell proliferations such as peripheral nerve sheath
lesions are seen in dogs and cats (Gleiser et al., 1979;
tumors, hemangiopericytomas, nodular fascitis, fbrosar-
Esplin, 1984; McChesney et al., 1980; Liggett et al.,
comas, and leiomyosarcomas. In spindle cell lipomas the
2002).
spindle cells are arranged in short parallel bundles, while
peripheral nerve sheath tumors are composed of pre-
dominantly small spindle cells arranged in wavy bundles,
Clinical features
streams, and concentric whorls (Antoni type A arrange-
ment). Both tumors may contain a fair amount of myxoid
Infltrative lipomas are uncommon in dogs and rare in
stroma. In some cases it may be helpful to perform
cats (Gleiser et al., 1979; McChesney et al., 1980; Esplin,
electron microscopy, as peripheral nerve sheath tumor
1984). Infltrative lipomas and infltrative angiolipomas
cells are surrounded by a basal lamina, which can be
are large, poorly defined, deep subcutaneous and intra-
demonstrated ultrastructurally. Some spindle cell lipomas
q  r as  i sms e
are rich in branching vessels surrounded by spindle
lipomas. Most tumors arise in the deep soft tissues of the
cells; differentiation from hemangiopericytoma may not
neck, trunk, and proximal legs (Pulley & Stannard 1990;
be possible if these lipomas contain scant adipose tissue,
Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992). Leg lesions may produce
even with immunohistochemistry (see below). Additional
 pain or impair locomotion.
sections from the mass may aid in identification of zones
 Affected animals are usually middle-aged or older, but
of lipocytes. The irregular arrangement of large spindle
 young adults occasionally develop lipomas of this type.
cells separates nodular fascitis from spindle cell lipoma.
 Females are predisposed (Pulley & Stannard 1990; Gold-
Moreover, nodular fascitis may contain a reactive inflam-
schmidt & Shofer, 1992). A study of 16 dogs described a
matory infltrate. Fibrosarcomas and leiomyosarcomas
 median age of 6 years and a fermale to male ratio of 4:1
are highly cellular and do not contain admixed adipo-
(Bergman et al., 1994). This study also reported a high
cytes. Leiomyosarcomas are characterized by spindle cells
incidence of infltrative lipomas in Labrador Retrievers.
that contain plump elongated nuclei with blunt ends,
 Standard Schnauzers and Doberman Pinschers also are at
while in spindle cell lipomas the nuclei are narrow and
increased risk (Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992).
pointed.
 Infltrative lipomas and angiolipomas do not undergo
malignant transformation and possess no metastatic
 potential. However they commonly require radical surgi-
Immunohistochemistry
cal excision, external beam irradiation, or a combination
Immunohistochemical studies have not been performed
thereof, to prevent local recurrence (McEntee et al.,
on canine spindle cell lipomas. Based on human studies,
2000).
772
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Histopathology (Figure 30.8)
Infiltrative angiolipoma
This subcutaneous lesion is composed of proliferating
Infltrative lipoma is a diffusely invasive neoplasm involy-
vascular structures, admixed with an infltrative growth
ing the subcutis, skeletal muscle, and fascia. The tumor is
of well-differentiated fatty tisue as seen in infltrating
unencapsulated, and margins are difficult to assess. The
lipomas (Liggett et al., 2002). Infltrative angiolipomas
 neoplasm is composed of sheets and trabeculae of mature
may penetrate underlying muscle. The proliferating vas-
lipocytes identical to those of simple lipoma; however,
cular channels are lined by well-differentiated endothelial
 the mass markedly infltrates the surrounding tissue. The
cells.
tumor tissue spreads along fascial planes and into muscle
 Infltrating angiolipoma that affects muscle has been
bundles. The myofbers often become individualized and
considered an entity that must be differentiated from
atrophic as they are entrapped by the encroaching adipose
 intramuscular hemangioma (also called mixed intramus-
tissue. Although the adipose tissue appears poorly vascu-
cular hemangioma; Liggett et al., 2002). However,
larized, degenerative changes are rarely observed.
this may be an issue of nomenclature, as both neoplasms
The histopathologic appearance of infltrative lipoma
feature proliferation of vessels as well as adipose tissue
is unique in excisional biopsy specimens. Small amounts
within muscle (Liggett et al., 2002). Intramuscular
of normal fat are often present between muscle bundles
hemangiomas originate within the muscle, whereas infl-
in obese animals, and it may be difficult to render a defin-
trative angiolipomas originate in the subcutaneous fat
itive diagnosis of infltrative lipoma in such patients if
and invade the underlying muscle; it may be impossible
only core needle or small incisional biopsy samples are
to determine the exact origin in most cases.
provided.
 Differentiation of inflrative angiolipoma from infl-
 trative hemangioma and progressive angiomatosis may
not be possible based on small core biopsies. Large exci-
sional biopsies are necessary to appreciate the combined
proliferation of vascular structures and fatty tissue seen
in infltrative angiolipoma. The vascular structures in
angiolipomas are more consistently composed of thin-
walled vessels lined by flat endothelial cells; arteriovenous
structures often featured in angiomatosis are not
observed.
LIPOSARCOMA
Liposarcoma is the most common malignant soft tissue
tumor in humans (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001). Similar to
the human classifcation, feline and canine malignant
lipocytic tumors have been categorized as atypical lipoma,
well-differentiated liposarcoma, myxoid liposarcoma,
and pleomorphic (dedifferentiated) liposarcoma (Doster
et al., 1986; Messick & Radin, 1989).
Ultrastructural evaluation suggests that canine liposar-
comas evolve from precursor cells of white adipose tissue,
also referred to as ordinary or unilocular adipose tissue,
which is characterized by a signet ring appearance (Doster
et al., 1986). The etiology of canine liposarcomas is
largely unknown. Some strains of feline sarcoma virus
have been associated with development of liposarcomas
in kittens (Stephens et al., 1983).
Clinical features
Liposarcomas, which include atypical lipoma, are uncom-
mon in dogs and very rare in cats; the incidence of canine
Fig. 30.8 Infiltrative lipoma in a dog. Mature lipocytes infiltrate
 and feline liposarcomas was less than 0.5% in one survey
between muscle bundles and individual muscle fibers.
of all skin and subcutaneous tumors (Goldschmidt &
Lipocytic tumors
773
Shofer 1992). The authors believe that liposarcomas are
of much lower incidence in cats than in dogs; only a few
feline cases have been reported (Carpenter et al., 1987;
Tanimoto et al., 1987).
Liposarcomas are variably circumscribed, soft or
fleshy masses that measure 2cm or more in diameter.
Most liposarcomas arise in the subcutis, but frequently
involve the dermis secondarily (Goldschmidt & Shofer,
1992). With dermal involvement, the skin is thickened
and often alopecic. Ulceration may occur in larger
lesions. Most tumors involve the axial region and
proximal legs (Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992; Baez et al.,
2004).
 The average age of affected dogs is 9 to 10 years (Bevier
& Goldschmidt, 1981; Doster et al., 1986; Baez et al.,
2004); Shetland Sheepdogs and Beagles appear to be pre-
disposed (Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992). Sex predilections
have not been observed. Too few cases of feline cutaneous
liposarcoma have been reported to determine predilection
data.
 Biologic behavior of liposarcoma in humans is partially
dependent upon the histopathologic subtype (Weiss &
Goldblum, 2001); whereas atypical lipomas are consid-
ered of low-grade malignancy, dedifferentiated liposarco-
mas have a poor prognosis. Differences in behavior have
not been conclusively shown in animals; however, in one
large study, three of four dogs with metastatic disease at
the time of surgery had pleomorphic liposarcomas (Baez
et al., 2004). Recurrence of liposarcomas in dogs and
cats following surgical excision has been considered a
Fig. 30.9 Atypical lipoma in a dog. Admixed with mature fatty
common event in some reviews (Theilen & Madewell,
1987), while Goldschmidt and Shofer (1992) considered
vacuoles and small round nuclei (arrow).
it uncommon. A 28% recurrence rate among 43 dogs was
reported; longest survival times were correlated with wide
rather than marginal excision (Baez et al., 2004). The inci-
dence of distant metastasis, however is low in cats and
cells, are smalle, have large, centrally located nuclei and
dogs. Metastases of canine liposarcomas have been found
few small cytoplasmic vacuoles (Banks, 1993). Occasion-
in the lungs (Theilen & Madewell, 1987; Pulley
&
ally, mild pleomorphism, nuclear hyperchromatism, and
Stannard, 1990), but were reportedly rare at the time of
rare mitotic figures are seen in these precursor cells. The
surgery in a recent large report (Baez et al., 2004). Other
presence of lipoblasts with occasional cellular atypia is
locations for metastatic lesions are liver and bone (Theilen
considered an indication of an early transition to more
& Madewell, 1987).
aggressive behavior. Hence, atypical lipomas are best con-
sidered low-grade liposarcomas. One case of regional
lymph node metastasis from a very large atypical lipoma
Histopathology
in the front leg of a dog has been observed by the authors.
Arypical lipomas should be differentiated from mildly
Atypical lipoma (Figure 30.9)
 inflamed lipomas, from foci of mildly inflamed adipose
The majority of these usually well-circumscribed but
tissue (steatitis), and from fibrolipomas. Inflamed fat con-
nonencapsulated   masses  are  composed    of   well-
tains lesional foamy macrophages, which may be difficult
differentiated lipocytes similar to lipomas. Sclerotic areas
 to differentiate from lipoblasts. Atypia and mitotic activ-
may be present. In comparison to lipoma there is subtle
ity of lipoblasts may allow differentiation. In contrast to
increased cellularity, and there are small numbers of indi-
atypical lipomas, fbrolipomas have strands of fbrous
vidual or clustered lipoblasts dispersed amongst the well-
tissue in an otherwise typical lipoma and no evidence of
differentiated lipocytes. Lipoblasts, the lipocyte precursor
lipoblasts.
774
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 30.10 Well-differentiated liposarcoma in a dog. Polygonal cells
Fig. 30.11 Higher magnification of liposarcoma in a dog. The mass
is dominated by lipoblasts containing numerous small lipid vacuoles;
size.
note admixed mature lipocytes.
Well-differentiated liposarcoma (Figures 30.10 and
ical. Hemorrhage, necrosis, fbrosis, and ulceration are
30.11)
secondary features.
This is the most common histopathologic subtype of
 In general, the differential diagnosis of liposarcoma is
liposarcoma. Multilobular, fairly well-circumscribed, but
not problematic. The presence of well-differentiated
unencapsulated neoplasms arise from the subcutis and
lipocytes and moderate numbers of lipoblasts usually
often infltrate the dermis. The masses comprise large,
 separates well-differentiated liposarcomas from other
round to polygonal cells arranged in solid sheets. Stromal
mesenchymal malignancies.
collagen production is not observed. Occasionally, there
is a component of admixed spindle cells embedded in 
Myxoid liposarcoma (Figures 30.12 and 30.13)
myxoid stroma.
This is a less common variant of liposarcoma, character-
The majority of tumor cells have abundant cytoplasm
ized by a background of mucin (Messick & Radin, 1989).
and variable numbers of easily recognizable intracyto-
The masses are unencapsulated with poorly defined
plasmic lipid droplets. Moderate numbers of cells have
margins. They are composed of a mixture of lipocytes,
single large lipid vacuoles, resulting in peripheral nuclear
lipoblasts, spindle cells, and stellate cells. The myxoid
displacement as in mature lipocytes. Other cells resemble
ground substance, demonstrable with Alcian blue stain at
lipoblasts (lipocyte precursors), and contain central nuclei
pH 2.5, may be intermingled with small numbers of col-
and small numbers of delicate lipid droplets. Lipoblastic
lagen fbrils. A delicate anastomosing capillary vascula-
nuclei are large and pleomorphic; they are often round
 ture is present. Lipocytes are fairly well differentiated and
with marginated chromatin and prominent nucleoli.
usually have single large cytoplasmic lipid vacuoles. There
Mitotic activity is low, but most of the mitoses are atyp-
are variable numbers of lipoblasts, usually few, as well as
Lipocytic tumors
775
Fig. 30.12 Myxoid liposarcoma in a dog. There is a bubbly appear-
Fig. 30.13
Myxoid liposa
arcoma in a dog. Spindle and stellate
cells predominate in this example and are distributed haphazardly
ance of the stroma and single lipid vacuoles in many of the tumor
through a stroma of mucin and collagen fibers. Note scattered
cells. Note mucin lake at left (arrow).
mature lipocytes with single large vacuoles and lipoblasts {arrow at
right) with multiple small vacuoles.
occasional multinucleated cells. Stellate and spindle cells
are arranged haphazardly or in interlacing bundles; in
some areas they may predominate. Nuclear features of the
giant cells are common, and comprise tumor cells or reac-
spindle cell population resemble those of fbrosarcoma or
tive leukocytic giant cells. Stromal production of mucin
myxosarcoma (see Chapter 27). These spindle cells have
or collagen is not observed. The cells have abundant
few cytoplasmic lipid droplets or may lack any evidence
 eosinophilic cytoplasm that may appear glassy or foamy.
of lipid storage.
Distinct lipid vacuoles are usually recognizable in small
 Differential diagnoses for myxoid liposarcoma include
numbers of neoplastic cells (lipoblasts). Nuclei also
exhibit marked variability in size, shape, and chromatin
myxosarcoma and myxoid peripheral nerve sheath
pattern. Nuclear hyperchromatism is common and nucle-
tumors. If cells of obvious lipocyte lineage are sparse or
 oli are prominent. Many mitoses are present, and atypi-
absent, differentiation of myxoid liposarcomas from these
cal mitoses are common.
sarcomas may not be possible based on histomorphology.
Pleomorphic liposarcomas with scant lipoblasts may
Oil red O stains on frozen sections may help to identify
be diffcult to differentiate from other pleomorphic
intracytoplasmic fat within the tumor cells.
mesenchymal malignancies,   particularly  histiocytic
sarcomas  (see Chapter
 35). Pleomorphic liposar-
Pleomorphic liposarcoma (Figure 30.14)
comas with numerous multinucleated giant cells may
This rare variant of liposarcoma is characterized by tumor
present as anaplastic sarcomas with giant cells (see
cells that vary markedly in size and shape. Multinucleated
Chapter 33}.
776
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
morphic liposarcomas can be differentiated from histio-
cytic sarcomas by their lack of expression of common
leukocyte markers (CD45, CD18).
REFERENCES
Introduction
Banks, J.W. (1993) Applied Veterinary Histology, 3rd edn, pp.
93-5. Mosby, St Louis.
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, FS. (1992) Skin Tumors in the
Dog and Cat, pp. 192-203, Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Hendrick, M.J., Mahaffey, E.A., Moore, F.M. et al. (1998) His-
tologic classification of mesenchymal tumors of skin and soft
tissues of domestic animals. In: World Health Organization
International Histologic Classification of Tumors of Domes-
tic Animals, pp. 19-20. Armed Forces Institute of Pathology,
American Registry of Pathology, Washington DC.
Liggett, A.D., Frazier, K.S. & Styer, E.L. (2002) Angiolipoma-
tous tumors in dogs and a cat. Vet Pathol 39, 286-9.
Messick, J.B. & Radin, M.J. (1989) Cytologic, histologic, and
ultrastructural characteristics of a canine myxoid liposarcoma.
Vet Pathol 26, 520-2.
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, JR. (2001a) Benign lipomatous
tumors. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn
(eds L.M. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 571-639. Mosby, St
Louis.
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, JR. (2001b) Liposarcoma. In:
Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn (eds L.M.
Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 641-93. Mosby, St Louis.
Fig. 30.14 Pleomorphic liposarcoma in a dog. Solid sheets of highly
Lipomatosis
 pleomorphic polygonal cells exhibit variable lipid vacuolation. Note
Carpenter, J.L., Andrew, L.K. & Holzworth, J. (1987) Tumors
markedly enlarged, hyperchromatic nuclei.
and tumor-like lesions. In: Diseases of the Cat (ed. J.
Holzworth), p. 423. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Immunohistochemistry
Gilbert, PA., Griffin, G.E. & Walder, E.J. (1990) Diffuse truncal
lipomas in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26, 586-8.
Immunohistochemistry generally is not useful in the iden-
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001) Benign lipomatous
tification of liposarcomas or in their differentiation from
tumors. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn
(eds L.M. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 619-22. Mosby, St
other mesenchymal malignancies. Lipocytes, like other
Louis.
mesenchymal cells, express vimentin but do not express
other known surface or cytoplasmic proteins specific for
Lipoma
 this cell type. Therefore, immunohistochemistry does not
Bevier, D.E. & Goldschmidt, M.H. (1981) Skin tumors in dogs.
allow differentiation between myxosarcoma and myxoid
Part Il: Tumors of the soft (mesenchymal) tissue. Comp Cont
liposarcoma, for example, or between 
1  pleomorphic
Ed 3, 506-14.
liposarcoma and other undifferentiated mesenchymal
Carpenter, J.L., Andrew, L.K. & Holzworth, J. (1987) Tumors 
malignancies. Differentiation of myxoid liposarcoma
and tumor-like lesions. In: Diseases of the Cat (ed. J. Holz-
 from the myxoid variant of peripheral nerve sheath tumor 
worth), p. 408. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
also may be problematic, as neoplastic lipocytes occa-
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, FS. (1992) Skin Tumors in
the Dog and Cat, pp. 2-3, 192-203. Pergamon Press,
sionally express S100, and peripheral nerve sheath tumors
Oxford.
 are not consistently positive for S100. Some nerve sheath
Hendrick, M.J., Mahaffey, E.A., Moore, F.M. et al. (1998) His-
tumors, in contrast to lipocytic neoplasms, express glial
tologic classification of mesenchymal tumors of skin and soft
fbrillary acidic protein (GFAP). In contrast to liposar-
tissues of domestic animals. In: World Health Organization
coma, peripheral nerve sheath tumors have a basal lamina
International Histologic Classification of Tumors of Domes-
surrounding each tumor cell that can be demonstrated by
tic Animals, pp. 19-20. Armed Forces Institute of Pathology,
immunohistochemistry for laminin and collagen IV. Pleo-
American Registry of Pathology, Washington DC.
Lipocytic tumors
777
Liggett, A.D., Frazier, K.S. & Styer, E.L. (2002) Angiolipoma-
Pulley, L.T. & Stannard, A.A. (1990) Tumors of the skin
tous tumors in dogs and a cat. Vet Pathol 39, 286-9.
and soft tissues. In: Tumors in Domestic Animals, 3rd edn (ed.
Pulley, L.T. & Stannard, A.A. (1990) Tumors of the skin and
JE. Moulton), pp. 31-3. University of California Press,
soft tissues. In: Tumors in Domestic Animals, 3rd edn (ed. J.E.
Berkeley.
Moulton), p. 31. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001) Benign lipomatous
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
tumors. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 1237, 1308-11. W.B.
(eds L.M. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), p. 613. Mosby, St
Saunders, Philadelphia.
Louis.
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001) Benign lipomatous
Liposarcoma
(eds L.M. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 574-90. Mosby, St
Baez, J.L., Hendrick, M.J., Shofer, F.S. et al. (2004) Liposarco-
Louis.
mas in dogs: 56 cases (1989-2000). J Am Vet Med Assoc 224,
887-91.
Spindle Cell Lipoma
Banks, J.W. (1993) Applied Veterinary Histology, 3rd edn, pp.
Cerelli, L.A. & Wick, M.R. (2002) Immunohistology of soft
93-5. Mosby, St Louis.
tissue and osseous neoplasia. In: Diagnostic Immunohisto-
Bevier, D.E. & Goldschmidt, M.H. (1981) Skin tumors in dogs.
chemistry (ed. D.D. Dabbs), p. 96-7. Churchill Livingstone,
Part Il: Tumors of the soft (mesenchymal) tissue. Comp Cont
New York.
Ed 3, 506-14.
Duve, S., Muller-Hocker, J. & Worret, W.1. (1995) Spindle-cell
Carpenter, J.L., Andrew, L.K. & Holzworth, J. (1987) Tumors
lipoma of the skin. Am J Dermatopathol 17, 529-33.
and tumor-like lesions. In: Diseases of the Cat (ed. J. Holz-
Enzinger, FM. & Harvey, D.A. (1975) Spindle cell lipoma.
worth), p. 423. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Cancer 36, 1852-9.
Doster, A.R., Tomlinson, M.J., Mahaffey, E.A. et al. (1986)
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001) Benign lipomatous
Canine liposarcoma. Vet Pathol 23, 84-7.
tumors. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, FS. (1992) Skin Tumors in the
(eds L.M. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 590-7. Mosby, St Louis.
Dog and Cat, pp. 2-3, 192-203. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Messick, J.B. & Radin, M.J. (1989) Cytologic, histologic, and
InfiltrativeLipoma
ultrastructural characteristics of a canine myxoid liposarcoma.
Bergman, PJ., Withrow, S.J., Straw, R.C., et al. (1994) Infiltra-
Vet Patbol 26, 520-22.
tive lipoma in dogs: 16 cases (1981-1992). J Am Vet Med
Pulley, L.T. & Stannard, A.A. (1990) Tumors of the skin
Assoc 205, 322-4.
and soft tissues. In: Tumors in Domestic Animals, 3rd edn
Esplin, D.G. (1984) Infiltrative lipoma in a cat. Feline Pract 14,
(ed. J.E. Moulton), p. 31. University of California Press,
24-5.
Berkeley.
Gleiser, C.A., Jardine, J.H., Raulston, G.L., et al. (1979) Infl-
Stephens, L.C., Tsai, C.C., Raulston, G.L. et al. (1983) Virus-
trating lipomas in the dog. Vet Pathol 16, 623-4.
associated liposarcoma and malignant lymphoma in a kitten.
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, FS. (1992) Skin Tumors in the
J Am Vet Med Assoc 183, 123-5.
Dog and Cat, pp. 192-203. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Tanimoto, T., Shirota, K., Nakamura, M. et al. (1987) Liposar-
Liggett, A.D., Frazier, K.S. & Styer, E.L. (2002) Angiolipoma-
coma in an old cat. Nippon Juigaku Zasshi 49, 719-20.
tous tumors in dogs and a cat. Vet Pathot 39, 286-9.
Theilen, G.H. & Madewell, B.R. (1987) Tumors of the skin and
McChesney, A.E., Stephens, L.C., Lebel J. et al. (1980) Infiltra-
subcutaneous tissue. In: Veterinary Cancer Medicine, p. 292.
tive lipoma in dogs. Vet Pathol 17, 316-22.
Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia.
McEntee, M.C., Page, R.L., Mauldin, G.N. et al. (2000) Results
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001) Liposarcoma. In: Enzinger
of irradiation of infltrative lipoma in 13 dogs. Vet Radiol
and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn (eds L.M. Weiss &
Ultrasound 41, 554-6.
JR. Goldblum), pp. 648-90. Mosby, St Louis.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 31
Smooth muscle and skeletal muscle tumors
Muscle tumors of the skin are usually composed of
may explain why dermal leiomyomas are often closely
smooth muscle; both leiomyoma and leiomyosarcoma
associated with adnexal structures.
have been described (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001a,b). Skele-
Cutaneous leiomyomas (including piloleiomyomas)
tal muscle proliferations include skeletal muscle hamar-
occur in both cats and dogs. Angioleiomyoma has been
toma, rhabdomyoma, and rhabdomyosarcoma (Weiss &
reported in a cat (Liu & Mikaelian, 2003). Some dermal
Goldblum, 2001c,d). All of these tumors, with the excep-
s isn  sd n 
tion of rhabdomyoma, are observed in dogs and/or cats.
muscle hamartomas rather than true leiomyomas. Puta-
 Under the influence of transforming growth factor-beta
tive hamartomas of arrector pili muscle have been
described in the dog (Liu & Mikaelian, 2003); however,
factor (GM-CSF), fbroblasts may transform into myof-
the histologic description did not diverge signifcantly
broblasts (Schuerch et al., 1997) that display myoblastic
from leiomyoma. In contrast to the nodular lesions
features. Proliferations of myofbroblasts are discussed
described by Liu and Mikaelian (2003), smooth muscle
with fbrosarcomas (myofbroblastic fbrosarcomas; see
hamartomas in humans are poorly-delineated plaques
Chapter 27).
containing enlarged, disoriented, but discrete muscle
 Both smooth and skeletal muscles express the inter-
bundles that are usually admixed with large hair follicles
mediate flaments vimentin, actin, and desmin (Folpe
(Ragsdale, 1997). Nodular benign smooth muscle prolif-
& Gown, 2001). Muscle isoforms of actin include Q-
erations arising from arrector pili muscle will be discussed
smooth-muscle actin, expressed by smooth muscle cells
as piloleiomyomas in this text.
and myofbroblasts, and pan-muscle actin, expressed by
One report describes bilateral rhabdomyomas on the
smooth muscle, myofbroblasts, and skeletal muscle.
convex surface of the pinnae in four white cats (Roth,
Desmin, although fairly characteristic of muscle cells, is
1990). It is the authors' opinion that these lesions are
occasionally also expressed by nonmuscle cells, including
more consistent with leiomyomas.
fbroblastic reticulum cells in the lymph node, submeso-
thelial fbroblasts, and endometrial stromal cells. Skeletal
Clinical features
 muscle cells can be differentiated from smooth muscle cells
by their expression of myoglobin, myogenic transcription
Smooth muscle tumors of the skin are very rare in
factors, and lack of expression of c-smooth-muscle
dogs (Bevier & Goldschmidt, 1981; Goldschmidt, 1985).
actin, as well as by electron microscopic documentation
Leiomyomas have been reported in feline skin, but there
of striation (Folpe & Gown, 2001).
is no data for their incidence (Finnie et al., 1995; Cooper
& Valentine, 2002; Liu & Mikaelian, 2003).
Cutaneous leiomyomas are solitary, well-circumscribed,
LEIOMYOMA
frm, round to ovoid nodules that are less than 2cm in
Cutaneous leiomyomas may arise from vascular smooth
diameter. They mostly occur on the vulva, perineal area,
muscle, arrector pili muscle (piloleiomyoma), or from
groin, head, and back. Piloleiomyomas in dogs have
deep dermal smooth muscle of the genital region
been recognized on the dorsal trunk, legs, and head
(Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992; van der Wall, 1981; Weiss
(Liu & Mikaelian, 2003). Interestingly, leiomyomas have
& Goldblum, 2001; Liu & Mikaelian, 2003). Some
not been reported in the scrotum, which contains abun-
tumors of vascular smooth muscle also have a vasopro-
dant smooth muscle. Feline piloleiomyomas have been
liferative component; these are termed angioleiomyomas
observed in the skin of the thigh and the dorsal muzzle
The perifollicular dermis harbors the mid-dermal vascu-
(Liu & Mikaelian, 2003). Age and breed predilections for
lar plexuses and the bulk of the arrector pili muscles. This
smooth muscle proliferations have not been documented.
778
Smooth muscle and skeletal muscle tumors
779
Histopathology
Typical leiomyomas are small, circumscribed, but unen-
capsulated dermal nodules composed of long, plump
spindle cells arranged in interlacing fascicles. There is
little or no collagenous stroma. Frequently there are one
or several adnexal structures enclosed in the mass, and
the interlacing muscle fascicles tightly surround entrapped
hair follicles and glands. The spindle cells have abundant
pink cytoplasm with perinuclear vacuolation. These
perinuclear vacuoles contain glycogen, which can be
demonstrated with a periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) stain.
Nuclei are bland and elongated; they are blunt-ended
and have frequent chromatin crossbars. A twisted appear-
ance may characterize some nuclei. Mitotic fgures are
usually not present. Leiomyomas stain yellow with van
Gieson's stain. Masson's trichrome stain colors smooth
muscle red, and longitudinal cytoplasmic striation may be
apparent. Rarely, the tumors are secondarily ulcerated
and inflamed
Leiomyomas may be confused with fbromas. In con-
trast to leiomyomas, fbromas contain obvious interstitial
collagen, and the nuclei of fbroblasts tend to be more
tapered rather than blunt-ended as in leiomyomas. The
collagen in fibromas stains red with van Gieson's stain and
blue with Masson's trichrome stain. These special stains
are usually sufficient to differentiate between fibroma and
leiomyoma, if needed.
Piloleiomyoma (Figure 31.1)
Fig. 31.1 Piloleiomyoma in a dog arising from the arrector pili
These leiomyomas arise from the arrector pili muscles.
muscle {arrow). {Case material courtesy S.M. Liu.)
The connection of the neoplasm to pre-existing arrector
pili muscles is reportedly fairly evident in dogs, while it
Immunohistochemistry
may be diffcult to see in cats (Liu & Mikaelian, 2003).
Osseous metaplasia has been observed in one cat with
Smooth muscle is vimentin-positive, as are other mes-
multiple piloleiomyomas (Finnie et al., 1995). The con-
enchymal tissues. The expression of desmin and Q-
nection with the arrector pili muscles differentiates
smooth-muscle actin assists in the identification of
piloleiomyoma from other leiomyomas or from dermal
smooth muscle origin. Fibromas lack expression
of
fbromas.
desmin and C-smooth-muscle actin  (Andreasen
&
Mahaffey, 1987).
Angioleiomyoma
As described in a single cat, this well-delineated tumor
LEIOMYOSARCOMA
is composed of packed, interlacing bundles of smooth
muscle fibers originating from vessel walls. The muscle
 Leiomyosarcoma in humans includes myxoid, epithelioid,
bundles are composed of plump spindle cells with indis-
and pleomorphic variants (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001).
tinct cell borders. The vessels within the mass are also
Cutaneous leiomyosarcomas have been reported in both
proliferative (Liu & Mikaelian, 2003). Occasionally, the
dogs and cats, but myxoid and epithelioid variants have
vascular spaces are very thin and clef-like. The tumor
not been identified in those species (Brodey, 1970; Cooper
cells blend imperceptibly into the muscle layer of the
& Valentine, 2002). Canine and feline leiomyosarcomas
vascular walls. The endothelial cells lining the vessels of
may originate from arrector pili muscles (piloleiomyo-
origin lack evidence of atypia (Liu & Mikaelian, 2003).
sarcoma) or from vessel walls (angioleiomyosarcoma)
The association with blood vessels differentiates angi-
(Carpenter et al., 1987; Liu & Mikaelian, 2003). Pleomor-
oleiomyoma from other leiomyomas or from dermal
phic variants are also recognized; some of these resemble
fbromas.
anaplastic sarcomas with giant cells (see Chapter 33).
780
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Cutaneous malignant smooth muscle tumors of dogs
and cats may be underdiagnosed due to their resemblance
to far more common spindle-cell tumors such as fbrosar-
comas, peripheral nerve sheath tumors, and histiocytic
sarcomas. An intravascular leiomyosarcoma has been
reported in a digit of a cat (Jacobsen & Valentine, 2000);
the authors believe that this lesion is more consistent with
a glomus tumor (see Chapter 29).
Clinical features
Leiomyosarcomas of the skin are rare in dogs and cats.
Canine and feline leiomyosarcomas are small, nonulcer-
ated, predominantly dermal tumors. Leiomyosarcomas
of the perineal areas occur in cats and dogs (Cooper
& Valentine, 2002). Piloleiomyosarcomas have been
observed on the trunk, legs, and lip in dogs, and on the
thigh in a cat (Liu & Mikaelian, 2003). Angioleiomyo-
sarcomas were reported on the face of one cat and on
the extremities, including pawpads, in dogs (Liu &
Mikaelian, 2003).
Breed and age predilections are not available.
Leiomyosarcomas are locally invasive and tend to recur 
after incomplete excision. Metastatic lesions have not
been reported (Liu & Mikaelian, 2003).
Histopathology
Leiomyosarcoma (Figure 31.2)
 In general, leiomyosarcomas are variably circumscribed
chermistry. The tumor cells have elongated, blunt-ended nuclei and
but unencapsulated dermal neoplasms that may extend
often one nucleolus. There is moderate anisokaryosis and occasional
mitotic figures {arrow) are present. (Case material courtesy S.M.
into the subcutis. The overlying epidermis may be hyper-
 plastic or ulcerated. There is minimal stromal collagen.
Liu.)
Most recognized leiomyosarcomas are well differenti-
ated and are composed of long, plump spindle cells
arranged in bundles. The neoplastic cells have abundant
tumors with scant stroma, such as fbrosarcomas, myof-
eosinophilic cytoplasm or a clear appearance due to vari-
broblastic fbrosarcomas, spindle cell predominant histi-
able cytoplasmic vacuolation. Nuclei are of medium
ocytic sarcomas, and malignant peripheral nerve sheath
size; the majority retain the typical blunt-ended, elongated
 tumors. Even blunt-ended or twisted nuclear morphology
confguration of typical smooth muscle cells. Some nuclei
may not be reliably predictive of smooth muscle origin;
appear twisted. Nucleoli are small. The chromatin is
 in a small study of several tumors with typical smooth
stippled or marginated, and chromatin crossbars can
muscle morphology, the authors were unable to confrm
usually be detected. Occasionally, moderate anisocytosis
smooth muscle origin using immunohistochemistry (see
and anisokaryosis are seen. Mitotic activity is low to mod-
below).
 erate. Similar to their benign counterpart, leiomyosarco-
 Fibrosarcoma and myofbroblastic fbrosarcoma con-
mas stain yellow with van Gieson's stain. Masson's
tain variable amounts of collagen, which stains red with
trichrome stain colors the neoplastic cells red and often
van Gieson's stain and blue with Masson's trichrome
reveals a longitudinal cytoplasmic striation.
stain. In contrast to well-differentiated leiomyosarcomas,
 In contrast to leiomyomas, leiomyosarcomas are char-
most histiocytic sarcomas contain some individualized
acterized by an expansive and invasive growth pattern,
round cells with abundant cytoplasm, as well as giant
higher cellularity, and cellular atypia. The differential
 cells, admixed with the spindle cells. Distinction between
diagnosis of cutaneous leiomyosarcoma may be diffcult
 histiocytic sarcoma and potential epithelioid variants
due the histopathologic similarity to other spindle cell
(as seen in humans) of leiomyosarcoma would require
Smooth muscle and skeletal muscle tumors
781
immunohistochemistry (see below). Malignant peripheral
Differential  diagnoses  of  piloleiomyosarcoma 
are
 nerve sheath tumors are composed of smaller spindle cells
those of routine leiomyosarcoma (see above). However,
with fusiform or serpentine nuclei. The cells may be
in contrast to piloleiomyosarcomas, other mesenchymal
arranged in palisades, or they may be embedded in a
d noisane Susixa-and on inauuo nou op suseidou
mucinous matrix; these patterns are not observed with
muscles.
well-differentiated leiomyosarcoma.
Angioleiomyosarcoma
Piloleiomyosarcoma (Figure 31.3)
 Angioleiomyosarcomas are closely connected with vascu-
These tumor nodules resemble piloleiomyomas (see p.
lar structures and originate from the muscular media of
778) and connect to pre-existing arrector pili muscles
 pre-existing dermal blood vessels. The tumor cells blend
(Liu & Mikaelian, 2003). Adnexal appendages may be
into the muscle layer of the vascular walls. Closely packed
entrapped within the tumor mass (Liu & Mikaelian, 2003).
interlacing bundles of plump spindle cells surround cap-
 In contrast to their benign counterparts, piloleiomyosarco-
illaries, veins, arterioles, arteries, or thin clef-like vascu-
mas are composed of more pleomorphic, plump spindle
lar spaces. The tumor cells resemble those of routine
cells, which occasionally show nuclear palisading and
leiomyosarcomas.
packeting. Central areas of necrosis, inflammation sec-
Differential diagnoses of angioleiomyosarcoma are
ondary to ulceration, and ruptured follicles may be
similar to those of leiomyosarcoma (see above). In
 q i rad a  z j ar  v 
contrast to angioleiomyosarcoma, these other mesenchy-
felds (40x) has been reported (Liu & Mikaelian, 2003).
 mal tumors do not connect to the wall of pre-existing
blood vessels. In addition, angioleiomyosarcomas may
require differentiation from spindle cell glomus cell
lined capillary-like vascular structures, and often small
nerves are seen along the margin of the tumor. Angi-
oleiomyosarcomas are composed of smooth muscle cells
proliferating from the muscular layer of intralesional
vessels.
Pleomorphic leiomyosarcoma
These tumors are poorly demarcated and are invasive into
the surrounding tissues. They are composed of plump
spindle cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and
large vesicular oval to elongated, blunt-ended nuclei
with marginated and occasionally stippled chromatin.
 In comparison to routine leiomyosarcomas, pleomorphic
leiomyosarcomas are characterized by moderate to
marked anisocytosis and anisokaryosis of the tumor cells.
The mitotic activity is moderate to high and bizarre
mitotic fgures may be seen. There may be variable
numbers of elongated and occasionally stellate multi-
nucleated tumor giant cells. These giant cells may have
prominent anisokaryosis. In addition, there may be
multinucleated giant cells with more monomorphic round
nuclei. The latter include tumor giant cells as well as reac-
tive giant cells of leukocytic origin. Pleomorphic, poorly
differentiated leiomyosarcomas, particularly those with
numerous giant cells, may present as anaplastic sarcomas
with giant cells (see Chapter 33).
 The principal differential diagnosis for pleomorphic
leiomyosarcoma is rhabdomyosarcoma. Cross-striations,
which can be visualized by phosphotungstic acid-
Fig. 31.3 Pleomorphic piloleiomyosarcoma in a dog confirmed by
hematoxylin (PTAH) stain or electron microscopy,
immunohistochemistry. The pleomorphic spindle cells are arranged
in interlacing bundles. There is prorminent anisokaryosis. Note the
focus of necrosis at bottom. (Case material courtesy S.M. Liu.)
sarcomas. In addition, pleomorphic leiomyosarcomas
782
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
need to be differentiated from poorly differentiated
Clinical features
fbrosarcomas and myofbroblastic fbrosarcomas, as well
The limited number of skeletal muscle hamartomas seen
as histiocytic sarcomas. Immunohistochemistry is often
in dogs presented as small frm dermal or subcutaneous
required to determine the cell of origin as all are pleo-
nodules with intact overlying epidermis. Based on the
morphic and may feature giant cells (see below). Fibrosar-
 comas and myofbroblastic fbrosarcomas are composed
small number of cases observed, there were no sex or
 breed predispositions. Lesions were found in young dogs.
of spindle cells with elongated and more pointed nuclei,
  a  
 nuclei; however nuclear morphology often is not reliably
Histopathology (Figures 31.4 and 31.5)
predictive (see above). Moreover fbrosarcomas and
myofbroblastic fbrosarcomas produce variable collagen,
Canine skeletal hamartomas are composed of multifocal
nodules of small skeletal muscle fbers that are haphaz-
which stains red with van Gieson's stain and blue with
 ardly distributed throughout the dermis. The fbers may
Masson's trichrome stain; this is in contrast to the scant
 be embedded in a collagenous stroma and surrounded by
or absent stroma seen in leiomyosarcomas. The presence
adnexal structures and adipose tissue. The overlying epi-
of large, round, cytoplasm-rich tumor cells admixed with
dermis is normal. Skeletal muscle hamartomas in humans
plump spindle-shaped tumor cells suggests histiocytic
may show central calcifcation (Weiss & Goldblum,
sarcoma; immunohistochemistry may be required.
2001), a feature not seen in the canine equivalent. Canine
skeletal muscle hamartomas have unique histologic
features and are easy to differentiate from other benign
Immunohistochemistry
mesenchymal proliferations.
Like other mesenchymal tumors, leiomyosarcomas are
positive for vimentin. The expression of desmin and Q-
smooth-muscle actin identifes smooth muscle origin
(Andreasen & Mahaffey, 1987). In contrast, fbrosarco-
mas, peripheral nerve sheath tumors, and histiocytic
sarcomas lack expression of α-smooth-muscle actin and
desmin. In contrast to muscle tumors, some peripheral
nerve sheath tumors may be positive for S100 and express
glial fbrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and neuron-specifc
common leukocyte antigens CD45 and CD18, and as den-
dritic antigen presenting cells they are also positive for
CD1, CD11c, and MHCII. In contrast to leiomyosarco-
mas, rhabmyosarcomas lack expression of α-smooth-
muscle actin but express pan-muscle actin and myoglobin.
Myofbroblastic fbrosarcomas and glomus tumors
coexpress vimentin and C-smooth-muscle actin; occa
sionally they may also express desmin. In those desmin-
positive cases, immunohistochemical differentiation from
leiomyosarcomas and angioleiomyosarcomas may not be
possible.
CANINE SKELETAL
MUSCLE HAMARTOMA
Skeletal muscle hamartomas, also referred to as striated
muscle hamartomas, are rare lesions predominantly
 seen on the face and neck of newborn children (Weiss &
Goldblum, 2001). Some children have other congenital
anomalies associated with these hamartomas. Skeletal
 muscle hamartomas of the skin have not been reported in 
Fig. 31.4 Skeletal muscle hamartoma in a dog. Groups of darkly
dogs and cats. The authors have observed a few cases in
stained normal skeletal muscle fibers are embedded in the collage-
dogs.
nous stroma of the interfollicular dermis.
Smooth muscle and skeletal muscle tumors
783
Fig. 31.5 Higher magnification of
skeletal muscle hamartoma of Fig. 31.4
showing normal morphology of the
skeletal muscle fibers.
RHABDOMYOSARCOMA
Primary cutaneous rhabdomyosarcomas in humans are
extremely rare. More commonly, the dermis and subcutis
may be secondarily infltrated by an aggressive rhabdo-
myosarcoma arising from underlying tissue (Weiss &
Goldblum, 2001). Rhabdomyosarcomas occur in cats
(Macy & Bergman, 1995). One canine cutaneous rhab-
domyosarcoma has been seen by one of the authors
(E.J.W.).
Clinical features
Cutaneous rhabdomyosarcoma is extremely rare in cats.
Most rhabdomyosarcomas in feline skin develop at the site
of previous injection or vaccination (Macy & Bergman,
1995); the complex features of vaccine-induced sarcomas
are discussed in Chapter 33. Rhabdomyosarcomas vary in
size and may measure up to several centimeters in diam-
eter. They are frm, poorly demarcated, often multilobu-
lated masses, which arise in the deep subcutis and the
underlying skeletal muscles. Due to tumor invasion into
the dermis and subcutis, the skin is frmly adhered to the
mass. Alopecia and ulceration are common.
Age and breed predilections are not known. The canine
rhabdomyosarcoma was observed on the ventrolateral
thorax of an 8-year-old Vizsla. The tumor recurred twice,
but metastases were not observed.
Fig. 31.6 Rhabdomyosarcoma in a dog. Pleomorphic plump
Histopathology (Figures 31.6 and 31.7)
spindle cells are associated with rudimentary, fragmented, darkly
 Rhabdomyosarcomas are characterized by poorly demar-
stained muscle fibers.
cated subcutaneous masses that may extend into the
784
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 31.7 Rhabdomyosarcoma
Fig. 31.6. Immunohistochemistry for
 desmin confirms the muscle origin of
this
sarcoma
(chromogen  amino-
ethylcarbazole
[AEC]);
-smooth-
muscle actin staining was negative.
 dermis and the underlying skeletal muscles. Larger tumors
however nuclear morphology often is not reliably pre-
often have areas of necrosis and an associated inflrate
dictive of cell type. Moreover, fbrosarcomas and myof-
of neutrophils. Pleomorphic spindle cells are arranged in 
 broblastic fibrosarcomas often produce a variable amount
irregular, partially interlacing bundles and occasional
of collagen, which stains red with van Gieson's stain and
whorls. Neoplastic cells often trail into fber-like struc-
blue with Masson's trichrome stain; this is in contrast to
 tures. The spindle-shaped tumor cells have ovoid to elon-
the scant or
gated and vesicular nuclei with blunt ends and one or
more prominent nucleoli, and variable eosinophilic cyto-
 plasm. Occasionally, a mixture of vesicular and hyper-
in dense bundles, as well as more individualized round
chromatic nuclei is noted. The mitotic rate is highly
cells with abundant cytoplasm.
variable, and atypical, bizarre mitotic fgures may be
observed. Multinucleated giant cells may be present,
Immunohistochemistry
including both tumor giant cells and reactive leukocytic
giant cells. Multinucleated tumor cells may have elon-
 Rhabdomyosarcomas express vimentin, pan-muscle actin,
gated nuclei arranged in a row. Highly pleomorphic,
desmin, and myoglobin, but lack expression of c-smooth-
poorly differentiated rhabdomyosarcomas with abundant
muscle actin (Brown, 1987; Martin de las Mulas et al.,
giant cells may present as anaplastic sarcomas with giant
1992). In contrast to rhabdomyosarcomas, leiomyosarco-
cells (see Chapter 33). Phosphotungstic acid-hematoxylin 
mas lack expression of myoglobin, but express C-smooth-
(PTAH) staining may reveal delicate cross-striations, also
muscle actin instead. Myofbroblastic fbrosarcomas
demonstrated by electron microscopy.
 express C-smooth-muscle actin and some may coexpress
 Rhabdomyosarcomas may be diffcult to differentiate
desmin, but they consistently lack expression of myoglo-
from other mesenchymal malignancies in which pleo-
bin. Fibrosarcomas and histiocytic sarcomas express
morphism is present, including pleomorphic leiomyosar-
vimentin, but lack expression of any muscle-specifc pro-
comas,
poorly
differentiated
fbrosarcomas
and
teins. Histiocytic sarcomas are of leukocytic origin, and
myofbroblastic fbrosarcomas, as well as histiocytic sar-
hence express the common leukocyte antigen CD45 and
comas. Moreover poorly differentiated rhabdomyosarco-
CD18 as well as CD1, CD11c, and MHCII.
 mas may present as anaplastic sarcomas with giant cells
(see Chapter 33). Leiomyosarcomas lack the cross-
striations of skeletal muscle that are visualized by PTAH-
REFERENCES
stainor
 electron microscopy. Fibrosarcomas and
 myofbroblastic fbrosarcomas are composed of spindle
Introduction
cells with elongated and more pointed nuclei, while rhab.
Folpe, A.L. & Gown, A.M. (2001) Immunohistochemistry for
domyosarcomas  have elongated blunt-ended nuclei;
analysis of soft tissue tumors. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft
Smooth muscle and skeletal muscle tumors
785
Tissue Tumors, 4th edn (eds S.W. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum),
van der Wall, G. (1981) Haarbalgmuskelleiomyom bei einer
pp. 209-16. Mosby, St Louis.
Boxerhuendin. Tierarztl Prax 9, 531-2.
Schuerch, W., Frank, L.A. & Gabbiani, G. (1997) Myofibro-
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001) Benign tumors of smooth
blast. In: Histology for Pathologists, 2nd edn (ed. S.S.
muscle. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn
Sternberg), pp. 134-57. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia.
(eds S.W. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 696-704. Mosby, St
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001a) Benign tumors of smooth
Louis
muscle. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn
(eds S.W. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 695-726. Mosby, St
Leiomyosarcoma
Louis.
Andreasen, C.B. & Mahaffey, E.A. (1987) Immunohistochemi-
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001b) Leiomyosarcoma. In:
cal demonstration of desmin in canine smooth muscle tumors.
Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn (eds S.W.
Vet Pathol 24, 211-5.
Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 727-48. Mosby, St Louis.
Brodey, R.s. (1970) Canine and feline neoplasia. Adv Vet Sci
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001c) Rhabdomyoma. In:
Comp Med 14, 309-54.
Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn (eds S.W.
Carpenter, JL., Andrew, L.K. & Holzworth, J. (1987) Tumors
Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 769-84. Mosby, St Louis.
and tumor-like lesions. In: Diseases of the Cat (ed. J.
Weiss S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001d) Rhabdomyosarcoma. In:
Holzworth), p. 468. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn (eds S.W.
Cooper, B.J. & Valentine, B.A. (2002) Tumors of the muscle. In:
Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 785-836. Mosby, St Louis.
Tumors of the Domestic Animals, 4th edn (ed. D.J. Meuten),
pp. 330-2. Blackwell Publishing, Ames.
Leiomyoma
Jacobsen, M.C. & Valentine, B.A. (2000) Dermal intravascular
Andreasen, C.B. & Mahaffey, E.A. (1987) Immunohistochemi-
leiomyosarcoma in a cat. Vet Pathol 37, 100-3.
cal demonstration of desmin in canine smooth muscle tumors.
Liu, S.M. & Mikaelian, I. (2003) Cutaneous smooth muscle
Vet Pathol 24, 211-5.
mors in the dog and cat. Vet Pathol 40, 685-92.
Bevier, D.E. & Goldschmidt, M.H. (1981) Skin tumors in dogs.
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, JR. (2001) Leiomyosarcoma. In:
 Part Il: Tumors of the soft (mesenchymal) tissue. Comp Cont
Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn (eds S.W.
Ed 3, 506-14.
Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 741-4. Mosby, St Louis.
Cooper, B.J. & Valentine, B.A. (2002) Tumors of the muscle. In:
Tumors in Domestic Animals, 4th edn (ed. D.J. Meuten), pp.
Canine Skeletal Muscie Hamartoma
329-30. Blackwell Publishing, Ames.
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001) Rhabdomyoma. In:
Finnie, J.W., Leong, S-Y. & Milios, J. (1995) Multiple
Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn (eds S.W.
piloleiomyomas in a cat. J Comp Pathol 113, 201-4.
Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), p. 780. Mosby, St Louis.
Goldschmidt, M.H. (1985) Dermal mesenchymal neoplasms
of domestic animals. In: Proceedings of the AAVD/ACVD
Rhabdomyosarcoma
Meeting, Orlando, pp. 1-11.
Browm, PJ. (1987) Immunohistochemical localization of myo-
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, FS. (1992) Skin Tumors in the
globin in connective tissue tumors in dogs. Vet Pathol 24,
Dog and Cat, p. 291. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
573-4.
Liu, S.M. & Mikaelian, I. (2003) Cutaneous smooth muscle
Macy, D.W. & Bergman, PJ. (1995) Vaccine-associated sarcoma
mumors in the dog and cat. Vet Pathot 40, 685-92.
in cats. Feline Pract 23, 24-7.
Ragsdale, B.D. (1997) Tumors of fatty, muscular, and osseous
Marin de las Mulas, J., Vos, JH. & Van Mil, FN. (1992)
tissue In: Lever's Histopathology of the Skin, 8th edn (eds D.
Desmin and vimentin immunocharacterization of feline
Elder, R. Elenitsas, C. Jaworsky & B. Johnson, Jr.), pp. 955-9.
muscle tumors. Vet Pathol 29, 260-2.
Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia.
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001) Rhabdomyosarcoma. In:
Roth, L. (1990) Rhabdomyoma of the ear pinna in four cats.
Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn (eds S.W.
J Comp Pathol, 103, 237-40.
Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 785-822. Mosby, St Louis.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 32
Neural and perineural tumors
Nerves and nerve sheath cells originate from the neuro-
 Affected animals are less than 4 years of age and often
ectoderm or neural crest (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001a,b).
 have a prolonged history of severe self-trauma to the tail
Cells forming the peripheral nerve sheath may produce
tip. Five of six dogs in the original report of Gross & Carr
collagen, and hence have characteristics similar to fbro-
(1990) were Cocker Spaniels; this suggests a possible
blasts. Peripheral nerve sheath cells, in particular
breed predilection.
Schwann cells, are surrounded by a basal lamina that can
be demonstrated by electron microscopy or by immuno-
Histopathology (Figure 32.1)
histochemistry. Neural and perineural tumors include
traumatic neuroma, and benign and malignant peripheral
Tail dock neuromas are characterized by multiple small
nerve sheath tumors.
nerve bundles that are arranged individually and in clus-
Merkel cells form mechanoreceptors in conjunction
ters. These foci of proliferating neural tissue are randomly
with nerve terminals. The exact origin of Merkel cells has
distributed through dense connective tissue, which is com
been debated (Kidd et al., 1971; Hashimoto, 1972;
posed of thick collagen bundles with minimal cellularity,
Ortonne & Darmon, 1985; Saurat et al., 1988; Saxod,
resembling scar tissue. The fbrous tissue extends through-
1996). Most recent evidence confrms neural crest origin
out the dermis and through the subcutis to the periosteum
for mammalian Merkel cells (Szeder et al., 2003); thus,
of the caudal coccygeal vertebra. Axons within the nerve
 Merkel cell tumors are included in this chapter.
bundles are thinly myelinated, and the perineurium
appears slightly thickened. The histological appearance
of tail dock neuroma is unique; there are no known
TRAUMATIC NEUROMA
differential diagnoses.
(Synonym: tail dock neuroma)
MERKEL CELL TUMOR
Neuromas are exuberant but non-neoplastic prolifera
tions of nerve tissue (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001). They are
(Synonym: neuroendocrine carcinoma)
a manifestation of traumatic or surgical nerve transsec-
tion followed by disorganized proliferation of the proxi-
Merkel cell tumors, which are also referred to as Merkel
mal nerve stump due to poor apposition or absence of the
cell carcinomas, neuroendocrine carcinomas, or trabecu-
distal nerve segment. They are reported in many species
lar carcinomas, are fairly uncommon solitary round cell
and occur in a variety of anatomic locations. Neuromas
tumors of the skin and mucous membrane in humans
in dogs are mostly seen as a sequel to cosmetic caudec-
(Lever & Schaumburg-Lever 1990; Reed & Argenyi,
tomy; these are referred to as tail dock neuromas (Gross
1997; Kerl & Hoffman-Wellenhof, 2003). The exact
& Carr 1990). Traumatic neuromas have not been
origin of the Merkel cell has been debated in the litera-
reported in cats.
ture. Merkel cells express cytokeratin (CK) 20 and some
desmosomal proteins, and they have tonoflament-like
Clinical features
structures that converge upon the desmosomal structures
(Kidd et al., 1971; Hashimoto, 1972; Ortonne &
Neuromas in dogs are rare. Tail dock neuromas present
Darmon, 1985; Saurat et al., 1988). These observations 
as painful, alopecic, hyperpigmented, lichenifed lesions of
indicate epithelial characteristics; Merkel cell tumors have
 the docked tip of the tail. The underlying connective tissue
 also been referred to as cutaneous small cell undifferenti-
is thickened and frm, and there is focal adhesion between
ated carcinomas (Reed & Argenyi, 1997).
the connective tissue and the skin.
 Origin from the neural crest has been proposed, char-
786
Neural and perineural tumors
787
evaluation and immunohistochemistry (see below).
Clinical features
Merkel cell tumors are rare in dogs and cats. The tumor 
nodules are characterized by frm, intradermal, flesh-
colored, or red nodules or plaques measuring up to
1.5 cm in diameter. The overlying skin may be alopecic.
There are no known predilection sites in the skin; lesions
also may occur in the oral cavity.
Merkel cell tumors are mostly seen in older dogs,
ranging from 7 to 14 years (Glick et al., 1983; Whiteley
& Leininger, 1987; Konno et al., 1998). The two feline
cases were described in an 8-year-old and an 18-year-old
(Patnaik et al., 2001; Bagnasco et al., 2003). The small
number of cases published does not permit reliable con-
clusions regarding breed predilections.
 In contrast to Merkel cell tumor in humans, most cases 
of canine Merkel cell tumors reported appear to have
-s  (a1   ) q 
cal excision is curative. While behavior was benign in one
feline report (Bagnasco et al., 2003), in a second cat there
was recurrence and pulmonary metastasis (Patnaik et al.,
2001).
Histopathology (Figures 32.2 through 32.4)
In general, Merkel cell tumors are intradermal non-
Fig. 32.1
1 Traumatic (tail dock) neuroma in a dog. Numerous small
encapsulated masses that often extend into the subcuta-
nerve bundles are distributed haphazardly through thick collagen
neous tissue. Epidermis and follicular structures are not
resembling scar tissue.
invaded. The tumor may be composed of solid nests and
clusters of fairly monomorphic round cells surrounded by
a delicate fbrovascular stroma to create packets. Cords
acterizing Merkel cells as neuroendocrine cells and cells of
and trabeculae of cells may be prominent, more closely
the amine precursor uptake and decarboxylation (APUD)
resembling human Merkel cell tumors. The round tumor
system (Saxod, 1996). The following fndings support
cells are characterized by a moderate amount of pale
this hypothesis: Merkel cells have membrane-bound
eosinophilic cytoplasm and centrally located, round or
dense-core granules; they express neuron-specific enolase
oval nuclei with a sharply defined nuclear membrane. The
(NSE), chromogranin A, and synaptophysin (Folpe &
chromatin is evenly dispersed, or occasionally finely
Gown, 2001; DeLellis & Shin, 2002); and they also
clumped and marginated. The nucleoli are small or incon-
often connect with structures identified as a mitochondria-
spicuous. Cellular atypia is rare, and mitotic fgures are
rich, nonmyelinated axon terminals (Hashimoto, 1972).
occasionally seen.
Most recently, marked Merkel cells in whiskers and inter-
On electron microscopy, the tumor cells have loosely
follicular skin of transgenic mice were found to express
arranged, often perinuclear intermediate flaments, rudi-
beta-galactosidase, confrming Merkel cells as neural crest 
mentary desmosomal structures, interdigitating cellular
descendants (Szeder et al., 2003).
projections, and membrane-bound dense core granules,
 Merkel cell tumors have been described in dogs and
which are mainly concentrated in the cytoplasmic
cats (Glick et al., 1983; Whiteley & Leininger 1987;
processes(
(Whiteley   &   Leininger,  1987).  Grimelius
Konno et al., 1998; Patnaik et al., 2001; Bagnasco et al.,
 argyrophilic stain colors the cytoplasm of variable numbers
2003). Some of the early descriptions of Merkel cell
of tumor cells, as seen in other neuroendocrine tumors.
tumor in these two species may, in fact, be of neoplasms
Differential diagnosis for Merkel cell tumors includes
of other origins, as cutaneous round cell tumors are dif-
other cutaneous round cell tumors, such as plasmacy-
fcult to differentiate based on morphologic features only.
tomas, mast cell tumors, balloon cell melanocytomas,
788
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 32.2 Merkel cell tumor in a cat
composed of small dark cells in nests
and packets. {Case material courtesy
F Abramo.)
Fig.
32.3 Higher magnification of
Merkel celtumor in Fig. 32.2 showing
packets of cells separated by a delicate
fibrovascular stroma. The cells have
round to oval nuclei with finely clumped
chromatin.
round cell glomus tumors, histiocytomas, transmissible
cell tumors, plasmacytomas are composed of a more
venereal tumors, and nonepitheliotropic lymphomas.
pleomorphic cell population characterized by eccentri-
Morphologic features and special stains may partially
cally located nuclei and more basophilic cytoplasm; in
assist in differentiation, but often immunohistochemistry
addition, small to moderate numbers of multinucleated
is required to identify the cell of origin (see below). Both
tumor cells are usually present. Mast cell tumors are char-
nonepitheliotropic lymphoma and transmissible venereal
 acterized by intracytoplasmic metachromatic granules,
tumors may be most difficult to differentiate from Merkel
which can be demonstrated by toluidine blue or Giemsa
cell tumors based on morphologic features alone. Except
stains. Balloon cell melanocytomas are characterized by
for plasmacytomas, glomus tumors, and, to a lesser
 round cells that have a larger amount of clear cytoplasm
extent, transmissible venereal tumors, other round cell
when compared to Merkel cell tumors. Moreover the
tumors are not arranged in packets. In contrast to Merkel
presence of melanin, often requiring Fontana-Masson
Neural and perineural tumors
789
Fig. 32.4 Merkel cell tumor of Fig.
32.2. Immunohistochemistry with
neuron-specific enolase (NSE) demon-
strates positive cytoplasmmic reactivity
(chromogen diaminobenzidine [DAB]).
staining, differentiates melanocytomas from Merkel cell
contrast to Merkel cell tumors, glomus tumors express
tumors. In contrast to Merkel cell tumors, glomus tumors
C-smooth-muscle actin and may occasionally also
are usually well circumscribed and associated with
express desmin.
numerous vascular structures and nerves. Histiocytomas
are often characterized by intraepidermal tumor cell
aggregates, a feature not observed in Merkel cell tumors.
BENIGN PERIPHERAL NERVE
 During regression, both histiocytomas and transmissible
SHEATH TUMOR
venereal tumors have marked lymphocytic infltration, a
feature not seen in Merkel cell tumors.
(Synonyms: schwannoma, neurofbroma)
Immunohistochemistry
Benign peripheral nerve sheath tumors in humans are
 often subclassifed as schwannoma, neurothekeoma, neu-
Canine and feline Merkel cell tumors are positive for
rofbroma, neurofbromatosis, and perineuroma (Weiss &
CK20 (detected with pancytokeratin stains), chromo-
Goldblum, 2001). This classification is based upon such
granin A, and neuron-specifc enolase (NSE) (Konno
features as presence or absence of encapsulation, amount
et al., 1998; Patnaik et al., 2001; Bagnasco et al., 2003).
and type of stroma, and presumed cell of origin (Weiss &
Feline and canine Merkel cell tumors have not been eval-
Goldblum, 2001).
uated for expression of c-kit receptor; this receptor for
With the exception of benign myxoid peripheral nerve
stem cell factor is expressed by human Merkel cell tumors
sheath tumors in dogs, which resemble myxoid schwan-
(Su et al., 2002)
noma or neurothekeoma in humans, there is no clear-
Canine and feline Merkel cell tumors lack expression
cut histopathologic subclassifcation of peripheral nerve
of the common leukocyte markers CD45 and CD18,
sheath tumors in dogs and cats. Most benign canine and
which allows differentiation of Merkel cell tumors from
 feline peripheral nerve sheath tumors have been presumed
leukocytic round cell tumors, including lymphoma, plas-
to be of Schwann cell origin (Cordy, 1990; Summers
macytoma, histiocytoma, mast cell tumor, and transmis-
et al., 1992). There is a basal lamina surrounding single
sible venereal tumor. Melanocytomas and glomus tumors
cells and groups of tumor cells, demonstrated by electron
lack expression of cytokeratins and chromogranin A.
Melanocytomas express vimentin instead, and may
be
which supports this hypothesis. As clinical and morpho-
positive for melanoma-associated antigen (Melan-A),
logic similarities amongst the proposed subclassifcations
melanoma-associated antigen recognized by T cells
outweigh the differences (Goldschmidt & Hendrick,
(MART-1), tyrosinase, S100, HMB-45/gp100, tyrosine-
2002; Koestner & Higgins, 2002), the authors prefer
related protein-2 (TRP-2) or melanoma isoform of
to classify most of these tumors under the general name
microphthalmia transcription factor (MITF-M). In
 of peripheral nerve sheath tumor.
790
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Clinical features
Benign cutaneous peripheral nerve sheath tumors are
uncommon neoplasms in dogs and cats. However, the
exact incidence of these tumors is difficult to evaluate as
they have marked histopathologic and immunopheno-
typic similarities with other spindle cell tumors. Hence,
they may be underdiagnosed or overdiagnosed, depend-
ing on the bias of the pathologist. Based on one large
survey, the combined incidence of benign and malignant
neural tumors is reported to be 0.5% in dogs and 1.4%
in cats (Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992).
 In dogs, peripheral nerve sheath tumors usually present
as circumscribed, lobulated cutaneous masses of variable
consistency. They are generally 2 to 3 cm in diameter, but
occasionally may measure up to 5 cm. They most often
develop in the subcutaneous tissue and may expand into
the dermis. The overlying skin may be atrophic and
 alopecic, and ulceration is uncommon. Lesions are most 
commonly located on the trunk and distal legs. Myxoid
peripheral nerve sheath tumors (myxoid schwannomas)
have been observed on the digits of dogs only. In cats,
cutaneous peripheral nerve sheath tumors are usually
smaller intradermal nodules located on the head and
neck.
Affected animals are middle-aged or older; the
mean age in dogs is 7.3 to 8.3 years (Bradley et al., 1982;
Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992). The mean age in cat is
reported to be 9 years (Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992). There 
is no breed predilection reported for these tumors. One
Fig. 32.5 Benign peripheral nerve sheath tumor in a dog. Spindle
source found a 3 : 1 female predominance for feline benign
cells are arranged in palisades and partial whorls. Note the delicate
 neural tumors, but the total number of cases was small
 collagenous stroma.
(Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992). Benign peripheral nerve
sheath tumors may recur after incomplete excision.
fusiform or serpentine nuclei, which are small and
euchromatic, and pale, poorly defined cytoplasm.
Histopathology
Nucleoli are inconspicuous. Occasional nuclear hyper-
chromatism is seen and mitotic fgures are rare. Electron
Benign peripheral nerve sheath tumor
 microscopy shows that the basal lamina around the tumor
(Figures 32.5 and 32.6)
cells is often thickened and folded. The neoplastic cells
These may be delineated by a delicate capsule, or they
are arranged in wavy bundles, streams, and concentric
may present as unencapsulated, variably demarcated
whorls. Whorls are occasionally around blood vessels.
masses. The latter are mainly subcutaneous and occa-
 The latter most likely represent an attempt to reduplicate
sionally have delicate projections of tumor tissue extend-
tactile receptor structures. This pattern is referred to as
ing into adjacent fat and along fascial planes. This
Antoni type A (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001). Palisading and
explains the recurrence often observed with peripheral
herringbone patterns appear less common than in
nerve sheath tumors. Benign dermal nerve sheath tumors
schwannomas of humans (Koester & Higgins, 2002), but 
often extend to the dermal-epidermal junction,
as
if present, they are very characteristic. Moreover, forma-
observed in neurofbromatosis in humans (Weiss 
&
tion of Verocay bodies, as described in human tumors,
Goldblum, 2001). At the periphery of smaller neoplasms,
characterized by a double row of palisading tumor cells,
small nerve branches may be detected.
is rare. Some areas of the neoplasms may contain poly-
In dogs, benign peripheral nerve sheath tumors are
 gonal cells with small dark nuclei, loosely distributed in
composed of predominantly small spindle cells embedded
a fbrillar and mucinous matrix. This growth pattern is
in a delicate collagenous stroma. Cells have ovoid,
referred to as Antoni type B. Occasionally, tumors with a
Neural and perineural tumors
791
while infltrative proliferation of tumor cells along fascial
planes and nerves is frequently seen with malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors.
Hemangiopericytoma  and benign peripheral nerve
sheath tumors may be very similar architecturally and dif-
ficult to differentiate. Concentric whorling around central
 branching capillaries is a feature of hemangiopericytoma.
However, concentric circling around central small vessels
may also occasionally be seen with benign peripheral
nerve sheath tumors. In comparison to peripheral nerve
sheath tumors, hemangiopericytomas are often more cel-
lular. A predominance of fusiform and serpentine nuclei
with smaller nucleoli is more consistent with the diagno-
sis of a peripheral nerve sheath tumor while heman-
 giopericytomas have round to oval nuclei.
Additional differential diagnoses for benign peripheral
nerve sheath tumors include fbroma, fbrosarcoma,
spindle cell lipoma, and dermatofbroma. Fibromas are
less cellular and lack palisading and marked whorling of
 cells. The stromal collagen is coarser and more abundant.
 Fibrosarcomas have mitotic activity, and atypical mitoses
may be seen. Fibrosarcomas also lack palisading and
marked whorling of cells, and stromal collagen is usually
coarser. Both peripheral nerve sheath tumors and spindle
cell lipomas contain myxoid stroma, but most spindle cell
lipomas have a fair amount of admixed adipose tissue.
The spindle cells of spindle cell lipoma are not arranged
in whorls and they do not palisade. Dermatofbromas and
benign superfcial peripheral nerve sheath tumors have
Fig. 32.6 Higher magnification of benign peripheral nerve sheath
similar cellularity and architecture. Dermatofbromas can
tumor in a cat. Spindle cells are arranged in bundles. Note small
usually be distinguished by their ragged margins and
normal nerve bundles {arrow) at the periphery of the tumor at
entrapment of pre-existing dermal collagen bundles by the
bottom.
proliferating fbrocytes; dermatofbromas may also be
partially mineralized.
plexiform architecture occur, characterized by discrete
Myxoid peripheral nerve sheath tumor
lobules interspersed with broad, winding trabeculae of
(Figure 32.7)
spindle cells. These resemble plexiform neurofbroma in
 Myxoid peripheral nerve sheath tumors have a multilob.
humans (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001).
ular confguration with small spindle and stellate cells
In cats, benign peripheral nerve sheath tumors have
forming loose, concentric swirls in an abundant back-
 morphologic features similar to their canine counterparts.
 ground of mucin (acid mucopolysaccharides). These
However they tend to be less cellular and are character-
lobular structures, delineated by delicate bundles of col-
ized by more abundant collagenous and mucoid matrix.
lagen, are strongly reminiscent of Pacinian corpuscles.
The tumors are mostly composed of elongated spindle
Cytologic features are as described for typical benign
cells, which form fascicles. Admixed are areas of either
 peripheral nerve sheath tumors.
Antoni type A or type B patterns. Palisading is more
 The differential diagnoses for myxoid peripheral nerve
common than in canine peripheral nerve sheath tumors
sheath tumor are myxoma and low-grade myxosarcoma.
(Koester & Higgins, 2002). A reactive lymphoid infltrate
These tumors share a moderate to marked amount of
is common.
stroma containing acid mucopolysaccharides. In contrast
Benign peripheral nerve sheath tumors are separated
to benign peripheral nerve sheath tumors, formation of a
from malignant nerve sheath tumors by the presence of a
lobular pattern and large, concentric whorls of the tumor
fairly monomorphic cell population and a relative absence
cells are not seen with myxomas and low-grade myxo-
of mitotic fgures. Marked branching invasion of the
sarcomas. Narrow serpentine nuclei, if present, are more
underlying soft tissue is usually absent in benign lesions,
consistent with peripheral nerve sheath origin, while
792
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 32.7 Benign myxoid peripheral
nerve sheath turmor frorm the digit of a
dog. Stellate and spindle cells tend to
forrm loose whorls in an abundant
 myxoid stroma. Note the multilobular
architecture
createdbycollagen
bundles.
 hyperchromatic nuclei and mitotic figures can usually be
 transformation of benign peripheral nerve sheath tumors 
identifed in myxosarcomas.
has been described in humans (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001).
- (ai 'd ass) sirda uaiuq ni on re
Immunohistochemistry
nant canine and feline peripheral nerve sheath tumors
have been presumed to be mainly of Schwann cell origin
Immunohistochemistry of benign peripheral nerve sheath
(George et al., 1989; Cordy, 1990; Summers et al., 1992).
tumors in dogs and cats is not as diagnostically reliable
There is a basal lamina surrounding single cells and
as in humans (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001). Canine and
groups of cells, demonstrated by electron microscopy or
feline benign peripheral nerve sheath tumors consistently
by immunohistochemistry (see below) which supports this
express vimentin. However, they vary significantly in their
hypothesis. As clinical and morphologic similarities out-
expression of glial fbrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and
weigh the differences in proposed subclassifications
S100 (Koester & Higgins, 2002). However the often
(Goldschmidt & Hendrick, 2002; Koestner & Higgins,
thickened and folded basal lamina is positive for laminin
and collagen IV.
 the general name of malignant peripheral nerve sheath
In the absence of positive staining for S100 and GFAP,
tumors.
it may be diffcult to differentiate benign peripheral nerve
sheath tumors from fbromas, dermatofbromas, spindle
Clinical features
cell lipomas, low-grade fbrosarcomas, or hemangioperi-
cytomas. Also, some spindle cell lipomas, as determined
Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors appear to be
in humans, may express S100, which also confounds dif-
uncommon in dogs and cats. Based on one large survey,
ferentiation. However, in contrast to peripheral nerve
 the combined incidence of benign and malignant neural
sheath tumors, these other tumors have no basal lamina,
tumors is reported to be 0.5% in dogs and 1.4% in cats
and hence are negative for laminin and collagen IV.
(Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992). The exact incidence is
diffcult to evaluate, however as they have marked
histopathologic similarities to other spindle cell neo-
MALIGNANT PERIPHERAL NERVE
plasms such as fbrosarcoma, myxosarcoma, heman-
SHEATH TUMOR
giopericytoma, spindle cell amelanotic melanoma, and
(Synonyms: malignant schwannoma, neurofbrosarcoma)
histiocytic sarcoma, and thus may be underdiagnosed
 or overdiagnosed.
 Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors in humans may
 Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors have similar
be subclassified as malignant schwannoma and neuro-
 d aai sieo u  i s 
fbrosarcoma (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001). Malignant
 In dogs, they predominantly arise in the subcutis and may
Neural and perineural tumors
793
extend into the dermis; most masses measure more than
tumors distal to the knee or elbow developed metastasis
2cm in diameter are poorly defined, and are usually
(Kuntz et al., 1997).
frmly adhered to underlying soft tissue. In cats, they are
often smaller and intradermal. The overlying skin may be
Histopathology (Figures 32.8 through 32.10)
atrophic and alopecic; ulceration is uncommon.
Canine malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors are
In dogs, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors are
mostly located on the trunk or extremities, while feline
unencapsulated, mostly subcutaneous masses that exhibit
tumors are mostly observed on the head and neck. Several
infltrative growth into deeper tissues including adjacent
feline malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors have
fat and fascial planes. Frequently, small branches or
been seen in the periorbital area by one author (E.J.W.).
fnger-like tendrils of tumor cells invade the underlying
Mean age of affected dogs is 9 years and in cats 11
soft tissue and proliferate along fascial planes and nerve
years (Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992); that survey also
sheaths. This growth pattern explains the recurrence often
reported a predisposition in Golden Retrievers and a 3 :2
observed with peripheral nerve sheath tumors. The less
female predominance in cats. Malignant nerve sheath
common dermal tumors often extend to the dermal-
tumors tend to recur after surgical excision. The
epidermal junction, similar to neurofbrosarcoma in
incidence of recurrence is higher in cats than in dogs.
humans (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001). Nerve fbers may be
Metastases, however are uncommon (Kuntz et al.,
entrapped within the tumor mass and small nerve
1997; Goldschmidt & Hendrick, 2002), but have been
branches are often seen at the periphery of smaller neo-
observed in the lungs and lymph nodes (Kuntz et al.,
plasms. Occasionally, small numbers of tumor cells can
1997). One survey showed that none of the dogs with
Fig. 32.9 Higher magnification of malignant peripheral nerve
Fig. 32.8 Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor in a cat. Spindle
sheath tumor in a dog. The tumor cells have larger and less pointed
cells are arranged in bundles and partial whorls. Note vesicular
nuclei than in benign peripheral nerve sheath turmors (see Fig. 32.6).
nuclei and small nucleoli.
Note mitotic figure {arrow).
794
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
5 mitoses per 10 high power felds (40x) (Kuntz et al.,
1997). Atypical mitoses may be present.
Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors differ from
 benign nerve sheath tumors by a more pleomorphic cell
population, increased mitotic activity, less pronounced
 neural patterns, and infltrative growth. Further differen-
tial diagnoses for malignant peripheral nerve sheath
 tumors include fbrosarcoma and myxosarcoma, heman-
 giopericytoma, spindle cell amelanotic melanoma, and
histiocytic sarcoma. In comparison to malignant periph-
eral nerve sheath tumors, fbrosarcomas may have a fair
number of tumor giant cells, and palisading is not seen.
Similar to myxosarcoma, malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors may contain myxoid stroma. Myxosarco-
mas have a larger amount of myxoid stroma, the tumor
cells are haphazardly arranged within the extracellular
matrix, and neural patterns are not observed.
 Hemangiopericytomas and malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumors may be strikingly similar. While malignant
peripheral nerve sheath tumors are characterized by
 fusiform and serpentine nuclei with smaller nucleoli,
hemangiopericytomas have rather round to oval nuclei;
also, their cellular whorls are clearly centered on capil-
 laries. Amelanotic spindle cell melanomas may exhibit
neural patterns such as whorling and occasional palisad-
 ing. In contrast to peripheral nerve sheath tumors, spindle
cell melanomas often have some degree of junctional
activity with the overlying epidermis or follicular epithe-
lium, as well as minimal melanin, which may be docu-
Fig. 32.10 Malignant peripheral nerve sheath turmor in a dog. The
mented by Fontana-Masson stain. In the absence of
tumor mass contains a large zone of chondro-osseous metaplasia.
junctional activity and melanin, differentiation of ame-
 lanotic melanomas with neural patterns and malignant
 peripheral nerve sheath tumors may not be possible, even
be seen within nerve fascicles at some distance from the
with immunohistochemistry (see below). Most histiocytic
primary mass.
sarcomas are composed of both spindle cells and large
 Canine malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors have
round cells; multinucleated tumor giant cells are relatively
morphologic features similar to benign peripheral nerve
common in contrast to malignant peripheral nerve sheath
sheath tumors (see p. 789). In general, malignant tumors
tumors.
have higher cellularity, and neural patterns may be subtle.
'd aas) surned g pue y sadki quouv pasunouoid sou
Immunohistochemistry
790) are often less evident. The tumor cells are embedded
in a delicate collagenous stroma. Zones of necrosis and
Immunohistochemistry of peripheral nerve sheath tumors
sclerosis may be present. Myxoid change of the stroma
 in dogs and cats is not as diagnostically reliable as in
may occur and occasionally the extracellular matrix
humans (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001). Only expression of
exhibits focal cartilaginous or osseous differentiation.
vimentin is consistently seen, while expression of glial fb-
The tumor masses comprise variably pleomorphic,
rillary acidic protein (GFAP) and S100 is variable (Koester
plump spindle cells arranged mostly in interlacing
& Higgins, 2002). However, the thickened basal lamina
bundles, while palisading and whorls, indicating redupli-
around the tumor cells can be demonstrated by immuno-
cation of tactile receptor structures, are less pronounced
histochemistry for laminin and collagen IV, both base-
than in benign tumors. The spindle-shaped tumor cells
ment membrane components.
have pale, poorly defined cytoplasm, and moderately
 In the absence of positive staining for S100 and GFAP,
enlarged, vesicular nuclei that vary from fusiform to
it may be diffcult to differentiate malignant peripheral
ovoid to serpentine. Anisokaryosis may be prominent.
nerve sheath tumors from fbrosarcomas, myxosarcomas,
 The mitotic activity is moderate and has been reported as
and hemangiopericytomas. However in contrast to
Neural and perineural tumors
795
peripheral nerve sheath tumors, these tumors have no
chemistry (ed. D.D. Dabbs), p. 233. Churchill Livingstone,
basal lamina, and hence are negative for laminin or col-
New York.
lagen IV. Similar to malignant nerve sheath tumors,
Folpe, A.L. & Gown, A.M. (2001) Immunohistochemistry for
malignant melanomas may express S100. However, in
analysis of soft tissue tumors. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Sofft
contrast to nerve sheath tumors, melanomas may be pos-
Tissue Tumors, 4th edn (eds S.W. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum),
pp. 201-205. Mosby, St Louis.
itive for melanoma-associated antigen recognized by T
Glick, A.D., Holscher, M.A. & Crenshaw J.D. (1983)
-  os  
Neuroendocrine carcinoma of the skin in a dog. Vet Pathol
HMB-45/gp100, tyrosinase, tyrosinase related protein-2
20,761-3.
(TRP-2) or melanoma isoform of microphthalmia tran-
Hashimoto, K. (1972) Fine structure of Merkel cells in human
scription factor (MITF-M). Expression of leukocytic
oral mucosa. J Invest Dermatol 58, 381-7.
markers such as the common leukocyte proteins CD45
Kerl, H. & Hofmann-Wellenhof, R. (2003) Cutaneous neuroen-
and CD18, as well as expression of CD1, CD11c and
docrine carcinoma: Merkel cell carcinoma. In: Fitzpatrick's
MHC II, separates histiocytic sarcomas from malignant
Dermatology in General Medicine, 6th edn (eds I.M.
peripheral nerve sheath tumors.
Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff , K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith
& S.1. Katz), pp. 808-13. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Kidd, R.L., Krawczyk, W.S. & Wilgram, W.F (1971) The Merkel
cell in human epidermis: its differentiation from other den-
REFERENCES
dritic cells. Arch Dermatol Forsch 241, 374-84.
Konno, A., Nagata, M. & Nanko, H. {1998) Immunohisto-
Introduction
chemical diagnosis of a Merkel cell tumor in a dog. Vet Pathol
Hashimoto, K. (1972) Fine structure of Merkel cells in human
35,538-40.
oral mucosa. J Invest Dermatol 58, 381-7.
Lever, W.F. & Schaumburg-Lever, G. (1990) Histopathology of
Kidd, R.L., Krawczyk, W.S. & Wilgram, W.F. (1971) The Merke)
the Skin, 7th edn, pp. 749-51. J.B. Lippincott, Philadelphia.
cell in human epidermis: its differentiation from other
Ortonne, J.P. & Darmon, M. (1985) Merkel cells express desmo-
dendritic cells. Arch Dermatol Forsch 241, 374-84.
somal proteins and cytokeratins. Acta Derm Venereol 65,
Ortonne, J.P. & Darmon, M. (1985) Merkel cells express desmo-
161-4.
somal proteins and cytokeratins. Acta Derm Venereol 65,
Patnaik, A.K., Post, G.S. & Erlandson, R.A. (2001) Clinico-
161-4.
pathologic and electron microscopic study of cutaneous neu-
Saurat, J.H., Petchot-Bacque, J.P., Verrando, P. et al. (1988)
roendocrine (Merkel cell) carcinoma in a cat with comparison
Normal Merkel cells express a synaptophysin-like immunore-
to human and canine tumors. Vet Pathot 38, 553-6.
activity. Dermatologica 177, 1-10.
Reed, R.J. & Argenyi, Z. (1997) Tumors of neural tissue. In:
Saxod, R. (1996) Ontogeny of cutaneous sensory organs.
Lever's Histopathology of the Skin, 8th edn (eds D. Elder, R.
Microsc Res Tech 34, 313-33.
Elenitsas, C. Jaworsky & B. Johnson, Jr), pp. 1000-2,
Szeder, V., Grim, M., Halata, Z. et al. (2003) Neural crest origin
Lipincott-Raven, Philadelphia.
of mammalian Merkel cells. Dev Biot 253, 258-63.
Saurat, JH., Petchot-Bacque, J.P., Verrando, P. et al. (1988)
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001a) Benign tumor of periph-
Normal Merkel cells express a synaptophysin-like immunore-
eral nerves. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th
activity. Dermatologica 177, 1-10.
edn (eds S.W. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 1111-208. Mosby,
Saxod, R. (1996) Ontogeny of cutaneous sensory organs.
St Louis.
Microsc Res Tech 34,313-33.
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001b) Malignant tumors of
Su, L.D., Fullen, D.R., Lowe, L. et al. (2002) CD117 (KIT
  s     
receptor) expression in Merkel cell carcinomas. Am J
Tumors, 4th edn (eds S.W. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp.
Dermatopathol 24, 289-93.
1209-64. Mosby, St Louis.
Szeder, V., Grim, M., Halata, Z. et al. (2003) Neural crest origin
of mammalian Merkel cells. Dev Biol 253, 258-63.
Traumatic Neuroma
Whiteley, L.O. & Leininger, JR. (1987) Neuroendocrine
Gross, T.L. & Carr, S.H. (1990) Amputation neuroma of docked
(Merkel) cell tumors in canine oral cavity. Vet Pathol 24,
tails in dogs. Vet Pathol 27, 61-2.
570-2.
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001) Benign tumor of periph-
eral nerves. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th
Benign Peripheral Nerve Sheath Tumors
edn (eds S.W. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), p. 1114. Mosby, St
Bradley, R.L., Withrow, S.J. & Snyder, S. P (1982) Nerve sheath
Louis.
tumors in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 18, 915-21.
Cordy, D.R. (1990) Tumors of the nervous system and eye. In:
Merkel Cell Tumor
Tumors of Domestic Animats, 3rd edn (ed. J.E. Moulton), pp.
Bagnasco, G., Properzi, R., Porto, R. et al. (2003) Feline cuta-
652-4. University of California Press, Berkeley.
neous neuroendocrine carcinoma (Merkel cell tumor): clinical
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Hendrick, M.J. (2002) Tumors of the
and pathological findings. Vet Dermatol 14, 111-15.
skin and soft tissue. In: Tumors of the Domestic Animals,
DeLellis, R.A. & Shin, S.J. (2002) Diagnostic immunohisto-
4th edn (ed. D.J. Meuten), p. 95. Blackwell Publishing,
chemistry of endocrine tumors. In: Diagnostic Immunohisto-
Ames.
796
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Goldschmidt M.H. & Shofer, F.S. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Hendrick, M.J. (2002) Tumors of the skin
Dog and Cat, pp. 2-3, 184-91. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
and soft tissue. In: Tumors of the Domestic Animais, 4th
Koester, A. & Higgins, R.J. (2002) Tumors of the nervous system
edn (ed. D.J. Meuten), pp. 95-6. Blackwell Publishing,
In: Tumors of the Domestic Animals, 4th edn (ed. D.J.
Ames.
 Meuten), pp. 731-5. Blackwell Publishing, Ames.
Goldschmidt M.H. & Shofer, FS. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
Summers, B.A., Valentine, B., Van Winkle, I. et al. (1992) Diver-
Dog and Cat, pp. 2-3, 184-91. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
 gent differentiation in canine peripheral nerve sheath tumors.
Koester, A. & Higgins, R.J. (2002) Tumors of the nervous
Vet Pathot 29, 447 (abstract).
system. In: Tumors of the Domestic Animals, 4th edn (ed. D.J.
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001) Benign tumors of the
Meuten), pp. 731-5. Blackwell Publishing, Ames.
peripheral nerves. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft
Tissue
Kuntz C.A., Dernell W.S., Powers B.E., et al. (1997) Prog-
Tumors, 4th edn (eds S.W. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp.
u seooies anss-nos jo juaean [eons ioj sioioej oso
1122-73, Mosby, St Louis.
dogs: 75 cases (1986-1996). J Am Vet Med Assoc 211,
1147-51.
Malignant Peripberal Nerve Sheath Tumors
Summers, B.A., Valentine, B., Van Winkle, T. et al. (1992) Diver-
Cordy, D.R. (1990) Tumors of the nervous system and eye. In:
 gent differentiation in canine peripheral nerve sheath tumors.
Tumors of Domestic Animais, 3rd edn (ed. J.E. Moulton), pp.
Vet Pathol 29, 447 (abstract).
652-4. University of California Press, Berkeley.
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001) Malignant tumor of the
George, E., Swanson, PE. & Wick, M.R. (1989) Malignant
peripheral nerves. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue
peripheral nerve sheath tumors of the skin. Am
Tumors, 4th edn (eds S.w. Weiss & JR. Goldblum), pp.
Dermatopathol 11, 213-21.
1209-35. Mosby, St Louis.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 33
Other mesenchymal tumors
ing factor (GM-CSF), both of which are produced by
VACCINE-INDUCED SARCOMA
lesional macrophages (Schuerch et al., 1997).
(Synonym: injection-induced sarcoma)
Vaccine-induced sarcomas derive from fbroblastic,
myofbroblastic, myoblastic, osteoblastic, and chron-
Sarcoma as a complication of vaccination has not been
droblastic origins (Dubielzig et al., 1993; Macy &
reported in humans, but is well documented in cats
Bergman, 1995; Macy & Hendrick, 1996; Couto et al.,
(Hendrick & Goldschmidt, 1991; Dubielzig et al., 1993;
 2002). Occasionally, sarcomas may also arise from histi-
Hendrick & Brooks, 1994). Vaccine-induced sarcomas
 Ocytes; one of the authors (V.K.A.) has recognized histio-
have been mostly associated with killed rabies and killed
cytic sarcoma of dendritic cell origin at a previous vaccine
feline leukemia virus (FeLV) vaccines (Macy & Hendrick,
injection site. Hence, fbrosarcomas, myxosarcomas,
1996). A direct role for virus has not been shown; in one
myofbroblastic fbrosarcomas, rhabdomyosarcomas,
study feline immunodefciency virus (FIV), FeLV, papillo-
Osteosarcomas, chondrosarcomas, and histiocytic sarco-
mavirus, polyomavirus, or herpesvirus could not be iden-
 mas all may be recognized in the setting of vaccine induc-
tified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis of
tion. More than one type may coexist in a given tumor.
50 vaccine-induced sarcomas (Kidney et al., 2001). In a
 In some cases, the tumors are composed of primitive
report of a large multicenter study (Kass et al., 2003)
tumor cells, and specific lineage cannot be assigned. Some
there was no obvious association between development
of these primitive vaccine-induced sarcomas have numer-
of vaccine-induced sarcoma and brand or manufacturer
ous multinucleated giant cells and likely were previously
within a vaccine antigen class; the report, however, sug-
classified as anaplastic sarcomas with giant cells or ^malig-
gested an association with administration of long-acting
nant fbrous histiocytomas' (see p. 806).
medications, such as long-acting penicillin and methyl
prednisolone acetate.
Clinical features
Both killed rabies and FeLV vaccines contain an alu-
minum adjuvant (Macy & Hendrick, 1996). Aluminum
The prevalence of vaccine-induced sarcomas has been
has previously been linked to chronic inflammation and
reported as approximately one to two cases per 10 000
the formation of granulomas at vaccine injection sites
rabies or FeLV vaccinations (Macy & Hendrick, 1996;
(Hendrick & Dunagan, 1991). However although most 
Gobar & Kass, 2002). The tumors vary in size and may
vaccines in the large study of Kass et al. (2003) were adju-
S     sn s 
vanted, there was no significant difference in incidence of
poorly demarcated,  often  multilobulated masses  that
sarcoma between adjuvanted and nonadjuvanted products.
usually arise in the subcutis or in skeletal muscle. A
Vaccine-induced sarcomas are believed to evolve from
 central large cavity filled with clear fluid often is observed
primitive mesenchymal cells within the inflammatory reac-
on cut section. Alopecia and ulceration are common. The
tion (Macy & Hendrick, 1996). The study of Gobar &
tumor masses are seen at common injection sites, such as
Kass (2002) has shown that the risk of development of sar-
 the dorsal neck, interscapular region, dorsolateral thorax,
comas secondary to inflammation increases if local inflam-
hindleg, and dorsal lumbar region. Occasionally, typical
mation fails to resolve after 4 months. Various cytokines
 vaccine-induced sarcomas are seen more ventrally; gravi-
and growth factors may play a crucial role in the develop-
tational drift of vaccine product is the likely cause for
ment and differentiation of these sarcomas (Couto et al.,
these aberrant locations.
2002). For example, myofbroblastic differentiation may
The average age for cats with vaccine-induced sarcoma
be guided by the influence of transforming growth factor-
is about 10 years (Kass et al., 2003), and the highest peaks
beta (TGF-β) and granulocyte-monocyte colony stimulat-
of incidence have been seen in cats 6 to 7 and 10 to 11
797
798
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Fig.33.1
Vaccine-induced sarcoma (fibrosarcoma) in a cat. The
Fig. 33.2 Higher magnification of Fig. 33.1. The neoplastic spindle
poorly circumscribed mass has a central cavity and multifocal
cells are associated with a reactive lymphocytic infiltrate that is dis-
nodular lymphocytic infiltrates along the right margin.
persed throughout the tumor mass and in an aggregate along the
tumor margin at bottom.
years of age (Kass et al., 1993). However, the overall risk
for developing a vaccine-induced sarcoma seems to
and/or histiocytic origin. Independent of the cell of origin,
decrease with increasing age (Doddy et al., 1996). A
vaccine-induced sarcomas are poorly demarcated subcu-
higher incidence in females has been reported in two
taneous masses that extend into the dermis and the under-
studies (Tennant 2000; Kass et al., 2003). Breed predilec-
lying skeletal muscle. Vaccine-induced sarcomas tend to
tions have not been reported (Kass et al., 1993).
be characterized by the presence of less differentiated
Vaccine-induced sarcomas are locally invasive and
tumor cells, increased numbers of bizarre mitotic fgures,
aggressive neoplasms, and complete surgical excision is
and more numerous tumor giant cells compared to their
often diffcult. The incidence of recurrence is therefore
nonvaccine-induced counterparts. Aggregates of large
high, and metastasis to draining lymph nodes does occur.
macrophages with intracytoplasmic blue-gray material
Metastasis to other organ systems, such as the lungs, has
(probable vaccine adjuvant) may still be present within or
been reported as well (Briscoe et al., 1998). Prolonged
 at the margins of the tumor. Areas of tumor necrosis con-
survival time is closely related to early surgical interven-
taining neutrophils are common. Necrosis leads to cavi-
tion and radical excision. Survival times of up to 576 days
tation, which may be predominantly central or multifocal.
 after surgery have been reported (Hershey et al., 2000).
Margins of these cavitations are composed of necrotic
tumor tissue.
Vaccine-induced sarcomas typically contain a reactive
Histopathology (Figures 33.1 through 33.6)
lymphoid infltrate that may be severe. It is mainly
Vaccine-induced  sarcomas may be of fbroblastic,
observed along the margins but may be present through-
myofibroblastic, myoblastic, chrondroblastic, osteoblastic,
out the tumor. The lymphoid infltrate often is arranged
Other mesenchymal tumors
799
Fig. 33.3 High magnification of vaccine-induced sarcoma (fibrosar-
Fig. 33.4 Vaccine-induced sarcoma {histiocytic sarcoma) in a cat
There is marked anisocytosis and anisokaryosis of the turmor cells
are occasional giant cells.
and numerous multinucleated cells are present.
in dense aggregates and may form follicular structures.
nuclei and lack mitotic fgures, while others have marked
The intensity of the lymphoid infltrates does not corre-
anisokaryosis and bizarre mitoses. These two morpho-
late with the degree of differentiation of the tumor cell
 logically distinct populations of multinucleated giant cells
population (Couto et al., 2002).
are of tumor cell as well as reactive histiocytic origin
 In many cases neoplastic cells are fairly pleomorphic
(Couto et al., 2002). The number of pleomorphic multi-
and primitive, and the specific mesenchymal cell of origin
nucleated tumor cells appears to correlate with cytologi-
can only be determined by special stains and immunohis-
cal features of increased malignancy.
tochemistry (see below). In general, the tumor cells are
Variable extracellular matrix is observed. Tumors of
spindle-shaped and arranged in irregular, partially
fbroblastic origin may have ample collagen, while sarco-
interlacing bundles. Occasional whorls may be seen.
 mas of muscle origin have scant collagenous stroma. The
Alternatively, very plump spindle cells or round cells
authors have seen one case of vaccine-associated keloidal
with histiocytoid characteristics may be observed. Most
fbrosarcoma (see Chapter 27). Osteoid deposition is
spindle cells have large ovoid to fusiform and vesicular
seen in vaccine-induced osteosarcomas. Non-neoplastic
nuclei with one or several prominent nucleoli. The round
osseous metaplasia may occasionally be found in tumors
cells have round to oval, large vesicular nuclei usually
 not of osteoblastic origin; this may be a sequela to tissue
located in the center of the cell. The mitotic rate is vari-
hypoxia. With chondroid differentiation, chondroblastic
able and has been reported as up to 2 per high power field
cells are located within lacunae and are surrounded by a
(40x) (Couto et al.,
2002). Atypical, bizarre mitotic
partially hyalinized myxoid stroma.
fgures are frequent. Multinucleated giant cells are rela-
Special stains may help to assign the cell of origin to
tively common. Some have regular monomorphic, round
some vaccine-induced sarcomas. For example, phospho-
800
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
品
Fig. 33.5 Higher magnification of vaccine-induced sarcoma (histio-
Fig. 33.6 Vaccine-induced sarcoma {osteosarcoma) in a cat demon-
cytic sarcoma) in a cat, composed of large round cells with round
strating production of homogeneous, amorphous osteoid (arrow).
nuclei, prominent nucleoli, and abundant vacuolated cytoplasm.
Occasional giant cells are noted.
Immunohistochemistry
 tungstic acidic-hematoxylin (PTAH) enhances the appear-
All tumors are positive for vimentin, which confrms mes-
ance of cross striations, and hence can identify skeletal
enchymal origin. Immunohistochemistry for vimentin, Q-
muscle origin. However immunohistochemistry is often
smooth-muscle actin, pan-muscle actin, desmin, S100,
required (see below).
and leukocyte antigens (CD45 and CD18) may allow sub-
Differentiation of the various morphologic subtypes of
classification of the tumor cell population (Table 33.1).
vaccine-induced sarcomas from their nonvaccine induced
 Multinucleated giant cells are of variable immunopheno-
counterparts is not always possible. Anaplasia is more
type. Tumor multinucleated giant cells express an im-
pronounced in vaccine-induced tumors. Primitive forms
munophenotype identical to the tumor cell population.
of vaccine-induced sarcomas with numerous giant cells
Reactive multinucleated giant cells express the common
likely were previously classifed as anaplastic sarcoma
leukocyte antigen CD45 and CD18, and thus are most
with giant cells, and are essentially indistinguishable from
likely of histiocytic origin.
that entity (see p. 806). Lymphocytic inflammation is not
specific to vaccine-induced sarcoma but may be present
TRANSMISSIBLE VENEREAL TUMOR
in nonvaccine-induced sarcomas as well (Doddy et al.,
1996). However the lymphoid infltration tends to be
Transmissible venereal tumor (TVT), occasionally also
more intense in vaccine-induced sarcomas, and may for-
referred to as Sticker tumor or venereal granuloma,
tuitously be accompanied by basophilic vaccine product
Aq pausuen si il 'shop ui Auo paziuosar uaaq seu
within macrophages. Definitive identification of vaccine
viable tumor cells spread from infected dogs or bitches
association usually is based principally upon the clinical
during coitus, or by licking or rubbing. Transmissible
history and location of the tumor masses.
venereal tumors can therefore spread fairly rapidly where
Other mesenchymal tumors
801
Table 33.1  Immunophenotype of vaccine-induced sarcomas.
 Cell origin
Vimentin
Smooth-actin
Desmin
S100
CD45; CD18
Osteocalcin
Osteonectin
Fibroblasts
+
一
一
Myofibroblasts
+
+
-/(+)
一
Rhabdomyoblasts
+
+
一
Chondrocytes
+
-/(+)
Osteoblasts
X
Histiocytes
+
dogs are allowed to roam freely, or in active breeding
tissue can occasionally be seen, indicating transmission
colonies.
through traumatized skin.
Although the lesions have been recognized for many
 Transmissible venereal tumors can develop at any age.
years, the exact origin of this tumor remains unknown.
No breed or sex predilections have been described.
The karyotype of TVT cells is consistently composed of
Early lesions exhibit rapid growth. A subsequent
58 or 59 chromosomes, which differs from the 78 chro-
decreased rate of growth may indicate a developing
mosomes of normal canine cells (Weber et al., 1965).
immune response (Cohen & Steel, 1972). Spontaneous
A consistent unique genetic marker within the oncogene
c-myc has been documented in TVT cells (Katzir et al.,
 d     
1987; Amariglio et al., 1991). An inverted transposable
development of subsequent tumors (Beschorner et al.,
element inserted into the c-myc gene has been identified
1979; Mizuno et al., 1989). Additional cutaneous tumors
by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) studies.
are
usually
induced
by traumatic
 implantation
 The tumor cells express vimentin and are of mesenchy-
(Goldschmidt & Hendrick, 2002). Metastasis to draining
mal origin (Pereira et al., 2000), and 
have
ebeen
lymph nodes is common and mainly involves the superfi-
identifed as canine leukocytes (Moore, PF. & Affolter,
cial inguinal lymph nodes in males and superfcial
V.K, unpublished data, 2003). Some studies suggest a
inguinal and external iliac lymph nodes in females. The
histiocytic origin (Mozos et al., 1996; Marchal etal., 1997);
development of distant metastasis involving internal
including a report in which intracytoplasmic Leishmania
organs has been associated with immune suppression,
 sp. amastigotes were described (Albanese et al., 2002);
such as concurrent viral diseases. Metastatic lesions have
however, the immunophenotype of the infected cells and
been described in the lungs, liver, pancreas, tonsils, brain,
the tumor cells was not determined in that report, and thus
pituitary gland, and eyes (Nielsen & Kennedy, 1990).
the presence of infected reactive histiocytes, admixed
within the tumor cell population cannot be ruled out.
Histopathology (Figures 33.7 and 33.8)
Extensive immunophenotyping of TVTs on snap-frozen
tissue samples has failed to confrm a histiocytic origin
Transmissible venereal tumors are characterized by poorly
(Moore, P.F. & Affolter, VK., unpublished data, 2003).
demarcated dermal and subcutaneous masses composed
of sheets and rows of round or polyhedral cells with indis-
tinct cell borders. The tumor cell population is supported
Clinical features
by a fne fbrovascular stroma. On rare occasions there
The exact incidence of TVTs is not known. Transmissible
may be intraepithelial tumor cell aggregates. The tumor
venereal tumors are mainly seen where dogs are intensely
cells have large round granular to vesicular nuclei and a
bred or within wild dog populations (Nielsen & Kennedy,
large single nucleolus. There is a moderate amount of
1990). The tumors vary in size from small nodules to
 pale, eosinophilic cytoplasm. The marked cytoplasmic
large masses that measure up to 10cm in diameter.
vacuolization, which is highly characteristic in aspirates
Transmissible venereal tumors present as either nodular,
and imprints of these tumors, is often inconspicuous or
pedunculated, or papillary and multilobular, ill-defined
absent in tissue sections. Mitotic fgures are numerous,
cutaneous masses. The surface is often ulcerated. The con-
and as many as 6 to 8 per high power feld (40x) may be
sistency of these tumors varies, and they may be soft and
observed. There is often necrosis of the surface as well as
friable or semifrm.
foci throughout the tumor mass. A reactive infltrate of
Lesions are mainly observed on genital skin or mucosa
lymphocytes with fewer plasma cells, macrophages, and
However, lesions may develop anywhere in the skin, in
neutrophils may be seen; this infltrate is scant during the
the oral cavity, or within nasal and conjunctival mucosa.
progressive growth of the early stage, and is most promi-
Extragenital subcutaneous masses with overlying scar
nent in regressing lesions.
802
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 33.7 Transmissible venereal tumor in a dog composed of
Fig. 33.8 Higher magnification of transmissible venereal tumor in
round cells supported by a delicate fibrovascular stroma.
a dog. The round tumor cells have round, clearly defined, finely gran-
ular to vesicular nuclei, often distinct single nucleoli, and a moder-
ate armount of pale, occasionally vacuolated cytoplasm.
Transmissible venereal tumors are often indistinguish-
able from many other canine round cell tumors based on
morphologic features only. These include canine histiocy-
anisokaryosis than seen in TVTs; binucleated and multi-
tomas, nonepitheliotropic large cell lymphomas, mast cell
nucleated tumor cells are common. The dense cytoplas-
tumors, plasmacytomas, balloon cell melanocytomas, and
mic RNA in plasma cells stains magenta with methyl
Merkel cell tumors. Cytoplasmic vacuolization, if promi-
 green pyronine (MGP) stain. In contrast to TVTs, balloon
nent enough to appear in tissue sections, assists in sepa-
 cell melanocytomas are often characterized by packeting
rating TVTs from other round cell tumors.
of the tumor cells, and there may be occasional spindle
Histiocytomas may exhibit epitheliotropism, which is
cells. Fontana-Masson's stain also may identify small
very rarely seen in TVTs. The proliferating Langerhans 
amounts of melanin. Electron microscopy reveals the
cells of histiocytomas often have slightly indented nuclei,
presence of dense core secretory granules and desmoso-
while TVTs tend to have monomorphic, large, round
mal structures in Merkel cell tumors; the argyrophilic
 nuclei. Neoplastic lymphocytes may have large, round to
cytoplasmic granules can be demonstrated with Grimelius
ovoid or folded and cleaved nuclei with finely stippled or
stain. In contrast to TVTs, Merkel cell tumors are char-
 marginated chromatin. Mast cell tumors are characterized
acterized by distinct packeting of the tumor cells, which
by intracytoplasmic granules. In poorly granulated mast
is typical for neuroendocrine neoplasms.
cell tumors, the metachromatic granules may be visual-
ized by toluidine blue or Giemsa stains. In contrast to
Immunohistochemistry
TVTs, lymphomas and mast cell tumors may contain
a moderate to marked eosinophilic infltrate. Plasma-
Expression of CD45 and CD45RA can be demonstrated
cytomas are often characterized by more anisocytosis and
in TVTs, indicating leukocytic origin (Moore, PF. &
Other mesenchymal tumors
803
Affolter V.K., unpublished data, 2003). The only other
synovial membranes are no longer considered valid.
protein consistently expressed by the tumor cells is
However, about half of the humans affected have a
CD49d, a β1-integrin involved with ligation of cells to the
history of previous trauma at the site, an observation that
extracellular matrix and endothelial cells (Moore, PF. &
would support damage to joint capsules or tendon
Affolter VK., unpublished data, 2003). Some lesions are
sheaths. Most cases in dogs are incidental fndings, and
reported to be positive for alpha-1-antitrypsin and
a direct association with previous trauma cannot usually
lysozyme, and a histiocytic origin has been suggested
be established. The development of ganglion cysts has
(Mozos et al., 1996). However, evaluation of snap-frozen
been interpreted as metaplasia of fbroblasts to mucin-
tissue samples and flow cytometry on solubilized tumors
secreting cells (Cho et al., 2000).
has consistently failed to show expression of the glyco-
proteins characteristic for histiocytes (macrophages or
Clinical features
dendritic cells), such as CD11b, CD11c, CD1, and MHC
II (Moore, P.F. & Affolter V.K., unpublished data, 2003).
Subcutaneous ganglions are rarely seen in dogs and cats.
These results do not support the hypothesis of a histio-
Subcutaneous ganglions are soft and ill-defned masses
cytic origin for TVTs.
that may measure up to several centimeters. As they
 In contrast to TVTs, other leukocytic round cell tumors
contain unilocular or multilocular cavities, they may fluc
express additional leukocytic cell markers. Cutaneous
tuate on palpation. The cysts contain a yellowish muci-
lymphomas usually express the T cell marker CD3. His-
 nous fluid on cut section, and the walls of the cavities may
tiocytomas are positive for CD18, CD11c, CD1, MHC II,
form internal shiny folds. Similar to humans, ganglions in
and E-cadherin, a phenotype consistent with Langerhans
dogs and cats mostly develop in the vicinity of joints, in
cells (see also Chapter 35). Mast cell origin may be
particular the elbow and stifle (Cho et al., 2000; Pool &
confrmed by positive staining for tryptase and KIT.
Thompson, 2002).
Plasmacytomas are positive for CD45 and CD45RA,
 There are no breed or sex predilections for ganglions
immunoglobulins  and  immunoglobulin light chains;
in dogs and cats. The lesions have been reported in dogs
about 80% of the tumors express CD79a. Amelanotic
as young as 4 months of age (Cho et al., 2000). Ganglions
melanocytic tumors and Merkel cell tumors lack expres-
 are benign lesions and complete excision is curative. They
sion of leukocyte markers CD18 and CD45. Positive
may recur locally if excision is incomplete.
staining with S100, melanoma-associated antigen (Melan-
A), melanoma-associated antigen recognized by T cells
aisoform
Histopathology (Figures 33.9 and 33.10)
{MART-1},
HMB-45/gp100, melanoma
of
microphthalmia transcription factor (MITF-M), tyrosi-
 At an early stage, ganglions are characterized by a local-
nase, or tyrosine-related protein-2 (TRP-2) may confrm
ized accumulation of myxoid material in the subcutis and
 melanocytic origin. Merkel cel tumors express neuron 
 deep dermis. With progression, unilocular or multilocu-
specific enolase (NSE), synaptophysin, chromogranin A,
lar, thick-walled cavities develop, which contain bluish-
 and cytokeratin 20 (detected with pancytokeratin stains).
 gray mucinous material. There is no epithelial or synovial
cell lining (Cho et al., 2000). The cavities are lined by
fbroblasts, and the wall is composed of inner myxoma-
GANGLION
tously and outer fbromatous regions. The inner myxo-
(Synonym: ganglion cyst)
s e so aq pze si r s
and stellate cells embedded in abundant myxoid stroma.
 Ganglions or ganglion cysts are myxoid tumorous masses
Moderate anisokaryosis may be seen. Mitotic fgures are
containing unilocular or multilocular cysts (Weiss &
rare. Electron microscopy of these cells reveal abundant
Goldblum, 2001). In humans, ganglions of the subcuta-
rough endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus; both
neous tissues tend to occur in close proximity to joints or
may be markedly dilated and contain fne granular mate-
tendon sheaths, primarily on the hands and feet. Although
rial, indicating degenerative change (Cho et al., 2000).
ganglions may be attached to joint capsules or tendon
The outer layer is composed of irregularly arranged
sheaths, they do not connect with the synovial lining
fbroblasts, a collagenous stroma, and marked neovascu-
(Weiss & Goldblum, 2001; Pool & Thompson, 2002). This
larization resembling granulation tissue. The content of
separates ganglions from synovial cysts. Subcutaneous
the cavities and the myxoid portion of the wall both stain
 ganglions are seen in dogs, but they have not been reported
positively for acid mucin (blue) with Alcian blue-periodic
in cats (Cho et al., 2000; Pool & Thompson, 2002).
acid-Schiff (PAS) stains (pH 2.5) (Cho et al., 2000).
However one author (E.J.W.) has seen two cases in cats.
Depending on the location of the ganglion, there are com-
The pathogenesis of ganglions is poorly understood.
ponents of either joint capsule or tendon sheath in the sur-
Previously suggested mechanisms involving rupture of
rounding tissue.
804
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 33.9 Ganglion in a dog. The central cavity is surrounded by a
Fig. 33.10 Higher magnification of Fig. 33.9. There is an abrupt
thick-walled capsule of myxoid fibrous tissue.
transition from the cavity to the capsule. No epithelial lining is seen.
Ganglions need to be differentiated from myxomas,
and
alpha-1-antichymotrypsin,  two antiproteinases
localized mucinosis, or synovial cysts. Early stages of gan-
present in macrophages (Ulrich et al., 1987). However,
glion resemble myxoma; both are characterized by loosely
these proteases are also found in other leukocytic cells
arranged fbroblasts producing mucin. However with
from the bone marrow as well as in epithelial cells from
progression, ganglions develop cavitations, a feature not
the gastrointestinal tract, pancreas, and liver (Ulrich et al.,
seen in myxomas. Localized mucinosis is characterized by
1987). Recent immunohistologic data from human gran-
an accumulation of hypocellular mucin separating pre-
ular cell tumors indicate expression of S100, neuron spe-
existing collagen bundles; cavitation is absent. Synovial
cific enolase (NSE), and various myelin proteins; tumor
cysts are characterized by similar myxoid tissue sur-
cells are surrounded by a laminin-positive basement mem-
rounding a central cystic space; these cysts, however, are
brane (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001). These results suggest a
lined by synovial cells.
neural origin for granular cell tumors in humans.
Granular cell tumors of the skin, oral cavity, and central
nervous system have been recognized in cats and dogs
GRANULAR CELL TUMOR
(Beck et al., 1986; Cordy, 1990; Goldschmidt & Shofer,
(Synonyms: granular cell myoblastoma, granular cell
1992). Although histologic features resemble the mor-
schwannoma)
phologic characteristics of its counterpart in humans, the
 exact origin of the proliferating cells remains unknown.
 Granular cell tumor in humans, previously referred to as
 Except for their expression of vimentin, which supporrs
granular cell myoblastoma, was frst considered to be of
a mesenchymal origin, immunohistologic and ultrastruc-
muscular origin (Weiss & Goldblum, 2001). One study
tural studies do not support a unique cell of origin for all
demonstrated positive staining for alpha-1-antitrypsin
the granular cell tumors examined (Geyer at al., 1992;
Other mesenchymal tumors
805
Patnaik, 1993; Higgins et al., 2001). Some canine granu-
tumors have been reported in the tongue, the palate, the
lar cell tumors appear to be of neural origin (Geyer et al.,
digits, and on the vulva (Rallis et al., 2001; Cooper &
1992; Rallis et al., 2001), while others lack the
Valentine, 2002).
immunophenotype and basement membrane that would
No breed or sex predilections have been documented
support neural derivation (Higgins et al., 2001; Cooper
Sen 6 oi 8 si shop u aae ueu a 'sads iaua 1o
& Valentine, 2002; Head et al., 2002). Two studies have
(Head et al., 2002). The mean age of affected cats has not
demonstrated membrane bound autophagic vesicles con-
been reported.
taining cellular debris by electron microscopy in some
 Feline and canine granular cell tumors exhibit slow
tumors, a feature that would suggest histiocytic origin
expansive growth, and surgical excision usually is cura-
(Geyer et al., 1992; Higgins et al., 2001). Alpha-1-
tive. Only one canine case has been reported with
antitrypsin and alpha-l-antichymotrypsin have been
metastatic lesions in the lung, heart, and diaphragm (Beck
observed in some canine tumors (Higgins et al., 2001), as
et al., 1986).
seen in macrophages as well as other cell types in humans
(Ulrich et al., 1987). Immunohistochermistry with more
Histopathology (Figures 33.11 and 33.12)
specific leukocyte markers (see below) has failed to
confrm histiocytic origin. Seemingly, granular cell tumor
Granular cell tumors are characterized by variably cir-
is a morphologic designation for tumors in dogs and cats
cumscribed, nonencapsulated masses composed of sheets,
that have similar cytologic features but likely various
cords, or nests of large, round to polygonal cells divided
cellular origins.
by collagen that may be delicate and fibrillar, or thick and
hyalinized. The overlying epithelium is often markedly
Clinical features
hyperplastic. The tumor cells have well-defined cell
borders, and a moderate amount of pale, eosinophilic
Granular cell tumors of all sites are uncommon in dogs
cytoplasm. There are delicate, eosinophilic and periodic
and rare in cats (Cooper & Valentine, 2002); these neo-
acid-Schiff (PAS) positive, diastase resistant (nonglyco-
plasms are considered very rare in the skin and subcutis
gen) granules. In some reports, electron microscopic eval-
of these species. Granular cell tumors are mostly well-
uation identifed these granules as membrane bound
defined solitary masses. Occasionally they are larger and
autophagic vesicles containing cellular debris (Geyer et
poorly circumscribed. In dogs they mostly develop in the 
al., 1992; Higgins et al., 2001). The round nuclei are
oral cavity, in particular on the tongue and palate, but 
usually small, central, or eccentric, and may contain one
may also occur on the lips, the ears, other locations of the
or two distinct nucleoli. Mitotic fgures are rare.
skin, as well as in internal organs (Wyand & Wolke, 1968;
Granular cell tumors are distinctive and differential
Geyer et al., 1992; Patnaik, 1993). In cats, granular cell
diagnosis is not highly problematic. Well-differentiated
Fig. 33.11 Granular cell tumor in a
dog. The deep dermal and subcuta-
neous mass is nonencapsulated.
806
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
tiocytic origin could not be confrmed in two cases exam-
ined, as tumor cells lacked expression of the common
leukocyte markers CD18 and CD45 (Moore, PF. &
Affolter, VK., unpublished data, 2003). Some canine
granular cell tumors express S100 and neuron-specifc
enolase (NSE), and a neural origin has been suggested
(Geyer et al., 1992). Expression of S100 was reported in
one canine granular cell tumor of the brain (Patnaik,
1993), but neural origin of the granular cell tumor in the
brain of another dog could not be confrmed as tumor
cells only partially expressed S100 and lacked a basal
lamina, a feature observed with neural origin (Higgins
et al., 2001). Moreover canine and feline granular cell
tumors have reportedly lacked expression of glial fbril-
lary acidic protein (GFAP) (Geyer et al., 1992; Higgins et
al., 2001), another neural marker. Some canine and feline
granular cell tumors have expressed c-smooth muscle
actin or desmin (Patnaik, 1993; Rallis et al., 2001), sug-
gesting muscle origin. These highly variable fndings indi-
cate that canine and feline granular cell tumors likely are
 of different cell origins.
Differentially, histiocytic sarcomas are composed of
dendritic antigen presenting cells, which express the
common leukocyte markers CD45 and CD18 as well as
CD1, CD11c and MHC II, in contrast to granular cell
tumors. Histiocytic sarcomas lack expression of α-smooth
muscle actin, desmin, NSE, GFAP, or S100. Positive stain-
melanoma-associated antigen  recognized  by  T  cells
Fig. 33.12 Higher magnification of granular cell tumor in a dog.
(MART-1},
HMB-45/gp100, tyrosinase,
melanoma
The individualized large round cells have central round to oval,
isoform of microphthalmia transcription factor (MITF-
 dense nuclei and abundant pale granular cytoplasm.
M), or tyrosine-related protein-2 (TRP-2) may assist in
 confrming melanocytic origin.
histiocytic sarcoma and balloon cell melanocytoma may
ANAPLASTIC SARCOMA
need to be considered. In contrast to granular cell tumors,
WITH GIANT CELLS
well-differentiated histiocytic sarcomas are usually com-
posed of individualized round tumor cells with admixed
(Synonym: malignant fbrous histiocytoma, giant cell
spindle-shaped tumor cells. The cytoplasm lacks the gran-
tumor of soft tissue, spindle cell tumor of soft parts)
ular appearance of granular cell tumors. The round to
oval nuclei are often indented or twisted, while nuclei of
"Malignant fbrous histiocytoma’ is a term that was frst
granular cell tumors are consistently round. Fontana-
proposed in the human literature. It encompasses a group
Masson's stain may identify small amounts of melanin in
of soft tissue neoplasms characterized by spindle cells in
 balloon cell melanocytomas, and a small number of more 
a storiform (cartwheel) growth pattern that are admixed
spindle-shaped tumor cells may be admixed.
with histiocytoid cells in varying proportions (Ozzello
et al., 1963). This group of tumors includes low-grade
 Immunohistochemistry
to high-grade malignancies that, based on their predo-
minant morphologic features, have been divided into
Several studies reveal a variable immunophenotype
storiform-pleomorphic, myxoid, giant cell, and inflam-
of granular cell tumors. Some tumors have been re-
matory subtypes (Weiss & Enzinger, 1978; Heenan, 1997;
ported to be positive for alpha-l-antitrypsin, alpha-1-
Weiss & Goldblum, 2001). These tumors were originally
antichymotrypsin, and lysozyme (Higgins et al., 2001),
believed to derive from a monocyte/macrophage cell
suggesting histiocytic origin. However, these markers are
that could undergo transition to a ^facultative' fbroblast.
not specific for histiocytic cells (see above). Further, a his-
Immunophenotyping has since indicated that these
Other mesenchymal tumors
807
 soa jo d  sdn s 
rhabdomyosarcoma (see Chapter 31), or histiocytic
enchymal tumors with histologic similarities (Mirra
sarcoma (see Chapter 35).
et al., 1977; Kindblom et al., 1982; Dehner, 1988;
Heenan, 1997; Weiss & Goldblum, 2001). Some anaplas-
Clinical features
tic sarcomas arising from primitive mesenchymal cells
may have potential for epithelial differentiation, and
True anaplastic sarcomas with giant cells are uncommon.
hence express both vimentin and cytokeratins. These
Goldschmidt and Shofer (1992) report the incidence of
have been described as epithelioid sarcomas (Enzinger,
'giant celltumors of soft tisue' as less than O.5% in dogs
1970).
and 0.9% in cats of all cutaneous neoplasms. Canine and
 The nomenclature of malignant fbrous histiocytoma
feline anaplastic sarcomas with giant cells present simi-
did not fnd its way into the veterinary literature until
larly to their more well-differentiated counterparts.
1979 when a small series of neoplasms in dogs and cats
Solitary, large, frm, poorly circumscribed, subcutaneous,
were reported with morphologic features similar to malig-
and dermal masses are usually observed. Alopecia and
nant fbrous histiocytomas in humans (Gleiser et al.,
 ulceration of the overlying epidermis may be present. Legs 
1979). Numerous case reports and review articles have
and shoulders are the most common sites.
been published since (Bevier & Goldschmidt,
1981;
The average age for anaplastic sarcomas with giant cells
Confer et al., 1981; Macy & Reynolds, 1981; Renlund &
is 8 years in dogs and 10 years in cats (Goldschmidt &
Pritzker 1984; Hendrick et al., 1992; Kerlin & Hendrick,
 Shofer, 1992). Occasionally, lesions are seen in very young
1996).
animals (Pires, 1997). Goldschmidt and Shofer (1992)
 The diagnosis of malignant fbrous histiocytoma has
report that females are more frequently affected than
always been controversial in veterinary
medicine.
males at a ratio of 2:1. There are no known breed
Goldschmidt and Shofer (1992) preferred ‘giant cell
 predilections for either cats or dogs.
tumor of soft tissue' for this neoplasm. More recent
The description of the behavior of feline and canine
studies clearly demonstrate that ^malignant fibrous histio-
anaplastic sarcomas with giant cells (malignant fbrous
cytoma’ is actually a group of sarcomas of various
histiocytomas) varies among different reports. Locally
cellular origins, and may represent anaplastic variants of
 invasive tumors with no or low metastatic potential, as
fbrosarcoma, myofbroblastic fbrosarcoma, leiomyosar-
well as highly aggressive turmors with metastases to drain-
coma, rhabdomyosarcoma, liposarcoma, synovial cell
paqisap ane suanshs sueno rauo pue sapou qdai su
sarcoma, and histiocytic sarcoma (Thoolen et al., 1992;
(Garma-Avina, 1987; Allen & Duncan, 1988; Gibson et
Pace et al., 1994; Kerlin & Hendrick, 1996; Kramer et
al., 1989; Thoolen et al., 1992; Waters et al., 1994; Kerlin
al., 1998; Affolter & Moore, 2002; Couto et al., 2002).
& Hendrick, 1996; Booth et al., 1998; Affolter & Moore,
Vaccine-induced sarcoma, which also is of variable
2002). Behavioral differences may reflect the different
mesenchymal origin (see p. 797), may present as an
cellular origin of these neoplasms.
anaplastic sarcoma with giant cells. “Malignant fbrous
histiocytoma’ thus is considered a descriptive morpho-
Histopathology (Figures 33.13 through 33.17)
logic terrm which does not reflect the cellular origin of the
lesions. Essentially, the term implies the erroneous exis-
Canine and feline cutaneous anaplastic sarcomas with
tence of a “fibrous histiocyte'
giant cells are unencapsulated, poorly defined tumor
 The study of Williamson and Middleton (1998) empha-
 masses that are mostly localized to the subcutis. Dermal
sizes the diffculties of separating poorly differentiated
extension may occur secondarily. Variable amounts of col-
spindle cell tumors in dogs, and hence proposes the use
lagen may be present, and the collagenous stroma may be
of 'spindle cell tumors of canine soft parts', unless the cell
hyalinized in some areas. Ulceration, necrosis, hemor-
of origin can be determined based on immunohistochem-
rhage, and sclerosis are common secondary features. The
istry. Similar to that study, the authors choose to use the
tumor cell population is composed of variable numbers
more descriptive and generic term ‘anaplastic sarcoma
of spindle cells, large round cells (referred to as *histiocy-
with giant cells' to designate these poorly differentiated
toid' cells), and multinucleated giant cells.
mesenchymal neoplasms of various origins. In essence, if
 Plump spindle-shaped tumor cells form dense bundles
 the specifc origin cannot be determined by morphology
or sheets. They may be arranged in a storiform pattern
and immunohistochemistry, it is appropriate to designate
(storiform’ is derived from the Latin storea, meaning
the neoplasm as an anaplastic sarcoma with giant cells.
rope mat). Individual units comprising the ‘mats"
Otherwise these neoplasms should be designated
as
allegedly resemble spokes radiating from a central point.
poorly differentiated sarcomas of their specifc origin
Occasionally, the cells may be arranged around vessels.
(fbrosarcoma, myofbroblastic fbrosarcoma (see Chapter
The spindle cells have scant and poorly defined cyto
27), liposarcoma (see Chapter 30), leiomyosarcoma,
 plasm, and either uniform elongated nuclei with pointed
808
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 33.13 Anaplastic sarcoma with giant cells in a dog featuring
Fig. 33.14 Anaplastic sarcoma with giant cells in a dog. Spindle
pleomorphic round to plump spindle cells with marked
cells are arranged in repetitive storiforrm patterns; giant cells are
anisokaryosis. Note the lipid vacuolation of the histiocytoid cells.
absent in this view.
or blunt ends, or large oval nuclei. The nuclei have highly
Multinucleated giant cells have a large amount of
atypical features, including variable chromatin patterns,
eosinophilic cytoplasm and may have up to 30 nuclei. In
eccentric position, and frequent cytoplasmic invagina-
 particular abundant giant cells are common in anaplastic
tions. Mitotic activity varies and may be very high.
sarcomas of cats. The nuclei of some of these giant cells
Bizarre mitotic fgures are common.
 Ar aa pe 'adu p ns aq k
The presence of histiocytoid tumor cells varies between
no evidence of mitosis. This group of multinucleated giant
and within tumors, and may be very prominent in some
cells may represent reactive histiocytic giant cells. Other
areas. The histiocytoid cell population is mainly com-
multinucleated giant cells have marked anisokaryosis.
posed of large round cells with differing morphologies.
moderate to marked mitotic activity, and occasional
Some histiocytoid tumor cells have round to oval, often
 bizarre mitotic fgures. Most of these more pleomorphic
pleomorphic, vesicular nuclei and a moderate to abun-
giant cells are of tumor cell origin. It may be important
dant amount of pale eosinophilic cytoplasm. Mitotic
 to differentiate berween neoplastic and reactive multinu-
activity and degree of mitotic atypia vary in this popula-
cleated giant cells in these neoplasms, as the presence of
tion. Admixed there are also variable numbers of a second
 neoplastic giant cells is considered a sign of poor prog-
population of round cells with fairly monomorphic,
 nosis in human medicine, while the presence of reactive
round and indented nuclei and intracytoplasmic lipid vac-
multinucleated histiocytic giant cells may indicate a devel-
uoles or intracellular hemosiderin; these may represent
oping antitumor immune response (Josten & Rudolph,
tumor cells or reactive histiocytes with phagocytic activ-
1997).Immunohistochemistry
 allows  differentiation
ity. Differentiation between tumor cells and reactive his-
between reactive and neoplastic multinucleated giant cells
tiocytes requires immunohistochemistry (see below).
(see below}
Other mesenchymal tumors
809
Fig. 33.15 Anaplastic sarcoma with giant cells in a dog composed
Fig. 33.16 Anaplastic sarcoma with giant cells in a dog. The round
of haphazardly arranged anaplastic spindle cells. The accompanying 
to spindled neoplastic cells are associated with pleomorphic multi-
giant cells have fairly monomorphic nuclei and no evidence of
nucleated tumor cells with bizarre, large nuclei; cormpare these tumor
mitosis, suggestive of reactive histiocytic origin.
giant cells with those of Fig. 33.15.
The presence of numerous giant cells is fairly charac-
Osteosarcomas usually contain variable osteoid deposits
teristic for this morphologic group of tumors, but essen-
between some of the tumor cells, and mineralization of
tially ‘anaplastic sarcoma with giant cells' is a diagnosis
 the osteoid may occur. Moreover osteoclasts are positive
of
 default. Differential diagnosis should involve
an
for tarrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP), while
attempt to identify other specifc poorly differentiated sar-
multinucleated tumor giant cells of anaplastic sarcomas
comas with giant cells (fbrosarcoma, myofbroblastic
and reactive multinucleated giant cells are negative for
fbrosarcoma (see Chapter 27), liposarcoma (see Chapter
TRAP (Josten & Rudolph, 1997). Anaplastic carcinomas
30), leiomyosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma (see Chapter
may exhibit plump spindle cells, but in contrast to
31), or histiocytic sarcoma (see Chapter 35). Occasion-
anaplastic sarcomas, occasionally may have cytoplasmic
ally, some areas within a tumor are composed of more
mucin. Also, anaplastic carcinomas may have small foci
distinctive architectural patterns and differentiated tumor
of tubular or acinar structures. Immunohistochemistry
may be required.
In such cases immunohistochemistry also may help to
confrm a specifc cell type. In those cases, the diagnosis
 Immunohistochemistry
of anaplastic sarcoma with giant cells should be avoided,
and the tumor designated more specifically.
 As with all mesenchymal tumors, anaplastic sarcomas
Anaplastic sarcomas with giant cells may also need to
with giant cells are positive for vimentin. A panel of anti-
be differentiated from poorly differentiated osteosar-
bodies, including C-smooth-muscle actin, pan-muscle
comas with giant cells, and anaplastic carcinomas.
actin, desmin, leukocyte markers, osteonectin, osteocal-
810
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
 notype identical to the single nucleated tumor cells, while
reactive multinucleated giant cells are of leukocytic origin
and thus express CD18 and CD45. Moreover neoplastic
multinucleated giant cells tend to be strongly positive for
MIB1, which recognizes the nuclear nonhistone protein
Ki67 that is associated with cell growth and division. The
high Ki67 labeling index indicates marked proliferative
 activity (Josten & Rudolph, 1997). In contrast, reactive
multinucleated histiocytic giant cells, similar to osteo-
clasts, lack mitotic activity and are negative for MIB1
(Josten & Rudolph, 1997).
REFERENCES
Vaccine-induced Sarcoma
Briscoe, C.M., Lipscomb, T.P & McKinney, L. (1998) Pul-
monary metastasis of a feline vaccination-site fbrosarcoma.
J Vet Diagn Invest 10, 79-82.
Couto, S.S., Griffey, S.M., Duarte, PC. et al. (2002) Feline
vaccine-associated fibrosarcoma: morphologic distinctions.
Vet Pathol 39, 33-41.
Doddy, F.D., Glickman, L.T., Glickman, N.W. et al. (1996)
 Feline fibrosarcomas at vaccination sites and non-vaccination
sites. J Comp Pathol 114, 165-74.
Dubielzig, R.R., Hawkins, K.L. & Miller, PE. (1993) Myofi-
broblastic sarcoma originating at the site of rabies vaccination
in a cat. J Vet Diagn Invest 5, 637-8.
Gobar, G.M. & Kass, P.H. (2002) World Wide Web-based survey
of vaccination practices, postvaccinal reactions, and vaccine
site-associated sarcomas in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 220,
Fig. 33.17 Anaplastic histiocytic sarcoma in a cat. This neoplasm
1477-82.
was initially diagnosed as an anaplastic sarcoma with giant cells;
Hendrick, M.J. & Brooks, JJ. (1994) Postvaccinal sarcomas in
immunohistochermistry with anti-CD18 antibody confirms the
 o i ss  oos n 
leukocytic origin (chromogen diaminobenzidine [DAB]).
126-9.
Hendrick, M.J. & Dunagan, C.A. (1991) Focal necrotizing
granulomatous panniculitis associated with subcutaneous
injection of rabies vaccine in cats and dogs: 10 cases
cin, and cytokeratins may permit identification of
anaplastic variants of fbrosarcoma, myofbroblastic
(1988-1989). J Am Vet Med Assoc 198, 304-5.
fbrosarcoma (see Chapter 27), liposarcoma (see Chapter
Hendrick, M.J. & Goldschmidt, M.H. (1991) Do injection site 
reactions induce fibrosarcoma in cats? J Am Vet Med Assoc
30), leiomyosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma (see Chapter
199, 968 (letter).
31), and histiocytic sarcoma (see Chapter 35). Anaplastic
Hershey, A.E., Sorenmo, K.U., Hendrick, M.J. et al. (2000) Prog-
carcinomas generally retain broad expression of cytoker-
nosis for presumed feline vaccine-associated sarcoma after
atin intermediate flaments, while minimal patchy expres-
excision: 61 cases (1986-1996). J Am Vet Med Assoc 216,
sion of cytokeratins is only occasionally seen in anaplastic
58-61.
sarcomas. Anaplastic carcinomas may also express the
Kass, PH., Barnes, W.G., Jr, Spangler, W.L. et al. {1993) Epi-
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), although the utility of
demiologic evidence for a causal relation between vaccination
 this marker in veterinary pathology has not been well doc-
and fibrosarcoma tumorigenesis in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
umented. The default diagnosis of anaplastic sarcoma
203, 396-405.
with giant cels should be made if immunophenotypic
Kass, PH., Spangler, W.L., Hendrick, M.J. et al. (2003) Multi-
center case-control study of risk factors associated with devel-
evaluation fails to exhibit expression of specific markers,
opment of vaccine-associated sarcomas in cats. J Am Vet Med
and hence fails to identify a specific mesenchymal cell of
Assoc 223, 1283-92.
origin.
Kidney, B.A., Haines, D.M., Ellis, J.A. et al. (2001) Evaluation
 Immunohistochemistry has identifed two giant cell
 of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues from vaccine
populations in anaplastic sarcomas with giant cells. Neo
site-associated sarcomas of cats for polyomavirus DNA and
plastic multinucleated giant cells express an immunophe-
antigen. Am J Vet Res 62, 828-32.
Other mesenchymal tumors
811
Macy, D.W. & Bergman, PJ. (1995) Vaccine-associated sarcoma
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001) Benign soft tissue tumors
in cats. Feline Pract 23, 24-7.
and pseudotumors of miscellaneous type. In: Enzinger and
Macy, D.W. & Hendrick, M.J. (1996) The potential role of
Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn (ed. S.W. Weiss & J.R.
inflammation in the development of postvaccinal sarcomas in
Goldblum), pp. 1443-4. Mosby, St Louis.
cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 26, 103-9.
Schuerch, W., Frank, L.A. & Gabbiani, G. (1997) Myofibrob-
Granular Cell Tumor
Jast. In: Histology for Pathologists, 2nd edn (ed. S.S.
Beck, E.E., Withrow, S.J. & McChesney, A.E. et al. (1986)
Sternberg), pp. 134-57. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia.
Canine tongue tumors: a retrospective review of 57 cases.
Tennant, B. (2000) Feline injection-site fibrosarcoma: results of
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 22, 525-32.
the BSAVA survey. J Small Anim Pract 41, 181-2.
Cooper, B.J. & Valentine, B.A. (2002) Tumors of the muscle. In:
Tumors of the Domestic Animais, 4th edn (ed. D.J. Meuten),
Transmissible Venereal Tumor
 pp. 361-2. Blackwell Publishing, Ames.
Albanese, F., Ploli A., Millanta F. et al. (2002) Primary cutaneous
Cordy, D.R. (1990) Tumors of the nervous system and eye. In:
extragenital canine transmissible venereal tumor with Leish-
Tumors of Domestic Animals, 3rd edn (ed. JE. Moulton),
mania-laden macrophages: a further suggestion of histiocytic
p. 654. University of California Press, Berkeley.
origin? Vet Dermatol 13, 243-6.
Geyer, C., Hafner, A., Pfeghaar, S. et al. (1992) Immunohisto-
Amariglio, E.N., Hakim, I., Brok-Simoni, F. et al. (1991) Iden-
chemical and ultrastructural investigation of granular cell
tity of rearranged LINE/c-MYC junction sequences specific for
umours in dog, cat, and horse. J Vet Med B 39, 485-94.
the canine transmissible venereal tumor. Proc Natl Acad Sci
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, F.S. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
USA 88, 8136-9.
Dog and Cat, pp. 184-91. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Beschorner, W.E., Hess, A.D., Nerenberg, S.T. et al. (1979) Iso-
Head, K.W., Else, R.W. & Dubielzig, R.R. (2002) Tumors of
lation and characterization of canine venereal
tumor-
the alimentary tract. In: Tumors of the Domestic Animals,
associated inhibitory and blocking factors. Cancer Res 39,
4th edn (ed. D.J. Meuten), p. 433. Blackwell Publishing,
3920-7.
Ames.
Cohen, D. & Steel, G.G. (1972) Thymidine labeling studies in
Higgins, R.J., LeCouteur, R.A., Vernau, K.M. et al. (2001) Gran-
a transmissible venereal tumor of the dog. Br J Cancer 26,
ular cell tumor of the canine central nervous system: two cases.
413-9.
Vet Pathol 38, 620-7.
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Hendrick, M.J. (2002) Tumors of the skin
Patnaik, A.K. (1993) Histologic and immunohistochemical
and soft tissues. In: Tumors in Domestic Animals, 4th edn (ed.
studies of granular cell tumors in seven dogs, three cats, one
D.J. Meuten), pp. 115-7. Blackwell Publishing, Ames.
horse, and one bird. Vet Pathol 30, 176-85.
Katzir, N., Arman, E., Cohen, D. et al. (1987) Common origin
Rallis, T.S., Tontis, D.K., Soubasis, N.H. et al. (2001) Immuno-
of transmissible venereal tumors (TVT) in dogs. Oncogene 1,
histochemical study of a granular cell tumor on the tongue of
445-8.
a dog. Vet Clin Patbot 30, 62-6.
Marchal, T., Chabanne, L. & Kaplasnki, C. (1997) Immunophe-
Urich, J., Heitz, PU., Fischer, T. et al. (1987) Granular cell
notype of canine transmissible venereal tumor Vet Immunol
tumors: evidence for heterogeneous tumor cell differentiation.
Immunopathol 57, 1-11.
An immunocytochemical study. Virchows Arch B Cell Pathol
Mizuno, S., Fujinaga, I., Tajima, M. et al. (1989) Role of lym-
Ind Mol Pathol 53, 52-7.
phocytes in dogs experimentally re-challenged with canine
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001) Benign tumor of periph-
transmissible sarcoma. Nippon Juigaku Zasshi 51, 86-95.
eral nerves. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th
Mozos, E., Mendez, A., Gomez-Villamandos, J.C. et al. (1996)
edn (eds S.W. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 1178-88. Mosby,
Immunohistochemical characterization of canine transmissible
St Louis.
venereal tumor. Vet Patbol 33, 257-63.
Wyand, D.S. & Wolke, R.E. (1968) Granular cell myoblastoma
Nielsen, S.W. & Kennedy, PC. (1990) Tumors of the skin and
of the canine tongue: case reports. Am J Vet Res 29, 1309-13.
soft tissues. In: Tumors in Domestic Animals, 3rd edn (ed.
J.E. Moulton), pp. 498-502. University of California Press,
Anaplastic Sarcoma with Giant Cells
Berkeley.
Affolter, VK. & Moore, PF (2002) Localized and disseminated
Pereira, J.S., Silva, A.B., Martins, A.L. et al. (2000) Immuno-
histiocytic sarcoma of dendritic cell origin in the dog. Vet
histochemical characterization of intraocular metastasis of a
Pathol 39,74-83.
canine transmissible venereal tumor. Vet Ophthatmol 3, 43-7.
Allen, S.W. & Duncan, JR. (1988) Malignant fbrous histiocy-
Weber, W.T., Nowell, PC. & Hare, W.C.D. (1965) Chromosome
toma in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 192, 90-1.
studies of a transplanted and primary canine veneral sarcoma.
Bevier, D.E. & Goldschmidt, M.H. (1981) Skin tumors in dogs.
J Natl Cancer Inst 35, 537-41.
Part Il: Tumors of the soft (mesenchymal) tissue. Comp Cont
Ed3,506-14.
Ganglion
Booth, M.J., Bastianello, S.S., Jiminez, M. et al. (1998) Malig-
Cho, K.O., Park, N.Y., Kang, M.I. et al. (2000) Ganglion cysts 
nant fibrous histiocytoma of the deep peri-articular tissue of
in a juvenile dog. Vet Pathol 37, 340-3.
the stifle in a dog- J S Afr Vet Assoc 69, 163-8.
Pool, R.R. & Thompson, KG. (2002) Tumors of the joints. In
Confer, A.W., Enright, F.M. & Beard, G.B. (1981) Ultrastructure
Tumors in Domestic Animals, 4th edn (ed. D.J. Meuten),
of a feline extraskeletal giant cell tumor (malignant fibrous
pp. 220-22. Blackwell Publishing, Ames.
histiocytoma). Vet Pathol 18, 738-44.
812
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Couto, S.S., Griffey, S.M., Duarte, PC. et al. (2002) Feline
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 3 (eds K.W.
vaccine-associated fibrosarcoma: morphologic distinctions.
Kwochka, T. Willemse & C. von Tscharner), pp. S57-8,
Vet Patbol 39, 33-41.
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
Dehner, L.P. (1988) Malignant fbrous histiocytoma. Nonspecific
Macy, D.W. & Reynolds, H.A. (1981) The incidence, character-
morphologic pattern, specific pathologic entity, or both? Arch
istics and clinical management of skin tumors in cats. J Am
Pathol Lab Med 112, 236-7.
Anim Hosp Assoc 17, 1026-34.
Enzinger, FM. (1970) Epitheloid sarcoma: a sarcoma simulating
Mirra, J.M., Gold, R.H. & Marafiote, R. (1977) Malignant
a granuloma or carcinoma. Cancer 26, 1029-41.
(fibrous) histiocytoma arising in association with a bone
Garma-Avina, A. (1987) Malignant fibrous histiocytoma of the
infarct in sickle-cell disease: coincidence or cause-and-effect?
giant cell type in a cat. J Comp Pathol 97, 551-7.
Cancer 39, 186-94.
Gibson, K.L., Blass, C.E., Simpson, M. et al. (1989) Malignant
Ozello, L., Stout, A.P. & Murray, M.R. (1963) Cultural charac-
fibrous histiocytoma in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 194,
teristics of malignant histiocytomas and fbrous xanthomas.
1443-5.
Cancer 16, 331-44.
Gleiser, C.A., Raulston, G.L., Jardine, J.H. et al. (1979) Malig-
Pace, L.W., Kreeger, J.M., Miller, M.A. et al. (1994) Immuno-
nant fibrous histiocytoma in dogs and cats. Vet Pathol 16,
histochemical staining of feline malignant fibrous histiocy-
199-208.
tomas. Vet Pathol 31, 168-72.
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, FS. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
 Pires, M.A. (1997) Malignant fbrous histiocytoma in a puppy.
Dog and Cat, pp. 2-3, 175-8. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Vet Record 140, 234-5.
Heenan, PJ. (1997) Tumors of the fibrous issue involving the
Renlund, R.C. & Pritzker, K.P. (1984) Malignant fbrous
skin. In: Lever's Histopathology of the Skin, 8th edn (eds D.
histiocytoma involving the digit in a cat. Vet Patbol 21,
Elder, R. Elenitsas, C. Jaworsky & B. Johnson, Jr) pp. 862-3.
442-4.
Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia.
Thoolen, R.J., Vos, J.H., van der Linde-Sipman, J.S. et al. (1992)
Hendrick, M.J., Brooks, JJ. & Bruce, E.H. (1992) Six cases of
Malignant fibrous histiocytomas in dogs and cats: an immuno-
malignant fibrous histiocytoma of the canine spleen. Vet
histochemical study. Res Vet Sci 53, 198-204.
Pathol 29, 351-4.
Waters, C.B., Morrison, W.B., DeNicola, D.B. et al. (1994) Giant
Josten, M. & Rudolph, R. (1997) Methods for the differentia-
cell variant of malignant fibrous histiocytoma in dogs: 10 cases
tion of giant cells in canine and feline neoplasia in paraffn
(1986-1993). J Am Vet Med Assoc 205, 1420-4.
sections. Zentratbt Veterinaermed 44, 159-66.
Weiss, S.W. & Enzinger, F.M. (1978) Malignant fibrous histio-
Kerlin, R.L. & Hendrick, M.J. (1996) Malignant fibrous histio-
cytoma: an analysis of 200 cases. Cancer 41, 2250-66.
cytoma and malignant histiocytosis in the dog 
- convergent or
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001) Malignant fibrohistiocytic
divergent phenotypic differentiation? Vet Pathol 33, 713-6.
tumors. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn
Kindblom, L.G., Jacobsen, G.K. & Jacobsen, M. (1982)
(eds S.W. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 539-66. Mosby, St
Immunohistochemical investigations of tumors of supposed
Louis.
fibroblastic-histiocytic origin. Hum Pathol 13, 834-40.
Williamson, M.M. & Middleton, D.J. (1998) Cutaneous soft
Kramer, L., Corradi, A. & Di Lecce, R. (1998) Feline malignant
tissue tumors in dogs: classification, differentiation, and his-
fbrous histiocytoma: an immunohistochemical study. In:
togenesis. Vet Dermatol 9, 43-8.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat:Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 34
Melanocytic tumors
The classification of human melanocytic tumors is
A), melanoma-associated antigen recognized by T cells
complex, and confusion has been engendered by the use 
(MART-1), the melanoma isoform of microphthalmia
of such terms as ^congenital nevus', “acquired nevus', and
transcription factor (MITF-M), the enzyme tyrosinase,
"nevus cell (Lever & Schaumburg-Lever, 1990). The s0-
and gp100 (HMB-45) (Radford et al., 1996; Barrio,
called “nevus cells’ in human pathology are melanocytes
1998; Busam et al., 1998, 2001; Jungbluth et al., 2000;
with slight histopathologic and biochemical alterations
Orchard, 2000; Berset et al., 2001). Melan-A and MART-
(Lever & Schaumburg-Lever, 1990). The terms 'nevus'
1 antibodies recognize the same antigen, CD63 (Hemler,
and *nevus cells' will be avoided by the authors except for
2002). However, according to a small pilot study of
comparative purposes.
several canine melanocytic tumors by one of the authors
 In the past, different classifcation systems have been
(V.K.A.), Melan-A and MART-1 are not consistently both
used for canine and feline melanocytic proliferations.
 positive in individual cases, and hence may have different
The term *melanoma’ has been variably employed in vet-
 specificities. In addition to Melan-A and MART-1, S100
erinary nomenclature systems. Some classifications have
used the term 'melanoma’ to designate both benign and
 promising results in the same study. Further, the study of
malignant neoplasms (Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992),
Choi and Kusewitt (2003) reports that the tyrosinase-
while others have limited it to malignant neoplastic pro-
related protein-2 (TRP-2) appears to be retained in many
liferations (Pully & Stannard, 1990). As in Veterinary
amelanotic melanomas in dogs. Antibodies specific for
Dermatopathology (Walder & Gross, 1992), and in
MITF-M are currently being evaluated for their useful-
accordance with the revised World Health Organization
ness in diagnosis of canine and feline melanocytic tumors.
classification system (Goldschmidt et al., 1998), the
It appears that this protein is strongly expressed in both
e ssduoua on eonoouiau, un aun asn snoi
canine and feline melanomas (Wojcieszyn, J., personal
variants of congenital and acquired benign neoplasms
communication, 2003).
arising from melanocytes; “melanoma’ is used synony-
Dermal melanocytes must be differentiated from
mously with malignant melanoma.
melanin-phagocytizing histiocytes, referred to as
Melanocytes are neuroectodermal cells. During fetal
 melanophages. The latter are often admixed with prolif-
development, melanoblasts migrate from the neural crest
erating melanocytes. While melanocytes contain fnely
to the epidermis and the hair bulbs, where they differen-
dispersed melanin granules, melanophages are distended
tiate into mature cells. Homing signals, which direct the
 with phagocytized coarse melanin granules of varying
migration of melanoblasts to their destination, have not
size. Electron microscopy demonstrates the presence of
been identified to date (Sulaimon & Kitchell, 2003). Some
cross-striation in the melanosomes of melanocytes,
melanoblasts may be retained in the dermis and mature
whereas macrophages contain melanin in secondary lyso-
to dermal melanocytes. Melanocytic proliferations may
somes (Dardick, 1996).
therefore arise from melanocytes in the epidermis, the
UV light radiation has a significant infuence on the
dermis, or the adnexa.
development of some melanocytic tumors in humans
While  intraepidermal neoplastic melanocytes retain
(Longstreth, 1988; Langley et al., 2003). This has not
their expression of E-cadherin, dermal tumor cells no
been recognized in dogs and cats. A possible link between
longer express it (Tang et al., 1994). Immunohistochem-
naturally
 occurring feline uveal melanomas and the
istry for E-cadherin is therefore not useful in the diagno-
presence of feline leukemia virus/feline sascoma virus
sis of dermal melanocytic tumors. Melanocytes contain
(FeLV/FeSV) has been described (Stiles et al., 1999);
melanosomes, melanin granules, and tyrosinase. They
however, the presence of viral DNA has not been reported
also express S100, melanoma-associated antigen (Melan-
in cutaneous melanocytic proliferations in cats. Loss of
813
814
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
expression of the tumor suppressor gene product p53,
lesions increase in size and number and then become
which induces the pancyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor
stable. In dogs, they are often incidental fndings, and
p21/Waf-1, has been identifed in benign canine
 their natural progression is unknown. They are usually
melanocytic tumors (Ritt et al., 1998). As a result the
 less than 5 mm in diameter.
tumor cells continuously divide and proliferate. The
Lentigines may be solitary or multiple (lentigo simplex)
expresion of KIT, the product of the proto-oncogene
or occasionally numerous (lentiginosis profusa). The
c-kit, plays an important role in the normal develop-
lesions in cats occur predominantly on the head, often on
ment of melanocytes in humans (Fleischman,
1992).
lips, eyelid margins, nasal planum, and pinnae (Scott,
Moreover, the loss of expression of KIT has been associ-
1987; Scott et al., 2001). Lentigines in dogs occur almost
ated with metastatic behavior of melanomas in humans
exclusively on the nipples (Kraft & Frese, 1976). Multi-
(Natali et al., 1992). In contrast, the importance of KIT
ple lesions with early lentiginous change were observed
in the normal development of feline and
canine
by the authors in a 12-year-old Golden Retriever that
 melanocytes and its involvement in melanocytic neopla-
presented with multiple macular pigmented foci with
sia has not been demonstrated to date (Sulaimon &
scale.
Kitchell, 2003).
 In cats, lentigines tend to appear early in life, affecting
animals less than 1 year of age. This suggests a con-
genital etiology. There are no breed predilections in cats,
LENTIGO
but affected animals have orange, cream, red, tricolor,
Lentigo is a melanocytic proliferation best interpreted as
or silver haircoats (Scott, 1987). Lesions in dogs occur
 intraepidermal melanocytic hyperplasia of well differenti-
in older animals, and there are no known breed
ated melanocytes (Elder & Elenitsas, 1997; Grichnik et
predispositions.
al., 2003). Lentigo simplex in humans is characterized by
a few small, scattered macules, while lentiginosis profusa
Histopathology (Figures 34.1 and 34.2)
features innumerable small macules (Elder & Elenitsas,
1997; Grichnik et al., 2003). The pathogenesis of lentigo
Lentigines are discrete, sharply demarcated, plaque-like
simplex and lentiginosis profusa is not known; however,
lesions characterized by minimal to mild, irregular epi-
lentigo simplex may be regarded as an incipient or evolv.
ing junctional melanocytoma (Elder & Elenitsas, 1997).
(Elder & Elenitsas, 1997; Grichnik et al., 2003). The
 Solar lentigines develop mainly in older people and are,
lesions contain increased numbers of deeply pigmented
 therefore, also referred to as senile lentigines (Elder &
melanocytes. In addition, the epidermal keratinocytes are
Elenitsas, 1997).
markedly hyperpigmented, which may partially obscure
Lesions analogous to human lentigo simplex occur
the presence of melanocytic hyperplasia. Numerous
in dogs and in cats (Scott, 1987; Scott et al., 2001) and
 melanocytes are usually distributed as single cells among
s u p aq su esnnd sio
 the basal epithelial cells and may be more concentrated
(Scott, 1987; Nash & Paulsen, 1990). Lesions originally
 along elongated rete ridge-like extensions, often in “drip'
reported as canine lentiginosis profusa (Briggs,
，1985)
confgurations. The melanocytes are enlarged due to
were reclassified as pigmented epidermal nevi in Veteri-
engorgement with melanin, but are otherwise normal.
naryDermatopathology(Walder &(
Gross,
1992);
Dermal-epidermal clusters of melanocytes may occasion-
however recent studies indicate that these lesions
are
ally be present, and small numbers of melanophages may
induced by papillomavirus (Nagata, 1995) and are
accumulate in the superficial dermis.
 better referred to as pigmented viral plaques (see Chapter 
The differential diagnoses for lentigo are ephelids
22). Clinical photographs in some reference texts illus-
(freckles) and pigmented viral plaques (see Chapter 22).
trating ^multiple lentigines' or tar spots' on the abdomen
Lentigines are grossly macular and are characterized
of dogs also are more consistent with pigmented viral
microscopically by melanocyte hyperplasia, epidermal
plaques.
hyperpigmentation, and irregular epidermal hyperplasia.
Ephelids are also macular, but show discrete areas of
hyperpigmentation only, with no hyperplasia of mela-
Clinical features
nocytes or keratinocytes. Pigmented viral plaques also
 Based on the small number of cases reported, there are no
lack melanocyte hyperplasia but exhibit epidermal hyper-
incidence data for lentigo simplex in dogs and cats or
plasia, often in a scalloped pattern, with prominent hyper-
lentiginosis profusa in cats. The authors believe that they
pigmentation, hypergranulosis, and hyperkeratosis;
are common, but are infrequently biopsied. Lentigines are
koilocytosis may be present. Intralesional papilloma-
well-demarcated, black, macular, or slightly raised, well-
virus can be demonstrated by immunohistochemistry (see
circumscribed lesions with a smooth surface. In cats, the
Chapter 22).
Melanocytic tumors
815
Fig. 34.1 Lentigo in a cat. Densely-
pigmented melanocytes are accumu-
lated in the basal cell layer of the lip
margin. Note that epithelial hyperpla-
sia is minimal.
Fig. 34.2 Lentigo in the nipple of a
dog. Densely-pigmented melanocytes
are concentrated along rete ridge-like
extensions of the hyperplastic epider-
mis. Hyperpigmentation extends into
the straturm corneum. Note stellate
melanocytes and plump melanophages
in the underlying dermis.
cytomas include dermal, compound, and balloon cell
MELANOCYTOMA
melanocytomas in dogs and cats, as well as multiple dys-
(Synonym: benign melanoma)
 plastic melanocytoma syndrome in dogs.
Cutaneous melanocytomas include  all  variants  of
Clinical features
congenital and acquired benign neoplasms arising from
melanocytes. Melanocytomas are traditionally subdivided
Melanocytomas are common in dogs and account for 3%
into junctional, compound, and dermal types in humans,
to 4% of skin tumors (Conroy, 1983; Goldschmidt &
according to the location of the proliferating melanocytes
 Shofer, 1992). The ratio of cutaneous melanocytomas to
within the skin (Elder & Elenitsas, 1997). Melano-
malignant melanomas is reported in these surveys as 2:1
816
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
(Conroy, 1983) and 4:1 (Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992).
head, particularly the pinnae (Goldschmidt et al., 1993;
Melanocytomas are uncommon in cats, comprising
Miller et al., 1993). Canine compound melanocytomas
only 0.6% to 1.3% of all skin tumors (Carpenter et al.,
occur most often on the trunk and head, especially on the
1987; Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992). The frequency of
eyelids and muzzle. They may occur as pedunculated
feline melanocytomas documented in the literature ranges
lesions on the lips. Dermal melanocytomas are most often
from 32% to 58% of all melanocytic proliferations (Macy
truncal in location in dogs, and they occasionally occur
& Reynolds, 1981; Carpenter et al., 1987; Goldschmidt
on the extremities, particularly between the digits.
& Shofer 1992; Goldschmidt et al., 1993). Balloon cell
The average age of dogs with melanocytomas in the
melanocytoma is rare (Walder, 2000).
se s8op inq 'sieak I'8 sem (0661) Ie 1a uolog Jo Apnis
 Junctional (intraepidermal) melanocytomas occur the-
young as 1.5 years were affected. The peak occurrence
oretically in dogs and cats, but have not been described.
is reported by Goldschmidt & Hendrick (2002) to be
 This may be because solitary macular lesions are difficult
between 5 and 11 years in dogs, and 4 and 13 years in
to detect on haired skin and are unlikely to be biopsied
cats; the average is 9 years for both species (Goldschmidt
even when present on glabrous skin. Hence, canine and
& Shofer, 1992). A higher incidence for all melanocytic
feline lesions are likely only biopsied when junctional
 neoplasms is documented in canine breeds with dark pig-
melanocytomas   have  progressed 
into
compound
mentation of the skin: dogs at higher risk are Scottish,
melanomas, a process documented in other species (Elder
Airedale and Boston Terriers; Miniature and Standard
& Elenitsas, 1997).
Schnauzers; Doberman Pinschers; Vizslas; Golden and
Compound (intraepidermal and dermal) melanocy-
Chesapeake Bay Retrievers; Irish Setters; Chow Chows;
tomas resemble compound melanocytic nevi in humans.
Boxers; and Cocker and Springer Spaniels (Conroy, 1967;
They are the most common type of melanocytoma
Bolon et al., 1990; Goldschmidt & Hendrick, 2002; Scott
observed in dogs. One retrospective study found that
et al., 2001 [compilation]). A predilection for males was
 compound melanocytomas accounted for 71% of feline
observed by Conroy (1983), but this observation has not
melanocytomas (Miller et al., 1993).
been confrmed by others. A higher incidence (65%) of
Dermal melanocytomas are similar to the human cellu-
melanocytomas was seen in female cats; 35% of cats with
lar blue nevus or common blue nevus. Dermal melanocy-
 melanocytic proliferations in general had black or gray
tomas are common in dogs. The majority of the feline
coat color (Goldschmidt et al., 1993).
benign melanocytic tumors described by Carpenter et al.
 Clinical criteria used to differentiate between benign
(1987) were dermal melanocytomas, while Miller et al.
and malignant melanocytic neoplasms are not sharply
(1993) listed 29% of feline melanocytomas in this category.
defined in dogs and cats. Location of the tumor has been
It is important to note that wide variation in incidence
considered important in regard to the clinical behavior.
data is likely a result of lack of standardized diagnostic
Melanocytic tumors of the nailbeds, mucocutaneous junc-
criteria for malignancy in melanocytic neoplasms; con-
tions, and oral mucosa are generally malignant; lesions
troversies persist in both human and veterinary medicine.
on haired skin, including lips and digits, are more likely
Some investigators equate “benign behavior', i.e. lack of
to be benign. Histologically benign melanocytic tumors
recurrence or metastasis, with a benign neoplasm; this
have been seen on the labial mucocutaneous junction
approach is misleading, as it discounts the possibility of
and oral mucosa; a clinicopathologic study is underway
a malignant neoplasm that has been surgically cured.
to investigate the biological behavior of these lesions
Compound melanocytomas present as solitary, circum-
(Esplin, 2003). In a retrospective survey of melanocytic
scribed, brown to black, alopecic nodules that are usually
neoplasms in dogs, four of 52 dogs with apparently
less than 1 crm in diameter. The nodules may be smooth
benign histologic lesions developed metastases or inoper-
or slightly papillated, and vary from papular, dome-
 able recurrences (Bostock, 1979). In a more recent report,
shaped, and plaque-like to pedunculated in configuration.
all of 77 neoplasms considered histologically benign did 
Ulceration is uncommon.
exhibit benign behavior (Bolon, 1990), suggesting that
Dermal melanocytomas present as solitary, circum-
 more stringent histologic criteria allow more accurate
 scribed, alopecic, fleshy, dome-shaped masses that are 0.5
prognostication.
to 4.0 cm in diameter. The lesions generally appear blue-
 Malignant transformation occurs in a small percentage
black when viewed through lightly pigmented skin, but
of benign melanocytic tumors in humans (Grichnik et al.,
2003). This phenomenon has not been well documented
pigmentation of the overlying epidermis. In cases of
 in animals, but it may occur occasionally (Conroy, 1983)
balloon cell dermal melanocytoma, the dermal nodule
and has been observed by the authors. A recent case
may have a cream or tan color.
report describes malignant transformation of a congeni-
Canine melanocytomas in general may occur anywhere
tal melanocytoma with subsequent metastasis in a 5-year-
 on the body. In cats, benign melanocytic lesions favor the 
old Golden Retriever (Valentine et al., 1999).
Melanocytic tumors
817
Multiple dysplastic melanocytoma syndrome
neural structures; this is not unexpected in light of the
The authors have observed a few cases of multiple (syn-
embryologic derivation of melanocytes from the neural
chronous and metachronous) melanocytic tumors in dogs
crest. Round to polygonal cells are usually arranged in
that were benign in their early stages but subsequently
sheets and dense packets; the packets are separated by a
developed cytologic features of malignancy when allowed
 very scant stroma. Epithelioid cells are rounded, have a
to increase in size. One dog, a spayed female Chow Chow,
large amount of pale eosinophilic cytoplasm, and are
developed hundreds of these lesions over a period of 13
arranged in sheets and larger nests. Cell boundaries of
years. Most lesions were removed in early stages. Metas-
epithelioid melanocytes may be diffcult to discern. Den-
tasis did not occur. This entity has some similarities to the
dritic melanocytes have a highly angular shape, some-
dysplastic nevus syndrome in humans, which may occur
times with long cytoplasmic processes, and are usually
in the context of malignant melanomas or as a separate
arranged in small nests. Balloon melanocytes are large
entity (Elder & Elenitsas, 1997; Salopek, 2002). If
round cells that have abundant, very pale cytoplasm (see
surgically removed at an early stage, multiple dysplastic
below).
melanocytomas have a good prognosis and recurrence is
 In general, melanocytoma cells have slightly enlarged,
not observed. However new lesions may develop else-
vesicular nuclei and small or inconspicuous nucleoli.
where on the body over time.
Nuclear shape may vary slightly from round to oval
 depending on the type of tumor cell. Balloon cell nuclei
Histopathology
are smaller uniform, and ovoid. Mitotic fgures are rare
 in all cell types, and mitotic atypia is not observed.
In general, melanocytomas are symmetrical, circum-
The amount of melanin in individual tumor cells varies;
scribed, but unencapsulated masses. Melanocytomas have
 the granules are small and uniform in size within a given
a variety of histopathologic patterns and are composed of
tumor cell. Spindle, round to polygonal, and balloon cells
spindle cells, round to polygonal cells, epithelioid cells,
often have sparsely-distributed melanin pigmentation.
dendritic cells, or balloon cells; these cell types all may
Large epithelioid tumor cell and dendritic cells tend to
occur either alone or in combination. Spindle cell-
 be heavily pigmented. With the exception of balloon cell 
predominant  morphology  was  statistically  associated
melanocytomas, the vast majority of feline and canine
with benignity in one study (71% melanocytomas in con-
 melanocytomas have moderate to marked melanin pig-
trast to 29% melanomas) (Goldschmidt et al., 1993).
mentation overall, at least in the superficial portions of
Approximately two-thirds of canine melanocytomas have
the tumors. Fontana-Masson stain will usually confrm
combined spindle and epithelioid morphology.
 the presence of scant cytoplasmic melanin in poorly pig-
Spindle melanocytes have pale, poorly defined cyto-
mented tumors. An abundance of melanin granules may
plasm. These fusiform cells are usually arranged in small
obscure nuclear features. Bleaching of the tissue section
nests, or form whorls and serpentine bundles, simulating
with permanganate or oxalic acid will allow evaluation
Fig. 34.3 Compound melanocytoma
in a dog composed of heavily pig-
mented  epithelioid melanocytes ar-
ranged in nests and clusters. Note the
relative symmetry of both dermal and
epidermal components.
818
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
of cellular morphology if investigation for cytologic
lymphocytes and plasma cells suggests a secondary host
features of malignancy is needed.
immunologic response, particularly in the absence of trau-
 In most melanocytomas, the overlying epidermis is
matic features such as ulceration. Traumatic ulceration is
hyperpigmented, regardless of the presence or absence of
 accompanied by an influx of neutrophils.
 intraepidermal clusters of neoplastic melanocytes. There
may be secondary ulceration due to trauma. Typically,
Compound melanocytoma (Figures 34.3 and 34.4)
melanocytomas have a scant to occasionally moderate
These tumors are often wedge-shaped in confguration
stromal collagen. Variable numbers of melanophages are
and include a junctional and dermal component. Numer-
often grouped in small clusters. Small foci of necrosis may
ous, densely packed tumor cells are present in the dermis.
be present in large tumors. A reactive population of
Variable numbers of tumor cells accumulate in clusters
Fig. 34.4 Higher magnification of
compound melanocytoma in a dog.
Epithelioid cells containing moderate
melanin pigment are arranged in nests
and clusters within the derrmis and
along the derrmal-epidermal junction.
 Nuclei are relatively small and uniforrm.
Fig. 34.5 Dermal melanocytoma in a
dog. A large, well-circumscribed mass
of heavily pigmented cells encroaches
upon the subcutaneous fat.
Melanocytic tumors
819
Fig. 34.6 Dermal melanocytoma in
n a dog. Sparsely pigmented
Fig. 34.7 Higher magnification of dermal melanocytoma of Fig.
fusiform cells arranged in whorls and nests are interspersed with
34.6, showing uniform, ovoid nuclei and inconspicuous nucleoli.
heavily-pigmented epithelioid cells and melanophages.
Note small bundles and nests reminiscent of neural tumors.
and nests within the epidermis along the dermal-
the subcutis. Most dermal melanocytomas are composed
epidermal junction and similarly in the outer follicular
of spindle cells arranged in bundles, nests and whorls.
wall. This pattern is referred to as “junctional activity'.
Dermal melanocytomas are moderately cellular and
Intraepidermal tumor aggregates may be prominent.
 generally lack stromal collagen. Melanophages are often
Some neoplasms have melanocytic nests localized in the
distributed throughout the tumor nodule or arranged in
superficial dermis with sparing of the overlying epidermis;
it is presumed that these nests have migrated downward
from their previous location in the epidermis, as is
observed.
observed in the life cycle of human pigmented nevi (Elder
 Some dermal melanocytomas are composed of epithe-
& Elenitsas, 1997; Grichnik et al., 2003). This suggests
lioid or dendritic cells that are heavily pigmented. These
that some canine and feline compound melanocytomas
tumor nodules have a small amount of stromal collagen.
may represent a progressive stage of clinically inapparent
Nuclear morphology may be obscured by the large
junctional melanocytoma, a process well recognized in
amount of pigment. Bleaching of the tissue section with
other species.
permanganate or oxalic acid will allow evaluation of cel-
lular morphology if investigation for cytologic features of
Dermal melanocytoma (Figures 34.5 through 34.8)
 malignancy is needed. Although nuclei may be large, there
These tumors are strictly intradermal in location. An
is minimal nuclear pleomorphism.
unaffected Grenz zone is present in the superficial dermis,
 Differentiation of melanocytoma from malignant mela-
clearly separating the tumor cell population from the
noma can be diffcult in some cases. Categorization by
cytologic criteria, including cell type, mitotic rate, and
820
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 34.8 Derrmal melanocytoma in a dog dominated by moderately
Fig. 34.9 Balloon cell melanocytoma in a dog. Solid sheets of large,
 pigmented epithelioid cells in sheets and nests. Nuclei are large and
 polygonal cells have finely granular pigmentation. Nuclei are small
vesicular, but uniforrm.
Note
coarse
melanin granules in
and dark.
 melanophages at top right.
feline melanocytomas versus their malignant counterparts
degree of pigmentation, varies markedly among different
is less clear (Goldschmidt et al., 1993; Smith et al., 2002).
 surveys. Most reviews fail to report a reliable connection
The proliferation index and the growth fraction are
between the presence of a specific cell type and behavior
additional indicators of the biologic behavior of many
of the melanocytic tumors. Architectural symmetry and
neoplasms, and may assist in differentiating between
well-defned tumor margins are indicators of a benign
 melanocytomas and melanomas (Roels et al., 1999) (see
lesion despite the large size of a tumor mass. Compound
immunohistochemistry, below).
malignant
 melanomas
often have
aggregates
of
 Spindle cell-predominant melanocytomas with sparse
 melanocytic cells at higher levels (pagetoid pattern) of the
 pigmentation and marked neural growth patterns may be
epidermis, while in melanocytomas the melanocyte aggre-
difficult to differentiate from dermal benign peripheral
gates tend to be limited to the lower part of the epider-
nerve sheath tumors. The presence of melanin granules,
mis. The presence of numerous individual melanocytes in 
 which may require Fontana-Masson staining for detec-
the basal cell layer, mimicking a lentiginous pattern, is
tion, assists in confrming the diagnosis.
also suggestive of malignancy. Although the nuclei of
melanocytomas may be large and have prominent nucle-
Balloon cell melanocytoma (Figures 34.9 and 34.10)
oli, relative nuclear uniformity is observed. A mitotic
 Balloon cell change is considered a degenerative process
index of fewer than 2 per 10 high-power fields has been
induced by coalescence of melanosomes in conjunc-
considered to support benign biologic behavior in most 
tion with abnormal melanogenesis in the tumor cells
melanocytic tumors in dogs (Bostock, 1979). In contrast,
(Sondergaard et al., 1980; Gupta et al., 1985); scattered
the value of mitotic activity to predict the outcome of
balloon cells may be found in otherwise typical com-
Melanocytic tumors
821
Fig. 34.10 Balloon cell melanocy-
toma in a dog. Fontana-Masson stain
demonstrates occasional dark brown
melanin pigment in the tumor cells.
pound and dermal melanocytomas. Balloon cell
larger lesions. Some of the proliferating melanocytes have
melanocytomas are most often dermal. They are com-
irregularly shaped and enlarged hyperchromatic nuclei.
posed predominantly of large round cells, although small 
 Differential diagnoses are as for compound melanocy-
numbers of fusiform or polygonal melanocytes are often
tomas (see above); the presence of numerous tumors and
present. The abundant and pale cytoplasm of the balloon
variable cytologic atypia allow differentiation.
cells generally has a fnely granular qualiry. Dust-like
melanin granules may be detected in small numbers,
Immunohistochemistry
usually requiring Fontana-Masson staining. However,
balloon cell melanocytomas often lack readily visible pig-
Neoplastic melanocytes may retain the expression of
mentation, and immunohistochemistry may aid in their
proteins S100, melanoma-associated antigen (Melan-A),
identification (see below). Nuclei are small, uniform, and
melanoma-associated antigen recognized by T cells
ovoid; mitotic fgures are rarely observed.
(MART-1), HMB-45/gp100, melanoma isoform of micro-
Balloon cell melanocytomas should be differentiated
phthalmia transcription factor (MITF-M), tyrosinase-
from leukocytic round cell tumors, particularly if pigment
related protein-2 (TRP-2), and tyrosinase. Their presence
is scant and/or difficult to demonstrate. Differential diag-
can be demonstrated by using antibodies specific for these
noses include large cell (clear cell) lymphoma, canine cuta-
 proteins. The usefulness of these cell markers used indi-
neous histiocytoma, plasmacytoma, poorly granulated
vidually  in  the  identification of poorly  pigmented
mast cell tumor and transmissible venereal tumor. In con-
 melanocytic proliferations in cats and dogs is still under
trast to melanocytomas, leukocytic round cell tumors lack
debate (Sanduski et al., 1985; Cangul et al., 1999;
 the presence of admixed fusiform tumor cells. The nuclei
Sulaimon et al., 1999, 2002; Ramos-Vara et al., 2000,
of leukocytic round cell tumors tend to be larger than those
2002; Koenig et al., 2001; Laprie et al., 2001; Choi &
of balloon cell melanocytoma. Plasma cell tumors have
Kusewitt, 2003). Studies evaluating the presence of
variable numbers of multinucleated tumor cells, a feature
Melan-A, MART-1, HMB-45/gp100, and neuron-specifc
not observed in balloon cell melanocytomas. The dense
enolase (NSE), as well as other markers, have mainly
cytoplasmic RNA in plasma cells stains magenta with
focused on identification  of amelanotic malignant
methyl green pyronine (MGP). Mast cells usually contain
melanomas (see p. 825).
some cytoplasmic granules that are metachromatic
One particular clone of S100 (S100a) was successfully
 (purple) with toluidine blue or Giemsa stains.
used to identify balloon cell melanocytic tumors (Walder,
2000). Balloon cell melanocytomas are differentiated
Multiple dysplastic melanocytoma syndrome
 from leukocytic round cell tumors (histiocytomas, lym-
These lesions mostly resemble compound melanocytomas
phoma, mast cell tumors, plasmacytomas, and transmis-
on low magnification. However, cytologic atypia and
sible venereal tumors) by the expression of the common
mitotic fgures are present; their incidence increases in
leukocyte antigen CD45 in the latter.
822
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Identification of nuclear proteins associated with cell
and is often referred to as the ^epidermal melanin unit' or
growth and division can be used as indicators of malig-
the “follicular melanin unit’ (Sulaimon & Kitchell, 2003).
nancy, and thus may be helpful in differentiating
 As a result, the neoplastic cell population could initiate a
melanocytomas from melanomas. Particularly, the non-
reactive proliferation of the second cellular component.
histone protein Ki67 and the proliferating cell nuclear
Keratinocytes produce melanocyte-stimulating hormone
antigen (PCNA), a nuclear protein essential for correct
alpha (MSH-α) and hence may, in combination with
DNA polymerase function, assist in separating benign
kinase activation or release of basic fbroblast growth
from malignant melanocytic tumors. The proliferation
factor (bFGF), initiate melanocyte proliferation (De Luca
et al., 1993; Luger et al., 1993; Schauer et al., 1994).
Alternatively, melanocytes are known to release trans-
in malignant melanomas (Roels et al., 1999). Feline
forming growth factor (TGF), which can bind to recep-
melanocytomas have a proliferation index of 6%, while
 tors for epidermal growth factor (EGF) on keratinocytes.
 their malignant counterparts have an index of 26% (Roels
The result of this interaction would be a reactive pro-
et al., 1999). The growth fraction (defined as percentage
liferation of keratinocytes (Marquardt et al., 1983).
of Ki67-positive nuclear area) was 0.21% for canine
Prominent or  even  pseudoepitheliomatous  epidermal
melanocytomas and 21% for canine malignant mela-
hyperplasia is a well-documented occurrence in human
nomas (Roels et al., 1999). Feline melanocytomas have a
melanocytic nevi and, less commonly, in malignant
growth fraction of 0.36% versus 16.6% in feline malig-
melanomas (Scott et al., 1989; Kamino et al., 1990; Dorji
nant melanomas (Roels et al., 1999).
et al., 2002; Mott et al., 2002). Also, bidirectional hor-
MELANOCYTOMA-ACANTHOMA
 This neoplasm has no exact human analogue. Pigmented
seborrheic keratosis in humans, a lesion characterized
by a proliferative epidermis with admixed multifocal
aggregates of intraepidermal melanocytes, is occasionally
referred to as melanoacanthoma (Silver & Ho, 2003).
Desmoplastic trichoepitheliomas with concurrent intra-
dermal nevi are also described in the human literature; it
has been suggested that this represents a complex neo-
plasm rather than a 'collision' tumor, i.e. two distinct neo-
plasms occurring at the same anatomic site (Rahbari &
Mehregan, 1975; Brownstein & Starink, 1987; Keen,
1996).
Canine melanocytoma-acanthomas are mixed tumors
that are composed of a benign melanocytic prolifera-
tion, resembling compound melanocytoma, and a benign
epithelial
proliferation.
A dermal
1  melanocytoma-
acanthoma has been immunophenotyped in a German
Shepherd Dog (Espinosa de los Monteros et al., 2000),
identifying the presence of keratinocytes and melano-
cytes. The epithelial component usually appears folli-
cular and resembles an isthmus-type tricholemmoma or
infundibular keratinizing acanthoma (see Chapter 23).
Studies using low and high molecular weight keratins
to identify the exact origin of the epithelial component
of melanocytoma-acanthoma have not yet been per-
formed. The authors have chosen the general appellation
‘acanthoma’ until the epithelial portion can be clearly
classified.
The pathogenesis of canine melanocytoma-acanthoma
is not known. It is still unclear whether both cell compo-
Fig. 34.11 Melanocytoma-acanthoma in a dog. Multiple cystic
nents are truly neoplastic. The close interaction between
structures lined by keratinizing squamous epithelium are associated
keratinocytes and melanocytes has been well established
with nests of variably pigmented melanocytes.
Melanocytic tumors
823
monal and/or cytokine interactions could be operant in
melanoma arising in melanocytoma-acanthoma have
these neoplasms.
been seen by the authors.
The authors have also observed a single case of
melanocytoma associated with a proliferation of sweat
Histopathology (Figures 34.11 through 34.16)
glands in a dog (see below). The pathomechanism of this
lesion remains unclear; however, those proposed for the
Melanocytoma-acanthomas are well-circumscribed, unen-
 development of melanocytoma-acanthoma may also have
capsulated dermal nodules that are focally contiguous
driven this lesion.
with the epidermis. The epithelial component is charac-
terized by anastomosing rabeculae of fairly small ker-
Clinical features
atinocytes with peripheral palisading. There are cystic
structures of varying size containing amorphous or lami-
Melanocytoma-acanthoma is a rare neoplasm of dogs.
nated keratin. The majority of cystic structures keratinize
It has not been recognized in cats. Melanocytoma-
without a granular cell layer. These features are consis-
acanthomas are solitary, circumscribed, pigmented, dome-
 tent with follicular origin of the epithelial component and
shaped nodules that measure less than 1 cm in diameter.
suggest isthmus differentiation (see Chapter 23). There
Only a small number of cases have been observed, and
are occasional larger cysts that demonstrate infundibular
age, breed and site predilections are as yet undetermined.
keratinization, characterized by presence of keratohyalin
 The lesions have predominantly expansive growth, and
granules.
surgery is curative. However several cases of malignant
Numerous nests and clusters of polygonal or spindled
Fig. 34.12 Higher magnification of melanocytoma-acanthoma in a
Fig. 34.13 Higher magnification of melanocytoma-acanthoma of
dog. Islands of small, pale keratinocytes have central cysts flled with
Fig. 34.12 demonstrating intraepithelial nests of melanocytes with
amorphous keratin. Clusters of small melanocytes are present in the
uniform, ovoid nuclei. Note tricholemmal-type keratinization of
stroma and within the epitheliurm.
cystic structure and clurmps of rmelanin within the cyst.
824
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 34.14 Spindle cell melanoma arising from a melano-
ciated with sweat gland prolifera
cytoma-acanthoma in a dog. A large mass composed of mainly spin-
tion in a dog. Dermal sheets and nests of pigmented polygonal and
dled melanocytes in the lower portion lies 
adiacentto
numerous irregular sweat glands
melanocytoma-acanthoma at top.
melanocytes are distributed along the periphery of the
small melanocytes may be sparsely pigmented and very
epithelial trabeculae and cysts, simulating junctional
difficult to distinguish from basaloid keratinocytes.
activity. The keratinocytes and cyst contents show patchy
Nuclei are small, ovoid, and euchromatic. Nucleoli are
areas of clumped melanization. There is a sparse collage-
inconspicuous, and mitotic fgures are not observed.
nous stroma that is filled with clusters of melanocytes and
 In rare instances, malignant transformation of the
 melanophages, analogous to the dermal component of a
 melanocytic cell population has been noted, characterized
compound melanocytoma (see p. 815).
by denser proliferations of spindled and polygonal
The majority of keratinocytes have moderate, glassy,
melanocytes with anisokaryosis. An obvious mass of
pale pink cytoplasm. Nuclei are bland and ovoid, and
melanocytes may develop adjacent to and contiguous
nucleoli are inconspicuous. Mitotic activity is minimal.
with the melanocytoma-acanthoma. Occasionally, the
Scattered individual dyskeratotic cells, characterized by
former shows features of malignancy such as cytologic
shrinkage and brightly eosinophilic cytoplasm, are also
atypia and mitotic fgures.
noted. Rarely, moderate pleomorphism of the ker-
 A melanocytoma associated with proliferation of sweat
atinocytes and local invasive growth indicate possible
glands has been observed in one dog. The majority of the
early malignant transformation of the epithelial compo-
tumor nodule was composed of variably pigmented, fairly
nent; alternatively, this may be reactive pseudoepithe-
monomorphic, predominantly spindled melanocytes with
liomatous hyperplasia.
admixed dispersed melanophages. Entrapped within the
The melanocytes have minimal to moderate cytoplasm
melanocytoma was one area of irregular, branching
and moderate to abundant melanin granules. Some of the
hyperplastic glandular structures consistent with apocrine
Melanocytic tumors 
825
2003). However the etiopathogenesis of canine and feline
melanoma is not well understood. Malignant transfor-
mation of benign melanocytic proliferations of dogs has
been reported (Conroy, 1983; Valentine et al., 1999). The
incidence of this malignant transformation is not known,
however, and the progression has not been associated
with UV radiation.
Canine and feline malignant melanocytic tumors
include melanomas with junctional activity and dermal
  s  r  s
melanomas, spindle cell melanomas, and feline giant
epithelioid melanomas. Purely intraepidermal melano-
mas, described as superficial spreading melanoma or
lentigo maligna in humans, have not been reported in
dogs and cats. However, the authors have seen a case
of multiple intraepidermal proliferations of atypical
melanocytes in a dog consistent with a diagnosis of super-
ficial spreading melanoma; the lesions were associated
with a melanoma with junctional activity. Moreover, the
authors also have observed a case of apparent malignant
 transformation in a lentigo consistent with a diagnosis of
lentigo maligna. This raises the question of whether early
radial growth phase melanomas may be missed in dogs
and cats, as lesions may not be biopsied until a vertical
 growth phase produces an obvious mass.
Clinical features
In dogs, melanomas accounted for 0.8% (Goldschmidt &
Fig. 34.16 Higher magnification of melanocytoma of Fig. 34.15.
Shofer, 1992) and 2% (Conroy, 1983) of all skin tumors
Predominantly polygonal, variably pigmented melanocytes accom-
in two large surveys, and represented 19% and 33%
of the total cutaneous melanocytic neoplasms in these
surveys, respectively. Melanomas are less common in cats,
comprising only 0.4% to 2.8% of all skin tumors
(Carpenter et al., 1987; Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992). In
sweat glands. Occasionally, there were papillated struc-
cats, berween 42% and 68% of allcutaneous melanocytic
tures protruding into the glandular lumina.
proliferations exhibit malignant behavior  (Macy &
 Melanocytoma-acanthoma is unique, and differential
Reynolds, 1981; Carpenter et al., 1987; Goldschmidt &
diagnosis is not problematic. The consistent close inter-
Shofer, 1992; Goldschmidt et al., 1993). It is important
relationship of the melanocytic and epithelial components
to note that wide variations in data are likely a result of
of melanocytoma-acanthoma differentiates it from a
lack of standardized diagnostic criteria for malignancy
random overlap of two neoplasms, i.e. a ^collision' tumor,
in melanocytic neoplasms; controversies persist in both
such as a compound melanocytoma with tricholemmoma
human and veterinary medicine. Some investigators
or trichoepithelioma (see Chapter 23).
equate “benign behavior', i.e. lack of recurrence or meta-
stasis, with a benign neoplasm; this approach is mislead-
ing, as it discounts the possibility of a malignant neoplasm
MELANOMA
that has been surgically cured.
(Synonym: malignant melanoma)
Melanomas range in size from several millimeters to
as large as 10 cm in diameter; the majority of lesions
 In humans, malignant melanomas often transform from
are 1 to 3 cm in diameter. Most neoplasms are sessile,
pre-existing benign melanocytic proliferations (Grichnik
but occasional melanomas are polypoid or plaque-like.
et al., 2003). The influence of UV radiation in the patho-
Melanomas appear gray, brown, or black, depending
genesis of malignant transformation has been well docu-
upon the extent of melanin production, presence of junc-
mented in humans (Longstreth, 1988; Langley et al.,
-uidadau aasar jo anussaid pue Xaioe ieuo
826
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
tion of the overlying epidermis. Ulceration is common,
developed recurrence and/or metastasis within 2 years,
particularly in larger lesions.
and significantly reduced survival time correlated with
The head (particularly lips and eyelids) and legs (includ-
both mitotic index and proliferation markers. In a small
ing nailbeds) are the most frequently reported locations
retrospective study on canine balloon cell melanomas, no
for cutaneous melanomas in dogs (Goldschmidt & Shofer,
recurrences or metastases were documented, suggesting
1992). They also occur on the trunk. Based upon the
that this variant has indolent biologic behavior (Walder,
small number of described cases in cats, the head, thorax,
2000).
 and tail are preferential sites (Goldschmidt et al., 1993;
The study of Bolon et al. (1990) reported a 35% sur-
Miller et al., 1993); in one study, eyelid melanocytic
gical cure rate for histopathologically malignant canine
tumors were invariably malignant (Goldschmidt et al.,
melanocytic tumors; the remaining 65% recurred and/or
1993).
metastasized. However, lesions from nailbed and labial
Cutaneous melanoma is mostly seen in older animals.
mucocutaneous junction were included in the data, prob-
The average age in dogs is between 9 and 11 years, and
ably increasing the number of unfavorable outcomes;
in cats between 8 and 12 years (Goldschmidt & Hendrick,
metastases to regional lymph nodes and lungs occurred in
2002). However in both species cutaneous melanomas
13% of those cases. Nailbed melanomas in dogs were
may develop in animals as young as 2 years of age. Dogs
reported by Marino et al. (1995) to have a 58% incidence
with heavily pigmented skin, such as black Cocker
of metastasis and a 13% 2-year survival rate. Two of five
Spaniels;
;Scottish, Boston,
 and Airedale
Terriers;
cats with cutaneous melanoma had multiple recurrences
Schnauzers; Doberman Pinschers; Irish Setters; Vizslas;
and satellite metastases (the development of multiple
Golden and Chesapeake Bay Retrievers; Irish Setters;
small cutaneous nodules around a primary melanoma),
Chow Chows; and Boxers are predisposed to all melano-
and one cat developed extensive visceral metastasis
cytic neoplasms (Bolon et al., 1990; Scott et al., 2001
(Patnaik, 1988).
[compilation]; Goldschmidt & Hendrick, 2002). Cats with
black or gray haircoats are reported to be predisposed to
Histopathology
 melanocytic tumors in general (Goldschmidt et al., 1993;
Goldschmidt & Hendrick, 2002). There are no sex
 In general, melanomas are fairly well circumscribed but
predilections reported for cutaneous melanomas in dogs or
unencapsulated neoplasms that may involve epidermis
cats. Giant cell epithelioid melanomas occur only in cats.
and dermis or dermis alone; large tumor masses may
Clinical criteria used to differentiate between benign
extend to the subcutis. The overlying epidermis may be
and malignant melanocytic neoplasms
6 are not sharply
hyperpigmented, regardless of the presence or absence of
defined in dogs and cats. Location of the tumor has been
intraepidermal clusters or nests of neoplastic melanocytes
considered important in regard to the clinical behavior.
(junctional activity). Melanomas tend to be asymmetrical.
Melanocytic tumors of the nailbeds, mucocutaneous junc-
The asymmetry may be most readily recognizable in the
tions, and oral mucosa are generally malignant; lesions on
epidermal component of junctional tumors. Ulceration
haired skin, including lips and digits, are more likely to
 and necrosis are common features, particularly in larger
be benign. The large majority of melanomas in dogs and
masses. Pigmentary incontinence as a result of tumor cell
cats are primarily dermal in location; thus, the complex
necrosis is common, and numerous melanophages may be
human prognostic schermes based on depth of dermal
distributed throughout the neoplasm. Stromal collagen is
invasion from intraepidermal melanomas (Clark's level,
minimal to moderate and occasionally exhibits chondroid
Breslow thickness) do not apply. Moreover, the loss of
and/or
osseous
 metaplasia. Some tumors possess 
a
expression of KIT, a factor indicating progression to a
 myxoid stroma. A reactive population of lymphocytes
metastatic phenotype in melanomas in humans (Natali et
and plasma cells may be present peripherally.
al., 1992), has not been demonstrated in dogs or cats to
 Melanoma cells display a marked diversity of cytologic
date (Sulaimon & Kitchell, 2003). Large tumor size has
features, as they share common embryologic roots with
been reported to correlate significantly with aggressive
both neural and epithelial tissues. As in melanocytoma
biologic behavior (Theilen & Madewell, 1987). Con-
(see p. 815) the cell types observed include spindle cells,
versely, tumor size in the study of Bostock (1979) was
round to polygonal cells, dendritic cells, epithelioid
found not to be of prognostic value.
cells, and balloon cells. Ganglion cell and multinucleated
The proliferation index and the growth fraction are
giant cell forms also may be observed. Most canine
additional indicators of the biologic behavior of many
 melanomas comprise varying proportions of spindle cells
 neoplasms, and may assist in differentiating between
and round to polygonal cells. Pure spindle cell melanomas
melanocytomas and melanomas (Roels et al., 1999;
and pure epithelioid melanomas occur less frequently,
Laprie et al., 2001) (see immunohistochemistry, below).
as do balloon cell melanomas. The majority of retrospec-
 In the report of Laprie et al. (2001), 22% of the dogs
 tive studies, however indicate that different cell types 
Melanocytic tumors
827
are not of prognostic significance in canine and feline
melanocytic tumors (Conroy, 1967; Bostock, 1
1979;
Macy & Reynolds, 1981; Bolon et al., 1990; Miller et al.,
The cytoplasm of most melanoma cells is pale and the
1993).
degree of pigmentation varies from abundant to unde-
 Spindle melanocytes have poorly defined cytoplasm.
tectable both within a given neoplasm and amongst
These fusiform cells are usually arranged in interlacing
neoplasms. No consistent degree or pattern of melanin
bundles, partial whorls and nests. These morphologic fea-
 pigmentation occurs within a given melanoma. The abun-
tures resemble neural structures; this is not unexpected in
dance of melanin granules in some melanomas tends to
light of the embryologic derivation of melanocytes from
obscure nuclear features; thus, bleaching of the tissue
the neural crest. The nuclei are plump and fusiform; mod-
section with potassium permanganate or oxalic acid may
erate to marked nuclear pleomorphism is seen. Chromatin
be required to evaluate cellular and nuclear morphol-
patterns vary from tumor to tumor and often within a
 ogy. The cytoplasm of amelanotic melanomas often has a
given neoplasm. Nucleoli are present and may be promi-
 gray or muddy purplish-gray, granular quality. Fontana-
nent. Round to polygonal cells are arranged in sheets and
Masson staining may confrm the presence of cytoplasmic
dense packets of cells; the packets are separated by a scant
melanin in some poorly pigmented tumors.
stroma. Dendritic cells have a highly angular stellate
shape, often with long cytoplasmic processes, and plump
Dermal melanomas (Figures 34.17 through 34.22)
oval to elongated nuclei. Epithelioid cells have a large
These tumor masses lack junctional activity, but often
amount of pale eosinophilic cytoplasm, often with indis-
extend deeply into the subcutaneous tissue. Although a
tinct cell borders; the cells are arranged in sheets and larger
specifc cell type may predominate, most tumors will
nests. Both round to polygonal and epithelioid cells have
exhibit a mixture of spindle cells, round to polygonal
large ovoid nuclei. Similar to their spindle-shaped coun-
cells, and/or epithelioid cells. Spindle cells are often
terparts, they may exhibit marked anisokaryosis, variable
 poorly pigmented. Round to polygonal and epithelioid
chromatin patterns, and prominent nucleoli. Balloon
 cells tend to have moderate to abundant melanin, but may
melanoma cells are large with clear cytoplasm (see below).
be sparsely pigmented in amelanotic forms.
Occasionally, tumors contain small numbers of ganglion-
The primary differential diagnosis of dermal melanoma
like cells characterized by abundant, angular cytoplasm
is melanocytoma, particularly for smaller neoplasms.
and large, eccentric, often hyperchromatic nuclei. Mitotic
Moderate to marked nuclear pleomorphism, nucleolar
a ot rad raena no e Ansn si seoa u Aiiae
prominence, a mitotic rate of 3 or greater per 10 high
power felds (40x), and mitotic atypia is present. Low-
power felds (40x), presence of atypical mitoses, asym-
grade or well-differentiated melanomas also occur; these
metry of the tumor nodule, and marked lymphoplasma-
Fig. 34.17 Dermal melanoma in a
dog composed predominantly of non-
pigmented spindle cells arranged in
interlacing bundles. Small numbers of
heavily pigmented cells are present.
Note that an intraepidermal compo-
nent is not evident.
828
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 34.18 Dermal malignant melanoma with chondroid meta
Fig.34.19 Higher magnific
ition of malignant dermal melanoma in
plasia in a dog. Nests and trabeculae of darkly pigmented, poly
a dog featuring moderate nuclear enlargerment and pleomorphism.
gonal rmelanocytes are interspersed with zones of well-differentiated
cartilage.
cytic inflammation are features which support a diagno-
plasmacytomas. Also, the dense cytoplasmic RNA stains
sis of melanoma (Bostock, 1979; Bolon et al., 1990; Gold-
 magenta with methyl green pyronine (MGP) stain. In con-
schmidt et al., 1993; Miller et al., 1993). A predominance
trast to amelanotic melanomas, transmissible venereal
of epithelioid tumor cells, multinucleated melanocytes,
tumors have fnely vacuolated tumor cells. Amelanotic
and prominent tumor necrosis indicate malignancy of
 epithelioid dermal melanomas may mimic anaplastic car-
melanocytic tumors in cats (Goldschmidt et al., 1993;
cinomas. If Fontana-Masson staining fails to reveal
Miller et al., 1993). Identifcation of the proliferation 
melanin, immunohistochemistry may be required (see
index and the growth fraction also assists in differentiat-
below).
ing between melanocytomas and melanomas (see im-
munohistochemistry, below) (Roels et al., 1999).
Melanomas with junctional activity
Dermal amelanotic melanomas that are composed of
 Many melanomas, particularly those of the nailbed and
round melanocytes should be differentiated from leuko-
lip, have demonstrable “junctional activity', i.e. the pres-
cytic round cell tumors, including nonepitheliotropic lym-
 ence of tumor cells at the dermal-epidermal junction, as
phomas, plasma cell tumors, poorly granulated mast cell
 well as at higher levels of the epidermis. The intraepider-
tumors, transmissible venereal tumors and Merkel cell
 mal component is composed predominantly of epithelioid
tumors. In particular, plasma cell tumors, and Merkel cell
 melanocytes arranged individually or in nests and clus-
tumors may most closely mimic amelanotic melanomas as
 ters. Distribution of numerous melanocytes through all
these are usually characterized by packeting and nesting
 levels of the epidermis is referred to as a ‘pagetoid'
of tumor cells. Multilobular nuclei are more common in 
pattern. Numerous individual neoplastic melanocytes
Melanocytictumors
829
Fig. 34.20 Dermal melanoma in a dog. Polygonal poorly pig-
Fig. 34.21 Dermal melanoma in a dog. Highly pleomorphic spindle
mented cells are arranged in sheets and nests, and have vacuolated
cells and polygonal cells are arranged in nests. Nuclei are markedly
and granular cytoplasm.
enlarged and have prominent nucleoli. Note rmitotic figures (arrow).
present within the basal cell layer only, which is also
The differential diagnoses for pigmented melanomas
referred to as an 'atypical lentiginous infltrate', is another
-       
feature that may be seen in melanomas. Intraepidermal
nomas (see above). The differential diagnoses for
melanocytes often contain more melanin pigment than the
amelanotic melanomas with junctional activity include
 cells of the dermal component.
epitheliotropic T cell lymphoma and canine cutaneous
 In one dog with junctional melanoma, the authors
histiocytoma with intraepidermal tumor cell aggregates.
observed purely intraepidermal accumulations of neo-
Most melanomas with junctional activity have some
plastic melanocytes in additional biopsies. Large, round,
 melanin pigmentation, which helps to differentiate them
poorly pigmented melanocytes were seen as single cells
 from round cell tumors with intraepidermal tumor cell
and as aggregates throughout the epidermis (pagetoid dis-
 aggregates. The presence of mixed spindle and polygonal
tribution). These features are characteristic of superficial
tumor cells also indicates melanocytic origin, as histiocy-
spreading melanoma in humans (Rosai, 1996).
The
tomas and lymphomas are characterized by a relatively
melanocytic origin of these cells was confrmed with
monomorphic round cell population.
immunohistochemistry (see below).
The authors also observed a small lesion in a dog con-
Spindle cell and desmoplastic melanomas
sistent with lentigo maligna in humans (Rosai, 1996). The 
(Figures 34.23 through 34.25)
lesion was architecturally similar to a benign lentigo (see
This subgroup of dermal melanomas is composed pre-
p. 814), but had small aggregates of atypical melanocytes
 dominantly of spindled melanocytes. The vast majority
arranged along the basal cell layer and concentrated in 
 are amelanotic, and cells are arranged in bundles or pal-
markedly elongated rete ridges.
isades, mimicking tumors of neural origin. Admixed there
830
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 34.22
2 Amelanotic spindle cell dermal
al melanoma in a dog.
Hig. 34.23 Desmoplastic melanoma in a dog. Note prominent
Spindle to stellate cells are embedded in a loose stroma; compare
fibroblastic component and abundant collagen. Single tumor cells lie
with densely organized spindle cell melanoma of Fig. 34.14.
amongst the fibroblastic population (see Fig. 34.25).
are stellate (dendritic) cells. The spindled melanocytes
spindle cell melanomas are particularly diffcult to distin-
may be densely packed, or arranged loosely within abun-
 guish from benign or non-neoplastic collagenous masses.
dant pale stroma. As melanin granules are exremely
Careful search for small numbers of atypical pigmented
sparse, a Fontana-Masson stain usually is necessary to
cells in the dermis and overlying epidermis (lentiginous
detect the presence of melanin granules. Occasionally,
change or junctional activity) is needed, using step sec-
there is a prominent fbroblastic component associated
tioning if necessary. Immunohistochemistry usually is
with the spindle shaped melanocytes, and collagen may
required for definitive diagnosis (see below).
become more abundant than the tumor cells. These
lesions, which can resemble nodular scars or fbromas,
Balloon cell melanoma (clear cell melanoma)
are also referred to as “desmoplastic melanoma’ in the
 Balloon cell change is considered a degenerative change
human literature (Elder & Elenitsas, 1997). Desmoplas-
induced by coalescence of melanosomes in conjunc-
tic melanomas tend to have small areas of lentiginous
tion with abnormal melanogenesis in the tumor cells
 change (individual atypical melanocytes in the overlying
(Sondergaard et al., 1980; Gupta et al., 1985). This
basilar epidermis)
or　junctional
activity
(nested
subtype of dermal melanoma has a multilobular archi-
 melanocytes in the lower epidermis) associated with the
tecture and does not possess an intraepidermal compo-
dermal mass. Step sections may be required to fnd this
nent (Diters & Walsh, 1984; van der Linde-Sipman et al.,
highly diagnostic intraepithelial component.
         
Differentiation of fbrosarcoma and nerve sheath tumors
eosinophilic cytoplasm. The majority of cells have an
from amelanotic spindle cell dermal melanomas may not
epithelioid conformation, but small zones of spindling
be possible based on morphologic features. Desmoplastic
may be detected. Most balloon cell melanomas are
Melanocytic tumors
831
Fig. 34.24 Higher magnification of desmoplastic melanoma of Fig.
Fig. 34.25 Desmoplastic melanoma of Fig. 34.23. Fontana-
34.23. The overlying epidermis is hyperplastic and harbors a focal
Masson stain demonstrates dark brown melanin in some of the spin-
nest of pigmented melanocytes {junctional activity) (arrow)
dled neoplastic melanocytes, which are entrapped within the dense
fibrous tissue
amelanotic. Dust-like melanin granules similar to those of
balloon cell melanocytoma may be present in a few tumor 
clear cell apocrine ductular carcinoma, the clear cells are
cells, and Fontana-Masson staining may be required for
arranged in solid islands with central cystic degeneration,
their demonstration. Nuclei are large and vesicular, and
or may line tubular structures. Epidermal or follicular
have prominent nucleoli. Mitotic activity is relatively low.
contiguiry and residual hyperplastic follicular papillary
Differential diagnoses for balloon cell melanomas are
mesenchymal bodies are additional features of this rare
large cell variants of leukocytic round celltumors (poorly-
  )     
differentiated mast cell tumors, histiocytic sarcomas, and
Immunohistochemistry may be needed to differentiate
large cell lymphomas), and clear cell apocrine ductular
 among clear cell tumors (see below).
carcinoma. Toluidine blue or Giemsa stain may permit
identifcation of the metachromatic granules of mast cell
Giant epithelioid melanoma (Figure 34.26)
tumors. Histiocytic sarcomas may comprise a predomi-
Melanormas in cats are often composed of epithelioid
nantly round cell population with large amounts of pale
cells, and occasional giant epithelioid forms are seen
cytoplasm; however, most have admixed spindle cells as
(Goldschmidt et al., 1993). This subtype of dermal
well. Large cell (clear cell) lymphomas may have a large
melanoma is composed of large cells with a glassy,
amount of fairly clear cytoplasm and may not be distin-
eosinophilic cytoplasm. They have large nuclei, which
guishable from balloon cell melanomas based on mor-
vary in shape from ovoid to fusiform, and may contain
phologic features. Small to moderate amounts of melanin 
large nucleoli. Marked to moderate anisokaryosis is seen,
pigment are often present in clear cell apocrine ductular 
and the chromatin pattern varies among tumors and
carcinoma, increasing the possibility for misdiagnosis. In
within a particular tumor mass. Margination of chro-
832
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
(Barrio, 1998; Busam et al., 1998, 2001; Radford et al.,
1996; Orchard, 2000; Berset et al., 2001). However the
usefulness of these markers used individually in identify-
ing feline and canine amelanotic melanomas is still under
debate (Sanduski et al., 1985; Cangul et al., 1999, 2001;
Sulaimon et al., 1999; Ramos-Vara et al., 2000, 2002;
Koenig et al., 2001; Laprie et al., 2001; Hoinghaus et al.,
2002; Sulaimon et al., 2002; Choi & Kusewitt, 2003).
Different specificities among the various clones of these
immunostain reagents accounts for some of the inconsis-
tencies in reported staining results. The S100a clone
(which is unrelated to the αβ subunits of S100 protein)
was successfully used to identify balloon cell melanomas
(Walder 2000). HMB45 was successfully demonstrated in
melanomas after pretreatment of tissue samples with
KMnO4-oxalic acid (Sulaimon et al., 1999). It appears
that MITF-M is strongly expressed in canine and feline
melanomas (Wojcieszyn, J., personal communication,
2003). Expression of neuron-specifc enolase (NSE) has
been reported as well(Smith et al., 2002). A recent study
shows that 50% of canine amelanotic melanomas evalu-
ated retained the expression of tyrosinase-related protein-
2 (TRP-2) (Choi & Kusewitt, 2003). Melan-A, MART-1,
S100 (α unit), S100 (αβ units), and tyrosinase gave prom-
ising results in a small pilot study performed by one of
the authors in dogs (VK.A.). However none of the indi-
vidual antibodies gave a consistent and reliably positive
result in all the cases evaluated. Hence, the entire panel
ideally should be applied to any questionable case, which
Fig. 34.26 Giant epithelioid melanoma in a cat. Large epithelioid
 may be fnancially restrictive.
cells have abundant, glassy or finely granulated cytoplasm. Nuclei
Identifcation of nuclear proteins associated with cell
are large and have prominent nucleoli.
growth and division, including Ki67 (a nonhistone pro-
tein) and proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) (a
nuclear protein essential for correct DNA polymerase
function) can be used as indicators of malignancy and
matin or fnely stippled chromatin may be seen. The
thus may be helpful in differentiating melanocytomas
mitotic activity is 3 or more per 10 high-power felds, and
from melanomas. The proliferation index (defined as
mitotic atypia is present.
percentage of PCNA-positive nuclear area) of canine
Similar to balloon cell melanomas, poorly pigmented
melanomas was 54% compared to 2.8% in melanocy-
feline giant epithelioid melanomas may need to be differ-
tomas (Roels et al., 1999). The predictive value of the pro-
entiated from leukocytic round cell proliferations, partic-
liferation index in regard to clinical behavior of canine
ularly pleomorphic mast cell tumors or feline progressive
melanomas has been reported as 97% (Laprie et al.,
dendritic cell histiocytosis (see Chapter 35). Immunohis-
2001). Feline melanomas have a proliferation index of
tochemistry will facilitate differentiation (see below).
26%, while melanocytomas have an index of 6% (Roels
et al., 1999). The growth fraction (defned as percentage
 Immunohistochemistry
of Ki67-positive nuclear area) was 21% for canine
melanomas versus 0.21% for melanocytomas (Roels et
Melanoma cells often retain expression of character-
al., 1999). Feline melanomas have a growth fraction of
istic proteins. In humans, a panel of antibodies spe-
16.6% versus 0.36% in melanocytomas (Roels et al.,
cifc for S100, melanoma-associated antigen (Melan-A),
1999).
melanoma-associated antigen recognized by T cells
 In the differentiation of spindle cell amelanotic mela-
(MART-1), E-cadherin, tyrosinase, HMB45/gp100, and
nomas from fbrosarcomas and peripheral nerve sheath
melanoma isoform of microphthalmia transcription
tumors, both fbrosarcomas and peripheral nerve sheath
Uo ooo kapi on pasn si (-) ro
 tumors express vimentin but are negative for Melan-A,
Melanocytic tumors
833
MART-1, S100, HMB-45/gp100, MITF-M, tyrosinase,
Jungbluth, A.A., Iversen, K., Coplan, K. et al. (2000) T311 - an
and TRP-2.
anti-tyrosinase monoclonal antibody for the detection of
 In contrast to amelanotic melanomas of round cell type,
melanocytic lesions in paraffin embedded tissues. Pathol Res
balloon cell type, and giant epithelioid type in cats, leuko-
Pract 196, 235-42.
cytic round cell tumors (including histiocytomas and his-
Langley, R.G.B., Barnhill, R.L., Mihm, M.C. et al. (2003) Neo-
tiocytic sarcomas in dogs, and progressive dendritic cell
plasms: cutaneous melanoma. In: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in
General Medicine, 6th edn (eds I.M Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K.
histiocytosis in cats), express the common leukocyte anti-
Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.1. Katz), pp. 917-47.
gens CD45 and CD18. The expression of cytokeratins
MeGraw-Hill, New York.
 generally separates carcinomas from amelanotic epithe-
Lever, W.F. & Schaumburg-Lever, G. (1990) Histopathology of
lioid melanomas or balloon cell melanomas in dogs;
the Skin, 7th edn, pp. 756-805. J.B. Lippincott, Philadelphia.
however, weak or focal cytokeratin staining is reported in
Longstreth, J. (1988) Cutaneous malignant melanoma and
a small proportion of melanomas (Dabbs, 2002). To com-
ulraviolet radiation: a review. Cancer Metastasis Rev 7,
plicate the picture, clear cell apocrine ductular carcinoma
321-33.
can expres vimentin as well as Melan-A and MART-1
Natali, PG., Nicorta, M.R., Winkler, A.B. et al. (1992) Pro-
(see Chapter 25); however only apocrine ductular carci-
 gression of human cutaneous melanoma is associated with the
loss of c-kit oncogene receptor. Int J Cancer 52, 197-201.
nomas are positive for CAM5.2.
Orchard, G.E. (2000) Comparison of immunohistochemical
Jabeling of melanocyte differentiation antibodies Melan-A,
tyrosinase and HMB 45 with NKIC3 and S100 protein in the
REFERENCES
evaluation of benign naevi and malignant melanoma. His-
tochem J 32, 475-81.
Introduction
Pulley, L.T. & Stannard, A.A. {1990) Tumors of the skin
Barrio, M.M., Bravo, A.1., Portela, P. et al. (1998) A new epitope
and soft tissues. In: Tumors in Domestic Animals, 3rd edn (ed.
on  human melanoma-associated
antigen CD63/ME491
J.E. Moulton), pp. 75-82. University of California Press,
expressed by both primary and metastatic melanoma.
Berkeley.
Hybridoma 17, 355-64.
Radford, K.J., Thorne, R.F & Hersey, P (1996) CD63 associ-
Berset, M., Cerottini, J.P, Guggisberg, D. et al. (2001) Expres-
ates with transmembrane 4 superfamily members, CD9 and
 sion of Melan-A/MART-1 antigen as a prognostic factor in
CD81, and with beta-1-integrins in human melanoma.
primary cutaneous melanoma. Int J Cancer 95, 73-7.
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 222, 13-8.
Busam, K.J., Chen, Y.T., Old, L.J. et al. (1998) Expression of
Ritt, M.G., Wojcieszyn, J. & Modiano, J.F. (1998) Functional
Melan-A (MART-1) in benign melanocytic nevi and primary
loss of p21/Waf-1 in a case of benign canine multicentric
cutaneous malignant melanoma. Am J Surg Patbol 22,
melanoma. Vet Patbol 35, 94-101.
976-82.
Stiles, J., Bienzle, D., Render, J.A. et al. (1999) Use of nested
Busam, K.J., Iversen, K., Coplan, K.C. et al. (2001) Analysis of
 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for detection of retroviruses
microphthalmia transcription factor expression in normal
from formalin-fixed, paraffn-embedded uveal melanomas in
tissues and tumors, and comparison of its expression with
cats. Vet Ophthatmol 2, 113-6.
S-100 protein, gp100, and tyrosinase in desmoplastic malig-
Sulaimon, S.s. & Kitchell, B.E.
(2003) The biology of
nant melanoma. Am J Surg Pathol 25, 197-204.
melanocytes. Vet Dermatol 14, 57-65 (review).
Choi, C. & Kusewitt, D.F. (2003) Comparison of tyrosinase-
Tang, A., Eller, M.S., Hara, M. et al. (1994) E-cadherin is the
related protein-2, S-100 and Melan-A immunoreactivity in
major mediator of human melanocyte adhesion to ker-
canine amelanotic melanomas. Vet Pathol 40, 713-8.
atinocytes in vitro. J Cell Sci 107, 983-92.
Dardick, I. (1996) Handbook of Diagnostic Electron Micro-
Walder, E.J. & Gross, T.L. (1992) Melanocytic tumors. In: Vet-
scopy for Pathologists-in-Training, pp. 3.8-3.9. Igaku-Shoin
erinary Dermatopathology: A Macroscopic and Microscopic
Medical Publisher, Tokyo.
Evaluation of Canine and Feline Skin Disease (T.L. Gross, P.J.
Fleishman, R.A. (1992) Effects of the c-kit codon 884 Phe-Leu
Ihrke & E.J. Walder), p. 451. Mosby, St Louis.
substitution demonstrated in human piebaldism. Am J Human
Genet 51, 667-8.
Lentigo
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, FS. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
Briggs, O.M. (1985) Lentiginosis profusa in the pug: three case
Dog and Cat, pp. 131-51. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
reports. J Small Anim Pract 26,675-80.
Goldschmidt, MH., Dunstan, RW., Stannard, A.A. et al. (1998)
Elder, D. & Elenitsas, R (1997) Benign pigmented lesions and 
Histologic classification of epithelial and melanocytic tumors
malignant melanoma. In: Lever's Histopathology of the Skin,
of the skin of domestic animals. In: World Health Organiza-
8th edn (eds D. Elder, R. Elenitsas, C. Jaworsky & B. Johnson,
tion International Histologic Classification of Tumors
sof
 Jr), pp. 631-3. Lippincot-Raven, Philadelphia.
Domestic Animals, pp. 38-40. Armed Forces Institute of
Grichnik, J.M., Rhodes, A.R. & Sober, A.J. (2003) Benign hyper-
Pathology, American Registry of Pathology, Washington DC.
plasias and neoplasias of melanocytes. In: Fitzpatrick's Der-
Hemler, M.E. (2002) CD63. National Center for Biotechnology
matology in General Medicine, 6th edn (eds I.M Freedberg,
Information (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov), Protein Review on the
A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.1.
Web.
Katz), pp. 881-9. McGraw-Hill, New York.
834
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Kraft, I. & Frese, K. (1976) Lenigo-aehnliche Proliferazionen
Grichnik, J.M., Rhodes, A.R. & Sober, A.J. (2003) Benign hyper-
des Zitzenepithels beim Hund. Zentralbt Veterinaermed 23,
plasias and neoplasias of melanocytes. In: Fitzpatrick's Der-
243-7.
matology in General Medicine, 6th edn (eds I.M. Freedberg,
Nagata, M. (1995) Pigmented plaques associated with papillo-
A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.I.
mavirus infection in dogs. Vet Dermatol 6, 179-85.
Katz), pp. 889-904. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Nash, S. & Paulsen, D. (1990) Generalized lentigines in a silver
Gupta, S.K., Rajwanshi, A.K. & Das, D.K. (1985) Fine needle
cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 196, 1500-1.
aspiration cytology smear paterns of malignant melanoma.
Scott, D.W. (1987) Lentigo simplex in orange cats. Companion
Acta Cytol29,983-8.
Anim Pract 1, 23-5.
Koenig, A., Wojcieszyn, J., Weeks, B.R. et al. (2001) Expression
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muler  Kirk's
of S100a, vimentin, NSE, and Melan-A/MART-1 in seven
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 1006-7. W.B. Saun-
canine melanoma cells lines and rwenty-nine retrospective
ders, Philadelphia.
cases of canine melanoma. Vet Pathol 38, 427-35.
Walder, E.J. & Gross, T.L. {1992) Epidermal tumors. In:
Laprie, C., Abadie, J., Amardeilh, M.F. et al. (2001) MIB-1
Veterinary Dermatopathology: A Macroscopic and Micro-
immunoreactivity correlates with biologic behavior in canine
scopic Evatuation of Canine and Feline Skin Disease
cutaneous melanoma. Vet Dermatol 12, 139-47.
(T.L. Gross, P.J. Ihrke & E.J. Walder), pp. 331-2. Mosby, St
Macy, D.W. & Reynolds, H.A. (1981) The incidence, character-
Louis.
istics and clinical management of skin tumors in cats. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 17, 1026-34.
Melanocytoma
Miller, W.H., Scott, D.W. & Anderson, W.1. (1993) Feline cuta-
Bolon, B., Calderwood-Mays, M.B. & Hall, B.J. (1990) Char-
neous melanocytic neoplasms: a retrospective analysis of 43
acteristics of canine melanomas and comparison of histology
cases (1979-1991). Vet Dermatol 4, 19-26.
and DNA ploidy to their biologic behavior. Vet Pathol 27,
Ramos-Vara, J.A., Beissenherz, M.E., Miller, M.A. et al. (2000)
96-102.
Retrospective study of 388 canine oral melanomas with clin-
Bostock, D.E. (1979) Prognosis after surgical excision of canine
ical, histological, and immunohistochemical review of 129
melanomas. Vet Pathol 16, 32-40.
cases. Vet Patbol 37,597-608.
Cangul, I.T., van Garderen, E., van der Poel, H.J. et al. (1999)
Ramos-Vara, J.A., Miller, M.A., Johnson, G.C. et al. (2002)
Tyrosinase gene expression in clear cell sarcoma indicates a
Melan A and S100 protein immunohistochemistry in feline
melanocytic origin: insight from the first reported canine case.
melanomas: 48 cases. Vet Patbol 39, 127-32.
APMIS 107, 982-8.
Roels, S., Tilmant, K. & Ducatelle, R. (1999) PCNA and Ki67
Carpenter, J.L., Andrew, L.K. & Holzworth, J. (1987) Tumors 
proliferation markers as criteria for predicion of clinical
and tumor-like lesions. In: Diseases of the Cat (ed. J.
behaviour of melanocytic tumours in cats and dogs. J Comp
Holzworth), pp. 408, 579-83. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
Pathol 121, 13-24.
Choi, C. & Kusewitt, D.F. (2003) Comparison of tyrosinase-
Salopek, T.G. (2002) The dilemma of the dysplastic nevus. Der-
related protein-2, S-100 and Melan-A immunoreactivity in
matol Clin 20, 617-28, vili.
canine amelanotic melanomas. Vet Pathol 40, 713-18.
Sandusky, G.E., Jr, Carlton, W.W. & Wightman, K.A. (1985)
Conroy, J.D.
(1967)Melanocytic tumors of(
domestic
Immunohistochemical staining for S100 protein in the diag-
animals with specific reference to dogs. Arch Dermatol 96,
nosis of canine amelanotic melanoma. Vet Pathol 22, 577-81.
372-80.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Mutter  Kirk’s
Conroy, J.D. (1983) Canine skin tumors. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 1359-61. W.B. Saun-
19,91-114
ders, Philadelphia.
Elder, D. & Elenitsas, R. (1997) Benign pigmented lesions and
Smith, S.H., Goldschmidt, M.H. & McManus, PM. (2002) A
malignant melanoma. In: Lever's Histopathology of the Skin,
comparative review of melanocytic neoplasms. Vet Pathol 39,
8th edn (eds D. Elder, R. Elenitsas, C. Jaworsky & B. Johnson,
651-78.
Jr) pp. 633-54. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia.
Sondergaard, K., Henschel, A. & Hou-Jensen, K. (1980)
Esplin, D.G. (2003) Biological behavior of well-differentiated
Metastatic melanoma with balloon cell change: an electron
melanocytic neoplasms of the mucous membranes of the lips
microscopic study. Ultrastruct Patbot 1, 357-60.
and oral cavity in dogs. In: Proceedings of the ISVD Meeting
Sulaimon, S., Ehrhart, E. & Kitchell, B. (1999) Imunohisto-
Monterey, p. 16.
chemical detection of canine melanomas with HMB-45. Vet
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Hendrick, M.J. (2002) Tumors of the skin
Pathol 36, 496 (abstract).
and soft tissue. In: Tumors of the Domestic Animals, 4th
Sulaimon S., Kitchell B. & Ehrhart E. (2002) Immunohisto-
edn (ed. D.J. Meuten), pp. 78-81. Blackwell Publishing,
chemical detection of melanoma-specifc antigens in sponta-
Ames.
neous canine melanoma. J Comp Pathol 127, 162-8.
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, FS. (1992) Skin Tumors of
Valentine, B.A., McManus, PM. & Knox, A.M. (1999) Malig-
the Dog and Cat, pp. 2-3, 142-51. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
nant transformation of a giant congenital pigmented nevus
Goldschmidt, M.H., Liu, S.M.S. & Schofer, F.S. (1993) Feline
(hamartoma) in a dog. Vet Dermatol 10, 127-30.
dermal melanoma: a retrospective study. In: Advances in Vet-
Walder, E.J. (20o0) Amelanotic balloon cell melanoma: a diag-
erinary Dermatology, Vol. 2. (eds P.J. Ihrke, I. Mason & S.D.
nostic challenge. In: Proceedings of the ISVD Meeting, San
White), pp. 285-91. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Francisco, p. 9.
Melanocytic tumors
835
Melanocytoma-Acanthoma
Berset, M., Cerottini, J.P., Guggisberg, D. et al. (2001) Expres-
Brownstein, M.H. & Starink, T.M. (1987) Desmoplastic tri-
sion of Melan-A/MART-1 antigen as a prognostic factor in
choepithelioma and intradermal nevus: a combined malfor-
primary cutaneous melanoma. Int J Cancer 95, 73-7.
mation. J Am Acad Dermatol 17, 489-92.
Bolon, B., Calderwood-Mays, M.B. & Hall, B.J. (1990) Char-
De Luca, M., Siegrist, W., Bondanza, S. et al. (1993) Alpha
 acteristics of canine melanomas and comparison of histology
melanocyte stimulating hormone (alpha MSH) stimulates
and DNA ploidy to their biologic behavior. Vet Pathol 27,
96-102.
receptors. J Cell Sci 10s, 1079-84.
Bostock, D.E. (1979) Prognosis after surgical excision of canine
Dorji, T., Cavazza, A., Nappi, O. et al. (2002) Spitz nevus of the
melanomas. Vet Pathol 16, 32-40.
tongue with pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia: report of
Busam, K.J., Chen YT., Old, L.J. et al. (1998) Expression of
three cases of a pseudomalignant condition. Am J Surg Pathol
 Melan-A (MART1) in benign melanocytic nevi and primary
26, 774-7.
cutaneous malignant melanoma. Am J Surg Pathol 22,
Espinosa de los Monteros, A., Martin de las Mulas, J.,
976-82.
Fernandez, A. et al. (2000) Immunohistopathologic charac-
Busam, K.J., Iversen, K., Coplan, K.C. et al. (2001) Analysis of
terization of a dermal melanocytoma-acanthoma in a German 
microphthalmia transcription factor expression in normal
Shepherd Dog. Vet Pathol 37, 268-71.
tissues and tumors, and comparison of its expression with
Kamino, H., Tam, S.T. & Alvarez, L. (1990) Malignant
 S-100 protein, gp100, and tyrosinase in desmoplastic malig-
melanoma with pseudocarcinomatous hyperplasia - an entity
nant melanoma. Am J Surg Pathol 25, 197-204.
that can simulate squamous cell carcinoma.
Alight-
Cangul, I.T., van Garderen, E., van der Poel, H.J. et al. (1999)
microscopic and immunohistochemical study of four cases.
Tyrosinase gene expression in clear cell sarcoma indicates a
Am J Dermatopathol 12, 446-51.
melanocytic origin: insight from the first reported canine case.
Keen, C.E. (1996) Combined skin lesions. Am J Dermatopathol
APMIS 107, 982-8.
18,527-32.
Cangul, I.I., van Garderen, E., van der Linde-Sipman, J.S. et al.
Luger, T.A., Schauer, E., Trautinger, F. et al. (1993) Produc-
(2001) Canine balloon and signet-ring cell melanomas: a his-
-jay ueuny Aq sundonouelau Suissaddnsounuu! jo uon
tological and immunohistochemical characterization. J Comp
atinocytes. Ann NY Acad Sci 680, 567-70.
Pathol 125, 166-73.
Marquardt, H., Hunkapiller, M.W., Hood, L.E. et al. (1983)
Carpenter, J.L., Andrew, L.K. & Holzworth, J. (1987) Tumors
Transforming growth
factors produced by retrovirus-
and tumor-like lesions. In: Diseases of the Cat (ed. J.
transformed rodent fibroblasts and human melanoma cells:
Holzworth), pp. 408, 579-83. W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia.
amino acid sequence homology with epidermal growth factor.
Choi, C. & Kusewitt, D.F. (2003) Comparison of tyrosinase-
Proc Nattl Acad Sci USA 80, 4684-8.
related protein-2, S-100 and Melan-A immunoreactivity in
Mott, R.T., Rosenberg, A, Livingston, S. et al. (2002)
canine amelanotic melanomas. Vet Pathol 40, 713-8.
 Melanoma associated with pseudoepitheliomatous hyperpla-
Conroy, J.D. (1967) Melanocytic tumors of domestic animals
sia: a case series and investigation into the role of epidermal
with specific reference to dogs. Arch Dermatol 96, 372-80.
growth factor receptor. J Cutan Pathol 29, 490-7.
Conroy, J.D. (1983) Canine skin tumors. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
Rahbari, H. & Mehregan, A.T. (1975) Trichoepithelioma and
19, 91-114.
pigmented nevus: a combined malformation. J Cutan Pathol
 Dabbs, D.J. (2002) Carcinomatous differentiation and metasta-
2, 225-31.
tic carcinoma of unknown primary. In: Diagnostic Immuno-
Schauer, E.,
Trautinger, F, Kock, A. et al. (1994)
histochemistry (ed. D.J. Dabbs), pp.173-4. Churchill
Proopiomelanocortin-derived peptides are synthesized and
Livingstone, New York.
released by human keratinocytes. J Clin Invest 93, 2258-62.
Diters, R.W. & Walsh, K.M. (1984) Canine cutaneous clear cell
Scott, G., Chen, K.T. & Rosai, J. (1989) Pseudoepithelioma-
melanomas: a report of 3 cases. Vet Pathol 21, 355-6.
tous hyperplasia in Spitz nevi. A possible source of confusion
 Elder, D. & Elenitsas, R. (1997) Benign pigmented lesions and
with squamous cell carcinoma. Arch Pathol Lab Med 113,
malignant melanoma. In: Lever's Histopathology of the Skin,
61-3.
 Sth edn (eds D. Elder, R. Elenitsas, C. Jaworsky & B. Johnson,
Silver, S.G. & Ho, V.C.Y. (2003) Benign epithelial tumors.
 Jr), p. 654-77. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia.
In: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General Medicine, 6th
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Hendrick, M.J. (2002) Tumors of the skin
edn (eds I.M. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen,
and soft tissue. In: Tumors of the Domestic Animals, 4th
L.A. Goldsmith & S.1. Katz), p. 770. McGraw-Hill, New
edn (ed. D.J. Meuten), pp. 81-3. Blackwell Publishing,
York.
Ames.
Sulaimon, S.S. & Kitchell, B.E. (2003) The biology of
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, F.S. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
melanocytes. Vet Dermatol 14, 57-65 (review).
Dog and Cat, pp. 2-3, 142-51. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Goldschmidt, M.H., Liu, S.M.S. & Shofer, F.S. (1993) Feline
Melanoma
dermal melanoma: a retrospective study. In: Advances in Vet-
Barrio, M.M., Bravo, A.1., Portela, P. et al. (1998) A new epitope
erinary Dermatology, Vol. 2 (eds PJ. Ihrke, I. Mason & S.D.
on human melanoma-associated antigen CD63/ME491
White), pp. 285-91. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
expressed by both primary and metastatic melanoma.
Grichnik, J.M., Rhodes, A.R. & Sober, A.J. (2003) Benign hyper-
Hybridoma 17, 355-64.
plasias and neoplasias of melanocytes. In: Fitzpatrick's Der-
836
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
matology in General Medicine, 6th edn (eds I.M. Freedberg.
Ramos-Vara, J.A., Beissenherz, M.E., Miller, M.A. et al. (2000)
AZ. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.1.
Retrospective study of 388 canine oral melanomas with clini-
Katz), pp. 889-904. McGraw-Hill, New York.
cal, histological, and immunohistochemical review of 129
Gupta, S.K., Rajwanshi, A.K. & Das, D.K. (1985) Fine needle
cases. Vet Pathol 37, 597-608.
aspiration cytology smear patterns of malignant melanoma.
Ramos-Vara, JA., Miller, M.A., Johnson, G.C. et al. (2002)
Acta Cytol 29, 983-8.
Melan A and S100 protein immunohistochemistry in feline
Hoinghaus, R., Mischke, R. & Hewicker-Trautwein, M. (2002)
melanomas: 48 cases. Vet Pathol 39, 127-32.
Use of immunocytochemical techniques in canine melanoma.
Roels, S., Tilmant, K. & Ducatelle, R. (1999) PCNA and Ki67
J Vet Med A Pbysiol Pathol Clin Med 49, 198-202.
proliferation markers as criteria for prediction of clinical
Koenig, A., Wojcieszyn, J., Weeks, B.R. et al. (2001) Expression
behaviour of melanocytic tumours in cats and dogs. J Comp
of S100a, vimentin, NSE, and Melan-A/MART-1 in seven
Pathol 121, 13-24.
canine melanoma cells lines and twenty-nine retrospective
Rosai, J. (1996) Ackerman's Surgical Pathology, 8th edn, pp.
cases of canine melanoma. Vet Pathol 38, 427-35.
150-64. Mosby, St Louis.
Langley, R.G.B., Barnhill, R.L., Mihm, M.C. et al. (2003) Neo-
Sandusky, G.E., Jr, Carlton, W.W. & Wightman, K.A. (1985)
plasms: cutaneous melanoma. In: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in
Immunohistochemical staining for S100 protein in the diag-
General Medicine, 6th edn (eds I.M. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K.
nosis of canine amelanotic melanoma. Vet Pathol 22, 577-81.
Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.1. Katz), pp. 917-47.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
McGraw-Hill, New York.
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 1361-64. W.B. Saun-
Laprie, C., Abadie, J., Amardeilh, M.F. et al. (2001) MIB-1
ders, Philadelphia.
immunoreactivity correlates with biologic behavior in canine
Smith, S.H., Goldschmidt, M.H. & McManus, PM. (2002) A
cutaneous melanoma. Vet Dermatol 12, 139-47.
comparative review of melanocytic neoplasms. Vet Pathol 39,
Longstreth, J. (1988) Cutaneous malignant melanoma and
651-78.
ultraviolet radiation: a review. Cancer Metastasis Rev 7,
Sondergaard, K., Henschel, A. & Hou-Jensen, K. (1980)
321-33.
 Metastatic melanoma with balloon cell change: an electron
Macy, D.W. & Reymolds, H.A. (1981) The incidence, character-
microscopic study. Ultrastruct Pathol 1, 357-60.
istics and clinical management of skin tumors in cats. J Am
Sulaimon, S.S. and Kitchell, B.E. (2003) The biology of
Anim Hosp Assoc 17, 1026-34.
melanocytes. Vet Dermatol 14, 57-65 (review).
Marino, D.J.M., Matthiesen, D.T., Stefanacci, J.D. et al. (1995)
Sulaimon, S., Ehrhart, E. & Kitchell, B. (1999) Imunohisto-
Evaluation of dogs with digit masses: 117 cases (1981-1991).
chemical detection of canine melanomas with HMB-45. Vet
J Am Vet Med Assoc 207, 726-8.
Pathol 36, 496 (abstract).
Miller, W.H., Scott, D.W. & Anderson, W.1. (1993) Feline cuta-
Sulaimon, S., Kitchell, B. & Ehrhart, E. (2002) Immunohisto-
neous melanocytic neoplasms: a retrospective analysis of 43
chemical detection of melanoma-specific antigens in sponta-
cases (1979-1991). Vet Dermatol 4, 19-26
neous canine melanoma. J Comp Pathol 127, 162-8.
Natali, PG., Nicorta, M.R., Winkler, A.B. et al. (1992) Pro-
Theilen, G.H. & Madewell, B.R. (1987) Veterinary 
Cancer
 gression of human cutanoeus melanoma is associated with the
Medicine, pp. 315-22, Lea & Febiger, Philadelphia.
loss of c-kit oncogene receptor. Int J Cancer 52, 197-201.
Valentine, B.A., McManus, PM. & Knox, A.M. (1999) Malig-
Orchard, G.E. (2o00) Comparison of immunohistochemical
nant transformation of a giant congenital pigmented nevus
labeling of melanocyte differentiation antibodies Melan-A,
(hamartoma) in a dog. Vet Dermatol 10, 127-30.
tyrosinase and HMB 45 with NKIC3 and S100 protein in the
van
der Linde-Sipman, J.S., de Witt, M.M., van Garderen,
evaluation of benign naevi and malignant melanoma. His-
E.,
Molenbeck, R.F et al. (1997) Cutaneous malignant
tochem J 32, 475-81.
melanomas in 57 cats: identification of (amelanotic) signet-
Patnaik, A.K. (1988) Feline melanoma: a comparative study of
ring and ballooning cell types and verifcation of their origin
ocular, oral and dermal neoplasms. Vet Pathot 25, 105-12.
 by immunohistochemistry, electron microscopy, and in situ
Radford, K.J., Thorne, R.F & Hersey, P (1996) CD63 associ-
hybridization. Vet Pathol 34, 31-8.
ates with transmembrane 4 superfamily members, CD9 and
Walder, E.J. (20o0) Amelanotic balloon cell melanoma: a diag-
CD81, and with beta-1-integrins in human melanoma.
nostic challenge. In: Proceedings of the ISVD Meeting, San
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 222, 13-8.
Francisco, p. 9.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 35
Histiocytic tumors
Histiocytic proliferative diseases in humans include reac-
be a reactive inflammatory process in dogs that is most
tive and neoplastic proliferations of either dendritic 
 suggestive of an immune regulatory dysfunction and not
antigen presenting cells or macrophages (Favara et al.,
a true neoplasm (Affolter & Moore, 2000b); it is there-
1997; Schmitz & Favara, 1998). Histiocytes are CD45+,
fore discussed with noninfectious nodular and diffuse
CD18+ leukocytes that originate from a CD34+ precur-
granulomatous and pyogranulomatous diseases (see
sor cell in the bone marrow. Upon differentiation guided
Chapter 13). Proliferations of dendritic cell origin are
by a variety of cytokines and stem cell factors, the
uncommon in cats; most seen to date have been consid-
precursor cells develop into phenotypically separate cell
ered neoplastic and have been categorized as progressive
lineages with different tissue distribution and function
dendritic cell histiocytosis or histiocytic sarcoma (Affolter
(Table 35.1) (Affolter & Moore, 2002a). Macrophages
& Moore, 2000a). Primary cutaneous neoplasms of
are primarily involved with phagocytosis and intracellu-
macrophages have not been identifed in dogs and cats.
lar digestion of foreign antigens. Dendritic antigen pre-
senting cells are poorly phagocytic; they specialize in
REACTIVE FIBROHISTIOCYTIC NODULE
processing and presenting antigens, and hence express the
antigen presenting molecules CD1, MHC II, and MHC I.
(Synonyms: benign fbrous histiocytoma, juvenile xan-
Dendritic cells are a diverse group, and can be divided
thogranuloma, fbroxanthoma)
into sublineages based on their phenotype and location
(Table 35.1) (Affolter & Moore, 2002a). The dendritic
Benign fbrohistiocytic proliferations in humans include a
cells involved in proliferative histiocytic diseases affect-
variety of processes composed of mixed fbroblasts and
ing the skin are either of Langerhans cell origin or of 
histiocytes (Rosai, 1996; Weiss & Goldblum, 2001).
interstitial/dermal dendritic cell origin. Langerhans cells
Lesions with a predominance of histiocytic cells are also
harbor in the epidermis and follicular epithelium, while
referred to as benign fbrous histiocytoma, juvenile xan-
interstitialdermal dendritic cells are located in the
thogranuloma, and papular xanthoma (Rosai, 1996;
perivascular dermis.
Weiss & Goldblum, 2001; Breier et al., 2002). Human
 Some leukocyte proteins are variably expressed by
 dermatofbromas are also included in this group; however,
macrophages versus dendritic cells and therefore allow
feline and canine dermatofbromas are primarily com-
differentiation between these two sublineages of histio-
posed of fbroblasts and fbrocytes (see Chapter 27).
cytes. A limited panel of antibodies currently is available
Canine fbrohistiocytic nodules have similar but not iden-
for immunophenotyping histiocytic cells in formalin-
tical characteristics to juvenile xanthogranuloma in
fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues. Immunophenotypic dif-
humans, which comprise nonLangerhans cell histiocytes
ferentiation between macrophages and dendritic cells
(Weiss & Goldblum, 2001). Although, in humans, fbro-
currently requires fresh-frozen tissue samples (Table 35.1)
histiocytic nodules are considered to be reactive prolifer-
(Moore et al., 1998).
ations rather than true neoplasms, the term “benign
A variety of reactive and neoplastic histiocytic dis-
fbrous histiocytoma’ is still used.
eases, including proliferations of dendritic cells and
Reactive fbrohistiocytic nodules occur in dogs. Based
macrophages, have been recognized in dogs and cats
on the human literature, they were previously referred
(Affolter & Moore, 2000a). Canine dendritic cell neo-
to as “benign fbrous histiocytomas’ in Veterinary Der-
plasms include solitary and multiple histiocytomas, as 
matopathology (Walder & Gross, 1992). The term
well as localized and disseminated histiocytic sarcoma
“benign fbrous histiocytoma’ now is considered inaccu-
(Moore et al., 1996; Affolter & Moore, 2002b). Reactive
rate as it implies the existence of a *fbrous histiocyte', i.e.
histiocytosis, also of dendritic cell origin, is considered to
a hybrid cell of fbroblastic and histiocytic origin. A small
837
838
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Table 35.1  Phenotypic characteristics of
Cell type
 Phenotype in
macrophages and antigen presenting den-
dritic cells (DC).
Fresh-frozen tissue
 Formalin-fixed tissue
Macrophages
CD45, CD18
CD45, CD18
CD11b, MHC11, CD68
Antigen presenting DC
CD45, CD18
CD45, CD18
CD1, CD11c, MHCII, CD11b,
ICAM-1
Langerhans cells
E-cadherin
E-cadherin
interstitial (dermal) DC
CD90
activated dermal DC
CD4
pilot study by one author (V.K.A.) indicates that most
canine fbrohistiocytic nodules are predominated by
CD45+, CD18+ histiocytes, and have admixed vimentin-
positive fbroblasts. The authors therefore prefer the
descriptive term “fbrohistiocytic nodule'
The etiology of canine fbrohistiocytic
nodules is
unknown. As all samples evaluated by immunohisto-
chemistry to date were submitted in formalin, it is cur-
rently not known whether the lesional histiocytes are
 macrophages or dendritic cells. The presence of lipid-type
vacuoles in many of the cells suggests that they are phago-
cytic macrophages. The benign morphology and biologi-
cal behavior, and the presence of a mixed cell population
suggest a reactive process.
Clinical features
 Reactive fbrohistiocytic nodules are uncommon in dogs.
These are solitary or occasionally multiple firm cutaneous
nodules, measuring less than 1 cm in diameter. They may
be partially alopecic. Lesions occur most often on the
face, scrotum, and legs, but other sites may be affected.
Most affected dogs are less than 3 years of age. In con-
 trast to juvenile xanthogranulomas in humans, which
often occur in infants, reactive fbrohistiocytic nodules
 have not been reported in puppies. Neither breed nor sex 
 predilections have been observed.
 It is not known if spontaneous regression occurs (a
feature of juvenile xanthogranuloma of humans), as most
reactive fbrohistiocytic nodules are solitary and diag-
Fig. 35.1 Reactive fibrohistiocytic nodule in a dog composed of
nosed after surgical excision. Reactive fbrohistiocytic
intermingled spindle cells and larger round cells.
nodules have a good prognosis, as recurrence following
surgical excision has not been observed.
cellular infltrate usually extends to the dermal-epidermal
junction, and the overlying epithelium often is hyperplas-
Histopathology (Figures 35.1 through 35.5)
tic. A sparse collagenous matrix, occasionally composed
Fibrohistiocytic nodules are circumscribed, nonencapsu-
lated dermal nodules composed predominantly of histio-
resents residual dermal collagen.
cytic cells arranged in solid sheets. The lesions commonly
 Large round to polygonal histiocytic cells have abun-
have a wedge-shaped or base-narrow confguration. The
 dant, pale eosinophilic cytoplasm that may contain vari-
Histiocytic tumors
839
Fig. 35.2  Reactive fibrohistiocytic nodule in a dog with diffuse lym-
Fig. 35.3 Higher magnification of reactive fibrohistiocytic nodule
phocytic inflammation.
in a dog. Pale round cells with poorly defined boundaries are inter
mingled with spindle cells.
able numbers of delicate vacuoles with smooth contours,
consistent with lipid. The nuclei are small and vary from
abnormalities of lipid metabolism are usually multiple
round or oval to irregular. Nucleoli are inconspicuous,
and have histiocytic cells with markedly foamy cyto-
and mitotic fgures are observed infrequently. Occasional
plasm. Late lesions of reactive histiocytosis may exhibit
multinucleated cells are present. Admixed are plump
vacuolization of the lesional dendritic cells, which may
spindle cells that also are histiocytic based on immuno-
make differentiation from fbrohistiocytic nodules more
histochemistry (see below). These spindle cells have oval
diffcult. However reactive histiocytosis is a multicentric
to slightly elongated nuclei with marginated chromatin.
disease that is characterized by a multinodular to diffuse,
Some spindle cells are narrower and more elongate, con-
pleocellular infltrate that predominates in the deep
sistent with fbrocytic origin, and have pointed nuclei with
dermis rather than the superficial dermis, and tends to be
fnely dispersed chromatin. Lymphocytic infltrates are
markedly angiocentric.(
Granulomatous inflammation,
either dispersed throughout the mass or are arranged in
either infectious or sterile, commonly has a multinodular
aggregates. Neutrophils
6 and eosinophils are usually
to coalescing confguration and is composed of a
present in small numbers.
markedly pleocellular cell population with larger numbers
Differential diagnoses
for   benign  fbrohistiocytic
of neutrophils.
nodules include cutaneous histiocytomas, cutaneous xan-
thomas, reactive histiocytosis, and other infectious and
Immunohistochemistry
noninfectious granulomatous processes. The histiocytes
of canine cutaneous histiocytoma have less cytoplasm and
Reactive fbrohistiocytic nodules are predominated by
do not exhibit cytoplasmic lipidization. Moreover, histio-
CD45+, CD18+ histiocytes; these include the round cell
cytomas often have epitheliotropism and lack admixed
population as well as the plump spindle cells. Additional
spindle cells. Cutaneous xanthomas associated with
differentiation between macrophages and dendritic cells
840
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
has been precluded by the lack of fresh tissue samples.
The occasionally observed multinucleated cells are histi-
ocytes and also express CD45 and CD18. The admixed
slender spindle cells express vimentin, but lack expression
of leukocyte markers and hence are consistent with fbro-
cytes. The lymphocytic infltrate is composed of CD3+ T
cells. Immunohistochemistry is of limited help in the dif-
ferentiation of fbrohistiocytic nodules from differential
lesions (see above), as the exact immunophenotype of the
histiocytic sublineage in fbrohistiocytic nodules is not
known.
CANINE CUTANEOUS HISTIOCYTOMA
Histiocytomas are composed of Langerhans cells (Table
35.1). Proliferations of Langerhans cells vary in humans
and include several clinical presentations (Munn & Chu,
1998). The lesions may be limited to the skin, such as in
 congenital histiocytoma and Hashimoto-Pritzker disease
(Munn & Chu, 1998; Schmitz & Favara, 1998). Often
several organ systems are affected in humans, including
skin (80% of cases), bone, lymph nodes, spleen, liver,
thymus, bone marrow, lung, and central nervous system,
as in Hand-Schuller-Christian disease or Letterer-Siwe
disease (Munn & Chu, 1998; Schmitz & Favara, 1998).
In dogs, persistent and recurrent histiocytomas as well as
 more aggressive Langerhans cell histiocytosis have been
identifed.
Langerhans cells are the intraepithelial dendritic
Fig. 35.4 High magnification of reactive fibrohistiocytic nodule
antigen presenting cells of the skin that are located
in a dog demonstrating large finely vacuolated histiocytic cells;
between keratinocytes (Birbeck et al., 1961). Homotypic
note fewer admixed spindle cells comprising both histiocytes and
 binding of E-cadherin keeps the nonactivated Langerhans
fibroblasts.
 cells within the epidermis and follicular epithelium (Tang
Fig. 35.5 Reactive fibrohistiocytic
nodule in a dog. Immunohisto-
chemistry with anti-CD18 confirms the
leukocytic origin of the round cells and
many of the spindle cells (chromogen
diaminobenzidine [DAB]).
Histiocytic tumors
841
et al., 1993). Canine Langerhans cells lack Birbeck gran-
cytoma cells to the draining lymph node with lym-
ules (Moore et al., 1996), a distinctive ultrastructural
phadenopathy is relatively common with persistent and
marker of Langerhans cells in humans and other species
recurrent histiocytomas. In rare cases, persistent histiocy-
(Chu & Jaffe, 1994). Thus, this morphologic characteris-
tomas may result in development of internal lesions
tic cannot be used to identify canine histiocytomas
(Nagata et al., 2000), a process best referred to as Langer-
(Moore et al., 1996; Affolter & Moore, 2002).
hans cell histiocytosis (see below). Therapy with immuno-
suppressive drugs is contraindicated for persistent and
Clinical features
the possibility of lymphocyte-induced regression.
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma is a common, usually
benign tumor in dogs. Typically, canine cutaneous histio-
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
cytoma presents as rapidly growing, erythematous, dome-
The syndrome of multiple, persistent and recurrent cuta-
shaped nodule or plaque, usually less than 2.5 cm in
neous histiocytomas with spread to lymph nodes and ulti-
diameter. These occur as solitary or occasionally, multi-
mate involvement of internal organs is referred to as
ple lesions that develop over a short period of time.
Langerhans cell histiocytosis as the condition resembles
Alopecia and ulceration are common. Predilection sites
progressive Langerhans cell histiocytosis in humans
for histiocytomas are the head, ears, neck, and extremi-
(Broadbent et al., 1994; Schmitz & Favara, 1998). A
ties, but they may occur in any location.
minority of dogs with multiple persistent histiocytomas
Canine cutaneous histiocytoma is seen mostly in
and lymph node involvement develop subsequent internal
younger dogs; the incidence drops drastically after 3 years
 of age. However, histiocytomas may develop at any age.
the lungs, multiple lymph nodes, spleen, heart, kidneys,
for
pancreas, and liver. Subsequent Langerhans cell histiocy-
certain breeds (Scott et al., 2001). This observation could
tosis has occurred in the clinical setting of multiple histi-
not be substantiated upon review of 256 cases by one
  d a j    no s
author (V.K.A.); histiocytomas were seen with equal fre-
external ear canal in several dogs. A case of multiple
quency throughout a large number of breeds with
the
persistent and recurrent cutaneous histiocytomas with
exception of persistent and recurrent histiocytoma
(see
eventual metastasis to lymph node and internal organs
below). The latter is often observed in Shar Peis and Shar
has been reported in a Dachshund (Nagata et al.,
Pei mixed-breed dogs. Sex predilections are not observed.
2000).
 Langerhans
cell
histiocytosis  has  a  poor
 For the majority of cases, lesions undergo spontaneous 
 prognosis. Affected dogs are usually euthanized due to
regression and, once regression has been initiated, may
rapid deterioration.
disappear within days. Lymphadenopathy is probably
 more common than clinically appreciated (Moore et al.,
1996). Histiocytoma cells are Langerhans cells and, as
Histopathology
Migration of histiocytoma cells to the draining lymph
Cutaneous bistiocytoma (Figures 35.6 through 35.9)
node leads to nonpainful lymphadenopathy and can be
In general, canine cutaneous histiocytomas are circum-
seen with both solitary and multiple histiocytomas. The
scribed but nonencapsulated nodules that infltrate the
lymphadenopathy usually regresses simultaneously with
superficial and deep dermis. They may extend into the
the skin lesions.
subcutis. Histiocytomas have a base-narrow or top-heavy
confguration, i.e. their silhouette resembles an inverted
Persistent and recurrent cutaneous histiocytomas
trapezoid or wedge. The nodules are composed of a dense
In this form of histiocytoma, numerous lesions may be
proliferation of round and polygonal cells arranged in
 grouped in one region or, alternatively, are dispersed over
cords and dense sheets that variably obliterate adnexal
the entire body (Moore et al., 1996). New lesions develop
structures. In the superficial aspects of the tumor, the cells
as others regress. The lesions may persist over several
may form loose cords or rows that stream down from the
months. Persistent and recurrent histiocytomas
 dermal-epidermal junction. The epidermis may be hyper-
are
usually multifocal (Moore et al., 1996; Nagata et al.,
 plastic and rete peg-like extensions may penetrate the ne0-
2000); occasional solitary histiocytomas are similarly per-
plasm. Epidermal invasion, characterized by either single
sistent and nonregressive (Moore et al., 1996). Ulcerated
cells or aggregates, is present in about 80% of cases and
nodules are prone to secondary bacterial infection, which
is usually mild; follicular invasion is not a prominent
may result in septicemia. In some cases, the nodules even-
feature (Moore et al., 1996). In some cases, epitheliotro-
tually undergo spontaneous regression. In other cases,
pism is pronounced. Early lesions have an intact surface,
however, involution does not occur. Migration of histio-
while ulceration is a common feature of later lesions.
842
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 35.6 Canine cutaneous histiocy-
toma. Cords of cells are oriented per-
pendicularly to the skin surface in the
superficial aspect of the tumor, while
the dense deep portion is composed of
sheets of cells.
Fig. 35.7 Higher magnification of
canine cutaneous histiocytoma, demon-
strating unusually marked epitheliotro-
pisrm of single cells and aggregates.
The tumor cells have discrete cell boundaries and
In regressing lesions, the epidermis is often ulcerated,
possess moderate to abundant, lightly eosinophilic cyto-
and the tumor nodules have multiple areas of necrosis.
plasm. Occasionally, the cytoplasm has a pale, clear
There is a dense T cell lymphocytic infltrate, which frst
 appearance, a feature that is also referred to as clear cell
predominates at the base of the tumor nodule and gradu-
change. In solid sheet-like areas of proliferation in the
 ally infltrates the entire tumor mass. In addition, there are
deeper dermis, cells have less defined cell borders. The
variable numbers of larger histiocytic cells admixed with
centrally located nuclei are round to oval; indented, C-
the histiocytoma cells. The former are characterized by a
shaped or folded nuclei are also present, and occasionally
larger amount of amphophilic cytoplasm and indented and
-  r a     
slightly twisted nuclei. Giant cells may be evident rarely.
dispersed or marginated chromatin. Mitotic activity is
These cells represent infltrating reactive dermal dendritic
moderate.
cells (see immunohistochemistry, below). In some late-
Histiocytic tumors
843
Fig. 35.8 Canine cutaneous histiocy-
toma. Lymphocytic infiltrates are pre-
sent at the base of the tumor indicating
regression.
Fig.  35.9 High  magnificationof
canine cutaneous histiocytoma; note
neoplastic invasion of a dermal lym-
phatic {arrows). Note the admixed small
reactive lymphocytes.
stage lesions, lymphocytes and reactive histiocytes out-
obliterates the subcapsular sinusoids and infltrates para-
number the histiocytoma cells, and diagnosis in these cases
cortical tissue. As a result, there is a variable degree of
requires careful search for residual cords or clusters of his-
effacement of the lymph node architecture.
tiocytoma cells in the superficial dermis. Ulcerated surfaces
and areas of necrosis are infltrated by neutrophils. Occa-
Persistent and recurrent cutaneous histiocytomas
sionally, histiocytomas may contain small numbers of
In persistent lesions there is a lack of a reactive T cell infl-
eosinophils.
 trate. Instead there may be aggregates of plasma cells. The
Lymph node extension may be heralded by the presence
neoplastic infltrate often extends deeper into the subcu-
of numerous histiocytoma cells in markedly distended
taneous tissue. Ulcerations of the epidermis are common,
dermal lymphatics. Lymph node involvement is charac-
and neutrophils are limited to the ulcerated surface.
terized by a dense population of histiocytoma cells that
Mitotic activity is moderate to high, and atypical mitoses
844
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
may be present. Infltration of the draining lymph node
more cellular atypia manifested by larger and more irreg-
tissue with partial effacement of the architecture is
ular cells with a variable amount of cytoplasm and severe
common (see above)
anisokaryosis.
 In contrast to histiocytomas and Langerhans cell histi-
Langerhans cell histiocytosis (Figure 35.10)
 Ocytosis, histiocytic sarcomas involving the skin usually
 As in persistent and recurrent cutaneous histiocytomas,
originate in the subcutis and underlying tissues, and sec-
 the neoplastic cells extend deeply into the subcutaneous
ondarily infltrate the deep dermis. Most histiocytic sar-
tissue. In addition, intralymphatic tumor cell aggregates 
comas have variable numbers of spindle-shaped tumor
are common. The neoplastic cells may be more pleomor-
cells admixed, a feature not seen with histiocytomas.
phic than in routine cutaneous histiocytomas, and aniso-
 Other differential diagnoses for all forms of canine his-
cytosis and anisokaryosis may be pronounced. The
tiocytomas include epitheliotropic lymphoma, as well as
mitotic index is high and atypical mitoses are observed.
 amelanotic malignant melanoma with junctional activity,
 Reactive T cell infltrates are not observed, as in typical
 both of which have intraepidermal tumor cell aggregates.
histiocytoma (see above), but plasma cell aggregates may
 In addition, transmissable venereal tumors may rarely
be present. Metastatic lesions in lymph nodes may largely
feature epidermotropism. Further plasma cell tumor,
efface the lymph node architecture and replace the
nonepitheliotropic lymphoma, poorly granulated mast cell
parenchyma by pleomorphic round cells similar to the
tumor and Merkel cell tumor should be ruled out.
tumor cell infltrate in the skin. Distant metastases in
As clinical management of histiocytomas and reactive
internal organs are characterized by nonencapsulated,
histiocytosis are very different, it is also crucial to differ-
infltrative, and obliterative tumor masses. The cellular
entiate between these lesions (see Chapter 13). Histiocy-
morphology of these distant metastatic lesions may be
toma and cutaneous T-cell lymphoma can mimic each
similar to the primary skin lesions or alternatively, display
other perfectly, and  immunohistochemistry often  is
required (see below). Most amelanotic melanomas have
variable numbers of spindle-shaped tumor cells admixed
with the round cell population. Packeting is prominent
in1
melanomas, but not in cutaneous histiocytomas;
Fontana-Masson stain may identify small amounts of
intracytoplasmic melanin. In contrast to histiocytomas,
epidermal involvement is absent in plasmacytomas, mast
cell tumors, and most ransmissible venereal tumors.
 Moreover plasmacytomas are often composed of a fairly
pleomorphic cell population arranged in tight packets.
Multinucleated tumor cells or cells with multilobular
nuclei are common in plasmacytomas, and fairly well-
differentiated plasma cells may be observed along the
tumor margins. The dense cytoplasmic RNA of plasma
cells stains magenta with methyl green pyronine (MGP)
stain. Poorly granulated mast cell tumors are separated
from histiocytomas by the usual presence of small numbers
of intracytoplasmic metachromatic granules, identifed
with Giemsa or toluidine blue stains. Transmissible vene-
real tumors can mimic histiocytomas, particularly in the
regressing stage, as both tumors have marked lymphocytic
infltrate during regression. However transmissible vene-
real tumor cells have fne cytoplasmic vacuoles, a feature
much beter appreciated in impression smears. Merkel
cell tumors are characterized by marked packeting of
 the tumor cells and a very delicate vascular stroma. In
contrast to histiocytomas, Merkel cell tumors lack the
 presence of indented nuclei. Merkel cells have membrane-
bound dense-core granules, desmosomal proteins, and
tonoflament-like structures, which can be detected by
Fig. 35.10 High magnification of Langerhans cell histiocytosis in a
electron microscopy. Moreover, with Merkel cell tumors,
dog. The proliferating histiocytoma cells (Langerhans cells) are pleo-
a Grimelius stain highlights argyrophilic cytoplasmic
 morphic and have marked anisokaryosis.
 granules in variable numbers of the tumor cells.
Histiocytic tumors
845
Immunohistochemistry
 on the clinical behavior, this entity resembles Langerhans
cell histiocytosis in humans (Favara et al., 1997; Arico &
Histiocytomas express the common leukocyte markers
Egeler, 1998). Feline progressive dendritic cell histiocyto-
CD45, CD18, and are also CD1+, CD11c+, CD90-,
sis can be histologically subdivided into epitheliotropic
CD4-, MHC II+, and ICAM-1+ (Moore et al., 1996). In
and nonepitheliotropic forms, both of which are com-
most cases, the tumor cells also express E-cadherin
posed of dendritic cells of nonLangerhans cell type
(Affolter & Moore, 2002). This immunophenotype is
(Affolter, VK. & Moore, P.F., unpublished data, 2002).
characteristic of Langerhans cells (see Table 35.1). The
expression of E-cadherin is often maintained in metasta-
tic lesions in the lymph node and other organs; its expres
Clinical features
sion, however may be weak or limited to a subpopulation
The small number of cases recognized to date offers limited
of migrating tumor cells. Rarely, cases with lack of E-cad-
clinical information about feline progressive dendritic cell
herin expression are observed. The admixed T cell popu-
histiocytosis. It is apparently rare, but the exact incidence
lation seen in regressing histiocytomas is composed of
is not known. Affected cats may initially present with a
cytotoxic CD8+ T cells. The reactive histiocytic infltra-
solitary skin nodule. In most cases lesions are frst observed
tion present in regressing histiocytomas is composed of
either on the head, neck, or lower extremities. Over time,
CD1+, CD11c+, MHC II+, CD90+ dermal dendritic cells,
 multiple nonpainful intradermal nodules develop and may
which lack expression of E-cadherin.
occur in any location. Occasionally, the lesions are limited
In contrast to cutaneous histiocytomas, cutaneous lym-
to one extremity. The nodules may measure up to 1.5 cm
phomas lack dendritic cell markers. The vast majority of
in diameter. Early lesions have an intact skin surface, while
cutaneous lymphomas is composed of CD3+ T cells.
ulceration is a common sequela. The nodules may wax and
Plasma cell tumors are composed of CD45RA+ tumor
wane in size, but complete spontaneous regression has not
cells, which may also maintain the expression of CD79a
been seen. In general, the nodules progress in size over
and immunoglobulin. Mast cell tumors are positive for
time, and may coalesce to large plaques.
CD45, but detectable expression of CD18 varies. More-
Based on the limited number of cases seen in cats, there
over, canine mast cell tumors express KIT and may be
 are no sex or breed predilections for this disease. The age
positive for tryptase. Transmissible venereal tumors
in cats observed to date has ranged from 9 to 17 years.
express CD45, CD45RA, and may express CD49d but
Some cats with progressive histiocytosis develop
lack expression of other lymphocytic or histiocytic
numerous lesions limited to the skin over a prolonged
markers. Merkel cell tumors and melanocytic tumors lack
period of time, without evidence of internal lesions.
expression of leukocyte markers and hence, are negative
However, lymph node involvement is common as the
for CD45 and CD18. Melanomas 
may
express
 disease progresses. Draining lymph nodes are ofen
melanoma-associated antigen recognized by  T cells
enlarged but not painful. Progressive dendritic cell histi-
(MART-1),  melanoma-associated  antigen (Melan-A),
ocytosis may develop morphologic features and clinical
S100, tyrosinase, melanoma isoform of microphthalmia
behavior of histiocytic sarcoma, as at a terminal stage,
ranscription factor (MITF-M), tyrosinase-related protein-
one to several internal organs may be affected. Clinical
2 (TRP-2), or HMB-45/gp100 instead, and Merkel cell
signs vary depending on the organ systems involved.
tumors are positive for cytokeratin 20 (detected by pan-
cytokeratin stains), neuron-specific enolase (NSE), synap-
tophysin, and chromogranin A.
Histopathology (Figures 35.11 through 35.14)
While histiocytomas are composed of Langerhans cells
Feline progressive dendritic cell histiocytosis may be
(E-cadherin+, CD4-, CD90-), reactive histiocytosis is
nonepitheliotropic or epitheliotropic. Lesions are charac-
characterized by a proliferation of reactive dermal den-
 terized by fairly well circumscribed but nonencapsulated
dritic cells, which coexpress CD90 and CD4 (Table 35.1)
nodules that extend from the superficial dermis into the
but lack expression of E-cadherin. Histiocytic sarcomas
subcutis. Similar to canine cutaneous histiocytomas, the
of nonLangerhans cell origin express CD1, CD11c, and
lesions tend to have a base-narrow or top-heavy confgu-
MHC II, and may also express CD90; however they lack
ration. Early lesions may appear as multinodular infl-
expression of E-cadherin.
 trates that gradually coalesce. The surface of the nodules
may be intact, eroded, or ulcerated.
 The nodules are composed of a dense proliferation of
FELINE PROGRESSIVE DENDRITIC
large round and polygonal histiocytic cells with discrete
CELL HISTIOCYTOSIS
cell boundaries, and a moderate to abundant amount of
A small number of cases of a clinically progressive disor-
lightly eosinophilic cytoplasm. The proliferating cells
der of dendritic cell origin have recently been identified in
have centrally located, large, vesicular nuclei. These are
cats (Affolter & Moore, 2000; Day et al., 2000). Based
oval or reniform and indented, and contain marginated
846
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 35.11 Progressive dendritic cell
histiocytosis in a cat demonstrating
a diffuse infiltrate of the dermis and
subcutis.
Fig. 35.12 Higher magnification of
progressive dendritic cell histiocytosis
in a cat. In this nonepitheliotropic
form, the large round cells expand to
the baserment membrane zone but do
not infiltrate the overlying epidermis.
The centrally located nuclei are sur-
rounded by a moderate to abundant
pale cytoplasm.
or finely clumped chromatin. Multinucleated histiocytic
In nonepitheliotropic dendritic cell histiocytosis, the
cells may be present, and intralymphatic aggregates are
infltrates extend to the superficial dermis and basement
Occasionally seen. Mitotic activity ranges from moderate
membrane, but invasion of the overlying epidermis is not
to high. Birbeck's granules, characteristic of Langerhans
seen. In epitheliotropic dendritic cell histiocytosis, the
cells, could not be found in a case evaluated by electron 
dermal nodules extend to the basement membrane zone
microscopy (Madewell, B., personal communication,
 and single cells or aggregates of cells are observed in the
2002). Cytoplasmic vacuolation of histiocytic cells occa-
 overlying epidermis. Involvement of folicular epithelium
sionally is prominent in older lesions, creating a foamy,
has not been observed. Reactive inflammation, which is
xanthomatous appearance; these cells are secondarily
variable in severity, is composed of dispersed lymphocytes
infltrating, circulating macrophages (see immunohisto-
and neutrophils.
chemistry, below).
Primary
differential  diagnoses   for   nonepithelio-
Histiocytic tumors
847
Fig. 35.13 Progressive dendritic cell
histiocytosis in a cat, epitheliotropic
forrm. Pale tumor cells are infiltrating the
epidermis.
Note
 anisocytosis and
anisokaryosis.
Fig. 35.14 Progressive dendritic cell
histiocytosis in a cat. Immunohisto-
chemistry with anti-CD1 confirms the
dendritic cell origin of the tumor cells
in this frozen section (chromogen
aminoethylcarbazole [AEC]).
tropic feline progressive dendritic cell histiocytosis are
composed of round cells, which, however, are arranged in
nonepitheliotropic lymphoma, amelanotic 
malignant
packets and accompanied by variable spindle-shaped
melanoma, cutaneous xanthoma (for vacuolated lesions),
tumor cells. Small amounts of melanin pigment may be
Merkel cell tumor, poorly granulated or pleomorphic mast
 demonstrated by Fontana-Masson staining. Older lesions
cell tumor and plasmacytoma. Differential diagnoses for 
of progressive feline dendritic cell histiocytosis may be
feline progressive dendritic cell histiocytosis with epithe-
characterized by  infltration of markedly vacuolated
liotropism include epitheliotropic lymphoma and amelan-
macrophages and may be diffcult to distinguish from cuta-
otic melanoma with junctional activity. Lymphoma cells
neous xanthomas (see Chapter 13). In cutaneous xan-
may have a higher nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio when com-
thomas, cholesterol clefts and evidence of phagocytosis
pared to feline progressive dendritic cell histiocytosis, and
 may be found in some lesions. Merkel celltumors are char-
the tumor cells may have cleaved nuclei with marked mar-
acterized by tight packets of tumor cells surrounded by a
gination of chromatin. Amelanotic melanomas may be
delicate fbrovascular stroma. Merkel cells have a smaller
848
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
 amount of cytoplasm when compared to feline progressive
HISTIOCYTIC SARCOMA
dendritic cell histiocytosis. Moreover, Merkel cell tumors
have membrane-bound dense-core granules, desmosomal
proteins and tonoflament-like structures, which can be
seminated dendritic cell sarcoma)
detected by electron microscopy. The demonstration of
intracytoplasmic metachromatic granules by Giemsa or
True histiocytic sarcomas of dendritic cell origin, includ-
toluidine blue stains confrms mast cell origin. Plasmacy-
ing localized and disseminated forms, are relatively rare
tomas tend to have a discrete Grenz zone (zone of non-
in humans (Bucsky & Egeler, 1998; Gogusev & Nezelof,
involvement of the superfcial-most dermis), while feline
1998). Canine histiocytic sarcoma occurs as a localized or
dendritic cell histiocytosis usually extends to the basement
disseminated neoplastic proliferation of dendritic cells
 membrane zone. Moreover, plasmacytomas are composed
(Affolter & Moore, 2002). Very few cases of localized his-
of round cells arranged in nests and cords. The abundant
tiocytic sarcoma of dendritic cell origin have been identi-
RNA in plasma cells may be readily demonstrated with
fed in cats (Affolter & Moore, 2000). The exact
methyl green pyronine (MGP) stain, which imparts a
sublineage of the proliferating dendritic cells involved in
magenta hue.
canine and feline histiocytic sarcomas of different organ
systems remains to be determined (see immunohisto-
chemistry, below).
Immunohistochemistry
Disserminated histiocytic sarcoma was frst reported as
The proliferating histiocytic cell population in feline pro-
'malignant
histiocytosis’ in Bernese Mountain Dogs
gressive dendritic cell histiocytosis consistently expresses
(Moore & Rosin, 1986), but has now been recognized in
CD18, CD1, and MHC II, a phenotype consistent with
a variety of breeds. Disseminated histiocytic sarcoma is
dendritic cells (Table 35.1). The vast majority of cases of
 preferred over 'malignant histiocytosis', because the latter
both the epitheliotropic and nonepitheliotropic forms
implies a simultaneous development of histiocytic prolif-
lack expression of E-cadherin, indicating a proliferation
erations in different locations. At this point, there is no
of dermal dendritic cells rather than Langerhans cells;
substantiating evidence that this occurs in dogs (Affolter
however three cases demonsrating expression of E-
& Moore, 2002). Disseminated histiocytic sarcoma
cadherin have been observed. Thus, the exact sublineage
 mostly presents as a malignancy of internal organs
of the proliferating dendritic cells is not yet known.
with widespread metastasis, but skin and subcutis may
The admixed reactive lymphoid infltrate is composed of
occasionally be involved as well (Affolter & Moore,
CD8+ cytotoxic T cells.
2002).
In contrast to feline progressive dendritic cell histiocy-
 Localized histiocytic sarcoma often originates in the
tosis, cutaneous xanthomas are composed of CD18+,
subcutaneous tissue; other common primary locations
CD1-, CD11b+ macrophages (Table 35.1). However,
include spleen, tongue, lung, brainstem, nasal cavity, ver-
older lesions of feline progressive dendritic cell histiocy-
tebral bone, and epidural space (Affolter & Moore,
tosis may contain numerous vacuolated macrophages as
2002). Occasionally, numerous multinucleated giant cells
well. Immunohistochemistry will generally detect the
are present, which explains why some cases of localized
primary proliferating dendritic cells; however if the infl-
histiocytic sarcoma present with features of anaplastic
tration of macrophages is severe, then biopsy of newer
sarcoma with giant cells, also referred to as ‘malignant
lesions may be required for differentiation from cuta-
fbrous histiocytoma' (Gleiser et al., 1979; Kerlin &
neous xanthoma. Feline cutaneous lymphomas evaluated
Hendrick, 1996) (see Chapter 33).
 by immunohistochemistry to date have been composed of 
CD3+ T cells. Mast cells and plasmacytomas lack expres-
Clinical features
sion of CD1. Immunostaining for tryptase may permit
identifcation of poorly granulated mast cell tumors.
Localized histiocytic sarcomas are fairly common in
Feline plasmacytomas have not yet been evaluated for
dogs, but uncommon in cats. The exact incidence of
expression of CD79a, but presence 
  of cytoplasmic
these neoplasms is not known. The tumor masses are frm,
immunoglobulins can be demonstrated. As nonleukocytic
may measure up to several centimeters in diameter, and
cells, melanomas and Merkel cell tumors lack expression
infltrate the surrounding tissue. In dogs, most tumor
of CD45 and CD18. Melanoma isoform 
of micro-
masses are located on extremities. Some tumors are
pthalmia transcription factor (MITF-M) and S100 may
identify melanocytic origin, while Merkel cell tumors are
lameness and a slowly progressive ill-defined swelling.
 positive for cytokeratin 20 (detected by pancytokeratin),
Skin involvement with disseminated histiocytic sarcoma
neuron-specific enolase (NSE), synaptophysin, and chro-
is occasionally seen and may develop at any site of the
mogranin A.
body.
Histiocytic tumors
849
Fig. 35.15 Histiocytic sarcoma in a dog demonstrating a coalesc-
Fig. 35.16 Higher magnification of histiocytic sarcoma in a dog. In
ing multinodular pattern. There is a small aggregate of reactive small
this spindle cell predominant example the elongated cells are
lymphocytes in the upper left corner.
arranged in irregular bundles.
Histiocytic sarcomas have been recognized in a variety
amputation of the extremity. Prognosis of disseminated
of breeds, but Rottweilers, Bernese Mountain Dogs, and
histiocytic sarcoma is poor as the diagnosis is usually
Golden and Labrador Retrievers are over-represented.
made at a stage when surgery is not an option based on
The age of affected dogs ranges from 2 to 13 years, and
widely distributed internal lesions; chemotherapy has
a female to male ratio of 1.2:1 has been observed
been unsuccessful.
(Affolter & Moore, 2002).
The few cases of feline localized histiocytic sarcomas
Histopathology (Figures 35.15 through 35.18)
characterized to date were located on the extremities and
abdomen (Affolter & Moore, 2000). Feline histiocytic
Localized histiocytic sarcomas and the cutaneous tumor
sarcoma has been diagnosed in cats between 8 and 11
 masses associated with disseminated histiocytic sarcomas
years of age. No breed or sex incidence data are available.
have identical histologic features. Histiocytic sarcomas
Localized  histiocytic sarcomas demonstrate  locally
 are poorly demarcated, locally invasive neoplasms. These
invasive growth and metastasize to draining lymph nodes
are characterized by a dense pleomorphic cell prolifera-
in later stages of the disease. Distant metastases are pos-
tion that effaces normal tissue architecture. Neoplastic
sible. However in contrast to disseminated histiocytic
 cells may infltrate diffusely or form multiple coalescing
sarcoma, localized histiocytic sarcomas of the skin and
nodules. Multiple areas of necrosis are common.
underlying tissue are detected earlier which probably
 Morphology and arrangement of the tumor cell popu-
reduces the incidence of widespread metastasis. A more
lation vary among tumors and among different areas of
favorable outcome is observed with early wide surgical
a given tumor. Two major patterns are recognized: round
excision of the primary tumor mass, which may involve
cell predominant and spindle cell predominant. Some
850
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
00
89
心
Fig. 35.17 Higher magnification of histiocytic sarcoma in a dog. In
Fig. 35.18
High magnification of histiocytic sarcoma in a cat fea-
this round cell predominant example large neoplastic cells are
turing numerous bizarre multinucleated tumor giant cells.
admixed with neutrophils.
numerous dispersed lymphocytes or aggregates of lym-
 tumor nodules are predominantly composed of individu-
phocytes can be observed.
alized large round cells with abundant amphophilic cyto-
Canine spindle cell predominant histiocytic sarcomas
plasm and occasional cytoplasmic vacuolation. These
can mimic other pleomorphic spindle cell or round cell
round cells have large, vesicular round to oval,
or
sarcomas, including poorly-differentiated fbrosarcomas 
indented and twisted nuclei with one or several nucleoli.
(some of which may be of myofbroblastic origin),
A second pattern is characterized by variably dense pro-
 malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, pleomorphic
liferations of plump spindle cells with long cytoplasmic
leiomyosarcomas, pleomorphic liposarcomas, synovial
processes and large, oval, vesicular, and partially rwisted
 cell sarcomas, and hemangiopericytomas. Some histio-
nuclei. Occasionally, the nuclei have more condensed,
cytic sarcomas may have numerous giant cells and thus
coarse chromatin. Marked anisocytosis and anisokaryosis
may require differentiation from anaplastic sarcomas
may be observed. Multinucleated tumor giant cells are
with giant cells of variable origin (see Chapter 33).
common and often bizarre, and present as either large
 e q pznr n a ssa
round cells or as stellate cells with long cytoplasmic
monomorphic spindle cell population than histiocytic sar-
 processes. Up to seven mitotic figures may be present per 
comas, and round tumor cells are uncommon. Also, in
high power feld (40x). Occasional phagocytic vacuoles
contrast to histiocytic sarcomas, poorly-differentiated
contain neutrophils or cellular fragments of tumor cells.
fbrosarcomas may still produce collagen, which can be
 Reactive leukocytes range from a few dispersed cells to
 demonstrated with Masson's trichrome stain. The pres-
prominent inflammation. 
 Neutrophils are consistently
ence of palisading tumor cells, occasional arrangement of
seen, in particular in conjunction with areas of necrosis.
the tumor cells in Antoni type A or B patterns, and the
The number of reactive lymphocytes varies; occasional to
formation of Verocay bodies separate peripheral nerve
Histiocytic tumors
851
sheath tumors from histiocytic sarcomas. In contrast to
Langerhans cell histiocytosis composed of Langerhans
histiocytic sarcomas, peripheral nerve sheath tumors are
cells expresses E-cadherin and consistently lacks ex-
ultrastructurally characterized by a basal lamina around
pression of CD90, allowing differentiation from histio-
the tumor cells that is often thickened and folded.
cytic sarcomas. Anaplastic fbrosarcomas (including
Leiomyosarcomas arise from either the arrector pili
 myofbroblastic variants), hemangiopericytomas, periph-
muscles or from dermal vessel walls, and a connection
eral nerve sheath tumors, 1
leiomyosarcomas, synovial
with these structures may be evident. Pleomorphic
cell sarcomas, and pleomorphic liposarcomas can be dif-
leiomyosarcomas with giant cells may require differenti-
      
ation from histiocytic sarcomas by immunohistochem-
of expression of common leukocyte markers (CD45,
istry (see below). Pleomorphic liposarcomas may be
CD18).
difficult to differentiate from histiocytic sarcomas, parti-
cularly if distinctly vacuolated lipoblasts are not evident.
Oil red O or Sudan black stains may help to detect neutral
REFERENCES
lipid. Similar to histiocytic sarcomas, synovial cell tumors
may be composed of spindle-shaped and round tumor
Introduction
cells. In most cases, both pleomorphic liposarcomas and
Affolter, VK. & Moore, PF (2000a) In: Proceedings for ESVD
synovial cell sarcomas require immunohistochemistry to
Workshop on Immunodermatology 2000: from the laboratory
differentiate them from histiocytic sarcoma. Histiocytic
to the clinic, advances in the diagnosis and pathogenesis of
 uas nuue rennoseaad a yoel sores
animat skin diseases, Saint-Paul de Vence.
hemangiopericytomas.
Affolter, V.K. & Moore, PF. (2000b) Canine cutaneous and sys-
Round cell predominant histiocytic sarcomas should be
temic histiocytosis: a reactive histiocytosis of dermal dendritic
differentiated from Langerhans cell histiocytosis, poorly
origin. Am J Dermatopathot 22, 40-8.
granulated grade III mast cell tumors, and amelanotic
Affolter, V.K. & Moore, PF. (2002a) Histiocytes in skin disease.
malignant melanomas. In contrast to histiocytic sarco-
In: Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 4 (eds K.
mas, which originate in the subcutis and may extend into
Thoday & C. Foil, R. Bond). pp. 111-30. Blackwell Publish-
the dermis, Langerhans cell histiocytosis arises in the
ing, Oxford.
Affolter, V.K. & Moore, P.F. (2002b) Localized and disseminated
dermis, infltrates the epidermis and extends into the sub-
histiocytic sarcoma of dendritic cell origin in the dog. Vet
cutis. Poorly granulated mast cell tumors are separated
Pathol 39, 74-83.
from histiocytomas by the usual presence
of small
Favara, B.E., Feller, A.C., Pauli, M. et al. (1997) Contemporary
numbers of intracytoplasmic metachromatic
granules,
classification of histiocytic disorders. The WHO Committee
identifed with Giemsa or toluidine blue stains. Packeting
on Histiocytic/Reticulum Cell Proliferations. Reclassification
is prominent in melanomas, but not in histiocytic sarco-
Working Group of the Histiocyte Society. Med Pediatr Oncol
mas; Fontana-Masson stain may identify small amounts
29, 157-66.
of intracytoplasmic melanin; immunohistochemistry may
Moore, PF., Schrenzel, M.D., Affolter, VK. et al. (1996) Canine
be required in melanin-negative tumors.
cutaneous histiocytoma is an epidermotropic Langerhans cell
histiocytosis that expresses CD1 and specific beta-2-integrin
molecules. Am J Pathol 148, 1699-708.
Immunohistochemistry
Moore, PF., Affolter, V.K., Olivry, T. et al. (1998) The use of
immunological reagents in defining the pathogenesis of canine
Independent of their morphologic features, the tumor
skin diseases involving proliferation of leukocytes. In:
cells of canine histiocytic sarcomas consistently express
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 3 (eds
CD45, CD18, CDI, CD11c, and MHC II, and hence are
K.W. Kwochka, T. Willemse & C. von Tscharner), pp. 77-94.
dendritic antigen-presenting cells (see Table 35.1). These
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
cells lack expression of E-cadherin and are therefore not
Schmitz, L. & Favara, B.E. (1998) Nosology and pathology of
Langerhans cells. In some cases, a subpopulation of tumor
Langerhans cell histiocytosis. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am
cells expresses CD90. Histiocytic sarcomas of the subcutis
12, 221-46.
and dermis that coexpress CD90 likely arise from dermal
dendritic cells. However, in view of the diversity of the
Reactive Fibrohistiocytic Nodules
dendritic cell populations, histiocytic sarcomas in other
Breier, F., Zelger, B., Reiter, H. et al. (2002) Papular xanthoma:
a clinicopathological study of 10 cases. J Cutan Pathol
visceral locations may arise from other subsets of den-
29,200-6.
dritic cells.
Rosai, J. (1996) Skin. In: Ackerman's Surgical Pathology,
Feline histiocytic sarcomas express CD18, CD1, and
Vol. 1, 8th edn (ed. J. Rosai), pp. 170-7. Mosby, St Louis.
 MHC II, and lack expression of E-cadherin. The exact
Walder, E.J. & Gross, T.L. (1992) Other mesenchymal tumors.
subset of dendritic cells in feline histiocytic sarcoma
In: Veterinary Dermatopathology: A Macroscopic and Micro
remains to be determined.
scopic Evaluation of canine and Feline Skin Disease (T.L.
852
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Gross, PJ. Thrke and E.J. Walder), pp. 445-6. Mosby,
Feline Progressive Dendritic Cell Histiocytosis
St Louis.
Affolter, V.K. & Moore, PF. (2000) In: Proceedings for ESVD
Weiss, S.W. & Goldblum, J.R. (2001) Benign fbrohistiocytic
Workshop on Immunodermatology 2000: from the laboratory
tumors. In: Enzinger and Weiss's Soft Tissue Tumors, 4th edn
to the clinic, advances in the diagnosis and pathogenesis of
(eds S.W. Weiss & J.R. Goldblum), pp. 441-70. Mosby,
animal skin diseases, Saint-Paul de Vence.
St Louis.
Arico, M. & Egeler, R.M. (1998) Clinical aspects of Langerhans
cell histiocytosis. Hematol Oncol Clin N Amer 12, 247-58.
Canine Cutaneous Histiocytoma
Day, M.J., Lopatkin, I., Lucke, M. et al. (2000) Multiple cuta-
Affolter, V.K. & Moore, PF. (2002) Histiocytes in skin disease,
neous histiocytomas in a cat. Vet Dermatol 11, 305-10.
In: Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 4 (eds K.
Favara, B.E., Feller, A.C., Pauli, M. et al. (1997) Contemporary
Thoday, C. Foil & R. Bond), pp. 111-30. Blackwell Publish-
classification of histiocytic disorders. The WHO Committee
ing, Oxford.
on Histiocyic/Reticulum Cell Proliferations. Reclassification
Birbeck, M.S., Breathnach, A.S. & Everall, J.D. (1961) An elec-
Working Group of the Histiocyte Society. Med Pediatr Oncol
tron microscope study of basal melanocytes and high level
29, 157-66.
clear cells (Langerhans cells) in vitiligo. J Invest Dermatol
37,51-76.
Histiocytic Sarcoma
Broadbent, V., Egeler, R.M. & Nesbit, M.E., Jr (1994) Langer-
Affolter, V.K. & Moore, PF. (2000) In: Proceedings for ESVD
hans cell histiocytosis - clinical and epidemiological aspects.
Workshop on Immunodermatology 2000: from the laboratory
Br J Cancer Suppt 23, S11-6.
to the clinic, advances in the diagnosis and pathogenesis of
Chu, T. & Jaffe, R. (1994) The normal Langerhans cell and the
animat skin diseases, Saint-Paul de Vence.
LCH cell. Br J Cancer Suppl 23, S4-10.
Affolter, V.K. & Moore, PF. (2002) Localized and disseminated
Moore, P.F., Schrenzel, M.D., Affolter, VK. et al. (1996) Canine
histiocytic sarcoma of dendritic cell origin in the dog. Vet
cutaneous histiocytoma is an epidermotropic Langerhans cell
Pathol 39, 74-83.
histiocytosis that expresses CD1 and specific beta-2-integrin
Bucsky, P. & Egeler, R.M. (1998) Malignant histiocytic disorders
molecules. Am J Pathol 148, 1699-708.
in children: clinical and therapeutic approaches with a
Munn, S. & Chu, A.C. (1998) Langerhans cell histiocytosis of
nosologic discussion. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 12,
the skin. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 12, 269-86.
465-72.
Nagata, M., Hirata, M., Ishida, T. et al. (2000) Progressive
Gleiser, C.A., Raulston, G.L., Jardine, J.H. et al. (1979) Malig-
Langerhans’ cell histiocytosis in a puppy. Vet Dermatol
nant fbrous histiocytoma in dogs and cats. Vet Pathol 16,
11, 241-6.
199-208.
Schmitz, L. & Favara, B.E. (1998) Nosology and pathology of
Gogusev, J. & Nezelof, C. (1998) Malignant histiocytosis: his-
Langerhans cell histiocytosis. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am
tologic, cytochemical, chromosomal, and molecular data with
12, 22146.
a nosologic discussion. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 12,
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
445-64.
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 1347-50. WB.
Kerlin, R.L. & Hendrick M.J. (1996) Malignant fibrous histio-
Saunders, Philadelphia.
cytoma and malignant histiocytosis in the dog - convergent or
Tang, A., Amagai, M., Granger, L.G. et al. (1993) Adhesion of
divergent phenotypic differentiation? Vet Pathol 33, 713-6.
epidermal Langerhans cells to keratinocytes mediated by E-
Moore, PF & Rosin, A. {1986) Malignant histiocytosis of
cadherin. Nature 361, 82-5.
Bernese mountain dogs. Vet Pathol 23, 1-10.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 36
Mast cell tumors
Mast cell proliferations in humans include solitary or
phorylation of the KIT protein results in ligand-
multiple cutaneous mast cell tumors, cutaneous and sys-
independent activation of the receptor tyrosine kinase on
temic mastocytosis, and mast cell leukemia (Valent et al.,
mast cells and their subsequent proliferation (Longley &
2001). Solitary and multiple mast cell tumors, and cuta-
Metcalfe, 2000). Similar to humans, canine mast cell
neous and systemic mastocytosis have been recognized in
tumors have been associated with mutations of the proto-
dogs and cats. The highest mast cell density in normal
oncogene c-kit, characterized by tandem duplications
canine and feline skin is found in the perivascular dermis,
(London et al., 1996, 1999; Zemke et al., 2002). This
while few mast cells can be found in the subcutaneous
results in consistent activation of the receptor tyrosine
tissue. Compared to other body locations, mast cells are
kinase and subsequent mast cell proliferation. Similar
more numerous on the pinnae and the chin in dogs, and
mutations of the c-kit proto-oncogene were not found in
the pinnae and feet in cats (Foster, 1994; Auxilia & Hill,
splenic mast cell tumors of cats (London, C.A., personal
2000). However there is no increased prevalence of mast
communication, 2002). In human mast cell tumors, muta-
cell tumors in these locations.
 tions have also been observed in p53, a tumor suppressor
o aq n   snd n i
encoded protein (p53) serves as a negative
via blood into peripheral tissues where they differentiate
regulator for cell proliferation (Levine et al., 1991; Clarke
into mature mast cells. Murine mast cell were initially
et al.,
1993).
 The aberrant p53 gene product can be
classifed into connective tissue (typical) mast cells and
detected by immunohistochemistry and its presence cor-
mucosal (atypical) mast cells based on the morphology
relates with more aggressive behavior of some neoplasias.
of their granules, tinctorial properties, formaldehyde
However, detection of the p53 protein is not useful in
resistance, and granular components. Canine mast
characterizing the clinical association between cytologic
cells, similar to human mast cells, cannot be classified
features and survival time or recurrence in dogs (Jaffe et
according to the system used in mice (Hill & Martin,
al., 2000; Ginn et al., 2003).
1998; Hill, 2002). Canine mast cells are separated ac-
Mast cells produce and release numerous factors
cording to their formalin sensitivity and the presence
(cytokines, chemokines, prostaglandins, coagulation
of proteases (Welle, 1997); mast cells contain either
factors, etc.), which bind to their appropriate ligands to
chymase (MCe) or chymase and tryptase (MCer).
.In
mediate profound physiological effects. These include
formalin-fixed normal canine skin MCer predominate,
vascular permeability, smooth muscle contraction, leuko-
while fxation with Carnoy's fxative reveals a predomi-
cytic chemotaxis (in particular eosinophils), activation of
nance of MCe (Kube et al., 1998). This variation must be
metalloproteinases, and alteration of coagulability
considered when immunohistochermistry for tryptase is
(Gordon et al., 1990; Hill & Martin, 1998; Hill, 2002).
used to identify canine mast cells. There is no equivalent
Thus, a variety of paraneoplastic disorders may occur in
characterization of feline cutaneous mast cells available
 conjunction with mast cell proliferations (Rogers, 1996).
to date.
 The importance of the interaction of stem cell factor
CANINE MAST CELL TUMOR
(SCF) with its specifc KIT receptors in regard to mast cell
maturation, proliferation, and activation has been docu-
Clinical features
mented in a variety of species (Hill & Martin, 1998; Hill,
2002). Human mast cell proliferations have been associ-
Cutaneous mast cell tumors are common neoplasms in
ated with mutations of the proto-oncogene c-kit, which
dogs, and represent between 10% and 15% of all
encodes for the KIT protein (CD117), a receptor tyrosine
skin tumors (Conroy, 1983; Pulley & Stannard, 1990;
kinase (Longley & Metcalfe, 2000). Constitutive phos-
Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992). The annual incidence has
853
854
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
been estimated at about 90 mast cell tumors per 100 000
category. Also, the Patnaik systerm does not account for
dogs (Rabanal & Ferrer, 2002).
superficial dermal tumors, which, based on their cytologic
Canine mast cell tumors may be solitary or multicen-
features, would be considered to be grade II or IIl. These
tric in the skin; multiple tumors may be observed syn-
shortcomings suggest that a revised grading systerm for
chronously or sequentially. Multiple tumors occur in
canine mast cell disease may be needed.
about 10% to 15% of cases (London & Seguin, 2003).
 One early study documents survival times of 51 weeks
Mast cell tumors are generally alopecic, erythematous,
for well-differentiated tumors, 28 weeks for intermediate-
edematous nodules that vary in size from several mil-
 grade tumors, and 18 weeks for poorly-differentiated
limeters to several centimeters. Lesions on distal extrem-
tumors (Bostock, 1973). Patnaik et al. (1984) reported
ities and lips may present as poorly defined areas of
survival rates at 1500 days of 93% for grade I tumors,
swelling. Ulceration is often present in larger lesions. An
44% for grade II tumors, and 6% for grade III tumors.
increased incidence of mast cell tumors on the proximal
 Bensignor et al. (1998) reported 24 month survival rates
rear legs, perineum, and prepuce was reported by Tams
after therapy (including surgery, radiotherapy, and
and Macy (1981). Rabanal and Ferrer (2002) reported
 chemotherapy) of 54% for dogs with grade I tumors and
50% of canine mast cell tumors on the trunk, 40% on
6% for dogs with grade III tumors. A more recent study
 the extremities, and 10% on the head. However, mast cell
indicates a fair prognosis for grade II mast cell tumors
 tumors may develop anywhere on the body, and the sub-
that have been widely excised (3 cm margins) (Seguin et
cutis as well as dermis may be involved.
al., 2001). A signifcant association between tumor-free
The average age of affected dogs is 8 years, but mast
 versus nontumor-free surgical margins and frequency of
cell tumors are occasionally found in dogs as young as 4
relapse by 12 to 24 months postoperatively has been doc-
 months. Breed predilections for Boxers, Boston Terriers,
umented; however, there were no significant differences in
Bull Terriers, Bullmastiffs, Staffordshire Terriers, Fox
tumor-related death rates between dogs in the tumor-free
Terriers, English Bulldogs, Dachshunds, Labrador and
and nontumor-free margin groups (Michels et al., 2002).
Golden Retrievers, Beagles, Pugs, Chinese Shar Peis,
Mast cell tumors located in the perineal area, scrotum,
Rhodesian Ridgebacks, and Weimaraners have
been
prepuce, and digits may have more aggressive behavior
reported (Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992; Scott et al., 2001;
(Scott et al., 2001). Another study describes an increased
Rabanal & Ferrer 2002). Shar Peis often develop mast
regional metastatic rate of facial mast cell tumors when
cell tumors at a younger age (Miller, 1995). It also has
 compared to mast cell tumors of other locations (Gieger
been reported that certain predilection sites are associated
et al., 2003). Metastasis occurs frst in regional lymph
with a particular breed. Boxers, Boston Terriers, Pugs,
nodes. Any mast cell tumor is capable of metastasis; it is
English Setters, and American Staffordshire Terriers
 therefore important to evaluate the extent of disease in
tend to have hindleg masses; Rhodesian Ridgebacks
dogs presenting with cutaneous mast cell neoplasia
have a higher incidence of mast cell tumors on the tail;
(London & Seguin, 2003).
and English Setters often develop lesions on the head
Other molecular studies are providing alternative
(Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992). Significant sex predilec-
indices for characteristics of mast cell differentiation, and
tions have not been noted (Goldschmidt & Shofer,
 thus prognosis. The proliferation index (based on Ki67
1992).
antigen as evaluated by immunohistochemistry with MIB-
All canine cutaneous mast cell tumors should be con-
1 antibody) is significantly higher in grade Ill tumors
sidered potentially malignant. The most commonly
(21.17%) than in grade II tumors (13.32%) and grade I
utilized grading system (see below) was developed by
tumors (5.95%) (Sakai et al., 2002). Silver stained nucle-
Patnaik et al. (1984). It classifies the tumors from grades
 olar organizing regions (AgNORs) have successfully been
I to III, with grade IIl being the most aggressive type.
used to predict prognosis in canine mast cell tumors, as
A recent review supports this correlation between
higher counts are observed in poorly differentiated mast
histopathologic grade and biologic behavior (Bensignor et
cell tumors when compared with well-differentiated mast
al., 1998). Using this grading system, the majority of
cell tumors (Bostock et al., 1989; Kravis et al., 1996). One
canine mast cell tumors are grades I and II.
study comparing the average number of silver-stained
The grading system of Patnaik et al. (1984) uses a com-
nucleolar organizing regions (AoNORs) to the degree of
bination of cytologic features and thickness of the tumor,
differentiation of subcutaneous canine mast cell tumors
starting in the superficial dermis and expanding into the
i 1iea) iuno qiu e qm sop jo %e 1en paioda
subcutis. Hence, it does not account for cytologically
4.9) were lost from tumor-related causes, while none of
well-differentiated mast cell tumors (grade I) that origi-
the dogs with a low count (less than 1.7) was lost
nate in the superficial subcutis. According to the Patnaik
(Bostock et al., 1989). Matrix metalloproteinases 2 and 9
system, these tumors are a result of downward extension
(enzymes that break down extracellular matrix) have been
from the dermis and automatically fall into the grade II
suggested to be an important factor in the pathogenesis
Mast cell tumors
855
of canine mast cell tumors (Leibman et al., 2000). The
values for the grade I to II and II to II comparisons, this
technique may not be of practical value.
the degree of malignant behavior of these neoplasms.
Additionally, mutations in the proto-oncogene c-kit (see
Grade I mast cell tumor (Figure 36.1)
introduction, p. 853) were signifcantly associated with
 According to Patnaik's grading system, grade I mast cell
higher grades of mast cell tumors (Zemke et al., 2002).
tumors are small, fairly well circumscribed but nonen-
Intensity of expression of KIT increases with increasing
capsulated neoplasms confined to the interfollicular
grade (Reguera et al., 2000). Increased cytoplasmic stain-
dermis (Patnaik et al., 1984). However, the authors have
ing (but not membrane staining) for the KIT protein was
observed morphologically identical tumors that arise in
correlated with an increased rate of local recurrence and
the superficial subcutis (above the panniculus carnosus),
decreased survival time in a recent study (Kiupel et al.,
or extend from the dermis into the superficial subcutis,
2004).
but behave as Patnaik grade I tumors; this is supported
Palpation of mast cell tumors or trauma to the tumor
by the AgNOR study, which included only subcutaneous
masses may result in release of histamine and other
mast cell tumors (see above) (Bostock et al., 1989).
vasoactive mediators from the mast cells, causing local
 Most grade I mast cell tumors have an intact overlying
edema and inflammation (Darier's sign) (Rabanal &
epidermis. Tumor cells are arranged in cords and loose
Ferrer, 2002). Due to the ulcerogenic activity of mast cell
sheets, and resemble normal granulated mast cells. They
vasoactive amines, gastric ulcers may be observed.
are characterized by discrete cell borders and cytoplasmic
Massive degranulation of neoplastic mast cells may
granules that appear gray-blue in color with hematoxylin
occasionally occur, resulting in generalized edema, altered
and eosin stain. Toluidine blue or Giemsa stains are
coagulability, severe hypotension, and/or terminal hem-
orrhagic gastroenteritis.
Histopathology
In general, canine mast cell tumors are nonencapsulated
dermal and/or subcutaneous masses composed of round
cells arranged in cords and sheets. The tumors rarely
extend to the dermal-epidermal junction, and intraepi-
dermal mast cell aggregates are not seen. The overlying
epidermis is usually intact over small lesions and may be
ulcerated over larger masses. The collagenous stroma
varies from scant to abundant, and may appear edema-
tous or hyalinized. Some tumors show extensive sclerosis
and very low cellularity. In some masses, the collagen
Apreu on Aanenapou pue pazueau readde saipunq
enlarged, resembling keloidal change of collagen seen
with canine keloidal fbroma (see Chapter 27).
Variable numbers of eosinophils are present in almost
all lesions. Eosinophils are either dispersed throughout
the neoplastic tissue or form aggregates. Marked deposi-
tion of mucin and perivascular hyalinization are seen in
response to eosinophilic infltration. Foci of marked
philic collagen bundles to form flame figures, previously
referred to as collagenolysis.
 A recent study reports that nuclear area, nuclear mean
diameter, and nuclear perimeter of the tumor cell are sta-
tistically different between grades II and III and between
grades I and III mast cell tumors (Strefezzi et al., 2003).
These results indicate that nuclear morphometry may
assist in grading mast cell tumors; however because there
Fig. 36.1 Canine grade I mast cell tumor. Round cells with uniform
was no significant difference between grades I and II and
nuclei and granular cytoplasm are arranged in cords and loose
because there was considerable overlap in the range of
sheets.
856
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 36.2 Canine grade II mast cell turmor. Nuclei are larger and
Fig. 36.3 Canine grade II mast cell turmor with keloidal change.
slightly more pleormorphic than in Fig. 36.1. Note central focus of
Entrapped in the tumor mass are numerous thickened and hyalin-
eosinophilic degranulation around a collagen bundle (flame figure)
ized collagen bundles.
usually not necessary to demonstrate cytoplasmic granu-
behave as Patnaik grade I tumors. In the authors' opinion,
lation. Nuclei are small, round to oval, and have incon-
small well-differentiated tumors should be placed in the
spicuous nucleoli. Mitotic fgures are infrequent or
lowest category of malignancy (grade I) independent of
absent. Most grade I mast cell tumors have a moderate
their location. Moreover some tumors with grade II cyto-
to large number of eosinophils dispersed throughout
logic features are confned to superfcial dermis. These
the neoplastic tissue, and flame fgures are not uncom-
observations are at odds with the current classifcation
mon. Tumor necrosis is uncommon, but occasional well-
system (Patnaik et al., 1984).
differentiated mast  cell tumors
become extensively
 In most grade II mast cell tumors, the neoplastic cells
infarcted. The diagnosis of grade I mast cell tumors is
 are larger slightly more pleomorphic, and more sparsely
straightforward, as the vast majority of proliferating mast
 granulated than grade I neoplasms. Nuclei are moderately
cells are well differentiated and heavily granulated.
enlarged, fairly uniform and vesicular, with small but
obvious nucleoli. Mitotic activity varies from absent to
Grade II mast cell tumor (Figures 36.2 and 36.3)
moderately low. Cytoplasm is moderate and variably
Dermal grade II mast cell tumors are usually larger,
granulated. Eosinophils vary from few to numerous.
deeper, and less well circumscribed than grade I neo-
Occasional   lesions
contain
massive numbers
of
plasms. By defnition, Patnaik grade II tumors extend
eosinophils and relatively few neoplastic mast cells limited
into the deep dermis and may involve the subcutis.
to scattered cords and clusters.
The authors
 have observed  morphologically  well-
The number of granulated tumor cells in grade II mast
differentiated tumors that arise in the superfcial subcutis
cell tumors varies. However toluidine blue and Giemsa
or extend from the deep dermis to the subcutis and
stains usually will identify typical metachromatic purple
Mast cell tumors
857
intracytoplasmic granules. This will allow differentiation
nucleoli. Mitotic activity is moderate to high, and many
of grade II mast cell tumors from other
cutaneous round
atypical mitoses are present. The cytoplasm is pale;
cell tumors such as cutaneous nonepitheliotropic lym-
phoma, canine H
histiocytoma,  transmissible
veneral
The authors also recognize a subset of poorly differen-
tumors, plasmacytomas, and Merkel cell tumors.
 tiated mast cell tumors that may mimic lymphoid tumors;
these occur mostly at mucocutaneous junctions of the
Grade III mast cell tumor (Figure 36.4)
nose and lip. These mast cell tumors are characterized by
Poorly-differentiated canine mast cell tumors are gener-
smaller uniform cells with minimal cytoplasm, and
ally large, poorly-circumscribed, and extend deeply into
folded, euchromatic nuclei with small nucleoli; cytoplas-
the subcutis. Necrosis and ulceration are common sec-
 mic granules are often indiscernible.
ondary features. The authors have also observed smaller
Giemsa and toluidine blue stains often will identify a
lesions confined to the dermis that have grade III cyto-
few cytoplasmic metachromatic granules in at least a
logic features; these are not specifically addressed in the
small subpopulation of neoplastic cells. The granules
 original Patnaik system, and their biologic behavior is
may be very small, requiring use of oil immersion for
unknown.
detection. Immunohistochemistry may be required for
 Round to polygonal or highly pleomorphic tumor cells
confrmation of mast cell origin (see below). The
 are arranged primarily in solid sheets and nests. Cell
eosinophilotactic effects of the mast cells continue to
margins are often not well defned. Nuclei are large,
decrease with increasing anaplasia, but eosinophils are
round to ovoid and vesicular, and have prominent
still detectable in small numbers in most instances, and
may be abundant in rare cases.
Grade II mast cell tumors usually are very poorly gran-
ulated, and hence must be differentiated from other cuta-
neous round cell tumors including nonepitheliotropic
lymphomas, plasma cell tumors, canine histiocytomas,
 transmissible venereal tumors, round cell type histiocytic
sarcomas, Merkel cell tumors, and balloon cell malignant
melanomas. The presence of eosinophils is not a reliable
differential feature of mast cell tumors, as cutaneous
lymphomas can have variable numbers of reactive
eosinophils. The tumor cells of nonepitheliotropic cuta-
neous lymphomas usually have less cytoplasm and round,
occasionally
cleaved nuclei. Plasma cell tumors are
usually characterized by packeting of tumor cells, mod-
erate pleomorphism, and the presence of binucleated and
multinucleated tumor cells. The dense cytoplasmic RNA
in plasma cells stains magenta with methyl green pyro-
nine (MGP) stain; also, well-differentiated plasma cells
are often present along the margin of the tumor mass.
gates, a feature not observed with mast cell tumors.
Canine histiocytomas also have a top-heavy confguration
and are composed of a relatively monomorphic cell
 population of round cells with round or indented nuclei.
 Transmissible venereal tumors have cytoplasmic vacuoles
 that can be easily appreciated in imprint preparations or
aspirates. Moreover eosinophils are not common in
 transmissible venereal tumors. Both regressing histiocy-
tomas and transmissible venereal tumors are character-
ized by lymphoid infltrates, a feature not usually seen in
mast cell tumors. Histiocytic sarcomas primarily com-
posed of round cells may mimic grade II mast cell tumors
Fig. 36.4 Canine grade Ill mast cell tumor. Pleomorphic round cells
lack obvious cytoplasmic granularity. Anisokaryosis is marked, and
perfectly and immunohistochemisry may be required.
nucleoli are often prominent. Note the large population of
The majority of histiocytic tumors, however, have at least
eosinophils.
a small subpopulation of tumor cells that are spindled. In
858
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
contrast to mast cell tumors, Merkel cell tumors are com-
FELINE MAST CELL TUMOR
 posed of tight packets of round cells separated by a deli-
cate fbrovascular stroma. The argyrophilic cytoplasmic
Feline mast cell tumors include well-differentiated mast
granules in Merkel cells are highlighted with Grimelius
cell tumors, atypical poorly granulated mast cell tumors,
stain. Moreover Merkel cell tumors have membrane
also referred to as "histiocytic mast cell tumors' (Wilcock
bound dense core granules and tonoflament-like struc-
et al., 1986), and pleomorphic mast cell tumors (Johnson
tures that are identified
with electron 
microscopy.
et al., 2002). The authors choose to use the term 'atypi-
Fontana-Masson stain should reveal small amounts of
cal poorly-granulated mast cell tumor′ instead of “histio-
melanin pigment in balloon cell melanomas.
cytic mast cell tumor' (Wilcock et al., 1986), as the latter
term may lead to confusion with true histiocytic prolifer-
Immunohistochemistry
ations. Histopathologic grading using the system of
Patnaik et al. (1984) does not appear to have reliable
Based on limited data, mast cells tumors are positive for
prognostic significance in cats (Molander-McCrary et al.,
the common leukocyte marker CD45 and variably retain
1998). The presence of c-kit mutations similar to those
their expression of the leukocyte antigens CD45RA
in mast cell proliferations in humans and dogs was not
and CD18 (Moore, PF. & Affolter VK., unpublished
 documented in splenic mast cell tumors in cats (London,
data, 2003). Immunohistochemistry with antiryptase and
C.A., personal communication, 2002). Thus, the use of
antichymase antibodies may assist identification of mast
anti-KIT antibodies for diagnosis of cutaneous mast cell
cell origin (Fernandez et al., 2003). However, based on
tumors in cats may not be of value, but has not been
the experience of one author (V.K.A.), immunohisto-
specifically investigated.
chemistry with antitryptase antibodies is often associated
with background staining and occasional spurious stain-
Clinical features
ing of histiocytes.
Canine mast cell tumors express KIT (Reguera et al.,
The incidence of feline mast cell tumors documented in
2000), and there is a direct correlation between advanc-
most reports varies between about 8% and 15% of skin
ing grade and the intensity of expression of this protein
tumors (Macy & Reynolds, 1981; Buerger & Scott, 1987;
(see above). Thus the immunohistochemical detection of
Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992). Another survey reported
KIT is useful both for the identification of mast cell
an incidence of 21% (Miller et al., 1991). Feline mast cell
tumors as well as for prognostication. The proliferation
tumors present as discrete, frm, tan, alopecic papules and
index based on Ki67, also of prognostic value (see above),
nodules, ranging from a few millimeters to 2 cm in diam-
can be assessed by immunohistochemistry utilizing MIB-
eter. Solitary or multiple nodules may develop. Larger
1 antibody.
lesions are often focally ulcerated. The head and legs are
Similar to mast cell tumors, lymphomas, plasma cell
more often affected (Buerger & Scott, 1987; Goldschmidt
tumors, cutaneous histiocytomas, histiocytic sarcomas,
& Shofer 1992); the head, upper thigh, and dorsal tail
and transmissible venereal tumors all express the common
were favored in another report (Macy & Reynolds,
leukocyte antigen CD45. The vast majority of canine
1981). Atypical poorly granulated mast cell tumors, frst
cutaneous lymphomas are composed of CD3+ T cells.
documented as “histiocytic mast cell tumors’ (Wilcock
 Plasma cell tumors express CD45RA, immunoglobulins
et al., 1986), occur as grouped papular or nodular lesions,
or immunoglobulin light chains, and may retain the
usually on the head.
expression of CD79a. Histiocytomas and histiocytic sar-
Typical mast cell tumors are rarely observed in cats
comas are composed of CD18+, CD1+, CD11c+, MHC
under 4 years of age. The average age of affected animals
I+ dendritic cells; histiocytomas co-express E-cadherin.
in all surveys is about 9 to 11 years. Atypical poorly-
Transmissible venereal tumors coexpress CD45RA and
 granulated mast cell tumors have been observed in 6-
may be positive for the adhesion molecule CD49d. Both
week-old to 4-year-old cats (Wilcock et al., 1986).
 melanocytic tumors and Merkel cell tumors lack expres-
Siamese cats are predisposed to develop mast cel tumors,
sion of leukocytic proteins such as CD45 and CD18.
 including the atypical poorly-granulated mast cell tumors
Melanocytic tumors may be positive for S100, melanoma-
(Wilcock et al., 1986; Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992).
associated  antigen
1(Melan-A),
, melanoma-associated
 There is no apparent sex predilection. An association
antigen recognized by T cells (MART-1), tyrosinase-
between feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) infection
related
protein-2 (TRP-2), E-cadherin,
tyrosinase,
and the development of multiple cutaneous mast cell
HMB45/gp100, and melanoma isoform of microph-
tumors has been reported (Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992).
thalmia
a transcription factor (MITF-M).
Merkel
cell
Most reviews consider the majority of feline mast cell
tumors are positive for pancytokeratins, neuron-specifc
tumors to be largely benign neoplasms with low local
enolase (NSE), synaptophysin, and chromogranin A.
recurrence rates (Wilcock et al., 1986; Buerger & Scott,
Mast cell tumors
859
1987; Molander-McCrary et al., 1998; Johnson et al.,
2002). Development of additional primary tumors at
other cutaneous sites has been reported in 35% of
affected cats in one survey; distant metastasis was not
observed (Buerger & Scott, 1987). Atypical poorly-
 granulated mast cell tumors sometimes recur as multiple
crops of miliary nodules, which eventually regress spon-
taneously (Wilcock et al., 1986). This behavior suggests
a reactive hyperplasia rather than neoplasia. Most studies
indicate that morphologic features usually associated
with malignancy, such as pleomorphism and inflrrative
growth, do not correlate with malignant behavior
(Buerger & Scott, 1987; Molander-McCrary et al., 1998;
Johnson et al., 2002), although high mitotic activity may
be an exception (Johnson et al., 2002). It is thus appar-
ent that feline cutaneous mast cell tumors, regardless of
morphology, generally have a favorable prognosis despite
 their tendency to occur at additional skin sites. However,
the authors have observed nodal mast cell infltrates in
rare cats with a history of cutaneous mast cell neoplasia.
Rarely, numerous and widespread papular to small
nodular cutaneous mast cell tumors may result from cuta-
neous spread of primary visceral mast cell neoplasia.
Histopathology
Well-differentiated mast cell tumor (Figure 36.5)
In general, feline mast cell tumors, as typified by the
well-differentiated subtype, present as variably demar-
Fig. 36.5 Well-differentiated mast cell turmor in a cat. Uniform
cated but unencapsulated dermal masses that may occa-
round cells with centrally-located nuclei and granular cytoplasm are
sionally extend into the subcutaneous tissue. Usually,
arranged in cords and sheets. Note scattered eosinophils (arrow).
there is a narrow band of uninvolved superficial dermis
(Grenz zone). Occasionally, tumor cells extend to the
dermal-epidermal junction (Buerger & Scott, 1987).
Single tumor cells may rarely be seen within the epider-
Atypical, poorly granulated (histiocytic') mast
mis, but intraepithelial tumor aggregates are not observed
cell tumor (Figure 36.6)
(Buerger & Scott, 1987). Larger masses may be ulcerated.
These mast cell proliferations are small, nonencapsulated,
There is a delicate collagenous stroma. The number of
 deep dermal and subcutaneous nodules comprising solid
admixed eosinophils varies, but is usually small. Nodular
sheets of a mixture of large polygonal cells and slightly
aggregates of lymphocytes may be observed.
spindle-shaped cells, which may resemble histiocytes. The
 The tumors are composed of solid sheets and cords of
nuclei are large, vesicular and may be slightly indented.
uniform round cells with discrete cytoplasmic margins.
Nucleoli are small, and mitotic activity is low. The tumor
The cytoplasm is variably granular and may appear
cells have ample, pale eosinophilic cytoplasm, which may
eosinophilic, grayish, or muddy. The granules, although
 be vacuolated. There is equivocal cytoplasmic granularity
often very fine, can usually be recognized without special
when evaluated by hematoxylin and eosin (HE) stains.
stains. They are metachromatically purple with toluidine
Most cells have orthochromatic (blue) granules when
blue or Giemsa stains. The centrally or slightly paracen-
 stained with Giemsa or toluidine blue stains. Some tumor
Aanenapou aeu pue punon ane lelnu panen kn
cells have faint metachromatic purple granulation, indi-
stippled chromatin. Nuclear pleomorphism is absent to
cating mastocytic origin. Moreover these granules have
minimal. Nucleoli are inconspicuous, and mitotic fgures
features typical of feline mast cells when evaluated by
are rarely observed. Feline well-differentiated mast cell
electron microscopy (Wilcock et al., 1986). Eosinophils
tumors are fairly characteristic, and differentiation from
tend to be more numerous than in typical feline mast cell
other round cell tumors is not problematic.
tumors.
860
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
®
0.6
ML
9r
中
          
Fig. 36.7 Pleomorphic mast cell tumor in a cat. This tumor is com-
There are well-defined, large round tumor cells with vesicular, round
posed of large pleomorphic cells which have slightly granular cyto-
to oval nuclei and amphophilic finely vacuolated cytoplasm with lack
plasm and moderate anisokaryosis. Note the infiltrate of eosinophils
of cytoplasmic granules. Note resemblance to histiocytes.
and lymphocytes at right edge.
Arypical, poorly-granulated mast cell tumors in cats
Pleomorphic mast cell tumor (Figure 36.7)
must be differentiated from histiocytic lesions, in partic-
A small percentage of feline mast cell tumors exhibit
ular, feline progressive dendritic cell histiocytosis and
marked pleomorphism. These poorly-differentiated neo-
cutaneous xanthomas. The presence of metachromatic
plasms are usually larger, less discrete, and infltrate more
granules, visualized by toluidine blue or Giemsa stains,
deeply into the underlying tissue. Partial or total loss of
confrms mast cell origin. Moreover, progressive histiocy-
 cytoplasmic granulation is evident with routine HE stains
tosis generally lacks eosinophils, which are usually
as well as with toluidine blue and Giemsa stains. The few
present in moderate numbers in atypical poorly-
metachromatic granules that may be present are very
granulated mast cell tumors. Xanthomas may contain
delicate, and oil immersion may be required for their
eosinophils as well, but they are usually associated with
detection. The nuclei are large and often eccentric in loca-
admixed lymphocytes and neutrophils. In contrast to
 tion, and they have variable chromatin patterns. Nucleoli
atypical poorly-granulated mast cell tumors, cutaneous
are single and vary from inconspicuous to prominent.
xanthomas are composed of macrophages that contain
 Mitotic activity may be moderate to high. Tumor giant
numerous, delicate, lipid vacuoles. Immunohistochem-
cells with single multilobulated nuclei or occasional mul-
istry may be necessary to differentiate between histiocytic
tiple nuclei may be seen.
proliferations and atypical poorly-granulated mast cell
Pleomorphic feline mast cell tumors should be differ-
tumors (see below).
entiated from other cutaneous round cell tumors, includ-
Mast cell tumors
861
ing nonepitheliotropic lymphomas, plasma cell tumors,
self-limiting mast cell hyperplasia to progressive, malig-
some amelanotic melanomas, and feline progressive den-
nant disease. Most pediatric cases of cutaneous mastocy-
dritic cell histiocytosis. In the majority of cases, Giemsa
tosis do not include systemic involvement and, in general,
or toluidine blue stain reveals metachromatic granulation
have a higher incidence of spontaneous regression. Some
in at least a small subpopulation of tumor cells. Nonepi-
 forms of cutaneous mastocytosis in humans are associated
theliotropic lymphoma is mostly composed of round cells
with mutations of the c-kit oncogene (Longley &
with a high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio, and nuclear
Metcalfe, 2000).
cleavage may be seen. Plasma cell tumors have less abun-
 In humans, cutaneous mastocytosis presents as either
dant, glassier cytoplasm; the high concentration of cyto-
urticaria pigmentosa (also referred to as maculopapular
plasmic RNA stains magenta with methyl green pyronine
cutaneous mastocytosis) or as diffuse cutaneous masto-
(MGP) stain. Small numbers of well-differentiated plasma
cytosis (Valent et al., 2001). Urticaria pigmentosa is char-
cells can usually be identifed, and amyloid may be
acterized by nodules or plaques, and may be associated
present. Occasional amelanotic melanomas in cats have
with telangiectasia. Diffuse mastocytosis is associated
abundant, eosinophilic cytoplasm and
eccentric,
pleo-
with diffusely thickened skin, which may have a smooth
morphic nuclei, but a few melanin granules
usually be
surface.
demonstrated by Fontana-Masson staining.
Feline pro-
Although involvement of the skin may occur, most case
gressive dendritic cell histiocytosis is characterized by pro-
reporrs of mastocytosis in dogs and cats describe systemic
liferations of large cells with abundant, pale eosinophilic
mastocytosis affecting several internal organs with or
cytoplasm, and often indented nuclei.
without mastocytemia (Orkin, 1967; Confer et al., 1978;
Weller, 1978; O'Keefe et al., 1987). A few cases of
Immunohistochemistry
primary  papular cutaneous mastocytosis resembling
urticaria pigmentosa in humans have been described in
The use of anti-KIT antibodies for feline cutaneous mast
dogs and cats (Davis et al., 1992; Vitale et al., 1996).
cell tumors has not been specifically investigated but may
 Clark also described a case of urticaria pigmentosa in a
not be of value, as c-kit mutations were not found in
dog (Gross & Schick, 1992). One case of cutaneous
splenic mast cell tumors in cats (London, C.A., personal
mastocytosis reported in a cat is more consistent with
communication, 2002). Moreover, the protease content of
diffuse mastocytosis as described in humans (Brown &
feline cutaneous mast cells has not been evaluated, so the
Chalmers, 1990).
value of immunohistochemistry for tryptase and chymase
in identifying poorly differentiated mast cell proliferations
in cats is still undetermined.
Clinical features
Pleomorphic feline mast cell tumors can be identified
by using immunohistochemistry to rule out other round
Urticaria pigmentosa/papular mastocytosis
cell tumors. Feline cutaneous lymphomas evaluated to
(Figure 36.8 through 36.10)
date are composed of CD3+ T cells. Feline plasmacytomas
 pe so u a  e si 1d 
(Davis et al., 1992; Gross & Schick, 1992; Vitale et al.,
leukocyte antigens such as CD45RA and CD79a, but the
1996). The dogs present with partially erythematous small
presence of intracytoplasmic immunoglobulins can be
papules; some papules progress to plaques. There may be
identifed. Feline progressive histiocytosis is composed of
occasional wheals. Rarely, hemorrhagic bullae develop.
CD18+, CD1+, MHC II+ cells, a phenotype consistent
The lesions are observed on the head, neck, trunk, per-
with dendritic antigen-presenting cells. Dermal amelan-
otic melanocytic tumors lack expression of the common
 matographism occurs, as manipulation induces erythema,
leukocyte antigens (CD45, CD18) and are usually posi-
edema, and subsequent induration (Darier's sign).
tive for S100. Melanoma isoform of microphthalmia tran-
Urticaria pigmentosa has been described in a
scription factor (MITF-M) appears to be strongly
Newfoundland, Cocker Spaniel, Labrador Retrievers,
expressed in feline melanomas.
and a Jack Russell Terrier (Davis et al., 1992; Gross &
Schick, 1992; Vitale et al., 1996), but the authors have
observed it in other breeds, including Chinese Shar Peis.
CUTANEOUS MASTOCYTOSIS
 Affected dogs are mostly under 1 year of age.
Based on the age of onset, mastocytosis in humans is
 Feline urticaria pigmentosa has been reported in three
usually divided into pediatric and adult forms (Longley &
related Sphinx cats (Vitale et al., 1996). Partially sym-
Metcalfe, 2000; Valent et al., 2001; Wolff et al., 2001).
 metrical, coalescing, dark brown macules with erythema
Cutaneous mastocytosis in humans ranges from benign
and miliary, crusted papules were noted on the ventrum,
862
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
 Fig. 36.8 Early urticaria pigmentosa
in a cat. A Giemsa stain shows
metachromatic granules in the cyto-
 plasm of the well-differentiated mast
cells.
36.9 Urticaria
pigmentosa/
papular mastocytosis in a puppy. The
small  dermal nodule is composed of
densely packed mast cells.
chest, neck, and extremities. The lesions were arranged in
urticaria pigmentosa to systemic mastocytosis may occur
a strikingly linear fashion and the skin was thickened and
and has been observed in a Labrador Retriever by one
lichenified. Dermatographism was not present. General-
author (T.L.G.) (Gross & Schick, 1992). The lesions in
ized pruritus was observed as well as moderate lym-
 the Sphinx cats regressed completely with antihistamine
phadenopathy. The age of the three Sphinx cats ranged
therapy. Progression to systemic lesions was not observed.
from 8 months to 2.5 years. The fact that all three cats
had the same grandsire may indicate a hereditary com-
Diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis
ponent to feline urticaria pigmentosa.
A single case was reported in a 1-year-old domestic short-
Similar to urticaria pigmentosa in infants, early onset
haired cat (Brown & Chalmers, 1990). Generalized,
 miliary, crusted papules with alopecia and erosions were
leaving hyperpigmented macules. Other cases require con-
seen. The skin was diffusely lichenified and thick skinfolds
tinuous antihistamine therapy. However, progression from
were noted. The lesions were pruritic. There was moder-
Mast cell tumors
863
Fig. 36.10 Higher magnification of
urticaria pigmentosa/papular mastocy-
tosis of Fig. 36.9 showing well differ-
entiated mast cells with heavily
granulated cytoplasm.
ate generalized peripheral lymphadenopathy. Mast cells
characterized by predominantly perivascular mast cell
 aggregates, should be differentiated from a hypersensitiy-
were seen in the buffy coat, but involvement of internal
ity reaction, which may contain numerous mast cells as
organs could not be found at the time of evaluation.
well, particularly in cats.
Euthanasia precluded determination of the natural clini-
cal course.
Diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis
The case reported in a domestic shorthaired cat was
Histopathology
described as a diffuse dermal or superfcial band-like
infltration of moderately pleomorphic polygonal cells
Urticaria pigmentosa/papular mastocytosis
with large vesicular nuclei (Brown & Chalmers, 1990).
The lesions of urticaria pigmentosa are characterized by
The cells had abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm, which
a moderate to severe, perivascular to diffuse infltrate of
contained metachromatic purple granules with toluidine
fairly monomorphic, well-differentiated mast cells that
blue and Giemsa staining. Binucleated and multinucleated
may extend from the superfcial to the deep dermis. The
mast cells were common, and occasional mitotic fgures
infltration is poorly demarcated and may extend into the
were seen. The surrounding dermal and subcutaneous
subcutis. A perivascular arrangement of mast cells may be
tissue was edematous. Lymph node involvement was
seen at the margins of the lesions. The lesional mast cells
characterized by subcapsular, paracortical, and medullary
are characterized by a central nucleus and granular cyto-
infltration of similar moderately pleomorphic mast cells.
plasm. Toluidine blue and Giemsa stains demonstrate
Diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis is differentiated from
the typical metachromatic character of the cytoplasmic
urticaria pigmentosa by a pleomorphic cell type, in con-
granules. Mitotic fgures are rare. Small numbers of
trast to the well-differentiated infltrate of the latter.
eosinophils and neutrophils are admixed, and lymphoid
aggregates may be present.
REFERENCES
With lymph node involvement, numerous mast cells are
 detected in the subcapsular sinusoids and the paracortex.
Introduction
The migrating mast cells are well differentiated and have
Auxilia, S.T. & Hill, P.B. (2000) Mast cell distribution, epider.
obvious granulated cytoplasm.
mal thickness and hair follicle density in normal canine skin:
Urticaria pigmentosa is characterized by well-
possible explanation for the predilection sites of atopic der-
differentiated mast cells and definitive diagnosis is usually
matitis? Vet Dermatol 11, 247-54.
not problematic. Clinical characteristics should permit
Clarke, A.R., Purdie, C.A., Harrison, D.J. et al. (1993) Thymo-
differentiation of urticaria pigmentosa in dogs from small
juapuadapu! pue juapuadap-csd Aq pasnpu! sisondode aio
dermal grade I mast cell tumors. Mild early changes,
pathways. Nature 362, 849-52.
864
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Foster, A.D. (1994) A study of the number and distribution of
canine spontaneous mast cell tumours. Br J Cancer 59,
cutaneous mast cells in cats with disease not affecting the skin.
915-18.
Vet Dermatol 5, 17-20.
Conroy, J.D. (1983) Canine skin tumors.J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
Ginn, PE., Fox, L.E., Brower, J.C. et al. (2000) Immunohisto-
19, 91-114.
chemical detection of p53 tumor-suppressor protein is a poor
Fernandez, N., West, K., Jackson, M. et al. (2003) Immunohis-
indicator of prognosis for canine cutaneous mast cell tumors.
tochemical and enzyme histochemical stains for the diagnosis
Vet Pathol 37, 33-9.
of canine cutaneous mast cell tumors and histiocytomas. Vet
Gordon, J.R., Burd, PR. & Galli, S.J. (1990) Mast cells as a
Pathol 40, 613 (abstract).
source of multifunctional cytokines. Immunol Today 11,
Gieger, T., Theon, A., Werner, J. et al. (2003) Muzzle mast cell
458-64.
tumors in dogs: 24 cases (1990-2001). J Vet Intern Med 17,
Hill, P.B. (2002) Mast cells: a review of their biology and role
687-92.
in cutaneous inflammation, In: Advances in Veterinary
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, FS. (1992) Skin Tumors in the
Dermatology, Vol. 4 (ed. K.L. Thoday, C. Foil & R. Bond),
Dog and Cat, p. 2-3, 231-51. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
pp. 161-77. Blackwell Publishing, Oxford.
Kiupel, M., Webster, J.D., Kaneene, J.B. et al. (2004) The use
Hill, PB. & Martin, R.J.(1998) A review of mast cell biology.
 of KIT and tryptase expression patterns as prognostic tools
Vet Dermatol 9, 145-66.
for canine cutaneous mast cell tumours. Vet Pathol 41,
Jaffe, M.H., Hosgood, G., Taylor, H.W. et al. (2000) Immuno-
371-7.
histochemical and clinical evaluation of p53 in canine cuta-
Kravis, L.D., Vail, D.M., Kisseberth, W.C. et al. (1996) Fre-
neous mast cell tumors. Vet Patbot 37, 40-6.
 quency of argyrophilic nucleolar organizer regions in fine-
Kube, P, Audige, L., Kuther, K. et al. (1998) Distribution,
needle aspirates and biopsy specimens from mast cell tumors
density and heterogeneity of canine mast cells and influence
in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 209, 1418-20.
of fixation techniques. Histochem Cell Biol 110, 129-35.
Leibman, N.F., Lana, S.E., Hansen, R.A. et al. (2000) Identifi-
Levine, A.J., Momand, J. & Finlay, C.A. (1991) The p53 tumor
cation of matrix metalloproteinases in canine cutaneous mast
suppressor gene, Nature 351, 453-6.
cell tumors. J Vet Intern Med 14, 583-6.
London, C.A., Kisseberth, W.C., Galli, S.J. et al. (1996) Expres
London, C.A. & Seguin, B. (2003) Mast cell tumors in the dog.
sion of stem cell factor receptor (c-kit) by malignant mast cells
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 33,473-89.
from spontaneous canine mast cell tumors. J Comp Pathol
Michels, G.M., Knapp, D.W, De Nicola, D.B. et al. (2002)
115, 399-414.
Prognosis following surgical excision of canine cutaneous
London, C.A., Galli, S.J., Yuuki, T. et al. (1999) Spontaneous 
mast cell tumors with histopathologically tumor-free versus
canine mast cell tumors express tandem duplication of the
non-tumor-free margins: a retrospective study of 31 cases. J
proto-oncogene c-kit. Exp Hematol 27,687-97.
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38, 458-66.
Longley, B.J. & Metcalfe, D.D. (2000) A proposed classification 
 Miller, D.M. (1995) The occurrence of mast cell tumors in young
 of mastocytosis incorporating molecular genetics. Hematol
Shar-Peis. J Vet Diagn Invest 7, 360-3.
Oncol Clin North Am 14, 697-701.
Patnaik, A.K., Ehler, W.J. & MacEwen, E.G. {1984) Canine
Rogers, K.S. (1996) Mast cell tumors: dilemmas in diagnosis and
cutaneous mast cell tumor: morphologic grading and survival
treatment. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 26, 87-102.
time in 83 dogs. Vet Pathot 21, 469-74.
Valent, P., Horny, H.-P., Li, C.Y. et al. (2001) Mastocytosis (mast
Pulley, L.T. & Stannard, A.A. (1990) Tumors of the skin and
cell disease). In: Pathology and Genetics: Tumours of
soft tissues. In: Tumors in Domestic Animals, 3rd edn (ed. J.E.
Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues, Vol. 1 (eds E.S. Jaffe,
Moulton), pp. 38-43. University of California Press, Berkeley.
N.L. Harris, H. Stein & J.W. Vardiman), pp. 292-302. IARC
Rabanal, R. & Ferrer, L. (2002) Mast cell tumors: from the
Press, Lyon.
molecular biology to the clinic. In: Proceedings of the ISVD
Welle, M. (1997) Development, significance, and heterogeneity
Meeting, Nice, pp. 11-26.
of mast cells with particular regard to the mast cell-specific
Reguera, M.J., Rabanal, R.M., Puigdemont, A. et al. (2000)
proteases chymase and tryptase. J Leukoc Biol 61, 233-45.
Canine mast cell tumors express stem cell factor receptor. Am
Zemke, D., Yamini, B. & Yuzbasiyan-Gurkan, V. (2002) Muta-
J Dermatopathol 22, 49-54.
tions in the juxtamembrane domain of c-kit are associated
Sakai, N., Noda, A., Shirai, N, et al. (2002) Proliferative activ-
with higher grade mast cell tumors in dogs. Vet Pathol 39,
ity of canine mast cell tumors evaluated by bromodeoxyuri-
529-35.
dine incorporation and Ki-67 expression. J Comp Pathol 127,
233-8.
Canine Mast Cell Tumor
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
Bensignor, E., Delisle, F. & Devauchelle, P. (1998) A retrospec-
Small Animal Dermatology, 6th edn, pp. 1320-30. WB.
tive study of 84 cases of mast cell tumors in dogs. In: Advances
Saunders, Philadelphia.
in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 3 (eds K.W. Kwochka,
Seguin, B., Leibman, N.F, Bregazzi, V.S. et al. (2001) Clinical
T. Willemse & C. von Tscharner), pp. 560-1. Butterworth-
outcome of dogs with grade-Il mast cell tumors treated with
Heinemann, Oxford.
surgery alone: 55 cases (1996-1999). J Am Vet Med Assoc
Bostock, D.E. (1973) The prognosis following surgical removal
218,1120-3.
of mastocytomas in dogs. J Small Anim Pract 14, 27-41.
Strefezzi, R.F, Xavier, J.G. & Catao-Dias, J.L. (2003) Mor-
Bostock, D.E., Crocker, J., Harris, K. et al. (1989) Nuclear
phometry of canine cutaneous mast cell tumors. Vet Pathol
organizer regions as indicators of post-surgical prognosis in
40,268-75.
Mast cell tumors
865
Tams, TR. & Macy, D.W. (1981) Canine mast cell tumors.
Cutaneous Mastocytosis
Comp Cont Educ 3, 869-76.
Brown, C.A. & Chalmers, S.A. (1990) Diffuse cutaneous mas-
Zemke, D., Yamini, B. & Yuzbasiyan-Gurkan, V. (2002) Muta-
tocytosis in a cat. Vet Pathol 27, 366-9.
tions in the juxtamembrane domain of c-kit are associated
Confer, A.W., Langloss, J.M. & Cashell, I.G. (1978) Long-term
with higher grade mast cell tumors in dogs. Vet Pathol 39,
survival of two cats with mastocytosis. J Am Vet Med Assoc
529-35.
172, 160-1.
Davis, B.J., Page, R., Sannes, PL. et al. (1992) Cutaneous mas-
Feline Mast Cell Tumor
tocytosis in a dog. Vet Pathol 29, 363-5.
Buerger, R.G. & Scott, D.W. (1987) Cutaneous mast cell neo-
Gross, T.L. & Schick R.O. (1992) Dermatopathology of newly
plasia in cats: 14 cases (1975-1985). J Am Vet Med Assoc 190,
described skin diseases (workshop report). In: Advances in
1440-4.
Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 2 (eds P.J. Ihrke, I.S. Mason &
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, FS. (1992) Skin Tumors in
S.D. White), pp. 417-20. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
the Dog and Cat, pp. 2-3; 231-51. Pergamon Press,
Longley, B.J. & Metcalfe, D.D. (2000) A proposed classification
Oxford.
of mastocytosis incorporating molecular genetics. Hematol
Johnson, T.O., Schulman, F.Y, Lipscomb, T.P. et al. (2002)
Oncol Clin North Am 14,697-701.
Histopathology
and biologic behavior of pleomorphic
O'Keefe, D.A., Couto, C.G., Burke-Schwartz, C. et al. (1987)
cutaneous mast cell tumors in fifteen cats. Vet Pathol 39,
Systemic mastocytosis in 16 dogs. J Vet Intern Med 1, 75-80.
452-7.
Orkin, M. (1967) Mastocytosis in animals. Arch Dermatol 96,
Macy, D.W. & Reynolds, H.A. (1981) The incidence, character-
381-5.
istics and clinical management of skin tumors in cats. J Am
Valent, P., Horny, H.-P., Li, C.Y. et al. (2001) Mastocytosis (mast
Anim Hosp Assoc 17, 1026-34.
cell disease). In: Pathology and Genetics: Tumours of
Miller, M.A., Nelson, S.L., Turk, J.R. et al. (1991) Cutaneous
Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues, Vol. 1 (eds E.S. Jaffe,
neoplasia in 340 cats. Vet Pathol 28, 389-95.
N.L. Harris, H. Stein & J.W. Vardiman), pp. 292-302. IARC
Molander-McCrary, H., Henry, C.J., Potter, K. et al. (1998)
Press, Lyon.
Cutaneous mast cell tumors in cats: 32 cases (1991-1994). J
Vitale, C.B., Ihrke, PJ., Olivry, I. et al. (1996) Feline urticaria
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 34, 281-4.
pigmentosa in three related Sphinx cats. Vet Dermatol 7,
Patnaik, A.K.,Ehler, WJ. & MacEwen, E.G. (1984) Canine
227-33.
cutaneous mast cell tumor: morphologic grading and survival
Weller, R.E (1978) Systemic mastocytosis and mastocytemia in
time in 83 dogs. Vet Pathol 21, 469-74.
a cat. Mod Vet Pract 59, 41-3.
Wilcock, B.P, Yager, JA. & Zink M.C. (1986) The morphology
Wolff, K., Komar, M. & Petzelbauer, P (2001) Clinical and
and behavior of feline cutaneous mastocytomas. Vet Pathol
histopathological aspects of cutaneous mastocytosis. Leuk Res
23,320-4.
25, 519-28.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Chapter 37
Lymphocytic
 tumors
Skin tumors of lymphocytic origin in humans include
 cats, irrespective of location, being about twice as high as
neoplastic and reactive lesions that are composed of
 in dogs. The role of feline leukemia virus (FeLV) in feline
skin-seeking lymphocytes (Le Boit & McCalmont,
leukermia and lymphoma has been well established. The
1997). These cells are an essential component of the skin-
presence of FeLV was demonstrated in a cat with epithe-
associated lymphoid tissue (SALT) (Bos & Kapsenberg,
liotropic lymphoma (Tobey et al., 1994). A canine retro-
1990). They express the cutaneous lymphocyte antigen
virus has been isolated from a leukemic dog (Safran et al.,
(CLA), a glycoprotein that facilitates the binding of lym-
1992), but there is no clear indication of retroviral
phocytes to E-selectin on high endothelial venules in the
involvement in canine cutaneous lymphoma (Moore &
skin (Picker et al., 1990, 1991). Cutaneous lymphocytic
Olivry, 1994).
proliferations in humans have been categorized as: (1)
 The majority of feline and canine lymphocytic prolif-
epitheliotropic lymphoma, also referred to as mycosis
erations in the skin are composed of T cells. B cell lym-
fungoides; (2) Sézary syndrome, which is a leukemic
phomas are extremely rare. Most cutaneous B cell
variant of epitheliotropic lymphoma; (3) nonepithelio-
proliferations present as plasma cell tumors. Lymphocyte
tropic lymphoma, which also includes vasotropic
subpopulations express different cell surface antigens
lymphoma (also referred to as lymphomatoid granulo-
(Table 37.1), and hence can be identified by their
matosis) and intravascular large B cell lymphoma; (4)
- se on pnan oel sisodi snoi
 et al., 1998). A limited panel of antibodies is currently
toma cutis, cutaneous lymphocytic hyperplasia,
and
available to identify and characterize lymphocytes and
pseudolymphoma); and (5) cutaneous (extramedullary)
plasma cells in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues
plasmacytoma or plasma cell tumor (Le Boit & McCal-
(Table 37.1). Immunohistochemical evaluation of fresh,
mont, 1997).
snap-frozen tisue allows use of a more extensive panel of
Histologic differences between reactive and neoplastic
antibodies, as epitopes are not denatured by the process
lymphocytic proliferations are not always evident. Evalu-
 of fixation. Clonality testing of T cell and B cell popula-
ation of lesions for expansion of clonal lymphocytic pop-
tions by PCR is becoming more accessible in veterinary
ulations can be achieved by amplification of variable
medicine, which should continue to provide more in
regions of immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) for B cells
depth assessment of lymphocytic proliferations of
and of T cell receptors for T cells using polymerase chain
dogs and cats (Dreitz et al., 1999; Vernau & Moore,
reaction (PCR) or Southern blotting (Bakels et al., 1997;
1999).
Wood, 2001; Holm et al., 2002). The presence of a clonal
lymphocytic population is supportive of a neoplastic pro-
CUTANEOUS PLASMACYTOMA
liferation (Bakels et al., 1997; Wood, 2001), while reac-
tive lymphocytic infltrates are usually composed of
(Synonym: plasma cell tumor)
polyclonal lymphocytic populations. However, clonal
lesions with subsequent spontaneous regression have been
Extramedullary plasma cell tumors in humans may
reported to occur in humans within the context of a reac-
develop in various organs, including the skin and subcutis
tive process such as drug reaction or lichen planus (Bakels
(Grogan et al., 2001). Cutaneous plasmacytomas have
et al., 1997; Ceballos et al., 2002; Holm et al., 2002).
been recognized in dogs and cats (Carothers et al., 1989;
As reviewed by Moore and Olivry (1994), cutaneous
Schrenzel et al., 1998; Majzoub et al., 2003). The etiol-
lymphocytic proliferations represent about 3% to 8% of
ogy of plasmacytomas is unknown. In murine plasma-
all canine lymphomas and about 0.2% to 1.7% of feline
cytoma models, a direct relationship between chronic
lymphomas, with the overall incidence of lymphoma in
 persistent antigen-induced inflammation or administra-
866
Lymphocytic tumors
867
Table 37.1  Phenotypic characteristics of
Cell type
 Phenotype in
T cells, B cells, and plasma cells.
Fresh-frozen tissue
Formalin-fixed tissue
T cells
CD45
CD45
[CD45RA]*
[CD45RA]*
CD18
CD18
CD3
CD3&
CD5
CD4 (helper cells)
CD8 (cytotoxic cells); αα or αβ
T cell receptor (TCRαβ or TCRyd)
B cells
CD45
CD45
CD18
CD18
CD79a
CD79a
[CD45RA]*
[CD45RA]*
CD21
 Plasma cells
CD45
CD45
[CD18]*
[CD18]*
CD45RA*
CD45RA*
Immunoglobulin (IgG, IgA, IgM)
Immunoglobulin (IgG, IgA, IgM)
[CD79a]*
[CD79a]*
*[Incidence of expression varies]
tion of immunomodulatory drugs and tumorigenesis has
dogs with chronic otitis, and oral masses mainly involve
been documented (Potter et al., 1994). Canine plasmacy-
the maxillary gingiva, particularly in dogs with chronic
tomas were reported to occur in the context of otitis and
periodontal disease (Schrenzel et al., 1998).
periodontal disease in dogs (Schrenzel et al., 1998).
A case resembling human systemic plasmacytosis was
described in a Keeshond with edematous, alopecic,
Clinical features
erythematous, and crusting lesions of the rear legs,
 groin, scrotum, and chest (Gookin et al., 1998). Regional
Canine cutaneous plasmacytomas have been reported
lymphadenopathy and polyclonal gammopathy  were
with increasing frequency, and are considered to represent
observed; Bence-Jones proteins and osteolysis (as seen in
a signifcant portion of canine cutaneous round cell
multiple myeloma) were not discovered.
tumors (Schrenzel et al., 1998). The incidence of plasma-
 In cats, solitary or multiple cutaneous or subcutaneous
cytomas is reported to be 1.5% of all canine skin tumors
plasmacytomas have been documented on the paws,
(Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992). Cutaneous plasmacy-
thorax, neck,
shoulder tail, metatarsus, and nose
tomas are rare in cats.
(Majzoub et al., 2003), but may also develop on the face,
 In most instances, canine cutaneous plasmacytomas
in particular lip and chin, as well as in the oral cavity.
develop as solitary lesions, but multiple masses may
 One reported case of feline extramedullary plasmacytoma
Occur, and may be numerous in some cases (Rakich et al.,
included multiple masses in the subcutis; subsequently
1989). Plasmacytomas are sessile, frm, raised dermal
internal lesions developed (Carothers et al., 1989).
masses measuring less than 2 cm in diameter. There is rare
 Plasmacytomas have been seen in dogs between 4 and
extension to the subcutis. The surface is either sparsely
13 years of age, with an average age of approximately
haired or alopecic, but rarely ulcerated. Mucosal plasma-
10 years. Some surveys did not observe an apparent
cytomas have an intact surface epithelium and are either
breed
 predilection (Rowland et al., 1991; Schrenzel
pedunculated or have a broad base. Common locations
et al., 1998). However, others report Cocker Spaniels,
are the pinnae, lips, digits, chin, and oral cavity. In one
Airedale Terriers, Kerry Blue Terriers, Scottish Terriers,
study of canine plasmacytomas, the legs and trunk were
and Standard Poodles to be predisposed (Rakich et al.,
common sites (Cangul et al., 2002), while in another, the
1989; Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992; Platz et al., 1999).
paws and oral mucosa were affected most often (Platz
 Some studies report a predisposition for males (Breuer et
et al., 1999). Masses of the pinna may be observed in
al., 1993; Platz et al., 1999; Cangul et al., 2002), while
868
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
another source does not indicate any sex predisposition
Histopathology (Figures 37.1 through 37.6)
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992).
 Feline plasmacytomas are usually seen in older cats,
Canine cutaneous plasmacytomas are usually circum-
 and have been reported in cats between 6 and 20 years of
scribed but nonencapsulated uni- or multinodular masses
 age (Majzoub et al., 2003). There is no breed predilection
that are mostly confned to the dermis; some lesions have
based on the small number of cases described (Breuer
poorly defined margins, and some extend into the subcutis.
et al., 1993; Majzoub et al., 2003). Some studies report
There is usually a narrow but distinct zone of uninvolved
that male cats appear to be affected more often than
superficial dermis (Grenz zone), but tumor cells will occa-
female cats (Lucke, 1987; Breuer et al., 1993; Day,
sionally extend to the epidermis. The neoplasms are com-
1995). However others do not report a sex predilection
posed predominantly of round to polygonal cells arranged
in sheets and tightly packed nests. Occasionally, there is a
(Goldschmidt & Shofer 1992; Majzoub et al., 2003).
pseudoglandular arrangement of cells with erythrocytes in
Most cutaneous plasmacytomas are benign lesions, and
 surgical excision is usually curative. The authors suspect
the center. At the periphery of the neoplasm the plasma-
cytic character of the tumor cells is more apparent, and the 
 that digital plasmacytomas, as well as plasmacytomas of
 cells are smaller, less cohesive, and are arranged in rows.
the oral cavity or subcutis may be more behaviorally
The tumor nests are separated by a delicate, interlaced
aggressive; this has not been documented in the literature,
fbrovascular stroma. Reticulin fbers, which can be
however. Occasionally, solitary or multiple cutaneous
plasmacytomas exhibit malignant behavior and may
demonstrated with Gomori's or Wilder's silver stains,
 incompletely surround the plasma cell aggregates.
metastasize to internal organs.
Marked  variation  in tumor  cell differentiation is
Recent studies describe six histologic subtypes of plas-
macytomas in dogs (Platz et al., 1999; Cangul et al.,
 common, and anisocytosis and anisokaryosis are usually
2002) and four histologic subtypes in cats (see below)
(Majzoub et al., 2003). There was no reported correla-
 tion in dogs between cell type of plasmacytoma and prog-
 nosis in one study (Cangul et al, 2002). In a second study,
three of 14 polymorphous-blastic type tumors demon-
strated metastasis to regional lymph nodes (Platz et al.,
1999).
 Recent studies have assessed the proliferative rates of
canine plasmacytomas, considered of prognostic rele-
vance in human tumor studies, by immunohistochemistry
for the nonhistone nuclear antigen Ki67 (Platz et al.,
1999) and the proto-oncogene cyclin D1 (Cangul et al.,
2002). There was no statistical correlation between cell
type and the presence of the cell proliferation marker
Ki67 assessed by MIB1 monoclonal antibody (Platz et al.,
1999). Staining for cyclin D1 was sparse to negative in all
but one tumor in another study; in contrast, three of six
cases of multiple myeloma were positive (Cangul et al.,
2002). Similar feline studies have not been performed.
An association with systemic plasma cell dyscrasia is
considered to be uncommon in dogs (Rakich et al., 1989);
au aidnnu peq Apnis ieq un sop s jo ino om
monoclonal gammopathy was not investigated. Similar
to multiple myeloma in humans (Grogan et al., 2001),
a reported feline extramedullary plasmacytoma with
subsequent internal metastasis was associated with a
monoclonal gammopathy (Carothers et al., 1989);
an additional cat reported separately had a solitary
cutaneous plasmacytoma that progressed to multiple
myeloma (Patel et al., 2003). Conversely, dissemina-
tion of multiple myeloma to multiple extraosseous cuta
neous sites also has been reported in a cat (Patel et al.,
Fig. 37.1 Plasmacytoma in a dog featuring tumor cells arranged in
2003).
 packets and separated by a fibrovascular stroma.
Lymphocytic tumors
869
Fig. 37.2 Higher magnification of plasmacytoma in a dog
Fig. 37.3 Plasmacytoma in a dog demonstrating anisokaryosis,
composed of fairly well differentiated plasma cells characterized by
eccentric nuclei and glassy pale cytoplasm.
multinucleated tumor cells.
noted. The majority of the tumor cells are round with
readily demonstrated in most plasmacytomas with methyl
discrete borders. The cells are further characterized by
green pyronine (MGP) stain, particularly within the
moderate to abundant cytoplasm, which has a glassy,
 peripheral well-differentiated population. The positive
eosinophilic or amphophilic appearance. Occasionally,
reaction creates magenta staining of the cytoplasm, in
the cytoplasm has a granular quality. The nuclei are situ-
 particular around the perinuclear halo. In rare neoplasms
ated centrally or paracentrally. They may be round, cres-
there may be partial clear cell change characterized by
centic or irregular, and may have single or multiple
swollen, pale cytoplasm; this alteration may represent a
nucleoli; vesicular or stippled, dense chromatin is
 degenerative process. Reactive infltrates of histiocytes
observed. Mitotic activity ranges from one to nine mitotic
and lymphocytes usually are more prominent in poorly
fgures per 10 high power felds (40x). Multinucleated
differentiated
 plasmacytomas.
Occasionally, a few
cells, or cells with enlarged, lobulated, often hyperchro-
eosinophils can be seen.
matic nuclei, usually are seen and are more abundant in
 Two recent studies present subclassifications of canine
poorly differentiated lesions.
plasmacytomas based on the variable morphologic fea-
The smaller peripheral cells often exhibit typical plas-
tures described above (Platz et al., 1999; Cangul et al.
macytic differentiation, characterized by a moderate
 2002). Plasmacytomas are described as hyaline type,
amount of pale or muddy purple cytoplasm and eccentric
mature type, cleaved type, asynchronous type, and poly-
nuclei with peripherally clustered chromatin. Perinuclear
morphous-blastic type (Platz et al., 1999; Cangul et al.,
halos are evident frequently. Karyorrhexis and pyknosis
 2002). Features of different subtypes can be found within
are more common in areas with well-differentiated tumor 
a particular tumor mass. The hyaline type is characterized
cells. The high density of RNA in plasma cells can be
by tumor cells with somewhat pale eosinophilic cyto-
870
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 37.4 Plasmacytoma in a dog. The upper aspect features clear
Fig. 37.5 Plasmacytoma in a dog. Well-differentiated plasma cells
cell change of the turmor cells, characterized by pale cytoplasm.
 ir  r j sd r   
body-type giant cells.
plasm, sometimes featuring sickle-shaped nuclei; the
mature type is composed of cells resembling mature
cells. Plasmacytosis of the affected lymph nodes was
plasma cells with darker cytoplasm (Platz et al., 1999;
found (Gookin et al., 1998).
Cangul et al., 2002). Both of these types have low
 Feline cutaneous plasmacytomas present with histo-
 numbers of multinucleated tumor cells. The cleaved type
logic features similar to plasmacytomas in dogs. Similar
is characterized by cells with convoluted nuclei, slightly
 to dogs, a recent review categorizes feline plasmacytomas
granular cytoplasm, and a moderate number of multi-
based on the degree of differentiation, as mature plasma-
nucleated tumor cells. The asynchronous type describes
 cytomas, cleaved plasmacytomas, asynchronous plasma-
tumor cells that have a nuclear to cytoplasmic asynchrony
cytomas, and polymorphous plasmacytomas (see above)
in maturation, but retain the perinuclear halo; the nuclei
(Majzoub et al., 2003).
are blastic. The polymorphous-blastic type is character-
Approximately 10% of canine cutaneous plasmacy-
ized by marked cellular pleomorphism, lack of a perinu-
tomas show varying degrees of amyloid production
clear halo, and a high mitotic rate. The number and size
(see Chapter 15). Amyloidosis appears to occur more
of giant cells increase as tumor types become more pleo-
frequently in association  with feline plasmacytomas
morphic. Oral plasmacytomas may reveal an additional
(Majzoub et al., 2003). Primary or immunoglobulin-
type referred to as monomorphous-blastic type; the cells
associated (AL) amyloid is derived from immunoglobulin
are large with euchromatic nuclei and small, centrally
light chains (Rowland & Linke, 1994; Platz et al., 1997;
located nucleoli (Cangul et al., 2002).
Majzoub et al., 2003). Plasmacytomas with amyloid are
The single case of canine systemic plasmacytosis with
invariably composed of well-differentiated tumor cells.
polyclonal gammopathy was characterized by severe
Occasional tumors are overwhelmed by amyloid and
perivascular infltration of the skin by mature plasma
contain only scattered islands of residual tumor cells.
Lymphocytic tumors
871
numbers of intracytoplasmic metachromatic granules can
be identifed with Giemsa or toluidine blue stains in
poorly granulated mast cell tumors. Moreover mast
cell tumors have more stromal collagen and are often
accompanied by a reactive eosinophilic infltrate. Most
amelanotic dermal melanomas have some admixed
spindle-shaped tumor cells. Fontana-Masson stain may
reveal small amounts of intracytoplasmic melanin. Trans-
missible venereal tumors lack the nesting or packeting of
plasmacytomas, and the cells have fine cytoplasmic vac-
 uoles, a feature much better appreciated in fresh imprints 
and smears. Merkel cell tumors are characterized by
marked packeting, and hence can mimic plasmacytomas.
However, in contrast to plasmacytomas, Merkel cell
tumors are composed of a more monomorphic round cell
population, and have argyrophilic cytoplasmic granules
demonstrable with Grimelius stain. Ultrastructurally, they
have membrane-bound dense-core granules, desmosomal
proteins,
and
tonoflament-like structures.(
Glomus
tumors are usually very well circumscribed and encapsu-
lated, and there are numerous vascular structures and
nerves associated with the tumor mass. Most cutaneous
histiocytic sarcomas represent extensions from tumor
masses arising in the subcutis and underlying tissues.
 Round cells of histiocytic sarcomas are larger and are
characterized by large round to oval and indented vesi-
cular nuclei, and a large amount of amphophilic cyto-
plasm; most histiocytic sarcomas also have admixed
plump spindle cells.
Fig. 37.6 Plasmacytoma in a dog. Most of the accumulated
amyloid has undergone cartilaginous metaplasia.
Immunohistochemistry
Antigens used to characterize lymphoid proliferations
immunophenotypically are listed in Table 37.1. Canine
Amyloid usually is accompanied by a granulomatous
plasmacytomas consistently express the common leuko-
inflammatory reaction, which includes foreign body-type
cyte marker CD45, but are often negative for CD18
multinucleated giant cells. Multifocal chondroid meta-
(Table 37.1). The expression of the restricted isoform
plasia can develop in the deposited amyloid.
CD45RA varies; CD45RA may be expressed diffusely or
 Differential diagnoses for cutaneous plasmacytomas
by a subpopulation of tumor cells only. In about 80% of
are other cutaneous round cell tumors, including histio-
canine plasmacytomas, the tumor cells express CD79a
cytomas, nonepitheliotropic lymphomas, poorly granu-
(MB-1), the signaling molecule associated with the B cell
lated mast cell tumors, amelanotic dermal malignant
 receptor (Schrenzel et al., 1998). There is no information
melanomas of round cell type, transmissible venereal
available regarding expression of these glycoproteins by
tumors, Merkel cell tumors, glomus tumors, and round
feline plasmacytomas. Documentation of cytoplasmic
cell type histiocytic sarcomas. Tumor cells with large,
immunoglobulins by immunohistochemistry has been
mulilobular nuclei, multinucleated tumor cells as well as
made in both canine and feline tumors (Baer et al., 1989;
marginal well-differentiated plasma cells are the primary
Rakich et al., 1989; Platz et al., 1999; Cangul et al., 2002;
distinguishing features of plasmacytomas. Also, dense
Majzoub et al., 2003). Moreover, lambda light chain reac-
cytoplasmic RNA is demonstrable with MGP stain in
tivity was found in all nine cats evaluated in one study
plasma cells. Histiocytomas usually contain small intra-
(Majzoub et al., 2003) and in the vast majority of dogs
epithelial tumor cell aggregates, a feature not observed in
in two large studies (Platz et al., 1999; Cangul et al.,
plasmacytomas. Nonepitheliotropic lymphomas tend to
2002). This is not surprising, as normal feline and canine
be composed of more homogeneous round cells charac-
plasma cells preferentially express lambda light chains as
terized by a high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio. Smal
well (Arun et al., 1996).
872
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
The vast majority of cutaneous lymphomas express
population may evolve from a polyclonal reactive lym-
CD3 (T cell origin). Cutaneous B cell lymphomas,
phocytic infltrate with transformation to cutaneous lym-
expressing CD21 and CD79a, are extremely rare in dogs
 phoma (Winkelmann & Dabski, 1987). Recently, with the
and cats. Mast cell tumors are CD45+ and variably
use of more sensitive polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
express CD45RA and CD18, but lack expression of
based techniques, 27 of 44 human patients with cuta-
CD79a. Immunohistochemistry for tryptase and KIT may
neous lymphocytosis were found to have clonality of B
identify poorly differentiated mast cell tumors. Histio-
and T cells; however only one patient developed overt
cytomas are composed of CD18+, CD1+, CD11c+,
lymphoma within a few years of onset (Nihal et al.,
MHC II+, E-cadherin+ Langerhans cells. Transmissible
2003). Lesions with clonal lymphocyte expansion can
venereal tumors consistently express CD45 and may be
undergo spontaneous regression (Ceballos et al., 2002),
positive for CD45RA and CD49d, but lack expression
and clonal T cell receptor arrangement has been docu-
of CD79a. Merkel cell tumors, melanomas and glomus
mented in a few cases of transient cutaneous drug-induced
tumors lack expression of the leukocyte markers CD45
lymphocytosis in humans (Brady et al., 1999).
and CD18; instead, Merkel cell tumors are positive for
Lesions resembling cutaneous lymphocytosis have been
pancytokeratins, neuron-specific enolase (NSE), synapto-
documented in cats (Gilbert et al., 2004a) and a few cases
physin and chromogranin A. Melanomas may express
have been seen in dogs by the authors. In contrast to
melanoma-associated antigen recognized by T cells
lymphocytosis in humans, the feline and canine lesions
(MART-1), melanoma-associated antigen (Melan-A),
s a  n   pd ae 
S100, melanoma isoform of microphthalmia transcription
 presentation is of a banal, well-differentiated lymphocytic
factor (MITF-M), tyrosinase-related protein-2 (TRP-2)
infltrate, as in humans, differentiation from indolent lym-
tyrosinase, or HMB45/gp100. Glomus tumors are positive
 phoma relies mostly on clinical follow-up documenting
for C-smooth-muscle actin and the cells are surrounded by
long-term survival and benign clinical behavior. Cur-
a laminin-positive and collagen  IV-positive basement
rently, the exact nature of this lymphocytic proliferation
membrane; some tumors express desmin as well.
remains uncertain. Some reported cases of cutaneous lym-
phoma in the cat may, in fact, represent lymphocytosis,
as clinical follow-up showed a prolonged survival time
CUTANEOUS LYMPHOCYTOSIS
and no progression of the lymphocytic proliferation
(Synonyms: cutaneous lymphocytoma, cutaneous lym-
(Baker & Scott, 1989). Drugs and vaccines have been sug-
phocytic hyperplasia, pseudolymphoma)
gested as possible antigenic triggers of cutaneous lym-
phocytosis in cats (Gilbert et al., 2004a).
Cutaneous lymphocytosis, cutaneous lymphocytoma,
cutaneous lymphoid hyperplasia, pseudolymphoma, and
 tor genes in lesions of feline lymphocytosis has shown that
lymphadenosis benigna cutis are all terms that have
 clonal rearrangement is more often observed than poly-
been introduced to describe a heterogeneous group
clonal rearrangement (Gilbert et al., 2004b). Hence, feline
of lymphocytic proliferations in humans (Rijlaarsam
 clonal cutaneous lymphocytosis may represent low-grade,
& Willemze, 1994; Le Boit & McCalmont, 1997;
 indolent lymphoma, or as recently defned in humans, an
Ploysangam et al., 1998). In contrast to cutaneous lym-
intermediate state (clonal lymphocytosis') with potential
phoma, these lesions exhibit a mostly benign, self-limit-
for developing into overt lymphoma (Nihal et al., 2003).
ing behavior characterized by slow progression, lack of
Preliminary studies in the dogs with lymphocytosis indi-
 metastasis, and potential regression. Cutaneous lympho-
cate a clonal rearrangement of the T cell receptor as well
cytosis is considered to be the result of a persistent anti-
(Moore PF. & Afolter V.K., unpublished data, 2003).
genic stimulus, and may be associated with a variety of
 As in humans, while clonal rearrangement suggests a po-
antigens such as drug reactions, arthropod bites, contac-
tential neoplastic process, diffculties in strict interpreta-
tants, borreliosis, and herpesvirus infections. In humans
 tion of clonality studies exist; clonal lesions may regress,
these lesions may involve either B cell or T cell expansion
and transient inflammatory lesions may occasionally be
(Ploysangam et al., 1998; Wood, 2003).
clonal.
  r s  s n s
immunophenotypic evaluations do not reliably permit
Clinical features
differentiation of cutaneous lymphocytosis from cuta-
neous lymphoma. In contrast to lymphoma, which repre-
 The exact incidence of cutaneous lymphocytosis in cats
sents a clonal lymphocytic population, lymphocytosis
and dogs is not known. Many cats present with solitary
was thought to be composed of a polyclonal reactive
lesions, but multiple lesions may occur. The majority of
lymphocytic infltrate; spontaneous regression is not
cats exhibit alopecia, erythema, and scaling, which may
uncommon (Bakels et al., 1997). However a clonal sub-
be accompanied by crusting. Other lesions observed are
Lymphocytic tumors
873
alopecic and erythematous plaques, and, less commonly,
sometimes for up to 2 years (Gilbert et al., 2004a). The
nodules or miliary papules. The principal predilection site
lesions may wax and wane, but in contrast to lymphocy-
is the thorax, but lesions may develop anywhere on the
tosis in humans, spontaneous regression has not been
body and are common on the legs, pinnae, flank, and neck
reported (Gilbert et al., 2004a). Most cats have no sys-
(Gilbert et al., 2004a). Pruritus is common.
temic signs and no evidence of internal lesions; however,
The small number of cases observed in dogs offers
investigation for potential internal involvement has not
limited information about cutaneous lymphocytosis in
this species. Similar to cats, dogs present with patches of
nal organs was associated with systemic signs of weight
erythroderma several centimeters in diameter, or have ery-
loss, anorexia, pulmonary edema, diabetes mellitus, and
thematous and scaly plaques. Nodules have not been
kidney failure in six of 12 euthanized cats (Gilbert
observed. One unique case of epitheliotropic lympho-
et al., 2004a). It is not known whether skin lesions pre-
cytosis presented with progressive leukotrichia only
ceded the internal lesions, or if they arose concurrently in
(Rosenkrantz & Gross, 2001). This case was not avail-
these cats.
able for clonality testing. Canine lymphocytosis lesions
The  single
e case of  epitheliotropic  lymphocytosis
have been observed in the axillae, the dorsal head, the
observed in the Boxer with leukotrichia remained stable
ears, on the neck and thorax, in the inguinal region, and
over a follow-up period of 2 years after progression to
on the cranial thighs.
 nearly diffuse loss of pigment from the haircoat; progres-
 The average age of affected cats is 12 years with a range
sion to cutaneous lymphoma was not seen (Rosenkrantz
of 6 to 15 years (Gilbert et al., 2004a). Breed or sex pre-
& Gross, 2001). One dog observed by the authors with
dilections have not been observed. Canine cutaneous lym-
a 3 year history of cutaneous lymphocytosis developed
phocytosis has been seen in a Golden Retriever,
subsequent multicentric lymphoma; follow-up was not
a
Shetland Sheepdog, a Chinese Crested, a Welsh Corgi, and
available in the other canine cases.
 a mixed breed dog. The case of epitheliotropic lympho-
cytosis was in a Boxer. Except for the Boxer, all dogs were
Histopathology (Figures 37.7 through 37.11)
01 8 uon paguei sae aul pue 'saleuay pakeds ro ioeu!
14 years.
Cutaneous lymphocytosis is usually characterized by
 Most data for the clinical behavior of cutaneous lym
 perivascular to diffuse infltration of small lymphocytes.
phocytosis have been collected from feline cases. Cuta-
 In cats, early lesions may involve the superficial dermis
neous lymphocytosis in cats currently is best considered
 primarily, but the infltrate usually extends into the deep
a relatively benign disease with a prolonged clinical
dermis. In dogs, the lymphocytic infltrate is predomi-
course in most cases. Skin lesions develop to a certain size
 nantly seen in the superficial dermis; a zone of acellular-
and then remain stable for an extended period of time,
ity in the superficial dermis (Grenz zone) is present. The
Fig. 37.7 Lymphocytosis in a cat.
There is a diffuse dermal infiltrate of
small lymphocytes. Epitheliotropism is
not observed.
874
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
lymphocytic infltrate may spare the epithelial structures
completely in dogs; foci of dispersed intraepidermal and
 Aaxde u ss are sndi reoe
of the feline cases (Gilbert et al., 2004a). In contrast
to the other dogs observed to date, the Boxer with
leukotrichia had an epitheliotropic mature lymphocytic
 infltrate primarily affecting t
 the follicular epithelium
(Rosenkrantz & Gross 2001).
The primary population of lymphocytes is character-
ized by small, dark nuclei and a small or moderate
amount of very pale cytoplasm. Mitotic fgures are
extremely rare or absent. Small, tightly packed aggre-
gates of smaller lymphocytes with minimal cytoplasm
may be embedded within the diffuse infltrate in cats;
these correlate with B cell populations (see immuno-
histochemistry, below). B cell aggregates have not been
seen in the canine cases. Dispersed throughout the lesion
there is a mild to moderate reactive infltrate of histio-
cytes, mast cells, and eosinophils. The overlying epider-
mis is moderately hyperplastic. Erosion or ulceration is
occasionally seen.
Cutaneous lymphocytosis is unique histologically. Poly-
 merase chain reaction (PCR) amplifcation for T cell
receptor and immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) rear-
 rangement, although currently of limited availability, is
useful to distinguish monoclonal from polyclonal T cell
 or B cell populations. Some cases of clonal lymphocyto-
sis may eventually progress to lymphoma. Cutaneous
 lymphocytosis also should be differentiated from lym-
Fig. 37.8 Higher magnification of lymphocytosis in a cat. Admixed
phocytic leukemia with cutaneous involvement. With the
with the diffuse dermal lymphocyte infiltrate (T cells) there is an
latter, the neoplastic lymphocytes are tightly packed
aggregate of small lymphocytes (B cells) (arrow).
around dermal vessels, while in lymphocytosis the cells
Fig. 37.9 Lymphocytosis in a dog.
There is a superficial and mid-dermal
dense infiltrate with multifocal exten-
sion into the deep derrmis and subcutis.
Lymphocytic tumors
875
Fig. 37.10 Lymphocytosis in a dog
The diffuse infiltrate is composed of
stnall well-differentiated lymphocytes.
diffuse lymphoid infltrate. Some cases of feline lympho-
cytosis may mimic feline mast cell tumor because the lym-
phoid infltrate is characterized by a larger amount of
clear cytoplasm; however, Giemsa or toluidine blue stains
are uniformly negative for mast cell granules.
Immunohistochemistry
Antigens used to characterize lymphocytic proliferations
immunophenotypically are listed in Table 37.1. In cats,
the diffuse lymphocytic infltrate of cutaneous lymphocy-
tosis is composed of CD3+, CD5+ T cells. The small lym-
phocytic aggregates comprise CD79a+, CD21+ small B
cells (Gilbert et al., 2004a). Occasionally, there are a
few dispersed CD79a+ B cells admixed with the CD3+ T
cells. The T cell population is either a mixed population
of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells or is of uniformly double-
negative (CD4-, CD8-) T cells (Gilbert et al., unpublished
data, 2003). The latter phenotype usually is not seen in
reactive lymphocytic infltrates, and suggests the presence
of a neoplastic cell population.
Canine lymphocytosis is composed of CD3+ T cells;
B cells are not seen. The immunophenotype of the T
cell population varies among cases: double-negative
(CD4-, CD8-) αβ T cell receptor (TCRαβ)+ T cells,
CD8+, TCRαβ+ T cells, or CD8+, TCRy&+ T cells have
been observed. Immunophenotypic features fail to reli-
ably differentiate cutaneous lymphocytosis from malig-
Fig. 37.11 Follicular rmural lymphocytosis in a dog demonstrating
nant lymphoma and chronic leukemia with cutaneous
diffuse intramural infiltrates of mature lymphocytes. (Case material]
lesions, as all these lesions are composed of T cells (see
courtesy W.S. Rosenkrantz.)
Table 37.1).
876
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
epitheliotropic lymphomas in humans (Burg et al., 2001).
EPITHELIOTROPIC LYMPHOMA
 Both human and canine cutaneous epitheliotropic lym-
(Synonyms: mycosis fungoides; epitheliotropic T cell
phoma are composed of memory T cells (see below).
lymphoma)
Moreover canine cutaneous epitheliotropic lymphoma
predominantly develops in areas commonly affected with
Cutaneous epitheliotropic lymphoma or ‘mycosis fun-
allergic conditions such as atopic dermatitis (Duclos &
goides’ (MF) is an uncommon, unrelentingly progressive
Hargis, 1996). Some dogs with cutaneous epitheliotropic
 disease characterized by neoplastic infltration of the epi-
lymphoma have a previous history of chronic allergic skin
dermis and adnexal structures. The archaic misnomer
disease. These observations support the hypothesis that
'mycosis fungoides' is well-accepted in the human and
chronic antigen stimulation may be an initiator of a clonal
veterinary literature (Moore et al., 1994; Le Boit &
neoplastic T cell population in the skin.
McCalmont, 1997; Ralfkiaer & Jaffe, 2001). The classi-
fication of epitheliotropic lymphoma is well-entrenched
Clinical features
in the human literature, but controversial in veterinary
medicine. The classification scheme commonly used in
Cutaneous lymphoma is reported to represent 1% of all
human medicine is perhaps most useful histopathologi
canine skin tumors and 2.8% of all feline skin tumors,
cally rather than clinically in dogs and cats.
but these data include both epitheliotropic and non-
Epitheliotropic lymphoma in humans is subclassified
epitheliotropic types (Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992).
as: (1) pagetoid reticulosis, also referred to as *Woringer-
Cutaneous epitheliotropic lymphoma is less common in
(localized) and
1*Ketron-Goodman
cats than in dogs (Moore & Olivry, 1994). Epitheliotropic
disease? (generalized); (2)“classical mycosis fungoides; (3)
 lymphoma presents with a wide range of skin lesions and
d'emblée form; and (4) Sézary syndrome (Le Boit &
can mimic virtually any inflammatory disease of the skin.
McCalmont, 1997; Ralfkiaer & Jaffe, 2001). The vast
"Classical MF is the most common form of epithe-
majority of epitheliotropic lymphomas in humans are
liotropic lymphoma seen in the dog (Moore & Olivry,
composed of CD4+ helper T cells expressing the cβ T cell
1994). Three clinical stages are often referred to as patch,
receptor (TCRαβ+), while cytotoxic CD8+ and TCRy8+
plaque, and tumor stage in humans. However there is
epitheliotropic lymphomas are uncommon (Knowles,
often considerable overlap of these stages, particularly in
1989; Berti et al., 1991, 1999; Ralfkiaer, 1991; Lu et al.,
dogs. Patch and plaque stages usually are present simul-
2002). In contrast, the proliferating T cells in canine
 taneously. Progression from the patch or plaque stage to
epitheliotropic lymphoma express CD8 in the majority of
tumor stage is more rapid in dogs, when compared to
cases and are double negative (CD4-, CD8-) in the
human epitheliotropic lymphoma (Moore & Olivry,
minority (Moore et al., 1994). A small number of fully
1994). This rapidity of progression may explain the high
incidence of tumor formation with epitheliotropic lym-
composed of CD3+, double negative (CD4-, CD8-) T
phoma in dogs. Spread to lymph nodes and other organs
lymphocytes as observed by one author (V.K.A.).
may be observed with the tumor stage in dogs (Beale &
The etiology of mycosis fungoides is largely unknown.
Bolon, 1993; Moore et al., 1994). Patch and plaque
Truncated sequences of human T-lymphotropic virus
lesions are common in cats; the tumor stage appears less
(HTLV-1) have been identified in some cutaneous epithe-
 prevalent. The d'emblée form of MF is characterized by
liotropic lymphomas in humans (Ghosh et al., 1994;
tumor formation without previous patch and plaque
Pancake et al., 1995). Cats with epitheliotropic cutaneous
stage, and is more common in dogs than in humans
lymphoma are negative for feline leukemia
virus
(Moore & Olivry, 1994).
(FeLV) using immunofluorescence and
denzyme-linked
Canine pagetoid reticulosis is characterized by exfolia-
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) on blood (Caciolo et al,
tive erythroderma with scaling, alopecia, erosions or
1984; Tobey et al., 1994). However, the presence of FeLV
ulcerations, but without palpable masses. The pagetoid
DNA was identified in one case of feline epitheliotropic
form often favors mucocutaneous junctions and pawpads
lymphoma using amplification by polymerase chain reac-
in dogs, but lesions may ocur anywhere. In cats, the
tion (PCR) (Tobey et al., 1994). A canine retrovirus has
mucocutaneous junctions and oral cavity are less com-
 been isolated from a leukemic dog, but no clear relation-
monly affected. Most canine and feline cases involve
ship to leukemia and lymphoma has been established
multiple areas of the body, which resembles the clinical
(Safran et al., 1992).
presentation of disseminated pagetoid reticulosis in
Persistent environmental antigens and/or Langerhans
humans, also referred to as the Ketron-Goodman variant
cell abnormalities act as a stimulus for chronic T-cell acti-
(Le Boit & McCalmont, 1997).
vation and proliferation; progression to a clonal expan-
Sezary syndrome is characterized by the simultaneous
sion has been suggested as a possible cause of cutaneous
 presence of cutaneous epitheliotropic lymphoma, periph-
Lymphocytic tumors
877
eral lymphadenopathy, and circulating tumor cells in the
striking subgroup. Ulceration can occur in palpably infl-
peripheral blood (Ralfkiaer & Jaffe, 2001). Sézary syn-
 trated areas or seemingly occurs in normal-appearing
drome is rare in dogs and cats (Moore & Olivry, 1994).
mucosa. The gingiva, palate, or tongue may be involved.
Typical clinical signs include extensive erythematous
 Biopsy specimens from a single case of canine mycosis
scaling and patchy alopecia, accompanied by marked pru-
fungoides were observed by the authors in which skin
ritus (Thrall et al., 1984; DeBoer et al., 1990). This syn-
lesions were clinically described as 'scalded', accompanied
drome rarely may also be observed in conjunction with
by nearly diffuse alopecia. Although blisters were not
 tumor formation. Other clinical signs are lymphadenopa-
described clinically, there was subepidermal blister for-
thy and leukemia. Often other organs are affected; one
mation evident histopathologically (see below), compara-
dog presented with additional lesions in lymph nodes,
 ble to bullous mycosis fungoides of humans (Bowman et
spleen, liver, heart, lung, and kidneys (Thrall et al., 1984).
al., 2001).
Visceral involvement was not observed in the case
 Although feline MF is less common than canine MF, all
reported in a cat (Schick et al., 1993).
four of the clinical categories of epitheliotropic lymphoma
The clinical presentation of epitheliotropic lymphoma
also are seen in cats. Feline lesions most frequently affect
in both the dog and the cat is highly pleomorphic. Thus,
the face, eyelids, mucocutaneous junctions, elbow, and
it may be most useful clinically to subdivide epithe-
trunk (Affolter & Moore, 2000; Scott et al., 2001).
The melding of clinical and histopathologic classifica-
cal presentation (
(Scott et al., 2001: (1)
 exfoliative
 tions is not always clear-cut. Animals diagnosed as having
erythroderma; (2) mucocutaneous localization; (3) solitary
'pagetoid reticulosis', for example, usually present clini-
or multiple plaques or nodules; and (4) ulcerative disease
cally with exfoliative erythroderma (category 1) or muco-
of the oral mucosa. Mucocutaneous and cutaneous forms
cutaneous localization (category 2). The term ^d'emblée
merge with chronicity and disease progression.
form’ refers to tumor formation in the absence of previ-
The clinical features of category 1, ‘exfoliative ery-
ous patches or plaques and can be placed in category 3.
throderma', include generalized erythema, scaling, loss of
Sézary syndrome can occur with any cutaneous clinical
pigmentation, and alopecia. This category is most chal-
 presentation; circulating tumor cells are required for this
lenging clinically as it closely mimics other inflammatory,
diagnosis.
exfoliative skin diseases. Over time, patches, plaques, and
Cutaneous
epitheliotropic lymphoma is a disease of
nodules commonly develop (category 3; see below). Hem-
older cats and dogs. The ages in one study ranged from
orrhage into the skin may mimic hyperpigmentation. The
6 to 14 years with a mean age of 11 years in dogs (Moore
trunk and head commonly are affected, but lesions may
et al., 1994). Feline cases have been seen in cats berween
begin or develop in any location. Lesions affecting the
12 and 17 years old (Baker & Scott, 1989; Schick et al.,
face tend to be partially bilaterally symmetric.
Lym-
1993; Affolter, V.K., & Moore, PF, unpublished data,
phadenopathy can occur. However, frequently, it is not
2000). There are no apparent breed or sex predilections.
determined if this reflects reactive inflammation or neo-
Cutaneous epitheliotropic lymphoma is a progressive
plastic invasion. Pruritus is variable and, if present, can
disease. None of the known protocols of chemotherapy
vary between mild and severe.
appears to affect the long-term clinical course. In dogs,
Animals with category 2, mucocutaneous localization',
 the course of the disease varies from a few months up to
are characterized by erythema, depigmentation, alopecia,
2 years (Moore et al., 1994). Eventually, the lesions may
irregular infltration, erosion, and ulceration. Depigmen-
o) nm se suno ro p su qu on pxa
tation is a common and clinically striking feature.
.The
et al., 1994). The small number of feline cases ob-
facial mucocutaneous junctions of the mouth, planum
served restricts any reliable conclusions regarding clinical
nasale, and eyelids are affected most frequently. Localized
behavior.
involvement restricted to the lips is a common feature.
Clinical differential diagnoses vary considerably con-
Marked bilateral symmetry can be noted on the lips and
tingent on clinical classification, and are numerous due to
philtrum. The planum nasale also may be affected, as may
the clinical pleomorphism of MF. The ‘exfoliative ery-
the anorectal junction, vulva, and prepuce.
throderma’ group must be differentiated from sarcoptic
Category 3 is characterized by 'solitary or multiple
acariasis, atopic dermatitis, food allergy, vasculitis, and
plaques or nodules' that usually are erythematous and
diseases of abnormal cornification. Lack of blanching
scaly or crusted. Larger lesions erode and ulcerate.
with diascopy may suggest vasculitis. Animals with
Grouped lesions gradually coalesce. In rare cases, indi-
'mucocutaneous localization’ must be differentiated from
vidual lesions may regress as other lesions develop and
ulcerative autoimmune disease or erythema multiforme.
expand. Neoplastic lymphadenopathy is noted in more
"Solitary or multiple plaques or nodules' caused by epithe-
advanced disease.
liotropic lymphoma are not visually distinctive and must
Category 4, ulcerative disease of the oral mucosa', is a
be differentiated from other neoplasms as well as inflam-
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
matory diseases causing plaques or nodules. Epithe-
liotropic lymphoma presenting as ‘ulcerative disease of
the oral mucosa’ must be differentiated from chronic
stomatitis of any etiology, including oral autoimmune
skin disease.
Histopathology
 The key diagnostic feature of epitheliotropic lymphoma
is the tropism of the neoplastic cells for the epidermal or
mucosal epithelium and the adnexal structures, in par-
ticular the follicular wall. The intraepithelial neoplastic
lymphocytes are either diffusely distributed within the
epithelium or form discrete aggregates, referred to as
“Pautrier's microaggregates’ or 'microabscesses'. Diffuse
infltrates tend to remain in the lower levels of the epi
dermis. Tropism to adnexal structures may be more
 prominent than invasion into the epidermis, and complete
obliteration of the hair follicles and adnexal glands may
occur. Infltration of apocrine sweat glands may be strik.
ing in some cases, and is highly diagnostic for epithe-
liotropic lymphoma, as inflammatory infltrates generally
do not occur in this location.
The epidermis may be moderately acanthotic, but
marked epidermal hyperplasia is not a feature of epithe-
liotropic lymphoma. Hyperkeratosis may be mild to mod-
erate. Spongiosis is absent or mild. Severe lesions may be
ulcerated and exudative, in which case there is an inflam-
matory infltrate admixed with the neoplastic lympho-
Fig. 37.12 Mycosis fungoides in a dog, plaque stage. This low
cytes. Occasionally, accompanying mucinosis of the
power magnification demonstrates proliferating neoplastic lympho-
invaded follicular epithelium is observed. The degree of
cytes predominantly in the epiderrmis and superficial follicles; these
 dermal involvement and cytologic features vary amongst
also infiltrate the superficial dermis.
 the different forms (see below). Autoregression of lesions
is associated with dermal fbrosis and scant reactive lym-
phocytic infltrates.
isthmus, creating a nodular effect on low power exami-
nation. Occasionally the tumor cell infltrate may spare
Classical mycosis fungoides and d'emblee form
the overlying epidermis while markedly invading folicles
(Figures 37.12 through 37.15)
and adnexal glands. Accompanying the epitheliotropic
Typically, neoplastic infltrates are present in the epider-
cells there may be mild to occasionally striking apoptosis
mis and adnexa as well as the underlying dermis. The
of keratinocytes, characterized by shrinkage and intense
dermal-epidermal  junction   often  is obliterated
and
 eosinophilia, sometimes leading to confluent necrosis and
blurred by the dense tumor cell infltrate. With patch and
ulceration. The dermal component of patch and plaque
plaque lesions, the dermal infltrate is limited to the super-
stage lesions may include reactive small lymphocytes,
ficial dermis. The tumor stage and d'emblée forms are
plasma cells, eosinophils, and neutrophils.
characterized by diffuse infltration of tumor cells in the
Cytologic features may be quite diverse. With patch and
deep dermis and subcutis, but in contrast to the tumor
plaque lesions, the tumor cells are often small, resembling
stage and d'emblée form in humans, intraepithelial
     's 
involvement is usually still present and the adnexal struc-
euchromatic or hyperchromatic nuclei with a variably
tures are obliterated. Residual follicles and sweat glands
irregular contour and a small to moderate amount of
show marked epitheliotropic infltration by tumor lym-
cytoplasm. The intraepithelial lymphocytes often appear
phocytes, and are often demarcated only by an intact
slightly larger than their intradermal counterparts. With
glassy or basement membrane. The infltrate usually
 tumor-stage lesions, all of the neoplastic cells are larger.
affects the entire length of the hair follicle; however in
They have more cytoplasm, which often is pale and
some cases the infltrate is focused in the region of the
 eosinophilic, or clear; the former cytoplasmic appearance
Lymphocytic tumors
879
Fig.37.13Mycosisfungoidesin
a dog, tumor stage. The dermal-
epidermal junction is blurred by intra-
epidermal neoplastic lymphocytes that
coalesce with the dermal infiltrate.
Fig. 37.14 Mycosis fungoides in a dog, tumor stage. The diffuse
Fig. 37.15 Mycosis fungoides in a dog, tumor stage. The apocrine
neoplastic infiltrate is invading the epithelium of multiple hair
follicles.
sweat glands are invaded by neoplastic lymphocytes.
880
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
resembles histiocytes. The nuclei are large and often
cytes tend to migrate through the entire thickness of the
folded or cleaved, with margination of the chromatin. In
epidermis, while intraepidermal neoplastic aggregates
the small or medium-sized lymphocytes, the nucleoli are
tend to accumulate in the lower half of the epidermis.
inconspicuous and mitotic activity is low. In the large lym-
 In contrast to epitheliotropic lymphoma, intraepithelial
phocytes of tumor-stage MF, nucleoli are also larger and
lymphocytes tend to be less numerous in erythema multi-
mitotic fgures may be more numerous.
forme and are mostly associated with the apoptotic ker-
In the single case of MF with bullous lesions, tumor
atinocytes(
(satellitosis).
Lymphocytic  infltration
1of
cells infltrated the follicular epithelium and superfcial
apocrine sweat glands is much more characteristic of
dermis predominantly; epidermal infltration was surpris-
epitheliotropic lymphoma than erythema multiforme. The
ingly sparse. There was also superficial mixed dermal
authors have seen cases of erythema rmultiforme featuring
inflammation in which mature lymphocytes and plasma
large histiocytic round cells (putative Langerhans cells) in
cells predominated; a few neurophils and occasional
clusters. These lesions strongly mimic epitheliotropic lym-
eosinophils were found. The epidermis was separated
phoma with apoptosis; clinical as well as immunohisto-
along the dermal-epidermal junction to form bullae
logical  differentiation  may  be  required
1forthese
which were generally devoid of content, or contained a
-e pn po asd a sase r
few degenerated cells. The epidermis of the bullae was
 gates of Langerhans cells has been referred to as *pseudo-
often diffusely devitalized, morphologically resembling
Pautrier abscesses' (Candiago et al., 2000; Burkert et al.,
toxic epidermal necrolysis (see Chapter 4). This appear-
2002).
ance suggests a toxic effect, perhaps mediated by the neo-
 Mycosis fungoides with bullous lesions should be dif-
plastic infltrate.
 ferentiated from subepidermal bullous diseases such as
Very early patch and plaque stage lesions mimic inflam-
 bullous pemphigoid and epidermolysis bullosa acquisita
matory interface dermatitis, and differentiation requires
(see Chapter 2). Diffuse devitalization of the epidermis
clinical follow-up and evaluation of biopsies at a later
is also similar to toxic epidermal necrolysis. Identifica-
stage. Early stages of patch and plaque stage epithe-
tion of epitheliotropic neoplastic lymphocytes is key to
liotropic lymphoma need to be differentiated from reac-
differentiation.
tive lymphocytic inflammation with marked exocytosis,
The tumor stage of classical MF should be differenti-
as seen in hypersensitivity reactions (see Chapter 9), as
ated from other round cell tumors of the skin featuring
well as erythema multiforme (see Chapter 4). Reactive
epitheliotropism particularly canine cutaneous histio-
inflammatory lesions often are associated with 
1 more
cytomas and Merkel cell tumors. Rare transmissable
severe spongiosis, and epidermal hyperplasia tends to be
venereal tumors also may exhibit mild intraepidermal
more pronounced when compared to epitheliotropic lym-
accumulations of tumor cells. Dermal amelanotic
phoma. Moreover, intraepidermal inflammatory lympho-
 melanomas of round cell type, plasmacytomas, and mast
Fig. 37.16 Pagetoid reticulosis at the
mucocutaneous junction of a dog. The
neoplastic cell population is confined to
the hyperplastic epithelium. In the
underlying dermis there is a mild reac-
tive infiltrate only.
Lymphocytic tumors
881
cell tumors can usually be ruled out as they do not exhibit
Histiocytomas and cutaneous lym-
phomas can mimic each other perfectly. In contrast to
epitheliotropic lymphoma, histiocytomas rarely exhibit
epitheliotropism to adnexal structures. In contrast to lym-
phomas, Merkel cell tumors are characterized by promi-
nent nesting or packeting of tumor cells, separated by a
delicate fbrovascular stroma.
Pagetoid reticulosis (Figures 37.16 through 37.18)
cytic infltrate is confined essentially to the epidermis and
the adnexal structures, in particular the follicular epithe-
lium and sweat glands. Variable numbers of apoptotic
keratinocytes may be observed in conjunction with the
lymphocytic infltrate. The neoplastic cells are often small
lymphocytes with hyperchromatic nuclei, resembling
those of early patch stage (see above), or may be larger
with more cytoplasm. The infltrate may be severe enough
to replace all of the keratinocytes in some areas. The
superficial dermis may contain a mild to moderate pleo-
cellular inflrate composed of reactive lymphocytes,
plasma cells, histiocytes, and occasional granulocytes.
As the disease progresses the dermis is infltrated by
11
neoplastic lymphocytes; at that point it may be indistin-
guishable from tumor stage (see above). Systemic spread
may be observed.
Pagetoid reticulosis has characteristic histologic fea-
tures, and differential diagnosis is not problematic in well-
developed lesions. Early stages may be diffcult to
Fig. 37.17 Higher magnification of pagetoid reticulosis of Fig.
differentiate from reactive lymphocytic dermatitis with
37.16. The architecture of the lower half of the epidermis is dis-
severe exocytosis, as seen in some hypersensitivity re-
rupted by a coalescing infiltration of neoplastic lymphocytes. The
actions, as well as erythema multiforme. Inflammatory
derrmal infiltrate is pleocellular and reactive.
Fig. 37.18 Pagetoid reticulosis in a
dog. Immunohistochemistry ona
frozen section with anti-y8-TCR {T cell
receptor） antibody demonstrates dif-
fusely positive neoplastic yo-T cells in
the epidermis; the dermal infiltrate is
largely negative (chromogen, aminoe-
thylcarbazole [AEC]).
882
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
lesions, however, usually exhibit features of exudative
Two feline cases evaluated by one author (VK.A.)
dermatitis, including patchy or diffuse spongiosis, as well
expressed a double negative (CD8-, CD4-) immuno-
as more pronounced epidermal hyperplasia. In contrast to
phenotype. Monoclonal antibodies to evaluate T cell
pagetoid reticulosis, intraepithelial lymphocytes tend to
receptors of the lesional T cells in feline epitheliotropic
be less numerous in erythema multiforme and are often
lymphomas  are currently 
not available. The exact
closely associated with the apoptotic keratinocytes (satel-
 immunophenotype of the Sezary syndrome cases reported
litosis). Lymphocytic infltration of apocrine sweat glands
in dogs and cats is unknown.
is much more characteristic of epitheliotropic lymphoma
In differentiation, other round cell tumors (except
than erythema multiforme.
nonepitheliotropic T cell lymphoma) lack T cell surface
molecules. Histiocytomas strongly express CD1, CD11c,
Sezary syndrome
 MHC II, and E-cadherin instead. Merkel cell tumors lack
Cutaneous lesions exhibit features of classical MF (see
expression of leukocyte antigens CD45 and CD18, but
above). Neoplastic lymphocytes are also present in the
are positive for cytokeratin 20 (detected by pancytoker-
lymph nodes and the peripheral blood. About 50% of the 
atin), neuron-specifc enolase (NSE), synaptophysin, and
neoplastic lymphocytes in the peripheral blood may have
chromogranin A.
hyperchromatic, folded, and grooved nuclei (Thrall et al.,
 Immunohistochemistry for the proliferating cell nuclear
1984), referred to as Sézary cells. Sézary syndrome should
antigen (PCNA) is not reliable in the differentiation of
be differentiated from lymphocytic leukemia with sec-
 early epitheliotropic lymphoma from reactive lympho-
ondary involvement of the skin (see p. 888). The latter is
cytic processes (Murphy & Olivry, 2000). Moreover, re-
characterized by dermal perivascular accumulations of
active lymphoid infltrates are mostly composed of a
 neoplastic lymphocytes and lacks epitheliotropism of the
mixture of CD4+ T cells and CD8+ T cells, with both T
 neoplastic lymphocytic population.
cell populations continuing to express CDs. The intra-
epithelial Langerhans cell aggregates seen in association
with erythema multiforme are positive for CD1, CD11c,
Immunohistochemistry
MHC II, and E-cadherin, but lack expression of T cell
Antigens used to characterize lymphomas immunopheno-
markers.
typically are listed in Table 37.1. Epitheliotropic lym-
phoma in cats and dogs is composed of CD3+ T cells
NONEPITHELIOTROPIC LYMPHOMA
(Moore et al., 1998; Affolter & Moore, 2000). The
majority of canine epitheliotropic lymphomas are com-
Cutaneous nonepitheliotropic lymphoma may be primary
posed of memory T cells, which lack expression of
or may occur in conjunction with disseminated lym-
CD45RA, but express high levels of adhesion molecules 
phoma (Ralfkiaer et al., 2001a,b). In humans, extensive
(β1 integrin VLA-4). The presence of memory cells sup-
histologic subtyping of lymphomas based on their cellu-
 ports the hypothesis of previous antigen stimulation. In
lar morphology has resulted in somewhat controversial
contrast to humans, the proliferating T cells in canine
classifcation systems, including the Rappaport nomen-
epitheliotropic lymphoma express CD8 in approximately
clature, the National Cancer Institute Working Formula-
80% of the cases and are double negative (CD4-, CD8-)
tion, and the Kiel classification (Greenlee et al. 1990). In
 in the remaining 20% (Moore et al., 1994). Canine page-
 humans, cutaneous nonepitheliotropic lymphoma may be
toid reticulosis is a proliferation of CD3+, y8 T cell recep-
of T cell or B cell origin (Harris, 2001; Ralfkiaer et al.,
tor (TCRy8)+ T cells (Moore et al., 1998). The reactive
2001a,b).
dermal lymphocytic infltrate in the superfcial dermis is
Cutaneous nonepitheliotropic lymphoma has been rec-
composed of TCRαB+ T cells. “Classic' MF in dogs is
ognized in dogs and cats (Moore et al., 1998). Unfortu-
    o     
 nately, the elaborate classification systems of lymphomas
(Moore et al., 1998). The tumor cell population may no
in humans are of limited value for predicting the be-
longer express other surface proteins that are expected to
 havior and prognosis of primary cutaneous nonepithe-
be found on normal T cells (Ralfkiaer & Jaffe, 2001). For
liotropic lymphoma in dogs and cats (Valli et al., 2002).
example, a loss of expression of CD5 was seen in 64% of
 In addition to the classical form, nonepitheliotropic lym-
the canine cases in one study and was more common in
phomas in dogs and cats also include vasotropic and
TCRy8+ T cell (73%) than in TCRcβ+ T cell (29%) lym-
vasoinvasive lymphoma, also referred to as lymphoma-
phoma (Moore et al., 1998). The lack of CD5 expression
toid granulomatosis (Walder & Barr, 1986; Smith et al.,
may be useful as a prognosticator in the TCRαβ
1996), and intravascular lymphoma, also referred to as
immunophenotype as it occurred only in tumor stage
malignant angioendotheliomatosis  (Vangessel et al.,
lesions (Moore et al., 1998).
2000). The vast majority of cutaneous canine and feline
Lymphocytic tumors
883
nonepitheliotropic lymphomas are of T cell origin (Moore
lesions involve the face, eyelids, mucocutaneous junc-
et al., 1998; Affolter & Moore, 2000). B cell lymphomas
tions, and trunk. Affected dogs also develop respiratory
are extremely rare (Day, 1995), and were not found in
 distress due to pulmonary involvement (Postorino, 1987;
one study of 24 dogs (Moore et al., 1998).
Moore et al., 1998). Although pulmonary lymphomatoid
 The etiology of canine and feline nonepitheliotropic
 granulomatosis has been reported in the cat (Valentine et
lymphoma is unknown. The presence of feline leukemia
al., 2000), cutaneous involvement has not been seen in
virus (FeLV) could not be shown by immunofluorescence
that species.
on blood samples of affected cats (Caciolo et al., 1984).
Nevertheless, a retroviral etiology should be considered,
Cutaneous intravascular lymphoma
as FeLV virus was demonstrated in feline cutaneous
(malignant angioendotheliomatosis)
epitheliotropic lymphoma using amplification by poly-
This form of lymphoma has been reported in the skin of
merase chain reaction (PCR) (Tobey et al., 1994).
one dog (Vangessel et al., 2000). The animal presented
Although canine retrovirus has been isolated from a
with hyperpigmented, dark red, alopecic plaques and
leukemic dog, a clear relationship to leukemia and lym-
nodules on the head, neck, and trunk. Upon necropsy,
phoma has not been established (Safran et al., 1992).
additional tumor infltrates were identified in the frontal
 lobe of the brain. Intravascular lymphoma has previously
Clinical features
been reported in the brain and other organs in dogs
and cats (Summers & Lahunta, 1985; Lapointe et al.,
Nonepitheliotropic lymphoma is the most common form
1997). Cutaneous intravascular lymphoma has not been
of cutaneous lymphoma in cats, while it is less common
described in cats.
in dogs (Caciolo et al., 1984; Beale & Bolon, 1993;
Moore & Olivry, 1994). Cutaneous lymphoma is
reported to represent 1% of all canine skin tumors
Histopathology
and 2.8% of all feline skin tumors, but these data include
both epitheliotropic  and  nonepitheliotropic types
Nonepitheliotropic lympboma
(Goldschmidt & Shofer, 1992). Solitary or multiple, dis-
(Figures 37.19 through 37.22)
crete dermal and subcutaneous nodules or infltrative
 Classical nonepitheliotropic lymphoma is characterized
plaques may develop at any site of the body (Beale &
by predominantly deep dermal and subcutaneous nonen-
Bolon, 1993). The oral cavity is less commonly affected.
capsulated masses composed of sheets or nodular perivas-
Ulcers and regional lymphadenopathy are common
cular aggregates of relatively monomorphic cells. The
 Sex predilections are not reported. Weimaraners,
neoplastic infltrates have a bottom-heavy or base-wide
Boxers, Saint Bernards, Basset Hounds, Irish Setters,
confguration and efface cutaneous structures. With
Cocker
Spaniels,(
German Shepherd Dogs,
，Golden
superfcial dermal involvement, an area of uninvolved
Retrievers, and Scottish Terriers have been reported to be
superficial dermis (Grenz zone) is usually seen, and
predisposed (Beale & Bolon, 1993; Scott et al., 2001).
 adnexal structures are not invaded. However, occasional
The cutaneous intravascular lymphoma was reported in
intraepidermal tumor cells may be present. The epidermis
a 9-year-old, female spayed Boxer (Vangessel et al., 2000).
overlying the tumor may be ulcerated. Dispersed reactive
Surgical excision of solitary tumors in dogs has been
eosinophils are common (Moore & Olivry, 1994), which
reported as curative in a few cases of cutaneous nonep-
is likely due to release of eosinophilic chemotactic factor
itheliotropic lymphomas (Brown et al., 1980; McKeever
 IL-5 by the neoplastic lymphocytes.
et al., 1982). However, the vast majority of canine and
The cellular morphology of cutaneous nonepithe-
feline nonepitheliotropic lymphomas exhibit rapid pro-
liotropic lymphoma is highly variable, and can be
gression and metastasis to draining lymph nodes; subse-
subclassifed as small cell, large cell, or immunoblastic
quent systemic involvement is common (Moore et al.,
  s si add nn sr  "d
1998).
cells are characterized by round nuclei with condensed
chromatin and scant cytoplasm. Large cells have large,
Vasotropic and vasoinvasive nonepitheliotropic
oval, folded, vesicular nuclei and abundant clear cyto-
lymphoma (lymphomatoid granulomatosis)
plasm, and hence may mimic the appearance of histio-
This form of cutaneous lymphoma is characterized by
cytes. Large cell lymphomas also have been refered to
recurrent dermal and subcutaneous nodules or black fluc-
as ‘clear cell lymphomas or, inaccurately, “histiocytic'
in r id i ssd as 'sid 
lymphomas. Occasionally, the neoplastic lymphocytes
ulcers with massive exudation and crusting (Walder &
 resemble immunoblasts and contain large vesicular nuclei,
Barr, 1986; Smith et al., 1996; Wood et al., 2001). The
one central large nucleolus, and scant cytoplasm.
884
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
G
5
G
Fig. 37.19 Nonepitheliotropic lymphoma in a dog. The tumor cells
Fig. 37.20 Nonepitheliotropic lymphoma in a dog. Large, vesicu-
have vesicular nuclei with irregular or folded profiles. Mitotic activ-
Jar nuclei contain multiple nucleoli, which tend to have a peripheral
ity is fairly high.
distribution. Note fairly high mitotic activity.
Anisokaryosis may be prominent and cleavage of the
cell or B cell lesions suggestive of cutaneous lymphoma.
nuclei may be seen. Mitotic activity is highly variable and
Clinical follow-up, however, indicated a reactive process,
corresponds to cell type and/or tumor grade. Small cell
 as the T cell lesions regressed spontaneously and the B cell
lymphomas have a low mitotic activity, while most large
lesions regressed while on treatment with antibiotics.
cell and immunoblastic lymphomas have a moderate to
 Evaluation of clonality for B cells (clonal rearrangement
high mitotic rate.
of immunoglobulin heavy chain [IgH] and for T cells
The authors have observed a small number of nonep-
(clonal rearrangement of T cell receptors [TCRs]) assists 
itheliotropic lymphomas in dogs in which early stages
 in identifying a clonal lymphocyte population, which
were associated with severe pleocellular inflammation. In
supports the presence of a neoplastic process. Reactive B
some cases, the dermatitis features numerous eosinophils,
cell or T cell infltrates are usually polyclonal.
and eosinophilic furunculosis may be present. Admixed
 Immunohistochemistry (see below) often is required to
with the reactive infltrate are large, poorly differentiated,
differentiate nonepitheliotropic lymphoma from other
rounded, pleomorphic tumor cells with large, round and
cutaneous round cell tumors, such as histiocytomas, plas-
cleaved, hyperchromatic nuclei and a high nuclear to
macytomas, mast cell tumors, transmissible venereal
cytoplasmic ratio. With disease progression, the neoplas-
tumors, Merkel cell tumors, and amelanotic melanomas
tic cells become more numerous and accumulate in sheets.
with predominantly round cells. Moreover, early lym-
Occasionally, reactive lymphoid infltrates cannot be
phomas associated with massive reactive pleocellular
differentiated from neoplastic cell populations based on
infltrates often cannot be differentiated from purely
morphologic features and immunohistochemistry. One
inflammatory processes. Identification of T cell origin of
author (V.K.A.) has observed cutaneous pleomorphic T
the interspersed atypical tumor cells requires immunohis-
Lymphocytic tumors
885
Fig. 37.21 Nonepitheliotropic lymphoma in a dog. The tumor
Fig. 37.22 Nonepitheliotropic lymphoma in a cat. The highly
cells resemble immunoblasts: they have a moderate amount of
mitotic cells have abundant poorly-defined cytoplasm, large pleo-
amphophilic cytoplasm, large vesicular nuclei, and prominent
 morphic nuclei, and prominent nucleoli; note resemblance to histio-
centrally-located nucleoli. Note numerous mitotic figures.
cytes.
tochemistry.  In contrast to nonepitheliotropic lym-
Merkel cell tumors are characterized by marked packet-
phomas, histiocytomas have a ‘top-heavy’ confguration
ing or nesting of the tumor cells, and a fne vascular
and intraepidermal tumor cells can usually be found. The
 stroma is noted. Round cell amelanotic melanomas may
cytologic features, however may be indistinguishable
 be characterized by cells with a larger amount of cyto-
between these two tumors, requiring immunohistochem-
plasm when compared to lymphomas, and there may be
istry. Plasmacytomas often display marked anisocytosis,
few admixed spindle tumor cells. Fontana-Masson stain
and anisokaryosis, and binucleated and multinucleated
may assist in detecting small amounts of melanin within
cells are common. Moreover, the proliferating plasma
the tumor cells.
cells are arranged in tight packets, and well-differentiated
plasma cells can usually be identified along the tumor
Vasotropic and vasoinvasive nonepitheliotropic
margins; eosinophils, however, are not present. Dense 
lymphoma (lymphomatoid granulomatosis)
cytoplasmic RNA of plasma cells stains magenta with
(Figures 37.23 and 37.24)
methyl green pyronine (MGP) stain. Both mast cell
Similar to lesions in humans, abrupt full-thickness
tumors and lymphomas may have many intralesional
epidermal ulceration overlying wedge-shaped zones of
eosinophils. Toluidine blue and Giemsa stains will usually
ischemic dermal necrosis are present. Angiocentric,
identify the metachromatic granules of poorly granulated
multinodular tumor cell aggregates, which may coalesce
mast cell tumors. Transmissible venereal tumors comprise
to a diffuse tumor cell infltrate, are noted in the sur-
round cells with fine cytoplasmic vacuoles, which are best
rounding intact deep dermis and subcutis. In many cases
identifed by aspirates and imprints from fresh specimens.
of vasotropic lymphoma, a monomorphic population is
886
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Fig. 37.23 Vasotropic and vasoinvasive, nonepitheliotropic lym-
Hig. 37.24 Higher magnification of vasotropic and vasoinvasive,
phoma in a dog. The pleomorphic neoplastic infiltrate obliterates
nonepitheliotropic lymphoma in a dog. The wall of a deep dermal
blood vessels at right. Note granular degeneration of dermal colla-
arteriole is infiltrated by pleomorphic tumor cells.
gen and necrosis of adnexal epithelium within the rmargin of a dermal
infarct at left.
lesions of vasoinvasive lymphoma are characterized by
pleomorphic large round cells with moderate to marked
present within and around blood vessel walls. Early
 mitotic activity. Immunohistochemistry may be necessary
lesions of lymphomatoid granulomatosis are more pleo.
to differentiate the two diseases (see below).
cellular and may have features of a granulomatous angio-
centric inflammatory response. Over time, the number of
Intravascular lympboma (malignant
pleomorphic large round cells increases, an increase in
angioendotheliomatosis) (Figures 37.25 and 37.26)
mitotic fgures is noted, and vasoinvasion is observed.
 Intravascular lymphoma is characterized by intravascular
Vascular invasion may be associated with fbrinoid necro-
proliferations of neoplastic lymphocytes in the absence
sis of the vascular wall (Smith et al., 1996).
of a solid primary tumor (Valli et al., 2002). The reported
The large neoplastic cells have pale
cytoplasm
canine cutaneous case was characterized by multinodular
and vesicular nuclei, which are slightly elongated and
dermal masses that invaded the subcutaneous tissue, and
[wisted or irregular in profle, and hence resemble histio-
was accompanied by vascular proliferation as occasion-
cytes. However, their immunophenotype indicates T cell
ally seen in humans (Vangessel et al., 2000). The mass
origin.
was composed of thin-walled vascular channels lined by
Cutaneous lymphomatoid granulomatosis may be over-
plump fusiform cells. Multiple foci of hemorrhage and
looked primarily because of its rarity, and because it can
necrosis were noted. The vascular channels were packed
mimic pleocellular, angiocentric reactive processes, such
with small to medium-sized, fairly monomorphous round
as reactive histiocytosis (see Chapter 13). The lesional his-
cells with sparse cytoplasm and round to oval indented
nuclei with one or two nucleoli. Histologic features of
and rarely exhibit mitotic activity, while progressive
intravascular lymphoma are unique and characteristic,
Lymphocytic tumors
887
Fig. 37.25 Intravascular lymphoma
in a dog. Proliferating small vessels
are filled with neoplastic lympho-
cytes {Case materialcourtesy S.P
McDonough.)
Fig. 37.26 Higher magnification of
intravascular lymphoma of Fig. 37.25.
Thin-walled vascular structures are
filled with neoplastic lymphocytes.
Canine nonepitheliotropic CD3+ T cell lymphomas com-
tumors.
prise either CD8+ or double negative (CD4-, CD8-) lym-
phocytes; one CD4+ case was observed in a single study of
16 cases (Moore et al., 1998). The canine tumor cell popu-
Immunohistochemistry (see Table 37.1)
lation may express either αβ T cell receptor (TCRαβ) or 
Classical canine and feline nonepitheliotropic lymphomas
TCRy&; double negative cases can be observed with both
are predominantly composed of CD3+ T cells (Moore &
TCRαβ or TCRy& lymphomas. The T cells usually express
Olivry, 1994; Moore et al., 1998). The few cases of
CD45RA, in contrast to epitheliotropic lymphomas, and
reported B cell lymphomas have been identified by their
CD5 is expressed by about 60% of the cases (Moore et al.,
expression of immunoglobulin G (IgG) (Day, 1995). Occa-
1998). T cell receptor-silent cases have been seen in dogs
sional cases of CD3-, CD79a- non-B, non-T cell prolifer-
as well, indicative of the loss of TCR expression by the
ations have been observed in dogs (Moore et al., 1998).
tumor cells (Moore et al., 1998). Alternatively, these cases
888
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
could also represent CD3e+ natural killer (NK) cell lym-
course during which cutaneous lesions may develop. Lym-
phomas (Yamaguchi et al., 1993). The tumor population
phocytic leukemia associated with neoplastic infltrates in
may contain admixed numerous reactive CD1+, CD11c+,
the skin is also referred to as leukemia cutis (McLean &
MHC II+ dendritic cells as well as reactive, well differen-
Haynes, 2003). In humans, these lesions are usually char-
tiated, small CD3+, CD8+ T cells.
acterized by nodules, plaques, and ulcers, or diffuse ery-
In cats the immunophenotype has varied in the few
throderma (Head & Edelson, 1993; McLean & Haynes,
cases evaluated to date. Neoplastic T cells are consistently
2003). Chronic T cell lymphocytic leukemia with cuta-
CD3+ and CD5+, but CD4 and CD8 expression is vari-
neous lesions has been recognized in two dogs (Moore,
able. Further studies are needed.
PF. & Vernau, W. personal communication, 2003), and a
In contrast to vasoinvasive lymphoma in humans,
cat (Affolter & Moore, 2000). The morphologic and
which is a clonal expansion of B cells (Gogstetter et al.,
immunophenotypic characteristics of the tumor cells in
2000), canine vasoinvasive lymphomas (lymphomatoid
 the skin are similar to the cells in the peripheral blood.
granulomatosis) are composed of T cells (Smith, et al.,
1996; Moore et al., 1998). The exact phenotype of
Clinical features
the CD3+ cells has not been characterized to date. The
intravascular
lymphoma(malignant
angioendothe-
Both dogs and the cat had been diagnosed with chronic
liomatosis) reported in the dog was composed of CD45+,
T cell leukemia prior to the development of skin lesions.
CD3+, CD8+, TCRαβ+ T cells entrapped in proliferative 
Leukemia had been confrmed by complete blood count
blood vessels (Vangessel et al., 2000).
(CBC), flow cytometry, and immunohistochemistry on
In contrast to cutaneous nonepitheliotropic lymphoma,
 cytospin preparations from peripheral blood.
other round cell tumors lack T cell surface molecules.
All three animals were middle-aged. The domestic
Instead, histiocytomas are positive for CD1, CD11c,
shorthaired cat had CD3+, CD5+, CD4+ leukemia
 MHC Il, and E-cadherin. Transmissible venereal tumors 
(Affolter & Moore, 2000). One dog, a male, had CD3+,
consistently express CD45, and may be positive for
CD8+, TCRy&+ T cell leukemia, and cytology was sug-
CD45RA and CD49d. In contrast to lymphomas, poorly
gestive of a proliferation of large granular lymphocytes
granulated mast cell tumors are positive for KIT and may
(Moore, PF. & Vernau, W., personal communication,
also be positive for tryptase. Amelanotic melanomas and
1999). The second dog, an 8-year-old, neutered male
 Merkel cell tumors both lack expression of leukocyte anti-
Labrador Retriever, was diagnosed with a CD3+, CD8+,
gens CD45 and CD18. Merkel cell tumors are positive
TCRαβ+ T cell leukemia (Moore, PF. & Affolter, V.K.,
for cytokeratin 20 (detected by pancytokeratin stains),
unpublished data, 2003).
neuron-specifc enolase (NSE), synaptophysin, and chro-
Numerous small skin papules and nodules were
mogranin A, while melanomas may express melanoma-
observed in all three animals. In the frst dog, the skin
associated antigen recognized by T cells (MART-1),
lesions developed while receiving chemotherapy. Small
melanoma-associated antigen (Melan-A), S100, tyrosi-
papules and nodules were present on the head, trunk, and
nase-related protein-2 (TRP-2) tyrosinase, the melanoma
extremities, and were arranged in a symmetrical distribu-
isoform of microphthalmia transcription factor (MITF-
tion. A linear arrangement of nodules along the ear
M) or HMB45/gp100 instead.
margins and the eyelids was seen in the cat; this linear
Differentiation of neoplastic versus reactive T cell pro.
configuration suggested an association with vessels or
liferations cannot be reliably achieved by evaluating the
lymphatics (Affolter & Moore, 2000). In both dogs and
expression of proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA),
the cat, the nodules were not pruritic and not painful.
as both conditions may be characterized by an increase
Some nodules were ulcerated.
of PCNA (Murphy & Olivry, 2000). Evaluation of the
lesions for clonal T cell receptor arrangement of the
u osdou e ki  uod  L re
Histopathology (Figures 37.27 and 37.28)
phoid population within a reactive cellular infltrate.
Skin biopsies reveal a dense nodular, monomorphic lym-
phocytic infltrate closely associated with dermal blood
vessels, forming perivascular cuffs. The dermal inflrate
CHRONIC LYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA
may become more diffuse and extend to the basal lamina.
WTH CUTANEOUS LESIONS
However, epitheliotropism is not noted. The samples from
(Synonym: leukemia cutis)
 the cat revealed superficial and deep dermal involvement.
The frst dog had primarily deep dermal infltrates
In contrast to acute lymphocytic leukemia, a process char-
(Moore, PF. & Vernau, W., personal communication,
acterized by a very rapid deterioration, chronic lympho-
2003), while the second dog had mid-dermal to superficial
cytic leukemia presents with a slowly progressive clinical
 perivascular infltrates.
Lymphocytic tumors
889
Fig-
37.27Chronic
lymphocytic
leukemia with cutaneous lesions in a
cat. Small lymphocytes are accumulat-
ing perivascularly; these have coalesced
superficially and around adnexa.
Fig. 37.28 Higher magnification of
chronic lymphocytic leukermia  with
cutaneous lesions of Fig. 37.27
demonstrating uniformly small neo-
plastic lymphocytes.
Some vessels may be dilated and obliterated by neo-
intravascular
lymphoma
(malignant  angioendothe-
plastic cells that are morphologically identical to the infl-
liomatosis), as well as cutaneous lymphocytosis (if the
trate in the dermis. Tissue necrosis subsequent to vascular
infltrating population is well differentiated). Intravascu-
obstruction may be present. Neoplastic cells have a
lar lymphoma is composed of tumor cells confned to the
relatively well-differentiated morphology, with small or
vascular structures, and a dermal infltrate is not present.
slightly enlarged nuclei, dense or fnely stippled chro-
 In chronic lymphocytic leukemia with cutaneous involve-
matin, and a scant or moderate amount of cytoplasm.
ment, the close association of the tumor cell population
Mitotic fgures were not seen in the three observed cases.
with the dermal vasculature and the presence of intravas-
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia with cutaneous involve-
cular tumor cells are in contrast to primary cutaneous
ment should be differentiated principally from primary
 nonepitheliotropic lymphoma, which is characterized
cutaneous nonepitheliotropic T cell lymphoma, including 
by a more diffuse neoplastic lymphocytic infltrate with
890
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
variable numbers of tumor cells in lymphatics. In contrast
Kwochka, T. Willemse & C. von Tscharner), pp. 77-94. But-
to leukemia with cutaneous lesions, cutaneous lympho-
terworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
cytosis is not as tightly related to the vasculature, and
Picker, L.J., Michie, S.A. & Rott, L.S. (1990) A unique pheno-
generally presents as a diffuse dermal infltrate of well dif-
type of skin-associated lymphocytes in humans. Am J Patbol
ferentiated lymphocytes.
136,1053-68.
Picker, L.J., Kishimoto, T.K., Smith, C. W. et al. (1991) ELAM-
1 is an adhesion molecule for skin-homing T cells. Nature 349,
Immunohistochemistry (see Table 37.1)
796-9.
Safran, N., Perk, K., Eyal, O. et al. (1992) Isolation of a nove]
The cutaneous T lymphocytic infltrates exhibit an
retrovirus isolate from a leukaemic dog. Res Vet Sci 52, 250-5.
immunophenotype identical to the neoplastic lymphocytic
Tobey, J.C., Houston, D.M., Breur, G.J. et al. (1994) Cutaneous
infltrate in the peripheral blood. The tumor cells in the
T-cell lymphoma in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 204, 606-9.
cat were positive for CD3, CD5, and CD4 (Affolter &
Vernau, W. & Moore, PF. (1999) An immunophenotypic study
Moore, 2000). The intravascular and perivascular tumor
of canine leukemias and preliminary assessment of clonality
cells in the frst dog were CD3+, CD8+, TCR+ (Moore,
by polymerase chain reaction. Vet Immunol Immunopathol
PF. & Vernau,W, personal communication, 2003) and
69, 145-64.
Wood, G.S. (2001) T-cell receptor and immunoglobulin gene
in the second dog were CD3+, CD8+, TCRαβ+ (Moore,
PF. & Affolter, VK., unpublished data, 2003).
rearrangements in diagnosing skin disease. Arch Dermatol
137,1503-6.
 Immunophenotyping of the lesional lymphocytic infl-
trate does allow differentiation between leukemia with
Cutaneous Plasmacytoma
cutaneous involvement and primary cutaneous lymphoma
Arun, S.s., Breuer, W. & Hermanns, W. (1996) Immunohisto-
with secondary systemic involvement. However, similar to
chemical examination of light-chain expression (A/k) in
nonepitheliotropic lymphoma (see p. 882), immunohisto-
canine, feline, bovine and porcine plasma cells. Zentraibt Vet-
chemistry will help to rule out other round cell tumors
erinarmed A 43, 573-6.
S   s   
Baer, K.E., Patnaik, A.K., Gilbertson S.R. et al. (1989) Cuta-
neous plasmacytomas in dogs: a morphologic and immuno-
histochemical study. Vet Patbol 26, 216-21.
REFERENCES
Breuer, W., Colbatzky, F, Platz, S. et al. (1993) Immunoglobu-
lin producing tumors in dogs and cats. J Comp Pathol 109,
Introduction
203-16.
Bakels, V., van Oostveen, J.W., van der Putte, S.C. et al. (1997)
Cangul, I.T., Wijnen, M., Van Garderen, E. et al. (2002) Clinico-
Immunophenotyping and gene rearrangement analysis provide
 pathologic aspects of canine cutaneous and mucocutaneous
additional criteria to differentiate between cutaneous T-cell
plasmacytomas. J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med 49,
lymphomas and pseudo-T-cell lymphomas. Am J Pathol 150,
307-12.
1941-9.
Carothers, M.A., Johnson, G.C., DiBartola, S.P. et al. (1989)
Bos, J.D. & Kapsenberg, M.L. (1990) Lymphocyte subpopula-
Extramedullary plasmacytoma and immunoglobulin-associated
tions of the skin immune system. In: Skin Immune System
amyloidosis in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 19s, 1593-7.
(SIS) (ed. J.D. Bos), pp. 89-108. CRC Press, Boca Raton.
Day, M.J. (1995) Immunophenotypic characterization of cuta-
Ceballos, K.M., Gascoyne, R.D., Martinka, M. et al. (2002)
neous lymphocytic neoplasia in the dog and cat. J Comp
Heavy multinodular cutaneous lymphocytic infiltrates: clini-
Pathol 112, 79-96.
copathologic features and B-cell clonality. J Cutan Pathol 29,
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, F.S. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
159-67.
Dog and Cat, pp. 2-3, 265-70. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Dreitz, M.J., Ogilvie, G. & Sim, G.K. (1999) Rearranged T cell
Gookin, J.L., Sellon, R.K., McDorman, K.S. et al. (1998) Sys-
lymphocyte antigen receptor genes as a marker of malignant
f Bop e ut Auedouues leuoajod pue sisonseuse[d sua
T cells. Vt Immunol Immunopathol 69, 113-9.
Vet Intern Med 12, 471-4.
Holm, N., Flaig, M.J., Yardi, A.S. et al. (2002) The value of
Grogan, T.M., Van Camp, B. & Kyle, R.A. (2001) Plasma cell
molecular analysis by PCR in the diagnosis of cutaneous lym-
neoplasms. In: Pathology and Genetics: Tumours of
phocytic infiltrates. J Cutan Pathol 29,447-52.
Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues (eds E.S. Jaffe, N.L.
Le Boit, PE. & McCalmont, TH. (1997) Cutaneous lymphomas
Harris, H. Stein & J.W. Vardiman), pp. 142-52. IARC Press,
and leukemias. In: Lever's Histopathology of tbe Skin, 8th edn
Lyon.
(eds D. Elder, R. Elenitsas, C. Jaworsky & B. Johnson, Jr), pp.
Lucke, V.M. (1987) Primary cutaneous plasmacytomas in dog
805-46. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia.
and cat. J Small Anim Pract 28, 49-55.
Moore, PF. & Olivry, T. (1994) Cutaneous lymphomas in com-
Majzoub, M., Breuer, W., Platz, S.J. et al. (2003) Histopatho-
panion animals. Clin Dermatol 12, 499-505.
logic and immunophenotypic characterization of extrame-
Moore, P.F., Affolter, V.K., Olivry, T. et al. (1998) The use of
dullary plasmacytomas in nine cats. Vet Pathol 40, 249-53.
immunological reagents in defining the pathogenesis of canine
Patel, R.T., Caceres, A. & McManus, P.M. (2003) Feline multi-
skin diseases involving proliferation of leukocytes. In:
ple myeloma: a review of 12 cases (1996-2003). Vet Pathol
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 3 (eds K.W.
40, 596 (abstract).
Lymphocytic tumors
891
Platz, S.J., Breuer, W., Geisel, O. et al. (1997) Identification of
In: Proceedings of the AAVD/ACVD Meeting, Norfolk, p. 229
lambda light chain amyloid in eight canine and two feline
(abstract).
extramedullary plasmacytomas. J Comp Pathol 116, 45-54.
Winkelmann, R.K. & Dabski, K. (1987) Large cell lymphocy-
Platz, S.J., Breuer, W., Pfleghaar, S. et al. (1999) Prognostic value
toma: follow-up, immunopathology studies, and comparison
of histopathological grading in canine extramedullary plas-
to cutaneous follicular and Crosti lymphoma. Arch Dermatol
macytomas. Vet Pathol 36, 23-7.
Res 279, S81-7.
Potter, M., Morrison, S., Wiener, F. et al. (1994) Induction of
Wood, G.s. (2003) Inflammatory diseases that simulate lym-
phomas: cutaneous pseudolymphoma. In: Ftzpatrick's Der-
strains of mice. J Natl Cancer Inst 86, 1058-65.
matology in General Medicine, 6th edn (eds I.W. Freedberg.
Rakich, PM., Latimer, K.S., Weiss, R. et al. (1989) Mucocuta-
A.Z. Eisen, K. Wolff, K.F Austen, L.A. Goldschmidt & S.I.
neous plasmacytomas in dogs: 75 cases (1980-1987). J Am
Katz), pp. 1567-80. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Vet Med Assoc 194, 803-10.
Rowland, P.H. & Linke, R.P. (1994) Immunohistochemical char-
Epitheliotropic Lympboma
acterization of lambda light-chain-derived amyloid in one
Affolter, V.K. & Moore, P.F (2000) Histiocyic proliferative dis-
feline and five canine plasma cell tumors. Vet Patbol 31,
eases in dogs and cats. In: Proceedings for ESVD Workshop
390-3.
on Immunodermatology 2oo0: from the laboratory to the
Rowland, PH., Valenine, B.A., Stebbins, K.E. et al. (1991)
clinic; advances in the diagnosis and pathogenesis of animal
Cutaneous plasmacytomas with amyloid in six dogs. Vet
skin diseases, Saint-Paul de Vence.
Pathol 28, 125-30.
Baker, J.L. & Scott, D.W. (1989) Mycosis fungoides in two cats.
Schrenzel, M.D., Naydan, D.K. & Moore, PF. (1998) Leukocyte
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 25, 97-101.
differentiation antigens in canine cutaneous and oral plasma-
Beale, K.M. & Bolon, B. (1993) Canine cutaneous lymphosar-
cytomas. Vet Dermatol 9, 33-41.
 coma: epitheliotropic and non-epitheliotropic, a retrospective
study. In: Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 2 (eds P.J.
Cutaneous Lymphocytosis
 Ihrke,I.S. Mason & S.D. White), pp.273-84.Pergamon Press,
Bakels, V., van Oostveen, J.W., van der Putte, S. C. et al. (1997)
Oxford.
Immunophenotyping and gene rearrangement analysis provide
Berti, E., Cerri, A., Cavicchini, S. et al. (1991) Primary cutaneous
addiional criteria to differentiate between cutaneous T-cell
gamma/delta T-cell lymphoma presenting as disseminated
lymphomas and pseudo-T-cell lymphomas. Am J Pathol 150,
pagetoid reticulosis. J Invest Dermatol 96, 718-22.
1941-9.
Berti, E., Tomasini, D., Vermeer, M.H. et al. (1999) Primary
Baker, J.L. & Scott, D.W. (1989) Mycosis fungoides in two cats.
cutaneous CD8-positive epidermotropic cytotoxic T cell lym-
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2s, 97-101.
phoma; a distinctive clinicopathological entity with an aggres-
Brady, S.P., Magro, C.M., Diaz-Cano, S.J. et al. (1999) Analysis
sive clinical behavior. Am J Pathol 155, 483-96.
of clonality of atypical cutaneous lymphocytic infltrates asso-
Bowman, P.H., Hogan, D.J. & Sanusi, I.D. (2001) Mycosis fun-
ciated with drug therapy by PCR/DGGE. Hum Pathol 30,
goides bullosa: report of a case and review of the literature. J
130-6.
Am Acad Dermatol 45, 934-9.
Ceballos, K.M., Gascoyne, R.D., Martinka, M. et al. (2002)
Burg, G., Dummer, R., Haeffner, A. et al. (2001) From inflam-
Heavy multinodular cutaneous lymphocytic infltrates: clini-
mation to neoplasia: mycosis fungoides evolves from reactive
copathologic features and B-cell clonality. J Cutan Pathol 29,
 inflammatory conditions (lymphocytic infltrates) transform-
159-67.
ing into neoplastic plaques and tumors. Arch Dermatol 137,
Gilbert, S., Affolter, V.K., Gross, T.L. et al. {2004a) Clinical,
949-52.
morphological and immunohistochemical characterization of
Burkert, K.L., Huhn, K., Menezes, D.W. et al. (2002) Langer-
cutaneous lymphocytosis in 23 cats. Vet Dermatol, 15, 3-12.
hans cell microgranulomas (pseudo-Pautrier abscesses): mor-
Gilbert, S., Affolter, VK., Schmidt, P et al. (2004b) Clonality
 phologic diversity, diagnostic implicatons and pathogenetic
studies of feline cutaneous lymphocytosis. Vet Dermatol 15,
mechanisms. J Cutan Pathol 29, 511-6.
24 (abstract).
Caciolo, P.L., Nesbitt, G.H., Patnaik, A.K. et al. (1984) Cuta-
Le Boit, PE. & McCalmont T.H. (1997) Cutaneous lymphomas
neous lymphosarcoma in the cat; a report of nine cases. J Am
and leukemias. In: Lever's Histopathology of the Skin, 8th edn
Anim Hosp Assoc 20, 491-6.
(eds D. Elder, R. Elenitsas, C. Jaworsky & B. Johnson, Jr), pp.
Candiago, E., Marocolo, D., Manganoni, M.A. et al. (2000)
819-20. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia.
Nonlymphoid intraepidermal mononuclear cell collections
Nihal, M., Mikkola, D., Horvath, N. et al. (2003) Cutaneous 
(pseudo-Pautrier abscesses): a morphologic and immuno-
im umnunuos aanenaoudoyduil e eise[diadiy pioudui]
phenotypical characterization. Am J Dermatopathol 22,
lymphomatous potential. Hum Pathol 34, 617-22.
1-6.
Ploysangam, T., Breneman, D.L. & Mutasim, D.F. (1998) Cuta-
Day, M.J. (1995) Immunophenotypic characterization of cuta-
neous pseudolymphomas. J Am Acad Dermatot 38, 877-95.
neous lymphocytic neoplasia ins the dog and cat. J Comp
Rijlaarsdam, J.U. & Willemze, R. (1994) Cutaneous pseudolym-
Pathol 112, 79-96.
phoma: classification and differential diagnosis. Sem Derma-
DeBoer, D.J., Turrel, J.M. & Moore, PF. (1990) Mycosis
tol 13, 187-96.
fungoides in a dog: demonstration of T cell specificity
Rosenkrantz, W.S. & Gross, T.L. (2001) Epitheliotropic lym-
and response to radiotherapy. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26,
phocytic adnexal infltration with leukotrichia in a boxer dog.
566-72.
892
Mesenchymal neoplasms and other tumors
Duclos, D.D. & Hargis, A.M. (1996) Canine epitheliotropic
Nonepitheliotropic Lymphoma
lymphoma limited to the face and footpads. Conference in
Affolter, VK. & Moore, PF. (2000) Histiocytic proliferative dis-
Dermatology. Vet Dermatol 7, 243-6.
eases in dogs and cats. In: Proceedings for ESVD Workshop
Goldschmidt, M.H. and Shofer, FS. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
on Immunodermatology 2oo0: from the laboratory to the
Dog and Cat, pp. 2-3, Pergamon Press, Oxford.
clinic; advances in the diagnosis and patbogenesis of animat
Ghosh, S.K., Abrams, J.T., Terunuma, H. et al. (1994) Human
skin diseases, Saint-Paul de Vence.
T-cell leukemia virus type I tax/rex DNA and RNA in cuta-
Beale, K.M. & Bolon, B. (1993) Canine cutaneous lymphosar-
neous T-Cell lymphoma. Blood 84, 2663-71.
coma: epitheliotropic and non-epitheliotropic, a retrospective
Knowles, D.M. (1989) Immunophenotypic and antigen receptor
study. In: Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 2 (eds P.J.
gene rearrangement analysis in T cell neoplasia. Am J Pathol
 Ihrke, I.S. Mason & S.D. White), pp. 273-84. Pergamon Press,
134, 761-85.
Oxford.
Le Boit, PE. & McCalmont, TH. (1997) Cutaneous lymphomas
Brown, N.O., Nesbitt, G.H., Patnaik, A.K. et al. (1980) Cuta-
and leukemias. In: Lever's Histopathology of the Skin, 8th edn
neous lymphosarcoma in the dog: a disease with variable clin-
(eds D. Elder, R. Elenitsas, C. Jaworsky & B. Johnson, Jr), pp.
ical and histologic manifestations. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16,
820-9. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia.
565-72.
Lu, D., Patel, K.A., Duvic, M. et al. (2002) Clinical and patho-
Caciolo, PL., Nesbitt, G.H., Patnaik, A.K. et al. (1984) Cuta-
logical spectrum of CD8-positive cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.
neous lymphosarcoma in the cat; a report of nine cases. J Am
J Comp Pathol 29,465-72.
Anim Hosp Assoc 20, 491-6.
Moore, PF. & Olivry, T. (1994) Cutaneous lymphomas in com-
Day, M.J. (1995) Immunophenotypic characterization of cuta-
panion animals. Clin Dermatol 12, 499-505.
neous lymphocytic neoplasia in the dog and cat. J Comp
Moore, PF., Olivry, T. & Naydan, D. (1994) Canine cutaneous
Pathol 112, 79-96.
epitheliotropic lymphoma (mycosis fungoides) is a prolifera-
Gogstetter, D., Brown, M., Seab, J. et al. (2000) Angiocentric
tive disorder of CD8+ T cells. Am J Pathol 144, 421-9.
primary cutaneous T-cell-rich B-cell lymphoma: a case
Moore, PF, Affolter, V.K., Olivry, T. et al. (1998) The use of
report and review of the literature. J Cutan Patbot 27, S16-
immunological reagents in defining the pathogenesis of canine
25.
skin diseases involving proliferation of leukocytes. In:
Goldschmidt, M.H. & Shofer, FS. (1992) Skin Tumors of the
Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 3 (eds K.W.
Dog and Cat, pp. 2-3. Pergamon Press, Oxford.
Kwochka, T. Willemse & C. von Tscharner), pp. 77-94. But-
Greenlee, PG., Filippa, D.A., Quimby, F.W. et al. (1990) Lym-
terworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
phomas in dogs. A morphologic, immunologic, and clinical
Murphy, K.M. & Olivry, T. (2000) Comparison of T-lympho-
study. Cancer 66, 480-90.
cyte proliferation in canine epitheliotropic lymphosarcoma
Harris, N.L. (2001) Mature B cell neoplasms: Introduction. In:
and benign lymphocytic disorders. Vet Dermatol 11, 99-105.
Pathology and Genetics: Tumours of Haematopoietic and
Pancake, B.A., Zucker-Franklin, D. & Coutavas, E.E. (1995)
Lymphoid Tissues (eds E.S. Jaffe, N.L. Harris, H. Stein & J.W.
The cutaneous T cell lymphoma, mycosis fungoides, is a
Vardiman), pp. 121-6. IARC Press, Lyon.
human T cell lymphotropic virus-associated disease. A study
Lapointe, J.M., Higgins, R.J., Kortz, G.D. et al. (1997) Intravas-
of 50 patients. J Clin Invest 95, 547-54.
Ralfkiaer, E. (1991) Immunohistological
markers for the
liomatosis) in a cat. Vet Pathol 34, 247-50.
diagnosis of cutaneous lymphomas. Semin Diagn Pathol 8,
McKeever, P.J., Grindem, C.B., Stevens, J.B. et al. (1982) Canine
62-72.
cutaneous lymphoma. J Am Vet Med Assoc 180, 531-6.
Ralfkiaer, E. & Jaffe, E.S. (2001) Mycosis fungoides and Sézary
Moore, PF. & Olivry, T. (1994) Cutaneous lymphomas in com-
symdrome.
.In: Patbology and Genetics: Tumours
of
panion animals. Clin Dermatol 12, 499-505.
Haemopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues (eds E.S. Jaffe, N.L.
Moore, PF., Affolter, VK., Olivry, T. et al. (1998) The use
Harris, H. Stein & J.W. Vardiman), pp. 216-20. IARC Press,
of immunological reagents in defining the pathogenesis of
Lyon.
canine skin diseases involving proliferation of leukocytes.
Safran, N., Perk, K., Eyal, O. et al. (1992) Isolation of a nove]
In: Advances in Veterinary Dermatology, Vol. 3 (eds K.W.
retrovirus isolate from a leukaemic dog. Res Vet Sci 52,
Kwochka, T. Willemse & C. von Tscharner), pp. 77-94.
250-5.
Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.
Schick, R.O., Murphey, G.F. & Goldschmidt, M.H. (1993) Cuta-
neous lymphosarcoma and leukemia in a cat. J Am Vet Med
proliferation in canine epitheliotropic lymphosarcoma and
Assoc 203, 1155-8
benign lymphocytic disorders. Vet Dermatol 11, 99-105.
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
Postorino, N.C. (1987) Canine pulmonary lymphomatoid gran-
Small Animal Dermatology, pp. 1330-42. W.B. Saunders,
ulomatosis. In: Proceedings of the VCS Annual Conference,
Philadelphia.
Madison.
Thrall, M.A., Macy, D.M., Snyder, S.P et al. (1984) Cutaneous
Ralfkiaer, E., Delsol, G., Willemze, R. et al. (2001a) Primary
 lymphosarcoma and leukemia in a dog resembling Sézary syn-
cutaneous CD30-positive T-cell lymphoproliferative disorder.
drome in man. Vet Pathot 21, 182-6.
In: Pathology and Genetics: Tumours of Haematopoietic and
Tobey, J.C., Houston, D.M., Breur, G.J. et al. (1994) Cutaneous
Lymphoid Tissues (eds E.S. Jaffe, N.L. Harris, H. Stein & J.W.
T-cell lymphoma in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 204, 606-9.
Vardiman), pp. 221-4. IARC Press, Lyon.
Lymphocytic tumors
893
Ralfkiaer, E., Mueller-Hermelink, H.K. & Jaffe, E.S. (2001b)
phoma (malignant angioendotheliomatosis). Vet Dermatol 11,
Peripheral T cell lymphoma, unspecifed. In: Pathology and
291-7.
Genetics: Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues
Walder, E.J. & Barr, R.J. (1986) A case of lymphomatoid gran-
(eds E.S. Jaffe, N.L. Harris, H. Stein & J.W. Vardiman), pp.
ulomatosis with primary cutaneous manifestations in the dog.
227-9. IARC Press, Lyon.
In: Proceedings of the ACVP Meeting, New Orleans.
Safran, N., Perk, K., Eyal, O. et al. (1992) Isolation of a nove]
Wood, G.S. (2001) T-cell receptor and immunoglobulin gene
retrovirus isolate from a leukaemic dog. Res Vet Sci 52, 250-5.
rearrangements in diagnosing skin disease. Arch Dermatol
Scott, D.W., Miller, W.H. & Griffin, C.E. (2001) Muller  Kirk's
137,1503-6.
Small Animal Dermatology, pp. 1330-42. W.B. Saunders,
Yamaguchi, M., Ohno, T., Oka, K. et al. (1993) Discordant reac-
Philadelphia.
tion of Leu4 and rabbit anti-human CD3 epsilon in sinusoidal
Smith, K.C., Day, M.J., Shaw, S.C. et al. (1996) Canine lym-
"T'-cell lymphomas. Int J Hematol 59, 25-30.
phomatoid granulomatosis: an immunophenotypic analysis of
three cases. J Comp Patbol 11s, 129-38.
Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia with Cutaneous Lesions
Summers, B.A. & Lahunta A. (1985) Cerebral angioendothe-
Affolter, V.K. & Moore, PF (2000) Histiocytic proliferative dis-
liomatosis. Acta Neuropathol 68, 10-4.
eases in dogs and cats. In: Proceedings of ESVD Workshop on
Tobey, J.C., Houston, D.M., Breur, G.J. et al. (1994) Cutaneous
Immunodermatology 20oo: from the laboratory to the clinic;
T-cell lymphoma in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 204, 606-9.
advances in the diagnosis and pathogenesis of animat skin dis-
Valentine, B.A., Blue, J.T., Zimmer, J.F. et al. (20oo) Pulmonary
Eases, Saint-Paul de Vence.
lymphomatoid granulomatosis in a cat. J Vet Diagn Invest 12,
Head, PW. & Edelson, R.L. (1993) Lymphomas, pseudolym-
465-7.
 phomas and related conditions. In: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology
Valli, V.E., Jacobs, R.M., Parodi, A.L. et al. (2002) Histologic
in General Medicine, 4th edn (eds I.M. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen,
classification of hematopoietic tumors of domestic animals. In:
K. Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.I. Katz), p. 1305.
World Health Organization International Histologic Classifi-
McGraw-Hill, New York.
cation of Tumors of Domestic Animals, Vol. 8, 2nd edn, pp.
McLean, D.1. & Haynes, H.A. (2003) Skin manifestations of dis-
13-24, 42-46. Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, American
eases in other organ systems. In: Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in
Registry of Pathology, Washington DC.
General Medicine, 6th edn (eds I.M. Freedberg, A.Z. Eisen, K.
Vangessel, YA., McDonough, S.P, McCormick, H.J. et al.
Wolff, K.F. Austen, L.A. Goldsmith & S.1. Katz), p. 1794.
(2000) Cutaneous presentation of canine intravascular lym-
McGraw-Hill, New York.
Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, Second Edition
Thelma Lee Gross, Peter J. Ihrke, Emily J. Walder, Verena K. Affolter
Copyright @ 2005 by Blackwell Science Ltd
Note: page numbers in itatics refer to figures; those in bold refer to tables. Synonyms are in parentheses following the name of the
condition. Differential diagnoses are listed under the condition *compared with . . ."
abscess
acral lick dermatitis (lick granuloma) 140-2, 429
mycobacterial opportunistic infection 284
clinical features 140-1
sterile of repositol injection 541, 542, 544-5
compared with
clinical features 542, 544-5
callus 185
histopathology 545
fibroadnexal hamartoma 606
Abyssinian cats
interdigital furunculosis 432
feline ceruminous cystomatosis 667
 linear epidermal hamartoma 565
psychogenic alopecia 514
histopathology 141-2, 429, 430
Acanthocheilonema 225,226,227-8
traumatic furunculosis 420, 423
acantholysis
acrochordon (skin tag, fibroepithelial polyp, fbromatous
canine dermatophytosis 414
polyp, fibromatous plaque) 713-16
impetigo 6
clinical features 713-14
inflamed linear epidermal nevus 156
compared with
metastatic pulmonary carcinoma in cats 704
fibroadnexal hamartoma 606
nailbed squamous cell carcinoma 700
fbroma 720,721
paraneoplastic pemphigus 37
granulation tissue-type hemangioma 745-6
pemphigus erythematosus 57
 lymphangiomatosis 749
pemphigus foliaceus 6, 15-16, 415, 416, 417
squamous papilloma 567
pemphigus vulgaris 33, 34
subcorneal pustular dermatosis 20
acrochordonous plaque 713-16
superficial pustular dermatophytosis 12
clinical features 714
superficial pustular drug reactions 24
histopathology 715-16
superficial spreading pyoderma 9
acrodermatitis of Bull Terriers (lethal acrodermatitis of Bull
 acanthoma see infundibular keratinizing acanthoma;
Terriers) 193-6
melanocytoma-acanthoma
clinical features 193-4
acanthosis nigricans of Dachshunds 151-2
compared with zinc-responsive dermatosis 191
clinical features 151
histopathology 195-6
histopathology 151-2
acromelanism 498
acariasis
actin, smooth muscle 256
compared with
actinic carcinoma n situ 576
flea allergy dermatitis 210, 211
actinic comedones see comedones, actinic 
80 202 Aae poo]
actinic furunculosis see furunculosis, actinic
see also cheyletiellosis; demodicosis, canine; demodicosis,
actinic keratosis (solar keratosis, squamous cell carcinoma in
 feline follicular; demodicosis, feline superficial; notoedric
sit) 148-51, 399, 575-8
acariasis; sarcoptic acariasis
acantholytic variant 576-7
acne, canine (muzzle folliculitis and furunculosis) 423, 435-7
actinic comedones 184
clinical features 435-6
basal cell carcinoma coexistence 590
compared with
clinical features 148-50, 576
acral lick dermatitis 429
compared with bowenoid in situ carcinoma 580-1
interdigital furunculosis 432
histopathology
150-1,576-8
histopathology 436-7
lichenoid 576
acne, feline 437-40
actinomycosis 272-5
clinical features 437-8
clinical features 272-4
compared with callus pyoderma 435
compared with foreign body reactions 337
contagious 438
histopathology 274-5
histopathology 438-40
infection in foreign body reactions 337
895
896
Index
adhesion molecules, angiomatosis 735
clinical features 501-2
adipocytes
compared with congenital hypotrichosis 530
actinomycosis 274
histopathology 502-3
feline acquired skin fragility syndrome 390
areata 460-4
feline pansteatitis 553
clinical features 460-2
idiopathic sterile nodular panniculitis 550
compared with follicular lipidosis 531
mycobacterial opportunistic infection 285
histopathology 462-4
nocardiosis 274
canine cutaneous histiocytoma 841
 pancreatic panniculitis 557
canine traction compared with canine ischemic
post-traumatic alopecia 506-7
dermatopathy 505
traumatic panniculiis 546
chemotherapy-induced 510-11
vasculitic panniculitis of thermal burns 547
color dilution (blue dog disease, color mutant alopecia)
adipose tissue
518-22
compared with lipoma 768
clinical features 518-20
fibrotic compared with fibrolipoma 768-9
histopathology 520-2
saponification 557
 congenital (see hypotrichosis, congenital)
traumatic panniculitis 546
cyclical flank (seasonal flank alopecia, recurrent flank
see aiso steatitis
alopecia, flank alopecia) 525-8
adnexa
clinical features 525-6
atrophic diseases 480-515
histopathology 526-8
canine nodular dermatofibrosis 712
doxorubicin-induced (Adriamycin-induced alopecia)
dysplastic diseases 518-35
510-11,512
adnexal glands, epitheliotropic lymphoma 878
compared with telogen effluvium 510
adrenal sex hormone imbalance see alopecia X
endocrine, compared with
Adriamycin-induced alopecia see alopecia, doxorubicin-
acquired partern alopecia 503
induced
canine follicular dysplasia 525
Airedale Terrier, cyclical flank alopecia 526
canine hyperglucocorticoidism 487
Akita
female hyperestrogenism 494
 facially-predominant pemphigus foliaceus 15
hypothyroidism 483-4
sebaceous adenitis 186, 187, 455
Sertoli cell tumor-associated skin disease 491-2
allergic contact dermatitis 105-9, 214-16
telogen effluvium 510
clinical features 105-6
feline hyperglucocorticoidism association 488, 489
compared with
feline psychogenic (self-induced psychogenic feline hair loss)
allergic contact dermatitis 109
513-15
arthropod bite reactions 345
clinical features 513-14
atopic dermatitis 203, 205-6
histopathology 515
feline superficial demodicosis 225
female hyperestrogenism 492-3
Malassezia dermatitis 146
hypothyroidism 481-2
pseudopelade 469
mucinosa (see mucinosis, follicular)
seborrheic dermatitis 165
mural folliculitis 470
superficial spreading pyoderma 200
 paraneoplastic compared with feline hyperglucocoricoidism
histopathology 106-9, 214-16
490
mucinosis association 381, 383
pathological 512-13
allergic miliary dermatitis, feline 118-21, 211, 212
postclipping 497-8
clinical features 118-19
clinical features 497-8
compared with
compared with alopecia X 497
atopic dermatiis 204, 205
histopathology 498
feline eosinophilic plaque 122,353
 postrabies vaccination panniculitis 539
food allergy 207
post-traumatic 505-7
histopathology 119-21, 211, 212
clinical features 505-6
allergic spongiotic reaction compared with facial dermatitis of
histopathology 506-7
Persian and Himalayan cats 114
self-induced 514
allergy
Sertoli cell tumor-associated skin disease 491
compared with
traction (mechanical alopecia) 507-9
feline psychogenic alopecia 515
clinical features 507-8
hyperplastic dermatosis of West Highland White Terriers
compared with post-traumatic alopecia 507
148
histopathology 508-9
irritant contact dermatitis 99, 100
vaccine-induced sarcoma 797
hyperplastic dermatitis 136-7
zebra pattern 508
impetiginization compared with superficial spreading
see also cicatricial alopecia
pyoderma 9
 alopecia X (adrenal sex hormone imbalance, follicular
see also atopic dermatitis; flea allergy; food allergy
dysfunction of plush-coated dogs, adrenal hyperplasia-like
alopecia
syndrome, growth hormone/castration-responsive
acquired pattern (canine pinnal alopecia, pattern baldness,
dermatosis) 494-7
 Dachshund pattern baldness) 501-3
clinical features 494-5
897
compared with
progressive 736,737-8
canine follicular dysplasia 524-5
compared with
canine hyperglucocorticoidism 487
hemangiosarcoma 751
hypothyroidism 484
infiltrative angiolipoma 772
postclipping alopecia 498
lymphangiomatosis 749
Sertoli cell tumor-associated skin disease 491-2
phlebectasia 243
histopathology 495-7
telangiectasia 242
alopecic breeds 528
secondary to lymphedema (Klippel-Trenaunay-like
amine precursor uptake and decarboxylation (APUD) cells 787
syndrome) 736-7,739-40,741,742
amino acids, superficial necrolytic dermatitis 86-7, 91
compared with granulation tissue-type hemangioma
amphoterocin B, calcinosis cutis 374
745-6
amyloid 385,386
angiosarcoma
plasmacytoma 870-1
anaplastic 752, 755
amyloidosis
epithelioid 752,753
cutaneous 383-6
feline abdominal 754, 755
clinical features 383-5
of lymphatic origin 752, 755
histopathology 385-6
 mixed spindle-polygonal 752
organ-limited 384
of vascular origin 752, 755
plasmacytoma 870-1
see also hemangiosarcoma; lymphangiosarcoma
systemic 384
alpha-1-antichymotrypsin, granular cell tumor 804, 805, 806
anagen 604
antidesmoglein autoantibody 13-14, 33
follicular lipidosis 531
antigen-antibody reaction see Splendore-Hoeppli reaction
premature cessation 510
anti-Mycobacterium bovis (BCG) polyclonal stain
anagen efluvium 509
canine leproid granuloma 283
anaphylaxis, fire ant bites 349
feline leprosy syndrome 280
 anaplasia, vaccine-induced sarcoma 800
mycobacterial opportunistic infection 286
anaplastic carcinoma, compared with
antinuclear antibody (ANA) test
anaplastic sarcoma with giant cells 809
pemphigus erythematosus 58
epithelioid angiosarcoma 752
 systemic lupus erythematosus 56
anaplastic sarcoma with giant cells 723, 724
alpha-1-antitrypsin, granular cell tumor 804, 805, 806
compared with fibrosarcoma 725
ants
anatrichosomiasis, cutaneous (Anatrichosoma) 229-31
eosinophilic furunculosis of the face 451
clinical features 229-30
see also fire ant bites
histopathology_ 230-1
apocrine adenocarcinoma, compared with
Ancylostoma 228
eccrine carcinoma 690
ancylostomiasis, cutaneous (see hookworm dermatitis)
metastatic pulmonary adenocarcinoma in cats 706
angioedema (hives) 239-41
apocrine cyst 666
clinical features 239-40
 compared with apocrine cystadenoma 670
histopathology 240-1
apocrine cystadenocarcinoma 678
insect bite reactions 343
 compared with apocrine cystadenoma 670
 angioendotheliomatosis, malignant (intravascular lymphoma)
apocrine cystadenoma (sweat gland cystadenoma, apocrine
882,883,886-7
hidrocystoma) 668-70
 compared with chronic lymphocytic leukemia with
clinical features 668-9
cutaneous lesions 889
compared with
angiofibrolipoma 769
apocrine cyst 666
angiokeratoma 741,742,744-5
apocrine cystadenocarcinoma 680
angioleiomyoma 778, 779
histopathology 669-70
angioleiomyosarcoma 781
multicentric compared with canine apocrine cystomatosis
compared with glomus tumors 761-2
667-8
angiolipoma 769
apocrine cystic calcinosis 379-80
compared with
apocrine cystomatosis, canine 667
angiomatosis 738
apocrine ductular adenocarcinoma
 cavernous hemangioma 743
clear cell compared with clear cell basal cell carcinoma 596
infiltrative hemangioma 743
compared with
infltrative 771, 772
acantholytic squamous cell carcinoma 586
angiomatosis 735-41
canine apocrine ductular adenoma 673
arteriovenous 737
feline apocrine ductular adenoma 674
bacillary 735
apocrine ductular adenoma (ductular sweat gland adenoma,
clinical features
：736-7
basaloid sweat gland adenoma, nodular hidradenoma)
compared with
672-7
 arteriovenous hemangioma 744
canine 673
granulation tissue-type hemangioma 745-6
clinical features 672-3
infltrative hemangioma 743
compared with
histopathology 737-40
apocrine ductular carcinoma 684,685
immunohistochemistry 740-1
trichoblastoma with outer root sheath differentiation 628
898
Index
feline 674
clinical features 342-3
 compared with solid-cystic apocrine ductular adenoma
histopathology 343-5
676
arthropods, venomous
histopathology 673-6
angioedema 240
immunohistochemistry 676-7
eosinophilic furunculosis of the face 451-2
solid-cystic 674-6, 677
urticaria 240
apocrine ductular carcinoma (ductular sweat gland
aspergillosis 301-3
adenocarcinoma, malignant nodular hidradenoma,
asthenia, cutaneous see Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
hidradenocarcinoma) 681-2, 683, 684-9
Atlees sign 144
clear cell 681, 686-8
atopic dermatitis 109, 200-6
 compared with balloon cell melanoma 831
angioedema 240
clinical features 681-2
clinical features 200-4
elbow 682,683,684
compared with
histopathology 682, 683,684-8
epitheliotropic lymphoma 877
immunohistochemistry 688-9
flea allergy dermatitis 211
solid-cystic 681, 685-6
urticarial allergic eruption 213
apocrine secretory adenocarcinoma (sweat gland
vitiligo 234
 adenocarcinoma, epitrichial adenocarcinoma) 677-81
diagnostic criteria 201-2
clinical features 677
feline allergic miliary dermatitis 118
compared with apocrine secretory adenoma 671
feline indolent ulcer association 128
complex 680
German Shepherd Dog pyoderma 425
histopathology 677-80
histopathology 204-6
immunohistochemistry 681
hyperplastic dermatosis of West Highland White Terriers
simple 678-80
147
apocrine secretory adenoma (sweat gland adenoma, epitrichial
Malassezia dermatitis 143
 sweat gland adenoma) 670-1
urticaria 240
clinical features 670
atrichial sweat gland carcinoma see eccrine carcinoma
 compared with apocrine adenocarcinoma 679
complex 670-1
B cells 866
histopathology 670-1
cutaneous lymphocytosis 872, 874
simple 670, 671
phenotypic characteristics 867
apocrine sweat glands
bacille Calmette-Guerin (BCG) stain see anti-Mycobacterium
carcinoma compared with perianal gland carcinoma
bovis (BCG) polyclonal stain
662
bacterial endocarditis, septic vasculitis 238
ectasia in flea allergy dermatitis 211
bacterial folliculitis, deep 416
 lymphocytic infltration 78
bacterial folliculitis, superficial (superficial pyoderma)
apoptosis
406-10
discoid lupus erythematosus 55, 264
clinical features 406-7
basal cell 54
compared with
erythema multiforme 66, 68
eosinophilic pustulosis 418
keratinocytes 35, 54,75
feline dermatophytosis 413
erythema multiforme 76, 77
deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis 421
feline thymoma-associated exfoliative dermatitis 78-9
flea allergy dermatitis association 211
toxic shock syndrome 85
histopathology 407-10
lupoid onychitis 72
bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis, deep (deep pyoderma)
 paraneoplastic pemphigus 37, 38
420-4
pemphigus foliaceus 14, 17, 18, 38
clinical features 420-2
superficial necrolytic dermatitis 89
compared with
verrucous squamous cell carcinoma 588
canine acne 436
vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus of Shetland
eosinophilic furunculosis of the face 453
 Sheepdog and Collie 62
97t euapod boa praudaus ueuan
viral exophytic papilloma 569
interdigital furunculosis 432
warty dyskeratoma 614
kerion 441
armadillo Westie syndrome see hyperplastic dermatosis of West
postgrooming furunculosis 428-9
Highland white Terrier
histopathology 422-4
arrector pili muscle 604
bacterial infection
hamartoma 778
angiomatosis 735
piloleiomyoma 779
compared with
arteriovenous hemangioma 741, 744, 745
feline herpesvirus ulcerative dermatitis 352
arteritis of the nasal philtrum see proliferative arteritis of the
metatarsal fistulation of German Shepherd Dog 555
 nasal philtrum
spider bites 348
arthropod bite reactions (insect bite granuloma) 342-5
secondary
canine eosinophilic dermatitis 361
bullous pemphigoid 27
canine eosinophilic granuloma 358
burns 96
899
chronic hyperplastic dermatitis 136
basosquamous carcinoma 598
compared with foreign body reactions 337
sebaceous carcinoma 654
cystic follicles in fibroadnexal hamartoma 607
see also nailbed basal cell carcinoma
familial pawpad hyperkeratosis 180
basal cell tumor see apocrine ductular adenoma;
foreign body reactions 337
tichoblastoma
giant cell dermatosis in FeLV-positive cats 159
Basidiobolus 305,307, 308,310
hypothyroidism 482
basosquamous carcinoma (basal-squamous cell carcinoma)
ichthyosis 176
597-8
interdigital furunculosis 432
clinical features 597
metatarsal fistulation of German Shepherd Dog 554
compared with keratinizing basal cel carcinoma 594-5
nasodigital hyperkeratosis 169
histopathology 597-8
Schnauzer comedo syndrome 182
bathing, postgrooming furunculosis 427
superficial necrolytic dermatitis 88
Beagles, lymphangioma 748
bacterial intertrigo 261
Belgian Sheepdog, sebaceous adenitis 455
compared with mucocutaneous pyoderma 263
Belgian Tervuren, vitiligo 232, 233
bacterial pseudomycetoma (cutaneous bacterial granuloma,
 Bernese Mountain Dogs, histiocytic sarcoma 849
botryomycosis) 275-6, 277
betamethasone, topical corticosteroid reaction 392
clinical features 275-6
Bichon Frises, postrabies vaccination panniculitis 539
compared with
Birt-Hogg-Dube syndrome 711
acinomycosis 275
black flies 342-3
Nocardia 275
black hair follicular dysplasia see dysplasia, black hair
histopathology 276, 277
follicular
balloon cell(s) 826, 827, 830-1
blaschkitis 156, 192
balloon cell melanocytoma 817, 820-1
blastomycosis, cutaneous (Blastomyces dermatitidis) 291-5,
compared with
292,297
granular cell tumor 806
clinical features 291-4
Merkel cell tumor 787, 788-9
compared with cryptococcosis 297
transmissible venereal tumor 802, 803
dangers to humans 293-4
balloon cell melanoma, compared with
histopathology 294-5
apocrine ductular carcinoma 687
blue dog disease see alopecia, color dilution
clear cell basal cell carcinoma 596
bone
Bartonella bacilliformis 735
 invasion in eccrine carcinoma 689
basal cell(s)
 proliferation in nailbed keratoacanthoma 699
canine ischemic dermatopathy 504
Border Terrier, sebaceous gland hyperplasia 531, 532
degeneration in discoid lupus erythematosus 264-5
Boston Terrier
vacuolation in lupoid onychitis 72
acquired pattern alopecia 502
basal cell carcinoma (basal cell epithelioma) 589-96
calcinosis circumscripta 379
bowenoid in situ carcinoma malignant progression 580
botryomycosis see bacterial pseudomycetoma
clear cell 595-6
bovine papillomavirus-1 and -2 (BPV1 and BPV2)
compared with
730
apocrine ductular carcinoma 687-8
bowenoid in situ carcinoma (Bowen's disease, multicentric
sebaceous carcinoma 652
papillomavirus-induced squamous cell carcinoma in situ)
ticholemmoma 622
150-1,578-81
clinical features 590-1
basal cell carcinoma origin 590
compared with
clinical features 579
 feline apocrine ductular adenoma 674
compared with actinic keratosis 577
sebaceous epithelioma 650
feline follicular demodicosis association 448
solid-cystic apocrine ductular adenoma 675-6
feline viral plaque malignant transformation 575
spindle cell trichoblastoma 631
histopathology 579-81
feline viral plaque malignant transformation 575
Boxer
granular cell compared with granular cell type
calcinosis circumscripta 379
trichoblastoma 633
cyclical flank alopecia 526
histopathology 591-6
dermoid cyst 566
immunohistochemistry 596
kerion 440
keratinizing 594-5
Briard, sebaceous gland hyperplasia 531
 compared with
bronchopneumonia, acrodermatitis of Bull Terriers 194
basaloid trichoepithelioma 618-19
buffalo gnat 342-3
basosquamous carcinoma 598
bulbitis, alopecia areata 463-4
malignant pilomatricoma 638
Bull Terrier
malignant trichoepithelioma 636-7
superficial pustular dermatophytosis 12
pilomatricoma 625
see also acrodermatitis of Bull Terriers
metastases 591
bullae, hemorrhagic
solid 591-4
deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis 421
compared with
German Shepherd Dog pyoderma 426
900
Index
Bulldog, English
compared with superficial pustular dermatophytosis 13
acrochordonous plaque 714
histopathology 10-11
calcinosis cutis 375
secondary in acrodermatitis of Bull Terriers 194
female hyperestrogenism 493
canine nodular dermatofibrosis see dermatofibrosis, canine
Bulldog, French, female hyperestrogenism 493
nodular
bullous pemphigoid 27-30
capillary hemangioma 741, 743-4
clinical features 27-8
compared with
compared with
hemangiosarcoma 751
 epidermolysis bullosa acquisita 42
scrotal-type vascular hamartoma 739
hereditary epidermolysis bullosa 40
carcinoma cuniculatum 588
linear IgA dermatosis 46
carprofen 367
mucous membrane pemphigoid 32
castration
mycosis fungoides 880
 perianal gland adenoma 655
histopathology 29-30
 perianal gland carcinoma 659
burns 94-8
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel
chemical 97
canine eosinophilic granuloma 359, 360
compared with irritant contact dermatitis 102
ichthyosis 163, 164
clinical features 94-6
 pancreatic panniculitis 556
first-degree compared with toxic epidermal necrolysis
cavernous hemangioma 741, 743
83
compared with lymphangiomatosis 749
histopathology 96-8
cedar chip bedding 105-6
thermal 96-7, 98
cellulitis, juvenile see sterile granulomatous dermatitis and
compared with
lymphadenitis, juvenile
cryoglobulinemia/cryofibrinemia 244
septic vasculitis 238,239
ceruminous cystomatosis, feline 667-8
vasculiic panniculitis 547-8, 552
clinical features 667
histopathology 668
calcification
chemotherapy, alopecia 510-11
calcinosis circumscripta 378
cheyletiellosis (Cheyletiella dermatitis) 220-2
dystrophic 373-4, 379
clinical features 220-1
jatrogenic 373, 374, 379
compared with notoedric/sarcoptic acariasis 219
idiopathic 373, 374, 379
histopathology 221-2
metastatic 373,374,378, 379
Chihuahua, acquired pattern alopecia 502
trichoepithelioma 618
Chinese Shar Pei
calcinosis circumscripta {tumoral calcinosis) 373, 378-80
canine cutaneous histiocytoma 841
clinical features 378-9
mucinosis 381,382,383
compared with calcinosis cutis 375
neutrophilic immunologic vasculitis 244, 245, 246,
histopathology 379-80
247
occult demodicosis 444
calcinosis cutis 373-7
cholesterol 330, 331
clinical features 373-5
cholesterol clefts
histopathology 375-7
cutaneous xanthoma 331,332
hyperglucocorticoidism 485,486-7
follicular cyst 609
calcium chloride therapy 374
chondrolipoma 770
calcium deposition 373
Chow Chow
calcium gluconate therapy 374, 375, 377
alopecia X 495,497
calcium ion pump mutations 43
facially-predominant pemphigus foliaceus 15
callus (pressure point granuloma) 184-5, 186
Churg-Strauss granuloma 337, 339, 340
clinical features 184-5
compared with familial cutaneous vasculopathy of German
compared with actinic comedones 184
 Shepherd Dogs 365
histopathology 185, 186
chylomicrons 330
see also keratoma, pawpad
cicatricial alopecia (cicatrix, scarring alopecia) 397-8, 399,
callus pyoderma (pressure point pyoderma) 420, 423,
509
433-5
clinical features 397-8
clinical features 433-4
compared with morphea 397
compared with
histopathology 398, 399
acral lick dermatitis 429
cicatricial pemphigoid see mucous membrane pemphigoid
actinic furunculosis 431
claw abnormalities, lupoid onychitis 70-2
canine acne 436-7
clear cells, solid-cystic apocrine ductular adenoma 675
interdigital furunculosis 432
coagulation factors, angiomatosis 735
histopathology 434-5
coagulation necrosis 96
candidiasis {(Candida)  9-11
vasculitic panniculitis of thermal burns 547, 548
clinical features 9-10
Coccidioides immitis 292
Index
901
coccidiomycosis, cutaneous 291-5
color mutant alopecia see alopecia, color dilution
clinical features 291-4
comedones
histopathology 294-5
acinic 150, 183-4,399
Cocker Spaniel
actinic furunculosis 431
American, cryptococcosis 296
clinical features 183-4
amyloidosis 384-5, 386
compared with
cheyletiellosis 221
callus 185
pancreatic panniculitis 556
callus pyoderma 435
sarcoptic acariasis 217
topical corticosteroid reaction 394
sebaceous epithelioma 648
deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis 420
seborrhea 163
histopathology 184
vitamin A-responsive dermatosis 165, 166
canine acne 436-7
collagen
canine hyperglucocorticoidism 485
acrochordon 714-15
congenital hypotrichosis 529
calcinosis cutis 375-6
feline acne 438, 439
chondrolipoma 770
feline hyperglucocorticoidism 489
cicatricial alopecia 398, 399
female hyperestrogenism 493
feline acquired skin fragility syndrome 391
hyperglucocorticoidism 486
palisading granuloma 338-9
interdigital furunculosis 432
postrabies vaccination panniculitis 540, 541
Schnauzer comedo syndrome 181-3
solar elastosis and fibrosis 400
topical corticosteroid reacion 392, 393, 394
topical corticosteroid reaction 393
complement C5b-9 membrane attack complex 248
 collagen bundles
complement factor 3 (C3) 6, 17
acrochordonous plaque 715
Conidiobolus 305, 307, 308
canine mast cell tumors 855
connective tissue
canine nodular dermatofbrosis 712, 713
collagenous in morphea 397
dermatofbroma 716,717
fbrous in cicatricial alopecia 398
dermoid cyst 566
connective tissue disease
fibroadnexal hamartoma 606
degenerative/dysplastic/depositional 373-401
fibroma 720
neutrophilic immunologic vasculitis 245
fibrosarcoma
1723,724
contact dermatitis see allergic contact dermatitis; irritant
 collagen fibers
contact dermatitis
 canine eosinophilic granuloma 360
Coonhounds, apocrine ductular carcinoma 681
canine keloidal fbroma 721-2
 copper defciency, acrodermatitis of Bull Terriers 193-4
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome 388-9
corn see keratoma, pawpad
familial cutaneous vasculopathy of German Shepherd Dogs
cornification, abnormal 161-96
365
corticosteroid reaction, topical 392-4
feline eosinophilic granuloma 356, 357
clinical features 392-3
perforating dermatitis 396
compared with actinic comedones 183, 184
collagen IV
histopathology 393-4
epidermolysis bullosa acquisita 42
cowpox virus infection, feline 127-8
linear IgA dermatosis 45
clinical features 127
collagen Vll, epidermolysis bullosa acquisita 41
compared with feline herpesvirus ulcerative dermatitis 126
collagen XVII 30
histopathology 128
hereditary epidermolysis bullosa 38-9
cryofbrinogenemia and cryoglobulinemia (cutaneous
collagenolytic granuloma see eosinophilic granuloma, canine
cryopathies)243-4
collagenosis, perforating see perforating dermatitis
clinical features 243-4
collagenous hamartoma (collagenous nevus) 710-11
histopathology 244
clinical features 710
compared with
295-7
canine nodular dermatofibrosis 712
clinical features 295-6
fibroma 720
compared with sporotrichosis 298, 300-1
histopathology 710-11
histopathology 296-7
Collie
cryptorchidism, Sertoli cell tumor-associated skin disease 490,
 bullous pemphigoid 28
491
canine familial dermatomyositis 51
Cushing's disease see hyperglucocorticoidism
discoid lupus erythematosus 53
cutaneous and renal glomerular vasculopathy see vasculopathy
idiopathic sterile nodular panniculitis 550
of Greyhounds
 pemphigus erythematosus 18
cutaneous cryopathies see cryofibrinogenemia and
pemphigus vulgaris 34
cryoglobulinemia
pyotraumatic dermatitis 116
cutaneous flushing 241-3
vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus 55, 57,
clinical features 241-2
61-3
histopathology 242-3
902
Index
cutaneous horn of feline pawpad 562, 563
demodicosis, feline superficial (demodectic mange, demodectic
cystic hyperplasia of sweat glands see apocrine cystomatosis,
acariasis) 222-5
canine
clinical features 222-4
cysts
compared with feline dermatophytosis 413
dilated pore 612,613
histopathology 224-5
 infundibular keratnizing acanthoma 619
dendritic cell(s)
pilomatricoma 624-5
cutaneous histiocytoma 842
sebaceous adenoma 647
melanocytoma 819
warty dyskeratoma 613-14
melanoma 826,827
phenotypic characteristics 838
 isthmus cyst; matrical cyst; nailbed epithelial inclusion
proliferation 837
cyst
dendritic cell histiocytosis, feline progressive 845-8
cytokeratin immunostains 589, 596
clinical features 845
apocrine adenocarcinoma 681
compared with
apocrine ductular adenoma 672, 676-7
cutaneous xanthoma 333
apocrine ductular carcinoma 688-9
feline leprosy syndrome 280
eccrine carcinoma 691
 giant epithelioid melanoma 832
metastatic pulmonary adenocarcinoma in cats 706
mast cell tumors 860
nailbed squamous cell carcinoma 702
pleomorphic mast cell tumors 861
sebaceous carcinoma 654-5
histopathology 845-8
trichoblastoma 633-4
immunohistochemistry 848
 dendritic cell sarcoma see histiocytic sarcoma
Dachshund pattern baldness see alopecia, acquired pattern
depigmentation
Dachshunds
epitheliotropic lymphoma 877
alopecia areata 461-2
idiopathic 233
ear margin seborrhea 167
lips with mucocutaneous pyoderma 261
idiopathic sterile nodular panniculitis 548, 549, 550,
vitiligo 231-4
551
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome 267
juvenile sterile granulomatous dermatitis and lymphadenitis
dermal-epidermal junction interface diseases 49-72
328
dermatofibroma 716-17
 sebaceous adenitis 187
clinical features 716
see aiso acanthosis nigricans of Dachshunds
compared with
Darier's disease, canine (canine Hailey-Hailey disease)
benign peripheral nerve sheath tumor 791, 792
43-5
canine keloidal fibroma 722
clinical features 43-4
fibroma 720-1
compared with actinic keratosis 578
histopathology 716-17
histopathology 44-5
dermatofibrosis, canine nodular 711-12, 713
Darier's sign 861
clinical features 712
degloving injury compared with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
compared with
389
collagenous hamartoma 711
Demodex canis 442, 443, 444
fibroma 720
Demodex cati 447-8
histopathology 712, 713
Demodex gatoi 447-8
dermatographism 240, 861
Demodex injai 443, 446
dermatomyositis, canine 248, 503-5
demodicosis, canine (demodectic mange, demodectic acariasis)
compared with
442-4, 445, 446-7
post-traumatic alopecia 507
canine hyperglucocorticoidism 485
traction alopecia 509
clinical features 442-4
familial 49, 51
compared with
histopathology 503-5
deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis 424
dermatopathy, canine ischemic 247, 503-5
sebaceous adenitis 456
compared with
deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis 420
post-traumatic alopecia 507
generalized 443
traction alopecia 509
histopathology 444, 445,446-7
histopathology 503-5
 juvenile-onset generalized 443
dermatophytic pseudomycetoma 288-91
localized 443
clinical features 288-90
mural folliculitis 464-6
feline dermatophytosis 411
occult 444, 446, 465, 466
histopathology 290-1
eosinophilic mucinotic mural folliculitis
dermatophytosis
471
canine (canine ringworm) 413-15
demodicosis, feline follicular (demodectic mange, demodectic
clinical features 413-14
acariasis) 447-9
histopathology 414-15
clinical features 447-8
compared with
histopathology 448-9
canine demodicosis 446-7
Index
903
deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis 424
vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus of Shetland
feline follicular demodicosis 449
 Sheepdog and Collie 62
 pemphigus foliaceus 416
vitiligo 234
feline (feline ringworm) 410-13
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome 268
clinical features 410-11
histopathology 54-5, 264-5
compared with sebaceous adenitis 457
mucinosis association 383
histopathology 411-12
solar vasculopathy association 257, 258
hyphae 412,415
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
keratin-colonizing 464
sterile pustular erythroderma of Miniature Schnauzers
kerion 441
21
mural folliculitis 464-6
toxic shock syndrome 84
secondary in superficial necrolytic dermatitis 88
 Doberman Pinscher
spores 412, 415
bullous pemphigoid 28
superficial pustular 11-13, 411-12
color dilution alopecia 519
clinical features 11-12
cryptococcosis 296
compared with
follicular dysplasia 524
candidiasis 10-11
sarcoptic acariasis 217
 pemphigus foliaceus 17
doggie door syndrome 546
histopathology 12-13
 Dogues de Bordeaux, familial pawpad hyperkeratosis
dermatosparaxis see Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
180
dermis
dorsal thermal necrosis 95
granulomatous diseases
doxorubicin see alopecia, doxorubicin-induced
infectious 272-316
drug reactions
noninfectious 320-40
angioedema 240
lichenoid diseases 261-71
canine eosinophilic dermatitis 361
 nodular and diffuse diseases with prominent eosinophils,
compared with
neutrophils or plasma cells 342-70
mural folliculitis 466
ossification 374, 376-7
pseudopelade 469
perivascular diseases 200-34
sebaceous adenitis 457
pyogranulomatous diseases
cutaneous flushing 241, 242
infectious 272-316
erythema multiforme 66
noninfectious 320-40
feline allergic miliary dermatitis 118
vascular diseases 238-59
Stt shop u shnsley [emu snoeuonuens
dermoid cyst (dermoid sinus, pilonidal cyst) 566-7
lupoid, compared with
clinical features 566
exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus of German
compared with
Shorthaired Pointer 59-61
fibroadnexal hamartoma 607
systemic lupus erythematosus 57
infundibular cyst 609
vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus of Shetland
histopathology 566-7
 Sheepdog and Collie 62
desmoglein 1 4, 13
neutrophilic immunologic vasculitis 245
pemphigus foliaceus 17
superficial pustular 23-5
pemphigus vulgaris 33
clinical features 23-4
 desmoglein 3, pemphigus vulgaris 32, 33
compared with
diabetes mellitus
pemphigus foliaceus 17
feline acquired skin fragility syndrome 390-1
 sterile pustular erythroderma of Miniature Schnauzers
feline follicular demodicosis 447, 448
21
feline hyperglucocorticoidism association 488
histology 24-5
diarrhea, acrodermatitis of Bull Terriers 194
toxic epidermal necrolysis 82
dilated pore (of Winer) 612, 613
urticaria 240
diroflariasis, cutaneous 225-8
ductular sweat gland adenocarcinoma see apocrine ductular
discoid lupus erythematosus 52-5, 263-5
carcinoma
clinical features 52-3
ductular sweat gland adenoma/carcinoma, solid-cystic,
compared with
compared with
erythema multiforme 68, 78
basal cell carcinoma 592-3, 594
exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus of German
spindle cell trichoblastoma 631-2
Shorthaired Pointer 59-61
Dunstan's blue line 8
feline thymoma-associated exfoliative dermatitis
dyskeratosis, warty dyskeratoma 614
70
dyslipoproteinemias 330
ischemic dermatopathy 52
dysplasia
lichenoid keratosis 271
adnexal 518-35
 mucocutaneous pyoderma 263
black hair follicular 518-22
pemphigus foliaceus 266
clinical features 518-20
psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis 270
histopathology 520-2
 systemic lupus erythematosus 57
bowenoid in situ carcinoma 579
904
Index
ear
familial cutaneous vasculopathy of German Shepherd
canine demodicosis 443
Dogs 366
fly-strike 342
plasma cell pododermatitis 364
 See also pinna; proliferative thrombovascular necrosis of the
histopathology 359-60
pinnae
oral 359,360
ear canal, ceruminous gland apocrine cyst 666
eosinophilic granuloma, feline (feline collagenolytic granuloma,
ear margin dermatosis see seborrhea, canine ear margin
feline linear granuloma) 355-8
eccrine carcinoma (atrichial sweat gland carcinoma)
clinical features 355-6
689-91
compared with
clinical features 689
feline herpesvirus ulcerative dermatitis 352
compared with
feline mosquito bite sensitivity 345,347
metastatic pulmonary adenocarcinoma in cats 706
 feline indolent ulcer association 129
nailbed squamous cell carcinoma 701-2
histopathology 356-8
histopathology 689-91
oral356
immunohistochemistry 691
eosinophilic granuloma complex 109
eccrine glands 665
eosinophilic indolent ulcer, compared with
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (cutaneous asthenia,
feline herpesvirus ulcerative dermatitis 126
dermatosparaxis) 386-9
feline mosquito bite hypersensitivity 123-4
clinical features 386-8
eosinophilic intraepidermal pustulation, allergic contact
compared with feline acquired skin fragility syndrome
dermatitis 109
390-1
eosinophilic plaque, feline 109-11, 121-2, 352-3
histopathology 388-9
clinical features 109-10
ehrlichiosis
compared with
German Shepherd Dog pyoderma 425
feline allergic miliary dermatitis 120, 211
septic vasculitis 238
feline herpesvirus ulcerative dermatitis 126, 352
elastin fibrils, eosinophilic wavy 64, 65
feline indolent ulcer 130, 354, 355
endorphin blockers, acral lick dermatitis 140
feline mosquito bite hypersensitivity 123
endothelial cells
feline mosquito bite sensitivity 345, 347
angiomatosis 737
feline eosinophilic granuloma association 355
arteriovenous hemangioma 744
histopathology 110-11, 121-2, 353
cavernous hemangioma 743
eosinophilic pustules, intraepidermal 146
hemangiosarcoma 749, 751
eosinophilic pustulosis, sterile of dogs 417-18
lymphangiosarcoma 753
clinical features 417-18
lymphatic 748
compared with
markers 735
eosinophilic furunculosis of the face 453
entomophthoromycosis 303-9, 310
superficial bacterial folliculitis 410
clinical features 303-6
histopathology 418
histopathology 306-9, 310
eosinophilic ulcer, feline see indolent ulcer, feline
eosinophilic dermatitis, canine (eosinophilic dermatitis and
ephelids, compared with lentigo 814
edema, eosinophilic cellulitis) 360-2
epidermal melanin unit 822
clinical features 360-1
epidermal squamous cell carcinoma 705-6
compared with
epidermis
canine eosinophilic granuloma 360
crusting diseases 116-34
 sterile pustular erythroderma of Miniature Schnauzers
dysplasia with secondary Malassezia pacbydermatis infection
370
146, 147
histopathology 361-2
hyperplastic diseases 136-59
eosinophilic folliculitis 208
necrotizing diseases 75-102
eosinophilic furuncles, sterile eosinophilic pustulosis 418
pustular diseases 4-25
eosinophilic furunculosis 342
spongiotic diseases 105-15
 canine eosinophilic granuloma association 358
umors 562-98
compared with
ulcerative diseases 116-34
canine eosinophilic granuloma 360
vesicular diseases 105-15
 deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis 424
epidermodysplasia verruciformis see viral plaque, feline
eosinophilic pustulosis 418
epidermolysis bullosa, hereditary (congenital epidermolysis
kerion 441-2
bullosa, epidermolysis bullosa congenita) 38-40
postgrooming furunculosis 428
clinical features 38-9
of the face 450-3
compared with
clinical features 450-2
bullous pemphigoid 29
histopathology 452-3
epidermolysis bullosa acquisita 42
eosinophilic granuloma, canine (canine collagenolytic
linear IgA dermatosis 46
granuloma) 342,358-60
mucous membrane pemphigoid 32
clinical features 358-9
dystrophic 38, 3940
compared with
histopathology 39-40
canine eosinophilic dermatitis 362
junctional 38,39-40
905
epidermolysis bullosa acquisita (acquired epidermolysis
lymphocytes 880
bullosa) 40-3
viral triggers 66
Brunsting-Perry form 41
erythroderma, exfoliative 877
clinical features 40-1
erythrophagocytosis, cutaneous 321, 323
compared with
Escherichia coli
bullous pemphigoid 29
deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis 420
hereditary epidermolysis bullosa 40
otitis media in erythema multiforme 76, 77
linear IgA dermatosis 46
postgrooming furunculosis 427
 mucous membrane pemphigoid 32
estrogen supplementation, female hyperestrogenism 492
mycosis fungoides 880
systemic lupus erythematosus 57
exfoliative toxins, staphylococcal 4, 6
histopathology 41-3
eyelid margins, focal/multifocal lesions compared with
epithelial clefts 
cutaneous xanthoma 333
clear cell basal cell carcinoma 595
solid basal cell carcinoma 592
facial dermatitis of Persian and Himalayan cats 112-15
epithelioid cells
clinical features 112-13
melanocytoma 817, 818, 819
histopathology 113-15
melanoma
a 826,827,831-2
fat necrosis, pancreatic panniculitis 557
epithelioma
feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)
calcifying (see pilomatricoma)
bowenoid in situ carcinoma 579
intracutaneous cornifying (see infundibular keratinizing
feline dermatophytosis 410-11
acanthoma)
feline follicular demodicosis 447, 448
see also sebaceous epithelioma
Malassezia dermatitis association 143
epitheliotropism, cutaneous histiocytoma 841
mast cell tumor association 858
epitope spreading 33, 53
feline leukemia virus (FeLV)
epitrichial adenocarcinoma see apocrine secretory
bowenoid in situ carcinoma 579
adenocarcinoma
cutaneous horn of feline pawpad association 562
epitrichial sweat gland adenoma see apocrine secretory
feline dermatophytosis 410-11
adenoma
feline follicular demodicosis 447, 448
Erisipelothrix rhusopathiae, septic vasculitis 238
feline uveal melanoma 813
erythema ab igne (chronic moderate heat dermatitis, chronic
giant cell dermatomosis 157-8
radiant heat dermatitis) 63-5
lymphoma 866
clinical features 63-4
Malassezia dermatitis association 143
histopathology 64-5
vaccine-induced sarcoma 797
erythema multiforme 65-8, 75-6, 77,78
feline sarcoma virus (FeSV)
clawbed 72
feline uveal melanoma 813
clinical features 65-7
fibrosarcoma 722-3, 724
compared with
liposarcoma 772
 discoid lupus erythematosus 55
fibrin deposition, solar vasculopathy 258
epitheliotropic lymphoma 877
fibrinoid degeneration
exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus of German
cell poor vasculitis 248
Shorthaired Pointer 59-61
proliferative thrombovascular necrosis of the pinnae
feline thymoma-associated exfoliative dermatitis 69-70,
254
79
vasculitic panniculitis of thermal burns 547
lupoid onychitis 72
fibrinoid vasculopathy, discoid lupus erythematosus association
pagetoid reticulosis 881-2
264
paraneoplastic pemphigus 37
fibroadnexal hamartoma (fibroadnexal dysplasia, focal adnexal
 pemphigus foliaceus 18
dysplasia) 605-7
sebaceous gland dysplasia 535
clinical features 606
 systemic lupus erythematosus 57
compared with
toxic epidermal necrolysis 81, 82-3
follicular hamartoma 605
toxic shock syndrome 85
sebaceous hamartoma 643
vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus of Shetland
trichofolliculoma 616
 Sheepdog and Collie 62
histopathology 606-7
drug-induced 66
fibroblast growth factor, angiomatosis 735
Escberichia coli otitis media 76, 77
fbroblasts
follicular 76, 77
Mycobacterium avium complex 287
 compared with granulomatous mural folliculitis in dogs
myxosarcoma 729
476
fbrocytes, mucinosis 382
histology 67-8,75-6, 77, 78
fibroepithelial polyp see acrochordon
hyperkeratotic 75-6, 89
fibrohistiocytic nodules, reactive (benign fibrous histiocytoma,
compared with proliferative necrotizing otitis of kittens
 juvenile xanthogranuloma, fibroxanthoma) 837-40
80
clinical features 837
Langerhans cells 880, 882
compared with
906
Index
arthropod bite reactions 345
laminar in post-traumatic alopecia 506
canine leproid granuloma 283
metatarsal fistulation of German Shepherd Dog 555
 palisading granuloma 339-40
subepidermal laminar 131-2
histopathology 838-9, 840
superficial bacterial folliculitis 409
immunohistochemistry 839-40
topical corticosteroid reaction 394
fibrolipoma 767,768-9
traumatic panniculitis 546
 compared with atypical lipoma 773
fbrous histiocytoma, benign see fbrohistiocytic nodules,
fibroma 719-21
reactive
clinical features 719
fibroxanthoma see fibrohistiocytic nodules, reactive
compared with
fire ant bites 349-51
benign peripheral nerve sheath tumor 791, 792
clinical features 349-50
canine keloidal fbroma 722
compared with arthropod bite reactions 345
canine nodular dermatofibrosis 712
histopathology 350-1
collagenous hamartoma 711
fistula formation, foreign body reactions 337
dermatofibroma 717
Fite's stain 275, 282
fibropruritic nodules 140
for mycobacterial opportunistic infection 286
leiomyoma 779
flame follicles 480, 610
histopathology 720-1
alopecia X 495-7
keloidal (see keloidal fibroma, canine)
canine eosinophilic granuloma 360
subcutaneous 719-21
canine follicular dysplasia 525
clinical features 719
canine mast cell tumors 855
histopathology 720-1
feline eosinophilic granuloma 356, 358
fibromatous plaque see acrochordonous plaque
female hyperestrogenism 494
fibromatous polyp see acrochordon
hyperglucocorticoidism 486
fibropapilloma see sarcoid, feline
hypothyroidism 483
fibroplasia, follicular cyst 609
Sertoli cell tumor-associated skin disease 491
fibropruritic nodules 138-40
flank alopecia see alopecia, cyclical flank
clinical features 138-9
flea allergy dermatitis (FAD, fea bite hypersensitivity, flea bite
histopathology 139-40
dermatitis) 109, 208-11, 212
fibrosarcoma 722-7
clinical features 208-10
clinical features 723
compared with
compared with
atopic dermatitis 203
anaplastic sarcoma with giant cells 809, 810
food allergy 207, 208
angiosarcoma 755
hookworm dermatitis 229
benign peripheral nerve sheath tumor 791, 792
sarcoptic acariasis 217, 219
feline sarcoid 730
feline allergic miliary dermatitis 118
hemangiopericytoma 764
feline indolent ulcer association 128
histiocytic sarcoma 850, 851
fbropruritic nodule 138, 139
leiomyosarcoma 780
German Shepherd Dog 138
 malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor 794
German Shepherd Dog pyoderma 425
nodular fascitis 718-19
Golden Retriever 138
 pleomorphic leiomyosarcoma 782
histopathology 210-11, 212
rhabdomyosarcoma 784
 hyperplastic dermatosis of West Highland White Terriers
spindle cell lipoma 771
147
spindle cell melanoma 830, 832
 pyotraumatic dermatitis association 116
follicular papillary origin 725-6
flies
histopathology 723-7
black 342-3
immunohistochemistry 727
stable 342
myofibroblastic 726-7
fly-strike 342, 344, 345
 adoua um paed
focal adnexal dysplasia see fibroadnexal hamartoma
recurrence rate 723
follicular atrophy
vaccine-associated 799
canine ischemic dermatopathy 505
well-differentiated compared with dermatofibroma 717
compared with postrabies vaccination panniculitis 541
see also keloidal fibrosarcoma
ischemic 509
fibrosis
postinjection panniculitis 542
acral lick dermatitis 429
sterile abscess of repositol injection 545
alopecia areata 462
follicular cyst 607-12
calcinosis cutis 376, 379
clinical features 608
canine eosinophilic granuloma 360
compared with sebaceous duct cyst 641
cutaneous xanthoma 331
histopathology 608-12
deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis 423
follicular dysplasia, canine (hair follicle dysplasia) 522-5
foreign body reactions 336, 337
clinical features 522-3
juvenile sterile granulomatous dermatitis and lymphadenitis
compared with
329
black hair follicular dysplasia 522
907
color dilution alopecia 522
angioedema 240
 congenital hypotrichosis 530
clinical features 206-7
histopathology 523-5
compared with
follicular dysplasia of the Siberian Husky S22, 523, 525
epitheliotropic lymphoma 877
compared with alopecia X 497
feline eosinophilic granuloma 357
follicular epaulettes, seborrhea 163-4
feline eosinophilic plaque 353
follicular hamartoma 605
feline mosquito bite sensitivity 345, 347
compared with fibroadnexal hamartoma 607
flea allergy dermatitis 210, 211
follicular infundibula bridging 423
hookworm dermatitis 229
follicular infundibular cyst, compared with
mural folliculitis 466
dermoid cyst 566
notoedric acariasis 219
dilated pore 612
sarcoptic acariasis 217, 219
follicular keratosis
sebaceous adenitis 457
ear margin seborrhea 168
feline allergic miliary dermatitis 118, 119, 211
feline follicular demodicosis 448
feline indolent ulcer association 128
interdigital furunculosis 432
 German Shepherd Dog pyoderma 425
traction alopecia 508
histopathology 207-8
vitamin A-responsive dermatosis 166
hyperplastic dermatosis of West Highland White Terriers
follicular lipidosis 530-1
147
clinical features 530
urticaria 240
histopathology 531
foreign body implantation
follicular melanin unit 822
actinomycosis 273,274
follicular mucinosis see mucinosis, follicular
nocardiosis 274
follicular parakeratosis, congenital 172-4
foreign body reactions (foreign body granuloma) 334-7
clinical features 172-3
acral lick dermatitis association 429
compared with
clinical features 334-6
acrodermatitis of Bull Terriers 196
compared with
inflamed linear epidermal nevus 192
actinomycosis 275
histopathology 173-4
blastomycosis 295
follicular parakeratosis, inflamed linear epidermal nevus 192,
coccidioidomycosis 295
193
entomophthoromycosis 309
follicular plugging
histoplasmosis 295
sebaceous adenitis 188
lagenidiosis 309
vitamin A-responsive dermatosis 166
metatarsal fistulation of German Shepherd Dog 555
follicular stem cell carcinoma 681
mycobacterial opportunistic infection 280
follicular stem cells 604
Nocardia 275
folliculettes, dermoid cyst 566
postinjection panniculitis 542
folliculitis
pythiosis 309
canine demodicosis 444
spider bites 348
compared with foreign body reactions 337
deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis 422
congenital hypotrichosis 529
follicular cyst rupture 609
eosinophilic 208
histopathology 336-7
feline allergic miliary dermatitis 211
interdigital furunculosis 432
foreign body reactions 336
penetrating 336
with impetigo 4, 6
trichoepithelioma 618
luminal 408
Fox Terrier
compared with feline follicular demodicosis 449
 familial cutaneous vasculopathy 50
dermatophyte mural folliculitis 465
superfcial pustular dermatophytosis 12
neutrophilic in canine dermatophytosis 414
Foxhounds, leishmaniasis 314
Pelodera dermatitis 450
foxtail foreign body penetration 273, 336
pemphigus foliaceus 416
fungal infection
pustular
compared with
mural folliculitis 466
feline acne 440
with superficial pustular dermatophytosis 13
metatarsal fistulation of German Shepherd Dog 555
Schnauzer comedo symdrome 182
keratinophilic 410
superficial perforating 409-10
opportunistic 301-3
 eaad lupids ladns y
cinical features 301-2
see also acne, canine; bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis,
compared with
deep; mural folliculitis
cutaneous xanthoma 332
folliculosebaceous hamartoma compared with dermoid cyst
dermatophytic pseudomycetoma 291
566-7
feline leprosy syndrome 280-1
food see generic dog food dermatosis
sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma syndrome
food allergy (adverse food reactions, food hypersensitivity,
323
food intolerance) 109, 206-8
histopathology 303
908
Index
Lee suogseau Apoq uzianoy yim paieduos skydondes
calcinosis circumscripta 379
secondary
canine eosinophilic granuloma 359
chronic hyperplastic dermatitis 136, 137
canine nodular dermatofibrosis 711, 712, 713
facial dermatitis of Persian and Himalayan cats 114
discoid lupus erythematosus 53
feline thymoma-associated exfoliative dermatitis 69, 79
eosinophilic furunculosis of the face 452
lupoid onychitis 71
familial cutaneous vasculopathy 50
superficial necrolytic dermatitis 88, 91
fibropruritic nodules 138
see also Malassezia dermatitis
hemorrhagic bullae 421
furuncles
lupoid onychitis 71
eosinophilic 418
mucocutaneous pyoderma 262
postgrooming furunculosis 428
 mucous membrane pemphigoid 31
furunculosis
pemphigus erythematosus 18
actinic 150,184,429-31
pemphigus vulgaris 34
clinical features 429-30
perianal gland carcinoma 659
compared with
pyotraumatic dermatitis 116
canine acne 436-7
pythiosis 305
interdigital furunculosis 432
see also metatarsal fistulation of German Shepherd Dog;
deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis 420
vasculopathy, cutaneous familial of German Shepherd
histopathology 430-1
Dogs
 solar elastosis and fibrosis association 399
German Shepherd Dog pyoderma 424-6
canine demodicosis 444, 445
clinical features 424-5
canine dermatophytosis 414
 histopathology 426
compared with
ghost cells
foreign body reactions 337
hybrid cysts 612
pemphigus foliaceus 416
matrical cyst 611
foreign body reactions 336
pilomatricoma 625
interdigital (pedal folliculitis and furunculosis, interdigital
trichoepithelioma 617, 618
pyoderma) 420, 423, 431-3
giant cell(s)
clinical features 431-2
amyloidosis 385
compared with
anaplastic sarcoma with giant cells 808-9
acral lick dermatitis 429
calcinosis cutis 376
actinic furunculosis 431
cutaneous xanthoma 331, 332
callus pyoderma 435
deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis 422
canine acne 436-7
feline eosinophilic granuloma 356, 357
histopathology 432-3
feline leprosy symdrome 279, 280
 metatarsal fistulation of German Shepherd Dog 554
feline pansteatitis 553
Pelodera dermatitis 450
fibrosarcoma 723
 pemphigus foliaceus 416
fungal opportunistic infections 303
postgrooming 420, 423, 427-9
 granulomatous mural foliculitis in dogs 475
clinical features 427-8
histiocytic sarcoma 848, 850
compared with acral lick dermatitis 429
Jagenidiosis 306-7
histopathology 428-9
leiomyosarcoma 781
 pyogranulomatous with superficial pustular dermatophytosis
melanoma 826
13
Mycobacterium avium complex 287
Schnauzer comedo syndrome 182
palisading granuloma
1339
traumatic 140, 142,420,423
pleomorphic liposarcoma 775, 776
acral lick dermatitis association 429
postinjection panniculitis
542
callus pyoderma 433
rhabdomyosarcoma 784
compared with canine acne 436
vaccine-induced sarcoma 798,799
see aiso acne, canine; bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis,
giant cell dermatosis in FeLV-positive cats 157-9
 deep; eosinophilic furunculosis
clinical features 157-8
histopathology 158-9
ganglion 803-4
giant cell tumor of soft tissue see sarcoma, anaplastic with
 ganglion cells in melanoma 826
giant cells
generic dog food dermatosis 91-2, 93
Giemsa stain, leishmaniasis 316
clinical features 91-2
glomerulonephritis, immune-mediated 364
compared with
glomus tumors 759-62
acrodermatitis of Bull Terriers 194, 196
clinical features 759
superficial necrolytic dermatitis 91
compared with plasmacytoma 871, 872
zinc-responsive dermatosis 189, 191
histopathology 759-62
histopathology 92, 93
immunohistochemistry 762
German Shepherd Dog
intravascular 762
alopecia areata 461-2
round cell compared with Merkel cell tumor 788, 789
aspergillosis 302
spindle cell compared with angioleiomyosarcoma 781, 782
Index
909
glucagon, superficial necrolytic dermatitis 87
parafollicular in canine demodicosis 444, 446
 glucocorticoid excess diseases compared with Schnauzer
postinjection panniculitis 542
comedo symdrome 182
 sterile, compared with
glycosaminoglycans 381
arthropod bite reactions 345
gnat, buffalo 342-3
anine leproid granuloma 283
Golden Retriever
feline leprosy syndrome 280
fbropruritic nodules 138
 juvenile sterile granulomatous dermatitis and
histiocytic sarcoma 849
lymphadenitis 329
 juvenile sterile granulomatous dermatitis and lymphadenitis
leishmaniasis 316
328
 palisading granuloma 339-40
kerion 440
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome 268
pyotraumatic dermatitis 116
mubular with Mycobacterium avium complex 287
sebaceous gland hyperplasia 531
see also callus; keratogranuloma; leproid granuloma, canine;
Gomori's methenamine silver stain 295
sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma syndrome;
dermatophytic pseudomycetoma 290-1
trichogranuloma
fungal opportunistic infections 303
granulomatous dermatitis and lymphadenitis, juvenile sterile
protothecosis 312
551
pythiosis 307
 granulomatous diseases of dermis
graft-versus-host disease compared with feline thymoma-
infectious 272-316
associated exfoliative dermatitis 70, 79
compared with reactive histiocytosis 327
granular cell tumor (granular cell myoblastoma, granular cell
noninfectious 320-40
schwannoma) 804-6
 granulomatous inflammation in feline pansteatitis 553
clinical features 805
grass awns 336
compared with granular cell type trichoblastoma 633
Great Danes
histopathology 805-6
cryptococcosis 296
immunohistochemistry 806
epidermolysis bullosa acquisita 41
granular degeneration, linear epidermal hamartoma 565
Grenz zone 730, 819, 848, 859
granulation tissue, compared with
cutaneous lymphocytosis 873
 granulation tissue-type hemangioma 745-6
nonepitheliotropic lymphoma 883
nodular fascitis 718-19
plasmacytoma 868
 granulation tissue-type hemangioma 741, 742, 745-6
Greyhound
compared with
Italian and acquired pattern alopecia 502
acrochordon 715
pawpad keratoma 563, 564
angiomatosis secondary to lymphedema 740
grooming see furunculosis, postgrooming
granuloma
grooming devices, traction alopecia 508
arthropod bite 343,344
 gynecomastia, female hyperestrogenism 493
bacterial (see bacterial pseudomycetoma)
blastomycosis 294
Hailey-Hailey disease see Darier's disease, canine
canine sarcoidosis 334
hair bulb 604
cell poor vasculitis 249, 250
hair follicles
coccidioidomycosis 294
acquired pattern alopecia 502-3
compared with postrabies vaccination panniculitis 541
alopecia areata 460-4
cutaneous diroflariasis 227, 228
anagen phase in follicular lipidosis 531
cutaneous xanthoma 332
canine ischemic dermatopathy 504
deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis 422
congenital hypotrichosis 529
foreign body
cystic in fibroadnexal hamartoma 606-7
acral lick dermatitis association 429
degenerative mucinotic mural folliculitis in cats 474
callus pyoderma 435
dermoid cyst 566
interdigital furunculosis 432
epitheliotropic lymphoma 878
reactions 337
external root sheath mineralization 376, 377
histoplasmosis 294
feline acquired skin fragility syndrome 390
insect bite (see arthropod bite reactions)
feline dermatophytosis 412
kerion 441
 granulomatous mural foliculitis in dogs 476
leishmaniasis 315
hyperglucocorticoidism 485
linear 355-6
mural diseases 460-78
Mycobacterium avium complex 287
post-traumatic alopecia 506
palisading 337-40
pseudopelade 468-9
clinical features 337
regressing 480
compared with
sebaceous nevus 644
arthropod bite reactions 345
structure 604
canine leproid granuloma 283
topical corticosteroid reaction 394
familial cutaneous vasculopathy of German Shepherd
traction alopecia 508
Dogs 365
trichofolliculoma 615
histopathology 338-40
see also follicular entries
910
Index
hair germ
capillary hemangioma 744
primary 604
scrotal-type vascular hamartoma 739
secondary 604
see also solar-induced hemangiosarcoma
trichoblastoma 625
hemosiderin, cavernous hemangioma 743
hair growth
hemosiderophages
hypothyroidism 481-2
feline abdominal angiosarcoma 755
thyroid hormone 481
lymphangiosarcoma 755
hair growth cycle 480
 proliferative thrombovascular necrosis of the pinnae
arrest 480, 487
254
alopecia X 495, 496
hemosiderosis, scarring steatitis 768-9
feline hyperglucocorticoidism 489
hepatoid cells
female hyperestrogenism 494
nodular perianal gland hyperplasia 655-6
hair shafts
perianal gland adenoma 656, 657
alopecia areata 462
perianal gland carcinoma 660
color dilution alopecia 519
hepatoid gland(s)
degenerative mucinotic mural folliculitis in cats 474
 metaplasia in sebaceous adenoma 646, 647
displacement 429
 nodular hyperplasia (se perianal gland hyperplasia,
follicular hamartoma 605
nodular)
kerion 441
transitional 643
haircoat
hepatoid gland adenoma see perianal gland adenoma
canine follicular dysplasia 522
hepatoid gland carcinoma see perianal gland carcinoma
excessive physiological shedding 512-13
hepatoid gland epithelioma see perianal gland epithelioma
hamartoma 155-6
hepatopathy, vacuolar in superficial necrolytic dermatitis 87,
arrector pili muscle 778
90
canine skeletal muscle 782, 783
herpesvirus ulcerative dermatitis, feline 124-6, 351-2
folliculosebaceous compared with dermoid cyst 566-7
clinical features 124-5
scrotal-type vascular 740, 741
compared with
see also collagenous hamartoma; scrotal-type vascular
feline cowpox infection 128
hamartoma
feline eosinophilic granuloma 357
heat dermatitis see erythema ab igne
feline eosinophilic plaque 122, 353
hemangioma 741-8
feline indolent ulcer 130, 354
clinical features 742-3
feline mosquito bite hypersensitivity 123, 124
histopathology 743-7
feline mosquito bite sensitivity 345, 347
immunohistochemistry 747-8
histopathology 125-6, 351-2
infiltrative 741,742,743,744
hidradenitis, suppurative 423
compared with
hidradenocarcinoma see apocrine ductular carcinoma
angiolipoma 769
hidradenoma
angiomatosis 738
malignant nodular (see apocrine ductular carcinoma)
 infiltrative angiolipoma 772
nodular (see apocrine ductular adenoma, solid-cystic)
intramuscular compared with infiltrative angiolipoma 772
poroid 672
see also capillary hemangioma; cavernous hemangioma;
 compared with solid-cystic apocrine ductular adenoma
 granulation tissue-type hemangioma; solar-induced
675
hemangioma; spindle cell hemangioma
 hidrocystoma, apocrine see apocrine cystadenoma
hemangiopericytoma 762-4
Himalayan cats
clinical features 762-3
apocrine cystadenoma 668-9
compared with
dermatophyte pseudomycetoma 289
benign peripheral nerve sheath tumor 791, 792
facial dermatitis 112-15
glomus tumors 761-2
histiocytic cells
histiocytic sarcoma 850, 851
feline progressive dendritic cell histiocytosis 846
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor 794
Mycobacterium avium complex 287
spindle cell lipoma 771
reactive fbrohistiocytic nodules 838-9
histopathology 763-4
histiocytic sarcoma 848-51
immunohistochemistry 764
clinical features 848-9
hemangiosarcoma (angiosarcoma) 749-53
compared with
clinical features 750
anaplastic sarcoma with giant cells 809, 810
compared with
balloon cell melanoma 831, 833
angiomatosis 738
canine mast cell tumors grade III 857-8
 spindle cell hemangioma 746-7
granular cell tumor 806
histopathology 750-2, 753
Langerhans cell histiocytosis 844
immunohistochemistry 753
leiomyosarcoma 780-1
 malignant transformation 750
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor 794
well-differentiated 7512
plasmacytoma 871
 compared with
rhabdomyosarcoma 784
Index
911
disseminated 848, 849
Sertoli cell tumor-associated skin disease 491-2
histopathology 849-51
deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis 420
immunohistochemistry 851
see also hyperglucocorticoidism 
spindle cell predominant, compared with
feline sarcoid 730
clinical features 362-3
fibrosarcoma 725
histopathology 363
hemangiopericytoma 764
hyperestrogenism, female (ovarian imbalance type 1) 492-4
histiocytoid cells, anaplastic sarcoma with giant cells 808
clinical features 492-3
histiocytoma
compared with
benign fibrous (see fibrohistiocytic nodules, reactive)
canine hyperglucocoricoidism 487
canine cutaneous 840-5
hypothyroidism 484
clinical features 841
histopathology 493-4
compared with
jatrogenic 492
mast cell tumors 857, 858
hyperextensibility of skin 387
mycosis fungoides 880, 881
hyperglucocorticoidism
reactive fibrohistiocytic nodules 839
canine (canine hyperadrenocorticism, canine Cushing's
histopathology 841-4
disease, canine Cushing's syndrome) 374, 375, 376, 484-7
immunohistochemistry 845
clinical features 484-5
compared with
histopathology 485-7
balloon cell melanocytoma 821
compared with
balloon cell melanoma 833
actinic comedones 183, 184
epitheliotropic lymphoma 882
callus 185
glomus tumors 760,761
feline paraneoplastic alopecia 501
melanoma with junctional activity 829
hypothyroidism 484
Merkel cell tumor 788, 789
Schnauzer comedo syndrome 182
nonepitheliotropic lymphoma 884-5, 888
sterile abscess of repositol injection 545
plasmacytoma 871
topical corticosteroid reaction 394
transmissible venereal tumor 802, 803
endogenous 484
malignant fibrous (see sarcoma, anaplastic with giant cells)
feline (feline hyperadrenocorticism, feline Cushing's disease)
persistent and recurrent 841, 843-4
487-90
regressing compared with reactive histiocytosis 327
cinical features 487-8
histiocytosis, malignant see histiocytic sarcoma
histopathology 489-90
histiocytosis, reactive 323-7, 837
feline acquired skin fragility syndrome 390-1
clinical features 323-5
feline dermatophytosis 410-11
compared with
feline follicular demodicosis 447, 448
reactive fibrohistiocytic nodules 839
jatrogenic 373, 484-5, 486-7
 sebaceous adenitis 456
 deep bacterial foliculitis and furunculosis 420
sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma syndrome 323
phlebectasia 242, 243
histopathology 325-7
hypergranulosis
see also Langerhans cell histiocytosis
compared with linear epidermal hamartoma 565
histoplasmosis, cutaneous (Histoplasma capsulatum) 291-5
pigmented viral plaque 573
clinical features 291-4
sebaceous nevus 644, 645
histopathology 294-5
hyperlipoproteinemia 330
hives see angioedema; urticaria
hypermelanosis, cyclical flank alopecia 527
hookworm dermatitis (cutaneous ancylostomiasis and
hyperpigmentation
uncinariasis) 228-9
acrochordon 715
clinical features 228-9
alopecia X 495
compared with flea allergy dermatitis 210, 211
epitheliotropic lymphoma 877
histopathology 229
female hyperestrogenism 493, 494
Hordeum (foxtail) 336
follicular hamartoma 605
human infection risk
lentigo 814,815
feline dermatophytosis 411
melanocytoma 818
 canine dermatophytosis 413
melanoma 825-6
coccidioidomycosis 293-4
pigmented viral plaque 573
sporotrichosis 298
Sertoli cell tumor-associated skin disease 491
Husky see Siberian Husky
hyperplastic dermatiis, chronic 136-8
hyalohyphomycosis 301-3
clinical features 136
hyaluronic acid 380-1
compared with
hybrid cyst 611-12
acanthosis nigricans of Dachshunds 152
21-hydroxylase deficiency, nonclassic late-onset 495
hyperplastic dermatosis of West Highland White Terriers
hyperadrenocorticism 485
148
compared with
superficial spreading pyoderma 200
hypothyroidism 484
histopathology 136-8
912
Index
hyperplastic dermatosis of West Highland White Terrier
bullous impetigo 4
{epidermal dysplasia and Malassezia pacbydermatitis
cryptococcosis 296
infection in West Highland White Terriers, armadillo
feline dermatophytosis 410-11
Wesie syndrome) 146-8
feline follicular demodicosis 447
clinical features 146-7
 feline herpesvirus ulcerative dermatitis 124
histopathology 147-8
nocardiosis 273
hypersensitivity reaction
pigmented viral plaque 572
canine eosinophilic dermatitis 361
impetiginization
canine eosinophilic granuloma 358
 chronic hyperplastic dermatitis 137
Cheyletiella mite 221
compared with superfcial spreading pyoderma 9
compared with
impetigo 4-6
pagetoid reticulosis 881
bullous 4, 5,6
postinjection panniculitis 542
compared with pemphigus foliaceus 17
eosinophilic furunculosis of the face 451
canine hyperglucocorticoidism 485
fire ant bites 349
clinical features 4-5
Malassezia dermatitis 143
compared with
parasitic 449
feline eosinophilic plaque 120-1
pawpads 111
sterile pustular erythroderma of Miniature Schnauzers 21
sarcoptic acariasis 217
subcorneal pustular dermatosis 20
type I immediate 105
superfcial pustular drug reactions 24
flea allergy dermatitis 208-9, 211
superficial spreading pyoderma 9
neutrophilic immunologic vasculitis 245
histopathology 5-6
type III 245, 342
inclusion bodies
type IV delayed 105, 106, 122
feline herpesvirus ulcerative dermatitis 351-2, 357
arthropod bite reactions 342
see also intranuclear inclusion bodies
flea allergy dermatitis 208-9, 211
indolent ulcer, feline (feline eosinophilic ulcer, rodent ulcer)
hypoparathyroidism 374, 375,377
128-9,353-5
hyposomatotropism 495
clinical features 128-9
hypothyroidism 381-2, 481-4
compared with
clinical features 481-2
feline eosinophilic granuloma 357
compared with
feline eosinophilic plaque 122, 353
canine hyperglucocorticoidism 487
feline herpesvirus ulcerative dermatitis 352
female hyperestrogenism 494
feline mosquito bite sensitivity 345, 347
Sertoli cell tumor-associated skin disease 491-2
feline eosinophilic granuloma association 355
German Shepherd Dog pyoderma 425
histopathology 129-30, 354-5
histopathology 482-4
 neutrophilic, compared with
hypotrichosis, congenital (congenital alopecia) 528-30
idiopathic feline ulcerative dermatosis 132
clinical features 528-9
 pyotraumatic dermatitis 118
histopathology 529-30
jnflammation
 granulomatous in feline pansteatitis 553
ichthyosis 163, 164,174-7,178,179
lipoma 768
clinical features 174-7
 nodular sebaceous hyperplasia 642
compared with congenital follicular parakeratosis 173
sebaceous adenoma 646
epidermolytic 175, 178,179
trichoepithelioma 618
histopathology 177, 178, 179
see also linear epidermal nevus, inflamed; pyogranulomatous
nonepidermolytic 175, 176, 177, 179
inflammation
IgA, linear IgA dermatosis 45
inflammatory dermatopathy compared with feline viral plaque
IgE 200-1
575
flea allergy dermatitis 209
 inflammatory linear verrucous epidermal nevus see linear
IgG
epidermal nevus, inflamed
 bullous pemphigoid 29
inflammatory pseudotumor compared with nodular fascitis
 discoid lupus erythematosus 55
718-19
 epidermolysis bullosa acquisita 42
infundibular cyst 608-9
linear IgA dermatosis 45
 infundibular keratinizing acanthoma (intracutaneous
 mucous membrane pemphigoid 32
cornifying epithelioma) 619-21
paraneoplastic pemphigus 37
clinical features 619
 pemphigus foliaceus 17
compared with
pemphigus vulgaris 35
trichoepithelioma 619
sarcoptic acariasis 216
tricholemmoma 623
IgG4 antibodies 14
viral inverted papilloma 570-1
 immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) rearrangement in
histopathology 619-21
cutaneous lymphocytosis 874
injection-induced sarcoma see vaccine-induced sarcoma
immunosuppression
innocent bystander epiphenomenon 368, 370
acinomycosis 273
insect bite granuloma see arthropod bite reactions
Index
913
insect bite sensitivity, feline see mosquito bite sensitivity, feline
pigmented viral plaque 573
 integrin alpha-6, hereditary epidermolysis bullosa 38-9
proliferating isthmus cyst 610
intranuclear inclusion bodies
keratoma, pawpad (pawpad corn, callus) 562-4
feline herpesvirus ulcerative dermatitis 126
clinical features 564
feline poxvirus infection 128
histopathology 564
viral inverted papilloma 570
kerion 440-2
Irish Terrier, familial pawpad hyperkeratosis 180
canine dermatophytosis 414
Irish Water Spaniel, follicular dysplasia 524
clinical features 440
irritant contact dermatitis 98-102
 compared with deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis
clinical features 98-100
424
 compared with allergic contact dermatitis 109
histopathology 441-2
histopathology 100-2
Kerry Blue Terrier, dermoid cyst 566
ischemic dermatopathy 49-52
KIT expression 814, 826
clinical features 49-51
mast cell mumors 853, 855, 858
compared with
Klippel-Trenaunay syndrome, angiomatosis 735
erythema ab igne 64, 65
Klippel-Trenaunay-like syndrome (angiomatosis secondary to
 systemic lupus erythematosus 57
lymphedema) 736-7,739-40, 741, 742
histopathology 51-2
compared with granulation tissue-type hemangioma
syndromes 49-51
745-6
 ischemic dermatopathy, generalized idiopathic (GIID) 49, 50-1
koilocytosis
isthmus cyst 609-10
feline viral plaque 575
proliferating 610
linear epidermal hamartoma 565
compared with infundibular keratinizing acanthoma 620
nailbed inverted squamous papilloma 697
pigmented viral plaque 573, 574
Jack Russell Terrier
viral exophytic papilloma 569
ichthyosis 175, 176
viral inverted papilloma 570
vasculitis 248
joints, hyperextensibility 387
Labrador Retriever
juvenile sterile granulomatous dermatitis and lymphadenitis see
canine eosinophilic dermatitis 361
 granulomatous dermatitis and lymphadenitis, juvenile
congenital folicular parakeratosis 172-3
sterile
fbropruritic nodules 138
 juvenile xanthogranuloma see fibrohistiocytic nodules, reactive
histiocytic sarcoma 849
juvenile sterile granulomatous dermatitis and lymphadenitis
karyorrhexis, plasmacytoma 869
328
Keeshond, alopecia X 495
pawpad hyperkeratosis 181
keloidal fbroma
pyotraumatic dermatitis 116
canine 721-2
sarcoptic acariasis 217
clinical features 721
see also nasal parakeratosis of Labrador Retrievers
histopathology 721-2
lagenidiosis (Lagenidium) 303-9, 310, 311
compared with
clinical features 303-6
dermatofibroma 717
compared with foreign body reactions 337
fibroma 720
histopathology 306-9, 310, 311
keloidal fbrosarcoma 722, 726
laminin-5 30
keratin 10 175
 hereditary epidermolysis bullosa 38-9
keratin lakes, canine apocrine ductular adenoma 673
Langerhans cell(s) 200, 837
keratin-colonizing dermatophytosis see dermatophytosis,
atopic dermatitis 205
superficial pustular
erythema multiforme 880, 882
keratinization
histiocytoma 840-1
apocrine ductular carcinoma 682
Langerhans cell histiocytosis 841, 844
malignant pilomatricoma 638
compared with histiocytic sarcoma 851
nailbed keratoacanthoma 698
Latrodectus (widow spiders) 347
pilomatricoma 625
leimyosarcoma 779-82
squamous cell carcinoma 583
leiomyoma 778-9
keratogranuloma 429
clinical features 778
callus pyoderma 435
histopathology 779
canine acne 436
leiomyosarcoma
interdigital furunculosis 432
clinical features
780
keratohyalin
compared with
viral exophytic papilloma 569
anaplastic sarcoma with giant cells 809, 810
viral inverted papilloma 570
fbrosarcoma 725
keratohyalin granules
gomus tumors 761-2
bowenoid in situ carcinoma 580
histiocytic sarcoma 851
canine apocrine ductular adenoma 673
spindle cell lipoma 771
melanocytoma-acanthoma 823
histopathology 780-2
914
Index
immunohistochemistry 782
leukotrichia
intravascular 762
 alopecia areata 461
pleomorphic 781-2
vitiligo 233, 234
compared with
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome 267
histiocytic sarcoma 850, 851
 Lhasa Apso, juvenile sterile granulomatous dermatitis and
rhabdomyosarcoma 784
lymphadenitis 328
leishmaniasis, cutaneous (Leishmania) 312-16
Jichenification
clinical features 312-14
notoedric acariasis 219
 compared with sebaceous adenitis 456, 457
Sertoli cell tumor-associated skin disease 491
histopathology 315-16
lichenoid dermatitis 261-71
 sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma syndrome 320, 323,
psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis 154
334
lichenoid inflammation 49
vectors 313, 314
discoid lupus erythematosus 52, 54, 55
with visceral disease 313
erythema multiforme 67
lentiginosis profusa 814
 mucous membrane pemphigoid 32
lentigo 814,815
pemphigus foliaceus 266
 compared with pigmented viral plaque 574
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome 268
maligna 825, 829
lichenoid keratosis 154-5, 271
simplex 814
clinical features 154-5
leproid granuloma, canine 281-3
compared with
clinical features 281-2
psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis 270
histopathology 282-3
 psoriasiform-lichenoid hyperplasia 153
leprosy syndrome, feline 276-81
histopathology 155, 271
clinical features 276-9
lichenoid-interface 264
compared with sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma
lick granuloma see acral lick dermatitis
syndrome 323
 linear epidermal hamartoma (linear epidermal nevus,
histopathology 279-81
verrucous epidermal nevus) 564-5
lepromatous 277,278,279
clinical features 565
compared with
compared with pigmented viral plaque 574
cutaneous xanthoma 332
histopathology 565
fungal opporunistic infections 303
linear epidermal nevus, inflamed (inflammatory linear
Mycobacterium avium complex 287
verrucous epidermal nevus) 155-7, 191-2, 193
tuberculoid 277, 278,279-80,281
clinical features 155-6
vectors 278
compared with congenital follicular parakeratosis 173, 174
lethal acrodermatitis of Bull Terriers see acrodermatitis of Bull
histopathology 156-7, 192, 193
Terriers
linear IgA dermatosis 45-6
Jeukemia
clinical features 45
eosinophilic 362
compared with
lymphocytic
epidermolysis bullosa acquisita 42
chronic with cutaneous lesions 888-90
hereditary epidermolysis bullosa 40
compared with
mucous membrane pemphigoid 32
cutaneous lymphocytosis 874-5
histopathology 45-6
Sezary syndrome 882
lipid deposits, cutaneous xanthoma 331-2
leukocytic round cell tumors, compared with
lipid vacuoles, pleomorphic liposarcoma 775, 776
 balloon cell melanocytoma 821
lipoblasts 768, 769
balloon cell melanoma 831, 833
atypical lipoma 773
dermal melanoma 828
myxoid liposarcoma 774-5
giant epithelioid melanoma 832, 833
well-differentiated liposarcoma 774
glomus tumors 760-1
lipocysts, traction alopecia 509
round cell melanoma 833
lipocytes 776
leukocytoclasia
lipoma 767,768
canine sterile neutrophilic dermatosis 368
myxoid liposarcoma 774, 775
familial cutaneous vasculopathy of German Shepherd dogs
vasculitic septal panniculitis 552
251
well-differentiated liposarcoma 774
neutrophilic immunologic vasculitis 246, 247
lipogranulomatous reaction, sebaceous adenoma 646
sterile pustular erythroderma of Miniature Schnauzers
lipoma 766-70
369
atypical 772, 773
vasculitic panniculitis of thermal burns 547
clinical features 767
vasculitic septal panniculitis 552
compared with lipomatosis 766
leukocytoclastic vasculitis, subcutaneous see panniculitis,
histopathology 767-70
vasculitic septal
infltrative 771-2
Jeukoderma
inflamed 768
vitiligo 233
 compared with atypical lipoma 773
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome 267
see also spindle cell lipoma
915
lipomatosis 766
lymphatic channels, lymphangiomatosis 748
lipoprotein lipase 330, 331
lymphedema, angiomatosis secondary to 736-7
lipoproteins 330
 compared with granulation tissue-type hemangioma
liposarcoma 772-6
745-6
clinical features 772-3
histopathology 739-40, 741, 742
compared with
lymphocytic hyperplasia, cutaneous see lymphocytosis,
anaplastic sarcoma with giant cells 809, 810
cutaneous
sebaceous carcinoma 653
lymphocytoma see lymphocytosis, cutaneous
histopathology 773-5, 776
lymphocytosis, cutaneous (cutaneous lymphocytoma,
immunohistochemistry 776
cutaneous lymphocytic hyperplasia, pseudolymphoma)
myxoid 774-5, 776
872-5
pleomorphic 775,776
clinical features 872-3
compared with histiocytic sarcoma 850, 851
compared with chronic lymphocytic leukemia with
well-differentiated 774
cutaneous lesions 889, 890
lips, mucocutaneous pyoderma 261, 262
epitheliotropic 873
low density lipoprotein {LDL) 330, 331
feline 872-3
Loxoscetes (recluse spiders) 347
feline clonal 872
lupoid dermatosis of German Shorthaired Pointer see lupus
histopathology 873-5
erythematosus, cutaneous, exfoliative of German
immunohistochemistry 875
 Shorthaired Pointer
lymphoma
compared with
clinical features 70-1
balloon cell melanocytoma 821
histopathology 71-2
cutaneous lymphocytosis 874
lupus erythematosus, cutaneous
mast cell tumors 858
compared with
cutaneous
erythema multiforme 68, 78
compared with
feline thymoma-associated exfoliative dermatitis 70, 79
canine cutaneous histiocytoma 845
ischemic dermatopathy 52
plasmacytoma 872
pemphigus erythematosus 19
follicular mucinosis association 478
exfoliative of German Shorthaired Pointer (lupoid
epitheliotropic (myocosis fungoides, epitheliotropic T cell
dermatosis of German Shorthaired Pointer) 55, 57, 59-61
ymphoma) 876-8,879,880-2
clinical features 59
cinical features 876-8
compared with
compared with
discoid lupus erythematosus 55
erythema multiforme 78
systemic lupus erythematosus 57
 Langerhans cell histiocytosis 844
vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus of Shetland
melanoma with junctional acivity 829
 Sheepdog and Collie 63
d'emblée form 878, 880-1
19-6s xgoroyedonsy
feline leukemia virus 883
vesicular compared with discoid lupus erythematosus 55
follicular mucinosis association 477
vesicular of Shetland Sheepdog and Collie (ulcerative 
histopathology 878, 879, 880-2
dermatosis of Shetland Sheepdog and Collie) 55, 57, 61-3
immunohistochemistry 882
clinical features 61-2
progression 876, 877
histopathology 62-3
tages 876,877,878, 880
see aiso systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
tmor formation 876
lymph nodes
feline leukemia virus 866
cutaneous histiocytoma 843
intravascular 882, 883
diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis 863
large cel compared with balloon cell melanoma 831
Langerhans cell histiocytosis 844
nonepitheliotropic 882-8
plasmacytosis 870
B cell infltrates 884
lymphangioma 748-9
dinical features 883
compared with
compared with
acrochordon 715
canine mast cell tumors grade IIl 857
cavernous hemangioma 743
chronic lymphocytic leukemia with cutaneous lesions
lymphangiomatosis 748-9
889
compared with
dermal melanoma 828
cavernous hemangioma 743
feline progressive dendritic cell histiocytosis 847
lymphangiosarcoma 754, 755
Langerhans cell histiocytosis 844
lymphangiosarcoma 753-6
Merkel cell tumor 788
clinical features 754
plasmacytoma 871
compared with
pleomorphic mast cell tumors 861
hemangiosarcoma 751-2
transmissible venereal tumor 802, 803
lymphangiomatosis 749
histopathology 883-7
histopathology 754-5
immunohistochemistry 884, 887-8
immunohistochemistry 756
large cell 883
916
Index
phenotypes 883
sarcoptic (see srcoptic acariasis)
T cell infiltrates 884
see demodicosis, feline superficial
T cell 470, 472
Masson's trichrome stain, palisading granuloma 338-9
 See also angioendotheliomatosis, malignant; lymphomatoid
mast cell(s) 853
granulomatosis
allergic contact dermatitis 216
lymphomatoid granulomatosis 882, 883, 885-6, 888
 canine eosinophilic granuloma 360
lysosomes, granular cell type trichoblastoma 633
degranulation 855
dermatofibroma 717
macromelanosomes 521
diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis 863
major basic protein 355, 361
feline allergic miliary dermatitis 211
Malassezia dermatitis 142-4,145,146
feline herpesvirus ulcerative dermatitis 352
with bacterial intertrigo 261
feline hypereosinophilic syndrome 363
clinical features 142-4
feline indolent ulcer 354
feline mosquito bite sensitivity 345
White Terriers 148
feline paraneoplastic alopecia 501
feline 143
feline superficial demodicosis 224
histopathology 144, 145,146
flea allergy dermatitis 211
hypersensitivity reaction 143
food allergy 207, 208
secondary
mucinosis 381
acrodermatitis of Bull Terriers 194
perforating dermatitis 396
atopic dermatitis 203
sarcoptic acariasis 218
chronic hyperplastic dermatitis 136, 137
urticaria pigmentosa 863
congenital follicular parakeratosis 173
mast cell tumors
facial dermatitis of Persian and Himalayan cats 113, 114
canine 853-8
familial pawpad hyperkeratosis 180
clinical features 853-5
feline acne 438, 439
gradeI 855-6
feline paraneoplastic alopecia 499, 501
grade II 856-7
feline thymoma-associated exfoliative dermatitis 69, 79
8-258 II ape1
female hyperestrogenism 493
grading system 854
food allergy 206
histopathology 855-8
hypothyroidism 482
immunohistochemistry 858
ichthyosis 176
survival 854
interdigital furunculosis 432
compared with
mucinosis 381
balloon cell melanocytoma 821
nasodigital hyperkeratosis 169
balloon cell melanoma 831
sarcoptic acariasis 217
canine cutaneous histocytoma 845
seborrheic dermatitis 162
canine eosinophilic granuloma 360
Sertoli cell tumor-associated skin disease 491
cutaneous xanthoma 332
superficial necrolytic dermatitis 191
dermal melanoma 828
zinc-responsive dermatosis 189
feline progressive dendritic cell histiocytosis 847, 848
superficial necrolytic dermatitis 88, 91
 giant epithelioid melanoma 832
West Highland White Terriers 146, 147
histiocytic sarcoma 851
male feminizing syndrome see Sertoli cell tumor-associated
Langerhans cell histiocytosis 844
skin disease
Merkel cell tumor 787-8
malignant melanoma see melanoma, malignant
mycosis fungoides 880-1
mammary tumors
nonepitheliotropic lymphoma 884-5, 888
adenocarcinoma compared with apocrine adenocarcinoma
plasmacytoma 871, 872
679,680
transmissible venereal tumor 802, 803
adenoma compared with apocrine secretory adenoma 671
urticaria pigmentosa 863
basaloid adenocarcinoma compared with apocrine ductular
cutaneous flushing 241, 242
carcinoma 684
feline 858-61
basaloid adenoma compared with canine apocrine ductular
atypical, poorly granulated 859-60
adenoma 673
clinical features 858-9
 carcinosarcoma compared with apocrine adenocarcinoma
compared with cutaneous lymphocytosis 875
680
histopathology 859-61
 cystadenocarcinoma compared with apocrine
immunohistochemistry 861
cystadenocarcinoma 680
prognosis 859
Manchester Terrier
recurrence 859
dermatophyte pseudomycetoma 289, 290
well-differentiated 859
superficial pustular dermatophytosis 12
keloidal change of collagen compared with canine keloidal
mange
fbroma 722
demodectic (see demodicosis, canine; demodicosis, feline
pleomorphic 860-1
follicular)
mastocytosis, cutaneous 861-3
notoedric (see notoedric acariasis)
clinical features 861-3
917
diffuse 862-3
histopathology 823-5
histopathology 863
malignant transformation 824
papular 861-2, 863
 melanogenesis, balloon cell melanocytoma 820
mastocytosis, systemic 862
melanoma, benign see melanocytoma
matrical carcinoma 636,638
melanoma, malignant 813, 815-16, 825-33
see also pilomatricoma, malignant; trichoepithelioma,
amelanotic 827, 828
malignant
compared with
matrical cells, malignant trichoepithelioma 635
feline progressive dendritic cell histiocytosis 847
matrical cyst 610-11
feline sarcoid 730
compared with pilomatricoma 625
histiocytic sarcoma 851
 matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), canine mast cell tumors
Langerhans cell histiocytosis 844
854-5
 malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor 794,
mechanical alopecia see alopecia, traction
795
meibomian adenoma 645, 646-7
mycosis fungoides 880-1
meibomian epithelioma 648, 649-50
nonepitheliotropic lymphoma 884-5, 888
melanin
plasmacytoma 871
apocrine ductular carcinoma 686
pleomorphic mast cell tumors 861
balloon cell melanoma 831
spindle cell squamous cell carcinoma 587
black hair follicle dysplasia 519, 520-1
balloon cell 826, 827, 830-1
canine follicular dysplasia 524, 525
compared with
color dilution alopecia 519, 520-1, 522
apocrine ductular carcinoma 687
cyclical flank alopecia 527
canine mast cell tumors grade Il 857, 858
melanocytoma 817, 820
clear cell basal cell carcinoma 596
balloon cell 821
clinical features 825-6
melanoma 827
compared with
with junctional activity 829
canine cutaneous histiocytoma 845
spindle cell 830
feline progressive dendritic cell histiocytosis 848
pigmented viral plaque 573
melanocytoma 816, 819-20, 822
Sertoli cell tumor-associated skin disease 491
plasmacytoma 872
vitiligo 234
dermal 827-8
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome 268, 269
desmoplastic 829-30, 831
melanization, solid-cystic apocrine ductular adenoma 675
feline uveal 813
melanocytes
giant epithelioid 831-2
balloon 817
histopathology 826-32
black hair follicle dysplasia 519
immunohistochemistry 832-3
dendritic 817
with junctional activity 828-9
follicular 461
nailbed 826
keratinocyte interaction 822
spindle cell 826, 827, 829-30
lentigo 813, 814, 815
superficial spreading 825
melanocytoma 820
melanophages 813, 819
melanocytoma-acanthoma 824
 facial dermatitis of Persian and Himalayan cats 114
multiple dysplastic melanocytoma symdrome 821
flea allergy dermatitis 211
pagetoid distribution 828
melanocytoma-acanthoma 824
spindle 817
melanoma 826
vitiligo 234
nailbed basal cell carcinoma 703
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome 268
pigmented viral plaque 573
see also balloon cell melanocytoma
 proliferative thrombovascular necrosis of the pinnae
melanocytic tumors compared with canine cutaneous
254
histiocytoma 845
traction alopecia 508
melanocytoma (benign melanoma) 815-22
melanosomes
clinical features 815-17
balloon cell melanocytoma 820
compared with
black hair follicle dysplasia 521
dermal melanoma 827-8
color dilution alopecia 521
melanoma 826,832
 Merkel cell tumors (neuroendocrine carcinoma) 786-9
compound 816,818-19
clinical features 787
dermal 816,818,819-20
compared with
histopathology 817-21
canine cutaneous histiocytoma 845
immunohistochemistry 821-2
anine mast cell tumors grade IIl 857, 858
junctional 816, 819
dermal melanoma 828
malignant transformation 816
epitheliotropic lymphoma 882
multiple dysplastic symdrome 817, 821
feline progressive dendritic cell histiocytosis 847-8
see also balloon cell melanocytoma
gomus tumors 760-1
melanocytoma-acanthoma 822-5
Langerhans cell histiocytosis 844
clinical features 823
mycosis fungoides 880, 881
918
Index
nonepitheliotropic lymphoma 884-5
mosquito bite sensitivity, feline (feline insect bite
plasmacytoma 871, 872
hypersensitivity) 122-4, 345, 346, 347
transmissible venereal tumor 802, 803
clinical features 122-3
histopathology 787-9
compared with
immunohistochemistry 789
feline eosinophilic granuloma 357
metabolic epidermal necrosis see necrolytic dermatitis,
feline eosinophilic plaque 122, 353
superficial
feline herpesvirus ulcerative dermatitis 126, 352
metaplasia
feline indolent ulcer 130, 354-5
 nodular sebaceous hyperplasia 642-3
food allergy 207, 208
sebaceous carcinoma 652
histopathology 123-4, 345, 346, 347
metastases
Mott cells, plasma cell pododermatitis 364
apocrine ductular carcinoma 681-2
mucin 380, 383
apocrine secretory adenocarcinoma 677
accumulation in follicular mucinosis 478
atypical lipoma 773
chondrolipoma 770
eccrine carcinoma 689
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome 388
fibrosarcoma 723
eosinophilic mucinotic mural folliculitis 471
hemangiopericytoma 763
ganglion 803
hemangiosarcoma 750
ribbon type trichoblastoma 626-7
histiocytic sarcoma 849
mucinosis, cutaneous 380-3
Langerhans cell histiocytosis 844
clinical features 380-2
liposarcoma 773
compared with ganglion 804
lymph nodes in Langerhans cell histiocytosis 844
epitheliotropic lymphoma 878
lymphangiosarcoma 754
feline eosinophilic plaque 121, 122, 353
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor 793
histopathology 382-3
malignant pilomatricoma 637
hypothyroidism 482
mast cell tumors 854
mucinosis, follicular {alopecia mucinosa) 470, 477-8
melanoma 826
clinical features 477
myxosarcoma 728
compared with
nailbed squamous cell carcinoma 700
degenerative mucinotic mural folliculitis in cats 474
perianal gland carcinoma 659
eosinophilic mucinotic mural folliculitis 471-2
sebaceous carcinoma 650
feline follicular demodicosis 448
 transmissible venereal tumor 801
histopathology 477-8
vaccine-induced sarcoma 798
mucocutaneous junction chronic inflammation 263
see also pulmonary carcinoma, metastatic in cats
mucocutaneous pyoderma 261-3
metatarsal fistulation of German Shepherd Dog (sterile pedal
clinical features 261-2
 panniculitis of German Shepherd Dog, deep
compared with
metatarsal/metacarpal toritis in German Shepherd Dogs)
discoid lupus erythematosus 55, 264-5
5535
lichenoid keratosis 271
clinical features 553-4
psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis 270
histopathology 555
histopathology 262-3
microangiopathy, complement-mediated 248
mucormycosis 301-3
microflariasis, cutaneous 225-8
mucous membrane pemphigoid (cicatricial pemphigoid)
clinical features 225-6
30-2
histopathology 227-8
clinical features 30-1
Microsporum canis 289
compared with
canine dermatophytosis 413
bullous pemphigoid 29-30
dermatophytic pseudomycetoma 291
epidermolysis bullosa acquisita 42
feline dermatophytosis 410, 411
hereditary epidermolysis bullosa 40
kerion association 440
linear IgA dermatosis 46
Microsporum gypseum
mucocutaneous pyoderma 263
canine dermatophytosis 413, 414
histopathology 31-2
feline dermatophytosis 410
multiple canine cutaneous histiocytomas in regression
kerion association 440
326-7
miliary dermatitis 407
Munro microabscesses 153, 154
compared with feline eosinophilic plaque 111
mural folliculitis 460
feline dermatophytosis 411
alopecia 470
feline mosquito bite hypersensitivity 123
canine demodicosis 444
see also allergic miliary dermatitis, feline
compared with sebaceous adenitis 457
mites
degenerative mucinotic in cats 472-4
antigens in sarcoptic acariasis 216, 217
clinical features 472-3
see also acariasis
histopathology 473-4
 moist dermatitis, acute see pyotraumatic dermatitis
demodicosis
mononuclear cell dermatitis, food allergy 208
clinical features 464
morphea 396-7
histopathology 464-6
compared with cicatricial alopecia 398
dermatophytosis
Index
919
clinical features 464
myxosarcoma (myxofbrosarcoma) 728-30
histopathology 464-6
clinical features 728
eosinophilic mucinotic 466, 469-72
compared with
clinical features 469-70
 malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor 794
 compared with follicular mucinosis 478
myxoid liposarcoma 775
histopathology 470-2
 myxoid peripheral nerve sheath tumor 791-2
granulomatous in dogs 474-7
myxoma 728
clinical features 474-5
histopathology 728-9
histopathology 475-6
lymphocytic 466
nailbed basal cell carcinoma (subungual basal cell carcinoma)
mucinotic 478
702-3
mural spongiosis, eosinophilic mucinotic mural folliculitis
clinical features 702
471
histopathology 702-3
muzzle folliculitis and furunculosis see acne, canine
nailbed epithelial inclusion cyst 695-6
mycetoma, eumycotic 301-3
nailbed inverted squamous papilloma (subungual inverted
mycobacterial infection
squamous papilloma) 696-8
compared with
clinical features 696
acinomycosis 275
histopathology 696-8
feline acne 440
nailbed keratoacanthoma (subungual keratoacanthoma)
idiopathic sterile nodular panniculitis 551
698-700
Nocardia 275
clinical features 698
feline leprosy syndrome 276-7
compared with
opportunistic (opportunistic mycobacterial granulomas,
 nailbed inverted squamous papilloma 697
 atypical mycobacteriosis, nontuberculous mycobacterial
nailbed squamous cell carcinoma 701
infection) 283-7
histopathology 698-700
clinical features 284-5
nailbed melanoma 826
compared with
nailbed squamous cell carcinoma (subungual squamous cell
foreign body reactions 337
carcinoma) 700-2
 sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma syndrome 323
acantholytic compared with eccrine carcinoma 690, 701-2
histopathology 285-6
clinical features
700
Runyon Group IV 284
compared with
Mycobacterium avium complex
metastatic pulmonary carcinoma in cats 705-6
compared with feline leprosy syndrome 280
 nailbed inverted squamous papilloma 697-8
mycobacterial opportunistic infection 
histopathology 700-2
clinical features 287-8
immunohistochemistry 702
histopathology 288
verrucous 701
Mycobacterium kansasii 278
well-differentiated 700-1
Mycobacterium leprae 277
nasal parakeratosis of Labrador Retrievers 170-2
Mycobacterium tepraemurium 277,278
clinical features 170-1
Mycobacterium szuigai 278
compared with
Mycobacterium visibilis278
nasodigital hyperkeratosis 169, 170
mycosis fungoides, classical 878, 879, 880-1
zinc-responsive dermatosis 191
immunohistochemistry 882
histopathology 171-2
see also lymphoma, epitheliotropic
nasal philtrum, proliferative arteritis 255-6
myofibroblastic fibrosarcoma
722
compared with
hyperkeratosis) 169-70
anaplastic sarcoma with giant cells 809, 810
clinical features 169-70
leiomyosarcoma 780
 a e o sisad s  
nodular fasciitis 718-19
histopathology 170
pleomorphic leiomyosarcoma 782
necrolytic dermatitis, superficial (metabolic epidermal necrosis,
rhabdomyosarcoma 784
hepatocutaneous syndrome, necrolytic migratory
myofbroblastic sarcoma 722
erythema) 86-91,192
myofbrosarcoma 722
clinical features 86-8
 myositis, ischemic dermatopathy 52
compared with
myxedema
acrodermatitis of Bull Terriers 194, 196
cutaneous in hypothyroidism 482
candidiasis 11
mucinosis 381-2
generic dog food dermatosis 92
 myxofibrosarcoma see myxosarcoma
Matassezia dermatitis 146
myxoma (myxofbroma)
727-8
psoriasiform dermatitis of pawpads 112
clinical features 727
split pawpad disease 94
compared with
zinc-responsive dermatosis 190-1
ganglion 804
hepatopathic 87, 90
myxoid peripheral nerve sheath tumor 791-2
histopathology 88-91, 191, 192
myxosarcoma 729
Malassezia dermaitis association 143
histopathology 727-8
pancreatic 87, 90
920
Index
necrolytic dermatitis, superficial suppurative of Miniature
onychomycosis
Schnauzers see sterile pustular erythroderma of Miniature
canine dermatophytosis 414
Schnauzers
feline dermatophytosis 411
necrotizing fascitis, streptococcal 84
oral autoimmune skin disease compared with epitheliotropic
nematodes see anatrichosomiasis, cutaneous (Anatrichosoma);
lymphoma 878
Pelodera dermatitis
 organoid nevus see sebaceous nevus
neoplasia, feline follicular demodicosis 447, 448
orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis
neuroendocrine carcinoma see Merkel cell tumors
cheyletiellosis 221
neuroendocrine cells 787
compared with ichthyosis 179
neurofbroma see peripheral nerve sheath tumor, benign
cyclical flank alopecia 527
neurofibrosarcoma see peripheral nerve sheath tumor,
feline hyperglucocorticoidism 489
malignant
feline paraneoplastic alopecia 501
neuroma, traumatic 786,787
leishmaniasis 315
neurotoxins, spider bite 347
notoedric acariasis 219
neutrophilic dermatosis, canine sterile (Sweet's syndrome)
sebaceous gland dysplasia 533
366-8
see also seborrhea, canine ear margin
clinical features 366-7
ossification, dermal 374, 376-7
compared with sterile pustular erythroderma of Miniature
osteoblasts 377
Schnauzers 21, 370
osteoclasts 377
histopathology 367-8
osteoma cutis 374,376-7
neutrophilic immunologic vasculitis 244-7
osteomyelitis
clinical features 244-5
nailbed squamous cell carcinoma 701
compared with
of P3 in lupoid onychitis 72
cell poor vasculitis 250
secondary in nailbed keratoacanthoma 699
septic vasculitis 238, 239
osteosarcoma
solar vasculopathy 259
with giant cells compared with anaplastic sarcoma with
urticarial allergic eruption 212, 214
giant cells 809
discoid lupus erythematosus association 264
vaccine-induced 799
histopathology 245-7
otitis
nevus 813
feline follicular demodicosis 448
see also collagenous hamartoma; follicular hamartoma;
 proliferative necrotizing of kittens 79-80, 81
 linear epidermal hamartoma; linear epidermal nevus,
otitis externa
inflamed; sebaceous nevus
food allergy 206
Nikolsky sign, pemphigus vulgaris 33
hypothyroidism 482
nocardiosis (Nocardia)272-5
seborrhea 162
clinical features 272-4
ovarian imbalance type I see hyperestrogenism, female
compared with
ovaries, cystic/neoplasms 492
foreign body reactions 337
 mycobacterial opportunistic infection 287
p53 protein 853
histopathology 274-5
pagetoid reticulosis 876, 877, 881-2
infection in foreign body reactions 337
 pancreatic panniculitis see panniculitis, pancreatic
nodular fascitis 717-19
pancreatic paraneoplastic alopecia see paraneoplastic alopecia,
clinical features 718
feline
compared with
pancreatitis 556
fbrosarcoma 725
panfollicular cysts 612
spindle cell lipoma 771
panniculitis
histopathology 718-19
chronic rear leg swelling 540-1
Norfolk Terrier, ichthyosis 175, 176
chronic scarring compared with traumatic panniculitis 547
Norwegian Elkhounds, apocrine ductular carcinoma 681
idiopathic sterile nodular 548, 549, 550-1
notoedric acariasis (Notoedres cati) (feline scabies, notoedric
infectious compared with idiopathic sterile nodular
mange, head mange)
panniculitis 551
compared with
mostly lobular 538
cheyletiellosis 221-2
mostly septal 538
food allergy 207, 208
mycobacterial opportunistic infection 285
feline 219-20
neutrophilic 97
clinical features 219
pancreatic 555-7
histopathology 219-20
clinical features 555-6
histopathology 556-7
ocular lesions, reactive histiocytosis 324
postinjection 541-2, 543-4
Old English Sheepdog
clinical features 541-2
apocrine cysts 666
histopathology 541-2, 543-4
apocrine ductular adenoma 673
traumatic 545-7
doxorubicin-induced alopecia 511
clinical features 545-6
onychogryphosis, leishmaniasis 314
compared with postinjection panniculitis 542
Index
921
histopathology 546-7
psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis 153,154
vasculitic of thermal burns 547-8, 549
sarcoptic acariasis 218
 compared with vasculitic septal panniculitis 552
seborrhea 163, 164
histopathology 547-8, 549
solar keratosis 150
vasculitic septal S51-2
squamous cell carcinoma 583
clinical features 551
stacked 150
compared with vasculitic panniculitis of thermal burns
superficial necrolytic dermatitis 191
548
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome 268
histopathology 551-2
zinc-responsive dermatosis 190
see also postrabies vaccination panniculitis; sterile nodular
paraneoplastic alopecia, feline (pancreatic paraneoplastic
 panniculitis, idiopathic
alopecia) 498-501
panniculus
clinical features 498-500
diseases 538-57
compared with Malassezia dermatitis 146
inflammation compared with canine ischemic dermatopathy
histopathology 500-1
505
Malassezia dermatitis association 143
 pansteatitis, feline (feline vitamin E defciency, vitamin E
paraneoplastic exfoliative dermatitis see thymoma-associated
deficiency steatitis) 552-3
exfoliative dermatitis, feline
clinical features 552-3
paraneoplastic pemphigus 36-8
compared with pancreatic panniculitis 557
clinical features 36-7
histopathology 553
compared with pemphigus vulgaris 35
lipomatosis association 766
histopathology 37-8
papilloma
parasitic infestations, feline allergic miliary dermatitis 118
cutaneous inverted 568, 570-1
paronychia, interdigital furunculosis 432
see also squamous papilloma; viral papilloma
Pasteurella multocida, feline acne 438
 papillomatosis, cutaneous 568
pattern baldness see alopecia, acquired pattern
papillomavirus 567-8
Pautrier's microaggregates, microabscesses 878
bowenoid in situ carcinoma 578
(sa dd e saa dmed
carcinogenesis 571-2, 574
179-81
feline sarcoid 730
clinical features 179-80
feline viral plaque 574
compared with nasodigital hyperkeratosis 169, 170
immunohistochemistry 562,564,565,567,570,571
histopathology 180-1
acinic keratosis diagnosis 578
pawpad lesions
bowenoid in situ carcinoma 578-9, 581
cutaneous horn of feline pawpad 562, 563
feline viral plaque 575
feline paraneoplastic alopecia 499, 500
pigmented viral plaque 573, 574
metatarsal fistulation of German Shepherd Dog 553
oncogenesis synergy with ultraviolet radiation 581
see also keratoma, pawpad
squamous cell carcinoma etiology 582
Pelodera dermatitis (rhabditic dermatitis) 231, 449-50, 451
parakeratosis
clinical features 449-50
acral lick dermatitis 141-2
histopathology 450, 451
acrochordonous plaque 716
pemphigoid, bullous compared with mycosis fungoides 880
acrodermatitis of Bull Terriers 195
pemphigus
actinic keratosis 576
panfollicular 16-17, 415,416
atopic dermatitis 205
See also bullous pemphigoid; mucous membrane
bowenoid in situ carcinoma 579
pemphigoid; paraneoplastic pemphigus 
callus pyoderma 435
pemphigus erythematosus 18-19, 57-8
compared with acrodermatitis of Bull Terriers 196
clinical features 18
congenital follicular parakeratosis 173-4
compared with pemphigus foliaceus 17-18, 266
degenerative mucinotic mural folliculitis in cats 473
histopathology 18-19, 57-8
eosinophilic mucinotic mural folliculitis 470
pemphigus foliaceus 13-18,265-6, 415-16,417
familial cutaneous vasculopathy of German Shepherd Dogs
clinical features
 13-15
251, 365
compared with
flea allergy dermatitis 211
eosinophilic pustulosis 418
granulomatous mural folliculitis in dogs 475
impetigo 6
hookworm dermatitis 229
 paraneoplastic pemphigus 37-8
hyperplastic dermatosis of West Highland White Terriers
pemphigus erythematosus 58
148
subcorneal pustular dermatosis 20
inflamed linear epidermal nevus 156, 157, 192, 193
superfcial pustular dermatophytosis 13
irritant contact dermatitis 100, 101, 102, 109
superfcial pustular drug reactions 24
leishmaniasis 315
drug-induced 14, 15
Malassezia dermatitis 144, 146
compared with
 nasal parakeratosis of Labrador Retrievers 171
pemphigus foliaceus 17
nasodigital hyperkeratosis 170
superficial pustular drug reactions 24
notoedric acariasis 219
facially-predominant 15, 16-17, 18 
psoriasiform dermatitis of pawpads 111, 112
compared with
922
Index
mucocutaneous pyoderma 263
spindle cell lipoma 771
pemphigus erythematosus 19
spindle cell melanoma 830, 832-3
histopathology 15-18, 265-6, 415-16, 417
histopathology 790-2
 panfollicular compared with pemphigus vegetans 34
immunohistochemistry 792
 suenagan sngtyduad
myxoid 789, 791-2
compared with pemphigus foliaceus 17, 416
compared with
 pemphigus vulgaris (suprabasilar pemphigus) 32-5
myxoid liposarcoma 775, 776
clinical features 32-4
myxoma 728
compared with
superficial compared with dermatofbroma 717
actinic keratosis 578
 peripheral nerve sheath tumor, malignant (malignant
canine Darier's disease 44-5
schwannoma, neurofbrosarcoma) 792-5
paraneoplastic pemphigus 37
clinical features 792-3
drug-induced 33
compared with
histopathology 34-5
benign peripheral nerve sheath tumor 791
mucocutaneous phenotype 33-4
fibrosarcoma
725
pemphigus-lupus crossover disease 266
histiocytic sarcoma 850-1, 851
penicilliosis 301-3
leiomyosarcoma 781
 perforating dermatitis (perforating collagenosis) 394-6
spindle cell melanoma 830, 832-3
clinical features 394-5
spindle cell squamous cell carcinoma 587
histopathology 395-6
histopathology 793-4
 perianal fistula, metatarsal fistulation of German Shepherd
immunohistochemistry 794-5
Dog 554
recurrence 793
perianal gland adenoma (nodular hepatoid gland hyperplasia,
Persian cats
hepatoid gland adenoma) 655-8
apocrine cystadenoma 668-9
clinical features 655
apocrine cysts 666
compared with
dermatophytic pseudomycetoma 289
nodular perianal gland adenoma 656
facial dermatitis 112-15
 perianal gland carcinoma 661
feline ceruminous cystomatosis 667
perianal gland epithelioma 658
feline dermatophytosis 410, 411
histopathology 656-8
feline viral plaque 574-5
perianal gland carcinoma (hepatoid gland carcinoma)
sebaceous gland hyperplasia 531, 532
659-62
phaeohyphomycosis 301-3
clinical features 659
phalanges, pressure lysis
compared with
with nailbed keratoacanthoma 698, 699
perianal adenoma 657
with nailbed squamous cell carcinoma 701
 perianal gland epithelioma 658
phenytoin compared with feline acquired skin fragility
poorly-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma
syndrome 391
585
phlebectasia 241-3
histopathology 659-62
canine hyperglucocorticoidism 485, 487
immunohistochemistry 662
clinical features 241,242
recurrence 659
feline hyperglucocorticoidism 489-90
perianal gland epithelioma 658, 659
histopathology 242, 243
compared with perianal adenoma 657
topical corticosteroid reaction 393
recurrence 658
piloleiomyoma 778, 779
 perianal gland hyperplasia, nodular (nodular hepatoid gland
piloleiomyosarcoma
781
hyperplasia, hepatoid gland adenoma) 655-8
compared with glomus tumors 761-2
clinical features 655
pilomatricoma 611, 624-5
histopathology 655-6
clinical features 624
perihidradenitis, acral lick dermatitis 142, 429
compared with
 periodic acid-Schiff(PAS) stain 295
calcinosis circumscripta 380
dermatophytic pseudomycetoma 290-1
malignant pilomatricoma 638
fungal opportunistic infecions 303
trichoblastoma with outer root sheath differentiation 630
protothecosis 312
trichoepithelioma 618
pythiosis 307
histopathology 624-5
periosteal fbrosis, nailbed keratoacanthoma 699
malignant, compared with
 peripheral nerve sheath tumor, benign (schwannoma,
keratinizing basal cell carcinoma 594-5
neurofbroma) 789-92
malignant trichoepithelioma 636
clinical features 790
pilomatricoma 625
compared with
pilomatrix carcinoma see pilomatricoma, malignant
feline sarcoid 730
pilonidal cyst see dermoid cyst
fbroma 720, 721
pinna
hemangiopericytoma 764
calcinosis circumscripta 379
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor 794
canine eosinophilic granuloma 360
melanocytoma 820
canine leproid granuloma 281
923
ceruminous gland apocrine cyst 666
Standard, sebaceous adenitis 186, 187, 188, 454, 455
hypothyroidism 482
 Portuguese Water Dogs, follicular dysplasia 523-4
plasmacytoma 867
postrabies vaccination panniculitis 49, 538-41
warty dyskeratoma 613
cell poor vasculitis 250
see also alopecia, acquired pattern; proliferative
clinical features 538-40
thrombovascular necrosis of the pinnae; seborrhea, canine
compared with
ear margin
canine ischemic dermatopathy 504
Pit Bull Terriers
postinjection panniculitis 542
acrochordonous plaque 714
histopathology 540-1
apocrine ductular adenoma 673
pressure-point granuloma see callus
Pityrosporum ovale 142
 pressure-point pyoderma see callus pyoderma
plants
projections, horn-like in perforating dermatitis 395
foreign bodies 336, 337
proliferative arteritis of the nasal philtrum (arteritis of the
sensiizing 105,107
nasal philtrum) 255-6
plaques, epitheliotropic lymphoma 876, 877
clinical features 255
plasma cell dyscrasia, systemic 868
histopathology 255-6
plasma cell pododermatitis 363-4
proliferative necrotizing otitis of kittens 79-80, 81
clinical features 363-4
clinical features 79
 compared with familial cutaneous vasculopathy of German
histopathology 79-80
 Shepherd Dogs 366
proliferative thrombovascular necrosis of the pinnae 253-5
histopathology 364
clinical features 253
plasma cell stomatitis, plasma cell pododermatitis association
compared with proliferative arteritis of the nasal philtrum
364
256
plasmacytoma (plasma cell tumor) 385, 866-72
histolopathology 254-5
canine 868-70, 871
Proteus
clinical features 867-8
bacterial pseudomycetoma 276
compared with
deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis 420
balloon cell melanocytoma 821
postgrooming furunculosis 427
canine cutaneous histiocytoma 845
protothecosis, cutaneous (Prototheca) 309-12
 canine mast cell tumors grade IIl 857
clinical features 309-11
dermal melanoma 828
 compared with foreign body reactions 336
feline progressive dendritic cel histiocytosis 847, 848
histopathology 312
glomus tumors 760, 761
pruritis
Langerhans cell histiocytosis 844
atopic dermatitis 202-3
Merkel cell tumor 787-8
cheyletiellosis 221
mycosis fungoides 880-1
degenerative mucinotic mural folliculitis in cats 472
nonepitheliotropic lymphoma 884-5
feline superficial demodicosis 223-4
pleomorphic mast cell tumors 861
flea allergy dermatitis 209
transmissible venereal tumor 802
impetiginization due to self-trauma compared with
extramedullary 385, 386
superficial spreading pyoderma 9
feline 870
insect bite reactions 343
histopathology 868-71
notoedric acariasis 219
immunohistochemistry 868, 871-2
Pelodera dermatitis 450
malignant transformation 868
sarcoptic acariasis 217
subclassification 869-70
pseudolymphoma see lymphocytosis, cutaneous
plasmacytosis 867
Pseudomonas
systemic 870
bacterial pseudomycetoma 276
 plastic exposure, pinnal irritant contact dermatitis 101
deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis 420
 pododermatitis
postgrooming furunculosis 427
candidal 9-10
pseudo-Pautrier abscesses 880
ulcerative 230
pseudopelade 466-9
see also plasma cell pododermatitis
clinical features 466-8
 Pointer, German Shorthaired 55
compared with
exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus 55, 57, 59-61,
alopecia areata 463-4
63
 granulomatous mural folliculitis in dogs 477
 polypoid fbroma compared with acrochordon 715
sebaceous adenitis 457
polypoid hemangioma compared with acrochordon 715
histopathology 468-9
Pomeranian, alopecia X 495, 497
psoriasiform dermatitis of pawpads 111-12
Poodle
clinical features 111
doxorubicin-induced alopecia 511
histopathology 111-12
Miniature
psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis 152-3, 154, 155, 269-70
 idiopathic sterile nodular panniculitis 550
clinical features 152-3
sterile abscess of repositol injection 545
compared with lichenoid keratosis 155, 271
postrabies vaccination panniculitis 539
histopathology 153,154,269-70
924
Index
psychogenic feline hair loss see alopecia, feline psychogenic
candidiasis 10
public health hazard, sporotrichosis 298
 superfcial pustular dermatophytosis 13
Pugs
superficial pustular drug reactions 24
acrochordonous plaque 714
histopathology 7-9, 200,201
pigmented viral plaque 571, 572
pyoderma gangrenosum 132-4
pulmonary adenocarcinoma, metastatic in cats 706
clinical features 132-4
compared with eccrine carcinoma 690
histopathology 133, 134
pulmonary carcinoma, metastatic in cats 703-6
pyogranuloma
adenosquamous 704-5
actinomycosis 274
clinical features 704
bacterial pseudomycetoma 276
compared with nailbed squamous cell carcinoma 702
blastomycosis 294
histopathology 704-6
canine demodicosis 445,446,446
immunohistochemistry 706
coccidioidomycosis 294
squamous cell carcinoma 705-6
compared with postrabies vaccination panniculitis 541
puppy strangles see sterile granulomatous dermatitis and
entomophthoromycosis 307
lymphadenitis, juvenile
feline leprosy symdrome 280
pustular dermatosis
foreign body
subcorneal 19-20
acral lick dermatitis association 429
clinical features 19-20
interdigital furunculosis 432
compared with sterile pustular erythroderma of Miniature
reactions 337
Schnauzers 21
histoplasmosis 294
histopathology 20
infectious of dermis 272-316
superficial in dermatophyte mural folliculitis 465
juvenile sterile granulomatous dermatitis and lymphadenitis
pustular diseases of epidermis 4-25
329
pustules
kerion 441
canine acne 436
metatarsal fistulation of German Shepherd Dog 555
feline acne 438
mycobacterial opportunistic infection 285, 286-7
feline dermatophytosis 411
Mycobacterium avium complex 287
9ht eaoid soa praydaus ua
nocardiosis 274
juvenile sterile granulomatous dermatitis and lymphadenitis
Pelodera dermatitis 450
328,329
postinjection panniculitis 542
pemphigus foliaceus 415-16, 417
pythiosis 306
postgrooming furunculosis 428
sebaceous adenitis 454, 456
 sterile eosinophilic pustulosis 418
sporotrichosis 299
sterile pustular erythroderma of Miniature Schnauzers
 pyogranuloma syndrome
369
compared with
superficial bacterial folliculitis 406, 408, 410
arthropod bite reactions 345
pyknosis in plasmacytoma 869
canine leproid granuloma 283
pyoderma
 juvenile sterile granulomatous dermatitis and
actinic furunculosis 431
lymphadenitis 329
 bacterial compared with pyoderma gangrenosum 134
leishmaniasis 316
deep (see bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis, deep)
interdigital (see furunculosis, interdigital)
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome 268
juvenile (see sterile granulomatous dermatitis and
see aiso sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma syndrome
lymphadenitis, juvenile)
pyogranulomatous dermatitis, diffuse 439
secondary
pyogranulomatous diseases of dermis
atopic dermatitis 203
infectious 272-316
black hair follicle dysplasia 520
noninfectious 320-40
color dilution alopecia 519, 520
pyogranulomatous inflammation
congenital follicular parakeratosis 173
feline acne 439
female hyperestrogenism 493
feline pansteatitis 553
food allergy 206
pancreatic panniculitis 557
hypothyroidism 482
pyotraumatic dermatitis 116-18
mucinosis 381
clinical features 116-17
sarcoptic acariasis 217
compared with
seborrheic dermatitis 162
 deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis 421,
Sertoli cell tumor-associated skin disease 491
422
 superficial (see bacterial folliculitis, superficial)
feline indolent ulcer 355
see also callus pyoderma; German Shepherd Dog pyoderma
idiopathic feline ulcerative dermatosis 132
pyoderma, superficial spreading (exfoliative pyoderma) 6-9,
histopathology 117-18
200,201,202
pythiosis (Pythium insidiosum) 303-9
clinical features 6-7
clinical features 303-6
compared with
compared with foreign body reactions 337
atopic dermatitis 203,205
histopathology 306-9
925
rabies vaccination
compared with
cell poor vasculitis 248, 250
cheyletiellosis 221-2
vaccine-induced sarcoma 797
epitheliotropic lymphoma 877
red spaghetti of Walder 64, 65
flea allergy dermatitis 210, 211
renal amyloidosis, plasma cell pododermatitis association 364
food allergy 207, 208
renal disease in calcinosis cutis 379
hookworm dermatitis 229
renal failure in calcinosis 378
histopathology 218-19
renal glomerular pathology, vasculopathy of Greyhounds 252,
seroconversion 216
253
scabies
renal lesions, canine nodular dermatofibrosis 712
Norwegian 217, 218
 repositol injections
see also notoedric acariasis; sarcoptic acariasis
follicular atrophy 541
scar, nodular, compared with
sterile abscess 541, 542, 544-5
canine nodular dermatofbrosis 712
clinical features 542, 544-5
collagenous hamartoma 711
histopathology 545
fibroma 720
reserve cells, perianal gland carcinoma 660
scar, nodular hyperplastic compared with canine keloidal
reticulin fibers, plasmacytoma 868
fbroma 722
rhabdomyosarcoma 783-4
scar tissue 398
clinical features 783
scarring alopecia see cicatricial alopecia
compared with
Schnauzer comedo symdrome 181-3
anaplastic sarcoma with giant cells 809, 810
clinical features 181-2
pleomorphic leiomyosarcoma 781, 782
compared with
histopathology 783-4
actinic comedones 183,184
immunohistochemistry 784
actinic furunculosis 431
Rhodesian Ridgeback, dermoid cyst 566
callus 185
Rhodococcus erythropolis 278
callus pyoderma 435
ringworm
canine acne 436-7
canine (see dermatophytosis, canine)
interdigital furunculosis 432
feline (see dermatophytosis, feline)
deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis 420
 Rocky Mountain spotted fever, septic vasculitis 238
histopathology 182-3
rodent ulcer see indolent ulcer, feline
Schnauzer syndrome see sterile pustular erythroderma of
root sheath, inner/outer 604
Miniature Schnauzers
Rottweilers
Schnauzers
congenital follicular parakeratosis 172, 173
Giant, lupoid onychitis 71
eosinophilic furunculosis of the face 452
Miniature
follicular lipidosis 531
 pigmented viral plaque 572
histiocytic sarcoma 849
sterile pustular erythroderma 20-2, 23
lupoid onychitis 71
subcorneal pustular dermatosis 19
Standard, lupoid onychitis 71
Saint Bernard, pyotraumatic dermatitis 116
schwannoma see granular cell tumor; peripheral nerve sheath
Samoyeds
tumor, benign; peripheral nerve sheath tumor, malignant
alopecia X 495
scleroderma, localized see morphea
sebaceous adenitis 187
sclerotic plaques, morphea 396-7
sarcoid, feline 730-1
scrotal-type vascular hamartoma 736, 738-9, 740, 741
sarcoidosis, canine 333-4
compared with
clinical features 333-4
mapillary hemangioma 744
compared with palisading granuloma 339-40
 spindle cell hemangioma 746-7
histopathology 334
seasonal flank alopecia see alopecia, cyclical flank
sarcoma
sebaceoma 645
anaplastic with giant cells 806-10
sebaceous adenitis (granulomatous sebaceous adenitis) 186-8
clinical features 807
clinical features 186-8
compared with
compared with
histiocytic sarcoma 850, 851
ear margin seborrhea 168-9
pleomorphic liposarcoma 775
exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus of German
rhabdomyosarcoma 784
 Shorthaired Pointer 59-61
giant cell populations 810
 granulomatous mural foliculis in dogs 476
histopathology 807-9
pseudopelade 469
immunohistochemistry 809-10
reactive histiocytosis 327
histocytic compared with pleomorphic liposarcoma 775,
sebaceous gland dysplasia 535
776
vitamin A-responsive dermatosis 166
see also vaccine-induced sarcoma
feline compared with feline thymoma-associated exfoliative
Sarcoptes scabei var. canis 216
dermatitis 70
sarcoptic acariasis (canine scabies, sarcoptic mange) 216-19
histopathology 188, 454-7
clinical features 216-17
leishmaniasis 315
926
Index
sebaceous adenoma 645-7
seborrhea
clinical features 645-6
oleosa 162
compared with
secondary in hypothyroidism 482
 nodular sebaceous hyperplasia 643
sicca 162
sebaceous epithelioma 650
seborrhea, canine ear margin (canine ear margin dermatosis)
compound 646-7
165,167-9
histopathology 646-7
clinical features 167-8
sebo-apocrine pattern 650
compared with
simple 646
acquired pattern alopecia 502
sebaceous carcinoma 650-5
sebaceous adenitis 188
clinical features 650-1
vitamin A-responsive dermatosis 166
compared with poorly-differentiated squamous cell
histopathology 168-9
carcinoma 585
hypothyroidism 482, 483
epitheliomatous 650-1,653-4
seborrhea, primary 161-5
compared with
clinical features 161-3
basal cell carcinoma 592-3, 594
compared with
sebaceous epithelioma 650
ear margin seborrhea 168
histopathology 651-4
jchthyosis 179
immunohistochemistry 654-5
sebaceous adenitis 187, 188
sebocytic 650, 651-3
vitamin A-responsive dermatosis 165-6, 166-7
compared with clear cell basal cell carcinoma 596
histopathology 163-5
sebaceous carcinoma, sebocytic compared with perianal gland
seborrheic dermatitis 161-5
carcinoma 662
clinical features 161-3
sebaceous duct cyst 641, 642
histopathology 163-5
sebaceous epithelioma 647-50
self-grooming, excessive in cats 499
clinical features 648
self-rauma
compared with
acral lock dermatitis 140
basal cell carcinoma 592-3, 594
atopic dermatitis 203
sebaceous adenoma 647
calcinosis cutis 375
sebaceous carcinoma 654
compared with chronic hyperplastic dermatitis 137
histopathology 648-50
food allergy 206, 207
sebaceous gland(s) 604
interdigital furunculosis 432
cyclical flank alopecia 527
senile sebaceous hyperplasia see sebaceous gland hyperplasia,
follicular hamartoma 605
nodular
hyperglucocorticoidism 485-6
sepsis, burns 96
hyperplastic dermatosis of West Highland White Terriers
SERCA2 gene 43
148
 Sertoli cell tumor-associated skin disease, canine (male
sebaceous gland dysplasia 533, 534, 535
feminizing symdrome) 490-2
clinical features 533
clinical features 490-1
histopathology 533, 534, 535
compared with
sebaceous gland hyperplasia 531-3
canine hyperglucocorticoidism 487
atopic dermatitis 205
female hyperestrogenism 493-4
clinical features 531-2
hypothyroidism 484
flea allergy dermatitis 211
histopathology 491-2
food allergy 207
Setter
histopathology 531-2
English, canine Darier's disease 43
sebaceous gland hyperplasia, nodular (senile sebaceous
Gordon, juvenile sterile granulomatous dermatitis and
hyperplasia) 641-3
lymphadenitis 328
clinical features 641
Sezary syndrome 876-7, 882
compared with
shampoo, postgrooming furunculosis 427
sebaceous adenoma 646, 647
Shar Pei see Chinese Shar Pei
sebaceous nevus 645
shedding, excessive physiological 512-13
histopathology 641-3
clinical features 512-13
sebaceous hamartoma 643
histopathology 513
sebaceous nevus (nevus sebaceus, organoid nevus)
Sheepdogs see named breeds
643-5
Shetland Sheepdog
clinical features 644
canine familial dermatomyositis 51
compared with nodular sebaceous hyperplasia 643
discoid lupus erythematosus 53
histopathology 644-5
superficial spreading pyoderma 6-7
sebocytes
vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus 55, 57, 61-3
sebaceous adenoma 646-7
Siamese cats
sebaceous carcinoma 651, 654
apocrine ductular carcinoma 681
sebaceous gland dysplasia 533
cryptococcosis 296
solid-cystic apocrine ductular adenoma 675
 psychogenic alopecia 514
927
Siberian Husky
spindle cells
discoid lupus erythematosus 53
anaplastic sarcoma with giant cells 807-8, 809
canine eosinophilic granuloma 359, 360
angiosarcoma of lymphatic origin 755
follicular dysplasia 497, 522, 523, 525
angiosarcoma of vascular origin 752
silver-positive nucleolar organizer regions (AgNORs)
benign peripheral nerve sheath tumor 790, 791
canine mast cell tumors 854
canine keloidal fibroma 722
nodular perianal gland hyperplasia 656
dermatofibroma 716
perianal gland adenoma 657-8
feline mast cell tumors 859
perianal gland carcinoma 661-2
feline sarcoid 731
Simulidae (black fly)342
fibrosarcoma 723, 724
skeletal muscle, canine hamartoma 782, 783
ganglion 803
skin fragility symdrome, feline acquired 389-91
glomus tumors 760
clinical features 389-90
hemangiopericytoma 763
compared with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome 388, 389
histiocytic sarcoma 849-50
feline hyperglucocorticoidism association 488, 489
leiomyosarcoma 780
histopathology 390-1
lymphangiosarcoma 754
skin tags see acrochordon
 malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor 794
skin-associated lymphoid tissue (SALT) 866
melanocytoma 817, 819
smooth muscle
melanocytoma-acanthoma 823-4
leimyosarcoma 779-82
melanoma 826, 827
leiomyoma 778-9
Mycobacterium avium complex 287
solar elastosis and fbrosis (solar dermatitis) 399-401
myxoid liposarcoma 775
clinical features 399
 myxoid peripheral nerve sheath tumor 791
compared with topical corticosteroid reaction 394
myxoma 727-8
histopathology 399-401
myxosarcoma 729
solar vasculopathy association 258
nodular fascitis 718
solar-jnduced hemangioma 747
reactive fibrohistiocytic nodules 839
solar-induced hemangiosarcoma
752
scrotal-type vascular hamartoma 739
solar keratosis see actinic keratosis
spindle cell lipoma 771
solar vasculopathy 52, 55, 256-9
vaccine-induced sarcoma 799
clinical features 256-7
Splendore-Hoeppli reaction 272, 274, 275
compared with phlebectasia 243
bacterial pseudomycetoma 276, 277
histopathology 257-8
Conidiobolus 308
solar elastosis and fbrosis association 399
dermatophytic pseudomycetoma 288, 290, 291
solar-induced hemangioma 741, 742, 747
lagenidiosis 308
solar-induced hemangiosarcoma 749-50, 752
split pawpad disease 92-4
compared with solar-induced hemangioma 747
clinical features 92-4
Solenopsis invicta (fire ant) 349
histopathology 94
Spaniel see named breeds
sporotrichosis (Sporothrix schenckii) 298-301
 Sphinx cats, uricaria pigmentosa 861-2
clinical features 298
spider bite 347-9
histopathology
299-301
clinical features 347-8
Springer Spaniel
compared with
English, apocrine ductular adenoma 673
arthropod bite reactions 345
psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis 152, 153, 154,155
fre ant bites 351
squamous cell carcinoma 581-9
 pyoderma gangrenosum 134
acantholytic 585-6
histopathology 348-9
spiders, eosinophilic furunculosis of the face 451
carcinoma 690
spindle cell hemangioma 741, 742, 746-7
compared with
 compared with scrotal-type vascular hamartoma
apocrine ductular carcinoma 684-5
739
warty dyskeratoma 614
spindle cell lipoma 770-1
actinic comedones 184
clinical features 770
actinic keratosis 150
compared with
 malignant transformation 576
benign peripheral nerve sheath tumor 791, 792
basal cell carcinoma coexistence 590
nodular fasciitis 718-19
bowenoid in situ carcinoma malignant progression 579,
580
immunohistochemistry
771
causal factors 581-2
spindle cell sarcoma compared with spindle cell squamous cell 
clinical features 582-3
carcinoma 587
compared with
spindle cell squamous cell carcinoma 586-8
actinic keratosis 577
spindle cell tumors 722
 apocrine adenocarcinoma 680
canine with whorling pattern 763, 764.
perianal gland carcinoma 662
of soft parts (see sarcoma, anaplastic with giant cells)
sebaceous carcinoma 652
928
Index
epidermal compared with metastatic pulmonary carcinoma
feline sarcoid 731
in cats 705-6
ganglion 803
feline viral plaque malignant transformation 575
histiocytic sarcoma 850
histopathology 583-9
myxoid liposarcoma 775
immunohistochemistry 589
 myxoid peripheral nerve sheath tumor 791
metastases 581, 582-3
myxoma 727-8
pathogenetic mechanisms 581-2
myxosarcoma 729
 pigmented viral plaque malignant transformation 572,
stem cell factor 853
574
stem cells, follicular 604
poorly-differentiated 584-5
sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma syndrome 320-3
prognosis 583
clinical features 320-2
solar-induced hemangiosarcoma 752
compared with
spindle cell 586-8
canine sarcoidosis 334
compared with fibrosarcoma 725
feline acne 439
verrucous 588-9
 granulomatous mural folliculitis in dogs 476
well-differentiated 581, 583-4
reactive histiocytosis 326
compared with nailbed keratoacanthoma 699-700
sebaceous adenitis 456
see also nailbed squamous cell carcinoma
histopathology 322-3
squamous papilloma 567
Leishmania 320,323,334
compared with viral exophytic papilloma 570
 sterile granulomatous dermatitis and lymphadenitis, juvenile
stable flies 342
(juvenile cellulitis, juvenile pyoderma, puppy strangles)
stains
327-9
anti-Mycobacterium bovis (BCG) polyclonal
clinical features 327-8
canine leproid granuloma 283
compared with
feline leprosy syndrome 280
deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis 424
 mycobacterial opportunistic infection 286
reactive histiocytosis 327
Fite's
sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma syndrome 323
for canine leproid granuloma 282
histopathology 328-9
for mycobacterial opportunistic infection 286
sterile nodular panniculitis, idiopathic 329
for Nocardia 275
sterile pustular erythroderma of Miniature Schnauzers
Giemsa for leishmaniasis 316
(superfcial suppurative necrolytic dermatitis of Miniature
Gomori's methenamine silver 295
Schnauzers, Schnauzer syndrome) 20-2, 369-70
dermatophytic pseudomycetoma 290-1
clinical features 20-2
fungal opportunistic infections 303
compared with canine sterile neutrophilic dermatosis 368
protothecosis 312
histopathology 22, 369-70
pythiosis 307
Stevens-Johnson syndrome 66, 81
Masson's trichrome for palisading granuloma 338-9
Sticker tumor see transmissible venereal tumor
periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) 295
stomatitis compared with epitheliotropic lymphoma 878
dermatophytic pseudomycetoma 290-1
Stomoxys calcitrans (stable fly) 342
fungal opportunistic infections 303
stratum corneum
protothecosis 312
lifting 8,9
pythiosis 307
post-traumatic alopecia 506
von Kossa 376, 377
Streptococcus
see aiso cytokeratin immunostains
bacterial pseudomycetoma 276
staphylococcal exfoliative toxins 4, 6
feline acne 438
staphylococcal infection
stress, feline herpesvirus ulcerative dermatitis 124
acrodermatitis of Bull Terriers 195
subungual basal cell carcinoma see nailbed basal cell
bacterial pseudomycetoma 275-6,277
carcinoma
feline acne 438, 440
subungual keratoacanthoma see nailbed keratoacanthoma
secondary, giant cell dermatosis in FeLV-positive cats 159
subungual squamous cell carcinoma see nailbed squamous cell
Staphylococcus aureus, toxic shock syndrome 84
carcinoma
Stapbylococcus byicus 6,9
sulfur granules 272, 273, 274-5
Staphylococcus intermedius 4,6
suppurative hidradenitis 423
deep bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis 420
suprabasilar clefting
infection in foreign body reactions 337
erythema multiforme 37
Malassezia dermatitis association 143
paraneoplastic pemphigus 37
postgrooming furunculosis 427
pemphigus vulgaris 34, 35, 37
superfcial bacterial folliculitis 406
suprabasilar pemphigus see pemphigus vulgaris
steatitis
sweat gland(s) 665
compared with atypical lipoma 773
follicular hamartoma 605
scarring 768-9
hyperplasia in food allergy 207
see also pansteatitis, feline
orphaned 398
stellate cells
proliferation with melanocytoma 823, 824-5
dermatofbroma 716
see also apocrine cyst; apocrine glands; eccrine glands
929
sweat gland adenocarcinoma see apocrine secretory
thyroid hormone
adenocarcinoma
hair growth 481
 sweat gland adenoma see apocrine ductular adenoma; apocrine
supplementation inducing ichthyosis compared with
secretory adenoma
superficial spreading pyoderma 9
 Sweet's syndrome see neutrophilic dermatosis, canine sterile
thyroid necrosis and atrophy, idiopathic 481
 synovial cell sarcoma compared with histiocytic sarcoma 850,
thyroiditis, lymphocytic 481
851
tick bite reactions 342, 344
 synovial cysts compared with ganglion 804
compared with urticarial allergic eruption 213-14
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) 55-7
tissue grains
bullous 57
actinomycosis 272,274-5
type I compared with epidermolysis bullosa acquisita 42-3
bacterial pseudomycetoma 276
clinical features 55-6
dermatophytic pseudomycetoma 290, 291
compared with
nocardiosis 272, 274, 275
discoid lupus erythematosus 53, 55
topical medications, sensitizing 105
erythema multiforme 68, 78
toxic epidermal necrolysis 80-4
feline thymoma-associated exfoliative dermatitis 70
clinical features 80-2
ischemic dermatopathy 52
compared with
vitiligo 234
burns 98
histopathology 56-7
erythema multiforme 78
see also lupus erythematosus, cutaneous
toxic shock syndrome 85,86
histopathology 82-4
T cell lymphoma, eosinophilic mucinotic mural folliculitis
toxic shock syndrome 84-5, 86
association 470, 472
clinical features 84
T cell receptors in lymphocytosis 872, 874
compared with
T cells 866
 sterile pustular erythroderma of Miniature Schnauzers
cutaneous lymphocytosis 872, 875
21
epitheliotropic lymphoma 876
toxic epidermal necrolysis 83-4
nonepitheliotropic lymphoma 886-7
histopathology 84-5, 86
phenotypic characteristics 867
streptococcal84
tail dock neuroma see neuroma, traumatic
trachyonychia, alopecia areata 461
tar spots see viral plaque, canine pigmented
traction alopecia compared with cicatricial alopecia 398
telangiectasia 241-3
Tradescantia fuminensis 105, 107
clinical features 241, 242
allergic contact dermatitis 216
histopathology 242, 243
transforming growth factor βB1 (TGF-β1) 711
telogen 604
transglutaminase 1 175
canine ischemic dermatopathy 504
transmissible venereal tumor 800-3
doxorubicin-induced alopecia 511, 512
clinical features 801
feline paraneoplastic alopecia 501
compared with
 post-traumaic alopecia 506
balloon cell melanocytoma 821
 prolonged in postclipping alopecia 497, 498
canine cutaneous histiocytoma 845
telogen effluvium (telogen defluxion) 509-10
canine mast cell tumors grade Il 857
clinical features 509
dermal melanoma 828
compared with
Langerhans cell histiocytosis 844
doxorubicin-induced alopecia 511
mast cell tumors 858
excessive physiological shedding 513
Merkel cell tumor 788, 789
hyperglucocorticoidism 487
mycosis fungoides 880
hypothyroidism 483-4,484
nonepitheliotropic lymphoma 884-5, 888
histopathology 510
plasmacytoma 871, 872
Terriers
histopathology 801-2
doxorubicin-induced alopecia 511
immunohistochemistry 802-3
see also named breeds
trauma
T-helper 1 and 2 responses 201
compared with
thrombosis, cavernous/infiltrative hemangioma 743
feline herpesvirus ulcerative dermatitis 352
thrombovascular necrosis of the pinnae, proliferative 253-5
 proliferative thrombovascular necrosis of the pinnae
thymoma-associated exfoliative dermatitis, feline
255
(paraneoplastic exfoliative dermatitis) 68-70, 78-9
feline acquired skin fragility syndrome 390
clinical features 68-9
interdigital furunculosis 432
compared with
nailbed cysts 695
erythema ab igne 65
puncture-induced compared with metatarsal fistulation of
erythema multiforme 68, 78
German Shepherd Dog 555
facial dermatitis of Persian and Himalayan cats 114
shearing compared with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome 389
Malassezia dermatitis 146
traumatic furunculosis see furunculosis, traumatic
histopathology 69-70, 78-9
traumatic neuroma 786, 787
Malassezia dermatitis association 143
triamcinolone, topical corticosteroid reaction 392
930
Index
trichoblastoma (basal cell tumor) 625-9, 630, 631-4
compared with granular cell type trichoblastoma 633
clinical features 626
isthmus 622-3,624
compared with
compared with
basal cell carcinoma 592, 593-4
infundibular keratinizing acanthoma 621
solid-cystic apocrine ductular adenoma 675-6
trabecular trichoblastoma 630
tricholemmoma 622
trichoblastoma with outer root sheath differentiation
granular cell type 633, 634
628,630
histopathology 626-8, 629, 630-3
trichomalacia, feline psychogenic alopecia 515
immunohistochemistry 633-4
Trichopbyton,keratin-colonizing 466
with outer root sheath differentiation 627-8, 629, 630
Trichophyton mentagrophytes 11, 289
 compared with canine apocrine ductular adenoma 673
canine dermatophytosis 413,414
ribbon type 626-7, 628-9
 dermatophytic pseudomycetoma 291
compared with canine apocrine ductular adenoma 673
feline dermatophytosis 410
spindle cell 631-3
kerion association 440
trabecular 623, 630, 631
trichorrhexis nodosa 507-8
trichodysplasia in alopecia areata 462
tricohyalin 461
trichoepithelioma 611, 616-19
pseudopelade 467
clinical features 616
triglycerides 330, 331
compared with
tumoral calcinosis see calcinosis circumscripta
 infundibular keratinizing acanthoma 621
tumors
keratinizing basal cell carcinoma 594-5
epidermal 562-98
pilomatricoma 625
fbrous 710-31
trichoblastoma with outer root sheath differentiation 630
follicular 604-38
trichofolliculoma 616
foci of divergent differentiation 604-5
histopathology 616-19
histiocytic 837-51
infltrative 634
lipocytic 766-76
 inflamed benign compared with malignant trichoepithelioma
lymphocytic 866-90
636
melanocytic 813-33
malignant 634-7
nailbed epithelial 695-706
clinical features 634
neural/perineural 786-95
compared with
perivascular 759-64
basaloid trichoepithelioma 618-19
sebaceous 641-62
keratinizing basal cell carcinoma 594-5
skeletal muscle 778-84
malignant pilomatricoma 638
smooth muscle 778-84
pilomatricoma 625
sweat gland 665-91
histopathology 635-7
vascular 735-56
panfollicular cyst progression 612
see also mast cell tumors; transmissible venereal tumor
trichofolliculoma 614-16
tumour necrosis factor α (TNF-α) 82
clinical features 615
compared with
ulcerative dermatitis, chronic with linear subepidermal fibrosis
dermoid cyst 566
see ulcerative dermatosis, idiopathic feline
fbroadnexal hamartoma 607
ulcerative dermatosis, idiopathic feline (chronic ulcerative
trichoepithelioma 619
dermatitis with linear subepidermal fibrosis) 130-2
histopathology 615-16
clinical features 130-1
sebaceous 605, 616
compared with pyotraumatic dermatitis 118
trichogenesis, malignant trichoepithelioma 636
histopathology 131-2
trichogranuloma 429
ulcerative dermatosis of Shetland Sheepdog and Collie see 
callus pyoderma 435
lupus erythematosus, cutaneous, vesicular of Shetland
canine acne 436
Sheepdog and Collie
interdigital furunculosis 432
ultraviolet radiation
trichohyalin 463
actinic keratosis 576
trichoepithelioma 618
basal cell carcinoma 590
tricholemmal cyst 609-10
synergy with papillomavirus oncogenesis 581
tricholemmal keratinization
Uncinaria stenocephala 228
feline hyperglucocorticoidism 489, 490
uncinariasis, cutaneous see hookworm dermatitis
postclipping alopecia 497, 498
urticaria (hives)  239-41
tricholemmoma 621-3,624
clinical features 239-40
bulb-type 622, 623
compared with mucinosis 383
compared with
histopathology 240-1
clear cell basal cell carcinoma 596
insect bite reactions 343
ribbon type trichoblastoma 627
urticaria pigmentosa 861-2, 863
trichoblastoma with outer root sheath differentiation
urticarial allergic eruption 212-14
628,630
clinical features 212
clinical features 621-2
compared with
Index
931
arthropod bite reactions 345
infundibular keratinizing acanthoma 620-1
neutrophilic immunologic vasculitis 247
linear epidermal hamartoma 565
uricaria 240, 241
pawpad keratoma 564
histopathology 213-14
squamous papilloma 567
exophytic 568-70
vaccine-induced ischemic dermatopathy, generalized (GVID)
histopathology 568-71
49,50-1,539
viral plaque, canine pigmented (verruca plana) 571-4
vaccine-induced osteosarcoma 799
clinical features 572
vaccine-induced sarcoma (injection-induced sarcoma) 797-800
compared with
clinical features 797-8
lentigo 814
histopathology 798-800
 linear epidermal hamartoma 565
immunohistochemistry 800
histopathology 572-4
vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGF) 735
malignant transformation 572, 573-4
vasculitis 238
viral plaque, feline (verruca plana, epidermodysplasia
compared with
verruciformis) 574-5
cryoglobulinemia/cryofbrinemia 243, 244
clinical features 574-5
epitheliotropic lymphoma 877
compared with actinic keratosis 577
 deep vessel compared with spider bites 348
histopathology 575
Jack Russell Terriers 248
vitamin A-responsive dermatosis 162, 165-7
primary compared with burns 98
clinical features 165-6, 165-7
septic compared with cryoglobulinemia/cryofbrinemia 244
compared with
see also neutrophilic immunologic vasculitis
ear margin seborrhea 168
vasculitis, cell poor (cell poor vasculopathy, ischemic
primary seborrhea 164-5
dermatopathy) 247-8,249, 250
sbaceous adenitis 187, 188
clinical features 247-8
histopathology 166-7
compared with
vitamin E deficiency
palisading granuloma 340
compared with pancreatic panniculitis 557
solar vasculopathy 259
feline pansteatitis 552-3
histopathology 248, 249, 250
vitiligo 231-4
vasculis, septic 238-9
clinical features 231-4
clinical features 238
histopathology 234
compared with neutrophilic immunologic vasculitis 247
solar vasculopathy association 257
histopathology 239
Vizsla, sebaceous adenitis 187, 188, 455
vasculopathy
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like syndrome (uveodermatologic
cutaneous familial 50
syndrome) 266-8,269
spider bites 348
clinical features 266-8
urticarial allergic eruption 213
compared with
see also solar vasculopathy
discoid lupus erythematosus 264-5
vasculopathy, cutaneous familial of German Shepherd Dogs
 granulomatous mural folliculitis in dogs 476
250-1, 252, 364-6
leishmaniasis 316
clinical features 250-1
sebaceous adeniis 456, 457
compared with palisading granuloma 340
vitiligo 234
histopathology 251, 252, 365-6
histopathology 268, 269
vasculopathy of Greyhounds (cutaneous and renal glomerular
ophthalmic signs 267
vasculopathy, Alabama rot, Greenetrack disease) 251-3
von Kossa stain 377
clinical features 252-3
calcinosis cutis 376
histopathology 253
venereal tumor, transmissible see transmissible venereal tumor
warts see viral papilloma
Verocay bodies 790, 850-1
warty dyskeratoma 612-14, 615
verruca see viral papilloma
clinical features 613
verruca plana see viral plaque, canine pigmented; viral plaque,
histopathology 613-14, 615
feline
Weimaraners
verrucous epidermal nevus see linear epidermal hamartoma
apocrine cysts 666
vimentin, smooth muscle 256
follicular dysplasia 524
viral cytopathic effect 567
pigmentary abnormalities 518
viral infections
Wells' syndrome 355, 361
compared with giant cell dermatosis in FeLV-positive cats
West Highland White Terrier see hyperplastic dermatosis of
159
West Highland White Terrier
erythema multiforme 66
Whippet, acquired pattern alopecia 502
neutrophilic immunologic vasculitis 245
witch's feet 527, 528
viral papilloma (wart, verruca) 567-71
wound contamination
clinical features 568
acinomycosis 272-3,274
compared with
entormophthoromycosis 305
cutaneous horn of feline pawpad 562
lagenidiosis 305
932
Index
mycobacterial opportunistic infection 284
Yorkshire Terrier, dermatophyte pseudomycetoma 289, 290
nocardiosis 272, 273, 274
sporotrichosis 298
zinc deficiency, acrodermatitis of Bull Terriers 193, 194
wounds, penetrating, compared with foreign body reactions
zinc-responsive dermatosis 188-91
337
clinical features 188-90
compared with
xanthogranulomatous reaction, sebaceous adenoma 646
acrodermatitis of Bull Terriers 194, 196
xanthoma, cutaneous (xanthomatosis) 330-3
generic dog food dermatosis 91, 92
clinical features 330-1
irritant contact dermatitis 102
compared with
nasal parakeratosis of Labrador Retrievers 172
feline leprosy symdrome 280
nasodigital hyperkeratosis 170
feline mast cell tumors 860
psoriasiform dermatitis of pawpads 112
feline progressive dendritic cell histiocytosis 847, 848
superfcial necrolytic dermatitis 91, 191
fungal opportunistic infections 303
histopathology 190-1
reactive fibrohistiocytic nodules 839
syndromes I and I1 189, 190
histopathology 331-3
zoonoses see human infection risk