Atlasof
Small Animal Ultrasonography
Dominique Penninck
 Marc-André d'Anjou
RV
RA
ASD
RPA
Diverticuli
Interlobar
vessel
Arcuatevessel
Blackwell
Publishing
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.co m
M
ATLAS
S OF
SMALL
ANIMAL
ULTRASONOGRAPHY
Dominique Penninck
Marc-André d'Anjou
ustrations by Beth Mellor
Blackwell
Publishing
CONTENTS
Contributors  ix
Preface
xi
1. Nervous System 3
Section 1. Brain 3
Judith Hudson and Nancy Cox
Section 2. Spine 33
Judith Hudson and Martin Kramer
Section 3. Peripheral Nerves 44
Martin Kramer and Judith Hudson
2. Eye and Orbit
49
Kathy Spaulding
3. Neck 91
 Allison Zwingenberger and Erik Wisner
4. Thorax
119
Silke Hecht
5.Heart 151
Donald Brown and Hugues Gaillot
6.Liver 217
Marc-Andre d'Anjou
7. Spleen
263
Silke Hecht
8. Gastrointestinal Tract 281
Dominique Penninck
9.Pancreas 319
 Dominique Penninck
vi
vili CONTENTS
10. Kidneys and Ureters  339
Marc-Andre d'Anjou
 11. Bladder and Urethra
365
 James Sutherland-Smith
12. Adrenal Glands
385
John Graham
13. Female Reproductive Tract 397
Silke Hccht
14. Male Reproductive Tract 417
Silke Hecht
15. Abdominal Cavity, Lymph Nodes,
and Great Vessels 445
Marc-Andre d'Anjou
16. Musculoskeletal System 465
Martin Kramer and Marc-Andre d'Anjou
Index 511
ONTRIBUTORS
mald Brown, DVM, PhD, DACVIM Cardiology
Martin Kramer, Dr.med.vet., PhD, DECVDI
xiate Professor Cardiology
Professor
egartment of Clinical Sciences
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
ts Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine
Clinic for Small Animals
 estborough Road
Justus-Liebig University-Giessen
rth Grafton, MA 01536, USA
Frankfurter Str. 108
 35392 Giessen, Germany
ncy R. Cox, DVM, MS, PhD
entist, Scott-Ritchey Rescarch Center and
Dominique Penninck, DVM, PhD, DACVR
xiate Professor, Department of Pathobiology
DECVDI
lege of Veterinary Medicine
Professor Diagnostic Imaging
rum University
Department of Clinical Sciences
un, AL 35849, USA
Tufts Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine
200 Westborough Road
f-Andre d'Anjou, DMV, DACVR
North Grafton, MA 01536, USA
istant Professor, Diagnostic Imaging
Kathy Spaulding, DVM, DACVR
erartment of Clinical Sciences
Clinical Professor Radiology
Facilty of Veterinary Medicine
versity of Montreal
Large Animal Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical
 Sicotte
=i-Hyacinthe Quebec, Canada J2S 7C6
Sciences
Texas A&M University
Huzres Gaillot, DMV
4475TAML
College Station, TX 77843-4475, USA
igeric Medicale Veterinaire de Paris 15
2 rue Robert de Flers
James Sutherland-Smith, BVSc, DACVR
5Paris,Francc
Assistant Professor, Diagnostic Imaging
Department of Clinical Sciences
 Graham, MVB, MSc, DVR, MRCVS, DACVR,
Tufts Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine
DECVDI
iatcd Veterinary Specialists,
200 Westborough Road.
 South US Highway 17-92
North Grafton, MA 01536, USA
land, FL 32751, USA
Erik Wisner, DVM, DACVR
Professor of Diagnostic Imaging
e Hecht, Dr.med.vet., DACVR, DECVDI
 Department of Surgical and Radiological Sciences
-stant Professor of Radiology
School of Vcterinary Medicine, University of
atment of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
California
ivcrsity of Tennessee College of Veterinary
1 Shields Avenue
Vedicine
Davis, CA 95616, USA
xville, TN 37996,USA
Allison Zwingenberger, DVM, DACVR, DECVDI
-:h A. Hudson, DVM, PhD, DACVR
Assistant Professor of Diagnostic Imaging
Fiessor of Diagnostic Imaging
Department of Surgical and Radiological Sciences
eratment of Clinical Sciences
School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
ge of Veterinary Medicine
Califonia
-umn University
1 Shiclds Avcnue
-m,AL35849,USA
Davis, CA 95616, USA
ix
PREFACE
ince the start of veterinary ultrasonography in the late 1970s, many technological changes have transformed this
:agnostic modality. Research and publications have enabled all sonographers to increasc their level of expertise
nificantly. Today, ultrasonography is an integral part of the diagnostic approach in academic institutions, as
xell as in private practice.
d illustrations addressing the normal anatomy and common disorders of most body parts in small animals.
These images were carefully selected or created for their teaching capability.
The choice of contributors reflects somc of the international expertise available today.
We hope that this atlas will be a refercnce source for veterinary students, interns, and residents, as well as for
r=jiologists, intemists, and surgeons eager to learn and excel in this modality.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
e are pleased to acknowledge the "behind the scenes" contributions of many collagues, technicians, students,
nd residents, past and present, who helped in gathering the neccssary image collections to assemble this atlas.
szecial thanks to those at Tufts University Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine and at the Faculty of
''eterinary Medicine, University of Montreal.
e express our deep gratitude also to the contributors for sharing their expertise and passion and to the pub-
"-shing team at Blackwell who assisted us with this project.
Finally, we thank the many pets that patiently participated in these studies, enabling us to learn and teach
"th their images.
Spccial thanks to Beth Mellor, who produced most of the illustrations. Her artistic talent has greatly enhanced
e mission of this book
xi
CHAPTER ONE
NERVOUS SYSTEM
SECTION 1
Brain
Judith Hudson and Nancy Cox
SCANNING TECHNIQUE
verse images, the ventral structures are located cau-
dally to dorsal structurcs scen in the image.
Ihe brain of most small animals can be imaged ade
In absence of a fontancl, a lower-frequency trans-
quately with a high-frequency transducer (7.5-10 MHz)
ducer (e.g, 5MHz) can be used to penetrate the skull,
to provide the best resolution. The use of a lower-
enabling partial visualization of the brain. Penetration
frequency transducer (3-5MHz) may also be necessary
 of the temporal bone can be used for this purpose in
in large dogs or in dogs with. thick bone. Although
 some small dogs in which the brain cannot be other-
sector scanners, lincar array transducers, and curvilin-
wise imaged (Figure 1.2A).
ear array transducers all can be used, sector scanners
Visualization of caudal structures of the brain
and curvilinear array transducers provide better visu-
can be achieved by imaging at the foramen magnum
alization of peripheral structures. A small footprint is
(Figure 1.2B).
also helpful.
Craniotomy sites, and defects caused by trauma or
Sedation is usually not necessary. Most smallanimals
disease, can be used in imaging the brain. Prenatal
can be imaged while wrapped in a warm towel and
neurosonography is common in human medicine but
held gently in the sonographer's lap. Fur can usually
is seldom used in animals. The brain of unborn pup-
pies and kittens can be evaluated in utero, however.
individuals with a thick hair coat, clipping may
improve the quality of the images.
has been reported (Cruz et al. 2003). Based on findings
In young puppies, the bregmatic fontanel can be
in human patients, ultrasound images of the brain of
used as an acoustic window to the brain up to approxi-
puppics and kittens in late gestation in utero should
mately 1 month of age (Hudson et al. 1991). In some
enable the detection of other major defects in brain
individuals, particularly in. toy-brced dogs, the breg-
development, such as anencephalies, encephaloceles,
matic fontanels may persist into adult life. A kitten's
and meninogoceles.
?rain can be imaged through the fontanel up to about
 months of age although accessibility decreases over
time (Jaderlund et al. 2003). Unless the fontanel or
defect is very large, the tip of the transducer must be
NORMAL SONOGRAPHIC
eld relatively stationary; the transducer can slide only
ANATOMY OF THE BRAIN
a short distance. The brain is imagcd by using a "wind-
sield wipcr” tcchniquc, with the tip of the probe
In Dogs
scting as a pivot point to scan from rostral to caudal
Transverse Images
and back to obtain transverse images and from side to
The sonographic analormy of the brain of normal dogs
s usually angled to view rostral and caudal structures,
has been described (Hudson et al. 1989) (Figure 1.3).
most images are made in oblique rather than perpen-
The longitudinal fissure and splenial sulci form a
dicular planes (Figure 1.1). Therefore, it should be
hyperechoic umbrella-like structure that can be used
emembered that, in rostral transverse images, ventral
as a landmark to locatc the midline of the brain. This
is particularly useful when a natural or created defect
structures in the image whereas, in the caudal trans-
 in the skull is located asymmetrically. The cingulate
3
Plane 1
Plane 2
Figure 1.1. Normal brain in a dog and ultrasound beams resulting in planes 1 and 2. A: Sagittal magnetic resonance image
of the brain of a normal golden retriever illustrating how the ultrasound beam (planes 1 and 2 represented by the arrows)
passes through the brain when the beam is placed over the fontanel to obtain transverse sonograms. B: Plane 1 shows the
ultrasound beam angled perpendicular to the long axis of the brain to image the rostral horns of the lateral ventricles.
C: Plane 2 shows the ultrasound beam angled caudally to image the third ventricle and mesencephalon. D: Transverse mag-
netic resonance image of the brain of a normal dog showing the axis of an ultrasound beam over the fontanel to obtain midline
(smoire)sureouoseeseredpe
Figure 1.2. A: Hydrocephalus. Transverse magnetic resonance image of a dog with hydrocephalus showing the axis of an
ultrasound beam to obtain parasagittal images (arrows and corresponding planes 1 and 2). Plane 1 shows the bean angled
third ventricle; CN, caudate nucleus; LLV, left latcral ventriclc; and T, thalamus. B: Foramen magnum window. Sagittal
magnetic resonance image of a cat showing the axis of the ultrasound beam (arrow) for imaging of the brain through the
cat made through the foramen magnum is on the bottom right. A histological image made in a similar plane is on the bottom
left. M, midbrain; and V, vermis.
Plane
Plane 2
Figure 1.2
Figure 1.3. Transverse sonograms of the brain of a 1-month-old Yorkshire terrier. The ventricles are asymmetrical but within
normal limits. A: Rostral sonogram. B: Sonogram at the level of the interthalamic adhesion. C: Sonograrm at the level of the
third ventricle. D: Sonogram with the ultrasound beam angled caudally to image the mesencephalon. E: Sonogram with the
ultrasound beam angled caudally to image the cerebellum. 3, third ventricle; CC, corpus callosum; CG, cingulate gyrus; CN,
caudate nucleus; F, fornix; H, hippocampus; IA, interthalamic adhesion; LF, longitudinal fissure; LLV,leff lateral ventricle;
M, mesencephalon; P, pyriform lobe; Po, pons; RLV, right lateral ventricle; SS, splenial sulcus; Su, subarachnoid space; T,
thalamus; andV,vermis.
7ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
Figure1.3.Continued
gyrus is found deep to each splenial sulcus. Rostrally,i
in thc lateral ventricle, so only a single hyperechoic
the caudate nuclei are recognizable as hyperechoic
focus might be seen on each side of the midline in
curved structures.The lateral ventricles are located
some dogs. If there is sufficient CSF, the lateral ventri-
medial to the caudate nuclei and vary greatly in size
cle can be seen.
according to the breed, age,and individual. Asymmetry
 In older puppies and adult dogs, alternating hyper-
is common.Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is anechoic and
echoic and hypoechoic lines represent the callosal
may cause the lateral ventricles to appear as small
sulcus, corpus callosum, and fornix. Comparison with
anechoic slits in some individuals.
histological samples suggests that the most superficial
As the beam is swept slightly more caudally, the
hyperechoic layer is the callosal sulcus, which contains
rostral fornix comcs into view.Choroid plexus is
vessels that pulsate. The corpus callosum is comprised
hyperechoic while it lies on the floor of the central
of a hypoechoic surface with a deeper hyperechoic
portion of the lateral ventricle and the roof of the tem-
border. The fornix is hypoechoic. In the first few days
poral horn. It may be difficult to distinguish between
of life, these structures may appear only as a single
thc caudate nucleus and the adjacent choroid plexus
hyperechoic region. Detail improves as myelination
8NERVOUS SYSTEM:BRAIN
progresses after birth. Most of the brain is uniformly
tentorium is incompletely ossified in neonates, ena-
hypoechoic, but the pyriform lobes are visible because
bling visualization of hyperechoic echoes created by
 of hyperechoic meninges dorsal to each lobe.
the vermis in the posttentorial area of the brain. More
When the probe is tilted to sweep the ultrasound
superficially, the callosal sulcus is seen as a hypere-
beam caudally, the dorsal portion of each hippocam-
choic line. The corpus callosum has an appearance
pus appears as a hypoechoic structure close to the
similar to that seen in transverse images. It is
midline.Dorsolateral to each of these structures，a
hypoechoic, with a deep hyperechoic interface.
hyperechoic area represents choroid plexus in each
When the probe is angled to obtain a lateral para-
lateral ventricle. Another hyperechoic area is seen in
sagittal image, the subarachnoid space and third ven-
the midline ventral to the level of the dorsal portions
tricle are no longer seen; the thalamus and lateral
of the hippocampi. Depending on the angle of ultra-
ventricle are now visible on the imaged side. The thala-
sound section, this hyperechoic area may represent
mus appears as a hypoechoic structure outlined by
choroid plexus in the dorsal portion of the third
hyperechoic choroid plexus in the lateral ventricle.
ventricle or pia mater that is located more caudally in
Areas of the lateral ventricle with sufficient CSF may
the adjacent subarachnoid space. Vessels and trabecu-
appear anechoic or hypoechoic. The caudate nucleus
lae in the subarachnoid space may create a complex
is imaged rostral to the thalamus as a hypoechoic
of echoes that outline the mesencephalon and cause
structure with increased echogenicity superficially.
it to appear as a dome-shapcd hypocchoic structure.
This structure is more apparent in older dogs than in
The petrous temporal bones will create irregular
neonates. The thalamocaudatc groove is seen between
hyperechoic echoes on the floor of the cranium on each
the thalamus and caudate nucleus. This groove is more
side of the midline deep to the hypoechoic pyriform
apparent in older dogs, but in neonates a hyperechoic
lobes.
clump of choroid plexus is often seen in the lateral
More caudally, the osseous tentorium is a hypere-
ventricle in this region. Care should be taken not to
choic structure shaped like an inverted V. In older
mistake this normal appearance for intraventricular
animals, this structure often prevents visualization
hemorrhage that is also hyperechoic. In lateral para-
of the caudal brain, but the medulla and cerebellum
sagittal images, the splenial sulcus is seen in addition
can be imaged in neonatal animals. The medulla is
to the callosal sulcus and corpus callosum and appears
hypoechoic. The vermis of the cerebellum is repre-
as an undulating hyperechoic line. The cingulate gyrus
 sented by a stack of hyperechoic lines seen in the
shows as a hypoechoic structure deep to the splenial
midline.Each lateral cerebellar hemisphere is located
sulcus.
more laterally as a hypoechoic structure.
InCats
Parasagittal Images
The feline brain can be evaluated by using transverse
Longitudinal images made near the midline are true
and longitudinal sonographic planes (Figures 1.5
sagittal images, but when the probe is moved past the
and 1.6).
edge of the fontanel, the probe must be angled to
The lateral ventricles are slitlike in kittens. In some
cnable thebeam toreach the lateral margins of the
normal magnetic resonance images of the adult feline
brain. The floor of the cranium appears curved in
brain (Hudson et al. 1995), the lateral ventricles cannot
images showing the lateral portions of thc brain,
be discerned. Using ultrasound, measurementoflateral
whereas the floor of the cranium is more irrcgular in
ventricles is also more problematic in cats than in dogs
images made near the midline (midsagittal images).
because landmarks such as the thalamocaudate groove
As the probe is angled laterally, structures that are
 and the interthalamic adhesion arc lcss recognizable
anatomically closer to the midline appear in the near
(Jaderlund et al. 2003). In the study by Jaderlund and
field of the ultrasound image, whereas more lateral
colleagues, the most reliable and repeatable measurc-
structures are seen in the far field (Figure 1.4).
ments were obtained by measuring the central portion
The interthalamic adhesion and, more caudally, the
of the lateral ventricle in parasagittal views angled
mesencephalon can be seen in midsagittal images as
5*-10° from the midline. In these images, the dorsal
hypoechoic structures surrounded by echoes created
 and ventral walls of each lateral ventricle were parallel
mainly by choroid plexus in the third ventricle and
to each other, but the walls on each side were per-
pendicular to the ultrasound beam (Figure 1.6). The
some areas, the third ventricle will appear anechoic or
caudal portion of each lateral ventricle was larger than
hypoechoic because of the presence of CSF. The osseous
the more rostral portions, which provided clear
sonogram. B: Parasagittal sonogram with the ultrasound beam angled laterally to image the right lateral ventricle.
C: Parasagital sonogram with the ultrasound beam angled laterally to image the left lateral ventricle. C, cerebellum; CG,
right; RLV, right lateral ventricle; SS, splenial sulcus; and I, thalamus.
Figure1.5.
.Transverse sonograms of the brain of a normal 1-week-old kitten.The ventricles in a kitten are slitlike and mucl
smaller than those of a puppy. A: Rostral sonogram showing the caudate nuclei and lateral ventricles (arrows). B: Sonograr.
with the ultrasound beam perpendicular to the brain. C: Sonogram at the level of the third ventricle. D: Sonogram at the leve
of the mesencephalon. E: Sonogram with the probe angled caudally to image the cerebellum. The vcrmis appears as a serie
of stacked linear echoes. 3, third ventricle; CC, corpus callosum; CG, cingulate gyrus; CN, caudate nucleus (plus the choroi
plexus in the lateral ventricle); F,fornix; LF,longitudinal fissurc; LV, lateral ventricle; M,mesencephalon;P, pyriform lob
SS, splenial sulcus; and V, vermis.
CPRZYP
10
BIBLJOTEKL
11ATLAS OFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
一
Figure 1.5.Continued
visualization in parasagittal scans. Curving of the
The rostral cerebral artery runs rostrally and dor-
occipital horn made accurate measurement difficult,
sally and then curves caudally along thc mcdial aspect
however. Difficulty was also experienced when mea-
of the hemisphere. The artery anastomoses with a
s   sa   
branch of the caudal communicating artery that sup
Measurement wasrecommended al the junction of the
plies the caudomedial portion of the cerebrum. The
sella turcica and the cranial fossa to provide a land-
middle cerebral artery sends central branches that
mark for greater repeatability, but the ventricular walls
enter the midportion of the brain.A lateral branch
were at a slightly oblique angle to the beam in trans-
supplies the surface of the brain. In the area of the
verse images at this level.
spine, the vertebral arteries unite to form the basilar
artery, which enters the brain caudally and divides
BrainVasculature
into the right and left caudal communicating arteries.
Each caudal communicating artery connects the basilar
In dogs, the internal carotid artery enters the cranial
 artery with the ipsilateral internal carotid artery.
vault and divides into the rostral cerebral artery,the
Cats differ from dogs in that the terminal extracra-
middle cerebral artery, and the caudal communicating
nial portion of the internal carotid artery is regressed
artery (Schaller 1992) (Figure 1.7).
(Figure 1.8).
CB
AC
PD
4.0MHz
RG
22
mm
1.9
mm
4.0
KHz
HPF
80
Hz
PS
=45.44 cm/s
ED=
=12.28cm/s
TAP=28.43 cm/s
MCA
RT
=0.049
=1.17
S
PI
RI
=0.73
Figure 1.7
12NERVOUS SYSTEM:BRAIN
 In cats and dogs, the ascending pharyngeal artery
artery. Velocities in these vessels can be measured by
arises from the external carotid artery and runs ros-
switching the sonographic mode to pulsed-wave or
trally to anastomose with the intermal carotid artery,
continuous-wave Doppler imaging. The most accurate
but, in cats, the ascending pharyngeal artery is a major
measurements are made from sagittal images because
source of blood to the brain.
the sonographer can ensure that the Doppler angle (the
Color flow Doppler imaging can be used to image
angle between the path of the ultrasound beam and
the cerebral arteries,particularly the rostral cerebral
the direction of flow) is as close to zero as possible.
artery and the central branch of themiddle cerebral
Velocities are likely to bcunderestimatedwhenmade
Figure 1.6. Sagittal to parasagittal sonograrms of the brain of a normal 1-week-old kitten. A: Midline sagittal sonogram.
insert shows sagittal and parasagittal planes correcsponding to the sonograms.
sonogram showing the branches of the internal carotid artery. B: Parasagittal sonogram of the brain showing placement of
portion of the rostral cercbral artery (R). The electronic cursors have been placed to measure velocity and calculate the resis-
tance index from the Doppler waveform.Arrows indicate the location of the lateral ventricles.ACC, branch of the rostral
cerebral artery (artery along the corpus callosum); CB, callosal branches; ICA, internal carotid artery; MCA,middle branch
of the middle cerebral artery; and RCA, rostral cerebral artery.
14 NERVOUS SYSTEM: BRAIN
from transverse images, because the Doppler angle
cannot be accurately measured. Nevertheless, in some
cases, transverse images must be made because the
sonographic window is too small and the probe to0
RCA
large to enable sonographers to tilt the probe ade-
quately to obtain parasagittal images of the rostral
brain. Although the Doppler cursor is best placed
using the color flow Doppler image as a guide, pulsa-
 tions can be seen on gray-scale images, and the Doppler
 cursor can be placed on these pulsations to obtain
C.A
velocity measurements (Hudson et al. 1997).
 Evaluation of vessels may be helpful when the brain
 is injured or is damaged by disease. Color flow Doppler
imaging can be used to identify overcirculated or
B
undercirculated areas. The resistance index (Rl) is cal-
culated as the following ratio:
(systolic velocity - diastolic velocity)/
RCA
diastolic velocity
 High RI may be associated with a poor prognosis in
 some disease processes (Saito et al. 2003).
SONOGRAPHY OF
BRAIN DISORDERS
 The most common application of neurosonography
of the brain is to measure ventricular size when
 diagnosing hydrocephalus. Other applications include
evaluation of animals with traumatic cranial defects
for evidence of hemorrhage or infection, intraopera-
tive or postoperative examination of brain neoplasms,
 and imaging of masses associated with bony lysis.
Additionally, ultrasound can be used to guide biopsy
 or fine-needle aspiration of brain lesions or to guide
-18.0cm/s
 injection of substances into the brain.
Figure 1.8. Sonograms made using color Doppler imaging
to show the vasculature of the brain of a normal cat.
Hydrocephalus
A: Parasagittal sonogram showing the branches of the inter-
 Hydrocephalus can be congenital or acquired. The dis-
 nal carotid artery. B: Parasagittal sonogram of the feline
order is common in toy-breed dogs, which may have
brain showing placement of the pulsed Doppler cursors on
 persistent fontanels (Figure 1.9).
the rostral cerebral artery. A normal waveform is shown.
C: Sonogram of the caudal aspect of the brain made through
It should not be assumed that a dog has hydro-
the foramen magnum showing the pulsed Doppler cursor
 cephalus merely because there is a persistent fontanel.
 placed on basilar artery. The resistance index can be calcu-
Not all toy-breed dogs with a persistent fontanel have
lated from the peak systolic and diastolic vclocities. The
hydrocephalus, and, conversely, toy-breed dogs can
ascending pharyngeal artery anastomoses with the internal
 have hydrocephalus without having a persistent fon-
carotid artery becoming a major source of blood to the brain.
 tanel. In some toy-breed or small breed dogs without
A portion of the extracranial internal carotid artery is not 
 a persistent fontanel, the temporal bone is thin enough
patent. ACC, branch of the rostral cerebral artery (artery
to allow transcranial imaging. In addition, limited
along the corpus callosum); BA, basilar artery; ICA,
 imaging of the caudal fossa can be achieved using the
internal carotid artery; RCA, rostral cerebral artery; and T,
foramen magnum. Because the fontanel ossifies in
thalamus.
aq Aeu snpou Suer nao 'shop rahre Au
B
RLV
V
RLV
Figure 1.9.Sonograms of a 1-year-old Chihuahua with severe ventriculomegaly. A: Rostral sonogram showing the caudate
nuclei and lateral ventricles. B: Sonogram made at the level of the rostral portion of the third ventricle. C: Sonogram made
at the level of the thalami. D: Sonogram made at the level of the pituitary gland. Notice the irregularity of the floor of the
Cranium at this level. E: Sonogram made with the ultrasound beam pointed caudally to display mesencephalon. F: Sonogram
showing the osseous tentorium (arrows).3,third ventricle; CN,caudate nuclei; H,hippocampus; IA,interthalamic adhesion;
LL, longitudinal fissure; LLV, left lateral ventricle; M, mesencephalon; P, pyriform lobe; RLV, right lateral ventricle; and SS,
splenial sulcus on the left side.
15
16 NERVOUS SYSTEM:BRAIN
necessary to examine the brain for hydrocephalus in
Several studies using ultrasonography or magnetic
these dogs after the first few weeks of life.
resonance imaging (MRl) have shown that the severity
Acquired hydrocephalus can be caused by obstruc-
of clinical signs is not directly related to the degree of
tion at various locations in the ventricular system.
ventriculomegaly, and ventriculomegaly can be seen
Neoplasia, hemorrhage (including intraventricular
in neurologically normal dogs (De Haan ct al. 1994;
hemorrhage in the perinatal period), and infection are
Vullo et al. 1997). A study using MRI to compare ven-
among thepossiblecausesof obstruction.Location of
tricularvolumeinYorkshire terriers tothatin German
the obstruction dictates the pattern of dilation of the
shepherds indicated that percentage of ventricle area
ventricular system; therefore, a finding of asymmetri-
 cal dilation recognizable via ultrasound images can
Yorkshire terriers, but the range of ventricle area for
assist in determining the focus of the obstruction.
neurologically normal Yorkshire terriers overlapped
Interference with absorption of CSF from the sub-
that of neurologicallyabnormalYorkshire terriers
arachnoid space into the venous system can cause non-
(Estave-Ratsch et al. 2001). Ventriculomegaly should
obstructive hydrocephalus. Ex vacuo hydrocephalus is
caused by the atrophy or failure of the brain to develop
phalus (Hudson et al. 1990; Spaulding and Sharp 1990;
(Ettinger and Feldman 2005).
Ettinger and Feldman 2005). Breed differences and
Several methods have been proposed for evaluating
severity of clinical signs should be considered.
enlarged lateral ventricles on sonograms (Figure 1.10
Measurement of blood flow in the basilar artery might
and Table 1.1). The degree of ventriculomegaly ranges
help to identify animals in which enlarged ventricles
from the ventricles being only slightly enlarged to
are significant or are likely to become clinically signifi-
ventricles occupying most of the brain.Midline struc-
cant (Saito et al. 2003). In one study, RI at the basilar
tures between the lateral ventricles are intact in some
animals,but the lateral ventricles become confluent in
 or other brain disease compared with normal dogs or
others (Figure 1.11).
dogs with asymptomatic hydrocephalus. Additionally,
Table 1.1
Guidelinesfor measurements of the ventricular system as currently available in the literature
Parameter
How Measured
Normal
Ventriculomegaly
Hudson et al. (1990)
Lateral ventricular height:
Measure the dorsoventral dimension of the
0.04-0.35cm
>0.35 cm
transverse
lateralventriclewiththeprobeperpendicular
Mean, 0.15cm
at orcaudal to theinterthalamic adhesion
Cerebral mantle thickness:
Measure the thickncss of brain tissue dorsal to
1.63-1.91cm
Often decreased;may
transverse
eachlateralventricle
be very thin
Ventricle-hemisphere ratio
Ratio of thelateral ventricular height to the
Mean, 0.19
>0.19
(measured on transverse
width of the ipsilateral hemisphere
images)
Ventricle-mantle ratio
Ratioof thelateral ventricular height to the
Mean, 0.25
>0.25
(measured on transverse
thickness of the cerebral mantle
images)
Lateral ventricular height:
Measure the dorsoventral dimension of the
Mean, 0.14cm
sagittal
lateral ventriclewith theprobe perpendicular
at the thalamocaudate sulcus
Spaulding and Sharp (1990)
Dorsoventral dimension of
Measure the dorsoventral dimension of the
NA
NA
lateralventricle
lateralventricle at thelevel of thepituitary
fossa
Dorsoventral percentage
Ratio of the dorsoventral dimension of the lateral0-14%
15%-25%→moderate
ventricle to thedorsoventral dimension of the
ventriculomegaly
brain
>25%→severe
ventriculomegaly
NA, not applicable.
Cerebral
Mantle
Thickness
Height RLV
Dorsoventral
Dimension of
RLV
Dorsoventral
Dimension of
the Brain
Figure 1.10.Measurcmcnt of the lateral ventricles in a 3-nonth-old Chihuahua. A: Transverse sonogram at the level of the
interthalamic adhesion showing mcasurement using the method of HIudson et al. (1990) The lateral ventricular height can be
compared with the cerebral mantle thickness (the thickncss of the parenchyma dorsal to the lateral ventricle) to obtain the
ventricle-mantle ratio. B: Transverse sonogram at the level of the pituitary gland showing mcasurement by using the method
 of Spaulding and Sharp (1990). Another method of measurement calculates the dorsoventral measurement of thc lateral ven-
tricle as a percentage of the dorsoventral measurement of the brain. Rl.V, right lateral ventricle.
17
18 NERVOUS SYSTEM:BRAIN
RLV
LIV
B
Figure 1.11.Variability in expansion of the ventricular system in hydroccphalus. Additional images from the brain of the
ence of the rostral horns. The third ventricle is not enlarged. Sonograms of another Chihuahua in Figure 1.9 show that vcn
triculomegaly involves the temporal horns, as well as rostral horns and central parts, and there is enlargement of the thirc
ventricle in that dog. Midline structures remain mainly intact, however. A: Rostral transverse sonogram. B: Parasagitta
sonogram. H, hippocampus; LLV, left lateral ventricle; RLV, right lateral ventricle; SS, splenial sulcus; and T, thalamus.
neurological deficits, although that is not always tru
asymptomatic dogs with severe ventriculomegaly and
(Figure 1.12).
high RI later developed clinical signs, although the use
 The suggested methods of measurement are nc
of high RI by itself did not identify asymptomatic dogs
always useful (Table 1.1). Some animals may hav
that were likely to become symptomatic (Saito et al.
 minimal enlargement in the described planes for me
2003).
surement but have greatly enlarged ventricles in othe
It may also be useful to evaluate the amount of
areas, such as the caudal part of the central horn an
brain tissue spared by the dilated ventricles. Animals
the temporal horn. The third or fourth ventricles ma
with very little brain tissue commonly have severc
19ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
B
RLV
LLV
LLV
Figure 1.12.Incidental ventriculomegaly. Sonogram and magnetic resonance image (MRI) of the brain of a 10-year-old
Maltese with severe but incidental ventriculomegaly. The ventriculomegaly was noted during spinal MR imaging performed
to evaluate intervertebral disc heniation in the cervical region. The dog was not showing clinical evidence of brain abnor-
malities. A: Transverse sonogram showing massive ventriculomegaly involving the right and left lateral ventriclcs (RLV and
LLV, respectively). B: Parasagittal MRI showing a severely dilated left lateral ventricle (LLV).
also be enlarged. Sonographers should be careful
and selection of treatment.If a cranial dcfcct rcmains
to record these findings, as well as any other abnor-
following surgical intervention, ultrasonography can
malities,including additional anomalies or masses
be used tofollow thepatient postoperatively to deter-
that may be related to theventriculomegaly.
mine response to therapy.
Neoplasia
Infectious Lesions
In most animals with brain neoplasia, MRI or com-
In rare instances, a brain abscess or granulomatous
puted tomography is used to make the initial diagno-
mass might occur in either a very young animal or an
sis because the thick bone of the cranium precludes
older animal with a persistent fontanel or other cranial
diagnosis with ultrasonography. Ultrasonography is
defect (Klopp et al. 2000). Abscessation can appear as
more likely to be used either intraoperatively or post-
a cavitary and hypoechoic lesion containing swirling
operatively, although a window might provided by a
cellular material compressing the surrounding brain
persistent fontanel or by bone lysis associated with a
parenchyma (Figure 1.14).
neoplasm (Figure 1.13).
In case of organized granuloma, a well-marginated
 Most neoplasms in people and animals are hypere-
hyperechoic lesion can be detected. Thus, a granulo-
choic to the adjacent normal brain.
matous mass should be considered as a differential
Ultrasonography can assist in defining thc borders
diagnosis for neoplasia when a hyperechoic mass is.
of a mass intraoperatively so that most or all of the
seen on ultrasonography (Figure 1.15).
abnormal tissue can be removed. The vessels associ-
ated with a mass or other lesion can also be evaluated.
TraumaticHemorrhage
Ultrasound-guided biopsy can be performed if the
nature of a lesion is questionable. This enables prelimi-
Ulrasonography is used to examine the brain of
nary diagnosis to establish the neoplastic or nonneo-
animalswith traumatic cranial defect to determine
plastic nature of the lesion and establish a prognosis
whether hemorrhage has occurred. Comatose or
TRANS
LONG
Figure 1.14.Abscess in the cerebrum of a kittcn.The kitter
Figure 1.13.Astrocytoma in the cerebellum of an 8-year-
had ventrolateral strabismus and soft-tissue swelling on its
old terrier. A: Magnetic resonance image shows a hyperin-
head. An abscess was diagnosed and drained via a palpable
tense mass (M) in the cerebellum.A craniotony was donc
fontanel. A: Transverse ultrasonographic plane showing 
to enable an intraoperative ultrasound-guided biopsy of
large pocket of cellular fluid within the cerebrum (arrows)
the mass. B: Transverse (trans) sonogram showing the
B: Transverse postcontrast computed tomography, on whicl
hyperechoic mass (between the cursors) in the cerebellum.
a large, heterogeneous, contrast-enhancing mass lesion i
C: Parasagiltal (long) sonogram showing the cerebellar mass.
observed (arrows).
Images courtesy of D. Perninck and S. Hecht.
20
ticulomegaly was not apparent from that location.A: Sagittal T1-weighted magnetic resonance image after intravenous
administration of gadolinium showing a hyperintense lesion in the rostral brain stem (arrows). B: Transverse T2-weighted
stem is a hyperechoic mass (arrows) just ventral to the cerebellar vermis (V).
22 NERVOUS SYSTEM:BRAIN
causes a lesion to become hyperechoic. As the clot
semicomatoseanimalscanbe evaluatedfor evidence
breaks down, anechoic or hypoechoic areas may be
of active hemorrhage requiring surgical intervention
if a suitable sonographic window is available (Figure
seen (Figure 1.17).
 Serial sonograms enable continuing evaluation of
1.16)
Bleeding into the brain is usually seen immediately
 patients without anesthesia and with little stress to the
as a hypoechoic area, but erythrocyte aggregation
patients. Rechcck ultrasonographic evaluation is
RLV
IV
SS
Rostral
B
(B) sonograms, there is thickening of the splenial sulci (SS) suggesting localized hemorrhage. Other areas of the brain appc
normal, and the patient recovered uneventfully. LF, longitudinal fissure; LV, choroid plexus in the lateral ventricle; LLV, a1
of the left lateral ventricle; RLV, area of the right lateral ventricle; SS, splenial sulcus; and T, thalamus.
23ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
lot
be
of
he
is
Figure 1.17. Head trauma in a 4-year-old Chihuahua. A: Transverse sonogram of the brain after head trauma and subse-
quent seizures. The dog was in lateral recumbcncy and was minimally responsive. A collection of fluid (F) surrounds the
splenial sulcus (SS) on each side. The right splenial sulcus is displaced ventrally. The right lateral ventricle (RL.V) and left
hteral ventricle (LLV) are mildly dilated. B: T1-weighted magnetic resonance image showing decreased signal intensity (D)
in the region of the splenial sulci.
warranted especially when patients have changed
pontine angle have been reported. Arachnoid cysts are
mentation.
seen most commonly in the quadrigeminal cistern,
where they appear as a well-defined anechoic mass
between the caudal aspect of the cerebral hemispheres.
CysticLesions
The midbrain will be found ventral to the cyst, and the
cerebellum will be caudal (Saito et al. 2001). Congenital
Crstic lesions can be produced by infectious disease or
cysts secondary to abnormal development or destruc-
neoplasia or may have no apparent cause (Cruz et al.
tion of brain parenchyma, such as in Dandy-Walker
2003) (Figure 1.18).
syndrome and porencephaly or hydranencephaly, can
sittal
pear
Choroid plexus cysts, intracranial arachnoid cysts,
also occur. Hydranencephaly is diagnosed when the
and epidermoid and dermoid cysts associated with the
cerebral hemispheres are absent or almost completely
area
fourth ventricle, quadrigeminal cistern, or cerebello-
absent (Cruz et al. 2003).
Skull
Vertebra
Figure 1.18.Cyst in the cerebellum of an 8-year-old terrier. The cyst was drained surgically, but an astrocytoma was later
which a well-defined, hypointense cystlike lesion is identified (*). C: Transverse sonogram of the cerebellum imaged from
the foramen magnum on which the cyst appears as a well-defined, oval, anechoic lesion (*). D: Longitudinal sonogram of the
cyst.The bone of the skull and vertebral column prevents visualization of portions of the brain and spine, but the part of the
brain (arrowheads) can be seen through the foramen magnum.A portion of the spinal cord (SC) can also be observed as it
of D.Penninck and S. Hecht.E and F:Sonograms of a 1-year-old Chihuahua with hydrocephalus and a quadrigeminal cyst.
E: Sagittal sonogram showing the quadrigeminal cyst (Q) and confluence of the dilated lateral ventricles (LV). F: Transverse
sonogram. LLV, left lateral ventricle; M, midbrain; and RLV, right lateral ventricle. Images courtesy of B. Poteet, Gulf Coast
VeterinarySpecialists,Houston.
24
25ATLASOF SMALL ANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
RLV
LLV
V
Fgure 1.18.Continued
Congenital Disease
Herniation of the cerebellum can obstruct CSF flow,
causing hydrocephalus and syringomyelia (Ettinger
Agenesisof the CorpusCallosum
and Feldman 2005).Chiari type I malformations have
Agenesis of the corpus callosum has been reported
been reported to occur in the Cavalier King Charles
uncommonly in dogs (Spaulding and Sharp 1990). In
breed,with anomalies of thefirst cervical vertebra and
people, sonographic findings include lateral separa-
skull, and in Maltese dogs (Kirberger et al. 1997). In
tion of the rostral horns and bodies of the lateral
some dogs, these conditions can be diagnosed by using
rentricles, elevation and variable dilation of the third
the foramen magnum to provide an acoustic window
rentricle, and dilation of the Occipital horns.The
in evaluating the cerebellum,fourth ventricle,spinal
bundles of Probst cause concavity of the medial wall
cord, and central canal.
of the lateral ventricles. In dogs, enlargement and
dorsal displacement of the third ventricle can be seen
Dandy-Walker-like Syndrome
Figure 1.19).
Acondition resembling Dandy-Walker syndrome
of children has been reported in a Boston terrier
Chiari-like Malformations
(Nourreddine et al. 2004). The puppy exhibited ataxia,
计
Chiari-like malformations are conditions in which
rolling, and intention tremors. Sonographic findings
thcrc is variablc pathology, such as malformation of
can include hypoplasia of the cerebellar vermis, con-
the craniovertebral junction, cerebellar dysplasia, and
fluence of the lateral ventricles, enlargement of the
elongation or displacement of portions of the cerebel-
third and lateral ventricles, and cystic lesions within
lum (Figure 1.20).
the cerebellum.A fluid accumulation sccnbetween the
LLV
Figure1.19.
Agenesis of the corpus callosum and hydrocephalus. Images of the brain of a young puppy with severe neu-
A: Rostral transverse sonogram showing marked dilation of the latcral ventricle. B: Transverse sonogram angled caudally to
image the vermis of the cerebellum. The third ventricle is enlarged and displaced dorsally. C: Parasagittal sonogram with the
ultrasound beam angled laterally to image the enlarged left lateral ventricle. D: Sagittal sonogram showing marked enlarge-
ment and dorsal displacement of the third ventricle.F: Radiograph of the brain after ventriculography was performed using
greatly dilated and displaced dorsally. 3, third ventricle; IA, interthalamic adhesion; LLV, left lateral ventricle; RLV, right
lateral ventricle; andV,vermis.
26
27ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
OB
C1
Figure 1.20. Chiari-like malformation. Sagittal (A) and transverse (B) sonographic images obtained through a large foramen
magnum in a dog with occipital dysplasia. The cerebellum (C, arrowheads) protrudes into the foramen, below the occipital
bone (OB). A tubular ancchoic fluid collection is observed along the middorsal portion of the cranial cervical spinal cord (SC),
consistent with syringomyelia (S). The fourth ventricle (4V) is also dilated. Malformation of the skull enables better visualiza-
tion of the brain than usual (compare with Figure 1.18). BS, brain stem; and CP, choroid plexus of the fourth ventricle. Images
courtesy of M. A. d'Anjou.
lateralventricles and thecerebellumwasdetermined
 decreased detail of the brain echotexlure might be
to be a cyst associated with the fourth ventricle.
apparent with ultrasonography either through a per-
sistent fontanel or by viewing the brain through the
foramen magnum (Figure 1.21).
Hypoplasia
Cerebellar hypoplasia, which is reduced size of the
Cerebrocortical hypoplasia has been reported to be
cerebellum because of abnormal development, can
caused by loss or abnormal proliferation and/or migra-
be caused byviral infections such as panleukopenia
tion of cortical neurons because of specific inherited
(feline parvovirus) in cats, toxins or other environmen-
abnormalities,toxins,in utero infections,or vascular
tal influences, or genetic abnormalities, or the cause
insults. In some cases, lack of development shown as
may be unknown.
Figure 1.21. Sonograms of a normal kitten and a kitten with abnormal brain development. A: Sonogram of a normal 1-
weck-old kitten next to the gross transverse section from a normal 1-month-old kitten. B: Sonogram of an 8-week-old kitten
with severe neurological deficits caused by cerebrocortical dysplasia and abnormal myelinization.The sonogram shows a
lack of detail compared with the normal kitten.The cause of this lack of detail is unknown.A gross transverse section from
the kitten is seen on the left. Note the decreased visualization of white matter tracks and decrcascd depth of sulci.
Figure 1.22. Cystic crebellar lesion in a dog. A: Sagittal T2-weighted spin echo magnetic resonance image showing a well-
C: Intraoperative sonogram showing the brain after drainagc of the cyst. The arrow indicates the area of the lesion after
suction. Images courtesy of D. Penninck and S. Hecht.
28
29ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES
 Ultrasound can be used intraoperatively to guide
needle placement for drainage of cystic lesions or
When the brain is examined intraoperatively, the probe
during debulking of brain masses to ensure complete
head should be coated with sterile acoustic gel and
removal of a mass and to localize vessels and minimize
enclosed in sterilized material, such as a surgical glove
hemorrhage (Figures 1.22 and 1.23).
or sterilized plastic wrap. Sterile probe sleeves are
Lesions with uncertain etiology can be biopsied
available commercially. Some of these extend for
using ultrasound to guide placement of the biopsy
somc distance along the probe cord to ensure sterility.
needle. Ultrasound can also guide insertion of tubes
Alternatively,the cord can be wrapped in sterilc clastic
for treatment of obstructive hydrocephalus or needles
bandaging material so that asepsis can be morc casily
for injection of drugs or chemotherapeutic agents into
maintained. Sterile physiological saline placed at the
thc lesion. Postoperative sonography can be used to
surgical site prevents drying of the tissues and achieves
evaluatc the surgical site (Figure 1.24).
an acoustic match between the probe and the brain.
A
Fluid
Fluid
Cyst
Figure 1.22
Figure 1.23.Cerebellar astrocytoma. A: Transverse sonogram of the brain of the 8-year-old terrier in Figures 1.13 and 1.18.
lesion with mild distal cnhancement (arrows).Fluid (F) can be seen at the surgical site. B:After drainage, only a smallamount
of fluid remains, as is evidenced by a small anechoic area (arrow). C: Subsequently, clinical signs recured.Magneticresonance
Adeouosen aaeadonu so paeu snoaid a jo re au u sem sseu e ie peaaau sueous pue sae
was used to measure the mass (M) prior to debulking. Histopathology revealed that the mass was an astrocytoma. Images
courtesy of D.Penninck and S.Hecht.
30
parasagittal sonogram. No mass lesions are visible, and biopsy findings suggested previous trauma. B: Postoperative para-
swelling after surgery. Ultrasonography was performed to check for a possible dural fistula. No dural cyst was seen, and the
lateral ventricles were normal. The dog recovered uneventfully. Arrows indicate the surface of the brain. F, fluid at the surgi-
cal site; LV, latcral ventricle; Mu, muscle under the crariotomy sile; and SS, splenial sulcus.
31
32 NERVOUS SYSTEM:BRAIN
REFERENCES
Hudson JA, Simpson ST, Cox NR, Buxton DF (1991)
Ultrasonographic examination of the normal canine neo-
natal brain.Vet Radiol 32:50-59.
Cruz R,Alvarado MS,Sandoval JE,Vilchez E(2003)Prenatal
Jaderlund KH, Hansson K, Berg A-L, Sjostrom A, Narfstrom
sonographic diagnosis of fetal death and hydranencephaly
K (2003) Cerebral ventricular size in developing normal
in two Chihuahua fetuses.Vet Radiol Ultrasound 44:589-
kittens mcasured by ultrasonography. Vet Radiol Utra-
592.
sound 44:581-588.
De Haan CE,Kraft SL,Gavin PR,Wendling LR,Griebenow
Kirberger RM, Jacobson I.S, Davies JV, Engela J (1997)
ML (1994) Normal variation in size of the lateral ventricles
Hydromyelia in the dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
of the Labrador retriever dog as assessed by magnetic
38:30-38.
resonance imaging. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 35:83-86.
Klopp LS, Hathcock JT, Sorjonen DC (2000) Magnetic reso-
Estave-Ratsch B, Kneissl S, Gabler C (2001) Comparative
nance inaging features of brain stem abscessation in two
evaluation of the ventricles in the Yorkshire Terrier and
cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 41:300-307.
the German Shepherd dog using low-field MRI. Vet Radiol
Nourreddinc C, Harder R, Olby NJ, Spaulding K, Brown T
Ultrasound 42:410-413.
(2004) Ultrasonographic appearance of Dandy Walker-like
Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC (2005) Primary Brain Diseases.
syndrome in a Boston terrier. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 45:
In:Ettinger SJ, ed. Textbook of Veterinary Internal
336-339.
Medicine, 6th edition. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, PP
Saito M,Olby NJ,SpauldingK (2001) Identification of arach-
820-835.
noid cysts in the quadrigeminal cistern using ultrasonog-
IHudson JA, Buxton DF, Cox NR, Finn-Bodner ST, Simpson
raphy.Vet Radiol Ultrasound 42:435-439.
ST, Wright JC, Wallace SS, Mitro A (1997) Color flow
Sailto M, Olby NJ, Spaulding K, Munana K,Sharp NJH (2003)
 Doppler imaging and Doppler spectral analysis of the
Relationship among basilararteryresistance index,degree
brain of neonatal dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 38:313-
 of ventriculomegaly, and clinical signs in hydrocephalic
322.
dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 44:667-694.
Hudson JA, Cartee RE, Simpson ST, Buxton DF (1989)
Schaller O (1992) Illustrated Veterinary Anatomical Nomen-
Ultrasonographic anatomy of the canine brain. Vet Radiol
clature.Stuttgart, Germany:Enke.
30:13-21.
 Spaulding KA, Sharp NJH (1990) Ultrasonographic imaging
Hudson LC, Cauzinille L, Kornegay JN, Tompkins MB (1995)
Magnetic rcsonance imaging of the normal feline brain.
31:59-64.
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 36:267-275.
Vullo T, Korenman E, Manzo RP, Gomez DG, Deck MDF,
Hudson JA, Simpson ST, Buxton DF, Cartee RE, Steiss JE
Cahill PT (1997) Diagnosis of cerebral ventriculomegaly in
(1990) Ultrasonographic diagnosis of canine hydrocepha-
normal adult beagles using quantitative MRI. Vet Radiol
lus. Vet Radiol 31:50-58.
Ultrasound 38:277-281.
SECTION 2
oine
Judith Hudson and Martin Kramer
SCANNING TECHNIQUE
graphic window. Vertebral bone lysis because of neo-
plasia orinfection can alsoprovide an acoustic window
Because of acoustic shadowing created by bone,
for the spinal cord. Additionally, the spinal cord may
ultrasonography of the spinal cord can usually be
be visible perinatally because of incomplete vertebral
performed only during or following surgical laminec-
ossification.
tomy, corpectomy, or foraminotomy (Nakayama 1993;
Gallagher et al. 1995) (Figures 1.25 and 1.26).
The cervical spinal cord can be partially visible
NORMAL SONOGRAPHIC
through the foramen magnum and between the atlas
ANATOMY OF THE SPINE
 and axis while the neck is fully flexed (Figure 1.27). In
addition, windows through ventral slot surgery or sur-
The spinal cord is relatively hypoechoic, the meninges
gical sites involving the caudal portion of the brain
are hyperechoic, and the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is
enable partial cvaluation of the cranial cervical spine
anechoic (Figure 1.31). The more superficial bright line
(Figures 1.27 and 1.28).
represents the dura mater and arachnoid together,
A portion of the lumbar spinal cord can be seen
whereas the deeper line represents the pia mater
through the intervertebral disc space either with a dor-
(Finn-Bodner et al. 1995).Anechoic CSF separates these
solateral approach through the lumbar musculature or
two hyperechoic lines. Centrally, one or two lines are
from the ventral aspect when performing abdominal
present at the location of the central canal. Deep to the
ultrasonography (Figures 1.29 and 1.30). Using a
ventral transabdominal approach, the spinal cord can 
the meninges. The surface of the bone deep to the
only be assessed at the disc space. Intervertebral disc
spinal cord and meninges appears as a thick hypere-
calcification and bridging spondylosis deformans can
choic line. Absorption of sound prevents imaging of
significantly limit its visibility.
structures deep to the bone.
The spinal cord is small and superficial, making a
Transverse images can be obtained if the available
high-frequency transducer (usually 7.5-12MHz) the
probe has a small footprint. In these images, the spinal
optimal choice. Transducers with a small footprint are
cord is hypoechoic with a circular or oval shape,
preferred to better fit the narrow surgical sites.Perhaps
whereas the central canal appears as a central hypere-
the most common use of spinal cord ultrasonography
choic dot (Finn-Bodner et al. 1995).
is intraoperatively to evaluate whether all disc mate-
The spinal cord is supplied by ventral and dorsal
rial has been removed from the spinal canal during a
branches of spinal artcrics that originate from verte-
laminectomy or cervical ventral slot surgery. Other
bral, thoracic vertcbral, and lumbar arteries. The
intraoperative applications include evaluation of the
ventral branches unite to form the ventral spinal artery,
cord because of trauma, suspected ncoplasia, develop-
from which a central branch supplies the central
mental abnormalities, and infection. For intraoperative
portion of the spinal cord. Both ventral and dorsal
applications, the probe must be placed in a long, sterile,
branches supply the spinal cord from the periphery.
plastic cover, and sterilc acoustic gel must be used.
Examination of intraparenchymal branches with
Postoperatively, the spinal cord can be monitored
 Doppler ultrasound has been described (Hudson et al.
if a remaining defect in the vertebra provides a sono-
1995).
33
Dura
Figure 1.25. Position of probe. Ilustration of a hemilami-
nectomy site of a dog with a sectorial probe positioned at the
surgical site to evaluate the spinal cord.
Figure 1.26.  Position of probe in a longitudinal plane on
the thoracolumbar spine in a dog with recent back surgery.
Both  longitudinal  and  transverse  images  should be
obtained.
Figure  1.27.  Normal  canine  cranial  cervical  spine.
 Longitudinal (A) and transverse (B) sonograms obtained at
the atlanto-occipital junction. C: Power Doppler mode of the
neighboring vessels at the same location. Arrowheads outline
the cranial portion of the cervical spine. The arrow points to
the central canal. At, lamina of the atlas; and Oc, occipital
bone.
34
the fourth ventricle (4) and spinal cord. CC, central canal of the spinal cord; and F, floor of the cranium. B: Longitudinal
sonogram made with the transducer moved slightly to the midline, making the central canal more visible. CC, central canal;
Thc arrowhead points to the brain-stem mass. CB, cerebellum; LV, lateral ventricle; and MO, medulla oblongata.
35
AO
CVC
AO
CVC
Figure 1.29
Figure 1.29.Ventral sonographic anatomy of the lumbar spine. A: Longitudinal sonogram and corresponding labeled
(arrows). B: Transverse sonogram and corresponding labeled schematic image at the level a disc. The spinal cord is observed
dorsally (arrow). C: Transverse sonogram and corresponding labeled schematic image at the level of the caudal aspect of the
Vertebral body. The arrowheads point to the shadowing associated with the vertebral body. AO, aorla; and CVC, caudal vena
cava. Images courtesy of D. Penninck.
Fgure 1.30.Normal lumbar spinc of a 3-month-old Samoycd dog.Sagittal sonogram of thc caudal lumbar spine in a puppy
Arrowheads point to vertebral bodies. E, vertebral end plates. Image courtesy of D. Penninck.
Fgure 1.31.Longitudinal sonograms of a normal canine spinal cord during surgery.The spinal cord (between the cursors)
s relatively hypoechoic, and the meninges are hyperechoic and outline the anechoic cerebrospinal fluid. CC, central canal;
 dura mater and arachnoid mater; E, epidural space; and p, pia mater. The bone interface is hyperechoic and hyperattenuat-
rglimiting evaluation of any structure deeper to it.
37
38 NERVOUS SYSTEM:SPINE
ship between the absence of oscillations and poor
SONOGRAPHY OF
outcome in some animals(Nakayama 1993).The
SPINAL DISORDERS
significance of the lack of oscillations remains
controversial.
Disc Herniation
chyma and therefore easily identified (Hudson et al.
Hemorrhage
1998). Herniated disc material may appear as amor-
In research studies evaluating the efficacy of various
phous, bright material with irregular margins (Figure
drugs for the treatment of spinal cord trauma, ultraso-
1.32). During surgery, sonography may assist the
nography was performed to document the appearance
surgeon in assessing complete rcmoval of disc frag-
 of hemorrhage (Finn-Bodner et al. 1995). Hemorrhage
ments. Acute compressive lesions tend to increase
 appeared as a hyperechoic region that obscured visu-
focally the spinal diameter and obliterate the central
alization of the linear echoes normally associated with
canal (Figure 1.33). In situ hemostatic gel or foam can
the spinal cord (Figure 1.35). Traumatic hematomas in
mimic the presence of disc material (Figure 1.34).
the vertebral canal are amorphous, inhomogeneous,
Some authors have reported oscillations in the
and irregularly marginated Jones et al. 1996; Rault
spinal cord that they attributed to pulsations in arterial
et al. 2004; Tanaka et al. 2006) (Figure 1.36).
branches and suggested that there might be a relation-
SC
Figure 1.32.Images of a dog with intervertebral disc herniation. A: Longitudinal sonogram made near the midline. A small
amount of hyperechoic disc material (arrows) is seen deep to the hypoechoic spinal cord (SC). Some hemorrhage (H) shows
as a hyperechoic region superficial to thc spinal cord. B: A larger amount of disc material (arrows) is apparent in this longi-
tudinal sonogram made more laterally. C: Computed tomographic image of the spinal cord of the same dog showing the
hyperdense disc material (arrow) on the right side of the midline.
39ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
CC
2.0-
Fgure 1.33.Compressive herniated disc material in the
Tetebral canal of a dog. The hyperechoic disc material
(arrowheads) has irregular margins and compresses the
spinal cord (SC). Part of the visible central canal (arrow) is
xeen away from the lesion. F, fluid at the surgical site.
Figure 1.35.Sonogram of a traumatized spinal cord in a
region (arrowheads) obscuring the linear echoes normally
seen in the spinal cord. CC, central canal.
Fgure 1.34. Successfully removed disc material in a dog.
Figure 1.36. Hematoma in a dog, 2 days after lumbar
Cmpressive disc material was removed at the C4-5 inter-
hemilaminectomy. On this sagittal sonogram, the irregular,
Tetebral disc space. The subarachnoid spaces and central
inhomogeneous,
zral (arrows) are normal; there is no evidence of cord com-
echotexture
lesion
represents
a
ression. The echogenic structure (arrowheads) seen dorsal
hematoma.
he spinal cord represents hemostatic foam in situ and
muld not be confused with disc material. F, fluid at surgery
(Figure 1.39). Multinodal or metastatic neoplasms,
site. Image courtesy of D. Penninck.
such as multiple myeloma and disseminated histio-
 cytic sarcoma, can affect multiple vertebral segments
and other body regions such as the abdomen, requir-
Neoplasia
ing complete body imaging in most cases. Serial
Ie appearance of neoplasia is nonspecific and varies
ultrasound cxaminations may alsohelp to evaluate
inechogenicity and uniformity (McConnell et al. 2003;
progression of neoplastic disease or response to
Ianaka et al. 2006) (Figures 1.37 and 1.38). Tumors
chemotherapy.
may arise from the vertebrae or soft tissues of the
sinal canal, such as the meninges or spinal cord. The
Cystic Lesions
eact location or origin and nature of the lesion cannot
Spinal arachnoid or intradural cysts have been reported
ame. Tumors arising from neurological tissue may
as cystlike lesions in the subarachnoid space of dogs
pearinunexpected locations such as the kidney
and cats (Galloway et al. 1999). These are not lined
40NERVOUS SYSTEM:SPINE
Figure 1.39.Neuroblastoma in the kidney of a cat. The
large mass deforms the contours of the kidney and is hetero-
gencous, with both hypoechoic and hyperechoic areas inter-
Figure 1.37.Intramedullary tumor (sarcoma) in a dog. On
mingled. Only a smallportion of the kidney was recognizable
this longitudinal sonogram obtained after dorsal laminec-
as renal tissue (not shown)
spinal canal (c). Fl, fluid at the surgery site.
C6
tetraparesis. A dorsal laminectomy was performed at C5-6. A: Longitudinal sonogram at the laminectomy site showing a
hypoechoic mass (M) compressing and flattening the spinal cord (C). The central canal (arrow) cannot be visualized where
compression is greatest on this plane. B: Transverse sonogram at C5-6. The spinal cord is flattened and displaced laterally
although the central canal is visible (arrow) on this image. A small amount of hemorrhage appears bright and can be seen
on the ventral surface of the mass. D, intervertebral disc at C5-6. C: Sagittal magnetic resonance image showing the mass
(arrows) dorsal to the spinal cord (C) at C5-6.C5, body of the fifth cervical vertebra; and C6, body of the sixth cervical
vertebra.
with a secreting epithelium and therefore not consid-
compressed spinal cord may be increased in echo-
ered as true cysts.
genicity.The line thought to represent the pia in normal
The fluid contents may be anechoic to isoechoic to
animals is not always visiblc (Galloway et al. 1999)
the spinal cord (Galloway et al. 1999). The lesions can
After drainage of arachnoid or intradural cysts, the
appcar septated with irregular hyperechoic lines. An
 spinal cord can be monitored for rccurrence by using
irrcgular and thickened dura may be present. The
the surgical site as an acousticwindow (Hudson et al.
central canal may or may not be recognized, and the
1998).
41ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
Syringomyelia
Vertebral andPerivertebralChanges
Dilation of the central canal with an ependymal lining
Many changes—such as malformation (spina bifida),
(hydromyelia) and cavitation within the spinal cord
spondylosis, spondylarthrosis, or articular facet osteo-
lacking an ependymal lining (syrinx), a combined con-
arthrosis, osteomyelitis, discospondylitis, fracture, and
dition known as syringomyelia,can occur secondary
tumor—can affect the shape and echogenicity of the
to numerous conditions (Rusbridge et al. 2006).
vertebral and perivertebral structures.
Syringomyelia has been mainly described in relation
Ventral spondylosis bridges two vertebral bodies
to Chiari type I-like malformation syndrome in
 along the ventral longitudinal ligament and appears as
Cavalier King Charles spaniels and other small breeds
a hyperechoic bridge associated with acoustic shadow-
of dogs. Other processes such as trauma, neoplasia,
ing. The disc at that space cannot be visualized.
intracranial epidermoid cysts, and arachnoiditis can
Spondylarthrosis or articular facet osteoarthrosis is
lead to this condition (Kirberger et al. 1997; MacKillop
visible as hyperechoic, irregularly lined surfaces over
et al. 2006; Rusbridge et al. 2006) (Figure 1.40).
the joint space and is associated with acoustic shadow-
In all cases, syringomyelia is thought to occur as a
ing (Figure 1.42).
consequence of altered CSF dynamics (Rusbridge et al.
In discospondylitis, a ventral approach to thc
2006). Concurrent myelomalacia might also be found,
 affected disc enables visualization of a partial or com-
with a tendency to increase the spinalcord echogenicity
plete loss of the fiber organization of the discs. The
with an obliteration of the central canal (Figure 1.41).
vertebral hyperechoic contours become irregular and
may be interrupted by the presence of hypoechoic or
anechoic lytic foci. A hypoechoic area of swelling is
Meningocele
Tethering of the spinal cord with an associated menin-
gucele, extramedullary intradural cyst, and lipoma
was sonographically evaluated in a Manx-type cat
Plummer et al. 1993). The lipoma appeared as a hyper-
echoic region located within a hypoechoic tract repre-
sp
senting the meningocele.A hyperechoic linearstructure
located within the meningocele was believed to be the
filum terminale, although this could not be confirmed
on histology.
Figure 1.41. Myelomalacia in a dog. Sagittal sonogram of
a segment of spine (sp) after laminectomy and durotomy.
The cord is uniformly mildly echogenic, and the central canal
is not visible. Anechoic fluid is noted in the near field, placed
to serve as an acoustic window.
Fgure 1.40.Syringomyelia in a Cavalier King Charles
aniel with Chiari typeI-likemalformation syndrome.
Longitudinal image obtained at the level of the atlantoaxial
Figure 1.42.Articular facet osteoarthrosis in a dog.Sagittal
xtion.The dilated central canal (between the cursors)
easures 2.5 mm in diameter. At, atlas; and Ax, axis.
choic surface at the level of the articular facets (AF).
42 NERVOUS SYSTEM:SPINE
often seen laterally and ventrally to the disc space. The
Primary bony tumors or metastases are visible as
 irregular and inhomogeneous areas destroying the
surrounding fat or muscles may also be affected.
 Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspirates of the affected
hyperechoic bony structure (Figure 1.44). The involved
discs can be done (Rault et al. 2004; Packer et al.
soft tissue usually appears more hypoechoic than
normal, with irregular borders.
2005).
 r e se se ss rs 
Fractures of the vertebral bodies can be visualized
as interruptions of the continuous hyperechoic line of
anechoic, inhomogeneous to homogeneous area with
irregular and ill-defined margins. Neighboring organs
the surface of the bone. In acute cases, an inhomoge-
may be affected. In some cases, a foreign body can be
neous, mixed echotexture hematoma can be seen at the
identified within the abscess. Foreign material often
fracture site.
appears as hyperechoic with or without acoustic shad-
Postoperative seromas can be observcd at the inci-
owing (Figure 1.43) (Packer et al. 2005).
sion sites. They often are regularly marginated and
二
Figure 1.43. Sublumbar abscess with foreign bodies (wooden sticks) in a dog. Sagittal (A) and transverse (B) sonograms of
the swollen, inhomogeneous, and mostly hypoechoic sublumbar region. The wooden sticks appear as hyperechoic linear
interfaces (fb and arrows). In the far field, the surface of the adjacent vertebral bodies is irregular, most likely because of
periostitis.
Figure 1.44. Vertebral osteosarcoma in a dog. Sagittal sonogram (A) and schematic labeled image (B). The ventral cortical
surface of this lunbar vertebral body is moderately irregular and interrupted (arrowheads). An inhomogeneous and mostly
hypoechoic soft-tissue mass (M) extends along the ventral aspect of the vertebra.N,normal adjacent vertebra. Imagc courtesy
of D.Penninck
43ATLAS OF SMALLANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
dogs and cats: 15 cases (1988-1993). J Am Vet Med Ass0c
207:1320-1324.
Galloway AM, Curtis NC, Sommerlad SF, Watt PR (1999)
Correlative imaging findings in seven dogs and one
cat with spinal arachnoid cysts. Vct Radiol Ultrasound
40:445-452.
Hudson JA, Finn-Bodner ST, Coates JR, et al. (1995) Color
 Doppler imaging and Doppler spectral analysis in the
spinal cord of normal dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
36:542-547.
Hudson JA, Finn-Bodner ST，S
Steiss JE (1998) Neur0-
sonography. Vet Clin North Am Small Animal Pract
28:943-971
Jones JC, Hudson JA, Sorjonen DC, ct al. (1996) Effects of
experimental nerve root compression on arterial blood
Figure 1.45. Seroma at a recent hemilaminectomy site in a
flow velocity in the seventh lumbar spinal ganglion of the
iog. Sagittal sonogram of a hypoechoic and inhomogeneous
dog: Measurement using intraoperative Doppler ultraso-
lesion with irregular margins, representing a superficial
nography. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 37:133-140.
seroma (S) at the surgical site.
Kirberger RM, Jacobson LS, Davies JV, Engela J (1997)
Hydromyelia in the dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
38:30-38.
MacKillopE,SchatzbergSJ,deLahuntaA(2006)Intracranial
hypoechoic to anechoic, with or without thin linear
epidermoid cyst and syringohydromyelia in a dog. Vet
hyperechoic septa (Figure 1.45).
Radiol Ultrasound 47:339-344.
McConnell JF, Garosi LS, Dennis R, Smith KC (2003) Imaging
of spinal nephroblastoma in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES
44:537-541.
Nakayama M (1993) Intraoperative spinal ultrasonography
Intraoperative ultrasonography can be useful in deter-
in dogs: Normal findings and case-history reports. Vet
mining whether herniated disc material remains in the
Radiol Ultrasound 34:264-268.
vertebral canal or foramina(Nakayama 1993).The use
Nanai B, Lyman R, Bichscl P (2006) Intraoperative use of
ultrasonography during continuous dorsal laminectomy
of spinal ultrasonography has also been described
in tow dogs with caudal cervical vertebral instability and
during dorsal laminectomy in dogs with caudal cervi-
malformation ("Wobbler syndrome"). Vet Surg 35:465-
calvertebral instability and malformation to ensure
469.
that the spinal cord has been adequately decompressed
Packer RA, Coates JR, Cook CR,Lattimer JC, O'Brien DP
Nanai et al. 2006). Sonography can also be useful for
(2005) Sublumbar abscess and discospondylitis in a cat.
aluating cystic lesions after drainage to ensure that
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 46:396-399.
fluid has not recurred (Hudson et al. 1998). As in other
Plummer SB, Bunch SE, Khoo LH, Spaulding KA, Korncgay
locations, ultrasound-guided aspirates or tissue-core
JN (1993) Tethered spinal cord and an intradural lipoma
biopsies of focal lesions can be done if a satisfactory
associated with a meningocele in a Manx-type cat. J Am
acoustic window is available.
Vet Med Assoc 203:1159-1161
Rault DN, Besso JG, Ruel Y, et al. (2004) Ultrasonography of
discospondylitis: Seven dogs and three cats. In: Annual
Scientific Conference of the European Association of
REFERENCES
Veterinary Diagnostic Imaging, September 8-11, Ghent,
Belgium, p 151.
Fmn-Bodner ST, IIudson JA, Coates JR, et al. (1995)
Rusbridge C, Greitz D, Iskandar BJ (2006) Syringomyelia:
Ultrasonographic anatomy of the normal canine spinal
cord and correlation with histopathology after induced
ment. J Vet Intern Med 20:469-479.
spinal cord trauma.Vet Radiol Ultrasound 36:39-48
Tanaka H, Nakayama M, Takase K (2006) Intraoperative
Gallagher JG, Penninck D, Boudriaux RJ, Schelling SH (1995)
Lltrasonography of the brain and vertebral canal in
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47:99-102.
SECTION 3
PERIPHERAL NERVES
Martin Kramer and Judith Hudson
SCANNING TECHNIQUE
more easily compressed than the arteries.Normal
nerves are small (2-3mm) linear hypoechoic structures
Because of their small size and superficial location,
 outlined by bright walls.
The axillary lymph nodes located adjacent to the
frequency (>10MHz) linear transducers. If needed, a
vessels are smooth ovoid, homogeneous, and echo-
stand-off pad can be used to place the nerve into the
 genic structures. Sometimes the hilar fat can be seen as
focal zone. Color flow Doppler imaging can be useful
a hyperechoic line in the center of the parenchyma.
in differentiating vessels from nerves. Imaging in mul-
tiple planes and following structures distally can also
be helpful. In addition, nerves are not compliant to
SONOGRAPHIC FEATURES OF
pressure, unlike vessels, and moving a limb can help
PERIPHERAL NERVE
in differentiating a tendon from a nerve.
The region of the brachial plexus can be scanned
DISORDERS
with lower-frequencyprobes, depending on the size of
the dog. The patient is placed in lateral recumbency
Rupture
with the affccted limb up. The plexus is assessed with
Rupture or transection of nerves can occur associated
the limb fully extcndcd and abducted.The axilla is
with fractures, sharp-object penetration, or other inju-
examined with the probe positioned craniocaudally
ries. Research has shown that nerve degenerates
(perpendicular to the limb axis).
rapidly after transection.Wallerian degeneration in
the distal scgmcnt causes a breakdown of myeliniza-
tion that is more severc in the more distal portion. The
NORMAL SONOGRAPHIC
proximal stumpundergoes traumatic degeneration
ANATOMY OF PERIPHERAL
and is more likely to be visualized.After injury, loss
of visualization of the distal segment strongly suggests
NERVES
rupture.It is important,however,to remember that
nerves often dive into or between muscular and tendi-
In longitudinal section, nerves appear as tubular
hypoechoic structures with linear echogenic walls
nous structures.Knowledge of anatomy is necessary
to ensure that the nerve is transected and has not
(Hudson et al. 1996). The midportion of the nerve is
mainly hypoechoic, with small dispersed hyperechoic
alteredcourse.
Serial examination can be useful to determine if
internal echoes (Figure 1.46). The walls of nerves are
brighter and better defined than vessels walls; vascular
there is any evidence of repair after injury. In some
animals, a neuroma may form at the site of transection,
walls are less distinct. In transverse section, nerves are
circular or oval hypoechoic structures.
raphy. Regeneration has been described as irregular
The brachial plexus can also be evaluated. In the
regrowth with or without neuroma formation.
axilla, the largest structures are the axillary vessels
(arteries and veins), which appear tubular and anechoic,
with smooth hyperechoic walls (Figure 1.47).By
DemyelinizationWithoutRupture
means of Doppler ultrasonography, veins can be dis-
tinguished from arteries by their Doppler signature,
Demyelinization also can occur after trauma or inflam-
larger size, and lack of visible pulsation. They can be
mation that is not severe enough to cause transection.
45ATLAS OF SMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
TROC
structure with small hyperechoic internal echoes, outlined by linear hyperechoic walls. A: Proximal portion of thc ncrve
(arrows) near the greater trochanter (troc). B: Normal sciatic nerve in the midfemoral region showing sharp linear echogenic
walls (arrows). The nerve measures 2.5mm in diameter.
useful in determining whether compression has caused
demyelinization or other abnormalities in the affected
nerve.
Neoplasia
Peripheral nerve sheath tumors in the brachial plexus
of dogs were described as hypoechoic tubular struc-
tures (Rose et al. 2005) or as fusiform masses exhibit-
ing mixed echogenicity (Platt et al. 1999) (Figures 1.49
 and 1.50). These tumors can occur in unusual locations
such as the thorax (Essman et al. 2002).
Figure 1.47. Normal brachial plexus in a dog. The brachial
plexus (arrow) is present between the round anechoic vas-
OtherDisordersof theBrachialPlexus
cular structures (v). The nerves are poorly echogenic and
slightly inhomogeneous.M, adjacent muscle
In acute partial or complete avulsions of the brachial
plexus, a hypoechoic to anechoic, inhomogeneous,
and irregularly demarcated area is seen in the axillary
region. This area represents the hematoma. Torn nerve
tissue can usually not be seen sonographically.
In such cases, the nerve is poorly visualized distal to
Tumors of the brachial plexus can usually be visual-
the site of injury.Comparisonwith the nerve on the
healthy contralateral side is helpful (Figurc 1.48).
from hyperechoic to anechoic areas (Figure 1.51), and
can be inhomogeneous.
Compression
Metastases to the axillary lymph nodes in the area
Nerve compression can be caused by local masses
of the brachial plexus can also beidentified.Affected
such as neoplasms or hematomas, by incorrectly
lymph nodes are typically rounded, moderately to
applied external bandaging, or by compartmental syn-
severely enlarged, and mildly to moderately inhomo-
drome. Carpal tunnel syndrome in people causes
geneous. The hilar fat usually disappears. A definitive
swelling of the median nerve that can be imaged
diagnosis canbeobtainedby ultrasound-guided needle
external to the carpal tunnel. Ultrasonography can be
biopsy
46 NERVOUS SYSTEM:PERIPHERAL NERVES
A
B
Figure 1.48.Sonogram of the right sciatic nerve in a dog with neurological deficits. Compare these images with those of
the left sciatic nerve of the same dog shown in Figure 1.1. A: Sciatic nerve (arrows) near the greater trochanter. B: Sciatic
nerve near the midfemoral region (arrows). The nerve has a variable diameter and irregular interrupted walls (arrows). The
nerve is swollen in the midfcmoral region and measures 2.9 mm.
Figure 1.49. Median nerve sarcoma in a dog.A 20-mm-
long by 5-mm wide, mostly hypoechoic lesion (arrowheads)
is distal and medial to the elbow joint, along the path of the
mediannerve
Figure 1.51.Brachial plexus tumor.A large (2cm long by
1cm wide), well defined, oval and poorly echogenic mass
(arrowheads) is in the axillary region of this Bernese moun-
tain dog that presented with lamencss.A histiocytic sarcoma
was identified.
raphy can be used to monitor the nerves and deter-
mine whether healing is occurring. Sonography could
Figure 1.50. Radial nerve sheath tumor.A large (5cm
also be useful in the resection of masses associated
long) mass (arrows) is on the cranial aspect of the left elbow
withnerves
limb muscle atrophy. The elongated mass is well defined
and inhomogeneously hypoechoic. Image courtesy of K.
Spaulding.
REFERENCES
INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES
Essman SC, Hoover JP,Bahr RJ, Ritchey JW, Watson C (2002)
An intrathoracic malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor
Ultrasonography can be used to guide fine-needle
 in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 43:255-259.
aspirations or biopsies, or to locate nerve endings prior Hudson JA, Steiss JE, Braund KG, Toivio-Kinnucan M (1996)
to surgical repair. Following anastomosis, ultrasonog-
Ultrasonography of peripheral nerves during wallrian
47ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
degeneration and regeneration following transection. Vet
Rose S, Long C, Knipe M, Hornof B (2005) Ultrasonographic
Radiol Ultrasound 37:302-312.
evaluation of brachial plexus tumors in five dogs. Vet
Platt SR, Graham J, Chrisman CL, et al. (1999) Magnetic reso-
Radiol Ultrasound 46:514-517.
nance imaging and ultrasonography in the diagnosis of
a malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor in a dog. Vet
RadiolUltrasound 40:367-371.
CIIAPTER TWO
EYE AND ORBIT
Kathy Spaulding
PREPARATION AND
able is recommended.Transducers with a range from
SCANNING TECHNIQUE
7.5- to 50-MHz range are used to image the globe and
orbit. The 25- to 50-MHz transducers are generally
ocular specificbecause they are designed for optimally
There are three primary methods for imaging the
imaging the near-field structures within the globc.
globe:directly on the cornea,through the eyelid,or
They are excellent forresolution of the cornea,anterior
imaging through a water bath over the globe.
chamber, iris, ciliary body, and lens. The vitreous body
Imaging with the transducer applied directly on the
and the retrobulbar area are often best imagedwith
cornea, which is the method most frequently used,
the 7.5-to 13-MHz transducers.A linear transducer
produces the highest-quality images (Figure 2.1).
provides optinum imaging of the near-field struc-
Artifacts and image degradation occur whenimaging
tures, but manipulating a sector or convex probe with
through the eyelid. The technique of imaging through
a small footprint may be easier.
the closed lid is recommended if there is a deep corneal
The patient's eyelids are manually held open by the
ulcer,recent severe globe trauma,or recent ocular
restrainer while the head is secured (Hager et al. 1987;
surgery. Using a water bath helps to image the near
Dziezyc et al. 1988). Large-breed dogs are often more
field (anterior chamber). However,a water bath is
cumbersome to hold in position and not often used or
the globe into the orbit and thus limit access to the eye.
needed with current ultrasound equipment.The
The globes of brachiocephalic breeds are generally
recently available high-resolution transducers either
more accessible.
have a water bath attached to the transducer or do not
Geometrically speaking,the globe is nearly a sphere.
require a water bath to image the superficial structures
It is important to identify the direction of the beam;
of the globe.
that is,whereit enters the globe and the corresponding
 The examination is generally performed with the
location on the opposite side of it. The globe should be
dogs awake.For the safety of the imager and the
imaged in sagittal, dorsal, and transverse planes
patient, mild scdation of an unruly paticnt may be
(Figures 2.3-2.8). Selected oblique planes are used to
advised if manual restraint is inadequate to sccurcly
delineate a lesion better.The entire globe is syste
position it.If the animal is heavily sedated or anesthe-
matically scanned with a fanning motion. The globc is
tized, then the globe tends to rotate ventrally. The
scanned from one sideto the other in each sagittal and
angle of the incident beam through the eye is then
dorsal plane and from rostrally to caudally in a trans
affected.With a transducercovering the surface of the
verse plane.Access to the posterior section of the globe
globe, seeing the direction of gaze of the globe may be
is often more difficult in patients with a retracted
difficult (Figure 2.2).
globe. The zygomatic salivary gland, located ventrally
This is important when localizing a lesion within the
to the globe, can be imaged with the probe placed
globe. A topical anesthetic is applied at a dose of 1-2
ventrolaterally to the zygomatic arch (Figure 2.9).
drops to the cormea 2-5min prior to the examination.
Doppler imaging or standardized A-mode scanning
Different acoustic coupling gels can be used. A
may provide additional vascular and measurement
sterile, water-soluble lubricating acoustic gel approved
information.
for the eye is recommended. It is important that the gel
Appropriate positional markers identifying the loca-
does not contain preservatives or perfumes. At the end
tion of the transducer relative to the globe are docu-
of the examination, the gel should be flushed from the
mented on the image and changed with new positions.
eve with approved sterile eyewash.
High-frequency transducers are selected depending
image to identify the nasal (medial) aspect for a hori-
on the equipment available and the region of the eye
 zontal plane and superior (dorsal) for a vertical plane
and orbit to be imaged. The highest resolution avail-
(Figures 2.3 and 2.5).
49
Figure 2.1. Probe placement. Images can be made either through the eyelid (left) or directly on the cornea. Imaging directly
 on the cornea produces the best images. This rcquires digitally retracting the eyelids (right)
Figure2.2.
2.Directions of the gaze. The direction of the gaze influences the globe section displayed. Control of the direction
of the gaze is limited. Whcn the transducer is placed over the globe, the direction of the gaze is often obscured. This can lead
to erroneous location of a lesion within the eye.
Ventral
Dorsal
Figure 2.3.Sagittal plane. A sagittal plane through the eye divides it into right and left halves. The near ficld of the image
is on the cornea and anterior chamber.The far field represents the vitreous and retina.The dorsal part is by convention placed
On the left of the image. AC, anterior chamber; L,lens; and V, vitrcous body.
50
51ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
4
6
5
CENTRAL
3
6
into right and lefthalves. The globe is then scanned from one side to the othcr to obtain a complete view of the entire globe
(planes 1-6). When imaging from one side of the eye, the opposite side of the far side of the globe is displayed.
Medial
Lateral
AC
Figure 2.5. Dorsal plane. A dorsal plane divides the globe into dorsal and ventral halves. The image should be displayed
such that the right side of the image represents the medial (nasal) side of the eye. AC, anterior chamber; L, lens; and V, vitre-
ousbody.
The directional terms used with reference to the
carth.The central axis of the eye is an imaginary
globe are anterior and posterior (rostral to caudal),
line from the center of the cornea (anterior pole) to
superior and inferior (dorsal to ventral), and medial
the posterior center of the sclera (posterior pole)
and lateral (nasal to tcmporal). The planes and axis of
(Figure 2.10).
the globe can be thought of in similar terms as those
This is analogous to the axis of the earth between
of thclongitudinal and latitudinal directions of the
the north and south poles. The degrees around the
#
5
5
CENTRAL
6
Figure 2.6. Array of dorsal planes. The central image represents the dorsal plane through the globe with equal divisions
into dorsal and ventral halves. The globe is then scanned from dorsal to ventral to include the entire globe (planes 1-6).
Figure 2.7.Transverse plane. A transverse image of the globe can bc achieved by placing the transducer at the limbus and
52
Figure 2.8. Retro-orbital scanning. Both longitudinal (left) and transverse (right) images should be made of the retro-orbital
region to include the orbital cone. This is achieved by placing the transducer caudal to the eye and dorsal to the zygomatic
arch.
VF13-
6.7mm
Figure 2.9. Zygomatic gland scanning. A: Images of the zygomatic salivary gland are obtained by placing the transducer
Tentral to the zygomatic arch and caudoventral to the globe. B: The zygomatic salivary gland is identified as a well-defined
echogenic tissue (between the cursors) with a thin capsule located deep to the zygomatic arch depicted by the hyperechoic
rentral to the globe. D: Corresponding parasagittal magnetic resonance image.
53
54EYE AND ORBIT
globe in each plane can be thought of in terms of the
hours on the face of a clock. Using the central axis as
a central reference point, there are two primary per-
pendicular planes: The equatorial (transverse) and the
meridional (longitudinal) planes are perpendicular to
each other.
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC
ANATOMY OF THE
NORMAL EYE
 Ultrasound imaging of the orbit primarily consists of
the globe (eyeball or bulbus oculi) and ocular adnexa,
including the tissues within the periorbital cone in the
retro-orbital area (optic nerve,extrinsic ocular muscles,
vessels, fat, and surface of adjacent orbital bone) and
the soft tissues and glands (lacrimal gland and zygo-
 matic salivary gland) around the globe.
Figure 2.10. Central axis of the globe. This central line
The globe is composed of two chambers (the ante-
rior and the posterior) and the vitreal body (Figure
(arrow) is the pivotal line through the center of the globe.
This is the central reference point.Two planes perpendicular
2.11). The globe contains the uveal tract (vascular
and intersecting this reference point are the equatorial and
tract), which consists anteriorly of the iris and ciliary
the meridional planes. Localization of a lcsion on a round
body and posteriorly of the choroid. A single lens is
 globe without specific landmarks is achieved by using these
secured between the anterior part of the eye and the
 planes and thc positions around the clock.
A
AC
VB
Posterior
Chamber
Figure 2.11. Normal ocular globe. A: The globe contains the anterior chamber, the posterior chambcr, and the vitreous
body. B: The three chambers are identified on this ultrasound image. Lach chamber contains anechoic fluid. The anterior
chamber (AC) is bordered by the cornea (C) anteriorly and the iris (I) posteriorly. The posterior chamber is a smallarea located
55ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
vitreous body.The retina represents the innermost
tivc line is the corneal surface. The stroma is low
 of the three layers of the globe wall in the posterior
rcflective, with a second highly reflective line at the
segment.
endothelium or Descemet's membrane.
The corneoscleral junction (limbus) is defined by
chamber, posterior chamber, and vitreous body) have
the transition belween thelowly reflective cornea and
an anechoic appearance, with few reflectors present
highly reflective sclera. The sclera is imaged as a highly
(Figure 2.11). It is best evaluated with a frequency of
reflective structure compared with the cornea.The
25MHz or greater. The thickness of the cornea and
sclera can usually be differentiated from overlying
various parts of the eyehas been recorded in different
episclera and underlying ciliary body and retina
species (Schiffer et al. 1982; Cottrill et al. 1989; Boroffka
(Figure2.13)
et al. 2006).
The anterior chamber can be difficult to image
 Depending on the probe frequency, the cornea pres-
because of its compressibility, size, and location in the
ents as a single or double parallel echogenic line with
near field. The anterior chamber is delineated by the
an anechoic center (Figure 2.12). The first highly reflec-
cornea, the iris, and the central anterior lens capsule.
A
Sclera
Corne
AC
AC
VB
D
Fgure 2.12. Normal cornea. The cornea is best seen with a 25- to 50-MHz transducer. The cornea has two parallel lines
mith an anechoic to mildly echogenic center. A: High-resolution sonogram of the cornea. B: The junction is imaged with a
-MHz transducer. The corneal-scleral junction is defined by the transition between the two parall lines with an anechoic
SC: The corneal-scleral junction, anterior chamber (AC), anterior lens capsule (arrowhead), and part of the iris (I). The
ea surface is slightly flattened by the standoff. D: Scheimatic representation of these structures.VB,vitreous body
58EYEAND ORBIT
(Figure 2.17), allows varying amounts of light to pen-
epithelium, which lies on the surface of the ciliary
etrate to the retina on the posterior surface of the globe.
process. The ciliary body contains muscle fibers that
The muscles in the iris control the pupil size. The pupil
regulate the shapc of the lens. The lens is supported at
appears as a circular void in the iris. When the pupil
enuoz) suu rosudsns ou Aq ropnba 
fibers). The zonules are scen as striations that attach to
is constricted or when the beam is off axis,the iris may
bemistaken for the anterior surface of thelens.The
the lens contour. The iris, ciliary body, and zonules are
iris,which is the anatomical demarcation between the
often best imaged from a transverse or oblique view.
anterior and posterior chambers, is contiguous at
The lens is composed of a capsule, anterior epithe-
the equatorial plane in the periphery of the globe to
lium, lens fibers, and nucleus. The capsule is like an
the ciliary body. The ciliary body is highly vascular
envelope that encases the lens. The lens fibers that
and at the junction with the choroid forms the ora
make up the majority of the lens are positioned in
serrata. The aqucous humor is produced by the ciliary
layers with the cortex forning the outer layer of the
represent four varying sizes of the pupil (arrows) as imaged from a transverse plane.
59ATLAS OFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
Figure 2.18.Normal lens. When the sound beam interacts with the surface of the lens, there is a change in acoustic imped-
ance and a strong reflection is produced. This is seen as a thin curvilinear hyperechoic line on both the anterior and posterior
surfaces of the normal lens. The position changes depending on the angle at which the incident beam hits the lens, which is
the entire curve of the lens. A-C: In the thrcc images, note the change in position of the specular reflection (arrows) as the
angle through the globe is changed.
lens and the nucleus located in the center. The lens is
 primarily supported in place by the zonular ligaments
at the equator. The vitreous body contributes to main-
tain the lens position posteriorly.
The internal appearance of the normal lens is
anechoic. Curvilinear hyperechoic interfaces appcar
at the anterior and posterior margins of the lens, as
the result of specular reflection, when scanned per-
pendicularly. This reflection is caused by the acoustic
impedance difference between the fluid in the anterior
chamber and the sound interacting with the surface of
the lens (Figure 2.18). The peripheral curved margins
of the normal lens are not seen.The surface of the lens
is smooth and slightly convex. The size of the lens
varies with the species. The anterior surface of the
lens can be dificult to separate from the iris unless the
pupil is dilated. The normal nucleus has the same
appearance as the cortex of the lens. The lens can
Figure 2.19. Braum's bump artifact. This may produce an
produce artifacts as the sound is accelerated through
abnormal shape to the posteriorwall of the globe.This occurs
it, and because of its shape, the sound may be refracted.
because of refraction of the sound asthe sound goes through
This is manifested in the posterior chamber and the
the lens. The bent or refracted sound may then be reflected
posterior wall as Baum's bumps with an abnormal
from a more anterior and closer part of the globe. The echoes
shape to the globe (Figure 2.19).
are then displayed at a wrong position and appear to be
Posterior to the lens and extending to the posterior
"bumps" (arrow) on the posterior surface of the globe. When
aspect of the globe is the vitreal body, which fills the
the sound goes through the center ofthe lens, refraction does
vitreous cavity. This vitreous body is a thick, acellular,
not occur, and the posterior wallis not foreshortencd.
gelatinous structure composed of 98% water, muco-
polysaccharides, and hyaluronic acid. The vitreous
forms the hyaloid fossa, a fibrillar dense indentation,
cavity is bounded by the lens zonules and posterior
to adapt the posterior surface of the lens. The vitreous
capsule anteriorly and retina posteriorly (Figure 2.20).
body is densely packed at the posterior surface of the
The vitreous body attaches primarily at thc region of
lens except at the posterior pole of the lens, where it
the optic disc (vitreous base) and at the ora scrrata and
encircles the attachiment of the hyaloid canal(Cloquet's
60EYE AND ORBIT
Figure 2.20.Normal vitreous body and cavity. The vitreal body is a thick, acellular, round, gelatinous mass that is normally
anechoic and is located in the vitreous cavity.It is bounded by the retina, choroid, and sclera posteriorly and the ciliary body
A: Sagittal plane B: Transverse-obliquc.
 Or central canal) (Figure 2.21). This canal extends from
the posterior surface of the lens through the vitreous
body to the optic disc on the posterior surface of the
globe. This potential space in the vitreous body con-
tains the hyaloid artery in an embryonic eye (Figure
2.22). Remnants of this vessel may be present in adults.
The posterior surface of the vitreal body, located in
close proximity to the retina, does not have a true
membrane but is referred to as the posterior hyaloid
membrane.
The posterior wall of the globe is formed by a thin,
hyperechoic, smooth layer that represents the com-
bined layers of the sclera, choroid, and retina.There is
notcleardemarcationbetweenthethreelayersinthe
normal globe. The retina is the most anterior, and the
sclera forms the posterior layer. The retina extends
from the opticnerve to the ora serrata located just
posteriorly to the ciliary body. Located slightly ven-
trally and mcdially in the posterior wall of the globe
in dogs and cats is the optic disc. The optic nerve
courses in a straight or undulating course from the
Figure 2.21.Hyaloid canal. This may be seen as faint mem-
posterior surface of the globe at the optic disc into the
branes extending from thc posterior surface of the lens to the
periorbita of the retrobulbar rcgion to the optic canal
optic disc. When vitreal degeneration occurs, this area may
in the skull (Figure 2.23).
bc more evident (between the arrows). On this dorsal plane,
The retrobulbar space (periorbital cone), which
includes the extrinsic ocular muscles, the optic nerve,
present, but the canal is echo free.
Figure 2.22.Fetal eye.This is the globe of an approximately
54-day-old fetus. Note the straight line from the posterior
surface of the lens to the posterior surface of the globe.This is
a patent hyaloid vessel supplying nutrition to the lens. This
vessel typically is not present after birth.
A
B
Figure 2.23. Normal optic disc and nerve. The optic disc and nerve in dogs and cats are located slightly ventrally and
medially on the posterior wall of the globe. A: The angle of the beam often is from a slightly anterior dorsal to posterior
Tentral direction (arrow). O, section of the optic nerve. B: The magnetic resonance image displays the optic nerve in the center
and thc cxtraocular musclcs at the periphery. C: The optic nerve is seen as a hypoechoic, ofen undulating, linear structure
fat. D: The hypoechoic muscles may appear similar in size and echogenicity but attach primarily to the periphery of the globe,
and their position will help to distinguish them from the optic nerve. The optic nerve is usually less than 3mm wide (between
the cursors). E: Color Doppler of ocular vessels along the optic nerve.
61
62EYE AND ORBIT
arteries and veins, and periorbital fat, can also be eval-
(Figure 2.25). Scleral thickening may support scleritis
uated (Figure 2.8). The frontal bone, which forms the
or episcleritis.
mcdial wall of the orbit, appears as a hyperechoic
The cornea and the sclera merge at the limbus or
interface associated with shadowing.The extraocular
corneoscleral junction and form the iridocorneal angle
orbital muscles are hypoechoic linear structures that
with the iris. In small animals,this angle represents the
attach to the globc. The optic nerve is a thin, linear,
most relevant site for aqueous humor outflow. Any
hypoechoic structure outlined by adjacent hyperechoic
fere with normal flow of the aqueous humor and cause
fat.The lobular lacrimal gland, which is on the lateral
(temporal) side of the orbit, and the zygomatic salivary
glaucoma.An enlarged anterior chamber may be
gland, which is ventral and caudal to the globe and
 associated with glaucoma, aphakia, or posterior lens
ventral to the orbital cone, can also be imaged (Figurc
dislocation (Figure 2.26). A small chamber size may be
2.9). This approach may be used to aspirate tissue from
associated with an anteriorly subluxated lens, with
a mass located posterior to the globe.
trauma,with tumor,or with compression by the trans-
ducer (Figure 2.27).
Cells and fibrin debris within the aqueous humor
SONOGRAPHY OF OCULAR AND
often present as echogenic foci that are moved along
by ocular motion (Figure 2.28). Mass can be free or
ORBITAL ABNORMALITIES
attached to iris, lens, or cormea (Figure 2.29). The
presence of vascular flow within a mass is often
Cornea and Anterior Chamber
helpful in determining whether the mass is a blood clot
The size, echogenicity, and appearance of the layers of
 or tumor and may assist in determining the tissuc of
the cornea may change with corneal disease, because
 origin.
 of inflammation, degeneration, neoplasia, trauma, or
Uveitisis an inflammation of the uveal tract (Sapienza
spccific corneal disorders, such as bullous keratopathy
et al. 2000; Van der Woerdt 2000).When involving the
that occurs with diseases affecting the endothelial cells
anterior uvea, it is referred to as iritis and iridocyclitis.
of the posterior corneal surface (Figure 2.24). Their
If the inflammation involves the posterior part of
degeneration docs not any longer regulate the amount
the uveal tract, it is classified as choroiditis. Often the
of intrastromal fluid, leading to bullae formation and
inflammatory process involves the retina and is then
possible corneal ulcers. Limbal infiltration caused by
referred to as chorioretinitis. The primary abnormali-
neoplasia or granulation tissue may be identified as
ties associated with the uveal tract include cysts, neo-
focal thickening of the cornea or sclcra. Determining
plasia, and inflammation. Iridociliary cysts present
the depth and involvement of the mass is hclpful
 as singular or multiple (Deehr and Dubielzig 1998;
because the prognosis is more guarded if a limbal
 Spiess et al. 1998). The cysts are thin walled and have
mass extends beyond the sclera to the ciliary body
yno internalreflectivity.Cysts may form on the iris
Figure 2.24. Bullous keratopathy. The cornea can be seen with a 10-MHz transduccr, but more diseases are being evaluated
with 25-MHz (or above) transducers.A: The normal cornca.B: Bullous keratopathy.Note the cystic areas within the abnormal
cornea.
63ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
Figure 2.25.Limbal tumor. A: Photograph of a canine limbal melanoma (arrow). B: The arrows depict the echogenic mass,
which appears to communicate with the adjacent ciliary body. The ciliary body is thickened, and local infiltration is
suspected.
Figure 2.26. Posterior lens luxation. The echogenic lens (cataract) is in the posterior portion of the vitreous body, near the
 optic dlisc. Irregular curvilinear structures are seen near the posterior lens capsule. Image courtesy of D. Penninck.
or ciliary body and extend into either the anterior or
Tumors of the iris and ciliary body may present as
posterior chamber or vitreous body. They may occur focal masses or a diffuse infiltrative process. The most
in any breed, but golden retrievers, Great Danes,
common intraocular tumor in dogs is melanoma and
Rottweilers, or Labrador retrievers are predisposed.
is most often associated with the anterior uvea.It is
The cysts, which are usually congenital, may be free
important to distinguishlimbal melanomas from uveal
floating or attached to the ciliary body, posterior iris,
 tract melanomas in dogs because the treatments differ.
The ciliary body is also commonly affected by other
ciliary cysts can also cause uveitis or glaucoma (Figure
tumors, such as lymphoma, adenoma, adenocarci-
2.30).
noma, and medulloepithelioma or metastasis.
64EYE AND ORBIT
Figure 2.27.Anterior chamber changes.A: The anterior chamber normally contains anechoic fluid. The chamber can be
compressed by transducer mild pressure, which hampers evaluation of this chamber. B: Ciliary body tumor with local exten-
sion into the anterior chamber.Themass is an anaplastic,malignant,round-cell tumor with invasion into the iris,sclera,and
cornea. It was poorly differentiated, and a malignant melanoma was suspected. C: There is a focal thickening of the iris caused
by the presence of a melanoma (arrows). There is blood flow within the mass. The anterior chamber is enlarged because of
glaucoma.
Figure 2.28.Iridal lymphoma. A: Photograph of a thickened iris and focal infiltrate (arrow) in the anterior chamber. B and
C:The echogenic mass has invaded the anterior chamber (arrow) and is in continuity with the iris (arrows).
Lens
changes within a cataractous lens produce acoustic
inhomogeneities.
Abnorrmalities of the lens include cataracts (cortical
The 1nost commonly used ways to classify catarac-
or nuclear), liquefaction of the cortex, intumescence
tous changes are based on topography or stage of
(swelling) of the lens, rupture of the anterior or poste-
maturation. Although both can be used clinically by
rior capsule,posteriorlenticonus,retrolenticular mem-
slit lamp examination, a classification that describes
brane, subluxation, or dislocation.
the topographical location of the lens degeneration
Cataracts are degenerative changes in the lens (Gelatt
seems more appropriate when imaging is used.
and MacKay 2005). A cataract produces increased
According to their location within the lens, cataracts
echoes in variouslocationswithin an anechoic lens.
will be addressed as capsular,cortical (anterior, poste-
The echogenicity, shape, and size of the lens may
rior, or equatorial) or nuclear (the core of the lens).
change with the type of cataract and its duration.The
The classificationbased on the stage of progression of
Figure 2.29.Anterior chamber masses.A: Ciliary body tumor with local extension into the anterior chamber.Thc mass is
an anaplastic,malignant,round-cll tumor with invasion into the iris,sclera,and cornea.It was poorly differentiated, and a
malignant melanoma was suspected.A large echogenic mass is in the anterior chamber, which is distended, consistent with
a malignant melanoma arising from the iris. B: The anterior chamber is enlarged and diffusely filled with echogenic cellular
contents. This was an epithelial adenoma arising from the iridociliary body. C: The iris is thickened and has poorly defined
irregular margins because of an infiltrative lymphoma.D: The iris is diffusely thickened especially on the left side.This is a
malignant histiocytosis involving the iris and the ciliary body.
65
66 EYE AND ORBIT
A
Figure 2.30. Iridociliary cysts. They may be identified within the anterior or posterior chambers. A: The most common
locations are shown in this illustration. There may be one or multiple cysts. B: There is one cyst (between the cursors) in the
the cataractis clinical andincludes incipient,immature
dislocates the lens.In one clinical study comparing
and mature cataract with <10%, 10-100% partial
lens morphometry in normal and cataractous lenses,
opacity, 100% complete opacity respectively. These
diabetic cataracts had an increased axial thickness
 q  n  s   s
(Beamet al.1999).Maturecataractshada trend toward
increased in diabetic mature hyperosmotic cataracts)
increased axial thickness,whereas immature cataracts
Hypermature and Morgagnian cataracts are later
demonstratedatrendtowardreducedthickness
 stages with cortical reabsorption. In these stages the
(Williams 2004).
lens thickness is reduced and the capsules appear
Posterior lenticonus is a developmental anomaly
wrinkled; these changes can be assessed ultrasono-
of the lens with localized cone-shaped protrusion
graphically. Resorption can be detected as a decrease
of the axial portion of its posterior surfaces. The
in the anteroposterior thickness of the lens. In a cortical
lens may have an isolated protrusion of the posterior
cataract, the anterior and/or posterior cortices become
thin capsule. The posterior capsule may appear irregu-
echogenic,and the entire capsule may be apparent
lar or wrinkled. This may be seen in association with
and not just the region of the specular reflection.
a retrolenticular membrane and a persistent hyper-
The cortical sutures may become echogenic and be
plastic primary vitreous (Figure 2.37). A posterior
identified especially from a transverse plane (Figures
capsule cataract and irregularity are important to
2.31 and 2.32). A nucleus that becomes echogenic is
recognize prior to surgery because they can lead to
referred to as a nuclear cataract. The changes might
surgical complications when removal of the lens is
progress to involve the entire lens. (Figure 2.33) A
attempted.
morgagnian cataract, which occurs when the content
The lens rupture may be associated with anterior
of the lens becomes liqucficd,with the nucleusbecom-
uveitis, fibrin or granulation tissue proliferation, or
ing free and mobile within thc lcns, is identified when
 adherence to the pupil. The rupture may occur anteri-
the nucleus is not within the center of the lens (Figurc
orly, posteriorly, or peripherally. Equatorial ruptures
2.34).A markedly calcified cataractous lens has an
are more common in diabetic patients (Figure 2.38). A
increased sound velocity, which can result in an arti-
posterior lenticonus has an cventration on the poste-
factually shortened globe.The amount of refraction
rior surface, but the lens is still containcd.
through the lens may vary and cause an abnormal
Lenticular nodular proliferations, also called
shape to the globe. An intumescent lens, which is
lenticular fibroxanthomatous nodules,occur when the
associated with imbibition of fluid, is manifested as a
lens ruptures. The lens capsule and lens epithelium
thick, echogenic lens caused by an osmotic gradient 
haveundergone
fibrous metaplasia, which is
difference as seen in early cataracts or in diabetes mel-
associated with trauma and a rupture of the lens
litus (Figure 2.35). Hypermature cataracts are often
(Figure 2.39).
thin because the lens protein has liquefied and absorbed
A dislocated lens is identified by its abnormal posi-
(Figure 2.36). This shrunken lens has fibrotic changes
tion. Subluxation occurs when the zonule partially
 n a uo   pe as a go
ruptures, and the lens is tilted from its normal posiltion
B
Figure 2.31.Cortical cataracts and other conditions mimicking cataracts.A: The normal hyperechoic curvilinear speculan
reflection (arrow) is perpendicular to the incident sound beam.B:The iris (arrowhead) is on the anterior surface of the lens)
the pupil is in the center,and the curvilinear specular reflection is on the posterior surface of the lens (arrow). C: The lens
has thin hyperechoic lines (arrowheads), indicating early cataract changes. The strong hyperechoic curvilinear line (arrow) is
the postcrior spccular rcflcction at thc surfacc of thc lens. This hclps to identify thc position within thc lcns of the cataract.
This is more likely on the surface of the nucleus. D: The lens has a thin hyperechoic line (arrows) around the lens consistent
with a cortical cataract.The thicker hyperechoic focal areas (arrowhead) in the lens represent incomplete cataractous involve-
ment of the sutures of the cortex of the lens. E: The surface of the lens has a hyperechoic rim (short arrows) around it that
represents cortical cataracts (long arrow). The anterior part of the cortex is thickened and hyperechoic.
Figure 2.32. Various stages of cataract. A: An irregular hyperechoic posterior cataract is prcsent. Noticing this change is
important when a lens is being extracted, because the change may lead to complications.B: A large amount of nuclear cataract
is present. C: An irregularity (arrow) is noted on the posterior surface of the cataractous lens. This may be caused by posterior
rupture or, in this case, by a retained primary vitreous. D: Asymmetric but nearly complete nuclear cataract is present.
E: The entire lens is echogenic, consistent with a complete cataract. Echoes within the vitreous are consistent with degenera-
tive changes. F: Note that the lens is much smaller than normal. The margins of the lens are hyperechoic. This is a supermature
cataract with resorption of lens contents.These changes are responsible for traction on the retina and can cause retinal detach-
ment. Note the retraction of the vitreal body (arrowheads) and the echoes in the vitreous, consistent with degenerative
changes.
68
Figure 2.33.Cataracts involving the sutures of the lens. The involvement becomes more extensive from A to F.All are
transverse images of the lens. With the first image, the involvement is cortical, and by F there is complete cortical and nuclear
involvement with progression of disease and type of involvement. Notice the iris surrounding the lens in each image.
Figure 2.34. Morgagnian cataract. The contents of the lens has liquefied (arrows). The cataractous nuclcus is mobile within
the lens and may change in position.Thc lens is often smaller than normal because the lens contents has been resorbed.
70EYE AND ORBIT
Figure 2.35.Swollen lens. This is often caused by the imbibition of fluid because of the osmotic gradient difference of fluid
within the lcns. It may be seen with various disorders but is often associated with diabetes mellitus.
MEDIAL
PLANE
DORSAL
201mm
34m
Figure 2.36. Supermnature cataract. The lens is entirely hyperechoic and is smaller than normal. The lens protcin has lique-
fied and been absorbed. Traction on the retina by the shrunken lens may lcad to retinal detachment.
but still behind the iris and in front of the patellar fossa
VitreousandRetina
of the vitreous. Luxation occurs when the zonules at
the peripheralligamentous attachments totallyrupture,
Clinical conditions with sonographically visible vitreal
and the lens is displaced anteriorly to the iris or pos-
 changes include changes in the shape of the globe,
teriorly into the vitreal cavity.A luxated lens is often
vitreous opacities (such as asteroid hyalosis, synchysis
cataractous, especially if it has been luxated for any
scintillans, vitreous hemorrhage, and uvcitis), poste-
durationof time because of nutritionloss.Lens
rior vitreous detachment, persistence and hyperplasia
dislocation may occur secondary to trauma, space-
of the primary vitreous or remnant of the hyaloid
Occupying masses, glaucoma, or hereditary predispo-
artery, retinal delachment, or presence of a foreign
sition (Figure 2.40).
body or a mass.
71ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
A
B
C
D
Figure 2.37.Posterior lenticonus.This is a developmental anomaly of the lens with localized cone-shaped protrusion of the
axial portion of the anterior or posterior surfaces.The lens may have an isolated protrusion of the thinned capsule lined by
a single layer of epithelium. A: The posterior capsule may appear irregular (arrow) or wrinkled. B: A remnant of the hyaloid
vessel is noted as a linear hyperechoic line (arrow) extending from the posterior surface of the lens. C:The hyaloid canal
(arrow) is depicted as the central canal. D: Persistent vessels (arrow)may be found extending from the posterior surfacc of
the lens to thc optic disc within the canal.
The globe shape may be altered by developmental
coloboma (an absence or defect of ocular tissue),a
anomalies, trauma, glaucoma, an internal mass, or by
 mass, or chronic glaucoma.
pressure from an extraocular mass (Figures 2.41 and
Echogenic foci or debris within the vitreous can
2.42). Microphthalmos (reduction in eye volume) may
have several causes. They appear as dotlike reflectors
becaused by developmental defectsormaybe acquired
within the normally anechoic vitreous body(Figure
(phthisis bulbi) secondary to chronic wasting diseases
 2.43). Membranes may be imaged and appear as hyper-
（uveitisorend-stageglaucoma)ortrauma.Buphthalmos
echoic lines within the vitreous. These reflectors are
(an enlarged globe) instead may be associated with
more common in eyes thathave sustained trauma or
Figure 2.41.Changes in globe shape.A: A mass (undifferentiated mcscnchymal tumor) posterior to the globe displaces the
vessels and indents the posterior surface of thc globe. B: Limbal mass (melanoma) with extension into the ciliary body. The
entire globe is displaced and distorted by the mass. MED, medial. C: Mass medial to the globe. The mass, which is a lacrimal
adcnocarcinoma, distorts the normal round shape of the globe.D:A rounded mass (nasal cavity adenocarcinoma)posterior
to the globe indents and distorts the vitreous cavity and thecontour of theglobe.
74
75ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
m p e go sn ) ss e () oeo pnn uuosai a pue a   z nm
hemorrhagic contents with fibrin tags floating in the vitreous body.
especially in young animals. Erythrocytes often pre-
membranes are typically lowcr in intensity when
cipitate onto a preexisting vitreous strand, acquired
compared with detached retinal membranes. Blood
membrane, or the posterior hyaloid membrane,and
within the vitreous framework typically is absorbed
this may lead to an increase in densification of the
more slowly (Zeiss and Dubielzig 2004). Bleeding into
membranes and an increase in the acoustic reflectivity
e suu ju sse e se qasand Ae snaa a
(Figure 2.46).Fibrous strands may develop secondary
tumor. Similar sonographic changes are present in
to clot formation. These strands may cause tractional
inflammatory and heimorrhagic vitreous changes
retinal detachment when they contract. The vitreal
(Figure 2.47).
76EYE AND ORBIT
Figure 2.43. Vitreal foci and membranes. A and B: Within the vitreous are several faint echogenic foci and membranes.
C and D: The posterior margin of thc rctracted vitreal body is seen along the inner part of the orbital wall(arrows). Small,
pinpoint, hyperechoic foci are in the vitreous body in D, consistent with asteroid hyalosis. When present, the membranes
may be confused with retinal detachment.
Endophthalmitis,which is an inflammatoryprocess
detached retina and the choroid (chorioretinitis)
involving the internal structures of the eye, may appear
(Figures 2.48 and 2.49).
identical to diffuse vitreal hemorrhage. There may be
Persistent and hyperplastic primary vitreous is a
small pointlike hyperechoic lesions that demonstrate
congenital condition (Bayon et al. 2001; Gemensky-
movement within the globe after the eye moves. It has
a tendency to organize faster than hemorrhage and
primary vitreous (hyaloid artery and posterior tunica
often producesvitreal membranes.The echoes may be
vasculosa lentis) incompletely regresses after birth.
located within the vitreous or have echoes between the
Severe forms include microphthalmia,cataract
Figure 2.44.Degenerative changes in the vitreous.A: Pinpoint hyperechoic foci with faint small comet tails caused by
asteroid hyalosis. B: Anterior luxated lens (arrows) and suspected hemorrhage in the vitreous body. An anechoic area is
around theperiphery of thevitreous,likelybecause of resorption.C:Retraction of thevitreal body,a supermature cataract,
and asteroid hyalosis. D: Faint membranes within the vitreous, most consistent with fibrin tags.
Figure 2.45. Vitreal retraction. A-C: There is a progressive liquefaction and separation of the posterior vitreous from the
retinal membrane.A faint, hyperechoic, curvilinear area around the periphery of the vitreal body may identify the vitreal
margin. The region between the vitreal body and the retina is oftcn ancchoic (arrows). LT, left.
78EYE AND ORBIT
B
Figure 2.48.Chorioretinitis. A: Normal retina for compari-
son. LT, left eye. B: Thickening and mild irregularity of the
surface of the retina is noted (arrow). This is consistent with
a chorioretinitis in this patient. RT, right eye.
Figure 2.46.Post-traumatic hemorrhage.The vitreous
contains mobile low-level echces. The membranes are fibrin
tags. Retinal detachnent is also present but not clearly seen
on this plane.
Figure 2.49.Endophthalmitis.Note the numerous mem-
branes and celular contents in the vitreous. This appearance
can be similar to hemorrhage. The membranes usually move
in random directions and not usually as hyperechoic as the
retina detached membrane.Retinal detachments nay occur
in conjunction with this process.
formation, and a connective-tissue strand (retrolentic-
ular fibrovascular tissue) between the posterior surface
of lens and the area of optic nerve head. A funnel-
shaped rctrolenticular mass with a thin echogenic stalk
emerging from the lens and coursing to the optic disc
may be seen. The axial length of the globe may be
shortened. The strand between the surface of the lens
Figure 2.47. Ciliary body tumor. The large echogenic rmass
and the areaof theopticnerve headmay containpatent
originating from the temporal side of the ciliary body has
hyaloid vessels (Tigure 2.50).
caused retinal detachment and hemorrhage in the vitreous.
A retinal detachment is a commonly encountered
It is difficult to separale the mass from the hemorrhage on
abnormality that can be sonographically diagnosed.
the image. Blood flow may be uscful in determining the
The retina normally adheres firmly to the optic nerve
extent of involvemcnt.
79ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
Figure 2.50.Retinal detachments.A: Classic example of thc retinal membranes coursing from their attachment at the optic
disc. B: Complete detached retinal membranes from the optic disc to the orra serrata. C: Flat retinal detachment. D: Retinal
detachment with numerous other membranes making the diagnosis more challenging. E: Posterior to the delached retinal
membranes, there is echogenic material representing pus from a Prototheca infection. F: Chronic complete retinal detachment.
posterior to the retinal membrane because of blastomycosis.
head posteriorly and to the ora serrata anteriorly. With
A vitreal membrane and a detached taunt retina
a retinal detachment, the retinal layers will remain
have a similar appearance. Attachment to the optic
attached at these two points but may be separated
disc must be dcmonstrated.The retinal membrane is
from the adjacent choroid by fluid anywhere between
typically thicker and more echogenic. Incomplete
them. The detachment may occur focally or along the
retinal detachment may also occur in various locations
entire surface between these two points. The different
(Figure 2.52). Hypermature cataracts have a higher
types of retinal detachments include the rhegmatoge-
incidence of retinal detachments because of traction
nous (tear), the mechanical (traction), the serous or
and tearing caused by the shrinking lens.Trauma,
inflammatory infiltrate located between thc choroid
inflammalion, tumors, or systemic hypertension may
and the retina. A complete retinal detachment has
also cause a detachment. Identification of a retinal
been referred to as a “morning glory" sign (Figure
detachment can be difficult if different membranes are
2.51). In a sagittal plane, the detachment looks like an
in the vitreous complicated by strands and floating
isosceles triangle that is open toward the anterior
opacities.Vitreal degeneration and detachment occur
segment. The retina in an acute detachment is usually
 as the hyaloid body shrinks. A potential space is pro-
thin and highly echogenic. With time, the membrane
duced between the vitreous and the retina,which is
becomes thicker, more fixed, and less mobile, and the
Considered an incidental degenerativechange in older
membrane moves to the center of the vitreous to form
patients. Adhesions may form between the vitrcal
a funnel-shapcd configuration.
body and the retina and lead to focal retinal detach-
80EYE AND ORBIT
D
Figure 2.51. Retinal detachment, different planes (parallel lines). A: Longitudinal sonogram of a detached retina.
B-D: Transverse images showing the detached retina as an isosceles triangle, depending on whcre the slice was taken through
the membrane (see corresponding lines from A). The detached membrane can then appcar as a three-dimensional
parachute.
ments. The adhesions and membranes may be con-
present and their location. Metal has a typical comet
fused with a retinal membrane. Blood flow within the
ring-down artifact with a hyperechoic surface to the
membrane is consistent with a retinal detachment.A
reflector.Wooden forcign material might be associated
chorioretinitis may cause an exudate to accumulale
with shadowing (Figure 2.53). The sound impedance
between the retina and the choroid. Echogenic
within the foreign body,the foreignbody's and surface
material is identified in the subretinal area,and the
characteristics,and itsdirection relative to the incident
retina is separated from the choroid, leading to this
beam will help in locating the forcign body and in
diagnosis.
identifying the type of material present. A hypoechoic
tract around the foreign body may assist in locating a
foreign body.
IntraocularForeignBodies
Some normal structures in the eye can mimic a
foreign body. These include specular reflection from
depending on the type and shape of foreign material
the lens and the shadowing bone forming the orbit.
Figure 2.52.Complicated retinal detachments.A: Chorioretinitis with secondary retinal detachments caused by blastomy-
cosis. B: Note the very echogenic contents posterior to the retinal membrane of the same dog. The cellular contents are mobile
and move with gravity.C: Retinal detachment secondary to chorioretinitis and neuritis from an unknown organism.Note
the echogenic material posterior to the thickened retinal membrane. D: Note also that the optic nerve is thickened (arrow-
heads) (same dog as in C). E: Traumatic lens luxation with hemorrhage and retinal detachment that is difficult to distinguish
from the fibrin membranes.F: Large ciliary body tumor. A flat retinal detachment (arrow) is secondary to tearing of the retina
by the mass. Note the displacement of the lens by the mass.
Figure 2.53.Foreign bodies.A and B:Wooden stick.A hyperechoic line (arrow) associated with shadowing is present
between the margins of the zygormatic bone. The globe is to the left of the imagc. The wooden foreign body is between the
cursors in B. C and D: Pellet-gun metallic foreign bodies (BBs) with associated comet-tail artifact (arrowheads). The BB
to the globe. A mixcd cchogenic and anechoic area is around the foreign object, consistent with purulent material in the fistular
tractaround.
82
83ATLASOF SMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
Figure 2.54. Ciliary body tumors. A-D: Different size, extension, and echogenicity of ciliary body masses. L, lens. Final
diagnosis: melanoma (A), limbal melanoma (B), ciliary body carcinoma (C), and melanoma (D).
IntraocularNeoplasia
melanocytoma anterior uveal melanocytoma, choroi-
dal melanocytoma, malignant ocular melanoma,
Ocular tumors are usually echogenic. Ultrasound may
trauma-associated sarcoma (cats), iridociliary epithe-
be used to locate the lesion and assess the degree of
lial tumor (Dubielzig et al. 1989), medulloepithelioma,
involvement. Masses (unlike blood clots) are vascular-
and plasmacytoma have been reported as primary
ized,often have a broad base,and the attachment to
ocular neoplasms. Metastatic tumors reported include
the wall or the tissue of origin can be identified.
lymphoma,squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma
Extraocular masses may have intraocular extensions.
(often mammary or pulmonary), oral mclanoma, and
Ocular neoplasia may be primary, multicentric, or
hemangiosarcoma (Dubielzig 2002). Tumoral masses
metastatic. Tumors of the melanocytic origin are the
may be difficult to distinguish from blood clots or
most common primary intraocular neoplasms in cats
a granuloma (Figure 2.54). Lymphoma may have
and dogs. Diffuse iridal melanomas (cats), epibulbar
very echogcnic thickening of the iris and ciliary
84EYEAND ORBIT
B
is displayed al the top of each case.A: Undifferentiated mesenchymal tumor (arrows) located posterior to the globe and dis-
placing it anteriorly. B: Nasal adenocarcinoma with extensive lysis of the bony orbit and extension into the periorbital tissues.
The globc is displaced laterally and dorsally (arrows). C: Osteosarcoma involving the skull, with secondary ocular involve-
ment. Note the hyperechoic and shadowing structure (arrows) displacing the globe. E, ocular globe.
body,echoes in the anterior and posterior chambers,
margins may be sharp and discrete or diffuse and
and thickening of the choroid, with possible retinal
ill-defined.
detachment.
Tumors involving the tissues around the eye include
nasal tumors, primary benign or malignant bone
tumors, oral melanomas, squamous cell carcinomas,
RetrobulbarDisease
hemangiosarcomas. These tumors may invade the
The bone surrounding the ocular cone limits the sono-
orbital space. The adjacent bone may be destroyed and
graphic evaluation of orbital lesions. Abnormalities
have an irregular appearance.
include blunting of the posterior aspect of the globe;
Additional periorbital tissues that may affect the
diffuse, increased echogenicity of the retrobulbar
globe include the lacrimal gland and the zygomatic
space, with failure to delineate the optic nerve; a dis-
 gland (Giudice et al. 2005). Either inflammation or neo-
crete, hypoechoic mass in the retrobulbar space; and a
plasia may affect the size, shape, and echogenicity of
discrete, highly echogenic mass deforming the poste-
the different periorbital glands. Enlargement or a mass
rior aspect of the globe (Morgan 1989; Attali-Soussay
from the affected glands can produce a mass effcct that
et al. 2001). Retrobulbar malignancies present as hyper-
displaces the globe (Figures 2.56-2.61).
echoic or hypoechoic changes with various degrees of
The optic nerve is a curvilinear, hypoechoic struc-
deformity of the posterior aspect of the globe (Figure
ture coursing from the posterior surface of the globe
2.55). The appearance of inflammatory changes varies
into theorbital cone.Abnormalitiesof thenerveinclude
neuritis (Figure 2.62) with diffuse enlargement or neo-
 mass with possible blunting of the posterior aspect of
plasia with either focal or diffuse enlargement (Figure
the globc. Diffuse, non-deforming lesions often are
 2.63). Tumors of the optic nerve include meningioma,
most compatible with retrobulbar cellulitis, but the
neurofibroma, astrocytoma, and lymphoma.
Figure 2.56. Inflamed zygomatic gland. A: Normal appearance of the zygomatic gland. B and C: Enlarged zygomatic sali-
vary gland from inflammation.
Figure 2.57. Chronic inyositis. A and B: The masseter muscle (arrows) is hyperechoic and has disrupted fibers. The muscle
size is reduced.This is caused by fibrosis secondary to chronic myositis.
85
A
R
Figure 2.58. Temporalis myositis. A: Thc temporalis muscle (arrows) is markedly thickened secondary to acute myositis.
B:Normal temporalis muscle (arrows) for comparison.
Figure 2.59. Lacrimal gland adenocarcinorra. A: Echogenic soft-tissue infiltrate is present on the medial aspect of the left
globe (arrows). B: Corresponding transverse computed tomographic imagc showing the lateral displacement of the globe by
the infiltrate.
EVe
Figure 2.60. Lacrimal gland adenoma. A homogeneous echogenic mass (M) is lateral to and displacing the globe.
Figure 2.61. Maxillary cyst. A: The cyst is filled with mobile echogenic contents, creating prcssure necrosis on the orbit,
graphic image of the large lesion.
一
Figure 2.62. Optic neuritis. An indentation (arrows) into the globe at the optic disc is seen in both the ultrasound (A) and
the magnetic resonance (B) images. The optic nerve (arrowheads) is thickened. Image courtesy of D. Penninck.
B
Figure 2.63. Optic nerve meningioma. Focal thickening of the optic ncrve is seen in the ultrasound image (arrows) (A), as
well as on the specimen (arrow) (B).
89ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
Figure 2.64.Polymyositis of the extraocular musclcs.A: Longitudinal imagc of thickcncd cxtraocular muscles within the
orbital cone. B: Transverse to oblique view of the same area.C: Corresponding transverse
computed tomographic image.The
arrows point to the thickened muscles.
Extraocular muscles include the four rectus muscles
INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES
(dorsal, medial,ventral, and lateral),retractor bulbi
muscle, and dorsal and ventral oblique muscles.
Normally the muscles attach in the equatorial zone of
Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration of masses
the globe and form a cone whose apex is at the poste
in the periorbital and retro-orbital region can be
rior orbital bony wall. The muscles run around the
performed.Thistechnique enablesvisualizationof
optic nerve and are hypoechoic, being surrounded by
the mass and the needle placement into the lesion.
hyperechoic fat.Diseases affecting these muscles
The angle in which the needle is placed relative to the
include an immune-mediated myositis (Allgoewer
direction of the transducer is vital in order to position
et al.2000) that results in enlarged and hypoechoic
the tip of the needle accurately.Aspiration in theretro-
muscles in the acute phase. Muscular fibrosis is the
orbital region with ultrasound guidance is helpful in
outcome in chronic cases.Neoplasia is possible but less
avoidingvital structures such asthe opticnerve,the
common (Figure 2.64).
globe, and the vessels. It is also helpful in placing the
90EYE AND ORBIT
Dietrich U, Kostlin R, Tassani M (1995) Ultrasonographic
examination of the eyes of dogs with cataracts [Abstract].
Vet RadiolUltrasound 36:436.
Dubielzig RR (2002) Tumors of the eye. In: Meuten D, ed.
Tumors in Domestic Animals, 4th edition. Ames, IA:
Blackwell, pp 739-754.
Dubielzig RR, Steinberg H, Garvin H, Dcchr AJ, Fischer B
(1998) Iridociliary cpithelial tumors in 100 dogs and 17
cats:A morphological study.Vet Ophthalmol 1:223-231.
u Aydei3ouosenm reno (8861) Va 1ae f szza
veterinary medicine. Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim)
3:1-9.
Gelatt K, MacKay E (2005) Prevalence of primary breed-
related cataracts in the dog in North America. Vet
Ophthalmol 8:101-111.
Gemensky-Metzler A, Wilkic DA (2004) Surgical manage-
ment and histologic and immunohistochemical features of
Figure 2.65.Ultrasound-guided freehand aspirate of a
a cataract and retrolental plaque secondary to persistent
retro-orbital mass. The needle attached to a syringe is placed
hyperplastic tunica vasculosa lentis/persistent hyperplas-
into the retrobulbar lesion.
tic primary vitreous (PHTVL/PHPV) in a bloodhound
puppy.Vet Ophthalmol 7:369-375.
Giudice C, Marco R, Mirko R, Luca M, Giorgio C (2005)
needle within the mass or infiltrate to acquire appro-
Zygomatic gland adenoma in a dog: Histochemical and
priate cells for cytology, or to drain the abscess cavity
inmunohistochemical evaluation.Vet Ophthalmol8:
(Figure 2.65).
13-16.
Grahn BH, Storey ES, McMillan C (2004) Inherited retinal
REFERENCES
Hager DA, Dziezyc J, Millchamp NJ (1987) Two-dimensional
Allgoewer I, Blair M, Basher T, Davidson M, et al. (2000)
and normal anatomy.Vet Radiol 28:60-65.
Extraocular muscle myositis and restrictive strabismus in
Morgan RV (1989) Ultrasonography of retrobulbar discascs
10 dogs. Vet Ophthalmol 3:21-26.
of the dog and cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 25:393-399.
AttaliSoussay K, Jegou J, Clerc B (2001) Retrobulbar tumors
Sapienza JS, Simo FJ, Prades-Sapienza A (2000) Golden
 in dogs and cats: 25 cases. Vet Ophthalmol 4:19-27.
retriever uveitis: 75 cases (1994-1999). Vet Ophthalmol
Bayon A, Tovar MC, Fermandez del Palacio MJ, Agut A
3:214-246
(2001) Ocular complications of persistent hyperplastic
Schiffer SP,Rantanen NW, Leary GA, Bryan GM (1982)
primary vitreous in three dogs. Vet Ophthalmol 4:35-40.
Biometric study of the canine eye, using A-mode ultraso-
Beam A, Correa M, Davidson M (1999) A retrospective-
nography.Am JVet Res 43:826-830.
cohort study on the development of cataracts in dogs with
Spiess BM, Bolliger JO, Guscetti F, IIaessig M, Lackner PA,
diabetes mellitus: 200 cases.Vet Ophthalmol 2:169-172.
Ruchli MB (1998) Multiple ciliary body cysts and second-
Borofka SA, Voorhour G, Verbruggen AM, Teske E (2006)
ary glaucoma in the Great Dane: A report of nine cases.
Intraobserver and intcrobserver repeatability of ocular
Vet Ophthalmol 1:41-45.
biometric measurements obtained by means of B-mode
Van der Woerdt A (2000) Lens-induced uveitis. Vet
ultrasonography in dogs. Am J Vet Res 67:1743-1749.
Ophthalmol 3:227-234.
Cottrill N, Banks WJ, Pechman RI) (1989) Ultrasonographic
Williams DL (2004) Lens morphometry determined by B-
and biometric evaluation of the eye and orbit of dogs. Am
mode ultrasonography of the normal and cataractous
J Vet Res 50:898-903.
canine lens. Vet Ophthalmol 7:91-95.
Deehr AJ, Dubielzig RR (1998) A histopathological study of
Zeiss CJ, Dubielzig RR (2004) A morphologic study of intra-
vitreal mcmbrancs associatedwith intraocular hemor-
Ophthalmol 1:153-158.
rhage in the dog. Vet Ophthalmol 7:239-243.
CHAPTER THREE
ECK
Allison Zwingenberger and Erik Wisner
SCANNING TECHNIQUE
jugular vein can be determined with color and pulsed-
wave Doppler.
Because the ventralcervical region is anatomically
complex, ultrasound is uniquely suited to evaluating
cervical organs and tissues that are not readily charac-
NORMAL SONOGRAPHIC
terized on survey or contrast radiographs. In addition
to defining gross anatomy of the neck, high-resolution
ANATOMY
ultrasound can also be used to examine very small
There are a few anatomical landmarks that are useful
structures such as the thyroid and parathyroidglands.
for locating cervical structures of clinical interest. The
High-frcqucncy (8- to 15-MHz) linear transducers
ventral margin of the mandible appears as a smooth,
and curvilinear transducers provide thebest images of
small structures and those with complex intcrnal archi-
hyperechoic interface surrounded by skeletal muscle.
tecture. Tissue harmonic imaging is also available on
Structures surrounding it include the parotid and
mandibular salivary glands,the external ear canal, and
some newer machines, which can further improve
the tympanic bulla caudally. The parotid salivary
iimage resolution by decreasing artifacts.
gland is caudal to the external ear canal, and the tym-
For ultrasonography of most structures, the animal
is positioned in dorsal recumbency with the area of
panic bulla is medial to the canal.
The mandibular salivary gland is a marker for the
interest clipped (Figure 3.1A). Because many of the
organs in the neck are symmetrically paired,itis useful
origin of the external jugular vein, the bifurcation of
to clip both sides in order to compare them. Positioning
the common carotid artery, and the medial retropha-
ryngeal lymph node.
the patient so that the neck is as straight as possible is
The larynx is located on the ventral midline, and the
important to locate anatomical landmarks reliably and
paired hyperechoic arytenoid cartilages are landmarks
to compare one side of the neck accurately with the
for the vocal folds. Structures located near the larynx
other. For imaging the tympanic bullae, positioning
from cranial to caudal include the parotid salivary
the patient in sternal recumbency (Figure 3.1B) or
gland, mandibular salivary gland, medial retropha-
seated with the head held straight and extended is
ryngeal lymph node, mandibular lymph nodes, maxil-
preferred. Any structure can be investigated while the
lary and linguofacial veins, and internal and external
animal is in lateral recumbency (Figure 3.1C) accord-
ing to operator preference or for dyspneic animals,
carotid arteries.
The trachea is on ventral midline and commonly
with the caveat that anatomy may appear somewhat
distorted and comparisons to the contralateral neck
used as a fixed midline anatomical landmark when
the thyroid and parathyroid glands are imagcd and is
will be impaired.
used to define the caudal aspect of the larynx.
Although the ultrasound bcam cannot penetrate air
The jugular vein and common carotid artery are
within hollow structures such as the tympanic bullae,
easily located and can serve as landmarks for identify-
trachea, and larynx, the interface betwccn air and adja-
ing the thyroid and parathyroid glands.
cent soft tissues can still be evaluated for regularity of
contours and physiological motion as exemplified by
examination of the vocal folds.
Bullae
 In addition to two-dimensional B-mode imaging,
color flow Doppler, power Doppler, and pulsed-wave
The external ear canal and tympanic bulla are bcst
Doppler imaging can be used to evaluate vascularity
imaged with a curvilinear transducer of medium
of organs, vessels, and tissues. Flow characteristics of
frequency (5-8MHz) with a small footprint. The
large vessels such as the common carotid artery and
contacl area for imaging these structures is small, and
91
92NECK
Left
TC
EMA
R LN
EMV
IMA
CC
IMV
PT
T
JV
CCA
TR
D
Figure 3.1.Images of positioning for the ultrasound probe on
fa dog.A:Dorsal recumbency is convenient for
imaging most of the structures of the neck. It enables comparison of bilaterally symmetrical structures, and it is easy to main-
  q   jo r  d s a o  e s nn n
recumbency is an alternate position for investigating the structures of the neck. D: Schematic representation of probe position-
ing and corresponding scan planes on the neck. E: Schematic main anatomical structures evaluated with ultrasound. CC,
cricoid cartilage; CCA, common carotid artery; E, esophagus; EMA, extemal maxillary artery; EMV, external maxillary vein;
IMA, internal maxillary artery;IMV,internal maxillary vein; JV, jugular vein; PT, parathyroid gland; RLN, retropharyngeal
lymph node; T, thyroid gland; TC, thyroid cartilage; and TR, trachea.
a higher-frequency linear transducer is often too large
crosssection of thevertical exlernal ear canalisvisible
to position evenly on the skin. In addition, the bone of
 as a curvilinear hyperechoic line filled with air produc-
the tympanic bulla absorbs the ultrasound beam, and
ing reverberation artifact. In a transverse plane with
higher frequencies may not penetrate the bullae wall
 respect to the head, the external ear canal appears in
longitudinal orientation. The ear canal lies just caudal
The external ear canal and bulla are imaged from
to the zygomatic arch, with the masseter muscle lateral
both a lateral approach and a ventral approach (Figure
to the arch and the sternocephalicus muscle caudal
3.1B and C) with the patientin sternal,seated,or lateral
to it. The horizontal portion of the ear canal is
recumbency (Dickic ct al. 2003).From a lateral position
imaged from a ventral position either in longitudinal
with the transduccr oriented in a dorsal plane, the
 or in transverse orientation (Figure 3.2). From the
Figure 3.2. Normal external car canal and tympanic bulla of a dog. A and B: Ultrasonographic and schematic images
obtained from the ventral approach to the external ear canal and tympanic bulla. Cranial is to the left of the images. A:
Beginning with the transducer positioned just caudal to the zygomatic arch, slide the transducer ventrally and then rotate to
a vertical (sagittal with respect to the head) orientation. The external ear canal (EC) is visible as a curved, bright, soft-tissue-air
interface with reverberation and acoustic shadowing in the far field.The parotid salivary gland (P) is a triangular,hyperechoic
structure caudal and superficial to the external ear canal.B:Moving medially from the external ear canal, the tympanic bulla
(TB) is visible as a semicircular hyperechoic line. The far wallis not visible because of acoustic shadowing and reverberation.
The mandible is superficial cranially (N) and is seen as acoustic shadowing. The digastricus muscle (D), mandibular salivary
gland (M), and parotid salivary gland (P) are in the ncar field. The maxillary artery (arrowhead) is caudal to the bulla.
C: Ultrasonographic and schematic images of the tympanic bulla in a cat. When imaged from a lateral approach (dorsal ori-
entation with respcct to the head), the tympanic bulla (TB)is located more superficially. The parotid salivary gland (P) is
hypoechoic and located superficially and caudally to the bulla.
93
94NECK
longitudinal position, the transducer can be rotated
 of thc mandibular salivary gland, but may not be dis-
slightly to view the tympanic bulla and external ear
tinguished as a separate entity. The parotid salivary
 canal in the same image.
gland is oriented vertically latcral to the external ear
The middle ear is imaged from the lateral and ventral
canal and dorsally and superficially to the mandibular
positions. The lateral position is just ventral to the
salivary gland (Figure 3.2A).
external ear canal, with the transducer positioned
 In the parasagittal imaging plane, the mandibular
between the zygomatic arch and the wing of the atlas
 salivary gland is caudal to the more hypoechoic digas-
and directed medially in a dorsal plane. In this window,
tricus muscle, with the medial retropharyngeal lymph
the parotid salivary gland is hypoechoic to the sur-
node medial to it (Figure 3.4A). To image the mandibu-
rounding tissue and superficial to the tympanic bulla.
lar salivary gland in a sagittal orientation, the trans-
The bulla itself is curvilinear,with internal gas associ-
ducer can be rotated slightly from the parasagittal
ated with acoustic shadowing. The maxillary artery
plane relative to the head and neck. It is well defined
can be identified with Doppler ultrasound caudally
and triangular or round, with a hyperechoic capsule
and laterally to the tympanic bulla at the junction of
the external ear canal and the bulla.
 From the ventral approach, the mandibular salivary
gland is visible in the near field, with the digastricus
muscle imposed between it and the tympanic bulla
(Figure 3.2). Mandibular lymph nodes may appear as
hypoechoic structures at the caudal aspect of the
bulla.
The tympanic bulla is composed of thin bone and is
filled with air. The normal bulla wall appears as an
echogenic curved line, and the air within it causes
reverberation artifact and dirty shadowing deep to the
bone margin. The bone is thin enough that the ultra-
sound beam penetrates it, and therefore within the
bulla cavity the presence of soft tissue or fluid caused
by a middle-ear disorder can be identified.
SalivaryGlands
Figure 3.3. Normal mandibulary salivary glancd in a dog.
Parasagittalimage taken with the transducer rotated slightly
The mandibular salivary gland is easily visible caudal
medially. Cranial is to the left of the image. The mandibular
to the ramus of the mandible, and between the linguo-
salivary gland (M) has a striated echotexture with a central
facial and maxillary veins as they join to form the
linearecho.Thedigastricus muscle(asterisk)isthchypoechoic
jugular vein (Figure 3.3). A portion of the sublingual
band overlying thc mandible (arrow), which appears as a
salivary gland shares the capsule of the rostral portion
hyperechoic line with distal acoustic shadowing.
is lateral to the origin of the common carotid artery and appears as a hypoechoic, lobular structure in the near field. The
lary vein (MV) is caudal to the mandibular salivary gland. The common carotid artery has a distinct hyperechoic wall(arrow-
head). B: At the caudal edge of the mandibular salivary gland, the maxillary vein (MV) and linguofacial vein (L) join to form
the jugular vein (not shown). C: Sagittal image of the common carotid artery (CC) in the midcervical region. The artery has
a thicker, more hyperechoic wall (arrow) compared with the jugular vein. D: The jugular vein I), which is in the jugular
furrow, has a much thinner wall than the common carotid artery and is easily compressed. E: Longitudinal image of the
changes from blue to red as the blood flow passes perpencicular to the ultrasound beam. F: Pulsed-wave Doppler imaging
of the jugular vein produces a smooth,laminar, low-velocity signal. G: Pulsed-waveDoppler of the carotid artery has distinct
pulsatile flow with higher velocity. Note the characteristic arterial systolic peaks (arrow). The velocities are lower than actual
velocities because no angle correction can be used.
C
20
10
cm/s
-10
cm's
10
-20
30
40
Figure 3.4.
96NECK
and linear echogenic streaks within finely textured
mandibular salivary gland. The external carotid artery
hypoechoic parenchyma (Figure 3.3).
continues in a straight line from the common carotid
Moving dorsally from the mandibular salivary gland
 artery, whereas the internal carotid artery is slightly
by using a dorsal plane, the parotid salivary gland
smaller in diameter and travels medially at a 30° angle
appears as a less-distinct, heterogeneous, and poorly
(Figure 3.4A). The carotid bulb, a focal dilatation of the
marginated structure lateral or caudalto the curvilin-
arterial lumen at the origin of the internal carotid
ear external ear canal.
artery, can be seen occasionally.
a (zHNzi-a) ianpsuen Aouanban-usy e Sun
VesselsandNerves
vagosympathetic trunk is near the internal jugular
vein and dorsal to the common carotid artery within
The major neck vessels that can be seen with ultra-
the carotid sheath. In transvcrse orientation, the carot-
sound are the jugular veins and their primary tributar-
id sheath appears hyperechoic and encompasses the
ies andthecommon carotid arteriesand their major
 common carotid artery, vagosympathetic trunk, and
branches (Wisner et al. 1991). Othcr vessels, such as
internal jugular vein. The vagosympathetic trunk is
thyroid arteries and veins, are smaller and seen incon-
dorsal to the common carotid artery and appears
sistently. All of these structures are imaged in trans-
hypoechoic. It can be seen from the laryngeal region
versc or sagittal plane. Some may be seen from ventral
to the thoracic inlet, and no visible vascular structures
midline,whereas others may be seen better with the
are within it. The vagosympathetic trunk is approxi-
transducer positioned lateral to midline. For the vas-
mately 1.2 ± 0.4mm in diameter, which varies with the
cular structures and thyroid glands, the sagittal plane
weight of the animal (Reese et al. 2001).
is obtained by orienting the transducer in a cranial
to caudal direction and rotating the imaging plane
LymphNodes
30°-45° medially.
 The external jugular vein (Figure 3.4D and E) lies
Mandibular lymph nodes are small, oval or kidney-
superficially within the jugular furrow. Cranially, the
shaped structures located medially and caudally to the
maxillary and linguofacial veins join to form the exter-
mandibular salivary glands and clustered around the
nal jugular vein at the caudal aspect of the mandibular
 jugular vein. Thesenodes are usually mildly hypoechoic
to surrounding fat, although they can be isoechoic.
compressed, so very little transducer pressure should
There are usually 2-3 lymph nodes on each side. The
be used to image it. The transducer should be placed
medial and lateral retropharyngeal lymph nodes are
in the jugular furrow in a sagittal orientation and
dorsal to the pharynx and medial to thc mandibular
angled 45 toward midline. The wall of the jugular
salivary gland (Figure 3.3). The medial rctropharyn-
vein is thin,and the lumen is anechoic.With color
Doppler or pulsed-wave Doppler ultrasound,
a
lymph nodes and can be more than 0.5cm in diameter
smooth, laminar flow is seen (Figure 3.4F). This is
and 2-4cm long. The cranial portion of these nodes is
sometimes difficulto demonstratebecause theDoppler
typically wider than the caudal part, which is more
signal is weakest when the vessel lies at nearly 90° to
fusiform. These occasionally appear as two to three
the beam. Slight angulation of the transducer in a
closely associated nodes.Mandibular,retropharyn-
caudal direction, as well as angle correction con-
geal, and cranial cervical lymph nodes can be seen in
trols, will improve the Doppler image. Weak pulsatile
normal dogs, depending on the size of the lymph
flow referred from the carotid artery will be seen
nodes and the transducer frequency. The nodes are
Occasionally.
usually well defined,oval, and less than 0.5cm in
The common carotid artery is located in close asso-
diameter. The superficial cervical lymph nodes, located
ciation and parallel to the trachea.The artery has
in the lateroventral aspect of the caudal neck, are often
a thick, hyperechoic wall and anechoic lumen
paired and significantly larger than those in the cranial
(Figure 3.4A and C), with a pulsatile Doppler wave-
cervical region. These nodes can be found superficially
form (Figure 3.4G). Each artery is located at the dorso-
in the prescapular region and slightly dorsal to the
lateral margin of the trachea, and the sternohyoid and
jugular furrow.
sternothyroid muscles are locatedventromedially to
them. The sternocephalicus muscle lies between the
common carotid artery and the more superficialjugular
Tongue
vein. The common carotid artery branches into the
The tongue is attached to the paired mylohyoid and
internal and external carotid arteriesmedial to the
geniohyoid muscles that are attached to the ramus of
97ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
the mandible and the hyoid apparatus. The mylohyoid
shadowing in the far field. In sagittal orientation, the
originates from the medial side of the mandible, and
epiglottis is a short echogenic line parallel to the trans-
the geniohyoid from the ramus of the mandiblc.Both
ducer surface and dorsal to thecranialportion of the
muscles attach to the basihyoid bone caudally. Thc
thyroid cartilage. Its motion during swallowing assists
tongue is hyperechoic to the supporting musculature
its identification.
(Figure 3.5).
 In transverse section, the arytenoid cartilages appear
transducer and within the thyroid cartilage near the
Larynx
lateral walls (Figure 3.6). Between the arytenoid carti-
Just caudal to the tongue, the thyroid and cricoid car-
lages and the true vocal folds are hypoechoic bands
tilages have echogenic surfaces and produce acoustic medial to the wall of the thyroid cartilage. Thcse
B
more ventral geniohyoid and mylohyoid muscles. In parasagittal orientation, the fibers have a diagonal pattern. B: In trans-
have a butterfly shape
A
B
Ventral is at the top of the imagc, and the right side is on the left. The thyroid cartilage is visible as a hyperechoic V-shaped
ments, the cuneiform processes of the arytenoid cartilages appear as hyperechoic dots (arrows). The vocal muscles (M) are
larynx taken during inspiration. The cuneiform processes move in abduction in inspiration and in adduction in cxpiration
(compare with A).
98NECK
represent the insertion of the aryepiglottic fold from
 or hyperechoic. The glands are uniformly echogenic,
the epiglottis on the ventral portion of the cuneiform
though occasionally they have hyperechoic or
process of the arytenoid cartilage and are called the
hypoechoic foci or are diffusely mottled. Small vessels
false vocal folds.
may sometimes be seen as anechoic structures cours-
 Orienting the transducer transversely ventral to the
ing through the thyroid tissue, which can be confirmed
thyroid cartilage shows the moving vocal folds. The
with Doppler ultrasound. Both canine and feline thy-
transducer is then moved caudally to the junction of
roids can be imaged by using a 10- to 13-MHz trans-
the thyroid and cricoid cartilages and directed crani-
ducer for best resolution. Cats may also occasionally
ally toward the vocal folds, which are attached to the
have ectopic thyroid tissue locatcd in the caudal cervi-
vocal process of the arytenoid cartilage dorsally and
cal region or cranial mediastinum.
the thyroid cartilage ventrally. The vocal folds consist
Thyroid volumc can be estimated by measuring the
of the vocal ligaments located craniomedially, and the
length, width, and height of the gland, and using the
vocal muscle continues laterally and caudally from it
formula π/6(length × width × height) to calculate
to join with the larynx. The vocal ligaments appear as
volume. The thyroid gland volume is correlated with
vertical hyperechoic bands in the central larynx that
body weight and body surface area more thanwith
contact each other in the ventral portion of the thyroid
breed. There is more intraobserver variability in mea-
cartilage. The vocal proccsscs of the arytenoid carti-
suring the length of the glands because they taper
lage arc hyperechoic lines that join with the vocal liga-
caudally and the distal limit maybe difficult to define
ments dorsally. The air-filled space between the vocal
(Table 3.1)
folds is the rima glottis. Mineralization of the laryngeal
 On average, there are four parathyroid glands
cartilages may hinder viewing of the vocal folds
located in each thyroidlobe,with two in each cranial
through the thyroid cartilages.
and caudal pole. However, there is significant normal
Normal motion of the vocal folds is abduction dur-
individual variation inboth parathyroid numbers and
ing inspiration and adduction during expiration.
.The
distribution.Normal parathyroid glands are usually
cuneiform and vocal processes of the arytenoid carti-
well margined, hypoechoic to anechoic, and less than
lages also move in this manner. The motion may be
2 mm in diameter and 3.3mm long (Reusch et al. 2000;
  sn     
Wisner et al. 2002) (Figure 3.8). All parathyroid glands
should be evaluated for symmetry, and overall motion
 are not always visible in normal dogs.
 is minimal in normal dogs.
Tracheaand Esophagus
ThyroidandParathyroidGlands
Both structures contain air that causes reverberation
The left and right thyroid lobes lie between the common
artifacts and acoustic shadowing. However, their
carotid artery and the trachea and are often positioned
near walls (ventral and lateral) can be examined
at slightly different levels craniocaudally.To locate thc
using ultrasound. The trachea has a hyperechoic,
thyroids, place the transducer in a transverse planc
 round to oval wall and travels in a sagittal plane. In
centered on the trachea just caudal to the larynx and
a longitudinal view, the tracheal rings are visible
move it caudally until triangular structurcs are seen
(Figure 3.9A). In transverse view, in the midportion
between the trachea and carotid (Figure 3.7). Each
 of the neck, the near wall is curved and echogenic,
thyroid may also be located separately by sliding the
with distal acoustic shadowing obscuring the lumen
probe latcral to the trachea and by following the cor-
(Figure 3.9B)
respondent common carotid artery on cross section,
The esophagus is also sagittally oriented, but varies
which serves as an important landmark. Once a thyroid
in position from dorsal to the trachea caudal to the
is located,rotate the transducer 90° to a sagittal plane,
larynx, to left of the trachea at the thoracic inlet. The
keeping the thyroid in the middle of the screen. This
lumen of the esophagus has a star shape in transverse
motion can be challenging because the thyroid gland
orientation and contains a small amount of gas and
is thin.The transducer may need tobe angled medially
mucus. In sagittal orientation, the muscularis layer is
from the jugular furrow to get the best sagittal plane
visible as a hypoechoic band superficially, and gas or
(Figure 3.8A).
fluid may be seen in the lumen (Figure 3.10A). If
The thyroid is fusiform orellipsoid in sagittal section,
imaged obliquely, the folds of the mucosal surface
and round, oval, or triangular in transverse section.
appear as parallel hyperechoic bands (Figure 3.10B).
Thyroid glands in dogs are isoechoic to surrounding
The esophagus can be seen medial to the left common
tissue, though a small percentage can be hypoechoic
carotid artery and left thyroid gland.
Y
culature (M). B: The normal cranial parathyroid gland (PT, between the cursors) is at the cranial extremity of the thyroid
gland (Th). Image courtesy of D. Penninck. C: Right thyroid gland. In the transverse orientation, the thyroid is triangular
orientation, the left thyroid (between the cursors) is ventral or lateral to the esophagus (E), dorsal to the ventral musculature
(M), and also between the trachea (T) and common carotid artery (asterisk).
Table 3.1.
Measurementsof normal structuresin theneck
Width/Diameter (mm)
Length (mm)
Height（mm）
Volume（mm²)
Structure
Vagosympathetic trunk
1.2 ± 0.4
Medial retropharyngeal lymphnode
5
20-40
Mandibular lymph node
5
Thyroid,feline(single lobe)
66-103
20.5 (18.9-22.1)
3.3(2.5-4.1)
89 (66-112)
Left
20.3 (18.7-21.9)
3.0(2.4-3.6)
80 (61-99)
Right
Cats (total volume)
124-215
Thyroid,canine
Beagles
5.3 (3.3-7.3)
24.5 (20.4-28.5)
5.3 (3.3-7.3)
380
Akitas
63-1912
315-1580
Golden retrievers
Toyandminiaturepoodles
128-713
Parathyroid
2
3.3 (2.0-4.6)
Combined data from Wisner et al. (1991 and 1994),Reusch et al. (2000), Reese and Ruppert (2001), Taeymans et al. (2005), and Bromel
et al. (2005).
99
thyroid glands (arrows) are visible in the cranial and caudal aspects of the thyroid lobe.
M
B
Figure3.9.
.Normal trachea in a dog. A: Sagittal plane. The tracheal rings are visible in the sagittal plane as rectangular,
hypoechoic structures (arrows) with central hypcrechoic dots, dorsal to the hyperechoic air column (arrowhead). The air-tissue
interface causes reverberation artifact in the far field, which appears as equally spaced and progressively less echogenic lines
parallel to the original air interface. The hypoechoic ventral muscles (M) of the neck are in the near field. B: Transverse plane.
ring-air interface is hyperechoic (arrowhead). The tracheal lumen carunot be evaluated because of thc presence of reverbera-
tion and shadowing.
100
101ATLASOF SMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
Figure 3.10. Normal esophagus of a dog. Cranial is to the left of the image. A: The muscularis layer is seen as a hypoechoic
line (arrowheads) in the near and far fields. The smallamount of mucus or gas in the lumen causes a hyperechoic appearance
(asterisk) deep to the Imucosa (arrowhead). C: Transverse sonogram of the esophagus (arrows) in a normal dog. The prescncc
Of gas in the lumen prevents optimal visualization of the wall. T, trachea. Image courtesy of D. Penninck.
SONOGRAPHIC FEATURES OF
Thetransmissionof theultrasound beam throughthe
fluid also renders the far wall of the bulla visible
NECK DISORDERS
(Figure 3.11). If air and gas are present in the bulla, a
dependent scanning position may be the most sensi-
Bulla
tive. Fluid can also be found incidentally as a transient
Middle-ear disease is often characterized by the pres-
bulla effusion rather than as a result of inflaimmatory
ence of fluid in the tympanic bulla. Fluid in the bulla
 or obstructive disease, so its presence should be cor-
appears hypoechoic,replacingthe normal gas shadows.
related with clinical signs of middle-ear disease.
102 NECK
A
with cranial to the left of the image. The ventromedial compartment of the bulla is filled with anechoic fluid, and the near
wall is scen more clearly. The far wall (>) is also visible because the fluid has transmitted the ultrasound. The dorsolateral
compartment (arrow) appears hypoechoic, and there is no reverberation artifact, suggesting soft-tissue content. B: Magnetic
resonance T1-weighted postcontrast sagittal image of the tympanic bulla. The magnetic resonance image confirins the pres-
ence of fluid in the ventromedial compartment (>) and contrast-enhancing soft tissue in the dorsolateral compartment (arrow)
of the tympanic bulla.
Tumors and inflammatory polyps cause soft-tissue
filling of the bulla on computed tomographic and
 magnetic resonance images, but has not been reported
with ultrasound imaging. Bulla thickness irregularity
or alterationmayindicatemore severeear disease
such as neoplasia, osteomyelitis, or craniomandibular
osteopathy.
Experimentally, a fluid-filled external ear canal
improves the visualization of canal size and cartilage
thickncss. The tympanic membrane cannot be seen
directly; however, if thc car canal is fluid filled and the
bulla is air filled, the mcmbrane is likely intact. If the
membrane is ruptured, the bulla is also fluid filled.
Salivary Glands
Disorders that affect the salivary glands include true
cyst, mucocele, sialolith, sialitis (Figure 3.12), sialocele
(Figure 3.13), salivary duct cyst (Figure 3.14), and
neoplasia.
Figure 3.12. Lymphoplasmacytic sialoadenitis in a dog.
Most of these conditions are rare in dogs and cats.
On this sagittal image,the right mandibular gland is rounded,
Localization of the lesion is based on the anatomical
hypoechoic, and enlarged (arrows), and the salivary ducts
site and surrounding landmarks. Common findings in
are dilated (asterisk).
inflammatory or obstructive disease include enlarge-
ment of the gland and/or salivary ducts and edema in
the surrounding tissues. Cystic lesions,nodularlesions,
and enlarged salivary glands can be aspirated to deter-
mine their origin.
103ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
B
Figure 3.13.Sialocele in a 13-year-old Jack Russcll terrier.A: A dilated mandibular and sublingual duct system is present.
B: Transverse sonogram of the dilated duct filled with poorly echogenic fluid. The larynx (arrows) is near the dilated duct.
A fine-needle aspirate confirmed the presence of saliva.Images courtesy of D.Penninck.
Figure 3.14. Salivary duct cyst in a cat. On these transverse (A) and sagittal (B) images, a well-demarcated fluid flled
structure is ventral and lateral to the mandible (arrowhead). The cyst contains hyperechoic sedimenting debris (asterisk).
Vessels
hypoxia and overstimulation of the carotid bodies
caused by brachycephalic syndrome may contribute to
Abnormalities involving the carotid artery and jugular
the increased prevalence of disease in these breeds.
Other neuroendocrine tumors,such as thyroid tumors,
animals (c.g., hyperadrenocorticism and protein-losing
may occur in conjunction with chemodectomas. On
nephropathy) and may be a complication of catheter
ultrasound examination, these tumors are located at
placement. The acute thrombus may be anechoic and
the bifurcation of the common carotid artery into the
is recognized only by a flow void in the color Doppler
 internal and external carotid arteries. Tumors may sur-
signal. More chronically, the thrombus becomes more
echogenic and visible in B-mode imaging. Stenosis of
are generally highly vascular. They are hypoechoic to
these vessels can occur as a complication of surgery,
surrounding tissues, lobulated, and well marginated
trauma, or invasive neoplasia. Stenosis appears as a
(Wisner et al. 1994; Fife et al. 2003) (Figure 3.15). Fine-
narrowing of the vessel lumen, with increased velocity
needle aspirates should be performed with caution,
or turbulent flow.
 considering the vascularity and proximity of major
Carotid-body tumors are rare neuroendocrine
vessels.
tumors that arise from the pressure sensors in the
Any invasive tumor, such as thyroid carcinoma, can
carotid artery. Older brachycephalic breeds may be
cause local distortion of vasculature. Invasion of the
predisposed to developing chemodectomas. Chronic
common carotid artery can cause erosion of the
104 NECK
TR-1
Figure 3.15.
 Chemodectoma in a 12-year-old dog. Sagittal B-mode (A) and transverse color Doppler (B) ultrasound images
 of a mass found in the neck. A smooth, well-circumscribed, hypoechoic mass is noted at the medial aspect of the right common
carotid artery (CC). Initially the mass was suspected to originate from the thyroid gland. At surgery, the thyroid glands were
normal. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
racic inlet may also invade local vessels or cause
thrombosis. If the cranial vena cava is thrombosed,
distended, or occluded, veins may be seen more crani-
ally. Obstruction of venous flow may also cause sub-
 cutaneous edema of the head and neck.
Arteriovenous fistula in association with a recurr-
ent thyroid carcinoma has been reported in the neck
(Wisner et al. 1994). These abnormal connections
 between the arterial system and the venous system
often have multiple tortuous vessels with arterial flow
characteristics. The local veins may be distended, and
left heart failure can occur.
 Cervical masses such as lymphoma and thyroid car-
cinoma may also involve the vagosympathetic trunk,
 causing Horner's syndrome (Melian et al. 1996) and
laryngeal paralysis (Schaer et al. 1979). There is also a
 single report of a neoplastic mass originating from the
vagus nerve (Ruppert et al. 2000).
Figure 3.16.
6.Venous invasion and thrombosis in a dog.
Transverse image of the thyroid with thyroid carcinoma. A
Lymph Nodes and Soft Tissues
large, ill-defined, hypoechoic mass (T) has replaced the
 Enlarged mandibular, retropharyngeal, or cervical
thyroid gland. The mass had invaded the thyroid vein, with
a tumor thrombus occupying most of the lumen (asterisk).
lymph nodes may be caused by local inflammation,
The tumor thrombus continued into the jugular vein
tumoral infiltration, or regional metastatic disease.
(arrow).
Tumors of the mouth often metastasize to the man-
dibular lymph nodes. Lymph nodes affected by inflam-
matory disease (Figure 3.17) or neoplastic disease are
wall and massive hemorrhage (Slensky et al. 2003).
enlarged, rounded, and hypoechoic. The margins of
Local vessels may be infiltrated by the neoplasia
the lymph nodes can be indistinct if there is local
(Figure 3.16), recruited into the tumor, compressed, or
inflammation.
thrombosed. Other small vessels may also distend to
Cavitation can also occur in reactive nodes because
supply the mass. Tumors of the caudal neck and tho-
of abscessation and in metastatic nodes because of
105ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
Figure 3.17. Mandibular lymphadenopathy in a dog. A: Sagittal image of the normal left mandibular lymph node (cursors).
Itis oval and is slightly hypoechoic to the surrounding tissues. B: The right mandibular lymph node is reactive. Itis hypoechoic
image of enlarged mandibular lymph nodes with pyogranulomatous lymphadenitis and cellulitis. The lymph nodes are
slightly inhomogeneous and have irregular contours. Inage C courtesy of D. Penninck.
hemorrhage and necrosis. Metastatic lymph nodes can
be surrounded by slightly hyperechoic tissue (Figure
also be hypoechoic or heterogeneous without enlarge-
3.18B). The distal enhancement can cause the nodes to
ment. They tend to become rounder and thicker from
be confused with anechoic cysts.
their normal oval or clongated shape. Reactive and
Other cervical masses that are nonlymphoid, thyroid,
metastatic lymph nodes appear very similar, and finc-
 Or parathyroid in origin, such as lipomas, hemangio-
needle aspiration is generally needed for a diagnosis.
 sarcomas, fibrosarcomas, hematomas, and abscesses.
Lymphoma causes generalized peripheral lymph-
Masses in the ncck can appear solid, cystic, or complex
adenopathy in dogs, but rarely in cats.Affected lymph
(Gooding et al. 1977). Neoplastic masses are usually
nodes of the head and neck are enlarged and
solid or complex, and hematomas arc complex or
hypoechoic. The nodes may have indistinct margins
 cystic. Acutely, hematomas appear as hypoechoic
and disrupted internal architecture. In dogs with lym-
masses with a hypoechoic center. With time, septa-
phoma, the cervical and mandibular lymph nodes
tions can develop,echogenicity increases, and a capsule
enlarge to a lesser degree than the retropharyngeal
may form (Wisner et al. 2002).HIematomas should
lymph nodes (Figure 3.18A). These hypoechoic lymph
 become smaller with tine. Lipomas are usually well
marginated, are elliptical, and are striated and
106NECK
M
B
B
Figure 3.18. Sonograms of the neck of a dog with lymphoma. Cranial is to the left of the image. A: The medial retropha-
ryngeal lymph node (R) is markedly enlarged,rounded, and hypoechoic.It ismedial to the normalmandibular salivary gland
(M) and many times its size. B: The paired superficial cervical lymph nodes are also markedly enlarged and are not normally
seen. They are rounded, with a hypoechoic, speckled echotexture.There is also distal acoustic enhancement deep to the lymph
nodes (asterisk). The tissues surrounding the lymph nodes are hyperechoic, indicating inflammation or edema.
A
B
MASS
Figure 3.19. Intermandibular cellulitis in a dog. A: Transverse image taken bctwccn the mandibles from a ventral position.
A large, heterogeneous mass is in the soft tissues of the neck (cursors). The margin is hypoechoic, which suggcsts cdcma,
and the mass is attenuating, with decreased signal in the far field. B: In this more cranial image, an enlarged, hypoechoic
reactive lymph node (arrow) is superficial to the mass (asterisk).
hyperechoic to surrounding musculature. Howevcr,
,echoic septa (Figure 3.20C). Inflamed fatly tissues are
lipomas can be infiltrative and poorly defined. often thickened, hyperechoic, and hyperattenuating
Interfascial planes or muscles can be infiltrated.
(Figure 3.20D). Abscesses are often septated, with a
Penetrating wounds from the skin or esophagus, t
thick wall and echogenic fluid contents (Figure 3.22).
with or without foreign bodies, may cause diffuse or (
Cystic lesions are rare and usually thyroid or branchial
localized cellulitis ofthe soft tissues of theneck (Figures  in origin (Wisner et al. 2002). Foreign bodies can be
3.19-3.22). Edema can be seen dissecting between  challenging to identify. Their detection is greatly influ-
fascial planes or within the subcutaneous fat asenced by the their acoustic characteristics and by their
anechoic or hypoechoic areas separated by thin hyper-
size, location, and shape (Figure 3.21).
107ATLASOF SMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
neck in an 11-year-old Irish setter, on which a multicavitated mass measuring about 4.5 x 6cm is caudoventral to the larynx
o s p  pe  ud  o o s ( rady pue a si pou i p 
another large-breed dog with a history of neck pain and swelling and inappetance. The subcutaneous fat is swollen and
presents several hypoechoic, septated cavities (*) located caudal to one of the mandibular (M) salivary glands. The neighbor-
ing fat is hyperechoic and hyperattenuating. The presence of serohemorrhagic fluid and pus was confirmed by fine-needle
aspirations. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
Larynx
Occurs in the ventral larynx, as well as on the vocal
cords. Laryngeal cysts have been reported infre-
Neoplasia (Figure 3.23), trauma (Figure 3.24), inflam-
  auho Ae pue sh pue ssop u un
mation (Figure 3.25), and cysts can affect the larynx
epiglottis, laryngcal wall, or paralaryngeal tissues.
and paralaryngeal structures.The most common
They are seen as anechoic masses distorting the rima
neoplasia of the larynx in cats is lymphoma, and
glottides.
in dogs is malignant epithelial neoplasia (Carlisle
 Laryngeal paralysis, which is a neuropathy of the
et al. 1991). These tumors can appear as masses in
recurrent laryngeal nerve,causes unilateral or bilateral
the laryngeal wall and may also distort or obliterate
paralysis of the vocal folds. Ultrasound can be used to
the normal laryngeal structures. Lymphoma in cats
evaluate the motion of thevocal folds and cuneiform
appears as a well-circumscribed, hypoechoic or
cartilages to diagnose the condition. The criterion for
mixed echogenic mass arising from the ventral or
diagnosing laryngeal paralysis is reduced or asym-
lateral larynx. The mass may narrow the lumen of
metrical motion of the vocal folds. This appears as
the larynx or displace the larynx to the side. Squamous
lack of abduction of the cuneiform cartilages and
cell carcinoma may appear more destructive and
vocal folds during inspiration on one or both sides
Figure 3.21.Sewing needle and associated cellulitis in a dog. A: The needle (arrow) appears as a discrete hyperechoic line
surrounded by a poorly marginated hypoechoic arca representing extensive cellulitis and edema.B: The needle tip (arrow)
is close to the esophagus (E) and the carotid artery (arrowhead). TR, trachea. C: Hypocchoic arborization through the super-
ficial and deep cervical soft tissue is noted and is often seen in abscess formation, dissecting cellulitis, and edema. Images
courtesy ofD.Penninck.
-4.24cm
Figure 3.22. Retropharyngeal abscess in a dog. A: Lateral oblique radiograph of the head and neck of a dog with a history
ventral displacement of the nasopharynx, larynx, and trachea (arrows). B: Transverse sonogram in the region of the mass. A.
large, irregular, moderately echogenic mass (arrows) is lateral and caudal to the esophagus (ES). This mass has a thick wall
 encircling an irregular cavity filled with echogenic fluid. Fine-needle aspirations and surgical biopsies confirmed the presence
 of a sterile, pyogranulomatous abscess of uncertain origin. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
108
109ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
B
Figure 3.23.Laryngeal melanoma in a dog. A: Transverse image of the larynx through the thyroid cartilage. An ill-defined
soft tissue mass (asterisk) is within the left side of the lumen of the larynx. B: In left sagittal orientation, the mass is bettcr
delineated originating from the left laryngeal wall(cursors). Cranial is to the left side of the image. Hyperechoic revcrberating
Figure 3.24. Penetrating laryngeal foreign body in a dog. A: On this transverse image, the air-filled larynx is visiblc as an
anechoic acoustic shadowing artifact (L). There is a hyperechoic linear structure (arrow) exiting the larynx at a ventrolateral
oblique angle. The tissues surrounding this foreign body are distorted (between thc carets). B: The foreign body (arrow) can
be followed from the larynx to the right ventral neck.
(Figure 3.26). Approximately 50% of dogs with laryn-
caused by inflammation, edema, or neoplasia. The
geal paralysis have abnormal dorsal and ventral move-
anatomy and motion of the cuneiform cartilage are
mentof the arytenoid cartilages that is causcd by the
similar to those of dogs, but the smaller size of the
unaffected contraction of the cricothyroid muscle
feline larynx may cause incomplete visibility of the
(Rudorf et al. 2001). Signs of severe upper-airway
vocal folds.
obstruction include collapse of the pharynx during
inspiration, paradoxical movement of the vocal folds
ThyroidGlands
(blowing laterally during expiration), and caudal dis-
placement of the whole larynx.
Hyperthyroidism caused by functional thyroid ade-
Laryngeal paralysis and vocal cord thickening have
noma or adenomatous hypcrplasia is very common
been reported in cats. Vocal cord thickening can be
in older cats (Mooney 2002). This can manifest as a
110NECK
image. The vocal folds appear normal at this level. B: Just caudal to the vocal folds is a lobulated, hypoechoic inass (arrows)
involving the right side of the larynx and trachea. CC points to the common carotid artery.
Thyroid glands occasionally contain cysts with distal
acoustic enhancement. These cysts can be confused
with normal parathyroid glands, which can also appear
hypoechoic or anechoic. The cyst may be irregular in
shape, but its margin should be visible in both planes.
Thyroid and parathyroid neoplasia, such as thyroid
cystadenoma and parathyroid adenocarcinoma, can
also appear cystic (Phillips et al. 2003) (Figure 3.27A
and C). Thyroid glands that cannot be identified on
ultrasound are rarely hyperfunctioning, so cats with
unilateral thyroid hyperplasia may only have one
visiblelobe.
Dogs are more often affected by hypothyroidism.
On ultrasound examination in one study, hypothyroid
lobes were more rounded on transverse imaging rather
than their normal triangular shape (Reese et al. 2005).
However, a further study of normal dogs revealed
many with a similar transverse shape, making the
Figure 3.26. Laryngeal paralysis in a dog. The cuneiform
 earlier observation nonspecific. Hypothyroid lobes are
processes of the arytenoid cartilage (arrows) fail to abduct
also hypoechoic and smaller than normal lobes (Figure
during inspiration.
3.28). They may be heterogeneous in echotexture
discrete nodule within the thyroid gland or as diffuse
and have an irregularly shaped capsule (Bromel et al.
thyroid enlargement. Ultrasound can be used to
2005).
measure the volume of the thyroid glands to detect
Thyroid carcinoma is a rare but aggressive neopla-
enlargement. Although this is not a functional test as
sia that affects dogs and cats. It often presents at an
is nuclear scintigraphy, enlarged glands are indicative
advanced stage, with the mass involving a large area
of thyroid disease. Both thyroid lobes are affected in
of the ventral cervical region and distorting local
70% of cats (Mooney 2002)
anatomy. This may make localizing the origin of the
Hyperplastic thyroid glands are hypoechoic or
mass to the thyroid difficult. On ultrasound examina-
isocchoic to surrounding tissue and hypoechoic to
tion, the mass appears heterogeneous and hypoechoic
normal thyroids. In thyroid adenomas, the glands can
to normal thyroid tissue, with good to poor margin-
be focally or diffusely affected, often with a lobular
ation (Figure 3.29). The trachea and esophagus may bc
margin and tubular shape (Figure 3.27B).
displaced ventrally and laterally, and the enlarging
C
lobe is outlined by cursors, and the center is filled with anechoic fluid. B: Sagittal image of the right thyroid with thyroid
adenoma.The thyroid lobe is outlined by cursors.The gland is enlarged and rounded, with an irregular bordcr, and is
B
lobe outlined by cursors and arrows. It is poorly marginated and slightly hypoechoic to the surrounding tissue (arrows).
points to the common carotid artery.
111
3.16cm
X2.03cm
Figure3.29.
Thyroid carcinoma in dogs. A: Transverse image of the left thyroid gland. The large, hypoechoic thyroid car-
cinoma is displacing the common carotid artery (asterisk) laterally. The trachea (Tr) is visible on the medial side of the mass.
 Foci of mineralization are within the mass, causing acoustic shadowing (arrowhead). The vagosympathetic trunk (arrow) is
dorsal to the common carotid artery. B: Panoramic view of a large thyroid carcinoma (over 5 cm long) deviating the carotid
thyroid carcinoma presented in B. Prominent vessels are at the ventral periphery of the mass. D: Power Doppler of another
thyroid carcinoma, which is highly vascularized. The mass is between the common carotid artery (asterisk) and the trachea
(Tr). Image courtesy of D. Penninck. E and F: Sagittal B-mode and color Doppler images of another thyroid carcinoma. The
 mass contains discrete, hyperechoic mineral foci and a fluid cavitation (arrow). Prominent vessels are noted at the ventral
 periphery, and the external jugular vein I) is displaced and compressed, but not invaded. Images E and F courtesy of M.A.
d'Anjou.
112
113ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
 mass can cause upper-airway obstruction. The local
Secondary hyperparathyroidism is caused by parathy-
vasculatureandesophaguscan be compressedor
roid hyperplasia secondary to renal diseasc or nutri-
invaded by thyroid carcinoma (Figures 3.16 and 3.29F).
tional deficiencies, and often more thanone parathyroid
Mineralization of the mass can be observed as hyper-
gland is visible.
echoic foci with distal acoustic shadowing (Figure
 Parathyroid nodules are hypoechoic to anechoic and
3.29A and E), and metastasis to local lymph nodes is
often have distal acoustic enhancement. They tend to
be well circumscribed and are round or oval (Figure
common.
3.30). Parathyroid nodules that are greater than 4mm
in diameter are more likely to be parathyroid adeno-
ParathyroidGlands
mas or carcinomas, whereas those less than 4mm in
Dogs with hypercalcemia may have primary or sec-
ondary parathyroid disease, and ultrasonography
 ondary to chronic renal disease or hypercalcemia of
often helps to differentiate between them (Reusch ct
malignancy (Wisner et al. 1997). Parathyroid neoplasia
al. 2000). Primary hyperparathyroidism is caused by
tcnds to involve one gland, though a second nodule
hyperplasia, adenoma, or less commonly, adenocarci-
has been reported in a case of adenoma (Wisner et al.
noma and presents as a single parathyroid nodule.
1997). Cats rarely have parathyroid adenoma.
D
Figure 3.30.Parathyroid chief cell adenoma in dogs. A: Sagittal image of the right thyroid (arrowheads) and parathyroid
glancls of a 10-year-old English sctter. A discrete hypoechoic nodule (between the cursors) measuring 7 mn in diameter is
present cranially. Image courtesy of D. Penninck. B: Transverse image of the right thyroid (arrowheads) and parathyroid
the medial contour of thethyroid gland.The diagnosis is parathyroid chief cell adenoma.The adjacent common carotid artery
(asterisk) seen on cross section should not be confused with a parathyroid nodule. T, trachea. Image courtesy of D. Penninck.
C: Transverse image of the left parathyroid of a dog with parathyroid carcinoma. A round, hypoechoic nodule (asterisk) is
between the trachea (T) and the common carotid artery (arrow) in the left neck. D: In sagittal orientation, the nodule protrudes
from the cranioventral aspect (arrow) of the thyroid gland. The dorsal border of the thyroid gland is marked with the
caret.
114NECK
In acute renal failure, parathyroid length (median,
(Wisner ct al. 2002). Othcr lesions, such as thickening
2.7mm) is similar to that in normal dogs (median,  can also be detected (Figurcs 3.32 and 3.33).
3.3mm). In dogs with chronic renal failure, however,
Intraluminal esophageal ultrasound has also been
the parathyroid glands are longer (median, 5.7mm)
used to investigate lesions such as enlarged lymph
(Reusch et al. 2000). This may help to differentiate
nodes and mediastinal masses in the thorax (Gaschen
between acute and chronic renal failure, although
et al.2003)
there is likely to be some overlap between the two
groups.
Trachea
In dogs with tracheal collapse, the hyperechoic air
column just caudal to the cricoid cartilage appears
oval and flattened (Rudorf et al.1997). This may be
associated with tracheal collapse in the thoracic inlet,
as well. The dorsal trachcal mcmbranc is not visiblc
directly, but this alteration in shape of the air column
is indicative of invagination. The flattening of the air
column may worsen slightly with the head in an
extended position.Other tracheal lesions such as
masses, trauma, or edema may occasionally be seen
(Figure 3.31).
Figure 3.31.Tracheal edema in a dog.Sagittalimage of the
Esophagus
trachea of a dog with postanesthetic regurgitation and aspi-
ration causing tracheal edema. Cranial is to the left of thc
Ultrasonography can be used to identify mass lesions
imagc.Thc trachcal wall is mildly thickened and irregular in
in the cervical esophagus to monitor correct placement
the caudal portion of the neck. The asterisks outline a
B
Figure 3.32. Esophagus of a dog with esophageal fibrosis and muscular hypertrophy. A: Cranial is on the left of the image.
In the sagittal orientation,the lumen of the esophagus is indicated by the far-field cursor and the serosal surface by the near-
field cursor. The muscularis layer is hypoechoic, and the entire esophageal wall is thickened. B: Transverse image of the
with a curvilinear 5-to 8-MHz transducer.
115ATLASOF SMALI.ANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
1.12cm
1.62cm
C
Cranial
Caudal
1.03cm
0.52cm
Figure 3.33. Idiopathic esophageal hypertrophy in a dog. A: Lateral radiograph of the cranial neck in a dog with chronic
its cranial lumen (arrow), caudal to the cricopharyngeal muscle. B-D: Transverse (B) and sagittal (C and D) sonograms of
the diffusely and markcdly thickened esophagus, involving especially the muscular layer. The mucosa is hyperechoic and
confluent with the submucosa. Cranial and caudal portions of the esophagus are represented in C and D, respectively. The
arrow points to the collapsed lumen. Mucosal and muscular hyperplasia and hypertrophy, as wellas nonspecific inflamma-
tion, were diagnosed by means of ultrasound-guided biopsies. There was no evidence of a neoplastic process. Images courtesy
of M.A.d'Anjou.
SPECIAL PROCEDURES
ity, to map vessels prior to fine-needle aspiration or
biopsy, and to determine operability of a mass lesion.
Tissue samples of neck lesions are most often obtained
Feline hyperthyroidism has been treated using both
by using a fine-needle aspirate, though tissue-core
heat ablation and percutancous ethanol ablation
biopsies of larger lesions are possible using ultrasound
(Wells et al. 2001; Mallery et al. 2003) (Figure 3.35).
guidance (Figure 3.34). However, because of the high
 Complications from both of these procedures include
vascularity of some organs and masses such as those
Horner's syndrome and laryngeal paralysis. Heat abla-
of thyroid origin, and the presence of large arteries and
tion obtained better results than ethanol ablation, with
veins often adjacent to cervical lesions, particular care
a mean euthyroid period of 4 months. The longest
should be taken when either fine-needle aspiration or
cuthyroid period with ethanol ablation was 27 weeks,
tissue-core biopsy is attempted.
with a higher complication rate. Neither of these
Vesselsof masses and tissuescanbeidentifiedwith
methods is as effective as the surgical, medical, or
color and power Doppler imaging to gauge vascular-
radiotherapeutic methods currently in use.
116 NECK
REFERENCES
Bromcl C, Pollard RE, Kass PH, Samii VF, Davidson AP,
Nelson RW (2005) Ultrasonographic evaluation of the
thyroid gland in healthy, hypothyroid, and euthyroid
golden retrievers with nonthyroidal illness. J Vet Intern
Med 19:499-506.
Carlisle CH, Biery DN, Thrall DE (1991) Tracheal and laryn-
geal tumors in the dog and cat: Literature review and 13
additional patients.VetRadiol 32:229-235.
Dickie AM, Doust R, Cromarty L, Johnson VS, Sullivan M,
Boyd JS (2003) Ultrasound imaging of the canine tympanic
bulla.Res Vet Sci 75:121-126
Fife W, Mattoon J, Drost WT, Groppe D, Wellman M (2003)
Figure 3.34.Fine-nccdlc aspiration of an enlarged man-
Imaging features of a presumed carotid body tumor in a
dibular lymph node in a dog. The final diagnosis is pyo-
dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 44:322-325.
granulomatous lymphadenitis (the same dog as in Figure
Gaschen L, Kircher P, Hoffimann G, et al. (2003) Endoscopic
3.17C). Image courtesy of D. Penninck.
ultrasonography for the diagnosis of intrathoracic lesions
in two dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 44:292-299.
Gooding GA, Herzog KA, Laing FC, McDonald EJ Jr (1977)
 Ultrasonographic assessment of neck masses. J Clin
Ultrasound 5:248-252.
Mallery KF, Pollard RE, Nelson RW, Hornof WJ, Feldman
EC (2003) Percutaneous ultrasound-guided radiofre-
quency heat ablation for treatment of hyperthyroidisin in
cats.J Am Vet Med Assoc 223:1602-1607.
Melian C,Morales M, Espinosa de los Monteros A,Peterson
ME (1996) Horncr's syndrome associated with a functional
thyroid carcinoma in a dog. J Small Anim Pract 37:591-
593.
Mooney CT (2002) Pathogenesis of feline hyperthyroidism.
J Feline Med Surg 4:167-169.
Phillips DE, Radlinsky MG, Fischer JR, Biller DS (2003) Cystic
thyroid and parathyroid lesions in cats. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 39:349-54.
Reese S, Breyer U, Deeg C,Kraft W, Kaspers B (2005) Thyroid
 sonography as an effective tool to discriminate between
euthyroid sick and hypothyroid dogs. J Vet Intern Med
Figure 3.35.Intralcsional ultrasound-guided injection in a
19:491-498
dog.Sagittal image of a thyroid gland during ablation with
Reese S, Ruppert C (2001) Ultrasonographic imaging of the
intralesional injection of ethanol.The ethanol accumulation
vagosympathetic trunk in the dog.Vet Radiol Ultrasound
is a round, hyperechoic area (asterisk) within the thyroid
42:272-275.
gland (T). The needle originates from the left superficial
Reusch CE, Tomsa K,ZimmerC,etal.(2000) Ultrasonography
aspect of the image, and the tip is at the asterisk.
of the parathyroid glands as an aid in diffcrentiation of
acute and chronic rcnal failure in dogs. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 217:1849-1852.
Rudorf H, Barr FJ, Lane JG (2001) The role of ultrasound in
the assessment of laryngeal paralysis in the dog. Vet Radiol
Ablation of thyroid carcinomabyusinginjection of
Ultrasound 42:338-343.
pure medical ethanol has been reported (Wisner et al.
Rudorf H, Herrtage ME, White RA (1997) Use of ultrasonog-
2002). The target volume of injec.tion is approximately
raphy in the diagnosis of tracheal collapse. J Small Anim
half of the tumor volume, although the amount injected
Pract 38:513-518.
depends on the tumor characteristics.Complications
Ruppert C, Hartmann K, Fischer A, Hirschberger J, Hafner
include inadvertent injection or diffusion of ethanol to
A, Schmidt P (2000) Cervical neoplasia originating
the local blood vessels or vagosympathetic trunk and
from the vagus nerve in a dog. J Small Anim Pract
recurrent laryngeal nerve.
41:119122
117 ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
plastic thyroid nodulcs in cats.J Am Vet Med Assoc
hemiplegia due to neoplasia of the vagus nerve in a cat.
218:1293-127.
JAmVetMed Assoc174:513-515.
Wisner ER, Mattoon JS, Nyland TG (2002) Neck. In: Nyland
Slensky KA, Volk SW, Schwarz T, Duda L, Mauldin EA,
TG,ed. Small Animal Diagnostic Ultrasound. Philadelphia:
WB Saunders, pp 285-304.
to arterial invasion in a dog with thyroid carcinoma.J Am
Wisner ER, Mattoon JS, Nyland TG,Baker TW (1991) Normal
Vet Med Assoc 223:649-653.
ultrasonographic anatomy of the canine neck. Vet Radiol
Taymans O, Duchateau L, Schreurs E, Kramer M, Daminet
Ultrasound 32:185-190.
S, Saunders JH (2005) Intra- and interobserver variability
Wisner ER, Nyland TG, Mattoon JS (1994) Ultrasonographic
of ultrasonographic measurements of the thyroid gland
a  pue sop a u sasu raia jo uxan
in healthy beagles.Vet Radiol Ultrasound 46:139-
Radiol Ultrasound 35:310-315.
142.
Wisner ER, Penninck D, Biller DS, Feldman EC, Drake C,
Wells AL, Long CD, Hornof WJ, et al. (2001) Use of percuta-
Nyland TG (1997) High-resolution parathyroid sonogra-
neous ethanol injection for treatment of bilateral hyper-
phy.Vet Radiol Ultrasound 38:462-466.
CHAPTER FOUR
IHORAX
Silke Hecht
PREPARATION AND
dures are difficult to perform using this approach, and
the field of view is limited to the size of the table
SCANNING TECHNIQUE
window and the ability toposition the area ofinterest
over the opening.
Inanormal animal,evaluationofintrathoracicstruc-
tures is hampered by the interposition of aerated lung
Usually, a sector transducer or a curvilinear or
microconvex sonographic probe with a small footprint
tissue.However, collapsed or consolidated lung, tho-
should be selected when using an intercostal window,
racic masses, or pleural effusion can provide a suitable
although a linear probe may also be used. The optimal
acoustic window.Thoracicradiography should always
frequency depends on the size of the animal and the
precede thoracic ultrasonography to confirm the pres-
location of the lesion. For the examination of the cranial
ence of alesion,identify a suitable acousticwindow,
and rule out entities, such as severe pneumothorax,
mediastinum in large dogs, a 5-MIIz transducer may
be used, whereas examination of small superficial
whichprecludeanultrasonographic examination
(Tidwell 1998). Since pleural effusion may facilitate the
pulmonary lesions necessitates the use of a higher-
frequency transducer (7.5 or 10.0 MHz). A standoff pad
examination of intrathoracicstructures,thoracocente
sis should be postponed until the ultrasonographic
may improve image quality during the evaluation of
thoracic wall lesions. For a transhepatic or thoracic
examination has been performed, unless the patient
has respiratory compromise.
inlet approach, sector or curvilinear transducers are
To optimize image quality, hair should be clipped in
most commonly used.
The examinationis performed in atleast twoplanes,
the region to be scanned, and acoustic gel should be
depending on the nature, size, and location of the
lesion.
used and involves examination of the thoracic struc-
tures by positioning the transducer on the chest wall
between adjacent ribs (Figure 4.1A and B). Animals are
generally positioned in lateral recumbency, although
NORMAL SONOGRAPHIC
scanning in sternal recumbency or while a patient is
ANATOMY
standing may be considered in compromised patients
Or for an initial screening. A thoracic inlet approach can
Intercostal Approach
sometimes help in visualizing cranial thoraciclesions
(Figure 4.1C).
The soft tissues of the thoracic wall (skin, subcutane-
A subcostal (transhepatic) approach may be used to
ous fat, and muscle) appear as layered tissues of alter-
assess caudal mediastinal or caudal pulmonary lesions.
nating echogenicity in the near field (Figure 4.2). The
Thc cxamination tcchniquc is similar to that used fon
parietal pleura is rarely recognized as a discrete struc-
evaluation of the liver. The animal is positioned in
ture, but may be diffcrcntiatcd from the visceral pleura
dorsal or lateral recumbency, and the transducer is
in rcal timc by thc sliding motion of the lung during
aimed cranially under the rib cage.
Some examiners prefer imaging the dependent
curvilinear,hyperechoic structures with distal acoustic
portion of the thorax by using a cardiac table. This 
shadowing (Figure 4.2). The lung interface is seen
approach optimizes the acoustic window, because
as an echogenic linear band with distal reverbera-
pleural fluid accumulates in the dependent portion of
tion arlifacts and dirly shadowing. The pulmonary
the thorax, and the pulmonary structures in the near
parenchyma deep to the lung surface cannot be evalu-
field contain less air because of positional atelectasis.
ated in normal animals because of these artifacts
However, ultrasound-guided interventional proce-
(Figure 4.2).
119
B
A
Figure4.1.
Ultrasonographic examination of the thorax. The patient can be examined while it is standing or in sternal,
lateral, or dorsal recumbency. A and B: Intercostal approach. The transducer is placed on the thoracic wall in the area of
astinum (B), the thoracic limbs are pulled forward. The transducer is placed on the thoracic wall caudal to the elbows and
dorsal to the sternum. Transverse and dorsal or sagittal planes can be used. C: Thoracic inlet approach to evaluate the most
cranial aspect of the thoracic cavity.The transducer is placed midline on the caudal neck and aimed caudally into the thorax.
obtainedsubsequently.
Dorsal
Cranial
Rib
Rib
Figure4.2,
120
121 ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
Evaluation of the normal cranial and caudal medi-
to the liver (Figure 4.4). The diaphragm cannot be dis-
astinum by means of an intercostal approach is often
tinguished from the adjacent hyperechoic lung inter-
hampered by interposition of aerated lung. However,
face, except in cases of pleural effusion or consolidation
cranial mediastinal  vessels may be visualized
as
of the caudal lung lobes. The caudal thoracic esopha-
tubular anechoic structures that show flow on Doppler
gus is occasionally seen traversing the diaphragm (see
examination (Figure 4.3).
Figure 8.3). Using this approach, the examiner has to
 The thymus may be visible in young animals. Care
be aware of the commonly observed mirror artifact
must be taken not to confuse abundant mediastinal fat
(see Figure 6.4).
with intrathoracic mass lesions. Normal cranial medi-
astinal or sternal lymph nodes are usually not visible.
Thoracic Inlet Approach
Transhepatic (Subcostal) Approach
By using a thoracic inlet approach, mediastinal fat,
cranial thoracic trachea, and esophagus are usually
The diaphragm-lung interface appears as a curvilinear,
seen (Figure 4.5). Cranial mediastinal vessels may be
strongly hyperechoic structure in the far field cranial
visible.
 Rt BCV
CrVC
Lt BCV
BCT
Figure 4.3.
. Normal cranial mediastinum in a dog when using a right intercostal approach (dorsal plane) and color Doppler.
The cranial mediastinal vessels are clearly visible. The confluence of the brachiocephalic veins to form the cranial vena cava
is observed. BCT, brachiocephalic trunk; CrVC, cranial vena cava; Lt BCV, Left brachiocephalic vein; and Rt BCV, right bra-
chiocephalic vein.
Figure 4.2. Normal thoracic wall when using an intercostal approach. Transverse (A and B) and longitudinal (C and D)
ultrasonographic and schematic images. The subcutaneous tissues (SC), which include muscle, fat, and fascial planes, are
 as a smooth, strongly hyperechoic line. Distal to the lung surface are dirty shadowing and reverberation artifacts (Rev) that
prevent evaluation of the normal air-filled lung. The normal ribs are visible as strongly hyperechoic curvilinear structures
(Rib), with clean distal shadowing in the far field.
Right
GB
Lung
A
Cranial
Lung
D
Figure 4.4. Normal caudal thorax in a dog when using a transhepatic (subcostal) approach. Transverse (A and B) and sagit-
 tal (C and D) ultrasonographic and schematic images. The diaphragm-lung interface (arrows) appears as a curvilinear hyper-
echoic line cranial to the liver. A mirror image of the hyperechoic acoustic enhancement (E) deep to the gallbladder (GB) is
in the lung region (E'). H, heart; and ST, stomach.
a si rm n a  n e e u pd si n  s  s pe ()
as a hypoechoic crescent (arrow). Thc adjacent hyperechoic crescent (arrowhead) represents the interface between tracheal
wall and intraluminal gas. A combination of acoustic shadowing (S) and reverberation (R) is visible in the far field.
122
123ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPIIY
Lung
form mass lesion associated with the caudal dorsal thorax(under the sonographic probe). This mass is in broad-based contact
with the dorsal thoracic wall (extrapleural sign). Metallic hemoclips associated with the cranial ventral thorax are consistent
with previous removal of a cranial mediastinal mass (thymoma). B: The mass, which is visualized by using a left dorsal
intercostal approach, appears as a homogeneously hypoechoic mass lesion (arrows) forming an obtuse angle with the adjacent
thoracic wall. The hyperechoic interface of the normal lung is visible in the far field, as well as acoustic shadows associated
with ribs (R).
SONOGRAPHIC FEATURES OF
Benign or malignant neoplastic processes, such as
infiltrative lipomas or soft-tissue sarcomas, may also
THORACIC DISORDERS
invade the thoracic wall (Figure 4.9). Metastatic disease
may also involve one or several of these bones, causing
LesionsoftheThoracicWall
variable alteration in their normal hyperechoic, shad-
Thoracic wall lesions include neoplasms, inflamma-
owing surface. The osseous proliferation and/or lysis
tory lesions, and trauma. Ultrasound allows assess-
encountered in aggressive bone lesions are typically
mentoftheextentandmarginationofalesion,bone
irregular andpoorlydefinedwhen comparedwith
involvement (such as in rib neoplasms or trauma),
 benign processes, such as chronic rib fractures.
echotexture (solid and/or fluid filled),invasion of
Inflammatory lesions affecting the thoracic wall
adjacent structures, and presence of foreign material
include
 cellulitis, abscesses, and granulomas.
Or gas (e.g., in.abscesses). A thoracic wall mass is
Ultrasound enables identification of fluid pockets and
convex,in broad-based contact with the chest wall,
differentiation of well-circumscribed processes from
and displaces the normal lung interface (extrapleural
infiltrativeprocesses.Ultrasonography hasbeen proven
sign). In contrast to most mass lesions originating from
to be more accurate than fistulography in the detection
the pulmonary parenchyma, the angle between the
of foreign material in animals with chronic draining
extrapleural mass and the adjacent thoracic wall is
obtuse (Figure 4.6).Additionally, the dynamic visual-
on their size and composition, foreign bodies are
ization oflung motion underneath thoracic wall lesions
usually hyperechoic to the surrounding soft tissues and
enables their extrapulmonary origin to be confirmed.
often cast an acoustic shadow (Figure 4.10)
In contrast to pulmonary masses, thoracic wall mass
In cases of thoracic trauma, ultrasonography can be
lesions are static or move with the chest wall during
used as an alternative to radiography in the diagnosis
respiration.
of rib fractures. Findings include discontinuity of corti-
Masses originating from ribs or stermum are most
cal alignment (Figure 4.11), as well as edge shadowing
commonly neoplastic in etiology (e.g., chondrosar-
and reverberation artifacts arising from the margin of
coma or osteosarcoma).These masses cause irregular
the displaced rib segment (Hurleyet al.2004).However,
disruption of the smooth contour of the affected bone
based on the literature on human patients, ultrasonog-
and are accompanied by an intrathoracic andextratho-
raphy does not significantly increase the detection rate
racic mass lesion of variable size and echogenicity
of rib fractures, may be uncomfortable for a patient,
(Figures 4.7 and 4.8).
and is more time-consuming than radiography.
124THORAX
Dorsal
Dorsal
obtained at the level of the 1lth rib, on which an aggressive osteolytic and osteoproliferative rib mass (M) is identified that
is protruding into the right hemithorax.Ultrasonographically,the mass is mixed in echogenicity,and hyperechoic foci (arrow)
are associated with acoustic shadowing (), consistent with mineralization.
Dorsal
Mass
Figure 4.8. Rib mass in a 9-year-old Labrador retriever. A: On the lateral thoracic radiograph, a large volume of pleural
effusion is identified. A mass lesion associated with the cranial ventral thorax at the level of the costal cartilages of the third
pair of ribs shows irregular amorphous mineralization (black arrows). B: Transverse plane ultrasonographic image of the rib
mass lesion (white arrows). The mass is of mixed echogenicity, with multiple hyperechoic foci () corresponding to the min-
eralized areas seen radiographically, some of which are associated with strong acoustic shadowing. Primary rib tumor was
diagnosed.
AbnormalitiesofthePleuraand
problem, such as a cranial mediastinal mass; and
guiding interventional or therapeutic thoracocentesis.
thePleuralSpace
Pleural effusion appears as echogenic or anechoic
material separating the thoracicwall and diaphragm
Pleural Effusion
from the lung surface. The fluid echogenicity is
 Ultrasonography is useful in detecting and character-
mainly influenced by the concentration of free
izing pleural effusion; identifying the underlying
cells. Transuidates,modified transudates, and chylous
Cranial
3.23cm
Figure 4.9. Infiltrative soft-tissue sarcoma in a large-breed dog. Ultrasonographic (A) and schematic (B) dorsal images of
lateral aspect of the ribs (R), which are associated with strong acoustic shadowing. This mass infiltrated the intercostal muscles
and portions of the ribs without invading the pleural space.Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
FB
Lung
Lung
0.64cm
Figure 4.10. Chronic draining tract with foreign body in a 7-year-old German shorthair pointer. Ultrasonographic (A and
B) and schematic (C and D) images of a portion of the thoracic wall in. A and C: The draining tract (T, arrowheads) appears
as a 6-mm-wide tubular structure within the subcutaneous tissues of the thoracic wallimmediately superficial to the ribs (R).
B and D: At the terinination of the tract, a hyperechoic, sharp-edged structure of 0.9 x 0.2 cm is identified, consistent with a
foreign body (FB). The foreign body is surrounded by hypoechoic material, consistent with an abscess (A).Acoustic shadow-
ing is not obscrved. A wooden splinter was identified at surgery. Images courtesy of D. Penninck.
125
126 THORAX
B
disruption of the smooth hyperechoic contour of the rib (R), with displacement of the fracture fragments (arrow). Material of
inhomogeneous soft-tissue echogenicity is noted at the fracture site (arrowheads), consistent with a hematoma. The lung (L)
surface is focally visible beyond the fracture site. Images courtesy of M.Kramer.
Cranial
Right
Liver
Livei
CVC
HV
PE
PE
Figure 4.12. Congcstive heart failure in a dyspneic cat. Sagittal (A) and parasagittal oblique (B) subcostal images of the
caudal thorax.There is anechoic pleural effusion (PE) cranial to the diaphragm (arrows), and distension of caudal vena cava
(CVC) and hepatic veins (HV).
effusion are generally hypoechoic or anechoic (Figures
Chronicpleural effusion causes echogenic strands to
4.12 and 4.13). Exudates, malignant pleural effusions,
develop within the plcural space, consistent with
or hemorrhages are usually echogenic (Figures 4.14
pleural adhesions or fibrinous bands (Figure 4.16).
and 4.15).
Free fluid may be differentiated from trapped fluid
Pleural Lesions
pockets by scanning the patient in different recumbent
positions. Although free fluid accumulates in the
The pleural cavity can be affected by inflammation
dependent portion of the thorax, trapped fluid is not
t (pleuritis), neoplasia (carcinomatosis, mesothelioma,
influenced by gravity and remains in the same region
 and metastatic disease), and loss of integrity subse-
of the pleural space.
quent to trauma. The detection of smaller pleural
Dorsal
Figure 4.13.Transverse image in a cat with severe chylotho-
rax.A large volume of anechoic pleuraleffusion(PE)isvisible,
delineating a collapscd lung lobe (arrows). Image courtesy of
M.A.d'Anjou.
caN
B
Figure 4.14.Severe pleural effusion in a dyspneic dog. Oblique intercostal sonographic images of the cranial (A) and caudal
(B) thorax. A large volume of echogenic effusion (PE) is in both pleural spaces, on each side of the caudal mediastinum (CaM).
 In A, the border of the cranial mediastinum (CrM) is irregular and hyperechoic (arrows). The diaphragm (D) is visualized,
tesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
Dorsal
P
Figure 4.15.Chronic chylothorax and pleuritis in a 10-ycar
old mixcd-breed dog. Sevcre, cchogenic pleural effusion (PE)
is seen whcn using a left intercostal approach caudal to the
heart (H). Irregular thickening of the parietal pleural is
observed (arrows). Image courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
127
128THORAX
Figure 4.16. Chronic pleuritis in a 2-year-old cat. Ultrasonographic (A) and schematic (B) transverse images on which
anechoic pleural fluid (PE)is associated with lung atelectasis (L). Hyperechoic linear strands (thin arrows) are visible within
the fluid, consistent with pleural adhesions or fibrin strands and indicative of chronicity. The visceral pleura is also thickened
(wide arrows).
Figure 4.17.Pleural carcinomatosis and cranial mediastinal mass in a 9-year-old dog. A: Left lateralradiograph of the thorax.
Modcratc plcural effusion, as well as a cranial mediastinum mass, cause dorsal displacement of the trachea and lungs. A
round soft-tissue opacity is associated with the dorsal thorax bordering the thoracic spine (arrows). B: Intercostal ultrasono-
interface (I., arrows) in the far field. Pleural effusion (PE) is also present. Fine-needle aspirates of the cranial mediastinal and
pleural lesions were consistent with carcinoma.
nodules and masses on radiographs is commonly
differentiation between pulmonary and parietal
hamperedbythepresenceof pleuraleffusion.
pleural lesions is usually possible based on real-time
Additionally,radiographic distinction between pleural
ultrasonography. Whereas a pulmonary mass moves
and pulmonary masses may be challenging. On ultra-
with respiration, a mass arising from the parietal
sonographic examination, pleural disease manifests as
pleura remains stationary in comparison with the
thickening, irregularity, or mass lesions of variable
sliding lung (Mattoon and Nyland 1995).
echogenicity associated with the pleura. Lesions arising
Nodules or masses arising from the visceral
from the parietal pleura are readily recognized,
pleura cannot be easily distinguished from lesions
especially in the presence of pleural effusion (Figures
originating
fromthe
pulmonary
1parenchyma
4.15-4.18). Even in the absence of pleural effusion,
(Figure 4.19).
129ATLAS OF SMALLANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
Cranial
RCrL
PE
CrM
Figure 4.18. Pleural carcinomatosis and pulmonary carcinoma in a 10-year-old cat. Intercostal approach. On these dorsal
ultrasonographic (A) and schematic (B) images, the right cranial lung lobe (RCrL) is rounded, irregular, and has assumed
rates the lung lobe from the parietal pleura (PE).The parietal pleura (arrows) is thickened, slightly irregular, and unusually
hypoechoic.CrM,cranial mediastinum;and H,heart
Liver
B
thickencd,iregular,and hypocchoic.Thc visccral plcura of theeft caudallung lobeis also markedly thickened (arrowheads).
Pleural effusion (PE) separates the lung lobe from the diaphragm (D).The visceral pleural lesion cannot be differentiated
from a primary pulmonary lesion by means of ultrasonography.
Pneumothorax
4.41).However, the classic gliding sign of the lung
Although radiography remains the imaging modality
against the parietal pleura is not observed. In cases of
concurrent pleural effusion, a gas-fluid interface may
of choice to diagnose air within the pleural space,
ultrasonographic assessment of the pleural space
bevisualized.
should always be performed after interventional pro-
cedures,and the examiner should be aware of the
ultrasonographic appearance of pneumothorax. Free
AbnormalitiesoftheMediastinum
airwithin thepleural spacemay create similar rever-
Ultrasound facilitates differentiation of entities,such
beration artifacts as normal lung (see Figures 4.20 and
as accumulation of fat, fluid, or true mediastinal
130 THORAX
Dorsal
3
Figure 4.20.Mild pneumothorax after biopsy of a pulmonary mass in a dog. A lincar hyperechogenicity with distal rever-
beration artifacts (arrowheads) is in the near field superficial to the mass. The biopsy tract (BT) is characterized by a line of
punctate hyperechogenicities through the mass. BW, body wall.
Cranial
Figure 4.21. Cranial mediastinal cyst in a 9-year-old cat. A: Lateral thoracic radiograph demonstrating an ovoid area of
 re n  po an en sa (me  a on rr  do ps
approach immediately dorsal to the sternum at the level of the fourth intercostal space. Cranial to the heart (H) is a round
anechoic structure with distal enhancement (*), consistent with the presence of a cranial mediastinal cyst.
masses,which cause cranial mediastinal widening on
depends on their location, size, and the presence of a
radiographs. Additionally, it enables identification of
suitable acoustic window. Differential diagnoses for
a cranial mediastinal mass in the presence of pleural
cranial mediastinal masses include cysts, enlarged
effusion,facilitates charactcrization of cranial medias-
lymphnodes,neoplasms(e.g.,.lymphoma or thymoma),
tinal mass lesions (cystic in contrast to solid), and is
inflammatory lesions (abscesses or granulomas), and
helpful in the identification of a window suitable for
hematomas. An accumulation of fat may occasionally
interventional procedures.
appear masslike and has the potential for a false-
positivc diagnosis of a mediastinal mass (Konde and
Spaulding 1991).
Mediastinal Mass Lesions
 Cranial mediastinal cysts are an occasional inciden-
These aremost commonly found in the cranioventral
tal finding in cats (Zekas and Adams 2002). They are
mediastinum and are often accompanied by pleural
usually well circumscribcd, thin walled, and filled
effusion(Reichle andWisner 2000).Theirvisualization
with anechoic fluid (Figure 4.21).
131ATLAS OF SMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
Cranial
PE
B
pleural effusion that mask mediastinal structures such as the cardiac silhouette.Lung lobes are retracted from the body wall.
B: Ultrasonographic image at the right second intercostal spacc immediately dorsal to the sternum. Hypoechoic effusion is
On both sides of the cranial mediastinum (arrows). A mildly enlarged sternal lymph node (cursors) is surrounded with hyper-
echogenic fat and cross-sectional views of hypoechoic vessels (*). A curved hyperechoic interface casting strong shadowing,
consistent with a rib, is in the near field (R). PE, pleural effusion. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
Enlarged sternal lymph nodes are recognized as
Dorsal
rounded nodules or masses of variable size, margin-
ation,echotexture，and echogenicity immediately
dorsal to thc sternum (Figures 4.22-4.24). As the peri-
toneal cavity is partly drained by these nodes, ultraso-
nographic examination of the abdomen for underlying
disease processes may be warranted in affected
patients. Although reactive lymph nodes tend to be
smaller than neoplastic or granulomatous lesions,
ultrasonographic differentiation of thesc entities, and
differentiation of an enlarged lymph node from cranial
 mediastinal mass lesions of other etiology, may not be
possible.
+173cm
Masses of inflammatory or neoplastic etiology may
 appear rounded or lobulated, solid, or cystic, homoge-
Figure 4.23. Metastatic sternal lymph node in a dog with
neous, or inhomogeneous (Figures 4.25-4.32). Larger
splerichemangiosarcoma and hemoabdomen.Transverse
aggressive lesions may infiltrate the surrounding
ultrasonographic image of an enlarged sternal lymph node
structures, hampering determination of their origin.
(cursors) via an intercostal approach dorsal to the sternum
Lymphoma is most commonly associated with the
at the level of the second intercostal space. The enlarged
 presence of markedly enlarged and variably homoge-
lymph node appears as a round hypoechoic nodule sur-
neous, hypoechoic lymph nodes or mass(es) in the
rounded by echogenic fat, and adjacent lo cross-sectional
anechoic vessels (*). The final histopathologic diagnosis
cranial mediastinum. Thymomas have a tendency to
is metastalic hemangiosarcoma. Image courtesy of M.A.
 appear cystic (Tidwell 1998). However, cranial medias-
d'Anjou.
tinal masses cannot be differentiated based on their
ultrasonographic appearance, and histopathology or
cytology is needed to assess the nature of the lesion.
Crania
Dorsal
1.52cm
Figure 4.24. Disseminated histiocytic sarcoma in a 5-year-old Bernese mountain dog. Sagittal B-mode (A) and transverse
 radiographs. Multiple well-defined, hypoechoic nodules and masses (arrows and cursors) are surrounded by mediastinal
 s eo sos s () se pe () ien oar 
B
Figure 4.25. Thymoma in a 12-year-old cat. A: Lateral thoracic radiograph demonstrating a large cranial mediastinal mass
(arrow) causing dorsal displacement of the trachea and silhouetting with the cardiac silhouette. B: Ultrasonographic image
obtained through a right cranial intercostal approach. A large cranial mediastinal mass lesion (arrows) is of mixed echogenicity,
with several anechoic (cystic or cavitated) areas (*). Cranial mediastinal vessels (V) are seen in the far field as anechoic circular
structures on cross section. Thymoma was diagnosed based on ultrasonographically obtained biopsy samples.
132
二
Figure 4.26.  Lymphoma in a 4-year-old cat. A: In the lateral thoracic radiograph is a large cranial mediastinal mass silhou-
etting with the heart and displacing the trachea dorsally. Pleural effusion is also present, as indicated by scalloped fluid tissue
 opacity associated with the ventral thorax, pleural fissure lines, and retraction of the caudodorsal lung lobes from the thoracic
en one se su s um a re sssa ar  heq  m pn  pe  pe a mn
structures with strongly hyperechoic vessel walls (V). Lymphoma was diagnosed based on histopathology.
P
Figure 4.27. Granulomatous lymphadenopathy in a cat. A: On the lateral thoracic radiograph is a large,ill-defined, cranial
mediastinal mass displacing and compressing the trachea (arrow). Severe swelling was also apparent throughout the neck.
B: Transverse sonogram via an intercostal approach. A large heterogeneous mass (cursors) is associated with the cranial
nosed based on ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
133
2.85cm
Figure 4.28. Thymoma in a 10-year-old golden retriever. A: On the lateral radiograph of the thorax is a well-circumscribed,
round, soft-tissue opacity associated with the cranial mediastinum immediately cranial to the cardiac silhouette.The esopha-
gus (arrows) is gas distended, consistcnt with megaesophagus. B: Transverse sonogram via a right intercostal approach.
immediately dorsal to the sternum. The mass (cursors) appears as a homogeneous, round, hypoechoic structure. Thymoma
was diagnosed based on histopathology.
Crania
Figure 4.29.Cranial mediastinal lymphoma in a 7-year-old Labrador retriever. A: Lateral thoracic radiograph of a large
soft-tisuc opacity in the cranial mediastinum. The opacity is displacing the trachea and cranial lung ventral margin dorsally
(arrowheads). B: Corresponding ultrasonographic image by using a dorsal oblique plane through a right intercostal window.
A well-defined hypoechoic mass with hyperechoic speckles is in the cranial mediastinum (arrows). A smallamount of ancchoic
pleural effusion (PE) is also observed around the mass. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
134
Cranial
5.65cm
B
Figure 4.30. C'ranial mediastinal mass in an 11-year-old large, mixed-breed dog. A: On this lateral thoracic radiograph, a
well-circumscribed, round, soft-tissue opacity in the cranial thorax is suspected to originate from the mediastinum on the
ventrodorsal radiograph (not shown). B: Using a right parasternal intercostal approach, a lobulated hypoechoic mass is noted.
Fine-needle aspiration was performed, and a mast cell tumor was diagnosed cytologically. The displaccd lung interface (L)
and associated reverberation artifacts are in the near field. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
Cranial
Cranial
Figure 4.31.Cranial mediastinallymphoma in a l-year-old
Lhasa apso. Dorsal sonogram via a right intercostal approach.
Figure4.32.
2.Cranial mediastinal mass in a domestic long-
A large,ill-defined mass lesion (arrows) is cranial to the heart
hair cat. The examination is performcd by using a right inter-
(H). The lesion is mainly hypocchoic, with hyperechoic foci
costal approach. A large mass, mixed in echogenicity, with a
in the near field.
large,hypoechoic cavitary component (arrows) is cranial to
the heart (H). A small amount of pleural effusion is in the
near field (arrowhead). The histopathologic diagnosis was
adenocarcinoma.
135
136 THORAX
Ao
Figure 4.33. Heart base tumor in a small-breed dog. A: Ventrodorsal thoracic radiograph in which a soft-tissue opacity
associated with a mass effect (M) is in the left cranial hemithorax. The trachea (T) and cardiac silhouette (H) are displaced to
the right, and the main left bronchus (Br) is partially compressed. An alveolar patterm is in the caudal portion of the left cranial
lobe (arrow). B: B-mode sonogram obtained by using a transverse intercostal approach (as shown in A). A well-defined solid
se s sn st adoa rmod u i ( hey ar dsp s pg rau a u sa u paxu (so) ss
appears hypervascularized. The aorta (Ao) is in the far field, adjacent to the mass. A ncuroendocrine tumor was highly sus-
 pected on cytological specimens obtained with fine-needle aspiration. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
 Other Mediastinal Lesions
sionally be visualized via a thoracic inlet or transhe-
 patic approach, depending on their location and size
Radiography (including contrast procedures)  and
(Figure 4.34).
thoracic computed tomography remain the imaging
 Ultrasonography has been described as an alterna-
modalities of choice for the diagnosis of lesions
tive to fluoroscopy in the diagnosis of tracheal collapse
associated with the dorsal mediastinum, trachea,
(Rudorf et al. 1997). Additionally, it may prove useful
 and esophagus. Transesophageal ultrasonography
 in distinguishing between tracheal collapse and other
may also be of great value when available. Heart
causes of tracheal narrowing such as tracheal wall
base tumors may be visualized through the heart
thickening or compressive mass lesions (Figure 4.35).
 or by using an intercostal approach, if large enough
 The ultrasonographic examination is performed using
(Figure 4.33). Esophageal dilation and mass lesions 
 a thoracic inlet approach and is limited to the cervical
(neoplasms, foreign bodies, or granulomas) may occa-
and cranial thoracic trachea.
137ATLAS OFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
Cranial
D
Figure 4.34.Esophageal mass in a 14-year-old Welsh corgi. Aand B: Thoracic radiographs rcveala homogeneous, sof-tissue
opacity (M, arrows) associated with the caudal mediastinum, in the caudal region of the esophagus (E), summating with the
obtained with a ventral transhepatic approach (sagittal plane). At the level of the esophageal hiatus, the mass (M, arrows) is
associated with the esophagus (E). Liver and stonach (S) are visible in the near field, and the lung-diaphragm interface (D)
manifests as a curvilinear, strongly hyperechoic structure bordering the esophageal mass.
PulmonaryDisorders
malities commonly detected and investigated by means
 of ultrasonography are atelectasis, consolidation, and
The ability to assess pulmonary lesions depends on the
pulmonary mass lesions. The presence of pleural effu-
location and size of the lesion, as well as the prcscnce
sion facilitates the evaluation of lobar size, shape, and
of a suitable acoustic window. Normally aerated lung,
contour.A comparativeillustration of the ultrasono-
and lesions surrounded by normally aerated lung,
graphic appearance of different pulmonary disorders
cannot be evaluated ultrasonographically.However,
is shown in Figure 4.36. Although tendencies in ultra-
when fluid or cells replace the airwithin alveoli and/
sonographic appearance exist for some of the pro-
or airways, or if a lung lobe collapses, evaluation of
cesses,fine-needle aspirations or biopsies are required
the affected lung becomes possible. Pulmonary abnor-
 in most instances to confirm the diagnosis.
138THORAX
Cranial
B
0.37cm
Figure 4.35. Tracheal wall thickening caused by eosinophilic airway disease in a 4-year-old cat. A: The lateral thoracic
radiograph shows extensive narrowing of the cranial thoracic trachea. B: An ultrasonographic examination of the trachea
(arrowheads) is performed by using a thoracic inlet approach. The tracheal wall (cursors) is thickened (0.3cm) and hypoechoic.
Anechoic material, consistent withmucus,is present within the severely narrowed tracheal lumen (). gas bubble is present
more cranially, appearing as a reverberating hyperechoic focus in the nondependent portion of the lumen (arrow).
Atelectasis
assumes an echotexture similar to liver (hepatized lung)
Atelectasis (pulmonary collapse) may occur secondary
(Schwarz and Tidwell 1999). The affected lung lobe
to increased pressure within the pleural space (pneu-
typically retains its normal shape and volume (Figures
4.36-4.38 and 4.41). Air-filled bronchi appear as hyper-
mothorax or pleural effusion) and may be a sequela to
bronchial obstruction or a result of decreased pulmo-
echoic air bronchograms radiating from the hilus, which
are commonly associated with reverberation artifacts
nary compliance and inability of the lung to inflate
 Or dirty shadowing. Residual air within alveoli also
properly. Ultrasonographic assessment of atelectatic
remains hyperechoic (Figure 4.38). If the bronchial
lungis easy in casesof concurrent pleural effusion,but
impossible in cases of pneumothorax. Affected lung
lumen is filled with secretions or cellular debris,fluid
bronchograms develop, which resemblc vcssels but can
lar structures that are commonly surrounded by pleural
be distinguished by means of color or power Doppler
fluid (Figure 4.13). The echogenicity of atelectatic lung
by their lack of flow (Figure 4.39). Although pulmo-
depends on the amount of residual air within the air-
nary consolidation is most commonly associated with
spaces and may range from uniformly hypoechoic to
pneumonia, it may also be encountered in lung contu-
strongly hyperechoic. Linear and speckled hyperechoic
sion,lobe torsion (d'Anjou et al.2005),and infiltrative
foci, indicating residual air within bronchi and alveoli,
pulmonary neoplasia (Tigures 4.39-4.41). Dispersed,
hyperechoic, and reverberaling foci, indicating vesicu-
as well as bronchial walls, are often seen. Additionally,
vessels can usually be visualized, particularly by
lar emphysema, are commonly observed in the central
means of color or power Doppler. Completely col-
portion of a Iwisted lung lobe (Figures 4.39 and 4.40),
lapsed lung lobes tend to be similar in echogenicity
and lobes infiltraledwith neoplasia are often hetero-
geneous and deformed. Additionally, concurrent
and cchotexture toliver lobes.In cases of obstructive
pleural effusion is expected in cases of lung-lobe
 atelectasis, ultrasonography may prove useful in iden-
tification of the obstructive lesion (e.g., mass).
torsion and in some cases of pulmonary neoplasia, as
opposed to pneumonia. Color or power Ioppler can
Consolidation
prove useful in confirming the lack of flow in a twisted
lobe. However, ultrasonographic differentiation of
When fluid or cells uniformly infiltrate the pulmonary
these entities, which may coexist in the same lobe, may
air spaces, the lung often becomes hypoechoic and
not be possible.
liver
PE
Figure 4.36.Schematic ultrasound images of pulmonary abnormalities.A: Consolidation.Normal pulmonary parenchyma
is filled with fluid or replaced with inflammatory or neoplastic infiltrates. The affected portion (arrows) is hypoechoic when
B: Atelectasis. The lung is collapsed because of pleural effusion (PE). The affected lung lobe is significantly reduced in volume
reverberating interface of the contralateral air-filled lung is seen in the far ficld. C: Pulmonary mass lesion. With increasing
size, pulmonary mass lesions cause loss of the normal shape and margination of a lung lobe, with distortion of the pulmonary
border and the normal triangular form of a lung lobe (arrows). These changes are enhanced if pleural effusion is present (PF).
The echogenicity of pulmonary mass lesions is variable. D: Pulmonary nodule. Lung nodules are typically spherical and well
demarcated from the peripheral aerated lung (arrows). These nodules can only be detected if they are in contact with the
thoracic wall. L, aerated lung.
Pulmonary Masses and Nodules
nographically only if located at the periphery of the
lung field and if a suitable acoustic window is
Although pulmonary masses in small animals are
present.
most commonly neoplastic in etiology, benign lesions
such as abscesses, cysts, hematomas, or granulomas
ormixed echogenicand solid.They cause focal
may also be encountered. In the absence of pleural disruption of the reflective lung surface and com-
cffusion, pulmonary masses can be evaluated ultraso-
monly form an acute angle with the thoracic wall
Figure 4.37.Acute suppurative pneumonia with hemorrhage in a 10-year-old Labrador retriever. A: The right lateral radio-
graph of the thorax shows an alveolar pattern in the left caudal lung lobe and a clear border between the left cranial and
caudal lung lobe (lobar margination [arrows]). There is also a mixed alvcolar pattcrm and an interstitial pattern in the left
cranial lung lobe. B: The ultrasonographic examination is performed in a dorsal plane by using a left caudal dorsal intercostal
caudal to the diaphragm.Acoustic shadows related to superficial ribs (R) are present.
Dorsal
Figure 4.38.Aspiration pneumonia in two dogs.Both examinations are performed with a right intercostal approach. A: The
right middle lung lobe (arrows) is homogeneous and mostly hypoechoic, with a few hyperechoic foci representing gas inclu-
sions.Thelung lobe retains its normal triangular shape and size.There is no evidence of pleural effusion.B:Focal pneumonia
(white arrow) involving the right middle lobe, which appears as an irregular, hypoechoic region with gas speckles associated
with comet-tail artifacts (black arrow). Deeper foci of pneumonia cannot be visualized because of overlying aerated lung (L).
Image B courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
140
Dorsa
Figure 4.39. Torsion of the right middle lung lobe in a 5-year-old mixed large-breed dog. A: On the lateral thoracic radio-
 graph, marked pleural effusion is noted, as well as right middle lung lobe opacification and enlargement (arrows). The main
bronchus is interrupted (arrowhead), and punctate and linear gas lucencies are observed in the consolidated lobe. B: The
ultrasound examination is performed by using a right intercostal approach at the level of the sixth intercostal space. The
 peripheral portion of the lung lobe is hypoechoic, and dispersed and hyperechoic foci are in the central portion, in association
with reverberation artifacts, consistent with gas (G). This pattern is commonly encountered with lung-lobe torsion. A fluid-
filled bronchus (fluid bronchogram) appears in the apex of this lobe (B). Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
Cranial
PF
Figure 4.40. Lung-lobe torsion in a small-breed dog. A and B: Ultrasonographic images of different portions of the right
 Cranial lung lobe, which appears "hepatized" and enlarged (arrows). The lobe is diffusely mildly echogenic and presents dis-
 persed hyperechoic foci that were consistent with gas. When color Doppler is used (B), there is no evidence of any vascular
flow. A small volume of hypoechoic pleural effusion (PE) is also apparent around the lobe. Images courtesy of M.A.
d'Anjoul.
141
Cranial
Liver
Figure 4.41.Uniform lung consolidation in two dogs.A: Bronchoalveolar carcinoma in a 15-year-old mixed-breed dog
and has retained its normal triangular shape. The abnormal portion of this lobe is in contact with the diaphragm (D). The
normal lung portion, which remains aerated, is seen in the far field (L). B: Traumatic lung contusion in another dog in which
with mild pneumothorax. L, normal aerated lung. Image B courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
Figure 4.42. Disseminated histiocytic sarcoma in a 6-year-old Bernese mountain dog. A: On the left lateral radiograph of
the thorax is an approximately 5-cm soft-tissue mass in the caudal ventral thorax, summating with the diaphragm (arrows).
B: The ultrasonographic examination of the caudal ventral thorax was performed by using an intercostal approach immedi-
atcly dorsal to the stcrnum. The mass (cursors) is irregular, homogeneous, hypoechoic, and associated with the ventral aspect
of the right caudal lung lobe.The peripheral border is strongly hyperechoic and associated with reverberation artifacts, con-
sistent with aerated portion of the lung lobe (L). On real-time examination, it was seen to be sliding with respiration. A
reverberating artifact originating from the pleural space and consistent with free air is also observed in the near field
(arrowhead).
142
143ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPIIY
3.09cm
Figure4.43.Pulmonary carcinomainan8-year-old
Labrador retriever. The examination was performed by using
Figure 4.44.Pulmonary carcinoma in a 12-year-old cat.
The examination is performed by using an intercostal
an intercostal approach. The pulmonary mass is well circum-
approach. A 3-cm mixed echogenic mass (arrows) associated
scribed,almost anechoic, forms an acutc angle with the tho-
racic wall (arrows), and is surrounded by normally aerated
with the pulmonary parenchyma distorts the normal lung
lung parenchyma (L).
margins. The adjacent normal lung is characterized by a
hyperreflective intcrfacc (L). A small amount of plcural cffu-
sion (PE) is present.
A mixed echogenic mass associated with the right lung (suspected right midle lung lobe) distorts the normal lung margins.
Concurrent pleural effusion (PE) is noted, delineating the irregular contours of the lung lesion.
(Figures 4.42 and 4.43). Lung masses or nodules aretorlion of the normal contour of the affected lung lobe
easily identified as pulmonary in origin when they  (Figures 4.44 and 4.45). Central tumor necrosis can
move with the rest of the lung during respiration.
vary in appearance and may lead to confusion with a
However, this feature is not observed in cases of
pulmonary abscess, particularly when hypoechoic or
pleural adhesions. In contrast to atelectasis or consoli-
anechoic.Air cavities and dystrophicmineralization,
dation, pulmonary mass lesions frequently cause dis-
 appearing as hyperechoic foci with or without rever-
144THORAX
二
 0.9cm
Figure 4.46.Pulmonary nodule in a Dalmalian with a history Of weight loss.A: A small, round, soft-tissue opacity is
observed on this left lateral thoracic radiograph in the right hemithorax (arrow). B: Using a left intercostal approach, a spheri-
cal hypoechoic nodule was obscrved at the supcrficial aspect of the lung (L). Fine-needle aspiration by using ultrasound
guidance revealed a metastatic sarcoma. An abdominal fibrosarcoma was identified. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
Figure 4.47.Fungal granuloma (blastomycosis) in a dog. A small, superficial, homogeneous, hypoechoic mass (cursors) is
associated with the pulmonary parenchyma.
berating and shadowing artifacts, are often seen in
also resemble benign mass lesions such as granulomas
primary lung tumors.
and chronic hematomas, necessitating cytological or
Pulmonary metastases may be recognized as periph-
histological analysis for a definitive diagnosis (Figure
erally distributed, round, hypoechoic nodules moving
4.47).
with the aerated lung (Figure 4.46). Larger metastases
Pulmonary cysts, acute hematomas, and abscesses
can be fluid filled. Cysts are usually thin walled and
pulmonary neoplasms. However, these lesions may
contain anechoic fluid. Abscesses and hematomas have
145ATLASOF SMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
4.68cm
9.13cm
Figure 4.48.Pulmonary abscess in a 5-year-old collie. A: On the lateral thoracic radiograph is a large, well-circumscribed,
homogeneous mass lesion associated with the caudal dorsal lung fields immediately cranial to the diaphragm (arrows).
seen immediately cranial to the diaphragm (D). It is anechoic and surrounded by a thin, hyperechoic rim. The concentric
dottcd lincs (arrowheads) represent an artifact likely caused by electrical interference.
variable wall thickness and margination,and the echo-
iner has tobe aware of common artifacts occurring at
gcnicity of their contents may range from anechoic
the level of the diaphragm. If the animal has ascites,
to echogenic (Figures 4.48-4.50). Abscessing pncu-
refraction of the beam at the liver surface may cause
monia may also cause lobar enlargcmcnt and marked
the diaphragm to appear discontinuous. The com-
heterogeneity, mimicking neoplasia and necrosis.
Furthermore, these processes can coexist.
for a herniation of liver into the thorax (see Figurc 6.4).
Adhesions betweenliverand lung incases of
chronic diaphragmatic rupture might resemble the ap-
Diaphragmatic Disorders
pearance of an intact diaphragm and lead to a false-
negative result on the ultrasonographic examination.
Hernia
Diaphragmatic, pulmonary, or pleural mass lesions
Although challenging, ultrasonography represents
may also lead to misinterpretation by mimicking
abdominal contents in the thoracic cavity (Spattini
traumatic diaphragmatic hernias (i.e., ruptures), true
etal.2003)
(congenital) diaphragmatic hernias, and congenital
The ultrasonographic diagnosis of a PPDHis usually
peritoneo-pericardial diaphragmatic hernias (PPDH)
straightforward if abdominal organs (e.g., liver or
(Spattini et al. 2003).
intestine) are present within the pericardial sac (Figures
The ultrasonographic characteristics of  a dia-
4.54 and 4.55).
phragmatic hernia or rupture are an irregular or
asymmetrical cranial aspect of the liver and the pres-
Other Diaphragmatic Disorders
ence of abdominal viscera in the thorax (Figures
4.51-4.55).
Other disorders of the diaphragm are extremely rare.
If an ultrasonographic examination is performed to
Benign or malignant mass lesions are occasionally
confirm or exclude a diaphragmatic hernia, the exam-
encountered (Figure 4.56).
Figure4.49.
lung field on the right lateral radiograph (white arrows). An alveolar pattern is also apparent in the cranioventral lung field,
as well as irregular,air-filled, dilated bronchi consistent with bronchiectasis (black arrows).B: On this ultrasonographic image
obtained through the left sixth intercostal space, a large portion of the left caudal lung lobe (LCL) in contact with the dia-
of this lung lobe (L) is a spherical hyperechoic mass (arrows) with an irregular hypoechoic center (*). A thin hypoechoic rim
is at the periphery of this mass, as well as edge-shadowing artifacts (arrowheads). Fine-needle aspiration confirmed the pres-
ence of a pyogranuloma. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
146
B
C
Figure 4.50. Traumatic pulmonary hematoma in a 9-year-old Scottish deerhound. Radiographs and sonogram of the lung
after bronchoalveolar lavage.A: The ventrodorsal radiograph, at the time of presentation,reveals a generalized unstructured
interstitial pattern. No other abnormality is detected at this time. A bronchoalveolar lavage was then performed. B: Recheck
radiographs 6 days latcr show a homogcncous 3-cm mass lesion associated with the right lung at the level of the sixth rib
An anechoic, well-circumscribed lesion of 3-cm diameter is associated with the lung. Aspiration yielded blood, consistent
with a hematoma.
Cranial
Cranial
the midthorax (A) and the caudal thorax (B).The spleen (S)is displaced within the thoracic cavity,lateral to the heart (H).
The stomach (St) is also displaced cranial to the liver. The ribs (R) in the near field are characterized by strong acoustic shadows
(arrowheads). Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
147
GB
Figure 4.52. Diaphragmatic rupture in a 3-year-old mixed-brccd dog. Ultrasonographic (A) and schematic (B) images of
the caudal thorax obtained by using an intercostal approach. The margin of the diaphragm (arrows) is disrupted, and part of
the liver (L) and the gallbladder (GB) are herniated into the thoracic cavity (black arrow). In the far field is echogenic pleural
cffusion (PE), consistent with hemorrhage.
Cranial
GB
Figure 4.53. Ierniation of the gallbladder ina cat. A: On the lateral thoracic radiograph, a well-circumscribed, round opacity
phragm is discontinuous in the near field, with herniation of the gall bladder (GB) into the thoracic cavity.
Figure 4.54.Peritonco-pcricardial diaphragmatic hernia in a 2-year-old cat. A: The lateral thoracic radiograph reveals loss
of the ventral part of the diaphragmatic silhouette and silhouetting of abdominal and peritoneal contents.A "mesothelial
remnant" sign is ventral to the caudal vena cava (arrow). The cardiac silhouette is enlarged. B: The ultrasonographic exami-
chyma (L) is visible in the near field close to, and displacing, the heart (H).
148
149ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
Liver
Figure 4.55. Peritoneo-pericardial diaphragmatic hernia in an 8-year-old Rhodesian ridgeback. The examination is per-
forrned via a right intercostal approach. Normal hepatic parenchyma is visible in the near field. There is a 9-cm mixed echo-
genic hepatic mass within the pericardial sac (arrows). Histopathologic examination of the herniated liver lobe revealed
hepatocellular atrophy and hepatic dysplasia caused by compression and circulatory compromise. There was no evidence of
neoplasia.
Cranial
B
arrows). The larger mass measures more than 6cm in maximum diameter, and the smaller mass 1measures 2.5cm. The lung
is displaced cranially (L), and anechoic plcural effusion is in the near field (PE), as wellas anechoic peritoneal effusion caudal
to the diaphragm.
INTERVENTIONAL
may be chosen. Patient preparation (sedation with or
without anesthesia, sterile preparation) is routinely
PROCEDURES
perforned. Depending on the size and location of the
lesion, 20- to 22-gauge injection or spinal needles are
Ultrasound is very useful to aid diagnostic or thera-
used for fine-needle aspiration, and 16- to 18-gauge
peutic thoracocentesis, especially if only a small
biopsy needles are used to obtain core biopsy samples.
volume of pleural effusion is present (Figure 4.57).
 Fine-needle aspiration can be performed freehand,
Additionally, fine-needle aspiration or biopsies of tho-
with an extension tube or directly attached to a5-to
racic mass lesions are commonly performed. These
10-mL syringe, enabling, with practice, faster and safer
procedures are safe and have a high diagnostic yield
interventions. Biopsy samples can also be obtained
(Wood et al. 1998) (Figure 4.58). Although an intercos-
freehand or by using a biopsy guide.
tal approach is most commonly used, a thoracic inlet 
To facilitate fine-needle aspiration or biopsy of
approach and even a transdiaphragmatic approach
pulmonary lesions, it might be necessary to induce
150THORAX
Figure 4.57.Ultrasound-guided thoracocentesis in a cat
with pleural effusion.The needle is traversing the thoracic
Figure 4.58. Biopsy of a pulmonary mass(bronchoalveolar
wall, and the needle tip, which appears as a hyperechoic line
carcinoma) in a dog. Two closely aligned needle tracts are
(arrow), is within the pleural space. The aerated lung (L) is
visible as hyperechoic lines (arrow) in the periphery of the
partially retracted medially.
Imass (arrowheads) adjacent to the aerated portion of the
lung (L). There is no evidence of pneumothorax. The hyper-
cchoic superficial margin of a rib (R), associated with acous-
tic shadowing, is in the near field.
respiratory standstill for the duration of the procedure,
warranting endotracheal intubation of the patient. In
addition to hemorrhage,which is a potential sequela
to any biopsy, fine-needle aspiration or biopsy of
Mattoon JS,Nyland TG (1995) Thorax. In:Nyland TG,
Mattoon JS, eds. Small Animal Diagnostic Ultrasound.
However, severe complications necessitating thera-
Philadelphia:WB Saunders, pp 325-353.
peutic intervention arerare.
Reichle JK,Wisner ER (2000) Non-cardiac thoracic ultra-
sound in 75 feline and canine patients. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 41:154-162.
Rudorf H, Herrtagc ME, Whitc RA (1997) Usc of ultrasonog-
REFERENCES
raphy in the diagnosis of tracheal collapse. J Small Anim
Pract 38:513-518.
Armbrust LJ, Biller DS, Radlinsky MG, Hoskinson JJ (2003)
Schwarz LA, Tidwell AS (1999) Alternative imaging of the
Ultrasonographic diagnosis of foreign bodies associated
lung. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 14:187-206.
with chronic draining tracts and abscesses in dogs. Vet
Spattini G, Rossi F, Vignoli M, Lamb CR (2003) Use of ultra-
Radiol Ultrasound 44:66-70.
sound to diagnose diaphragmatic rupture in dogs and
d'Anjou MA, Tidwell AS, Hecht S (2005) Radiographic
cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 44:226-230.
diagnosis of lung lobc torsion.Vct Radiol Ultrasound
Tidwell AS (1998) Ultrasonography of the thorax (excluding
46:478-484.
the heart).Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 28:
Hurley ME, Keye GD, Hamilton S (2004) Is ultrasound really
993-1015.
helpful in the detection of rib fractures? Injury 3
35
Wood EF, O'Brien RT, Young KM (1998) Utrasound-guided
562-566.
fine-needle aspiration of focal parenchymal lesions of the
Konde LJ, Spaulding K (1991) Sonographic evaluation of
lung in dogs and cats. J Vet Intern Med 12:338-342.
the cranial mediastinum in small animals.Vet Radiol
Zekas LJ,Adams WM (2002) Cranial mediastinal cysts in
32:178-184.
nine cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 43:413-418.
CHAPTER FIVE
HEART
Donald Brown and Hugues Gaillot
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHIC
et al. 1986; Thomas et al. 1993). The central left ven-
tricular (LV) axis can be conceptualized as an imagi-
TECHNIQUE
nary line that extends between the cardiac apex and
base in the center of the LV lumen. When the trans-
Instrumentation
ducer is oriented such that the scan plane includes or
Echocardiographic methods differ from abdominal
is parallel to this axis, a long-axis image is obtained. If
techniques in that transducer placement is confined to
the scan plane is perpendicular to this axis, a short-axis
limited windows of accessbetween the ribs and aerated
image is obtained (Figure 5.1).
lung. This limitation imposes the need for a small
Because of impedance mismatching and ultrasound
transducer footprint. Echocardiographic examinations
attenuation imposed by the ribs and air-filled lungs,
are then best performed using sector or curvilinear
transthoracic echocardiography is limited to relatively
scanning transducers, preferably with phased-array
small windows of access.These surround the heart
technology. Echocardiography also requires greater
on both the right and left sides of the ventral thorax,
temporal resolution. Maximal temporal resolution is
i.e., next to the sternum (parasternal). The size of
obtained by decreasing field depth and minimizing the
these access windows depends on individual thoracic
sector angle (sector width). The ultimate in temporal
conformation and may be increased by pulmonary
resolution is obtained by using motion-mode echocar-
underinflation (e.g., sccondary to pleural effusion or
diography (M-mode). Numerous dedicated abbrevia-
atelectasis) and decrcascd by overinflation as may
tions and conventions are used in this chapter and are
occurwith manycardiopulmonary diseases.Additional
listed in Table 5.1.
access can be gained from the subcostal (subxiphoid)
 Suggested guidelines for transducer frequencies
position, imaging the heart through the liver and
include 8-12MHz for cats and similarly sized dogs,
caudal mediastinum; limited views of the aortic arch
4-8 MHz for dogs in the 5-to 40-kg range,and 2-4 MHz
may be available from the thoracic inlet (suprasternal
for large dogs (>40kg). When performing an echocar-
transducer position), as well.
diogram, a concurrent electrocardiogram may be
valuable or essential, depending on the goals of the
study.
Right Parasternal Views
Usually there are two or more rib spaces available for
Preparation ofPatients
right parasternal (RPS) vicws, including a cranial loca-
tion, corresponding typically to the fourth intercostal
Patients are positioned in lateral recumbency, with the
spacc, and a more caudal location at the fifth (Figure
transducer applied to thepatientfrombelowwith the
5.2).
aid of a table with cutouts designed for this purpose
For images suitable for LV quantification, the trans-
(Figure 5.1).Acoustic transmission is facilitated either
ducer is positioned within the selected rib space so that
by clipping the hair over the point of transducer appli-
the central beam of the transducer is perpendicular to
po m ng a s  q o u
the LV long axis at the tips of the mitral valve leaflets.
coupling gel.
A short-axis image is obtained by twisting the trans-
ducer so that the LV cross section is as close to circular
Two-dimensional Echocardiography
as possible. Angulation in the base-apex direction
yields a series of RPS short-axis views, depending on
Cardiac image orientation and transducer placement
the transection level (Figure 5.2).
are referenced with respect to the heart itself (Henry
 Long-axis images are obtained from the RPS posi-
et al.1980;Thomas 1984;Bonagura et al.1985;O'Grady
tion by applying a 90? counterclockwise transducer
151
152 HEART
Table 5.1.
twist, relative to the short-axis orientation, and fanning
Abbreviations and conventions used throughout
so that the LV central axis lies within the scan planc;
this chapter
a four-chamber view results (Figure 5.3). From this
view, slight cranial angulation and clockwise twisting
Anatomical designations
Anterior mitral valve lcaflet
brings the LV outflow tract and aorta into view.
AML
Ao
Aorta or aortic
AV
Aorticvalve
Left Apical Views
CaVC
Caudal vena cava
CrVC
Cranial vena cava
Left apical position (LAp) images are best obtained
CT
Chordae tendinae
with the patient in left lateral recumbency, with the
IVS
Intraventricular septum
transducer applied to the left ventral thorax from
LA
Left atrium or left atrial
Left atrial appendage
below (Figure 5.4). A true apical view results when the
LAA
LPA
Left main pulmonary artery
transducer is placed at an extreme ventral and caudal
LV
Left ventricle or left ventricular
location, approaching a subcostal position. The trans-
LVOT
Left ventricular outflow tract
ducer is angled cranially so that the central ultrasound
LVW
Left ventricular wall
beam is pointed toward the heart base along the LV
MV
Mitralvalve
central axis. The truc apical view may be technically
Pcricardium
Papillary muscle
challenging, so a more cranial transducer position may
PM
Posteriormitral valve leaflet
be suitable but results in a forcshortened LV view that
PML
PT
Pulrmonary trunk
is unsuitable for ventricular quantification.
PV
Pulmonicvalve
Cranial angulation of the transduccr from the LAp
RA
Right atrium or right atrial
four-chamber position brings the aortic root into
RAA
Right atrial appendage
the scanplane and enables visualization of thc aortic
RPA
Right main pulmonary artery
valve.This scan plane constitutes the apical five-chamber
RV
Right ventricle orright ventricular
Right ventricular outflow tract
image and often is suitable for aortic flow-velocity
RVOT
Right ventricular wall
quantification.
1.However the subcostal transducer
RVW
TV
Tricuspid valve
location typically is better aligned for maximal veloc-
Echocardiographicmodality
ity measurements in dogs (Abbott and MacLean
CFD
Color flow Doppler
2003)
CWD
Continuous-wave Doppler
From the apical four-chamber view, a 90° clockwise
M-mode
Motion mode
twist yields the apical two-chamber view including the
PWD
Pulsed-wave Doppler
left ventricle and atrium in the near and far fields,
TD
Tissue Dopplcr
respectively.
TDI
Tissue Dopplerimaging
2DE
Two-dimensional echocardiography
Transducer position and orientation
Left Parasternal Views
Ap
Apex
Left parasternal position (LPS) views of the heart, also
Bs
Base
callcd left cranial views, are obtained preferably with
Ca
Caudal
Cr
Cranial
the patient in left lateral recumbency. The transducer
LAp
Left apical
is positioned so that it is cranial to the heart, at the
LPS
Left parasternal
fourth to fifth intercostal space, and approximately at
LAX
Long-axis (orientation)
the level of the costal-chondral junction in the dorsal-
RPS
Right parasternal (position)
ventral direction.
SAX
Short-axis (orientation)
 Baseline left cranial long-axis images are obtained
Diseases and conditions
with the scan plane oriented parallel to the ascending
AI
Aortic insufficiency
aorta, twisting so as to include a longitudinal view of
CDVD
Chronic degenerative valve disease
this structure (Figure 5.5).Portions of the left ventriclc
DCM
Dilated cardiomyopathy
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
and atrium, mitral valve, and right ventricular (RV)
HCM
LCHF
Left-sided congestive heart failure
outflow tract may be visible from this position. The
MR
Mitral regurgitation
view is particularly useful for evaluation of heart base
PI
Pulmonic insufficiency
tumors and the RV outflow tract.
RCHF
Right-sided congestive heart failure
With dorsal and slightly caudal angulation of the
TR
Tricuspid regurgitation
transducer, the scan plane encounters the left atrium
TransversePlane
Base
Cauda
Sagittal
Craniak
Plane
Left
Ventricular
pex
Dorsal Plane
Axis
Id
AO
LAA
RVOT
RAA
LV
RV
B
Ao
RA
RV
RVOT
C
RAA
Figure 5.1. Echocardiographic orientation and anatomy. A: A prevailing coordinate system is defined in terms of the LV
axis for the individual's heart. The terms base and apex are specific to the heart and do not usually correspond preciscly with
dorsaland ventrai directions referenced withrespect to the animal.Similarly,thecranial-caudal axis of the hcart is perpendicular
to the base-apex axis and docs not coincide precisely with the anatomical definitions.B and C: The transducer is most com-
monly applied to recumbent patients from below with the aid of a specially designed table.For the definiticn of abbreviations
in thefigures inthis chapter,sceTable5.1.
153
RPSShortAxisViews
RA
RPA
Ca
RA
RC
LA
LAA
Pulmonary
Vein
Figure 5.2. RPS SAx scanning technique. For RPS SAx views, the transducer is positioned so that the scan plane slices per-
pendicularly to the LV central axis at the level of the CT. Numbers 1-6 refer to the scan plane orientation and image obtaincd.
left coronary (LC), and noncoronary (NC) cusps of the Ao valve may be visible.3: Slice 3 at the mitral level. The mitral leaflets
are widely separated while blood flows between the leaflets into the LV chamber. 4: Slice 4 at the chordal level. 5: Slice 5 at
the LV level.P, pericardium.
154
155ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
RVW
RV
SAI
LVOT
RVW
RV
RVW
RV
SA
LV
PM
Figure5.2.Continued
and ventricle, RV outflow tract, and pulmonary
From the initial LPS view of the LV outflow tract, a
trunk; the pulmonary bifurcation typically can be
clockwise twist results in a scan plane that slices the
visualized.
aortic root transversely (Figure 5.6). Fanning the trans-
Relative to the initial LV outflow tracl position,
ducer in a cranial-dorsal direction produces a range of
ventral and slightly cranial angulation causes the scan
images for optimal viewing of the right atrium and RV
plane to transect the right atrium, right atrial (RA)
inflow tract, RV inflow and outflow tracts, and pulmo-
appendage, tricuspid valve, and RV inflow. The RA
nary trunk. The latter enables visualization of the pul-
appendage can be closely inspected from this vantage
monary bifurcation,ascending aorta, and structures
point for evidence of neoplasia.
associated with the heart base.
RPSLongAxisViews
TV
RV
RA
IVS
AML
IAS
Ap
Bs
PML
LA
PM
LVW
RWW
2
RV
TV
RA
SA
AP
Bs
AV
NC
Ao
PM
RPA
LAA
LVW
Figure 5.3. RPS LAx scanning technique. For RPS LAx views, the transducer is positioned so that the scan plane contains,
Or is parallel to, the LV central axis. 1: Slice 1 with a four-chamber view. 2: Slice 2 with an LVOT view. NC is the noncoronary
portion of the Ao sinus of Valsalva. IΛS, interatrial septum.
Figure 5.4. LAp scanning technique. The transducer is positioned at the left apex of the heart. Cranial angulation brings
the heart into the scan plane.1: LAp four-chainber view.2:LAp fivc-chamber view.3: LAp two-chamber view.IAS,interatrial
septuim.
156
Left Apical Scanning Views
iAp
RVW
LVW
IVS
PM-
RV
LV
2
MV
RA
~IAS
Bs
Ap
V
PM
MV
LA
Figure 5.4.
LeftParasternal LongAxisViews
1
RV
RV
RA
RVOT
RVOT
LVOT
LA
Figure 5.5.Left parasternal LAx scanning technique. The transducer is positioned near the left cranial border of the heart.
sary as suggested by the figure. 1: LPS LAx view at the RV. 2: LPS LAx view at the RAA. 3: LPS LAx view at thc Ao. RC and
NC refer to the right coronary and noncoronary portions of the Ao sinus of Valsalva. 4: LPS LAx view.
158
LPS Short Axis Views
RV
RVOT
RA
LA
RV
RO
RA
RVOT
RA
Cranial-caudal yields the series of SAx images. Variable angulation in the dorsal-ventral direction may be necessary as sug-
gested by the figure. 1: IPS SAx view at the RV inflow tract. The right coronary (RC), left coronary (LC), and noncoronary
(NC) cusps of the Ao valve may be visible. 2: LPS SAx view at the inflow-outlow.Both the inflow and outflow tracts of the
right heart may be visible with subtle angulation and twist adjustments. The right coronary (RC), left coronary (LC), and
noncoronary (NC) cusps of the Ao valve may be visible. 3: LPS SAx vicw at the PT. PV, pulmonary vein.
159
160 HEART
Subcostal and Suprasternal Views
Motion-mode Echocardiography
(M-mode)
The suprasternal view necessitates transducer posi-
tioning at the thoracic inlet with the scan plane ori-
The majority of M-mode dimensional recordings are
 ented parallel to the patient's sagittal plane. This view
made from the RPS transducer position (Bonagura
is best for imaging the aortic arch and valuable, con-
1983; Bonagura et al. 1985). One of the principalapplica-
 sequently, for quantification of aortic insufficiency.
tions of M-mode is for the recording of time-dependent
The subcostal view is obtained, with the patient in
short-axis dimensions of the heart, and this dictates a
lateral recumbency, by positioning the transducer at
specific external transducer location that is determined
the xiphoid process and pressing into the abdomen
by the cardiac anatomy (Figures 5.8-5.12).
while pointing the transducer almost directly cranially
(Figure 5.7). The twist is adjusted to be approximately
Doppler Echocardiography
 parallel to the sagittal plane. For Doppler aortic veloc-
ity recordings, the transducer is fanned to include the
 Doppler echocardiography uses the Doppler principal
aortic root.
to determine the velocity of moving blood or tissue
B
Liver
RVOT
Ao
Figure 5.7. Subcostal approach. This transducer position is used principally for Doppler recordings of Ao ejection and typi-
 cally yields the best alignment with flow in dogs. The liver is interposed between the transducer and heart. The CFD image
(B) depicts Ao ejection.
A
RV!
:RV
RA
IVS
SAI
LV
LV
4
1
LA
！
LVW
B
RV
RA
RV
SAI
LV
LV
AW
LA
LVW
C
RV
RA
RV
TV
RA
Ao
1
LA
PM
LAA
LAA
LVW
Figure 5.8.M-mode scan-line orientation. 2DE is used to position the transducer and orient the scan line throughout M-
mode recordings as shown. Orientations are depicted for LV (A), MV (B), and Ao-LA (C) recordings.
161
162HEART
A
B
A
RV
IVS
LV
LVW
Figure 5.9.M-mode at the LV level. The M-mode recording (middle tier) is generated from the selected scan line shone in
the RPS SAx (top tier) and LAx (bottom tier) images. Time marker A is at end diastole coinciding with the onset of the QRS
complex of the electrocardiogram. Time marker B is at end systole, which coincides with the minimum LV dimension near
the end of the electrocardiographic T wave.
(Darke 1992; Kirberger et al. 1992; Bonagura and Miller
sured velocities arise, so the anatomical location of
1998; Bonagura et al. 1998). With pulsed-oave Doppler velocities must be inferred or determined using other
(PWD), the round-trip time of the ultrasound pulse is  means (e.g., PWD).
used to determine the tissue depth at which theveloc-
Color flou Doppler (CFD) is a pulsed-wave modality
ity occurs; the maximum depth dictates a specific
in whichvelocity characteristics are encoded to a color
pulse-repetition frequency. In turn, repetitive pulsa-
display, via a uscr selected mapping, and overlaid
tion of the ultrasound is dircctly responsible for the
onto the real-time 2DE image. This enables the ultra-
aliasing phenomenon whereby mcasurcd vclocity is
sonographer to visualize directly the source of veloci-
observed to occur at an alias velocity. The alias velocity
ties within the heart and great vessels within the
maybe agrossmisrepresentation of actualvelocity
anatomical framework of the image. Being a pulsed-
(Figure 5.13). In contrast to PWD, ultrasound is emitted
wave modality, CFD is subject to velocity measure-
continuouslyin the continuous-waveDopplermodality,
ment ambiguity caused by aliasing (Figure 5.14). PWD
which does not suffer from the velocily ambiguity of
and CFD are better suitedfor differentiation between
PWD. There is no practical limit to the velocity mag-
laminar and turbulent flow patterns than is CWD.
nitude that can be measured with continuous-wave
Aorticflowvelocityisrecordedfrom the subcostal
Doppler(CWD).However,this mode does not enable
 or LAp transducer position for velocity quantification.
determination of the tissue depth from which the mea-
The normal aortic ejection signal peaks early in the
163ATLAS OF SMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
RV
SAL
LVW
Figure 5.10.M-mode at the MV level. The M-mode recording (middle ticr) is gcncrated from the selected scan line shone
diastole and apposed during systole. Time marker A is at early diastole, and marker B is at late diastole immediately after
the P wave of the electrocardiogram. Marker C is at a prolonged diastasis,i.e.,middiastole, and D is at end systole.
ejection cycle and may impart a daggerlike shape to
mode counterparts, velocity signals exhibit phasic
the velocity envelope (Figure 5.15). By comparison,
changes that reflect the physiology of ventricular
pulmonary ejection from the same individual exhibits
filling. The tricuspid inflow-velocity signal is similar
a later peak velocity with a lower maximal value, and
to the mitral but normally exhibitsdiminished velocity
a longer duration of ejection (Figure 5.16). Pulmonic
magnitude in comparison, in part because of greater
ejection recordings may be obtained from either the
effective orifice area for the tricuspid valve. Recording
RPS or LPS transducer positions, and it may be appro-
of tricuspid inflow is facilitated by placing the trans-
priate to attempt both if quantification of maximal
ducer one or more rib spaces farther cranially as
velocity is desired. It is normal for the pulmonic valve
compared with thc optimal position for mitral
to exhibit a small amount of insuficiency (see Figure
recordings.
5.18).
Examples of normal CFD recordings are shown in
Mitral and tricuspid inflow velocities are usually
Figures 5.17 and 5.18.
recorded from the LAp position to best align the ultra-
sound beam with the direction of inflow (Figure 5.15).
TissueDoppler Recordings
PWD recordings are made by placing the sample
volume near the tips of the open mitral or tricuspid
Tissue Doppler recordings are employed to quantify
leaflets to include maximal velocities.Like their M-
the velocity of motion of cardiac tissue directly. The
164HEART
B
RV
AC
LAA
shone in the RPS SAx (top tier) and LAx (bottom tier) images.Because of the orientation of the scan line, only the left coronary
cusp is typically visible during systole in the dog. Time marker A is at middiastole, and the AV is shown closed during this
phase.Time marker B coincides with systole,and the left coronary cusp is visible near the far-field Ao wall
most common use of tissue Doppler in cardiology is
 ultrasonographer must possess a detailed understand-
to record the longitudinal (base-apex) velocity of the
ing of cardiovascular physiology, pathophysiology,
mitral annulus from the LAp four-chamber position.
and the sources of variation for observations
Velocity recordings may be obtained from either the
(Table 5.2).
septal or lateral mitral annulus, adjusting transducer
position so that annular motion of the choscn site is
Measurement and Index Normalization
directed along the Doppler scan line to the cxtcnt pos-
sible (Figure 5.19).
A basic, but troublesome, aspect of veterinary cardiol-
ogy has bccn to interpret raw measurements for the
range of body-size and breed variations encountered,
EchocardiographicMeasurements
particularly for dogs. Although no entirely satisfactory
andIndices
approach has been detcrmined, a common feature of
Besides direct visual observation, structural and func-
many well-normalized indices is that they derive
tional evaluation of the heart may entail echocardio-
from a ratio of two measurements with the same phys-
graphic measurements of linear dimensions, areas,
ical units. Echocardiographic ratio indices havc long
time intervals, or velocities, and calculation of perfor-
 been used in cardiology, with examples dating from
manceindices from theseraw data.To characterize
the beginning of the technique. Left atrial (LA) size,
and quantify the heart echocardiographically, the
for example, may be expressed in terms of aortic
B
RV
Ao
LAA
RV
IVS
AML
LV
PML
LVW
Figure 5.12.
2.M-mode recordings. A: This recording is made at the LV level corresponding to the scan-line orientation shown
in Figure 5.8A. Epicardial and endocardial surfaces of the IVS and LVW are well delineated throughout the recording, which
is necessary for measurement accuracy. B: This Ao root recording corresponds to the orientation in Figure 5.8C. The AV is
visible. C: This recording is at the MV level (Figure 5.8B). D: Depicted are letter designations A-F of MV motion.
Table5.2
Sources of cchocardiographic variation
Image acquisition
Genetic variation
Observer technique
Body size
Instrument settings
Species variation
Measurement from images
Breed variation
Observer technique
Individual variation
Hemodynamicvariation(shortterm)
Pathophysiology
Autonomic balance
Disease consequences
Preload
Cardiovascularremodeling
Afterload
Interpretive methods
Contractility
Observer experience
Heart rate
Statistical methods
Drugs
Spectrumofnormal
Environmentalvariation(longterm)
Data availability
Nutrition
Athletic training level
Drugs
Expertise as an echocardiographer necessitates an extensive understanding of these factors and interrelationships.
165
Figure 5.13. Spectral PWD aliasing. Spectral Doppler recordings represent velocity along the y-axis, corresponding to
 Doppler shift frequency, and time along the x-axis. In this example of Ao ejection, flow is directed away from the transducer,
 and velocity in this direction is depicted below the baseline. The velocity reaches the alias velocity (Nyquist limit) at position
 tinues to increase, actually passing the zero baseline to the peak velocity indicated at position 3.
一
Figure5.14.
167ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
dimension (LA/Aom). It is often preferable, however,
In dogs, for example, LA area in the RPS short-axis
to index cardiac linear dimcnsions in terms of the body
orientation (SAx) image is normally 2-4 aortic areas in
weight (BW, in kilograms) raised to the one-third
size, regardless of body size (LA area/AoA. = 2-4).
power. The wcight-based aortic dimension, Aow =
Themajority ofpublished cardiac dimensional data
0.795 BW1/3, is an estimate of a dog's aortic diameter,
for dogs and cats are from M-mode recordings. Many
and expectations for LA/Aow are similar to the index
of these may be recast into the form of a ratio index
derived using the measured aortic dimension (Figure
that enables interpretation independent of body
5.20). Similarly, the aortic area can be approximated as
weight. Normal values for raw echocardiographic
AoAw = IAow/4, the area of a circle with radius
measurements and ratio indices are tabulated in thc
Aow/2,and incorporated into various area ratio indices.
Appendix at the end of this chapter.
Figure 5.15. Normal PWI recordings. PWD recordings from a normal dog are shown for the Ao (A, LAp transducer posi-
ejection flowvelocity peaks early insystole andmay generate a dagger-shaped velocity envelope like thc one shown.Inclusion
of the valve ilself in the velocity sampling volume generates a vertical artifact that marks the end of the ejection for both
cardiac cycles shown. Normal mitral and tricuspid inflow occurs in two distinct phases (E and A waves as labeled) corre-
sponding to M-mode designations.
Figure 5.14.Laminar versus turbulent flow. A: The PWD Ao ejection signal, recorded from the subcostal transducer posi-
tion of a normal dog, demonstrates a laminar flow signal. B: In contrast, a CWD recording of a turbulent pattern from a dog
rangc of Doppler frequencies (i.e., velocities) at each moment during the ejection and spectral broadening of the signal; the
early in the Ao ejection phase. The color pattern is laminar but depicts color aliasing that occurs at position 1. Velocity con-
tinues to increase in the direction of the outflow and has aliased to black, at position 2, wrapping around to blue again at
position 3. D: The CFD image of AO ejection for the bradycardic dog. Color aliasing occurs so that velocity can be seen to
Wrap around thecolor scaleat least twice with ablue-yellow interface(Nyquist frequency)at positions1 and3,and indicated
Zero velocity at positions 2 and 4. A turbulent color flow pattern appears in the Ao (T), as represented by smalljuxtaposcd
islands of blue and yellow, also known as a mosaic pattern.
RV
Figure 5.16. Variation of Ao ejection velocity with location. PWD recordings of Ao ejection with the LAp five-chamber
image (A) showing sample volume locations. There is a marked progression of peak velocity from the subvalvular position
(1) to the valvular (2) and supravalvular (3) positions. CWD recordings from the same transducer position (not shown)
samples all velocities included along the chosen scan line (dotted). In B, the envelope of the CWD recording indicates the
 maximum velocity along the scan line throughout ejection, and there may be considerable spectral broadening because a wide
 range of velocities is present along the line at each moment in time.
B
60
RV
RI
RV
RA
Figure 5.17.
R
R
RA
RA
D
RVOT
RVOT
Ao
D
Ld
Figure 5.18. Normal CFD images of mitral and pulmonic flow. LV inflow, recorded from the LAp 4 chamber view, is shown
for early diastole (A) and for atrial kick (B), corresponding to the E and A waves of mitral inflow, respectively (Figure 5.32).
 RPS SAx images of pulmonic flow correspond to laminar systolic ejection (C) and mild PI (D). The latter is a normal
finding.
Figure 5.17. Normal CFD images of Ao flow. A and B: CFD images from the RPS position of a normal dog. Inflow (A) and
 outlow (B) velocities of the LV are not aligned with the direction of ultrasound propagation from the RPS position, and 
accurate quantification of these velocities is not achieved. A: Normal mitral inflow in early diastole is directed relatively
toward the transducer and depicted in red in accordance with the color velocity map shown. B: LV ejection follows a bend 
 in the Ao so that part of the flow is directed toward the transducer (red), part is directed away (blue), and velocity is com-
 pletely perpendicular to the ultrasound beam at location 1, where velocity appears to be zero (black). Color aliasing occurs
at location 2, where flow away from the transducer exceeds the Nyquist limit. Improved LV inflow and outflow alignment
 are achieved from the LAp position. C: Early peak Ao ejection, with color aliasing. D: Subsequent ejection at decreased
velocity.
169
172HEART
division by the measured aortic dimension (Aom)
estimations of ventricular stroke volume and cardiac
Mean values of this ratio are near 1.0 across the entire
output in conjunction with Doppler velocity measure-
body-size spectrum but with normal maximum values
ments (Figure 5.24).
up to 1.4, depending on breed (Appendix). The upper
limit for the raw measurement in cats ranges from 1.2
Cardiac Volume and Mass
to 1.7cm, depending on the study (Appendix). Linear
2DE LA measurements from SAx and LAx images
Numerous mathematical formulas have been pro-
afford advantages in sensitivity overM-mode determi-
posed for the estimation ofventricularvolume,which
nations (Figure 5.23). Like their M-mode counterparts,
pertains importantly to cardiovascular diagnosis and
maximal 2DE LA size determinations aremade at end
prognosis.
systole, just prior to the mitral valve opening.
Fjection fraction is a ratio index calculated from ven-
Measurements of aortic and pulmonary trunkdiam-
tricular volume as(EIV-ESV)/EDV,where EDVand
etermaybe used to evaluate these outflow tractsfor
ESV are the end-diastolic volume and the end-systolic
narrowing, stenosis, or dilation, and also are used for
volume, respectively (Schiller et al. 1989). Many
B
LAmax
AXAC
LAXLAD
M-
de
SAxLAD
C
LA SAxD /Aow=1.23±0.16[0.82-1.61]
SAxAoArea
LA LAx D / Aow = 1.58 ± 0.13 [1.32- 1.94]
LA SAx C / Aow= 6.47 ± 0.65[5.32-7.96]
LA SAxA/AoAw=2.49±0.48[1.54-3.38]
Ao SAx D / Aow= 0.96 ± 0.12 [0.71 - 1.31]
Ao SAx C / Aow=3.29 ± 0.39 [2.51 -4.18]
Ao SAxA/ AoAw =0.93 ± 0.22[0.54-1.51]
SAxLAArea
SAxAo Circumference
SAxLA Circumference
Figure 5.23.LA size determination.LA size determination is problematic because of the irregular three-dimensional shape.
In dogs,the standard M-mode measurement includes only a small portion of the LA,i.e., the LAA (A).Linear measurements
made from the 2DE RPS SAx (A) and LAx (B) are more representative of atrial size but still suffer from angular dependence.
Thc planimctcred SAx LA arca and circumfcrcncc arc lcss dcpcndcnt on anglc (C). LA mcasurcmcnts studicd by Rishniw
and Erb may be conveniently expressed as a ratio index, dividing linear dimensionsby the weight-based Ao diameter (Ao
=0.795 BWi/3) and area measurements by the weight-based Ao area (AoA = II Ao/4). Each index exhibits minimal depen-
dence on body size. Mean ± standard deviation and, in brackets, range for each index are shown. Original data supplied by
Rishniw and Erb (2000). A, area; BW, body weight; C, circumference; D, diameter, and max, maximum.
B
LV
RVO
Figure 5.24. LVOT and RVOT diameters. RPS LAx (A and B) and SAx (C) images are shown. Measurements are made
A: Position 1 depicts the Ao root diameter in diastole. B: The systolic dimension,where the measurement can be made between
the right coronary cusp and Ao root wall to quantify the flow diameter. Position 2 in A corresponds to the dilation that occurs
at the sinus of Valsalva, and position 3 is the sinotubular junction, a local mininum for the Ao diameter. C: The diameter of
the PV orifice. Accurate determination of RVOT diameter is problematic because the ultrasound beam is nearly parallel to
the reflecting surfaces.
cardiologists use the terms ejectionfraction and sys-
tolic function synonymously.The one-dimensional
analogue of ejection fraction is the fractional shorten-
ing,FS=(LVIDd -LVIDs)/LVIDd, determined usually
from M-mode short-axis measurements of diastolic
(LVIDd) and systolic (LVIDs) LV internal dimension.
LV stroke volume (SV) may be estimated from the dif-
ference between diastolic and systolic volumes.A
body-size normalizedratioindex,w△A (Table5.3),is
the estimated LV SAx stroke area divided by the
weight-based aortic area. Values derived from M-
mode measurements range from 0.8 to 2.8 in dogs and
maybe somewhat breed and body size dependent
LV Mass-Area-Length
(Appendix). The M-mode index is simplistic but valu-
ablefor clinicalquantification of LVvolume overload
.05π
 Or underload in the authors' experience. Relative echo-
3(a +t)²
LV Mass -Truncated Ellipsoid
cardiographic ratio indices of the left ventricle and
interventricular septum are defined in Table 5.4.
Figure 5.25.LV mass estimation by 2DE methods. Short-
LV mass may be estimated by calculating the exter-
axis cxtcrnal (A) and intcrnal (A) areas are determined by
nalvolume of the left ventricle and subtracting the
planimetry at the level of the mitral CT and used to deter-
internal volume (Schiller et al. 1989) (Figure 5.25).
mine geometric mean radi, both outer (r) and inner (r);
constant wall thickness (t) is assumed. The major axis of the
Myocardial mass is normally proportional to body
ellipsoid (a) is measured along the LV axis from the apex to
weight and thus requires normalization. Ratio indices
the point of maximal radius, as shown; the distance (d) com-
wWAd and wWAs correspond to normalized LV
prises the renmainder of the LV length from the apex to the
short-axis wall area in diastole and systole, respec-
mitral annulus. The constant (1.05g/cm) is the density of
tively, where myocardial wall area is divided by the
normal soft tissuc.LV mass values obtained by either
weight-based aortic area (Table 5.3). Normal values of
equation require normalization for body size (Schiller et al.
wWAd in dogs range roughly from 1.8 to 5.5 but with
1989)
174 HEART
Table 5.3.
Weight-based echocardiographicratioindices
Index
Calculation
Description
wAo
Aom/AOw
Indexedaorticroot dimension
wlVSd
IVSd/AO
Indexed interventricular septal thickness,diastole
wLVIDd
LVIDd/Aow
Indexed left ventricularinternal dimension,diastole
wLVWd
LVWd/Aow
Indexed left ventricular wall thickness, diastole
wIVSs
IVSs/Aow
Indexed interventricular septal thickness, systole
WLVIDs
LVIDs/AOw
Indexedleftventricularinternal dimension,systole
WLVWs
LVWs/Aow
Indexed left ventricular wall thickness,systole
WLA
LA/AOw
Indexedleft atrial dimcnsion
wLVODd
(IVSd+LVIDd + LVWd)/Aow
Indexofleftventricularouterdimension,diastole
wWTd
(IVSd + LVWd)/Aow
Index of combined septal and left ventricularwall thickness,diastole
wLVODs
(IVSs + LVIDs + LVWs)/A0w
Index of left ventricular outer dimension,systole
wWTs
(IVSs + LVWs)/Aow
Indexof combined septal and left ventricularwallthickness,systole
W△A
(LVIDd² -LVIDs²)/Aow²
Index of change in left ventricular internal area, i.e., short-axis stroke area
wWAd
(LVODd²- LVIDd²)/Aow²
Index of left ventricular short-axis myocardial wall area, diastole, i.e.,
hypertrophy
wWAs
(LVODs²-LVIDs²)/Aow
Index of left ventricular short-axis myocardial wall area, systole,i.e.
hypertrophy
A ratio index normalizes raw echocardiographic measurements for body size. Aow is the weight-based aortic dimension calculated as
Aow = kBw1 where k is a species-dependent constant equal to 0.795 in dogs and 0.567 in cats.
Table 5.4.
Relative echocardiographicratio indices
Index
Calculation
Description
FS
(LVIDd-LVIDs)/LVIDd
Fractional shortening.Relative leftventricular internal wallmotion or LV
short axis deformation.
FWTd
(IVSd+LVWd)/LVODd
Fractional leftventricularmyocardialwall thickness,diastole.Relative left
ventricularwall thickness in diastole.
FWTs
(IVSs+LVWs)/LVODs
Fractional left ventricular myocardial wall thickness, systole.Relative left
ventricularwall thickness in systole.
F△A
(LVIDd² - LVIDs²)/LVIDd²
Fractional changein left ventricularinternal area.Relative left ventricular
internal wall motion orleftventricular short-axis deformation.
FWAd
(LVODd²-LVIDd²)/(LVODd²)
Fractional left ventricular myocardial wall area (short axis), diastole.
Relativeleftventricularwall area in diastole.
FWAs
(LVODs²-LVIDs²)/(LVODs²)
Fractional left ventricular myocardial wall area (short axis). Relative left
ventricular wall area in systole.
IVSFT
(IVSs-IVSd)/IVSd
Intraventricularseptumfractional thickening.Relativethickening of
interventricular septum.
LVWFT
(LVWs-LVWd)/LVWd
Left ventricular wall fractional thickening.Relative thickening of left
ventricularwall.
RWTd
2LVWd/LVIDd
Relativeleft ventricular wall thickness,diastole.Relative left ventricular
wall thickness to chamber dimension,diastole.
RWTs
2 LVWs/LVIDs
Relativeleftventricularwall thicknesssystoleelativeleft ventricular
wall thickness to chamber dimension, systole.
Fractional shortening is a better-known ratio index derived by dividing the change in left ventricular internal dimension by the diastolic
value;it is common practice to multiply the result by 100 and express the value as a percentage (%△Di.Relative ratio indices are normalized
for some aspect of heart size, not for the size of the individual.
significant breed dependency; upper values in Italian
not estimate true myocardial mass. However, they
greyhounds, whippets, and greyhounds range from
may be superior indicators of hypertrophy compared
5.0 to 6.0 (Appendix).These are clinical indices derived
with simplc mcasurements of wall thickness, which
from M-mode or planar 2DE measurements that do
can depend strongly on hcmodynamic conditions.
175ATLAS OF SMALLANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
Doppler Measurements and Systolic
Doppler signals are ideal for obtaining the required
Time Intervals
measurements.Systolic time intervals are determined
from time measurements of the cardiac cycle and con-
Much of the quantitative value of Doppler studies
sequently are indices of global function; determina-
stems from the application of fluid dynamic principles
tions aremostcommonly used toevaluateLVfunction.
to the interpretation of measured velocities through
A ratio index of preejection period (PEP)-LV ejection
the modified Bernoulli equation (Hatle and Angelsen 
time (PEP/LVET), is often used to help normalize raw
1985). The modified Bernoulli equation is expressed as
time measurements for body size and heart rate. An
P =4 V2 for many clinical applications, where velocity
additional index, the velocity of circumferential short-
(V) is in meters per second (m/s) and the calculated
ening,is equivalent to the fractional shortening divided
pressure is in millimeters of mercury (mm Hg). Velocity
by LV ejection time (FS/LVET) and so relatcs to the
recordings are optimized accomplished at the time of
rate of cardiac deformation.Additional determina-
the recording by diligent positioning of the transducer
tions made from either aortic or pulmonary flow-
at the appropriate body-wall location, aided by cues
velocity signals include the acceleration time and the
from the CFD image and both visual and auditory
velocity time integral (VTI). Acceleration time is related
feedback from the spectral Doppler display (Darke et
to both myocardial function and afterload (Figure
al. 1993). Transducer position varies with the specific
5.26).
lesion to be evaluated, e.g., aortic stenosis versus mitral
The aortic or pulmonary VTI is the planimetered
regurgitation (MR), as well as nuances specific to the 
area under the flow-velocity envelope. It has physical
individual.
units of length (e.g., centimeters), corresponding to
Besides pressure gradients, valuable functional
the integration of velocity with respect to time, and
information is derived from spectral Doppler signals
also has been termed the stroke length (Figure 5.30).
that enable the timing of cardiac cycle events and csti-
Multiplication of theVTI by the effective orifice area
mation of blood flow rate (Figure 5.26). Systolic time
(Ae) gives the volume of blood passing through the
intervals have been employed for many years to evalu-
orifice during the ejection, i.e.,the forward stroke
ate cardiac function, predating the ultrasonic era, but
volumc (SV=VTI× Ae).Multiplication of the stroke
C
PEP
ET
VTI
2
AT
QAVC
yields the velocity-time integral (VTI), which has units of length (e.g., centimeters). B: Measurement of the temporal peak
velocity (Vpeas). C: Determination of timing intervals. The preejcction period (PEP) is from the onset of the electrocardiographic
QRS complex to the onset of ejection.Measurcment of the ejection time (ET) is facilitated by inclusion of the Ao valve in the
velocity sampling volume so that valve motion artifacts delineate the interval. Total electrical-mechanical systole is fron
the onset of the QRS to Ao valve closure (QAVC) and is the sum of PEP and ET. The acceleration time (AT) is the interval
from the beginning of the ejection to the peak flow velocity. Average flow velocity (e.g., centimeters per second) can be deter-
mined by dividing the VlI by ET. Terminology applies to RV outflow signals, as well
176HEART
VTI
DT
Figure 5.27. Measurements from mitral inflow signals. Measurements include peak velocities for the E and A waves and
the velocity-time integrals (VTIs) of each. The E/A peak velocity ratio, normally greater than 1.0, or VTl/VTI may be used
to quantify relative contributions of each to ventricular filling.Peak velocities are related to the peak atrial-ventricular pres
sure gradient through the Bernoulli equation and so may suggest valvular stenosis or increased LA presure. The acceleration
time (AT) is the interval from opening of the MV to pcak velocity. The deceleration time (DT)is determined by extrapolating
from peak F-wave velocity to baseline along the flow-velocity envelope, as shown; it is common for the A wave to intervene
without the velocity envelope reaching zero. The slope of the deceleration may also be recorded.
volume by heart rate gives the cardiac output. The
both, corresponding to a complete or incomplete
effective orifice area (Ae) may be estimated from 2DE
hyperechoic ring of fibrocartilaginous tissue encircling
images as just described for aortic and pulmonary
the outflow tract (Bonagura and Herring 1985b). AS
outflow tracts by using the measured diameter (D) to
 causes LV pressure overload and concentric hypertro-
compute the area of a corresponding circle (A = πD² /4)
phy of the left ventricle as quantified by septal and LV
(Figure 5.24).
wall thickncss and other indices of absolute or relative
Measurements from mitral and tricuspid inflow-
hypcrtrophy. The extent of hypertrophy is variably
velocity signals include the velocity magnitudc of the
correlated with the severity of obstruction.Severe
E and A waves and the planimetered area (VTI) for
 obstruction also may be accompanied by increased
each (Figure 5.27). Factors affecting the form of inflow
echogenicity of the papillary muscles and/or sub-
endocardial myocardium, possibly secondary to
ular function.
ischemia of these regions and subsequent fibrosis or
calcification. In severely affected cases, M-mode echo-
cardiography of the aortic root may demonstrate pre-
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE
mature systolic closure of the aortic valve.
CFD of the LV outflow tract in systole reveals a
ValvularDiseases
region of flow acceleration proximal to the obstructive
lesion, and turbulent or disturbed flow with increased
Aortic Stenosis
velocity distally (Moise 1989) (Figure 5.29). Arbitrary
Aortic stenosis (AS) signifies an obstruction to LV
prognostic categories based on the pressure gradient
outflow.It may be valvular, subvalvular (subaortic
are mild (<50mm Hg), moderate(50-75 mm Hg), severe
stenosis [SAS]), or supravalvular. SAS is the most
(75-100 mm Hg), and very severe (>100mm Hg). The
common congenital defect of large-breed dogs.
aortic flow-velocity envelope also becomes more
Moderate to severe SAS causes characteristic, but vari-
rounded,and its acceleration time increases; that is,
able, 2DE abnormalities, including discrete or diffuse
delayed peakvelocity with increasing severity (Figure
narrowing of the I.V outflow tract, poststenotic aortic
5.30). The pressure gradient and peak velocity arc
dilation, and thickening of the aortic and anterior
flow-dependent indices of scvcrity.
mitral valve leaflets (Figure 5.28). On the RPS LAx
 In the absence of shunts or significant semilunar
e se readde re uonnsqo rnareaqns e aen
valve insufficiency, the ratio of aortic (VTIA) and pul-
echogenic ridge on the septum, mitral apparatus, or
monary (VTIp) VTIs approximates the ratio of effective
177ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
B
RV
V
LV
PM
PM
LVW
Figure 5.28.RPS SAx images from a dog with subaortic stenosis (SAS).The maximum Ao dimension occurs normally at
the level of the Ao sinus of Valsalva (A); valve leaflets are evident.The obstruction in SAS is most typically at the immediate
subvalvular location, and the short-axis view may suggest thc anatomical scvcrity in tcrms of cross-scctional arca rclativc to
the Ao root (B). C: Thickened LVW and LV septum, caused by concentric hypertrophy, are evident. There is an increase in
subendocardial echogenicity (arrow) thought to represent fibrosis,secondary to ischemia.D: M-mode through the Ao root
depicts Ao valve leaflets (AV) that separate partially in early systole, only to quickly return to the closed position. The leaflets
may inscribe a diamond or double diamond within the confines of the Ao root.
orificeareasof the two tracts and iscorrectedforbody
PulmonicStenosis
size and flow rate. In the authors' experience, VTI/
VTIp > 1.6 (PWD at the valve level) is suggestive of
Pulmonic stenosis (PS)is the third most common
mild SAS and is specific compared with velocity alone
 s q so u op o 
(Figure 5.30). Bicuspid aortic valve is a common con-
in cats. PS signifies an obstruction to RV outflow and
genital defect in human patients but a rare cause of
may occur at subvalvular, supravalvular, or valvular
stenosis in dogs and cats (Figure 5.31)
locations, the latter being the most common site in
178HEART
SAS
Figure 5.29. CFD images from a dog with subaortic stenosis (SAS). A: This RPS LAx 2DE image depicts the location of the
 obstruction immediately proximal to the AV and is confirmed by CFD in B. Although the example shown includes both septal
 and mitral aspects of the encircling obstruction, neither may be clearly evident, depending on the extent and location of the
 collar. C and D: CFD images obtained from the LAp five-chamber position. During systole (C), the color halo of a flow con-
 vergence zone appears where flow acceleration and color aliasing occur proximal to the obstruction. A turbulent mosaic pattern
a m  a s p sd as ar u snd au o ia  a u asp e st
 zone is in the Ao as blood accelerates toward the transducer at the location of the AV. CFD clearly demonstrates that the
 location of the obstruction is proximal to the valve in this instance. Mild to moderate Ao insufficiency commonly accompanies
SAS.
 dogs. Potential echocardiographic features in common
endocardial surface and contributing to obstruction.
with all forms of PS include RA enlargement, postste-
 Increased echogenicity of the RV myocardium may be
 notic dilation of the pulmonary trunk, and concentric
associated with severe obstruction and presumed ische-
hypertrophy of the right ventricle with increased thick-
 mic myocardial damagc. Severe RV pressure over-
 ness of the septum and RV wall. The RV papillary
load causes flattening of the interventricular septum
 muscles may become prominent, as do trabeculae
and an ovoid LV cross section in the short-axis plane.
 carnae, imparting an uneven appearance to the RV
 LV volume underload in this circumstance may suggest
>0
中
Stroke Length =Velocity-Time Integral
(B, subcostal position) outflow tracts of a dog. A temporal peak velocity of 6m/s for the stenosis corresponds to a maximum
pressure gradient of 4 x 6² = 144mm Hg and a very sevcre stenosis. The area under each phasic velocity curve, indicated by
hatching, is termed the velocity-time integral (VTI) and has physical units of length (c.g., centimeters). This quantity has also
been termed the stroke length,corresponding to the length of a figure whose volume equals the cardiac stroke volume, and
whose cross-sectional area is the effective orifice area the ventricle ejects through.If the stroke volumes of the two ventricles
are the same, then the ratio of VTIs approximates the ratio of effective orifice areas and is an index of stenosis severity that
isrelatively flow independent.
B
RV
Figure 5.31.Valvular Ao stenosis. 2DE RPS SAx (A) and LAx (B) images from a dog with a bicuspid Ao valve. A: Only
two cusps (C) are evident where there are normally three.B: A maximal opening excursion of the leaflets.Significant stenosis
accompanied this unusual abnormality, as evidenced by the Doppler recordings (not shown).
179
180HEART
concentric LV hypertrophy erroneously (pseudohy-
Combined Doppler examination of the RV outflow
 pertrophy) with increased LV wall thickness and
tract enables peak gradient quantification (CWD) and
decreased LV and LA internal dimensions (Figure
 confirms the location of the obstruction, indicated by
5.32).
the velocity step up (PWD) or flow convergence zone
 In valvular PS, leaflets may be thickened and/or
(CFD) just proximal to the lesion. Suggested prognos-
 fused at the commissures such that leaflet separation
tic categories based on the pressure gradient are mild
is impaired; the fused leaflets may form a valvular
(<50 mm Hg), moderate (50-100mmHg), and severe
 dome as they bulge into the pulmonary artery during
(>100mm Hg). Specificity and sensitivity of these
 systole. The outflow tract itself may be hypoplastic and
categories for specific outcomes have not been
echogenic in conjunction with valvular lesions. An
 determined. Mild to moderate tricuspid regurgitation
unusual form of subvalvular PS is caused by a discrete
 commonly coexists with significant pressure overload
fibromuscular partition separating the RV outflow
 of the right heart. CWD evaluation of this jet velocity
tract from the RV; this condition has also been termed
sometimes provides supplemental quantitative infor-
double-chamber right ventricle (Figure 5.33). Supra-
 mation, particularly when alignment with the PS jet is
valvular obstructions also may be visualized.
problematic.
B
RVW
RVOT
RV
Figure 5.32. Valvular pulmonic stenosis in a dog. RPS SAx 2DE image (A), RPS CFD at the PV (B), and CWD of the pul-
 monic flow jet (C) from a dog with severe valvular pulmonic stenosis. The RVW is extremely thickened at more than twice
that LVW thickness. The increased echogenicity of the myocardium is thought to be caused by ischemia and fibrosis. The
 septum is displaced toward the LV, thus causing an ovoid LV cross section because of the flattened septum. CFD confirms
 the location of the obstruction at the valve. A velocity of nearly 8.0m/s corresponds to a peak pressure gradient of 4 x 8² =
 250 mm Hg and severe obstruction.
P
A
B
SVS
PL
RV
RA
Figure 5.33. Subvalvular pulmonic stenosis in a dog. RPS SAx 2DE (A) and CFD (B) from the pulmonary outflow tract of
a dog with double-chamber RV, a variant of subvalvular pulmonic stenosis. The PV is of normal thickness, but a discrete sub-
valvular stenosis (SVS) divides the RV proper from a subvalvular chamber (SVC). CFD confirms the location of the obstruc-
tion, proximal to the valve. C: This RPs LAx image illustrates marked thickening of the RVW and an area of increased
echogenicity secondary to myocardial hypertrophy and fibrosis (arrow).
181ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
Tricuspid Dysplasia
Echocardiographic findings may include abnormal
numbers or arrangement of papillary muscles; chordae
Dysplasia of the tricuspid valve may entail a wide
tendinae may be foreshortened or papillary muscles
range  of structural  abnormalities.  The condition 
 may attach directly to a valve leaflet. Tricuspid leaflets
is  transmitted   genetically   in  Labrador  retrievers,
 may be elongated (Figure 5.34) or shortened and
the   most  frequently
affected
canine breed.
abnormally tethered to the septum or RV wall, thereby
Chp
D
RI
Figure 5.34. Tricuspid dysplasia and pulmonic stenosis in a Labrador retriever with RCHF. The RPS LAx CFD image (A)
demonstrates marked TR. Unusually, the extreme RA dilation caused the RPS position to be suitable for TR velocity quanti-
fication with the jet directed toward the transducer (B). A TR jet velocity of 5.0m/s suggests a driving pressure of 4 x 52² =
ss oond aq pn pao anssd a o s u assad a pu m aeu si p 
was responsible (not shown). The LAp four-chamber view (C) demonstrates extreme dilation of both the RA and RV. The
TV leaflets are overlong and displaced toward the apex (compare with the position of the mitral leaflets). The CFD image
from the same location (D) demonstrates marked TR and apical displacement of the flow convergence zone into the RV.
Frame-by-frame visualization of the tricuspid apparatus revealed direct attachment of PMs to the tricuspid leaflets and a
nctwork of abnormal interconnecting CT, tethering the TV leaflets to the myocardial wall.
182HEART
restricting motion and function;leaflet fusion may
Clinically relevant forms of MD cause hemodynami-
cause stenosis (Figure 5.35). The entire tricuspid appa-
cally significant MR (most commonly), mitral stenosis)
ratusmaybedisplaced toward thecardiac apex,similar
or aortic outflow obstruction. The authors have encoun-
to Ebstein's malformation in human patients. Tricuspid
 tered several cases of MD causing SAS directly where
dysplasia may causevalvularregurgitation andvari-
the anterior mitral leaflet was tethered to the septum
able degrees of RV volume overload with dilation of
Subsequent rupture of the abnormal chordae caused
the right ventricle and right atrium. Doppler examina-
spontaneous resolution of the stenosis.
tion reveals tricuspid regurgitation; the origin of this
jet, determined from the flow convergence zone, may
be displaced toward the RV apex.
PatentDuctusArteriosus
>3.0m/s) should prompt consideration of concurrent
Left to right patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) is the first
pulmonary hypertension or PS, and atrial septal defect
or second most common congenital heart defect in
also may accompany the condition (Figure 5.34).
 dogs. Echocardiographic features of the condition
 ieis  pss aq  oe sios pisn
include LV and LA dilation, LV hypertrophy, and
this valve leading to a diastolic jet (e.g., >2.0m/s) into
increased stroke volume (volume overload) (Figure 5.38)
the right ventricle.
Both the aorta and pulmonary trunk may be dilated in
 conjunction with increased blood flow. CFD examina-
tion of the pulmonary trunk reveals continuous turbu
Mitral Dysplasia
lent flow and is useful in establishing the site of the
Mitral valve dysplasia (MD) may entail a wide range
ductusitself.Continuous-wave spectral Dopplerveloc-
 of structural and functional abnormalities, including
ity quantification reveals continuous flow into the
abnormal numbers or origins of papillary muscles;
excessively shortened， lengthened， or thickened
of roughly 4.5-5.5m/s, corresponding to the normal
chordae tendinae; and abnormal chordal attachments
systolic aortic-pulmonic gradient of 80-120mm Hg
to nonvalvular structures (Figures 5.36 and 5.37)
(Moise 1989). Velocities significantly lower than this
B
V
RV
RA
IR
Figure 5.35. Tricuspid dysplasia with valvular stenosis and regurgitation. 2DE LAp four-chamber image (A) and CWD
recording (B) from a I abrador retriever. Arrows indicate the position of tricuspid leaflets at maximal separation during dias-
tole. A TR velocity of less than 3.0m/s (B) is consistent with relatively normal TR driving pressure (RV pressure - RA pressure
= ca. 36 mm Hg). However, actual peak RV pressure may be substantially greater in this case because the RA pressure is likely
increased. The inflow recording denonstrates abnormal spectral broadening, and the velocity is elevated throughout diastole.
A peak inflow gradient of 4 × 3.52 = ca. 50mm IIg occurs at the Doppler A wave following a large P wave on the electrocar-
diogram. The E-F slope is flattened because of delayed prcssurc cqualization bctwccn the atrium and ventricle.
183ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
MR
V
V
PM
MV
[hp
[hp]
RA
RA
 during maximal diastolic separation of the MV leaflets. A: The tip of the anterior leaflet is tethered, so that the valve cannot
o had ar on a se  a anssad a ps go aaq uas a prmn son pe u uo
terior) leaflet (i.e., extreme shortening of CT). B: The diminished maximal orifice area is suggested by the cross-sectional image
 at the level of the valve tips. C: The PWD recording (LAp transducer position) demonstrates a turbulent diastolic inflow
 signal, and the E wave approaches 2m/s, corresponding to a 16-mm Hg gradient across the MV (modified Bernoulli equa-
tion). A turbulent MR signal with aliasing is also present. This example demonstrates a relatively mild case of stenosis, as
 suggested by the peak inflow velocity and also the rapid decline of velocity after the peak of the E wave (compare with E-F
 slope of the tricuspid dysplasia example in Figure 5.35). D: The LAp CFD image obtained during diastole demonstrates a
flow convergence zone at the atrial side of the MV and a turbulent inflow jet within the LV. The systolic image (E) demon-
strates the MR jet into the enlarged LA.
 value may suggest pulmonary hypertension or a more 
pulmonary vascular resistance at birth produces
complex lesion.
pulmonary pressures that approach or exceed aortic
It is valuable to image the ductus directly and to
values and consequent reversal of the shunt flow direc-
 determine carefully its suitability for interventional
tion and arterial desaturation, which may persist from
closure by coil embolization.
birth. This scenario is consistent with echocardio-
Right to left shunting patent ductus arteriosus
graphic findings of a thickened RV wall and septum
(reverse PDA or RPDA) is uncommon but most typi-
typical of an RV pressure overload (Figure 5.39). The
cally occurs in dogs with a large ductus and persistent
alternate RPDA scenario, i.e., left to right PDA produc-
fetal circulation. Failure of the normal reduction of
ing progressive pulmonary hypertension and eventual
MV
八
the close-up (B), a PM is visible giving rise to shortened CT that distract the MV abnormally toward the LVW. There was
dramatic MR (not shown).
EPSS
V
PV
RPA
DA
DA
MIA
Figure 5.38.  Left to right shunting patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). As suggested by the 2DE SAx LV image (A) and M-mode
 (B), PDA causes LV dilation and stroke volume overload. Fractional shortening was depressed in this case, and the E-point
t0 septal separation distance (EPSS) was increased (C), suggestive of marked ventricular remodeling and deteriorating myo-
 cardial function. RPS SAx images (D-F) enable visualization of a large ductus (DA) that narrows at its entry into the pulmo-
 nary circulation. CFD images in systole (E) and diastole (F) facilitate the diagnosis by showing continuous flow from the PDA
 causing turbulence in the PT. A prominent CFD mirror-image artifact (MIA) is evident. Visualization and evaluation of the
 PDA is facilitated by the occurrence of a flow convergence zone (FCZ).
184
185ATLASOF SMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
A
B
RVOT
Figure 5.39. Reverse patent ductus arteriosus (RPDA or right to left PDA). The RPS SAx image (A) depicts marked RV
septum. The LV appears somewhat small and thick walled because of volume underload and distortion by the RV. B: CFD
 imaging at the PV level depicts a laminar flow pattern with color aliasing in the central flow core. CFD interrogation of the
RVOT, PT, and RPA yielded no evidence of stenosis, yet a dramatic increase in TR velocity confirmed increased RV pressure
and pulmonary hypertension (not shown). 2DE echocontrast imaging of the abdominal Ao, following venous injection of
micro-aerated saline, can be used to confirm the lesion if necessary.
shunt reversal, is less likely. The latter would be
cardiac pressure and chamber compliance, both ASD
expected to include LV dilation secondary to LV stroke
and VSD most typically cause left to right shunting of
volume overload.
blood and pulmonary overcirculation. Under these cir-
RPDA is suspected when there is clinical and echo-
cumstances, ASD causes volume overload and conse-
 cardiographic evidence of RV pressure overload in the
quent dilation of the right ventricle, whereas VSD
absence of an obstructive pulmonary lesion. The diag-
necessitates increased stroke volume of the left ventri-
nosis may be confirmed by an echocontrast study
cle. These abnormalities depend on the magnitude of
(bubble study), if necessary. The method consists of
the shunt.
injecting echogenic aerated saline into a peripheral
vein (e.g., cephalic vein) while imaging the heart or
Atrial Septal Defect
 great vessels. This technique enables determination of
which vessels or cardiac chambers receive unoxygen-
Deficiency of the septum secundum (septum secun-
ated flow. In the case of RPDA, the abdominal aorta
dum ASD) causes a defect near the normal position of
receives echocontrast within a few seconds of injec-
the fossa ovalis in the midatrial wall (Figures 5.40 and
tion, having traversed the vena cava, right heart, pul-
5.41). In distinction, a septum primum defect (septum
monary trunk, and ductus.
 primum ASD, endocardial cushion defect, or atrioven-
tricular canal ASD) is located near the atrioventricular
canal and may cause ASD, VSD, or both (Figure 5.42).
Abnormalities of Cardiac Septation
Sinus venosus ASD, which is rare in small animals,
Failure of cardiac septation during embryogenesis
occurs near the junction of the cranial vena cava. Patent
results in a defect between the two hearts, including
foramen ovale is not an anatomical defect but results
atrial septal defect (ASD), ventricular septal defect
when functional closure of the foramen ovale at birth
(VSD), or a combination of these two. Septation abnor-
 is not permanent. ASD flow typically is generated by
malities may cause a wide spectrum of functional
 a small pressure gradient with jet velocity less than
disease. Because of the normal distributions of intra-
0.5m/s.
RVOT
Ao
RA
LA
Figure 5.43. Membranous ventricular septal defect (VSD) in a cat. LAx (A) and SAx (B) CFD RPS images from a cat with
 membranous (or perimembranous) VSD. The location of the defect is identified by the color halo of the flow convergence
zone, caused by color aliasing, where the blood accelerates through the defect; a turbulent mosaic color flow pattern is visible
in the RV. The defect is immediately proximal to the Ao valve. This is the most common type of VSD in small animals.
VSD
Ao
RPA
SL
58
VSD
Figure 5.44.
[hp]
B
RVW
RVW
VSD
RV
IVS
LVW
MAT
[hp)]
RVW
RVW
RV
Figure5.45.
.Tetralogy of Fallot (TF) in a cat. RPS 2DE LAx (A) and SAx (B) images depict extreme hypertrophy of the RVW.
 The LV appears diminutive and the LVW thickened as because of distortion and underloading caused by the extreme RV
 disease. The overriding Ao is demonstrated in image A where the Ao root appears to straddle the IVS immediately distal to
 the ventricular septal defect (VSD). C and D: Corresponding CFD images. The VSD was somewhat restrictive in this case,
and image C demonstrates moderate velocity flow from the RV into the Ao caused by a significant pressure gradient.
 Hypertrophy was extreme to the extent that the RVOT could not be fully visualized. However, imagc D demonstrates flow
 convergence caused by infundibular stenosis.
Figure 5.44. Outlet ventricular septal defect (VSD). LAx (A and C) and SAx (B and C) 2DE (A and C) and CFD (B and D)
 RPS images from a dog with a left-to-right restrictive VSD in conjunction with an Ao that straddles the septum (A) (i.e., over-
riding Ao). The location of the defect is identified by the color halo of the flow convergence zone, caused by color aliasing.
where the blood accelerates through the defect. Because the Ao straddles the septum, the defect lies directly beneath the Ao
valve, particularly evident in D.
189
190 HEART
：
Figure 5.46.  Cor triatriatum. RPS SAx CFD image of cor triatriatum dexter in a Labrador retriever (A) and LAx image of
 cor triatriatum sinister in a young cat (B). In each case, an accessory chamber (AC) is separated from the atrium by a restric-
tive membrane. A: The dog also had tricuspid dysplasia, so the TV was displaced into the ventricle and is not visible. B: The
MV is visible, and the flow convergence zone depicts the location of the restrictive membrane.
A
B
RV
C
Figure 5.47. Miscellaneous and incidental abnormalities. A: The RPS SAx view from a cat with peritoneal-pericardial dia-
 phragmatic hernia (PPDH). The liver (L) is juxtaposed to the heart, where normally there is intervening lung tissue and the
 e pue snsp rsan go sus  puasad sm pn au e au asu ot rede u sap   s
 radiograph revealed a markedly enlarged cardiac silhouette, prompting cardiac evaluation. Respiratory signs were caused
 by bronchial disease and unrelated to the congenital pericardial abnormality. PPDH is often an incidental finding. Images
B (RPS LAx) and C (LAp with caudal angulation) are from a dog with marked dilation of the coronary sinus (CS) likely
 caused by a persistent left CrVC. The view in image C shows the CS entering the RA at the caudal aspect of the heart.
Peritoneal-pericardial diaphragmatic hernia, which
 reveals a range of abdominal organs within the peri-
implies a communication between the pericardial
 cardial space. Often, cardiac function is little affected,
space and the abdominal cavity, is likely related to
and determining whether clinical signs are related
abnormal fetal development of the septum transver-
to the hernia may be difficult (Figure 5.47; see also
sum or pleuroperitoneal folds. The condition is most
Chapter 4 and Figures 4.54 and 4.55).
common in cats and may be diagnosed subsequent
 Eisenmenger physiology is caused by a shunt
to  the  incidental discovery of an enlarged cardiac
 defect (ASD, VSD, or PDA) that results in right to left
 silhouette on thoracic radiography. Echocardiography
shunting subsequent to pulmonary vascular disease.
RV
RV
Figure 5.48. Uncorrected transposition of the great vessels (TGV). RPS LAx (A) and SAx (B) 2DE images from a rare case
 of uncorrected TGV in a cyanotic kitten (aorticopulmonary situs inversus). A: The Ao is evident leaving the RV while the PT
joins the LV.Poststenotic dilation of the PT is visible because of a constriction at the junction of this vessel with the LV.
B: This SAx image reveals simultaneous transverse views of both the Ao and PT. This does not occur in a normal hcart because
the two semilunar valves do not normally lic in thc samc planc. An atrial septal defect was the location of bidirectional shunt-
ing in this case. A shunt is necessary for survival beyond birth in uncorrected TGV because the pulmonary and systemic cir-
culations are otherwise isolated from each other.
High-volumepulmonary overcirculation from aleft to
genicity, and prolapse of the valvularleaflets (Bonagura
right shunt may initiate a well-described sequence of
and Herring 1985a). Characteristic remodeling changes
pulnonary vascular changes that ultimately causes
secondary to MR include progressively increasing LA
elevation of right-sided pressures and shunt reversal.
and diastolic LV dimensions (Brown etal. 2005) (Figure
RV hypertrophy is present, and Doppler or echocon-
5.49).The end-systolic LV internal dimension (LVIDs)
trast studies may assist in identifying the location and
is characteristically preserved with the condition.
direction of the shunt.
This remodeling pattern coincides with a norimal to
 Diagnosis of complex congenital heart disease is one
increased fractional shortening, which is, consequently,
of the most challenging applications of echocardiogra-
a poor index for staging disease severity. In late-stage
phy and largely beyond the scope of this chapter.
disease, LVIDs and E-point septal separation may
Potential abnormalities may include hypoplastic
begin to increase; these findings have been interpreted
cardiac chambers, atretic great vessels, and situs inver-
as evidence of myocardial dysfunction or failure
sus at the level of the abdomen, ventricles, or great
(Kittleson et al. 1984).
vessels (Figure 5.48).
Echocardiographic techniques for evaluation of MR
range from qualitative measures to semiquantitative.
One of the simplest methods is to evaluate the MR jet
ACQUIRED HEART DISEASE
sizeby visualinspection on a CFDimage.Alternatively,
a ratio can be calculated (i.e., planimetered jet area
AcquiredValvularHeartDisease
divided by LA area) to provide a seemingly quantita-
tive estimate of MR severity. Unfortunately, the extent
Endocardiosis
of the MR jet is highly dependent on CFD control set-
Endocardiosis, also known as chronic degenerative
tings, jet and chamber geomctry, and ambient hemo-
valve disease (CDVD), is the most common acquired
dynamic conditions (Figurc 5.50).
A semiquantitative Doppler method of MR evalua-
among smaller breeds. The mitral valve is the most
tion involves estimation of the regurgitant fraction by
commonly affected,but the tricuspid valve may be
using the proximal isovelocity surface area (PISA),
affected concurrently and/or preferentially in indi-
whichfocuseson theflow convergencezoneon the
viduals. Exemplary 2DE echocardiographic findings of
LV side of the regurgitant orifice (Kittleson and
mitral CDvD include thickening,increased echo-
Brown 2003). Instantaneous blood flow rate across any
192HEART
B
RA
RA
RV
RA
LV
Figure 5.49.Chronic degenerative valve disease (CDVD [endocardiosis]).A:This RPS LAx view in early systole denon-
strates dilation of the I.V and LA along with prolapse of the AML, which appcars as a displacement into the LA (arrow). B:
This diastolic RPS SAx view portrays dramatic thickening of the leaflets. C: This SAx view at the level of the Ao root demon-
strates dramatic LA dilation. D: This RPS LAx view of the IV demonstrates prolapse into the RA (arrow).
hemisphere is simply the product of blood velocity
as follows:V.=(Q-/V,)×VTI.This value is used to
al that radius and the area of the hemisphere, A =
calculate the regurgitant fraction after the LV forward
2nr². Radius and velocity are both determined from a
stroke volume has been estimated (Vsv = areaao X
CFD image, the radius being the distance from the
VTIAs). The regurgitant fraction is V./(V, + Vsv).
orifice to the aliasing velocity (Figure 5.50). The PISA
method is very sensitive to the radius measurement,
InfectiveEndocarditis
and determining the location of the valvular orifice
accurately can be difficult. Color M-mode can be
Infective endocarditis is an unusual,but potentially
helpful in increasing temporal resolution and enabling
devastating, consequence of bacteremia and/or sepsis
visual averaging of the radius during the regurgitant
most commonly affecting medium-sized and large
flow.
 dogs. Lesions most typically involve the aortic and/or
Using the maximal regurgitant flow rate (Q [PISA
mitralvalvesbutcanalsoextendto surroundingmyo-
 method]), the peak regurgitation velocity (Vp), and the
cardial tissue, with possible periannular abscessation
VTI of the MR, the MR volume (V) can bc calculated
(Figure 5.51).
193ATLAS OF SMALLANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
B
RV
RA
IVS
LV
LVW
74
Figure 5.50. MR severity. Qualitative evaluation of MR can be made from CFD assessment of jet size (A). +4 MR is associ-
 ated with retrograde jet extension into the pulmonary veins. Semiquantitative methods assume that the regurgitant flow rate
(cm? /s) is approximated as the surface area of the hemispherical flow convergence zone (A = 2lr) multiplied by the aliasing
velocity (proximal isovelocity surface area method [PISA]). However, the computed mathematical solution of the assumed
 flow (B) results in infinite velocity at the infinitesimal orifice (inner black zone); PISA assumptions are not valid unless the
hemisphere radius is large with respect to the orifice size. C: This LAp CFD image, which is from the regurgitant orifice of a
 dog with severe MR, was recorded at an aliasing velocity of 74cm/s; the estimated radius of the hemisphere (r) is not large
enough compared with the orifice. Requirements for the PISA determination are improved by adjusting the color baseline in
the direction of flow, downward in this case, which decreases the aliasing velocity and increases the distance from the alias-
e o p ' a u r a rn  a ap uaq s s o a o  a 
velocity to 42 cm/s and increasing the hemisphere radius; the radius also can be estimated from the color M-mode record-
ing (E).
 Nonspecific echocardiographic signs include thick-
hyperechoic,  with  acoustic  shadowing  indicating
ened hypcrechoic aortic and mitral valve leaflets,
calcification.
 chordal rupture, and diastolic mitral valve fluttering
 Large vegetative lesions may cause valvular steno-
 or oscillation (Lombard and Buergelt 1983b). The diag-
sis, insufficiency, or both. The volume overload (insuf-
 nosis of endocarditis might be difficult if lesions are
ficiency, either valve) or pressure overload (AS) is often 
 small or involve only the mitral valve of dogs predis-
acute. Hence, cardiac remodeling may not be apparent
 posed to endocardiosis. Echocardiographic follow-
even though marked functional compromise is present.
up may be useful in these cases by revealing rapid
 Doppler echocardiography enables confirmation and
valvular changes. Chronic vegetations may appear
quantification of the valvular dysfunction.
194HEART
B
RI
74
IVOT
RPA
Figure 5.51. Endocarditis of the Ao and MVs. RPS SAx (A and C) and LAx (B and D) images from a dog with mitral and
Ao endocarditis. The largest component of the vegetative lesion (V) is on the anterior leaflet of the MV and extends into the
LVOT during systole. Nevertheless, the principal functional deficit in this case was Ao insufficiency, evident on the CFD
image (D) as dramatic diastolic flow into the LV from the Ao.
Endocarditis is the most likely cause of substantial
 dimensions particularly in systole, and depressed frac-
aortic insufficiency in dogs. Echocardiographic evi-
tional shortening and ejection fraction (Calvert et al.
 dence of severe aortic insufficiency includes prema-
1982) (Figure 5.53). Another fundamental diagnostic
ture systolic mitral valve closure, an increasingly
criterion is a decrease in the ratio of wall thickness
negative  diastolic slope  of the aortic  regurgitation
to chamber dimension representing the inability of the
Doppler velocity envelope, and flow reversal in pro-
myocardium to thicken appropriately. This decrease in
 gressively distal segments of the aorta (Figure 5.52).
relative wall thickness imparts the visual impression
of dilation on 2DE images. Increased mitral E-point
to septal separation distance is also noticed as a
Myocardial Disease
consequence of LV dilation, systolic dysfunction, and
Dilated Cardiomyopathy
decreased peak mitral inflow.
LV echocardiographic changes are often most readily
Cardinal echocardiographic features of dilated cardio-
observed, but anatomical, pathological, and functional
myopathy (DCM) include chronically increased LV
abnormalities are typically biventricular. As the name
195 ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
B
RVOT
RVOT
Figure 5.52. Miscellaneous findings with infective endocarditis. A: M-mode depicts early systolic closure of the MV (arrow)
caused by sevcre Ao insufficiency leading to early diastolic equilibration of LV and LA pressures. B: Diastolic MV fluttering
(arow) is caused by the turbulent flow of Ao insufficiency past the valve. C: This RPS LAx image depicts a large vegetation
(V) on the Ao valve and a para-annular abscess (PAA). D and E: These RPS SAx images (2DE and CFD, respectively) are
 from a dog with Ao valve endocarditis, vegetative lesions (V), and rupture of the sinus of Valsalva causing an acquired shunt.
 Continuous (systole and diastole) left to right flow occurred across this defect because of the persistent pressure gradient
between the Ao and RV.
implies, the pathology of arrhythmogenic RV cardio-
Doppler   studies   most  commonly  demonstrate
 myopathy (ARVC) is initiated in the right heart but
atrioventricular valve regurgitation in DCM relating
 may cause global cardiac disease resembling the typical
to cardiac dilation and consequent dysfunction of
DCM. ARVC is common in boxers as a familial disease
the mitral and/or tricuspid apparatus (Figure 5.54).
(also termed boxer cardiomyopathy) and has been
Typically, atrioventricular valvular regurgitation in
reported in cats (Harvey et al. 2005).
DCM is not as voluminous as in CDVD, but both
196HEART
R
RV
V
MAT
RI
RA
Figure 5.53.DCM in a boxer.A: RPS M-mode recordings demonstrate dramatic LV dilation and decreased fractional short-
ening. The E-point to septal separation distance (EPSS)is markedly increased, as is the LA/Ao.RPS SAx (B and D) and LAx
(C) 2DE images depict marked dilation of all chambers.
diseases may occur in some individuals and produce
(intraventricular septum [IVS] or LV wall [LVW]) or
a mixcd cchocardiographic pattcrn.
indcxcd wall thickncss (wWT, wIVS, or wLVW),
increased wall thickness relative to chamber dimen-
sion (RWT,FWT, orFWA [defined in Table5.4]),and
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
indices suggestive of an actual increase in muscle mass
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), defined as a
(wWA) (Moise et al. 1986) (Appendix). Increasing
primary myocardial abnormality,is the most common
functional severity commonly is accompanied bypro-
acquired heart disease in cats and is reported as a rare
gressive LA dilalion (Figure 5.55).
condition in dogs (Fox 1999). Echocardiographic abnor-
M-mode echocardiography is useful in quantifying
malities caused by feline HCM relate principally to HCM changes but also suffers linitations. The LV
myocardial hypertrophyincludingincreased absolute
wall thickness in diastole (LVWd) is less than 0.55 cm
197 ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
B
h
RV
RV
RA
Figure 5.54. Valvular regurgitation with DCM. RPS LAx CFD images from the boxer in Figure 5.53. Marked cardiac dilation
contributes to TR (A) and MR (B) commonly evident with the disease.
ChpL
B
P
R
RV
RA
AO
LVW
Figure 5.55. HCM. RPS SAx CFD images from a cat with HCM as suggested by thickening of the IVS and LVW, a decrease 
in LV internal dimension, and LA dilation.
 normally, and values greater than 0.60 cm are sugges-
The result is dynamic outflow obstruction and subval-
tive of hypertrophy. However, subtle papillary muscle
vular AS (Figure 5.56).
hypertrophy in mild cases or regional disparity in wall
 The obstructive aspect of HCM is best assessed with
thickness may have no representation in an M-mode
 the addition of Doppler methods. While SAM is a
study. Systolic anterior motion (SAM) of the mitral
common source of outflow obstruction, hypertrophy
valve is a functional abnormality, best identified on
of papillary muscles or muscular trabeculae may cause
M-mode recordings, that typifies obstructive HCM.
intraventricular obstruction, observed as a turbulent
198HEART
RVW
Figure 5.56. Dynamic LV outflow obstruction with HCM. M-mode recordings from cats with (B) and without (A) dynamic
outflow obstruction secondary to HCM. There is pronounced thickening of the IVS and LVW in both cases. Arrows in both
indicate the location of the MV during systole. A: Adequate separation between the IVS and MV coincides with an unob-
structed LVOT. B: There is systolic anterior motion (SAM) of the MV; the MV is displaced into the LVOT and obstructs
outflow. C: This RPS LAx CFD image displays the functional result of systolic obstruction, including both intra-Ao turbulence
caused by dynamic stenosis, and MR. D: This LAp CWD recording from the LVOT depicts spectral broadening caused by
turbulence, increased peak velocity, and a dagger-shaped velocity envelope. Increasing proximity of the MV to the interven-
 Development of intracardiac thrombi can sometimes
systolic jet emanating from within the ventricular
be observed echocardiographically, particularly within
chamber. Continuous-wave Doppler recording estab-
 the LA appendage (Figure 5.57). Stagnant blood flow
lishes the outflow tract blood flow velocity associated
can manifest echocardiographically as spontaneous
with an obstruction. Study of mitral inflow velocities
echocontrast, so-called smoke within the left atrium,
may suggest impaired diastolic function and restric-
suggesting a high propensity for thrombus formation.
tive physiology (see the next section).
199ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
Chp
B
A
Figure 5.57.LA thrombus. RPS SAx (A) and LAx (B) images from a cat with restrictive cardiomyopathy demonstrating a
free-floating echogenic thrombus (T) within the LA
Restrictive Cardiomyopathy
Pulmonary Hypertension, Cor Pulmonale,
Restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM) includes a diversc
and HeartwormDisease(Dirofilariasis)
array of discasc that can cause loss of ventricular com-
pliancc,restrictive physiology and,ultimately,severe
Pulmonary hypertension (PHT) is excessive pulmonary
signs of congestive heart failure (Fox 1999). The source
arterial pressure and may be caused by elevated pul-
of restriction in RCM may reside within the myocar-
monary venous pressure (left-sided congestive heart
dium (myocardial RCM) or be localized to the endo-
failure, pulmonary venous obstruction, mitral steno-
cardium (endocardial RCM).
sis, or cor triatriatum sinister), pulmonary overcircula-
Feline myocardial RCM is associated with a restric-
tion (left to right shunts), or increased pulmonary
tive flow pattern characterized in severe cases by
vascular resistance (pulmonary thromboembolism,
increased velocity of the mitral E wave followed by an
dirofilariasis, chronic respiratory disease and alveolar
abrupt termination ofinflowwith ashorteneddecel-
hypoxia, external vascular compression, vascular
eration time (Figure 5.58). This pattern may 0ccur in
obliteration,persistent fetal circulation, or idiopathic
the presence of normal fractional shortening and ejec-
PHT).
tion fraction and normal wall thicknesses or only mild
Cor pulmonale is RV hypertrophy and dysfunction
hypertrophy. Atrial dilation is often dramatic in RCM,
caused by PHT not due to congenital heart disease or
particularly involving the left chamber, and predis-
left heart failure causes. 2DE evidence of cor pulmo-
poses patients to thromboembolic events (Figure 5.57).
nale may include thickening of the RV wall, papillary
The LV endomyocardial form may include increased
muscle, and trabeculae. RV and/or RA dilation may
endocardial thickness and echogenicity, distortion
occur, particularly if significant tricuspid regurgitation
and dysfunction of the mitral apparatus, or strands of
results. The pulmonary trunk and main branches may
echogenic tissue that bridge the ventricular chamber
be dilated, which is an asscssmcnt made by compari
walls. RCM is often diagnosed by exclusion of typical
son with the aorta. The left ventriclc may appear ovoid
DCM and HCM morphological characteristics in thc
in cross section in the RPS short-axis image, with septal
prescncc of clearly significant heart disease. Hence,
flattening because of compression and distortion
echocardiographic findings may entail a wide range of
imposed by the right heart; pseudohypertrophy of
features, and a notable fraction of feline cardiomyopa-
the left ventricle may occur from left-sided volume
thies are not readily classified morphologically (unclas-
underload and septal hypertrophy. Paradoxical septal
sified cardiomyopathy).
motion may be evident on M-mode recordings as
200HEART
B
RV
RV
RA
RA
120
100
RV
一
60
Figure 5.58. Restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM). 2DE LAx (A) and SAx axis (B) images and M-mode (C) and PWD mitral
inflow (D) recordings from a cat with RCM. There is dramatic atrial enlargement on the 2DE images, particularly of the left
chainber; significant RV dilation is also present (A). Nevertheless, wall thicknesses of all chainbers are normal to mildly
increased, thc LV internal chamber dimensions and fractional shortening are within normal limits (C). The PWD recording
(D) dcmonstrates a restrictive flow pattern. In this example, the E wave of mitral inflow is prominent, with mildly increased
velocity, and the A wave is nearly absent; atrial contraction causes little additional ventricular filling because of loss of com-
pliance (i.e., restriction).
systolic LV pressure distends the septum toward the
directly within the pulmonary arteries, right ventricle
transducer (Figure 5.59). Doppler confirmation of PHT
 or right atrium, or vena cavae (Lombard and Buergelt
1983a) (Figure 5.60). Echocardiography is an insensi-
is made by CWD or at times by PWD quantification of
tive test for HWD in dogs because parasites rmay
tricuspid regurgitation or pulmonary insufficiency
velocity; either or both may be caused by the excessive
reside entirely within lobar and distal pulmonary
pressures and geometric distortion imposed by PHT.
arterics, which are inaccessible to 2DE examination.
Heartworm disease (HWD or dirofilarasis) is an impor-
Neverthelcss, when adults may be visualized in more
 o  d r  e g  
proximal locations of the pulmonary circulation, 2DE
addition  to  the echocardiographic  abnormalities
facilitates qualitative evaluation of a parasite burden
already noted, adult parasites may be visualized
that becomes moderate to marked.Vena cava syndrome
201 ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
B
PM
RV
Figure 5.59. Cor pulmonale in a dog with chronic respiratory disease. A: This RPS SAx image depicts RV dilation, flattening
 of the IVS, and a small LV chamber. The RV PM is prominent because of hypertrophy, but RVW thickening is not dramatic.
B: This CFD image demonstrates PV insufficiency, a normal finding except for the extent of the jet in this case, and dilation
 of the PT and RPA. CWD recordings of (C) TR and (D) pulmonary insufficiency confirm pulmonary hypertension. The peak
 TR velocity is greater than 4.5 m/s, which corresponds to a systolic driving pressure of greater than 80mm Hg and peak pul-
 monary insufficiency velocity of 3.5 m/s, with a diastolic driving pressure of about 50 mm Hg.
 is characterized by a dramatic parasite burden within
nized echocardiographically. Effusions may be idio-
 the right ventricle, right atrium, and vena cavae.
pathic (benign idiopathic PE), neoplastic, cardiogenic
Adult heartworms have a distinctive echocardio-
(congestive heart failure), inflammatory, infectious,
 graphic appcarance because of the echogenicity of the
 or hemorrhagic in origin. PE typically appears as an
parasite's cuticle relative to the gut (Figure 5.60).
 anechoic or variably echogenic space between the epi-
Although still an insensitive test, echocardiography is
cardial surface of the heart and the echogenic parietal
 an important adjunct for the diagnosis of HWD in cats
pericardium (Bonagura and Pipers 1981). Any signifi-
where visualization of a single adult parasite confirms
 cant fluid accumulation within the pericardium should
the condition.
prompt the ultrasonographer to search for a cause
(advanced heart disease, neoplasia, or potential cardiac
Pericardial Disease
rupture) before completing the study. Cardiac tam-
ponade results when PE accumulation is sufficient to
Pericardial effusion (PE), which is the most common
 elevate the intrapericardial pressure at the level of or
 disorder involving the pericardium, is readily recog-
- above the right heart filling pressure. Tamponade is
202HEART
B
Figure 5.60. Heartworm disease (dirofilariasis). A: This RPS LAx image from a dog with vena cava syndrome depicts an
extensive bolus of parasites flowing from the RA into the RV in early diastole (arrows indicate adult parasites in A-C).
ciency virus infection. The RV and RA are dilated in both A and B. C: This RPS SAx image demonstrates parasites in a more
3.5m/s between the PT and RV, consistent with a driving pressure of 4 x 3.5² = ca. 50mm Hg and pulmonary hypertension.
characterized  echocardiographically by decreased
CardiacNeoplasia
ventricular size and early diastolic collapse of the right
atrium, right ventricle, or both. With large effusions,
Echocardiography is well suited for the diagnosis
of cardiac neoplasia, which is common in dogs and
the heart may exhibit a swinging motion within the
a frequent cause of PE (Thomas et al. 1984).
pericardial spacc, typically on an every-other-beat
Hemangiosarcoma is the most common cardiac malig-
basis. This motion coincides with the electrocardio-
nancy, with a strong site predilection for the RA
graphic occurrence of electrical alternans and is heart
rate dependent (Figure 5.61).
appendage, right atrium, and RV wall. Small tumors
203ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
B
CWA
PE
PE
RA
LV
IV
VW
P
Figure 5.61.Pericardial effusion (PF) and tamponade.RPS SAx(A) and LAx (B) images from a dog with PE causing cardiac
tamponade. There is a large anechoic space between the heart and the echogenic P. The LV and RV chambers are decreased
 in size. The RA exhibits early diastolic collapse in the LAx image (B, arrow). 2DE is superior for establishing the presence or
absence of PE. However M-mode (C) is sometimes valuable for timing cardiac cycle events.
 on the RA appendage often may be visualized from
Cardiac neoplasia in cats is uncommon. Lymphoma
either the LPS or RPS transducer positions, and visu-
may occur within theheart,as one ormore discrete
alization may be improved by placing the transducer
masses, or as a diffuse, infiltrative lesion causing
at the most cranial aspect of the imaging window.
altered and irregular echogenicity.
Neoplasia cannot be ruled out by echocardiography,
however,andmultipletransducerpositions should be
MiscellaneousAcquiredDisease
attempted if a tumor is suspected. PE may improve
tumor visualization, providing an echo-free zone for
Echocardiography is an insensitive method for the
contrast. Hemangiosarcoma may appear mottled or
detection of pulmonary thromboembolism but may
cavitated because of hypoechoic collections of blood
provide evidence of chronicity (cor pulmonale) or
within thc tumor (Figure 5.62).
hemodynamic severity (right-sided pressures, acute
Chemodectoma (aortic body tumor),which is a
dilation, and RV stroke volume). Occasionally,thrombi
common tumor of brachiocephalic breeds, ariscs from
may be visible in the pulmonary trunk or main
aortic chemoreceptor cells that are often situated ncar
branches (Figure 5.64). CFD or echocontrast may be
the base of the heart (heart base tumor) (Thomas et al.
valuable in delineating a thrombus and avoid
1984). Chemodectomas range in appearance from a
overinterpretation.
small nodule, seemingly adherent to the ascending
Systemic hypertension (SHT), which is common in
aorta, to a large mass that partially or completely sur-
both dogs and cats, may cause nonspecific echocardio-
rounds the great vessel. Tumors are most often bio-
graphic changes because of left-sided pressure over-
logically benign and cause clinical signs from PE or
load. LVwall thickness and indices of LV hypertrophy
compression of the trachea or heart. Echocardiographic
may be increased with chronic SHT. Alterations
examination of a heart base tumor may necessitate
can resemble mild to moderate HCM in cats and
imaging the ascending aorta far dorsal to the heart
thus require blood-pressure determination for differ-
(Figure 5.63).
entiation. Inconsistently,the aortic root and proximal
Thyroid carcinoma may arise from ectopic thyroid
aorta may be dilated with mild to moderate aortic
tissue, typically located at the heart base or within the
insufficiency. In the absence of LV outflow obstruc-
RV outflow tract. Tumors may cause PE or obstruction
tion, peak MR velocity greater than 6.3m/s suggests 
of the RV ejection tract (Figure 5.63).
SHT with peak systolic pressure greater than
Mesothelioma involving the pericardium may be
160mm Hg.
difficult to diagnose echocardiographically because it
Hyperthyroidism is the most common endocrinopa-
does not typically produce a discrete, echogenic mass.
thy in cats, and concurrent, nonspecific echocardio-
Pericardial and/or pleuraleffusionofunexplained
graphic abnormalities often are observed. LV wall
origin must include this cell type as a differential.
thickening and hypertrophy may occur, and the
204 HEART
Figure 5.63. Cardiac neoplasia. A and B: RPS LAx and SAx views from a dog with a large mass (M) at the heart base.
C: A thyroid carcinoma (M) is apparent on this RPS SAx view at a typical location in the RVOT. D: A SAx RPS image from a
cat with echogenic cardiac metastases (M) from a carcinoma. A small amount of pericardial effusion (PF) is also evident.
remodeling of the heart to impair valve function, and
condition may resemble HCM of mild to moderate
severity echocardiographically (Moise et al. 1986).
 congestive heart failure with pulmonary edema and/
or pleural effusion may occur in severe cases.
Tachycardia and increased indices of stroke volume
(e.g, w^A) may result with variable dilation of all
Hyperthyroid cats are occasionally seen with cardiac
cardiac chambers. Atrioventricular valvular regurgita-
 changes resembling DCM, including marked chamber
dilation and depressed fractional shortening.
tion may accompany the condition if there is sufficient
Chpl
B
A
PE
RV
Ao
V
RA
A
    i n  s  ( x e ( x  ()   m
evident (PE) because of extcnsion of the tumor and bleeding into the pericardial space. C and D: Two variations of atypical
cardiac HSA. In C, a large mass (M) fills the RV and RA in the RPS LAx image. In D, an LAp four-chamber view depicts a
mass filling the LA.
B
RV
RV
Figure5.63.
AO
RV
RPA
PT
Figure 5.64. Pulmonary thromboembolism (PTE) in a dog. A: This RPS SAx image depicts RV dilation and hypertrophy,
the latter suggesting chronicity.The LV appears small because ofvolume underloading.B:A thrombus (PTE) is evident in
thedilatedRPA.
205
206 HEART
tial. The catheter entry location is at the fifth to seventh
INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES
intercostal space of the right ventral thorax, at the level
Pericardiocentesis (PC) is both a therapeutic and diag-
of the costochondral junction (Figure 5.65). Ultrasound
nostic procedure. Pericardial effusion (PE) associated
guidance is highly useful in directing the catheter,
with clinical signs due to cardiac compression
in confirming the distribution and amount of PE, in
establishing the optimal catheter entry point and direc-
(tamponade) is the major indication for PC. PC is also
indicated in obtaining a sample of PE for diagnostic
tion, and in confirming the catheter position. Needle
entry should be near the center of the rib space to
analysis.
 Insufficient PE volume is the main contraindication
avoid puncture of the intercostal vessels and also cath-
for PC if the risk of the procedure outweighs potential
eter kinking and obstruction by a rib as the patient
benefits.Relative contraindications include hemor-
breathes.
rhagic PE secondary to bleeding disorders or atrial
Using aseptic technique, the operator attaches a
sterile 3-mL syringe to the catheter, positions the point
tear, because reducing the pericardial pressure may
of the catheter at the predetermined location, and
perpetuate hemorrhage. Distension of the pericardium
by solid tumors or abdominal contents as seen in
 orients the direction of the catheter dorsocranially. The
peritoneal-pericardial diaphragmatic hernia is also a
entire apparatus is advanced through the skin and
thoracic wall while mild negative pressure (suction) is
contraindication for PC.
The required equipment list includes a 14- to 18-
applied with the syringe. A burst of ventricular pre-
mature complexes on the electrocardiogram suggests
gauge over-the-needle catheter (2-5 inches [5.08-
12.7cm], depending on patient size), syringes (3-50
that the catheter tip is in contact with the epicardium
this requires catheter retraction until the dysrhythmia
mL), three-way stopcock, extension tubing, and collec-
tion tubes or apparatus for cytology (EDTA) and
resolves. The flexible catheter is advanced off the stylus
into the pericardial space, and the metal catheter stylus
culture submission.
is then fully withdrawn. Extension tubing is attached
 Sedation and local analgesia are useful and can be
directly to the flexible catheter end, leading to a large
obtained with diazepam (0.2mg/kg) intravenous (IV)
in combination with either butorphanol (0.2mg/kg) IV
or oxymorphone (0.1 mg/kg) IV. Agents promoting
by an assistant.
hypotension must be avoided (e.g., acepromazine).
With tamponade, decompression of the pericardial
space by even a small amount often causes an observ-
The patient is usually positioned in left lateral
recumbcncy. Electrocardiographic monitoring for
able decrease in heart rate. A continual decrease in
heart rate and rhythm during the procedure is essen-
heart rate throughout the proccdure is suggestive of
A
B
Figure 5.65.Iericardioccntesis in a dog. A: The catheter is placed at the fifth to seventh intercostal spaces of the right ventral
needlc within the fluid-filled pericardial sac.
207ATLASOF SMALL ANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
correct catheter placement, whereas any trend toward
Darke PGG, Bonagura JD, Miller M (1993) Transducer orien-
increased heart rate should prompt the operator to
tation for Doppler echocardiography in dogs. J Small
interrupt aspiration and reevaluate catheter position.
Anim Pract 34:2-8.
Once the catheter-tip positioning within the pericar-
Fox PR (1999) Feline cardiomyopathies. In: Fox PR, Sisson D,
dial space is assured, complctc and rapid cvacuation
Moise NS,eds.Textbook of Canine and Feline Cardiology:
Principles and Clinical Practice,2nd edition.Philadclphia:
of PE may proccd (cxccptions: atrial tcar or blceding
WB Saunders, pp 621-678.
disorder). Significant ventricular arrhythmias should
Hansson K, Haggstrom J, Kvart C, Lord P (2002) Left atrial
to aortic root indices using two-dimensional and M-mode
drawal. Intravenous administration of a 2% lidocaine
echocardiography in cavalier King Charles spaniels with
bolus (2-4mg/kg = 1-2mL per 10kg) should be con-
and without left atrial enlargement. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
sidered if the dysrhythmia does not abate promptly.
43:568-575.
Potential complications of PC include puncture of
Harvey AM, Battersby IA, Faena M, Fews D, Darke PGG,
cardiac chambers or great vessels, cardiac dysrhyth-
Ferasin L
(2005) Arrhythmogenic right ventricular
mia, coronary laceration, exsanguination, pulmonary
cardiomyopathy in two cats. J Small Anim Pract 46:151-
156
laceration or hemorrhage, and pneumothorax. Com-
plications are minimized by careful preparation and
Hatle LK, Angelsen B (1985) Physics of blood flow. In:
Doppler Ultrasound in Cardiology: Physics, Principles,
technique.
and Clinical Applications, 2nd edition. Philadelphia: Lea
and Febiger, pp 8-31.
Henry WL, DeMaria A, Gramiak R, et al. (1980) Report of
REFERENCES
the American Society of Echocardiography Committe
on Nomenclature and Standards in Two-dimensional
Abbott JA, MacLean HN (2003) Comparison of Doppler-
Echocardiography. Circulation 62:212 217.
derived peak aortic velocities obtained from subcostal and
Kirberger RM, Bland-van den Berg P, Grimbeek RJ (1992)
apical transducer sites in healthy dogs. Vet Radiol
 Doppler echocardiography in the normal dog. Part Il:
Ultrasound 44:695-698.
Factors influencing blood flow velocities and a compari-
Bonagura JD (1983) M-mode echocardiography: Basic prin-
son between left and right heart blood flow.Vet Radiol
ciples. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 13:299-319.
Ultrasound 33:380-386.
Bonagura JD, Herring DS (1985a) Echocardiography:
Kittleson MD, Brown WA (2003) Regurgitant fraction mea-
Acquired heart disease. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
sured by using the proximal isovelocity surface area
Pract 15:1209-1224.
method in dogs with chronic myxomatous mitral valvc
Bonagura JD, Herring DS (1985b) Echocardiography:
disease. J Vet Intern Med 17:84-88.
 Congenital heart disease. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Kittleson MD, Eyster GE,Knowlen GG, Olivier NB, Anderson
Pract 15:1195-1208.
LK (1984) Myocardial function in small dogs with chronic.
Bonagura JD, Miller MW (1998) Doppler echocardiography
mitral regurgitation and severe congestive heart failure.
II: Color Doppler imaging. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
J Am Vet Med Ass 184:455-459.
Pract 28:1361-1389.
Lombard CW, Buergelt CD (1983a) Echocardiographic and
Bonagura JD, Miller MW, Darke PGG (1998) Doppler
clinical findings in dogs with heartworm-induced cor pul-
echocardiography I. Pulsed-wave and continuous-wave
monale. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 5:971-979.
examinations. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
Lombard CW, Buergelt CD (1983b) Vegetative bacterial
28:1325-1359
endocarditis in dogs: Echocardiographic diagnosis and
Bonagura JD,
O'Grady
MR,
Herring
DS
(1985)
clinical signs.J Small Anim Pract 24:325-339.
Fchocardiography: Principles of interpretation. Vet Clin
Moise NS (1989) Doppler echocardiographic evaluation of
North Am Small Anim Pract 15:1177-1194.
congenital cardiac disease. J Vet Intern Med 3:195-207.
Bonagura JD, Pipers FS (1981) Echocardiographic features
Moise NS, Dietze AE, Mezza LE, Strickland D, Erb HN,
Edwards NJ (1986) Echocardiography, electrocardiogra-
179:49-56.
phy, and radiography of cats with dilatation cardiomyop-
Brown DJ, Rush JE, MacGregor J, Ross JN Jr, Brewer B, Rand
athy,hypcrtrophic cardiomyopathy,and hyperthyroidism.
WM (2005) Quantitative echocardiographic evaluation of
Am J Vet Res 47:1476-1486.
mitral endocardiosis in dogs using ratio indices. J Vet
O'Grady MR, Bonagura JD, Powers JD, Herring DS (1986)
Intern Med 19:542-552.
Quantitative cross-sectional echocardiography in the
Calvert CA, Chapman WL Jr, Toal RL (1982) Congestive
normal dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 27:34-49.
cardiomyopathy in Doberman pinscher dogs. J Am Vet
O'Rourke RA,Hanrath P, Henry WN,et al.(1984) Report
Med Ass0c 181:598-602.
ofthe Joint International Sociely and Federation of
Darke PGG (1992) Doppler echocardiography. J Small Anim
Cardiology/World HHealth Organization Task Force on
Pract 33:104-112.
recommendations for standardization of measurements
208HEART
EchocardiographyCommitteeonStandards,Subcommittee
from M-mode echocardiograms. Circulation 69:854A-
 on Quantitation of Two-dimensional Echocardiograms.
857A.
 J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2:358-367.
Rishniw M, Erb HN (2000) Evalualion of four 2-dimensional
Thomas WP (1984) Two-dimensional, real-time echocardiog-
echocardiographic methods of assessing left atrial size in
raphy in the dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 25:50-64.
dogs. J Vet Interm Med 14:429-435.
Thomas WP, Gaber CE, Jacobs GJ, et al. (1993)
Sahn DJ, DeMaria A, Kisslo J, Weyman A (1978)
Rccommendations for standards in transthoracic two-
Recormmendations regarding quantitation in M-node
dimensional echocardiography in the dog and cat. J Vet
echocardiography: Results of a survey of echocardio-
Intern Med 7:247-252.
graphic measurements.Circulation 58:1072-1083.
Thomas WP, Sisson D, Bauer TG, Rced JR (1984) Detection
Schillcr NB, Shah PM, Crawford M, et al. (1989)
 of cardiac masses in dogs by two-dimensional echocar-
Recommendations for quantitation of theleft ventricle by
diography. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 25:65-72.
two-dimensional echocardiography. American Society of
APPENDIX
Caninebreed-specificM-modereferencevalues:unindexed
Reference
Breed
N
BW(kg)
LVIDd(cm)LVIDs(cm)IVSd（cm)
IVSs(cm)
LVWd(cm）LVWs(cm)
Ao(cm)
LA (cm)
Miniature poodle
20
3.0
2.00b
1.00b
0.50b
0.80h
0.50b
0.80b
1.00h
1.20b
Morrison et al. 1992
[1.4-9.0]
[1.60-2.80]
[0.80-1.60]
[0.40-0.60]
[0.60-1.00]
[0.40-0.60]
[0.60-1.00][0.80-1.30]
[0.80-1.80]
Della Torre et al.2000a
Italian greyhound
20
5.4 = 1.5
2.22 ± 0.27
1.28±0.28
0.64 ± 0.11
0.91±0.13
0.71±0.09
1.02±0.08
[3.2-8.4]
[1.63-2.66]
[0.84-1.76]
[0.44-0.85]
[0.69-1.15]
[0.49-0.92]
[0.86-1.19]
Haggstroma
Cavalier King
57
8.9 ± 1.4
2.92 ± 0.31
1.96 ± 0.25
0.70 ±0.09
1.60±0.15
1.60±0.19
Cornell et al. 2004
Charles spaniel
[5.5-11.9]
[2.20-3.55]
[1.50-2.70]
[0.50-0.85]
[1.20-2.00]
[1.10-2.25]
Crippa et al. 1992
Beagle
20
8.9±1.5
2.63
1.57
0.67
0.96
0.82
1.14
[5.9-11.9]
[1.95-3.31]
[0.89-2.25]
[0.45-0.89]
[0.66-1.26]
[0.441.20]
[0.76-1.52]
Pedersena
Dachshund
33
9.5 ± 1.9
2.84 ± 0.33
1.88±0.29
0.70±0.10
0.95± 0.11
0.68±0.13
1.01±0.14
1.82=0.18
1.63± 0.23
Cornell et al. 2004
[6.2-16.0]
[2.20-3.60]
[1.20-2.60]
[0.50-0.80]
[0.70-1.20]
[0.40-0.90]
[0.70-1.20]
[1.50-2.30]
[1.00-2.10]
Baade et al. 2002
WestHighland
24
10.3±0.9
2.88
2.00
0.69
1.02
0.64
0.98
whiteterrier
[8.5-12.1]
[1.74-4.02]
[1.26-2.74]
[0.41-0.97]
[0.52-1.52]
[0.40-0.88]
[0.72-1.24]
Gooding et al. 1986
English cocker
12
12.2± 2.4
3.38±0.35
2.23±0.29
0.82 ±0.14
0.79 ± 0.12
spaniel
[8.5-15.8]
[2.90-4.00]
[1.90-2.80]
[0.50-0.90]
[0.50-0.90]
Morrison et al. 1992
Welsh corgi
20
15.0b
3.20
1.90b
0.80b
1.20h
0.80b
1.20b
1.80b
2.10b
[8.0-19.0]
[2.80-4.00]
[1.20-2.30]
[0.60-0.90]
[1.00-1.40]
[0.60-1.00]
[0.80-1.30]
[1.50-2.20]
[1.20-2.40]
Sisson and Schaeffer
English pointer
16
19.2 ± 2.8
3.92 ± 0.24
2.53 ± 0.24
0.69 ± 0.11
1.06 ± 0.10
0.71 ± 0.07
1.15±0.13
2.41 ±0.17
2.26 ± 0.20
[13.6-24.9]
[3.444.40]
[2.05-3.01]
[0.47-0.91]
[0.86-1.26]
[0.57-0.85]
[0.89-1.41]
[2.07-2.75]
1[1.86-2.66]
1991
Morrison et al. 1992
Afghan hound
20
23.0b
4.20b
2.80b
1.30b
1.30b
0.90b
1.20
2.60
2.60b
[17.0-36.0]
[3.30-5.20]
[2.00-3.70]
[0.80-1.80]
[0.80-1.80]
[0.70-1.10]
[0.90-1.80]
[2.00-3.40]
[1.80-3.50]
209
Page et al. 1993
Greyhound
16
26.6±3.5
4.41 ± 0.30
3.25±0.35
1.06 ±0.17
1.34 ± 0.26
1.21 ± 0.17
1.53 ± 0.22
[20.7-32.5]
[4.00-4.90]
[2.90-3.80]
[0.80-1.40]
[1.00-1.70]
[0.90-1.40]
[1.20-1.80]
Della Torre et al. 2000a
Greyhound
20
26.9 ± 3.3
4.27 ±0.28
3.21±0.25
1.19 ± 0.13
1.57±0.13
1.29 ± 0.11
1.71 ± 0.13
[21.7-31.5]
[3.88-4.92]
[2.84-3.66]
[0.9-1.51]
[1.33-1.85]
[1.13-1.49]
[1.54-2.04]
Snyder et al. 1995#
Greyhound
11
29.1 ± 3.7
4.69 ±0.30
3.33±0.26
1.34 ± 0.17
1.16 ± 0.17
[24.9-36.3]
[3.98-4.98]
[2.84-3.63]
[1.04-1.61]
[0.82-1.34]
Vollmara
Boxer
75
31.0± 4.8
4.13 ± 0.38
2.78± 0.31
0.97±0.16
1.38±0.22
0.98± 0.13
1.46±0.18
2.28±0.22
2.46±0.31
Cornell et al. 2004
[22.5-43.0]
[3.27-5.08]
[2.0-3.59]
[0.65-1.27]
1[1.00-1.90]
[0.66-1.26]
[1.08-1.95]
[1.82-3.00]
[1.72-3.46]
Morrison et al. 1992
Golden retriever
20
32.0h
4.50b
2.70b
1.00h
1.40b
1.00b
1.50b
2.40b
2.70b
[23.0-41.0]
[3.70-5.10]
[1.80-3.50]
[0.80-1.30]
[1.00-1.70]
[0.80-1.20]
[1.00-1.90]
[1.40-2.70]
[1.60-3.20]
Calvert and Brown
Doberman
21
36.0
4.68 ± 0.42
3.08 ± 0.33
0.96 ±0.06
1.43 ± 0.07
0.96±0.06
1.41±0.08
2.99 ±0.23
2.66±0.15
pinscher
[31.0-42.0]
[4.10-5.50]
[2.50-3.60]
[0.80-1.00]
[1.30-1.50]
[0.90-1.00]
[1.30-1.50]
[2.80-3.50]
[2.20-2.80]
1986
Bayon et al. 1994
Spanish mastiff
12
52.4 ± 3.3
4.77 ± 0.14
2.90 ± 0.11
0.98 ± 0.04
1.56±0.05
0.97 ± 0.04
1.52 ± 0.04
2.76 ± 0.08
2.85±0.09
[45.8-59.0]
[4.50-5.04]
[2.69-3.11]
[0.89-1.06]
[1.46-1.66]
[0.90-1.04]
[1.43-1.60]
[2.61-2.91]
[2.67-3.03]
Koch et al. 1996
Newfoundland
27
61.0
5.00
3.55
1.15
1.50
1.00
1.50
2.90
3.00
[47.0-69.5]
[4.40-6.00]
[2.90-4.40]
[0.70-1.50]
[1.10-2.00]
[0.80-1.30]
[1.10-1.60]
[2.60-3.30]
[2.40-3.30]
Koch et al. 1996
Great Dane
15
62.0
5.30
3.95
1.45
1.65
1.25
1.60
2.95
3.30
[52.0-75.0]
[4.40-5.90]
[3.40-4.50]
[1.20-1.60]
[1.40-1.90]
[1.00-1.60]
[1.10-1.90]
[2.80-3.40]
[2.80-4.60]
Irish wolfhound
144
63.5±8.3
5.07±0.37
3.35±0.33
1.11±0.19
1.55±0.22
1.06 ±0.16
1.58± 0.19
3.29±0.30
3.18± 0.31
Vollmara
Cornell et al. 2004
[45.0-91.0]
[4.30-5.97]
[2.55-4.09]
[0.56-1.67]
[1.03-2.13]
[0.66-1.44]
[1.19-2.21]
[2.71-4.13]
[2.47-3.89]
Koch et al. 1996
Irish wolfhound
20
68.5
5.00
3.60
1.20
1.50
1.00
1.40
3.00
3.10
[50.0-80.0][4.60-5.90][3.30-4.50][0.90-1.45]
[1.10-1.70]
[0.90-1.30]
[1.10-1.70]
[2.90-3.10]
[2.20-3.50]
"Original data supplied by investigators.All others fromreferenced sources.
bMeanormedian±standarddeviation[range].
Ao,aorta;W,bodyweight;IVSd,interventricular septal thickness,diastole;IVSs,interventricular septal thickness,systole;A,left atrium;VIDd,leftventricularinternal dimension,
diastole;LVIDs,left ventricularinternal dimension,systole;LVWd,left ventricular wallthickness,diastole;and LVWs,left ventricular wall thickness,systole.
Canine breed-specific M-mode reference values indexed for body size (weight-based ratio indices)
Reference
Breed
N
BW (kg)
wLVIDd
wLVIDs
wIVSd
wlVSs
wLVWd
WLVWs
wAo
WLA
Morrison et al.
Miniature poodle
20
3.0b
1.74b
0.87b
0.44b
0.70b
0.44b
0.70b
0.87b
1.05b
1992
[1.4-9.0]
[1.402.44]
[0.70-1.40]
[0.35-0.52]
[0.52-0.87]
[0.35-0.52]
[0.52-0.87]
[0.70-1.13]
[0.70-1.57]
Della Torre et al.
Italian
20
5.4± 1.5
1.61±0.18
0.93=0.17
0.46±0.06
0.66 ±0.07
0.51±0.05
0.74 ± 0.07
2000
greyhound
[3.2-8.4]
[1.17-1.88]
[0.62-1.22]
[0.34-0.57]
[0.52-0.80]
[0.42-0.65]
[0.61-0.86]
Haggstroma Cornell
Cavalier King
57
8.9± 1.4
1.78 ± 0.16
1.19 ±0.14
0.42±0.05
0.98 ±0.09
0.97±0.10
et al.2004
 Charles spaniel
[5.5-11.9]
[1.40-2.16]
[0.91-1.60]
[0.34-0.52]
[0.78-1.19]
[0.76-1.24]
Crippa et al. 1992
Beagle
20
8.9±1.5
1.60
0.95
0.41
0.58
0.50
0.69
[5.9-11.9]
[1.18-2.01]
[0.54-1.37]
[0.27-0.54]
[0.40-0.76]
[0.27-0.73]
[0.46-0.92]
Pedersen? Cornell
Dachshund
33
9.5± 1.9
1.70 ± 0.19
1.12±0.16
0.42 ± 0.05
0.57±0.06
0.41 ±0.07
0.61±0.08
1.08 ± 0.09
0.98±0.14
et al.2004
[6.2-16.0]
[1.32-2.37]
[0.72-1.51]
[0.29-0.53]
[0.41-0.66]
[0.24-0.53]
[0.42-0.75]
[0.90-1.25]
[0.60-1.18]
Baade et al.2002
WestHighland
24
10.3± 0.9
1.66
1.16
0.40
0.59
0.37
0.57
0
white terrier
[8.5-12.1]
[1.01-2.32]
[0.73-1.58]
[0.24-0.56]
[0.30-0.88]
[0.23-0.51]
[0.42-0.72]
Gooding et al.1986Englishcocker
12
12.2 ±2.4
1.85 ± 0.14
1.22 ± 0.14
0.45± 0.08
0.44 ± 0.08
spaniel
[8.5-15.8]
[1.62-2.04]
[1.02-1.41]
[0.25-0.55]
[0.25-0.55]
Della Torre et al.
Whippet
20
14.5 ± 2.1
1.86±0.12
1.25 ±0.14
0.44±0.05
0.64±0.06
0.46±0.05
0.67 ± 0.10
2000a
[10.8-20.2]
[1.56-2.03]
[0.96-1.49]
[0.32-0.52]
[0.45-0.72]
[0.40-0.60]
[0.56-0.92]
Morrison et al.
Welsh corgi
20
15.0b
1.63b
0.97b
0.41b
0.61b
0.41b
0.61b
0.92h
1.07h
1992
[8.0-19.0]
[1.43-2.04]
[0.61-1.17]
[0.31-0.46]
[0.51-0.71]
[0.31-0.51]
[0.41-0.66]
[0.76-1.12]
[0.61-1.22]
Sisson and
English pointer
16
19.2 ± 2.8
1.84 ± 0.11
1.19 ± 0.11
0.32 ± 0.05
0.50±0.05
0.33±0.03
0.54 ± 0.06
1.13 ± 0.08
1.06±0.09
Schaeffer 1991
[13.6-24.9]
[1.62-2.07]
[0.96-1.41]
[0.22-0.43]
[0.40-0.59]
[0.27-0.40]
[0.42-0.66]
[0.97-1.29]
[0.87-1.25]
Wey” Cornell et al.
Generic
47
20.8± 13.0
1.75 ± 0.16
1.16±0.19
0.40±0.06
0.56±0.11
0.40± 0.05
0.57±0.09
2004
[2.2-47.4]
[1.45-2.09]
[0.62-1.42]
[0.28-0.54]
[0.38-0.92]
[0.29-0.50]
[0.39-0.78]
Morrison et al.
Afghan hound
20
23.0b
1.86b
1.24b
0.57b
0.57b
0.40b
0.53b
1.15b
1.15b
1992
[17.0-36.0]
[1.46-2.30]
[0.88-1.64]
[0.35-0.80]
[0.35-0.80]
[0.31-0.49]
[0.40-0.80]
[0.88-1.50]
[0.80-1.55]
de Madron 1983
Generic
27
24.4 ± 19.2
1.91 ± 0.16
1.29 ± 0.16
0.36±0.08
0.52±0.07
0.33 ±0.07
0.51 ±0.09
1.06 ± 0.15
1.05±0.17
[2.7-95.0]
[1.49-2.16]
[0.99-1.68]
[0.23-0.54]
[0.36-0.65]
[0.22-0.52]
[0.32-0.72]
[0.81-1.38]
[0.39-1.26]
Brown et al.2003
Generic
25.2± 17.4
1.59 ± 0.15
1.04± 0.160.44± 0.06
0.59 ±0.09
0.41±0.06
0.60 ± 0.08
1.00±0.12
1.01±0.11
[2.3-76.4]
[1.30-1.85]
[0.78-1.36]
[0.28-0.57]
[0.40-0.79]
[0.29-0.57]
[0.43-0.76]
[0.81-1.43]
[0.76-1.26]
Page et al. 1993
Greyhound
16
26.6 ± 3.5
1.86 ± 0.12
1.37 ±0.15
0.45 ± 0.07
0.56±0.11
0.51±0.07
0.64±0.09
[20.7-32.5]
[1.69-2.06]
[1.22-1.60]
[0.34-0.59]
[0.42-0.72]
[0.38-0.59]
[0.51-0.76]
Della Torre et al.
Greyhound
20
26.9 ±3.3
1.79 ± 0.13
1.35 ±0.10
0.05±0.04
0.66 ± 0.04
0.54±0.04
0.72±0.05
2000a
[21.7-31.5]
[1.62-2.05]
[1.22-1.58]
[0.43-0.62]
[0.54-0.74]
[0.49-0.60]
[0.65-0.90]
Goncalves et al.
Generic
70
27.7 ± 19.5
1.52 ± 0.14
0.95±0.13
0.52±0.08
0.70±0.09
0.42±0.11
0.63±0.10
0.93± 0.12
1.13 ± 0.14
[3.9-97.7]
[1.21-1.79]
[0.61-1.24]
[0.38-0.70]
[0.54-0.93]
[0.29-1.15]
[0.45-0.91]
[0.71-1.48]
[0.89-1.50]
2002a
Snyder et al. 1995a
Greyhound
11
29.1 ± 3.7
1.92 ± 0.12
1.37 ± 0.11
0.55 ± 0.07
0.48 ± 0.06
[24.9-36.3]
[1.68-2.12]
[1.20-1.54]
[0.44-0.67]
[0.34-0.55]
Lombard Cornell
Generic
23
30.1± 7.8
1.76 ± 0.17
1.10 = 0.13
0.42±0.04
1.01±0.08
0.98 ± 0.13
et al.2004
[21.0-44.0]
[1.37-2.01]
[0.82-1.34]
[0.35-0.53]
[0.80-1.17]
[0.62-1.14]
VollmarCornell
Boxer
75
31.0±4.8
1.66 ± 0.14
1.12 ± 0.12
0.39±0.06
0.55±0.08
0.40±0.05
0.59 ± 0.07
0.92±0.08
0.99±0.11
et al. 2004
[22.5-43.0]
[1.39-2.09]
[0.84-1.43]
[0.27-0.50]
[0.41-0.77]
[0.26-0.52]
[0.42-0.81]
[0.79-1.16]
[0.73-1.30]
Morrison et al.
Goldenretriever
20
32.0b
1.78b
1.07b
0.40b
0.55b
0.40b
0.59b
0.95b
1.07b
[23.0-41.0]
[1.472.02]
[0.71-1.39]
[0.32-0.51]
[0.40-0.67]
[0.32-0.48]
[0.40-0.75]
[0.55-1.07]
1992
[0.63-1.27]
Calvert and Brown
Doberman
21
36.0
1.78 ± 0.16
1.17 ± 0.13
0.37 ±0.02
0.54± 0.02
0.37 ± 0.02
0.54± 0.03
1.14 ± 0.09
1.01±0.06
pinscher
[31.0-42.0]
[1.56-2.09]
[0.95-1.37]
[0.30-0.38]
[0.50-0.57]
[0.34-0.38]
[0.50-0.57]
[1.07-1.33]
[0.84-1.07]
1986
Bayon et al. 1994
Spanish mastiff
12
52.4±3.3
1.60 ± 0.05
0.97 ± 0.04
0.33 ± 0.01
0.53±0.02
0.33± 0.01
0.51±0.01
0.93± 0.03
0.96±0.03
[45.8-59.0]
[1.51-1.69]
[0.90-1.05]
[0.30-0.36]
[0.49-0.56]
[0.30-0.35]
[0.48-0.54]
[0.88-0.98]
[0.90-1.02]
Koch et al. 1996
Newfoundland
27
61.0
1.60
1.13
0.37
0.48
0.32
0.48
0.93
0.96
[47.0-69.5]
[1.41-1.92]
[0.93-1.41]
[0.22-0.48]
[0.35-0.64]
[0.26-0.42]
[0.35-0.51]
[0.83-1.05]
[0.77-1.05]
Koch et al. 1996
Great Dane
15
62.0
1.68
1.26
0.46
0.52
0.40
0.51
0.94
1.05
[52.0-75.0]
[1.40-1.87]
[1.08-1.43]
[0.38-0.51]
[0.44-0.60]
[0.32-0.51]
[0.35-0.60]
[0.89-1.08]
[0.89-1.46]
Vollmar Cornell
Irish wolfhound
144
63.5 ±8.3
1.60 ± 0.12
1.06 ± 0.11
0.35 ± 0.06
0.49 ± 0.07
0.33 ± 0.05
0.50±0.06
1.04 ± 0.09
1.01±0.11
et al.2004
[45.0-91.0]
[1.33-1.88]
[0.83-1.29]
[0.19-0.51]
[0.32-0.67]
[0.21-0.47]
[0.37-0.65]
[0.89-1.30]
[0.73-1.26]
Koch et al. 1996
Irish wolfhound
20
68.5
1.54
1.11
0.37
0.46
0.31
0.43
0.92
0.95
[50.0-80.0]
[1.41-1.81]
[1.01-1.38][0.28-0.45]
[0.34-0.52]
[0.28-0.40]
[0.34-0.52]
[0.89-0.95]
[0.68-1.08]
aOriginal data supplied by investigators.All others cstimated from referenced sources.
bMean or median, ± standard deviation [range].
IndexformulasfromTable5.3.
Canine breed-specific M-mode functional and relative indices
Reference
Breed
N
BW (kg)
FS
EF
WAA
FWTd
FWAd
wWAd
wWAs
Della Torre et al. 2000a
Italian greyhound
20
5.4
0.43
0.80
1.75
0.38
0.61
4.11
4.58
[3.2-8.4]
[0.32-0.56]
[0.68-0.92]
[0.98-2.25]
[0.30-0.45]
[0.51-0.70]
[2.63-5.20]
[3.17-6.08]
Haggstrom Cornell
Cavalier King
57
8.9
0.33
0.69
1.74
et al.2004
Charles spaniel
[5.5-11.9]
[0.21-0.44]
[0.50-0.82]
[0.94-2.59]
Crippa et al. 1992
Beagle
20
8.9
0.40
[5.9-11.9]
[0.22-0.58]
Pedersen Cornell
Dachshund
33
9.5
0.34
0.70
1.63
0.33
0.55
3.51
4.01
et al.2004
[6.2-16.0]
[0.19-0.53]
[0.46-0.89]
[0.86-4.35]
[0.25-0.39]
[0.44-0.62]
[1.71-4.36]
[1.90-5.13]
Baade et al. 2002
West Highland
24
10.3
0.35
white terrier
[8.5-12.1]
[0.21-0.49]
Gooding et al. 1986
English cocker
12
12.2
0.34
0.71
1.95
0.32
0.54
4.09
spaniel
[8.5-15.8]
[0.29-0.43]
[0.64-0.82]
[1.52-2.53]
[0.20-0.38]
[0.36-0.62]
[2.26-5.33]
DellaTorre et al.2000a
Whippet
20
14.5
0.33
0.69
1.88
0.33
0.55
4.20
4.96
[10.8-20.2]
[0.25-0.47]
[0.57-0.85]
[1.45-2.36]
[0.29-0.42]
[0.49-0.66]
[3.36-5.08]
[3.97-5.72]
Maschiro et al. 1976
Generic
16
17.6
0.31
0.67
1.72
0.25
0.44
2.59
[11.3-24.0]
[0.24-0.39]
[0.57-0.77]
[1.142.13]
[0.22-0.29]
[0.39-0.50]
[2.07-3.39]
Sisson and Schaeffer
English pointer
16
19.2
0.36
1991
[13.6-24.9]
[0.28-0.44]
Weya Cornell et al.
Generic
47
20.8
0.34
0.69
1.71
0.31
0.53
3.47
3.91
2004
[2.2-47.4]
[0.23-0.59]
[0.54-0.93]
[0.91-2.71]
[0.25-0.37]
[0.43-0.61]
[2.50-4.90]
[2.46-6.37]
de Madron 1983
Generic
27
24.4
0.33
0.69
1.99
0.26
0.46
3.15
3.72
212
[2.7-95.0]
[0.22-0.46]
[0.53-0.84]
[1.20-2.60]
[0.19-0.32]
[0.35-0.54]
[1.95-5.12]
[2.21-5.25]
Brown et al. 2003
Generic
50
25.2
0.34
0.71
1.44
0.35
0.57
3.40
3.94
[2.3-76.4]
[0.25-0.50]
[0.58-0.87]
[0.78-2.01]
[0.28-0.44]
[0.48-0.68]
[2.21-5.05]
[2.63-5.13]
DellaTorre etal.2000a
Greyhound
20
26.9
0.25
0.57
1.40
0.37
0.60
4.83
5.62
[21.7-31.5]
[0.18-0.32]
[0.44-0.68]
[0.87-2.01]
[0.32-0.42]
[0.53-0.66]
[3.87-5.30]
[4.48-6.32]
Goncalves et al.2002"
Generic
70
27.7
0.38
0.75
1.43
0.38
0.61
3.77
4.30
[3.9-97.7]
[0.30-0.57]
[0.66-0.92]
[0.80-2.21]
[0.30-0.54]
[0.52-0.79]
[2.44-7.31]
[2.81-5.88]
Snyder et al. 1995a
Greyhound
11
29.1
0.29
0.64
1.82
0.35
0.57
4.99
[24.9-36.3]
[0.24-0.37]
[0.56-0.75]
[1.39-2.30]
[0.32-0.40]
[0.54-0.64]
[4.04-5.98]
Lombarda Cornell et al.
Generic
23
30.1
0.38
0.75
1.93
2004
[21.0-44.0]
[0.30-0.49]
[0.66-0.87]
[0.95-2.75]
Vollmar? Cornell et al.
Boxer
75
31.0
0.33
0.69
1.50
0.32
0.54
3.23
3.85
2004
[22.5-43.0]
[0.26-0.41]
[0.59-0.79]
[0.94-2.35]
[0.24-0.39]
[0.42-0.63]
[1.93-4.47]
[2.58-5.72]
Bayon et al. 1994
Spanish mastiff
12
52.4
[45.8-59.0]
Koch et al. 1996
Newfoundland
27
61.0
0.30
[47.0-69.5]
[0.22-0.37]
Koch et al. 1996
GreatDane
15
62.0
0.25
[52.0-75.0]
[0.18-0.36]
Vollmar Cornell et al.
Irish wolfhound
144
63.5
0.34
0.71
1.45
0.30
0.51
2.68
3.09
2004
[45.0-91.0]
[0.25-0.45]
[0.58-0.84]
[0.95-2.36]
[0.20-0.36]
[0.36-0.59]
[1.56-4.30]
[1.94-4.19]
Koch et al. 1996
Irishwolfhound
20
68.5
0.28
[50.0-80.0]
[0.20-0.34]
"Original data supplied by investigators. All others from referenced sources.
Mean or median, ± standard deviation [rangel.
Index formulas from Table 5.3.
Feline M-mode echocardiographicreference values
References
Pipers et al. 1979
Sisson et al. 1991
Moise et al. 1986
Allen and
Allen 1982
Fox et al.1985
Jacobs et al. 1985
Downey 1983
Unanesthetized
Xylazine-sodium
Sodium
Unanesthetized
Unanesthetized
Ketamine
Conditions
Unanesthetized
pentobarbital
pentobarbital
hydrochloride
79
11
8
10
30
N
30
25
4.30 ±0.50
3.50±0.41
3.64± 0.66
[2.05-6.80]
BW (kg)
[1.96-6.26]
[2.30-6.80]
[2.70-8.20]
[120-240]
182±22
163 ± 13
175±20
[160-300]
HR (/min)
[147-242]
[120-240]
[0.12-0.75]
RVIDd(cm)
[0.00-0.70]
0.50 ± 0.07
0.40±0.03
[0.22-0.49]
IVSd (cm)
[0.22-0.40]
[0.28-0.60]
[0.30-0.60]
[1.08-2.14]
1.51 ± 0.21
1.29 ± 0.09
1.30±0.12
[1.07-1.73]
LVIDd (cm)
[1.20-1.98]
[1.12-2.18]
[0.32-0.56]
[0.25-0.60]
0.46 ± 0.05
0.40±0.40
[0.210.45]
LVWd (cm)
[0.22-0.44]
RVWs(cm)
[0.23-0.43]
RVIDs (cm)
[0.27-0.94]
[0.47-0.70]
[0.40-0.90]
0.76 ± 0.12
IVSs (cm)
[0.64-1.68]
[0.40-1.12]
0.69±0.22
0.88 ± 0.08
0.86±0.16
[0.49-1.16]
LVIDs (cm)
[0.52-1.08]
[0.54-0.81]
[0.43-0.98]
0.78± 0.10
LVWs (cm)
[0.40-1.18]
[0.60-1.21]
0.95± 0.15
0.90 ± 0.07
[0.71-1.15]
Ao (cm)
[0.72-1.19]
1.21±0.18
1.00 ± 0.07
[0.72-1.33]
LA (cm)
[0.93-1.51]
[0.45-1.12]
[0.70-1.70]
[0.88-1.79]
1.29 ±0.23
[0.73-1.64]
LA/AO
[0.95-1.65]
[0.40-0.67]
0.55 ± 0.10
0.31 ± 0.47
0.35 ± 0.25
[0.30-0.60]
FS
[0.39-0.61]
[0.23-0.56]
[0.00-0.20]
0.04± 0.07
EPSS (cm)
[0.00-0.21]
Mean 上 standard deviation [rangel.
Canine Doppler outflow reference values
References
Kirberger et al.
Kirberger et al.
Brown et al.
Darke et al.
Gaber 1987
Yuill and O'Grady
Bonagura and Miller
1992
1992
1991
1993
1991
1989
Method
CWD
PWD
PWD
PWD
CWD
PWD
Aortic Vpeak (m/s)
1.49 ± 0.27
1.57 ± 0.33
1.06 ± 0.21
1.19 ± 0.24
1.19 ± 0.18
1.18 ± 0.11
1.20
[0.99-2.10]
[1.06-2.29]
[0.65-1.37]
[1.04-1.38]
[-1.70]
Aortic VTI (m)
0.146 ± 0.029
Aortic AT (s)
0.055±0.015
0.050±0.010
AorticET(s)
0.182 ± 0.029
0.205 ± 0.015
Aortic PEP (s)
0.058±0.012
AorticPEP/ET
0.22±0.06
Aorticacceleration
32.00 ± 14.00
34.00 ± 16.00
(cm/s)
PulmonicVpeak (m/s)
1.25±0.26
1.20 ±0.20
0.84±0.17
0.99 ±0.22
1.000.15
0.98±0.09
1.07
[0.60-1.91]
[0.88-1.20]
[0.34-1.29]
[0.76-1.22]
[-1.30]
Pulmonic VTI (m)
0.131 ± 0.028
Pulmonic AT (s)
0.08±0.02
0.07 ± 0.02
Pulmonic ET (s)
0.184 ± 0.028
0.219±0.018
Pulmonic PEP (s)
0.051±0.010
Pulmonic PEP/ET
0.14 ±0.03
Mcan ± standard deviation [range].
215 ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
Canine Dopplerinflowreference values
References
Yuill and O'Grady
Gaber 1987
Kirberger et al.
Darke etal.
 Bonagura and
Yamamoto and
1991
1992
1993
Miller 1989
Masuyama 1993
Mitral Epeak (m/s)
0.86±0.10
0.75 ±0.12
0.91 ± 0.15
0.65±0.18
0.76
0.56 ± 0.18
[0.70-1.08]
[0.59-1.18]
[-1.00]
Mitral Apeak (m/s)
0.63±0.13
0.43 ± 0.13
0.49
0.44 ± 0.11
[0.33-0.93]
[-0.75]
Mitral Epeaw/Apeak
1.48 ± 0.31
1.55 ± 0.36
1.30 ± 0.30
[1.04-2.42]
Mitral VTI (m)
0.094±0.032
Tricuspid Epeak (m/s)
0.69± 0.08
0.56 ± 0.16
0.86±0.20
0.57±0.15
0.60
[0.52-0.92]
[0.49-1.31]
[-0.80]
Tricuspid Apeak (m/s)
0.58 ± 0.16
0.37+0.15
0.48
[0.33-0.94]
[-0.60]
Tricuspid Epeak/Apeak
1.60 ± 0.56
1.62 ± 0.36
[0.69-3.08]
Systolic timeintervalreferencevalues(canine and feline)
References
Boon et al. 1983
Atkins and Snyder 1992
Atkins and Snyder 1992
Species
Canine
Canine
Feline
HR (/min)
98± 24
124±23
226 ±25
LVET (s)
0.178±0.017
0.159 ± 0.015
0.116±0.019
PEP (s)
0.057± 0.018
0.054±0.007
0.046 ±0.005
PEP/LVET
0.32 ± 0.11
0.24±0.05
0.40 ±0.05
Vcf (/s)
2.21 ± 0.40
2.48 ± 0.50
4.00 ± 0.90
REFERENCES
Brown DJ, Knight DH, King RR (1991) Use of pulsed-wave
 Doppler echocardiography to determine aortic and pul-
monary velocity and flow variables in clinically normal
Allen DG (1982) Echocardiographic study of the anesthe-
dogs.Am J Vet Res 52:543-550.
tized cat.Can J Comp Med 46:115-122.
Brown DJ, Rush JE, MacGregor J, Ross IN, Brewer B, Rand
Allen DG, Downey RS (1983) Echocardiographic assessment
W (2003) M-mode echocardiographic ratio indices in
of cats anesthetized with xylazinc-sodium pentobarbital.
normal dogs, cats, and horses: A novel quantitative
Can J Comp Med 47:281-283.
method. J Vet Intern Med 17:653-662.
Atkins CE, Snyder PS (1992) Systolic time intervals and their
Calvert CA, Brown J (1986) Use of M-mode echocardiogra-
derivatives for evaluation of cardiac function. J Vet Intern
phy in the diagnosis of congestive cardiomyopathy in
Med6:55-63
Doberman pinschers. J Am Vet Med Assoc 189:293-297.
Baade H, Schober K, Oechtering G (2002) Echocardiographic
Cornell CC, Kittleson MD, Della Torre P, et al. (2004)
reference values in West Highland White Terriers with
Allometric scaling of M-mode variables in normal adult
special regard to right heart function. Tierarztl Prax
dogs. J Vet Intern Med 18:311-321.
30:172-179.
Crippa L, Ferro E, Melloni E, Brambilla P, Cavalleti E (1992)
Bayon A,Fernandez del Palacio MJ, Montes AM, Gutierrez
 Echocardiographic parameters and indices in the normal
Panizo C (1994) M-mode echocardiography study in
beagle dog. Lab Anim 26:190-195.
growing Spanish mastiffs. J Small Anim Pract 35:473-
 Darke PGG, Fuentes VL, Champion SR (1993) Doppler echo-
479.
cardiography in canine congestive cardiomyopathy. In:
Bonagura JD, Miller MW (1989) Veterinary echocardiogra-
11th ACVIM Forun, pp 531-534.
phy.Am J Cardiovasc Ultrasound Allied Tech 6:229-264.
de Madron E (1983) M-mode echocardiography in the dog
Boon J, Wingfield WE, Miller CW (1983) Echocardiographic
(L'echocardiographic cn mode M chez le chien normal) 76:
indices in the normal dog.Vet Radiol 24:214-221.
EcoleNationaleVeterinaire d'Alfort.
216 HEART
Della Torre PK, Kirby AC, Church DB, Malik R (2000)
Moise NS, Dietze AE, Mezza LE, Strickland D, Erb HN,
Echocardiographic measurements in greyhounds, whip-
Edwards NJ (1986) Echocardiography, electrocardiogra-
phy, and radiography of cats with dilatation cardiomyop-
pets, and Italian greyhounds: Dogs with similar conforma-
athy,hyperrophiccardiomyopathy,and hyperthyroidism.
tion but different size.Aust VetJ 78:49-55.
Fox PR, Bond BR,Peterson ME (1985) Echocardiographic
Ann J Vet Res 47:1476-1486.
reference values in healthy cats sedated with ketamine
Morrison SA,Moise NS, Scarlett J, Mohammed H, Yeager
AE (1992) Effect of breed and body weight on echocardio-
hydrochloride.Am J Vet Res 46:1479-1484.
Gaber C (1987) Normal pulsed Doppler flow velocitics in
graphic values in four breeds of dogs of differing somato-
adult dogs. In: 5th ACVIM Forum, p 923.
type. J Vet Intern Med 6:220-224.
Page A, Edmunds G, Atwell RB (1993) Echocardiographic
Goncalves AC,Orton EC,Boon JA,Salman MD (2002) Linear,
logarithmic, and polynomial models of M-mode echocar-
values in the greyhound.Aust Vet J 70:361-364.
diographic measurements in dogs. Am J Vet Res 63:994-
Pipers FS, Reef V, Hamlin RL (1979) Echocardiography in the
domestic cat.Am JVet Res 40:882-886.
999.
Sisson D, Schacffer D (1991) Changes in linear dimensions
GoodingJP,Robinson WF,MewsGC(1986)Echocardiographic
in clinically
of the heart, relative to body weight, as measured by M-
assessment of left ventricular dimensions
normal English cocker spaniels. Am J Vet Res 47:296-
mode echocardiography in growing dogs. Am J Vet Res
300.
52:1591-1596.
Jacobs G, Knight DH (1985) M-mode echocardiographic
Sisson DD, Knight DH, Helinski C, et al. (1991) Plasma
measurements in nonanesthetized healthy cats: Effects of
taurine concentrations and M-mode echocardiographic
body weight,heart rate,and other variables.AmJVet Res
measures in healthy cats and in cats with dilated cardio-
46:1705-1711.
myopathy.JVetIntern Med5:232-238.
Kirberger RM, Bland-van den Berg P, Grimbeek RJ (1992)
Snyder PS, Sato T, Atkins CE (1995) A comparison of echo-
cardiographic indices of the nonracing healthy greyhound
Doppler echocardiography in the normal dog: Part I1.
Factors influencing blood flow velocities and a compari-
toreference values from other breeds.Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 36:387-392.
son betwen left and right heart blood flow.Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 33:380-386.
Yamamoto K, Masuyama TJT (1993) Effects of hearl rate on
the left ventricular filling dynamics: Assessment from
Koch J, Pedersen HD, Jensen AL, Flagstad A (1996) M-mode
echocardiographic diagnosis of dilated cardiomyopathy in
simultaneous recordings of pulsed Dopplcr transmitral
giant breed dogs. J Vet Med 43:297-304.
flow velocity pattern and haemodynamic variables.
Maschiro I, Nelson RR, Cohn JN, Franciosa JA (1976)
Cardiovasc Res 27:935-941.
Ventricular dimensions measured noninvasively by echo-
Yuill CDM, O'Grady MR (1991) Doppler-derived velocity of
cardiography in the awake dog. J App Physiol 41:953-
blood flow across the cardiac valves in the normal dog.
Can J Vet Res 55:185-192.
959.
CHAPTER SIX
LIVER
Marc-André d'Anjou
must be constantly adjusted during the exam in order
PREPARATION AND
to optimize ultrasonographic penetration and image
SCANNING TECHNIQUE
quality (Figure 6.2).
Hair clipping of animals should cover the entire cranial
abdomen and ideally the last one or two intercostal
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC
spaces, particularly in deep-chested dogs or if micro-
hepatica is suspected. Animals can be scanned in
ANATOMYOFTHE
dorsal, left, or right recumbency after acoustic gel
NORMAL LIVER
application.The ability tovisualize the liver in small
animals is related to body conformation, liver size,
Parenchyma and Size
and overlying gastrointestinal content. In small dogs
and cats, the liver can usually be entirely scanned
In dogs and cats, the liver is composed of four lobes,
in transverse and longitudinal planes by means of a
four sublobes, and two processcs: left lobe (lateral and
subcostal approach (Figure 6.1), as long as the stomach
medial), quadrate lobe, right lobe (lateral and medial),
is not overly distended with ingesta or gas. The trans-
and caudate lobe (caudate and papillary processes)
verse colon can also limit hepatic visibility, particu-
(Evans 1993a; Hudson and Hamilton 1993), which
larly if filled with gas or feces, or if the liver is small.
cannot be easily distinguished unless separatcd by
 In thcsc instances, an intercostal approach can provide
peritoneal effusion (Figure 6.3).
a useful alternative. In large deep-chested dogs, the
The left lobe forms a third to nearly a half of the
liver is complctely hidden by the rib cage, routinely
entire liver mass and contacts the left portion of the
requiring the use of an intercostal approach to reach
gallbladder (GB). The quadrate lobe is relatively central
all parts of the liver. In these dogs, and especially if
and partially encircles the GB. The right portion of the
the liver is atrophied,scveral other structures,such as
GBis in contact with theright mediallobe.The caudate
the spleen, can move under the costal arch and should
process of the caudate lobe is the most caudal exten-
not be confused for a portion of the liver. In obese
sion of the liver, on the right side, and extends to the
animals, the presence of a large amount of falciform
level of the right kidney. The hepatic and portal veins
fat can also reduce hepatic visibility by increasing the
(PVs) of each of these hepatic lobe divisions are rela-
distance between the sonographic probe and the organ
tively constant in dogs and can represent useful ultra-
sonographic landmarks (Carlisle et al. 1995).
A large part of the liver is beneath the costal arch,
scattering.
The appropriate probe must be chosen based on the
just cranial to the stomach, in dogs and cats. Its cranial
size and depth of the liver. In small or medium-sized
margin lies against the diaphragm and lung interface.
dogs and cats, a medium-frequency probe (5 MHz and
The diaphragm appears as a curved hyperechoic line,
higher) can be used unless the liver is markedly
enlarged, whereas a probe with more penetration
(Figure 6.4).
(5MHz and lower) is required in larger dogs. Sectorial
Caudally,the liver is often in contact with the spleen
or convex probes are preferred over linear probes
 on the left side and with the right kidncy on the right
because of the triangular shaped scanned field of view
side at thelevel of the renal fossa of the caudatc lobe.
that enables larger portions of the liver to be imaged.
The hepatic volume is difficult to evaluate objectively
A smaller footprint also enables most parts of the liver
in cats and dogs, mainly because of the variability
to be rcached through limited acoustic windows such
in body conformation. As with radiography, thc
as intercostal spaces. Gain settings and focal zones
costal arch and location of the stomach can help in
217
218LIVER
GB
Duodenum
iV
A
stomach
B
Diaphragm
C
Cranial
Gastric
body
stric
fundus
GB
Diaphragm
Figure 6.1. Ultrasonographic approach and anatomy of the normal liver. llustration of the scanning technique using a
subcostal approach with a dog or a cat in dorsal recumbency.The ultrasound probe must be moved in order to cover the
entire liver, sequentially in sagittal (A-C) and transversc (D-F) planes. The additional use of oblique planes, as well as an
intercostal approach, can be necessary in some patients. A-C: Using a longitudinal plane in a dog, the probe is sequentially
moved from the right (A) to the left (C) of the liver (L).The intimate relation betwcen the duodenum-stomach and the liver
appear as round, anechoic structures on cross section. The gallbladder (GB), located to the right of the midline, is a useful
landmark. D-F: By using a transverse plane, the liver is also entirely scanned, from its cranioventral portion (D) to its cau-
dodorsal portion (F). The gallbladder is seen on the right in the midportion of the liver (E). Branching portal veins (PV) with
hyperechoic boundaries are also recognized.
subjectively evaluatingliver size,taking into account
breeds and in cats,the liver normally extends to the
bodyconformation.Thecaudalextensionof thehepatic
costal arch. The caudal tips of the hepatic lobes nor-
lobes can be compared with the location of the last pair
mally arepointed.With severe hepatomegaly,these
of ribs (Figure 6.5A). In deep-chested dogs, the liver
tips are rounded and can extend beyond the right
does not usually reach the costal arch, and the stomach
kidney and/or reach the left kidney, depending on the
is often cranially locatcd. Conversely, in small dog
symmetry of the enlargement (Figure 6.5B)
liver
stomach
ncreas
pleen
Right
Left
Right
Left
Duodenum
Gastric
body
Figure 6.1.Continued
Ventral
Cranial
Diaphragm interface
Figure 6.2.Gain setting. Because of the attenuation of the ultrasound beam as it travels through soft tissues, the amplifica-
tion of echoes received must be adjusted according to tissue type and depth. This modulation can be made using time-gain
with (A) excessive near gain and insufficient far gain, (B) well-adjusted ncar and far gains, and (C) insufficient near gain and
excessive far gain.
219
220 LIVER
The falciform ligament filled with a variable amount
isoechoic or hyperechoic to the liver and presents a
of fat is ventral to thelivcr and protrudes between the
coarse echotexture relative to the liver. However, clini-
right and left portions, dorsal to the xiphoid process
 cally obese cats may have a liver that is hyperechoic to
(Figure 6.6). This poorly defined structure is usually
the falciform fat (Nicoll et al. 1998). The normal hepatic
parenchyma is uniformly hypoechoic, with a coarser
echotexture, when compared with the spleen. Its echo-
genicity relative to the renal cortices is more variable,
although usually hyperechoic (Figure 6.7).
RM
Biliary System
The biliary system is relatively similar in dogs and
cats. The GB, occasionally bilobed in cats (Figurc 6.8),
represents the bile reservoir and is an anechoic
teardrop-shaped structure with a conical extension:
the cystic duct. The GB can vary markedly in size
among animals and becomes enlarged in anorexic
animals.Therefore,itsvolume alone cannot be used as
a reliable sign of biliary obstruction. The wall of the
normal GB is thin and smooth, measuring less than
Figure 6.3.Effusion separating hepatic lobes.Longitudinal
1 mm thick in cats (Hittmair et al. 2001) and less than
oblique image of the right portion of the liver with three
2-3 mm in dogs (Spaulding 2003). Biliary sludge can
distinct separate lobes well outlined by peritoneal effusion
accumulate in normal GB and is usually considered
(). C, caudate lobe; RL, right lateral; and RM, right medial.
nonsignificant, particularly in dogs (Bromel et al. 1998)
Cranial
GB
GB
Pseudo-GB
oragh
interface
image
Pseudo-liver
Figure 6.4.Mirror image of liver and gallbladder. Sagittal ultrasonographic and schematic images of a mirror artifact com-
monly visualized at the lung-diaphragm interface.Hepatic structures including the gallbladder (GB) are artifactually reflected
waves (black arrows along path A) back to the liver and the gallbladder. This relatively intense beam interacts again with
path (gray arrows). Because of the increased travel time, the spatial localization of these multireflected echoes appears deeper
mirror image is added to the accurately localized structures (path B). Care must be taken not to confuse a mirror image with
a thoracic pathology.
221ATLASOF SMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
Cranial
Rib
Live
Spleen
二
Figure 6.5. Evaluation of liver size. A: Normal liver. Left parasagittal image of the cranial abdomcn in a normal small-breed
dog with the caudal tip of the liver (L and arrowheads) exlending slightly beyond the last rib. Acoustic shadowing (*) is noted
deep to this hyperattenuating structure. The tip of the liver appcars smooth and pointy. B: Hepatomegaly. On this sagittal
image of the liver obtained in the right cranial abdomen of a dog,a liver lobe (arrows) extends caudal to the right kidney
(RK) and has a rounded tip consistent with enlargement. Passive hepatic congestion was diagnosed, and peritoneal effusion
(*) was also detected.
Rightcranial
GB
Figure 6.6.Falciform ligament. On these sagittal oblique ultrasonographic and corresponding schematic images of the liver,
the falciform fat appears as a triangular hyperechoic structure with a coarse echotexture protruding between the right and
recumbency). The arrow points to the lung-diaphragm interface. LL, left liver; and RL, right liver.
(Figure 6.9). The sludge is then mobile, sometimes
must be differentiated from a focal hyperechoic hepatic
giving the impression of an aggregate mimicking a
lesion.
soft-tissue mass. However, the movement of the echo-
The intrahepatic biliary tree, composed of biliary
genic substance should respond to gravity after the
canaliculi and largerbiliary ducts, is not seen in normal
animal is repositioned. Additionally, because of the 
patients. The common bilc duct (CBD), which repre-
relativelylow attenuation of the ultrasound beam
sents the continuation of theconnectingGB cysticduct
through the bile, acoustic enhancement is commonly
and biliary ducts,can be seen morc easily in normal
observed beyond the GB (Figure 6.9). This artifact
 cats than in normal dogs. The CBD can be visualized
222LIVER
Rightcranial
Figure 6.7. Liver, spleen, and kidney relative echogenicities and echotextures. A: Sagittal image obtained in the left cranial
abdomen of a normal dog.The liver (l.) is in contact with the spleen (S), and is relatively hypoechoic and more granular in
echotexture. B: Sagittal image obtained in the right cranial abdomen of a normal dog. The liver (L) appears relatively isoechoic
to the cortex of the right kidney (RK). Acoustic shadowing (arrow) is caused by one of the last ribs.
Crania
Figure 6.9.Biliary sludge. Longitudinal image of the right-
central portion of the liver of a normal dog with the GB and
cystic duct (CD) containing poorly defined echogenic mate-
Figure 6.8. Bilobed gallbladder in a cat. On this transverse
rial consistent with biliary sludge.The mobility of thissludge
imagc obtained in the right-central portion of the liver of a
was confirmed by repositioning the animal during the exam.
normal cat,the gallbladderispartially dividedinto two com
FF,falciform fat; L,liver; and St, stomach
partments (*). This represents an incidental finding in cats.
Far acoustic enhancement is noted in the liver dorsal to these
fluid-filled cavities (arrows).
HepaticVasculature
The afferent vascular flow to the liver is dual, with a
between the proximal duodenum (ventrally) and the
largcr proportion coming from the PV (80%) and the
PV (dorsally) (Figure 6.10). It can be up to 3mm wide
rest coming from thc hcpatic arteries (Evans 1993a)
in normal dogs (Zeman et al. 1981) and 4mm wide in
(Figure 6.11). The efferent flow follows thc hepatic
normal cats (Léveillé et al. 1996). It parallels the PV
veins into the caudal vena cava (CVC). This particular
over a few centimeters before entering into the duode-
vascular pattern is divided into all hepatic lobes and
num through the major duodenal papilla.
can aid in distinguishing these lobes. When using
223ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
common bileduct
Pyloricantrum
majorduodenal
minor
duodenai
papilla
Pancreas
accessory
poncreoticduct
CVC
Figure 6.10. Scanning technique for the common bile duct in a cat. Schematic representation of the regional anatomy and
bile dluct. The probe is then rotated to obtain a transverse plane (B). The common bile duct (2mm wide) is found just ventral
to the portal vein (PV) and dorsal to the proximal duodenum (D). This duct can sometimes be followed to the level of the
major duodenal papilla, at the same level as the pancreatic duct termination. CVC, caudal vena cava; and GB, gallbladder.
B-mode imaging, only the hepatic and PVs (larger
6.12B).Arterial flow,also directed from the center to
than the arteries) can be seen as anechoic, branching,
the periphery, can also demonstrate a red signal,
smoothly tapering tubular structures. The walls of the
 depending on the size of the arteries and the Dopplcr
PVs appear hyperechoic, regardless of the orientation
settings, such as gain and filtration threshold.
of the ultrasonographic beam, facilitating their identi-
fication (Figure 6.12). However, the walls of the hepatic.
ExtrahepaticPortalVasculature
veins can also appear hyperechoic when the ultraso-
nographic beam is directed perpendicularly (see Figure
The extrahepatic portion of the PV is relatively central
in the abdomen, ventral to the CVC, and ventral and
6.71).
The visibility of the largcr and smaller branches of
to the right of the aorta (Figure 6.13). The main PV is
these veins is influenced by patient size, vascular
more tortuous than the CVC and aorta, and curves
luminal diameler, portal flow, pressure in the CVC,
slightly to the right side before entering the liver.
hepatic parenchymal echogenicity, and image quality
When measured at the level of the porta hepatis, its
and resolution. When measured at the same depth, thc
luminal diameter varies between 3.4 and 5.0mm in
hepatic and portal branches should be relatively sym-
normal cats and between 3.3 and 10.5mm in normal
metrical in diameter (Figure 6.12B).
dogs. When comparing the maximal luminal diameter
The use of color Doppler facilitates the identification
of thePV and the aorta,PV-aorta ratios of 0.71-1.25
and distinction of hepatic vessels. When using stan-
are normally cxpected in these two species(d'Anjou
dard color-map settings, portal flow directed from the
et al. 2004).
center to the periphery appears as a red signal, whereas
The main PV is formcd by the confluence of the
hepatic venous flow appears as a blue signal (Figure
cranial and caudal mcscnteric veins and splenic vein,
224LIVER
and therefore drains most abdominal organs (Evans
Right
Left
1993b) (Figure 6.11). It also receives a smaller tributary.
the gastroduodenal vein, only a few centimeters caudal
to the hepatic entrance. The gastroduodenal vein con-
nects to the right-ventral aspect of the PV after receiv-
ing the pancreaticoduodenal and gastroepiploic veins.
 A few centimeters more caudally, the main PV receives
the splenic vein on the left side, which follows the left
limb of the pancreas after receiving the left gastric
 vein. The cranial mesenteric vein receiving all jejunal
branches represents the caudal extension of the main
LG
s pn rns o ro u a e a
vein another few centimeters caudal to the splenic
 vein. These portal tributaries enlarge as they approach
PD
Ao
the main PV, and the flow of all is directed toward the
CVC
liver (hepatopetal flow). The portal flow contained in
CaM
 these tributaries, as well as in the main PV, is normally
CrM
parabolic and relatively constant, giving a characteris-
tic spectral Doppler pattern (Figure 6.14). Portal flow
mean velocity can be measured with spectral Doppler,
after the use of an insonation angle correction of less
than 60°. Portal flow mean velocity can be calculated
Figure 6.11. Portal vascular system. Schematic illustration
by the ultrasound system by using the uniform
of the hepatic vasculature and extrahepatic portal system of
 insonation technique, which requires the application
dogs and cats, as seen from a ventral approach. The liver
of a sample gate volume that fills the entire width of
receives its vascular supply through the portal vein (PV) and
the main PV. Alternatively, a sample gate volume
 hepatic arteries (HA). The portal vein receives several smaller
that fills approximately half of the vessel lumen placed
veins draining most abdominal viscera. The relationship
in its center can be used to obtain maximal flow veloc-
with the caudal vena cava (CVC) and aorta (Ao) is also illus-
ity. Because of the parabolic behavior of the portal
trated. HV, hepatic veins. Veins of the portal system: CaM,
flow, mean portal flow velocity can then be estimated
caudal mesenteric; CrM, cranial mesenteric; GD, gastroduo-
denal; GE, gastroepiploic; Jej, jejunal; LG, left gastric, PD,
by multiplying this result by 0.57. Mean portal flow
 pancreaticoduodenal; and S, splenic.
velocities have been reported to vary between 15 ± 3
Figure 6.12. Hepatic vasculature. Portal veins can be differentiated from hepatic veins because of the consistent hyperecho-
 genicity of their walls (arrows), regardless of the ultrasound-beam orientation. With conventional color Doppler, portal
venous flow appears as a red signal directed toward the transducer, compared with a blue signal for the hepatic veins that
drain in the caudal vena cava (i.e., away from thc transducer). Smaller hepatic arteries are not normally seen.
Right
Left
Right
PV
CVC
Ao
B
CVC
PV
Ao
Right
Left
Cranial
GB
CVC
PV
Ao
A0
0.39cm
0.42cm
 ventral schematic image (B) of the hepatic vasculature showing the relationship between the portal vein (PV), caudal vena
 cava (CVC), and aorta (Ao). On transverse (C) and longitudinal (D) ultrasonographic images obtained at the porta hepatis,
these three vessels can usually be well visualized in normal dogs and cats, and should be similar in size. When measured at
the caudal margin of the liver, the portal vein should not be less than 65% of the diameter of the aorta. GB, gallbladder.
Computed tomographic image courtesy of Matthew Winter, University of Florida.
Cranial
Figure 6.14. Spectral Doppler pattern of the portal flow.
With spectral Doppler, the flow within the portal vein (PV)
 can be assessed after placing the sample-volume gate in the
 center of the vascular lumen and correcting for the angle of 
 flow direction. The flow spectrum observed in this normal dog
is broad and relatively linear, with some variations occurring
because of movement of the sample volume during respira-
tion in regard to the center of the vessel, where maximal veloc-
ity is reached. Mean flow velocity is calculated by multiplying
the maximal velocity (25cm/s) by a factor of 0.57, which
equals 14.3cm/s. The angle of sample volume correction
was 50%.
225
226 LIVER
and 18 ± 8cm/s in normal dogs and 10-18cm/s in
Diffuse HepaticParenchymal Disorders
normal cats (Nyland and Fisher 1990; Lamb and
Diffuse hepatic disorders can be difficult to differenti-
Mahoney 1994; Lamb 1998; d'Anjou et al. 2004).
ate from poorly defined multifocal diseases. Typically,
However, these measurements are susceptible to inac-
these disorders affect all lobes,although not always
curate estimations,especially with higher correction
symmetrically. The parenchymal echogenicity can be
angles (more than 60°), and must therefore be used
increased, reduced, or unaffected. These disorders can
cautiously.
also affect the parenchymal uniformity and distort the
hepatic margin. The evaluation of the liver contour is
facilitated by thc presence of peritonealeffusion (Figure
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC
6.3). With the cxccption of congenital portal vascular
FEATURES OF HEPATIC
anomalies such as portosystcmic shunting, chronic
DISORDERS
hepatitis,and cirrhosis,most disorders tend tobe asso-
ciated with symmetrical or asymmetrical hepatomeg-
Several hepatic disorders are found in dogs and cats
aly. Two or more hepatic disorders, such as hepatitis,
and cause focal, multifocal, or diffuse parenchymal
vacuolar hepalopathy, or nodular hyperplasia, can be
alterations.The evaluation of thelivermust include
found in the same patient, complicating the ultrasono-
sevcral parameters: liver size and contour, parenchy-
 graphic diagnosis and justifying fine-needle aspiration
 mal echogenicity, and ultrasound-beam attenuation,
 or biopsy in most cases. Table 6.1 lists the typical diag-
as well as the distribution of abnormalities. Although
nostic differential for diffuse changes in hepatic paren-
some of these disorders have characteristic ultrasono-
chymal echogenicity, and Table 6.2 lists the causes of
graphic features, most changes are not pathognomonic
diffuse or focal/asymmetrical hepatomegaly.
of one particular process. A more definite diagnosis is
Vacuolar Hepatopathies and Nodular Hyperplasia
usually based on the combination of clinical presenta-
tion, blood-test results, ultrasonographic findings, and
Hepatic lipidosis and steroid hepatopathies are
cytological or histopathologic results.
common. Misccllaneous vacuolar hepatopathies are
Table6.1.
Diagnostic differentials for diffuse alterations in hepatic parenchymal echogenicity
Diffuse Hyperechogenicity
Diffuse Hypoechogenicity
Mixed Echogenicity
Steroid hepatopathy
Passive congestion
Steroid hepatopathy associated with benign
Lipidosis
Acute hepatitis or cholangiohepatitis
hyperplasia,or other combinations of processes
Other vacuolar hepatopathies
Lymphoma
Hepatitis
Chronic hepatitis
Leukemia
Lymphoma
Fibrosis
Histiocytic neoplasms
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Cirrhosis
Amyloidosis
Metastasis
Lymphoma
Necrosis
Mast cell tumor
Amyloidosis
Table 6.2.
Diagnostic differentials for alterations in hepatic volume
Diffuse Hepatomegaly
FocalorAsymmetricalHepatomegaly
Small Liver
Steroid hepatopathy
Primary or metastaticneoplasia
Congenital portosystemic
Lipidosis
Abscess
shunting
Hepatitis or cholangiohepatitis
Cyst(s)
Microvascular dysplasia or
Passive congestion
Granuloma
primary portal vein hypoplasia
Round-cell neoplasia:lymphoma,malignant
Thrombosis
Cirrhosis
histiocytosis, and mast cells
Lobar torsion
Fibrosis
Massive hepatocellular carcinoma or
Hematoma
Severe hypovolemia
metastases
Amyloidosis
227ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
often present with other primary disorders in dogs
appear heterogeneous or contain hypoechoic or hyper-
(Wang et al. 2004). These hepatopathies are usually
echoic nodular foci, possibly because of concurrent
associated with a diffuse increase in parenchymal
nodular hyperplasia (Figure 6.17).
echogenicity and hepatomegaly (Nyland and Park
1983; Biller 1992) (Figures 6.15-6.17). The parenchyma
Hepatitis,Cholangiohepatitis,and Cirrhosis
can also appear hyperattenuating. i.e., result in exces-
sive sound-beam attenuation (Figures 6.16 and 6.17).
 Diffuse hepatic inflammatory processes can show vari-
Consequently, the far gain must be increased in many
able ultrasonographic features. In cats, cholangiohepa-
of these patients to be able to evaluate the deepest por-
titis is most commonly associated with a decrease in
tions of theliver.Additionally,theparenchyma can
parenchymal echogenicity and an increased visibility
of the portal vasculature (Newell et al. 1998) (Figure
6.18). Additionally, this process is often associated
With biliary anomalies, such as biliary sludge, choleli-
thiasis, or wall thickening. In dogs, acute hepatitis also
tends to cause diffuse liver hypoechogenicity (Biller
1992), as seen with leptospirosis (Figure 6.19).
Chronic hepatitis, on the other hand, tends to be
associated with fibrosis, which is typically associated
with an increased echogenicity (Biller 1992). The pres-
ence of chronic active inflammation, consisting of a
mixture of inflammatory cells, edema, fibrosis, nccro-
sis, as well as regenerative nodules (hyperplasia) can
cause a markedly heterogeneous liver with variable
echogenicity (Figure 6.20). Although cirrhosis classi-
cally causes the liver to appear small, hyperechoic, and
irregular in contour (Biller 1992) (Figure 6.21), its
Figure 6.15. Hyperechoic liver. Dual images of the liver
and spleen of a dog that were obtained with identical set-
 appearance can vary and sometimes mimic neoplasia.
tings (depth, gain, and focus), allowing hepatic and splenic
However, chronic hepatitis and its ultimate outcome,
parenchymal echogenicities to be compared. Hepatic lipido-
cirrhosis, usually do not cause hepatic enlargement,
sis that causcd a diffusely hyperechoic liver, isoechoic to the
as opposed to the effect of massive neoplastic
spleen, was diagnosed.
infiltration.
Crania
Right
GB
B
genicity and ultrasonographic beam hyperattcnuation.The liver (L) is markedly hyperechoic to the falciform fat (FF), at least
superficially. The echoes coming from the deepest portions of the liver were reduced and could only be partially compensated
for by increasing far gain.A small volume of peritoneal effusion (PF) is noted between liver lobes. GB, gallbladder.
228LIVER
B
Figure 6.17. Steroid hepatopathy. Longitudinal images of the left portion of the liver in a dog with pituitary-dcpcndent
less than 1cm widc, are noted in the liver in A (arrows). B. The liver contour is rounded (arrowheads) and extends beyond
the gastric fundus. In A, the deep portion of the liver is diffcult to assess because of increased ultrasound-beam attenuation.
Cranial
icterus. The liver parenchyma is diffusely hypoechoic, and the portal vein margins appear promincnt. These features are
suggestive of cholangiohepatitis in cats. B: Longitudinal imagc of thc central portion of the liver in another cat with cholan-
(FF) locatedventrally.Arrows delineate the cranial hepaticborder.
HepaticNeoplasia
Lymphoma can involve the liver without detectable
ultrasonographic changes or cause diffuse parenchy-
Although scveral primary and secondary neoplastic
 mal hypoechogenicity, hyperechogenicity, or mixed
proccsscs can affect the liver in dogs and cats, diffuse 
echogenicity,with or without hypoechoic nodules
(Whiteley et al. 1989; Lamb et al. 1991) (Figure 6.22).
caused by diffuse round-cell infiltration. Hepatomegaly
Histiocytic neoplasms are more commonly associated
is expected in most types of diffuse neoplasia, although
with hypoechoic nodules and masses, although diffuse
its magnitude can vary with the level of infiltration.
hcpatic hypoechogenicity has been reported (Cruz-
229ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
Left
HV
二
2.04cm
B
Figure 6.20. Chronic active hepatitis and nodular hyper-
plasia. A: Longitudinal image of the left portion of the liver
Figure 6.19. Canine acutc hcpatitis.A: Transvcrse oblique
(L), which appears diffusely hypoechoic, and with irregular
image of the left side of the liver in a dog with acute hepatitis
and ill-defined contours. The adjacent fat is hyperechoic.
with prominent portal veins (PV) because of diffuse paren-
Chronic active hepatitis was diagnosed on fine-needle aspi-
chymal hypoechogenicity. The main left hepatic vein (HV)
ration and ultrasound-guided biopsy. B: Transverse oblique
  d  
nence of the PV boundaries may have also been related to
diffuse parenchymal heterogeneity. Several hypoechoic
the inflammatory process.B:Leptospirosis. Ultrasonographic
coalescing nodules are found that reach up to 2cm deep,as
image of a portion of the liver in a dog with acute leptospi-
well as hyperechoic patches (*). Ultrasound-guided biopsy
rosis. The liver is diffusely hypoechoic, and its portal walls
confirmed chronic hepatitis with fibrosis and nodular hyper-
p, pe s anop se sudde ud a
plasia.FF, falciform fat.
throughout the parenchyma. These findings are common in
dogs with leptospirosis.
Miscellaneous Diffuse Hepatic Disorders
Arambulo et al. 2004) (see Figure 6.33). Conversely,
Other typcs of hepatopathies can be encountered in
mast cell infiltration of the liver tends to cause diffuse
 small animals, although less commonly. Amyloidosis,
hyperechogenicity (Sato and Solano 2004). Hepatic
primarily affecting shar-peis and Abyssinian and
carcinomas can also be diffuse, or involve multiple
Siamese cats, can cause hepatic enlargement and
lobes, with a variable ultrasonographic appearance
parenchymal ultrasonographic changes. In cats, the
that depends on the presence of necrosis, inflamma-
liver tendstobecome diffuselyheterogeneous
tion, hemorrhage, or cavitation. A mixed pattern of
with mixed hyperechoic and hypoechoic foci (Beatty
et al. 2002). Spontaneous hepatic rupture and hemo-
(Figure 6.23).
abdomen can also be caused by massive hepatic
Figure 6.21.Hepatic cirrhosis. Transverse oblique images of the right (A) and left (B) portions of the liver (L) in a dog with
chyma, irregularly deforming its contours.These contours are visualized because of the presence of a large volume of anechoic
 peritoneal effusion (PE). These findings are common in end-stage cirrhosis in dogs.
Stomach
Crania
denum
Figure 6.22. Canine lymphoma. A: Transverse oblique image of the left portion of the liver in a dog with multicentric lym-
phoma. The portal vein walls are prominent because of diffuse parenchymal hypoechogenicity. The left lateral hepatic lobe
is cnlarged (arrowheads), extending several centimeters caudal to the stomach,and its caudal tip is rounded. B: Lymphoma
images. In this other dog with lymphoma, multiple, well-defined, hypoechoic nodules (*) are notcd throughout the liver.
Image Ccourtesy of D.Penninck.
230
231ATLAS OF SMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
Figure 6.24.Hepatocutaneous syndrome.Transverse
B
image of the left central portion of the liver of a dog with
superficialnecrolytic dermatitis.Diffuselydistributed
echoic parenchyma,givingahoneycomb pattern.Histological
evaluation revealed tissue necrosis and mild inflammation.
The arrowheads delineate the rounded margins of thc liver.
ideal imaging conditions in people (Nyman et al. 2004).
The conspicuity of a focal lesion is also greatly influ-
enced by its imaging characteristics.Hence, for a given
size, an anechoic cyst is more likely to be detected than
Stomach
a soft-tissue nodule of echogenicity similar to one of
adjacent norinal parenchyma. Although many differ-
Figure 6.23.Diffuse hepatic carcinomas.A:Hepatic ade-
ent types of focal lesions can be detected with ultraso-
nocarcinoma in a cat. The liver is moderately enlarged and
nography, the appearance of several of these processes
mildly inhomogeneous, with several ill-defined hypoechoic
is quite variable, resulting in limited diagnostic speci-
areas.The neoplastic infiltration deforms the vasculature
ficity. The advances in contrast harmonic ultrasonog-
(arrowheads). Image courtesy of D. Penninck. B: Hepato-
raphy have helped to increase the overall diagnostic
cellular carcinoma in a dog. Longitudinal image of the left
accuracy and may prove to be useful in clinical setings
lateral hepatic lobe in a dog with diffuse hepatocellular car-
(Nyman et al. 2004; O'Brien et al. 2004). This topic,
cinoma.This lobe extending caudal to the stomach (arrows)
though, is beyond the scope of this chapter.
Table 6.3 lists the diagnostic differential for focal
toneal effusion is also evident ventrally (PE).
hepatic lesions, based on their typical appearance.
Although some trends in ultrasonographic appearance
amyloidosis. In dogs with hepatocutaneous syndrome
have been reported for some of these processes, a
(superficial necrolytic dermatitis), the liver can become
definitive diagnosis usually requires fine-needle
highly hyperechoic with diffusely distributed 0.5- to
aspiration or biopsy.
1.5-cm-wide hypoechoic regions, producing a honey-
comb pattern (Nyland et al. 1996) (Figure 6.24).
Benign Hyperplasia and Neoplasia
Benign nodular hyperplasia is common, particularly
Focal HepaticParenchymalDisorders
in dogs, and accounts for many focal hepatic lesions
The improvement in ultrasound equipment technol-
identified with ultrasonography. Although these
ogy has increased the sensitivity of ultrasonography in
regenerative nodules can vary in echogenicity and
detecting focal hepatic lesions. It has been suggested
 size, they tend to appear as hypoechoic nodules mca-
that hepatomas exceeding 5mm can be detected in
 suring less than 5-15 mm wide (Stonewater et al. 1990;
232 LIVER
Table6.3.
Diagnostic differentials for focal hepatic lesions with ultrasonography
Anechoic
Hypoechoic
Hyperechoic
Mixed Echogenicity
Cyst
Nodular hyperplasia
Nodular hyperplasia
Nodular hyperplasia
Cystic tumor
Metastasis
Primary neoplasia
Primary neoplasia
Necrosis
Lymphoma
Metastasis
Metastasis
Abscess
Primary hepatic neoplasia
Mineralization or cholelithiasis
Abscess
Hematoma
Abscess
Abscess
Hematoma
Necrosis
Fat or myelolipoma
Hematoma
Granuloma
Complexcyst
Gas
Metallic clip
B
Stomach
0.58cm
1.02cm
Figure 6.25.
5.Nodular hyperplasia. Longitudinal images of the left portion of the livcr (L) in two dogs with a variable appear-
ance of regenerative nodules.A: Several poorly defined hypoechoic foci, less than 1cm wide are noted. B: Conversely, the
regenerative nodule is hypcrcchoic and well defined. FF, falciform fat.
O'Brien et al. 2004) (Figure 6.25). As for most other
appearances (Nyland and Park 1983; Whiteley et al.
types of focal lesions, their margin can be well circum-
1989; O'Brien et al. 2004) (Figures 6.27-6.31 and 6.36-
scribed or poorly defined. Benign hepatic adenomas
6.38). Focal hypoechoic lesions with a hyperechoic
or hcpatomas can appear as a focal mass of variable
center, also termed target lesions,are more commonly
size and usually hyperechoic (O'Brien et al. 2004)
associated with metastasis (Figure 6.29 and 6.32),
(Figure 6.26).
sia, can cause a similar pattern (Cuccovillo and Lamb
2002; O'Brien et al. 2004). It has been reported that the
Malignant Neoplasia
finding of at least one target lesion in the liver or spleen
The liver is a common target for metastasis, mainly
had a positive predictive value of 74% for malignancy
through the portal system, which drains most abdomi-
in small animals (Cuccovillo and Lamb 2002).
nal structures. Primary hepatic neoplasms such as
Histiocytic neoplasms and lymphoma can demon-
hepatocellular carcinomas can also be seen as focal
strate similar imaging characteristics. Although find-
or multifocal masses, although less frequently
ythan
metastasis.
.The variable tissue characteristics
of
nodules or masses, hypoechoic or mixed in echo-
primary and metastatic neoplastic processes, includ-
genicity, are commonly found with thcse processes
ing tissue density, vascular pattern, necrosis, liquefac-
(Cruz-Arambulo et al.2
2002;Ramirez et al. 2002)
tion, and calcification, cause variable ultrasonographic
(Figures 6.33 and 6.34). Significant hepatic lymphadc-
233ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
B
Right
Left
CVC
Ao
7.11cm
(arrowheads), measuring at least 7 cm wide, is in the right portion of the liver and in contact with the gallbladder (GB), portal
vein (PV), and caudal vena cava (CVC), and close to the aorta (Ao). The extent of this mass and the lack of vascular invasion
could not be confirmed with the ultrasonographic exam and required computed tomography. C and D: Adenoma or hepa-
toma. Longitudinal images of two separate hypcrcchoic masscs found in the liver of a clinically normal dog. The smaller
 a o  s (sos ') s nr  pe  on un e ssd (se ) sm
ings on fine-needle aspiration were consistent with benign liver tumors (adenoma or hepatoma).
nopathy is also common with these neoplasms of
cystadenomas and cystadenocarcinomas,commonly
round-cell origin and their presence often helps in
demonstrating a multilocular pattern and a change in
diagnosing these processes.
tissue appearance around the anechoic cavitations
(Nyland and Park 1999) (Figures 6.36 and 6.37).
Although more common in cats, cystic or cavitary
CavitaryLesions
tumors can also bc sccn in dogs (Figure 6.38).
Hepatic and biliary cysts are sometimes identified in
Hepatic absccsscs, which are uncommon in dogs
dogs and cats and appear as well circumscribed,
and cats, tend to appear as round to oval, rcgular or
regular or irregular, anechoic foci, typically associated
irregular, hypoechoic lesions that are often cavitated
with far-enhancement arlifact (Nyland and Park 1983)
(Schwarz et al. 1998). Enhancement artifact, abdominal
(Figure 6.35). In these benign cysts, the adjacent paren-
effusion, regional lymphadenopathy, and hypere-
chyma is usually normal. These cavitary lesions inust
choic perihepatic fat are commonly seen in affected
be differentiated from cystic tumors,such as biliary
animals (Figure 6.39A). Abscesses can also show pus
7.82c
Liver
3.842cm
Figure 6.27. Primary liver carcinomas. A: Hepatocellular carcinoma in a dog. Transverse image obtained in the right cranial
the architecture of a liver lobe. A small amount of fluid is noted around the mass. PE, peritoneal effusion. B: Hepatic adeno-
carcinoma and metastasis in a dog. A spherical, hyperechoic mass (4.6cm) is deforming the contour of a liver lobe and sur-
rounded by mildly echogenic peritoneal effusion (PE). Another small, hypoechoic nodule (1.6cm) in the same lobe is
associated with acoustic enhancement in the far field (arrowheads). C: Neuroendocrine carcinoma in a dog.Multiple mildly
hyperechoic masses (2.2-3.1cm) demonstrating a hypoechoic halo were found in the liver of this dog, with a histological
diagnosis of neuroendocrine carcinoma. GB, gallbladder. Image courtesy of D. Penninck.D: Biliary carcinoma in a cat.
Transverse image of the liver in a cat with icteria. A lobulated, mildly hyperechoic,inhomogencous mass (arrows and cursors)
is displacing the gallbladder (Ga) ventrally. Irregular, ancchoic,tubular structures (arrowheads) are also noted throughout
the liver,consistent with dilated intrahepatic biliary ducts.
Cranial
Figure6.28.
235ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
sedimentation in the central cavitations or appear as
can mimic abscesses, although these lesions typically
complex or more echogenic masses (Figure 6.39B).
show a thinner, more well-defined rim. Parasitic cysts
Hyperechoic foci with reverberation consistent with
occurringwithliverflukes or hydatid disease can look
gas can also be observed (Figure 3.69C). Cellular debris
similar to abscesses with the addition of mineraliza-
or hemorrhage accumulating in benign hepatic cysts
tion (Nyland et al. 1999).Fine-needle aspiration can be
PE
 .81cm
GB
4.15cm
Figure 6.29.Hepatic metastases.A: Pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Oblique image of the left hepatic lobe with two distinct
metastatic nodules (arrows). A smaller hypoechoic nodule with a thin hyperechoic rim and a larger hyperechoic nodule are
present, measuring 0.8cm and 1.8 cm wide, respectively. Hypoechoic peritoneal effusion (PE) is present. B: Splenic heman-
giosarcoma. Well-dcfincd, ancchoic cavitary mctastascs arc scen in the liver of this other dog with splenic hemangiosarcoma
and severe,echogenic peritoneal effusion (PE) consistent with hemorrhage.Acoustic enhancement (arrowheads) is noted
this dog with thyroid carcinoma. The hypoechoic halo seen at the periphery of these rather hyperechoic nodules is a feature
that is most commonly observed with metastases. GB, gallbladder. D: Pancreatic adenocarcinoma. A 4-cm inhomogeneous
a diagnosis of pancreatic metastasis. GB, gallbladder. Images B and C courtesy of D. Penninck.
Figure 6.28. Hepatic metastases. On these ultrasonographic and corresponding schematic images, three irregular hypere-
choic nodules, 1.0-1.5 cm wide, are found in the liver of a dog with splenic hemangiosarcoma. Hypoechoic to ancchoic cavitary
foci are found in some of these nodulcs and arc associatcd with far cnhancement (arrowheads) Peritoneal effusion (PE)
delineates the liver lobes (L). Hepatic metastases were confirmed at surgery. AW, abdominal wall
236LIVER
Live
Live
Stomao
-at
2.94cm
hcmoabdomen. A large hyperechoic mass (arrowheads) with a hypoechoic necrotic area (*) involves the margin of a hepatic
lobe. These features are common with malignant tumors. B: Oblique image of the left portion of the liver in a cat with hemoab-
domen. A 3-cm-wide inhomogeneous mass with small anechoic cavitary portions is at the caudal tip of the left lateral liver
hemorrhage.
Figure 6.31.Myxosarcoma in a dog. A: A large, Inarkedly heterogeneous, cavitated mass in the liver of this dog is disturb-
ing most of the hepatic architecture. B: Longitudinal image of the same tumor obtained 3 months later. In this image, a clear
distinction is made between the heterogeneous mass and the normal liver (L). Image courtesy of D. Penninck.
useful in confirming the nature of the fluid contained
 In people, granulomatous lesions tend to appear as
in cavitary lesions and enable drainage of abscesses.
hyperechoic nodules (Mills et al. 1990). Hepatic hem-
orrhage is rare in dogs and is usually related to hem-
Granulomas, Hematomas, and Mineralization
angiosarcoma or trauma (Whiteley et al. 1989). Hepatic
hematomas can also develop following ultrasound-
Hepatic granulomas or pyogranulomas can sometimes
 guided procedures such as biopsies and demonstrate
occur in dogs and cats, particularly with fungal dis-
variable ultrasonographic changes related to clot
eases or with feline infectious peritonitis (Figure 6.40).
 Organization and resorption (Nyland and Park 1983)
Cranial
0.53cm
B
Cranial
Stomach
: 259m
B
Figure 6.33.Disseminated histiocytic sarcoma (malignant
Figure 6.32.Target lesions.A: Longitudinal image of the
histiocytosis). A: Multiplc hypoechoic nodules and masses
midportion of the liver in a dog with intestinal carcinoma,
(more than 3cm wide) are in the liver of this Bernese moun-
on which a small nodule outlined by a peripheral hypoechoic
tain dog.Theselesions are relatively well circumscribed and
halo is seen.The central portion of this lesion is more echo-
have a mildly echogenic center. Ihe liver was also enlarged.
genic, giving the impression of a target. B: Longitudinal
B: In this other dog with disseminated histiocytic sarcoma,
obliqueimage of the left portion of the liver of a dogwith a
the liver (L)is uniformly hypoechoic and enlarged. The dif-
primary hepatocellular carcinoma identified in the right
ference between the hepatic and splenic (S)echogenicities
lateral lobe.An ovoid nodule with a peripheral hypoechoic.
was considered excessive.
halo and a more echogenic center (arrows), consistent with
a metastasis, is in the liver (L). Smaller but similar target
lesions were found in the rest of the liver.FF, falciform fat.
Figure 6.34.Lymphoma.Close-up longitudinal image 0f
the left portion of the liver (L) of a dog with multicentric
lymphoma. Two well-defined hypoechoic nodules, reaching
2.1 cm wide, are present, and thc central portion of the largest
nodule is more echogenic. These features are commonly
2.11cm
Figure 6.33A) in dogs.
1.28cm
237
6.5cm
Figure 6.35. Benign hepatic cyst-like lesions. A: Transverse image of the liver (L) of a dog with a discrete anechoic structure
(approximately 1cm wide) that is septated and associated with far acoustic enhancement (arrows), consistent with hypoat-
tenuating content. A clear fluid was aspirated with ultrasound guidance. The peripheral hepatic parenchyma is homogeneous.
B: Longitudinal image of the liver of a dog with a well-circumscribed, loculated, anechoic structure. Irregular contours and
far enhancement (arrowheads) are present. Bile was aspirated. The clinical significance of this finding was not determined in
presumably because of cholecystitis.C and D: Ultrasound images of a large liver cyst in a dog with abdominal pain that were
obtained before (C) and after (D) ultrasound-guided drainage. The peripheral liver parenchyma is normal.
Right
Figure 6.36. Biliary cysladenocarcinoma in a cat. Transverse ulrasonographic and corresponding schenmatic inages of the
liver of a cat with increased hepatic enzymes. A multiloculated mass(arrows and cursors) with a more solid dorsal componcnt
(*)is identified in the right portion of the liver.Far acoustic enhancement is noted (arrowheads) because of the presence of
hypoattenuating fluid-filled cavities. A malignant tumor was confirmed through ultrasound-guided biopsy. FF, falciform
fat.
238
Cranial
3.49cn
Figure 6.38. Biliary carcinoma in a dog.Longitudinal
Figure 6.37. Biliary cystadenoma in a cat. Longitudinal
image of the right portion of the liver in an icteric dog with
oblique image of the left portion of the liver of a cat with a
a large cavitated mass. This poorly defined mass (arrows)
palpable mass in the cranioventral abdomen.A multilocu-
contains irregular hypoechoic and ancchoic cavitations. The
lated hyperechoic mass (arrows) is ventral to the stomach
findings on ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration of the
(St) and connected to the liver (L). Within this mass are mul-
more solid portions of the mass were suggestive of biliary
tiple anechoic cavities (*), consistent with biliary
carcinoma.
cystadenoma.
Cranial
Cranial
3
2.15cm
Caudal Left
Figure 6.39. Hepatic abscesses. A: Longitudinal image of the
left portion of the liver in a febrile dog with abdominal pain.
An irregular hypoechoic lesion (arrowheads)can be seen. The
abdominal fat adjacent to the liver (L) border is hyperechoic
and hyperattenuating,suggesting steatitis.Ultrasound-guided
fine-needle aspiration confirmcd thc presence of an abscess.
B: Longitudinal oblique image of the left portion of the liver
with a hypoechoic center is found at the dorsal margin of this
lobe, which was indicative of a septic abscess. C: Longitudinal
image of the liver of a Airedale terrier in which a hepatic
abscess was identified. The abscessed region (arrows), deep in
the liver, is poorly marginated and contains several reverbcr-
ating, hyperechoic foci consistent with gas. Image C courtesy
of D.Penninck.
239
240LIVER
Crania
1.16cm
1.69cm
Figure 6.41. Hepatic hematoma. Longitudinal image of the
Crani
left portion of the liver in small-breed dog that was bitten by
a larger dog 3 days earlier. An ill-defined, irrcgular area of
 mixed echogenicity (arrows and cursors), consistent with a
traumatic hematoma,is found in the superficial portion of
the liver.
factors, such as the size of the mineral foci relative to
the size of the ultrasound beam, image contrast, and
equipment settings (probe frequency, gain, and focal
Zone).Furthermore, other types of hyperattenuating
material, such as fibrous tissue or a migrating foreign
body, cana
also be associated with acoustic
Figure 6.40.Hepatic granulomas. A: Longitudinal image
of the left portion of the liver (L) in a dog with a relatively
shadowing.
well-defined hyperechoic focus associated with acoustic
Hepatic Lobe Torsion,Infarction, and Gas
no underlying etiology could be identified. This granuloma
was thought to be an incidental finding. B: Longitudinal
Liver-lobe torsion, which leads to lobar congestion,
image of the right portion of the liver in an icteric cat with
hemorrhage, and necrosis, can show variable signs
irregular hyperechoic nodules (arrows) dispersed within a
that can mimic neoplasia or abscess formation. In a
hypoechoic liver (L). The diagnosis was pyogranulomatous
rccent report, the affected lobe was hypoechoic (more
cholangiohepatitis in relation to fcline infectious peritonitis.
commonly) or mixed in echogenicity, and Doppler 
FF, falciform fat.
assessment of the lobe revealed reduced vascularity in
many dogs (Hinkle Schwartz et al. 2006) (Figure 6.43).
Spontaneous infarction is less common in the liver
(Figure 6.41). With time, hematomas tend to develop
when compared with the splecn, but can show a similar
a cystic component following clot lysis. This feature,
 pattern of an irregular and poorly echogenic area with
as well as the progressive reduction in size on follow-
reduced fow on color Doppler or power Doppler
up exams, should help in differentiating spontaneous
(Figure 6.44). Hyperechoic foci associated with rever-
hematomas from neoplastic processes. Hepatic miner-
berating artifact, consistent with gas, can be sccn in the
alization other than cholelithiasis can accompany
liver, most often in the biliary tract, following surgery.
benign processes (such as hematoma or granuloma) or
Gas can also form because of bacterial infection (Figurc
malignant processes. Mineralization typically appears
6.45). Metallic clips used with surgical biopsies appear
as strongly hyperechoic foci associated with acoustic
 as short, strongly hyperechoic lines with reverbera-
shadowing (Figure 6.42). However, the visibility or
tion, mimicking gas. A radiograph can be used, if
magnitude of the shadowing is influenced by several
needed, to differentiate gas from metal.
Cranial
Figure 6.42.  Parenchymal mineralization. Longitudinal image of the left portion of the liver (L) in a dog with chronic hepa-
titis. The liver parenchyma is diffusely hyperechoic, with several small, hyperechoic, irregular foci associated with acoustic
shadowing (arrows).
B
Figure 6.43. Hepatic lobe torsion. A: The twisted left lateral liver lobe is diffusely hypoechoic (arrowheads), contrasting
with the underlying left medial lobe (L). B: A close-up view of the affected lobe. There was no evidence of flow through the
LeftCranial
PE
 Figure 6.44. Hepatic infarction. Longitudinal oblique image of the left portion of the liver (L) of dog with increased liver
 enzymes. Within the liver is an irregular hypoechoic region (arrows) with peripheral vascular signal. Ultrasound-guided
 biopsy revealed infarction of uncertain origin. Peritoneal effusion (PE) is also noted.
241
242LIVER
Figure 6.45. Emphysematous hepatitis. Corresponding lateral abdominal radiograph and sonogram of a dog with emphy-
sematous hepatitis. Gas foci (arrows) are radiotransparent on the radiograph and hyperechoic with reverberation artifacts on
the ultrasound image. The affected lobe (L1) is enlarged, hyperechoic, and heterogeneous when compared with an adjacent
lobe (L2). Images courtesy of D. Penninck.
DISORDERS OF
inflammation possibly associated with fibrosis can
limit its capacity to distend. Furthermore, reduced
THE BILIARY SYSTEM
limit GB dilatation. Thus, the absence of GB distension
Biliary Obstruction
should not be used to rule out biliary obstruction.
Extrahepatic biliary obstruction more commonly
tive tool in assessing icteric dogs and cats with biliary
 involves the CBD, mainly in its distal segment, in proxi-
obstruction.After complete obstruction of the CBD,
mity to the major duodenal papilla. Pancreatitis is
retrograde dilatation is expected that initially affects
 often responsible for CBD obstruction, particularly in
the CBD and GB, followed by the extrahepatic ducts
dogs, because of edema, inflammation, and fibrosis
and intrahepatic ducts (Nyland and Gillett 1982).With
involving the duodenal wall and major papilla and/or
extrahepatic biliary obstruction, the cystic duct and
the CBD (Tahie and Martin 1995; Lévcillé et al. 1996;
CBD dilate and often become tortuous proximal to the
Mayhew et al. 2002) (Figure 6.49). Chronic duodenitis
site of obstruction (Figures 6.46-6.51). A CBD more
 or cholecystitis can also be associated with fibrous
than 4mm wide is usually predictive of obstruction in
tissue proliferation and subsequent stenosis. Inflam-
cats (Leveillé et al. 1996). This is probably also true in
matory processes involving the biliary tract can be
dogs, although it has not been described. Within 5-7
associated with cholelithiasis (Mayhew et al. 2002).
days, irregular and tortuous anechoic tubes with
The CBD must be evaluated thoroughly for the pres-
hyperechoic walls can be found in the liver, following
ence of hyperechoic and hyperattenuating choleliths,
the more linear PVs and unassociated with color flow,
possibly lodged in the distal CBD (Figure 6.50).
indicating dilated hepatic ducts. This sign, also referred
Choleliths can also form secondary to partial or com-
plete biliary obstruction (Mayhew et al. 2002),thus
of completc obstruction (Figures 6.47C and 6.48).
complicating the ultrasound identification of the source
Additionally, thcse anechoic tubes can be associated
of the obstruction.
with acoustic far enhanccment, which is not expected
 Several types of neoplasia (predominantly carcino-
with vessels than contain a more attenuating fluid
 mas) involving the biliary tract, the duodenum, or the
(Nyland and Gillett 1982). Although the GB can be
pancreas can cause biliary obstruction(Fahie and
dilated with biliary obstruction, wall contraction or
Martin 1995). Nodules or masses of variable echo-
243ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
B
GB
BD
BD
+1.7cm
BD
Figure 6.46.
. Congenital malformation with biliary ectasia in two cats. A: Sagittal image at the porta hepatis in a 2-year-old
cat with biliary obstruction. Numerous bile ducts (BD), including the common bile duct, are markedly dilated (lumen between
the cursors) and show a thickened wall (arrowheads). The bile content is also more echogenic than normal. Extensive biliary
changes observed in a 8-month-old cat. The bile ducts are distended and irregular. The gallbladder (GB) contains echogenic
sludge and shows a thickcned, hypcrechoic wall (arrowheads). Color Doppler (B) was used to confirm the absence of flow
 in these bile ducts (BD), distinguishing those from hepatic vessels. A congenital defect such as hypoplasia or atresia of the
genicity, sometimes with a cystic component, can be
2001). With cholecystitis, the chronicity and severity of
observed (Figure 6.51). Evaluation of the rest of the
the inflammatory process influence the appearance of
abdomen, especially the liver parenchyma and lymph
the wall. Although it can appear normal, thickening is
nodes, can help in differentiating benign from malig-
often seen, along with a double-rim pattern (particu-
nant processes. Fine-needle aspiration or biopsy is
larly in more acute cases) or diffuse wall hypere-
recommended if the abnormal tissue can be safely
chogenicity, sometimes associated with dystrophic
reached.
mineralization, particularly in chronic cholecystitis
(Figure 6.52). The double-rim pattern is often seen
Gallbladder and Common Bile Duct
in wall edema (Figure 6.53). Changes in the GB wall 
may be more evident with concurrent parenchymal
Wall Anomalies
hypoechogenicity, such as in many cases of feline
GB wall thickening (greater than 1mm in cats and
cholangiohepatitis.
greater than 2-3 mm in dogs) can be caused by inflam-
Thickening of the CBD wall, along with luminal
mation (cholecystitis), edema (portal hypertension,
dilatation, is also common with cholecystitis (Figure
hypoalbuminemia, biliary obstruction, or inflamma-
6.54). In fact, it can be difficult to differentiate obstruc-
tion), cystic mucosal hyperplasia, or rarely neoplasia
tive dilation of the CBD from dilatation associated
(Nyland and Park 1983; Spaulding 1993; Hittmair et al.
with stasis secondary to chronic inflammation of the
Cranial
CD
CBD
CVC
0.56cm
C
Cranial
Figure 6.47.Extrahepatic biliary obstruction. A: Longitudinal image obtained just caudal to the porta hepatis of a dog with
a dilated common bile duct (CBD) ventral to thc portal vein (PV) and caudal vena cava (CVC). The lumen of the CBD reaches
of the liver of anicteric cat.Tortuous hypoechoic to anechoic tubular structures representing dilated hepatic duct (HD),cystic
duct (CD), and common bile duct (CBD) indicate extrahepatic biliary obstruction. C: Longitudinal image (with power
Doppler) of the right portion of the liver in a cat with an obstructive mass involving the common bile duct. Multiple anechoic,
tortuous, tubular structures without evidence of flow that are indicative of intrahepalic bile ducts are found in the liver.A
lobulated anechoic structure at the porta hepatis is associated with far acoustic enhancement (arrows) consistent with a dilata-
tion of the junction of the extrahepatic biliary ducts, the cystic duct, and the common bile duct.
small hyperechoic structure, consistent with a cholelith (arrow),is found in the distal portion of the common bile duct (CBD).
The common bile duct and cystic duct (CD) are dilated and thickened (1.7mm) because of cholecystitis and biliary obstruc-
tion. The stone is casting an acoustic shadow (*).
244
Liver
B
tortuous, anechoic, tubular structures () near the portal veins (PV and arrows). Power Doppler was used to confirm the
absence of flow in these tubes,indicating intrahepatic biliary duct distension.Thehyperechoic and hyperattenuating fat caudal
to the liver seen in longitudinal image A was consistent with steatitis. Chronic pancreatitis was diagnosed.
Right
Cranial
Duodent
PE
0.69cm
B
CBD
Figure 6.49.Pancreatitis and biliary obstruction. Transverse (A) and longitudinal (B) images of the proximal duodenum of
a dog with pancreatitis. The distal portion of the common bile duct (CBD) is dilated. The peripheral fat is markedly hypere-
choic, and a snall amount of peritoneal effusion is noted (PE). The duodenal papilla (arrowheads) is hyperechoic and sub-
jectively enlarged, and the wall of the common bile duct appears thickened. These changes suggest an extension of thc
inflammatory process to these structures that causes biliary obstruction. In A, the arrow points to the thickened common bile
duct wall.
Cranial
Duodenum
Liver
CBD
0.17cm
0.17cm
Figure 6.50.
Crania
Duodenum
2.10cm
0.61cm
Figure 6.51. Biliary obstruction by a mass. A: Biliary carcinoma in a cat. Longitudinal image of a cat's common bile duct
(CBD) with a uniform, mildly echogenic mass (arrows and cursors) obliterating the lumen of the CBD. These features can
indicate chronic cholecystitis with fibrosis, or a neoplastic process. Biliary carcinoma was identified at surgery. B: Chronic
tissue.Adjacent hyperechoicfat (*) is consistent with steatitis.
Cranial
Right
0.61cr
Figure 6.52.Cholecystitis.A: Longitudinal image of the
right-central portion of the liver of a febrile cat. The gallblad-
der (GB) is thickened and has a hyperechoic, irregular wall
with ill-defined margins (arrows). The peripheral hepatic
parenchyma is hypoechoic. Cholangiohepatitis was diagnosed
GB
based on fine-needle aspiration of the livcr. B: Transverse
image of the liver and gallbladder (GB) of a small-breed dog
thickened (2.4mm) and hypoechoic in its center. C: Transverse
image of the gallbladder (GB) of a dog with a clinical history
 Of fever and increased liver enzymes. The gallbladder wall is
thickened and associated with a multilayered pattern because
:0.24cl
Of severe wall inflanmation, edema, and necrosis.
246
247ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
Crania
Cranial
GE
CBD
0.37cn
0.35cm
Figure 6.54. Common bile duct thickening. Longitudinal
image of the common bile duct (CBD) of a cat with elevated
Figure 6.53. Gallbladder wall edema. Longitudinal image
liver enzymes andvomiting.The lumen of the common bile
of the gallbladder (GB) in a dog with hypoalbuminemia. The
duct iswellvisualized,whileless than 4mm wide.The duct
wall (arrows) is thickened and hyperechoic, suggesting
gallbladder wall is thickened, with a double rim (arrows)
an inflammalory process.The catresponded to medical treat-
consistent with edema.Cholecystitis could be not excluded
based on the image (see Figurc 6.52B).
ments for cholecystitis.PV, portal vein.
biliary system (Leveille et al. 1996). Furthermore, in
et al. 2000). The GB wall may also appear thickened,
chronic outflow obstruction, the CBD can remain
hyperechoic, and irregular because of edema, inflam-
dilated even after the cause of obstruction has been
mation, and/or necrosis. A discontinuity in the GB
alleviated.
wall is an important sign of rupture, along with the
 GB wall polyps and malignant neoplastic processes,
presence of hyperechoic fat at the periphery of the GB
although rarely seen in dogs and cats, can be associ-
and the presence of peritoneal effusion (Figure 6.57).
ated with biliary obstruction. Although it can be diffi-
These signs generally indicate a surgical emergency.
cull to differentiate these processes,pedunculated
Fragments of mucoceles may also migrate within the
echogenic masses protruding into the GB lumen are
peritoneal cavity (Figure 6.57B). Although most
more typical of polyps.
affected dogs have concurrent clinical evidence of hep-
 GB mucoceles are being increasingly recognized in
atobiliary disease, GB mucocele can be found inciden-
dogs, particularly in older dogs of small and medium-
tally on ultrasound.
sized breeds, now representing an important cause of
biliary obstruction (Besso et al. 2000). This complex
pathology is characterized by an excessive accumula-
Cholelithiasis
tion of mucus within the GB lumen, progressively
Choleliths arc often incidental within any portion of
leading to overdistension and wall necrosis and
the biliary tract in dogs and cats. An underlying or
rupture. Intraluminal mucinous plugs can extend or
consecutive inflammatory process (cholecystitis or
migrate into the CBD and cause obstruction. In affected
cholangiohepatitis) is more commonly recognized in
GB,a characteristic accumulation of hypocchoicmucus
cats (Eich and Ludwig 2002). These calculi typically
is seen boarding the inner margin of the wall, centrally
appear as well-defined, hyperechoic, shadowing foci
displacing the echogenic biliary sludge,which becomes
with a tendency to form linear tracts when located in
 independent of gravity. As the mucocele is progres-
the hepatic ducts or a sediment in the GB lumen and
sively formcd in the GB, a stellate pattern is seen
cystic duct (Figure 6.58). Consecutive intrahepatic or
initially, followed by the appearance of immobile
extrahepatic biliary obstruction can be observed,
hypcrechoic radiating striations that lead to the appear-
although choleliths may also form because of an
ance of a kiwifruit-like pattern (Figures 6.55-6.57)(Besso
obstruction (Mayhew et al. 2002).
Liver
B
"stellate"pattern
  e o p a go s () r e ()  o r re  
increased liver enzymes. The gallbladder is distended with echogenic biliary sludge (BS) in the dependent portion of the
lumen (arrowheads at horizontal levcl). An interrupted and irregular, hypoechoic to anechoic rim is visible at the inner
periphery of the gallbladder, consistent with mucus. The triangular shape of these hypoechoic foci (arrows) has been referred
asthestellatepattern.
B
Fat
Figure 6.56. Complete gallbladder mucocele. Transversc (A) and longitudinal (B) images of the gallbladder of a dog with
icterus and acute abdominal pain. The gallbladder is distended and shows a pattern of hypcrecchoic striations (arrows) radiat-
ing toward its center. The central hyperechoic area is heterogeneous and completely immobile. These fcatures are described
(arrowheads) and the adjacent fat is hyperechoic, suggesting imminent or recent wall rupture.
Figure 6.58. Cholelithiasis. A: Longitudinal image of the central portion of the liver (L) in a small dog with acute pancre-
atitis. Several rounded hyperechoic structures (*) associated with acoustic shadowing (arrowheads),consistent with choleliths,
are in the gallbladder (GB) neck.Small hyperechoic foci, associated with some reverberation (arrow), are in thc nondependent
ventral region of the galbladder. These foci could indicate small choleliths adhered to the wall or indicate gas.There was no
increase in liver enzymes in this dog. The gallstones were not considered clinically significant. B: A larger volume of choleli-
thiasis (*) is in the dependent portion of the gallbladder (GB) of this other larger dog with Cushing's disease. Similar ultra-
sound features are observed. C: Transverse oblique inage of the left portion of the liver of a cat with increased liver enzymes.
Several linear hyperechoic tracts (short arrows), causing acoustic shadowing (arrowheads), are parallel to the portal veins
(PV). These features suggest cholelithiasis within the intrahepatic biliary ducts. Cholangiohepatitis was diagnosed with
ultrasound-guided aspiration and biopsy.
248
Right
Crania
Figure 6.57. Gallbladder rupture. A: Transversc image of the gallbladder in a dog with signs of acute abdominal pain. A
kiwifruit-like pattern of striations, consistent with mucocele, is notcd (arrow) in the gallbladder (GB).The fat at the right and
was confirmed with surgical exploration. L, liver.B: Migrating mucocele.Longitudinal image of the region just caudoventral
to the liver (L) in a dog with gallbladder mucocele.A crescent-shaped anechoic structure with fine radiating striations (arrows)
rupture. Consecutive bile perilonitis was present, associated with hyperechoic fat.
Crania
GB
Livel
Figure6.58.
250 LIVER
DISORDERS OF THE HEPATIC
Extrahepatic portosystemic shunts,arising from the
AND PORTAL VASCULATURE
main PV or a tributary (for example, the splenic, right
gastric, left gastric, or gastroepiploic vein), represent
Congenital Portosystemic Shunts
the most common type of Pss and are most prevalent
in small breeds of dogs and in cats (Lamb 1996 and
Portosystemic shunts (PSS), which represent one of the
1998; Lamb et al. 1996a; d'Anjou et al. 2004; Szatmari
most common vascular anomalies in dogs and cats,
et al. 2004). An anomalous tortuous vesscl, containing
connect the portal system to the systemic circulation
hepatofugal flow and with a maximal diameter similar
through the CVC or azygos vein. The use of ultraso-
to the one of the aorta, is typically seen originating
nography in the detection and characterization of these
from a branch of the portal system (Figure 6.61). A
anomalies has been well described (Lamb 1996 and
termination into the CVC is often visualized in associa-
1998; Lamb et al. 1996a; d'Anjou et al. 2004; Szatmari
tion with focal flow turbulence that appears as a nosaic
et al. 2004). Most PSS are congenital in dogs and cats,
pattern on color Doppler (Lamb 1996; d'Anjou et al.
and more commonlydetected in juvenile animals;
2004) (Figure 6.61D).
however, a certain number of these shunts can remain
Portocaval shunts typically terminate in the CVC
undetected for several years in dogs and particularly
Cranial to the right renal vein (Figure 6.61C). The shunt
in cats.
termination can be more difficult tovisualize when a
Because of thecommon reductionin hepaticvolume
 shunt connects to the azygos vein. Portoazygos shunts
in affccted animals, a complete evaluation of the intra-
typically dive craniodorsally,in the direction of the
hepatic and extrahepatic portal vasculature can be
 aortic hiatus, after originating from one of the portal
challenging to achieve (Figure 6.59). A right-lateral
branches (Figure 6.62). The anomalous vessel can be
approach through the 11th or 12th intercostal spaces
followed dorsally and cranially to the transverse
may be required in order to visualize the liver and
colon and stomach, unless this window is blocked by
porta hepatitis, as well as the region of the CVC,
acoustic. shadowing and/or reverberation caused by
without overlying gastrointestinal content.
the presence of gas, ingesta, or feces. In some cases, a
Congenital PSS are most often single. Double-shunt-
dilated vessel adjacent and parallel to the aorta can be
ing loops anastomosing before entering the systemic
seen that contains venous flow directed cranially. The
circulation were reported to be more common with
visualization of such a vessel, which canindicate either
shunts originating from the right gastric vein in
the shunt or a dilated azygos vein, is considered spe-
dogs (Szatmari et al. 2004). Schematic morphological 
cific for portoazygos shunting (Figure 6.62C).
 differences among congenital PSS are depicted in
Intrahepatic portosystemic shunts are more prevalent
Figure 6.60.
in large-breed dogs and are defined as left-divisional,
central divisional, or right-divisional. Left-divisional
shunts, caused by a patent ductus venosus, represent
the most common form of intrahepatic shunt (Szatmari
et al. 2004) (Figure 6.60). With this type of PSS, a large
Cranial
tortuous vessel is seen originating from the intrahe-
patic PV and curving into the left portion of the
liver before entering the CVC (Figure 6.63A).
Spleer
Morphologically, these shunts typically connect to the
left hepatic vein, which drains into the CVC. Right-
divisional shunts often appear as a mirror image of
patent ductus venosus PSS, but instead curve into the
right liver before connecting to a right hepatic vein or
to the CVC (Figure 6.63B and C). Central divisional
shunts often present as a window-type shunt between
 a closely aligned intrahepatic PV and CVC. The PV is
commonly dilated at the site of the foramen, and flow
Figure 6.59. Microhepatica. Longitudinal image of the
turbulence can be observed in the CVC (Figure
central portion of the livcr (L) of a dog with a congenital
6.63D).
extrahepatic portosystemic shunt.Because of the significant
The PV size has a significant predictive value
reductioninhepaticvolume,the spleenis displaced cranially
in shunt investigation.In fact,because of flow diver-
and the portal vein cannot be easilyfollowed to the liver.
sion,the size of the PV cranial to the shunt origin is
B
Ao
azygosvein
splenic vein
CVC
CVC
CrM
CrM
EXTRAHEPATICPORTOCAVAL SHUNT
EXTRAHEPATICPORTOAZYGOSSHUNT
C
lefthepatic
PV
splenic vein
CVC
CrM
Ao
CrM
jejunal
veins
splenorenal
shunt
INTRAHEPATIC SHUNT
PATENT DUCTUS VENOSUS
PORTAL HYPERTENSION AND
ACQUIRED PORTOSYSTEMICSHUNTS
Figure 6.60. Categories of portosystemic shunts. Schematic illustrations of typical categories of portosystemic shunts
showing the direction of shunting flow (arrows) in dogs and cats. A and B: Congenital extrahepatic shunts can terminate into
significantly reduced because of flow diversion. A portoazygos shunt can be followed in the direction of the aortic hiatus,
 along the aorta (Ao), but its termination can be dificult to visualize. On the other hand, most portocaval shunt terminations 
 can be seen with ultrasonography. C: Left-sided intrahepatic shunts (patent ductus venosus) represent the most common type
 of intrahepatic shunts. This shunt typically terminates into an "ampula" formed by the confluence of this shunt and a left
 by chronic liver disease and secondary portal hypertension. Small tortuous vessels can usually be identified in the central
 abdomen around the caudal vena cava (CVC), as well as between the splen and the left kidney (splenorenal anastomosis).
 Intrahepatic veins can also be distorted and reduced in diameter. With chronic hepatitis or cirrhosis, the liver is typically
 irregular in contour and heterogeneous. CrM, cranial mesenteric vein; and PV, portal vein. Illustrations by M.A. d'Anjou.
251
252LIVER
0.37cm
0.16cm
C
Righ
D
Figure 6.61.
 Extrahepatic portocaval shunts. A: Longitudinal color Doppler image of the abdomen of a Yorkshire terrier.
An anomalous shunting vein (S) just caudal to the stomach is scen originating from the main portal vein. This vessel contains
hepatofugal flow and is directed craniodorsally. The portal vein diameter (PV) is significantly reduced cranial to the shunt
 origin (arrowheads). B: Longitudinal sonogram of the abdomen of a Maltese terrier with an anomalous vein, just caudal to
the stomach, that originates from the main portal vein (PV). The portal vein diameter (small arrows) is significantly reduced
 cranial to the shunt origin (large arrow) when compared with caudal to the shunt. C: Transverse color Doppler image obtained
 in the craniodorsal abdomen of a 8-year-old small dog with a small aberrant vessel (S) connecting to the caudal vena cava
(CVC), just cranial to the site of the right renal vein. This shunting vessel was followed to the splenic vein compatible with
an extrahepatic splenocaval shunt. Ao, aorta. D: Longitudinal color Doppler ultrasound image obtained in the craniodorsal
abdomen of a dog with extrahepatic portocaval shunting. A mosaic pattcrn observed in the caudal vena cava (CVC) is con-
sistent with flow turbulence at the site of shunt tcrmination (S). Ao, aorta; and L, liver.
significantly reduced (d'Anjou et al. 2004; Szatmari et
shunt (Figure 6.65), whereas a ratio ≥0.8 excludes this
al. 2004) (Figures 6.61A and B and 6.64). A congenital
typc of PSS (Figure 6.15). However, a low PV-aorta
extrahepatic shunt is suspected if the main PV is
ratio could also be found in dogs with primary PV
smaller in diameter when compared with its tributar-
hypoplasia (idiopathic noncirrhotic portal hyperten-
ies. The search for the origin of the PSS is focused on 
sion), leading to multiple acquired PSS because of
the region where the PV, or a tributary, abruptly
 portal hypertension. PV-aorta ratios of ≥0.8 are scen
diminishes in size. A ratio comparing the luminal
 only in animals with a normal portal system, micro-
diameter of the PV, just before entering the liver, with
vascular dysplasia, intrahepatic PSS, or portal hyper-
the maximal luminal diameter of the aorta, obtained
tension caused by chronic liver disease.
in the cranial abdomen, was investigated to predict the
pue shop u paaiasqo aq uo shuu aauo peaas
likelihood of an extrahepatic PSS in dogs and cats
cats affected with congenital PSS. Besides the reduc-
(d'Anjou et al. 2004). Based on these results, a PV-aorta
tion in liver volume observed in most patients (partic-
ratio of ≤0.65 predicts the presence of an extrahepatic
ularly in dogs), the visibility of intrahepatic portal
253 ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
branches is often reduced because of hypoperfusion.
RightCran
When evaluated with spectral Doppler, the portal
flow is commonly irregular because  of  cardiac
cycle influence on the normally relatively constant
portal flow (Lamb 1996 and 1998; d'Anjou et al. 2004)
(Figure 6.65). The kidneys are commonly enlarged,
 especially in dogs, and uroliths are often recognized.
The  combination  of  microhepatica, 
 renomegaly,
and urolithiasis is highly predictive of PSS in young
dogs with clinically suspected shunting (d'Anjou
et al. 2004).
 A systematic approach is recommended in the detec-
 tion of congenital and acquired PSS in animals (Figure
B
Crania
6.66).
Portal Hypertension and Acquired
Portosystemic Shunts
Chronic liver disease, particularly involving fibrosis
and diffuse nodular regeneration (cirrhosis) or infiltra-
tive neoplasia, can cause reduced PV compliance and
increased pressure. Portal hypertension can also be
Diap
 caused by congenital or developmental PV hypoplasia
0.39cm
(also termed noncirrhotic portal hypertension), arte-
rioportal fistula, portal thrombosis, or PV compres-
sion from an extraluminal mass. Ultrasonographically,
 portal hypertension can be manifested by the presence
of ascites and signs of edema involving several struc-
tures, such as the GB wall and pancreas. Portal hyper-
tension is suspected when the portal flow is significantly
reduced in velocity (mean <10cm/s) or reversed
(hepatofugal), especially if the vein is normal in size or
(007 1e ta no,p 06e1 ius pue puea) pe
(Figures 6.65B and 6.67). However, flow reduction or
 reversal may not be observed at the time of the
exam.
C
 Sustained portal hypertension leads to the opening
 of preexisting collateral vessels that connect the portal
Figure 6.62. Portoazygos shunts. A: Transverse image
obtained in the craniodorsal abdomen of a small-breed dog
system to the systemic circulation (Figure 6.60D). Of
 these collaterals in dogs, a splenorenal anastomosis is
with a large vessel dorsal to the stomach in the direction of
the aortic hiatus. This vein contained hepatofugal flow
 commonly observed that originates from the splenic
(arrow) and could be followed to the diaphragm. A portoa-
vein and has a flow directed caudally and coursing
zygos shunt was confirmed at surgery. B: Longitudinal
caudally along the dorsal splenic border (Figure 6.68A)
oblique color Doppler image obtained in the craniodorsal
(d'Anjou et al. 2004). The caudal termination of this
abdomen of a young Yorkshire terrier. An aberrant vein with
collateral can be difficult to visualize. However, in the
hepatofugal flow (short arrow) is next to the gastric cardia
 same region, multiple small tortuous vessels are often
and diaphragm. A portoazygos shunt was surgically con-
seen that connect to the left renal vein or directly to
firmed. C: Longitudinal color Doppler image obtained in the
the CVC (Figure 6.68B). The visualization of a vein
craniodorsal abdomen of a young cat with a right azygos
connecting to the left renal vein, consistent with a
vein (Az) abnormally apparent. A shunt was detected con-
dilated gonadal vein, has been described as a specific
necting to this vein in the midabdomen. Ao, aorta.
sign of acquired PSs (Szatmari et al. 2004) and indi-
cates the termination of the splenorenal anastomosis
(Figure 6.68D). Small, tortuous, aberrant vessels can
254 LIVER
PV
CVC
CVC
Righ
Cra
CVC
CVC
C
 cranial abdomen of a young goldcn retriever. A large tortuous vein apparent in the liver connects to the caudal vena cava
(CVC and arrow). Hepatofugal flow observed on color Doppler was consistent with a left-divisional intrahepatic shunt (S).
The liver (L) is also reduced in volume. B: Right-divisional shunt. Transverse ultrasound image of the liver (L) obtained
through the right 12th intercostal space (S) in a young Bernese mountain dog with suspected portosystemic shunting. A large,
 intrahepatic, tortuous vein connects the portal vein (PV)to the caudal vena cava (CVC). C: Right-divisional shunt. Longitudinal
saood paadsns ym e o e u aeds poa e  a yno pno a posn anb
shunting. A large tortuous vein (S) is between the portal vein (PV) and the caudal vena cava (CVC) in the liver (L). Turbulent 
flow is obvious, as manifested by a mosaic pattern on color mode at the site of communication of the shunt (arrow) with the
 caudal vena cava. D: Central divisional intrahepatic shunt. Longitudinal color Doppler image obtained in the craniodorsal
abdomen of a young large-breed dog with suspected portosystemic shunting. The intrahepatic portal vein (PV) dives dorsally
 and a "window" (arrow) containing turbulent flow (mosaic pattern) is seen connecting to the caudal vena cava (CVC).
also be observed in the mesentery and surrounding the
matically increase the pressure within the portal
CVC, particularly when color or power Doppler is
system and lead to rapidly progressive hypertension
used (Figure 6.68C). Flow turbulence is typically seen
and the eventual opening of portosystemic collaterals
in the CVC at the site of shunt entry.
(acquired PSS). Ultrasonographically, the PV can
become markedly enlarged, and flow reversal can be
observed with Doppler (Szatmari et al. 2004) (Figure
Arterioportal Fistulas
 Congenital or acquired connections between PVs and
dilated and tortuous in the affected lobe, which can be
hepatic arteries, termed arterioportal fistulas, can dra-
more difficult to identify.
255ATLASOFSMALIANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
Cranial
Aorta
+0.25cm
+0.48cm
Figure 6.64. Reduced portal vein-aorta ratio. In these longitudinal images of the portal vein (PV) and aorta, obtained at thc
level of the porta hepatis, the portal vein appears significantly smaller. The portal vein-aorta ratio was calculated as 0.52. A
congenital extrahepatic shunt was detected caudal to the sitc of mcasurement of the portal vein.The caudal vena cava (CVC)
can be collapsed easily during thc cxam (arrow).
Crania
SVAngle60o
-7.2cmis
Figure 6.65.Portal flow alterations. A: Intrahepatic shunt. Spectral Doppler evaluation of the portal flow characteristics in
a dog with intrahepatic shunting. The flow velocity is markedly irregular in the main extrahepatic portal vein (PV) bccausc
tion of the portal flow in a dog with chronic liver disease.The flow vclocity is reduced(maximal 7.2cm/s) in the extrahepatic
portal vcin (PV) because of intrahepatic hypertension. Multiple acquired shunts were detected.
PortalVenousThrombosis
thrombosis causes portal hypertension and conse-
quently the formation of multiple acquired PSS, par-
Thrombosis can form because of a hypercoagulablc
ticularly if the thrombosis is long-standing.Portal
slale, vascular stasis, or damage to the vascular endo-t
thrombosis can also cxtend caudally into the cranial
thelium (Lamb et al. 1996b). Local neoplasia or inflam-
mesenteric vein or splcnic vein and cause conges-
mation can lead to PV thrombosis.Significant portal
tionthat canlead tolife-threatening infarction.
ULTRASONOGRAPHICAPPROACHFORPORTOSYSTEMIC SHUNTDETECTION
PVsmaller than tributaries
NormalPV
Normal to large PV
PVIAoratio<0.65
PV/Ao ratio 0.65-0.8
PVIAoratio>0.8
Small uniform liver with
Small uniform liver.
Small uniform liver.
Heterogeneous
Normal liversize
Largeand tortuous
reduced intrahepatic
Single anomalous
Large hepatic vessel
ornodular liver,
PV normallybranching
hepatic vessel (s).
portal branches.
extrahepaticvein
ordilatedPVnot
+/-reduced in size.
and tapering into liver.
Signs of portal
Signs of portal
with hepatofugal flow.
tapering into liver,
Signs of portal
hypertension and
hypertension and
connectingto
hypertension and
MAPSS*.
MAPSS*.
hepatic vein or CVC.
MAPSS*.
PVflowirreg
gular
PVflow+/-irregular
PVflow+/-irre
<10cm/sec
May>20cm/sec
May<10cm/sec
orreve
Primary portal vein
Congenital
Normal portal system
Congenital
Arterioportal
Chronic liver disease
hypoplasia
extrahepatic shunt
or hepatic
intrahepatic shunt
fistula
(e.g.,cirrhosis)
(non-cirrhotic
microvascular
withsecondary
portal hypertension)
dysplasia
portal hypertension
Ang
Enlarg
directed towards aorta or
F/-withreversedflow
CVC with turbulence.
Ascites and
eaticeder
adjacent and parallel toaorta,
Tortuous vessels in mesentery.
with craniad flow.
Tortuous vein orinating from
splenicveinwithhepatofugal flow
Vein connecting toleftrenalvein.
Portocaval shunt
Portoazygos shunt
shunts (PsS) are shown. The main portal vein (PV) is evaluated and measured just caudal to its insertion into the liver. In
that process, care most be taken not to confuse a portal tributary or an aberrant vein for the main portal vein. CvC, caudal
vena cava; MA PSS, multiple acquired portosystemic shunts; and PV/Ao (aorta) ratio,ratio between the luminal diameter of
the main portal vein and aorta.
Right
Figure 6.67.Portal hypertension. Transverse image obtained
in the midcranial abdomen, caudal to the liver, of a small-
breed dog. The portal vein (PV) is cnlarged. The flow velocity
is reduced becausc of portal hypertension. Hepatic cirrhosis
0.74cm
was diagnosed.
256
257 ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
Crania
B
PE
LRV
Figure 6.68.
3. Multiple acquired portosystemic shunts. A: Longitudinal image obtained at the level of the spleen. A tortuous
vein (arrow) containing flow directed caudally was connccted to the splenic vein cranially and could be followed to the level
of the right renal vein, caudal, consistent with an acquired splenorenal anastomosis. This dog had primary portal vcin
hypoplasia. B: Longitudinal image of a dog with portal hypertension obtained in the midabdomen, at the level of the caudal
vena cava (CVC). Multiple small tortuous vessels are seen in the mesentery, in proximity to the CVC, with a direct connection
 observed (arrow). Anechoic peritoneal effusion (PE) is also detected. C: Longitudinal image obtained in the midabdomen, at
the level of the omentum and smallintestine (SI), of a dog with portal hypertension. Multiple smalltortuous vessels are seen
 in the mesentery. D: Longitudinal image obtained at the level of the left adrenal gland (Ad) in a dog with portal hypertension
 caused by portal venous thrombosis. An aberrant vein is seen connecting with the left renal vein (LRV), consistent with an
 enlarged left gonadal vein (LGV). This feature is spccific of acquired portosystemic shunt in dogs. Images courtesy of D.
Penninck.
 Ultrasonographically, thrombi are characterized by a
around or within the thrombus, particularly when the
lack of flow in the affected region of the vein, as well
vessel is aligned perpendicularly to the probe or if the
 as by the presence of an immobile, mildly echogenic
flow is significantly reduced.
structure within the vessel lumen (Lamb et al. 1996b)
(Figure 6.70). The vein can be dilated, particularly
Hepatic Congestion
caudal to the stenosis and involving the peripheral
 portal tributaries. Vascular congestion can be better
 Hepatic venous congestion is more commonly caused
assessed with spectral Doppler. Color Doppler and
by right-sided heart insufficiency, such as cardiac tam-
 power Doppler are also useful in confirming the mag-
ponade, leading to increased pressure within the CVC
 nitude of the thrombosis, particularly when thrombi
 and consequently within hepatic veins. The CVC and
 are  initially  formed  and  hypoechogenic.  Power
hepatic veins appear dilated, and the liver is typically
Doppler, which is more sensitive and not direction
enlarged and diffusely hypoechoic (Biller 1992)
dependent, helps to better assess the presence of flow
(Figure 6.71).
GB
5cm
WeL
eq5.0MHz
PRF 3731 Hz
5cm
0.62cm
Portal venous flow
-10
C
124:29
-20-
 portosystemic shunting, a markedly tortuous vascular structure with turbulent flow is observed within the liver (L), just
on color Doppler (B) and abnormal pulsatility on spectral Doppler (D). These signs indicate the presence of an arterioportal
fistula in the liver. C: Additionally, the celiac artery (CA) is noted to be much larger than the cranial mesenteric artery (CMA).
Multiple acquired shunts were detected during the exam (not shown). Images courtesy of D. Penninck
B
Cranial
0.70cm
Figure 6.70. Portal venous thrombosis. A: Transverse image of the left portion of the liver (L) in a dog with severe chronic
hepatitis. The intrahepatic portal venous lumens (arrows) appear hyperechoic. Color Doppler confirmed the absence of flow
and the presence of massive thrombosis. Secondary portal hypertension was also identified. PV, portal vein. B: Longitudinal
a rod a  rd no si pe u d m p  e u n pd a o a
enlarged (cursors) and presents a mildly hyperechoic luminal content without evidence of flow on color Doppler, indicating
thrombosis. The surrounding fat is mildly hyperechoic. Multiple acquired shunting vessels were also identified.
258
259ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
the targeted tissue. Typically, 20- to 22-gauge needles
Right
needles are used for automated core biopsy. Fine-
needle aspiration can usually be performed with
patients under minimal sedation, whereas biopsy
usually requires general anesthesia. Aspiration can be
performed with a customized biopsy-needle guide
placed on the probe or by using a freehand technique.
The latter, which is more commonly used especially
HV
on superficial lesions, can usually bc performed more
quickly and limits possible lacerations (Figure 6.72).
Although freehand aspiration is relatively safe and
CVC
easy to perform in cases of diffuse hepatic disorders,
it can be more challenging if small, deep lesions are
targeted. With the assisted technique, the needle is
Figure 6.71.Passive hepatic venous congestive.Transverse
placed through the biopsy guide tunnel and intro-
image of the central portion of the liver (L) of a dog with
duced along a precise path, which, however, cannot be
cardiac tamponade.The caudal vena cava (CVC) and hepatic
modified (Figure 6.73).
veins (HV) are dilated, and the hepatic parenchyma is dif-
Vacuolar hepatopathies, such as lipidosis and hyper-
fusely mildly hypoechoic. The gallbladder (GB) wall has a
double rim because of edema. The left hepatic vein has
adrenocorticism, are reliably diagnosed through cyto-
hyperechoic walls (arrows) because of their perpendicular
logical specimens obtained with fine-needle aspiration
position relative to thc ultrasound beam
(Wang et al. 2004). Some neoplastic processes, such as
lymphoma, and inflammatory processes can also be
INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES
diagnosed through cytological examination, although
a more confident diagnosis may require biopsy. Fine-
Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration and biopsy
needle drainage of cavitary lesions, such as cysts
havc become routine procedures complementing
or abscesses, can also be performed as a diagnostic
hcpatic ultrasonography (Penninck and Finn-Bodner
 and/or therapeutic procedure (Figure 6.35C and D).
1998). The choice of needle size (gaugc) and length
Hemorrhage represents the most common compli-
depends on the size, the vascularity, and thc depth of
cation observed with ultrasound-guided aspiration
Cranial
Liver
Figure 6.72. Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration. On this photograph, a freehand, ultrasound-guided, fine-needle
aspiration is performed.The needle is inserted through the skin just caudalto the xiphoid process and costal arch, and through
the left portion of the liver.This technique is preferred when diffuse processes aresuspected,because it prevents inadvertent
into the parenchyma (arrows).
260 LIVER
 Ultrasound-guided cholecystocentesis can be used
Cran
to obtain a sample of bile for culture or for GB decom-
 pression in animals with extrahepatic biliary obstruc-
tion secondary to an inflammatory process, such as
 pancreatitis (Center 1996; Herman et al. 2005). Althougn
infrequent, bile leakage and subsequent peritonitis, as
well as peritoneal hemorrhage, represent potential
complications. Risks of complications are increased if
the GB is distended or if its wall is diseased. The trans-
 hepatic approach is considered to be the safest percu-
 taneous method of bile aspiration, enabling the liver
 parenchyma to seal the area of GB Puncture (Center
1996).
 Intraoperative ultrasonography can also help in the
Figure 6.73. Ultrasound-guided percutaneous biopsy.
 localization of an intrahepatic shunt and assist surgical
 Longitudinal image obtained using power Doppler after
 ligation or placement of embolization coils.
 biopsy of the left portion of the liver of a dog with suspected
 hepatitis. A hyperechoic needle tract can be seen along the
 biopsy guide path (small aligned dots at the arrow) without
REFERENCES
evidence of hemorrhage. The left portion of the liver was
chosen to avoid the gallbladder.
 Beatty JA, Barrs VR, Martin PA, et al. (2002) Spontaneous
hepatic rupture in six cats with systemic amyloidosis.
 J Small Anim Pract 43:355-363.
 Besso JG, Wrigley RH, Gliatto JM, Webster CRL (2000)
Cranial
 Utrasonographic appearance and clinical findings in 14
 dogs with gallbladder mucocele. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
41:261-271.
 Biller DS (1992) Ultrasonography of diffuse liver disease:
A review. J Vet Intern Med 6:71-76.
Bromel C, Barthez PY, Léveill R, Scrivani PV (1998)
 Prevalence of gallbladder sludge in dogs as assessed by
ultrasonography. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 9:206-210.
 Carlisle CH, Wu JX, Heath TJ (1995) Anatomy of the portal
 and hepatic veins of the dog: A basis for systematic evalu-
 ation ofthe liverbyultrasonography. VetRadiol Ultrasound
36:227-233.
Figure 6.74. Postbiopsy hemorrhage. Longitudinal image
 Center SA (1996) Diseases of the gallbladder and biliary tree.
 obtained after ultrasound-guided biopsy of the left portion
 In: Guilford WG, Center SA, Strombeck DR, Williams DA,
 of the liver of a dog with chronic active hepatitis. A red-
Meyer DJ,eds.Strombeck'sSmall AnimalGastroenterology,
signal linear tract (arrow), consistent with retrograde hemor-
 3rd edition. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, p 860-882.
rhage, is observed along the biopsy tract. Echogenic
 Cruz-Arambulo R, Wrigley R, Powers B (2004) Sonographic
 peritoneal effusion is at the cranial aspect of the biopsy site
 features of histiocytic neoplasms in the canine abdomen.
(*), consistent with peritoneal hemorrhage.
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 45:554-558.
Cuccovillo A, Lamb CR (2002) Cellular features of sono-
 graphic target lesions of the liver and spleen in 21 dogs.
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 43:275-278.
and biopsy, particularly if the liver is friable and/or
d'Anjou MA, Penninck D, Cornejo L, Pibarot P (2004)
if a coagulopathy is present. Preinterventional coag-
 Ultrasonographic diagnosis of portosystemic shunting in
ulation profiles are recommended in most cases.
dogs and cat. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 45:424-437.
Additionally, postinterventional  ultrasonographic
 Eich CS, Ludwig LL (2002) The surgical treatment of chole-
examination should be performed to monitor the
 lithiasis in cats: A study of nine cases. J Am Anim Hosp
 presence of hemorrhage (Figure 6.74).
Assoc 38:290-296.
 Needle-tract implantation of neoplastic or infectious
 Evans HE (1993a) Chapter 7: The Digestive Apparatus and
processes, although not well investigated in small
 Abdomen. In: Evans HE, Christensen GC, eds. Miller's
 animals, can represent a limiting factor, particularly if
Anatomy of the Dog, 3rd edition. Philadelphia: WB
 surgical excision is planned.
 Saunders, pp 385-462.
261ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
Evans HE (1993b) Veins. In: Evans HE,Christensen GC,eds.
Nyland TG,Barthez PY,Ortega TM, Davis CR (1996) Hcpatic
Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 3rd edition.Philadelphia:
 su s d pe sn
WB Saunders, pp 682-716.
canine superficial necrolytic dermatitis. Vet Radiol
Fahie MA, Martin RA (1995) Extrahepatic biliary tract
Ultrasound 37:200-205.
obstruction: A retrospective study of 45 cases (1983-1993).
Nyland TG, Fisher PF. (1990) Evaluation of experimentally
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:478-482.
induced canine hepatic cirrhosis using duplex Doppler
Herman BA, Brawer RS, Murtaugh RJ, Hackner SG (2005)
ultrasound.Vet Radiol Ultrasound 31:189-194.
Therapeutic percutaneous ultrasound-guided cholecysto-
Nyland TG, Gillett NA (1982) Sonographic evaluation of
centesis in three dogs with extrahepatic biliary obstruction
experinental bile duct ligation in the dog. Vet Radiol
and pancreatitis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 227:1782-1786.
Ultrasound 23:252-260.
Hinkle Schwarlz SG, Mitchell SL, Keating JH, Chan DL
Nyland TG, Koblik PD, Tellyer SE (1999) Ultrasonographic
(2006) Liver lobe torsion in dogs: 13 cases (1995-2004).
evaluation of biliary cystadenomas in cats.Vet Radiol
J Am Vct Med Assoc 228:242-247.
Ultrasound 40:300-306.
Hittmair
KM,Vielgrader
HD,
Loupal
(2001)
Nyland TG, Park RD (1983) Hepatic ultrasonography in the
Ultrasonographic evaluation of gallbladder wall thickness
dog.Vet Radiol Ultrasound 24:74-84.
in cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 42:149-155.
Nyman HT, Kristensen AT, Flagstad A, McEvoy FJ (2004) A
Hudson LC, Hamilton WP, eds. (1993) Atlas of Feline
review of the sonographic assessment of tumor metastases
Anatomy forVeterinarians,1st edition.Philadelphia:WB
in liverand superficiallymph nodes. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
Saunders, 287 pp.
45:438-448.
Lamb CR (1996) Ultrasonographic diagnosis of congenital
O'Brien RT, Iani M, Delaney F, Young K (2004) Contrast
portosystcmic shunts in dogs: Results of a prospective
harmonic ultrasound of spontaneous liver nodules in 32
study. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 37:281-288.
dogs. Vet Radiol Ulltrasound 45:547-553.
Lamb CR (1998) Ultrasonography of portosystemic shunts in
Penninck D, Finn-Bodner ST (1998) Updates in interven-
dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
tional ultrasonography. Vet Clin North Am Small Anin
28:725-753.
Pract 28:1017-1040.
Lamb CR,Forster-van Hijfte MA, White RN, McEvoy FJ,
 RamirezS,Douglass JP, Robertson ID(2002)Ultrasonographic
Rutgers HC (1996a) Ultrasonographic diagnosis of con-
features of canine abdominal malignant histiocytosis.Vet
genital portosystemic shunt in 14 cats.J Small Anim Pract
Radiol Ultrasound 43:167-170.
35:205-209
Sato A, Solano M (2004) Ultrasonographic findings in
Lamb CR, Hartzband LE, Tidwell AT, Pearson SH (1991)
abdominal mast cell disease: A retrospective study of 19
Ultrasonographic findings in hepatic and splenic lympho-
patients.Vet Radiol Ultrasound 45:51-57.
sarcoma in dogs and cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
Schwarz LA,Penninck DG, Leveille-Webster C (1998)
32:117-120.
Hepatic abscesses in 13 dogs: A review of the ultrasono-
Lamb CR, Mahoney PN (1994) Comparison of three methods
graphic findings, clinical data and therapeutic options. Vet
for calculating portal blood flow velocity in dogs using
Radiol Ultrasound 39:357-365.
duplex-Doppler ultrasonography. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
Spaulding KA (1993) Ultrasound corner: Gallbladder wall
35:190-194.
thickness. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 34:270-272.
Lamb CR, Wriglcy RH, Simpson KW, et al. (1996b)
Stonewater JL, Lamb C, Shelling SH (1990) Ultrasonographic
 Ultrasonographic diagnosis of portal vein thrombosis in
features of canine hepatic nodular hyperplasia.Vet Radiol
four dogs.Vet Radiol Ultrasound 37:121-129.
Ultrasound 31:268-272.
Léveille R, Biller DS, Shiroma JT (1996) Sonographic evalua-
Szatmari V, Rothuizen J, van den Ingh GA, van Sluijs FJ,
tion of the common bile ducts in cats. I Vet Intern Med
Voorhout G (2004) Ulirasonographic findings in dogs with
10:296-299.
hyperanmonenia: 90 cases (2000-2002). J Am Vet Mcd
Mayhew PD, Holt DE,McLear RC,Washabau RJ (2002)
Assoc 224:717-727.
Pathogenesis and outcome of extrahepatic biliary obstruc-
Wang KW, Panceria DL, Al-Rukibat RK, Radi AZ (2004)
tion in cat. J Small Anim Pract 43:247-253.
Accuracy of ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration of
Mills P, Saverymuttu S, Fallowfield M, Nussey S, Joseph AE
the liver and cytologic findings in dogs and cats: 97 cases
(1990) Ultrasound in the diagnosis of granulomatous liver
(1990-2000).J Am Vet Med Assoc 224:75-78.
disease. Clin Radiol 41:113-115.
Whiteley MB, Feeney DA, Whiteley LO, Hardy RM (1989)
Newell SM, Selcer BA, Girard E, Roberts GD, Thompson JP,
Harrison JM (1998) Correlations between ultrasonographic
canine hepatic tumors:A review of 48cases.Ultrasound
findings and specific hepatic diseases in cats: 72 cases
Med 8:621-630.
(1985-1997).J Ain Vet Med Assoc 213:94-98.
Zeman RK, Taylor KJ, Roscnfield AT, Schwartz A, Gold JA
Nicoll RG, O'Brien R, Jackson MW (1998)Quantitative ultra-
(1981) Acute experimental biliary obstruction in the dog:
sonography ofthe liver inobese cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
Sonographic findings and clinical implications. Am J
39:47-50.
Roentgenol 136:965-967.
CHAPTERSEVEN
SPLEEN
Silke Hecht
PREPARATION AND
monly seen to form a "hook" between gastric fundus
and left kidney (Figure 7.2). The splenic parenchyma
SCANNING TECHNIQUE
is homogeneous and of a fine echotexture and is
covered by a thin, very hyperechoic capsule (Figure
Ultrasonographic examination of the spleen is usually
7.3). In comparison with liver and renal cortices, the
performed with the animal in dorsal recumbency. For
spleen is usually hyperechoic (Nyland et al. 1995)
evaluation of the craniodorsal extremity (head) of the
(Figure 7.4). Branches of the splenic vein are seen as
spleen in large and deep-chested dogs it, may be ben-
tubular anechoic structures within the splenic paren-
eficial to position the dog in right lateral recumbency
chyma and exit the spleen at the hilus (Figure 7.5).
and use a left intercostal approach. The abdomen and,
if necessary, the left caudal thoracic wall are clipped,
Splenic arteries are usually not seen.
and acoustic coupling gel is applied. Depending on the
sizc of the animal, a 5-to 10-MHz curvilinear or sector
transduccr is routinely used. Alternatively,because of
SONOGRAPHIC FINDINGS IN
the superficial location of thc splcen, use of a linear
transducer may be feasiblc, particularly in small dogs
SPLENIC DISORDERS
or in cats.
The cranial extremity of the spleen is located in thc
Splenomegaly (Normal Echogenicity)
left craniodorsal abdomen immediately caudal to the
Ultrasonographic assessment of splenic size is subjec-
stomach and adjacent to the body wall. Its position
tive. In dogs, the margins of the spleen appear rounded,
varies with gastric filling. The position of splenic
and the organ extends further caudally and to the right
extremities and splenic size are highly variable in dogs,
side of the abdomen. In cats, folding of the spleen
necessitating modification of the ultrasonographic
upon itself indicates splenic enlargement (Hanson et
approach in individual patients (Figure 7.1). After
al. 2001). Splenomegaly with normal echogenicity is a
examination of the cranial extremity of the spleen
frequent finding in dogs sedated with acepromazine
through a ventral abdominal or left intercostal
(O'Brien et al. 2004) (Figurc 7.6). However,it may also
approach, the spleen is traced to the hilus and caudal
be encountered secondary to extramedullary hemato-
extremity,whichcanbe done by positioning the trans
poiesis, infectious diseases, splenic torsion, or malig-
ducer in a plane transverse to the long axis of the
nant infiltration such as occurs in lymphoma and mast
spleen. However, since the spleen extends beyond the
cell tumors (Nyland et al. 1995; Saunders et al. 1998;
transducer's field of view in most dogs, a thorough
Hanson et al. 2001; Sato and Solano 2004) (Figure
examination of the abdomen with meandering probe
7.7).
movement is usually necessary to facilitate examina-
tion of the entire organ. In cats, the spleen is smaller
and more consistent in size and location.
Diffuse Echogenic Changes of
the SplenicParenchyma
SONOGRAPHICANATOMY OF
Generalized splenomegaly with parenchymal hetero-
THE NORMAL SPLEEN
geneity or hypoechogenicity can be observed in a
variety of splenic disorders, including extramedullary
Thc spleen is elongated and tongue-shaped in the
hematopoiesis, nodular hyperplasia, neoplastic infil-
long-axis view and triangular on cross section. Whereas
tration (e.g., mast cell or lymphoma) (Figures 7.8 and
the position of thc spleen is variable in dogs, the cranial
7.9), infection (Figure 7.10), and vascular compromise
extremity (head) is in a very dorsal location and com-
(Figures 7.11-7.13). A diffuse, lacy, hypoechoic
263
HEP
S
K
Spleen
UB
Figure 7.1.Normal anatomy and scanning technique in a dog. Left: A schematic representation of the spleen and its vari
able position in thc abdomcn.Ultrasound-probe positioninghas to be adapted to accommodate the situation in the individual
patient. LK, left kidney; and SI, small intestine. Right: A panoramic ultrasonographic view of the spleen, displaying its
relationship to the liver (HEP), small intestine (SI), left kidney (LK), and urinary bladder (UB).
4
B
of the spleen is in the near field.B: Image obtained with transverse transducer orientation.The cranial extremity of the spleen
(arrowheads) courses along the left abdominal wall laterally to the left kidney (LK), which is visible on cross section. The
central portion of the spleen is seen in the near field.
264
A
B
Figure 7.3. Normal feline spleen. A: Sagittal sonogram of a normal spleen. The spleen is visible in the near field as a homo-
 Aidreus e se sradde (spel uas  uads pu e go us asasu ia ( up  au on aso
 ginated triangular structure of homogeneous echotexture in the left cranial abdomen.
fat
Figure 7.4. Normal splenic echogenicity in a 3-year-old large breed dog. A: Comparison between normal splenic and hepatic
parenchyma. The cranial extremity of the spleen (S and arrowheads) curves dorsally along the liver (L) and is relatively
e s u ma  g a a go o a  n oe si axa   s  rn
B
Figure 7.5. Normal splenic veins in two dogs. A: Normal spleen in a 13-year-old shi tzu. A branch of the splenic vein is
leaving the spleen at the splenic hilus. B: Color Doppler image of a branch of the splenic vein leaving the hilus in a 12-year-
 old springer spaniel. There is normal low-velocity flow without evidence of turbulence or thrombosis. As it moves away from
the transducer, this flow appears blue on the color map.
265
1.7cm
2.6cm
Figure 7.6.Splenomegaly following sedation in a 7-year-old mixed-breed dog. A: Image of the spleen prior to sedation.
Maximum thickness of the spleen is 1.7cm. B: Splenic enlargement is seen approximately 15min after administration of
accpromazine. Maximum thickness of the spleen is 2.6cm.
Spleen
RK
B
Figure 7.7. Splenomegaly in a 7-year-old mixed-breed dog with lymphoma. A: On the ventrodorsal radiograph of the
B: Ultrasonographic image of the spleen at the level of the right kidney (RK). The spleen is cnlarged, within normal limits
for echogenicity, and smoothly marginated.
Figure 7.8.Splcnic mast cell tumor in a 9-year-old domes-
Figure 7.9. Splenic lymphoma in a 10-year-old mixed-
tic shorthair cat. The spleen is enlarged and has irregular
breed dog.The spleen is enlarged, slightly inhomogeneous,
contours. A small amount of anechoic peritoneal effusion
irregular, and hypoechoic.
outlines the margins of the spleen. Image courtesy of D.
Penninck.
266
Spleen 
Fat
Figure  7.10  Splenic  histoplasmosis  in  an  11l-year-old
miniature schnauzer. The spleen (arrowheads) is hypoechoic
 to the adjacent left kidney (LK) and inhomogeneous.
Figure 7.11.  Splenic infarction and necrosis in a 6-year-old
German shepherd. Enlarged and inhoimogeneous spleen
 outlined by anechoic abdominal effusion (*) caused by
 massivc infarction of undetermined etiology.
Figure 7.12. Splenic torsion in a 9-year-old standard poodle. Common features of splenic torsion. Left: Sonographic image
 of the spleen at the hilus, showing an echogenic thrombus obliterating the vessel lumen. Upon Doppler examination, no flow
was detected in the splenic veins. Right: Sonographic image of the splenic parenchyma. The spleen is enlarged and has a
 diffuse lacy hypoechoic echotexture. The adjacent abdominal fat is hyperechoic. Images courtesy of D. Penninck.
Figure 7.13. Splenic torsion in a 10-year-old Labrador retriever with acute abdominal pain. B-mode and power Doppler
images of the torsed spleen. Several regions show a characteristic anechoic, lacey echotexture consistent with infarction and
necrosis. Power Doppler revealed reduced blood flow. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
267
268SPLEEN
echotexture of the spleen is commonly encountered in
noses include nodular hyperplasia,extramedullary
dogs with splenic torsion (Saunders et al. 1998) and
hematopoiesis (Figures 7.14-7.16), hematoma (Figure
can be seen with extensive venous thrombosis.
7.17), infection (Figure 7.18), infiltrative neoplasia such
 as lymphoma, mast cell disease or disseminated his-
the degree of torsion and change over time.
tiocytic or poorly differentiated sarcoma (Figures 7.19
and 7.20), and metastatic disease (Figures 7.21-7.23)
FocalandMultifocalAbnormalitiesof
(Wrigley et al. 1988; Lamb et al. 1991; Crevier et al.
theSplenicParenchyma
2000; Hanson el al. 2001;Ramirez et al.2002; Sato and
Solano2004)
Splenic nodules of variable echogenicity and size are
A spotted echotexture of the spleen with multiple
a common and nonspecific finding. Diffcrential diag-
 small hypoechoic nodules is highly suggestive of
1.56cm
1.59cm
2.23cm
Figure 7.14. Nodular hyperplasia and extramedullary hematopoicsis in a dog. Ultrasonographic images of the spleen
obtained during abdominal staging for hind-leg mast cell tumor. Two nodular lesions were observed. A: One of these nodules
(between the cursors) has a smooth, well-defined, mildly hypoechoic border displacing thc splenic capsule.B: The second
nodule (betwcen the cursors) is more irregular and only slightly hypoechoic to the normal splenic parenchyma. Fine-needle
aspiration revealed the presence of nodular hyperplasia and extramedullary hematopoiesis involving these two separate
lesions. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
B
Figure 7.15. Nodular hypcrplasia in a 12-year-old golden retriever. On these longitudinal sonographic (A) and schematic
(B) images is a poorly defined, isoechoic to hyperechoic nodule (approximately 1-cm diameter) associated with the splenic
parenchyma (arrowheads) and deforming the contour (arrows) of the spleen (Sp).
269ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
lymphoma (Figure 7.24), although it can also be seen
in benign and other malignant conditions (Figure
7.23).
Strongly hyperechoic nodules along the mesenteric
border of the spleen, with or without distal acoustic
shadowing, are a common incidental finding espe-
cially in older dogs. These lesions represent myeloli-
pomas (Schwarz et al. 2001) (Figures 7.25-7.27). These
parenchyma, commonly along vessels. Their size and
number vary greatly. In rare instances, these lesions
can grow significantly (Figure 7.27).
Splcnic masses cause deformation of the splenic
bordcr. They are of variable shape, margination, and
echogenicity and may be cavitated (Saundcrs 1998).As
SPLEEN
Figure 7.17.Splenic hematomas in two dogs. A: Longi-
tudinal sonogram of the distal tip of the spleen, outlined on
its visceral surface by an irregularly hypoechoic region. This
lesion represents a subcapsular hematoma in this dog
Figure 7.16.Extramedullary hematopoiesis in a 4-year-old
recently hit by a car. Image courtesy of D. Penninck.
cat. The spleen is enlarged, and multiple ill-defined
B: Splenic hematoma in a 13-year-old Labrador retriever.
hypocchoic nodules and foci are associated with the splenic
An approximately 1.5-cm, mixed echogenic nodule (arrow-
parenchyma.
heads) is associated with the splenic parenchyma.
SPLEEN
B
Figure 7.18.Pyogranulomatous splenitis of undetermined etiology in a 5-year-old Rottweiler. Ultrasound (A) and schematic
ill-defined foci. On the ultrasound image, the affected parenchyma is also hyperattenuating, resulting in hypoechogenicity
in the far field.
270 SPLEEN
LEEN
0.90cm
Figure 7.19. Lymphoma in a shi tzu. There is a 0.9cm
Figure 7.22. Malignant splenic epithelial neoplasm (pre-
hypoechoic nodule (arrows) associated with the spleen.
sumably metastatic) in a 10-year-old golden retriever. There
were several hypoechoic nodules associated with the spleen,
one of which is shown and measures 1.3cm in diameter
(between the cursors)
SPLEEN
Figure 7.20.Disseminated histiocytic sarcoma in a 7-year-
old Bernese mountain dog.There are multiple hypoechoic
nodules throughout the spleen, some of which deform the
splenic border (arrow).
Figure 7.23.Metastatic anal sac adenocarcinoma in a dog
The splecn is enlarged and has extensively distributed
PLEEN
hypoechoic nodules. Fine-needle aspiration revealed epithe
lial metastatic disease throughout the spleen, liver, and
abdominal lymph nodes, although lymphoma was initially
expected based on the ultrasonographic features. Image
courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou
in the case of splenic nodules, splenic masses may
 be benign or malignant and cannot bc differentiated
based on their ultrasonographic appearance. Dif-
ferential diagnoses include benign lesions such as
nodular hyperplasia and hematomas (Tigures 7.28-
7.31), and malignancies such as hemangiosarcoma,
other sarcomas, round-cell neoplasms, and metastases
(Figures 7.32-7.41). According to recent publications)
Figure 7.21. Malignant splenic epithelial neoplasm (pre-
sumably metastatic) in a cat. Several hypoechoic nodules arc
benign splenic mass lesions are more common than
in the spleen. The one displayed on this image measures
malignant mass lesions in dogs (Fife et al. 2004).
0.8 × 0.6cm (betwcen the cursors).
Although rupture of a splenic mass with subsequent
SPLEEN
Figure 7.24.Lymphoma in a 6-year-old pit bull. There are
Figure 7.25.Splenic myelolipoma in an 11-year-old collie.
numerous small hypoechoic nodules throughout the spleen,
Close to a branch of the splenic vein is a focal, strongly
causing a spotted echotexture. This pattern is most com-
hyperechoicnodulcassociatedwith thevisceral border of
monly secn with lymphoma.
the spleen (arrow).
Figure 7.26.Splenic myelolipomas in a 12-year-old mixed-
breed dog. Multiple strongly hypcrcchoic nodules are associ-
ated with the visceral border of the spleen (arrows).The
largest nodule (between the cursors) measures 1.2 x 1.7cm.
B
Figure 7.27. Large splenic myelolipomas in a cat and a dog. A: Panoramic view of the spleen of a 8-year-old domestic
shorthair cat. Multiple strongly hyperechoic nodules and masslesions are associated with the splenic parenchyma, deforming
the capsule. The largest of these masses is associated with acoustic scattering in the far field (*), blurring the dorsal border of
the spleen and mass. B: A similar but larger hyperechoic mass, originating from the spleen (Sp),is seen in this dog referred
for a possible splenic hemangiosarcoma. A benign myelolipoma reaching 13cm wide was confirmed histologically after sple-
nectomy.Image B courtesy of M.A.d'Anjou.Image A courtesy of D.Penninck
271
SPLEEN
1298m
Figure 7.28. Large benign splenic masses in two dogs. A: Splenic nodular hyperplasia in an 11-year-old Labrador retriever.
nation indicated no evidence of malignancy. B: Nodular hyperplasia and hcmatoma in a 14-year-old mixed-breed dog. A
relatively homogeneous mass of 10 x 12cm (between the cursors) is associated with the splccn.
Mass
B
s are go s (a s pe () es  p e u su ss u ra ' n
s
Figure 7.30.Splenic nodular hyperplasia, hemorrhage, and
infarction in a 9-year-old Labrador retriever.An illdefined,
more than 10-cn, mixed echogenic and cavitated mass is asso-
ciated with the spleen. There was no evidence of malignancy
on histopathologic examination.
272
1:18:59
Figure 7.31. Splenic nodular hyperplasia and hemorrhage in a 13-year-old Labrador retriever. Follow up images of the
spleen in this dog previously diagnosed with hemangiosarcoma of the thoracic wall.A: The initial examination shows a wcll-
circumscribed hypoechoic nodule of approximately1-cm diameter associated with the spleen (arrow).B:Examination 3 weeks
later shows that the nodule (between the cursors) has doubled in size (2.2-cm diameter) and is almost anechoic, indicating
cavitation.There was no evidence of malignancy onhistopathologic examination.
B
SPLEEN
SPLEEN
SPLEEN
SPLEEN
11.16cm
Figure 7.32. Variable appearances of splenic hemangiosarcoma in dogs. A: An approximately 6-cm-wide, mixed echogenic
and mainly hypoechoic mass was identified in this 12-year-old Border collie. B: A round, well-circumscribed, mixed cchogcnic
and cavitated mass of 8-cm diameter was identified in this 4-year-old golden retriever. C: Il-defined, mixed echogenic mass
(arrows) associated with the spleen of this 9-year-old golden retriever, replacing most of the normal parenchyma. D: Mixed
echogenic mass of more than 1l-cm diameter associated with the spleen (between the cursors) in this 8-year-old (Gierman
shepherd.
273
Figure 7.33. Splenic hemangiosarcoma and hemoabdomen in a large-breed dog. A: Ultrasound image of the spleen in which
 an abdominal mass was palpated. An irregular, well-defined, hypoechoic mass measuring approximately 7cm wide is
u a u as ae s a  s a n sssa rs sn o r n as on p
field, which confirms the origin of this mass. The main splenic vein (SpV) is displaced by the mass. B: Severe, echogenic,
 peritoncal effusion (F) is also present, consistent with hemorrhage. SI, small intestine. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
SPLEEN
Figure 7.34. Malignant fibrous histiocytoma in a dog. On
this panoramic ultrasound view, a solid, mixed echogenic
Figure 7.35. Histiocytic sarcoma in a 9-year-old golden
mass (between the cursors) over 8 cm long is associated with
retriever. A large, nearly isoechoic splenic mass (M) and a
the cranial aspect of the spleen.
 similar echogenic nodule (arrowheads) deforming the splenic
 contour are present. The histopathologic diagnosis was
histiocytic sarcoma. Image courtesy of D. Penninck.
SPLEEN
 Figure 7.36. Presumptive malignant fibrous histiocytoma
Figure 7.37. Poorly differentiated splenic sarcoma in an 8
in a 12-year-old cat. There are multiple hypoechoic nodules
 year-old boxer. There is an approximately 10cm mainly
in the spleen, each measuring up to 2cm in maximum
hypoechoic and inhomogeneous mass associated with the
diameter.
spleen. Normal spleen is present in the near field (arrow).
275ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
4.12cm
Figure 7.40.Splenic mast cell tumor in a cat.A homoge-
neous mass of medium echogenicity is associated with the
spleen, which measures more than4cm in diameter (between
the cursors). A small volume of abdominal effusion is at the
periphery of this mass, particularly in the near field
(arrowhead).
Figure 7.38. Splenic sarcoma in a 10-year-old cat.A hom0-
geneous hypoechoic nodule (between the cursors) associated
with the spleen is deforming the splenic border.
SPLEEN
Figure 7.41.Splenic hemangiosarcoma and hemoabdo-
men in an 8-year-old Labrador retriever.There are two
masses (arrows), which are characterized by a hypoechoic
rim and a hyperechoic center (target lcsions). A large volume
Figure 7.39.Round-cell tumor of the spleen in a 10-year-
 of echogenic abdominal effusion (F) is noted.
old coonhound. There is severe generalized splenomegaly,
and the normal parenchyma is replaced by numerous ill-
defined mass lesions of variable echogenicity.
described as target lesions, are more commonly associ-
ated with malignant processes such as metastasis
hemoabdomen is more frequenlly encountered in
(Cuccovillo and Lamb 2002) (Figure 7.41). However,
cases of splenic malignancies (Figures 7.33, 7.37, 7.40,
thcse may also be seen with benign processes such as
and 7.41), it also occurs in benign lesions. Splenic cysts
nodular hyperplasia. Malignant neoplasms may occa-
and abscesses are rare and manifest as fluid-filled cavi-
sionally disrupt thc splenic capsule and invade the
ties of variable echogenicity within the splenic paren-
adjacent mesentery (Figure 7.42).
chyma, similar to hepatic cysts and abscesses. These
cannotbe differentiatedfrom hematomas or cavitated
VascularDisorders
masses based on their ultrasonographic appearance
Nodules or masses with a hypoechoic rim and a
Thrombosis of splenicvein branchesis occasionally
hyperechoic to isoechoic center, which have been
encountered as the result of altered bloodflowor
276 SPLEEN
Mass
Figure 7.42.  Poorly differentiated carcinoma in a 7-year-old Labrador retriever. Left: An ill-defined mixed echogenic mass
 suspected to be infiltrating the adjacent hyperechoic mesentery (arrows). Right: The corresponding modified labeled sono-
 gram. Sp, spleen.
A
B
Figure 7.43. Splenic vein thrombus without evidence of splenic infarction in a 12-year-old springer spaniel. A: Echogenic
 material is associated with one of the branches of the splenic vein. The splenic parenchyma is within normal limits. B: On
color Doppler examination, blood flow is noted around the thrombus (arrow), indicating incomplete vascular occlusion.
coagulation (Hardie et al. 1995). It manifests as echo-
Splenic torsion is a rare disorder in dogs. Usually,
genic material within the otherwise anechoic lumen of
there is progressive enlargement of the spleen, with
the vessel. Thrombi may remain inconsequential if 
decreased to absent blood flow. The parenchymal
occlusion of  the  vessel  is incomplete  or  collateral 
echogenicity and echotexture can vary as the conges-
vessels provide venous drainage of the affected areas
 tion, hemorrhage, or infarction progresses. The paren-
(Figures 7.43 and 7.44). Occasionally, malignant splenic
chyma is typically mottled, and lacy anechoic to
tumors invade splenic vessels and cause splenic vein
hypoechoic areas are observed, focally or diffusely,
thrombosis and splenic infarction (Figure 7.45).
throughout the spleen (Saunders et al. 1998; Mai 2006)
When splenic infarction occurs, the affected areas
(Figures 7.12, 7.13, and 7.49). Static, echogenic thrombi
 appear hypoechoic, sharply demarcated from the adja-
can sometimes be seen in vascular lumens (Figure
cent parenchyma, and show decreased or absent blood
7.49). Additionally, the bordering fat can become
 flow on color Doppler or power Doppler examination.
hyperechoic, and a hilar, perivenous, hyperechoic tri-
 In contrast to splenic masses, infarcts do not tend to
angle has been described as a relatively specific sign
distort the normal organ contour, although this can be
of acute splenic torsion in dogs (Mai 2006) (Figure
seen (Figures 7.46-7.48).
7.50). However, these changes can also be found with
Splenic Vein Branches
Figure 7.44. Chronic splenic vein thrombosis in an 1l-year-old Labrador retriever. Strongly echogenic material is within
the lumen of the splenic vein branches (arrows). Ultrasound-beam attenuation is distal to one of the thrombi (arrowheads),
indicating fibrosis and/or mineralization of the clot. There is no evidence of parenchymal changes suggesting infarction.
Figure 7.45.Poorly differentiated carcinoma withvascular
invasion in a 7-year-old Labrador retriever (the same dog as
in Figure 7.44). On power Doppler examination, no blood flow
is detected within the affected splenic vein branch,even
though the lumen appears hypoechoic.
B
area is observed at the caudal extremity of the spleen (between the cursors), which is confined to the normal splenic border
without evidence of a mass effect. B: In another dog, the infarcted area presents a mass effect at the tip of the spleen (arrows).
Image B courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
277
Fat
Figure  7.47. Splenic infarct  in a  4-year-old Australian
Figure 7.48. Splenic infarct in a 15-year-old golden
shepherd. A sharply demarcated hypoechoic area is associ-
 retriever. An inhomogeneous lacy hypoechoic area within
ated with the body of the spleen (between the cursors).
the spleen does not show blood flow on color Doppler
 Echogenic material, consistent with a thrombus, is within the
examination. The fat at the dorsal margin of the spleen
lumen of the contributing splenic vein (arrow).
is hyperechoic.
B
fat
Figure 7.49. Splenic torsion in a 6-year-old standard poodle. Left: Sonographic image of thc spleen at the time of presenta-
m mo ou uoexa idoa on ais aon s eu um pue sady Ainouso s uas au uon
d os a o a ss  (e s si sn oanar e pe sa os  r p
chyma 2 days later. The spleen is enlarged and has a diffuse, lacy hypoechoic echotexture. The adjacent fat is hyperechoic.
B
fat
Figure 7.50. Perivenous hyperechoic triangle at the level of the splenic hilus in two dogs. A hyperechoic triangle (arrows)
is a common feature observed with splenic torsion, as seen in A. This feature can also be observed with massive splenic
infarction, as seen in B. This second dog was suffering from severe necrotic pancreatitis and progressively developed splenic
infarction. At surgery, the spleen was not twisted, but was removed because of the complete venous thrombosis. In each case.
the adjacent fat was hyperechoic. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
279ATLASOF SMALL ANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
Sp
Figure 7.51.Lymphoma in a shi tzu. In the far field to the
Figure 7.53.Clostridial splenitis in a 10-year-old grey-
spleen (Sp) are two enlarged lymph nodes (0.9 and 1.3 cm in
hound. Multiple small confluent hyperechoic foci are associ-
diameter, respectively; between the cursors) adjacent to a
ated withthecranialportionofthespleen.Theinhomogeneous
branch of the splenic vein (arrowhead).
hypoechoic area distal to this lesion (dirty shadowing
arrowheads)is consistent with gas inclusions within the
splenic parenchyma.
 Gas inclusions in the spleen, though rarely seen, are
indicative of infection with gas-producing bacteria
(Gaschen et al. 2003) (Figure 7.53). Gas typically
appearsashyperechoicfociwithreverberation
artifacts.
INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES
Fine-needle aspiration of the spleen is routinely per-
formed and is particularly useful in the diagnosis of
diffuse infiltrative disorders. In most cases, freehand
Figure 7.52.Extraskeletal osteosarcoma in a 10-year-old
 aspiration is possible because of the spleen's superfi-
German shepherd. An irregularly marginated hyperechoic
cial location. A guide may be useful in cases of deep
mass lesion associated with the splenic parenchyma shows
focal lesions. Tissue-core biopsy of a splenic lesion is
strong distal ultrasound-beam attenuation (arrowheads)
not routinely performed. However, in cases of incon-
clusive fine-needle aspiration, biopsy of poorly vascu-
larized mass lesions may be considered. Aspiration of
extensivevenous thrombosis and/or diffuse neoplas-
fluid-filled splenic mass lesions such as hemangiosar-
tic infiltration (e.g., lymphoma).
comas or hcmatomas frequently remainsinconclusive
because of blood dilution.
OtherAbnormalities
 n n  s  s 
REFERENCES
ultrasonographically. Enlarged lymph nodes may be
visualized in cases of metastatic neoplasia as isoechoic
Crevicr FR, Wrigley RH (2000) The sonographic features of
to hypoechoic, rounded, soft-tissue nodules along the
splenic lymphoid hyperplasia in 31 dogs: A retrospective
splenic vessels close to the hilus (Figure 7.51).
study (1980-2000) [Abstract]. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
Strongly hypcrcchoic areas with strong distal acous-
41:566
tic shadowing are indicative of dystrophic mineraliza-
Cuccovillo A, Lamb CR (2002) Cellular features of sono-
tion or a mineralized neoplasm such as extraskeletal
graphic target lesions of the liver and spleen in 21 dogs
osteosarcoma (Figure 7.52)
and a cat.Vet Radiol Ultrasound 43:275-278.
280SPLEEN
Fife WD,Samii VF, Drost WT, Mattoon JS,Hoshaw-Woodard
 Diagnostic Ultrasound. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, PP
S (2004) Comparison between malignant and nonmalig-
128-143.
nant splenic masses in dogs using contrast-enhanced
O'Brien RT, Waller KR, Osgood TL (2004) Sonographic
computed tomography. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 45:289-
features of drug-induced splenic congestion. Vet Radiol
297.
Ultrasound 45:225-227.
Gaschen L, Kircher P, Venzin C, Hurter K, Lang J (2003)
 RamirezS, Douglass JP, Robertson ID (2002) Ultrasonographic
Imaging diagnosis: The abdominal air-vasculogram in a
features of canine abdominal malignant histiocytosis. Vet
dog with splenic torsion and clostridial infection. Vet
Radiol Ultrasound 43:167-170.
Radiol Ultrasound 44:553-555.
Sato AF, Solano M (2004) Ultrasonographic findings in
Hanson JA, Papageorges M, Girard E, Menard M, Hebert P
 abdominal mast cell disease: A retrospective study of 19
(2001) Ultrasonographic appearance of splenic disease in
patients. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 45:51-57.
101 cats.Vet Radiol Ullrasound 42:441-445.
Saunders HM (1998) Ultrasonography of abdominal cavitary
Hardie EM, Vaden SL, Spaulding K, Malarkey DE (1995)
parenchymal lesions. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Splenic infarction in 16 dogs: A rctrospcctivc study. J Vet
Pract 28:755-775.
Intern Med 9:141-148.
Saunders HM, Neath PJ, Brockman DJ (1998) B-mode and
Lamb CR, Hartzband LE, Tidwell AS, Pearson SH (1991)
Doppler ultrasound imaging of the spleen with canine
Ultrasonographic findings in hepatic and splenic lympho-
splenic torsion: A retrospective evaluation. Vet Radiol
sarcoma in dogs and cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
Ultrasound 39:349-353.
32:117-120.
Schwarz LA, Penninck DG, Gliatto J (2001) Canine splenic
Mai W (2006) The hilar perivenous hyperechoic triangle as a
myelolipomas. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 42:347-348.
sign of acute splenic torsion in dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
Wrigley RH, Konde LJ, Park RD, Lebel JL (1988)
47:487491.
Ultrasonographic features of splenic lymphosarcoma in
Nyland TG, Mattoon JS, Herrgesell ER, Wisner ER (1995)
dogs: 12 cascs (1980-1986). J Am Vet Med Assoc 193:
Spleen. In: Nyland TG, Mattoon JS, eds. Small Animal
1565-1568.
CHAPTER EIGHT
GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT
Dominique Penninck
PREPARATION AND
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC
SCANNING PROCEDURE
ANATOMY OF THE NORMAL
Animals can be scanned while they are in dorsal
GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT
recumbency, right or left recumbency, or standing
position,if needed, to optimize an acoustic window by
The wall thickness and layering, and relative motility
displacing the intraluminal fluid to the rcgion of inter-
of different segments of the GI tract, can be evaluated.
est. Left lateral recumbency helps with the evaluation
The thickness of the GI tract can be measured by
of the fundus, whcreas right lateral recumbency
placing calipers on the outer aspect of the serosa and
improvcs thc evaluation of the pylorus and duode-
on the mucosal inner border.
num. The standing position can be helpful for evaluat-
Table 8.1 lists the range of normal thickness of
ing the ventral aspect of the pylorus and body of the
the GI wall in dogs and cats (Penninck et al. 1989;
stomach. However, the results of these positional
Newell et al. 1999; Goggin et al. 2000; Delaney et al.
studies also depend on a dog's conformation, the
2003).
degree of stomach dilation, the nature of gastric con-
 The gastric wall is challenging to measure mainly
tents, and palient cooperation.
when the stomach is collapsed. There is significant
A real-time scanner with a high-frequency (7.5MHz
difference between the thicknesses of the rugal
and higher) sectorial, curvilinear, or linear transducer
folds and interrugal folds.The thickness varies
is recommended. High-frequency probes optimize the
depending on the degree of distension and the size of
evaluation of the gastrointestinal (GI) wall layering.
the dog. The mean of the observed rate of peristalsis
Curvilinear probes with a small footprint are useful
is 4-5 contractions per minute in dogs. The descending
because they can more easily be placed below the rib
n a st u  si sop  onp
cage or between ribs for the assessment of the stomach
of the small bowel. The ileum in cats can easily be
and proximal duodenum.Transverse and longitudinal
ns  e d s  
views of the GI segments are required to fully assess
layer.
the thickness and the extent of a suspected lesion
The colon, oftcn gas or feces filled, has a thinner wall
(Figure 8.1).
than the small bowel in dogs and cats. Composite
Little preparation is needed; a fast of 12h can reduce
images of the main segments of the GI tract in dogs
interference with gastric contents and the associated
and cats illustrate their main features (Figures 8.3 and
gas, but the results are inconsistcnt. Gas in the GI tract
8.4).
is the most common cause of imaging artifacts such as
Five ultrasonographic layers can be identified
reverbcration, comet tail, and acoustic shadowing
throughout the GI tract. Froin the lumen to the
(Figure 8.2).
serosal surface, one can identify the hyperechoic
281
$pleen
location of the main gastrointestinal segments, with placements of the probe to fully evaluate some of these segments.Plan
A shows the position of the probe on the stomach.Both transverse (top sonographic image) and longitudinal images (bottom
sonographic imagc) arc obtaincd by sliding thc probe along the long axis of the stomach.Plan B shows the position of the
probe on the descending duodenum. Both transverse (top sonographic image) and longitudinal images (bottom sonographic
image) of this bowel segment are displayed. Plan C shows the position of the probe on the descending colon.Both transverse
(top sonographic image) and longitudinal images (bottom sonographic image) of the colon are displayed.
seen. In this 10 year-old corgi, the most distal portion of the esophagus (E) is visible. In the same image is a transverse view
of the aorta (Ao) and the fundus of the stomach.B: The stomach is easily recognized by its location, the presence. of rugal folds,
and its peristaltic activity. When the stomach is collapsed like in this dog, it is difficult to assess the wall thickness accurately.
Note the adjacent transverse colon (C) located caudal to the stomach body. C: The proximal duodenum (D) is a superficial and
rectilinear segment coursing along the right lateral abdominal wall. The duodenum has a thicker wall than the remaining small
bowel. Another fluid-filled intestinal segment is in the near field, consistent with a segment of jejunum (I) D: In the proximal
portion of the descending duodenum, the duodenal papilla, seen on transverse plane on this picture (between the cursors) can
easily be identified. Occasionally, as in this dog, a small anechoic (fluid filled) lumen can be seen. E: Jejunal segments are freely
looping in the midabdomen. The wallayering is visible. F: The ileocecocoli junction is difficult to identify because gas is often
collected at that location. In this dog, a small amount of fluid at the junction facilitated its identification on a transverse plane.
Note the smaller-diameter segment of the ileum (I) joining the ascending colon (C). G: The colon, often gas or feces filled, has
a thinner wall than the small bowel. In this dog, the finely layered colonic wall is 1.5mm thick.
282
Figure 8.2.Artifacts coimmonly seen associaled with the gastrointestinal tract.A: Gas in the colon of this dog creates a
reverberation artifact (R) masking most of the far wall. The sound is entirely reflcctcd back from the gas and then bounces
back and forth betwccn thc probe and the gas, creating multiple echoes from one ultrasound pulse. B and C: The mixture of
gas and fecal material in the gastrointestinal tract often creates acoustic shadowing (S) appearing as an area of low-amplitude
           ss     ss
homogeneity.
Figure8.3.
283
Bladder
in an adult cat. A small amount of gas in the lumen prevents complete assessment of the far wall. Rugal folds protrude into
the lumen (arrows). B: Transverse sonogram of the descending duodenum (between the cursors). The wall layering is visible.
The gas-filled colon associated with shadowing is on the right side of the duodenum. C: Several loops of jejunum, containing
fluid and gas, are present in this sonogram (arrows). There is no significant difference between the thickness of duodenum
and jejunum in cats. D: Transverse sonogran of the ileum. The gas-filled cecum is on the right of the ileum, and the ileum
is entering the echogenic fluid-filled ascending colon (arrows). This short segment of bowel has morc prominent submucosa
and muscularis than the remaining bowel segments in cats. Thcsc characteristic features have been referred as the "wagon-
wheel" sign in cats. E: Transverse sonogram of the feces-filled descending colon in a normal cat. The thin wall and its layering
are barely visible (arrows), just ventral to the hyperechoic interface created by the presence of feces and its associated shadow
in the far field.
284
lumen
mucosa
submucosa
muscularis
subserosa/
serosa
can easily be identified.B: Schematic representation of the bowel wall layers.The lumen is a bright interface in the center of
the bowel, surrounded by the relatively thick mucosa (hypoechoic), thin submucosa (hyperechoic), thin muscularis (hy-
poechoic),and thin subserosa/serosa (hyperechoic).
gastric lumen. It may or may not be associated with imaging artifacts. In this dog, small, rounded, echogenic balls of food
can be identified in the gastric lumen. B: A large amount of food or large pieces of food can occasionally mimic a mass in the
stomach. A large poorly echogenic“mass" was seen in this dog presented becausc of vomiting (*). The“mass" was surrounded
by a small amount of gas and mucus. During the real-time examination, the content was moving within the gastric lumen.
Note the absence of artifact with this pattern. The gastrointestinal wall can be fully evaluated. D: The fluid pattern is charac-
terized by anechoic to uniformly echogenic lurinal contents. This pattern optimizes the visualization of the wall layers on
cach side of the lumen. LU, lumen of the bowel. E: The gas pallern appears as an intraluminal, hyperechoic, reflective surface
with acoustic shadowing and prevents cvaluation of deeper structures. At the ileocolic junction in this cat, a small amount
 of gas is seen in the ascending colon. The gas is associated with a reverberation artifact.
286 GASTROINTESTINAITRACT
Table 8.1.
Reference table for normal range of wall thickness for
the different segments of the gastrointestinal tract in
dogs and cats
Wall Thickness
Dog
Cat
Stomach
1.7-3.6mm
Duodenum
3-6mmb
2.0-2.5mm
Jejunum
2-5mmb
2.0-2.5mm
lleum
2-4mm
2.5-3.2mm
Colon
2-3mm
1.4-2.5mm
Varies with distension of the stomach andmeasurements taken
at the rugal or the interrugal level.
Figure 8.6.Continued
Body weight correlation exists (Delaney et al. 2003).
mucosal interface in contact with the lumen,the
8.6E) has a thin, layered wall and often contains gas
hypoechoic mucosa, the hyperechoic submucosa, the
and feces.
hypoechoic muscular layer, and the hyperechoic
subserosa and serosa (Figure 8.5). The mucosal layer
often is thicker than the muscularis layer, but mucosa
and muscularis can be of equal thickness during
SONOGRAPHIC FEATURES
peristaltism.
There is a good morphological correlation between
OF GASTROINTESTINAL
the ultrasonographic appearance and the histological
DISORDERS
layers.
The normal luminal contents can vary and consist of
Intussusception
food, mucus, fluid, or gas (Figure 8.6).
The distal esophagus, which can be occasionally
The main ultrasonographic feature of an intussuscep-
seen on ultrasound in small dogs (Figure 8.3A), is dif-
 tion is the multilayered appearance of the wall (called
ficult to access because its position is cranial to the
also concentric rings or ring sign) representing the
diaphragm and because of the interposition of gas in
 the surrounding lungs.
intussuscipiens (Figure 8.7).
The stomach, which is the largest portion of the GI
  s p q ss p sop 
tract, can be identified easily by its rugal folds (Figures
et al. 2003), the appearance of intussusception varies
8.1A, 8.3B, and 8.4A).
somewhat with the location and length of the GI
The descending duodenum (Figures 8.1B and 8.3C),
segment involved, the duration of the process, and
which is the thickest segment of small bowel in dogs,
the orientation of the scan plane relative to the axis of
has a superficial and rectilinear course along the right
the intussusception. The intussuscipiens (outer
lateral abdominal wall.
bowel segment) is often thickened, edematous,
The duodenal papilla (Figure 8.3D) is identified
and hypoechoic, whereas the thickness and layering
easilyin the proximalportion of the descending
duodenum.
nated portion can involve different segments of the
The ileum in cats (Figure 8.4D) is a short bowel
GI tract, such as the stomach (Figure 8.8), small
segment that has prominent submucosa and muscula-
bowel (Figures 8.9 and 8.10), or colon (Figures 8.11 and
ris. The ilcocecocolic junction can be challenging
8.12).
toidentifyin dogs bccausc thc（
cecum is most
Gastric intussusception is rare, but when encoun-
commonly gas filled (Figure 8.3F). In cats, the ileoce-
tered can be challenging to diagnosc ultrasonographi-
cocolic junction (Figure 8.4D) can be more easily rec-
cally (Hoffman et al. 2003; Lec ct al. 2005). Frequently,
ognized. The colon (Figures 8.1C, 8.2, 8.3G, 8.4E, and
invaginated mesenteric fat is associated with the intus-
287ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
LT
Fat
A
Intussusceptum
B
Intussuscipiens
Fat
Figure 8.7.Intussusception in a cat. Illustrations of the rclationship of the intussuscipiens, intussusceptum, and surround-
ing structures. On the top (A) is the longitudinal sonogram of a jejunoileal intussusception and its corresponding schematic
illustration. On the bottom (B) is the transverse sonogram of a jejunoileal intussusccption and its corresponding schermatic
illustration. The intestinal lumen (Lu) is dilated with fluid because of mechanical obstruction, and hypcrcchoic fat is invagi-
nated with the intussusceptum within the intussuscipiens.
suscipiens. On occasions, inflammatory pseudocysts,
genicity, depending on the makeup of their material
enlarged lymph nodes (Figure 8.12B), foreign bodies
(Figure 8.16).
(Figure 8.9), or tumoral mass (Figure 8.13) in older
Independently from the type of foreign body, the
 patients can be seen within or near the intussusception
presence of bright interface associated with strong
site.
shadowing is highly suggestive of a foreign material
At times, complex lesions affecting the GI tract, such
(Tidwell and Penninck 1992). Feces in the colon can
 as redundant or hyperplastic mucosa protruding into
simulate foreign material, and compact fecal material
the its lumen, can simulate the patterm of intussuscep-
is similarly associated with shadowing. It is thus criti-
tion (Figure 8.14). By evaluating the lesion in sevcral
cal to identify accurately the segment of the intestinal
planes, one can avoid such pitfalls.
tract, especially differentiating small bowel from colon
(Figure 8.2). Occasionally, the contour of the interface
ForeignBodies
can enable the identification of the type of foreign
body (Figure 8.17).
GI foreign bodies greatly vary in size, shape, and echo-
Linear foreign bodies present as bright linear
genicity. Segmental fluid or gas accumulation within
interfaces, commonly associated with shadowing,
the stomach or part of the intestinal tractis an indicator
and the affected bowel segment often appears
 of mcchanical ileus (obstruction). When present, abnor-
plicated (Figure 8.18). The degree of plication varies
mal fluid distension facilitates the detection of foreign
with duration and severity. Intestinal distension
material (Figure 8.15).
often is less pronounced than with larger obstructive
Balls are easily identified because of their character-
foreign bodies. Linear foreign bodies vary in diamcter,
istic curvilinear interface. They may vary in echo-
 contour, and length and can be associated with largcr
Stomach
Stomach
Figure 8.8.Duodenogastric intussusception. Illustration of a duodenogastric intussusception in a 6-year-old male Labrador
retriever with glomerulonephritis and presented because of severe, acute vomiting. The most proximal portion of the duo-
denum is invaginatcd within the pylorus, which protrudes within the fluid-filled gastric body (Stomach). The gastric wall
was severely thickened and hypoechoic because of severe edema (arrows). This change was misinterpreted as a mass.
D,duodenum.
FB
jejunojejunal intussusception identified in a 3-year-old standard poodle. The intussuscepted seginent contains a linear foreign
body (FB) associated with acoustic shadowing (arrowheads). The invaginated hyperechoic fat is crescent shaped at the center
289ATIAS OF SMALL ANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
Figure 8.10. Jejunal intussusception. Transverse sonographic (A) and schematic (B) images of a jejunoduodenal intussus-
ception diagnosed in this 6-year-old Mallese terrier, which had progressive weight loss and inappetence over the previous 2
months.A foreign body was identified in the stomach and proximal duodenum (not seen in this image). The layers of both
segments of bowel are mostly intact. Only a small amount of fat (F) is invaginated. Lu, lumen of the intussuscepted
segment.
B
Figure 8.11. Colonic intussusception. Transverse sonographic (A) and schematic (B) images of a distal colocolonic intus-
susception detected in this 13-year-old cat, which had a history of 3 months straining to defecate and bloody stool. A multi-
layered appearance of the colon is notcd. Bl, bladder; and Lu, lumen of intussuscepted colonic segment.
portions that can remain anchored in the pyloric
Gastric trichobezoars, commonly referred to as
antrum.
hairballs, are commonly seen in cats. These compact
Thc presence of GI parasites can mimic the appear-
foreign bodies appear as irregular bright interfaces
ance of linear foreign bodies. Roundworms (Ascaris)
with a strong, uniform, clean acoustic shadow (Figure
appear as smooth, tubular hyperechoic structures
8.20A).In dogs and cats, Several foreign bodies can
(Figure 8.19). Shadowing is usually not observed with
be encountered that have variable size, shape
these adult parasites.
echogenicity, and acoustic shadowing. The ultrasound
Figure 8.12. Intussusceptions. A: Corresponding transverse
ultrasonographic (left) and schematic (right) imagcs of an ileo-
colic intussusception (cursors)in a cat. The ileum (arrows) is
identified as the
intussuscepted
segment
within
the colon. Notc the hyperechoic intussuscepted fat asym-
metricallydistributed around theintussusceptedileum
B: Longitudinal ultrasonographic image of a jejunojejunal intus-
() au      e n
is identified in the intussusception.
Figure 8.13. Intussusception and intestinal mass. Transverse sonographic (A) and schematic (B) images of a large poorly
echogenic mass associated with an intussusception in a 13-year-old golden retriever. The mass was diagnosed as a colonic
adenocarcinoma (cursors). F, invaginated fat; and Lu,lumen of intussusceptum.
291ATLAS OF SMALLANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
GB
D
Figure 8.14. Chronic mucosal hyperplasia in a young French bulldog. Transverse (A) and sagittal (B) sonograms of an
exuberant nodular lesion at the pylorus of this 4-month-old French bulldog with a history of lethargy and regurgitation. In
stomach. However, on one of the parasagittal planes (C, and corresponding schematic image D), the asymmelrical but cir-
cumferential lesion protruding into the gastric lumen is more clearly defined as originating from the pyloric wall. The final
diagnosis after surgical rcsection was chronic mucosal hyperplasia.Duo, duodenum; GB, gallbladder; L, liver; lu, lumen of
pyloric antrum; and Pyl, pylorus.
features depend on the physical properties of the
locally thickened, and focal loss of layering is
material.
common.
Perforating foreign bodies, such as ingested teriyaki
At times, foreign material accumulates at a patho-
sticks, are usually anchored within the stomach and
 logically narrowed intestinal site. The narrowing can
may affect the surrounding soft tissue within and
be caused by intussusception (Figure 8.10), post-
outside the cranial abdominal cavily(Penninck and
traumatic or surgical stricture, or focal neoplastic
Mitchell 2003) (Figure 8.21). The perforated wall is
infiltrate (Figure 8.22).
Figure 8.15. Duodenal obstructive foreign body. A: Transverse sonogram of the fluid distended stomach of an 8-year-old
Lhapsa apso that had suffered 3 days of vomiting and a painful abdomen. Decreased gastric motility is noted during the
examination. Lu, lumen of stomach. B: The descending duodenum is also fluid distended up to the level of the foreign mate-
rial (about 2cm wide [cursors]). Note the strong, uniform acoustic shadowing beyond the bright interface of the foreign body
Lu,lumen of descending duodenum.
A
Figure 8.16. Gastric foreign bodies: play balls. A: Longitudinal sonogram of the pyloric region of a dog presented because
of vomiting. A large (4.6-cm diameter),rounded, poorly echogenic structure, associated with moderate acoustic shadowing.
is between the cursors. A spongy ball was retrieved endoscopically. B: In this other dog, the ball appears as a bright curvilinear
interface associated with strong acoustic shadowing.
292
3.83cm
3.83cm
Figure 8.17. Intestinal foreign body: peach pit. Longitudinal sonographic (A) and schematic (B) images of a bowel segment
of a 5-year-old cocker spaniel that had acute vomiting. A peach pit is in the lumen (Lu) of a mildly fluid-distended bowel
segment and has a characteristic curved interface with evenly spaced small protuberances in the near field. Note the uniform
strong acoustic shadow associated with the foreign body.
InflammatoryDiseases
both inflammatory and neoplastic diseases.As there
is often marked focal thickening with loss of layering,
Wall thickening is the most common finding in inflam-
the underlying disorder cannot be characterized
matory diseases, but this finding is not specific. The
reliably.
severity of the thickening is not a reliable feature for
Gastric wall edema, which is commonly associated
distinguishing different inflammatory from neoplastic
with underlying inflammation and ulceration, appears
diseases. Symmetry, extent of the wall thickening, and
as extensive and moderate thickening with altered lay-
layer identification are useful parameters in distin-
ering. A thin inner hypoechoic layer borders the
guishing inflammation from neoplasia (Penninck et al.
remaining finely striated wall (Figure 8.25). Because of
2003). Inflammation is usually characterized by exten-
the degree of thickening and the disrupted layering,
sive and symmetrical wall thickening with preserved
this condition could easily be mistaken for a tumor.
layering. However, depending on the severity of the
Uremic gastritis or gastropathy is commonly encoun-
inflammation and the presence of wall edema or hem-
tered in patients with chronic urcmia. The ultrasono-
  s s e a  a 
graphic features are a modcratcly thickened gastric
echogenicity or relative thickness of one or more
wall with prominent rugal folds and a hyperechoic
layers.
line at the mucosal-luminal interface secondary to
In gastritis, diffuse or localized wall thickening with
mineralization of the mucosa (Grooters et al. 1994)
decreased motility can be identified.Commonly the
(Figure 8.26).
stomach is collapsed during the ultrasound evalua-
Common intestinal inflammatory diseases such as
tion, limiting accurate assessment of the wall thick-
lymphocytic-plasmacytic enteritis are associated with
ness. In severe gastritis, the wall thickening can be
mild to moderate wall thickening that most commonly
associated with increased echogenicity or decreased
affects several or all intestinal segments with a variable
visualization of the wall layers (Figure 8.23).
degree of severity. Different ultrasonographic features
Gastric ulcers may be identified as discrete, mucosal
are encountered: mild to moderate wall thickening
defects outlined by hyperechoic microbubbles accu-
 affecting primarily the mucosa, the submucosa, and/
mulatedatthecratersite(Figure8.24A-C).Hyperechoic
or the muscular layer; diffuse increased echogenicity
speckles consistent with dissecting gas can also be
of the mucosa; or presence of bright mucosal speckles
observed in the affected wall in some animals(Figure
(Baez et al.1999; Penninck et al. 2003) (Figure 8.27A
8.24C and D).Fluid accumulation and decreased
gastric motility are common findings in ulcerative
encountered with ulcerative enteritis (Figure 8.27C).
disease (Penninck et al. 1997). Ulcers can be seen in
Smooth muscle thickening can be present in chronic
Figure 8.18. Linear foreign bodies in dogs. A: Illustration of linear foreign material in the stomach and extending into the
descending duodenum, and the corresponding longitudinal sonograms. The linear foreign body itself often appears as a bright
lincar interface (arrows) intermittently associated with shadowing. B: Linear foreign body associated with marked intestinal
plication (near field). The linear foreign body is the bright, nearly rectilincar interface seen in the lumen of this severely cor-
rugated jejunal segment. Note the perpendicular hyperechoic striations (arrows) associated with the redundant submucosal
layer.
294
295ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
0.22cm
Figure 8.19.Roundworms. Longitudinal (A) and transverse (B) sonograms of a roundworm in ajejunal segment of a young
dog with chronic diarrhea.Several other worms were identified throughout the intestinal tract,in association with fluid
accumulation. These worms appear as tubular, double-interfaced, hyperechoic structures (between the cursors and at the
arrow) in the lumen of the gastrointestinal tract.During real-time evaluation, the worms canbe seen moving if they are alive.
Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
enteritis, particularly in cats, but this finding is not
Colonic inflammatory changes are challenging to
specific and also can be present in other disorders,
detect ultrasonographically. Redundancy of the folds
such as mechanical obstruction secondary to foreign
tends to cause one to overestimate the degree of wall
material or tumoral infiltration (Penninck 2002; Diana
thickening. Wall layering is often less distinct because
et al. 2003) (Figure 8.27D).
 of a thin wall (Figure 8.32A and B). In ulcerative colitis,
Lincar hyperechoic lines within the mucosa and
the luminal mucosal border is irregular because of the
aligncd perpendicular to the lumen axis most likely
numerous smallsuperficial ulcers affecting the mucosa
represent dilated lacteols (Figure 8.28). This finding is
(Figure 8.32C).
commonly associated with protein-losing enteropathy
Parasitic infestations such as peritoneal cestodiasis
and lymphangiectasia, and occasionally this pattern
are rare. Cystic subserosal lesions have bcen found on
can be associated with diffusely infiltrative tumors
the GI tract of affected dogs or cats (Vcnco et al.2005)
(Sutherland-Smith et al. 2007).
(Figure 8.33).
Corrugation of the small bowel appears as regular
waves of undulated bowel segments (Figure 8.29). This
nonspecific finding can be seen in association with
Perforation andDehiscence
regional inflammation such as enteritis, pancreatitis,
peritonitis, or abdominal neoplasia, or bowel ischemia
In perforation secondary to foreign-body migration,
(Moon et al. 2003).
deep ulceration, or postoperative dehiscence, the
In cases of severe inflammatory changes encoun-
affected wall is thickened and hypoechoic,and there
tered with lymphoplasmacytic, eosinophilic, or granu-
is local loss of layering (Boysen et al. 2003). At times,
lomatous enteritis, edema, hemorrhage, and fibrosis 
a hyperechoic tract can be seen crossing the wall, and
can severely disrupt the wall layering and be associ-
the adjacent mesenteric is significantly increased in
ated with mass lesions suggestive of a tumoral process
echogenicity because of focal steatitis or peritonitis
(Figure 8.30).
(Figures 8.34-8.37). Fluid accumulation can often be
Inflammation, such as pancreatitis and duodenitis,
seen near the perforation or dehiscence site, and free
can also be caused by regional extension of affected
peritoneal gas can sometimes be detected as short,
adjacent tissue (Figure 8.31).
bright, linear interfaces in the most upper portion of
Figure 8.20.Intestinal foreign bodies. A wide range of foreign material can be found in the gastrointestinal tract. Most of
them are associated with strong acoustic shadowing.A: Trichobezoars are compact foreign bodies with a bright interface and
jejunal segment.D: Severalirregular interfaces with uniform shadowing are in thismoderately distended jejunum.E: A poorly
echogenic object with echogenic center (arrowheads) is noted in the fluid dilated jejunum (J) of a cat. A piece of a plastic toy
was removed surgically. F: A rounded and nearly layered structure (arrowheads) is in a dilated segment of small intestine
At first, this appearance was confused for a thickened bowel segment. At surgery, a large fragment of a "Kong" toy was
removed.
296
Figure 8.22.Partially obstructive intestinal adenocarci-
noma.Foreign material(arrows) accumulatedproximal to
thefocally thickened(arrowheads) jejunal segment.Surgical
resection was performed and the histopathological diagnosis
was adenocarcinoma.
Figure8.21.Perforating teriyaki stick.Teriyaki sticks
appear as long, linear, bright interfaces, commonly associ-
ated with shadowing, within the gastrointestinal tract. In this
young dog with a history of left cranial flank swelling, par-
(arrow) was identified in the fundus of the stomach. The
stick was perforating the gastric wall and aiming toward
the caudal chest wall (cranial the left 12th rib). The lumen of
the stomach (ST) is at the left of the image.
Figure 8.23. Severe gastritis. A: Despite a collapsed stomach, there is marked thickening (10mm [arrows]) of the wall in
this 1l-year-old Maltese terrier that was diagnosed as having eosinophilic gastritis. The mucosa is diffusely incrcased in
echogenicity. B: A moderately thickened (8mm [cursors]) wallis noted in this 1-year-old cat that had severe chronic ulcerative
mucosal and mural gastritis. The wall is also hyperechoic.
297
298 GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT
B
C
1.61cn
Figure 8.24.Gastric ulcers. A: Marked focal gastric wallthickening with loss of lyering is noted in this 6-year-old springer
spaniel. Within the thickest portion of the wallis a central cratcr (arrow). There is clear demarcation between the layered and
affected wall segments (arrowhcad). These features can be seen in both severe inflammatory and neoplastic processes. Lu,
lumen.B: A small amount of echogenic fluid is seen in the gastric lumen (lu) of this young cat with chemically induced gas-
tritis. The wallis thickened (between the cursors), and its layers are focally indistinct. A discrete mucosal crater (arrow) is
noted. C: Hyperechoic speckles (arrows), consistent with gas, are found in the thickened wall of this dog with uremic gastritis
and ulcerations.The layers are ill-defined. The wall opposite to the ulceration reaches 1.6cm in thickness (belween the cursors)
D: Malignant ulcer in a 10-year-old Labrador retriever with gastric adenocarcinoma. Hyperechoic speckles (arrows) are in
the thickened portion of the wall (arrowheads), infiltrated with the epithelial neoplasm.The laycrs are indistinct. Images C
and D courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
the abdomen and be associated with comet-tail arti-
At times, a stricture can be seen at a previous enter-
facts (Figure 8.34B).
otomy or enterectomy site. Abnormal fluid, gas, or
 In postoperative enterotomy or enterectomy, the sur-
food accumulation is then noted proximal to the stric-
gical site can be identified by the regular alignment of
ture site (Figurc 8.39).
sutures, which appear as small bright interfaces along
A fluid pocket representing a sterile seroma may
or around the bowel, depending on the choice of surgi-
accumulatenear
oratarcccntsurgicalor
cal procedure (Figure 8.38A). Focal thickening of the
ultrasound-guided biopsy site (Figure 8.40). This is a
bowel with loss of layering is commonly seen, but is
rare and transient complication of surgical intestinal
expected to resolve partially over time (Figure 8.38).
biopsies.
299ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
B
Figure 8.25. Pyogranulomatous gastritis. A: Longitudinal sonogram of the pyloric antrum of a 2-year-old Chihuahua with
moderate to severe pyogranulomatous gastritis. Walledema obliterates the normal wall layering, and only a thin and discrete
anechoic hand is on the inner mucosa.A small amount of fluid is in the gastric lumen.Mild regional lymphadenopathy is
noted (cursors). B: Recheck sonogram 3 days later showing near complete resolution of the edema, but the wall layering
remains affected.
Figure 8.26. Uremic gastropathy. A: Uremic gastropathy is seen in dogs or cats suffering from chronic uremia. Thickening
of the wall with a hyperechoic line (arrows) along the gastric mucosa and mineralization at the mucosal-luminal interface are
common findings. B: Enlarged view with labels of the gastric wall changes. L, liver; Lu, lumen.
GastrointestinalTumors
 motility and regional lymphadenopathy (Penninck et
al. 1994). These features are similar in the stomach and
GI neoplasia is often associated with motility distur-
along the intestinal tract (Figure 8.41). Gastric masses
bances that produce luminal fluid accumulation, which
 may be masked by the presence of air in the lumen,
optimizes visualization of the lesion (Penninck 1998).
particularly when located onthe lesser curvature
In dogs and cats, the most common ultrasonographic (Figure 8.42). The thickening of the GI wall can range
findings in GI lymphoma are transmural thickening
5widely, from 5mm to over 25mm (Figures 8.43 and
associated with the diffuse loss of normal wall layer-
8.44). Mesenteric lymphadenopathy is a common
ing, reduced wall echogenicity, decreased localized
1 finding in intestinal lymphoma and in some instances
300GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT
Figure 8.27. Inflammatory bowel diseasc. A: Longitudinal sonogram of a mildly thickened jejunal segment of a dog with
lymphocytic-plasmacytic enteritis.Several bright speckles are unevenly distributed within the prominent mucosal layer, but
the wall layers can still be identified.B: In this dog with eosinophilic enteritis, several intestinal segments were thickened
hypermotilc, and partially fluid filled. The wall layers were visible, but the mucosa appeared hyperechoic and ill-defined.
C: Longitudinal sonogram of a focally thickened jejunum in a corgi with severe ulcerative eosinophilic enteritis. The submu-
were seen in this cat with severe lymphocytic-plasmacytic enteritis.In this patient, the muscular layeris thicker (arrows) than
the corresponding mucosa. A small amount of fluid is noted in the bowel, and the intestinal motility was reduced during the
liveexam.
can be rcsponsible for most of the midabdominal mass
 as edema, inflammation, fibrosis, or hemorrhage, can
effect (Figure 8.44). Ulcerated lymphoma can be
mask this hallmark feature. Because of the particulat
encountered as an irregular mucosal surface or as a
appearance and to avoid confusion with the term
large defect centered on the affected portion of the GI
layered wall, which is usually reserved to describe the
tract (Tigure 8.45). In cats, alimentary lymphoma can
normal appearance of the GI wall, we call this feature
affect the intestinal tract without fully disrupting the
pseudolayering. This pseudolayering most likely corre
wall layering (Tigure 8.46).
lates with the unevenly layered tumor distribution
The most common ultrasonographic finding in
noted histopathologically. This particular ultrasono-
gastric carcinoma is wall transmural thickening that is
 graphic feature is strongly suggestive of gastric carci-
associated with altered wall layering (Penninck et al.
noma (Figure 8.47).
1998). This altered layering appears as a moderatcly
Intestinal carcinomas have been documented in
echogenic zone surrounded by outer and inner, poorly  dogs and cats, although it is encountered less fre-
 quently in cats. The most common ultrasonographic
8.47). However, other associated mural changes, such
Pomeranian with a confirmed diagnosis of moderate eosinophilic enteritis with multifocal lymphangiectasis and focal mural
lipogranuloma represent dilated lacteals. B: Similar findings are present in this dog with severe lymphoplasmacytic
enteritis.
Figure 8.29.Bowelcorrugation caused by peritonitis.Several
corrugated bowel segments are present in this 5-year-old
Weimaraner. CChronic peritonitis secondary to multifocal per-
2.5X3cm
Figure 8.30. Granulomatous enteritis. A: In this cat, there is diffuse loss of laycring of most jejunal segments. Moderate
sonogram of severe recurrent granulomatous enteritis in a cat. Marked thickening and inhomogeneity of the intestinal wall
is present, with the formation of mass lesions (arrows). C: Transverse sonogram of a granuloma secondary to a previously
migrating foreign body in a dog. The lesion created this eccentric mass (cursors), deforming the intestinal lumen (Lu).
301
Figure 8.31.Duodenitis and pancreatitis in a dog. The duode
num is thickened, and the wall layering appeared affected but
still visible(arrows).The adjacent right limb of the pancreasis
enlarged and hypoechoic (arrowheads). Hyperechoic mesen-
teric fat outlines the margins of the inflamed pancreas.
Figure 8.32. Colonic wall thickening and ulcers. A: Longitudinal sonographic (left) and schematic (right) images of the
ileocecocolic junction of a dog with parasitic (hookworm) colitis.The wall is circumferentially thickened, and the wall layering
is lost at the junction between the ileum and cecum and/or colon (arrow). B: True thickening should not be confused with
colonic wall redundancy as seen in this cat presented for obstipation.Numerous folds can be idcntificd (arrows) on the lon-
gitudinal (left) and transverse (right) planes. C: Longitudinal (left) and transverse (right) sonograms of a segment of the
descending colon in a cat with severe ulcerative colitis. The wall is diffusely, severely thickened, which particularly involves
of M.A.d'Anjou.
302
0.82cm
Figure 8.32.Contined
Figure 8.33.Peritoneal cestodiasis.Peritoneal cestodiasis in
this 6-year-old mixed-breed dog is associated with a round,
anechoic cystic lesion(C) associated with the serosal surface
of an intestinal segment (I).Far enhancement is notedbeyond
the hypoattenuating fluid as a hyperechoic band (*). This
sonographic image was obtained with a transverse plane.
 Image reprinted with permission (Venco et al. 2005).
B
0.70c
Figure 8.34.Intestinal perforation.A: A jjunal perforation secondary to foreign bodies (hairpins) was surgically confirmed
cursors). B: Free gas (arrow) and a moderate amount of echogenic fluid (not seen on this image) in the abdomcn indicate
perforation.
303
Fa
Figure 8.35. Intestinal perforation and peritoneal abscess. This 1l-year-old English setter had a septic abdomen. A: A bright
(not shown). B: A localized fluid pocket representing an abscess cavity (arrowheads) is near the perforation site (arrow). At
surgery,the perforation, local abscessation, and peritonitis were confirmed.
Figure 8.36.Pcrforating ulcer. Gastric ulceration and perfo-
ration were confirmed surgically in this 15-year-old mixed-
breed dog that had experienced vomiting. On ultrasound, a
discrete hyperechoic tract (white arrow) is seen crossing the
thickened and hypoechoic gastric wall (arrowheads). The fat
adjacent to theperforation siteishyperechoic,indicative of
focal steatitis or peritonitis. Lu, gastric lumen.
Eat
Figure 8.37.Intestinal dehiscence. A: There is dehiscence at the duodenal suture site in this 4-year-old Jack Russcll terrier
Fluid accumulation (F) and bright fat are centered at the dehiscence site. Discontinuity of the duodenal wall is identified
(arrow). B: The duodenum is hypomotile and fluid fillcd. Deformity of the duodenum axis is noted at the level of the suture
line (arrowheads). Lu, lumen.
304
Figure 8.38. Postoperative enterotomy. A: Normal immediate postoperative sonogram of an enterotomy site in a dog. The
sutures appear as discrete, small, bright interfaces (arrow). B and C: Longitudinal (B) and transverse (C) planes obtained at
the site of anastomosis. The wall layering is disrupted, and the wall margins are deformed (between the cursors). Free gas
and free fluid (arrow) are commonly encountered.The surrounding fat is bright. D: Several days later, the wall layering
remains disrupted (arrow) in this longitudinal sonogram. E: Several weeks after surgery, despite a persistent focal thickening.
Figure 8.39.Intestinal stricture.Severe fluid distension
(F)is noted proximal to the stricture site (arrows) in this dog
with previous enterectomies for intestinal foreign bodies.
Suboptimal peristaltic activity was noted throughout the
intestinal tract. Stricture at the surgical site was diagnosed
surgically.
305
Figure 8.40.Subserosal seroma following biopsy. A discrete,
rounded and hypoechoic fluid cavity associated with acoustic
enhancement is deforming the adjacent intestinal wall and
lumen. This represents a cystic seroma secondary to a recent
surgical intestinal biopsy. The dog had no clinical signs related
to this finding.
Figure 8.41. Intestinal lymphoma. A and B: Transverse (A) and longitudinal (B) sonograms of the thickened duodenum
of a 10-year-old golden retriever with lymphoma. There is circumferential, irregular thickening (between the cursors: 1.3cm)
of a segment of small intestine, with extensive loss of wall layering. Fluid is noted in the lumen (Lu). C and D: Transverse
(C) and longitudinal (D) sonograms of a long jejunal segment in an anorectic 15-year-old cat with lymphoma. Marked thick.
ening of the wall and loss of layering are noted, as well as poorly marginated serosal margins surrounded by bright fat. This
indicates the presence of the gas-filled lumen and hclps in confirming the intestinal origin.
306
GW
+3.66cm
Figure 8.42.Gastric lymphoma.A: Lateral radiograph of a cat with chronic weight loss and vomiting. A smooth soft-tissue
 mass (arrowheads) protrudes into the gas-filled gastric lumen. B: Longitudinal sonogram obtained at the level of the gastric
fundus. A 3.7-cm, hypoechoic, mildly inhomogeneous mass (cursors) that protrudes into the gastric lumen is partially masked
normal gastric wall (GW), with intact layering, and the level of mass infiltration, with altered layers. Images courtesy of M.A.
'noluv,p
BOWEL
B
BOWEL
Figure 8.43. Intestinal lymphoma. Longitudinal sonographic (A) and schematic (B) sonograms of an intcstinal scgmcnt of
bowel are still visiblebutirregular.hemuscular layerissignificantlythicker thannormal,suggesting idiopathichypertrophy
or hyperplasia.On theright portion of the mage,thewall is significantly thicker,with completeloss of layering at the place
of tumoral infiltration. On the schematic image, the arrow points to the transition between layered wall and complete loss of
layering.L,lumen.
307
A
二
Figure 8.44. Intestinal lymphoma. A: Longitudinal sonogram of an asymmctrically thickened (1.5 cm) bowel segment in an
11-year-old cat diagnosed with alimentary lymphoma. The loss of layering involved mostly one side of the wall (arrowheads).
The muscular layer appears particularly thickened in the opposite wall (arrow) B: The mesenteric lymph nodes were mark-
cdly enlarged (4.5cm thick), lobulated, and hypoechoic.
Figure 8.45.Ulcerated lymphoma.Longitudinal sonogram
of an ulcerated lymphoma in a 15-year-old cat with vomiting
and depression. Part of the gastric wall was moderately thick-
ened, with complete loss of layering. The mucosal surface
appears irregular, and a layer of hyperechoic microbubbles
has accumulated atthe site of the extensiveulceration(arrows).
The stomach is filled with fluid and was hypomotile during
theexam.
A1LN
P
B
Figure 8.46.Feline lymphoma without loss of layering. A:Feline lymphoma occasionally is not associated with complete
loss of wall layering, as in this 10-year-old cat with diffusely, mildly thickened bowel loops (4mm). The muscular layer is
particularly prominent. B: The mesenteric lymph nodes are moderately enlarged (up to 2.2 cm wide) (arrowheads).
309ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
B
Figure 8.47. Gastric pseudolayering sign with adenocarcinoma. Longitudinal sonographic (A) and schematic (B) images
(arrow) suggestive of carcinoma. A mild amount of fluid is noted in the lumen (Lu). The gastric lymph node is enlarged
(0.8x 1.3 cm) (arrowhead) and has a target appearance (a hypoechoic rim around a bright center).
loss of layering, which is often associated with lymph-
 Other tumors have been reported, such as carcinoid,
adenopathy (Paoloni et al. 2002) (Figure 8.48). In the
neurilemoma,nerve-sheath tumor,histiocytic sarcoma,
majority of these cases, evidence of fluid accumulation
mast cell tumor,hemangiosarcoma,and extraskeletal
is proximal to the intestinal thickening or mass associ-
osteosarcoma (Stimson et al. 2000). The lesions tend to
atedwith alocalized ileus.Intestinal carcinoma shares
appear as poorly echogenic masses or as focal thicken-
some of the ultrasonographic features seen in intesti-
ing with loss of layering. No specific ultrasonographic
nal lymphoma, but the length of the lesion tends to be
feature helps in differentiating the different tumors
shorter in carcinoma than lymphoma, and mechanical
(Figure 8.55).
ileus is more common in carcinoma than in lymphoma
(Figures 8.48-8.50).
Several ultrasonographic features of Gl smooth
Miscellaneous Gastrointestinal Disorders
muscle tumors are helpful in differentiating them from
other types of GI neoplasia.Leiomyosarcomas are
Congenital GI disorders are rare in small animals.
 ofen large (over 3cm) intramural lesions growing out
Enteric duplication is rare, but has been reported in the
of the serosa as large eccentric or extraluminal masses
literature (Spaulding et al. 1990).
(Myers and Penninck 1994)(Figures 8.51-8.54).
In small-breed dogs, chronic hypertrophic pyloric
Uncommonly they invade or project into the GI lumen.
stenosis can be encountered (Figure 8.56). The hyper-
Because of their common exophytic distribution and
trophic and/or hyperplastic changes primarily affect
their large size, it is difficult to assess the anatomical
the smooth muscle layer of the pylorus (Biller et al.
origin of the mass and even more so to determine the
1994). Because of this chronic condition, the stomach
precise layer of tumor origin. During real-time evalu-
tends to be flaccid, and a moderate amount of fluid or
ation, it is important to identify within the mass any
food accumulates in it.
gas and/or the small amount of fluid located in the
At times, the hypertrophic mucosal or hyperplastic
distorted lumen.
glandular changes of the gastric wall may appear as a
Commonly the presence of a reverberation artifact
discrete nodule or mass. Exuberant hyperplastic or
indicates the presence of gas, and attempts to connect
hypertrophic mucosal or muscular changes cannot
this artifact to an adjacent bowel segment should be
be differentiated from benign polyps based on their
made to confirm the Gl origin. Large GI leiomyosarco-
imaging or gross appearance. Gastric polyps can
mas tend tobeheterogeneouswithamixedechogenic
appear as large, moderately echogenic nodules or
pattern. The presence of anechoic and hypoechoic foci
masses projecting into the gastric lumen (Figure
within the mass may correlatewith the areas of central
8.57). They often are asymptomatic unless located in
degeneration and necrosis frequently found in these
the pylorus and thus creating a gastric outflow
large lesions.
disturbance.
SSD
FM
Figure 8.48. Jejunal adenocarcinomas causing partial obstruction. A: Sonogram of a circumferentially thickened bowel
segment in a dog with jejunal adenocarcinoma. At the tumor site, the wall is hypoechoic, with absent layering.The length of
the lesion was estimated to be less than 5cm.Lu, lumen; and Sp, spleen. B: Moderate echogenic fluid accumulation (F) is
present proximal to the lesion. This fluid is almost confluent with the distended walls (arrowheads) C: longitudinal sonogram
of an intestinal adenocarcinoma in a cat that had experienced weight loss and anorexia.Proximal to the obstruction site is
intestinal distension and foreign-material accumulation (FM).The arrows point to the narrowed and affected bowel segment.
D: Transverse sonogram of the same lesion. The arrow points to thc thickcncd ilcum.
310
unevenly circumferential adcnocarcinoma invading the jejunum in this dog (arrows). Note the intact wall at the margin of
the mass (arrowheads).Lu,lumen.
A
1.4 cm
Figure 8.50.Colonic carcinoma.A:Longitudinal sonogram of the colon of a 20-year-old cat.A 1.4-cm, asymmetrical,
moderately echogenic mass is noted involving the colonic wall and protruding into the lumen (arrowheads).A large amount
of peritoneal fluid (F) is present. B: An enlarged regional lymph node (LN) is also present. The final diagnosis was colonic
carcinoma with metastases to local lymph nodes. F, peritoneal fluid. The arrowheads point to the mass.
A
B
into its lumen. The layers are focally indistinct. Mucosal polyp, hyperplastic nodule, and smooth-muscle tumor can look
alikc.
311
Figure 8.52. Smooth-muscle tumor and intussusception. Occasionally, smooth-muscle tumors are seen associated with an
hypoechoic layer representing the muscular layer seems to be the most affected. Differential diagnoses for this focal change
seen at the intussusceptum may be smooth-muscle tumor,focal inflammation,edema, or hemorrhage of the wall.The fat is
invaginated. B: The longitudinal sonogram centered on the thickening reveals a large hypoechoic mass imbedded in the
intussusception.
二
Figure 8.53. Intestinal leiomyosarcoma in two dogs. A: Sonogram of a jejunal leiomyosarcoma. The mass is large (approxi-
intcstinal lumen. The mass is inhomogeneous; a few hypoechoic areas seen within the mass most likely are areas of central
degeneration and necrosis.B: Similar features of a large, eccentric, inhomogeneous mass noted in this other dog diagnosed
with intestinal leiomyosarcoma.The arrows point to the lumen of the affected segments.
312
COLON
COLON
3.01cm
the lesion. The lumen (arrow) of the colon is collapsed, and a small amount of trapped gas is associated with reverberation.
In B, in the near ficld, the arrow points to the intact urethra, located ventral to the round mass (between the cursors).
Longitudinal (C) and transverse (D) images of another smooth-muscle tumor in a dog with obstipation. The mass is eccentric,
inhomogeneous, and appears to communicate with the muscularis of the adjacent colonic wall (arrow in C). Large shadowing
feces are noted within the colonic lumen, partially compressed by mural mass (arrows). The prostate is located ventrally (P).
Images C' and D courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
313
0.91cm
÷0.34cm
Figure 8.55. Unusual intestinal tumors. A: Longitudinal sonogram of a large, hypoechoic mass invading this midjejunal
segment. The arrow points to the level of transition between the abnormally thickened wall with loss of layering and the
normal wall. A poorly differentiated sarcoma was diagnosed. B: Transverse sonogram of the same lesion. The lumen (Lu) is
eccentrically located. C: A hypocchoic mass (arrows) projecting within the lumen of this bowel segment was noted in this
11-year-old German shepherd. The mass is boomerang shaped, and there is loss of wall layering. The surgical biopsy sample
was diagnosed as jejunal mast cell tumor. D: Diffusely thickened intestinal tract in a 10-year-old cocker spaniel-poodle mix
and there are multiple, hyperechoic, linear mucosal striations consistent with lacteal dilation. E and F: Longitudinal and
transverse images of a segment of jejunum in a Bermese mountain dog with disseminated histiocytic sarcoma.A small, well-
defined,hyperechoic noduleis present within themuscularis,deforming the contour of the submucosa.Similarlesions were
observed in other intestinal segments. All nodules, including those in the livcr were hyperechoic. Images E and F courtesy
ofM.A.d'Anjou.
314
0.67cm
0.63cm
Figure 8.56.Pyloric hypertrophy. A and B: There is moderate thickening of the pyloric sphincter in this 9-year-old shih tzu.
The hypertrophied walls (between the cursors) protrude as two rounded projections (arrows) into the fluid-filled pyloric
antrum (Lu). The wall layers are still visible
3.5x2.2cm
Figure 8.57. Gastric polyps. A: The stomach of a 9-year-old Lhasa apso with intermittent vomiting is distended with
echogenic and amorphous food material compromising full evaluation of the stomach. However, near the pyloroduodenal
angle, a moderately echogcnic mass (M) protrudes into the gastric lumen (Lu), along an intact wall (arrowheads). Other
B: There is an outflow obstruction secondary to a large (over 3cm thick) gastric mass in this 7-year-old giant schnauzer that
had experienced vomiting. A lobulated mass is seen protruding into the lumen (Lu), opposite to the intact wall of the greater
315
316 GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT
B
Figure 8.58. Duodenal mucosal hyperplasia evolving into adenocarcinoma. A and B: Longitudinal (A) and transverse (B)
images of marked diffuse duodenal thickening (between the cursors) in a 13-year-old cat. The papilla is fluid dilated (arrow-
head). Initial surgical biopsies were diagnostic of extensive tubulovillous, adenomatous, mucosal hyperplasia. Drastic surgical
resection was performed 7 months later, and the final histopathologic diagnosis was duodenal adenocarcinoma. The sono-
graphic features had not progressed during this long period. C: There is difuse thickening with loss of layering along several
jejunal segments in this corgi diagnosed with moderate eosinophilic erosive and polypoid enteritis. The arrow points to one
polyp. Notice the loss of wall layering.
Extensive hyperplastic changes can be found at
layering and adjacent hyperechoic fat suggestive of
 other locations along the GI tract. If located within the
peritonitis can then be observed.
proximal portion of the descending duodenum, these
changes may induce outflow obstruction or com-
INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES
promise the bile flow (Figure 8.58A). Focal lesions along
the intestinal tract mimic tumoral nodules(Figure
Percutaneous ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspira
8.58B).
tion and automated microcore biopsy of GI lesions are
GI vascular disorders such as infarction or ischemia
safe alternative procedures to use instead of endo-
 scopic or surgical biopsy. The guided techniques of
ing to diagnose (Fan et al. 1999; Wallack et al. 2003).
fine-needle aspiration using either a 22- or 20-gauge
Bowel infarction can initially display normal layering
spinal needle, and/or microcore automated biopsy
of a focally dilated small bowel segment. Subsequent
using an 18-gauge Tru-Cut needle, assisted by an auto-
(72h after presentation) thickening and loss of wall
 mated biopsy gun, are efficient and safe methods of
317ATLAS OF SMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
B
Figure 8.59. Ultrasound-guided biopsy and fine-needle aspiration. A: An ultrasound-guided core biopsy was performed
on this markedly thickened and distorled intestinal wall of a dog diagnosed with lymphoma. The visible needle path enables
careful placemcnt of thc needle (>), far away from the intestinal lumen (L). B: Fine-needle aspiration can also be performed
safely. Notice the needle tip (black arrow) engaged in this mildly thickened bowel segment.
obtaining a diagnostic sample (Penninck et al. 1993)
Delaney F, O'Brien RT, Waller K (2003) Ultrasound
(Figure 8.59).
evaluation of small bowel thickncss compared to
They are especially useful when lesions are not acces-
weight in normal dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 44:
sible endoscopically and when surgical resection is not a
577-580
safe option for a compromised patient. One paramount
Diana A, Pietra M, Guglielmini C, Boari A,Bettini G, Cipone
M (2003) Ultrasonographic and pathologic features of
safety rule is to carefully locate and avoid the lumen.
 In presence of a GI lesion associated with regional
intestinal smooth muscle hypertrophy in four cats. Vet
Radiol Ultrasound 44:566-569
lyimphadenopathy, it is recommended to target both
Fan TM, Simpson KW, Polack E, Dykes N, IIarvey J (1999)
structures to increase the chance of obtaining one or
Intestinal haemorrhagc associatcd with colonic vascular
more diagnostic sample.
ectasia (angiodysplasia) in a dog. J Small Anim Pract
Complications such as local hemorrhage or seroma
40:2530.
collection are rare. Intestinal content leakage, which
Goggin JM, Biller IDS, Debey BM, Pickar JG, Mason D (2000)
can be a serious complication, can be avoided by
Ultrasonographic measurement of gastrointestinal wall
careful selection of the biopsy site.
thickness and the ultrasonographic appearance of the
ileocolic region in healthy cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
36:224-228.
REFERENCES
Grooters AM, Miyabayashi T, Biller DS, Merryman J (1994)
Baez. JB, Hendrick MJ,Walker LM, Washabau RJ (1999)
dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 35:35-40.
Radiographic, ultrasonographic,and endoscopic findings
Hoffman Kl. (2003) Sonographic signs of gastroduodenal
in catswithinflammatory boweldisease of the stomach
linear foreign body in 3 dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
and small intestine: 33 cases (1990-1997). J Am Vet Med
44:466469.
Assoc 215:349-354.
Lamb CR, Mantis P (1998) Ultrasonographic features of
Biller DS, Partington BP, Miyabayashi T, Leveille R (1994)
intestinal intussusception in 10 dogs. J Small Anim Pract
Utrasonographic appearance of chronic hypertrophic
39:437441.
pyloric gastropathy in the dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
Lee H, Yeon S, Lee H, et al. (2005) Lltrasonographic diagno-
35:30-33.
sis: Pylorogastric intussusception in a dog. Vet Radiol
Boysen SR, Tidwell AS, Penninck DGi (2003) Sonographic
Ultrasound 46:317-318.
findings in dogs and cats with intestinal perforation: A
Moon ML, Biller DS, Armbrust LJ (2003) Ultrasonographic
retrospective study (1995-2001). Vet Radiol Ultrasound
appearance and etiology of corrugated small intestine.
44:556-564.
Vet RadiolUltrasound 44:199-203.
318 GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT
Myers NC, Penninck DG (1994) Ultrasonographic diagnosis
canine gastric epithelial neoplasia. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
Of gastrointestinal smooth muscle tumors in the dog.Vet
39:342-348.
Radiol Ultrasound 35:391-397.
Penninck DG,Moore AS, Tidwell AS, Matz ME,Freden GO
Newell SM, Graham JP, Roberts GD, Ginn PE, Harrison JM
(1994) Ultrasonography of alimentary lymphosarcoma in
(1999) Sonography of the normal feline gastrointestinal
the cat. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 35:299-304.
tract.Vet Radiol Ultrasound 40:40-43.
Penninck DG,Nyland TG,Fisher PE,Kerr LY (1989)Normal
PaoloniMC,PenninckDG,Moore AS(2002) Ultrasonographic.
ultrasonography of the canine gastrointestinal tract. Vet
and clinicopathologic findings in 21 cases of canine
Radiol Ultrasound 30:272-276.
intestinal adenocarcinoma.Vet Radiol Ultrasound 43:562-
Penninck DG, Smyers B, Webster CRL, Rand W, Moore AS
567.
(2003) Diagnostic value of ultrasonography in differentiat-
Patsikas MN, Papazoglou LG, Papaioannou NG, Savvas I,
ing canine enteritis from intestinal neoplasia. Vet Radiol
Kazakos GM, Dessiris AK (2003) Ultrasonographic find-
Ultrasound 44:570-575.
Spaulding KA, Cohn LA, Miller RT, Hardie EM (1990)
Med Surg 5:335-343.
Enteric duplication in two dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
 Penninck DG (1998) Ultrasonographic characterization of
31:83-88.
gastrointestinal tumors.Vet Clin North Am 28:777-
Stimson EL, Cook WT,Smith MM,Forrester SD, Moon ML,
797.
Saunders GK (2000) Extraskeletal osteosarcoma in the
Penninck DG (2002) Gastrointestinal tract. In: Nyland T,
duodenum of a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 36:332-336.
Mattoon J, eds. Small Animal Diagnostic Ultrasound, 2nd
Sutherland-Smith J, Penninck DJ, Keating JH, Webster CRL
edition. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, pp 207-230.
(2007) The morphological significance of ultrasonographic
Penninck DG,Crystal MA,Matz ME,Pearson SH(1993) The
intestinal hyperechoic striations in dogs. Vet Radiol
technique of percutaneous ultrasound guided fine-needle
Ultrasound 48:51-57.
aspiration biopsy and automated microcore biopsy in
Tidwell AS, Penninck IDG (1992) Ultrasonography of gastro-
small animal gastrointestinal diseases.  Vet Radiol
intestinal foreign bodies. Vet Radiol Uitrasound 33:
Ultrasound 34:433-436.
160-169.
Penninck DG, Matz M, Tidwell AS (1997) Ultrasonographic
Venco L, Kramer L, Pagliaro L, Genchi C (2005) Ultra-
detection of gastric ulceration. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
sonographic fealures of peritoneal cestodiasis caused by
38:308-312.
Mesocestoides sp. in a dog and in a cat. Vet Radiol
Penninck D, Mitchell SL (2003) Ultrasonographic detection
Ultrasound 46:417-422.
 of ingested and perforating wooden forcign bodies in four
WallackST,Hornof WJ,Herrgesell EJ(2003) Ultrasonographic
dogs. J Am Vet Mced Assoc 223:206-209.
diagnosis: Small bowel infarction in a cat. Vet Radiol
Penninck DG, Moore AS, Gliatto J (1998) Ultrasonography of
Utrasound 44:81-85.
CHAPTER NINE
PANCREAS
Dominique Penninck
PREPARATION AND
The portal vein represents a useful landmark because
SCANNING PROCEDURE
it is located just dorsal and to the left of thc body
of the pancreas (Figure 9.1). A transvcrsc scan just
The pancreas is a thin, elongated organ located along
caudal to thc porta hepatis and pylorus may be used
the greater curvature of the stomach and the mesen-
to locate this vein and the body of the pancreas. The
left pancreatic lobe is more difficult to image in dogs
teric border of the descending duodenum. Gas in the
gastrointestinal tract often hampers complete evalua-
because of gas interference in the adjacent stomach
tion. A 12-h fast may reduce gas interference.
and transverse colon. However, in cats, the left limb is
The anatomical landmarks used to locate the right 
larger and can be more easily identified than the right
pancreatic lobe are the right kidney; the desccnding
limb.
duodenum, with its straight coursc along the right
High-frequency transducers (greater than 7.5MHz)
abdominal wall; and the pancreaticoduodenal vein
are recommended to evaluate the pancreas, especially
paralleling thc descending duodenum (Figure 9.1).
in cats and small to medium-sized dogs. The small
The right pancreatic lobe can be imaged from a ventral
contact area of sectorial, narrow curvilinear or micro-
Or lateral approach, with a longitudinal scan-plane
convex transducers facilitates access to the right cranial
orientation used to find the descending duodenum
abdominal quadrant for imaging under or between the
and right kidney (Saunders 1991). Using the ventral
right ribs.
approach, the transducer is placed under the last rib
of the animal and angled dorsally to image the right
kidney. The scan plane is then moved medially until
ULTRASONOGRAPHY OF
the descending duodenum is imaged medial to the
right kidney. Alternatively, the ventral approach can
THE NORMAL PANCREAS
start caudal to the xiphoid process. In a longitudinal
InDogs
scan plane, the stomach is identified,and the scan
plane is moved laterally toward the right following the
The pancreas is thin, amorphous, and poorly distinct
pyloric antrum into the descending duodenum.
from the adjacent mesenteric fat. The pancreas is
The lateral approach is preferred to locate the
divided into three portions: right lobe, left lobe, and
descending duodenum in deep-chested dogs. Once the
body (Figure 9.1). The right lobe lies in the mesoduo-
descending duodenum is located by using the ventral
denum dorsomedial to the descending duodenum,
or lateral approach, the right pancreatic lobe and the
ventral to the right kidney, and vcntrolateral to the
 pancreaticoduodenal vein can be identified. In large
portal vcin. Only the veins draining the right lobe are
and deep-chested dogs, it is often necessary to use an
sccn ultrasonographically (Saunders 1991). The body
intercostal window to access the most cranial portion
lies caudal to the pyloric region, craniomedial to the
 of the descending duodenum and the corresponding
right kidney, and ventral to the portal vein. The pylorus
portion of the pancrcas. On occasion, the right pancre-
is in the right cranial abdomen. The left lobe originales
atic lobe is bcst scanned from the right side,with the
 at the pancreatic body, lies dorsocaudal to the gastric
animal in a right lateral recumbency as gastric fluid
antrum, and continues across the midline between the
moves in the dependent pyloric antrum.
stomach and the transverse colon. The normal left lobe
The pancreatic body can be imaged from ventrally
Occasionally is seen in the triangular region defined
or from the right side, with the animal in a dorsal,
by the spleen, stomach, and left kidney. The normal
left, or right lateral recumbent position, by moving
pancreas is homogeneous and is isoechoic or slightly
the scan plane craniomedially to the proximal descend-
hyperechoic to the caudate liver lobe. On rare occa-
ing duodenum and caudally to the pyloric antrum.
sions, a normal pancreas can be diffusely hyperechoic
319
320 PANCREAS
CBD
Pancreas
Figure 9.1. Approach to the normal canine pancreas. Illustration of the pancreas within the abdominal cavity, with the
probe positioned along the left and right lobes of this organ at locations A, B, and C. Ao, aorta; CBD, common bile duct; CVC,
caudal vena cava; Duod, duodenum;GB,galbladder; L,liver;LK,left kidney;PD, pancreatic duct; PV,portal vein;SP,spleen;
and ST, stomach.A: Transverse sonogram of theleft lobe (arrows)seen between the stomach (St) and the collapsed transverse
colon (arrowhead). B: Transverse sonogram of the right lobe of the pancreas (arrows). The layered descending duodenum is
lateral to the pancreas.The pancreaticoduodenal vein appears as an anechoic rounded structure within the lobe. C: Longitudinal
sonogram of the right pancreatic lobe (arrows) near the right kidney (K). Image C courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
but within normal range for size (Figure 9.2). The pan-
pancreatic body are more centrally located,and the
creaticoduodenalveinis seenclearlyin therightlobe
angle formed by the left and right lobes with the pan-
and can be followed into the gastroduodenal vein and
creatic body is smaller.The normal sonographic
portal vein.
appearance of the feline pancreas is isoechoic to slightly
hyperechoic to the adjacent liver lobes and nearly
isoechoic to the surrounding mesenteric fat (Figure
In Cats
9.3).
In contrast to dogs, the distal third of the feline right
The mean thickness measurements for each part of
limb curves cranially, giving it a hooklike appearance
the pancreas and the pancreatic duct in cats are sum-
(Etue et al. 2001). The pyloroduodenal angle and the
marized in Table 9.1.
Figure 9.2.Normal pancreas in an old dog. Longitudinal
sonogram of the left lobe of the pancreas in this 12-year-old
Yorkie. The pancreas (arrows) is diffusely increased in echo-
genicity but maintains a normal size. The histopathology of
the pancreas was unremarkable.
CBD
Duod
positioned along the left (A) and right lobes (C) and body (B) of this organ. CBD, common bile duct; Duod, duodenum; GB,
gallbladder; L, liver; LK, left kidney; PD, pancreatic duct; PV, portal vein; RK, right kidney; SP, spleen; and ST, stomach.
A: Longitudinal sonogram showing the hook-shaped distal extremity of the left lobe. B: Longitudinal sonogram of the body.
of the pancreas (cursors). Duod, duodenum. The arrow points to the pancreatic duct.
321
322 PANCREAS
Table 9.1.
Pancreaticmeasurementsinnormal cats
Normal Cats
Left Lobe Mean (Range)
Body Mean (Range)
Right Lobe Mean (Range)
PD Mean (Range)
20°
5.4 mm
6.6mm
4.5mm
0.8mm
1-9 years
(3.4-9.0)
(4.7-9.5)
(2.8-5.9)
(0.5-1.3)
84b
5.4mm
5.6mm
NR
1.1mm
3 months to 16 years
(2.9-9.5*)
(3.3-9.4#)
(0.65-2.5)
6.5mm
6.4mm
4.3mm
1.13mm
15°
>10years
(4.6-10.3)
(4.6-9.0)
(3.0-5.7)
(0.6-2.4)
PD, pancreatic duct; and NR, not reported.
Etue et al.2001.
Moon et al.2005
Hecht et al.2006.
erand upper limits of the 95%referenceinterval.
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC
adjacent mesentcry is hyperechoic because of inflam-
mation and edcma.
FEATURES OF PANCREATIC
 Pancreatic edema appears as numerous hypoechoic
DISORDERS
 stripes demarcating pancreatic lobulation and dissect-
ing the enlarged pancreas (Figure 9.8). Pancrcatic
Pancreatitis
edema may be associated with pancreatitis (Figure
9.8A and B), although it can also be caused by hypo-
Pancreatitis has various ultrasonographic appear-
albuminemia or portal hypertension (Figure 9.8C)
ances, depending on the severity, duration, and
(Lamb 1999)
extent of pancreatic andperipancreatic tissue
 Focal pancreatic lesions caused by acute pancreatitis
inflammation.
contain combined areas of pancreatic necrosis,hemor-
 In acute pancreatitis, the pancreas appears enlarged
 rhage, and surrounding inflamed mesentery (Edwards
and diffusely hypoechoic while the surrounding fat
et al. 1990). The hypoechoic and anechoic areas corre-
appears moderately hyperechoic as the result of fat
sponding to collections of hemorrhage and necrotic
saponification (Figure 9.4). In dogs, the right limb of
tissue may, with chronicity, become more organized
the pancreas tends to be most commonly affected
and develop into pseudocyst or abscess. Pseudocysts
(Nyland ct al. 1983), whereas, in cats, the changes tend
are fluid-filled lesions caused by pancreatitis that are
to be more severe in the body and left limb.
surrounded by a capsule of fibrous tissue. The fluid is
 In cats, similar changes can be seen (Figure 9.5A and
composed of pancreatic secretions originating from a
 D), but pancreatic enlargement and diffuse changes in
ruptured duct. Pancreatic pseudocysts are anechoic to
pancreatic and surrounding fat echogenicity are often
poorly echogenic rounded lesions, occasionally associ-
less obvious (Figure 9.5B and C).
ated with acoustic enhancement in the far field. They
Pancreatitis in cats has been reported associated
arc reported in both dogs and cats (Rutgers et al.
with hepatic lipidosis, inflammatory bowel disease,
1985; Hines et al. 1996; VanEnkevort et al. 1999)
and cholangiohepatilis (Akol et al. 1993). Thickened
(Figure 9.9).
gastric and/or duodenal wall and regional peritoneal
Retention cysts are caused by pancreatic duct block-
effusion can be seen in association with pancreatitis
age and cannot be differentiated from congenital cysts
(Saunders et al. 2002) (Figures 9.4-9.6). The thickening
 or pseudocysts (Tigure 9.10).
of the gastric and duodenal wall is usually not associ-
Pancreatic abscesses are a circumscribed collection
ated with complete loss of layering, although the wall
 Of pus, usually located within the pancreas or close to
layers can be altered (Figure 9.6B).
it, containing little or no pancreatic necrosis (Salisbury
In severe hemorrhagic, necrotizing pancreatitis,
et al. 1988). They are more common in dogs (Figure
irregular hypoechoic area(s) represent necrosis and
 9.11) than in cats (Figure 9.12). Ultrasonographic dif-
hemorrhage of part of the pancreas and peripancreatic
ferentiation among these different fluid-filled pancre-
tissue (Figure 9.7). The pancreatic margins can be ill-
atic lesions is impossible. Abscesses with echogenic
defined, and the pancreas appears amorphous. The
fluid may also mimic masses.
323ATLASOTSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
x0.9cm
+2.41cm
C
Figure 9.4.Acute pancreatitis in dogs. A: Longitudinal sonogram of the thickened (2.4cm, cursors +), irregular, hypoechoic
right lobe of the pancreas (arrows) surrounded by hypcrcchoic mesenteric fat. The descending duodenum is also thickened
(9mm, cursors x), but its layers are still visible. B: Transverse sonogram of the same lobe (arrows). Notice the extension of
the bright fat and the small amount of anechoic effusion (*) between the bowel loops. The bowel segment in the near field is
corrugated. C: Transverse sonogram of the right limb of the pancreas of a dog with acute abdominal pain and vomiting. The
ing, hampering the visualization of deeper structures (not shown). The descending duodenum is also significantly thickened
(1 cm),but layers remain distinct. D: In the same dog, the colon (arrows) was markedly corrugated. A normal bowel loop is
in the near field. Images C and D courtesy of M.A.d'Anjou.
Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration is recom-
bile duct (CBD) is dilated and tortuous (Figure 9.13).
mended to determine the nature of the collection.
In dogs, the normal CBD is not seen, whereas, in cats,
Peritoncal effusion secondary to pancreatitis is more
the CBD often isvisible and considered within normal
common with the severe, hemorrhagic, necrotizing
form of pancreatitis. The effusion is more commonly a
1996). Serial ultrasonographic examinations of the
small volume of fluicd that accumulates in small pockets
biliary tract can be necessary to document progressive
between the pancreas and adjacent mesentery.
mechanical obstruction. Progressive dilation of the
Bile duct obstruction secondary to pancreatic inflam-
biliary tract from the common bile duct to the periph-
mation and subsequent fibrosis can cause gallbladder
eral intrahepatic ducts occurred 1 week after experi-
and bile duct distension. In these cases, the common
mental bile duct ligation (Nyland and Gilletle 1982)
324 PANCREAS
1.7cm
C
Figure 9.5. Acute pancreatitis in cats. A: Longitudinal sonogram of the left lobe of the pancreas. The lobe is markedly
thickened, hypoechoic, and surrounded by hyperechoic local fat. B: In this other cat, the pancreas is only mildly thickened,
but the surrounding fat is bright, outlining the pancreatic contours (arrows). C: The body and left lobe of the pancreas are
within the upper limits of normal for size but appear hypoechoic. PV, portal vein; and ST, stomach. D: Power Doppler longi-
tudinal image of the right limb of the pancreas in another cat. The pancreas is enlarged, hypoechoic, and surrounded by
hyperechoic fat and focal anechoic peritoneal effusion (*). The pancreatic duct is clearly delineated (arrowhead) and not
associated with flow, in comparison with nearby vessels.
Dilation of the extrahepatic bile ducts and gallbladder
9.14B). Chronic pancreatitis characterized by inter-
 can remain despite reestablishment of normal bile flow
stitial fibrosis with acinar atrophy and lymphocytic
after obstruction.
infiltrates is rarely suspected clinically. Most cases
 The mass effect created by an inflamed hypoechoic
encountered have vague clinical signs and nonspecific
pancreas and hyperechoic peripancreatic tissue can
laboratory values. In these cases, the pancreas can be
displace the descending duodenum. Because the right 
within normal range for size, and the parenchyma
pancreatic lobe is located dorsomedial to the descend-
often is inhomogeneous (Figure 9.15). In cats, chronic
ing duodenum, this loop of bowel is often displaced
pancreatitis is twice more frequent than acute pancre-
ventrolaterally (Murtaugh et al. 1985). In subacute to
atitis. As this condition is often subclinical, it is very
chronic active pancreatitis, the pancreas remains a dis-
difficult to confirm the pancreatic changes histopatho-
tinct, well-defined hypoechoic structure that contrasts 
logically. On ultrasound, the changes can be similar to
with the slightly hyperechoic peripancreatic mesen-
those described in dogs or subtle to inexistent (Figure
tery (Figure 9.14A). At times, irregular margins of the
9.16). Acute necrotizing pancreatitis from chronic non-
pancreas and foci of mineralization can be seen (Figure
325ATLAS OF SMALI.ANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
Duoderum
Pancreas
Fat
Pancreas
0.71cm
071cm
Fa
Figure 9.6. Duodenal changes associated with pancreatitis in two dogs. A and B: Longitudinal sonograms and correspond-
ing schcmatic images of two dogs diagnosed with severe acute pancreatitis. In both, the duodenum is thickened and atonic,
and the wall layering is altered. The right pancrcatic limb is hypoechoic, and the surrounding fat is hyperechoic. Pyl,
pylorus.
ated based on  clincopathologic testing and/or
hypoechoic to isoechoic nodules that can vary in size
sonographic abnormalities (Ferreri et al. 2003). A tissue
are recognized (Hecht et al. 2007) (Figure 9.18). These
core biopsy (under ultrasound guidance or at surgery)
nodules can be confused for neoplastic disorders, such
can be obtained to confirm the diagnosis.
as insulinomas.Theymay also look similar to cystic
In cats, the pancreatic duct can appear dilated (more
formations, although far acoustic enhancement is not
than 1.3 mm) in acute pancreatitis (Wall et al. 2001) or
usually expected with soft-tissue nodules.
chronicpancreatitis or even in older cats with no clini-
Pancreatic exocrine tumors such as adenocarcinoma
cal evidence of active or chronic pancreatic disease.
arise from acinar cells or ductal epithelium.Even
Pancreatic duct dilatation may also occur in associa-
though these tumors are rare, they are the most
tion with pancreatic lithiasis (Figure 9.17E and F).
common type of pancreatic neoplasia insmall animals.
They tend to develop in the central portion of the
PancreaticNodularHyperplasia
gland. As they grow, they may compress the common
bile duct, invadc thc adjacent gastric and duodenal
andNeoplasia
segments (Figure 9.19D),and frequently metastasize to
Pancreatic nodular hyperplasia is occasionally sccn in
thc liver (Lamb et al. 1995). They often are poorly
the pancreas of old dogs and cats. Weli-defined
echogenic nodules or masses(Tigure 9.18).Other
PANC
PANC
3CPA
3.82cm
Figure 9.7. Necroticohemorrhagic pancreatitis in two dogs. A and B: Transverse (A) and longitudinal (B) sonograms of the
 thickened pancreas of an 8-year-old Labrador retriever with active suppurative pancreatitis with areas of hemorrhage and
 necrosis. The inhomogeneous and hypoechoic pancreas has irregular margins outlined by bright fat. C and D: Longitudinal
 sonograms of the right pancreatic limb in a 10-year-old golden retriever with severe necroticohemorrhagic pancreatitis. The
pancreatic limb (P) is markedly enlarged, hypoechoic, and ill-defined, particularly in its distal extremity (arrows). Using
Power Doppler (D) in this same region, there is no evidence of vascular flow motion, in comparison with the proximal portion
 of the limb. The superficial fat shows increased vascularity. Images C and D courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
326
Figure 9.8. Pancreatic edema in dogs. A: Transverse sonogram of the edematous thickened pancreas (the same dog as in
 a a si iee s  ss se  e pra si sd a (a pe r a
sonogram of the right pancrcatic lobe of a 3-year-old Welsh corgi with pancreatitis. Hypoechoic striations are crossing the
pancreas, and the contours of the pancreas are outlined by fluid. A dilated, fluid-filled segment of bowel is noted in the near
field (arrowheads). C: Longitudinal sonographic image of the right pancreatic limb (arrows) in a small dog with acute portal
in the pancreas are consistent with edema.These changes resolved a day later.L,liver;and RK,right kidney.Image C courtesy
ofM.A.d'Anjou.
327
Figure 9.13. Dilated common bile duct in a cat with pancreatitis. Transverse (A) and longitudinal (B) sonograms of the
The (BD is greatly distended, reaching 1.4cm in diameter proximally (A) and 1.2cm distally (B). Notice that the CBD and
gallbladder(GB) walls are thickened.
+1.5cm
Figure 9.14. Chronic pancreatitis in two dogs. A: Difuse chronic active necrotizing pancreatitis with fibrosis and regenera-
tion in a 14-year-old shih tzu. The pancreas (cursors) is markedly irregular and mostly hypoechoic, with a few inhomogeneous
areas. It is 1.5 cm thick.St, stomach.B: Presumptive chronic pancreatitis in an 11-year-old mixed-breed dog.Numerous hyper-
echoic foci are seen in the pancreas (arrow). Some of these foci are associated with shadowing (arrowhead), suggesting
mineralization.The pancreas is hypoechoic, but the surrounding fat is normal.
330
0.77cm
3
Figure 9.15. Chronic pancrealitis in an 8-year-old Australian shepherd. The sagittal (A) and transverse (B) sonograms of
thc right pancreatic lobe (between the cursors) show a pancreas that is within normal range for size but very inhomogeneous.
D, duodenum.
42
 diffuse lymphoplasmocytic pancreatitis. The pancreas is irregular and mildly hypoechoic. The central pancreatic duct appears
normal. B: Chronic pancreatitis with pancreatic atrophy and Islet cell fibrosis in another cat. The pancreas (arrows) appears
thickened (9.2mm) and hyperechoic, but the pancreatic cduct (D) is dilated (4.2mm), counting for nearly half of the overall
pancreaticlobethickness.
331
A
2.5ml
ANCREAS
E
Figure 9.17. Dilated pancreatic duct (PD) in cats. A: Smoothly dilated, 2.5-mm-wide PD (between the cursors) in a 12-year-
 old cat with two concurrent pancreatic cystic lesions and hepatic disease. B: Dilated, 3-mm-wide PD in a 16-year-old cat with
 concurrent hepatitis and suspected pancreatitis. The pancreas is delineated by the cursors. C: Dilated and thickened, 3.5-mm-
wide PD ina 14-year-old cat with hepatitis and fibrosing choledochitis. The pancreas appears normal. D: Dilated, 3.4-mm-wide
PD (between the cursors) in an elderly cat with pancreatic atrophy. The pancreatic tissue around the PD is barely visible
(arrows). Color Doppler can be useful in differentiating a PD from vessels. PV, portal vein. E: Large calculus (between the
cursors) in this dilated, 1-cm-wide PD. F: Dilated PD with small intraluminal calculi and mineralized sediments.
332
333 ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
0.31cm
B
RK
Liver
Liver
0.52cm
Figure 9.18. Nodular hyperplasia in a cat and a dog. A: Longitudinal sonographic image with color Doppler of the pancreas
 of a cat with chronic inflammatory bowel disease. Two well-defined 3-mm hypoechoic nodules (between the cursors) are
and longitudinal (C) sonographic images of the right pancreatic limb of a small-breed dog with diabetes mellitus. Several
well-defined, hypoechoic nodules of variable size and shape are seen throughout the pancreatic tissue (arrowheads), which
 is otherwise hyperechoic. There was no evidence of changes to the peripheral fat. Fine-needle aspiration of the pancreas
su u  pue onp ona esedad rpou m sad o u go asd a paeaa
courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
tumors have occasionally been encountered in the
abnormal echogenicity (Figure 9.21). The size of the
pancreas of dogs and cats: cystadenoma, metastatic
pancreatic lesions varies greatly, but a majority of the
carcinoma, and lymphoma (Figure 9.20).
Kood pue wg'z ot renba io ssal aq on puan suisa
Pancreatic endocrine tumors such as glucagonomas,
echogenic (Lamb et al. 1995).
insulinomas, and gastrinomas are uncommon. From 
Most endocrine tumors are malignant and tend to
that group, insulinomas are the most commonly
spread to the regionallymph nodes and liver. Therefore,
encountered in dogs. The ultrasound detection rate
sonographic screening of the hepatic parenchyma and
varies depending on the size and distribution of the
 regional lymph nodes is recommended to detect pos-
lesions, the equipment quality, and the operator's
 sible hepatic metastasis (Figure 9.22). Metastatic lymph
experience. The visibility of these lesions may also be
 nodes often are enlarged and hypoechoic.
affected by the presence of overlying gastrointestinal
Whereas pancreatic tumors usually prcscnt as a
content and by body conformation (e.g., deep-chested
focal nodule or mass, neoplasia cannot reliably be dif-
 or obese dogs). Insulinomas can present as a solitary
ferentiated from pancrcatitis (Figure 9.23) or nodular
nodule, multiple nodules, or an ill-defined area of
hyperplasia.
ANCREAS
B
LEFT
.15cm
1.56cm
Duo
* 2:83m 
2.2cm
Figure 9.19.  Pancreatic carcinomas in cats and dogs. A: Longitudinal sonographic image of the left pancreatic limb (arrow-
heads) in a cat. A small hypoechoic mass (1.5cm) at the tail of this limb indicated pancreatic adenocarcinoma. B: Another
hypoechoic mass found in the proximal portion of the left pancreatic limb of a cat. This mass is adjacent to the portal vein
(PV). The rest of the left limb (arrowheads) is normal. Pancreatic adenocarcinoma was confirmed histologically. C: A larger
mass (white arrows, 3cm) in another cat is consistent with a poorly differentiated carcinoma. This mass is heterogeneous and
has mineral foci (black arrow) associated with acoustic shadowing. D: Transvcrse sonographic view of a pancreatic mass
(arrows) invading the wall of the duodenum in a dog. A poorly differentiated carcinoma was diagnosed with cytology after
fine-needle aspiration. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
A
B
Figure 9.20. Pancreatic lymphoma in two dogs. A: Numerous variably sized hypoechoic nodules replace the normal
 echotexture of the pancreas (arrowheads) in this 4-year-old mixed-breed dog. The duodenum (D) is seen in the near field.
 B: Diffuse pancreatic enlargement (arrowheads) associated with diffuse hypoechogenicity in this 7-year-old Labrador
retriever.
334
B
nodules (A and B) or less commonly as a hypoechoic mass (C). The nodular lesions are between the cursors (A) and the
 several small hypoechoic nodules (arrows). The portal vein (PV) is ventral to the body of the pancreas. St, stomach.
一
GB
 Figure 9.22. Metastatic insulinoma to the liver and lymph nodes. A: Multiple target-shaped nodules are present in several
liver lobes. Ultrasound-guided core biopsies confirmed the diagnosis of hepatic metastases caused by insulinoma. B: A single
large hypoechoic nodule is in the hilus of the liver, near the gallbladder (GB), which is consistent with metastatic
lymphadenopathy.
335
B
and hypoechoic pancreas (arrows) surrounded by bright fat mimics pancreatitis.The histopathologic diagnosis on surgical
samples is adenocarcinoma.Tumoral infiltration can also be associated with inflanmation.D, duodenum.
B
Figure 9.24. Drainage of cavitary lesion in 9-year-old Australian shcphcrd. A: A hypoechoic cavity (arrows) is present in
the enflamed pancreas of this dog. The needle track is centered on the cavity.The cavity was drained, and about 10mL of
bloody purulent fluid was withdrawn. The final diagnosis was sterile abscess. C, colon. B: A recheck 1 week later shows a
smaller and poorly defined cavity (between the cursors) in the same portion of the pancreas (P), and the dog's condition
improved clinically.The peripheral fat remained hyperechoic.
Figure 9.25. Recheck after lidocaine intraperitoneal injection
in a miniature schnauzer with pancreatitis.The injection was
performed to control persistent and severe pain. An exten-
the pancreas (P) and duodenum (D) most likely represents an
iatrogenichematoma.
336
337ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
SPECIAL PROCEDURES
-y ym sp  eaa  ()  q
minemia and portal hypertension.JVet Intern Med 13:498-
Fine-needle aspiration or core biopsy of diffuse or
500.
focal pancreatic lesions can be performed safely if
Lamb CR, Simpson KW, Boswood A, Matthewman LA (1995)
adequate precautions are taken to avoid large
Ultrasonography of pancreatic neoplasia in the dog: A
retrospective review of 16 cases. Vet Rec 37:65-68.
vessels.
Léveille R, Biller DS, Shiroma JT (1996) Sonographic evalua-
Fluid-filled lesions, such as pseudocysts and
tion of the common bile duct in cats.J Vet Intern Med
abscesses,can also be sampled and drained safely
10:296-299
under ultrasound guidance (Figure 9.24). Serial ultra-
Moon ML,Panciera DL,Ward DL,Steiner JM,Williams DA
sound examinations are useful inmonitoringresolu-
(2005) Age-related changes in the ultrasound appearance
tion or progression of fluid-filled lesions or response
of the normal feline pancreas. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
to treatment (Figure 9.25).
46:138-142
Murtaugh RJ, Herring DS, Jacobs RM, DeHoff WD (1985)
Pancreatic ultrasonography in dogs with experimentally
 induced acute pancreatitis. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 26:27-
REFERENCES
32.
Nyland TG, Gillette NA (1982) Sonographic evaluation of
Akol KG,Washabau RJ, Saunders HM, Hendrick MJ (1993)
experimental bile duct ligation in the dog. Vet Radiol
Acute pancreatitis in cats with hepatic lipidosis. J Vet
Ultrasound 23:252-260.
Intern Med 7:205-209.
Nyland TG, Mulvany MH, Strombeck DR (1983) Ultrasonic
Edwards DF,Bauer MS,Walker MA,Pardo AD,McCracken
MD, Walker TL (1990) Pancreatic masses in seven dogs
the dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 24:260-266.
following acute pancreatitis. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
Rutgers C, Herring DS, Orton EC (1985) Pancreatic pseudo-
26:189-198.
cyst associated with acute pancreatitis in a dog:
Etue SM,Penninck DG,Labato MA,Pearson S,Tidwell A
Ultrasonographic diagnosis. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
(2001) Ultrasonography of the normal feline pancreas and
21:411-416.
associated anatomical landmarks:A prospective study of
Salisbury SK, Lantz GC,Nelson RW, Kazacos EA (1988)
20 cats.Vet Radiol Ultrasound 42:330-336.
Pancrcatic absccss in dogs: Six cascs (1978-1986). J Am Vct
Ferreri JA, Hardam E, Kimmel SA, et al. (2003) Clinical dif-
Med Assoc 193:1104-1108
ferentiation of acute necrotizing from chronic nonsuppu-
Saunders HM (1991) Ultrasonography of the pancreas. Probl
rative pancreatitis in cats: 63 cases (1996-2001). J Am Vet
Vet Med 3:583-603.
Med Assoc 223:469-474.
Saunders HM, VanWinkle TJ, Drobatz K, Kimmel SE,
Hecht S, Penninck DG, Keating JH (2007) Imaging findings
Washabau RJ (2002) Ultrasonographic findings in cats
in pancreatic neoplasia and nodular hyperplasia in 19 cats.
with clinical, gross pathologic, and histologic evidence of
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 48:45-50.
acute pancreatic necrosis: 20 cases (1994-2001) J Am Vet
Hecht S, Penninck DG, Mahony OM, King R, Rand WM
Mcd Assoc 221:1724-1730.
(2006) Relationship of pancreatic duct dilation to age and
VanEnkevort BA, O'Brien RT, Young KM (1999) Pancreatic
clinical findings in cats. Vet Radiol Utrasound 47:287-
pseudocysts in 4 dogs and 2 cats: Ultrasonographic and
294.
clinicopathologic findings. J Vet Intern Med 13:309-313.
Hines BL, Salisbury SK, Jakovljevic S, De Nicola DB (1996)
Wall M, Biller DS, Schoning P, Olsen D, Moore LE (2001)
Pancreatic pseudocyst associated with chronic-active nec-
Pancreatitis in a cat demonstrating pancreatic duct
rotizing pancreatitis in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
dilatation ultrasonographically. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
32:147-152
37:49-53.
CHAPTERTEN
KIDNEYS AND URETERS
Marc-André d'Anjou
PREPARATION AND
window. The right kidney is more cranial and dorsal,
particularly in dogs, and usually is in contact or close
SCANNING TECHNIQUE
Prior to the ultrasonographic examination, the animal's
the caudate lobe. Both kidneys are symmetrical in size
 and shape in cats and dogs. Kidneys can be oval, par-
hair must be clipped, and ultrasonic gel must be
ticularly incats, orbean shaped, which is more common
applied to its skin to optimize images of the kidneys.
in dogs. Kidneys can be measured on all planes, and
Animals can be scanned in dorsal,left,orright recum-
volumes can be estimated. In normal cats, renal length
bency. The left kidney can usually be well visualized
has been reported to vary between 3.0 and 4.3cm
with a ventrolateral approach, although the presence
(Walter et al. 1987a). In dogs, absolute measurements
of gas or feces in the descending colon can sometimes
must take into account total body weight and confor-
limit its evaluation.The right kidney is typically more
mation, because great variations exist (Barr et al. 1990).
difficult to image, especially in deep-chested dogs,
 A ncw mcthod using a ratio between the renal length
because of its deeplocalization in the craniodorsal
and thc aorta diameter was recently proposed
abdomen.The right ventrolateral subcostal approach
is usually sufficient. Howcvcr, in certain dogs, a lateral
(Mareschal et al. 2007). This ratio is obtained by divid-
 ing the maximal renal length by the luminal diameter
approach through the 11th or 12th intercostal space
might be necessary. The visualization of thc right
of the aorta. The aorta must be measured at the level
 of the kidneys when it is maximally distended during
kidney can also be affected by the presence of intesti-
nal content, especially in the descending duodenum,
the cardiac cycle. The renal size should be considered
reduced if the K/Aoratiois less than5.5 and increased
ascending colon, or cecum.
when greater than 9.1.
Kidneys can markedly vary in depth according to an
Renal cortex, medulla, and the collecting system can
animal's body conformation.In small dogs and cats,
be visualized with ultrasonography in dogs and cats
a high-frequency sonographic probe (7.5MHz and
higher) is recommended, whereas kidneys of larger
(Konde et al. 1984; Walter et al. 1988) (Figures 10.1 and
10.2). The renal medulla is hypoechoic when compared
dogs usually require a probe with more penetration
(5MHz and lower). Sectorial or convex probes are con-
with the cortex, which is usually hypoechoic or
isoechoic to the liver and typically hypoechoic to the
sidered more useful because they enable the entire
spleen. However, in certain dogs and several cats with
kidney to be imaged. Additionally, these probes tend
normal renal function, renal cortices can be hyper-
to have a smaller footprint, which can more easily be
echoic to the liver (Figure 10.3). In cats, the accumula-
used intercostally
tion of fatty vacuoles in the renal cortex appears
Kidneys should be scanned from cranial to caudal
to contribute to its hyperechogenicity (Yeager and
and lateral to medial, in several transverse and longi-
 Anderson 1989). The medulla appears separated into
tudinal planes, to fully assess all portions, including
several lobulated segments by the presence of linear
the cortex, medulla, and collecting system (Figure
echogenicitics representing borders of the interlobar
10.1).
vcsscls and diverticuli.The medulla is nearly anechoic
in certain animals and should not be confused with
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC
dilatation of the renal pelvis. The renal crcst is the
prolongation of the renal medulla, which is in contact
ANATOMYOFNORMAL
with the pelvis.The walls of the arcuate arteries can
KIDNEYS
be observed as paired, short, hyperechoic lines at the
corlicomedullary junction, which can sometimes gen-
In many dogs,theleft kidney can be evaluated through
erate an acoustic shadow and must be differentiated
the body of the spleen, which provides a good acoustic
from mineralization (Figure 10.4). These vessels, as
339
AV
Figure 10.1. Sonographic approach and normal anatomy in the dog. In dorsal recumbency, a ventrolateral approach to the
left kidney is used. The probe is moved through the kidney sequentially in transversc and longitudinal planes. AO, aorta;
CVC, caudal vena cava; LK, left kidney; and RK, right kidney. A: Transvcrse (T) sonogram performed on the cranial pole of
the left kidney. B: The probe is placed at thc hilus region: Transverse (T) and longitudinal (L) sonograms with corresponding
schematic and labeled imagcs.AV,arcuate vessels; C,renal cortex; M, renal medulla;P,pelvis; RC,renal crest;RD+IV,renal
diverticuli and interlobar vessels; Sp, spleen; SV,splenic vein; and U, ureter.
Crania
Rightlat
Medial
medulla
sinus
3.81cm
A
Figure 10.2. Norrmal feline kidney. Longitudinal (A) and transverse (B) images of the right kidney (arrowheads) in a normal
cat.
340
341ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
well as the larger renal and intralobar vessels, can also
is facilitated by the use of newer high-resolution
 be evaluated with color Doppler or power Doppler
systems. The pelvic height should measure less than
(Figure 10.5). The renal arteries and veins, usually
2mm (Figure 10.6). The renal diverticuli and ureter,
single on each side, can be followed from the hilus to
unless distended, are not normally seen in dogs and
the aorta and caudal vena cava, respectively. These
cats. The pelvis is surrounded by the sinus, which
vessels must be differentiated from dilated ureters.
contains fat and appears hyperechoic and is particu-
The renal pelvis can sometimes be visualized in
larly prominent in obese cats.
 normal dogs and cats, especially in animals receiving
intravenous fluids or being treated with diuretics
(Pugh et al. 1994). The visualization of the renal pelvis 
Crani
Cortex
Cranial
6.71cm
Figure 10.4. Hyperechoic kidney in a clinically normal
dog. Longitudinal image of the left kidney. The renal cortex
(arrowheads) is isoechoic to the adjacent spleen (Sp). A thin,
4.28cm
hyperechoic band is also noted in the medulla, consistent
with an incidental rim sign (RS). Acoustic shadowing is also
Figure 10.3. Hyperechoic kidney  in a normal  cat.
observed dorsally (short arrows) because of attenuation and
Longitudinal image of the left kidney of a cat with normal
refraction of the ultrasound waves by normal structures
 renal function. The renal cortex appeared hyperechoic to the
such as walls of vessels and collecting system, and sinus fat.
 liver (not shown). This kidney is otherwise normal in shape,
 This shadowing must not be misinterpreted as a sign of
size, and contour.
 nephrolithiasis.
Cra
Left lateral
Spleen
RV
kidney. The vascular flow can be observed with color Doppler through the renal, interlobar, and arcuate vessels. AA, arcuate
artery; IA, interlobar artery; and RV, renal vein.
342KIDNEYS AND URETERS
_eftlatera
Crani
5.55c
Figure 10.7. Compensatory hypertrophy. Longitudinal
image of the left kidney of a cat with right renal agenesis but
normal renal function. This unique kidney is cnlarged but
Figure 10.6. Physiological pyelectasia in a cat. On this
normal in shape and contour. Some acoustic shadowing is
transverse image obtained in the central portion of the left
(arrowheads) caused by excessive attenuation of the ultra-
kidney,minimal distension of the renal pelvis appears as an
sound beam by the region of the sinus.
anechoic, crescent-shaped region just medial to the renal
crest (C). This pelvis is surrounded at the hilus by hyper-
echoic fat contained in the sinus (S).The ureter is not visible.
This cat was receiving intravenous fluids.
Cranial
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC
FEATURES OF RENAL
DISORDERS
Congenital Renal and
UreteralMalformations
-2.55cn
With the exception of polycystic kidney disease and
Figure 10.8. Renal dysplasia in a dog. Longitudinal image
ectopic ureters, congenital malformations of the upper
of the left kidney of a mixed-breed dog with unilateral renal
urinary tract are rare in dogs and cats. Renal agenesis
dysplasia. This kidney is small and hyperechoic to the spleen.
(complete absence) or hypoplasia is often associated
Edge shadowing is also observed ().
with compensatory enlargement of the unique kidney
(Figure 10.7). Renal ectopia and fusion have also been
rcported (Allworth and Hofman 1999; Hecht et al.
plasia should be suspected in a young dog with
2005). Renal dysplasia is defined as disorganized
deformed kidneys and clinical renal insufficiency.
development of renal parcnchyma because of anoma-
lous differentiation. The kidneys are typically small,
DiffuseParenchymal Renal Diseases
irregular, and hyperechoic, with reduced corticome-
dullary distinction, similarly to kidneys with chronic
Increased renalechogenicity is one of the most common
inflammatory disease (Abraham 2003) (Figure 10.8).
findings in dogs and cats with renal insufficiency.
These young dogs may be predisposed to ascending
Several renal diseases can be associated with increased
pyelonephritis, which contributes to the morphologi-
cortical and/or medullary echogenicity in the acute or
cal modifications observed on ultrasound (Abraham
 chronic phases of the process. Interstitial and glomcru-
2003). Although renal developmental anomalies can be
lar nephritis, acute tubular nephrosis or nccrosis
confirmed only with histological analysis, renal dys-
(caused by ethylene glycol, grapes in dogs, and lily in
343ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
cats), end-stage renal disease, and nephrocalcinosis
tubular necrosis andcalciumoxalate deposition
can all cause renal hyperechogenicity (Walter et al.
caused by ethylene glycol toxicity (Figure 10.9). In
1987;Barr et al. 1989; Adams et al. 1991;Forrest et al.
other cases, both medulla and cortex can become
1998; Eubig et al. 2005). In some of these disease pro-
hyperechoic,causingreducedcorticomedullaryborder
cesses, the cortical echogenicity can be more specifi-
distinction (Figure 10.10). This is particularly evident
cally increased, enhancing the corticomedullary
in dogs and cats with chronic renal disease (Figures
distinction.This can be dramatic in cases of acute
10.11-10.14)
Crani
Cranial
Liver
4.35cm
A
Figure 10.9.Ethylenc glycol toxicity in a dog. On this lon-
gitudinal image of the right kidney, the cortex is markedly
lobe because of oxalate crystal deposition and tubular necro-
sis.The renal medulla is not affected, and the corticomedul-
lary distinction is enhanced.
Cranial
RK
4.97cm
B
Liver
Figure 10.11.Chronic renal disease.A:Chronic intersti-
tial nephritis and sclerosis in a dachshund. On this longi-
tudinal image of the left kidney,both the cortex and mcdulla
appear hypcrcchoic, hcterogeneous, and poorly demarcated.
The kidney is small and irregular in contour, and several
hyperechoic stripes are observed, which may have been
Figure 10.10.Acute interstitial nephritis caused by lepto-
related to fibrosis and/or dystrophic mineralization observed
spirosis. Longitudinal image of the right cranial abdomen of
on histopathology. B: Nephrosclerosis. Longitudinal image
a dog with acute renal insufficiency. The right kidney (RK)
of the left kidney of a 5-year-old shar-pei with chronic renal
   s   
insufficiency and proteinuria. The cortex is markedly hyper-
genicity contrasts with the concurrent hypoechogenicity
echoic, granular in echotexture, and appears thinned when
involving the adjacent liver, which was presumably caused
comparcd with the medulla. The kidney is also small and
by hepatitis. The rcnal corticomedullary distinction is signifi-
mildly irregular. Nephrosclerosis was the histological diag-
cantly reduced.
nosis based on ultrasound-guided biopsies. Sp, spleen.
344KIDNEYS AND URETERS
2.66cm
Figure 10.12. Chronic interstitial nephritis with nephroli-
s e u  yt a yo sn reuo si
Figure 10.14. Nephrocalcinosis. Longitudinal image of the
and poorly demarcated. This kidney is also small and irregu-
left kidney in a cat with hypercalcemia. An irregular hyper-
larly shaped (arrowheads), and a hyperechoic focus (arrow)
echoic band is seen involving the region of the corticomedul-
associated with acoustic shadowing () is present in its
lary junction, secondary to renal tubular calcification.
cranial pole. This mineral focus was confirmed to represent
a nephrolith.
gestion, and/or hemorrhage. This finding, known as
the medullary rim sign, has been observed in several
Cranial
disease processes, such as acute tubular necrosis (eth-
ylene glycol toxicity), nephrocalcinosis, leptospirosis,
and pyogranulomatous vasculitis caused by feline
infectious peritonitis, as wcll as in normal cats and
dogs (Barr et al. 1989; Biller et al. 1992; Forrest et al.
1998; Mantis and Lamb 2000) (Figures 10.15-10.17).
This hyperechoic band has been attributed to an insult
to the renal tubules in the deepest portion of the
medulla, which is most metabolically active and there-
fore more susceptible to ischemia (Biller et al. 1992)
Because of their relatively high prevalence in dogs and
1.62cm
cats, renal hyperechogenicity and medullary rim signs
should not be considered as accurate indicators of
Figure 10.13.Chronic interstitial nephritis with dystrophic
renal disease; however, the possibility remains that
mineralization. Longitudinal image of the left kidney in a cat
these findings could represent sentinel signs of early
with chronic renal insufficiency. This kidney is small and
renal disease or past renal insult (Mantis and Lamb
hyperechoic. The corticomedullary distinction is reduccd,
2000).
and several linear and iregular hyperechoic foci noted in the
Although it can be difficult to distinguish clinically
region of the pelvis and diverticuli (short arrows) are associ-
normal kidneys from acute and chronic renal disease
ated with acoustic shadowing (arrowheads). These foci indi-
 processes, several other ultrasonographic parameters
cated dystrophic mineralization. Fdge shadowing is also
can be helpful, such as size, shape, contour, and intr-
observed (long arrows).
nal architecture. Kidneys affected with chronic inter-
stitial nephritis tend to become small, irregular, and
Additionally, in several cases of parenchymal renal
more diffusely hypcrechoic (Walter et al. 1987) (Figures
disease, a circumferential hyperechoic band can be
10.11-10.13).
The remodelingprocess  affecting
found in the medulla, parallel to the corticomedullary
these kidneys, which involves fibrosis, causes archi-
border, consistent with mineralization, necrosis, con-
tectural distortions.Lincar or patchy dystrophic
Retroperitonealfat
5.58cm
5.58
Figure 10.15. Medullary rim sign. Longitudinal ultrasonographic and schematic images of the left kidney of a dog with
normal renal function. A thin hyperechoic band is noted in the deep portion of the medulla, parall to the corticomedullary
junction. This rim sign (RS) is not a sensitive or specific sign of renal disease. Additionally, the renal cortex is mildly hyper-
echoic and irregular, which can also be observed in dogs with normal renal function. Acoustic shadowing, probably related
to normal structures, is also present deep to the renal pelvis (arrowhead).
Cranial
-0
Right lateral
PE
A
B
Figure 10.16.Pyogranulomatous vasculitis. Longitudinal (A) and transverse (B) images of the right kidney in a cat diag
nosed with feline infectious peritonitis. A prominent hyperechoic band is in the medulla (arrow), parallel to the cortical
Crani
B
Left lateral
Spleen
*4.94cm
+0.28cm
Figure 10.17. Acute leptospirosis. Longitudinal (A) and transverse (B) image of the left kidney (arrowheads) in a small
tion is reduced. The renal pelvis (long arrow) is also dilated. Additionally, a medullary rim sign is present (short arrow). Ao,
aorta.
346 KIDNEYS AND URETERS
mineralization can also be observed in these kidneys,
10.20). Other findings can include a hypoechoic halo
especially in the region of the collecting system, where
at the periphery of the cortex, hyperechoic foci or
striations throughout the medulla, pyelectasia, and
hyperechoic foci that cause acoustic shadowing (Figure
hypoechoic medullary or cortical nodules or masses
10.13). These mineral foci are usually difficult to dif-
(Figures 10.20 and 10.21). Other tumors, such as squa-
ferentiate from true nephroliths,which can also accom-
mous cell carcinoma, may diffusely infiltrate the kidney
pany chronic renal diseases. Kidneys affected with
and markedly distort the renal architecture (Figures
acute processes, such as infectious pyelonephritis,
10.21 and 10.22).
interstitial nephritis (e.g., caused by leptospirosis), or
acute tubular necrosis (e.g., causcd by ethylene glycol)
FocalParenchymalRenalDisorders
can become enlarged and hyperechoic, with a contour
that usually remains smooth (Figures 10.9 and 10.10).
Focal significant or nonsignificant renal lesions are
Perinephric effusion can also be observed in these
common in dogs and cats. Renal cysts, nephroliths or
patients and was described particularly with leptospi
dystrophic mineralization, and cortical infarcts are
rosis (Forrest et al. 1998).
more common than primary or metastatic neoplasia
 Protein-losing glomerular diseases, such as glomer-
granulomas, and abscesses.
ulonephritis and renal amyloidosis, cannot be distin-
guished from other types of diffuse renal disorders.
Renal Cavitary Lesions
Affected kidneys are commonly hyperechoic and can
vary in size according to the chronicity of the disease
Benign renal cysts typically appear as round to oval,
(Figure 10.18).
anechoic structures with a thin, well demarcated,
 Renal parenchymal mineralization (nephrocalcino-
hyperechoic rim and may show distal acoustic enhance-
sis) in dogs and cats with or without hypercalcemia
ment (Reichle et al. 2002) (Figure 10.23). Cysts can be
can cause renal diffuse cortical and/or medullary
solitary or multifocal and vary in size. In some patients,
hyperechogenicity, a medullary rim sign, and/or dis-
internal echoes can be observed in association with
persed hyperechoic foci (Figures 10.14 and 10.19).
hemorrhage or necrotic debris. Inherited polycystic
kidney disease, which affects long-haired cats and
focal renal changes, with the exception of lymphoma 
Cairn terriers, can be variable in severity, can be some-
in cats. With lymphoma in cats, the kidneys typically
times associated with chronic interstitial nephritis, and
become cnlarged, irregular, and hyperechoic (Figure
 may cause significant rcnal distortion (Figures 10.24
8.63cm
Figure 10.18. Glomerulonephritis. Longitudinal image of
Figure 10.19.Nephrocalcinosis in a dog with hypercalce
the left kidney (arrowheads) of a German shepherd diag-
Imia. On this longitudinal image, small hyperechoic foc
nosed with bilateral glomerulonephritis. The kidney appears
(arrows) are seen throughout thc left kidney, particularl
smoothly enlarged and hyperechoic, particularly at the level
involving the cortex, consistent with extensive renal
of the cortex, which also appears subjectively thickened.
calcification.
Crania
Renal
diverticuli
Figure 10.20. Renal lymphoma in a cat. On these longitudinal images, the left kidney is enlarged, reaching more than 6cm
in length, and moderately hyperechoic.The lobulated sections of the medulla appear prominent, and a hypoechoic halo is
present at the periphery of the cortex (between the short arrows). Mild dilatation of the renal diverticuli is also apparent (long
arrows).Thesefeatures are commonlyseenwithrenallymphomain cats.
Cranial
Renalpelvis
heads) in another cat with lymphoma. The kidney is enlarged, reaching more than 8cm in length, and markedly hetero-
geneous. Several ill-defined hypoechoic nodules and masses () are in the parenchyma, distorting its architecture. This pattern
is another manifestation of lymphoma in cats and sometimes in dogs.
A
Figure 10.22.Diffuse squamous cell carcinoma in a cat.A: Longitudinal sonogram of the right kidney that is enlarged
(5.3cm),irregularly shaped,and diffusely increased in echogenicity.The kidney is surrounded by fluid(F).B:Panoramicview
of the same kidney showing the subcapsular echogenic fluid distention (arrows). L, liver. Images courtesy of D. Penninck.
348KIDNEYS AND URETERS
Cranial
Cra
Liver
6.02cm
1.82cm
Figure 10.25. Polycystic rcnal disease. Longitudinal image
Figure 10.23. Renal cyst. Longitudinal image of the right
of thc left kidney in a Persian cat with bilateral polycystic
kidney in a dog with an incidental cortical cyst, which
renal disease. Several round hypoechoic to anechoic struc-
appcars as a 1.8cm, round, well-defined, anechoic structure,
tures, delineated by a thin, wel-defined, hyperechoic rim,
associated with distal acoustic enhancement (*). The renal
cortex (delineated by arrowheads)is hyperechoic to the adja-
are found throughout the renal parenchyma(delinealed by
the arrowheads). The mild echogenicity noted in some of
cent liver,although there was no clinical evidence of renal
these cysts () may be the result of partial volume averaging
failure.
(the combination of tissue and cystic fluid in thc same imaged
slice) or the presence of intracystic hemorrhage or debris.
This polycystic discasc causes renal enlargement. The hyper-
Cranial
echogenicity noted involving the renal parenchyma is caused
by concurrent interstitial nephritis and fibrosis.
Cranial
Figure 10.24. Polycystic renal disease. Longitudinal image
of the left kidney of a Himalayan cat with bilateral polycystic
renal disease. Several well-defined, round, anechoic struc-
tures are found throughout thc renal parenchyma (delin-
eated by arrowheads), in association with far acoustic
Figure 10.26. Chronic renal degencration and cyst forma-
enhancement (arrows), consistent with cavitary lesions con-
tion. Longitudinal image of thc left kidney of an adult
taining a hypoattenuating fluid.
Labrador retrievcr with chronic renal insufficiency. The
kidney (arrowheads) is hyperechoic, and the corticomedul-
lary distinction is reduced. Two well-defined, circulal,
and 10.25). Most of these cysts are in the cortex or at
anechoic foci (white arrows) are noted in the region of the
the corticomcdullary junction (Reichle et al. 2002).
corticomedullary junction, consistent with degenerative
Renal cysts can also be sccondary to chronic renal dis-
cysts. The cysts are presumed tobe secondary to the presence
eases in dogs and cats (Figure 10.26).
of the chronic renal disease. Incomplete acoustic shadowing
Solitary cysts, which can somctimes become rela-
is also apparent dorsally (black arrows) because of higher
tively large, must be differentiatcd from solitary solid
ultrasound beam attcnuation by the structures in the peripel-
 Or cavitary masses, abscesses, and hematomas. Solid
vic region and sinus and/or possibly because of early dys-
masses or nodules are typically associatcd with static
trophic mineralization.
internal echoes that can be affected by gain settings
these lesions can alter the renal internal architecture
and that are usually not associated with distal acoustic
(Figure 10.30). Because their variable characteristics,
renal primary or metastatic neoplastic processes can-
tated because of necrosis.Renal cystadenocarcinomas
not be easily distinguished with ultrasonography.
have been reported in German shepherds and are
However, lymphoma and malignant histiocytosis (his-
usually associated with dermatofibrosis (Moe and
tiocytic sarcoma) tend to appear as hypoechoic nodules
Lium 1997). With ultrasonography, a fluid-filled cavity
 or masses (Figure 10.31).
(or cavities) typically predominates, infiltrating the
 Other types of solitary neoplastic masses include
kidney, with a solid-tissue component that can pro-
adenocarcinomas, hemangiomas, nephroblastomas,
trude inside the cyst(s) (Figure 10.27).
and several types of sarcomas,including hemangiosar
Renal abscesses can usually be differentiated from
coma, as well as metastases (Gasser et al. 2003) (Figures
true cysts by the presence of echoes and sedimentation
10.30, 10.32, and 10.33). These neoplastic processes can
within the cavitary lesion and especially by a rather
be well defincd or ill-defined and can be associated
poorly demarcated and irregular contour (Figure
with retroperitoneal hemorrhage or complctcly replace
10.28). Distal enhancement may still be present if the
normal parenchymal architecture. The absence of an
cellular count remains relatively small.
identifiable kidney in the region lateral to the origin of
the renal vessels might be the only sign that can help
in confidently suspecting a renal mass. Other imaging
Renal Solid-Mass Lesions
tests (excretory urography, computed tomography, or
Solid-tissue proliferative diseases can appear as homo-
magnetic resonance) can be required to confirm the
geneous or heterogeneous, hypoechoic, isoechoic or
 origin of the mass.
hyperechoic, regular or irregular lesions, with variably
Other less common solid processes, such as granu-
well-defined margins (Figure 10.29). This variable
lomas (fungal diseases), pyogranulomas (feline infec-
ultrasonographic appearance is reflected by the cell
tious peritonitis), or solid abscesses can appear similar
type, as well as by the variable presence and distribu-
to neoplastic processes (Figure 10.34). Hence, fine-
tion of vessels,tissue necrosis,fibrosis,mineralization,
needle aspiration or biopsy is required in most cases
and hemorrhage (Walter et al. 1987b). When large,
to achieve a precise diagnosis.
Live
Farenhance
Cranial pole
Figure 10.27. Cystadenocarcinoma. Longitudinal ultrasonographic and schematic images of the right kidney of a German
shepherd with a palpable renal mass. A large anechoic cystic (C) cavitary lesion involves the caudal renal pole, in association
with far acoustic enhancement. An irregular hyperechoic mass (short arrows) is noted at the cranial margin of the "cyst" in
the central portion of the kidney. Artifactual hyperechoic lincs arc at the inncr ventral margin of the cystic component of the
renal mass (long arrow at the top), consistent with acoustic reverberation.
350KIDNEYS AND URETERS
B
7.88cm
Figure 10.28. Renal abscesses. A: Septic cmbolus and abscess formation. Longitudinal image of the left kidney in a golden
retriever diagnosed with bacterial scpticemia. An ill-defined hyperechoic rimlike focus (arrows), with a hypoechoic center, is
al the level of the rcnal cortex. A septic exudate was aspirated with ultrasound guidance. B: Renal abscess caused by a
wooden foreign-body perforation. A poorly echogenic cavity (arrows) with a few bright echoes (mixture of debris and gas)
involves the caudal pole of the left kidney (K). The retroperitoneal fat is hyperechoic, and a small amount of fluid is noted
in the near field, adjacent to the abscess, which was confirmed at surgery. S, splcen. Image B courtesy of D. Penninck.
Cranial
eftlateral
4.07cm
Figure 10.29. Solitary nodule. Longitudinal (left) and transverse (right) images of the left kidney in a Lhasa apso with
multicentric lymphoma. A hypoechoic nodule (arrows) is in the renal cortex, adjacent to the renal sinus (S) and crest (C).
infarcts are typically hyperechoic and cause focal corti-
OtherFocal Lesions
cal depression (Figures 10.36 and 10.37). These chronic
Mineral foci are commonly identified in kidneys of
older dogs and cats becausc of soft-tissue mineraliza-
-acoustic shadow. Benign renal infarcts can also look
tion or urolithiasis (Figure 10.35). Renal infarcts can similar to septic emboli, although these tend to be more
also be identified as linear or wedged-shaped, well- heterogeneous in appearance. Although extremely
defined lesions in the cortex, perpcndicular to the
rare,gas foci can alsobe present within kidneys becausc
capsule. Although their appearance can vary, chronic
 of hematogenous or ascending infection.
351ATLAS OF SMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
Cranial
Figure 10.30. Nephroblastoma in a boxer. A large mass
(arrowheads) measuring about 9cm long entirely distorts the
Crania
renal architecture. Image courtesy of D. Penninck.
Leftlatera
Spleen
*164cm
Figure 10.32. Primary and metastatic renal neoplasia.
A: Renal adenocarcinoma. Longitudinal image of the left
kidney (arrowheads) of a 6-year-old dog with chronic weight
loss and anorcxia. A relatively well-circumscribed hypere-
Figure 10.31. Renal and splenic nodules. Transverse image
choic mass (arrows) found in the caudal pole was confirmed
of the left kidney (LK) in a medium-sized dog.A hypoechoic
to be a renal primary adenocarcinoma. Image courtesy of S.
nodule (arrows) involves the rcnal cortex, deforming its
Hecht. B: Metastatic carcinoma. Longitudinal image of the
contour.This nodule was not associated with far acoustic
left kidney of a cat in which a pulmonary mass was identi-
enhancement.Similar nodules ofvariable size were also
fied on radiographs. Tumor staging revealed a paracortical
detected in the liver and spleen (other arrows). Tumors of
hypoechoic nodule at the caudal renal pole. A metastatic
round-cell origin should be considered when these lesions
focus of bronchoalveolar carcinoma was suspected on cyto-
are found. Disseminated histiocytic sarcoma (malignant his-
logical examination.
tiocytosis) was identified.
DisordersoftheCollectingSystem
can sometimes be difficult to differentiatefrom adja-
cent interlobar without the use of color or power
The renal pelvis and diverticuli are usually not dis-
Doppler (Figure 10.38).
tended in normal dogs and cats. Dilatation of the
Pyelectasia can be observed in animals with
pelvis, also tcrmed pyelectasia, is usually more appar-
increased diuresis (e.g, diuretic therapy or chronic
ent on transverse planes at the levcl of the renal hilus.
 e m s   (n 
It appears as an anechoic crescnt at the medial margin
malformation (e.g., ureteral ectopia), pyelonephritis,
of the renal crest (the deep portion of the medulla)
or lower urinary obstruction (Felkei et al. 1995). The
(Figure 10.6). Mild dilatation of the pelvic diverticuli
ureter can also be seen in these patients and be most
Crania
Kidney
Fat
eftlater
Kidney
B
Figure 10.33. Renal hemangiosarcoma and retroperitoneal hemorrhage. Longitudinal (A) and transverse (B) ultrasono-
graphic and schematic images of the left kidney in a large dog with suspected intra-abdominal hemorrhage. A large, il-defined
and hcterogeneous mass encircles the ventral aspect of the left kidney (arrowheads). The most ventral component of this mass
and hyperechoic (arrows), and appears to invade thc renal cortex, consistent with a primary renal hemangiosarcoma.
Cran
Cranial
0.58cm
Figure 10.34.Renal pyogranuloma. Longitudinal image of
the left kidney of a cat with clinically suspected infectious
Figure 10.35. Renal mineralization. Longitudinal imagc of
peritonitis. The renal architecture and contour (arrowheads)
the left kidney of a clinically normal dog. Several foci of
aremarkedly deformed,and therenalparenchyma ishetero-
mineralization (arrows) are in the region of the collecting
system,the largest being associated with acoustic shadowing
medulla, adjaccnt to the renal pelvis(P).Pyogranulomatous
(arrowheads). These mineral foci may represent nephroliths
 nephritis was diagnosed by fine-needle aspiration.
and/or dystrophic mineralization.
352
Cranial
Nephrolith
Acoustic
+3.54cm
3.54cm
shadow
Figure 10.36. Cortical infarcts and pelvic nephrolith. Longitudinal ultrasonographic and schematic images of the right
kidney of a cat with chronic urolithiasis but normal renal function. Triangular shaped hyperechoic foci are noted in the cranial
 and caudal renal poles, consistent with incidental infarcts (arrows). A large nephrolith in the region of the pelvis is not associ-
ated with outflow obstruction.
B
Figure 10.37.  Chronic renal infarcts. A: Chronic infarct (arrow) on the caudal pole of the left kidney in a dog with normal
 renal function. Image courtesy of D. Penninck. B: Close-up longitudinal image of the left kidney (arrowheads) in a cat with 
 normal renal function. At the periphery of the kidney are triangular-shaped hyperechoic foci (arrows) that are associated with
focal cortical depression, consistent with chronic renal infarction. Acoustic shadowing was observed deep to the largest infarct
(*), likely because of the presence of hyperattenuating fibrosis and possibly mineralization.
Cranial
Diverticuli
Interlobar
vessel
Pelvis
Arcuatevessel
left kidney. The renal pelvis is distended, as well as the diverticuli, which appear distinct from the interlobar vessels on power
Doppler. The medulla (M) is hyperechoic to the cortex (C) because of nephrocalcinosis.
354KIDNEYS AND URETERS
easily idcntified on transverse planes at the level of the
distorted and show a hyperechoic rim because of
hilus, central to the renal vessels (Figure 10.39). Table
fibrous tissue remodeling (Figure 10.44).However, it
10.1 lists causes of pyelectasia and hydronephrosis in
must be pointed out that the renal pelvis may remain
dogs and cats.
normal in mild or early pyelonephritis (Neuwirth
When pyelectasia is more pronounced or if hydro-
et al. 1993).
nephrosis develops because of urinary flow obstruc-
As opposed to pyelectasia, hydronephrosis is con-
tion, renal diverticuli appear as rounded, anechoic
sidered to be consecutive to an obstructive disease
fingerlike projections that connect with the renal pelvis
(Pugh et al. 1994), such as that caused by the migration
(Figures 10.40-10.42). Markedly dilated diverticuli and
of a nephrolith or caused by an infiltrating process
pelvis must be differentiated from renal cysts or sec-
involving the pelvis, the ureter, or more commonly the
tions of the medulla. The presence of protein or cells
ureterovesicular junction. In cases of chronic obstruc-
(pus or hemorrhage) may increase the urine echo-
tion,progressive distension of the renal pelvis and
genicity and even be associated with sedimentation,
diverticuli can cause markcd parenchymal atrophy
such as sometimes seen in cases of pyelonephritis
(Figures 10.45-10.47).
(Figures 10.40 and 10.43)
Ureteral distcnsion, also termed hydroureter, is
With chronic pyelonephritis, in addition to paren-
usually observed in combination with hydronephrosis
chymal changes, the pelvis and diverticuli can become
in cases of urine flow obstruction.Distended ureters,
Cranial
Diverticuli
Sinus
Pelvis
7.07cm
7.07cm
B
Leftlateral
Renal crest
Sinus
kidney of a dog with urethral obstruction. The proximal ureter, pelvis, and diverticuliappear mildly distended because of
outflow obstruction. The proximal ureter is better identified on the transverse image.
Table 10.1.
Differential diagnosis for pyelectasia and hydronephrosis in small animals
Pyelectasia
Hydronephrosis
Intravenous fluid therapy
Lower urinary-tract obstruction
Diuretic therapy
Pelvic or ureteral obstruction: a stone,an infiltrative mass at
Increased diuresis caused by renal insufficiency
the bladder trigone,a stricture, or a retroperitoneal mass
Distended bladder
Congenital malformation
Pyelonephritis or ureteritis
Ectopicureter or anothercongenital malformation
Cranial
Rightlateral
5.58cm
0.27cm
A
B
Figure 10.40.Moderate hydronephrosis. Longitudinal (A) and transverse (B) ultrasonographic images of the right kidney
of a small-brced dog with acutc rcnal failurc and abdominal pain. The kidney (arrowheads) is enlarged and hyperechoic, and
the corticomedullary distinction is attenuated.The renal pelvis (*) and diverticuli (short arrows) are moderately dilated. The
caused by ascending urinary infection.Note the sharp, oblique line of cellular sediment in the pelvis on the transverse view,
which was parallel to the exam table.
Cranial
Cranial
Figure 10.41.Obstructive hydronephrosis.Longitudinal
image of the right kidney (arrowheads) in a dog with ure.
Figure 10.42. Chronic pyelonephritis and nephroliths.
teral obstruction caused by a ureterolith.The distended
Longitudinal image of the left kidney of a cat with renal
pelvic diverticuli (*) are rounded and partially separated by
failure and abdominal pain. The kidney (outlined by arrow-
hyperechoic septa that contain interlobar arteries and veins.
The distended proximal ureter (U) is also apparent, com-
heads) is hyperechoic and irregular, and its pelvis and
diverticuli (*) are distended and deformed, appearing as
municating with the pelvis (P).
hypoechoic fingerlikc projcctions. Irrcgular hypcrcchoic and
hyperattenuating foci (arrow) are in the center of the pelvis,
consistent with small nephroliths.The corticomedullary
junction is indistinct. These signs were caused by chronic
pyelonephritis in association with urolithiasis.
355
356KIDNEYS AND URETERS
Rightlateral
5.32cm
A
B
Figure 10.43.Pyonephrosis and urcteral abscess. Longitudinal (A) and transverse (B) images of the right kidney of a dog
with fever and abdominal pain. The renal pelvis (P) and diverticuli are asymmetrically dilated in the cranial pole of the kidney
(arrows). The proximal portion of the ureter (U) is also distended. These portions of the collecting system contain echogenic
Cranial
Figure 10.44.Severe chronic pyelonephritis.Longitudinal
Figure 10.45. Sevcrc hydronephrosis. Longitudinal image
   e     o a
of the left kidney in a dog with severe renomegaly diagnosed
renal insufficiency and recurrent cystitis. The kidney is
 on radiographs. The kidney appears as a fluid-filled cavity
with peripheral hyperechoic bands consistent with interdi-
appearing isoechoic to the spleen. The hypoechoic pelvis (P)
verticular septa (arrow). A large,irregular,hyperechoic mass
is moderately distended and irregular, and its contour is
at the level of the renalhilus is invading the renal pelvis and
hyperechoic.
ureter and causing the hydronephrosis.Surgical resection
confirimed the presence of a soft-tissue sarcoma.
which can become markedly enlarged and tortuous
turesthat areusually associatedwith acousticshadow-
with long-standing obstructions, can usually be fol-
ing (Figure 10.49). With complete obstruction, the
lowed caudally to the level of the obstruction. Color or
ureter appears dilated cranially and abruptly blunted
Power Doppler can be useful in differentiating an
caudally at the level of the urolith. Several migrating
abdominal vessel from a distended ureter (Figure
urolithsmay bepresent,justifying a detailed examina
10.48). Migrated uroliths appear as hyperechoic struc-
tion of the entire region of each ureter, up to the level
Cranial
Cranial
Figure 10.48. Hydroureter. Longitudinal image obtained
with Power Doppler in the left midabdomen of a young
female dog with urinary incontinence. A 0.5-cm-wide
Figure 10.46.
.Hemangiosarcoma in a dachshund. The
hypoechoic tubular structure can be seen coursing from the
mass (arrows) is centered on the pelvis and is responsible for
renal pelvis to the caudal abdomen, consistent with a dilated
the severc hydronephrosis affecting the right kidney. The
ureter. No flow is present. This ureter terminated in the
renal diverticuli are markedly dilated (*) and contain echo-
vagina rather than in the urinary bladder, indicating
genic fluid, particularly in the dependent portion, consistent
ectopia.
with hemorrhage. Image courtesy of D. Penninck.
Crania
0.81cm
Figure10.49.
. Hydroureter. Longitudinal image obtained
along the midportion of the right ureter (u) in a dog with
hydronephrosis. An ovoid 0.8-cm-wide hyperechoic struc-
Figure 10.47. Severe hydronephrosis. Longitudinal image
 of the left kidney in a cat with severe renomegaly. The kidney
ture (arrow) found in the lumen of the ureter is associated
with a strong acoustic shadow (arrowheads), with proximal
is completely replaced by hypoechoic fluid, with a rim of
luminal dilatation, indicating an obstructive urolith. U,
parenchyma remaining that is only a few millimeters thick
ureter.
(arrows). Hydroureter is also identified (U). Inadvertent liga-
tion of the distal ureter, secondary to a previous ovariohys-
 terectomy, was identified during exploratory surgery.
in cats has been reported to reach 90% (Kyles et al.
2005).
of the bladder. The identification of small uroliths can
Although
1  neoplastic  processes  infiltrating  the
 be limited by the presence of overlying gastrointestinal
bladder trigone and/or ureter are more commonly
structures, such as the descending colon, or by the lack
responsible for ureteral obstruction (Figures 10.51 and
of significant ureteral distension (Kyles et al. 2005)
 10.52), especially in dogs, other retroperitoneal pro-
(Figure 10.50). When combining radiography and
cesses, such as soft-tissue sarcomas, abscesses, or gran-
ultrasonography, the sensitivity to detect urolithiasis
ulomas, can also compress and/or infiltrate the ureter.
358KIDNEYS AND URETERS
Rightlatera
Leftlatcral
Bladder
Bladder
B
Figure 10.50.Nonobstructive uroliths in two cats. A: Transverse image obtained at the level of the right renal hilus of a cat
hyperechogenicity (short arrows), suggesting ureteritis. There is no evidence of ureteral outflow obstruction. On the follow-up
exam, these small uroliths were found in the urinary bladder. M, medulla; and S, sinus. B: Longitudinal (left) and transverse
(right) images of the distal right ureter of a cat with a chronic history of urolithiasis. Several hyperechoic foci (arrows) are
found in the ureter (arrowheads) of this cat without evidence of hydroureter or hydronephrosis. Acoustic shadows are noted
in the far field. Some of these calculi were eventually found in the bladder. The ureteral wall is mildly thickened due to edema
and/or inflammation. EI, external iliac vessel.
Ureteral obstruction can also be caused by a blood clot,
colon) (Figure 10.53). These ureters are often distended
an inflammatory stricture, or a small infiltrative mass,
because of partial obstruction at the site of termination
which can be more challenging to diagnose and dif-
or intramural tunneling, ileus, and/or ascending infec-
ferentiate. Other imaging tests, such as excretory urog-
tion. Hydronephrosis can also be present, especially
raphy, which can be combined with computed
when there is marked hydroureter. With B-mode Or
with color or power Doppler ultrasonography,an
a
clear diagnosis cannot be made by using
intravesical urine jet can sometimes be observed adja-
ultrasonography.
cent to the ureterovesical junction (Lamb and Gregory
Unilateral or bilateral congenital ectopic ureters,
1998). The visualization of this ureteral jet can be facili-
which are more common in female dogs, can some-
tated by administering a diuretic after withholding
times beidentified and followed to their termination
water for severalhours.A jet of dilutedurine can be
site (theurethra,most commonly, or the vagina or the
more easily observedwithina bladderfilledwithmore
359ATLAS OFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
Leftlateral
Bladder
Colon
Figure 10.51.Infiltrative bladder mass and hydroureter. Transverse image obtained at the level of the neck of the urinary
bladder in a female dog with chronic hematuria. An irregular and poorly defined transmural mass involves the region of the
right ureterovesicular junction (arrowheads). The distal portion of the right ureter is dilated (U) by the stenosis (arrow).
Figure 10.52. Infiltrative ureterallymphoma. Longitudinal inages obtained at the level of the right kidney (A) and midright
ureter (B) in a cat. The kidney (K) is deformed, and the corticomedullary distinction is significantly reduced. The renal pelvis
(P) and proximal ureter (UL) are dilated. An oval, hypoechoic, uniform mass (arrows) is found at the level of the right ureter.
The ureteral lumen (UL) is dilated cranially. A 3-mm hyperechoic structure in the center of this mass is associated with partial
acoustic shadowing and consistent with a concurrent urolith, obstructed at the level of by the infiltrative mass. Histopathology
revealed the presence of an unusual lymphoma infiltrating the kidney and ureter. Images courtesy of D. Penninck.
concentrated urine. However, the visualization of a
acterized by a focal cystic dilatation of the distal sub-
urine jet into thebladder lumen cannot exclude the
mucosal portion of the ureter thatprotrudes into the
possibility of tunneling ectopic ureters with multiple
bladder lumen (Figure 11.35). A thin-walled, round
fenestrations.
structure containing anechoic fluid can be observed
Ureterocele is another congenital ureteral malforma-
within the neck of the bladder by means of ultrasono-
tion, which can sometimes be associated with ectopia
graphy (Stifleret al. 2002).Ectopic ureterocele involves
(Stiffler et al. 2002). An intravesical ureterocele is char-
the distal portion of an ectopic ureter.
360KIDNEYS AND URETERS
Right lateral
Bladder
Bla
Urethra
Color
A
二
0.75cm
AL
Pelvis
Figure 10.53. Ectopic ureters. A and B: Longitudinal (A) and transverse (B) images obtained in the region of the bladder
trigone, in which a tubular structure filld with an anechoic luid (U) extendsbeyond the ureterovesicularjunction, along the
distal colon. There is no flow on color Doppler, as opposed to the external iliac artery (a) and vein (v), which supports
a diagnosis of ureteral ectopia. Excretory urography confirmed a termination into the distal portion of the urethra.
-u n m  a n e u () ou q a go s ( aaa pe () eo  p 
nence. A fluid-filled tubular structure (arrows) consistent with a distal ureter extends through the wall of thc bladder, on the
dlorsal midline, beyond the ureteral papilla.Because of the shadow created by the pelvis, the termination of this ureter could
at surgery.
DISORDERS OF
the periphery of the renal cortex (Figure 10.54). These
THE PERINEPHRIC
changes can also be found with the accumulation of
urine or blood, usually following trauma to the kidney
RETROPERITONEAL SPACE
and/or ureter (Figure 10.55). Although the effusion
can be confirmed and characterized with ultrasono-
Several types of fluid can accumulate in the retroperi-
graphy and fine-needle aspiration, the rupture cannot
toneal space at the periphery of the kidneys.
be easily localized and usuallyrequires other imaging
Retroperitoneal transudate, which can be seen with
tools, such as excretory urography.
several types of renal disease, appears as linear or tri-
Exudates and acute hemorrhage tend to be more
angular to oval-shaped, anechoic to hypoechoic foci at
echogenic because of their higher cell count. In cases
361ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
 of inflammatory processes involving the retroperito-
Cranial
neal space, the retroperitoneal fat typically becomes
hyperechoic and hyperattenuating. These changes are
common with acutc pyelonephritis and ureteritis
(Figure 10.56).
Perinephric pseudocysts, which have been more
commonly reported in cats, appear as an accumulation
of fluid, usually anechoic, around one orboth kidneys,
and most commonly between the capsule and the renal
cortex (Ochoa et al. 1999; Beck et al. 2000) (Figure
10.57). These pseudocyststypically encircle the kidneys,
although they can be focal (Miles and Jergens 1992).
According to a report on 26 cats, subcapsular perirenal
pseudocysts are formed by accumulation of a transu-
Figure10.54.Retroperitonealeffusion.Longitudinalimage
date between the capsule and parenchyma of the
obtained in the region just caudal to the right kidney (RK) of
kidney, because of underlying parenchymal disease,
a dog with acute renal insufficiency caused by leptospirosis.
and may contribute to abdominal discomfort (Beck
Irregular linear hypoechoic regions (*) are within the retro-
et al. 2000). Urine may also be contained in these pseu-
peritoneal space, caudal to the renal cortex, consistent with
docysts (Ochoa et al. 1999).
transudation. The fat appears mildly hyperechoic, which
 Urinomas, described as an encapsulated accumula-
was attributed to edema.
tion of urine caused by traumatic extravasation (Figure
10.55), can appear similar to pseudocysts. Fine-needle
aspiration can be helpful in confirming the nature of
thc perirenal fluid.
SI
SI
CPA
Fat
1.85cm
2.64cm
Figure 10.55. Ureteral rupture, retropcritoncal urinoma, and abscess. Longitudinal (A)and transverse (B)ultrasound images
obtained with a linear transducer at the caudal aspect of the left kidney (LK, arrowheads).A poorly defined accumulation of
hypoechoic fluid (arrows) is in the retroperitoneal space, caudal to the kidney (A) and lateral to the left ureter (U) (B). The
vessel. The paraureteral fluid collction was sampled with ultrasound guidance, and urine and pus were identified. SI, sinall
intestine.
362 KIDNEYS AND URETERS
RPE
Figure 10.58.Ultrasound-guided aspiration.A fine-needle
aspiration is performed on a perirenal pseudocyst (the same
Figure 10.56.Retroperitoneal steatitis.Longitudinal imagc
cat as in Figure 10.22). The needle tip (arrow) is in the fluid-
obtained in the region of the caudal pole of the right kidney
filled cavity. Image courtesy of D. Penninck.
(RK) of a cat with hydronephrosis and severe pyelonephritis.
The renal pelvis (P) and proximal ureter (U) are distended,
and the surrounding fat is hyperechoic and markedly hyper
attenuating. The renal contour is consequently poorly
Leftlateral
defined. A small amount of retroperitoneal effusion (RPE) is
also present. Fine-needle aspiration confirmed the presence
of sterile retroperitoneal steatitis.
Figure 10.59.Ultrasound-guided renal biopsy. A biopsy is
performed through the lateral cortex(C)of the left kidney
(arrowheads) ofa shar-pei (the same as in Figure 10.11B). The
hyperechoic needle (arrows) is seen along the biopsy-guided
tract (dotted line), avoiding thc medulla (M).
2.54cn
and length depends on the size, vascularity, and depth
Figure 10.57.Perinephric pseudocyst. Longitudinal image
of the targeted lissue. Usually, 20- to 22-gauge needles
of the left kidney (LK) of a cat with chronic renal insuffi-
are used for fine-needle aspiration, and 14-to 20-gauge
ciency. The kidney is small (2.54cm), deformed, irregular,
needles are used for automated core biopsy (Figures
and diffusely hyperechoic because of chronic interstitial
10.58 and 10.59). Fine-needle aspiration can usually be
nephritis. The kidney is contained in a large anechoic
performed with the animal under minimal sedation,
cystlike cavity (arrows), consistent with a perinephric pseu-
whereas biopsy usually requires general anesthesia.
docyst. Image courtesy of J. Sutherland-Smith.
Neoplastic processes, such as lymphoma, are usually
diagnosed on a cytological specimen obtained with
INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES
fine-needle aspiration, although a more confident
diagnosis can sometimes require a biopsy. When
 Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration and biopsy
inflammatory processes are suspected, biopsy is
have become routine procedures complementing renal
generally recommended because it enables a better
ultrasonography. The choice of needle size (gauge)
discrimination between processes. Complications
363ATLASOF SMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
B
Figure 10.60. Ultrasound-guided pyelocentesis and pyelography. A: Transverse ultrasound image of the left kidney in cat
long needle (arrows) was inserted into the renal pelvis (P) for urine collection. This was followed by the injection of 5mL of
iopamidol (300 mg iodine/mL). B: On a lateral radiograph of the caudal abdoimen obtained 10 min later, opacification of the
pelvis and ureter (U) is observed. A urinary catheter and an oval gas bubble are visible in the bladder. Ureteral obstruction
is indicated by the lack of contrast medium reaching the distal urcter and urinary bladder (UB). An obstructive clot was
identified in the distal ureter at surgery.
associated with ultrasound-guided biopsy have been
in azotemic cats (Adin et al. 2003). Complications are
reported to vary between 9% in dogs and 15% in
considered rare.Aswithrenal aspiration or biopsy,
cats, and most commonly have included hemorrhage
hematuria can occur.
(Vaden et al. 2005). Older dogs and severely azotemic
 Some dogs and cats can benefit from drainage of
large renal cysls or pseudocysts (Ochoa et al. 1999).
et al. 2005). Larger-gauge needles (14 or 16 gauge) are
Therapeutic drainage and lavage of the renal pelvis
associated with higher-quality specimens (i.e., with
can also help to remove obstructive pus in dogs with
larger number of glomeruli), but also with greater like-
pyonephrosis (Szatmari et al. 2001).
lihood of hemorrhage (Rawlings et al. 2003).
Fine-needle drainage of cavitary lesions, such as
cysts or abscesses, can also be performed as a diagnos-
tic and/or therapeutic procedure (Figure 10.58). In
REFERENCES
place of excretory urography, fine-needle aspiration of
a distended pelvis (pyelocenthesis) can be performed
Abraham LA, Beck C, Slocombe RF (2003) Renal dysplasia
and followed by intrapelvic injection of iodine-based
and urinary tract infcction in a Bull Mastiff puppy. Aust
contrast medium (Rivers et al. 1997) (Figure 10.60).
Vet J 81:336-339.
After a 22-gauge spinal needle with a 45° angle is
Adams WH, Toal RL, Breider MA (1991) Ultrasonographic
inserted through the great curvature of the kidney, a
findings in dogs and cats with oxalate nephrosis attribut-
volume of contrast medium equal to one-half of the
able to ethylene glycol intoxication: 15 cases (1984-1988).
aspirated volume of urine is injected with ultrasound
JAm Vet Med Assoc 199:492-496.
guidance prior to radiographic exposure. By allwing
Adin CA, Herrgesell EJ, Nyland TG, et al. (2003) Antegrade
a higher concentration of contrast medium to reach the
pyelography for suspected ureteral obstruction in cats:
11 cats (1995-2001). J Am Vet Med Assoc 222:1576-
pelvis and ureter in cases of renal failure, thcir shape
1581.
and content can be better defined.Additionally, the
Allworth MS, Hoffman KL (1999) Crossed renal ectopia with
risk of contrast medium-induccd nephropathy can be
fusion in a cat.Vet Radiol Ultrasound 40:357-360.
lowered in animals with compromised renal function.
Barr FJ, Holt PE, Gibbs C (1990) Ultrasonographic measure-
Antegradc pyclography can be a useful alternative in
ments of normal renal parameters. J Small Anim Pract
the diagnosis and localization of ureteral obstructions
31:180-184.
364 KIDNEYS AND URETERS
Barr FJ, Petteson MW, Lucke VM, Gibbs C (1989)
Neuwirth L,Mahaffey M,Crowell W,etal.(1993)Comparison
of excrctory urography and ultrasonography for detection
appearance. Vet Radiology Ultrasound 30:169-173.
of experimentally induced pyelonephritis in dogs. Am J
Beck JA, Bellenger CR, Lamb WA, et al. (2000) Perirenal
Vet Res 54:660-669.
Ochoa VB, DiBartola SP, Chew DJ, Westropp J, Carothers M,
Biller DS, Bradley GA, Partington BP (1992) Renal medullary
Biller D (1999) Perinephric pseudocysts in the cat: A retro-
rim sign: Ultrasonographic evidence of renal disease. Vet
spective study and review of the literature. J Vet Intern
RadiolUltrasound 33:286-290.
Med 13:47-55.
Eubig PA, Brady MS, Gwaltney-Brant SM, Khan SA,
Pugh CR, Schelling CG, Moreau RE, Golden D (1994)
Mazzaferro EM,Morrow CM (2005)Acute renal failure in
latrogenic renal pyelectasia in the dog. Vet Radiol
dogs after the ingestion of grapes or raisins: A retrospec-
Ultrasound 35:50-51.
tive evaluation of 43 dogs (1992-2002).J Vet Intern Med
Rawlings CA, Diamond H, Howerth EW, Neuwirth L,
19:663-674.
Canalis C (2003)Diagnostic quality of percutancous kidney
Felki C, Voros Fenyves B (1995) Lesions of the renal pelvis
and proximal ureter in various nephro-urological condi-
ultrasound guidance in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
tions: An ultrasonographic study. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
223:317-321.
36:397-401.
Reichle JK, DiBartola SP, Léveille R (2002) Renal ultrasono-
Forrest LJ, O'Brien RT, Tremelling MS, Steinberg H, Coolcy
graphic and computed tomographic appearance, volume,
and function of cats with autosomal dominant polycystic
with leptospirosis. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 39:337-340.
kidney disease.Vet Radiol Ultrasound 43:368-373.
Gasser AM,Bush WW,Smith SS,Walton R (2003) Extradural
Rivers BJ, Walter PA, Polzin DJ (1997) Ultrasonographic-
spinal, bone marrow, and renal nephroblastoma. J Am
guided, percutaneous antegrade pyelography: Techniquc
Anim Hosp Assoc 39:80-85.
and clinical application in the dog and cat. J Am Anim
Hecht S, McCarthy RJ, Tidwell AS (2005) What is your
Hosp Assoc 33:61-68.
       
Stiffler KS, Stevenson MAM, Mahaffey MB, Howerth EW,
22.3224.
Barsanti JA (2002) Intravesical ureterocele with concurrent
Konde LJ, Wrigley RH, Park RD, Lebel JL (1984) Ultra-
renal dysfunction in a dog: A case report and proposed
sonographic anatomy of the normal canine kidney. Vet
classification system.J Am Anim IIosp Assoc 38:33-39.
Radiol 25:173-178.
Szatmari V, Osi Z, Manczur F (2001) Ultrasound-guided per-
Kyles AE, Hardie EM, Wooden BG,et al. (2005) Clinical,
cutaneous drainage for treatment of pyoncphrosis in two
clinicopathologic, radiographic, and ultrasonographic
dogs.J Am Vet Med Assoc 218:1796-1799.
abnormalitics in cats with ureteral calculi: 163 cases (1984-
Vaden SL, Levine JF, Lees GF, Groman RP, Grauer GF,
2002). J Am Vet Med Assoc 226:932-936.
Forrester SD (2005) Renal biopsy: A retrospective study of
Lamh CR, Gregory SP (1998) Ultrasonographic findings in
methods and complications in 283 dogs and 65 cats.J Vet
14 dogs with ectopic ureter. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 39:218-
Intern Med 19:794-801.
223.
Walter PA,Feeney DA,Johnston GR,Fletcher TF (1987a)
Mantis P, Lamb CR (2000) Most dogs with medullary rim
Feline renal ultrasonography: Quantitative analyses of
 sign on ultrasonography have no demonstrable renal dys-
imaged anatomy. Am J Vet Res 48:596 599.
function.Vet Radiol Ultrasound 41:164-166.
Walter PA,Feeney Da, Johnston GR, O'Leary TP (1987b)
Marcschal A, d'Anjou MA, Moreau M, Alexander K,
Ultrasonographic evaluation of renal parenchymal dis-
Beauregard G (2007) Utrasonographic measurement of
eases in dogs: 32 cases (1981-1986). J Am Vet med Assoc
kidney-to-aorta ratio as a method os cstimating renal size
191:999-1007.
in dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 48(5):434-438.
Walter PA, Johnston GR, Feeney DA, O'Brien TD (1988)
Miles KG, Jergens AE (1992) Unilateral perinephric pseudo-
Applications of ultrasonography in the diagnosis of paren-
cystof undetermined origin in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
chymal kidney discase in cats: 24 cases (1981-1986). J An
33:277-281.
Vet Med Assoc 192:92-98.
Moe L,Lium B(1997) Hereditary multifocal renal cystadeno-
Yeager AE, Anderson WI(1989) Studyof association between
carcinomas and nodular dermalofibrosis in 51 German
histologic features and echogenicity of architecturally
shepherd dogs. J Small Anim Pract 38:498-505.
normal cat kidneys. Am J Vet Res 50:860-863.
CHAPTER ELEVEN
BLADDER AND URETHRA
James Sutherland-Smith
PREPARATION AND
uterine body is between the urinarybladder and the
SCANNING TECHNIQUE
colon.
The four histological bladder wall layers are the
The ventral abdominal hair is clipped to the level of
mucosa
(hypoechoic),submucosa(
(hyperechoic),
the pubic bone, and ultrasonic gel is applied to the
muscularis (hypoechoic), and serosa (hyperechoic).
skin. A transabdominal approach with the animal in
However, these layers are difficult to define sono-
dorsal recumbency is preferred,but left or right lateral
graphically compared with the gastrointestinal tract.
The bladder wall thickness decreases as the urinary
recumbency or a standing position may be used in
bladder volume increases (Figure 11.4). The normal
confirming the presence of intraluminal sediment or
calculi, which will fall toward the gravity-dependent
bladder wall thickness increases up to 1mm with
wall. If the penile urethra is to be imaged, then hair
(Table 11.1). The normal rangc of bladder wall thick-
may be clipped from the perineum and the region
ness in cats is between 1.3 and 1.7mm (Finn-Bodner
cranial to the scrotum.
1995).
A real-time medium- to high-frequency(5to 7.5MHz
or higher) convex,linear, or vector transducer is rec-
The trigone of the bladder is not clearly delineated
ommended. A microconvex transducer with a small
from the remainder of the bladder wall. The ureters
contact area has the advantage of being easier to point
are not seen entering the urinarybladder unless they
toward the intrapelvic structures. Two complementary
are dilated. Ureteral papilla may be seen extending
transverse and longitudinal planes are used to fully
from the dorsal wall and should not be confused for
abnormal focal wall thickening (Figure 11.5).
assess the bladder and urethra (Figure 11.1).
 Ureteral jets may be seen emerging from the dorsal
Thc bcst ultrasound images of the bladder
are
obtaincd when it is moderately distended (Figure
 bladder wall at the trigone. They appear as a burst of
11.2). If the bladder is empty and pathology is sus-
hyperechoic speckles on B-mode ultrasound or a pulse
pected,it is advisable either to rescan the bladder after
of positive (red) signal on color flow Doppler (Figure
11.6).The visualization of ureteral jets is variable
waiting for it to refill naturally, to place a urinary
because it requires a difference in the specific gravity
catheter and fill the bladder with sterile isotonic (0.9%)
between the urine in the bladder and the urine exiting
saline,or to administerintravenous furosemide
the ureter.
The normalurine within the urinary bladder is
 anechoic. However, echogenic urine is not specific for 
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC
urinary tract disease, and a urinalysis can assist in
ANATOMY OF THE NORMAL
 determining its significance. Additionally, images of
the urinary bladder are prone to side-lobe and grating-
URINARY BLADDER
lobe artifacts that can crcatc the appearance of pseu-
AND URETHRA
dosludge (Figure 11.7). Adjustmcnt of the gain (Figure
11.8) and use of harmonic ultrasound help to reduce
The bladder is within the caudoventral abdomcn, and
the formation of these sometimes confusing echoes.
the urcthra cxtends into the pelvic canal. The descend-
Retrograde positive-contrast urethrography remains
ing colon, aorta,and caudal vena cava are dorsal to the
the preferred modality for assessing the entire urethra.
urinary bladder. These vessels can be identified by
Ultrasound is a useful and complementary modality
their location and by using color Doppler.
for part of the accessible urethra. The urethra extends
Air within the colon cause a mirror-image artifact of
caudally frorn the bladder into the pelvic canal (Figure
the wrinary bladder (Figure 11.3). In intact females, the
11.9).
365
CR
B
Figure 11.1. Composite image of the urinary bladder and adjacent anatomical structures in a dog. The schematic diagram
on the right shows the position of the urinary bladder, the dorsally located colon, aorta, and caudal vena cava, as well as
Aeumn a go ueouos eupnuot v y 'sued suseu asiasuen pue reunu piepuns aun nog suoisod snpsuen 
the far field and is causing mild indentation of the dorsal bladder wall. AO, aorta; CR, cranial; CVC, caudal vena cava; and
R, right.
Right
Left
Figure 11.2.  Normal bladder and main vessels in a dog.
Color flow  Doppler transverse  sonogram of  the urinary
bladder and the dorsally located aorta (red) and caudal vena
cava (blue), to the left of an intestinal loop (SI).
366
Cranial
B
caused by errors in position of echoes reflected from the ventral colon wall-colon luminal gas interface. Right: The corre-
sponding labeled schematic representation. B, bladder; B', mirror image of the bladder; and C, colon.
A
mm
2 mm
3mm
Figure 11.4. Normal bladder thickness and distension in a normal 30-kg dog. A series of longitudinal ultrasound images
of the urinary bladder with different volumes of sterile saline infused into the bladder lumen. A: Longitudinal sonogram of
an empty urinary bladder with an indwelling red-rubber urinary catheter (arrow). The urinary bladder wall thickness is 4mm.
B:A total of 60mL (2mL/kg) of saline is infused, and the bladder wall thickness now is 3mm.C: With a total volume of
120 mL (4mL/kg),the bladder wall thickness is 2mm.
Table 11.1.
Variation in bladder wall thickness with changes in intraluminal volume in dogs
DegreeofBladderDistension
MeanThickness(mm)
StandardDeviation(mm)
Minimal (0.5mL/kg)
2.3
0.43
Mild (2mL/kg)
1.6
0.29
Moderate (4mL/kg)
1.4
0.28
Adapted from Geisse et al. (1997).
367
Figure 11.5. Normal ureteral papilae in a dog. Longitudinal
sonogram of the trigone of the urinary bladder. There is a
 smooth, broad-based echogenic protuberance at (arrow) the
 dorsocaudal aspect of the urinary bladder. These protuber-
 ances are seen bilaterally and are visible ureteral papillae.
B
Figure 11.6. Ureteral jet in a dog. A: Longitudinal sonogram of a ureteral jet seen using B-mode ultrasound. Although best 
 appreciated in real time, a fountain-like collection of echoes is seen in the otherwise anechoic urine. B: Transverse color flow
Doppler sonogram of a ureteral jet. The use of color flow Doppler can aid the detection of ureteral jets. The red indicates flow
toward the transducer.
A
B
Figure 11.7. Pseudosludge and side-lobe artifacts. A: Longitudinal sonogram of the urinary bladder ilustrating pseudo-
 sludge (arrow) caused by side-lobe and grating-lobe artifacts. These echoes are caused by reflections at the margins of the
 bladder wall Scanning with the animal standing may help in confirming this artifact. True sediment should fall to the depen-
 bladder. The time-gain compensation has been adjusted to reduce the appearance of the pseudosludge artifact.
368
Figure 11.8. Duplex (A) and harmonic (B) longitudinal sonogram of a urinary bladder and pscudosludge in a dog.
Harmonic ultrasound (B) reduces both the ncar-field and the far-field artifacts.
transverse (B) planes. The descending colon (C) is seen in the far field in B.
369
370BLADDER AND URETHRA
In dogs,the prostate surrounds theproximalurethra.
within the urethral groove of the os penis dorsally and
Shadowing from the pubis obscures the caudal intra-
the bulbus glandis ventrally (Figure 11.10B). The ure-
pelvic portion of the urethra.The proximal penile
thral lumen is not normally seen unless there is urinary
urethra is located within the corpus spongiosum
bladder distension, in which case urethral obstruction
between the corpus cavernosum dorsally and the bul-
should be considered. The urethral wall is composed
bospongiosus and retractor penis muscles ventrally
of thesamehistologicallayers astheurinarybladder.
(Figure 11.10A). The distal penile urethra is located
These layers are not readily resolved when normal.
CC
BS
B
Urethra
Figure 11.10. Normal penile urethra in a dog. On the left, an illustration of the anatomical structures near the urethra are
prcscnted. The dotted lines (A, B) correspond to the transverse planes seen on the sonograms on the right. P, prostate. A:
Transverse sonogram (with and without labels) of the midpenile urethra at a level just cranial to the scrotum.The urethra
B: Transverse sonogram (with and without labels) of the distal penile urethra at the level of the os penis (Os), which is seen
as a hyperechoic U-shaped structure with distal shadow. The urethra is located within the anastomosing tissue of the corpus
spongiosum and bulbus glandis (CS/BG). The bulbus glandis (BG) forms the bulk of the tissue surrounding the os penis.
371ATLASOFSMALLANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC
ance is multifocal irregular hyperechoic interfaces with
distal reverberation artifact (Petite et al. 2006) (Figure
FEATURES OF BLADDER
11.14). By using alternative patient positions, free
AND URETHRAL DISORDERS
luminal gas (often seen in catheterized patients) can
be distinguished from emphysematous cystitis. The
Cystitis
free luminal gas will move with patient position,
whereas the bladder wall gas will remain in the same
Cystitis most commonly causes extensive irregular
location.
hypoechoic thickcning of the urinary bladder wall.
This thickening is usually greatest at the cranioventral
aspect of the urinary bladder (Figures 11.1l and
Neoplasia
11.12).
The bladder wall changes can be associated with
Transitional cell carcinoma is the most common nco-
other findings, such as cystic calculi or blood clots.
plasm of the urinary bladder. Transitional cell carci-
Polypoid cystitis is an uncommon form of cystitis
reported in dogs. It can present as a hyperechoic pol-
a broad-based attachment projecting into the urinary
 aod sss o se penad o pio
bladder lumen. The echogenicity is often mixed and
the lumen, as well as diffuse bladder wall thickening
has an overall appearance that can be hyperechoic,
in some cases (Martinez et al. 2003) (Figure 11.13A
isoechoic, or hypoechoic compared with the bladder
and B). These masses occur most commonly in the
wall. The masses are most commonly in the bladder
cranioventral aspect of the urinary bladder (Martinez
neck (trigone) region and dorsal bladder wall (Leveille
et al. 2003). Polypoid cystitis can have a similar ultra-
et al. 1992) (Figures 11.5-11.18). Because of the location
sonographic appearance to bladder wall neoplasia,
of the ureteral papilla in this region, unilateral or bilat-
and a biopsy is recommended.
eral hydroureter may be encountered. It is common for
Emphysematous cystitis is characterized by gas-
the mass to extend into the proximal urethra. Dogs
forming bacteria such as Escherichia coli, Aerobacter
withtransitional cell carcinomamayhave concurrent
aerogenes, Proteus mirabilis, and Clostridium sp.within
cystitis,urethritis,calculi, and/or blood clots.
thebladderwallandis seenmostcommonly india-
A wide variety of other bladder tumor types
betic animals with glucosuria. The sonographic appear-
Figure 11.11. Cystitis in a dog. Longitudinal sonogram of
the urinary bladder showing moderate hypoechoic cranial
Figure 11.12.Cystitis in a dog.Transverse sonogram of
thickening of the body and apex of the urinary bladder wall.
the urinary bladder showing moderate,diffuse,hypoechoic,
This finding is most consistent with cystitis. The urine from
and irregular thickening of the bladder wall. This finding is
the dog cultured positive for Escherichia coli on multiple
consistent with cystitis.The urinalysis showed 3+ bacteria,
occasions.
and it cultured positive for Escherichia coli.
372BLADDER AND URETHRA
Figure11.14.Emphysematouscystitisinadog.
Longitudinal sonogram of the urinary bladder showing a
hyperechoic interface in the ventral bladder wall with rever-
beration (arrows), consistent with emphysematous cystitis.
B
The urine cultured positive for Escherichia coli.
+1.78cm
Figure 11.13.Polypoid cystitis in two dogs.A:Transverse
sonogram of the urinary bladder with two small peduncu-
lated masses (arrows) extending from the right bladder wall
into the bladder lumen.The bladder wall thickness is within
5.13x1.86c
normal limits. B: Longitudinal sonogram of a different dog
with a singlc broad bascd mass, thickcning of the bladder
Figure 11.15. Bladder tumor in a dog. Longitudinal sono-
wall(arrowheads)and shadowing calculi dorsally and
gram of a broad-based hyperechoic mass associated with the
caudally (C). Histopathology following surgical excisional
craniodorsal bladder wall, consistent with transitional cell
biopsy revealed a mucosal polyp.
carcinoma.
carcinoma)and mesenchymal tumors (botryoid
enchymal origin.Uncommonly, bladder tumors can
rhabdomyosarcoma, chemodectoma, leiomyosarcoma,
diffusely invade the bladder wall (Figure 11.22B).
leiomyoma,fibroma,fibrosarcoma，hemangioma,
The most common urethral neoplasms in dogs
hemangiosarcoma, lymphoma [Benigni et al. 2006],
include transitional cell carcinoma, squamous cell car-
and
mast
tumor)
(Figures 11.19-11.22).
cinoma, and adenocarcinoma. Proximal urethral neo-
 Ultrasonographic differentiation of tumor type and
plasms are often caused by local spread of bladder Of
differentiation from nonneoplastic disease is often
prostatic neoplasms. Urethral transitional cell carci-
impossible without a biopsy. However, a mass with a
noma has a markedly hyperechoic nonshadowing
smooth luminal surface is more likely to have a mes-
mucosal line and may be associated with hypoechoic
M2
4.06cm
Figure 11.16. Bladder tumor in a 10-year-old female dog with hematuria. Longitudinal sonograms of the bladder. Two
foci consistent with mineralization. Both of these masses are attached to the bladder walls (arrowheads). Suction biopsies
revealed transitional cell carcinomas. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
B
firmed transitional cell carcinoma. In each dog, a lobulated mass occupies the bladder neck and extends into the urethra
(arrows). A suction biopsy was used to confirm the diagnosis.
Figure 11.18.Bladder neck and urethral transitional cell car-
cinoma in a castrated male dog.Longitudinal sonogram of thc
bladder neck and proximal urcthra.There is anirregulartissue
projection into the bladder lumen, at the level of the trigone
(T).The proximal urethra is also thickened (arrows), and the
0.88cm
prostate is enlarged (arrowheads). A suction biopsy confirmed
transitional cell carcinoma. Image courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
373
374BLADDER AND URETHRA
5.26cm
Figure 11.20.Bladder tumor (hemangiosarcoma) in a
dog. Transverse sonogram of a large cavitated mass
associated with the right bladder wall. Given the cavitated
appearance, a hematoma was suspected. At surgery, the
highly vascular bladder mass was considered unresectable
and was biopsied. The histopathologic diagnosis was
hemangiosarcoma.
Figure11.19.Bladderleiomyosarcoma inadog.A:
Sagittal sonogram of a large bladder wall leiomyosarcoma.
A heterogeneous, broad-based mass (arrows) is invading the
wall at the apex and body, deforming the shape of the
bladder and protruding into its lumen (B). B: Longitudinal
panoramic sonogram of another large echogenic mass
deforming the contour of the bladder. The mass was diag-
nosed as low-grade leiomyosarcoma.
Figure 11.21.Bladder tumor (mast cell tuunor) in a dog
thickening of the urethral wall (Figure 11.23) (Hanson
Longitudinal sonogram of a urinary bladder with a highly
and Tidwell 1996). Squamous cell carcinoma is most
vascular, pedunculated, mixed-echogenicity mass originat-
commonly associated with the distal urethra.Other
ing from the craniovcntral bladder wall. Cytology of the
types of neoplastic processes can compress or invade
mass with special stains was consistent with a mast cell
the urethra along its path (Figure 11.24).
neoplasm.
Enlargement of the medial iliac, hypogastric, sacral,
or superficial inguinal lymph nodes is not specific to
bladder or urethral disease,but they should belocated
and measured to aid the staging of a suspected neo-
detection (Weichselbaum et al. 1999). Cystic. 0r ure
plastic disease.
thral calculi are usually mobile and collect in the
dependent portion of the lumen. They are usually
spherical, with a hyperechoic curvilinear interface
Calculi
However, they can be a variety of sizes and shapes. A
High-frequency bladder ultrasound may have a similar
distal shadow is only variably present and is more
likely seen with a higher transducer frequency and
375ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
B
1.83cm
Figure 11.22. Extensive bladder tumors in two dogs and a cat. A: Panoramic longitudinal sonogram of a large caudal
bladder mass involving the trigoneof a dog.The histopathology obtained at necropsy revealed a poorly differentiated carci-
noma.B: Longitudinal sonogram of the bladder of a 6-year-old Labrador retriever with diffuse carcinomatous infiltration of
the wall. C: Retrograde vaginourethrocystogram (left) and longitudinal sonogram (right) of the bladder of a 1-year-old cat
with urinary incontinence and hematuria. In the contrast study, the dorsal bladder wall is thick, and there is extravasation
of contrast medium into the peritoneal cavity (arrow). In the sonogram, a large heterogeneous, multilobulated mass (arrows)
(2006).
with calculi of a greater thickness (Figures 11.25 and
fied, particularly proximal to the os penis (Figure
11.26). A reverberation artifact may also occur distal to
11.29). Enlargement of the urinary bladder with dila-
cystic calculi. The presence or absence of these artifacts
 tion of the urethral lumen is supportive of urethral
docs not correlate with the composition of the calculus
obstruction (Figure 11.30).
(Weichselbaum et al. 2000). Although the appearance
The descending colon can indent and appear con-
is nonspecific, crystalluria may be seen as a collection
fluent with the dorsal wall of the urinary bladder. The
 of swirling moderate-intensity intraluminal echoes. A
hyperechoic interface and shadowing artifact gener-
collection of small calculi or mineralized sediment
ated by the colon can mimic cystic calculi (Figure
may generate a linear interface (Figures 11.27 and
11.31). Rotation of the transducer into the longitudinal
11.28). This sediment usually suspends with gentle
 plane will reveal the colon as a linear interface running
agitation of the urinary bladder.
the length of the image, whereas the calculi should
Although the urethra cannot be evaluated com-
remain approximately spherical. Additionally, reposi-
pletely with ultrasound, urethral calculi may be identi-
tioning the animal into a standing or lateral position
376BLADDER AND URETHRA
0.39cm
Figure 11.23.Bladder neck and urethral tumor (transi-
tional cell carcinoma) in a dog. Longitudinal sonogram of
trigone and urethra.The urethral wall is thickened, with a
linear hyperechoic lining at the luminal margin (arrow). Wall
thickening is also prcscnt at the bladder trigone. The histo-
pathologic diagnosis was transitional cell carcinoma.
Figure 11.24. Urethral tumor (osteosarcoma) in a dog.A:
Longitudinal sonogram of the caudal membranous urethra
which contains an indwelling catheter (arrow C). A hypere-
choic shadowing mass (arrowheads) is caudodorsal to the
urethra.B:Positive-contrastretrograde urethrogramshowing
a mineral opacity mass (arrows) causing marked attenuation
of the urethral contrast. The histopathologic diagnosis from
an ultrasound-guided microcore biopsy was osteosarcoma.
should cause any calculi to fall to the dependent wall,
whereas the colon remains in a dorsal location.
IntraluminalBlood Clotsand
Figure 11.25. Cystic calculus in a dog. Longitudinal sono-
MuralHemorrhage
grain of the urinary bladder, which contains a spherical
hyperechoic interface with distal shadowing (), consistent
Blood clots and mural hemorrhage may be caused by
with a cystic calculus.Additionally,several smaller hypere-
bladder trauma, cystitis, a generalized bleeding disor-
choic interfaccs are noted just cranially (arrow), also consis
der, or neoplasia. Blood within the urinary bladder
tent with calculi, although not causing acoustic shadowing,
lumen or wall can have a variable appearance and can
because of their smaller size. Side-lobe artifacts are in the
mimic exuberant inflammatory disease or neoplasia.
apical portion of the bladder (A)
Intraluminal clots are generally hypcrcchoic and range
377ATLAS OFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
Figure 11.26.Cystic calculi in a dog. Transverse sonogram
of the urinary bladder showing two small hyperechoic struc-
tures associated with the ventral bladder wall (arrows) that
Figure 11.27. Bladder sediments in a dog. Transverse
are thought to represent small cystic calculi. Urinalysis
sonogram of diffusely echogenic urine and a collection of
revealed calcium oxalate crystalluria.The colon (C) is associ-
hyperechoic material (arrow) on the dependent bladder wall
ated with acoustic shadowing.
with distal shadowing. The urinalysis showed 3+ amorphous
crystalluria.
A
Figure 11.28.Cystic calculi and sediment in two dogs. Sedimentation in the dependent portion of the urinary bladder. A:
Pyuria appears as nonshadowing, moderately echogenic sludge that progressively sediments during the exam. A straight
horizontal border is seen (arrow).B: A mineral sediment, such as seen with crystalluria, is more hyperechoic and typically
associated with acoustic shadowing (*). The dog was diagnosecd and treated for a portoazygous shunt. Image A courtesy of
M.A.d'Anjou.
from thin linear structures to large round masses
clot from a neoplastic mass. The mobility of these
(Figures 11.32-11.34).
intraluminalstructuresmayalsobe demonstrated
Mural hemorrhage causes diffuse uniform wall
with repositioning of the patient. Recheck examina-
thickening (O'Brien and Wood 1998). The absence of
tions will help differentiate neoplastic or inflammatory
color flow Doppler signal can help differentiate a blood
mural disease because thickening secondary lo sys-
378BLADDER AND URETHRA
Figure 11.31.Calculus versus colon in a dog.Transverse
sonogram of the urinary bladder and the descending colon
(C).The colon is indcnting the dorsal aspect of the bladder,
0.48cm
which can mimic a large cystic calculus. A small, round,
hyperechoic interface representing a true cystic calculus
Figure 11.29. Urethral calculus in a dog. A longitudinal
(arrow) is adjacent to the dependent bladder wall.
sonogram of the distal penile urethra. A large-diameter,
hyperechoic, spherical calculus with distal shadowing is
causing dilation of the urethra (cursors). The calculus is just
proximal to the os penis (not seen). On analysis, the composi-
tion of the calculus was struvite.
temic bleeding disorders resolves rapidly at the
approximate rate of 1 mm/day once the underlying
abnormalities are corrected(O'BrienandWood
1998).
CongenitalAnomalies
Although rare, a variety of congenital urinary bladder
abnormalities may be identified sonographically.They
may predispose patients to incontinence or urinary
tract infections, or may be incidental findings.
Anomalous conditions include urachal diverticulum,
patent urachus,urachal cysts,ureteroceles,and ectopic
ureters.
Ureteroceles are cystic dilations of the terminal
ureter within the urinary bladder. They can be subdi-
vided as orthotopic or ectopic, depending on whether
the ureters enter the bladder at a normal location.
Ureteroceles are thin-walled, smooth, spherical, and
cystlike structures that protrude into the bladder
lumen and are filled with anechoic fluid (Figure 11.35)-
Figure 11.30. Urethral distension in a blocked cat.
Ectopic ureters may be identified ultrasonographically
Longitudinal sonogram of the dilated urethra.The lumen
by either dilated ureters coursing beyond the dorsal
(not normally visualized) contains nearly anechoic urine (U).
bladder neck caudally or by an absence of urcteral jets
Urethral wall layers can be visualized (arrowheads).
in the trigone region (Figure 11.36).
Figure 11.33.Bladder blood clot in a dog.Longitudinal
sonogram of the urinary bladder, which contains a floating
B
linear hyperechoic structure of variable thickness.A urinaly-
sis revealed numerous red blood cells highly suggestive of a
suspended blood clot.
2.43cm
Figure 11.32.Bladder blood clot in a dog.A: Longitudinal
sonogram of the urinarybladder,which contains a smooth,
ovoid,inhomogeneous,echogenicity mass.Differential diag-
noses included a bladder neoplasm or a hematoma.B:A
transverse sonogram of the right kidney with a 2.43-cm-
diameter right hilar renal mass (arrows). The hyperechoic
bands of tissue (arrowheads) radiating from the hilus to the
periphery are characteristic of hydronephrosis. Echogenic
urine is found in the dilated diverticuli (D), consistent with
hemorrhage. At necropsy, the urinary bladder mass was a
hematoma secondary to renal hemangiosarcoma.
Figure 11.34.Bladder blood clot in a dog.A longitudinal
sonogram of the bladder containing a large bilobed mass
with an echogenic periphery and a hyperechoic center. The
mass had no identifiable color flow Doppler signal. Urinalysis
revealed numerous red blood cells, and the presumptive
diagnosis was hematoma.
379
380BLADDERAND URETHRA
8.4mm
Figure 11.36. Ectopic ureter. Longitudinal sonogram of a
Figure 11.35.Ureterocele in a dog.Longitudinal sonogram
dilated ureter (8.4mm-cursors), which was followed from
of the urinary bladder (B) with a thin-walled cystic out-
the left kidney and courses caudal to bladder neck (B), con-
pouching of the left ureter (U). The cystic structure contains
sistent with an ectopic ureter.
anechoic fluid and is consistent with a ureterocele. Image
courtesy of C.Warman,Veterinary Specialist Group,
Auckland, New Zealand.
Figure 11.37. Sonogram and contrast radiographic study of a ruptured urinary bladder in a dog. A. Longitudinal sonogram.
The indwelling, salinc-filled Foley catheter can be seen caudally (arrow). There is marked thickening of the bladder wall
(arrowheads) and a loss of visualization of the bladder lumen.Abdominal effusion is also noted. Because of the suspicion of
bladder rupture, a positive-contrast cystogram was performed. Hyperechoic foci are noted in the dorsally displaced bladder
lumen, associated with acoustic shadowing (*), consistent with calculi. B: Lateral radiograph of the caudal abdomen following
a retrograde positive-contrast cystogram.Contrast is free within the peritoneal space.At surgery,the bladder rupture and
hematoma were identified
A vesicourachal diverticulum is a fluid-filled struc-
Trauma
ture that extends as a convex outpouching of the
bladder lumen, usually with a thin wall, although it
A positive-contrast retrograde cystourethrogram is the
can become thick and irregular in cases of chronic
preferred method of diagnosing rupture of the urethra
cystitis. These diverticuli can vary in size and are typi-
Or urinary bladder.On ultrasound,the ruptured
cally in cranioventral aspect of the urinary bladder
urinary bladder wall is thickened (Figure 11.37), and
wall. Diverticulum may also occur at other locations
there is abdominal effusion of echogenicity that
because of trauma or cystitis.
depends on urine cellularity. Calculi or other debris
381ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL UI.TRASONOGRAPHY
can also accumulate in the peritoneal cavity.A
bladder when abdominal cffusion is present. The inter-
hypoechoic bladder wall defect or tract may be seen
pretation of the artifact is aided by a concurrent edge
occasionally.
shadow and absence of bladder wall thickening (Figure
This should be distinguished from a refraction arti-
11.38).
fact associated with the cranial aspect of the urinary
SPECIAL PROCEDURES
Cystocentesis
Once sufficient bladder distension is determined by
ultrasonography, a guided cystocentesis can be per-
formed. The skin can be prepared with an alcohol-
soaked swab. A 22-gauge, 1-or 1.5-inch needle attached
to a 5-mL syringe is used. The needle is placed just
cranial to the transducer while trying to keep the
needle aligned with the plane of the ultrasound beam.
'The needle appears as a fine linear hyperechoic inter-
face that often causes distal reverberation or shadow-
ing artifacts (Figure 11.39).
Suction Biopsy
Cystoscopic biopsy and ultrasound-guided suction
Figure 11.38.Refraction artifact versus bladder rupture in
biopsy are the preferred methods of confirming
a dog. Longitudinal sonogram of the bladder containing
bladder or urethral neoplasia. Percutaneous fine-
anechoic urine surrounded by echogenic abdominal effusion
needle aspiration of suspected transitional cell carci-
(F).The refraction artifact at the cranial aspect of the bladder
noma in the bladder is not recommended because the
mimics bladder wall rupture (arrow), but no bladder wall
technique can lead to regional spread of the tumor
rupture is present.
along the needle tract.
(arrows).
382BLADDER AND URETHRA
Figure 11.40. Suction biopsy in a dog. Longitudinal sono-
gram of the urinary bladder and an indwelling red-rubber
Figure 11.41.Suction biopsy in a cat. Longitudinal sono-
cathctcr during a suction biopsy. The catheter walls are
gram of the trigone of the bladder during a suction biopsy.
hyperechoic and the lumen hypoechoic. A small defcct in the
The two parallel hyperechoic lines are the walls of the cath-
catheter wall (arrow) corresponds to one of the side holes in
eter. Ultrasound guidance directed the catheter in contact
the catheter, which can be guided into the desired location
with the bladder mass.
of the biopsy.
The suction biopsy is performed under hcavy seda-
 or smeared on a slide for cytology. If the procedure
tion (propofol) or general anesthesia. An appropriately
isrepeated,a new red-rubber catheter is used.
sized red-rubber cathctcr with side holes is connected
 Intravesicular hemorrhage is a potential complication
to a 20-mL syringe and is placed aseptically into the
of this procedure (Lamb et al. 1996).
urinary bladder. The urinary bladder (if empty) is
filled with a small volume of sterile saline to provide
an acoustic window and better delineate the abnormal
REFERENCES
tissue to sample. Only a simall volume is required
because the bladder wall collapsing around the cathe-
ter aids the aspiration of the targeted tissue rather than
Benigni L, Lamb CR, Corzo-Menendez N, Holloway A,
urine. The catheter tip is visualized within the urinary
Eastwood JM (2006) Lymphoma affecting the urinary
bladder as a pair of parallel hyperechoic lines with a
bladder in three dogs and a cat. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
hypoechoic lumen, and the side holes of the catheter
47:592-596
Finn-Bodner ST (1995) The urinary bladder. In: Cartee RE
can also be identified as discrete hypoechoic defects
Selcer BA,Hudson JA, et al., eds. Practical Veterinary
(Figures 11.40 and 11.41) The catheter tip can then be
positioned adjacent to the bladder mass or wall thick-
Geisse AL, Lowry JE, Schaeffer DJ, Smith CW (1997)
ening to be biopsied. High-frequency ultrasound may
Sonographic evaluation of urinary bladder wall thickness
enable more specific placement by visualization of the
in normal dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 38:132-137.
catheter holes.
Hanson JA, Tidwell AS (1996) Ultrasonographic appearance
The syringe plunger is pulled back. If urine is
of urethral transitional cell carcinoma in ten dogs. Vet
obtained, then the catheter is rotated to reposition the
Radiol Ultrasound 37:293-299.
side hole adjacent to the tissue of interest. Once nega-
Lamb CR, Trower ND, Gregory SP (1996) Ultrasound-guided
tive pressure can be maintained,the prcssure is applied
catheter biopsy of the lower urinary tract: Technique and
and released 3-4 times, collecting tissuc from the adja-
results in 12 dogs. J Small Anim Pract 37:413-416.
Leveille R, Biller DS, Partington BP, Miyabayashi T (1992)
cent mucosa. Suction is applied and held, with the aim
being to adhere the catheter to the mass. The urinary
Sonographic investigation of transitional cell carcinoma of
the urinarybladder in smallanimals.Vet Radiol Ultrasound
catheter is abruptly withdrawn 4-6cm from the
33:103-107.
bladder while the suction is held, with the aim of
Martinez I, Mattoon JS, Faton KA, Chew DJ, DiBartola SP
pulling a larger fragment of tissue from the mass. The
(2003) Polypoid cystitis in 17 dogs (1978-2001). JVet Intem
contents of the catheter are then emptied into formalin
Med 17:499-509.
383ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
O'Brien RT, Wood EF (1998)Urinary bladdcr mural hemor-
Comparison of survey, contrast radiographic and ultraso-
rhage associated with systemic bleeding disorders in three
nographic techniques in an in vitro bladder phantom. Vet
dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 39:354-356.
Radiol Ultrasound 40:386-400.
Petite A, Busoni V, Heinen Ml, Billen F, Snaps F (2006)
Weichselbaum RC, Feeney DA, Jessen CR, Osbornc CA,
Radiographic and ultrasonographic findings of emphyse-
Dreytser V, Holte J (2000) Relevance of sonographic
matous cystitis in four nondiabetic female dogs. Vet Radiol
artifacts observed during in viro characterization of
Ultrasound 47:90-93.
urocystolith mineral composition. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
Wcichsclbaum RC, Feeney DA, Jessen CR, Osborne CA,
41:438-446.
Dreytser V, Holte J(1999) Urocystolith detection:
CHAPTERTWELVE
ADRENAL GLANDS
John Graham
PREPARATION AND
SONOGRAPHY OF THE NORMAL
SCANNING TECHNIQUE
ADRENAL GLANDS
The adrenal glands are small, paired structures located
In Dogs
in the craniodorsal abdomen, medial to the ipsilateral
kidney and adjacent to the aorta (left) and caudal vena
The normal left adrenal gland is hypoechoic to thc
cava (right). The cells of the adrenal cortex produce
surrounding fat, is well defined, and has an elongated
cortisol and other corticoids, aldosterone, androgens,
bilobed shape, frequently described as resembling a
estrogens, and progestins whereas the chromaffin cells
peanut (Figure 12.1A and C). When using a high-
of the medulla produce catecholamines (Feldman and
frequency transducer, a thin hyperechoic line, which
Nelson 2004). The adrenal glands are a key component
runs parallel to the capsule, may be seen, representing
of the endocrine system, and their deranged function
the junction between cortex and medulla (Figure
can produce a wide range of clinical signs, which may
12.1C). The right adrenal gland may appear wedge
be vague or nonspecific. The ultrasonographic evalu-
 shaped in some dogs (Figure 12.1D), but in most it has
ation of the adrenal glands is technically challenging.
an elongated ovoid shape (Figure 12.1B), usually
but assessment of the glands is now considered part
without the pronounced waist seen in the left adrenal
of a complete abdominal scan in both dogs and cats.
gland. The right adrenal gland is also hypoechoic in
Although the glands are small, a competent sonogra-
comparison to the surrounding fat and may exhibit a
pher using good-quality equipment can identify both
thin hyperechoic band separating cortex and medulla.
glands in most paticnts. For a lateral approach, the hair
The adrenal glands are located in the retroperitoneal
coat should be clipped from the latcral abdomen to the
space, medial to the ipsilateral kidney. The left adrenal
level of the transverse processcs of the lumbar spine
 gland is located along the lateral aspect of the abdomi-
and over the last few intercostal spaces on the right.
nal aorta, just cranial to the origin of the left renal
Evaluation of the adrenal glands is facilitated by the
 artcry. The left phrenicoabdominal artery and vein
use of high-frequency linear or sector probes and a
 pass dorsal and ventral, respectively, to the midbody
sound knowledge of normal anatomy. Sedation may
 of the gland. The right adrcnal gland is located close
be helpful in evaluating agitated, aggressive, or painful
to caudal vena cava, lying between lateral and dorsal
patients, and in obese patients because it relaxes the
to this vessel, just cranial to the right rcnal artery and
abdomen and allows the operator to apply pressure
right renal vein. The right phrenicoabdominal artery
with less patient discomfort. For most dogs, a 7-Mhz
and vein pass dorsal and ventral to the gland, as on
or 10-Mhz sector transducer is thebest choice to evalu-
the left. The adrenal glands may be scanned from the
ate the adrenals.A linear transducer may be used to
ventral abdomen, but interference from gas and ingesta
 evaluate the left adrenal gland in many dogs and both
within the gastrointestinal tract makes this approach
glands in many cats. However, the large contact foot-
more difficult. When scanning patients in dorsal
print and narrow field of view of such probes are
 recumbency, it may be helpful to tilt then toward or
unsuitable for evaluating the right adrenal gland in
away from the operator to enable one to place the
most dogs.
probe further dorsal. The author prefers to scan the
385
Lateral
Ventral
RAdrenal
LAdrenal
RK
LK
LeftAdrenal
RightAdrenal
B
CVC
A0
0.77cm
CVC
0.75cm
Figure 12.1.Normal adrenal glands in dogs.The two schematic drawings on top illustrate the localization of the adrenal
glands in a dog placed on lateral recumbency (left) and on dorsal recumbency (ventral approach: top right). AO, aorta; CA.
celiac artery; CM, cranial mcsenteric; CVC, caudal vena cava; LK, left kidney; and RK, right kidney. A: Dorsal plane image
of a normal canine left adrenal gland.Note the elongated bilobed shape with a portion of a phrenicoabdominal vessel in cross
section within the ventral groove (black arrow). The anechoic structure caudal and lateral to thc gland is the left renal vein
(arrowhead), whereas the cranial mesenteric artery (white arrow) lies deep to the midbody of the adrenal gland. B: Sagittal
plane image of a normal canine right adrenal gland. The gland is fusiform and is parallel to the aorta (Ao) in the far field. It
is also closely apposed to the caudal vena cava (CVC),which runs medially and somewhat parallel to the gland.Hyperechoic
 a e  (e e p  gn pad -u e pau ae aa d a go sro
plane images of normal left (C) and right (D) adrenal glands. A well-defined hyperechoic rim is at the corticomedullary junc-
tion.Theleft gland is slightly oblique in regard to the aorta (Ao),located dorsally,and hasa characteristic peanut shape,and
the right gland appears as an arrowhead cranially. The caudal vena cava (CVC) is compressed in the near field. Images B-D
courtesy of M.A.d'Anjou.
387 ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
1L0.61cm
Fat
CA
 CMA
B
Figure12.2.
2. Anatomical landmarks for the left adrenal gland in dogs. A: Dorsal plane image of a normal canine left adrenal
   so  ae a   ao    p pe  a u e o  d
[euooas-ssono on pure puel8 ay on resiop sn! papesol s! (ov) eyioe au l! punore Alenure1o sasinos pue puel3 euaape a]
views of the celiac and cranial mesenteric arteries. The thin vessel, with arterial flow, which originates from the aorta and
crosses the midbody of the adrenal gland, is the left phrenicoabdominal artery. The layered pattern of colors noted in several
arteries is caused by aliasing and does not truly indicate flow reversal.
 adrenals by using a lateral approach. When scanning
from the lateral aspect of the aorta and courses a short
 patients in lateral recumbency, the probe is placed on
distance laterally before making a sharp turn cranially.
the upper side of the abdomen as far dorsal as possible,
 From this point, one scans further cranially, fanning
just ventral to the lumbar transverse processes, to min-
the beam dorsally and ventrally. A short distance cra-
imize interference from interposed gas in the small
 nially to the left renal artery, the celiac artery cranially
intestine and colon.
 and the cranial mesenteric artery caudally arise from
The initial approach to the left adrenal gland is to
the aorta. As one fans the beam ventrally from the
scan the area medial to the left kidney and lateral to
aorta, these arteries appear as two well-defined, circu-
the abdominal aorta. For the right adrenal gland, area
lar, hypoechoic or anechoic pulsing structures (Figure
 medial to the right kidney and lateral to dorsal to the
12.2). The left adrenal gland is ventrolateral or lateral
caudal vena cava is scanned. This technique may be
to the aorta, cranial to the left renal artery and vein,
 successful in many patients. However, the position of 
 and at the level or immediately caudal to the origin of
the adrenal glands varies in relation to the kidneys.
the cranial mesenteric artery (Figures 12.1 and 12.2).
 The left kidney in particular may rotate and drop when 
Once these vessels are identified, the beam is fanned
a dog is placed in right lateral recumbency.
. If
ventral to dorsal and back again through this area until
 this initial approach fails, the glands can be more reli-
the adrenal gland is found. In thin animals, the gland
ably located by using vascular landmarks in either
is closely apposed to the aorta. As the quantity of body
 lateral or dorsal recumbency (Spaulding 1997) (Figure
fat increases, it is laid down around the adrenal gland,
12.2).
incrcasing separation from the aorta, but also provid-
To identify the left adrenal gland, the probe is placed
ing contrast and making the gland more prominent.
 on the left abdominal wall, just ventral to the lumbar
The long axis of the left adrenal gland may be slightly
transverse 
 processes  and  approximately  halfway
tilted in comparison with the long axis of the aorta,
between the last rib and the iliac crest. A dorsal plane
 and the probe may need to be rotated until the length
image is obtained, and the ultrasound beam is fanned
 of the left adrenal gland is maximized. The phren-
ventral and dorsal until the aorta is found. The probe
icoabdominal vein may be seen as two fine, hypere-
is then rotated until a longitudinal image of the aorta
 choic parallel lines obliquely crossing the midbody of
is obtained. One then follows the aorta cranial to the
the adrenal gland (Figure 12.1A). The phrenicoabdom-
origin of the left renal artery, which usually originates
inal vessels may be quite small and not seen on B-
388 ADRENAL GLANDS
mode images, but blood flow can usually be seen with
color Doppler examination (Figure 12.2B).
To identify the right adrenal gland, the probe is
placed in the right paralumbar fossa just ventral to the
transverse processes. The beam is fanned dorsal and
ventral until the caudal vena cava is identified.A
common error is to apply too much pressure to thc
abdominal wall, which collapses the caudal vena cava
and prevents its idcntification.The caudal vena cava
may appcar to pulse because of referred motion from
the adjacent aorta, but may be distinguished from the
aorta by applying mild or moderate pressure, which
will cause the vessel to collapse (Figures 12.1D and
12.3). Alternatively, color or pulsed Doppler interroga-
tion reveals craniad, low-velocity venous flow within
Figure 12.3. Normal canine right adrenal gland.
the vena cava. The vena cava and aorta are close
Transverse plane image of the gland (between the cursors),
together in the midabdomen, and in some dogs both
and the caudal vena cava, in the right cranial abdomen.The
vessels can be seen in the same scan plane. The vena
adrenal gland is closely apposed to the dorsolateral border
cava is followed cranially,which usually requires the
of the caudal vena cava (CVC). Note how the shape of the
probe be placed caudal to the last rib and angled crani-
caudal vena cava is rhomboidal, a result of partial collapse
ally. In the cranial abdomen, the aorta and caudal vena
caused by pressure applied by the sonographer.Fat is present
cava separate. The beam is fanned ventral and dorsal
between the right kidney (RK) and the adrenal.
through the caudal vena cava until the cranial mesen-
teric and celiac arteries are identified. The appearance
of these vessels is identical to that seen from the left
side of the abdomen: They appear as two round
hypoechoic or anechoic structures just ventral to the
aorta and medial to the caudal vena cava. The right
selected for inclusion were described as normal, young.
adrenal gland is located between dorsal and dorsolat-
old, healthy, or not showing signs of any endocrine
eral to the caudal vena cava, at approximately the level
disease, and these studies may havc included dogs
of the cranial mcscnteric and celiac arteries. In almost
with subclinical or nonfunctional adrenal lesions.The
all dogs, thc right adrenal gland is closely apposed to
maximum diamctcr of the adrenal gland at the caudal
the caudal vena cava and may be difficult to distin-
pole seems to be the mostreliable measure of adrenal
guish in a dorsal plane image because of volume aver-
size, and a measurement of 7.4mm as the maximum
aging. Obtaining a transverse or frontal plane image
normal measurement appears to offer a reasonable
through the caudal vena cava may be helpful in iden-
combination of sensitivity and specificity (Barthez
tifying the gland (Figure 12.3). It may be necessary to
et al.1998).
place the probe in one of thelast two or three intercos-
tal spaces if the gland cannot be imaged by angling the
probe cranially from a position caudal to the last rib.
In Cats
This approach works better in small dogs because
The adrenal glands in cats are found by using a similar
pressure cannot be used to bring the gland closer to
the probe.
ning the area medial to the kidney and adjacent to the
A wide range of normal adrenal sizes has been
aorta or caudal vena cava is sufficient to identify the
reported in dogs. The left adrenal gland is 3-16mm in
 adrenal glands. The same vascular landmarks as used
maximum diameter and 10-50mm long. The right
in dogs can also be used to find the feline adrenal
adrenal gland is up to 3-14 mm in maximum diameter
glands. The feline adrenal gland is short, ovoid or
and 10-39 mm long (Barthez et al. 1995; Grooters et al.
cylindrical, and hypoechoic (Cartee et al. 1993) (Figure
1995; Hoerauf and Reusch 1996; Douglass et al. 1997).
12.4). With high-frequency transducers, one can some
There appears to be a poor correlation between body
times distinguish between cortex and medulla. In
weight and maximum adrenal diameter and better
normal cats, both adrenal glands are 10-11mm long.
correlation between adrenal length and body size. The
and the maximum diameter of both glands is
broad range of reported sizes reflects that patients
4.3 ± 0.3mm.
389ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
Sp
Ao
CVC
Ao
ovoid (between the cursors, 9.5mm). The celiac (left arrow) and cranial mesenteric (right arrow) arteries are seen medial to
ovoid hypoechoic structure (between the cursors, 1cm), and the medulla is slightly more echogenic than the cortex (L, liver).
The caudal vena cava (CVC) and aorta (Ao) are in the same plane. Images courtesy of D. Penninck.
0.87cm
is uniformly enlarged (the caudal pole [arrows] is approximately 10mm wide), but retains a normal shape. There was similar
enlargement of the right adrenal gland.This finding is consistent with pituitary-dcpendent hyperadrenocorticism.The left
kidney (LK) is in the near field. B: Sagittal plane image of the right adrenal gland in another dog with pituitary-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism. This gland is smoothly cnlarged. The left gland was within normal limits for size (7mm thick).
SONOGRAPHIC FINDINGS IN
alone in diagnosing hyperadrenocorticism. Pituitary-
dependent hyperadrenocorticism (PDH) accounts
ADRENAL DISORDERS
for approximately 80% of dogs with hyperadreno-
corticism. If a patient's history, clinical signs, and
Cushing's Syndrome
laboratory test results support a diagnosis of hyperad-
Cushing's syndrome or hyperadrenocorticism is one
renocorticism, PDH should be suspected if both
of the most common endocrinopathies in dogs.
 adrenal glands appcar symmetrically enlarged (often
Utrasound is frequently used as part of the medical
described as plump) (Barthez et al. 1998; Feldman and
database of suspected cases (Behrend et al. 2002). Nelson 2004) (Figures 12.5 and 12.6).
However,it mustbe remembered that,although ultra-
Unfortunately, the adrcnal glands may measure
sound may provide useful data, it cannot be used
within the normal range (less than 7.4mm) in some
390 ADRENAL GLANDS
183cm
0.83cm
Figure 12.6. Pituitary-dependent adrenal hyperplasia in a dog. Color Doppler images obtained in a dog with a pituitary
tumor and signs of hyperadrenocorticism. Both adrenals are enlarged, which is more evident on the left side (A). The caudal
pole of the right gland (B)is thicker than the cranialpole. Theleftadrenal gland (A) is mildly inhomogeneous. Phrenicoabdominal
vessels are seen at the ventromedial aspect of each gland (arrows). Other vascular landmarks, such as the aorta (Ao) and the
caudal vena cava (CVC), are also in the scanned field. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou
0.86cm
Figure 12.7.  Rounded adrenal gland in a dog with a
Figure 12.8. Primary adrenal hyperadrenocorticism in a
chronic, nonendocrinian disorder. Dorsal oblique image of
 dog. Dorsal plane image obtained in the left craniodorsal
the left adrenal gland in a small-breed dog with a chronic
abdomen. A large bilobed mass is medial and cranial to the
disease, but without evidence of hyperadrenocorticism. The
kidney (between the cursors). The mass has a mottled
gland is rounded. Note the hyperechoic medulla in compari-
echotexture and is well defined. The right adrenal gland was
son to the cortex. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
not identified, and these findings are consistent with primary
unilateral adrenal hyperadrenocorticism.
cases of PDH or may demonstrate unilateral or asym-
metrical enlargement (Barthez et al. 1995). As already
be considered if one adrenal gland is enlarged, con-
mentioned, some healthy dogs have adrenal glands
tains a nodule, or has been effaced by a mass and the
that exceed 7.4mm in maximal diameter. Some dogs
 contralateral gland is small or not seen, suggesting that
with chronic nonendocrine disease may also exhibit
it has been suppressed (Figure 12.8). However, in some
mild symmetrical adrenal enlargement (Figure 12.7).
cases, the functional tumor may be small and is not
Adrenal tumor hyperadrenocorticism (ATH) caused
detected by ultrasonography. Further confounding the
by  functional  adrenocortical  tumors  accounts  for
diagnosis, there are reports of dogs with tumors of
approximately 20% of dogs with naturally occurring
both the pituitary gland and the adrenal cortex, as well
hyperadrenocorticism. In dogs with compatible clini-
as bilateral primary adrenal neoplasia (Greco et al.
cal signs and clinicopathologic findings, ATH should
1999). In dogs with hyperadrenocorticism caused by
391ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
Colc
CA
CMA
CVC
nomegaly. These changes were also apparent on the left side. Vascular landmarks are noted. Ao, aorta; CA, celiac artery;
CMA, cranial mesenteric artery; and CVC, caudal vena cava. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
exogenous steroid administration, the adrenal glands
cumstantial evidence supporting a diagnosis of hypo-
may appcar small or may not be seen.
adrenocorticism (Figure 12.10).
 In contrast to dogs, adrenal disease is uncommon in
cats. Adrenal mineralization is common in older cats
Adrenal Nodulesand Masses
and should not be considered a sign of neoplasia
(Figure 12.9). Feline Cushing's syndrome is uncom-
The differential diagnosis for adrenal nodules and
mon, but ultrasonography may be helpful in determin-
masses includes cortical adenoma, cortical adenocarci-
ing whether the disease is pituitary dependent or
noma, pheochromocytoma, metastasis, and hyperpla-
caused by a functional adrenal cortical tumor.The cri-
sia. Cortical tumors may or may not be functional, and
teria are similar to those in dogs and, based on the
there may be no signs of hyperadrenocorticism. The
limited data available, may be more reliable (Watson
 sonographic appearance of these lesions is nonspecific
and Herrtage1998;Feldmanand Nelson2004).Bilateral
(Figure 12.11). Clinical signs of pheochromocytomas
adrenal enlargement suggests PDH, whereas a unilat-
are often vague, nonspecific, or intermittent (Teldman
eral nodule or mass suggests ATH. However, as in
and Nelson 2004), and their sonographic features are
dogs, some cats with PDH had normal adrenal glands
nonspecific (Figures 12.12 and 12.13). Nodules and
while one catwithATH hadbilateraladrenal
masses vary in size and echogenicity. However, if the
enlargement.
nodules exceeds 2cm, benign or malignant neoplasia
is more likely,and if the lesion exceeds 4cm,malignant
neoplasia is more likely (Besso et al. 1997). However,
Addison'sDisease
both benign neoplasms and hyperplasia may produce
A diagnosis of Addison's disease cannot be made
quite large lesions. The most reliable sign of malig-
based on ultrasonographic findings alonc. However, a
nancy is evidence of invasion of local tissues and struc
study showedmeasurablereductioninthickness
tures,which can occur with adrenocortical carcinomas
(range for left adrenal gland, 2.2 to 3.0mm, and for 
and pheochromocytomas (Platt et al. 1998).
right adrenal gland, 2.2 to 3.4mm) and length (range
Thesc tumors may invade the adjacent kidney or
for left adrenal gland, 10.0 to 19.7mm, and for right
musculature and extend to involve thevertebrae and
adrenal gland, 9.5 to 18.8mm) of affected adrenal
cause neurological signs. Locally invasive lesions may
glands compared to the normal dogs (Hoerauf and
be recognized sonographically especially if they distort
Reusch 1999). Therefore,in a patient with consistent
the kidney (Figure 12.13).
clinical and laboratory findings, the detection of small
Invasion of the caudal vena cava and formation of a
adrenal glands or failure to detect the glands, despite
thrombus within its lumen may occur with malignan-
a technically adequate study, can be considered cir-
cies of the right adrenal gland (Figurcs 12.14-12.16).
392 ADRENAL GLANDS
B
0.23cm
Figure 12.10. Addison's disease in a dog. Sagittal ultrasound images of the left (A) and right (B) adrenal glands in a dog
renal vein. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
B
RI
6.84
Figure 12.11.  Adrenal tumors in two dogs. A: Sagittal sonogram of a pheochromocytoma of the right adrenal gland in a
 9-year-old Chihuahua crossed. The mass is homogeneously echogenic and appears dorsal to the aorta (Ao) and just cranial
to the left renal vein (RV). L, liver. B: Transverse sonogram of an adenocarcinoma of the left adrcnal gland in an 11-ycar-old
 large-breed dog. A large, irregular, inhomogeneous mass (arrowheads) has replaced the left adrenal gland. This mass contains
 amorphous mineralization, as seen as shadowing hyperechoic foci (arrow), which is more typical of this malignant process.
the left renal vein (RV) is seen in B. S, spleen. Images courtesy of D. Penninck and M.A. d'Anjou.
Other local vessels may also be invaded, such as the
detected. Aortic thrombosis caused by tumor invasion
renal veins, adrenal veins, and phrenicoabdominal
has not been reported (Besso et al. 1997). Hyperechoic
vessels. Vascular invasion by malignant adrenal neo-
foci with distal acoustic shadowing, representing min-
 plasms is detected more commonly by histopathology
eralization, have been reported more commonly with
and necropsy than by ultrasound, because the affected
adrenocortical tumors, but may occur in medullary
vessels may be quite small and below the limit of
tumors and with benign lesions (Figure 12.11). The
ultrasound resolution (Besso et al. 1997; Feldman and
shape of the adrenal lesion may offer some circum-
Nelson 2004). The presence of a venous thrombus
stantial evidence as to type. If the gland retains a
adjacent to an adrenal mass is highly suggestive of
normal shape, hyperplasia is considered more likely.
 malignancy.
 Discrete, well-defined nodules suggests benign neo-
Hyperadrenocorticism may cause a hypercoagula-
plasia, whereas amorphous or irregularly shaped
ble state and, in this condition, aortic thrombus can be
 masses suggest malignancy (Besso et al. 1997).
Figure 12.12. Adrenal pheochromocytomas in two dogs. A: Sagittal sonogram of a pheochromocytoma in the 8-year-old
boxer crossed. A large mass is medial to the left kidney, but not invading the adljacent vessels. B: Sagittal sonogram of a
pheochromocytoma in the 15-year-old golden retriever. The mass is adjacent to right renal vein (RV) and caudal vena cava
(CVC),but not invading them, as confirmed during surgery. Images courtesy of D. Penninck.
Figure 12.13. Invasive pheochromocytoma in a dog. Dorsal
plane image obtained in the right craniodorsal abdomen. The
right kidney is in the near field (arrowheads), and the renal
(arrows) is present medial to the right kidney and extends into
the hilus of the kidney. The pelvic dilation suggests partial
obstruction of the ureter by invasion or encasement by the mass.
The mass was found to be a pheochrornocytoma.
B
LRV
Figure 12.14. Adrenocortical carcinoma and venous throrrbosis in a dog. Sagittal (A) and transverse (B) plane images
obtained in the left inidabdomen of a dog with peritoneal effusion and pelvic limb swelling. A large, irregular, inhomogencous
mass (arrowheads) is ventral to the caudal vena cava (CVC), displacing thc left renal vein caudally (LRV). A moderately
(RRV), consistent with thrombosis (arrows). At surgery, there was no evidence of vascular invasion by the mass, although
this was initially suspected. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
394 ADRENAL GLANDS
Mass
1.37cm
1.63cm
 of a large pheochromocytoma (arrows) of the right adrenal gland. B: A transverse sonogram of the mass and the invaded
caudal vena cava (CVC), which appears significantly larger than the adjacent aorta (Ao). C: The echogenic thrombus is well
seen in the lumen of the vessel. D: The color Doppler assessment outlines the caudal margin of the thrombus. The vascular
invasion was confirmed at surgery. Images courtcsy of D. Penninck.
Adrenal nodules and small masses have become
Clinicopathologic tests are indicated if any such signs
 more common incidental findings as operator experi-
 are identified. Larger masses or nodules (greater than
ence has increased and machine quality has improved.
2cm) are more likely to be neoplastic, so surgical 
These are sometimes referred to as "incidentalomas"
removal should be considered. However, many of
(Figure 12.17) and leave clinicians with the dilemma of
these patients have serious concurrent illnesses and
how far the diagnosis should be pursued. Many of
adde aaisse ue rns os 'poe ab aq d
 these lesions cause no clinical signs, and a diagnosis is
may not be indicated or acceptable to the owner. If
 never confirmed. Reported diagnoses include normal
there is no evidence of endocrine disease or sono-
tissue, nonfunctional cortical tumors, granulomas,
graphic evidence of invasiveness, serial ultrasound
adrenal cysts, myelolipoma, hemorrhage, metastatic
examinations at 1- to 3-month intervals can be used to
tumor, and pheochromocytoma (Feldman and Nelson
 monitor for enlargement or progression of the lesion.
 2004). The medical history and clinical signs should
 If there is evidence of progression, surgical excision
be   reviewed  for  evidence  of  endocrine  disease.
may be prudent.
B
6.05cm
C
Bladder
CVC
Figure 12.16. Invasive adrenal tumor in an 1l-year-old schnauzer. A: Sagittal sonogram of a large invasive tumor of the
left adrenal gland. B: On color Doppler evaluation, the mass appears highly vascular. C: An extensive thrombus is within the
caudal vena cava (CVC) outlined by white arrowheads. D: The thrombus (T) extends caudally up to the level of the bladder.
 E: Inhomogeneous, echogenic thrombus (arrow) is also seen invading the renal vein. The small bright focus within the throm-
 bus most likely represents mineralization. The highly vascular mass and dependcnt thrombus could not be successfully
 resected at surgery. Images courtesy of D. Penninck.
Figure 12.17. Incidental adrenal nodules in two dogs. A:
Dorsal plane imagc of a left adrenal gland. A well-defined,
 inhomogeneous, hyperechoic nodule is in the cranial pole of the
A
adrenal gland. The nodule was an incidental finding and
remained unchanged on serial examinations. Anechoic cross
sections of the celiac and cranial mesenteric arteries are seen
 dorsally. B: Sagittal sonogram of both adrenal glands of a 15-
 year-old Siberian husky with incidental bilateral changes in
echogenicity and shape (arrows). These changes remained
unchanged on serial cxaminations. Images courtesy of D.
Penninck.
RADRENAL
ENAL
L68C1
396ADRENAL GLANDS
Barthez PY, Nyland TG, Feldman EC (1998) Ultrasonography
of the adrenal glands in the dog, cal, and ferret. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 28:869-885.
Behrend EN, Kemppaincn RJ, Clark TP,Salman MD,Peterson
ME (2002) Diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism in dogs: A
survey of internists and dermatologists.J Am Vet Med
Ass0c 220:1643-1649.
Besso JG, Penninck DG, Gliatto JM (1997) Retrospective
ultrasonographic evaluation of adrenal lesions in 26 dogs.
Vet Radiol Ultrasound38:448-455.
Cartee RE, Finn-Bodner ST, Gray BW (1993) Ultrasound
examination of the feline adrenal gland. J Diagn Med
Sonogr 9:327-330.
Douglass JP, Berry CR, James S (1997) Ultrasonographic
adrenal gland measurements in dogs without evidence of
Figure 12.18. Fine-needle aspiralion using a 22-gauge
adrenal disease.Vet Radiol Ultrasound 38:124-130.
spinal needle (arrow) was performed on this adrenal mass
Feldman EC, Nelson RW (2004) The adrenal gland. In:
Feldman EC, Nelson RW, eds. Canine and Feline
(arrowheads) in a dog. No complication was cncountered
Endocrinology and Reproduction, 3rd edition. St Louis:
during the procedure. The final diagnosis was adrenocortical
WB Saunders, pp 394-439.
adenocarcinoma.
Greco DS,Petcrson ME,Davidson AP,Feldman EC,Komurek
K (1999) Concurrent pituitary and adrenal tumors in dogs
with hyperadrenocorticism: 17 cases (1978-1995). J Am Vet
Med Assoc 214:1349-1353.
INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES
Grooters AM, Biller DS, Merryman J (1995) Ultrasonographic
Fine-needle aspiration or biopsy of adrenal nodules or
parameters of normal canine adrenal glands: Comparison
to necropsy findings. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 36:126-130.
masses may be attempted (Figure 12.18) and is rou-
Hoerauf A, Reusch C (1996) Ultrasonographic evaluation of
tinely performed in human patients. However, in dogs
thc adrenal glands in healthy dogs, dogs with Cushing's
these tests areof equivocalvalue and are notwithout
disease due to functional adrenal tumors and dogs
risk. It may be difficult to distinguish hyperplasia and
with Addison's disease [Abstract]. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
benign and malignant adrenocortical tumors based on
37:488.
cytologic criteria. Attempted fine-needle aspiration or
Hoerauf A, Reusch C (1999) Ultrasonographic evaluation of
biopsy of a pheochromocytoma may cause uncontrol-
the adrenal glands in six dogs with hypoadrenocorticism.
lable hemorrhage or paroxysmal hypertension.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35:214-218.
PlattSR, Sheppard BJ, Graham J, Uhl EW, Meeks J, Clemmons
RM (1998) Pheochromocytoma in the vertebral canal of
REFERENCES
two dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 34:365-371.
Spaulding KA (1997) A review of sonographic identification
of abdominal blood vessels and juxtavascular organs. Vet
Barthez PY,Nyland TG,Feldman EC (1995) UItrasonographic
Radiol Ultrasound 38:4-23.
evaluation of adrenal glands in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
Watson PJ, Herrtage ME (1998) Hyperadrenocorticism in six
207:1180-1183.
cats. J Small Anim Pract 39:175-184.
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE TRACT
Silke Hecht
s p sop u  w adde ns
EXAMINATION TECHNIQUE
than 1cm long in cats. The appearance of the ovary
The ovaries and the uterus are the only female
varies during the estrus cycle (Table 13.1 and Figures
reproductive organs routinely visualized by means of
13.2-13.5). Although ultrasonographic changes during
ultrasonography. The normal uterine tubes are usually
the ovarian cycle have been well studied in dogs, the
too small to be seen, and the vulva and vagina are dif-
exact time of ovulation cannot be predicted (Yeager
ficult to image transabdominallybecause of their intra-
and Concannon 1995; Silva et al. 1996).
pelvic location. Mammary glands are infrequently
examined.
Ovarian Disorders
 Indications for ultrasonographic examination of the
female reproductive tract include pregnancy diagno-
 Ovarian diseases are uncommon in dogs and very rare
sis, assessment of normal fetal development and via-
in cats. In many cases, a presumptive diagnosis of an
f
bility, vaginal discharge, clinical signs compatible with
ovarian abnormality is made based on clinical find-
S
 hormonal inbalances suggesting ovarian dysfunction,
 ings, and ultrasonography is used to confirm the sus-
,S
P
and abdominal mass lesions in intact queens and
picion rather than serving as the primary means of
bitches. Indications for ultrasonographic examination
diagnosis (England et al. 2003).
of
 of the mammary glands include abnormal findings on
Ovarian
cysts
appear
as
anechoic,
well-
n.
palpation (swelling, pain, and heat) and a need to
circumscribed, and thin-walled structures with distal
assess the extent of mammary gland neoplasia.
enhanccment (Figures 13.6 and 13.7). Hormonally
ns
 The examination is performed with the animal in
inactive cysts arising from the ovarian bursa and
of
dorsal recumbency (Figure 13.1). An approach in
lateral recumbency may prove useful in the examina-
cannot be differentiatcd through ultrasonography.
on
tion of the ovaries. A 5-MHz transducer is usually
Large follicles and corpora lutea may be confused with
let
sufficient to visualize an enlarged fluid-filled uterus,
ovarian cysts, and the finding of fluid-filled structures
six
fetal structures, or abdominal mass lesions; however,
 associated with the ovary has to be interpreted in light
a 7.5- or 10-MHz transducer provides better detail in
 of the clinical presentation.
the examination of smaller structures and is recom-
 Ovarian tumors (epithelial tumors, sex-cord stromal
mendcd for most indications. For the examination of
tumors, and germ-cell tumors), which appear as
the mammary glands, a high-resolution transducer
nodules or masses of variable size and echogenicity,
(7.5MHz or higher) is recommended.
may have a cystic or mineral component (Figures 13.8
and 13.9). Tumor types cannot be differentiated ultra-
sonographically, although teratomas and teratocarci-
nomas have the tendency to become very large and
OVARIES
contain bone or mineral. The origin of an ovarian mass
 can be difficult to determine when the enlarging organ
Normal SonographicAnatomy
changes position and moves ventrally from its original
The ovaries are located caudally, and often laterally,
location (Diez-Bru et al. 1998). Common concurrent
to the caudal poles of the kidneys, which are used as
findings include ascites, pyometra, and cystic endome-
landmarks for their identification. They are oval and
trial hyperplasia.
397
RK
Ovary
Uterine Horn
UB
Body of Uterus
B
Cervix
Vagina
UB
Figure 13.1.Normal female reproductive tract. On the left is a schematic representation of the anatomy of the female
reproductive tract. The ovaries are located caudally and often laterally to the kidneys. The cervix and body of the uterus are
located dorsally to the urinary bladder. The uterine horns extend craniolaterally from the uterine body and are usually not
easily visible in a normal dog. A: Sagittal image of a normal left canine ovary (arrowheads). The left kidney (LK) is used as
a landmark, and the ovary is identified as an ovoid soft-tissue structure of medium echogenicity caudal to the caudal pole.
is identified as a circular structure between the urinary bladder (UB) and colon, which are used as landmarks. On the sagittal
image, the uterus (black arrows) is seen as a tubular structure of medium echogenicity dorsal to the urinary bladder (UB).
OVARY
Figure 13.2.Normal ovary during anestrus. Sagittal image
Of the left ovary (between the cursors) in a 6-year-old Labrador
retriever during anestrus.The ovary is smoothly marginated,
and slightly hypoechoic to the adjacent left renal cortex (LK),
1.07cm
without evidence of follicles or corpora lutea.
398
Table 13.1.
Ultrasonographic appearance of canine ovaries throughout the estrus cycle
Time of the Estrus Cycle
Appearanceof theOvary
Anestrus and early
Small (mean length,1.2cm)
proestrus
Oval shapewitha smooth contour
Uniform echogenicity (no follicles,CLs,or other structures)
Proestrus
Size gradually increases; becomes a plumper oval shape; contour usually remains smooth.
Follicles appear as round or oval-shaped anechoic fluid cavities with a thin wall or no apparent
wall.
Mean follicle number four (range, 0-10).
Follicle diameter is breed dependent. On the day prior to ovulation, mean diameter reaches
from 5mm in beagles to 8mm in retrievers.The maximum diameter of preovulatory follicles
may be as large as 11mm.
Day of ovulation
Follicle number usually decreases to 0-2 follicles per ovary.
The remaining follicles tend to decrease in diameter,but the ovary maintains its size.
Contour may appear bumpy.
Solid, hypoechoic CLs may appear.
A scant amount of fluid is occasionally detected adjacent to the ovary.
Estrus
Maximum ovarian size is reached 5-6 days after ovulation (300%-400% of anestrus volume).
The contour is bumpy.
Fluid-filled CLs have anechoic centers.
There is a mean of three fluid-filled CLs per ovary.
May be indistinguishable from follicles.
Tend to be several millimeters larger, thickerwalled, and more variable in shape thanfollicles.
Solid CLs are 5-9mm in diameter.
Diestrus
The contour is bumpy.
Fluid-filled CLs gradually decreasc in size and increase in echogenicity to become 6-mm solid
CLs between 10 and 14 days after ovulation.
Ovarian size decreases somewhat (200%-300% of anestrus volume) as fluid-filled CLs regress.
Solid CLs persist through most of diestrus.
CL, corpus luteum.
Reprinted from Yeager and Concannon (1995), with permission.
Figure 13.3.Normal ovary during anestrus.Sagittalimage
Figure 13.4.Normal ovary during diestrus.Sagittal image
of the left ovary (between the cursors) in a 6-year-old
of the left ovary (between thc cursors) in an 8-year-old shih
Labrador retriever during late proestrus or early estrus. The
tzu during diestrus. Several small circular hypoechoic
three circular anechoic follicles within the ovary are associ-
corpora lutea are associated with the ovary.A hypoechoic
aled with far enhancement. LK, left kidney.
linear band extending distally from the cranial pole of
the ovary is consistent with edge shadowing artifact
(arrowheads).
399
Figure 13.5. Normal ovary during pregnancy. Sagittal
Figure 13.6. Ovarian cysts in a dog. The right ovary
(betwecn the cursors) is 2.2cm long, and two thin-walled
nant 4-year-old pointer.Twolarge hypoechoic corpora lutca
anechoic circular structures are associated with the cranial
and the caudal poles, respectively. The cysts are character-
cause a lumpy organ contour.
ized by distal enhancement (arrowheads).
KID
Figure 13.7.Cystic ovary in a 15-year-old vizsla.Multiple
Figure 13.8. Ovarian adenocarcinoma in a dog.A 2.8 x
3.1-cm irregularly marginated and mixed echogenic mass
thin-walled anechoic structures are associated with the left
Ovary. Normal ovarian parenchyma cannot be identified.
(arrows) is caudal to the left kidney (L KID).
Figure 13.9.Sex-cord stromal tumor arising from residual
Ovarian tissue in a spayed 9-year-old Labrador retriever. A
st (smoe) sseu susoua paxtu pue snoousouu aae
associated with the midabdomen.
400
401ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
UTERUS
Pregnancy
Normal Pregnancy
Normal SonographicAnatomy
Ultrasonography is a reliable method for diagnosing
The normal nongravid uterus is inconspicuous, often
pregnancy in simall animals. Inconsistency exists in the
difficult to identify in dogs, and usually not seen in
literature regarding the time of the earliest definitive
cats. It is best identified in the caudal abdomen, where
diagnosis, partially because it is difficult to determine
it appears as a tubular structure between the urinary
the time of conception in dogs. The improved image
bladder (ventral) and the descending colon (dorsal)
detail provided by more recent ultrasound systems
(Figure 13.1). Its size and appearance depend on the
could contribute to earlier diagnosis.
size of the animal, previous pregnancies, and stage of
The most commonly used definition of gestational
the estrus cycle (Table 13.2 and Figures 13.10 and
age is the number of days after luteinizing hormone
13.11).After identification of the cervix or the uterine
(LH) peak in dogs and the number of days after breed-
body,the uterus is traced cranially to the level of the
ing in cats (Mattoon and Nyland 1995). According to
bifurcation and the uterinc horns. An alternative
approach is the identification of the uterine horns close
to the ovaries; however, their small diameter at this
location hinders identification.Even if thc uterine
body and the cervix are seen in a nongravid animal,
the uterine horns may not be visible because of their
small size and surrounding intestinal segments. The
Lterus
lack of identifiable wall layers helps in differentiating
uterine horns from intestinal loops.
In spayed dogs, the uterine stump is usually incon-
 spicuous and may be visible as a blind-ending tubular
structure between urinary bladder and colon (Figure
Colon
13.12).
A
Table 13.2
Uterus
Ultrasonographic appearance of the canine uterus during
the estrus cycle
UB
Time
Appearance of the Uterus
Colon
Late diestrus and
Uniformly hypoechoic
anestrus
Neither layered wall nor luminal echo
3-8mm in diameter
Difficult to detect
Vagina and cervix difficult to
distinguish from the uterine body
B
B
Proestrus,estrus,
1-mmhyperechoicluminal echo and
Figure 13.10.Normal anestrus uterus in a 6-year-old
metestrus,and
hypocchoic inner layer of uterine
Scottish terrier. A: On the sagittal image, the uterus (arrow-
early diestrus
wall variably present
heads) is a tubular,homogeneous structure of medium echo-
Relatively easy to detect
genicity dorsal to the colon, which is characterized by a
1-3mm larger in diameter in
hyperechoic interface and distal dirty shadowing. The transi-
comparison with anestrus
tion between the cervix and the uterine body is inconspicu-
Focal cnlargement of cervixwith
ous.The urinary bladder is not visible on this image. B: On
"bul's eye" appearance in cross
the transverse image, the uterus (arrow) appears as a round,
sectionbecauseofmultiple layers
a o pu uo   s anns sn
Data from Yeager and Concannon (1995).
the urinary bladder (UB).
Cervix
Colon
Colon
Cervix
B
Figure 13.11.Normal late-proestrus Or early-estrus uterus in a 6-year-old Labrador retriever (the samc dog as in Figure
13.3). A: Sagittal image of cervix and body of the uterus. The uterine wallis thicker than during anestrus. Hyperechoic luminal
echoes and a small volume of intraluminal fluid are present (arrowheads). The diameter of the cervix is larger than the diam-
eter of the uterine body.B: Transverse image of the cervix (between the cursors).The cervix is thick walled,with hyperechoic
and hypoechoic echoes within the lumen (L). The uterus appears lateral to the descending colon.
UB
UB
Figure 13.12.Uterinc stump in a healthy 12-year-old mixed-breed dog. A: Sagittal image. The uterine stump) appears as
tubular structure between the urinary bladder (UB) and the colon (C). B: Transverse image.The uterine stump (between the
arrowheads) appears as a circular hypoechoic structure between the urinary bladder (UB) and the colon (C).
402
403ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
these definitions, the length of normal pregnancy is
the uterus.The embryo can be disccrned at days 23-25
65 ± 1 day for dogs and 61 days for cats. A practical
in dogs and at days 16-18 in cats. The fetus develops
problem is that information on hormone assays is often
rapidly after day 30, enabling the identification of
unavailable to animal owners and ultrasonographers.
 intermal organs. A summary of ultrasonographic find-
If the time of breeding is known, pregnancy can usually
ings at different stages of pregnancy is presented in
be ruled out 30-33 days after the last breeding in dogs
Table 13.3. Formulas have been developed and pub-
and 15-20 days after the last breeding in cats, based on
lished to determine gestational age and predict time of
a negative ultrasonographic examination.
parturition based on measurements of fetal dimen-
Ultrasonography is useful in monitoring normal
sions (Beck et al. 1990; England et al. 1990; Yeager
embryonic and fetal development (Yeager et al. 1992;
et al. 1992; Mattoon and Nyland 1995) (Table 13.4)
Zambelli et al. 2002) (Figures 13.13-13.18). The first
Using these parameters, time of parturition can be pre-
reliable ultrasonographic indicator of pregnancy is
dicted with an accuracy of ±2-3 days (England et al.
the detection of gestational chambers, which appear as
 2003). Ultrasonographic determination of litter size is
small, thin-walled anechoic structures associated with
not reliable (Ioal et al. 1986).
HEAD
LIVER
C
HEAR
D
Figure 13.13. Progression of normal pregnancy in a domestic shorthair cat. A: Day 16. The embryo (arrow) is directly
attached to the wall of the circular,fluid-filled gestational sac in the far field (between the cursors).A second fluid-filled ges-
tational sac is in the near field. B: Day 39. Transverse image of the fetus (between the cursors). Hepatic parenchyma and
gallbladder (GB) are visible. Linear echogenic material adjacent to the fetus is consistent with yolk-sac membrane (arrow-
right of the image.he spine (S)is visible,the heart (H)is surrounded by hyperechoic lung,and the anechoic structure caudal
cranial abdomen. The heart is surrounded by hyperechoic pulmonary parenchyma. Gallbladder (GB), stomach (ST), and
urinary bladder appear as circular anechoic structures in the abdomen.
section 62 days after last breeding. The results of hormone assays are not available. A: Day 28 after last breeding. An embryo
(E) is visible in the fluid-filled gestational sac. A flickering heartbeat was observed on real-time examination. The yolk sac (Y)
is the fluid-filled structure adjacent to the fetus. B: Day 35.Transverse image of the fetus. The surrounding allantoic membrane
is indicated by arrowheads. The yolk sac (Y) is the folded fluid-filled structure adjacent to the fetus. C: Day 42.Dorsal plane
image of the fetal head. The mandible is to the left on the image, and the cranium and brain are to the right. D: Day 42. Dorsal
plane image of the fetal hody. Skull (to the left of the image) and vertebral column are clearly visible (arrows). E: Day 60.
image of the fetal thorax. Cardiac chambers and large vessels are clearly visible. The surrounding lung is hyperechoic.
404
S
Caudal
Cranial.
B
EYEILENS
Ribs
IBCT
Trachea
?
Figure 13.15. Normal late-term pregnancy in a 4-year-old pointer. Ultrasonographic examination was performed 2 months
nation.A: Sagittal image of the fetal abdomen.The left kidney (arrowheads),with distinct cortex and medulla,is caudal to
the fluid-filled stomach (S). Tubular intestinal segments are in the near field. : Sagittal image of the fetal eye, which appears
(arrowhead).C: Dorsal image of fetal caudal neck and cranial thorax.The trachea is tubular and fluid filled.The ribs are
characterized by small curvilinear bright interfaces associated with strong shadows. D: Sagittal image of the thorax.The
off the brachiocephalic trunk (BCT).
Figure 13.16. Sonogram of a 25-day-old canine fetus. The
zonular placenta is distinctly identified (arrows).The arrow-
head points to a thin membrane probably representing either
part of the allantoic membrane or the yolk sac. Image courtesy
of D.Penninck.
405
406 FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE TRACT
Table 13.3.
Ultrasonographic diagnosis of pregnancy
Ultrasonographic Findings
Dog
Cat
Cranial
(Days After 
(Days After
LHa Surge)
Breeding)
UA
 Gestational chamber
20
10
 Placental layers of uterine
22-24
15-17
wall
Embryo and heartbeat 
23-25
16-18
Fetal movement
34-36
30-34
 Skeleton
30-33
 Bladder and stomach 
35-39
29-32
Liver (hypoechoic) and
38-42
29-32
lung (hyperechoic)
Figure 13.17. Normal fetal circulation. The head of the
fetus is to the left of the image. The umbilical vein (UV) and
LH, luteinizing hormone.
 Data from Yeager et al. (1992) and Zambelli et al. (2002).
umbilical artery (UA) extend cranially to the liver (L) and
caudally to the cranial aspect of the fluid-filled urinary
bladder (UB), respectively. The heart (H) is visible cranial to
the diaphragm. The heterogeneous color pattern observed in
Table13.4.
pre iada e usee Aq pasnes s are tequn a
 Formulas to predict gestational age and days before
that results when pulse-repetition frequency is too low in
 parturition in dogs and catsa
regard to a high-velocity blood flow.
Gestational age in dogs (±3 days)
Less than 40 days
GA=(6×GSD)+20
GA = (3 × CRL) + 27
More than 40 days
GA =(15xHD)+ 20
GA=(7×BD) +29
GA =(6 × HD) + (3 ×BD) + 30
Days before parturition in dogs 
DBP=65-GA
Gestational age in cats (±2 days)
1A
Greater than 40 days
GA = 25 × HD + 3 
GA=11×BD+21
Days before parturition in cats
DBP=61-GA
Gestational age (GA) is based on days after luteinizing hormone
(LH) surge in dogs and days after breeding in cats. Gestational sac
diameter (GSD), crown-rump length (CRL), head diameter (HD), and
Figure 13.18. Normal fetal circulation. The head of the
body diameter (BD) measurements are in centimeters. Days before 
fetus is to the right of the image. The caudal vena cava (C)
 parturition (DBP) is based on 65 ± 1 days after LH surge in dogs and 
and the aorta (A) enter and leave the right and left heart,
61 days after breeding in cats.
respectively. The aorta gives off the ductus arteriosus (D).
 Data modified and adapted from England et al. (1990), Yeager et
al. (1992), and Beck et al. 1990.
Reprinted from Mattoon and Nyland (1995), with permission from
Elsevier.
Normal Postpartum Uterus
 Ultrasonographic changes during normal involution
Sonography of Abnormal Pregnancy
 of the postpartum uterus have been described. Uterine
wall  thickness  and  volume  of intraluminal  fluid
The most common abnormalities of pregnancy in dogs
decrease, and the uterus becomes less conspicuous
and cats are resorption (embryonic death before
 Over time. Uterine involution usually takes 3-4 weeks
25 days) and abortion (fetal death after 35 days)
 in dogs and 24 days in cats (Pharr and Post 1992;
 Embryonic resorption manifests as loss of the normal
Ferretti et al. 2000).
 anechoic gestational chamber, with accumulation of
407ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
the last breeding. Transverse image of a collapsed thick-walled gestational chamber, which contains a small amount of
Occurred several days prior to the ultrasonographic examination. B: Day 35 after the last breeding. Embryonic death was
more recent in respect to the ultrasonographic cxamination than in A. Transverse image of a thick-walled gestational chamber,
which is filled with echogenic fluid. The embryonic remnant is indistinctly visible (arrowheads). The gestational chamber has
not yct collapsed.
B
nation 23 days after the last breeding. A thick-walled gestational chamber is filled with echogenic material and fluid.
Embryonic structures are not visible. B: Ultrasonographic examination 1 month after the last breeding. The gestational
chamber has collapsed.
echogenic material within the lumen, loss of embry-r
mulation of gas within fetus or uterus, and fetal disin-
onic heartbeat, embryonic disintegration, and ulti-  tegration (England et al. 2003) (Figure 13.21). Failure
mately collapse of the gestational chamber with
of implantation of the conceptus, small size or under-
thickening of the uterine wall (England 1998) (Figures
development of the conceptus for true gestational age,
13.19 and 13.20).
and abnormal location of the conceptus within the
Signs of fetal death include absence of heartbeat and
uterus can usually not be diagnosed (England 1998).
fetal movement, abnormal fctal posture, reduced
Ultrasonography is of particular value in assessing
volume and increased echogenicity of fetal fluid, accu-
fetal viability and distress. Normal fetal heart rate has
FFL
Figure 13.21. Fetal abnormalities. Ultrasonographic (left) and schematic (right) images of a feline dead fetus. A: The trans-
verse image of the fetus is small,the skull bones are collapsed (arrowhead), and only a small amount of echogenic fluid (F)
is seen adjacent to the fetus.Normal fetal anatomy (skeleton and organs) is not recognized because of fetal disintegration. In
B (schematic image of A), the small arrows indicate bones or mineral foci within the dead fetus. The nature of the changes
and the small size of the fetus in comparison to a near-term fetus (see C and D) suggest that this fetus died several days prior
to the ultrasonographic examination. Ut, wall of the uterus and/or placenta. C and D: Sagital image of a dead, near-term
fetus in the same cal.There is normal fetal anatomy,but a heartbeat was nol delecled on ultrasonographic examination.The
diaphragm is a fine echogenic curvilinear line.Spine(Sp),abdominal structures (Abd), and heart (H) with adjacent hypoechoic
lung are clearly seen.Anechoic intraluminal uterine fluid (LFL) is present.A small amount of abdominal effusion (FFL) is
seen in the near field. The appearance of the fetus indicates that death has occurred recently. E and F: Anasarca in a Chinook
dog. The affected fetus was surrounded by contained fluid (arrows in E) best seen here around the head (H) and neck. A
moderate pleural effusion (P) associated with retracted echogenic lungs (arrowheads) is noted in F.
408
409ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
 hyperechoic, and contains material of soft-tissue echogenicity. Fetal structures cannot be discerned.
been reported to be twice that of maternal heart rate
and polyps are common. Uterine stump pyometra
andis a reliable indicator of fetal viability.Bradycardia
manifests as a fluid-filled, blind-ending pouch between
is the normal response of a fetus to hypoxia and is an
the urinary bladder and descending colon (Figure
important parameter in identifying in dystocia.
13.27).
Although a large number of congenital defects can
Cystic endometrial hyperplasia causes thickening
 a re s s e  s  n
 of the endometrium, with cystic lesions embedded
diagnosed in utero. Examples of fetal abnormalities
in the uterine wall because of proliferation of
that can be detected by means of ultrasonography
endometrial glands (Voges and Neuwirth 1996)
include hydrocephalus, fetal pleural efusion, and
(Figure 13.28). The hyperplasia is commonly associ-
hydrops fetalis or anasarca (Allen et al. 1989). Only
ated with fluid accumulation within the uterine
a few other pregnancy disorders have been reported
lumen and may precede the development of mucome-
in small animals. Uterine torsion is a potentially
tra or pyometra (Figure 13.29) or be associated with
life-threatening condition that is characterized by
endometritis
infarction of the affected uterine segment, with sub-
Neoplasms of the uterus or the uterine stump, such
sequent wall thickening, increased echogenicity of
 as polyps, leiomyomas, leiomyosarcomas, or adeno-
uterine wall and fetal fluids, and fetal death (Figure
carcinomas, are rare (Klein 1996). They appear as
13.22).
nodules or masses of variable shape, size, and echo-
genicity and may be associated with fluid accumula-
tion within the uterine lumen (Figures 13.30-13.32).
UterineDiseases
Vaginal masses can be visualized when they become
Fluid within the uterus is easily visualized by means
large enough to extend from the pelvic canal into the
of ultrasonography. Echogenicity of the luminal con-
abdomen (Figure 13.33). Uterine stump granulomas
tents is variable. Although hydrometra and mucome-
manifest as mass lesions of variable echogenicity
tra are usually characterized by anechoicluminal fluid,
between thc bladder and colon (Figure 13.34).
and pyometra and hemometra tend to show echogenic
Differentiation of neoplastic from nonneoplastic
luminal contents, ultrasonographic differentiation of
uterine or vaginal mass lesions and ultrasonographic
these entities is often not possible (Figures 13.23-3.26).
distinction among different tumor types is not
Concurrent uterine wall thickening, endometrial cysts,
possible.
UB
Uterus
Colon
Right uterine horn
Figure 13.23.Endometritis and pyometra in dogs.A and B: Endometritis and cystic endometrial hyperplasia in a 1-year-old
Ultrasonographic (C) and schematic (D) images of the cervix and body of the uterus. The cervix is closed. The uterus is thick
walled and distended with echogenic material. The uterus appears between the descending colon containing gas, dorsally,
and the urinary bladder (UB), ventrally. Ultrasonographic (E) and schematic (F) images of the right uterine horn showing a
thickened wall (between the cursors, 0.5-0.8cm).The lumen of the uterus contains echogenic fluid.
410
Figure 13.24. Pyometra in a dog. Transverse image of the
Figure 13.25.Pyometra in an 1l-year-old Shiba Inu.The
left uterine horn (between the cursors) in an 1l-year-old
uterus is distended with fluid. The echogenicity of the fluid
whippet. The uterus is thick walled (approximately 3mm)
in the far field is higher than in the near field, indicating
andcontains anechoicfluid.The uterinewall doesnot show
scttling of particles (cells) in the dependent portion of the
wall layers, enabling diffcrcntiation from adjacent small
uterus.
intestinal scgments (arrows).
A
B
Figure 13.26.Hydrometra in a 13-year-old cat.A: Transverse image of the uterine horns, which are distended with anechoic
fluid and measure up to 3cm in diameter.B: Sagittal image of one of the fluid-distended uterine horns. There is irregularity
of theuterinewallin thefarfield(arrow).Linearhyperechoiclinesprojected on thelumen are consistent with reverberation
artifact (arrowheads).
UB
UTERUS
B
Figure 13.27. Uterine stump pyometra in a dog. Sagittal (A) and transverse (B) images of the uterus of a dog that previously
in the far field is more echogenic than in the near field, consistent with settling of solid particles (cells) in the dependent
portion.
411
Bladder
Uterus
UB
2.07cm
Figure 13.28. Cystic endometrial hyperplasia in dogs. A and B: Ultrasonographic and schematic images of the uterus in a
dog with endometrial cystic hyperplasia. The uterus is thickened, and multiple circular hypoechoic and anechoic structures
are embedded in the uterine wall, consistent with cysts (arrowheads). C: Cystic endometrial hyperplasia ina 1-year-old spayed
the urinary bladder (UB). Image courtesy of D. Penninck. D: Ultrasound image of a scgmcnt of an cnlarged uterine horn
(betwccn thc cursors) in an intact female dog with a history of chronic vulvar discharge.The uterine wall is thickened and
irregular, and several anechoic to hypoechoic cysts (arrows) are identified. Image courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
二
Figure 13.29.Presumptive cystic endometrial hyperplasia and mucometra in a 5-year-old briard. Sagittal images of diffcrent
areas of the left uterine horn obtained with a curvilinear (A)and a lincar (B) transduccr.The uterus is filled with anechoic
fluid and thick walled,with multiple anechoic cysts embedded in the uterine wall.
412
Uterus
Figure 13.30. Uterine polyp and hydrometra in a 13-year-
old cat. (the same cat as in Figurc 13.28). The transverse
 Figure 13.31.  Uterine stump adenocarcinoma in a 16-year-
image of the uterus shows a lobulated soft-tissue struc-
old mixed-breed dog. A mixed echogenic mass of more than
ture of 1-cm diameter surrounded by anechoic fluid
7-cm diameter is associated with the caudal abdomen.
(arrowheads).
Figure 13.32. Uterine leiomyoma in an8-year-old Rottweiler.
A mixed echogenic mass (between the cursors) is associated
with the caudal abdomen, which measures 8.3 x 5.2cm in
maximum diameter.
A
1
4.16cm
a au un ssu usdenod e go s pnosn (a) apo-a pe ) adoa aamon a lea e'it n
 of a 10-year-old American Eskimo female dog. A prominent vascular pattern is seen throughout the mass, which is also het-
erogeneous. This mass causes dorsal displacement of the rectum (R), but without evidence of wall invasion (arrow). Images
courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
413
414FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE TRACT
LADDER
B
year-old cat.There is a 1.5-cm homogeneous mass lesion of medium echogenicity (between the cursors) dorsal and to the left
of the urinary bladder.
MAMMARY GLANDS
Sonography of Abnormal
MammaryGlands
Sonography of Normal
Mammary Glands
Abnormalities of the mammary glands include neo-
plasia,cysts, and inflammation.Mammary tumors
The appearance of the mammary glands changes
appear ultrasonographically as irregular, mixed echo-
under hormonal influences (late-term pregnancy and
genic mass lesions of variable size (Figures 13.37 and
lactation). Normal mammary tissue in nonlactating
13.38). Benign and malignant mammary tumors cannot
dogs is coarse and hypoechoic (Figure 13.35). In lactat-
be differentiated based on their ultrasonographic
ing bitches, mammary tissue is more prominent, largc
appearance. Since metastases are common in malig-
vesscls enter the glands, and milk-filled ducts are
nant tumors, the axillary and/or inguinallymph nodes
encountered (Figure13.36).
shouldbe examinedfor enlargement andabnormal
echotexture. Mastitis manifests as swelling and
hypoechogenicity of the mammary tissue, with absces-
sation in severe cases.
Skin
Fat
Fat
Figure 13.35. Inactive mammary tissue in an anestrus 7-year-old nulliparous beagle. Ultrasonographic and schematic
images on which the mammary gland (arrowheads) is inconspicuous, small (1.0 x 0.5cn), and of sinilar echogenicity and
texture as adjaccnt subcutaneous fat.
Figure 13.36.Active mammary tissue in a 4-year-old dog 2 days prior to parturition. A: The mammary tissue measures up
to 3cm in thickness, is of medium echogenicity, and contains numerous tubular milk-filled ducts (arrowheads). B: On color
Doppler examination, the mammary tissue is well vascularized. No color signal is detected in the ducts.
Figure 13.38.Ulcerated and extensive mammary carci-
noma invading most of theright middle to caudalmammary
Figure13.37.Mixed mammary tumor in a 6-year-old
chain in a 14-year-old cat. The mass is mostly hypoechoic
Rottweiler. An approximately 3-cm heterogeneous mass is
and has irregular margins. Image courtesy of D. Penninck.
associated with a mammary gland.Strong distal acoustic
shadowing (arrowheads) indicates mineralization.
INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES
REFERENCES
Allen WE, England GCW, White KB (1989) HIydrops foetalis
Depending on size and location, fine-ncedle aspiration
dliagnosed by real time ultrasonography in a bichon frise
or biopsy of mass lesions associated with the ovary
bitch. J Small Anim Pract 30:465-467.
or the uterus can be performed under ultrasound
Beck KA, Baldwin CJ,Bosu WTK (1990) Ultrasound predic-
guidance following the same principles and precau-
tion of parturition in the queen. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
tions as in other organ systems. Because of the risk of
31:32-35
leakage into the peritoneal cavity, uterine fluid is
Diez-Bru N, Garcia-Real I, Martinez EM, Rollan E, Mayenco
usually not aspirated. Amniocentesis is not a routine
A,Llorens P (1998) Ultrasonographic appearance of
procedure in the assessment of pregnant dogs or
ovarian tumors in 10 dogs.Vet Radiol Ultrasound
cats.
39:226-233.
416 FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE TRACT
England GCW (1998) Ultrasonographic assessment of abnor-
 of the canine postpartum uterus. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
mal pregnancy.Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
33:35-40.
28:849-868.
Silva LDM, Onclin K, Verstegen JP (1996) Assessment of
England GCW, Allen WE, Porter DJ (1990) Studies on canine
ovarian changes around ovulation in bitches by ultraso-
pregnancy using B-mode ultrasound: Development of the
nography, laparoscopy and hormonal assays. Vet Radiol
conceptus and determination of gestational agc.J Small
Ultrasound 37:313-320.
Anim Pract 31:324 329.
Toal RL, Walker MA,Henry GA (1986) A comparison of
England GCW, Yeager AE, Concannon PW (2003) Ultrasound
real-time ultrasound, palpation and radiography in preg-
imaging of the reproductive tract of the bitch. In:
Concannon PW, England GCW, Verstegen JP, Linde-
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 27:102-108.
Forsberg C, eds. Recent Advances in Small Animal
Voges AK, Neuwirth L (1996) Ultrasound diagnosis:
Reproduction. Ithaca, NY: International Veterinary
Cystic uterine hyperplasia. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 37:
Information Service.
131-132.
Ferrelli LM, Newell SM, Graham JP, Roberts GD (2000)
Yeager AE, Concannon PW (1995) Ultrasonography of the
Radiographic and ultrasonographic evaluation of thc
reproductive tract of the female dog and cat. In: Bonagura
normal feline postpartum uterus. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
JD,ed.Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIl. Philadelphia:
41:287-291.
WB Saunders, Pp. 1040-1052.
Klein MK (1996) Tumors of the female reproductive
Yeager AE, Mohammed HO,Meyers-Wallen V,Vannerson
system.In: Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG,eds.Small Animal
 L, Concannon PW (1992) Ultrasonographic appearance of
Clinical Oncology. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, Pp.
the uterus, placenta, fetus, and fetal membranes through-
347-355.
oul accurately timed pregnancy in beagles. Am J Vet Res
Mattoon JS, Nyland TG (1995) Ovaries and uterus. In: Nyland
53:342-351.
TG, Mattoon JS, eds. Small Animal Diagnostic Ultrasound.
Zambelli D, Caneppele B, Bassi S, Paladini C (2002)
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, Pp. 231-249.
Ultrasound aspects of fetal and extrafetal structures in
 Pharr JW, Post K (1992) Ultrasonography and radiography
 pregnant cats. J Feline Med Surg 4:95-106.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
MALE REPRODUCTIVE TRACT
Silke Hecht
PREPARATION AND
is usually unnecessary. Ultrasound gel is preferred as
a contact medium over alcohol because of the risk of
SCANNING PROCEDURE
scrotal irritation.The testicles are scanned in at least
two plancs (sagittal and transverse) (Figure 14.2).
Ultrasonographic examination of male reproductive
The penis is occasionally examined to identify urc-
 rn nnq sp u paad u si suo
thral abnormalities or to assess integrity of thc os pcnis.
cats.Examination technique,normal findings, and dis-
Dependent on the examiner's preference, a linear
orders of themale reproductive tract described in this
chapter relate to dogs.
or curvilinear high-frequency transducer (7.5MHz or
higher) may be used. The examination is started at the
Indications for examination of the male reproduc
level of the os penis and is continued proximally to the
tive tract include andrologic evaluation of breeding
dogs; identification of retained testicles; difficulties or
level ofthe ischium.Evaluationof thepenile urethra
may be enhanced by instillation of saline by using a
abnormalities in urination or defecation; abdominal,
balloon-type catheter inserted into the distal penile
scrotal, and penile pain or discomfort; caudal abdomi-
nal mass lesions; perineal hernia; clinical signs com-
urethra.
patible with hormonal imbalances (hyperestrogenism);
scrotal or penile trauma; and palpable scrotal
abnormalities
PROSTATE
The prostate is examined transabdominally after
routine clipping and application of contact gel. The
Normal Sonographic Anatomy of
dog is usually positioned in dorsal recumbency. A
the Prostate
rectal examination technique has been described (Zohil
and Castellano 1995), but is not used routinely. A 5.0-
Location, size, and appearance of the prostate vary
MHz transducer may be sufficient to identify gross
with age, previous disease, and status (intact versus
prostatic abnormalities such as paraprostatic cysts or
neutered) (Feeney et al. 1989; Johnston et al. 1991b). In
prostatic abscesses; however, a 7.5- or 10-MHz trans-
intact dogs, the prostate is of medium echogenicity
ducer provides better detail and is recommended for
and homogeneous, with a fine to medium coarse
most indications. The prostate is located in the caudal
echotexture and smooth margins (Mattoon and Nyland
abdomen or cranial pelvic canal. It is identified caudal
2002). On sagittal image, the shape is rounded to ovoid.
to the urinarybladderandventraltothedistal descend-
On transverse image, the two prostatic lobes are sym-
ing colon and rectum. Examination is performed in
metrical. The vertical raphc and prostatic urethra with
transverse and sagittal planes (Figure 14.1). Instillation
surrounding urcthralis muscle are generally visible as
of saline into the urinary bladder may improve the
a hypoechoic area between both lobes (Figures 14.1
acoustic window (Teeney et al. 1989; Johnston et al.
and 14.3). The urethral structures may be associated
 shop pru u adsa 'sop as u (i6
with edge shadowing on transverse planes, which
an empty or intrapelvic bladder, ultrasonographic
should not be misinterpreted as a lesion. In intact
identification of the prostate may be challenging. In
males, age-related changes in ultrasonographic appear-
these cases,a concurrent digital rectal examination can
ance of the prostale include increase in size and echo-
be performed to identify the prostate and direct it
genicity (Figures 14.1 and 14.4). Prostatic cysts are a
toward the ultrasound transducer.
The testicles should be examined with a high-
1998; Mattoon and Nyland 2002). Prostatic size in
frequency transducer (at least 7.5MHz). The author
prefers a linear transducer with broad contact area and
body weight (Ruel et al. 1998; Atalan et al. 1999) (Table
good resolution in the near field over a sector or cur-
14.1). In neutered dogs, the prostate is small, incon-
vilinear transducer.Use of a standoff pad is recom-
spicuous, hypoechoic, and homogeneous. The two
mended by some examiners. Clipping of the scrotum
lobes can usually not be distinguished (Figure 14.5A
417
colon
prostate
CS
ad
bladdel
urethra
symphysis
CC
BS
prostate
B
urethra
Figure 14.1. Normal anatomy of the canine prostate. On the top are illustrations (A, longitudinal; and B, transverse) of the
e ss   pss e go s  asasn pe  s ae don a o ss au ss
the bottom are sagittal (left) and transverse (right) images of an intact male (a 5-year-old intact golden retriever). C, colon.
On the bottom left image, the arrows delineate the prostate. On the top left sonogram,the arrow points to a small cystic cal-
culus in the bladder neck.Imagcs courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou and D.Penninck.
418
Prepuce
Penis
Testicle
Long
Epipidymis
A
Body
Head
Testis
Trans
Epididymis
idymis
Penis
B
Mediastinum
Scrotal Septum
Figure 14.2. Scanning technique and normal sonographic anatomy of the testicle in an adult dog. On the top of the figure,
A:Sagittal image of the right testicle.The testicle is oval, of medium echogenicity, and of fine and homogeneous cchotexture.
The tunica albuginea is smooth, thin, and hyperechoic. The mediastinum testis is seen as a central linear hyperechoic band.
The cpididymis is not visualized. Edge shadowing occurs at the cranial pole of the testicle (arrowhead). B: Transverse image
of the testicles. The testiclcs are round and of medium echogenicity. The mediastinum testis is seen as a central or slightly
eccentric hyperechoic focus in the right and left testicles, respectively. Part of epididymal bodies is visualized dorsal to the
testicles. The ovoid structure dorsal to the testicles represents part of the penis.
419
B
Figure 14.3. Normal prostate in a 1-year-old intact Boston terrier. A: Sagittal image. The prostate appears as an ovoid,
homogeneous structure of medium echogenicity dorsal to the abdominal wall (W) and ventral to thc colon (C). The irregular,
visible in this image. Caudal and ventral to the prostate, the hyperechoic interface of the pubis marks the pelvic inlet. The
 sd   p s  ssse    e s snd   p 
metrical and homogeneous. The central prostatic urethra and urethralis muscle (U) are hypoechoic. The colon is dorsal to the
prostate.C, colon; and W, wall.
UB
UB
B
Figure 14.4. Comparison of the prostate in two small-breed intact dogs with age-related changes of the normal canine
prostate. A: Sagittal image of the prostate in a 3-month-old shih tzu. The prostate (between the cursors) is ovoid, hypoechoic,
old toy poodle. The prostate (between the cursors) is rounded, of medium echogenicity, and 1.8cm high. UB, urinary
bladder.
420
Table 14.1.
Prostaticdimensionsinhealthyintactdogs and correlationto age and bodyweight
Rueletal.1998
Atalan et al.1999
Length (cm)
1.7-6.9
1.8-5.0
Height (on transverse image) (cm)
1.3-4.7
1.4-3.6
Width(cm)
1.8-6.9
1.4-4.3
Volume (cm²)
2.3-80.0
8.1-28.2
Correlation between prostatic length (L [cml), age
L=(0.055×BW)+(0.143×A)+3.31
(A [years]), and body weight (BW [kg])
Correlation between prostatic height (H [cml), age
H=(0.044× BW) +(0.083× A) + 2.25
(A[years]),and body weight (BW[kg])
Correlation between prostatic width(W [cm]), age
W=(0.047×BW)+(0.089×A)+3.45
(A[years]),and body weight(BW[kgl)
Correlation between prostatic volume(V [cm²]),age
V=(0.867xBW)+(1.885×A)+15.88
V=8.48+(0.238×BW)
(A [years]),and body weight (BW[kg])
V= 9.79 +(0.871×A)
Adapted from Ruel et al. (1998) and Atalan et al. (1999).
UB
Colon
Colon
UB
Figure 14.5. Normal prostate in two neutered dogs. A and B: Sagittal (A) and transverse (B) images of a normal prostate
in a 7-year-old, neutered, mixed-breed dog. The prostate (between the cursors and arrowheads) is caudal to the neck of the
urinary bladder (UB) and ventral to the colon. It is small, inconspicuous, and oval in sagital view, rounded in transverse
view, and homogeneously hypoechoic. C and D: Sagillal (C) and transverse (D) images of a normal prostate in an 8-year-old
neutered Pomeranian. The prostate (arrowheads) is small, elongated in sagittal view, rounded in transverse view, and of
medium echogenicity.
421
308cm
2.69cm
Figure 14.6.Prostatic remodeling in an old dog with late neutering.Sagittal (A) and transverse (B) planes of the prostate
of a 10-year-old dog neulered al the age of 8 years. The prostate (between the cursors) is enlarged compared with that in
residual cysts.Some of these changes may be attributed to previous prostatitis.The images appeared similar on follow-up
exams. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
B
Colon
5.44cm
5.13cm
Colon
3.64cm
Figure 14.7. Benign prostatic hyperplasia in two dogs. A and B: Sagittal (A) and transverse (B) images of the prostate in a
9-year-old German shorthair pointer with benign prostatic hyperplasia. The prostate (between the cursors) is enlarged (5.8 x
cal on transvcrsc vicw. C and D: Sagittal (A) and transverse (B) images of the prostate of a 6-year-old Rottweiler in which
similar signs are observed. An edge shadow noted on the transverse plane is caused by the presence of the round, central
urethra. Images C and D courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
422
423ATLASOF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
Figure 14.8.Bcnign prostatic hyperplasia and intrapros-
Figure 14.9. Benign cystic prostatic hyperplasia in a 10-
tatic cysts in a 10-year-old husky. Sagittal image of the pros-
year-old golden retriever. Parasagittal image (arrowheads)
tate showsprostaticenlargement(5.3x4.4cm),inhomogeneity
shows prostatic enlargement (7.2 × 4.2cm) and generalized
of the parenchyma, and multiple anechoic areas consistent
hyperechogenicity of the parenchyma,with numerous inter-
with prostatic cysts.
spersed hypoechoic foci consistent with small cysts.
and B). Incidental parenchymal inhomogeneities may
 and echotexture of the prostatic parenchyma are vari-
Occasionally be observed in the prostate of older cas-
able, ranging from normal to heterogeneous.Although
trated dogs (Figure 14.6).
changes in echogenicity and echotexture tend to be
more severe than those seen in BPH, ultrasonographic
Sonographic Findings in
differentiation of these conditions is often not possible,
and prostatitis in many cases complicates preexisting
ProstaticAbnormalities
BPH (Figure 14.10). In some cases of acute prostatitis,
Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), bacterial pros-
hyperechoic fat or a scant volume effusion may be
tatitis, paraprostatic cysts, and prostatic neoplasia
detected adjacent to the prostate (Figure 14.11).
are the most common prostatic disorders in dogs.
Prostatic abscesses can develop subsequent to prosta-
Prostatic cysts are a common incidental finding or
titis and may appcar similar to prostatic cysts (Figures
14.12 and 14.13). Other ultrasonographic findings in
tatic diseases. Prostatic abscesses may develop as a
prostatic abscessation include development of a thick
complication ofbacterialprostatitis and/orinfected
wall around the abscess cavity, intracavitary accumu-
cysts.
lation of echogenic fluid, gas inclusions in case of infec-
BPH is a spontaneous condition in older dogs
tion with gas-producing bacteria, and septation (Figure
and is a common incidental finding. The prostate is
14.14). Dystrophic mineralization may be encountered
enlarged,of normal to increased echogenicity,and of
in chronic prostatitis (Figure 14.12).
homogeneous or inhomogeneous echotexture (Figure
Fungal prostatitis is rare, causes variable ultrasono-
14.7). On transverse image, the two lobes are usually
 graphic changes, and may mimic prostatic neoplasia
symmetrical, although asymmetrical enlargement may
(Figure 14.15).
occur. Intraprostatic cysts are common and manifest as
Paraprostatic cysts are fluid-filled remnants of the
circular to irregularly shaped anechoic areas of vari-
 millerian duct system that occur predominantly in
able size (Figures 14.8 and 14.9).
older large-breed dogs (Stowater and Lamb 1989).
Acute and chronic infections occur in the canine
Unlike true intraprostatic cysts, paraprostatic cysts are
prostate, usually secondary to ascent of urethral bac-
located in the vicinity of the prostate, but may com-
teria into a gland with BPH (Johnston et al. 2000). The
municate with intraprostatic cavitations. The cyst wall
prostatemaybe ofnormalsizeorenlarged.Echogenicity
is of variable thickness (Figures 14.16 and 14.17).
B
+
Figure 14.10. Benign prostatic hyperplasia and chronic lymphoplasmacytic prostatitis in an 11-year old mixed-breed dog.
Sagittal (A) and transverse (B) images of the prostate (between the cursors), which is enlarged (5.9 x 5.7 x 8.0cm),inhomoge-
neous,with an irregular contour and mixed echogenicity.
B
十
Figure 14.11. Acute prostatitis, benign prostatic hyperplasia, and intraprostatic cysts in an 8-year-old German shepherd.
The diagnosis of prostatitis was based on clinical and ultrasonographic findings. No infectious organisms were seen on aspi-
rates of one of the prostatic cysts. A: Sagittal image of the prostate. The prostate (between thc cursors) is enlarged (6.4 ×
6.0cm), hyperechoic, and has multiple round to oval, hypoechoic to anechoic cavitations of up to 1.8-cm diameter.
B: Transverse image of the left lobe of the prostate (between the cursors) and the paraprostatic tissues. The right lobe of the
prostate is not completely included in the field of view.A small volume of abdominal effusion and strongly hyperechoic fat
is adjacent to the prostate (arrows), suggesting a component of prostatic inflammation with secondary steatitis.
Figure 14.12. Severe, diffuse chronic-active, suppurative
prostatitis with multifocal necrosis, abscessation, and interst
tial hemorrhage in a 9-year-old mixed-breed dog.Sagittal
sonogram of the prostate (between the cursors), which is
enlarged (7.5 x 4.8cm), irregular in contour, and mixed in
echogenicity, with multiple irregularly marginated anechoic
areas consistentwith abscesses.Parenchymalmineralization
is sccn as strongly hyperechoic focus with distal shadowing
(arrowheads).
424
prostate of a 3-year-old Border colle. A well-defined anechoic cavity (between the cursors) is present. The volume of the
lesion is estimated at 3.9mL.B: Sterile prostatic abscess in an 8-year-old boxer.Transverse image shows a lacy hypoechoic
to anechoic septated lesion of more than 6-cm maximum diameter associated with the right lobe (between the cursors).
B
4.42cm
Figure 14.14. Septic prostatitis in a dog. Sagittal (A) and transverse (B) images of the prostate of an intact male dog with
signs of abdominal pain and fevcr. The prostate is markedly enlarged and deformed (arrows) because of nultiple hypoechoic
cavitary lesions, the largest reaching 4.4cm. Ultrasound-guided aspirations of these cavitations revealed the presence of ncu-
trophils with bacteria.C, descending colon. Images courtesy of M.A.d'Anjou.
Figure 14.15. Fungal prostatitis (blastomycosis) in an 8-
year-old cocker spaniel. The transverse image shows an
enlarged,irregularly
marginated,inhomogeneously
hypoechoic prostate (arrowheads) with surrounding hypere-
choic fat. Enlarged medial iliac lymph nodes were also seen
(notshown).
425
3.2cm
Figure 14.16.A: Paraprostatic cyst in a 4-year-old cryptorchid Labrador retriever.The transverse image was acquired at
the level of the midabdomen. The fluid-filled structures were separate from the urinary bladder (not shown).A thick echogenic
septum (S) separates a compartment filled with very echogenic fluid (left) from a compartment with less echogenicfluid
(right).B:Paraprostatic cyst in a middle-aged dog.The cyst (between the cursors)is seen as tubular anechoic structure
without a discernible wall extending cranially from the dorsal aspect of the hyperechoic prostate (arrowheads)
A
B
B
the bladder (BL). B: The prostate (P) is moderately enlarged and contains several smaller parenchymal cysts. The main large
cyst (C) appears to originate from the right lobe.
B
(C) are in the midabdomen and caudal abdomen. A: The cystic wall is thickened (between the cursors). B: Some cysts (C) are
filled with echogenic debris,and mineralized foci (arrows) are noted, as well.
426
0.95cm
3.29cm
2.83cm
.27cm
Figure 14.19.Prostatic adenocarcinoma and transitional cell carcinoma in three dogs.A and B: Sagittal (A) and transverse
(B) images of a prostatic adenocarcinoma in an older, neutered, mixed-breed dog. The prostate (between the cursors) is large
strongly hyperechoic areas with distal shadowing (arrowheads) are consistent with mincralization. C and D: Sagittal (C) and
transverse (D) images of a prostatic adenocarcinoma in an older, neutered, large-breed dog. The prostate is enlarged, irregular,
and relatively hypoechoic, with several small hyperechoic foci. A protuberance (arrow) is also seen projecting into the urinary
bladder (UB) secondary to tumor invasion. Images C and D courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou. E and F: Sagittal (E) and transverse
(F) images of transitional cell carcinoma, probably originating from the prostatic urethra, in a 12-year-old, neutered Labrador
retriever. The prostate (arrowheads) has retained an normal shape, but is large for a neutered dog. Prostatic parenchyma is
hypoechoic.The centrally located,strongly hyperechoic line with distal acoustic shadowing (arrow,S) is consistent with ure-
thral mineralization.
427
428 MALE REPRODUCTIVE TRACT
C
:0.37cm
Figure 14.20. Transitional cell carcinoma and regional lymphadenopathy in an old, neutered dog with hematuria and
dysuria. Sagittal (A) and transverse (B) images of the bladder neck and prostate. Strongly shadowing hyperechoic foci are in
-ody pue () e dpun suau go sase reies (moie at sppq au u s uoalod anss-os e pue tesad a
gastric (D) lymph nodes, which appear enlarged and irregular. The medial iliac node (C) is relatively uniform and nearly
anechoic in comparison with the hypogastric (D) node that is heterogeneous and course in echotexture. These lymph nodes
 are adjacent to the extermal and internal iliac vessels, respectively. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
Paraprostatic cysts contain anechoic to echogenic fluid,
cinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, transitional cell car-
can become very large, may contain internal septa, and
cinoma, lymphoma, and hemangiosarcoma (Winter
may be mineralized (Figure 14.18). Sometimes it is
et al. 2006). Bladder or urcthral transitional cell carci-
difficult to differentiate paraprostatic cysts from the
noma can extend into the prostatic parenchyma. In
urinary bladder. In these cases, catheterization of the
contrast to other prostatic disorders, neutered dogs are
urinary bladder with evacuation of urine or infusion
as commonly affected as intact dogs (Bell et al. 1991).
 of saline is useful in differentiating urinary bladder
Typically, the prostate is enlarged and irregular, with
from paraprostatic cysts.
a hypoechoic to heterogeneous echotexture (Figures
Ultrasonographic findings in prostatic neoplasia are
14.19 and 14.20). On transverse view, the prostatic
variable. Adenocarcinoma is the most common tumor
lobes are usually asymmetrical (Figures 14.19 and
type. Other tumor types include undifferentiated car-
14.21). Mineralization of the prostatic parenchyma is
429ATLASOF SMALL ANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
B
the cursors) is enlarged with echogenic margins and a central hypocchoic to anechoic area. B: Transverse image. There is
hypoechoic to anechoic cavitary areas.
Figure 14.22. Metastatic lymphadenopathy secondary to prostatic adenocarcinoma in an oldcr, ncutercd, mixed-breed dog
and irregular in shape and margination.Multiple hypoechoic to anechoic areas indicate cavitation, and multifocal strongly
hyperechoic foci with acoustic shadowing are compatible with mineralization. The aorta (Ao) is visualized as an anechoic
circular structure in the near field
often seen, and metastases to mcdial iliac or hypogas-
vertebrae may be seen, consistent with bone metasta-
tric lymph nodes arc common (Figures 14.20 and
ses. Other occasional findings in prostatic neoplasia
14.22). The surrounding fat may also become hypere-
 are urethral obstruction, bladder wall thickening, or
choic, and irregular bony proliferation of the ventral
ureteral obstruction with hydroureler and hydrone-
margin of the vertebral bodies of the caudal lumbar
phrosis if the mass is invading the trigone.
430MALE REPRODUCTIVE TRACT
TESTICLES
parison with testicular parenchyma, epididymal parts
are hypoechoic and of coarse echotexture (Figure
Normal SonographicAnatomy of
14.24A-C). Examination of the entire epididymis in
the Testicles
One plane is usually not possible because of its location
and course, and requires repositioning of the ultra-
Normal testicles are of medium echogenicity and have
sound probe and examination in at least two planes.
a fine, homogeneous echotexture (Pugh et al. 1990).
The spermatic cord can be followcd from the head of
The testicular borderis characterized by a thin,smooth
the cpididymis to the inguinal ring and is character-
and hyperechoic tunica albuginea. On sagittal image,
izcd by the large tortuous anechoic venous structures
a central hyperechoic line is visible that represents the
of the pampiniform plexus. This plexus presents a
mediastinum testis (Figure 14.2A). On transverse view,
prominent and complex flow pattern on color Doppler
the mediastinum testis appears as a centrally located
or power Doppler (Figure 14.24D).
hyperechoic focus (Figure 14.2B). In very young dogs,
the testicles are small but homogeneous, and the medi-
 astinum can be identified (Figure 14.23). In older dogs,
Sonographic Findings in
small hyperechoic foci representing testicular septa are
TesticularAbnormalities
occasionally visible.Testicular sizeis directly related
to body weight (Hecht 2001; Hecht et al.2003)(Table
Testicular disorders include cryptorchidism, testicular
14.2).
neoplasia, inflammatory disorders (orchitis and cpi-
The head and tail of the epididymis are located at
didymitis), testicular or epididymal cysts, torsion,
the cranial and caudal poles of the testicle,respectively,
infarction, atrophy, and trauma. Other disease pro-
and the body is found dorsal to the testicle. In com-
cesses affecting the scrotum include accumulation of
of the left testis. The mediastinum testis is seen. The epididymis is on the left of the image. Images courtesy of D. Penninck.
Table 14.2.
Testicular dimensions inhealthyintactdogsand correlationtobodyweight
Body Weight (kg)
Length (cm)
Width (cm)
Height (cm)
Mediastinal Width(cm)
1-10
1.5-3.3
1.0-2.2
0.8-1.6
0.1-0.2
11-20
2.0-3.9
1.4-3.2
1.3-2.2
0.1-0.2
21-30
3.0-4.0
1.5-3.6
1.5-2.4
0.1-0.3
31-40
2.6 to >4.0a
1.7-3.7
1.6-3.2
0.1-0.3
>40
3.4 to >4.0a
2.6-3.8
1.6-3.0
0.1-0.3
*The transducer field of view was limited to 4cm, and accurate measurements were not possible beyond that point.
Adapted from Hecht (2001).
431ATLAS OF SMALLANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
Figure 14.24. Normal epididymis and pampiniform plexus in a 9-year-old mixed-breed dog. A: Sagittal image of the epi-
didymal tail (arrowheads). It is caudal to the testicle (T), hypoechoic, and of coarse echotexture. B: Parasagittal image of the
testicle demonstrating the tubular body of the epididymis (arrowheads) dorsolateral to the testicle (T). C: Sagittal image of
the epididymal head and adjacent part of the spermatic cord (arrowheads), which appear hypoechoic and coarse in compari-
son with the cranial pole of the testicle (T). D: Sagittal color Doppler image of part of the spermatic cord. Tortuous vessels of
the pampiniform plexus show the color flow signal.
fluid (hydrocele or hematocele) and scrotal hernia. The
high (Hecht 2001), but is likely facilitated by the use of
accuracy in diagnosis of testicular and/or scrotal dis-
high-resolution ultrasound systems.
 orders in dogs is high (Hecht 2001; Hecht et al. 2003).
Occasionally, the gubernaculum testis is visualized.
Cryptorchid  testicles  are  usually  small  and
It appears as tubular structure extending from the
hypoechoic, but have normal architecture with a
caudal pole of the retained testicle to the inguinal ring
 central hyperechoic mediastinum (Figures 14.25 and
(Figure 14.28). Abdominally and inguinally located
14.26). They can be found anywhere between the
testicles are predisposed to neoplastic transformation
caudal pole of the kidneys to the inguinal area. If the
and can reach considerable size in this instance.
mediastinum testis is not developed, identification of
Testicular tumors are common. Leydig and intersti-
an undescended testicle may be difficult (Figure 14.27).
tial cell tumors are frequent incidental findings in
Sensitivity of ultrasonography in the identification of
descended testicles in older dogs and may occur bilat-
inguinal or abdominal cryptorchid testicles in dogs is
erally. They are usually benign. Seminomas and Sertoli
432MALE REPRODUCTIVE TRACT
Figure 14.25.Abdominal cryptorchidism in a 1-year-old
Figure 14.27.Abdominal cryptorchidism in a 7-month-old
golder retriever. The left testicle (between the cursors) is
Boston terricr. The testicle (betwccn the cursors) is adjacent
to the descending colon (C). It is inconspicuous,homoge-
intra-abdominal, small (3.1cm long), hypoechoic, and of
normal architecture.
neous, and 1.0 x 0.4cm. The mediastinum testis is not
visible.
Figure 14.26.
.Abdominal cryptorchidism in a 10-year-old
golden retriever. The left testicle (between the cursors) is
intra-abdominal, small (2.6cm long), and of norimal architec-
ture. Linear hypoechoic areas emanating from the cranial
Figure 14.28. Prominent gubernaculum testis in a cryptor
and caudal poles are consistent with edge-shadowing arti-
chid 5-month old mastiff. The gubernaculum (arrowheads)
facts (arrowheads).
appears as tubular structure of 3-mm diameter and was seen
extending from the caudal pole of the intra-abdominal right
testicle to the inguinal ring.
cell tumors can affect cryptorchid and descended tes-
ticles. These tumors have the potential for hormone
production and metastases. Other tumor types are
Concurrent prostatic changes such as benign prostatic
extremely rare.Testicular tumors in cryptorchid testi-
hyperplasia or squamous metaplasia are common,
cles tend to exhibit more malignant behavior than in
especially in hormone-producing tumors. In case of
descended testicles and occur in younger animals.
metastatic neoplasia, enlarged medial iliac lymph
Utrasonographic findings in testicular tumors range
nodes may be seen.
from circumscribed small nodules to large complex
Orchitis and epididymitis may occur subsequent
masses with disruption of normal testicular anatomy
to hematogenous spread of infectious organisms, may
(Johnston et al. 1991a) (Figures 14.29-14.32). Different
result from urinary tract or prostatic inflammation,
tumor types cannot be distinguished ultrasonographi-
or may be caused by scrotal trauma. Inflammatory
cally (Pugh and Konde 1991; Hecht et al. 2003).
scrotal disorders exhibit variable ultrasonographic
Figure 14.29.Leydig cell tumor in four dogs.A: Sagittal image of the left testicle in a 15-year-old Labrador retriever.A
hypocchoic nodule of 5-mm diameter (between the cursors) is associated with the testicular parenchyma adjacent to the linear
hyperechoic mediastinum testis. B: Transverse image of thc right tcsticle in a 6-year-old boxer. A 2.4 x 2.0-cm nodule (between
the cursors) is slightly hyperechoic to surrounding normal testicular parenchyma and has two small anechoic foci. C: Sagittal
image of the left testicle in a 10-year-old golden retriever. The testicular parenchyma has been largely replaced by an approxi-
mately 3-cm, mixed echogenic and cavitary mass. D: Sagittal image of the left testicle in a 13-year-old sheltie. The testicular
parenchyma is of mixed echogenicity, the testicle has an irregular margin, and the mediastinum testis is not visible.
B
-2.57cm
1.29cm
Figure 14.30. Seminoma in two dogs. A: Sagittal image of the left testicle in a 8-year-old large-breed dog. An irregular, but
well-defined, hypoechoic nodulc mcasuring 2.6 × 1.3cm is in the testicle (between the cursors). B: Sagital image of the left
testicle in a 10-year-old Labrador retriever with an enlarged, endured scrotum. The testicular parenchyma is completely
replaced by an inhomogeneous mass with several iregular cavitations containing anechoic to echogenic fluid. Images courtesy
Of M.A. d'Anjou.
Bladder
Figure 14.31. Sertoli cell tumor in four dogs. A: Sagittal image of the right abdominal cryptorchid testicle (between the
cursors) in1 a 10-year-old golden retriever. The testicle is small(2.8x 1.2cm). A hypoechoic nodule of 1.0-cm diameter (arrow-
heads) is associated with the cranial pole of the testicle. B: Transverse image of the right inguinal cryptorchid testicle in an 8-
ycar-old mixcd-brecd dog. A 1.9 x 1.8-cm hypoechoic nodule (between the cursors) is associated with the testicle. C: Sertoli
cell tumor of a retained right testicle in an 8-year-old boxer. An echogenic mass of approximatcly 2.5-cm-diamctcr dorsal to
the bladder is associated with strong edge shadows. D: Sagittal image of the left testicle in a 12-year-old West Highland white
terrier.The testicle is within the scrotum and of normal size and shape. The testicular parenchyma is of mixed echogenicity,
and the mediastinum testis is not visible.
Figure14.32.Mixedtesticular tumorsina 13-year-old
sheltie. Mixed tumor (seminoma and Sertoli cell tumor) in an
abdominal cryptorchid testicle. The enlarged (4.5 cm), mixed
echogenic testicle (between the cursors) has multiple anechoic
areas.
434
435ATLAS OF SMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
characteristics, ranging from diffuse echogenicity
graphic examination shows an abdominal  mass
changes of testicle and/or epididymis to complex
of variable size and echogenicity, with decreased or
masses and anechoic areas subsequent to abscess for-
absent blood flow on color Doppler examination
mation (Pugh and Konde 1991; Hecht et al. 2003; Ober
(Miyabashi et al. 1990; Hecht 2001) (Figure 14.39))
et al.2004) (Figures 14.33-14.36).Fluid may accumu-
Intra-abdominal and intrascrotal torsion of nonneo-
late within the scrotum or the scrotum may thicken.
plastic testicles and vascular compromise of other
Whereas testicular and epididymal size increase in
etiology of the testicle (infarction or space-occupying
acute inflammation, they decrease in chronic cases.
lesions within the inguinal ring) are rare (Hecht et al.
Testicular or epididymalcysts are occasional
2004) (Figures 14.40 and 14.41). Dependent on the
incidental findings. They appear as anechoic, well-
degree and duration of vascular occlusion, the affected
circumscribed, rounded areas, often with distal
testicle
may appear hyperechoic or hypoechoic,
acoustic enhancement (Figures 14.37 and 14.38).
increased, or normal or decreased in size, with initially
Testicular torsion most commonly affects retained
normal architecture. Concurrent abdominal or scrotal
neoplastic testicles. In this instance, the ultrasono-
cffusion is common, cspecially in acute cases.
Figure 14.33. Severe, subacute, necrotizing and suppurative orchitis and epididymitis of undetermined etiology in a 3-year-
neous, with disruption of normal architecture. On color Doppler examination, blood flow was reduced compared with the
normal right testicle (not shown).
A
Figure14.35.Epididymitisin a 9-year-old Labrador
Figure 14.34.Fungal orchitis and epididymitis (blastomy-
retriever. In the parasagittal image of the left testicle, the
cosis) in a 3-year-old Walker hound. Sagittal images of the
epididymis (arrowheads) is larger than usual and of mixed
right testicle (A) and head of the cpididymis (B) show
cchogenicity. Several anechoic areas are in the tail of the
testicular and epididymal (arrowheads) enlargement and
epididymis (arrows). The testicle (T) is within normal limits
inhomogeneity.
for size and echotexture.
Figure 14.37.Cyst associated with the cranial pole of the
right testicle in a 7-year-old Yorkshire terrier.A round
anechoic structure of 5-mm diameter(between the cursors)
Figure 14.36.Testicular abscess in a 7-year-old shar-pei. In
is associated with the testicular parenchyma.
thc sagittal imagc of thc right testicle is an approximately 2-
cm, inhomogeneous hypoechoic to anechoic mass. Normal
testicular parenchyma is not visible.
Figure 14.38.Epididymal cyst and mild hydrocele in a 7-
ycar-old mixcd-breed dog.An anechoic structure of approxi-
mately 3-mm diameter isassociated with the head of the
epididymis (arrowhead), just cranial to the testicle (T). The
triangular anechoic area cranial to the head of the epididymis
is consistent with a small volume of intrascrotal fluid
(arrow).
B
Figure 14.39.Intra-abdominal torsion of a retained neoplastic testicle (Sertoli cell tumor) in a 9-year-old German shepherd.
 A: The lateral abdominal radiograph shows a lobulated soft-tissue mass of more than 20 cm in diameter associated with the
cranial ventral abdomen (arrows).Enlarged sublumbar lymph nodes (arrowheads) are consistent with metastatic disease.
Prominent mammillae are noted, consistent with feminization caused by hormone-producing tumor. B: The ulrasonographic
image shows a mixed echogenic mass (only shown in part).
436
437ATLAS OFSMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
B
Figure 14.40.  Testicular torsion in a 1-year-old Border collie. The left testis (L) is normal, whereas the right testicle (R) has
hemorrhage and numerous thrombi, compatible with torsion and underlying orchitis and epididymitis. A: The left and right
testicles are imaged side by side. There is a significant difference in size. The right testicle and epididymis are larger than the
left. B: Comparative color Dopplcr signal between the left (normal) and the right testis (no flow). C: Comparative color
 Doppler signal between the lef (normal) and the right epididymis (poor flow).
 Testicular atrophy may have a number of causes,
 Whereas ultrasonography plays a major role in
 such as thermal insult (e.g., in cryptorchid testicles),
 assessing human patients with scrotal trauma, it is
 previous orchitis, hormonal influences, or vascular
 rarely performed for this indication in dogs. Findings
compromise.  Atrophic  testicles  are   small  and
 in scrotal trauma include scrotal hematoma, hemato-
hypoechoic, but maintain their normal architecture
 cele, scrotal contusion, intratesticular hematoma, and
(Figures 14.42 and 14.43; see also Figures 14.26 and
testicular rupture. Scrotal hematomas with accumula-
14.27).
tion of blood within scrotal soft tissues manifest as
438MALEREPRODUCTIVETRACT
1
* 2.26cm 
Figure 14.41.Torsion of a nonneoplastic testicle in a 6-month-old, bilaterally cryptorchid boxer. A: Sagittal ultrasonographic
image of the right intra-abdominal atrophic testicle (between the cursors). The mediastinum testis (arrow) is within the
hypoechoic testicle. B: Sagittal ultrasonographic image of the left intra-abdominal testicle. The testicle appears globoid rather
than oval and hyperechoic compared with the right. The mediastinum testis (solid arrow) is barely recognizable. Two addi-
tional round structures are seen adjacent to the testicle and are relatively hypoechoic. They represent the enlarged head and
tail (broken arrow) of the epididymis.Reprinted with permission from Hecht et al.(2004).
testicle (A) and the left testicle (B) are small (3cm long [between the cursors]) and hypoechoic.
space-occupyinglesions of variable echogenicity that
Hydrocele manifests as anechoic to echogenic mate-
displace the testicle and epididymis (Figure 14.44). In
rial adjacent to the testicles.The condition is rare in
hematocele,there is intrascrotal fluid accumulation of
 dogs. It may be an occasional incidental finding, but is
variable echogenicity. Testicular contusion and hema-
more commonly found secondary to a variety of scrotal
toma appear as diffuse echogenic changes of testicular
 disorders (e.g., orchitis and testicular torsion). It may
parenchyma or mass lesions of variable echogenicity.
also occur secondary to ascites when abdominal fluid
Differentiation from testicularlesions of inflammatory
descends through the inguinal ring (Figure 14.45).
or neoplastic etiology is mainly bascd on medical
In inguinal or scrotal hernia, abnormal contents
history rather than ultrasonographic characteristics.
(e.g., bowel loops or mesenteric fat) may be found
Inhomogeneous echotcxture of the testicular paren-
within the inguinal ring or scrotum. Concurrent find-
chyma with loss of contour definitionindicatestesticu-
ings include hydrocele and testicular congestion or
lar rupture.
infarction.
Figure 14.43.Testicular atrophy of unknown etiology in a 12-year-old Doberman.A: Sagittal image of normal right testicle
The testicle measures 3.8cm long (between the cursors), is of normal medium echogenicity, homogeneous, with centrally
located linear hyperechoic mediastinum testis. B: Sagittal image of atrophic left testicle. The testicle is smaller than the right
(2.7cm long [between the cursors]), hypoechoic, and slightly inhomogeneous. Centrally located mediastinum testis is
unremarkable
Figure 14.44.Blunt scrotal trauma in a 5-month-old dog. A-C: The scrotum is enlarged and filled with material of mixed
echogenicity, representing a hematoma at varying stagcs of organization. D: Thc left testicle (arrowheads) is displaced and
surrounded by material of mixed echogenicity.
439
440MALE REPRODUCTIVE TRACT
Fluid
PENIS
Normal SonographicAnatomy
of the Penis
At the level of the distal penis,the smooth, hyperechoic
interface of the os penis is surrounded by penile soft
tissues (glans penis) and prepuce. The urethra is
located within a V-shaped ventral groove in the os
penis and is usually not visible unless distended
(Figure 14.46). Proximal to the osseous part, penile soft
tissues(corpus cavernosum, corpus spongiosum,and
 muscles of the penis) are of medium echogenicity and
inconspicuous.
Figure 14.45.Transverse image of the right hemiscrotum
in a 9-year-old dog with ascites and subsequent hydrocele.
The testicle (T) is surrounded by anechoic fluid.Acoustic
shadowing (arrowheads) is observed distal to the centrally
located mediastinum testis.
Prepuce
S
Figure 14.46. Normal canine penis. Sagittal (A) and transverse (B) sonographic and schematic images of the penis in a 6-
and the abdominal wall (arrowheads) are visible. On transverse view (B), the hyperechoic os penis (op) is characterized by
distal shadowing (S). Differentiation of surrounding penile soft tissues is not possible on this image. The urethra is not visible.
Shadowing (S) is noted distal to the os penis. Surrounding penile soft tissues are symmetrical.
D
Urethra
OsPenis
Figure 14.47.Healed fracture of the os penis and mural urethral lesion (urethritis) in a 6-year-old mastiff with dysuria.
A:The lateral radiograph shows irregularity of penile contour at the midbody of os penis (arrowheads), consistent with previ-
ous fracture. B: Urethrogram demonstrating a flling defect associated with the prostatic urethra at the most caudal level of
thc os penis (arrow). C: Sagittal ultrasonographic image of the midbody of the os penis. There is an irregular contour to the
hyperechoic interface of the os penis at the previous fracture site (arrowheads). D: Transverse image of the penis during
instillation of saline to facilitate urethralidentification.The os penis is characterized by its irregular hyperechoic surface and
distal shadowing. The fluid-distended urethra is visible as an anechoic circular structure (arrowheads) lateral to the os penis.
The unusual urethral position was atributed to previous trauma. The anechoic area in the near field represents part of the
standoff pad. E: Sagittal image of the urethra, which appears as an inconspicuous tubular structure (arrowheads). The anechoic
area in the near field represents part of the standoff pad. F: Sagittal image of the urethra during instillation of saline. The
urethra (arrowheads) is fluid filled. The filling defect identified during the urethrogram manifests as urethral wall thickening
and irregularity (arrow). The hypoechoic arca to thc right of thc A is artifactual bccause of poor transducer-to-skin contact.
The anechoic area in the near field represents part of the standoff pad.
441
442 MALE REPRODUCTIVE TRACT
B
Figure 14.48. Drainage of prostatic abscess in a 3-ycar-old Border collie. A: Transverse sonogram of the prostate with right
lobe abscess. The arrow points to the urethral catheter placed to better identify and avoid the urethra during the procedure.
B: Transverse sonogram of the prostate after drainage. The abscess cavity is nearly collapsed.
SonographicFindingsin
However, recurrent filling usually warrants surgery at
Penile Abnormalities
a later stage.
Fine-needle aspiration or biopsy of intra-abdominal
 Common abnormalities of the penis warranting ultra-
testicular tumors is commonly performed, following
sonographic examination include urethral calculi, frac-
 the same principles and precautions as in biopsies of
ture or neoplasia of the os penis, or urethral lesions
other abdominal organs. Fine-needle aspiration of
such as tumor or stricture.Lesions of the os penis
intrascrotal testicles is infrequently performed in vet-
cause discontinuity of its osseous contour (Figure
 erinary medicine. However, the procedure has a high
14.47). Concurrent soft-tissue changes may be encoun-
 accuracy in the diagnosis of testicular neoplasms, with
tered, especially in acute trauma. Urethrography
a low risk of adverse effects (Dorsch et al. 2006).
remains the imaging modality of choice for assessing
urethral patency and integrity.
REFERENCES
INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES
Atalan G, Holt PE, Barr FJ (1999) Ultrasonographic estinma-
Percutaneous fine-needle aspiration or biopsy of the
tion of prostate size in normal dogs and relationship to
prostate is easily performed. The same principles and
bodyweight and age. J Small Anim Pract 40:119-122.
precautions used in other interventional procedures
Boland LE, Hardie RJ, Grcgory SP, Lamb CR (2003)
apply. To avoid urethral injury during the procedure,
Ultrasound-guided percutaneous drainage as the primary
a urinary catheter should be placed to facilitate iden-
treatment for prostatic abscesses and cysts in dogs. J Am
tification of the prostatic urethra. In cases of suspected
Anim Hosp Assoc 39:151-159.
prostatic neoplasia, sampling by mcans of traumatic
Dorsch R, Majzoub M, Hecht S, Hartmann K, Hirschberger
catheterization or prostatic massage should be given
 J (2006) Diagnostische Wertigkeit der Hodenzytologie
preference because of the risk of implantation of mctas-
beim Hund.Tieraerztl Prax34:91-98.
Feeney DA,Johnston GR,Klausner JS,Bell FJ (1989) Caninc
tases along the needle tract after percutaneous aspira-
prostatic ultrasonography: 1989. Semin Vet Med Surg
tion (Nyland et al. 2002).
(Small Anim) 4:44-57.
 Percutaneous drainage of prostalic abscesses and in
HechtS(2001)Sonographische Diagnostik des Skrotalinhaltes
situ injection of antibiotics is a valid alternative method
beim Hund unter besonderer Beruecksichtigung testiku-
to surgical intervention, especially in inmunocompro-
laerer Neoplasien [PhD thesis]. Munich: Chirurgische
mised patients (Boland et al. 2003) (Figure 14.48).
Tierklinik,Ludwig-Maximilians University.
Percutaneous drainage of paraprostatic cysts can be
Hecht S, King R, Tidwell AS, Gorman SC (2004) Ultrasound
performed to temporarily relieve patient discomfort.
diagnosis:Intra-abdominal torsion of a non-neoplastic
443ATLASOF SMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
testicle in a cryptorchid dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
biopsy of transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder,
45:58-61.
urethra,and prostate.Vet Radiol Ultrasound 43:50-53.
Hecht S, Matiasek K, Koestlin R (2003) Die sonographische
Ober CP, Spaulding K, Brcitschwerdt EB, Malarkey DE,
Untersuchung des Skrotalinhaltes beim Hund unter
Hegarty BC (2004) Orchitis in two dogs with Rocky
besonderer Beruecksichtigung testikulaerer Neoplasien.
Mountain spotted fever. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 45:458-
Tieraerztl Prax 31:199-210.
465.
Johnston GR,Feeney DA, Johnston SD,O'Brien TD (199la)
Pugh CR, Konde LJ (1991) Sonographic evaluation of canine
Ultrasonographic features of testicular neoplasia in dogs:
testicular and scrotal abnormalities: A review of 26 case
16 cases (1980-1988). J Am Vet Med Assoc 198:1779-
histories.Vet Radiol Ultrasound 32:243-250.
1784.
Pugh CR,Konde LJ, Park RD (1990) Testicular ultrasound in
Johnston GR, Feeney DA, Rivers B, Walter PA (1991b)
the normal dog.Vet Radiol Ultrasound 31:195-199.
 Diagnostic imaging of the male canine reproductivc
RuelY,BarthezPY,MaillesA,BegonD(1998)Ultrasonographic
Organs: Mcthods and limitations. Vet Clin North Am Small
evaluation of the prostate in healthy intact dogs. Vet
Anim Pract 21:553-589.
Radiol Ultrasound 39:212-216.
Johnston SD, Kamolpatana K, Root-Kustritz MV, Johnston
Stowater JL,Lamb CR (1989) Ultrasonographic features of
GR (2000) Prostatic disorders in the dog. Anim Reprod Sci
 paraprostatic cysts in nine dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
60-61:405-415.
30:232-239.
Mattoon JS, Nyland TG (2002) Prostate and testes. In: Nyland
Winter MD,Locke JE,Penuinck DG(2006) Imaging diagno-
TG, Mattoon JS, eds. Small Animal Diagnostic Ultrasound.
sis: Urinary obstruction secondary to prostatic lymphoma
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, Pp. 250-266.
in a young dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47:597-601.
Miyabashi T, Billcr DS, Cooley AJ (1990) Ultrasonographic
Zohil AM, Castellano C (1995) Prepubic and transrectal
appearance of torsion of a testicular seminoma in a crypt-
ultrasonography of the canine prostate: A comparative
orchid dog. J Small Anim Pract 31:401-403.
study.VetRadiolUltras0und36:393-396.
Nyland TG, Wallack ST,Wisner ER (2002) Needle-tract
implantation following US-guided fine-needle aspiration
CHAPTERFIFTEEN
ABDOMINAL CAVITY, LYMPH
NODES, AND GREAT VESSELS
Marc-André d'Anjou
PREPARATION AND
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC
SCANNING TECHNIQUE
ANATOMY OF THE NORMAL
PERITONEAL CAVITY, FAT,
To have access to all portions of the abdominal cavity
of dogs and cats,hair must be clipped ventrally
VESSELS, AND LYMPH NODES
and laterallybetween the costal arch and caudal
margin of the abdomen. Clipping may be extended
The peritoneum is composed of a thin serous mem-
more cranially in deep-chested dogs to better visualize
brane that is divided into parietal and visceral compo-
the subcostal region.After the application of acoustic
nents. The peritoneal cavity is a potential space located
gel, the animal can be scanned in dorsal, left, or right
between these two layers that contains only a small
recumbency.Some disorders of the peritoneal space,
volume of fluid that serves as a lubricant.However,
such as effusion or free air, respond to gravity
this amount of fluid is usually not detectable with
and may require repositioning the animal toreach a
ultrasound. The peritoneum appears as a smooth
diagnosis.
hyperechoic interface that is better appreciated when
Ultrasonographic probes must be selected according
a moderate volume of ascites is present.A variable
to the size of the animal and the depth of the eval-
 amount of fat is present, mainly in thc falciform liga-
uated region(s). A high-frequency probe (7.5MHz
ment, omentum,mesentery，and retropcritoncum
and higher) is recommended in cats and in small dogs
The fat appears coarse in echotexture and relatively
or if superficial structures are examined,whereas
isoechoic to the liver.The mesentery contains vessels
probes with more penetration (5.0-7.5 MHz and lower)
and lymph nodes that can be visualized in most
are generally indicated in larger dogs. Disorders affect-
patients.
ing the attenuation of the ultrasound beam may also
A thorough knowledge of vascular anatomy and
influence the probe selection. For example, peritoneal
hemodynamics is necessary to facilitate the identifica-
transudation is associated with reduced sound attenu-
tion and assessment of abdominal vessels (Evans
ation, as opposed to inflammatory or neoplastic pro-
1993a, 1993b; Spaulding 1997; Finnn-Bodner and
cesses involving the omentum that typically produce
Hudson 1998; Szatmari et al. 2001).
increased ultrasound attenuation. In these instances,
A schematic illustration of the principal vessels in
probes with a higher or lower frequency, respectively,
the abdomen, as well as major lymph nodes, of dogs
may improve image quality. Sectorial or convex probes
and cats is presented in Figure 15.1. Although the arte-
are preferred because they can reach all portions of the
rial flow of all structures is supplied by the abdominal
abdomen, including the subcostal region, as opposed
aorta, the venous flow is separated between the portal
to linear probes, which have a larger footprint. Doppler
system and the systemic circulation(seethe Extrahepatic
evaluation of abdominal vascular structures requires
Portal Vasculature section in Chapter 6). In compari-
the use of dedicated probes and software.
son with the portal system, a limited number of
445
446 ABDOMINALCAVITY,LYMPH NODES,AND GREATVESSELS
RK
PV
Stomach
SV
Pancreas
Spleen
LK
8
VC
AO
SM
Cecun
Jejunu
12
Figure 15.1.Schematic illustration of abdominal lymph nodes and major vessels.Note the intimate anatomical relationship
colic; 8, aortic; 9 and 9, renal; 10 and 10', medial iliac; 11, hypogastric; and 12, sacral. Vessels: AO, aorta; CMV, cranial mes-
enteric vein; CVC, caudal vena cava; DCI, deep circumflex iliac vessels; EI, external iliac vessels; PV, portal vein; and SV,
splenic vein. Other landmarks: LK, left kidney; and RK, right kidney.
abdominal veins drain into the caudal vena cava
 inal lymph nodes in dogs and cats (Bezuidenhout 1993;
(CVC). The CVC crosscs the abdomen from caudal to
Pugh 1994).
cranial, remaining on the right of the midline. Visible
In dogs, several lymph nodes can be routinely iden-
vcins with B-mode ultrasonography include, from
tified (Spaulding 1997; Llabres-Diaz 2004). Some can
cranial to caudal, hepatic veins, phrenicoabdominal
also be detected in cats. These lymph nodes are uni-
veins, renal veins, and iliac veins (deep circumflex,
formly echogenic, relatively isoechoic or slightly
common,external, and internal).The aorta is more
hypoechoic to the adjacent fatty tissues, smooth, and
dorsal than the CVC in the cranial abdomen and
fusiform to oval (Pugh 1994; Llabres-Diaz 2004) (Figure
remains on the left side.Major abdominal branches of
15.2). A thin hyperechoic capsule is often identified,
the aorta that can be localized ultrasonographically
and occasionally a normal hyperechoic central line can
include, from cranial to caudal: celiac artery (left
be seen crossing these nodes in the region of the nodal
gastric, hepatic, and splenic arteries), cranial mesen-
hilus. Although anatomical size references have been
teric and renal arteries. These vessels are useful land-
reported in dogs for normal lymph nodes (maximal 5-
marks for identifying abdominal lymph nodes. Lymph
mm thickness) (Bezuidenhout 1993), reference ranges
nodes are routinely evaluated in small animal patients,
that can be reliably used with ultrasonography have
because the nodes drain several organs and structures.
not been reported for all sizes of dogs and cats. In the
Table 15.1 lists the location and drainage of the abdom-
author's experience, lymph nodcs can reach 7-8mm
Table 15.1.
Location and drainage of abdominal lymph nodes
Lymph Node
Location
Drainage Areas
Hepatic
Along the portal vein,caudal to the porta hepatis
Liver, stomach,duodenum,and
pancreas
Splenic
Alongthesplenicveinsandtheleftpancreaticlobe
Liver, spleen, esophagus, stomach,
pancreas, and omentum
Gastric
Near the pylorus
Diaphragm, liver, esophagus, stomach,
duodenum,pancreas,and
peritoneum
Pancreaticoduodenal
Near the cranial duodenal flexure,between the
Duodenum,pancreas,and omentum
pylorus and the right pancreatic limb
Jejunal
Along the mesentericvascular trce(cranial
Jejunum,ileum,and pancreas
mesenteric artery and vein)
Colic
Near the ileocolicjunction and mesocolon
lleum,cecum,and colon
Lumbar aortic
Along aorta
Kidneys,adrenals,bladder,utrus,
prostate,and gonads
Medial iliac, hypogastric,
At thecaudal aortic trifurcation,between the deep
Ureters, bladder, uterus, prostate,
and sacral
circumflex and the external iliac arteries(medial),
gonads, peripelvic and pubic areas,
medial to the internal iliac arteries (hypogastric)
abdominal skin,and muscles
and along the median sacral artery (sacral)
A
Cranial
B
at
0.63cm
2.00cm
Righ
Righ
Bladder
Bladder
EIA
EIV
Spine
0.27cm
0.31cm
0.32cm
Figure 15.2. Normal lymph nodes. A and B: Longitudinal ultrasonographic imagcs of normal mesenteric (A, arrows) and
medial iliac (B, cursors) lymph nodes in two dogs. The nodes are fusiform, well defined, uniform, and mildly hypoechoic
compared with the peripheral fat.The short-to-long axis ratio is less than 0.5. Ao, aorta.C and D: Transverse images of normal
medial iliac (C, arrows) and hypogastric (D, arrows) lymph nodes in another dog. Note the proximity of these nodes to the
urinary bladder and to the caudal vena cava (CVC) and aorta (Ao), as well as their branches (EIA and EIV: left external iliac
arlery and vein). The spine is located just dorsal to the hypogastric nodes and appears as a strongly shadowing interface.
447
448ABDOMINALCAVITY,LYMPHNODES,AND GREATVESSELS
thick in large normal dogs. The shape of these nodes
recent ultrasound systems. Peritoneal fluid distribu-
may actually represent a more useful landmark.A
tion depends on its nature and on gravity. Free fluid
ratio comparing the short and long axes should be less
moves with gravity, between abdominal organs, and
than 0.5 in normal nodes (Llabrés-Diaz 2004; Nyman
locates itself according to the position of the animal.
et al. 2004).
Free fluid is more likely to be detected when scanning
Lymph nodes routinely identified include the jejunal
the dependent portion of a dog that is in lateral recum-
(or mesenteric) and medial iliac lymph nodes. Jejunal
bency (Boysen et al. 2004). Small volumes of free fluid
nodes appear as a group of fusiform nodes aligned
can be identified at theleft lateral margin of the spleen
with the cranial mesenteric artery and vein and
between hepatic lobes or intestinal loops, or cranial to
their branches within the omentum.Some of these
the apex of the bladder (Spaulding 1993), often as tri-
nodes can be relatively long. The iliosacral lym-
angular foci that are anechoic or hypoechoic to the
phocenter is the groupformedby the sublumbar
surrounding tissues (Figure 15.3).However,trapped
lymph nodes, which are located along thc caudal
or loculated fluids can remain in thc nondcpcndent
aortic trifurcation. The mcdial iliac lymph nodcs,
portion of the abdomen.Trapped fluids are more com-
which are typically larger than the other nodes,
monly associated with chronic exudates.Caremust be
maybemore easily identified from a lateral flank
taken not to confuse free or trapped peritoneal fluid
approach rather than from the ventral abdomen,
with fluid-filled structures, such as severe hydrone-
because theformer allows placing the probe closer
phrosis, hydroureter, dilated bowel loops, or cysts
to the node and avoiding the descending colon
(Figure 15.4A). Structures such as bowel loops or mes-
(Llabres-Diaz 2004).
enteric folds are usually observed moving within the
fluid, particularly if a large volume of peritoneal fluid
is present (Figure 15.4B).
PERITONEAL EFFUSION
The echogenicity of the peritoneal fluid is usually
proportional to its content in cells and other debris,
Peritoneal effusion can be detected with ultrasonogra-
which act as ultrasound reflectors (Spaulding 1993;
phy if the volume of free fluid exceeds approximately
Hanbidge et al. 2003). Low cellular fluids, such as pure
2mL/kg, which is half of what is needed for a radio-
 or modified transudates, are typically anechoic to
graphic diagnosis (Henley et al. 1989). Even smaller
hypoechoic (Figures 15.4 and 15.5), in comparison with
amounts of effusion are likely identified with more
Cranial
Left
Figure 15.3. Mild peritoneal effusion. Longitudinal (A) and transverse (B) images obtained in a dog with hypoproteinenia
in themidventral and left-lateral portions of the abdomen,respectively.Small triangular anechoic foci (arrows) are between
smallintestinal loops (SI)and lateral tothe spleen, consistent with alow cellular fluid.A pure transudate was aspirated under
ultrasound guidance. LK, left kidney.
449ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
Cranial
SI
8.77cm
Figure 15.5. Modified transudate. Longitudinal image
obtained in the right cranial abdomen of a dog with perito-
neal effusion.Several structures,such as liver lobes (l.),right
kidney (RK), and smallintestinal loops (SI) are separated by
anechoic areas (*). The appearance of this effusion is sugges-
tive of a pure or modified transudate rather than an
exudate.
PE
Cranial
Figure 15.4.Loculated fluid compared with peritoncal
effusion. A: Longitudinal image obtained in the right ahdom-
inal quadrant of a cat with a chronically distended abdomen.
A large fluid-filled multiloculated cyst is identified, displac-
ing all surrounding structures. Several septa (arrows) are
scen throughout this benign cavitary structure that origi-
nated from the omentum. B: Transverse image obtained in
the right cranial abdomen of a dog with cardiac tamponade.
o   e  p s s rd 
anechoic effusion (PE). The descending duodenum (D), pan-
creas (arrowheads), and omentum (O) are distinctly visual-
Figure 15.6. Echogenic peritoneal effusion. Longitudinal
ized within the contrasting anechoic fluid.
image of a dog with abdominal distension and pain. A large
volume of particulate,echogenic, peritoneal effusion (PE) is
seen around the spleen (Sp). These features are suggestive
(Figure 15.6). Highly cellular and homogeneous puru-
of a cellular effusion, such as exudate or hemorrhage.A
    e  s 
diagnosis of septic peritonitis was made based on fluid
tissue organs, such as the spleen, and sometimes be
aspiration.
recognized only because of their visible motion and
lack of vascularity. Fxudates can also be septated
because of fibrin strands that commonly develop with
neal blood may appear anechoic or echogenic, with
this type of effusion, particularly with purulent peri-
swirling of particles within the fluid (Hanbidgc ct al.
tonitis (Spaulding 1993).
2003; Pintar et al. 2003). Hematomas can develop and
 Peritoneal hemorrhage varies in appearance accord-
initially appear as homogcneous echogenic masses.
ing to the interval between the onset of bleeding and
Lysis of the hematoma produces a more heterogeneous
the time of the ultrasonographic exam. Fresh perito-
appcarancc, with the formation of cystic areas and
450ABDOMINALCAVITY,LYMPHNODES,AND GREATVESSELS
ent types of fluids. Hence, modified transudates may
look similar to exudates. Other ultrasonographic find-
ings, such as the presence of nodules on the surface of
the peritoneum in cases of carcinomatosis or with
the presence of a large splenic mass, should be used to
orient the diagnosis.
Table 15.2 describes the typical appearance of vari
Bladder
able types of peritoneal effusion (Spaulding 1993;
Hanbidge et al. 2003) in dogs and cats.
PERITONITIS, S
STEATITIS, AND
Figure 15.7. Hernoabdomen. Longitudinal image of the
PNEUMOPERITONEUM
caudal abdomen of a cat diagnosed with multifocal biliary
carcinomas. Floating, echogcnic structures (*), not attached
A variable amount of effusion is observed with perito-
to any structure and consistent with blood clots,wereidenti-
nitis in dogs and cats, usually with moderate to high
fied cranial to the bladder.
echogenicity because of the high cellular content
(Boysen et al. 2003). However, in some types of peri-
tonitis, such as feline infectious peritonitis (FIP), the
Table 15.2.
effusion can bc less echogenic (Spaulding 1993) (Figure
Typical ultrasonographic appearance of peritoneal
15.8A). The peritoneum, omentum, and mesentery
effusions
 may also appear thickened, hypcrcchoic, and hyperat-
tenuated, focally or more diffusely (Hanbidge et al.
Ultrasonographic
Diagnostic Differential
2003). These features can significantly limit the pene-
Appearance
tralion of the ultrasound beam and consequently the
Anechoic or hypoechoic
Pure or modified transudate
ability to visualize and assess deep organs. In these
fluid
Serohemorrhagic fluid
instances, the abdominal structures appear ill-defined,
Urine leak
and their inner architecture cannot be well recognized.
Chylous effusion
An area of mesenteric fat hyperechogenicity is sugges-
Echogenic with mobile
Fresh hemorrhage
tive of inflammation (steatitis) in dogs and cats, and
particles
Modificd transudate
should be thoroughly investigated for a possible
Purulent exudate or loculated
nearby source of inflammation, such as intestinal per-
abscess
foration or pancreatitis (Boysen et al. 2003) (Figure
Serosanguinous exudate
Carcinomatosis
15.8B).
Chylous effusion
Idiopathic omental and mesenteric sterile steatitis
has also been recognized in dogs, resembling the
Highly echogenic with
Purulent exudate
human disease called mesenteric panniculitis (Komori
fibrous strands
Mobile echogenic masses
Blood clots
unknown, predisposing factors could include recent
Masses or nodules attached to
surgery, retained surgical material, prior abdominal
the mesentery,omentum or
trauma, ulcerative disease, autoimmune disease, or
visceralserosa
(carcinomatosis)
drugs. Sonographic fcatures reported in people include
a well-defined hyperechoic mass in the root of the
mesentery, displacing intcstinal loops (Roson et al.
2006) (Tigure 15.9). Thickening and hyperechogenicity
septa (Hanbidge et al. 2003) (Figure 15.7). In a previous
of the mesentery can also be associated with infarction
study of dogs with nontraumatic hemoabdomen, a
 or neoplastic invasion (Ilanbidge et al. 2003).
 malignancy was identified in 80% and hemangiosar-
Leakage or rupture of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract
coma in 70% of cases (Pintar et al. 2003).
is one of the inost common causes of septic peritonitis
However, it must be pointed out that some overlap
in dogs and cats. GI leakage may be caused by post-
exists in regard to the echogenic appearance of differ-
surgical intestinal dehiscence, GI perforation caused
451ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
Cranial
PE
Figure 15.9. Omental steatitis. Longitudinal image of the
Right
right abdomen of a dog that had recent surgery for splenic
torsion.An irregular,hyperechoic,hyperattenuating mass
rounded by hypoechoic peritonealeffusion (*). These changes
were attributed to omental steatitis, possibly secondary to
surgical manipulation. They eventually resolved.The ultra-
sonographic changes to the fat prevented any visualization
of deep abdominal structures.
loops. In addition to the other aforementioned ultraso-
 nographic changes, GI ileus with fluid accumulation is
commonly observed (Boysen 2003). GI contents such
Figure 15.8.Peritonitis and steatitis.A: Feline infectious
as foreign material or free gas can sometimes be rec-
peritonitis. A large volume of hypoechoic peritoneal effu-
ognized in the peritoneal space.Free gas appears as
sion (PE) is seen around a markedly thickened, irregular,
echogenic foci or lines that are associated with rever-
hyperechoic mesentery (M). The changes to the mesentery
beration artifacts such as comet tails. The lines collect
were caused by pyogranulomatous vasculitis and steatitis
(the same cat as in Figure 10.16). B: Intestinal perforating
between the nondependent abdominal wall and intra-
foreign body.Transverse image obtained in the right nidab-
abdominal structures such as the liver, omentum,
domen of a dog with a history of acute vomiting and severe
stomach, or intestine (Boysen et al. 2003) (Figure 15.10).
abdominal pain. A triangular hyperechoic interface (long
When peritoneal effusion is present, gas bubbles can
arrow) is in a small intestinal loop, associated with far acous-
appear as floating echogenic foci (Hanbidge et al.
tic shadowing (short arrow), consistent with a foreign body.
2003).Free gas tends to shift in position with bowel or
The peripheral mesenteric and omental fat ishyperechoic
patient movement.
and hyperattenuating, and a mass effect was observed on
 Spontaneous pneumoperitoneum can also be caused
other peripheral structures.These features are typical of ste-
by abdominal wall trauma,bladder rupture, an exten-
atitis caused by intestinal perforation.
sion of pneumothorax, splenic necrosis,clostridial
peritonitis, or be idiopathic (Saunders and Tobias
2003). If a large volume of free air is in the peritoneal
cavity, ultrasonographic visualization of deep struc-
by a penetrating foreign body, GI ulcer (benign or
turesmaybesignificantlyhampered byreverberation
malignant), gastric dilatation and volvulus, intes-
artifacts or shadowing.Because free air can persist
tinal intussusception, intestinal infarction, penetrating
several days before complete resorption, the signifi-
abdominal trauma, or iatrogenic cause (Boysen et al.
 iae si o sp ui p  a jo a
2003). Inflamed perienteric fat often appears as a mass
must be interpreted with caution,particularly if other
effect, displacing adjacent structures such as intestinal
signs of intestinal dehiscence are not present.
452ABDOMINALCAVITY,LYMPHNODES,AND GREATVESSELS
Cranial
Right
B
Figure 15.10. Free air in the peritoneal space. Longitudinal (A) and transverse (B) images obtained in the left cranial and
mid-right abdomen of a dog that had surgery a few days carlicr. Short, redundant, hyperechoic lines (short arrows), which
appear as "comet tails" and are consistent with reverberation artifacts, are in the upper portion of the abdomen. These artifacts
move during the exam along the inner surface of the abdominal wall, indicating free air.Air is also observed in an intestinal
lumen (long arrow), associated with "dirty” acoustic shadowing.
PERITONEAL ABSCESSES,
GRANULOMAS, AND
PYOGRANULOMAS
Abscess formation can precede or follow the onset of
peritonitis. Ultrasonographically, peritoneal abscesses
often present as fluid pockets with particles, sur-
rounded by an ill-defined hyperechoic wall and some-
times internal septa or gas foci (Konde et al. 1986;
Hanbidge et al. 2003) (Figure 15.11). The cavitary
porlion of the abscess is often hypoechoic, and far
*6.25cm
acoustic enhancement may be recognized if the cell
count is not too high.Conversely, caseous abscesses
may be associated with some acoustic shadowing. The
Figure 15.11. Peritoneal abscess. Transverse image of the
presence of gas in the central portion of a peritoneal
left caudal abdomen of a dog with abdominal pain. An ill-
mass,recognized as hyperechoic foci with reverbera-
defined hypoechoic area, surrounded by an ill-defined
tion artifacts, should be considered as a relatively spe-
hyperechoic rim (arrows), is present without evidence of
cific sign of an abscess (Hanbidge et al. 2003)
organ involvement. A sterile abscess, attached to the
Peritoneal granulomas or pyogranulomas are rare in
omentum and mesentery,was confirmed at surgery.
small animals. They can be found with feline infectious
453ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
Cranial
Bladde
Jej
Figure 15.12.Wooden stick foreign body in a dog.A
Figure 15.13. Fat nodular necrosis. Longitudinal image
hyperechoic linear interface consistent with a stick (arrows)
obtained in the caudal abdomen of a dog with chronic renal
is noted, surrounded by a hypoechoic cast of inflammatory
disease. A well-defined, oval, hyperechoic nodule (arrows)
cells (arrowheads). The stick was impaling a segment of
is dorsal to the bladder trigone. Partial acoustic shadowing
jejunum (Jej) and the left kidney (the same dog as in Figure
is noted in the far field (arrowheads), indicating ultrasound-
10.28A). A small amount of free fluid (*) is near the perfora-
beam hyperattenuation in comparison with adjacent fat.
tion site. Image courtesy of D. Penninck.
These features are consistent with incidental fat nodular
necrosis.
peritonitis or fungal diseases or be caused by foreign
peritonitis (Merlo and Lamb 2000). Foreign bodies
bodies, such as retained surgical sponges (Merlo and
migrating into the abdominal cavity are not necessar-
Lamb 2000). Fungal pyogranulomas, such as those
ily associated with signs of peritonitis (Penninck and
caused by botryomycosis, are similar to bacterial
Mitchell 2003)
abscesses on ultrasonographic exam (Share and
Utroska 2002). Foreign bodies can produce a suppura-
tive granulomatous or pyogranulormatous response of
NODULAR FAT NECROSIS
variable size.Some foreign bodies, such as wooden
slicks or grass awns, can migrate through the abdomi-
A benign and incidental finding in dogs and cats, this
nal wall or GI and create a sinus tract that can be rec-
     se e 
 ognized by their tubular, often tortuous, shape and
soft-tissue masses in the abdominal fat. With ultra-
their marked hypoechogenicity in comparison with
sound, these foci can be recognized as well-defined
the surrounding tissues that appear hyperechoic
hyperechoic and hyperattenuating (acoustic shadow)
because of the inflammatory reaction and/or scar
nodules or masses in the abdominal fat, which can be
tissue (Penninck and Mitchell 2003; Staudte et al. 2004).
multiple in the same patient (Schwarz et al. 2000)
The foreign body itself is not always ultrasonographi-
(Figure 15.13). A hypoechoic center may also be
cally visible. Wooden sticks usually appear as linear
observed.
hyperechoic interfaces, with acoustic shadowing
in
most cases (Figure 15.12). However, plant materials
chronically imbedded in tissues can undergo a degra-
dation that can render these objects less attenuating
PERITONEAL AND
and therefore less likely to be associated with acoustic
RETROPERITONEAL NEOPLASIA
shadowing (Staudte et al. 2004). Grass awns appear as
spindle-shaped, lincar, hyperechoic interfaces measur-
Primary peritoneal neoplastic processes, such as meso-
ing 3-4cm long. with acoustic shadowing less com-
theliomas, are extremely rare in dogs and cats (Morini
monly observed than with wood (Staudte et al.2004;
et al. 2006).Peritoneal soft-tissue masses seen with
Gnudi et al. 2005). Retained surgical sponges typically
ultrasonography are most often related to abdominal
appear as a hypoechoic mass with central hyperechoic
organs, such as the spleen, liver, pancreas, or intestine.
foci and are associated with other variable signs of
Lipomas, infiltrative or not, may also be found within
454 ABDOMINAL CAVITY,LYMPH NODES,AND GREATVESSELS
the omentum, mesentery, or other portions of the
faces or within the floating omentum or mesentery
abdomen (Figure 15.14). These fatty masses are typi-
(Hanbidge et al. 2003) (Figures 15.16 and 15.17).
cally hyperechoic and hyperattenuating
Metastatic nodules tend to appear isoechoic to the
 Other neoplastic processes, such as lymphoma, may
abdominal wall or hypoechoic to adjacent fat (Monteiro
infiltrate the omentum ormesentery,whichcanappear
and O'Brien 2004), although theirechogenicity,as well
markedly heterogeneous (Figure 15.15).
as their size and shape, can vary (Figures 15.16-15.18).
Widespread dissemination ofneoplasia throughout
the peritoneum, a condition referred to as carcinoma-
or diffusely thickened, which has been described as
tosis,is morecommon than primary peritoneal tumors.
"omental ormesenteric cakes”in people(Hanbidge et
The term carcinomatosis is used in veterinary medi-
al. 2003). Additionally, mineral foci may be observed
cine toincludeperitoneal invasionby epithelial,mes-
as hyperechoic foci casting an acoustic shadow.
enchymal, or hematopoietic tumors (Monteiro and
 Soft-tissue sarcomas, especially hemangiosarcoma
O'Brien 2004).In cats,the most common sites of
can befound in theretroperitoneal space,particularly
primary carcinomas associated with carcinomatosis
 in dogs. Ultrasonography can bc uscful in diffcrcntiat-
are the liver,pancreas,and intestine (Monteiro and
ing a retroperitoneal mass from retroperitoncal
  s p s  o 
effusion, renomegaly, or renal mass suspected on
tured hemangiosarcoma probably represents the
radiographs.Retroperitoneal soft-tissue masses are
most common type of carcinomatosis or sarcomatosis
 often heterogeneous and ill-defined, and may invade
(Monteiro and O'Brien 2004). Free peritoneal effusion
major vessels such as the CVC, aorta, or renal vessels.
is expected in most cases of carcinomatosis (Figures
However,it can be difficult to differentiate true large
15.16 and 15.17). The volume and echogenicity of the
retroperitoneal masses from masses originating from
fluid can vary and may be influenced by a high protein
 the adrenal glands or urinary system. Alternate
content,concurrent presence of sterile or septic perito-
imaging such as computed tomography and magnetic
nitis, or hemorrhage. Peritoneal effusion contributes to
resonance imaging may also help in better defining the
the visibility of nodules attached to the peritoneal sur-
origin and extent of retroperitoneal masses.
Figure 15.14.Mesenteric lipoma.A: Lateral abdominal radiograph of the abdomen of a large-breed dog with a palpable
abdominal mass. A mildly inhomogeneous mass (arrows) in the caudal abdomen is deforming the descending colon and
bladdcr (Bl). The mass is of intcrmcdiatc opacity bctwccn fat and soft tissuc. B: Longitudinal sonographic imagc of a portion
of this mass that contacts the ventral abdominal wall (arrows) and extends beyond the limits of the scanned field ofview.
This mass is hyperechoic, hyperattenuating, and relatively uniform. A mesenteric lipoma was surgically confirmed.
B
Figure 15.15.Mesenteric infiltrative mass. Transverse images obtained in the right caudal abdomen of a dog with intestinal
lymphoma. A: A large ill-defined mass with mixed echogenicity is observed (arrows), surrounded with hyperechoic fat.
(arrowheads). Mesenteric infiltration by the intestinal lymphoma was confirmed.
Cranial
Intestine
Omentum
Figure 15.16. Sarcomatosis. Longitudinal sonographic (A) and schematic (B) images of the right portion of the abdomen of
a cat with disseminated soft-tissue sarcoma. Multiple hyperechoic masses, consistent with metastases, are in the mesentery
and omentum (arrows). Severe hypoechoic peritoneal effusion is also present (*), delineating abdominal structures.
Crania
Figure 15.17.Carcinomatosis. Longitudinal image obtained
in the left cranial abdomen of a cat with biliary carcinoma.An
oval, mildly echogenic nodule (arrows) is on the surface of the
peritoneum, at the level of the left kidney (LK).Several similar
nodules were detected in therestof the abdomen,consistent
with carcinomatosis.A large volume of hypoechoic peritoneal
effusion (PE) related to the metastatic disease is also present.
455
456 ABDOMINALCAVITY,LYMPIINODES,AND GREATVESSELS
C
Cranial
Liver
Spleen
Figure 15.18. Omental carcinomatosis and sarcomatosis. A: Longitudinal image of the midabdomen of a cat diagnosed with
pancreatic adenocarcinoma. The omentum is enlarged, hyperechoic, and filled with small hypoechoic nodules (arrows) con-
sistent with metastases. B: Transverse image obtained in the right cranial abdomen, medial to the region of the pancreas, in
a dog. A well-defined, circular, hypoechoic focus is in the onentum (arrow). The region dorsal to this focus is hypcrechoic
(arrowheads), consistent with acoustic enhancement. This hypoechoic focus contrasts with the surrounding hyperechoic and
hyperattenuating omental fat.A necrotic metastatic focus was cytologically identified with fine-needle aspiration.Ileocecal
adenocarcinoma was confirmed. C: Longitudinal image of the left cranial abdomen of a dog with a large splenic mass and
peritoneal effusion (not shown). Three, small, il-defined, hypoechoic foci (between the cursors) are in the omental fat between
the liver and the spleen. Rupture splenic hemangiosarcoma with hepatic and omental metastases were identified in
surgery.
LYMPHADENOPATHY
hyperechoic hilus unlike with neoplastic infiltrations
(Figure 15.20). Primary or metastatic neoplastic lymph
Changes in size, shape, contour, and internal echo-
nodes are commonly hypoechoic (Figures 15.19, 15.21,
genicity and echotexture are important criteria that
and 15.22), facilitating their identification, although
help to detect lymphadenopathies and differentiate
areas of hyperechogenicity may be present if coagula-
benign from malignant processes. Enlarged lymph
tive necrosis, hemorrhage, or mineralization is also
nodes typically become more rounded. Ratios compar-
present (Figure 15.23).
ing their short (S) and long (L) axes increase more sig-
nificantly with neoplastic infiltration (Llabres-Diaz
markedly enlarged and distorted (Figure 15.24).
2004; Nyman et al. 2004). S/L axis ratios > 0.5 are
Hypoechoic or anechoic areas may also be seen as the
usually predictive of neoplasia (Figure 15.19), as
resultofliquefactionnecrosisorcyst formation
opposed to ratios < 0.5, which are usually calculated
(Llabres-Diaz 2004) (Figures 15.24 and 15.25). Cyst for-
for normal or reactive lymph nodes (Figure 15.20).
 mation may also be seen in benign lymph nodes (Figure
Internal nodal architecture tends to be more affected
15.25A). Malignant nodes may also be inflamed or
by neoplastic infiltration (Llabres-Diaz 2004; Nyman et
abscessed and can therefore become markedly hetero-
ai. 2004). Reactive lymph nodes tend to present a
geneous (Figure 15.25D).
Figure 15.19.  Malignant lymph nodes. Longitudinal image
 obtained in the midabdomen of a dog with peripheral lymph-
adenomegaly.  Multiple  oval  to  rounded, well-defined,
hypoechoic masses are in the root of the mesentery, consistent
with enlarged mesenteric lymph nodes (arrows). The ultraso-
 nographic features of these nodes are highly suggestive of
2.28
 malignancy, particularly lymphoma.
Crania
Right
0.70cm
macl
Spleen
Liver
0.43cr
Figure 15.20. Reactive lymphadenopathy. A: Longitudinal image of the midabdomen of a dog with a history of inflamma-
tory bowel disease. The mesenteric lymph nodes (arrows) are more prominent because of reduced echogenicity, particularly
 peripherally, as well as mild mesenteric fat hyperechogenicity. The cranial mesenteric artery and vein (CMA & V) are noted
between these nodes, serving as a useful landmark for their identification. The orientation of the flow in the artery, which is
directed toward the probe, is displayed as a red signal on color Doppler. B: Ultrasound images of mildly enlarged gastric
(left) and splenic (right) lymph nodes in a cat with septic peritonitis. The fat around the gastric lymph node is hyperechoic,
 contrasting with the hypoechoic lymph node. The hilar portion of these nodes remains hyperechoic.
457
Righ
Crani
Bladde
HLI
+1.72cm
Figure 15.22.Anal sac gland lymphatic metastases
Longitudinal image obtained in the caudal abdomen of a dog
Figure 15.21. Neoplastic hepatic lymph nodes. Transverse
with a perianal mass. A large heterogeneous mass (arrows)
sonographic image obtained at the porta hepatis in a dog
with well-defined contours is dorsal to the urinary bladder,
with pulmonary histiocytic sarcoma. The hepatic lymph
in the region of the medial iliac lymph nodes. A hyperechoic
nodes (IILN) are identified adjacent to the porlal vein (PV)
focus (arrowhead) associated with acoustic shadowing,con-
and dorsal to the body of the pancreas (P) and stomach (S).
sistcnt with mineralization, is in the cranial portion of the
These nodes are enlarged, irregular, and less echogenic than
mass. Metastatic anal sac carcinoma was diagnosed with
normal. They remain relatively uniform. Disseminated his-
cytology on fine-needle aspiration.
tiocytic sarcoma was identified in the liver and several
abdominal lymph nodes.
B
2.11cm
Figure 15.23. Sublumbar lymphadenopathy caused by metastatic carcinoma. A: Lateral abdominal radiograph of a medium-
sized breed dog with metastatic carcinoma.An ill-defined, lobulated, soft-tissue opacity (arrows)is ventral to the sixth and
seventh lumbar vertebrae. B: Longitudinal sonographic image obtained in the same region, lateral to the right iliac artery and
vein (not shown). An iregular, hypoechoic mass with surrounding mildly hyperechoic fat, consistent with metastatic disease,
is at the location of a medial iliac lymph node.
Figure 15.25.Cavitary lymph nodes. A: Benign cystic node.Multiple,irregular, well-defined anechoic cysts are incidentally
found in the hepatic node of this dog with urinary calculi.HA, hepatic artery; and PV,portal vein.B: Cystic node with ly-
avascular arca (arrows) is in the cranial region of the enlarged lymph node (arrowheads). Fine-needle aspiration confirmed
the presence of a fluid-filled cavity or cyst within this portion of the nodc, and lymphoma was confirmed in the caudal solid
portion. C: Necrosis. On this ultrasound image, two adjacent mesenteric lymph nodes are severely enlarged, nearly anechoic,
and ill-defined. The surrounding fat is markedly hyperechoic.Fine-needle aspiration revealed the presence of metastatic car-
hepatic lymph node in a dog with multicentric lymphoma and suspected pancreatitis. Echogenic fluid is in the affected node,
with a cellular sediment forming a line (arrow)parallel to thehorizontal plane (probe placed obliquely).The adjacent pancreas
(P) is hypoechoic and the peripheral fat is mildly hyperechoic. PV, portal vein.
458
Right
Bladder
6.37cm
Spine
Figure 15.24. Sublumbar lymphadenopathy caused by metastatic sarcoma. A: Lateral abdominal radiograph of a large-
breed dog with partial urinary obstruction and signs suggestive of colitis. A somewhat lobulated sof-tissue opacity is in the
caudodorsal abdomen and displacing the descending colon ventrally and associated with marked bladder distension. The
 colon is corrugated. B: Transverse sonographic image obtained in the caudal abdomen. The mass suspected on radiographs
 is large and heterogeneous (between the cursors). Metastatic soft-tissue sarcoma to lymph nodes was highly suspected based
on fine-needle aspiration.
B
Cranial
PV
Live
×127cm
Righ
3.00cm
Figure 15.25.
459
460ABDOMINALCAVITY,LYMPH NODES,AND GREAT VESSELS
spectral Doppler, color Doppler, or power Doppler, as
Crania
well as the lack of compressibility (applicable to distal
CVC and peripheral veins), are useful signs in the
identification of acute thrombosis (Linkins et al. 2006).
With time, an echogenic area, usually attached to a
portion of the vessel wall, is observed filling a portion
of the vascular lumen.The thrombus can appear
uniform or heterogeneous because of blood clot lysis
and recanalization.
CVC thrombosis canbe caused by the cranial exten-
sion of spontaneous femoral or iliac vein thrombosis,
or by the invasion of malignant tumors involving adja-
Figure
15.26.Granulomatous
lymphadenopathy.
Crania
 Longitudinal image obtained in a dog diagnosed with an
intestinal mass, on which a mesenteric lymph node appears
moderately enlarged (2cm thick x 6cm long). This lymph
node is not as hypoechoic as typically seen with lymphorma
Surgery confirmed the presence of severe granulomatous
enteritis caused by pythiosis.
CVC
Inflammatorylymphnodesalso tendtobeill-defined
(Nyman et al. 2004). Noninflamed malignant nodes are
acoustic enhancement. However, some overlap exists
in the ultrasonographic appearance of benign and
malignant lymph node pathologies. For example,
granulomatous diseases, such as pythiosis, can mimic
Cranial
neoplasia (Figure 15.26).
 In people, the use of color Doppler, power Doppler,
 Or contrast ultrasonography increases the accuracy in
differentiating benign from malignant nodes (Nyman
et al. 2004). In benign nodes, the blood flow distribu-
tion is primarily hilar,whereas it tends to be more
peripheral or mixed with malignancies. Resistive and
(Nyman et al. 2004).
VASCULAR THROMBOSIS AND
OTHER ANOMALIES
Figure15.27.Thrombosisof thecaudalvenacava.
In addition to the portal system, thrombi and emboli
A: Small thrombus. Longitudinal image of the caudal
involving the CVC, aorta, or iliac vessels can be
portion of the caudal vena cava (CVC) of a cat on which a
detected with ultrasonography in dogs or cats. A thor-
well-defined, oval, mildly echogenic thrombus is seen
ough evaluation of all vascular branches, including
(arrows). This thrombus was partially obliterating the vessel
femoral veins and arteries, is required when pelvic
lumen. Image courtesy of D. Penninck. B: Massive throm-
bosis. Longitudinal image obtained in the right cranial
thromboembolic disease is suspected.
abdomen ofa dog with severe ascites (*). The CVCisenlarged,
The appearance of thrombosis can vary in the acute
and its lumen is diffusely and uniformly cchogcnic,consis-
and chronic phases. Initially, the thrombus may be
tent with thrombosis.There was no evidence of flow on color
poorly echogenic and more difficult to identify using
or power Doppler. A hepatic mass infiltrating the CVC was
standard B-mode. The lack of flow as evaluated with
suspected.
461ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
Crania
Right
CVC
EIA
A
B
0.80cm
0.96cm
Figure 15.28. Aortic thromboembolism. Longitudinal (A) and transverse (B) images of the caudal portion of the abdominal
aorta (Ao) in a dog with pelvic weakness. An echogenic, relatively well-defined, tubular structure in the aorta is occluding
most of its lumen, consistcnt with a thromboembolus (arrows). The dog had hyperacdrenocorticism, which was considered as
the probable predisposing factor for thrombus formation. CVC, caudal vena cava; and EIA, external iliac artery.
Cranial
Ao
chronic Cushing's disease. Linear hyperechoic foci (arrows) with acoustic shadowing are along the inner margin of the dorsal
the cortex, of this dog, which is consistent with nephrocalcinosis. Similar changes were present in the other kidney.
cent organs, such as the liver and adrenal glands,
 opathies in cats. In dogs, aortic and iliac thromboem-
that produces endothelial damage (Finn-Bodner and
bolisin is usually present because of a disorder
Hudson 1998). External compression of the CVC may
associated with a hypercoagulable state, cardiac
cause flow congestion, which represents a predispos-
disease or neoplasia (Boswood et al. 2000) (Figure
ing factor for thrombus formation (Figure 15.27).
15.28).
Peritoneal effusion may develop if venous flow is sig-
Vascular wall mineralization, particularly involving
nificantly reduced through the CVC. Additionally,
the aorta, can sometimes be observed in dogs and is
thrombosisisfavored by thepresence ofa hypercoagu-
usually considered an incidental finding. Hyperechoic
lable status.
plaquelike lesions can be observed at the inner margin
Distal aortic and iliac thromboembolism represents
of the wall, with acoustic shadowing if large enough
an important complication associated with cardiomy-
(Figure 15.29).
Abdominal vascular malformations other than por-
Henley RK, Hager DA, Ackerman N (1989) A comparison of
tosystemic shunts are extremely rare in dogs and cats.
two-dimensional ultrasonography and radiography for
the detection of small amounts of free peritoneal fluid in
mental aplasia of the CVC with azygos continuation
the dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 30:121-124.
 e  z s  p  s
Komori S, Nakagaki K, Koyama H, Yamagami T (2002)
Idiopathic mesenteric and omcntal stcatitis in a dog. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 221:1591-1593.
Konde LJ, Lebel JL, Park RD, Wrigley RH (1986) Sonographic
INTERVENTIONAL
application in the diagnosis of intraabdominal abscess in
PROCEDURES
the dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 27:151-154.
Linkins LA, Stretton R, Probyn L, Kearon C (2006)
Interobserver agreement on ultrasound measurements
Finc-needle aspiration of peritoneal fluids is used rou-
of residual vein diameter, thrombus echogenicity and
tinely with ultrasonography in dogs and cats. With
Doppler venous flow in patients with previous venous
minimal practice, even small amount of fluids can be
thrombosis. Thromb Res 117:241-247.
securely aspirated.Abdominal masses and lymph
Llabrés-Diaz FJ (2004) Ultrasonography of the medial lymph
nodes can also be aspirated or biopsied. Cavitated
nodes in the dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 45:156-165.
masses, abscesses, or cysts can also be drained with
Merlo M, Lamb CR (2000) Radiographic and ultrasono-
ultrasound guidance.
graphic features of retained surgical sponge in eight dogs.
Vet RadiolUltras0und 41:279-283.
Monteiro CB,O'Brien RT (2004) A retrospective study on the
 sonographic findings of abdominal carcinomatosis in 14
REFERENCES
cats.Vet Radiol Ultrasound 45:559-564.
Morini M, Bettini G, Morandi F, Burdisso R, Marcato PS
Barthez PY, Siemens LM, Koblik PD (1996) Azygos continu-
(2006) Deciduoid peritoneal mesothelioma in a dog. Vet
ation of the caudal vena cava in a dog: Radiographic
Pathol 43:198-201.
and ultrasonographic diagnosis. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
Nyman HT, Kristensen AT, Flagstad A, McEvoy FJ (2004) A
37:354-356.
review of the sonographic assessment of tumor metastases
Bezuidenhout AJ (1993) The lymphatic systen. In: Evans HE,
in liverand superficiallymph nodes.Vet Radiol Ultrasound
ed.Miller's Anatomy of thc Dog,3rd edition. Philadelphia:
45:438-448.
WB Saunders, Pp. 717-757.
 Penninck D, Mitchell S (2003) Ultrasonographic detection of
Boysen SR, Rozanski EA,Tidwell AS, Holm JL, Shaw, SP,
ingested and perforating wooden foreign bodies in four
Rush JE (2004) Fvaluation of a focused assessment with
dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 223:206-209.
sonography for trauma protocol to detect free abdominal
Pintar J, Breitschwerdt EB,Hardie EM,Spaulding KA (2003)
fluid in dogs involved in motor vehicle accidents. J Am
Acute nontraumatic hemoabdomen in the dog:A retro-
Vet Med Assoc 225:1198-1204.
spective analysis of 39 cases (1987-2001). J Am Anim Hosp
 Boysen SR, Tidwell AS, Penninck D (2003) Ultrasonographic
Assoc 39:518-522.
findings in dogs and cats with gastrointestinal perforation.
Pugh CR (1994) Ultrasonographic examination of abdorninal
Vet RadiolUltrasound 44:556-564.
lymph nodes in the dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 35:110-
Boswood A,Lamb CR, White RN
(2000) Aortic and
115.
iliac thrombosis in six dogs. J Small Anim Pract 41:109-
Roson N, Garriga V, Cuadrado M, et al. (2006) Sonographic
114.
findings of mesenteric panniculitis: Correlation with CT
Evans HE (1993a) The Heart and Arteries & Chapter
and literature review.J Clin Ultrasound 34:169-176.
12: Veins. In: Evans HE, ed. Miller's Anatomy of the
 Saunders WB, Tobias KM (2003) Pneumoperitoneum in dogs
and cats: 39 cases (1983-2002). J Am Vet Med Assoc
586-681.
223:462-468.
Evans HE (1993b) Vcins. In: Evans HE, Christensen GC, eds.
Schwarz T, Morandi F, Gnudi G,et al. (2000) Nodular fat
Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 3rd edition. Philadelphia:
nccrosis in the feline and canine abdomen.Vet Radiol
WB Saunders, Pp. 682-716.
Ultrasound 41:335-339.
Finn-Bodner ST, Hudson JA (1998) Abdominal vascular
Share B, Utroska B (2002) Intra-abdcminal botryomycosis in
sonography.
.Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 220:1025-1027.
28:887-943.
Spaulding KA (1993) Sonographic evaluation of peritoneal
Gnudi G, Volta A, Bonazzi M, Gazzola M, Bertoni G (2005)
effusion in small animals. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 34:427-
 Ultrasonographic features of grass awn migration in the
431.
dog.Vet Radiol Ultrasound 46:423-426.
Spaulding KA (1997) A review of sonographic identification
Hanbidge AE, Lynch D, Wilson SR (2003) US of the pcrito-
of abdominal blood vessels and juxtavascular organs. Vet
neum. Radiographics 23:663-684.
Radiol Ultrasound 38:4-23.
463ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
Staudte KL, Hopper BJ, Gibson NR, Read RA (2004) Use of
Szatmari V, Sotonyi P, Voros K (2001) Normal duplex
ultrasonography to facilitate surgical removal of non-
Doppler waveforms of major abdominal blood vessels in
enteric foreign bodies in 17 dogs. J Small Anim Pract
dogs: A review. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 42:93-107.
45:395-400.
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM
Martin Kramer and Marc-André d'Anjou
SHOULDER
a long footprint. Scanning the cranial aspect of the
shoulder joint is difficult because of the presence of the
Scanning Technique
major tubercle,which allows only a small surface of
probe contact. Medial imaging of the shoulder joint
Ultrasonography of the shoulder joint and the sur-
may be facilitated by the use of a curved or sector
rounding tissues is best performed with a linear
transducerbecauseof theintimaterelationshipbetween
transducer using frequencies greater than 10MHz.
the thoracic limb and the thoracic wall (Figure 16.4).
Curvilinear probes may be used to facilitate the
surface, such as the axillary area.The hair around the
Normal Sonographic Anatomy of
joint is clipped. All tendons and muscles are scanmed
the Shoulder
longitudinally and transversally (Figure 16.1).
Supraspinatus Muscle
The sonogram of the shoulder joint starts by scan-
ning the supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscles
The supraspinatus muscle originates on the supraspi-
down to their attachment sites at the major tubercle
natus fossa of the scapula and is scanned distally in
(Figure 16.2). Then the biceps muscle is examined,
longitudinal sections over the extensor side of the
after maximal external rotation of the shoulder joint
humerus to its insertion site on the major tubercle
(Figures 16.1 and 16.2). Abducting the limb may also
(Figures 16.2 and 16.5). The muscle is hypoechoic and
help gaining bcttcr access to the region. The scan
loosely striated, and smoothly marginated. The major
begins at the musclc belly, along the craniomedial
tubercle appcars as a curvilinear hyperechoic interface,
aspect of the humeral diaphysis. Thc probe is
with irregular margins and acoustic shadowing, on
then gradually moved proximally along its proximal
which the supraspinatus muscles inserts (Figure 16.5).
tendon, which lies within the intertubercular groove,
At that level,because of the orientation of thetendon
at the medial aspect of the shoulder joint. The biceps
fibers, this portion remains similar in appearance to
tendon is then followed to its origin on the supragle-
the muscle belly, in comparison to the adjacent biceps
noid tubercle of the scapula. The most important stan-
tendon (Kramer and Gerwing 1994).
dard scanplane is thecrosssectionofthe intertubercular
groove between the major and minor tubercles. At that
Infraspinatus Muscle
level, the tendon is encircled by a sheath filled with a
small amount of synovial fluid that connects with the
The infraspinatus muscle is scanned in longitudinal
 joint space proximally (Figure 16.2). The tendon and
and transverse planes from its origin on the infraspi-
its sheath are contained in the intertubercular groove
nous fossa to its short tendon at the caudolateral
by a transverse ligament between the major and minor
margin of the major tubercle. The muscle belly is stri-
tubercles (Kramer and Gerwing 1994).
ated with thin hyperechoic bands that run obliquely
The intra-articular structures of the shoulder are
connecting a central line to the periphery, giving a
imaged by positioning the transducer laterally in a
characteristic fish-bone pattern (Figure 16.6). The
craniocaudal orientation immediately distal to the
muscle belly becomes narrower distally, merging into
acromion, which serves as a landmark (Figure 16.3).
a tendon beyond the joint.The tendinous tissue dis-
The joint is scanned by slowly adducting and simulta-
plays typical hyperechoic fibrils arranged in parallel
ncously rotating the limb while the probe remains in
lines, with a peripheral hyperechoic outline (periten-
the same position. As there is limited space, a second
 e  se  rr  
image—perpendicular to the first—is difficult to
echoic convex structure on which the tendon ends,
achieve, particularly with a linear transducer that has
laterally, while curving and tapering when scanned
465
Figure  16.1. Scanning technique  for the  shoulder.
 Illustration showing the position of the dog and ultrasound
probe to obtain longitudinal images of the supraspinatus
and infraspinatus muscles (A) and biceps tendon (B). For the
Figure 16.3. Sonographic approach to the shoulder joint.
assessment of the biceps tendon, the leg must be pulled and
The caudolateral portion of the shoulder joint can be evalu-
externally rotated (curved arrow), facilitating the approach
 ated after placing the probe just caudal to the acromion,
 to the intertubercular groove, which is located in the medial 
 which can be easily palpated. The caudal extent of the joint
portion of the shoulder.
space and capsule (JC) can be assessed. Illustration by M.A.
d'Anjou.
SS
SS
MT
MT
IS
GHL
GHI
TH
Lateral view
Medial view
Figure 16.2. Schematic views of the normal shoulder anatomy in dogs. Lateral view: The supraspinatus (SS) and infraspi-
natus (IS) muscles and tendons are cranial and caudal to the scapular spine, respectively. The SS tendon inserts on the major
 tubercle (MT), just lateral to the bicipital groove. The IS inserts on the humeral head more laterally. The lateral glenohumeral
ligament (GHL) is lateral to the joint capsule and synovial space (S). Medial view: The biceps (B) muscle and tendon coursc
 along the medial aspect of the humerus. The tendon of origin is in the intertubercular groove, just medial to the major tubercle
(MT). It extends within a tendon sheath (arrowheads) that connects with the shoulder joint synovium (S) and is contained by
the transverse humeral ligament (THL). The biceps tendon courses along the insertion site of the supraspinatus (SS) tendon,
shaped proximally. Illustrations by M.A. d'Anjou.
466
467ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
longitudinally (like a bird's bcak). The infraspinatus
muscle is covered by the deltoid muscle,which dis-
plays typical muscle echotexture (Figure 16.6). The
fascias of both muscles can be distinguished sono-
graphically (Kramer and Gerwing 1994) (Figure 16.6).
Biceps Brachii Muscle
In the longitudinal plane, the biceps muscle appears
hypoechoic, with a hyperechoic line in the center rep-
resenting the border between the two fused muscle
bellies. Hyperechoic lines extend from this central line
and run at a slightly oblique angle to the longitudinal
axis (fish-bone pattern). In cross section, the shape of
Figure 16.4.Scanning technique for the medial aspect of
the muscle resembles a section of citrus fruit. The
the shoulder joint.llustration showing the position of the
dog and ultrasound probe when scanning the medial aspect
transducer is then positioned proximal to the muscle-
of the shoulder and axillary area. The leg must be abducted.
tendon interface, which is ill-defined (Figure 16.7A)
The approach can also be facilitated by pulling (as shown)
The proximal tendon runs within the humeral intertu-
or extending the leg.
bercular groove, also called the bicipital groove, which
Distal
Medio-proxima
HH
Figure 16.5. Normal sonographic anatomy of the supraspinatus muscle and tendon. Longitudinal (A) and transverse (B)
breed dog. The characteristic hypoechoic echotexture with small hyperechoic dots and lines of the supraspinatus muscle is
seen. Because of the orientation and distribution of the tendon fibers, this portion also appears hypoechoic. It fans (arrows)
appear as thin hyperechoic interfaces casting acoustic shadow. The biceps tendon (BT, arrowheads) and its sheath course
caudally and medially, in proximity to the SST
468MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM
tcndon sheath wall and humeral surface, respectively.
line at the lateral aspect of the bicipital groove and
tendon. It is more distinct than the minor tubercle
DM
medially, which is seen only as a small elevation of the
reflective line on thc surface of the bone. The intertu-
bercular groove appears as a mildly concave hypere-
choic line extending into the reflective lines of the
tubercle (Figure 16.7C). The intertubercular ligament
cannot be distinguished from the surrounding soft
ISM
tissue. Distally, the distal outpouch of the synovial
sheath can appear lobulated in some dogs.
The longitudinal examination is then performed by
following the tendon across the joint to its origin on
the supraglenoid tubercle. In the far field, the hypere-
choic line of the humeral bone surface becomesvisible.
Proximal to this point of orientation, the hypoechoic
to anechoic area of the joint space and dorsally the
supraglenoid tubercle can be distinguished. The latter
DM
structure is visible as a slightly convex, hyperechoic
interface associated with acoustic shadowing. In this
region, the use of a cross-sectional plane does not
SN
provide additional information. Because of its curva-
ture along the intertubercular groove, the tendon
hyperechoic echotexture can be evaluated only when
perpendicular to the probe (Figure 16.7B). At the level
Figure 16.6. Normal sonographic anatomy of the infraspi-
of the supraglenoid tubercle,the tendinous fibers curve
natus muscle. A and B: Longitudinal sonographic images of
 and become hypoechoic as they enter the bone (Figure
the normal infraspinatus muscle (ISM) obtained at two dif-
16.7A). This region should not bc confused for a
ferent levels.The characteristic echotexture of the muscle is
lesion.
present. The deltoid muscle (DM) is in the near field, sepa-
Finally, the tendon is dynamically examined by
rated by a thin hyperechoic interface (arrow) that represents
flexing, extending, abducting, and adducting the
the intermuscular fascia.The shadowing hyperechoic surface
shoulder joint. During these manipulations, the finc
of the scapula (S) is seen in the far field in A.
fibrillar structure of the biceps tendon is visualized
throughout its length. When the joint is flexed, the
its original size (Kramer et al. 2001b).
lies medial to thc major tubercle, deep in the medial
groove of the shoulder. At that level, transverse scans
ShoulderJointSpace
are prefered for assessing the tendinous texture, the
tendon sheath, and the intertubercular groove. On a
Craniocaudal positioning of the transducer perpen-
transverse plane, the tendon appears as an oval, uni-
dicular to the joint space enables visualization of the
formly hyperechoic structure measuring approxi-
surface of the humeral head as a semicircular, convex,
mately 3mm thick in medium-sized to large dogs
hyperechoic line with distal acoustic shadowing. The
(Figure 16.7C). The transducer must be placed care-
line should appear smooth, distinct, and continuous.
fully perpendicular to the tendon fiber to avoid a drop
The humcral head is located at a depth of 1-3cm and
in tendon echogenicity (anisotropy) that could be con-
is covercd by muscles. Because of the semicircular
fused for a lesion (Figure 16.7A and B). The tendon is
 anatomy of the head, only a small section of the surface
surrounded by a thin hypoechoic halo, consistent with
can be assessed. In these perpendicular views, the
the tendon sheath,which is typically fusiform to oval
bone surface appears as a distinct, curvilinear, hyper-
 on cross section (Figure 16.7C). Thin, linear, hypere-
echoic line, with a 0.5- to 0.7-mm anechoic central band
choic interfaces can be seen at the superficial and deep
that represents the cartilage. The caudal and cranial
margins of the sheath at the interface level of the
borders of thehumeral head are scanned tangentially
BM
SGT
ITG
Humerus
Proximal
Distal
Figure 16.7. Normal sonographic anatomy of the biceps
tendon in dogs. A and B: In these longitudinal sonographic
and schematic images of the normal biceps tendon, the most
proximal (A) and distal (B) portions of this tendon are seen
(between the arrowheads) (see probe B on Figure 16.1). The
characteristic hyperechoic echotexture of the tendon is well
visualized when imaged perpendicularly. This tendon is
hypoechoic (*) at the level of origin on the supraglenoid tuber-
cle (SGT), as well as in curved portions more distally. Deep to
the tendon, the intertubercular groove (ITG) appears as a
SS
curved, hyperechoic interface. The proximal portion of the
biceps muscle (BM) is seen distal to the humeral head. C:
Transverse sonographic and schematic images obtained at the
MaT
level of the intertubercular groove (ITG). When imaged per-
pendicularly, the biceps tendon (BT) appears as a uniformly
hyperechoic oval to flat structure surrounded by a thin
TG
hypoechoic rim (arrows) represcnting the tendon sheath with
some fluid. The biceps tendon slides along the latcral aspect
Medial
Lateral
of the minor tubercle (MiT),medial to the major tuberclc
(MaT) and supraspinatus tendon of insertion (SST).
469
470MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM
 and appear indistinct, making them difficult to assess.
Infraspinatus Muscle
 In these planes, the synovium appears hypoechoic
ContractureoftheInfraspinatusMuscle
Distinct
with small hyperechoic dots. The outer, curved line
abnormalities in both echogenicity and echo pattern
above the cartilage represents the joint capsule (Figure
are seen in the affected muscle. The transition from
16.8). This merges with the echotexture of the covering
muscle to tendon, and the tendon itself,are usually
musculature.Accurate differentiation of these struc-
affected. These areas are highly inhomogeneous with
tures is usually not possible (Kramer and Gerwing
hypoechoic and hyperechoic zones. The tendinous
1994).
tissue appears edematous with irregular margins
(Kramer et al. 1996;Siems et al.1998).
Biceps Tendon
TenosynovitisThe ultrasonographic characteristics
of bicipital tenosynovitis in dogs can be classified
according to severity (Kramer et al. 2001b) (Table 16.1).
The bicipital tendon appears mildly to severely thick-
ened, losing its normal flat to oval shape to become
rounded. Its normal fibrillar pattern can also be
affected. Hypoechoic areas caused by partial tears
and/or hcmorrhage can be seen (Figure 16.11).
Theaffectedtendon may alsoappear significantly
inhomogeneous.
Tendon sheath effusion, which is often observed,
appears as an enlarged hypoechoic to anechoic halo
surrounding the affected tendon. The effusion can
Figure 16.8.Normal sonographic anatomy of the shoulder
range from mild to severe and is well visualized on
joint. Longitudinal sonographic image obtained at the cau-
transverse images over the intertubercular groove
dolateral aspect of the shoulder. The humeral head (HH)
(Figures 16.11 and 16.12). In most cases, the thickened
appears as a shadowing, hyperechoic, convex interface. The
adjacent articular cartilage and small volumc of synovial
synovium cannot be easily distinguished from the
fluid appear as a thin hypocchoic band. The surrounding
synovial fluid. However,irregular synovial thickening
joint capsule JC) is hyperechoic. C, thin layer of cartilage
or flocculent synovial fluid can be observed in some
and synovial fluid.
 dogs (Long and Nyland 1999). Fibrous adhesions with
SonographicFeatures of Specific
Table 16.1.
Bicipital tenosynovitis in dogs
Shoulder Disorders
Grade 1
Mild effusion of the tendon sheath(anechoic
Supraspinatus Muscle
ring <2mm thick)
Supraspinatus Tendonitis and Mineralization
Normaltendon
Inflamed or degenerated supraspinatus tendons
Grade2
Moderateeffusionof the tendon sheath
can be thickened and inhomogeneous bccausc of
(anechoic ring 2-3mm thick)
fibrous disruption, hemorrhage, and/or f
fibrosis.
Tendon mildly inhomogeneous
Mineralization can also be found in the region of inser-
Grade3
Severe effusion of the tendon sheath (anechoic
tion on the major tubercle in the distal part of the
ring >3mm,cxtending further distally and
tendon, although it may also be found in some clini-
medially in the tendon sheath)
cally normal dogs. These mineral foci appear as small,
Tendon moderately to severely
inhomogeneous and thickened or reduced to
hyperechoic, irregularly defined structures, with or
dunis e
without distal acoustic shadowing and with or without
a surrounding hypoechoic to anechoic area (reaction
Grade 4
Maximal distensionof the tendon sheath
tissue) (Gerwing and Kramer 1994; Long and Nyland
because of traumatic hemorrhage
Tendononlymildlytomoderately abnormal
1999) (Figures 16.9 and 16.10)
471ATLAS OF SMALLANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
0.47cm
0.47cm
Latera
Figure 16.9. Calcifying supraspinatus tendinopathy. A and B: Mediolateral and tangential radiographs of the intertuber-
cular groove in a large-breed dog with shoulder pain. Small mineral opacilies (arrows) are observed in the region of insertion
of the supraspinatus tendon, located just lateral to the intertubercular groove and biceps tendon (arrowhcads). C: Transverse
sonographic and schematic images of the intertubcrcular groove in the same dog. An irregular, hyperechoic, shadowing focus
is in the distal supraspinatus tendon (ST), consistent with mineralization. This mineralization, as seen in the tangential
radiographic projection, is adjacent to the biceps tendon (BT). Moderate distension of the biceps tendon shcath is observed,
as the result of tenosynovitis, which was suspected to be secondary to the supraspinatus tendon lesion. MaT, major tubercle;
and MiT, minor tubercle.
the tendon, particularly within the bicipital groove,  ing musculature (Rivers et al. 1992; Kramer ct al. 2001b;
can also be seen on dynamic sonograms.In severe
Esterline et al. 2005) (Figure 16.11E and F).
cases, the tendon sheath develops a bulge in the direc-
Exostoses (osteophytes) can form within the intertu-
tion of the minor tubercle. The wall of the tendon bercular groove as a result of chronic degenerative
sheath is clearly visible as a hyperechoic line repre-
joint disease and/or bicipital tenosynovitis. The exos
senting theborderbetween the fluid and the surround-
toses are attached to the tendon sheath and appear as
472MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM
M
Proxima
Figure 16.10.Calcifying supraspinatus tendinopathy. Longitudinal (A) and transverse (B) sonographic and schematic views
of the supraspinatus tendon (SST) in a large-breed dog with shoulder pain.The supraspinatus tendon is inhomogeneous and
presents several hyperechoic foci some of which cause acoustic shadowing, consistent with fibrosis and mincralization.BT,
biceps tendon; and MT, major tubercle.
hyperechoic,more or less concave,smooth,curved
choic bone fragments with acoustic shadowing can be
structures. Acoustic shadowing is usually present  visible (Figure 16.15A). The proximalpartofthe tendon
when these mineral deposits exceed 2-3mm (Figure
16.12). In severe cases, the surrounding osteophytic
inhomogeneous. In contrast to a complete rupture,
formations may form a tumnel around the tendon, sig-
 areas of tendon tissue displaying a normal fibrillar
nificantlyhampering thevisualization of the tendon
echotexture can be found in a transverse image.A
(Figure 16.13). Mineralization of the bicipital tendon
hypoechoic to anechoic region, also called core lesion,
sheath cannot easily be distinguished from migrating
can be found in the central portion of the affected
calcified bodies, such as those related to osteochondri-
tendon, at the level of fibrillar disruption and hema
tis dissecans.
toma formation, associated with tendon enlargement
(Figures 16.11 and 16.15B) A cleft can also be observed
CompleteandPartialTendonRupturesWith
complete rupture, the homogeneous parallel, fibrillar
Tendon sheath effusion devclops around the tcndon
structure of the tendon is destroyed. The gap be-
(Kramer et al. 2001b).
tween retracted tendon stumps is usually anechoic or
hypoechoic,and moderate to severe tendon sheath
Fractures of the Supraglenoid TubercleThefrac-
effusion can be observed as the result of hemorrhage
tured supraglenoid tubercle is visualized at the proxi-
(Figure 16.14). The distal stump commonly is of mixed
mal extent of the biceps tendon as a hyperechoic, more
echogenicity and echotexture.
or less convex structure with smooth margins and
Most partial ruptures occur in the area of the supra-
 acoustic shadowing. The fragment can be seen moving
glenoid tubercle. At this site, multiple, small, hypere-
with the tendon during dynamic flexion and extension
x0.68cm
Lateral
Lateral
Figure 16.11. Bicipital tenosynovitis. A and B: Transverse (A) and longitudinal (B) sonograms of the biceps tendon (arrow-
hcads) of a Labrador retriever scanned at the level of the intertubercular groove (ITG). The tendon is enlarged and rounded.
A hypoechoic core lesion is in the center of thc tcndon, consistent with tendonitis with probable partial rupture.The tendon
sheath (arrow) is mildly distended. C-E: Variable levels of tendon sheath distension (arrows) in several dogs with tenosyno-
vitis. Hypoechoic lesions are in the central portion of the biceps tendon (BT) (E). F: Distension of the tendon sheath in another
dog with bicipital rupture and hemorrhage. The tendon sheath (arrows) is filled with inhomogeneously echogenic hematomas
that encircle the biceps tendon (BT).
473
TG
aspect of the bicipital tendon sheath. The adjacent tendon (between the cursors) is mildly thickened. B: Tendon shcath wall
mineralization can appear as a hyperechoic senicircular groove (arrows) that may partially or completely encircle the biceps
tendon.
ITG
0.72cm
×0.60cm
Lateral
Proximal
Figure 16.13.Chronic bicipital tcnosynovitis with mincralization.A:Mediolateral radiographic view of the shoulder of a
4-year-old Rottwciler with chronic shoulder pain and lameness. Mineralization is found along the intertubercular groove
(arrows), as well as in the distal region of the tendon sheath.Periarticular new bone formation is also present at the caudal
aspect of the shoulder, consistent with degenerative joint disease. B and C: Transverse (B) and longitudinal (C) sonographic
images of the intertubercular groove (ITG) on which an irregular and hyperechoic mineral cast partially encircles the biceps
tendon (arrows). The tendon (between the cursors) is enlarged and presents a hypoechoic line (arrowhead) consistent with
a tear.
SGT
Figure 16.14. Cornplete bicipital tendon rupture. Longitudinal (A) and transverse (B-D) sonographic images of the biceps
tendon and muscle in a dog with non-weight-bearing lameness.Significant distension of the tendon sheath (TS) is recognized.
Hypercchoic and inhomogeneous retracted ends of the biceps tendon (arrows in B and C) are noted. Mildly echogenic regions,
consistent with hemorrhage,are in the synovial sheath (C). The proximal portion of the biceps tendon (A,arrows) and muscle
noid tubercle. Images courtesy of D. Penninck
Figure 16.15.Partial bicipital tendon rupture. A: Longitudinal sonogram of the proximal portion of the biccps tendon in a
(BT), which is also enlarged. The tencdon sheath (TS) has excessive fluid accumulation. H, humerus. Image B courtesy of
D.Penninck.
475
476MUSCULOSKELETALSYSTEM
of the shoulder,in associationwithmoderate tendon
dynamic examination, the tendon slides back into the
sheath efusion (Gerwing and Kramer 1994). The
groove intermittently. The ruptured ligament cannot
surface of the tubercle appears irregular, and a bone
be visualized sonographically (Gerwing and Kramcr
defect can be observed. In cases of partial avulsion
1994; Kramer et al. 2001b).
fracture,small bone fragments can be identified adja
cent to the supraglenoid tubercle. Hyperechoic foci are
Joint
observed in the proximal tendon and may be associ-
ated with acoustic shadowing (Kramer et al. 2001b)
OsteochondritisDissecansThe subchondral defect
(Figure 16.15A).
on the caudal part of the humeral head can be visual-
ized as an irregularity in the hyperechoic convex
Calcified BodiesintheTendonSheathFreebodies
bone surface. The defect appears hypoechoic, with or
in the tendonsheath and caudal to thehumeralhead
without hyperechoic dots or lines, because of disturbed
areusuallycausedbyosteochondritisdissecans
endochondral ossification and osteochondral fissures
(OCD). Depending on their size, these are chips
Or fragments (Figure 16.19). The length of the defect
(>2mm), microchips (1-2mm), or stipples (<1mm).
can be measured (0.5-20mm) via a craniocaudal scan.
Ultrasonographically, these bodies appear as hypere-
"Joint mice" might be present within the bicipital
choic, rounded or flat structures of different sizes that
tendon sheath along with effusion of both the joint
may cast acoustic shadows. They can be located any-
space and tendon sheath (Tacke et al. 1999; Vandevelde
where around the tendon within the synovial sheath,
et al. 2006) (Figure 16.16).
which is usually distended (Kramcr et al. 2001b)
(Figure 16.16). These migrated bodics may adhere
Osteoarthritis In chronic  osteoarthritis，t
the
to the synovium and be difficult to differentiate
joint space of thc shoulder appears distended and
from osteophytic formations, osteochondromas (Figure
hypoechoic. Thc joint capsule is visible as a hypere.
16.17), or even primary bone tumors.
choic, thickened line (Figure 16.20). The cartilage can
be thickened and, depending on the duration of the
Tendon LuxationRupture of the transverse liga-
disease, becomes increasingly echogenic and inhomo-
 ment causes medial luxation of the tendon over the
geneous (Gerwing and Kramer 1994). Irregularities of
minor tubercle, which then cannot be demonstrated in
the bone surface at the periphery of the joint are rec-
the intertubercular groove. Instead, a moderate effu-
ognized when periarticular osteophytes develop.
sion of the tendon sheath is seen.The oval tendon with
its typical fibrillar echotexture can be found in the
InstabilityShoulder joint instabilities can be deter-
region of the minor tubercle (Figure 16.18). During
mined by performing a dynamic scan of the joint to see
MT
Proximal
Lateral
Figure 16.16. Migrating osteochondral fragments. Longitudinal and transverse sonograms of the distal tendon sheath in a
dog with osteochondritis dissecans of the humeral head. Numerous hyperechoic foci (arrows) are in the distended tendon
apparent on the surface of the humerus. MT, major tubercle. Images courtesy of D. Penninck.
Lateral
Figure 16.17. Osteochondromatosis. Transverse sonographic and schematic images obtaincd at the proximolateral aspect
of the shoulder in a large-breed dog with chronic shoulder pain. An irregular, hyperechoic, strongly shadowing interface is
lateral to the major tubercle (MT) and biceps tendon (BT), associated with thickening of the synovium (S) and joint capsule
osteochondroma.
BT
M
Media
Figure 16.18. Biceps tendon luxation. In these transverse sonographic and schematic images of the intertubercular groove
of a dog, the biceps tendon (BT) appcars displaced medially over the minor tubercle (MiT). The tendon sheath is filled with
fluid at the level of the bicipital groove. MaT, major tuberclc; and TS,tendon sheath.
Figure 16.19. Osteochondritis dissecans. Sonographic image
of the humeral head in a dog with osteochondritis dissecans.
An irregular osseous defect (arrows) is noted along the sub-
chondral portion of the humeral head (HH). The overlying
hypoechoic cartilage (C) is thickened.
477
478 MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM
joint disease.The thickened synovium and joint capsule JC) appear as a hyperechoic band adjacent to the hypoechoic articular
cartilage and fluid (C/F). SC, subchondral bone of the humeral head.
the abnormal gliding of the humeral head. However,
this evaluation is subjective and often requires a com-
 parison with the contralateral shoulder.
ELBOW
Although radiography, computed tomography, and
magnetic resonance imaging are most commonly used
to image the elbow, ultrasonography can represent a
useful tool in practice, particularly in the assessment
 of soft-tissue structures. The approach to the normal
canine elbow has been well described (Knox et al. 2003;
Lamb and Wong 2005).
Figure 16.21. Scanning technique for the medial aspect of
the elbow. Illustration showing the position of the dog and
Scanning Technique and Normal
ultrasound probe when scanning the medial aspect of the
Ultrasonographic Anatomy
elbow.
A linear, high-frequency (>10MHz) ultrasound trans-
ducer is preferred for assessing all portions of the
sedation. The hair around the elbow is clipped, and the
humerus. The distal portion of the triceps muscle can
patient initially is placed in lateral recumbency with
be seen caudolatcrally inserting onto the olecranon.
the elbow of interest up. After the lateral aspect of the
Distally, the lateral region of the elbow is initially
joint has been evaluated,the patient is turned over
 scanned in cross section to better identify all muscles
to assess the medial structures more easily (Figure
and tendons.Each muscle and tendon is then scanned
16.21).
longitudinally. The most conspicuous muscle is the
extensor carpi radialis located on the craniolateral
aspect of the forearm. Caudal to this region, the
Lateral Aspect: Muscles and Lateral
common and lateral digital extensor tendons, as well
Collateral Ligament
 as the extensor carpi ulnaris, are visualized.
The humerus and the brachialis muscle on the proxi-
Thelateral collateral ligament is very thin and more
mal craniolateral aspect of the joint are examined.
easily assessed proximally because it displays multi-
During flexion and extension of the elbow, the
ple, fine, hyperechoic parallel lines that attach to the
hypocchoic brachialis muscle can be shown to slide
lateral humeral epicondyle. The distal aspect of the
against the smooth, linear, hyperechoic interface of the
ligament is typically hypoechoic because the sound
479ATLASOF SMALL ANIMALLLTRASONOGRAPHY
beam cannot be dirccted perpendicular to its longitu-
16.22B). The ligament fibers spread caudally to the
dinal axis.
ulna and become slightly thicker near the radius.
Because of the oblique course of the medial collateral
Caudal Aspect: Triceps, Olecranon,
ligament, it is often not possible to identify the fibrillar
and Anconeal Process
pattern in the distal portion (Lamb and Wong 2005).
The biceps brachii tendon can be visualized on the
The elbow joint is flexed, and the ultrasound probe is
cranial aspect of the distal humerus and followed to
initially placed cranially on the olecranon. When a sag-
its insertion sites on the ulnar and radial tuberosities,
ittal, perpendicular plane is used, the distal portion of
just adjacent to the medial coronoid process (Lamb
the triceps muscle appears as a hyperechoic structure
and Wong 2005) (Figure 16.22A). This tendon shows a
with multiple fine parallel lines, representing the col-
typical echotexture with hyperechoic lines. When the
lagen fibers, which insert onto the olecranon. Two dis-
probe is moved proximally during a transverse scan,
tinct protuberances are recognized on the proximal
the surface of the medial coronoid process (MCP)
aspect of the olecranon: the craniolateral and cranio-
comes into view as an angular process on the medial
medial tuberosities,which are located proximal to the
aspect of the ulna (Figure 16.22). The MCP is located
anconeal process. The transducer is then slightly
deep to the medial collateral ligament and biceps
rotated laterally,enabling visualization of the outline
tendon (Lamb and Wong 2005). A 90° flexion of the
of the anconeal process. This process is examined as
elbow and rotation of the forearm around its longi-
the transducer is moved medially from the most lateral
tudinal axis may facilitate the identification of this
edge of the olecranon. The normal anconeal process
structure.
appears as a curved, hyperechoic interface. Artifactual
pseudoindentations are a common finding on the
surface of the bone. The caudal joint capsule is usually
SonographicFeatures of Specific
not visible. The caudal structures of the joint are
ElbowDisorders
scanned in flexion and extension of the elbow by
OsteoarthritisandSepticArthritis
placing the probe on the lateral epicondyle.
Even minor effusions of the elbow joint can be visual-
CranialAspect:Joint Space,Muscles,Vessels,
ized. Anechoic fluid in a recess of the joint can always
and Nerves
be interpreted as a sign of a pathological process and
is most commonly related to elbow dysplasia. With
This region is examined after the elbow joint has been
chronic degenerative joint disease (DJD), the joint
extended. Proximally, both the brachialis and biceps
capsule is visible as a hyperechoic, thick line be-
brachi muscles (Figure 16.22A) can be distinguished;
tween the synovium and the surrounding muscula-
distally, the extensor carpi radialis muscle is visible. In
ture.Periarticular new bone formations, caused by
addition,vessels and nerves embedded within the
 osteoarthritis, appear as irregularly circumscribed pro-
adipose tissue can be visualized. The cranial portion
tuberances on the bony surfaces (Michele et al.1998)
 e se sede s ul a an jo
(Figure 16.24). However, it must be pointed out that
hypoechoic cleft between the smooth, hyperechoic
similar findings may be found with septic arthritis.
contours of the humeral condyles and radial head.
Rapidly progressive, echogenic joint effusion is more
The normal joint capsule and synovium cannot
differentiated.
16.23).
Medial Aspect: Medial Collateral Ligament and
Osteochondritis Dissecans
Medial CoronoidProcess
Osteochondrosis or OCD, which typically affects the
In the proximal caudomedial rcgion of the elbow, the
medial articular portion of the humeral condyle,is
two heads of the triceps brachi muscle can be differ-
difficult to assess sonographically because of the local-
entiated. The medial epicondyle is initially assessed in
ization of the defect (Michele et al. 1998). Displaced
a longitudinal plane and appears as curved, slightly
 Osteochondral fragments may be visible.
irregular, hyperechoic interface on the distomedial
aspect of the humerus. The medial collateral ligament,
which merges from the medial epicondyle, appears
Fragmented Medial CoronoidProcess
proximally as a thin, linear, hyperechoic structure that
Acompletelydetached coronoid bone fragment
is densely packed with fine, parallel echoes (Figure
can sometimes be identified as a very hyperechoic
480MUSCULOSKELETAI. SYSTEM
Proxim
HC
MG
Proximal
MCP
Figure 16.22. Normal sonographic anatomy of the canine elbow. A: Longitudinal sonographic and schematic images of the
craniomedial aspect of the elbow. A portion of the distal biceps brachi (BB) appears as a hyperechoic fusiform structure with
dense hyperechoic lines inserting on the craniomedioproximal surface of the ulna (U). B: Longitudinal sonographic and
schenatic images obtained just medial to A. The medial collatcral ligament (arrows) is just medial to the medial coronoid
process (MCP) and humeral condyle (HC). C: Transverse-oblique sonographic and schematic images of the craniomedial
aspect of the elbow. The hyperechoic interface of the medial coronoid process (MCP) is well visualized adjacent to the head
Of the radius (R). The joint capsule is a hyperechoic band (arrow) that cannot be consistently distinguished from collateral
ligaments.
structure with acoustic shadowing, cranial or medial
Ununited AnconealProcess
to its anatomically correct position (Figure 16.24). The
presence of new bone formation on the medial coro-
Ununited anconeal process is recognized as an inter-
noid process, as the result of DJD, may be confused for
ruption of the hyperechoic outline of the protuberance
fragmentation of the MCP. In general, fissurcs of the
(Figure 16.25). In some cases, movement of the frag-
MCP cannot be displayed sonographically. Performing
 ment can be demonstrated with a dynamic sonogram.
a dynamic examination with flexion and extension of
In chronic disease,an anechoic moderate effusion,
thejoint may lead to movementof the fragment, thereby
hypcrcchoic thickening of the joint capsule, and/or
confirming the diagnosis (Schleich et al. 1992).
irregularly circumscribed, hyperechoic, arthritic new
481ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
bone formations may be observed (Michele et al.
1998).
FragmentationorAvulsionof theMedical
Humeral Epicondyleand Metaplasiaof
theDeepDigital FlexorMuscle
Mineralization associated with the carpal and digital
flexor nuscles, which originate on the medial humeral
Proximal
epicondyle, are sometimes seen in dogs.These
may relate to avulsionfractures,fragmentation,and/
Figure 16.23. Septic arthritis. Longitudinal sonogram of
 Or dystrophic mineralization (Figure 16.26). These may
the caudolateral aspect of the elbow of a dog with septic
also relate to muscular metaplasia (Michele and
arthritis.A focal accumulation of inhomogeneous,echogenic
Gerwing 1999) (Figure 16.27). Adhesions to the joint
fluid (arrows) is present, consistent with pus.
capsule can be present, although this feature cannot be
ME
MCF
MCP
Proximal
Proximal
obtained in two dogs in the region of the medial coronoid process (MCP). An irregular discontinuity of the craniomedial
surface of these processes is noted, as well as suspected displaced fragments (arrows). Periarticular new bone formation con-
sistent with dcgcnerative joint disease has caused an irregularity in the medial surface of the humeral condyle (HC). ME,
medial humeral epicondylc.
Cranial
Figure 16.25. Ununited anconeal process. Longitudinal sonographic and schematic images obtained at the level of the
anconeal process (AP) in a dog with suspected elbow dysplasia. The probe is placed on the dorsal (cranioproximal) surface
of this process. A V-shaped cleft (arrows) is noted cranial to the olecranum (Ol), consistent with an ununitcd anconeum.
Hyperechoic dots consistent with partial mineralization are noted within the cleft.
ME
ME
Proximal
Proximal
obtained at the caudomedial aspect of the medial humeral epicondyle (ME) in a dog. Numerous oval hyperechoic structures
(arrows) consistent with calcified bodies are present at the medial aspect of the cubital joint and proxinal ulna (U). The adja-
cent soft tissues are inhomogeneous and enlarged. The medial epicondyle surface is also irregular. Images courtesy of
D.Penninck.
482
483ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
Figure 16.27. Metaplasia of thc dccp digital flexor muscle. Longitudinal sonographic and schematic images obtained at the
caudomedial aspect of the medial humeral epicondyle (ME) in another dog. A well-defincd, hypcrcchoic oval structure with
strong acoustic shadowing is noted that is consistent with a calcified body. The adjacent muscles (M) are enlarged and inho.
STIFLE
Scanning Technique and Normal
SonographicAnatomy
A high-frequency linear transducer (>10MHz) is
usually preferred for assessing all structures of the
knee. The hair must be clipped from the distal third of
the femur to just below the tibial tuberosity. Initially,
the dog is placed in lateral recumbency with the
affected limb up (Figure 16.29A). The final dynamic
Hy
examination requires flexion and extension of the joint,
as well as inward and outward rotation of the knee in
the area of the menisci (Engelke et al. 1997a; Kramer
et al. 1999).
Figure 16.28.Hemorrhagic hygroma.The olecranon bursa
The stifle joint is examined from proximally to dis-
is markedly distended and filled with an anechoic fluid con-
tally. After scanning the cranial, caudal, and lateral
sistent with hygroma (Hy). Additionally, a large inhomoge-
aspects of the joint, the dog is turned over so that the
neous structure is found in the distended bursa indicative of
affected limb faces downward, allowing assessment of
a chronic hematoma (He).
the medial region (Figure 16.29B). The stifle can be
divided into five regions: suprapatellar,infrapatellar,
lateral, caudal, and medial (Kramer et al. 1999).
easily seen ultrasonographically. Concurrent elbow
Suprapatellar Region: Quadriceps Tendon,
dysplasia is common.
Femoral Trochlea,and Proximal Joint Recess
The suprapatellar region is proximal to the tendon of
Hygroma
the quadriccps femoris muscle. The knee is flexed to
 In large, heavy dogs, the olecranian bursa, which is
45°,and both longitudinal and transverse views are
located undcr the inscrtion of the triceps muscle, can  assessed, focusing on the distal femur, the patella, the
bccomc distcnded and/or inflamed.The bursa can
joint capsule, the suprapatellar recess,as well as the
be filled with variable fluid (blood, pus, or some other)
quadriceps femoris muscle and tendon (Figure 16.29A).
of variable echogenicity. The capsule is hyperechoic
The hyperechoic convex surface of the patella can be
and can be thickened (Michele et al. 1998) (Figure
used as a landmark. The suprapatellar indentation of
16.28).
the femoropatellar joint sac directly proximal to the
484 MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM
A
Figure 16.29. Scanning technique for the stifl. The position of the dog and ultrasound probe when using longitudinal
planes to scan the lateral and cranial aspects of the stifle (A) and medial (B) regions. Longitudinal and transverse planes must
be used in all regions.
patella is of particular interest. In a normal knee, the
suprapatellar recess is a 1- to 2-mm-thick or smaller,
anechoic, more or less inhomogeneous structure
located above thc hyperechoic shaft of the femur
(Figure 16.30). On the femoral side, the joint capsule
cannot be differentiated from the surrounding struc-
tures.However, in the region of the quadriceps femoris
muscle, part of the joint capsule can be seen as a hyper-
echoic line. In most dogs, the fascia of the quadriceps
muscle carnot be clearly differentiated from the sur-
rounding structures.
The distal tendon of the quadriceps femoris muscle
Proximal
and the femoral condyles, trochlea, and covering car-
tilagebecomeclearlyvisiblebymeansof a dynamic
Figure 16.30. Normal suprapatellar region. Longitudinal
scan. The articular cartilage is a 1- to 2-mm-thick
SOnogram of the suprapatellar region. The suprapatellar
anechoicbandlocated directly above the curvilinear,
recess is seen as a small anechoic focus (arrow) at the proxi-
hyperechoic subchondral surface of the femur. The
mal aspect of the fenmoral trochlea, just proximal to the
depth and surface continuity of this cartilage must be
patella (P). Only the convex, hyperechoic surface of the
examined (Figure 16.31).
patella can be seen.This structure limits the visualization of
The area above the patella can easily be evaluated
the fcmoral trochlea.F,femur.
in a transverse scan with the stifle maximally flexed.
This position enables the assessment of the cartilage,
Infrapatellar Region: Patella and Patellar
as well as the shape and depth of the femoral trochlea.
Ligament,Femoral Condyles,Infrapatellar
At this point, a dynamic examination (subsequent
Fat Body,and Cruciate Ligaments
flcxion and extension) enables the assessment of the
sliding movcmcnt of the patella into the trochlear
Because of the convexity of the femoral condyles,only
a few areas of the joint surface can be assessed. Multiple
groove.
485ATLASOF SMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
tibia to the region between thefemoral condyles.The
caudal cruciate ligament, which can be observed
when the knee is maximally extended,appears as a
hypoechoic, more or less ovoid structure. In small
dogs, the ligament cannot be visualized because of
limited space between the condyles that causes super-
imposition and artifacts. The space between the femur
and tibia is filled with homogeneous tissue of medium
echogenicity. Differentiation between the infrapatellar
fat body and the meniscus is usually not possible from
a cranial approach (Reed et al. 1995; Engelke et al.
Proximal
1997a; Kramer et al. 1999).
Figure 16.31. Normal trochlear ridge and cartilage.
Longitudinal sonogram of one of the ridges of thc trochlea
LateralAspect:Fabella,LateralCollateral
in a normal dog. The osseous portion of the ridge appears as
Ligament,Long Digital Extensor Tendon,
a smooth, convex, hyperechoic line and is covered by a thin
Lateral Meniscus,Joint Capsule,and Synovium
hypoechoic band (arrow) that represents the cartilage and
The surface of the lateral fabella is located immediately
synovial fluid. These latter components cannot be distin-
guished. TR, trochlear ridge.
above the surface of thecondyle.When a longitudinal
plane is used, the head of the gastrocnemius muscle
comesintoviewnext to the caudolateral outline of the
condyle and the fabella. The muscleis identified by the
imaging planes of each condyle are necessary. When
presence of the fabella within its tendon. The trans-
the stifle is extended, the patella slides proximally on
verse parts of the biceps femoris muscle and the super-
the trochlea, and the medial and laterai femoral con-
ficial digital extensor tendon run across the tibia.
dyles can be more fully examined. The joint cartilage
By means of a longitudinal plane centered on the
is anechoic and smoothly marginated (Figure 16.32).
lateral joint space, the lateral femoral and tibial con-
All planes must be used to ensure the identifica-
dyles are visualized proximally and distally, respec-
tion of defects, as well as to rule out artifactual
tively (Figures 16.29A and 16.33). Static and dynamic
pseudodefects.
sonograms are obtained with stifle flexion and exten-
As the knee is 90 flexed, the transducer is moved
sion, as well as internal and external rotations. The
over the patellar ligament and patella (Figure 16.29A).
joint capsule, the collateral ligaments, and the lateral
The patella, which appears as a hyperechoic, convex
meniscus can all be assessed on a longitudinal plane
line with strong acoustic shadowing, is partially
(Figure 16.33)
embedded in the patellar ligament, which presents a
The long digital extensor tendon, which demon-
characteristic hyperechoic band witha fibrillar echotex-
strates a typical fibrillar echotexture,runs bctwccn the
ture (Figure 16.32). A thin, echogenic, periligamentous
lateral meniscus and thc joint capsule, cranial to the
sheath is also seen (Mattern et al. 2006). The distal
collateral ligament. Thc origin of the tendon can be
margin of the patellar ligament appears slightly thicker
traced across the joint to the extensor fossa, a focal
and the insertion site is less echogenic than the rest of
depression in the craniolateral margin of the lateral
the structure.When viewed transvcrsally, the curved
femoral condyle.The tendon,which is surrounded by
margins of the ligament are not visible because of
its sheath, runs through the tibialis cranialis muscle.
edge-shadowing artifacts.
The tendon sheath is formed by an indentation of the
Beneath the patellar ligament, the infrapatellar fat
joint sac and cannot be identified (Mueller et al.
body is a triangular, poorly demarcated structure of
2002).
mixed echotexture, but primarily hypoechoic, located
The meniscus appears as a triangle structure of
cranial to the joint space (Figure 16.32). Within the
uniform, medium echogenicity located between the
infrapatellar fat body, vessels are often visible
as
femoral condyle and the tibial plateau (Mueller and
hyperechoic thin, double-lined,tubular structures with
Kramer 2003) (Figure 16.33). The abaxial surface of the
an anechoic center. With the stifle still flexed, lateral
lateral meniscus should be linear and perfectly aligned
rotation of the transducer by 20°enablesvisualization
with the surface of the adjacent femoral and tibial con-
of the hypoechoic to anechoic cranial cruciate liga-
dyles. Additionally, a fine hypoechoic line may be seen
ment, which extends from the cranial margin of the
on the femoral and tibial surfaces of the meniscus,
486MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM
L
Proximal
distal portions of the infrapatellar region of a normal dog. The patellar ligament (PL and arrows) appears as a moderately
ligament is relatively hypoechoic and granular in echotexture. Small vessels located within this fat body appear as hyperechoic
dots and lines.A thin hypoechoic band (arrowheads) consistent with cartilage and synovial fluid is noted on the surface of
the femoral trochlea (TT) and tibial plateau (TP))
consistent with articular cartilage and synovial fluid
as the popliteus and gastrocnemius muscles, are visible.
(Mahn et al. 2005) (Figure 16.33). When the collateral
The caudal horn of the meniscus appears sometimes
ligament is used as a landmark, three different regions
between the condyles of the femur and tibia(Kramer
can be examined: cranial horn, middle portion, and
et al. 1999)
caudal horn (Mahn et al. 2005).
Medial Aspect:Fabella,Medial Collateral
Caudal Aspect:Popliteal Lymph Node
Ligament, Medial Meniscus, Joint Capsule,
and Synovium
The caudal region of the stifle is examined in longitu-
dinal and transverse scans with the joint in a slightly
With the stifle subsequently extended andflexed,
flexed position. As opposed to the approach in human
the medial region is scanned from cranial to caudal,
knees, this approach provides fairly low visibility of
encompassing the medial femoral condyle. A longitu-
intra-articular structures in dogs. The popliteal artery
dinal plane is most useful, and the medial femoral
and lymph node can be found caudal to the stile joint,
condyle, tibial plateau, medial collateral ligament,
and portions of the caudal muscles of the thigh, as well
medial meniscus, joint capsule, and synovium are
487ATLAS OF SMALL ANIMAL ULTRASONOGRAPHY
Latera
C/F
Medial
MF
Lateral
Figure 16.33. Femoral menisci: sonographic approach and normal anatomy. When scanned using a longitudinal plane, the
menisci appcar as moderately echogenic, triangular structures (M and arrowheads on the medial side) located between each
femoral condyle and the opposite tibial plateau (TP). Thin hypoechoic layers consistent with articular cartilage and fluid (C/F
and arrowheads) are observed on each side of the menisci. Collateral ligaments (CL) can also be seen crossing the medial and
lateral aspects of the joint. LFC, lateral femoral condyle; and MFC, medial femoral condyle.
examined similarly as on the lateral side (Kramer et al.
In comparison to degenerative effusions, septic effu-
1999; Mueller et al. 2002) (Figures 16.29B and 16.33).
sions appear more echogenic, and floating particles
can be observed. Hemorrhagic effusions can range in
echogenicity, depending on their chronicity.
SonographicFeatures of Specific
Stifle Disorders
Joint Effusion
Osteoarthritis
In dogs with moderate to severe stifle effusion, dilata-
When osteoarthriticperiarticularnewbone formations
tion of the suprapatellar recess is visible as an anechoic,
develop, the contours of the patella,femoral trochlea
tubelike structure surrounded by a hyperechoicline
 ridges, condyles, and epicondyles, as well as the tibial
(joint capsule) (Figure 16.34A and B). Joint effusion 
plateau, become irregular (Figure 16.35). Joint effusion
also causes cranial displacement and compression of
is typically observed, and the infrapatellar fat
thc infrapatellar fat body, which becomes outlined by
body appears inhomogeneous and more echogenic.
the anechoic to hypocchoic fluid (Figure 16.35C).
Occasionally, small fluid-filled areas (cysts) can be
Distally, the distended synovial sheath that wraps
seen within this fat body (Kramer et al. 1999). In addi-
around the tendon of the long digital cxtensorbecomes
tion, the joint capsule appears thickened (a hypere-
clearly visible as an anechoic to hypocchoic tubular
choic band), and redundant synovial thickening can be
structure displacing the tibialis cranialis (Figurc
visualized, particularly if associated with significant
16.34D).
 joint effusion.
488MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM
一
Proximal
D
sion of the suprapatellar recess (*) along the femoral trochlea (FT) and ridges (R). P, patella; and QF, quadriceps femoris.
C: Longitudinal sonographic and schematic images of the infrapatellar area with the infrapatellar fat body being displaced
and heterogeneous. Anechoic effusion (*) is noted, delineating the degenerated articular cartilage that appcars morc cchogenic
along the femoral trochlea (FT). PL, patcllar ligamcnt; and TP, tibial plateau. D: Longitudinal sonographic and schematic
images of the distal joint sulcus, which is distended with anechoic synovial fluid (*) and encircling the long digital extensor
tendon (LDE) and displacing the tibialis cranialis (TC) muscle cranially. T, tibia.
Patellar Luxation
stiflejoint, the trochlear cartilage and groove depth can
be assessed and measured.
By using a transverse plane with the transducer placed
at thelevel of the femoral trochlea, a luxated patella
Patellar Fractures and Desmopathies
can be seen as an oval, hyperechoic structure with
acoustic shadowlocatedmedially or laterally tothe
A fracture of the patella is seen as an interruption
trochlea ridges. The trochlear groove is typically
of the outline of the smoothbone surface(Kramer
shallow.With subsequent extension and flexion of the
et al. 1999) and is often associated with damage to the
489ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
B
TR
Proximal
Medial
Figure 16.35.Stifle osteoarthritis. A and B: Longitudinal sonograms of the proximaljoint recess (A) and infrapatellar region
(B) in a dog with chronic stifl degenerative joint disease. Anechoic joint effusion is present, and the joint capsule and
synovium (IJC/S, arrows) are thickened. The carilage (C) along the trochlea is hyperechoic and heterogeneous. The infrapatel-
degenerated and ruptured cranial cruciate ligamcnt (CL). P, patella; TP,tibial plateau; and TR, trochlear ridge. C: Transverse
sonographic image of the femoral trochlea in another dog with degenerative joint discasc.Thc cranial surfaccs of thc trochlcar
ridges (arrows) are irregular because of osteophytosis. The proximal joint recesses at the medial aspect of the trochlea and
over the trochlear groove (TG) are filled with anechoic fluid (*)
quadriceps tendon (proximally) or patellar ligament
ends of the ligament are clearly visible.Approximately
(distally).
6-7 weeks later, the fibers are oriented longitudinally,
Ruptures of the patellar ligament can be partial or
resulting in decreased thickness of the tendon. The
complete. In both cases, the ligament appears edema-
healing ligament appears more homogeneous, and its
tous and hypoechoic to hyperechoic with irregular
echogenicity resemblesthat of anormalligament.
margins at the site of rupture. With avulsion fracture,
 However, some inhomogeneous areas may remain for
small hyperechoic bone fragments are visible at the
months (Kramer et al. 1999).
extremity of theligament and associatedwith acoustic
 Patellar thickening is also recognized following
shadowing if more than 2-3mm wide (Figure 16.36).
tibial plateau-leveling Osteotomy (TPLO), particularly
When a longitudinal plane is used, a separation of the
in large dogs (Mattern et al. 2006). Postoperative
ruptured ends can be observed as the knee is flexed.
changes noted at 1 month also include hypocchoic to
During therapy, this view enables the evaluation and
documentation of the healing and consolidation
ments. These changes have been significantly linked to
process. Initially, the area of insult becomcs thicker
 the degree of tibial plateau rotation during the proce-
and inhomogeneous with a mixed echotexture. Both
dure, supporting the role for increased stress in the
490MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM
in a dog with acute stifle pain and swelling. The patellar ligament (arrowheads) is irregularly thickened and heterogeneous.
A hyperechoic,partially shadowing bony fragment (arrow) is just distal to the patella (P), consistent with fracture of the apex.
The distal margin of the patella is abnormally flat, and the patella is displaced proximally. TG, trochlear groove.
development ofpatellarligamentdesmitis(Mattern et
al. 2006). However, thcsc changes may be clinically
 insignificant in most dogs.
Avulsion fracture of the tibial tuberosity can also be
visualized in the infrapatellar region. During a dynamic
ultrasound exam, the acutely avulsed bony structure
can move during flexion of the knee, confirming the
diagnosis. However, this motion can be limited, par-
ticularly if a fibrous callous is already present.
Proximal
Osteochondritis Dissecans
OCD appears as an irregular defect on the contour of
Figure 16.37. Osteochondritis dissecans. Longitudinal
the subchondral bone, typically at the lateral condyle.
sonographic image of the lateral femoral condyle (FC) in a
The abnormal cartilage can vary in thickness and echo-
young dog. A concave defect (arrows) is filled with mildly
   e   
echogenic and partially mineralized cartilage.
geneous. Detached pieces of cartilage are seen as
hypercchoic structures of variable size. Other free
bodies may also be visible, and their location can be
determined (Kramer et al. 1999) (Figure 16.37). Joint
period (chronic rupture), the irregularly demarcated
effusion is typically observed in association with OCD,
 and hyperechoic stumps of the ligament can be seen
and periarticular osteophytes develop in the chronic.
(Figure 16.38). The stump close to the ligamcnt inser-
tion on the tibia can be more easily visualized, whercas
phase.
the other stump, near the origin on the femur, is less
often visualized (Engelke et al. 1997b; Kramer et al.
Cranial Cruciate Ligament Rupture
1999). The visibility of the cranial cruciate ligament is
To assess the presence of cranial cruciate ligamentous
limited if a large volume of effusion is present, because
damage, a cranial, longitudinal approach is used, and
this structure appears hypoechoic when scanned at an
angle (Kramer et al. 1999; Gnudi and Bertoni 2001).
the stifle must be completely flexed,which may be
Avulsion fragments may also be recognized as more
acutely ruptured cranial cruciate ligament cannot be
 or less shadowing hyperechoic foci in the central
identified in most cases (Gnudi and Bertoni 2001).
portion of the joint. Chronic ruptures are commonly
However, in the region of the cranial cruciate ligament,
associated with fibrous tissue proliferation in the
an irregular, anechoic area (hematoma) can sometimes
region just cranial to the intercondylar groove, which
be identified (Kramer et al. 1999; Gnudi and Bertoni
i  appears as an irregular, hyperechoic structure (Gnudi
2001). lf the rupture has been present for a longer
and Bertoni 2001) (Figure 16.35B)
491ATLAS OFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
Proximal
Figure 16.38.Cranial cruciate ligament rupture. Longitudinal sonographic and schematic images of the infrapatellar region
nd n o d p  e se  po ( s  am 
O, osteophytosis over the femoral trochlea; P, patella; and PL, patellar ligament.
Meniscal Tears and Degeneration
minor and major lesions may be present. A hypere-
choicdoublelineisusuallyindicativeof meniscal tear
Meniscal tears and degenerative changes are more
(Mueller and Kramer 2003).
commonly obscrved medially and secondary to stifle
Joint effusion can be observed at the periphery of the
instability caused by cranial cruciate rupture. Isolated
affected meniscus, as well as a change in meniscal
meniscal damage is rarc in dogs and may affect more
shape or position (Mahn et al. 2005). Affected menisci
commonly the lateral meniscus (Mahn et al. 2005).
may bulge axially (medial meniscus) or abaxially
Most tears appear to present a buckct-handle configu-
(lateral meniscus) or show an irregular contour (Figure
ration. However, because of the difficulty in visualiz-
16.39A). Effusion or replacement tissue may also be
ing the internal portion of the menisci, partial and
found in the region of the meniscus after surgical exci-
complete tears can be difficult to visualize.
sion (Figure 16.39C).
 Chronic meniscal degeneration has a characteristic
appearance that can be more easily recognized.
The involved meniscus appears edematous, and the
Collateral Ligament Rupture
echotexture is distinctly inhomogeneous with hypere-
In cases of severe and acute rupture of the medial or
choic and hypoechoic areas (Figure 16.39A).
lateral collateral ligaments, a discontinuity of the
A decreasein thevisibility ofa meniscus maybe due
affected ligament may be identified. Typically, hema-
to its displacement. However, it must be pointed out
tomas are found at the level of the tear, seen as
that thissign doesnot necessarilyindicate thepresence
hypoechoic to anechoic, homogeneous to mildly inho-
 of meniscal disease. Ultrasonographic assessment of
 mogeneous areas. When a longitudinal medial or
the menisci can be limited by several factors, including
lateral approach is used, a dynamic examination of the
severe fibrosis of the soft tissues along the medial
joint space while stressing its opening medially and
aspect of the joint,marked osteophytosis caused by
laterally may confirm joint instability. Joint effusion
severe DJD, and previous surgery (Mahn et al. 2005).
rapidly devclops and appears as bulging medial and/
The size of the dog may also represent a limiting factor
 Or lateral synovial recesses. Capsular tear may also be
because thinncr menisci (small patients) or deeper
present, and fluid may have accumulated in the peri-
menisci (very large or obese dogs) can be more difficult
articular soft tissues.
to visualize well (Muellcr and Kramer 2003).
Another sign of meniscal disease is the presence of
hyperechoie lines, double lines, and stipples within a
Avulsionof theLongDigital ExtensorTendon
meniscus (Figure 16.39B). If these foci are widely dis-
tributed and numerous, large lesions within the menis-
In cases of avulsion fracture of the origin of the long
cus are likely.However, a smaller size or number docs
digital extensor tendon, shadowing hyperechoic foci
not necessarily correlate with less severe lesions. Both
consistent with bone fragments can be found just distal
492 MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM
Proximal
Figure 16.39. Meniscal degeneration and luxation. A-C: Longitudinal sonographic and corresponding schematic images of
degenerated menisci in dogs. In all dogs, the medial margins of the tibial plateau (TP) and medial femoral condyle (FC) are
irregular because of periarticular new bone formation. A: The medial meniscus is bulging medially (arrowheads) and presents
a hyperechoic band (arrow). B: Hyperechoic stripes (arrows) are found in the meniscus of this other dog. C: The region of
the medial meniscus is filled with synovial fluid () because of meniscal luxation.
to the level of the extensor fossa at thelateral femoral
slight movements of the probe in cranial and caudal
condyle (Kramer et al. 1999).
directions, the joint capsule can be identified. The
face with acoustic shadowing. The shadowing caused
HIP
by the femoral head represents a significant limiting
factor in assessing the coxofemoral joint space and
Scanning Technique and Normal
acetabulum, particularly when a transverse plane is
Sonographic Anatomy
used (Greshake and Ackerman 1992).
The articular cartilage appears a smooth hypoechoic
Animals are placed in lateralrecumbency with the limb
layer around the femoral hcad. The joint capsule
appears as a hypcrechoic line at the periphery of the
 Although it can be useful in some patients, sedation or
head and connected to the acetabular margins (Figure
anesthesia is usually unncccssary (Greshake and
16.41).
Ackerman 1992; Flocck ct al. 2003). A high-resolution
Hips can be evaluated in puppies that are up to 7-8
(>8-10MHz) linear transducer is recommended.
Weeks of age (Greshake and Ackerman 1992). Each hip
Longitudinal and transverse images are obtained by
is evaluated preferably by using a longitudinal plane
positioning the probe on the lateral aspect of the hip,
and dynamically examinedwhile dorsolateral sub-
dorsal to the greater trochanter (Tigure 16.40). With
luxalion is forced (distraction) (Figure 16.42). The
Cranial
Figure 16.41. Normalhipjointinanadult dog. Longitudinal
Figure 16.40.Scanning technique for the hip.The position
image of the coxofermoral joint in a normal, mature, large-
of the dog and ultrasound probe when scanning the hip on
breed dog. The dorsal surface of the femoral head (FH)
a longitudinal plane. A dynamic exam is also performed
appears as a convcx hyperechoic line, and the craniodorsal
while flexing, extending, abducting, and adducting the leg.
acetabular rim (A) is seen as a triangular projcction that is
Coxofemoral joint passive laxity can also be evaluatcd by
congruent with the femoral head. The joint capsule is a
forcing the femur laterally.
superficial, thin, and moderately echogenic band (arrows).
The surface of the ilium (l) is seen cranially.
二
Figure 16.42. Normal hip joint in a young puppy: neutral and dynamic examination. A: In neutral position, the nonossified
femoral head (FH and small arrowheads) is well visualized and appears in contact with the acetabular (Ac) fossa. B: Because
of some normal degree of passive laxity, the femoral head (FH) can be moved dorsolaterally in relation to the incompletely
Ossified labrum (L and large arrowheads) of the acetabulum (Ac). The degree of passive laxity can be evaluated
dynamically.
493
494MUSCULOSKELETALSYSTEM
Figure 16.43. Hip luxation. Longitudinal image of the
Figure16.44.Femoralhead andneckostectomy
coxofemoral joint region in a traumatizcd dog. The femoral
Longitudinal image of the coxofemoral joint region in a dog
head (FH) appears dorsally displaced in relation to the ace-
after femoral head and neck ostectomy.Hypoechoic soft-
tabulum (Ac). Hypoechoic soft-tissue swelling is noted
tissue swelling is noted around the joint (arrows). The joint
around the femoral head.
space is filled with echogenic material consistent with hem-
orrhage and/or scar tissue. The dorsal margin of the acetab-
ulum (Ac) is irregular because of periarticular new bonc
cartilage is thick at that time, and thc subchondral
formation. F, proximal fcmur.
bone is partially mineralized and irregular. Thc shad-
owing bony structures hamper complete assessment of
these joints.
AvascularNecrosisof theFemoral Head
With avascular necrosis (Legg-Calve-Perthes disease),
HipDysplasia and Osteoarthritis
the femoral head and neck typically become irregular
and lytic, with gaps noted at the osseous margins. The
The use of ultrasound in the diagnosis of hip dysplasia
has been investigated in young puppies. Although
joint capsule can be thickened, and a moderate joint
dynamic measurements can predict the onset of osteo-
effusion can be evident.
arthritis in some dogs such as Labrador retriever-
golden retriever mix puppies (Adams et al. 2000), it is
not currently recognized as a reliable clinical tool in
CALCANEAL TENDON
the early diagnosis of hip dysplasia in dogs.
(ACHILLES TENDON)
Joint effusion and capsular thickening related to
Osteoarthritis are of the same sonographic appearance
Injuries to the calcaneal tendon (Achilles tendon) are
as described in previous chapters.
uncommonin small animals andare usuallyproduced
by direct trauma (Lamb and Duvernois 2005). The cal-
caneal tendon consists of all structures that attach to
Coxofemoral Joint Luxation
thc calcancal tubcrosity. The gastrocnemius and the
Coxofemoral joint luxation typically causes craniodor-
supcrficial digital flexor tendons represent the two
sal displacement of the femoral head (Figure 16.43).
 main components. Tendons of the biceps femoris, sem-
If present, secondary articular changes can be seen
itendinosus, and gracilis muscles form anothcr con-
and the contentof the acetabulum evaluated.Tibrin
joined component, also called the common calcaneal
in the joint capsule appears as an accumulation
tendon (CCT). The medial and lateral gastrocnemius
of irregular material ranging from hyperechoic lo
muscles fuse at their distal aspect, becoming one
hypoechoic.
tendon that runs within the deep portion of the calca-
After femoralheadostectomy,the acetabulum and
neal tendon and inserts on the calcaneal tuberosily.
surrounding tissue can be easily examined. The area
The superficial digital flexor tendon inserts both later-
around the joint can vary in echogenicity and homo-
ally and medially on this tuberosity, forming a caplike
geneity because of hemorrhage, edema, muscular con-
structure. The common calcaneal tendon is the deepest
tracture, and/or scar tissue (Figure 16.44).
portion of the calcaneal tendon and inserts on the
495ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
dorsal aspect of the calcaneal tuberosity (Hermanson
tuberosity.Finally,a dynamic examination is per-
and Evans 1993).
formed (flexion and extension of the hock) (Kramer et
al. 2001a; Lamb and Duvernois 2005)
ScanningTechnique
Normal SonographicAnatomy
 Ultrasonography of the calcaneal tendon is performed
in a standardized fashion: The tarsocrural joint is
A longitudinal image directly above the tuber calcanei
slightly flexed, stretching the tendon that can be more
shows the surface of the calcaneus as a convex hyper-
easily imaged (Figure 16.45). Initially, a longitudinal
echoic line with distal acoustic shadowing (Figure
scan is performed by placing the probe over the calca-
16.45A). Immediately proximal to this bony protuber-
neal tuberosity at the tendon insertion. The transducer
ance that serves as an important landmark is a 5 x
is then moved proximally to examine the whole struc-
5-mm, hypocchoic, ill-defined area representing the
ture, as well as the musculotendinous junctions and
calcancal bursa with its surrounding connective tissue
muscles.Transverse views are then used to visualize
(Figure 16.45A). The CCT is a moderately echogenic,
individual portions of the tendon, from the level of
homogeneous structure with parallel hyperechoic
their muscular origin to the level of the calcaneal
lines(fibrillar echotexture) inserting on the tuberosity
SD
Medial
SD
C
Medial
Figure 16.45. Normal sonographic anatomy of the calcaneal (Achilles) tendon. Sonographic and schematic images.
A: Longitudinal sonogram. The common calcaneal tendon (CCT), which is the deepest component of the calcaneal tendon,
has a characteristic hyperechoic, linear echotexture when scanned perpendicularly. The other components of the calcaneal
tendon, i.e.the gastrocnemius (G) and superficial digital flexor (SDF) tendons, are seen more superficially. The calcaneal bursa
(B) appears as a simall, triangular anechoic area just proximal to the calcaneal tuberosity (C). B and C: Transverse sonograms.
These images are obtained at the midlevel (B) and distal level (C) of thc calcaneal tendon (CT). The superficial digital flexor
calcaneal tendons. (CG) calcaneal groove.
496MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM
(Figure 16.45A). The peritendineum is a smooth hyper-
neous to homogeneous and from hypoechoic to mod-
echoic band at the periphery of the tendon.Further
eratelyhyperechoic.Thesurface of the calcaneal
proximally,the muscles display their typical echotex-
tuberosity is usually irregular and ill-defined because
ture (see section on Musculature). On transverse
of new bone formation. Avulsed fragments and/or
images, the CCT is a moderately echogenic, round
dystrophic mineralization can be recognized within
structure with multiple small hyperechoic dots, that
the affected tendon as dispersed hyperechoic foci that
inserts deeply on the dorsoproximal margin of the cal-
can exhibit acoustic shadowing if their size exceeds 2-
d r   t   
3mm (Rivers et al. 1997; Swiderski et al. 2005)
dineum surrounding the tendonis visible as a
 By using ultrasonography, the healing process of the
hyperechoic line. However, the presence of edge shad-
CCT with or without surgical intervention can be eval-
owing prevents a clear visualization of its curved axial
uated (Kramer et al. 2001a). Within thc first day aftcr
and abaxial borders (Rivers et al. 1997; Kramcr ct al.
trauma,the hematoma between the ends of the tendon
2001a; Lamb and Duvernois 2005).
stumps appears hypoechoic to anechoic. Organization
of the hematoma during the first and second week
leads to a more inhomogeneous image with echogenic
Disorders of the Common Calcaneal Tendon
areas.From weeks 2-6, the diameler and the inhomo-
Partial and Complete Rupture and Healing
geneity of the injured area increase.Afler 8 weeks,
Process In complete rupture, the echolexture of the
replacement tissue begins to grow in a longitudinal
CCT is completely interrupted, and a hypoechoic and
direction, and both diameter and inhomogeneity
inhomogeneous area (hematoma) is observed between
decrease. The decrease in diameter is accompanied by
the retracted ends of the tendon. The proximal and
the reappearance of the characteristic tendinous fibril-
distal stumps of the tendon appear drumsticklike and
lar echotexture. This healing process is completed by
inhomogeneous with a mixed echotexture. During
10-12 weeks after trauma. However, the injured CCT
dynamic examination, the movement of the ruptured
remains much less homogeneous in comparison to the
ends is clearly visible.
unaffected tendon for a long period (up to years).
With partial tendon rupture, the affected portion
Tears of the Gastrocnemius MusclesTears can be
(deep or superficial) appears inhomogeneous and
identified by visualizing an interruption of the normal
hypoechoic to anechoic with poorly demarcated areas
(Figure 16.46). In contrast, the part of the tendon that
echotexture. The accompanying hematomas are visible
is intact displays a normal fibrillar echotexture.
as inhomogeneous, hypoechoic to anechoic, and poorly
demarcated areas at the site of injury (see section on
Occasionally, a small anechoic fluid borderline is
visible between the tendon and the peritendineum.
Musculature) (Swiderski et al. 2005).
 In chronic partial ruptures, images of the affected
DisplacementoftheSuperficialDigitalFlexor
part of the tendon can vary from highly inhomoge-
TendonMedial or lateral luxation of the superficial
SDE
SDF
C
CT
Figure 16.46. Partial rupture of the gastrocnemius tendon. Longitudinal (A) and transverse (B) sonograms of the calcaneal
tendon in a dog with acute trauma. The gastrocnemius tendon (G) is markedly enlarged and hypoechoic. The superficial
geneous, which may also be because of partial rupture. Images courtesy of D. Penninck.
497ATLAS OF SMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
Figure 16.47.Chronic luxation of the superficial digital flexor tendon in large dog. A: In this longitudinal sonogram obtained
medial to the calcaneum, an inhomogeneous mass (arrowheads) with anechoic fluid cavities is noted that is consistent with
chronic hematoma and fibrous tissue. Prox, proximal. B: Transverse sonogram obtained at the plantaromedial aspect of the
calcaneum (C), distal to the calcaneal tuberosity.The superficial digital flexor tendon (arrows) is displaced laterally.The
changes caused by chronic hematoma and fibrous tissue thickening are noted medially (arrowheads) in the region of avulsion
of tcndon inscrtion.Lat, lateral; and Med,medial.
digital flexor tendon can be visualized by obtaining a
transverse image above the calcaneal tuberosity.
Adjacent to this convex, hyperechoic, shadowing
structure, the medially or laterally displaced crescent-
shaped to oval tendon comes into view.The luxated
tendon can be enlarged and inhomogeneous, and a
heterogeneoushematoma can alsobe observed at the
leveloffibrousavulsion onthemedial orlateralaspect
of the calcaneum.
MISCELLANEOUS
MUSCULOSKELETAL
DISORDERS
Musculature
Figure 16.48. Normal muscle sonographic anatomy in a
Scanning Technique
dog. Longitudinal sonographic image of a norinal muscle
showing the characteristic hypoechoic echotexture with fine
Muscles that are located laterally, cranially, or cau-
hyperechoic dots and lines. Intermuscular fascias (F) appear
  d a d  a r 
as thin, hyperechoic planes between muscle bellies.
recumbency with the limb of interest up.Medially
located muscles are assessed with the affected limb
facing down while abducting theupperlimb.Individual
Normal Muscle Sonographic Anatomy
muscles are scanned betwccn their origin and
insertion by using both longitudinal and transverse
On longitudinal images, the structure of normal
planes.
 The examination begins with images of the muscle
echoic striations. The fascias appear as smooth, contin-
belly, proceeds to the transition site of the muscle to
uous, hyperechoic lines, particularly when scanned
its tendon, and finishes with the attachment and inser-
perpendicularly (Figures 16.6 and 16.48). On transverse
tion sites, respectively (Kramer et al. 1997).
views,the background is hypoechoic with echoic dots
498MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM
representing the muscle septa, giving a coarse echotex-
Or without acoustic shadowing) at the level of the pre-
lure to themuscle belly.Tangential muscleboundaries
vious trauma is indicative of scar formation (Brcur and
are more difficult to image because of edge shadowing
Pluhar 1997). The diameter of the muscle may be
(Kramer et al. 1997). Subcutaneous and intramuscular
normal or smaller in the traumatized region.
fat planes are usually slightly hyperechoic to muscle
A fascial tear appears as an interruption of the hyper-
bellies, although their appearance can vary.
echoic line enrobing the muscle bely, with protrusion
of this muscle through the defect.
MiscellaneousDisordersofMusclesand Tendons
In complete muscle rupture,the typical echotexture of
the muscle structure at the site of trauma is no longer
Muscle InjuriesThe appearance of muscular trauma
visible. Because of acute hemorrhage, the area appears
varies with the severity and onset of the injury. Strain
anechoic or hypoechoic (Figure 16.49B). In chronic
injuries,whichmay ormaynotbesecondarytoaknown
rupture, the region appears highly inhomogeneous and
traumatic event, likely represent an underestimated
has a mixed echotexture and echogenicity (organiza-
source of hind lameness in dogs (Breur and Blevins
tion of the hematoma) (Figure 16.50). The muscle stump
1997; Nielsen and Pluhar 2004). Hip adductor, pectin-
can be described as a coblike, thickened, inhomoge-
neous structure that is more echogenic than the sur-
posed to strain injuries. In the acute phase, muscle
rounding tissue. During a dynamic examination with
flexion and extension of the limb, the separation of the
obscrvcd (Breur and Pluhar 1997) (Figure 16.49A-C). If
muscle ends becomes evident (Kramer et al. 1997).
the muscle is partially ruptured, thc normal muscular
echotexture is partially lost (Kramer et al. 1997)
MuscularContracture andAmyotrophyMuscular
Following muscular trauma, the healing process can
contracture affecting any muscle, but particularly the
be evaluated sonographically. In the chronic phase, a
gracilis, infraspinatus, or quadriceps muscles, results
hyperechoic and variably inhomogeneous area(with
in abnormal muscle echotexture and echogenicity.
A
D
Figure 16.49.Acute muscle tears.A-C: Iliopsoas strain in an
8-year-old boxer lame after a strenuous hike.These transverse
sonographic (A) and schematic (B) images, as well as a longi-
tudinal sonogram (C), of the right iliopsoas muscle were
obtained at the lateral aspect of the caudal lumbar spine. The
muscle (arrowheads) is diffusely enlarged, and two large
hypoechoic lesions (*) within the muscle are disrupting its
architecture. These areas most likely represent tears associated
with hcmorrhagc and edema. This process was bilateral. V,
caudal lumbar vertebra. Images A-C courtesy of D. Penninck.
D: Sonographic image of the pelvic limb of a traumatized dog.
A large anechoic area fills a portion of the leg, and retracted
muscles stumps are identified (M), indicating complete muscle
rupture with hemorrhage (H). B, bone surface.
499ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
sonographic assessment difficult. The use of high-
frequency (ideally >12MHz), linear transducers
directed perfectly perpendicular to the ligarment is
essential.
In longitudinal scans,linear ligaments appear as
hyperechoic structures with a fibrillar echotexture
(Figure 16.22). Most ligaments are too small to be
consistently identified,particularly in cross-sectional
planes, because they cannot be distinguished from the
surrounding structures (capsule and muscle fascia).
Ligaments with fanning fibers are oriented obliquely
(e.g., cruciate ligaments) and are usually hypoechoic.
Sonographic Features of Ligament Disorders
Figure 16.50. Muscle tear with hemorrhage. Sonographic
Because of their small size, acutely ruptured ligaments
image of a pelvic limb muscle in another dog with previous
cannot be easilyvisualized with ultrasound.A small
trauma. A large, inhomogeneous, intramuscular mass is
noted that is consistent with an organizing hematoma (H).
anechoic or hypoechoic hematoma in the area of
Note the difference in echotexture when compared with the
rupturc may bc sccn in the initial phasc. If the injury
normal muscle shown in Figure 16.48.
is associated with a bone avulsion fracture, the frag-
ment is visible as a hyperechoic structure with acoustic
Hyperechoic and variably inhomogeneous regions are
shadowing within the reactive tissue. Ruptured liga-
observed in the affected muscle, primarily because of
fibrosis. The fascia is usually difficult to differentiate
particularly in the chronic phase. Ligament rupture
from the surrounding tissue. The appearance of the
may cause joint instability,which may be evidenced
muscle begins to resemble a tendon, and the muscle
by means of a dymamic examination. Over time, cap-
fibers become indistinct. These changes often involve
sular thickening develops.
the entire muscle (Kramer et al. 1996).
Muscle atrophy caused by chronic disuse or neu-
Cellulitis,Abscesses,and ForeignBodies
ropathy is associated with only minimal echotexture
changes. The echogenicity of the affected muscle tends
Cellulitis is an inflammatory process involving the con-
to be slightly increased but remains homogeneous.
nective tissue and typically appears as alternating
anechoic and hyperechoic bands in the subcutaneous
Fibrosing and Calcifying Myopathies
planes,often resulting in increased ultrasound-beam
attenuation that limits the assessment of deep struc-
and Tendinopathies
tures (Figure 16.54B).Inflamed tissue can become
Fibrosing and calcifying myopathies and tendinopa-
enlarged. Phlegmon is a suppurative inflammation of
thies,whichmay or maynot be traumatic inorigin,are
the connective tissue that typically leads to accumula-
occasionally seen in dogs. The muscular and/or tendi-
tion of hypoechoic fluid pockets in the subcutaneous
nous part of the supraspinatus, iliopsoas, gluteal,
tissucs (Figures 16.53 and 16.54).
biceps brachii, and abductor pollicis longus are more
More confined abscesses may also develop and appcar
commonly affected (Figures 16.51 and 16.52). The
as cavitary masses containing particulate fluid. A
calcium deposits are visible as hyperechoic, irregu-
 hyperechoic wall of variable thickness is often recog-
lar structures that display acoustic shadowing. The
nized in the chronic phase (Figures 16.54C and 16.56).
affected tendon or muscle can also become enlarged,
Internal septa may also form. Thus, abscesses can be
with an altered, inhomogeneous echotexture.
complex in ultrasonographic appearance and resemble
neoplastic processes. An abscess can be identified as
Ligaments
either intramuscular or intermuscular,subfascial,or
Scanning Technique and Normal
subcutaneous. Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspira-
tion or drainage may assist in the diagnosis and treat-
Sonographic Anatomy
ment of the suppurative process (Figure 16.53B).
Theligaments of dogs and cats are usually very small
Inflammatory processes may be secondary to the
and frequently close to uneven bony surfaces, making
gpresence of foreign bodies (FBs), such as wooden sticks,
500MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM
BT
Proximal
C
H
Proximal
ITG
×0.51m
Lateral
Lateral
2.10cm
dog with chronic thoracic lameness.An irregular mineral opacily is noted superimposed over the proximal humeral metaphy-
This portion of thc muscle is cnlargcd (arrows), heterogeneous, and contains irregular hyperechoic areas with acoustic shad-
Owing, consistent with mineralization (M). D and E: Transverse sonograms The biceps tendon (BT) (cursors) is also mildly
enlarged on this transverse image (D) obtained at the level of the intertubercular groove (ITG) (plane D' in A). Just distal to
the intertubercular groove (plane E'), the biceps muscle (between the cursors in E) is thickened and presents hyperechoic foci,
some of which are associated with acoustic shadowing, consistent with mineralization and fibrosis.H,humerus.
porcupine quills, grass awns, glass, or plastic or metal
genicity can vary, depending on their physical and
objects (Figures 16.55-16.57). The accuracy of ultras0-
acoustic characteristics (Boyse et al. 2001; Armbrust et
nography in detecting FBs,particularly if superficial,
al. 2003).Acoustic shadowing is expected; however, it
in people is high (Boyse et al. 2001). Although most
FBs are hyperechoic to normal soft tissues, their echo-
bony structure in the far field or by the ultrasono-
MG
Figure 16.52. Gluteal calcifying myopathy. Longitudinal sonographic and schematic images of the distal portion of the
hyperechoic foci near its insertion site on the greater trochanter (GT), consistent with mineralization. Image courtesy of D.
Penninck.
C
Figure 16.53. Intermuscular abscess and myositis in a cat. Transverse (A) and longitudinal (C) sonographic images obtained
at the caudal aspect of the femur (F) in a cat with pelvic limb swelling and fever. An irregular accumulation of echogenic
fluid is found between one of the muscles (M) and the femur. B: This cavitary lesion was aspirated using ultrasound guid-
 ance, which led to a diagnosis of a septic abscess. D: A nearby inhomogeneous mass (arrows) was found adjacent to large
vessels. Fine-needle aspiration confirmed the presence of septic and necrotic myositis.
501
Proxima
Figure 16.54. Septic abscess in the elbow region of a dog. A: Mediolateral radiograph of the elbow rcgion of a 5-ycar-old
large-breed dog with progressive, painful swelling caudal to the elbow. Soft-tissue swelling (arrows) is present without evi-
dence of bone involvement or a radiopaque foreign body. This radiograph was obtained afer the ultrasound exam, which
region of the limb, the subcutaneous tissue appears hyperechoic and hyperattenuating as the result of celulitis. C and D: A
large cavitary mass lesion (arrows) containing echogenic fluid (*) and mobile echogenic septa is caudal to the olecranon (O)
and triceps tendon (T). An irregular, moderately echogenic capsule is noted proxiinally (arrow to the left in C)
+1.24cm
 e u  en d a on rn un n go a   ua e n r i n
of fibrous tissue.The caudal surface of the ulna is irregular because of periostitis.B: More distally, a 1.2-cm-long hyperechoic
interface with dirty shadowing is found,which indicated a foreign body (FB).
502
503ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
3.25cm
Figure 16.56.
6.Porcupine quill migration and abscess. A 3.25-cm, moderately echogenic mass (arrows) is shown with a central
fluid-filled cavity as well as a short, fusiform, double-lined hyperechoic structure when seen longitudinally and circular when
seen transvcrsally.
beration artifacts (comet tails), which may be confused
with air bubbles. Metal objects of any size can easily
be identifiable on standard radiographs. Glass is typi-
cally hyperechoic and may be recognized on radio-
graphs. Porcupine quills appear as double-banded,
fusiform, hyperechoic structures (Figure 16.56).
FB
Small FBs may remain undetected if smaller than
2-3 mm or if deeply embedded in tissues. Furthermore,
the presence of nearby mineral or aerated structures,
such as in the region of the distal extremities (e.g.)
sesamoid bones) or the larynx and hyoid apparatus,
MC
may limit the identification of FBs.
Ultrasound may also be useful in the surgical plan-
ning or intraoperatively, assisting in the localization of
a FB (Brisson et al. 2004) by placing a fine needle under
Figure 16.57. Wooden stick foreign body. Transverse
ultrasound guidance to the level of the FB.
sonographic image obtained at the dorsal aspect of the meta-
carpal bones (MC) of a dog. A thin, straight, hyperechoic
foreign body (FB)is surrounded by mildly echogenic inflam-
BenignandMalignantTumors
matory tissue (arrows).A wooden stick was identified at
surgery.
Soft-tissue tumors can usually be identified by using
ultrasonography and are classified as solid, cystic, or
graphic complexity of the associated soft-tissue reac-
mixed lesions. Tumors often show mixed echogenicity,
tion. Wooden sticks often are of medium echogenicity
and their echotexture ranges from homogeneous to
that can be confounded by the surrounding tissue
highly inhomogeneous and from anechoic to highly
changes. A hypoechoic rim, consistent with an inflam-
hyperechoic (Figures 16.58-16.60). The tumor margins
matory cast or fistular tract, commonly develops
may or may not be clearly visible. When color Dopplcr
around an FB, helping its identification (Shah et al.
aay e  sr  n st
1992; Kramer et al. 1997; Gnudi et al. 2005) (Figure
with tortuous and randomly distributedvessels
16.55).Also,in some instances, the artifacts associated
(Figure 16.59). However, malignant tumors may also
with the FBs are more clearly visible than the body
be poorly perfused and/or necrotic (Figure 16.60).
itself.The characteristics of the artifacts present deeper
Ultrasonography cannot accurately differentiate malig-
to the objects appear to be related to the surface shape
nant and benign diseases such as hemorrhage (Thiel et
of the FBs rather than to its composition (Boyse et al.
 al. 2003) (Figure 16.61). Ultrasound-guided or surgical
2001). Metal objects are typically associated with rever-
aspiration or biopsy is required in all cases.
504 MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM
1.31cm
invaded by the neoplastic process. The muscle fascias (arrows) remain well defined.
e a  a  a 
as an irregular soft-tissue thickening that crosses the
joint space, invades the osteochondral junctions, and
protrudes into the synovial space (Figure 16.63). The
bone surface at the periphery of the joint becomes
irregular, and soft-tissue nodules or masses can be seen
to extend within the metaphyseal cortex and medulla.
arthropathies, which justifies fine-needle aspiration or
biopsy.
Bones
. Muscular fibrosarcoma in a dog. Sonographic
Scanning Technique and Sonographic Anatomy
Figure16.59.
image a large soft-tissue mass involving the limb of a dog.
Although radiography remains the principal modality
The mass is relatively hyperechoic and well vascularized, as
 in the investigation of bone diseases, ultrasonography
evidenced by using color Doppler in the deep portion of the
can provide additional information, particularly in
mass.
regard to the soft-tissue component of these processes.
Linear transducers are preferred over convex or secto-
Lipomas appear as mildly echogenic masses with
rial probes, because linear transducers provide a better
'e pa eo ss pue sop onor sn
image quality (higher resolution and less distortion).
2006) (Figure 16.62). Lipomas can be located in the
The exam is performed similarly as for muscles and
subcutaneous or intermuscular  planes  or  within
tendons, with the patient in lateral recumbency.
muscles (intramuscular). They are usually well encap-
The surface of a long bone is examined by slowly
sulated, although they can be ill-defined and invasive.
moving the probe along the long axis of the bone,
The  distinction  between  invasive  or noninvasive
usually with a longitudinal plane that enables visual-
lipomas cannot be made with accuracy by means of
izing a larger portion of the bone surface. This way, the
ultrasonography.
area of interest can be compared with adjacent normal
 Ultrasound can also be very useful in the identifica-
portions of the bone (e.g., tumor or fracture). A trans-
tion of soft-tissue joint tumors such as synovial cell
verse vicw only rarcly provides additional informa-
sarcoma or histiocytic sarcoma. Thesc tumors can vary
tion (Risselada et al. 2003).
505ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
Figure 16.60. Fibrosarcoma. Sonographic images of a large soft-tissue mass involving the pelvic limb of a dog. This mass
is solid and moderately echogenic in most areas, but also presents anechoic, fluid-filled necrotic and hemorrhagic cavities.
Images courtesy of D. Penninck.
Figure 16.62. Lipoma. Sonographic image of a subcutane-
Ous mass with features characteristic of a lipoma.The mass
4.52cm
is moderately echogenic and has uniformly distributed
1:34:44
hyperechoic dots and short lines.
Figure 16.61.Muscular hemorrhage. Sonographic images
of the pelvic limb of a dog with rapidly progressive swelling.
A hypoechoic, inhomogeneous mass measuring more than
9 cm is noted involving the musculature. Henorrhage was
SonographicFeatures ofBone Disorders
found on fine-needle aspiration.This mass resolved with
Osteomyelitis and Bone Tumors Ostcomyelitis can
time and was presumed to represent a benign spontancous
vary in ultrasonographic appearance. An ill-defined,
hematoma of uncertain origin.
irregular hyperechoic surface can be seen superficial
to the bone cortex because of periosteal new bone
formation. Peripheral, inflamed soft tissues appear
Becauseofthereflection and absorptionof thesound
swollen, hypoechoic, and inhomogeneous. The lytic
waves, the bone surface appears as a smooth, hypere-
cortical surface can be uneven, with multiple indenta-
choic, continuous line with strong acoustic shadowing.
tions (Kramer et al. 1997).
This surface is more irregular at the sites of origin and
Primary and metastatic bone tumors associated with
insertion of tendons and ligaments. Superficial to the
cortical lysis can be assessed sonographically, particu-
bony surface, the typical echotexture of soft-tissue
larly if they extend into the surrounding soft tissue.
structures,i.e.,muscles and tendons, comes into view.
They can vary in echogenicity and uniformity (Figures
In the near field, the image of the skin-transducer
16.64 and 16.65). Occasionally, periosteal elevation
interface can be seen as a hyperechoic zone (Risselada
(Codman's triangle) is seen. If sufficient cortical lysis
et al. 2003).
is present, the deeper bone tissue can be visualized.
Talus
Lat
1.03cm
Figure 16.63.Synovial cell sarcoma.A: Mediolateral radiograph of the tarsus of a 6-year-old large-breed dog with chronic
lameness. Soft-tissue swelling (arrowheads) is noted at the periphery of the tarsus, as well as lytic foci in the distal tibial
metaphysis (arrows). B-D: Longitudinal (B) and transverse (C and D) sonograms of the dorsal aspect of the talus that show
an irregular layer of echogenic tissue in the near field (arrowheads), as well as irregular bone defects (arrows). Lat, lateral.
E: Longitudinal sonogram obtained at the plantar aspect. The soft-tissue thickening (arrowheads) is noted at the periphery
of the common calcaneal tendon (CCT), reaching the level of the calcaneal tuberosity (CT). These features are typical of syno-
vial cell sarcoma or synovial histiocytic sarcoma. Prox, proximal.
A
B
Tibia
ill-defined, hypoechoic mass (arrows) has hyperechoic foci, some of which are associated with acoustic shadowing, consistent
with mineralization. The underlying bone cortex is no longer visible because of the extensive lysis. B: A well-defined, mildly
echogenic mass (arrowheads) involves the humerus (H). The surface of the humerus is markedly irregular because of aggres-
sive new bone formation and lysis.
507ATLAS OF SMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPIIY
S
Scapula
Scapula
Cranial
Proximal
Figure 16.65. Metastatic carcinoma to the scapula. Transverse (left) and longitudinal (right) sonograms of the scapular
spine in a dog with a transitional cell carcinoma and metastatic disease. Irregular new bonc formation (arrows) is present at
the level of the scapula. Adjaccnt supraspinatus (SS) and infraspinatus (IS) muscles are reduced in thickness and hyperechoic
bccause of atrophy. Several similar lesions were identified in other bones, and metastatic carcinoma was confirmed.
Ultrasound can also assist in fine-needle aspiration or
multiple fragments (Figure 16.66A). If the fracture gap
biopsy of bone lesions, avoiding the need for surgical
is wide enough, the medulla region can be visualized.
(6.  na ) sd s u 
Surgical implants can be seen as hyperechoic, rever-
berating structures within or surrounding the bone.
Fractures Fractures of long bones and their healing
Stage II (8-14 days after trauma): The tissue within
process, as well as the associated soft-tissue damage
 the fracture gap appears hypoechoic to anechoic and
(muscle rupture or hematoma), can be assessed ultra-
more heterogeneous (resorption of the hematoma)
sonographically. Because there are no points of orien-
(Figure 16.66B)
tation, the exact relationship between the fractured
Stage IIla (15-21 days after trauma): Fracture margins
ends is difficult to determine.To standardize the docu-
become irregular and blunted because of bone resorp-
mentation of fracture hcaling of long bones, multiple
tion. The early ossifying callus appears as an irregular
and repeatable imagcs must be obtained. The recom-
 or undulating hyperechoic surface. The surrounding
mended transducer positions for the assessment of
tissue representing the maturing hematoma and the
long bones are craniolateral (distal humcrus, radius,
nonossified callus is inhomogeneous with a hypoechoic
ulna, and tibia) and caudolateral (proximal humerus
to isoechoic cchotcxturc (compared with overlying
cranial, femur medial, and fibula) (Risselada et al.
muscles).
2003).
 Stage Illb (22-28 days after trauma): The nonossificd
 Ultrasonography can be used to evaluate secondary
callus becomes progressively more echogenic (Figurc
fracture healing in biologically treated fractures
16.66C).
(Risselada et al. 2005). In comparison to radiography,
 Stage IV (29-42 days after trauma): The echogenicity
the completion of fracture healing can be determined
 of the callus increases and appears heterogeneous,
earlier. Secondary fracture healing can be divided into
consistent with incomplete ossification. Hyperechoic
five stages.
mineral foci, which may display acoustic shadowing,
Stage I (O-7 days after trauma): The area surround-
are noted in the callus (Figure 16.66D).
ing the fracture is homogeneous and hypoechoic to
Stage V (more than 43 days after trauma): The frac-
anechoicbecauseof hematomaformation.Thefracture
ture has healed completely.The cortex is seen as a
site appears as a discontinuity (step) of the bone
continuous,smooth,or slightly irregular,hyperechoic
surface, which may be associated with the presence of
line (Figure 16.66E). The surrounding soft-tissue thick-
several, separate hyperechoic interfaces indicating
 ening is reduced or resolved. Intramedullary implants
508 MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM
 are no longer visible because the cortical integrity has
been reestablished (Risselada et al. 2005).
During normal fracture healing, the newly develop-
ing tissues require more nutrients and have a higher
metabolic rate. This requires the development of new
vessels(neovascularization) at the fracture site and can
be visualized using power Doppler ultrasound. A
Doppler signal can be obtained as of day 10 after
A
trauma, reaching a maximum between days 11 and 30,
before gradually decreasing. Signals can be detected in
and close to the callus (Risselada et al. 2006).
REFERENCES
Adams WM, Dueland RT, Daniels R, Fialkowski JP,
Nordheim EV (2000) Comparison of two palpation, four
radiographic and three ultrasound methods for early
detection of mild to moderate canine hip dysplasia. Vet
RadiolUltrasound 41:484-490.
Armbrust LJ, Biller DS,Radlinsky MG, Hoskinsons JJ (2003)
Ultrasonographic diagnosis of foreign bodies associated
with chronic draining tracts and abscesses in dogs. Vet
RadiolUltrasound 44:66-70.
Brcur GJ, Blevins WE (1997) Traumatic injury of the iliopsoas
muscle in three dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 210:1631-
1634.
Brisson BA, Bersenas A, Etue SM (2004) Ultrasonographic
diagnosis of septic arthritis secondary to porcupine quill
migration in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc 9:1467-1470.
Boyse TD,Fessell DP,Jacobson JA, Lin J, van Holsbeeck MT,
Hayes CW (2001) US of soft-tissue foreign bodies and assO-
ciated complications with surgical correlation. Radio-
graphics 12:1251-1256.
Engelke A,Meyer-Lindenberg A,Nolte I (1997a) Die
Ultraschalluntersuchung des Kniegelenkes des Hundes
[The ultrasonographic exarmination of the stifle joint in
dogs].Berl Munch Tierarztl Wochenschr110:24-29.
D
Figure 16.66. Bone fracture: healing process. Sequential
sonograms showing progressive bone healing. A: Stage I
(days O-7). A discontinuity of the bonc cortex is identified
that is associated with sharp ends (arrow). Hypoechoic soft-
tissue swelling is noted at the fracture site (arrowhead).
B: Stage III (days 15-21). The bone defect (arrow) is progres-
sively remodeled.A nonossified callus (arrowheads) is
present. C: Stage IV (days 22-28). The nonossified callus is
progressively more echogenic(arrowheads), and the fracture
gap (arrow) is progressively narrower. D: Stage V (days
29-42). The fracture gap is nearly completely filled with new
bone and poorly seen (arrow). The peripheral callus is
reduced in volumc (arrowheads). E: Stage VI (more than 43
days).The fracture is healed.The surface of the bone remains
mildly irregular (arrow).
509ATLASOFSMALLANIMALULTRASONOGRAPHY
Engelke A, Meyer-Lindenberg A, Nolte I (1997b). Die
tendon and tendon sheath of the biceps brachii muscle.Vet
Ultraschalluntersuchung des inneren Kniegelenkes bei
Surg 30:64-71
Hunden mit Kreuzbandriss [The ultrasonographic exami-
Kramer M, Stengel H, Gerwing M, Schimke E, Sheppard C
nation of the inner structures of the stifle joint in dogs
(1999) Sonography of the canine stifle. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 40:282-293.
Wochenschr 104:114 117.
Kramer M, Schimke E, Schachenmayr W, Gerwing M (1996)
Esterline ML, Armbrust L, Roush JK (2005) A comparison of
Diagnosis and therapy of special tendon and muscle
palpation guided and ultrasound guided percutaneous
diseases in the dog. Part I: Contracture of the gracilis
biceps brachii tenotomy in dogs. Vet (omp Orthop
and infraspinatus muscle [in German]. Kleintierpraxis
Traumatol 18:135-139.
41:889-896.
Floeck A, Kramer M, Tellhelm B, Schimke E (2003)
Lamb C, Duvernois A (2005) Ultrasonographic analomy of
Die sonographische Untersuchung des Hueftgelenks
the normal canine calcaneal tendon.Vet Radiol Ultrasound
beim Deutschen-Schaeferhund-Welpen [Ultrasonographic
46:326-330.
examination of the hip joint of the German shepherd].
Lamb C, Wong K (2005) Ultrasonographic anatomy of the
Tierarztl Prax 31:82-91.
canine elbow.Vet Radiol Ultrasound 46:319-325.
Gerwing M, Kramer M (1994) Die Sononographie des
Long C, Nyland TG (1999) Ultrasonographic evaluation of
Schultergelenkes und
seinerumgebenden
Weich-
the canine shoulder.Vet Radiol Ultrasound 40:372-379.
teile beim Hund. Teil B: Sonographische Diagnostik
Mahn MM,Cook JL,Cook CR,Balke MT (2005) Arthroscopic
von Erkrankungen im Bereich des Schultergelenkes
verification of ultrasonographic diagnosis of meniscal
[Ultrasonography of the shoulder joint and the surround-
pathology in dogs. Vet Surg 34:318-323.
ing soft tissue. Part B: Ultrasonographic diagnosis of dis-
Mattern KL,Berry RB,Peck JN,de HaanJ (2006)Radiographic
cases in the region of the shoulder joint]. Kleintierpraxis
and ultrasonographic evaluation of thc patellar ligament
39:141-156.
following tibial plateau leveling osteotomy. Vet Radiol
Gnudi G, Bcrtoni G (2001） Echographic examination
Ultrasound 47:185-191.
of the stifle joint affectedby cranial cruciate ligament
Michele U, Gerwing M (1999) Sonographie bei Metaplasien
rupture in the dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 42:266-
im Ursprung des M. flexor digitalis profundus des Hundes
270.
[Ultrasonographic findings of metaplasias in the origin of
Gnudi G, Volta A, Bonazzi M, Gazzola M, Bretoni G (2005)
the flexor digitals profundus muscle in dogs]. Ultraschall
Ultrasonographic features of grass awn migration in the
Med 20:76.
dog.Vet Radiol Ultrasound 46:423-426.
Michele U, Gerwing M, Kramer M, Schimkc E (1998)
Greshake RJ, Ackerman N (1992) Ultrasound of the coxo-
 Sonographischc Moglichkeiten am Ellbogengelenk des
femoraljoints of thc canine neonate.Vet Radiol Ultrasound
Hundes: Anatomische Grundlagen und pathologische
33:99-104
Befunde [Ultrasonographic possibilities in the elhow of the
Hermanson JW, Evans HE (1993) Chapter
6:The
dog: Anatomical structures and pathological findingsl.
Muscoloskeletal System. In: Evans HE, Christensen GC,
In: Jahrestagung der DVG-FG Kieintierkrankheiten 19.-
eds. Miller's Anatomyof the Dog,3rd edition.Philadelphia:
22.11.1998 Stuttgart, Kongr.ber. [Annual Conference of the
WB Saunders, pp 258-384
DVG-FG on Small Animal Illnesses, November 19-22,
Knox VW IV, Sehgal CM, Wood AK (2003) Correlation of
1998, Stuttgart]. Proceedings 44:385-388.
ultrasonographic observations with anatomic features and
Mueller S, Kramcr M (2003) Die Eignung der Sonographie
radiography of the elbow joint in dogs. Am J Vet Res
fuir die Diagnostik von Meniskuslasionen des Hundes
64:721-726.
[Usefulness of ultrasonography in the diagnosis of menis-
Kramer M, Gerwing M (1994) Die Sononographie des
cal lesions in the dogl. Tierarztl Prax 31:10-15.
Schultergelenkes und seiner umgebenden
Weichteile
Mueller S,KramerM,Tellhelm B,Schimke E(2002) Rupture
beim Hund. Teil A: Die sonographische Anatomie des
Of the origin of the long digitalextensor muscle in a border
Schultergelenkes und seiner Weichteile [Ultrasonography
collie [in German]. Prakt Tierarzt 83:416-421.
of the shoulder joint and the surrounding soft tissue.Part
Nielsen C, Pluhar GE (2004) Diagnosis and treatment of hind
A:Ultrasonographic analomy of the shoulder joint].
limb muscle strain injuries in 22 dogs. Vet Comp Orthop
Kleintierpraxis 39:71-80.
Traumatol 18:247-253.
Kramer M, Gerwing M, Hach V, Schimke E (1997) Sonogra-
O'Brien RT,Dueland RT, Adams WC, Meinen J (1997)
phy of the musculoskeletal system in dogs and cats. Vet
Dynamic ultrasonographic measurement of passive coxo-
Radiol Ultrasound 38:139-149.
femoral joint laxity in puppies. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
Kramer M, Gerwing M, Michele U, Schimke E, Kindler S
33:275-281.
(200la) Ultrasonographic examination of injuries to the
Reed AL, Payne JT, Constaninescu GM (1995) Ultra-
Achilles tendon in dogs and cats. J Small Anim Pract
sonographic analomy of the normal canine stifle. Vet
42:531-535
Radiol Ultrasound 36:315-321.
Kramer M, Gerwing M, Sheppard C, Schimke E (2001b)
RisscladaM,KramerM,deRoosterH,Taeymans O,Verleyen
Ultrasonography for the diagnosis of diseases of the
P, van Bree H (2005) Ultrasonographic and radiographic
510MUSCULOSKELETALSYSTEM
assessment of uncomplicated secondary fracture healing
Shah ZR, Crass JR, Dubravka CO, Bellon EM (1992)
of long bones in dogs and cats. Vet Surg 34:99-107.
Ultrasonographic detection of foreign bodies insoft tissues
Risselada M, Kramer M, van Bree H (2003) Approaches for
using turkey muscle as a model. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
ultrasonographic evaluation of long bones in the dog. Vet
33:94-100.
Radiol Ultrasound 44:214-220.
Siems JJ, Breur GJ, Blevins WE, Cornell KK (1998) Use of
Risselada M,Kramer M,van Bree II, Taeymans O,Verleyen
two-dimensional real-time ultrasonography for diagnos-
P (2006) Powcr Dopplcr asscssmcnt of thc ncovasculariza-
ing contracturc and strain of the infraspinatus muscle in a
tion during uncomplicated fracture healing of long bones
dog.J Am Vet Medic Assoc 212:77-80.
in dogs and cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47:301-306.
Swiderski J, Fitch RB, Staatz A, Lowery J (2005) Sonographic
Rivers B, Wallace L,Johnston GR (1992) Biceps tenosynovitis
assisted diagnosis and treatment of bilateral gastrocne-
in the dog: Radiographic and sonographic findings. Vet
mius tendon rupture in a Labrador retriever repaired with
Comp Orthop Traumatol 5:51-57.
fascia lata and polypropylene mesh.Vet Comp Orthop
Rivers BJ,Walter PA,Kramek B,Wallace L(1997)Sonographic
Traumatol18:258-263.
findings in canine common calcaneal tendon injury. Vet
Tacke S, Kramer M, Schimke E, et al. (1999) Osteochon-
Comp Orthop Traumatol 10:45-53.
drosis dissecans (OCD) am Schultergelenk des Hundes
Sami VF, Nyland TG, Werner LL, Baker TW (1999)
[Osteochondritis dissecans in the shoulder joint of the
Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy of bone
dogl. Tierarztl Prax 27:81-90.
lesions: A preliminary report. Vet Radiol Utrasound 40:
Thiel C, Kramer M, Schimke E (2003) The ultrasonographic
82-86.
examination of skin tumors (B-mode, color Doppler,power
Schleich S, Tellhelm B, Schimke E, Gerwing M, Kramer M
Doppler) and their differential diagnosis in dogs and cats
(1992)Korrelationzwischen klinischen, rontgenologischen,
[in German]. Kleintierpraxis 48:253-260.
sonographischen und Operationsbefunden bei fragmenti-
Vandevelde B,Saunders JH,Kramer M,Van Ryssen B,van
ertem Processus coronoideus des Hundes [Correlation
Bree H (2006) Comparison of the ultrasonographic appear-
between clinical, radiographic, ultrasonographic, and sur-
ance of osteochondrosis lesions in the caninc shoulder
with radiography, arthrography and arthroscopy. Vet
In: Jahrestagung der DVG-FG Kleintierkrankheiten 06.-
Radiol Ultrasound 47:174-184.
08.11.1992 Bonn, Kong.ber.[Annual Conference of the
Volta A, Bonazzi M, Gnudi G, Gazzola M, Bertoni G (2006)
DVG-FG on Small Animal Illnesses, November 6-8, 1992,
Ultrasonographic features of canine lipomas. Vet Radiol
Bonn]. Proceedings 38:406-420.
Ultrasound 47:589-591.
INDEX
Agenesis
mirror-image,145,217, 220f,365,
A
Abscess
corpus callosum, 25, 26f
367f
brain, 19, 20f
renal,342f
pseudosludge,368-369f
Aliasing, Color Doppler, 162, 166-
reverberation,93f,119, 121f,129,
cardiac para-annular, 195f
cervical,105,106,107f,108f
167f, 169f, 178f, 183f, 185f, 188-
130f,135f, 140-142f,143,371,
189f,192,193f
372f,375,451,451f,452,503
cranial mediastinal, 130t
hepatic,226t,232t,233,239f
Anisotropy, see aiso Artifact, 468
shadowing,93f, 94f, 109f,113,122f,
Anterior chamber,55,55f
143,147f,240-241f,248f,344f,
musculotendinous,499-503,
Aorta
345f,357f,373f,376f, 452,467f,
501-503f
abdominal,225f,251f,253f,255f,
471-472f, 500, 500f
pancreatic,329f
366f, 445-446, 447f
side-lobe and grating lobe, 365,
peritoneal,304f,452,452f
prostatic,423,424f,425f,435,442,
caudal trifurcation of the, 448
368f
Arterioportal fistula, hepatic, 253-254,
Atelectasis or lung collapse, 127f,
442f
258f
128f, 138, 139f
pulmonary,138,143,144,145f
renal,346-349,350f,356f,363
Arteriovenous fistula,cervical,104
Atrial septal defect,182,185,186f,
retroperitoneal,357,361f,63
Artery (ies)
187f, 191f
sublumbar,42,42f
arcuate,339,341f
testicular,436f
brachiocephalic,121f
thoracic wall,123,125f
cranial mesenteric,258f,446,457f
B
Acoustic or distal enhancement,105,
celiac,258f,446
Biliary ducts,dilatation of,234f,
106f,113,122f,130f,221,222f,
common, carotid,92f,95f,96,99f,
243-245f
233,234-235f,238f,348-349f,349,
103, 104f, 112f, 113f
Biliary obstruction,243f
external carotid, 95f, 96
extrahepatic, 242-243,244-246f,247
452
Addison's disease,391,392f
external and internal maxillary, 92f,
Biliary ectasia, 243
93f, 94, 95f
Biliary sludge,220-221, 221-222f,
Adenocarcinoma, see aiso Tumor(s),
hepatic,222
243f, 248-249f
see also Carcinoma
adrenal,392f,396f
hyaloid,60,70,73,76
Biliary system
cranial mediastinal,135f
internal, carotid,95f, 96
examination of the normal, 220-
main pulmonary, 199, 205f
222, 223f
colonic,311f
renal, 446
disorders of the,242-249,243-249f
gastric, 300,309f
hcpatic,231f,234f
Arthritis
Biopsy
intestinal,290f,297f,300,309f,310f,
septic, 479,481f, 487
bladder and urethral, suction, 381-
311f, 316f
Ascites
382,382f
Portal hypertension and, 253
brain, 29
lacrymal gland, 74f, 86f
Aspiration, see Finc-needle aspiration
gastrointestinal tract,298,316, 317f
nasal, 84f
Astrocytoma,20f,24f,30f
kidney, 362-363
pancreatic,235f,336f,456f
Amyloidosis
liver, 260
renal,349,351f
uterine, 413f
hepatic, 226t,229
neck lesion, 115
Adenoma
renal,346
pancreas,325,337
adrenal, 391
Artifact
prostate,442
hepatic,231,233f
acoustic or distal enhancement,105,
spleen, 279
106f,113,122f,130f, 221,222f,
thorax,149,150f
lacrymal gland, 87f
233,234-235f,238f,348-349f,349,
thyroid,115f
Adrenal glands
appearance of the normal,385,386f,
452
Bladder
387,3871,388,388f, 389f
anisotropy,468
blood clot in the, 371, 376-377,
examination of the,385,386f
Braum's bump, 59f
379f
measurcment of the,388
comet tail, 142f, 451, 452f
disorders of the,371-381,371-381f
tumor(s) of the, 391-394, 392f-396f
dirty shadowing, 119, 121f
examination of the normal, 365,
Adrenomegaly, 391f
edge shadowing, 123, 381f
366-369f
511
512 INDEX
neoplasia of the,371,372-373f,374,
hypertrophic,196-197,197-198f,
Corpus cavernous, 370, 370f
375-376f, 376, 381
199, 203-204
Corpus spongiosum, 370, 370f
rupture of the,380-381, 380f
restritive, 199, 200f
Cryptococcosis, 133f
Brachial plexus,44,45,45f, 46f
Carotid-body tumor,103
Cryptorchidism, 430,432f
Brain
Cartilage, articular
Crystalluria, 375, 377f
disorders of the, 14-28
abnormal,476,477f,488-489f
Cushing's disease, see
cystic lesions of the, 23-24f
normal,468,470f,484-485,485f,
Hyperadrenocorticism
examination of the normal, 3-14,
487f
Cyst (s)
4f-14f
Cataract,63f, 64-66,67f,68f,69f,70f
cerebellar,29f
hypoplasia of the, 27, 28f
Cellulitis, 106, 106, 107-108, 499, 502f
cervical, 106
infectious lesions of the, 19, 21f
Cerebellar hypoplasia, 27, 28f
cranial mediastinal, 130f,130
neoplasia of the,19-23, 20f, 21f
Cervix, uterine, 402f
hepatic,226t,232t,233,235,238f
trauma of the,19-23,22f, 23f
Chemodectoma
laryngeal, 107
vasculature,11-14,13f,14f
cardiac, 203
omental,449f
Bronchiectasis, 146f
cervical,103,104f
pancreatic,328f
Bronchogram
Chiari-like malformation, 25, 27f
prostatic cyst,418f,423,423f,
air, 138
Cholangiohepatitis, 226t, 228f, 240f,
424f
fluid,138,141f
248f
pulmonary, 139, 144
Bowel, see Intestine
Cholecystocentesis, ultrasound-
renal,346-349,348f,354,363
Bursa, calcaneal,495,495f
guided, 260
thyroid,110
Cholecystitis,238f,242,244f,246-247f,
Cystadenoma and
247
cystadenocarcinoma
C
Cholelithiasis,232t,242,244f,247,
Biliary,233,238-239f
Calcification, see Mineralization
248f
Renal,349,349f
Calcified bodies, 476, 476-477f
Chondrosarcoma,123
Cystic neoplasia
Calculus, or calculi
Chorioretinitis, 78f, 80
hepatic or biliary,232t,233,234f,
cystic,365,71,372f,37375,376
Chylothorax,127f
239f
378f, 380f
Cirrhosis, hepatic, 226, 226t, 227, 230f,
renal, 349f
renal,350,353f,355f
253,256t,256f
thyroid,110,111f
ureteral, 356-357,357-359f
Colon,see also Gastrointestinal
Cystic endometrial hyperplasia,
urethral, 378f
Colonic intussusception,289f
uterine,412f
Carcinoma, see also adenocarcinoma
Colonic thickening, 302f
Cystitis,371,371-372f,376,380
adrenal, 391, 393f
Colonic wall, 282f-284f
emphysematous,371,372f
biliary, 234f, 239f,246f, 455f
Comet tail,seealsoArtifact,142f,303f
polypoid,371, 372f
ciliary body, 83f
451,452f
Cystocentesis, ultrasound-guided,
hepatocellular,226t,231f,232,234f
Common bile duct
381, 381f
laryngeal, 107
examination of the normal, 221-
pancreatic,334f
222, 223f
pulmonary,129f, 142f, 143f
dilation of the, 242,243-246f,330f
D
renal, 346,347f
wall thickening of the,243, 243f,
Dandy-Walker-like syndrome, 25-27
thyroid,103,104,104f,110,112f,
245f,247f
Dehiscence, gastrointestinal, 295, 304f,
115,203,235f
Congenital heart diseases, 176-191,
450
transitional cell, 371, 372-373f,374,
177-191f
Diaphragm
375-376f,381
Congenital renal malformations, 342
normal, 121,121f,217,218f
Carcinomatosis
Congestion,hepatic venous,221,226t,
rupture of the,145,148f,149f
peritoneal,450,450t,454,455-456f
257,259f
Dirofilariasis, 199, 200, 202f
pleural,126,127f,128f,129f
Congestive heart failure, 126f
Disc herniation,38,38f,39f
Cardiac linear dimensions, 170-171,
Consolidation, lung,138, 139f,142f
intraoperative assessment of, 43,
171f
Contusion, lung, 138, 142f
39f
Cardiac ratio indices,normal,164,
Cornea
Diverticulum, vericourachal, 380
167,170f, 172-173f, 174t,213t
 normal appearance of the, 55, 55f,
Doppler
Cardiac tamponade,201, 203f, 206,
56f
color, 13f, 14f, 91, 95f, 96, 104f, 112f,
257, 259f
disorders of the, 62, 62f
121f, 132f, 138, 141f, 162, 160f,
Cardiac volume and mass estimation,
Cor pulmonale, 199-200, 201f, 203
168-169f, 223, 224f, 241f, 250,
172-173
Cor triatriatum,187,190f,199
251f,257-258f,358,459f,503
Cardiomyopathy
Core lesion, with tendinopathy, 472,
power,34f, 91,112f,133f,136f,138,
dilated,194-195,196f, 197f,199,204
473f
253,257,257f,358,459f
513 INDEX
spectral, 14f, 91,95f,96,224-225,
pleural, 119,124,126-129f, 133-
Fibrous strands, 128f, 449f
225f, 255f, 258f
135f, 138,139-141f, 143f
 Fine-needle aspiration
tissue, 163
trapped or encapsulated,448,449f
brain,29,29f, 30f
Double-chambcr right ventricle,180,
Elbow, examination of the,478-479,
gastrointestinal tract,316,317,317f
180f
478f, 480f
kidney,362-363,362-363f
Drainage
Embryonic. resorption, 406,407,407f
liver,259,259f
ultrasound-guided, 259
Endocardial cushion defect, 185
musculoskeletal, 499,501f, 503-504,
pancreatic pseudocyst,336f,337
Endocardiosis,191, 192f,193
507
prostatic abscess,442,442f
Endocarditis,infective,192-194,
neck lesion, 115, 116f
Duct (s)
194-195f
pancreas, 337
biliary, 234f, 242, 245
Endophthalmitis,76,78f
prostate,442
common bile, 221-222, 223f, 242-
Entcritis, sce also Intestine, 293-295,
spleen, 279
243,243-245f
300f,301f,316f
thoracic,149
cystic, 220-221, 222f, 242
Epididymis, normal, 430, 431f
Flow convergence zone, 178f, 180,
Duodenitis,295,302f
Epididymitis, 430,432,435f, 437f
181f, 182-183, 184f, 188-190f, 191,
Dysplasia
Esophagus
193f
hepatic, 149f
examination of the normal, 92, 98,
Flow turbulence
microvascular,226t,252
99f, 101f, 121
cardiac, 167f
mitral valve,182, 183-184f
dilated,115f,134f,136
caudal vena cava,250,251f,253,
renal,342,342f
inflammation of the, 115f
253f
tricuspid,181-182, 182f
intraluminal ultrasound of the,114
Foreign body
neoplasia of the, 136,137f
cervical,106,108f,109f
thickening or hypertrophy of the,
esophageal, 136
F
114, 114-115f
gastrointestinal, 287-291, 292f,293f,
Echocardiography, normal, 151-176,
Ethanol ablation of thyroid
294f, 296f, 297f, 451f, 451
153f-176f
carcinoma, 116
linear foreign body (ies), 287, 288,
color flow Doppler, 162, 160f,
Ethylene glycol toxicity, 342-344, 343f,
294f
168-169f
346
musculoskeletal,499,502-503f
continuous-wave Dopplcr, 162,
External ear canal, 91-92, 93f
needle,108f
175-176
Extrapleural sign, 123, 123f
ocular, 80, 82f
measurements and indices in,
Exudate
peritoneal,453
164-174
pleural, 126
renal,350f
M-mode, 160, 161-165f, 171f
peritoneal,448,449f, 449
surgical sponge, retained, 453
pulsed-waved, 162, 166-168f, 170f
retroperitoneal, 360
teriyaki stick,291,297f
two-dimensional,150-160,153-
Eye
thoracic wall, 125f
160f
anatomy of the,55-62,54f-62f
wooden-stick,453,453f,503f
Echogenicity
examination of the normal, 49-55,
Fracture
Relativc,222f
50f-55f
 assessment of long bone, 507-508,
Ectopic ureter,342,355t,357f,358-
fetal, 61f
508f
359,360f,378,380f
foreign body in the, 80, 82f
ligament or tendon avulsion,491,
Fdema
trauma of the, 75f
499
gallbladder wall, 246-247f, 253,
tumor of the,83-84,83f,84f
medial humeral epicondyle,481
259f
patellar, 488-489, 490f
gastric wall, 293,299f
supraglenoid tubercle avulsion,
interfascial, 106
F
472, 476
pancreatic,253
Fat
tibial tuberosity avulsion, 490
subcutaneous,106,106f,108f
falciform,217,220,221222f,227f
Fungal disease
tracheal wall, 114f
mediastinal, 119, 129
prostatic,423,425f
Eisenmenger physiology, 190
retroperitoneal,350f,358f,361,361f,
renal, 349
Effusion or fluid
362f, 445
testicular,435f
joint, 479-480,487
Fat necrosis,453,453f
pericardial, 201-202,203-204f,
Feline infectious peritonitis, 344, 345f,
206-207
349, 450, 451f
G
retroperitoneal, 346, 360,361-362f
Fetal abnormalities, 408f, 409
Gain setting,219f, 365
peritoncal, 220f, 230f,234f, 241f,
Fibrosis
Gallbladder
257f,345f,380,381f,448-450,
hepatic, 253
bilobed,220,222f
448-450f, 450t, 455f
myocardial,176,177f,180f
dilation of the,242
514 INDEX
examination of the normal, 217,
neoplastic disorders of the, 202-203,
Hip joint
218f, 220-221, 220221f, 223f
204f
dysplasia of the,494
hcrniation of the,148f
Heart base tumor, 136,136f, 203
examination of the,492,493f
rupture of the,247,248-249f
Heartworm disease(dirofilariasis)
luxation of the,494,494f
wall thickening of the, 243, 246-
199,200,202f
Horner's syndrone, 104
247f, 247,259f
Hemangiosarcoma
IIyaloid canal, see also Hyaloid artcry,
Gallbladder mucocele, 247, 248-249f
bladder,374f
60f
Gallstones, see also Cholelithiasis,248f
cardiac,202,204f
Hydroccphalus, see aiso
hepatic, 236f
Ventriculomegaly, 14-19, 15f-
Gas
hepatic,232t,239f, 240,242f
metastatic,131f,235f,454,456f
27f
gastric, 281,284f
renal,349,352f,357f,379f
Hydronephrosis,354,354-358f,355t,
colonic,283f
retroperitoneal,454
358,362f
Gastric. see also Stomach
splenic,270,273f,274f, 275f
Hydroureter,354,357-359f,358
Gastric distention,292f
Hematoma
Hygroma,483,483f
Gastric foreign body, 292f
bladder,374f,379-380f
Hyoid apparatus, 97
Gastric polyp, 309, 315f
cervical,105
Hyperadrcnocorticism,461f
Gastric tumor(s), 299-309, 307f, 309f
hepatic,226t,232t,236,240,240f
adrenal changes with, 389, 390,
Gastric ulcer, 298f
ligament tear and, 499
390f, 391
Gastric wall
muscular, 498,498f, 505f
liver changes with, 226,226t,
edema of the,293,299f
peritoneal, 449
228f
layering of,281, 282f
pulmonary,138,144,147f
Hypercalcemia, 344f, 346, 346f
normal appearance of, 281, 282,
rib,126f
parathyroid glands and, 113
285f
tendon tear and,472,473f,496-497,
Hyperparathyroidism, 113-114
thickness of, 286
497f
Hyperplasia
Gastritis, 293,297f-299f
IIemoabdomen,449-450,450f,450t
hepatic benign nodular,226,226t,
Gastrointestinal biopsy, 316-317, 317f
amyloidosis and, 229
227,228f,231,232t,232
Gastrointestinal disordcrs,286-316
hemangiosarcoma and, 236f, 450
Hypertension
Gastrointestinal foreign body, 287-
Hemorrhage
portal, 252-255,255-257f
291,292f-294f
bladder wall, 376
pulmonary,182,183,185f,186f,199,
Gastrointestinal inflammation,293-
pleural, 126
201f,202f
295, 300f-302f
post-biopsy, 259-260, 260f, 363
systemic,203
Gastrointestinal tract
pulmonary, 140f
IIyperthyroidism,109, 203-204
normal appearance of, 281-286,
relroperitoneal,349,352f,360
ethanol or hcat ablation in, 115-116,
282f-286f
Hepatitis,226t,227
116f
contents of the,285f
acute,227,229f
Hypertrophy
Gliding sign, lung, 129
chronic,226,226t
concentric cardiac,176,177f,178,
Glomerulonephritis,346,346f
chronic active, 229f
196
Granuloma or pyogranuloma
emphysematous,242f
eccentric cardiac
hepatic,226t,232t,236,240f
Hepatocutanecus syndrome, 231, 231f
Hypothyroidism,110,111f
peritoneal,452,453
Hepatofugal flow, 250, 251f, 253, 253f,
Hypovolemia, 226t
pulmonary,138,144, 144f, 146f
254,258f
renal,346,349,352f,357f
Hepatopetal flow, 224
Granulomatous or pyogranulomatous
Hcpatoma, 231,233f
process,44,345f352f,45
Hepatomegaly, 218, 221f, 226t, 228,
Infarct, or infarction
237f
hepatic,240,241f
Hepatopathy
intestinal, 451
H
steroid,226,226t,228f
portal thrombosis and, 255
Halo sign, perirenal, 347f
vacuolar,226,226t
renal cortical,346,350,353f
Harmonic ultrasonography, 91, 231,
Hernia
Instability, joint, 476
369
diaphragmatic,145,147-149f
Insufficiency
Heart, see also Cardiac
peritoneopericardial, 145,148f,149f,
aortic valve, 160,176,178f, 193-194,
acquired diseases of the, 191-205,
190, 190f
194-195f, 203
192 205f
Histiocytic sarcoma
pulmonary,163,200,201f
congenital diseases of the, 176-191,
hepatic,226t, 228, 237f
Insulinoma, see also Pancreatic tumor,
177-191f
renal,349,351f
325,333,335
examination of the,151-176,153-
disseminated,132f,142f,226t,237f,
Intestinal biopsy, 316, 317f
173f, 174t, 175f
351f, 458f
Intestinal dehiscence,295, 304f
515 INDEX
Intestinal forcign body, 287-291, 292f,
Leiomyoma, see also Smooth muscle
necrotic,458f
293f, 294f, 296f, 297f
tumor(s)
neoplastic or metastatic, 104, 105,
Intestinal perforation
gastric,311f
131, 131f, 456, 457-459f
Intestinal stricture,305f
intestinal,311f
reactive,104,105f,131,131f,456,
Intestinal tumor(s), 299-309, 306f-
uterine, 413f
457f
308f, 310f-314f
vaginal, 413f
sublumbar,458-459f
Intestinal wall, 281-286, 282f,285f
Leiomyosarcoma,see also Smooth
Lymph node (s)
Intestine
muscle tumor(s)
abscessed,104,456,458f
anatomy of thc,282f-286f
bladder, 374f
aortic,446f,447t
biopsy of the, 316-317, 317f
intestinal,309,312f
cavitary, or cystic, 104,456,458f
contents,in the,285f
Lens
colic,311f,446f,447t
examination of the,281,282f
luxation of the,73f,73f
cranial cervical, 96
Intussusception
normal appearance of the, 58-59,
cranial mediastinal, 121, 130, 131,
appearance of, 286-287,287f
59f
131f
duodenogastric, 288f
posterior rupture of the, 72f
examinaticn of the normal, 446-
jejunal, 288f-290f
Leptospirosis
448, 447f
colonic,289f
hepatic,227,229f
gastric,309f,446f,447t,45
Invagination, see Intussusception,
renal,343f,344,345f,346,361f
hepatic,446f,447t,458f
451
Leukemia,226t
hypogastric, 446f, 447t, 447f
Iris
Leydig cell tumor, 431,433f
inguinal, 374
normal appearance of the, 56-57,
Ligament (s)
56f, 57f
collateral, 478-479,480f, 485-486,
447f, 448, 457f
Ischemia
487f, 491
mandibular, 96,99t
myocardial, 176,177f, 178, 10f
cranial cruciate,484-485,490,491f
medial iliac, 374, 446f, 447f, 448,
bowel, 295,316
disorders of,499
458f
examination of,499
medial retropharyngeal, 94, 95f, 96,
falciform,218f,220,221f
99t, 105f
J
atellar, 484-485,488-488
mesenteric (or jejunal), 290f, 299)
Joint mice, see also Calcified bodies,
Linear foreign body(ies), 287, 288,
476, 476-477f
294f
pancreaticoduodenal,446f,447t
Liver
popliteal, 486
diffuse parenchymal disorders of
renal, 446f
K
the, 226-231, 226t
sacral,374,446f,447t
Kidneys
cxamination of the normal, 217-
splenic,446f,447t,457f
diffuse disorders of the, 342-346,
220, 218-219f
sternal, 121, 131
343-347f
focal parenchymal disorders of the,
sublumbar,447t,447f,448
examination of the normal, 339-
231-241
Lymphoma
341,340-342f
neoplastic disorders of the, 226t,
bladder,372
focal disorders of the,346-351,
228-229, 230-231f, 231233, 232t,
cervical,104,105,106f
348-353f
233-239[
cranial mediastinal, 130, 131,
neoplasia of the,346,347f,349,
Lipidosis,hepatic,226,226t,227f
133-135f
350-352f,356-357f
Lipoma,453,504,505f
gastric, 307f
cervical,105
hepatic,226t,228,230f,232t,237f
infiltrative, 123
intestinal,306f-308f,309,317f,455f
L
mesenteric,454
laryngeal, 107
Laryngeal paralysis, 104, 107, 109,
Luxation, patellar, 488
mesenteric,308f,457f,458f
110f
Lung, see also Pulmonary
pancreatic,334f
Larynx
Disorders of the,137-145, 138-145f
peritoneal,454,455f
examination of the normal, 97,97f
Examination of the,119-121,
renal,346,347f,349,350f,359f,362
disorders of the, 107
120-122f
subcutaneous,504f
Left atrium
Lymphadenopathy
dilation of the,182,184f,192f,196,
abdominal,456-460,457-460f
196-197f, 198
cranial mediastinal,105f,133f
M
Left ventricle
granulomatous or
Mammary glands
dilatation of the,182,184f,192f,
pyogranulomatous,460f
appearance ofnornal,414,414f
196-197f
inflammatory,104,105f,107f,133f,
tumor of,414,415f
hypertrophy of the, 176,177f,182
460
Mandible,91,93f,94f
516 INDEX
Mass (es)
Meniscus, or menisci
Muscle trauma, 498,498-499f
adrenal, 390,390f, 390,391,392,
femorotibial,485-486,487f,461,
Musculature
392f,393f,394,394f,395f,396f
492f
examination of the,497-498,497f
bladder,359f,371-372,372-375f,
Mesentery
Myelolipoma
377, 379f, 382
normal, 445
hepatic, 232t
cardiac, 203
inflammatory processes of the, 445,
splenic, 269, 271f
cavitary,112f,135f
450, 451f, 452f
Myelomalacia,41f
cerebral, 19,20f,21f,23,29,30f, 31f
ncoplastic invasion of the,445,450,
Myocardial disease, 194-199
cervical, 105, 108f
455-456f
Myopathies, or tendinopathies
cranial mediastinal, 124, 128f, 130,
Mesothelial remnant, 148f
fibrosing and calcifying, 499,
131, 132-135f
Mesothelioma,126,203,453
500-501f
diaphragmatic, 145, 149f
Metallic clip, 232t, 240
Myositis
esophageal, 137f
Metastasis or metastatic disease
septic,501f
ocular,62,63,63f,64f,65f,70,71,
bone,505,507f
temporalis, 86f
74f, 81f,83,83f,84,87f,89, 90f
cranial mediastinal, 131f
Myxosarcoma, 236f
gastrointestinal tract, 287,290f, 295,
hepatic,226t,232t,235f,237f
299,300,301f,306f,307f,309
lymph node, 458-459f
315f
peritoneal, 454,455-456f
N
heart base, 136,136f
pleural,127f,128
Neck,examination of the,91,92f
hepatic,228,233-235f
pulmonary,144f
Necrosis
laryngeal, 107, 109f, 110f
renal,346,349,351f
acute tubular,343-344,343f,345
musculoskeletal, 499f, 499, 501-
Microhepatica, 250f, 253
femoral head avascular,494
506f,504
Microvascular dysplasia, hepatic, 252
hepatic,226t, 232t
pancreatic,2,324,25,333,
Mineralization
Nephritis, interstitial, 342, 343-344f,
335f
renal,343-344f,346,348f,349-350,
344,346,348f,362f
prostatic,429,432,433f,434f
352-353f
Nephrocalcinosis,343-344,344f,346,
pleural, 128,128f
hepatic,232t, 236,240, 241f
346f,353f,461f
pulmonary, 123,128,129f, 137-139,
neoplastic,113,506f
Nephroblastoma, 349, 351f
139f, 142f, 143, 143f
tendon or muscle,470,471-472f,
Nephrolithiasis,341f, 344f,346,352-
renal,346,347f,348-349,349f,351-
472, 474f, 481, 496, 500-501f
353f,354,355f
352f,355t,356-357f,358,359f
vascular wall, 461,461f
Nephrosclerosis,343
rib, 124f, 125f
Mirror-image see also Artifact, 145,
Nephrosis, acute tubular,342
splenic,269,270,271f-275f,275,
217,220f,365,367f
Neoplasia, see aiso tumor, mass,
276, 277f-279f
Mitralvalve
nodule
testicular,435,436f
dysplasia of the, 183f
bladder,371,372-373f,374,375
thoracic wall,123,123f
endocardiosis,191,192f
376f, 376, 381
thyroid,104f,112f
regurgition of the,193f
bone,505-506
Mast cell tumor
Mosaic pattern, turbulent flow, 167f,
brain, 16,19,23
bladder,374f
178f, 183f, 188f, 198f
cardiac,202,204f
cranial mediastinal,135f
Muscle
carotid-body,103
hepatic, 226t,229
biceps, 465, 466f, 467, 469f, 479
ocular,57f,62,83,84,89
Medial coronoid process
brachialis, 478-479
gastrointestinal, 309
fragmentation of the,479-480,481f
cricopharyngeal, 115f
hepatic, 228-229,229f,232-233,
normal,479,480f
deltoid, 468f
232t, 233f
Medial humeral epicondyle
digastricus, 93f, 94, 94f
joint, 506f
avulsion, or fragmentation, 481,
extensor carpi radialis,478-479
laryngeal, 107
482f
gastrocnemius,485
mammary glands, 414
Mediastinum,120f,121,121f,127f
iliops0as, 498, 498f
nerve,45
abnormalities of the, 129-136
infraspinatus,465,466f, 468f
muscle,503-504,504-505f
cyst in the, 130, 130f
quadriceps fcmoris,483-484
pancreatic,325,333
mass in the,128f, 130,131,132-
sternohyoid,96
peritoneal,453-454
134f
sternothyroid,96
parathyroid,110,113,113f
Medullary rim sign, renal, 341, 344,
supraspinatus, 465, 466-467f
prostatic, 423,428, 429
345f,346
tibialis cranialis,485
penis,442
Megaesophagus, 133f
triceps, 478-479
pulnonary,137-139,142f,143,143f
Melanoma, laryngeal, 109f
Muscle contracture,498
renal,346,347f,349,349-352f,356-
Meningocele, 41
infraspinatus, 470
357f, 359f,362
517 INDEX
retroperitoneal space, 454
Osteochondritis dissecans
Patent ductus venosus,250, 251f,
spinal, 33,39
femoral condyle,490,490f
254f
splenic, 268, 279
humeral head,476,476-477f
Patent ductus arteriosus, 182-183,
testicular,430,432
humeral condyle, 479
184-185f, 190
thyroid,103-105,104f,107,112f,
Osteochondroma, or
reversed,183,185,185f
113, 116
osteochondromatosis, 476-477,
Paradoxical septal motion, 186f, 199
urethral, 372, 373f
477f
Paraprostatic cyst, 417,423,426f, 428,
Nerve(s)
Osteomyelitis, 505
442
brachial, 46f
Osteophyte, or osteophytosis, 471,
Penis
examination of normal peripleral,
476, 489f, 490
appearance of normal,440,440f
4445, 45f
Osteosarcoma, 376f
examination of,419,440f
median, 46f
appendicular, 506f
fracture of,441f
radial, 46f
rib,123,124f
Perforation, gastrointestinal, 295, 304f,
Neuroblastoina, renal,40f
splenic, 279f
450,451, 451f
Neuroendocrine tumor, 103, 136f,
vertebral,42f
Percutaneous procedurcs sec Biopsy,
234f
Otitis media,102,102f
Fine-needle aspiration
Nodular hyperplasia
Ovary
Pericardial effusion, 201-202, 203-
adrenal,389f,390f,391,392
examination of, 397,398f
204f, 206-207
hepatic,226-227,226t,228-229f,
normal appearance of, 397,
Pericardiodentesis, ultrasound-
231-232, 232t, 232f
398f-400f
guided,206,206f
pancreatic,325,333f
Ovarian cyst, 397,400f
Peripheral nerve(s), see nerve(s)
splenic,268,268f,272f,273f
Ovarian tumor(s), 397, 400f
Peritoneal cestodiasis, 303f
Nodule (s)
Ovulation cycle,399,399f
Peritoneocentesis, ultrasound-guided,
adrenal,390-392,394,395f,396
Overcirculation, pulmonary, 185, 186f,
462
gastrointestinal, 309, 311f, 314f, 316
187f, 191, 199
Peritonitis,450
hepatic, 228,228f,229f, 230f,231,
Overload
bile,249f
234-235f,237f
pressure,176,180,181f,183,185,
septic,449f, 450,457f
pancreatic,325,333,333f-335f
193,203
Pheochromocytoma, 391, 392f-394f,
parathyroid,113,113f
volume,173,182,184-185,186-
394,396
pleural, 126,128
187f,193
Pleura, 119, 124
pulmonary,139,139f,143,144f
abnormalities of the, 124-129
renal,346-349,347f,350-352f
thickcncd,127-129f
spleniv, 268,268f, 269,269f, 270,
P
Pleuritis,126,127-129f
270f-,275f, 275, 279
Pancreas
Pneumonia,138,140f
testicular,432,433f,433f
examination of the,319,320f,321f
abscessing, 145f
 normal appearance of the, 320f,
aspiration,140f
321f
pyogranulamous, 146f
measurements of the, 322t
Pneumothorax,119,129,130f,142f
Obstruction
Pancreatic cyst, 328f
 Pneumoperitoneum, 451, 452f
ureteral,354-358,354f,355t,355f,
Pancreatic duct,321f,332f
Pseudocyst
358f,363f
Pancrcatic cdema,322,327f
perinephric,361,362f,363
Omcntum
Pancreatic pseudocyst,322,328f,337
Pseudosludge see also Artifact,
normal,445,449f
Pancreatic tumor(s),325-336,
368-369f
inflammatory processes of the, 445,
334f-336f
Polyps
450,451f,452f
Pancreatitis, 245f
gallbladder wall, 247
neoplastic invasion of the, 445,454,
acute,329f,332f
gastric,309,315f
455456f
chronic,330f, 331f
bladder,371,372f
Optic nerve
necroticohemorrhagic, 326f
uterine,413f
inflammation of the, 88f
Papilla
 Portal hypertension, 252-255,
normal appcarance of the, 61f
duodenal major,223f,242
255-257f
Orchitis,430,432,435f,437,437f,438
ureteral,365,368,371
Portal vein
Os penis, 370, 370f
Parathyroid glands
doppler assessment of the, 224-225,
Osseous metaplasia
examination of the,98,99f,99t,100f
225f,251f,255f,258f
deep digital flexor muscle, 481, 483f
hyperplasia of the, 113-114
primary hypoplasia of the, 226t,
Osteoarthritis, or degenerative joint
adenoma of the,113,113f
252-253,256t,257f
disease, 476, 478f, 479-480, 481f,
malignant neoplasia of the, 113,
normal, 217,218f,223,223f,225f,
487, 489f
113f
446f
518 INDEX
Kidney-aorta,339
Round-cell neoplasia
Portal system
Portal vein-aorta,252,255f,256t
hepatic,226t,228
normalextrahepatic,223,224-225f,
Renal, see also Kidneys
renal, 351f
256t
Portoazygos shunt, 250,251f, 253f,
Renal agenesis,342f
Roundworms, 295f
Renal disease
256t
Portosystemic shunt (s) or shunting,
chronic,343-344,343f,348f
226,250-257,251f,256t
diffuse parenchymal, 342-346
S
focal, 346-351
Salivary duct cyst,102f
acquired,251f,253-255,256t,257f
polycystic,342,346,348f
Salivary glands
congenital, 226t, 250-253,256t
Renal calculus（i）,350,353f,355f
mandibular, 91, 93-95f,94
extrahepatic,250,251-252f,256t
Renal cyst (s),346-349,348f,354,363
parotid, 91, 93f, 94
intrahepatic,250,251f,254-255f,
Renal insufficiency,342,343-344f,
disorders of the,102,102f
256t
Postpartum uterus, 406
348f
Sarcoma
Renal granuloma, 346,349,352f,357f
histiocytic,132f,142f,226t,237f,
Pregnancy
abnormal,406,407,409,407f-409f
Renal pelvis
351f, 458f
disorders of the,351-356,353-357f,
intramedullary,40f
gestational age in, 404f, 406
355t
rib,124f,125f
normal progression of, 401, 403,
examination of the normal, 340f,
soft-tissue,105,123,125f,356f,357,
403f-406f
341,342f
506f
Pressure gradient
Renal-aortic ratio,339
splenic,268,270,270f, 274f,
aortic stenosis and,176,178f
Renal tumor(s) or neoplasia, 346,347f,
275f
atrial septal defect and,185,186f
349,349-352f,356-357f,359f,362
Sarcomatosis,454,455-456f
mitral dysplasia and, 183f
patent ductus arteriosus and, 182
Reproductive tract female see also
Scrotal trauma,439f
ovaries,uterus, pregnancy
Scrotum,430,433f,435,438
pulmonic stenosis and,180,180f
tricuspid Dysplasia and, 182f
examination of,397,398f
Seminoma,431,433f,434f
ventricular septal defect and, 187
appearance ofnormal,397,398f
Septal defect
399,399f, 400f,401,402,401f-406f
atrial,182,185,186f,187f,190,
Prostate
Reproductive tract male see also
191f
appearance of the normal,417,418f,
prostatc,testis
ventricular,185,187,
420f
biopsy of, 442,442f
examination of,417,418f,419f
188-189f
examination of,370,370f,417
appearance of normal, 417,418f,
Seroma
measurement of, 421
419f
postoperative,43,43f
Retinal detachument,78-80,79f,80f,
subserosal, 306f
Prostatic cyst,418f,423,423f,424f
Prostatic hyperplasia,422f, 423, 423f,
81f
Sertoli cell tumor,431,434f,436f
Retrobulbar space
Shadowing, see also Artifact, 93f, 94f,
424f, 432
normal appearance of, 60
109f, 113,122f, 143,147f, 240-
Prostatic tumor,427f, 428
mass of, 84,86f, 87f
241f,248f,283f,293f,344f,345f,
Prostatitis,422f,423,424f
biopsy of the, 89-90, 90f
357f,373f,376f,452,467f, 471-
Pulmonary, see Lung
Reverberation see also Artefact,93f,
472f,500,500f
Pupil
normal appearancc of the, 58,58f
119,121f,129,130f,135f,140
dirty,119,121f
Pus,107,233,354,355f,356f,361f,
142f,143,281,283f,371,372f,375
edge,123,416f,342f,344f,381f
451,451f,452,503
Shoulder
363, 481f, 483
Rhabdomyosarcoma
cxamination of the normal, 465-
Pyelectasia,renal,342,346,351,354,
bladder,botryoid,372
470, 466-470f
355t
diaphragmatic,149f
Sialoadenitis,102,102f
Pyelocentensis,356,363f
Rib (s)
Sialocele,102,102f
Pyelonephritis,342,346,351,353f,
aggressive lesion of the, 123
Side-lobe and grating lobe, see also
354,355t,355f,357f,61,362
fracture,of the,123,126f
Artifact,365,368f
Pyogranuloma (sec Granuloma)
mass of the, 124f, 125f
Sinus of Valsalva,156f,158f,173f,
Pyonephoris, 356f, 363
sarcoma,of,124f,125f
177f, 195f
Pythiosis, 460, 460f
Right atrium
Situs inversus,191, 191f
dilatation of the,178f,18f,18f
Smoke sign,left atrial,198
Right ventricle
Smooth muscle tumors,312f,313f
R
dilation of the,181f,186-187f
Spine.
Ratio (s)
hypertrophy of the,178f80f,1f,
examination of the normal, 33-37,
Cardiac dimensional,164,167,170f,
172-173f, 174t, 213t
187f, 189f, 191, 199
34f-37f
519 INDEX
Spinal cord
Tendon, normal
adenomatous hyperplasia of the,
hemorrhage of the, 38, 39f
biceps brachi, 465, 466f, 469f, 470t
109
neoplasia of the, 39,40f
calcaneal (Achilles), 494-496, 495f
cysts in, 110
Spleen
gastrocnemius,494,495f
enlargement of the, 110
appearance of the normal, 263, 264f,
infraspinatus,465,466f
examination of the, 91, 98, 99f,99t,
265f
long digital extensor, 485
100f
displacement of the, 147f
superficial digital flexor, 494, 495f
tumors of the,103,104f,112f
examination of the,263
supraspinatus,465,466f,469f
Tibial tuberosity avulsion fracture,
extramedullary hematopoiesis of
Tendonitis,or tenosynovitis,or
490
269f
tendinopathy
Tongue
hematoma of the, 269f
bicipital, 470-472,470t,471f,
cxamination of the,96,97f
histoplasmosis of the,267f
473475f
Torsion
infarction of the,276,276f-278f
infraspinatus
liver lobe,226t,240,241f
myelolipoma of the, 269, 271f
supraspinatus, 470, 471-472f
lung lobe, 138, 141f
thrombus of the, 267f,276f,278
Tendon luxation
Toxicity
tumor(s), of the, 263, 268-270, 270f-
biceps, 476, 477f
ethylene glycol,342-344,343f,346
276f,275
superficial digital flexor, 496-497,
grapes, 342
torsion of the, 263, 267f, 268, 276,
497f
lily, 342
278f
Tendon rupture
Trachca
vessels of the, 263, 265f
bicipital,472,473f,475f
examination of the,91,98,100f,
Splenitis,269f,279f
calcaneal (Achilles),496-497,
121, 122f
Splenomegaly,263,266f
496-497f
collapse of the, 114, 136
Splenorenal shunt, Acquired,251f,
Teriyaki stick, 291,297f
compression of the, 136
253,257f
Testis
displacement of the,132-134f,
Steatitis
appearance of,419f,430,430f,431f
136f
abdominal,239f,295,304f,450,
atrophy of,430,437,438f,439f
thickening of the, 114, 138f
451f
examination of,417,419f
Transudate
retroperitoneal, 362f
measurement of,439
peritoneal,448,448-449f,450t
Stenosis
torsion of, 435,436f,437f,438,438f
Tricuspid dysplasia,181-182, 182f,
aortic or subaortic, 176-177,
tumor(s) of,431,432,433f,434f,
190f
177-179f
436f
Tricuspid valve regurgitation
mitral, 182,183f,199
Tetralogy of Fallot, 187, 189f
endocardiosis and, 191
pulmonic,177-178
Thoracocentesis,ultrtasound-guided,
pulmonoic stenosis and, 180, 181f
tricuspid, 182
149,150f
Tumor (s) see Neoplasia
vascular,103
Thym0ma,123f,130,131,132f,133f
Tympanic bullae (middle ear)
Steroid hepatopathy, 226, 226t, 228f
Thymus, normal, 121
examination of the,91-92,92f,93f
Stifle
Thoracic, see also Lung,Thorax
disorders of the, 101-102
exarnination of the,483-487,
Thoracic biopsy or fine-needle
484487f
aspiration,149,150f
Stomach see also Gastric
Thoracic wall mass,123, 123f
U
examination of the,281,282f
Thoracic wall abscess, 123, 125f
Ulceration
normal appearance of the,283f,
Thorax
gastric,293,298f
284f, 285f
examination of the,119-122,
gastrointestinal, 451
contents of the, 285f
120-122f
and tumor,308f
Stricture,intestinal,291,298,305f
Thromboembolism
Ununited anconeal proccss, 480, 482f
Stroke length,175, 178f
aortic or iliac,461, 461f
Ureter
Supraglenoid tubercle fracture,472,
pulmonary, 205f
dilatation of the,354,354f,357-
476
Thrombus or thrombosis,103,104f,
359f, 358
Syringomyelia, 41, 41f
226t
ectopic,342,355t,357f,358-359,
Systolic anterior motion,197,198f
aortic,460
360f,378,380f
left atrial, 198, 199f
Ureteral jet,365,368f,378
portal venous,253,55,257f,2f
Ureteritis,355t,358f,361
T
caudal vena cava,460-461,460f
Uretcrocele,359,378,380f
Target lesion (s)
femoral vein or artery,460
Urethra
hepatic, 235f, 237f
Thyroid gland, 113
examination of the normal, 365,
splenic,275,275f
adenoma of the, 109, 111f
369-370f, 370
520 INDEX
disorders of the,373f,376f,378f,
caudal mesenteric,223,224f
Ventricular system
380f
cranial mesenteric, 223,224f,446f,
measurement of the,16-19,16t,
Uremic gastritis, 293, 299f
446, 448, 457f
17f
Urinoma, 361, 361f
deep circomflex iliac, 446f, 446
Ventriculomegaly see also
Lroliths, or urolithiasis
extermal and internal maxillary,92f,
Hydrocephalus, 14-19, 15f-27f
bladder, 365, 371, 372f, 374-375,
95f,96
Vitreal foci, 76f
376-378f,380f
external jugular, 92f, 94, 95f, 96,
Vitreal retraction, 72-73, 77f
renal, 350,353f, 355f
112f
Vitreousbody
ureteral,356-357,357-359f
external iliac, 446f, 446
anatomy of the, 59,59f, 60f
urethral, 378f
gastroepiploic, 224f, 250
degeneration of the, 77f
Uterine granuloma, 414f
gonadal, left, 253, 257f
hemorrhage in the, 78f
Lterinc involution, 406
hepatic,217,222-223,224f,257,446
Vocal folds, 97f,98
Uterine stump pyometra, 409, 411f
iliac, 446
abnormal motion of the,107,109
Uterine torsion, 409f
jejunal,224f
thickening of the, 109
Uterus
left gastric, 224f, 250
Volvulus
 cystic endometrial hyperplasia of,
linguofacial, 95f, 96
Gastric, 451
412f
maxillary, 95f, 96
examination of, 398f, 401
pancreaticoduodenal, 224f, 319,
fluid filled,409,410f,411f,412f
320f
W
normal appearance of, 398f, 401,
phrenicoabdominal, 446
Wall layering
401f
portal, 217,218f,223,223-224f,
bladder,365
tumors of,409,413f
446f
gastrointestinal tract, 281, 285,
renal,446
285f
right gastric, 250
V
splenic,223,224f,250,263,265f,
Vagosympathetic trunk, 96, 99t,104,
446f
Y
112f
thyroid, 96
Yolk sac membrane, 403f-405f
Valvular disease
Vena cava
chronic dcgcncrative, 191, 192f, 195
caudal,224-225f,233f,250,251f,
Vasculitis
253,255f,257,366f, 446f, 446,454
Z
pyogranulomatous, 345f
cranial,121f
Zygomatic salivary gland
Vein (s)
 persistent left cranial, 190f
normal appearance,53f
azygos,250,253f
syndrome of the, 200
inflammation of the, 85f
PRZYA
BIBLIOTEKA GLOWNA
Uniwersytetu Przyrodniczego
w Lublinie
1u582
Atlas of
Small Animal Ultrasonography
Atlas of Small Animal Cltrasonography provides a highly visual guide to the use
of diagnostic ultrasound in small animal practice. This up-to-date atlas of the
 most commonly performed ultrasound examinations will be a valuable reference
to well-established users of ultrasound as well as those just being introduced to
the technology.
Each chapter provides the reader with valuable information on the use
 of  ultrasound  diagnostics  in  small  animal  veterinary medicine.  Taking  a 
systems-based approach, Atlas of Small gAnimal Eltrasonography is divided into
chapters on ultrasound procedures and techniques for examination of all major
body parts and systems. Each chapter provides numerous illustrations and ultra-
sound images to aid the reader in diagnostic interpretation.
Allas  of  Small  Animal  Ultrasonography  is  an   in-depth   reference   that 
provides thorough coverage of ultrasound techniques and interpretation.
This volume will serve as an indispensable guide to the use of this important
clinical modality.
EDITORS
Dominique Penninck is Professor of Diagnostic Imaging in the Department of
Clinical Sciences, Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine, Tufts University.
Marc-Andre d'Anjou is Assistant Professor of Diagnostic Imaging in the Department
of Clinical Sciences, Faculte de Medecine Veterinaire, Universite de Montreal.
RELATEDTITLES
Diagnostic Ultrasound in Small Animal Practice
Edited by Paddy Mannion
ISBN 9780632053872
Atlas of Interpretative Radiographic gInatomy of the Dog and Cat
By Arlene Coulson and Noreen Lewis
ISBN 9780632040780
Biblioteka Glowna
Uniwersytetu Przyrodniczego w Lublinie
ISBN 978-0-8138-2800-8
1010039079
Blackwell
Publishing
9780813828008