Atlasof
Small Animal Ultrasonography
DominiquePenninck
Marc-Andre d'Anjou
RA
ASD
LV
RPA
Diverticuli
Interlobar
vessel
Blackwell
Publishing
CONTENTS
CONTRIBUTORS
PREFACE
CHAPTER ONE NERVOUS SYSTEM
SCANNING TECHNIQUE
NORMAL SONOGRAPHIC ANATOMY OF THE BRAIN
SONOGRAPHY OF BRAIN DISORDERS
INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES
SCANNING TECHNIQUE
NORMAL SONOGRAPHIC ANATOMY OF THE SPINE
SONOGRAPHY OF SPINALDISORDERS
INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES
SCANNING TECHNIQUE
NORMAL SONOGRAPHIC ANATOMY OF PERIPHERAL NERVES
SONOGRAPHICFEATURESOFPERIPHERALNERVEDISORDERS
INTERVENTIONALPROCEDURES
CHAPTER TWOEYEANDORBIT
PREPARATION AND SCANNING TECHNIQUE
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC ANATOMY OF THE NORMAL EYE
INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES
CHAPTER THREE NECK
SCANNING TECHNIQUE
NORMAL SONOGRAPHIC ANATOMY
2
SONOGRAPHIC FEATURES OF NECK DISORDERS
SPECIAL PROCEDURES
CHAPTER FOUR THORAX
PREPARATION AND SCANNING TECHNIQUE
NORMAL SONOGRAPHIC ANATOMY
SONOGRAPHIC FEATURES OF THORACIC DISORDERS
INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES
CHAPTER FIVE HEART
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHIC TECHNIQUE
CONGENITALHEART DISEASE
ACQUIRED HEART DISEASE
INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES
CHAPTER SIX LIVER
PREPARATION AND SCANNING TECHNIQUE
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC ANATOMY OF THE NORMAL LIVER
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC FEATURES OF HEPATIC DISORDERS
DISORDERS OF THE BILIARY SYSTEM
DISORDERS OF THE HEPATIC AND PORTAL VASCULATURE
INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES
CHAPTER SEVEN SPLEEN
PREPARATION AND SCANNING TECHNIQUE
SONOGRAPHIC ANATOMY OF THE NORMAL SPLEEN
SONOGRAPHIC FINDINGS IN SPLENIC DISORDERS
INTERVENTIONALPROCEDURES
3
CHAPTER EIGHT GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT
PREPARATION AND SCANNING PROCEDURE
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC
ANATOMYOF
THE
NORMAL
GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT
SONOGRAPHIC FEATURES OF GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS
INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES
CHAPTER NINE PANCREAS
PREPARATION AND SCANNING PROCEDURE
ULTRASONOGRAPHY OF THE NORMAL PANCREAS
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC FEATURES OF PANCREATIC DISORDERS
SPECIAL PROCEDURES
CHAPTER TEN KIDNEYS ANDURETERS
PREPARATION AND SCANNING TECHNIQUE
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC ANATOMY OF NORMAL KIDNEYS
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC FEATURES OF RENAL DISORDERS
DISORDERS OF THE PERINEPHRIC RETROPERITONEAL SPACE
INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES
CHAPTER ELEVEN BLADDER AND URETHRA
PREPARATION AND SCANNING TECHNIQUE
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC ANATOMY OF THE NORMAL URINARY
BLADDER AND URETHRA
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC
FEATURES OF BLADDER
AND
URETHRAL DISORDERS
SPECIAL PROCEDURES
CHAPTERTWELVEADRENALGLANDS
4
PREPARATION AND SCANNING TECHNIQUE
SONOGRAPHY OF THE NORMAL ADRENAL GLANDS
INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES
CHAPTER THIRTEEN FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE TRACT
EXAMINATION TECHNIQUE
OVARIES
UTERUS
MAMMARYGLANDS
INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES
CHAPTER FOURTEEN MALE REPRODUCTIVE TRACT
PREPARATION ANDSCANNINGPROCEDURE
PROSTATE
TESTICLES
PENIS
INTERVENTIONALPROCEDURES
CHAPTER FIFTEEN ABDOMINAL CAVITY, LYMPH NODES, AND
GREAT VESSELS
PREPARATION AND SCANNING TECHNIQUE
ULTRASONOGRAPHICA
ANATOMY OFTHE NORMAL
PERITONEAL CAVITY, FAT, VESSELS, AND LYMPH NODES
PERITONEAL EFFUSION
PERITONITIS, STEATITIS, AND PNEUMOPERITONEUM
PERITONEAL
ABSCESSES,
GRANULOMAS,
AND
PYOGRANULOMAS
5
NODULAR FAT NECROSIS
PERITONEAL AND RETROPERITONEAL NEOPLASIA
LYMPHADENOPATHY
VASCULAR THROMBOSIS AND OTHER ANOMALIES
INTERVENTIONAL PROCEDURES
CHAPTER SIXTEEN MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM
SHOULDER
ELBOW
STIFLE
HIP
CALCANEAL TENDON (ACHILLES TENDON)
MISCELLANEOUS MUSCULOSKELETAL DISORDERS
INDEX
6
ATLAS OF
SMALL ANIMAL
ULTRASONOGRAPHY
DominiquePenninck
Marc-Andre d'Anjou
IllustrationsbyBethMellor
Blackwell
Publishing
in the Department of Clinical Sciences, Cummings School of Veterinary
Medicine, Tufts University.
Marc-Andre d'Anjou, DVM, is an Assistant Professor of Diagnostic
Imaging, Department of Clinical Sciences, Faculte de Medecine,
Veterinaire, Universite de Montreal.
@2008 Blackwell Publishing
All rights reserved
Blackwell Publishing Professional
2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014, USA
Orders:1-800-862-6657
Office: 1-515-292-0140
Fax: 1-515-292-3348
Web site: www.blackwellprofessional.com
Blackwell Publishing Ltd
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK
Tel.: +44 (0)1865 776868
Blackwell Publishing Asia
550 Swanston Street, Carlton, Victoria 3053, Australia
Tel.: +61 (0)3 8359 1011
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the
internal or personal use of specific clients, is granted by Blackwell
Publishing, provided that the base fe is paid directly to the Copyright
Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those
organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by CCC, a
separate system of payments has been arranged. The fee codes for users of
the Transactional Reporting Service is ISBN-13: 978-0-8138-2800-8/
2008.
First edition, 2008
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Atlas of small animal ultrasonography/[edited by] Dominique Penninck,
Marc-Andre d'Anjou.-lst ed.
8
p- ; cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
[SBN 978-0-8138-2800-8 (alk. paper)
1. Veterinary ultrasonography-Atlases. I. Penninck, Dominique. II.
d'Anjou, Marc-Andre.
[DNLM: 1. Ultrasonography-veterinary-Atlases. 2. VeterinaryMedicine
methods-Atlases. SF 772.58 A881 2008]
SF772.58A85 2008
636.089'607543-dc22
2007013146
DEDICATION
To my children, Anais and Loic for their loving support, continuous
encouragement and . - - patience!
To Marianne Spehl, an inspiring mentor and friend.
In memory of my father, Albert Penninck, and my nephew, Vincent
Dupierreux.
Dominique Penninck
To Annabelle, Olivier, and Heloise, for their constant love,
comprehension, and energizing presence.
To all participants in our veterinary community that allow us to advance in
pure mutualism.
In memory of my brother Charles.
Marc-Andre d'Anjou
10
CONTRIBUTORS
Donald Brown, DVM, PhD, DACVIM Cardiology
Associate Professor Cardiology
Department of Clinical Sciences
Tufts Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine
200 Westborough Road
North Grafton, MA 01536, USA
Nancy R. Cox, DVM, MS, PhD
Scientist, Scott-Ritchey Research Center and
Associate Professor, Department of Pathobiology
College of Veterinary Medicine
Auburn University
Auburn, AL 35849, USA
Marc-Andre d'Anjou, DMV, DACVR
Assistant Professor, Diagnostic Imaging
Department of Clinical Sciences
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
University of Montreal
3200 Sicotte
Saint-Hyacinthe Quebec, Canada J2S 7C6
Hugues Gaillot, DMV
Imagerie Medicale Veterinaire de Paris 15
10, 12 rue Robert de Flers
75015 Paris, France
11
John Graham, MVB, MSc, DVR, MRCVS, DACVR, DECVDI
Affiliated Veterinary Specialists,
9905 South US Highway 17-92
Maitland, FL 32751, USA
Silke Hecht, Dr.med. vet., DACVR, DECVDI
Assistant Professor of Radiology
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
University of Tennessee College of Veterinary Medicine
Knoxville, TN 37996, USA
Judith A. Hudson, DVM, PhD, DACVR
Professor of Diagnostic Imaging
Department of Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
Auburn University
Auburn, AL 35849, USA
Martin Kramer, Dr.med.vet., PhD, DECVDI
Professor
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Clinic for Small Animals
Justus-Liebig University-Giessen
Frankfurter Str. 108
35392 Giessen, Germany
Dominique Penninck, DVM, PhD, DACVR, DECVDI
Professor Diagnostic Imaging
12
Department of Clinical Sciences
Tufts Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine
200 Westborough Road
North Grafton, MA 01536, USA
Kathy Spaulding, DVM, DACVR
Clinical Professor Radiology
Large Animal Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences
Texas A&M University
4475 TAMU
College Station, TX 77843-4475, USA
James Sutherland-Smith, BVSc, DACVR
Assistant Professor, Diagnostic Imaging
Department of Clinical Sciences
Tufts Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine
200 Westborough Road
North Grafton, MA 01536, USA
Erik Wisner, DVM, DACVR
Professor of Diagnostic Imaging
Department of Surgical and Radiological Sciences
School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California 1
Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616, USA
Allison Zwingenberger, DVM, DACVR, DECVDI
13
Assistant Professor of Diagnostic Imaging
Department of Surgical and Radiological Sciences
School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California
1ShieldsAvenue
Davis, CA 95616, USA
14
PREFACE
Since the start of veterinary ultrasonography in the late 1970s, many
Research and publications have enabled all sonographers to increase their
level of expertise significantly. Today, ultrasonography is an integral part
of the diagnostic approach in academic institutions, as well as in private
practice.
The main goal of this book is to provide its readers with a vast collection
of high-quality sonographic images and illustrations addressing the normal
anatomy and common disorders of most body parts in small animals.
These images were carefully selected or created for their teaching
capability.
The choice of contributors reflects some of the international expertise
available today.
We hope that this atlas will be a reference source for veterinary students,
interns, and residents, as well as for radiologists, internists, and surgeons
eager to learn and excel in this modality.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are pleased to acknowledge the “behind the scenes” contributions of
many colleagues, technicians, students, and residents, past and present,
atlas. Special thanks to those at Tufts University Cummings School of
Veterinary Medicine and at the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Montreal.
We express our deep gratitude also to the contributors for sharing their
expertise and passion and to the publishing team at Blackwell who
assisted us with this project.
Finally, we thank the many pets that patiently participated in these studies,
enabling us to learn and teach with their images.
Special thanks to Beth Mellor, who produced most of the illustrations. Her
artistic talent has greatly enhanced the mission of this book.
15
CHAPTER ONE
NERVOUS SYSTEM
SECTION 1
Brain
Judith Hudson and Nancy Cox
SCANNING TECHNIOUE
The brain of most small animals can be imaged adequately with a
The use of a lower-frequency transducer (3-5 MHz) may also be
   e    o s   s
scanners, linear array transducers, and curvilinear array transducers all can
be used, sector scanners and curvilinear array transducers provide better
visualization of peripheral structures. A small footprint is also helpful.
Sedation is usually not necessary. Most small animals can be imaged
while wrapped in a warm towel and held gently in the sonographer's lap.
Fur can usually be parted for the acoustic gel to be applied. In some
individuals with a thick hair coat, clipping may improve the quality of the
images.
16
In young puppies, the bregmatic fontanel can be used as an acoustic
  uos  o  1 xodd  d   m o
1991). In some individuals, particularly in toy-breed dogs, the bregmatic
fontanels may persist into adult life. A kitten's brain can be imaged
through the fontanel up to about 5 months of age although accessibility
decreases over time (Jaderlund et al. 2003). Unless the fontanel or defect
is very large, the tip of the transducer must be held relatively stationary;
the transducer can slide only a short distance. The brain is imaged by
using a "windshield wiper" technique, with the tip of the probe acting as a
 u n  pe  on   s mn n ni
images and from side to side to obtain longitudinal images. Because the
probe is usually angled to view rostral and caudal structures, most images
l a s d   o   
Therefore, it should be remembered that, in rostral transverse images,
ventral structures seen are actually located rostrally to dorsal structures in
the image whereas, in the caudal transverse images, the ventral structures
are located caudally to dorsal structures seen in the image.
[n absence of a fontanel, a lower-frequency transducer (e-g-, 5 MHz) can
be used to penetrate the skull, enabling partial visualization of the brain
Penetration of the temporal bone can be used for this purpose in some
Visualization of caudal structures of the brain can be achieved by imaging
at the foramen magnum (Figure 1.2B)
Craniotomy sites, and defects caused by trauma or disease, can be used in
imaging the brain. Prenatal neurosonography is common in human
medicine but is seldom used in animals. The brain of unborn puppies and
kittens can be evaluated in utero, however. Prenatal sonographic diagnosis
of hydranencephaly has been reported (Cruz et al. 2003). Based on
findings in human patients, ultrasound images of the brain of puppies and
kittens in late gestation in utero should enable the detection of other major
defects in brain development, such as anencephalies, encephaloceles, and
meninogoceles.
17
NORMAL SONOGRAPHIC
ANATOMY OF THE BRAIN
In Dogs
Transverse Images
The sonographic anatomy of the brain of normal dogs has been described
(Hudson et al. 1989) (Figure 1.3). The longitudinal fissure and splenial
sulci form a hyperechoic umbrella-like structure that can be used as a
landmark to locate the midline of the brain. This is particularly useful
when a natural or created defect in the skull is located asymmetrically.
The cingulate gyrus is found deep to each splenial sulcus. Rostrally, the
caudate nuclei are recognizable as hyperechoic curved structures. The
lateral ventricles are located medial to the caudate nuclei and vary greatly
in size according to the breed, age, and individual. Asymmetry is
common. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is anechoic and may cause the lateral
ventricles to appear as small anechoic slits in some individuals.
Figure 1.1. Normal brain in a dog and ultrasound beams resulting in
planes 1 and 2. A: Sagittal magnetic resonance image of the brain of a
normal golden retriever illustrating how the ultrasound beam (planes l and
2 represented by the arrows) passes through the brain when the beam is
placed over the fontanel to obtain transverse sonograms. B: Plane 1 shows
the ultrasound beam angled perpendicular to the long axis of the brain to
image the rostral horns of the lateral ventricles. C: Plane 2 shows the
ultrasound beam angled caudally to image the third ventricle and
          
normal dog showing the axis of an ultrasound beam over the fontanel to
obtain midline and parasagittal sonograms (arrows).
18
Plane
D
Figure 1.2. A: Hydrocephalus. Transverse magnetic resonance image of
a dog with hydrocephalus showing the axis of an ultrasound beam to
obtain parasagittal images (arrows and corresponding planes 1 and 2).
Plane 1 shows the beam angled laterally to obtain a parasagittal image.
temporal bone. 3, third ventricle; CN, caudate nucleus; LLV, left lateral
ventricle; and T, thalamus. B: Foramen magnum window. Sagittal
magnetic resonance image of a cat showing the axis of the ultrasound
beam (arrow) for imaging of the brain through the foramen magnum. The
plane of the ultrasound beam passes through the cerebellum and midbrain.
A sonogram of a normal cat made through the foramen magnum is on the
19
bottom right. A histological image made in a similar plane is on the
bottom left. M, midbrain; and V, vermis.
Plane1
Plane2
LEFT
LLV
20
Figure 1.3. Transverse sonograms of the brain of a l-month-old Yorkshire
terrier. The ventricles are asymmetrical but within normal limits. A:
Rostral sonogram. B: Sonogram at the level of the interthalamic adhesion.
C: Sonogram at the level of the third ventricle. D: Sonogram with the
ultrasound beam angled caudally to image the mesencephalon. E:
Sonogram with the ultrasound beam angled caudally to image the
cerebellum. 3, third ventricle; CC, corpus callosum; CG, cingulate gyrus;
CN, caudate nucleus; F, fornix; H, hippocampus; IA, interthalamic
adhesion; LF, longitudinal fissure; LLV, left lateral ventricle; M,
mesencephalon; P, pyriform lobe; Po, pons; RLV, right lateral ventricle;
SS, splenial sulcus; Su, subarachnoid space; T, thalamus; and V, vermis.
21
22
As the beam is swept slightly more caudally, the rostral fornix comes into
view. Choroid plexus is hyperechoic while it lies on the floor of the
central portion of the lateral ventricle and the roof of the temporal horn. [t
may be difficult to distinguish between the caudate nucleus and the
adjacent choroid plexus in the lateral ventricle, so only a single
hyperechoic focus might be seen on each side of the midline in some dogs.
If there is sufficient CSF, the lateral ventricle can be seen.
[n older puppies and adult dogs, alternating hyperechoic and hypoechoic
lines represent the callosal sulcus, corpus callosum, and fornix.
Comparison with histological samples suggests that the most superficial
hyperechoic layer is the callosal sulcus, which contains vessels that
pulsate. The corpus callosum is comprised of a hypoechoic surface with a
deeper hyperechoic border. The fornix is hypoechoic. In the first few days
of life, these structures may appear only as a single hyperechoic region.
Detail improves as myelination progresses after birth. Most of the brain is
23
hyperechoic meninges dorsal to each lobe.
When the probe is tilted to sweep the ultrasound beam caudally, the dorsal
the midline. Dorsolateral to each of these structures, a hyperechoic area
represents choroid plexus in each lateral ventricle. Another hyperechoic
area is seen in the midline ventral to the level of the dorsal portions of the
hippocampi. Depending on the angle of ultrasound section, this
hyperechoic area may represent choroid plexus in the dorsal portion of the
third ventricle or pia mater that is located more caudally in the adjacent
subarachnoid space. Vessels and trabeculae in the subarachnoid space may
create a complex of echoes that outline the mesencephalon and cause it to
appear as a dome-shaped hypoechoic structure. The petrous temporal
bones will create irregular hyperechoic echoes on the floor of the cranium
 s
More caudally, the osseous tentorium is a hyperechoic structure shaped
like an inverted V. In older animals, this structure often prevents
visualization of the caudal brain, but the medulla and cerebellum can be
imaged in neonatal animals. The medulla is hypoechoic. The vermis of the
cerebellum is represented by a stack of hyperechoic lines seen in the
midline. Each lateral cerebellar hemisphere is located more laterally as a
hypoechoic structure.
Parasagittal Images
Longitudinal images made near the midline are true sagittal images, but
when the probe is moved past the edge of the fontanel, the probe must be
angled to enable the beam to reach the lateral margins of the brain. The
floor of the cranium appears curved in images showing the lateral portions
  i    n o  a s  n 
e          
laterally, structures that are anatomically closer to the midline appear in
the near field of the ultrasound image, whereas more lateral structures are
seen in the far field (Figure l.4).
The interthalamic adhesion and, more caudally, the mesencephalon can be
seen in midsagittal images as hypoechoic structures surrounded by echoes
created mainly by choroid plexus in the third ventricle and meninges and
24
in vessels in the subarachnoid space. In some areas, the third ventricle will
appear anechoic or hypoechoic because of the presence of CSF. The
osseous tentorium is incompletely ossified in neonates, enabling
visualization of hyperechoic echoes created by the vermis in the
posttentorial area of the brain. More superficially, the callosal sulcus is
seen as a hyperechoic line. The corpus callosum has an appearance similar
to that seen in transverse images. It is hypoechoic, with a deep
hyperechoic interface.
When the probe is angled to obtain a lateral parasagittal image, the
subarachnoid space and third ventricle are no longer seen; the thalamus
and lateral ventricle are now visible on the imaged side. The thalamus
in the lateral ventricle. Areas of the lateral ventricle with sufficient CSF
may appear anechoic or hypoechoic. The caudate nucleus is imaged
rostraltothe thalamus as a hypoechoic structure withincreased
p n un e o si ans s ns 
than in neonates. The thalamocaudate groove is seen between the
thalamus and caudate nucleus. This groove is more apparent in older dogs,
but in neonates a hyperechoic clump of choroid plexus is often seen in the
lateral ventricle in this region. Care should be taken not to mistake this
addition to the callosal sulcus and corpus callosum and appears as an
undulating hyperechoic line. The cingulate gyrus shows as a hypoechoic
structure deep to the splenial sulcus.
In Cats
sonographic planes (Figures 1.5 and 1.6).
The lateral ventricles are slitlike in kittens. In some normal magnetic
resonance images of the adult feline brain (Hudson et al. 1995), the lateral
ventricles cannot be discerned. Using ultrasound, measurement of lateral
ventricles is also more problematic in cats than in dogs because landmarks
such as the thalamocaudate groove and the interthalamic adhesion are less
recognizable (Jaderlund et al. 2003). In the study by Jaderlund and
colleagues, the most reliable and repeatable measurements were obtained
25
by measuring the central portion of the lateral ventricle in parasagittal
views angled 5°-l0° from the midline. In these images, the dorsal and
walls on each side were perpendicular to the ultrasound beam (Figure 1.6).
rostral portions, which provided clear visualization in parasagittal scans.
Curving of the occipital horn made accurate measurement difficult,
however. Difficulty was also experienced when measuring the lateral
ventricles in transverse images. Measurement was recommended at the
junction of the sella turcica and the cranial fossa to provide a landmark for
angle to the beam in transverse images at this level.
Figure 1.4. Sagittal to parasagittal sonograms of the brain of a normal
1-month-old Yorkshire terrier. A: Midline sagittal sonogram. B:
Parasagittal sonogram with the ultrasound beam angled laterally to image
the right lateral ventricle. C: Parasagittal sonogram with the ultrasound
beam angled laterally to image the left lateral ventricle. C, cerebellum;
CG, cingulate gyrus; CN, caudate nucleus; F, fornix; H, hippocampus; IA,
interthalamic adhesion; L, left; M, mesencephalon; R, right; RLV, right
lateral ventricle; SS, splenial sulcus; and T, thalamus.
26
Figure 1.5. Transverse sonograms of the brain of a normal 1-week-old
kitten. The ventricles in a kitten are slitlike and much smaller than those of
a puppy. A: Rostral sonogram showing the caudate nuclei and lateral
ventricles (arrows). B: Sonogram with the ultrasound beam perpendicular
to the brain. C: Sonogram at the level of the third ventricle. D: Sonogram
at the level of the mesencephalon. E: Sonogram with the probe angled
caudally to image the cerebellum. The vermis appears as a series of
stacked linear echoes. 3, third ventricle; CC, corpus callosum; CG,
27
cingulate gyrus; CN, caudate nucleus (plus the choroid plexus in the
lateral ventricle); F, fornix; LF, longitudinal fissure; LV, lateral ventricle;
M, mesencephalon; P, pyriform lobe; SS, splenial sulcus; and V, vermis.
28
29
Brain Vasculature
[n dogs, the internal carotid artery enters the cranial vault and divides into
the rostral cerebral artery, the middle cerebral artery, and the caudal
communicating artery (Schaller 1992) (Figure 1.7).
The rostral cerebral artery runs rostrally and dorsally and then curves
caudally along the medial aspect of the hemisphere. The artery
anastomoses with a branch of the caudal communicating artery that
supplies the caudomedial portion of the cerebrum. The middle cerebral
lateral branch supplies the surface of the brain. In the area of the spine, the
vertebral arteries unite to form the basilar artery, which enters the brain
caudally and divides into the right and left caudal communicating arteries.
Each caudal communicating artery connects the basilar artery with the
ipsilateral internal carotid artery.
30
Cats differ from dogs in that the terminal extracranial portion of the
internal carotid artery is regressed (Figure l.8).
In cats and dogs, the ascending pharyngeal artery arises from the external
carotid artery and runs rostrally to anastomose with the internal carotid
artery, but, in cats, the ascending pharyngeal artery is a major source of
blood to thebrain.
Color flow Doppler imaging can be used to image the cerebral arteries,
particularly the rostral cerebral artery and the central branch of the middle
cerebral artery. Velocities in these vessels can be measured by switching
the sonographic mode to pulsed-wave or continuous-wave Doppler
imaging. The most accurate measurements are made from sagittal images
because the sonographer can ensure that the Doppler angle (the angle
between the path of the ultrasound beam and the direction of flow) is as
close to zero as possible. Velocities are likely to be underestimated when
accurately measured. Nevertheless, in some cases, transverse images must
be made because the sonographic window is too small and the probe to0
large to enable sonographers to tilt the probe adequately to obtain
parasagittal images of the rostral brain. Although the Doppler cursor is
best placed using the color flow Doppler image as a guide, pulsations can
be seen on gray-scale images, and the Doppler cursor can be placed on
Figure 1.6. Sagittal to parasagittal sonograms of the brain of a normal
1-week-old kitten. A: Midline sagittal sonogram. B: Parasagittal
sonogram with the beam angled lateral to the midline. CS, callosal sulcus;
F, fornix; H, hippocampus; IA, interthalamic adhesion; LV, lateral
ventricle; SS, splenial sulcus; and T, thalamus. The arrow in the magnetic
resonance image insert shows sagittaland parasagittalplanes
corresponding to the sonograms.
31
Figure 1.7. Sonograms with color Doppler imaging to show the
vasculature of the brain of a normal dog. A: Parasagittal sonogram
showing the branches of the internal carotid artery. B: Parasagittal
sonogram of the brain showing placement of the pulsed Doppler cursors
on the rostral cerebral artery. C: Transverse sonogram of the rostral brain
showing the dorsal portion of the rostral cerebral artery (R). The electronic
cursors have been placed to measure velocity and calculate the resistance
index from the Doppler waveform. Arrows indicate the location of the
lateral ventricles. ACC, branch of the rostral cerebral artery (artery along
the corpus callosum); CB, callosal branches; ICA, internal carotid artery;
MCA, middle branch of the middle cerebral artery; and RCA, rostral
cerebralartery.
32
RC
ACC
PD
4.0MHz
RG
22
mm
SY
1.9
mm
PRF
4.0
KHZ
HPF
80
HZ
PS=45.44Cm/s
ED=12.28cm/s
TAP=28.43cm/s
RT
=0.049
S
PI
=1.17
RI
=0.73
Figure 1.8. Sonograms made using color Doppler imaging to show the
vasculature of the brain of a normal cat. A: Parasagittal sonogram
showing the branches of the internal carotid artery. B: Parasagittal
33
sonogram of the feline brain showing placement of the pulsed Doppler
cursors on the rostral cerebral artery. A normal waveform is shown. C:
Sonogram of the caudal aspect of the brain made through the foramen
magnum showing the pulsed Doppler cursor placed on basilar artery. The
resistance index can be calculated from the peak systolic and diastolic
velocities. The ascending pharyngeal artery anastomoses with the internal
carotid artery becoming a major source of blood to the brain. A portion of
the extracranial internal carotid artery is not patent. ACC, branch of the
rostral cerebral artery (artery along the corpus callosum); BA, basilar
artery; ICA, internal carotid artery; RCA, rostral cerebral artery; and T,
thalamus.
34
RC
-ICA
B
RCA
damaged by disease. Color flow Doppler imaging can be used to identify
overcirculated or undercirculated areas. The resistance index (Rl) is
calculated as the following ratio:
(systolic velocity - diastolic velocity)/diastolic velocity
High Rl may be associated with a poor prognosis in some disease
processes (Saito et al. 2003).
SONOGRAPHY OF BRAIN
DISORDERS
The most common application of neurosonography of the brain is to
measure  ventricular  size  when   diagnosing  hydrocephalus.  Other
applications include evaluation of animals with traumatic cranial defects
for evidence of hemorrhage or infection, intraoperative or postoperative
examination of brain neoplasms, and imaging of masses associated with
bony lysis. Additionally, ultrasound can be used to guide biopsy or
fine-needle aspiration of brain lesions or to guide injection of substances
into the brain.
Hydrocephalus
It should not be assumed that a dog has hydrocephalus merely because
there is a persistent fontanel. Not all toy-breed dogs with a persistent
fontanel have hydrocephalus, and, conversely, toy-breed dogs can have
hydrocephalus without having a persistent fontanel. In some toy-breed or
small breed dogs without a persistent fontanel, the temporal bone is thin
enough to allow transcranial imaging. In addition, limited imaging of the
caudal fossa can be achieved using the foramen magnum. Because the
fontanel ossifies in many larger dogs, other imaging modalities may be
36
first few weeks of life.
Figure 1.9. Sonograms of a l-year-old Chihuahua with severe
ventriculomegaly. A: Rostral sonogram showing the caudate nuclei and
lateral ventricles. B: Sonogram made at the level of the rostral portion of
the third ventricle. C: Sonogram made at the level of the thalami. D:
Sonogram made at the level of the pituitary gland. Notice the irregularity
of the floor of the cranium at this level. E: Sonogram made with the
ultrasound beam pointed caudally to display mesencephalon. F: Sonogram
showing the osseous tentorium (arrows). 3, third ventricle; CN, caudate
nuclei; H, hippocampus; [A, interthalamic adhesion; LF, longitudinal
fissure; LLV, left lateral ventricle; M, mesencephalon; P, pyriform lobe;
RLV, right lateral ventricle; and SS, splenial sulcus on the left side.
37
B
Acquired hydrocephalus can be caused by obstruction at various locations
in t
theventricularsystem.
Neoplasia, hemorrhage (including
  n      
among the possible causes of obstruction. Location of the obstruction
dictates the pattern of dilation of the ventricular system; therefore, a
finding of asymmetrical dilation recognizable via ultrasound images can
assist in determining the focus of the obstruction. Interference with
absorption of CSF from the subarachnoid space into the venous system
38
caused by the atrophy or failure of the brain to develop (Ettinger and
Feldman 2005).
l e  e d  a  l
ventricles on sonograms (Figure 1.10 and Table 1.1). The degree of
to ventricles occupying most of the brain. Midline structures between the
          s
become confluent in others (Figure 1.11).
Several studies using ultrasonography or magnetic resonance imaging
(MRl) have shown that the severity of clinical signs is not directly related
to the degree of ventriculomegaly, and ventriculomegaly can be seen in
neurologically normal dogs (De Haan et al. 1994; Vullo et al. 1997). A
study using MRI to compare ventricular volume in Yorkshire terriers to
that in German shepherds indicated that percentage of ventricle area to
hemispheric area was significantly greater in the Yorkshire terriers, but
the range of ventricle area for neurologically normal Yorkshire terriers
Overlapped
lthatof
fneurologicallyabnormalYorkshire terriers
(Estave-Ratsch et al. 200l). Ventriculomegaly should not be equated with
clinically significant hydrocephalus (Hudson et al. 1990; Spaulding and
Sharp 1990; Ettinger and Feldman 2005). Breed differences and severity
of clinical signs should be considered. Measurement of blood flow in the
basilar artery might help to identify animals in which enlarged ventricles
are significant or are likely to become clinically significant (Saito et al.
2003). In one study, RI at the basilar artery was higher in dogs with
clinical hydrocephalus or other brain disease compared with normal dogs
or dogs with asymptomatic hydrocephalus. Additionally, asymptomatic
dogs with severe ventriculomegaly and high RI later developed clinical
signs, although the use of high RI by itself did not identify asymptomatic
dogs that were likely to become symptomatic (Saito et al. 2003).
Table 1.1. Guidelines for measurements of the ventricular system as
currently available in the literature
39
Parameter
How Meas
Normal
Ventricalomegaly
Hudson at al. (1990)
Lateral vcntricular hcight:
Measure tho dorsoventral dimension of the
0.040.35cm
>0.35cm
transversc
lateral ventriclewith thoprobo porpendieular
Moan,C.15 cm
at or caudal to the interthalamicadhesion
Cerebral mantle thickness:
Measure the thickness of brain tissue dorsal to
1.63-1.01cm
Often decreased:may
transverse
eachlateralventricle
bevery thin
Ventricle-hemisphere ratio
Ratio of thelateral ventricular height to the
Mean,C.19
>0.19
Imeasuredon transversa
width of the iosilateral hemischere
Ventricle-mantleratio
Ratioof the lateralventricular height to the
Mean, 0.25
>0.25
Imeasured on transversa
thickness ofihe cerebral mantl
images)
Lateral ventricular height:
Measure the dorsoventral dimension of the
Mean, 0.14cm
sagittal
at the thalsmocaudate sulcus
Spaulding and Sharp (1990)
Dursoventral dirmension of
Measure the dorsoveniral dimension of the
NA
NA
lateral ventricla
lateral ventricle at the lavel of thepititary
fossa
Dorsoventral percentage
Ratio of the dorsoventral dimensionof thelateral
0-14%
15%-25%→moderate
ventricle to the dorsoventral dimension of th9
ventriculomegaly
brain
>25%sovorc
ventriculomegely
NA noeppliceble
Figure 1.10.
.Measurement of the lateral ventricles in a 3-month-old
         
adhesion showing measurement using the method of Hudson et al. (1990)
The lateral ventricular height can be compared with the cerebral mantle
thickness (the thickness of the parenchyma dorsal to the lateral ventricle)
to obtain the ventricle-mantle ratio. B: Transverse sonogram at the level of
o o  s   s   
Spaulding and Sharp (1990). Another method of measurement calculates
40
Cerebra
Mantle
Thic
HeightRLV
B
Dorsoventral
Dimension of
RLV
Dorsoventral
Dimension of
the Brain
Figure 1.11. Variability in expansion of the ventricular system in
hydrocephalus. Additional images from the brain of the 3-month-old
Chihuahua shown in Figure 1.10 indicate that the temporal horns are
minimally affected, but there is a confluence of the rostral horns. The third
ventricle is not enlarged. Sonograms of another Chihuahua in Figure 1.9
show that ventriculomegaly involves the temporal horns, as well as rostral
horns and central parts, and there is enlargement of the third ventricle in
that dog. Midline structures remain mainly intact, however. A: Rostral
transverse sonogram. B: Parasagittal sonogram. H, hippocampus; LLV,
left lateral ventricle; RLV, right lateral ventricle; SS, splenial sulcus; and
T, thalamus.
41
It may also be useful to evaluate the amount of brain tissue spared by the
severe neurological deficits, although that is not always true (Figure 1.12)
The suggested methods of measurement are not always useful (Table 1.1).
Some animals may have minimal enlargement in the described planes for
measurement but have greatly enlarged ventricles in other areas, such as
the caudal part of the central horn and the temporal horn. The third or
fourth ventricles may also be enlarged. Sonographers should be careful to
record these findings, as well as any other abnormalities, including
ventriculomegaly.
Figure 1.12. Incidental  ventriculomegaly.  Sonogram  and magnetic
resonance image (MRI) of the brain of a 10-year-old Maltese with severe
but incidental ventriculomegaly. The ventriculomegaly was noted during
spinal MR imaging performed to evaluate intervertebral disc herniation in
42
the cervical region. The dog was not showing clinical evidence of brain
abnormalities. A: Transverse sonogram   showing
massive
ventriculomegaly involving the right and left lateral ventricles (RLV and
LLV, respectively). B: Parasagittal MRI showing a severely dilated left
lateral ventricle(LLV)
B
RLV
LLV
LLV
Neoplasia
In most animals with brain neoplasia, MRI or computed tomography is
used to make the initial diagnosis because the thick bone of the cranium
precludes diagnosis with ultrasonography. Ultrasonography is more likely
to be used either intraoperatively or postoperatively, although a window
neoplasm (Figure 1.13).
Most neoplasms in people and animals are hyperechoic to the adjacent
normal brain.
intraoperatively so that most or all of the abnormal tissue can be removed.
The vessels associated with a mass or other lesion can also be evaluated.
Ultrasound-guided biopsy can be performed if the nature of a lesion is
questionable. This enables preliminary diagnosis  to establish the
neoplastic or nonneo-plastic nature of the lesion and establish a prognosis
and selection of treatment. If a cranial defect remains following surgical
43
Infectious Lesions
[In rare instances, a brain abscess or granulomatous mass might occur in
either a very young animal or an older animal with a persistent fontanel or
other cranial defect (Klopp et al. 2000). Abscessation can appear as a
cavitary and hypoechoic lesion containing swirling cellular material
In case of organized granuloma, a well-marginated hyperechoic lesion can
be detected. Thus, a granulomatous mass should be considered as a
differential diagnosis for neoplasia when a hyperechoic mass is seen on
ultrasonography (Figure 1.15).
Traumatic Hemorrhage
Ultrasonography is used to examine the brain of animals with traumatic
cranial defect to determine whether hemorrhage has occurred. Comatose
or semicomatose animals can be evaluated for evidence of active
window is available (Figure 1.16).
Figure 1.13. Astrocytoma in the cerebellum of an 8-year-old terrier. A:
cerebellum. A craniotomy was done to enable an intraoperative
ultrasound-guided biopsy of the mass. B: Transverse (trans) sonogram
showing the hyperechoic mass (between the cursors) in the cerebellum. C:
Parasagittal (long) sonogram showing the cerebellar mass. Images
courtesy of D. Penninck and S. Hecht.
44
B
TRANS
ONG
Figure 1.14. Abscess in the cerebrum of a kitten. The kitten had
ventrolateral strabismus and soft-tissue swelling on its head. An abscess
was diagnosed and drained via a palpable fontanel. A: Transverse
ultrasonographic plane showing a large pocket of cellular fluid within the
which a large, heterogeneous, contrast-enhancing mass lesion is observed
(arrows).
46
Figure 1.15.
.Granulomatousmeningoencephalitisina5-year-old
Yorkshire terrier. A mass was identified in the brain stem and
subsequently biopsied. The mass could be seen with ultrasonography
performed at the foramen magnum although ventriculomegaly was not
apparent from that location. A: Sagittal Tl-weighted magnetic resonance
image  after  intravenous  administration  of gadolinium  showing
hyperintense lesion in the rostral brain stem (arrows). B: Transverse
T2-weighted magnetic resonance image showing a hyperintense lesion in
the brain stem to the right of the midline (arrows). The lateral and third
ventricles are dilated. C: Sagittal sonographic image obtained through the
foramen magnum. Cursors have been placed to measure the mass
(arrows). D: Transverse sonographic image obtained through the foramen
 magnum. In the brain stem is a hyperechoic mass (arrows) just ventral to
the cerebellar vermis (V)
48
Bleeding into the brain is usually seen immediately as a hypoechoic area,
but erythrocyte aggregation causes a lesion to become hyperechoic. As the
          s
1.17).
Serial sonograms enable continuing evaluation of patients without
anesthesia and with little stress to the patients. Recheck ultrasonographic
evaluation is warranted especially when patients have changed mentation.
Figure 1.16. Sonograms of the brain of a puppy hit by a car and comatose.
On these transverse (A) and parasagittal (B) sonograms, there is
thickening of the splenial sulci (SS) suggesting localized hemorrhage.
Other areas of the brain appear normal, and the patient recovered
uneventfully. LF, longitudinal fissure; LV, choroid plexus in the lateral
ventricle; LLV, area of the left lateral ventricle; RLV, area of the right
lateral ventricle; SS, splenial sulcus; and T, thalamus.
Rostral
49
Figure 1.17. Head trauma in a 4-year-old Chihuahua. A: Transverse
sonogram of the brain after head trauma and subsequent seizures. The dog
was in lateral recumbency and was minimally responsive. A collection of
fluid (F) surrounds the splenial sulcus (SS) on each side. The right splenial
sulcus is displaced ventrally. The right lateral ventricle (RLV) and left
lateral ventricle (LLV) are mildly dilated. B: T1-weighted magnetic
resonance image showing decreased signal intensity (D) in the region of
the splenial sulci.
CysticLesions
Cystic lesions can be produced by infectious disease or neoplasia or may
have no apparent cause (Cruz et al. 2003) (Figure 1.18)
Choroid plexus cysts, intracranial arachnoid cysts, and epidermoid and
dermoid cysts associated with the fourth ventricle, quadrigeminal cistern,
most commonly in the quadrigeminal cistern, where they appear as a
well-defined anechoic mass between the caudal aspect of the cerebral
hemispheres. The midbrain will be found ventral to the cyst, and the
50
   (       
to abnormal development or destruction of brain parenchyma, such as in
Dandy-Walker syndrome and porencephaly or hydranencephaly, can also
occur. Hydranencephaly is diagnosed when the cerebral hemispheres are
absent or almost completely absent (Cruz et al. 2003).
Figure 1.18. Cyst in the cerebellum of an 8-year-old terrier. The cyst was
drained surgically, but an astrocytoma was later diagnosed at the site (as
T1-weighted images of the brain on which a well-defined, hypointense
cystlike lesion is identified (*). C: Transverse sonogram of the cerebellum
imaged from the foramen magnum on which the cyst appears as a
well-defined, oval, anechoic lesion (*). D: Longitudinal sonogram of the
cyst. The bone of the skull and vertebral column prevents visualization of
portions of the brain and spine, but the part of the brain (arrowheads) can
be seen through the foramen magnum. A portion of the spinal cord (SC)
can also be observed as it joins the medulla oblongata (M) rostrally.
Cursors have been placed to measure the cyst in the cerebellum. Images
courtesy of D. Penninck and S. Hecht. E and F: Sonograms of a
1-year-old Chihuahua with hydrocephalus and a quadrigeminal cyst.
E: Sagittal sonogram showing the quadrigeminal cyst (Q) and confluence
of the dilated lateral ventricles (LV). F: Transverse sonogram. LLV, left
lateral ventricle; M, midbrain; and RLV, right lateral ventricle. Images
courtesy of B. Poteet, Gulf Coast Veterinary Specialists, Houston.
51
ertebra
52
RLV
LLV
Congenital Disease
Agenesis of the Corpus Callosum
Agenesis of the corpus callosum has been reported uncommonly in dogs
(Spaulding and Sharp 1990). In people, sonographic findings include
lateral separation of the rostral horns and bodies of the lateral ventricles.
elevation and variable dilation of the third ventricle, and dilation of the
occipital horns. The bundles of Probst cause concavity of the medial wall
of the lateral ventricles. In dogs, enlargement and dorsal displacement of
the third ventricle can be seen (Figure 1.19).
Chiari-like Malformations
Chiari-like malformations are conditions in which there is variable
pathology, such as malformation of the craniovertebral junction, cerebellar
dysplasia, and elongation or displacement of portions of the cerebellum
(Figure 1.20).
53
Herniation of the cerebellum can obstruct CSF flow, causing
hydrocephalus and syringomyelia (Ettinger and Feldman 2005). Chiari
  a      a  l a
Charles breed, with anomalies of the first cervical vertebra and skull, and
can be diagnosed by using the foramen magnum to provide an acoustic
window in evaluating the cerebellum, fourth ventricle, spinal cord, and
central canal.
Dandy-Walker-like Syndrome
A condition resembling Dandy-Walker syndrome of children has been
reported in a Boston terrier (Nourreddine et al. 2004). The puppy
exhibited ataxia, rolling, and intention tremors. Sonographic findings can
include hypoplasia of the cerebellar vermis, confluence of the lateral
ventricles, enlargement of the third and lateral ventricles, and cystic
lesions within the cerebellum. A fluid accumulation seen between the
lateral ventricles and the cerebellum was determined to be a cyst
associated with the fourth ventricle.
Figure 1.19. Agenesis of the corpus callosum and hydrocephalus. Images
of the brain of a young puppy with severe neurological deficits. The right
and left lateral ventricles are greatly dilated. The third ventricle is enlarged
and displaced dorsally. A: Rostral transverse sonogram showing marked
dilation of the lateral ventricle. B: Transverse sonogram angled caudally
to image the vermis of the cerebellum. The third ventricle is enlarged and
displaced dorsally. C: Parasagittal sonogram with the ultrasound beam
angled laterally to image the enlarged left lateral ventricle. D: Sagittal
sonogram showing marked enlargement and dorsal displacement of the
third ventricle. E: Radiograph of the brain after ventriculography was
performed using an iodinated contrast medium. The lateral ventricles
(arrows) are greatly dilated. The third ventricle (outlined in black) is
greatly dilated and displaced dorsally. 3, third ventricle; IA, interthalamic
adhesion; LLV, left lateral ventricle; RLV, right lateral ventricle; and V,
vermis.
54
L.LV
Figure 1.20. Chiari-like malformation. Sagittal (A) and transverse (B)
sop e ui wnuaeu uaweoy sael e yanou paueqo saeun ojyderouos
with occipital dysplasia. The cerebellum (C, arrowheads) protrudes into
          
collection is observed along the middorsal portion of the cranial cervical
spinal cord (SC), consistent with syringomyelia (S). The fourth ventricle
(4V) is also dilated. Malformation of the skull enables better visualization
of the brain than usual (compare with Figure 1.18). BS, brain stem; and
CP, choroid plexus of the fourth ventricle. Images courtesy of M. A.
d'Anjou.
55
Hypoplasia
Cerebrocortical hypoplasia has been reported to be caused by loss or
abnormal proliferation and/or migration of cortical neurons because of
specific inherited abnormalities, toxins, in utero infections, or vascular
insults. In some cases, lack of development shown as decreased detail of
   e     
through a persistent fontanel or by viewing the brain through the foramen
magnum (Figure 1.21)
Cerebellar hypoplasia, which is reduced size of the cerebellum because of
abnormal development, can be caused by viral infections such as
panleukopenia (feline parvovirus) in cats, toxins or other environmental
influences, or genetic abnormalities, or the cause may be unknown.
Figure 1.21. Sonograms of a normal kitten and a kitten with abnormal
brain development. A: Sonogram of a normal 1-week-old kitten next to
Sonogram of an 8-week-old kitten with severe neurological deficits
caused by cerebrocortical dysplasia and abnormal myelinization. The
sonogram shows a lack of detail compared with the normal kitten. The
cause of this lack of detail is unknown. A gross transverse section from
56
matter tracks and decreased depth of sulci.
Figure 1.22. Cystic cerebellar lesion in a dog. A: Sagittal T2-weighted
spin echo magnetic resonance image showing a well-defined, hyperintense
cystic lesion in the cerebellum. B: Intraoperative sonogram shows an
anechoic circular lesion (cyst) with some hypoechoic material around the
 margins. Fluid has been placed at the surgical site to enable imaging. C:
Intraoperative sonogram showing the brain after drainage of the cyst. The
arrow indicates the area of the lesion after suction. Images courtesy of D
Penninck and S.Hecht.
57
PInI
INTERVENTIONAL
PROCEDURES
When the brain is examined intraoperatively, the probe head should be
coated with sterile acoustic gel and enclosed in sterilized material, such as
a surgical glove or sterilized plastic wrap. Sterile probe sleeves are
available commercially. Some of these extend for some distance along the
probe cord to ensure sterility. Alternatively, the cord can be wrapped in
sterile elastic bandaging material so that asepsis can be more easily
 maintained. Sterile physiological saline placed at the surgical site prevents
58
drying of the tissues and achieves an acoustic match between the probe
and the brain.
Ultrasound can be used intraoperatively to guide needle placement for
drainage of cystic lesions or during debulking of brain masses to ensure
complete removal of a mass and to localize vessels and minimize
hemorrhage (Figures 1.22 and 1.23).
Lesions with uncertain etiology can be biopsied using ultrasound to guide
placement of the biopsy needle. Ultrasound can also guide insertion of
tubes for treatment of obstructive hydrocephalus or needles for injection
Of drugs or chemotherapeutic agents into the lesion. Postoperative
sonography can be used to evaluate the surgical site (Figure l.24).
Figure 1.23. Cerebellar astrocytoma. A: Transverse sonogram of the brain
of the 8-year-old terrier in Figures 1.13 and 1.18. This dog had a
cerebellar cyst. When intraoperative ultrasonography was performed, the
cyst (C) was a well-defined anechoic lesion with mild distal enhancement
(arrows). Fluid (F) can be seen at the surgical site. B: After drainage, only
a small amount of fluid remains, as is evidenced by a small anechoic area
(arrow). C: Subsequently, clinical signs recurred. Magnetic resonance
images and sonograms revealed that a mass was in the area of the
previously imaged cyst. Intraoperative ultrasonography was used to
measure the mass (M) prior to debulking. Histopathology revealed that the
mass was an astrocytoma. Images courtesy of D. Penninck and S. Hecht.
59
Figure 1.24. Seizuring dog with hyperintense focus in the cerebral cortex
On magnetic resonance imaging. A: Intraoperative parasagittal
sonogram. No mass lesions are visible, and biopsy findings suggested
previous trauma. B: Postoperative parasagittal sonogram made by
imaging through the intact skin and muscle over the craniotomy site.
 There is considerable facial swelling after surgery. Ultrasonography was
s s  g o   s     
and the lateral ventricles were normal. The dog recovered uneventfully.
Arrows indicate the surface of the brain. F, fluid at the surgical site; LV
lateral ventricle; Mu, muscle under the craniotomy site; and SS, splenial
Sulc us.
60
REFERENCES
Cruz R, Alvarado MS, Sandoval JE, Vilchez E (2003) Prenatal
     e o si 
Chihuahua fetuses.Vet RadiolUltrasound 44:589-592
De Haan CE, Kraft SL, Gavin PR, Wendling LR, Griebenow ML (1994)
Normal variation in size of the lateral ventricles of the Labrador retriever
dog as assessed by magnetic resonance imaging. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
35:83-86.
61
Estave-Ratsch B, Kneissl S, Gabler C (2001) Comparative evaluation of
the ventricles in the Yorkshire Terrier and the German Shepherd dog
using low-field MRI. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 42:410-413.
Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC (2005) Primary Brain Diseases. In: Ettinger SJ,
ed. Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 6" edition. Philadelphia:
WB Saunders, pp 820-835.
Hudson JA, Buxton DF, Cox NR, Finn-Bodner ST, Simpson ST, Wright
JC, Wallace SS, Mitro A (1997) Color flow Doppler imaging and Doppler
spectral analysis of the brain of neonatal dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
38:313-322.
Hudson JA, Cartee RE, Simpson ST, Buxton DF (1989) Ultrasonographic
anatomy of the canine brain. Vet Radiol 30:13-21.
Hudson LC, Cauzinille L, Kornegay JN, Tompkins MB (1995) Magnetic
resonance imaging of the normal feline brain. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
36:267-275.
Hudson JA, Simpson ST, Buxton DF, Cartee RE, Steiss JE (1990)
Ultrasonographic  diagnosis  of  canine  hydrocephalus.   Vet  Radiol
31:50-58.
Hudson JA, Simpson ST, Cox NR, Buxton DF (1991) Ultrasonographic
examination of the normal canine neonatal brain. Vet Radiol 32:50-59.
Jaderlund KH, Hansson K, Berg A-L, Sjostrom A, Narfstrom K (2003)
Cerebral ventricular size in developing normal kittens measured by
ultrasonography. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 44:581-588.
Kirberger RM, Jacobson LS, Davies JV, Engela J (1997) Hydromyelia in
the dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 38:30-38.
Klopp LS, Hathcock JT, Sorjonen DC (2000) Magnetic resonance
imaging features of brain stem abscessation in two cats. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 41:300-307.
Nourreddine C, Harder R, Olby NJ, Spaulding K, Brown T (2004)
Ultrasonographic appearance of Dandy Walker-like syndrome in a Boston
terrier. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 45: 336-339.
62
the quadrigeminal cistern using ultrasonography. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
42:435-439.
Saito M, Olby NJ, Spaulding K, Munana K, Sharp NJH (2003)
Relationship among basilar artery resistance index, degree of
ventriculomegaly, and clinical signs in hydrocephalic dogs. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 44:667-694.
Schaller O (1992) [llustrated Veterinary Anatomical Nomenclature.
Stuttgart, Germany: Enke.
Spaulding KA, Sharp NJH (1990) Ultrasonographic imaging of the lateral
cerebral ventricles in the dog. Vet Radiol 31:59-64.
Vullo T, Korenman E, Manzo RP, Gomez DG, Deck MDF, Cahill PT
(1997) Diagnosis of cerebral ventriculomegaly in normal adult beagles
using quantitative MRI. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 38:277-281.
SECTION 2
Spine
Judith Hudson and Martin Kramer
SCANNING TECHNIQUE
Because of acoustic shadowing created by bone, ultrasonography of the
spinal cord can usually be performed only during or following surgical
laminectomy, corpectomy, or foraminotomy (Nakayama 1993; Gallagher
et al. 1995) (Figures 1.25 and 1.26).
The cervical spinal cord can be partially visible through the foramen
magnum and between the atlas and axis while the neck is fully flexed
(Figure l.27). In addition, windows through ventral slot surgery or
63
surgical sites involving the caudal portion of the brain enable partial
evaluation of the cranial cervical spine (Figures 1.27 and 1.28).
A portion of the lumbar spinal cord can be seen through the intervertebral
disc space either with a dorsolateral approach through the lumbar
musculature or from the ventral aspect when performing abdominal
ultrasonography (Figures 1.29 and 1.30). Using a ventral transabdominal
approach, the spinal cord can only be assessed at the disc space.
Intervertebral disc calcification and bridging spondylosis deformans can
significantly limit its visibility.
The spinal cord is small and superficial, making a high-frequency
transducer (usually 7.5-12 MHz) the optimal choice. Transducers with a
small footprint are preferred to better fit the narrow surgical sites. Perhaps
evaluate whether all disc material has been removed from the spinal canal
during a laminectomy or cervical ventral slot surgery. Other intraoperative
applications include evaluation of the cord because of trauma, suspected
neoplasia, developmental abnormalities, and infection. For intraoperative
applications, the probe must be placed in a long, sterile, plastic cover, and
monitored if a remaining defect in the vertebra provides a sonographic
window. Vertebral bone lysis because of neoplasia or infection can also
provide an acoustic window for the spinal cord. Additionally, the spinal
cord may be visible perinatally because of incomplete vertebral
Ossification.
NORMALSONOGRAPHIC
ANATOMY OF THE SPINE
The spinal cord is relatively hypoechoic, the meninges are hyperechoic,
and the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is anechoic (Figure 1.31). The more
n pe    a si a r 
whereas the deeper line represents the pia mater (Finn-Bodner et al. 1995).
Anechoic CSF separates these two hyperechoic lines. Centrally, one or
two lines are present at the location of the central canal. Deep to the
64
         
surface of the bone deep to the spinal cord and meninges appears as a
thick hyperechoic line. Absorption of sound prevents imaging of
structures deep to the bone.
Transverse images can be obtained if the available probe has a small
footprint. In these images, the spinal cord is hypoechoic with a circular or
 n n e s se  o  s s g
(Finn-Bodner et al. 1995).
The spinal cord is supplied by ventral and dorsal branches of spinal
arteries that originate from vertebral, thoracic vertebral, and lumbar
arteries. The ventral branches unite to form the ventral spinal artery, from
ventral and dorsal branches supply the spinal cord from the periphery.
Examination of intraparenchymal branches with Doppler ultrasound has
been described (Hudson et al. 1995).
Figure 1.25. Position of probe. [llustration of a hemilaminectomy site of a
dog with a sectorial probe positioned at the surgical site to evaluate the
spinalcord.
65
Dura
Figure 1.26. Position of probe in a longitudinal plane on the
thoracolumbar spine in a dog with recent back surgery. Both longitudinal
and transverse images should be obtained.
66
Figure 1.27. Normal canine cranial cervical spine. Longitudinal (A) and
transverse (B) sonograms obtained at the atlanto-occipital junction. C:
Power Doppler mode of the neighboring vessels at the same location.
Arrowheads outline the cranial portion of the cervical spine. The arrow
points to the central canal. At, lamina of the atlas; and Oc, occipital bone.
image
Figure 1.28. Sonograms of a Boston terrier undergoing brain surgery. The
brain mass caused herniation of the cerebellum (CB). A craniotomy has
been performed and an incision made through the dura mater. A:
Longitudinal sonogram showing the fourth ventricle (4) and spinal cord.
CC, central canal of the spinal cord; and F, floor of the cranium. B:
Longitudinal sonogram made with the transducer moved slightly to the
midline, making the central canal more visible. CC, central canal; F, floor
of the cranium; and M, medulla oblongata. C: Sagittal magnetic resonance
image of the brain and the spinal cord. The arrowhead points to the
brain-stem mass. CB, cerebellum; LV, lateral ventricle; and MO, medulla
oblongata.
67
Figure 1.29. Ventral sonographic anatomy of the lumbar spine. A:
Longitudinal sonogram and corresponding labeled schematic image,
obtained via a transabdominal approach, of the caudal lumbar spine of an
adult beagle. The vertebral body (VB) has a distinct curvilinear shape. In
normal dogs, the intact disc (D) can be an acoustic window to see part of
the cord (arrows). B: Transverse sonogram and corresponding labeled
schematic image at the level a disc. The spinal cord is observed dorsally
(arrow). C: Transverse sonogram and corresponding labeled schematic
image at the level of the caudal aspect of the vertebral body. The
arrowheads point to the shadowing associated with the vertebral body.
AO, aorta; and CVC, caudal vena cava. Images courtesy of D. Penninck.
68
AO
CVC
CVC
AO
Figure 1.30. Normal lumbar spine of a 3-month-old Samoyed dog.
point to vertebral bodies. E, vertebral end plates. Image courtesy of D.
Penninck.
69
Figure 1.31. Longitudinal sonograms of a normal canine spinal cord
during surgery. The spinal cord (between the cursors) is relatively
hypoechoic, and the meninges are hyperechoic and outline the anechoic
cerebrospinal fluid. CC, central canal; d, dura mater and arachnoid mater;
E, epidural space; and p, pia mater. The bone interface is hyperechoic and
hyperattenuating, limiting evaluation of any structure deeper to it.
70
Bone
SONOGRAPHY OF SPINAL
DISORDERS
Disc Herniation
Disc material is hyperechoic to the spinal cord parenchyma and therefore
easily identified (Hudson et al. 1998). Herniated disc material may appear
as amorphous, bright material with irregular margins (Figure 1.32).
 During surgery, sonography may assist the surgeon in assessing complete
removal of disc fragments. Acute compressive lesions tend to increase
focally the spinal diameter and obliterate the central canal (Figure 1.33).
In situ hemostatic gel or foam can mimic the presence of disc material
(Figure 1.34).
Some authors have reported oscillations in the spinal cord that they
attributed to pulsations in arterial branches and suggested that there might
be a relationship between the absence of oscillations and poor outcome in
71
some animals (Nakayama 1993). The significance of the lack of
oscillations remainscontroversial.
Hemorrhage
In research studies evaluating the efficacy of various drugs for the
treatment of spinal cord trauma, ultrasonography was performed to
document the appearance of hemorrhage (Finn-Bodner et al. 1995).
Hemorrhage appeared as a hyperechoic region that obscured visualization
of the linear echoes normally associated with the spinal cord (Figure
1.35). Traumatic hematomas in the vertebral canal are amorphous,
inhomogeneous, and irregularly marginated (Jones et al. 1996; Rault et al.
2004; Tanaka et al. 2006) (Figure 1.36)
Figure 1.32. Images of a dog with intervertebral disc herniation. A:
Longitudinal sonogram made near the midline. A small amount of
hyperechoic disc material (arrows) is seen deep to the hypoechoic spinal
cord (SC). Some hemorrhage (H) shows as a hyperechoic region
superficial to the spinal cord. B: A larger amount of disc material (arrows)
is apparent in this longitudinal sonogram made more laterally. C:
Computed tomographic image of the spinal cord of the same dog showing
the hyperdense disc material (arrow) on the right side of the midline.
72
Figure 1.33. Compressive herniated disc material in the vertebral canal of
a dog. The hyperechoic disc material (arrowheads) has irregular margins
and compresses the spinal cord (SC). Part of the visible central canal
(arrow) is seen away from the lesion. F, fluid at the surgical site.
Figure 1.34. Successfully removed disc material in a dog. Compressive
disc material was removed at the C4-5 intervertebral disc space. The
subarachnoid spaces and central canal (arrows) are normal; there is no
evidence of cord compression. The echogenic structure (arrowheads) seen
dorsal to the spinal cord represents hemostatic foam in situ and should not
be confused with disc material. F, fluid at surgery site. Image courtesy of
D. Penninck.
73
Figure 1.35. Sonogram of a traumatized spinal cord in a dog. Spinal cord
hemorrhage appears as a hyperechoic region (arrowheads) obscuring the
linear echoes normally seen in the spinal cord. CC, central canal.
74
Figure 1.36. Hematoma in a dog, 2 days after lumbar hemilaminectomy.
On this sagittal sonogram, the irregular, inhomogeneous, echotexture
lesion represents a hematoma.
75
Neoplasia
The appearance of neoplasia is nonspecific and varies in echogenicity and
uniformity (McConnell et al. 2003; Tanaka et al. 2006) (Figures 1.37 and
1.38). Tumors may arise from the vertebrae or soft tissues of the spinal
canal, such as the meninges or spinal cord. The exact location or origin
and nature of the lesion cannot be diagnosed solely on the
ultrasonographic appearance. Tumors arising from neurological tissue
may appear in unexpected locations such as the kidney (Figure 1.39).
Multinodal or metastatic neoplasms, such as multiple myeloma and
disseminated histiocytic sarcoma, can affect multiple vertebral segments
and other body regions such as the abdomen, requiring complete body
imaging in most cases. Serial ultrasound examinations may also help to
evaluate progression of neoplastic disease or response to chemotherapy.
Cystic Lesions
in the subarachnoid space of dogs and cats (Galloway et al. 1999). These
are not lined with a secreting epithelium and therefore not considered as
true cysts.
Figure 1.37. Intramedullary tumor (sarcoma) in a dog. On this
longitudinal sonogram obtained after dorsal laminectomy, an irregularly
marginated mass (M) is noted in the spinal canal (c). Fl, fluid at the
surgery site.
76
Figure 1.38. Intradural extramedullary mass (M) in an American
foxhound with a 2-month history of chronic progressive tetraparesis. A
dorsal laminectomy was performed at C5-6. A: Longitudinal sonogram at
the laminectomy site showing a hypoechoic mass (M) compressing and
flattening the spinal cord (C). The central canal (arrow) cannot be
visualized where compression is greatest on this plane. B: Transverse
sonogram at C5-6. The spinal cord is flattened and displaced laterally
although the central canal is visible (arrow) on this image. A small amount
of hemorrhage appears bright and can be seen on the ventral surface of the
 mass. D, intervertebral disc at C5-6. C: Sagittal magnetic resonance image
showing the mass (arrows) dorsal to the spinal cord (C) at C5-6. C5, body
of the fifth cervical vertebra; and C6, body of the sixth cervical vertebra.
77
Figure 1.39. Neuroblastoma in the kidney of a cat. The large mass
deforms the contours of the kidney and is heterogeneous, with both
hypoechoic and hyperechoic areas intermingled. Only a small portion of
the kidney was recognizable as renal tissue (not shown).
           
(Galloway et al. 1999). The lesions can appear septated with irregular
hyperechoic lines. An irregular and thickened dura may be present. The
central canal may or may not be recognized, and the compressed spinal
pia in normal animals is not always visible (Galloway et al. 1999). After
78
drainage of arachnoid or intradural cysts, the spinal cord can be monitored
for recurrence by using the surgical site as an acoustic window (Hudson et
al.1998).
Syringomyelia
cavitation within the spinal cord lacking an ependymal lining (syrinx), a
combined condition known as syringomyelia, can occur secondary to
numerous conditions (Rusbridge et al. 2006). Syringomyelia has been
mainly described in relation to Chiari type [-like malformation syndrome
in Cavalier King Charles spaniels and other small breeds of dogs. Other
processes such as trauma, neoplasia, intracranial epidermoid cysts, and
arachnoiditis can lead to this condition (Kirberger et al. 1997; MacKillop
et al. 2006; Rusbridge et al. 2006) (Figure 1.40)-
In all cases, syringomyelia is thought to occur as a consequence of altered
CSF dynamics (Rusbridge et al. 2006). Concurrent myelomalacia might
also be found, with a tendency to increase the spinal cord echogenicity
with an obliteration of the central canal (Figure 1.41).
Meningocele
Tethering of the spinal cord with an associated meningocele
extramedullary intradural cyst, and lipoma was sonographically evaluated
in a Manx-type cat (Plummer et al. 1993). The lipoma appeared as a
hyperechoic region located within a hypoechoic tract representing the
meningocele was believed to be the filum terminale, although this could
not be confirmed on histology.
Vertebral and Perivertebral Changes
Many changes—such as malformation (spina bifida), spondylosis.
spondylarthrosis, or articular facet osteoarthrosis, osteomyelitis,
discospondylitis, fracture, and tumor—can affect the shape and
echogenicity of the vertebral and perivertebral structures.
79
Ventral spondylosis bridges two vertebral bodies along the ventral
longitudinal ligament and appears as a hyperechoic bridge associated with
acoustic shadowing. The disc at that space cannot be visualized.
Spondylarthrosis or articular facet osteoarthrosis is visible as hyperechoic.
irregularly lined surfaces over the joint space and is associated with
acoustic shadowing (Figure 1.42)
In discospondylitis, a ventral approach to the affected disc enables
visualization of a partial or complete loss of the fiber organization of the
discs. The vertebral hyperechoic contours become irregular and may be
hypoechoic area of swelling is often seen laterally and ventrally to the disc
space. The surrounding fat or muscles may also be affected.
Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspirates of the affected discs can be done
(Rault et al. 2004; Packer et al. 2005).
Figure 1.40. Syringomyelia in a Cavalier King Charles spaniel with
Chiari type [-like malformation syndrome. Longitudinal image obtained
at the level of the atlantoaxial junction. The dilated central canal (between
80
Figure 1.41. Myelomalacia in a dog. Sagittal sonogram of a segment of
spine (sp) after laminectomy and durotomy. The cord is uniformly mildly
echogenic, and the central canal is not visible. Anechoic fluid is noted in
the near field, placed to serve as an acoustic window.
Sp
Figure 1.42. Articular facet osteoarthrosis in a dog. Sagittal sonogram of a
segment of spine with an irregular hyperechoic surface at the level of the
articular facets (AF).
A sublumbar abscess appears as a hypoechoic to anechoic,
inhomogeneoustohomogeneousareawithirregularandill-defined
margins. Neighboring organs may be affected. In some cases, a foreign
e    se      
81
as hyperechoic with or without acoustic shadowing (Figure 1.43) (Packer
et al. 2005).
Primary bony tumors or metastases are visible as irregular and
inhomogeneous areas destroying the hyperechoic bony structure (Figure
1.44). The involved soft tissue usually appears more hypoechoic than
normal, with irregular borders.
Fractures of the vertebral bodies can be visualized as interruptions of the
continuous hyperechoic line of the surface of the bone. In acute cases, an
inhomogeneous, mixed echotexture hematoma can be seen at the fracture
site.
Postoperative seromas can be observed at the incision sites. They often are
regularly marginated and hypoechoic to anechoic, with or without thin
linear hyperechoic septa (Figure 1.45).
Figure 1.43. Sublumbar abscess with foreign bodies (wooden sticks) in a
dog. Sagittal (A) and transverse (B) sonograms of the swollen,
inhomogeneous, and mostly hypoechoic sublumbar region. The wooden
sticks appear as hyperechoic linear interfaces (fb and arrows). In the far
field, the surface of the adjacent vertebral bodies is irregular, most likely
because of periostitis.
Figure 1.44. Vertebral osteosarcoma in a dog. Sagittal sonogram (A) and
schematic labeled image (B). The ventral cortical surface of this lumbar
vertebral body is moderately irregular and interrupted (arrowheads). An
inhomogeneous and mostly hypoechoic soft-tissue mass (M) extends
along the ventral aspect of the vertebra. N, normal adjacent vertebra.
Image courtesy of D. Penninck.
82
Figure 1.45. Seroma at a recent hemilaminectomy site in a dog. Sagittal
sonogram of a hypoechoic and inhomogeneous lesion with irregular
 margins, representing a superficial seroma (S) at the surgical site.
INTERVENTIONAL
PROCEDURES
[ntraoperative ultrasonography can be useful in determining whether
herniated disc material remains in the vertebral canal or foramina
83
(Nakayama 1993). The use of spinal ultrasonography has also been
described during dorsal laminectomy in dogs  with caudal cervical
vertebral instability and malformation to ensure that the spinal cord has
been adequately decompressed (Nanai et al. 2006). Sonography can also
be useful for evaluating cystic lesions after drainage to ensure that fluid
has not recurred (Hudson et al. 1998). As in other locations,
ultrasound-guided aspirates or tissue-core biopsies of focal lesions can be
done if a satisfactory acoustic window is available.
REFERENCES
Finn-Bodner ST, Hudson JA, Coates JR, et al. (1995) Ultrasonographic
anatomy of the normal canine spinal cord and correlation with
histopathology after induced spinal cord trauma. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
36:39-48.
   so  g a e   o o
cases (1988-1993). J Am Vet Med Ass0c 207:1320-1324.
Galloway AM, Curtis NC, Sommerlad SF, Watt PR (1999) Correlative
imaging findings in seven dogs and one cat with spinal arachnoid cysts.
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 40:445-452
Hudson JA, Finn-Bodner ST, Coates JR, et al. (l995) Color Doppler
imaging and Doppler spectral analysis in the spinal cord of normal dogs.
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 36:542-547.
Hudson JA, Finn-Bodner ST, Steiss JE (1998) Neuro-sonography. Vet
Clin North Am Small Animal Pract 28:943-971.
Jones JC, Hudson JA, Sorjonen DC, et al. (1996) Effects of experimental
nerve root compression on arterial blood flow velocity in the seventh
lumbar spinal ganglion of the dog: Measurement using intraoperative
Doppler ultrasonography. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 37: 133-140.
Kirberger RM, Jacobson LS, Davies JV, Engela J (1997) Hydromyelia in
the dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 38:30-38.
MacKillop E, Schatzberg SJ, de Lahunta A (2006) [ntracranial epidermoid
cyst and syringohydromyelia in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47:339-344.
84
McConnell JF, Garosi LS, Dennis R, Smith KC (2003) Imaging of spinal
nephroblastoma in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 44:537-541.
Nakayama M (1993) Intraoperative spinal ultrasonography in dogs:
Normal  findings  and  case-history  reports.  Vet  Radiol  Ultrasound
34:264-268
Nanai B, Lyman R, Bichsel P (2006) Intraoperative use of
ultrasonography during continuous dorsal laminectomy in tow dogs with
syndrome"). Vet Surg 35:465-469.
Packer RA, Coates JR, Cook CR, Lattimer JC, O'Brien DP (2005)
Sublumbar abscess and discospondylitis in a cat. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
46:396-399
Plummer SB, Bunch SE, Khoo LH, Spaulding KA, Kornegay JN (1993)
Tethered   spinal  cord   and  an  intradural lipoma associated   with  a
meningocele in a Manx-type cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 203:1159-1161.
Rault DN, Besso JG, Ruel Y, et al. (2004) Ultrasonography of
discospondylitis: Seven dogs and three cats. In: Annual Scientific
Conference of the European Association of Veterinary Diagnostic
Imaging, September 8-11, Ghent, Belgium, p 151.
concepts in pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment. J Vet Intern Med
20:469479.
Tanaka H, Nakayama M, Takase K (2006) Intraoperative spinal
ultrasonography in two dogs with spinal disease. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
47:99-102
SECTION 3
PERIPHERALNERVES
Martin Kramer and Judith Hudson
85
SCANNING TECHNIQUE
Because of their small size and superficial location, peripheral nerves are
Color flow Doppler imaging can be useful in differentiating vessels from
nerves. Imaging in multiple planes and following structures distally can
also be helpful. In addition, nerves are not compliant to pressure, unlike
   e   d  q e o  'ss
nerve.
The region of the brachial plexus can be scanned with lower-frequency
probes, depending on the size of the dog. The patient is placed in lateral
recumbency with the affected limb up. The plexus is assessed with the
limb fully extended and abducted. The axilla is examined with the probe
positioned craniocaudally (perpendicular to the limb axis).
NORMAL SONOGRAPHIC
ANATOMY OF PERIPHERAL
NERVES
[n longitudinal section, nerves appear as tubular hypoechoic structures
with linear echogenic walls (Hudson et al. 1996). The midportion of the
nerve is mainly hypoechoic, with small dispersed hyperechoic internal
echoes (Figure 1.46). The walls of nerves are brighter and better defined
than vessels walls; vascular walls are less distinct. In transverse section,
nerves are circular or oval hypoechoic structures.
The brachial plexus can also be evaluated. In the axilla, the largest
structures are the axillary vessels (arteries and veins), which appear
tubular and anechoic, with smooth hyperechoic walls (Figure 1.47). By
means of Doppler ultrasonography, veins can be distinguished from
arteries by their Doppler signature, larger size, and lack of visible
pulsation. They can be more easily compressed than the arteries. Normal
86
nerves are small (2-3 mm) linear hypoechoic structures outlined by bright
walls.
The axillary lymph nodes located adjacent to the vessels are smooth
Ovoid, homogeneous, and echo-genic structures. Sometimes the hilar fat
can be seen as a hyperechoic line in the center of the parenchyma
SONOGRAPHIC FEATURES
OF PERIPHERAL NERVE
DISORDERS
Rupture
   o      
sharp-object penetration, or other injuries. Research has shown that nerve
degenerates rapidly after transection. Wallerian degeneration in the distal
segment causes a breakdown of myelinization that is more severe in the
more distal portion.  The proximal stump undergoes traumatic
degeneration and is more likely to be visualized. After injury, loss of
visualization of the distal segment strongly suggests rupture. It is
muscular and tendinous structures. Knowledge of anatomy is necessary to
ensure that the nerve is transected and has not altered course.
Serial examination can be useful to determine if there is any evidence of
repair after injury. In some animals, a neuroma may form at the site of
Regeneration has been described as irregular regrowth with or without
neuroma formation.
87
Demyelinization Without Rupture
Demyelinization also can occur after trauma or inflammation that is not
severe enough to cause transection. In such cases, the nerve is poorly
visualized distal to the site of injury. Comparison with the nerve on the
healthy contralateral side is helpful (Figure 1.48).
Figure 1.46. Longitudinal sonograms of a normal sciatic nerve in a dog. A
normal nerve is a tubular, poorly echogenic structure with small
hyperechoic internal echoes, outlined by linear hyperechoic walls. A:
B: Normal sciatic nerve in the midfemoral region showing sharp linear
echogenic walls (arrows). The nerve measures 2.5 mm in diameter.
ROC
Figure 1.47. Normal brachial plexus in a dog. The brachial plexus (arrow)
is present between the round anechoic vascular structures (v). The nerves
are poorly echogenic and slightly inhomogeneous. M, adjacent muscle.
88
Compression
Nerve compression can be caused by local masses such as neoplasms or
hematomas, by incorrectly
compartmental syndrome.  Carpal tunnel syndrome in people causes
           
tunnel.  Ultrasonography can be useful  in determining  whether
compression has caused demyelinization or other abnormalities in the
affected nerve.
Neoplasia
Peripheral nerve sheath tumors in the brachial plexus of dogs were
described as hypoechoic tubular structures (Rose et al. 2005) or as
fusiform masses exhibiting mixed echogenicity (Platt et al. 1999) (Figures
1.49 and 1.50). These tumors can occur in unusual locations such as the
thorax (Essman et al. 2002)
89
Other Disorders of the Brachial Plexus
[n acute partial or complete avulsions of the brachial plexus, a hypoechoio
to anechoic, inhomogeneous, and irregularly demarcated area is seen in
the axillary region. This area represents the hematoma. Torn nerve tissue
can usually not be seen sonographically.
ultrasonography if they exceed 5 mm. These masses appear round to oval,
l  s       
and can be inhomogeneous.
Metastases to the axillary lymph nodes in the area of the brachial plexus
moderately   to severely  enlarged, and mildly  to moderately
inhomogeneous. The hilar fat usually disappears. A definitive diagnosis
can be obtained by ultrasound-guided needle biopsy.
Figure 1.48. Sonogram of the right sciatic nerve in a dog with
neurological deficits. Compare these images with those of the left sciatic
nerve of the same dog shown in Figure 1.1. A: Sciatic nerve (arrows) near
the greater trochanter. B: Sciatic nerve near the midfemoral region
(arrows). The nerve has a variable diameter and irregular interrupted walls
(arrows). The nerve is swollen in the midfemoral region and measures 2.9
mm.
Figure 1.49. Median nerve sarcoma in a dog. A 20-mm-long by 5-mm
wide, mostly hypoechoic lesion (arrowheads) is distal and medial to the
elbow joint, along the path of the median nerve.
90
 (  )       i 
(arrows) is on the cranial aspect of the left elbow in a 5-year-old Labrador
retriever with lameness and fore-limb muscle atrophy. The elongated mass
is well defined and inhomogeneously hypoechoic. Image courtesy of K
Spaulding
Figure 1.51. Brachial plexus tumor. A large (2 cm long by 1 cm wide),
well defined, oval and poorly echogenic mass (arrowheads) is in the
axillary region of this Bernese mountain dog that presented with lameness.
A histiocytic sarcoma was identified.
91
INTERVENTIONAL
PROCEDURES
Ultrasonography can be used to guide fine-needle aspirations or biopsies.
or to locate nerve endings prior to surgical repair. Following anastomosis.
ultrasonography can be used to monitor the nerves and determine whether
healing is occurring. Sonography could also be useful in the resection of
masses associated with nerves.
REFERENCES
Essman SC, Hoover JP, Bahr RJ, Ritchey JW, Watson C (2002) An
intrathoracic malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor in a dog. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 43:255-259
92
Hudson JA, Steiss JE, Braund KG, Toivio-Kinnucan M (l996)
Ultrasonography of peripheral nerves during wallerian degeneration and
regeneration following transection. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 37:302-312.
Platt SR, Graham J, Chrisman CL, et al.(1999) Magnetic resonance
imaging and ultrasonography in the diagnosis of a malignant peripheral
nerve sheath tumor in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 40:367-371.
Rose S, Long C, Knipe M, Hornof B (2005) Ultrasonographic evaluation
of brachial plexus tumors in five dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
46:514-517.
93
CHAPTER TWO
EYE AND ORBIT
Kathy Spaulding
PREPARATIONAND
SCANNING TECHNIOUE
There are three primary methods for imaging the globe: directly on the
cornea, through the eyelid, or imaging through a water bath over the
globe.
Imaging with the transducer applied directly on the cornea, which is the
 method most frequently used, produces the highest-quality images (Figure
2.1).
Artifacts and image degradation occur when imaging through the eyelid.
The technique of imaging through the closed lid is recommended if there
is a deep corneal ulcer, recent severe globe trauma, or recent ocular
chamber). However, a water bath is cumbersome to hold in position and
not often used or needed with current ultrasound equipment. The recently
available high-resolution transducers either have a water bath attached to
structures of the globe.
safety of the imager and the patient, mild sedation of an unruly patient
94
may be advised if manual restraint is inadequate to securely position it. [f
the animal is heavily sedated or anesthetized, then the globe tends to rotate
ventrally. The angle of the incident beam through the eye is then affected.
With a transducer covering the surface of the globe, seeing the direction of
gaze of the globe may be difficult (Figure 2.2).
This is important when localizing a lesion within the globe. A topical
anesthetic is applied at a dose of 1-2 drops to the cornea 2-5 min prior to
the examination.
Different acoustic coupling gels can be used. A sterile, water-soluble
lubricating acoustic gel approved for the eye is recommended. It is
important that the gel does not contain preservatives or perfumes. At the
end of the examination, the gel should be flushed from the eye with
approved sterile eyewash.
available and the region of the eye and orbit to be imaged. The highest
to 50-MHz range are used to image the globe and orbit. The 25- to
50-MHz transducers are generally ocular specific because they are
designed for optimally imaging the near-field structures within the globe.
They are excellent for resolution of the cornea, anterior chamber, iris,
ciliary body, and lens. The vitreous body and the retrobulbar area are often
best imaged with the 7.5- to 13-MHz transducers. A linear transducer
provides optimum imaging of the near-field structures, but manipulating a
sector or convex probe with a small footprint may be easier.
The patient's eyelids are manually held open by the restrainer while the
head is secured (Hager et al. 1987; Dziezyc et al. 1988). Large-breed dogs
  o s     m   o 
globe into the orbit and thus limit access to the eye. The globes of
brachiocephalic breeds are generally more accessible.
Geometrically speaking, the globe is nearly a sphere. It is important to
identify the direction of the beam; that is, where it enters the globe and the
imaged in sagittal, dorsal, and transverse planes (Figures 2.3-2.8).
Selected oblique planes are used to delineate a lesion better. The entire
globe is systematically scanned with a fanning motion. The globe is
scanned from one side to the other in each sagittal and dorsal plane and
95
from rostrally to caudally in a transverse plane. Access to the posterior
section of the globe is often more difficult in patients with a retracted
globe. The zygomatic salivary gland, located ventrally to the globe, can be
imaged with the probe placed ventrolaterally to the zygomatic arch
(Figure 2.9). Doppler imaging or standardized A-mode scanning may
 provide additional vascular and measurement information.
Appropriate positional markers identifying the location of the transducer
relative to the globe are documented on the image and changed with new
positions. The probe position marker is usually placed on the image to
identify the nasal (medial) aspect for a horizontal plane and superior
(dorsal) for a vertical plane (Figures 2.3 and 2.5)
Figure 2.1. Probe placement. Images can be made either through the
eyelid (left) or directly on the cornea. Imaging directly on the cornea
produces the best images. This requires digitally retracting the eyelids
(right).
Figure 2.2. Directions of the gaze. The direction of the gaze influences
the globe section displayed. Control of the direction of the gaze is limited.
often obscured. This can lead to erroneous location of a lesion within the
eye.
96
Figure 2.3. Sagittal plane. A sagittal plane through the eye divides it into
    si  n g    s l e n
anterior chamber. The far field represents the vitreous and retina. The
dorsal part is by convention placed on the left of the image. AC, anterior
chamber; L, lens; and V, vitreous body.
Ventral
Figure 2.4. Array of sagittal images. The central image represents the
sagittal view through the globe with equal divisions into right and left
halves. The globe is then scanned from one side to the other to obtain a
complete view of the entire globe (planes 1-6). When imaging from one
side of the eye, the opposite side of the far side of the globe is displayed.
97
4
2
5
CENTRAL
3
6
Figure 2.5. Dorsal plane. A dorsal plane divides the globe into dorsal and
o is    n  a r ai a  
the image represents the medial (nasal) side of the eye. AC, anterior
chamber; L, lens; and V, vitreous body.
Medial
The directional terms used with reference to the globe are anterior and
posterior (rostral to caudal), superior and inferior (dorsal to ventral), and
medial and lateral (nasal to temporal). The planes and axis of the globe
can be thought of in similar terms as those of the longitudinal and
latitudinal directions of the earth. The central axis of the eye is an
imaginary line from the center of the cornea (anterior pole) to the posterior
center of the sclera (posterior pole) (Figure 2.10)
This is analogous to the axis of the earth between the north and south
poles. The degrees around the globe in each plane can be thought of in
98
terms of the hours on the face of a clock. Using the central axis as a
central reference point, there are two primary perpendicular planes: The
equatorial (transverse) and the meridional (longitudinal) planes are
perpendicular to each other.
Figure 2.6. Array of dorsal planes. The central image represents the dorsal
plane through the globe with equal divisions into dorsal and ventral
halves. The globe is then scanned from dorsal to ventral to include the
entire globe (planes 1-6).
4
3
4
5
6
5
CENTRAL
3
6
Figure 2.7. Transverse plane. A transverse image of the globe can be
achieved by placing the transducer at the limbus and scanning across the
globe. Radial views of the globe can be achieved by moving the
transducer around the globe.
99
Figure 2.8. Retro-orbital scanning. Both longitudinal (left) and transverse
(right) images should be made of the retro-orbital region to include the
orbital cone. This is achieved by placing the transducer caudal to the eye
and dorsal to the zygomatic arch.
Figure 2.9. Zygomatic gland scanning. A: Images of the zygomatic
zygomatic arch and caudoventral to the globe. B: The zygomatic salivary
gland is identified as a well-defined echogenic tissue (between the
cursors) with a thin capsule located deep to the zygomatic arch depicted
by the hyperechoic shadowing bone. C: Corresponding transverse
magnetic resonance image. The zygomatic gland is identified by the
arrows ventral to the globe. D: Corresponding parasagittal magnetic
resonanceimage.
100
Figure 2.10. Central axis of the globe. This central line (arrow) is the
pivotal line through the center of the globe. This is the central reference
point. Two planes perpendicular and intersecting this reference point are
the equatorial and the meridional planes. Localization of a lesion on a
round globe without specific landmarks is achieved by using these planes
and the positions around the clock.
101
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC
ANATOMY OF THE NORMAL
EYE
Ultrasound imaging of the orbit primarily consists of the globe (eyeball or
bulbus oculi) and ocular adnexa, including the tissues within the
periorbital cone in the retro-orbital area (optic nerve, extrinsic ocular
muscles, vessels, fat, and surface of adjacent orbital bone) and the soft
102
tissues and glands (lacrimal gland and zygomatic salivary gland) around
theglobe.
The globe is composed of two chambers (the anterior and the posterior)
and the vitreal body (Figure 2.1ll). The globe contains the uveal tract
(vascular tract), which consists anteriorly of the iris and ciliary body and
posteriorly of the choroid. A single lens is secured between the anterior
part of the eye and the vitreous body. The retina represents the innermost
of the three layers of the globe wall in the posterior segment.
Figure 2.11. Normal ocular globe. A: The globe contains the anterior
chamber, the posterior chamber, and the vitreous body. B: The three
chambers are identified on this ultrasound image. Each chamber contains
anechoic fluid. The anterior chamber (AC) is bordered by the cornea (C)
anteriorly and the iris (l) posteriorly. The posterior chamber is a small area
located posterior to the iris and anterior to the ciliary body (CB) and the
lens (L). The vitreous body (VB) is bounded posteriorly and peripherally
by the retina and anteriorly by the lens and ciliary body (CB).
A
B
In the normal young eye, the three cavities (anterior chamber, posterior
chamber, and vitreous body) have an anechoic appearance, with few
reflectors present (Figure 2.11). It is best evaluated with a frequency of 25
  o s s    o se    
1989; Boroffka et al. 2006).
Depending on the probe frequency, the cornea presents as a single or
double parallel echogenic line with an anechoic center (Figure 2.12). The
103
first highly reflective line is the corneal surface. The stroma is low
reflective, with a second highly reflective line at the endothelium or
Descemet's membrane.
The corneoscleral junction (limbus) is defined by the transition between
the lowly reflective cornea and highly reflective sclera. The sclera is
imaged as a highly reflective structure compared with the cornea. The
sclera can usually be differentiated from overlying episclera and
underlying ciliary body and retina (Figure 2.13)
The anterior chamber can be difficult to image because of its
compressibility, size, and location in the near field. The anterior chamber
is delineated by the cornea, the iris, and the central anterior lens capsule. It
is distended with noncellular anechoic aqueous humor (Figure 2. 14).
Figure 2.12. Normal cornea. The cornea is best seen with a 25- to
50-MHz transducer. The cornea has two parallel lines with an anechoic to
mildly echogenic center. A: High-resolution sonogram of the cornea. B:
The junction is imaged with a 25-MHz transducer. The corneal-scleral
junction is defined by the transition between the two parallel lines with an
anechoic to echogenic center representing the cornea (C) and the wider,
more uniform, echo distribution of the highly reflective sclera (S). C: The
corneal-scleral junction, anterior chamber (AC), anterior lens capsule
(arrowhead), and part of the iris (I). The cornea surface is slightly
flattened by the standoff. D: Schematic representation of these structures.
VB,vitreousbody.
104
Figure 2.13. Corneal-scleral junction. A: The corneal-scleral junction
cannot be adequately evaluated with a 7.5-MHz transducer. B:
High-resolution sonogram of the corneal-scleral junction.The bright
superficial straight line (arrow) represents the standoff interface.
Figure 2.14. Sagittal plane of a normal globe. The anterior chamber, the
vitreous body, and the internal contents of the lens are anechoic. A:
Longitudinal sonogram of a canine eye. B: Modified and labeled image.
AC, anterior chamber; and PC, posterior chamber. Note the nucleus
sclerosis affecting the lens. Image courtesy of D. Penninck.
105
VitreousBody
The normally shallow posterior chamber, which is located between the iris
and the peripheral lens, contains aqueous humor that is produced by the
ciliary body and flows from the posterior chamber to the anterior chamber
through the pupil.
The uvea, which represents the vascular layer of the globe, is composed
ciliary body and the iris (Figures 2.15 and 2.16)
The iris is a dynamic, muscular, contractile diaphragm with a central
opening (the pupil). The size of the pupil, which can vary rapidly in
diameter (Figure 2.17), allows varying amounts of light to penetrate to the
retina on the posterior surface of the globe. The muscles in the iris control
the pupil size. The pupil appears as a circular void in the iris. When the
pupil is constricted or when the beam is off axis, the iris may be mistaken
for the anterior surface of the lens. The iris, which is the anatomical
demarcation between the anterior and posterior chambers, is contiguous at
the equatorial plane in the periphery of the globe to the ciliary body. The
ciliary body is highly vascular and at the junction with the choroid forms
which lies on the surface of the ciliary process. The ciliary body contains
muscle fibers that regulate the shape of the lens. The lens is supported at
the equator by the suspensory ligaments (zonular fibers). The zonules are
seen as striations that attach to the lens contour. The iris, ciliary body, and
zonules are often best imaged from a transverse or oblique view.
106
Figure 2.15. Normal iris and ciliary bodies. A: Plastic model of the iris
and ciliary body, which are part of the uveal system. B: The iris (I) is seen
on the anterior surface of the lens and anterior to the ciliary body. C: The
iris encircles the pupil and controls the pupil size as seen on a transverse
imaging plane. D: The iris is in close apposition to the ciliary body as seen
around the periphery of the iris.
Figure 2.16. Normal ciliary bodies. The ciliary body with the zonules to
  (s) ss o  s  i l   ns
equator (periphery) of the lens. This is a frequent area of primary ocular
neoplasia. With contraction of the muscle fibers in the ciliary body, the
zonules assist in adjusting the shape of the lens.
107
Lens
The lens is composed of a capsule, anterior epithelium, lens fibers, and
nucleus. The capsule is like an envelope that encases the lens. The lens
fibers that make up the majority of the lens are positioned in layers with
the cortex forming the outer layer of the lens and the nucleus located in
the center. The lens is primarily supported in place by the zonular
ligaments at the equator. The vitreous body contributes to maintain the
lens position posteriorly.
Figure 2.17. Normal pupil. The pupil size is dynamic and is controlled by
the contraction of the iris. A-D: These images represent four varying sizes
of the pupil (arrows) as imaged from a transverse plane.
108
Figure 2.18. Normal lens. When the sound beam interacts with the surface
of the lens, there is a change in acoustic impedance and a strong reflection
anterior and posterior surfaces of the normal lens. The position changes
depending on the angle at which the incident beam hits the lens, which is
often useful in identifying the margin of the lens. This is seen only at the
perpendicular angle with the lens and not around the entire curve of the
lens. A-C: In the three images, note the change in position of the specular
reflection (arrows) as the angle through the globe is changed.
109
The internal appearance of the normal lens is anechoic. Curvilinear
hyperechoic interfaces appear at the anterior and posterior margins of the
lens, as the result of specular reflection, when scanned perpendicularly
This reflection is caused by the acoustic impedance difference between the
fluid in the anterior chamber and the sound interacting with the surface of
the lens (Figure 2.18). The peripheral curved margins of the normal lens
are not seen. The surface of the lens is smooth and slightly convex. The
size of the lens varies with the species. The anterior surface of the lens can
be difficult to separate from the iris unless the pupil is dilated. The normal
nucleus has the same appearance as the cortex of the lens. The lens can
produce artifacts as the sound is accelerated through it, and because of its
shape, the sound may be refracted. This is manifested in the posterior
chamber and the posterior wall as Baum's bumps with an abnormal shape
to the globe (Figure 2.19)
Posterior to the lens and extending to the posterior aspect of the globe is
the vitreal body, which fills the vitreous cavity. This vitreous body is a
thick, acellular,gelatinous
structure
ecomposed of 98% water,
muco-polysaccharides, and hyaluronic acid. The vitreous cavity is
bounded by the lens zonules and posterior capsule anteriorly and retina
posteriorly (Figure 2.20). The vitreous body attaches primarily at the
region of the optic disc (vitreous base) and at the ora serrata and forms the
hyaloid fossa, a fibrillar dense indentation, to adapt the posterior surface
of the lens. The vitreous body is densely packed at the posterior surface of
the lens except at the posterior pole of the lens, where it encircles the
attachment of the hyaloid canal (Cloquet's or central canal) (Figure 2.21)
This canal extends from the posterior surface of the lens through the
vitreous body to the optic disc on the posterior surface of the globe. This
potential space in the vitreous body contains the hyaloid artery in an
embryonic eye (Figure 2.22). Remnants of this vessel may be present in
adults. The posterior surface of the vitreal body, located in close proximity
110
posterior hyaloid membrane.
Figure 2.19. Braum's bump artifact. This may produce an abnormal shape
to the posterior wall of the globe. This occurs because of refraction of the
sound as the sound goes through the lens. The bent or refracted sound may
then be reflected from a more anterior and closer part of the globe. The
echoes are then displayed at a wrong position and appear to be "bumps
(arrow) on the posterior surface of the globe. When the sound goes
through the center of the lens, refraction does not occur, and the posterior
wall is not foreshortened.
Figure 2.20. Normal vitreous body and cavity. The vitreal body is a thick.
acellular, round, gelatinous mass that is normally anechoic and is located
in the vitreous cavity. [t is bounded by the retina, choroid, and sclera
s
anteriorly. It is attached primarily at the optic disc and on the posterior
surface of the lens. A: Sagittal plane B: Transverse-oblique
111
The posterior wall of the globe is formed by a thin, hyperechoic, smooth
layer that represents the combined layers of the sclera, choroid, and retina.
           
globe. The retina is the most anterior, and the sclera forms the posterior
layer. The retina extends from the optic nerve to the ora serrata located
just posteriorly to the ciliary body. Located slightly ventrally and medially
in the posterior wall of the globe in dogs and cats is the optic disc. The
optic nerve courses in a straight or undulating course from the posterior
surface of the globe at the optic disc into the periorbita of the retrobulbar
region to the optic canal in the skull (Figure 2.23)
The retrobulbar space (periorbital cone), which includes the extrinsic
ocular muscles, the optic nerve, arteries and veins, and periorbital fat, can
also be evaluated (Figure 2.8). The frontal bone, which forms the medial
wall of the orbit, appears as a hyperechoic interface associated with
shadowing- The extraocular orbital muscles are hypoechoic linear
structures that attach to the globe. The optic nerve is a thin, linear,
hypoechoic structure outlined by adjacent hyperechoic fat. The lobular
lacrimal gland, which is on the lateral (temporal) side of the orbit, and the
zygomatic salivary gland, which is ventral and caudal to the globe and
ventral to the orbital cone, can also be imaged (Figure 2.9). This approach
may be used to aspirate tissue from a mass located posterior to the globe.
          
extending from the posterior surface of the lens to the optic disc. When
vitreal degeneration occurs, this area may be more evident (between the
112
arrows). On this dorsal plane, faint echoes representing mild vitreal
degeneration are present, but the canal is echo free.
Figure 2.22. Fetal eye. This is the globe of an approximately 54-day-old
fetus. Note the straight line from the posterior surface of the lens to the
posterior surface of the globe. This is a patent hyaloid vessel supplying
nutrition to the lens. This vessel typically is not present after birth.
113
Figure 2.23. Normal optic disc and nerve. The optic disc and nerve in
dogs and cats are located slightly ventrally and medially on the posterior
wall of the globe. A: The angle of the beam often is from a slightly
anterior dorsal to posterior ventral direction (arrow). O, section of the
optic nerve. B: The magnetic resonance image displays the optic nerve in
the center and the extraocular muscles at the periphery. C: The optic nerve
is seen as a hypoechoic, often undulating, linear structure (arrow) coursing
       n     
hypoechoic relative to the surrounding fat. D: The hypoechoic muscles
may appear similar in size and echogenicity but attach primarily to the
  m du m d a    go aa
from the optic nerve. The optic nerve is usually less than 3 mm wide
(between the cursors). E: Color Doppler of ocular vessels along the optic
nerve.
114
SONOGRAPHY OF OCULAR
AND ORBITAL
ABNORMALITIES
Cornea and Anterior Chamber
The size, echogenicity, and appearance of the layers of the cornea may
change with corneal disease, because of inflammation, degeneration,
neoplasia, trauma, or specific corneal disorders, such as bullous
keratopathy that occurs with diseases affecting the endothelial cells of the
posterior corneal surface (Figure 2.24). Their degeneration does not any
longer regulate the amount of intrastromal fluid, leading to bullae
formation and possible corneal ulcers.  Limbal infiltration caused by
115
neoplasia or granulation tissue may be identified as focal thickening of the
helpful because the prognosis is more guarded if a limbal mass extends
beyond the sclera to the ciliary body (Figure 2.25). Scleral thickening may
support scleritis or episcleritis.
The cornea and the sclera merge at the limbus or corneoscleral junction
and form the iridocorneal angle with the iris. In small animals, this angle
represents the most relevant site for aqueous humor outflow. Any primary
       n   
aqueous humor and cause glaucoma. An enlarged anterior chamber may
be associated with glaucoma, aphakia, or posterior lens dislocation (Figure
          
subluxated lens, with trauma, with tumor, or with compression by the
transducer (Figure 2.27).
Cells and fibrin debris within the aqueous humor often present as
echogenic foci that are moved along by ocular motion (Figure 2.28). Mass
can be free or attached to iris, lens, or cornea (Figure 2.29). The presence
of vascular flow within a mass is often helpful in determining whether the
o nss   i siss  pn o o n oq e si s
Origin.
Uveitis is an inflammation of the uveal tract (Sapienza et al. 2000; Van
iritis and iridocyclitis. If the inflammation involves the posterior part of
the uveal tract, it is classified as choroiditis. Often the inflammatory
process involves the retina and is then referred to as chorioretinitis. The
neoplasia, and inflammation. Iridociliary cysts present as singular or
multiple (Deehr and Dubielzig 1998; Spiess et al. 1998). The cysts are thin
         o   
ciliary body and extend into either the anterior or posterior chamber or
vitreous body. They may occur in any breed, but golden retrievers, Great
Danes, Rottweilers, or Labrador retrievers are predisposed. The cysts.
which are usually congenital, may be free floating or attached to the
ciliary body, posterior iris, or cornea. Their finding may be incidental, but
irido-ciliary cysts can also cause uveitis or glaucoma (Figure 2.30).
Figure 2.24. Bullous keratopathy. The cornea can be seen with a 10-MHz
116
transducers. A: The normal cornea. B: Bullous keratopathy. Note the
cystic areas within the abnormal cornea.
Figure 2.25. Limbal tumor. A: Photograph of a canine limbal melanoma
(arrow). B: The arrows depict the echogenic mass, which appears to
communicate with the adjacent ciliary body. The ciliary body is thickened,
and local infiltration is suspected.
Figure 2.26. Posterior lens luxation. The echogenic lens (cataract) is in
the posterior portion of the vitreous body, near the optic disc. Irregular
curvilinear structures are seen near the posterior lens capsule. Image
courtesy of D.Penninck.
117
e no sss ooy se usnd e poq ei pue si a jo son
diffuse infiltrative process. The most common intraocular tumor in dogs is
melanoma and is most often associated with the anterior uvea. It is
dogs because the treatments differ. The ciliary body is also commonly
affected by other tumors, such as lymphoma, adenoma, adenocarcinoma,
and medulloepithelioma or metastasis.
Figure 2.27. Anterior chamber changes. A: The anterior chamber
         
transducer mild pressure, which hampers evaluation of this chamber. B:
Ciliary body tumor with local extension into the anterior chamber. The
iris, sclera, and cornea. It was poorly differentiated, and a malignant
118
melanoma was suspected. C: There is a focal thickening of the iris caused
by the presence of a melanoma (arrows). There is blood flow within the
mass. The anterior chamber is enlarged because of glaucoma.
Figure 2.28. Iridal lymphoma. A: Photograph of a thickened iris and focal
infiltrate (arrow) in the anterior chamber. B and C: The echogenic mass
has invaded the anterior chamber (arrow) and is in continuity with the iris
(arrows).
Lens
Abnormalities of the lens include cataracts (cortical or nuclear),
liquefaction of the cortex, intumescence (swelling) of the lens, rupture of
the anterior or posterior capsule, posterior lenticonus, retrolenticular
membrane, subluxation, or dislocation.
Cataracts are degenerative changes in the lens (Gelatt and MacKay 2005).
A cataract produces increased echoes in various locations within an
anechoic lens. The echogenicity, shape, and size of the lens may change
with the type of cataract and its duration. The changes within a cataractous
lens produce acoustic inhomogeneities.
119
The most commonly used ways to classify cataractous changes are based
on topography or stage of maturation. Although both can be used
clinically by slit lamp examination, a classification that describes the
cataracts will be addressed as capsular, cortical (anterior, posterior, or
equatorial) or nuclear (the core of the lens). The classification based on
the stage of progression of the cataract is clinical and includes incipient,
immature and mature cataract with <10%, 10-100% partial opacity, 100%
complete opacity respectively. These stages maintain the lens volume (it
may be slightly increased in diabetic mature hyperosmotic cataracts).
Hypermature and Morgagnian cataracts are later stages with cortical
reabsorption. In these stages the lens thickness is reduced and the capsules
appear wrinkled; these changes can be assessed ultrasono-graphically.
Resorption can be detected as a decrease in the anteroposterior thickness
of the lens. In a cortical cataract, the anterior and/or posterior cortices
become echogenic, and the entire capsule may be apparent and not just the
region of the specular reflection. The cortical sutures may become
echogenic and be identified especially from a transverse plane (Figures
2.31 and 2.32). A nucleus that becomes echogenic is referred to as a
nuclear cataract. The changes might progress to involve the entire lens.
(Figure 2.33) A morgagnian cataract, which occurs when the content of
  a  s  e  s sl 
within the lens, is identified when the nucleus is not within the center of
the lens (Figure 2.34). A markedly calcified cataractous lens has an
increased sound velocity, which can result in an arti-factually shortened
globe. The amount of refraction through the lens may vary and cause an
abnormal shape to the globe. An intumescent lens, which is associated
with imbibition of fluid, is manifested as a thick, echogenic lens caused by
an osmotic gradient difference as seen in early cataracts or in diabetes
mellitus (Figure 2.35). Hypermature cataracts are often thin because the
lens protein has liquefied and absorbed (Figure 2.36). This shrunken lens
has fibrotic changes of the capsule and may pull on the zonules, which
dislocates the lens. In one clinical study comparing lens morphometry in
normal and cataractous lenses, diabetic cataracts had an increased axial
thickness (Beam et al. 1999). Mature cataracts had a trend toward
increased axial thickness, whereas immature cataracts demonstrated a
trend toward reduced thickness (Williams 2004).
120
Figure 2.29. Anterior chamber masses. A: Ciliary body tumor with local
extension into the anterior chamber. The mass is an anaplastic, malignant,
round-cell tumor with invasion into the iris, sclera, and cornea. It was
poorly differentiated, and a malignant melanoma was suspected. A large
echogenic mass is in the anterior chamber, which is distended, consistent
with a malignant melanoma arising from the iris. B: The anterior chamber
is enlarged and diffusely filled with echogenic cellular contents. This was
an epithelial adenoma arising from the iridociliary body. C: The iris is
thickened and has poorly defined irregular margins because of an
infiltrative lymphoma. D: The iris is diffusely thickened especially on the
left side. This is a malignant histiocytosis involving the iris and the ciliary
body
121
Figure 2.30. Iridociliary cysts. They may be identified within the anterior
Or posterior chambers. A: The most common locations are shown in this
            
(between the cursors) in the anterior chamber of this Jack Russell terrier.
The iris (l) is irregular and thickened because of anterior uveitis. C: There
is a large single cyst (arrow) on the posterior surface of the ciliary body at
the medial (nasal) aspect of the eye.
A
Posterior lenticonus is a developmental anomaly of the lens with localized
cone-shaped protrusion of the axial portion of its posterior surfaces. The
lens may have an isolated protrusion of the posterior thin capsule. The
posterior capsule may appear irregular or wrinkled. This may be seen in
 ri       s
primaryvitreous
6(Figure 2.37). A posterior capsule cataract and
lead to surgical complications when removal of the lens is attempted.
The lens rupture may be associated with anterior uveitis, fibrin or
granulation tissue proliferation, or adherence to the pupil. The rupture may
common in diabetic patients (Figure 2.38). A posterior lenticonus has an
eventration on the posterior surface, but the lens is still contained
Lenticular nodular proliferations, also called lenticular fibroxanthomatous
l pn asd l  s sal a um o 'so
epithelium have undergone fibrous metaplasia, which is associated with
trauma and a rupture of the lens (Figure 2.39).
A dislocated lens is identified by its abnormal position. Subluxation
occurs when the zonule partially ruptures, and the lens is tilted from its
normal position but still behind the iris and in front of the patellar fossa of
the vitreous. Luxation occurs when the zonules at the peripheral
ligamentous attachments totally rupture, and the lens is displaced
122
anteriorly to the iris or posteriorly into the vitreal cavity. A luxated lens is
often cataractous, especially if it has been luxated for any duration of time
because of nutrition loss. Lens dislocation may occur secondary to trauma.
2.40.
Figure 2.31. Cortical cataracts and other conditions mimicking cataracts.
       
perpendicular to the incident sound beam. B: The iris (arrowhead) is on
the anterior surface of the lens, the pupil is in the center, and the
 a eo  rd  o t n s 
(arrow). C: The lens has thin hyperechoic lines (arrowheads), indicating
early cataract changes. The strong hyperechoic curvilinear line (arrow) is
the posterior specular reflection at the surface of the lens. This helps to
identify the position within the lens of the cataract. This is more likely on
the surface of the nucleus. D: The lens has a thin hyperechoic line
(arrows) around the lens consistent with a cortical cataract. The thicker
        
cataractous involvement of the sutures of the cortex of the lens. E: The
surface of the lens has a hyperechoic rim (short arrows) around it that
represents cortical cataracts (long arrow). The anterior part of the cortex is
thickened and hyperechoic.
123
A
R
Figure 2.32. Various stages of cataract. A: An irregular hyperechoic
 posterior cataract is present. Noticing this change is important when a lens
is being extracted, because the change may lead to complications. B: A
large amount of nuclear cataract is present. C: An irregularity (arrow) is
noted on the posterior surface of the cataractous lens. This may be caused
by posterior rupture or, in this case, by a retained primary vitreous. D:
Asymmetric but nearly complete nuclear cataract is present. E: The entire
lens is echogenic, consistent with a complete cataract. Echoes within the
vitreous are consistent with degenerative changes. F: Note that the lens is
much smaller than normal. The margins of the lens are hyperechoic. This
is a supermature cataract with resorption of lens contents. These changes
are responsible for traction on the retina and can cause retinal detachment.
Note the retraction of the vitreal body (arrowheads) and the echoes in the
vitreous, consistent with degenerative changes.
124
Figure 2.33. Cataracts involving the sutures of the lens. The involvement
becomes more extensive from A to F. All are transverse images of the
lens. With the first image, the involvement is cortical, and by F there is
complete cortical and nuclear involvement with progression of disease and
Figure 2.34. Morgagnian cataract. The contents of the lens has liquefied
(arrows). The cataractous nucleus is mobile within the lens and may
125
change in position. The lens is often smaller than normal because the lens
contents has been resorbed.
Figure 2.35. Swollen lens. This is often caused by the imbibition of fluid
because of the osmotic gradient difference of fluid within the lens. It may
be seen with various disorders but is often associated with diabetes
mellitus.
126
Figure 2.36. Supermature cataract. The lens is entirely hyperechoic and is
e      sl    
Traction on the retina by the shrunken lens may lead to retinal
detachment.
127
RT.EYE
MEDIAL
DORSAL
PLANE
D1=
15.2mm
50.2mm
201m
D2=
3.6mmC=26.2mA=
34m
Vitreous and Retina
Clinical conditions with sonographically visible vitreal changes include
changes in the shape of the globe, vitreous opacities (such as asteroid
hyalosis, synchysis scintillans, vitreous hemorrhage, and uveitis),
posterior vitreous detachment, persistence and hyperplasia of the primary
vitreous or remnant of the hyaloid artery, retinal detachment, or presence
of a foreign body or a mass.
Figure 2.37. Posterior lenticonus. This is a developmental anomaly of the
lens with localized cone-shaped protrusion of the axial portion of the
anterior or posterior surfaces. The lens may have an isolated protrusion of
the thinned capsule lined by a single layer of epithelium. A: The posterior
capsule may appear irregular (arrow) or wrinkled. B: A remnant of the
hyaloid vessel is noted as a linear hyperechoic line (arrow) extending from
the posterior surface of the lens. C: The hyaloid canal (arrow) is depicted
as the central canal. D: Persistent vessels (arrow) may be found extending
from the posterior surface of the lens to the optic disc within the canal.
128
C
D
The globe shape may be altered by developmental anomalies, trauma,
glaucoma, an internal mass, or by pressure from an extraocular mass
(Figures 2.41 and 2.42). Microphthalmos (reduction in eye volume) may
be caused by developmental defects or may be acquired (phthisis bulbi)
secondary to chronic wasting diseases (uveitis or end-stage glaucoma) or
trauma. Buphthalmos (an enlarged globe) instead may be associated with
coloboma (an absence or defect of ocular tissue), a mass, or chronic
glaucoma.
Echogenic foci or debris within the vitreous can have several causes. They
appear as dotlike reflectors within the normally anechoic vitreous body
(Figure 2.43). Membranes may be imaged and appear as hyperechoic lines
within the vitreous. These reflectors are more common in eyes that have
sustained trauma or disease and are often pronounced in myopic or senile
vitreous.
129
Figure 2.38. Posterior rupture of the lens. A: Schematic drawing of a
rupture of posterior lens capsule (arrow). B-D: Examples of irregular
posterior lens capsules (arrows)
Degenerative changes are common and become more common as one
ages. They include asteroid hyalosis, synchysis scintillans, vitreal
degeneration, and posterior vitreal detachment. Asteroid hyalosis is caused
by calcium containing lipids suspended in the vitreous framework. These
small foci of 0.03- to 0.l-mm calcium-lipid complexes are discrete
pinpoint reflectors. A few may be present or a large number may be
dispersed throughout the vitreous (Figure 2.44). In synchysis scintillans.
the cholesterol crystals are not suspended. They sink to the bottom of the
Vitreal degeneration is often identified in dogs with cataracts. In one
study, vitreal degeneration was seen in 55%, 89%, and 100% of dogs with
130
immature, mature, and hypermature cataracts, respectively (Dietrich et al.
1995).
A detached vitreous may appear as a linear or curvilinear convex echo in
the posterior aspect of the vitreous cavity. High gain may be useful to
assist in imaging this subtle change. The detached vitreous body is
characterized by multicurved lines with varying reflectivity. Anechoic
       a  a 
(Figure 2.45).
Figure 2.39. Anterior rupture of the lens in a cat. A: Photograph of the
affected eye. B: Granulation tissue has formed (arrow). When the lens of a
cat is damaged, the incidence of malignant transformation increases.
Figure 2.40. Anterior luxation of the lens. Note that the lens is not longer
in the center of the ciliary body and posterior to the iris. A: Multiple
membranes in the vitreous represent retinal detachments and possible
fibrin tags (arrow). B: Echogenic material is present in the anterior
chamber secondary to a uveitis because of the luxated lens (arrows). Both
o x sio as  iq o n  s  s
by loss of nutrients. C: Another case of anterior lens luxation. The lens
(L) is clearly displaced within the anterior chamber, anteriorly to the
ciliary bodies (arrowhead). The two hyperechoic curved lines (arrow)
represent the cornea. Image C courtesy of D. Penninck.
131
Echoes within the vitreous may be caused by inflammation, infection, or
hemorrhage. Hemorrhage into the vitreous may produce a multitude of
echoes within the anechoic vitreous cavity, varies in appearance, and often
depends on the duration, severity, and the location of the bleed. Acute
hemorrhage may not be evident for several days or until a clot forms.
Hemorrhage may be seen as diffuse pointlike multiple echoes. The
posterior hyaloid artery may bleed into the vitreous especially in young
animals. Erythrocytes often precipitate onto a preexisting vitreous strand.
acquired membrane, or the posterior hyaloid membrane, and this may lead
to an increase in densification of the membranes and an increase in the
acoustic reflectivity (Figure 2.46). Fibrous strands may develop secondary
to clot formation. These strands may cause tractional retinal detachment
when they contract. The vitreal membranes are typically lower in intensity
when compared with detached retinal membranes. Blood within the
vitreous framework typically is absorbed more slowly (Zeiss and
Dubielzig 2004). Bleeding into the vitreous may present as a mass that
mimics a tumor. Similar sonographic changes are present in inflammatory
and hemorrhagic vitreous changes (Figure 2.47).
Figure 2.41. Changes in globe shape. A: A mass (undifferentiated
mesenchymal tumor) posterior to the globe displaces the vessels and
indents the posterior surface of the globe. B: Limbal mass (melanoma)
 e     o     
distorted by the mass. MED, medial. C: Mass medial to the globe. The
mass, which is a lacrimal adenocarcinoma, distorts the normal round
posterior to the globe indents and distorts the vitreous cavity and the
contour of the globe.
132
Figure 2.42. Eye trauma. A and B: Corresponding computed tomographic
(A) and sonographic (B) images of a dog with marked disruption of the
d pue  leq jo e woy eun noedun Aq pasneo (moe) aqo
Rupture of the globe secondary to a kick to the eye. The globe has been
lacerated and ruptured as supported by its irregular contour. Note the
echogenic hemorrhagic contents with fibrin tags floating in the vitreous
body.
133
Figure 2.43. Vitreal foci and membranes. A and B: Within the vitreous
are several faint echogenic foci and membranes. C and D: The posterior
margin of the retracted vitreal body is seen along the inner part of the
orbital wall (arrows). Small, pinpoint, hyperechoic foci are in the vitreous
body in D, consistent with asteroid hyalosis. When present, the
membranes may be confused with retinal detachment.
134
Endophthalmitis, which is an inflammatory process involving the internal
structures of the eye, may appear identical to diffuse vitreal hemorrhage.
        
movement within the globe after the eye moves. It has a tendency to
organize faster than hemorrhage and often produces vitreal membranes.
The echoes may be located within the vitreous or have echoes between the
detached retina and the choroid (chorioretinitis) (Figures 2.48 and 2.49)
Persistent and hyperplastic primary vitreous is a congenital condition
(Bayon et al. 200l; Gemensky-Metzler and Wilkie 2004; Grahn et al.
2004). The primary vitreous (hyaloid artery and posterior tunica vasculosa
lentis) incompletely regresses after birth. Severe forms  include
microphthalmia, cataract formation, and a connective-tissue strand
(retrolenticular fibrovascular tissue) between the posterior surface of lens
      o go  i 
135
with a thin echogenic stalk emerging from the lens and coursing to the
optic disc may be seen. The axial length of the globe may be shortened
The strand between the surface of the lens and the area of the optic nerve
head may contain patent hyaloid vessels (Figure 2.50)
Figure 2.44. Degenerative changes in the vitreous. A: Pinpoint
hyperechoic foci with faint small comet tails caused by asteroid hyalosis.
B: Anterior luxated lens (arrows) and suspected hemorrhage in the
vitreous body. An anechoic area is around the periphery of the vitreous,
likely because of resorption. C: Retraction of the vitreal body, a
supermature cataract, and asteroid hyalosis. D: Faint membranes within
the vitreous, most consistent with fibrin tags.
Figure 2.45. Vitreal retraction. A-C: There is a progressive liquefaction
and separation of the posterior vitreous from the retinal membrane. A
faint, hyperechoic, curvilinear area around the periphery of the vitreal
136
 g   t a  g n i a 
and the retina is often anechoic (arrows). LT, left.
Figure 2.46. Post-traumatic hemorrhage. The vitreous contains mobile
low-level echoes. The membranes are fibrin tags. Retinal detachment is
also present but not clearly seen on this plane.
137
Figure 2.47. Ciliary body tumor. The large echogenic mass originating
from the temporal side of the ciliary body has caused retinal detachment
and hemorrhage in the vitreous. It is difficult to separate the mass from the
hemorrhage on the image. Blood flow may be useful in determining the
extentofinvolvement.
138
Figure 2.48. Chorioretinitis. A: Normal retina for comparison. LT, left
eye. B: Thickening and mild irregularity of the surface of the retina is
noted (arrow). This is consistent with a chorioretinitis in this patient. RT,
righteye.
139
B
Figure 2.49. Endophthalmitis. Note the numerous membranes and cellular
contents in the vitreous. This appearance can be similar to hemorrhage.
The membranes usually move in random directions and not usually as
hyperechoic as the retina detached membrane. Retinal detachments may
occur in conjunction with this process.
140
A retinal detachment is a commonly encountered abnormality that can be
sonographically diagnosed. The retina normally adheres firmly to the optic
nerve head posteriorly and to the ora serrata anteriorly. With a retinal
detachment, the retinal layers will remain attached at these two points but
may be separated from the adjacent choroid by fluid anywhere between
them. The detachment may occur focally or along the entire surface
between these two points. The different types of retinal detachments
include the rhegmatogenous (tear), the mechanical (traction), the serous or
inflammatory infiltrate located between the choroid and the retina. A
 , e e n   s   
sign (Figure 2.51). In a sagittal plane, the detachment looks like an
isosceles triangle that is open toward the anterior segment. The retina in
an acute detachment is usually thin and highly echogenic. With time, the
membrane becomes thicker, more fixed, and less mobile, and the
membrane moves to the center of the vitreous to form a funnel-shaped
configuration.
141
Figure 2.50. Retinal detachments. A: Classic example of the retinal
membranes coursing from their attachment at the optic disc. B: Complete
detached retinal membranes from the optic disc to the orra serrata. C: Flat
retinal detachment. D: Retinal detachment with numerous other
membranes making the diagnosis more challenging. E: Posterior to the
 detached retinal membranes, there is echogenic material representing pus
from a Prototheca infection. F: Chronic complete retinal detachment.
posterior surface of the lens. Echogenic contents are posterior to the
retinal membrane because of blastomycosis.
A vitreal membrane and a detached taunt retina have a similar appearance.
Attachment to the optic disc must be demonstrated. The retinal membrane
is typically thicker and more echogenic. Incomplete retinal detachment
may also occur in various locations (Figure 2.52). Hypermature cataracts
tearing caused by the shrinking lens. Trauma, inflammation, tumors, or
systemic hypertension may also cause a detachment. Identification of a
          
vitreous complicated  by  strands  and floating  opacities.   Vitreal
degeneration and detachment occur as the hyaloid body shrinks. A
potential space is produced between the vitreous and the retina, which is
considered an incidental degenerative change in older patients. Adhesions
142
may form between the vitreal body and the retina and lead to focal retinal
detachments. The adhesions and membranes may be confused with a
retinal membrane. Blood flow within the membrane is consistent with a
        
between the retina and the choroid. Echogenic material is identified in the
subretinal area, and the retina is separated from the choroid, leading to this
diagnosis.
Figure 2.51. Retinal detachment, different planes (parallel lines). A:
Longitudinal sonogram of a detached retina. B-D: Transverse images
showing the detached retina as an isosceles triangle, depending on where
the slice was taken through the membrane (see corresponding lines from
         
parachute.
D
143
Intraocular Foreign Bodies
The appearance of intraocular foreign bodies varies depending on the type
and shape of foreign material present and their location. Metal has a
  s       
reflector. Wooden foreign material might be associated with shadowing
(Figure 2.53). The sound impedance within the foreign body, the foreign
body's and surface characteristics, and its direction relative to the incident
jo ad a up! u! pue Apoq uaiaoy au sue ui diu lm u
material present. A hypoechoic tract around the foreign body may assist in
locating a foreign body.
 q      n  ss hu 
include specular reflection from the lens and the shadowing bone forming
the orbit.
Figure 2.52. Complicated retinal detachments. A: Chorioretinitis with
secondary retinal detachments caused by blastomycosis. B: Note the very
echogenic contents posterior to the retinal membrane of the same dog. The
cellular contents are mobile and move with gravity. C: Retinal detachment
secondary to chorioretinitis and neuritis from an unknown organism. Note
the echogenic material posterior to the thickened retinal membrane. D:
Note also that the optic nerve is thickened (arrowheads) (same dog as in
C). E: Traumatic lens luxation with hemorrhage and retinal detachment
that is difficult to distinguish from the fibrin membranes. F: Large ciliary
body tumor. A flat retinal detachment (arrow) is secondary to tearing of
the retina by the mass. Note the displacement of the lens by the mass.
144
Figure 2.53. Foreign bodies. A and B: Wooden stick. A hyperechoic line
(arrow) associated with shadowing is present between the margins of the
zygomatic bone. The globe is to the left of the image. The wooden foreign
body is between the cursors in B. C and D: Pellet-gun metallic foreign
bodies (BBs) with associated comet-tail artifact (arrowheads). The BB
appears within the globe in D. RT, right eye. E and F: Short linear
145
foreign object. Soft-tissue swelling is adjacent and ventral to the globe. A
mixed echogenic and anechoic area is around the foreign object,
consistent with purulent material in the fistular tract around.
Figure 2.54. Ciliary body tumors. A-D: Different size, extension, and
echogenicity of ciliary body masses. L, lens. Final diagnosis: melanoma
(A), limbal melanoma (B), ciliary body carcinoma (C), and melanoma
(D).
146
Intraocular Neoplasia
Ocular tumors are usually echogenic. Ultrasound may be used to locate
the lesion and assess the degree of involvement. Masses (unlike blood
clots) are vascularized, often have a broad base, and the attachment to the
wall or the tissue of origin can be identified. Extraocular masses may have
intraocular extensions. Ocular neoplasia may be primary, multicentric, or
metastatic. Tumors of the melanocytic origin are the most common
primary intraocular neoplasms in cats and dogs. Diffuse iridal melanomas
(cats), epibulbar melanocytoma anterior uveal melanocytoma, choroidal
melanocytoma, malignant ocular melanoma, trauma-associated sarcoma
(cats), i
 iridociliary    epithelial
tumor(Dubielzig
花
al.1989),
medulloepithelioma,and plasmacytoma have been reported as primary
ocular  neoplasms.  Metastatic  tumors  reported  include lymphoma.
squamous  cell  carcinoma, adenocarcinoma
1(oftenmammaryor
147
pulmonary), oral melanoma, and hemangiosarcoma (Dubielzig 2002).
Tumoral masses may be difficult to distinguish from blood clots or a
granuloma (Figure 2.54). Lymphoma may have very echogenic thickening
of the iris and ciliary body, echoes in the anterior and posterior chambers,
and thickening of the choroid, with possible retinal detachment.
Figure 2.55. Periocular tumors and secondary displacement of the globe
The corresponding computed tomographic image is displayed at the top of
each case. A: Undifferentiated mesenchymal tumor (arrows) located
posterior to the globe and displacing it anteriorly. B: Nasal
adenocarcinoma with extensive lysis of the bony orbit and extension into
(arrows). C: Osteosarcoma involving the skull, with secondary ocular
involvement. Note the hyperechoic and shadowing structure (arrows)
displacing the globe.E, ocular globe.
B
Retrobulbar Disease
The bone surrounding the ocular cone limits the sonographic evaluation of
orbital lesions. Abnormalities include blunting of the posterior aspect of
the globe; diffuse, increased echogenicity of the retrobulbar space, with
failure to delineate the optic nerve; a discrete, hypoechoic mass in the
retrobulbar space; and a discrete, highly echogenic mass deforming the
posterior aspect of the globe (Morgan 1989; Attali-Soussay et al. 2001).
148
Retrobulbar malignancies present as hyperechoic or hypoechoic changes
with various degrees of deformity of the posterior aspect of the globe
(Figure 2.55). The appearance of inflammatory changes varies from a
diffuse hyperechoic to a discrete hypoechoic mass with possible blunting
of the posterior aspect of the globe. Diffuse, non-deforming lesions often
are most compatible with retrobulbar cellulitis, but the margins may be
sharp and discrete or diffuse and ill-defined.
Tumors involving the tissues around the eye include nasal tumors, primary
benign or malignant bone tumors, oral melanomas, squamous cell
carcinomas, hemangiosarcomas. These tumors may invade the orbital
space. The adjacent bone may be destroyed and have an irregular
appearance.
lacrimal gland and the zygomatic gland (Giudice et al. 2005). Either
inflammation or neoplasia may affect the size, shape, and echogenicity of
glands can produce a mass effect that displaces the globe (Figures
2.56-2.61).
   s      do 
posterior surface of the globe into the orbital cone. Abnormalities of the
nerve include neuritis (Figure 2.62) with diffuse enlargement or neoplasia
with either focal or diffuse enlargement (Figure 2.63). Tumors of the optic
nerve include meningioma, neurofibroma, astrocytoma, and lymphoma.
zygomatic gland. B and C: Enlarged zygomatic salivary gland from
inflammation.
149
Figure 2.57. Chronic myositis. A and B: The masseter muscle (arrows) is
hyperechoic and has disrupted fibers. The muscle size is reduced. This is
caused by fibrosis secondary to chronic myositis.
Figure 2.58. Temporalis myositis. A: The temporalis muscle (arrows) is
markedly thickened secondary to acute myositis. B: Normal temporalis
muscle(arrows) for comparison.
150
Figure 2.59. Lacrimal gland adenocarcinoma. A: Echogenic soft-tissue
infiltrate is present on the medial aspect of the left globe (arrows). B:
Corresponding transverse computed tomographic image showing the
lateral displacement of the globe by the infiltrate.
Figure 2.60. Lacrimal gland adenoma. A homogeneous echogenic mass
(M) is lateral to and displacing the globe.
151
Eye
Figure 2.61. Maxillary cyst. A: The cyst is filled with mobile echogenic
contents, creating pressure necrosis on the orbit, and displaces the globe.
Ultrasound was used to aspirate the fluid contents. B: Corresponding
transverse computed tomographic image of the large lesion.
Figure 2.62. Optic neuritis. An indentation (arrows) into the globe at the
 optic disc is seen in both the ultrasound (A) and the magnetic resonance
152
(B) images. The optic nerve (arrowheads) is thickened. Image courtesy of
D. Penninck.
Figure 2.63. Optic nerve meningioma. Focal thickening of the optic nerve
is seen in the ultrasound image (arrows) (A), as well as on the specimen
(arrow) (B).
Figure 2.64. Polymyositis of the extraocular muscles. A: Longitudinal
image of thickened extraocular muscles within the orbital cone. B:
Transverse to oblique view of the same area. C: Corresponding transverse
computed tomographic image. The arrows point to the thickened muscles.
153
Extraocular muscles include the four rectus muscles (dorsal, medial,
ventral, and lateral), retractor bulbi muscle, and dorsal and ventral oblique
and form a cone whose apex is at the posterior orbital bony wall. The
muscles run around the optic nerve and are hypoechoic, being surrounded
by  hyperechoic fat.  Diseases affecting these  muscles  include  an
immune-mediated myositis (Allgoewer et al. 2000) that results in enlarged
and hypoechoic muscles in the acute phase. Muscular fibrosis is the
outcome in chronic cases. Neoplasia is possible but less common (Figure
2.64).
154
INTERVENTIONAL
PROCEDURES
Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration of masses in the periorbital and
retro-orbital region can be performed. This technique enables visualization
of the mass and the needle placement into the lesion. The angle in which
the needle is placed relative to the direction of the transducer is vital in
order to position the tip of the needle accurately. Aspiration in the
retro-orbital region with ultrasound guidance is helpful in avoiding vital
structures such as the optic nerve, the globe, and the vessels. It is also
helpful in placing the needle within the mass or infiltrate to acquire
appropriate cells for cytology, or to drain the abscess cavity (Figure 2.65)
Figure 2.65. Ultrasound-guided freehand aspirate of a retro-orbital mass.
The needle attached to a syringe is placed into the retrobulbar lesion.
REFERENCES
155
Allgoewer I, Blair M, Basher T, Davidson M, et al. (2000) Extraocular
muscle myositis and restrictive strabismus in 10 dogs. Vet Ophthalmol
3:21-26.
Attali-Soussay K, Jegou J, Clerc B (2001) Retrobulbar tumors in dogs and
cats: 25 cases. Vet Ophthalmol 4:19-27
Bayon A, Tovar MC, Fernandez del Palacio MJ, Agut A (2001) Ocular
Vet Ophthalmol 4:35-40.
    (      
Vet Ophthalmol 2: 169-172.
Boroffka SA, Voorhour G, Verbruggen AM, Teske E (2006) Intraobserver
and interobserver repeatability of ocular biometric measurements obtained
by means of B-mode ultrasonography in dogs. Am J Vet Res
67:1743-1749.
Cottrill N, Banks WJ, Pechman RD (1989) Ultrasonographic and
biometric evaluation of the eye and orbit of dogs. Am J Vet Res
50:898-903.
Deehr AJ, Dubielzig RR (1998) A histopathological study of iridociliary
Dietrich U, Kostlin R, Tassani M (1995) Ultrasonographic examination of
the eyes of dogs with cataracts [Abstract]. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 36:436.
Dubielzig RR (2002) Tumors of the eye. In: Meuten D, ed. Tumors in
Domestic Animals, 4th edition. Ames, IA: Blackwell, pp 739-754.
Dubielzig RR, Steinberg H, Garvin H, Deehr AJ, Fischer B (1998)
[ridociliary epithelial tumors in 100 dogs and 17 cats: A morphological
study. Vet Ophthalmol 1:223-231.
Dziezyc J, Hager DA (1988) Ocular ultrasonography in veterinary
medicine. Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 3:1-9.
Gelatt K, MacKay E (2005) Prevalence of primary breed-related cataracts
in the dog in North America. Vet Ophthalmol 8: 101-1 11.
156
Gemensky-Metzler A, Wilkie DA (2004) Surgical management and
histologic and immunohistochemical features of a cataract and retrolental
plaque secondary to persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa lentis/
persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous (PHTVL/PHPV) in a bloodhound
puppy. Vet Ophthalmol 7:369-375.
Giudice C, Marco R, Mirko R, Luca M, Giorgio C (2005) Zygomatic
gland adenoma in a dog: Histochemical and immunohistochemical
evaluation. Vet Ophthalmol 8: 13-16.
Grahn BH, Storey ES, McMillan C (2004) Inherited retinal dysplasia and
persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous in Miniature Schnauzer dogs. Vet
Ophthalmol 7:151-158.
Hager DA, Dziezyc J, Millchamp NJ (1987) Two-dimensional real-time
Radio1 28:60-65.
Morgan RV (1989) Ultrasonography of retrobulbar diseases of the dog
and cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 25:393-399.
Sapienza JS, Simo FJ, Prades-Sapienza A (2000) Golden retriever uveitis:
75 cases (1994-1999). Vet Ophthalmol 3:214-246.
Schiffer SP, Rantanen NW, Leary GA, Bryan GM (1982) Biometric study
Of the canine eye, using A-mode ultrasonography. Am J Vet Res
43:826-830.
Spiess BM, Bolliger JO, Guscetti F, Haessig M, Lackner PA, Ruehli MB
(1998) Multiple ciliary body cysts and secondary glaucoma in the Great
Dane: A report of nine cases. Vet Ophthalmol 1:41-45.
Van der Woerdt A (2000) Lens-induced uveitis. Vet Ophthalmol
3:227-234.
Williams DL (2004) Lens morphometry determined by B-mode
ultrasonography of the normaland cataractous canine lens. Vet
Ophthalmol 7:91-95.
Zeiss CJ, Dubielzig RR (2004) A morphologic study of intravitreal
membranes associated with intraocular hemorrhage in the dog. Vet
Ophthalmol 7:239-243.
157
CHAPTER THREE
NECK
Allison Zwingenberger and Erik Wisner
SCANNING TECHNIQUE
Because the ventral cervical region is anatomically complex, ultrasound is
readily characterized on survey or contrast radiographs. In addition to
defining gross anatomy of the neck, high-resolution ultrasound can also be
used to examine very small structures such as the thyroid and parathyroid
eauauno pue siaonpsun seau! (zhN-sl m -a) Aouanba-ua!H sue
transducers provide the best images of small structures and those with
complex internal architecture. Tissue harmonic imaging is also available
on some newer machines, which can further improve image resolution by
decreasing artifacts.
For ultrasonography of most structures, the animal is positioned in dorsal
recumbency with the area of interest clipped (Figure 3.1 A). Because many
of the organs in the neck are symmetrically paired, it is useful to clip both
sides in order to compare them. Positioning the patient so that the neck is
as straight as possible is important to locate anatomical landmarks reliably
and to compare one side of the neck accurately with the other. For
imaging the tympanic bullae, positioning the patient in sternal recumbency
(Figure 3.1B) or seated with the head held straight and extended is
preferred. Any structure can be investigated while the animal is in lateral
recumbency (Figure 3.1C) according to operator preference or for
158
dyspneic animals, with the caveat that anatomy may appear somewhat
distorted and comparisons to the contralateral neck will be impaired.
Although the ultrasound beam cannot penetrate air within hollow
structures such as the tympanic bullae, trachea, and larynx, the interface
between air and adjacent soft tissues can still be evaluated for regularity of
contours and physiological motion as exemplified by examination of the
vocal folds.
[n addition to two-dimensional B-mode imaging, color flow Doppler,
power Doppler, and pulsed-wave Doppler imaging can be used to evaluate
vascularity of organs, vessels, and tissues. Flow characteristics of large
vessels such as the common carotid artery and jugular vein can be
determined with color and pulsed-wave Doppler.
NORMALSONOGRAPHIC
ANATOMY
There are a few anatomical landmarks that are useful for locating cervical
structures of clinical interest. The ventral margin of the mandible appears
as a smooth, hyperechoic interface surrounded by skeletal muscle.
Structures surrounding it include the parotid and mandibular salivary
glands, the external ear canal, and the tympanic bulla caudally. The
parotid salivary gland is caudal to the external ear canal, and the tympanic
bulla is medial to the canal.
The mandibular salivary gland is a marker for the origin of the external
jugular vein, the bifurcation of the common carotid artery, and the medial
retropharyngeal lymph node.
The larynx is located on the ventral midline, and the paired hyperechoic
arytenoid cartilages are landmarks for the vocal folds. Structures located
near the larynx from cranial to caudal include the parotid salivary gland.
mandibular salivary gland, medial retropharyngeal lymph node.
mandibular lymph nodes, maxillary and linguofacial veins, and internal
and external carotid arteries.
159
The trachea is on ventral midline and commonly used as a fixed midline
anatomical landmark when the thyroid and parathyroid glands are imaged
and is used to define the caudal aspect of the larynx.
The jugular vein and common carotid artery are easily located and can
serve as landmarks for identifying the thyroid and parathyroid glands.
Bullae
The external ear canal and tympanic bulla are best imaged with a
curvilinear transducer of medium frequency (5-8 MHz) with a small
footprint. The contact area for imaging these structures is small, and a
higher-frequency linear transducer is often too large to position evenly on
the skin. In addition, the bone of the tympanic bulla absorbs the ultrasound
beam, and higher frequencies may not penetrate the bullae wall adequately
to generate an image of the lumen.
Figure 3.1. Images of positioning for the ultrasound probe on the neck of
a dog. A: Dorsal recumbency is convenient for imaging most of the
structures of the neck. It enables comparison of bilaterally symmetrical
structures, and it is easy to maintain true sagittal and transverse
orientation. B: Sternal positioning for ultrasonography of the tympanic
bulla. C: Lateral recumbency is an alternate position for investigating the
structures of the neck. D: Schematic representation of probe positioning
structures evaluated with ultrasound. CC, cricoid cartilage; CCA, common
carotid artery; E, esophagus; EMA, external maxillary artery; EMV,
external maxillary vein; IMA, internal maxillary artery; IMV, internal
maxillary vein; JV, jugular vein; PT, parathyroid gland; RLN,
retropharyngeal lymph node; T, thyroid gland; TC, thyroid cartilage; and
TR,trachea.
160
eff
EMA
EMV
RLN
IMA
The external ear canal and bulla are imaged from both a lateral approach
and a ventral approach (Figure 3.1B and C) with the patient in sternal,
seated, or lateral recumbency (Dickie et al. 2003). From a lateral position
with the transducer oriented in a dorsal plane, the cross section of the
vertical external ear canal is visible as a curvilinear hyperechoic line filled
with air producing reverberation artifact. In a transverse plane with respect
ear canal lies just caudal to the zygomatic arch, with the masseter muscle
lateral to the arch and the sternocephalicus muscle caudal to it. The
horizontal portion of the ear canal is imaged from a ventral position either
in longitudinal or in transverse orientation (Figure 3.2). From the
longitudinal position, the transducer can be rotated slightly to view the
tympanic bulla and external ear canal in the same image.
Figure 3.2. Normal external ear canal and tympanic bulla of a dog. A and
B: Ultrasonographic and schematic images obtained from the ventral
approach to the external ear canal and tympanic bulla. Cranial is to the left
of the images. A: Beginning with the transducer positioned just caudal to
the zygomatic arch, slide the transducer ventrally and then rotate to a
vertical (sagittal with respect to the head) orientation. The external ear
canal (EC) is visible as a curved, bright, soft-tissue-air interface with
reverberation and acoustic shadowing in the far field. The parotid salivary
gland (P) is a triangular, hyperechoic structure caudal and superficial to
161
tympanic bulla (TB) is visible as a semicircular hyperechoic line. The far
wall is not visible because of acoustic shadowing and reverberation. The
mandible is superficial cranially (N) and is seen as acoustic shadowing.
The digastricus muscle (D), mandibular salivary gland (M), and parotid
salivary gland (P) are in the near field. The maxillary artery (arrowhead) is
caudal to the bulla. C: Ultrasonographic and schematic images of the
[p) yoe  e o p um o e ui eq od
orientation with respect to the head), the tympanic bulla (TB) is located
more superficially. The parotid salivary gland (P) is hypoechoic and
located superficially and caudally to the bulla.
The middle ear is imaged from the lateral and ventral positions. The
lateral position is just ventral to the external ear canal, with the transducer
positioned between the zygomatic arch and the wing of the atlas and
directed medially in a dorsal plane. In this window, the parotid salivary
gland is hypoechoic to the surrounding tissue and superficial to the
tympanic bulla. The bulla itself is curvilinear, with internal gas associated
with acoustic shadowing. The maxillary artery can be identified with
162
Doppler ultrasound caudally and laterally to the tympanic bulla at the
junction of the external ear canal and the bulla.
From the ventral approach, the mandibular salivary gland is visible in the
near field, with the digastricus muscle imposed between it and the
tympanic bulla (Figure 3.2). Mandibular lymph nodes may appear as
hypoechoic structures at the caudal aspect of the bulla
The tympanic bulla is composed of thin bone and is filled with air. The
normal bulla wall appears as an echogenic curved line, and the air within
 a m d ors a p  u so !
margin. The bone is thin enough that the ultrasound beam penetrates it,
and therefore within the bulla cavity the presence of soft tissue or fluid
caused by a middle-ear disorder can be identified.
Salivary Glands
The mandibular salivary gland is easily visible caudal to the ramus of the
mandible, and between the linguofacial and maxillary veins as they join to
form the jugular vein (Figure 3.3). A portion of the sublingual salivary
gland shares the capsule of the rostral portion of the mandibular salivary
gland, but may not be distinguished as a separate entity. The parotid
salivary gland is oriented vertically lateral to the external ear canal and
dorsally and superficially to the mandibular salivary gland (Figure 3.2A)
In the parasagittal imaging plane, the mandibular salivary gland is caudal
tothe more hypoechoic digastricus muscle, with the medial
retropharyngeal lymph node medial to it (Figure 3.4A). To image the
mandibular salivary gland in a sagittal orientation, the transducer can be
rotated slightly from the parasagittal plane relative to the head and neck. It
is well defined and triangular or round, with a hyperechoic capsule and
linear echogenic streaks within finely textured hypoechoic parenchyma
(Figure 3.3)
image taken with the transducer rotated slightly medially. Cranial is to the
s  s       a g l
echotexture with a central linear echo. The digastricus muscle (asterisk) is
the hypoechoic band overlying the mandible (arrow), which appears as a
hyperechoic line with distal acoustic shadowing.
163
Figure 3.4. Images of the carotid artery and jugular vein of a normal dog.
A: Sagittal image of the internal carotid artery (IC) and external carotid
artery (EC) as they join to form the common carotid artery (CC). The
mandibular salivary gland (M) is lateral to the origin of the common
carotid artery and appears as a hypoechoic, lobular structure in the near
 a  ) u  n l  
mandibular salivary gland and the common carotid artery. The maxillary
vein (MV) is caudal to the mandibular salivary gland. The common
carotid artery has a distinct hyperechoic wall (arrowhead). B: At the
caudal edge of the mandibular salivary gland, the maxillary vein (MV)
and linguofacial vein (L) join to form the jugular vein (not shown). C:
Sagittal image of the common carotid artery (CC) in the midcervical
region. The artery has a thicker, more hyperechoic wall (arrow) compared
furrow, has a much thinner wall than the common carotid artery and is
easily compressed. E: Longitudinal image of the jugular vein by using
compressing the vessel. The color signal changes from blue to red as the
blood flow passes perpendicular to the ultrasound beam. F: Pulsed-wave
Doppler imaging of the jugular vein produces a smooth, laminar,
low-velocity signal. G: Pulsed-wave Doppler of the carotid artery has
distinct pulsatile flow with higher velocity. Note the characteristic arterial
systolic peaks (arrow). The velocities are lower than actual velocities
because no angle correction can be used.
164
CC
20
Moving dorsally from the mandibular salivary gland by using a dorsal
plane, the parotid salivary gland appears as a less-distinct, heterogeneous,
and poorly marginated structure lateral or caudal to the curvilinear
external ear canal.
Vessels and Nerves
The major neck vessels that can be seen with ultrasound are the jugular
veins and their primary tributaries and the common carotid arteries and
 s s s  (lal  a ) s  
arteries and veins, are smaller and seen inconsistently. All of these
165
structures are imaged in transverse or sagittal plane. Some may be seen
          
transducer positioned lateral to midline. For the vascular structures and
thyroid glands, the sagittal plane is obtained by orienting the transducer in
a cranial to caudal direction and rotating the imaging plane 30°-45°
medially.
The external jugular vein (Figure 3.4D and E) lies superficially within the
jugular furrow. Cranially, the maxillary and linguofacial veins join to form
the external jugular vein at the caudal aspect of the mandibular salivary
gland (Figure 3.4B). The jugular vein is easily compressed, so very little
transducer pressure should be used to image it. The transducer should be
placed in the jugular furrow in a sagittal orientation and angled 45° toward
midline. The wall of the jugular vein is thin, and the lumen is anechoic.
With color Doppler or pulsed-wave Doppler ultrasound, a smooth, laminar
flow is seen (Figure 3.4F). This is sometimes difficult to demonstrate
because the Doppler signal is weakest when the vessel lies at nearly 90° to
the beam. Slight angulation of the transducer in a caudal direction, as well
   l e      s
The common carotid artery is located in close association and parallel to
the trachea. The artery has a thick, hyperechoic wall and anechoic lumen
(Figure 3.4A and C), with a pulsatile Doppler waveform (Figure 3.4G).
Each artery is located at the dorsolateral margin of the trachea, and the
sternohyoid and sternothyroid muscles are located ventromedially to them.
The sternocephalicus muscle lies between the common carotid artery and
the more superficial jugular vein. The common carotid artery branches
into the internal and external carotid arteries medial to the mandibular
salivary gland. The external carotid artery continues in a straight line from
the common carotid artery, whereas the internal carotid artery is slightly
 o       go    a 
internal carotid artery, can be seen occasionally.
Using a high-frequency transducer (8-12 MHz), the vagosympathetic
trunk is near the internal jugular vein and dorsal to the common carotid
artery within the carotid sheath. In transverse orientation, the carotid
sheath appears hyperechoic and encompasses the common carotid artery,
vagosympathetic trunk, and internal jugular vein. The vagosympathetic
166
can be seen from the laryngeal region to the thoracic inlet, and no visible
vascular structures are within it. The vagosympathetic trunk is
approximately 1.2 ± 0.4 mm in diameter, which varies with the weight of
the animal (Reese et al. 2001).
Lymph Nodes
Mandibular lymph nodes are small, oval or kidney-shaped structures
located medially and caudally to the mandibular salivary glands and
clustered around the jugular vein. These nodes are usually mildly
hypoechoic to surrounding fat, although they can be isoechoic. There are
retropharyngeal lymph nodes are dorsal to the pharynx and medial to the
mandibular salivary gland (Figure 3.3). The medial retropharyngeal lymph
node is larger than most other cervical lymph nodes and can be more than
0.5 cm in diameter and 2-4 cm long. The cranial portion of these nodes is
occasionally appear as two to three closely associated nodes. Mandibular,
retropharyngeal, and cranial cervical lymph nodes can be seen in normal
dogs, depending on the size of the lymph nodes and the transducer
frequency. The nodes are usually well defined, oval, and less than 0.5 cm
in diameter. The superficial cervical lymph nodes, located in the
lateroventral aspect of the caudal neck, are often paired and significantly
larger than those in the cranial cervical region. These nodes can be found
superficially in the prescapular region and slightly dorsal to the jugular
furrow.
Tongue
The tongue is attached to the paired mylohyoid and geniohyoid muscles
that are attached to the ramus of the mandible and the hyoid apparatus.
The mylohyoid originates from the medial side of the mandible, and the
geniohyoid from the ramus of the mandible. Both muscles attach to the
basihyoid bone caudally. The tongue is hyperechoic to the supporting
musculature (Figure 3.5)
167
Larynx
Just caudal to the tongue, the thyroid and cricoid cartilages have
echogenic surfaces and produce acoustic shadowing in the far field. In
sagittal orientation, the epiglottis is a short echogenic line parallel to the
transducer surface and dorsal to the cranial portion of the thyroid cartilage.
Its motion during swallowing assists its identification.
lines oriented parallel to the transducer and within the thyroid cartilage
near the lateral walls (Figure 3.6). Between the arytenoid cartilages and
the true vocal folds are hypoechoic bands medial to the wall of the thyroid
cartilage. These represent the insertion of the aryepiglottic fold from the
epiglottis on the ventral portion of the cuneiform process of the arytenoid
cartilage and are called the false vocal folds
Figure 3.5. Transverse and parasagittal images of the canine tongue. A:
The muscle of the tongue is hyperechoic to the more ventral geniohyoid
and mylohyoid muscles. In parasagittal orientation, the fibers have a
diagonal pattern. B: In transverse orientation, the round hypoechoic
muscles have a butterfly shape.
A
Figure 3.6. Normal larynx in a dog. A: Transverse image of the larynx
taken through the thyroid cartilage at expiration. Ventral is at the top of
the image, and the right side is on the left. The thyroid cartilage is visible
as a hyperechoic V-shaped line (T). The rima glottis is the air-filled space
(asterisk) between the hyperechoic vocal ligaments (>). Dorsal to the
vocal ligaments, the cuneiform processes of the arytenoid cartilages
appear as hyperechoic dots (arrows). The vocal muscles (M) are
          
cartilage on either side. B: Transverse image of the canine larynx taken
168
during inspiration. The cuneiform processes move in abduction in
Orienting the transducer transversely ventral to the thyroid cartilage shows
the moving vocal folds. The transducer is then moved caudally to the
junction of the thyroid and cricoid cartilages and directed cranially toward
the vocal folds, which are attached to the vocal process of the arytenoid
cartilage dorsally and the thyroid cartilage ventrally. The vocal folds
consist of the vocal ligaments located craniomedially, and the vocal
muscle continues laterally and caudally from it to join with the larynx.
[n a ui sa a ia se e sl  
larynx that contact each other in the ventral portion of the thyroid
cartilage. The vocal processes of the arytenoid cartilage are hyperechoic
lines that join with the vocal ligaments dorsally. The air-filled space
between the vocal folds is the rima glottis. Mineralization of the laryngeal
cartilages may hinder viewing of the vocal folds through the thyroid
cartilages.
Normal motion of the vocal folds is abduction during inspiration and
adduction during expiration. The cuneiform and vocal processes of the
arytenoid cartilages also move in this manner. The motion may be more
symmetry, and overall motion is minimal in normal dogs.
Thyroid and Parathyroid Glands
The left and right thyroid lobes lie between the common carotid artery and
the trachea and are often positioned at slightly different levels
craniocaudally. To locate the thyroids, place the transducer in a transverse
plane centered on the trachea just caudal to the larynx and move it
caudally until triangular structures are seen between the trachea and
carotid (Figure 3.7). Each thyroid may also be located separately by
169
sliding the probe lateral to the trachea and by following the correspondent
common carotid artery on cross section, which serves as an important
landmark. Once a thyroid is located, rotate the transducer 90° to a sagittal
plane, keeping the thyroid in the middle of the screen. This motion can be
challenging because the thyroid gland is thin. The transducer may need to
ed qes isaq aun ea on mony ennf au wog ia pe ag
(Figure 3.8A)
The thyroid is fusiform or ellipsoid in sagittal section, and round, oval, or
triangular in transverse section. Thyroid glands in dogs are isoechoic to
surrounding tissue, though a small percentage can be hypoechoic or
hyperechoic. The glands are uniformly echogenic, though occasionally
     n     
 sn   s s i s  ss
the thyroid tissue, which can be confirmed with Doppler ultrasound. Both
canine and feline thyroids can be imaged by using a 10- to 13-MHz
transducer for best resolution. Cats may also occasionally have ectopic
Thyroid volume can be estimated by measuring the length, width, and
height of the gland, and using the formula m/6 (length x width × height) to
calculate volume. The thyroid gland volume is correlated with body
weight and body surface area more than with breed. There is more
intraobserver variability in measuring the length of the glands because
they taper caudally and the distal limit may be difficult to define (Table
3.1
On average, there are four parathyroid glands located in each thyroid lobe.
with two in each cranial and caudal pole. However, there is significant
normal individual variation in both parathyroid numbers and distribution.
Normal parathyroid glands are usually well margined, hypoechoic to
anechoic, and less than 2 mm in diameter and 3.3 mm long (Reusch et al.
2000; Wisner et al. 2002) (Figure 3.8). All parathyroid glands are not
always visible in normal dogs.
Trachea andEsophagus
  e  ss    s s
shadowing. However, their near walls (ventral and lateral) can be
170
examined using ultrasound. The trachea has a hyperechoic, round to oval
wall and travels in a sagittal plane. [n a longitudinal view, the tracheal
rings are visible (Figure 3.9A). In transverse view, in the midportion of
the neck, the near wall is curved and echogenic, with distal acoustic
shadowing obscuring the lumen (Figure 3.9B)
The esophagus is also sagittally oriented, but varies in position from
dorsal to the trachea caudal to the larynx, to left of the trachea at the
thoracic inlet. The lumen of the esophagus has a star shape in transverse
orientation and contains a small amount of gas and mucus. In sagittal
orientation, the muscularis layer is visible as a hypoechoic band
superficially, and gas or fluid may be seen in the lumen (Figure 3.10A). [f
imaged obliquely, the folds of the mucosal surface appear as parallel
hyperechoic bands (Figure 3.10B). The esophagus can be seen medial to
the left common carotid artery and left thyroid gland.
Figure 3.7. Normal thyroid glands in a dog. Sagittal (A and B) and
transverse (C and D) images of normal thyroid glands. A: In sagittal
 orientation, the thyroid (cursors) is fusiform to elliptical and isoechoic or
hyperechoic to the surrounding musculature (M). B: The normal cranial
parathyroid gland (PT, between the cursors) is at the cranial extremity of
the thyroid gland (Th). Image courtesy of D. Penninck. C: Right thyroid
   t o  'o    
       (   
thyroid gland in another dog. In transverse orientation, the left thyroid
  ) s    o a si (o n )
the ventral musculature (M), and also between the trachea (T) and
common carotid artery (asterisk).
171
B
Table 3.1. Measurements of normal structures in the neck
Structura
Width/Diameter(mm)
Length (mm)
Height (mm)
Volume(mm)
Vagosympathetic trunk
1.2 ± 0.4
Modialrotropharyngeal ymphnode
5
2040
Mandibular lymphnode
<5
Thyrcid,feline (single lobe)
001-90
Left
20.5 118.022.1)
3.3 [2.5 4.1}
8(66112)
Right
20.3113.7-21.9)
3.0[2.4-3.6}
80（61-99)
Cats(total volume)
124-215
Thyroid,canine
5.3(3.3-7.3)
24.5(20.4-28.5)
5.3 [3.3-7.3}
380
Akitas
63-1912
Golden retrievers
315-1580
Toy and miniature poodles
128-713
Parathyroid
2
3.3 (2.0-4.6)
Ci daaWial (194eual. [200）du 201）Taal2005）Bl
e.al. (20051.
Figure 3.8. Normal parathyroid glands in a dog. Sagittal image of a
normal thyroid. Two small, round, hypoechoic parathyroid glands
(arrows) are visible in the cranial and caudal aspects of the thyroid lobe.
172
Figure 3.9. Normal trachea in a dog. A: Sagittal plane. The tracheal rings
are visible in the sagittal plane as rectangular, hypoechoic structures
(arrows) with central hyperechoic dots, dorsal to the hyperechoic air
    s   
in the far field, which appears as equally spaced and progressively less
echogenic lines parallel to the original air interface. The hypoechoic
ventral muscles (M) of the neck are in the near field. B: Transverse
plane. The cartilage ring is visible as a curved hypoechoic band (arrows)
with a thin, superficial, hyperechoic interface. The tracheal ring-air
interface is hyperechoic (arrowhead). The tracheal lumen cannot be
evaluated because of the presence of reverberation and shadowing.
Figure 3.10. Normal esophagus of a dog. Cranial is to the left of the
image. A: The muscularis layer is seen as a hypoechoic line (arrowheads)
in the near and far fields. The small amount of mucus or gas in the lumen
causes a hyperechoic appearance (arrow). B: If the esophagus is imaged at
hyperechoic lines (asterisk) deep to the mucosa (arrowhead). C:
Transverse sonogram of the esophagus (arrows) in a normal dog. The
presence of gas in the lumen prevents optimal visualization of the wall. T,
trachea. Image courtesy of D. Penninck.
173
SONOGRAPHIC FEATURES
OF NECK DISORDERS
Bulla
Middle-ear disease is often characterized by the presence of fluid in the
 edn io se q a u  ia o
normal gas shadows. The transmission of the ultrasound beam through the
fluid also renders the far wall of the bulla visible (Figure 3.11). If air and
gas are present in the bulla, a dependent scanning position may be the
most sensitive. Fluid can also be found incidentally as a transient bulla
effusion rather than as a result of inflammatory or obstructive disease, so
its presence should be correlated with clinical signs of middle-ear disease.
Figure 3.11. Otitis media in a cat. A: Sagittal image of the tympanic
bulla. The sonogram is taken from the ventral position, with cranial to the
174
left of the image. The ventromedial compartment of the bulla is filled with
anechoic fluid, and the near wall is seen more clearly. The far wall (>) is
   n s    ii os
 si   no s ()  
resonance T1-weighted postcontrast sagittal image of the tympanic bulla.
The magnetic resonance image confirms the presence of fluid in the
dorsolateral compartment (arrow) of the tympanic bulla.
Tumors and inflammatory polyps cause soft-tissue filling of the bulla on
computed tomographic and magnetic resonance images, but has not been
reported with ultrasound imaging. Bulla thickness irregularity or alteration
may indicate more severe ear disease such as neoplasia, osteomyelitis, or
craniomandibular osteopathy.
Experimentally, a fluid-filled external ear canal improves the visualization
of canal size and cartilage thickness. The tympanic membrane cannot be
seen directly; however, if the ear canal is fluid filled and the bulla is air
filled, the membrane is likely intact. If the membrane is ruptured, the bulla
is also fluid filled.
Salivary Glands
Disorders that affect the salivary glands include true cyst, mucocele,
sialolith, sialitis (Figure 3.12), sialocele (Figure 3.13), salivary duct cyst
(Figure 3.14), and neoplasia.
Most of these conditions are rare in dogs and cats. Localization of the
lesion is based on the anatomical site and surrounding landmarks.
enlargement of the gland and/or salivary ducts and edema in the
175
surrounding tissues. Cystic lesions, nodular lesions, and enlarged salivary
glands can be aspirated to determine their origin.
Figure 3.12. Lymphoplasmacytic sialoadenitis in a dog. On this sagittal
image, the right mandibular gland is rounded, hypoechoic, and enlarged
(arrows), and the salivary ducts are dilated (asterisk)
Figure 3.13. Sialocele in a 13-year-old Jack Russell terrier. A: A dilated
mandibular and sublingual duct system is present. B: Transverse
sonogram of the dilated duct filled with poorly echogenic fluid. The
larynx (arrows) is near the dilated duct. A fine-needle aspirate confirmed
the presence of saliva. Images courtesy of D. Penninck.
B
Figure 3.14. Salivary duct cyst in a cat. On these transverse (A) and
sagittal (B) images, a well-demarcated fluid filled structure is ventral and
lateral to the mandible (arrowhead). The cyst contains hyperechoic
sedimenting debris (asterisk).
176
Vessels
thrombosis in hypercoagulable animals (e.g., hyperadrenocorticism and
protein-losing nephropathy) and may be a complication of catheter
placement. The acute thrombus may be anechoic and is recognized only
by a flow void in the color Doppler signal. More chronically, the thrombus
becomes more echogenic and visible in B-mode imaging. Stenosis of
these vessels can occur as a complication of surgery, trauma, or invasive
neoplasia. Stenosis appears as a narrowing of the vessel lumen, with
increased velocity or turbulent flow.
  n  s u    
pressure sensors in the carotid artery. Older brachycephalic breeds may be
predisposed   to developing  chemodectomas.   Chronic  hypoxia   and
overstimulation of the carotid bodies caused by brachycephalic syndrome
    e ad  a  o 
Other neuroendocrine tumors, such as thyroid tumors, may occur in
conjunction with chemodectomas. On ultrasound examination, these
tumors are located at the bifurcation of the common carotid artery into the
internal and external carotid arteries. Tumors may surround the common
carotid artery and its branches and are generally highly vascular. They are
hypoechoic to surrounding tissues, lobulated, and well marginated
Wisner et al. 1994; Fife et al. 2003) (Figure 3.15). Fine-needle aspirates
should be performed with caution, considering the vascularity and
proximity of major vessels.
Any invasive tumor, such as thyroid carcinoma, can cause local distortion
of vasculature. Invasion of the common carotid artery can cause erosion of
the wall and massive hemorrhage (Slensky et al. 2003). Local vessels may
177
be infiltrated by the neoplasia (Figure 3.16), recruited into the tumor,
compressed, or thrombosed. Other small vessels may also distend to
supply the mass. Tumors of the caudal neck and thoracic inlet may also
    e       
thrombosed, distended, or occluded, veins may be seen more cranially.
Obstruction of venous flow may also cause subcutaneous edema of the
head and neck.
Figure 3.15. Chemodectoma in a 12-year-old dog. Sagittal B-mode (A)
and transverse color Doppler (B) ultrasound images of a mass found in the
neck. A smooth, well-circumscribed, hypoechoic mass is noted at the
medial aspect of the right common carotid artery (CC). Initially the mass
was suspected to originate from the thyroid gland. At surgery, the thyroid
glands were normal. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
W26子
Figure 3.16. Venous invasion and thrombosis in a dog. Transverse image
of the thyroid with thyroid carcinoma. A large, ill-defined, hypoechoic
mass (T) has replaced the thyroid gland. The mass had invaded the thyroid
vein, with a tumor thrombus occupying most of the lumen (asterisk). The
tumor thrombus continued into the jugular vein (arrow).
178
Arteriovenous fistula in association with a recurrent thyroid carcinoma has
been reportedin the neck (Wisner et al. 1994). These abnormal
connections between the arterial system and the venous system often have
multiple tortuous vessels with arterial flow characteristics. The local veins
may be distended, and left heart failure can occur.
Cervical masses such as lymphoma and thyroid carcinoma may also
involve the vagosympathetic trunk, causing Horner’s syndrome (Melian et
al. 1996) and laryngeal paralysis (Schaer et al. 1979). There is also a
single report of a neoplastic mass originating from the vagus nerve
(Ruppert et al. 2000).
179
Lymph Nodes and Soft Tissues
Enlarged mandibular, retropharyngeal, or cervical lymph nodes may be
caused by local inflammation, tumoral infiltration, or regional metastatic
disease. Tumors of the mouth often metastasize to the mandibular lymph
nodes. Lymph nodes affected by inflammatory disease (Figure 3.17) or
neoplastic disease are enlarged, rounded, and hypoechoic. The margins of
the lymph nodes can be indistinct if there is local inflammation.
metastatic nodes because of hemorrhage and necrosis. Metastatic lymph
nodes can also be hypoechoic or heterogeneous without enlargement.
They tend to become rounder and thicker from their normal oval or
elongated shape. Reactive and metastatic lymph nodes appear very
similar, and fine-needle aspiration is generally needed for a diagnosis.
Figure 3.17. Mandibular lymphadenopathy in a dog. A: Sagittal image of
the normal left mandibular lymph node (cursors). It is oval and is slightly
hypoechoic to the surrounding tissues. B: The right mandibular lymph
node is reactive. It is hypoechoic and rounded compared with the left, with
Sagittal imageof
pyogranulomatous lymphadenitis and cellulitis. The lymph nodes are
slightly inhomogeneous and have irregular contours. Image C courtesy of
D. Penninck.
180
Lymphoma causes generalized peripheral lymphadenopathy in dogs, but
rarely in cats. Affected lymph nodes of the head and neck are enlarged and
hypoechoic. The nodes may have indistinct margins and disrupted internal
architecture. In dogs with lymphoma, the cervical and mandibular lymph
nodes enlarge to a lesser degree than the retropharyngeal lymph nodes
  o      (l 
        
(Figure 3.18B). The distal enhancement can cause the nodes to be
confused with anechoic cysts.
origin, such as lipomas, hemangiosarcomas, fibrosarcomas, hematomas,
and abscesses. Masses in the neck can appear solid, cystic, or complex
(Gooding et al. 1977). Neoplastic masses are usually solid or complex.
and hematomas are complex or cystic. Acutely, hematomas appear as
hypoechoic masses with a hypoechoic center. With time, septa-tions can
develop, echogenicity increases, and a capsule may form (Wisner et al.
2002). Hematomas should become smaller with time. Lipomas are usually
well marginated, are elliptical, and are striated and hyperechoic to
Surrounding musculature. However, lipomas can be infiltrative and poorly
defined. Interfascial planes or muscles can be infiltrated.
181
Figure 3.18. Sonograms of the neck of a dog with lymphoma. Cranial is
to the left of the image. A: The medial retropharyngeal lymph node (R) is
markedly enlarged, rounded, and hypoechoic. It is medial to the normal
mandibular salivary gland (M) and many times its size. B: The paired
superficial cervical lymph nodes are also markedly enlarged and are not
normally seen. They are rounded, with a hypoechoic, speckled
echotexture. There is also distal acoustic enhancement deep to the lymph
nodes (asterisk).  The tissues surrounding the lymph nodes are
hyperechoic, indicating inflammation or edema.
Figure 3.19. Intermandibular cellulitis in a dog. A: Transverse image
taken between the mandibles from a ventral position. A large,
heterogeneous mass is in the soft tissues of the neck (cursors). The margin
is hypoechoic, which suggests edema, and the mass is attenuating, with
decreased signal in the far field. B: In this more cranial image, an
enlarged, hypoechoic reactive lymph node (arrow) is superficial to the
mass(asterisk).
Penetrating wounds from the skin or esophagus, with or without foreign
bodies, may cause diffuse or localized cellulitis of the soft tissues of the
182
       (l  
planes or within the subcutaneous fat as anechoic or hypoechoic areas
separated by thin hyperechoic septa (Figure 3.20C). Inflamed fatty tissues
are often thickened, hyperechoic, and hyperattenuating (Figure 3.20D)
Abscesses are often septated, with a thick wall and echogenic fluid
contents (Figure 3.22). Cystic lesions are rare and usually thyroid or
branchial in origin (Wisner et al. 2002). Foreign bodies can be challenging
to identify. Their detection is greatly influenced by the their acoustic
characteristics and by their size, location, and shape (Figure 3.21).
Figure 3.20. Septic suppurative cellulitis and abscess formation in two
dogs. A and B: Sagittal images of the cranioventral neck in an 1l-year-old
Irish setter, on which a multicavitated mass measuring about 4.5 × 6 cm is
hypoechoic (LN). Images courtesy of D. Penninck. C and D: Sagittal
images obtained in another large-breed dog with a history of neck pain
and swelling and inappetance. The subcutaneous fat is swollen and
presents several hypoechoic, septated cavities (*) located caudal to one of
the mandibular (M) salivary glands. The neighboring fat is hyperechoic
and hyperattenuating. The presence of serohemorrhagic fluid and pus was
confirmed by fine-needle aspirations. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou
日
183
Larynx
Neoplasia (Figure 3.23), trauma (Figure 3.24), inflammation (Figure
3.25), and cysts can affect the larynx and paralaryngeal structures. The
most common neoplasia of the larynx in cats is lymphoma, and in dogs is
malignant epithelial neoplasia (Carlisle et al. 1991). These tumors can
appear as masses in the laryngeal wall and may also distort or obliterate
the normal laryngeal structures. Lymphoma in cats appears as a
well-circumscribed, hypoechoic or mixed echogenic mass arising from the
ventral or lateral larynx. The mass may narrow the lumen of the larynx or
displace the larynx to the side. Squamous cell carcinoma may appear more
destructive and occurs in the ventral larynx, as well as on the vocal cords.
originate from the epiglottis, laryngeal wall, or paralaryngeal tissues. They
are seen as anechoic masses distorting the rima glottides.
Laryngeal paralysis, which is a neuropathy of the recurrent laryngeal
can be used to evaluate the motion of the vocal folds and cuneiform
cartilages to diagnose the condition. The criterion for diagnosing laryngeal
paralysis is reduced or asymmetrical motion of the vocal folds. This
appears as lack of abduction of the cuneiform cartilages and vocal folds
during inspiration on one or both sides (Figure 3.26). Approximately 50%
of dogs  with laryn-geal paralysis have abnormal dorsal  and  ventral
contraction of the cricothyroid muscle (Rudorf et al. 2ool). Signs of
severe upper-airway obstruction include collapse of the pharynx during
inspiration, paradoxical movement of the vocal folds (blowing laterally
during expiration), and caudal displacement of the whole larynx.
Figure 3.21. Sewing needle and associated cellulitis in a dog. A: The
 Aa ps au nr os e se sdde (mo) a
poorly marginated hypoechoic area representing extensive cellulitis and
edema. B: The needle tip (arrow) is close to the esophagus (E) and the
carotid artery (arrowhead). TR, trachea. C: Hypoechoic arborization
through the superficial and deep cervical soft tissue is noted and is often
seen in abscess formation, dissecting cellulitis, and edema. Images
courtesy of D.Penninck
184
Figure 3.22. Retropharyngeal abscess in a dog- A: Lateral oblique
radiograph of the head and neck of a dog with a history of difficulties in
swallowing and of neck pain. A soft-tissue mass effect (asterisk) is in the
retropharyngeal region, causing ventral displacement of the nasopharynx,
larynx, and trachea (arrows). B: Transverse sonogram in the region of the
mass. A large, irregular, moderately echogenic mass (arrows) is lateral
and caudal to the esophagus (ES). This mass has a thick wall encircling an
irregular cavity filled with echogenic fluid. Fine-needle aspirations and
surgical biopsies confirmed the presence of a sterile, pyogranulomatous
abscess of uncertain origin. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
Figure 3.23. Laryngeal melanoma in a dog. A: Transverse image of the
larynx through the thyroid cartilage. An ill-defined soft tissue mass
(asterisk) is within the left side of the lumen of the larynx. B: In left
185
sagittal orientation, the mass is better delineated originating from the left
laryngeal wall (cursors). Cranial is to the left side of the image.
Hyperechoic reverberating artifact caused by the soft-tissue-air interface
is in the far field (arrow).
Figure 3.24. Penetrating laryngeal foreign body in a dog- A: On this
transverse image, the air-filled larynx is visible as an anechoic acoustic
shadowing artifact (L). There is a hyperechoic linear structure (arrow)
exiting the larynx at a ventrolateral oblique angle. The tissues surrounding
A g   ( ae a   o  s
  a  x      ()
Laryngeal paralysis and vocal cord thickening have been reported in cats.
Vocal cord thickening can be caused by inflammation, edema, or
neoplasia. The anatomy and motion of the cuneiform cartilage are similar
to those of dogs,but the smaller size of the feline larynx may cause
incomplete visibility of the vocal folds.
186
Thyroid Glands
Hyperthyroidism caused by functional thyroid adenoma or adenomatous
hyperplasia is very common in older cats (Mooney 2002). This can
manifest as a discrete nodule within the thyroid gland or as diffuse thyroid
enlargement. Ultrasound can be used to measure the volume of the thyroid
glands to detect enlargement. Although this is not a functional test as is
nuclear scintigraphy, enlarged glands are indicative of thyroid disease.
Both thyroid lobes are affected in 70% of cats (Mooney 2002).
Figure 3.25. Lymphofollicular laryngitis in a cat. A: Transverse image of
the larynx with the right side on the left of the image. The vocal folds
appear normal at this level. B: Just caudal to the vocal folds is a lobulated,
hypoechoic mass (arrows) involving the right side of the larynx and
trachea. CC points to the common carotid artery.
Figure 3.26. Laryngeal paralysis in a dog. The cuneiform processes of the
arytenoid cartilage (arrows) fail to abduct during inspiration.
187
Hyperplastic thyroid glands are hypoechoic or isoechoic to surrounding
tissue and hypoechoic to normal thyroids. In thyroid adenomas, the glands
can be focally or diffusely affected, often with a lobular margin and
tubular shape (Figure 3.27B)
Thyroid glands occasionally contain cysts with distal acoustic
enhancement. These cysts can be confused with normal parathyroid
glands, which can also appear hypoechoic or anechoic. The cyst may be
irregular in shape, but its margin should be visible in both planes. Thyroid
and parathyroid neoplasia, such as thyroid cystadenoma and parathyroid
adenocarcinoma, can also appear cystic (Phillips et al. 2003) (Figure
3.27A and C). Thyroid glands that cannot be identified on ultrasound are
only have one visible lobe.
Dogs are more often affected by hypothyroidism. On ultrasound
examination in one study, hypothyroid lobes were more rounded on
188
transverse imaging rather than their normal triangular shape (Reese et al.
2005). However, a further study of normal dogs revealed many with a
similar transverse shape, making the earlier observation nonspecific.
Hypothyroid lobes are also hypoechoic and smaller than normal lobes
(Figure 3.28). They may be heterogeneous in echotexture and have an
irregularly shaped capsule (Bromel et al. 2005).
Thyroid carcinoma is a rare but aggressive neoplasia that affects dogs and
cats. It often presents at an advanced stage, with the mass involving a
large area of the ventral cervical region and distorting local anatomy. This
ultrasound examination, the mass appears heterogeneous and hypoechoic
to normal thyroid tissue, with good to poor margination (Figure 3.29). The
trachea and esophagus may be displaced ventrally and laterally, and the
enlarging mass can cause upper-airway obstruction. The local vasculature
and esophagus can be compressed or invaded by thyroid carcinoma
(Figures 3.16 and 3.29F). Mineralization of the mass can be observed as
hyperechoic foci with distal acoustic shadowing (Figure 3.29A and E),
and metastasis to local lymph nodes is common.
Figure 3.27. Thyroid adenoma in cats. A: Transverse image of the right
thyroid with a cystic thyroid adenoma. The thyroid lobe is outlined by
cursors, and the center is filled with anechoic fluid. B: Sagittal image of
the right thyroid with thyroid adenoma. The thyroid lobe is outlined by
cursors. The gland is enlarged and rounded, with an irregular border, and
is isoechoic to surrounding tissue. C: Sagittal image of a thyroid cystic
adenoma in a l6-year-old Burmese cat. The lesion is primarily cystic but
filled with echogenic fluid mimicking a solid mass. Image C courtesy of
D. Penninck.
189
Figure 3.28. Right thyroid lobe of a dog with hypothyroidism. Sagittal
(A) and transverse (B) images of the small thyroid lobe outlined by
cursors and arrows. It is poorly marginated and slightly hypoechoic to the
surrounding tissue (arrows).
* points to the common carotid artery.
Figure 3.29. Thyroid carcinoma in dogs. A: Transverse image of the left
thyroid gland. The large, hypoechoic thyroid carcinoma is displacing the
common carotid artery (asterisk) laterally. The trachea (Tr) is visible on
the medial side of the mass. Foci of mineralization are within the mass,
190
causing acoustic shadowing (arrowhead). The vagosympathetic trunk
(arrow) is dorsal to the common carotid artery. B: Panoramic view of a
large thyroid carcinoma (over 5 cm long) deviating the carotid (arrow)
laterally. The mass is inhomogeneous and multicavitated Image courtesy
of D. Penninck. C: Color Doppler of the thyroid carcinoma presented in
B. Prominent vessels are at the ventral periphery of the mass. D: Power
Doppler of another thyroid carcinoma, which is highly vascularized. The
mass is between the common carotid artery (asterisk) and the trachea (Tr)
Image courtesy of D. Penninck. E and F: Sagittal B-mode and color
Doppler images of another thyroid carcinoma. The mass contains discrete,
hyperechoic mineral foci and a fluid cavitation (arrow). Prominent vessels
are noted at the ventral periphery, and the external jugular vein (J) is
displaced and compressed, but not invaded. Images E and F courtesy of
M.A. d'Anjou.
191
3.16cm
2.03cm
Parathyroid Glands
Dogs with hypercalcemia may have primary or secondary parathyroid
disease, and ultrasonography often helps to differentiate between them
(Reusch et al. 2000).  Primary  hyperparathyroidism  is caused by
hyperplasia, adenoma, or less commonly, adenocarci-noma and presents
as a single parathyroid nodule. Secondary hyperparathyroidism is caused
by parathyroid hyperplasia secondary to renal disease or nutritional
deficiencies, and often more than one parathyroid gland is visible.
Parathyroid nodules are hypoechoic to anechoic and often have distal
acoustic enhancement. They tend to be well circumscribed and are round
192
or oval (Figure 3.30). Parathyroid nodules that are greater than 4 mm in
diameter are more likely to be parathyroid adenomas or carcinomas,
whereas those less than 4 mm in diameter are more often primary
hyperplastic, or secondary to chronic renal disease or hypercalcemia of
   s     ) 
(Wisner et al. 1997). Cats rarely have parathyroid adenoma.
Figure 3.30. Parathyroid chief cell adenoma in dogs. A: Sagittal image of
English setter. A discrete hypoechoic nodule (between the cursors)
measuring 7 mm in diameter is present cranially. Image courtesy of D
Penninck. B: Transverse image of the right thyroid (arrowheads) and
parathyroid glands of a 10-year-old Siberian husky. A discrete hypoechoic
nodule (between the cursors) measuring 8 × 4 mm is deforming the medial
contour of the thyroid gland. The diagnosis is parathyroid chief cell
adenoma. The adjacent common carotid artery (asterisk) seen on cross
section should not be confused with a parathyroid nodule. T, trachea.
Image courtesy of D. Penninck. C: Transverse image of the left
parathyroid of a dog with parathyroid carcinoma. A round, hypoechoic
nodule (asterisk) is between the trachea (T) and the common carotid artery
from the cranioventral aspect (arrow) of the thyroid gland. The dorsal
border of the thyroid gland is marked with the caret.
193
[n acute renal failure, parathyroid length (median, 2.7 mm) is similar to
that in normal dogs (median, 3.3 mm). In dogs with chronic renal failure.
however, the parathyroid glands are longer (median, 5.7 mm) (Reusch et
al. 2000). This may help to differentiate between acute and chronic renal
failure, although there is likely to be some overlap between the two
groups.
Trachea
[n dogs with tracheal collapse, the hyperechoic air column just caudal to
the cricoid cartilage appears oval and flattened (Rudorf et al. 1997). This
may be associated with tracheal collapse in the thoracic inlet, as well. The
dorsal tracheal membrane is not visible directly, but this alteration in
shape of the air column is indicative of invagination. The flattening of the
 Other tracheal lesions such as masses, trauma, or edema may occasionally
be seen (Figure 3.31).
194
Esophagus
Ultrasonography can be used to identify mass lesions in the cervical
esophagus to monitor correct placement of an endotracheal tube or to
confirm megaesophagus (Wisner et al. 2002). Other lesions, such as
thickening, can also be detected (Figures 3.32 and 3.33)
lesions such as enlarged lymph nodes and mediastinal masses in the
thorax (Gaschen et al. 2003).
Figure 3.31. Tracheal edema in a dog. Sagittal image of the trachea of a
dog with postanesthetic regurgitation and aspiration causing tracheal
edema. Cranial is to the left of the image. The tracheal wall is mildly
thickened and irregular in the caudal portion of the neck. The asterisks
outline a hypoechoic tracheal cartilage ring.
Figure 3.32. Esophagus of a dog with esophageal fibrosis and muscular
hypertrophy. A: Cranial is on the left of the image. In the sagittal
195
orientation, the lumen of the esophagus is indicated by the far-field cursor
  s a o ia   a   
hypoechoic, and the entire esophageal wall is thickened. B: Transverse
image of the esophagus. The trachea (asterisk) is visible on the left side of
the image, to the right of the esophagus. Images were taken with a
curvilinear 5- to 8-MHz transducer.
一
Figure 3.33. Idiopathic esophageal hypertrophy in a dog. A: Lateral
radiograph of the cranial neck in a dog with chronic swallowing disorder.
The esophagus (E) is abnormally dilated with air, and a soft-tissue
mass-like projection is noted within its cranial lumen (arrow), caudal to
the cricopharyngeal muscle. B-D: Transverse (B) and sagittal (C and D)
sonograms of the diffusely and markedly thickened esophagus, involving
especially the muscular layer. The mucosa is hyperechoic and confluent
with the submucosa. Cranial and caudal portions of the esophagus are
represented in C and D, respectively. The arrow points to the collapsed
lumen. Mucosal and muscular hyperplasia and hypertrophy, as well as
nonspecific inflammation, were diagnosed by means of ultrasound-guided
biopsies. There was no evidence of a neoplastic process. Images courtesy
ofM.A.d'Anjou.
196
SPECIAL PROCEDURES
Tissue samples of neck lesions are most often obtained by using a
fine-needle aspirate, though tissue-core biopsies of larger lesions are
possible using ultrasound guidance (Figure 3.34). However, because of the
high vascularity of some organs and masses such as those of thyroid
origin, and the presence of large arteries and veins often adjacent to
cervical lesions, particular care should be taken when either fine-needle
aspiration or tissue-core biopsy is attempted.
Vessels of masses and tissues can be identified with color and power
Doppler imaging to gauge vascularity, to map vessels prior to fine-needle
aspiration or biopsy, and to determine operability of a mass lesion.
Feline hyperthyroidism has been treated using both heat ablation and
percutaneous ethanol ablation (Wells et al. 200l; Mallery et al. 2003)
 s  o   s  
Horner's syndrome and laryngeal paralysis. Heat ablation obtained better
results than ethanol ablation, with a mean euthyroid period of 4 months.
The longest euthyroid period with ethanol ablation was 27 weeks, with a
higher complication rate. Neither of these methods is as effective as the
surgical, medical, or radiotherapeutic methods currently in use.
197
Figure 3.34. Fine-needle aspiration of an enlarged mandibular lymph
u suapeudui snoeuonueord si sisouaep eu aui op e ui apou
same dog as in Figure 3.17C). Image courtesy of D. Penninck.
Figure 3.35. Intralesional ultrasound-guided injection in a dog. Sagittal
image of a thyroid gland during ablation with intralesional injection of
ethanol. The ethanol accumulation is a round, hyperechoic area (asterisk)
within the thyroid gland (T). The needle originates from the left
superficial aspect of the image, and the tip is at the asterisk.
Ablation of thyroid carcinoma by using injection of pure medical ethanol
approximately half of the tumor volume, although the amount injected
depends on the tumor characteristics. Complications include inadvertent
injection or diffusion of ethanol to the local blood vessels or
vagosympathetic trunk and recurrent laryngeal nerve.
REFERENCES
Bromel C, Pollard RE, Kass PH, Samii VF, Davidson AP, Nelson RW
(2005) Ultrasonographic evaluation of the thyroid gland in healthy,
hypothyroid, and euthyroid golden retrievers with nonthyroidal illness. J
Vet Intern Med 19:499-506.
198
    (      
in the dog and cat: Literature review and 13 additional patients. Vet
Radiol 32:229-235.
Dickie AM, Doust R, Cromarty L, Johnson VS, Sullivan M, Boyd JS
(2003) Ultrasound imaging of the canine tympanic bulla. Res Vet Sci
75:121-126.
Fife W, Mattoon J, Drost WT, Groppe D, Wellman M (2003) Imaging
features of a presumed carotid body tumor in a dog. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 44:322-325.
Gaschen L, Kircher P, Hoffmann G, et al. (2003) Endoscopic
ultrasonography for the diagnosis of intrathoracic lesions in two dogs. Vet
RadiolUltras0und 44:292-299
Gooding GA, Herzog KA, Laing FC, McDonald EJ Jr (l977)
Ultrasonographic  assessment of  neck  masses.  J  Clin Ultrasound
5:248-252
Mallery KF, Pollard RE, Nelson RW, Hornof WJ, Feldman EC (2003)
Percutaneous  ultrasound-guided   radiofrequency  heat  ablation  for
treatment of hyperthyroidism in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
223:1602-1607.
Melian C, Morales M, Espinosa de los Monteros A, Peterson ME (1996)
Horner's syndrome associated with a functional thyroid carcinoma in a
dog. J Small Anim Pract 37:591-593.
Mooney CT (2002) Pathogenesis of feline hyperthyroidism. J Feline Med
Surg 4:167-169.
Phillips DE, Radlinsky MG, Fischer JR, Biller DS (2003) Cystic thyroid
     
Reese S, Breyer U, Deeg C, Kraft W, Kaspers B (2005) Thyroid
sonography as an effective tool to discriminate between euthyroid sick and
hypothyroid dogs. J Vet Intern Med 19:491-498.
Reese S, Ruppert C (2001) Ultrasonographic imaging of the
vagosympathetic trunk in the dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 42:272-275.
199
Reusch CE, Tomsa K, Zimmer C, et al. (2000) Ultrasonography of the
parathyroid glands as an aid in differentiation of acute and chronic renal
failure in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 217:1849-1852.
Rudorf H, Barr FJ, Lane JG (2ool) The role of ultrasound in the
assessment of laryngeal paralysis in the dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
42:338-343.
Rudorf H, Herrtage ME, White RA (1997) Use of ultrasonography in the
diagnosis of tracheal collapse. J Small Anim Pract 38:513-518.
Ruppert C, Hartmann K, Fischer A, Hirschberger J, Hafner A, Schmidt P
(2000) Cervical neoplasia originating from the vagus nerve in a dog. J
Small Anim Pract 41:119-122.
Schaer M, Zaki FA, Harvey HJ, O'Reilly WH (1979) Laryngeal
             
Ass0c 174:513-515.
Slensky KA, Volk SW, Schwarz T, Duda L, Mauldin EA, Silverstein D
(2003) Acute severe hemorrhage secondary to arterial invasion in a dog
with thyroid carcinoma. J Am Vet Med Assoc 223:649-653.
Taymans O, Duchateau L, Schreurs E, Kramer M, Daminet S, Saunders
JH (2005) Intra- and interobserver variability of ultrasonographic
measurements of the thyroid gland in healthy beagles. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 46:139-142.
Wells AL, Long CD, Hornof WJ, et al. (2001) Use of percutaneous
ethanol injection for treatment of bilateral hyperplastic thyroid nodules in
cats. J Am Vet Med Ass0c 218:1293-127.
Wisner ER, Mattoon JS, Nyland TG (2002) Neck. In: Nyland TG, ed.
Small Animal Diagnostic Ultrasound. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, Pp
285-304.
ultrasonographic anatomy of the canine neck. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
32:185-190.
Wisner ER, Nyland TG, Mattoon JS (1994) Ultrasonographic examination
of cervical masses in the dog and cat. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 35:310-315.
200
Wisner ER, Penninck D, Biller DS, Feldman EC, Drake C, Nyland TG
(1997) High-resolution parathyroid sonography. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
38:462-466.
201
CHAPTER FOUR
THORAX
Silke Hecht
PREPARATION AND
SCANNING TECHNIOUE
In a normal animal, evaluation of intrathoracic structures is hampered by
the interposition of aerated lung tissue. However, collapsed or
consolidated lung, thoracic masses, or pleural effusion can provide a
suitable acoustic window. Thoracic radiography should always precede
suitable acoustic window, and rule out entities, such as severe
pneumothorax, which preclude an ultrasonographic examination (Tidwell
1998). Since pleural effusion may  facilitate the examination of
intrathoracic structures, thoracocentesis should be postponed until the
ultrasonographic examination has been performed, unless the patient has
respiratory compromise.
To optimize image quality, hair should be clipped in the region to be
scanned, and acoustic gel should be applied. An intercostal approach is
most commonly used and involves examination of the thoracic structures
by positioning the transducer on the chest wall between adjacent ribs
(Figure 4.lA and B). Animals are generally positioned in lateral
recumbency, although scanning in sternal recumbency or while a patient is
202
screening. A thoracic inlet approach can sometimes help in visualizing
cranial thoracic lesions (Figure 4.1C).
mediastinal or caudal pulmonary lesions. The examination technique is
similar to that used for evaluation of the liver. The animal is positioned in
dorsal or lateral recumbency, and the transducer is aimed cranially under
the rib cage.
using a cardiac table. This approach optimizes the acoustic window,
because pleural fluid accumulates in the dependent portion of the thorax.
and the pulmonary structures in the near field contain less air because of
positional  atelectasis.  However,  ultrasound-guided  interventional
procedures are difficult to perform using this approach, and the field of
view is limited to the size of the table window and the ability to position
the area of interest over the opening-
Usually, a sector transducer or a curvilinear or microconvex sonographic
 probe with a small footprint should be selected when using an intercostal
window, although a linear probe may also be used. The optimal frequency
depends on the size of the animal and the location of the lesion. For the
examination of the cranial mediastinum in large dogs, a 5-MHz transducer
may be used, whereas examination of small superficial pulmonary lesions
necessitates the use of a higher-frequency transducer (7.5 or 10.0 MHz). A
wall lesions. For a transhepatic or thoracic inlet approach, sector or
curvilinear transducers are most commonly used.
The examination is performed in at least two planes, depending on the
nature, size, and location of the lesion
203
NORMALSONOGRAPHIC
ANATOMY
Intercostal Approach
The soft tissues of the thoracic wall (skin, subcutaneous fat, and muscle)
appear as layered tissues of alternating echogenicity in the near field
(Figure 4.2). The parietal pleura is rarely recognized as a discrete
structure, but may be differentiated from the visceral pleura in real time by
the sliding motion of the lung during respiration. The ribs appear as
smoothly marginated, curvilinear, hyperechoic structures with distal
acoustic shadowing (Figure 4.2). The lung interface is seen as an
echogenic linear band with distal reverberation artifacts and dirty
shadowing. The pulmonary parenchyma deep to the lung surface cannot
be evaluated in normal animals because of these artifacts (Figure 4.2).
Figure 4.1. Ultrasonographic examination of the thorax. The patient can
be examined while it is standing or in sternal, lateral, or dorsal
recumbency. A and B: Intercostal approach. The transducer is placed on
the thoracic wall in the area of interest; for example, at the level of a
pulmonary lesion suspected radiographically (A). To better evaluate the
cranial mediastinum (B), the thoracic limbs are pulled forward. The
transducer is placed on the thoracic wall caudal to the elbows and dorsal
to the sternum. Transverse and dorsal or sagittal planes can be used. C:
Thoracic inlet approach to evaluate the most cranial aspect of the
thoracic cavity. The transducer is placed midline on the caudal neck and
aimed caudally into the thorax. An initial dorsal plane view is useful to
identify the trachea, esophagus, and great vessels. Sagittal and oblique
views are obtained subsequently.
204
Figure 4.2. Normal thoracic wall when using an intercostal approach.
Transverse (A and B) and longitudinal (C and D) ultrasonographic and
schematic images. The subcutaneous tissues (SC), which include muscle,
fat, and fascial planes, are recognized as multiple alternating hypoechoic
and hyperechoic layers in the near field. The lung surface (L, arrows)
appears as a smooth, strongly hyperechoic line. Distal to the lung surface
are dirty shadowing and reverberation artifacts (Rev) that prevent
evaluation of the normal air-filled lung. The normal ribs are visible as
strongly hyperechoic curvilinear structures (Rib), with clean distal
shadowing in the far field.
Evaluation of the normal cranial and caudal mediastinum by means of an
However, cranial mediastinal vessels may be visualized as tubular
anechoic structures that show flow on Doppler examination (Figure 4.3).
The thymus may be visible in young animals. Care must be taken not to
confuse abundant mediastinal fat with intrathoracic mass lesions. Normal
cranial mediastinal or sternal lymph nodes are usually not visible.
205
Transhepatic (Subcostal) Approach
The diaphragm-lung interface appears as a curvilinear,
， strongly
hyperechoic structure in the far field cranial to the liver (Figure 4.4). The
diaphragm cannot be distinguished from the adjacent hyperechoic lung
lung lobes. The caudal thoracic esophagus is occasionally seen traversing
the diaphragm (see Figure 8.3). Using this approach, the examiner has to
be aware of the commonly observed mirror artifact (see Figure 6.4).
Thoracic Inlet Approach
By using a thoracic inlet approach, mediastinal fat, cranial thoracic
trachea, and esophagus are usually seen (Figure 4.5). Cranial mediastinal
vessels may be visible.
Figure 4.3. Normal cranial mediastinum in a dog when using a right
intercostal approach (dorsal plane) and color Doppler. The cranial
mediastinal vessels are clearly visible. The confluence of the
brachiocephalic veins to form the cranial vena cava is observed. BCT,
brachiocephalic trunk; CrVC, cranial vena cava; Lt BCV, Left
brachiocephalic vein; and Rt BCV, right brachiocephalic vein.
RtBCV
CrVC
LtBCV
BCT
206
Figure 4.4. Normal caudal thorax in a dog when using a transhepatic
( e ) s Pe (a e ) e odde (soan)
ultrasonographic and schematic images. The diaphragm-lung interface
(arrows) appears as a curvilinear hyperechoic line cranial to the liver. A
gallbladder (GB) is in the lung region (E'). H, heart; and ST, stomach.
Figure 4.5. Normal cranial thorax in a dog when using a thoracic inlet
approach. Transverse to dorsal ultrasonographic (A) and schematic (B)
images. The transducer is positioned midline and aimed caudally. The
ventral tracheal wall is visible as a hypoechoic crescent (arrow). The
between tracheal wall and intraluminal gas. A combination of acoustic
shadowing (S) and reverberation (R) is visible in the far field.
Figure 4.6. Extrapleural mass (metastatic thymoma) in a 7-year-old
elkhound. A: On this right lateral radiograph is a fusiform mass lesion
associated with the caudal dorsal thorax (under the sonographic probe).
This mass is in broad-based contact with the dorsal thoracic wall
(extrapleural sign). Metallic hemoclips associated with the cranial ventral
thorax are consistent with previous removal of a cranial mediastinal mass
207
(thymoma). B: The mass, which is visualized by using a left dorsal
(arrows) forming an obtuse angle with the adjacent thoracic wall. The
hyperechoic interface of the normal lung is visible in the far field, as well
as acoustic shadows associated with ribs (R).
SONOGRAPHIC FEATURES
OF THORACIC DISORDERS
Lesions of the Thoracic Wall
Thoracic wall lesions include neoplasms, inflammatory lesions, and
trauma. Ultrasound allows assessment of the extent and margination of a
lesion, bone involvement (such as in rib neoplasms or trauma),
echotexture (solid and/or fluid filled), invasion of adjacent structures, and
presence of foreign material or gas (e-g., in abscesses). A thoracic wall
mass is convex, in broad-based contact with the chest wall, and displaces
the normal lung interface (extrapleural sign). In contrast to most mass
lesions originating from the pulmonary parenchyma, the angle between
the extrapleural mass and the adjacent thoracic wall is obtuse (Figure 4.6).
Additionally, the dynamic visualization of lung motion underneath
thoracic wall lesions enables their extrapulmonary origin to be confirmed.
[In contrast to pulmonary masses, thoracic wall mass lesions are static or
move with the chest wall during respiration.
Masses originating from ribs or sternum are most commonly neoplastic in
etiology (e.g-, chondrosarcoma or osteosarcoma). These masses cause
irregular disruption of the smooth contour of the affected bone and are
208
accompanied by an intrathoracic and extrathoracic mass lesion of variable
size and echogenicity (Figures 4.7 and 4.8).
Benign or malignant neoplastic processes, such as infiltrative lipomas or
soft-tissue sarcomas, may also invade the thoracic wall (Figure 4.9).
Metastatic disease may also involve one or several of these bones, causing
variable alteration in their normal hyperechoic, shadowing surface. The
osseous proliferation and/or lysis encountered in aggressive bone lesions
are typically irregular and poorly defined when compared with benign
processes, such as chronic rib fractures.
Inflammatory  lesions  affecting  the thoracic  wall  include cellulitis.
abscesses, and granulomas. Ultrasound enables identification of fluid
  n d  s  ss 
accurate than fistulography in the detection of foreign material in animals
with chronic draining tracts or abscesses (Armbrust et al. 2003).
Depending on their size and composition, foreign bodies are usually
hyperechoic to the surrounding soft tissues and often cast an acoustic
shadow (Figure 4.10).
In cases of thoracic trauma, ultrasonography can be used as an alternative
to radiography in the diagnosis of rib fractures. Findings include
discontinuity of cortical alignment (Figure 4.ll), as well as edge
shadowing and reverberation artifacts arising from the margin of the
displaced rib segment (Hurley et al. 2004). However, based on the
literature on human patients, ultrasonography does not significantly
increase the detection rate of rib fractures, may be uncomfortable for a
patient, and is more time-consuming than radiography.
Figure 4.7. Rib 0steosarcoma in a 10-year-old Rottweiler. Transverse
ultrasound (A) and computed tomographic (B) images obtained at the
level of the lith rib, on which an aggressive osteolytic and
osteoproliferative rib mass (M) is identified that is protruding into the
right hemithorax. Ultrasonographically, the mass is mixed in echogenicity.
and hyperechoic foci (arrow) are associated with acoustic shadowing (*),
consistent with mineralization.
209
Figure 4.8. Rib mass in a 9-year-old Labrador retriever. A: On the lateral
thoracic radiograph, a large volume of pleural effusion is identified. A
mass lesion associated with the cranial ventral thorax at the level of the
costal cartilages of the third pair of ribs shows irregular amorphous
mineralization (black arrows). B: Transverse plane ultrasonographic
image of the rib mass lesion (white arrows). The mass is of mixed
echogenicity, with multiple hyperechoic foci (*) corresponding to the
mineralized areas seen radiographically, some of which are associated
with strong acoustic shadowing. Primary rib tumor was diagnosed.
Abnormalities of the Pleura and the
Pleural Space
Pleural Effusion
Ultrasonography is useful in detecting and characterizing pleural effusion;
identifying the underlying problem, such as a cranial mediastinal mass;
and guiding interventional or therapeutic thoracocentesis. Pleural effusion
appears as echogenic or anechoic material separating the thoracic wall and
 i        
 s o      
transudates, and chylous effusion are generally hypoechoic or anechoic
210
(Figures 4.12 and 4.13). Exudates, malignant pleural effusions, 0r
hemorrhages are usually echogenic (Figures 4.14 and 4.15).
Figure 4.9. Infiltrative soft-tissue sarcoma in a large-breed dog.
Ultrasonographic (A) and schematic (B) dorsal images of the thoracic wall
in a dog with firm swelling on palpation. A heterogeneous, 3.23-cm-thick
mass (arrows) is visible at the lateral aspect of the ribs (R), which are
associated with strong acoustic shadowing. This mass infiltrated the
intercostal muscles and portions of the ribs without invading the pleural
space. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
Figure 4.10. Chronic draining tract with foreign body in a 7-year-old
German shorthair pointer. Ultrasonographic (A and B) and schematic (C
and D) images of a portion of the thoracic wall in. A and C: The draining
tract (T, arrowheads) appears as a 6-mm-wide tubular structure within the
ribs (R). B and D: At the termination of the tract, a hyperechoic,
sharp-edged structure of 0.9 × 0.2 cm is identified, consistent with a
       )  
material, consistent with an abscess (A). Acoustic shadowing is not
observed. A wooden splinter was identified at surgery. Images courtesy of
D. Penninck.
211
Figure 4.11. Rib fracture in a dog. Ultrasonographic images obtained in a
transverse plane in respect to the thoracic cavity, which corresponds to the
long axis of the rib. Images A and B were obtained at different levels of
the rib fracture. There is disruption of the smooth hyperechoic contour of
the rib (R), with displacement of the fracture fragments (arrow). Material
of inhomogeneous soft-tissue echogenicity is noted at the fracture site
(arrowheads), consistent with a hematoma. The lung (L) surface is focally
visible beyond the fracture site. Images courtesy of M. Kramer.
Figure 4.12. Congestive heart failure in a dyspneic cat. Sagittal (A) and
parasagittal oblique (B) subcostal images of the caudal thorax. There is
anechoic pleural effusion (PE) cranial to the diaphragm (arrows), and
distension of caudal vena cava (CVC) and hepatic veins (HV)
212
accumulates in the dependent portion of the thorax, trapped fluid is not
influenced by gravity and remains in the same region of the pleural space.
Chronic pleural effusion causes echogenic strands to develop within the
pleural space, consistent with pleural adhesions or fibrinous bands (Figure
4.16).
Pleural Lesions
The pleural cavity can be affected by inflammation (pleuritis), neoplasia
(carcinomatosis, mesothelioma, and metastatic disease), and loss of
integrity subsequent to trauma. The detection of smaller pleural nodules
and masses on radiographs is commonly hampered by the presence of
pleural effusion. Additionally, radiographic distinction between pleural
and  pulmonary  masses  may  be  challenging-
.  On ultrasonographic
examination, pleural disease manifests as thickening, irregularity, or mass
lesions of variable echogenicity associated with the pleura. Lesions arising
from the parietal pleura are readily recognized, especially in the presence
of pleural effusion (Figures 4.15-4.18). Even in the absence of pleural
effusion, differentiation between pulmonary and parietal pleural lesions is
a
pulmonary mass moves with respiration, a mass arising from the parietal
pleura remains stationary in comparison with the sliding lung (Mattoon
and Nyland 1995).
Figure 4.13. Transverse image in a cat with severe chylothorax. A large
volume of anechoic pleural effusion (PE) is visible, delineating a
collapsed lung lobe (arrows). Image courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
213
Dorsal
PE
Figure 4.14. Severe pleural effusion in a dyspneic dog. Oblique
intercostal sonographic images of the cranial (A) and caudal (B) thorax. A
large volume of echogenic effusion (PE) is in both pleural spaces, on each
side of the caudal mediastinum (CaM). In A, the border of the cranial
mediastinum (CrM) is irregular and hyperechoic (arrows). The diaphragm
(D) is visualized, as well as the liver just caudal to it. Carcinomatosis
secondary to metastatic disease was diagnosed at necropsy. Images
courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
Figure 4.15. Chronic chylothorax and pleuritis in a 10-year-old
mixed-breed dog. Severe, echogenic pleural effusion (PE) is seen when
j ()  a   de s l  isn
thickening of the parietal pleural is observed (arrows). Image courtesy of
M.A.d'Anjou.
214
Figure 4.16. Chronic pleuritis in a 2-year-old cat. Ultrasonographic (A)
and schematic (B) transverse images on which anechoic pleural fluid (PE)
is associated with lung atelectasis (L). Hyperechoic linear strands (thin
arrows) are visible within the fluid, consistent with pleural adhesions or
fibrin strands and indicative of chronicity. The visceral pleura is also
thickened (wide arrows).
Figure 4.17. Pleural carcinomatosis and cranial mediastinal mass in a
9-year-old dog. A: Left lateral radiograph of the thorax. Moderate pleural
effusion, as well as a cranial mediastinum mass, cause dorsal displacement
of the trachea and lungs. A round soft-tissue opacity is associated with the
dorsal thorax bordering the thoracic spine (arrows). B: Intercostal
ultrasonographic image of the dorsal thoracic mass. The mass is seen
arising from the pleura and is separate from the hyperechoic lung interface
(L, arrows) in the far field. Pleural effusion (PE) is also present.
Fine-needle aspirates of the cranial mediastinal and pleural lesions were
consistent with carcinoma.
215
Nodules or masses arising from the visceral pleura cannot be easily
distinguished from lesions originating from the pulmonary parenchyma
(Figure 4.19).
Figure 4.18. Pleural carcinomatosis and pulmonary carcinoma in a
10-year-old cat. Intercostal approach. On these dorsal ultrasonographic
(A) and schematic (B) images, the right cranial lung lobe (RCrL) is
rounded, irregular, and has assumed soft-tissue echogenicity because of
replacement of normally air-filled parenchyma by neoplastic cells.
  id gd a o ao  e ss  
parietal pleura (arrows) is thickened, slightly irregular, and unusually
hypoechoic. CrM, cranial mediastinum; and H, heart.
Figure 4.19. Chronic pleuritis in a 2-year-old cat (the same patient as in
Figure 4.16). Ultrasonographic (A) and schematic (B) images obtained by
using a left caudodorsal intercostal approach. The superficial parietal
pleura (arrows) is irregularly thickened, irregular, and hypoechoic. The
visceral pleura of the left caudal lung lobe is also markedly thickened
(arrowheads). Pleural effusion (PE) separates the lung lobe from the
diaphragm (D). The visceral pleural lesion cannot be differentiated from a
primary pulmonary lesion by means of ultrasonography.
216
Pneumothorax
Although radiography remains the imaging modality of choice to diagnose
air within the pleural space, ultrasonographic assessment of the pleural
space should always be performed after interventional procedures, and the
examiner should be aware of the ultrasonographic appearance of
pneumothorax. Free air within the pleural space may create similar
t  t s  e  s se 
However, the classic gliding sign of the lung against the parietal pleura is
maybe visualized
Abnormalities of the Mediastinum
Ultrasound facilitates differentiation of entities, such as accumulation of
fat, fluid, or true mediastinal masses, which cause cranial mediastinal
widening on radiographs. Additionally, it enables identification of a
cranial mediastinal mass in the presence of pleural effusion, facilitates
characterization of cranial medias-tinal mass lesions (cystic in contrast to
solid), and is helpful in the identification of a window suitable for
interventional procedures.
 u su Auond e go Asdoq aye xoouud p on't ann
(arrowheads) is in the near field superficial to the mass. The biopsy tract
(BT) is characterized by a line of punctate hyperechogenicities through the
mass. Bw, body wall.
217
Figure 4.21. Cranial mediastinal cyst in a 9-year-old cat. A: Lateral
thoracic radiograph demonstrating an ovoid area of increased opacity
immediately cranial to the heart (arrows). B: Ultrasonographic image
sternum at the level of the fourth intercostal space. Cranial to the heart (H)
is a round anechoic structure with distal enhancement (*), consistent with
the presence of a cranial mediastinal cyst.
Mediastinal Mass Lesions
These are most commonly found in the cranioventral mediastinum and are
often accompanied by pleural effusion (Reichle and Wisner 2000). Their
visualization depends on their location, size, and the presence of a suitable
acoustic window. Differential diagnoses for cranial mediastinal masses
include cysts, enlarged lymph nodes, neoplasms (e.g., lymphoma or
thymoma), inflammatory lesions (abscesses or granulomas), and
hematomas. An accumulation of fat may occasionally appear masslike and
has the potential for a false-positive diagnosis of a mediastinal mass
(Konde and Spaulding 1991).
218
Cranial mediastinal cysts are an occasional incidental finding in cats
(Zekas and Adams 2002). They are usually well circumscribed, thin
walled, and filled with anechoic fluid (Figure 4.21).
Figure 4.22. Reactive sternal lymph node in a dog with chylothorax. A:
Lateral thoracic radiograph showing significant pleural effusion that mask
mediastinal structures such as the cardiac silhouette. Lung lobes are
retracted from the body wall. B: Ultrasonographic image at the right
second intercostal space immediately dorsal to the sternum. Hypoechoic
effusion is on both sides of the cranial mediastinum (arrows). A mildly
enlarged sternal lymph node (cursors) is surrounded with hyper-echogenic
fat and cross-sectional views of hypoechoic vessels (*). A curved
hyperechoic interface casting strong shadowing, consistent with a rib, is in
the near field (R). PE, pleural effusion. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
Figure 4.23. Metastatic sternal lymph node in a dog with splenic
hemangiosarcoma and hemoabdomen. Transverse ultrasonographic image
of an enlarged sternal lymph node (cursors) via an intercostal approach
dorsal to the sternum at the level of the second intercostal space. The
enlarged lymph node appears as a round hypoechoic nodule surrounded by
echogenic fat, and adjacent to cross-sectional anechoic vessels (*). The
final histopathologic diagnosis is metastatic hemangiosarcoma. Image
courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
219
Dorsal
1.73m
Enlarged sternal lymph nodes are recognized as rounded nodules or
masses of variable size, margination, echotexture, and echogenicity
immediately dorsal to the sternum (Figures 4.22-4.24). As the peritoneal
cavity is partly drained by these nodes, ultrasonographic examination of
 e   ssd s    
affected patients. Although reactive lymph nodes tend to be smaller than
neoplastic or granulomatous lesions, ultrasonographic differentiation of
these entities, and differentiation of an enlarged lymph node from cranial
mediastinal mass lesions of other etiology, may not be possible.
Masses of inflammatory or neoplastic etiology may appear rounded or
lobulated, solid, or cystic, homogeneous, or inhomogeneous (Figures
4.25-4.32). Larger aggressive lesions may infiltrate the surrounding
structures, hampering determination of their origin. Lymphoma is most
commonly associated with the presence of markedly enlarged and variably
homogeneous, hypoechoic lymph nodes or mass(es) in the cranial
mediastinum. Thymomas have a tendency to appear cystic (Tidwell 1998).
However, cranial medias-tinal masses cannot be differentiated based on
their ultrasonographic appearance, and histopathology or cytology is
needed to assess the nature of the lesion.
220
Figure 4.24. Disseminated histiocytic sarcoma in a 5-year-old Bernese
( o o n  () o  o 
intercostal sonographic images of the cranioventral thorax. A cranial
mediastinal mass was suspected on radiographs. Multiple well-defined,
hypoechoic nodules and masses (arrows and cursors) are surrounded by
mediastinal hyperechoic fat (F) and arteries (A). Images courtesy of M.A.
d'Anjou.
2.57
Figure4.25.
5.Thymoma in a 12-year-old cat. A: Lateral thoracic
radiograph demonstrating a large cranial mediastinal mass (arrow) causing
dorsal displacement of the trachea and silhouetting with the cardiac
silhouette. B: Ultrasonographic image obtained through a right cranial
intercostal approach. A large cranial mediastinal mass lesion (arrows) is of
Cranial mediastinal vessels (V) are seen in the far field as anechoic
circular structures on cross section. Thymoma was diagnosed based on
ultrasonographically obtained biopsy samples.
Figure 4.26. Lymphoma in a 4-year-old cat. A: [n the lateral thoracic
radiograph is a large cranial mediastinal mass silhouetting with the heart
and displacing the trachea dorsally. Pleural effusion is also present, as
indicated by scalloped fluid tissue opacity associated with the ventral
221
thorax, pleural fissure lines, and retraction of the caudodorsal lung lobes
from the thoracic wall and diaphragm. B: Longitudinal sonogram via an
intercostal approach. A large homogeneous mass (arrows) is associated
with the cranial mediastinum and in contact with the heart (H). Large
vessels are visible within this mass as anechoic tubular structures with
strongly hyperechoic vessel walls (V). Lymphoma was diagnosed based
onhistopathology.
Figure 4.27. Granulomatous lymphadenopathy in a cat. A: On the lateral
thoracic radiograph is a large, ill-defined, cranial mediastinal mass
displacing and compressing the trachea (arrow). Severe swelling was also
apparent throughout the neck. B: Transverse sonogram via an intercostal
cranial mediastinum. Increased vascularity is noted at the periphery of the
mass by using power Doppler. Cryptococcosis was diagnosed based on
ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration. Images courtesy of M.A.
d'Anjou.
Figure 4.28. Thymoma in a 10-year-old golden retriever. A: On the lateral
radiograph of the thorax is a well-circumscribed, round, soft-tissue opacity
222
associated with the cranial mediastinum immediately cranial to the cardiac
silhouette. The esophagus (arrows) is gas distended, consistent with
megaesophagus. B: Transverse sonogram via a right intercostal approach
immediately dorsal to the sternum. The mass (cursors) appears as a
homogeneous, round, hypoechoic structure. Thymoma was diagnosed
based onhistopathology.
Figure 4.29. Cranial mediastinal lymphoma in a 7-year-old Labrador
retriever. A: Lateral thoracic radiograph of a large soft-tissue opacity in
the cranial mediastinum. The opacity is displacing the trachea and cranial
lung
 ventral   margin  dorsally  (arrowheads).   B: Corresponding
ultrasonographic image by using a dorsal oblique plane through a right
intercostal window. A well-defined hypoechoic mass with hyperechoic
speckles is in the cranial mediastinum (arrows). A small amount of
anechoic pleural effusion (PE) is also observed around the mass. Images
courtesy of M.A. d' Anjou.
Figure 4.30. Cranial mediastinal mass in an 1l-year-old large,
a
radiograph (not shown). B: Using a right parasternal intercostal approach.
performed, and a mast cell tumor was diagnosed cytologically. The
223
displaced lung interface (L) and associated reverberation artifacts are in
the near field. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
Figure 4.31. Cranial mediastinal lymphoma in a 1-year-old Lhasa apso.
Dorsal sonogram via a right intercostal approach. A large, ill-defined mass
lesion (arrows) is cranial to the heart (H). The lesion is mainly
hypoechoic, with hyperechoic foci in the near field.
Cranial
Figure 4.32. Cranial mediastinal mass in a domestic longhair cat. The
examination is performed by using a right intercostal approach. A large
mass, mixed in echogenicity, with a large, hypoechoic cavitary component
(arrows) is cranial to the heart (H). A small amount of pleural effusion is
in the near field (arrowhead). The histopathologic diagnosis was
adenocarcinoma.
224
Cranial
Figure 4.33. Heart base tumor in a small-breed dog- A: Ventrodorsal
thoracic radiograph in which a soft-tissue opacity associated with a mass
effect (M) is in the left cranial hemithorax. The trachea (T) and cardiac
silhouette (H) are displaced to the right, and the main left bronchus (Br) is
partially compressed. An alveolar pattern is in the caudal portion of the
left cranial lobe (arrow). B: B-mode sonogram obtained by using a
transverse intercostal approach (as shown in A). A well-defined solid
mass (cursors), mixed in echogenicity, in the near field is displacing the
heart (H). C: When power Doppler is used, this mass appears
hypervascularized. The aorta (Ao) is in the far field, adjacent to the mass.
A neuroendocrine tumor was highly suspected on cytological specimens
obtained with fine-needle aspiration. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
225
Other Mediastinal Lesions
Radiography (including contrast procedures) and thoracic computed
tomography remain the imaging modalities of choice for the diagnosis of
lesions associated with the dorsal mediastinum, trachea, and esophagus.
Transesophageal ultrasonography may also be of great value when
available. Heart base tumors may be visualized through the heart or by
using an intercostal approach, if large enough (Figure 4.33). Esophageal
dilation and mass lesions (neoplasms, foreign bodies, or granulomas) may
occasionally be visualized via a thoracic inlet or transhe-patic approach,
depending on their location and size (Figure 4.34).
Ultrasonography has been described as an alternative to fluoroscopy in the
diagnosis of tracheal collapse (Rudorf et al. 1997). Additionally, it may
prove useful in distinguishing between tracheal collapse and other causes
of tracheal narrowing such as tracheal wall thickening or compressive
mass lesions (Figure 4.35). The ultrasonographic examination is
performed using a thoracic inlet approach and is limited to the cervical
andcranial thoracictrachea.
226
Figure 4.34. Esophageal mass in a 14-year-old Welsh corgi. A and B:
Thoracic radiographs reveal a homogeneous, soft-tissue opacity (M,
         oss 
the esophagus (E), summating with the diaphragm. The position of the
ultrasound transducer is shown in B. C and D: Ultrasonographic and
schematic images obtained with a ventral transhepatic approach (sagittal
plane). At the level of the esophageal hiatus, the mass (M, arrows) is
associated with the esophagus (E). Liver and stomach (S) are visible in the
a e s sis (a i ede-a a e i 
strongly hyperechoic structure bordering the esophageal mass.
Pulmonary Disorders
The ability to assess pulmonary lesions depends on the location and size
of the lesion, as well as the presence of a suitable acoustic window.
Normally aerated lung, and lesions surrounded by normally aerated lung,
   a   a  
replace the air within alveoli and/or airways, or if a lung lobe collapses.
evaluation  of  the  affected  lung  becomes  possible.  Pulmonary
abnormalities  commonly  detected and investigated  by means  of
ultrasonography are atelectasis, consolidation, and pulmonary mass
lesions. The presence of pleural effusion facilitates the evaluation of lobar
size, shape, and
Icontour.
A
comparativeillustration of the
227
ultrasonographic appearance of different pulmonary disorders is shown in
Figure 4.36. Although tendencies in ultrasonographic appearance exist for
some of the processes, fine-needle aspirations or biopsies are required in
most instances to confirm the diagnosis.
Figure 4.35. Tracheal wall thickening caused by eosinophilic airway
disease in a 4-year-old cat. A: The lateral thoracic radiograph shows
extensivenarrowing
ofthecranial
thoracic trachea.B:An
ultrasonographic examination of the trachea (arrowheads) is performed by
using a thoracic inlet approach. The tracheal wall (cursors) is thickened
(0.3 cm) and hypoechoic. Anechoic material, consistent with mucus, is
present within the severely narrowed tracheal lumen (*). A gas bubble is
 present more cranially, appearing as a reverberating hyperechoic focus in
the nondependent portion of the lumen (arrow).
Atelectasis
Atelectasis (pulmonary collapse) may occur secondary to increased
pressure within the pleural space (pneumothorax or pleural effusion) and
may be a sequela to bronchial obstruction or a result of decreased
pulmonary compliance and inability of the lung to inflate properly.
Ultrasonographic assessment of atelectatic lung is easy in cases of
concurrent pleural effusion, but impossible in cases of pneumothorax.
Affected lung lobes appear as small, smoothly marginated, triangular
structures that are commonly surrounded by pleural fluid (Figure 4.13).
The echogenicity of atelectatic lung depends on the amount of residual air
within the airspaces and may range from uniformly hypoechoic to strongly
hyperechoic. Linear and speckled hyperechoic foci, indicating residual air
within bronchi and alveoli, as well as bronchial walls, are often seen.
Additionally, vessels can usually be visualized, particularly by means of
color or power Doppler. Completely collapsed lung lobes tend to be
similar in echogenicity and echotexture to liver lobes. In cases of
228
obstructive atelectasis, ultrasonography may prove useful in identification
of the obstructive lesion (e.g., mass).
Consolidation
When fluid or cells uniformly infiltrate the pulmonary air spaces, the lung
often becomes hypoechoic and assumes an echotexture similar to liver
(hepatized fung) (Schwarz and Tidwell 1999). The affected lung lobe
typically retains its normal shape and volume (Figures 4.36-4.38 and
4.41). Air-filled bronchi appear as hyperechoic air bronchograms
radiating from the hilus, which are commonly associated with
reverberation artifacts or dirty shadowing. Residual air within alveoli also
remains hyperechoic (Figure 4.38). If the bronchial lumen is filled with
secretions or cellular debris, fluid bronchograms develop, which resemble
vessels but can be distinguished by means of color or power Doppler by
their lack of flow (Figure 4.39). Although pulmonary consolidation is
most commonly associated with pneumonia, it may also be encountered in
lung contusion, lobe torsion (d'Anjou et al. 2005), and infiltrative
pulmonary neoplasia (Figures 4.39-4.41). Dispersed, hyperechoic, and
reverberating foci, indicating vesicular emphysema, are commonly
observed in the central portion of a twisted lung lobe (Figures 4.39 and
4.40), and lobes infiltrated with neoplasia are often heterogeneous and
deformed. Additionally, concurrent pleural effusion is expected in cases of
lung-lobe torsion and in some cases of pulmonary neoplasia, as opposed to
pneumonia. Color or power Doppler can prove useful in confirming the
lack of flow in a twisted lobe. However, ultrasonographic differentiation
of these entities, which may coexist in the same lobe, may not be possible.
Figure 4.36. Schematic ultrasound images of pulmonary abnormalities.
A: Consolidation. Normal pulmonary parenchyma is filled with fluid or
replaced with inflammatory or neoplastic infiltrates. The affected portion
(arrows) is hypoechoic when compared with the normally aerated,
hyperechoic lung portion (L). The lung lobe retains its normal size, shape,
and contour. B: Atelectasis. The lung is collapsed because of pleural
effusion (PE). The affected lung lobe is significantly reduced in volume
(arrows). Occasional hyperechoic foci within the collapsed lung lobe are
consistent with a small amount of residual air. The reverberating interface
of the contralateral air-filled lung is seen in the far field. C: Pulmonary
mass lesion. With increasing size, pulmonary mass lesions cause loss of
229
the normal shape and margination of a lung lobe, with distortion of the
pulmonary border and the normal triangular form of a lung lobe (arrows).
These changes are enhanced if pleural effusion is present (PE). The
echogenicity of pulmonary mass lesions is variable. D: Pulmonary
nodule. Lung nodules are typically spherical and well demarcated from
the peripheral aerated lung (arrows). These nodules can only be detected if
they are in contact with the thoracic wall. L, aerated lung.
Pulmonary Masses and Nodules
Although pulmonary masses in small animals are most commonly
neoplastic in etiology, benign lesions such as abscesses, cysts, hematomas.
or granulomas may also be encountered. In the absence of pleural
effusion, pulmonary masses can be evaluated ultrasonographically only if
located at the periphery of the lung field and if a suitable acoustic window
is present.
Pulmonary neoplasms usually appear hypoechoic or mixed echogenic and
solid. They cause focal disruption of the reflective lung surface and
commonly form an acute angle with the thoracic wall (Figures 4.42 and
230
4.43). Lung masses or nodules are easily identified as pulmonary in origin
feature is not observed in cases of pleural adhesions. In contrast to
atelectasis or consolidation, pulmonary mass lesions frequently cause
distortion of the normal contour of the affected lung lobe (Figures 4.44
and 4.45). Central tumor necrosis can vary in appearance and may lead to
confusion with a pulmonary abscess, particularly when hypoechoic or
anechoic. Air cavities and dystrophic mineralization, appearing as
hyperechoic foci with or without reverberating and shadowing artifacts,
are often seen in primary lung tumors.
Figure 4.37. Acute suppurative pneumonia with hemorrhage in a
10-year-old Labrador retriever. A: The right lateral radiograph of the
thorax shows an alveolar pattern in the left caudal lung lobe and a clear
border between the left cranial and caudal lung lobe (lobar margination
in the left cranial lung lobe. B: The ultrasonographic examination is
performed in a dorsal plane by using a left caudal dorsal intercostal
approach. The left caudal lung lobe is homogeneously echogenic (arrows)
and is hyperechoic to the hepatic parenchyma seen caudal to the
diaphragm. Acoustic shadows related to superficial ribs (R) are present.
Figure 4.38. Aspiration pneumonia in two dogs. Both examinations are
foci representing gas inclusions. The lung lobe retains its normal
triangular shape and size. There is no evidence of pleural effusion. B:
Focal pneumonia (white arrow) involving the right middle lobe, which
appears as an irregular, hypoechoic region with gas speckles associated
with comet-tail artifacts (black arrow). Deeper foci of pneumonia cannot
be visualized because of overlying aerated lung (L). Image B courtesy of
M.A. d'Anjou.
231
Figure 4.39. Torsion of the right middle lung lobe in a 5-year-old mixed
large-breed dog. A: On the lateral thoracic radiograph, marked pleural
effusion is noted, as well as right middle lung lobe opacification and
enlargement (arrows). The main bronchus is interrupted (arrowhead), and
 punctate and linear gas lucencies are observed in the consolidated lobe. B:
The ultrasound examination is performed by using a right intercostal
approach at the level of the sixth intercostal space. The peripheral portion
of the lung lobe is hypoechoic, and dispersed and hyperechoic foci are in
       
with gas (G). This pattern is commonly encountered with lung-lobe
torsion. A fluid-filled bronchus (fluid bronchogram) appears in the apex of
this lobe (B). Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
Figure 4.40. Lung-lobe torsion in a small-breed dog- A and B:
Ultrasonographic images of different portions of the right cranial lung
lobe, which appears “hepatized" and enlarged (arrows). The lobe is
diffusely mildly echogenic and presents dispersed hyperechoic foci that
were consistent with gas. When color Doppler is used (B), there is no
evidence of any vascular flow. A small volume of hypoechoic pleural
effusion (PE) is also apparent around the lobe. Images courtesy of M.A.
d'Anjou.
232
Figure 4.41. Uniform lung consolidation in two dogs. A: Bronchoalveolar
carcinoma in a 15-year-old mixed-breed dog. Dorsal sonogram by using a
right intercostal approach. The tip of the right caudal lung lobe (arrows) is
uniformly hypoechoic and has retained its normal triangular shape. The
abnormal portion of this lobe is in contact with the diaphragm (D). The
normal lung portion, which remains aerated, is seen in the far field (L). B:
Traumatic lung contusion in another dog in which the affected portion of
the right caudal lobe (arrows) is uniformly moderately echogenic.
Additionally, a short linear hyperechogenicity is in the caudolateral
portion of the pleural space (arrowhead), in association with a comet-tail
artifact, consistent with mild pneumothorax. L, normal aerated lung.
Image B courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
Figure 4.42. Disseminated histiocytic sarcoma in a 6-year-old Bernese
mountain dog. A: On the left lateral radiograph of the thorax is an
approximately 5-cm soft-tissue mass in the caudal ventral thorax,
summating with the diaphragm (arrows). B: The ultrasonographic
examination of the caudal ventral thorax was performed by using an
intercostal approach immediately dorsal to the sternum. The mass
(cursors) is irregular, homogeneous, hypoechoic, and associated with the
ventral aspect of the right caudal lung lobe. The peripheral border is
strongly  hyperechoic and  associated  with  reverberation artifacts,
233
consistent with aerated portion of the lung lobe (L). On real-time
examination, it was seen to be sliding with respiration. A reverberating
artifact originating from the pleural space and consistent with free air is
also observed in the near field (arrowhead).
Figure 4.43. Pulmonary carcinoma in an 8-year-old Labrador retriever.
The examination was performed by using an intercostal approach. The
pulmonary mass is well circumscribed, almost anechoic, forms an acute
  s   )   n  
aerated lung parenchyma (L).
Figure 4.44. Pulmonary carcinoma in a 12-year-old cat. The examination
is performed by using an intercostal approach. A 3-cm mixed echogenic
mass (arrows) associated with the pulmonary parenchyma distorts the
normal lung margins. The adjacent normal lung is characterized by a
hyperreflective interface (L). A small amount of pleural effusion (PE) is
present.
234
Figure 4.45. Pulmonary carcinoma in a 9-year-old cat. The examination is
performed by using a right intercostal approach. A mixed echogenic mass
associated with the right lung (suspected right middle lung lobe) distorts
the normal lung margins. Concurrent pleural effusion (PE) is noted,
delineating the irregular contours of the lung lesion.
Figure 4.46. Pulmonary nodule in a Dalmatian with a history of weight
loss. A: A small, round, soft-tissue opacity is observed on this left lateral
thoracic radiograph in the right hemithorax (arrow). B: Using a left
intercostal approach, a spherical hypoechoic nodule was observed at the
superficial aspect of the lung (L). Fine-needle aspiration by using
ultrasound guidance revealed a metastatic sarcoma. An abdominal
fibrosarcoma was identified. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
235
Figure 4.47. Fungal granuloma (blastomycosis) in a dog. A small,
 ens st (sos) s so 'o a
the pulmonary parenchyma.
round, hypoechoic nodules moving with the aerated lung (Figure 4.46).
Larger metastases may show similar ultrasonographic features as primary
pulmonary neoplasms. However, these lesions may also resemble benign
mass lesions such as granulomas and chronic hematomas, necessitating
cytological or histological analysis for a definitive diagnosis (Figure 4.47).
Pulmonary cysts, acute hematomas, and abscesses can be fluid filled.
Cysts are usually thin walled and contain anechoic fluid. Abscesses and
hematomas have variable wall thickness and margination, and the
        o 
(Figures 4.48-4.50).
1.Abscessing pneumoniamayalso cause lobar
enlargement and marked heterogeneity, mimicking neoplasia and necrosis.
Furthermore, these processes can coexist.
Figure 4.48. Pulmonary abscess in a 5-year-old collie. A: On the lateral
thoracic radiograph is a large, well-circumscribed, homogeneous mass
lesion associated with the caudal dorsal lung fields immediately cranial to
the diaphragm (arrows).  B:  The ultrasonographic examination  is
  ( ) e   s  
(cursors) is seen immediately cranial to the diaphragm (D). It is anechoic
236
and surrounded by a thin, hyperechoic rim. The concentric dotted lines
(arrowheads) represent an artifact likely caused by electrical interference.
.4sm
Diaphragmatic Disorders
Hernia
Although challenging, ultrasonography represents an important diagnostic
tool in the investigation of traumatic diaphragmatic hernias (i.e., ruptures),
true
(congenital)   diaphragmatic   hernias,   and   congenital
peritoneo-pericardial diaphragmatic hernias (PPDH) (Spattini et al. 2003)
The ultrasonographic characteristics of a diaphragmatic hernia or rupture
are an irregular or asymmetrical cranial aspect of the liver and the
 presence of abdominal viscera in the thorax (Figures 4.5 1-4.55).
If an ultrasonographic examination is performed to confirm or exclude a
diaphragmatic hernia, the examiner has to be aware of common artifacts
occurring at the level of the diaphragm. If the animal has ascites,
refraction of the beam at the liver surface may cause the diaphragm to
appear discontinuous. The commonly seen mirror-image artifact might be
mistaken for a herniation of liver into the thorax (see Figure 6.4).
Adhesions between liver and lung in cases of chronic diaphragmatic
rupture might resemble the appearance of an intact diaphragm and lead to
false-negative  result  on  the ultrasonographic  examination.
Diaphragmatic, pulmonary, or pleural mass lesions may also lead to
misinterpretation by mimicking abdominal contents in the thoracic cavity
(Spattini et al. 2003)
237
The ultrasonographic diagnosis of a PPDH is usually straightforward if
       )  
pericardial sac (Figures 4.54 and 4.55).
Other Diaphragmatic Disorders
Other disorders of the diaphragm are extremely rare. Benign or malignant
mass lesions are occasionally encountered (Figure 4.56).
Figure 4.49. Chronic pyogranulomatous pneumonia in a large-breed dog.
A: A soft-tissue opacity is in the caudoventral lung field on the right
the cranioventral lung field, as well as irregular, air-filled, dilated bronchi
consistent with bronchiectasis (black arrows). B: On this ultrasonographic
image obtained through the left sixth intercostal space, a large portion of
the left caudal lung lobe (LCL) in contact with the diaphragm (D) is
heterogeneous, moderately echogenic, and enlarged. C and D:
Sonographic and schematic images. In a portion of this lung lobe (L) is a
spherical hyperechoic mass (arrows) with an irregular hypoechoic center
(*). A thin hypoechoic rim is at the periphery of this mass, as well as
edge-shadowing artifacts (arrowheads). Fine-needle aspiration confirmed
the presence of a pyogranuloma. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
238
Figure 4.50. Traumatic pulmonary hematoma in a 9-year-old Scottish
deerhound. Radiographs and sonogram of the lung after bronchoalveolar
lavage. A: The ventrodorsal radiograph, at the time of presentation,
reveals  a generalized  unstructured  interstitial  pattern. No  other
abnormality is detected at this time. A bronchoalveolar lavage was then
performed. B: Recheck radiographs 6 days later show a homogeneous
3-cm mass lesion associated with the right lung at the level of the sixth rib
(arrow). C: The ultrasonographic examination was performed by using a
well-circumscribed lesion of 3-cm diameter is associated with the lung.
Aspiration yielded blood, consistent with a hematoma.
239
Figure 4.51. Diaphragmatic rupture in a 5-year-old cat. Longitudinal
sonogram via a left intercostal approach. Images of the midthorax (A) and
the caudal thorax (B). The spleen (S) is displaced within the thoracic
cavity, lateral to the heart (H). The stomach (St) is also displaced cranial
to the liver. The ribs (R) in the near field are characterized by strong
acoustic shadows (arrowheads). Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
Crania
Crania
Ultrasonographic (A) and schematic (B) images of the caudal thorax
obtained by using an intercostal approach. The margin of the diaphragm
(arrows) is disrupted, and part of the liver (L) and the gallbladder (GB) are
herniated into the thoracic cavity (black arrow). In the far field is
echogenic pleural effusion (PE), consistent with hemorrhage.
240
Figure 4.53. Herniation of the gallbladder in a cat. A: On the lateral
thoracic radiograph, a well-circumscribed, round opacity (arrows) is
between the diaphragm and cardiac silhouette. B: The ultrasonographic
examination is performed by using a right ventral intercostal approach.
The diaphragm (D) is the strongly hyperechoic curvilinear structure in the
far field. The diaphragm is discontinuous in the near field, with herniation
of the gall bladder (GB) into the thoracic cavity.
Crania
cat. A: The lateral thoracic radiograph reveals loss of the ventral part of
the diaphragmatic silhouette and silhouetting of abdominal and peritoneal
 a      is  ,  
(arrow). The cardiac silhouette is enlarged. B: The ultrasonographic
examination was performed by using an intercostal approach. There is
 ()    (mo) d a jo 
visible in the near field close to, and displacing, the heart (H).
241
Figure 4.55. Peritoneo-pericardial diaphragmatic hernia in an 8-year-old
Rhodesian ridgeback. The examination is performed via a right intercostal
approach. Normal hepatic parenchyma is visible in the near field. There is
a 9-cm mixed echogenic hepatic mass within the pericardial sac (arrows)
Histopathologic  examination  of  the  herniated liver  lobe  revealed
hepatocellular atrophy and hepatic dysplasia caused by compression and
circulatory compromise. There was no evidence of neoplasia.
LIver
Figure 4.56. Diaphragmatic rhabdomyosarcoma in a 4-month-old cat.
Ultrasonographic (A) and schematic (B) images obtained with an
intercostal approach. Two mixed echogenic mass lesions (M1 and M2) are
arising from the diaphragm (D, arrows). The larger mass measures more
than 6 cm in maximum diameter, and the smaller mass measures 2.5 cm.
The lung is displaced cranially (L), and anechoic pleural effusion is in the
242
near field (PE), as well as anechoic peritoneal effusion caudal to the
diaphragm.
Cranial
INTERVENTIONAL
PROCEDURES
Ultrasound is very useful to aid diagnostic or therapeutic thoracocentesis,
especially if only a small volume of pleural effusion is present (Figure
4.57). Additionally, fine-needle aspiration or biopsies of thoracic mass
lesions are commonly performed. These procedures are safe and have a
high diagnostic yield (Wood et al. 1998) (Figure 4.58). Although an
intercostal approach is most commonly used, a thoracic inlet approach and
even a transdiaphragmatic approach may be chosen. Patient preparation
(sedation with or without anesthesia, sterile preparation) is routinely
performed. Depending on the size and location of the lesion, 20- to
22-gauge injection or spinal needles are used for fine-needle aspiration,
and 16- to 18-gauge biopsy needles are used to obtain core biopsy
 a  d   e  
extension tube or directly attached to a 5- to 10-mL syringe, enabling,
 o  s      d 
obtained freehand or by using a biopsy guide.
To facilitate fine-needle aspiration or biopsy of pulmonary lesions, it
might be necessary to induce respiratory standstill for the duration of the
procedure, warranting endotracheal intubation of the patient. In addition to
         
243
aspiration or biopsy of pulmonary lesions might also cause pneumothorax.
rare.
Figure 4.57. Ultrasound-guided thoracocentesis in a cat with pleural
effusion. The needle is traversing the thoracic wall, and the needle tip,
which appears as a hyperechoic line (arrow), is within the pleural space.
The aerated lung (L) is partially retracted medially.
Figure 4.58. Biopsy of a pulmonary mass (bronchoalveolar carcinoma) in
a dog. Two closely aligned needle tracts are visible as hyperechoic lines
(arrow) in the periphery of the mass (arrowheads) adjacent to the aerated
portion of the lung (L). There is no evidence of pneumothorax. The
hyperechoic superficial margin of a rib (R), associated with acoustic
shadowing, is in the near field.
244
REFERENCES
Armbrust LJ, Biller DS, Radlinsky MG, Hoskinson JJ (2003)
Ultrasonographic diagnosis of foreign bodies associated with chronic
draining tracts and abscesses in dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 44:66-70.
d’Anjou MA, Tidwell AS, Hecht S (2005) Radiographic diagnosis of lung
lobe torsion. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 46:478-484.
Hurley ME, Keye GD, Hamilton S (2004) [s ultrasound really helpful in
the detection of rib fractures? Injury 35:562-566.
Konde LJ, Spaulding K (1991) Sonographic evaluation of the cranial
mediastinum in small animals. Vet Radiol 32:178-184.
Mattoon JS, Nyland TG (1995) Thorax. In: Nyland TG, Mattoon JS, eds.
Small Animal Diagnostic Utrasound. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, pp
325-353
Reichle JK, Wisner ER (2000) Non-cardiac thoracic ultrasound in 75
feline and canine patients. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 4l:154-162.
Rudorf H, Herrtage ME, White RA (1997) Use of ultrasonography in the
diagnosis of tracheal collapse. J Small Anim Pract 38:513-518.
245
Schwarz LA, Tidwell AS (1999) Alternative imaging of the lung. Clin
Tech Small Anim Pract 14:187-206.
Spattini G, Rossi F, Vignoli M, Lamb CR (2003) Use of ultrasound to
diagnose diaphragmatic rupture in dogs and cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
44:226-230
Tidwell AS (1998) Ultrasonography of the thorax (excluding the heart).
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 28:993-1015.
Wood EF, O'Brien RT, Young KM (1998) Ultrasound-guided fine-needle
aspiration of focal parenchymal lesions of the lung in dogs and cats. J Vet
[ntern Med 12:338-342.
Zekas LJ, Adams WM (2002) Cranial mediastinal cysts in nine cats. Vet
Radiol Ultrasound 43:413-418
246
CHAPTER FIVE
HEART
Donald Brown and Hugues Gaillot
ECHOCARDIOGRAPHIC
TECHNIQUE
Instrumentation
Echocardiographic methods differ from abdominal techniques in that
transducer placement is confined to limited windows of access between
the ribs and aerated lung. This limitation imposes the need for a small
transducer  footprint.  Echocardiographic  examinations  are  then  best
performed using sector or curvilinear scanning transducers, preferably
temporal resolution.  Maximal  temporal resolution is obtained by
decreasing field depth and minimizing the sector angle (sector width). The
ultimate in temporal resolution is obtained by using motion-mode
echocardiography (M-mode). Numerous dedicated abbreviations and
conventions are used in this chapter and are listed in Table 5.1.
Suggested guidelines for transducer frequencies include 8-12 MHz for
cats and similarly sized dogs, 4-8 MHz for dogs in the 5- to 40-kg range,
and 2-4 MHz for large dogs (>40 kg). When performingan
247
echocardiogram, a concurrent electrocardiogram may be valuable or
essential, depending on the goals of the study.
Preparation of Patients
Patients are positioned in lateral recumbency, with the transducer applied
to the patient from below with the aid of a table with cutouts designed for
this purpose (Figure 5.1). Acoustic transmission is facilitated either by
saturating the fur with ultrasound coupling gel.
Two-dimensional Echocardiography
Cardiac image orientation and transducer placement are referenced with
respect to the heart itself (Henry et al. 1980; Thomas 1984; Bonagura et
al. 1985; O'Grady et al. 1986; Thomas et al. 1993). The central left
ventricular (LV) axis can be conceptualized as an imaginary line that
extends between the cardiac apex and base in the center of the LV lumen.
When the transducer is oriented such that the scan plane includes or is
parallel to this axis, a long-axis image is obtained. If the scan plane is
perpendicular to this axis, a short-axis image is obtained (Figure 5.1).
Because of impedance mismatching and ultrasound attenuation imposed
by the ribs and air-filled lungs, transthoracic echocardiography is limited
to relatively small windows of access. These surround the heart on both
the right and left sides of the ventral thorax, i.e., next to the sternum
(parasterna/). The size of these access windows depends on individual
thoracic conformation and may be increased by pulmonary underinflation
(e.g, secondary to pleural effusion or atelectasis) and decreased by
Overinflation as may occur with many cardiopulmonary diseases.
Additional access can be gained from the subcostal (subxiphoid) position,
imaging the heart through the liver and caudal mediastinum; limited views
of the aortic arch may be available from the thoracic inlet (suprasternal
transducer position), as well.
248
Right Parasternal Views
  e  s       
(RPS) views, including a cranial location, corresponding typically to the
fourth intercostal space, and a more caudal location at the fifth (Figure
5.2).
For images suitable for LV quantification, the transducer is positioned
  an go a  a  o as q ps a 
perpendicular to the LV long axis at the tips of the mitral valve leaflets. A
  o s      t  
base-apex direction yields a series of RPS short-axis views, depending on
the transection level (Figure 5.2).
Long-axis images are obtained from the RPS position by applying a 90°
counterclockwise transducer twist, relative to the short-axis orientation,
and fanning so that the LV central axis lies within the scan plane; a
four-chamber view results (Figure 5.3). From this view, slight cranial
angulation and clockwise twisting brings the LV outflow tract and aorta
into view.
Table 5.1. Abbreviations and conventions used throughout this chapter
Anatomical designations
AML
Anterior mitral valve leaflet
Ao
Aorta or aortic
AV
Aortic valve
CaVC
Caudal vena cava
CrVC
 Cranial vena cava
CT
Chordae tendinae
IVS
Intraventricular septum
LA
Left atrium or left atrial
LAA
Left atrial appendage
LPA
Left main pulmonary artery
LV
Left ventricle or left ventricular
LVOT
Left ventricular outflow tract
249
LVW
Left ventricular wall
MV
Mitral valve
P
Pericardium
PM
Papillary muscle
PML
Posterior mitral valve leaflet
PT
Pulmonary trunk
PV
Pulmonic valve
RA
Right atrium or right atrial
RAA
Right atrial appendage
RPA
Right main pulmonary artery
RV
Right ventricle or right ventricular
RVOT
Right ventricular outflow tract
RVW
Right ventricular wall
TV
Tricuspid valve
Echocardiographic modality
CFD
Color flow Doppler
CWD
Continuous-wave Doppler
M-mode
Motion mode
PWD
Pulsed-wave Doppler
TD
Tissue Doppler
TDI
Tissue Doppler imaging
2DE
Two-dimensional echocardiography
Transducer position and orientation
Ap
Apex
Bs
Base
Ca
Caudal
Cr
Cranial
LAp
Left apical
LPS
 Left parasternal
250
LAx
Long-ax is (orientation)
RPS
Right parasternal (position)
SAx
Short-axis (orientation)
Diseases and conditions
AI
Aorticinsufficiency
CDVD
Chronic degenerative valve disease
DCM
 Dilated cardiomyopathy
HCM
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
LCHF
Left-sided congestive heart failure
MR
Mitral regurgitation
PI
Pulmonic insufficiency
RCHF
Right-sided congestive heart failure
TR
Tricuspid regurgitation
Left Apical Views
Left apical position (LAp) images are best obtained with the patient in left
lateral recumbency, with the transducer applied to the left ventral thorax
placed at an extreme ventral and caudal location, approaching a subcostal
position. The transducer is angled cranially so that the central ultrasound
beam is pointed toward the heart base along the LV central axis. The true
apical view may be technically challenging, so a more cranial transducer
position may be suitable but results in a foreshortened LV view that is
unsuitable for ventricular quantification.
Cranial angulation of the transducer from the LAp four-chamber position
brings the aortic root into the scan plane and enables visualization of the
aortic valve. This scan plane constitutes the apical five-chamber image
and often is suitable for aortic flow-velocity quantification. However the
subcostal transducer location typically is better aligned for maximal
velocity measurements in dogs (Abbott and MacLean 2003).
251
From the apical four-chamber view, a 90° clockwise twist yields the apical
far fields, respectively.
Left Parasternal Views
Left parasternal position (LPS) views of the heart, also called left cranial
views, are obtained preferably with the patient in left lateral recumbency.
The transducer is positioned so that it is cranial to the heart, at the fourth
to fifth intercostal space, and approximately at the level of the
costal-chondral junction in the dorsalventral direction.
Baseline left cranial long-axis images are obtained with the scan plane
oriented parallel to the ascending aorta, twisting so as to include a
longitudinal view of this structure (Figure 5.5). Portions of the left
ventricle and atrium, mitral valve, and right ventricular (RV) outflow tract
           
With dorsal and slightly caudal angulation of the transducer, the scan
plane encounters the left atrium and ventricle, RV outflow tract, and
Figure 5.1. Echocardiographic orientation and anatomy. A: A prevailing
coordinate system is defined in terms of the LV axis for the individual's
heart. The terms base and apex are specific to the heart and do not usually
correspond precisely with dorsal and ventral directions referenced with
respect to the animal. Similarly, the cranial-caudal axis of the heart is
perpendicular to the base-apex axis and does not coincide precisely with
the anatomical definitions. B and C: The transducer is most commonly
applied to recumbent patients from below with the aid of a specially
designed table. For the definition of abbreviations in the figures in this
chapter, see Tabie 5.1.
252
lenibes
Plane
Left
Ventricular
DorsalPlane
Axis
RVOT
RVO
RAA
Figure 5.2. RPS SAx scanning technique. For RPS SAx views, the
transducer is positioned so that the scan plane slices perpendicularly to the
LV central axis at the level of the CT. Numbers 1-6 refer to the scan plane
orientation and image obtained. Slice 6 is not shown on subsequent
images. 1: Slice 1 at the PT level. 2: Slice 2 at the Ao root level. The right
coronary (RC), left coronary (LC), and noncoronary (NC) cusps of the Ao
valve may be visible. 3: Slice 3 at the mitral level. The mitral leaflets are
widely separated while blood flows between the leaflets into the LV
chamber. 4: Slice 4 at the chordal level. 5: Slice 5 at the LV level. P,
pericardium.
253
RPSShortAxisViev
Relative to the initial LV outflow tract position, ventral and slightly
cranial angulation causes the scan plane to transect the right atrium, right
254
atrial (RA) appendage, tricuspid valve, and RV inflow. The RA
appendage can be closely inspected from this vantage point for evidence
Of neoplasia.
From the initial LPS view of the LV outflow tract, a clockwise twist
results in a scan plane that slices the aortic root transversely (Figure 5.6)
Fanning the transducer in a cranial-dorsal direction produces a range of
images for optimal viewing of the right atrium and RV inflow tract, RV
inflow and outflow tracts, and pulmonary trunk. The latter enables
visualization of the pulmonary bifurcation, ascending aorta, and structures
associated with the heart base.
Figure 5.3. RPS LAx scanning technique. For RPS LAx views, the
transducer is positioned so that the scan plane contains, or is parallel to,
the LV central axis. 1: Slice 1 with a four-chamber view. 2: Slice 2 with
an LVOT view. NC is the noncoronary portion of the Ao sinus of
Valsalva. IAS, interatrial septum.
RPSLongAxisViewy
Figure 5.4. LAp scanning technique. The transducer is positioned at the
s a  m  s o   a jo xae 
255
plane. 1: LAp four-chamber view. 2: LAp five-chamber view. 3: LAp
two-chamber view. IAS, interatrial septum.
LeftApicalScanningViews
Figure 5.5. Left parasternal LAx scanning technique. The transducer is
positioned near the left cranial border of the heart. Dorsal-ventral
angulation yields the series of LAx images. Variable angulation in the
:I ana au Aq pasns se Aressu aa re uoap lejueio-epnn
LPS LAx view at the RV. 2: LPS LAx view at the RAA. 3: LPS LAx
view at the Ao.RC and NC refer to the right coronary and noncoronary
portions of the Ao sinus of Valsalva. 4: LPS LAx view.
256
LeftParasternal LongAxisViews
Figure 5.6. Left parasternal SAx scanning technique. The transducer is
positioned near the left cranial border of the heart. Cranial-caudal yields
the series of SAx images. Variable angulation in the dorsal-ventral
at the RV inflow tract. The right coronary (RC), left coronary (LC), and
noncoronary (NC) cusps of the Ao valve may be visible.2: LPS SAx view
at the inflow-outflow. Both the inflow and outflow tracts of the right heart
may be visible with subtle angulation and twist adjustments. The right
coronary (RC), left coronary (LC), and noncoronary (NC) cusps of the Ao
valve may be visible. 3: LPS SAx view at the PT. PV, pulmonary vein.
257
LPSShortAxlsVlews
Subcostal and Suprasternal Views
The suprasternal view necessitates transducer positioning at the thoracic
inlet with the scan plane oriented parallel to the patient's sagittal plane.
This view is best for imaging the aortic arch and valuable, consequently,
for quantification of aortic insufficiency. The subcostal view is obtained,
with the patient in lateral recumbency, by positioning the transducer at the
transducer almost directly cranially (Figure 5.7). The twist is adjusted to
be approximately parallel to the sagittal plane. For Doppler aortic velocity
recordings, the transducer is fanned to include the aortic root.
258
Motion-modeEchocardiography(M-mode)
The majority of M-mode dimensional recordings are made from the RPS
transducer position (Bonagura 1983; Bonagura et al. 1985). One of the
 principal applications of M-mode is for the recording of time-dependent
short-axis dimensions of the heart, and this dictates a specific external
transducer location that is determined by the cardiac anatomy (Figures
5.8-5.12).
DopplerEchocardiography
Doppler echocardiography uses the Doppler principal to determine the
velocity of moving blood or tissue (Darke 1992; Kirberger et al. 1992;
Bonagura and Miller 1998; Bonagura et al. 1998). With pulsed-wave
Doppler (PWD), the round-trip time of the ultrasound pulse is used to
determine the tissue depth at which the velocity occurs; the maximum
depth dictates a specific pulse-repetition frequency. In turn, repetitive
pulsation of the ultrasound is directly responsible for the aliasing
phenomenon whereby measured velocity is observed to occur at an alias
velocity. The alias velocity may be a gross misrepresentation of actual
velocity (Figure 5.13). In contrast to PWD, ultrasound is emitted
continuously in the continuous-wave Doppler modality, which does not
suffer from the velocity ambiguity of PWD. There is no practical limit to
the velocity magnitude that can be measured with continuous-wave
Doppler (CWD). However, this mode does not enable determination of the
tissue depth from which the measured velocities arise, so the anatomical
location of velocities must be inferred or determined using other means
(e-g-, PWD).
Figure 5.7. Subcostal approach. This transducer position is used
principally for Doppler recordings of Ao ejection and typically yields the
best alignment with flow in dogs. The liver is interposed between the
transducer and heart. The CFD image (B) depicts Ao ejection
259
Figure 5.8. M-mode scan-line orientation. 2DE is used to position the
transducer and orient the scan line throughout M-mode recordings as
shown. Orientations are depicted for LV (A), MV (B), and Ao-LA (C)
rec ordings.
260
RV
RV
Figure 5.9. M-mode at the LV level. The M-mode recording (middle tier)
is generated from the selected scan line shone in the RPS SAx (top tier)
and LAx (bottom tier) images. Time marker A is at end diastole
coinciding with the onset of the QRS complex of the electrocardiogram.
Time marker B is at end systole, which coincides with the minimum LV
dimension near the end of the electrocardiographic T wave.
261
Color flow Doppler (CFD) is a pulsed-wave modality in which velocity
characteristics are encoded to a color display, via a user selected mapping,
and overlaid onto the real-time 2DE image. This enables the
ultra-sonographer to visualize directly the source of velocities within the
heart and great vessels within the anatomical framework of the image.
Being a pulsed-wave modality, CFD is subject to velocity measurement
ambiguity caused by aliasing (Figure 5.14). PWD and CFD are better
suited for differentiation between laminar and turbulent flow patterns than
isCwD.
Aortic flow velocity is recorded from the subcostal or LAp transducer
position for velocity quantification. The normal aortic ejection signal
peaks early in the ejection cycle and may impart a daggerlike shape to the
velocity envelope (Figure 5.15). By comparison, pulmonary ejection from
the same individual exhibits a later peak velocity with a lower maximal
value, and a longer duration of ejection (Figure 5.16). Pulmonic ejection
recordings may be obtained from either the RPS or LPS transducer
positions, and it may be appropriate to attempt both if quantification of
maximal velocity is desired. It is normal for the pulmonic valve to exhibit
a small amount of insufficiency (see Figure 5.18).
Figure 5.10. M-mode at the MV level. The M-mode recording (middle
tier) is generated from the selected scan line shone in the RPS SAx (top
tier) and LAx (bottom tier) images. The two primary mitral leaflets are
separated from each other during diastole and apposed during systole.
Time marker A is at early diastole, and marker B is at late diastole
262
immediately after the P wave of the electrocardiogram. Marker C is at a
prolonged diastasis, i.e., middiastole, and D is at end systole.
Mitral and tricuspid inflow velocities are usually recorded from the LAp
position to best align the ultrasound beam with the direction of inflow
(Figure 5.15). PWD recordings are made by placing the sample volume
near the tips of the open mitral or tricuspid leaflets to include maximal
velocities. Like their Mmode counterparts, velocity signals exhibit phasic
changes that reflect the physiology of ventricular filling. The tricuspid
inflow-velocity signal is similar to the mitral but normally exhibits
diminished velocity magnitude in comparison, in part because of greater
effective orifice area for the tricuspid valve. Recording of tricuspid inflow
is facilitated by placing the transducer one or more rib spaces farther
cranially as compared with the optimal position for mitral recordings.
Examples of normal CFD recordings are shown in Figures 5.17 and 5.18.
Tissue Doppler Recordings
Tissue Doppler recordings are employed to quantify the velocity of
motion of cardiac tissue directly. The most common use of tissue Doppler
in cardiology is to record the longitudinal (base-apex) velocity of the
mitral annulus from the LAp four-chamber position. Velocity recordings
may be obtained from either the septal or lateral mitral annulus, adjusting
transducer position so that annular motion of the chosen site is directed
along the Doppler scan line to the extent possible (Figure 5.19)
263
Figure 5.11. M-mode at the Ao root level. The M-mode recording (middle
tier) is generated from the selected scan line shone in the RPS SAx (top
tier) and LAx (bottom tier) images. Because of the orientation of the scan
line, only the left coronary cusp is typically visible during systole in the
dog. Time marker A is at middiastole, and the AV is shown closed during
this phase. Time marker B coincides with systole, and the left coronary
cusp is visible near the far-field Ao wall.
Echocardiographic Measurements and
Indices
Besides direct visual observation, structural and functional evaluation of
the  heart  may   entail   echocardiographic  measurements  of  linear
dimensions, areas, time intervals, or velocities, and calculation of
heart echocardiographically, the ultrasonographer must possess a detailed
understanding of cardiovascular physiology, pathophysiology, and the
sources of variation for observations (Table 5.2).
Measurement and Index Normalization
A basic, but troublesome, aspect of veterinary cardiology has been to
variations encountered, particularly for dogs. Although no entirely
264
satisfactory approach has been determined, a common feature of many
measurements with the same physical units. Echocardiographic ratio
indices have long been used in cardiology, with examples dating from the
beginning of the technique. Left atrial (LA) size, for example, may be
expressed in terms of aortic dimension (LA/Aom). It is often preferable,
   go s t si  r x m 
(BW, in kilograms) raised to the one-third power. The weight-based aortic
dimension, Aow = 0.795 Bw1/3, is an estimate of a dog's aortic diameter,
and expectations for LA/Aow are similar to the index derived using the
 measured aortic dimension (Figure 5.20). Similarly, the aortic area can be
approximated as AoAw = IlAow2/4, the area of a circle with radius Aow/
2, and incorporated into various area ratio indices. In dogs, for example,
LA area in the RPS short-axis orientation (SAx) image is normally 2-4
aortic areas in size, regardless of body size (LA area/AoAw = 2-4).
Figure 5.12. M-mode recordings. A: This recording is made at the LV
level corresponding to the scan-line orientation shown in Figure 5.8A
Epicardial and endocardial surfaces of the IVS and LVW are well
delineated throughout the recording, which is necessary for measurement
    s   o s  
Figure 5.8C. The AV is visible. C: This recording is at the MV level
(Figure 5.8B). D: Depicted are letter designations A-F of MV motion.
AA
RV
Table 5.2. Sources of echocardiographic variation
265
Image acquisition
Genetic variation
Observer technique
Body size
Instrument settings
Species variation
 Breed variation
 Individual variation
Measurement from images
Pathophysiology
Observer technique
Disease consequences
Cardiovascular remodeling
Hemodynamic variation (short term) Interpretive methods
Autonomic balance
Observer experience
Preload
Statistical methods
Afterload
Spectrum of normal
Contractility
Data availability
Heart rate
Drugs
Environmental variation (long term)
Nutrition
Athletic training level
Drugs
Expertise as an echocardiographer necessitates an extensive understanding
of these factors and interrelationships.
Figure 5.13. Spectral PWD aliasing. Spectral Doppler recordings
represent velocity along the y-axis, corresponding to Doppler shift
frequency, and time along the x-axis. In this example of Ao ejection, flow
is directed away from the transducer, and velocity in this direction is
depicted below the baseline. The velocity reaches the alias velocity
(Nyquist limit) at position 1 and further increases causing the signal to
wrap around to the positive side of the velocity scale (position 2). Velocity
continues to increase, actually passing the zero baseline to the peak
velocity indicated at position 3.
266
Figure 5.14. Laminar versus turbulent flow. A: The PWD Ao ejection
signal, recorded from the subcostal transducer position of a normal dog.
demonstrates a laminar flow signal. B: In contrast, a CWD recording of a
bradycardia causing a marked increase in stroke volume. This results in a
wide range of Doppler frequencies (i.e., velocities) at each moment during
the ejection and spectral broadening of the signal; the velocity envelope is
filled in (white) throughout ejection. C: A CFD image from the normal
dog (LAp transducer position) early in the Ao ejection phase. The color
pattern is laminar but depicts color aliasing that occurs at position 1.
Velocity continues to increase in the direction of the outflow and has
aliased to black, at position 2, wrapping around to blue again at position 3.
occurs so that velocity can be seen to wrap around the color scale at least
twice with a blue-yellow interface (Nyquist frequency) at positions l and
3, and indicated zero velocity at positions 2 and 4. A turbulent color flow
pattern appears in the Ao (T), as represented by small juxtaposed islands
of blue and yellow, also known as a mosaic pattern.
267
The majority of published cardiac dimensional data for dogs and cats are
from M-mode recordings. Many of these may be recast into the form of a
ratio index that enables interpretation independent of body weight. Normal
values for raw echocardiographic measurements and ratio indices are
tabulated in the Appendix at the end of this chapter.
Figure 5.15. Normal PWD recordings. PWD recordings from a normal
dog are shown for the Ao (A, LAp transducer position), pulmonic (B, RPS
position), mitral (C, LAp position), and tricuspid (D, LAp position)
valves. Characteristically, Ao ejection flow velocity peaks early in systole
and may generate a dagger-shaped velocity envelope like the one shown.
Inclusion of the valve itself in the velocity sampling volume generates a
vertical artifact that marks the end of the ejection for both cardiac cycles
shown. Normal mitral and tricuspid inflow occurs in two distinct phases
(E and A waves as labeled) corresponding to M-mode designations.
268
Figure 5.16. Variation of Ao ejection velocity with location. PWD
recordings of Ao ejection with the LAp five-chamber image (A) showing
sample volume locations. There is a marked progression of peak velocity
from the subvalvular position (1) to the valvular (2) and supravalvular (3)
positions. CWD recordings from the same transducer position (not shown)
samples all velocities included along the chosen scan line (dotted). In B,
the envelope of the CWD recording indicates the maximum velocity along
the scan line throughout ejection, and there may be considerable spectral
each moment in time.
Figure 5.17. Normal CFD images of Ao flow. A and B: CFD images
from the RPS position of a normal dog. [nflow (A) and outflow (B)
velocities of the LV are not aligned with the direction of ultrasound
velocities is not achieved. A: Normal mitral inflow in early diastole is
directed relatively toward the transducer and depicted in red in accordance
with the color velocity map shown. B: LV ejection follows a bend in the
Ao so that part of the flow is directed toward the transducer (red), part is
directed away (blue), and velocity is completely perpendicular to the
ultrasound beam at location l, where velocity appears to be zero (black).
Color aliasing occurs at location 2, where flow away from the transducer
269
exceeds the Nyquist limit. Improved LV inflow and outflow alignment are
achieved from the LAp position. C: Early peak Ao ejection, with color
aliasing. D: Subsequent ejection at decreased velocity.
A
B
Figure 5.18. Normal CFD images of mitral and pulmonic flow. LV
inflow, recorded from the LAp 4 chamber view, is shown for early
diastole (A) and for atrial kick (B), corresponding to the E and A waves of
mitral inflow, respectively (Figure 5.32). RPS SAx images of pulmonic
flow correspond to laminar systolic ejection (C) and mild PI (D). The
latter is a normal finding.
270
VO
Figure 5.19. TD recording of mitral annular velocity. Velocity sampling
locations are depicted in the LAp four-chamber image (A) to record either
septal or lateral mitral annulus velocity (B). Diastolic annular velocity
measurements recapitulate the mitral inflow pattern with two distinct
phases of filling. The LV expands longitudinally in both early and late
diastole, resulting in annular velocity away from the transducer and
generation of the Em and Am waves, respectively. LV contraction entails a
longitudinal component that is directed toward the transducer and
generation of the systolic TD wave (Sm).
A
Figure 5.20. Ratio index normalization for body size. Size normalization
Of measured linear dimensions, area, volume, or mass can often be
accomplished by using a ratio index. The measured Ao diameter (Aom),
obtained from M-mode or 2DE recordings, has been used as a suitable
271
reference length in echocardiography. The diastolic LV internal dimension
(LVIDd), for example, ranges between 1.2 and 2.0 Ao diameters across in
normal dogs, regardless of body size. However, the Ao dimension also
may be estimated from body weight (kilograms), as shown, and often is
superior statistically to Aom as a length standard.
AO=0.795BW3
LVIDd/Ao~1.5
VIDd/Ao-1.6
Linear Dimensions
       
cursor alignment. For LV measurements, the M-mode scan line should
transect the LV central axis perpendicularly near the tips of the open
mitral leaflets (Sahn et al. 1978; O'Rourke et al. 1984). M-mode linear
measurements are made vertically along the y-axis of the strip chart, i.e.,
at  a  specific  instant  in  time
(Figure 5.21). A simultaneous
electrocardiogram facilitates timing of the cardiac cycle where the QRS
complex signals the end of diastole. It is typical for the maximum LV
internal dimension to occur during the QRS complex, and it is often
possible to observe a slight presystolic distension induced by atrial
contraction. End systole occurs near the end of the electrocardiographic T
wave, but the timing of the systolic measurement is determined from the
echocardiogram itself at the occurrence of the minimum LV internal
dimension. Normally, the inter-ventricular septum moves away from the
transducer during systole while the LV wall moves toward it, but motion
        ss s  
interval near end systole where the septum and LV wall both move toward
the transducer. Consequently, the minimal internal dimension need not
coincide with maximal wall excursions with respect to the transducer.
 s       
images of the 2DE, and this is preferable whenever M-mode cursor
alignment is not attainable (O'Grady et al. 1986; Schiller et al. 1989)
(Figure 5.22).
272
        
short-axis dimension corresponds to the LV internal dimension (LVID)
from M-mode, whereas D2 must be determined from 2DE, from either the
RPS SAx or LAp two-chamber image, as shown. LV length (L) is
measured from the plane of the mitral annulus to the LV apex along the
central LV axis (Schiller et al. 1989).
LeftApical 2-Chamber
1
RightParasternal LongAxis
D1
(LVID
VID
RightParasternal ShortAxis
LeftApical4-Chamber
LA size embodies relevant diagnostic and prognostic information, but
shape (Rishniw and Erb 2000; Hansson et al. 2002). The measurement
includes only a small portion of the structure—the atrial appendage—plus
a variable thickness of adipose tissue that lies between the aorta and
appendage. Body-size normalization of the M-mode measurement in dogs
has been accomplished through division by the measured aortic dimension
(Aom). Mean values of this ratio are near 1.0 across the entire body-size
spectrum but with normal maximum values up to 1.4, depending on breed
273
1.2 to 1.7 cm, depending on the study (Appendix). Linear 2DE LA
measurements from SAx and LAx images afford advantages in sensitivity
counterparts, maximal 2DE LA size determinations are made at end
systole, just prior to the mitral valve opening.
Figure  5.22.
Linear ventricular
measurements
fromM-mode
echocardiography. 2DE guidance for transducer placement and M-mode
scan-line selection is paramount for accurate and reproducible results.
Subscripts d and s refer to diastolic and systolic determinations.
respectively, where end diastole coincides with the greatest LV internal
dimension (LVID), typically shortly after the onset of the QRS complex,
and systole coincides with the smallest LVID. The Ao measurement is
made at end diastole, coincident with maximal distance of the Ao from the
transducer, and the LAA measurement is made at its maximal dimension
in time, coinciding with end systole. Linear measurements are made
vertically across the strip chart. EPSS, end point to septal separation
distance; and RVID, RV internal dimension.
VDd
LVC
Measurements of aortic and pulmonary trunk diameter may be used to
evaluate these outflow tracts for narrowing, stenosis, or dilation, and also
are used for estimations of ventricular stroke volume and cardiac output in
conjunction with Doppler velocity measurements (Figure 5.24).
Cardiac Volume and Mass
Numerous mathematical formulas have been proposed for the estimation
of ventricular volume, which pertains importantly to cardiovascular
diagnosis and prognosis.
274
        i o 
(EDV - ESV)/EDV, where EDV and ESV are the end-diastolic volume
and the end-systolic volume, respectively (Schiller et al. 1989). Many
cardiologists use the terms ejection fraction and systolic function
synonymously. The one-dimensional analogue of ejection fraction is the
fractional shortening, FS = (LVIDd - LVIDs)/LVIDd, determined usually
from M-mode short-axis measurements of diastolic (LVIDd) and systolic
(LVIDs) LV internal dimension. LV stroke volume (SV) may be
estimated from the difference between diastolic and systolic volumes. A
body-size normalized ratio index, wAA (Table 5.3), is the estimated LV
SAx stroke area divided by the weight-based aortic area. Values derived
from M-mode measurements range from 0.8 to 2.8 in dogs and may be
is simplistic but valuable for clinical quantification of LV volume
overload or underloadinthe authors’experience. Relative
echocardiographic ratio indices of the left ventricle and interventricular
septum are defined in Table 5.4.
Figure 5.23. LA size determination. LA size determination is problematic
because of the irregular three-dimensional shape. In dogs, the standard
M-mode measurement includes only a small portion of the LA, i.e., the
 () x  h    s  ) 
LAx (B) are more representative of atrial size but still suffer from angular
dependence. The planimetered SAx LA area and circumference are less
dependent on angle (C). LA measurements studied by Rishniw and Erb
may be conveniently expressed as a ratio index, dividing linear
）and
Each index exhibits minimal dependence on body size. Mean ± standard
       s   
supplied by Rishniw and Erb (2000). A, area; BW, body weight; C,
circumference; D, diameter, and max, maximum.
275
LAXLAD
SAXLA
LA5AxD/AOw=1.23±0.16[0.82-1.61]
LA LAxD/AOw=1.58±0.13[1.32-1.94]
LASAxC/Aow= 6.47 ± 0.65[5.32-7.96]
LA SAx A / AoAw = 2.49 ± 0.48 [1.54 - 3.38]
AoSAxD/AD
=0.96 ±0.12[0.71- 1.31]
AoSAxC/Ao
=3.29±0.39 [2.51-4.18]
Ao SAx A/ AoAw = 0.93 ± 0.22 [0.54 - 1.51]
AxAoCircumference
SAxLA Circumference
Figure 5.24. LVOT and RVOT diameters. RPS LAx (A and B) and
SAx (C) images are shown. Measurements are made perpendicular to the
vessel axes, and longitudinal vessel images show how dimensions vary in
diameter with axial location. A: Position 1 depicts the Ao root diameter in
diastole. B: The systolic dimension, where the measurement can be made
diameter. Position 2 in A corresponds to the dilation that occurs at the
sinus of Valsalva, and position 3 is the sinotubular junction, a local
Accurate determination of RVOT diameter is problematic because the
ultrasound beam is nearly parallel to the reflecting surfaces.
B
LV mass may be estimated by calculating the external volume of the left
ventricle and subtracting the internal volume (Schiller et al. 1989) (Figure
5.25). Myocardial mass is normally proportional to body weight and thus
requires normalization. Ratio indices wWAd and wWAs correspond to
276
normalized LV short-axis wall area in diastole and systole, respectively.
where myocardial wall area is divided by the weight-based aortic area
 8l o   sop  4 go sa (o (9 2)
5.5 but with significant breed dependency; upper values in Italian not
estimate true myocardial mass. However, they greyhounds, whippets, and
greyhounds range from may be superior indicators of hypertrophy
compared 5.0 to 6.0 (Appendix). These are clinical indices derived with
simple measurements of wall thickness, which from M-mode or planar
2DE measurements that do can depend strongly on hemodynamic
conditions.
Figure 5.25. LV mass estimation by 2DE methods. Short-axis external
(A1) and internal (A2) areas are determined by planimetry at the level of
the mitral CT and used to determine geometric mean radii, both outer (r1)
and inner (r2); constant wall thickness (t) is assumed. The major axis of
the ellipsoid (a) is measured along the LV axis from the apex to the point
of maximal radius, as shown; the distance (d) comprises the remainder of
the LV length from the apex to the mitral annulus. The constant (1.05
g/cm') is the density of normal soft tissue. LV mass values obtained by
either equation require normalization for body size (Schiller et al. 1989)
277
105
LVMass-Area-Length
1.05
[+
3（a+)
LVMass-Truncated Ellipsoid
Table 5.3. Weight-based echocardiographic ratio indices
Indax
Calulation
Desuriptinn
wAo
Aom/Acw
Indexedaorticroctdimension
PSAIM
IVSd/Aow
Indoxed intorvontricular soptal thickness,diactole
wLVIDd
LVIDd;AOw
Indoxedloft ventricular intornal dimension，diastolc
wLWWd
LVwd'Ao
Indoxed loft ventricular wall thickncss,diastolo
wIVSs
IVSs/Aow
Indexedinterventricular septalthickness,systole
WLVIDs
LVIDs/Ao
Indexed leftventricularinternal dimensionsystole
wLWW's
LWWs/ACw
Indexed left ventricular wall thickness, systole
WLA
LA/AOW
Indexed left atrial dimension
wLVODd
IVSd+ LVIDd + LVWd/An
Index of left ventricular utar mension,diastole
wWTd
(IVSd+LWWd）/Ao
Indexofconbined sepial and left ventriculer wall Lhickness, diastole
wLVODs
{IVSs +LVIDs +LVWs）Ao
Iex lft ventricular r irnersinsystole
wWTs
(IVSs+LVWs)/4o
Index of combined septal and leftventricularwallthickness,systole
W4A
LVIDd²-LVIDs²)Ao2
Index of hane in lft ventriculr inteel area,ie., short-exisstroke ar
wWAd
LVODd²-LVIDC/Ao²
Index of left ventricular short-axismyccardial wallareaciastola, i.
(LVODs²-LVIDs²Ao
Index of left ventricular short-axis myccardial wall area, systole, i.
hypartrophy
wWAs
hyportrophy
Aretio index normalizes rew cchocardicgraphicmoesurements far body size.Acis the weight-based aoric dimension calculated s
Ao-kDW where k is a spsties-depencent constant ecual to 0.795 in dogs and 0.567 in cats.
Table 5.4. Relative echocardiography ratio indices
278
Index
Cakalation
Description
FS
(LVIDd-LVIDs/LVIDd
Fractional shortening.Relative left ventricular intemal wallmcticn or LV
short axic deformation
FWTd
PCOAVIPAT+PSA
Frectional left ventriculermyocardial wallthickness,diastole.Relative left
ventriculer woll thickness in dicstole.
FWTs
VSs+LVWs/LVCDs
Frectional left ventriculermyocardial wallthickness,systole.Relative left
ventricular wall thickness in systole.
FsA
（LVIDd²-LVIDs/LVIDd
Frctional changeinlft ventriculrinteal areaRelativleftventricuar
internal wall motion or laft veniricular short-axis deforrnation.
FWAd
(LVOD-LVIDd(LVODd)
Frctinallfveriulryxardialwallreashoraxisdiastole
Relativeleftvantricularwallarea in diastole
FWAs
(LVODs²-LVIDs)/ILVCDs²)
Fractional left ventricularmyocardial wall area(short axis).Relativa left
ventricular wall area in systola.
IVSFT
(NSsIVSd/IVSd
Intraventricular scptum fraoticnal thickcning.Relativo thickening of
intorventrioularcoptum.
LVWFT
(LVWs-LVWd）/LVWd
Left ventricular wallfractionel thickening.Felative thickening of lett
2LVW/LVIDd
Relativeleft ventricularwellthickness,diastcle.Felativeleftventriculer
ventriculer wall.
RWTd
wall thickness to charbar dimension, diastale
RWTs
2LVWs/LVID
Relative lefventricularwll thickness,syslle.Relaliveeftventricular
wall thickness to chamber dimension,systale
Fractionalhorteningieabetterknownratiindexderivedbydividingthechanginlafventrioularinternal dimeneinbythdiatolic
uuudenexeeed  ln
fcr some aepet of heart size, not for the eize f the indivicual.
Doppler
MFractional
shortening
is
better-easurements and Systolie Time Intervals
Much of the quantitative value of Doppler studies stems from the
application of fluid dynamic principles to the interpretation of measured
velocities through the modified Bernoulli equation (Hatle and Angelsen
1985). The modified Bernoulli equation is expressed as AP = 4 V2 for
 many clinical applications, where velocity (V) is in meters per second (m/
s) and the calculated pressure is in millimeters of mercury (mm Hg).
Velocity recordings are optimized accomplished at the time  of  the
recording by diligent positioning of the transducer at the appropriate
body-wall location, aided by cues from the CFD image and both visual
and auditory feedback from the spectral Doppler display (Darke et al.
1993). Transducer position varies with the specific lesion to be evaluated,
e.g-, aortic stenosis versus mitral regurgitation (MR), as well as nuances
specific to the individual.
Besides pressure gradients, valuable functional information is derived
from spectral Doppler signals that enable the timing of cardiac cycle
events and estimation of blood flow rate (Figure 5.26). Systolic time
intervals have been employed for many years to evaluate cardiac function,
predating the ultrasonic era, but Doppler signals are ideal for obtaining the
required measurements. Systolic time intervals are determined from time
279
measurements of the cardiac cycle and consequently are indices of global
function; determinations are most commonly used to evaluate LV
function. A ratio index of preejection period (PEP)-LV ejection time
(PEP/LVET), is often used to help normalize raw time measurements for
body size and heart rate. An additional index, the velocity of
circumferential shortening, is equivalent to the fractional shortening
    s o  (it)     
cardiac deformation. Additional determinations made from either aortic or
pulmonary flow-velocity signals include the acceleration time and the
velocity time integral (VTI). Acceleration time is related to both
myocardial function and afterload (Figure 5.26).
The aortic or pulmonary VTl is the planimetered area under the
flow-velocity envelope. It has physical units of length (e-g-, centimeters),
has been termed the stroke length (Figure 5.30). Multiplication of the VTI
by the effective orifice area (AE) gives the volume of blood passing
through the orifice during the ejection, ie., the forward stroke volume (SV
= VTI × AE). Multiplication of the stroke volume by heart rate gives the
cardiac output. The effective orifice area (AE) may be estimated from 2DE
the measured diameter (D) to compute the area of a corresponding circle
(A=πD²/4) (Figure5.24)
Figure 5.26. Measurements from Ao spectral Doppler signals. A:
Planimetry of the area under the flow-velocity envelope yields the
velocity-time integral (VTI), which has units of length (e.g., centimeters).
B: Measurement of the temporal peak velocity (Vpeak). C: Determination
of timing intervals. The preejection period (PEP) is from the onset of the
electrocardiographic QRS complex to the onset of ejection. Measurement
of the ejection time (ET) is facilitated by inclusion of the Ao valve in the
interval. Total electrical-mechanical systole is from the onset of the QRS
to Ao valve closure (QAVC) and is the sum of PEP and ET. The
the peak flow velocity. Average flow velocity (e.g-, centimeters per
second) can be determined by dividing the VTI by ET. Terminology
applies to RV outflow signals, as well.
280
QAVC
Figure 5.27. Measurements from mitral inflow signals. Measurements
include peak velocities for the E and A waves and the velocity-time
integrals (VTIs) of each. The E/A peak velocity ratio, normally greater
than l.0, or VTIe/VTIA may be used to quantify relative contributions of
each to ventricular filling. Peak velocities are related to the peak
atrial-ventricular pressure gradient through the Bernoulli equation and so
may suggest valvular stenosis or increased LA pressure. The acceleration
time (AT) is the interval from opening of the MV to peak velocity. The
velocity to baseline along the flow-velocity envelope, as shown; it is
common for the A wave to intervene without the velocity envelope
reaching zero. The slope of the deceleration may also be recorded.
VTI
Measurements from mitral and tricuspid inflow-velocity signals include
the velocity magnitude of the E and A waves and the planimetered area
(VTI) for each (Figure 5.27). Factors affecting the form of inflow
velocities are complex and pertain to diastolic ventricular function.
281
CONGENITAL HEART
DISEASE
Valvular Diseases
Aortic Stenosis
Aortic stenosis (AS) signifies an obstruction to LV outflow. It may be
valvular, subvalvular (subaortic stenosis [SAS]), or supravalvular. SAS is
the most common congenital defect of large-breed dogs. Moderate to
severe SAS causes characteristic, but variable, 2DE abnormalities,
including discrete or diffuse narrowing of the LV outflow tract,
 poststenotic aortic dilation, and thickening of the aortic and anterior mitral
valve leaflets (Figure 5.28). On the RPS LAx image, a subvalvular
obstruction may appear as an echogenic ridge on the septum, mitral
apparatus, or both, corresponding to a complete or incomplete
hyperechoic ring of fibrocartilaginous tissue encircling the outflow tract
(Bonagura and Herring 1985b). AS causes LV pressure 0verload and
wall thickness and other indices of absolute or relative hypertrophy. The
extent of hypertrophy is variably correlated with the severity of
obstruction. Severe obstruction also may be accompanied by increased
echogenicity of the papillary muscles and/or sub-endocardial myocardium,
possibly secondary to ischemia of these regions and subsequent fibrosis or
calcification. In severely affected cases, M-mode echocardiography of the
aortic root may demonstrate premature systolic closure of the aortic valve.
CFD of the LV outflow tract in systole reveals a region of flow
acceleration proximal to the obstructive lesion, and turbulent or disturbed
flow with increased velocity distally (Moise 1989) (Figure 5.29)
Arbitrary prognostic categories based on the pressure gradient are mild
pue (8H ww 001-9) as (3H ww 909) pou (sH ww 05>)
becomes more rounded, and its acceleration time increases; that is,
282
delayed peak velocity with increasing severity (Figure 5.30). The pressure
gradient and peak velocity are flow-dependent indices of severity.
In the absence of shunts or significant semilunar valve insufficiency, the
ratio of aortic (VTIA) and pulmonary (VTIP) VTIs approximates the ratio
of effective orifice areas of the two tracts and is corrected for body size
and flow rate. In the authors’ experience, VTIA/ VTIP > 1.6 (PWD at the
valve level) is suggestive of mild SAS and is specific compared with
velocity alone (Figure 5.30). Bicuspid aortic valve is a common congenital
defect in human patients but a rare cause of stenosis in dogs and cats
(Figure 5.31).
Figure 5.28. RPS SAx images from a dog with subaortic stenosis (SAS).
The maximum Ao dimension occurs normally at the level of the Ao sinus
of Valsalva (A); valve leaflets are evident. The obstruction in SAS is most
typically at the immediate subvalvular location, and the short-axis view
may suggest the anatomical severity in terms of cross-sectional area
relative to the Ao root (B). C: Thickened LVW and LV septum, caused by
concentric hypertrophy, are evident. There is an increase
in
    ()  
secondary to ischemia. D: M-mode through the Ao root depicts Ao valve
leaflets (AV) that separate partially in early systole, only to quickly return
to the closed position. The leaflets may inscribe a diamond or double
diamond within the confines of the Ao root.
283
PM
LVW
Pulmonic Stenosis
Pulmonic stenosis (PS) is the third most common congenital cardiac
defect in dogs but is uncommon in cats. PS signifies an obstruction to RV
outflow and may occur at subvalvular, supravalvular, or valvular
locations, the latter being the most common site in dogs. Potential
echocardiographic features in common with all forms of PS include RA
enlargement, poststenotic dilation of the pulmonary trunk, and concentric
hypertrophy of the right ventricle with increased thickness of the septum
and RV wall. The RV papillary muscles may become prominent, as do
trabeculae carnae, imparting an uneven appearance to the RV endocardial
surface and contributing to obstruction. Increased echogenicity of the RV
myocardium may be associated with severe obstruction and presumed
ischemic myocardial damage. Severe RV pressure overload causes
flattening of the interventricular septum and an ovoid LV cross section in
284
the short-axis plane. LV volume underload in this circumstance may
suggest concentric LV hypertrophy erroneously (pseudohypertrophy) with
increased LV wall thickness and decreased LV and LA internal
dimensions (Figure 5.32)
Figure 5.29. CFD images from a dog with subaortic stenosis (SAS). A:
This RPS LAx 2DE image depicts the location of the obstruction
immediately proximal to the AV and is confirmed by CFD in B. Although
the example shown includes both septal and mitral aspects of the
encircling obstruction, neither may be clearly evident, depending on the
extent and location of the collar. C and D: CFD images obtained from the
 o   a  s    d
convergence zone appears where flow acceleration and color aliasing
occur proximal to the obstruction. A turbulent mosaic pattern is apparent
distally in the Ao. D: Ao insufficiency present in the same patient during
diastole. Here the flow convergence zone is in the Ao as blood accelerates
toward the transducer at the location of the A V. CFD clearly demonstrates
that the location of the obstruction is proximal to the valve in this instance.
Mild to moderate Ao insufficiency commonly accompanies SAS.
285
SAS
LV
C
V
SAS
Figure5.30.
Spectral Doppler  recordings  in subaortic
stenosis.
Recordings from the pulmonary (A, RPS position) and Ao (B, subcostal
position) outflow tracts of a dog. A temporal peak velocity of 6 m/s for the
stenosis corresponds to a maximum pressure gradient of 4 × 62 = 144 mm
Hg and a very severe stenosis. The area under each phasic velocity curve,
indicated by hatching, is termed the velocity-time integra! (VTI) and has
physical units of length (e.g-, centimeters). This quantity has also been
termed the stroke length, corresponding to the length of a figure whose
volume equals the cardiac stroke volume, and whose cross-sectional area
is the effective orifice area the ventricle ejects through. If the stroke
volumes of the two ventricles are the same, then the ratio of VTIs
approximates the ratio of effective orifice areas and is an index of stenosis
severity that is relatively flow independent.
286
>000
StrokeLength=Velocity-TimeIntegral
Figure 5.31. Valvular Ao stenosis. 2DE RPS SAx (A) and LAx (B)
images from a dog with a bicuspid Ao valve. A: Only two cusps (C) are
evident where there are normally three. B: A maximal opening excursion
 of the leaflets. Significant stenosis accompanied this unusual abnormality,
as evidenced by the Doppler recordings (not shown).
StrokeLength=Velocity-TimeIntegral
In valvular PS, leaflets may be thickened and/or fused at the commissures
   sal s a n i    
valvular dome as they bulge into the pulmonary artery during systole. The
outflow tract itself may be hypoplastic and echogenic in conjunction with
valvular lesions. An unusual form of subvalvular PS is caused by a
discrete fibromuscular partition separating the RV outflow tract from the
287
RV; this condition has also been termed doubie-chamber right ventricle
(Figure 5.33). Supravalvular obstructions also may be visualized.
Combined Doppler examination of the RV outflow tract enables peak
gradient quantification (CWD) and confirms the location of the
obstruction, indicated by the velocity step up (PWD) or flow convergence
zone (CFD) just proximal to the lesion. Suggested prognostic categories
based on the pressure gradient are mild (<50 mm Hg), moderate (50-100
 go s  d (  ol) as e  
categories for specific outcomes have not been determined. Mild to
moderate tricuspid regurgitation  commonly  coexists  with  significant
pressure overload of the right heart. CWD evaluation of this jet velocity
sometimes provides supplemental quantitative information, particularly
when alignment with the PS jet is problematic.
Figure 5.32. Valvular pulmonic stenosis in a dog. RPS SAx 2DE image
(A), RPS CFD at the PV (B), and CWD of the pulmonic flow jet (C) from
a dog with severe valvular pulmonic stenosis. The RVW is extremely
echogenicity of the myocardium is thought to be caused by ischemia and
fibrosis. The septum is displaced toward the LV, thus causing an ovoid
LV cross section because of the flattened septum. CFD confirms the
location of the obstruction at the valve. A velocity of nearly 8.0 m/s
corresponds to a peak pressure gradient of 4 x 8^ = 250 mm Hg and severe
obstruction.
Figure 5.33. Subvalvular pulmonic stenosis in a dog. RPS SAx 2DE (A)
and CFD (B) from the pulmonary outflow tract of a dog with
double-chamber RV, a variant of subvalvular pulmonic stenosis. The PV is
of normal thickness, but a discrete sub-valvular stenosis (SVS) divides the
RV proper from a sub-valvular chamber (SVC). CFD confirms the
location of the obstruction, proximal to the valve. C: This RPS LAx image
288
illustrates marked thickening of the RVW and an area of increased
C
Tricuspid Dysplasia
Dysplasia of the tricuspid valve may entail a wide range of structural
abnormalities. The condition is transmitted genetically  in  Labrador
retrievers, the most frequently affected canine breed. Echocardiographic
findings may include abnormal numbers or arrangement of papillary
muscles; chordae tendinae may be foreshortened or papillary muscles may
attach directly to a valve leaflet. Tricuspid leaflets may be elongated
(Figure 5.34) or shortened and abnormally tethered to the septum or RV
wall, thereby restricting motion and function; leaflet fusion may cause
stenosis (Figure 5.35). The entire tricuspid apparatus may be displaced
toward the cardiac apex, similar to Ebstein's malformation in human
patients.  Tricuspid  dysplasia  may cause  valvular regurgitation  and
variable degrees of RV volume overload with dilation of the right
ventricle and right atrium. Doppler examination reveals tricuspid
regurgitation; the origin of this jet, determined from the flow convergence
zone, may be displaced toward the RV apex.
289
RA
Figure 5.34. Tricuspid dysplasia and pulmonic stenosis in a Labrador
retriever with RCHF. The RPS LAx CFD image (A) demonstrates marked
TR. Unusually, the extreme RA dilation caused the RPS position to be
suitable for TR velocity quantification with the jet directed toward the
transducer (B). A TR jet velocity of 5.0 m/s suggests a driving pressure of
4 × 52 = 100 mm Hg and is incompatible with normal RV pressure. In this
case, RV pressure overload caused by pulmonic stenosis was responsible
(not shown). The LAp four-chamber view (C) demonstrates extreme
dilation of both the RA and RV. The TV leaflets are overlong and
displaced toward the apex (compare with the position of the mitral
leaflets). The CFD image from the same location (D) demonstrates
RV. Frame-by-frame visualization of the tricuspid apparatus revealed
direct attachment of PMs to the tricuspid leaflets and a network of
290
abnormal interconnecting CT, tethering the TV leaflets to the myocardial
wall.
[ncreased tricuspid regurgitation jet velocity (e-g-, >3.0 m/s) should
prompt consideration of concurrent pulmonary hypertension or PS, and
atrial septal defect also may accompany the condition (Figure 5.34).
 Tricuspid stenosis also may be caused by dysplasia of this valve leading to
a diastolic jet (e-g-, >2.0 m/s) into the right ventricle.
Mitral Dysplasia
Mitral valve dysplasia (MD) may entail a wide range of structural and
functional abnormalities, including abnormal numbers or origins of
papillary muscles; excessively shortened, lengthened, or thickened
chordae tendinae; and abnormal chordal attachments to nonvalvular
structures (Figures 5.36 and 5.37).
Clinically relevant forms of MD cause hemodynamically significant MR
(most commonly), mitral stenosis, or aortic outflow obstruction. The
authors have encountered several cases of MD causing SAS directly
where the anterior mitral leaflet was tethered to the septum. Subsequent
rupture of the abnormal chordae caused spontaneous resolution of the
stenosis.
Patent Ductus Arteriosus
Left to right patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) is the first or second most
the condition include LV and LA dilation, LV hypertrophy, and increased
stroke volume (volume overload) (Figure 5.38). Both the aorta and
pulmonary trunk may be dilated in conjunction with increased blood flow.
CFD examination of the pulmonary trunk reveals continuous turbulent
flow and is useful in establishing the site of the ductus itself.
Continuous-wave   spectral  Doppler   velocity  quantification   reveals
continuous flow into the pulmonary trunk and a peak velocity during
systole of roughly 4.5-5.5 m/s, corresponding to the normal systolic
aortic-pulmonic gradient of 80-120 mm Hg (Moise 1989). Velocities
a more complex lesion.
291
Figure 5.35. Tricuspid dysplasia with valvular stenosis and regurgitation.
2DE LAp four-chamber image (A) and CWD recording (B) from a
Labrador retriever. Arrows indicate the position of tricuspid leaflets at
maximal separation during diastole. A TR velocity of less than 3.0 m/s (B)
is consistent with relatively normal TR driving pressure (RV pressure -
  s a d  o     = sd 
increased.  The  inflow  recording  demonstrates  abnormal  spectral
broadening, and the velocity is elevated throughout diastole. A peak
inflow gradient of4 × 3.52 = ca. 50 mm Hg occurs at the Doppler A wave
following a large P wave on the electrocardiogram. The E-F slope is
flattened because of delayed pressure equalization between the atrium and
ventricle.
RA
TR
Figure 5.36. Mitral dysplasia with valvular stenosis and regurgitation in a
cat. RPS LAx (A) and SAx (B) images obtained during maximal diastolic
separation of the MV leaflets. A: The tip of the anterior leaflet is tethered.
so that the valve cannot open normally, and bows toward the septum
because of increased LA pressure. A PM attaches directly to the parietal
(posterior) leaflet (i.e., extreme shortening of CT). B: The diminished
maximal orifice area is suggested by the cross-sectional image at the level
of the valve tips. C: The PWD recording (LAp transducer position)
demonstrates a turbulent diastolic inflow signal, and the E wave
approaches 2 m/s, corresponding to a 16-mm Hg gradient across the MV
(modified Bernoulli equation). A turbulent MR signal with aliasing is also
present. This example demonstrates a relatively mild case of stenosis, as
suggested by the peak inflow velocity and also the rapid decline of
velocity after the peak of the E wave (compare with E-F slope of the
292
  i   (es  u xa s 
obtained during diastole demonstrates a flow convergence zone at the
atrial side of the MV and a turbulent inflow jet within the LV. The systolic
image (E) demonstrates the MR jet into the enlarged LA.
B
D
It is valuable to image the ductus directly and to determine carefully its
suitability for interventional closure by coil embolization.
Right to left shunting patent ductus arteriosus (reverse PDA or RPDA) is
ue sonp sl e m sop un so eoid o inq uooun
persistent fetal circulation. Failure of the normal reduction of pulmonary
vascular resistance at birth produces pulmonary pressures that approach or
exceed aortic values and consequent reversal of the shunt flow direction
and arterial desaturation, which may persist from birth. This scenario is
consistent with echocardiography findings of a thickened RV wall and
septum typical of an RV pressure overload (Figure 5.39). The alternate
RPDA scenario, i.e., left to right PDA producing progressive pulmonary
hypertension and eventual shunt reversal, is less likely. The latter would
be expected to include LV dilation secondary to LV stroke volume
Overload.
293
Figure 5.37. Mitral dysplasia in a Rottweiler puppy. A and B: The RPS
LAx images depict marked LV and LA dilation. On the close-up (B), a
PM is visible giving rise to shortened CT that distract the MV abnormally
toward the LVW. There was dramatic MR (not shown).
LV
MV
LV
A
Figure 5.38. Left to right shunting patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). As
Suggested by the 2DE SAx LV image (A) and M-mode (B), PDA causes
LV dilation and stroke volume overload. Fractional shortening was
depressed in this case, and the E-point to septal separation distance
(EPSS) was increased (C), suggestive of marked ventricular remodeling
and deteriorating myocardial function. RPS SAx images (D-F) enable
visualization of a large ductus (DA) that narrows at its entry into the
pulmonary circulation. CFD images in systole (E) and diastole (F)
facilitate the diagnosis by showing continuous flow from the PDA causing
turbulence in the PT. A prominent CFD mirror-image artifact (MIA) is
evident. Visualization and evaluation of the PDA is facilitated by the
Occurrence of a flow convergence zone (FCZ).
294
FPSS
Figure 5.39. Reverse patent ductus arteriosus (RPDA or right to left
PDA). The RPS SAx image (A) depicts marked RV hypertrophy,
including dramatic thickening of the RVW and the trabecular and
papillary muscles (PMs) of the interventricular septum. The LV appears
somewhat small and thick walled because of volume underload and
distortion by the RV. B: CFD imaging at the PV level depicts a laminar
flow pattern with color aliasing in the central flow core. CFD interrogation
of the RVOT, PT, and RPA yielded no evidence of stenosis, yet a
dramatic increase in TR velocity confirmed increased RV pressure and
pulmonary hypertension (not shown). 2DE echocontrast imaging of the
abdominal Ao, following venous injection of micro-aerated saline, can be
used to confirm the lesion if necessary.
B
295
RPDA is suspected when there is clinical and echocardiographic evidence
of RV pressure overload in the absence of an obstructive pulmonary
lesion. The diagnosis may be confirmed by an echocontrast study (bubble
study), if necessary. The method consists of injecting echogenic aerated
saline into a peripheral vein (e-g-, cephalic vein) while imaging the heart
 Or great vessels. This technique enables determination of which vessels or
cardiac chambers receive unoxygenated flow. In the case of RPDA, the
abdominal aorta receives echocontrast within a few seconds of injection.
having traversed the vena cava, right heart, pulmonary trunk, and ductus.
Abnormalities of Cardiac Septation
Failure of cardiac septation during embryogenesis results in a defect
between the two hearts, including atrial septal defect (ASD), ventricular
septal defect (VSD), or a combination of these two. Septation
abnormalities may cause a wide spectrum of functional disease. Because
of the normal distributions  of intracardiac pressure and chamber
compliance, both ASD and VSD most typically cause left to right shunting
of blood and pulmonary overcirculation. Under these circumstances, ASD
causes volume overload and consequent dilation of the right ventricle,
whereas VSD necessitates increased stroke volume of the left ventricle.
These abnormalities depend on the magnitude of the shunt.
Atrial Septal Defect
Deficiency of the septum secundum (septum secundum ASD) causes a
defect near the normal position of the fossa ovalis in the midatrial wall
(Figures 5.40 and 5.41). In distinction, a septum primum defect (septum
primum ASD, endocardial cushion defect, or atrioventricular canal ASD)
is located near the atrioventricular canal and may cause ASD, VSD, or
both (Figure 5.42). Sinus venosus ASD, which is rare in small animals,
occurs near the junction of the cranial vena cava. Patent foramen ovale is
not an anatomical defect but results when functional closure of the
foramen ovale at birth is not permanent. ASD flow typically is generated
by a small pressure gradient with jet velocity less than 0.5 m/s.
Figure 5.40. Secundum atrial septal defect (ASD). RPS SAx 2DE image
(A) from a dog with a large-secundum-type ASD demonstrating RV
296
dilation secondary volume overload. The RV dilation is also apparent on
the M-mode recording (B) as is paradoxicai septal motion (arrow) caused
by displacement of the septum away from the transducer with diastolic
filling of the enlarged RV. A CWD recording (C) of TR in this dog
demonstrates a peak TV gradient of 4 x 3.52 m/s = ca. 50 mm Hg,
pulmonic stenosis was evident, and pulmonary hypertension is a
well-known sequela to chronic pulmonary overcirculation.
B
R
Figure 5.41. Secundum atrial septal defect (ASD). CFD RPS LAx (A) and
SAx (B) images from the dog of the previous figure with secundum ASD
(Figure 5.40). The RV and RA are dramatically dilated because of the
volume overload generated by the defect, and there pulmonary
   eo     i n
increased velocity of blood flow in the main pulmonary artery. The LAx
image demonstrates flow across the defect. Apparent ASD flow at this
location must be differentiated from CaVC flow into the RA.
F
RV
RA
ASD
ASD
RA
RVO
LV
RPA
297
Figure 5.42. Primum atrial septal defect (ASD). LAx (A) and SAx (B)
   s- e m  e  s  
so-called common atrium. The RV is dramatically enlarged because of
volume overload, and a hyper-trophied PM attaches directly to an
elongated TV leaflet).  RV hypertrophy is secondary  to pulmonary
overcirculation and hypertension in this case. The tricuspid and mitral
apparatuses communicate through the defect, which involves the
atrio-ventricular canal portion of the ventricular septum, as well (inlet
VSD).
RW
RW
Ventricular Septal Defect
VSD also occurs with a range of anatomical and functional types. One
aspect of classification relates to whether the VsD is small and restrictive,
where the pressure gradient between the right and left ventricles is
maintained and jet velocity is greater than 4 m/s, in contrast to
nonrestrictive, where the large size of the defect approximates a single
ventricle with pressure equilibration between the right and left sides (e.g-,
<3 m/s).
The most common form of VSD in dogs and cats is caused by a defect in
the membranous (or conoven-tricular) septum located just proximal to the
aortic root (Figure 5.43). Conversely, a defect in the conotruncal septum
   n       s
(supracristal VSD, outlet VSD, or doubly committed VSD), including the
specific type associated with tetralogy of Fallot (Figure 5.44). In the latter,
298
       
disproportionate sizes of the two outflow tracts. The muscular outflow
septum obstructs the RV outflow tract, causing a sub-valvular PS, and the
aorta is enlarged and straddles (overrides) the interventricular septum.
 Tetralogy of Fallot is the most common cyanotic congenital cardiac defect
in small animals but is part of a spectrum of conditions ranging from mild
outflow tract abnormalities to pseudotruncus arteriosus with pulmonary
atresia, where conotruncal septal malalignment is so marked that the
pulmonary outflow tract is functionally obliterated (Figure 5.45)
Miscellaneous and Complex Congenital
Disease
A wide range of cardiac congenital defects and combination defects are
possible, with varying severity and clinical importance of each.
Echocardiographic principles are applied in each case to determine the
presence of connections between vessels and chambers and pressure
gradients between the connections.
Cor triatriatum is an unusual condition characterized by the presence of
 
perforated membrane partition (Figure 5.46). Blood received by the
accessory chamber must flow through the perforation, which may be
restrictive. A significant pressure gradient across the membrane implies
congestion of tissues and organs with venous drainage to the accessory
chamber. Cor triatriatum may occur for the right atrium (cor triatriatum
dexter) or the left (cor triatriatum sinister).
Figure 5.43. Membranous ventricular septal defect (VSD) in a cat. LAx
(A) and SAx (B) CFD RPS images from a cat with membranous (or
perimembranous) VSD. The location of the defect is identified by the
color halo of the flow convergence zone, caused by color aliasing, where
the blood accelerates through the defect; a turbulent mosaic color flow
pattern is visible in the RV. The defect is immediately proximal to the Ao
valve. This is the most common type of VSD in small animals.
299
RVOT
Figure 5.45. Tetralogy of Fallot (TF) in a cat. RPS 2DE LAx (A) and SAx
(B) images depict extreme hypertrophy of the RVW. The LV appears
diminutive and the LVW thickened as because of distortion and
underloading caused by the extreme RV disease. The overriding Ao is
demonstrated in image A where the Ao root appears to straddle the IVS
immediately distal to the ventricular septal defect (VSD). C and D:
Corresponding CFD images. The VSD was somewhat restrictive in this
case, and image C demonstrates moderate velocity flow from the RV into
extreme to the extent that the RVOT could not be fully visualized.
However, image D demonstrates flow convergence caused by infundibular
stenosis.
300
RVW
SD
VS
LVW
Figure 5.44. Outlet ventricular septal defect (VSD). LAx (A and C) and
SAx (B and C) 2DE (A and C) and CFD (B and D) RPS images from a
dog with a left-to-right restrictive VSD in conjunction with an Ao that
straddles the septum (A) (i.e., overriding Ao). The location of the defect is
identified by the color halo of the flow convergence zone, caused by color
aliasing, where the blood accelerates through the defect. Because the Ao
straddles the septum, the defect lies directly beneath the Ao valve,
particularly evident in D.
301
SD
VSD
VSD
Figure 5.46. Cor triatriatum. RPS SAx CFD image of cor triatriatum
dexter in a Labrador retriever (A) and LAx image of cor triatriatum
sinister in a young cat (B). In each case, an accessory chamber (AC) is
separated from the atrium by a restrictive membrane. A: The dog also had
tricuspid dysplasia, so the TV was displaced into the ventricle and is not
visible. B: The MV is visible, and the flow convergence zone depicts the
location of the restrictive membrane.
302
RTA
Figure 5.47. Miscellaneous and incidental abnormalities. A: The RPS
SAx view from a cat with peritoneal-pericardial diaphragmatic hernia
(PPDH). The liver (L) is juxtaposed to the heart, where normally there is
intervening lung tissue and the diaphragm. The P does not appear to
enclose the heart. The cat was presented for signs of respiratory distress,
and a thoracic radiograph revealed a markedly enlarged cardiac silhouette.
prompting cardiac evaluation. Respiratory signs were caused by bronchial
disease and unrelated to the congenital pericardial abnormality. PPDH is
often an incidental finding. Images B (RPS LAx) and C (LAp with caudal
angulation) are from a dog with marked dilation of the coronary sinus
(CS) likely caused by a persistent left CrVC. The view in image C shows
the CS entering the RA at the caudal aspect of the heart.
Peritoneal-pericardial   diaphragmatic   hernia,   which   implies 
communication between the pericardial space and the abdominal cavity, is
likely related to abnormal fetal development of the septum transversum or
pleuroperitoneal folds. The condition is most common in cats and may be
diagnosed subsequent to the incidental discovery of an enlarged cardiac
silhouette on thoracic radiography. Echocardiography reveals a range of
303
abdominal organs within the peri-cardial space. Often, cardiac function is
little affected, and determining whether clinical signs are related to the
hernia may be difficult (Figure 5.47; see also Chapter 4 and Figures 4.54
and 4.55).
Eisenmenger physiology is caused by a shunt defect (ASD, VSD, or PDA)
that results in right to left shunting subsequent to pulmonary vascular
disease. High-volume pulmonary overcirculation from a left to right shunt
may initiate a well-described sequence of pulmonary vascular changes
that ultimately causes elevation of right-sided pressures and shunt
reversal. RV hypertrophy is present, and Doppler or echocontrast studies
may assist in identifying the location and direction of the shunt.
Figure 5.48. Uncorrected transposition of the great vessels (TGV). RPS
LAx (A) and SAx (B) 2DE images from a rare case of uncorrected TGV
in a cyanotic kitten (aorticopulmonary situs inversus). A: The Ao is
evident leaving the RV while the PT joins the LV. Poststenotic dilation of
the PT is visible because of a constriction at the junction of this vessel
with the LV. B: This SAx image reveals simultaneous transverse views of
both the Ao and PT. This does not occur in a normal heart because the two
semilunar valves do not normally lie in the same plane. An atrial septal
defect was the location of bidirectional shunting in this case. A shunt is
necessary for survival beyond birth in uncorrected TGV because the
pulmonary and systemic circulations are otherwise isolated from each
Other.
Diagnosisof complexcongenitalheart diseaseisone of themost
challenging applications of echocardiography and largely beyond the
scope of this chapter. Potential abnormalities may include hypoplastic
304
cardiac chambers, atretic great vessels, and situs inversus at the level of
the abdomen, ventricles, or great vessels (Figure 5.48).
ACOUIRED HEART DISEASE
Acquired Valvular Heart Disease
Endocardiosis
Endocardiosis, also known as chronic degenerative valve disease
(CDVD), is the most common acquired heart disease of dogs and is
particularly prevalent among smaller breeds. The mitral valve is the most
commonly affected, but the tricuspid valve may be affected concurrently
and/or preferentially in individuals. Exemplary 2DE echocardiographic
findings of mitral CDVD include thickening, increased echogenicity, and
prolapse of the valvular leaflets (Bonagura and Herring 1985a).
Characteristic remodeling changes secondary to MR include progressively
increasing LA and diastolic LV dimensions (Brown et al. 2005) (Figure
5.49).  The   end-systolic
CLVinternal
dimension (LVIDs)
1S
characteristically preserved with the condition. This remodeling pattern
coincides with a normal to increased fractional shortening, which is,
consequently, a poor index for staging disease severity. In late-stage
findings have been interpreted as evidence of myocardial dysfunction or
failure (Kittleson et al. 1984).
Echocardiographic techniques for evaluation of MR range from qualitative
measures to semiquantitative. One of the simplest methods is to evaluate
the MR jet size by visual inspection on a CFD image. Alternatively, a
ratio can be calculated (i.e., planimetered jet area divided by LA area) to
provide a seemingly quantitative estimate of MR severity. Unfortunately,
the extent of the MR jet is highly dependent on CFD control settings, jet
and chamber geometry, and ambient hemo-dynamic conditions (Figure
5.50).
305
A semiquantitative Doppler method of MR evaluation involves estimation
of the regurgitant fraction by using the proximal isovelocity surface area
(PISA),which focuses on the flow convergence zone on the LV side of
the regurgitant orifice (Kittleson and Brown 2003). Instantaneous blood
flow rate across any hemisphere is simply the product of blood velocity at
that radius and the area of the hemisphere, A = 2nr². Radius and velocity
are both determined from a CFD image, the radius being the distance from
the orifice to the aliasing velocity (Figure 5.50). The PISA method is very
sensitive to the radius measurement, and determining the location of the
valvular orifice accurately can be difficult. Color M-mode can be helpful
in increasing temporal resolution and enabling visual averaging of the
radius during the regurgitant flow.
Figure 5.49. Chronic degenerative valve disease (CDVD [endocardiosis]).
A: This RPS LAx view in early systole demonstrates dilation of the LV
and LA along with prolapse of the AML, which appears as a displacement
into the LA (arrow). B: This diastolic RPS SAx view portrays dramatic
thickening of the leaflets. C: This SAx view at the level of the Ao root
demonstrates dramatic LA dilation. D: This RPS LAx view of the TV
demonstrates prolapse into the RA (arrow)
306
RA
RA
Using the maximal regurgitant flow rate (Qr [PISA method]), the peak
regurgitation velocity (Vp), and the VTI of the MR, the MR volume (Vr)
can be calculated as follows: Vr = (Qr/Vp) x VTIr. This value is used to
been estimated (VSV = areaAo x VTIAo). The regurgitant fraction is
V/(V + Vsv)
Infective Endocarditis
Infective endocarditis is an unusual, but potentially devastating,
consequence of bacteremia and/or sepsis most commonly affecting
and/or mitral valves but can also extend to surrounding myo-cardial tissue,
with possible periannular abscessation (Figure 5.51).
Figure 5.50. MR severity. Qualitative evaluation of MR can be made
from CFD assessment of jet size (A). +4 MR is associated with retrograde
jet extension into the pulmonary veins. Semiquantitative methods assume
307
that the regurgitant flow rate (cm?/s) is approximated as the surface area
of the hemispherical flow convergence zone (A = 2ITr²) multiplied by the
aliasing velocity (proximal isovelocity surface area method [PISA])
However, the computed mathematical solution of the assumed flow (B)
results in infinite velocity at the infinitesimal orifice (inner black zone);
PISA assumptions are not valid unless the hemisphere radius is large with
respect to the orifice size. C: This LAp CFD image, which is from the
regurgitant orifice of a dog with severe MR, was recorded at an aliasing
velocity of 74 cm/s; the estimated radius of the hemisphere @ is not large
enough compared with the orifice. Requirements for the PISA
determination are improved by adjusting the color baseline in the direction
of flow, downward in this case, which decreases the aliasing velocity and
increases the distance from the aliasing velocity contour to the orifice.
This has been done for the color M-mode recording in image D,
decreasing the aliasing velocity to 42 cm/s and increasing the hemisphere
radius; the radius also can be estimated from the color M-mode recording
(E).
A
B
RV
RA
IVS
LV
LVW
Nonspecific echocardiographic signs include thickened hyperechoic aortic
and mitral valve leaflets, chordal rupture, and diastolic mitral valve
308
fluttering or oscillation (Lombard and Buergelt 1983b). The diagnosis 0f
endocarditis might be difficult if lesions are small or involve only the
mitral valve of dogs predisposed to endocardiosis. Echocardiographic
follow-up may be useful in these cases by revealing rapid valvular
shadowing indicating calcification.
Large vegetative lesions may cause valvular stenosis, insufficiency, or
both. The volume overload (insufficiency, either valve) or pressure
overload (AS) is often acute. Hence, cardiac remodeling may not be
apparent even though marked functional compromise is present. Doppler
echocardiography enables confirmation and quantification of the valvular
dysfunction.
Figure 5.51. Endocarditis of the Ao and MVs. RPS SAx (A and C) and
LAx (B and D) images from a dog with mitral and Ao endocarditis. The
largest component of the vegetative lesion (V) is on the anterior leaflet of
the MV and extends into the LVOT during systole. Nevertheless, the
principal functional deficit in this case was Ao insufficiency, evident on
the CFD image (D) as dramatic diastolic flow into the LV from the Ao.
309
A
B
LV
D
Endocarditis is the most likely cause of substantial aortic insufficiency in
dogs. Echocardiographic evidence of severe aortic insufficiency includes
premature systolic mitral valve closure, an increasingly negative diastolic
slope of the aortic regurgitation Doppler velocity envelope, and flow
reversal in progressively distal segments of the aorta (Figure 5.52).
Myocardial Disease
Dilated Cardiomyopathy
include chronically increased LV dimensions particularly in systole, and
(Figure 5.53). Another fundamental diagnostic criterion is a decrease in
the ratio of wall thickness to chamber dimension representing the inability
of the myocardium to thicken appropriately. This decrease in relative wall
thickness imparts the visual impression of dilation on 2DE images.
310
Increased mitral E-point to septal separation distance is also noticed as a
consequence of LV dilation, systolic dysfunction, and decreased peak
mitral inflow.
LV echocardiographic changes are often most readily observed, but
biventricular. As the name implies, the pathology of arrhythmogenic RV
cardiomyopathy (ARVC) is initiated in the right heart but may cause
global cardiac disease resembling the typical DCM. ARVC is common in
boxers as a familial disease (also termed boxer cardiomyopathy) and has
been reported in cats (Harvey et al. 2005).
Figure 5.52. Miscellaneous findings with infective endocarditis. A:
M-mode depicts early systolic closure of the MV (arrow) caused by severe
Ao insufficiency leading to early diastolic equilibration of LV and LA
pressures. B: Diastolic MV fluttering (arrow) is caused by the turbulent
flow of Ao insufficiency past the valve. C: This RPS LAx image depicts a
large vegetation (V) on the Ao valve and a para-annular abscess (PAA). D
and E: These RPS SAx images (2DE and CFD, respectively) are from a
dog with Ao valve endocarditis, vegetative lesions (V), and rupture of the
sinus of Valsalva causing an acquired shunt. Continuous (systole and
diastole) left to right flow occurred across this defect because of the
persistent pressure gradient between the Ao and RV.
311
Doppler studies most commonly demonstrate atrioventricular  valve
regurgitation in DCM relating to cardiac dilation and consequent
dysfunction of the mitral and/or tricuspid apparatus (Figure 5.54).
Typically, atrioventricular valvular regurgitation in DCM is not as
voluminous as in CDVD, but both diseases may occur in some individuals
and produce a mixed echocardiography pattern.
Figure 5.53. DCM in a boxer. A: RPS M-mode recordings demonstrate
dramatic LV dilation and decreased fractional shortening. The E-point to
septal separation distance (EPSS) is markedly increased, as is the LA/Ao.
RPS SAx (B and D) and LAx (C) 2DE images depict marked dilation of
all chambers.
312
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), defined as a primary myocardial
abnormality, is the most common acquired heart disease in cats and is
reported as a rare condition in dogs (Fox 1999). Echocardiographic
abnormalities caused by feline HCM relate principally to myocardial
hypertrophy including increased absolute (intraventricular septum [IVS]
or LV wall [LVW]) or indexed wall thickness (wWT, wIVS, or wLVW),
increased wall thickness relative to chamber dimension (RWT, FWT, or
FWA [defined in Table 5.4]), and indices suggestive of an actual increase
in muscle mass (wWA) (Moise et al. 1986) (Appendix). Increasing
functional severity commonly is accompanied by progressive LA dilation
(Figure 5.55).
M-mode echocardiography is useful in quantifying HCM changes but also
suffers limitations. The LV wall thickness in diastole (LVWd) is less than
0.55 cm normally, and values greater than 0.60 cm are suggestive of
M-mode study. Systolic anterior motion (SAM) of the mitral valve is a
313
typifies obstructive HCM. The result is dynamic outflow obstruction and
subvalvular AS (Figure 5.56).
Figure 5.54. Valvular regurgitation with DCM. RPS LAx CFD images
from the boxer in Figure 5.53. Marked cardiac dilation contributes to TR
(A) and MR (B) commonly evident with the disease.
Figure 5.55. HCM. RPS SAx CFD images from a cat with HCM as
Suggested by thickening of the IVS and LVW, a decrease in LV internal
dimension, and LA dilation.
The obstructive aspect of HCM is best assessed with the addition of
Doppler methods. While SAM is a common source of outflow obstruction,
hypertrophy of papillary muscles or muscular trabeculae may cause
intraventricular obstruction, observed as a turbulent systolic jet emanating
from within the ventricular chamber. Continuous-wave Doppler recording
establishes the outflow tract blood flow velocity associated with an
obstruction. Study of mitral inflow velocities may suggest impaired
diastolic function and restrictive physiology (see the next section).
Figure 5.56. Dynamic LV outflow obstruction with HCM. M-mode
recordings from cats with (B) and without (A) dynamic outflow
obstruction secondary to HCM. There is pronounced thickening of the
314
IVS and LVW in both cases. Arrows in both indicate the location of the
MV during systole. A: Adequate separation between the IVS and MV
coincides with an unobstructed LVOT. B: There is systolic anterior
motion (SAM) of the MV; the MV is displaced into the LVOT and
obstructs outflow. C: This RPS LAx CFD image displays the functional
result of systolic obstruction, including both intra-Ao turbulence, caused
by dynamic stenosis, and MR. D: This LAp CWD recording from the
velocity, and a dagger-shaped velocity envelope. Increasing proximity of
the MV to the interventricular septum, beginning at the arrow, causes an
abrupt change in the envelope as the degree of obstruction increases.
Development of intracardiac  thrombi  can sometimes be observed
echocardiographically, particularly within the LA appendage (Figure
5.57). Stagnant blood flow can manifest echocardiographically as
spontaneous echocontrast, so-called smoke within the left atrium,
Suggesting a high propensity for thrombus formation.
Figure 5.57. LA thrombus. RPS SAx (A) and LAx (B) images from a cat
with restrictive cardiomyopathy demonstrating a free-floating echogenic
thrombus(T) within the LA.
315
Restrictive Cardiomyopathy
Restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM) includes a diverse array of disease that
can cause loss of ventricular compliance, restrictive physiology and,
ultimately, severe signs of congestive heart failure (Fox 1999). The source
of restriction in RCM may reside within the myocardium (myocardial
RCM) or be localized to the endocardium (endocardial RCM).
characterized in severe cases by increased velocity of the mitral E wave
followed by an abrupt termination of inflow with a shortened deceleration
time (Figure 5.58). This pattern may occur in the presence of normal
fractional shortening and ejection fraction and normal wall thicknesses or
only mild hypertrophy. Atrial dilation is often dramatic in RCM,
particularly involving the left chamber, and predisposes patients to
thromboembolic events (Figure 5.57). The LV endomyocardial form may
include increased endocardial thickness and echogenicity, distortion and
dysfunction of the mitral apparatus, or strands of echogenic tissue that
bridge the ventricular chamber walls. RCM is often diagnosed by
presence of clearly significant heart disease. Hence, echocardiographic
findings may entail a wide range of features, and a notable fraction of
feline cardiomyopathies are not readily classified morphologically
(unclassified cardiomyopathy).
316
Pulmonary Hypertension, Cor
Pulmonale, and Heartworm Disease
(Dirofllariasis)
Puimonary hypertension (PHT) is excessive pulmonary arterial pressure
and may be caused by elevated pulmonary venous pressure (left-sided
congestive heart failure, pulmonary venous obstruction, mitral stenosis, or
cor triatriatum sinister), pulmonary overcirculation (left to right shunts), or
increased pulmonary vascular resistance (pulmonary thromboembolism,
diroilariasis, chronic respiratory disease and alveolar hypoxia, external
vascular compression, vascular obliteration, persistent fetal circulation, or
idiopathic PHT)
due to congenital heart disease or left heart failure causes. 2DE evidence
of cor pulmonale may include thickening of the RV wall, papillary
muscle, and trabeculae. RV and/or RA dilation may occur, particularly if
significant tricuspid regurgitation results. The pulmonary trunk and main
branches may be dilated, which is an assessment made by comparison
with the aorta. The left ventricle may appear ovoid in cross section in the
RPS short-axis image, with septal flattening because of compression and
distortion imposed by the right heart; pseudohypertrophy of the left
a n   i-l    a
hypertrophy.  Paradoxical  septal  motion may be evident on  M-mode
recordings as systolic LV pressure distends the septum toward the
transducer (Figure 5.59). Doppler confirmation of PHT is made by CWD
or at times by PWD quantication of tricuspid regurgitation or pulmonary
insuficiency velocity; either or both may be caused by the excessive
 pressures and geometric distortion imposed by PHT.
Figure 5.58. Restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM). 2DE LAx (A) and SAx
axis (B) images and M-mode (C) and PWD mitral inflow (D) recordings
from a cat with RCM. There is dramatic atrial enlargement on the 2DE
images, particularly of the left chamber; significant RV dilation is also
present (A). Nevertheless, wall thicknesses of all chambers are normal to
mildly increased, the LV internal chamber dimensions and fractional
shortening are within normal limits (C). The PWD recording (D)
demonstrates a restrictive flow pattern. In this example, the E wave of
317
mitral inflow is prominent, with mildly increased velocity, and the A wave
is nearly absent; atrial contraction causes little additional ventricular
filling because of loss of compliance (i.e., restriction).
Heartworm disease (HWD or dirofilarasis) is an important cause of PHT
and cor pulmonale in dogs. In addition to the echocardiographic
within the pulmonary arteries, right ventricle or right atrium, or vena
cavae (Lombard and Buergelt 1983a) (Figure 5.60). Echocardiography is
an insensitive test for HWD in dogs because parasites may reside entirely
within lobar and distal pulmonary arteries, which are inaccessible to 2DE
examination. Nevertheless, when adults may be visualized in more
proximal locations of the pulmonary circulation, 2DE facilitates
qualitative evaluation of a parasite burden that becomes moderate to
marked. Vena cava syndrome is characterized by a dramatic parasite
burden within the right ventricle, right atrium, and vena cavae.
Figure 5.59. Cor pulmonale in a dog with chronic respiratory disease. A:
This RPS SAx image depicts RV dilation, flattening of the IVS, and a
small LV chamber. The RV PM is prominent because of hypertrophy, but
RVW thickening is not dramatic. B: This CFD image demonstrates PV
insufficiency, a normal finding except for the extent of the jet in this case,
and dilation of the PT and RPA. CWD recordings of (C) TR and (D)
318
velocity is greater than 4.5 m/s, which corresponds to a systolic driving
nsun ond yad p  u og t  jo ss
velocity of 3.5 m/s, with a diastolic driving pressure of about 50 mm Hg.
Adult heartworms have a distinctive echocardiographic appearance
because of the echogenicity of the parasite's cuticle relative to the gut
(Figure 5.60). Although still an insensitive test, echocardiography is an
important adjunct for the diagnosis of HWD in cats where visualization of
a single adult parasite confirms the condition.
PericardialDisease
Pericardial effusion (PE), which is the most common disorder involving
the pericardium, is readily recognized echocardiographically. Effusions
may be idio-pathic (benign idiopathic PE), neoplastic, cardiogenic
(congestive heart failure), inflammatory, infectious, or hemorrhagic in
origin. PE typically appears as an anechoic or variably echogenic space
between the epi-cardial surface of the heart and the echogenic parietal
pericardium  (Bonagura  and  Pipers 1981).  Any  significant fluid
accumulation within the pericardium should prompt the ultrasonographer
to search for a cause (advanced heart disease, neoplasia, or potential
cardiac rupture) before completing the study. Cardiac tamponade results
when PE accumulation is sufficient to elevate the intrapericardial pressure
at the level of or above the right heart filling pressure. Tamponade is
319
characterized echocardiographically by decreased ventricular size and
early diastolic collapse of the right atrium, right ventricle, or both. With
large effusions, the heart may exhibit a swinging motion within the
pericardial space, typically on an every-other-beat basis. This motion
coincides with the electrocardio-graphic occurrence of electrical alternans
and is heart rate dependent (Figure 5.61).
Figure 5.60. Heartworm disease (dirofilariasis). A: This RPS LAx image
from a dog with vena cava syndrome depicts an extensive bolus of
parasites flowing from the RA into the RV in early diastole (arrows
indicate adult parasites in A-C). B: This LAp four-chamber image is from
a rare case of vena cava syndrome from a cat with concurrent feline
immunodeficiency virus infection. The RV and RA are dilated in both A
and B. C: This RPS SAx image demonstrates parasites in a more typical
location within the RPA. D: A continuous-wave Doppler recording of PI
demonstrates a peak diastolic velocity of 3.5 m/s between the PT and RV
consistent with a driving pressure of 4 × 3.52 = ca. 50 mm Hg and
pulmonary hypertension.
320
Cardiac Neoplasia
Echocardiography is well suited for the diagnosis of cardiac neoplasia,
  s  o     o    
1984). Hemangiosarcoma is the most common cardiac malignancy, with a
Small tumors on the RA appendage often may be visualized from either
the LPS or RPS transducer positions, and visualization may be improved
by placing the transducer at the most cranial aspect of the imaging
window. Neoplasia cannot be ruled out by echocardiography, however,
suspected. PE may improve tumor visualization, providing an echo-free
zone for contrast. Hemangiosarcoma may appear mottled or cavitated
because of hypoechoic collections of blood within the tumor (Figure
5.62).
321
Figure 5.61. Pericardial effusion (PE) and tamponade. RPS SAx (A) and
LAx (B) images from a dog with PE causing cardiac tamponade. There is
 t a      a q    
RV chambers are decreased in size. The RA exhibits early diastolic
collapse in the LAx image (B, arrow). 2DE is superior for establishing the
presence or absence of PE. However M-mode (C) is sometimes valuable
for timing cardiac cycle events.
Chemodectoma (aortic body tumor), which is a common tumor of
brachiocephalic breeds, arises from aortic chemoreceptor cells that are
often situated near the base of the heart (heart base tumor) (Thomas et al.
1984). Chemodectomas range in appearance from a small nodule,
seemingly adherent to the ascending aorta, to a large mass that partially or
completely surrounds the great vessel. Tumors are most often biologically
benign and cause clinical signs from PE or compression of the trachea or
heart. Echocardiographic examination of a heart base tumor may
  an o sop g i se an  asu
5.63).
at the heart base or within the RV outflow tract. Tumors may cause PE or
obstruction of the RV ejection tract (Figure 5.63).
        
echocardiographically because it does not typically produce a discrete,
echogenic mass. Pericardial and/or pleural effusion of unexplained origin
must include this cell type as a differential
Cardiac neoplasia in cats is uncommon. Lymphoma may occur within the
heart, as one or more discrete masses, or as a diffuse, infiltrative lesion
causing altered and irregular echogenicity.
322
Miscellaneous Acguired Disease
Echocardiography is an insensitive method for the detection of puimonary
thromboembolism but may provide evidence of chronicity (cor pulmonale)
or hemodynamic severity (right-sided pressures, acute dilation, and RV
stroke volume). Occasionally, thrombi may be visible in the pulmonary
trunk or main branches (Figure 5.64). CFD or echocontrast may be
valuable in delineating a thrombus and avoid overinterpretation.
Systemic hypertension (SHT), which is common in both dogs and cats.
may cause nonspecific echocardiographic changes because of left-sided
pressure overload. LV wall thickness and indices of LV hypertrophy may
be increased with chronic SHT. Alterations can resemble mild to moderate
  s      
differentiation. Inconsistently, the aortic root and proximal aorta may be
dilated with mild to moderate aortic insufficiency. In the absence of LV
outflow obstruction, peak MR velocity greater than 6.3 m/s suggests SHT
  l   asd s d 
Hyperthyroidism is the most common endocrinopathy in cats, and
concurrent,  nonspecific echocardiographic abnormalities often are
observed. LV wall thickening and hypertrophy may occur, and the
condition may resemble HCM of mild to moderate severity
echocardiographically (Moise et al. 1986). Tachycardia and increased
indices of stroke volume (e.g-, wAA) may result with variable dilation of
all  cardiac chambers. Atrioventricular valvular regurgitation may
accompany the condition if there is sufficient remodeling of the heart to
impair valve function, and congestive heart failure with pulmonary edema
and/ or pleural effusion may occur in severe cases. Hyperthyroid cats are
occasionally seen with cardiac changes resembling DCM, including
 marked chamber dilation and depressed fractional shortening.
Figure 5.62. Hemangiosarcoma (HSA). RPS SAx (A) and LAx (B) 2DE
images illustrate the typical location for HSA in a dog. A large mass (M)
appears at the junction of the RVW and RA in this case. A small amount
of pericardial effusion is evident (PE) because of extension of the tumor
and bleeding into the pericardial space. C and D: Two variations of
atypical cardiac HSA. In C, a large mass (M) fills the RV and RA in the
RPS LAx image. In D, an LAp four-chamber view depicts a mass filling
the LA.
323
Figure 5.63. Cardiac neoplasia. A and B: RPS LAx and SAx views from
a dog with a large mass (M) at the heart base. C: A thyroid carcinoma (M)
is apparent on this RPS SAx view at a typical location in the RVOT. D: A
SAx RPS image from a cat with echogenic cardiac metastases (M) from a
carcinoma. A small amount of pericardial effusion (PE) is also evident.
324
Figure 5.64. Pulmonary thromboembolism (PTE) in a dog. A: This RPS
SAx image depicts RV dilation and hypertrophy, the latter suggesting
chronicity. The LV appears small because of volume underloading. B: A
thrombus (PTE) is evident in the dilated RPA.
INTERVENTIONAL
PROCEDURES
Pericardiocentesis (PC) is both a therapeutic and diagnostic procedure.
Pericardial effusion (PE) associated with clinical signs due to cardiac
compression (tamponade) is the major indication for PC. PC is also
[nsufficient PE volume is the main contraindication for PC if the risk of
the procedure outweighs potential beneits. Relative contraindications
include hemorrhagic PE secondary to bleeding disorders or atrial tear,
Distension of the pericardium by solid tumors or abdominal contents as
seen   in   peritoneal-pericardial
1 diaphragmatic
Cherniaisalsoa
contraindication for PC
The required equipment list includes a 14- to 18-gauge over-the-needle
catheter (2-5 inches [5.08-12.7 cm], depending on patient size), syringes
(3-50 mL), three-way stopcock, extension tubing, and collection tubes or
apparatus for cytology (EDTA) and culture submission.
Sedation and local analgesia are useful and can be obtained with diazepam
(0.2 mg/kg) intravenous (IV) in combination with either butorphanol (0.2
325
mg/kg) IV or oxymorphone (o.1 mg/kg) IV. Agents promoting
hypotension must be avoided (e-g-, acepromazine).
  l      
procedure is essential. The catheter entry location is at the fifth to seventh
intercostal space of the right ventral thorax, at the level of the
costochondral junction (Figure 5.65). Ultrasound guidance is highly useful
in directing the catheter, in confirming the distribution and amount of PE,
in establishing the optimal catheter entry point and direction, and in
confirming the catheter position. Needle entry should be near the center of
the rib space to avoid puncture of the intercostal vessels and also catheter
   s  e    s
Using aseptic technique, the operator attaches a sterile 3-mL syringe to the
catheter, positions the point of the catheter at the predetermined location,
and orients the direction of the catheter dorsocranially. The entire
apparatus is advanced through the skin and thoracic wall while mild
negative pressure (suction) is applied with the syringe. A burst of
ventricular premature complexes on the electrocardiogram suggests that
the catheter tip is in contact with the epicardium; this requires catheter
retraction until the dysrhythmia resolves. The flexible catheter is advanced
off the stylus into the pericardial space, and the metal catheter stylus is
catheter end, leading to a large syringe and interposed three-way stopcock
Operated by an assistant.
With tamponade, decompression of the pericardial space by even a small
decrease in heart rate throughout the procedure is suggestive of correct
catheter placement, whereas any trend toward increased heart rate should
prompt the operator to interrupt aspiration and reevaluate catheter
position. Once the catheter-tip positioning within the pericar-dial space is
atrial tear or bleeding disorder). Significant ventricular arrhythmias should
prompt catheter repositioning and/or partial withdrawal. Intravenous
administration of a 2% lidocaine bolus (2-4 mg/kg = 1-2 mL per 10 kg)
should be considered if the dysrhythmia does not abate promptly.
Figure 5.65. Pericardiocentesis in a dog. A: The catheter is placed at the
fifth to seventh intercostal spaces of the right ventral thorax, at the level of
326
the costochondral junction (arrow). B: The arrow indicates the orientation
A
Potential complications of PC include puncture of cardiac chambers or
great vessels, cardiac dysrhythmia, coronary laceration, exsanguination.
pulmonary laceration or hemorrhage, and pneumothorax. Complications
are minimized by careful preparation and technique.
REFERENCES
Abbott JA, MacLean HN (2003) Comparison of Doppler-derived peak
aortic velocities obtained from subcostal and apical transducer sites in
healthy dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 44:695-698.
Bonagura JD (1983) M-mode echocardiography: Basic principles. Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 13:299-319.
Bonagura JD, Herring DS (1985a) Echocardiography: Acquired heart
disease. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 15:1209-1224.
Bonagura JD, Herring DS (1985b) Echocardiography: Congenital heart
disease. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 15:1195-1208.
Bonagura JD, Miller MW (1998) Doppler echocardiography [I: Color
Doppler imaging. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 28:1361-1389.
Bonagura JD, Miller MW, Darke PGG (1998) Doppler echocardiography
I. Pulsed-wave and continuous-wave examinations. Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 28:1325-1359.
Bonagura JD, O'Grady MR, Herring DS (1985) Echocardiography:
Principles of interpretation. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
15:1177-1194.
327
Bonagura JD, Pipers FS (1981) Echocardiographic features of pericardial
effusion in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 179:49-56.
Brown DJ, Rush JE, MacGregor J, Ross JN Jr, Brewer B, Rand WM
(2005) Quantitative echocardiographic evaluation of mitral endocardiosis
in dogs using ratio indices. J Vet Intern Med 19:542-552.
Calvert CA, Chapman WL Jr, Toal RL (1982) Congestive
cardiomyopathy in Doberman pinscher dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
181:598-602.
Darke PGG (1992) Doppler echocardiography. J Small Anim Pract
33:104-112.
Darke PGG, Bonagura JD, Miller M (1993) Transducer orientation for
Doppler echocardiography in dogs. J Small Anim Pract 34:2-8.
Fox PR (1999) Feline cardiomyopathies. In: Fox PR, Sisson D, Moise NS
eds. Textbook of Canine and Feline Cardiology: Principles and Clinical
Practice, 2nd edition. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, pp 621-678.
Hansson K, Haggstrom J, Kvart C, Lord P (2002) Left atrial to aortic root
indices using two-dimensional and M-mode echocardiography in cavalier
King Charles spaniels with and without left atrial enlargement. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 43:568-575.
Harvey AM, Battersby IA, Faena M, Fews D, Darke PGG, Ferasin L
Small Anim Pract 46:151-156.
Hatle LK, Angelsen B (1985) Physics of blood flow. In: Doppler
Ultrasound in Cardiology: Physics, Principles, and Clinical Applications,
2nd edition. Philadelphia: Lea and Febiger, pp 8-31.
Henry WL, DeMaria A, Gramiak R, et al. (1980) Report of the American
Society of Echocardiography Committe on Nomenclature and Standards
in Two-dimensional Echocardiography. Circulation 62:212-217.
Kirberger RM, Bland-van den Berg P, Grimbeek RJ (1992) Doppler
echocardiography in the normal dog. Part [l: Factors influencing blood
flow velocities and a comparison between left and right heart blood flow.
Vet Radiol Ultras0und 33:380-386.
328
the proximal isovelocity surface area method in dogs with chronic
myxomatous mitral valve disease. J Vet Intern Med 17:84-88.
Kittleson MD, Eyster GE, Knowlen GG, Olivier NB, Anderson LK (1984)
Myocardial function in small dogs with chronic mitral regurgitation and
severe congestive heart failure. J Am Vet Med Ass 184:455-459.
Lombard CW, Buergelt CD (1983a) Echocardiographic and clinical
findings in dogs with heartworm-induced cor pulmonale. Compend Contin
Educ Pract Vet 5:971-979.
Lombard CW, Buergelt CD (1983b) Vegetative bacterial endocarditis in
dogs: Echocardiographic diagnosis and clinical signs. J Small Anim Pract
24:325-339
Moise NS (1989) Doppler echocardiographic evaluation of congenital
cardiac disease. J Vet Intern Med 3: 195-207.
Moise NS, Dietze AE, Mezza LE, Strickland D, Erb HN, Edwards NJ
(1986) Echocardiography, electrocardiography, and radiography of cats
with dilatation  cardiomyopathy,  hypertrophic  cardiomyopathy, and
hyperthyroidism. Am J Vet Res 47: 1476-1486.
O'Grady MR, Bonagura JD, Powers JD, Herring DS (1986) Quantitative
cross-sectional  echocardiography   in  the  normal  dog.  Vet  Radiol
Ultrasound 27:34-49
O'Rourke RA, Hanrath P, Henry WN, et al. (1984) Report of the Joint
InternationalSociety and Federationof Cardiology/WorldHealth
Organization Task Force on recommendations for standardization of
measurements
  from   M-mode    echocardiograms.  Circulation
69:854A-857A.
Rishniw M, Erb HN (2000) Evaluation of four 2-dimensional
echocardiographic methods of assessing left atrial size in dogs. J Vet
Intern Med 14:429-435.
Sahn DJ, DeMaria A, Kisslo J, Weyman A (1978) Recommendations
regarding quantitation in M-mode echocardiography: Results of a survey
of echocardiographic measurements. Circulation 58: 1072-1083.
329
Schiller NB, Shah PM, Crawford M, et al. (1989) Recommendations for
quantitation of the left ventricle by two-dimensional echocardiography.
American
Societyof
Echocardiography
Committee on Standards
Subcommittee on Quantitation of Two-dimensional Echocardiograms. J
Am Soc Echocardiogr 2:358-367.
Thomas WP (1984) Two-dimensional, real-time echocardiography in the
dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 25:50-64.
Thomas WP, Gaber CE, Jacobs GJ, et al. (1993) Recommendations for
standards in transthoracic two-dimensional echocardiography in the dog
and cat. J Vet Intern Med 7:247-252.
Thomas WP, Sisson D, Bauer TG, Reed JR (1984) Detection of cardiac
masses in dogs byt
two-dimensionalechocardiography.Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 25:65-72.
APPENDIX
Canine breed-specific M-mode reference values: unindexed
Bread
RW(kg）
Ao[cm}
LA (crn)
Msrrson e al. 13B2
Mimiatur pxxxlla
20
1.00
][0.40-0.30][0.00-1.00]
0.50b
0.a0
0.50
1.00
1.20
Dalls Torra et sl. 20c Itallan arayhound
20
0.64_0.11
0.910.13
AucnrE6cH
Cuvalier King
B7
10.440.85]10.69-1.151
11.20-2.00111.10-2.25
1.80 ± 0.151.60 = 0.15
Crippu ot ul. 1092
2604
Beagle
Pederserr
Dachshund
33
 11020
Baade al.2002
West Highland
24
1-21
11.74-4.021
2.88
2.00
0.89
10.52-1.521
1.02
0.64
10.72-1.241
0.96
Goxting c4 ul. 1988
white terrler
12
2.23±0.200.82=0.14
Marrison ac al. 1a90
20
[60-19,0]
1114
1.20
1.20*
1.60
2.10h
RRIS
iaaRI pUR
English poirier
1819.2-2.6
3.82±0.24
0-1
1691
Aighen hound
20
113,8-24.9
0 
  
Page et al. 1383
Greytound
5.2
[4.00-4.90]
[2.903.30]
[0.801.40]
[1.00-1.70]
Dell Terreet al.2000Greyound
20
4.27 1 0.29
3.211 0.26
1.19-0.13
1.57 L0.13
:21-1.01
Smyder el al. 1595
Greyhound
11
[1.33-1.85]
3..]
1610.
Vallmar
Boxor
75
0+
2.78- 0.81
1.97 -0.16
1.3+0.22
0.98+0.1
++9
Merrieon et al. 1992
Golden retriever
20
[23.041.01 [3.70-5.101
32.0
4.50
1,00b
1.50
2.70b
Calvert and Brown
21
[31.0-42.0]
36.0
4.660.42
1.41±0.082.59±0.23
[2.50-3.80]
[2.20-2.80]
2.36_0.15
Bayon at a. 1534
1986
Spaniesh miff
12
B2.4 - 3.8
[4.10-5.50]
0+
11'0 +06'2
++
2.85-0.0
Koch 8. 1696
Newfoundland
27
00'e
Koch st al. 1596
Graat Dane
15
5.30
1.45
1.65
1.25
2.95
3.30
lrish wclfhourd
144
55± 0.22
Koch at al. 1a6
lrish wclfhourd
20
[50.0 81.0] [4.0-5.01][3.20 450][0.01.5][1.107.70][0:801.30] 1.101.70][2.99-5.1] [2.20 2.50]
885
rirlsd
an-
nsl: LVDs wnrentrna dimat;w It w
tole; LA, left atrium; LVIDd, left ventriculer internal cinensin
 ann Lvw/s, lef vanirisler wll thickscas watok
330
Canine breed-specific M-mode reference values indexed for body size
(weight-based ratio indices)
Ersed
gW (lg)
wVEd
wVEe
wIVS4
vlVSe
PaA1
wVWs
wAo
aL
20
174
0.44°
+t al
2000
11.17-1.88
[06.821.22]
HigztoncCoel
5
8.1 1.4
[0.34-0.57]
0.520.80
0.42-0:65]
[0.8'0.86]
13%2
Beagh
20
msl
Not Hghav
1041-
Enghten
21
101-231107-18
0.30-0.85
Goodirng e al, 09
12
[0.42-0.721
Wiepi
Dells Te 
t al
29
elsh cral
0.460.7:
064*
1.0
S
Engliah p
16
Gsr
4
.-1.1
Algienl
Generic
Brow el zl. 2003
Gemeric
5025.2±17.41.59±0.15
1.04_0.160.44⊥0.050.5910.090.4110.080.60±0.061.00±0.121.01_0.11
Pugo et ul. 13
Grcyhound
18
12.376,4]
11.301.851
 
10.761.36
10.200.571
10.400.79110.290.571
10.430.761
=9
1.88 ± 0.12
1.37 =0.16
[0.42-0.721[0.38-0.58]
0
00F90
Dallia Torre at al.
Greyhound
5
1.35-D.10
1.6日+D14D54+0.04
0.72 +0.05
[0.51-0.70]
2000
121.7-31.51 11.62-2.051
11.22-1.50
10.43-0.821
10.54-0.74110.49-0.601
71277+195 1.52+0.14
10.65-0.901
Gannches ct al
Genarin
0.95-0.18
D0+25
0.70+D.09D.42+0.11
0+0
-+
2002'
13.8-97.71
11.21-1.701
10.61-1.241
10.300.701
10.54-0.83110.29-1.151
10.45-0.91110.71-1.48110.66-1.501
Snyriar at al. 1995*
Greyhound
11
26.1-3.7
1.52 +0.12
1.37-0.11
0.55 + 0.07
0.46+0.00
Lamhand Correll
[24.9-38.3]11.88-2.12]
[1.20-1.54]
[0.440.87]
[0.340.55]
Genarin
53
30.1  7.8
1.7日+0.17
[0.821.34]
1.10-0.1
0.42 + 0.04
1.01+0.0HD98-D.13
Vollmar Cornell
nl :  2106
[21.044.0][1.372.01]
[0.35 0.523]
[0.MD2.17][021.14]
Boxer
75
31.0_0
1.66 ± 0.14
1.12_0.12
0.39±0.030.55 10.080.40 ± 0.05
0.59 ± 0.07
0.52±0.03
0.99_0.11
20
1.79
1.07
qCPC
0.55b
0.40
0.55
1.07
M8E2
[2.0 47.]11.47-2.02][0.711.2][0.21.51] [0.4 0.57][0.320.4][0.401 0.75][0.55.07] [01.27]
Calvert anc Brown
Doberman
21
1.78 ± 0.16
1.17_0.13
0.37 ± 0.02
[.59-0.57] [.34 0.2]
0.5410.02 0.3710.02
S00TS0
1.14 ± 0.09
1.01_0.06
Bayon ot l. 1094
pinshar
12
1.042
97-
[1.071.23]
Spunish masti
0.53 ± 0.02
0.23±0.01
0.53 ± 0.03
96-
[45.8-58.0]1.511.08] [0.90-1.05] [0.30-0.36][0.4a-0.56][0.30-0.35][0.8-0.54][0.88-0.58]  [0 501.02]
Koch et al. 896
Nevfoundlarel
27
147.0-69.51 11.411,921 10,931.41110.22-0.481 10.35-0.64110.26-0,421 10.35-0,51110.801.051 10.77-1.05]
B1.0
1.13
0.37
0.43
32
0.48
0.33
0.9B
Kech at al. 896
Grcai Das:
15
B2.0
[1.06-1.43]
1.26
0.B2
.41
Vollmar Cornell
Irish weifhound
14
+-559
1.06 - 0.11
0.35 + 0.03
0.48 + 0.17
500+50
909+050
1.04+0.04
145.0-81.0111.33-1.0110.63-1.2910.19-0.51110.32-0.87110.21-6.47110.37-0.8510.89-1.30110.731.26
Irish woifhound
21
[50.08.0]1.411.1][1.011.8][0.28.4][0.360.21[0.280.40][.340.52][0.9.][01.0]
E8.5
PL
1.11
0.37
0.43
0.43
0.92
0.95
Criginel date supled sy ivesiats.Allothers es ri from rfersed soures.
Msen cr medier. L etancard deviatioe Irenge l.
Canine breed-specific M-mode functional and relative indices
331
Rafarance
Brand
BW [kg)
FS
EF
W.A
FWTel
FWAd
wWAd
vAWAs
Dela Tarra et :al. 2000*
laim gnzhouaed
20
Higgstrom* Comall
Cavailer King
57
Charls speninl
[5.5 11.3]
8.8
Crinpa et al. 192
al.204
[0.21-0.44]
[0.510.22]
Beagle
20
[0.94 2.58]
[5.211.]
8.9
Preserear cmel
3
16-2-1.11
Bede el al.2002
West Highleand
24
0.5-12.11
10.3
1021-0.
0.35
Gooting el al.1986
Emnglish couker
Whirte terrier
12
15
1028-0.431
Della Torro et ul. 2000*
20
[10.8 20:2]
14.5
[25-0.47]
0.33
[3E0]
4.20
[26]
4.96
Maxchir at aL. 1w7E
Ganaric
16
[.3:24.0[024 0.]
[0.57 0.77]
[1.142.1][0220.29]10.30-0.]
5D
0.44
Skeas and Schacfer
English nointar
[2.07-2.39]
WayComel sal.
991
[13.6-24.9] [0-0.41]
Generic
20.8
102-0.501
0.34
10.540.93
0.08
1.71
1025-0.371
0.31
12.501,901
3.47
[2.463.37]
3.91
Gerneric
27
(27-45.0
11.5-5.121
Erown et al. 200
50
10 25-0.50
0.34
10 20-0.441
0.35
1,.8-
(2.6-5.13]
3.94
Dela Too et ul. 00*
Groylhound
20
Gannalven et al., zou2*
Gnerin
1
[3.9 97.7]
[0:20 0.57]
[0.680.02]
D.75
[0.80 2.2][0300.5]
[0.520.79]
[2.44-7,31]
[2.815.88]
4.20
Snycer at al. 1595*
Greyhand
11
29.1
1.25
1.H2
[0 32-0.40]
[0.5601.64]
5'0
[6.04-5.9H]
4.E
La mhant Comell at al.
Ganari
23
2004
Bover
121.0-44.01
10.30-0.491
10.66-0,071
10.95-2,751
Volimer Cornel et el.
[22.5-43.0][026-0.41110.59-0.79]
31.0
0.33
0.60
[0.94-2.351[024-0.39]10.42-0.631
1.50
0.32
0.54
1.83-471
3.23
[2.58-5.72]
3.35
Bsver stal.1594
2004
Spanish mast
12
145.-0
Koch ot al. 1596
pnpuncimag
27
[47.0 .5][022 0.37]
61.0
0.30
Koch et al. 1996
Grest Dane
15
Vel lnar Carasl et al.
Iristh wlhand
144
2004
D.T1
Koch at al. 1a6
Irish wolhound
20
[50.0-60.0][020-0.34]
68.5
0.28
ers from rsforensed eourcse.
 
Feline M-mode echocardiographic reference values
Jacnhs at al. 18R5
Fipars et al. 1978
Sisson et al. 1961
Moise et al. 1889
Allan anel
Allen 1962
Fox at al. 1985
Downey 1969
Conditions
Unenesthetzed
Unanesthetzed
Unanesthetizec
Unanesthetized
Xylsz ine-soclum
Sodum
arbital
Ketemine
1
pmolhial
hryrlr
A
[1.93-6.20]
30
2E
79
EW akg
[2.70-8.20]
3.50 +0.41
8
30
[120-240]
[120-240]
18222
1619
3.64  0.66
175-20
IVSd (rn)
[0.28 0.80]
[0.30 0.63]
0.50 - 0.07
0.40  0.00
[0.22 0:48
LVIDJ 1ort
[1.12 2.18]
[7.0g2.14]
0.46 = 0.05
1.51 = 0.21
129 ± 0.09
1.30 = 0.12
LVWd 1omb
[0.22-0.44]
[0.32-0.56]
[0.25-0.601
0.40=0,40
10.21051
[1.071.73]
RVWis lom)
[0.23 0.43]
RVIDs larh
IVSsicn?
10.27-0.341
[0.470.70]
[0.641.88]
[0.400.50]
0.76 - 0.12
LVIDe: (em)
[0.527.08]
[0.407.12]
0.69 -0.22
028 + 4.18
0.85  0.16
[0.43 1.18]
LVWe iem
[0.540.811
[0.43-0.53]
0.76_0.10
[0.72-7.19]
[0.801.21]
95  0.1
10.21-1.181
10.93-1.511
10.70-1.701
[9.73 164]
10.72-1.331
LA/An
[01.95 .85]
[0.23- 0.56]
[1.88 1.79]
S
[]
[0.400.67]
021 + 4.47
0.3 - 0.25
EPSS Icm
0.04 _ 0.07
[0.330 60]
[0.000.21]
[0.000.20]
Msan I stendard devietion lrergel.
Canine Doppler outflow reference values
332
s
Kirbangor at al.
Kirherger at al.
Errwm at al.
Derke nt al.
Gaher 1887
Yuill and O'Grady
Banagara en Millor
1592
1992
1991
1993
1961
1969
Method
CVD
PWD
PWD
PWD
CWD
PWD
Arti: V (r's)
1.49 + 0.27
1.062.29]
EE'D + 'L
[0.861.37]
1.06 - 0.21
+BL
1.19 + 0.18
[0.992.10]
[1.04 1.3]
1.18-0.11
11.70]
1.20
Aortic VTI 1ml
0.055±0.016
0.146 = 0.028
Aurtic AT [sl
0.060 ± 0.010
Aurtic ET 1sl
0.162 ⊥ 0.029
0.205 _0.015
Anrtic PEP 4s)
Anrtic PEP/ET
Z0D+8900
90 + 
Aortc acceleraticn
32.00 ± 14.00
34.00 ± 16.00
Pulrnone V, (m/s)
n's]
1.25 ± 0.28
1.20 ± 0.20
0.84 = 0.17
0.06 ± 0.22
1.00 ± 0.15
0.98 = 0.06
1.07
Pulrrionie VTI (m]
[0.601.81]
10.881.201
0.131 = 0.02
[0.341.29]
[0.76-1.221
|1.301
PulrnonkAT Is]
0.08±0.02
0.07 ± 0.02
Pulmonie ET 4s)
0.184 + 0.028
0.219 -0.018
Pulmonk PEP s)
.051 + 3.010
Puimonk PEP/ET
O0TI°0
Mecn=
[couo 
Canine Doppler inflow reference values
Yull and 0CradyGober 1067
Kirbcrgor ct edl.
Darks et ol
Bonoguro and
Yamamsto and
1991
1862
1993
Miller 1906
Mas ayama 1990
Vitrs E mel
0.85 ± 0.10
0.75 ± 0.12
0.91 ± 0.15
0.65 ± 0.18
0.56 ± 0.18
(0; 
[0.70-1.08]
0.63 ± C.13
[0.591.19]
'FV0
[0.75]
0.49
0.44 ± 0.11
1461-421
[C60-CC0]
Vitral Es/Aest
00'0 T ≤5L
'0 T 061
0.59 ± 0.08
0.56 ± 0.16
0.86 ± C.20
0.57 ± 0.15
0.094 ± 0.C32
I0.52-0.92]
Tricspird Aμn (m/t
0.37 + 0.15
[0.330.94]
1.60 ± 0.56
1.62 ± 0.36
[0.60]
Tricuspid Eμw/p
[80'-090]
Systolic time interval reference values (canine and feline)
Hsterences
or et al. 1903
Attins and Snyder 1992
Canina
PEP/LVET
0.40 ± 0.06
Vef V/e)
2.48 ± 0.50
4.00 ± 0.90
REFERENCES
Allen DG (1982) Echocardiographic study of the anesthetized cat. Can J
Comp Med 46:115-122.
Allen DG, Downey RS (1983) Echocardiographic assessment of cats
anesthetizedwith
1xylazine-sodium pentobarbital. Can J Comp
Med
47:281-283
Atkins CE, Snyder PS (1992) Systolic time intervals and their derivatives
for evaluation of cardiac function. J Vet Intern Med 6:55-63.
333
Baade H, Schober K, Oechtering G (2002) Echocardiographic reference
function. Tierarztl Prax 30:172-179.
Bayon A, Fernandez del Palacio MJ, Montes AM, Gutierrez Panizo C
(1994) M-mode echocardiography study in growing Spanish mastiffs. J
SmallAnimPract 35:473-479.
Bonagura JD, Miller MW (1989) Veterinary echocardiography. Am J
Cardiovasc Ultrasound Allied Tech 6:229-264.
Boon J, Wingfield WE, Miller CW (1983) Echocardiographic indices in
the normal dog. Vet Radiol 24:214-221.
Brown DJ, Knight DH, King RR (1991) Use of pulsed-wave Doppler
echocardiography to determine aortic and pulmonary velocity and flow
variables in clinically normal dogs. Am J Vet Res 52:543-550.
Brown DJ, Rush JE, MacGregor J, Ross JN, Brewer B, Rand W (2003)
M-mode echocardiographic ratio indices in normal dogs, cats, and horses:
A novel quantitative method. J Vet Intern Med 17:653-662.
Calvert CA, Brown J (1986) Use of M-mode echocardiography in the
diagnosis of congestive cardiomyopathy in Doberman pinschers. J Am
Vet Med Assoc 189:293-297.
Cornell CC, Kittleson MD, Della Torre P, et al. (2004) Allometric scaling
of M-mode variables in normal adult dogs. J Vet Intern Med 18:311-321.
Crippa L, Ferro E, Melloni E, Brambilla P, Cavalletti E (l992)
Echocardiographic parameters and indices in the normal beagle dog. Lab
Anim 26:190-195.
Darke PGG, Fuentes VL, Champion SR (1993) Doppler echocardiography
in canine congestive cardiomyopathy. In: llth ACVIM Forum, Pp
531-534.
de Madron E (1983) M-mode echocardiography in the dog
(L'echocardiographie en mode M chez le chien normal) 76: Ecole
Nationale Veterinaire d'Alfort.
Della Torre PK，Kirby AC,Church DB,Malik R (2000)
Echocardiographic measurements in greyhounds, whippets, and Italian
334
greyhounds: Dogs with similar conformation but different size. Aust Vet J
78:49-55.
Fox PR, Bond BR, Peterson ME (l985) Echocardiographic reference
values in healthy cats sedated with ketamine hydrochloride. Am J Vet Res
46:1479-1484.
Gaber C (1987) Normal pulsed Doppler flow velocities in adult dogs. Ini
5th ACVIM Forum, p 923.
Goncalves AC, Orton EC, Boon JA, Salman MD (2002) Linear.
logarithmic, and polynomial models of M-mode echocardiographic
measurements in dogs. Am J Vet Res 63:994-999.
Gooding JP, Robinson WF, Mews GC (1986) Echocardiographic
assessment of left ventricular dimensions in clinically normal English
cocker spaniels. Am J Vet Kes 47:296-300.
Jacobs G, Knight DH (1985) M-mode echocardiographic measurements in
nonanesthetized healthy cats: Effects of body weight, heart rate, and other
variables. Am J Vet Res 46: 1705-1711.
Kirberger RM, Bland-van den Berg P, Grimbeek RJ (1992) Doppler
echocardiography in the normal dog: Part Il. Factors influencing blood
flow velocities and a comparison betwen left and right heart blood flow.
Vet Radiol Ultras0und 33:380-386.
Koch J, Pedersen HD, Jensen AL, Flagstad A (l996) M-mode
echocardiographic diagnosis of dilated cardiomyopathy in giant breed
dogs. J Vet Med 43:297-304.
Maschiro I, Nelson RR, Cohn JN, Franciosa JA (1976) Ventricular
dimensions measured noninvasively by echocardiography in the awake
dog. J App Physiol 41:953-959.
Moise NS, Dietze AE, Mezza LE, Strickland D, Erb HN, Edwards NJ
(1986) Echocardiography, electrocardiogra-phy, and radiography of cats
with dilatation cardiomyopathy, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and
hyperthyroidism. Am J Vet Res 47: 1476-1486.
Morrison SA, Moise NS, Scarlett J, Mohammed H, Yeager AE (l992)
Effect of breed and body weight on echocardiographic values in four
breeds of dogs of differing somatotype. J Vet Intern Med 6:220-224.
335
Page A, Edmunds G, Atwell RB (1993) Echocardiographic values in the
greyhound. Aust Vet J 70:361-364.
    (      
cat. Am J Vet Res 40:882-886.
 n g s  i s (h    
relative to body weight, as measured by M-mode echocardiography in
growing dogs. Am J Vet Res 52:1591-1596.
Sisson DD, Knight DH, Helinski C, et al. (l991) Plasma taurine
concentrations and M-mode echocardiographic measures in healthy cats
and in cats with dilated cardiomyopathy. J Vet Intern Med 5:232-238.
Snyder PS, Sato T, Atkins CE (1995) A comparison of echocardiographic
indices of the nonracing healthy greyhound to reference values from other
breeds. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 36:387-392
Yamamoto K, Masuyama TJT (1993) Effects of heart rate on the left
pulsed  Doppler transmitral  flow  velocity pattern and haemodynamic
variables. Cardiovasc Res 27:935-941.
Yuill CDM, O'Grady MR (1991) Doppler-derived velocity of blood flow
across the cardiac valves in the normal dog. Can J Vet Res 55:185-192.
336
CHAPTER SIX
LIVER
Marc-Andre d’Anjou
PREPARATION AND
SCANNING TECHNIQUE
Hair clipping of animals should cover the entire cranial abdomen and
ideally the last one or two intercostal spaces, particularly in deep-chested
dogs or if microhepatica is suspected. Animals can be scanned in dorsal,
left, or right recumbency after acoustic gel application. The ability to
visualize the liver in small animals is related to body conformation, liver
size, and overlying gastrointestinal content. In small dogs and cats, the
liver can usually be entirely scanned in transverse and longitudinal planes
by means of a subcostal approach (Figure 6.1), as long as the stomach is
not overly distended with ingesta or gas. The transverse colon can also
limit hepatic visibility, particularly if filled with gas or feces, or if the liver
is small. [n these instances, an intercostal approach can provide a useful
alternative. In large deepchested dogs, the liver is completely hidden by
the rib cage, routinely requiring the use of an intercostal approach to reach
all parts of the liver. In these dogs, and especially if the liver is atrophied.
several other structures, such as the spleen, can move under the costal arch
and should not be confused for a portion of the liver. In obese animals, the
presence of a large amount of falciform fat can also reduce hepatic
the organ and by degrading image quality because of beam scattering.
337
The appropriate probe must be chosen based on the size and depth of the
liver. In small or medium-sized dogs and cats, a medium-frequency probe
(5 MHz and higher) can be used unless the liver is markedly enlarged,
whereas a probe with more penetration (5 MHz and lower) is required in
larger dogs. Sectorial or convex probes are preferred over linear probes
because of the triangular shaped scanned field of view that enables larger
portions of the liver to be imaged. A smaller footprint also enables most
parts of the liver to be reached through limited acoustic windows such as
intercostal spaces. Gain settings and focal zones must be constantly
adjusted during the exam in order to optimize ultrasonographic
 penetration and image quality (Figure 6.2)
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC
ANATOMY OF THE NORMAL
LIVER
Parenchyma and Size
In dogs and cats, the liver is composed of four lobes, four sublobes, and
two processes: left lobe (lateral and medial), quadrate lobe, right lobe
(lateral and medial), and caudate lobe (caudate and papillary processes)
(Evans 1993a; Hudson and Hamilton 1993), which cannot be easily
distinguished unless separated by peritoneal effusion (Figure 6.3).
The left lobe forms a third to nearly a half of the entire liver mass and
contacts the left portion of the gallbladder (GB). The quadrate lobe is
relatively central and partially encircles the GB. The right portion of the
GB is in contact with the right medial lobe. The caudate process of the
caudate lobe is the most caudal extension of the liver, on the right side.
and extends to the level of the right kidney. The hepatic and portal veins
(PVs) of each of these hepatic lobe divisions are relatively constant in
dogs and can represent useful ultrasonographic landmarks (Carlisle et al.
1995).
338
A large part of the liver is beneath the costal arch, just cranial to the
stomach, in dogs and cats. Its cranial margin lies against the diaphragm
and lung interface. The diaphragm appears as a curved hyperechoic line,
sometimes associated with a mirror-image artifact (Figure 6.4)
Caudally, the liver is often in contact with the spleen on the left side and
caudate lobe. The hepatic volume is difficult to evaluate objectively in
cats and dogs, mainly because of the variability in body conformation. As
with radiography, the costal arch and location of the stomach can help in
subjectively evaluating liver size, taking into account body conformation.
The caudal extension of the hepatic lobes can be compared with the
location of the last pair of ribs (Figure 6.5A). In deep-chested dogs, the
cranially located. Conversely, in small dog breeds and in cats, the liver
normally are pointed. With severe hepatomegaly, these tips are rounded
and can extend beyond the right kidney and/or reach the left kidney,
depending on the symmetry of the enlargement (Figure 6.5B).
Figure 6.1. Ultrasonographic approach and anatomy of the normal liver.
[llustration of the scanning technique using a subcostal approach with a
dog or a cat in dorsal recumbency. The ultrasound probe must be moved
in order to cover the entire liver, sequentially in sagittal (A-C) and
transverse (D-F) planes. The additional use of oblique planes, as well as
longitudinal plane in a dog, the probe is sequentially moved from the right
(A) to the left (C) of the liver (L). The intimate relation between the
duodenum-stomach and the liver is visualized. The falciform ligament,
which can vary in size because of fat deposition, is in the near field.
Hepatic vessels (V) appear as round, anechoic structures on cross section.
The gallbladder (GB), located to the right of the midline, is a useful
landmark. D-F: By using a transverse plane, the liver is also entirely
scanned, from its cranioventral portion (D) to its caudodorsal portion (F).
The gallbladder is seen on the right in the midportion of the liver (E).
Branching portal veins (PV) with hyperechoic boundaries are also
recognized.
339
Figure 6.2. Gain setting. Because of the attenuation of the ultrasound
beam as it travels through soft tissues, the amplification of echoes
received must be adjusted according to tissue type and depth. This
general gain knobs. These three images show the variation in echogenicity
of a normal liver with (A) excessive near gain and insufficient far gain,
(B) well-adjusted near and far gains, and (C) insufficient near gain and
excessive far gain.
340
The falciform ligament filled with a variable amount of fat is ventral to the
liver and protrudes between the right and left portions, dorsal to the
xiphoid process (Figure 6.6). This poorly defined structure is usually
isoechoic or hyperechoic to the liver and presents a coarse echotexture
relative to the liver. However, clinically obese cats may have a liver that is
hyperechoic to the falciform fat (Nicoll et al. 1998). The normal hepatic
parenchyma is uniformly hypoechoic, with a coarser echotexture, when
compared with the spleen. Its echogenicity relative to the renal cortices is
more variable, although usually hyperechoic (Figure 6.7).
Figure 6.3. Effusion separating hepatic lobes. Longitudinal oblique image
of the right portion of the liver with three distinct separate lobes well
outlined by peritoneal effusion (*). C, caudate lobe; RL, right lateral; and
RM,rightmedial.
BiliarySystem
The biliary system is relatively similar in dogs and cats. The GB
occasionally bilobed in cats (Figure 6.8), represents the bile reservoir and
is an anechoic teardropshaped structure with a conical extension: the
cystic duct. The GB can vary markedly in size among animals and
becomes enlarged in anorexic animals. Therefore, its volume alone cannot
341
be used as a reliable sign of biliary obstruction. The wall of the normal
GB is thin and smooth, measuring less than 1 mm thick in cats (Hittmair
et al.2001) and less than 2-3 mm in dogs (Spaulding 2003).Biliary
sludge can accumulate in normal GB and is usually considered
nonsignificant, particularly in dogs (Bromel et al. 1998) (Figure 6.9). The
sludge is then mobile, sometimes giving the impression of an aggregate
mimicking a soft-tissue mass. However, the movement of the echogenic
substance should respond to gravity after the animal is repositioned.
Additionally, because of the relatively low attenuation of the ultrasound
beam through the bile, acoustic enhancement is commonly observed
beyond the GB (Figure 6.9). This artifact must be differentiated from a
focal hyperechoic hepatic lesion.
Figure  6.4.  Mirror  image of liver and   gallbladder. Sagittal
ultrasonographic and schematic images of a mirror artifact commonly
the gallbladder (GB) are artifactually reflected beyond the lung surface.
The smooth, curved, lung-diaphragm interface acts as a mirror intensely
reflecting the ultrasound waves (black arrows along path A) back to the
liver and the gallbladder. This relatively intense beam interacts again with
the hepatic structures and is partially reflected back to the diaphragm and
( ) d s   ad p  o a
Because of the increased travel time, the spatial localization of these
multireflected echoes appears deeper beyond the diaphragm in the animal.
In fact, the computer assumes that the reflected path A is actually located
at A'. This mirror image is added to the accurately localized structures
(path B). Care must be taken not to confuse a mirror image with a thoracic
pathology.
Figure 6.5. Evaluation of liver size. A: Normal liver. Left parasagittal
image of the cranial abdomen in a normal small-breed dog with the caudal
342
tip of the liver (L and arrowheads) extending slightly beyond the last rib.
Acoustic shadowing (*) is noted deep to this hyperattenuating structure.
The tip of the liver appears smooth and pointy. B: Hepatomegaly. On this
sagittal image of the liver obtained in the right cranial abdomen of a dog, a
liver lobe (arrows) extends caudal to the right kidney (RK) and has a
rounded tip consistent with enlargement. Passive hepatic congestion was
diagnosed, and peritoneal effusion (*) was also detected.
Figure 6.6. Falciform ligament. On these sagittal oblique ultrasonographio
and corresponding schematic images of the liver, the falciform fat appears
between the right and left portions of the liver. The gallbladder (GB)
contains a small amount of biliary sludge (S) in its dependent portion
 i n on s e  ( )
LL, left liver; and RL, right liver.
The intrahepatic biliary tree, composed of biliary canaliculi and larger
biliary ducts, is not seen in normal patients. The common bile duct (CBD),
which represents the continuation of the connecting GB cystic duct and
biliary ducts, can be seen more easily in normal cats than in normal dogs.
The CBD can be visualized between the proximal duodenum (ventrally)
and the PV (dorsally) (Figure 6.10). It can be up to 3 mm wide in normal
dogs (Zeman et al. 1981) and 4 mm wide in normal cats (Leveille et al.
1996). It parallels the PV over a few centimeters before entering into the
duodenum through the major duodenal papilla.
343
Figure 6.7. Liver, spleen, and kidney relative echogenicities and
echotextures. A: Sagittal image obtained in the left cranial abdomen of a
normal dog. The liver (L) is in contact with the spleen (S), and is
relatively hypoechoic and more granular in echotexture. B: Sagittal image
   o   o      
appears relatively isoechoic to the cortex of the right kidney (RK).
Acoustic shadowing (arrow) is caused by one of the last ribs.
Figure 6.8. Bilobed gallbladder in a cat. On this transverse image
obtained in the right-central portion of the liver of a normal cat, the
gallbladder is partially divided into two compartments (*) This represents
   i        
liver dorsal to these fluid-filled cavities (arrows).
Figure 6.9. Biliary sludge. Longitudinal image of the right-central portion
of the liver of a normal dog with the GB and cystic duct (CD) containing
poorly defined echogenic material consistent with biliary sludge. The
mobility of this sludge was confirmed by repositioning the animal during
the exam. FF, falciform fat; L, liver; and St, stomach.
344
Hepatic Vasculature
d  e   si r n o    
coming from the PV (80%) and the rest coming from the hepatic arteries
(Evans 1993a) (Figure 6.11). The efferent flow follows the hepatic veins
into the caudal vena cava (CVC). This particular vascular pattern is
divided into all hepatic lobes and can aid in distinguishing these lobes.
When using B-mode imaging, only the hepatic and PVs (larger than the
         (s
structures. The walls of the PVs appear hyperechoic, regardless of the
orientation of the ultrasonographic beam, facilitating their identification
(Figure 6.12). However, the walls of the hepatic veins can also appear
hyperechoic when the ultrasonographic beam is directed perpendicularly
(see Figure 6.71).
Figure 6.10. Scanning technique for the common bile duct in a cat.
Schematic representation of the regional anatomy and landmarks of the
biliary tract in the cat, with the ultrasound probe placed to obtain a
longitudinal view (A) of the common bile duct. The probe is then rotated
to obtain a transverse plane (B). The common bile duct (2 mm wide) is
found just ventral to the portal vein (PV) and dorsal to the proximal
duodenum (D). This duct can sometimes be followed to the level of the
major duodenal papilla, at the same level as the pancreatic duct
termination. CVC, caudal vena cava; and GB, gallbladder.
345
The visibility of the larger and smaller branches of these veins is
influenced by patient size, vascular luminal diameter, portal flow, pressure
in the CVC, hepatic parenchymal echogenicity, and image quality and
resolution. When measured at the same depth, the hepatic and portal
branches should be relatively symmetrical in diameter (Figure 6.12B).
The use of color Doppler facilitates the identification and distinction of
hepatic vessels. When using standard color-map settings, portal flow
directed from the center to the periphery appears as a red signal, whereas
hepatic venous flow appears as a blue signal (Figure 6.12B). Arterial flow,
also directed from the center to the periphery, can also demonstrate a red
signal, depending on the size of the arteries and the Doppler settings, such
asgain andfiltration threshold.
Extrahepatic Portal Vasculature
The extrahepatic portion of the PV is relatively central in the abdomen,
ventral to the CVC, and ventral and to the right of the aorta (Figure 6.13).
The main PV is more tortuous than the CVC and aorta, and curves slightly
to the right side before entering the liver. When measured at the level of
the porta hepatis, its luminal diameter varies between 3.4 and 5.0 mm in
normalcatsandbetween3.3and10.5mminnormaldogs.When
    n go     
s
(d' Anjou et al. 2004).
346
The main PVis formed by the confluence of the cranialand caudal
mesenteric veins and splenic vein, and therefore drains most abdominal
organs (Evans 1993b) (Figure 6.11). It also receives a smaller tributary,
the gastroduodenal vein, only a few centimeters caudal to the hepatic
entrance. The gastroduodenal vein connects to the right-ventral aspect of
the PV after receiving the pancreaticoduodenal and gastroepiploic veins.
on the left side, which follows the left limb of the pancreas after receiving
the left gastric vein. The cranial mesenteric vein receiving all jejunal
branches represents the caudal extension of the main PV after the entry of
the smaller caudal mesenteric vein another few centimeters caudal to the
splenic vein. These portal tributaries enlarge as they approach the main
PV, and the flow of all is directed toward the liver (hepatopetal ffow). The
portal flow contained in these tributaries, as well as in the main PV, is
normally parabolic and relatively constant, giving a characteristic spectral
with spectral Doppler, after the use of an insonation angle correction of
         
m        
requires the application of a sample gate volume that fills the entire width
of the main PV. Alternatively, a sample gate volume that fills
approximately half of the vessel lumen placed in its center can be used to
obtain maximal flow velocity. Because of the parabolic behavior of the
multiplying this result by 0.57. Mean portal flow velocities have been
reported to vary between 15 ± 3 and 18 ± 8 cm/s in normal dogs and
10-18 cm/s in normal cats (Nyland and Fisher 1990; Lamb and Mahoney
1994; Lamb 1998; d'Anjou et al. 2004). However, these measurements are
       
angles (more than 60°), and must therefore be used cautiously.
Figure 6.11. Portal vascular system. Schematic illustration of the hepatic
     s go s    
a ventral approach. The liver receives its vascular supply through the
portal vein (PV) and hepatic arteries (HA). The portal vein receives
several smaller veins draining most abdominal viscera. The relationship
with the caudal vena cava (CVC) and aorta (Ao) is also illustrated. HV,
hepatic veins. Veins of the portal system: CaM, caudal mesenteric; CrM,
347
cranial mesenteric; GD, gastroduodenal; GE, gastroepiploic; Jej, jejunal;
LG, left gastric, PD, pancreaticoduodenal; and S, splenic.
ight
Leff
Figure 6.12. Hepatic vasculature. Portal veins can be differentiated from
hepatic veins because of the consistent hyperechogenicity of their walls
(arrows), regardless of the ultrasoundbeam orientation. With conventional
color Doppler, portal venous flow appears as a red signal directed toward
in the caudal vena cava (i.e., away from the transducer). Smaller hepatic
arteries are not normally seen.
Figure 6.13. Ultrasonographic approach to the hepatic vasculature.
Transverse computed tomographic image (A) and ventral schematic image
(B) of the hepatic vasculature showing the relationship between the portal
vein (PV), caudal vena cava (CVC), and aorta (Ao). On transverse (C) and
longitudinal (D) ultrasonographic images obtained at the porta hepatis.
these three vessels can usually be well visualized in normal dogs and cats,
and should be similar in size. When measured at the caudal margin of the
liver, the portal vein should not be less than 65% of the diameter of the
348
aorta. GB, gallbladder. Computed tomographic image courtesy of
Matthew Winter, University of Florida.
CVC
Figure 6.14. Spectral Doppler pattern of the portal flow. With spectral
Doppler, the flow within the portal vein (PV) can be assessed after placing
the sample-volume gate in the center of the vascular lumen and correcting
dog is broad and relatively linear, with some variations occurring because
velocity is calculated by multiplying the maximal velocity (25 cm/s) by a
factor of 0.57, which equals 14.3 cm/s. The angle of sample volume
correctionwas50°.
349
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC
FEATURES OF HEPATIC
DISORDERS
multifocal, or diffuse parenchymal alterations. The evaluation of the liver
must include several parameters: liver size and contour, parenchymal
echogenicity, and ultrasoundbeam attenuation, as well as the distribution
of abnormalities. Although some of these disorders have characteristic
ultrasonographic features, most changes are not pathognomonic of one
particular process. A more definite diagnosis is usually based on the
combination of clinical presentation, blood-test results, ultrasonographic
findings, and cytological or histopathologic results.
Diffuse Hepatic Parenchymal Disorders
Diffuse hepatic disorders can be difficult to differentiate from poorly
defined multifocal diseases. Typically, these disorders affect all lobes,
although not always symmetrically. The parenchymal echogenicity can be
increased, reduced, or unaffected. These disorders can also affect the
parenchymal uniformity and distort the hepatic margin. The evaluation of
the liver contour is facilitated by the presence of peritoneal effusion
(Figure 6.3). With the exception of congenital portal vascular anomalies
such as portosystemic shunting, chronic hepatitis, and cirrhosis, most
disorders tend to be associated with symmetrical or asymmetrical
hepatomegaly. Two or more hepatic disorders, such as hepatitis, vacuolar
'ud sus aun u punoy aq uo 'eiseidaaday renpou no Xydoday
complicating the ultrasonographic diagnosis and justifying fine-needle
aspiration or biopsy in most cases. Table 6.1 lists the typical diagnostic
differential for diffuse changes in hepatic paren-chymal echogenicity, and
Table 6.2 lists the causes of diffuse or focal/asymmetrical hepatomegaly.
350
Vacuolar Hepatopathies and Nodular
Hyperplasia
Hepatic lipidosis and steroid hepatopathies are common. Miscellaneous
vacuolar hepatopathies are often present with other primary disorders in
dogs (Wang et al. 2004). These hepatopathies are usually associated with
a diffuse increase in parenchymal echogenicity and hepatomegaly (Nyland
and Park 1983; Biller 1992) (Figures 6.15-6.17). The parenchyma can also
appear hyperattenuating, i.e., result in excessive sound-beam attenuation
(Figures 6.16 and 6.17). Consequently, the far gain must be increased in
many of these patients to be able to evaluate the deepest portions of the
liver. Additionally, the parenchyma can appear heterogeneous or contain
nodular hyperplasia (Figure 6. 17).
Table 6.1. Diagnostic differentials for diffuse alterations in hepatic
parenchymal echogenicity
Sreroic hspatcpethy
rvacuolarhs
rhosi
Table 6.2. Diagnostic differentials for alterations in hepatic volume
Dfusc Hspatcmsgaly
Focel or Aaym
Small Liver
Prmary
Crlioss
Figure 6.15. Hyperechoic liver. Dual images of the liver and spleen of a
dog that were obtained with identical settings (depth, gain, and focus),
allowing hepatic and splenic parenchymal echogenicities to be compared.
Hepatic lipidosis that caused a diffusely hyperechoic liver, isoechoic to
the spleen, was diagnosed.
351
Hepatitis, Cholangiohepatitis, and
Cirrhosis
Diffuse  hepatic
cinflammatory
processes
 can show variable
ultrasonographic features. In cats, cholangiohepatitis is most commonly
associated with a decrease in parenchymal echogenicity and an increased
visibility of the portal vasculature (Newell et al. 1998) (Figure 6.18).
Additionally, this process is often associated with biliary anomalies, such
as biliary sludge, cholelithiasis, or wall thickening. In dogs, acute hepatitis
also tends to cause diffuse liver hypoechogenicity (Biller 1992), as seen
with leptospirosis (Figure 6.19)
Chronic hepatitis, on the other hand, tends to be associated with fibrosis,
which is typically associated with an increased echogenicity (Biller 1992)
The presence of chronic active inflammation, consisting of a mixture of
inflammatory cells, edema, fibrosis, necrosis, as well as regenerative
nodules (hyperplasia) can cause a markedly heterogeneous liver with
variable echogenicity (Figure 6.20). Although cirrhosis classically causes
1992) (Figure 6.21), its appearance can vary and sometimes mimic
neoplasia. However, chronic hepatitis and its ultimate outcome, cirrhosis,
usually do not cause hepatic enlargement, as opposed to the effect of
massive neoplastic infiltration.
Figure 6.16. Feline hepatic lipidosis. Sagittal (A) and transverse (B)
images of the liver in a cat with diffuse hyperechogenicity and
 t    r  
hyperechoic to the falciform fat (FF), at least superficially. The echoes
coming from the deepest portions of the liver were reduced and could only
352
be partially compensated for by increasing far gain. A small volume of
 peritoneal effusion (PE) is noted between liver lobes. GB, gallbladder.
Figure 6.17. Steroid hepatopathy. Longitudinal images of the left portion
 of the liver in a dog with pituitarydependent hyperadrenocorticism. The
liver (L) is enlarged, diffusely hyperechoic, and heterogeneous. Multiple
hypoechoic nodular foci, less than l cm wide, are noted in the liver in A
(arrows). B. The liver contour is rounded (arrowheads) and extends
beyond the gastric fundus. In A, the deep portion of the liver is difficult to
assess  because  of increased
ultrasound-beam attenuation.
Ultrasound-guided biopsy indicated vacuolar hepathopathy and benign
nodular hyperplasia.
Figure 6.18. Feline cholangiohepatitis. A: Longitudinal image of the left
portion of the liver (arrows) of a cat with fever and icterus. The liver
parenchyma is diffusely hypoechoic, and the portal vein margins appear
prominent. These features are suggestive of cholangiohepatitis in cats. B:
Longitudinal image of the central portion of the liver in another cat with
cholangiohepatitis. Similar features are observed. The liver (L) is
        
located ventrally. Arrows delineate the cranial hepatic border
353
Hepatic Neoplasia
Although several primary and secondary neoplastic processes can affect
the liver in dogs and cats, diffuse hepatic involvement is less common and
is usually caused by diffuse round-cell infiltration. Hepatomegaly is
expected in most types of diffuse neoplasia, although its magnitude can
vary with the level of iniltration.
Lymphoma can involve the liver without detectable ultrasonographic
changes
 or cause diffuse  parenchymal
hypoechogenicity,
hyperechogenicity, or mixed echogenicity, with or without hypoechoic
nodules (Whiteley et al. 1989; Lamb et al. 1991) (Figure 6.22). Histiocytic
neoplasms are more commonly associated with hypoechoic nodules and
(CruzArambulo et al. 2004) (see Figure 6.33). Conversely, mast cell
infiltration of the liver tends to cause diffuse hyperechogenicity (Sato and
Solano 2004). Hepatic carcinomas can also be diffuse, or involve multiple
lobes, with a variable ultrasonographic appearance that depends on the
presence of necrosis, inflammation, hemorrhage, or cavitation. A mixed
n sn  s ym  si aa o 
6.23).
Figure 6.19. Canine acute hepatitis. A: Transverse oblique image of the
left side of the liver in a dog with acute hepatitis with prominent portal
veins (PV) because of diffuse parenchymal hypoechogenicity. The main
left hepatic vein (HV) is also observed, but its wall is less apparent. The
prominence of the PV boundaries may have also been related to the
inflammatory process. B: Leptospirosis. Ultrasonographic image of a
portion of the liver in a dog with acute leptospirosis. The liver is diffusely
hypoechoic, and its portal walls are prominent, appearing as double lines
354
and "donuts" throughout the parenchyma. These findings are common in
dogs with leptospirosis.
Figure 6.20. Chronic active hepatitis and nodular hyperplasia. A:
Longitudinal image of the left portion of the liver (L), which appears
diffusely hypoechoic, and with irregular and ill-defined contours. The
adjacent fat is hyperechoic. Chronic active hepatitis was diagnosed on
fine-needle aspiration and ultrasound-guided biopsy. B: Transverse
oblique image of the left portion of the liver (L) in another dog with
diffuse   parenchymal  heterogeneity.  Several  hypoechoic  coalescing
y s lm s daap o z o d    a so
patches (*). Ultrasound-guided biopsy confirmed chronic hepatitis with
fibrosis and nodular hyperplasia. FF, falciform fat.
355
Miscellaneous Diffuse Hepatic
Disorders
although less commonly. Amyloidosis, primarily affecting sharpeis and
Abyssinian and Siamese cats, can cause hepatic enlargement and
parenchymal ultrasonographic changes. In cats, the liver tends to become
diffusely heterogeneous with mixed hyperechoic and hypoechoic foci
(Beatty et al. 2002). Spontaneous hepatic rupture and hemo-abdomen can
also be caused by massive hepatic amyloidosis. In dogs with
hepatocutaneous syndrome (superficial necrolytic dermatitis), the liver can
become highly hyperechoic with diffusely distributed 0.5- to 1.5-cm-wide
hypoechoic regions, producing a honeycomb pattern (Nyland et al. 1996)
(Figure 6.24)
Figure 6.21. Hepatic cirrhosis. Transverse oblique images of the right (A)
and left (B) portions of the liver (L) in a dog with chronic hepatic
insufficiency. All lobes are small and hyperechoic. Hypoechoic nodules
(*) are found throughout the parenchyma, irregularly deforming its
contours. These contours are visualized because of the presence of a large
356
volume of anechoic peritoneal effusion (PE). These findings are common
in end-stage cirrhosis in dogs.
Figure 6.22. Canine lymphoma. A: Transverse oblique image of the left
portion of the liver in a dog with multicentric lymphoma. The portal vein
walls are prominent because of diffuse parenchymal hypoechogenicity.
The left lateral hepatic lobe is enlarged (arrowheads), extending several
centimeters caudal to the stomach, and its caudal tip is rounded. B:
Lymphoma can also cause diffuse hepatic hyperechogenicity (L), as seen
in this other dog. The spleen (S) is relatively hypoechoic. Both organs are
enlarged, and their borders are rounded. Peritoneal effusion is also present
(PE). C: Sonographic and schematic images. In this other dog with
lymphoma, multiple, well-defined, hypoechoic nodules (*) are noted
throughout the liver. Image C courtesy of D. Penninck.
Figure 6.23. Diffuse hepatic carcinomas. A: Hepatic adenocarcinoma in
a cat. The liver is moderately enlarged and mildly inhomogeneous, with
several ill-defined hypoechoic areas. The neoplastic infiltration deforms
357
the vasculature (arrowheads). Image courtesy of D. Penninck. B:
  eo  o     e-
 e ar    e   r g
a nodular border. Marked peritoneal effusion is also evident ventrally
(PE).
Figure 6.24. Hepatocutaneous syndrome. Transverse image of the left
central portion of the liver of a dog with superficial necrolytic dermatitis.
Diffusely distributed hypoechoic irregular foci (arrows) are surrounded by
hyper-echoic parenchyma, giving a honeycomb pattern. Histological
evaluation  revealed tissue necrosis and mild  inflammation. The
arrowheads delineate the rounded margins of the liver.
358
Focal Hepatic Parenchymal Disorders
The improvement in ultrasound equipment technology has increased the
sensitivity of ultrasonography in detecting focal hepatic lesions. It has
imaging conditions in people (Nyman et al. 2004). The conspicuity of a
focal lesion is also greatly influenced by its imaging characteristics.
Hence, for a given size, an anechoic cyst is more likely to be detected than
a soft-tissue nodule of echogenicity similar to one of adjacent normal
parenchyma. Although many different types of focal lesions can be
detected with ultraso-nography, the appearance of several of these
processes is quite variable, resulting in limited diagnostic specificity. The
advances in contrast harmonic ultrasonography have helped to increase
the overall diagnostic accuracy and may prove to be useful in clinical
settings (Nyman et al. 2004; O'Brien et al. 2004). This topic, though, is
beyond the scope of this chapter.
Table 6.3 lists the diagnostic differential for focal hepatic lesions, based
on their typical appearance. Although some trends in ultrasonographic
appearance have been reported for some of these processes, a definitive
diagnosis usually requires fine-needle aspiration or biopsy.
Benign Hyperplasia and Neoplasia
Benign nodular hyperplasia is common, particularly in dogs, and accounts
for many focal hepatic lesions identified with ultrasonography. Although
these regenerative nodules can vary in echogenicity and size, they tend to
appear as hypoechoic nodules measuring less than 5-15 mm wide
(Stonewater et al. 1990; O'Brien et al. 2004) (Figure 6.25). As for most
other types of focal lesions, their margin can be well circumscribed or
poorly defined. Benign hepatic adenomas or hepatomas can appear as a
focal mass of variable size and usually hyperechoic (O'Brien et al. 2004)
(Figure 6.26).
Table 6.3. Diagnostic differentials for focal hepatic lesions with
ultrasonography
359
Cyst
odular hyperolacia
Nodlarhyperplesio
recclssi:
Mineraliatinrhleliiasis
Abs
Atom
aAc xoduuoy
Figure 6.25. Nodular hyperplasia. Longitudinal images of the left portion
   a   s o  (   
nodules. A: Several poorly defined hypoechoic foci, less than 1 cm wide
are noted. B: Conversely, the regenerative nodule is hyperechoic and well
defined. FF, falciform fat.
Malignant Neoplasia
The liver is a common target for metastasis, mainly through the portal
system, which drains most abdominal structures. Primary hepatic
neoplasms such as hepatocellular carcinomas can also be seen as focal or
multifocal masses, although less frequently than metastasis. The variable
tissue characteristics of primary and metastatic neoplastic processes,
including tissue density, vascular pattern, necrosis, liquefaction, and
calcification, cause variable ultrasonographic appearances (Nyland and
Park 1983; Whiteley et al. 1989; O'Brien et al. 2004) (Figures 6.27-6.31
and 6.36-6.38). Focal hypoechoic lesions with a hyperechoic center, also
termed target lesions, are more commonly associated with metastasis
(Figure 6.29 and 6.32), although benign processes, such as nodular
hyperplasia, can cause a similar pattern (Cuccovillo and Lamb 2002;
O'Brien et al. 2004). It has been reported that the finding of at least one
target lesion in the liver or spleen had a positive predictive value of 74%
for malignancy in small animals (Cuccovillo and Lamb 2002).
Histiocytic neoplasms and lymphoma can demonstrate similar imaging
360
commonly found with these processes (Cruz-Arambulo et al. 2002;
Ramirez et al. 2002) (Figures 6.33 and 6.34). Significant hepatic
lymphadenopathy is also common with these neoplasms of round-cell
origin and their presence often helps in diagnosing these processes.
Figure 6.26. Benign liver tumors. A and B: Hepatoma. Longitudinal (A)
and transverse (B) images of the right portion of the liver of a dog with
increased liver enzymes. In these images, a large, mildly hyperechoic and
mildly heterogeneous mass (arrowheads), measuring at least 7 cm wide, is
in the right portion of the liver and in contact with the gallbladder (GB),
portal vein (PV), and caudal vena cava (CVC), and close to the aorta (Ao).
The extent of this mass and the lack of vascular invasion could not be
confirmed  with the ultrasonographic exam and required computed
tomography. C and D: Adenoma or hepatoma. Longitudinal images of
two separate hyperechoic masses found in the liver of a clinically normal
dog. The smaller mass (C, arrowheads) presents a thin hypoechoic halo,
and the larger mass (D, cursors) is mildly inhomogeneous. The findings
on fine-needle aspiration were consistent with benign liver tumors
(adenoma orhepatoma)
Cavitary Lesions
Hepatic and biliary cysts are sometimes identified in dogs and cats and
appear as well circumscribed, regular or irregular, anechoic foci, typically
361
associated with far-enhancement artifact (Nyland and Park 1983) (Figure
6.35). In these benign cysts, the adjacent parenchyma is usually normal.
biliary cystadenomas and cystadenocarcinomas, commonly demonstrating
  e ss un  e p d  e
anechoic cavitations (Nyland and Park 1999) (Figures 6.36 and 6.37).
  o          
in dogs (Figure 6.38)
Hepatic abscesses, which are uncommon in dogs and cats, tend to appear
as round to oval, regular or irregular, hypoechoic lesions that are often
cavitated (Schwarz et al. 1998). Enhancement artifact, abdominal effusion.
regional lymphadenopathy, and hyperechoic perihepatic fat are commonly
seen in affected animals (Figure 6.39A). Abscesses can also show pus
Sedimentation in the central cavitations or appear as complex or more
echogenic masses (Figure 6.39B). Hyperechoic foci with reverberation
consistent with gas can also be observed (Figure 3.69C). Cellular debris or
hemorrhage accumulating in benign hepatic cysts can mimic abscesses,
although these lesions typically show a thinner, more well-defined rim.
Parasitic cysts occurring with liver flukes or hydatid disease can look
similar to abscesses with the addition of mineralization (Nyland et al.
1999). Fine-needle aspiration can be useful in confirming the nature of the
fluid contained in cavitary lesions and enable drainage of abscesses.
Figure 6.27. Primary liver carcinomas. A: Hepatocellular carcinoma in
a dog. Transverse image obtained in the right cranial abdomen of a dog
with a hemoabdomen. An irregular, inhomogeneous and poorly defined
mass (7.8 cm wide) is deforming the architecture of a liver lobe. A small
amount of fluid is noted around the mass. PE, peritoneal effusion. B:
Hepatic adenocarcinoma and metastasis in a dog.  A spherical,
hyperechoic mass (4.6 cm) is deforming the contour of a liver lobe and
hypoechoic nodule (l.6 cm) in the same lobe is associated with acoustic
demonstrating a hypoechoic halo were found in the liver of this dog, with
a histological diagnosis of neuroendocrine carcinoma. GB, gallbladder.
Image courtesy of D. Penninck. D: Biliary carcinoma in a cat.
Transverse image of the liver in a cat with icteria. A lobulated, mildly
hyperechoic, inhomogeneous mass (arrows and cursors) is displacing the
362
gallbladder (Ga) ventrally. Irregular, anechoic, tubular structures
(arrowheads) are also noted throughout the liver, consistent with dilated
intrahepatic biliary ducts.
Figure 6.28. Hepatic metastases. On these ultrasonographic and
1.0-l.5 cm wide, are found in the liver of a dog with splenic
hemangiosarcoma. Hypoechoic to anechoic cavitary foci are found in
some of these nodules and are associated with far enhancement
(arrowheads) Peritoneal effusion (PE) delineates the liver lobes (L)
Hepatic metastases were confirmed at surgery. AW, abdominal wall.
Figure 6.29. Hepatic metastases. A: Pancreatic adenocarcinoma.
Oblique image of the left hepatic lobe with two distinct metastatic nodules
(arrows). A smaller hypoechoic nodule with a thin hyperechoic rim and a
larger hyperechoic nodule are present, measuring 0.8 cm and 1.8 cm wide.
respectively. Hypoechoic peritoneal effusion (PE) is present. B: Splenic
hemangiosarcoma. Well-defined, anechoic cavitary metastases are seen
in the liver of this other dog with splenic hemangiosarcoma and severe,
363
echogenic peritoneal effusion (PE) consistent with hemorrhage. Acoustic
enhancement (arrowheads) is noted distal to these fluid-filled lesions. C:
Thyroid carcinoma. Multiple “target" lesions (arrows) are seen
throughout the liver of this dog with thyroid carcinoma. The hypoechoic
halo seen at the periphery of these rather hyperechoic nodules is a feature
that is most commonly observed with metastases. GB, gallbladder. D:
Pancreatic adenocarcinoma. A 4-cm inhomogeneous mass is in the liver
of this other dog with malignant pancreatic neoplasia. The findings on
fine-needle aspiration supported a diagnosis of pancreatic metastasis. GB,
gallbladder. Images B and C courtesy of D.Penninck.
1.89F
Figure 6.30. Hepatic hemangiosarcoma. A: Longitudinal image obtained
of the left portion of the liver in a dog with acute hemoabdomen. A large
hyperechoic mass (arrowheads) with a hypoechoic necrotic area (*)
involves the margin of a hepatic lobe. These features are common with
malignant tumors. B: Oblique image of the left portion of the liver in a cat
with hemoabdomen. A 3-cm-wide inhomogeneous mass with small
anechoic cavitary portions is at the caudal tip of the left lateral liver lobe.
Peritoneal effusion (PE) with echogenic floating structures is identified in
the cranioventral abdomen, consistent with hemorrhage.
364
Figure 6.31. Myxosarcoma in a dog. A: A large, markedly heterogeneous.
cavitated mass in the liver of this dog is disturbing most of the hepatic
architecture. B: Longitudinal image of the same tumor obtained 3 months
later. In this image, a clear distinction is made between the heterogeneous
mass and the normal liver (L). Image courtesy of D. Penninck.
Granulomas, Hematomas, and
Mineralization
Hepatic granulomas or pyogranulomas can sometimes occur in dogs and
cats, particularly with fungal diseases or with feline infectious peritonitis
(Figure 6.40). In people, granulomatous lesions tend to appear as
hyperechoic nodules (Mills et al. 1990). Hepatic hemorrhage is rare in
dogs and is usually related to hemangiosarcoma or trauma (Whiteley et al.
1989). Hepatic hematomas can also develop following ultrasound-guided
procedures such as biopsies and demonstrate variable ultrasonographic
changes related to clot organization and resorption (Nyland and Park
1983) (Figure 6.41). With time, hematomas tend to develop a cystic
component following clot lysis. This feature, as well as the progressive
spontaneoushematomas
 from  neoplastic  processes.
Hepatic
mineralization other than cholelithiasis can accompany benign processes
365
(such as hematoma or granuloma) or malignant processes. Mineralization
shadowing (Figure 6.42). However, the visibility or magnitude of the
shadowing is influenced by several factors, such as the size of the mineral
foci relative to the size of the ultrasound beam, image contrast, and
equipment settings (probe frequency, gain, and focal zone). Furthermore,
other types of hyperattenuating material, such as fibrous tissue or a
migrating foreign body, can also be associated with acoustic shadowing.
Figure 6.32. Target lesions. A: Longitudinal image of the midportion of
the liver in a dog with intestinal carcinoma, on which a small nodule
outlined by a peripheral hypoechoic halo is seen. The central portion of
this lesion is more echogenic, giving the impression of a target. B:
Longitudinal oblique image of the left portion of the liver of a dog with a
primary hepatocellular carcinoma identified in the right lateral lobe. An
ovoid nodule with a peripheral hypoechoic halo and a more echogenic
center (arrows), consistent with a metastasis, is in the liver (L). Smaller
but similar target lesions were found in the rest of the liver. FF, falciform
fat.
0.53c
1.59cm
Figure 6.33. Disseminated histiocytic sarcoma (malignant histiocytosis)
A: Multiple hypoechoic nodules and masses (more than 3 cm wide) are in
366
the liver of this Bernese mountain dog. These lesions are relatively well
circumscribed and have a mildly echogenic center. The liver was also
enlarged. B: In this other dog with disseminated histiocytic sarcoma, the
liver (L) is uniformly hypoechoic and enlarged. The difference between
the hepatic and splenic (S) echogenicities was considered excessive.
Figure 6.34. Lymphoma. Close-up longitudinal image of the left portion
of the liver (L) of a dog with multicentric lymphoma. Two well-defined
hypoechoic nodules, reaching 2.1 cm wide, are present, and the central
portion of the largest nodule is more echogenic. These features are
commonly recognized with lymphoma and malignant histiocytosis (see
Figure 6.33A) in dogs.
367
Figure 6.35. Benign hepatic cyst-like lesions. A: Transverse image of the
liver (L) of a dog with a discrete anechoic structure (approximately 1 cm
wide) that is septated and associated with far acoustic enhancement
     o a  
aspirated with ultrasound guidance. The peripheral hepatic parenchyma is
homogeneous. B: Longitudinal image of the liver of a dog with a
well-circumscribed, loculated, anechoic structure. Irregular contours and
far enhancement (arrowheads) are present. Bile was aspirated. The clinical
hyperechoic regenerative nodule (arrows) is also present. The gallbladder
wall is thickened and irregular (GB), presumably because of cholecystitis.
C and D: Ultrasound images of a large liver cyst in a dog with abdominal
pain that were obtained before (C) and after (D) ultrasound-guided
 drainage. The peripheral liver parenchyma is normal.
Figure6.36.
Biliary
/cystadenocarcinoma  in   a cat.  Transverse
with increased hepatic enzymes. A multiloculated mass (arrows and
cursors) with a more solid dorsal component (*) is identified in the right
(         
because of the presence of hypoattenuating fluid-filled cavities. A
malignant tumor was confirmed through ultrasound-guided biopsy. FF,
falciformfat.
368
Figure 6.37. Biliary cystadenoma in a cat. Longitudinal oblique image of
  s      go r  g d l 
cranioventral abdomen. A multiloculated hyperechoic mass (arrows) is
ventral to the stomach (St) and connected to the liver (L). Within this mass
are multiple anechoic cavities (*), consistent with biliary cystadenoma.
Figure 6.38. Biliary carcinoma in a dog. Longitudinal image of the right
    e       n o 
poorly defined mass (arrows) contains irregular hypoechoic and anechoic
cavitations. The findings on ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration of
the more solid portions of the mass were suggestive of biliary carcinoma.
Figure 6.39. Hepatic abscesses. A: Longitudinal image of the left portion
of the liver in a febrile dog with abdominal pain. An irregular hypoechoic
lesion (arrowheads) can be seen. The abdominal fat adjacent to the liver
369
(L) border is hyperechoic and hyperattenuating, suggesting steatitis.
Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration confirmed the presence of an
abscess. B: Longitudinal oblique image of the left portion of the liver in a
febrile dog. A poorly defined hyperechoic nodule (arrows) with a
hypoechoic center is found at the dorsal margin of this lobe, which was
indicative of a septic abscess. C: Longitudinal image of the liver of a
Airedale terrier in which a hepatic abscess was identified. The abscessed
region (arrows), deep in the liver, is poorly marginated and contains
courtesy of D. Penninck.
Figure 6.40. Hepatic granulomas. A: Longitudinal image of the left
portion of the liver (L) in a dog with a relatively well-defined hyperechoic
focus associated with acoustic shadowing (arrows). A granuloma was
diagnosed, although no underlying etiology could be identified. This
granuloma was thought to be an incidental finding. B: Longitudinal image
    i  i   o    
e  ( a o e a s (s 
was pyogranulomatous cholangiohepatitis in relation to feline infectious
peritonitis.FF, falciform fat.
370
Figure 6.41. Hepatic hematoma. Longitudinal image of the left portion of
the liver in small-breed dog that was bitten by a larger dog 3 days earlier.
An ill-defined, irregular area of mixed echogenicity (arrows and cursors),
consistent with a traumatic hematoma, is found in the superficial portion
Of theliver.
Hepatic Lobe Torsion, Infarction, and
Gas
Liver-lobe torsion, which leads to lobar congestion, hemorrhage, and
necrosis, can show variable signs that can mimic neoplasia or abscess
formation. In a recent report, the affected lobe was hypoechoic (more
371
commonly) or mixed in echogenicity, and Doppler assessment of the lobe
revealed reduced vascularity in many dogs (Hinkle Schwartz et al. 2006)
(Figure 6.43). Spontaneous infarction is less common in the liver when
and poorly echogenic area with reduced flow on color Doppler or power
Doppler (Figure 6.44). Hyperechoic foci associated with reverberating
artifact, consistent with gas, can be seen in the liver, most often in the
biliary tract, following surgery. Gas can also form because of bacterial
infection (Figure 6.45). Metallic clips used with surgical biopsies appear
as short, strongly hyperechoic lines with reverberation, mimicking gas. A
radiograph can be used, if needed, to differentiate gas from metal.
Figure 6.42. Parenchymal mineralization. Longitudinal image of the left
portion of the liver (L) in a dog with chronic hepatitis. The liver
parenchyma is diffusely hyperechoic, with several small, hyperechoic,
irregular foci associated with acoustic shadowing (arrows)
Figure 6.43. Hepatic lobe torsion. A: The twisted left lateral liver lobe is
diffusely hypoechoic (arrowheads), contrasting with the underlying left
medial lobe (L). B: A close-up view of the affected lobe. There was no
evidence of flow through the visible vessels. The lobe margins are
rounded. The surrounding fat is hyperechoic. Images courtesy of D.
Penninck.
372
Figure 6.44. Hepatic infarction. Longitudinal oblique image of the left
liver is an irregular hypoechoic region (arrows) with peripheral vascular
signal. Ultrasound-guided biopsy revealed infarction of uncertain origin.
Peritoneal effusion (PE) is also noted.
LeftOra
Figure 6.45. Emphysematous hepatitis. Corresponding lateral abdominal
radiograph and sonogram of a dog with emphysematous hepatitis. Gas
foci (arrows) are radiotransparent on the radiograph and hyperechoic with
reverberation artifacts on the ultrasound image. The affected lobe (L1) is
enlarged, hyperechoic, and heterogeneous when compared with an
adjacent lobe (L2). Images courtesy of D. Penninck.
373
DISORDERS OF THEBILIARY
SYSTEM
Biliary Obstruction
Ultrasonography has become an important investigative tool in assessing
icteric dogs and cats with biliary obstruction. After complete obstruction
of the CBD, retrograde dilatation is expected that initially affects the CBD
and GB, followed by the extrahepatic ducts and intrahepatic ducts (Nyland
and Gillett 1982). With extrahepatic biliary obstruction, the cystic duct
and CBD dilate and often become tortuous proximal to the site of
obstruction (Figures 6.46-6.51). A CBD more than 4 mm wide is usually
predictive of obstruction in cats (Leveillé et al. 1996). This is probably
irregular and tortuous anechoic tubes with hyperechoic walls can be found
in the liver, following the more linear PVs and unassociated with color
flow, indicating dilated hepatic ducts. This sign, also referred to as the
"too many tubes" sign, is usually indicative of complete obstruction
(Figures 6.47C and 6.48). Additionally, these anechoic tubes can be
associated with acoustic far enhancement, which is not expected with
vessels than contain a more attenuating fluid (Nyland and Gillett 1982).
Although the GB can be dilated with biliary obstruction, wall contraction
distend. Furthermore, reduced compliance of the peripheral liver
parenchyma may limit GB dilatation. Thus, the absence of GB distension
should not be used to rule out biliary obstruction.
Extrahepatic biliary obstruction more commonly involves the CBD
mainly in its distal segment, in proximity to the major duodenal papilla.
Pancreatitis is often responsible for CBD obstruction, particularly in dogs,
because of edema, inflammation, and fibrosis involving the duodenal wall
and major papilla and/or the CBD (Fahie and Martin 1995; Leveille et al.
1996; Mayhew et al. 2002) (Figure 6.49). Chronic duodenitis 0r
cholecystitis can also be associated with fibrous tissue proliferation and
subsequent stenosis. Inflammatory processes involving the biliary tract
can be associated with cholelithiasis (Mayhew et al. 2002). The CBD must
374
hyperattenuating choleliths, possibly lodged in the distal CBD (Figure
6.50). Choleliths can also form secondary to partial or complete biliary
obstruction (Mayhew et al. 2002), thus complicating the ultrasound
identification of the source of the obstruction.
Several types of neoplasia (predominantly carcinomas) involving the
o a s  sd a  'o a n 
(Fahie and Martin 1995). Nodules or masses of variable echogenicity,
sometimes with a cystic component, can be observed (Figure 6.51)
Evaluation of the rest of the abdomen, especially the liver parenchyma and
lymph nodes, can help in differentiating benign from malignant processes.
Fine-needle aspiration or biopsy is recommended if the abnormal tissue
can be safely reached.
Figure 6.46. Congenital malformation with biliary ectasia in two cats. A:
           
obstruction. Numerous bile ducts (BD), including the common bile duct,
are markedly dilated (lumen between the cursors) and show a thickened
wall (arrowheads). The bile content is also more echogenic than normal.
Extensive biliary tree fibrosis and stenosis were identified, and an
underlying congenital defect was suspected. GB, gallbladder. B-D:
Similar changes observed in a 8-month-old cat. The bile ducts are
distended and irregular. The gallbladder (GB) contains echogenic sludge
and shows a thickened, hyperechoic wall (arrowheads). Color Doppler (B)
was used to confirm the absence of flow in these bile ducts (BD),
distinguishing those from hepatic vessels. A congenital defect such as
Images courtesy of D. Penninck.
375
Gallbladder and Common Bile Duct
Wall Anomalies
   n   s   i     
dogs) can be caused by inflammation (cholecystitis), edema (portal
hypertension, hypoalbuminemia, biliary obstruction, or inflammation),
cystic mucosal hyperplasia, or rarely neoplasia (Nyland and Park 1983;
Spaulding 1993; Hittmair et al. 2001). With cholecystitis, the chronicity
and severity of the inflammatory process influence the appearance of the
wall. Although it can appear normal, thickening is often seen, along with a
double-rim pattern (particularly in more acute cases) or diffuse wall
hyperechogenicity, sometimes associated with dystrophic mineralization,
particularly in chronic cholecystitis (Figure 6.52). The double-rim pattern
is often seen in wall edema (Figure 6.53). Changes in the GB wall may be
more evident with concurrent parenchymal hypoechogenicity, such as in
many cases of feline cholangiohepatitis.
Thickening of the CBD wall, along with luminal dilatation, is also
common with cholecystitis (Figure 6.54). In fact, it can be difficult to
differentiate obstructive dilation of the CBD from dilatation associated
with stasis secondary to chronic inflammation of the biliary system
(Leveille et al. 1996). Furthermore, in chronic outflow obstruction, the
CBD can remain dilated even after the cause of obstruction has been
alleviated.
376
Figure 6.47. Extrahepatic biliary obstruction. A: Longitudinal image
obtained just caudal to the porta hepatis of a dog with a dilated common
bile duct (CBD) ventral to the portal vein (PV) and caudal vena cava
(CVC). The lumen of the CBD reaches 5.6 mm wide, indicating an
obstruction located more distally. B: Longitudinal image obtained in the
to anechoic tubular structures representing dilated hepatic duct (HD),
cystic duct (CD), and common bile duct (CBD) indicate extrahepatic
biliary obstruction. C: Longitudinal image (with power Doppler) of the
common bile duct. Multiple anechoic, tortuous, tubular structures without
evidence of flow that are indicative of intrahepatic bile ducts are found in
the liver. A lobulated anechoic structure at the porta hepatis is associated
with far acoustic enhancement (arrows) consistent with a dilatation of the
junction of the extrahepatic biliary ducts, the cystic duct, and the common
bile duct.
Figure 6.48. Chronic extrahepatic biliary obstruction. Longitudinal (A)
and transverse (B) images of the liver of a dog with tortuous, anechoic,
tubular structures (*) near the portal veins (PV and arrows). Power
Doppler was used to confirm the absence of flow in these tubes, indicating
intrahepatic biliary duct distension. The hyperechoic and hyperattenuating
fat caudal to the liver seen in longitudinal image A was consistent with
steatitis. Chronic pancreatitis was diagnosed.
377
Figure 6.49. Pancreatitis and biliary obstruction. Transverse (A) and
longitudinal (B) images of the proximal duodenum of a dog with
pancreatitis. The distal portion of the common bile duct (CBD) is dilated.
The peripheral fat is markedly hyperechoic, and a small amount of
peritoneal effusion is noted (PE). The duodenal papilla (arrowheads) is
hyperechoic and subjectively enlarged, and the wall of the common bile
duct appears thickened. These changes suggest an extension of the
inflammatory process to these structures that causes biliary obstruction. In
A, the arrow points to the thickened common bile duct wall.
Figure 6.50. Obstructive cholelith. Longitudinal ultrasonographic and
   n       
structure, consistent with a cholelith (arrow), is found in the distal portion
of the common bile duct (CBD). The common bile duct and cystic duct
(CD) are dilated and thickened (l.7 mm) because of cholecystitis and
biliary obstruction. The stone is casting an acoustic shadow (*).
378
 y 1   s 1 q    
cat. Longitudinal image of a cat's common bile duct (CBD) with a
uniform, mildly echogenic mass (arrows and cursors) obliterating the
lumen of the CBD. These features can indicate chronic cholecystitis with
fibrosis, or a neoplastic process. Biliary carcinoma was identified at
Surgery. B: Chronic cholecystitis and common bile duct obstruction.
Longitudinal image of the common bile duct in a cat with chronic
suppurative cholangiohepatitis and cholecystitis. Within the distal
sdosu e sisns pe (sosn) ss e st (a) nn aq uoo
process.  However,  this mass  was confirmed to represent
pyogranulomatous inflammation associated with fibrous tissue. Adjacent
hyperechoic fat (*) is consistent with steatitis.
Figure 6.52. Cholecystitis. A: Longitudinal image of the right-central
portion of the liver of a febrile cat. The gallbladder (GB) is thickened and
has a hyperechoic, irregular wall with ill-defined margins (arrows). The
peripheral hepatic parenchyma is hypoechoic. Cholangiohepatitis was
diagnosed based on fine-needle aspiration of the liver. B: Transverse
image of the liver and gallbladder (GB) of a small-breed dog with
increased liver enzymes. The gallbladder wall is mildly thickened (2.4
mm) and hypoechoic in its center. C: Transverse image of the gallbladder
(GB) of a dog with a clinical history of fever and increased liver enzymes.
The gallbladder wall is thickened and associated with a multilayered
pattern because of severe wall inflammation, edema, and necrosis.
379
Figure 6.53. Gallbladder wall edema. Longitudinal image of the
gallbladder (GB) in a dog with hypoalbuminemia. The gallbladder wall is
thickened, with a double rim (arrows) consistent with edema.
Cholecystitis could be not excluded based on the image (see Figure
6.52B).
  re sssd osdou   sod  
in dogs and cats, can be associated with biliary obstruction. Although it
can be difficult to differentiate these processes, pedunculated echogenic
older dogs of small and medium-sized breeds, now representing an
important cause of biliary obstruction (Besso et al. 2000). This complex
pathology is characterized by an excessive accumulation of mucus within
the GB lumen, progressively leading to overdistension and wall necrosis
and rupture. Intraluminal mucinous plugs can extend or migrate into the
380
CBD and cause obstruction. [n affected GB, a characteristic accumulation
  o    on   s o o
centrally displacing the echogenic biliary sludge, which becomes
GB, a stellate pattern is seen initially, followed by the appearance of
immobile hyperechoic radiating striations that lead to the appearance of a
kiwifruit-like pattern (Figures 6.55-6.57) (Bess0 et al. 2000). The GB wall
may also appear thickened, hyperechoic, and irregular because of edema.
inflammation, and/or necrosis. A discontinuity in the GB wall is an
important sign of rupture, along with the presence of hyperechoic fat at
the periphery of the GB and the presence of peritoneal effusion (Figure
6.57). These signs generally indicate a surgical emergency. Fragments of
mucoceles may also migrate within the peritoneal cavity (Figure 6.57B).
Although most affected dogs have concurrent clinical evidence of
hep-atobiliary disease, GB mucocele can be found incidentally on
ultrasound.
Figure 6.54. Common bile duct thickening. Longitudinal image of the
common bile duct (CBD) of a cat with elevated liver enzymes and
vomiting. The lumen of the common bile duct is well visualized, while
less than 4 mm wide. The duct wall(arrows) is thickened and
medical treatments for cholecystitis. PV, portal vein.
Cholelithiasis
Choleliths are often incidental within any portion of the biliary tract in
dogs and cats. An underlying or consecutive inflammatory process
hyperechoic, shadowing foci with a tendency to form linear tracts when
381
(Figure 6.58) Consecutive intrahepatic or extrahepatic biliary obstruction
can be observed, although choleliths may also form because of an
obstruction (Mayhew et al. 2002)
Figure 6.55. Partial gallbladder mucocele. Transverse (A) and
longitudinal (B) images of the gallbladder of a dog with increased liver
enzymes. The gallbladder is distended with echogenic biliary sludge (BS)
in the dependent portion of the lumen (arrowheads at horizontal level). An
interrupted and irregular, hypoechoic to anechoic rim is visible at the inner
periphery of the gallbladder, consistent with mucus. The triangular shape
of these hypoechoic foci (arrows) has been referred as the stellate pattern.
Figure 6.56. Complete gallbladder mucocele. Transverse (A) and
longitudinal (B) images of the gallbladder of a dog with icterus and acute
 n e ss  s     
hyperechoic striations (arrows) radiating toward its center. The central
hyperechoic area is heterogeneous and completely immobile. These
features are described as a kiwifruit-like pattern, which is a
pathognomonic sign for gallbladder mucocele. The gallbladder wall is also
thickened (arrowheads) and the adjacent fat is hyperechoic, suggesting
imminent or recent wall rupture.
382
Figure 6.57. Gallbladder rupture. A: Transverse image of the
gallbladder in a dog with signs of acute abdominal pain. A kiwifruit-like
pattern of striations, consistent with mucocele, is noted (arrow) in the
gallbladder (GB). The fat at the right and ventral aspects of the gallbladder
is markedly hyperechoic and hyperattenuating, highly suggestive of wall
perforation and was confirmed with surgical exploration. L, liver. B:
Migrating mucocele. Longitudinal image of the region just caudoventral
to the liver (L) in a dog with gallbladder mucocele. A crescent-shaped
anechoic structure with fine radiating striations (arrows) is found at the
caudal margin of the liver. This structure represents a fragment of
mucocele that migrated after gallbladder rupture.
.Consecutivebile
 peritonitis was present, associated with hyperechoic fat.
Figure 6.58. Cholelithiasis. A: Longitudinal image of the central portion
of the liver (L) in a small dog with acute pancreatitis. Several rounded
hyperechoic structures (*)associated with
1 acousticshadowing
(arrowheads), consistent with choleliths, are in the gallbladder (GB) neck.
Small hyperechoic foci, associated with some reverberation (arrow), are in
the nondependent ventral region of the gallbladder. These foci could
indicate small choleliths adhered to the wall or indicate gas. There was no
increase in liver enzymes in this dog. The gallstones were not considered
clinically significant. B: A larger volume of cholelithiasis (*) is in the
dependent portion of the gallbladder (GB) of this other larger dog with
Cushing's disease. Similar ultrasound features are observed. C:
Transverse oblique image of the left portion of the liver of a cat with
increased liver enzymes. Several linear hyperechoic tracts (short arrows),
causing acoustic shadowing (arrowheads), are parallel to the portal veins
(PV). These features suggest cholelithiasis within the intrahepatic biliary
ducts. Cholangiohepatitis
 was   diagnosed  with  ultrasound-guided
aspiration and biopsy.
383
DISORDERS OF THE HEPATIC
ANDPORTAL VASCULATURE
Congenital Portosystemic Shunts
Portosystemic shunts (PSS), which represent one of the most common
vascular anomalies in dogs and cats, connect the portal system to the
systemic circulation through the CVC or azygos vein. The use of
ultrasonography in the detection and characterization of these anomalies
9661 1 1 q11 68661 pue 9661 qu7) pqs 1m u9q seq
d'Anjou et al. 2004; Szatmari et al. 2004). Most PSS are congenital in
dogs and cats, and more commonly detected in juvenile animals; however,
a certain number of these shunts can remain undetected for several years
in dogs and particularly in cats.
Because of the common reduction in hepatic volume in affected animals, a
complete  evaluation   of the  intra-hepatic  and  extrahepatic  portal
vasculature can be challenging to achieve (Figure 6.59). A right-lateral
approach through the 1ith or 12th intercostal spaces may be required in
384
order to visualize the liver and porta hepatitis, as well as the region of the
CVC, without overlying gastrointestinal content.
Congenital PSS are most often single. Double-shunting loops
anastomosing before entering the systemic circulation were reported to be
(Szatmari et al. 2004). Schematic morphological differences among
congenital PSS are depicted in Figure 6.60.
Figure 6.59. Microhepatica. Longitudinal image of the central portion of
the liver (L) of a dog with a congenital extrahepatic portosystemic shunt.
Because of the significant reduction in hepatic volume, the spleen is
displaced cranially and the portal vein cannot be easily followed to the
liver.
Extrahepatic portosystemic shunts, arising from the main PV or a tributary
(for example, the splenic, right gastric, left gastric, or gastroepiploic vein),
s i d n    o    n 
breeds of dogs and in cats (Lamb 1996 and 1998; Lamb et al. 1996a
containing hepatofugal flow and with a maximal diameter similar to the
one of the aorta, is typically seen originating from a branch of the portal
system (Figure 6.61). A termination into the CVC is often visualized in
association with focal flow turbulence that appears as a mosaic pattern on
color Doppler (Lamb 1996; d'Anjou et al. 2004) (Figure 6.61D)
Portocaval shunts typically terminate in the CVC cranial to the right renal
vein (Figure 6.61C). The shunt termination can be more difficult to
visualize when a shunt connects to the azygos vein. Portoazygos shunts
typically dive craniodorsally, in the direction of the aortic hiatus, after
originating from one of the portal branches (Figure 6.62). The anomalous
vessel can be followed dorsally and cranially to the transverse colon and
stomach, unless this window is blocked by acoustic shadowing and/or
385
reverberation caused by the presence of gas, ingesta, or feces. In some
cases, a dilated vessel adjacent and parallel to the aorta can be seen that
contains venous flow directed cranially. The visualization of such a vessel,
which can indicate either the shunt or a dilated azygos vein, is considered
specific for portoazygos shunting (Figure 6.62C).
Intrahepatic portosystemic shunts are more prevalent in large-breed dogs
and are defined as left-divisional, central divisional, or right-divisional.
Left-divisional shunts, caused by a patent ductus venosus, represent the
most common form of intrahepatic shunt (Szatmari et al. 2004) (Figure
from the intrahepatic PV and curving into the left portion of the liver
before entering the CVC (Figure 6.63A). Morphologically, these shunts
typically connect to the left hepatic vein, which drains into the CVC
Right-divisional shunts often appear as a mirror image of patent ductus
venosus PSs, but instead curve into the right liver before connecting to a
right hepatic vein or to the CVC (Figure 6.63B and C). Central divisional
shunts often present as a window-type shunt between a closely aligned
intrahepatic PV and CVC. The PV is commonly dilated at the site of the
foramen, and flow turbulence can be observed in the CVC (Figure 6.63D).
The PV size has a significant predictive value in shunt investigation. In
fact, because of flow diversion, the size of the PV cranial to the shunt
origin is significantly reduced (d'Anjou et al. 2004; Szatmari et al. 2004)
(Figures 6.61A and B and 6.64). A congenital extrahepatic shunt is
suspected if the main PV is smaller in diameter when compared with its
tributaries. The search for the origin of the PSS is focused on the region
where the PV, or a tributary, abruptly diminishes in size. A ratio
comparing the luminal diameter of the PV, just before entering the liver,
with the maximal luminal diameter of the aorta, obtained in the cranial
abdomen, was investigated to predict the likelihood of an extrahepatic
 s  o a (o   o) so  so  
PV-aorta ratio of <0.65 predicts the presence of an extrahepatic shunt
(Figure 6.65), whereas a ratio >0.8 excludes this type of PSS (Figure
6.15). However, a low PV-aorta ratio could also be found in dogs with
primary PV hypoplasia (idiopathic noncirrhotic portal hypertension)
ratios of >0.8 are seen only in animals with a normal portal system.
micro-vascular dysplasia, intrahepatic PSS, or portal hypertension caused
by chronic liver disease.
386
Figure 6.60. Categories of portosystemic shunts. Schematic illustrations
of typical categories of portosystemic shunts showing the direction of
shunting flow (arrows) in dogs and cats. A and B: Congenital extrahepatic
shunts can terminate into the caudal vena cava or azygos vein. In either
case, the diameter of the portal vein (PV) cranial to the origin of the shunt
is significantly reduced because of flow diversion. A portoazygos shunt
can be followed in the direction of the aortic hiatus, along the aorta (Ao),
but its termination can be difficult to visualize. On the other hand, most
portocaval shunt terminations can be seen with ultrasonography. C:
Left-sided intrahepatic shunts (patent ductus venosus) represent the most
common type of intrahepatic shunts. This shunt typically terminates into
an “ampula" formed by the confluence of this shunt and a left hepatic
vein, just before the caudal vena cava (CVC). PV, portal vein. D: Multiple
acquired shunts most commonly are caused by chronic liver disease and
secondary portal hypertension. Small tortuous vessels can usually be
identified in the central abdomen around the caudal vena cava (CVC), as
well as between the spleen and the left kidney (splenorenal anastomosis).
Intrahepatic veins can also be distorted and reduced in diameter. With
chronic hepatitis or cirrhosis, the liver is typically irregular in contour and
heterogeneous. CrM, cranial mesenteric vein; and PV, portal vein.
[llustrations by M.A. d'Anjou.
387
AVALSHUN
EXTRAHE
INTRAHEPATICSHUNT
PATENTDUCTUSVENOSUS
ACQUIREDPORTOSYSTEMICSHUNTS
Figure 6.6l. Extrahepatic portocaval shunts. A: Longitudinal color
Doppler image of the abdomen of a Yorkshire terrier. An anomalous
shunting vein (S) just caudal to the stomach is seen originating from the
main portal vein. This vessel contains hepatofugal flow and is directed
craniodorsally. The portal vein diameter (PV) is significantly reduced
cranial to the shunt origin (arrowheads). B: Longitudinal sonogram of the
abdomen of a Maltese terrier with an anomalous vein, just caudal to the
stomach, that originates from the main portal vein (PV). The portal vein
diameter (small arrows) is significantly reduced cranial to the shunt origin
(large arrow) when compared with caudal to the shunt. C: Transverse
color Doppler image obtained in the craniodorsal abdomen of a 8-year-old
small dog with a small aberrant vessel (S) connecting to the caudal vena
cava (CVC), just cranial to the site of the right renal vein. This shunting
vessel was followed to the splenic vein compatible with an extrahepatic
splenocaval shunt. Ao, aorta. D: Longitudinal color Doppler ultrasound
image obtained in the craniodorsal abdomen of a dog with extrahepatic
portocaval shunting. A mosaic pattern observed in the caudal vena cava
(CVC) is consistent with flow turbulence at the site of shunt termination
(S). Ao, aorta; and L, liver.
388
Several other findings can be observed in dogs and cats affected with
congenital PSS. Besides the reduction in liver volume observed in most
patients (particularly in dogs), the visibility of intrahepatic portal branches
is often reduced because of hypoperfusion. When evaluated with spectral
Doppler, the portal flow is commonly irregular because of cardiac cycle
influence on the normally relatively constant portal flow (Lamb 1996 and
1998; d’Anjou et al. 2004) (Figure 6.65). The kidneys are commonly
enlarged, especially in dogs, and uroliths are often recognized. The
combination of microhepatica, renomegaly, and urolithiasis is highly
(d'Anjou et al. 2004).
Figure 6.62. Portoazygos shunts. A: Transverse image obtained in the
craniodorsal abdomen of a small-breed dog with a large vessel dorsal to
the stomach in the direction of the aortic hiatus. This vein contained
hepatofugal flow (arrow) and could be followed to the diaphragm. A
portoazygos shunt was confirmed at surgery. B: Longitudinal oblique
color Doppler image obtained in the craniodorsal abdomen of a young
Yorkshire terrier. An aberrant vein with hepatofugal flow (short arrow) is
next to the gastric cardia and diaphragm. A portoazygos shunt was
surgically confirmed. C: Longitudinal color Doppler image obtained in
the craniodorsal abdomen of a young cat with a right azygos vein (Az)
abnormally apparent. A shunt was detected connecting to this vein in the
midabdomen.Ao,aorta.
389
A systematic approach is recommended in the detection of congenital and
acquired PSS in animals (Figure 6.66).
Portal Hypertension and Acquired
Portosystemic Shunts
Chronic liver disease, particularly involving fibrosis and diffuse nodular
regeneration (cirrhosis) or infiltrative neoplasia, can cause reduced PV
compliance and increased pressure. Portal hypertension can also be caused
by congenital or developmental PV hypoplasia (also termed noncirrhotic
portal hypertension), arterioportal fistula, portal thrombosis, or PV
o sis pe sse go d a aa ps a  is
edema involving several structures, such as the GB wall and pancreas.
Portal hypertension is suspected when the portal flow is significantly
390
if the vein is normal in size or dilated (Nyland and Fisher 1990; d'Anjou
may not be observed at the time of the exam.
vessels that connect the portal system to the systemic circulation (Figure
6.60D). Of these collaterals in dogs, a splenorenal anastomosis is
commonly observed that originates from the splenic vein and has a flow
directed caudally and coursing caudally along the dorsal splenic border
(Figure 6.68A) (d'Anjou et al. 2004). The caudal termination of this
collateral can be difficult to visualize. However,in the same region,
multiple small tortuous vessels are often seen that connect to the left renal
vein or directly to the CVC (Figure 6.68B). The visualization of a vein
connecting to the left renal vein, consistent with a dilated gonadal vein,
has been described as a specific sign of acquired PSS (Szatmari et al.
2004) and indicates the termination of the splenorenal anastomosis (Figure
6.68D). Small, tortuous, aberrant vessels can also be observed in the
Doppler is used (Figure 6.68C). Flow turbulence is typically seen in the
CVC at the site of shunt entry.
Figure 6.63. Intrahepatic shunts. A: Patent ductus venosus. Longitudinal
oblique ultrasound image obtained in the left cranial abdomen of a young
caudal vena cava (CVC and arrow). Hepatofugal flow observed on color
Doppler was consistent with a left-divisional intrahepatic shunt (S). The
liver (L) is also reduced in volume. B: Right-divisional shunt. Transverse
intercostal space (S) in a young Bernese mountain dog with suspected
portal vein (PV) to the caudal vena cava (CVC). C: Right-divisional
shunt. Longitudinal oblique ultrasound image obtained through the right
12th intercostal space in a young Akita with suspected portosystemic
shunting. A large tortuous vein (S) is between the portal vein (PV) and the
caudal vena cava (CVC) in the liver (L). Turbulent flow is obvious, as
manifested by a mosaic pattern on color mode at the site of
communication of the shunt (arrow) with the caudal vena cava. D:
Central divisional intrahepatic shunt. Longitudinal color Doppler image
obtained in the craniodorsal abdomen of a young large-breed dog with
suspected portosystemic shunting. The intrahepatic portal vein (PV) dives
391
dorsally and a “window" (arrow) containing turbulent flow (mosaic
pattern) is seen connecting to the caudal vena cava (CVC).
ArterioportalFistulas
Congenital or acquired connections between PVs and hepatic arteries,
termed arterioportal fistulas, can dramatically increase the pressure within
au pue uisuad sissond Aipiden o pal pue waisss od a
eventual opening of  portosystemic  collaterals  (acquired   PSS).
Ultrasonographically, the PV can become markedly enlarged, and flow
reversal can be observed with Doppler (Szatmari et al. 2004) (Figure
s pe pe oq Aidi soa od d (
in the affected lobe, which can be more difficult to identify.
Figure 6.64. Reduced portal vein-aorta ratio. In these longitudinal images
of the portal vein (PV) and aorta, obtained at the level of the porta hepatis,
the portal vein appears significantly smaller. The portal vein-aorta ratio
was calculated as 0.52. A congenital extrahepatic shunt was detected
caudal to the site of measurement of the portal vein. The caudal vena cava
(CVC) can be collapsed easily during the exam (arrow).
392
Figure 6.65. Portal flow alterations. A: Intrahepatic shunt. Spectral
Doppler evaluation of the portal flow characteristics in a dog with
intrahepatic shunting. The flow velocity is markedly irregular in the main
extrahepatic portal vein (PV) because of the retrograde influence of
pressure variations in the caudal vena cava. B: Portal hypertension.
Spectral Doppler evaluation of the portal flow in a dog with chronic liver
disease. The flow velocity is reduced (maximal 72 cm/s) in the
       
Multiple acquired shunts were detected.
Portal Venous Thrombosis
Thrombosis can form because of a hypercoagulable state, vascular stasis,
or damage to the vascular endothelium (Lamb et al. 1996b). Local
neoplasia or inflammation can lead to PV thrombosis. Significant portal
thrombosis causes portal hypertension and consequently the formation of
multiple acquired PsS, particularly if the thrombosis is long-standing.
Portal thrombosis can also extend caudally into the cranial mesenteric vein
or splenic vein and cause congestion that can lead to life-threatening
infarction. Ultrasonographically, thrombi are characterized by a lack of
flow in the affected region of the vein, as well as by the presence of an
immobile, mildly echogenic structure within the vessel lumen (Lamb et al.
393
1996b) (Figure 6.70). The vein can be dilated, particularly caudal to the
stenosis  and  involving  the  peripheral   portal   tributaries.   Vascular
congestion can be better assessed with spectral Doppler. Color Doppler
and power Doppler are also useful in confirming the magnitude of the
thrombosis, particularly  when  thrombi  are  initially  formed and
hypoechogenic. Power Doppler, which is more sensitive and not direction
dependent, helps to better assess the presence of flow around or within the
thrombus, particularly when the vessel is aligned perpendicularly to the
probe or if the flow is significantly reduced.
Figure 6.66. Portosystemic shunt search algorithm. Typical findings
observed with different categories of portosystemic shunts (PSS) are
shown. The main portal vein (PV) is evaluated and measured just caudal
to its insertion into the liver. In that process, care most be taken not to
     a       
CVC, caudal vena cava; MA PSS, multiple acquired portosystemic shunts;
and PV/Ao (aorta) ratio, ratio between the luminal diameter of the main
portal vein and aorta.
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC APPROACH FOR PORTOSYSTEMIC SHUNT DETECTION
Figure 6.67. Portal hypertension. Transverse image obtained in the
midcranial abdomen, caudal to the liver, of a small-breed dog. The portal
vein (PV) is enlarged. The flow velocity is reduced because of portal
hypertension. Hepatic cirrhosis was diagnosed.
394
Figure 6.68. Multiple acquired portosystemic shunts. A: Longitudinal
image obtained at the level of the spleen. A tortuous vein (arrow)
containing flow directed caudally was connectedto the splenic vein
   a go al a n  aq o  
caudally, consistent with an acquired splenorenal anastomosis. This dog
had primary portal vein hypoplasia. B: Longitudinal image of a dog with
portal hypertension obtained in the midabdomen, at the level of the caudal
vena cava (CVC). Multiple small tortuous vessels are seen in the
mesentery, in proximity to the CVC, with a direct connection observed
(arrow). Anechoic peritoneal effusion (PE) is also detected. C:
Longitudinal image obtained in the midabdomen, at the level of the
omentum and small intestine (SI), of a dog with portal hypertension.
Multiple small tortuous vessels are seen in the mesentery. D: Longitudinal
m sop e u! (pv) puel jeuape yal aun jo [aal ayi ie pauieqo sew
portal hypertension caused by portal venous thrombosis. An aberrant vein
is seen connecting with the left renal vein (LRV), consistent with an
enlarged left gonadal vein (LGV). This feature is specific of acquired
portosystemic shunt in dogs. Images courtesy of D. Penninck.
395
Hepatic Congestion
Hepatic venous congestion is more commonly caused by right-sided heart
insufficiency, such as cardiac tamponade, leading to increased pressure
within the CVC and consequently within hepatic veins. The CVC and
hepatic veins appear dilated, and the liver is typically enlarged and
diffusely hypoechoic (Biller 1992) (Figure 6.71).
Figure 6.69. Arterioportal fistula. A: On this longitudinal color Doppler
image obtained in a young dog with suspected portosystemic shunting, a
markedly tortuous vascular structure with turbulent flow is observed
within the liver (L), just caudal to the gallbladder (GB). The portal vein
(PV) is distended and associated with reversed flow (hepatofugal; red
signal) on color Doppler (B) and abnormal pulsatility on spectral Doppler
  s       i  
liver. C: Additionally, the celiac artery (CA) is noted to be much larger
than the cranial mesenteric artery (CMA). Multiple acquired shunts were
detected during the exam (not shown). Images courtesy of D. Penninck
Figure 6.70. Portal venous thrombosis. A: Transverse image of the left
portion of the liver (L) in a dog with severe chronic hepatitis. The
intrahepatic portal venous lumens (arrows) appear hyperechoic. Color
Doppler confirmed the absence of flow and the presence of massive
thrombosis. Secondary portal hypertension was also identified. PV, portal
vein. B: Longitudinal image of the portal vein in a small dog with
protein-losing nephropathy and signs of portal hypertension. The portal
396
vein is enlarged (cursors) and presents a mildly hyperechoic luminal
content without evidence of flow on color Doppler, indicating thrombosis.
The surrounding fat is mildly hyperechoic. Multiple acquired shunting
vessels were also identified
Figure 6.71. Passive hepatic venous congestive. Transverse image of the
      o (   o  
caudal vena cava (CVC) and hepatic veins (HV) are dilated, and the
( an a o a  i  
wall has a double rim because of edema. The left hepatic vein has
hyperechoic walls (arrows) because of their perpendicular position relative
to the ultrasound beam.
INTERVENTIONAL
PROCEDURES
Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration and biopsy have become routine
procedures complementing hepatic  ultrasonography   (Penninck  and
Finn-Bodner 1998). The choice of needle size (gauge) and length depends
397
20- to 22-gauge needles are used for fine-needle aspiration, and 14- to
18-gauge needles are used for automated core biopsy. Fine-needle
aspiration can usually be performed with patients under minimal sedation,
performed with a customized biopsy-needle guide placed on the probe or
by using a freehand technique. The latter, which is more commonly used
and limits possible lacerations (Figure 6.72). Although freehand aspiration
is relatively safe and easy to perform in cases of diffuse hepatic disorders,
assisted technique, the needle is placed through the biopsy guide tunnel
and introduced along a precise path, which, however, cannot be modified
(Figure 6.73).
Vacuolar hepatopathies, such as lipidosis and hyperadrenocorticism, are
reliably   diagnosed   through  cytological  specimens  obtained   with
fine-needle aspiration (Wang et al. 2004). Some neoplastic processes, such
as lymphoma, and inflammatory processes can also be diagnosed through
biopsy. Fine-needle drainage of cavitary lesions, such as cysts or
procedure (Figure 6.35C and D).
Hemorrhage represents the most common complication observed with
ultrasound-guided aspiration and biopsy, particularly if the liver is friable
and/or if a coagulopathy is present. Preinterventional coagulation profiles
are recommended in most cases. Additionally, postinterventional
ultrasonographic examination should be performed to monitor the
presence of hemorrhage (Figure 6.74).
Figure6.72.
 Ultrasound-guided    fine-needle   aspiration.   On   this
photograph, a freehand, ultrasound-guided, fine-needle aspiration is
performed. The needle is inserted through the skin just caudal to the
xiphoid process and costal arch, and through the left portion of the liver
This technique is preferred when diffuse processes are suspected, because
it prevents inadvertent gallbladder puncture. The corresponding ultrasound
 s a  i a   s oe si 
into the parenchyma (arrows).
398
Figure 6.73. Ultrasound-guided percutaneous biopsy. Longitudinal image
obtained using power Doppler after biopsy of the left portion of the liver
of a dog with suspected hepatitis. A hyperechoic needle tract can be seen
along the biopsy guide path (small aligned dots at the arrow) without
evidence of hemorrhage. The left portion of the liver was chosen to avoid
the gallbladder.
Figure 6.74. Postbiopsy hemorrhage. Longitudinal image obtained after
ultrasound-guided biopsy of the left portion of the liver of a dog with
chronic active hepatitis. A redsignal linear tract (arrow), consistent with
retrograde hemorrhage, is observed along the biopsy tract. Echogenic
peritoneal effusion is at the cranial aspect of the biopsy site (*), consistent
with peritoneal hemorrhage.
399
Needle-tract implantation of neoplastic or infectious processes, although
particularly if surgical excision is planned.
Ultrasound-guided cholecystocentesis can be used to obtain a sample of
bile for culture or for GB decompression in animals with extrahepatic
biliary obstruction secondary to an inflammatory process, such as
pancreatitis (Center 1996; Herman et al. 2005). Although infrequent, bile
leakage and subsequent peritonitis, as well as peritoneal hemorrhage,
represent potential complications. Risks of complications are increased if
the GB is distended or if its wall is diseased. The transhepatic approach is
considered to be the safest percutaneous method of bile aspiration.
enabling the liver parenchyma to seal the area of GB Puncture (Center
1996).
Intraoperative ultrasonography can also help in the localization of an
intrahepatic shunt and assist surgical ligation or placement of
embolization coils.
REFERENCES
Beatty JA, Barrs VR, Martin PA, et al. (2002) Spontaneous hepatic
rupture in six cats with systemic amyloidosis. J Small Anim Pract
43:355-363.
Besso  JG,  Wrigley  RH,  Gliatto  JM,  Webster CRL (2000)
Ultrasonographic appearance and clinical findings in 14 dogs with
gallbladder mucocele. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 41:261-271.
Biller DS (1992) Ultrasonography of diffuse liver disease: A review. J Vet
[ntern Med 6:71-76.
Bromel C, Barthez PY, Léveillé R, Scrivani PV (1998) Prevalence of
gallbladder sludge in dogs as assessed by ultrasonography. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 9:206-210.
Carlisle CH, Wu JX, Heath TJ (1995) Anatomy of the portal and hepatic
veins of the dog: A basis for systematic evaluation of the liver by
ultrasonography. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 36:227-233.
Center SA (1996) Diseases of the gallbladder and biliary tree. In: Guilford
WG, Center SA, Strombeck DR, Williams DA, Meyer DJ, eds.
400
Strombeck's Small Animal Gastroenterology, 3"d edition. Philadelphia
WB Saunders, pp 860-882.
Cruz-Arambulo R, Wrigley R, Powers B (2004) Sonographic features of
histiocytic neoplasms in the canine abdomen. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
45:554-558
Cuccovillo A, Lamb CR (2002) Cellular features of sonographic target
lesions of the liver and spleen in 21 dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
43:275-278
d'Anjou MA, Penninck D, Cornejo L, Pibarot P (2004) Ultrasonographic
diagnosis of portosystemic shunting in dogs and cat. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 45:424-437.
Eich CS, Ludwig LL (2002) The surgical treatment of cholelithiasis in
cats: A study of nine cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38:290-296
Evans HE (1993a) Chapter 7: The Digestive Apparatus and Abdomen. In:
Evans HE, Christensen GC, eds. Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 3'd edition.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, pp 385-462.
Evans HE (1993b) Veins. In: Evans HE, Christensen GC, eds. Miller's
Anatomy of the Dog, 3rd edition. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, pp
682-716.
Fahie MA, Martin RA (1995) Extrahepatic biliary tract obstruction: A
     5  
31:478-482.
Herman BA, Brawer RS, Murtaugh RJ, Hackner SG (2005) Therapeutic
percutaneous ultrasound-guided cholecystocentesis in three dogs with
extrahepatic biliary obstruction and pancreatitis. J Am Vet Med Assoc
227:1782-1786.
Hinkle Schwartz SG, Mitchell SL, Keating JH, Chan DL (2006) Liver
lobe torsion in dogs: 13 cases (1995-2004). J Am Vet Med Assoc
228:242-247
Hittmair KM, Vielgrader HD, Loupal G (2001) Ultrasonographic
42:149-155.
401
Hudson LC, Hamilton WP, eds. (1993) Atlas of Feline Anatomy for
Veterinarians, 1st edition. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 287 pp. Lamb CR
(1996) Ultrasonographic diagnosis of congenital portosystemic shunts in
dogs: Results of a prospective study. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 37:281-288.
Lamb CR (1998) Ultrasonography of portosystemic shunts in dogs and
cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 28:725-753.
Lamb CR, Forster-van Hijfte MA, White RN, McEvoy FJ, Rutgers HC
(1996a) Ultrasonographic diagnosis of congenital portosystemic shunt in
14 cats. J Small Anim Pract 35:205-209.
Lamb CR,Hartzband LE, Tidwell AT, Pearson SH (1991)
Ultrasonographic findings in hepatic and splenic lympho-sarcoma in dogs
and cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 32:117-120.
Lamb CR, Mahoney PN (1994) Comparison of three methods for
ultrasonography. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 35:190-194.
Lamb CR, Wrigley RH, Simpson KW, et al. (1996b) Ultrasonographic
diagnosis of portal vein thrombosis in four dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
37:121-129.
Léveillé R, Biller DS, Shiroma JT (1996) Sonographic evaluation of the
common bile ducts in cats. J Vet Intern Med 10:296-299.
Mayhew PD, Holt DE, McLear RC, Washabau RJ (2002) Pathogenesis
and outcome of extrahepatic biliary obstruction in cat. J Small Anim Pract
43:247-253.
Mills P, Saverymuttu S, Fallowfield M, Nussey S, Joseph AE (1990)
Ultrasound in the diagnosis of granulomatous liver disease. Clin Radiol
41:113-115.
Newell SM, Selcer BA, Girard E, Roberts GD, Thompson JP, Harrison
JM (l998) Correlations between ultrasonographic findings and specific
hepatic diseases in cats: 72 cases (1985-1997). J Am Vet Med Assoc
213:94-98.
Nicoll RG, O'Brien R, Jackson MW (1998) Quantitative ultrasonography
of the liver in obese cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 39:47-50.
402
Nyland TG, Barthez PY, Ortega TM, Davis CR (l996) Hepatic
ultrasonographic and pathologic findings in dogs with canine superficial
necrolytic dermatitis. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 37:200-205.
Nyland TG, Fisher PE (1990) Evaluation of experimentally induced
canine hepatic cirrhosis using duplex Doppler ultrasound. Vet Radiol
t61-681:15 punose
Nyland TG, Gillett NA (1982) Sonographic evaluation of experimental
   e p an u  n a
Nyland TG, Koblik PD, Tellyer SE (1999) Ultrasonographic evaluation of
biliary cystadenomas in cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 40:300-306.
Nyland TG, Park RD (1983) Hepatic ultrasonography in the dog. Vet
Radiol Ultrasound 24:7484. Nyman HT, Kristensen AT, Flagstad A,
McEvoy FJ (2004) A review of the sonographic assessment of tumor
metastases in liver and superficial lymph nodes. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
45:438-448.
O'Brien RT, Iani M, Delaney F, Young K (2004) Contrast harmonic
ultrasound of spontaneous liver nodules in 32 dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
45:547-553.
     
ultrasonography. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 28:1017-1040.
Ramirez S, Douglass JP, Robertson [D (2002) Ultrasonographic features
of canine abdominal malignant histiocytosis. Vet RadiolUltrasound
43:167-170.
Sato A, Solano M (2004) Ultrasonographic findings in abdominal mast
cell disease: A retrospective study of 19 patients. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
45:51-57.
Schwarz LA, Penninck DG, Leveille-Webster C (1998) Hepatic abscesses
therapeutic options. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 39:357-365.
Spaulding KA (1993) Ultrasound corner: Gallbladder wall thickness. Vet
Radiol Ultras0und 34:270-272.
403
Stonewater JL, Lamb C, Shelling SH (1990) Ultrasonographic features of
canine hepatic nodular hyperplasia. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 31:268-272.
Szatmari V, Rothuizen J, van den Ingh GA, van Sluijs FJ, Voorhout G
(2004) Ultrasonographic findings in dogs with hyperammonemia: 90 cases
(2000-2002).J Am Vet Med Ass0c 224:717-727.
Wang KW, Panceria DL, Al-Rukibat RK, Radi AZ (2004) Accuracy 0f
ultrasound-guided  fine-needle  aspiration of  the liver  and  cytologic
findings in dogs and cats: 97 cases (1990-2000). J Am Vet Med Assoc
224:75-78.
Whiteley MB, Feeney DA, Whiteley LO, Hardy RM (1989)
Ultrasonographic appearance of primary and metastatic canine hepatic
tumors: A review of 48 cases. Ultrasound Med 8:621-630.
Zeman RK, Taylor KJ, Rosenfield AT, Schwartz A, Gold JA (l981)
Acute experimental biliary obstruction in the dog: Sonographic findings
404
CHAPTER SEVEN
SPLEEN
Silke Hecht
PREPARATION AND
SCANNING TECHNIQUE
Ultrasonographic examination of the spleen is usually performed with the
animal in dorsal recumbency. For evaluation of the craniodorsal extremity
(head) of the spleen in large and deep-chested dogs it, may be beneficial to
position the dog in right lateral recumbency and use a left intercostal
approach. The abdomen and, if necessary, the left caudal thoracic wall are
clipped, and acoustic coupling gel is applied. Depending on the size of the
animal, a 5- to 10-MHz curvilinear or sector transducer is routinely used.
Alternatively, because of the superficial location of the spleen, use of a
The cranial extremity of the spleen is located in the left craniodorsal
wall. Its position varies with gastric filling. The position of splenic
extremities and splenic size are highly variable in dogs, necessitating
(Figure 7.l). After examination of the cranial extremity of the spleen
through a ventral abdominal or left intercostal approach, the spleen is
the transducer in a plane transverse to the long axis of the spleen.
However, since the spleen extends beyond the transducer's field of view
405
in most dogs, a thorough examination of the abdomen with meandering
probe movement is usually necessary to facilitate examination of the
entire organ. In cats, the spleen is smaller and more consistent in size and
location.
SONOGRAPHIC ANATOMY OF
THE NORMAL SPLEEN
The spleen is elongated and tongue-shaped in the long-axis view and
triangular on cross section. Whereas the position of the spleen is variable
in dogs, the cranial extremity (head) is in a very dorsal location and
commonly seen to form a “hook" between gastric fundus and left kidney
(Figure 7.2). The splenic parenchyma is homogeneous and of a fine
echotexture and is covered by a thin, very hyperechoic capsule (Figure
7.3). In comparison with liver and renal cortices, the spleen is usually
hyperechoic (Nyland et al. 1995) (Figure 7.4). Branches of the splenic
vein are seen as tubular anechoic structures within the splenic parenchyma
not seen.
SONOGRAPHIC FINDINGS IN
SPLENIC DISORDERS
Splenomegaly (Normal Echogenicity)
Ultrasonographic assessment of splenic size is subjective. In dogs, the
margins of the spleen appear rounded, and the organ extends further
caudally and to the right side of the abdomen. In cats, folding of the spleen
upon itself indicates splenic enlargement (Hanson et al. 200l).
406
sedated with acepromazine (O'Brien et al. 2004) (Figure 7.6). However, it
may also be encountered secondary to extramedullary hematopoiesis,
infectious diseases, splenic torsion, or malignant infiltration such as
occurs in lymphoma and mast cell tumors (Nyland et al. 1995; Saunders et
al. 1998; Hanson et al. 200l; Sato and Solano 2004) (Figure 7.7).
Diffuse Echogenic Changes of the
Splenic Parenchyma
Generalized  splenomegaly  with 
 parenchymal
1 heterogeneity or
hypoechogenicity can be observed in a variety of splenic disorders,
including extramedullary hematopoiesis, nodular hyperplasia, neoplastic
infiltration (e.g-, mast cell or lymphoma) (Figures 7.8 and 7.9), infection
(Figure 7.10), and vascular compromise (Figures 7.11-7.13). A diffuse,
dogs with splenic torsion (Saunders et al. 1998) and can be seen with
extensive venous thrombosis. However, the appearance of the spleen may
vary with the degree of torsion and change over time.
Figure 7.1. Normal anatomy and scanning technique in a dog. Left: A
schematic representation of the spleen and its variable position in the
abdomen.Ultrasound-probe
positioninghas tobeadapted
：to
accommodate the situation in the individual patient. LK, left kidney; and
Sl, small intestine. Right: A panoramic ultrasonographic view of the
spleen, displaying its relationship to the liver (HEP), small intestine (SI),
left kidney (LK), and urinary bladder (UB).
407
Figure 7.2. Normal ultrasonographic appearance of the craniodorsal
extremity of the spleen in a dog. A: Image obtained with sagittal
transducer orientation. The cranial portion of the spleen courses dorsally
(arrowheads). Part of the central portion of the spleen is in the near field.
B: Image obtained with transverse transducer orientation. The cranial
extremity of the spleen (arrowheads) courses along the left abdominal wall
laterally to the left kidney (LK), which is visible on cross section. The
central portion of the spleen is seen in the near field.
Figure 7.3. Normal feline spleen. A: Sagittal sonogram of a normal
spleen. The spleen is visible in the near field as a homogeneous
tongue-shaped organ with a very hyperechoic capsule. The caudal
(LK). B: Transverse sonogram of a normal spleen. The spleen
(arrowheads) appears as a sharply marginated triangular structure of
homogeneous echotexture in the left cranial abdomen.
408
Figure 7.4. Normal splenic echogenicity in a 3-year-old large breed dog.
A: Comparison between normal splenic and hepatic parenchyma. The
cranial extremity of the spleen (S and arrowheads) curves dorsally along
the liver (L) and is relatively hyperechoic to this organ. Its echotexture is
also finer than the one of the liver. B: Comparison between normal splenic
and renal echogenicity. The spleen (S) in the near field is hyperechoic to
the left kidney (LK). Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
  s    o  s s   
13-year-old shi tzu. A branch of the splenic vein is leaving the spleen at
the splenic hilus. B: Color Doppler image of a branch of the splenic vein
leaving the hilus in a 12-year-old springer spaniel. There is normal
low-velocity flow without evidence of turbulence or thrombosis. As it
moves away from the transducer, this flow appears blue on the color map.
Figure 7.6. Splenomegaly following sedation in a 7-year-old mixed-breed
dog. A: Image of the spleen prior to sedation. Maximum thickness of the
409
after administration of acepromazine. Maximum thickness of the spleen is
2.6cm.
Figure 7.7. Splenomegaly in a 7-year-oldmixed-breeddog with
lymphoma. A: On the ventrodorsal radiograph of the abdomen, the spleen
extends across midline into the right abdomen and folds on itself at the
level of the right kidney. B: Ultrasonographic image of the spleen at the
level of the right kidney (RK). The spleen is enlarged, within normal
limits for echogenicity, and smoothly marginated.
Sple
The spleen is enlarged and has irregular contours. A small amount of
anechoic peritoneal effusion outlines the margins of the spleen. Image
courtesy of D. Penninck.
410
Figure 7.9. Splenic lymphoma in a 10-year-old mixed-breed dog. The
spleen is enlarged, slightly inhomogeneous, irregular, and hypoechoic
Figure 7.10 Splenic histoplasmosis in an 1l-year-old miniature schnauzer.
The spleen (arrowheads) is hypoechoic to the adjacent left kidney (LK)
andinhomogeneous.
Spleen
Figure 7.11. Splenic infarction and necrosis in a 6-year-old German
shepherd.  Enlarged and inhomogeneous spleen outlined by anechoic
abdominal effusion (*) caused by massive infarction of undetermined
etiology.
411
Figure 7.12. Splenic torsion in a 9-year-old standard poodle. Common
features of splenic torsion. Left: Sonographic image of the spleen at the
hilus, showing an echogenic thrombus obliterating the vessel lumen. Upon
Doppler examination, no flow was detected in the splenic veins. Right:
Sonographic image of the splenic parenchyma. The spleen is enlarged and
has a diffuse lacy hypoechoic echotexture. The adjacent abdominal fat is
hyperechoic. Images courtesy of D. Penninck.
Figure 7.13. Splenic torsion in a 10-year-old Labrador retriever with acute
abdominal pain. B-mode and power Doppler images of the torsed spleen.
Several regions show a characteristic anechoic, lacey echotexture
consistent with infarction and necrosis. Power Doppler revealed reduced
blood flow. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
412
Focal and Multifocal Abnormalities of
the Splenic Parenchyma
Splenic nodules of variable echogenicity and size are a common and
nonspecific finding. Differential diagnoses include nodular hyperplasia,
extramedullary hematopoiesis (Figures 7.14-7.16), hematoma (Figure
7.17), infection (Figure 7.18), infiltrative neoplasia such as lymphoma.
sarcoma (Figures 7.19 and 7.20), and metastatic disease (Figures
7.21-7.23) (Wrigley et al. 1988; Lamb et al. 1991; Crevier et al. 2000;
Hanson et al. 200l; Ramirez et al. 2002; Sato and Solano 2004).
A spotted echotexture of the spleen with multiple small hypoechoic
nodules is highly suggestive of lymphoma (Figure 7.24), although it can
also be seen in benign and other malignant conditions (Figure 7.23)
Figure 7.14. Nodular hyperplasia and extramedullary hematopoiesis in a
dog. Ultrasonographic images of the spleen obtained during abdominal
staging for hind-leg mast cell tumor. Two nodular lesions were observed.
A: One of these nodules (between the cursors) has a smooth, well-defined,
mildly hypoechoic border displacing the splenic capsule. B: The second
nodule (between the cursors) is more irregular and only slightly
hypoechoic to the normal splenic parenchyma. Fine-needle aspiration
revealed  the presence of nodular hyperplasia and  extramedullary
hematopoiesis involving these two separate lesions. Images courtesy of
M.A.d'Anjou
Figure 7.15. Nodular hyperplasia in a 12-year-old golden retriever. On
d e si sen (a) as pue (v) doos euol s
defined, isoechoic to hyperechoic nodule (approximately l-cm diameter)
associated with the splenic parenchyma (arrowheads) and deforming the
contour (arrows) of the spleen (Sp).
413
Strongly hyperechoic nodules along the mesenteric border of the spleen,
with or without distal acoustic shadowing, are a common incidental
      (   
appear deeper in the splenic parenchyma, commonly along vessels. Their
size and number vary greatly. In rare instances, these lesions can grow
significantly (Figure 7.27)
Splenic masses cause deformation of the splenic border. They are of
variable shape, margination, and echogenicity and may be cavitated
(Saunders 1998). As in the case of splenic nodules, splenic masses may be
  s    n   a
ultrasonographic
 appearance.  Differential  diagnoses  include  benign
lesions such as nodular hyperplasia and hematomas (Figures 7.28-7.31),
and malignancies such as hemangiosarcoma, other sarcomas, round-cell
neoplasms, and metastases (Figures 7.32-7.41). According to recent
publications, benign splenic mass lesions are more common than
malignant mass lesions in dogs (Fife et al. 2004). Although rupture of a
encountered in cases of splenic malignancies (Figures 7.33, 7.37, 7.40,
and 7.41), it also occurs in benign lesions. Splenic cysts and abscesses are
rare and manifest as fluid-filled cavities of variable echogenicity within
the splenic parenchyma, similar to hepatic cysts and abscesses. These
cannot be differentiated from hematomas or cavitated masses based on
their ultrasonographic appearance.
Figure 7.16. Extramedullary hematopoiesis in a 4-year-old cat. The spleen
is enlarged, and multiple ill-defined hypoechoic nodules and foci are
associated with the splenic parenchyma.
414
Figure 7.17. Splenic hematomas in two dogs. A: Longitudinal sonogram
of the distal tip of the spleen, outlined on its visceral surface by an
irregularly hypoechoic region. This lesion represents a subcapsular
hematoma in this dog recently hit by a car. Image courtesy of D.
Penninck. B: Splenic hematoma in a 13-year-old Labrador retriever. An
approximately 1.5-cm, mixed echogenic nodule (arrowheads) is associated
with thesplenicparenchyma.
415
B
Figure 7.18. Pyogranulomatous splenitis of undetermined etiology in a
spleen, in which it appears enlarged and diffusely hyperechoic with
dispersed hypoechoic nodules and ill-defined foci. On the ultrasound
hypoechogenicityin the farfield.
Figure 7.19. Lymphoma in a shi tzu. There is a 0.9 cm hypoechoic nodule
(arrows) associated with the spleen.
416
0.90cm
Figure 7.20. Disseminated histiocytic sarcoma in a 7-year-old Bernese
mountain dog. There are multiple hypoechoic nodules throughout the
spleen, some of which deform the splenic border (arrow).
SPLEEN
 metastatic) in a cat. Several hypoechoic nodules are in the spleen. The one
displayed on this image measures 0.8 × 0.6 cm (between the cursors).
417
Figure  7.22.  Malignant  splenic epithelial  neoplasm  (presumably
metastatic) in a 10-year-old golden retriever. There were several
hypoechoic nodules associated with the spleen, one of which is shown and
measures 1.3 cm in diameter (between the cursors).
Figure 7.23. Metastatic anal sac adenocarcinoma in a dog. The spleen is
enlarged and has extensively distributed hypoechoic nodules. Fine-needle
aspiration revealed epithelial metastatic disease throughout the spleen,
liver, and abdominal lymph nodes, although lymphoma was initially
expected based on the ultrasonographic features. Image courtesy of M.A.
d'Anjou.
418
small hypoechoic nodules throughout the spleen, causing a spotted
echotexture. This pattern is most commonly seen with lymphoma.
SP LEEN
          
branch of the splenic vein is a focal, strongly hyperechoic nodule
associated with the visceral border of the spleen (arrow).
419
Figure 7.26. Splenic myelolipomas in a 12-year-old mixedbreed dog
Multiple strongly hyperechoic nodules are associated with the visceral
border of the spleen (arrows). The largest nodule (between the cursors)
measures 1.2 × 1.7 cm.
Figure 7.27. Large splenic myelolipomas in a cat and a dog. A:
Panoramic view of the spleen of a 8-year-old domestic shorthair cat
Multiple strongly hyperechoic nodules and mass lesions are associated
with the splenic parenchyma, deforming the capsule. The largest of these
masses is associated with acoustic scattering in the far field (*), blurring
     s      h 
referred for a possible splenic hemangiosarcoma. A benign myelolipoma
420
reaching 13 cm wide was confirmed histologically after splenectomy.
Image B courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou. Image A courtesy of D. Penninck
Figure 7.28. Large benign splenic masses in two dogs. A: Splenic nodular
hyperplasia in an 1l-year-old Labrador retriever. An approximately 15 cm
mixed echogenic mass is associated with the cranial extremity of the
spleen. Histopathologic examination indicated no evidence of malignancy.
B: Nodular hyperplasia and hematoma in a 14-year-old mixed-breed dog.
A relatively homogeneous mass of 10 x 12 cm (between the cursors) is
associatedwith the spleen.
Figure 7.29.  Large benign splenic mass in  a dog.  Longitudinal
sonographic (A) and schematic (B) images of a large splenic mass (Sp)
extramedullary hematopoiesis.
Figure 7.30. Splenic nodular hyperplasia, hemorrhage, and infarction in a
9-year-old Labrador retriever. An ill-defined, more than 10-cm, mixed
421
echogenic and cavitated mass is associated with the spleen. There was no
evidence of malignancy on histopathologic examination.
Figure 7.31. Splenic nodular hyperplasia and hemorrhage in a 13-year-old
Labrador retriever. Follow up images of the spleen in this dog previously
diagnosed with hemangiosarcoma of the thoracic wall. A: The initial
examination  shows  a  well-circumscribed  hypoechoic  nodule   of
approximately l-cm diameter associated with the spleen (arrow). B:
Examination 3 weeks later shows that the nodule (between the cursors)
has doubled in size (2.2-cm diameter) and is almost anechoic, indicating
cavitation. There was no evidence of malignancy on histopathologic
examination.
Figure 7.32. Variable appearances of splenic hemangiosarcoma in dogs.
A: An approximately 6-cm-wide, mixed echogenic and mainly
hypoechoic mass was identified in this 12-year-old Border collie. B: A
round, well-circumscribed, mixed echogenic and cavitated mass of 8-cm
diameter was identified in this 4-year-old golden retriever. C: [ll-defined,
 o     ( s  
9-year-old golden retriever, replacing most of the normal parenchyma. D:
Mixed echogenic mass of more than ll-cm diameter associated with the
spleen (between the cursors) in this 8-year-old German shepherd.
422
Figure 7.33. Splenic hemangiosarcoma and hemoabdomen ina
large-breed dog. A: Ultrasound image of the spleen in which an
abdominal mass was palpated. An irregular, well-defined, hypoechoic
 ds o p si ia   xe  sm
color Doppler, numerous short vessels connecting the mass with the
spleen are seen in the near field, which confirms the origin of this mass.
  s       s  
echogenic, peritoneal effusion (F) is also present, consistent with
hemorrhage. SI, small intestine. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
Figure 7.34. Malignant fibrous histiocytoma in a dog. On this panoramic
ultrasound view, a solid, mixed echogenic mass (between the cursors)
over 8 cm long is associated with the cranial aspect of the spleen
423
Figure 7.35. Histiocytic sarcoma in a 9-year-old golden retriever. A large,
nearly isoechoic splenic mass (M) and a similar echogenic nodule
(arrowheads) deforming the splenic contour are present. The
histopathologic diagnosis was histiocytic sarcoma. Image courtesy of D.
Penninck.
SPLEEN
Figure 7.36. Presumptive malignant fibrous histiocytoma in a 12-year-old
up to 2 cm in maximum diameter.
424
Figure 7.37. Poorly differentiated splenic sarcoma in an 8-year-old boxer.
 p o   il ie  si r
mass associated with the spleen. Normal spleen is present in the near field
(arrow).
Figure 7.38. Splenic sarcoma in a 10-year-old cat. A homogeneous
hypoechoic nodule (between the cursors) associated with the spleen is
deforming the splenic border.
425
Figure 7.39. Round-cell tumor of the spleen in a 10-year-old coonhound
There is severe generalized splenomegaly, and the normal parenchyma is
replaced by numerous ill-defined mass lesions of variable echogenicity.
SPLEEN
Figure 7.40. Splenic mast cell tumor in a cat. A homogeneous mass of
medium echogenicity is associated with the spleen, which measures more
abdominal effusion is at the periphery of this mass, particularly in the near
field (arrowhead).
426
4.12cm
Nodules or masses with a hypoechoic rim and a hyperechoic to isoechoic
center, which have been described as target lesions, are more commonly
associated with malignant processes such as metastasis (Cuccovillo and
Lamb 2002) (Figure 7.41). However, these may also be seen with benign
processes such  as nodular  hyperplasia.  Malignant  neoplasms may
occasionally disrupt the splenic capsule and invade the adjacent mesentery
(Figure 7.42).
Figure 7.41. Splenic hemangiosarcoma and hemoabdo-men in an
8-year-old Labrador retriever. There are two masses (arrows), which are
lesions). A large volume of echogenic abdominal effusion (F) is noted.
427
Vascular Disorders
Thrombosis of splenic vein branches is occasionally encountered as the
result of altered blood flow or coagulation (Hardie et al. 1995). [t
manifests as echogenic material within the otherwise anechoic lumen of
is incomplete or collateral vessels provide venous drainage of the affected
areas (Figures 7.43 and 7.44). Occasionally, malignant splenic tumors
invade splenic vessels and cause splenic vein thrombosis and splenic
infarction (Figure 7.45)
Figure 7.42. Poorly differentiated carcinoma in a 7-year-old Labrador
retriever. Left: An ill-defined mixed echogenic mass suspected to be
infiltrating the adjacent hyperechoic mesentery (arrows). Right: The
corresponding modified labeled sono-gram. Sp, spleen.
Figure 7.43. Splenic vein thrombus without evidence of splenic infarction
in a 12-year-old springer spaniel. A: Echogenic material is associated with
one of the branches of the splenic vein. The splenic parenchyma is within
normal limits. B: On color Doppler examination, blood flow is noted
around the thrombus (arrow), indicating incomplete vascular occlusion.
When splenic infarction occurs, the affected areas appear hypoechoic.
sharply demarcated from the adjacent parenchyma, and show decreased or
absent blood flow on color Doppler or power Doppler examination. In
428
contrast to splenic masses, infarcts do not tend to distort the normal organ
contour, although this can be seen (Figures 7.46-7.48).
Splenic torsion is a rare disorder in dogs. Usually, there is progressive
enlargement of the spleen, with decreased to absent blood flow. The
parenchymal echogenicity and echotexture can vary as the congestion,
hemorrhage, or infarction progresses. The parenchyma is typically
mottled, and lacy anechoic to hypoechoic areas are observed, focally or
diffusely, throughout the spleen (Saunders et al. 1998; Mai 2006) (Figures
7.12, 7.13, and 7.49). Static, echogenic thrombi can sometimes be seen in
vascular lumens (Figure 7.49). Additionally, the bordering fat can become
hyperechoic, and a hilar, perivenous, hyperechoic triangle has been
2006) (Figure 7.50). However, these changes can also be found with
extensive venous thrombosis and/or diffuse neoplastic infiltration (e.g-,
Iymphoma).
Figure 7.44. Chronic splenic vein thrombosis in an 11-year-old Labrador
retriever. Strongly echogenic material is within the lumen of the splenic
vein branches (arrows). Ultrasound-beam attenuation is distal to one of the
thrombi (arrowheads), indicating fibrosis and/or mineralization of the clot.
There is no evidence of parenchymal changes suggesting infarction.
Figure 7.45. Poorly differentiated carcinoma with vascular invasion in a
7-year-old Labrador retriever (the same dog as in Figure 7.44). On power
Doppler examination, no blood flow is detected within the affected splenic
 s  e    as
429
Figure 7.46. Splenic infarcts in two dogs. A: In a 10-year-old Australian
shepherd, a sharply demarcated, lacy hypoechoic area is observed at the
caudal extremity of the spleen (between the cursors), which is conined to
the normal splenic border without evidence of a mass effect. B: In another
dog, the infarcted area presents a mass effect at the tip of the spleen
(arrows).Image B courtesy of M.A.d'Anjou.
Figure 7.47. Splenic infarct in a 4-year-old Australian shepherd. A
sharply demarcated hypoechoic area is associated with the body of the
spleen (between the cursors). Echogenic material, consistent with a
thrombus, is within the lumen of the contributing splenic vein (arrow)
430
Figure 7.48. Splenic infarct in a 15-year-old golden retriever. An
inhomogeneous lacy hypoechoic area within the spleen does not show
blood flow on color Doppler examination. The fat at the dorsal margin of
the spleen is hyperechoic.
SPLEEN
Figure 7.49. Splenic torsion in a 6-year-old standard poodle. Left:
Sonographic image of the spleen at the time of presentation. The spleen is
Doppler examination, no flow was detected in the splenic veins, and a
hyperechoic thrombus is seen (arrow). Right: Sonographic image of the
splenic parenchyma 2 days later. The spleen is enlarged and has a diffuse,
lacy hypoechoic echotexture. The adjacent fat is hyperechoic.
431
s e o       s 
hilus in two dogs. A hyperechoic triangle (arrows) is a common feature
observed with splenic torsion, as seen in A. This feature can also be
observed with massive splenic infarction, as seen in B. This second dog
developed splenic infarction. At surgery, the spleen was not twisted, but
was removed because of the complete venous thrombosis. In each case,
the adjacent fat was hyperechoic. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
Figure 7.51. Lymphoma in a shi tzu. In the far field to the spleen (Sp) are
between the cursors) adjacent to a branch of the splenic vein (arrowhead).
Sp
432
Figure 7.52. Extraskeletal osteosarcoma in a 10-year-old German
shepherd. An irregularly marginated hyperechoic mass lesion associated
with the splenic parenchyma shows strong distal ultrasound-beam
attenuation (arrowheads).
Other Abnormalities
Normal splenic lymph nodes are usually not seen ultrasonographically.
Enlarged lymph nodes may be visualized in cases of metastatic neoplasia
as isoechoic to hypoechoic, rounded, soft-tissue nodules along the splenic
vessels close to the hilus (Figure 7.51).
Strongly hyperechoic areas with strong distal acoustic shadowing are
indicative of dystrophic mineralization or a mineralized neoplasm such as
extraskeletal osteosarcoma (Figure 7.52).
Figure 7.53. Clostridial splenitis in a 10-year-old greyhound. Multiple
small confluent hyperechoic foci are associated with the cranial portion of
the spleen. The inhomogeneous hypoechoic area distal to this lesion (dirty
shadowing, arrowheads) is consistent with gas inclusions within the
splenic parenchyma.
433
Gas inclusions in the spleen, though rarely seen, are indicative of infection
with gas-producing bacteria (Gaschen et al. 2003) (Figure 7.53). Gas
typically appears as hyperechoic foci with reverberation artifacts.
INTERVENTIONAL
PROCEDURES
particularly useful in the diagnosis of diffuse infiltrative disorders. In most
location. A guide may be useful in cases of deep focal lesions. Tissue-core
biopsy of a splenic lesion is not routinely performed. However, in cases of
inconclusive fine-needle aspiration, biopsy of poorly vascu-larized mass
lesions may be considered. Aspiration of fluid-filled splenic mass lesions
such as hemangiosar-comas or hematomas  frequently
/ remains
inconclusive because of blood dilution.
REFERENCES
Crevier FR, Wrigley RH (2000) The sonographic features of splenic
(oan) Ans aaoadsona  sop 1 u eisdady ioudu
[Abstract]. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 41:566.
434
Cuccovillo A, Lamb CR (2002) Cellular features of sonographic target
lesions of the liver and spleen in 2l dogs and a cat. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
43:275-278.
Fife WD, Samii VF, Drost WT, Mattoon JS, Hoshaw-Woodard S (2004)
Comparison between malignant and nonmalignant splenic masses in dogs
using contrast-enhanced computed tomography. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
45:289-297.
Gaschen L, Kircher P, Venzin C, Hurter K, Lang J (2003) Imaging
diagnosis: The abdominal air-vasculogram in a dog with splenic torsion
and clostridial infection. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 44:553-555.
Hanson JA, Papageorges M, Girard E, Menard M, Hebert P (2001)
Ultrasonographic appearance of splenic disease in 101 cats. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 42:441445.
Hardie EM, Vaden SL, Spaulding K, Malarkey DE (1995) Splenic
Lamb CR,  Hartzband LE,  Tidwell AS, Pearson  SH (l991)
Ultrasonographic findings in hepatic and splenic lymphosarcoma in dogs
and cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 32: 117-120.
splenic torsion in dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47:487-491.
Nyland TG, Mattoon JS, Herrgesell ER, Wisner ER (1995) Spleen. [n
Nyland TG, Mattoon JS, eds. Small Animal Diagnostic Ultrasound.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, pp 128-143.
O'Brien RT, Waller KR, Osgood TL (2004) Sonographic features of
drug-induced splenic congestion. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 45:225-227.
Ramirez S, Douglass JP, Robertson [D (2002) Ultrasonographic features
of canine abdominal malignant histiocytosis. Vet  Radiol Ultrasound
43:167-170.
cell disease: A retrospective study of 19 patients. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
45:51-57.
435
Saunders HM (1 998) Ultrasonography of abdominal cavitary parenchymal
lesions. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 28:755-775.
Saunders HM, Neath PJ, Brockman DJ (1998) B-mode and Doppler
ultrasound imaging of the spleen with canine splenic torsion: A
retrospective evaluation. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 39:349-353.
Schwarz LA, Penninck DG, Gliatto J (2001) Canine splenic
myelolipomas. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 42:347-348.
Wrigley RH, Konde LJ, Park RD, Lebel JL (1988) Ultrasonographic
features of splenic lymphosarcoma in dogs: 12 cases (1980-1986). J Am
Vet Med Assoc 193: 1565-1568.
436
CHAPTER EIGHT
GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT
Dominique Penninck
PREPARATION AND
SCANNING PROCEDURE
Animals can be scanned while they are in dorsal recumbency, right or left
recumbency, or standing position, if needed, to optimize an acoustic
window by displacing the intraluminal fluid to the region of interest. Left
lateral recumbency helps with the evaluation of the fundus, whereas right
lateral recumbency improves the evaluation of the pylorus and duodenum.
The standing position can be helpful for evaluating the ventral aspect of
the pylorus and body of the stomach. However, the results of these
positional studies also depend on a dog's conformation, the degree of
stomach dilation, the nature of gastric contents, and patient cooperation.
A real-time scanner with a high-frequency (7.5 MHz and higher) sectorial,
optimize the evaluation of the gastrointestinal (Gl) wall layering.
Curvilinear probes with a small footprint are useful because they can more
easily be placed below the rib cage or between ribs for the assessment of
the stomach and proximal duodenum. Transverse and longitudinal views
of the GI segments are required to fully assess the thickness and the extent
of a suspected lesion (Figure 8.1).
Little preparation is needed; a fast of 12 h can reduce interference with
gastric contents and the associated gas, but the results are inconsistent.
437
Gas in the GI tract is the most common cause of imaging artifacts such as
reverberation, comet tail, and acoustic shadowing (Figure 8.2).
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC
ANATOMY OF THE NORMAL
GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT
The wall thickness and layering, and relative motility of different
segments of the GI tract, can be evaluated. The thickness of the GI tract
can be measured by placing calipers on the outer aspect of the serosa and
on the mucosal inner border.
Table 8.1 lists the range of normal thickness of the Gl wall in dogs and
cats (Penninck et al. 1989; Newell et al. 1999; Goggin et al. 2000;
Delaney et al. 2003).
The gastric wall is challenging to measure mainly when the stomach is
collapsed. There is significant difference between the thicknesses of the
rugal folds and interrugal folds. The thickness varies depending on the
degree of distension and the size of the dog. The mean of the observed
rate of peristalsis is 4-5 contractions per minute in dogs. The descending
duodenum in dogs is thicker than is the remainder of the small bowel. The
  d s a p a s uo s u 
submucosal layer.
The colon, often gas or feces filled, has a thinner wall than the small
bowel in dogs and cats. Composite images of the main segments of the GI
tract in dogs and cats illustrate their main features (Figures 8.3 and 8.4).
Five ultrasonographic layers can be identified throughout the Gl tract.
From the lumen to the serosal surface, one can identify the hyperechoic
hyperechoic submucosa, the hypoechoic muscular layer, and the
hyperechoic subserosa and serosa (Figure 8.5). The mucosal layer often is
   s     s   
equal thickness during peristaltism.
438
Figure 8.1.
Ultrasonographic
anatomy
ofthenormal
canine
gastrointestinal tract in dorsal recumbency. [llustration of the location of
the main gastrointestinal segments, with placements of the probe to fully
evaluate some of these segments. Plan A shows the position of the probe
on the stomach. Both transverse (top sonographic image) and longitudinal
images (bottom sonographic image) are obtained by sliding the probe
along the long axis of the stomach. Plan B shows the position of the probe
on the descending duodenum. Both transverse (top sonographic image)
and longitudinal images (bottom sonographic image) of this bowel
segment are displayed. Plan C shows the position of the probe on the
descending colon. Both 
1transverse
 (top sonographic image) and
longitudinal images (bottom sonographic image) of the colon are
displayed.
Figure 8.2. Artifacts commonly seen associated with the gastrointestinal
tract. A: Gas in the colon of this dog creates a reverberation artifact (R)
masking most of the far wall. The sound is entirely reflected back from the
'sa au pue aqond au uaamiaq yoy pue yoeq saounoq uau pue ses
439
creating multiple echoes from one ultrasound pulse. B and C: The
mixture of gas and fecal material in the gastrointestinal tract often creates
acoustic shadowing (S) appearing as an area of low-amplitude echoes
created by highly attenuating structures. The shadowing can be dirty (B)
Or clean (C), depending on its homogeneity.
Figure 8.3. Sonograms of normal gastrointestinal segments in dogs. A:
On transabdominal approach, the esophagus is rarely seen. In this 10
year-old corgi, the most distal portion of the esophagus (E) is visible. In
the same image is a transverse view of the aorta (Ao) and the fundus of
the stomach. B: The stomach is easily recognized by its location, the
presence of rugal folds, and its peristaltic activity. When the stomach is
collapsed like in this dog, it is difficult to assess the wall thickness
accurately. Note the adjacent transverse colon (C) located caudal to the
stomach body. C: The proximal duodenum (D) is a superficial and
rectilinear segment coursing along the right lateral abdominal wall. The
duodenum has a thicker wall than the remaining small bowel. Another
fluid-filled intestinal segment is in the near field, consistent with a
duodenum, the duodenal papilla, seen on transverse plane on this picture
(between the cursors) can easily be identified. Occasionally, as in this dog,
a small anechoic (fluid filled) lumen can be seen. E: Jejunal segments are
freely looping in the midabdomen. The wall layering is visible. F: The
ileocecocolic junction is difficult to identify because gas is often collected
at that location. In this dog, a small amount of fluid at the junction
smaller-diameter segment of the ileum (l) joining the ascending colon (C).
G: The colon, often gas or feces filled, has a thinner wall than the small
bowel. In this dog, the finely layered colonic wall is 1.5 mm thick.
440
Figure 8.4. Sonograms of normal gastrointestinal segments in cats. A:
Transverse sonogram of the collapsed gastric fundus in an adult cat. A
wall. Rugal folds protrude into the lumen (arrows). B: Transverse
sonogram of the descending duodenum (between the cursors). The wall
layering is visible. The gas-filled colon associated with shadowing is on
the right side of the duodenum. C: Several loops of jejunum, containing
fluid and gas, are present in this sonogram (arrows). There is no
significant difference between the thickness of duodenum and jejunum in
cats. D: Transverse sonogram of the ileum. The gas-filled cecum is on the
right of the ileum, and the ileum is entering the echogenic fluid-filled
ascending colon (arrows). This short segment of bowel has more
prominent submucosa and muscularis than the remaining bowel segments
in cats. These characteristic features have been referred as the
"wagon-wheel" sign in cats. E: Transverse sonogram of the feces-filled
descending colon in a normal cat. The thin wall and its layering are barely
visible (arrows), just ventral to the hyperechoic interface created by the
 presence of feces and its associated shadow in the far field.
441
Figure 8.5. Normal intestinal layers. A: Longitudinal sonogram of a
normal jejunal segment. Five ultrasonographic layers can easily be
identified. B: Schematic representation of the bowel wall layers. The
lumen is a bright interface in the center of the bowel, surrounded by the
relatively thick mucosa (hypoechoic), thin submucosa (hyperechoic), thin
muscularis (hypoechoic), and thin subserosa/serosa (hyperechoic).
442
lumen
mucosa
muscularis
subserosa
serosa
 of food particles of variable size and shape in the gastric lumen. It may or
may not be associated with imaging artifacts. In this dog, small, rounded,
echogenic balls of food can be identified in the gastric lumen. B: A large
amount of food or large pieces of food can occasionally mimic a mass in
op s  s sa s, o d sl  s a
s e  ps sm ss,  () a go ss psd
was moving within the gastric lumen. A mural mass was considered less
likely, but a gastric foreign body could not be ruled out. A repeat
examination, after fast, showed an empty normal stomach. C: The mucous
juas qeunff sun jo uunl au u aoaui uaq e se sieadde uan
Note the absence of artifact with this pattern. The gastrointestinal wall can
be fully evaluated. D: The fluid pattern is characterized by anechoic to
uniformly  echogenic luminal contents.  This  pattern  optimizes  the
visualization of the wall layers on each side of the lumen. LU, lumen of
    e      s
reflective surface with acoustic shadowing and prevents evaluation of
deeper structures. At the ileocolic junction in this cat, a small amount of
gas is seen in the ascending colon. The gas is associated with a
reverberation artifact.
443
There is a good morphological correlation between the ultrasonographic
appearance and the histological layers.
The normal luminal contents can vary and consist of food, mucus, fluid, or
gas (Figure 8.6)
444
The distal esophagus, which can be occasionally seen on ultrasound in
small dogs (Figure 8.3A), is difficult to access because its position is
cranial to the diaphragm and because of the interposition of gas in the
surrounding lungs.
The stomach, which is the largest portion of the GI tract, can be identified
easily by its rugal folds (Figures 8.1A, 8.3B, and 8.4A).
The descending duodenum (Figures 8.1B and 8.3C), which is the thickest
segment of small bowel in dogs, has a superficial and rectilinear course
along the right lateral abdominal wall.
The duodenal papilla (Figure 8.3D) is identified easily in the proximal
 portion of the descending duodenum.
The ileum in cats (Figure 8.4D) is a short bowel segment that has
prominent submucosa and muscula-ris. The ileocecocolic junction can be
challenging to identify in dogs because the cecum is most commonly gas
filled (Figure 8.3F). In cats, the ileocecocolic junction (Figure 8.4D) can
be more easily recognized. The colon (Figures 8.1C, 8.2, 8.3G, 8.4E, and
8.6E) has a thin, layered wall and often contains gas and feces.
Table 8.1. Reference table for normal range of wall thickness for the
different segments of the gastrointestinal tract in dogs and cats
Wall Thickness
Dog
Cat
Stomach
2-5 mma
1.7-3.6 mm
Duodenum
3-6 mmb
2.0-2.5 mm
Jejunum
2-5 mmb
2.0-2.5 mm
Ileum
2-4 mm
2.5-3.2 mm
Colon
2-3 mm
1.42.5 mm
aVaries with distension of the stomach and measurements taken at the
rugal or the interrugal level.
bBody weight correlation exists (Delaney et al. 2003).
445
SONOGRAPHIC FEATURES
OF GASTROINTESTINAL
DISORDERS
Intussusception
The main ultrasonographic feature of an intussusception is the
multilayered appearance of the wall (called also concentric rings or ring
sign) representing the superimposed wall layers of the intussusceptum and
intussuscipiens (Figure 8.7).
[n dogs and cats (Lamb and Mantis 1998; Patsikas et al. 2003), the
appearance of intussusception varies somewhat with the location and
length of the GI segment involved, the duration of the process, and the
orientation of the scan plane relative to the axis of the intussusception.
and hypoechoic, whereas the thickness and layering of the intussusceptum
may appear normal. The invaginated portion can involve different
segments of the GI tract, such as the stomach (Figure 8.8), small bowel
(Figures 8.9 and 8.10), or colon (Figures 8.11 and 8.12).
Gastric intussusception is rare, but when encountered can be challenging
to diagnose ultrasonographically (Hoffman et al. 2003; Lee et al. 2005).
Frequently, invaginated mesenteric fat  is associated with  the
intussuscipiens. On occasions, inflammatory pseudocysts, enlarged lymph
nodes (Figure 8.12B), foreign bodies (Figure 8.9), or tumoral mass (Figure
8.13) in older patients can be seen within or near the intussusception site.
Figure 8.7. Intussusception in a cat. [llustrations of the relationship of the
intussuscipiens, intussusceptum, and surrounding structures. On the top
sh! pue uodaosnssnu! eaounif e jo weouos (eupnsuol aun s! ()
corresponding schematic illustration. On the bottom (B) is the transverse
sonogram of a jejunoileal intussusception and its corresponding schematic
illustration. The intestinal lumen (Lu) is dilated with fluid because of
446
mechanical obstruction, and hyperechoic fat is invaginated with the
intussusceptum within the intussuscipiens.
Fat
ntussusceptum
Intussuscipiens
Fat
At times, complex lesions affecting the GI tract, such as redundant or
hyperplastic mucosa protruding into the its lumen, can simulate the pattern
of intussusception (Figure 8.14). By evaluating the lesion in several
planes, one can avoid such pitfalls.
Foreign Bodies
GI foreign bodies greatly vary in size, shape, and echogenicity. Segmental
fluid or gas accumulation within the stomach or part of the intestinal tract
is an indicator of mechanical ileus (obstruction). When present, abnormal
fluid distension facilitates the detection of foreign material (Figure 8.15).
Balls are easily identified because of their characteristic curvilinear
interface. They may vary in echogenicity, depending on the makeup of
their material (Figure 8.16).
Independently from the type of foreign body, the presence of bright
interface associated with strong shadowing is highly suggestive of a
foreign material (Tidwell and Penninck 1992). Feces in the colon can
simulate foreign material, and compact fecal material is similarly
associated with shadowing. It is thus critical to identify accurately the
447
segment of the intestinal tract, especially differentiating small bowel from
colon (Figure 8.2). Occasionally, the contour of the interface can enable
the identification of the type of foreign body (Figure 8.17).
    e d   
associated with shadowing, and the affected bowel segment often appears
plicated (Figure 8.18). The degree of plication varies with duration and
severity. Intestinal distension often is less pronounced than with larger
obstructive foreign bodies. Linear foreign bodies vary in diameter,
contour, and length and can be associated with larger portions that can
remain anchored in the pyloric antrum.
Figure 8.8.
Duodenogastric
intussusception.Illustrationofa
duodenogastric intussusception in a 6-year-old male Labrador retriever
with glomerulonephritis and presented because of severe, acute vomiting.
The most proximal portion of the duodenum is invaginated within the
pylorus, which protrudes within the fluid-filled gastric body (Stomach)
The gastric wall was severely thickened and hypoechoic because of severe
edema (arrows). This change was misinterpreted as a mass. D, duodenum.
Stomach
+
448
Figure 8.9. Jejunal intussusception and linear foreign body. Transverse
sonographic  (A) and  schematic (B) images of a jejunojejunal
intussusception identified in a 3-year-old  standard poodle. The
intussuscepted segment contains a linear foreign body (FB) associated
with acoustic shadowing (arrowheads). The invaginated hyperechoic fat is
crescent shaped at the center of the intussusception. Note the concentric
hypoechoic rings consistent with an intussusception
schematic (B) images of a jejunoduodenal intussusception diagnosed in
this 6-year-old Maltese terrier, which had progressive weight loss and
inappetence over the previous 2 months. A foreign body was identified in
the stomach and proximal duodenum (not seen in this image). The layers
of both segments of bowel are mostly intact. Only a small amount of fat
(F) is invaginated. Lu, lumen of the intussuscepted segment
449
Figure 8.11. Colonic intussusception. Transverse sonographic (A) and
schematic (B) images of a distal colocolonic intussusception detected in
this 13-year-old cat, which had a history of 3 months straining to defecate
and bloody stool. A multi-layered appearance of the colon is noted. Bl,
bladder; and Lu, lumen of intussuscepted colonic segment.
B
The presence of Gl parasites can mimic the appearance of linear foreign
bodies. Roundworms (Ascaris) appear as smooth, tubular hyperechoic
structures (Figure 8.19). Shadowing is usually not observed with these
adult parasites.
Gastric trichobezoars, commonly referred to as hairbalis, are commonly
  s  so   i   
interfaces with a strong, uniform, clean acoustic shadow (Figure 8.20A)
In dogs and cats, Several foreign bodies can be encountered that have
variable
e size, shape, echogenicity, and acoustic shadowing.
.The
ultrasound features depend on the physical properties of the material.
Figure
8.12.
[ntussusceptions.A:Corresponding
gtransverse
ultrasonographic (left) and schematic (right) images of an ileocolic
intussusception (cursors) in a cat. The ileum (arrows) is identified as the
intussuscepted segment within the colon. Note  the hyperechoic
intussuscepted fat asymmetrically distributed around the intussuscepted
ileum.  B:  Longitudinal ultrasonographic image of  a  jejunojejunal
intussusception in a Siamese cat. A mesenteric lymph node (arrow) is
identified in the intussusception.
450
Figure 8.13. Intussusception and intestinal mass. Transverse sonographic
(A) and schematic (B) images of a large poorly echogenic mass associated
with an intussusception in a 13-year-old golden retriever. The mass was
diagnosed as a colonic adenocarcinoma (cursors). F, invaginated fat; and
Lu, lumen of intussusceptum.
451
Figure 8.14. Chronic mucosal hyperplasia in a young French bulldog.
Transverse (A) and sagittal (B) sonograms of an exuberant nodular lesion
at the pylorus of this 4-month-old French bulldog with a history of
  e i s s    
Suggestive of intussusception. The arrowheads outline the serosal margins
of the stomach. However, on one of the parasagittal planes (C, and
lesion protruding into the gastric lumen is more clearly defined as
originating from the pyloric wall. The final diagnosis after surgical
resection was chronic mucosal hyperplasia. Duo, duodenum; GB.
gallbladder; L, liver; lu, lumen of pyloric antrum; and Pyl, pylorus.
Perforating foreign bodies, such as ingested teriyaki sticks, are usually
anchored within the stomach and may affect the surrounding soft tissue
within and outside the cranial abdominal cavity (Penninck and Mitchell
[  n o st m d  iha a) (o
loss of layering iscommon.
452
At times, foreign material accumulates at a pathologically narrowed
intestinal site. The narrowing can be caused by intussusception (Figure
8.10), post-traumatic or surgical stricture, or focal neoplastic infiltrate
(Figure 8.22).
Figure 8.15. Duodenal obstructive foreign body. A: Transverse sonogram
of the fluid distended stomach of an 8-year-old Lhapsa apso that had
suffered 3 days of vomiting and a painful abdomen. Decreased gastric
motility is noted during the examination. Lu, lumen of stomach. B: The
descending duodenum is also fluid distended up to the level of the foreign
  os  o s] m   o) 
shadowing beyond the bright interface of the foreign body. Lu, lumen of
descending duodenum.
Figure 8.16. Gastric foreign bodies: play balls. A: Longitudinal sonogram
of the pyloric region of a dog presented because of vomiting. A large
(4.6-cm diameter), rounded, poorly echogenic structure, associated with
moderate acoustic shadowing. is between the cursors. A spongy ball was
retrieved endoscopically. B: In this other dog, the ball appears as a bright
curvilinear interface associated with strong acoustic shadowing.
453
Figure 8.17. Intestinal foreign body: peach pit. Longitudinal sonographic
(A) and schematic (B) images of a bowel segment of a 5-year-old cocker
spaniel that had acute vomiting. A peach pit is in the lumen (Lu) of a
mildly fluid-distended bowel segment and has a characteristic curved
interface with evenly spaced small protuberances in the near field. Note
the uniform strong acoustic shadow associated with the foreign body.
3.83cm
3.83cm
Inflammatory Diseases
Wall thickening is the most common finding in inflammatory diseases, but
this finding is not specific. The severity of the thickening is not a reliable
feature for distinguishing different inflammatory from neoplastic diseases.
Symmetry, extent of the wall thickening, and layer identification are
useful  parameters  in  distinguishing  inflammation   from  neoplasia
(Penninck et al. 2003). [nflammation is usually characterized by extensive
and symmetrical wall thickening with preserved layering. However,
454
depending on the severity of the inflammation and the presence of wall
echogenicity or relative thickness of one or more layers.
[n gastritis, diffuse or localized wall thickening with decreased motility
canbeidentified.Commonly the stomachis collapsed during the
ultrasound evaluation, limiting accurate assessment of the wall thickness.
 e s a   a  ' as 
echogenicity or decreased visualization of the wall layers (Figure 8.23)
Gastric ulcers may be identified as discrete, mucosal defects outlined by
hyperechoic microbubbles accumulated at the crater site (Figure
8.24A-C). Hyperechoic speckles consistent with dissecting gas can also
be observed in the affected wall in some animals (Figure 8.24C and D).
Fluid accumulation and decreased gastric motility are common findings in
ulcerative disease (Penninck et al. 1997). Ulcers can be seen in both
inflammatory and neoplastic diseases. As there is often marked focal
thickening with loss of layering, the underlying disorder cannot be
characterized reliably.
Gastric wall edema, which is commonly associated with underlying
inflammation and ulceration, appears as extensive  and moderate
thickening with altered layering. A thin inner hypoechoic layer borders the
remaining finely striated wall (Figure 8.25). Because of the degree of
thickening and the disrupted layering, this condition could easily be
mistaken for a tumor.
Uremic gastritis or gastropathy is commonly encountered in patients with
chronic uremia. The ultrasonographic features are a moderately thickened
gastric wall with prominent rugal folds and a hyperechoic line at the
mucosal-luminal interface secondary to mineralization of the mucosa
(Grooters et al. 1994) (Figure 8.26).
Common
intestinal
inflammatory   diseases   such   as
lymphocytic-plasmacytic enteritis are associated with mild to moderate
wall thickening that most commonly affects several or all intestinal
segments with a variable degree of severity. Different ultrasonographic
features are encountered: mild to moderate wall thickening affecting
primarily the mucosa, the submucosa, and/ or the muscular layer; diffuse
increased echogenicity of the mucosa; or presence of bright mucosal
speckles (Baez et al. 1999; Penninck et al. 2003) (Figure 8.27A and B).
455
Loss of wall layer integrity can also be encountered with ulcerative
enteritis (Figure 8.27C). Smooth muscle thickening can be present in
chronic enteritis, particularly in cats, but this finding is not specific and
o   n s  n  i  o
secondary to foreign material or tumoral infiltration (Penninck 2002;
Diana et al. 2003) (Figure 8.27D).
Figure 8.18. Linear foreign bodies in dogs. A: [llustration of linear
foreign material in the stomach and extending into the descending
duodenum, and the corresponding longitudinal sonograms. The linear
(s) n l na e se se o s o uia
intermittently associated with shadowing- B: Linear foreign body
associated with marked intestinal plication (near field). The linear foreign
body is the bright, nearly rectilinear interface seen in the lumen of this
severely corrugated jejunal segment. Note the perpendicular hyperechoic
striations (arrows) associated with the redundant submucosal layer.
456
457
Figure 8.19. Roundworms. Longitudinal (A) and transverse (B)
sonograms of a roundworm in a jejunal segment of a young dog with
chronic diarrhea. Several other worms were identified throughout the
intestinal tract, in association with fluid accumulation. These worms
appear as tubular, double-interfaced, hyperechoic structures (between the
cursors and at the arrow) in the lumen of the gastrointestinal tract. During
real-time evaluation, the worms can be seen moving if they are alive.
Images courtesy of M.A. d' Anjou
Linear hyperechoic lines within the mucosa and aligned perpendicular to
the lumen axis most likely represent dilated lacteols (Figure 8.28). This
finding is commonly associated with protein-losing enteropathy and
lymphangiectasia, and occasionally this pattern can be associated with
diffusely infiltrative tumors (Sutherland-Smith et al. 2007).
Corrugation of the small bowel appears as regular waves of undulated
bowel segments (Figure 8.29). This nonspecific finding can be seen in
association with regional inflammation such as enteritis, pancreatitis,
peritonitis, or abdominal neoplasia, or bowel ischemia (Moon et al. 2003).
In cases of   severe inflammatorychanges encounteredwith
lymphoplasmacytic, eosinophilic, or granulomatous enteritis, edema,
hemorrhage, and fibrosis can severely disrupt the wall layering and be
associated with mass lesions suggestive of a tumoral process (Figure
8.30.
Inflammation, such as pancreatitis and duodenitis, can also be caused by
regional extension of affected adjacent tissue (Figure 8.31).
458
Colonic inflammatory changes  are challenging  to detect
ultrasonographically. Redundancy of the folds tends to cause one to
overestimate the degree of wall thickening. Wall layering is often less
distinct because of a thin wall (Figure 8.32A and B). In ulcerative colitis.
the luminal mucosal border is irregular because of the numerous small
superficial ulcers affecting the mucosa (Figure 8.32C)
Parasitic infestations such as peritoneal cestodiasis are rare. Cystic
subserosal lesions have been found on the GI tract of affected dogs or cats
(Venco et al. 2005) (Figure 8.33).
Perforation and Dehiscence
[n perforation secondary to foreign-body migration, deep ulceration, or
postoperative dehiscence, the affected wall is thickened and hypoechoic,
and there is local loss of layering (Boysen et al. 2003). At times, a
mesenteric is significantly increased in echogenicity because of focal
be seen near the perforation or dehiscence site, and free peritoneal gas can
sometimes be detected as short, bright, linear interfaces in the most upper
portion of the abdomen and be associated with comet-tail artifacts (Figure
8.34B)
Figure 8.20. Intestinal foreign bodies. A wide range of foreign material
can be found in the gastrointestinal tract. Most of them are associated with
strong acoustic shadowing. A: Trichobezoars are compact foreign bodies
with a bright interface and a uniform and clean acoustic shadow, as seen
        l i s 
stomach. B: Elastic bands in the stomach of a young cat mimic prominent
rugal folds (arrowheads). The spacing and the uniform shadowing
(arrows) supported the presence of foreign material. C: A large piece of
corncob is in this dilated and thickened jejunal segment. D: Several
irregular interfaces with uniform shadowing are in this moderately
distended jejunum. E: A poorly echogenic object with echogenic center
 go aoaid y eo e go (r) ununf! paep piny su u! paou s! (speaumoe)
plastic toy was removed surgically. F: A rounded and nearly layered
structure (arrowheads) is in a dilated segment of small intestine. At first,
459
this appearance was confused for a thickened bowel segment. At surgery,
a large fragment of a *Kong" toy was removed.
B
Figure 8.21. Perforating teriyaki stick. Teriyaki sticks appear as long,
linear, bright interfaces, commonly associated with shadowing, within the
gastrointestinal tract. In this young dog with a history of left cranial flank
swelling, partially responsive to antibiotherapy, a long teriyaki stick
(arrow) was identified in the fundus of the stomach. The stick was
perforating the gastric wall and aiming toward the caudal chest wall
460
(cranial the left 12th rib). The lumen of the stomach (ST) is at the left of
theimage.
Figure 8.22. Partially obstructive intestinal adenocarcinoma. Foreign
material (arrows) accumulated proximal to the focally thickened
(arrowheads) jejunal segment. Surgical resection was performed and the
histopathological diagnosis was adenocarcinoma.
461
Figure 8.23. Severe gastritis. A: Despite a collapsed stomach, there is
marked thickening (l0 mm [arrows]) of the wall in this 1l-year-old
Maltese terrier that was diagnosed as having eosinophilic gastritis. The
mucosa is diffusely increased in echogenicity. B: A moderately thickened
(8 mm [cursors]) wall is noted in this 1-year-old cat that had severe
chronic ulcerative mucosal and mural gastritis. The wall is also
hyperechoic.
Figure 8.24. Gastric ulcers. A: Marked focal gastric wall thickening with
loss of layering is noted in this 6-year-old springer spaniel. Within the
462
thickest portion of the wall is a central crater (arrow). There is clear
demarcation between the layered and affected wall segments (arrowhead).
    o     e 
processes. Lu, lumen. B: A small amount of echogenic fluid is seen in the
gastric lumen (lu) of this young cat with chemically induced gastritis. The
wall is thickened (between the cursors), and its layers are focally
indistinct. A discrete mucosal crater (arrow) is noted. C: Hyperechoic
speckles (arrows), consistent with gas, are found in the thickened wall of
this dog with uremic gastritis and ulcerations. The layers are ill-defined.
The wall opposite to the ulceration reaches 1.6 cm in thickness (between
the cursors). D: Malignant ulcer in a 1O-year-old Labrador retriever with
gastric adenocarcinoma. Hyperechoic speckles (arrows) are in the
thickened portion of the wall (arrowheads), infiltrated with the epithelial
neoplasm. The layers are indistinct. Images C and D courtesy of M.A.
d'Anjou.
C
In postoperative enterotomy or enterectomy, the surgical site can be
identified by the regular alignment of sutures, which appear as small
bright interfaces along or around the bowel, depending on the choice of
surgical procedure (Figure 8.38A). Focal thickening of the bowel with loss
463
of layering is commonly seen, but is expected to resolve partially over
time (Figure 8.38)
At times, a stricture can be seen at a previous enterotomy or enterectomy
site. Abnormal fluid, gas, or food accumulation is then noted proximal to
the stricture site (Figure 8.39)
A fluid pocket representing a sterile seroma may accumulate near or at a
recent surgical or ultrasound-guided biopsy site (Figure 8.40). This is a
rare and transient complication of surgical intestinal biopsies.
Figure 8.25. Pyogranulomatous gastritis. A: Longitudinal sonogram of
the pyloric antrum of a 2-year-old Chihuahua with moderate to severe
pyogranulomatous gastritis. Wall edema obliterates the normal wall
            
mucosa. A small amount of fluid is in the gastric lumen. Mild regional
lymphadenopathy is noted (cursors). B: Recheck sonogram 3 days later
showing near complete resolution of the edema, but the wall layering
remains affected.
Figure 8.26. Uremic gastropathy. A: Uremic gastropathy is seen in dogs
or cats suffering from chronic uremia. Thickening of the wall with a
hyperechoic line (arrows) along the gastric mucosa and mineralization at
the mucosal-luminal interface are common findings. B: Enlarged view
with labels of the gastric wall changes. L, liver; Lu, lumen.
464
Gastrointestinal Tumors
GI neoplasia is often associated with motility disturbances that produce
luminal fluid accumulation, which optimizes visualization of the lesion
(Penninck 1998).
lymphoma are transmural thickening associated with the diffuse loss of
normal wall layering, reduced wall echogenicity, decreased localized
motility and regional lymphadenopathy (Penninck et al. 1994). These
features are similar in the stomach and along the intestinal tract (Figure
8.41). Gastric masses may be masked by the presence of air in the lumen,
particularly when located on the lesser curvature (Figure 8.42). The
thickening of the Gl wall can range widely, from 5 mm to over 25 mm
(Figures 8.43 and 8.44). Mesenteric lymphadenopathy is a common
finding in intestinal lymphoma and in some instances can be responsible
for most of the midabdominal mass effect (Figure 8.44). Ulcerated
lymphoma can be encountered as an irregular mucosal surface or as a
In cats, alimentary lymphoma can affect the intestinal tract without fully
disrupting the wall layering (Figure 8.46).
Figure 8.27. Inflammatory bowel disease. A: Longitudinal sonogram of a
mildly thickened jejunal segment of a dog with lymphocytic-plasmacytic
enteritis. Several bright speckles are unevenly distributed within the
prominent mucosal layer, but the wall layers can still be identified. B: In
this dog with eosinophilic enteritis, several intestinal segments were
thickened, hypermotile, and partially fluid filled. The wall layers were
465
visible, but the mucosa appeared hyperechoic and ill-defined. C:
Longitudinal sonogram of a focally thickened jejunum in a corgi with
severe ulcerative eosinophilic enteritis. The submucosa appears
subjectively more prominent than normal. D: Several thickened (6 mm)
intestinal loops with altered layering were seen in this cat with severe
lymphocytic-plasmacytic enteritis. In this patient, the muscular layer is
thicker (arrows) than the corresponding mucosa. A small amount of fluid
is noted in the bowel, and the intestinal motility was reduced during the
liveexam.
The most common ultrasonographic finding in gastric carcinoma is wall
transmural thickening that is associated with altered wall layering
(Penninck et al. 1998). This altered layering appears as a moderately
echogenic zone surrounded by outer and inner, poorly echogenic lines and
is present in many dogs (Figure 8.47). However, other associated mural
changes, such as edema, inflammation, fibrosis, or hemorrhage, can mask
this hallmark feature. Because of the particular appearance and to avoid
confusion with the term layered wall, which is usually reserved to
describe the normal appearance of the Gl wall, we call this feature
pseudolayering. This pseudolayering most likely correlates with the
unevenly  layered  tumor distribution  noted histopathologically.  This
466
particular ultrasonographic feature is strongly suggestive of gastric
carcinoma (Figure 8.47).
Intestinal carcinomas have been documented in dogs and cats, although it
is encountered less frequently in cats. The most common ultrasonographic
findings are transmural thickening with a complete loss of layering, which
is often associated with lymphadenopathy (Paoloni et al. 2002) (Figure
8.48). In the majority of these cases, evidence of fluid accumulation is
proximal to the intestinal thickening or mass associated with a localized
ileus. Intestinal carcinoma shares some of the ultrasonographic features
seen in intestinal lymphoma, but the length of the lesion tends to be
shorter in carcinoma than lymphoma, and mechanical ileus is more
common in carcinoma than in lymphoma (Figures 8.48-8.50)
Figure 8.28. Mucosal hyperechoic striations. A: Longitudinal sonogram
of mildly thickened jejunal segments (between the cursors) with
hyperechoic linear striations within the mucosal layer. The bright mucosal
striations in this 13-year-old Pomeranian with a confirmed diagnosis of
moderate eosinophilic enteritis with multifocal lymphangiectasis and focal
 present in this dog with severe lymphoplasmacytic enteritis.
Figure 8.29. Bowel corrugation caused by peritonitis. Several corrugated
bowel segments are present in this 5-year-old Weimaraner. Chronic
peritonitis secondary to multifocal perforation of the jejunum was present
atsurgery.
467
Figure 8.30. Granulomatous enteritis. A: [n this cat, there is diffuse loss
of layering of most jejunal segments. Moderate peritoneal effusion is
present around the intestine. The surgical biopsies were diagnostic for
toxoplasmosis. B:  Longitudinal sonogram of  severe
recurrent
the intestinal wall is present, with the formation of mass lesions (arrows).
C: Transverse sonogram of a granuloma secondary to a previously
migrating foreign body in a dog. The lesion created this eccentric mass
(cursors), deforming the intestinal lumen (Lu).
Figure 8.31. Duodenitis and pancreatitis in a dog. The duodenum is
thickened, and the wall layering appeared affected but still visible
(arrows). The adjacent right limb of the pancreas is enlarged and
468
hypoechoic (arrowheads). Hyperechoic mesenteric fat outlines the
margins of the inflamed pancreas.
Pancreas
Figure 8.32. Colonic wall thickening and ulcers. A: Longitudinal
  o s ) s   s
junction of a dog withparasitic (hookworm)colitis.The wallis
circumferentially thickened, and the wall layering is lost at the junction
between the ileum and cecum and/or colon (arrow). B: True thickening
should not be confused with colonic wall redundancy as seen in this cat
presented for obstipation. Numerous folds can be identified (arrows) on
the longitudinal (left) and transverse (right) planes. C: Longitudinal (left)
and transverse (right) sonograms of a segment of the descending colon in
a cat with severe ulcerative colitis. The wall is diffusely, severely
thickened, which particularly involves the mucosa. This mucosa is
hyperechoic (arrowheads) and presents irregular, hyperechoic, craterlike
lesions consistent with ulceration (arrows). The mucosal surface is
irregular in the rest of the segment, also consistent with erosions. Image C
courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
469
Figure 8.33. Peritoneal cestodiasis. Peritoneal cestodiasis in this
6-year-old mixed-breed dog is associated with a round, anechoic cystic
lesion (C) associated with the serosal surface of an intestinal segment (l).
Far enhancement is noted beyond the hypoattenuating fluid as a
hyperechoic band (*). This sonographic image was obtained with a
transverse plane. [mage reprinted with permission (Venco et al. 2005).
470
Figure 8.34. Intestinal perforation. A: A jejunal perforation secondary to
foreign bodies (hairpins) was surgically confirmed in this 5-year-old
       
thickened jejunal segment (between the cursors). B: Free gas (arrow) and
a moderate amount of echogenic fluid (not seen on this image) in the
abdomenindicateperforation.
471
Figure  8.35. Intestinal   perforation   and   peritoneal   abscess.   This
1l-year-old English setter had a septic abdomen. A: A bright tract dissects
the bowel wall (arrow). Peritoneal fluid (F) is noted and the mesenteric fat
is bright. Free gas was also identified (not shown). B: A localized fluid
site (arrow). At surgery, the perforation, local abscessation, and peritonitis
were confirmed.
A
Figure 8.36. Perforating ulcer. Gastric ulceration and perforation were
experienced vomiting. On ultrasound, a discrete hyperechoic tract (white
arrow) is seen crossing the thickened and hypoechoic gastric wall
(arrowheads). The fat adjacent to the perforation site is hyperechoic.
indicative of focal steatitis or peritonitis. Lu, gastric lumen.
472
Figure 8.37. Intestinal dehiscence. A: There is dehiscence at the duodenal
suture site in this 4-year-old Jack Russell terrier. Fluid accumulation (F)
and bright fat are centered at the dehiscence site. Discontinuity of the
duodenal wall is identified (arrow). B: The duodenum is hypomotile and
fluid filled. Deformity of the duodenum axis is noted at the level of the
suture line (arrowheads). Lu, lumen.
Figure8.38.
Postoperative
enterotomy.A:Normal
immediate
postoperative sonogram of an enterotomy site in a dog. The sutures appear
473
as discrete, small, bright interfaces (arrow). B and C: Longitudinal (B)
and transverse (C) planes obtained at the site of anastomosis. The wall
layering is disrupted, and the wall margins are deformed (between the
cursors). Free gas and free fluid (arrow) are commonly encountered. The
surrounding fat is bright. D: Several days later, the wall layering remains
disrupted (arrow) in this longitudinal sonogram. E: Several weeks after
surgery, despite a persistent focal thickening, the submucosa layer can be
u  o si i (s s is s  s 
gastrointestinal signs.
Figure 8.39. Intestinal stricture. Severe fluid distension (F) is noted
proximal to the stricture site (arrows) in this dog with previous
enterectomies for intestinal foreign bodies. Suboptimal peristaltic activity
was noted throughout the intestinal tract. Stricture at the surgical site was
diagnosed surgically.
474
Figure 8.40. Subserosal seroma following biopsy. A discrete, rounded and
      
deforming the adjacent intestinal wall and lumen. This represents a cystic
seroma secondary to a recent surgical intestinal biopsy. The dog had no
clinical signs related to this finding.
475
BOWEI
Figure 8.41. Intestinal lymphoma. A and B: Transverse (A) and
longitudinal (B) sonograms of the thickened duodenum of a 10-year-old
golden retriever with lymphoma. There is circumferential, irregular
thickening (between the cursors: 1.3 cm) of a segment of small intestine,
with extensive loss of wall layering. Fluid is noted in the lumen (Lu). C
and D: Transverse (C) and longitudinal (D) sonograms of a long jejunal
segment in an anorectic 15-year-old cat with lymphoma. Marked
thickening of the wall and loss of layering are noted, as well as poorly
 may represent neoplastic infiltrate within the mesentery. The bright, linear
interface in the center of the mass indicates the presence of the gas-filled
lumen and helps in confirming the intestinal origin.
476
A
Figure 8.42. Gastric lymphoma. A: Lateral radiograph of a cat with
chronic weight loss and vomiting. A smooth soft-tissue mass (arrowheads)
protrudes into the gas-filled gastric lumen. B: Longitudinal sonogram
obtained at the level of the gastric fundus. A 3.7-cm, hypoechoic, mildly
inhomogeneous mass (cursors) that protrudes into the gastric lumen is
partially masked by the presence of gas and its related reverberation
artifacts. The arrowhead points to the level of transition between the
normal gastric wall (GW), with intact layering, and the level of mass
infiltration, with altered layers. Images courtesy of M.A. d' Anjou.
477
Figure 8.43. Intestinal lymphoma. Longitudinal sonographic (A) and
schematic (B) sonograms of an intestinal segment of a cat with lymphoma.
The wall was circumferentially thickened (l cm thick) (cursors). The
layers of the left portion of the bowel are still visible but irregular. The
muscular layer is significantly thicker than normal, suggesting idiopathic
hypertrophy or hyperplasia. On the right portion of the image, the wall is
significantly thicker, with complete loss of layering at the place of tumoral
infiltration. On the schematic image, the arrow points to the transition
between layered wall and complete loss of layering. L, lumen.
BOWEL
BOWEL
Figure 8.44. Intestinal lymphoma. A: Longitudinal sonogram of an
asymmetrically thickened (1.5 cm) bowel segment in an 11-year-old cat
diagnosed with alimentary lymphoma. The loss of layering involved
mostly one side of the wall (arrowheads). The muscular layer appears
particularly thickened in the opposite wall (arrow) B: The mesenteric
lymph nodes were markedly enlarged (4.5 cm thick), lobulated, and
hypoechoic.
478
Figure 8.45. Ulcerated lymphoma. Longitudinal sonogram of an ulcerated
lymphoma in a 15-year-old cat with vomiting and depression. Part of the
gastric wall was moderately thickened, with complete loss of layering.
r eo      s  s
microbubbles has accumulated at the site of the extensive ulceration
(arrows). The stomach is filled with fluid and was hypomotile during the
exam.
Figure 8.46. Feline lymphoma without loss of layering. A: Feline
lymphoma occasionally is not associated with complete loss of wall
layering, as in this 10-year-old cat with diffusely, mildly thickened bowel
loops (4 mm). The muscular layer is particularly prominent. B: The
479
mesenteric lymph nodes are moderately enlarged (up to 2.2 cm wide)
(arrowheads).
Figure 8.47.
Gastric pseudolayering  sign  with  adenocarcinoma.
Longitudinal sonographic (A) and schematic (B) images of the pyloric
antrum of a dog with carcinoma. The markedly thickened wall (up to 1.3
cm) displayed a pseudolayering pattern (arrow) suggestive of carcinoma.
A mild amount of fluid is noted in the lumen (Lu). The gastric lymph node
is enlarged (0.8 × 1.3 cm) (arrowhead) and has a target appearance (a
hypoechoic rim around a bright center).
Several ultrasonographic features of GI smooth muscle tumors are helpful
in
differentiating
them
fromother
types of  GI  neoplasia.
Leiomyosarcomas are often large (over 3 cm) intramural lesions growing
out of the serosa as large eccentric or extraluminal masses (Myers and
Penninck 1994) (Figures 8.51-8.54). Uncommonly they invade 0r project
into the Gl lumen. Because of their common exophytic distribution and
their large size, it is difficult to assess the anatomical origin of the mass
and even more so to determine the precise layer of tumor origin. During
 u s an um ! m n s! ! 'u -i
and/or the small amount of fluid located in the distorted lumen.
480
Commonly the presence of a reverberation artifact indicates the presence
of gas, and attempts to connect this artifact to an adjacent bowel segment
should be made to confirm the Gl origin. Large GI leiomyosarcomas tend
to be heterogeneous with a mixed echogenic pattern. The presence of
anechoic and hypoechoic foci within the mass may correlate with the
areas of central degeneration and necrosis frequently found in these large
lesions.
Other tumors have been reported, such as carcinoid, neurilemoma,
nerve-sheath  tumor,  histiocytic  sarcoma,  mast  cell  tumor,
hemangiosarcoma, and extraskeletal osteosarcoma (Stimson et al. 2000)
The lesions tend to appear as poorly echogenic masses or as focal
helps in differentiating the different tumors (Figure 8.55)-
Miscellaneous Gastrointestinal
Disorders
 p rg se s u  e sos i 
rare, but has been reported in the literature (Spaulding et al. 1990).
In small-breed dogs, chronic hypertrophic pyloric stenosis can be
encountered (Figure 8.56). The hyper-trophic and/or hyperplastic changes
primarily affect the smooth muscle layer of the pylorus (Biller et al. 1994).
Because of this chronic condition, the stomach tends to be flaccid, and a
moderate amount of fluid or food accumulates in it.
At times, the hypertrophic mucosal or hyperplastic glandular changes of
the gastric wall may appear as a discrete nodule or mass. Exuberant
hyperplastic or hypertrophic mucosal or muscular changes cannot be
appearance. Gastric polyps can appear as large, moderately echogenic
nodules or masses projecting into the gastric lumen (Figure 8.57). They
often are asymptomatic unless located in the pylorus and thus creating a
gastric outflow disturbance.
Figure 8.48. Jejunal adenocarcinomas causing partial obstruction. A:
Sonogram of a circumferentially thickened bowel segment in a dog with
jejunal adenocarcinoma. At the tumor site, the wall is hypoechoic, with
481
absent layering. The length of the lesion was estimated to be less than 5
cm. Lu, lumen; and Sp, spleen. B: Moderate echogenic fluid accumulation
(F) is present proximal to the lesion. This fluid is almost confluent with
the distended walls (arrowheads) C: longitudinal sonogram of an
intestinal adenocarcinoma in a cat that had experienced weight loss and
anorexia. Proximal to the obstruction site is intestinal distension and
foreign-material accumulation (FM). The arrows point to the narrowed
and affected bowel segment. D: Transverse sonogram of the same lesion.
The arrow points to the thickened ileum.
Sp
FM
Figure 8.49. Jejunal adenocarcinoma. Longitudinal sonographic (A) and
schematic (B) images of a focally invasive and unevenly circumferential
adenocarcinoma invading the jejunum in this dog (arrows). Note the intact
wall at the margin of the mass (arrowheads). Lu, lumen.
482
Figure 8.50. Colonic carcinoma. A: Longitudinal sonogram of the colon
of a 20-year-old cat. A 1 .4-cm, asymmetrical, moderately echogenic mass
is noted involving the colonic wall and protruding into the lumen
(arrowheads). A large amount of peritoneal fluid (F) is present. B: An
enlarged regional lymph node (LN) is also present. The final diagnosis
fluid. The arrowheads point to the mass.
Figure 8.51. Leiomyoma. Transverse sonographic (A) and schematic (B)
images of a small mass located at the pyloroduodenal angle in a dog. The
mass is hypoechoic and homogeneous, deforming the outer contour of the
duodenum, and protrudes into its lumen. The layers are focally indistinct.
alike.
483
Figure 8.52. Smooth-muscle tumor and intussusception. Occasionally.
smooth-muscle tumors are seen associated with an intussusception, as
seen in this dog- A: The intussusceptum has a focally thickened wall
(between the cursors). The outer hypoechoic layer representing the
muscular layer seems to be the most affected. Differential diagnoses for
tumor, focal inflammation, edema, or hemorrhage of the wall. The fat is
invaginated. B: The longitudinal sonogram centered on the thickening
Figure 8.53. Intestinal leiomyosarcoma in two dogs. A: Sonogram of a
jejunal leiomyosarcoma. The mass is large (approximately 8 cm long by 5
represent gas in the distorted intestinal lumen. The mass 
IS
inhomogeneous; a few hypoechoic areas seen within the mass most likely
are areas of central degeneration and necrosis. B: Similar features of a
large, eccentric, inhomogeneous mass noted in this other dog diagnosed
with intestinal leiomyosarcoma. The arrows point to the lumen of the
affected segments.
484
Figure 8.54. Colonic smooth-muscle tumors. Longitudinal (A) and
transverse (B) images of a large, hypoechoic mass extending into the
pelvic canal. The pubis prevents a complete ultrasonographic assessment
of the contour and margins of the lesion. The lumen (arrow) of the colon
is collapsed, and a small amount of trapped gas is associated with
reverberation. In B, in the near field, the arrow points to the intact urethra.
located ventral to the round mass (between the cursors). Longitudinal (C)
and transverse (D) images of another smooth-muscle tumor in a dog with
obstipation. The mass is eccentric, inhomogeneous, and appears to
communicate with the muscularis of the adjacent colonic wall (arrow in
C). Large shadowing feces are noted within the colonic lumen, partially
compressed by mural mass (arrows). The prostate is located ventrally (P).
Images C and D courtesy of M.A. d' Anjou.
485
3.20cm
Figure 8.55. Unusual intestinal tumors. A: Longitudinal sonogram of a
large, hypoechoic mass invading this midjejunal segment. The arrow
with loss of layering and the normal wall. A poorly differentiated sarcoma
was diagnosed. B: Transverse sonogram of the same lesion. The lumen
(Lu) is eccentrically located. C: A hypoechoic mass (arrows) projecting
German shepherd. The mass is boomerang shaped, and there is loss of
wall layering. The surgical biopsy sample was diagnosed as jejunal mast
cell tumor. D: Diffusely thickened intestinal tract in a 10-year-old cocker
spaniel-poodle mix with a poorly differentiated round-cell neoplasm
(suspected of histiocytic origin). Note that the wall layering is maintained,
and there are multiple, hyperechoic, linear mucosal striations consistent
with lacteal dilation. E and F: Longitudinal and transverse images of a
segment of jejunum in a Bernese mountain dog with disseminated
histiocytic sarcoma. A small, well-defined, hyperechoic nodule is present
within the muscularis, deforming the contour of the submucosa. Similar
lesions were observed in other intestinal segments. All nodules, including
those in the liver were hyperechoic. Images E and F courtesy of M.A.
d'Anjou.
486
0.91cm
0.34c
0.61
Figure 8.56. Pyloric hypertrophy. A and B: There is moderate thickening
of the pyloric sphincter in this 9-year-old shih tzu. The hypertrophied
walls (between the cursors) protrude as two rounded projections (arrows)
into the fluid-filled pyloric antrum (Lu). The wall layers are still visible.
487
0.67cm
0.63
Figure 8.57. Gastric polyps. A: The stomach of a 9-year-old Lhasa apso
with intermittent vomiting is distended with echogenic and amorphous
food material compromising full evaluation of the stomach. However.
near the pyloroduodenal angle, a moderately echogenic mass (M)
protrudes into the gastric lumen (Lu), along an intact wall (arrowheads).
Other hyperechoic masses were seen projecting into the gastric lumen (not
shown here). They all were diagnosed as gastric polyps. B: There is an
outflow obstruction secondary to a large (over 3 cm thick) gastric mass in
this 7-year-old giant schnauzer that had experienced vomiting. A lobulated
mass is seen protruding into the lumen (Lu), opposite to the intact wall of
the greater curvature. The histopathologic diagnosis was inflamed, benign,
mucosal polyp.
Figure8.58.
Duodenalmucosal
hyperplasiaevolving
into
adenocarcinoma. A and B: Longitudinal (A) and transverse (B) images of
marked diffuse duodenal thickening (between the cursors) in a 13-year-old
diagnostic of extensive tubulovillous, adenomatous, mucosal hyperplasia
Drastic surgical resection was performed 7 months later, and the final
488
histopathologic    diagnosis   was    duodenal   adenocarcinoma.  The
 ad an si  ssd nou  s os
There is diffuse thickening with loss of layering along several jejunal
segments in this corgi diagnosed with moderate eosinophilic erosive and
polypoid enteritis. The arrow points to one polyp. Notice the loss of wall
layering
Extensive hyperplastic changes can be found at other locations along the
Gl tract. If located within the proximal portion of the descending
duodenum, these changes may induce outflow obstruction or compromise
the bile flow (Figure 8.58A). Focal lesions along the intestinal tract mimic
tumoral nodules (Figure 8.58B).
GI vascular disorders such as infarction or ischemia or angiodysplasia are
uncommon and very challenging to diagnose (Fan et al. 1999; Wallack et
al. 2003). Bowel infarction can initially display normal layering of a
focally dilated small bowel segment. Subsequent (72 h after presentation)
     e    
Suggestive of peritonitis can then be observed.
489
INTERVENTIONAL
PROCEDURES
Percutaneous ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration and automated
microcore biopsy of Gl lesions are safe alternative procedures to use
instead of endo-scopic or surgical biopsy. The guided techniques of
fine-needle aspiration using either a 22- or 20-gauge spinal needle, and/or
microcore automated biopsy using an 18-gauge Tru-Cut needle, assisted
e suuieqo jo spoyau ayes pue quaie ane una rsdo paeuone ue Aq
diagnostic sample (Penninck et al. 1993) (Figure 8.59).
Figure 8.59. Ultrasound-guided biopsy and fine-needle aspiration. A: An
ultrasound-guided core biopsy was performed on this markedly thickened
and distorted intestinal wall of a dog diagnosed with lymphoma. The
visible needle path enables careful placement of the needle (>), far away
from the intestinal lumen (L). B: Fine-needle aspiration can also be
performed safely. Notice the needle tip (black arrow) engaged in this
mildly thickenedbowelsegment.
They are especially useful when lesions are not accessible endoscopically
and when surgical resection is not a safe option for a compromised
patient. One paramount safety rule is to carefully locate and avoid the
lumen.
[n presence of a Gl lesion associated with regional lymphadenopathy, it is
recommended to target both structures to increase the chance of obtaining
 one or more diagnostic sample.
490
Intestinal content leakage, which can be a serious complication, can be
avoided by careful selection of the biopsy site.
REFERENCES
Baez JB, Hendrick MJ, Walker LM, Washabau RJ (1999) Radiographic.
ultrasonographic, and endoscopic findings in cats with inflammatory
bowel disease of the stomach and small intestine: 33 cases (1990-1997). J
Am Vet Med Ass0c 215:349-354.
Biller DS, Partington BP, Miyabayashi T, Leveille R (l994)
Ultrasonographic appearance of chronic hypertrophic pyloric gastropathy
in the dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 35:30-33.
dogs  and cats  with  intestinal  perforation:  A retrospective  study
Delaney F, O'Brien RT, Waller K (2003) Ultrasound evaluation of small
bowel thickness compared to weight in normal dogs. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 44: 577-580.
Diana A, Pietra M, Guglielmini C, Boari A, Bettini G, Cipone M (2003)
Ultrasonographic and pathologic features of intestinal smooth muscle
hypertrophy in four cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 44:566-569.
Fan TM, Simpson KW, Polack E, Dykes N, Harvey J (1999) Intestinal
haemorrhage associated with colonic vascular ectasia (angiodysplasia) in a
dog. J Small Anim Pract 40:25-30.
Goggin JM, Biller DS, Debey BM, Pickar JG, Mason D (2000)
Ultrasonographic measurement of gastrointestinal wall thickness and the
ultrasonographic appearance of the ileocolic region in healthy cats. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 36:224-228.
Grooters AM, Miyabayashi T, Biller DS, Merryman J (1994) Sonographic
35:35-40.
body in 3 dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 44:466-469.
491
Lamb CR, Mantis P (1998) Utrasonographic features of intestinal
intussusception in 10 dogs. J Small Anim Pract 39:437-441.
Lee H, Yeon S, Lee H, et al. (2005) Ultrasonographic diagnosis:
Pylorogastric  intussusception  in  a   dog.  Vet  Radiol  Ultrasound
46:317-318.
Moon ML, Biller DS, Armbrust LJ (2003) Ultrasonographic appearance
and  etiology  of  corrugated  small  intestine.  Vet  Radiol  Ultrasound
44:199-203.
Myers NC, Penninck DG (1994) Ultrasonographic diagnosis of
gastrointestinal smooth muscle tumors in the dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
35:391-397.
Newell SM, Graham JP, Roberts GD, Ginn PE, Harrison JM (1999)
Sonography of the normal feline gastrointestinal tract.  Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 40:40-43.
Paoloni MC, Penninck DG, Moore AS (2002) Ultrasonographic and
clinicopathologic    findings   in  21   cases    of   canine   intestinal
adenocarcinoma. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 43:562-567.
Patsikas MN, Papazoglou LG, Papaioannou NG, Savvas I, Kazakos GM,
Dessiris   AK (2003) Ultrasonographic   findings  of i
intestinal
intussusception in seven cats. J Feline Med Surg 5:335-343.
Penninck DG (1998) Ultrasonographic characterization of gastrointestinal
tumors. Vet Clin North Am 28:777-797.
Penninck DG (2002) Gastrointestinal tract. [n: Nyland T, Mattoon J, eds.
Small Animal Diagnostic Ultrasound, 2nd edition. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders, pp 207-230.
Penninck DG, Crystal MA, Matz ME, Pearson SH (1993) The technique
automated microcore biopsy in small animal gastrointestinal diseases. Vet.
RadiolUltrasound34:433-436.
Penninck DG, Matz M, Tidwell AS (1997) Ultrasonographic detection of
gastric ulceration. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 38:308-312.
492
Penninck D, Mitchell SL (2003) Ultrasonographic detection of ingested
and perforating wooden foreign bodies in four dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
223:206-209.
Penninck DG, Moore AS, Gliatto J (1998) Ultrasonography of canine
gastric epithelial ne0plasia. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 39:342-348.
Penninck DG, Moore AS, Tidwell AS, Matz ME, Freden GO (1994)
Ultrasonography of alimentary lymphosarcoma in the cat. Vet Radiol
Ultras0und 35:299-304.
Penninck DG, Nyland TG,Fisher PE,Kerr LY (1989) Normal
ultrasonography of the canine gastrointestinal tract. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
30:272-276.
Penninck DG, Smyers B, Webster CRL, Rand W, Moore AS (2003)
Diagnostic value of ultrasonography in differentiating canine enteritis
from intestinal neoplasia. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 44:570-575
Spaulding KA, Cohn LA, Miller RT, Hardie EM (1990) Enteric
duplication in two dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 31:83-88.
Stimson EL, Cook WT, Smith MM, Forrester SD, Moon ML, Saunders
GK (2000) Extraskeletal osteosarcoma in the duodenum of a cat. J Am
AnimHospAss0c36:332-336.
Sutherland-Smith J, Penninck DJ, Keating JH, Webster CRL (2007) The
morphological  significance  of  ultrasonographic  intestinal  hyperechoic
striations in dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 48:51-57.
Tidwell AS, Penninck DG (1992) Ultrasonography of gastrointestinal
foreign bodies. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 33: 160-169.
Venco L, Kramer L, Pagliaro L, Genchi C (2005) Ultrasonographic
features of peritoneal cestodiasis caused by Mesocestoides sp. in a dog and
in a cat. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 46:417-422.
Wallack ST, Hornof WJ, Herrgesell EJ (2003) Ultrasonographic
diagnosis: Small bowel infarction in a cat. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
44:81-85.
493
CHAPTER NINE
PANCREAS
Dominique Penninck
PREPARATION AND
SCANNING PROCEDURE
The pancreas is a thin, elongated organ located along the greater curvature
of the stomach and the mesen-teric border of the descending duodenum.
Gas in the gastrointestinal tract often hampers complete evaluation. A
1 2-h fast may reduce gas interference.
The anatomical landmarks used to locate the right pancreatic lobe are the
right kidney; the descending duodenum, with its straight course along the
right abdominal wall; and the pancreaticoduodenal vein paralleling the
descending duodenum (Figure 9.1). The right pancreatic lobe can be
imaged from a ventral or lateral approach, with a longitudinal scan-plane
orientation used to find the descending duodenum and right kidney
(Saunders 1991). Using the ventral approach, the transducer is placed
under the last rib of the animal and angled dorsally to image the right
kidney. The scan plane is then moved medially until the descending
duodenum is imaged medial to the right kidney. Alternatively, the ventral
approach can start caudal to the xiphoid process. In a longitudinal scan
plane, the stomach is identified, and the scan plane is moved laterally
  o       
duodenum.
494
The lateral approach is preferred to locate the descending duodenum in
deep-chested dogs. Once the descending duodenum is located by using the
ventral or lateral approach, the right pancreatic lobe and the
pancreaticoduodenal vein can be identified. In large and deep-chested
dogs, it is often necessary to use an intercostal window to access the most
cranial portion of the descending duodenum and the corresponding portion
of the pancreas. On occasion, the right pancreatic lobe is best scanned
from the right side, with the animal in a right lateral recumbency as gastric
fluid moves in the dependent pyloric antrum.
with the animal in a dorsal, left, or right lateral recumbent position, by
moving the scan plane craniomedially to the proximal descending
duodenum and caudally to the pyloric antrum. The portal vein represents a
useful landmark because it is located just dorsal and to the left of the body
od aui on lepn isnf ueos asiaasun  (ie angi) saoud ai jo
hepatis and pylorus may be used to locate this vein and the body of the
pancreas. The left pancreatic lobe is more difficult to image in dogs
because of gas interference in the adjacent stomach and transverse colon.
However, in cats, the left limb is larger and can be more easily identified
than the right limb.
High-frequency transducers (greater than 7.5 MHz) are recommended to
The small contact area of sectorial, narrow curvilinear or micro-convex
transducers facilitates access to the right cranial abdominal quadrant for
imaging under or between the right ribs.
ULTRASONOGRAPHY OF THE
NORMAL PANCREAS
InDogs
The pancreas is thin, amorphous, and poorly distinct from the adjacent
mesenteric fat. The pancreas is divided into three portions: right lobe, left
lobe, and body (Figure 9.1). The right lobe lies in the mesoduo-denum
dorsomedial to the descending duodenum, ventral to the right kidney, and
495
ventrolateral to the portal vein. Only the veins draining the right lobe are
seen ultrasonographically (Saunders 1991). The body lies caudal to the
pyloric region, craniomedial to the right kidney, and ventral to the portal
vein. The pylorus is in the right cranial abdomen. The left lobe originates
      s   
continues across the midline between the stomach and the transverse
colon. The normal left lobe occasionally is seen in the triangular region
defined by the spleen, stomach, and left kidney. The normal pancreas is
homogeneous and is isoechoic or slightly hyperechoic to the caudate liver
lobe. On rare occasions, a normal pancreas can be diffusely hyperechoic
od  (e a is o s u m 
      l      i 
gastroduodenal vein and portal vein.
Figure 9.1. Approach to the normal canine pancreas. [llustration of the
pancreas within the abdominal cavity, with the probe positioned along the
left and right lobes of this organ at locations A, B, and C. Ao, aorta; CBD,
common bile duct; CVC, caudal vena cava; Duod, duodenum; GB,
gallbladder; L, liver; LK, left kidney; PD, pancreatic duct; PV, portal vein;
SP, spleen; and ST, stomach. A: Transverse sonogram of the left lobe
(arrows) seen between the stomach (St) and the collapsed transverse colon
(arrowhead). B: Transverse sonogram of the right lobe of the pancreas
(arrows). The layered descending duodenum is lateral to the pancreas. The
pancreaticoduodenal vein appears as an anechoic rounded structure within
the lobe. C: Longitudinal sonogram of the right pancreatic lobe (arrows)
near the right kidney (K). [mage C courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou
496
CBD
In Cats
giving it a hooklike appearance (Etue et al. 2001). The pyloroduodenal
angle and the pancreatic body are more centrally located, and the angle
formed by the left and right lobes with the pancreatic body is smaller. The
normal sonographic appearance of the feline pancreas is isoechoic to
slightly hyperechoic to the adjacent liver lobes and nearly isoechoic to the
surrounding mesenteric fat (Figure 9.3).
The mean thickness measurements for each part of the pancreas and the
 pancreatic duct in cats are summarized in Table 9.1.
Figure 9.2. Normal pancreas in an old dog. Longitudinal sonogram of the
left lobe of the pancreas in this 12-year-old Yorkie. The pancreas (arrows)
is diffusely increased in echogenicity but maintains a normal size. The
histopathology of the pancreas was unremarkable.
497
Figure 9.3. Approach to the normal feline pancreas. [llustration of the
pancreas within the abdominal cavity with the probe positioned along the
left (A) and right lobes (C) and body (B) of this organ. CBD, common bile
duct; Duod, duodenum; GB, gallbladder; L, liver; LK, left kidney; PD,
pancreatic duct; PV, portal vein; RK, right kidney; SP, spleen; and ST,
stomach. A: Longitudinal sonogram showing the hook-shaped distal
extremity of the left lobe. B: Longitudinal sonogram of the body. Notice
the portal vein (PV) dorsal to the body (cursors). L, liver; and St, stomach.
C: Longitudinal sonogram of the right lobe of the pancreas (cursors).
Duod, duodenum. The arrow points to the pancreatic duct.
498
CBD
日
Table 9.1. Pancreatic measurements in normal cats
Normal Cats
Left Lobe Mean (Range)Body Mean (Range)
Right Lobe Mean KRange)PD Mean (Range)
20a
5.4mm
6.6mm
4.5mm
0.8mm
1-9 years
(3.49.0)
(4.79.5)
(2.8-5.9)
(0.51.3)
84b
5.4mm
5.6mm
NR
1.1mm
3 months to 16 years
(2.9-9.5)
(6-')
(0.65-2.5)
15#
6.5mm
6.4mm
4.3mm
1.13mm
>10 years
(4.6-10.3)
(4.69.0)
(3.05.7)
(0.62.4)
PD, pancreatic duct; and NR, not reported.
"Etue et al. 2001.
bMoon et al. 2005.
CHecht et al.2006.
*Values represent the lower and upper limits of the 95% reference
interval.
499
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC
FEATURES OF PANCREATIC
DISORDERS
Pancreatitis
Pancreatitis has various ultrasonographic appear-ances, depending on the
severity, duration, and extent of pancreatic and peripancreatic tissue
inflammation.
In acute pancreatitis, the pancreas appears enlarged and diffusely
hypoechoic while the surrounding fat appears moderately hyperechoic as
an go ql nuatu aun 'sop ul (th ana) uoodes ey jo nnsan u
pancreas tends to be most commonly affected (Nyland et al. 1983),
whereas, in cats, the changes tend to be more severe in the body and left
limb.
d  (  e aa s aq  s s  
enlargement and diffuse changes in pancreatic and surrounding fat
echogenicity are often less obvious (Figure 9.5B and C).
inflammatory bowel disease, and cholangiohepatitis (Akol et al. 1993).
Thickened gastric and/or duodenal wall and regional peritoneal effusion
9.4-9.6). The thickening of the gastric and duodenal wall is usually not
 associated with complete loss of layering, although the wall layers can be
altered (Figure 9.6B)
[n severe hemorrhagic, necrotizing pancreatitis, irregular hypoechoic
area(s) represent necrosis and hemorrhage of part of the pancreas and
peripancreatic tissue (Figure 9.7). The pancreatic margins can be
ill-defined, and the pancreas appears amorphous. The adjacent mesentery
is hyperechoic because of inflammation and edema.
500
Pancreatic edema appears as numerous hypoechoic stripes demarcating
pancreatic lobulation and dissecting the enlarged pancreas (Figure 9.8).
Pancreatic edema may be associated with pancreatitis (Figure 9.8A and
B), although it can also be caused by hypo-albuminemia or portal
hypertension (Figure 9.8C) (Lamb 1999).
Focal pancreatic lesions caused by acute pancreatitis contain combined
areas of pancreatic necrosis, hemorrhage, and surrounding inflamed
mesentery (Edwards et al. 1990). The hypoechoic and anechoic areas
corresponding to collections of hemorrhage and necrotic tissue may, with
chronicity, become more organized and develop into pseudocyst or
abscess. Pseudocysts are fluid-filled lesions caused by pancreatitis that are
surrounded by a capsule of fibrous tissue. The fluid is composed of
pancreatic secretions originating from  a ruptured duct. Pancreatic
pseudocysts are anechoic to poorly echogenic rounded lesions,
occasionally associated with acoustic enhancement in the far field. They
are reported in both dogs and cats (Rutgers et al. 1985; Hines et al. 1996;
VanEnkevort et al. 1999) (Figure 9.9).
    r d    si s
differentiated from congenital cysts or pseudocysts (Figure 9.10)
Pancreatic abscesses are a circumscribed collection of pus, usually located
within the pancreas or close to it, containing little or no pancreatic
necrosis (Salisbury et al. 1988). They are more common in dogs (Figure
9.11) than in cats (Figure 9.12). Ultrasonographic differentiation among
these different fluid-filled pancreatic lesions is impossible. Abscesses with
echogenic fluid may also mimic masses.
Figure 9.4. Acute pancreatitis in dogs. A: Longitudinal sonogram of the
thickened (2.4 cm, cursors +), irregular, hypoechoic right lobe of the
       
descending duodenum is also thickened (9 mm, cursors ×), but its layers
are still visible. B: Transverse sonogram of the same lobe (arrows). Notice
the extension of the bright fat and the small amount of anechoic effusion
   n   o  o    ()
corrugated. C: Transverse sonogram of the right limb of the pancreas of a
enlarged, hypoechoic, irregular, and ill-defined. The surrounding fat is
hyperechoic and hyperattenuat-ing, hampering the visualization of deeper
structures (not shown). The descending duodenum is also significantly
501
thickened (1 cm), but layers remain distinct. D: In the same dog, the colon
(arrows) was markedly corrugated. A normal bowel loop is in the near
field. Images C and D courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
0.9cm
213cm
Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration is recommended to determine
the nature of the collection. Peritoneal effusion secondary to pancreatitis is
more common with the severe, hemorrhagic, necrotizing form of
pancreatitis. The effusion is more commonly a small volume of fluid that
accumulates in small pockets between the pancreas and adjacent
mesentery.
Bile duct obstruction secondary to pancreatic inflammation and
subsequent fibrosis can cause gallbladder and bile duct distension. In these
cases, the common bile duct (CBD) is dilated and tortuous (Figure 9.13).
In dogs, the normal CBD is not seen, whereas, in cats, the CBD often is
visible and considered within normal limits when up to 4 mm in diameter
(Leveille et al. 1996). Serial ultrasonographic examinations of the biliary
tract can be necessary to document progressive mechanical obstruction.
Progressive dilation of the biliary tract from the common bile duct to the
 peripheral intrahepatic ducts occurred 1 week after experimental bile duct
502
 a x o a (l    s
and gallbladder can remain despite reestablishment of normal bile flow
afterobstruction.
Figure 9.5. Acute pancreatitis in cats. A: Longitudinal sonogram of the
left lobe of the pancreas. The lobe is markedly thickened, hypoechoic, and
 sd   o s ul a   o a s
only mildly thickened, but the surrounding fat is bright, outlining the
pancreatic contours (arrows). C: The body and left lobe of the pancreas
are within the upper limits of normal for size but appear hypoechoic. PV,
portal vein; and ST, stomach. D: Power Doppler longitudinal image of the
right limb of the pancreas in another cat. The pancreas is enlarged,
e g       
peritoneal effusion (*). The pancreatic duct is clearly delineated
(arrowhead) and not associated with flow, in comparison with nearby
vessels.
1.7CI
        s 
hyperechoic peripancreatic tissue can displace the descending duodenum.
Because the right pancreatic lobe is located dorsomedial to the descending
duodenum, this loop of bowel is often displaced ventrolaterally (Murtaugh
et al. 1985). In subacute to chronic active pancreatitis, the pancreas
remains a distinct, well-defined hypoechoic structure that contrasts with
503
the slightly hyperechoic peripancreatic mesentery (Figure 9.14A). At
times, irregular margins of the pancreas and foci of mineralization can be
seen (Figure 9.14B). Chronic pancreatitis characterized by interstitial
fibrosis with acinar atrophy and lymphocytic infiltrates is rarely suspected
clinically. Most cases encountered have vague clinical signs and
nonspecific laboratory values. In these cases, the pancreas can be within
(Figure 9.15). In cats, chronic pancreatitis is twice more frequent than
acute pancreatitis. As this condition is often subclinical, it is very difficult
changes can be similar to those described in dogs or subtle to inexistent
(Figure 9.16). Acute necrotizing pancreatitis from chronic nonsuppurative
pancreatitis cannot reliably be differentiated based on clincopathologic
testing and/or sonographic abnormalities (Ferreri et al. 2003). A tissue
core biopsy (under ultrasound guidance or at surgery) can be obtained to
confirm the diagnosis.
Figure 9.6. Duodenal changes associated with pancreatitis in two dogs. A
and B: Longitudinal sonograms and corresponding schematic images of
two dogs diagnosed with severe acute pancreatitis. In both, the duodenum
is thickened and atonic, and the wall layering is altered. The right
pancreatic limb is hypoechoic, and the surrounding fat is hyperechoic. Pyl,
pylorus.
504
B
In cats, the pancreatic duct can appear dilated (more than 1.3 mm) in acute
pancreatitis (Wall et al. 200l) or chronic pancreatitis or even in older cats
with no clinical evidence of active or chronic pancreatic disease.
lithiasis (Figure 9.1 7E and F).
Pancreatic Nodular Hyperplasia and
Neoplasia
Pancreatic nodular hyperplasia is occasionally seen in the pancreas of old
dogs and cats. Well-defined hypoechoic to isoechoic nodules that can vary
be confused for neoplastic disorders, such as insulinomas. They may also
look similar to cystic formations, although far acoustic enhancement is not
usually expected with soft-tissue nodules.
Pancreatic exocrine tumors such as adenocarcinoma arise from acinar
cells or ductal epithelium. Even though these tumors are rare, they are the
505
develop in the central portion of the gland. As they grow, they may
compress the common bile duct, invade the adjacent gastric and duodenal
segments (Figure 9.19D), and frequently metastasize to the liver (Lamb et
al. 1995). They often are poorly echogenic nodules 0r masses (Figure
9.18). Other tumors have occasionally been encountered in the pancreas of
 dogs and cats: cystadenoma, metastatic carcinoma, and lymphoma (Figure
9.20)
Figure 9.7. Necroticohemorrhagic pancreatitis in two dogs. A and B:
Transverse (A) and longitudinal (B) sonograms of the thickened pancreas
of an 8-year-old Labrador retriever with active suppurative pancreatitis
with areas of hemorrhage and necrosis. The inhomogeneous and
hypoechoic pancreas has irregular margins outlined by bright fat. C and
D: Longitudinal sonograms of the right pancreatic limb in a 10-year-old
golden retriever  with severe  necroticohemorrhagic pancreatitis.  The
pancreatic limb (P) is markedly enlarged, hypoechoic, and ill-defined,
particularly in its distal extremity (arrows). Using Power Doppler (D) in
this same region, there is no evidence of vascular flow motion, in
          
shows increased vascularity. Images C and D courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
506
Figure 9.8. Pancreatic edema in dogs. A: Transverse sonogram of the
edematous thickened pancreas (the same dog as in Figure 9.7A and B)
The pancreas is enlarged and has anechoic stripes. The surrounding fat is
hyperechoic. B: Longitudinal sonogram of the right pancreatic lobe of a
3-year-old Welsh corgi with pancreatitis. Hypoechoic striations are
crossing the pancreas, and the contours of the pancreas are outlined by
Pie eau au u paou st lemoq jo iuaas pelpin paep v in
(arrowheads). C: Longitudinal sonographic image of the right pancreatic
limb (arrows) in a small dog with acute portal hypertension following
surgery for an extrahepatic portosystemic shunt. Characteristic hypoechoic
to anechoic stripes noted in the pancreas are consistent with edema. These
changes resolved a day later. L, liver; and RK, right kidney. Image C
courtesy of M.A. d' Anjou.
Figure 9.9. Pancreatic pseudocyst in a dog. Transverse (A) and
longitudinal (B) sonograms of a large pancreatic pseudocyst associated
with a severe acute pancreatitis. Part of the thickened and hypoechoic
pancreas (P) is in the center of the hypoechoic to nearly anechoic lesion
representing the pseudocyst (arrows). Ultrasound-guided fine-needle
aspiration confirmed the diagnosis.
507
Figure 9.10. Pancreatic cysts in dogs and cats. A: Oblique sonogram of
two small cystic lesions (arrows) in the left pancreatic lobe (P) of an
1 1-year-old miniature schnauzer. St, stomach; and V, adjacent vessels. B:
Longitudinal sonogram of the distal extremity of the left pancreatic lobe
   (      i  
no clinical history of previous pancreatitis. Sp, spleen. C: Large
pancreatic cyst on the left lobe and body of the pancreas in a l6-year-old
cat. D: The same region after ultrasound-guided drainage of the cyst
presented in Figure 9.10C.
508
Figure 9.11. Pancreatic abscess in two dogs. A: Longitudinal sonogram of
an ovoid discrete hypoechoic cavity (arrows) in the right pancreatic lobe
(P) of a 6-year-old cocker spaniel. Notice the thickened and atonic (fluid
filled) duodenum in the near field (cursors). The muscularis layer of the
duodenal wall is especially prominent. Hyperechoic fat is seen around the
pancreas. The cavity was confirmed by ultrasound-guided aspiration to be
an abscess. B: Transverse sonogram and corresponding schematic
sonogram of an abscess (arrows) in the right pancreatic lobe (P) of a
10-year-old   Labrador  crossed. The  peripheral  fat  is  hyperechoic
indicating steatitis.
3cm
Figure 9.12. Pancreatic abscess in two cats. A: Sonogram and
corresponding schematic image of a small hypoechoic cavity (arrow) in
the cranial part of the right pancreatic lobe (between the cursors). The
lesion deforms the contour of the pancreas and is outlined by focally
bright fat. B: Large cavity containing a mildly echogenic fluid (between
the cursors, +) severely deforming the right lobe of the pancreas (P
between the arrows). With gentle pressure, the echogenic fluid moved on
real-time examination.
509
1.25cn
Figure 9.13. Dilated common bile duct in a cat with pancreatitis.
op aq too a go soos (a) eao pue () ass
(between the cursors) in a cat with pancreatitis and pancreatic abscess (the
same cat as in Figure 9.12B). The CBD is greatly distended, reaching 1.4
cm in diameter proximally (A) and 1.2 cm distally (B). Notice that the
CBD and gallbladder (GB) walls are thickened.
Figure 9.14. Chronic pancreatitis in two dogs. A: Diffuse chronic active
necrotizing pancreatitis with fibrosis and regeneration in a 14-year-old
         
hypoechoic, with a few inhomogeneous areas. It is 1.5 cm thick. St,
stomach. B: Presumptive chronic pancreatitis in an 1l-year-old
510
(arrow). Some of these foci are associated with shadowing (arrowhead),
suggesting mineralization. The pancreas is hypoechoic, but the
surrounding fat is normal.
1.5Cr
Figure 9.15. Chronic pancreatitis in an 8-year-old Australian shepherd
The sagittal (A) and transverse (B) sonograms of the right pancreatic lobe
(between the cursors) show a pancreas that is within normal range for size
but very inhomogeneous. D, duodenum.
Figure 9.16.
sonographic image of the left pancreatic limb of a cat with diffuse
lymphoplasmocytic pancreatitis. The pancreas is irregular and mildly
hypoechoic. The central pancreatic duct appears normal. B: Chronic
pancreatitis with pancreatic atrophy and Islet cell fibrosis in another cat.
The pancreas (arrows) appears thickened (9.2 mm) and hyperechoic, but
the pancreatic duct (D) is dilated (4.2 mm), counting for nearly half of the
overall pancreatic lobe thickness.
511
O.94c
Figure 9.17. Dilated pancreatic duct (PD) in cats. A: Smoothly dilated,
2.5-mm-wide PD (between the cursors) in a 12-year-old cat with two
concurrent pancreatic cystic lesions and hepatic disease. B: Dilated
3-mm-wide PD in al6-year-oldcat with concurrent hepatitis and
 o a  pep st sd a sed pon
Dilated and thickened, 3.5-mm-wide PD in a 14-year-old cat with hepatitis
and fibrosing choledochitis. The pancreas appears normal. D: Dilated,
3.4-mm-wide PD (between the cursors) in an elderly cat with pancreatic
atrophy. The pancreatic tissue around the PD is barely visible (arrows).
Color Doppler can be useful in differentiating a PD from vessels. PV,
portal vein. E: Large calculus (between the cursors) in this dilated,
1-cm-wide PD. F: Dilated PD with small intraluminal calculi and
mineralized sediments.
512
口
Figure 9.18. Nodular hyperplasia in a cat and a dog. A: Longitudinal
sonographic image with color Doppler of the pancreas of a cat with
nodules (between the cursors) are identified in the left pancreatic limb
(arrowheads). The rest of the pancreas is mildly heterogeneous. B and C:
Transverse (B) and longitudinal (C) sonographic images of the right
pancreatic limb of a small-breed dog with diabetes mellitus. Several
well-defined, hypoechoic nodules of variable size and shape are seen
throughout the pancreatic tissue  (arrowheads), which is otherwise
  e  s  e o s  
Fine-needle aspiration of the pancreas revealed the presence of mild
chronic pancreatitis with nodular hyperplasia. Duod, duodenum; and RK,
right kidney. Images courtesy of M.A. d' Anjou.
513
0.30cm
Pancreatic endocrine tumors such as glucagonomas, insulinomas, and
gastrinomas are uncommon. From that group, insulinomas are the most
commonly encountered in dogs. The ultrasound detection rate varies
depending on the size and distribution of the lesions, the equipment
quality, and the operator's experience. The visibility of these lesions may
also be affected by the presence of overlying gastrointestinal content and
by body conformation (e-g-, deep-chested or obese dogs). Insulinomas can
present as a solitary nodule, multiple nodules, or an ill-defined area of
  n o i     
varies greatly, but a majority of the lesions tend to be less or equal to 2.5
cm and poorly echogenic (Lamb et al. 1995).
Most endocrine tumors are malignant and tend to spread to the regional
lymph nodes and liver. Therefore, sonographic screening of the hepatic
parenchyma and regional lymph nodes is recommended to detect possible
hepatic metastasis (Figure 9.22). Metastatic lymph nodes often are
enlarged and hypoechoic.
neoplasia cannot reliably be differentiated from pancreatitis (Figure 9.23)
or nodularhyperplasia.
514
Figure 9.19. Pancreatic carcinomas in cats and dogs. A: Longitudinal
sonographic image of the left pancreatic limb (arrowheads) in a cat. A
m         s o 
pancreatic adenocarcinoma. B: Another hypoechoic mass found in the
proximal portion of the left pancreatic limb of a cat. This mass is adjacent
to the portal vein (PV). The rest of the left limb (arrowheads) is normal.
Pancreatic adenocarcinoma was confirmed histologically. C: A larger
mass (white arrows, 3 cm) in another cat is consistent with a poorly
differentiated carcinoma. This mass is heterogeneous and has mineral foci
(black arrow) associated with acoustic shadowing- D: Transverse
sonographic view of a pancreatic mass (arrows) invading the wall of the
duodenum in a dog. A poorly differentiated carcinoma was diagnosed
d'Anjou.
NCREA
B
LEF
1.18m
Figure 9.20. Pancreatic lymphoma in two dogs. A: Numerous variably
sized hypoechoic nodules replace the normal echotexture of the pancreas
(arrowheads) in this 4-year-old mixed-breed dog. The duodenum (D) is
         
associated with diffuse hypoechogenicity in this 7-year-old Labrador
retriever.
515
Figure 9.21. Pancreatic insulinoma in dogs. Insulinoma can appear as a
single hypoechoic nodule or as several hypoechoic nodules (A and B) or
less commonly as a hypoechoic mass (C). The nodular lesions are
between the cursors (A) and the arrows (B). The pancreas is delineated by
the arrowheads in A. In B is color Doppler assessment of the pancreatic
region with several small hypoechoic nodules (arrows). The portal vein
(PV) is ventral to the body of the pancreas. St, stomach.
Figure 9.22. Metastatic insulinoma to the liver and lymph nodes. A:
Multiple target-shaped  nodules are present in several liver lobes.
Ultrasound-guided core biopsies confirmed the diagnosis of hepatic
516
metastases caused by insulinoma. B: A single large hypoechoic nodule is
in the hilus of the liver, near the gallbladder (GB), which is consistent
with metastatic lymphadenopathy.
GB
Figure 9.23. Pancreatic adenocarcinoma in a dog. Longitudinal (A) and
transverse (B) sonograms of the diffusely thickened and hypoechoic
  s     ( s
histopathologic  diagnosis  on  surgical  samples  is  adenocarcinoma.
Tumoral infiltration can also be associated with inflammation. D,
unuaponp
Figure 9.24.Drainage of cavitarylesionin9-year-oldAustralian
          
pancreas of this dog. The needle track is centered on the cavity. The cavity
was drained, and about 10 mL of bloody purulent fluid was withdrawn.
The final diagnosis was sterile abscess. C, colon. B: A recheck 1 week
later shows a smaller and poorly defined cavity (between the cursors) in
the same portion of the pancreas (P), and the dog's condition improved
clinically. The peripheral fat remained hyperechoic.
517
Figure 9.25. Recheck after lidocaine intraperitoneal injection in a
miniature schnauzer with pancreatitis. The injection was performed to
control persistent and severe pain. An extensively hypoechoic to anechoic
and striated area (arrows) near the pancreas (P) and duodenum (D) most
likely represents an iatrogenic hematoma.
SPECIAL PROCEDURES
Fine-needle aspiration or core biopsy of diffuse or focal pancreatic lesions
vessels.
518
Fluid-filled lesions, such as pseudocysts and abscesses, can also be
sampled and drained safely under ultrasound guidance (Figure 9.24).
Serial ultrasound examinations are useful in monitoring resolution or
 progression of fluid-filled lesions or response to treatment (Figure 9.25)
REFERENCES
Akol KG, Washabau RJ, Saunders HM, Hendrick MJ (l993) Acute
Edwards DF, Bauer MS, Walker MA, Pardo AD, McCracken MD, Walker
TL (1990) Pancreatic masses in seven dogs following acute pancreatitis. J
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:189-198.
Etue SM, Penninck DG, Labato MA, Pearson S, Tidwell A (200l)
Ultrasonography of the normal feline pancreas and associated anatomical
42:330-336.
Ferreri JA, Hardam E, Kimmel SA, et al. (2003) Clinical differentiation of
acute necrotizing from chronic nonsuppurative pancreatitis in cats: 63
cases (1996-2001). J Am Vet Med Assoc 223:469-474.
Hecht S, Penninck DG, Keating JH (2007) Imaging findings in pancreatic
neoplasia and nodular hyperplasia in 19 cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
48:45-50.
Hecht S, Penninck DG, Mahony OM, King R, Rand WM (2006)
Relationship of pancreatic duct dilation to age and clinical findings in cats.
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47:287-294.
Hines BL, Salisbury SK, Jakovljevic S, De Nicola DB (1996) Pancreatic
pseudocyst associated with chronic-active nec-rotizing pancreatitis in a
cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:147-152.
 -nay  sop un  d (l)  q
portal hypertension. J Vet Intern Med 13:498-500.
Lamb CR, Simpson KW, Boswood A, Matthewman LA (l995)
Ultrasonography of pancreatic neoplasia in the dog: A retrospective
review of 16 cases.Vet Rec 37:65-68.
519
Leveillé R, Biller DS, Shiroma JT (1996) Sonographic evaluation of the
common bile duct in cats. J Vet Intern Med 10:296-299
Moon ML, Panciera DL, Ward DL, Steiner JM, Williams DA (2005)
Age-related changes in the ultrasound appearance of the normal feline
pancreas. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 46:138-142.
Murtaugh RJ, Herring DS, Jacobs RM, DeHoff WD (1985) Pancreatic
ultrasonography in dogs with experimentally induced acute pancreatitis.
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 26:27-32.
Nyland TG, Gillette NA (l982) Sonographic evaluation of experimental
bile duct ligation in the dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 23:252-260.
Nyland TG, Mulvany MH, Strombeck DR (1983) Ultrasonic features of
experimentally induced, acute pancreatitis in the dog. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 24:260-266.
Rutgers C, Herring DS, Orton EC (1985) Pancreatic pseudocyst associated
with acute pancreatitis in a dog: Ultrasonographic diagnosis. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 21:411-416.
Salisbury SK, Lantz GC, Nelson RW, Kazacos EA (l988) Pancreatic
abscess in dogs: Six cases (1978-1986). J Am Vet Med Assoc
193:1104-1108.
Saunders HM (1991) Ultrasonography of the pancreas. Probl Vet Med
3:583-603.
Saunders HM, VanWinkle TJ, Drobatz K, Kimmel SE, Washabau RJ
and  histologic evidence of acute pancreatic  necrosis:  20  cases
(1994-2001) J Am Vet Med Ass0c 221:1724-1730.
VanEnkevort BA, O'Brien RT, Young KM (1999) Pancreatic pseudocysts
 ssuuy sionouedou pue sudeouosin seo z pue sop t u
Vet [ntern Med 13:309-313.
Wall M, Biller DS, Schoning P, Olsen D, Moore LE (2001) Pancreatitis in
a cat demonstrating pancreatic duct dilatation ultrasonographically. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 37:49-53
520
CHAPTER TEN
KIDNEYSAND URETERS
Marc-Andre d'Anjou
PREPARATION AND
SCANNING TECHNIQUE
clipped, and ultrasonic gel must be applied to its skin to optimize images
of the kidneys. Animals can be scanned in dorsal, left, or right
recumbency. The left kidney can usually be well visualized with a
ventrolateral approach, although the presence of gas or feces in the
descending colon can sometimes limit its evaluation. The right kidney is
typically more difficult to image, especially in deep-chested dogs, because
of its deep localization in the craniodorsal abdomen. The right
ventrolateral subcostal approach is usually sufficient. However, in certain
necessary. The visualization of the right kidney can also be affected by the
presence of intestinal content, especially in the descending duodenum,
ascending colon, or cecum.
q sl u   p un   uo s
conformation. In small dogs and cats, a high-frequency sonographic probe
(7.5 MHz and higher) is recommended, whereas kidneys of larger dogs
usually require a probe with more penetration (5 MHz and lower).
Sectorial or convex probes are considered more useful because they
521
enable the entire kidney to be imaged. Additionally, these probes tend to
have a smaller footprint, which can more easily be used intercostally.
Kidneys should be scanned from cranial to caudal and lateral to medial, in
several transverse and longitudinal planes, to fully assess all portions,
including the cortex, medulla, and collecting system (Figure 10. 1)
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC
ANATOMY OF NORMAL
KIDNEYS
In many dogs, the left kidney can be evaluated through the body of the
spleen, which provides a good acoustic window. The right kidney is more
cranial and dorsal, particularly in dogs, and usually is in contact or close
  a go al an  d  a m a
 sop pe so un adus pu azis u s ae su o
 uo soa pe 'sand e uo panse aq uo sau iso
estimated. In normal cats, renal length has been reported to vary between
3.0 and 4.3 cm (Walter et al. 1987a). In dogs, absolute measurements must
take into account total body weight and conformation, because great
variations exist (Barr et al. 1990). A new method using a ratio between the
renal length and the aorta diameter was recently proposed (Mareschal et
al. 2007). This ratio is obtained by dividing the maximal renal length by
the luminal diameter of the aorta. The aorta must be measured at the level
of the kidneys when it is maximally distended during the cardiac cycle.
The renal size should be considered reduced if the K/Ao ratio is less than
5.5 and increased when greater than 9.1.
Renal cortex, medulla, and the collecting system can be visualized with
ultrasonography in dogs and cats (Konde et al. 1984; Walter et al. 1988)
(Figures 10.1 and 10.2). The renal medulla is hypoechoic when compared
with the cortex, which is usually hypoechoic or isoechoic to the liver and
cats with normal renal function, renal cortices can be hyper-echoic to the
522
liver (Figure 10.3). In cats, the accumulation of fatty vacuoles in the renal
Anderson 1989). The medulla appears separated into several lobulated
segments by the presence of linear echogenicities representing borders of
the interlobar vessels and diverticuli. The medulla is nearly anechoic in
certain animals and should not be confused with dilatation of the renal
pelvis. The renal crest is the prolongation of the renal medulla, which is in
contact with the pelvis. The walls of the arcuate arteries can be observed
as paired, short, hyperechoic lines at the corticomedullary junction, which
can sometimes generate an acoustic shadow and must be differentiated
from mineralization (Figure 10.4). These vessels, as well as the larger
power Doppler (Figure 10.5). The renal arteries and veins, usually single
on each side, can be followed from the hilus to the aorta and caudal vena
cava, respectively. These vessels must be differentiated from dilated
ureters.
Figure 10.1. Sonographic approach and normal anatomy in the dog. In
dorsal recumbency, a ventrolateral approach to the left kidney is used. The
probe is moved through the kidney sequentially in transverse and
longitudinal planes. AO, aorta; CVC, caudal vena cava; LK, left kidney;
and RK, right kidney. A: Transverse (T) sonogram performed on the
cranial pole of the left kidney. B: The probe is placed at the hilus region:
Transverse (T) and longitudinal (L) sonograms with corresponding
schematic and labeled images. AV, arcuate vessels; C, renal cortex; M,
renal medulla; P, pelvis; RC, renal crest; RD + IV, renal diverticuli and
interlobar vessels; Sp, spleen; SV, splenic vein; and U, ureter.
523
Figure 10.2. Normal feline kidney. Longitudinal (A) and transverse (B)
images of the right kidney (arrowheads) in a normal cat.
The renal pelvis can sometimes be visualized in normal dogs and cats,
e    s so i sn  i
diuretics (Pugh et al. 1994). The visualization of the renal pelvis is
facilitated by the use of newer high-resolution systems. The pelvic height
should measure less than 2 mm (Figure 10.6). The renal diverticuli and
ureter, unless distended, are not normally seen in dogs and cats. The pelvis
r se  g  m 'ss   s s
and is particularly prominent in obese cats.
Figure 10.3. Hyperechoic kidney in a normal cat. Longitudinal image of
the left kidney of a cat with normal renal function. The renal cortex
524
appeared hyperechoic to the liver (not shown). This kidney is otherwise
normal in shape, size, and contour.
Crari
Figure 10.4. Hyperechoic kidney in a clinically normal dog. Longitudinal
image of the left kidney. The renal cortex (arrowheads) is isoechoic to the
adjacent spleen (Sp). A thin, hyperechoic band is also noted in the
 medulla, consistent with an incidental rim sign (RS). Acoustic shadowing
is also observed dorsally (short arrows) because of attenuation and
refraction of the ultrasound waves by normal structures such as walls of
vessels and collecting system, and sinus fat. This shadowing must not be
misinterpreted as a sign of nephrolithiasis.
Cranial
Sp
Cortex.
6.71cm
525
Figure 10.s. Renal vasculature with color Doppler in a normal dog
Longitudinal (A) and transverse (B) images of the left kidney. The
vascular flow can be observed with color Doppler through the renal,
interlobar, and arcuate vessels. AA, arcuate artery; IA, interlobar artery;
and RV, renal vein.
Figure 10.6. Physiological pyelectasia in a cat. On this transverse image
obtained in the central portion of the left kidney, minimal distension of the
renal pelvis appears as an anechoic, crescent-shaped region just medial to
the renal crest (C). This pelvis is surrounded at the hilus by hyperechoic
fat contained in the sinus (S). The ureter is not visible. This cat was
receiving intravenous fluids.
526
eft lateral
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC
FEATURES OF RENAL
DISORDERS
Congenital Renal and Ureteral
Malformations
With the exception of polycystic kidney disease and ectopic ureters,
ue sop u aeu ae nen Aun addn an go suo qeuuon
cats. Renal agenesis (complete absence) or hypoplasia is often associated
527
with compensatory enlargement of the unique kidney (Figure 10.7). Renal
Hecht et al. 2005). Renal dysplasia is defined as disorganized
development of renal parenchyma because of anomalous differentiation.
The kidneys are typically small, irregular, and hyperechoic, with reduced
corticomedullary
ydistinction, similarly to kidneys  withchronic
inflammatory disease (Abraham 2003) (Figure 10.8). These young dogs
may be predisposed to ascending pyelonephritis, which contributes to the
morphological modifications observed on ultrasound (Abraham 2003)
Although renal developmental anomalies can be confirmed only with
histological analysis, renal dysplasia should be suspected in a young dog
with deformed kidneys and clinical renal insufficiency.
Figure 10.7. Compensatory hypertrophy. Longitudinal image of the left
kidney of a cat with right renal agenesis but normal renal function. This
unique kidney is enlarged but normal in shape and contour. Some acoustic
shadowing is (arrowheads) caused by excessive attenuation of the
ultrasound beam by the region of the sinus.
Cranial
5.55cm
Figure 10.8. Renal dysplasia in a dog. Longitudinal image of the left
kidney of a mixed-breed dog with unilateral renal dysplasia. This kidney
528
is small and hyperechoic to the spleen. Edge shadowing is also observed
(*)
Cranial
Spleen
2.55cm
Diffuse Parenchymal Renal Diseases
and cats with renal insufficiency. Several renal diseases can be associated
with increased cortical and/or medullary echogenicity in the acute or
chronic phases of the process. Interstitial and glomerular nephritis, acute
and lily in cats), end-stage renal disease, and nephrocalcinosis can all
cause renal hyperechogenicity (Walter et al. 1987; Barr et al. 1989;
Adams et al. 1991; Forrest et al. 1998; Eubig et al. 2005). [n some of these
disease processes, the cortical echogenicity can be more specifically
increased, enhancing the corticomedullary distinction. This can be
dramatic in cases of acute tubular necrosis and calcium oxalate deposition
caused by ethylene glycol toxicity (Figure 10.9). In other cases, both
medulla  and cortex can become
hyperechoic, causing reduced
corticomedullary border distinction (Figure 10.10). This is particularly
evident in dogs and cats with chronic renal disease (Figures 10.11-10.14).
529
Figure 10.9. Ethylene glycol toxicity in a dog. On this longitudinal image
of the right kidney, the cortex is markedly hyperechoic in comparison with
the adjacent hepatic caudate lobe because of oxalate crystal deposition and
tubular necrosis. The renal medulla is not affected, and the
corticomedullary distinction is enhanced.
Cranial
Liver
Figure 10.10. Acute interstitial nephritis caused by leptospirosis
 Longitudinal image of the right cranial abdomen of a dog with acute renal
insufficiency. The right kidney (RK) is enlarged and diffusely
hyperechoic.  This hyperechogenicity contrasts with  the concurrent
hypoechogenicity involving the adjacent liver, which was presumably
caused by hepatitis. The renal corticomedullary distinction is significantly
reduced.
530
Cranial
RK
Liver
Figure 10.11. Chronic renal disease. A: Chronic interstitial nephritis
and sclerosis in a dachshund. On this longitudinal image of the left
kidney, both the cortex and medulla appear hyperechoic, heterogeneous,
and poorly demarcated. The kidney is small and irregular in contour, and
fibrosis and/or dystrophic mineralization observed on histopathology. B:
Nephrosclerosis. Longitudinal image of the left kidney of a 5-year-old
shar-pei with chronic renal insufficiency and proteinuria. The cortex is
markedly hyperechoic, granular in echotexture, and appears thinned when
On
ultrasound-guided biopsies. Sp, spleen.
531
Cranial
4.35cm
Cranial
4.97cm
B
532
Figure   10.12.   Chronic   interstitial   nephritis   with   nephrolithiasis.
Longitudinal image of the left kidney in a small-breed dog. Both the
cortex and medulla appear hyperechoic and poorly demarcated. This
kidney is also small and irregularly shaped (arrowheads), and a
hyperechoic focus (arrow) associated with acoustic shadowing (*) is
 present in its cranial pole. This mineral focus was confirmed to represent a
nephrolith.
Cranial
Figure 10.13. Chronic interstitial nephritis with dystrophic mineralization.
Longitudinal image of the left kidney in a cat with chronic renal
insufficiency. This kidney is small and hyperechoic. The corticomedullary
distinction is reduced, and several linear and irregular hyperechoic foci
noted in the region of the pelvis and diverticuli (short arrows) are
associated with acoustic shadowing (arrowheads). These foci indicated
dystrophic mineralization. Edge shadowing is also observed (long arrows)
533
Cranial
-1.62cm
Additionally, in several cases of parenchymal renal disease, a
circumferential hyperechoic band can be found in the medulla, parallel to
the corticomedullary border, consistent with mineralization, necrosis,
congestion, and/or hemorrhage. This finding, known as the medullary rim
sign, has been observed in several disease processes, such as acute tubular
necrosis (ethylene glycol toxicity), nephrocalcinosis, leptospirosis, and
pyogranulomatous vasculitis caused by feline infectious peritonitis, as
well as in normal cats and dogs (Barr et al. 1989; Biller et al. 1992;
Forrest et al. 1998; Mantis and Lamb 2000) (Figures 10.15-10.17). This
hyperechoic band has been attributed to an insult to the renal tubules in
the deepest portion of the medulla, which is most metabolically active and
therefore more susceptible to ischemia (Biller et al. 1992). Because of
their relatively high prevalence in dogs and cats, renal hyperechogenicity
and medullary rim signs should not be considered as accurate indicators of
renal disease; however, the possibility remains that these findings could
represent sentinel signs of early renal disease or past renal insult (Mantis
and Lamb2000)
Figure 10.14. Nephrocalcinosis. Longitudinal image of the left kidney in
534
involving the region of the corticomedul-lary junction, secondary to renal
tubularcalcification.
Cranial
2.66cm
Although it can be difficult to distinguish clinically normal kidneys from
acute and chronic renal disease processes, several other ultrasonographic
parameters can be helpful, such as size, shape, contour, and internal
architecture. Kidneys affected with chronic interstitial nephritis tend to
become small, irregular, and more diffusely hyperechoic (Walter et al.
1987) (Figures 10.11-10.13). The remodeling process affecting these
kidneys, which involves fibrosis, causes architectural distortions. Linear
or patchy dystrophic mineralization can also be observed in these kidneys,
especially in the region of the collecting system, where the mineralization
shadowing (Figure 10.13). These mineral foci are usually difficult to
differentiate from true nephroliths, which can also accompany chronic
renal diseases. Kidneys affected with acute processes, such as infectious
pyelonephritis, interstitial nephritis (e.g-, caused by leptospirosis), or acute
535
tubular necrosis (e-g-, caused by ethylene glycol), can become enlarged
and hyperechoic, with a contour that usually remains smooth (Figures 10.9
and 10.10). Perinephric effusion can also be observed in these patients and
was described particularly with leptospi-rosis (Forrest et al. 1998).
schematic images of the left kidney of a dog with normal renal function. A
thin hyperechoic band is noted in the deep portion of the medulla, parallel
   o s ( s  s    
specific sign of renal disease. Additionally, the renal cortex is mildly
hyperechoic and irregular, which can also be observed in dogs with
normal renal function. Acoustic shadowing, probably related to normal
structures, is also present deep to the renal pelvis (arrowhead).
Figure 10.16. Pyogranulomatous vasculitis. Longitudinal (A) and
infectious peritonitis. A prominent hyperechoic band is in the medulla
(arrow), parallel to the cortical margin, consistent with a medullary rim
sign. Pronounced peritoneal effusion (PE) is also present.
Rightlatee
536
Figure 10.17. Acute leptospirosis. Longitudinal (A) and transverse (B)
image of the left kidney (arrowheads) in a small-breed dog diagnosed with
leptospirosis. The kidney is smoothly enlarged and hyperechoic, and the
corticomedullary distinction is reduced. The renal pelvis (long arrow) is
also dilated. Additionally, a medullary rim sign is present (short arrow)
Ao, aorta.
B
4.94ci
Protein-losing glomerular diseases, such as glomerulonephritis and renal
amyloidosis, cannot be distinguished from other types of diffuse renal
disorders. Affected kidneys are commonly hyperechoic and can vary in
size according to the chronicity of the disease (Figure 10.18).
Renal parenchymal mineralization (nephrocalcinosis) in dogs and cats
with or without hypercalcemia can cause renal diffuse cortical and/or
medullary hyperechogenicity, a medullary rim sign, and/or dispersed
hyperechoic foci (Figures 10.14 and 10.19).
Neoplastic processes typically cause focal or multi-focal renal changes,
with the exception of lymphoma in cats. With lymphoma in cats, the
kidneys typically become enlarged, irregular, and hyperechoic (Figure
10.20). Other findings can include a hypoechoic halo at the periphery of
the cortex, hyperechoic foci or striations throughout the medulla,
pyelectasia, and hypoechoic medullary or cortical nodules or masses
(Figures 10.20 and 10.21). Other tumors, such as squamous cell
carcinoma, may diffusely infiltrate the kidney and markedly distort the
renal architecture (Figures 10.21 and 10.22).
Figure 10.18. Glomerulonephritis. Longitudinal image of the left kidney
(arrowheads)  of  a  German  shepherd   diagnosed   with  bilateral
glomerulonephritis.  The  kidney  appears  smoothly  enlarged  and
537
hyperechoic, particularly at the level of the cortex, which also appears
subjectively thickened.
Focal Parenchymal Renal Disorders
Focal significant or nonsignificant renal lesions are common in dogs and
cats. Renal cysts, nephroliths or dystrophic mineralization, and cortical
infarcts are more common
1  than  primary or  metastatic   neoplasia.
 granulomas, and abscesses.
Renal Cavitary Lesions
Benign renal cysts typically appear as round to oval, anechoic structures
with a thin, well demarcated, hyperechoic rim and may show distal
acoustic enhancement (Reichle et al. 2002) (Figure 10.23). Cysts can be
solitary or multifocal and vary in size. In some patients, internal echoes
can be observed in association with hemorrhage or necrotic debris.
538
Inherited polycystic kidney disease, which affects long-haired cats and
          
with chronic interstitial nephritis, and may cause significant renal
distortion (Figures 10.24 and 10.25). Most of these cysts are in the cortex
Or at the corticomedullary junction (Reichle et al. 2002). Renal cysts can
also be secondary to chronic renal diseases in dogs and cats (Figure
10.26).
Figure 10.19. Nephrocalcinosis in a dog with hypercalcemia. On this
longitudinal image, small hyperechoic foci (arrows) are seen throughout
the left kidney, particularly involving the cortex, consistent with extensive
renalcalcification.
Figure 10.20. Renal lymphoma in a cat. On these longitudinal images, the
left kidney is enlarged, reaching more than 6 cm in length, and moderately
hyperechoic. The lobulated sections of the medulla appear prominent, and
short arrows). Mild dilatation of the renal diverticuli is also apparent (long
Rena
539
Figure 10.21. Renal lymphoma in a cat. Longitudinal ultrasonographic
   g     i  a 
and markedly heterogeneous. Several ill-defined hypoechoic nodules and
masses (*) are in the parenchyma, distorting its architecture. This pattern
is another manifestation of lymphoma in cats and sometimes in dogs.
Figure 10.22. Diffuse squamous cell carcinoma in a cat. A: Longitudinal
sonogram of the right kidney that is enlarged (5.3 cm), irregularly shaped.
and diffusely increased in echogenicity. The kidney is surrounded by fluid
(F). B: Panoramic view of the same kidney showing the subcapsulal
echogenic fluid distention (arrows). L, liver. Images courtesy of D.
Penninck.
Figure 10.23. Renal cyst. Longitudinal image of the right kidney in a dog
with an incidental cortical cyst, which appears as a l.8 cm, round,
well-defined, anechoic structure, associated with distal acoustic
enhancement (*). The renal cortex (delineated by arrowheads) is
hyperechoic to the adjacent liver, although there was no clinical evidence
Ofrenalfailure.
540
Cranial
Liver
1.82cm
Figure 10.24. Polycystic renal disease. Longitudinal image of the left
kidney of a Himalayan cat with bilateral polycystic renal disease. Several
well-defined, round, anechoic structures are found throughout the renal
       
enhancement (arrows), consistent with cavitary lesions containing a
hypoattenuating fluid.
541
Cranial
Solitary cysts, which can sometimes become relatively large, must be
differentiated from solitary solid or cavitary masses, abscesses, and
hematomas. Solid masses or nodules are typically associated with static
A a  p s a a   o  soe 
not associated with distal acoustic enhancement. Large solid masses can
also appear cavi-tated because of necrosis. Renal cystadenocarcinomas
have been reported in German shepherds and are usually associated with
dermatofibrosis (Moe and Lium 1997). With ultrasonography, a
fluid-filled cavity (or cavities) typically predominates, infiltrating the
kidney, with a solid-tissue component that can protrude inside the cyst(s)
(Figure 10.27).
Figure 10.25. Polycystic renal disease. Longitudinal image of the left
kidney in a Persian cat with bilateral polycystic renal disease. Several
round hypoechoic to anechoic structures, delineated by a thin.
well-defined, hyperechoic rim, are found throughout the renal parenchyma
(delineated by the arrowheads). The mild echogenicity noted in some of
these cysts (*) may be the result of partial volume averaging (the
combination of tissue and cystic fluid in the same imaged slice) or the
presence of intracystic hemorrhage or debris. This polycystic disease
542
fibrosis.
Cranial
6.02cm
Figure 10.26.
Chronicrenaldegenerationandcyst formation
Longitudinal image of the left kidney of an adult Labrador retriever with
chronic renal insufficiency. The kidney (arrowheads) is hyperechoic, and
the corticomedullary distinction is reduced. Two well-defined, circular.
anechoic foci (white arrows) are noted in the region of the
corticomedullary junction, consistent with degenerative cysts. The cysts
are presumed to be secondary to the presence of the chronic renal disease.
[ncomplete acoustic shadowing is also apparent dorsally (black arrows)
because of higher ultrasound beam attenuation by the structures in the
peripelvic region and sinus and/or possibly because of early dystrophic
mineralization.
543
Cranial
-6.64cm
X0.24cm
Renal abscesses can usually be differentiated from true cysts by the
presence of echoes and sedimentation within the cavitary lesion and
especially by a rather poorly demarcated and irregular contour (Figure
          (
remains relatively small.
Renal Solid-Mass Lesions
Solid-tissue proliferative diseases can appear as homogeneous or
heterogeneous, hypoechoic, isoechoic or hyperechoic, regular or irregular
lesions, with variably well-defined margins (Figure 10.29). This variable
ultrasonographic appearance is reflected by the cell type, as well as by the
variable presence and distribution of vessels, tissue necrosis, fibrosis,
lesions can alter the renal internal architecture (Figure 10.30). Because
their variable characteristics, renal primary or metastatic neoplastic
processes cannot be easily distinguished with ultrasonography. However,
ymphoma and malignant histiocytosis (his-tiocytic sarcoma) tend to
appear as hypoechoic nodules or masses (Figure 10.31).
544
Figure 10.27. Cystadenocarcinoma. Longitudinal ultrasonographic and
schematic images of the right kidney of a German shepherd with a
palpable renal mass. A large anechoic cystic (C) cavitary lesion involves
the caudal renal pole, in association with far acoustic enhancement. An
irregular hyperechoic mass (short arrows) is noted at the cranial margin of
lines are at the inner ventral margin of the cystic component of the renal
mass (long arrow at the top), consistent with acoustic reverberation.
Other types of solitary neoplastic masses include adenocarcinomas,
hemangiomas, nephroblastomas, and several types of sarcomas, including
hemangiosarcoma, as well as metastases (Gasser et al. 2003) (Figures
10.30, 10.32, and 10.33). These neoplastic processes can be well defined
completely replace normal parenchymal architecture. The absence of an
identifiable kidney in the region lateral to the origin of the renal vessels
        is    
mass. Other imaging tests (excretory urography, computed tomography, or
magnetic resonance) can be required to confirm the origin of the mass.
Other less common solid processes, such as granulomas (fungal diseases),
pyogranulomas (feline infectious peritonitis), or solid abscesses can
appear similar to neoplastic processes (Figure 10.34). Hence, fine-needle
aspiration or biopsy is required in most cases to achieve a precise
diagnosis.
Figure 10.28. Renal abscesses. A: Septic embolus and abscess
formation. Longitudinal image of the left kidney in a golden retriever
545
diagnosed with bacterial septicemia. An ill-defined hyperechoic rimlike
focus (arrows), with a hypoechoic center, is at the level of the renal cortex.
A septic exudate was aspirated with ultrasound guidance. B: Renal
echogenic cavity (arrows) with a few bright echoes (mixture of debris and
gas) involves the caudal pole of the left kidney (K). The retroperitoneal fat
is hyperechoic, and a small amount of fluid is noted in the near field,
adjacent to the abscess, which was confirmed at surgery. S, spleen. Image
B courtesy of D. Penninck.
Figure 10.29. Solitary nodule. Longitudinal (left) and transverse (right)
images of the left kidney in a Lhasa apso with multicentric lymphoma. A
hypoechoic nodule (arrows) is in the renal cortex, adjacent to the renal
sinus (S) and crest (C).
4.58cm
Other Focal Lesions
 n so   s     e 
because of soft-tissue mineralization or urolithiasis (Figure 10.35). Renal
546
infarcts can also be identified as linear or wedged-shaped, well-defined
lesions in the cortex, perpendicular to the capsule. Although their
appearance can vary, chronic infarcts are typically hyperechoic and cause
focal cortical depression (Figures 10.36 and 10.37). These chronic infarcts
may also be hyperattenuating, generating an acoustic shadow. Benign
be more heterogeneous in appearance. Although extremely rare, gas foci
infection.
Figure 10.30. Nephroblastoma in a boxer. A large mass (arrowheads)
measuring about 9 cm long entirely distorts the renal architecture. Image
courtesy of D. Penninck.
Figure 10.31. Renal and splenic nodules. Transverse image of the left
kidney (LK) in a medium-sized dog. A hypoechoic nodule (arrows)
involves the renal cortex, deforming its contour. This nodule was not
associated with far acoustic enhancement. Similar nodules of variable size
were also detected in the liver and spleen (other arrows). Tumors of
round-cell origin should be considered when these lesions are found
Disseminated histiocytic sarcoma (malignant histiocytosis) was identified.
547
Left lateral
Spleen
Disorders of the Collecting System
The renal pelvis and diverticuli are usually not distended in normal dogs
and cats. Dilatation of the pelvis, also termed pyelectasia, is usually more
apparent on transverse planes at the level of the renal hilus. It appears as
an anechoic crescent at the medial margin of the renal crest (the deep
portion of the medulla) (Figure 10.6). Mild dilatation of the pelvic
diverticuli can sometimes be difficult to differentiate from adjacent
interlobar without the use of color or power Doppler (Figure 10.38)
Figure 10.32. Primary and metastatic renal neoplasia. A: Renal
adenocarcinoma. Longitudinal image of the left kidney (arrowheads) of a
6-year-old dog with chronic weight loss and anorexia. A relatively
was confirmed to be a renal primary adenocarcinoma. Image courtesy of
S. Hecht. B: Metastatic carcinoma. Longitudinal image of the left kidney
of a cat in which a pulmonary mass was identified on radiographs. Tumor
staging revealed a paracortical hypoechoic nodule at the caudal renal pole
548
Ametastatic focus of bronchoalveolar carcinoma was suspectedon
cytologicalexamination.
Cranial
Cranlal
1.64cm
1.15cm
549
Pyelectasia can be observed in animals with increased diuresis (e.g-,
diuretic therapy or chronic renal insufficiency) and in animals with a
congenital malformation (e.g., ureteral ectopia), pyelonephritis, or lower
urinary obstruction (Felkei et al. 1995). The ureter can also be seen in
these patients and be most easily identified on transverse planes at the
level of the hilus, central to the renal vessels (Figure 10.39). Table 10.1
lists causes of pyelectasia and hydronephrosis in dogs and cats.
Figure 10.33. Renal hemangiosarcoma and retroperitoneal hemorrhage.
Longitudinal (A) and transverse (B) ultrasonographic and schematic
images of the left kidney in a large dog with suspected intra-abdominal
hemorrhage. A large, ill-defined and heterogeneous mass encircles the
   )  l    
component of this mass appears lamellate, consistent with hemorrhage. A
smaller portion of this retroperitoneal mass appears more solid, uniform
         
consistent with a primary renal hemangiosarcoma.
Figure 10.34. Renal pyogranuloma. Longitudinal image of the left kidney
of a cat with clinically suspected infectious peritonitis. The renal
550
architecture and contour (arrowheads) are markedly deformed, and the
renal parenchyma is heterogeneous. A O.6-cm hyperechoic nodule
(cursors) is in the medulla, adjacent to the renal pelvis (P)
Pyogranulomatous nephritis was diagnosed by fine-needle aspiration.
Cranlal
0.58cm
0.56cm
Figure 10.35. Renal mineralization. Longitudinal image of the left kidney
of a clinically normal dog. Several foci of mineralization (arrows) are in
the region of the collecting system, the largest being associated with
acoustic shadowing (arrowheads). These mineral foci may represent
nephroliths and/or dystrophic mineralization.
551
Cranial
Figure 10.36. Cortical infarcts  and pelvic nephrolith.  Longitudinal
ultrasonographic and schematic images of the right kidney of a cat with
chronic urolithiasis  but  normal  renal  function.  Triangular  shaped
hyperechoic foci are noted in the cranial and caudal renal poles, consistent
with incidental infarcts (arrows). A large nephrolith in the region of the
pelvis is not associated with outflow obstruction.
3.54
Figure 10.37. Chronic renal infarcts. A: Chronic infarct (arrow) on the
caudal pole of the left kidney in a dog with normal renal function. Image
courtesy of D. Penninck. B: Close-up longitudinal image of the left kidney
(arrowheads) in a cat with normal renal function. At the periphery of the
552
with focal cortical depression, consistent with chronic renal infarction.
Acoustic shadowing was observed deep to the largest infarct (*), likely
because of the presence of hyperattenuating fibrosis and possibly
mineralization.
Figure 10.38. Dilated diverticuli in a cat with chronic pyelonephritis.
Sagittal ultrasonographic and schematic images of the left kidney. The
renal pelvis is distended, as well as the diverticuli, which appear distinct
from the interlobar vessels on power Doppler. The medulla (M) is
hyperechoic to the cortex (C) because of nephrocalcinosis.
Diverticuli
Interloba
vesse!
because of urinary flow obstruction, renal diverticuli appear as rounded
anechoic fingerlike projections that connect with the renal pelvis (Figures
10.40-10.42).
Markedly
dilateddiverticuli and
1pelvis
must
be
differentiated from renal cysts or sections of the medulla. The presence of
protein or cells (pus or hemorrhage) may increase the urine echogenicity
and even be associated with sedimentation, such as sometimes seen in
cases of pyelonephritis (Figures 10.40 and 10.43).
553
With chronic pyelonephritis, in addition to parenchymal changes, the
pelvis and diverticuli can become distorted and show a hyperechoic rim
because of fibrous tissue remodeling (Figure 10.44). However, it must be
pointed out that the renal pelvis may remain normal in mild or early
pyelonephritis (Neuwirth et al. 1993).
As opposed to pyelectasia, hydronephrosis is considered to be consecutive
to an obstructive disease (Pugh et al. 1994), such as that caused by the
migration of a nephrolith or caused by an infiltrating process involving the
pelvis, the ureter, or more commonly the ureterovesicular junction. In
cases of chronic obstruction, progressive distension of the renal pelvis and
Ureteral distension, also termed hydroureter, is usually observed in
Distended ureters, which can become markedly enlarged and tortuous with
long-standing obstructions, can usually be followed caudally to the level
of the obstruction. Color or Power Doppler can be useful in differentiating
an abdominal vessel from a distended ureter (Figure 10.48). Migrated
uroliths appear as hyperechoic structures that are usually associated with
acoustic shadowing (Figure 10.49). With complete obstruction, the ureter
appears dilated cranially and abruptly blunted caudally at the level of the
urolith. Several migrating uroliths may be present, justifying a detailed
examination of the entire region of each ureter, up to the level of the
bladder. The identification of small uroliths can be limited by the presence
of overlying gastrointestinal structures, such as the descending colon, or
by the lack of significant ureteral distension (Kyles et al. 2005) (Figure
10.50). When combining radiography and ultrasonography, the sensitivity
to detect urolithiasis in cats has been reported to reach 90% (Kyles et al.
2005).
ultrasonographic and schematic images of the left kidney of a dog with
urethral obstruction. The proximal ureter, pelvis, and diverticuli appear
mildly distended because of outflow obstruction. The proximal ureter is
better identified on the transverse image.
554
7.07e
7.07
B
Table 10.1. Differential diagnosis for pyelectasia and hydronephrosis in
small animals
Pyelectasia
Hydronephrosis
Intravenousfluid
Lower urinary-tract obstruction
therapy
Pelvic or ureteral obstruction: a stone, an infiltrative
Diuretic therapy
mass at the bladder trigone, a stricture, or a
Increased diuresis
retroperitoneal mass
caused by renal
Congenital malformation
insufficiency
Distended bladder
Pyelonephritis or
ureteritis
Ectopic ureter or
another congenital
malformation
Figure 10.40. Moderate hydronephrosis. Longitudinal (A) and transverse
(B) ultrasonographic images of the right kidney of a small-breed dog with
acute renal failure and abdominal pain. The kidney (arrowheads) is
enlarged and hyperechoic, and the corticomedullary distinction is
555
attenuated. The renal pelvis (*) and diverticuli (short arrows) are
moderately dilated. The proximal ureter is also mildly dilated and contains
highly echogenic urine (long arrow), consistent with pus. These signs
were caused by ascending urinary infection. Note the sharp, oblique line
of cellular sediment in the pelvis on the transverse view, which was
parallel to the exam table.
Figure 10.41. Obstructive hydronephrosis. Longitudinal image of the
   o g  e  (s)  
ureterolith. The distended pelvic diverticuli (*) are rounded and partially
The distended proximal ureter (U) is also apparent, communicating with
thepelvis(P)
Cranlal
556
Figure 10.42. Chronic pyelonephritis and nephroliths. Longitudinal image
of the left kidney of a cat with renal failure and abdominal pain. The
kidney (outlined by arrowheads) is hyperechoic and irregular, and its
pelvis and diverticuli (*) are distended and deformed, appearing as
and
hyperattenuating foci (arrow) are in the center of the pelvis, consistent
with small nephroliths. The corticomedullary junction is indistinct. These
signs  were caused  by  chronic pyelonephritis in association  with
urolithiasis.
Cranlal
Figure 10.43. Pyonephrosis and ureteral abscess. Longitudinal (A) and
transverse (B) images of the right kidney of a dog with fever and
abdominal pain. The renal pelvis (P) and diverticuli are asymmetrically
dilated in the cranial pole of the kidney (arrows). The proximal portion of
the ureter (U) is also distended. These portions of the collecting system
contain   echogenic
o sueu q snd se psoui leu 
ultrasound-guided pyelocentesis.
557
5.32cm
left kidney in a large-breed dog with chronic renal insufficiency and
recurrent cystitis. The kidney is markedly irregular (arrowheads) and
   e   e  
pelvis (P) is moderately distended and irregular, and its contour is
hyperechoic.
Cranial
Figure 10.45. Severe hydronephrosis. Longitudinal image of the left
kidney in a dog with severe renomegaly diagnosed on radiographs. The
kidney appears as a fluid-filled cavity with peripheral hyperechoic bands
558
       
hyperechoic mass at the level of the renal hilus is invading the renal pelvis
and ureter and causing the hydronephrosis. Surgical resection confirmed
the presence of a soft-tissue sarcoma.
Pelvis
Mas
Figure 10.46. Hemangiosarcoma in a dachshund. The mass (arrows) is
centered on the pelvis and is responsible for the severe hydronephrosis
affecting the right kidney. The renal diverticuli are markedly dilated (*)
and contain echogenic fluid, particularly in the dependent portion,
consistent with hemorrhage. Image courtesy of D. Penninck.
559
Cranial
Figure 10.47. Severe hydronephrosis. Longitudinal image of the left
kidney in a cat with severe renomegaly. The kidney is completely replaced
by hypoechoic fluid, with a rim of parenchyma remaining that is only a
few millimeters thick (arrows). Hydroureter is also identified (U).
   s    o  
Ovariohys-terectomy, was identified during exploratory surgery.
560
Figure 10.48. Hydroureter. Longitudinal image obtained with Power
Doppler in the left midabdomen of a young female dog with urinary
      o  
coursing from the renal pelvis to the caudal abdomen, consistent with a
dilated ureter. No flow is present. This ureter terminated in the vagina
rather than in the urinary bladder, indicating ectopia.
561
Cranial
0.49cm
Figure 10.49. Hydroureter. Longitudinal image obtained along the
midportion of the right ureter (u) in a dog with hydronephrosis. An ovoid
0.8-cm-wide hyperechoic structure (arrow) found in the lumen of the
ureter is associated with a strong acoustic shadow (arrowheads), with
proximal luminal dilatation, indicating an obstructive urolith. U, ureter.
Cranial
0.82cm
0.81cm
562
Although neoplastic processes infiltrating the bladder trigone and/or ureter
are more commonly responsible for ureteral obstruction (Figures 10.51
soft-tissue sarcomas, abscesses, or granulomas, can also compress and/or
infiltrate the ureter. Ureteral obstruction can also be caused by a blood
clot, an inflammatory stricture, or a small infiltrative mass, which can be
more challenging to diagnose and differentiate. Other imaging tests, such
as excretory urog-raphy, which can be combined with computed
bemade by using ultrasonography.
Figure 10.50. Nonobstructive uroliths in two cats. A: Transverse image
obtained at the level of the right renal hilus of a cat with abdominal pain.
Two small hyperechoic foci in the center of the ureter (long arrows) are
associated   with   peripheral   fat hyperechogenicity   (short arrows),
suggesting ureteritis. There is no evidence of ureteral outflow obstruction.
On the follow-up exam,these small uroliths were found in the urinary
bladder. M, medulla; and S, sinus. B: Longitudinal (left) and transverse
(right) images of the distal right ureter of a cat with a chronic history of
urolithiasis. Several hyperechoic foci (arrows) are found in the ureter
(arrowheads) of   this cat without evidence of  hydroureter or
hydronephrosis. Acoustic shadows are noted in the far field. Some of
these calculi were eventually found in the bladder. The ureteral wall is
mildly thickened due to edema and/or inflammation. El, external iliac
vessel.
563
Unilateral or bilateral congenital ectopic ureters, which are more common
i o e n   s  o  
termination site (the urethra, most commonly, or the vagina or the colon)
(Figure 10.53). These ureters are often distended because of partial
obstruction at the site of termination or intramural tunneling, ileus, and/or
ascending infection. Hydronephrosis can also be present, especially when
there is marked hydroureter. With B-mode or with color or power Doppler
ultrasonography, an intravesical urine jet can sometimes be observed
adjacent to the ureterovesical junction (Lamb and Gregory 1998). The
visualization of this ureteral jet can be facilitated by administering a
diuretic after withholding water for several hours. A jet of diluted urine
can be more easily observed within a bladder filled with more
concentrated urine. However, the visualization of a urine jet into the
bladder lumen cannot exclude the possibility of tunneling ectopic ureters
with multiple fenestrations.
Figure 10.51. Infiltrative bladder mass and hydroureter. Transverse image
obtained at the level of the neck of the urinary bladder in a female dog
with chronic hematuria. An irregular and poorly defined transmural mass
564
involves the region of the right ureterovesicular junction (arrowheads)
The distal portion of the right ureter is dilated (U) by the stenosis (arrow).
Leftlateral
Bladder
Colon
Figure 10.52. Infiltrative ureteral lymphoma. Longitudinal images
 u (a) aan nw pue () au n an go al a e po
cat. The kidney (K) is deformed, and the corticomedullary distinction is
significantly reduced. The renal pelvis (P) and proximal ureter (UL) are
dilated. An oval, hypoechoic, uniform mass (arrows) is found at the level
of the right ureter. The ureteral lumen (UL) is dilated cranially. A 3-mm
hyperechoic structure in the center of this mass is associated with partial
acoustic shadowing and consistent with a concurrent urolith, obstructed at
the level of by the infiltrative mass. Histopathology revealed the presence
of an unusual lymphoma infiltrating the kidney and ureter. Images
courtesy of D. Penninck.
565
Ureterocele is another congenital ureteral malformation, which can
sometimes be associated with ectopia (Stiffler et al. 2002). An intravesical
ureterocele is characterized by a focal cystic dilatation of the distal
(Figure 11.35). A thin-walled, round structure containing anechoic fluid
           
ultrasonography (Stiffler et al. 2002). Ectopic ureterocele involves the
distal portion of an ectopic ureter.
Figure 10.53. Ectopic ureters. A and B: Longitudinal (A) and transverse
(B) images obtained in the region of the bladder trigone, in which a
tubular structure filled with an anechoic fluid (U) extends beyond the
ureterovesicular junction, along the distal colon. There is no flow on color
Doppler, as opposed to the external iliac artery (a) and vein (v), which
supports a diagnosis of ureteral ectopia. Excretory urography confirmed a
termination into the distal portion of the urethra. C and D: Longitudinal
(C) and transverse (D) images of the bladder trigone (T) in a young
female dog with urinary incontinence. A fluid-filled tubular structure
(arrows) consistent with a distal ureter extends through the wall of the
bladder, on the dorsal midline, beyond the ureteral papilla. Because of the
shadow created by the pelvis, the termination of this ureter could not be
determined with ultrasonography. An intramural (tunneling) ectopic ureter
terminating into the urethra was confirmed at surgery.
566
DISORDERS OF THE
PERINEPHRIC
RETROPERITONEAL SPACE
Several types of fluid can accumulate in the retroperitoneal space at the
periphery of the kidneys. Retroperitoneal transudate, which can be seen
with several types of renal disease, appears as linear or triangular to
oval-shaped, anechoic to hypoechoic foci at the periphery of the renal
cortex (Figure 10.54). These changes can also be found with the
accumulation of urine or blood, usually following trauma to the kidney
and/or ureter (Figure 10.55). Although the effusion can be confirmed and
567
cannot be easily localized and usually requires other imaging tools, such
as excretory urography.
Exudates and acute hemorrhage tend to be more echogenic because of
their higher cell count. In cases of inflammatory processes involving the
retroperito-neal space, the retroperitoneal fat typically becomes
pyelonephritis and ureteritis (Figure 10.56).
Figure 10.54. Retroperitoneal effusion. Longitudinal image obtained in
the region just caudal to the right kidney (RK) of a dog with acute renal
insufficiency caused by leptospirosis. Irregular linear hypoechoic regions
(*) are within the retroperitoneal space, caudal to the renal cortex.
consistent with transudation. The fat appears mildly hyperechoic, which
was attributed to edema.
Cranial
RK
Fat
Perinephric pseudocysts, which have been more commonly reported in
cats, appear as an accumulation of fluid, usually anechoic, around one or
both kidneys, and most commonly between the capsule and the renal
cortex (Ochoa et al. 1999; Beck et al. 2000) (Figure 10.57). These
pseudocysts typically encircle the kidneys, although they can be focal
(Miles and Jergens 1992). According to a report on 26 cats, subcapsular
568
perirenal pseudocysts are formed by accumulation of a transudate between
the capsule and parenchyma of the kidney, because of underlying
parenchymal disease, and may contribute to abdominal discomfort (Beck
et al. 2000). Urine may also be contained in these pseudocysts (Ochoa et
al.1999).
Urinomas, described as an encapsulated accumulation of urine caused by
Fine-needle aspiration can be helpful in confirming the nature of the
perirenal fluid.
Figure 10.55. Ureteral rupture, retroperitoneal urinoma, and abscess.
Longitudinal (A) and transverse (B) ultrasound images obtained with a
linear transducer at the caudal aspect of the left kidney (LK, arrowheads)
A poorly defined accumulation of hypoechoic fluid (arrows) is in the
retroperitoneal space, caudal to the kidney (A) and lateral to the left ureter
 o od  l y i     ()
used to differentiate the mildly dilated ureter from an abdominal vessel.
The paraureteral fluid collection was sampled with ultrasound guidance,
and urine and pus were identified. SI, small intestine.
Figure 10.56. Retroperitoneal steatitis. Longitudinal image obtained in the
region of the caudal pole of the right kidney (RK) of a cat with
hydronephrosis and severe pyelonephritis. The renal pelvis (P) and
proximal ureter (U) are distended, and the surrounding fat is hyperechoic
and markedly hyper-attenuating. The renal contour is consequently poorly
defined. A small amount of retroperitoneal effusion (RPE) is also present.
569
Fine-needle aspiration confirmed the presence of sterile retroperitoneal
steatitis.
Cranial
RPE
RK
Fat
Figure 10.57. Perinephric pseudocyst. Longitudinal image of the left
kidney (LK) of a cat with chronic renal insufficiency. The kidney is small
(2.54 cm), deformed, irregular, and diffusely hyperechoic because of
chronic interstitial nephritis. The kidney is contained in a large anechoic
cystlike cavity (arrows), consistent with a perinephric pseudocyst. Image
courtesy of J.Sutherland-Smith.
570
INTERVENTIONAL
PROCEDURES
Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration and biopsy have become routine
procedures complementing renal ultrasonography. The choice of needle
size (gauge) and length depends on the size, vascularity, and depth of the
targeted tissue. Usually, 20- to 22-gauge needles are used for fine-needle
aspiration, and 14- to 20-gauge needles are used for automated core
biopsy (Figures 10.58 and 10.59). Fine-needle aspiration can usually be
performed with the animal under minimal sedation, whereas biopsy
usually requires  general anesthesia.  Neoplastic processes, such as
lymphoma, are usually diagnosed on a cytological specimen obtained with
571
generally recommended because it enables a better discrimination between
processes. Complications associated with ultrasound-guided biopsy have
been reported to vary between 9% in dogs and 15% in cats, and most
commonly have included hemorrhage (Vaden et al. 2005). Older dogs and
severely azotemic dogs were at higher risk for complications (Vaden et al.
2005). Larger-gauge needles (14 or 16 gauge) are associated with
higher-quality specimens (i.e., with larger number of glomeruli), but also
with greater likelihood of hemorrhage (Rawlings et al. 2003).
Figure 10.58. Ultrasound-guided aspiration. A fine-needle aspiration is
(ol anai un se ie sus a) isopnasd qeuad e uo paad
 o s g  l- a ui i () d u 
Penninck.
Figure 10.59. Ultrasound-guided renal biopsy. A biopsy is performed
through the lateral cortex (C) of the left kidney (arrowheads) of a shar-pei
(the same as in Figure 10.11B). The hyperechoic needle (arrows) is seen
along the biopsy-guided tract (dotted line), avoiding the medulla (M).
572
Left lateral
Figure10.60.
. Ultrasound-guided pyelocentesis and pyelography.  A:
Transverse ultrasound image of the left kidney in cat with acute renal
failure and anuria. The right kidney was previously removed for a
suspected tumor. A 2l-gauge 1.5-inch-long needle (arrows) was inserted
into the renal pelvis (P) for urine collection. This was followed by the
injection of 5 mL of iopamidol (300 mg iodine/mL). B: On a lateral
radiograph of the caudal abdomen obtained 10 min later, opacification of
the pelvis and ureter (U) is observed. A urinary catheter and an oval gas
bubble are visible in the bladder. Ureteral obstruction is indicated by the
(UB). An obstructive clot was identified in the distal ureter at surgery.
UB
573
Fine-needle drainage of cavitary lesions, such as cysts or abscesses, can
10.58). In place of excretory urography, fine-needle aspiration of a
distended pelvis (pyelocenthesis) can be performed and followed by
intrapelvic injection of iodine-based contrast medium (Rivers et al. 1997)
(Figure 10.60). After a 22-gauge spinal needle with a 45° angle is inserted
through the great curvature of the kidney, a volume of contrast medium
equal to one-half of the aspirated volume of urine is injected with
ultrasound guidance prior to radiographic exposure. By allowing a higher
renal failure, their shape and content can be better defined. Additionally,
the risk of contrast medium-induced nephropathy can be lowered in
animals with compromised renal function. Antegrade pyelography can be
auseful alternativein the diagnosis andlocalization of ureteral
obstructions in azotemic cats (Adin et al. 2003). Complications are
considered rare. As with renal aspiration or biopsy, hematuria can occur.
Some dogs and cats can benefit from drainage of large renal cysts or
pseudocysts (Ochoa et al. 1999). Therapeutic drainage and lavage of the
renal pelvis can also help to remove obstructive pus in dogs with
pyonephrosis (Szatmari et al. 2001).
REFERENCES
Abraham LA, Beck C, Slocombe RF (2003) Renal dysplasia and urinary
tract infection in a Bull Mastiff puppy. Aust Vet J 81:336-339.
Adams WH, Toal RL, Breider MA (1991) Ultrasonographic findings in
dogs and cats with oxalate nephrosis attributable to ethylene glycol
intoxication: 15 cases (1984-1988). J Am Vet Med Assoc 199:492-496.
Adin CA, Herrgesell EJ, Nyland TG, et al. (2003) Antegrade pyelography
for suspected ureteral obstruction in cats: 11 cats (1995-2001). J Am Vet
Med Assoc 222:1576-1581.
Allworth MS, Hoffman KL (1999) Crossed renal ectopia with fusion in a
cat. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 40:357-360.
Barr FJ, Holt PE, Gibbs C (1990) Ultrasonographic measurements of
normal renal parameters. J Small Anim Pract 31:180-184.
574
Barr FJ, Petteson MW, Lucke VM, Gibbs C (1989) Hypercalcemic
nephropathy in three dogs: Sonographic appearance. Vet Radiology
Ultrasound 30: 169-173.
Beck JA, Bellenger CR, Lamb WA, et al. (2000) Perirenal pseudocysts in
26 cats. Aust Vet J 78:166-171.
Biller DS, Bradley GA, Partington BP (1992) Renal medullary rim sign:
Ultrasonographic evidence of  renal disease.  Vet  Radiol Ultrasound
33:286-290.
Eubig PA, Brady MS, Gwaltney-Brant SM, Khan SA, Mazzaferro EM,
Morrow CM (2005) Acute renal failure in dogs after the ingestion of
grapes or raisins: A retrospective evaluation of 43 dogs (1992-2002). J
Vet Intern Med 19:663-674.
Felki C, Voros Fenyves B (1995) Lesions of the renal pelvis and proximal
ureter in various nephro-urological conditions: An ultrasonographic study.
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 36:397-401.
Forrest LJ, O'Brien RT, Tremelling MS, Steinberg H, Cooley AJ, Kerlin
RL (1998) Sonographic renal findings in 20 dogs with leptospirosis. Vet
RadiolUltras0und39:337-340.
Gasser AM, Bush WW, Smith SS, Walton R (2003) Extradural spinal,
bone marrow, and renal nephroblastoma. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
39:80-85.
Hecht S, McCarthy RJ, Tidwell AS (2005) What is your diagnosis?
Ectopic kidney. J Am Vet Med Ass0c 227: 223-224.
 ()  l      
anatomy of the normal canine kidney. Vet Radiol 25:173-178.
Kyles AE, Hardie EM, Wooden BG, et al. (2005) Clinical
clinicopathologic, radiographic, and ultrasonographic abnormalities in cats
with ureteral calculi: 163 cases (1984-2002). J Am Vet Med Assoc
226:932-936.
Lamb CR, Gregory SP (1998) Ultrasonographic findings in 14 dogs with
ectopic ureter. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 39:218-223.
575
Mantis P, Lamb CR (2000) Most dogs with medullary rim sign on
ultrasonography have no demonstrable renal dysfunction. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 41:164-166.
Mareschal A, d'Anjou MA, Moreau M, Alexander K, Beauregard G
(2007) Utrasonographic measurement of kidney-to-aorta ratio as a method
Os estimating renal size in dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 48(5):434-438.
Miles KG, Jergens AE (1992) Unilateral perinephric pseudocyst of
undetermined origin in a dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 33:277-281.
Moe L, Lium B (1997) Hereditary multifocal renal cystadenocarcinomas
Pract38:498-505
Neuwirth L, Mahaffey M, Crowell W, et al. (l993) Comparison of
induced pyelonephritis in dogs. Am J Vet Res 54:660-669.
Ochoa VB, DiBartola SP, Chew DJ, Westropp J, Carothers M, Biller D
(1999) Perinephric pseudocysts in the cat: A retrospective study and
review of the literature. J Vet Intern Med 13:47-55.
Pugh CR, Schelling CG, Moreau RE, Golden D (1994) Iatrogenic renal
pyelectasia in the dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 35:50-51.
Rawlings CA, Diamond H, Howerth EW, Neuwirth L, Canalis C (2003)
Diagnostic quality of percutaneous kidney biopsy specimens obtained
Ass0c 223:317-321.
Reichle JK, DiBartola SP, Leveillé R (2002) Renal ultrasonographic and
computed tomographic appearance, volume, and function of cats with
autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
43:368-373
Rivers BJ, Walter PA, Polzin DJ (1997) Ultrasonographic-guided
percutaneous antegrade pyelography: Technique and clinical application
in the dog and cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33:61-68.
Stiffler KS, Stevenson MAM, Mahaffey MB, Howerth EW, Barsanti JA
(2002) Intravesical ureterocele with concurrent renal dysfunction in a dog
576
38:33-39.
Szatmari V, Osi Z, Manczur F (200l) Ultrasound-guided percutaneous
drainage for treatment of pyonephrosis in two dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
218:1796-1799.
Vaden SL, Levine JF, Lees GE, Groman RP, Grauer GF, Forrester SD
(2005) Renal biopsy: A retrospective study of methods and complications
Walter PA, Feeney DA, Johnston GR, Fletcher TF (1987a) Feline renal
ultrasonography: Quantitative analyses of imaged anatomy. Am J Vet Res
48:596-599
Walter PA, Feeney Da, Johnston GR, O'Leary TP (1987b)
Ultrasonographic evaluation of renal parenchymal diseases in dogs: 32
cases (1981-1986). J Am Vet med Assoc 191:999-1007.
Walter PA, Johnston GR, Feeney DA, O'Brien TD (1988) Applications of
ultrasonography in the diagnosis of parenchymal kidney disease in cats:
24 cases (1981-1986). J Am Vet Med Assoc 192:92-98.
Yeager AE, Anderson WI (1989) Study of association between histologic
features and echogenicity of architecturally normal cat kidneys. Am J Vet
Res 50:860-863.
577
CHAPTERELEVEN
BLADDER AND URETHRA
James Sutherland-Smith
PREPARATIONAND
SCANNING TECHNIQUE
The ventral abdominal hair is clipped to the level of the pubic bone, and
ultrasonic gel is applied to the skin. A transabdominal approach with the
   l       
recumbency or a standing position may be used in confirming the
presence of intraluminal sediment or calculi, which will fall toward the
gravity-dependent wall. If the penile urethra is to be imaged, then hair
s  on  u   d s   a 
A real-time medium- to high-frequency (5 to 7.5 MHz or higher) convex,
linear, or vector transducer is recommended. A microconvex transducer
with a small contact area has the advantage of being easier to point toward
the intrapelvic structures. Two complementary transverse and longitudinal
planes are used to fully assess the bladder and urethra (Figure 11.1).
The best ultrasound images of the bladder are obtained when it is
moderately distended (Figure 11.2). If the bladder is empty and pathology
is suspected, it is advisable either to rescan the bladder after waiting for it
to refill naturally, to place a urinary catheter and fill the bladder with
sterile isotonic (0.9%) saline, or to administer intravenous furosemide.
578
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC
ANATOMY OF THE NORMAL
URINARY BLADDER AND
URETHRA
The bladder is within the caudoventral abdomen, and the urethra extends
into the pelvic canal. The descending colon, aorta, and caudal vena cava
location and by using color Doppler.
Air within the colon cause a mirror-image artifact of the wrinary bladder
n  n i o  a s  u (ll 
bladder and the colon.
The four histological bladder wall layers are the mucosa (hypoechoic)
submucosa (hyperechoic), muscularis (hypoechoic), and serosa
(hyperechoic). However, these layers are difficult to define
       o
wall thickness decreases as the urinary bladder volume increases (Figure
11.4). The normal bladder wall thickness increases up to l mm with
increasing body weight in dogs (Geisse et al. 1997) (Table 11.1). The
normal range of bladder wall thickness in cats is between 1.3 and 1.7 mm
(Finn-Bodner 1995).
The trigone of the bladder is not clearly delineated from the remainder of
the bladder wall. The ureters are not seen entering the urinary bladder
unless they are dilated. Ureteral papilla may be seen extending from the
dorsal wall and should not be confused for abnormal focal wall thickening
(Figure 11.5).
Ureteral jets may be seen emerging from the dorsal bladder wall at the
trigone. They appear as a burst of hyperechoic speckles on B-mode
ultrasound or a pulse of positive (red) signal on color flow Doppler
(Figure 1l.6). The visualization of ureteral jets is variable because it
579
           s
bladder and the urine exiting the ureter.
The normal urine within the urinary bladder is anechoic. However,
echogenic urine is not specific for urinary tract disease, and a urinalysis
can assist in determining its significance. Additionally, images of the
urinary bladder are prone to side-lobe and grating-lobe artifacts that can
create the appearance of pseudosludge (Figure 11.7). Adjustment of the
gain (Figure 1l.8) and use of harmonic ultrasound help to reduce the
formation of these sometimes confusing echoes.
Retrograde positive-contrast urethrography remains the preferred modality
for assessing the entire urethra. Ultrasound is a useful and complementary
modality for part of the accessible urethra. The urethra extends caudally
from the bladder into the pelvic canal (Figure 11.9).
Figure 11.1. Composite image of the urinary bladder and adjacent
anatomical structures in a dog. The schematic diagram on the right shows
the position of the urinary bladder, the dorsally located colon, aorta, and
caudal vena cava, as well as transducer positions for the standard
longitudinal and transverse imaging planes. A: A longitudinal sonogram
of the urinary bladder filled with normal anechoic urine. B: A transverse
sonogram of the urinary bladder. The colon is located dorsally in the far
field and is causing mild indentation of the dorsal bladder wall. AO, aorta;
CR, cranial; CVC, caudal vena cava; and R, right.
580
Figure 1l.2. Normal bladder and main vessels in a dog. Color flow
Doppler transverse sonogram of the urinary bladder and the dorsally
located aorta (red) and caudal vena cava (blue), to the left of an intestinal
loop(S1).
581
Right
Left
Figure 11.3. Mirror-image artifact in a dog. Left: Longitudinal sonogram
of the urinary bladder with a mirror-image artifact caused by errors in
position of echoes reflected from the ventral colon wall-colon luminal gas
interface. Right: The corresponding labeled schematic representation. B,
bladder; B', mirror image of the bladder; and C, colon.
582
Figure 11.4. Normal bladder thickness and distension in a normal 30-kg
dog. A series of longitudinal ultrasound images of the urinary bladder with
different volumes of sterile saline infused into the bladder lumen. A:
Longitudinal sonogram of an empty urinary bladder with an indwelling
red-rubber urinary catheter (arrow). The urinary bladder wall thickness is
4 mm. B: A total of 60 mL (2 mL/kg) of saline is infused, and the bladder
wall thickness now is 3 mm. C: With a total volume of 120 mL (4 mL/
kg), the bladder wall thickness is 2 mm.
A
2mm
3mm
Table 11.1.
.Variation in bladder wall thickness with changes in
intraluminalvolumeindogs
Degree of Bladder Distension
Mean Thickness (mm)
StandardDeviation (mm）
Minimal o.5mL/kg)
2.3
0.43
Mild(2mL/kg）
1.6
0.29
Moderate (4mL/kg)
1.4
0.28
Adapted from Geisse et al. (1 997).
Figure 11.5. Normal ureteral papillae in a dog. Longitudinal sonogram of
the trigone of the urinary bladder. There is a smooth, broad-based
echogenic protuberance at (arrow) the dorsocaudal aspect of the urinary
bladder. These protuberances are seen bilaterally and are visible ureteral
papillae.
583
Figure 11.6. Ureteral jet in a dog. A: Longitudinal sonogram of a ureteral
jet seen using B-mode ultrasound. Although best appreciated in real time,
a fountain-like collection of echoes is seen in the otherwise anechoic
urine. B: Transverse color flow Doppler sonogram of a ureteral jet. The
use of color flow Doppler can aid the detection of ureteral jets. The red
indicates flow toward the transducer.
584
Figure 11.7. Pseudosludge and side-lobe artifacts. A: Longitudinal
sonogram of the urinary bladder illustrating pseudo-sludge (arrow) caused
by side-lobe and grating-lobe artifacts. These echoes are caused by
reflections at the margins of the bladder wall. Scanning with the animal
standing may help in confirming this artifact. True sediment should fall to
the dependent wall and typically shows a straight linear border (see Figure
11.28A). B: Longitudinal sonogram of the same urinary bladder. The
pseudosludge artifact.
Figure 11.8. Duplex (A) and harmonic (B) longitudinal sonogram of a
(a) punosenjn sjuoueh gop e ul sopnisopnasd pue ieppeiq Areun
reduces both the near-field and the far-field artifacts.
Figure 11.9. Normal urethra in a male dog. Duplex sonogram of the
sd (a) asasun pue (v) (enluol u (moe) euan [eixoid
The descending colon (C) is seen in the far field in B.
585
In dogs, the prostate surrounds the proximal urethra. Shadowing from the
pubis obscures the caudal intra-pelvic portion of the urethra. The proximal
 penile urethra is located within the corpus spongiosum between the corpus
cavernosum dorsally and the bul-bospongiosus and retractor penis muscles
ventrally (Figure 11.10A). The distal penile urethra is located within the
urethral groove of the os penis dorsally and the bulbus glandis ventrally
(Figure 11.10B). The urethral lumen is not normally seen unless there is
urinary bladder distension, in which case urethral obstruction should be
considered. The urethral wall is composed of the same histological layers
as the urinary bladder. These layers are not readily resolved when normal.
Figure 11.10. Normal penile urethra in a dog. On the left, an illustration
of the anatomical structures near the urethra are presented. The dotted
lines (A, B) correspond to the transverse planes seen on the sonograms on
the right. P, prostate. A: Transverse sonogram (with and without labels) of
the midpenile urethra at a level just cranial to the scrotum. The urethra
CC, corpus cavernosum; and TA, tunica albuginea. B: Transverse
sonogram (with and without labels) of the distal penile urethra at the level
of the os penis (OS), which is seen as a hyperechoic U-shaped structure
with distal shadow. The urethra is located within the anastomosing tissue
of the corpus spongiosum and bulbus glandis (CS/BG). The bulbus
glandis (BG) forms the bulk of the tissue surrounding the os penis.
586
Urethra
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC
FEATURES OF BLADDER AND
URETHRALDISORDERS
Cystitis
of the urinary bladder wall. This thickening is usually greatest at the
cranioventral aspect of the urinary bladder (Figures 11.11 and 11.12)
587
The bladder wall changes can be associated with other findings, such as
cystic calculi or blood clots. Polypoid cystitis is an uncommon form of
cystitis reported in dogs. It can present as a hyperechoic polypoid to
 pedunculated mass or masses projecting into the lumen, as well as diffuse
bladder wall thickening in some cases (Martinez et al. 2003) (Figure
11.13A and B). These masses occur most commonly in the cranioventral
aspect of the urinary bladder (Martinez et al. 2003). Polypoid cystitis can
a biopsy is recommended.
Emphysematous cystitis is characterized by gas-forming bacteria such as
Escherichia coli,Aerobacter aerogenes,
Proteus mirabifis,and
Clostridium sp. within the bladder wall and is seen most commonly in
diabetic animals with glucosuria. The sonographic appearance is
multifocal  irregular  hyperechoic  interfaces  with distal  reverberation
artifact (Petite et al. 2006) (Figure 11.14). By using alternative patient
  ( n  s     
distinguished from emphysematous cystitis. The free luminal gas will
move with patient position, whereas the bladder wall gas will remain in
the same location.
Neoplasia
Transitional cell carcinoma is the most common neoplasm of the urinary
mass with a broad-based attachment projecting into the urinary bladder
lumen. The echogenicity is often mixed and has an overall appearance that
can be hyperechoic, isoechoic, or hypoechoic compared with the bladder
wall. The masses are most commonly in the bladder neck (trigone) region
and dorsal bladder wall (Leveille et al. 1992) (Figures 11.5-11.18)
Because of the location of the ureteral papilla in this region, unilateral or
bilateral hydroureter may be encountered. It is common for the mass to
extend into the proximal urethra. Dogs with transitional cell carcinoma
may have concurrent cystitis, urethritis, calculi, and/or blood clots.
A wide variety of other bladder tumor types are possible, including
epithelial (squamous cell carcinoma) and mesenchymal tumors (botryoid
rhabdomyosarcoma, chemodectoma,  leiomyosarcoma,  leiomyoma,
fibroma, fibrosarcoma, hemangioma, hemangiosarcoma, lymphoma
588
[Benigni et al. 2006], and mast cell tumor) (Figures 11.19-11.22)
nonneoplastic disease is often impossible without a biopsy. However, a
mass with a smooth luminal surface is more likely to have a mesenchymal
origin. Uncommonly, bladder tumors can diffusely invade the bladder
wall (Figure 11.22B)
Figure 11.11. Cystitis in a dog.Longitudinal sonogram of the urinary
bladder showing moderate hypoechoic cranial thickening of the body and
apex of the urinary bladder wall. This finding is most consistent with
cystitis. The urine from the dog cultured positive for Escherichia coli on
multiple occasions.
Figure 11.12. Cystitis in a dog. Transverse sonogram of the urinary
bladder showing moderate, diffuse, hypoechoic, and irregular thickening
of the bladder wall. This finding is consistent with cystitis. The urinalysis
showed 3+ bacteria, and it cultured positive for Escherichia cofi.
589
Figure 11.13. Polypoid cystitis in two dogs. A: Transverse sonogram of
the urinary bladder with two small pedunculated masses (arrows)
extending from the right bladder wall into the bladder lumen. The bladder
wall thickness is within normal limits. B: Longitudinal sonogram of a
different dog with a single broad based mass, thickening of the bladder
wall (arrowheads) and shadowing calculi dorsally and caudally (C)
Histopathology following surgical excisional biopsy revealed a mucosal
polyp.
590
B
+1.78cm
591
Figure 11.14. Emphysematous cystitis in a dog. Longitudinal sonogram of
the urinary bladder showing a hyperechoic interface in the ventral bladder
wall with reverberation (arrows), consistent with emphysematous cystitis.
The urine cultured positive for Escherichia coli.
Figure 11.15. Bladder tumor in a dog. Longitudinal sono-gram of a
wall, consistent with transitional cell carcinoma.
592
5.13x1.86cm
The most common urethral neoplasms in dogs include transitional cell
urethral neoplasms are often caused by local spread of bladder or prostatic
hyperechoic nonshadowing mucosal line and may be associated with
      s l 1
with the distal urethra. Other types of neoplastic processes can compress
or invade the urethra along its path (Figure 11.24).
Figure 11.16. Bladder tumor in a 10-year-old female dog with hematuria.
Longitudinal sonograms of the bladder. Two distinct hyperechoic masses
are in the bladder lumen (M1 and M2), showing hyperechoic speckles and
larger shadowing (*) foci consistent with mineralization. Both of these
masses are attached to the bladder walls (arrowheads). Suction biopsies
revealed transitional cell carcinomas. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
593
2.1lcm
Figure 11.17. Bladder tumor in two dogs. Longitudinal sonograms of the
urinary bladder of the dogs (A and B) with confirmed transitional cell
carcinoma. In each dog, a lobulated mass occupies the bladder neck and
extends into the urethra (arrows). A suction biopsy was used to confirm
the diagnosis.
Figure 11.18. Bladder neck and urethral transitional cell carcinoma in a
castrated male dog. Longitudinal sonogram of the bladder neck and
proximal urethra. There is an irregular tissue projection into the bladder
lumen, at the level of the trigone (T). The proximal urethra is also
thickened (arrows), and the prostate is enlarged (arrowheads). A suction
biopsy confirmed transitional cell carcinoma. Image courtesy of M.A.
d'Anjou.
594
0.88cm
Figure 11.19. Bladder leiomyosarcoma in a dog. A: Sagittal sonogram of
a large bladder wall leiomyosarcoma. A heterogeneous, broad-based mass
(arrows) is invading the wall at the apex and body, deforming the shape of
the bladder and protruding into its lumen (B). B: Longitudinal panoramic
sonogram of another large echogenic mass deforming the contour of the
bladder. The mass was diagnosed as low-grade leiomyosarcoma.
595
Cranial
Figure 11.20. Bladder tumor (hemangiosarcoma) in a dog. Transverse
sonogram of a large cavitated mass associated with the right bladder wall.
Given the cavitated appearance, a hematoma was suspected. At surgery,
596
the highly vascular bladder mass was considered unresectable and was
biopsied. The histopathologic diagnosis was hemangiosarcoma.
5.26cm
lymph nodes is not specific to bladder or urethral disease, but they should
be located and measured to aid the staging of a suspected neo-plastic
disease.
Calculi
radiographic contrast procedures in calculi detection (Weichselbaum et al.
1999). Cystic or urethral calculi are usually mobile and collect in the
dependent portion of the lumen. They are usually spherical, with a
hyperechoic curvilinear interface. However, they can be a variety of sizes
and shapes. A distal shadow is only variably present and is more likely
seen with a higher transducer frequency and with calculi of a greater
e  o q  (ll  ill s) ss
occur distal to cystic calculi. The presence or absence of these artifacts
does not correlate with the composition of the calculus (Weichselbaum et
  s s i e an   
597
seen as a collection of swirling moderate-intensity intraluminal echoes. A
collection of small calculi or mineralized sediment may generate a linear
gentle agitation of the urinary bladder.
Figure 11.21. Bladder tumor (mast cell tumor) in a dog. Longitudinal
sonogram of a urinary bladder with a highly vascular, pedunculated,
 a    o s 
Cytology of the mass with special stains was consistent with a mast cell
neoplasm.
Figure 11.22. Extensive bladder tumors in two dogs and a cat. A:
Panoramic longitudinal sonogram of a large caudal bladder mass
involving the trigone of a dog. The histopathology obtained at necropsy
revealed a poorly differentiated carcinoma. B: Longitudinal sonogram of
the bladder of a 6-year-old Labrador retriever with diffuse carcinomatous
infiltration of the wall. C: Retrograde vaginourethrocystogram (left) and
longitudinal sonogram (right) of the bladder of a l-year-old cat with
urinary incontinence and hematuria. In the contrast study, the dorsal
bladder wall is thick, and there is extravasation of contrast medium into
the peritoneal cavity (arrow). In the sonogram, a large heterogeneous,
598
multilobulated mass (arrows) at the trigone protruded into the peritoneal
Benigni et al. (2006).
Although the urethra cannot be evaluated completely with ultrasound
urethral calculi may be identified, particularly proximal to the os penis
(Figure 11.29). Enlargement of the urinary bladder with dilation of the
urethral lumen is supportive of urethral obstruction (Figure 11.30).
The descending colon can indent and appear confluent with the dorsal
wall of the urinary bladder. The hyperechoic interface and shadowing
artifact generated by the colon can mimic cystic calculi (Figure 1l.31)
Rotation of the transducer into the longitudinal plane will reveal the colon
as a linear interface running the length of the image, whereas the calculi
should remain approximately spherical. Additionally, repositioning the
animal into a standing or lateral position should cause any calculi to fall to
the dependent wall, whereas the colon remains in a dorsal location.
carcinoma) in a dog. Longitudinal sonogram of trigone and urethra. The
urethral wall is thickened, with a linear hyperechoic lining at the luminal
599
margin (arrow). Wall thickening is also present at the bladder trigone. The
histopathologic diagnosis was transitional cell carcinoma.
0.39cm
Figure 11.24. Urethral tumor (osteosarcoma) in a dog. A: Longitudinal
sonogram of the caudal membranous urethra, which contains an
indwelling catheter (arrow C). A hyperechoic shadowing mass
(arrowheads) is caudodorsal to the urethra. B: Positive-contrast retrograde
urethrogram showing a mineral opacity mass (arrows) causing marked
attenuation of the urethral contrast. The histopathologic diagnosis from an
ultrasound-guided microcore biopsy was osteosarcoma.
600
Figure 11.25. Cystic calculus in a dog. Longitudinal sonogram of the
urinary bladder, which contains a spherical hyperechoic interface with
601
distal shadowing (*), consistent with a cystic calculus. Additionally.
several smaller hyperechoic interfaces are noted just cranially (arrow),
also consistent with calculi, although not causing acoustic shadowing.
because of their smaller size. Side-lobe artifacts are in the apical portion
ofthebladder(A).
Intraluminal Blood Clots and Mural
Hemorrhage
 a  s      s po
cystitis, a generalized bleeding disorder, or neoplasia. Blood within the
urinary bladder lumen or wall can have a variable appearance and can
mimic exuberant inflammatory disease or neoplasia. Intraluminal clots are
generally hyperechoic and range from thin linear structures to large round
masses (Figures 11.32-11.34).
Figure 11.26. Cystic calculi in a dog. Transverse sonogram of the urinary
bladder showing two small hyperechoic structures associated with the
ventral bladder wall (arrows) that are thought to represent small cystic
602
associated with acoustic shadowing.
Figure 11.27. Bladder sediments in a dog. Transverse sonogram of
diffusely echogenic urine and a collection of hyperechoic material (arrow)
         o
showed3+amorphouscrystalluria.
603
Figure 11.28. Cystic calculi and sediment in two dogs. Sedimentation in
the dependent portion of the urinary bladder. A: Pyuria appears as
nonshadowing, moderately echogenic sludge that progressively sediments
during the exam. A straight horizontal border is seen (arrow). B: A
mineral sediment, such as seen with crystalluria, is more hyperechoic and
typically associated with acoustic shadowing (*). The dog was diagnosed
and treated for a portoazygous shunt. Image A courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
604
Mural hemorrhage causes diffuse uniform wall thickening (O'Brien and
Wood 1998). The absence of color flow Doppler signal can help
differentiate a blood clot from a neoplastic mass. The mobility of these
patient. Recheck examinations will help differentiate neoplastic or
inflammatory mural disease because thickening secondary to systemic
bleeding disorders resolves rapidly at the approximate rate of 1 mm/day
once the underlying abnormalities are corrected (O'Brien and Wood
1998).
Figure 11.29. Urethral calculus in a dog. A longitudinal sonogram of the
distal penile urethra. A large-diameter, hyperechoic, spherical calculus
with distal shadowing is causing dilation of the urethra (cursors). The
calculus is just proximal to the os penis (not seen). On analysis, the
composition of the calculus was struvite.
605
0.48cm
Figure 11.30. Urethral distension in a blocked cat. Longitudinal sonogram
of the dilated urethra. The lumen (not normally visualized) contains nearly
anechoic urine (U). Urethral wall layers can be visualized (arrowheads).
606
Figure 11.31. Calculus versus colon in a dog. Transverse sonogram of the
         n o  
(arrow) is adjacent to the dependent bladder wall.
607
Congenital Anomalies
Although rare, a variety of congenital urinary bladder abnormalities may
 s o     
incontinence or urinary tract infections, or may be incidental findings.
Anomalous conditions include urachal diverticulum, patent urachus,
urachal cysts, ureteroceles, and ectopic ureters.
Ureteroceles are cystic dilations of the terminal ureter within the urinary
bladder. They can be subdivided as orthotopic or ectopic, depending on
whether the ureters enter the bladder at a normal location. Ureteroceles are
thin-walled, smooth, spherical, and cystlike structures that protrude into
the bladder lumen and are filled with anechoic fluid (Figure 1l.35).
Ectopic ureters may be identified ultrasonographically by either dilated
ureters coursing beyond the dorsal bladder neck caudally or by an absence
of ureteral jets in the trigone region (Figure 1 l.36).
Figure 11.32. Bladder blood clot in a dog. A: Longitudinal sonogram of
the urinary bladder, which contains a smooth, ovoid, inhomogeneous.
608
echogenicity mass. Differential diagnoses included a bladder neoplasm or
a hematoma. B: A transverse sonogram of the right kidney with a
2.43-cm-diameter right hilar renal mass (arrows). The hyperechoic bands
of tissue (arrowheads) radiating from the hilus to the periphery are
characteristic of hydronephrosis. Echogenic urine is found in the dilated
diverticuli (D), consistent with hemorrhage. At necropsy, the urinary
bladder mass was a hematoma secondary to renal hemangiosarcoma.
609
B
2.43cm
610
Figure 11.33. Bladder blood clot in a dog. Longitudinal sonogram of the
urinary bladder, which contains a floating linear hyperechoic structure of
variable thickness. A urinalysis revealed numerous red blood cells highly
Suggestive of a suspended blood clot.
Figure 11.34. Bladder blood clot in a dog. A longitudinal sonogram of the
bladder containing a large bilobed mass with an echogenic periphery and a
hyperechoic center. The mass had no identifiable color flow Doppler
signal. Urinalysis revealed numerous red blood cells, and the presumptive
diagnosis was hematoma.
611
Figure 11.35. Ureterocele in a dog. Longitudinal sonogram of the urinary
bladder (B) with a thin-walled cystic out-pouching of the left ureter (U).
The cystic structure contains anechoic fluid and is consistent with a
ureterocele. Image courtesy of C. Warman, Veterinary Specialist Group,
Auckland, New Zealand.
612
Figure 11.36. Ectopic ureter. Longitudinal sonogram of a dilated ureter
(8.4 mm-cursors), which was followed from the left kidney and courses
caudal to bladder neck (B), consistent with an ectopic ureter.
一口
8.4mm
613
Figure 11.37. Sonogram and contrast radiographic study of a ruptured
urinary bladder in a dog. A. Longitudinal sonogram. The indwelling,
saline-filled Foley catheter can be seen caudally (arrow). There is marked
thickening of the bladder wall (arrowheads) and a loss of visualization of
the bladder lumen. Abdominal effusion is also noted. Because of the
suspicion of bladder rupture, a positive-contrast cystogram was
performed. Hyperechoic foci are noted in the dorsally displaced bladder
lumen, associated with acoustic shadowing (*), consistent with calculi. B:
Lateral radiograph of  the caudal abdomen  following  a retrograde
positive-contrast cystogram. Contrast is free within the peritoneal space.
At surgery, the bladder rupture and hematoma were identified.
A vesicourachal diverticulum is a fluid-filled structure that extends as a
convex outpouching of the bladder lumen, usually with a thin wall,
although it can become thick and irregular in cases of chronic cystitis.
These diverticuli can vary in size and are typically in cranioventral aspect
of the urinary bladder wall. Diverticulum may also occur at other locations
becauseof traumaOrcystitis.
mumnL
A positive-contrast retrograde cystourethrogram is the preferred method of
diagnosing rupture of the urethra or urinary bladder. On ultrasound, the
ruptured urinary bladder wall is thickened (Figure 11.37), and there is
Calculi or other debris can also accumulate in the peritoneal cavity. A
hypoechoic bladder wall defect or tract may be seen occasionally.
614
This should be distinguished from a refraction artifact associated with the
cranial aspect of the urinary bladder when abdominal effusion is present.
The interpretation of the artifact is aided by a concurrent edge shadow and
absence of bladder wall thickening (Figure 11.38)
Figure 11.38. Refra ction ar tifact versus bladder rupture in a dog.
Longitudinal
1  sonogram of  the  bladder  containing anechoic urine
surrounded by echogenic abdominal effusion (F). The refraction artifact at
the cranial aspect of the bladder mimics bladder wall rupture (arrow), but
no bladder wall rupture is present.
615
SPECIAL PROCEDURES
Cystocentesis
Once sufficient bladder distension is determined by ultrasonography, a
guided cystocentesis can be performed. The skin can be prepared with an
alcohol-soaked swab. A 22-gauge, 1- or 1.5-inch needle attached to a
5-mL syringe is used. The needle is placed just cranial to the transducer
while trying to keep the needle aligned with the plane of the ultrasound
beam. The needle appears as a fine linear hyperechoic interface that often
causes distal reverberation or shadowing artifacts (Figure 11.39).
Suction Biopsy
Cystoscopic biopsy and ultrasound-guided suction biopsy are the preferred
methods of confirming bladder or urethral neoplasia. Percutaneous
fine-needle aspiration of suspected transitional cell carcinoma in the
spread of the tumor along the needle tract.
Figure 11.39. Cystocentesis in a dog. Longitudinal sonogram of the
urinary bladder during cystocentesis (with and without labels). The fine
hyperechoic line created by the needle and the hyperechoic needle tip
within the lumen are visualized (arrows).
Figure 11.40. Suction biopsy in a dog. Longitudinal sono-gram of the
616
biopsy. The catheter walls are hyperechoic and the lumen hypoechoic. A
small defect in the catheter wall (arrow) corresponds to one of the side
holes in the catheter, which can be guided into the desired location of the
biopsy.
Figure 11.4l. Suction biopsy in a cat. Longitudinal sonogram of the
trigone of the bladder during a suction biopsy. The two parallel
hyperechoic lines are the walls of the catheter. Ultrasound guidance
directed the catheter in contact with the bladder mass.
617
The suction biopsy is performed under heavy sedation (propofol) or
general anesthesia. An appropriately sized red-rubber catheter with side
holes is connected to a 20-mL syringe and is placed aseptically into the
urinary bladder. The urinary bladder (if empty) is filled with a small
volume of sterile saline to provide an acoustic window and better
delineate the abnormal tissue to sample. Only a small volume is required
because the bladder wall collapsing around the catheter aids the aspiration
of the targeted tissue rather than urine. The catheter tip is visualized
within the urinary bladder as a pair of parallel hyperechoic lines with a
hypoechoic lumen, and the side holes of the catheter can also be identified
as discrete hypoechoic defects (Figures 11.40 and 11.41) The catheter tip
can then be positioned adjacent to the bladder mass or wall thickening to
be biopsied. High-frequency ultrasound may enable more specific
placement by visualization of the catheter holes.
The syringe plunger is pulled back. If urine is obtained, then the catheter
is rotated to reposition the side hole adjacent to the tissue of interest. Once
negative pressure can be maintained, the pressure is applied and released
3-4 times, collecting tissue from the adjacent mucosa. Suction is applied
and held, with the aim being to adhere the catheter to the mass. The
urinary catheter is abruptly withdrawn 4-6 cm from the bladder while the
618
mass. The contents of the catheter are then emptied into formalin or
smeared on a slide for cytology. If the procedure is repeated, a new
complication of this procedure (Lamb et al. 1996).
REFERENCES
Benigni L, Lamb CR, Corzo-Menendez N, Holloway A, Eastwood JM
(2006) Lymphoma affecting the urinary bladder in three dogs and a cat.
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47:592-596.
Finn-Bodner ST (1995) The urinary bladder. In: Cartee RE, Selcer BA,
Hudson JA, et al., eds. Practical Veterinary Ultrasound. Philadelphia: Lea
and Febiger, pp 210-235.
Geisse AL, Lowry JE, Schaeffer DJ, Smith CW (1997) Sonographic
evaluation of urinary bladder wall thickness in normal dogs. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 38:132-137.
Hanson JA, Tidwell AS (1996) Utrasonographic appearance of urethral
transitional  cell   carcinoma   in  ten dogs.  Vet   Radiol  Ultrasound
37:293-299.
Lamb CR, Trower ND, Gregory SP (1996) Ultrasound-guided catheter
biopsy of the lower urinary tract: Technique and results in 12 dogs. J
SmallAnimPract37:413-416.
Leveille R, Biller DS, Partington BP, Miyabayashi T (1992) Sonographic
investigation of transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder in small
animals. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 33:103-107.
Martinez I, Mattoon JS, Eaton KA, Chew DJ, DiBartola SP (2003)
Polypoid cystitis in 17 dogs (1978-2001). J Vet Intern Med 17:499-509.
O'Brien RT, Wood EF (l998) Urinary bladder mural hemorrhage
associated with systemic bleeding disorders in three dogs. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 39:354-356.
Petite A, Busoni V, Heinen MP, Billen F, Snaps F (2006) Radiographic
and  ultrasonographic findings of  emphyse-matous  cystitis in  four
nondiabetic female dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47:90-93.
619
Weichselbaum RC, Feeney DA, Jessen CR, Osborne CA, Dreytser V,
Holte J (1999) Urocystolith detection: Comparison of survey, contrast
phantom.Vet Radiol Ultrasound 40:386400.
Weichselbaum RC, Feeney DA, Jessen CR, Osborne CA, Dreytser V,
Holte J (2000) Relevance of sonographic artifacts observed during in vitro
characterization  of urocystolith   mineral   composition.   Vet  Radiol
Ultrasound 41:438-446.
620
CHAPTER TWELVE
ADRENAL GLANDS
John Graham
PREPARATION AND
SCANNING TECHNIQUE
The adrenal glands are small, paired structures located in the craniodorsal
abdomen, medial to the ipsilateral kidney and adjacent to the aorta (left)
and caudal vena cava (right). The cells of the adrenal cortex produce
cortisol and other corticoids, aldosterone, androgens, estrogens, and
progestins whereas the chromaffin cells of the medulla produce
catecholamines (Feldman and Nelson 2004). The adrenal glands are a key
component of the endocrine system, and their deranged function can
produce a wide range of clinical signs, which may be vague or
nonspecific. The ultrasonographic evaluation of the adrenal glands is
technically challenging, but assessment of the glands is now considered
glands are small, a competent sonogra-pher using good-quality equipment
can identify both glands in most patients. For a lateral approach, the hair
coat should be clipped from the lateral abdomen to the level of the
transverse processes of the lumbar spine and over the last few intercostal
use of high-frequency linear or sector probes and a sound knowledge of
normal anatomy. Sedation may be helpful in evaluating agitated,
aggressive, or painful patients, and in obese patients because it relaxes the
621
abdomen and allows the operator to apply pressure with less patient
discomfort. For most dogs, a 7-Mhz or 10-Mhz sector transducer is the
best choice to evaluate the adrenals. A linear transducer may be used to
 probes are unsuitable for evaluating the right adrenal gland in most dogs.
SONOGRAPHY OF THE
NORMAL ADRENAL GLANDS
In Dogs
The normal left adrenal gland is hypoechoic to the surrounding fat, is well
resembling a peanut (Figure 12.1A and C). When using a high-frequency
transducer, a thin hyperechoic line, which runs parallel to the capsule, may
be seen, representing the junction between cortex and medulla (Figure
12.1C). The right adrenal gland may appear wedge shaped in some dogs
anaid) adeus pioao paeauoe ue sey 1! iso u! inq (al'hl anai)
12.1B), usually without the pronounced waist seen in the left adrenal
     o t     
surrounding fat and may exhibit a thin hyperechoic band separating cortex
and medulla.
The adrenal glands are located in the retroperitoneal space, medial to the
ipsilateral kidney. The left adrenal gland is located along the lateral aspect
of the abdominal aorta, just cranial to the origin of the left renal artery.
The left phrenicoabdominal artery and vein pass dorsal and ventral,
respectively, to the midbody of the gland. The right adrenal gland is
located close to caudal vena cava, lying between lateral and dorsal to this
vessel, just cranial to the right renal artery and right renal vein. The right
phrenicoabdominal artery and vein pass dorsal and ventral to the gland, as
on the left. The adrenal glands may be scanned from the ventral abdomen,
makes this approach more difficult. When scanning patients in dorsal
622
operator to enable one to place the probe further dorsal. The author prefers
to scan the adrenals by using a lateral approach. When scanning patients
in lateral recumbency, the probe is placed on the upper side of the
processes, to minimize interference from interposed gas in the small
intestine and colon.
Figure 12.1. Normal adrenal glands in dogs. The two schematic drawings
 on top illustrate the localization of the adrenal glands in a dog placed on
lateral recumbency (left)and on dorsal recumbency (ventral approach: top
right).AO, aorta; CA, celiac artery; CM, cranial mesenteric; CVC, caudal
vena cava; LK, left kidney; and RK, right kidney. A: Dorsal plane image
of a normal canine left adrenal gland. Note the elongated bilobed shape
ventral groove (black arrow). The anechoic structure caudal and lateral to
the gland is the left renal vein (arrowhead), whereas the cranial mesenteric
artery (white arrow) lies deep to the midbody of the adrenal gland. B:
Sagittal plane image of a normal canine right adrenal gland. The gland is
fusiform and is parallel to the aorta (Ao) in the far field. It is also closely
apposed to the caudal vena cava (CVC), which runs medially and
somewhat parallel  to the gland. Hyperechoic borders of  the
phrenicoabdominal vein are noted at the mid-ventromedial aspect of the
gland (black arrow) C and D:Sagittal plane images of normal left (C)and
right (D)adrenal glands. A well-defined hyperechoic rim is at the
corticomedullary junction. The left gland is slightly oblique in regard to
the aorta (Ao), located dorsally, and has a characteristic peanut shape, and
 a          
(CVC) is compressed in the near field. Images B-D courtesy of M.A.
d'Anjou.
623
Lateral
Ventral
RAdrena
LeftAdrenal
RightAdrenal
CVC
Figure 12.2. Anatomical landmarks for the left adrenal gland in dogs. A:
Dorsal plane image of a normal canine left adrenal gland. The cranial pole
of the gland is located just ventral to the celiac (CA) and cranial
mesenteric (CMA) arteries. B: Dorsal plane image of a normal canine left
adrenal gland with color flow Doppler. The left renal artery (RA)
originates caudal to the left adrenal gland and courses cranially around it.
The aorta (Ao) is located just dorsal to the gland and to cross-sectional
views of the celiac and cranial mesenteric arteries. The thin vessel, with
arterial flow, which originates from the aorta and crosses the midbody of
624
the adrenal gland, is the left phrenicoabdominal artery. The layered pattern
of colors noted in several arteries is caused by aliasing and does not truly
indicate flowreversal.
110.61
The initial approach to the left adrenal gland is to scan the area medial to
the left kidney and lateral to the abdominal aorta. For the right adrenal
gland, area medial to the right kidney and lateral to dorsal to the caudal
vena cava is scanned. This technique may be successful in many patients.
However, the position of the adrenal glands varies in relation to the
kidneys. The left kidney in particular may rotate and drop when a dog is
can be more reliably located by using vascular landmarks in either lateral
or dorsal recumbency (Spaulding 1997) (Figure 12.2).
To identify the left adrenal gland, the probe is placed on the left
abdominal wall, just ventral to the lumbar transverse processes and
plane image is obtained, and the ultrasound beam is fanned ventral and
dorsal until the aorta is found. The probe is then rotated until a
longitudinal image of the aorta is obtained. One then follows the aorta
cranial to the origin of the left renal artery, which usually originates from
the lateral aspect of the aorta and courses a short distance laterally before
making a sharp turn cranially. From this point, one scans further cranially,
fanning the beam dorsally and ventrally. A short distance cranially to the
left renal artery, the celiac artery cranially and the cranial mesenteric
artery caudally arise from the aorta. As one fans the beam ventrally from
the aorta, these arteries appear as two well-defined, circular, hypoechoic
or anechoic pulsing structures (Figure 12.2). The left adrenal gland is
ventrolateral or lateral to the aorta, cranial to the left renal artery and vein.
and at the level or immediately caudal to the origin of the cranial
         
625
identified, the beam is fanned ventral to dorsal and back again through this
area until the adrenal gland is found. In thin animals, the gland is closely
mop piel st i! 'saseaui ey Apoq go Aunb a sy eoe au m pasodde
around the adrenal gland, increasing separation from the aorta, but also
providing contrast and making the gland more prominent. The long axis of
the left adrenal gland may be slightly tilted in comparison with the long
o yaual au un pau q on paau Ae aqond a pue 'eoe an o six
the left adrenal gland is maximized. The phren-icoabdominal vein may be
seen as two fine, hypere-choic parallel lines obliquely crossing the
midbody of the adrenal gland (Figure 12.1A). The phrenicoabdom-inal
oa nq 's apo q uo uaas nou pu s ainb aq A sassa
To identify the right adrenal gland, the probe is placed in the right
paralumbar fossa just ventral to the transverse processes. The beam is
fanned dorsal and ventral until the caudal vena cava is identified. A
common error is to apply too much pressure to the abdominal wall, which
collapses the caudal vena cava and prevents its identification. The caudal
or moderate pressure, which will cause the vessel to collapse (Figures
12.1D and 12.3). Alternatively, color or pulsed Doppler interrogation
reveals craniad, low-velocity venous flow within the vena cava. The vena
cava and aorta are close together in the midabdomen, and in some dogs
both vessels can be seen in the same scan plane. The vena cava is
followed cranially, which usually requires the probe be placed caudal to
the last rib and angled cranially. In the cranial abdomen, the aorta and
caudal vena cava separate. The beam is fanned ventral and dorsal through
the caudal vena cava until the cranial mesenteric and celiac arteries are
identified. The appearance of these vessels is identical to that seen from
the left side of the abdomen: They appear as two round hypoechoic or
anechoic structures just ventral to the aorta and medial to the caudal vena
cava. The right adrenal gland is located between dorsal and dorsolateral to
the caudal vena cava, at approximately the level of the cranial mesenteric
and celiac arteries. In almost all dogs, the right adrenal gland is closely
apposed to the caudal vena cava and may be difficult to distinguish in a
dorsal plane image because of volume averaging. Obtaining a transverse
          d  
identifying the gland (Figure 12.3). It may be necessary to place the probe
626
in one of the last two or three intercostal spaces if the gland cannot be
imaged by angling the probe cranially from a position caudal to the last
  ss  so    so d  
used to bring the gland closer to the probe.
adrenal gland is 3-16 mm in maximum diameter and 10-50 mm long. The
right adrenal gland is up to 3-14 mm in maximum diameter and 10-39
mm long (Barthez et al. 1995; Grooters et al. 1995; Hoerauf and Reusch
1996; Douglass et al. 1997). There appears to be a poor correlation
between  body  weight  and  maximum  adrenal  diameter  and  better
    i      
reported sizes reflects that patients selected for inclusion were described
as normal, young, old, healthy, or not showing signs of any endocrine
disease, and these studies may have included dogs with subclinical or
nonfunctional adrenal lesions. The maximum diameter of the adrenal
gland at the caudal pole seems to be the most reliable measure of adrenal
size, and a measurement of 7.4 mm as the maximum normal measurement
appears to offer a reasonable combination of sensitivity and specificity
(Barthez et al. 1998).
Figure 12.3. Normal canine right adrenal gland. Transverse plane image
of the gland (between the cursors), and the caudal vena cava, in the right
cranial abdomen. The adrenal gland is closely apposed to the dorsolateral
border of the caudal vena cava (CVC). Note how the shape of the caudal
vena cava is rhomboidal, a result of partial collapse caused by pressure
applied by the sonographer. Fat is present between the right kidney (RK)
and the adrenal.
627
ADRENAL
RK
In Cats
The adrenal glands in cats are found by using a similar approach to that
employed in dogs. In most cats, scanning the area medial to the kidney
adrenal glands. The same vascular landmarks as used in dogs can also be
used to find the feline adrenal glands. The feline adrenal gland is short,
ovoid or cylindrical, and hypoechoic (Cartee et al. 1993) (Figure 12.4)
cortex and medulla. In normal cats, both adrenal glands are 10-11 mm
long, and the maximum diameter of both glands is 4.3 ± 0.3 mm.
normal feline left adrenal gland. The gland is ovoid (between the cursors,
9.5 mm). The celiac (left arrow) and cranial mesenteric (right arrow)
arteries are seen medial to the gland. Ao, aorta; and Sp, spleen. B: Sagittal
plane image of a normal feline right adrenal gland. The gland appears as
an ovoid hypoechoic structure (between the cursors, 1 cm), and the
medulla is slightly more echogenic than the cortex (L, liver). The caudal
628
vena cava (CVC) and aorta (Ao) are in the same plane. Images courtesy of
D. Penninck.
Figure 12.5. Pituitary dependent adrenal hyperplasia in two dogs. A:
Dorsal plane image of a left adrenal gland. The gland is uniformly
enlarged (the caudal pole [arrows] is approximately 10 mm wide), but
retains a normal shape. There was similar enlargement of the right adrenal
gland.
-This  finding
 is   consistent   with  pituitary-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism. The left kidney (LK) is in the near field. B: Sagittal
plane image of the right adrenal gland in another dog with
enlarged. The left gland was within normal limits for size (7 mm thick).
0.87cm
629
SONOGRAPHIC FINDINGS IN
ADRENAL DISORDERS
Cushing's Syndrome
 go ped se pasn Aunba st punosenn soop ui saredoopu
medical database of suspected cases (Behrend et al. 2002). However, it
must be remembered that, although ultrasound may provide useful data, it
cannot be usedalone
1n
 diagnosing  hyperadrenocorticism.
 accounts for
approximately 80% of dogs with hyperadreno-corticism. If a patient's
history, clinical signs, and laboratory test results support a diagnosis of
hyperad-renocorticism, PDH should be suspected if both adrenal glands
appear symmetrically enlarged (often described as plump) (Barthez et al.
1998; Feldman and Nelson 2004) (Figures 12.5 and 12.6)
Unfortunately, the adrenal glands may measure within the normal range
(less than 7.4 mm) in some cases of PDH or may demonstrate unilateral or
asymmetrical enlargement (Barthez et al. 1995). As already mentioned,
some healthy dogs have adrenal glands that exceed 7.4 mm in maximal
diameter. Some dogs with chronic nonendocrine disease may also exhibit
mild symmetrical adrenal enlargement (Figure 12.7)
Figure 12.6. Pituitary-dependent adrenal hyperplasia in a dog. Color
Doppler images obtained in a dog with a pituitary tumor and signs of
hyperadrenocorticism. Both adrenals are enlarged, which is more evident
on the left side (A).The caudal pole of the right gland (B)is thicker than
the cranial pole. The left adrenal gland (A)is mildly inhomogeneous.
Phrenicoabdominal vessels are seen at the ventromedial aspect of each
gland (arrows). Other vascular landmarks, such as the aorta (Ao) and the
caudal vena cava (CVC), are also in the scanned field. Images courtesy of
M.A. d'Anjou.
630
Figure 12.7. Rounded adrenal gland in a dog with a chronic,
nonendocrinian disorder. Dorsal oblique image of the left adrenal gland in
a small-breed dog with a chronic disease, but without evidence of
medulla in comparison to the cortex. Images courtesy of M.A. d' Anjou.
0.86cm
Figure 12.8. Primary adrenal hyperadrenocorticism in a dog. Dorsal plane
image obtained in the left craniodorsal abdomen. A large bilobed mass is
medial and cranial to the kidney (between the cursors). The mass has a
mottled echotexture and is well defined. The right adrenal gland was not
identified, and these findings are consistent with primary unilateral
adrenal hyperadrenocorticism.
631
5.60cm
2.88cm
  )  
adrenocortical tumors accounts for approximately 20% of dogs with
clinical signs and clinicopathologic findings, ATH should be considered if
one adrenal gland is enlarged, contains a nodule, or has been effaced by a
mass and the contralateral gland is small or not seen, suggesting that it has
been suppressed (Figure 12.8). However, in some cases, the functional
tumor may be small and is not detected by ultrasonography. Further
confounding the diagnosis, there are reports of dogs with tumors of both
the pituitary gland and the adrenal cortex, as well as bilateral primary
adrenal neoplasia (Greco et al. 1999). In dogs with hyperadrenocorticism
appear small or may not be seen.
Figure 12.9. Incidental adrenal mineralization in an old cat. Sagittal
ultrasound (A)and schematic (B)images of the right adrenal gland on
which hyperechoic foci are seen in association with acoustic shadowing
(*), but without evidence of adre-nomegaly. These changes were also
apparent on the left side. Vascular landmarks are noted. Ao, aorta; CA,
celiac artery; CMA, cranial mesenteric artery; and CVC, caudal vena
cava. Images courtesy of M.A. d' Anjou.
632
In contrast to dogs, adrenal disease is uncommon in cats. Adrenal
mineralization is common in older cats and should not be considered a
sign of neoplasia (Figure 12.9). Feline Cushing's syndrome is uncommon,
but ultrasonography may be helpful in determining whether the disease is
pituitary dependent or caused by a functional adrenal cortical tumor. The
criteria are similar to those in dogs and, based on the limited data
available, may be more reliable (Watson and Herrtage 1998; Feldman and
Nelson 2004). Bilateral adrenal enlargement suggests PDH, whereas a
unilateral nodule or mass suggests ATH. However, as in dogs, some cats
with PDH had normal adrenal glands while one cat with ATH had
bilateral adrenal enlargement.
Addison's Disease
Adiagnosis of Addison's disease cannot be made based on
ultrasonographic findings alone. However, a study showed measurable
reduction in thickness (range for left adrenal gland, 2.2 to 3.0 mm, and for
right adrenal gland, 2.2 to 3.4 mm) and length (range for left adrenal
gland, 10.0 to 19.7 mm, and for right adrenal gland, 9.5 to 18.8 mm) of
affected adrenal glands compared to the normal dogs (Hoerauf and Reusch
1999). Therefore, in a patient with consistent clinical and laboratory
findings, the detection of small adrenal glands or failure to detect the
glands, despite a technically adequate study, can be considered
circumstantial evidence supporting a diagnosis of hypo-adrenocorticism
(Figure 12.10).
633
Adrenal Nodules and Masses
The differential diagnosis for adrenal nodules and masses includes cortical
adenoma, cortical adenocarci-noma, pheochromocytoma, metastasis, and
hyperpla-sia. Cortical tumors may or may not be functional, and there may
be no signs of hyperadrenocorticism. The sonographic appearance of these
lesionsisnonspecific
(Figure 12.11).
 Clinical  signs  of
pheochromocytomas are often vague, nonspecific, or intermittent
(Feldman and Nelson 2004), and their sonographic features are
nonspecific (Figures 12.12 and 12.13). Nodules and masses vary in size
and echogenicity. However, if the nodules exceeds 2 cm, benign or
malignant neoplasia is more likely, and if the lesion exceeds 4 cm,
malignant neoplasia is more likely (Besso et al. 1997). However, both
most reliable sign of malignancy is evidence of invasion of local tissues
and structures, which can occur with adrenocortical carcinomas and
pheochromocytomas (Platt et al. 1998).
These tumors may invade the adjacent kidney or musculature and extend
to involve the vertebrae and cause neurological signs. Locally invasive
lesions may be recognized sonographically especially if they distort the
kidney (Figure 12.13).
[nvasion of the caudal vena cava and formation of a thrombus within its
lumen may occur with malignancies of the right adrenal gland (Figures
12.14-12.16). Other local vessels may also be invaded, such as the renal
veins, adrenal veins, and phrenicoabdominal vessels. Vascular invasion by
malignant   adrenal   neoplasms  is   detected  more   commonly   by
histopathology and necropsy than by ultrasound, because the affected
vessels may be quite small and below the limit of ultrasound resolution
(Besso et al. 1997; Feldman and Nelson 2004). The presence of a venous
thrombus adjacent to an adrenal mass is highly suggestive of malignancy.
Figure 12.10. Addison's disease in a dog. Sagittal ultrasound images of
the left (A)and right (B)adrenal glands in a dog with hypoadrenocorticism.
Ao, aorta; and RV, left renal vein. Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
634
Figure 12.11. Adrenal tumors in two dogs. A: Sagittal sonogram of a
pheochromocytoma of the right adrenal gland in a 9-year-old Chihuahua
crossed. The mass is homogeneously echogenic and appears dorsal to the
aorta (Ao) and just cranial to the left renal vein (RV). L, liver. B:
Transverse sonogram of an adenocarcinoma of the left adrenal gland in an
11-year-old large-breed dog. A large, irregular, inhomogeneous mass
(arrowheads) has replaced the left adrenal gland. This mass contains
amorphous mineralization, as seen as shadowing hyperechoic foci (arrow),
which is more typical of this malignant process. In both lesions, there was
no sonographic evidence of vascular invasion, although caudal
displacement and compression of the left renal vein (RV) is seen in B. S,
spleen. Images courtesy of D. Penninck and M.A. d'Anjou.
B
    e    
condition, aortic thrombus can be detected. Aortic thrombosis caused by
tumor invasion has not been reported (Besso et al. 1997). Hyperechoic
foci with distal acoustic shadowing, representing mineralization, have
been reported more commonly with adrenocortical tumors, but may occur
in medullary tumors and with benign lesions (Figure 12.11). The shape of
the adrenal lesion may offer some circumstantial evidence as to type. If
the gland retains a normal shape, hyperplasia is considered more likely.
635
Discrete, well-defined nodules suggests benign neoplasia, whereas
amorphous or irregularly shaped masses suggest malignancy (Besso et al.
1997).
Figure 12.12. Adrenal pheochromocytomas in two dogs. A: Sagittal
sonogram of a pheochromocytoma in the 8-year-old boxer crossed. A
large mass is medial to the left kidney, but not invading the adjacent
vessels. B: Sagittal sonogram of a pheochromocytoma in the 15-year-old
golden retriever. The mass is adjacent to right renal vein (RV) and caudal
vena cava (CvC), but not invading them, as confirmed during surgery.
Images courtesy of D. Penninck.
Figure 12.13. Invasive pheochromocytoma in a dog. Dorsal plane image
   si  n    n   o
field (arrowheads), and the renal pelvis (P) is moderately dilated. A
bilobed, hypoechoic mass (arrows) is present medial to the right kidney
and extends into the hilus of the kidney. The pelvic dilation suggests
 a q n o is q   o o 
The mass was found to be a pheochromocytoma.
636
Figure 12.14. Adrenocortical carcinoma and venous thrombosis in a dog.
l  u o s da)  ) 
midabdomen of a dog with peritoneal effusion and pelvic limb swelling. A
large, irregular, inhomogeneous mass (arrowheads) is ventral to the caudal
vena cava (CVC), displacing the left renal vein caudally (LRV). A
moderately echogenic structure, with hypoechoic portions (B),is found in
the lumen of the CVC, protruding into the right renal vein (RRV),
consistent with thrombosis (arrows). At surgery, there was no evidence of
vascular invasion by the mass, although this was initially suspected.
Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
637
Figure 12.15.Large pheochromocytoma and venous thrombosis in a
12-year-old mixed-breed dog- A: Sagittal sonogram of a large
pheochromocytoma (arrows) of the right adrenal gland. B: A transverse
sonogram of the mass and the invaded caudal vena cava (CVC), which
appears significantly larger than the adjacent aorta (Ao). C: The
echogenic thrombus is well seen in the lumen of the vessel. D: The color
Doppler assessment outlines the caudal margin of the thrombus. The
vascular invasion was confirmed at surgery. Images courtesy of D.
Penninck.
638
Adrenal nodules and small masses have become more common incidental
findings as operator experience has increased and machine quality has
improved. These are sometimes referred to as “incidentalomas" (Figure
12.17) and leave clinicians with the dilemma of how far the diagnosis
should be pursued. Many of these lesions cause no clinical signs, and a
diagnosis is never confirmed. Reported diagnoses include normal tissue,
nonfunctional cortical tumors, granulomas, adrenal cysts, myelolipoma,
hemorrhage, metastatic tumor, and pheochromocytoma (Feldman and
Nelson 2004). The medical history and clinical signs should be reviewed
for evidence of endocrine disease. Clinicopathologic tests are indicated if
any such signs are identified. Larger masses or nodules (greater than 2
cm) are more likely to be neoplastic, so surgical removal should be
considered. However, many of these patients have serious concurrent
illnesses and may be quite aged, so such an aggressive approach may not
be indicated or acceptable to the owner. If there is no evidence of
endocrine disease or sono-graphic evidence of invasiveness, serial
ultrasound examinations at 1- to 3-month intervals can be used to monitor
for enlargement or progression of the lesion. If there is evidence of
 progression, surgical excision may be prudent.
Figure 12.16. Invasive adrenal tumor in an 1l-year-old schnauzer. A:
Sagittal sonogram of a large invasive tumor of the left adrenal gland. B:
On color Doppler evaluation, the mass appears highly vascular. C: An
extensive thrombus is within the caudal vena cava (CVC) outlined by
white arrowheads. D: The thrombus (T) extends caudally up to the level
of the bladder. E: Inhomogeneous, echogenic thrombus (arrow) is also
seen invading the renal vein. The small bright focus within the thrombus
most likely represents mineralization. The highly vascular mass and
dependent thrombus could not be successfully resected at surgery. Images
courtesy of D. Penninck.
639
03m
Figure 12.17. Incidental adrenal nodules in two dogs. A: Dorsal plane
image of a left adrenal gland. A well-defined, inhomogeneous,
hyperechoic nodule is in the cranial pole of the adrenal gland. The nodule
was an incidental finding and remained unchanged on serial examinations.
Anechoic cross sections of the celiac and cranial mesenteric arteries are
seen dorsally. B: Sagittal sonogram of both adrenal glands of a
      
serial examinations. Images courtesy of D. Penninck.
640
ADREN
Figure 12.18. Fine-needle aspiration using a 22-gauge spinal needle
(arrow) was performed on this adrenal mass (arrowheads) in a dog. No
complication was encountered during the procedure. The final diagnosis
was adrenocortical adenocarcinoma.
641
INTERVENTIONAL
PROCEDURES
Fine-needle aspiration or biopsy of adrenal nodules or masses may be
attempted (Figure 12.18) and is routinely performed in human patients.
However, in dogs these tests are of equivocal value and are not without
malignant adrenocortical tumors based on cytologic criteria. Attempted
fine-needle aspiration or biopsy of a pheochromocytoma may cause
uncontrollable hemorrhage or paroxysmal hypertension.
REFERENCES
Barthez PY, Nyland TG, Feldman EC (1995) Ultrasonographic evaluation
of adrenal glands in dogs.J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:1180-1183.
642
Barthez PY, Nyland TG, Feldman EC (l998) Ultrasonography of the
adrenal glands in the dog, cat, and ferret. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Pract 28:869-885
Behrend EN, Kemppainen RJ, Clark TP, Salman MD, Peterson ME
(2002) Diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism in dogs: A survey of internists
and dermatologists. J Am Vet Med Assoc 220: 1643-1649.
Besso JG,  Penninck  DG,  Gliatto  JM  (l997)  Retrospective
ultrasonographic evaluation of adrenal lesions in 26 dogs. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 38:448-455.
Cartee RE, Finn-Bodner ST, Gray BW (1993) Ultrasound examination of
the feline adrenal gland. J Diagn Med Sonogr 9:327-330.
Douglass JP, Berry CR, James S (1997) Ultrasonographic adrenal gland
measurements in dogs without evidence of adrenal disease. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 38:124-130.
Feldman EC, Nelson RW (2004) The adrenal gland. In:
Feldman EC, Nelson RW, eds. Canine and Feline Endocrinology and
Reproduction, 3' edition. St Louis: WB Saunders, pp 394-439.
Greco DS, Peterson ME, Davidson AP, Feldman EC, Komurek K (1999)
Concurrent   pituitary and  adrenal
al tumorsindogs with
214:1349-1353.
Grooters AM, Biller DS, Merryman J (1995) Ultrasonographic parameters
of normal canine adrenal glands: Comparison to necropsy findings. Vet
Radiol UItrasound 36:126-130.
Hoerauf A, Reusch C (1996) Ultrasonographic evaluation of the adrenal
glands in healthy dogs, dogs with Cushing's disease due to functional
adrenal tumors and dogs with Addison's disease [Abstract]. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 37:488.
Hoerauf A, Reusch C (1999) Ultrasonographic evaluation of the adrenal
35:214-218.
643
Platt SR, Sheppard BJ, Graham J, Uhl EW, Meeks J, Clemmons RM
(1998) Pheochromocytoma in the vertebral canal of two dogs. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 34:365-371.
Spaulding KA (l997) A review of sonographic identification of
abdominal blood vessels and juxtavascular organs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
38:4-23.
Watson PJ, Herrtage ME (1998) Hyperadrenocorticism in six cats. J Small
Anim Pract 39:175-184.
644
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE
TRACT
Silke Hecht
EXAMINATION TECHNIOUE
The ovaries and the uterus are the only female reproductive organs
routinely visualized by means of ultrasonography. The normal uterine
tubes are usually too small to be seen, and the vulva and vagina are
difficult to image transabdominally because of their intra-pelvic location.
Mammary glands are infrequently examined.
[ndications for ultrasonographic examination of the female reproductive
tract include pregnancy diagnosis, assessment of normal
1 fetal
with hormonal imbalances suggesting ovarian dysfunction, and abdominal
mass lesions in intact queens and bitches. Indications for ultrasonographic
examination of the mammary glands include abnormal findings on
palpation (swelling, pain, and heat) and a need to assess the extent of
 mammary gland neoplasia.
au u! inasn aaond Aeu Aouaqunou [erael u! yonoidde uy (l'tl ana)
examination of the ovaries. A 5-MHz transducer is usually sufficient to
visualize an enlarged fluid-filled uterus, fetal structures, or abdominal
mass lesions; however, a 7.5- or 10-MHz transducer provides better detail
645
in the examination of smaller structures and is recommended for most
indications. For the examination of the mammary glands, a
high-resolution transducer (7.5 MHz or higher) is recommended.
OVARIES
Normal Sonographic Anatomy
The ovaries are located caudally, and often laterally, to the caudal poles of
the kidneys, which are used as landmarks for their identification. They are
oval and measure approximately 2 cm long in dogs and less than l cm
long in cats. The appearance of the ovary varies during the estrus cycle
(Table 13.1 and Figures 13.2-13.5). Although ultrasonographic changes
during the ovarian cycle have been well studied in dogs, the exact time of
1996).
Ovarian Disorders
Ovarian diseases are uncommon in dogs and very rare in cats. In many
cases, a presumptive diagnosis of an ovarian abnormality is made based
on clinical findings, and ultrasonography is used to confirm the suspicion
rather than serving as the primary means of diagnosis (England et al.
2003).
Ovarian cysts appear as anechoic, well-circumscribed, and thin-walled
structures with distal enhancement (Figures 13.6 and 13.7). Hormonally
follicular  and luteinizing cysts  cannot be  differentiated   through
ultrasonography. Large follicles and corpora lutea may be confused with
ovarian cysts, and the finding of fluid-filled structures associated with the
ovary has to be interpreted in light of the clinical presentation
Ovarian tumors (epithelial tumors, sex-cord stromal tumors, and germ-cell
tumors), which appear as nodules or masses of variable size and
646
echogenicity, may have a cystic or mineral component (Figures 13.8 and
13.9).  Tumor  types cannot  be differentiated ultra-sonographically,
although teratomas and teratocarci-nomas have the tendency to become
very large and contain bone or mineral. The origin of an ovarian mass can
be difficult to determine when the enlarging organ changes position and
moves ventrally from its original location (Diez-Bru et al. 1998). Common
concurrent findings include ascites, pyometra, and cystic endome-trial
hyperplasia.
Figure 13.1. Normal female reproductive tract. On the left is a schematic
representation of the anatomy of the female reproductive tract. The
ovaries are located caudally and often laterally to the kidneys. The cervix
and body of the uterus are located dorsally to the urinary bladder. The
uterine horns extend craniolaterally from the uterine body and are usually
not easily visible in a normal dog. A: Sagittal image of a normal left
canine ovary (arrowheads). The left kidney (LK) is used as a landmark,
and the ovary is identified as an ovoid soft-tissue structure of medium
echogenicity caudal to the caudal pole. B and C: Transverse (B) and
sagittal (C) images of the normal canine uterus. On the transverse image,
urinary bladder (UB) and colon, which are used as landmarks. On the
sagittal image, the uterus (black arrows) is seen as a tubular structure of
medium echogenicity dorsal to the urinary bladder (UB).
647
RK
Ovary
UterineHorn
BodyofUterus
Cervix
Vagina
Figure 13.2. Normal ovary during anestrus. Sagittal image of the left
anestrus. The ovary is smoothly marginated, and slightly hypoechoic to
the adjacent left renal cortex (LK), without evidence of follicles or corpora
lutea.
648
OVARY
1.07cm
Table 13.1. Ultrasonographic appearance of canine ovaries throughout the
estrus cycle
Time of
Appearance of the Ovary
the
Estrus
Cycle
Anestrus
Small (mean length, 1.2 cm)
and early
Oval shape with a smooth contour
proestrus
Uniform echogenicity (no follicles, CLs,? or other structures)
proestrus
Size gradually increases; becomes a plumper oval shape; contour
usually remains smooth.
Follicles appear as round or oval-shaped anechoic fluid cavities with a
thin wall or no apparent wall.
Mean follicle number four (range, 0-10).
Follicle diameter is breed dependent. On the day prior to ovulation,
mean diameter reaches from S mm in beagles to 8 mm in retrievers.
The maximum diameter of preovulatory follicles may be as large as
11 mm.
Day of
Follicle number usually decreases to O—2 follicles per ovary.
ovulation
The remaining follicles tend to decrease in diameter, but the ovary
maintains its size.
Contour may appear bumpy.
649
Solid, hypoechoic CLs may appear.
A scant amount of fluid is occasionally detected adjacent to the ovary.
Estrus
Maximum ovarian size is reached S-6 days after ovulation
(300%400% of anestrus volume).
The contour is bumpy.
Fluid-filled CLs have anechoic centers.
There is a mean of three fluid-filled CLs per ovary.
May be indistinguishable from follicles.
Tend to be several millimeters larger, thicker walled, and more
variable in shape than follicles.
Solid CLs are S-9 mm in diameter.
Diestrus
The contour is bumpy.
Fluid-filled CLs gradually decrease in size and increase in
echogenicity to become 6-mm solid CLs between 10 and 14 days after
ovulation.
Ovarian size decreases somewhat (200%-300% of anestrus volume)
as fluid-filled CLs regress.
Solid CLs persist through most of diestrus.
aCL, corpus luteum.
Reprinted from Yeager and Concannon (1995), with permission.
Figure 13.3. Normal ovary during anestrus. Sagittal image of the left
Ovary (between the cursors) in a 6-year-old Labrador retriever during late
 Ovary are associated with far enhancement. LK, left kidney.
650
Figure 13.4. Normal ovary during diestrus. Sagittal image of the left
  s      s gs
 g       r  
of the ovary is consistent with edge shadowing artifact (arrowheads).
651
Figure 13.5. Normal ovary during pregnancy. Sagittal image of the left
 d a    (s   A
large hypoechoic corpora lutea cause a lumpy organ contour.
652
Figure 13.6. Ovarian cysts in a dog. The right ovary (between the cursors)
is 2.2 cm long, and two thin-walled anechoic circular structures are
associated with the cranial and the caudal poles, respectively. The cysts
are characterized by distal enhancement (arrowheads).
Figure 13.7. Cystic ovary in a 15-year-old vizsla. Multiple thin-walled
anechoic structures are associated with the left ovary. Normal ovarian
parenchyma cannot be identified.
653
Figure 13.8. Ovarian adenocarcinoma in a dog. A 2.8 × 3.1-cm irregularly
marginated and mixed echogenic mass (arrows) is caudal to the left
kidney (LKID).
654
Figure 13.9. Sex-cord stromal tumor arising from residual ovarian tissue
in a spayed 9-year-old Labrador retriever. A large inhomogeneous and
mixed echogenic mass (arrows) is associated with the midabdomen.
UTERUS
Normal Sonographic Anatomy
The normal nongravid uterus is inconspicuous, often difficult to identify
in dogs, and usually not seen in cats. It is best identified in the caudal
abdomen, where it appears as a tubular structure between the urinary
bladder (ventral) and the descending colon (dorsal) (Figure 13.1). Its size
and appearance depend on the size of the animal, previous pregnancies,
and stage of the estrus cycle (Table 13.2 and Figures 13.10 and 13.11)
After identification of the cervix or the uterine body, the uterus is traced
cranially to the level of the bifurcation and the uterine horns. An
alternative approach is the identification of the uterine horns close to the
ovaries; however, their small diameter at this location hinders
655
identification. Even if the uterine body and the cervix are seen in a
nongravid animal, the uterine horns may not be visible because of their
small size and surrounding intestinal segments. The lack of identifiable
wall layers helps in differentiating uterine horns from intestinal loops.
In spayed dogs, the uterine stump is usually inconspicuous and may be
visible as a blind-ending tubular structure between urinary bladder and
colon (Figure 13.12) .
Table 13.2. Ultrasonographic appearance of the canine uterus during the
estrus cycle
Time
Appearance of the Uterus
Late diestrus and
Uniformly hypoechoic
anestrus
Neither layered wall nor luminal echo
3-8 mm in diameter Difficult to detect
Vagina and cervix difficult to distinguish from the
uterine body
Proestrus, estrus,
1-mm hyperechoic luminal echo and hypoechoic inner
metestrus, and early
layer of uterine wall variably present
diestrus
Relatively easy to detect
13 mm larger in diameter in comparison with
anestrus
Focal enlargement of cervix with "bull's eye"
 appearance in cross section because of multiple layers
Data from Yeager and Concannon (1995)
Pregnancy
Normal Pregnancy
Ultrasonography is a reliable method for diagnosing pregnancy in small
animals. Inconsistency exists in the literature regarding the time of the
earliest definitive diagnosis, partially because it is difficult to determine
the time of conception in dogs. The improved image detail provided by
more recent ultrasound systems could contribute to earlier diagnosis.
656
The most commonly used definition of gestational age is the number of
days after luteinizing hormone (LH) peak in dogs and the number of days
after breeding in cats (Mattoon and Nyland 1995). According to these
definitions, the length of normal pregnancy is 65 ± 1 day for dogs and 61
days for cats. A practical problem is that information on hormone assays
is often unavailable to animal owners and ultrasonographers. If the time of
breeding is known, pregnancy can usually be ruled out 30-33 days after
   s   s h  s i   s
based on a negative ultrasonographic examination.
Figure 13.10. Normal anestrus uterus in a 6-year-old Scottish terrier. A:
On the sagittal image, the uterus (arrowheads) is a tubular, homogeneous
structure of medium echogenicity dorsal to the colon, which is
characterized by a hyperechoic interface and distal dirty shadowing. The
transition between the cervix and the uterine body is inconspicuous. The
urinary bladder is not visible on this image. B: On the transverse image,
the uterus (arrow) appears as a round, homogeneous structure dorsal to the
colon and to the left of the urinary bladder (UB).
657
terls
Colon
Uterus
Colon
Figure 13.11. Normal late-proestrus or early-estrus uterus in a 6-year-old
Labrador retriever (the same dog as in Figure 13.3). A: Sagittal image of
cervix and body of the uterus. The uterine wall is thicker than during
anestrus. Hyperechoic luminal echoes and a small volume of intraluminal
658
fluid are present (arrowheads). The diameter of the cervix is larger than
the diameter of the uterine body. B: Transverse image of the cervix
(between the cursors). The cervix is thick walled, with hyperechoic and
descendingcolon.
Golor
Figure 13.12. Uterine stump in a healthy 12-year-old mixed-breed dog.
A: Sagittal image. The uterine stump) appears as tubular structure
between the urinary bladder (UB) and the colon (C). B: Transverse image.
The uterine stump (between the arrowheads) appears as a circular
hypoechoic structure between the urinary bladder (UB) and the colon (C).
UB
UB
659
Ultrasonography is useful in monitoring normal embryonic and fetal
development (Yeager et al. 1992; Zambelli et al. 2002) (Figures
13.13-13.18). The first reliable ultrasonographic indicator of pregnancy is
the detection of gestational chambers, which appear as small, thin-walled
anechoic structures associated with the uterus. The embryo can be
 a ss u 811 sp  pu sop u  s 1 pa
 e    e    so
organs. A summary of ultrasonographic findings at different stages of
pregnancy is presented in Table 13.3. Formulas have been developed and
based on measurements of fetal dimensions (Beck et al. 1990; England et
al. 1990; Yeager et al. 1992; Mattoon and Nyland 1995) (Table 13.4).
Using these parameters, time of parturition can be predicted with an
accuracy of ±2-3 days (England et al. 2003). Ultrasonographic
determination of litter size is not reliable (Toal et al. 1986)
Figure 13.13. Progression of normal pregnancy in a domestic shorthair
cat. A: Day 16. The embryo (arrow) is directly attached to the wall of the
circular, fluid-filled gestational sac in the far field (between the cursors).
A second fluid-filled gestational sac is in the near field. B: Day 39.
Transverse image of the fetus (between the cursors). Hepatic parenchyma
and gallbladder (GB) are visible. Linear echogenic material adjacent to the
fetus is consistent with yolk-sac membrane (arrowheads). C: Day 39.
Sagittal image of the fetus (between the cursors). The head is to the left
and the pelvic limbs (PL) to the right of the image. The spine (S) is
visible, the heart (H) is surrounded by hyperechoic lung, and the anechoic
structure caudal to the diaphragm is consistent with a fluid-filled stomach
(arrowhead). D: Day 60. Sagittal image of the fetal thorax and cranial
abdomen.  The heart is surrounded by hyperechoic  pulmonary
parenchyma. Gallbladder (GB), stomach (ST), and urinary bladder appear
as circular anechoic structures in the abdomen.
660
HEAD
Figure 13.14. Progression of normal pregnancy in a 4-year-old Labrador
retriever. The dog was bred twice during the last estrus. Initially, several
embryos were identified, most of which were resorbed. One healthy puppy
was delivered by cesarean section 62 days after last breeding. The results
of hormone assays are not available. A: Day 28 after last breeding. An
embryo (E) is visible in the fluid-filled gestational sac. A flickering
heartbeat was observed on real-time examination. The yolk sac (Y) is the
fluid-filled structure adjacent to the fetus. B: Day 35. Transverse image of
the fetus. The surrounding allantoic membrane is indicated by arrowheads.
The yolk sac (Y) is the folded fluid-filled structure adjacent to the fetus.
C: Day 42. Dorsal plane image of the fetal head. The mandible is to the
left on the image, and the cranium and brain are to the right. D: Day 42.
 (i   l       o   
vertebral column are clearly visible (arrows). E: Day 60. Transverse
image of the fetal thorax. The heart is clearly visible and is surrounded by
hyperechoic lung (L). F: Day 60. Sagittal image of the fetal thorax.
Cardiac chambers and large vessels are clearly visible. The surrounding
lung is hyperechoic.
661
Figure 13.15. Normal late-term pregnancy in a 4-year-old pointer.
Ultrasonographic examination  was  performed  2 months  after  last
breeding. The dog had four healthy puppies delivered by cesarean section
2 days after the ultrasonographic examination. A: Sagittal image of the
fetal abdomen. The left kidney (arrowheads), with distinct cortex and
medulla, is caudal to the fluid-filled stomach (S). Tubular intestinal
segments are in the near field. B: Sagittal image of the fetal eye, which
appears as a circular anechoic structure within a hyperechoic osseous orbit
(O). The posterior capsule of the lens is clearly seen (arrowhead). C:
Dorsal image of fetal caudal neck and cranial thorax. The trachea is
bright interfaces associated with strong shadows. D: Sagittal image of the
thorax. The aortic arch and proximal aorta (A) are well visualized.
662
 si    i u a  (  n  
the brachiocephalic trunk(BCT)
Caudal
Cranial
YE/LE
Ribs
rachea
Figure 13.16. Sonogram of a 25-day-old canine fetus. The zonular
 e  sd     a s 
membrane probably representing either part of the allantoic membrane or
the yolk sac. Image courtesy of D. Penninck.
663
Figure 13.17. Normal fetal circulation. The head of the fetus is to the left
of the image. The umbilical vein (UV) and umbilical artery (UA) extend
cranially to the liver (L) and caudally to the cranial aspect of the
fluid-filled urinary bladder (UB), respectively. The heart (H) is visible
cranial to the diaphragm. The heterogeneous color pattern observed in the
umbilical artery is caused by aliasing, a Doppler artifact that results when
pulse-repetition frequency is too low in regard to a high-velocity blood
flow.
664
Cranial
UA
UB
Figure 13.18. Normal fetal circulation. The head of the fetus is to the right
of the image. The caudal vena cava (C) and the aorta (A) enter and leave
the right and left heart, respectively. The aorta gives off the ductus
arteriosus (D).
peoH
665
Normal Postpartum Uterus
Ultrasonographic changes during normal involution of the postpartum
uterus have been described. Uterine wall thickness and volume of
intraluminal fluid decrease, and the uterus becomes less conspicuous over
time. Uterine involution usually takes 3-4 weeks in dogs and 24 days in
cats (Pharr and Post 1992; Ferretti et al. 2000).
Table 13.3. Ultrasonographic diagnosis of pregnancy
Ultrasonographic Findings
Dog
(Days After
(Days After
LH Surge)
Breeding!
Gestational chamber
20
10
Placental layers of uterine
22-24
15-17
wall
Embryo and heartbeat
23-25
16-18
Fetalmovement
34-36
30-34
Skeleton
30-33
Bladder and stomach
35-39
29-32
Liver (hypoechoic) and
38-42
29-32
lung (hyperechoic)
LH, luteinizing hormone.
Data from Yeager et al. (1992) and Zambelli et al. (2002)
Table 13.4. Formulas to predict gestational age and days before
 parturition in dogs and catsa
666
Gestational age in dogs (±3 days)
Less than 40 days
GA=(6×GSD)+20
GA=(3×CRL)+27
More than 40 days
GA=（15xHD)+20
GA=(7×BD）+29
GA=(6×HD)+(3×BD）+30
Daysbefore parturition in dogs
DBP=65-GA
Gestational age in cats (±2 days)
Greater than 40 days
GA=25xHD+3
GA=11×BD+21
Days before parturition in cats
DBP=61-GA
aGestational age (GA) is based on days after luteinizing hormone (LH)
surge in dogs and days after breeding in cats. Gestational sac diameter
  ()  y ()   ()
diameter (BD) measurements are in centimeters. Days before parturition
(DBP) is based on 65 ± 1 days after LH surge in dogs and 61 days after
breeding in cats.
Data modified and adapted from England et al. (l990), Yeager et al.
(1992), and Beck et al. 1990.
Reprinted from Mattoon and Nyland (1995), with permission from
Elsevier.
Sonography of Abnormal Pregnancy
The most common abnormalities of pregnancy in dogs and cats are
resorption (embryonic death before 25 days) and abortion (fetal death after
35 days). Embryonic resorption manifests as loss of the normal anechoic
gestational chamber, with accumulation of echogenic material within the
lumen, loss of embryonic heartbeat, embryonic disintegration, and
667
ultimately collapse of the gestational chamber with thickening of the
uterine wall (England 1998) (Figures 13.19 and 13.20).
Figure 13.19. Embryonic resorption in a 4-year-old Labrador retriever
(the same dog as in Figure 13.14). A: Day 28 after the last breeding.
Transverse image of a collapsed thick-walled gestational chamber, which
contains a small amount of echogenic fluid. The embryo is no longer
identified. The appearance of the gestational chamber suggests that
embryonic death occurred several days prior to the ultrasonographic
examination. B: Day 35 after the last breeding. Embryonic death was
more recent in respect to the ultrasonographic examination than in A.
Transverse image of a thick-walled gestational chamber, which is filled
with echogenic fluid. The embryonic remnant is indistinctly visible
(arrowheads). The gestational chamber has not yet collapsed.
as in Figure 13.15). A: Ultrasonographic examination 23 days after the
        
material and fluid.  Embryonic structures are  not  visible. B:
Ultrasonographic examination 1 month after  the last breeding. The
gestational chamber has collapsed.
668
Signs of fetal death include absence of heartbeat and fetal movement.
abnormal fetal posture, reduced volume and increased echogenicity of
fetal fluid, accumulation of gas within fetus or uterus, and fetal
disintegration (England et al. 2003) (Figure 13.21). Failure of implantation
of the conceptus, small size or under-development of the conceptus for
true gestational age, and abnormal location of the conceptus within the
uterus can usually not be diagnosed (England 1998). Ultrasonography is
heart rate has been reported to be twice that of maternal heart rate and is a
reliable indicator of fetal viability. Bradycardia is the normal response of a
fetus to hypoxia and is an important parameter in identifying in dystocia.
Figure 13.21. Fetal abnormalities. Ultrasonographic (left) and schematic
(right) images of a feline dead fetus. A: The transverse image of the fetus
is small, the skull bones are collapsed (arrowhead), and only a small
amount of echogenic fluid (F) is seen adjacent to the fetus. Normal fetal
anatomy (skeleton and organs) is not recognized because of fetal
  s n  o n   l s
bones or mineral foci within the dead fetus. The nature of the changes and
  s sg - e  tod  sy a go azis s a
D) suggest that this fetus died several days prior to the ultrasonographic
examination. Ut, wall of the uterus and/or placenta. C and D: Sagittal
image of a dead, near-term fetus in the same cat. There is normal fetal
   o     
examination. The diaphragm is a fine echogenic curvilinear line. Spine
(Sp), abdominal structures (Abd), and heart (H) with adjacent hypoechoic
lung are clearly seen. Anechoic intraluminal uterine fluid (LFL) is present.
A small amount of abdominal effusion (FFL) is seen in the near field. The
appearance of the fetus indicates that death has occurred recently. E and
F: Anasarca in a Chinook dog. The affected fetus was surrounded by
contained fluid (arrows in E) best seen here around the head (H) and neck.
A moderate pleural effusion (P) associated with retracted echogenic lungs
(arrowheads) is noted in F.
669
Figure 13.22. Uterine torsion in a pregnant cat. Transverse sonogram of
the uterine horn (arrowheads) that is thickened, hyperechoic, and contains
material of soft-tissue echogenicity. Fetal structures cannot be discerned
670
Although a large number of congenital defects can occur in dogs and cats.
these defects are very rarely diagnosed in utero. Examples of fetal
abnormalities that can be detected by means of ultrasonography include
hydrocephalus, fetal pleural effusion, and hydrops fetalis or anasarca
(Allen et al. 1989). Only a few other pregnancy disorders have been
condition that is characterized by infarction of the affected uterine
segment, with subsequent wall thickening, increased echogenicity of
uterine wall and fetal fluids, and fetal death (Figure 13.22)
Uterine Diseases
Fluid within the uterus is easily visualized by means of ultrasonography.
Echogenicity of the luminal contents is variable. Although hydrometra and
pyometra and hemometra tend to show echogenic luminal contents,
ultrasonographic differentiation of these entities is often not possible
(Figures 13.23-3.26). Concurrent uterine wall thickening, endometrial
cysts, and polyps are common. Uterine stump pyometra manifests as a
fluid-filled, blind-ending pouch between the urinary bladder and
descending colon (Figure 13.27)
671
Cystic endometrial hyperplasia causes thickening of the endometrium.
with cystic lesions embedded in the uterine wall because of proliferation
of endometrial glands (Voges and Neuwirth 1996) (Figure 13.28). The
hyperplasia is commonly associated with fluid accumulation within the
uterine lumen and may precede the development of mucome-tra or
pyometra (Figure 13.29) or be associated with endometritis.
Neoplasms of the uterus or the uterine stump, such as polyps, leiomyomas,
leiomyosarcomas, or adeno-carcinomas, are rare (Klein 1996). They
appear as nodules or masses of variable shape, size, and echogenicity and
     ss  ( 
become large enough to extend from the pelvic canal into the abdomen
(Figure 13.33). Uterine stump granulomas manifest as mass lesions of
variable echogenicity between the bladder and colon (Figure 13.34).
Differentiation of neoplastic from nonneoplastic uterine or vaginal mass
lesions and ultrasonographic distinction among different tumor types is
notpossible.
Figure 13.23. Endometritis and pyometra in dogs. A and B: Endometritis
Sagittal sonograms of a thickened uterine horn (A) and body (B)
containing a small amount of anechoic fluid. Notice the irregular margins
of the uterus. Images courtesy of D. Penninck. C-F: Pyometra in an
 8-year-old shih tzu. Ultrasonographic (C) and schematic (D) images of the
cervix and body of the uterus. The cervix is closed. The uterus is thick
walled and distended with echogenic material. The uterus appears between
the descending colon containing gas, dorsally, and the urinary bladder
(UB), ventrally. Ultrasonographic (E) and schematic (F) images of the
right uterine horn showing a thickened wall (between the cursors, 0.5-0.8
cm). The lumen of the uterus contains echogenic fluid
672
UB
Figure 13.24. Pyometra in a dog. Transverse image of the left uterine
horn (between the cursors) in an 1l-year-old whippet. The uterus is thick
walled (approximately 3 mm) and contains anechoic fluid. The uterine
wall does not show wall layers, enabling differentiation from adjacent
small intestinal segments (arrows).
673
Figure 13.25. Pyometra in an 11-year-old Shiba Inu. The uterus is
distended with fluid. The echogenicity of the fluid in the far field is higher
than in the near field, indicating settling of particles (cells) in the
dependent portion of the uterus.
UTERUS
674
Figure 13.26. Hydrometra in a 13-year-old cat. A: Transverse image 0f
the uterine horns, which are distended with anechoic fluid and measure up
to 3 cm in diameter. B: Sagittal image of one of the fluid-distended uterine
horns. There is irregularity of the uterine wall in the far field (arrow).
Linear hyperechoic lines projected on the lumen are consistent with
reverberation artifact (arrowheads)
A
Figure 13.27. Uterine stump pyometra in a dog. Sagittal (A) and
transverse (B) images of the uterus of a dog that previously had a
hysterectomy. The uterine stump appears as blind-ending pouch dorsal to
 s! i  a u  l  (n) a n a
echogenic than in the near field, consistent with settling of solid particles
(cells) in the dependent portion.
Figure 13.28. Cystic endometrial hyperplasia in dogs. A and B:
Ultrasonographic and schematic images of the uterus in a dog with
endometrial cystic hyperplasia. The uterus is thickened, and multiple
circular hypoechoic and anechoic structures are embedded in the uterine
wall, consistent with cysts (arrowheads). C: Cystic endometrial
hyperplasia in a 1-year-old spayed sheltie with remnant ovarian tissue. A
lobulated cystic structure (arrow) confined to the uterine stump is present
dorsal to the urinary bladder (UB). Image courtesy of D. Penninck. D:
675
Ultrasound image of a segment of an enlarged uterine horn (between the
cursors) in an intact female dog with a history of chronic vulvar discharge.
The uterine wall is thickened and irregular, and several anechoic to
hypoechoic cysts (arrows) are identified. Image courtesy of M.A.
d'Anjou.
Bladder
Figure 13.29. Presumptive cystic endometrial hyperplasia and mucometra
in a 5-year-old briard. Sagittal images of different areas of the left uterine
horn obtained with a curvilinear (A) and a linear (B) transducer. The
uterus is filled with anechoic fluid and thick walled, with multiple
anechoic cysts embedded in the uterine wall.
676
Figure 13.30. Uterine polyp and hydrometra in a 13-year-old cat. (the
same cat as in Figure 13.28). The transverse image of the uterus shows a
lobulated soft-tissue structure of 1-cm diameter surrounded by anechoic
fluid(arrowheads)
Uterus
Figure 13.31. Uterine stump adenocarcinoma in  a 16-year-old
mixed-breed dog. A mixed echogenic mass of more than 7-cm diameter is
associated with the caudal abdomen.
677
Figure 13.32. Uterine leiomyoma in an 8-year-old Rottweiler. A mixed
echogenic mass (between the cursors) is associated with the caudal
abdomen, which measures 8.3 × 5.2 cm in maximum diameter.
678
Figure 13.33. Vaginal leiomyoma. Power Doppler (A) and B-mode (B)
ultrasound images of a prolapsing mass in the vagina of a 10-year-old
American Eskimo female dog. A prominent vascular pattern is seen
throughout the mass, which is also heterogeneous. This mass causes dorsal
displacement of the rectum (R), but without evidence of wall invasion
(arrow). Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
B
Figure 13.34. Uterine granulomas in a cat. Transverse (A) and sagittal (B)
images of a uterine stump granuloma in a 13-year-old cat. There is a
1.5-cm homogeneous mass lesion of medium echogenicity (between the
cursors) dorsal and to the left of the urinary bladder.
MAMMARY GLANDS
Sonography of Normal Mammary Glands
The appearance of the mammary glands changes under hormonal
influences (late-term pregnancy and lactation). Normal mammary tissue in
nonlactating dogs is coarse and hypoechoic (Figure 13.35). In lactat-ing
679
and milk-filled ducts are encountered (Figure 13.36).
Sonography of Abnormal Mammary Glands
Abnormalities of the mammary glands include neoplasia, cysts, and
inflammation. Mammary tumors appear ultrasonographically as irregular,
mixed echo-genic mass lesions of variable size (Figures 13.37 and 13.38).
Benign and malignant mammary tumors cannot be differentiated based on
their ultrasonographic appearance. Since metastases are common in
malignant tumors, the axillary and/or inguinal lymph nodes should be
examined for enlargement and abnormal echotexture. Mastitis manifests
as swelling and hypoechogenicity of the mammary tissue, with
absces-sation in severe cases.
Figure 13.35. Inactive mammary tissue in an anestrus 7-year-old
nulliparous beagle. Ultrasonographic and schematic images on which the
mammary gland (arrowheads) is inconspicuous, small (1.0 x 0.5 cm), and
 of similar echogenicity and texture as adjacent subcutaneous fat.
Fat
Fat
Figure 13.36. Active mammary tissue in a 4-year-old dog 2 days prior to
parturition. A: The mammary tissue measures up to 3 cm in thickness, is
of medium echogenicity, and contains numerous tubular milk-filled ducts
(arrowheads). B: On color Doppler examination, the mammary tissue is
well vascularized. No color signal is detected in the ducts.
680
Figure 13.37. Mixed mammary tumor in a 6-year-old Rottweiler. An
approximately 3-cm heterogeneous mass is associated with a mammary
gland.S
Strong
gdistalacousticshadowing
(arrowheads)
indicates
mineralization.
Figure 13.38. Ulcerated and extensive mammary carcinoma invading
most of the right middle to caudal mammary chain in a 14-year-old cat.
 The mass is mostly hypoechoic and has irregular margins. Image courtesy
of D. Penninck.
681
INTERVENTIONAL
PROCEDURES
Depending on size and location, fine-needle aspiration or biopsy of mass
lesions associated with the ovary or the uterus can be performed under
ultrasound guidance following the same principles and precautions as in
other organ systems. Because of the risk of leakage into the peritoneal
 ou t sis e o n i  an 
routine procedure in the assessment of pregnant dogs or cats.
REFERENCES
Allen WE, England GCW, White KB (1989) Hydrops foetalis diagnosed
by real time ultrasonography in a bichon frise bitch. J Small Anim Pract
30:465-467.
Beck KA, Baldwin CJ, Bosu WTK (l990) Ultrasound prediction of
parturition in the queen. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 31:32-35.
Diez-Bru N, Garcia-Real I, Martinez EM, Rollan E, Mayenco A, Llorens
RadiolUltras0und 39:226-233.
682
England GCW  (l998)  Ultrasonographic  assessment of abnormal
pregnancy. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 28:849-868.
England GCW, Allen WE, Porter DJ (1990) Studies on canine pregnancy
using B-mode ultrasound:  Development of  the conceptus and
determination of gestational age. J Small Anim Pract 31:324-329.
England GCW, Yeager AE, Concannon PW (2003) Ultrasound imaging of
the reproductive tract of the bitch. In: Concannon PW, England GCW,
Verstegen JP, Linde-Forsberg C, eds. Recent Advances in Small Animal
Reproduction. Ithaca, NY: International Veterinary Information Service.
Ferretti LM, Newell SM, Graham JP, Roberts GD (2000) Radiographic
and ultrasonographic evaluation of the normal feline postpartum uterus.
Vet Radiol Ultras0und 41:287-291.
Klein MK (1996) Tumors of the female reproductive system. In: Withrow
SJ, MacEwen EG, eds. Small Animal Clinical Oncology. Philadelphia:
WB Saunders, pp. 347-355.
Mattoon JS, Nyland TG (1995) Ovaries and uterus. In: Nyland TG
Mattoon JS, eds. Small Animal Diagnostic Ultrasound. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders, pp. 231-249.
Pharr JW, Post K (1992) Ultrasonography and radiography of the canine
postpartum uterus. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 33:35-40.
Silva LDM, Onclin K, Verstegen JP (l996) Assessment of ovarian
changes around ovulation in bitches by ultrasonography, laparoscopy and
hormonal assays. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 37:313-320.
Toal RL, Walker MA, Henry GA (1986) A comparison of real-time
ultrasound, palpation and radiography in pregnancy detection and litter
size determination in the bitch. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 27:102-108.
Voges AK, Neuwirth L (l996) Ultrasound diagnosis: Cystic uterine
hyperplasia. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 37: 131-132.
Yeager AE, Concannon PW (1995) Ultrasonography of the reproductive
tract of the female dog and cat. In: Bonagura JD, ed. Kirk's Current
683
Yeager AE, Mohammed HO, Meyers-Wallen V, Vannerson L, Concannon
PW (1992) Ultrasonographic appearance of the uterus, placenta, fetus, and
fetal membranes throughout accurately timed pregnancy in beagles. Am J
Vet Res 53:342-351.
Zambelli D, Caneppele B, Bassi S, Paladini C (2002) Ultrasound aspects
of fetal and extrafetal structures in pregnant cats. J Feline Med Surg
4:95-106.
684
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
MALE REPRODUCTIVE
TRACT
Silke Hecht
PREPARATIONAND
SCANNING PROCEDURE
Ultrasonographic examination of male reproductive organs is commonly
performed in dogs but rarely in cats. Examination technique, normal
findings, and disorders of the male reproductive tract described in this
chapter relate to dogs.
andrologic evaluation of breeding dogs; identification of retained testicles;
difficulties or abnormalities in urination or defecation; abdominal, scrotal,
and penile pain or discomfort; caudal abdominal mass lesions; perineal
hernia;
clinical  signs compatible   with hormonal  imbalances
(hyperestrogenism); scrotal  or  penile  trauma;  and palpable scrotal
abnormalities.
The prostate is examined transabdominally after routine clipping and
application of contact gel. The dog is usually positioned in dorsal
recumbency. A rectal examination technique has been described (Zohil
and Castellano 1995), but is not used routinely. A 5.0-MHz transducer
685
paraprostatic cysts or prostatic abscesses; however, a 7.5- or 10-MHz
transducer provides better detail and is recommended for most indications.
The prostate is located in the caudal abdomen or cranial pelvic canal. It is
identified caudal to the urinary bladder and ventral to the distal
descending colon and rectum. Examination is performed in transverse and
sagittal planes (Figure 14.1). Instillation of saline into the urinary bladder
may improve the acoustic window (Feeney et al. 1989; Johnston et al.
1991b). In some dogs, especially in neutered dogs with an empty or
intrapelvic bladder, ultrasonographic identification of the prostate may be
challenging. In these cases, a concurrent digital rectal examination can be
performed to identify the prostate and direct it toward the ultrasound
transducer.
The testicles should be examined with a high-frequency transducer (at
least 7.5 MHz). The author prefers a linear transducer with broad contact
            
Clipping of the scrotum is usually unnecessary. Ultrasound gel is
preferred as a contact medium over alcohol because of the risk of scrotal
irritation. The testicles are scanned in at least two planes (sagittal and
transverse) (Figure 14.2).
The penis is occasionally examined to identify urethral abnormalities or to
assess integrity of the os penis. Dependent on the examiner's preference, a
linear or curvilinear high-frequency transducer (7.5 MHz or higher) may
be used. The examination is started at the level of the os penis and is
continued proximally to the level of the ischium. Evaluation of the penile
urethra may be enhanced by instillation of saline by using a balloon-type
catheter inserted into the distal penile urethra.
686
PROSTATE
Normal Sonographic Anatomy of the
Prostate
Location, size, and appearance of the prostate vary with age, previous
disease, and status (intact versus neutered) (Feeney et al. 1989; Johnston
et al. 1991b). In intact dogs, the prostate is of medium echogenicity and
homogeneous, with a fine to medium coarse echotexture and smooth
margins (Mattoon and Nyland 2002). On sagittal image, the shape is
rounded to ovoid. On transverse image, the two prostatic lobes are
symmetrical. The vertical raphe and prostatic urethra with surrounding
urethralis muscle are generally visible as a hypoechoic area between both
lobes (Figures 14.1 and 14.3). The urethral structures may be associated
with edge shadowing on transverse planes, which should not be
misinterpreted as a lesion. In intact males, age-related changes in
ultrasonographic appearance of the prostate include increase in size and
echogenicity (Figures 14.1l and 14.4). Prostatic cysts are a common
incidental finding in older dogs (Ruel et al. 1998; Mattoon and Nyland
2002). Prostatic size in intact dogs is significantly correlated with age and
body weight (Ruel et al. 1998; Atalan et al. 1999) (Table 14.1). [n
neutered dogs, the prostate is small, inconspicuous, hypoechoic, and
homogeneous. The two lobes can usually not be distinguished (Figure
14.5A and B). Incidental parenchymal inhomogeneities may occasionally
be observed in the prostate of older castrated dogs (Figure 14.6).
Figure 14.1. Normal anatomy of the canine prostate. On the top are
illustrations (A, longitudinal; and B, transverse) of the prostate and the
surrounding structures in an adult male dog. BS, bulbus glandis; CC,
corpus cavernosum; and CS, corpus spongiosum. The sonograms on the
top are sagittal (left) and transverse (right) images of a castrated dog. The
sonograms at the bottom are sagittal (left) and transverse (right) images
       )    
bottom left image, the arrows delineate the prostate. On the top left
sonogram, the arrow points to a small cystic calculus in the bladder neck.
Images courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou and D. Penninck.
687
colon
prostate
urethra
symphysis
cC
BS
prostate
B
urethra
Figure 14.2. Scanning technique and normal sonographic anatomy of the
testicle in an adult dog. On the top of the figure, there is a schematic
representation of the position of the probe on the testicles, A and B
          
testicle. The testicle is oval, of medium echogenicity, and of fine and
homogeneous echotexture. The tunica albuginea is smooth, thin, and
hyperechoic. The mediastinum testis is seen as a central linear
hyperechoic band. The epididymis is not visualized. Edge shadowing
occurs at the cranial pole of the testicle (arrowhead). B: Transverse
image of the testicles. The testicles are round and of medium
688
echogenicity. The mediastinum testis is seen as a central or slightly
eccentric hyperechoic focus in the right and left testicles, respectively.
Part of epididymal bodies is visualized dorsal to the testicles. The ovoid
structure dorsal to the testicles represents part of the penis.
Prepuce
Penis
Testicle
Long
Epipidymis
Body
Testis
Trans
Epididymis.
B
Mediastinum
Scrotal Septum
Figure 14.3. Normal prostate in a l-year-old intact Boston terrier. A:
of medium echogenicity dorsal to the abdominal wall (W) and ventral to
the colon (C). The irregular, hyperechoic interface that casts a strong
shadow in the colon is caused by the presence of feces. The urinary
bladder is not visible in this image. Caudal and ventral to the prostate, the
689
hyperechoic interface of the pubis marks the pelvic inlet. The shadow
caused by the pubis represents a limiting factor when assessing the
 n s       
prostate is bilobed and appears oblique because of the angulation of the
probe. The lobes are symmetrical and homogeneous. The central prostatic
urethra and urethralis muscle (U) are hypoechoic. The colon is dorsal to
the prostate. C, colon; and W, wall.
Figure 14.4. Comparison of the prostate in two small-breed intact dogs
with age-related changes of the normal canine prostate. A: Sagittal image
of the prostate in a 3-month-old shih tzu. The prostate (between the
cursors) is ovoid, hypoechoic, and small (5 mm high). The urinary bladder
(UB) is noted cranial to the prostate. B: Sagittal image of the prostate in a
9-year-old toy poodle. The prostate (between the cursors) is rounded, of
e     l  o 
690
UB
Table 14.1. Prostatic dimensions in healthy intact dogs and correlation to
age and body weight
Ruel et al.1998
Atalan et al. 1999
Length (em)
1.7-6.9
1.8-5.0
Height fon transverse imagel (cm)
1.34.7
1.8-6.9
1.44.3
1.43.6
Width (cm)
Volume(cm)
2.3-80.0
8.1-28.2
Correlation between prostatic length (L [cm]), age
L = (0.055 ×BW) +(0.143 ×A} + 3.31
A[years),and body weight{BW [kg])
Correlation between prostatic height（H[cm])，age
H=(0.044×BW)+0.083×A)+2.25
(A [years])， and body weight (Bw [kg])
Correlation between prostatic width(W[em]，age
W= 0.047 × BW) + (0.089 ×A) + 3.45
(A [years]), and body weight (BW [kg])
Correlation between prostatic volume V [cm]，age
V = (0.867 × BW) + f1.885 × A) + 15.88
V = 8.48 + (0.238 × BW)
(A[years]),and body weight (BW [kg])
V=9.79+(0.871×A)
Adapted from Ruel et al. (1998) and Atalan et al. (1999)
Figure 14.5. Normal prostate in two neutered dogs. A and B: Sagittal (A)
mixed-breed dog. The prostate (between the cursors and arrowheads) is
caudal to the neck of the urinary bladder (UB) and ventral to the colon. It
is small, inconspicuous, and oval in sagittal view, rounded in transverse
view, and homogeneously hypoechoic. C and D: Sagittal (C) and
transverse (D) images of a normal prostate in an 8-year-old neutered
Pomeranian. The prostate (arrowheads) is small, elongated in sagittal
view, rounded in transverse view, and of medium echogenicity.
691
UB
U正E
Figure 14.6. Prostatic remodeling in an old dog with late neutering
Sagittal (A) and transverse (B) planes of the prostate of a 10-year-old dog
neutered at the age of 8 years. The prostate (between the cursors) is
enlarged compared with that in Figure 14.4 and appears heterogeneous.
Biopsies revealed the presence of normal prostatic tissue with fibrosis and
small residual cysts. Some of these changes may be attributed to previous
prostatitis. The images appeared similar on follow-up exams. Images
courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
     o     te 
(A) and transverse (B) images of the prostate in a 9-year-old German
shorthair pointer with benign prostatic hyperplasia. The prostate (between
692
the cursors) is enlarged (5.8 * 4.6 * 4.0 cm). The prostatic parenchyma is
mostly hyperechoic and slightly inhomogeneous. The prostatic lobes are
symmetrical on transverse view. C and D: Sagittal (A) and transverse (B)
images of the prostate of a 6-year-old Rottweiler in which similar signs
are observed. An edge shadow noted on the transverse plane is caused by
the presence of the round, central urethra. Images C and D courtesy of
M.A. d'Anjou.
Colon
54m
6.8em
Figure 14.8. Benign prostatic hyperplasia and intraprostatic cysts in a
10-year-old husky. Sagittal image of  the prostate shows prostatic
enlargement (5.3 * 4.4 cm), inhomogeneity 0f the parenchyma, and
multiple anechoic areas consistent with prostatic cysts.
693
Figure 14.9. Benign cystic prostatic hyperplasia in a 10-year-old golden
(7.2 * 4.2 cm) and generalized hyperechogenicity of the parenchyma, with
numerous interspersed hypoechoic foci consistent with small cysts.
694
Sonographic Findings in Prostatic
Abnormalities
Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), bacterial prostatitis, paraprostatic
dogs. Prostatic cysts are a common incidental finding or may be seen in
association with BPH and other prostatic diseases. Prostatic abscesses may
develop as a complication of bacterial prostatitis and/or infected cysts.
BPH is a spontaneous condition in older dogs and is a common incidental
finding. The prostate is enlarged, of normal to increased echogenicity, and
of homogeneous or inhomogeneous echotexture
(Figure14.7).On
transverse image, the two lobes are usually symmetrical, although
asymmetrical enlargement may occur. Intraprostatic cysts are common
and manifest as circular to irregularly shaped anechoic areas of variable
size (Figures 14.8 and 14.9).
Acute and chronic infections occur in the canine prostate, usually
        o   
et al. 2000). The prostate may be of normal size or enlarged. Echogenicity
         
normal to heterogeneous. Although changes in echogenicity and
ultrasonographic differentiation of these conditions is often not possible,
and prostatitis in many cases complicates preexisting BPH (Figure 14.10).
In some cases of acute prostatitis, hyperechoic fat or a scant volume
effusion may be detected adjacent to the prostate (Figure 14.11). Prostatic
abscesses can develop subsequent to prostatitis and may appear similar to
prostatic cysts (Figures 14.12 and 14.13). Other ultrasonographic findings
in prostatic abscessation include development of a thick wall around the
abscess cavity, intracavitary accumulation of echogenic fluid, gas
inclusions in case of infection with gas-producing bacteria, and septation
(Figure 14.14). Dystrophic mineralization may be encountered in chronic
prostatitis (Figure 14.12)
Fungal prostatitis is rare, causes variable ultrasonographic changes, and
may mimic prostatic neoplasia (Figure 14.15)
695
Paraprostatic cysts are fluid-filled remnants of the mullerian duct system
that occur predominantly in older large-breed dogs (Stowater and Lamb
1989). Unlike true intraprostatic cysts, paraprostatic cysts are located in
the vicinity of the prostate, but may communicate with intraprostatic
cavitations. The cyst wall is of variable thickness (Figures 14.16 and
become very large, may contain internal septa, and may be mineralized
(Figure 14.18). Sometimes it is difficult to differentiate paraprostatic cysts
from the urinary bladder. In these cases, catheterization of the urinary
bladder with evacuation of urine or infusion of saline is useful in
differentiating urinary bladder from paraprostatic cysts.
Figure
14.10.
Benign
prostatic1
hyperplasia
andchronic
lymphoplasmacytic prostatitis in an 1 1-year old mixed-breed dog. Sagittal
(A) and transverse (B) images of the prostate (between the cursors), which
is enlarged (5.9 * 5.7 * 8.0 cm), inhomogeneous, with an irregular contour
and mixed echogenicity.
Figure 14.11. Acute prostatitis, benign prostatic hyperplasia, and
intraprostatic cysts in an 8-year-old German shepherd. The diagnosis of
prostatitis was based on clinical and ultrasonographic findings. No
infectious organisms were seen on aspirates of one of the prostatic cysts.
A: Sagittal image of the prostate. The prostate (between the cursors) is
enlarged (6.4 * 6.0 cm), hyperechoic, and has multiple round to oval,
hypoechoic to anechoic cavitations of up to 1.8-cm diameter. B:
Transverse image of the left lobe of the prostate (between the cursors) and
the paraprostatic tissues. The right lobe of the prostate is not completely
included in the field of view. A small volume of abdominal effusion and
component of prostatic inflammation with secondary steatitis
696
Figure 14.12. Severe, diffuse chronic-active, suppurative prostatitis with
multifocal necrosis, abscessation, and interstitial hemorrhage in a
9-year-old mixed-breed dog. Sagittal sonogram of the prostate (between
 o  e ( t x )   m (o 
mixed in echogenicity, with multiple irregularly marginated anechoic
areas consistent with abscesses. Parenchymal mineralization is seen as
strongly hyperechoic focus with distal shadowing (arrowheads).
Figure 14.13. Prostatic abscesses in two dogs. A: Septic abscess.
Transverse sonogram centered on the right lobe of the prostate of a
3-year-old Border collie. A well-defined anechoic cavity (between the
cursors) is present. The volume of the lesion is estimated at 3.9 mL. B:
Sterile prostatic abscess in an 8-year-old boxer. Transverse image
697
shows a lacy hypoechoic to anechoic septated lesion of more than 6-cm
maximum diameter associated with the right lobe (between the cursors).
B
Figure 14.14. Septic prostatitis in a dog. Sagittal (A) and transverse (B)
images of the prostate of an intact male dog with signs of abdominal pain
and fever. The prostate is markedly enlarged and deformed (arrows)
    s    o 
cm. Ultrasound-guided aspirations of these cavitations revealed the
presence of neutrophils with bacteria. C, descending colon. Images
courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou.
Figure 14.15. Fungal prostatitis (blastomycosis) in an 8-year-old cocker
inhomogeneously hypoechoic prostate (arrowheads) with surrounding
hypere-choic fat. Enlarged medial iliac lymph nodes were also seen (not
shown).
698
Figure 14.16. A: Paraprostatic cyst in a 4-year-old cryptorchid
Labrador retriever. The transverse image was acquired at the level of the
midabdomen. The fluid-filled structures were separate from the urinary
bladder (not shown). A thick echogenic septum (S) separates a
compartment filled with very echogenic fluid (left) from a compartment
with less echogenic fluid (right). B: Paraprostatic cyst in a middle-aged
s io q s  si (so a n s a 
without a discernible wall extending cranially from the dorsal aspect of
the hyperechoic prostate (arrowheads).
Figure 14.17. Paraprostatic cysts associated with acute prostatitis in an
8-year-old boxer. A: The main cyst (C) is dorsal to the bladder (BL). B:
The prostate (P) is moderately enlarged and contains several smaller
699
parenchymal cysts. The main large cyst (C) appears to originate from the
right lobe.
Figure 14.18. Complex paraprostatic cysts associated with suppurative
prostatitis in a German shepherd. Numerous cysts (C) are in the
midabdomen and caudal abdomen. A: The cystic wall is thickened
(between the cursors). B: Some cysts (C) are filled with echogenic debris,
and mineralized foci (arrows) are noted, as well
Figure 14.19. Prostatic adenocarcinoma and transitional cell carcinoma in
three dogs. A and B: Sagittal (A) and transverse (B) images of a prostatic
adenocarcinoma in an older, neutered, mixed-breed dog. The prostate
(between the cursors) is large for a neutered dog, inhomogeneous, and has
irregular  margins.
-Prostatic parenchyma is of mixed echogenicity.
Multiple strongly hyperechoic areas with distal shadowing (arrowheads)
are consistent with mineralization. C and D: Sagittal (C) and transverse
(D) images of a prostatic adenocarcinoma in an older, neutered,
large-breed dog. The prostate is enlarged, irregular, and relatively
hypoechoic, with several small hyperechoic foci. A protuberance (arrow)
is also seen projecting into the urinary bladder (UB) secondary to tumor
invasion. Images C and D courtesy of M.A. d'Anjou. E and F: Sagittal
700
(E) and transverse (F) images of transitional cell carcinoma, probably
originating from the prostatic urethra, in a 12-year-old, neutered Labrador
retriever. The prostate (arrowheads) has retained an normal shape, but is
 o        
centrally located, strongly hyperechoic line with distal acoustic shadowing
(arrow, S) is consistent with urethral mineralization.
B
UB
4.27m
Figure 14.20. Transitional cell carcinoma and regional lymphadenopathy
in an old, neutered dog with hematuria and dysuria. Sagittal (A) and
transverse (B) images of the bladder neck and prostate. Strongly
shadowing hyperechoic foci are in the prostate, and a soft-tissue
projection is in the bladder lumen (arrow). Sagittal images of right medial
701
iliac (C) and hypo-gastric (D) lymph nodes, which appear enlarged and
irregular. The medial iliac node (C) is relatively uniform and nearly
        
heterogeneous and course in echotexture. These lymph nodes are adjacen
to the external and internal iliac vessels, respectively. Images courtesy of
M.A.d'Anjou.
B
2.37m
252e
Ultrasonographicfindings in prostatic
neoplasiaarevariable
Adenocarcinoma is the most common tumor type. Other tumor types
include undifferentiated carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, transitional
cell carcinoma, lymphoma, and hemangiosarcoma (Winter et al. 2006)
Bladder or urethral  transitional cell carcinoma can extend into  the
prostatic parenchyma. In contrast to other prostatic disorders, neutered
dogs are as commonly affected as intact dogs (Bell et al. 1991). Typically,
the prostate is enlarged and irregular, with a hypoechoic to heterogeneous
echotexture (Figures 14.19 and 14.20). On transverse view, the prostatic
lobes are usually asymmetrical (Figures 14.19 and 14.21). Mineralization
of the prostatic parenchyma is often seen, and metastases to medial iliac or
 (tl  l s)  a so  -so
surrounding fat may also become hypere-choic, and irregular bony
proliferation of the ventral margin of the vertebral bodies of the caudal
lumbar vertebrae may be seen, consistent with bone metastases. Other
occasional findings in prostatic neoplasia are urethral obstruction, bladder
702
wall   thickening,  or ureteral  obstruction   with  hydroureter  and
hydronephrosis if the mass is invading the trigone.
Figure 14.21. Prostatic hemangiosarcoma in a 10-year-old, neutered
greyhound. A: Sagittal image. The prostate (between the cursors) is
enlarged with echogenic margins and a central hypoechoic to anechoic
area. B: Transverse image. There is asymmetry and inhomogeneity of the
prostatic lobes. The prostate (between the cursors) is of mixed
echogenicity, with hypoechoic to anechoic cavitary areas.
B
Figure 14.22. Metastatic lymphadenopathy secondary to prostatic
adenocarcinoma in an older, neutered, mixed-breed dog (the same dog as
in Figure 14.18A and B). On this transverse image, the right medial iliac
margination. Multiple hypoechoic to anechoic areas indicate cavitation,
and multifocal strongly hyperechoic foci with acoustic shadowing are
compatible with mineralization. The aorta (Ao) is visualized as an
anechoic circular structure in the near field.
703
TESTICLES
Normal Sonographic Anatomy of the
Testicles
Normal testicles are of medium echogenicity and have a fine,
homogeneous echotexture (Pugh et al. 1990). The testicular border is
characterized by a thin, smooth and hyperechoic tunica albuginea. On
mediastinum testis (Figure 14.2A). On transverse view, the mediastinum
testis appears as a centrally located hyperechoic focus (Figure 14.2B). In
very young dogs, the testicles are small but homogeneous, and the
mediastinum can be identified (Figure 14.23). In older dogs, small
hyperechoic foci representing testicular septa are occasionally visible.
Testicular size is directly related to body weight (Hecht 200l; Hecht et al.
2003) (Table 14.2).
704
The head and tail of the epididymis are located at the cranial and caudal
poles of the testicle, respectively, and the body is found dorsal to the
testicle. In comparison with testicular parenchyma, epididymal parts are
hypoechoic and of coarse echotexture (Figure 14.24A-C). Examination of
the entire epididymis in one plane is usually not possible because of its
location and course, and requires repositioning of the ultrasound probe
and examination in at least two planes. The spermatic cord can be
followed from the head of the epididymis to the inguinal ring and is
characterized by the large tortuous anechoic venous structures of the
pampiniform plexus. This plexus presents a prominent and complex flow
pattern on color Doppler or power Doppler (Figure 14.24D)
Sonographic Findings in Testicular
Abnormalities
Testicular disorders include cryptorchidism, testicular neoplasia,
inflammatory disorders (orchitis and epi-didymitis), testicular or
epididymal cysts, torsion, infarction, atrophy, and trauma. Other disease
processes affecting the scrotum include accumulation of fluid (hydrocele
or hematocele) and scrotal hernia. The accuracy in diagnosis of testicular
and/or scrotal disorders in dogs is high (Hecht 2001; Hecht et al. 2003).
Figure 14.23. Testicles in a 3-month-old pointer. The testicles (between
the cursors) are small (less than 2 cm long), ovoid, and homogeneous. A:
Transverse sonogram of both testicles. Part of the penis (P) is dorsal to the
testicles. B: Sagittal sonogram of the left testis. The mediastinum testis is
seen. The epididymis is on the left of the image. Images courtesy of D.
Penninck.
705
Table 14.2.Testicular dimensions in healthy intact dogs and correlation to
body weight
Body Weight (kg)
Length (cm)
Width (cm)
Height (cm)
MediastinallWidth (cm)
1-10
1.5-3.3
1.0-2.2
0.8-1.6
0.10.2
3.-1.8
1.4-3.2
1.3-2.2
0.1-0.2
1.5-3.6
1.52.4
0'0-10
31-40
2.6 to4.0#
1.7-3.7
1.6-3.2
0.10.3
>40
2.6-3.8
1.63.0
0.10.3
The transducer fieldof view
/was limited to 4 cm, and accurate
measurements were not possible beyond that point. Adapted from Hecht
(2001).
Figure 14.24. Normal epididymis and pampiniform plexus in a 9-year-old
mixed-breed dog. A: Sagittal image of the epididymal tail (arrowheads). It
is caudal to the testicle (T), hypoechoic, and of coarse echotexture. B:
Parasagittal image of the testicle demonstrating the tubular body of the
epididymis (arrowheads) dorsolateral to the testicle (T). C: Sagittal image
of the epididymal head and adjacent part of the spermatic cord
(arrowheads), which appear hypoechoic and coarse in comparison with the
cranial pole of the testicle (T). D: Sagittal color Doppler image of part of
the spermatic cord. Tortuous vessels of the pampiniform plexus show the
color flow signal.
706
Cryptorchid testicles are usually small and hypoechoic, but have normal
 tl      e 
14.26). They can be found anywhere between the caudal pole of the
kidneys to the inguinal area. If the mediastinum testis is not developed,
identification of an undescended testicle may be difficult (Figure 14.27).
Sensitivity of ultrasonography  in  the identification of inguinal or
abdominal cryptorchid testicles in dogs is high (Hecht 2001), but is likely
facilitated by the use of high-resolution ultrasound systems.
Occasionally, the gubernaculum testis is visualized. It appears as tubular
structure extending from the caudal pole of the retained testicle to the
are predisposed to neoplastic transformation and can reach considerable
size in this instance.
frequent incidental findings in descended testicles in older dogs and may
occur bilaterally. They are usually benign. Seminomas and Sertoli cell
tumors can affect cryptorchid and descended testicles. These tumors have
707
the potential for hormone production and metastases. Other tumor types
are extremely rare. Testicular tumors in cryptorchid testicles tend to
exhibit more malignant behavior than in descended testicles and occur in
youngeranimals.
Figure 14.25. Abdominal cryptorchidism in a 1-year-old golden retriever.
The left testicle (between the cursors) is intra-abdominal, small (3.1 cm
long),hypoechoic, and of normal architecture.
Figure 14.26. Abdominal cryptorchidism  in  a 10-year-old golden
retriever. The left testicle (between the cursors) is intra-abdominal, small
         
emanating from the cranial and caudal poles are consistent with
edge-shadowing artifacts (arrowheads).
708
Figure 14.27. Abdominal cryptorchidism in a 7-month-old Boston terrier.
The testicle (between the cursors) is adjacent to the descending colon (C).
It is inconspicuous, homogeneous, and 1.0 * 0.4 cm. The mediastinum
testis is not visible.
709
Figure 14.28. Prominent gubernaculum testis in a cryptorchid 5-month
of 3-mm diameter and was seen extending from the caudal pole of the
intra-abdominal right testicle to the inguinal ring
small nodules to large complex masses with disruption of normal
testicular anatomy (Johnston et al. 1991a) (Figures 14.29-14.32).
Different tumor types cannot be distinguished ultrasonographically (Pugh
especially in hormone-producing tumors. In case of metastatic neoplasia.
enlarged medial iliac lymph nodes may be seen.
Orchitis and epididymitis may occur subsequent to hematogenous spread
of infectious organisms, may result from urinary tract or prostatic
inflammation, or may be caused by scrotal trauma. Inflammatory scrotal
disorders exhibit variable ultrasonographic characteristics, ranging from
diffuse echogenicity changes of testicle and/or epididymis to complex
710
masses and anechoic areas subsequent to abscess formation (Pugh and
Konde 1991; Hecht et al. 2003; Ober et al. 2004) (Figures 14.33-14.36).
Fluid may accumulate within the scrotum or the scrotum may thicken.
Whereas testicular and epididymal size increase in acute inflammation,
they decrease in chronic cases.
Figure 14.29. Leydig cell tumor in four dogs. A: Sagittal image of the left
testicle in a 15-year-old Labrador retriever. A hypoechoic nodule of 5-mm
diameter (between the cursors)is associatedwiththe testicular
parenchyma adjacent to the linear hyperechoic mediastinum testis. B:
            
2.0-cm nodule (between the cursors) is slightly hyperechoic to
surrounding normal testicular parenchyma and has two small anechoic
foci. C: Sagittal image of the left testicle in a 10-year-old golden retriever.
The testicular parenchyma has been largely replaced by an approximately
3-cm, mixed echogenic and cavitary mass. D: Sagittal image of the left
testicle in a 13-year-old sheltie. The testicular parenchyma is of mixed
echogenicity, the testicle has an irregular margin, and the mediastinum
testis is not visible.
711
Figure 14.30. Seminoma in two dogs. A: Sagittal image of the left testicle
hypoechoic nodule measuring 2.6 * 1.3 cm is in the testicle (between the
cursors). B: Sagittal image of the left testicle in a 10-year-old Labrador
completely replaced by an inhomogeneous mass with several irregular
cavitations containing anechoic to echogenic fluid. Images courtesy of
M.A.d'Anjou.
Figure 14.31. Sertoli cell tumor in four dogs. A: Sagittal image of the
right abdominal cryptorchid testicle (between the cursors) in a 10-year-old
golden retriever. The testicle is small (2.8 * 1.2 cm). A hypoechoic nodule
of 1.0-cm diameter (arrowheads) is associated with the cranial pole of the
testicle. B: Transverse image of the right inguinal cryptorchid testicle in
an 8-year-old mixed-breed dog. A 1.9 * 1.8-cm hypoechoic nodule
(between the cursors) is associated with the testicle. C: Sertoli cell tumor
of a retained right testicle in an 8-year-old boxer. An echogenic mass of
approximately 2.5-cm-diameter dorsal to the bladder is associated with
strong edge shadows. D: Sagittal image of the left testicle in a 12-year-old
West Highland white terrier. The testicle is within the scrotum and of
normal size and shape. The testicular parenchyma is of mixed
echogenicity, and the mediastinum testis is not visible.
712
Bladder
Figure 14.32. Mixed testicular tumors in a 13-year-old sheltie. Mixed
testicle. The enlarged (4.5 cm), mixed echogenic testicle (between the
cursors)has multiple anechoic areas.
713
Testicular or epididymal cysts are occasional incidental findings. They
appear as anechoic, well-circumscribed, rounded areas, often with distal
acoustic enhancement (Figures 14.37 and 14.38).
Testicular torsion most commonly affects retained neoplastic testicles. [n
this instance, the ultrasonographic examination shows an abdominal mass
of variable size and echogenicity, with decreased or absent blood flow on
color Doppler examination (Miyabashi et al. 1990; Hecht 2001) (Figure
14.39). [ntra-abdominal and intrascrotal torsion of nonneoplastic testicles
and vascular compromise of other etiology of the testicle (infarction or
space-occupying lesions within the inguinal ring) are rare (Hecht et al.
2004) (Figures 14.40 and 14.41). Dependent on the degree and duration of
vascular occlusion, the affected testicle may appear hyperechoic or
hypoechoic, increased, or normal or decreased in size, with initially
normal architecture. Concurrent abdominal or scrotal effusion is common,
especially in acute cases.
Figure 14.33. Severe, subacute, necrotizing and suppurative orchitis and
epididymitis of undetermined etiology in a 3-year-old golden retriever.
Sagittal (A) and transverse (B) images of the left testicle show that the
testicle is enlarged and heterogeneous, with disruption of normal
714
architecture. On color Doppler examination, blood flow was reduced
compared with the normal right testicle (not shown).
Figure 14.34. Fungal orchitis and epididymitis (blastomycosis) in a
3-year-old Walker hound. Sagittal images of the right testicle (A) and
head of the epididymis (B) show testicular and epididymal (arrowheads)
enlargement and inhomogeneity.
Figure 14.35. Epididymitis in a 9-year-old Labrador retriever. In the
parasagittal image of the left testicle, the epididymis (arrowheads) is
larger than usual and of mixed echogenicity. Several anechoic areas are in
the tail of the epididymis (arrows). The testicle (T) is within normal limits
for size and echotexture.
715
Figure 14.36. Testicular abscess in a 7-year-old shar-pei. In the sagittal
image of the right testicle is an approximately 2-cm, inhomogeneous
hypoechoic to anechoic mass. Normal testicular parenchyma is not visible.
716
Figure 14.37. Cyst associated with the cranial pole of the right testicle in
a 7-year-oldYorkshire terrier. Aroundanechoic structure of 5-mm
diameter (betweenthe cursors)is associatedwiththe testicular
parenchyma.
717
Figure 14.38. Epididymal cyst and mild hydrocele in a 7-year-old
mixed-breed dog. An anechoic structure of approximately 3-mm diameter
is associated with the head of the epididymis (arrowhead), just cranial to
the testicle (T). The triangular anechoic area cranial to the head of the
epididymis is consistent with a small volume of intrascrotal fluid (arrow).
Figure 14.39. Intra-abdominal torsion of a retained neoplastic testicle
   r  a   (  )
abdominal radiograph shows a lobulated soft-tissue mass of more than 20
         
Enlarged sublumbar lymph nodes (arrowheads) are consistent with
metastatic disease. Prominent mammillae are noted, consistent with
feminizationcaused
a om  uonpond-uoou q
ultrasonographic image shows a mixed echogenic mass (only shown in
part).
718
Figure 14.40. Testicular torsion in a 1-year-old Border collie. The left
testis (L) is normal, whereas the right testicle (R) has hemorrhage and
numerous thrombi, compatible with torsion and underlying orchitis and
epididymitis. A: The left and right testicles are imaged side by side. There
is a significant difference in size. The right testicle and epididymis are
(normal) and the right testis (no flow). C: Comparative color Doppler
Signal between the left (normal) and the right epididymis (poor flow).
719
Testicular atrophy may have a number of causes, such as thermal insult
(e.g, in cryptorchid testicles), previous orchitis, hormonal influences, or
vascular compromise. Atrophic testicles are small and hypoechoic, but
maintain their normal architecture (Figures 14.42 and 14.43; see also
Figures 14.26 and 14.27).
Whereas ultrasonography plays a major role in assessing human patients
with scrotal trauma, it is rarely performed for this indication in dogs.
Findings in scrotal trauma include scrotal hematoma, hematocele, scrotal
contusion, intratesticular hematoma, and testicular rupture. Scrotal
hematomas with accumulation of blood within scrotal soft tissues manifest
as space-occupying lesions of variable echogenicity that displace the
testicle and epididymis (Figure 14.44). In hematocele, there is intrascrotal
fluid accumulation of variable echogenicity. Testicular contusion and
720
hematoma appear as diffuse echogenic changes of testicular parenchyma
or mass lesions of variable echogenicity. Differentiation from testicular
lesions of inflammatory or neoplastic etiology is mainly based on medical
history rather than ultrasonographic characteristics. Inhomogeneous
echotexture of the testicular parenchyma with loss of contour definition
indicates testicu-lar rupture.
Figure 14.41. Torsion of a nonneoplastic testicle in a 6-month-old
bilaterally cryptorchid boxer. A: Sagittal ultrasonographic image of the
right intra-abdominal atrophic testicle (between the cursors). The
mediastinum testis (arrow) is within the hypoechoic testicle. B: Sagittal
ultrasonographic image of the left intra-abdominal testicle. The testicle
appears globoid rather than oval and hyperechoic compared with the right
        o
additional round structures are seen adjacent to the testicle and are
arrow) of the epididymis. Reprinted with permission from Hecht et al.
(2004)
LEST
15cm
Figure 14.42. Testicular atrophy in an 8-year-old, bilaterally cryptorchid
German shepherd. On sagittal image, the right testicle (A) and the left
721
testicles. The condition is rare in dogs. It may be an occasional incidental
finding, but is more commonly found secondary to a variety of scrotal
disorders (e.g-, orchitis and testicular torsion). It may also occur secondary
to ascites when abdominal fluid descends through the inguinal ring
(Figure 14.45).
In inguinal or scrotal hernia, abnormal contents (e.g-, bowel loops or
s o   a m     
Concurrent findings include hydrocele and testicular congestion  Or
infarction.
Figure 14.43. Testicular atrophy of unknown etiology in a 12-year-old
Doberman. A: Sagittal image of normal right testicle. The testicle
measures 3.8 cm long (between the cursors), is of normal medium
echogenicity, homogeneous, with centrally located linear hyperechoic
mediastinum testis. B: Sagittal image of atrophic left testicle. The testicle
 s  ]     a   
and slightly inhomogeneous. Centrally located mediastinum testis is
unremarkable.
Figure 14.44. Blunt scrotal trauma in a 5-month-old dog. A-C: The
scrotum is enlarged and filled with material of mixed echogenicity,
representing a hematoma at varying stages of organization. D: The left
testicle (arrowheads) is displaced and surrounded by material of mixed
echogenicity.
722
Figure 14.45. Transverse image of the right hemiscrotum in a 9-year-old
dog with ascites and subsequent hydrocele. The testicle (T) is surrounded
by anechoic fluid. Acoustic shadowing (arrowheads) is observed distal to
the centrally located mediastinum testis.
723
Fluid
PENIS
Normal Sonographic Anatomy of the
Penis
At the level of the distal penis, the smooth, hyperechoic interface of the os
penis is surrounded by penile soft tissues (glans penis) and prepuce. The
urethra is located within a V-shaped ventral groove in the os penis and is
usually not visible unless distended (Figure 14.46). Proximal to the
osseous part, penile soft tissues (corpus cavernosum, corpus spongiosum
and muscles of the penis) are of medium echogenicity and inconspicuous.
Figure 14.46. Normal canine penis. Sagittal (A) and transverse (B)
sonographic and schematic images of the penis in a 6-year-old, neutered,
 mixed-breed dog. On sagittal view (A), prepuce and part of the glans penis
   a m l i   u a ()
interface of the os penis (op outlined by arrows). In the far field, penile
724
soft tissues and the abdominal wall (arrowheads) are visible. On
A   (  o     
distal shadowing (S). Differentiation of surrounding penile soft tissues is
not possible on this image. The urethra is not visible. Shadowing (S) is
noted distal to the os penis. Surrounding penile soft tissues are
symmetrical.
Figure 14.47. Healed fracture of the 0s penis and mural urethral lesion
(urethritis) in a 6-year-old mastiff with dysuria. A: The lateral radiograph
shows irregularity of penile contour at the midbody of os penis
(arrowheads), consistent with previous fracture. B: Urethrogram
demonstrating a filling defect associated with the prostatic urethra at the
most caudal level of the os penis (arrow). C: Sagittal ultrasonographic
image of the midbody of the os penis. There is an irregular contour to the
hyperechoic interface of the os penis at the previous fracture site
(arrowheads). D: Transverse image of the penis during instillation of
saline to facilitate urethral identification. The os penis is characterized by
its   irregular   hyperechoic   surface   and
1 distal shadowing. The
fluid-distended urethra is visible as an anechoic circular structure
          (
     o   d  
represents part of the standoff pad. E: Sagittal image of the urethra, which
725
appears as an inconspicuous tubular structure (arrowheads). The anechoic
area in the near field represents part of the standoff pad. F: Sagittal image
Of the urethra during instillation of saline. The urethra (arrowheads) is
fluid filled. The filling defect identified during the urethrogram manifests
as urethral wall thickening and irregularity (arrow). The hypoechoic area
to the right of the A is artifactual because of poor transducer-to-skin
contact. The anechoic area in the near field represents part of the standoff
pad.
Urethra
OsPenis
Figure 14.48. Drainage of prostatic abscess in a 3-year-old Border collie.
A: Transverse sonogram of the prostate with right lobe abscess. The arrow
points to the urethral catheter placed to better identify and avoid the
urethra during the procedure. B: Transverse sonogram of the prostate after
drainage. The abscess cavity is nearly collapsed.
726
Sonographic Findings in Penile
Abnormalities
Common  abnormalities  of  the  penis  warranting ultrasonographic
examination include urethral calculi, fracture or neoplasia of the os penis.
or urethral lesions such as tumor or stricture. Lesions of the os penis cause
discontinuity of its osseous contour (Figure 14.47). Concurrent soft-tissue
changes may be encountered, especially in acute trauma. Urethrography
remains the imaging modality of choice for assessing urethral patency and
integrity.
INTERVENTIONAL
PROCEDURES
Percutaneous fine-needle aspiration or biopsy of the prostate is easily
performed.
-  The  same  principles   and
1 precautionsused  in other
procedure, a urinary catheter should be placed to facilitate identification of
 os ss d o   eo s 
given preference because of the risk of implantation of metastases along
the needle tract after percutaneous aspiration (Nyland et al. 2002).
Percutaneous drainage of prostatic abscesses and in situ injection of
antibiotics is a valid alternative method to surgical intervention, especially
727
in immunocompromised patients (Boland et al. 2003) (Figure 14.48)
temporarily relieve patient discomfort. However, recurrent filling usually
warrants surgery at a later stage.
Fine-needle aspiration or biopsy of intra-abdominal testicular tumors is
commonly performed, following the same principles and precautions as in
biopsies of other abdominal organs. Fine-needle aspiration of intrascrotal
testicles is infrequently performed in veterinary medicine. However, the
procedure has a high accuracy in the diagnosis of testicular neoplasms.
with a low risk of adverse effects (Dorsch et al. 2006).
REFERENCES
Atalan G, Holt PE, Barr FJ (1999) Ultrasonographic estimation of prostate
size in normal dogs and relationship to bodyweight and age. J Small Anim
Pract 40: 119-122.
Boland LE, Hardie RJ, Gregory SP, Lamb CR (2003) Ultrasound-guided
percutaneous drainage as the primary treatment for prostatic abscesses and
cysts in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 39:151-159.
Dorsch R, Majzoub M, Hecht S, Hartmann K, Hirschberger J (2006)
Diagnostische Wertigkeit der Hodenzytologie beim Hund. Tieraerztl Prax
34:91-98.
Feeney DA, Johnston GR, Klausner JS, Bell FJ (1989) Canine prostatic
ultrasonography: 1989. Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 4:44-57.
Hecht S (200l) Sonographische Diagnostik des Skrotalinhaltes beim Hund
unter besonderer Beruecksichtigung testikulaerer Neoplasien [PhD thesis].
Munich: Chirurgische Tierklinik, Ludwig-Maximilians University.
Hecht S, King R, Tidwell AS, Gorman SC (2004) Ultrasound diagnosis:
Intra-abdominal torsion of a non-neoplastic testicle in a cryptorchid dog.
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 45:58-61.
Hecht S, Matiasek K, Koestlin  R (2003) Die sonographische
Untersuchung des Skrotalinhaltes beim Hund unter besonderer
Beruecksichtigung testikulaerer Neoplasien. Tieraerztl Prax 31: 199-210.
728
Johnston GR, Feeney DA, Johnston SD, O'Brien TD (l99la)
(1980-1988). J Am Vet Med Ass0c 198:1779-1784.
Johnston GR, Feeney DA, Rivers B, Walter PA (l991b) Diagnostic
imaging of the male canine reproductive organs: Methods and limitations.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 21:553-589.
Johnston SD, Kamolpatana K, Root-Kustritz MV, Johnston GR (2000)
Prostatic disorders in the dog- Anim Reprod Sci 60-6l:405-415.
Mattoon JS, Nyland TG (2002) Prostate and testes. In: Nyland TG
Mattoon JS, eds. Small Animal Diagnostic Ultrasound. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders, pp. 250-266.
of torsion of a testicular seminoma in a cryptorchid dog. J Small Anim
Pract 31:401-403.
Nyland TG, Wallack ST, Wisner ER (2002) Needle-tract implantation
following US-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy of transitional cell
carcinoma of the bladder, urethra, and prostate. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
43:50-53.
Ober CP, Spaulding K, Breitschwerdt EB, Malarkey DE, Hegarty BC
(2004) Orchitis in two dogs with Rocky Mountain spotted fever. Vet
Radiol Ultrasound 45:458-465.
Pugh CR, Konde LJ (1991) Sonographic evaluation of canine testicular
and scrotal abnormalities: A review of 26 case histories. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 32:243-250.
Pugh CR, Konde LJ, Park RD (1990) Testicular ultrasound in the normal
dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 31:195-199.
Ruel Y, Barthez PY, Mailles A, Begon D (1998) Ultrasonographic
evaluation of the prostate in healthy intact dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
39:212-216.
Stowater JL, Lamb CR (1989) Ultrasonographic features of paraprostatic
cysts in nine dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 30:232-239.
729
Winter MD, Locke JE, Penninck DG (2006) Imaging diagnosis: Urinary
obstruction secondary to prostatic lymphoma in a young dog. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 47:597-601.
Zohil AM, Castellano C (1995) Prepubic and transrectal ultrasonography
of the canine prostate: A comparative study. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
36:393-396.
730
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
ABDOMINAL CAVITY.
LYMPH NODES. AND GREAT
VESSELS
Marc-Andre d'Anjou
PREPARATION AND
SCANNING TECHNIOUE
To have access to all portions of the abdominal cavity of dogs and cats,
hair must be clipped ventrally and laterally between the costal arch and
caudal margin of the abdomen. Clipping may be extended more cranially
in deep-chested dogs to better visualize the subcostal region. After the
application of acoustic gel, the animal can be scanned in dorsal, left, or
right recumbency. Some disorders of the peritoneal space, such as effusion
or free air, respond to gravity and may require repositioning the animal to
reach a diagnosis.
Ultrasonographic probes must be selected according to the size of the
animal and the depth of the evaluated region(s). A high-frequency probe
(7.5 MHz and higher) is recommended in cats and in small dogs or if
superficial structures are examined, whereas probes with more penetration
(5.0-7.5 MHz and lower) are generally indicated in larger dogs. Disorders
affecting the attenuation of the ultrasound beam may also influence the
731
probe selection. For example, peritoneal transudation is associated with
reduced sound attenuation, as opposed to inflammatory or neoplastic
processes involving the omentum that typically produce increased
ultrasound attenuation. In these instances, probes with a higher or lower
frequency, respectively, may improve image quality. Sectorial or convex
probes are preferred because they can reach all portions of the abdomen,
including the subcostal region, as opposed to linear probes, which have a
larger footprint. Doppler evaluation of abdominal vascular structures
requires the use of dedicated probes and software.
ULTRASONOGRAPHIC
ANATOMY OF THE NORMAL
PERITONEAL CAVITY, FAT.
VESSELS, AND LYMPH
NODES
The peritoneum is composed of a thin serous membrane that is divided
space located between these two layers that contains only a small volume
of fluid that serves as a lubricant. However, this amount of fluid is usually
not detectable with ultrasound. The peritoneum appears as a smooth
hyperechoic interface that is better appreciated when a moderate volume
of ascites is present. A variable amount of fat is present, mainly in the
falciform ligament, omentum, mesentery, and retroperitoneum. The fat
appears coarse in echotexture and relatively isoechoic to the liver. The
mesentery contains vessels and lymph nodes that can be visualized in
most patients.
A thorough knowledge of vascular anatomy and hemodynamics is
necessary to facilitate the identification and assessment of abdominal
vessels (Evans 1993a, 1993b; Spaulding 1997; Finnn-Bodner and Hudson
1998; Szatmari et al. 2001).
732
A schematic illustration of the principal vessels in the abdomen, as well as
major lymph nodes, of dogs and cats is presented in Figure 15.1. Although
the arterial flow of all structures is supplied by the abdominal aorta, the
venous flow is separated between the portal system and the systemic
circulation (see the Extrahepatic Portal Vasculature section in Chapter 6).
[n comparison with the portal system, a limited number of abdominal
veins drain into the caudal vena cava (CVC). The CVC crosses the
abdomen from caudal to cranial, remaining on the right of the midline.
Visible veins with B-mode ultrasonography include, from cranial to
caudal, hepatic veins, phrenicoabdominal veins, renal veins, and iliac
veins (deep circumflex, common, external, and internal). The aorta is
more dorsal than the CVC in the cranial abdomen and remains on the left
      o    
ultrasonographically include, from cranial to caudal: celiac artery (left
gastric, hepatic, and splenic arteries), cranial mesenteric and renal arteries.
These vessels are useful landmarks for identifying abdominal lymph
nodes. Lymph nodes are routinely evaluated in small animal patients,
because the nodes drain several organs and structures. Table 15.1 lists the
location and drainage of the abdominal lymph nodes in dogs and cats
(Bezuidenhout 1993; Pugh 1994).
Figure 15.1. Schematic illustration of abdominal lymph nodes and major
vessels. Note the intimate anatomical relationship between lymph nodes
and vessels. Lymph nodes: 1, hepatic; 2, gastric; 3, pancreaticoduodenal;
4 and 5, splenic; 6, jejunal; 7, colic; 8, aortic; 9 and 9', renal; 10 and 10',
medial iliac; 11, hypogastric; and 12, sacral. Vessels: AO, aorta; CMV,
cranial mesenteric vein; CVC, caudal vena cava; DCI, deep circumflex
iliac vessels; EI, external iliac vessels; PV, portal vein; and SV, splenic
vein. Other landmarks: LK, left kidney, and RK, right kidney.
733
RK
pleei
LK
Jejun
In dogs, several lymph nodes can be routinely identified (Spaulding 1997;
          
nodes are uniformly echogenic, relatively isoechoic or slightly hypoechoic
to the adjacent fatty tissues, smooth, and fusiform to oval (Pugh 1994;
      l  ( 
identified, and occasionally a normal hyperechoic central line can be seen
crossing these nodes in the region of the nodal hilus. Although anatomical
(maximal 5 mm thickness) (Bezuidenhout 1993), reference ranges that can
be reliably used with ultrasonography have not been reported for all sizes
of dogs and cats. In the author's experience, lymph nodes can reach 7-8
mm thick in large normal dogs. The shape of these nodes may actually
 pe os a d o  ul iasn a e ns
axes should be less than 0.5 in normal nodes (Llabres-Diaz 2004; Nyman
et al. 2004)
Table 15.1. Location and drainage of abdominal lymph nodes
734
Lymh Node
Hopotic
Gastric
Neer th pyloru
'uruspcnp
Duo
Jejunal
tIAR(rArI
trs)
Figure15.2.
Normal
lymph
 nodes.
A：
and  B:
: Longitudinal
ultrasonographic images of normal mesenteric (A, arrows) and medial
iliac (B, cursors) lymph nodes in two dogs. The nodes are fusiform, well
The short-to-long axis ratio is less than 0.5. Ao, aorta. C and D:
Trans verse images of normal medial iliac (C, arrows) and hypogastric (D,
arrows) lymph nodes in another dog. Note the proximity of these nodes to
the urinary bladder and to the caudal vena cava (CVC) and aorta (Ao), as
well as their branches (EIA and EIV: left external iliac artery and vein).
The spine is located just dorsal to the hypogastric nodes and appears as a
strongly shadowing interface.
Lymph nodes routinely identified include the jejunal (or mesenteric) and
medial iliac lymph nodes. Jejunal nodes appear as a group of fusiform
nodes aligned with the cranial mesenteric artery and vein and their
branches within the omentum. Some of these nodes can be relatively long.
The iliosacral lymphocenter is the group formed by the sublumbar lymph
735
nodes, which are located along the caudal aortic trifurcation. The medial
iliac lymph nodes, which are typically larger than the other nodes, may be
more easily identified from a lateral flank approach rather than from the
ventral abdomen, because the former allows placing the probe closer to
the node and avoiding the descending colon (Llabres-Diaz 2004).
PERITONEAL EFFUSION
Peritoneal effusion can be detected with ultrasonography if the volume of
free fluid exceeds approximately 2 mL/kg, which is half of what is needed
for a radiographic diagnosis (Henley et al. 1989). Even smaller amounts of
effusion are likely identiffied with more recent ultrasound systems.
Peritoneal fluid distribution depends on its nature and on gravity. Free
fluid moves with gravity, between abdominal organs, and locates itself
according to the position of the animal. Free fluid is more likely to be
detected when scanning the dependent portion of a dog that is in lateral
recumbency (Boysen et al. 2004). Small volumes of free fluid can be
identified at the left lateral margin of the spleen, between hepatic lobes or
intestinal loops, or cranial to the apex of the bladder (Spaulding 1993),
 a   o    tg  s o
tissues (Figure 15.3). However, trapped or loculated fluids can remain in
the nondependent portion of the abdomen. Trapped fluids are more
commonly associated with chronic exudates. Care must be taken not to
severe hydrone-phrosis, hydroureter, dilated bowel loops, or cysts (Figure
15.4A). Structures such as bowel loops or mesenteric folds are usually
peritoneal fluid is present (Figure 15.4B).
The echogenicity of the peritoneal fluid is usually proportional to its
content in cells and other debris, which act as ultrasound reflectors
(Spaulding 1993; Hanbidge et al. 2003). Low cellular fluids, such as pure
or modified transudates, are typically anechoic to hypoechoic (Figures
15.4 and 15.5), in comparison with exudates, which are typically
moderately echogenic (Figure 15.6). Highly cellular and homogeneous
purulent exudates can actually appear isoechoic to soft-tissue organs, such
as the spleen, and sometimes be recognized only because of their visible
736
motion and lack of vascularity. Exudates can also be septated because of
fibrin strands that commonly develop with this type of effusion,
particularly with purulent peritonitis (Spaulding 1993).
Figure 15.3. Mild peritoneal effusion. Longitudinal (A) and transverse (B)
images obtained in a dog with hypoproteinemia in the midventral and
left-lateral portions of the abdomen, respectively. Small triangular
anechoic foci (arrows) are between small intestinal loops (SI) and lateral
to the spleen, consistent with a low cellular fluid. A pure transudate was
aspirated under ultrasound guidance. LK, left kidney.
Cranial
eft
Figure 15.4. Loculated fluid compared with peritoneal effusion. A:
Longitudinal image obtained in the right abdominal quadrant of a cat with
a chronically distended abdomen. A large fluid-filled multiloculated cyst
is identified, displacing all surrounding structures. Several septa (arrows)
omentum. B: Transverse image obtained in the right cranial abdomen of a
dog with cardiac tamponade. The peritoneal space is distended by a large
volume of anechoic effusion (PE). The descending duodenum (D),
pancreas (arrowheads), and omentum (O) are distinctly visualized within
the contrasting anechoic fluid.
737
Cranial
8.77cm
PPE
Peritoneal hemorrhage varies in appearance according to the interval
between the onset of bleeding and the time of the ultrasonographic exam.
738
Fresh peritoneal blood may appear anechoic or echogenic, with swirling
of particles within the fluid (Hanbidge et al. 2003; Pintar et al. 2003).
Hematomas can develop and initially appear as homogeneous echogenic
masses. Lysis of the hematoma produces a more heterogeneous
appearance, with the formation of cystic areas and septa (Hanbidge et al.
2003) (Figure 15.7). In a previous study of dogs with nontraumatic
hemoabdomen,ar
malignancy
 was identiffied
in80%and
hemangiosar-coma in 70% of cases (Pintar et al. 2003).
Figure 15.5. Modified transudate. Longitudinal image obtained in the
right cranial abdomen of a dog with peritoneal effusion. Several
structures, such as liver lobes (L), right kidney (RK), and small intestinal
loops (SI) are separated by anechoic areas (*). The appearance of this
effusion is suggestive of a pure or modified transudate rather than an
exudate.
Cranial
SI
Figure 15.6. Echogenic peritoneal effusion. Longitudinal image of a dog
with abdominal distension and pain. A large volume of particulate,
 (s  ae  s i ( ie d 
features are suggestive of a cellular effusion, such as exudate or
hemorrhage. A diagnosis of septic peritonitis was made based on fluid
aspiration.
739
Cranial
P品E
Figure 15.7. Hemoabdomen. Longitudinal image of the caudal abdomen
 of a cat diagnosed with multifocal biliary carcinomas. Floating, echogenic
structures (*), not attached to any structure and consistent with blood
clots, were identified cranial to the bladder.
740
Cranial
Bladder
Table 15.2. Typical ultrasonographic appearance of peritoneal effusions
Ultrasonographic
Diagnostic Differential
Appearance
Anechoic or
Pure or modified transudate
hypoechoic fluid
Serohemorrhagic fluid
Urine leak
Chylous effusion
Echogenic with mobile
Freshhemorrhage
particles
Modified transudate
Purulent exudate or loculated abscess
Serosanguinous exudate
Carcinomatosis
Chylous effusion
Highly echogenic with
Purulent exudate
fibrous strands
Mobile echogenic
Blood clots
masses
Masses or nodules attached to the mesentery, omentum
orvisceral serosa(carcinomatosis)
However, it must be pointed out that some overlap exists in regard to the
echogenic appearance of different types of fluids. Hence, modified
transudates may look similar to exudates. Other ultrasonographic findings,
741
such as the presence of nodules on the surface of the peritoneum in cases
of carcinomatosis or with the presence of a large splenic mass, should be
used to orient the diagnosis.
Table 15.2 describes the typical appearance of variable types of peritoneal
effusion (Spaulding 1993; Hanbidge et al. 2003) in dogs and cats.
PERITONITIS, STEATITIS,
AND PNEUMOPERITONEUM
A variable amount of effusion is observed with peritonitis in dogs and
cats, usually with moderate to high echogenicity because of the high
cellular content (Boysen et al. 2003). However, in some types of
peritonitis, such as feline infectious peritonitis (FIP), the effusion can be
less echogenic (Spaulding 1993) (Figure 15.8A). The peritoneum.
hyperat-tenuated, focally or more diffusely (Hanbidge et al. 2003). These
features can significantly limit the penetration of the ultrasound beam and
consequently the ability to visualize and assess deep organs. In these
instances, the abdominal structures appear ill-defined, and their inner
architecture cannot be well recognized. An area of mesenteric fat
hyperechogenicity is suggestive of inflammation (steatitis) in dogs and
cats, and should be thoroughly investigated for a possible nearby source of
inflammation, such as intestinal perforation or pancreatitis (Boysen et al.
2003) (Figure 15.8B)
Idiopathic omental and mesenteric sterile steatitis has also been
recognized in dogs, resembling the human disease called mesenteric
panniculitis (Komori et al. 2002). Although the etiology of this condition
is unknown, predisposing factors could include recent surgery, retained
surgical material, prior abdominal trauma, ulcerative disease, autoimmune
disease, or drugs. Sonographic features reported in people include a
well-defined hyperechoic mass in the root of the mesentery, displacing
intestinal loops (Roson et al. 2006) (Figure 15.9). Thickening and
hyperechogenicity of the mesentery can also be associated with infarction
or neoplastic invasion (Hanbidge et al. 2003)
742
Leakage or rupture of the gastrointestinal (Gl) tract is one of the most
      s  s s  
caused by post-surgical intestinal dehiscence, Gl perforation caused by a
       o  
and volvulus, intestinal intussusception, intestinal infarction, penetrating
abdominal trauma, or iatrogenic cause (Boysen et al. 2003). Inflamed
perienteric fat often appears as a mass effect, displacing adjacent
structures such as intestinal loops. In addition to the other aforementioned
ultrasonographic changes, GI ileus with fluid accumulation is commonly
observed (Boysen 2003). GI contents such as foreign material or free gas
can sometimes be recognized in the peritoneal space. Free gas appears as
echogenic foci or lines that are associated with reverberation artifacts such
as comet tails. The lines collect between the nondependent abdominal wall
and intraabdominal structures such as the liver, omentum, stomach, or
intestine (Boysen et al. 2003) (Figure 15.10). When peritoneal effusion is
present, gas bubbles can appear as floating echogenic foci (Hanbidge et al.
2003). Free gas tends to shift in position with bowel or patient movement.
Figure 15.8. Peritonitis and steatitis. A: Feline infectious peritonitis. A
 s
to the mesentery were caused by pyogranulomatous vasculitis and steatitis
(the same cat as in Figure 10.16). B: Intestinal perforating foreign body.
Transverse image obtained in the right midab-domen of a dog with a
history of acute vomiting and severe abdominal pain. A triangular
hyperechoic interface (long arrow) is in a small intestinal loop, associated
with far acoustic shadowing (short arrow), consistent with a foreign body.
The peripheral mesenteric and omental fat is hyperechoic and
hyperattenuating, and a mass effect was observed on other peripheral
structures. These features are typical of steatitis caused by intestinal
perforation.
743
PE
Right
a
B
Figure 15.9. Omental steatitis. Longitudinal image of the right abdomen
of a dog that hadrecent surgeryfor splenic torsion. Anirregular.
744
hyperechoic, hyperattenuating mass occupies a large portion of the right
abdomen and is surrounded by hypoechoic peritoneal effusion (*). These
changes were attributed to omental steatitis, possibly secondary to surgical
manipulation. They eventually resolved. The ultrasonographic changes to
the fat prevented anyvisualization of deep abdominal structures.
Cranial
a
trauma, bladder rupture, an extension of pneumothorax, splenic necrosis,
clostridial peritonitis, or be idiopathic (Saunders and Tobias 2003). If a
visualization of deep structures may be significantly hampered by
reverberation artifacts or shadowing. Because free air can persist several
days before complete resorption, the significance of free air found in dogs
or cats after surgery must be interpreted with caution, particularly if other
signs of intestinal dehiscence are not present.
         ee 
transverse (B) images obtained in the left cranial and mid-right abdomen
of a dog that had surgery a few days earlier. Short, redundant, hyperechoic
lines (short arrows), which appear as “comet tails" and are consistent with
reverberation artifacts, are in the upper portion of the abdomen. These
artifacts move during the exam along the inner surface of the abdominal
745
wall, indicating free air. Air is also observed in an intestinal lumen (long
arrow), associated with *dirty” acoustic shadowing.
B
PERITONEAL ABSCESSES,
GRANULOMAS, AND
PYOGRANULOMAS
Abscess formation can precede or follow the onset of peritonitis.
Ultrasonographically, peritoneal abscesses often present as fluid pockets
with particles, surrounded by an ill-defined hyperechoic wall and
sometimes internal septa or gas foci (Konde et al. 1986; Hanbidge et al.
  ss  o    ilh ) (
hypoechoic, and far acoustic enhancement may be recognized if the cell
count is not too high. Conversely, caseous abscesses may be associated
with some acoustic shadowing. The presence of gas in the central portion
746
of a peritoneal mass, recognized as hyperechoic foci with reverberation
artifacts, should be considered as a relatively specific sign of an abscess
(Hanbidge et al. 2003).
Peritoneal granulomas or pyogranulomas are rare in small animals. They
can be found with feline infectious peritonitis or fungal diseases or be
caused by foreign bodies, such as retained surgical sponges (Merlo and
Lamb 2000). Fungal pyogranulomas, such as those caused by
botryomycosis, are similar to bacterial abscesses on ultrasonographic
exam (Share and Utroska 2002). Foreign bodies can produce a suppurative
granulomatous or pyogranulomatous response of variable size. Some
foreign bodies, such as wooden sticks or grass awns, can migrate through
the abdominal wall or Gl and create a sinus tract that can be recognized by
their tubular, often tortuous, shape and their marked hypoechogenicity in
of the inflammatory reaction and/or scar tissue (Penninck and Mitchell
2003; Staudte et al. 2004). The foreign body itself is not always
ultrasonographically visible. Wooden sticks usually appear as linear
hyperechoic interfaces, with acoustic shadowing in most cases (Figure
15.12). However, plant materials chronically imbedded in tissues can
undergo a degradation that can render these objects less attenuating and
therefore less likely to be associated with acoustic shadowing (Staudte et
al. 2004). Grass awns appear as spindle-shaped, linear, hyperechoic
interfaces measuring 3-4 cm long, with acoustic shadowing less
commonly observed than with wood (Staudte et al. 2004; Gnudi et al.
2005). Retained surgical sponges typically appear as a hypoechoic mass
with central hyperechoic foci and are associated with other variable signs
of peritonitis (Merlo and Lamb 2000). Foreign bodies migrating into the
abdominal cavity are not necessarily associated with signs of peritonitis
(Penninck and Mitchell 2003)
Figure 15.11. Peritoneal abscess. Transverse image of the left caudal
abdomen of a dog with abdominal pain. An ill-defined hypoechoic area,
surrounded by an ill-defined hyperechoic rim (arrows), is present without
evidence of organ involvement. A sterile abscess, attached to the omentum
and mesentery, was confirmed at surgery.
747
6.25cm
X6.66Gm
Figure 15.12. Wooden stick foreign body in a dog. A hyperechoic linear
interface consistent with a stick (arrows) is noted, surrounded by a
hypoechoic cast of inflammatory cells (arrowheads). The stick was
impaling a segment of jejunum (Jej) and the left kidney (the same dog as
in Figure 10.28A). A small amount of free fluid (*) is near the perforation
site. Image courtesy of D. Penninck.
748
Jej
Figure 15.13. Fat nodular necrosis. Longitudinal image obtained in the
hyperechoic nodule (arrows) is dorsal to the bladder trigone. Partial
acoustic shadowing is noted in the far field (arrowheads), indicating
ultrasound-beam hyperattenuation in comparison with adjacent fat. These
features are consistent with incidental fat nodular necrosis.
749
Cranlal
Bladder
Colon
NODULAR FAT NECROSIS
A benign and incidental finding in dogs and cats, this can appear as
partially mineralized circular to oval soft-tissue masses in the abdominal
fat. With ultrasound, these foci can be recognized as well-defined
hyperechoic and hyperattenuating (acoustic shadow) nodules or masses in
the abdominal fat, which can be multiple in the same patient (Schwarz et
al. 2000) (Figure 15.13). A hypoechoic center may also be observed.
750
PERITONEAL AND
RETROPERITONEAL
NEOPLASIA
Primary peritoneal neoplastic processes, such as meso-theliomas, are
extremely rare in dogs and cats (Morini et al. 2006). Peritoneal soft-tissue
masses seen with ultrasonography are most often related to abdominal
organs, such as the spleen, liver, pancreas, or intestine. Lipomas,
infiltrative or not, may also be found within the omentum, mesentery, or
other portions of the abdomen (Figure 15.14). These fatty masses are
typically hyperechoic and hyperattenuating.
Other neoplastic processes, such as lymphoma, may infiltrate the
Omentum or mesentery, which can appear markedly heterogeneous
(Figure 15.15).
Widespread dissemination of neoplasia throughout the peritoneum, a
condition referred to as carcinoma-tosis, is more common than primary
peritoneal tumors. The term carcinomatosis is used in veterinary medicine
hematopoietic tumors (Monteiro and O'Brien 2004). In cats, the most
common sites of primary carcinomas associated with carcinomatosis are
the liver, pancreas, and intestine (Monteiro and O'Brien 2004). In dogs,
peritoneal spread by ruptured hemangiosarcoma probably represents the
 s     i d  oo 
carcinomatosis (Figures 15.16 and 15.17). The volume and echogenicity
of the fluid can vary and may be influenced by a high protein content,
concurrent presence of sterile or septic peritonitis, or hemorrhage.
Peritoneal effusion contributes to the visibility of nodules attached to the
peritoneal surfaces or within the floating omentum or mesentery
(Hanbidge et al. 2003) (Figures 15.16 and 15.17). Metastatic nodules tend
to appear isoechoic to the abdominal wall or hypoechoic to adjacent fat
(Monteiro and O'Brien 2004), although their echogenicity, as well as their
size and shape, can vary (Figures 15.16-15.18). [nfiltrated omentum or
mesentery can appear focally or diffusely thickened, which has been
751
2003). Additionally, mineral foci may be observed as hyperechoic foci
casting an acoustic shadow.
Soft-tissue sarcomas, especially hemangiosarcoma, can be found in the
retroperitoneal space, particularly in dogs. Ultrasonography can be useful
in differentiating a retroperitoneal mass from retroperitoneal effusion.
renomegaly, or renal mass suspected on radiographs. Retroperitoneal
soft-tissue masses are often heterogeneous and ill-defined, and may invade
major vessels such as the CVC, aorta, or renal vessels. However, it can be
originating from the adrenal glands or urinary system. Alternate imaging
such as computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging may also
help in better defining the origin and extent of retroperitoneal masses.
Figure 15.14. Mesenteric lipoma. A: Lateral abdominal radiograph of the
abdomen of a large-breed dog with a palpable abdominal mass. A mildly
inhomogeneous mass (arrows) in the caudal abdomen is deforming the
descending colon and bladder (Bl). The mass is of intermediate opacity
between fat and soft tissue. B: Longitudinal sonographic image of a
portion of this mass that contacts the ventral abdominal wall (arrows) and
extends beyond the limits of the scanned field of view. This mass is
hyperechoic, hyperattenuating, and relatively uniform. A mesenteric
lipoma was surgically confirmed.
Figure 15.15. Mesenteric infiltrative mass. Transverse images obtained in
        g    
752
ill-defined mass with mixed echogenicity is observed  (arrows),
surrounded with hyperechoic fat. B: In the central portion of this mass, a
segment of small intestine is found with thickened and irregular
hypoechoic walls (arrowheads). Mesenteric infiltration by the intestinal
lymphoma was confirmed.
Figure 15.16. Sarcomatosis. Longitudinal sonographic (A) and schematic
(B) images of the right portion of the abdomen of a cat with disseminated
metastases, are in the mesentery and omentum (arrows). Severe
hypoechoic peritoneal effusion is also present (*), delineating abdominal
structures.
Cranial
Intcstin
Figure 15.17. Carcinomatosis. Longitudinal image obtained in the left
cranial abdomen of a cat with biliary carcinoma. An oval, mildly
echogenic nodule (arrows) is on the surface of the peritoneum, at the level
of the left kidney (LK). Several similar nodules were detected in the rest
of the abdomen, consistent with carcinomatosis. A large volume of
753
hypoechoic peritoneal effusion (PE) related to the metastatic disease is
also present.
Cranial
Liver
Figure 15.18. Omental carcinomatosis and sarcomatosis. A: Longitudinal
image of  the midabdomen of a cat diagnosed  with pancreatic
adenocarcinoma. The omentum is enlarged, hyperechoic, and filled with
small hypoechoic nodules (arrows) consistent with metastases. B:
Transverse image obtained in the right cranial abdomen, medial to the
region of the pancreas, in a dog. A well-defined, circular, hypoechoic
focus is in the omentum (arrow). The region dorsal to this focus is
hyperechoic (arrowheads), consistent with acoustic enhancement. This
hypoechoic focus contrasts with the surrounding hyperechoic and
hyperattenuating omentalfat. Anecrotic
metastatic
focus was
cytologically
/identifiedwithfine-needle
aspiration.
[leocecal
adenocarcinoma was confirmed. C: Longitudinal image of the left cranial
abdomen of a dog with a large splenic mass and peritoneal effusion (not
shown). Three, small, ill-defined, hypoechoic foci (between the cursors)
are in the omental fat between the liver and the spleen. Rupture splenic
hemangiosarcoma with hepatic and omental metastases were identified in
surgery.
754
Liven
LYMPHADENOPATHY
Changes in size, shape, contour, and internal echogenicity and echotexture
are
       
differentiate benign from malignant processes. Enlarged lymph nodes
(L)axes increase more significantly with neoplastic infiltration
(Llabres-Diaz 2004; Nyman et al. 2004). S/L axis ratios > 0.5 are usually
predictive of neoplasia (Figure 15.19), as opposed to ratios < 0.5, which
are usually calculated for normal or reactive lymph nodes (Figure 15.20).
Internal nodal architecture tends to be more affected by neoplastic
infiltration (Llabres-Diaz 2004; Nyman et al. 2004). Reactive lymph
nodes tend to present a hyperechoic hilus unlike with neoplastic
 infiltrations (Figure 15.20). Primary or metastatic neoplastic lymph nodes
are commonly hypoechoic (Figures 15.19, 15.21, and 15.22), facilitating
755
coagulative necrosis, hemorrhage, or mineralization is also present (Figure
15.23).
        s
distorted (Figure 15.24). Hypoechoic or anechoic areas may also be seen
as the result of liquefaction necrosis or cyst formation (Llabres-Diaz 2004)
(Figures 15.24 and 15.25). Cyst formation may also be seen in benign
lymph nodes (Figure 15.25A). Malignant nodes may also be inflamed or
abscessed and can therefore become markedly heterogeneous (Figure
15.25D).
Figure 15.19. Malignant lymph nodes. Longitudinal image obtained in the
midabdomen of a dog with peripheral lymph-adenomegaly. Multiple oval
to rounded, well-defined, hypoechoic masses are in the root of the
mesentery, consistent with enlarged mesenteric lymph nodes (arrows)
The ultrasonographic features of these nodes are highly suggestive of
malignancy, particularly lymphoma.
Cranial
2.28cm
Figure 15.20. Reactive lymphadenopathy. A: Longitudinal image of the
midabdomen of a dog with a history of inflammatory bowel disease. The
756
echogenicity, particularly peripherally, as well as mild mesenteric fat
hyperechogenicity. The cranial mesenteric artery and vein (CMA & V) are
noted between these nodes, serving as a useful landmark for their
identification. The orientation of the flow in the artery, which is directed
toward the probe, is displayed as a red signal on color Doppler. B:
Ultrasound images of mildly enlarged gastric (left) and splenic (right)
lymph nodes in a cat with septic peritonitis. The fat around the gastric
lymph node is hyperechoic, contrasting with the hypoechoic lymph node.
The hilar portion of these nodes remains hyperechoic.
Grani
Liver
Figure 15.21. Neoplastic hepatic lymph nodes. Transverse sonographic
image obtained at the porta hepatis in a dog with pulmonary histiocytic
sarcoma. The hepatic lymph nodes (HLN) are identified adjacent to the
portal vein (PV) and dorsal to the body of the pancreas (P) and stomach
(S). These nodes are enlarged, irregular, and less echogenic than normal.
757
They remain relatively uniform. Disseminated histiocytic sarcoma was
identified in the liver and several abdominal lymph nodes.
Right
HLN
HLR
-1.72cm
Figure 15.22. Anal sac gland lymphatic metastases. Longitudinal image
obtained in the caudal abdomen of a dog with a perianal mass. A large
heterogeneous mass (arrows) with well-defined contours is dorsal to the
urinary bladder, in the region of the medial iliac lymph nodes. A
hyperechoic focus (arrowhead) associated with acoustic shadowing,
consistent with mineralization, is in the cranial portion of the mass.
Metastatic anal sac carcinoma was diagnosed with cytology on fine-needle
aspiration.
758
Cranlal
Bladder
Figure 15.23. Sublumbar lymphadenopathy
y caused  by metastatic
carcinoma. A: Lateral abdominal radiograph of a medium-sized breed dog
with metastatic carcinoma. An ill-defined, lobulated, soft-tissue opacity
(arrows) is ventral to the sixth and seventh lumbar vertebrae. B:
Longitudinal sonographic image obtained in the same region, lateral to the
 o   (s no)  n  o no
with surrounding mildly hyperechoic fat, consistent with metastatic
disease, is at the location of a medial iliac lymph node.
B
Figure 15.24. Sublumbar lymphadenopathy caused by metastatic
sarcoma. A: Lateral abdominal radiograph of a large-breed dog with
759
partial urinary obstruction and signs suggestive of colitis. A somewhat
lobulated soft-tissue opacity is in the caudodorsal abdomen and displacing
the descending colon ventrally and associated with marked bladder
distension. The colon is corrugated. B: Transverse sonographic image
obtained in the caudal abdomen. The mass suspected on radiographs is
aspiration.
B
Bladder
Figure 15.25. Cavitary lymph nodes. A: Benign cystic node. Multiple,
irregular, well-defined anechoic cysts are incidentally found in the hepatic
node of this dog with urinary calculi. HA, hepatic artery; and PV, portal
vein. B: Cystic node with lymphoma. Longitudinal image of a
mesenteric lymph node in a dog with multicentric lymphoma. A large,
oval, anechoic, avascular area (arrows) is in the cranial region of the
enlarged lymph node (arrowheads). Fine-needle aspiration confirmed the
presence of a fluid-filled cavity or cyst within this portion of the node, and
lymphoma was confirmed in the caudal solid portion. C: Necrosis. On
this ultrasound image, two adjacent mesenteric lymph nodes are severely
enlarged, nearly anechoic, and ill-defined. The surrounding fat is
metastatic carcinoma associated with necrosis and inflammation. D:
Abscessed malignant node. Transverse image of a severely enlarged
hepatic lymph node in a dog with multicentric lymphoma and suspected
pancreatitis. Echogenic fluid is in the affected node, with a cellular
) d    l ()    n
760
placed obliquely). The adjacent pancreas (P) is hypoechoic and the
 peripheral fat is mildly hyperechoic. PV, portal vein.
Crani
3.00cm
Figure 15.26.
5.Granulomatous lymphadenopathy. Longitudinal image
obtained in a dog diagnosed with an intestinal mass, on which a
 g x    pa  sde au y s
long). This lymph node is not as hypoechoic as typically seen with
lymphoma. Surgery confirmed the presence of severe granulomatous
enteritis caused by pythiosis.
761
Cranlal
[nflammatory lymph nodes also tend to be ill-defined (Nyman et al. 2004).
Noninflamed malignant nodes are usually sharper in contour and may be
associated with acoustic enhancement. However, some overlap exists in
pathologies. For example, granulomatous diseases, such as pythiosis, can
mimic neoplasia (Figure 15.26)
In people, the use of color Doppler, power Doppler, or contrast
malignant nodes (Nyman et al. 2004). In benign nodes, the blood flow
distribution is primarily hilar, whereas it tends to be more peripheral or
mixed with malignancies. Resistive and pulsative indices are also higher
in malignant nodes (Nyman et al. 2004).
762
VASCULAR THROMBOSIS
ANDOTHERANOMALIES
In addition to the portal system, thrombi and emboli involving the CVC
aorta, or iliac vessels can be detected with ultrasonography in dogs or cats.
A thorough evaluation of all vascular branches, including femoral veins
and arteries, is required when pelvic thromboembolic disease is suspected
The appearance of thrombosis can vary in the acute and chronic phases.
Initially, the thrombus may be poorly echogenic and more difficult to
identify using standard B-mode. The lack of flow as evaluated with
spectral Doppler, color Doppler, or power Doppler, as well as the lack of
compressibility (applicable to distal CVC and peripheral veins), are useful
signs in the identification of acute thrombosis (Linkins et al. 2006). With
time, an echogenic area, usually attached to a portion of the vessel wall, is
observed filling a portion of the vascular lumen. The thrombus can appear
uniform or heterogeneous because of blood clot lysis and recanalization
CVC thrombosis can be caused by the cranial extension of spontaneous
femoral or iliac vein thrombosis, or by the invasion of malignant tumors
involving adjacent organs, such as the liver and adrenal glands, that
produces endothelial damage (Finn-Bodner and Hudson 1998). External
compression of the CVC may cause flow congestion, which represents a
predisposing factor for thrombus formation (Figure 15.27). Peritoneal
effusion may develop if venous flow is significantly reduced through the
CVC. Additionally, thrombosis is favored by the presence of a
hypercoagu-lable status.
Figure 15.27. Thrombosis of the caudal vena cava. A: Small thrombus.
Longitudinal image of the caudal portion of the caudal vena cava (CVC)
of a cat on which a well-defined, oval, mildly echogenic thrombus is seen
(arrows). This thrombus was partially obliterating the vessel lumen. Image
courtesy of D. Penninck. B: Massive thrombosis. Longitudinal image
obtained in the right cranial abdomen of a dog with severe ascites (*). The
CVC is enlarged, and its lumen is diffusely and uniformly echogenic.
consistent with thrombosis. There was no evidence of flow on color or
power Doppler. A hepatic mass infiltrating the CVC was suspected.
763
Craniall
CVC
B
Cranlal
Pancreas
2
Liver
CVC
Figure 15.28. Aortic thromboembolism. Longitudinal (A) and transverse
(B) images of the caudal portion of the abdominal aorta (Ao) in a dog with
764
in the aorta is occluding most of its lumen, consistent with a
thromboembolus (arrows). The dog had hyperadrenocorticism, which was
considered as the probable predisposing factor for thrombus formation.
CVC, caudal vena cava; and EIA, external iliac artery.
Crainia
Rgh
CVC
Figure 15.29. Aortic wall mineralization. A: Longitudinal sonographic
image of the caudal abdominal aorta of a dog with chronic Cushing's
disease. Linear hyperechoic foci (arrows) with acoustic shadowing are
along the inner margin of the dorsal aortic (Ao) wall. B: Extensively
  u  o  s  ss o 
kidney, particularly in the cortex, of this dog, which is consistent with
nephrocalcinosis. Similar changes were present in the other kidney.
Distal aortic  and iliac thromboembolism  represents an  important
complication associated with cardiomyopathies in cats. In dogs, aortic and
iliac thromboem-bolism is usually present because of a disorder associated
765
with a hypercoagulable state, cardiac disease or neoplasia (Boswood et al.
2000) (Figure 15.28).
Vascular wall mineralization, particularly involving the aorta, can
sometimes be observed in dogs and is usually considered an incidental
finding. Hyperechoic plaquelike lesions can be observed at the inner
margin of the wall, with acoustic shadowing if large enough (Figure
15.29).
Abdominal vascular malformations other than portosystemic shunts are
extremely rare in dogs and cats. The use of ultrasonography in the
identification of segmental aplasia of the CVC with azygos continuation
has been reported in dogs (Barthez et al. 1996).
INTERVENTIONAL
PROCEDURES
Fine-needle aspiration of  peritoneal  fluids is used routinely  with
ultrasonography in dogs and cats. With minimal practice, even small
amount of fluids can be securely aspirated. Abdominal masses and lymph
nodes can also be aspirated or biopsied. Cavitated masses, abscesses, or
cysts can also be drained with ultrasound guidance.
REFERENCES
Barthez PY, Siemens LM, Koblik PD (1996) Azygos continuation of the
caudal vena cava in a dog: Radiographic and ultrasonographic diagnosis.
VetRadiol Ultras0und37:354-356.
Bezuidenhout AJ (1993) The lymphatic system. In: Evans HE, ed.
Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 3'd edition. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, pp.
717-757.
Boysen SR, Rozanski EA, Tidwell AS, Holm JL, Shaw, SP, Rush JE
(2004) Evaluation of a focused assessment with sonography for trauma
protocol to detect free abdominal fluid in dogs involved in motor vehicle
accidents. J Am Vet Med Assoc 225:1198-1204.
766
Boysen SR, Tidwell AS, Penninck D (2003) Ultrasonographic findings in
dogs and cats with gastrointestinal perforation. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
44:556-564.
Boswood A, Lamb CR, White RN (2000) Aortic and iliac thrombosis in
six dogs. J Small Anim Pract 41:109-114.
Evans HE (1993a) The Heart and Arteries & Chapter 12: Veins. In: Evans
HE, ed. Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, 3rd edition. Philadelphia: WB
Saunders, pp. 586-681.
Evans HE (1993b) Veins. [n: Evans HE, Christensen GC, eds. Miller's
Anatomy of the Dog, 3rd edition. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, pp.
682-716.
Finn-Bodner ST, Hudson JA (1998) Abdominal vascular sonography. Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 28:887-943.
Gnudi G, Volta A, Bonazzi M, Gazzola M, Bertoni G (2005)
Ultrasonographic features of grass awn migration in the dog. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 46:423-426.
Hanbidge AE, Lynch D, Wilson SR (2003) US of the peritoneum.
Radiographics 23:663-684.
Henley RK, Hager DA, Ackerman N (1989) A comparison of
two-dimensional ultrasonography and radiography for the detection of
small amounts of free peritoneal fluid in the dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
30:121-124.
Komori S, Nakagaki K, Koyama H, Yamagami T (2002) Idiopathic
mesenteric and omental steatitis in a dog- J Am Vet Med Assoc
221:1591-1593.
Konde LJ, Lebel JL, Park RD, Wrigley RH (l986) Sonographic
application in the diagnosis of intraabdominal abscess in the dog. Vet
Radiol Ultrasound 27:151-154.
Linkins LA, Stretton R, Probyn L, Kearon C (2006) Interobserver
agreement on ultrasound measurements of residual vein diameter,
venous thrombosis. Thromb Res 117:241-247.
767
Llabres-Diaz FJ (2004) Ultrasonography of the medial lymph nodes in the
dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 45:156-165.
Merlo M, Lamb CR (2000) Radiographic and ultrasonographic features of
retained  surgical sponge  in eight dogs.  Vet Radiol Ultrasound
41:279-283.
Monteiro CB, O'Brien RT (2004) A retrospective study on the
sonographic findings of abdominal carcinomatosis in 14 cats. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 45:559-564.
Morini M, Bettini G, Morandi F, Burdisso R, Marcato PS (2006)
Deciduoid peritoneal mesothelioma in a dog. Vet Pathol 43:198-201.
         
the sonographic assessment of tumor metastases in liver and superficial
lymph nodes. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 45:438-448.
Penninck D, Mitchell S (2003) Ultrasonographic detection of ingested and
perforating wooden foreign bodies in four dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
223:206-209.
Pintar J, Breitschwerdt EB, Hardie EM, Spaulding KA (2003) Acute
nontraumatic hemoabdomen in the dog: A retrospective analysis of 39
cases (1987-2001). J Am Anim Hosp Ass0c 39:518-522.
Pugh CR (1994) Ultrasonographic examination of abdominal lymph nodes
in the dog. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 35:1 10-1 15.
Roson N, Garriga V, Cuadrado M, et al. (2006) Sonographic findings of
mesenteric panniculitis: Correlation with CT and literature review. J Clin
Ultrasound 34:169-176.
Saunders WB, Tobias KM (2003) Pneumoperitoneum in dogs and cats: 39
cases (1983-2002). J Am Vet Med Ass0c 223:462-468.
Schwarz T, Morandi F, Gnudi G, et al. (2000) Nodular fat necrosis in the
feline and canine abdomen. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 41:335-339.
Share B, Utroska B (2002) Intra-abdominal botryomycosis in a dog. J Am
Vet Med Ass0c 220:1025-1027.
 s d o   (  
small animals. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 34:427-431.
768
Spaulding KA (1997) A review of sonographic identification of
abdominal blood vessels and juxtavascular organs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
38:4-23.
Staudte KL， Hopper BJ, Gibson NR, Read RA (2004) Use of
ultrasonography to facilitate surgical removal of non-enteric foreign
bodies in 17 dogs. J Small Anim Pract 45:395-400.
Szatmari V, Sotonyi P, Voros K (2001) Normal duplex Doppler
waveforms of major abdominal blood vessels in dogs: A review. Vet
Radiol Ultras0und 42:93-107.
769
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
MUSCULOSKELETAL
SYSTEM
Martin Kramer and Marc-Andre d'Anjou
SHOULDER
Scanning Technique
Ultrasonography of the shoulder joint and the surrounding tissues is best
performed with a linear transducer using frequencies greater than 10 MHz.
portions or areas with a curved surface, such as the axillary area. The hair
around the joint is clipped. All tendons and muscles are scanned
longitudinally and transversally (Figure 16.1).
The sonogram of the shoulder joint starts by scanning the supraspinatus
and infraspinatus muscles down to their attachment sites at the major
tubercle (Figure 16.2). Then the biceps muscle is examined, after maximal
external rotation of the shoulder joint (Figures 16.1 and 16.2). Abducting
at the muscle belly, along the craniomedial aspect of the humeral
diaphysis. The probe is then gradually moved proximally along its
proximal tendon, which lies within the intertubercular groove, at the
medial aspect of the shoulder joint. The biceps tendon is then followed to
770
its origin on the supragle-noid tubercle of the scapula. The most important
standard scan plane is the cross section of the intertubercular groove
between the major and minor tubercles. At that level, the tendon is
encircled by a sheath filled with a small amount of synovial fluid that
connects with the joint space proximally (Figure 16.2). The tendon and its
sheath are contained in the intertubercular groove by a transverse ligament
between the major and minor tubercles (Kramer and Gerwing 1994).
The intra-articular structures of the shoulder are imaged by positioning the
transducer laterally in a craniocaudal orientation immediately distal to the
acromion, which serves as a landmark (Figure 16.3). The joint is scanned
by slowly adducting and simultaneously rotating the limb while the probe
remains in the same position. As there is limited space, a second
image—perpendicular to the first—is difficult to achieve, particularly with
a linear transducer that has a long footprint. Scanning the cranial aspect of
the shoulder joint is difficult because of the presence of the major
tubercle, which allows only a small surface of probe contact. Medial
imaging of the shoulder joint may be facilitated by the use of a curved or
sector transducer because of the intimate relationship between the thoracic
limb and the thoracic wall (Figure 16.4).
Normal Sonographic Anatomy of the
Shoulder
Supraspinatus Muscle
The supraspinatus muscle originates on the supraspi-natus fossa of the
scapula and is scanned distally in longitudinal sections over the extensor
side of the humerus to its insertion site on the major tubercle (Figures 16.2
and 16.5). The muscle is hypoechoic and loosely striated, and smoothly
  e e     
interface, with irregular margins and acoustic shadowing, on which the
Supraspinatus muscles inserts (Figure 16.5). At that level, because of the
 orientation of the tendon fibers, this portion remains similar in appearance
to the muscle belly, in comparison to the adjacent biceps tendon (Kramer
and Gerwing 1994).
771
Infraspinatus Muscle
The infraspinatus muscle is scanned in longitudinal and transverse planes
from its origin on the infraspi-nous fossa to its short tendon at the
with thin hyperechoic bands that run obliquely connecting a central line to
 (il ) d -   i  
joint. The tendinous tissue displays typical hyperechoic fibrils arranged in
 parallel lines, with a peripheral hyperechoic outline (periten-dineum). The
 greater tubercle appears as a hyper-echoic convex structure on which the
tendon ends, laterally, while curving and tapering when scanned
longitudinally (like a bird's beak). The infraspinatus muscle is covered by
the deltoid muscle, which displays typical muscle echotexture (Figure
16.6). The fascias of both muscles can be distinguished sono-graphically
(Kramer and Gerwing 1994) (Figure 16.6)
Figure 16.1. Scanning technique for the shoulder. [llustration showing the
position of the dog and ultrasound probe to obtain longitudinal images of
the supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscles (A) and biceps tendon (B).
For the assessment of the biceps tendon, the leg must be pulled and
externally rotated (curved arrow), facilitating the approach to the
intertubercular groove, which is located in the medial portion of the
shoulder.
772
B
Figure 16.2. Schematic views of the normal shoulder anatomy in dogs.
Lateral view: The supraspinatus (SS) and infraspinatus (IS) muscles and
tendons are cranial and caudal to the scapular spine, respectively. The SS
tendon inserts on the major tubercle (MT), just lateral to the bicipital
groove. The IS inserts on the humeral head more laterally. The lateral
glenohumeral ligament (GHL) is lateral to the joint capsule and synovial
space (S). Medial view: The biceps (B) muscle and tendon course along
 u i o go un    o os  
intertubercular groove, just medial to the major tubercle (MT). It extends
within a tendon sheath (arrowheads) that connects with the shoulder joint
synovium (S) and is contained by the transverse humeral ligament (THL).
The biceps tendon courses along the insertion site of the supraspinatus
(SS) tendon, located craniolaterally, and originates on the supraglenoid
tubercle (SGT). The medial glenohumeral ligament (GHL) is fan-shaped
proximally. Illustrations by M.A. d’ Anjou.
773
SS
SS
MT
GHL
Lateralview
Medialview
Figure 16.3. Sonographic approach to the shoulder joint. The caudolateral
portion of the shoulder joint can be evaluated after placing the probe just
caudal to the acromion, which can be easily palpated. The caudal extent of
 Aq uonsn passass aq ueo (r) ansdeo pue seds uo a
d'Anjou.
774
Acromion
Figure 16.4. Scanning technique for the medial aspect of the shoulder
joint. Illustration showing the position of the dog and ultrasound probe
when scanning the medial aspect of the shoulder and axillary area. The leg
shown) or extending the leg.
775
Biceps Brachii Muscle
[n the longitudinal plane, the biceps muscle appears hypoechoic, with a
hyperechoic line in the center representing the border between the two
fused muscle bellies. Hyperechoic lines extend from this central line and
run at a slightly oblique angle to the longitudinal axis (fish-bone pattern).
In cross section, the shape of the muscle resembles a section of citrus fruit.
which is ill-defined (Figure 16.7A). The proximal tendon runs within the
humeral intertubercular groove, also called the bicipital groove, which lies
medial to the major tubercle, deep in the medial groove of the shoulder. At
that level, transverse scans are preferred for assessing the tendinous
texture, the tendon sheath, and the intertubercular groove. On a transverse
plane, the tendon appears as an oval, uniformly hyperechoic structure
measuring approximately 3 mm thick in medium-sized to large dogs
(Figure 16.7C). The transducer must be placed carefully perpendicular to
could be confused for a lesion (Figure 16.7A and B). The tendon is
surrounded by a thin hypoechoic halo, consistent with the tendon sheath,
which is typically fusiform to oval on cross section (Figure 16.7C). Thin,
776
     s n  sn  
margins of the sheath at the interface level of the tendon sheath wall and
humeral surface, respectively. The major tubercle appears as a
hyperechoic convex line at the lateral aspect of the bicipital groove and
tendon. It is more distinct than the minor tubercle medially, which is seen
only as a small elevation of the reflective line on the surface of the bone.
The intertubercular groove appears as a mildly concave hyperechoic line
extending into the reflective lines of the tubercle (Figure 16.7C). The
intertubercular ligament cannot be distinguished from the surrounding soft
tissue. Distally, the distal outpouch of the synovial sheath can appear
lobulated in some dogs.
Figure 16.5. Normal sonographic anatomy of the supraspinatus muscle
and tendon. Longitudinal (A) and transverse (B) sonographic and
schematic images of the normal supraspinatus muscle (SSM) and
supraspinatus tendon (SST) in a large breed dog. The characteristic
hypoechoic echotexture with small hyperechoic dots and lines of the
supraspinatus muscle is seen. Because of the orientation and distribution
around the humeral major tubercle (MT) on which it inserts. The major
tubercle and the surface of the humeral head (HH) appear as thin
hyperechoic interfaces casting acoustic shadow. The biceps tendon (BT,
arrowheads) and its sheath course caudally and medially, in proximity to
the SST.
777
Dista
B
Figure 16.6. Normal sonographic anatomy of the infraspinatus muscle. A
and B: Longitudinal sonographic images of the normal infraspinatus
muscle (ISM) obtained at two different levels. The characteristic
echotexture of the muscle is present. The deltoid muscle (DM) is in the
 )        
represents the intermuscular fascia. The shadowing hyperechoic surface of
the scapula (S) is seen in the far field in A.
778
The longitudinal examination is then performed by following the tendon
across the joint to its origin on the supraglenoid tubercle. In the far field
         s
779
distinguished. The latter structure is visible as a slightly convex.
hyperechoic interface associated with acoustic shadowing. In this region,
the use of a cross-sectional plane does not provide additional information.
Because of its curvature along the intertubercular groove, the tendon
   n g l a n e ) 
tendinous fibers curve and become hypoechoic as they enter the bone
(Figure 16.7A). This region should not be confused for a lesion.
Finally, the tendon is dynamically examined by flexing, extending
abducting, and adducting the shoulder joint. During these manipulations.
the fine fibrillar structure of the biceps tendon is visualized throughout its
length. When the joint is flexed, the hypoechoic joint space enlarges to
approximately twice its original size (Kramer et al. 2001b).
Shoulder Joint Space
enables visualization of the surface of the humeral head as a semicircular.
convex, hyperechoic line with distal acoustic shadowing. The line should
appear smooth, distinct, and continuous. The humeral head is located at a
depth of 1-3 cm and is covered by muscles. Because of the semicircular
anatomy of the head, only a small section of the surface can be assessed.
In these perpendicular views, the bone surface appears as a distinct,
curvilinear, hyper-echoic line, with a 0.5- to 0.7-mm anechoic central
band that represents the cartilage. The caudal and cranial borders of the
humeral head are scanned tangentially and appear indistinct, making them
difficult to assess. In these planes, the synovium appears hypoechoic with
represents the joint capsule (Figure 16.8). This merges with the
echotexture of the covering musculature. Accurate differentiation of these
structures is usually not possible (Kramer and Gerwing 1994).
Figure 16.7. Normal sonographic anatomy of the biceps tendon in dogs. A
and B: In these longitudinal sonographic and schematic images of the
normal biceps tendon, the most proximal (A) and distal (B) portions of
16.1). The characteristic hyperechoic echotexture of the tendon is well
780
the level of origin on the supraglenoid tubercle (SGT), as well as in curved
portions more distally. Deep to the tendon, the intertubercular groove
(ITG) appears as a curved, hyperechoic interface. The proximal portion of
the biceps muscle (BM) is seen distal to the humeral head. C: Transverse
sonographic andschematic images obtained at the level of the
intertubercular groove (ITG). When imaged perpendicularly, the biceps
anns e on lao onooady Aon e se seadde (ia) uon
surrounded by a thin hypoechoic rim (arrows) representing the tendon
sheath with some fluid. The biceps tendon slides along the lateral aspect
of the minor tubercle (MiT), medial to the major tubercle (MaT) and
supraspinatus tendon of insertion (SST)
Figure 16.8. Normal sonographic anatomy of the shoulder joint.
Longitudinal sonographic image obtained at the cau-dolateral aspect of the
shoulder. The humeral head (HH) appears as a shadowing, hyperechoic.
convex interface. The adjacent articular cartilage and small volume of
uo suuns si u oioaody un e se ede pi leous
capsule (JC) is hyperechoic. C, thin layer of cartilage and synovial fluid.
781
Sonographic Features of Specific
Shoulder Disorders
Supraspinatus Muscle
Supraspinatus Tendonitis and Mineralization Inflamed or degenerated
supraspinatus tendons can be thickened and inhomogeneous because of
fibrous disruption, hemorrhage, and/or fibrosis. Mineralization can also be
found in the region of insertion on the major tubercle in the distal part of
These mineral foci appear as small, hyperechoic, irregularly defined
structures, with or without distal acoustic shadowing and with or without a
surrounding hypoechoic to anechoic area (reaction tissue) (Gerwing and
Kramer 1994; Long and Nyland 1999) (Figures 16.9 and 16.10)
782
Infraspinatus Muscle
Contracture of the Infraspinafus Muscle Distinct abnormalities in both
echogenicity and echo pattern are seen in the affected muscle. The
transition from muscle to tendon, and the tendon itself, are usually
affected. These areas are highly inhomogeneous with hypoechoic and
hyperechoic zones. The tendinous tissue appears edematous with irregular
margins (Kramer et al. 1996; Siems et al. 1998).
Biceps Tendon
Tenosynovitis
The
 ultrasonographic   characteristics   of   bicipital
tenosynovitis in dogs can be classified according to severity (Kramer et al.
as o  s un di ai (iil li) (o
thickened, losing its normal flat to oval shape to become rounded. Its
normal fibrillar pattern can also be affected. Hypoechoic areas caused by
partial tears and/or hemorrhage can be seen (Figure 16.11). The affected
tendon may also appear significantly inhomogeneous.
Tendon sheath effusion, which is often observed, appears as an enlarged
hypoechoic to anechoic halo surrounding the affected tendon. The
effusion can range from mild to severe and is well visualized on transverse
images 0ver the intertubercular groove (Figures 16.11 and 16.12). In most
cases, the thickened synovium cannot be easily distinguished from the
(666l puen pue Suo7) saop awos u! paaasqo aq ueo piny lejaouss
Fibrous adhesions with the tendon, particularly within the bicipital groove,
can also be seen on dynamic sonograms. In severe cases, the tendon
sheath develops a bulge in the direction of the minor tubercle. The wall of
the tendon sheath is clearly visible as a hyperechoic line representing the
border between the fluid and the surrounding musculature (Rivers et al.
1992; Kramer et al. 2001b; Esterline et al. 2005) (Figure 16.11E and F)
Table 16.1. Bicipital tenosynovitis in dogs
Grade Mild effusion of the tendon sheath (anechoic ring > mm thick)
Normal tendon
783
Grade Moderate effusion of the tendon sheath (anechoic ring 2-3 mm
2
thick)
Tendon mildly inhomogeneous
3
extending further distally and medially in the tendon sheath)
Tendon moderately to severely inhomogeneous and thickened or
reduced to a stump
Grade
Maximal distension of the tendon sheath because of traumatic
4
hemorrhage
Tendon only mildly to moderately abnormal
Figure16.9.
Calcifying supraspinatus  tendinopathy.  A and  B:
Mediolateral and tangential radiographs of the intertubercular groove in a
large-breed dog with shoulder pain. Small mineral opacities (arrows) are
observed in the region of insertion of the supraspinatus tendon, located
just lateral to the intertubercular groove and biceps tendon (arrowheads).
C: Transverse sonographic and schematic images of the intertubercular
groove in the same dog. An irregular, hyperechoic, shadowing focus is in
mineralization, as seen in the tangential radiographic projection, is
adjacent to the biceps tendon (BT). Moderate distension of the biceps
tendon sheath is observed, as the result of tenosynovitis, which was
suspected to be secondary to the supraspinatus tendon lesion. MaT, major
tubercle; and MiT, minor tubercle.
784
Exostoses (osteophytes) can form within the intertubercular groove as a
result of chronic degenerative joint disease and/or bicipital tenosynovitis.
The exos-toses are attached to the tendon sheath and appear as
hyperechoic, more or less concave, smooth, curved structures. Acoustic
shadowing is usually present when these mineral deposits exceed 2-3 mm
(Figure 16.12). In severe cases, the surrounding osteophytic formations
may form a tunnel around the tendon, significantly hampering the
visualization of the tendon (Figure 16.13). Mineralization of the bicipital
tendon sheath cannot easily be distinguished from migrating calcified
bodies, such as those related to osteochondritis dissecans.
Figure 16.10. Calcifying supraspinatus tendinopathy. Longitudinal (A)
and transverse (B) sonographic and schematic views of the supraspinatus
tendon (SST) in a large-breed dog with shoulder pain. The supraspinatus
tendon is inhomogeneous and presents several hyperechoic foci, some of
785
which cause acoustic shadowing, consistent with fibrosis and
mineralization. BT, biceps tendon; and MT, major tubercle.
Complete and Partial Tendon Ruptures With complete rupture, the
homogeneous parallel, fibrillar structure of the tendon is destroyed. The
gap between retracted tendon stumps is usually anechoic or hypoechoic,
and moderate to severe tendon sheath effusion can be observed as the
result of hemorrhage (Figure 16.14). The distal stump commonly is of
mixed echogenicity and echotexture.
Most partial ruptures occur in the area of the supraglenoid tubercle. At this
site, multiple, small, hyperechoic bone fragments with acoustic shadowing
appears hypoechoic and mildly to moderately inhomogeneous. In contrast
to a complete rupture, areas of tendon tissue displaying a normal fibrillar
echotexture can be found in a transverse image. A hypoechoic to anechoic
region, also called core fesion, can be found in the central portion of the
affected tendon, at the level of fibrillar disruption and hematoma
formation, associated with tendon enlargement (Figures 16.11 and
(Figure 16.13B). Tendon sheath effusion develops around the tendon
(Kramer et al. 2001b).
786
Fractures of the Supraglenoid Tubercle The fractured supraglenoid
tubercle is visualized at the proximal extent of the biceps tendon as a
hyperechoic, more or less convex structure with smooth margins and
acoustic shadowing. The fragment can be seen moving with the tendon
during dynamic flexion and extension of the shoulder, in association with
moderate tendon sheath effusion (Gerwing and Kramer 1994). The surface
of the tubercle appears irregular, and a bone defect can be observed. In
cases of partial avulsion fracture, small bone fragments can be identified
adjacent to the supraglenoid tubercle. Hyperechoic foci are observed in
the proximal tendon and may be associated with acoustic shadowing
(Kramer et al. 2001b) (Figure 16.15A).
Figure 16.11. Bicipital tenosynovitis. A and B: Transverse (A) and
longitudinal (B) sonograms of the biceps tendon (arrowheads) of a
Labrador retriever scanned at the level of the intertubercular groove
(ITG). The tendon is enlarged and rounded. A hypoechoic core lesion is in
the center of the tendon, consistent with tendonitis with probable partial
rupture. The tendon sheath (arrow) is mildly distended. C-E: Variable
levels of tendon sheath distension (arrows) in several dogs with
tenosynovitis. Hypoechoic lesions are in the central portion of the biceps
tendon (BT) (E). F: Distension of the tendon sheath in another dog with
bicipital rupture and hemorrhage. The tendon sheath (arrows) is filled with
(BT).
787
0o.68cm
Figure16.12.(
Chronic  bicipital  tenosynovitis  with  mineralization.
Transverse sonographic images obtained in two dogs at the level of the
intertubercular groove (ITG). A: A hyperechoic, shadowing mineral focus
(arrow) is present at the lateral aspect of the bicipital tendon sheath. The
adjacent tendon (between the cursors) is mildly thickened. B: Tendon
sheath wall mineralization can appear as a hyperechoic semicircular
groove (arrows) that may partially or completely encircle the biceps
tendon.
788
TO
0.32m
Figure 16.13. Chronic bicipital tenosynovitis with mineralization. A:
Mediolateral radiographic view of the shoulder of a 4-year-old Rottweiler
with chronic shoulder pain and lameness. Mineralization is found along
the intertubercular groove (arrows), as well as in the distal region of the
tendon sheath. Periarticular new bone formation is also present at the
caudal aspect of the shoulder, consistent with degenerative joint disease. B
and C: Transverse (B) and longitudinal (C) sonographic images of the
intertubercular groove (ITG) on which an irregular and hyperechoic
mineral cast partially encircles the biceps tendon (arrows). The tendon
     e  (  
(arrowhead)consistent with a tear.
789
atera
Figure 16.14. Complete bicipital tendon rupture. Longitudinal (A) and
transverse (B-D) sonographic images of the biceps tendon and muscle in a
dog with non-weight-bearing lameness. Significant distension of the
tendon sheath (TS) is recognized. Hyperechoic and inhomogeneous
retracted ends of the biceps tendon (arrows in B and C) are noted. Mildly
echogenic regions, consistent with hemorrhage, are in the synovial sheath
(C). The proximal portion of the biceps tendon (A, arrows) and muscle
(D, arrows) is inhomogeneous. Chronic bicipital tenosynovitis with
rupture was diagnosed. H, humerus; and SGT, supragle-noid tubercle.
Images courtesy of D. Penninck.
790
Figure 16.15. Partial bicipital tendon rupture. A: Longitudinal sonogram
tendon avulsion. An inhomogeneous, hypoechoic area (arrow) with small
hyperechoic dots consistent with mineral fragments is just distal to the
region of insertion on the supraglenoid tubercle (SGT). H, humerus. B:
Transverse sonogram in another dog with partial tendon rupture. An oval
anechoic area is in the central portion of the biceps tendon (BT), which is
also enlarged. The tendon sheath (TS) has excessive fluid accumulation.
H, humerus. Image B courtesy of D. Penninck
SGT
CalcifiedBodies infhe Tendon Sheath Freebodiesin the tendon sheath
o  ps a ae r a   l ps
dissecans (OCD). Depending on their size, these are chips (>2 mm)
791
microchips (1-2 mm), or stipples (<l mm). Ulta craniocaudal
flat structures of different sizes that may cast acoustic shadows. They can
be located anywhere around the tendon within the synovial sheath, which
is usually distended (Kramer et al. 2001b) (Figure 16.16). These migrated
bodies may adhere to the synovium and be difficult to differentiate from
osteophytic formations, osteochondromas (Figure 16.1 7), or even primary
bone tumors.
Tendon Luxation Rupture of the transverse ligament causes medial
           
demonstrated in the intertubercular groove. Instead, a moderate effusion
of the tendon sheath is seen. The oval tendon with its typical fibrillar
echotexture can be found in the region of the minor tubercle (Figure
16.18). During dynamic examination, the tendon slides back into the
groove intermittently. The ruptured ligament cannot be visualized
sonographically (Gerwing and Kramer 1994; Kramer et al. 2001b).
Joint
Osteochondrifis Dissecans The subchondral defect on the caudal part of
the humeral head can be visualized as an irregularity in the hyperechoic
convex bone surface. The defect appears hypoechoic, with or without
hyperechoic dots or lines, because of disturbed endochondral ossification
and osteochondral fissures or fragments (Figure 16.19). The length of the
defect can be measured (0.5-20 mm) via a craniocaudal scan. "Joint mice"
might be present within the bicipital tendon sheath along with effusion of
both the joint space and tendon sheath (Tacke et al. 1999; Vandevelde et
al. 2006) (Figure 16.16).
Osteoarthritis In chronic osteoarthritis, the joint space of the shoulder
appears distended and hypoechoic. The joint capsule is visible as a
hypere-choic, thickened line (Figure 16.20). The cartilage can be
thickened and, depending on the duration of the disease, becomes
increasingly echogenic and inhomo-geneous (Gerwing and Kramer 1994).
[rregularities of the bone surface at the periphery of the joint are
recognized when periarticular osteophytes develop.
792
Instability Shoulder joint instabilities can be determined by performing a
dynamic scan of the joint to see the abnormal gliding of the humeral head.
However, this evaluation is subjective and often requires a comparison
with the contralateral shoulder.
Figure 16.16. Migrating osteochondral fragments.  Longitudinal and
transverse sonograms of the distal tendon sheath in a dog with
osteochondritis dissecans of the humeral head. Numerous hyperechoic
foci (arrows) are in the distended tendon sheath (arrowheads), around the
bicipital tendon (BT). Thickening of the synovial lining (S), consistent
with synovitis, is also apparent on the surface of the humerus. MT, major
tubercle. Images courtesy of D. Penninck.
Figure16.17.
 Osteochondromatosis.  Transverse  sonographic  and
schematic images obtained at the proximolateral aspect of the shoulder in
a large-breed dog with chronic shoulder pain. An irregular, hyperechoic.
strongly shadowing interface is lateral to the major tubercle (MT) and
biceps tendon (BT), associated with thickening of the synovium (S) and
joint capsule (JC). Calcified bodies attached to the joint capsule, in
association with chronic synovitis, were identiffied at surgery. OC,
osteochondroma.
793
Figure 16.18. Biceps tendon luxation. In these transverse sonographic and
schematic images of the intertubercular groove of a dog, the biceps tendon
(BT) appears displaced medially over the minor tubercle (MiT). The
tendon sheath is filled with fluid at the level of the bicipital groove. MaT,
major tubercle; and TS, tendon sheath.
Figure 16.19. Osteochondritis dissecans. Sonographic image of the
humeral head in a dog with osteochondritis dissecans. An irregular
osseous defect (arrows) is noted along the subchondral portion of the
humeral head (HH). The overlying hypoechoic cartilage @ is thickened.
794
HH
Figure 16.20. Osteoarthritis. Sonographic and close-up schematic images
of the shoulder joint in a dog with degenerative joint disease. The
thickened synovium and joint capsule (JC) appear as a hyperechoic band
 )        
subchondral bone of the humeral head.
ELBOW
Although radiography, computed tomography, and magnetic resonance
imaging are most commonly used to image the elbow, ultrasonography
can represent a useful tool in practice, particularly in the assessment of
soft-tissue structures. The approach to the normal canine elbow has been
well described (Knox et al. 2003; Lamb and Wong 2005)
795
Scanning Technique and Normal
Ultrasonographic Anatomy
A linear, high-frequency (>10 MHz) ultrasound transducer is preferred for
assessing all portions of the elbow. This joint can usually be examined
without sedation. The hair around the elbow is clipped, and the patient
After the lateral aspect of the joint has been evaluated, the patient is turned
over to assess the medial structures more easily (Figure 16.21)
Lateral Aspect: Muscles and Lateral
Collateral Ligament
The humerus and the brachialis muscle on the proximal craniolateral
aspect of the joint are examined. During flexion and extension of the
elbow, the hypoechoic brachialis muscle can be shown to slide against the
smooth, linear, hyperechoic interface of the humerus. The distal portion of
the triceps muscle can be seen caudolaterally inserting onto the olecranon.
Figure 16.21. Scanning technique for the medial aspect of the elbow.
[llustration showing the position of the dog and ultrasound probe when
scanning the medial aspect of the elbow.
796
Distally, the lateral region of the elbow is initially scanned in cross section
to better identify all muscles and tendons. Each muscle and tendon is then
scanned longitudinally. The most conspicuous muscle is the extensor carpi
radialis located on the craniolateral aspect of the forearm. Caudal to this
region, the common and lateral digital extensor tendons, as well as the
extensor carpi ulnaris, are visualized.
The lateral collateral ligament is very thin and more easily assessed
proximally because it displays multiple, fine, hyperechoic parallel lines
           
directed perpendicular to its longitudinal axis.
Caudal Aspect: Triceps, Olecranon,
and Anconeal Process
The elbow joint is flexed, and the ultrasound probe is initially placed
cranially on the olecranon. When a sagittal, perpendicular plane is used,
with multiple fine parallel lines, representing the collagen fibers, which
797
insert onto the olecranon. Two distinct protuberances are recognized on
the proximal aspect of the olecranon: the craniolateral and cranio-medial
tuberosities, which are located proximal to the anconeal process. The
transducer is then slightly rotated laterally, enabling visualization of the
outline of the anconeal process. This process is examined as the transducer
is moved medially from the most lateral edge of the olecranon. The
 r     s  
Artifactual pseudoindentations are a common finding on the surface of the
bone. The caudal joint capsule is usually not visible. The caudal structures
of the joint are scanned in flexion and extension of the elbow by placing
the probe on the lateral epicondyle.
Cranial Aspect: Joint Space, Muscles,
Vessels, and Nerves
Proximally, both the brachialis and biceps brachii muscles (Figure
16.22A) can be distinguished; distally, the extensor carpi radialis muscle
is visible. In addition, vessels and nerves embedded within the adipose
tissue can be visualized. The cranial portion of the humeroradial joint
contours of the humeral condyles and radial head. The normal joint
capsule and synovium cannot differentiated.
Medial Aspect: Medial Collateral
Ligament and Medial Coronoid
Process
In the proximal caudomedial region of the elbow, the two heads of the
triceps brachii muscle can be differentiated. The medial epicondyle is
initially assessed in a longitudinal plane and appears as curved, slightly
irregular, hyperechoic interface on the distomedial aspect of the humerus.
The medial collateral ligament, which merges from the medial epicondyle.
appears proximally as a thin, linear, hyperechoic structure that is densely
  a l ) s d a m 
798
spread caudally to the ulna and become slightly thicker near the radius.
Because of the oblique course of the medial collateral ligament, it is often
not possible to identify the fibrillar pattern in the distal portion (Lamb and
Wong 2005). The biceps brachii tendon can be visualized on the cranial
aspect of the distal humerus and followed to its insertion sites on the ulnar
and radial tuberosities, just adjacent to the medial coronoid process (Lamb
and Wong 2005) (Figure 16.22A). This tendon shows a typical
echotexture with hyperechoic lines. When the probe is moved proximally
during a transverse scan, the surface of the medial coronoid process
(MCP) comes into view as an angular process on the medial aspect of the
ulna (Figure 16.22). The MCP is located deep to the medial collateral
ligament and biceps tendon (Lamb and Wong 2005). A 90° flexion of the
elbow and rotation of the forearm around its longitudinal axis may
facilitate the identification of this structure.
Sonographic Features of Specific
Elbow Disorders
Osteoarthritis and Septic Arthritis
Even minor effusions of the elbow joint can be visualized. Anechoic fluid
in a recess of the joint can always be interpreted as a sign of a pathological
process and is most commonly related to elbow dysplasia. With chronic
degenerative joint disease (DJD), the joint capsule is visible as a
hyperechoic, thick line between the synovium and the surrounding
musculature. Periarticular new bone formations, caused by osteoarthritis,
appear as irregularly circumscribed protuberances on the bony surfaces
(Michele et al. 1998) (Figure 16.24). However, it must be pointed out that
similar findings may be found with septic arthritis. Rapidly progressive,
echogenic joint effusion is more suggestive of a septic process or
hemorrhage (Figure 16.23).
799
Osteochondritis Dissecans
Osteochondrosis or OCD, which typically affects the medial articular
portion of the humeral condyle, is difficult to assess sonographically
because of the localization of the defect (Michele et al. 1998). Displaced
osteochondral fragments may be visible
Fragmented Medial Coronoid Process
A completely detached coronoid bone fragment can sometimes be
identified as a very hyperechoic structure with acoustic shadowing, cranial
or medial to its anatomically correct position (Figure 16.24). The presence
of new bone formation on the medial coro-noid process, as the result of
DJD, may be confused for fragmentation of the MCP. In general, fissures
of the MCP cannot be displayed sonographically. Performing a dynamic
examination with flexion and extension of the joint may lead to movement
of the fragment, thereby confirming the diagnosis (Schleich et al. 1992).
Figure 16.22. Normal sonographic anatomy of the canine elbow. A:
Longitudinal sonographic and schematic images of the craniomedial
aspect of the elbow. A portion of the distal biceps brachii (BB) appears as
the craniomedioproximal surface of the ulna (U). B: Longitudinal
sonographic and schematic images obtained just medial to A. The medial
collateral ligament (arrows) is just medial to the medial coronoid process
(MCP) and humeral condyle (HC). C: Transverse-oblique sonographic
and schematic images of the craniomedial aspect of the elbow. The
hyperechoic interface of the medial coronoid process (MCP) is well
visualized adjacent to the head of the radius (R). The joint capsule is a
hyperechoic band (arrow) that cannot be consistently distinguished from
collateral ligaments.
800
MCF
Ununited Anconeal Process
Ununited anconeal process is recognized as an interruption of the
hyperechoic outline of the protuberance (Figure 16.25). In some cases,
movement of the fragment can be demonstrated with a dynamic
sonogram. In chronic disease, an anechoic moderate effusion, hyperechoic
thickening of the joint capsule, and/or irregularly circumscribed
al. 1998).
Figure 16.23. Septic arthritis. Longitudinal sonogram of the caudolateral
aspect of the elbow of a dog with septic arthritis. A focal accumulation of
inhomogeneous, echogenic fluid (arrows) is present, consistent with pus.
801
Proximal
Fragmentation or Avulsion of the
Medical Humeral Epicondyle and
Metaplasia of the Deep Digital Flexor
Muscle
Mineralization associated with the carpal and digital flexor muscles,
which originate on the medial humeral epicondyle, are sometimes seen in
dogs. These may relate to avulsion fractures, fragmentation, and/ or
dystrophic mineralization (Figure 16.26). These may also relate to
muscular metaplasia (Michele and Gerwing 1999) (Figure 16.27).
Adhesions to the joint capsule can be present, although this feature cannot
be easily seen ultrasonographically. Concurrent elbow dysplasia is
common.
Figure 16.24. Fragmentation of the medial coronoid process. A and B:
Longitudinal sonographic and schematic images obtained in two dogs in
the region of the medial coronoid process (MCP). An irregular
discontinuity of the craniomedial surface of these processes is noted, as
well as suspected displaced fragments (arrows). Periarticular new bone
formation consistent with degenerative joint disease has caused an
irregularity in the medial surface of the humeral condyle (HC). ME,
medial humeral epicondyle.
802
jewxo
Figure 16.25. Ununited anconeal process. Longitudinal sonographic and
  ()    go  n e o  
dog with suspected elbow dysplasia. The probe is placed on the dorsal
(cranioproximal) surface of this process. A V-shaped cleft (arrows) is
noted cranial to the olecranum (Ol), consistent with an ununited
anconeum. Hyperechoic dots consistent with partial mineralization are
noted within the cleft.
Figure 16.26. Fragmentation of the medial humeral epicondyle. A and B:
Longitudinal  sonographic  and   schematic  images  obtained  at  the
caudomedial aspect of the medial humeral epicondyle (ME) in a dog.
Numerous oval hyperechoic structures (arrows) consistent with calcified
bodies are present at the medial aspect of the cubital joint and proximal
ulna (U). The adjacent soft tissues are inhomogeneous and enlarged. The
803
medial epicondyle surface is also irregular. Images courtesy of D.
Penninck.
Figure 16.27. Metaplasia of the deep digital flexor muscle. Longitudinal
sonographic and schematic images obtained at the caudomedial aspect of
the medial humeral epicondyle (ME) in another dog. A well-defined,
hyperechoic oval structure with strong acoustic shadowing is noted that is
 ae ( s   o   a i
and inhomogeneous. Osseous metaplasia of the deep digital flexor tendon
was diagnosed. U, ulna.
Figure 16.28. Hemorrhagic hygroma. The olecranon bursa is markedly
distended and filled with an anechoic fluid consistent with hygroma (Hy)
804
Additionally, a large inhomoge-neous structure is found in the distended
bursa indicative of a chronic hematoma (He).
Hygroma
In large, heavy dogs, the olecranian bursa, which is located under the
insertion of the triceps muscle, can become distended and/or inflamed.
The bursa can be filled with variable fluid (blood, pus, or some other) of
variable echogenicity. The capsule is hyperechoic and can be thickened
(Michele et al. 1998) (Figure 16.28).
805
STIFLE
Scanning Technigue and Normal
Sonographic Anatomy
   q rs  a  a go   isss
distal third of the femur to just below the tibial tuberosity. Initially, the
dog is placed in lateral recumbency with the affected limb up (Figure
16.29A). The final dynamic examination requires flexion and extension of
the joint, as well as inward and outward rotation of the knee in the area of
the menisci (Engelke et al. 1997a; Kramer et al. 1999).
The stifle joint is examined from proximally to distally. After scanning the
cranial, caudal, and lateral aspects of the joint, the dog is turned over so
that the affected limb faces downward, allowing assessment of the medial
     o   (l ) 
Suprapatellar, infrapatellar, lateral, caudal, and medial (Kramer et al.
1999).
Suprapatellar Region: Quadriceps
Tendon, Femoral Trochlea, and
Proximal Joint Recess
The suprapatellar region is proximal to the tendon of the quadriceps
femoris muscle. The knee is flexed to 45°, and both longitudinal and
transverse views are assessed, focusing on the distal femur, the patella, the
joint capsule, the suprapatellar recess, as well as the quadriceps femoris
muscle and tendon (Figure 16.29A). The hyperechoic convex surface 0f
femoropatellar joint sac directly proximal to the patella is of particular
interest. In a normal knee, the suprapatellar recess is a 1- to 2-mm-thick or
smaller, anechoic, more or less inhomogeneous structure located above
the hyperechoic shaft of the femur (Figure 16.30). On the femoral side, the
806
joint capsule cannot be differentiated from the surrounding structures.
However, in the region of the quadriceps femoris muscle, part of the joint
capsule can be seen as a hyper-echoic line. In most dogs, the fascia of the
quadriceps muscle cannot be clearly differentiated from the surrounding
structures.
Figure 16.29. Scanning technique for the stifle. The position of the dog
and ultrasound probe when using longitudinal planes to scan the lateral
and cranial aspects of the stifle (A) and medial (B) regions. Longitudinal
and transverse planes must be used in all regions.
A
B
The distal tendon of the quadriceps femoris muscle and the femoral
condyles, trochlea, and covering cartilage become clearly visible by
means of a dynamic scan. The articular cartilage is a 1- to 2-mm-thick
subchondral surface of the femur. The depth and surface continuity of this
cartilage must be examined (Figure 16.31).
The area above the patella can easily be evaluated in a transverse scan
with the stifle maximally flexed. This position enables the assessment of
the cartilage, as well as the shape and depth of the femoral trochlea. At
this point, a dynamic examination (subsequent flexion and extension)
enables the assessment of the sliding movement of the patella into the
trochleargroove.
Figure 16.30. Normal suprapatellar region. Longitudinal sonogram of the
Suprapatellar region. The suprapatellar recess is seen as a small anechoic
focus (arrow) at the proximal aspect of the femoral trochlea, just proximal
807
to the patella (P). Only the convex, hyperechoic surface of the patella can
be seen. This structure limits the visualization of the femoral trochlea. F,
femur.
Proximal
Infrapatellar Region: Patella and
Patellar Ligament, Femoral Condyles,
Infrapatellar Fat Body, and Cruciate
Ligaments
Because of the convexity of the femoral condyles, only a few areas of the
joint surface can be assessed. Multiple imaging planes of each condyle are
necessary. When the stifle is extended, the patella slides proximally on the
trochlea, and the medial and lateral femoral con-dyles can be more fully
examined. The joint cartilage is anechoic and smoothly marginated
defects, as well as to rule out artifactual pseudodefects.
Figure  16.31.  Normal  trochlear ridge  and  cartilage.  Longitudinal
sonogram of one of the ridges of the trochlea in a normal dog. The
808
 osseous portion of the ridge appears as a smooth, convex, hyperechoic line
and is covered by a thin hypoechoic band (arrow) that represents the
cartilage and synovial fluid.  These latter components cannot be
distinguished. TR, trochlear ridge.
Proximal
As the knee is 90° flexed, the transducer is moved over the patellar
ligament and patella (Figure 16.29A). The patella, which appears as a
hyperechoic, convex line with strong acoustic shadowing, is partially
embedded in the patellar ligament, which presents a characteristic
hyperechoic band with a fibrillar echotexture (Figure 16.32). A thin,
echogenic, periligamentous sheath is also seen (Mattern et al. 2006). The
distal margin of the patellar ligament appears slightly thicker and the
insertion site is less echogenic than the rest of the structure. When viewed
transversally, the curved margins of the ligament are not visible because
Of edge-shadowing artifacts.
poorly demarcated structure of mixed echotexture, but primarily
  el ) s   n   
infrapatellar fat body, vessels are often visible as hyperechoic thin,
double-lined, tubular structures with an anechoic center. With the stifle
still flexed, lateral rotation of the transducer by 20° enables visualization
of the hypoechoic to anechoic cranial cruciate ligament, which extends
from the cranial margin of the tibia to the region between the femoral
809
condyles. The caudal cruciate ligament, which can be observed when the
knee is maximally extended, appears as a hypoechoic, more or less ovoid
structure. [n small dogs, the ligament cannot be visualized because of
artifacts. The space between the femur and tibia is filled with
homogeneous tissue of medium echogenicity. Differentiation between the
 o alisd ou nsn si sniu an u poq g ele
cranial approach (Reed et al. 1995; Engelke et al. 1997a; Kramer et al.
1999).
Lateral Aspect: Fabella, Lateral
Collateral Ligament, Long Digital
Extensor Tendon, Lateral Meniscus,
Joint Capsule, and Synovium
The surface of the lateral fabella is located immediately above the surface
of the condyle. When a longitudinal plane is used, the head of the
gastrocnemius muscle comes into view next to the caudolateral outline of
the condyle and the fabella. The muscle is identified by the presence of the
fabella within its tendon. The transverse parts of the biceps femoris
muscle and the superficial digital extensor tendon run across the tibia.
By means of a longitudinal plane centered on the lateral joint space, the
lateral femoral and tibial con-dyles are visualized proximally and distally,
respectively (Figures 16.29A and 16.33). Static and dynamic sonograms
are obtained with stifle flexion and extension, as well as internal and
external rotations. The joint capsule, the collateral ligaments, and the
lateral meniscus can all be assessed on a longitudinal plane (Figure 16.33).
The long digital extensor tendon, which demonstrates a typical fibrillar
echotexture, runs between the lateral meniscus and the joint capsule,
cranial to the collateral ligament. The origin of the tendon can be traced
craniolateral margin of the lateral femoral condyle. The tendon, which is
surrounded by its sheath, runs through the tibialis cranialis muscle. The
tendon sheath is formed by an indentation of the joint sac and cannot be
identified (Mueller et al. 2002).
810
The menisus appears as a triangle structure of uniform, medium
echogenicity located between the femoral condyle and the tibial plateau
(Mueller and Kramer 2003) (Figure 16.33). The abaxial surface of the
 s e a  ad    rs ss g
the adjacent femoral and tibial condyles. Additionally, a fine hypoechoic
consistent with articular cartilage and synovial fluid (Mahn et al. 2005)
(Figure 16.33). When the collateral ligament is used as a landmark, three
different regions can be examined: cranial horn, middle portion, and
caudal horn (Mahn et al. 2005).
Figure 16.32. Normal infrapatellar region. Longitudinal sonographic and
schematic images obtained of the proximal and distal portions of the
infrapatellar region of a normal dog. The patellar ligament (PL and
arrows) appears as a moderately echogenic, linear band connecting the
patella (P) and the tibial crest. The infrapatellar fat pad located caudal to
the patellar ligament is relatively hypoechoic and granular in echotexture.
Small vessels located within this fat body appear as hyperechoic dots and
lines. A thin hypoechoic band (arrowheads) consistent with cartilage and
synovial fluid is noted on the surface of the femoral trochlea (FT) and
tibial plateau (TP).
811
Caudal Aspect: Popliteal Lymph Node
The caudal region of the stifle is examined in longitudinal and transverse
 n soo s uod pxa s e un f an m s
approach in human knees, this approach provides fairly low visibility of
be found caudal to the stile joint, and portions of the caudal muscles of the
thigh, as well as the popliteus and gastrocnemius muscles, are visible. The
caudal horn of the meniscus appears sometimes between the condyles of
the femur and tibia (Krame et al. 1999)
812
Medial Aspect: Fabella, Medial
Collateral Ligament, Medial Meniscus,
Joint Capsule, and Synovium
With the stifle subsequently extended and flexed, the medial region is
scanned from cranial to caudal, encompassing the medial femoral condyle.
A longitudinal plane is most useful, and the medial femoral condyle, tibial
plateau, medial collateral ligament, medial meniscus, joint capsule, and
synovium are examined similarly as on the lateral side (Kramer et al.
1999; Mueller et al. 2002) (Figures 16.29B and 16.33).
Figure 16.33. Femoral menisci: sonographic approach and normal
anatomy. When scanned using a longitudinal plane, the menisci appear as
moderately echogenic, triangular structures (M and arrowheads on the
medial side) located between each femoral condyle and the opposite tibial
        
and fluid (C/F and arrowheads) are observed on each side of the menisci.
Collateral ligaments (CL) can also be seen crossing the medial and lateral
aspects of the joint. LFC, lateral femoral condyle; and MFC, medial
femoral condyle.
Lateral
813
Sonographic Features of Specific Stifle
Disorders
Joint Effusion
[n dogs with moderate to severe stifle effusion, dilatation of the
suprapatellar recess is visible as an anechoic, tubelike structure
surrounded by a hyperechoic line (joint capsule) (Figure 16.34A and B).
Joint effusion also causes cranial displacement and compression of the
hypoechoic fluid (Figure 16.35C). Distally, the distended synovial sheath
visible as an anechoic to hypoechoic tubular structure displacing the
tibialis cranialis (Figure 16.34D).
In comparison to degenerative effusions, septic effusions appear more
echogenic, and floating particles can be observed. Hemorrhagic effusions
can range in echogenicity, depending on their chronicity.
Osteoarthritis
When osteoarthritic periarticular new bone formations develop, the
contours of the patella, femoral trochlea ridges, condyles, and
epicondyles, as well as the tibial plateau, become irregular (Figure 16.35).
Joint effusion is typically observed, and the infrapatellar fat body appears
inhomogeneous and more echogenic. Occasionally, small fluid-filled areas
(cysts) can be seen within this fat body (Kramer et al. 1999). In addition,
the joint capsule appears thickened (a hyperechoic band), and redundant
synovial thickening can be visualized, particularly if associated with
significant joint effusion.
Figure 16.34. Stifle joint effusion. A and B: Longitudinal (A) and
transverse (B) sonographic images in a dog with distension of the
suprapatellar recess (*) along the femoral trochlea (FT) and ridges ?. P,
patella; and QF, quadriceps femoris. C: Longitudinal sonographic and
A g i ae       
814
being displaced and heterogeneous. Anechoic effusion (*) is noted
delineating the degenerated articular cartilage that appears more echogenic
along the femoral trochlea (FT). PL, patellar ligament; and TP, tibial
plateau. D: Longitudinal sonographic and schematic images of the distal
encircling the long digital extensor tendon (LDE) and displacing the
tibialis cranialis (TC) muscle cranially. T, tibia.
Patellar Luxation
By using a transverse plane with the transducer placed at the level of the
femoral trochlea, a luxated patella can be seen as an oval, hyperechoic
structure with acoustic shadow located medially or laterally to the trochlea
ridges. The trochlear groove is typically shallow. With subsequent
815
extension and flexion of the stifle joint, the trochlear cartilage and groove
depth can be assessed and measured.
Patellar Fractures and Desmopathies
A fracture of the patella is seen as an interruption of the outline of the
smooth bone surface (Kramer et al. 1999) and is often associated with
damage to the quadriceps tendon (proximally) or patellar ligament
(distally).
Figure 16.35. Stifle osteoarthritis. A and B: Longitudinal sonograms of
the proximal joint recess (A) and infrapatellar region (B) in a dog with
chronic stifle degenerative joint disease. Anechoic joint effusion is
present, and the joint capsule and synovium (JC/S, arrows) are thickened.
The cartilage (C) along the trochlea is hyperechoic and heterogeneous.
The infrapatel-lar fat body is heterogeneous, and an irregular, hyperechoic
structure is in the midportion of the joint, consistent with a degenerated
and ruptured cranial cruciate ligament (CL). P, patella; TP, tibial plateau)
and TR, trochlear ridge. C: Transverse sonographic image of the femoral
trochlea in another dog with degenerative joint disease. The cranial
surfaces of the trochlear ridges (arrows) are irregular because of
osteophytosis. The proximal joint recesses at the medial aspect of the
trochlea and over the trochlear groove (TG) are filled with anechoic fluid
(*)
816
Ruptures of the patellar ligament can be partial or complete. In both cases.
the ligament appears edema-tous and hypoechoic to hyperechoic with
irregular margins at the site of rupture. With avulsion fracture, small
hyperechoic bone fragments are visible at the extremity of the ligament
and associated with acoustic shadowing if more than 2-3 mm wide
(Figure 16.36). When a longitudinal plane is used, a separation of the
ruptured ends can be observed as the knee is flexed. During therapy, this
view enables the evaluation and documentation of the healing and
consolidation process. Initially, the area of insult becomes thicker and
inhomogeneous with a mixed echotexture. Both ends of the ligament are
clearly visible. Approximately 6-7 weeks later, the fibers are oriented
longitudinally, resulting in decreased thickness of the tendon. The healing
ligament appears more homogeneous, and its echogenicity resembles that
of a normal ligament. However, some inhomogeneous areas may remain
for months (Kramer et al. 1999).
Patellar thickening is also recognized following tibial plateau-leveling
osteotomy (TPLO), particularly in large dogs (Mattern et al. 2006)
Postoperative changes noted at 1l month also include hypoechoic to
anechoic central lesions with partially disrupted ligaments. These changes
have been significantly linked to the degree of tibial plateau rotation
during the procedure, supporting the role for increased stress in the
817
development of patellar ligament desmitis (Mattern et al. 2006). However,
these changes may be clinically insignificant in most dogs.
Figure 16.36. Avulsion fracture of the patella. Longitudinal sonographic
and schematic images of the infrapatellar region in a dog with acute stifle
pain and swelling. The patellar ligament (arrowheads) is irregularly
thickened and heterogeneous. A hyperechoic, partially shadowing bony
fragment (arrow) is just distal to the patella (P), consistent with fracture of
the apex. The distal margin of the patella is abnormally flat, and the
patella is displaced proximally. TG, trochlear groove.
    o  s   o  
infrapatellar region. During a dynamic ultrasound exam, the acutely
avulsed bony structure can move during flexion of the knee, confirming
the diagnosis. However, this motion can be limited, particularly if a
fibrous callous is already present.
Osteochondritis Dissecans
pqns aun jo no au uo noagap nenai ue se seadde ao
bone, typically at the lateral condyle. The abnormal cartilage can vary in
thickness  and  echogenicity  but  often appears  hyperechoic  and
heterogeneous. Detached pieces of cartilage are seen as hyperechoic
structures of variable size. Other free bodies may also be visible, and their
location can be determined (Kramer et al. 1999) (Figure 16.37). Joint
effusion is typically observed in association with OCD, and periarticular
osteophytes develop in the chronic phase.
818
Cranial Cruciate Ligament Rupture
To assess the presence of cranial cruciate ligamentous damage, a cranial.
longitudinal approach is used, and the stifle must be completely flexed,
acutely ruptured cranial cruciate ligament cannot be identified in most
cases (Gnudi and Bertoni 200l). However, in the region of the cranial
cruciate ligament, an irregular, anechoic area (hematoma) can sometimes
be identified (Kramer et al. 1999; Gnudi and Bertoni 2001). If the rupture
has been present for a longer period (chronic rupture), the irregularly
demarcated and hyperechoic stumps of the ligament can be seen (Figure
16.38). The stump close to the ligament insertion on the tibia can be more
easily visualized, whereas the other stump, near the origin on the femur, is
less often visualized (Engelke et al. 1997b; Kramer et al. 1999). The
visibility of the cranial cruciate ligament is limited if a large volume of
effusion is present, because this structure appears hypoechoic when
scanned at an angle (Kramer et al. 1999; Gnudi and Bertoni 2001).
Avulsion fragments may also be recognized as more or less shadowing
hyperechoic foci in the central portion of the joint. Chronic ruptures are
commonly associated with fibrous tissue proliferation in the region just
cranial to the intercondylar groove, which appears as an irregular.
hyperechoic structure (Gnudi and Bertoni 2001) (Figure 16.35B)
Figure 16.37. Osteochondritis dissecans. Longitudinal sonographic image
of the lateral femoral condyle (FC) in a young dog. A concave defect
(arrows) is filled with mildly echogenic and partially mineralized
cartilage.
819
FC
Proximal
Figure 16.38. Cranial cruciate ligament rupture. Longitudinal sonographic
 and schematic images of the infrapatellar region in which the distal stump
(DS) of the ruptured ligament appears as a hyperechoic band proximal to
the tibial plateau (TP). O, osteophytosis over the femoral trochlea; P,
patella; and PL, patellar ligament.
Meniscal Tears and Degeneration
Meniscal tears and degenerative changes are more commonly observed
medially and secondary to stifle instability caused by cranial cruciate
rupture. Isolated meniscal damage is rare in dogs and may affect more
    (    s   
 present a bucket-handle configuration. However, because of the difficulty
820
in visualizing the internal portion of the menisci, partial and complete
tears can be difficult to visualize.
Chronic meniscal degeneration has a characteristic appearance that can be
more easily recognized. The involved meniscus appears edematous, and
the echotexture is distinctly inhomogeneous with  hyperechoic and
hypoechoic areas (Figure 16.39A)
A decrease in the visibility of a meniscus may be due to its displacement.
However, it must be pointed out that this sign does not necessarily
indicate the presence of meniscal disease. Ultrasonographic assessment of
the menisci can be limited by several factors, including severe fibrosis of
the soft tissues along the medial aspect of the joint, marked osteophytosis
caused by severe DJD, and previous surgery (Mahn et al. 2005). The size
of the dog may also represent a limiting factor because thinner menisci
   (s   a )    ( )
difficult to visualize well (Mueller and Kramer 2003).
Another sign of meniscal disease is the presence of hyperechoic lines.
double lines, and stipples within a meniscus (Figure 16.39B). If these foci
are widely distributed and numerous, large lesions within the meniscus are
likely. However, a smaller size or number does not necessarily correlate
with less severe lesions. Both minor and major lesions may be present. A
hypere-choic double line is usually indicative of meniscal tear (Mueller
and Kramer 2003).
Joint effusion can be observed at the periphery of the affected meniscus,
as well as a change in meniscal shape or position (Mahn et al. 2005).
Affected menisci may bulge axially (medial meniscus) or abaxially
(lateral meniscus) or show an irregular contour (Figure 16.39A). Effusion
or replacement tissue may also be found in the region of the meniscus
after surgical excision (Figure 16.39C)
Collateral Ligament Rupture
In cases of severe and acute rupture of the medial or lateral collateral
ligaments, a discontinuity of the affected ligament may be identified.
Typically, hematomas are found at the level of the tear, seen as
hypoechoic to anechoic, homogeneous to mildly inho-mogeneous areas.
When a longitudinal medial or lateral approach is used, a dynamic
821
examination of the joint space while stressing its opening medially and
laterally may confirm joint instability. Joint effusion rapidly develops and
appears as bulging medial and/ or lateral synovial recesses. Capsular tear
may also be present, and fluid may have accumulated in the periarticular
soft tissues.
Avulsion of the Long Digital Extensor
Tendon
In cases of avulsion fracture of the origin of the long digital extensor
tendon, shadowing hyperechoic foci consistent with bone fragments can
be found just distal to the level of the extensor fossa at the lateral femoral
condyle (Kramer et al. 1999).
Figure 16.39. Meniscal degeneration and luxation. A-C: Longitudinal
sonographic and corresponding schematic images of degenerated menisci
 (di) nd eiq au jo suae (ei an 'sop 1e uj sop u
bone formation. A: The medial meniscus is bulging medially (arrowheads)
and presents a hyperechoic band (arrow). B: Hyperechoic stripes (arrows)
are found in the meniscus of this other dog. C: The region of the medial
meniscus is filled with synovial fluid (*) because of meniscal luxation.
822
HIP
Scanning Technique and Normal
Sonographic Anatomy
Animals are placed in lateral recumbency with the limb of interest up, and
their hair is clipped around the hip. Although it can be useful in some
patients, sedation or anesthesia is usually unnecessary (Greshake and
linear transducer is recommended.
Longitudinal and transverse images are obtained by positioning the probe
on the lateral aspect of the hip, dorsal to the greater trochanter (Figure
16.40). With slight movements of the probe in cranial and caudal
directions, the joint capsule can be identified. The femoral head appears as
a convex hyperechoic interface with acoustic shadowing. The shadowing
caused by the femoral head represents a significant limiting factor in
823
assessing the coxofemoral joint space and acetabulum, particularly when a
transverse plane is used (Greshake and Ackerman 1992).
The articular cartilage appears a smooth hypoechoic layer around the
 n aul iu e s se ansd uo a u o
periphery of the head and connected to the acetabular margins (Figure
16.41).
Hips can be evaluated in puppies that are up to 7-8 weeks of age
a longitudinal plane and dynamically examined while dorsolateral
subluxation is forced (distraction) (Figure 16.42). The cartilage is thick at
that time, and the subchondral bone is partially mineralized and irregular.
The shadowing bony structures hamper complete assessment of these
joints.
Figure 16.40. Scanning technique for the hip. The position of the dog and
ultrasound probe when scanning the hip on a longitudinal plane. A
dynamic exam is also performed while flexing, extending, abducting, and
adducting the leg. Coxofemoral joint passive laxity can also be evaluated
by forcing the femur laterally.
824
Figure 16.41. Normal hip joint in an adult dog. Longitudinal image of the
of the femoral head (FH) appears as a convex hyperechoic line, and the
craniodorsal acetabular rim (A) is seen as a triangular projection that is
 s e st as of  r  a a 
and moderately echogenic band (arrows). The surface of the ilium (l) is
seen cranially.
825
Cranial
Figure 16.42. Normal hip joint in a young puppy: neutral and dynamic
examination. A: In neutral position, the nonossified femoral head (FH and
small arrowheads) is well visualized and appears in contact with the
acetabular (Ac) fossa. B: Because of some normal degree of passive
the incompletely ossified labrum (L and large arrowheads) of the
acetabulum (Ac). The degree of passive laxity can be evaluated
dynamically.
826
Figure 16.43. Hip luxation. Longitudinal image of the coxofemoral joint
displaced in relation to the acetabulum (Ac). Hypoechoic soft-tissue
swelling is noted around the femoral head.
827
Hip Dysplasia and Osteoarthritis
The use of ultrasound in the diagnosis of hip dysplasia has been
investigated in young puppies. Although dynamic measurements can
predict the onset of osteo-arthritis in some dogs such as Labrador
retriever-golden retriever mix puppies (Adams et al. 2000), it is not
currently recognized as a reliable clinical tool in the early diagnosis of hip
dysplasia in dogs.
Joint effusion and capsular thickening related to osteoarthritis are of the
same sonographic appearance as described in previous chapters.
Coxofemoral Joint Luxation
Coxofemoral joint luxation typically causes craniodor-sal displacement of
the femoral head (Figure 16.43). If present, secondary articular changes
can be seen and the content of the acetabulum evaluated. Fibrin in the
joint capsule appears as an accumulation of irregular material ranging
from hyperechoic to hypoechoic.
After femoral head ostectomy, the acetabulum and surrounding tissue can
be easily examined. The area around the joint can vary in echogenicity
and homogeneity because of hemorrhage, edema, muscular contracture,
and/or scar tissue (Figure 16.44)
828
Ac
Figure 16.44. Femoral head and neck ostectomy. Longitudinal image of
the coxofemoral joint region in a dog after femoral head and neck
ostectomy. Hypoechoic soft-tissue swelling is noted around the joint
(arrows). The joint space is filled with echogenic material consistent with
hemorrhage and/or scar tissue. The dorsal margin of the acetab-ulum (Ac)
femur.
Avascular Necrosis of the Femoral
Head
With avascular necrosis (Legg-Calve-Perthes disease), the femoral head
and neck typically become irregular and lytic, with gaps noted at the
osseous margins. The joint capsule can be thickened, and a moderate joint
effusion can be evident.
829
CALCANEAL TENDON
(ACHILLES TENDON)
[njuries to the calcaneal tendon (Achilles tendon) are uncommon in small
animals and are usually produced by direct trauma (Lamb and Duvernois
2005). The cal-caneal tendon consists of all structures that attach to the
  s n e s  s is
femoris, semitendinosus, and gracilis muscles form another conjoined
component, also called the common caicaneal tendon (CCT). The medial
and lateral gastrocnemius muscles fuse at their distal aspect, becoming
one tendon that runs within the deep portion of the calca-neal tendon and
inserts on the calcaneal tuberosity. The superficial digital flexor tendon
inserts both laterally and medially on this tuberosity, forming a caplike
structure. The common calcaneal tendon is the deepest portion of the
calcaneal tendon and inserts on the dorsal aspect of the calcaneal
tuberosity (Hermanson and Evans 1993)
Scanning Technigue
Ultrasonography of the calcaneal tendon is performed in a standardized
fashion: The tarsocrural joint is slightly flexed, stretching the tendon that
can be more easily imaged (Figure 16.45). Initially, a longitudinal scan is
performed by placing the probe over the calca-neal tuberosity at the
tendon insertion. The transducer is then moved proximally to examine the
whole structure, as well as the musculotendinous junctions and muscles.
Transverse views are then used to visualize individual portions of the
tendon, from the level of their muscular origin to the level of the calcaneal
tuberosity. Finally, a dynamic examination is performed (flexion and
extension of the hock) (Kramer et al. 200la; Lamb and Duvernois 2005).
Normal Sonographic Anatomy
A longitudinal image directly above the tuber calcanei shows the surface
of the calcaneus as a convex hyper-echoic line with distal acoustic
830
shadowing (Figure 16.45A). Immediately proximal to this bony
protuberance that serves as an important landmark is a 5 x 5-mm,
hypoechoic, ill-defined area representing the calcaneal bursa with its
surrounding connective tissue (Figure 16.45A). The CCT is a moderately
echogenic, homogeneous structure with parallel hyperechoic lines
(fibrillar echotexture) inserting on the tuberosity (Figure 16.45A). The
tendon. Further proximally, the muscles display their typical echotexture
(see section on Musculature). On transverse images, the CCT is a
moderately echogenic, round structure with multiple small hyperechoic
dots, that inserts deeply on the dorsoproximal margin of the cal-caneal
tendon is visible as a hyperechoic line. However, the presence of edge
shadowing prevents a clear visualization of its curved axial and abaxial
borders (Rivers et al. 1997; Kramer et al. 200la; Lamb and Duvernois
2005).
Figure 16.45. Normal sonographic anatomy of the calcaneal (Achilles)
tendon. Sonographic and schematic images. A: Longitudinal sonogram.
The common calcaneal tendon (CCT), which is the deepest component of
the calcaneal tendon, has a characteristic hyperechoic, linear echotexture
when scanned perpendicularly. The other components of the calcaneal
tendon, i.e. the gastrocnemius (G) and superficial digital flexor (SDF)
tendons, are seen more superficially. The calcaneal bursa (B) appears as a
small, triangular anechoic area just proximal to the calcaneal tuberosity
(C). B and C: Transverse sonograms. These images are obtained at the
midlevel (B) and distal level (C) of the calcaneal tendon (CT). The
superficial digital flexor (SDF), gastrocnemius (G), and common
         
flexor tendon, which appears as a caplike, superficial structure around the
calcaneal tuberosity, contains the gastrocnemius and common calcaneal
tendons. (CG) calcaneal groove.
831
Disorders of the Common Calcaneal
Tendon
Partial and Complete Rupture and HealingProcessIn complete rupture
the echotexture of the CCT is completely interrupted, and a hypoechoic
and inhomogeneous area (hematoma) is observed between the retracted
ends of the tendon. The proximal and distal stumps of the tendon appear
drumsticklike and inhomogeneous with a mixed echotexture. During
dynamic examination, the movement of the ruptured ends is clearly
visible.
appears inhomogeneous and hypoechoic to  anechoic  with poorly
demarcated areas (Figure 16.46). In contrast, the part of the tendon that is
intact displays a normal fibrillar echotexture. Occasionally, a small
peritendineum.
[n chronic partial ruptures, images of the affected part of the tendon can
vary from highly inhomogeneous to homogeneous and from hypoechoic
to moderately hyperechoic. The surface of the calcaneal tuberosity is
832
usually irregular and ill-defined because of new bone formation. Avulsed
affected tendon as dispersed hyperechoic foci that can exhibit acoustic
shadowing if their size exceeds 2-3 mm (Rivers et al. 1997; Swiderski et
al.2005).
By using ultrasonography, the healing process of the CCT with or without
first day after trauma, the hematoma between the ends of the tendon
stumps appears hypoechoic to anechoic. Organization of the hematoma
during the first and second week leads to a more inhomogeneous image
with echogenic areas. From weeks 2-6, the diameter and the
inhomo-geneity of the injured area increase. After 8 weeks, replacement
tissue begins to grow in a longitudinal direction, and both diameter and
inhomogeneity decrease. The decrease in diameter is accompanied by the
reappearance of the characteristic tendinous fibrillar echotexture. This
healing process is completed by 10-12 weeks after trauma. However, the
injured CCT remains much less homogeneous in comparison to the
unaffected tendon for a long period (up to years)
Tears of fhe Gasfrocnemius Muscles Tears can be identified by
visualizing an interruption of the normal echotexture. The accompanying
poorly demarcated areas at the site of injury (see section on Musculature)
(Swiderski et al. 2005).
Displacementofthe Superficial Digital Flexor Tendon Medial or lateral
 i   n x   a o x
this convex, hyperechoic, shadowing structure, the medially or laterally
displaced crescent-shaped to oval tendon comes into view. The luxated
tendon can be enlarged and inhomogeneous, and a heterogeneous
hematoma can also be observed at the level of fibrous avulsion on the
medial or lateral aspect of the calcaneum.
Figure 16.46. Partial rupture of the gastrocnemius tendon. Longitudinal
(A) and transverse (B) sonograms of the calcaneal tendon in a dog with
acute trauma. The gastrocnemius tendon (G) is markedly enlarged and
hypoechoic. The superficial digital flexor tendon (SDF) is displaced
caudally but appears intact. The common calcaneal tendon (CCT) is
833
mildly inhomo-geneous, which may also be because of partial rupture.
Images courtesy of D. Penninck.
Figure 16.47. Chronic luxation of the superficial digital flexor tendon in
large dog. A: In this longitudinal sonogram obtained medial to the
calcaneum, an inhomogeneous mass (arrowheads) with anechoic fluid
cavities is noted that is consistent with chronic hematoma and fibrous
tissue. Prox, proximal. B: Transverse sonogram obtained at the
plantaromedial aspect of the calcaneum (C), distal to the calcaneal
tuberosity. The superficial digital flexor tendon (arrows) is displaced
laterally. The changes caused by chronic hematoma and fibrous tissue
thickening are noted medially (arrowheads) in the region of avulsion of
tendon insertion. Lat, lateral; and Med, medial.
834
MISCELLANEOUS
MUSCULOSKELETAL
DISORDERS
Musculature
Scanning Technique
Muscles that are located laterally, cranially, or cau-dally are examined by
n isa o ql  m un e ui ad a 
Medially located muscles are assessed with the affected limb facing down
while abducting the upper limb. Individual muscles are scanned between
their origin and insertion by using both longitudinal and transverse planes.
The examination begins with images of the muscle belly, proceeds to the
transition site of the muscle to its tendon, and finishes with the attachment
and insertion sites, respectively (Kramer et al. 1997).
Figure 16.48. Normal muscle sonographic anatomy in a dog. Longitudinal
sonographic image of a normal muscle showing the characteristic
hypoechoic echotexture with fine hyperechoic dots and lines.
muscle bellies.
835
Normal Muscle Sonographic Anatomy
On longitudinal images, the structure of normal muscles appears
hypoechoic with fine, oblique, hyper-echoic striations. The fascias appear
as smooth, continuous, hyperechoic lines, particularly when scanned
  as uo (til  il s) 
background is hypoechoic with echoic dots representing the muscle septa,
giving a coarse echotexture to the muscle belly. Tangential muscle
boundaries are more difficult to image because of edge shadowing
(Kramer et al. 1997). Subcutaneous and intramuscular fat planes are
usually slightly hyperechoic to muscle bellies, although their appearance
can vary.
836
Miscellaneous Disorders of Muscles
and Tendons
Muscle Injuries The appearance of muscular trauma varies with the
severity and onset of the injury. Strain injuries, which may or may not be
secondary to a known traumatic event, likely represent an underestimated
source of hind lameness in dogs (Breur and Blevins 1997; Nielsen and
Pluhar 2004). Hip adductor, pectin-eus, and particularly iliopsoas muscles
appear predisposed to strain injuries. In the acute phase, muscle swelling
associated with hypoechoic areas is typically observed (Breur and Pluhar
1997) (Figure 16.49A-C). [f the muscle is partially ruptured, the normal
muscular echotexture is partially lost (Kramer et al. 1997).
Following muscular trauma, the healing process can be evaluated
sonographically. In the chronic phase, a hyperechoic and variably
inhomogeneous area (with or without acoustic shadowing) at the level of
the previous trauma is indicative of scar formation (Breur and Pluhar
1997). The diameter of the muscle may be normal or smaller in the
traumatized region.
the muscle belly, with protrusion of this muscle through the defect.
In complete muscle rupture, the typical echotexture of the muscle
structure at the site of trauma is no longer visible. Because of acute
hemorrhage, the area appears anechoic or hypoechoic (Figure 16.49B). In
chronic rupture, the region appears highly inhomogeneous and has a
mixed echotexture and echogenicity (organization of the hematoma)
(Figure 16.50). The muscle stump can be described as a coblike,
thickened, inhomoge-neous structure that is more echogenic than the
surrounding tissue. During a dynamic examination with lexion and
extension of the limb, the separation of the muscle ends becomes evident
(Kramer et al. 1997)
Muscular Contracture and Amyotrophy Muscular contracture affecting
any muscle, but particularly the gracilis, infraspinatus, or quadriceps
muscles, results in abnormal muscle echotexture and echogenicity.
  so a n s i  a
affected muscle, primarily because of fibrosis. The fascia is usually
837
difficult to differentiate from the surrounding tissue. The appearance of
the muscle begins to resemble a tendon, and the muscle fibers become
indistinct. These changes often involve the entire muscle (Kramer et al.
1996).
Figure 16.49. Acute muscle tears. A-C: [liopsoas strain in an 8-year-old
boxer lame after a strenuous hike. These transverse sonographic (A) and
schematic (B) images, as well as a longitudinal sonogram (C), of the right
iliopsoas muscle were obtained at the lateral aspect of the caudal lumbar
spine. The muscle (arrowheads) is diffusely enlarged, and two large
hypoechoic lesions (*) within the muscle are disrupting its architecture.
These areas most likely represent tears associated with hemorrhage and
edema. This process was bilateral. V, caudal lumbar vertebra. Images A-C
courtesy of D. Penninck. D: Sonographic image of the pelvic limb of a
traumatized dog. A large anechoic area fills a portion of the leg, and
retracted muscles stumps are identified (M), indicating complete muscle
rupture with hemorrhage (H). B, bone surface.
Figure 16.50. Muscle tear with hemorrhage. Sonographic image of a
pelvic limb muscle in another dog with previous trauma. A large,
inhomogeneous, intramuscular mass is noted that is consistent with an
Organizing hematoma (H). Note the difference in echotexture when
compared with the normal muscle shown in Figure 16.48.
838
Muscle atrophy caused by chronic disuse or neuropathy is associated with
only minimal echotexture changes. The echogenicity of the affected
muscle tends to be slightly increased but remains homogeneous.
Fibrosing and Calcifying Myopathies
and Tendinopathies
Fibrosing and calcifying myopathies and tendinopa-thies, which may 0r
may not be traumatic in origin, are occasionally seen in dogs. The
muscular and/or tendinous part of the supraspinatus, iliopsoas, gluteal,
biceps brachii, and abductor pollicis longus are more commonly affected
(Figures 16.51 and 16.52). The calcium deposits are visible as
hyperechoic, irregular structures that display acoustic shadowing. The
affected tendon or muscle can also become enlarged, with an altered
inhomogeneous echotexture.
839
Ligaments
Scanning Technique and Normal
Sonographic Anatomy
The ligaments of dogs and cats are usually very small and frequently close
to uneven bony surfaces, making sonographic assessment difficult. The
 s u  l   e a
perfectly perpendicular to the ligament is essential.
In longitudinal scans, linear ligaments appear as hyperechoic structures
with a fibrillar echotexture (Figure 16.22). Most ligaments are too small to
be consistently identified, particularly in cross-sectional planes, because
they cannot be distinguished from the surrounding structures (capsule and
muscle fascia). Ligaments with fanning fibers are oriented obliquely (e.g-,
cruciate ligaments) and are usually hypoechoic.
Sonographic Features of Ligament
Disorders
Because of their small size, acutely ruptured ligaments cannot be easily
visualized with ultrasound. A small anechoic or hypoechoic hematoma in
the area of rupture may be seen in the initial phase. If the injury is
associated with a bone avulsion fracture, the fragment is visible as a
hyperechoic structure with acoustic shadowing within the reactive tissue.
Ruptured ligament  stumps  can  become  hyperechoic and thickened,
particularly in the chronic phase. Ligament rupture may cause joint
instability, which may be evidenced by means of a dynamic examination.
Over time, capsular thickening develops.
840
Cellulitis, Abscesses, and Foreign
Bodies
Cellulitis is an inflammatory process involving the connective tissue and
 un s o pe oia e s se i
subcutaneous planes, often resulting in increased ultrasound-beam
attenuation that limits the assessment of deep structures (Figure 16.54B)
Inflamed tissue can become enlarged. Phlegmon is a suppurative
inflammation of the connective tissue that typically leads to accumulation
of hypoechoic fluid pockets in the subcutaneous tissues (Figures 16.53
and 16.54).
More confined abscesses may also develop and appear as cavitary masses
containing particulate fluid. A hyperechoic wall of variable thickness is
often recognized in the chronic phase (Figures 16.54C and 16.56). Internal
o  xa a  sss '  oe  
appearance and resemble neoplastic processes. An abscess can be
identified as either intramuscular or intermuscular, subfascial, or
subcutaneous. Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration or drainage may
assist in the diagnosis and treatment of the suppurative process (Figure
16.53B)
Inflammatory processes may be secondary to the presence of foreign
bodies (FBs), such as wooden sticks, porcupine quills, grass awns, glass,
or plastic or metal objects (Figures 16.55-16.57). The accuracy of
ultrasonography in detecting FBs, particularly if superficial, in people is
high (Boyse et al. 2001). Although most FBs are hyperechoic to normal
soft tissues, their echogenicity can vary, depending on their physical and
acoustic characteristics (Boyse et al. 200l; Armbrust et al. 2003).
Acoustic shadowing is expected; however, it may only be partial or be
masked by the presence of a bony structure in the far field or by the
ultrasono-graphic complexity  of the associated   soft-tissue reaction.
Wooden sticks often are of medium echogenicity that can be confounded
by the surrounding tissue changes. A hypoechoic rim, consistent with an
inflammatory cast or fistular tract, commonly develops around an FB,
helping its identification (Shah et al. 1992; Kramer et al. 1997; Gnudi et
al. 2005) (Figure 16.55). Also, in some instances, the artifacts associated
characteristics of the artifacts present deeper to the objects appear to be
841
related to the surface shape of the FBs rather than to its composition
(Boyse et al.  200l).  Metal objects are typically associated with
reverberation artifacts (comet tails), which may be confused with air
bubbles. Metal objects of any size can easily be identifiable on standard
radiographs. Glass is typically hyperechoic and may be recognized on
radiographs. Porcupine quills appear as double-banded, fusiform,
hyperechoic structures (Figure 16.56).
Figure 16.51. Bicipital calcifying myopathy. A: Mediolateral radiograph
      o   e go
thoracic lameness. An irregular mineral opacity is noted superimposed
over the proximal humeral metaphy-sis in the region of the biceps muscle.
B and C: Longitudinal sonograms obtained at the proximal aspect of the
biceps muscle. This portion of the muscle is enlarged (arrows),
heterogeneous, and contains irregular hyperechoic areas with acoustic
shadowing, consistent with mineralization (M). D and E: Transverse
sonograms The biceps tendon (BT) (cursors) is also mildly enlarged on
this transverse image (D) obtained at the level of the intertubercular
 i   s  (   d) (il) a
presents hyperechoic foci, some of which are associated with acoustic
shadowing, consistent with mineralization and fibrosis. H, humerus.
842
ITG
0.58cm
Figure 16.52. Gluteal calcifying myopathy. Longitudinal sonographic and
schematic images of the distal portion of the middle gluteal (MG) and
deep gluteal (DG) muscles. The deep gluteal muscle (arrowheads) is
heterogeneous and presents hyperechoic foci near its insertion site on the
greater trochanter (GT), consistent with mineralization. Image courtesy of
D. Penninck.
843
Figure 16.53. [ntermuscular abscess and myositis in a cat. Transverse (A)
and longitudinal (C) sonographic images obtained at the caudal aspect of
the femur (F) in a cat with pelvic limb swelling and fever. An irregular
accumulation of echogenic fluid is found between one of the muscles (M)
and the femur. B: This cavitary lesion was aspirated using ultrasound
guidance, which led to a diagnosis of a septic abscess. D: A nearby
ssa sl mn e p sm (moe) s snoo
Fine-needle aspiration confirmed the presence of septic and necrotic
myositis.
Figure 16.54. Septic abscess in the elbow region of a dog- A:
Mediolateral radiograph of the elbow region of a 5-year-old large-breed
844
dog with progressive, painful swelling caudal to the elbow. Soft-tissue
swelling (arrows) is present without evidence of bone involvement or a
radiopaque foreign body. This radiograph was obtained after the
ultrasound exam, which explains the presence of artifacts caused by wet
hair (arrowheads) caused by the presence of acoustic gel. B: In the
proximal region of the limb, the subcutaneous tissue appears hyperechoic
and hyperattenuating as the result of cellulitis. C and D: A large cavitary
mass lesion (arrows) containing echogenic fluid (*) and mobile echogenic
septa is caudal to the olecranon (O) and triceps tendon (T). An irregular.
moderately echogenic capsule is noted proximally (arrow to the left in C).
Figure 16.55. Fistular tract and foreign body. A: Longitudinal image 0f
the region caudal to the proximal ulna (U) in a dog with a chronic draining
tract. An interrupted hyperechoic line (arrow), consistent with gas, is seen
within a hypoechoic cast of fibrous tissue. The caudal surface of the ulna
is irregular because of periostitis. B: More distally, a l.2-cm-long
hyperechoic interface with dirty shadowing is found, which indicated a
foreign body (FB).
845
Figure16.56.
5. Porcupine quill migration and abscess. A 3.25-cm,
moderately echogenic mass (arrows) is shown with a central fluid-filled
cavity as well as a short, fusiform, double-lined hyperechoic structure
when seen longitudinally and circular when seen transversally.
Figure 16.57. Wooden stick foreign body. Transverse sonographic image
obtained at the dorsal aspect of the metacarpal bones (MC) of a dog. A
thin, straight, hyperechoic foreign body (FB) is surrounded by mildly
echogenic inflammatory tissue (arrows). A wooden stick was identified at
surgery.
846
FB
MC
Small FBs may remain undetected if smaller than 2-3 mm or if deeply
aerated structures, such as in the region of the distal extremities (e.g-,
sesamoid bones) or the larynx and hyoid apparatus, may limit the
identification of FBs.
Ultrasound may also be useful in the surgical planning or intraoperatively,
assisting in the localization of a FB (Brisson et al. 2004) by placing a fine
needle under ultrasound guidance to the level of the FB.
Benign and Malignant Tumors
Soft-tissue tumors can usually be identified by using ultrasonography and
are classified as solid, cystic, or mixed lesions. Tumors often show mixed
inhomogeneous and from anechoic to highly hyperechoic (Figures
16.58-16.60). The tumor margins may or may not be clearly visible.
When color Doppler is used, malignant tumors can appear hypervascular
with tortuous and randomly distributed vessels (Figure 16.59). However,
malignant tumors may also be poorly perfused and/or necrotic (Figure
847
16.60). Ultrasonography cannot accurately differentiate malignant and
benign diseases such as hemorrhage (Thiel et al. 2003) (Figure 16.61).
Ultrasound-guided or surgical aspiration or biopsy is required in all cases.
Figure 16.58. Subcutaneous lymphoma in a cat. In these sonographic
images obtained at the lateral aspect of the pelvic limb, a moderately
echogenic band in the near field is silhouetting with the dermis. Muscle
bellies (M) are displaced, but not invaded by the neoplastic process. The
muscle fascias (arrows) remain well defined.
Figure 16.59. Muscular fibrosarcoma in a dog. Sonographic image a large
soft-tissue mass involving the limb of a dog. The mass is relatively
hyperechoic and well vascularized, as evidenced by using color Doppler
in the deep portion of the mass.
848
Lipomas appear as mildly echogenic masses with diffuse hyperechoic dots
and striations (Volta et al. 2006) (Figure 16.62). Lipomas can be located
in  the subcutaneous or  intermuscular  planes  or  within  muscles
(intramuscular). They are usually well encapsulated, although they can be
ill-defined and invasive. The distinction between invasive or noninvasive
lipomas cannot be made with accuracy by means of ultrasonography.
Ultrasound can also be very useful in the identification of soft-tissue joint
tumors such as synovial cell sarcoma or histiocytic sarcoma. These tumors
  e        
irregular soft-tissue thickening that crosses the joint space, invades the
osteochondral junctions, and protrudes into the synovial space (Figure
i s  a go d  e s  a (
and soft-tissue nodules or masses can be seen to extend within the
metaphyseal cortex and medulla. These changes may also resemble severe
DJD or other arthropathies, which justifies fine-needle aspiration Oor
biopsy.
849
Bones
Scanning Technique and Sonographic Anatomy
of bone diseases, ultrasonography can provide additional information,
particularly in regard to the soft-tissue component of these processes
Linear transducers are preferred over convex or sectorial probes, because
linear transducers provide a better image quality (higher resolution and
less distortion). The exam is performed similarly as for muscles and
tendons, with the patient in lateral recumbency.
The surface of a long bone is examined by slowly moving the probe along
the long axis of the bone, usually with a longitudinal plane that enables
visualizing a larger portion of the bone surface. This way, the area of
interest can be compared with adjacent normal portions of the bone (e.g,
tumor or fracture). A transverse view only rarely provides additional
information (Risselada et al. 2003).
Figure 16.60. Fibrosarcoma. Sonographic images of a large soft-tissue
mass involving the pelvic limb of a dog. This mass is solid and moderately
echogenic in most areas, but also presents anechoic, fluid-filled necrotic
and hemorrhagic cavities. Images courtesy of D. Penninck.
Figure 16.61. Muscular hemorrhage. Sonographic images of the pelvic
limb of a dog with rapidly progressive swelling A hypoechoic,
 a  si  h  a  s soo
musculature. Hemorrhage was found on fine-needle aspiration. This mass
850
resolved with time and was presumed to represent a benign spontaneous
hematoma of uncertain origin.
8.90cm
4.52cm
1:34:44
Because of the reflection and absorption of the sound waves, the bone
surface appears as a smooth, hyperechoic, continuous line with strong
acoustic shadowing. This surface is more irregular at the sites of origin
and insertion of tendons and ligaments. Superficial to the bony surface.
the typical echotexture of soft-tissue structures, ie., muscles and tendons,
comes into view. In the near field, the image of the skin-transducer
interface can be seen as a hyperechoic zone (Risselada et al. 2003).
Figure 16.62. Lipoma. Sonographic image of a subcutaneous mass with
features characteristic of a lipoma. The mass is moderately echogenic and
has uniformly distributed hyperechoic dots and short lines.
851
Sonographic Features of Bone Disorders
OsteomyelitisandBoneTumorsOsteomyelitis
 can vary i
117
can be seen superficial to the bone cortex because of periosteal new bone
formation. Peripheral, inflamed soft tissues appear swollen, hypoechoic,
  a   n    
multiple indentations (Kramer et al. 1997)
Primary and metastatic bone tumors associated with cortical lysis can be
assessed sonographically, particularly if they extend into the surrounding
soft tissue. They can vary in echogenicity and uniformity (Figures 16.64
and 16.65). Occasionally, periosteal elevation (Codman's triangle) is seen.
visualized. Ultrasound can also assist in fine-needle aspiration or biopsy
of bone lesions, avoiding the need for surgical biopsy in some patients
(Samii et al. 1999)
Figure 16.63. Synovial cell sarcoma. A: Mediolateral radiograph of the
tarsus of a 6-year-old large-breed dog with chronic lameness. Soft-tissue
swelling (arrowheads) is noted at the periphery of the tarsus, as well as
lytic foci in the distal tibial metaphysis (arrows). B-D: Longitudinal (B)
and transverse (C and D) sonograms of the dorsal aspect of the talus that
show an irregular layer of echogenic tissue in the near field (arrowheads)
as well as irregular bone defects (arrows). Lat, lateral. E: Longitudinal
sonogram obtained at the plantar aspect. The soft-tissue thickening
852
(arrowheads) is noted at the periphery of the common calcaneal tendon
(CCT), reaching the level of the calcaneal tuberosity (CT). These features
are typical of synovial cell sarcoma or synovial histiocytic sarcoma. Prox,
proximal.
Figure 16.64. Osteosarcoma. Sonographic images of aggressive tibial (A)
and humeral (B) mass lesions in two dogs. A: An ill-defined, hypoechoic
mass (arrows) has hyperechoic foci, some of which are associated with
acoustic shadowing, consistent with mineralization. The underlying bone
  i         
well-defined, mildly echogenic mass (arrowheads) involves the humerus
      e    
aggressive new bone formation and lysis.
853
Figure 16.65. Metastatic carcinoma to the scapula. Transverse (left) and
longitudinal (right) sonograms of the scapular spine in a dog with a
transitional cell carcinoma and metastatic disease. Irregular new bone
formation (arrows) is present at the level of the scapula. Adjacent
supraspinatus (SS) and infraspinatus (IS) muscles are reduced in thickness
and hyperechoic because of atrophy. Several similar lesions were
identified in other bones, and metastatic carcinoma was confirmed.
Fractures Fractures of long bones and their healing process, as well as the
associated soft-tissue damage (muscle rupture or hematoma), can be
assessed ultra-sonographically. Because there are no points of orientation,
the exact relationship between the fractured ends is difficult to determine.
To standardize the documentation of fracture healing of long bones,
multiple and repeatable images must be obtained. The recommended
transducer positions for the assessment of long bones are craniolateral
(distal humerus, radius, ulna, and tibia) and caudolateral (proximal
humerus cranial, femur medial, and fibula) (Risselada et al. 2003).
854
Ultrasonography can be used to evaluate secondary fracture healing in
biologically treated fractures (Risselada et al. 2005). In comparison to
radiography, the completion of fracture healing can be determined earlier.
Secondary fracture healing can be divided into five stages.
  a    n  s o i 
homogeneous and hypoechoic to anechoic because of hematoma
formation. The fracture site appears as a discontinuity (step) of the bone
surface, which may be associated with the presence of several, separate
hyperechoic interfaces indicating multiple fragments (Figure 16.66A). [f
the fracture gap is wide enough, the medulla region can be visualized.
Surgical implants can be seen as hyperechoic, reverberating structures
within or surrounding the bone.
the hematoma) (Figure 16.66B).
i nq s g :( e s a) i a
and blunted because of bone resorption. The early ossifying callus appears
representing the maturing hematoma and the nonossified callus is
inhomogeneous with a hypoechoic to isoechoic echotexture (compared
with overlying muscles).
         
progressively more echogenic (Figure 16.66C).
Stage IV (29-42 days after trauma): The echogenicity of the callus
  si  e  
ossification. Hyperechoic mineral foci, which may display acoustic
shadowing, are noted in the callus (Figure 16.66D).
completely. The cortex is seen as a continuous, smooth, or slightly
irregular, hyperechoic line (Figure 16.66E). The surrounding soft-tissue
thickening is reduced or resolved. Intramedullary implants are no longer
al.2005).
Figure 16.66. Bone fracture: healing process. Sequential sonograms
showing progressive bone healing. A: Stage I (days 0-7). A discontinuity
855
of the bone cortex is identified that is associated with sharp ends (arrow)
Hypoechoic soft-tissue swelling is noted at the fracture site (arrowhead).
B: Stage Ill (days 15-21). The bone defect (arrow) is progressively
remodeled. A nonossified callus (arrowheads) is present. C: Stage IV
(days 22-28). The nonossified callus is progressively more echogenic
(arrowheads), and the fracture gap (arrow) is progressively narrower. D:
Stage V (days 29-42). The fracture gap is nearly completely filled with
new bone and poorly seen (arrow). The peripheral callus is reduced in
volume (arrowheads). E: Stage VI (more than 43 days). The fracture is
healed. The surface of the bone remains mildly irregular (arrow)
856
B
During normal fracture healing, the newly developing tissues require more
nutrients and have a higher metabolic rate. This requires the development
of new vessels (neovascularization) at the fracture site and can be
aq ueo leuais iaddoa v punosenn iaddoa iamod sussn paziensia
obtained as of day 10 after trauma, reaching a maximum between days 11
and 30, before gradually decreasing Signals can be detected in and close
to the callus (Risselada et al. 2006).
REFERENCES
Adams WM, Dueland RT, Daniels R, Fialkowski JP, Nordheim EV
(2000) Comparison of two palpation, four radiographic and three
ultrasound methods for early detection of mild to moderate canine hip
dysplasia. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 41 :484-490.
Armbrust LJ, Biller DS, Radlinsky MG, Hoskinsons JJ (2003)
Ultrasonographic diagnosis of foreign bodies associated with chronic
draining tracts and abscesses in dogs. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 44:66-70.
Breur GJ, Blevins WE (1997) Traumatic injury of the iliopsoas muscle in
three dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 210:1631-1634.
Brisson BA, Bersenas A, Etue SM (2004) Ultrasonographic diagnosis of
septic arthritis secondary to porcupine quill migration in a dog. J Am Vet
Med Assoc 9:1467-1470.
Boyse TD, Fessell DP, Jacobson JA, Lin J, van Holsbeeck MT, Hayes
CW (200l) US of soft-tissue foreign bodies and associated complications
with surgical correlation. Radiographics 12:1251-1256.
Engelke  A,  Meyer-Lindenberg
A，NolteI(1997a)Die
Ultraschalluntersuchung    des   Kniegelenkes   des   Hundes  [The
ultrasonographic examination of the stifle joint in dogs]. Berl Munch
Tierarztl Wochenschr 110:24-29.
Engelke  A， Meyer-Lindenberg　 A， Nolte  【(1997b). Die
Ultraschalluntersuchung des  inneren  Kniegelenkes bei  Hunden  mit
Kreuzbandriss [The ultrasonographic examination of the inner structures
of the stifle joint in dogs with ruptured cranial cruciate ligament]. Dtsch
Tierarztl Wochenschr 104:114-117.
858
         
guided and ultrasound guided percutaneous biceps brachii tenotomy in
dogs. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 18:135-139.
Floeck A, Kramer M, Tellhelm B, Schimke E (2003) Die sonographische
Untersuchung des Hueftgelenks beim Deutschen-Schaeferhund-Welpen
[Ultrasonographic examination of the hip joint of the German shepherd]
Tierarztl Prax 31:82-91.
Gerwing M, Kramer M (1994) Die Sononographie des Schultergelenkes
oos  i  q am ln s pn
Diagnostik   von  Erkrankungen im   Bereich  des   Schultergelenkes
[Ultrasonography of the shoulder joint and the surrounding soft tissue.
Part B: Ultrasonographic diagnosis of diseases in the region of the
shoulder joint]. Kleintierpraxis 39: 141-156.
Gnudi G, Bertoni G (2001) Echographic examination of the stifle joint
affected by cranial cruciate ligament rupture in the dog. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 42:266-270.
Gnudi G, Volta A, Bonazzi M, Gazzola M, Bretoni G (2005)
Ultrasonographic features of grass awn migration in the dog. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 46:423-426.
Greshake RJ, Ackerman N (1992) Ultrasound of the coxofemoral joints of
the canine neonate. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 33:99-104.
Hermanson JW, Evans HE (1993) Chapter 6: The Muscoloskeletal
System. In: Evans HE, Christensen GC, eds. Miller's Anatomy of the
Dog, 3d edition. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, pp 258-384
Knox VW IV, Sehgal CM, Wood AK (2003) Correlation of
ultrasonographic observations with anatomic features and radiography of
the elbow joint in dogs. Am J Vet Res 64:721-726.
Kramer M, Gerwing M (1994) Die Sononographie des Schultergelenkes
sonographische Anatomie des Schultergelenkes und seiner Weichteile
[Ultrasonography of the shoulder joint and the surrounding soft tissue.
Part A: Ultrasonographic anatomy of the shoulder joint]. Kleintierpraxis
39:71-80.
859
Kramer M, Gerwing M, Hach V, Schimke E (1997) Sonography of the
musculoskeletal system in dogs and cats.  Vet Radiol Ultrasound
38:139-149.
Kramer M, Gerwing M, Michele U, Schimke E, Kindler S (200la)
Ultrasonographic examination of injuries to the Achilles tendon in dogs
and cats.J Small Anim Pract 42:531-535
Kramer M, Gerwing M, Sheppard C, Schimke E (2001b) Ultrasonography
for the diagnosis of diseases of the tendon and tendon sheath of the biceps
brachii muscle. Vet Surg 30:64-71.
Kramer M, Stengel H, Gerwing M, Schimke E, Sheppard C (1999)
Sonography of the canine stifle.Vet Radiol Ultrasound 40:282-293.
Kramer M, Schimke E, Schachenmayr W,Gerwing M (1996) Diagnosis
and therapy of special tendon and muscle diseases in the dog. Part I:
    n    
Kleintierpraxis 41:889-896
Lamb C, Duvernois A (2005) Ultrasonographic anatomy of the normal
canine calcaneal tendon. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 46:326-330.
Lamb C, Wong K (2005) Ultrasonographic anatomy of the canine elbow.
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 46:319-325.
Long C, Nyland TG (1999) Ultrasonographic evaluation of the canine
shoulder. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 40:372-379.
Mahn MM, Cook JL, Cook CR, Balke MT (2005) Arthroscopic
verification of ultrasonographic diagnosis of meniscal pathology in dogs.
Vet Surg 34:318-323.
Mattern KL, Berry RB, Peck JN, de Haan JJ (2006) Radiographic and
ultrasonographic evaluation of the patellar ligament following tibial
plateau leveling 0steotomy. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47:185-191.
Michele U, Gerwing M (1999) Sonographie bei Metaplasien im Ursprung
des M. flexor digitalis profundus des Hundes [Ultrasonographic findings
of metaplasias in the origin of the flexor digitals profundus muscle in
dogs]. Ultraschall Med 20:76.
860
Michele U, Gerwing M, Kramer M, Schimke E (1998) Sonographische
Moglichkeiten am Ellbogengelenk des Hundes: Anatomische Grundlagen
und pathologische Befunde [Ultrasonographic possibilities in the elbow of
the  dog:  Anatomical  structures and   pathological findings].In:
Jahrestagung der DVG-FG Kleintierkrankheiten 19.22.11.1998 Stuttgart,
Kongr.ber. [Annual Conference of the DVG-FG on Small Animal
[llnesses, November 19-22, 1998, Stuttgart]. Proceedings 44:385-388.
Mueller S, Kramer M (2003) Die Eignung der Sonographie fir die
ultrasonography in the diagnosis of meniscal lesions in the dog]. Tierarztl
Prax 31:10-15.
Mueller S, Kramer M, Tellhelm B, Schimke E (2002) Rupture of the
origin of the long digital extensor muscle in a border collie [in German]
Prakt Tierarzt 83:416421.
Nielsen C, Pluhar GE (2004) Diagnosis and treatment of hind limb muscle
strain injuries in 22 dogs. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 18:247-253.
O'Brien RT, Dueland RT, Adams WC, Meinen J (1997) Dynamic
ultrasonographic measurement of passive coxo-femoral joint laxity in
puppies. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33:275-281.
Reed AL, Payne JT, Constaninescu GM (1995) Ultrasonographic anatomy
of the normal canine stifle.Vet Radiol Ultrasound 36:315-321.
Risselada M, Kramer M, de Rooster H, Taeymans O, Verleyen P, van
Bree H (2005) Ultrasonographic and radiographic assessment of
uncomplicated secondary fracture healing of long bones in dogs and cats.
Vet Surg 34:99-107.
Risselada M, Kramer M, van Bree H (2003) Approaches for
ultrasonographic evaluation of long bones in the dog. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 44:214-220.
Risselada M, Kramer M, van Bree H, Taeymans O, Verleyen P (2006)
Power   Doppler   assessment   of   the  neovascularization   during
uncomplicated fracture healing of long bones in dogs and cats. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound 47:301-306.
861
Rivers B, Wallace L, Johnston GR (1992) Biceps tenosynovitis in the dog:
Radiographic and sonographic findings. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol
5:51-57.
Rivers BJ, Walter PA, Kramek B, Wallace L (1997) Sonographic findings
in canine common calcaneal tendon injury. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol
10:45-53.
Samii VF, Nyland TG, Werner LL, Baker TW (1999) Ultrasound-guided
fine-needle aspiration biopsy of bone lesions: A preliminary report. Vet
Radiol Ultrasound 40: 82-86.
Schleich S, Tellhelm B, Schimke E, Gerwing M, Kramer M (1992)
Korrelation zwischen klinischen, rontgenologischen, sonographischen und
Hundes [Correlation between clinical, radiographic, ultrasonographic, and
surgical findings in  fractured coronoid process in  the dog]- In:
Jahrestagung der DVG-FG Kleintierkrankheiten 06.08.11.1992 Bonn,
[llnesses, November 6-8, 1992, Bonn]. Proceedings 38:406-420.
Shah ZR, Crass JR, Dubravka CO, Bellon EM (1992) Ultrasonographic
detection of foreign bodies in soft tissues using turkey muscle as a model.
Vet Radiol Ultras0und 33:94-100.
Siems JJ, Breur GJ, Blevins WE, Cornell KK (l998) Use of
strain of the infraspinatus muscle in a dog. J Am Vet Medic Assoc
212:77-80.
Swiderski J, Fitch RB, Staatz A, Lowery J (2005) Sonographic assisted
diagnosis and treatment of bilateral gastrocnemius tendon rupture in a
Labrador retriever repaired with fascia lata and polypropylene mesh. Vet
Comp Orthop Traumatol 18:258-263.
Tacke S, Kramer M, Schimke E, et al. (1999) Osteochondrosis dissecans
(OCD) am Schultergelenk des Hundes [Osteochondritis dissecans in the
shoulder joint of the dog]. Tierarztl Prax 27:81-90.
Thiel C, Kramer M, Schimke E (2003) The ultrasonographic examination
of skin tumors (B-mode, color Doppler, power Doppler) and their
862
differential diagnosis in dogs and cats [in German]. Kleintierpraxis
48:253-260.
Vandevelde B, Saunders JH, Kramer M, Van Ryssen B, van Bree H
(2006) Comparison of the ultrasonographic appearance of osteochondrosis
lesions in the canine shoulder with radiography, arthrography and
arthroscopy. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47:1 74-184.
Volta A, Bonazzi M, Gnudi G, Gazzola M, Bertoni G (2006)
Ultrasonographic features of canine lipomas. Vet Radiol Ultrasound
47:589-591.
863
[NDEX
A
Abscess
brain
cardiac para-annular
cervical
cranial mediastinal
hepatic
musculotendinous
pancreatic
peritoneal
prostatic
pulmonary
renal
retroperitoneal
sublumbar
testicular
thoracic wall
Acoustic or distal enhancement
Addison's disease
Adenocarcinoma, see aiso Tumor(s),see aiso Carcinoma
adrenal
cranial mediastinal
colonic
gastric
hepatic
intestinal
lacrymal gland
nasal
pancreatic
renal
uterine
Adenoma
adrenal
864
hepatic
lacrymal gland
Adrenal glands
appearance of the normal
examination of the
measurement of the
tumor(s) of the
Adrenomegaly
Agenesis
corpus callosum
renal
Aliasing, Color Doppler
Anisotropy, see also Artifact
Anterior chamber
Aorta
abdominal
caudal trifurcation of the
Arterioportal fistula, hepatic
Arteriovenous fistula, cervical
Artery (ies)
arcuate
brachiocephalic
cranial mesenteric
celiac
common, carotid
external carotid
external and internal maxillary
hepatic
hyaloid
internal, carotid
main pulmonary
renal
865
Arthritis
septic
Ascites
 Portal hypertension and
Aspiration, see Fine-needle aspiration
Astrocytoma
Amyloidosis
hepatic
renal
Artifact
acoustic or distal enhancement
anisotropy
Braum's bump
comet tail
dirty shadowing
edge shadowing
mirror-image
pseudosludge
reverberation
shadowing
side-lobe and grating lobe
Atelectasis or lung collapse
Atrial septal defect
B
Biliary ducts, dilatation of
Biliary obstruction
extrahepatic
Biliary ectasia
Biliary sludge
Biliary system
866
examination of the normal
disorders of the
Biopsy
bladder and urethral, suction
brain
gastrointestinal tract
kidney
liver
neck lesion
pancreas
prostate
spleen
thorax
thyroid
Bladder
blood clot in the
disorders of the
examination of the normal
neoplasia of the
rupture of the
Brachial plexus
Brain
disorders of the
cystic lesions of the
examination of the normal
hypoplasia of the
infectious lesions of the
neoplasia of the
trauma of the
vasculature
Bronchiectasis
Bronchogram
air
P!nU
867
Bowel, see Intestine
Bursa, calcaneal
C
Calcification, see Mineralization
Calcified bodies
Calculus, or calculi
cystic
renal
ureteral
urethral
Carcinoma, see aiso adenocarcinoma
adrenal
biliary
ciliary body
hepatocellular
laryngeal
pancreatic
pulmonary
renal
thyroid
transitional cell
Carcinomatosis
peritoneal
 pleural
Cardiac linear dimensions
Cardiac ratio indices, normal
Cardiac tamponade
Cardiac volume and mass estimation
Cardiomyopathy dilated
hypertrophic
restritive
868
Carotid-body tumor
Cartilage, articular
abnormal
normal
Cataract
Cellulitis
Cerebellar hypoplasia
Cervix, uterine
Chemodectoma
cardiac
cervical
Chiari-like malformation
Cholangiohepatitis
Cholecystocentesis, ultrasound-guided
Cholecystitis
Cholelithiasis
Chondrosarcoma
Chorioretinitis
Chylothorax
Cirrhosis, hepatic
Colon, see aiso Gastrointestinal
Colonic intussusception
Colonic thickening
Colonic wall
Comet tail, see also Artifact
Common bile duct
869
examination of the normal
dilation of the
wall thickening of the
Congenital heart diseases
Congenital renal malformations
Congestion, hepatic venous
Congestive heart failure
Consolidation, lung
Contusion, lung
Cornea
normal appearance of the
disorders of the
Cor pulmonale
Cor triatriatum
Core lesion, with tendinopathy
Corpus cavernous
 Corpus spongiosum
Cryptococcosis
Cryptorchidism
Crystalluria
Cushing's disease, see Hyperadrenocorticism
Cyst (s)
cerebellar
cervical
cranial mediastinal
hepatic
laryngeal
omental
870
pancreatic
prostatic cyst
pulmonary
renal
thyroid
Cystadenoma and cystadenocarcinoma
Biliary
Renal
Cystic neoplasia
hepatic or biliary
renal
thyroid
Cystic endometrial hyperplasia, uterine
Cystitis
emphysematous
polypoid
Cystocentesis, ultrasound-guided
D
Dandy-Walker-like syndrome
Dehiscence, gastrointestinal
Diaphragm
normal
rupture of the
Dirofilariasis
Disc herniation
intraoperative assessment of
Diverticulum, vericourachal
Doppler
color
power
871
spectral
tissue
Double-chamber right ventricle
Drainage
ultrasound-guided
pancreatic pseudocyst
prostatic abscess
Duct (s)
biliary
common bile
cystic
Duodenitis
Dysplasia
hepatic
microvascular
mitral valve
renal
tricuspid
E
Echocardiography, normal
color flow Doppler
 continuous-wave Doppler
measurements and indices in
M-mode
pulsed-waved
two-dimensional
Echogenicity
Relative
Ectopic ureter
Edema
gallbladder wall
gastric wall
872
interfascial
pancreatic
subcutaneous
tracheal wall
Eisenmenger physiology
Effusion or fluid
joint
 pericardial
retroperitoneal
peritoneal
pleural
trapped or encapsulated
Elbow, examination of the
Embryonic resorption
Endocardial cushion defect
Endocardiosis
Endocarditis, infective
Endophthalmitis
Enteritis, see aiso Intestine
Epididymis, normal
Epididymitis
Esophagus
examination of thenormal
dilated
inflammation of the
intraluminal ultrasound of the
neoplasia of the
thickening or hypertrophy of the
Ethanol ablation of thyroid carcinoma
Ethylene glycol toxicity
873
External ear canal
Extrapleural sign
Exudate
pleural
peritoneal
retroperitoneal
Eye
anatomy of the
examination of the normal
fetal
foreign body in the
trauma of the
tumor of the
F
Fat
falciform
mediastinal
retroperitoneal
Fat necrosis
Feline infectious peritonitis
Fetal abnormalities
Fibrosis
hepatic
myocardial
Fibrous strands
Fine-needle aspiration
brain
 gastrointestinal tract
kidney
liver
musculoskeletal
neck lesion
874
pancreas
prostate
spleen
thoracic
Flow convergence zone
Flow turbulence
cardiac
caudal vena cava
Foreign body
cervical
esophageal
 gastrointestinal
linear foreign body (ies)
musculoskeletal
needle
oc ular
peritoneal
renal
surgical sponge, retained
teriyaki stick
thoracic wall
wooden-stick
Fracture
assessment of long bone
ligament or tendon avulsion
medial humeral epicondyle
patellar
supraglenoid tubercle avulsion
tibial tuberosity avulsion
Fungal disease
prostatic
renal
testicular
G
875
Gain setting
Gallbladder
bilobed
dilation of the
examination of the normal
herniation of the
rupture of the
wall thickening of the
Gallbladder mucocele
Gallstones, see aiso Cholelithiasis
Gas
hepatic
gastric
colonic
Gastric. see afso Stomach
Gastric distention
Gastric foreign body
Gastric polyp
Gastric tumor(s)
Gastric ulcer
Gastric wall
edema of the
layering of
 normal appearance of
thickness of
Gastritis
Gastrointestinal biopsy
Gastrointestinal disorders
Gastrointestinal foreign body
876
Gastrointestinal inflammation
Gastrointestinal tract
 normal appearance of
contents of the
Gliding sign, lung
Glomerulonephritis
Granuloma or pyogranuloma
hepatic
peritoneal
pulmonary
renal
 Granulomatous or pyogranulomatous process
H
Halo sign, perirenal
Harmonic ultrasonography
Heart, see aiso Cardiac
acquired diseases of the
congenital diseases of the
examination of the
neoplastic disorders of the
Heart base tumor
Heartworm disease (dirofilariasis)
Hemangiosarcoma
bladder
cardiac
hepatic
metastatic
renal
retroperitoneal
splenic
877
Hematoma
bladder
cervical
hepatic
ligament tear and
muscular
peritoneal
pulmonary
rib
tendon tear and
Hemoabdomen
amyloidosis and
hemangiosarcoma and
Hemorrhage
bladder wall
pleural
post-biopsy
 pulmonary
retroperitoneal
Hepatitis
acute
chronic
chronic active
emphysematous
Hepatocutaneous syndrome
Hepatofugal flow
Hepatopetal flow
Hepatoma
Hepatomegaly
Hepatopathy
steroid
vacuolar
878
Hernia
diaphragmatic
peritoneopericardial
Histiocytic sarcoma
hepatic
renal
disseminated
Hip joint
dysplasia of the
examination of the
luxation of the
Horner's syndrome
Hyaloid canal, see aiso Hyaloid artery
Hydrocephalus, see also Ventriculomegaly
Hydronephrosis
Hydroureter
Hygroma
Hyoid apparatus
Hyperadrenocorticism
adrenal changes with
liver changes with
Hypercalcemia
 parathyroid glands and
Hyperparathyroidism
Hyperplasia
hepatic benign nodular
Hypertension
portal
 pulmonary
879
systemic
Hyperthyroidism
ethanol or heat ablation in
Hypertrophy
concentric cardiac
eccentric cardiac
Hypothyroidism
Hypovolemia
1
Infarct, or infarction
hepatic
intestinal
portal thrombosis and
renal cortical
Instability, joint
Insufficiency
aortic valve
pulmonary
Insulinoma, see aiso Pancreatic tumor
Intestinal biopsy
Intestinal dehiscence
Intestinal foreign body
Intestinal perforation
Intestinal stricture
[ntestinal tumor(s)
Intestinal wall
Intestine
anatomy of the
880
biopsy of the
contents, in the
examination of the
Intussusception
appearance of
duodenogastric
jejunal
colonic
Invagination, see Intussusception
[ris
normal appearance of the
Ischemia
myocardial
bowel
J
Joint mice, see aiso Calcified bodies
K
Kidneys
diffuse disorders of the
examination of the normal
focal disorders of the
 neoplasia of the
L
Laryngeal paralysis
Larynx
examination of the normal
disorders of the
Left atrium
dilation of the
Left ventricle
881
dilatation of the
hypertrophy of the
Leiomyoma, see aiso Smooth muscle tumor(s)
gastric
intestinal
uterine
vaginal
Leiomyosarcoma, see aiso Smooth muscle tumor(s)
bladder
intestinal
Lens
luxation of the
normal appearance of the
posterior rupture of the
Leptospirosis
hepatic
renal
Leukemia
 Leydig cell tumor
Ligament (s)
collateral
cranial cruciate
disorders of
examination of
falciform
patellar
Linear foreign body(ies)
Liver
diffuse parenchymal disorders of the
examination of the normal
focal parenchymal disorders of the
neoplastic disorders of the
882
Lipidosis, hepatic
Lipoma
cervical
infiltrative
mesenteric
Luxation, patellar
Lung, see aiso Pulmonary
Disorders of the
Examination of the
Lymphadenopathy
abdominal
cranial mediastinal
 granulomatous or pyogranulomatous
inflammatory
necrotic
neoplastic or metastatic
reactive
sublumbar
Lymph node (s)
abscessed
aortic
cavitary, or cystic
colic
cranial cervical
cranial mediastinal
examination of the normal
gastric
hepatic
hypogastric
inguinal
jejunal (or mesenteric)
mandibular
medial iliac
medial retropharyngeal
mesenteric (or jejunal)
883
pancreaticoduodenal
popliteal
renal
sacral
splenic
sternal
sublumbar
Lymphoma
bladder
cervical
cranial mediastinal
gastric
hepatic
intestinal
laryngeal
mesenteric
pancreatic
peritoneal
renal
subcutaneous
M
Mammary glands
appearance of normal
tumor of
Mandible
Mass (es)
adrenal
bladder
cardiac
cavitary
cerebral
cervical
cranial mediastinal
diaphragmatic
esophageal
ocular
884
gastrointestinal tract
heart base
hepatic
laryngeal
musculoskeletal
pancreatic
prostatic
pleural
pulmonary
renal
rib
splenic
testicular
thoracic wall
thyroid
Mast cell tumor
bladder
cranial mediastinal
hepatic
Medial coronoid process
fragmentation of the
normal
Medial humeral epicondyle
avulsion, or fragmentation
Mediastinum
abnormalities of the
cyst in the
mass in the
Medullary rim sign, renal
Megaesophagus
Melanoma, laryngeal
Meningocele
Meniscus, or menisci
885
femorotibial
Mesentery
normal
inflammatory processes of the
neoplastic invasion of the
Mesothelial remnant
Mesothelioma
Metallic clip
Metastasis or metastatic disease
bone
cranial mediastinal
hepatic
lymph node
peritoneal
pleural
pulmonary
renal
Microhepatica
Microvascular dysplasia, hepatic
Mineralization
renal
hepatic
neoplastic
tendon or muscle
vascular wall
Mirror-image see aiso Artifact
Mitral valve
dysplasia of the
endocardiosis
regurgition of the
Mosaic pattern, turbulent flow
886
Muscle
biceps
brachialis
cricopharyngeal
deltoid
digastricus
extensor carpi radialis
gastrocnemius
iliopsoas
infraspinatus
quadriceps femoris
sternohyoid
sternothyroid
supraspinatus
tibialis cranialis
triceps
Muscle contracture
infraspinatus
Muscle trauma
Musculature
examination of the
Myelolipoma
hepatic
splenic
Myelomalacia
Myocardial disease
Myopathies, or tendinopathies
fibrosing and calcifying
Myositis
septic
temporalis
Myxosarcoma
887
N
Neck, examination of the
Necrosis
acute tubular
femoral head avascular
hepatic
Nephritis, interstitial
Nephrocalcinosis
Nephroblastoma
Nephrolithiasis
Nephrosclerosis
Nephrosis, acute tubular
Neoplasia, see aiso tumor, mass, nodule
bladder
bone
brain
cardiac
carotid-body
oc ular
gastrointestinal
hepatic
joint
laryngeal
mammary glands
nerve
muscle
pancreatic
peritoneal
parathyroid
prostatic
penis
pulmonary
renal
888
retroperitoneal space
spinal
splenic
testicular
thyroid
urethral
Nerve(s)
brachial
examination of normal peripleral
median
radial
Neuroblastoma, renal
Neuroendocrine tumor
Nodular hyperplasia
adrenal
hepatic
pancreatic
splenic
Nodule (s)
adrenal
gastrointestinal
hepatic
pancreatic
parathyroid
pleural
pulmonary
renal
spleniv
testicular
0
Obstruction ureteral
Omentum normal
inflammatory processes of the
neoplastic invasion of the
889
Optic nerve
inflammation of the
normal appearance of the
Orchitis
Os penis
Osseous metaplasia
deep digital flexor muscle
Osteoarthritis, or degenerative joint disease
Osteochondritis dissecans
femoral condyle
humeral head
humeral condyle
Osteochondroma, or osteochondromatosis
Osteomyelitis
Osteophyte, or osteophytosis
Osteosarcoma
appendicular
rib
splenic
vertebral
Otitis media
Ovary
examination of
normal appearance of
Ovarian cyst
Ovarian tumor(s)
Ovulation cycle
Overcirculation, pulmonary
890
Overload pressure
volume
P
Pancreas
examination of the
normal appearance of the
measurements of the
Pancreatic cyst
Pancreatic duct
Pancreatic edema
 Pancreatic pseudocyst
Pancreatic tumor(s)
Pancreatitis
acute
chronic
necroticohemorrhagic
Papilla
duodenal major
ureteral
Parathyroid glands
examination of the
hyperplasia of the
adenoma of the
malignant neoplasia of the
Patent ductus venosus
Patent ductus arteriosus
reversed
Paradoxical septal motion
Paraprostatic cyst
891
Penis
appearance of normal
examination of
fracture of
Perforation, gastrointestinal
Percutaneous procedures see Biopsy, Fine-needle aspiration
Pericardial effusion
Pericardiodentesis, ultrasound-guided
Peripheral nerve(s), see nerve(s)
Peritoneal cestodiasis
Peritoneocentesis, ultrasound-guided
Peritonitis
bile
septic
Pheochromocytoma
Pleura
abnormalities of the
thickened
Pleuritis
Pneumonia
abscessing
aspiration
pyogranulamous
Pneumothorax
Pneumoperitoneum
Pseudocyst
perinephric
Pseudosludge see aiso Artifact
892
Polyps
gallbladder wall
gastric
bladder
uterine
Portal hypertension
Portal vein
doppler assessment of the
 primary hypoplasia of the
normal
Portal system normal extrahepatic
Portoazygos shunt
Portosystemic shunt (s) or shunting
acquired
congenital
extrahepatic
intrahepatic
Postpartum uterus
Pregnancy
abnormal
gestational age in
normal progression of
Pressure gradient
aortic stenosis and
atrial septal defect and
mitral dysplasia and
 patent ductus arteriosus and
pulmonic stenosis and
tricuspid Dysplasia and
ventricular septal defect and
Prostate
appearance of the normal
biopsy of
893
examination of
measurement of
Prostatic cyst
Prostatic hyperplasia
Prostatic tumor
Prostatitis
Pulmonary, see Lung
Pupil normal appearance of the
Pus
Pyelectasia, renal
Pyelocentensis
Pyelonephritis
Pyogranuloma (see Granuloma) Pyonephoris
Pythiosis
R
Ratio (s)
Cardiac dimensional
Kidney-aorta
Portal vein-aorta
Renal, see aiso Kidneys
Renal agenesis
Renal disease
chronic
diffuse parenchymal
focal
polycystic
Renal calculus(i)
894
Renal cyst (s)
Renal insufficiency
Renal granuloma
Renal pelvis
disorders of the
examinationofthenormal
Renal-aortic ratio
Renal tumor(s) or neoplasia
Reproductive tract female see also ovaries, uterus, pregnancy examination
of
appearance of normal
Reproductive tract male see aiso prostate, testis
examination of
appearance of normal
Retinal detachment
Retrobulbar space
 normal appearance of
mass of
biopsy of the
Reverberation see afso Artefact
Rhabdomyosarcoma
bladder, botryoid
diaphragmatic
Rib (s)
aggressive lesion of the
fracture, of the
mass of the
sarcoma, of
Right atrium
dilatation of the
895
Right ventricle
dilation of the
hypertrophy of the
Round-cell neoplasia
hepatic
renal
Roundworms
S
Salivary duct cyst
Salivary glands
mandibular
parotid
disorders of the
Sarcoma
histiocytic
intramedullary
rib
soft-tissue
splenic
Sarcomatosis
Scrotal trauma
Scrotum
Seminoma
Septal defect
atrial
ventricular
Seroma
postoperative
subserosal
Sertoli cell tumor
896
Shadowing, see aiso Artifact
Auu
edge
Shoulder
examination of the normal
Sialoadenitis
Sialocele
Side-lobe and grating lobe, see also Artifact
Sinus of Valsalva
Situs inversus
Smoke sign, left atrial
Smooth muscle tumors
Spine
examination of the normal
Spinal cord
hemorrhage of the
neoplasia of the
Spleen
appearance of the normal
displacement of the
examination of the
extramedullary hematopoiesis of
hematoma of the
histoplasmosis of the
infarction of the
myelolipoma of the
thrombus of the
tumor(s), of the
torsion of the
vessels of the
Splenitis
897
Splenomegaly
Splenorenal shunt, Acquired
Steatitis abdominal
retroperitoneal
Stenosis
aortic or subaortic
mitral
pulmonic
tricuspid
vascular
Steroid hepatopathy
Stifle examination of the
Stomach see aiso Gastric examination of the
normal appearance of the
contents of the
Stricture, intestinal
Stroke length
Supraglenoid tubercle fracture
Syringomyelia
Systolic anterior motion
T
Target lesion (s)
hepatic
splenic
Tendon, normal
biceps brachii
calcaneal (Achilles)
gastrocnemius
infraspinatus
long digital extensor
898
superficial digital flexor
supraspinatus
Tendonitis, or tenosynovitis, or tendinopathy
bicipital
infraspinatus
supraspinatus
Tendon luxation
biceps
superficial digital flexor
Tendon rupture
bicipital
calcaneal (Achilles)
Teriyaki stick
Testis
appearance of
atrophy of
examination of
measurement of
torsion of
tumor(s) of
Tetralogy of Fallot
Thoracocentesis, ultrtasound-guided
Thymoma
Thymus, normal
Thoracic, see aiso Lung, Thorax
Thoracic biopsy or fine-needle aspiration
Thoracic wall mass
Thoracic wall abscess
Thorax
examination of the
899
Thromboembolism
aortic or iliac
pulmonary
Thrombus or thrombosis
aortic
left atrial
 portal venous
caudal vena cava
femoral vein or artery
Thyroid gland
adenoma of the
 adenomatous hyperplasia of the
cysts in
enlargement of the
examination of the
tumors of the
Tibial tuberosity avulsion fracture
Tongue
examination of the
Torsion
liver lobe
lung lobe
Toxicity
ethylene glycol
grapes
ily
Trachea
examination of the
collapse of the
compression of the
displacement of the
thickening of the
Transudate
900
peritoneal
Tricuspid dysplasia
Tricuspid valve regurgitation
endocardiosis and
pulmonoic stenosis and
Tumor (s) see Neoplasia
Tympanic bullae (middle ear)
examination of the
disorders of the
U
Ulceration
gastric
gastrointestinal
and tumor
Ununited anconeal process
Ureter
dilatation of the
ectopic
Ureteral jet
Ureteritis
Ureterocele
Urethra
examination of the normal
disorders of the
Uremic gastritis
Urinoma
Uroliths, or urolithiasis
bladder
renal
901
ureteral
urethral
Uterine granuloma
Uterine involution
Uterine stump pyometra
Uterine torsion
Uterus
cystic endometrial hyperplasia of
examination of
ell! p!ny
 normal appearance of
tumors of
V
Vagosympathetic trunk
Valvular disease
chronic degenerative
Vasculitis
 pyogranulomatous
Vein (s)
azygos
caudal mesenteric
cranial mesenteric
deep circomflex iliac
external and internal maxillary
external jugular
external iliac
gastroepiploic
gonadal, left
hepatic
iliac
jejunal
left gastric
902
linguofacial
maxillary
 pancreaticoduodenal
phrenicoabdominal
portal
renal
right gastric
splenic
thyroid
Vena cava
caudal
cranial
persistent left cranial
syndrome of the
Ventricular system
measurement of the
Ventriculomegaly see aiso Hydrocephalus
Vitreal foci
Vitreal retraction
Vitreous body
anatomy of the
degeneration of the
hemorrhage in the
Vocal folds
abnormal motion of the
thickening of the
Volvulus
Gastric
W
Wall layering
bladder
gastrointestinal tract
903
Y
Yolk sac membrane
Z
Zygomatic salivary gland
normal appearance
inflammation of the
904