Dellmann's
Textbookof
VeterinaryHistology
SIXTHEDITION
lo.Ann Eurell,DVM,PhD
Brian L.Frappier,DVM,PhD
Blackwell
Publshing
Dellmann's
Textbook of
Veterinary Histology
mann's
Textbook of
Veterinary Histology
SIXTH EDITION
Jo Ann EUrEll, DVm, Phd
Department ofVeterinary Biosciences
University of Illinois
Urbana,Illinois
brian l. frappier, dvm, phd
Department ofBiomedicalSciences
University of MissouriColumbia
Columbia,Missouri
Blackwell
Publishing
2006 Blackwell Publishing
 All rights reserved
Blackwell Publishing Professional
2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014, USA
Orders:
1-800-862-6657
Office:
1-515-292-0140
Fax:
1-515-292-3348
Web site:
www.blackwellprofessional.com
Blackwell Publishing Ltd
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK
Tel.: +44 (0)1865 776868
Blackwell Publishing Asia
550 Swanston Street, Carlton, Victoria 3053, Australia
Tel.: +61 (0)3 8359 1011
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use of specific clients, is granted by
 Blackwell Publishing, provided that the base fee of $.10 per copy is paid directly to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood
 Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by CCC, a separate system of pay-
ments has been arranged. The fee code for users of the Transactional Reporting Service is ISBN-13: 978-0-7817-4148-4;
ISBN-10: 0-7817-4148-3/2006 $.10.
Sixth edition, 2006
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
 Dellmann's textbook of veterinary histology / [edited by] Jo Ann Eurell, Brian L. Frappier.—-6th ed.
p.; cm.
Rev. ed. of: Textbook of veterinary histology / [edited by] H. Dieter Dellmann, Jo Ann Eurell. 5th ed. c1998.
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN-13: 978-0-7817-4148-4
ISBN-10: 0-7817-4148-3
1. Veterinary histology. I. Eurell, Jo Ann Coers. II. Frappier, Brian L. III. Dellmann, Horst-Dieter. IV. Title. V. Title:
Textbook of veterinary histology.
[DNLM: 1. Histology. 2. Anatomy, Veterinary. SF 757.3 D3575 2006]
SF757.3T49 2006
636.089'10189—dc22
2005008748
The last digit is the print number: 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Dedicated to H.-Dieter Dellmann, Docteur-Veterinaire, Habil.
Preface
The publication of the sixth edition of the Texzbook of Veterinary
M. Bergmann, E. J. Ehrhart, R. Hamor, R. Hullinger, L.-I.
Histology marks the 3Oth year since H.-Dieter Dellmann and
Larsson, J. Messick, J. Plendl, C. Plopper, and J. Verlander. M.
Esther M. Brown first brought this book to veterinary students,
Chansky has produced several new illustrations for this edition.
histology instructors, and other biologists in 1976. Dr. Dellmann
Their expertise and participation has made this project possible.
continued this book through five English editions. The textbook
At the University of Illinois, Jo Ann Eurell would like to
has also been reprinted in Spanish, Japanese, Italian, Indonesian,
-dns Aolons!u iejuuai sualanxa ioy uosduoui ueof aziuosai
Portuguese, and Korean editions for international veterinary stu-
port, and Dr. Thomas E. Eurell as a constant source of inspira-
dents. We have attempted to recognize and honor Dr. Dellmann's
tion and encouragement. At the University of Missouri, Brian
dedication and contribution to veterinary histology by including
 Frappier offers appreciation and thanks to Howard A. Wilson for
his name in the title of this edition.
years of expert advice, technical assistance, and attention to detail.
In the beginning, this textbook was conceived as a teach-
This edition of the textbook is accompanied by a CD-ROM
ing tool for veterinary students rather than for graduate stu-
 containing a histology atlas with many images contributed by
dents or other histologists. We have attempted to continue this 
chapter authors. In addition, the family of W. E. Haensly has
tradition. The text and images for this edition have been up-
dated with the most current information available at the time
Dr. Haensly was a dedicated veterinary histologist, mentor, and
of publication.
friend, and we are pleased to present his work for the benefit of
With the retirement of Dr. Dellmann, J. A. Eurell and
veterinary students for years to come. We thank his wife, Patricia,
B. Frappier have taken over the editorial role for this edition. We
 and his family for their generosity.
would like to thank contributors to the fifth edition who did not
participate in this edition: A. Deldar, H.-Dieter Dellmann, G.
Jo Ann Eurell
Flottorp, I. Foss, and C. Henrikson. We would also like to thank
Urbana, Illinois
D. Biechler for illustrations in the previous edition. New con-
Brian Frappier
tributors for the sixth edition include: O. M. Andrisani, A. Beitz,
Columbia, Missouri
vili
Contributors
Donald R. Adams, PhD
E. J. Ehrhart, DVM, PhD
University Professor Emeritus
Associate Professor
Department of Biomedical Sciences
Colorado State University
Iowa State University
College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
 Department of Microbiology, Imm unology, and Pathology
Ames, Iowa
Fort Collins, Colorado
Ourania M. Andrisani, PhD
Jo Ann Eurell, DVM, PhD
Professor
Associate Professor of Morphology
 Department of Basic Medical Sciences
Department of Veterinary Biosciences
School of Veterinary Medicine
College of Veterinary Medicine
Purdue University
University of Illinois
West Lafayette, Indiana
Urbana, Illinois
Alvin Beitz, PhD
Thomas F. Fletcher, DVM, PhD
 Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences
 Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Minnesota
University of Minnesota
St. Paul, Minnesota
St. Paul, Minnesota
Martin Bergmann, Dr. med. vet.
Brian L. Frappier, DVM, PhD
Professor
Clinical Associate Professor
Institute of Veterinary Anatomy, Histology, and
 Department of Biomedical Sciences
Embryology
College of Veterinary Medicine
Justus-Liebig-University
 University of MissouriColumbia
Giessen, Germany
Columbia, Missouri
Vibeke Dantzer, DVM, Dr. Vet. Sci.
Ralph E. Hamor, DVM
Associate Professor
Clinical Associate Professor
Department of Basic Animal and Veterinary Sciences
 Department of Veterinary Clinical Medicine
 Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University
College of Veterinary Medicine
Copenhagen, Denmark
University of Illinois
Urbana, Illinois
ix
X
Contributors
 Ronald L. Hullinger, DVM, PhD
Charles G. Plopper, DVM, PhD
Professor
 Professor and Chair, Department of Anatomy, Physiology,
Department of Basic Medical Sciences 
and Cell Biology
School of Veterinary Medicine
School of Veterinary Medicine
Purdue University
University of California, Davis 
West Lafayette, Indiana
Davis, California
Thor Landsverk, Dr. med. vet.
Charles McLean Press, BSc (Vet.), BVSc, PhD
 Professor, Department of Basic Sciences and Aquatic
Professor, Department of Basic Sciences and Aquatic
Medicine
Medicine
 Norwegian School of Veterinary Science
Norwegian School of Veterinary Science
Oslo, Norway
Oslo, Norway
Lars-Inge Larsson, D. Sc.
Janis Priedkalns, BVSc, MA, PhD
 Professor, Division of Cell Biology
Emeritus Elder Professor of Anatomy and Histology
 Department of Anatomy and Physiology
Faculty of Medicine
The Royal Veterinary and Agricultural University
University of Adelaide
Frederiksberg, Denmark
Adelaide, South Australia
 Professor, Faculty of Medicine
University of Latvia
Rudolf Leiser, Dr. med. vet., Dr. h.c.
Professor
Riga, Latvia
 Institute of Veterinary Anatomy, Histology, and
Embryology
David C. Van Sickle, DVM, PhD
 Justus-Liebig-University
 Professor Emeritus, Department of Basic Medical Sciences
Giessen, Germany
School of Veterinary Medicine
Purdue University
West Lafayette, Indiana
Joanne B. Messick, DVM, PhD
Associate Professor
 Jill W. Verlander, DVM
 Population Medicine and Diagnostic Sciences
Director, Electron Microscopy Core Facility
College of Veterinary Medicine
College of Medicine
Cornell University
University of Florida
Ithaca, New York
Karl-Heinz Wrobel, Dr. med. vet., Dr. rer. nat.
Nancy A. Monteiro-Riviere, PhD
Professor
 Professor of Investigative Dermatology and Toxicology
Institute of Anatomy
Center for Chemical Toxicology and Research
University of Regensburg
Pharmacokinetics
Regensburg, Germany
Department of Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
 North Carolina State University
Raleigh, North Carolina
Johanna Plendl, Dr. med. vet.
 Professor of Veterinary Anatomy
Institute for Veterinary Anatomy
Free University of Berlin
Berlin, Germany
Contents
Cytology
Urinary System  212
Lars-Inge Larsson
Jill W. Verlander
2
Epithelium  17
12
Male Reproductive System 233
Brian L. Frappier
Karl-Heinz Wrobel
Martin Bergmann
3
 Connective and Supportive Tissues 
31
Jo Ann Eurell
13
Female Reproductive System 256
David C. Van Sickle
Janis Priedkalns
Rudolf Leiser
4
Blood and Bone Marrow  6l
Joanne Messick
14
 Placentation 
279
Vibeke Dantzer
5
Muscle  79
Rudolf Leiser
Jo Ann Eurell
15
Endocrine System 298
Nervous Tissue
9
Ron Hullinger
Alvin J. Beitz
Ourania M. Andrisani
Thomas F. Fletcher
16
Integument 320
7
Cardiovascular System
117
Nancy A. Monteiro-Riviere
Johanna Plendl
17
Eye350
8
Immune System
134
Charles McL. Press
Ralph E. Hamor
E. J. Ehrhart
Thor Landsverk
18
Ear364
9
Respiratory System
153
Charles G. Plopper
Jo Ann Eurell
Donald R. Adams
Index 377
10
Digestive System
170
 Brian L. Frappier
xi
Cytology
LARS-INGE LARSSON
General Overview
Cytoskeleton
Cell Membrane
Microtubules
Nucleus
Microflaments
 Nuclear Envelope
Intermediate Filaments
Nucleoplasm
Inclusions
Nucleoli
Cell Surface Modifications
Cytosol
Cell Cycle, Cell Division, and Apoptosis
Organelles
From Cells to Tissues
Rough and Smooth Endoplasmic Reticulum and
Intercellular Junctions
Ribosomes
Cell Communication
Golgi Complex and Vesicular Transport
 Mitochondria
Peroxisomes
GENERAL OVERVIEW
Eukaryotic cell structure and function thus depend upon
membranes and membrane-enclosed structures. The cell itself
The cell is the smallest unit of life, and all living matter (proto-
is delimited by the cell membrane. The cytoplasm consists of
plasm) is composed of cells. Cells possess the unique abilities to
 organelles, inclusions, and cytoskeletal components enclosed in 
replicate and to create energy from inanimate matter, which are
a semiviscous liquid, the cytosol (Fig. 1-1). The study of the
qualities that characterize life itself. Many living creatures are uni-
structural components of the cell is referred to as cytology, while
cellular (i.e., consist of a single cell), but higher organisms are
the study of the integration of cells to form tissues and organs is
comprised of a multiplicity of cells that specialize in different
referred to as histology. Such integration involves three differ-
functions including absorption, digestion, and excretion.
ent components: the cells themselves, the extracellular matrix
In primitive prokaryotic cells, like bacteria, there is little
(ECM), and tissue fluids. The ECM components are synthesized
organization of the many molecules that are needed for the life
by cells and are present in different proportions in different tis-
processes. In contrast, in eukaryotic organisms, the genetic ma-
sues. Tissue fluids transport nutrients, hormones, gases, and waste
terial is organized in a nucleus (karyon) and many other processes
 products to and from the cells.
have become restricted to membrane-bounded organelles. Such
Many parts of the cell can be studied in the light micro-
compartmentation prevents unordered mixing of different bio-
 scope, which allows maximal resolution of structures down to
chemical pathways, thus allowing for more sophisticated func-
0.2 μm in diameter at magnifications up to 1000 to 1500 times.
tions. The compartmentation also allows the cells to increase in
However, many cellular structures are smaller and the electron
size by ordered delivery of membrane-delimited molecules tO
microscope, offering much better resolution (down to O.1 nm)
their appropriate destinations. Thus, bacteria only reach 1 to 5 μm
and higher magnifications (up to X400,0o0), has to be used for
in size, while most eukaryotic cells are 5 to 50 μm.
their study.
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
secretory vesicle
Golgi complex
lipid inclusion
nuclear pore
centrosome
mitochondrion
nuclear
rough
envelope
endoplasmic
reticulum
nucleolus
smooth
endoplasmic
reticulum
fiGUre I-1
trast to different cell components. Additionally, living cells can be
A
stained with vital dyes that make it possible to follow fluorescent
common light microscopy stain is a combination of the dyes,
proteins expressed by genetically manipulated living cells
hematoxylin and eosin, which stain nuclei blue and cytoplasm
pink, respectively. When negative molecular groups bind posi-
CELL MEMBRANE
stained structures are described as basophilic. In contrast, basic
components (hemoglobin in mature red blood cells) attract posi-
The cell membrane (plasmalemma) encloses the cell and forms
tively charged (acidic) dyes such as eosin and are 
med aci-
ts &
ofconta
with the surrounding environment. The inter-
dophilic. Electron-absorbing heavy metal ions are used as stains
nal milieu of the cell must be kept constant, so the cell membrane
for electron microscopy. These stains show little chemical speci-
is involved in the active and passive transport of ions, water, oxy-
ficity, but impart contrast to cellular structures. In contrast, histo-
gen, carbon dioxide, nutrients, and secretory and excretory prod-
chemistry allows the localization of specific molecules by use of
ucts. The cell membrane is also involved in anchoring the cell to
antibodies tagged with labels that are deti
tableinthelightor
surrounding structures, as well as participating in signaling and
antibodies
 This structure is sometimes referred to as a
are labeled with fluorescent dyes that
unit me mbrane, which follows the theory that all biologic mem-
EnzVI
branes share the same structure.
enzyme substrates that produce colored or electron-dense
The cell membrane is 8 to 10 nm thick and has a characteris-
products that precipitate at the site of enzyme activity. The study
tic trilaminar structure in electron micrographs (Fig. 1-2). The
lamina separated by an electron-lucent layer. Biochemically, the
Cytology · Lors-lnge Lorsson
E
ciated proteins making up the electron-dense laminae and the
hydrophobic tails forming the electron-lucent layer. The bilayer
also contains other lipids, such as cholesterol and carbohydrate-
containing glycolipids
Proteins associated with the cell membrane are either inserted
into the phospholipid bilayer (integral proteins) or attached to its
 proteins are integral proteins that span the entire thickness of the
lipid bilayer. A fluid mosaic is created by transmembrane proteins,
which can diffuse laterally in the lipid bilayer. Protein diffusion is
restricted by cytoskeletal components, cell junctions, and peculiar
membrane substructures known as lipid rafts. Lipid rafts con-
tain high concentrations of cholesterol and sphingolipids, which
decrease the fluidity of the lipid bilayer. Some rafts contain pro-
teins called caveolins, which reorganize the membrane into pear-
shaped invaginations known as caveolae. These invaginations are
 believed to participate in signaling events and the cellular uptake
 of certain proteins such as albumin.
Some integral membrane proteins attach to oligosaccharides,
forming glycoproteins, while others attach to larger polysaccha-
rides (glycosaminoglycans), forming proteoglycans. Both oligo-
saccharides and glycosaminoglycans are present on the outside of
the cell membrane. Together with the carbohydrate portion of the
glycolipids, they form a carbohydrate-rich external cell coat, the
 glycocalyx, which is involved in many important functions re-
lating to cell recognition, signaling, and mechanical protection.
Blood group antigens form part of the glycocalyx of blood cells
The glycocalyx can be demonstrated by histochemical staining
using the periodic-acid-Schiff method or with labeled lectins,
FIGURE I-2 Trilaminar plasma membrane (arrowhead) of a
which are proteins that bind to specific carbohydrate structures.
neurolemmocyte (x415,000).
The cell membrane is asymmetrical with respect to membrane
proteins, the glycocalyx, and phospholipids
cell membrane is composed of phospholipids, which have a
Some transmembrane proteins are involved in cell-to-cell
hydrophilic head and hydrophobic tails. The phospholipids form
or cell-to-matrix interactions, while others form carriers or chan-
a bilayer in the membrane with the hydrophobic tails facing each
nels that transport substances such as ions and glucose through
other. Thus, the hydrophilic heads of the outer layer face the out-
 the membrane. Still other transmembrane proteins form recep-
side of the cell, while the heads of the inner layer face the cytosol
tors that transmit signals from outside the cell to inside. Certain
(Fig. 1-3). Such arrangement of the phospholipids has been cor-
hormones, including steroid hormones, can pass through the
related to the trilaminar structure with the polar heads and asso-
plasmalem ma and bind directly to intracellular receptors. Most
integral membrane 
glycolipid
glycoprotein
glycocalyx
phospholipid
lipid bilayer
XYXXXXX
 integral membrane
protein
integral transmembrane
 peripheral membrane
glycoprotein
protein
FIGURE I-3 Schematic drawing of the organization of the cell membrane.
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
hormones, growth factors, and neurotransmitters are either too
Materials pass through these pores in a manner that is strictly
large or too hydrophilic to pass through the cell membrane, and
controlled by proteins of the nuclear pore complex. In this way,
therefore use transmembrane proteins as receptors. Binding to the
protein synthesis is restricted to the cytoplasm, permitting the
extracellular region of such receptors evokes intracellular activa-
 nucleus to process and refine messenger ribonucleic acids (RNAs)
tion of so-called second messengers, such as cyclic adenosine
without risking their translation into proteins during processing
monophosphate (cAMP). Second messengers are intracellular
This refinement is not possible in prokaryotes and provides
molecules that convey the extracellular message into the interior
eukaryotic organisms with possibilities for more complex ex-
of the cell.
ploitation of the genome (e.g., through alternative splicing of
primary messenger RNAs).
NUCLEUS
Nucleoplasm
Chromatin refers to deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) complexed
between cell types, and these characteristics are useful for cell iden-
with proteins, of which the basic histones form the quantita-
tification. For example, lymphocytes have a round nucleus while
tively most important part and are involved in chromatin pack-
granulocytes have a lobulated nucleus. The nucleus is centrally
ing. Nonhistone proteins refer to proteins that are also involved
 located in many cell types, but it is displaced to the periphery in
in chromatin packing and protection or that participate in regu-
others (e.g., fat cells and skeletal muscle cells). Most cells have a
lation of DNA duplication, transcription, and repair.
single nucleus, but some, like osteoclasts, possess multiple nuclei.
In specimens stained with hematoxylin or other basic dyes,
Multinucleated cells may originate either from fusion of mononu-
the nucleus has areas of intense staining referred to as hetero-
clear cells or from incomplete division. Mature, mammalian red
 chromatin. Heterochromatin often occurs at the periphery of the
blood cells lack a nucleus altogether.
nucleus attached to the nuclear lamina and consists of condensed
DNA. Additionally, the nucleus contains lightly stained euchro-
Nuclear Envelope
matin that represents uncoiled DNA, which is accessible for tran-
scription into RNA. Ultrastructurally, heterochromatin appears a5
The nucleus is enclosed by a nuclear envelope, which contains
electron-dense granular masses while euchromatin is electron
nuclear pores that control the flow of materials between the nu-
lucent (Fig. 1-4). The proportion ofheterochromatin to euchromatin
cleus and the cytoplasm. The nuclear envelope is comprised of
varies between cells and is often an identifying feature.
two concentric unit membranes that are separated by a narrow
Chromatin is packed by coiling at several levels of organiza-
(25 to 70 nm) space (Fig. 1-4). The outer membrane is often
tion. The basic unit is the nucleosome that is formed from 200
studded with ribosomes and may be continuous with the rough
base pairs of double-stranded DNA complexed with several his-
endoplasmic reticulum. On the inside of the inner membrane,
tones. The exact number of base pairs involved is species variable.
the nuclear lamina is present. The nuclear lamina is a fibrous
The nucleosomes are separated by shorter (about 50-base-pair)
sheath, composed of specialized intermediate filaments called
 sequences of double-stranded DNA. Even during transcription,
lamins that provide the nucleus with mechanical strength. At
euchromatin is composed of nucleosomes and internucleosomal
intervals, circular nuclear pores interrupt the nuclear envelope.
strands while transcriptionally inactive heterochromatin is further
ER
N
FIGURE I-4 Part of the nucleus (N), with electron-dense heterochromatin and electron-lucent
euchromatin, and the cytoplasm (C) of a neurohypophysial glial cell. The nuclear envelope is pierced by
pores (arrow). The perinuclear space between the inner and outer nuclear membranes is continuous 
with a cistema of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (x67,000).
Cytology · Lors-lnge Lorsson
5
coiled. Heterochromatin is characterized by 30-nm chromatin
fibers consisting of spirals of coiled nucleosomes. Even more elab-
orate coiling and structuring of chromatin occurs in conjunction
with mitosis or meiosis and results in recognizable chromosomes.
In all cells of female individuals, one of the two X chromo-
somes is permanently inactivated and does not participate in tran-
scription. The inactive X chromosome is recognizable in epithelial
cells from the oral cavity asa single granule called sex chromatin-
(Barr body) that is attached to the nuclear lamina. In neutrophils,
the sex chromatin takes the form of a drum stick-like appendage
to the nucleus (Fig. 1-5). These structures have been used for gen-
3
der testing in the past, but today, in situ hybridization techniques
using labeled DNA probes that specifically bind to X chromo-
FIGURE I-6  Bovine chromosome pair 7 identified by their
somes are preferred. The formula for genetic information encoded
intense (white) fluorescence using in situ hybridization on spread
in the DNA is written using four letters representing the bases
metaphase chromosomes {l ), on cultured bovine endothelial cells,
observed in fluorescence (2), and in interference contrast to bring
adenine (A), guanine (G), thymine (T), and cytosine (C). The se-
out morphologic details (3). DNA has been gently counterstained
quence of these bases determines the information encoded in genes
by a more weakly fluorescent dye. Note in 2 and 3 the presence of
of the DNA, and this information is passed on (transcribed) to
a dividing cell (anaphase; left), in which the two pairs of chro-
RNA. Hybridization refers to the unique sequence of bases of the
mosome 7 are being divided between the two daughter cells. Also
applied probe that binds to the complementary sequence of nu-
note in 2 and 3 two interphase cells (right), which each contain two
cleotides in the DNA being investigated (A binding to T and G
fluorescent dots comesponding to two copies of chromosome 7.
to C). This technique affords a high degree of specificity and the
By this approach, the number of chromosomes can easily be deter-
probe can be labeled with a variety of substances that are detec-
mined also in interphase cells, obviating lengthy preparation of
metaphase chromosomes (×2000).
complementary to specific chromosome regions or genes can be
used for prenatal diagnosis of hereditary diseases (Fig. 1-6)
Nucleoli
The nuclear matrix refers to filamentous material remain-
ing after enzymatic digestion and extraction of the nucleus. It is
The nucleoli are prominent, spherical structures involved in pro-
 believed that the nuclear matrix is important for positioning chro-
duction of ribosomes (Fig. 1-7). At the light microscopic level,
mosomes in the nucleus in a pattern resembling that observed
 nucleoli range up to l μm in diameter and usually stain with basic
during mitotic cell division.
dyes such as hematoxylin, depending on their RNA content. The
number of nucleoli is determined by the number of active nucle-
 olar organizing regions (NORs), which are chromosomal regions
responsible for encoding ribosomal RNA (rRNA). Normally,
there are fewer nucleoli than NORs because either some NORs are
FIGURE I-7 Motor neuron from the spinal cord. The euchromatic
FIGURE I-5 Sex chromatin (arrow) in the nucleus of a
or Nissl substance) is visible as dark, pleomorphic masses throughout
neutrophil (×3800).
the cytoplasm. Cresyl violet Luxol fast blue (×l I00).
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
inactivated or several fuse to form one nucleolus. At the electron
large amounts of proteins is rich in ribosomes and mRNA and
microscopic level, nucleoli have areas of varying electron density.
is therefore strongly basophilic. Accumulations of basophilic,
 A granular component representing maturing ribosomal sub-
well-developed rER are sometimes referred to as ergastoplasm
units is often prominent. Fibrillar components representing
in pancreatic cells or Nissl substance in neurons (Fig. 1-7).
NOR DNA and transcribed rRNA are also observed. Nucleoli,
The sER does not have attached ribosomes and is not en-
along with nuclear chromatin, are dispersed in a nuclear sap con-
 gaged in protein synthesis. Instead, sER synthesizes lipids of cel-
sisting of water, ions, free nucleotides, RNA, and protein.
lular membranes and steroid hormones. Endocrine cells of the
gonads and adrenal cortex have a well-developed system of tubular
 sER (Fig. 1-9). In addition, several drug-metabolizing enzymes
CYTOSOL
that participate in detoxification of noxious and carcinogenic ma-
terials are present in sER. Finally, the sER performs calcium-
The cytosol makes up about half of the cell volume and contains
 sequestering functions in many cells. Release of calcium from the
water, ions, sugars, amino acids, nucleotides, hundreds of solu-
sER can be elicited by several external stimuli and may precipi-
ble enzymes (e.g., of the glycolytic pathway), subunits for the
tate a variety of cellular actions. Skeletal and cardiac muscle cells
cytoskeletal components, messenger RNA, transfer RNA, and
contain an elaborate system of sER, referred to as the sarcoplas-
myriad other molecules. Polymerization of actin is involved in
mic reticulum, which sequesters calcium ions that are released
regulating the viscosity of the cytosol. Transition of the cytosol
upon stimulation of muscle contraction.
from a gel state to a more soluble (gel-to-sol) state assists the for-
Ribosomes are bound to membranes of rER or present in the
mation of extensions (pseudopodia) involved in cell motility.
cytosol as free ribosomes. Each individual ribosome is formed
from two spherical subunits of different sizes. The subunits con-
ORGANELLES
Rough and Smooth Endoplasmic
Reticulum and Ribosomes
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) forms an anastomosing (inter-
connected) network of membrane-delimited sacs (cisternae) and
tubules. The rough ER (rER) is densely studded with ribosomes
and is engaged in protein synthesis (Fig. 1-8), while the smooth
ER (sER) lacks ribosomes and is engaged in lipid synthesis, cal-
cium sequestration, steroid hormone synthesis, and detoxifica-
tion of harmful agents. Both forms of ER are interconnected and
the rER connects to the outer nuclear membrane. The ribosomes
and membranes of the ER are below the resolution of the light
microscope. However, the cytoplasm of cells that synthesize
FlGURE I-8 Electron micrograph of pancreatic zymogen cell
FIGUrE 1-9
 Adrenal cortical cell containing abundant smooth
containing abundant cistermae of rough endoplasmic reticulum (rER)
endoplasmic reticulum, mitochondria (M), and lipid droplets (L) in the
(arrows) and several secretory granules (arrowheads) (x6600).
vicinity of the nucleus (N) (×27,000).
CytologyLors-lnge Lorssor
tain several different proteins, all synthesized in the cytosol, and
rRNA. A variety of cytosolic proteins enter the nucleus through
the nuclear pores and are assembled with rRNA in the nucleo-
lus. The immature ribosomal subunits then exit back to the cyto-
plasm through nuclear pores. Additional ribosomal proteins are
added in the cytosol.
Proteins are formed through the transcription of genes in
 the nucleus, which results in the formation of messenger ribo-
nucleic acids (mRNAs). The mRNAs are exported to the cytosol,
where they combine with the ribosomal subunits. An mRNA may
-og snqn sanuosoqi aidiinu Aq paieisui Aisnoauiinuis aq
ing a polyribosome (polysome). Multiple polyribosomes are often
scattered in the cytoplasm of cells
The nucleotide sequence of the mRNA depends upon the se-
quence of the gene from which it was transcribed and will, in turn,
encode different proteins. All mRNAs attach to ribosomes by their
 initiator codon (AUG representing adenine, uracil, and guanine),
which encodes methionine. For every amino acid encoded in the
mRNA sequence, there exists a corresponding transfer RNA
aoqi-VNu an on Pie oe 1e siods1n 1n (VN)
complex. The first tRNA carries methionine to the complex.
 Subsequently, the ribosome moves along the mRNA to the next
codon and recruits the next corresponding tRNA. The amino acids
released from the tRNAs join together by peptide bonds and form
a growing peptide chain that emerges from the mRNA-ribosome
complex.
If a protein is predestined for lysosome incorporation, mem-
FIGUREI-IOE
Eectron micrograph of the Golgi complex (Go)
brane insertion, or export from the cell, it will start with a short
and surrounding cytoplasm of an adenohypophysial cell. As the
secretory granules mature, they move away from the concave (trans)
hydrophobic signal peptide sequence. The signal peptide binds
side of the Golgi complex and their content becomes more electron-
t0 a signal recognition particle (SRP) present in the cytosol.
dense. In the sequence of maturation of the secretory vesicles, the
newest vesicle is I while the most mature vesicle is IV (x23,700).
cytosolic face of the rER, which results in threading of the pro-
tein into the cisternae of the ER. Once inside the rER, the pro-
tein undergoes several posttranslational modifications including
is transported through the Golgi complex in a cis-to-trans direc-
the cleavage of the signal peptide as well as folding and glyco-
tion. During this transport, the protein becomes concentrated and
sylation. Cytosolic proteins that are destined to remain in the cell
undergoes posttranslational modifications, including glycosyla-
lack signal peptides and are synthesized by free ribosomes (not
tion. At the trans side,appropriately modified proteins are sorted
attached to the rER) in the cytosol.
in the TGN and packaged in vesicles. Mannose-6-phosphate-
containing lysosomal enzymes bind to specific mannose-6-
phosphate receptors in the TGN and become packaged in vesicles
Golgi Complex and Vesicular Transport
that will become primary lysosomes. When budding off from the
The Golgi complex consists ofa series (usually 3 to 10) of flattened
TGN, these vesicles are coated with a protein, clathrin.
cisternae with a convex or cis side that is usually oriented toward
In specialized digestive glands and hormone-producing
 the nucleus and a concave or trans side that generally faces the
cells, secretory products are packaged in condensing vacuoles
cell periphery (Fig. 1-10). At the trans side, anastomosing tubules
that mature into secretory granules (Figs. 1-11 and 1-12). The
and cisternae form the trans-Golgi network (TGN) (Fig. l-11).
In addition, small vesicles are present at the periphery of the cister-
to secrete their contents. This type of secretion is referred to as
nae and larger vesicles or vacuoles are often detected at the trans
regulated secretion. When a signal is received, the membranes
side (Fig. 1-10). Although the Golgi complex can be visualized by
 of the secretory vesicles fuse with the cell membrane, resulting
silver impregnation in light microscopic preparations, electron
in the opening of an orifice through which the vesicle contents
microscopy is necessary to delineate its structure.
are expelled (secreted) through exocytosis. It is, of course, im-
Transmembrane,secretory, and lysosomal proteins are trans-
portant that the vesicles fuse with the correct membrane in the
ferred from the rER to the Golgi complex. Small transport vesi-
cell, and to this end, vesicles and target membranes are equipped
cles filled with newly synthesized proteins bud off the cisternae
of the rER and fuse with the cisternae on the cis side of the Golgi
(Soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive fusion protein Attachment
complex (Fig. 1-11). Subsequently, the protein from the vesicles
protein REceptors). The correct combination of vesicle SNAREs
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
rER
。
1
Golgi
complex
13
FIGURE I-I2E
 Eectron micrograph of pituitary endocrine cells,
O
/10
immunohistochemically stained with antibadies to adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH), conjugated to small 5-nm gold particles and with
4
antibodies to growth hormone (GH) conjugated to larger I 2-nm gold 
particles. The gold particles appear as electron-dense black dots over
secretory granules storing ACTH and GH, respectively. Cells involved
in regulated secretion store numerous secretory granules in their
cytoplasm, the different sizes and morphologies of which aid in cell 
FIGURE I-II  Schematic drawing illustrating transport of
identification (×42,000).
vesicles in the cell. Small transfer vesicles {l) bud off the (rER) and
fuse with the cis-side of the Golgi complex. Secretory granules (2)
form from vesicdles budding from the trans-Golgi network (TGN).
particulate material by endocytosis is referred to as phagocyto-
Mature secretory granules (3) release their contents through
sis. This process characteristically occurs in neutrophils and
exocytosis (4). Particulate material is taken into the cell by
 macrophages but can be executed by many different cell types.
phagocytosis (5), forming a phagosome (6). A Secondary lysosome
susrueio snoaju isuese uslueuau asuajap e s sisonogeud
(7) is formed as the phagosome fuses with primary lysosomes (8).
and also removes particles and cell debris. Pinocytosis refers to
derived from clathrin (T)-coated vesicles budding from the TGN.
the uptake of fluid, while receptor-mediated. endocytosis refers
During receptor-mediated endocytosis (9), receptors (Y) and their
bound ligands are transfermed to early endosomes {10). Dissociated
to the uptake of receptor-bound material. Cellular uptake of low-
receptors recycle back to the cell membrane through exocytosis
density lipoproteins (LDLs) exemplifies receptor-mediated endo-
 (i) saog enisan ka paodsue ae sueal alu (1 1)
cytosis. LDL particles bind to cell surface receptors and accumulate 
late endosomes {l3). Late endosomes also fuse with primary
in coated pits, which are clathrin-coated membrane invagina-
lysosomes and mature into secondary lysosomes. Secondary
tions (Fig. 1-11). The pits invaginate and form endocytotic vesi-
lysosomes that contain undigested material may remain in the cell as
cles with the receptor-bound LDL facing the inside. The vesicles
residual bodies (not shown).
transfer their contents to an early endosome, which is a system
of membrane-delimited tubules and vesicles. The internal pH of
the endosome is acidic, causing the LDL to dissociate from the re-
(vSNAREs) and target membrane SNAREs (tSNAREs) helps to
Ceptors. Subsequently, free receptors become enriched in the tu-
ensure that the appropriate components will fuse.
bular region of the endosome, which eventually pinches off to
While regulated secretion is the province of specialized se-
 form a shuttle vesicle that returns the receptors to the cell surface.
cretory cells, all cells are capable of constitutive secretion, which
The free ligands are sorted to multivesicular bodies (MVBs) and
is the continuous delivery of growth factors and components of
membranes and the extracellular matrix to the cell surface. This
with primary lysosomes and transform into secondary lysosomes.
delivery needs no specific stimulus and is exerted by small vesi-
cles that continuously bud off from the trans region of the Golgi
endosomal system (endocytotic vesicles, early and late endosomes,
complex and fuse with the cell membrane to deliver their contents
 and lysosomes) represent a maturing system or are separate struc-
through exocytosis.
tures shuttling components between themselves.
Both regulated and constitutive secretion result in the deliv-
Transcytosis is used for transporting material through
ery of considerable amounts of membrane material to the plasma-
cells. Endocytosed material on one surface of a cell is transported
lemma. The accumulation of membranes is balanced by a reverse
through the cytoplasm and exocytosed on the other surface (Fig.
process referred to as endocytosis (Fig. l-1l). Via endocytosis,
1-13). An example of transcytosis is the transport of material
the plasmalemma invaginates and forms a small vesicle that buds
from the blood to nearby tissue fluid.
off into the cytoplasm. Different types of endocytosis occur de-
Lysosomal enzymes eventually degrade most extracellular
Aueu sey sisoiopua pue paisaut leiaiiu aun uodn gupuad
material taken up by phagocytosis, pinocytosis, or receptor-
mediated endocytosis, but they do not break down material
CytologyLors-lnge Lorssor
FIGURE I-13Transcytotic vesicles {arrowheads) form at the
cell membrane and are present in the cytoplasm of a capillary
endothelial cell (×76,000).
FIGURE I-I4 Lipofuscin granule (G) in an adenohypophysial
cell. Nucleus (N) (×29,850)
undergoing transcytosis. The enzymes are sorted to primary lyso
somes in the Golgi complex. Primary lysosomes are very small
cristae, which limit a finely granular matrix
(down to 50 nm)and inconspicuous in most cells, but are larger (up
n the
.Mode
to 500 nm) in specialized phagocytic cells like neutrophils and
macrophages. Material undergoing receptor-mediated endocytosis
fine tubules. While most cells contain mitochondria having
or pinocytosis passes from early endosomes to late endosomes. The
late endosomes receive enzymes from primary lysosomes and then
that their mitochondrial cristae are tubular. While the outet
mature into secondary lysosomes (Fig. 1-11). Phagocytosed ma
mitochondrial membrane is permeable to many molecules
e also referred to as secc
In addition,constituents
 for the cell to digest aged or little-used organelles into useful
netabolites. In secondary lysosomes, lysosomal hydrolytic enzymes
digest the enclosed material. Such enzymes can digest most cellu
ar
material and include acid phosphatase, ribonuclease, deoxy-
ribonuclease, proteases, lipases, sulfatases, and β-glucuronidase. All
of these enzymes have an acidic pH, and a proton pump of the lyso-
somal membrane ensures that the lysosomal interior is optimally
acidic. In spite of the multitude of enzymes, some indigestible ma-
terial remains and is retained within the secondary lysosome, form-
ing a residual body. In long-lived cells such as neurons, cardiac
myocytes, and liver cells, gradual accumulation of residual bodies
results in the formation of a yellowish-brown age pigment, lipo
fuscin (Fig. 1-14).
Mitochondria
Mitochondria are spherical to oblong membrane-delimited
organelles that are 0.3 to l μm in diameter and up to 20 μm in
length. They are visible in the light microscope if stained with
cytochemical methods or vital dyes. Ultrastructurally, mitochon-
FiGUre I-I5 
Mitochondria with cristae {arrows) in an
dria are bounded by outer and inner membranes that are sep-
intestinal endocrine cell, which also contains two secretory granules
arated by an intermembrane space (Fig. 1-15). In the classical
(large arrowheads) and several cisternae of rough endoplasmic
interpretation of mitochondrial ultrastructure, the inner mem-
reticulum (rER) (small arrowheads) (×52,000)
10
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
transport across the inner membrane requires specific channels or
Peroxisomes
carriers. The mitochondrial matrix contains most of the enzymes
Peroxisomes (microbodies) are 0.2- to 1.2-um spherical,
of the citric acid cycle as well as enzymes involved in fatty acid
 oxidation. The inside of each crista is studded with 8.5 nm par-
membrane-delimited organelles that contain a paracrystalloid in-
ticles involved in the synthesis of adenosine triphosphate
clusion in some species. Their name is derived from their ability
(ATP). The energy bound in ATP can easily be traded by the
to metabolize hydrogen peroxide. Peroxisomes contain catalase,
many energy-demanding reactions in the cell. The main function
which produces water and oxygen from hydrogen peroxide, as
of mitochondria is to transform the inaccessible energy bound in
well as enzymes involved in oxidation of fatty acids. Like the
fuels such as glucose and fatty acids into easily accessible energy
fatty acid oxidation in mitochondria, peroxisomal fatty acid ox-
bound within ATP. A process known as oxidative phosphory-
idation also produces acetyl-CoA. However, peroxisomal acetyl-
CoA is not used for ATP synthesis but rather is transported to
lation, which consumes about 80% of inhaled O, and produces
COz, accomplishes this transformation. Metabolism of glucose
(glycolysis) in the cytoplasm results in the formation of pyruvate
Peroxisomes also contain enzymes that oxidize substrates like
L- and D-amino acids while reducing oxygen and hydrogen per-
which is converted into acetyl-coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) by the
mitochondria. Additionally, mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation
oxide. Peroxisomal proteins are synthesized in the cytosol and con-
tain a short amino acid sequence that is recognized by a receptor
results in the formation of acetyl-CoA. Acetyl-CoA enters the
citric acid cycle, which produces NADH and FADH,. Electrons
in the peroxisomal membrane, leading to import of the protein
from these molecules move via carriers in the inner mitochon-
into this organelle. Peroxisomes increase in number by division.
drial membrane to Oz,and this movement is coupled to the pump-
ing of H+ into the intermembrane space. This reaction generates
CYTOSKELETON
an electrochemical gradient, resulting in flow of H+ through a
proton channel that is coupled to the 8.5-nm ATP synthase par-
The term cytoskeleton is misleading in that it covers structures
ticles. The narrow tubular connections between the inner mem-
that function to maintain not only cell shape, but also the motil-
brane and the cristae may serve to compartmentalize the proton
ity and intracellular transport functions of the cell. There are
three main components of the cytoskeleton: microtubules, micro-
chondrial membrane. The flow of protons drives ATP synthesis
filaments, and intermediate filaments.
and large numbers of cristae increase the area that can harbor
ATP synthase particles. Cells with high-energy demands, such
as cardiac muscle cells and flight muscle cells, contain mitochon-
Microtubules
dria with numerous cristae. A protein, thermogenin, creates a
proton pore in the inner mitochondrial membrane and thus by-
Microtubules (Fig. l-16) are involved in the transport of vesicles
passes the transport of protons through the ATP synthase parti-
and other organelles within the cytoplasm, chromosome separa-
cles. This uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation produces
tion during cell division, and the motility of cilia and flagella. Each
heat instead of ATP and is used by hibernating animals, animals
microtubule is composed of 13 parallel rows of protofilaments that
adapted to cold climates, and newborns to maintain body tem-
form hollow tubes that are 25 nm in diameter. Individual proto-
filaments consist of subunits formed from two proteins, Q- and
adipose tissue, which has mitochondria rich in thermogenin.
β-tubulin (Fig. 1-17). Microtubules grow outward from the
The mitochondrial matrix also contains electron-dense
microtubule organizing center (MTOC), or centrosome,
bodies that are rich in calcium in some cell types, but the func-
located close to the nucleus (Fig. 1-16). Inside the centrosome,
tion of these dense bodies is unknown. The matrix also con-
two centrioles are present. The centrioles are composed of micro-
tains the circular DNA of mitochondria, which is similar to
tubules arranged as nine peripheral triplets and are positioned with
bacterial DNA, as well as rRNA, mRNA, and tRNA. Some mito-
their long axes perpendicular to each other (Fig. 1-1). The centri-
chondrial proteins are encoded by mitochondrial DNA and are
oles are believed to attract centrosome proteins important for tubu-
synthesized inside the mitochondria themselves, while others
lin polymerization. Microtubules of the centrioles do not extend as
are synthesized in the cytosol. The mitochondrial ribosomes are
cytoplasmic microtubules. Instead, microtubules in the cytoplasm
distinct from eukaryotic ribosomes and resemble bacterial ribo-
polymerize on rings of y-tubulin present in the vicinity of the cen-
somes. Mitochondria are present only in eukaryotes, and it is be-
trioles. These microtubules are polarized and grow most rapidly at
lieved that mitochondria are antecedents of aerobic bacteria that
their plus (β-subunit) end. The minus end of the microtubule may
have entered a symbiotic relationship with primitive anaerobic
either remain attached to the centrosome (e.g., during mitosis) or
eukaryotic cells. During cell division, mitochondria duplicate
detach from it. Detached microtubules preserve their orientation
-s Ieiaineq oi reluis ssaooid e Aq apiaip pue VNa umo iiau
with their minus end closest to the centrosome. Cytoplasmic micro-
sion. Additionally, mitochondria divide when need arises, such
tubules are in equilibrium with free microtubular subunits in the
as following exercise. Under special circumstances, changes in
cytosol, and they constantly grow and shrink by a process depend-
mitochondrial permeability lead to leakage of an electron car-
ent upon the hydrolysis of guanosine triphosphate (GTP). In con-
rier from the intermembrane space (cytochrome C), which acti-
trast, microtubules present in cilia and flagella are stable and do
vates programmed cell death (apoptosis).
not change size.
Cytology ·Lors-lnge Lorssor
FIGURE I-16
 A. Immunohistochemical staining for tubulin in cultured mammary epithelial cells.
Antitubulin antibodies labeled with a fluorescent dye have been used and microtubules appear in the
fuorescence microscope as white structures on a dark background. Note that microtubules converge at 
microtubule organizing centers close to the nuclei (arrow). B. Microtubules (arrows) in axons of
neurosecretory neurons (x63,000).
Two motor proteins, kinesin and dynein, are important for
microtubule function. Kinesin transports vesicles and other ma-
terial from the minus end of the microtubules toward the cell
 periphery, while dynein transports vesicles and other material in
the opposite direction. Both motor proteins bind their cargo and
"walk" along the microtubule in either the plus (kinesin) or
central singlet
 Jo sisioaay uoy Aaua Suraiap 'unap (uiauap) snuu
microtubules
ATP during the proces. In developing cells, kinesins pull the
ER outward toward the cell periphery while dyneins pull the
Golgi complex in the opposite direction.
peripheral cloublet
microtubules
Microfilaments
Microfilaments (7 nm) are comprised of the protein actin.
nembrane
Together with thicker filaments (15 nm) composed of the pro-
tein myosin, actin constitutes the main protein involved in mus-
cle contraction. In skeletal muscle, actin makes up lo% of all
tubulin dimers
 protein. However, actin is also an abundant protein (1 to 5%) in
polymerized into microtubules
nonmuscle cells. Actin occurs as a monomer (G-actin), which can
be polymerized to form 7-nm thick microfilaments (also referred
tubulin
to as actin filaments, or F-actin) (Fig. 1-18A). Like microtubules,
actin filaments are polarized with a plus end and a minus end
that makes directional movement of motor proteins (in this case,
myosin) possible. Microfilaments are also numerous in the cell
dynein arms
 protofilament
cortex underlying the plasmalemma. Here, actin filaments asso-
ciate with transmembrane proteins and stabilize cell shape while
simultaneously restricting protein mobility. Receptor-bound
FIGURE I-17 Diagram of the structure of a cilium. Nine
hormones and growth factors also interact with cortical actin fil-
doublet microtubules are found in the peripheral region of the
cilium while two singlets occupy the center. 0- and β-tubulin
aments. At the end of mitosis, actin and myosin filaments form
subunits are indicated in the paired microtubules {lower right
a band that eventually separates the daughter cells from each
drawing). Dynein arms extend from the A microtubule to contact
other. Exposure of cells to agents that stimulate cell migration
the B microtubule of an adjacent doublet. A basal body with nine
results in reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton and overly-
sets of triplet microtubules is shown at the base of the cilium.
ing plasmalemma into finger- or leaflike projections known as
12
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
n anon ure suansaong ssaidxa ot paaauia aeauaa san eoesoais 'd il aani
actin filaments predominantly occur as straight stress fibers. B. The microvilli at the apical surface of a smal
intestinal absorptive cell contain numerous microflaments that project into the terminal web (x5 I,000).
filopodia and lamellipodia, respectively. These projections
fied as organelles. Such inclusions include: (a) lipid droplets
probe the cell surroundings prior to the formation of specialized
(Fig. 1-9), which occur in, for example, adipocytes, adrenal corti-
matrix receptors (integrins), which bind to ECM proteins and
cal cells, and liver cells. In ordinary light microscopic prepara-
form focal adhesions. Integrins connect intracellularly to sturdy
tions, lipid is dissolved leaving unstained areas in the cytoplasm.
stress fibers consisting of multiple strands of actin filaments that
In frozen sections, lipid is retained and can be detected by special
 anchor the cell to its site of attachment. Actin filaments also par-
dyes. One of these is osmic acid, which imparts a dark coloration
ticipate in cell-to-cell adhesion phenomena at zonulae adherens
 of lipids in light and electron micrographs; (b) glycogen deposits
junctions and in the support of microvilli (Fig. 1-18B).
which are frequent in liver and muscle cells. Glycogen is normally
not discernible in the light microscope, but can be detected by
Intermediate Filaments
special stains such as periodic acid-Schiff(PAS) or Best's carmine.
 In the electron microscope glycogen is seen as fine electron-dense
The diameter of intermediate filaments (10 nm) lies between that
uisnodu se yons siuauaid (o) pue saiegaigse pue sainueig
of thin microfilaments (actin, 7 nm) and thick microfilaments
of aging cells, melanin of pigmented cells, and hemosiderin,
(myosin, 15 nm). Intermediate filaments are not polarized and
which is derived from the breakdown of hemoglobin. Lipofuscin
therefore are not engaged in intracellular transport, but perform
inclusions (residual bodies) appear light brown in the light mi-
anchoring and structural functions instead. Several different fam-
croscope and are often seen close to the nucleus in aging cells
ilies of intermediate filaments exist, including keratins (cyto-
Their formation has been described in conjunction with lysosomes,
keratins), vimentin, desmin, glial fibrillar acidic protein,
which accumulate the pigment. Melanin inclusions are detectable
and neurofilaments. In addition, filaments that associate with
the nuclear lamina (lamins) belong to this group. Keratins are
as minute dark granules present in pigmented epidermal cells,
associated with most epithelial cells. Vimentin is expressed by most
melanocytes, and certain types of neurons, while hemosiderin is a
cells of mesenchymal origin, while desmin is typical in smooth,
golden-brown pigment detected in macrophages that have phago-
cardiac, and skeletal muscle cells. Glial fibrillar acidic protein is
cytosed red blood cells.
found in glial cells, while neurofilaments are present in neurons.
Certain tumor cells can continue to express the original form of
CelL SUrFACe
intermediate filaments, such that immunohistochemistry ofthe fil-
aments can be used to determine the cell type of origin of the tumor.
MODIFICATIONS
Microvilli are fingerlike projections of the cell membrane that in-
INCLUSIONS
crease the surface area of absorptive cells. Microfilaments consti-
tute the core structure of the microvilli (Fig. l-18B). Stereocilia
The cytosol contains a number of deposits of materials that do not
represent a long variant of microvilli Both microvilli and stereocilia
perform any specific chemical reactions and, hence, are not classi-
are nonmotile
Cytology ·Lors-lnge Lorsson
13
Ciliated cells have numerous, 2- to 1O-um long motile cilia,
a new cell cycle ora resting stage (G0). Ordered transition through
which are on the cell surface that beat in a synchronous manner to
each of these steps is required. At critical checkpoints, the cell will
produce a unidirectional transport of material. Thus, in the respi-
determine if it is of the correct size and if DNA has been correctly
ratory tract, cilia transport mucus and particles in an oral direc-
replicated. Before proceeding to the next step of the cell cycle,
tion. Flagellated cells, like spermatozoa, normally have a single
appropriate signals must be received from neighboring cells. Pro-
flagellum. The structure of cilia and flagella is very similar
gression is controlled by special proteins called cyclins. Different
(Fig. 1-17). Both cilia and fagella are delimited by the cell mem-
cyclins are needed at different checkpoints and will activate en-
brane and contain a central region (axoneme) characterized by
zymes (cyclin-dependent kinases, or CDKs) that make it possi-
nine peripheral pairs (doublets) of longitudinal microtubules plus
ble for a cell to continue to the next step. Thus, the cell cycle is
one central pair. The central pair of microtubules is separated
tightly controlled. Failure of the cell to produce the right cyclin
from the peripheral pairs by a central sheath. A peripheral doublet
at the right time will stop cell cycle progression and may even re-
consists of one complete A microtubule (composed of 13 proto-
sult in the demise of the cell through apoptosis. If the cell cycle
filaments) and one incomplete B microtubule that shares part of
 progresses, the cell will enter mitosis.
its wall with the A microtubule. The nine peripheral A plus B dou-
Mitosis is characterized by the following morphologically dis-
blets are connected to each other by protein (nexin) bridges and
tinguishable phases: prophase, prometaphase, metaphase, anaphase,
to the central sheath by radial spokes. Arms of a special form of
telophase, and cytokinesis (Fig. 1-19). During prophase (Fig. 1-19),
dynein, LR-dynein, extend from the A microtubules. During
chromatin gradually becomes more condensed, resulting in the for-
ciliary movement, the dynein arms attach to B microtubules of
mation of individual, discernible chromosomes, which stain in-
the adjacent doublet. Because nexin protein bridges connect the
tensely with hematoxylin or other basic dyes. In addition, nucleoli
microtubules, they cannot slide past each other. Instead, the
disappear and the centrosome divides into two centrosomes that
movement of dynein in the minus direction is translated into a
migrate to opposite poles of the cell and begin to organize micro-
bending motion, which forms the basis for the motility of fla-
tubules into the mitotic spindle.
gella of spermatozoa and for the ciliary stroke of respiratory epi-
The next step, prometaphase, is characterized by the disap-
thelium. At the base of each cilium or flagellum, a basal body is
 pearance of the nuclear envelope (Fig. 1-19). This is brought about
present. Like centrioles, basal bodies have nine peripheral triplets
by phosphorylation of the nuclear lamins through an M-phase-
of microtubules and no central microtubules. The A and B
 promoting cyclin-dependent kinase, leading to electrostatic re-
microtubules of the cilium or flagellum continue directly into
pulsion between lamin subunits and ensuing breakdown of
the corresponding microtubules of the basal bodies. The cen-
the nuclear lamina. During metaphase, the chromosomes be-
tral microtubules of the axoneme terminate before the centriole,
come oriented in the equatorial plane perpendicular to the centro-
and the third microtubule of the basal body triplets does not ex-
somes (Fig. 1-19). In metaphase spread-preparations (Fig. 1-20)
tend into the axoneme. Certain plants contain colchicine, which
the chromosomes are easily seen to be composed of two closely ap-
prevents formation of microtubules. This substance inhibits cell
posed, identical halves (chromatids or sister-chromatids). The
division and vesicle transport and may cause death in cattle feed-
 sister-chromatids, formed earlier by DNA replication during the
ing on such plants.
S phase, become visible due to increased coiling of the DNA
Chromatids are connected to each other at the centromere, which
is a constricted, pale staining structure that contains a protein
Cell cycle, cell division,
complex, the kinetochore. The kinetochore is an attachment
AND APOPTOSIS
Colchicine prevents polymerization of microtubules and arrests
Somatic cells multiply by mitosis while gametes increase in num-
mitosis in metaphase. Techniques using colchicine are sometimes
 ber through a more complex process referred to as meiosis (see
employed to obtain metaphase chromosomes for cytogenetic in-
Chapter 12). Before a cell undergoes mitosis, it must duplicate
vestigation (Fig. 1-20).
its content of genetic information so that the resulting two daugh-
During anaphase, the two sister-chromatids separate from
ter cells will contain the same amount of DNA as the parental cell.
each other and are drawn toward a centrosome by the kineto-
In addition, since the cytoplasm and organelles are divided be-
chore microtubules (Fig. 1-19). Anaphase ends when the sister-
tween the daughter cells during cytoplasmic division, it is also
chromatids (now called daughter chromosomes) have separated
toward opposite sides of the cell.
before division. The cell therefore goes through a series of defin-
 During telophase, the nuclear envelope reappears (assisted
able steps referred to as the cell cycle. These steps are Gl (gap1),
 by dephosphorylation of lamins), chromosomes decondense, and
S(synthesis of DNA), G2 (gap2), and M (mitosis). During G1, the
nucleoli appear. Cytokinesis takes place concomitantly with
cell grows and receives signals (growth factors) from its surround-
telophase, resulting in a cleavage furrow around the equatorial
ings that order it to commence preparations for mitosis. While in
plane of the cell (Fig. 1-19). This furrow is created by the con-
the S phase, the cell doubles its DNA. During G2 the cell grows
traction of actin and myosin filaments and will divide the cyto-
further, checks the quality of the DNA it replicated during the
plasm into two halves surrounding each newly formed nucleus.
S phase, and synthesizes proteins (such as tubulin subunits) needed
The frequency with which cells pass through the cell cycle
for the M phase. After mitosis, the daughter cells may enter either
and divide varies considerably. Certain cells in the adult animal
14
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
FIGURE I-19
I. Prophase. 2. Prometaphase. 3. Metaphase. 4. Anaphase. 5. Telophase and
cytokinesis. 6. Late telophase in fetal oral epithelium, stained with iron-hematoxylin. Note the centrosome
and part of the microtubules of the spindle apparatus in 3 and 4 and the cleavage furrow in 5.
are constantly renewed, such as intestinal absorptive cells, which 
tion of growth factor-signaling mechanisms. This activation
are replaced every 3 to 5 days. Most cells are in either a perma-
makes tumor cells oblivious to the controlled signaling mecha-
nent or a temporary resting (GO) phase. Some cells, such as neu-
nisms in the body, resulting in continuous proliferation of cells
rons, lose their ability to divide in the adult animal and enter a
that take no heed of their surroundings. Since every round of cell
permanent GO state. Cells in a temporary GO phase normally do
division carries the risk of inducing mutations, it is likely that
not replicate but are able to do so if the need arises.
these uncontrolled cells will eventually acquire further muta-
Induction of a cell to proliferate involves stimulation by
tions that result in invasive, malignant behavior.
growth factors that are important for activating the cell cycle in
Safeguards to avoid mutation exist in the form of a cellular
G1. In tumor cells, mutations may result in autonomous activa-
suicide mechanism termed apoptosis. Apoptosis is defined by a
series of morphologic changes leading to the destruction of the cell.
 In tissue sections, apoptotic cells are recognized by the presence of
 condensed (pyknotic) nuclei that eventually break down into frag-
ments (karyorrhexis). The nuclear fragments are encased by cor-
responding fragments of cytoplasm to form apoptotic bodies that
are later phagocytosed by surrounding cells. Ifa cell contains mu-
tated or damaged DNA, it will activate the apoptotic program,
which, through a series of biochemical reactions, will ultimately
destroy the cell's genetic material. Apoptosis also plays a major role
for developmental sculpturing of the organism and for the replace.
ment of aged or infected cells.
FrOM CELLS tO TISSUeS
In multicellular organisms, cells integrate themselves in a social
context with other cells and assume specialized roles with functions
ads unss o ssand au uin aa u ngaq i
functions is called cellular differentiation. Social interaction re-
quires that cells make contact with other cells and with the ECM,
FIGURE I-20 Metaphase chromosomes from a boar. Note
resulting in the formation of tissues and organs. Moreover, the cells
sister-chromatids and centromeres, which are identified by
need to continue to communicate with each other by both local and
arrowheads and arrows, respectively, in the insert
global means.
Cytology · Lors-lnge Larssorn
15
Intercellular Junctions
space and vice versa. Additionally, the zonula occludens prevents
free mobility of transmembrane proteins in the cell membrane.
Several types of cell junctions (occluding, anchoring, and com-
An individual zonula occludens joins two neighboring cells by a
municating) occur between cells (Fig. 1-2l). Anchoring contacts
beltlike structure consisting of anastomosing ridges. The junc-
are present between adjacent cells as well as between cells and the
tion consists of transmembrane proteins, occludin and claudin,
ECM. Occluding and communicating contacts only occur be-
which join the two cell membranes together. Peripheral cyto-
tween cells. Intercellular contacts can be ring-shaped (zonulae)
plasmic proteins, ZO-1 and ZO-2, link claudin and occludin to
or spotlike (maculae).
 spectrin, a structural protein within the cell.
The presence of occluding contacts between cells is charac.
Zonulae adherens and maculae adherens (desmosomes) form
teristic of epithelial cells. In many epithelia, such as the lining of
cell-to-cell anchoring contacts, while focal adhesions and hemi-
the gastrointestinal tract, the zonula occludens (tight junction)
desmosomes form cell-to-ECM or cell-to-basement membrane
seals off the upper part of the epithelium. This mechanism pre-
contacts. Zonulae adherens are comprised of multiple, anchoring
vents leakage of material from the lumen into the subepithelial
transmembrane proteins known as cadherins. The extracellular re-
gion of a cadherin molecule engages in homophilic binding with a
cadherin molecule extending from an adjacent cell, thus forming a
protein bridge between the cells. Cadherin binding requires Ca2+.
Therefore, cell dispersal can often be achieved by restricting Ca2+
from cells. On the inside of the cell membrane, cadherins attach to
linker proteins, which, in turn, connect to microfilaments. In
 zonulae adherens junctions, cadherins join microfilaments of
neighboring cells into a network. The microfilaments connect with
the terminal web that represents a collction ofactin, myosin, and
keratin filaments (Fig. 1-18). This connection effectively anchors
tight junction
cells to each other. Moreover, by interacting with myosin, the actin
filaments can contract and alter the shape of the epithelium. It is
believed that the contraction of actin-myosin filaments connected
to zonulae adherens plays a role in the folding of the neuroectoder-
zonula adherens
mal epithelium that results in formation of the neural tube. In tall
columnar epithelium, zonulae adherens are present just below the
zonulae occludens. Together, these structures form the terminal
bar, which appears as a dense condensation of the cell membrane
when viewed with light microscopy.
Maculae adherens, or desmosomes, are 200- to 400-nm
disklike, cell-to-cell contacts that are particularly well developed
CELL JUNCTIONS
in the epidermis of the skin. Like zonulae adherens junctions,
maculae adherens have cadherins that function as junctional pro-
80
teins. The cadherins attach to intracellular adaptor protein com-
plexes that connect to intermediate filaments in neighboring
cells, producing a very strong, pointlike cell adhesion (Figs. 1-21
00
and 1-22). Ultrastructurally, maculae adherens are characterized
gap junction
by two prominent, dark-staining plaques located on the inside of
the two adjacent cell membranes. These plaques correspond to the
adaptor protein complexes. Intermediate filaments extend from
hemidesmosome
the plaques into the cytoplasm. The adjacent cell membranes in
the macula adherens are separated by a gap of about 30 nm, which
often contains an electron-dense line (Fig. 1-23).
Hemidesmosomes connect cells to the basement mem-
brane complex by way of specific cell-surface matrix receptor pro-
teins called integrins. Like maculae adherens, hemidesmosomes
connect intracellularly via adaptor proteins to intermediate fila-
ments. Ultrastructurally, hemidesmosomes look like half desmo-
basement membrane
somes with a plaque on the inside of the cell membrane from
which intermediate filaments radiate into the cytoplasm. In the
FIGURE I-2 1Diagrams of intercellular junctions: tight junction,
epidermis of the skin, maculae adherens anchor epidermal cells to
each other along the lateral margins and hemidesmosomes anchor
and gap junction. (From: Eurell J. Veterinory histology. Jackson, WY:
cells to the basement membrane above the dermis. Mutations in
Tetor NewMedio, 2004.)
keratin genes, integrins, or ECM proteins can produce painful
16
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
diseases (epidermolysis bullosa) characterized by blister formation
due to defective anchoring of epidermal cells.
Focal adhesions also connect cells to the underlying ma-
trix via integrins. The intracellular connection in focal adhesions
is via microfilaments, similar to that of zonulae adherens junc-
tions. Focal adhesions are not only involved in anchoring of cells,
 but also have been implicated in cell motility and signaling.
Gap junctions (nexus) are communicating junctions that
allow the passage of electrical signals, ions, and small water-
soluble molecules (up to 1oo0 daltons) between cells. At these
junctions, neighboring cell membranes are separated by a 2- to
dea aui ueds suoxauuon se umouy saxaduos uiaioid de uu-y
and form narrow channels through which small molecules may
pass from one cell to another. Gap junctions occur in many cell
types. For example, these communicating junctions are impor-
tant for conducting electrical signals through intercalated disks
FIGURE I-22
Immunohistochemical detection of keratins in
of cardiac muscle cells, thereby contributing to a coordinated con-
mammary epithelial cells in culture using fluorescent antibodies.
traction wave throughout the heart muscle.
Arrows indicate maculae adherens (×1200)
Cell Communication
Signals from other cells and from the ECM direct cellular func-
tions and processes. Cell com munication can be further described
as endocrine, neurocrine, and paracrine. Endocrine signaling 
through hormones secreted into the blood and neurocrine sig-
naling through neurotransmitters represent distant signaling
pathways. Paracrine secretion is local transmission of signals to
cells within diffusion distance. Autocrine signaling refers to a
mechanism by which cells signal to themselves. This phenome-
non is best known in cancer cells, which use autocrine secretion
of growth factors to circumvent normal intercellular control, lead-
ing to increased tumor size. Signaling by endocrine, neurocrine,
and paracrine mechanisms represents control mechanisms of the
body that ensure that all differentiated cells function properly.
Proliferation is only stimulated when need arises and is controlled
by growth factors that have cell and tissue selectivity. Examples
of growth factors include erythropoietin, epidermal growth factor,
and platelet-derived growth factor.
SUGGESTED REAdINGS
Bornens M. Centrosome composition and microtubule anchoring mech-
anisms. Curr Opin Cell Biol 2002;14:25-34.
Frey TG, Manella, CA. The internal structure of mitochondtia. TIBS
2000;25:319-324.
Gruenberg J. The endocytic pathway: a mosaic of domains. Nature Rev
2002;2:721-730.
Lodish H, Berk A, Zipursky LS, et al. Molecular Cell Biology. 4th Ed.
New York: W. H. Freeman & Co., 2000.
Huang S. Building an efficient factory: where is pre-rRNA synthesized
in the nucleolus? J Cell Biol 2002;157:739-741.
Marshall WF. Order and disorder in the hucleus. Curr Biol 2002;12:
FIGURE I-23 Maculae adherens between two
R185-192.
neurohypophysial glial cells. Notice the distinct central electron-
Perkins GA, Frey TG. Recent structural insight into mitochondria
dense lines and the intermediate filaments (arrowheads) that insert
gai ned by microscopy. Micron 2002;3 1:97-11 1.
into the dense plaques and then make a hairpin tum back into the
Purdue PE, Lazarow PB. Peroxisome biogenesis. Ann Rev Cell Dev Biol
cytoplasm (×87,500).
2000;17:701-752.
Epithelium
BRIAN L.FRAPPIER
Introduction
Stratified cuboidal epithelium
Cells, Tissues, and Organs
Stratified columnar epithelium
Characteristics of Epithelium
Sensory epithelium
Surface Epithelium
Glandular Epithelium and Glands
Classification
Classification of Glands
 Microscopic Structure 
 Morphologic characteristics
Simple squamous epithelium
 Simple glands 
Simple cuboidal epithelium
spueβ punoduo 
Simple columnar epithelium
 Parenchyma
Pseudostratified epithelium
Stroma
 Pseudostratified columnar epithelium
Nature of the secretory product
Transitional epithelium
Mode of release of the secretory product
Stratified squamous epithelium
Myoepithelial Cells
INTRODUCTION
lying connective tissue. Table 2-2 summarizes the main charac-
teristics of epithelium as a tissue.
Cells, Tissues, and Organs
The characteristics of the cells of epithelium include special-
ization for a variety of different functions, including protection,
Epithelium is a tissue. A tissue is an aggregation of cells and in-
absorption, secretion, excretion, and formation of barriers for se-
tercellular substances specialized to perform particular functions.
lective permeability. The location of cellular organelles and vari-
Despite its structural and functional complexity, the animal
ations in morphologic features of the luminal, basal, and lateral
body is composed of only four basic types of tissue: epithelium,
 portions of the cell membrane indicate a definite polarization of
connective tissue, muscle, and nervous tissue (Table 2-1).
epithelial cells. In mammals, essentially all epithelial cells con-
Organs consist of various arrangements of the four basic tissues
tain cytoplasmic filaments composed of the protein cytokeratin,
(Fig. 2-1).
 an exception being endothelial cells. Cells not of epithelial ori-
gin (e.g., mesenchymal cells) lack cytokeratin. This characteris-
tic is used in diagnostic pathology to identify the cell of origin
Characteristics of Epithelium
of malignant neoplasms (cancers), which consist of cells that are
Epithelium exists in two major forms: surface epithelium and
unrecognizable by routine histologic methods. In addition to
glandular epithelium. Surface epithelium consists of sheets of
functional diversity and specific structural characteristics, ep-
aggregated cellsofsimilartype that coverallof the external sur-
faces and line all of the internal surfaces of the body. Glandular
lost through attrition.
epithelium, the secretory cells of endocrine and exocrine glands,
At the basal surface of all epithelial cells that make contact
results from the proliferation of surface epithelial cells into under-
with underlying connective tissue, a thin sheet of extracellular
17
18
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
TABLE 2-I The Basic Tissues
TABLE 2-2
Characteristics of Epithelium
Epithelium
 Covers body surfaces (surface epithelium)
Connective tissue
 Forms secretory cells of glands (glandular epithelium)
Muscle
Cells are functionally diverse
Nervous tissue
Cells contain cytoplasmic cytokeratin flaments
 Cells are capable of mitosis (regeneration)
Contacts a basement membrane
matrix, the basement membrane, is present. The basement 
Devoid of blood vessels (avascular)
membrane usually is not visible in routine light-microscopic
Derived from each of the three embryonic germ layers
sections, but can be demonstrated with the periodic acid-Schiff
(PAS) technique or silver stains. As seen with the electron mi-
croscope, the basement membrane invariably consists of two dis-
The basement membrane serves in a variety of capacities, for
tinct layers: the lamina lucida, a low-density layer next to the
example, as an ultrafilter in capillaries, particularly those of the
epithelial cell membrane, and an underlying electron-dense lam-
renal corpuscle; as a selective barrier to exchange of macromole-
ina densa (lamina basalis or basal lamina) (Fig. 16-9). These
cules; and as a guide to epithelial cell movements. Since blood and
two laminae are synthesized by the epithelial cells and are com-
lymph vessels do not penetrate the basement membrane, overly-
posed principally of proteoglycans (primarily heparan sulfate)
ing epithelial cells receive their nutritional support by diffusion
as well as laminin, fibronectin, and type IV collagen. In most
through the basement membrane from capillaries located in the
basement membranes, a third component, the lamina fibroretic-
underlying connective tissue.
ularis (subbasal lamina), is present (Fig. 16-9). The lamina fi-
All three embryonic germ layers take part in the formation
broreticularis is composed principally of reticular fibers (type II
of epithelium. Ectoderm is the origin of the epithelium of the
collagen) and connects the lamina densa to the subepithelial con-
external body surfaces, such as the epidermis of the skin. Most of
nective tissue. In addition to providing attachment for the epithe-
lium, the lamina fibroreticularis permits stretching and recoil of
the lining epithelium (i.e., that lining the luminal surfaces of the
digestive and respiratory systems) originates from endoderm,
the epithelium in distensible organs. The basement mem brane
while mesoderm gives rise to the lining of the vascular system,
is described in greater detail in Chapter 16.
the lining of the serous membrane body cavities, and parts of the
In addition to underlying all epithelia that contact connec-
urinary and reproductive systems.
tive tissue, a basement membrane is found between two epithe-
lial layers in both the renal corpuscle of the kidney and the
 pulmonary alveolus. In these locations, the lamina fibroreticu-
SURFACE EPITHELIUM
laris is absent and the structure is referred to simply as the basal
lamina. A basal lamina also surrounds many individual cells in-
Classification
cluding smooth muscle cells, skeletal muscle cells, and cardiac
muscle cells, as well as adipocytes and neurolem mocytes.
The classification of the various surface epithelial types is based
on the number of layers present and the shape of the epithelial
cells. A surface epithelium consisting of a single layer of cells
Cells
resting on the basement membrane is described as a simple
epithelium. A stratified epithelium is composed of two or
more layers of cells with only the basal layer resting on the base-
ment membrane. The names given to the various types of strat-
Tissues
ified epithelia are based on the shape of the surface cells without
●Collections of cells and extracellular substances
regard to the shape of those within the deeper layers. A surface
●Four basic types
epithelium is considered pseudostratified ifall of its cells con-
tact the basement membrane but not all extend to the free
surface. As a result, nuclei are located at different levels within
a pseudostratified epithelium, giving the false impression of
Epithelium
Connective
Muscle
Nervous
stratification. Figure 2-2 depicts the classification of epithelial
tissue
tissue
tissue.
Microscopic Structure
Simple Squamous Epithelium
Organs
Simple squamous epithelium consists of a single layer of thin,
● Composed of various arangements of the four basic tissues
flat,scalelike cells. On surface view (Figs. 2-3A and 2-4), the cells
FIGURE 2-IStructural organization of the animal body.
have an irregular shape with a slightly serrated border. They fit to-
Epithelium · Brion L. Froppier
19
 Simple squamous epithelium
(including mesothelium and
endothelium)
Simple epithelium
 Simple cuboidal epithelium
(a single layer of cells)
 Simple columnar epithelium
Pseudostratified columnar epithelium
 Pseudostratified epithelium
(all cells contact the basement
Transitional epithelium
membrane, but not all reach the
Surface epithelium
free surface)
(sheets of cells covering
the extemal and internal
 Stratified squamous epithelium
surfaces of the body)
(keratinized and nonkeratinized)
Stratified epithelium
Stratified cuboidal epithelium
(two or more layers of cells)
Stratified columnar epithelium
EPITHELIUM
(one of the
basic tissues)
Sensory epithelium
(layers of sensory and supportive
cells in the retina, internal ear,
olfactory mucosa, and taste buds)
Glandular epithelium
(secretory cells of exocrine
 and endocrine glands)
FlGURE 2-2 Classification of the various forms of epithelial tissue.
gether to form a continuous sheet. A spherical to oval nucleus is
intermediate forms require some subjective judgment regard-
located near the center ofthe cell. On cross section, the cell appears
ing classification.
thicker in the area of the nucleus and has thin attenuated strands
Simple cuboidal epithelium can be found lining the ducts
of cytoplasm on either side (Fig. 2-4).
of many glands and the collecting ducts of the kidney, as a com-
 Simple squamous epithelium lines moist internal surfaces, 
 ponent of the choroid plexus in the brain and ciliary body of the
such as the serous membrane body cavities, the internal surface
 eye, and lining the follicles of the thyroid gland. The epithelium
of the heart, and the luminal surface of blood and lymph vessels.
 of the lens of the eye and the retinal pigment epithelium are also
The simple squamous epithelium lining the serous membrane
examples of simple cuboidal epithelium.
 body cavities (pleural, pericardial, and peritoneal cavities) is re-
ferred to as mesothelium; that lining the heart, blood vessels,
Simple Columnar Epithelium
 and lymph vessels is referred to as endothelium. Simple squa-
Simple columnar epithelium consists of tall, narrow cells with
mous epithelium is also found lining the pulmonary alveoli, the
considerably greater height than width (Figs. 2-3C and 2-6).
anterior chamber of the eye, the internal surface of the tympanic
Usually, the nuclei are oval and are located near the base of the cell.
membrane, the membranous labyrinth of the internal ear, the
Generally, simple columnar epithelium lines the luminal surface
glomerular capsule, and a portion of the loop of the nephron.
of organs that perform absorptive or secretory functions, for exam-
ple, the glandular stomach, the small and large intestines, and the
Simple Cuboida! Epithelium
gallbladder in the digestive system; the bulbourethral gland in the
Simple cuboidal epithelium is a single layer of cells whose
male reproductive system; and the uterus and uterine tube in the
width and height are approximately equal. These cells appear as
female reproductive system.
squares in cross sections but are more hexagonal when seen from
the surface (Figs. 2-3B and 2-5). When the height is slightly less
Pseudostratified Epithelium
than the width of a cell, it is known as low cuboidal epithelium,
Pseudostratified epithelium exists in two forms: pseudostrati-
and when the height is slightly greater than the width, the epi-
fied columnar epithelium and transitional epithelium. In both
thelium is called tall cuboidal epithelium. The classification of
forms,all of thecells contact the underlying basementmembrane,but not
epithelia is not always clear-cut, however, and many times
allofthemreachthefreesurface.
20
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
A
D
E
®
G
H
FIGURE 2-3 Schematic drawi
oitheliurm.B.Sirmplecuboida
epithelium. C. Simple columnar
th cilia and goblet cells. E. Transitional
epithelium. F. Stratified squamous epithelium, no
Pseudostratified columnar epithelium
created by the ciliated cells moves the dust-laden mucus to the
Pseudostratified columnar epithelium is composed of a single
body openings. A pseudostratified columnar epithelium with
layer of cells, but because the cells are irregular in size and shape,
stereocilia but lacking goblet cells is found lining the duct of the
their nuclei are located at various levels. Therefore, the epithelium
epididymis and the ductus deferens.
1 slan au '(-z pue e-z si) siae leiaaas aey oi sieadde
extend from the basement membrane to the surface of pseudo-
T ransitional epithelium
stratified columnar epithelium are ciliated or nonciliated ep-
Transitional epithelium, a pseudostratified type with a wide
ithelial cells and goblet cells (unicellular mucous glands). Basal
variety of appearances, lines hollow organs capable of consider-
cells are attached to the basement membrane but do not reach the
able distention, such as the renal pelvis and calices, ureter, uri-
surface of the epithelium. By division and differentiation, basal
nary bladder, and urethra. Transitional epithelium may also be
cells replace the other epithelial cell types lost by attrition.
seen in the palpebral conjunctiva, larynx, and nasopharynx. The
Ciliated, pseudostratified columnar epithelium with goblet
cells lines the greater part of the nasal cavity, paranasal sinuses,
transitional epitbelium. The shape of the epithelial cells depends
and nasopharynx, as well as the auditory tubes, the trachea, and
on the degree of organ distention at the time of fixation. When
the epithelium is under little tension, the surface cells are large
tribute to a thin mucous film over the epithelium. Dust particles
and "pillow-shaped," whereas the deeper cells are smaller and ir-
in the inhaled air become trapped in this mucus, and the current
regularly shaped (Figs. 2-3E and 2-8). When the epithelium is
Epithelium·Brion L. Froppier
21
FIGURE 2-4 Simple squamous epithelium. A. Surface view of
FIGURE 2-6  Simple columnar epithelium, lining of gallbladder
silver-impregnated mesothelium, mesentery. Silver stain (<x500).
(pig). Hematoxylin and eosin (x900).
B. Cross section of mesothelium, peritoneum on the surface of the
urinary bladder. Hematoxylin and eosin {×1200). (B: from 5tirson 
AW, Brown EM. Veterirory Histology Slide 5ets. East Lonsing. Ml:
surface of the cell. The region between the membrane plaques is
Michigon 5tate University, Instructional Media Center, 1 970.)
a normal cell membrane, and when the bladder contracts, the
plaques fold together much like a hinge, producing typical tran-
stretched, the cells become flattened and elongated, and the total
sitional epithelial surface ridges. Upon distention, the plaques
height of the epithelium decreases.
unfold, allowing expansion of the luminal surface.
The luminal surface of transitional epithelial cells appears
The surface epithelium of the urinary bladder is a barrier to
the diffusion of water from the subepithelial tissue to the hyper-
relatively smooth with the light microscope. In electron micro-
graphs, however, areas of thickened plasmalemma (plaques) an-
tonic urine stored in the lumen. Morphologic evidence of this
chored by numerous cytoplasmic filaments are seen on the luminal
FIGURE 2-7Pseudostratified columnar epithelium with cilia and
FIGURE 2-5 Simple cuboidal epithelium, collecting duct, kidney
o pago e oi siod ue au1 (op) eauo slla ago
(horse). Hematoxylin and eosin (x900).
Hematoxylin and eosin (×I 200).
22
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
B
FIGURE 2-9
 Stratifed squamous epithelium. A. Keratinized
stratified squamous epithelium, skin of teat {cow). Stratum basale
FIGURE 2-8 Transitional epithelium,urinary bladder (pig)
(a), stratum spinosum (b), stratum granulosum (c), stratum lucidum
Hematoxylin and eosin (x480). Note occasional pillow-shaped
un *g (osix) uisoa pue uxoewaH (a) wnawo wmeis (p)
surface epithelial cells and that the cells increase in size as they
keratinized stratified squamous epithelium, lip (cat). Hematoxylin
approa.ch the free surface.
and eosin (×380).
diffusion barrier includes (a) the increased thickness of the outer
cells of the stratum basale are mitotically active and give rise to the
lamina of the trilaminar cell membrane compared to the inner
cells that move into the upper layers of the epithelium.
lamina; (b) a concentration of tonofilaments immediately beneath
The next layer is the stratum spinosum (Fig. 2-9), com-
the luminal surface; and (c) junctional complexes located between
posed of a varying number of layers of polyhedral cells tightly
the adjacent surface cells that prevent intercellular diffusion.
adhered to each other by numerous desmosomes (maculae ad-
Detailed studies of transitional epithelium indicate that when
the epithelium is relaxed, the cells elongate and overlap each other
tween the desmosomal attachments shrinks, and wherever the
and the epithelium appears multilayered. All of the transitional
cells remain attached, small spiny processes radiate from the sur-
epithelial cells remain attached to the basement membrane by slen-
face of the cells. This appearance gives rise to the name of the
der cytoplasmic processes, much like the attachment in pseu-
sassand Auds asau ."iael Auds, io 'unsouds unies iakel
dostratified columnar epithelium (Fig. 2-3E). The attachment
contain cytokeratin filaments, termed tonofilaments, which
allows the cells to form a parallel alignment when the urinary
are condensed at the site of the desmosomes (Fig. l6-4).
bladder is distended; thus, fewer layers of cells are seen.
As the cells of the stratum spinosum move toward the sur-
face, they become more flattened and accumulate keratohyalin
Stratified Squamous Epithelium
granules and lamellar granules in their cytoplasm. This layer
Stratified squamous epithelium consists of several layers of
of cells, known as the stratum granulosum, is absent from
cells, but only the superficial cells have a squamous shape (Fig.
nonkeratinized stratified squamous epithelium as well as kera-
2-3F). Two types of stratified squamous epithelia are recognized
tinized forms that produce hard keratin, such as those found in
(Fig. 2-9). Keratinized stratified squamous epithelium has
the wall of the hoof and in the horn of ruminants.
cells in the surface layer that have lost their nuclei and are filled
The stratum lucidum occurs only in nonhairy skin regions
with keratin, a water-resistant protein that forms a protective
(Fig. 2-9). This layer of flattened keratinized cells between the stra-
barrier against the destructive forces of the environment. In
tum granulosum and the stratum corneum has a translucent ap-
nonkeratinized stratified squamous epithelium, contrary to
pearance because it contains eleidin, a protein similar to keratin
the implication of the name, keratin is present in the epithelial
but with a different affinity for histologic stains.
cells. In contrast to the keratinized epithelium, the flattened su-
The outermost layer of keratinized stratified squamous epi-
perficial cells retain their nuclei.
thelium is the stratum corneum, which consists of dead, kera-
Three to five distinct cell layers are present in stratified squa-
tinized cells that are fairly resistant to environmental irritants. To
mous epithelium (see also Chapter 16). The deepest layer of cells
reach the keratinized state, epithelial cells undergoa series of trans-
next to the basement membrane is the stratum basale (Figs. 2-3F
formations as they move from the stratum basale to the stratum
and 2-9), which is a single layer of cuboidal to columnar cells. The
corneum. The process of keratinization involves the gradual dis-
Epithelium · Brion L. Froppier
23
appearance of the nuclei, Golgi complexes, and mitochondria,
along with decreased lysosomal activity and a concurrent accumu-
lation of tonofilaments. Cells of the stratum basale are rich in
these germinative cells move up into the stratum spinosum, the
tonofilaments condense into bundles visible with the light micro-
scope (tonofibrils) and become attached to desmosomes. The
 cells in the stratum granulosum are flat and contain numerous
nonmembrane-bounded keratohyalin granules, which are readily
visible with the light microscope. With the electron microscope,
the tonofilaments are observed to extend into the periphery of the
cell, intermingling with the granules. The cells of the stratum
granulosum also contain unique, oval, membrane-bounded gran-
ules (100 to 500 nm) composed ofalternating light and dark lamel-
lae. These Golgi-derived lamellar granules (membrane-coating
an aui au au Ag 'iaudiad an aui ie paeo ae (samueia
reach the stratum lucidum, they are more elongated and flattened
and all the organelles are gone. With the light microscope, only the
 cell outlines are visible, and the cytoplasm appears homogeneous.
 Ultrastructural examination reveals densely packed tonofilaments
embedded in a dense matrix, probably derived from the kerato-
hyalin granules. In the stratum corneum, the contents of lamellar
FIGURE 2-I0 Stratifed (two-layered) cuboidal epithelium, duct
granules are secreted by exocytosis, thereby giving rise to the in-
of carpal gland (pig). Hematoxylin and eosin (×l 400)
tercellular substance between stratum corneum cells. This substance
is a component of the barrier properties of the epithelium. Groups
of cells in the outermost layer of the stratum corneum eventually
GLANDULAR EPIThELIUM
become loose and separate. This process gives rise to the descrip-
AND GLANDS
tive term stratum disjunctum.
A stratum corneum is not present in nonkeratinized stratified
The secretory cells of endocrine and exocrine glands constitute
squamous epithelium found on moist surfaces. The layer of keratin-
glandular epithelium. These cells derive from the proliferation
n on aii Aa se iau i as on  ii s i
surface of the epithelium is termed the stratum superficiale.
Stratified Cuboida! Epithelium
Stratified cuboidal epithelium consists of two or more layers of
cells with a surface layer of typical cuboidal cells. Frequently, it
occurs as a distinct two-layered epithelium lining the excretory
ducts of glands (Figs. 2-3G and 2-10)
Stratified Columnar Epithelium
Stratified columnar epithelium consists of several layers of cells.
The superficial layer of tall, prismatic cells does not extend to the
composed of smaller polyhedral cells that do not reach the surface.
This type of epithelium may be found lining the distal portion of
the urethra, as circumscribed areas in a transitional epithelium, in
 the parotid and mandibular ducts, and in the lacrimal sac and duct.
Sensory Epithelium
Epithelia containing supportive (sustentacular) cells and special-
ized receptor cells are found in the retina of the eye, the internal
ear, the olfactory mucosa, and the taste buds. These highly spe-
cialized sensory epithelia mediate the senses of vision, hearing.
FIGURE 2-II Stratified columnar epithelium, penile urethra
equilibrium, smell, and taste. These epithelia are described in de-
(horse). Hematoxylin and eosin {x620). Note that the surface cells
tail in Chapters 9, 10, 17, and 18.
are columnar and the nuclei form a fairly regular row.
24
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
 of surface epithelial cells into underlying connective tissue. A
Endocrine glands are multicellular glands that do not have a
gland is a structure that may consist exclusively of glandular
system of ducts to convey their secretory product to sites of utiliza-
epithelium or may include a complex duct system, lined by sur-
tion. Instead, the secretory products, often referred to as hormones,
face epithelium, and a supportive framework of connective tis-
are released directly into the intercellular fluid, from which they are
sue, the stroma. Glands are found, in one form or another, in
transported to a site of action by the blood and lymph.
most organs of the body.
Exocrine glands are multicellular glands with a system of
ducts through which their secretory products are transported to the
sites of utilization. Exocrine glands are either simple glands, con-
Classification of Glands
sisting of one to several secretory units connected to the surface
Glands are classified based on morphologic characteristics,
through an unbranched duct, or compound glands, with many
the nature of the secretory product, and the mode of release
secretory units emptying into a highly branched duct system.
of the secretory product (Table 2-3).
Simple glands
Morphologic Characteristics
Simple exocrine glands have secretory units ofvarious shapes and
Unicellular glands consist of a single secretory cell in a non-
dispositions. Simple straight tubular glands, such as those in the
secretory surface epithelium. An example of this type of gland is the
large intestine, pursue a straight, unbranched course in the sur-
goblet cell, a specialized epithelial cell that produces mucino-
rounding tissue and open directly onto the surface (Figs. 2-12A
 gen, which is released onto the epithelial surface as mucin, a com-
and 2-13). Simple coiled. tubular glands have a coiled or con-
ponent of mucus. As this secretory material is synthesized, it fills
voluted terminal portion. In histologic sections, the secretory
and expands the apical portion of the cell and forces the nucleus
unit appears as a cluster of cross-sectional profiles (Figs. 2-12B
into the slender basal portion, thus giving the cell a distinct gob-
and 2-14). Sweat glands of the skin are good examples of this
let shape (Fig. 2-7). Unicellular endocrine glands are found scat-
type. Simple branched tubular glands have a branched termi-
tered throughout the epithelial linings of the tubular organs of
 nal portion (Figs. 2-12C and 2-15). The branches converge into
a single duct near the opening onto the surface, and both portions
tems, as well as in various other organs (adrenal gland, kidney,
are lined with secretory cells. The glands of the stomach are typ-
and thyroid gland). These cells are referred to as APUD cells be-
ical simple branched tubular glands.
cause they are characterized by the uptake ofamine precursors and
Simple acinar and simple alveolar glands are similar be-
their subsequent decarboxylation in the process of amine or pep-
tide hormone synthesis (amine precursor zptake and decarboxyla-
to the surface by a short duct (Figs. 2-12D, 2-12E, and 2-16).
tion). APUD cells are described in detail in Chapter 15.
The lumen of the acinus is small and narrow, but that of the
Multicellular glands are composed of more than one cell,
alveolus is large and distended (Fig. 2-17). Simple acinar and
and most glands belong in this classification. They may occur as
simple alveolar glands are rare; some sebaceous glands are of the
a cluster of only a few secretory cells within a surface epithelium,
simple acinar type, whereas simple alveolar glands are found in
forming intraepithelial glands, or as large accumulations of
 the respiratory system of the chicken. Simple branched acinar
cells that have proliferated into the underlying connective tissue,
and simple branched alveolar glands are more com mon than
forming extraepithelial glands.
unbranched glands. In these branched types, two or more acini
TABLE 2-3 Classifications of Glands
 Based on Morphologic Characteristics 
Based on the Nature of the Secretory Product
 Unicellular Glands
Serous
Multicellular glands
Mucous
Intraepithelial
Seromucous (mixed)
Extraepithelial
Endocrine
Based on the Mode of Release of the Secretory Product
Exocrine
Merocrine (eccrine)
Apocrine
Simple
Tubular—straight, coiled, branched
Holocrine
 Acinar/Alveolar—single, branched
Cytocrine
Tubuloacinar/Tubuloalveolar
Compound
Tubular
Acinar/Alveolar
Tubuloacinar/Tubuloalveolar
Epithelium·Brion L. Froppier
25
B
C
E
F
G
H
FIGURE 2-I2 Schematic drawings illustrating the types of exocrine glands. A. Simple tubular gland
B. Simple coiled tubular gland. C. Simple branched tubular gland. D. Smple acinar gland and simple
branched acinar gland. E. Simple alveolar gland and simple branched alveolar gland. F. Compound
tubular gland. G. Compound acinar gland. H. Compound alveolar gland. Compound tubuloacinar/
tubuloalveolar glands consist of either a mixture of tubular and acinar/alveolar secretory units or tubular
secretory units "capped" by acini or alveoli.
or alveoli occur together, and their secretory product empties
minor salivary glands that empty into the oral cavity are classi-
through a common duct (Fig. 2-12D and E). Many of the larger
fied as this type.
sebaceous glands of the skin are of the simple branched acinar
type. Simple branched alveolar glands are found in the respira-
Compound glands
tory system of the chicken.
Compound glands contain the same types of secretory units as
Simple tubuloacinar and simple tubuloalveolar glands
those of the simple glands but have elaborate duct systems that
 branch repeatedly. Compound glands are classified as tubular, aci-
nal acinus or alveolus and occur only in the branched form. The
nar, alveolar, tubuloacinar, or tubuloalveolar types. For example,
26
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
FIGURE 2-13 Smple tubular glands. Large intestine (dog)
Hematoxylin and eosin (×1 20).
FIGURE 2-I4 Simple coiled tubular gland. Ceruminous gland,
consist of tubules of glandular epithelium would be classified as
ear canal (cow). Hematoxylin and eosin (x120).
compound tubular, whereas a compound tubuloacinar gland.
contains either a mixture of acinar and tubular secretory units or
tubular secretory units with terminal acini. Figure 2-12F, G, and
interlobular connective tissue. Interlobular ducts converge to
H and Figure 2-18 illustrate the various types of secretory units
form large lobar ducts, which drain individual lobes of the gland.
and ducts found in compound glands.
The main duct is formed by the convergence of the lobar ducts
(Fig. 2-18).
Parenchyma. Compound glands are composed of secretory
In some glands, such as the parotid salivary gland, portions
units and ducts, collectively termed parenchyma; the support-
of the intralobular ducts also contribute to the secretory product
ive or connective tissue elements comprise the stroma. Large
and thus are called secretory ducts. These ducts are also called
glands are partly or completely divided into lobes, which are
striated ducts, because their cells contain many mitochondria
large, easily recognized structural units. The lobes are further
oriented perpendicularly to the long axis of the cell and located
subdivided by connective tissue into lobules, which in turn are
 between folds of the basal plasmalemma, thus giving the cells a
composed of numerous secretory units (Fig. 2-18). Some of the 
 striated appearance (Fig. 2-18G). Intercalated ducts are small,
smaller compound glands have only lobules and secretory units.
nonsecretory intralobular ducts that connect the secretory units
The various segments of the duct system of compound glands are
with the secretory (striated) duct (Fig. 2-18C and E). Intercalated
identified by their location within the gland.
ducts are prominent in the parotid salivary gland and are also
Secretory product produced in tubules, acini, or alveoli of a
 present in the mandibular and sublingual salivary glands as well
compound gland flows first into an intralobular duct, usually
as the pancreas.
located in the center of the lobule. Intralobular ducts continue as
The general term excretory duct describes any of the
interlobular ducts as they emerge from the lobule to enter the
previously mentioned ducts that function only to transport the
Epithelium · Brion L. Froppier
27
FIGURE 2-16 Simple acinar gland. Sebaceous gland, nostril
(horse). Hematoxylin and eosin (×300).
FIGURE 2-15 Smple branched tubular glands. Fundic stomach
(dog). Hematoxylin and eosin (x1 20).
Mucous glands produce a thick, viscous secretion, mucin,
which contributes to a protective coating over the lining of hol-
low organs that com municate with the outside of the body (Fig.
secretory product to the site of utilization. They do not con-
2-18B). This protective coating is termed mucus and contains
tribute to the secretory product as do the secretory ducts.
cast-off epithelial cells and leukocytes, in addition to mucin. The
cells of the mucus-secreting units are filled with mucinogen, the
Stroma.   The stroma of compound glands includes the capsule
and the internal supportive framework. The capsule, composed
 of mucin, which stains light with hematoxylin and
of collagen, elastic, and reticular fibers, completely surrounds the
eosin. The nuclei are displaced toward the basal part of the cell
gland and gives rise to connective-tissue sheets (septa) or strands
 and are usually flattened against the cell membrane.
(trabeculae) that extend well into the parenchyma. Septa clearly
define the lobes and lobules and provide support for the various
lobar and interlobular ducts. Fine reticular fibers encircle the
individual secretory units.
Nature of the Secretory Product
Both simple and compound glands may be classified as mucous
serous, or seromucous (mixed), based on the nature of the secre?
tory product. Serous glands produce a thin watery product. The
cells of the secretory units usually have spherical nuclei near the
center of the cells, and the apical cytoplasm is filled with small 
secretory granules (Fig. 2-18F). These granules are precursors of
FIGURE 2-17
ory units. A. Acini, characterized
enzymes produced by many of the serous glands and are called
by a small lumen, parotid salivary gland (horse). Hematoxylin and
eosin (x480). B. Alveoli, mammary gland (sow). Note the large
part of the pancreas are typical serous glands.
lumen. Hematoxylin and eosin (x480).
28
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
G
H
FIGURE 2-I8 Schematic composite drawing and photomicrographs of the duct system and secretory units of a
compound gland. The photomicrographs correspond to the areas labeled A through H. A. Seromucous alveolus, tra.chea (pig).
Trichrome {x600). B. Mucous tubular secretory unit, bulbourethral gland (bull). Hematoxylin and eosin (x480). C. Cross
section of intercalated duct, parotid salivary gland (horse). Hematoxylin and eosin (x480). D. Mucous acinus with serous
demilunes, seromucous salivary gland (horse). Hematoxylin and eosin (×I0o0). E. Longitudinal section through intercalated 
duct, parotid salivary gland (horse). Hematoxylin and eosin {x480). F. Serous acinus, parotid salivary gland (horse). Hematoxylin
and eosin (×I200). G. Striated intralobular duct, parotid salivary gland (horse). Hematoxylin and eosin (x480). H. Interlobular
duct, mandibular salivary gland (dog). Hematoxylin and eosin (×30O). (Drowing from Stirson AW, Brown EM. Veterirary Histology
Slide Sets. East Lonsing, Ml: Michigon State University, Instructional Media Certer, I 970.)
Epithelium ·Brion L. Frappier
29
B
FlGURE 2-I9 Secretory units illustrating the various modes of release of the secretory product
A. Merocrine (eccrine) gland, prostate (dog). Hematoxylin and eosin (×1 200). B. Apocrine sudoriferous
gland, skin (pig), with myoepithelial cells at arrows. Hematoxylin and eosin (x6l0). C. Holocrine gland,
sebaceous gland (horse). Hematoxylin and eosin (x480).
Glands that contain both mucous and serous cells are de-
 accompanying cytoplasm and plasmalemma are separated from
scribed as seromucous, mucoserous, or simply “mixed." The
the cell, leaving the rest of the cell plasmalemma intact.
combinations of these two types of cells vary considerably from
Apocrine glands in the secretory state are easily recog-
one gland to another. Some secretory units contain intermixed
nized; however, when they are in a resting phase with no secre.
serous and mucous cells (Fig. 2-18A). Other seromucous glands
tory “droplets," their differentiation from merocrine glands is
are composed of a mixture of all-mucous acini and all-serous
difficult. Examples of apocrine glands include the mammary
acini, rather than each acinus containing some serous and some
gland and the general body sweat glands.
mucous cells. Most commonly, the serous cells are located at
In the holocrine mode of secretion, entire cells are re-
the periphery of the mucous secretory unit and are half-moon-
leased as the secretory product (Fig. 2-19C). The sebaceous
or crescent-shaped cells called serous demilunes (Fig. 2-18D).
 glands of the skin are typical holocrine glands. The cells become
They empty their serous secretory product into the lumen of
filled with lipid granules and move toward the duct of the
the secretory unit by way of small channels between the mu-
gland; the cells then disintegrate, and their contents are extruded
cous cells called intercellular canaliculi. Some seromucous
into the duct.
tubuloacinar glands have a mucous tubular unit with a termi-
 In the cytocrine mode of secretion, secretory material is
 nal serous acinus.
transferred from one cell to the cytoplasm of another cell. It is ex-
emplified in the epidermis, where melanocytes transfer the brown
pigment, melanin, into the cytoplasm of the keratinocytes.
Mode of Release of the Secretory Product
The mechanism by which the secretory product is released from
the cell forms the basis for a third classification of glands. Four
Myoepithelial Cells
different modes of release are recognized: merocrine or eccrine,
 In some glands, myoepithelial cells are interposed between the
apocrine, holocrine, and cytocrine.
 base of the secretory cells and the basement membrane. As their
During the merocrine (sometimes called eccrine) mode of
name suggests, myoepithelial cells posses characteristics of
secretion, the contents of small secretory granules are released as
both muscle cells (actin and myosin filaments) and epithelial
 the secretory product (Fig. 2-19A). The secretory granules are usu-
cells (cytokeratin). When stimulated, these cells contract and
ally enclosed within a membrane. When the secretory granule
force the secretory product of the epithelial cells into the duct
reaches the cell surface, its membrane fuses with the plasmalemma,
system. Myoepithelial cells are especially well developed in
thereby discharging the secretory product via exocytosis.
sweat glands and mammary glands (Fig. 2-19B). In the mam-
 In the apocrine mode of secretion, a large, single secretory
mary gland, myoepithelial cells are stimulated by oxytocin.
granule migrates in the cytoplasm to the cell apex. The plasma-
lemma and a portion of the neighboring cytoplasm surround the
granule. Eventually, the plasmalemma constricts beneath the
SUGGESTED READINGS
granule, causing the projection containing the granule to bulge
into the gland lumen (Fig. 2-19B). Constriction of the plasma-
Bharadwaj MB, Calhoun ML. Histology of the urethral epithelium of
lemma proceeds until the membrane-bounded granule and its
domestic animals. Am J Vet Res 1959;20:841-851,
0
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Franke WW, Jahn L, Knapp AC. Cytokeratins and desmosomal proteins
Ktstic RV. General Histology of the Mammal. New York: Springer-
in certain epithelioid and nonepithelial cells. In: Osborn M, Weber
Verlag, 1985.
K, eds. Cytoskeletal Proteins in Tumor Diagnosis. Cold Spring
Krstic RV. Ultrastructure of the Mammalian Cell. New York:
Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1989.
Springer-Verlag, 1979.
Gtiep EB, Robbins, ES. Epithelium. In: Weiss L, ed. Cell and Tissue
Martin BF, Wong YC. Development and maturation of the bladder
Biology. 6th Ed. Baltimore: Utban & Schwarzenberg, Inc., 1988.
epithelium of the guinea pig. Acta Anat 1981;110:359-375.
Hashimoto K. The eccrine and apocrine glands and their function. In:
Petry G, Amon H. Licht- und elektronenmikroskopische studien
Jarret A, ed. The Physiology and Pathophysiology of the Skin. New
iber struktur und dynamik des ibergangsepithels. Z Zellforsch 
York: Academic Press, 1978:5.
1966;69:587.
International Committee on Veterinary Gross Anatomical Nomen-
Phillips SJ, Griffin T. Scanning electron microscope evidence that
clature. Nomina anatomica veterinaria. 4th Ed. Ithaca, NY: Inter-
human urothelium is a pseudostratified epithelium. Anat Rec
hational Committee on Veterinary Gross Anatomical Nomenclature,
1985;211:153A
1994.
Severs J, Hicks RM. Analysis of membrane structure in transitional
International Committee on Veterinary Histological Nomenclature.
epithelium of rat urinary bladder. 2. The discoidal vesicles and
Nomina histologica. 2nd Ed. (revised) Ithaca, NY: International
Golgi apparatus: their role in luminal membrane biogenesis. J
Committee on Veterinary Histological Nomenclature, 1 994.
Ultrastruct Res 1979;69:279-296.
Connective and
Supportive Tissues
 JO ANN EURELL
DAVID C. VAN SICKLE
Connective Tissue Cells
Adipose Tissue
 Mesenchymal Cells 
White adipose tissue
Fbrocytes and Fibroblasts
Brown adipose tissue 
Reticular Cells
Adult Supportive Tissues
Adipocytes
Cartilage
 Pericytes
 Cartilage cells 
Mast Cells
Chondroblast
Macrophages
Chondrocyte
Plasma Cells 
Cartilage matrix
Pigrment Cells
 Classfication of cartilage
Other Cells of Loose Connective Tissue
Hyaline cartilage
Connective Tissue Fibers
Elastic cartilage
 Collagen Fibers
Fibrocartilage
Reticular Fibers
 Development of cartilage 
Elastic Fibers
Nutrition of cartilage
Fibrous Adhesive Proteins
Bone
Ground Substance
 Bone cells
Embryonic Connective Tissues
Mesenchyme
Osteoblast
Osteocyte
Mucous Connective Tissue
Adult Connective Tissues
Osteoclast
Loose Connective Tissue
Bone matrix
Dense Connective Tissue
Structural and functional characteristics
Dense irregular connective tissue
Macroscopic structure
 Dense regular connective tissue 
Histologic preparation
 Collagenous tendons and ligaments
Microscopic structure
Elastic ligaments
Osteogenesis
Reticular Connective Tissue
Intramembranous ossification
31
32
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Endochondral ossification
Bone remodeling
 Prirmary center of ossification
Fracture repair
 Secondary centers of ossification
Joints
Growth in length
 Fibrous Joints
Growth in width and circumference
Cartilaginous Joints
 Bone modeling
Synovial Joints 
Connective and supportive tissues connect other tissues, provide a
Cytoplasm. Secretory vesicles in the cytoplasm discharge their
framework, and support the entire body by means of carilage and
contents (e.g., procollagen, proteoglycans, proelastin) into the
 bones. These tissues also play an important role in thermoregula-
surrounding microenvironment. At the transmission electron
tion and in defense and repair mechanisms. Connective tissues are
microscopic (TEM) level, the cytoplasm has sparse rough endo-
also a reservoir for various hormones and cytokines that play an im-
plasmic reticulum (rER) and a small Golgi complex. Free ribo-
 portant role in growth and development.
somes, mitochondria, lysosomes, and vesicles are also present.
Most connective and supportive tissues are derived from meso-
Actin filaments occur as bundles in the cell processes. Fibrocytes
derm, which arises from the somites and lateral layers of the somatic
maintain the connective tissue matrix by forming the fibers and
and splanchnic mesoderm. In addition, neural crest cells from sur-
constantly renewing the ground substance.
 face ectoderm form the head mesenchyme, which subsequently de-
The fibroblast has a larger, more euchromatic nucleus and
velops into the connective tissue of the rostral head. Connective
more abundant, basophilic cytoplasm than the fibrocyte (Fig.
and supportive tissues are composed of cells, fibers, and amor-
3-2B). At the EM level, abundant rER and a prominent Golgi
phous ground substance in varying proportions. Embryonic
 Complex are present in the cytoplasm. These structural charac-
mesenchyme is a unique connective tissue because it lacks fibers
teristics indicate more active connective tissue matrix production
during early development. Based on occurrence, connective and
in comparison to the fibrocyte. Fibroblasts may arise directly
[eiaas uim inpe io sjuoiqua se pagissel are sanssi aaoddns
from undifferentiated mesenchymal cells or are transformed from
subgroups.
fibrocytes under the influence of microenvironmental factors (e.g..
Cytokines) In certain situations, fibroblasts may differentiate into
adipose cells, chondroblasts, or osteoblasts.
Myofibroblasts are fibroblasts that contain actin filaments
ConneCTive tisSue cellS
associated with dense bodies; hence, they resemble smooth mus-
The cells of connective tissue proper are diverse and have varied
functions ranging from production of connective tissue compo-
nents to phagocytosis and antibody formation. Many cells of con-
nective tissue, such as fibrocytes, remain as resident cells in a fixed
location within the tissue. Other connective tissue cells, such as
macrophages, are capable of moving through the tissue as mobile
or wandering cells.
Mesenchymal Cells
Mesenchymal cells are irregularly shaped with multiple processes
(Fig. 3-1). They are smaller than fibroblasts and have fewer cyto-
 plasmic organelles. The large, oval nucleus has a prominent nucle-
 olus and fine chromatin. The mesenchymal cel population serves
as a reservoir of pluripotent cells that can differentiate into other
types of connective tissue cells as needed.
Fibrocytes and Fibroblasts
The most common cell of connective tissue is the fibrocyte (Fig.
3-2A). Fibrocytes are generally elongated and spindle-shaped,
FIGURE 3-1 Mesenchyme (rat embryo). Note the stellate
with processes that contact adjacent cells and fibers. Their het-
mesenchymal cells in an amorphous ground substance. Hematoxylin
erochromatic nucleus is surrounded by a scant amount of pale
and eosin (x800).
Connective and Supportive Tissues ·Jo Ann Eurell ond Dovid C. Var Sickie
33
B
FIGURE 3-2 A. Fibrocytes (arrows), collagen fibers (C), connective tissue, liver (dog). B. Fbroblasts
(arrow), tendon (young puppy). The cells are located between collagen fibers (C). Hematoxylin and 
eosin (×1 520)
 cle cells. It is believed that myofibroblasts play a role in contrac-
Adipocytes
tion of the wound during healing.
Adipocytes are also referred to as fat cells or adipose cells (Fig.
 3-4). Individualadipocytes or clusters containing multiple cells are
normal components of loose connective tissue, but when the fat cells
Reticular Cells
outnumber other cell types, the tissue is called adipose tissue (see
 Reticular cells are similar inappearance to the fibrocyte (Fig. 3-3).
more on adipose tissue later in this chapter). Mature unilocular
They are stellate-shaped cells with a spherical nucleus and basophi-
O dn anseau ieu san iepauiod io ieaus ane saiodie
lic cytoplasm. Reticular cells produce reticular fibers, which form
120 μm in diameter. Most of the cellis occupied by a single, large 
 the fine structural network oforgans suchas the lymph nodes, spleen,
nonmembrane-bounded lipid droplet surrounded by a thin layer of
and bone marrow. These cells are fixed in the tissue and are capa-
 Cytoplasm. The cell nucleus is displaced to the periphery by the
ble of phagocytosis. Reticular cells should not be confused with the
lipid droplet, which is surrounded by cytoplasm that contains a
reticulocyte, an immature erythrocyte.
small Golgi complex, mitochondria, rER, and microfilaments
FIGURE 3-3
 Reticular connective tissue, lymph node (sheep).
Note the numerous interconnected reticular cells, which form a.
FIGURE 3-4  Two white adipocytes surrounded by capillaries.
three-dimensional network. Hematoxylin and eosin (x600).
Hematoxylin and eosin (x630). (Courtesy of A. Hanser.)
34
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
In contrast, mature multilocular adipocytes contain a more
centrally located nucleus with multiple lipid droplets in the cyto-
tiate into adipocytes, osteoblasts, and phagocytes.
plasm (Fig. 3-5). Both the Golgi complex and rER are rather
inconspicuous, but many mitochondria are present. The high con-
Mast Cells
centration of cytochromes in the mitochondria is primarily respon-
sible for the brown color ofaggregates of multilocular adipocytes,
Mast cells are common in loose connective tissue, especially
which are referred to as brown fat (described below)
around nerve endings and microcirculation. The cells are found
 Unilocular adipocytes produce chemical energy, whereas 
in the dermis of the skin and connective tissue of the respiratory
multilocular adipocytes metabolize lipid to produce heat. Leptin,
tract and gastrointestinal system.
a protein produced by unilocular fat cells, regulates the amount
Mast cells are large, polymorphic, spherical, or ovoid cells that
of adipose tissue in the body. Thermogenin, a transmembrane
contain a prominent, centrally located nucleus. Numerous secre-
protein in the mitochondria of brown fat, channels protons away
 tory granules are present in the cytoplasm (Fig. 3-6). These cells
from adenosine 5′-triphosphate (ATP) synthesis and into heat
can be identified with immunocytochemistry or a metachromatic
production instead.
stain, which has the capacity to stain elements of a cell or matrix
 Because fat is rapidly dissolved by most of the dehydration
a different color from that of the dye solution (e.g., toluidine blue,
and/or clearing agents commonly used for the preparation of
a blue dye that stains heparin-containing granules red). At the EM
histologic sections, the lipid droplets appear as clear spaces sur-
level, the mast cell granules are membrane-bounded and have crys-
rounded by cytoplasm (Fig. 3-4). When rapidly processed, the
talline, lamellar, or fine granular characteristics. The remaining
lipid can be preserved and stained with certain agents, such as
cytoplasm is occupied by an extensive Golgi complex, cisternae of
osmium tetroxide or Sudan IlI stain.
rER, free ribosomes, and mitochondria.
Mast cell granules contain histamine, heparin, and various
Pericytes
proteases. Histamine, a biogenic amine, is a vasoconstrictor that
causes increased permeability of small venules, thereby permit-
 Pericytes, also known as Rouget cells or periendothelial cells, are
ting leakage of plasma, resulting in tissue edema. This localized
elongated cells that are located adjacent to the endothelium lin-
inflammatory reaction is designed to dispose of foreign antigens
ing capillaries and postcapillary venules. The cells are surrounded
rapidly. Histamine also stimulates smooth muscle contraction in
by the basal lamina of the blood vessel and make frequent contact
small airways. Heparin, a glycosaminoglycan, acts as an anti-
with the underlying endothelial cells by extending processes
coagulant and is believed to stimulate angiogenesis. Mast cells can
through the lamina. Pericytes resemble fibrocytes in appearance
be activated to release their contents (degranulate) by physical
but have contractile filaments similar to smooth muscle. Proposed
 stimuli such as trauma or sunlight; immunogenic stimuli in-
functions of pericytes include regulating capillary blood flow;
cluding immunoglobulin (Ig) E, complement, or cytokines; and
serving as multipotent mesenchymal cells with specific ability to
 neurogenic stimuli such as neuropeptides.
form vascular smooth muscle cells; phagocytosing; and regulating
Three populations of mast cells based on protease content
have been identified. The mucosal mast cell (MC) contains
tryptase only, while the connective tissue mast cell (MCtc)
contains tryptase, chymase, carboxypeptidase, and cathepsin. A
FIGURE3-5
 Brown adipose tissue. Note the numerous small
lipid inclusions in the multilocular adipocytes. Hematoxylin and
FIGURE 3-6 Mast cell (arrow), lung (rabbit). Note the charac-
eosin (×600)
teristic granules. Hematoxylin and eosin, plastic section (xI 200).
Connective and Supportive Tissues ·Jo Ann Eurell ond Dovid C. Van Sickie
35
third mast cell type (MCe) has chymase and carboxypeptidase
The dog and cat have about 70% MCrc cells. Proteases can de-
stroy nearby cells and tissue matrix and activate complement
components. Arachidonic acid products (leukotrienes) and cyto-
kines (e.g., various interleukins, stem cell factor, and tumor
necrosis factor alpha [TNF-o]) are also produced by the mast cell
and immediately released without storage in the cytoplasmic
granules. In the past, the mast cell has been described as a "tis-
sue basophil," but despite some similarities, the mast cell and baso-
phil are different cells. Both cells develop from the same pluripotent
stem cell (CD34+), and both have basophilic cytoplasmic gran-
ules that contain similar inflammatory products. However,
basophils are terminally differentiated before they enter blood
circulation, while mast cells leave the bone marrow, pass through
the circulation, and differentiate in tissues outside the bone mar-
row. The mast cell can undergo mitotic division while the baso-
phil cannot. Also, basophils have a short lifespan of days while
most mast cells can survive for weeks to months.
Macrophages
FIGURE 3-7 Macrophage (amows), connective tissue. Note the
Macrophages are phagocytic cells that are scattered throughout
 numerous cytoplasmic vacuoles and phagolysosomes. Hematoxylin
 the body and form the mononuclear phagocyte system. They are
and eosin (×l 200).
derived from a bone marrow precursor cell (CFU-GM) that divides
and produces monocytes that circulate in the blood. The mono-
Inflammation can be characterized as acute or chronic based
cytes then migrate across blood vessel walls into the connective
tissue or organs and become macrophages. Mobile macrophages 
inflammation has more neutrophils than macrophages, whereas
wander through the tissues performing their phagocytic function
chronic inflam mation has more macrophages than neutrophils
while fixed macrophages remain in one location. The fixed macro-
When stimulated, macrophages may form clusters of epithelioid
phage of connective tissues is also known as the histiocyte. Other
cells, which resemble epithelial cells in morphology. Multi-
macrophages located in specific tissues include the stellate macro-
nucleated giant cells or foreign-body cells (Fig. 3-9)arise during
phage of the liver (Kupffer cell), the microglial cell, the intra-
chronic inflammation and are a result ofthe fusion of several macro-
epidermal macrophage (Langerhans cell), and the osteoclast.
phages in response to the presence of foreign material.
Macrophages are large, ovoid, or spherical cells that contain
cytoplasmic vacuoles and are readily distinguishable with the light
microscope (Fig. 3-7). At the EM level, they are characterized by
numerous lysosomes, phagosomes, phagolysosomes, and pseudo-
podia (footlike extensions of the cell membrane) (Fig. 3-8). Abun-
dant ribosomes, rER, smooth ER (sER), mitochondria, and a Golgi
complex are also present. Histochemical stains for lysosomal
enzymes, such as acid phosphatase, facilitate the identification of
macrophages. Once activated, the macrophage changes morphol-
ogy with increased microvilli and lamellipodia, whichare sheetlike
extensions of cytoplasm. The lamellipodia form transient adhesions
with the surrounding substrate, enabling the cell to move.
A variety of chemotactic stimuli (e.g., infectious agents,
cytokines) cause macrophages to migrate to locations in the body
where foreign material must be removed. Macrophages engulf
material such as cell debris, abnormal matrix components, neo-
plastic cells, bacteria, and inert substances by pinocytosis and
phagocytosis. Phagocytosis may be indiscriminate (e.g., dust par-
ticles in the lung) or may involve specific interaction with re-
ceptors on the macrophage surface (e.g., Fc receptors, IgG, and 
IgM). Macrophages also act as antigen-presenting cells, which
FIGURE 3-8 Macrophage containing abundant pinocytotic
process and display foreign substances so that lymphocytes can
vacuoles (arrows) and phagolysosomes (arrowhead) (x8000).
(Courtesy of j. Turek.)
36
dilated cisternae containing slightly granular and moderately
electron-dense material as well as spherical inclusions referred to
as Russell bodies (Fig. 3-1l). Russell bodies give a positive reac-
tion for immunoglobulin. Free ribosomes and mitochondria are
also present in the cytoplasm.
 Plasma cells are most numerous in lymphatic tissue, espe-
cially in the center of medullary cords of lymph nodes. They are
also particularly abundant in bone marrow, the loose connective
tissue underlying the epithelium of the gastrointestinal tract,
the respiratory system, and the female reproductive system.
Plasma cells do not originate in loose connective tissue but
develop from B lymphocytes that immigrate into the connective
tissue from the blood; they produce circulating or humoral anti-
bodies (see Chapter 8).
Pigment Cells
FIGURE 3-9 Multinucleated giant cell, lymph node (sheep)
Crossman's trichrome (×435).
Cells in connective tissue may contain pigments, including
melanin in domestic animals or pteridines and purines in fish
are a reflection of their multiple functions. These substances in-
clude enzymes such as lysozyme, which lyses the wall of many
bacteria; cytokines (interferons and interleukin); complement
components (C2, C3, C4, and C5); coagulation factors; and reac-
tive chemical species (hydrogen peroxide, hydroxyl radicals, ni-
tric oxide), which are important components of the bactericidal
and cytocidal (e.g., tumor cells) activities of macrophages.
Plasma Cells
Plasma cells are spherical, ovoid, or pear-shaped cells with a spher-
ical, eccentric nucleus. The chromatin is often arranged in periph-
erally located clumps or in centrally converging strands that give
the nucleus a “cartwheel" appearance (Fig. 3-10). The cytoplasm is
intensely basophilic, and a negatively stained Golgi region is usu-
ally present. At the fine-structural level, in addition to an exten-
sive Golgi complex, the cytoplasm has an abundant rER with
FIGURE 3-1l Part of a plasma cell with abundant rough
FIGURE 3-I0 Pasma cells (arrowheads), connective tissue,
endoplasmic reticulum (ER), mitochondria (M), extensive Golgi
duodenum. Hematoxylin and eosin (x900).
complex (G), and Russellbodies (R) (×19,500).
Connective and Supportive Tissues · Jo Ann Eurell ond Dovid C. Van Sickile
37
both ends (Fig. 3-13). Multiple 0 chains have been recognized.
Within the rER cisternae, these pro-α chains assemble into triple
helices to form procollagen molecules. The molecules are then
cles, and released by exocytosis. At this point in synthesis, col-
lagen can be classed as fibril-forming, FACIT (fibril-zssociated
collagens with interrupted zriple helices), sheet-forming, multi-
plexin, connecting and anchoring, or transmembrane collagen.
Twenty-seven collagen types are currently recognized.
Fibril-forming collagen then undergoes extracellular enzy-
matic cleavage of the propeptides to yield collagen molecules.
These molecules in turn assemble in the extracellular matrix (ECM)
to form collagen fibrils. The fibrils are only visible with the elec-
tron microscope, are up to several micrometers in length, and vary
in diameter (10 to 300 nm), with characteristic cross-striations re-
peated at 67-nm intervals (Figs. 3-13 and 3-14). Bundles of these
FIGURE 3-12
Pgment containing cells in the lamina propria of
fibrils form collagen fibers that are visible by light microscopy
a uterine caruncle (sheep). Hematoxylin and eosin (x325)
(Fig. 3-2B). Fibril-forming collagen includes types I, I, III, V, XI,
 XXIV, and XXVII. Fibers composed of type I collagen account for
and amphibians (Fig. 3-12). When present in large numbers,
90% of the body collagen. Type I collagen is found in skin, tendon, bone,
the cells impart color to the connective tissue. They occur in var-
and dentin, while type II collagen is specific for cartilage and vit-
ious locations such as the dermis, uterine caruncles of sheep,
reous humor. Frequently colocalized with type I collagen, type II
meninges, choroid, and iris. Their significance is described in
collagen is essential for normal collagen I fibrillogenesis. Type V
connection with these organs.
collagen is necessary for extracellular matrix assembly in connec-
tive tissues; it is present in fetal tissues and the placenta. Type XI
Other Cells of Loose Connective Tissue
collagen is found in hyaline cartilage and type XXIV is distributed
 in developing cornea and bone.
Depending on its location and various other factors (infestation
Fresh collagen fibers are white, and in histologic preparations,
by parasites, presence of bacteria, and the like), loose connective
they stain with acid dyes. Thus, they are red to pink in hema-
tissue may contain a varying number of lymphocytes, monocytes,
toxylin and eosin (H&E)-stained sections, red with van Gieson's
and granulocytes (especially eosinophils and neutrophils). The
 method, and blue in Mallory's and Masson's triple stains (green
structure and function of these immigrant cells are described in 
when light green stain is used). The fibers are flexible and can
the section on blood (see Chapter 4).
 adapt to the movements and changes in size of the organs with
Globule leukocytes are mononuclear cells with acidophilic
which they are associated. Collagen fibers are characterized by a
and metachromatic cytoplasmic granules. These cells are found
high tensile strength and a poor shear strength, and stretch is lim-
in epithelium and connective tissues of the respiratory, digestive,
Auanbasuo yual leu saul jo % Aaeuixoidde on pai!
reproductive, and urinary systems. Globule leukocytes are be-
they are found wherever high tensile strength is required, such as
lieved to be mucosal mast cells, but their origin as a subpopula-
in tendons, ligaments, and organ capsules.
tion of T lymphocytes has also been proposed.
Other collagens known as FACIT collagens (fibril-zsociated
collagens with interrupted riple helices) include types IX, XII
XIV, XX, XXI, and XXI1. These collagens serve as molecular
CONNECTIVE TISSUE FIbERS
bridges that are important in the organizationand stability of extra-
cellular matrices. Glycosaminoglycans are linked to type II col-
Structural connective tissue fibers include collagen, reticular, and
lagen of hyaline cartilage by collagen IX. Type XX collagen is
elastic fibers. In addition, fibrous adhesive proteins such as fi-
prevalent in corneal epithelium. The ECM of blood vessel walls con-
 bronectin and laminin bind structural fibers together or help
tains type XXI collagen, while the ECM at tissue junctions contains
cells attach to the connective tissue matrix.
type XXII collagens. Some FACIT collagens (types XVI and XIX)
 are unable to bind fibers and are referred toas FACIT-like collagens.
Collagen Fibers
Sheet-forming collagen forms a flexible framework of sheets
rather than fibrils. Collagen IV forms the basal lamina of epithe-
Collagen is the principal fiber type in mature connective tissue.
lia. In the eye, the posterior limiting lamina (Descemet's mem-
The turnover rate of collagen is tissue-specific and can vary within
brane) of the cornea is formed from type VII collagen. Type X
the same tissue. Most collagen digestion occurs through the action
collagen is found in the hypertrophic zone of the physis.
of metalloproteinases (e.g., collagenase) and serine proteases
Multiplexins (multiple triple-helix domains and interrup-
Collagen polypeptide chains are synthesized in the rER as
tions) are collagens that are associated with basement mem branes.
pro-o chains that contain extension peptides (propeptides) at
This subgroup includes types XV and XVIII.
38
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
fibrocyte of endotendineum
muscle
peritendineum
parietal layer
blood vessels
of tendon sheath
entering
mesotendineum
tendon
collagen fiber
pro-α
chain
procollagen
rER
collagen fibril
transfer vesicle
hole zone
overlap zone
Golgi complex
collagen molecule
cleavage
procollagen
secretory
of propeptides
)vesicle
FIGUre 3-13
 Collagen polypeptide chains are synthesized within the cell and released into the extracellular space as procollagen. In fibril-
such a way that hole zones are created, which stain dark, in contrast to overlap zones, which exclude stain. Bundles of light- and dark-banded
fibrils form collagen fibers. In a tendon, individual collagen fibers are surounded by endotendineum and bundles of fibers are bound by
peritendineum. In this drawing, the sheath surrounding the tendon is reflected to show the collagen fiber bundles (fascicles) inside. Blood
ouat aut Aiddns on wnauuanosaw aun yanoun ssed slassa
Connecting and anchoring collagen binds to the surface of
fibril-forming collagen and may mediate the interactions of fibrils
with one another and with other matrix components. Collagen
types VI and VII are believed to perform this function. Type VI
collagen forms unique beaded filaments, while collagen VII forms
anchoring fibrils that link collagen IV of the basal lamina of the
epidermis to the collagen of underlying connective tissue.
Transmembrane collagens include XIII, XVII, XXIII, and
XXV. Collagen XVII, a transmembrane collagen of the skin, is as-
sociated with hemidesmosomes and mutates in diseases that cause
blisters (epidermolysis bullosa). Type XXIII collagen is associated
with metastatic tumor cells while type XXV collagen is a neuronal
collagen.
Collagen XXVI is unclassified and is found in the testes and
ovary.
Reticular Fibers
FlGURE 3-I4 Eectron micrograph of collagen fibrils with
 In routine histologic preparations, reticular fibers cannot be dis-
characteristic cross-striations (x88,000).
tinguished from other small collagen fibers. These fibers can be
Connective and Supportive Tissues *Jo Anr Eurell and Dovid C. Var Sickie
6
identified only with certain silver impregnations (thus the term
 argyrophilic or argentaffin fibers) or with the periodic acid-
Schiff (PAS) reagent (Fig. 3-15). These fibers are actually indi-
vidual collagen fibrils (type III collagen) coated by proteoglycans
 and glycoproteins. This coating increases the affinity of the fibers
for silver salts. When individual reticular fibers are bundled to
form collagen fibers, the coating is supposedly displaced and the
argyrophilia decreases.
Reticular fibers form delicate, flexible networks around cap-
illaries, muscle fibers, nerves, adipose cells, and hepatocytes and
serve as a scaffolding to support cells or cell groups of endocrine,
lymphatic, and blood-forming organs. They are an integral part 
of basement membranes.
Elastic Fibers
FIGURE 3-I6[
Ligamentum nuchae, large ruminant. I. Longitu-
Elastic fibers and/or sheets (laminae) are present in organs in which
dinal section. 2. Cross section. Note that the large elastic fibers
 normal function requires elasticity in addition to tensile strength.
(arrowheads) are surrounded by networks of collagen fibers.
Elastic fibers can be stretched as much as two and one-half times
Crossman's trichrome (X600).
g n  a  m oi 'n  
in the pinna of the ear, vocal cords, epiglottis, lungs, ligamentum
joined by stable, covalent cross-links containing desmosine, an
nuchae, dermis, aorta, and muscular arteries, elastic fibers are one
identifying component of elastic fibers. The coils of elastin can
of the most resilient connective tissue fibers, withstanding chem-
stretch and then recoil as needed. Elastin is synthesized by fibro-
ical maceration and autoclaving.
 blasts and smooth muscle cells.
Elastic fibers usually ocur as individual, branching, and
The secondary component of elastic fibers is 10-nm micro-
 anastomosing fibers. Their diameters vary within a wide range,
fibrils that are embedded within and surround the elastic core
from O.2 to 5.0 μm in loose connective tissue to as large as 12 μm
(Fig. 3-17). The microfibrillar material is composed of a glyco-
in elastic ligaments, such as the ligamentum nuchae in the neck
protein, fibrillin, which is necessary for elastic fiber integrity.
(Fig. 3-16). In H&E-stained histologic sections, the larger elas-
During development of the elastic fiber, fibrillin microfi-
tic fibers in elastic ligaments are readily distinguished as highly
 brils are secreted before elastin and provide a scaffolding on
refractile, amorphous, light pink strands; they are stainable by
which elastin is deposited. At this stage, the fiber is referred to
Certain selective dyes, such as orcein and resorcin-fuchsin.
as oxytalan. In the second stage of development, elastin is de-
The main component of elastic fibers is elastin, which con-
 posited between the microfibrils, forming elaunin. As more
 tains a network of fibrillin microfibrils that form a supporting
elastin accumulates within the developing fiber, mature elastic
scaffold for the elastin. An amorphous protein rich in proline
fibers are formed. Developmentally, the elastic fiber is the last
and glycine, elastin contains little hydroxyproline. One theory of
fiber to appear in organs (e.g., lung) or connective tissue.
elastin structure is that the molecules are randomly coiled and
Fibrous Adhesive Proteins
The extracellular matrix contains noncollagenous fibrous proteins
that play a role in organizing the matrix and help cells toadhere to
it. Fibronectin, a major product of mesenchymal cells, is a fibril-
forming protein that binds tovarious structures, including the cell
membrane, collagen, elastin, and proteoglycans, and probably me-
diates the connection between the cytoskeleton and the ECM.
Fibronectin plays a role in a variety of processes, such as cell adhe-
 sion, cell differentiation, cell growth, and phagocytosis.
Laminins are large glycoproteins. They are a major con-
stituent of the basement membrane and are synthesized by the cells
that are in contact with it (e.g., epithelial cells, smooth muscle
cells, neurolemmocytes) (Fig. 16-6). Laminins are present in the
 lamina lucida (lamina rara) and lamina densa. They are connected
to type IV collagen by the adhesive glycoprotein nidogen (en-
FIGUrE 3-15
Reticular fibers. I. Liver (pig). Achucarro silver
tactin). Laminins form a structural network in the basement mem-
impregnation (x435). 2. Lymph node (dog). Palmgren silver
impregnation (×230).
they are signaling molecules that stabilize cell surface receptors.
40
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
fluid. The resulting gel is particularly abundant in the vitreous
humor of the eye and in synovial fluid; it is also found in the
umbilical cord, loose connective tissue, skin, and cartilage. Hy
aluronan binds proteoglycans into a larger molecule called an
 aggrecan (Fig. 3-18). Chondroitin-4-sulfate and chondroitin-
6-sulfate are abundant in cartilage, arteries, skin, and cornea. A
smaller amount is found in bone. Dermatan sulfate is found in
skin, tendon, ligamentum nuchae, sclera, and lung. Keratan sul-
fate is present in cartilage, bone, and cornea. Heparan sulfate
is found in arteries and the lung, whereas heparin is found in
mast cells, the lung, the liver, and skin. The latter six GAGs are
of the sulfated variety.
Proteoglycans are formed by covalently linking GAGs to
a protein core and range in size from small molecules (decorin,
m.w. 40,000) to large aggregates (aggrecan, m.w. 210,000) (Fig .
3-18). In addition to filling space in the connective tissue matrix
and imparting its unique biomechanical properties, proteogly-
cans may regulate the passage of molecules and cells in the in-
rercellular space. They are also believed to play a major role in
chemical signaling between cells and may bind and regulate the
activities of other secreted proteins.
Proteoglycans in low concentrations are not detected in
H&E-stained sections, but when present in higher concentra-
tions, as in hyaline cartilage, they stain with basophilic dyes
nyaluronar
FIGURE 3-17 Eectron micrograph of an elastic lamina between
collagen fibrils (longitudinal and cross sections). The electron-dense
thin lines in the elastic lamina are microfibrils (×2 I,000).
Other adhesive glycoproteins include fibrinogen (blood-
clotting mechanism), link protein (linking of cartilage matrix
components), mucins, tenascin (embryonic tissues, uncertain
function), and thrombospondin (platelet aggregation).
GROUND SUBSTANCE
The cells and fibers of connective tissue are embedded in an amor-
phous ground substance composed of glycosaminoglycans (GAGs),
proteoglycans, plasma constituents, metabolites, water, and ions.
The ground substance forms a hydrated gel that, by virtue of its
proteoglycan
high water content, has unique properties of resiliency.
Glycosaminoglycans are comprised of unbranched poly-
collagen fibrils
saccharides of alternating uronic acid and hexosamine residues.
FiGUrE 3-18
Seven major types of GAGs can be distinguished. Hyaluronan
are composed of proteoglycans bound to a hyaluronic acid chain by
(hyaluronic acid) is a nonsulfated GAG. It is a large, long mole
link proteins. The proteoglycans are composed of glycosaminoglycans.
cule that forms networks with spaces that are filled with tissue
 such as chondroitin and keratan sulfate, bound to a protein core.
When stained with toluidine blue or crystal violet, a metachro-
cans or proteoglycans. Collagen fibers (types I and II)are also pres-
matic change to pink or magenta occurs.
ent. In the adult organism, gelatinous connective tissue occurs in
the papillae of omasal laminae and reticular crests, the bovine glans
penis, and the core of the rooster comb.
EMbRYONIC CONNECTIVE
TISSUES
AdULT COnNECTIVE TISSUES
Mesenchyme
Adult connective tissues are classified based on the variation of
Mesenchyme, the connective tissue of the developing embryo, is
quantity and arrangement of fibers within the matrix. The prop-
composed of irregularly shaped mesenchymal cells and amorphous
erties of cell structure and the biochemical composition of fibers
ground substance (Fig. 3-1). The cell processes contact adjacent
 and ground substance are similar across connective tissue types.
cells and thus form a three-dimensional network. Mesenchymal
cells undergo numerous mitotic cell divisions and continuously
change their shape and location to adapt to the transformations 
Loose Connective Tissue
that occur during embryonic growth. During early development,
mesenchyme does not contain fibers, and the abundant amorphous 
Loose, or areolar, connective tissue is the most widely distributed
ground substance fills the wide intercellular spaces. Mesenchyme 
type ofconnective tissue in the adult animal (Fig. 3-20A). The cells
gives rise to various types of adult connective tissues, as well as 
and fibers of loose connective tissue are widely separated by spaces
blood and blood vessels.
filled with ground substance. Compared to other types of connec.
tive tissue, the cells in loose connective tissue are more abundant
 and include both fixed and mobile populations. All three fiber types
Mucous Connective Tissue
(reticular, collagen, and elastic) are present. The relative abundance
and orientation of fibers vary widely and depend primarily on the
Mucous or gelatinous connective tissue is found primarily in the
location and specific function of the tissue. In cases of injury, the
embryonic hypodermis and umbilical cord (Fig. 3-19). It is char-
stage of healing also causes variation in fiber arrangement. Early
acterized by stellate fibroblasts that form a network. The large in-
connective tissue is highly cellular with fine reticular fibers; later
tercellular spaces are occupied by a viscous, gel-like amorphous
 connective tissue has predominantly thick collagen fibers
-Ajgoujuesoskg aoy uoneai asod e seu ieui anueisqns punoig
The amorphous ground substance of loose connective tissue
Jo Annuenb iueoyjuois e puq ieun suenaioanoid jo pasoduon s!
tissue fluid. Substances dissolved in the tissue fluid can diffuse
Apean aaeq shul pue anueisqns puno snoudioue aul yanoiun
access to connective tissue cells. Circulating tissue fluid is formed
at the arterial end of capillaries and absorbed by either venous or
lym phatic capillaries.
Loose connective tissue is present beneath many epithelia,
where it provides support and a vascular supply. This tissue forms
the interstitial tissue in most organs, thereby allowing easy move-
ments and shifting of organs. Loose connective tissue is present
around nerve and skeletal muscle bundles as named tissue layers
(e.g., epineurium) and is found between the layers of smooth mus-
culature of hollow organs. The pia mater and arachnoid of the
brain and spinal cord are also composed of loose connective tissue
The functions of loose connective tissue range from the purely
mechanical, such as support and dampening biomechanical effects
in various locations (e.g., hypodermis), to more sophisticated func-
anianoe asuajap pue iiedan anssin ui uoniedioried se uns 'suon
(inflammation).
Dense Connective Tissue
 The fibers in dense connective tissue are more abundant than cells
and amorphous ground substance. Dense connective tissue is com-
FlGURE 3-I9 Gelatinous connective tissue, umbilical cord
monly classified as either dense irregular connective tissue, with
(pig). Fine collagen fibers (arrows) are present. Hematoxylin and
a random orientation of the fiber bundles, or dense regular con-
eosin (x800)
nective tissue, in which fibers are oriented in a regular pattern.
42
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
B
FIGURE 3-20 A. Loose connective tissue with blood vessels (arrows), liver (dog). B. Dense
irregular connective tissue (arrow), liver (dog). C. Dense regular connective tissue with fibrocytes
(arrows), tendon. Hematoxylin and eosin (x600)
Dense Irregular Connective Tissue
tendineum, the dense irregular connective tissue around the en-
 Fibrocytes are the predominant cell population in dense irreg-
tire tendon. The fibrocytes between the collagen fibers of the ten-
ular connective tissue (Fig. 3-20B). Collagen fibers are gener-
 don are long, flat cells of varying shape. Winglike cytoplasmic
ally arranged in bundles that cross each other at varying angles.
 processes extend between adjacent collagen fibers and give the
fibrocytes a stellate appearance in cross sections of tendon. Fol-
In thin aponeuroses or muscle fasciae, these bundles are located
in a single layer. In heavier aponeuroses, organ capsules, or der-
lowing injury, the fibroblasts of surrounding connective tissue
mis, the bundles are superimposed in several layers and interlace
sheaths proliferate and attempt to repair the damage.
with one another in multiple planes. This irregular configuration
The typical tendon structure may be altered at points of in-
sertion into bone or cartilage or where the tendon courses around
allows adaptation to changes in the size of an organ or the diam-
 bones. Wherever tendons or ligaments insert on bone or carti-
eter of a muscle, and stretching forces can be withstood in any di-
rection. Continuation of surface connective tissue into the organ
lage, the dense regular collagenous tissue of the tendon gradually
changes to fibrocartilage and then to mineralized fibrocartilage
or muscle enhances strength. Elastic networks facilitate a rapid
 before the point of osseous penetration. Collagen fibers from the
return to resting conditions.
tendon or ligament are embedded in the bone matrix as per-
Dense irregular connective tissue is found in a variety of
forating fibers (Sharpey's fibers). The function of this arrange-
locations, such as the lamina propria of the initial portions of
the digestive system, the capsule of the lung (visceral pleura)
ment is to gradually transmit biomechanical forces from a
 flexible fibrous unit to a stiffer osseous unit. In areas where ten-
and other organs (spleen, liver, kidney, testis), fasciae, aponeu-
around bones, they are subject not only to tension
roses, joint capsules, pericardium, and dermis. Special func-
tional and morphologic features are described with the various
but also to compression, which causes the cells to enlarge and
to become encapsulated such that the tissue appears similar to
organ systems.
fibrocartilage.
The mobility of the tendon is ensured either by the surround-
Dense Regular Connective Tissue
ing epitendineum or the tendon sheath, which consists of a vis-
Dense regular connective tissue occurs as collagenous tendons
ceral and a parietal portion (Fig. 3-13). The visceral portion is
and ligaments or as elastic ligaments (Fig. 3-20C). In both types,
tightly anchored to the epitendineum of the tendon and is sepa-
all fibers are arranged in the same direction, according to specific
rated from the parietal portion by a fluid-filled synovial cavity.
functional requirements.
Both the parietal and the visceral portions of the tendon sheath
comprise dense irregular connective tissue and a synovial layer,
Collagenous tendons and ligaments
the structure of which is similar to that of synovial membranes
The great tensile strength of collagenous tendons is reflected in
(see synovial joints below). Blood vessels supplying the tendon
their structure. They consist of fascicles of parallel collagen fibers
pass through a gap between the opposing edges of the synovial
(Fig. 3-13). Individual collagen fibers are surrounded by fibro-
sheath known as the mesotendineum.
 Cytes, which form the endotendineum. These fascicles are bound
Collagenous ligaments contain a lower percentage of ground
together by sparse, loose connective tissue (the peritendineum)
 substance than tendons and the collagen fibers are organized more
that forms a protective sheath around the blood vessels and nerves
randomly. Named connective tissue sheaths are not assigned to
of the tendon. The peritendineum is continuous with the epi-
ligaments
Connective and Supportive Tissues · Jo Arn Eurell ond Dovid C. Van Sickle 
Elastic ligaments
tain a few fibrocytes, mast cells, and sparse amorphous ground
Large elastic fibers that branch and interconnect predominate in
substance.
elastic ligaments. The fibers are surrounded by loose connective
tissue (Fig. 3-16). The ligamentum nuchae and some dorsal lig-
Brown Adipose Tissue
aments (ligamenta flava) of the vertebral column are examples of
 Brown adipose tissue (brown fat) is composed of aggregates of
elastic ligaments.
multilocular adipocytes (Fig. 3-5). The intercellular connective tis-
sue consists of fibrocytes, collagen, and reticular fibers. Capillaries
Reticular Connective Tissue
form a dense plexus, and the adipocytes are directly innervated by
adrenergic axons.
The stroma of all lymphatic organs (spleen, lymph node, hemal
Brown adipose tissue is particularly common and abundant
node, tonsils), diffuse lymphatic tissue, solitary lymphatic nodules,
in rodents and hibernating mammals. It is located primarily in the
and bone marrow is made of reticular connective tissue. This tis-
axillary and neck regions (interscapular fat body), along the tho-
sue is composed of stellate reticular cells and a complex three-
racic aorta and in the mediastinum, in the mesenteries, and around
dimensional network of reticular fibers (Fig. 3-15) (see Chapter 8).
 the abdominal aorta and vena cava near the kidney. Brown fat may
also be found in the same locations in other domestic mammals.
Adipose Tissue
Adipose tissue, or fat, is a specialized type of connective tissue
ADULT SUPPORTIVE TISSUES
that, in addition to performing insulating and mechanical func.
tions, plays an important role in the metabolism of the organism
Cartilage
One of the most important functions of adipose tissue is its partic-
ipation in fat metabolism. The turnover of intracellular fat is rapid,
sod in poq aui ui aloi aioddns e rog paziieiads si aie
with a continuous cycle of withdrawal and deposit, even if the or-
sesses considerable tensile strength because the intercellular sub-
 ganism has to draw on its fat reserves to supplement food intake.
stance has a supportive framework of collagen and/or elastic
Intracellular lipids are synthesized mainly from fatty acids
fibers, and the firm but pliable ground substance enhances its
but also from carbohydrates and proteins. The fatty acids nec-
weightbearing ability. In general, this tissue is avascular, alym-
phatic, and aneural. However, during development, blood ves-
down, by lipoprotein lipase, of the triglycerides contained in
sels penetrate certain cartilage structures (e.g, cartilaginous
blood chylomicrons or lipoproteins; after their uptake by the
epiphyses of developing bones).
adipocytes, the fatty acids are resynthesized to triglycerides.
Under hormonal (insulin) or nervous (norepinephrine) con-
Cartilage Cells
trol, intracellular enzymatic hydrolysis of triglycerides takes
Two cell types are recognized in cartilage: the chondroblast and
 place, and fatty acids and glycerol are released into the blood and
the chondrocyte.
catabolized in energy-yielding reactions. In brown adipocytes,
mitochondrial respiration is uncoupled from ATP synthesis; thus,
Chondroblast
the oxidation of stored fat generates heat rather than ATP, caus-
ing a rise in body temperature in arousing hibernating mammals.
The chondroblast is found in growing cartilage (Fig. 3-21). The
 In mammalian subcutaneous connective tissue, the adipose-
cell is oval-shaped with a spherical nucleus and a prominent
tissue component serves as a thermal and mechanical insulator.
Golgi apparatus. The cytoplasm is basophilic as a result of large
In the foot pads and digital cushions, adipose tissue is associated
quantities of rER. The chondroblast actively forms the matrix of
with bundles of collagen and elastic fibers. This combination of
cartilage that surrounds the perimeter of the cell.
fibers and fat cells allows the adipose tissue to act as a dampen-
ing cushion, and at the same time, the cells are protected by the
Chondrocyte
great tensile strength of the collagen fibers. After deformation,
After cartilage matrix formation is complete, the chondroblast be-
the elastic fibers allow the adipose cells to return to normal shape.
comes a less active cell, the chondrocyte (Fig. 3-22). The chon-
Two types of adipose tissue, white and brown, are distin-
drocyte varies from elongate to spherical in shape, depending on
guished in most mammals by differences in color, vascularity,
   g     
structure, and function.
within a lacuna, a cavity within the semirigid cartilage matrix.
In living cartilage or at the fine-structural level, the cell fills the
White Adipose Tissue
lacuna. Short cytoplasmic processes extend into the intercellular
The cells of white fat are separated by septa of loose connective
substance. In most light microscopic preparations, the cell surface
tissue into clusters of adipose cells referred to as lobules. Each
 appears separated from the lacunar walls because of shrinkage.
adipose cell is surrounded by a delicate network of collagen and
The chondrocyte has a spherical nucleus with one or more nucle-
reticular fibers that supports a dense capillary plexus and nerve
 oli and abundant rER and prominent Golgi complex. Glycogen
fibers (Fig. 3-4). In addition, the narrow intercellular spaces con-
and lipid accumulate in the cytoplasm of old chondrocytes, and
44
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
B
FIGURE 3-2I  Immature hyaline cartilage (dog). The fibrous
layer (FP) and cellular layer (CP) of the perichondrium border the
cartilage (C) containing chondroblasts (arrows). Hematoxylin and
eosin (x300).
in routine preparations, the cells appear vacuolated. Although
FIGURE 3-22 Mature hyaline cartilage (dog). The fibrous
perichondrium (A) surrounds the cartilage mass. The chondrocytes
considered a less active cell than the chondroblast, the chondro-
(B) lie in lacunae. The territorial matrix (C) is darker than the
cyte is responsible for continual ongoing maintenance of the sur-
interterritorial matrix (D). Hematoxylin and eosin (×425).
rounding matrix.
Cartilage Matrix
lagen and chondrocytes. The matrix is mineralized by calcium
The matrix of cartilage is composed offibers and ground substance
phosphate, present in hydroxyapatite form, in the deep region
of the articular cartilage and the zones of hypertrophy, resorp-
as found in other connective tissues, but the cartilage matrix has
tion, and ossification of the physis.
unique biomechanical properties. Collagen forms the framework
 Overall, the matrix is slightly basophilic when stained with
of the matrix. The major cartilage collagen is type II, but type I
H&E, reacts positively with PAS,and exhibitsa marked metachro-
predominates in fibrocartilage and other collagen types are pres-
ent in cartilage.
masia with metachromatic stains. Staining intensity varies across
the matrix due to variations in biochemical composition of the
The ground substance contains the GAGs chondroitin sul-
matrix related to biomechanical stresses.
fate, keratan sulfate, and hyaluronic acid, all of which play an im-
portant role in transporting water and electrolytes as well as in
Classification of Cartilage
 binding water to give hyaline cartilage its resiliency. GAGs com-
plex with a protein backbone to form proteoglycans (Fig. 3-18).
On the basis of different structural characteristics of the matrix,
Numerous proteoglycans join to a hyaluronan core with the help
three types of cartilage are distinguishable: hyaline cartilage,
of link proteins, thus forming a large aggrecan. The proteogly-
elastic cartilage, and fibrocartilage.
cans of the aggrecan are also bound to adjacent collagen fibrils,
thereby forming a loose network that functions as a molecular
Hyaline cartilage
sieve, limiting movement of larger molecules through the matrix.
Hyaline cartilage is found on the articulating surfaces of bones
Additional components of the cartilage matrix include
in synovial joints and provides support in the nose, larynx, tra-
the adhesive molecules, chondronectin, anchorin CII, and
chea, and bronchi. It forms most of the entire appendicular and
fibronectin, which are involved in the interaction between col-
 axial skeleton in the embryo.
Connective and Supportive Tissues ·Jo Ann Eurell ond Dovid C. Var Sickie
45
The chondrocytes in mature hyaline cartilage vary in size
that are visible in ordinary H&E preparations (Fig. 3-23). The
(Fig. 3-22). Chondrocytes near the surface of cartilage are small,
elastic fibers are few in number near the perichondrium but form
and their lacunae are elliptic, with their long axes parallel to the
a dense network within the cartilaginous mass. Chondrocytes lo-
surface. Deep within the cartilage, the cells are larger and more
cated away from the surface of elastic cartilage contain many fat
polyhedral. Some lacunae contain only one cell; others contain 
vacuoles. Later in adults, these fat-containing cells often become
two, four, or sometimes six cells. These multicellular lacunae are
adipose tissue.
called cell nests or isogenous cell groups.
The amorphous ground substance of hyaline cartilage is a firm
Fibrocartilage
gel containing a network of type II collagen fibrils. Since the fi-
Ofthe three cartilage types, fibrocartilage occurs least frequently.
brils have the same refractive index as the amorphous ground sub-
It is often interposed between other tissues and hyaline cartilage,
stance, they cannot be seen in standard preparations. Surrounding 
each chondrocyte is a thin layer of pericellular matrix that has
tendons, or ligaments. Fibrocartilage is found in the intervertebral
proteoglycans but lacks collagen. The territorial matrix sur-
disks and forms the menisci of the stifle joint. In dogs, fibrocarti-
rounds the pericellular matrix and is composed ofa network of fine
lage is found in the cardiac skeleton, which joins the atrial and ven-
collagen fibrils and ground substance. The interterritorial matrix
tricular heart muscles.
The most striking characteristic of fibrocartilage is the pres-
lies outside the territorial matrix and fills the remaining matrix
ence of prominent type I collagen fibers in the matrix (Fig. 3-24).
space. This matrix region contains large collagen fibrils and abun-
dant proteoglycans. Differences in collagen and proteoglycan
The microscopic appearance of fibrocartilage may vary with loca-
content account for the staining differences between regions as
tion. Fibrocartilage that attaches ligaments and tendons to bone
observed with the light microscope.
has large collagen fiber bundles dispersed ina plane parallel to the
At the ultrastructural level, matrix granules are adjacent
direction of the pulling forces, with rows of small lacunae con-
to the chondrocytes. These granules are proteoglycans secreted
taining chondrocytes between collagen bundles (Fig. 3-24A). In
by the chondrocytes and represent early stages of matrix produc-
the fibrocartilaginous cardiac skeleton (fibrous trigone) of the
tion. The proteoglycans later become components of aggrecans
dog, the chondrocytes and collagen fibers are distributed more
in the surrounding matrix.
randomly (Fig. 3-24B). The amorphous ground substance is
Except on articular surfaces, hyaline cartilage is surrounded
most abundant in the vicinity of the cells, whereas the remain-
by vascular connective tissue called the perichondrium, which
der of the matrix contains primarily collagen fiber bundles.
is composed of two distinct layers (Fig. 3-21). The layer imme-
 Fibrocartilage lacks a distinct perichondrium; the cartilage is
diately adjacent to the cartilage is com posed of chondroblasts and
surrounded by collagen fibers in some locations, but a cellular
a network of small blood vessels; it is called the cellular or chon-
layer is absent.
consists of irregularly arranged collagen fibers and fibroblasts.
Development of Cartilage
The first indication of cartilage formation within the embryo is
Elastic cartilage
a clustering of mesenchymal cells. These cells enlarge, withdraw
Elastic cartilage occurs where elasticity, as well as some rigid-
their processes, and synthesize and secrete amorphous ground
ity, is needed, such as in the epiglottis and external auditory
substance and procollagen (type II). They are then referred to as
canal. It is also part of the corniculate and cuneiform processes of
chondroblasts, and the cell clusters are called centers of chondri-
the larynx.
fication. As the intercellular matrix increases, the cells become
 In addition toall of the structural components of hyaline car-
spherical and isolated from each other in lacunae; at this point,
tilage, elastic cartilage possesses a dense network of elastic fibers
they are called chondrocytes.
A
B
FIGUrE 3-23
(black) penetrating the cellular layer (B) (x80). B. High-power magnification illustrates elastic fibers (C)
coursing through the matrix. The chondrocytes (D) nearly fill the la.cunae. Verhoeffs stain (x425)
46
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
FIGURE 3-24 A. Fibrocartilage at ligament insertion on bone (dog). The lacunae (arrows) are oriented
in the plane of pulling forces. Hematoxylin and eosin (x300). B. Cardiac skeleton (dog). The lacunae and
collagenous fibers are randomly arranged. Hematoxylin and eosin (×570).
Chondroblasts undergo several mitotic divisions, and after
Bone
each division, a new intercellular matrix separates the two result-
Bone is a connective tissue with cells and fibers embedded in a
ing daughter cells. This process leads to substantial expansion of
hard, mineralized substance that is wellsuited for supportive and
the cartilage from within and is referred to as interstitial growth.
-d ai a s s a 
protective functions. Functioning as an organ, bone provides in-
ternal support for the entire body as well as attachment sites for
mordium differentiates into the perichondrium. Chondroblasts
from the cellular layer of the perichondrium divide and secrete ad-
the muscles and tendons necessary for movement. It protects the
brain and organs in the thoracic cavity and contains the bone mar-
ditional matrix on the surface of the cartilage. The process is called
appositional growth. In the adult, the ability of the chondro-
row within its medullary space. Bone functions metabolically by
 genic layer to produce cartilage persists, but it is dormant until a
providing a source of calcium to maintain proper blood calcium
need arises for new cartilage.
levels and various growth factors (e.g., transforming growth factor-
beta [TGF-β]) that play a role in remodeling.
During the development of elastic cartilage, fibroblasts ini-
Bone is a dynamic tissue that is renewed and remodeled
tially produce undifferentiated fibrils. The fibroblasts later trans-
throughout the life of all ma mmals. Its construction is unique
form into chondroblasts and mature elastic fibers are identified
in the matrix.
because it provides the greatest tensile strength with the least
amount of weight of any tissue.
Nutrition of Cartilage
Bone Cells
Unlike other connective tissues, most cartilage is avascular.
Osteoblast
Therefore, the chondrocytes must depend on diffusion of nutri-
ents through the gelled matrix. These nutrients diffuse from
The osteoblast is the cell responsible for active formation and
[uas uong no unpuad au uum sade Aqiau
mineralization of bone matrix. The cells range from columnar to
fluid bathing the cartilage surface. When the intercellular ma-
squamous in shape and are located on surfaces of bone where new
trix becomes calcified, diffusion is no longer possible, and the
bone is being deposited (Figs. 3-25 and 3-26). The nucleus is lo.
chondrocytes die. This phenomenon occurs in aging and is nat:
cated in the basal region of the intensely basophilic cytoplasm
ural in endochondral bone development.
The Golgi apparatus and rER are prominent between the nucleus
Ifcartilage exceeds 3 mm? in size, then vessels may penetrate
and the secretory surface of the osteoblast. The cell deposits os-
the matrix. An example ofvascularized cartilage is the hyaline car-
teoid (collagen I and proteoglycans), the unmineralized matrix
tilage of developing epiphyses of long bones, which contain blood
of bone. In addition, the osteoblast produces various growth fac-
vessels and nerves surrounded by connective tissue in structures
tors including fibroblast growth factor, insulin growth factor,
called cartilage canals.
platelet-derived growth factor, and TGF-β.
Connective and Supportive Tissues · Jo Ann Eurell and David C. Von Sickle
47
Osteoblasts originate from pluripotent mesenchymal stem
cells that also give rise to chondroblasts, fibroblasts, and other cell
types. The osteoprogenitor cell, which ultimately develops into
a differentiated osteoblast, does not have a typical morphologic
appearance, but specific cell-surface molecules expressed during
differentiation help identify the cell line. Bone morphogenetic
 protein (BMP), a protein from the bone matrix, plays an impor-
tant role in the differentiation of stem cells into osteoblasts.
 Flattened, resting osteoblasts are known as bone lining
cells. These cells are found on the surfaces of adult trabeculae and
compact bone. They are capable of becoming active osteoblasts
when appropriately stimulated.
Osteoblasts have receptors for parathyroid hormone (PTH)
on their surface. When PTH binds to the osteoblast, the cell re-
 leases factors that stimulate osteoclastic activity.
Osteocyte
As matrix secretion approaches completion, approximately 10%
of the osteoblasts surround themselves with osteoid and modu-
late into osteocytes. The osteocyte is the principal cell in mature
bone and resides in a lacuna surrounded by calcified interstitial
matrix (Fig. 3-25). Numerous long, slender processes extend
from the cell body into canaliculi within the matrix to contact
adjacent osteocytes. Gap junctions are present at the contact
points and provide communication between osteocytes. Further,
the long cellular processes of the osteocyte are able to shorten and
PInU aaou on .dund, e se aaias Aeuu Aiarse siul "uaungual
through lacunae and canaliculi to transfer metabolites from the
surface of the bone. The organelles of young osteocytes resemble
osteoblasts, but as they mature, the Golgi complex and rER are
FIGURE 3-25
Trabecular bone (A) of intramembranous
less prominent and lysosomes increase in number.
osteogenesis has osteoblasts (B) and osteocytes (C) within lacunae.
The exact way in which osteocytes preserve the integrity of
Note the prominent blood vessels in the mesenchyme. Hematoxylin
bone matrix is not completely understood. Osteocytes are essential
and eosin (xl75).
in preserving bone structure because, upon their death, osteoclasts
immediately move to the area and resorb the bone. Therefore, sig-
nals from apoptotic osteocytes may be part ofa signaling pathway
to initiate bone remodeling.
although the osteoclast is primarily responsible for calcium re-
lease through bone resorption. Osteocytes are believed to re-
move and replace perilacunar bone, a l-μum layer immediately
adjacent to the osteocyte. Perilacunar bone removal is called os-
teocytic osteolysis. The extent to which this process normally
occurs is unclear.
The walls of the lacunae and canaliculi are covered with
GAGs. The maintenance of this covering by osteocytes is im-
portant to maintain the integrity of this tissue.
Osteoclast
The osteoclast is a large, multinucleated cell located on the sur-
face of bone (15 to 30 nuclei per cell, which is 40 to 100 μm in
 diameter) (Fig. 3-26). Occasional mononuclear osteoclasts are not
FIGURE 3-26 Osteodast, in an erosion lacuna (arrow),
easily recognized. The cytoplasm is acidophilic and contains a
resorbing bone. Osteoblasts (open arrows) are forming bone (B).
small amount of rER, ribosomes, numerous smooth vesicles, and
Hematoxylin and eosin (x475).
mitochondria.
48
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
The activated osteoclast has a ruffled border created by ex-
for supplying the bone cells with metabolites in a mineralized
bony surface. The cell secretes acid and lysosomal enzymes into
Canaliculi extend from one lacuna to another and to the bone sur-
this region. The cell membrane immediately adjacent to the ruf-
face, where they open into the connective tissue surrounding the
fled border adheres tightly to the bony surface, thereby sealing
capillaries. The canalicular system provides a conduit system for
the area of active bone resorption. As the osseous matrix is enzy-
nourishment of the mature osteocytes located deep in the bone,
matically digested, an erosion lacuna (Howship's lacuna) is
and the extensive capillary supply of bone further enhances the
formed. The lacuna remains after the osteoclast is no longer pres-
efficiency of the canalicular system.
ent, thus indicating prior areas of resorption. Osteoclasts may
Unlike cartilage, bone grows by apposition only. Because
 also be found in bone remodeling units as part of a cellular com-
the intercellular substance mineralizes so rapidly, interstitial
plex that remodels cortical bone in the adult (described later in
growth of bone is not possible. Therefore, bone changes shape
this chapter). In addition to the release of mineral and protein
and increases or decreases in size by adding layers to or removing
components of bone, osteoclasts are also responsible for the re-
layers from one or more of its existing surfaces.
lease and activation of TGF-β from the matrix. Osteoclasts are
stimulated by PTH, interleukins, and osteoprotegerin ligand
Macroscopic structure
(OPGL, RANKL); they are inhibited by calcitonin, osteoprote-
An adult long bone (e.g., humerus) consists of enlarged ends
gerin (OPG), and gonadal steroids.
(epiphyses) connected by a hollow cylindrical shaft (diaph-
Osteoclasts are derived from pluripotent stem cells (CFU-
GM) of the bone marrow that also give rise to monocytes and
ysis) (Fig. 3-29). The ends of the epiphyses are covered by a
thin layer of hyaline cartilage known as the articular cartilage,
 macrophages. Final differentiation to an osteoclast from a circu-
whereas the remainder of the external surface of the bone is cov-
lating monocyte occurs after the cells are recruited to bone re-
sorption sites. At the end of their cell lifespan, osteoclasts undergo
and 3-30). Each region of the bone is composed of lamellar bone,
apoptosis.
but it is arranged differently to best perform its biomechanical
function. The epiphyses have a thin shell of dense bone (sub-
Bone Matrix
chondral bone) under the articular cartilage. A network of
The matrix of bone is composed of osteoid produced by the os-
trabeculae forms spongy bone, which extends from the sub-
 teoblasts. Mineralization of the osteoid occurs as hydroxyapatite
chondral bone to form the center of the bone. The wall of the
Crystals are deposited in the osteoid framework.
diaphysis is composed of compact bone, which contains osteons.
The organic intercellular substance of bone contains sulfated
The inner (medullary) cavity of bone is lined by endosteum and
glycosaminoglycans, glycoproteins, and collagen. Glycoproteins
contains adipose tissue or red (hemopoietic) or yellow (adipose)
of bone include alkaline phosphatase, osteonectin, osteopontin,
bone marrow, depending on the age of the animal or the region
and sialoprotein. These glycoproteins are thought to play various
of the bone.
roles in bone mineralization. Another noncollagenous protein,
 In the growing animal, the diaphysis and epiphysis are
osteocalcin, regulates the activity of osteoclasts.
separated by the physeal-metaphyseal region (Fig. 3-31).
Type I collagen predominates in bone matrix with traces of
This region consists of a specialized hyaline cartilage plate, the
types II, V, and X. The collagen fibrils in each osteonal lamella
physis and the metaphysis, a region of trabecular bone un-
course in a spiral direction with respect to the long axis of the
derlying the physis. The physis, also referred to as the carti-
central canal. In addition to their spiral orientation, the colla-
laginous growth plate, is responsible for growth in length of
gen fibrils alternate at right angles to those in each adjacent
the animal's bones. During the growth proces, temporary tra-
lamella. This arrangement imparts considerable strength to each
beculae with cartilaginous cores are formed in the metaphysis
osteon.
and later modeled to permanent bony trabeculae (Figs. 3-29
The inorganic component of bone consists of submicroscopic
and 3-31). Upon cessation of growth, the cartilage cells of the
hydroxyapatite crystals deposited as slender needles within the
physis stop proliferating, but bone formation on the metaphy.
collagen fibril network. Such an eficient arrangement enhances
seal side of the physis continues. A transverse, perforated plate
the tensile strength that is characteristic of bone. The principal
of bone (epiphyseal scar) takes the place of the physis in the
ions in bone salt are Ca, CO, PO4, and OH, and the amounts of
skeletally mature animal. The epiphyseal scar may be visible on
Na, Mg, and Fe are substantial. Bone, then, is a major storehouse
radiographs as the epiphyseal line.
for calcium and phosphorus, which are mobilized whenever they
are needed.
Histologic preparation
Because of its dense mineral deposits, bone is difficult to sec-
Structura! and Functiona! Characteristics
tion and process for histologic procedures. Decalcification be-
Adult bone is distinguished from cartilage by the presence of both
fore histologic procesing removes the mineral from the bone,
a canalicular system and a direct vascular supply. The growth
leaving behind the organic matrix and the bone cells for study
process of bone also differs from that of cartilage.
(Fig. 3-32). If examination of osseous mineral content is re-
quired, undecalcified sections can be prepared using special tech-
ment; bone, however, has a unique lacunar-canalicular system
niques (Fig. 3-28).
Connective and Supportive Tissues · Jo Ann Eurell and David C. Von Sickle
49
innercircumferentiallamellae
interstitial lamellae
blood vessel in central canal
osteon-
osteonal lamella
central canal
outer circumferential
lamellae
periosteum
 perforating canal 
FIGURE 3-27The structural unit of compact bone is the cylindrical osteon. In this d
on is telescoped to show the
periosteal or endosteal surface. The space between adjacent osteons is filled by interstitial lamellae, and inner and outer circumferential
lamellae form the surfaces of compact bone.
Microscopic structure
The outermost layers of the shaft ofa long bone consist of com-
pact bone arranged as outer circumferential lamellae (2 to
8 μm thick). Deep to the outer circumferential lamellae are os-
teons (Haversian systems) formed by concentric lamellae sur-
rounding longitudinally oriented vascular channels (central
canals) (Fig. 3-27). Internal surfaces of compact bone from adult
animals are composed of inner circumferential lamellae encir-
cling the medullary cavity.
Lacunae are located between each lamella of the compact
bone (Fig. 3-28). Radiating from the lacunae are the branching
canaliculi that penetrate and join canaliculi of adjacent lamel-
lae. Thus, the lacunae and canaliculi form an extensive system of
interconnecting passageways for the transport of nutrients.
The central canal (Haversian canal) of each osteon contains
capillaries, lymphatic vessels, and nonmyelinated nerve fibers, all 
supported by reticular connective tissue. Central canals are con-
nected with each other and with the free surface by transverse or
horizontal channels called perforating canals (Volkmann's
FIGURE 3-28 Osteon of ground bone surrounded by a light
cement line (solid arrow). The central canal (C) carries blood
canals) (Figs. 3-27 and 3-28).
vessels, lymphatics, and nerves, and branches into a transverse
Most bones are invested with a tough connective tissue
perforating canal (P). Lacunae (L) are located between lamellae of
a oi s 1 (o- pe  sg) asad aun 'a
compact bone that surround the central canal. Fine canaliculi extend
an inner osteogenic layer that provides cells necessary to form
from each lacuna. Unstained (×230).
 bone and an outer fibrous layer made of irregularly arranged
50
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
secondary
center of
ossification
primary center
] of ossification
epiphysis
periosteal bud
metaphysis
diaphysis
hypertrophy
ofchondrocytes
bony collar
A
B
C
D
E
F
FIGURE 3-29
The stages of endochondral ossification of a long bone. A. A hyaline cartilage model
forms initially. B. The chondrocytes in the center of the model hypertrophy. C. A bony collar begins to 
form around the cartilage model. D. Blood vessels from the periosteum (periosteal bud) invade the
cartilage model, bringing bone-forming cells to initiate the primary center of ossification. E. The physis
(growth plate) and secondary centers of ossification are established. F. The physis closes in the mature 
bone and a confluent marrow cavity from the epiphysis to the diaphysis is formed.
collagen fibers and blood vessels. The vessels branch and enter
ization. The nucleation theory proposes that the hole regions
 the perforating canals and ultimately reach the central canal of
of type I collagen fibrils serve as the major site of calcium phos-
the osteons. The cellular layer is more evident in young animals
phate crystal deposition. A second theory describes matrix vesi-
than in adults. The periosteum is attached firmly to the bone by
cles, which are membrane-bounded structures that form along
bundles of coarse collagen fibers that have been incorporated into
the osteoblast membrane. The vesicles contain lipid, accumu-
the outer circumferential lamellae of the bone. These fibers are
lated calcium ions, and alkaline phosphatase, all of which are re-
called perforating (Sharpey's) fibers (Fig. 3-30). A periosteum
quired to initiate and maintain the process of mineralization.
is absent over the surface of hyaline articular cartilage and at sites
Bone is classified by the arrangement of collagen fibrils in
where tendons and ligaments insert on bones.
the matrix (woven versus lamellar bone) or by the type of pre-
The marrow cavity and central and perforating canals are
cursor connective tissue (intra membranous versus endochondral
lined witha layer of squamous bone-lining cells, osteoblasts, and
ossification).
osteoclasts called the endosteum. Some cells of the endosteum
Woven bone has collagen fibrils that are arranged in an ir-
regular anastomosing fashion (Fig. 3-32), whereas lamellar
Recently, the possibility has been suggested that these cells form
bone has a more organized matrix, which is deposited in layers
an ion barrier so that the fluid flowing through the lacunae and
(Fig. 3-28). Woven bone is formed rapidly and is considered to be
 canaliculi is separated from the interstitial fluid. In addition,
an immature form of bone; it is usually replaced by lamellar bone.
-ngan Aq siseisoauou leiauu u aloi e Aeld Aeu san Ieasopua
Woven bone is found in developing bone, fracture repair sites, and
lating the flow of calcium and phosphate into and out of bone
certain bone tumors. Calcified cartilage and woven bone seem to
fluids, thus maintaining an optimum microenvironment for the
mineralize in association with matrix vesicles, while the mineral-
growth of bone crystals.
ization of lamellar bone appears to follow the nucleation theory.
 Regardless of the site, bone develops by a process of trans-
Osteogenesis
formation from an existing connective tissue. The two different
 Bone is formed by a two-step process. First, osteoid is deposited
types of bone development depend on specific cells differentiat-
by osteoblasts, followed by mineralization of the osteoid several
ing within two different microenvironments. When bone forms
days later. Two theories exist for the initiation of bone mineral-
directly from connective tissue, the process is termed intrame m-
Connective and Supportive Tissues · Jo Ann Eurell ond Dovid C. Van Sickile
51
nous osteogenesis, osteoblasts become surrounded by a partially
mineralized matrix containing visible collagen fibrils (Fig. 3-32).
Gradually, more osteoid is produced, followed by complete min-
eralization. As a result, some osteoblasts become trapped within
their lacunae and become osteocytes. These small, isolated pieces
of developing bone within the connective tissue are called the
centers of ossification, which ultimately radiate in several di-
-e1n palien st auoq yons "(sz-e g!g) aejnzaqein unoy oi suoiaai
becular, spongy, or cancellous bone.
The bony trabeculae increase in width and length by the ad-
dition of new lamellae, forming a primary spongiosa of trabecu-
lar bone. In areas of the spongiosa where compact bone forms, the
mesenchymal space between trabeculae fills with osseous tissue
except for a central canal containing the vasculature of the new
osteon. In regions where spongy bone persists, the mesenchymal
 soft tissue located between trabeculae becomes bone marrow.
Endochondral ossification
Bones of the extremities, vertebral column, pelvis, and base of the
skull are formed initially as hyaline cartilage models that are re-
placed by bone in the developing embryo.
Primary Center of Ossification.As the cartilage model grows
both in width and in length, it reaches a stage when most of the
remaining growth occurs at the ends of the model. The chon-
drocytes in the midsection mature and enlarge, so that the ma-
trix between the hypertrophied cells becomes extremely thin
(Fig. 3-33). At the same time, these chondrocytes release matrix
vesicles, similar to those of osteoblasts, that promote calcification
of the surrounding cartilage matrix. This calcification prevents
the hypertrophied chondrocytes from receiving adequate nutri-
tion and results in their degeneration and death.
 In the meantime, the perichondrium is invaded by numer-
FIGURE 3-30 Decalcifed bone (cat). Bone (A) with periosteur
(B) attached by perforating fibers (C). Hematoxylin and eosin (x500)
ous capillaries. This event changes the microenvironment of the
(Courtesy of A. Honsen.)
chondrogenic layer to one that favors osteogenesis on the surface
ferentiate into osteoblasts and form a thin shell of bone around
branous ossification (Fig. 3-32). This term arose because the soft
the midsection of the cartilage model. This periosteal band. or
tissue located where bone will form is arranged in a layer and,
bony collar forms by intramembranous ossification, and the
hence, is membranous. The process of bone formation in pre-
perichondrium becomes the periosteum. Blood vessels are essen-
existing cartilage models is termed endochondral or intracarti-
tial in activating the osteogenic potential of the inner layer of the
laginous ossification (Fig. 3-33). During this process, calcified
perichondrium, the cells of which retain the ability to differen-
cartilage is replaced by bone. The terms intramembranous and en-
tiate into either chondroblasts or osteoblasts throughout their
dochondral indicate the type of microenvironment in which the
life. This ability is especially significant in fracture healing, dur-
bone forms, rather than the type of adult bone. For example, both
ing which cartilage forms in areas that are relatively devoid of
intramembranous and endochondral bone formation can give rise
capillaries, but endochondral ossification occurs as soon as capil-
to spongy bone in the adult.
laries grow into the area.
After the bony collar forms around the midsection of the
Intramembranous ossification
model, blood vessels from the periosteum invade the area of the de-
The process of intramembranous ossification takes place within
generating hypertrophied chondrocytes, thereby raising the oxy-
well-vascularized connective tissue, such as that found in the
gen level (Fig. 3-29 and 3-34). Osteoprogenitor cells from the
diploe of the developing calvaria of the skull. Osteoprogenitor
 periosteum, pericytes, and undifferentiated mesenchymal cells
cells differentiate into osteoblasts. These cells begin to synthe-
 all accompany the invading capillaries. These blood vessels and
size and secrete osteoid. The first secreted component of osteoid
their associated cells constitute the periosteal bud. When the
is collagen, and the remaining constituents of the ground sub-
periosteal bud reaches the interior of the midsection of the carti-
stance are produced somewhat later. During early intramembra.
lage model, the primary center of ossification is established.
52
Dellman's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
epiphysis
physis
metaphysis
hypertrophic
chondrocyte
 calcified
cartilage
osteoid
osteoblast
metaphyseal
blood vessel
FlGURE 3-3I Metaphyseal blood vessels make a sharp bend in the zone of resorption. Capillary loops
invade the lacunae of the degenerating hypertrophic chondrocytes. Osteoblasts form bone on the remnants
of the calcified physeal cartilage.
Under the influence of inductive bone-forming factors in the
interstitial growth, resulting in an increase in the length of the
blood plasma, the osteoprogenitor cells that accompany the cap-
model. The bony collar surrounding the diaphysis continues
illaries differentiate into osteoblasts. These cells cluster around
to increase in thickness and length, hence the primitive bone
fragments of the calcified cartilage, begin to synthesize and
in the primary center of ossification is no longer needed for
secrete osteoid, and somewhat later contribute to the minerali-
 support. Therefore, most of the bone in the primary center is
zation process. Such osteoblastic activity continues until bone
resorbed by osteoclasts, thus forming the marrow cavity, which
trabeculae containing cores of calcified cartilage are formed.
becomes filled with hemopoietic tissue developed from the un-
While the primary center of ossification is forming, the
differentiated mesenchymal cells brought in with the peri-
cartilage at each end of the model continues to proliferate by
osteal bud.
Connective and Supportive Tissues ● Jo Ann Eurell ond Dovid C. Van Sickle
53
FlGURE 3-32  Intramembranous bone development. Bone is
formed by osteoblasts (open arrows) surrounding the immature
bone spicule (arrow) Irregularly arranged collagen fibrils are present
(Me) surrounds the forming bone. Hematoxylin and eosin (x600).
FIGURE 3-34 Primary center of ossification (cat). Periosteal bud
(A) entering hypertrophied cartilage. Perichondrium (B). Crossman's
trichrome (x570).
Secondary Centers of Ossification.  The cartilaginous epi-
physes of the larger long bones develop additional centers of
ossification referred to as secondary centers (Fig. 3-29). The
epiphyseal cartilage of newborn animals is well supplied with
cartilage canals containing arterioles, venules, and nonmyeli-
nated nerve fibers, all surrounded by connective tissue (Fig. 3-35).
These canals arise from the perichondrium and are evenly spaced
throughout the epiphysis, providing nutrients to a given area
The blood vessels do not enter the physis or penetrate the future
articular cartilage. The arterioles of these canals end in a capil-
lary glomerulus, and the initial sites of ossification occur as multi-
ple foci adjacent to the glomeruli. When ossification begins, the
chondrocytes next to the glomerulus of the cartilage canal hyper-
trophy and degenerate, and the surrounding matrix calcifies. This
process is followed by the appearance of circularly oriented lay-
ers of hypertrophic and dividing chondrocytes. Thus, this cel-
lular arrangement resembles that of the growth zones in the
physis. Because the connective tissue in the cartilage canals is
continuous with the perichondrium, these cells have the same
 osteogenic potential for bone formation. Ultimately, these foci
fuse intoa single secondary center ofossification, forming spongy
bone in the epiphysis.
Ossification does not replace all of the epiphyseal cartilage
Enough cartilage remains such that the epiphyseal portion serves
as a template for enlarging the end of the bone, while the surface
FIGURE 3-33 Endochondral ossfication of a long bone (dog).
portion serves as the articular cartilage. A transverse plate of carti-
Hypertrophied cartilage cells (A) are in the center of the model.
lage is left between the diaphysis and each epiphysis. In domestic
Note the thin mineralized cartilage remnants between enlarged
animals, this physis persists until puberty, and then it too is re-
lacunae; perichondrium (B). Hematoxylin and eosin (x80).
placed by bone.
54
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Re
FIGURE 3-35  Cartilage canal in epiphysis of a I-day-old 
puppy containing an arteriole (A), venules (V), and glomerular
capillaries (C). Degenerating cartilage at arrow.
Growth in length
FIGURE 3-36  The physis is anchored to epiphyseal bone (E).
The physis and metaphysis function in bone growth in length and
Chondrocytes in the reserve zone (Re) are scattered in the matrix.
provide a scaffolding for constructing metaphyseal cancellous
In the zone of proliferation (P), chondrocytes are arranged in
bone. Continued interstitial growth of the cartilage in the physis,
columns. The cells increase in size in the zone of hypertrophy (H).
involving chondrocytic hyperplasia, synthesis of proteoglycans,
 Metaphyseal capillaries enter the zone of resorption (R), and bone
and chondrocyte hypertrophy, serves to lengthen the long bones.
is formed on the cartilage remnants of the physis in the zone of
Five distinct zones or regions are recognized in a longitudi-
ossification (O). Hematoxylin and eosin (×200)
nal section through the physis (Fig. 3-36). From the epiphysis to
the metaphysis, the following zones are present:
1. The reserve zone (resting zone) is adjacent to the bone and
leased from matrix vesicles causes a local increase of phos-
marrow cavity of the epiphysis (Fig. 3-37). Here, the small
phate. Accumulation of calcium in the vesicles and the in-
chondrocytes are dispersed in an irregular pattern and are
crease in phosphate leads to mineralization of the matrix,
nourished by epiphyseal blood vessels, which are arranged
and the last two or three hypertrophied cells in the column
in glomeruli. Matrix vesicles, membrane-bounded struc-
are bordered by a wall of calcified matrix. Transverse septa
tures similar to those produced by osteoblasts, are formed by
between the cells do not calcify. Some of these hypertro-
chondrocytes in this zone, but matrix mineralization does
 phied cells become shrunken, and their pyknotic nucleus ap-
not occur until deeper in the physis.
2. In the zone of proliferation, the chondrocytes are some-
4.
The metaphyseal capillaries make a sharp U-shaped bend in
what larger and form rows or columns parallel to the long
the zone of resorption and return to the medullary circu-
axis of the developing bone (Fig. 3-37). New cells are pro-
lation (Figs. 3-31 and 3-38). Individual capillary loops and
duced through cell division at the top of the columns. The
perivascular connective tissue invade the lacunae of the de-
Joj Aressanau salaueio aui ie ssasod suunjon aui u! slan
 generating hypertrophic chondrocytes located at the base of
synthesis of matrix, and each cell is separated from the cell
the cell columns.
in an ad jacent lacuna by a layer of matrix.
5. In the zone of ossification, osteoblasts differentiate from
3. As maturation progresses in the zone of hypertrophy, the
cells accompanying the invading capillaries. These cells de-
cells increase in size and begin to accumulate calcium. The
posit bone on the remains of the calcified walls of the chon-
cellular calcium is released into the matrix of the deep hy-
drocytic lacunae. The resulting trabeculae of bone with
pertrophic zone and matrix vesicles begin calcium uptake.
calcified cartilage centers are known collectively as the pri-
The action of alkaline phosphatase and neutral proteases re-
mary spongiosa (Figs. 3-31 and 3-39).
Connective and Supportive Tissues · Jo Ann Eurell ond Dovid C. Van Sickle
55
P
FIGURE 3-38Hypertrophic chondrocytes (arrowheads)
FIGURE 3-37 Chondrocytes of the reserve zone (Re) are
degenerate in the zone of hypertrophy (H) just above the zone of
scattered and spherical. New cells are produced at the top of the
of the degenerating chondrocytes. Hematoxylin and eosin (x300).
columns (arrow) in the zone of proliferation (P). Hematoxylin and
eosin (×550)
periosteal bone formation and endosteal bone resorption enlarge
the marrow cavity and increase the width of the diaphysis. Be-
The surface of many trabeculae of the primary spongiosa is
cause endosteal resorption lags behind periosteal production, the
covered with numerous osteoclasts for a short distance into the
thickness of the shaft wall slowly enlarges as the circumference
metaphysis. Precursors of these osteoclasts arrive with the invad-
increases.
ing metaphyseal vessels and differentiate into functional osteo-
The outer surface of an actively growing bone is uneven,
clasts within the bone. The osteoclasts actively resorb bone from
owing to numerous longitudinal ridges and grooves. Within
the surface of the trabeculae and reduce the number of trabeculae.
these grooves, osteoblasts from the adherent periosteum deposit
Because the cartilage cores of the trabeculae are continuous
bone around the periosteal vessels. Eventually, the edges of the
with the cartilaginous matrix of the physis, the new bony trabec-
groove meet, forming a tube lined with osteogenic cells and en-
ulae are anchored firmly to the physis. In longitudinal sections 
closing the blood vessel derived from the periosteum. The os-
through the growth plate, the bony trabeculae and their cartilage
teogenic cells produce concentric layers of bone around the blood
cores resemble separate stalks attached to the growth plate. In a
vessel within the new central canal. In this way, new primary os-
cross section taken through the metaphyseal side of the physis,
Sunok Suimoia Alaarne ue jo Aiaydiad aul oi pappe are suoal
however, each trabecula is actually a wall between adjacent tubes
 bone. Primary osteons comprising the cortical bone are gradually
filled with osteogenic cells and capillaries (Fig. 3-31).
replaced with more orderly secondary osteons.
 Deeper in the metaphysis, trabeculae of the primary spon-
Primary osteons are smaller than secondary osteons, lack ce-
giosa decrease and trabeculae composed of lamellar bone pre-
ment lines, and often have two or more blood vessels in their
 dominate. Trabecular bone without cartilage cores is known as
the secondary spongiosa.
cement lines, composed of mineralized matrix deficient in col-
lagen (Fig. 3-28). Between the secondary osteons are many ir-
Growth in width and circumference
regularly shaped groups of lamellae called interstitial lamellae.
The trabecular bone that formed in the original bony collar is con-
 Finally, the bone growth slows, and appositional growth in
verted to compact bone composed of primary osteons. Concurrent
the subperiosteal and endosteal regions adds more layers, which
56
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
FIGURE 3-39 Osteoblasts (arrows) form bone (B) on darker
staining calcified cartilage (C) in the zone of ossification. Hematoxylin
FIGURE 3-40 During growth, modeling occurs as new bone is
and eosin (x475).
added on the outer periosteal surface of the diaphysis and within
the metaphysis and epiphysis (solid arrows). Bone is concurrently
resorbed on both the endosteal and periosteal surfaces to shape
the adult bone (open arrows).
smooth the surface. These layers are the inner and outer circum-
ferential lamellae.
The important principle to note is that growth in length is
the result of endochondral ossification, whereas growth in width
the funnel shape in the direction of the diaphysis. Concurrent en-
is the result of intramembranous ossification. Each type of
dosteal bone formation creates a thickened metaphyseal cortex.
growth responds to different rules, and each can be affected sep-
Bone remodeling
arately without necessarily influencing the other.
 Bone modeling
Throughout life, bone is constantly being turned over. Early
woven bone is of poorer quality than mature lamellar bone. In ad-
 The changes in size and shape of bones during the growth proces
 dition, as bone ages, the quality also diminishes. Bone remodel-
 are called modeling. The concurrent action of bone resorption
ing is the process by which bone is constantly replaced.
and formation on different surfaces of a bone alters the overall
In contrast to modeling, bone remodeling occurs in a cyclical
shape. The process of modeling continues over most of the ske-
 leton until the adult shape of the bones is reached. Modeling is
shape or size of the bone. Remodeling is coupled; it initiates and
rapid and results in a net gain of bone in the body. Examples of
proceeds in only one way. First, activation of remodeling occurs,
modeling include the drifting of the diaphysis during growth,
 perhaps caused by a change in biomechanics. Osteoclastic bone re-
 shaping of the metaphyseal funnel, and enlargement of the cra-
sorption is then followed by osteoblastic bone formation. Balance
nial vault.
between bone resorption and formation is important for healthy
In the diaphysis, bone formation occurs on the periosteal
bone; however, bone resorption is often greater than bone forma-
 surface while bone is resorbed on the endosteal surface, resulting
tion, leading to net bone loss (e.g., osteoporosis related to aging).
in a wider diaphysis and larger marrow cavity (Fig. 3-40). If the
 Cortical bone is remodeled by cortical remodeling units.
modeling process occurs in an eccentric fashion, the entire dia-
The unit, when viewed longitudinally, consists ofa leading cut-
physis may drift in a specific direction.
ting cone composed of osteoclasts, which resorb compact bone
In contrast, the shaping of the metaphyseal region is accom
without respect to osteonal barriers (Fig. 3-41). The cutting cone
plished by periosteal resorption on the external surface to narrow
is followed by a reversal zone, in which resorption switches to
Connective and Supportive Tissues ·Jo Ann Eurell ond Dovid C. Var Sickie
57
reversal
closing cone
zone
cutting cone
resorption
cavity
forming
osteon
FIGURE 3-4l  The remodeling unit of cortical bone is composed of a cutting cone of osteoclasts,
which resorbs bone. Osteoclasts are followed by osteoblasts at the reversal zone and the osteoblasts of
the closing cone fll in the resorption cavity to create a new osteon.
osteoblastic bone formation. The structure terminates as a clos-
the opposing ends of the bone, and the external callus surrounds
ing cone, in which osteoblasts close the newly excavated osteon
the outermost surface of the broken bone.
by adding centripetal layers of lamellar bone inward from the ce-
The cells involved in callus formation are osteogenic cells of
ment line boundary. The osteoclasts of the cutting cone are sup-
the periosteum and endosteum. Early in the healing proces, the
ported metabolically by a glomerulus, whereas the osteoblasts of
cells of the periosteum proliferate to such an extent that the fibrous
the closing cone are within close diffusion distance from the
layer of the periosteum is lifted away from the bone. In addition,
blood vessel of the new central canal.
the endosteal cells proliferate, resulting ina thickened endosteum.
 In spongy bone, remodeling is accomplished on the endosteal
The undifferentiated marrow cells increase in number in the same
surface of the trabecula. Osteoclasts resorb bone from the surface
of the trabecula. Osteoblasts then form new bone in either the
and depends on the
same location where the resorption occurred or on the opposing
 bone fragments differentiate in the presence of blood vessels; con-
surface of the trabecula. If bone is formed on the opposing surface,
the alignment of the trabecula is changed in the direction of the
Those farther away from the bone proliferate in an area relatively
bone formation.
devoid of capillaries; consequently, they form chondroblasts, which
Fracture repair
rary splint that eventually is replaced by bone, following the
After a midshaft fracture of a bone, a certain sequence of events oc-
same sequence of events that occurs in endochondral ossification.
Curs during the healing process. Fracture repair involves changes
Gradually, the callus is remodeled by resorption of the trabeculae
in blood supply that affect cellular proliferation and differentiation
 at the periphery, until the original outline of the bone is restored.
as well as bone resorption.
No external callus develops when a bone fracture has smooth,
The trauma that causes the bone to break also tears the
even, opposing surfaces that are perfectly aligned without any space
adjacent soft tissues and blood vessels. The blood clot that forms
between the fragments, and the fragments are held rigidly through-
at the fracture site stops circulation and results in necrosis or
death of the surrounding tissue. Likewise, the interruption of the
distance on both sides ofthe fracture line. Osteogenic cells and cap-
illaries in the living bone proliferate and grow into the adjacent
and death of the osteocytes on each side of the fracture site.
dead bone. Simultaneously, osteoclasts invade the area and form
New tissue developing at the fracture site forms a bridge
cortical remodeling units that cross the fracture line. Resulting new
between the fragments. This formation is termed a callus and
osteons extend into the cortical bone on the other side of the frac-
is composed of two parts. The internal callus develops between
ture (primary osteosynthesis).
58
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Fractures that are realigned in direct apposition but have a
small space between the two fragments heal similarly, as long as
rigid fixation is maintained. The only difference is that the two
bone ends are joined initially by woven bone rather than by new
osteons. Remodeling occurs as a secondary event.
JOINTS
Joints connect two or more bones. The various types of joints are
classified according to the type of tissue that makes up the struc-
ture and the degree of movement permitted. As the result of
aging, certain fibrous and cartilaginous joints may become syn-
ostoses, as the respective connective tissues are eventually re-
placed by bone.
Fibrous Joints
Bones held together by collagenous or elastic dense connective
tissue are called syndesmoses or sutures. An example of a syn-
desmosis is the fibrous articulation between the radius and ulna.
Sutures are typical of the skull.
Cartilaginous Joints
Joints in which the two bones are connected by cartilage are syn-
chondroses, such as the physis. In the symphysis joint, the hya-
 line cartilage caps of adjacent bones are joined by thick fibrous
FIGURE 3-42 Vertebral column, longitudinal section (puppy)
The central nucleus pulposus (N) of the intervertebral disk is
bands. Between the hyaline cartilage and the collagen fibers is a
surrounded by the annulus fibrosus (A). The disk attaches to the
transition zone of fibrocartilage. The pelvic symphysis is an ex-
cartilaginous end plates (E) of the vertebral bodies (B). A spinal
ample of this type of joint.
nerve (S) exits from the spinal cord through the intervertebral
The intervertebral disk is a symphysis that consists of an
foramen above the disk. Hematoxylin and eosin (x8)
outer lamellated annulus fibrosus and an inner dorsally eccen-
tric cavity, which is filled with a gelatinous nucleus pulposus
in young animals (Fig. 3-42). The nucleus becomes more rigid
chondrocytes and the arrangement of the type II collagen fibrils
with age and may calcify in some breeds of dogs at approxi-
in the matrix: (l) the superficial zone has flat cells that lie
mately 5 years of age. The annulus is thicker ventrally than dor-
aejans aui ol ialleied panuano sqy uaon jo siae ououe
sally, and its fibers insert into a thin layer of hyaline cartilage
(2) the middle zone has larger, more spherical cells, displays a
covering the ends of adjacent vertebrae. The cells in the peri-
random arrangement of collagen fibrils, and stains the most in-
 pheral laminae of the annulus resemble fibrocytes, whereas the 
tensely of all zones for GAGs; and (3) the deep zone has cells
cells of the deeper lamellae are more representative of chondro-
that are arranged perpendicular to the articular surface between
cytes. The annulus is avascular and hence is sustained by diffu-
columns of collagen fibrils. These fibrils are anchored into the
sion from the vessels in the medullary cavity and periosteum of
calcified cartilage, which forms the deepest layer of articular
the vertebrae.
cartilage. The calcified cartilage is joined to underlying sub-
 chondral bone by simple adherence without traversing collagen
fibrils. Although uncalcified articular cartilage (superficial, mid-
Synovial Joints
dle, and upper deep zone) may vary in thickness during life, the
thickness of the calcified cartilage layer remains constant.
articular cartilage on the opposing bony surfaces, a lubricating
The tidemark is a thin layer of clusters of mineral, glyco-
synovial fluid within the closed joint cavity, and a joint capsule
proteins, and lipids located between the calcified and uncalcified
enclosing the entire joint (Fig. 3-43).
layers of the deep zone. In decalcified sections, the tidemark
The articulating surfaces of synovial joints are covered by a
 stains with hematoxylin. Multiple tidemarks may be present in
specialized complex, the articular cartilage, which consists of
 older animals and indicate that mineralization of the cartilage
hyaline cartilage, tidemark, and calcified cartilage (Fig. 3-44).
was interrupted and then resumed several times. This contrast-
The hyaline cartilage segment is devoid of perichondrium and
ing interface between calcified and uncalcified tissues is prone to
can be divided into three zones based on the morphology of the
fracture.
Connective and Supportive Tissues · Jo Ann Eurell and Dovid C. Vor Sickle
59
joint capsule
 synovial membrane
synovial
cavity
 articular cartilage
M
meniscus
FIGURE 3-43
 Articular cartilage covers the opposing bony
surfaces of a synovial joint as shown in this diagram of a stifle. The
joint space is flled with synovial fluid produced by the synovial
membrane of the surrounding joint capsule. A meniscus composed 
of fibrocartilage extends into the joint cavity.
The highly anionic GAGs (e.g., chondroitin sulfate and ker-
atan sulfate to a lesser degree) of articular cartilage normally bind
water, which is released upon compression of the cartilage. Con-
versely, when the compression is released, the water is absorbed
into the matrix and rebinds with the GAGs. This process pro-
vides a “weeping" lubrication of the articular surfaces, as well as
a circulation of nutrients to and waste products from the articu-
lar chondrocytes. This fluid circulation is important since the
FIGURE 3-44 Articular cartilage zones: superficial (S), middle (M).
articular cartilage is avascular and alymphatic.
and deep (D). Multiple tidemarks (closed arrows) are present in the
The joint capsule encloses the entire joint and comprises an
calcifed cartilage region. The junction of the articular carilage with
inner synovial membrane and outer fibrous layer (Fig. 3-45A)
the subchondral bone is indicated by the open arrow. Hematoxylin
The synovial membrane, in turn, is composed of synovial cells
and eosin (×290)
and subcellular connective tissue, which may be loose (Fig. 3-45 B),
fibrous, or adipose. The predominating type of connective tissue
in the synovial membrane varies with the location in the joint
Some synovial joints (stifle) have intraarticular menisci
and classifies the type of synovial membrane. The outer fibrous
composed of fibrocartilage (Fig. 3-43). Usually, menisci are an-
layer is composed of dense irregular connective tissue and is con-
chored on one side to the fibrous layer of the joint capsule. If
tinuous with the periosteum of adjacent bones.
the cartilages are removed after traumatic injury, a new struc-
The synovial cavity is filled with synovial fluid, which has
ture can develop from the fibrous layer of the capsule; however,
a composition similar to plasma. This fluid is derived as an ul-
it is composed of dense collagen rather than fibrocartilage.
trafiltrate of the blood with the addition of a substantial amount
These structures are important to the biomechanics of the joint,
of polymerized hyaluron from synovial cells. Synovial fluid pro-
and the ends (horns) are heavily innervated with proprioceptive
vides the lubrication for the articulating surfaces of joints.
nerves.
60
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
FIGURE 3-45 Phalangeal joint (dog). A. The articular cartilage (A) is developing adjacent to the joint
cavity (IC). The synovial membrane (S) has synovial villi (arrow) and the fibrous layer (F) of the joint capsule
is dense connective tissue (×l0o). B. Area outlined by rectangle in A. Synovial cells (closed arrows) rest on
SUGGESTED READINGS
Kuettner KE, Schleyerbach R, Hascall VC, eds. Articular Cartilage
Biochemistry. New York: Raven Press, 1986.
Alberts B, Bray D, Lewis J, et al. Molecular Biology of the Cell. 3rd Ed.
Malluche HH, Faugere M-C. Atlas of Mineralized Bone Histology. New
New York: Garland Publishing, 1994.
York: S. Karger, 1986.
Anderson C. Manual for the Examination of Bone. Boca Raton, FL: CRC
Piez KA, Reddi AH, eds. Extracellular Matrix Biochemistry. New
Press, 1982.
Yotk: Elsevier Biomedical, 1984.
Cheville NF. Cell Pathology. 2nd Ed. Ames, IA: Iowa State University
Reddi AH, ed. Extracellular matfix: structure and function. In: UCLA
Press, 1983.
 Symposia on Molecular and Cellular Biology. New York: Alan R.
Everts V, Van der Zee E, Creemers L, et al. Phagocytosis and intracel-
Liss, 1985;25:1.
lular digestion of collagen, its role in turnover and remodeling.
Ruggeri A, Motta PM, eds. Ultrastructure of the Connective Tissue
Histochem J 1996;28(4):229-245.
Matrix. Boston: M. Nijhoff, 1984.
Freeman MAR, ed. Adult Articular Cartilage. New York: Grune and
 Scott MA, Stockham SL. Basophils and mast cells. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl
Stratton,1972
JG, Jain NC, eds. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. Philadelphia:
 Frost HM. Intermediary Organization of the Skeleton. Boca Raton, FL:
Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins, 2000.
CRC Press, 1986;1, 11.
 Simon SR, ed. Orthopaedic Basic Science. Chicago: American Academy
Ghosh P, ed. The Biology of the Intervertebral Disc. Boca Raton, FL:
of Orthopaedic Surgeons, 1994.
CRC Press, 1988;1, I1.
Stockwell RA. Biology of Cartilage Cells. Cambridge: Cambridge
Gothlin G, Ericsson JLE. The osteoclast. Clin Orthop 1976;120:201.
University Press, 1979.
Hall BK, ed. Cartilage. San Diego: Academic Press, 1983;I, II.
Talmage RV. Morphological and physiological consideration in a hew
Hirschi KK, D'Amore, PA. Pericytes in the microvasculature.
concept of calcium transport of bone. Am J Anat 1970;129:
Cardiovasc Res 1996:32:687-698.
467476.
Ibbotson KJ, D'Souza SM, Kanis JA, et al. Physiological and pharma-
Tizard IR. Veterinary Immunology. Sth Ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders,
cological regulation of bone resorption. Metab Bone Dis Rel Res
1996.
198 1;2(3): 177-1 89
Utist MR, ed. Fundamental and Clinical Bone Physiology. Philadelphia:
Jee WSS. The skeletal tissues. In: Weiss L, ed. Histology, Cell and Tissue
 JB Lippincott, 1980.
Biology. 6th Ed. New York: Elsevier Biomedical, 1988:213.
Van Sickle DC, Kincaid SA. Comparative arthrology. In: Sokoloff L,
Jee WSS, Parfitt AM, eds. Bone Histomorphometry. Paris: Societe
ed. The Joints and Synovial Fluid. New York: Academic Press,
 Nouvelle de Publications Medicales et Dentaires, 1 981.
1979;1: 1.
Kimmel DB, Jee WSS. Bone cell kinetics during longitudinal bone
Weiss L, Sakai H. The hemopoietic stroma. Am J Anat 1984;170:
growth in the rat. Calcif Tissue Int 1980;32: 123-133.
447-463.
Kincaid SA, Van Sickle DC. Bone morphology and postnatal
Wilsman NJ, Van Sickle DC. Cartilage canals, their morphology and
osteogenesis—potential for disease. In: Alexander JW, Roberts
distribution. Anat Rec 1972;173:79-93.
 RE, eds. Symposium on Orthopedic Diseases. Philadelphia: WB
Woo SL-Y, Buckwalter JA, eds. Injury and Repair of the Musculoskeletal
Saunders, 1983;13(1):3.
Soft Tissues. Park Ridge: AAOS, 1 988.
Blood and Bone Marrow
IOANNE MESSICK
Blood
Hematopoietic stem cells
 Plasma 
Cytokines and regulation of hematopoiesis
Erythrocytes
Granulopoiesis
Leukocytes
 Neutrophilic precursors
Neutrophil
Eosinophilic and basophilic granulocytes and mast cells
 Eosinophil
Monocytopoiesis
Basophil
Erythropoiesis and Erythroid Precursors
Monocyte
Thrombopoiesis and Platelet Precursors
Lymphocyte
Lymphopoiesis and Lymphoid Precursors
Platelets/Thrombocytes
Other Cells in Bone Marrow
Bone Marrow
Structure and Function
Hematopoiesis
BLOoD
the killing potential of their granules, and the humoral and cell-
mediated imm une responses mounted by lymphocytes, the blood
The blood consists of specialized cells derived from the bone mar-
 provides a defense system for the animal. Finally, the platelets are
row that are suspended in a liquid called plasma. In an adult an-
tiny cellular elements that play a major role in hemostasis, pre-
imal, the blood volume is about 8 to 10% of the body weight or
venting the entire blood volume from being lost during hemor-
approximately 40 mL of blood for each lb. of body weight. Thus,
rhage. When blood is freshly drawn into a test tube without
the total blood volume in a 1000-lb. horse is estimated at 40 L,
anticoagulants, platelets and coagulation factors in the fluid por-
whereas that of a 10-lb. dog or cat is only about 400 mL. Blood
tion are responsible for the formation of a clot.
volume of some laboratory animals such as mice may be as low as
6% of body weight. The plasma component represents 55% of the
Plasma
blood volume, with the formed or cellular elements (red blood
cells, leukocytes, and platelets) making up the remaining 45%.
The addition of an anticoagulant such as ethylenediamine-
The blood has several important functions. First, the hemo-
tetraacetic acid (EDTA) to a test tube of freshly drawn blood will
globin contained within red blood cells carries oxygen to the tis-
prevent the formation of a clot. The plasma, or fluid portion of
sues and collects carbon dioxide to facilitate its removal. Blood
ua q siuaodon ieian si o paieidas aq uen pooiq a
also conveys nutrients such as amino acids, sugars, and minerals
trifugation, resulting in plasma at the top of the centrifuged
to the tissues, and it is a conduit for byproducts and toxic sub-
blood, the buffy coat in the middle, and the red cell mass at the
stances that may be removed by the liver and kidney. Hormones,
bottom of the tube (Fig. 4-1). The plasma is colorless to lightly
Suau Aq siaiei anssii oi em liaun axeiu sueiia pue sauazua
yellow depending on the animal species, and is a slightly alka-
of the blood. As a result of the phagocytic activity of leukocytes,
line fluid consisting of approximately 92% water and 8% solids
61
62
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
total blood volume and consists of platelets and leukocytes. The
platelet layer is whiter and is located at the top of the buffy coat.
This layer can be distinguished from the leukocyte layer, which
is below and slightly pink due to an admixture with erythrocytes
-100%
of low specific gravity, including reticulocytes. Although the
numbers of leukocytes and platelets vary in domestic animals,
8000 to 12,000 leukocytes/μL of blood and 200,000 to 400,000
platelets/μL of blood are usual.
Erythrocytes
In general, the size of an erythrocyte, or red blood cell, in domes-
plasma
tic animal species ranges from 3 to 7 μm. The red blood cells ofthe
dog are largest at about 7 μm in size, whereas those of sheep and
goats are only 4.5 μm and 3.2 μm, respectively. The shape of the
erythrocyte and presence of a nucleus varies among animal species.
Although mammalian red cells are reported to have a biconcave
50%
disk shape that results in a slight central pallor visible with light
microscopy, this feature is only easily seen in the red blood cells
buffy
of the dog (Fig. 4-2). The erythrocytes of family camellidae, in-
coat
cluding camels, lamas, and alpacas, havea characteristic oval shape.
Red blood cells ofamphibians, reptiles, and birds are also oval and,
unlike mammalian cells, retain a nucleus in maturity. Fragments
of the nucleus, or Howell-Jolly bodies, are normally seen in a
few circulating red cells of the horse and cat. An increased number
erythrocytes
of circulating red cells with nuclei or Howell-Jolly bodies in other
animal species may suggest that splenic function is abnormal or
that the animal may have been splenectomized.
 Red blood cells are rich in hemoglobin, a protein capable of
binding oxygen and transporting it to the tissues. The lack ofa nu-
cleus allows more room for hemoglobin, and the biconcave shape
 of the red blood cell helps increase its oxygen-carrying capacity.
The latter is likely related to increased surface area.
After
Before
sedimentation 
sedimentation
FIGURE 4-1 Bood before and after sedimentation. The
volume of packed erythrocytes is almost 45% of the total blood
volume. The leukocytes and platelets form a buffy coat, accounting
for approximately I% of the blood volume. The remainder of the 
 blood is the supematant plasma.
or dry matter. About 90% of dry matter is organic substances such
as glucose, lipids (cholesterol, triglycerides, phospholipids, lecithin,
and fats), proteins (albumin, globulins, fibrinogen, and others),
glycoproteins, hormones, amino acids, and vitamins. The inorganic
or mineral portion of the dry matter of plasma is dissolved in ionic
forms that can dissociate into positive and negative ions.
The cellular elements of blood form distinct layers follow-
ing centrifugation. The lowest layer is red in color and represents
about 45% of the blood volume. This layer consists of erythro-
cytes and represents the packed cell volume (PCV) or hemat-
 ocrit. The PCV is a measure (%) of the volume of erythrocytes
FIGURE 4-2 Scanning electron micrograph of erythrocytes
relative to the total volume of whole blood ina sample. The buffy
from a clinically normal dog. The erythrocytes are biconcave disks.
coat is an off-white layer identified on top of the packed red cells.
{From Jain NC. 5chaim's Veterinary Hematology. 4th Ed. Philodelphig:
In the normal patient, the buffy coat accounts for about l% of the
Leo & Febiger, 1 983.]
Blood and Bone Marrow · Joorne Messick 
63
Erythrocytes are the most numerous of the formed elements
the neutrophil contain many hydrolytic enzymes and antibacter-
 in the blood. About 5 to 10 million red blood cells are typically
ial substances needed to inactivate and digest phagocytosed mi-
present in every μL of blood in a healthy adult animal. In contrast,
croorganisms. The cell cytoplasm is rather transparent because the
the number of red blood cells may be as high as 12 to 15 million/μL
granules are small and neutral-staining in most mammalian neu-
of blood in sheep and goats
trophils. In contrast, the cytoplasmic granules of the neutrophil in
A few young polychromatophilic red blood cells (reticulo.
rabbits, guinea pigs, birds, amphibians, and reptiles are large and
cytes) are normally found in peripheral blood smears of dogs. In 
red, and the cell is called a heterophil (Plate 4-10).
contrast, these cells are normally absent from the blood of horses
Electron microscopic and cytochemical studies have revealed
and cows. The reticulocyte is slightly more bluish than the ma-
that neutrophils contain an active Golgi complex but few mito-
ture red blood cell in a Wright-Giemsa-stained blood smear, due 
 chondria. The cytoplasmic granules of the neutrophil vary in size
to the presence of residual ribonucleic acid (RNA). The ribo-
 and peroxidase activity. Primary granules (azurophilic granules)
somes, polyribosomes, and mitochondria retained in these cells 
 are larger and peroxidase-positive, whereas secondary granules
are aggregated into a reticular mesh when stained with vital
(specific granules) are smaller and lack peroxidase activity (Fig. 4-3).
stains such as new methylene blue. The enumeration of reticulo-
 The primary granules are membrane-bounded and contain en-
cyte numbers in the peripheral blood is used as an indication of
zymes such as acid hydrolases, neutral proteases, and elastase
 bone marrow erythropoietic activity.
Microbicidal elements, including myeloperoxidase, lysozyme,
The lifespan of the red blood cells in circulation is variable
defensins, and bactericidal permeability-inducing protein, are also
in veterinary species. In mice, the lifespan of red blood cells is
contained in primary granules. Interspecies variation in the cyto-
about 30 days, whereas the red blood cells of the cat and dog are
chemical reactivity and content of the primary granules has been
reported to survive 68 days and 110 days, respectively. A longer
reported. The secondary (specific) granules of the neutrophil con-
lifespan has been reported in adult goats, cows, and horses, ap-
tain enzymes such as alkaline phosphatase, collagenase, and C5a
proaching 125 days, 145 days, and 160 days, respectively. The
luapuadap-uasixo ssassod osie sludonan sauazua urids
loss of these cells is continually balanced by the release of reticu-
 and oxygen-independent systems for destroying internalized
locytes and mature red blood cells from the bone marrow
microorganisms within their secondary granules. These anti-
A slight variation in the size of red blood cells, or anisocyto-
microbial elements include cationic proteins and enzymes such as
sis, is a common finding ina peripheral blood smear. Although the
hydrolases, proteases, lactoferrin, lysozyme, and defensins as well
presence of poikilocytosis, or variation in shape of red blood cells,
 as enzymes that generate toxic metabolites of oxygen.
is a normal finding in goats and sheep, it is uncommon in other 
In most species, neutrophils are the most numerous of the
animal species. Crenated red blood cells, which have numerous
circulating white cells, accounting for 40 to 80% of the total
short, evenly spaced, blunt or sharp projections, are also a common
white cell numbers in most animal species. They function as
finding. These changes are usually artifact, but may occur in ani-
the body's first line of defense against microbial infections.
mals with lymphoma and in patients that are uremic. Rouleau
formation, or aggregates of red blood cells resembling “stacked
coins," is a common finding in the blood smear of the horse. In
the dog and cat, the presence of rouleau may suggest that certain
total protein concentrations, such as immune globulins or fi-
 brinogen, are increased. Agglutination, or irregular clumping of
red blood cells rather than “coinlike" stacking, is abnormal and
must be distinguished from rouleau formation.
Leukocytes
The blood leukocytes are divided into two categories: granulocytes
and agranulocytes. The term granulocyte relates to the presence
of specific granules in the cytoplasm of these cells, which can be
used to differentiate the neutrophil, eosinophil, and basophil. The
differing affinity of the granules for neutral, acidic, and basic stains
gives them their characteristic color. Agranulocytes lack distinc-
tive granules.
Neutrophil
FIGURE 4-3 Electron micrograph of a mature neutrophil from
canine bone marrow stained for peroxidase. The neutrophil contains
Neutrophils are produced in the bone marrow and released into
large, spherical, peroxidase-positive primary granules (pg) and small,
the blood once they mature. The mature neutrophil is approxi-
pleomorphic, peroxidase-negative secondary granules (sg). Some
mately 12 to 15 μm in diameter and is distinguished by a seg-
mitochondria (m) are present. The nuclear lobes show chromatin
mented nucleus, often comprised of three to four lobes containing
condensation. (From Jain NC. 5chalm's Veterinory Hematology. 4th Ed
clumped or heterochromatic chromatin (Plate 4-1). Granules of
Philodelphio: Leo & Febiger, 1 983.)
64
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
After spending a brief time of approximately 8 hours circulat-
Eosinophil
ing in the blood, neutrophils enter the surrounding tissues and
 Eosinophils are approximately the same size as the neutrophil, but
body cavities to carry out their specific functions. Thus, the en-
are easily distinguished by the presence of bright reddish granules
tire circulating pool of neutrophils is turned over about three
in their cytoplasm. The granules of the eosinophil have an affinity
times daily. Physiologic stimuli, such as stress (corticosteroids),
for eosin, a red acidophilic dye found in Wright stain. This stain-
fear (epinephrine), infection, infarction, or trauma, can increase
either the production or the release of neutrophils from the bone
highly basic proteins that attract the acidic dye. Another feature
marrow.
 that is helpful in identifying the eosinophil is the presence of a nu-
The circulating neutrophilic cells in the normal, healthy
cleus that rarely has more than two lobes, whereas the neutrophil
animal include mature, segmented neutrophils with a few band
nucleus usually has three or four lobes.
neutrophils. The band neutrophil is approximately the same
The size, shape, number, and staining characteristics of the
size or slightly smaller (12 to 15 μm) than the metamyelocyte.
 granules in eosinophils vary among the different animal species. In 
The nuclear chromatin pattern of the band is slightly less con-
the dog, the granules rarely fill the cytoplasm of the cell and may
densed and the nucleus is nonsegmented with a smooth contour
vary from small, homogenous pinkish-orange toa vacuolated gran-
and parallel-appearing sides. The mature neutrophil (seg-
ule. The granules in the eosinophil of the cat are rod-shaped and
mented neutrophil) has features similar to the band neu-
numerous and stain reddish. Large, bright reddish granules are
trophil, but the nucleus has two to five distinct lobes connected
found in the horse, whereas smaller, less intensely stained granules
by fine nuclear filaments. The cytoplasm of both band and seg-
that almost completely fill the cytoplasm are seen in the sheep.
mented neutrophils is clear and contains pale- or neutral-staining
goat, cow, and pig (Plates 4-2 and 4-3).
granules. The numbers of band neutrophils and less mature cells 
Ultrastructural studies of the eosinophil have shown that the
of this series may increase in response to a disease process. If
Golgi complex elaborates many primary granules (azurophilic
the numbers of bands are increased, but still less than the num-
au u sajnueig Areund ueqi nagiel aie sanueig asaui '(sanueig
 bers of mature neutrophils, this type of blood count is called a
neutrophil. The secondary granules (specific granules) of the
"left-shift." Other morphologic indications of an infla mmatory
canine eosinophil vary from dense homogenous granules sur-
 blood picture may include the presence of blue cytoplasmic in-
rounded by a narrow rim of lighter matrix to a clear vesicle with
clusions known as Dohle bodies (aggregates of ribosomes and
 only a cap of dense material. A few mitochondria and remnants
endoplasmic reticulum), cytoplasmic basophilia, and cytoplasmic
of rough endoplasmic reticulum are also found in the mature
vacuoles
eosinophil (Fig 4-4). Feline and guinea pig eosinophils have char-
n
rER
FIGURE 4-4  Eectron micrograph of a canine eosinophil. The cell contains pleomorphic granules
Dense and light homogeneous granules and clear vesicles are present. A few mitochondria (m) and
remnants of rough endoplasmic reticulum (rER) are scattered throughout the cell. (From Jqin NC. 5chaim's
Veterinory Hematology. 4th Ed. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1 983.)
Blood and Bone Marrow *Joorne Messick
65
acteristic crystalloid specific granules, whereas other species, in-
 cyte is lacy or reticular with some areas of condensation, and nu-
cluding the cow and horse, have only homogenous granules
cleoli are inconspicuous. The cytoplasm is abundant and grayish
Eosinophils usually account for only O to 8% of the total
blue in color, often containing a few discrete vacuoles and/or fine
leukocyte count, giving absolute numbers of 0 to 500 eosino-
azurophilic granules (Plates 4-9 and 4-11).
phils/μL of blood. The intravascular lifespan of the eosinophil
Monocytes account for 3 to 8% of the total leukocyte count.
is extremely short, estimated at less than 1 hour in the dog. The
Thus, the absolute number of monocytes is approximately 200 to
 -e “Aioneuueu! ainse u alon jueniodu ue sld ldouisoa
1000 cells/μL of blood. The circulating half-life of monocytes in
lergic, and anaphylactic reactions, and in controlling infesta-
the blood is variable among the species. They transiently circulate
 tions by helminthic parasites. In the process of regulating allergic
in the peripheral blood, exiting the vasculature either randomly or 
and inflammatory responses, this cell phagocytizes immune com-
in response to an inflammatory stimulus.
plexes and inhibits the release and replenishment of histamine
Upon leaving the blood, monocytes differentiate into long-
 and other vasoactive amines. The phagocytic and bactericidal
lived macrophages under the influence of specific tissue factors.
capabilities of eosinophils are limited when compared to those
The young macrophage is similar in morphology to that of the cir-
of neutrophils. It has been demonstrated that eosinophils may
culating monocytes, but with time, they become activated, in-
also induce damage in tissues and play a role in fibrosis when
creasing in size, phagocytic activity, and lysosomal enzyme
excessive numbers of eosinophils are present. Substances such
content. Electron micrographic studies often show many short
as antigen-antibody complexes, fibrin, fibrinogen, and factors
microvillus-like projections along the surface of the macrophage
released from stimulated T lymphocytes, basophils, or mast cells
and the cytoplasm is frequently vacuolated (Fig. 4-5). Although
may act as chemotactic factors for eosinophils. Histamine, re-
tissue macrophages are capable of cell division, most of the
 leased by both mast cells and basophils in response to tissue injury
macrophages at an inflammatory site have been recruited from the
or allergic reactions, is the major chemotactic factor for eosinophils.
blood. The exact lifespan of macrophages in tissues is unknown. It
appears that resident macrophages are long-lived; however,
Basophil
macrophages that accumulate in response to inflammatory stimuli
The basophil measures 10 to 15 μm and has a segmented nucleus.
are shorter lived.
Circulating monocytes and tissue macrophages comprise the
Characteristic deep purple granules often fillthe cytoplasm and ob-
mononuclear phagocyte system (MPS). These cells are widely
 scure the nucleus. The purplish staining of the granules is ascribed
distributed in tissues and serosal cavities throughout the body and
to their content of sulfated glycosaminoglycans. Granules of the
include specific cells such as stellate macrophages (Kupffer cells)
feline basophil are rod-shaped and usually stain dull purplish-gray
in the liver, alveolar and interstitial macrophages in the lung, sy-
due to lack of sulfated glycosaminoglycans, whereas granules of
the canine basophil stain reddish violet (Plates 4-4 and 4-5)
Basophil granules in the dog do not fill the cytoplasm of the cell,
in contrast to the granules in basophils from cows, horses, and cats.
Aeied aqAeu pue aqnjos-iaiem ar sanuei a 'saads auos u
dissolved or lost during the process of staining the blood smear.
The basophil is the least numerous granulocyte in the pe-
ripheral blood, rarely accounting for more than O to 1.5% of the
total leukocyte count or O to 200 basophils/μL. Evidence supports
the role of the basophil in allergic conditions, including ur-
ticaria, allergic rhinitis, allergic conjunctivitis, asthma, allergic
 gastroenteritis, and anaphylaxis caused by drug reactions or in-
sect stings. Another function of the basophil is to promote lipol-
ysis. Heparin released from the granules of the basophil promotes
the release of lipoprotein lipase from endothelial cells of the blood
vessel wall. This process causes clearing of chylomicra from the
blood and facilitates the metabolism of triglycerides. Basophils
also play a major role in mediating inflammatory responses. The
anticoagulant actions of heparin and the procoagulant effects of
antagonize and promote hemostasis, respectively.
FIGURE 4-5 Electron micrograph of a canine monocyte. The
Monocyte
cell contains many lysosomal granules (gr), several small to large
vesicles (v), abundant ribosomes (arrow), and prominent rough
 Monocytes are the largest leukocytes in the blood and are closely
S auduad la aun oe ilasa (a) wnnau sedoa
related to the neutrophil, sharing the same precursor cell (CSF-
cell also has many microvilluslike projections along the cellular
GM). They are 12 to 18 μm in diameter and have a pleomorphic
outline. The nucleus appears bilobed and shows areas of chromatin
nucleus, which may appear elongated, folded, indented, horse-
condensation. (From Jain NC. Schalm's Veterinory Hematology. 4th Ed.
shoe-shaped, and even lobed. The nuclear chromatin of the mono-
Philodelphio: Leo & Febiger, 1 983.)
66
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
novial cells in the joints, and microglia in the brain. Phagocytosis
the total leukocyte count in dogs, cats, and horses, but may be
and digestion of cellular debris, microorganisms, and particulate
50 to 60% of the leukocyte differential in cows, mice, and
matter are major functions of the macrophage. The MPS also plays
aunu ui aaindepe aul yo siuauodun Aay aie saioqdiuag soid
 an important role in the presentation of antigens to lymphocytes,
response. They play an important role in cell-mediated (T lym-
which initiates an immune response, and in the regulation of
phocytes) and antibody-mediated (B lymphocytes) immunity.
granulopoiesis and erythropoiesis through the action of cytokines
secreted by the macrophages.
Platelets/Thrombocytes
Lymphocyte
Platelets vary in size from 5 to 7 μm in length and 1.3 to 4.7 μm
Lymphocytes are variable in size. The smaller cells are 6 to 9 μm
in width among the animal species. A slight variation in platelet
size is present in most species, but is greatly accentuated in the
in diameter, which is only slightly larger than a red blood cell,
aaup u ur si on dn anseau sanoudui iail am
u yiual u! u oz oi dn 'sialaieidond ao 'siaaieid 1atieg '1
 be observed in the blood of the horse. In stained blood smears,
(Plates 4-1, 4-6, 4-7, and 4-8). Smallymphocytes are the most
platelets are discoid, oval, or elongated fragments of cytoplasm
numerous and may be found in the blood, lymphatic circulation,
that lack a nucleus and have fine, reddish-purple granules. The
and lymphatic tissue. In the blood of dogs and cats, smaller lym-
term platelet and thrombocyte are often used interchangeably;
phocytes are most common, whereas both small and large lym-
however, when describing the nucleated platelet in fish, reptiles,
phocytes are present in the blood of cows, sheep, and goats. These 
and birds, the term thrombocyte is preferred (Plate 4-12).
large lymphocytes are mature and lack nucleoli.
When observed by electron microscopy, resting platelets
The cell profile of the lymphocyte is normally round and
have a smooth surface with random indentations that represent
smooth with light microscopy, but short microvilli may be
the membranous invaginations of the open canalicular system
observed on their surface with electron microscopy (Fig. 4-6). Lym-
(OCS). This system opens to the platelet surface and is used for ex-
phocytes have a round to slightly indented nucleus with clumped
ternalization of platelet secretory products and internalization of
heterochromatin. Although lymphocytes are classified as agranular,
 substances from plasma into the platelet. Bovine platelets are de-
some of them may have a few azurophilic granules in their cyto-
void of an OCS and secrete their contents directly to the exterior.
plasm. The nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ratio of small lymphocytes is
Normal platelets are covered with amorphous material that forms
high, with only a modest amount of pale blue cytoplasm.
a thin external glycocalyx. This glycoprotein-rich layer is respon-
The number of lymphocytes in the peripheral circulation
 sible for the platelet's adhesive properties.
varies among the species. These cells account for 20 to 40% of
Beneath the surface membrane of the platelet, some micro-
filaments and a bundle of microtubules are observed. These cyto-
skeletal elements maintain normal platelet shape and make up the
contractile system. Thus, they are responsible for the change in
shape of platelets following activation and the subsequent secre-
tion of platelet granules. Another series of channels, the dense
tubular system (DTS), is found deep to the superficial cytoskele-
ton. The DTS provides a site for sequestration of calcium and
localization of enzymes for prostaglandin synthesis. The internal
 struc ture of the platelet is composed of many O granules, electron-
dense granules, and glycogen particles, with only a few mitochon-
dria and lysosomes. The α granules are membrane-bounded and
contain platelet factor 4, coagulation factors I (fibrinogen) and
V (proaccelerin), platelet-derived growth factor, and many other
components. Electron-dense granules are a storage pool for ade-
nine nucleotides, histamine,serotonin, catecholamines, and cal-
cium (Fig. 4-7).
The number of platelets in circulation ranges from about
200,000 to 400,000/uL of blood. In general, the lifespan of cir-
culating platelets in domestic animal species is about 8 to 12 days.
 A key role of the platelet is maintenance of primary (platelet plug
formation) and secondary (coagulation) hemostasis
FIGURE 4-6 Electron micrograph of a canine lymphocyte. The
cell has a moderate amount of cytoplasm surrounding a large
BONE MARROW
nucleus with nucleolus. The cytoplasm is rich in free ribosomes, has
some profles of rough endoplasmic reticulum and scattered
Structure and Function
mitochondria, and contains dense granules (azurophilic granules)
(Fromm Jain NC. Schaim's Veterinary Hermatology. 4th Ed. Philadelphia:
The bone marrow is a mesenchymal-derived tissue that consists
Leo & Febiger, 1 983.)
of hematopoietic cellular elements and a complex microenviron-
Blood and Bone Marrow · Joorne Messick
67
dense tubular system
exterior coat
lysosome
glycogen-
open
canalicular
system
α granules
electron-dense
granule
microfilaments
microtubules
FIGURE 4-7Schematic drawing of the fine structure of a platelet.
ment. In the adult animal, marrow is contained within the medul-
marrow space
lary cavity of flat and long bones and represents almost 5% of total
body weight. It is a soft, gelatinous tissue that is divided into
irregular, interconnected spaces by bony trabeculae. The rapidly
reticular
cell
fat cell
dividing, hematopoietic precursor cells (erythroid, myeloid, and
basement
continuously undergoes a process of self-replication and/or dif-
membrane
ferentiation. These precursor cells produce all of the peripheral
endothelial cells
rascular space
blood cells, including erythrocytes, leukocytes, and platelets. Cells
of the microenvironment, which include stromal cells (fibro-
O
blastlike reticular cells, endothelial cells, adipocytes, and macro-
phages), accessory cells (T lymphocytes, natural killer cells, and
monocytes/macrophages), and their products (extracellular ma-
trix and cytokines), are distributed throughout the bone marrow
space. These components provide a scaffold as well as nutrient
support for the developing hematopoietic cells. The supporting
megakar
marrow space
cells also play an active role in the regulation of hematopoiesis by
direct cell-to-cell contact and/or by secreting regulatory molecules
that influence the growth of hematopoietic precursor cells in a pos-
itive or negative manner. In addition, osteoblasts and osteoclasts of
FIGURE 4-8 Schematic drawing of the bone marrow, showing
vascular and cellular compartments. The hematopoietic cells are closely
adjacent bone are present in the bone marrow.
associated with thin-walled venous sinusoids. The walls of the sinusoids
Hematopoiesis is the process by which highly differentiated
are trilaminar: endothelial cells on the inside, a basement membrane
cells of the peripheral blood develop from specialized precursors in
forming the middle layer and supporting the hematopoietic cells, and
the bone marrow. Although the process occurs extravascularly in
filbroblastlike stromal (adventitial reticular) cells on the outside.
solid tissue that lies between the vascular spaces, the maturing cells
Cytoplasmic pseudopodia of the megakaryocyte extend through the
are closely associated with thin-walled venous sinusoids
sinus endothelium and release platelets directly into the vascular space.
68
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
The walls of the sinusoids in mature bone marrow are tri-
trabeculae of
laminar (Fig. 4-8). Each sinusoid is lined by a single layer of en-
oonemarrov
cancellous
(spongy) bone
dothelial cells on the inside (vascular space) with an overlying
basement membrane and supporting reticular cells on the out-
 side (bone marrow space). A selective barrier between the blood
compact bone
periosteal
and bone marrow results from the loose intercellular junctions
vein
created by the overlap of adjacent endothelial cells. The base-
 periosteum
ment membrane, which forms the middle layer of the sinusoid
wall, is irregular and may be discontinuous or absent in some
periosteal
areas. As a result of the unique structure of the wall, the sinu-
arteriole
nutrient artery
soid may dilate readily to accommodate a highly active, hyper-
 plastic bone marrow. The reticular cells covering the majority
periosteal
of the outer surface of the sinusoid wall appear to control access
capillaries
emissary vein
of cells from the marrow space into the circulation. When there
is massive demand for peripheral blood cells, the amount of sur-
medullary artery
central vein
face covered by these cells is markedly reduced. Reticular cells
radialartery
 of the bone marrow are also phagocytic and can accumulate a
medullary cavity
substantial amount of fat, thereby reducing the marrow space
FIGURE 4-9 Schematic drawing of the microcirculation of the
available for hematopoiesis.
bone marrow. The sinusoids receive blood from two sources, the
Excessive proliferation of stromal cells (myelofibrosis) in the
sinusoid wall and/or within the marrow space may result in the
nutrient artery and a periosteal capillary network, which penetrate
the cortical bone through numerous osteal canals.
failure of mature hematopoietic cells to gain access to the circula-
tion. The peripheral blood of patients with myelofibrosis is often
characterized by a severe pancytopenia (reduction in number of
which empties into venules in the perforating or nutrient canals
circulating blood cells). Myelofibrosis has been recognized in dogs
forming the major vascular outflow tracts from the marrow.
 and cats with underlying myeloproliferative diseases, as a termi-
The concentration of small venules and sinusoids is higher
nal event in dogs with a red cell metabolic defect (pyruvate kinase
 near the bone than in central areas of the marrow space. This pat-
deficiency), and in feline leukemia-infected cats; however, most
tern parallels the distribution of hematopoiesis, which is highest
 cases in animals are idiopathic.
in the subcortical areas and lowest in the area surrounding the
Fibroblastlike reticular cells branch from the sinusoid wall
central artery. Although the bone marrow is devoid of lymphat-
into the marrow space and may completely encircle developing
ics, it has a rich nerve supply that accompanies the blood vessels.
precursor cells. The cells create a structural framework for adjacent
These nerve fibers respond to intramedullary pressure resulting
hematopoietic cells and assist in hematopoiesis by binding essen-
from cellular proliferation, transmitting signals to the vessel walls.
tial growth factors. During development, a stratification of cells in 
The signaling results in adjustments of blood flow and release of
the marrow space occurs, with immature cells in areas nearest the
hematopoietic cells into the circulation.
 bone and mature cells at the vascular interface. Upon reaching ma-
Adipocytes are a major constituent of marrow tissue; how-
turity, hematopoietic cells migrate from the marrow space across
ever, the number of cells depends on the age of the individual
the endothelium into the lumen of the sinusoid, thereby gaining
access to the vascular or blood compartment. The migration occurs
proaches 100% at birth and is hematopoietically active (red
either through intercellular junctions between endothelial cells or
bone marrow) in the long bones of young animals. In contrast,
through intracellular pores in the endothelial cells. In addition to
the marrow cavity of long bones in adult animals is filled with
the transmural migration of mature blood cells, the cytoplasmic
fatty tissue (yellow bone marrow). Active bone marrow is found
only in the sternum, ribs, vertebrae, scapulae, skull, pelvis, and
jecting portions of the megakaryocyte dribble small cell fragments
 proximal ends of the femur and humerus of adult animals. The
known as platelets into the circulation.
proportion of fatty tissue increases with age, and cellularity de-
The vascular sinusoids of the bone marrow receive arterial
clines such that hematopoietic cells may occupy as little as 25%
blood from two major sources. One source of blood is the nutri-
 of the marrow in older animals. The adipocyte in bone marrow
ent artery, which penetrates the bony shaft at the nutrient fora-
HO saig uaui pue auoq ieiio aul sasiaaen Aaire aul 'uau
play a role in lipid metabolism and contribute to the promo-
several branches that extend throughout the marrow cavity. In
tion of hematopoiesis. Animals with certain diseases such as se-
the periphery of the bone marrow cavity, arterial capillaries feed
vere hemolytic anemia or chronic hypoxia may have a markedly
a branching network of venules and sinusoids. The second source
reduced bone marrow fat content. In contrast, in other diseases
[aisonad aui uoy sauon moiiu auoq aun on Addns pooiq jo
such as aplastic anemia, excessive infiltration of yellow marrow
capillary network that sends small vessels into perforating canals
has been reported.
in the cortical bone (Fig. 4-9). These transosteal vessels connect
Marrow stromal cells produce extracellular matrix (ECM)
with sinusoids at the bone marrow junction. Blood drains from
molecules such as collagen, fibronectin, laminin, thrombospon-
the sinusoids in the marrow into the longitudinal central vein,
 din, hemonectin, and proteoglycans. These substances facilitate
Blood and Bone Marrow * Joorne Messick
69
 cell-cell interactions and contribute to the up-regulation or down-
progenitors, whereas hemonectin participates in the maturation
Ymoig Sujuasand pue Supuq Aq sisanodoeuau jo uonejngai
and release of granulocytic cells from the bone marrow. These com-
factors to hematopoietic precursor cells.
plex interactions also lead to certain topographic patterns in the
bone marrow. For example, granulopoiesis takes place primarily in
Hematopoiesis
subcortical areas where the concentration of hemonectin is higher.
Granulopoiesis also occurs in foci that are associated with alkaline
Hematopoietic stem cells move from blood islands in the yolk
phosphatase-producing stromal cells. In addition, stromal cells
sac to developing organs in the embryo and fetus. Early in gesta-
produce other growth factors that regulate granulopoiesis, includ-
tion, primitive nucleated red blood cells that produce embryonic
ing granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulation factor (GM-
hemoglobin are released into the circulation. The hematopoietic
CSF), granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), and
activity of the yolk sac is short lived and its declining prod uction
macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF).
-iodoneuaq ui aseannui dieus e Aq pajued uone si sllan pooia jo
esis by the liver. It is unclear whether hematopoiesis begins in
Hematopoietic Stem Cells
the liver by differentiation of primitive mesenchymal cells into
hematopoietic stem cells or by colonization with stem cells that
All cells in the bone marrow, including erythroid, granulocytic-
migrate from the yolk sac. Definitive hematopoiesis, which de-
monocytic, lymphoid, and megakaryocytic lineages, originate from
velops in the liver, is characterized by hematopoietic stem cells
a population of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). Over the years,
that are capable of self-renewal and generation of progenitors that
these cells have been given various names, including pluripotent
are committed to erythroid, myeloid, megakaryocytic, and lym-
stem cells and uncommitted stem cells. The HSCs are not morpho-
phoid lineages. The spleen, lymph nodes, and thymus may con-
logically distinct. However, these cells do have highly specific
tribute to hematopoiesis during this phase, but these organs
homing properties for the bone marrow and are able to undergo
generally are more active in lymphocyte production. The liver
either self-renewal or differentiation into hematopoietic precur-
and spleen retain their potential for hematopoiesis throughout
sor cells. The HSCs may differentiate into two types of primitive,
life. When hematopoiesis is present in these organs in the adult
multipotent, committed precursor cells, which are the colony-
animal, the process is termed extramedullary hematopoiesis
forming unit—lymphoid (CFU-L) and the colony-forming
(EMH) and is considered an abnormal finding. EMH is a com-
unit—granulocyte, erythrocyte, monocyte/macrophage, and
megakaryocyte (CFU-GEMM) (Fig. 4-10). The term colony-
 blood cels. The most common conditions associated with marked
forming unit (CFU) has been adopted to describe an individual
cell capable of giving rise to a colony of hematopoietic cells. With
hypoplasia, and myeloproliferative disorders. Severe anemia in
further differentiation, pluripotent CFUs give rise to committed
both the dog and cat may also play a role in the development of
progenitors that can only proliferate and mature along more re-
EMH in this organ. Rodents are notable exceptions, since their
stricted pathways. Thus, a bipotent progenitor cell for granulo-
spleen normally serves as a hemopoietic organ.
cytes and monocytes (CFU-GM) is derived from the multipotent
precursor cell CFU-GEMM, which undergoes further prolifera-
Jo uosnpond aun Suoddns sueio ui siuauoduon Wog aa
tion and differentiation to result in an even more restricted prog-
 blood cells changes with time. This alteration may explain the shift-
eny. Thereafter, some progeny are able to differentiate along the
ing of hematopoiesis from one organ to another during fetal life.
neutrophilic (CFU-N), eosinophilic (CFU-Eo), and basophilic
The bone marrow begins to produce blood cels late in gestation and
(CFU-Bas) lineages while others differentiate along only the
is the primary site of hematopoiesis at birth, continuing to increase
monocytic lineage (CFU-M). Megakaryocytes and erythrocytes
cell production thereafter. The bone marrow in the adult animal is
are derived from a bipotent erythroid/megakaryocytic progeni-
an extremely active tissue with a daily output of blood cells ap-
tor (CFU-ME). In addition, progenitors that are committed solely
proaching 2.5 billion red ces, an equivalent number of platelets,
to the development of erythrocytes (CFU-E) and megakaryocytes
ia qo i d san u I p
(CFU-Meg) have been described. Similarly, further differentiation
Although not evident in histologic sections, the microenvi-
of CFU-L results in progeny that are committed to become T lym-
ronment of the bone marrow is a highly organized structure. The
phocytes (CFU-TL) and B lymphocytes (CFU-BL).
functional unit of erythropoiesis, the erythroblastic island, con-
The growth of unipotent progenitor cells (CFU-N, etc.) has
sists ofa central macrophage (nurse cell) encircled by erythroid pre-
been characterized both functionally and by membrane antigen
cursor cells. The macrophage provides erythropoietin and iron to
expression. Ultimately, the commitment of progenitor cells to
the developing erythroid cells. Erythroblastic islands are usually
 specific hematopoietic lineages is controlled through cell-specific
located away from the bone trabeculae and close to vascular struc-
transcription factors that initiate a pathway of distinct cellular
tures. Other components of the microenvironment, including the
signals.
 ECM, stromal cells, and a variety of regulatory cytokines, play an
important role in supporting the proliferation and/or differentia-
tion of hematopoietic progenitor cells. For example, in the ECM,
Cytokines and Regulation of Hematopoiesis
certain proteoglycans (heparan sulfate, chondroitin sulfate, and
A number of cytokines, including colony-stimulating factors, in-
hyaluronic acid) bind growth factors and present them to the pro-
terleukins, and growth factors, are involved in the regulation of
genitor cells. The modulation of erythropoiesis by fibronectin in-
hematopoiesis (Fig. 4-10). The primary effects of these cytokines
volves the attachment of this ECM component to early erythroid
 at different levels in the developmental pathways of blood cells and
70
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
hematopoietic
lymphoid
stem cell (HSC)
CFU-
myeloic
stemcell
IL3
stem cell
ILCF
CFU-ME
FU-GM
CFU-E
CFU-M
oriblast
nega
oronubricyte
xomyelocyte
asophilic rubricyte
oolychromatophilic
ubricyte
netamyelocyte
reticulocyte
basophi
eosinophil
their progenitors have been extensively studied. There is often a
etic target cells. Whether there is a stimulatory or inhibitory ef-
Cytokines that primarily act as negative regulators of hemato-
fect of the regulator on the target depends on the concentration
poiesis include tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-o), interferon-Y
and duration of exposure to the cytokine. The maturation stage of
(INF-y), transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), and lacto-
the target cell, existing cytokine milieu, and the physical rela-
ferrin. There is strong evidence that TNF-o and INF- play a role
tionship of the target cell to the marrow microenvironment may
in the development ofanemia of chronic disease (ACD). However,
also influence this response.
the regulation of granulopoiesis by lactoferrin is controversial.
For the most part, colony-stimulating factor (CsF) and in-
terleukins (ILs) are growth-stimulatory cytokines. Synergy be-
Granulopoiesis
tween stimulatory cytokines may result in important biologic
responses. For example, stem cellfactor (SCF), an essential growth
factor in normal hematopoiesis, exerts potent effects when com-
bined with granulocyte CSF (G-CSF). IL-3 also demonstrates syn-
ever,the most
ergistic effects with IL-1 and erythropoietin in the generation of
greatest numbers. The individual pathways and major cyto-
erythroid progenitors, whereas IL-3 and IL-5 promote the devel-
kines involved in the production of each type of mature blood
opment of eosinophils. In normal animals, the effect of throm-
cell from a precursor or stem cell population are shown in Fig.
bopoietin (TPO) in the peripheral blood is limited to marked
4-10 and described in detail hereafter. The characteristic het-
increase in the number of platelets. However, the administration
erogeneity of the marrow may be altered in various hematologic
Blood and Bone Marrow *Joorne Messick
71
 disorders, including myelodysplastic syndromes and hemato-
laries and venules, whereas the circulating granulocyte pool
poietic neoplasia.
(CGP) consists of cells that are more centrally located and free-
The process of granulopoiesis, or white blood cell formation,
floating in the vessels. The total and differential cell counts in
begins with the proliferation and differentiation of the myeloblast,
the complete blood count (CBC) are a reflection of the CGP. The
which is a progeny of the CFU-GM (Fig. 4-10). The transit time
Aaay Aeu inq azis u! ienba Aiaieuixodde ane d pue dN
 from the myeloblast stage to release of mature granulocytes into
exchange cells, thus altering the size of these pools. The granu-
the circulation may be as short as 4 to 5 days or as long as 10 days.
locytes remain in the blood for a brief period of time, randomly
 In general, as these cells mature, their size decreases progressively.
leaving the circulation and moving into the tissues where they
nuclear chromatin condenses, and nucleoli disappear. Ultimately,
perform their specific functions. The neutrophils can also be
the nucleus of the granulocyte becomes lobulated or segmented,
specifically attracted (a process known as chemotaxis) to tissues
the cytoplasm gradually loses basophilia, and specific or secondary
that are infected by microorganisms. The function of the neu-
granules accumulate.
trophil is to phagocytize, digest, and kill the invading bacteria.
 The morphology and development of granulocytes in the
 Although the eosinophil is also phagocytic, this cell is primarily
bone marrow has been extensively studied. The first three cells of
the myeloid lineage, the myeloblast, promyelocyte, and myelo-
 against parasitic infections. The basophil is the source of media-
cyte, are capable of mitotic cell division. The myeloblast under-
tors that promote immediate (allergic and anaphylactic) and de-
layed hypersensitivity reactions.
each of which multiplies and differentiates into two myelocytes
(Fig. 4-1l). The myelocyte may undergo two or three successive
Neutrophilic Precursors
mitotic cell divisions, without significant differentiation, to repli-
The earliest granulocytic precursor that can be morphologically
cate additional myelocytes. One consequence of multiple, succes-
identified is the myeloblast. The cell ranges in size from 15 to
sive divisions is that the generation of granulocytes may be
20 μm and is characterized by a spherical nucleus, finely stippled
amplified at this step. On the other hand, successive divisions may
chromatin, one or two nucleoli, and lightly to moderately ba-
be skipped to speed the production of mature granulocytes when
 sophilic cytoplasm. Cytoplasm of the myeloblast lacks or has few
there is great demand. Each myelocyte undergoes maturation
 primary granules. The myeloblast also does not have a prominent
without further cell division, generating the metamyelocyte,
light-staining perinuclear region, indicating a poorly developed
band, and mature segmented granulocyte.
Golgi complex.
 Once released into the circulation, the mature granulocytes,
Promyelocytes are slightly larger than myeloblasts and may
which are mostly segmented neutrophils, are distributed be-
 range up to 25 μm in diameter. The nucleus is often eccentric and
tween two peripheral blood pools. The marginal granulocytic
has slightly coarser chromatin and prominent nucleoli. A conspic-
pool (MGP) consists of granulocytes that line the walls of capil-
uous light-staining Golgi zone is also characteristic of the promy-
elocyte. The cell cytoplasm is lightly basophilic, more abundant
than the cytoplasm of the myeloblast, and contains numerous pri-
mary granules.
The nucleus of the myelocyte is spherical to ovoid, has coarse
chromatin, and lacks distinct nucleoli. In most animal species, the
synthesis of primary granules ceases at the myelocyte stage and
the number of these granules decreases during subsequent cell di-
visions. The appearance of secondary granules in the myelocyte
indicates a commitment to development along a specific cell lin-
eage (neutrophilic, eosinophilic, and basophilic myelocytes).
The nucleus of the metamyelocyte may vary from a slightly
indented sphere toa distinct “kidney-bean"'shape with coarse chro-
matin and no obvious nucleoli. The cytoplasm of the cellis filled
with secondary granules. Metamyelocytes are no longer capable
of mitotic cell division.
Eosinophilic and Basophilic
Granulocytes and Mast Cells
The stages of maturation of eosinophilic and basophilic granulo-
cytes are similar to those of neutrophilic granulocytes. However,
the size, shape, color, and number of specific granules vary greatly
FIGURE 4-II Granulocytic lineage (upper figure, left to right)
among the animal species. In general, the secondary granules of the
myeloblast, promyelocyte, myelocyte, metamyelocyte, band, and
neutrophil. Bone mamow smear (lower figure) showing the stages
such as peroxidase, acid phosphatase, and arylsulfatase. The gran-
of granulocyte differentiation.
ules also contain a variety of highly toxic proteins, such as major
72
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
 basic protein, eosinophil peroxidase, and eosinophilic cationic pro-
 and proliferation and by nuclear regulators that activate lineage-
tein. Based on their affinity for anionic dyes such as eosin, the gran-
 specific genes. Erythropoietin, produced by the kidney and other
ules are reddish when stained with routine hematologic stains. The
tissues, is the primary physiologic regulator of red cell produc-
contents of the granules are released directly onto helminthic and
tion. The apoptosis of newly formed erythroid progenitor cells is
protozoan targets to assist in killing the parasites. Eosinophils play
inhibited by erythropoietin, thereby allowing the cells to differ-
a role in anaphylactic and allergic reactions and also have the abil-
entiate into mature erythrocytes. Erythropoietin also plays a role
ity to phagocytize particles such as immune complexes
in the proliferation and differentiation of committed erythroid
The primary substances stored in granules of the basophil
progenitor cells, and it enhances the release of more mature cells
-oond sauzua siopy 'urdy 'sauue uaq apniu
into the blood.
glycans, and major basic protein. The granules are dark purple
The rubriblast, which is derived from the CFU-E, is the
with routine hematologic stains and they obscure the nucleus in
earliest recognizable erythroid precursor (Fig. 4-12). The cell
some species. The basophil is mainly involved in allergic and ana-
ranges in size from 15 to 25 μm and is characterized by a spher-
phylactic reactions. This process is mediated by cross-linking of
ical nucleus, stippled chromatin, one or two nucleoli, and deeply
surface immunoglobulin (Ig) E receptors on the basophil, which
 basophilic cytoplasm with a perinuclear pale area and no gran-
results in the release of the contents of the granules into the envi-
ules. A single rubriblast undergoes division and differentiates
ronment. Histamine, a major biogenic amine, contributes to local
to produce two prorubricytes. Although similar in appear-
increases in vascular permeability, smooth muscle contraction,
ance to the rubriblast, the nuclear chromatin of the prorubri-
and bronchoconstriction. The basophil may also play a role in host
 cyte may have minimal condensation and nucleoli are indistinct
defense against bacterial and viral infection, in some chronic and
The prorubricyte undergoes successive mitotic cell divisions and
fibrotic disorders, and possibly in tumor cytotoxicity.
continues to mature, producing basophilic rubricytes and poly-
The mast cell originates from a pluripotent hemopoietic
chromatophilic rubricytes. The nuclear chromatin of the baso-
stem cell; however, the lineage is distinct from the monocyte and
 philic rubricyte is more condensed and separated by light streaks,
granulocyte precursors. The mast cell is larger than the basophil
and the cell is slightly smaller in size than the prorubricyte. In
and has more abundant purplish granules and a spherical nucleus.
rubricyte, the change in color of the
Although mast cells are normal residents of the bone marrow, few
cytoplasm to
ites that hemoglobin synthesis
are normally present. The committed mast cell precursors move
 is well under way. Each polychromatophilic rubricyte undergoes
 from marrow to blood and then into the tissues,especially respira-
maturation without further cell division, generating the meta-
tory and mucosal tissues. In this location, the functions of mast
rubricyte and then a reticulocyte. A metarubricyte is the small-
cells include promoting hypersensitivity reactions, modulating
est nucleated erythrocyte, having condensed nuclear chromatin
immune responses, defending against tissue parasites, and pro-
and gray to reddish cytoplasm. The reticulocyte, which contains
mast cells, often found adjacent to microvasculature and neural tis-
Romanowsky stains, is released into the circulation. Within 1 to
sues, may also be involved in angiogenesis and tissue repair.
Monocytopoiesis
undetermined number of mitotic cell divisions. The circulating
a macrophage in surrounding tissues. Therefore, both monocytes
and macrophages are derived from a bipotent progenitor cell, the
CFU-GM. The monoblast has a spherical to slightly indented nu-
cleus with a fine chromatin pattern and nucleoli, but it is not eas-
 ily distinguished from the promonocyte. The mature monocyte
 is characterized by an abundant amount of bluish-gray cytoplasm.
 Monocytes may also have small, indistinct primary granules and
variable cytoplasmic vacuolation. The cytokines that are princi-
pally involved in monocyte development include IL-3, GM-CSF,
and M-CSF. Canine and bovine GM-CSFs have been produced as
dependent neutrophilia and monocytosis following administration.
Erythropoiesis and Erythroid Precursors
FIGURE 4-12 Erythrocytic lineage (upper figure, left to right):
rubriblast, prorubricyte, basophilic rubricyte, polychromatophilic
rubricyte, metarubricyte, reticulocyte, erythrocyte. Bone marrow
cells, is controlled by growth factors that permit cellular survival
smear (lower figure) showing the stages of erythroid differentiation.
Blood and Bone Marrow · Joorne Messick
73
PLATE 4-I Two canine neutrophils and one monocyte.
PLATE 4-2 Bovine eosinophil.
PLATE 4-3  Equine eosinophil. The granules of the equine
PLATE 4-4 Equine basophil.
eosinophil are the largest of all the domestic species.
PLATE 4-5 Ovine basophil and lymphocyte.
PLATE 4-6 Small canine lymphocyte.
74
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
PLATE 4-7 Large bovine lymphocyte and platelets.
PLATe 4-8
Bovine lymphocyte with azurophilic granules
and platelets.
PLATE 4-9
Two canine monocytes.
PLATe 4-10
 Avian heterophil and nucleated erythrocytes.
PLATE 4-II Avian monocyte.
PLATE 4-12
Two avian thrombocytes.
Blood and Bone Marrow *Joorne Messick
75
2 days, the reticulocytes lose their ribosomes and become mature,
body platelet mass are found in the circulation and the remain-
circulating erythrocytes or red blood cells.
ing one third is present in the spleen.
 In general, erythroid cells become smaller with each suc-
cessive mitotic division. Chromatin continues to condense until
Lymphopoiesis and Lymphoid Precursors
the nucleus becomes pyknotic and is eventually extruded from
the cell. After 3 to 5 days, the rubriblast matures into the retic-
Lymphocytes, like other hematopoietic cells, originate from a
ulocyte, and after 1 to 2 additional days, the reticulocyte is re.
population of pluripotent stem cells (Fig. 4-10). The earliest pro-
leased into the circulation. When senescent, red blood cells are
genitor cell in this lineage, the lymphoblast, is present in low
removed from the circulation by the MPS.
numbers in the marrow and is difficult to distinguish from rubri-
blasts and early myeloblasts. A spherical nucleus, fine chromatin,
variable number of nucleoli, and a thin rim of deeply basophilic,
Thrombopoiesis and Platelet Precursors
agranular cytoplasm characterize this cell. The lymphoblast un-
Megakaryocytes arise from a multipotent progenitor cell, CFU-
dergoes division and differentiates to produce prolymphocytes
GEMM, in which lineage-specific genes have been activated (Fig .
that subsequently divide and differentiate into mature lym-
4-10). Thrombopoietin, the primary physiologic regulator of
phocytes. The number of mitotic cell divisions that occur be-
the megakaryocytic lineage, stimulates the proliferation and dif-
tween the progenitor and mature stage is not known. Most of the
ferentiation of committed progenitor cells. This factor also en-
marrow lymphocytes are small with clumped nuclear chromatin
hances the release of platelets from mature megakaryocytes into
ui san pananu al jo oz on dn "loanu suaiedde ou pue
the circulation. Stem cell factor (SCF), IL-3, GM-CSF, and other
feline bone marrow are mature lymphocytes, whereas less than
factors also regulate the proliferation of the megakaryoblast,
10% are mature lymphocytes in other species.
the earliest recognizable progenitor cell of this lineage (Fig. 4-13).
There are two populations of mature lymphocytes: T lym-
In response to these factors, the megakaryoblast undergoes endo-
panipau-lan u uonouny ieui saianoqduai a pue sainoud
mitosis, a process of nuclear division and cytoplasmic maturation
and humoral immunity, respectively. B and T lymphocytes
without cellular division. The process of megakaryocytic matura-
cannot be distinguished by their morphology alone; rather, spe-
tion occurs adjacent to vascular sinusoids in the marrow. During
cial staining techniques, immunophenotyping, are required.
maturation, there is a progressive increase in cell size, nuclear ploidy
 In mammals, the bone marrow and ileal aggregated lymphatic
 (number of nuclei), and cytoplasmic volume. The cytoplasm be-
nodules (Peyer's patches) are the site of B-lymphocyte maturation
comes progressively less basophilic and acquires primary granules.
from stem cells to small lymphocytes that express cell surface
The mature cell may contain as many as 16 to 32 nuclei that are
immunoglobulin. B lymphocytes may undergo further dif-
discrete but connected.
ferentiation in the marrow to become plasma cells, giving rise
Platelets are the end product of the megakaryocytic cell
to low numbers of B cells in this location. Plasma cells are dis-
lineage. Although the exact mechanism by which platelets are
tinguished from resting lymphocytes by the presence of more
formed is not well understood, cytoplasmic pseudopodia of the
 abundant, deeply basophilic cytoplasm, a prominent light-staining
megakaryocyte have been observed extending through the sinu
perinuclear Golgi zone, and an eccentric nucleus. In birds, the
soid endothelium, dribbling platelets (fragments of their cyto-
process of B-lymphocyte maturation occurs in the cloacal bursa
plasm) into the vascular space. About two thirds of the total
(bursa of Fabricius).
Some lymphoid precursors leave the marrow and seed the
thymus, where they differentiate into thymic or T lympho-
cytes. In the bone marrow, a small population of lymphocytes
with an abundant amount of lightly basophilic cytoplasm and
azurophilic granules is often present. These cells are large gran-
ular lymphocytes (LGLs) and may be either natural killer cells
or cytotoxic T lymphocytes, which play an important role in
tumor resistance and host immunity to viral and other microbial
infections.
Other Cells in Bone Marrow
Fibroblastlike cells support the walls of the bone marrow sinu-
n aiarodiay aun ym uo qam, aun dn a pue spios
grow within the marrow space. These supporting cells may be fur-
ther named based on their location. Fibroblastlike cells occupy-
FIGURE 4-13
Megakaryocytic lineage: bone marrow smear
ing interstitial spaces are referred to as reticular cells, whereas
showing a mature, granular megakaryocyte and a promegakaryocyte
those in the periphery of small vessels are called adventitial cells
(arrow). A megakaryoblast is shown in the insert.
Collectively, these supporting cells are also known as adventitial
76
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
reticular cells. The morphology of these cells is somewhat vari-
SUGGESTED READINGS
able. Because of their elongate proceses, the cells may range up
-JeA pue sajnueig Areujd maj V 'iaaueip leaao u! ur of o1
Abboud CN. Human bone marrow microvasculat endothelial cells: elu-
uoles are commonly found within the cytoplasm. The cell nucleus
sive cells with unique structural and functional properties. Exp
Hematol 1995;23:1-3.
 tern and a variable number of nucleoli. Fibroblastlike cells are part
Bagby GJ Jr. Regulation of granulopoiesis: the lartoferrin controversy.
of the marrow microenvironment and induce the proliferation of
Blood Ce1ls 1989;15:386-399.
Bathija A, Ohanian M, Davis S, et al. The marrow fat cell: response to
early myeloid and B-lymphoid progenitor cells.
X-ray induced aplasia. Life Sci 1979;25:921-927.
Endothelial cells of the bone marrow sinusoids have been
Bertram TA. Neutrophil leukocyte stfucture and function in domestic
shown to support the proliferation and differentiation of myeloid
animals. Adv Vet Sci Comp Med 1985;30:91-129.
and megakaryocytic progenitors. The primary function of sinu-
Boosinger TR, Rebar AH, DeNicola DB, et al. Bone marrow alter-
soid endothelial cells includes the regulation of the trafficking
ations associated with canine parvoviral enteritis. Vet Pathol
out shan pianodoiuau jo (uooun) Suuou pue (uolino)
1982;19:558-561.
and out of the marrow. One consequence of this unique function
Borish L, Joseph BZ. Inflam mation and the allergic response. Med Clin
is that only selected cells may gain acces to a recipient's bone
North Am 1992;76:765-787.
marrow after bone marrow transplant. Endothelial cells and fibro-
Campbell AD. The role of hemonectin in the cell adhesion mechanisms
blastlike cells are often indistinguishable in a Wright's stained
of bone marrow. Hematol Pathol 1992;6:51-60.
Christian JA. Red cell survival and destruction. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl
marrow smear.
The adipocyte is a prominent component of the marrow
JG, Jain NC, et al., eds. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. Sth Ed.
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000.
stroma. The nucleus of the adipocyte is often eccentric and com-
Colby CQ, Chang Y, Fuchimoto V, et al. Cytokine-mobilized peripheral
pressed by fat-laden cytoplasmic vacuoles. Proliferating hemato-
blood progenitor cells for allogeneic reconstitution of miniature
poietic cells may rapidly replace this fatty tissue when there is
swine. Transplantation 2000;69:1 35- 140.
increased demand for blood cell production. Yellow marrow in-
 Day MJ. Biologyoflymphocytes and plasma cells In: Feldman BF, Zinkl
creases in amount with age and is composed of adipocytes. In con-
JG, Jain NC, et al., eds. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. Sth Ed.
trast, the red marrow of younger animals has few adipocytes.
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000.
This age-related difference is important when interpreting mar-
De Bruyn PP, Michelson PS, Thomas TB. The migration of blood
row cellularity. Recent evidence suggests that adipocytes are
cells of the bone marrow through the sinusoidal wall. J Morphol
secretory cells that produce cytokines such as IL-6 and TNF-O,
1971;133:417-437.
which may be involved in control of adipose mass, inflammatory
Diebold J, Molina T, Camilleri-Broet S, et al. Bone maffow manifesta-
tions of infections and systemic diseases observed in bone marrow
responses, and hematopoiesis.
trephine biopsy review. Histopathology 2000;37: 199-211.
In bone marrow biopsy specimens, osteoblasts and osteo-
Dines KC, Powell HC. Mast cell interactions with the hervous system:
clasts are found adjacent to bony trabeculae (Fig. 4-14). Osteo-
relationship to mechanisms of disease. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol
blasts, like stromal cells, are derived from a specific mesenchymal
1997;56:627-640.
stem cell line that is distinct from the hematopoietic stem cell.
Draehert K, Draenert Y. The vascular system of bone marrow. Scan
The osteoblast has a large, eccentric nucleus with prominent
Electron Microsc 1980: 113.
nucleoli and abundant basophilic cytoplasm. These cells are in-
Duarte RF, Franf DA. The synergy betrween stem cell factor (SCF) and
volved in the deposition of osteoid and formation of new bone.
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF): molecular basis
Osteoblasts may be found in clusters in bone marrow biopsies
and clinical relevance. Leuk Lymphoma 2002;43: 11 79-1187.
 of young animals but are rare in biopsies from adults. The osteo-
Eckardt KU. The potential of erythropoietin and related strategies to stim-
clast is involved in resorption and remodeling of bone. These
ulate erythropoiesis. Curr Opin In vestig Drugs 200 1;2: 1081-1085.
Fernandez FR, Grindem CB. Reticulocyte response. In: Feldman BF,
cells are derived from the monocytic lineage and are multi-
Zinkl JG, Jain NC, et al., eds. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology.
nucleated cells. The nuclei of the osteoclast are discrete and in-
Sth Ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000.
dividual, which distinguishes them from the single nucleus of
Foucat K, Foucar E. The mononucleat phagocyte and immunoregula-
the megakaryocyte.
tory effector (M-PIRE) system: evolving concepts. Semin Diagn
Pathol 1990;7:4-18.
Fridenshtein A. Stromal bone marrow cells and the hematopoietic
microenvironment. Arkh Patol 1982;44:3-11.
Garland JM. Lymphocytes, lymphokines, and hematopoiesis. Immunol
Ser 1990;49:297-328.
Gentry PA. Platelet biology. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, et al.,
eds. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. 5th ed. Philadelphia:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000.
Gevers EF, Lovetidge N, Robinson IC. Bone matrow adipocytes: a
B
neglected target tissue for growth hormone. Endocrinology 2002;
143:4065-4073.
FIGURE 4-I4 Bone marrow smears. A. Osteoblasts
Gimble JM, Robinson CE, Wu X, et al. The function of adipocytes in
(arrowheads). B. A single multinucleated osteoclast (arrowhead).
the bone matrrow stroma: an update. Bone 1996;19:421 -428.
Blood and Bone Marrow · Joorne Messick
77
Goldfarb AN, Flores JP, Lewandowska K. Involvement of the E2A basic
Ohta M, Saito M. Regeneration of bone marrow tissue. Growth and
helix-loop-helix protein in immunoglobulin heavy chain class
differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells and the role of bone
switching. Mol Immunol 1996;33:947-956.
matrow microenvironment on hematopoiesis. Hum Cell 1991;
Gonzalez CL, Jaffe ES. The histiocytoses: clinical presentation and dif-
4:212-221.
ferential diagnosis. Oncology (Huntingt) 1990;4:47-60.
Oni OO, Stafford H, Gregg PJ. An investigation of the routes of venous
Gregoriadis AE, Heersche JN, Aurbin JE. Differentiation of muscle, fat,
drainage from the bone marrow of the human tibial diaphysis. Clin
cartilage and bone from progenitor cells present in a bone derived
Orthop 1 988;230:237-244.
clonal cell population: effect of dexamethasone. J Cell Biol 1988;
 Palis J, Yoder MC. Yolk-sac hematopoiesis: the first blood cells of mouse
10:2139-2151.
and man. Exp Hematol 2001;29:927-936.
Gulati GL, Ashton JK, Hyun BH. Structure and function of the bone
 Prockop DJ. Marrow stromal cells as stem cells for nonhematopoietic
marrow and hematopoiesis. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 1988;
tissues. Science 1 997;276:71-74.
2:495-511.
Reagan WJ. A review of myelofibrosis in dogs. Toxicol Pathol 1993;
Gullberg U, Bengtsson N, Bulow E, et al. Processing and targeting
21: 164-169.
of granule proteins in human neutrophils. J Immunol Methods
 Riggs AD. DNA methylation and cell memory. Cell Biophys 1989;
1999;232:201-210.
15:1-13.
Hofer M, Viklicka S, Tkadlecek L, et al. Haemopoiesis in murine bone
 Roberts R, Gallagher J, Spooncer E, et al. Heparan sulphate bound
marrow and spleen after fractionated irradiation and repeated bone
growth factors: a mechanism for stromal cell mediated haemo-
marrow transplantation. Il. Granulopoiesis. Folia Biol (Praha)
poiesis. Nature 1988;332:376-378.
1989:35:418-428.
 Saleque S, Cameron S, Orkin SH. The zinc-finget proto-oncogene Gfi-1b
Jacobsen SE, Ruscetti FW, Ortiz M, et al. The growth response of
is essential for development of theerythroid and megakaryocytic lin-
Lin-Thy-1 + hematopoietic progenitors to cytokines is determined
eages. Genes Dev 2002; 16:301-306.
by the balance berween synergy of multiple stimulators and nega-
Scott MA, Stockham SL. Basophils and mast cells. In: Feldman BF,
tive cooperation of multiple inhibitors. Exp Hematol 1994;22:
Zinkl JG, Jain NC, et al., eds. Schalm's Veterinaty Hematology.
'686-586
 Sth Ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000.
Kaushansky K. Small molecule mimics of hematopoietic growth factors:
Schultze AE. Interpretation of canine leukocyte response In: Feldman BF,
improving on mother nature? Leukemia 2001;15:673-674.
Zinkl JG, Jain NC, et al., eds. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology.
Kitamura Y, Jippo T. Biology of mast cells and basophils. Arerugi
Sth Ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000.
1997;46: 1 003-1 006.
Shivdasani RA. The role of transcription factor NF-E2 in mega-
Kurata M, Suzuki M, Agar NS. Antioxidant systems and erythrocyte life-
katyocyte maturation and platelet production. Stem Cells 1996;
 span in mammals. Comp Biochem Physiol B 1993;:106:477-487.
14S1:112-115
Laharrague P, Fontanilles AM, Tkaczuk J, et al. Inflammatory/
 Shmakova NL, Yarmonenko SP, Shapiro IM. Cytological analysis of
haematopoietic cytokine production by human bone marrow adi-
radiation damage and recovery of bone matrow in mammals.
pocytes. Eur Cytokine Netw 2000;1l:634639.
Nature 1967;214:719-720.
 Lotem J, Sachs L. Cytokine control of developmental programs in nor-
Slavin BG, Yoffey JM, Yaffe P. Response of marrow adipocytes to hypo-
mal hematopoiesis and leukemia. Oncogene 2002;21:3284 3294.
xia and rebound. Prog Clin Biol Res 198l;59B:231-241.
MacKey MC. Cell kinetic status of haematopoietic stem cells. Cell Prolif
Smith GS. Neutrophils. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, et al.,
2001;34:71-83
eds. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. 5th Ed. Philadelphia:
Marone G, Casolaro V, Patella V, et al. Molecular and cellular biology
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000.
of mast cells and basophils. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 1997;
Tablin F, Castro M, Leven R M. Blood platelet formation in vitro. The
114:207-217.
role of the cytoskeleton in megakaryocyte ffagmentation. J Cell Sci
MeClugage SG Jr, MeCuskey RS, Meineke HA. Microscopy of living
1990;97:59-70.
bone marrow in situ. Il. Influence of the microenvironment on
Takamoto M, Sugane K. Synergism of IL-3, IL-5, and GM-CSF on
hemopoiesis. Blood 1971;38:96-107.
eosinophil differentiation and its application for an assay of murine
McLeod DL, Shreeve MM, Axelrad AA. Chromosome marker evidence
IL-5 as an eosinophil differentiation factor. Immunol Lett 1995;
for the bipotentiality of BFU-E. Blood 1980;56:318-322.
45:43-46.
Melchers F. B cell differentiation in bone marrow. Clin Immunol Im-
Tanlin F. Platelet structure and function. In: Feldman, BF, Zinkl JG,
munopathol 1995;76:S188-191.
Jain NC, et al., eds. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. Sth Ed. Phila-
Messher HA. The role of CFU-GEMM in human hemopoiesis. Blut
delphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000.
1986;53:269-277.
Tavassoli M, Aoki M. Localization of megakaryocytes in the bone mar-
Meuret G, Senn HJ, De Fliedner V, et al. Intravascular fate of granulo-
tow. Blood Cells 1989;15:3-14.
cytes administered by granulocyte transfusions. Acta Haematol
Thiele J, Galle R, Sander C, et al. Interactions betrween megakaryocytes
1976;55:1 93-198.
and sinus wall. An ultrastructural study on bone mafrow tissue in
Miyazaki H, Kato T. Thrombopoietin: biology and clinical potentials.
 primary (essential) thrombocythemia. J Submicrosc Cytol Pathol
Int J Hematol 1999:70:216-225.
1991;23:595-603.
Moreau I, Duvert V, Caux C, et al. Myofibroblastic sromal cells isolated
Thiele J, Timmer J, Jansen B, et al. Ultrastructure of neutrophilic gran-
from human bone marrow induce the proliferation of both eatly
ulopoiesis in the bone marrow of patients with chronic myeloid
myeloid and B-lymphoid cells. Blood 1993;82:2396-2405.
leukemia (CML). A morphometric study with special emphasis on
Ogilvie GK. Clinical use of hemopoietic growth factors. In: Feldman
azurophil (primary) and specific (secondary) granules. Virchows
BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, et al., eds. Schalm's Veterinary Hema-
Arch B Cell Pathol Incl Mol Pathol 1990;59:125-131.
tology. 5th Ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins,
Vaananen HK, Zhao H, Mulari M, et al. The cell biology of osteoclast
2000.
function. J Cell Sci 2000;1 13:377-381.
78
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Valledor AF, Borras FE, Cullell-Young M, et al. Transcription factors
Weiss L, Geduldig U. Barrier cells: stromal regulation of hematopoiesis
that regulate monocyte/macrophage differentiation. J Leukoc Biol
and blood cell release in hormal and stressed murine bone mafrow.
1998;63:405-417.
Blood 1991;78:975-990.
Verfaillie C, Hurley R, Bhatia R, et al. Role of bone mafrow matrix in
Wellman ML. Lymphoproliferative disorders of large granular lympho-
normal and abnormal hematopoiesis. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol
cytes. In: Feldman, BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, et al., eds. Schalm's
1996;16:201-224.
Veterinary Hematology. 5th Ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams
Voermans C, van Hennik PB, van der Schoot CE. Homing of human
& Wilkins, 2000.
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells: new insights, hew chal-
Wineman J, Moore K, Lemischka I, et al. Functional heterogeneity
lenges? J Hematother Stem Cell Res 200l;10:725-738.
of the hematopoietic microenvironment: rare stromal elements
Vogt C, Noe G, Rich IN. The role of the blood island during hormal
maintain long-term repopulating stem cells. Blood, 1996;87:
and 5-fluorouracil-perturbed hemopoiesis. Blood Cells 1991;
4082-4090
17:105-121.
Wolber FM, Leonard E, Michael S, et al. Roles of spleen and liver in
Vuillet-Gaugler MH, Breton-Gorius J, Vainchenker W, et al. Loss of
development of the murine hematopoietic system. Exp Hematol
attachment to fibronectin with terminal human erythroid differ-
2002;30:1010-1119.
entiation. Blood 1990;75:865-873.
Young KM. Eosinophils. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, et al., eds.
Weiss L. The structure of bone marrow. Functional interrelationships
Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. 5th Ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott 
of vascular and hematopoietic compartments in experimental
Williams & Wilkins, 2000.
hemolytic anemia: an electron microscopic study. J Morphol
Zhu Y, Ye D, Huang Z. The correlation of cytokines TNF alpha, IFN-
1965;117:467-537.
gamma, Epo with anemia in rheumatoid arthritis. Zhonghua Xue
Weiss L. The histophysiology of bone mattow. Clin Orthop 1967;
Ye Xue Za Zhi 2000;21:587-590.
52: 1 323.
Muscle
O ANN EURELI
Smooth Muscle
Classification of Skeletal Muscle Fibers
Light Microscopic Structure
Myogenesis, Hypertrophy, Atrophy, and Regeneration
Fine Structure
Cardiac Muscle
Contraction
Light Microscopic Structure
 Myogenesis, Hypertrophy, and Regeneration
Fine Structure
Skeletal Muscle
Cardiac Nodes and Impulse Conduction Fibers
Light Microscopic Structure
Contraction
Fine Structure
Myogenesis, Hypertrophy, and Regeneration
Contraction
Many cells in the body are capable of contraction and limited
longitudinally sectioned fibers. Other muscular tissue in the
movement, but only specialized collections of cells known as mus-
walls of hollow organs is composed of myocytes without cross-
cle are capable of strong, concerted contraction to produce inte-
striations and hence has a smooth appearance. Therefore, three
grated movement. Muscular tissues are present in three principal
 basic types of muscle fibers are recognized: (1) nonstriated smooth
areas of the vertebrate body: the walls of hollow organs (e.g., vis-
muscle, which forms the contractile portion of the walls of most
cera of the gastrointestinal tract, urogenital tract, blood vessels),
viscera; (2) striated skeletal muscle, which comprises the skele-
the skeletal muscles, and the heart.
tal muscles that originate and insert on the bones of the skele-
The specialized cells of muscular tissues have distinct mor-
ton; and (3) striated cardiac muscle, which is the major tissue
phologic characteristics directly related to their contractile acti-
of the walls of the heart. Skeletal muscle is considered to be vol-
vity. Muscle cells, also known as myocytes or myofibers, are
untary in control, whereas cardiac muscle and smooth muscle are
elongated cells with spindle-shaped or fiberlike profiles. The term
involuntary.
fiber in association with muscle refers to cells, in contrast to con-
nective tissue fibers, which are condensed extracellular substances
dispersed between cells.
saxe Suol iaui ym salpunq u! pagueine aie saiaoau aui
SMOOTH MUSCLE
aligned parallel to the direction of their contractions. The shape
Light Microscopic Structure
of the profiles of myocytes is dependent on the angle of sec-
tioning. Myocytes sectioned parallel to their long axes appear
Smooth muscle cells are elongated, spindle-shaped cells (Fig. 5-1).
as long rods or spindles, whereas those sectioned at right angles
Each cell contains a single, centrally located nucleus. The cells
are polygonal. Oblique sectioning results in various elliptic
range from 5 to 20 μm in diameter and from 20 μm to 1 mm or
profiles.
more in length. The cytoplasm of smooth myocytes is acidophilic.
Within the cytoplasm of all myocytes are abundant fibrous
Within a tissue section, the cross-sectional size of cells is
proteins that stain intensely eosinophilic. The arrangement of
highly variable due to the tapered shape of the cells. Many cross
these fibrous proteins is highly ordered in skeletal and cardiac
sections of the cell lack nuclear profiles because of the extent of
muscular tissue, resulting in characteristic cross-striations of
the cell beyond the central nuclear region (Fig. 5-1A).
79
80
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Contraction
The contractile apparatus of smooth muscle is capable of greater
shortening in length and more sustained contractions than that of
 striated muscle. Contraction is governed by the phosphorylation
of the myosin-II molecule in contrast to striated muscle, which is
regulated by a troponin-tropomyosin complex described below.
The contraction sequence begins with an increase of cal-
cium in the smooth muscle cell cytoplasm. Calcium increases by
entering the cell through voltage-dependent calcium channels
in the cell membrane or by inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3)-
induced release of calcium from the smooth endoplasmic reticu-
lum. The rise in cytosolic calcium leads to subsequent binding
of the calcium to calmodulin. The calcium-calmodulin com-
tiates phosphorylation of myosin-II and interaction between the
 actin and myosin-II myofilaments. The overall process leading
B
to actin-myosin interaction is longer when compared with other
muscle types, which results in the relatively slow contraction of
FIGURE 5-I Smooth muscle. A. Cross section. B. Longitudinal
smooth muscle.
section. The central myocyte nuclei (solid arrows) are absent in
Hormones that act via cyclic adenosine monophosphate
several cross sections due to sectional geometry. The tip of a
spindle-shaped cell is visible at the dotted arrow. Fibroblast nuclei
(cAMP) can affect smooth muscle contraction. cAMP activates
(open arrow) are dark and smaller than smooth muscle nuclei
Uisoau jo uoelioudsoud on Supeal aseury ureus-iug!l uisokiu 
Hematoxylin and eosin (x490)
and cell contraction. Estrogen increases cAMP and subsequently
smooth muscle contraction, while progesterone decreases cAMP,
resulting in decreased smooth muscle contraction.
 Individual myocytes are surrounded by a fine network of re-
Contraction of smooth muscle is involuntary. Innervation is
ticular fibers, blood vessels, and nerves. In smooth muscle, retic-
both parasympathetic and sympathetic, and the effects of neural
ular fibers are produced by myocytes rather than fibroblasts.
 input on smooth muscle are variable. Unitary smooth muscle,
 Although the connective tissue is analogous to the endomysium
found in the wall of visceral organs, behaves as a syncytium that
of skeletal muscle described below, it is not termed as such.
contracts in a networked fashion. Cells of this arrangement of
smooth muscle are extensively connected by gap junctions but
 sparsely innervated. In contrast, multiunit smooth muscle,
Fine Structure
found in the iris of the eye,is capable of precise contractions due
The cytoplasm of the smooth muscle myocyte contains numer-
to individual innervation of each myocyte. The multiunit myo-
cytes lack gap junctions, resulting in reduced coordinated com-
ous myofilaments in various orientations (Figs. 5-2 and 5-3).
Thin myofilaments of smooth muscle contain actin and tropo-
munication between cells.
myosin but lack troponin, which is present in skeletal and car-
diac muscle. Thick myofilaments, composed of myosin-II, are
Myogenesis, Hypertrophy,
sparse. The thick and thin myofilaments are not arranged in a
and Regeneration
highly ordered pattern as in striated muscle. Dense bodies in
Smooth muscle tissue increases in size by both hypertrophy (in-
the cytoplasm and the cell membrane serve as anchor sites for the
Crease in size) and hyperplasia (increase in number) of myocytes.
 myofilaments. Intermediate filaments (desmin and vimentin)
-ap Aq no sisonu qonoun uoy uen sian aposnu yoous man
further link the dense bodies into a meshwork array. The myofila-
ment attachment sites on the cell membrane also form junctions
healing of smooth muscle is mainly through connective tissue
that connect adjacent cells.
 scar formation.
Numerous pear-shaped invaginations (caveolae) and vesicles
are present along the cell membrane and are believed to play a role
in calcium transport (Figs. 5-2 and 5-3). Transverse T tubules
found in striated muscle are lacking and smooth endoplasmic
SKELETAL MUSCLE
reticulum is sparse. Gap junctions, which allow for cell coupling:
Light Microscopic Structure
occur at frequent periodic sites in the cell membrane. Other cel-
 lular organelles, including mitochondria, Golgi complex, rough
Skeletal muscle myocytes are elongated cells that range from 10
endoplasmic reticulum (rER), and free ribosomes, are located near
to 110 μm in diameter and can reach up to 50 cm in length. These
the nucleus. Each myocyte is surrounded by a basal lamina, except
fibers are derived from the prenatal fusion of many individual
at intercellular junctions (Fig. 5-3).
mononuclear myoblasts. As a result of the fusion, a single myocyte
Muscle·Jo Arnn Eurell
81
gapunctior
myofilament
caveolae
dense
bodies
FIGURE 5-2 The smooth muscle cell has a centrally located nucleus surrounded by cytoplasm
containing myoflaments in various orientations. The contractile myoflaments anchor into dense bodies 
on the cell membrane and within the cytoplasm of the smooth muscle cell. When the myofilaments 
 contract, the cell shortens (lower diagram). Numerous caveolae, vesicles, and gap junctions are present 
along the cell membrane.
82
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
FIGURE 5-4 Skeletal muscle, longitudinal section. Notice the
cross-striations and the nuclei located in the periphery of the
myocytes. Hematoxylin and eosin (x435).
are responsible for contraction. The myofibrils align in a longitu-
dinal direction to create the light and dark banding pattern of the
myocyte. Thick and thin myofilaments overlap in the darker A
band (anisotropic), whereas only thin myofilaments are present in
the lighter I band (isotropic). The myofibrils are connected by in-
termediate filaments of desmin and vimentin, such that the light
and dark bands of all myofibrils within a fiber are in register.
Satellite cells are spindle-shaped cells located adjacent to the
cell membrane of the myocyte and within its basement mem-
brane. Their nuclei are heterochromatic in contrast to the lighter-
staining nuclei of the myocyte. Satellite cells are best recognized
ndod e uasadai oi unoui ae Aui Adosou uaa ym
Ainju uodn paneaie aq ue yum 'siseqou aau yo uo
to initiate regeneration of muscle fibers
FIGURE 5-3  Electron micrograph of a crosssectioned smooth
muscle cell. The nucleus (N) is centrally located, and the cytoplasm
contains numerous myofilaments. Electron-dense bodies (*) serve
as attachment sites for the myofilarments. Numerous caveolae
(arrowheads) are present along the plasma membrane of an 
adjacent cell. The basal laminae (L) are visible between the two cells
and appear fused at points (×23,900). (Courtesy of W. 5. Tyler.)
contains multiple oval nuclei, which are peripherally located within
the cell (Fig. 5-4). When viewed in longitudinal section, trans-
verse striations are present as alternating light and dark bands. In
transverse section, the myocyte has an angular outline and a stip-
pled cytoplasm (Fig. 5-5). Peripheral nuclei may be absent in some
planes of the cross section of the myocyte. The surrounding cell
membrane is visible at higher magnification.
Each muscle cell contains myofibrils, which form the dots in
cross sections of the fiber at the light microscopic level (Fig. 5-6).
FIGURE 5-5 Skeletal muscle, cross section. The nuclei in the
The myofibrils are cylindricaland 1 to 2 μm in diameter. Individual
sparse endomysium (arrows) belong to either fibroblasts or satellite
myofibrils are composed of thick and thin myofilaments, which
cells. Hematoxylin and eosin (×435).
Muscle · Jo Arn Eurell
83
endomysium
T tubules
sarcolemma
myofibril
Biscyutp
Aband Iband
myofilament
smooth endoplasmic reticulum
(sarcoplasmic reticulum)
terminal cisternae
FIGURE 5-6  The myofibrils of skeletal muscle are comprised of myofilaments. Smooth endoplasmic
reticulum surrounds each myofibril and forms terminal cistemae near the T tubule. T tubules extend into
the cytoplasm from the cell membrane and surround the myofibrils at the A junction. A T tubule plus
two terminal cistermae form a triad structure. Peripheral nuclei of the skeletal muscle myofiber are not
shown in this illustration.
 Individual myocytes are bound together into primary bundles
myosin-II binding sites on the actin. In addition, triple globular
or fascicles (Fig. 5-7). Within a fascicle, an individual myocyte
units of troponin are spaced at regular intervals along the tropo-
is surrounded by reticular fibers, which form the endomysium.
myosin. The globular subunits include TnT, which binds tro-
Nerve fibers and an extensive network of continuous capillaries
ponin to tropomyosin; TnC, which binds calcium; and Tnl, which
are also present in the endomysium. Each fascicle is surrounded
binds to actin and prevents interaction with myosin. When calcium
by dense irregular connective tissue, termed the perimysium.
increases and binds to TnC, tropomyosin moves off the actin-
Supplying blood vessels and nerves plus muscle stretch receptors 
binding site and allows myosin-II to interact with actin.
(muscle spindles) are located in the perimysium. Most muscles
Thick myofilaments are composed of myosin-II, formed
are surrounded on the outer surface by a dense irregular connec-
by two heavy chains and four light chains of amino acids. The
tive tissue layer, the epimysium. The connective tissues of skeletal
two heavy chains twist together to form a rodlike tail with two
muscle are interconnected and provide a means by which contrac.
protruding globular heads. Two light chains are associated with
tile forces are transmitted to other tissues.
each head. The heads have binding sites for actin and for adeno-
sine triphosphate (ATP). In addition, they have adenosine tri-
phosphatase (ATPase) activity. Individual thick filaments are
Fine Structure
bound by bands of C protein, which stabilize the filament
Contractile myofilaments of skeletal muscle cells are primarily
The myofilaments are arranged to form the light and dark
actin or myosin-I. In addition, the myofilaments contain other
banding pattern visible in a longitudinal section of the myofibril
proteins involved in either binding the primary filaments to-
(Fig. 5-9). Adjacent thick myofilaments and overlapping thin
gether (e.g., actinins, M-line proteins) or regulating the actin and
myofilaments form the A band. Thin myofilaments do not ex-
myosin-II interaction (e.g., tropomyosin, troponin).
tend to the center of the A band, leaving a more lucent region
Thin myofilaments of skeletal muscle are composed ofactin,
known as the H band. The thick myofilaments are intercon-
troponin, and tropomyosin (Fig. 5-8). Globular molecules (G-actin)
nected down the center of the H band by an M line. The M line
within the myoblast polymerize to form filamentous strands
contains myomesin, which links the M line to desmin, and cre-
(F-actin). Each globular molecule has a binding site for myosin-II.
atine phosphokinase, which helps maintain levels of ATP for
Two filamentous strands twist together to form a double helix.
contraction. The pseudo-H zone is present on either side of the
 Filamentous tropomyosin molecules lie in the groove between
M line. In this region, thick myofilaments lack protruding cross-
the two twisted strands of F-actin. The tropomyosin covers the
bridges and the area appears more electron-lucent.
84
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
is associated with actin and may regulate the assembly and length
of actin filaments. Desmin filaments, located at the Z line, link
adjacent myofibrils together side by side,and also attach the myo-
fibrils to the cell membrane at specializations called costameres.
Dystrophin, a transmembrane complex of proteins, stabilizes
the cell membrane of the myocyte and links the cell to the sur-
rounding basement membrane. On the cytoplasmic side of the
cell membrane, the dystrophin complex is linked to actin myo-
filaments.
The cell membrane (previously termed sarcolemma) invagi-
nates at several sites to form a tubular network, theT' tubules(Figs.
5-6 and 5-10). Within the cytoplasm of the myocyte, individual
myofibrils are surrounded by highly specialized smooth endoplas-
mic reticulum (sER) (sarcoplasmic reticulum), which stores cal-
cium. The sER forms an anastomosing network of tubules around
the myofibrils and dilates to create terminal cisternae at the A-I
band junction. The membranes of the terminal cisternae have
voltage-gated channels to release the stored calcium when needed.
Each T tubule courses adjacent to two terminal cisternae and the
three structures collectively form a triad. Mitochondria and glyco-
gen granules are located in the cytoplasm between the myofibrils
and provide energy during muscle contraction.
Contraction
A motor unit is composed ofa nerve fiber (axon) and the muscle
cells it innervates. One nerve fiber may innervate multiple myo-
cytes. The axon contacts the skeletal muscle fiber and branches to
form a motor end plate on the surface of the myocyte. When
 stimulated, an action potential travels down the axon and causes
release of acetylcholine from the motor end plate into the synap-
tic cleft adjacent to the muscle fiber. Acetylcholine binds to re-
FIGURE 5-7The myofibers are organized into fascicles
ceptors on the cell membrane and opens receptor-gated sodium
(bundles) and separated from other fascicles by perimysium. Within
the larger divisions of the perimysium, notice the arteriole (A).
 channels into the myocyte. Sodium influxes into the muscle fiber
venule (V), intramuscular nerve branch (N), and muscle spindle (*).
and initiates a wave of depolarization that spreads across the cell
At the margin of the section is a portion of the epimysium
membrane
(arrowheads) (×125)
In the resting state before depolarization of the cell membrane,
the tropomyosin-troponin complex covers the myosin-II binding
sites on the actin filament (Fig. 5-8). Myosin-II heads are bound to
 ATP. As depolarization begins, an action potential spreads across
Ina cross section of the myofibril within the A band, groups
the cell membrane and extends into the T tubules. The depolar-
of six thin myofilaments surround one thick myofilament to
form a hexagonal lattice. The thick myofilaments are linked to
cium into the cytoplasm around the myofibrils. The calcium binds
each other by myosin-II cross-bridges (side arms that protrude
to troponin (TnC) on the thin myofilaments, causing the troponin
from the filaments) in the A band, except in the pseudo-H zone,
to undergo a conformation change. The change in troponin results
where cross-bridges are absent.
 in the movement of tropomyosin to expose the myosin-II binding
The I band is composed of the portion of the thin filaments
sites. Actin and myosin-I interact, allowing the increased hydrol-
that do not extend into the A band. These thin myofilaments are
ysis of ATP. Energy from the ATP hydrolysis is used to bend the
interconnected in the center of the I band by a Z line composed
head of the myosin-II complex. The movement of the head pulls
of α-actinin. A sarcomere extends from one Z line to the next
the attached actin toward the center of the sarcomere, thus short-
juuagueire iuanueioau jo iun guneadan aun snuasandan pue
ening the sarcomere and contracting the myocyte overall. The
within the myofibril.
 myosin-I head binds to a new ATP and then detaches from the
Several structural proteins that link the contractile myo-
actin filament and the cycle repeats. If ATP is depleted, the fila-
filaments are found within skeletal muscle. Springlike titin an-
ments cannot detach and rigor mortis sets in. After depolarization
chors the Z line to myosin-II filaments and the M line and helps
ends, calcium is actively transported back into the terminal cister-
maintain the A band width when muscle is stretched. Nebulin
nae and contraction ceases.
Muscle · Jo Ann Eurel
85
G-actin molecule
troponin complex
myosin Il
tropomyosin
heavy ,chains
myosin Il 
light chains
B
relaxed; actin and myosin-ll are not linked. B. As contraction begins, the troponin-tropomyosin complex
moves off the actin-binding site and allows myosin-ll to bind. The myosin-ll head then bends. C. The thin
myoflament is pulled toward the center of the sarcomere (to the left in this drawing). D. The actin-myosin
complex then dissociates, troponin-tropomyosin covers the actin-binding site, and the myosin head swings
forward to repeat the cycle.
86
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
dividual muscles, variable distribution of fiber types occurs. The
fiber types are identified by using antibodies against either fast- or
slow-twitch myosin isotypes. Fast muscle fibers contract quickly
while slow muscle fibers contract more slowly. Red skeletal mus-
cle fibers contain large amounts of myoglobin, which contributes
 to their red color. Myoglobin is an oxygen-carrying protein simi-
品
lar to hemoglobin. The red fibers have extensive mitochondria,
which are densely packed under the sarcolemma and between myo-
fibrils. This type of skeletal muscle fiber depends on the oxidative
pathway for energy production. Most red muscle fibers contract
and fatigue slowly and are termed slow-twitch fibers; however,
some fast-twitch red fibers do exist. In contrast to red muscle fibers,
white muscle fibers have less myoglobin and are lighter in color.
Fewer mitochondria are present, often clustering as pairs between
C
SARCOMERE
myofibrils near the I bands. The sER is more extensive, allowing
for rapid release of calcium to initiate contraction. The energy for
white muscle fiber contraction is primarily from anaerobic glyco-
lysis. White muscle fibers contract and fatigue more rapidly com-
PH
M
 pared with red muscle fibers and are known as fast-twitch fibers.
Z
Intermediate muscle fibers have characteristics of both red and
white fibers.
AWWW
MANIAN
Myogenesis, Hypertrophy, Atrophy,
WAIAWIAAT
and Regeneration
During development, mesenchymal cells differentiate into skele-
tal muscle myoblasts. Myoblasts may migrate to remote loca-
tions from their original site of development. As development
progresses, multiple myoblasts fuse and form elongated myo-
tubes. Within the myotube, contractile myofibrils are formed.
FIGUrE 5-9
Light micrograph (A) and electron micrograph
As additional myoblasts fuse to the developing myocyte and myo-
(B) of longitudinally oriented skeletal muscle and schematic
fibrils increase in number, the nuclei peripheralize within the cell
representation (C) of a sarcomere. In A, transverse striations
consisting of altermating light bands (l bands) and dark bands (A
 Satellite cells remain as potential myogenic cells within the basal
bands) are present. Each I band is bisected by a Z line (arrowheads)
lamina next to the mature myocyte.
(×1ll 50). In B, the transverse striations can be further resolved into
Hypertrophy of mature muscle cells occurs through the ac-
 Z lines (Z) that define a sarcomere and bisect the light I band (not
tivity of satellite cells. One satellite cell divides into two daugh-
labeled). The A band is electron-dense and is bisected by the M line 
ter cells. One daughter cell remains as a satellite cell, whereas the
(M, arrowhead), which connects adjacent thick myoflaments. On
other fuses with the muscle cell and adds additional nuclei. The
either side of the M line, an electron-lucent area represents the H
new nuclei direct the synthesis of additional myofibrils and other
band (H), where there is no overlap of thick and thin myofilaments
cytoplasmic elements. Neither the myocyte nor its nuclei divide
(×22,500). In C, the arrangement of myofilaments is shown in 
 during the process of hypertrophy. In contrast, during atrophy of
relation to the electron micrograph. PH is the pseudo-H zone, a
more electron-lucent region in which thick myofilarments lack
 skeletal muscle, myofibrils and nuclei are lost.
cross-bridges. The bottom diagram represents a cross section of
Regeneration of muscle is dependent on the extent of injury.
 the region indicated by the amows. Large dots represent thick 
Small areas of muscle can be regenerated through fusion of satel-
myofilaments and small dots represent thin myoflaments.
lite cells with each other to form new muscle cells or fusion with
 existing muscle cells. If damage is extensive, muscle is replaced
 During contraction, the I and H bands narrow and the Z lines 
by connective tissue instead.
move closer together. When muscle is stretched, opposite changes
occur. In contrast, the width of the A band remains constant dur-
ing either contraction or stretching.
CardIac MuScle
Classification of Skeletal Muscle Fibers
Light Microscopic Structure
Skeletal muscle fibers can be classified based on speed of contrac-
The striated myocytes of cardiac muscle branch and anastomose
tion, gross anatomic appearance, and fatigue resistance. Within in-
(Fig. 5-11). At the end-to-end junction of adjacent cells, dense
Muscle ·Jo Ann Eurell
87
FIGURE 5- I0 Eectron micrograph of a longitudinal section through a skeletal muscle cell. Structures
identified include: A band (A); I band (l); Z line (Z); M line (M); pseudo-H band (H); glycogen (G) within
the cytoplasm adjacent to mitochondria; terminal cistemae (L): T tubule (T); and other triads (*) locatec
at the A junction (×34,000).
intercalated disks are present. Cardiac myocytes are approxi-
mately 15 μm in diameter and 85 to 100 μm in length. The sin-
gle nuclei of cardiac muscle cells are located in the center of the
cell and the cytoplasm is acidophilic (Fig. 5-12).
A network of fine reticular and collagenous fibers surrounds
each cardiac muscle fiber. The network corresponds to endomy-
sium of skeletal muscle but is more irregular. In the heart, cardiac
anssi aAnauuon asuap Aq sdnoig onu! papiAipqns are saiAsoAu
analogous to the perimysium of skeletal muscle. No tissue that
[enpiaipun 'suasaind s unisaurda aposnu jeaays on spuodsaion
network (Figs. 5-11 and 5-12).
Fine Structure
Cardiac myocytes have myofibrils similar to skeletal muscle (Fig
5-13). The same banding pattern of myofilaments is present.
FIGURE 5-II Cardiac myocytes in longitudinal section. Note
T tubules, located at the Z line, are larger than in skeletal mus-
the transverse striations and branching of the myocytes, the central
cle (Fig. 5-14). The sarcoplasmic reticulum is usually present on
location of their nuclei, and the dark-stained intercalated disks
one side of the T tubule, forming a diad instead of a triad as found
(arrows). This muscle type has many capillaries (C) (×700).
in skeletal muscle.
88
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
The mitochondria of cardiac myocytes are larger and more
numerous than in skeletal muscle, indicating the degree of aero-
 bic metabolism that occurs in this tissue (Fig. 5-14). The cyto-
plasm also contains lipid droplets and glycogen.
The intercalated disk is the means by which cardiac muscle
cells are linked (Figs 5-13 and 5-15). The disk is formed by a
complex interdigitation of the adjacent cell membranes. The lon-
gitudinal region of the disk contains gap junctions, which allow
transfer of chemical signals between adjacent cells. Desmosomes
C
and fasciae adherens are present in the transverse region of the
disk. The desmosomes have intermediate filaments that extend
into the cytoplasm and result in strong attachment between cells.
Actin filaments of the myofibrils anchor into a specialized region
 of the myocyte membrane, the fascia adherens, located between
the desmosomes (Fig. 5-15).
Atrial myocytes are smaller and have fewer T tubules than
FIGURE 5-12
Cardiac muscle, cross section. Note the centrally
myocytes of the ventricle. In addition, atrial cardiac muscle has
located nuclei (arrow) and numerous capillaries (C). Hematoxylin
membrane-bounded dense granules in the cytoplasm that con-
and eosin (x800).
tain atrial natriuretic peptides (ANPs). ANPs stimulate the
inner medullary collecting ducts of the kidney to excrete sodium
reticular fibers
smooth
T tubule
Z line
intercalated
endoplasmic
disk
reticulum
(sarcoplasmic
reticulum)
FIGURE 5-I3 The T tubules of cardiac muscle are located at the Z line. Smooth endoplasmic
reticulum surrounds the myofibrils and contacts the T tubules, forming a diad structure. The ends of the
adjacent muscle fibers are joined by an intercalated disk. A nucleus, which is centrally located in the 
 cardiac muscle fiber, is not shown in this drawing.
Muscle · Jo Ann Eurell
68
 FIGURE 5-14  Eectron micrograph of a longitudinal section of cardiac muscle. The cel membrane
and basement membrane of each myocyte are indicated with arrowheads. Large mitochondria (M) with
( sane  ae  a a aa lao a a r  ae asu ad aa
entering the lower myocyte at the Z lines. Diads (D) composed of a T tubule and smooth endoplasmic
(natriuresis) and water (diuresis). The peptides also cause vascu-
Contraction
lar smooth muscle to relax.
Cardiac muscle is stimulated to contract by a mechanism similar
to skeletal muscle. As there is less sER in cardiac muscle, an ac-
Cardiac Nodes and Impulse
tion potential triggers the release of calcium from both the sER
Conduction Fibers
and T tubules. Contraction is activated through the interaction
of actin and myosin myofilaments. Sequential contraction of
Modified cardiac muscle cells form the cardiac nodes and im-
heart chambers is stimulated by the orderly spread of the action
pulse conduction fibers (Purkinje fibers) (Fig. 5-16 and Chap-
potentials via gap junctions in the intercalated disks. The num-
 ter 7). The cells of the sinoatrial and atrioventricular nodes are
 ber, size, and distribution of the gap junctions plus the type of
clustered together and have more cytoplasm and fewer myofibrils
 than cardiac myocytes, accounting for their light-staining cyto-
connexin (the structural protein of the gap junctions) influence
plasm. A large, pale area near the nucleus represents the storage
the rate of impulse conduction.
site of glycogen, which is removed during tissue procesing. The
cells stain positively for acetylcholinesterase, which relates to their
Myogenesis, Hypertrophy,
conductive function. At the ultrastructural level, the cells have
and Regeneration
mitochondria and sarcoplasmic reticulum but lack T tubules. The
atrioventricular bundle, composed of impulse conduction fibers
Cardiac muscle develops from splanchnic mesoderm surround-
similar to nodal cells, originates from the atrioventricular node
ing the endocardial heart tube. The fibers arise by differentiation
and supplies both ventricles. As the fibers course toward the apex
and growth of single cells. As the cells grow, new myofilaments
of the heart, they become larger than adjacent cardiac myocytes 
form. The ability of cardiac muscle cells to divide is lost soon after
and are a prominent feature of the subendocardium.
birth. Enlargement of the heart wall during exercise or cardiac
06
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
FIGURE 5-15 Electron micrograph of an intercalated disk
 from cardiac muscle. The fascia adherens junction (*) is oriented
transversely to the long axis of the myofbril. Desmosomes are
indicated by the double arrow. Gap junctions (arrowheads) are
oriented parallel to the long axis (×42, I00). (Courtesy of W. 5. Tyler.)
FIGURE 5-16 Cardiac impulse conduction fibers (one is
hyperplasia. Damage to a section of the heart wall, with the
resulting death of that section, is repaired primarily by prolifer-
located nucleus and sparse myofibrils (mf) in their cytoplasm.
ation of connective tissue rather than by regeneration of any sig-
PTAH stain (×I200).
nificant number of new cardiac myocytes. Stem cells are under 
investigation as a possible source of replacement cells for dam-
aged cardiac muscle cells.
Huxley HE. Electron microscopy studies of the structure of natural and
 synthetic protein filaments ffom striated muscle. J Mol Biol 1963;
7:281-308.
SUGGESTEd reAdInGS
Huxley HE. The structural basis of contraction and regulation in
skeletal muscle. In: Heilmeyer LMG, Riegg JC, Wieland T, eds.
Alberts B, Btay D, Lewis J, et al. Molecular Biology of the Cell. 3rd Ed.
Molecular Basis of Motility. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1976.
New York: Garland Publishing, 1994.
Jones DA, Round JM. Skeletal Muscle in Health and Disease. New
Allt G, Lawrenson JG. Pericytes: cellbiology and pathology. Cell Tiss
York: Manchester University Press, 1 990.
Org 2001;169:1-11.
Pardo JV, Siliciano JD, Craig SW. A vinculin-containing cortical lat-
Cardinet GH II, Leong DL, Means PS. Myocyte differentiation in nor-
tice in skeletal muscle: transverse lattice elements ("costameres")
mal and hypotrophied canine pectineal muscles. Muscle Nerve
mark sites of attachment between myofibrils and sarcolem ma. Proc
1982;5:665
Natl Acad Sci U S A 1983;80:1008-1012.
Cardinet GH III, Orvis JA. Skeletal muscle function. In: Kaneko J, ed.
Peachey LD, ed. Handbook of Physiology. Section 10: Skeletal Muscle.
Clinical Biochemistry of Domestic Animals. New York: Academic
Bethesda, MD: American Physiological Society, 1983.
Press, 1980.
Pollard TD, Earnshaw WC. Cell Biology. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2002.
Dellmann HD, Carithers JR. Cytology and Microscopic Anatomy.
Severs NJ. Cardiac muscle cell interaction: from microanatomy to the
Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1996.
moleculat make-up of the gap junction. Histol Histopathol 1995;
Ebashi S. Excitation-contraction coupling. Ann Rev Physiol 1976;36:
10:481-501.
293-313.
Tokuyasu KT, Dutton AH, Singer SJ. Immunoelectron microscopic
Guyton AC, Hall JE. Textbook of Medical Physiology. Philadelphia:
studies of desmin (skeleton) localization and intermediate fila-
WB Saunders, 1996.
ment organization in chicken cardiac muscle. J Cell Biol 1983;96:
Hill M, Wernig A, Goldspink, G. Muscle satellite (stem) cell activation
17361742.
during local tissue injury and repaif. J Anat 2003:203:89-99.
Wang K, Ramirez-Mitchell R. A network of transverse and longitudi-
Horowitz A, Menice CB, Laporte R, et al. Mechanisms of smooth muscle
hal intermediate filaments is associated with safcomeres of adult
contraction. Physiol Rev 1996;76:967-1003.
vertebrate skeletal muscle. J Cell Biol 1983;96:562-570.
Nervous Tissue
ALVIN J. BEITZ
THOMAS F.FLETCHER
Neurons
 Peripheral Nervous System Gliocytes
Neuronal Structure
Ganglionic gliocytes
 Cell body
Neurolemmocytes
Nucleus
Myelin Sheath 
Cell body cytoplasm
 Peripheral Nervous Tissue
Neuron processes
Nerves
Dendrites 
Ganglia
Axon
Efferent Neurons
Terminal branches (telodendrites)
Receptors
Classification
Nonencapsulated receptors
Regions of a Neuron 
Encapsulated receptors
Neuronal Communication
 Central Nervous Tissue
Intemeuronal chemical synapses
 Cerebral Cortex
Synaptic ultrastructure and function
Cerebellum
Neuroglia 
 Spinal Cord 
Central Nervous System Gliocytes
Meninges, Blood Vessels, and Cerebrospinal Fluid
Astrocytes
Meninges
Oligodendrocytes
Blood Vessels
Microglia
 Cerebrospinal Fluid 
Ependymal cells
 Nervous tissue parenchyma consists of neurons and support-
NEURONS
ive cells called neuroglia. Nervous tissue forms the nervous
system, which may be divided into the central nervous system
Neurons are the structural and functional units of the nervous
and the peripheral nervous system. The central nervous sys-
system. They are also trophic units because often they transform
tem (CNS) includes the brain and spinal cord. The peripheral
and sustain what they innervate. Generally, neurons must last a
nervous system (PNS) consists of cranial and spinal nerves, in-
lifetime because, with some exceptions (e.g., olfactory neurons
 cluding associated nerve roots and ganglia. Nerves and ganglia
and neuronal stem cells), mature neurons are incapable of mito-
that innervate viscera are designated the autonomic nervous
sis. However, recent evidence of new neuron formation in several
system.
regions of the brain has been discovered.
16
92
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Morphologically, neurons feature elongated processes, termed
easily excited to threshold than larger ones; that is, less synaptic
axons and dendrites, that extend variable distances from the cell
 body (perikaryon) (Fig. 6-1). Metabolically, neurons are actively
(which have high input impedance, by virtue of their size).
involved in maintaining their structural integrity and in synthe-
sizing, packaging, transporting, and releasing secretory products.
Nucleus
 Neurons specialize in excitability and they communicate by
Typically, the nucleus of a neuron is centrally positioned, spher-
releasing chemical agents (neurotransmitters, neuromodulators, or 
ical or ovoid, and relatively euchromatic, reflecting its high syn-
neurohormones). Excitation involves ions passing through protein
 thetic activity. Small neurons have rather heterochromatic nuclei.
channels embedded in neuronal plasma membrane that otherwise
Neurons in autonomic ganglia have eccentric nuclei. Nuclear
acts as a hydrophobic barrier to ion flow. Via chemical secretion,
size is proportional to neuron size. The nucleus appears relatively
neurons transmit excitation to other neurons or to muscle or glands.
large in a neuron because the cell body cytoplasm surrounding it
represents only a minor fraction of total cell volume.
Neuronal Structure
A prominent nucleolus is evident within the nucleus. In
females of some species, sex chromatin (Barr body) may be evi-
Neurons assume a variety of shapes and sizes, related to their func-
dent in the vicinity of the nucleolus (cats, rodents) or nuclear
tional roles. Neuronal processes are configured according to the
membrane (primates).
connections that must be made. Neurons with processes that ex-
tend long distances must necessarily be larger than less extensive
Cell body cytoplasm
neurons. Also, because larger processes conduct more rapidly than
Many proteins are synthesized in the cell body cytoplasm of the
 smaller ones, neurons that convey urgent information are large.
neuron, including cytoskeletal proteins (e.g., for neurofilaments
and microtubules), membrane proteins (e.g., for ion channels and
Cell Body
active transport), enzymatic proteins (e.g., for glucose metabo-
The cell body (perikaryon; soma) of a neuron consists of the nu-
lism and neurotransmitter synthesis), and secretory peptides
 cleus plus the surrounding cytoplasm and plasma membrane
(e.g ., neuromodulators and neurohormones).
(Fig. 6-1). In routinely stained histologic sections, the cell body
The cell body cytoplasm of large neurons stained with ani-
is the most identifiable feature of a neuron. Cellular constituents
line dyes and examined by light microscopy features clumps of
are synthesized within the cell body and then flow distally into
chromatophilic substance (Niss substance), which represent
neuronal processes (axon and dendrites)
aggregations of rough endoplasmic reticulum (rER), free ribo-
Cell bodies range from less than 10 μum to more than 100 μm
somes, and polyribosomes. Chromatophilic substance extends
in diameter. Cell body size is proportional to neuronal total vol-
into the trunks of dendrites, but it is absent from the axon and
ume, although the cell body itself represents a minor portion of
axon hillock, a pale-staining region of the cell body where the
the total volume (and an even smaller fraction of total surface
axon originates. Instead, the hillock contains neurofilaments
area). In multipolar neurons, where the cell body plasma mem-
and grouped microtubules. In small neurons, cytoplasmic chro-
brane integrates synaptic input, smaller cell bodies are more
matophilia appears relatively pale and diffuse.
input
dendrite
(synapse)
neuron
cellbody(soma)
(dendrite)
terminalbranches
jinitialsegment(ofaxon)
myelin
myelin
internode
node
axon
axonhillock
conducts'excitation
(ofcellbody)
(axon)
receivesinput
transmitsoutput
(dendriticzone)
(telodendriticzone)
 FIGURE 6-I Schematic ilustration of a typical (multipolar) neuron, showing multiple dendrites and
pue xpoq lan) auoz pupuap e apnoui suoibau jeuoouny Xpoq lao aun woy supeuewa uoxe auo
dendrites), which receives synaptic input; telodendritic zone (axon terminals), which makes synaptic
contact with other neurons; and the axon, which conducts excitation between the two zones. This axon
is drawn myelinated. The myelin insulation is interrupted by nodes (gaps). The myelin of each intermode
 is formed by individual glial cells {not shown).
Nervous Tissue ● Alvinr j. Beitz ond Thomos F. Fletcher
6
Whena neuron is injured (e.g., by transection of its axon), the
drite emerges as a main trunk that branches repeatedly into smaller
cell body swells, the nucleus shifts to an eccentric position, and ri-
and smaller twigs. The trunk has an organelle content similar to
bosomes disperse so that chromatophilic substance disappears from
that of the cell body. Small dendritic branches feature predomi-
the center of the cell body (chromatolysis). This response to in-
nantly microtubules, augmented by neurofilaments, mitochon-
jury, called the axonal reaction (Fig. 6-2), begins within days of
dria, and smooth endoplasmic reticulum (sER).
the injury and may persist several weeks. The reaction is consid-
Synaptic sites on dendrites are distinguished by a band of
ered pathologic evidence of nervous tissue damage in the CNS.
electron-dense cytoplasm of variable thickness that lines a region
Organelles in the cellbody cytoplasm of the neuron include
 of postsynaptic membrane that faces a presynaptic element
plentiful mitochondria, which support the aerobic energy needs
across a synaptic cleft (Fig. 6-3). The dense material represents
of the cell, and a prominent Golgi complex. Secretory vesicles
proteins (receptors, channels, enzymes, etc.) responsible for post-
originate from the complex and are transported through the axon
synaptic activity.
to synaptic boutons (expansions of the axon terminal). Secretory
vesicles com monly contain neuroactive peptides that influence
the excitability or growth of target cells. In the case of certain
 hypothalamic neurons, secretory vesicles contain neurohormones 
that are released in proximity to blood vessels and ultimately
enter the bloodstream.
 Synaptic vesicles containing neurotransmitters are con-
centrated in axon terminals, where they fuse with plasma mem-
brane and release neurotransmitter intoa synaptic cleft. Long-lived
as a residue of lysosomal activity.
Microtubules (25 nm in diameter) and neurofilaments
(10 nm in diameter) are numerous in the cell body. Microtubules
papunoq-aueiquau jo iiodsuein pidei aun u! paaloaul aie
 organelles within the neuron. Groups of neurofilaments, re-
ferred to as neurofibrils, can be visualized with light microscopy.
Neuron Processes
A typical neuron has a single axon and multiple dendrites origi-
nating as processes from its cell body (Fig. 6-1). The axon ends in
terminal branches that synapse with dendrites and cell bodies of
other neurons or innervate muscle or glandular epithelium. Each
type of neuronal process has a distinct functional role within the
neuron. Thus, the processes have different populations of plasma
membrane proteins (channels, receptors, transporters, pumps).
Dendrites
merous synaptic contacts from other neurons. Treelike, each den-
FIGURE 6-3 Schematic illustration of an axodendritic synapse.
The terminal bulb of an axon is separated from a dendrite (D) by a
synaptic cleft (SC) containing glycoprotein material. Astrocyte
processes (A) border the synaptic cleft bilaterally. Within the
terminal bulb, synaptic vesicles (S) are clustered around an active
zone in which an electron-dense band lines the plasma membrane.
As a consequence of Cat+ influx, synaptic vesicles are able to dock
with the plasma membrane and release neurotransmitter molecules
by exocytosis. Vesicle membrane is recovered from the plasma
membrane and conveyed, as coated vesicles (C), to smooth
endoplasmic reticulum (sER) for recycling. A solitary, large, dense-
FIGURE 6-2  Two light micrographs at different magnifications
core secretory vesidle (possibly containing a peptide or monoamine
of chromatolytic cell bodies from the spinal cord of a dog that had
neuroactive substance) is also shown (V), along with mitochondria.
spinal nerves transected. The cell bodies are swollen, nuclei are
microtubules, and neuroflarments. The transverse section of the
shifted to an eccentric position, and chromatophilic substance is lost
dendrite features an electron-dense band (E) along the postsynaptic
except for small amounts accumulated marginally. Nissl's stain {left,
membrane. Numerous microtubules and neurofilaments and a few
×200; right, x400).
sER profiles are evident in the dendrite.
94
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Many neurons display numerous dendritic spines (gem-
found in parasympathetic ganglia or in the brain, the axon orig-
mules), the postsynaptic partner in many excitatory synapses. A
inates as a branch of a dendrite. Except at its termination, axonal
spine is a short expanded process attached to the dendritic branch
 branches are sparse. When branches are present along the course
 by a narrow stalk, like a bud on a twig (Fig. 6-4). A spine ap-
of the axon, they emerge at right angles (from nodes in the case
paratus, consisting of alternating membrane sacs and dense ma-
 of myelinated axons) and are called collateral branches. Axo.
 terial, may be found within the spine. Spines increase dendritic
plasm, the cytoplasm of the axon, contains microtubules, neuro-
surface area and act to restrict the spread of postsynaptic excita-
filaments, mitochondria, and sER. Devoid of rER, axoplasm is not
tion. For a century or more, dendritic spines were considered very
well stained by hematoxylin and eosin and other routine histo-
static structures, but within the last 5 years, research has shown
logic stains.
that the structure of the spine is very dynamic. Time-lapse im-
The initial segment of the axon is a site just distal to the
aging shows that adult spines can change shape by as much as
axon hillock, where action potentials normally originate. It is
30% of their length or width within a few seconds to minutes.
narrower than the rest of the axon. Ultrastructurally, bundled
Furthermore, high-frequency stimulation induces protrusion of
microtubules are present and electron-dense material is evident
new dendritic processes as well as spine bifurcation, also within
along the inner surface of the plasma membrane of the initial seg-
minutes. These data suggest that changes in spine number or
ment. The density represents protein accumulation associated
-piaond Aq sdeuad Aiiiseid onduas on anqion Aeu adus
with ion channels and pumps. Similar electron-dense protein
ing a lasting structural substrate for newly encoded memories.
accumulations are also found at nodes of myelinated axons.
A slow flow of cytoplasm (l mm/day) and a slow transport of
Axon
cytoskeletal elements (10 mm/day) progress along the axon, from
The axon is a relatively long, cylindrical process that originates
axon hillock to terminal branches (anterograde transport). In ad-
from the axon hillock of the cell body and ends in terminal
dition, axons have a fast transport capability (up to 400 mm/day)
branches and synaptic boutons, which are described below. While
involving microtubule-linked movement of mitochondria and
the axon typically emerges from the cell body, in some neurons
 Constituents packaged in vesicles. There is alsoa retrograde trans-
terminal branches back to lysosomes within the cell body. Viruses
(e.g, rabies)and neurotoxins (e.g., tetanus toxin) can also be carried
to the cell body by this route.
Axons are capable of regenerative conduction; that is, they
 convey an excitation signal to the end of the axon with the same
magnitude as it had when it began at the initial segment. Large
axons conduct more rapidly than small ones, but to further in-
crease conduction velocity, large axons are myelinated (coated
with a myelin sheath formed by glial cells). Small nonmyelinated
axons are ensheathed by glial cells in peripheral nerves, but they
are not ensheathed at all in the CNS.
Axon degeneration may be causally linked to the docu-
mented physiologic and behavioral deficits observed in aged
animals. Traditionally, the decline in memory function and be-
havioral dysfunction that accompany normal aging in animals
have been attributed to loss of neurons in certain areas of the
brain. Recent data, however, show that aging does not induce
 prominent cell loss in the brain, but rather leads to degeneration
of axons that innervate certain forebrain structures.
Terminal branches (telodendrites)
Axons terminate by successively branching (Fig. 6-1). The col-
lective terminal branches constitute the axon terminal (teloden-
dritic) zone ofa neuron. Each terminal branch ends in an expansion
called a terminal synaptic bulb (synaptic bouton). Along the non-
 myelinated terminal branches, synapses occur at multiple focal
FIGURE 6-4  A pyramidal neuron from the cerebral cortex is
swellings called axonal varicosities (preterminal boutons). The
number of axonal varicosities is not insignificant; a single hip-
shown (Golgi silver impregnation). This multipolar neuron has a 
pyramidal cell body from which apical and basal dendrites arise. A
pocampal cell axon makes 50,000 synapses over a distance of only
single axon (not visible) leaves the lower surface of the cell body
 200 mm. Both axonal varicosities and terminal synaptic boutons
The insert, an enlargement of the middle of the apical dendrite,
are sites where neurotransmitter molecules are packaged and
shows dendritic spines.
stored within synaptic vesicles.
Nervous Tissue ● Alvinr j. Beitz ond Thomos F. Fletcher
95
The most common synaptic vesicle is spherical (40 to 50 nm
mechanism of neural plasticity, enabling neural development
in diameter) with an electron-lucent (agranular) core (Figs. 6-3 and
and subsequently behavioral modification and learning.
6-5). Such vesicles may contain any one of a number of neuro-
transmitters. Electron-lucent synaptic vesicles that appear flat-
Classification
tened when exposed to solutions of high osmolarity are associated
with inhibitory synapses. Some neurons have spherical vesicles (40
Neurons are anatomically classified as unipolar, bipolar, or multi-
to 60 nm in diameter) with an electron-dense (granular) core. The
polar according to the number of processes that emanate from the
electron-dense synaptic vesicles usually contain dopamine or nor-
cell body (Fig. 6-6).
epinephrine molecules.
In a unipolar neuron, the cell body gives offa single axon that
Synaptic vesicle proteins are synthesized in the cell body and
 soon bifurcates into central and peripheral branches. The periph-
transported rapidly to axon terminal sER, where they supplement
eral branch terminates in receptors that are sensitive to environ-
recycled vesicular mem
 mental energy. The central branch conveys the environmentally
ne load newly formed
induced excitation into the CNS. Unipolar cell bodies are found
in sensory ganglia located in roots of cranial and spinal nerves
cycled. Linked by cytoskeletal actin filaments, synaptic vesicles are
Mammalian unipolar neurons are often referred to as pseudo-
clustered together, in ready reserve for plasma membrane docking
unipolar, because they originate as bipolar cells and only become
and exocytosis during synaptic activity (Fig. 6-3). In addition to
unipolar during development. The unique geometry of unipolar
synaptic vesicles, terminal branches may contain secretory vesi-
 sensory neurons can lead to the generation of spontaneous dis-
cles that store neuroactive peptides (several dozen have been iden-
charge in the cell bodies, potentially disrupting the fidelity of
tified). Peptides are found in spherical, electron-dense vesicles that
afferent signaling in normal animals. More importantly, follow-
are relatively large (100 to 200 nm in diameter). The secretory vesi-
ing nerve injury, discharge originating ectopically within spinal
cles are synthesized in the cell body and transported to preterminal
ganglion cells is greatly augmented and can be a major contrib-
and terminal synaptic boutons for storage and release. The peptides 
utor to neuropathic dysesthesias and chronic pain.
generally act as neuromodulators (agents that augment neurotrans-
In a bipolar neuron, two processes emanate from the cell
mitter effects). Secretory vesicles of certain hypothalamic neurons
body, which is situated either within the axon (vestibulocochlear
Contain peptide hormones (e.g., vasopressin and oxytocin are stored
afferent neurons; bipolar cells of the retina) or at the juncture of
and released in the neurohypophysis).
the axon and a solitary dendrite (olfactory afferent neurons). Like
Sprouting of new terminal branches and degenerations of
unipolar neurons, bipolar neurons are afferent neurons that con-
existing branches in response to environmental change is a major
vey sensory information to the CNS.
10
FIGURE 6-5
5 Schematic ilustrations of types of central nervous system synapses. I . Axosomatic synapse with electron-lucent, spherical,
synaptic vesicles. 2. Axosomatic synapse with synaptic vesicles that are flattened (an artifact associated with inhibitory synapses). 3. Axosomatic
synapse with electron-dense synaptic vesicles. 4l. Axodendritic synapse. 5. Axoaxonic synapse in which one terminal bulb synapses on another
(associated with presynaptic inhibition). 6. Synapse on an axon hillock, close to the initial segment of the axon. 7. Axodendritic synapse on a
dendritic spine. 8. Relatively elaborate synapse on a dendritic spine. 9. Dendritic spine exhibiting a spine apparatus (smooth endoplasmic
reticulum plus electron-dense material). Io. Three axonal varicosities making synapses in passing (en passant).
96
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
distinct regions: (a) an input region or dendritic zone, where
dendrite
excitation is initially received; (b) an output region or telo-
dendritic (axon terminal) zone, where excitation is transmit-
ted to other cells; (c) an axon, which conducts excitation between
axonterminals
(synapse in CNS)
the dendritic and axon terminal zones; and (d) a cell body, which
nurtures the cell.
coiledproximal
In a typical multipolar neuron (Fig. 6-1), the receptive den-
axon
dritic zone features a large surface area encompassing the cell
body and highly branched dendrites. An elongated, cylindrical
axon originates from the cell body. The axon terminal zone is a
highly branched region located at the distal end of the axon. The
axonhillock
terminal branches feature localized expansions (boutons or bulbs)
(of cell body)
cell body
where neurotransmitter molecules are stored and released at
cellbody
synapses.
 In the case ofa unipolar afferent neuron, the cell body is sit-
uated along the axon and the dendritic zone consists of receptors
that change environmentalenergy into neuralexcitation. Dendritic
bipolar
unipolar
multipolar
 zones of bipolar afferent neurons may involve receptors (olfaction)
neuron
neuron
neuron
or synaptic contact with receptor cells (in the retina and inner
ear). From dendritic zones, excitation is conveyed along the axon
to terminal branches within the CNS.
The protein composition of the plasma membrane is
necessarily different at each functional region of a neuron. For
uox
axon
example, dendritic zone membrane has ligand-reactive protein
receptors that open ion channels, either directly or through sec-
ond messengers. Here the term “receptor" refers to membrane
cellbody
 proteins interacting with extracellular physiologic signals and
receptor
converting them into intracellular effects. Axon membrane has
(freenerve
voltage-gated Nat channels that enable membrane polarity re-
endings)
versal and regenerative conduction. The membrane of termi-
 nal branches and synaptic boutons has voltage-gated Cat+
channels (Cat+ is involved in the release of neurotransmitter mole-
dendriticzone
cules) and membrane-associated receptors for reuptake of released
(synapses on
cochlear
neurotransmitter.
hair cells)
axon
terminals
FIGURE 6-6
Schematic illustration of a bipolar neuron {left), a
Neuronal Communication
unipolar neuron (center), and a multipolar neuron (right). Neurons 
are anatomically classified according to the number of processes
Neurons communicate with one another, with glial cells, and
emanating from the cell body. Unipolar and bipolar neurons are
with the muscles and glands that neurons innervate. Alterations
sensory. Most neurons are multipolar, however, their shapes vary
in excitation communicated from neuron to neuron (neural cir-
considerably. The cytoplasm of the cell bodies features clumps of
cuits) constitute the basis of nervous system function.
chromatophilic substance (Nissl substance).
 Among the billions of neurons that comprise the nervous
 system, the primary means of communication is localized release
 of neurotransmitter molecules at interneuronal chemical synapses.
In a multipolar neuron, the cell body gives rise to multiple
Chemical synaptic arrangements are also encountered between
branches, several dendrites, and an axon. Nearly all of the billions
efferent neurons and the muscles and glands they innervate (see
of neurons comprising the CNS are multipolar, as are the neu-
Peripheral Nervous Tissue section). A few neurons com municate
rons contained in autonomic ganglia of the PNS.
through gap junctions (electrotonic synapses), especially in inver-
tebrates and fish. In mammals, gap junction communication is
common between neuroblasts during embryonic development,
Regions of a Neuron
but it is relatively rare between mature neurons. Other neurons
A typical neuron becomes excited at its input region, conducts
communicate by producing a gas that passes freely through neuro-
excitation to its output region, and transmits excitation via
nal membranes (e.g., the gases nitric oxide and carbon monoxide
 chemical secretion at synapses (Fig. 6-1). Reception, conduction,
are increasingly appreciated as major neurotransmitters; NO
and transmission of excitation require functionally different ion
and CO transmit signals between neurons by binding to a heme
channels and cellular features. Thus, an individual neuron has
moiety at the active site of soluble guanylyl cyclase, leading to
Nervous Tissue ● Alvir J. Beitz ond Thomas F. Fletcher
97
an increase in the intracellular second messenger molecule cyclic
tential continually registers the net effect of total synaptic input
guanosine 5′-monophosphate [cGMP])
to the neuron. In turn, the cell body affects the membrane poten-
tial at the nearby initial segment of the axon. At any moment, the
Interneurona! Chemica! Synopses
collective synaptic input to a neuron will be sufficient to trigger
an action potential at the initial segment of the axon or be insuf-
specialization where one neuron influences the excitability of
ficient to do so.
another by releasing neurotransmitter molecules from synaptic
The influence that one neuron has on another depends on
vesicles. A majority of neurotransmitters are biogenic amines
the number of synaptic contacts it makes with the target neuron
(e.g-, glutamate, glycine, dopamine, norepinephrine, serotonin,
and where the synapses are positioned. Synapses close to the ini-
acetylcholine, etc.). Generally, each neurotransmitter can inter-
tial segment will have much greater influence triggering an ac-
act with a variety of membrane receptors.
tion potential than will synapses on distal dendrites.
Synaptic Uitrastructure and Function
that undergoes reconfiguration to allow passage of selective ions,
 Ultrastructurally, an interneuronal chemical synapse may be iden-
tified by the juxtaposition of a presynaptic element, a synaptic
ion channels either directly or indirectly by activating second mes-
cleft, and a postsynaptic membrane (Fig. 6-3). The presynaptic
sengers (such as cyclic adenosine monophosphate [cAMP]). Second
element contains multiple synaptic vesicles clustered around an
messengers provide a means of amplifying the scope and impact
active zone indicated by electron density (protein accumulation)
of a neurotransmitter signal as well as prolonging its time course.
just inside the plasma membrane. The synaptic cleft (in the CNS,
Autoreceptors (receptors in presynaptic plasma membrane that
approximately the same width as the general intercellular space
influence neurotransmitter synthesis and release) and neuro-
ue oneusand spioy nun uanond e sueuon (apim uu o on oz
modulators (peptides released from secretory vesicles) typically
 isd    i
act via second messengers.
dendritic me mbrane contains many types of protein receptors
S   i nd a s
of an ion channel-receptor protein complex. When activated, the
domains are associated with postsynaptic densities that, under the
complex opens or closes the ion channel, resulting in a change in
electron microscope, appear as electron-dense material facing the
membrane permeability. Metabotropic receptors represent the
presynaptic active zone. The postsynaptic density, which consists
of adhesive proteins, such as cadherin-catenin complexes, receptor
ceptor protein acts via another protein such as a G protein to ac-
proteins, subsynaptic scaffolding proteins, and associated compo-
tivate or inhibit enzymes and possibly open, close, or modify ion
nents of the cell's cytoskeleton, is involved in the stabilization and
channels, ultimately leading to a change in cell function.
trafficking of receptors and in signal transduction.
Based on the ion channel or the G protein to which a recep-
When an action potential arrives at the end of an axon, it pas-
tor is coupled, the receptor may be excitatory or inhibitory. Thus,
sively depolarizes the presynaptic element (e.g., terminal synaptic
it is the nature of the receptor type, rather than the neurotrans-
bouton). Voltage-sensitive channels in the presynaptic membrane
mitter itself, that determines the function of a synapse (e.g., ex-
open to allow Ca++ influx. Elevated cytoplasmic Cat+ activates en-
some neurotransmitters (e.g., glutamate) are associated with ex-
citatory synapses, and others (e.g., glycine) are associated with
ing vesicles with plasma membrane. This mobilizes synaptic vesi-
inhibitory synapses. It is worth noting that glutamate receptors
cles, enabling them to dock with the plasma membrane and release
are the most prevalent excitatory neurotransmitter receptors in
several thousand neurotransmitter molecules by exocytosis. The
the brain, and they mediate almost all excitatory communica-
molecules diffuse into the synaptic cleft and bind with various
tions between CNS neurons. Thus, it is perhaps not surprising
receptors and transporters.
that epileptic seizures are a problem of overactivation of brain
 Synapses are very dynamic structures and there is constant
neurons that are driven mainly by glutamate synapses.
movement of receptors into and out of synaptic membranes
Most synapses between neurons involve terminal synaptic
Recent data have shown that rapid gain and loss of neurotrans-
boutons of one neuron contacting the input region of another
mitter receptors from synaptic sites are accounted for by endo-
neuron, forming axodendritic or axosomatic synapses (Fig. 6-5).
cytosis and exocytosis, as well as by lateral diffusion in the plane of
However, among the trillions of synapses in the nervous system,
the membrane. These events are interdependent and are regulated
every synaptic combination has been observed, including axo-
axonic, dendrodendritic, dendrosomatic, somatodendritic, and
Thus, it is known that activity-dependent elevation in post-
somatosomatic synapses.
The input region of a typical multipolar neuron receives
tor immobilization and local accumulation on the neuronal surface.
thousands of synaptic contacts. Excitatory and inhibitory synap-
Neurotransmitter receptor movement into and out of the synap-
tic effects are collectively sum mated and integrated at the cell
tic membrane is one of the core mechanisms for rapidly changing
body of the target neuron, so that the cell body membrane po-
the number of functional receptors during synaptic plasticity.
98
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Synaptic activity ceases when neurotransmitter molecules
Astrocytes
are removed from the synaptic cleft (or degraded in the case of
With routine stains, astrocytes are identified by their pale, ovoid
acetylcholine). Molecules are actively transported intracellularly
nuclei, which are largest among glial nuclei. With silver stains,
uau sideusaid aui u! aieol (sdund uaioid) sianodsuei Aq
astrocytes exhibit numerous processes that contain glial fibrils.
brane or in membranes of adjacent glial cells. Thus, neurotrans-
In white matter, the processes are long, slender, and moderately
mitter molecules are recycled to minimize the need for synthesis
Auay pue iaious ieadde sassanoid aui 'ianeu Aeig u! pauoueiq
within presynaptic cytoplasm. As well, synaptic vesicle mem-
branched. Thus, white matter is said to contain fibrous astro-
brane is recycled. Vesicle membrane is extracted from the pre-
 cytes, whereas gray matter contains protoplasmic astrocytes
synaptic plasma membrane and transported as coated vesicles to
(Fig. 6-7).
sER within the presynaptic cytoplasm (Fig. 6-3).
Under the electron microscope, astrocytes feature packed
bundles of intermediate filaments (8 nm in diameter) and pale
cytoplasm. The glial filaments, which are composed of glial fi-
NEUROGLIA
 brillar acidic protein (GFAP), are unique to astrocytes and form
a si a oss ir iia s s i 
 Neuroglia (gliocytes) comprise over 90% of the cells that make
 denser in fibrous astrocytes than in protoplasmic ones.
up the nervous system. Recent studies have shown that glia are not
Adjacent astrocytes are joined by gap junctions. In response
simply the support structure in which neurons are embedded.
to local stimulation, a widening excitatory wave of elevated cyto-
While the biology of glial cells is poorly understood, itis clear that
plasmic Catt can spread outward from cell to cell via the gap
glial-neuronal and glial-glial interactions are essential for many
junctions. The adjacent astrocytes are also linked by small, button-
 of the critical functions that occur in the nervous system. Neurons
like adhering junctions (spot desmosomes).
communicate with glial cells by releasing ATP at synapses and
Astrocyte processes terminate in expansions called end feet.
from axons during conduction. Glial cells have vital roles in neuro-
Collections of end feet form a glial-limiting membrane to which
nal development, activity, plasticity, and recovery from injury.
pia mater is attached at the CNS surface. End feet are prominent
Neuroglia are endowed with a rich assortment of ionic chan-
in the subependymal glial layer, and they form septa in the spinal
nels, neurotransmitter receptors, and transport mechanisms that
cord. End feet cover vessels within the brain and spinal cord, and
enable the gliocytes to respond to many of the same signals acting
they are believed to be responsible for inducing formation of tight
junctions between capillary endothelial cells (a basis for the blood-
to the serial flow of information along chains of neurons, glia com-
brain barrier further described on page 1 15).
municate with other glial cells through intracellular waves of cal-
Astrocytes provide structural support through their glial
cium and via intercellular diffusion of chemical messengers. By
fibrils, but in addition, these cells play a critical role in several
releasing neurotransmitters and other extracellular signaling mol-
aspects of brain function. By storing glycogen and releasing glu-
ecules, glia can affect neuronal excitability and synaptic transmis-
cose, they represent a source of reserve energy. Astrocyte plasma
sion and perhaps coordinate activity across networks of neurons.
membranes have ionic pumps that regulate K+ throughout the
Moreover, glia secrete cytokines, growth factors, and other trophic
 narrow extracellular space of the CNS. Astrocyte processes insu-
factors that dictate long- and short-term survival of neurons as well
late synapses and release substances that modulate synaptic sen-
as the elaboration and retraction of synaptic connections.
sitivity. Astrocytes can also take up neurotransmitter molecules
From a histologic perspective, neuroglial cels are relatively
from the synaptic cleft to stop ongoing synaptic activity.
small. With routine histologic stains, only their nuclei and cell
ed s aie ae l eai aa ep a
bodies are evident, and thus in tissue sections they are distin-
determined by neuronal activity and that astrocytes have the ca-
guished primarily by the size and shape of their cell bodies and
pacity to signal not only to each other, but also back to the neu-
the size and chromatin pattern of their nuclei. However, the use
 rons. Furthermore, since astrocytes can sense synaptic activity, it
of modern immunocytochemical staining for specific cell surface
is thought that they are pivotal intermediaries between neurons
or internal markers allows definitive identification of glial cells
and the brain microcirculation. In this regard, increased synap-
in brain sections. It should be noted that unlike mature neurons,
tic activity triggers calcium waves in astrocytes, causing their
 glial cells remain capable of mitosis, and thus they can give rise
end feet to release substances that cause local vasodilation. Thus,
to tumors of the nervous system.
astrocytes can act to couple brain activity not only to energy de-
Except for microglial cells, which migrate into the CNS
mands but also to blood flow requirements.
from mesoderm, CNS gliocytes are derived from the ectodermal
Finally, astrocytes seem to have an immune function; they
cells that form the embryonic neural tube. Neurolemmocytes of
can present antigens to T lymphocytes and can secrete a wide
the PNS are derived from the embryonic neural crest (as are neu-
array of chemokines and cytokines, allowing them to influence
rons that have cell bodies in ganglia).
T helper cell response and monocyte/microglia effector func-
tions. It should be noted that the reaction of astrocytes follow-
Central Nervous System Gliocytes
ing brain trauma or in certain pathologic states is characterized
 by astrocyte proliferation and hypertrophy, elongation of astro-
The gliocytes of the CNS include astrocytes, oligodendrocytes,
cyte processes, up-regulation of various intermediate filaments,
microglia, and ependymal cells.
and, in cases of severe trauma or pathology, the formation of a
Nervous Tissue ● Alvinr j. Beitz ond Thomas F. Fletcher
99
dense glial scar. This process is referred to as astrogliosis and the
glial scar is formed by the hypertrophied processes of reactive
astrocytes filling in the space that results from loss of myelin and
neurons.
Oligodendrocytes
Oligodendrocytes have relatively few branches (Fig. 6-7). In
oligodendrocytes
routine stains, they are recognized by their small, spherical,
densely stained nuclei. Ultrastructurally, oligodendrocyte
cytoplasm is electron-dense and rich in microtubules and or-
ganelles, especially rER and mitochondria. Oligodendrocytes
lack gap junctions.
 In gray matter, oligodendrocytes serve as perineuronal satel-
microglial
lites. New data indicate that oligodendrocytes act as growth fac-
cell
or
 providers. Oligodendrocytes synthesize defined growth
factors and provide trophic signals to nearby neurons. They also
appear to be quite sensitive to neurotrauma.
 In white matter, oligodendrocytes form myelin sheaths
fibrous
around axons, speeding action potential propagation in the CNS.
astrocyte
Intracellular trafficking of membrane constituents plays an
essential role in the biogenesis and maintenance of myelin. The
requisite proteins and lipids are transported from their sites of
synthesis to myelin via intracellular carrier vesicles transported
along elements of the cytoskeleton.
Microglia
Microglia are cells of mesodermal origin that invade the CNS
-JP pue asieds ane Aaul Alegoloiqua pazliejnssea s! ll uaum
ficult to find in normal tissue. In routine stains, microglia are
identified by their small, elongated, chromophilic nuclei. With
protoplasmic
silver impregnation, they are seen as small, elongated cells with
astrocyte
polar processes (Fig. 6-7). Under physiologic conditions, micro-
glia synthesize and release trophic factors; however, in response
to CNS injury, microglia react, proliferate, and express protec-
tive or, in some situations, cytotoxic properties. Microglia activa-
tion often precedes reactions of any other cell type in the brain and
once activated, they transform into macrophages with antigen-
presenting and phagocytic capabilities. Reactive microglia secrete
cytokines, including tumor necrosis factor and IL-1β, which can
affect synaptic transmission and have trophic effects on neurons.
Microglia have been recognized to play crucial roles in important
 diseases such as viral infections, autoimmunity, and neurodegen-
erative disorders
In addition to microglia, other cell types also respond to
oligo
Pericytes, cells associated with CNS capillaries and believed to
have contractile capability, are also thought to be phagocytic.
FiGUre 6-7
 Central nervous system gliocytes are drawn
Although the functional role of glial scarring is not completely
understood, it has been suggested to be an attempt by the CNS
monkey cerebral cortex (×700). The insert at the bottom
to restore homeostasis through isolation of the damaged region.
shows an astrocyte nucleus (astr) and an oligodendrocyte
nucleus (oligo) as they appear in white matter stained with
Ependymal Cells
Luxol blue and hematoxylin. An axon (a) surrounded by a.
myelin vacuole and neurokeratin can be seen. (Adopted from
Ependymal cells form an epithelium that lines ventricular cav-
Weiss L. Cell and Tissue Biology. A Textbook of Histology. 6th Ed.
ities within the brain and the central canal of the spinal cord. The
Baltirmore: Urban & 5chwarzerberg, Inc., 1 988.)
cells are typically cuboidal or columnar with numerous motile
001
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
cilia on their apical surfaces (Fig. 6-8). Ependymal cells are
in bulbs with stereocilia, are presumed to serve a receptive finction.
linked by zonulae adherens and gap junctions near their lumi-
Also, neurons containing secretory vesicles can be found among
nal borders. In the adult brain, mature ependyma is not merely
ependymal cells; they are believed to release catecholamines.
an inert lining but may instead regulate the transport of ions,
small molecules, and water between the cerebrospinal fluid and
Peripheral Nervous System Gliocytes
neuropil. Ependyma serves an important barrier function that
protects neural tissue from potentially harmful substances by
The gliocytes of the PNS include ganglionic gliocytes and neu-
mechanisms that are still incompletely understood. Ependymal
rolem mocytes (Schwann cells).
Aleid snu pue Aisede aaiauagan panu!l Auo aaey sa
Ganglionic Gliocytes
do not undergo mitotic proliferation. Tearing of the epithelium
leaves discontinuities that become filled with processes of sub-
Ganglionic gliocytes (satellite cells) encapsulate neuron cell
ventricular astrocytes.
bodies in the PNS. In cranial nerve and spinal (sensory) ganglia,
Specific modified ependymal cells, called choroid plexus
a tight capsule is formed around each neuron cell body (Fig. 6-9).
epithelium, cover the surfaces of choroid plexus villi and pro-
In autonomic ganglia (Fig. 6-10), capsules formed by ganglionic
duce cerebrospinal fluid by a mechanism that involves active
gliocytes are incomplete and may enclose more than one post-
secretion of Na+. Modified ependymal cells are also present at cer-
ganglionic cell body. Away from the cell body, ganglionic glio-
tain sites (circumventricular organs) within brain ventricles. In
cytes are replaced by neurolemmocytes that sheathe or myelinate
both cases, the modified ependymal cells are cuboidal and have
axons
microvilli instead of cilia extending into cerebrospinal fluid.
Adjacent cells are linked by relatively impermeable junctions
Neurolemmocytes
(zonulae occludens), establishing a localized ependymal barrier
Neurolemmocytes (Schwann cells)are gliocytes of the PNS that
in association with a locally reduced blood-brain barrier due to
sheathe and myelinate axons. Neurolemmocytes provide a pro-
the presence of fenestrated capillaries.
tected immediate environment for PNS neurons and are vital for
Tanycytes are modified ependymal cells found in the hypo.
axonal function and survival. Each neurolemmocyte is enclosed
thalamic wall of the third ventricle. The luminal border of a tany-
cyte has microvilli; the basal border features an elongated process 
that makes contact with capillaries and neurons. Tanycytes are
thought to guide hypothalamic axons and to be involved in trans-
port mechanisms between the ventricle and blood vessels of the
hypothalamic-hypophysial portal system. Thus, tanycytes can in-
At certain sites, neuronal processes extend between ependy-
mal cells to contact cerebrospinal fluid. The processes, which end
N
FIGURE 6-8 Ependymal cells (simple columnar epithelium) line
the central canal of a canine spinal cord. Motile cilia projecting into
FIGURE 6-9 Canine spinal ganglion. Unipolar neuron cell
the lumen of the central canal are evident (arrows). Hematoxylin 
bodies (N) are surounded by ganglionic gliocytes (satellite cells)
and eosin stain.
(arrows) within the ganglion. Triple stain.
Nervous Tissue ● Alvir j. Beitz ond Thomas F. Fletcher
101
BI
M
FIGURE 6-10 Canine autonomic ganglion. Cell bodies (N) of
postganglionic neurons are multipolar and have their nuclei positioned
FIGURE 6-I1
 Drawing of the ultrastructure of a peripheral nerve
eccentrically. Ganglionic gliocytes (satellite cells) (arrows) form an
neurolemmocyte sheathing 22 nonmyelinated axons (A). Each axon is
incomplete capsule around individual neuron cell bodies. Triple stain.
enveloped by neurolemmocyte processes. Mesoaxons (M) are formed
where the processes meet. A basal lamina (BL) surrounds the entire
Cell.(Fromm Lentz TL. Cell Fine Structure. Philodelphia: WB Sounders, 1 971.)
within a basal lamina. Neurolemmocytes can proliferate and be-
come phagocytic in the event of nerve damage.
Every axon in the PNS is sheathed or myelinated along its
entire length by neurolemmocytes (except for the most terminal
posed of multiple layers of neurolemmocyte plasma membrane
branches in some cases). Because an individual neurolem mocyte
and the neurolemmocyte is within a basal lamina (Fig. 6-12).
is less than l mm in length, a tandem series of many neuro-
Myelin formation in the PNS begins with a neurolemmo-
lemmocytes is required to enclose the entire length of a long axon.
cyte draped around a solitary axon, establishing a simple mes-
In the case of small axons, an individual neurolemmocyte
axon (Fig. 6-14). Induced by the axon itself, neurolemmocyte
sheathes a number of axons simultaneously and the axons (nerve
processes elongate, slide past one another, and proceed to pro-
fibers) are considered nonmyelinated (Fig. 6-11). Each axon
resides in a furrow, protected by a pair of neurolemmocyte
Cytoplasm is extruded from the wrappings, thereby leaving the
proceses so that the space surrounding the axon communicates
concentric lamellae of plasma membrane that constitute the
with the general interstitial space only by means of a narrow
gap known as the mesaxon. For PNS axons larger than l μm
myelin sheath.
 At high magnification,the myelin sheath exhibits a periodic-
in diameter, each neurolemmocyte encloses a single axon and
ity of concentric major dense lines separated by intraperiod
glial processes wrap around the axon to form a myelin sheath
(Fig. 6-12).
lines. Each major dense line is formed by fusion of inner surfaces
of plasma membrane as cytoplasm is extruded during myelin
sheath formation. An intraperiod line is formed where the outer
Myelin Sheath
surfaces of adjacent plasma membranes are separated by a small
The term myelin sheath (myelin) refers to wrappings of gliocyte
gap. The gap is continuous with the inner mesaxon and the
plasma membrane that surround an axon and insulate it to speed
outer mesaxon, all of which are derived from the original sim-
conduction. Myelin is formed by oligodendrocytes in the CNS
ple mesaxon of early myelin sheath development. Occasionally,
and neurolemmocytes in the PNS.
a major dense line appears to split and contain a pocket of cyto-
 In the PNS, a transverse section of a myelinated fiber viewed
plasm. Adjacent pockets of cytoplasm may extend throughout
by light microscopy reveals an axon enclosed in a myelin sheath
the thickness of the myelin sheath, thereby establishing a myelin
surrounded by neurolemmocyte cytoplasm (Fig. 6-13). With
incisure in the sheath.
102
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
BL
myelinated
nerve
fiber
FIGURE 6- I2 Ultrastructural drawing of a transected myelinated nerve fiber from the peripheral nervous system. A
neurolemmocyte has produced a myelin sheath around a single axon (A). The myelin sheath consists of multiple wrappings of
neurolemmocyte plasma membrane produced by paired neurolemmocyte processes that ultimately form outer and inner
mesaxons (arrowheads at I 2 and 6 o'clock, respectively). The nucleus of the neurolemmocyte is labeled (N). A basal lamina
(BL) surrounds the neurolemmocyte. The insert (lower right) shows the outer mesaxon and myelin sheath enlarged. Notice
that stained myelin exhibits major dense lines (formed by merger along the inner surface of neurolemmocyte plasma.
(From Lentz TL. Cell Fine Structure. Philadelphia: WB Sounders, 1 971.,)
FIGURE 6-13 Transverse section through myelinated fibers of
a canine peripheral nerve. Myelin sheath neurokeratin presents a.
radial pattem in this nerve (black arrows). The white arrow points to
the nucleus of a neurolemmocyte. Its cytoplasm can be seen
Nervous Tissue  Alvirn j. Beitz ond Thomas F. Fletcher
01
K
mesaxon
myelin
sheath
FIGURE 6-I4Schematic illustration of myelinated and
nonmyelinated developmental relationships between axons (ax) and
neurolemmocytes in cross-sectional perspective. A. Early in
development, several axons are sheathed in common by a
neurolemmocyte. B. After neurolemmocyte proliferation, a solitary
large axon that is destined to be myelinated is sheathed by a
neurolemmocyte; a mesaxon is formed where neurolemmocyte
processes meet. C. Neurolemmocyte processes elongate and
encircle the axon, thereby lengthening the original mesaxon.
D. A myelin sheath is formed when cytoplasm is extruded from
encircling neurolemmocyte processes, thereby leaving layers of
plasmalemma. Cytoplasm is generally retained intemal and external
FIGURE 6-15 Light micrograph of a longitudinal section of a.
to the myelin sheath, where an inner mesaxon and an outer
canine peripheral nerve. An axon passing through a myelin node
mesaxon are evident. E. In the case of nonmyelinated axons,
(white arrow) is evident at the center. Lipid extraction during tissue
 preparation disintegrates myelin leaving a protein residue 
neurolemmocyte invaginations provide a separate compartment and
mesaxon for each sheathed axon. Neurolemmocyte nucleus (N).
(neurokeratin) that presents a foamy appearance (nk) Nuclei in the 
(Adapted frorm Copenhaver WM, Bunge RP, Bunge MB. Bailey's
section belong to fibrocytes (small black arrow) or neurolemmocytes
Textbook of Histology. I 6th Ed. Baltimore: Wilims & Wikins, 1 971.,)
(large black arrows). Triple stain.
are exposed to the extracellular space (Figs. 6-16 and 6-17).
A longitudinal view ofa myelinated nerve fiber shows myelin
Internodes are shorter and nodes are wider in the CNS compared to
sheath gaps at the juncture of adjacent gliocytes (Fig. 6-15) Each
the PNS. A single oligodendrocyte is known to contribute inter-
 gap is referred to as a node (of Ranvier), and the myelin sheath
 nodes to as many as 50 myelinated fibers and the outer cytoplasm
between nodes is called an internode. The internodal transition
of the internode is restricted to a single ridge that is connected to
region immediately adjacent to a node is referred to as a para-
the oligodendrocyte perikaryon by a thin process.
node (Fig. 6-16). At the paranode, major dense lines split and
It is well established that myelin sheaths provide electrical
cytoplasm is retained in processes that overlap one another as each
-ul apou oi apou uony diun! sieinuaiod uoioe ieun os uojiejnsu!
contacts the axon plasma membrane. Outermost cytoplasmic
stead of progressing continually, as in nonmyelinated axons. The
processes of adjacent neurolemmocytes make contact, thus en-
jumping process, called saltatory conduction, is much faster
closing the node in the PNS. A continuous basal lamina is pres-
than nonmyelinated conduction, and the longer the internode is,
ent external to the neurolemmocytes. At the node, the axon bulges
slightly and exhibits subplasmalemmal electron-dense material.
myelin sheath thickness, and both are proportional to axon di-
In normal axons, sodium channels are present at high density
 ameter. However, because neurolemmocytes develop an associa-
within the nodal gap, and voltage-dependent potassium channels 
tion with axons early in development, axons that subsequently
are sequestered on the internodal side of the paranode—a region
grow farther (e.g., in the limbs) have longer internodes than
known as the juxtaparanode. The juxtaparanode and its associ-
axons (e.g., in the head) that do not grow as far.
ated potassium channels appear to stabilize nerve conduction and
The recent discovery of tight junctions and adhering junc-
help maintain the internodal resting potential.
tions between myelin lamellae may help elucidate other roles
 In the CNS, where myelin sheaths are formed by oligoden-
played by this compact multilamellar structure. Whereas in epi-
drocytes, nodes are not covered by cytoplasmic processes and they
thelial cells these junctions are formed between different cells, in
104
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
CNS
basal lamina
(reflected)
neurolemmocyte
process
PNS
myelin
central nervous system (CNS) (left) and the peripheral nervous system (PNS) (right). In the CNS, myelin
is formed by oligodendrocytes and nodes are broadly exposed to the extracellular space. In the PNS,
outer cytoplasmic processes of adjacent neurolemmocytes (Schwann cells) overlap to restrict node
exposure to the extracellular space. Also, neurolemmocytes are surrounded by a continuous basal
lamina. Myelin consists of compressed membranes of glial cells, distinguished by a series of major dense
lines separated by intraperiod lines. At each paranode, major dense lines split to contain terminal
cytoplasmic "loops" that contact the axon plasma membrane and impede ionic flow beyond the node.
myelinating glia these so-called autotypic junctions are found
bral canal. The term nerve fiber refers to one axon within a nerve.
between membrane lamellae of the same cell. Such junctions
 In the case of a myelinated axon, the term nerve fiber (mye-
were initially proposed to link adjacent mem branes for increased
linated nerve fiber) includes the axon plus the myelin sheath and
mechanical strength. However, tight junctions in other cell types
surrounding neurolemmocyte.
play critical roles in paracellular nonbarrier function, including
Individual nerve fibers may be classified as either afferent or
signal transduction, and fluid movement between cells via aqueous
efferent. Afferent fibers are sensory because they conduct exci-
 pores and channels. This knowledge, taken together with evidence
tation to the CNS. Typical afferent neurons have unipolar cell
from studies of normal and pathologic myelin, supports the pos-
 bodies located in cranial nerve and spinal (sensory) ganglia. The
-juny Areud e 'qouais leniueuau oi uoipe u! ieun Ai!
dendritic zone of an afferent neuron consists of receptors or post-
tion of junctional plaques in myelin is to regulate perfusion of the
 synaptic endings on sensory epithelial cells in the case of sense
periaxonal space.
 organs. Efferent axons arise from multipolar cell bodies located
 in the brain or spinal cord or in autonomic ganglia. They activate
muscle or gland or neurons in autonomic ganglia.
Individual nerve fibers are classified also as somatic or vis-
PERIPHERAL NERVOUS TISSUE
ceral. The somatic fibers innervate skin, skeletal muscles, and
joints, whereas visceral fibers innervate cardiac and smooth
Tissue of the PNS consists of cranial and spinal nerves, including
muscles and glands. Visceral efferent fibers, in particular, (and
their roots, distal branches, and ganglia. Cranial nerves originate
 often visceral fibers in general) are designated the autonomic
from the brain and exit from the cranial cavity. Spinal nerves
nervous system. The visceral efferent pathway involves two
originate from the spinal cord and exit from the vertebral canal.
neurons. The first (preganglionic) neuron has its cell body in
A nerve root is the proximal region of a cranial or spinal nerve
nau (iuoueisod) puonas an go Apoq nan aui SN a
that is enveloped by meninges within the cranial cavity or verte-
is located in an autonomic ganglion.
Nervous Tissue · Alvinr j. Beitz ond Thomos F. Fletcher
105
epineurium
fibrousperineurium
perineuralepithelioidcells
endoneurium
oligodendrocyte
myelin sheath
axon
·myelinnode
afferentnervefiber
neurolemmocyte
efferentaxon
sensory ending
motorendplate
FIGURE 6-I8 Diagram of peripheral nerve constituents: five
fascicles constitute this peripheral nerve. The fascicles are united by
a. surrounding epineurium (connective tissue). Each fascicle is
encircled by perineurium, which consists of layers of perineural
epithelioid cells surrounded by fibrous perineurium. Within a fascicle,
endoneurium surrounds individual myelinated fibers. A myelinated
fiber consists of an axon surrounded by a myelin sheath that is
formed by a series of neurolemmocytes and interrupted by nodes.
Somatic afferent and efferent myelinated fibers are illustrated
(Modified from jenkins TW. Functional Mommolion Neuroonatomy
2nd Ed. Philodeiphio: Leo & Febiger, 1 978.)
FlGURE 6-I7 llustration of an oligodendrocyte providing
myelin intermodes to three axons. A bisected view of a node,
sheets of the squamous cells, along with interposed collagen fi-
 brils, form a continuous tube enclosing nerve fibers and endo-
adjacent paranode regions, and part of an intemode is shown in the
foreground. The axon (A) bulges at the node and is exposed to
neurium within a fascicle. A perineural epithelioid tube may
extracellular space (ES). Loop profiles containing cytoplasm (Cyt)
have a dozen concentric layers at its origin, at the juncture of the
contact the axon at the paranodal regions. Cytoplasm is retained
nerve with its meningeal-covered root. The number of layers
along the ridges associated with inner and outer mesaxons, and
 gradually decreases as a nerve branches. A single layer surrounds
terminal branches, but epithelioid cells proliferate to encapsulate
lines. (Adopted from Bunge MB, Bunge RP, Ris H. Ultrastructural study
certain receptors. A blood-nerve barrier exists, constituted by
of remyelirnation in on expenimental lesion in odult cot spinal cord.
the epithelioid cells and the endothelium of endoneurial micro-
J Biophys Biochem Cytol 1 961;10:67-94.)
vessels. This barrier serves to protect axons and the internal nerve
environment from fluctuations in blood plasma levels of hor-
mones and ions and from toxic substances. While the perineural
Nerves
epithelioid tube affords nerve fibers a protected environment,
A nerve typically consists of thousands of axons, each sheathed
the enclosed intrafascicular space may also serve as a channel
-iosey onu! pazquesio lle pue sansouualounau Aq paeuau 1o
for infectious or toxic agents once they invade the epithelioid cell
cles enveloped by connective tissue (Fig. 6-18). A nerve fascicle
barrier.
is delimited by perineurium, which consists of fibrous tissue sur-
The perineural epithelioid cells are squamous and arranged
rounding epithelioid cells. The multiple fascicles of a nerve are
in concentric sheets. The fibrous perineurium is collagenous
bound together by connective tissue called epineurium. Within
connective tissue. The morphologic distinction between fibrous
a nerve fascicle, the fibrocytes and collagen fibers surrounding in-
 perineurium, which surrounds individual fascicles, and epineu-
dividual neurolemmocytes constitute endoneurium. Blood ves-
rium, which binds fascicles together, varies with the species. In the
sels supplying a nerve are designated vasa nervorum.
dog, for example, nerves are composed of a few relatively large fas-
 Individual perineural epithelioid cells are joined by zonulae
cicles and fibrous perineurium is dense compared to epineurium,
occludens and enveloped by basal laminae. Multiple concentric
which is a fimsy, fatty connective tissue. In contrast, fibrous peri-
106
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
neurium and epineurium tend to blend indistinguishably in
rons. The muscle fibers are readily fatigued and, because large
bovine nerves, which feature multiple small fascicles
neurons require additional synaptic input to reach threshold,
they fire only when strong muscle contractions are needed.
A neuromuscular synapse consists of a presynaptic neu-
Ganglia
ronal end plate overlaying a postsynaptic muscle sole plate at
au Aq panpoid aaau e jo suaua relua pazieol e s uotueg y
the midregion ofa muscle fiber (Fig. 6-19). A motor end plate
accumulation of neuron cell bodies. Spinal ganglia located in
is formed by very short branches within a circumscribed zone
dorsal spinal roots and ganglia in cranial nerve roots are referred
(plate) at the end of one terminal branch of an efferent neuron.
 to as sensory ganglia, because they contain cell bodies of pri-
Each branch of the end plate lies in a corresponding trough of
mary afferent neurons (Fig. 6-9). Afferent neurons are unipolar,
the sole plate. The width of the neuromuscular gap is 40 to
50 nm; however, the gap is increased by junctional folds, where
retina, and olfactory epithelium), in which afferent neurons are
sarcolemma of the trough undergoes transverse enfolding. Neuro-
bipolar.
lemmocytes cover the end plate, and associated basal lamina
Within a sensory ganglion, unipolar cell bodies are dis-
extends into the neuromuscular gap and junctional folds
tributed superficially and nerve fibers course through the center
(Fig. 6-20).
of the ganglion. These unipolar cell bodies range in size from
 End-plate cytoplasm contains many mitochondria and nu-
large (30 to 50 μm in diameter) to small(15 to 25 μm in diam-
merous agranular synaptic vesicles (40 nm in diameter). The vesi-
eter), and each cell body gives rise to a single axon that may coil
cles contain acetylcholine, whichis released at active sites opposite
initially before bifurcating into central and peripheral branches;
the junctional folds. Acetylcholine molecules diffuse across the
leul salis rondanan pindeusisod on puiq pue deo iejnosnoinau
Large cell bodies give rise to myelinated axons that bifurcate at
open cation channels, leading to muscle fiber depolarization.
Some binding sites are cholinesterase enzymes that degrade
gliocytes.
acetylcholine and thereby stop synaptic activity. Transporter pro-
Autonomic ganglia are accumulations of multipolar cell
tein molecules are present in the presynaptic membrane to recap-
bodies within autonomic nerves (Fig. 6-10). The neuron cell bod-
ture choline and recycle it.
ies, which have eccentric nuclei and marginally distributed chro-
The fusimotor or Y motor neuron is another type of
matophilic substance as normal features, are loosely encapsulated
 somatic efferent neuron. It innervates intrafusal muscle fibers
within muscle spindles. These relatively small neurons have
where terminals of cholinergic preganglionic neurons synapse on
myelinated axons that terminate as end plates or trail endings
dendritic zones of postganglionic neurons. Microscopic accumu-
(multiple synaptic contacts along the muscle fiber surface).
lations of postganglionic cell bodies within nerve plexuses of vis-
Preganglionic autonomic neurons originate in the CNS
ceral organs (especially the gut) constitute terminal autonomic
and synapse on postganglionic neurons in autonomic ganglia,
ganglia.
making typical interneuronal synapses. Postganglionic auto-
 Postganglionic neurons are classified either as cholinergic
nomic neurons have nonmyelinated axons that innervate car-
if they synthesize and release acetylcholine or as adrenergic if
diac muscle, smooth muscle, or glands. The postganglionic
their associated neurotransmitter is noradrenaline (norepineph-
axons terminate in branches that individually wander long dis-
rine). Adrenergic neurons feature dense-core synaptic vesicles.
tances without evidence of specialized contact with muscle or
Some autonomic ganglia contain a few small intensely fluores-
gland cells.
cent (SIF) cells. These SIF cells feature numerous large, dense-
Ultrastructurally, terminal autonomic nerves consist of iso-
core vesicles containing dopamine, which is released under neural
lated neurolemmocytes sheathing one or more terminal branches.
control. The significance of SIF cells is unknown, but they
The terminal branches have numerous preterminal synaptic vari-
form somatodendritic synapses and thus appear to function as
cosities along their course. Each preterminal varicosity bulges be-
interneurons.
yond the confines of the sheathing neurolemmocyte and contains
a concentration of synaptic vesicles. Thus, neurotransmitter is re-
leased from multiple sites and diffuses variable distances to bind
Efferent Neurons
with receptors on target cells. Postsynaptic specializations are not
Somatic efferent neurons (O motor neurons) innervate skeletal 
evident.
muscle. One such neuron, together with all the muscle fibers it
There are several lines of evidence indicating that postgan-
innervates, is regarded as a motor unit, because the muscle fibers
glionic sympathetic axons innervating immune organs, such as
contract as a unit when the neuron is excited. A motor unit may
nodes (see Chapter 8), can regulate cytokine
have few or several hundred muscle fibers, depending on muscle
size. Typical muscles have a range of large and small motor units.
release of noradrenaline from nonsynaptic axonal varicosities, re-
Small motor units have fatigue-resistant muscle fibers inner-
sulting in the suppression of immune responses. Conversely, im-
vated by small neurons that are the first to begin firing and the
mune cells can release neurotrophic factors, such as nerve growth
last to cease firing during muscular contraction. Large motor
factor and brain-derived neurotrophic factor, that act on appro-
units have hundreds of muscle fibers innervated by large neu-
Nervous Tissue ·Alvin J. Beitz ond Thomas F. Fletcher
107
N. nuc
M. nuc
FIGURE 6-19
uscle fibers. Each of three
erfusion of short branches collectively designated an end plate.
Neurolemmocytes that ensheathe axon terminal branches
roce
Neurolemmocyte nucleus (N. nuc.);: muscle fiber nucleus
(M. nuc.). (Adopted from Krstic RV. General Histology of the Mammal. New York: Springer-Verlog. 1 985.)
BI
FlGURE 6-20 Ultrastructural drawing of one nerve ending (NE) of a branched motor end plate
synapsing on a muscle fiber (MF). The nerve ending contains numerous synaptic vesicles (SV). The muscle
fber plasma membrane features junctional folds {JF) that greatly expand the synaptic cleft. The cleft
contains basal lamina (BL) continuous with that covering the muscle fiber and the neurolemmocyte
(N) overlaying the nerve ending. (Fromm Lentz TL. Cell Fine Structure. Philodelphio: WB 5ounders, I 97 1.)
801
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
 neuroprotective effects. This highlights the fact that the nervous
Nonencapsulated Receptors
 and immune systems are closely interlinked such that physiologic
ap Aaui Apoq aun inoynoui punoy aie saupua aaiau aai
or pathologic effects on one system may affect the other.
tect stimulation described as pain (noxious), warmth, cold, or
touch. Simultaneously, the same stimulus information is used for
Receptors
subconscious reflex activity. The receptors are associated with
nonmyelinated or thinly myelinated axons that branch exten-
Afferent axons convey information to the CNS from receptors or
sively to innervate a wide area (receptive field). The actual re-
-uas Jo suojsallo pazjueio aie suegio asuag suegio asuas uoij
 Ceptors are simply unsheathed terminal branches enveloped by
sory epithelial cells, neurons, and supporting cells that detect vi-
basal lamina (Fig. 6-21).
sual, auditory, olfactory, or taste stimuli In contrast, receptors
Hair follicle terminals, which detect body hairs being dis-
are individual, isolated stimulus detectors that are widely dis-
placed, are derived from myelinated axons that branch exten-
tributed in the body (Fig. 6-21). Generally, the peripheral branch
sively to innervate hundreds of follicles. Each follicle is encircled
of an afferent axon branches repeatedly, and a receptor is located
by a nonmyelinated plexus that disperses free nerve endings
at the termination of each branch. All receptors of a single neuron
among follicle epithelial cells. (A different situation prevails for
have the same structure and function.
tactile hair follicles [vibrissae], each of which receives several
Receptors are classfied in several ways. By location, extero-
myelinated axons, giving rise to several kinds of receptors.)
ceptors, proprioceptors, and enteroceptors are found at the 
 Nonencapsulated tactile corpuscles are often collected at
 body surfaces, in musculoskeletal structures, and in viscera, respec-
the base of a slight skin elevation called a tactile pad (Fig. 6-21).
tively. Receptors are classified according to the type of stimulus
Each tactile corpuscle consists of an expanded axonal terminal
they are sensitive to as mechanoreceptors, chemoreceptors, and
 branch that is embraced by processes of an epithelioid tactile cell
thermoreceptors. Morphologically, receptors may be classified as
(Merkel cell). The epithelioid cell, which develops under the
encapsulated and nonencapsulated. The following is a list of
trophic influence of the nerve ending, contains large dense core
vesicles. Individual tactile corpuscles are innervated by a mye-
common receptors
linated axon that distributes to a restricted receptive field. The
tactile corpuscles are capable of persistent firing (tonic receptors).
Encapsulated Receptors
spindle
Encapsulated tactile corpuscles (Meissner's corpuscles) are
 oval, encapsulated phasic mechanoreceptors for touch and super-
ficial pressure, found in the dermal papillae of mammalian skin
(Fig 6-21) Several myelinated axons give rise to nonmyelinated
branches that permeate a stack of flattened neurolem mocytes en-
capsulated by perineural epithelioid cells. Tactile corpuscles and
their associated afferent nerve fibers adapt rapidly and provide
 great sensitivity to minute skin deformation.
Lamellar corpuscles (Vater's corpuscles, Pacini's corpus-
cles) are widely distributed throughout the body and are large
encapsulated
tactile corpuscle
minal branch of a myelinated axon is encased in several layers of
nonencapsulated
lamellar
flattened neurolemmocytes that are surrounded by a fluid space
tactile corpuscle
corpuscle
and multiple concentric layers derived from perineural epithelioid
FIGURE 6-21
 Schematic drawings of five receptors at various
cells (Fig. 6-21). The layered lamellae of these corpuscles function
magnifications. Free nerve endings branch among cells of the
as an extremely selective high-pass filter, which serves to dampen
epidermis. Two nonencapsulated tactile corpuscles are shown at the
the large, dynamic stresses and strains applied to the skin, allow-
base of the epidermis; each corpuscle consists of a terminal branch 
ing these receptors to be extremely sensitive to transient pressure,
making contact with a specialized tactile cell (Merkel's cell). An
 such as vibratory stimuli. Thus, these lamellar corpuscles are able
encapsulated tactile corpuscle (Meissner's corpuscle) is located in the
 to provide a neural image of vibrations transmitted to the skin.
dermis; dendritic branches from multiple myelinated axons weave
 Bulbous corpuscles (Krause's corpuscles, Golgi-Mazzoni
among flattened neurolemmocytes within a capsule of perineural 
Corpuscles, genital corpuscles) vary in location, size, and shape.
epithelioid cells. A lamellar corpuscle (Pacini's corpuscle) features the
They are mechanoreceptors derived from myelinated axons that
dendritic branch of a myelinated axon encased in a core of flattened
neurolemmocytes within a laminated capsule composed of perineural
have highly coiled terminal branches enclosed in a relatively thin
 capsule derived from perineural epithelioid cells.
epithelioid cells. A neurotendinous spindle splays among the collagen
 Neurotendinous spindles (Golgi tendon organs) are lo-
bundles of a small tendon; the receptor has a thin capsule and is
associated with a myelinated axon (not shown). (Encopsuiaoted toctile
cated at muscle-tendon junctions and are activated by tension.
Corpuscle ond neurotendirous spindle from Krstic RV. Gereral Histology
Derived from a large myelinated axon, the receptor consists of
of the Marmmal. New York: 5pringer-Verlog. 1 985.)
terminal branches traveling on bundles of collagen fibers within
Nervous Tissue · Alvinr j. Beitz ond Thomos F. Fletcher
601
a fluid-filled, thin capsule derived from perineural epithelioid
Two types of receptors are found on intrafusal muscle fibers
cells (Fig. 6-21). Ruffini's corpuscle, a tonic mechanoreceptor
(Fig. 6-22). A primary ending, also called an annulospiral
found in dermis, fascia, and ligaments, is structurally similar to
ending, is derived from a single, large myelinated axon that has 
the neurotendinous spindle.
terminal branches that spiral around the nuclear regions of in-
Neuromuscular spindles (muscle spindles) are so elabo-
trafusal muscle fibers. A secondary ending is derived from a
rate that they could qualify as sense organs. Located in most
myelinated axon with dendritic branches arranged in a flower-
skeletal muscles, the spindle has an elongated (1.5 mm) capsule
spray configuration and situated on nuclear chain fibers adjacent
derived from perineural epithelioid cells. The capsule encloses af-
to the annulospiral endings. Collectively, the receptors are acti-
ferent and efferent innervation as well as two kinds of intrafusal
vated by the rate and degree of stretch that occurs when either
muscle fibers, designated nuclear bag and nuclear chain fibers 
the polar ends of intrafusal muscle fibers contract or the whole
(Fig. 6-22). A typical spindle has one or two nuclear bag fibers,
muscle is stretched. Information from spindle receptors is pri-
each with a dilated middle zone filled with nuclei and striated
marily subconscious and important for regulating muscle tone,
polar ends that project beyond the spindle capsule. Several nu-
adjusting posture, and coordinating movements.
clear chain fibers are also present within the spindle. These fibers
are smaller than nuclear bag fibers, contained entirely within the
spindle capsule, and characterized by a chain of nuclei at the mid-
CenTral nerVOUS TiSSUe
dle of the fiber. The middle nuclear region of both types of in-
trafusal muscle fibers lacks myofilaments and is stretched when
The CNS consists of the brain and spinal cord (plus the optic
the striated polar regions contract. The striated regions are inner-
nerve and retina, which originate embryologically as an exten-
-pua iauiia ys!qeisa ieun suoinau ronoiu () ronoiuisny Aq paia
sion of the brain). The brain may be divided into brainstem, cere-
plate or trail-type neuromuscular synapses. Trail endings form
bellum, and cerebrum. When the CNS is sliced and observed
multiple synaptic contacts as terminal branches ramify on the sur-
grossly, one can identify white-matter regions, gray-matter re-
face of a muscle fiber.
gions, and regions where white and gray matter are mixed.
type II afferent-
end plate on
axon from
extrafusal
secondary endings
muscle fiber
type Ia afferent
axon from
primary endings
trail-ending
on nuclear chain
intrafusal m. fiber
end plate
on nuclear bag
intrafusal m. fiber
tibrocvtes
endomysium
FIGURE 6-22 Schematic drawing of a muscle spindle and several extrafusal muscle fibers linked by collagen fibrils of the endomysium.
Perineural epithelioid cells that surround nerve fibers continue to form the spindle capsule (cut open). The contents of the spindle include
saouqy pue 'sasdeuis jenosnwaunau jo sad ome sioidanau Aepuonas pue Aewud 'siaqy alosnw jesngeui ureuo reapnu pue eq eaonu
and collagen fibrils. Primary or annulospiral endings, which spiral around nuclear bag and chain regions of intrafusal muscle fibers, arise from a
large (myelinated) axon. Secondary or flower-spray endings, which contact nuclear chain fibers adjacent to the primary ending, arise from a.
medium-sized (myelinated) axon. Small (myelinated) axons of fusimotor (Y) neurons synapse on the polar regions of intrafusal muscle fibers.
They form small end plates and trail endings. The trail endings are on nuclear chain fibers. Terminal branches of an ox motor neuron form
end plates on extrafusal muscle fibers. (From Krstic RV. General Histology of the Mammol. New York 5pringer-Verlog, 1 985.)
110
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
White matter is formed by dense accumulations of myeli-
cortex
(aeieadde aym e sey pue pidi u uiu s! uaau) suoxe paieu
Individual myelin sheaths are relatively thin in the CNS com-
pared to the PNS. Nonmyelinated axons of the CNS are not
sheathed; they are totally exposed to the CNS extracellular space.
White matter is composed of collections of tracts (called fasciculi
or lemnisci in particular cases). A tract consists of functionally
related nerve fibers with a similar origin and destination.
 An absence or scarcity of myelin results in CNS tissue having
a gray appearance. Gray matter is rich in neuronal cell bodies,
glial cells, and neuropil. Neuropil refers to the axons, terminal
branches, dendrites, and glial processes that collectively form a
 background matrix for the cell bodies seen with light microscopy.
Most synapses occur in the neuropil. Neuropil appears dense be-
cause the CNS extracellular space is uniformly narrow (approxi-
mately 20 nm wide).
Gray matter on the surface of the cerebellum and cerebrum
FIGURE 6-23Transverse section through the cerebrum of a
 is called cortex. Distinctive gray matter masses within the CNS
canine brain; white matter is stained dark. The cerebrum is
are usually designated nuclei. Generally, a nucleus receives input
composed of two cerebral hemispheres joined across the midline by
from one or more tracts and projects output to other tracts, which,
white matter (corpus callosum). The cerebral surface features
in turn, are input to a different nucleus or to cortex. For a given
elevations, called gyri (g), separated by grooves, called sulci (s). Gray
nucleus, incoming terminals typically synapse on small neurons
matter at the surface of the cerebrum is cerebral cortex. Cerebral
with short axons, called interneurons because they are inter-
white matter (w.m.) is deep to the cortex. Intemal masses of gray
posed between the input and output of the nucleus. Ultimately,
matter at the base of the cerebrum constitute basal nuclei (*).
the interneurons in a nucleus determine the appropriate output
for a particular input.
 Nervous tissue exhibits a variety of configurations among
5. Internal pyramidal layer—medium to large pyramidal
the different regions of the CNS. Gray and white matter features
neurons that send axons into the white matter; a thick layer
of three major CNS regions will be presented: cerebral cortex,
in the motor area of the cortex.
cerebellum, and spinal cord.
6. Fusiform (multiform) layer—many spindle-shaped neu-
rons that send axons into the white matter; deep to this
Cerebral Cortex
layer, cerebral white matter is composed of nerve fibers
going to and coming from the cortex.
The cerebrum of the brain is composed of paired cerebral hemi-
spheres (Fig. 6-23). The surface of each hemisphere has gyri
The basic functional unit of the neocortex is the 40- to 50-jum
(ridges) demarcated by sulci (grooves). The surface is coated by
gray matter called cerebral cortex. The characteristic neuron of
the cerebral cortex has a pyramid-shaped cell body, oriented
columns extend vertically from the white matter to the cortical
with its apex directed toward the surface (Fig. 6-4). Dendrites
surface and are linked into larger units called cortical columns
emerge from the apex and basal edges of the pyramidal cell; the
(approximately O.3 mm in diameter). Cortical columns are formed
axon leaves the center of the base and enters the white matter.
 by the binding together of approximately 50 to 80 minicolumns
 In mammals, all but the ventral cerebral cortex is designated
by common input and short-range horizontal connections. Indi-
neocortex, because it is phylogenetically recent. Cerebral neo-
vidual cortical columns are not histologically distinct. Physio-
cortex is divisible into six layers, although the layering is evi-
logically, all neurons within a column become active in response
dent only in thick sections and the prominence of individual
to a certain feature of a stimulus and are inactive in the absence of
layers varies from region to region. From superficial to deep, the
that feature. The pyramidal neuron is the anatomic basis for ver-
six layers are as follows (Fig. 6-24):
tical column organization. Pyramidal neurons have basal dendrites
1. Molecular layer—predominantly neuropil-oriented tan-
for making radial connections within a column, and they estab-
gentially; composed of apical dendrites from pyramidal cells
lish vertical contact by means of superficially directed apical den-
and terminal branches of superficial cortical afferent fibers.
drites and deeply directed axons.
2. External granular layer—predominantly small neurons
Two types of afferent fibers enter a cortical column from the
that serve as interneurons.
white matter. Nonspecific afferents, which lack specific infor-
 3. External pyramidal layer—small and medium pyramidal
mation content, ramify in all cortical layers, but especially in su-
neurons that send axons to adjacent cerebral cortex.
perficial layers. These fibers produce background excitation as a
4. Internal granular layer—small stellate neurons that re
means of alerting cortical columns. Specific afferents, the other
ceive specific sensory input, a thick layer in sensory areas of
fiber type, convey the modality-specific information with which
cortex (e.g., primary visual area).
the column is functionally concerned. The fibers synapse on the
Nervous Tissue ● Alvinr j. Beitz ond Thomos F. Fletcher
111
fo
0
cp
V
FIGURE 6-25
Transverse section through a canine hindbrain. The
cerebellum (above) is joined to the brainstem (below). The cerebellar
A
surface features elevations called folia (fo) separated by grooves called
VT
sulci (s). Cerebellar cortex, the surface gray matter, appears two-toned
because ofa cell-parse molecular layer covering a cell-dense granule
layer. Three cerebellar nuclei (*) are located bilaterally deep to the
white matter (wm). The brainstem exhibits white matter tracts, gray
wm
matter nuclei, regions in which white and gray matter are mixed, and
FIGURE 6-24Schematic illustration of the six layers {l to Vl) of
emerging cranial nerve roots (arrows). On each side, the tip of a
cerebral cortex {neocortex), shown in three perspectives. The left
choroid plexus (cp) is seen within the sumounding subarachnoid space.
panel illustrates nerve fibers (axons, telodendria, and dendrites) in
the cortex. From the white matter (wm), modality-specific input 
fibers (S) terminate in layer IV; nonspecific input fibers (NS)
The cerebellar cortex is divisible into three layers (Fig. 6-26).
aed aii aul sakel eadns au ui ieadsa aeat
The molecular layer, composed predominantly of neuropil, is
displays individual neurons as they are seen with silverimpregnation
most superficial. The granule cell layer, situated adjacent to white
(Golgi stain). The chara.cteristic neuron of the cerebral cortex has a
 matter, features densely packed granule cells (small neurons with
pyramidal shape. Notice that pyramidal neurons (P) have an apical 
heterochromatic nuclei). Because of the extremely dense packing
dendrite that ascends to the surface, radially oriented basal
of the granule cells, the cerebellum contains about five times
dendrites, and a single axon (a) that courses into the white matter.
The right panel shows neuron cell bodies in the different layers of
more neurons than the cerebral cortex. Finally, a single layer of
paiow) ueis ss e uiyeadde aut se (i ot 1 xauoo eqaa
large cell bodies is located at the interface of the molecular and
from Crosby EC, Humphrey T, Louer EW. Correlative Anatomy of the
granule cell layers. This is called the piriform cell layer (Purkinje
Nervous 5yster. New York: The Macmilon Co., I 962.)
cell layer).
The piriform neurons (Purkinje cells) send axons into the
white matter to synapse on neurons of cerebellar nuclei. Each
 piriform neuron has an elaborate dendritic tree that projects into
small neurons of the internal granular layer, which serve as inter-
neurons to distribute excitation throughout the column.
the molecular layer (Fig. 6-27) and makes more than 200,000
 Output from the cortical column is predominantly from py-
synaptic contacts with granule cell axons. Axons of granule cells
ramidal neurons, which send their axons into the white matter.
enter the molecular layer, bifurcate, travel longitudinally within
Superficial neurons send axons to neighboring regions of cortex
a folium, and synapse on numerous dendritic trees of the piriform
(short association fibers). Neurons in the deepest two layers of the
neurons. Another neuron of the cerebellar cortex is called a bas-
ket cell because its terminal branches form “baskets" surround-
cortex send long axons to the brainstem (projection fibers), to the
contralateral cerebral hemisphere (commissural fibers), or to dis-
ing cell bodies of adjacent piriform neurons. The cell bodies of
basket cells are found in the deep molecular layer; their axons
tant regions of the same hemisphere (long association fibers).
course transversely in the folium and inhibit laterally positioned
Cerebellum
piriform neurons.
Two major types of input fibers enter the cerebellar cortex.
The cerebellar surface features folia (narrow ridges) separated by
One type (climbing fibers) has terminal branches that climb like
sulci (grooves). The surface is coated by gray matter, called cere-
vines on piriform dendritic trees, each fiber making numerous
bellar cortex. White matter is located deep to the cortex, and
synapses-in-passing on one dendritic tree. The other type of input
three bilateral pairs of cerebellar nuclei are embedded within the
fiber has terminal expansions (mossy endings) within the granule
white matter (Fig. 6-25).
cell layer. Neighboring granule cells send dendrites to synapse
112
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Spinal Cord
wd
The cylindrical spinal cord is divisible into segments that are de-
marcated by the bilateral emergence of dorsal and ventral roots
of spinal nerves. A transverse section of the spinal cord has a cen-
tral canal surrounded by an H-shaped profile of gray matter,
which is in turn surrounded by white matter (Fig. 6-28). The
 spinal cord is divided in the median plane by a ventral median
fissure and a dorsal median septum (the septum is replaced by
wm
a fissure in the caudal half of the cord). Spinal cord and particu-
larly spinal gray matter are enlarged at segments supplying limbs
 because limb innervation requires additional nervous tissue.
pm
Spinal gray matter contains three categories of neurons: inter-
 neurons (contained within the gray matter, connecting afferent and
efferent neurons), projection neurons (which project axons through
white matter tracts to the brain), and efferent neurons (which send
axons into ventral roots). A group of related neuron cell bodies is
m
designated a nucleus (e.g., the intermediolateral nucleus is com-
posed ofsympathetic preganglionic neuron cellbodies) Spinal gray
matter is sometimes subdivided into 10 defined laminae (bound-
aries of laminae are indistinct in ordinary tissue sections).
Bilaterally, spinal gray matter consists of dorsal and ventral
gray columns connected by intermediate gray matter. In trans-
verse sections, gray column profiles are usually called horns. The
 ventral gray column (horn) contains somatic efferent neurons
wm
that innervate skeletal muscle. The dorsal gray column (horn)
afferent neurons synapse to convey sensory information related to
FIGURE 6-26  Two light micrographs at different magnification
pain, temperature, pressure, touch, etc. Intermediate gray mat-
of cerebellar cortex (pig). Nissl stain. Top: white matter (wm)
ter features visceral neurons. In thoracolumbar segments, a lat-
extends into the center of a. cerebellar folium. Cortex covering the
eral gray column (horn) containing sympathetic preganglionic
white matter exhibits a dense cell layer (g) and a relatively acellular
 neurons (intermediolateral nucleus) is present.
layer (m). Pia mater (pm) covers the cerebellar surface and extends
Spinal white matter is composed of fibers that form ascend-
into sulci separating folia (×l 5). Bottom: cerebellar cortex, situated
ing and descending tracts plus fibers entering from dorsal roots or
between white matter (wm) and pia mater (pm), is composed of
exiting to ventral roots. Ascending tracts terminate in the brain.
a ) akl lla au au eadns ot daap wy sakel aa
Axons of descending tracts originate in the brain and mainly
piriform cell layer (p); and the molecular layer (m) (×55).
dorsal roots enter white matter at a dorsolateral sulcus and termi-
nate principally in the dorsal gray column. Axons of efferent neu-
with each terminal expansion, thereby creating a synaptic com-
rons exit ventrolaterally as ventral root fibers.
plex known as a glomerulus.
Bilaterally, spinal white matter is divided into three anatomic
 The cerebellum regulates muscle tone, posture, and move-
regions. The dorsal funiculus is located between the midline and
ment so that these are expressed in an appropriate, coordinated
dorsal root attachments. The ventral funiculus is situated be-
tween the midline and ventral root attachments. The lateral fu-
lar nuclei are spontaneously active; they send their axons out
niculus is positioned between dorsal and ventral root attachments.
of the cerebellum to excite brain neurons responsible for initiat-
ing posture and movement. Input to the cerebellum comes from
MenInGeS, blood VeSSelS,
these brain neurons and from muscle and joint proprioceptors.
AND CEREBROSPINAL FLUID
Input fibers excite cerebellar nuclei and specific regions of cere-
bellar cortex. Excitatory granule cells and inhibitory basket cells
Meninges
interact to produce a localized pattern of active piriform neurons
in the cerebellar cortex. Piriform neuron axons, the only output
The brain and spinal cord and the roots of peripheral nerves are en-
from the cortex, inhibit neurons of cerebellar nuclei. Thus, the
veloped by a series of connective tissue sheaths termed meninges.
cerebellar cortex continuously compares movement initiation
 Meninges also surround the entire optic nerve (which is CNS tis-
with movement performance and regulates move ment execution
sue). Meninges contain cerebrospinal fluid and constitute a protec-
tive barrier. Inflammation of the meninges results in a condition
cerebellar nuclei.
termed meningitis.
Nervous Tissue · Alvin J. Beitz ond Thomos F. Fletcher
113
cerebellar
bisectedfolium
molecular
cortex
layer
Purkinje cell
transected
folium
granule cell
layer
basket cell
white matter
Golgi cell
+
mossy
fiber
mossy
fiber
Purkinje cell axon
climbing
fiber
granule cell
climbing
fiber
FIGURE 6-27
 Schematic diagram of cerebellar cortex. The three layers of cortex (labeled on the right)
are shown in bisected (right side) and transected (left side) views of a folium. The molecular layer of
cerebellar cortex is composed of neuronal processes plus a few small stellate neurons (upper right.
unlabeled). The piriform (Purkinje) cell layer features cell bodies of piriform cell neurons, which send their
axons into the white matter. The piriform cell dendritic tree is flattened and oriented perpendicular to the
long axis of the folium. The granule cellayer is packed with small granule cell neurons that send axons into
uau lan lalog aut apnpu suaunau leuoppe omi saupuap llan wuid uo asdeuss o dakel yenalow aut 
edge) and the basket cell (left edge). The Golgi cell (great stellate cell) is an inhibitory intermeuron located in
the upper part of the granule cell layer. The basket cell an inhibitory neuron located in the depths of the
molecular layer, has axonal branches that form "baskets" around piriform cell bodies. Cerebellar white matter
is composed of piriform cell axons leaving the cortex and two types of cortical afferents: mossy and climbing
fibers. A mossy fiber makes synaptic contact with granule cell dendrites; the mossy ending forms the center
of a synaptic glomerulus. Climbing fibers make many synaptic contacts on one Purkinje dendritic tree.
Traditionally, three meningeal layers are described, from
Spinal dura mater is surrounded by an epidural space that
superficial to deep: dura mater, arachnoid, and pia mater (Fig.
 separates the dura mater from periosteum lining the vertebral
6-29). Dura mater is sometimes called pachymeninx because
canal. Collagen and elastic fibers in the spinal dura are oriented
it is thick and strong. The arachnoid and pia mater are collec-
parallel to the long axis of the spine, providing the dura with lon-
tively termed leptomeninges, because they are delicate and con-
gitudinal tensile strength, stiffness, and the property of relaxation.
nected both embryologically and physically. A subarachnoid
Cranial dura mater is composed of two laminae. The inter-
 space containing cerebrospinal fluid separates arachnoid from
nal lamina is comparable to spinal dura mater; the external lam-
pia mater.
ina serves as periosteum for the cranial cavity. The two laminae
 Dura mater contains thick collagen bundles and elastic fibers,
are distinct only where the inner lamina separates from the outer
oriented longitudinally in spinal dura, but more irregularly in cra-
one to form partitions between parts of the brain (Fig. 6-29).
nial dura. The dura mater also contains fibrocytes, nerves, and
Endothelium-lined spaces, called dural venous sinuses, are
lymph and blood vessels. The inner surface of dura mater is lined
 present where the internal and external laminae separate. Venous
by multiple layers of flattened fibrocytes to which outer cells of the
blood drains into the sinuses, which resist collapse because of
arachnoid membrane adhere. Although there is no subdural space,
their rigid walls.
hemorrhage can result in the accumulation of blood between
Arachnoid (arachnoid membrane) consists of outer layers of
fibrocyte layers (subdural hematoma), giving the false impression
flattened fibrocytes and inner, loosely arranged, flattened fibro-
of a subdural space.
Cytes associated with small bundles of collagen fibers. Arachnoid.
114
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
DR
trabeculae are thin strands of inner arachnoid that traverse
duramater
the subarachnoid space and establish continuity with pia mater.
Arachnoid villi are microscopic projections of arachnoid that
penetrate walls of dural venous sinuses and act as one-way valves
for drainage of cerebrospinal fluid (Fig. 6-29). When cerebro-
spinal fluid pressure exceeds sinus blood pressure, arachnoid villi
expand to facilitate fluid transfer into the bloodstream. The villi
collapse to preclude blood reflux when venous pressure exceeds
cerebrospinal fluid pressure. Cerebrospinal fluid can also drain
into lymphatics of peripheral nerves.
The pia mater is a highly vascular layer that covers the spinal
 Cord and brain, lining every sulcus and fissure. It is characterized
by wide intercellular spaces containing variable amounts of inter-
lacing collagen fibers and fine elastic networks with a few
fibrocytes, lymphocytes, and mast cells. A basal lamina separates
denticulate
pia mater collagen from the underlying glial limiting membrane
VR
B Aq aejins laino sii uo paiaaon si eid aui (sassaiord aiaoise)
FIGURE 6-28 Transverse section through a canine spinal cord at
layer of flat fibrocytes.
the midthora.cic region (stained with Luxol blue and hematoxylin). The
Together with arachnoid, pia mater bounds the subarachnoid
central canal (*) is surrounded by butterfly-shaped gray matter (gray).
 space, which contains cerebrospinal fluid. The entire subarachnoid
which is surrounded by darkly stained white matter (white). In this
 space, including the surfaces of nerves and vessels that traverse the
thoracic segment gray matter features a small dorsal hom, a subtle
 space, is lined by flattened fibrocytes joined by zonulae adherens.
lateral hom, and a large ventral hom, bilaterally. Meninges and
 The fibrocytes are capable of phagocytosis, and macrophages are
transected nerve roots are extemal to the white matter. Bilaterally, a
process of denticulate ligament (denticulate) is evident between pia.
sporadically found on the lining of the subarachnoid space. Since
mater and dura mater. The spinal cord is divided into bilateral halves
the fibrocytic layer lining the subarachnoid space lacks a basal lam-
by a ventral median fissure and a dorsal median sulcus and septum. In
ina, a limited exchange of fluid, small molecules, and immuno-
each half white matter is divided into three regions: dorsal funiculus 
competent cells between the cerebrospinal fluid and the arachnoid
(DF), lateral funiculus (LF), and ventral funiculus (VF). A prominent
 and pia compartments is possible.
dorsolateral sulcus, where dorsal roots (DR) would enter, separates
Along each midlateral surface of the spinal cord, an increase
dorsal and lateral funiculi The boundary between lateral and ventral
in the amount of pia mater collagen creates an elongated liga-
funiculi is demarcated by the emergence of ventral roots (VR)
ment called the denticulate ligament. A periodic series of pro-
jections extends laterally from the ligament and attaches to
spinal dura mater (Fig. 6-28). Thus, bilateral denticulate liga-
ments act to suspend the spinal cord within the dura mater so the
spinal cord is completely surrounded by the cerebrospinal fluid
subarachnoidspace
arachnoidvillus
dorsal sagittal venous sinus
within the subarachnoid space.
 As nerve roots converge to form cranial and spinal nerves at
dura mater
arachnoid
cranial and intervertebral foramina, there is a transition from
meninges surrounding the nerve root to neural connective tissue
rachnoid
around the nerves. Flattened fibrocytes of the leptomeninges are
trabecula
pia mater
continued by the epithelioid cells of the perineurium. Dura
cerebral
mater is continued by fibrous perineurium and epineurium. Pia
cortex
mater collagen is continued by endoneurium.
falx cerebri
white matter
Blood Vessels
FIGURE 6-29 Schematic illustration of meningeal relationships at
the dorsal midline of the cranial cavity. The intermal lamina of dura
Blood vessels in the subarachnoid space are covered by lepto-
mater separates from the extermal (periosteal) lamina and forms a.
meningeal tissue derived from arachnoid trabeculae or pia
partition, the falx cerebri, between cerebral hemispheres. The
mater (Fig. 6-3O). When a vessel penetrates the CNS, it is sur-
separation also encloses a venous sinus lined by endothelial cells {intc
rounded by a perivascular space (i.e., a space situated be-
 se   s   sa 
tween the vessel wall and the glial limiting membrane). The
the intermal surface of dura mater. Ara.chnoid trabeculae connect to
space persists to the level of small vessels, where the basal lam-
pia mater by traversing the subara.chnoid space, which is filled with
cerebrospinal fluid. The fluid drains into venous blood through an
ina associated with the glial limiting membrane merges with
arachnoid villus that expands or collapses according to the pressure
vascular basal lamina. Leptomeninges, particularly pia mater
differential across it (Adopted frorm Weed LH. The obsorption of
collagen fibers, fill the perivascular space so that a space is not
Cerebrospirnal fluicd into the venous syster. Arm  Anot 1 923;31:191221.)
obvious, except when it fills with inflammatory cells under
Nervous Tissue ● Alvinr j. Beitz ond Thomos F. Fletcher
115
bone
dura mater
 arachnoid
arachnoid
tabeculae
pia mater
glial membrane
vessel
perivascular space
brain
FIGURE 6-30 Schematic illustration showing cranial meninges and perivascular space around vessels.
The entire subara.chnoid space, including surfaces of vessels, is coated by leptomeninges {ara.chnoid and 
pia mater). The perivascular space that is present between the glial limiting membrane and the vessel wall
is flled with pia mater collagen fibers.
pathologic conditions. Communication between perivascular
mater without intervening nervous tissue. A choroid plexus
spaces and the subarachnoid space is blocked by a continuous
arises from tela choroidea as a mass of villi that collectively forms
barrier of leptomeningeal cells, formed by cells on surfaces of
a fuzzy tufted growth extending into the ventricle. Each villus
vessels uniting with those on the pia mater surface.
consists of pial vasculature in loose connective tissue covered by
 In contrast to most endothelial cells in the body, endothelial
modified ependymal cells, called chorioid plexus epithelium.
cells of CNS capillaries are generally nonfenestrated and joined by
Although choroid plexus capillaries have fenestrated endothelial
tight junctions. These endothelial features are responsible for the
cells, choroid plexus epithelial cells are joined by zonulae occlu-
blood-brain barrier, which impedes diffusion of hydrophilic
dens near their luminal surfaces. These tight junctions contribute
molecules from the bloodstream to the CNS (polar molecules must
to the formation of a blood-cerebrospinal fluid barrier regu-
be specifically transported into the CNS). The trophic influence of
lating the extent to which proteins and drugs enter the cerebro-
astrocyte end feet in contact with the basal lamina surrounding
spinal fluid.
CNS capillaries induces CNS endothelial cells to become non-
Cerebrospinal fluid is produced by choroid plexus epi-
fenestrated and joined by tight junctions. A blood-brain barrier is
thelium through a process that involves active Nat secretion.
not present either neonatally or at the few sites in the adult brain
Choroid plexus epithelial cells exhibit pinocytotic vesicles,
where modified ependymal cells are found (choroid plexuses and
which originate at the base of each cell and migrate toward the
circumventricular organs).
luminal surface. In accordance with its location between two
A blood-brain barrier is also present in peripheral nerves.
circulating fluid compartments (the blood and the cerebro-
Capillaries within the endoneurium of peripheral nerves (but
 spinal fluid), the choroid plexus epithelium is involved in nu-
not ganglia) exhibit zonulae occludens. Perineural epithelioid
yiim uieiq aul Aiddns iauia ieui sassanoid aoueuxa snoia
cells surrounding nerve fascicles also have zonulae occludens.
 nutrients and hormones or clear deleterious compounds and
These tight junctions establish a blood-nerve barrier for hydro-
metabolites from the brain. Choroid plexuses also participate
philic molecules.
in neurohumoral brain modulation and neuroimmune inter-
actions, thereby contributing greatly to the maintenance of brain
homeostasis.
Cerebrospinal Fluid
Cerebrospinal fluid flows through brain ventricles. The fluid
Cerebrospinal fluid is produced by choroid plexuses in brain
leaves the ventricles by exiting through lateral apertures of the
ventricles. A region of each ventricular wall is formed by tela
fourth ventricle and entering the subarachnoid space, where it
choroidea, a term that refers to ependyma in contact with pia
surrounds the brain and spinal cord. Besides offering the physical
116
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
protection ofa fluid buffer, cerebrospinal fluid compensates for the
Kurosinski P, Gotz J. Glial cells under physiologic and pathologic con-
absence of lymphatics in the CNS because large molecules from the
ditions. Arch Neurol 2002;59:15241528.
CNS extracellular space are able to pass between ependymal cells
Jones EG. The nervous tissue. In: Weiss L, ed. Cell and Tissue Biology.
6th Ed. Baltimore: Urban & Schwarzenberg, 1988.
and into the cerebrospinal fluid.
Junqueira LC, Carneiro J, Kelly RO. Basic Histology. 8th Ed. Norwalk,
Dendritic cells are a subclass of antigen-presenting cells crit-
CT: Appleton & Lange, 1995.
ical in the initiation and regulation of adaptive immunity against
Krstit RV. General Histology of the Mammal. New York: Springer-
 pathogens and tumors (see Chapter 8). Recent studies have indi-
Verlag, 1985.
 cated that dendritic cells are present in normal meninges, choroid
Larocca JN, Rodriguez-Gabin AG. Myelin biogenesis: vesicle transport
plexuses, and cerebrospinal fluid, but absent from normal brain
in oligodendrocytes. Neurochem Res 2002;27:1313-1329.
 parenchyma. CNS inflammation is accom panied by recruitment
Messlinger K. Functional morphology of nociceptive and other fine sen-
of dendritic cells from the blood into the affected brain tissue.
sory endings (free nerve endings) in different tissues. Prog Brain
Dendritic cells present in different CNS compartments are likely
Res 1 996;113:273-298.
to play an important role in the defense against CNS infections,
Morgan CW. Axons of sacral preganglionic neurons in the cat:
but also may contribute to relapses or chronicity of CNS infla m-
 I Origin, initial segment, and myelination. J Neurocytol 2001;
mation and to breakdown of tolerance to CNS autoantigens.
30:523-544.
Manipulation of dendritic cell recruitment and function within
Mountcastle VB. Introduction. Computation in cortical colum ns. Cereb
Cortex 2003;1 3:2-4.
-uunonau Sunieanl roy aieis Mau e iuasandan Aeu SN au
Nimchinsky EA, Sabatini BL, Svoboda K. Structure and function of
matory diseases.
dendritic spines. Annu Rev Physiol 2002;64:313-353.
Orlin JR, Osen KK, Hovig T. Subdural compartment in pig. A mor-
phologic study with blood and horseradish peroxidase infused
SUGGESTEd rEAdInGS
subdurally. Anat Rec 1991;230:22-37.
Pannese E. Neurocytology. Fine Structure of Neurons, Nerves Pro-
Bergman R A, Afifi AK, Heidger PM Jr. Atlas of Microscopic Anatomy.
cesses, and Neuroglial Cells. New York: Thieme Medical Pub-
2nd Ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1989.
lishers, 1994.
Parri R, Crunelli V. An astrocyte bridge from synapse to blood flow. Nat
Microsc Res Tech. 1998;4l:2-13.
Neurosci 2003;6:43-50.
Calakos N, Scheller RH. Synaptic vesicle biogenesis, docking, and fusion:
Pashenkov M, Teleshova N, Link H. Inflammation in the central nerv-
a molecular description. Physiol Rev 1996;76: 1-29,
ous system: the role for dendritic cells. Brain Pathol 2003;13:
Choquet D, Triller A. The role of receptor diffusion in the organization
23-33.
of the postsynaptic membrane. Nat Rev Neurosci 2003;4:
Peters A, Palay SL, Webster HD. The Fine Structure of the Nervous
251-265.
System: Neurons and Supporting Cells. 3rd Ed. New York: Oxford
Cooper JR, Bloom FE, Roth RH. The Biochemical Basis of Neuro-
University Press, 1991.
pharmacology. 7th Ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996.
Segal M. Changing views of Cajal's neuron: the case of the dendritic
Dong Y, Benveniste EN. Immune function of astrocytes. Glia 200l;
spine. Prog Brain Res 2002;136:101-107.
36: 1 80-190.
Shepherd GM, Raastad M, Andersen P. General and vatiable features
Dyer CA. The structure and function of myelin: from inert membrane
of varicosity spacing along unmyelinated axons in the hippo-
to perfusion pump. Neurochem Res 2002;27: 1279-1292.
campus and cerebellum. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2002;99:
Fawcett DW. A Textbook of Histology. 12th Ed. Philadelphia: WB
6340-6345.
Saunders, 1994.
Sternberg SS. Histology for Pathologists. New York: Raven Press, 1992.
Fields RD, Stevens-Graham B. New insights into neuron-glia commu-
 Sternini C. Organization of the peripheral nervous system: autonomic
nication. Science 2002;298:556-562.
and sensory ganglia. J Investig Dermatol Symp Proc 1997;2: 1-7.
Friedman EM, Irwin MR. Modulation of immune cell function by the
Stevens, B, Porta, S, Haak LL, et al. Adenosine: a heuron-glial trans-
autonomic nervous system. Pharmacol Ther 1997;74:27-38.
mitter promoting myelination in the CNS in response of action
Hansson E, Ronnback L. Glial neuronal signaling in the central nervous
potentials. Neuron 2002;36:855-868.
system. FASEB J 2003;17:341-348.
Strazielle N, Ghersi-Egea JF. Choroid plexus in the central nervous sys-
Kazatinova-Noyes K, Shrager P. Molecular constituents of the node of
tem: biology and physiopathology. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol
Ranvier. Mol Neurobiol. 2002;26:167-182.
2000;59:561-574.
Kerschensteiner M, Stadelmann C, Dechant G, et al. Neurotrophic
von Bohlen und Halbach O, Unsicker K. Morphological alterations in the
cross-talk between the nervous and immune systems: implications
amygdala and hippocampus of mice during ageing. Eur J Neurosci
fot neurological diseases. Ann Neurol 2003;53:292-304.
2002;16:2434-2440.
Cardiovascular System
JOHANNA PLENDL
Blood Vessels
Specialized Blood Vessels
Structure-Function Relationships of Blood Vessels
 Sensory Receptors
General Structural Organization of Blood Vessels
Carotid body
Vascular Endothelium
Carotid sinus
Arteries
Heart
 Elastic arteries
 Endocardium
Muscular arteries
Myocardium 
Microvasculature
Epicardium and Pericardium
Arterioles
Cardiac Conduction System
Capillaries 
Cardiac Blood Vessels, Lymph Vessels, and Nerves
Venules
Lymph Vessels
Arteriovenous anastomoses
Lymph Capillaries
Veins
Small and Medium Lymph Vessels
Small veins
Large Lymph Vessels and Collecting Ducts
 Medium veins
Large veins
 Most tissues and organs of domestic animals are permeated by a
mine the structure of the various tubular portions comprising the
network of tubular passages that conduct the more fuid compo-
vascular system.
 nents of the body. Highly cellular and viscous blood flows through
the blood vascular system while the relatively acellular and
BLOOD VESSELS
u aisas rnsa qdi aun qnon sssd qda Aii
domestic mammals, the blood vascular system forms circulatory
Structure-Function Relationships
arcs emanating from and returning to the heart. The lymphatic
of Blood Vessels
vascular system forms drainage channels, which join the major
veins at the thoracic inlet and through which accumulating tis-
The blood vessels of the macrovasculature are visible with the
sue fluid returns to the circulating blood.
naked eye and include elastic and muscular arteries and accompa-
Blood and lymph flow because of the pressure gradients
 nying veins. Arteries of the macrovasculature carry the blood from
within the lumina of their respective vascular networks. These
the heart to the microvasculature, which includes arterioles,
pressure gradients arise from several forces including gravity, the
metarterioles, capillaries, venules, and arteriovenous anastomoses.
 pumping action of the heart, and the movements of musculo-
Functioning as return vessels of the macrovasculature, veins then
skeletal body parts. The pressure inside the vascular tubes differs
carry the blood from the microvasculature back to the heart.
from the pressure outside, and the resulting pressure gradients,
Blood vessels are commonly defined by their position in the
coupled with the shearing forces of fluid flow, probably deter-
vascular circuit. They are further characterized histologically by
117
118
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
their individual structure, which reflects the particular forces
Because veins receive blood from low pressure capillaries
withstood during blood flow and the mechanisms of control over
they oppose little residual pressure from the pumping action of
vascular function. Arteries control flow to the microvasculature
the heart. They do, however, withstand pressures caused by gravity
where blood flows slowly and can stop intermittently because
 and surrounding tissues such as muscle. Flow of blood through
 blood pressure is only slightly above or below the counteracting
the veins is caused by the minimal pressure of blood flowing from
pressure of surrounding tissues. In veins, the velocity of the blood
the capillaries into the veins and by pressure differences with sur-
fow returns toat least half that of the corresponding arteries, but
rounding tissues. This flow is augmented bya series of valves in
the blood pressure is reduced
the long veins of the extremities that facilitate movement of
Contractions of the heart ventricles are the greatest impel-
 blood toward the heart.
ling force to blood circulation. The thick conducting elastic ar-
The small pressure gradients within the veins provide rela-
teries, such as the aorta, receive the first surge of blood from each
tively low velocities of flow as compared to flow velocity in arte-
contraction, during which both velocity of flow and pressure reach
ries. However, the venous channels are brge in comparison to those
their peaks. The high pressure of the cardiac blood pumped out
of companion arteries; consequently, the rate of flow through the
during contraction of the cardiac ventricles (systole) is largely ab-
two different vessel types is equal.
sorbed by the stretch of the highly elastic arterial walls. At the
Because veins are larger than arteries, they hold nearly half
time of ventricular dilation (diastole), arterial wall tension low-
of the total blood volume in the body, and the contractile state
ers while maintaining blood pressure, and the volume of blood is
of the walls of the larger veins is an important determinant of
distributed into more numerous muscular arteries. These ves-
total vascular volume.
aun oiur Aieniuaaa pue sired Apoq no suedio oiads on peal sias
smallest branches of the arterial tree, the arterioles. The veloc-
General Structural Organization
ity of flow is gradually reduced as additional distributive branches
of Blood Vessels
greatly expand the total blood vessel volume, but pressure in the
 muscular arteries remains high. Peripheral outflow is regulated
The walls of all blood vessels larger than capillaries are composed
of three concentric layers or tunics that include an inner tunica
which determines contraction or relaxation of the smooth mus-
interna (intima), a middle tunica media, and an external tunica
cle cells in the walls of these arteries.
externa (adventitia) (Fig. 7-1). Arteries and veins are distin-
Frequently, the elastic, muscular, and arteriolar arteries are
guished from each other on the basis of the composition of the
referred to as large, medium, or small arteries, respectively.
various tunics, particularly the tunica media (Fig. 7-2).
On a comparative anatomic basis, the latter nomenclature is 
The tunica interna (tunica intima) is lined with a simple
confusing because an elastic artery of a cat may be of smaller cal-
 squamous epithelium known as endothelium and its underly-
iber than a muscular artery of a large ruminant. But within one
ing basal lamina. A subendothelial layer includes collagen and
species, the assumption of a relationship between structure and
elastic fibers, fibrocytes, and in some vessels, smooth muscle cells.
relative size is valid.
The outermost layer of the tunica interna is the internal elastic
 From the arterial tree, the vessels open into voluminous net-
 membrane. This membrane is a sheet of elastin that has gaps
works of small, uniformly thin-walled tubules called capillaries.
that permit diffusion of nutrients into the tunica media; it is usu-
In the liver, bone marrow, and certain endocrine glands, the cap-
ally absent in the smaller veins and thin or inconspicuous in the
illaries are called sinusoids. The total blood volume in capillaries
larger ones. The internal elastic membrane is often indistinct under
and sinusoids is much greater than in arterioles, such that the ve-
the light microscope but can be identified readily by electron mi-
locity of blood flow decreases from meters per second in the arte-
croscopy (Fig. 7-3). The tunica interna is avascular and is nourished
rial tree to less than 1 mm per second in capillaries. The shearing
through transendothelial transport of substances from the circu-
forces generated by viscous blood flowing within the narrow arte-
lating blood.
rioles decrease the pressure of the blood until it exceeds the pres-
The tunica media consists of several layers of smooth muscle
sure of the surrounding tissue fluid by 10 mm Hg or less. Thus,
in helical arrangement, interspersed with varying numbers of elas-
capillaries only oppose small-scale forces and therefore can have
tic laminae, elastic fibers, and collagen fibers. Most of the inner half
 thin walls structured from single cells. Blood-tissue exchanges
 of the tunica media receives nutrients from the tunica interna; the
take place within the capillary network, as well as across the wall
un sassaa poon lus nosa esea Aq Patddns s auiea
of postcapillary venules, which have a comparable structure.
supply the vessel wall). An external elastic membrane, similar
 Blood from the capillaries and sinusoids returns to the heart
in structure to the internal elastic membrane, is clearly distin-
via the veins. Veins of increasing size, usually classified simply
guishable in only the largest muscular arteries (Fig. 7-1).
In the outermost tunica externa (adventitia), collagen and
that are analogous to, and in most instances parallel with, the
elastic fibers predominate, and smooth muscle cells may be pres-
arterial trees. Consequently, arteries and their accompanying veins 
ent. This tunic also contains vasa vasorum that extend into the outer
are seen adjacent to each other in most tissue sections. Usually, a
layers of the tunica media (Fig. 7-4). Vasomotor nerves (nervi
nerve and sometimes a lymphatic vessel are seen along with the
vasorum) form plexuses in the externa of most large blood ves-
paired blood vessels. There are, however, specific exceptions, such
sels. A few axons penetrate the tunica media and terminate near
as in the lung where arteries and veins group independently.
smooth muscle cells (Fig. 7-5).
Cardiovascular System· Johanna Plend
119
FlGURE 7-ICross section through part of the wall of a canine
muscular artery. The most prominent layer of the tunica intema is
the intemal elastic membrane (A); the tunica media consists of
several altermating layers of smooth muscle cells and elastic lamellae
or fibers (B). In the tunica extema, elastic fibers predominate (C).
Verhoeffs elastic stain (×l 30)
FIGURE 7-3  Electron micrograph of part of the wall of a
muscular artery (rat). The endothelium rests on a thick internal
elastic membrane (A). The smooth muscle cells of the tunica media
are surrounded by a basal lamina and collagen fibrils are present in
the intercellular spaces (x7800).
Vascular Endothelium
The vascular endothelium is interposed between the blood in cir-
culation and the surrounding tissues or organs. Endothelial cells
have been shown to be functionally interactive with other cells in
many complex ways. The endothelial cytoskeleton, a complex net-
work of actin microfilaments, microtubules, and intermediate fil-
and regulate cell shape (Fig. 7-6).
Endothelial cells manifest extensive heterogeneity. Morpho.
logic heterogeneity of these cells is found in arteries versus veins
FIGURE 7-2Cross section through part of the canine femoral
and can be demonstrated by corrosion casts that exhibit details
artery (a) and vein (b). Arteries and veins are distinguished from each
of the endothelium. In arteries, endothelial cells are usually very
other on the basis of the thickness of the vascular wall and differences
elongated and lie parallel to the long axis of the vessel (Fig. 7-7).
in the composition of the various tunics, particularly the tunica media.
In contrast, endothelial cells of veins and capillaries are more
(M). Tunica intema (l); tunica exterma (E). Resorcin-fuchsin (×400).
rounded and less highly oriented.
120
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
The internal elastic membrane is often split into lamellae that
 may merge with the elastic laminae of the tunica media.
The tunica media is the thickest of the three tunics of the
vessel wall and consists primarily of concentrically arranged, fen-
estrated elastic laminae (Fig. 7-10). Smooth muscle cells lie be-
tween adjacent laminae to which they are attached by collagen
fibrils. The amorphous ground substance is basophilic due to the
R
A
B
enaianu lv sueskigouuonig paneins yo Anuenb ya
fibers and ground substance of the media are synthesized by the
smooth muscle cells. With increasing distance from the heart,
the number of smooth muscle cells in the tunica media of elastic
arteries increases and the amount of elastic tissue decreases. The
external elastic membrane is either absent or indistinct.
In the tunica externa, longitudinally arranged bundles of
collagen fibers predominate and are intermixed with a few elas-
tic fibers and fibroblasts. The interlacing of the collagen fibers
limits the elastic expansion of the vessel.
FIGURE 7-4  Scanning electron micrograph of microcorrosion
Transition from elastic to muscular arteries may be either
cast showing bovine pododermal vein (A) with accompanying vasa
vasorum (B) (×220). (Courtesy of Dr. R. Hirschberg, Berlir.,)
gradual or abrupt. In the dog, typical muscular renal arteries arise
immediately at right angles from the elastic abdominal aorta.
Carotid, femoral, vertebral, and brachial arteries commonly begin
Immuno- and glycohistochemical studies have led to the
as elastic arteries and gradually transform into the muscular type
recognition of species-, organ-, and age-specific endothelial cell
in peripheral regions. The site ofthe transitional zone for each ves-
surface receptors. Selectivity in the seeding of metastatic cells
 sel varies among species and individual animals.
from tumors and site-specificity of lymphocyte homing are ex-
amples of preferential adhesion to the endothelial cell surface.
Muscular Arteries
Structural heterogeneity such as the presence or absence of cer-
tain cellular organelles like Weibel-Palade bodies (rod-shaped
The tunica interna of muscular arteries consists of the endothelium
bundles of microtubules in Fig. 7-8), differences in the synthesis
with an underlying thin subendothelial layer composed of colla-
of specific enzymes or cytokines, and variability in the produc-
 gen and elastic fibers. In large muscular arteries, a few fibroblasts
tion of vascular regulatory products such as prostaglandins are
and smooth muscle cells are present. With decreasing vessel size,
testimony to the complexity of the endothelium.
the subendothelial layer gradually becomes thinner. The promi-
nent, thick internal elastic membrane (Figs. 7-1 and 7-3) has fen-
Arteries
estrations through which cytoplasmic processes of endothelial cells
contact the smooth muscle of the tunica media. Blood vessel tone
Elastic Arteries
The tunica interna of elastic arteries is often thicker than the in-
The two cell types interact in a dynamic manner to regulate blood
terna of other types of arteries (Fig. 7-9). The endothelial cells
vessel diameter.
often appear to have a bricklike shape. The subendothelial layer
 Muscular arteries are characterized by a thick tunica media
contains smooth muscle cells, fibroblasts, primarily longitudi-
 composed mainly of smooth muscle cells in the form of circular
nally oriented collagen fibers, and numerous fine elastic fibers.
or helical wrappings from three to more than 40 cell layers in thick-
 In the large domestic mam mals, this layer is particularly thick.
 ness. Interspersed between these smooth muscle cells are elastic
FIGURE 7-5 Longitudinal section through a bovine pododermal arteriole (A). Nervi vasorum (B)
form a plexus around the vessel and few axons penetrate the tunica media. Acetylcholinesterase
counterstained with nuclear fast red (×I OO). (Courtesy of Dr. 5. Buda, Berlin.)
Cardiovascular System·Joharna Plendi
121
FIGURE 7-8  Electron micrograph of a porcine endothelial cell
FIGURE 7-6  Cytoskeleton of endothelial cells, cultured in vitro
of the chorioid containing a so-called Weibel-Palade body (A),
and labeled by immunocytochemistry (i.e., a fluorescein-coupled 
longitudinally cut. These endothelial-specific bundles of microtubules
monoclonal antibody to actin) (x600).
are located in the cytoplasm. Cell nucleus (B) (×150,000)
fibers or lamellae, as well as collagen fibers (Figs. 7-1, 7-3, and
7-10). The external elastic membrane is often discontinuous and
not always clearly defined. It consists of a dense feltwork of elastic
fibers adjacent to the tunica externa (Fig. 7-1).
The tunica externa is composed of collagen fibers, fibro-
 blasts, and elastic fibers that decrease in number with decreasing
size of the vessel.
-ue ue uauM no uoexy noy paiedand are sanssi Suall uau
mal dies, the muscular arteries contract considerably and blood is
forced out of the lumina into the more expandable venous circula-
tion. The tunica interna, including the underlying intermal elastic
membrane, and the external elastic membrane are thrown into lon-
gitudinal folds. Consequently, the cross-sectional profiles of mus-
cular arteries in most histologic preparations have relatively small
lumina containing little blood, the elastic membranes appear scal-
loped, and endothelial cells have a bricklike shape (Fig. 7-1)
FIGURE 7-9  Cross section through part of the wall of the
FIGURE 7-7 Scanning electron micrograph of microcorrosion
equine thoracic aorta. A particularly thick subendothelial layer (S)
cast showing bovine pododermal artery with elongated endothelial
contains many longitudinally oriented elastic fibers. In the tunica.
cell imprints (A) lying parallel with the long axis of the vessel (×320)
media (M), elastic laminae predominate. Resorcin-fuchsin-van
(Courtesy of Dr. R. Hirschberg, Berlirn.)
Gieson's stain {x50). (Courtesy of A. Honsen.)
122
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Examples ofexceedingly intricate and extremely convoluted micro-
circulation are found in the lung, hoof,and claw (Fig. 7-1 1).
Arterioles
The tunica interna of arterioles consists of endothelium, a thin
subendothelial layer of collagen and elastic fibers (which is ab-
sent in the smallest arterioles), and an internal elastic membrane.
The internal elastic membrane is fenestrated and eventually dis-
appears in the smallest arterioles, allowing basal processes of the
endothelial cells to establish direct contact with the underlying
smooth muscle cells of the tunica media. In addition to one to
three layers of smooth muscle cells, the tunica media may also
contain collagen fibers (Fig. 7-12). An external elastic membrane
is absent. The tunica externa is loose connective tissue.
Capillaries
Capillaries are tubules of uniform diameter that are approxi-
mately 8 μm wide (ranging from 5 to 10 μm). The walls of cap-
illaries are composed of endothelial cells, an associated basal
lamina, pericytes, and a thin adventitial connective-tissue layer
that is lacking around brain capillaries (Figs. 7-13 and 7-14). A
tunica media is absent
Pericytes of capillaries and postcapillary venules are basal
lamina-enclosed cells with numerous processes. They are con-
sidered to be undifferentiated mesenchymal cells that can be
readily stimulated to divide mitotically and to migrate around
or away from the vesels. Pericytes may play a critical role in
blood vessel development and maturation. These cells are be-
lieved to transform into other cell types, especially fibroblasts
and smooth muscle cells. Apparently a capillary can transform by
this means into other types of vascular tubes if the internal flow
characteristics change. Indeed, this description is compatible
with the method by which arteries and veins develop during em-
bryogenesis. All blood vessels start as simple, endothelium-lined
capillarylike tubes during vasculogenesis, which is the de novo
FIGURE 7-10 Eectron micrograph of part of the tunica media
of the aorta (rat). Smooth muscle cells (A) surmounded by collager
filbrils (arrowheads) altemate with elastic laminae (B) (x9000)
Microvasculature
In its simplest form, the microvasculature comprises afferent arte-
rioles that lead to capillary networks drained by efferent venules.
Shunts may exist between arterioles and venules in the form of
either arteriovenous anastomoses or central channels that create
FIGURE 7-I1
preferential flow through capillary beds. In many organs, the micro-
cast of bovine pododermal arteriole (A) with branching convoluted
vasculature has unique architectural and structural characteristics.
capillaries (B) (×70). (Courtesy of Dr. R. Hirschberg, Berlin.)
Cardiovascular System ·Johanna Plend
123
FIGURE 7-12 Cross sections through an arteriole (A), with two
layers of smooth muscle in the tunica media, and a venule (B)
FIGURE 7-I4  Capillaries (arrows) in the canine myocardium.
classified as intermediate between pericytic and muscular because of
Note that the variable widths of the capillaries may be barely greater
the presence of one incomplete layer of smooth muscle. Hematoxylin
than or slightly smaller than the diameter of an erythrocyte. It is not 
and eosin (×X400). (From Dellmanr HD, Corithers JR. Cytology ond
always possible to distinguish clearly between the nuclei of
Microscopic Anatomy. Philadelphia: Wilims & Wilkins 1 996.)
endothelial cells and pericytes. Hematoxylin and eosin (×750)
differentiation of blood vessels from mesodermal precursor cells,
or during angiogenesis, which is the formation of new blood
vessels by migration and proliferation of endothelial cells from
preexisting vessels. Recent studies have shown that, in the pres-
ence of various soluble factors, it is possible to activate or inhibit
capillary growth in certain tissues.
Capillaries form networks called capillary beds, the density
of which is a reflection of the metabolic requirements of different
B
organs. For example, capillary beds are most dense in cardiac and
skeletal muscle and relatively less dense in tendons. Capillaries are
absent in most epithelia, dental enamel, dentin, cementum, most
cartilage, cornea, vitreous body, and lens. Vascular as well as avas-
cular zones have also been identified in fibrocartilaginous articu-
lar menisci.
Within the capillary beds, exchange takes place between
the circulating blood and interstitial fluid with water and water-
soluble substances leaving the arterial end of the capillaries. Fluids
then reenter at the venous end of the capillary as well as into post-
capillary venules further downstream. Plasma molecules may
C
D
leave the capillary lumen by transcytosis, through temporary
transendothelial channels, across monolayered diaphragms, or by
FIGURE 7-13 Drawing of the fine structural characteristics of
the four types of capillaries: continuous capillary (A), porous capillary
free diffusion (e.g., lipid-soluble substances).
(B), fenestrated capillary (C), and sinusoid (D). The fine dots
Continuous capillaries, fenestrated capillaries, porous capil-
around the endothelial cells and pericytes (in A and C only) indicate
laries, and sinusoids are distinguished by fine-structural charac-
the basal lamina, which is particularly thick in porous capillaries and
teristics of the capillary wall. The structural differences correspond
discontinuous in sinusoids.
to measurable differences in capillary permeability. Fenestrated
124
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
parenchymal cells from which they are separated by a basal lamina
neural capillaries have the least permeability, and the permeabil-
and small amount of adventitial connective tissue. In these capil-
ity of continuous muscular capillaries lies between these limits.
laries, portions of the endothelial cells are attenuated and have cir-
Continuous capillaries are virtually ubiquitous in the or-
cular fenestrae that are 6O to 80 nm in diameter. The fenestrae are
ganism. Individual endothelial cells are held together by tight
closed by monolayered diaphragms that are thinner than the cell
junctions (Figs. 7-13A, 7-15, and 7-16). Usually, these cells con-
membrane (Fig. 7-17). Diaphragms are absent in the kidney where
tain only a few mitochondria and ribosomes, little endoplasmic
the capillary wall is porous (Figs. 7-13B and 7-18). Fenestrations
reticulum,and small Golgi complexes. Transcytotic vesicles may
facilitate the passage of substances across the endothelium.
be either numerous, as in muscular capillaries (Fig. 7-15), or
Sinusoids are present in the liver, bone marrow, and certain
scarce to nonexistent, as in neural capillaries.
endocrine glands (Fig. 7-13D). They are larger than other capil-
Fenestrated capillaries (visceral capillaries) commonly occur
laries, lack uniformity in diameter, and shape themselves to fill
in the gastrointestinal tract (Fig. 7-13C and 7-17). They have a
the space within the confines of the surrounding parenchyma
large diameter and their shape is adapted to the surrounding
Large intercellular openings and pores through the endothelial
FIGURE 7-15 Eectron micrograph of a continuous (muscular) capillary (A). Tight junctions are
present between the endothelial cells (arrows). The basal lamina of the endothelium continues around 
the adjacent pericyte (B). The cell labeled C is either a fibrocyte or another pericyte. Black dots
between the cells are cross sections of collagen fibrils (×l 6,000)
Cardiovascular System·Joharna Plendi
125
FIGURE 7-17 Eectron micrograph of a fenestrated capilary in
the lamina propria of the small intestine (rat). The fenestrations
FIGURE 7-16 Electron micrograph of a continuous (neural)
(arrowheads) are closed by a monolayered diaphragm (x15,600).
capillary. Tight junctions {arrowhead) are present between adjacent
Insert (lower right) shows detail of a. pore with a diaphragm (x45,000).
endothelial cells (×2 I,000).
cells, along with a concomitant discontinuity or absence of the
tween the endothelial cells are more permeable than those in cap-
surrounding basal lamina, provide for a maximum exchange be-
illaries and are more sensitive to leakage induced by such agents
tween blood and surrounding parenchyma. Phagocytic cells often
as serotonin and histamine. These compounds play a role in the
span the lumen of sinusoids or lie just outside the endothelium.
inflam matory reaction, resulting in the accumulation of exces-
Arterioles continue into capillary beds (Fig. 7-19). Each cap-
sive extravascular fluid, soluble substances, and blood cells
illary bed has a wide ce ntral channel through which blood flows
Immediate postcapillary venules, referred to as high endothe-
continuously. Capillaries that branch from the central channel
lial venules, are found in most lymphoid tissue and are charac-
have more intermittent blood flow. The proximal portion of the
terized by specialized endothelial cells involved in the migration
central channel, the metarteriole, is a narrow vessel surrounded
of lymphocytes (see Chapter 8).
by large, isolated bundles of smooth muscle. The initial portion
As the venules increase in diameter (30 to 50 μm), they are
of the metarteriole is surrounded by additional smooth muscle
called pericytic venules or collecting venules in which peri-
cells, which form a precapillary sphincter that regulates the
cytes form a continuous layer (Fig. 7-19). Fibrocytes and colla-
blood flow through the capillary bed. The distal portion of the cen-
 gen fibers form a thin tunica externa. As venules increase further
tral channel is similar in structure to other capillaries but lacks
in diameter (50 to 100 μm), the pericytes are gradually replaced
smooth muscle found in the wall of the metarteriole. This portion
by circularly arranged muscle cells (Fig. 7-19). When these cells
of the central channel empties into the venule.
form one to two complete layers, the venule is referred to as a mus-
cular venule (Fig. 7-19). The tunica externa, containing elastic and
Venules
collagen fibers and scattered fibrocytes, becomes more prominent
Immediate postcapillary venules are similar in structure to cap-
Pericytic venules are a definite site for large molecular exchange
illaries but are larger in diameter (10 to 30 μm) (Fig. 7-19). The
 between the vascular and connective tissue spaces.
tunica interna is formed by either continuous or fenestrated
endothelial cells connected by incomplete tight junctions, a basal
Arteriovenous Anastomoses
lamina, and a thin subendothelial layer of longitudinal collagen
Direct connections between arterioles and venules without an
fibers. Occasional pericytes are present.
Postcapillary venules have a functional significance that is
moses. These anastomoses are short, usually nonbranched, and
not evident with simple morphologic studies. The junctions be-
often coiled vessels. They possess a thick smooth muscle layer
126
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
A highly convoluted arteriovenous anastomosis surrounded
by a thick connective-tissue capsule is called a glomus. The ves-
sel of the glomus is characterized by numerous longitudinal,
subendothelial epithelioid muscle cells surrounded by circularly
arranged muscle cells in the media. An internal elastic membrane
is absent. Glomera are particularly numerous in digital pads and
the external ear and have a thermoregulatory function.
Veins
Blood courses through venous trees in a direction opposite to that
in arterial trees. The structure of veins varies widely and is appar-
ently determined by differing local mechanical conditions. Conse-
quently, classification ofveins is difficult, especially because layers
in their walls are often absent or difficult to distinguish.
The terms small, medium, and large veins have only rel-
GC
ative meaning in any one animal. The large veins ofa cat may be
smaller than the medium-sized veins of a cow. Small veins are the
continuation of muscular venules. The medium-sized veins are
actually collecting veins and correspond in function and location
to the medium or muscular arteries. Veins corresponding to the
aorta are referred to as the great veins or large veins, or simply by
their gross anatomic names such as the vena cava.
GC
All types of veins that carry blood against gravity, ranging
from venules to small and medium veins of the extremities, are
equipped with flaplike, semilunar valves. Venous valves are paired
core of collagen fibers (Fig. 7-20). Proximal to the attachment of
the valves, the wall of the vein is slightly distended to form a valve
sinus. Free margins of the valves are oriented toward the heart
When closed, the valves prevent the backflow of blood.
Small Veins
As venules further increase in diameter, they become small veins.
 Endothelium and the associated basal lamina lining a small vein
are surrounded by a distinct media. The media has two to four
continuous layers of circularly oriented smooth muscle cells in-
with the surrounding tunica externa.
FlGURE 7-18 Eectron micrograph of part of the walls of two
Medium Veins
 glomerular capilaries (GC) of the kidney. The endothelial cells have
pores (arrowheads) (×27,600).
The wall structure of the medium veins reflects the physical
stresses of gravity and the centrifugal forces of locomotion that
they must withstand. Because the variation in position and ori-
in the subendothelium that receives a dense vasomotor nerve
entation of smooth muscle components is considerable in dif-
supply. Often, longitudinally oriented smooth muscle fibers
ferent veins within the various species, inclusive descriptions are
form cushions or sleeves. When arteriovenous anastomoses
difficult.
S! pue spaq Aiedes sassedkq Aieuasa poolq aul 'uado ane
The tunica interna consists of an endothelial lining and a
shunted directly into the venous system; when they are closed,
thin subendothelial layer of collagen and elastic fibers. An inter-
the blood flow to capillary beds is increased. Arteriovenous
nal elastic membrane may be present in the larger vessels. Usually,
anastomoses are particularly numerous in the skin, lips, intes-
the tunica media consists of several layers of smooth muscle with
tine, salivary glands, nasal mucosa, and male and female re-
associated collagen and elastic networks, which are commonly
productive tracts. They function in the regulation of blood
arranged in circular or spiral fashion. In the outer tunica media,
pressure and blood flow into capillary beds, thermoregulation,
smooth muscle cells may be longitudinally oriented. The tunica
and erection.
externa is composed predominantly of collagen networks an-
Cardiovascular System ·Johanna Plend
127
pericytic venule
muscular
venule
postcapillary venule
central channel
capillary
metarteriole
 precapillary sphincter
arteriole
FIGURE 7-I9 Schematic drawing of the microvasculature. Capillaries arise from both an arteriole
followed by a postcapillary venule, pericytic venule, and muscular venule, linked by a venule with an 
incomplete layer of smooth muscle.
chored to both the tunica media and the surrounding connective
The tunica media is thin when compared to the relative size
tissue. Longitudinally oriented elastic fibers are also present in
of the vessel or the diameter of the lumen. It consists of collagen,
the externa.
elastic fibers, and smooth muscle cells in varying proportions
(Fig. 7-2l). In most large veins, the amount of smooth muscle is 
Large Veins
insignificant.
The tunica interna of large veins has essentially the same
Conversely, the tunica externa is prominent and composed
structure as that of medium veins. However, the endothelium
 of longitudinally or spirally oriented bundles of smooth muscle
is often slightly thicker and blocklike, smooth muscle cells are
cells, together with collagen and elastic fibers that maintain the
 present occasionally, and the internal elastic membrane is more
 proper tension of the wall. The thickness of this layer depends on
prominent.
the location of the vein and is more pronounced in veins under
128
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
sphincterlike thickenings of the tunica media of veins perform
similar functions in the large intestine, liver, and skin.
Sensory Receptors
Sensory receptors are present at the bifurcation of the common
carotid artery. They include the carotid body and the carotid sinus,
which monitor changes in blood chemical composition (chemo-
receptors) and blood pressure (baroreceptors), respectively.
Carotid Body
The carotid body is enclosed by a connective tissue capsule and
consists of a dense sinusoidal capillary network surrounding clus-
ters of cells. Two cell types are present within these clusters:
granular endocrine cells (type I cells or chemoreceptor cells),
FIGURE 7-20
Cross section through a vein with a thick muscular
which contain many granules rich in catecholamines and sero-
tunica media (M) in the ovine teat. Hematoxylin and eosin (×200).
 tonin, and sustentacular cells (type II cells), which have few or
no granules. The sustentacular cells incompletely invest several
granular endocrine cells (Fig. 7-22). Nonmyelinated afferent and
efferent nerve terminals synapse on granular endocrine cells.
in the thoracic and abdominal cavities) (Fig. 7-21).
Hd poolq aul pue uoisuai apixo!p uoqien pue uagAxo ul sagueuo
generate action potentials in afferent nerve fibers, which then
Specialized Blood Vessels
travel to the central nervous system and trigger responses pri-
marily in the respiratory and cardiovascular systems.
Many blood vessels have special structural features that fulfill
specific functions in the regulation of blood flow. An increase in
the thickness of the wall is observed in vessels subjected to un-
Carotid Sinus
usual blood pressures such as arteries and veins of the teat (Fig.
7-20), veins of the glans penis, and coronary arteries. Conversely,
a decrease in the wall thickness occurs in protected, low-pressure
areas such as the skull (e.g., arteries of the brain, dural venous si-
nuses), bones, and lungs. Longitudinal muscle bundles that can
both arteries and veins of the penis, ovary, and uterus. Circular
FIGURE 7-2ICross section through part of the ovine vena
cava. The thin tunica media consists of a few bundles of smooth
muscle cells (arrowhead). The tunica exterma (TE) is the most
FIGURE 7-22
Ovine carotid body. Groups of large typeI cell
prominent layer and contains many bundles of longitudinally
are invested by flatter type Il cells (arrows). Hematoxylin and eosin
oriented smooth muscle. Hematoxylin and eosin (x40)
(×350). (Preporotion courtesy of j. H. Riley.)
Cardiovascular System · Johanna Plendl
129
carotid artery. At this point, the tunica media of the artery is
 occasional smooth muscle cells. Elastic fibers are particularly
thin and surrounded by a thick tunica externa that contains 
 abundant in the atrial walls and are usually arranged parallel to
many terminals from the carotid sinus branch of the glosso-
 the endocardial surface.
pharyngeal nerve. The terminals are mechanoreceptors that
The subendocardial layer is predominantly composed of
cause reflex bradycardia (a decrease in heart rate) and dilation
loosely arranged collagen and elastic fibers. Adipose cells may be
of the splanchnic blood vessels when stimulated by increased
 present, along with a rich supply of blood and lymph vessels and
blood pressure.
connective tissue that is continuous with that of the myocardium.
In some locations, modified cardiac muscle cells of the cardiac im-
pulse conduction system are present in the subendocardial layer
HEART
(Fig. 7-23).
The cardiac valves are endocardial folds covered by endo-
The thick wall of the heart is primarily composed of cardiac mus-
thelium. The subendothelial layer is rich in elastic and colla-
cle cells capable of spontaneous rhythmic contractions that pump
gen fibers. The atrioventricular valves consist of a stratum
blood into the vascular system. The inner layer of the heart is re-
 spongiosum located toward the atrial side and a stratum fi-
ferred to as endocardium and is continuous with the tunica in-
brosum on the ventricular side (Fig. 7-24). In the stratum spon-
terna of the large blood vessels entering and leaving the heart.
giosum, elastic and collagen fibers are loosely arranged. Blood
The middle contractile muscular layer is called the myocardium
and is by far the thickest layer of the organ. The outermost layer
stratum fibrosum, collagen fibers predominate and connect with
is the epicardium.
the fibrous rings surrounding the atrioventricular openings. The
fibers are also continuous with collagen fibers of the fibrous cords
Endocardium
(chordae tendineae) that arise from the endomysium of the
 papillary muscles. In the semilunar valves of the aorta and the
The endocardium lines the ventricles and atria com pletely and
pulmonary trunk, the central collagen fibers have a predomi-
covers the cardiac valves and associated structures. The endo-
 nantly circular arrangement and are reinforced by a thin layer of
cardium usually consists of three layers (Fig. 7-23). A continuous
 elastic fibers near the vessel and a thicker layer of elastic fibers on
endothelium forms the innermost layer. The subendothelial
the ventricular side. The thickening of the free edge of the semi-
layer, located beneath the endothelium is composed of dense
lunar valves is caused by the presence of loose connective and car-
irregular connective tissue with collagen and elastic fibers and
tilaginous tissues.
Myocardium
The middle and thickest layer of the heart is the myocardium,
which is composed of bundles of cardiac muscle cells, branches
FIGURE 7-24Sagittal section through the heart of a rabbit. The
FIGURE 7-23Horizontal section through part of the bovine
atrioventricular valve (bicuspid valve), which is located between the
heart wall Peripheral to the subendothelial layer (A) is the
left atrium (A) and ventricle (B), is covered by endothelium and
subendocardial layer, with large impulse-conducting muscle fibers (B),
consists of a stratum fibrosum (C) and stratum spongiosum
and the myocardium (C). Trichrome (x200).
(D). Elastica-Domagk stain (x50).
130
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
of cardiac conduction fibers, an extensive capillary network, and
the cardiac skeleton
Bundles of cardiac muscle cells are embedded in loose con-
nective tissue that contains a dense capillary network, lymph
vessels, and autonomic nerve fibers. The amount of interstitial
connective tissue is subject to local variations and is greater in
the myocardium of the right ventricle when compared to that
of the left ventricle. The atrial cardiac muscle cells are usually
smaller than the ventricular cardiac muscle cells. In atrial car-
diac muscle cells, numerous specific atrial granules contain-
ing atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) are present. ANP plays an
important role in fluid homeostasis (e.g., diuresis, natriuresis,
vasodilation).
The musculature of the atrial and ventricular walls is in-
serted into the cardiac skeleton, which is made up of three
 parts: (1) the fibrous rings (annuli fibrosi), (2) the fibrous tri-
angles (trigona fibrosa cordis), and (3) the fibrous (or membra-
nous) part of the interventricular septum. The fibrous rings
are composed of intermingling bundles of collagen and a few
elastic fibers that surround the atrioventricular, aortic, and pul-
monary trunk openings. The fibrous triangles are small areas
of connective tissue that fill the spaces between the atrioven-
tricular openings and the base of the aorta. The nature of this
connective tissue is species- and age-dependent. The triangles
may be predominantly dense, irregular connective tissue (in
pigs, cats, and rabbits),fibrocartilage(in dogs) (Fig. 7-25), hya-
line cartilage (in horses), or bone (in large ruminants). The
fibrous part of the interventricular septum consists of col-
lagen fiber bundles.
FIGURE 7-25 Horizontal section through a canine fibrous ring
and adjacent fibrous triangle of the heart. The ring is lined by a layer
Epicardium and Pericardium
of endothelium followed by an inner subendothelial layer of dense
The myocardium is covered externally by the epicardium (vis-
irregular connective tissue (A) and an outer layer of loose
connective tissue (B). The fibrous triangle (C) is highly cellular
ceral serous pericardium). The outermost layer is mesothelial
fibrocartilage. Hematoxylin and eosin (xl30).
cells, which line the pericardial cavity. Under this epithelium is
a loose connective-tissue layer rich in elastic fibers that forms
 protective sheaths around blood vessels and nerves. The connec-
tive tissue, which is often rich in adipocytes, is particularly abun-
and continues in the atrioventricular bundle. The sinoatrial node
dant around the large coronary blood vessels.
is composed of a network of thin, branching nodal muscle cells
The epicardium reflects off the surface of the heart to form
that contain scarce myofibrils and lack intercalated disks. The
the parietal serous pericardium. The parietal pericardium con-
nodal fibers are continuous with ordinary cardiac muscle fibers of
sists of an innermost mesothelial cell layer resting on a thin layer
-elan Aq paeiedas ane siaqy lenpiaipul unipresoku Iee aui
of loose connective tissue, which fuses with the fibrous peri-
tively large amounts of highly vascularized connective tissue con-
cardium, a thick layer of collagen fiber bundles and elastic fibers.
taining many autonomic nerve fibers and occasional ganglion cells
Located between the visceral and parietal serous pericardium,
(vagus nerve).
the pericardial cavity contains serous fluid that lubricates the
The atrioventricular node is composed of irregularly
mesothelial surfaces, allowing frictionless cardiac movement.
 arranged, small, branching nodal muscle fibers, the morphology
The pericardium can readily adapt to normal continual
of which is similar to those of the sinoatrial node. Nodal mus-
changes in the size of the heart and can alsolimit overfilling of the
cle fibers are interposed between atrial myocardial fibers and the
heart. However, cardiac tamponade (compression of the heart)
impulse-conducting fibers, which form the atrioventricular
may result if the pericardial cavity fills with excessive fluid.
bundle.
 Fibers in the atrioventricular bundle are also known as
cardiac conduction fibers (Purkinje fibers). These fibers are
Cardiac Conduction System
readily identified by their large diameter, large central spherical
The electrical impulse for cardiac contraction is generated in the
nucleus, and scarce peripheral myofibrils. The central area of the
sinoatrial node, subsequently spreads to the atrioventricular node,
cytoplasm is rich in glycogen and creates a light-staining halo
Cardiovascular System·Joharno Plendi
131
around the nucleus (Fig. 7-23). In longitudinal sections, charac-
teristic cross-striations and intercalated disks typical of cardiac
muscle cells are visible. The conducting fibers connect with
smaller transitional cells that lack intercalated disks and in turn
connect with ordinary myocardial cells.
Cardiac Blood Vessels, Lymph Vessels,
and Nerves
The coronary arteries are thick muscular arteries that often con-
tain bundles of longitudinal smooth muscle and epithelioid
muscle cells in the interna. The muscle component regulates the
blood fow within these vessels. From the coronaryarteries, a dense
capillary network supplies the myocardium, epicardium, cardiac
skeleton, and peripheral portions of cardiac valves. Blood flow-
ing from the cardiac capillary beds is collected by venules and
veins that open into the right atrium either through the coronary
sinus or through direct openings in the endocardium (venae cordis
minimae).
 Lymph capillaries form a network in the cardiac connective
tissue. The small lymphatics are continuous with larger lymph
vessels, especially in the subendocardial layer and the subepithe-
lial connective tissue of the epicardium.
 Both sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves innervate the
heart. They are numerous in the atria but scarce in the ventricles,
where mainly sympathetic fibers are represented. The nerves form
extensive plexuses that are particularly dense around the sinoatrial
and atrioventricular nodes. The parasympathetic (vagus) fibers
terminate on ganglion cells, which in turn contribute fibers to the
FIGURE 7-26 Cross section through a canine intestinal villus.
aforementioned plexuses. Both the myocardium and epicardium
Lymph capillary (A); blood capillaries (B). Hematoxylin and eosin
receive sensory fibers that terminate with club-shaped or platelike
{×435)
enlargements.
or adhering junctions. Frequently, variably sized gaps are observed
LYMPH VESSELS
between adjacent cells. These gaps are probably temporary as they
Aisnonuuon ieaddesip io readde
The lymph vascular system is an integral part of both the cir-
 The basal lamina around lymph capillaries is either dis-
culatory system and the defense system. It originates as a net-
continuous or absent (Fig. 7-27). Fine, extracellular matrix-
work of anastomosing lymph capillaries in the connective tissue
anchoring filaments link the outer surface of the endothelial
of the organism. The capillaries are continuous with larger
cells to pericapillary collagen fibrils and elastic fibers. These fil-
uo apou qdual auo iseal ie ynonun sed 1eun shassaa qdua
aments are responsible for keeping the lumina of the capillaries
their way to larger collecting ducts that drain the lymph into
 open, especially when the tissues are edematous.
the venous system.
Valves may be occasionally present in lymph capillaries and
are a constant feature of all other lymph vessels (Fig. 7-28). They
Lymph Capillaries
are composed of an endothelial fold with little intervening con-
nective tissue, except at the junction with the vessel wall, where
Lymph capillaries are endothelium-lined tubes that are usually
it is more abundant. Occasional smooth muscle fibers are found
larger in diameter than blood capillaries and variable in shape (Fig .
in the valves of the larger lymph vessels.
7-26). It is often difficult to distinguish between lymph and blood
As a general rule, lymph capillaries are found in conjunction
capillaries in histologic sections; however, recently described histo-
with loose connective tissue where they drain excess interstitial
chemical markers that discriminate between vascular and lym-
fluid that contains fat, proteins, cells, and particulate matter.
phatic endothelium may allow this distinction. The endothelial
They are absent in the central nervous system, certain structures
lining of lymph capillaries is usually thin. Adjacent endothelial
within the eye, bone marrow, cartilage, red pulp of the spleen,
cells are joined by intimate interdigitations, simple overlapping,
and liver lobules.
132
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
involved. These vessels differ from lymph capillaries by their
larger diameter and the presence of a continuous basal lamina
With increasing vessel diameter, a thin subendothelial connec-
tive tissue layer appears. One or two layers of smooth muscle and
elastic fibers are subsequently added in larger vessels. A tunica
externa is not distinguishable from connective tissue surround-
ing the lymph vessel
Large Lymph Vessels and Collecting Ducts
As in blood vessels, the walls of these large lymph vessels (ducts)
comprise three tunics; however, the layers are not always well
delineated (Fig. 7-29). The tunica interna consists of endothe-
lium and a layer of longitudinal, interlacing collagen and elas-
tic fibers. An internal elastic membrane is usually absent. The
tunica media contains smooth muscle cells, surrounded by
many elastic and collagen fibers, the number and orientation
of which vary with the location and species. The tunica externa
is composed of collagen and elastic fibers and may contain mus-
cle cells.
FIGURE 7-27 Eectron micrograph of a lymph capillary. The
thin endothelium contains numerous pinocytotic vesicles and lacks a.
basal lamina (×I6,000).
Small and Medium Lymph Vessels
The structure of the wall of small and medium lymph vessels is
subject to great variability according to location and the species
FIGURE 7-29   Cross section through the canine thoracic duct.
FIGURE 7-28 Lymphatic vessels of the bovine dermis cut
The wall consists of an endothelium and a thin tunica media with
longitudinally. Lymphatic vessels have valves (A) and display very
 sparse muscle cells; a distinct tunica extema is absent. Hematoxylin
large caliber lumina compared with the thickness of the wall.
and eosin (×l1O). (From Delimann HD, Carithers JR. Cytology ond
Hematoxylin and eosin (xl 00).
Microscopic Anatomy. Philadeiphia: Wiliams & Wikins, 1 996.)
Cardiovascular System ·Joharna Plendl
1
SUGGESTEd reAdInGS
 Patan S. Vasculogenesis and angiogenesis as mechanisms of vascular net-
wotk formation, growth and remodeling. Review. J Neurooncol
Bagshaw RJ, Fisher GM. Morphology of the carotid sinus in the dog.
2000;50:1-15.
 J Appl Physiol 1971;31:198-202.
Racker DK. Atrioventricular node and input pathways: a correlated gross
Biscoe TJ. Carotid body: structure and function. Physiol Rev 1971;
anatomical and histological study of the canine atfioventricular
51:437-495
junctional region. Anat Rec 1989;224:336-354.
Egginton S, Zhou AL, Brown MD, et al. The role of pericytes in control-
Ribatti D, Nico B, Vacca A, et al. Endothelial cell heterogeneity
ling angiogenesis in vivo. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2000;476:81-99.
o sy l  ia f is o p
Johansson BR. Size and distribution of endothelial plasmalemmal vesi-
81-90.
cles in consecutive segments of the microvasculature of cat skeletal
 Simionescu N, Simionescu M, Palade GE. Structural basis of permeabil-
muscle. Microvasc Res 1979;1 7: 107-117.
ity in sequential segments of the microvasculature. Microvasc Res
Kaley G, Altura BM, eds. Microcirculation. Baltimore: University Park
1978: 15:17-36.
Press, 1977, 1978;1-3.
 Stone EA, Stewart GJ. Architecture and structure of canine veins with
Leak LV. Lymphatic capillary ultrastructure and permeability. Eur J
special reference to confluences. Anat Rec 1988;222:1 54163.
Physiol 1972;336:$46.
Thaemert JC. Atrioventricular node innervation in ultrastructural three
Majno G, Joris I. Endothelium 1977: a review. Adv Exp Med Biol
dimensions. Am J Anat 1970;128:239-263.
1978;104:169-225, 481-526.
van Breemen C, Skarsgard P, Laher I, et al. Endothelium-smooth mus-
Marais J, Fossum TW. Ultrastructural morphology of the canine tho-
cle interactions in blood vessels. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol
racic duct and cisterna chyli. Acta Anat 1988;133:309-312.
1997;17:1203
Maul GG. Structure and function of pores in fenestrated capillaries.
Verna A. Ultrastructure of the carotid body in mammals. Int Rev Cytol
J Ultrastruct Res 1971;36:768-782.
1979;60:271-330.
Opthof T, de Jonge B, Masson-Pevet M, et al. Functional and morpho-
Viragh S, Challice CE. The impulse generation and conduction system
logical organization of the cat sinoatrial node. J Mol Cell Cardiol
of the heart. In: Dalton AJ, Challice CE, eds. Ultrastructure in
1986;18:1015-1031.
Biological Systems. New York: Academic Press, 1973.
Immune System
CHARLES McL. PRESS
THOR LANDSVERK
Cells of the Immune System
Medulla
Lymphocytes
 Blood vessels. lymph vessels, and nerves
Stromal Cells
 Secondary Lymphatic Tissues and Organs
 Reticular cells
Mucosa-Associated Lymphatic Tissue
Epithelial reticular cells 
Tonsils
 Antigen-Presenting Cells 
Bronchus-associated lymphatic tissue
Dendritic cells
Gut-associated lymphatic tissue
Follicular dendritic cells
Lymph Nodes
Interdigitating dendritic cells
Lymph vessels and sinuses
Macrophages
Cortex
B cells
Medulla
Organization of Cells to Form Lymphatic Tissues and Organs
 Blood vessels and nerves
Diffuse Lymphatic Tissue
Species differences
Lymphatic Nodules
Spleen
 Primary lymphatic nodules
Capsule and supportive tissue
Secondary lymphatic nodules
Red pulp
Primary Lymphatic Organs
White pulp
Bone Marrow
 Marginal zone 
 Aggregated Lymphatic Nodules in the Distal Small
Blood vessels
Intestine
Lymph vessels and nerves
Cloacal Bursa of Birds
Species differences
Thymus
Hemal Nodes and "Milk Spots"
Cortex
The immune system comprises organs, aggregated lymphatic tis-
trinsic sources. The processes of wear and tear and pathologic
sue, and cells that work to maintain the integrity of the body.
changes in tissues also result in an immune response.
Cells and tissues of the immune system identify and protect
against pathogenic organisms and ensure that the body's response
CEllS OF The
to foreign substances is appropriate. The system has innate com-
IMMUNE SYSTEM
-oduon aalndepe pue Aleoy!adsuou inq Aipideu ine ieui siuauod
puodsan oi au jo poad e paau inq Aegads ie ieui suau
The cellular participants of the immune response can be catego-
Threats to the integrity of the individual are not limited to ex-
rized as either migratory cells or fixed cells. Lymphocytes are the
134
Immune System ● Chorles Mcl. Press ond Thor Londsverk
135
principal migratory cells that are free to move anywhere in the
types undergo proliferation and differentiation to become ei-
body. Recirculation through the lymph or blood is a prominent
ther memory cells or effector cells. Memory cells are long-lived
feature of these leukocytes, ensuring effective surveillance of the
cells that have the ability to mount an enhanced response upon
tissues. The fixed cells are either mesenchymal or epithelial cells
a reencounter with antigen. Effector B-cell function is medi-
that form a scaffold for the stromal matrix in lymphatic tissue.
ated by the secreted antigen receptor (immunoglobulin, also
 These cells create a supportive framework that sustains the lym-
known as antibodies). In their active secretory phase, B effector
phocytes during different phases of development and function.
cells typically are manifest as plasma cells (see Chapter 3 for
The remarkable diversity of both migratory and fixed cells cre-
the histology of plasma cells). Since antibodies circulate in the
ates the unique character of lymphatic tissue.
extracellular fluids ("humors"), B cells are said to be responsi-
ble for the humoral immune response. Antigen with attached
Lymphocytes
-iuila pue saiaoogeud Aq pazjugonau Alisea aroiu si Apoqiiue
nated. The antigen-antibody complex also triggers a collection
The histology of lymphocytes is described in detail in Chapter 4.
of plasma proteins, called the complement system. The com-
Lymphocytes are migratory cells of the im mune system that con-
plement system is an important component of innate defense
trol adaptive im munity by initiating a specific response after en-
with wide-ranging effects that include the ability to kill micro-
countering antigens. Antigens are molecular components of
organisms.
exogenous agents, such as bacteria, viruses, protozoa, or toxins,
Effector T cells, on the other hand, act more directly on
adjacent cells within tissues. The two major subsets of effector
cells. The lymphocytic lineage gives rise to two major cell types:
T cells mediate their effects in different ways. T helper cells act
B cells (bone marrow-dependent) and T cells (thymus-
through the secretion of soluble, local-acting molecules called
dependent). B cells and T cells and their subpopulations are dis-
cytokines, whereas the T cytotoxic cells attach to antigens on
tinguished by different surface molecules that recognize antigens
target cells to kill them (Fig. 8-2). Since these cell-killing actions
(i.e., antigen receptors [Fig. 8-1]) and are involved in signal
require close cell-to-cell contact, T cells are said to be responsi-
 ble for the cell-mediated immune response.
ity markers). B and T cells cannot be identified using standard
A third category of lymphocyte, the natural killer (NK)
histologic stains such as hematoxylin and eosin.
cell, lacks an antigen receptor that is typical for either B or T cells.
B cells and T cells also differ in the way that they effect an
 NK cells appear to rely on an antigen recognition system that is
immune response. After antigen stimulation, both lymphocyte
less specific than that used by B cells and T cells; however, cell-
mediated killing by NK cells is similar to the mechanism of T cyto-
toxic cells. NK cells participate in the elimination of tumors and
Bcell
Tcell
virus-infected cells or other cells that show altered expression of
"self' molecules. In some species, these cells appear as large gran-
ular lym phocytes
Lymphocytes circulate continuously from the blood through
lymphatic and nonlymphatic tissues and subsequently return to
the blood either directly or via the lymph. This process, called
lymphocyte recirculation, facilitates the dissemination of an
immune response throughout the body and enables effective im-
mune surveillance for foreign invaders and alterations in the body's
own cells. Most lymphocytes enter organs such as the lungs, liver,
and bone marrow and return to the blood via venules, whereas some
lymphocytes leave these organs via the lymph and drain to lymph
 nodes via afferent lymph vessels. Tissue fluid from large peripheral
areas also drains into regional lymph nodes, further enhancing
get antigen. A proportion of lymphocytes migrates from blood
directly into lymphatic tissues through specialized postcapillary
venules called high endothelial venules (see Lymph Node sec-
tion below [Fig. 8-18]). High endothelial venules have lining
B-cell receptor
T-cell receptor
cells that are cuboidal, in contrast to the flattened endothelial
(immunoglobulin)
cells of other blood vessels. These specialized venules are abundant
FIGURE 8-I Schematic drawing of lymphocyte surface antigen
in lymphatic tissue and serve as the sites of entry for both T cells
receptors. The B-cell receptor is an immunoglobulin (antibody)
and B cells from the blood circulation. The spleen is an exception,
molecule that has two antigen-binding sites (dark segments),
because it does not possess specialized postcapillary venules or
is uae as e s iaa lae a saa
afferent lymphatics. Lymphocytes migrate into the spleen via
136
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Fc
BCR
Follicular
dendritic cell
B cell
Ag
Secreted antibodies
B cell
from plasma cell
MHCII
T helper cell
Interdigitating
Tcell
B cell
 dendritic cell 
MHCI
T cytotoxic cell
Target cell
T cell
Macrophage
FIGURE 8-2 Schematic drawing of antigen-antigen receptor interaction. The B-cell receptor (BCR)
can interact directly with native antigen (Ag), either while bound to the plasma membrane of a B cell or
uap ent au ka pauasad uaue sazoau ose oidaau lla-g aul pogue pataas se
cell. The T-cell eceptor recognizes processed antigen presented by a major histocompatibility complex
(MHC-ll) molecule on the surface of the interdigitating dendritic cell. The B cell can present antigen to
T cells by binding the antigen, processing it, and presenting it in the context of MHC Il (black arrow).
 Macrophages are also capable of presenting antigen to T cells.
blood capillaries in the marginal zone (see Spleen section below).
Epithelia! Reticular Cells
s n s o au sn may aaan ans
In the thymus and cloacal bursa, stellate epithelial reticular cells
the skin, synovia, muscle, and brain; however, during acute and
form a reticulum that supports developing lymphocytes and
 chronic inflammation, an influx of large numbers of lymphocytes
macrophages (see Thymus section below [Fig. 8-8]). Unlike retic-
can occur.
ular cells, epithelial reticular cells do not produce reticular fibers.
Stromal Cells
Antigen-Presenting Cells
Stromal cells are fixed cells of the lymphatic system that form a
For antigen recognition and the initiation of an im mune response
-sau iau!g 'asuodsal aunwu! aql joddns pue unjnjai anssil
to occur, B cells recognize antigen either directly or as complexes
enchymal reticular cells or epithelial reticular cells form a sup-
 presented by an antigen-presenting cell such as the follicular
portive mesh or stroma for the lymphocytes that constitute the
dendritic cell (Fig. 8-2). T cells require antigen to be presented
parenchyma of lymphatic organs.
on the surface of an antigen-presenting cell, such as the inter-
digitating dendritic cell, in association with a major histo-
Reticular Cells
compatibility complex (MHC) molecule.
Reticular cells of mesenchymal origin and fibroblastlike structure
 form a reticulum in all lymphatic organs except the thymus and
Dendritic Cells
cloacal bursa (see Lymph Node section below [Fig. 8-16]). Because
Most dendritic cells (DCs), including the interstitial dendritic
oftheir numerous long and branching processes,reticular cells have
cell, interdigitating dendritic cell, veiled cell, and intraepidermal
a stellate appearance. These cells synthesize reticular fibers that are
macrophage, are derived from hematopoietic stem cells. The
closely associated with or invaginated into their cell surface.
origin of follicular dendritic cells is unclear. Typical dendritic
Immune System · Charles McL. Press ond Thor Londsverk I37
cells have numerous long cytoplasmic processes (Fig. 8-2). Func-
phatic tissues. Diffuse lymphatic tissues are found scattered
tionally, dendritic cells bind antigens and cluster lymphocytes on
throughout loose connective tissues of the gut, respiratory tract,
their surface in tissues throughout the body. Once antigens are
urogenital system, and skin and in extranodular areas of lym-
bound and processed, the dendritic cell then becomes an antigen-
phatic organs. The organized lymphatic tissues include encap-
presenting cell. In the stratified squamous epithelia, dendritic
sulated organs such as the lymph nodes and spleen.
cells localize in the upper spinous layer and are termed intra-
epidermal macrophages (Langerhans cells) (see Chapter 16).
Diffuse Lymphatic Tissue
-uond sassod slas sjpuap pooq pue ydufi u are Aaui uau
inent surface folds and have been called veiled cells. Interstitial
Diffuse lymphatic tissue contains a variable number of small
dendritic cells are located in the heart, kidney, gut and lung.
lymphocytes, mingled with lymphoblasts (often seen in mitosis)
Follicular dendritic cells and interdigitating dendritic cells
and macrophages. The stroma of diffuse lymphatic tissue consists
are found in lymphatic tissues.
of a three-dimensional network of dendritic cells and connective
tissue.
Follicular dendritic cells
Follicular dendritic cells are specialized stromal cells localized
Lymphatic Nodules
within the B-cell areas of lymphatic tissue. Receptors on the fol-
Primary Lymphatic Nodules
licular dendritic cell surface bind to antigen and present it to
B cells that induce a humoral immune response (Fig. 8-2). In
Primary lymphatic nodules consist ofa stromal network of con-
 Contrast to other dendritic cells, follicular dendritic cells can trap
nective tissue and immature follicular dendritic cells (Fig. 8-3)
and maintain antigen in a complex for long periods of time.
Small, tightly packed lymphocytes and some medium lympho.
Follicular dendritic cells lack the MHC-II surface molecules
cytes are distributed throughout the stromal network and repre-
found in interdigitating dendritic cells.
sent predominantly naive recirculating B cells. Primary nodules
do not contain germinal centers.
Interdigitating dendritic cells
Interdigitating dendritic cells are found in lymph nodes,thymic
Secondary Lymphatic Nodules
medulla, and spleen. Cytoplasmic granules are characteristic fea-
Secondary lymphatic nodules are characterized by a light-
tures of these dendritic cells, which also have numerous MHC-II 
 staining germinal center within the nodule (Fig. 8-4). Formation
molecules on their surface that are associated with antigen pres-
of the germinal center begins in a primary nodule with an accu-
entation (Fig. 8-2). The interdigitating dendritic cell presents
mulation of large, euchromatic lymphoblasts and tingible body
antigen to T lymphocytes (helper cells), which induce a cellular
macrophages. Differentiated follicular dendritic cells form the
immune response
stroma of the secondary nodules. An established germinal cen-
ter consists of a central light zone and an adjacent dark zone. The
Macrophages
light zone is populated by B lymphocytes with euchromatic,
light-staining nuclei. Along the periphery of the light zone is a
 Macrophages, also known as mononuclear phagocytes, exist in var-
ious tissues and are active in the phagocytosis and degradation of
thin layer of small heteroc hromatic lymphocytes that often form
foreign substances (see Chapter 3 for the histology of macrophages).
a thicker cap, called the mantle, over the apex of the germinal
The processing of foreign substances into short peptides is essen-
center. The dark zone is composed of B-cell lymphoblasts en-
 gaged in intense mitotic activity. The germinal center is usually
tial for presentation of antigen to T cells in the peptide-binding
groove of the MHC-II molecule (Fig. 8-2).
oriented such that the light zone is closest and the dark zone is
farthest from the subcapsular sinus in lymph nodes, the surface
B Cells
epithelium in mucosal nodules, or the marginal zone in the spleen.
The germinal center regresses when cellular activity declines late
B cells expres MHC-II molecules and are very efficient in the pre-
in an immune response.
'saudou oi is ui 'sn iadu i on uae jo uoiuas
single antigen through surface immunoglobulin. The bound mole-
PRIMARY LYMPHATIC ORGANS
 cule is then endocytosed, fragmented, and presented by MHC-II
molecules.
During the development of the fetus, the unique identity of
Aed uim pausqeisa saoaq isiy saiaoudul a pue I
lymphatic organs. The primary lymphatic organs include the
ORGANIZATION OF CELLS
bone marrow (mammals), aggregated lymphatic nodules of the
TO FOrM LYmPHATIC TISSUeS
distal small intestine (sheep, cattle), cloacal bursa (birds), and
AND ORGANS
thymus (both mammals and birds). Stem cells in these organs are
located in a specialized environment that is isolated from antigen
As the fetus develops, the immune system is molded into two
and suitable for cellular differentiation and development. Intense
principal types of tissues: the diffuse and the organized lym-
cell proliferation is accompanied by random rearrangement of the
138
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
FIGUrE 8-3
pue sanooudwsl pazis-wnipaw ot lews jo areaaae ue jo sisisuo xahoo laino aut ui (n)
some follicular dendritic cells {arrowheads). Note the presence of a capillary network outlining
the primary nodule (arrows). Subcapsular sinus (S); capsule (C). Hematoxylin and eosin.
Jo uorssandxa pue roidanal uaginue aui roy aqisuodsai sauag
accessory molecules that allow interaction with other cells and
that also confer effector functions. Lymphocytes leaving a pri-
mary lymphatic organ are classified as naive or virgin cells be-
aul jo Aunis uaiue oi pasodxa uaq nou aay Aaun asne
emerging lymphocytes is followed by elimination of more than
R
 90% of the cells that are identified as unsuitable, largely because
of their reaction with the body's own molecules (autoreactivity).
These lymphocytes are eliminated by apoptosis, a mechanism
that involves activation of a genetic pathway ensuring rapid dis-
integration of the selected cells with minimal harm to the sur-
rounding tissues.
Even with the elimination of most of their cells, primary
lymphatic organs still produce vast numbers of B and T cells that
have a diverse repertoire of antigen specificities. The released
cells are disseminated throughout the body to diffuse lymphatic
tissue, secondary lymphatic tissue (i.e., mucosa-associated lym-
phoid tissue), and secondary lymphatic organs (e.g, lymph
nodes), where they will encounter antigen.
Bone Marrow
The structure and major hematopoietic functions of the bone
marrow are presented in Chapter 4. In mammals, the bone mar-
row is the source of pluripotent stem cells (e.g., B-cell and T-cell
 precursors) and B-cell differentiation. B cells are located adjacent
to the endosteum of bone and undergo differentiation and selec-
FIGURE 8-4 Lymph node (goat). Secondary lymphatic
tion as they migrate centrally toward the venous sinuses in the
nodule with germinal center. Dark area (D); light area (L);
hematopoietic space. B-cell maturation occurs in close associa-
mantle (M); capsule (C); deep cortex (DC). Hematoxylin and
tion with stromal reticular cells and macrophages of the bone
eosin (×l 50).
marrow.
Immune System · Charles McL. Press ond Thor Londsverk
139
Aggregated Lymphatic Nodules
phatic nodules (the ileal Peyer's patch) is present in the distal
in the Distal Small Intestine
jejunum/ileum. A specific role for the ileal Peyer's patch in the
diversification of the preim mune antigen-receptor repertoire and
Most organized lymphatic tissue associated with the gut has been
expansion of early B-cell populations has recently been defined
attributed with functions related to mucosal and systemic im-
in sheep and cattle (Fig. 8-5).
munity (see Gut-Associated Lymphoid Tissue below). In young
Removal of the ovine ileal Peyer's patch before birth results
ruminants, pigs, and carnivores, a single large aggregate of lym-
in a marked decline in the num ber of mature, circulating B cells.
FIGURE 8-5 A. Jejunal aggregated lymphatic nodules (lamb). A large saclike lymphatic nodule (n) is
eparated from other nodules in the submucosa by wide intermodular (T-cell) regions (i). A prominent 
corona (c) is interposed between the nodule and a broad dome region (d) that extends inta the gut 
lumen. Villus (v); lymphatic sinuses (arrows); capsule of nodule (arrowheads). Hematoxylin and eosin.
B. Jejunal Peyer's patch (3-week-old calf). Short microfolds are present on an M cell (m) at the dome
surface; adjacent absorptive cells have densely packed microvilli (×I0,000). C. Jejunal Peyer's patch
(3-week-old calf). An M cell (m) with microfolds is wedged between two microvilli-bearing (mv)
absorptive cells (a) and envelops lymphocytes (ly). Lumen (lu) (×7500)
140
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
At 2 months of age, the weight of the ileal Peyer's patch is more
a remarkable capacity for transcytosis of macromolecules, in-
than twice that of the thymus.
cluding antigens, from the bursal lumen into the nodules.
The intense cell division in the aggregated nodules is inde-
pendent of foreign antigen. Similar to the avian bursa described
below, the processes of positive and negative lymphocyte selec-
Thymus
tion likely occur, ensuring the suitability of the lymphocytes that
The thymus originates as a solid outgrowth from the epithelium
are permitted to exit into the blood and lymphatic circulations.
(endoderm) of the third pharyngeal pouch. The spreading of
 It should be noted that the earliest immigrants to both the
epithelial cells gives rise to a thymic epithelial reticulum, which
single large aggregate of lymphatic nodules in the distal small 
is invaded by blood vessels from the surrounding mesenchyme.
intestine of sheep and the avian bursa are already committed to
Migration of lymphocytic stem cells from the bone marrow into
the B-cell lineage. Thus, neither organ is strictly a primary lym-
the thymus occurs early in ontogeny and is probably associated
phatic organ; that is, B cells do not develop de novo from un-
with chemotactic signals produced by the thymic anlage. The
committed precursors.
lymphocytic stem cells invade the interstices, filling the spaces
between the epithelial cells. The thymus is therefore often re-
'snmui au u! 'ueo ieauidaoydual, e se on paay
Cloacal Bursa of Birds
lymphocytic stem cells develop into T cells.
The dichotomy of the T- and B-cellineages was first revealed in
The thymus consists of right and left lobes, each of which
birds. B cells were discovered in association with the avian cloa-
is surrounded by a capsule of connective tissue continuous with
cal bursa. The cloacal bursa (bursa of Fabricius) is a lymphatic
thin septa that subdivide the lobes into partially separated lob-
organ located in the dorsal wall of the cloaca (Fig. 8-6). The bursa
ules. The central medulla of each lobule is a branch of tissue
 is considered to be functionally equivalent to the mam malian
that arises from a central stalk in the lobe and is surrounded by
bone marrow in regard to the differentiation of B cells.
a cortex (Fig. 8-7).
From day 8 to day 15 of chicken embryo development, pre-
cursor cells committed to the B-cell lineage migrate into the de-
Cortex
veloping organ. Lymphatic nodules develop as invaginations of
The thymic cortex consists mainly of an epithelial reticulum and
the cloacal epithelium into underlying tissues of the cloaca at ap-
lymphocytes (Fig. 8-8). The stellate epithelial reticular cells
proximately day 12 of incubation. Longitudinal folds containing
have large, pale, ovoid nuclei and long, branching cytoplasmic
the nodules and a stroma of epithelial reticular cells then pro-
processes that contain numerous intermediate filaments; their
trude into the bursal lumen, followed by the formation of light
cellular organelles are inconspicuous. Adjacent epithelial reticu-
central and dark peripheral zones and the initiation of lymphocyte
lar cells are connected to each other by desmosomes, thus form-
differentiation within the nodules. Simple columnar or pseudo-
ing a cellular stromal network. At the periphery of the lobules
stratified epithelium overlying the nodules within the folds has
and around the perivascular spaces, a single layer of long, flat-
 tened epithelial cells forms a continuous lining. Lymphoblasts
and medium-sized lymphocytes predominate in the meshes of
the peripheral epithelial reticulum, where they undergo mitotic
 divisions producing small lymphocytes that differentiate in the
BL
 deep cortex. Tingible body macrophages, which are frequent
 near the medulla, phagocytize and eliminate dead T lymphocytes
and often contain lymphocyte remnants. The thymic cortex stains
much darker than the medulla because it contains a greater num-
ber of lymphocytes (Fig. 8-9).
Medulla
Many of the epithelial reticular cells in the medulla have the
larger and their epithelial nature is thus more obvious. These
larger cells contain more mitochondria, an extensive rough en-
doplasmic reticulum, well-developed Golgi complex, and gran-
ules when compared to cortical epithelial reticular cells
Some medullary epithelial reticular cells form thymic cor-
puscles, also called Hassal's corpuscles (Fig. 8-10). The corpus-
FIGURE 8-6 Cloacal bursa (chicken). A modified epithelium
cles consist of one to several calcified or degenerated large central
(between arrows) overies a lymphatic nodule that contains a dark
cells, which are surrounded by flat keratinized cells in a concen-
peripheral zone (pz) and a light central zone (cz). Bursal lumen (BL)
tric arrangement. Corpuscle cells are connected by desmosomes
Hematoxylin and eosin.
and contain bundles of intermediate filaments.
Immune System ● Oharles McL. Press ond Thor Londsverk
141
FIGURE 8-7 Thymus (cat). The thymic lobules (L), each consisting of a light medulla surrounded by
a dark cortex are partially separated by thin septa of connective tissue. Capsule (C). Hematoxylin and
eosin (×20).
Interdigitating dendritic cells, similar to those present in
 arterioles that course along the junction and give rise to a cap-
the T-cell areas of secondary lymphatic organs, are also present in
 illary network in the cortex. Capillaries then drain into post-
the medulla. The cells within the meshes of the epithelial retic-
capillary venules located either at the corticomedullary junction
ular network are predominantly small lymphocytes, along with
 or in the medulla; the postcapillary venules join veins in the
a few macrophages.
connective tissue septa. Cortical capillaries are characterized by
a continuous endothelium, perivascular connective tissue, and a
Blood Vesseis, Lymph Vesseis, and Nerves
The blood supply of the thymus is derived from arteries that
penetrate the parenchyma at the corticomedullary junction by
way of the connective tissue septa. The arteries divide into
capsule
epithelial reticular
cells
macrophages
cortex
lymphocytes
continuous lining
of epithelial cells
interdigitating cell
medulla
septal artery
thymic corpuscle
FIGURE 8-8 Schematic drawing of a portion of a thymic lobule.
The lobule consists of a cortex and medulla and has a border of
flattened epithelial cells. The epithelial reticulum of the cortex is 
heavily infltrated by lymphocytes undergoing cell division and
differentiation. The epithelial cells of the medulla may form
FIGURE 8-9 Thymus (dog). The dark cortex is clearly
concentric arrangements called thymic corpuscles or Hassall's
distinguishable from the light medulla, in which thymic
corpuscles. Blood vessels supply the lobule via the capsule and thin
corpuscles (arrowheads) are readily identified. Hematoxylin
connective tissue septa to reach the corticomedullary junction.
and eosin (x40)
142
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
contrast to the primary lymphatic organs where exposure to anti-
gen is strictly controlled. Antigens are transported from their site
of entry into the body to the secondary lymphatic tissues, via blood
or lymph, either free or associated with cells such as dendritic cells
and/or macrophages. The secondary lymphatic tissues are associ-
ated with mucosal surfaces, and thus are termed mucosa-associated
lymphatic tissue (MALT). The secondary lymphatic organs include
lymph nodes, spleen, and hemal nodes.
Mucosa-Associated Lymphatic Tissue
Cells of the im mune system are present either within or adjoin-
ing the mucosa of the respiratory, alimentary and urogenital
tracts and the mammary gland and are collectively referred to as
MALT (mucosa-associated lymphatic tissue). These lym-
phatic tissues function as an integrated mucosal immune system
to augment the mechanical and chemical barriers of surface mu-
FIGURE 8-10 Thymic corpuscles, thymus (dog). Notice the
 Cosal epithelia. Solitary lymphatic nodules, as wellas aggregates
amrangement of the cells in concentric layers and an enlarged
of nodules, are common in the subepithelial connective tissue of
epithelial reticular cell (arrow), which is probably the point of origin
most mucous membranes. Lymphatic nodules are especially nu-
of a new thymic corpuscle. Hematoxylin and eosin (×735)
merous in the digestive and respiratory systems and are also
present in the urogenital tract and around the eye. Aggregated
lymphatic nodules in the pharynx are referred to as tonsils.
sheath of epithelial reticular cell processes. Together, these lay-
Tonsils
ers form the blood-thymus barrier, which decreases the access
The tonsils are often the site of an early encounter with infec-
of circulating antigens that could interfere with the positive
tious agents and other antigens. Local production of antibodies
selection of lymphocytes in the cortical tissue. The absence of
 by tonsillar cells is important in a rapid initial immune response
such a barrier at the corticomedullary junction allows circulat-
 and a subsequent more generalized response.
ing antigens to contribute to the negative lymphocyte selection
 The tonsils are located adjacent to the lumen of the host organ
processes.
 and are covered by either a stratified squamous (oropharynx) or
T cells enter the blood by migrating through the endo-
pseudostratified columnar (nasopharynx) epithelium. The ton-
thelium of postcapillary venules at the corticomedullary junction.
sillar surface may be relatively smooth (e.g., palatine tonsil of
The T cells released from the thymus settle within the T-cell areas
dogs and cats) (Fig. 8-1 1A), or it may have surface invaginations,
of diffuse lymphatic tissue, secondary lymphatic tissue, and
referred to as tonsillar fossulae, that continue as deep, penetrat-
organs.
ing crypts (e.g., lingual tonsil in horses, palatine tonsil in horses
The thymus is particularly active in young animals, with
and ruminants) (Fig. 8-11B). These invaginations allow a high
 ix  o  a yo u l
concentration of lymphatic tissue in a given area.
Involution of the thymus is characterized by a gradual depletion
The epithelium is usually infiltrated to a variable degree
of lymphocytes (especially from the cortex), enlargement of the
with lymphocytes, neutrophils, and macrophages. This infiltra-
epithelial reticular cells, and invasion of the parenchyma by white
tion is particularly pronounced in the tonsils of the oropharynx.
adipocytes originating from the interlobular connective tissue.
Leukocytes that reach the lumen form salivary corpuscles
 In adult animals, the thymus consists of narrow cords of lympho-
(Fig. 8-11B). When they are not washed out of the fossulae by
cytes, in which enlarged epithelial reticular cells predominate, sur-
secretions from the surrounding salivary glands, these cells,
rounded by adipose tissue.
along with microorganisms, may obstruct the fossulae and cause
inflammation.
Beneath the epithelium, diffuse lymphatic tissue with plasma
SECONDARY LYMPHATIC
cells surrounds lymphatic nodules, which frequently have a ger-
TISSUeS AND ORGANS
 minal center and a cap (mantle) of small lymphocytes adjacent to
the epithelium. The tonsil is separated from the surrounding tis-
Secondary lymphatic tissues and organs are strategically sit-
uated at sites of antigen entry and are equipped with specialized
cleation" of the tonsil possible (e.g-, palatine tonsil of the dog)
microenvironments populated by the antigen-presenting cells
Tonsillar blood vessels have essentially the same distribution and
necessary to induce an immune response. Secondary lymphatic
tissues and organs are routinely exposed to antigen, in distinct 
 below). Afferent lymph vessels are lacking. A plexus of lymph cap-
Immune System ● Chorles McL. Press ond Thor Lardsverk
143
FIGURE 8-I I Palatine tonsil. A. Dog. The lymphatic tissue is embedded in a fossa (F) and is parly covered by a semilunar fold (s). The
smooth tonsillar surface (arrow) is a stratified squamous epithelium and overlies many lymphatic nodules (n). B. Calf The stratifed squamous
epithelium invaginates forming tonsillar fossulae (arrows) that continue as blind epithelial tubes or crypts (c) surrounded by lymphatic tissue.
Salivary corpuscles (sc). Hematoxylin and eosin.
ou! sureip pue lsuoi au jo siake dap aui ul suasaid sI sae!
mucosal lymphatic nodule (the corona), (c) an internodular region
the larger efferent lymph vessels in the tonsillar capsule.
rich in T cells and postcapillary venules through which lympho-
cytes recirculate, (d) an elevated region overlying lymphatic nod-
Bronchus-Associated Lymphatic Tissue
ules (the dome), and (e)a nodule-associated epithelium. The domes
BALT is the acronym for bronchus-associated lymphatic tis-
are located between typical small intestinal villi and crypts. The
nodule-associated epithelium covering the dome lacks goblet cells
sue, which includes clusters of lymphocytes present in the walls
of bronchi and bronchioles. Both T cells and B cells are present,
but includes M cells that have numerous microfolds of their lumi-
nal surface (Fig. 8-13). M cells typically enfold groups of lympho.
primarily at sites between an arteriole and bronchus epithelium,
 but these cells are not organized into nodules like intestinal ag-
cytes and occasionally surround macrophages and dendritic cells.
gregated lymphatic nodules. The development of BALT is
antigen-dependent, and BALT is not a constitutive structure in
Lymph Nodes
 all species. The presence of BALT varies widely from 100% in
Lymph nodes, situated along the extensive drainage system of
rabbits and rats, 50% in guinea pigs,and 33% in pigs, to its ab-
lymph vessels, filter antigens from the lymph before returning it to
sence in normal cat and human lungs. BALT is not well devel-
the bloodstream. Lymph nodes are the only lymphatic organ with
 oped in sheep and cattle.
both afferent and efferent lymph vessels and sinuses. These organs
usually have a slight indentation, the hilus, where blood and lymph
Gut-Associated Lymphatic Tissue
vessels enter or leave the lymph node. The parenchyma is organized
GALT is the acronym for gut-associated lymphatic tissue, which
into a cortex of lymphatic nodules and diffuse lymphatic tissue, and
includes solitary and aggregated lymphatic nodules, intraepithelial
a medulla of lymphatic tissue arranged in cords (Fig. 8-14).
lymphocytes, subepithelial lymphocytes, plasma cells, and macro-
Lymph nodes are surrounded bya capsule composed primarily
phages. Aggregated lymphatic nodules (Peyer's patches) occur-
of dense irregular connective tissue. In ruminants, smooth muscle
ring in the small intestine are visible as elevations in the mucosa
 cells are also present. Trabeculae extend from the capsule into the
(Figs. 8-5, 8-12 and 8-13). These lymphatic areas are most con-
 parenchyma as irregular septa that are distributed throughout the
spicuous in the ileum, appearing in ruminants, pigs, and carnivores
cortex and medulla (Fig. 8-15). The trabeculae provide support for
B aau Aeu pue ase Sunof u sanoau! eun yed aiel aluis e se
the entire node, carry blood vessels and nerves, and are surrounded
function different from that of smaller patches. The numerous dis-
by sinuses. The stroma of the lymph node is composed of reticular
crete small-intestinal aggregated lymphatic nodules and scattered
 cells and fibers. Lymphocytes, macrophages, and plasma cells are
aggregated or solitary nodules of the colon and rectum persist into
 supported by this reticular meshwork.
adulthood.
Lymph Vessels and Sinuses
Aggregated lymphatic tissue of the intestine contains
(a) submucosal lymphatic nodules with high mitotic activity
 Afferent lymph vessels penetrate the capsule at several different
(Fig. 8-13), (b) a zone of small lymphocytes that caps the sub-
sites and open into the subcapsular sinus (Fig. 8-14). Valves are
144
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
closely apposed large lymphatic nodules (n) that are separated by lymphatic sinuses (s) and small 
triangular intermodular (T-cell) regions (arrowheads). Small conical domes (d) protrude through the
a pe uxa (w) ss eui () ai  au y po ui a o n em
B. Calf. Nodule-associated epithelium. A homogenous population of modifed epithelial cells possessing
surface folds (arrows) overlies the dome.
villi
absorptive cell
gobletcell
FIGURE 8-I3   Schematic drawing of part of aggregated lymphatic nodules in the small intestine
Submucosal lymphatic nodules (N) are capped by a mantle (M) and lie beneath the dome (D). The
nodule-associated epithelium overlying the dome contains many M cells interspersed among absorptive
enoatui au ui ruasaid ae satoydual 1 pue (d) sanuan eldesod sllao algoe se ang slia
region (l), which, along with the lamina propria of the villi,is drained by lymphatic vessels (L).
Immune System · Chorles McL. Press ond Thor Londsverk
145
ymphocyte accumulation
afferent lymphatics
subcapsular
in deep cortex
Dostcapillary
ymphatic nodule
medullarysir
efferent lymphatics
FIGURE 8-I4
 Schematic drawing of a lymph node. The direction of lymph flow is shown
with amows.
present in both the afferent and the efferent lymph vessels,
thereby ensuring a one-way flow of lymph. Cortical sinuses
arise from the subcapsular sinus to accompany the connective tis-
sue trabeculae and continue into medullary sinuses. These si-
nuses form a network of branching and anastomosing channels
that converge toward the hilus to open into the efferent lymph
vessels. All lymph leaves the node through the efferent lymph
vessels (Fig. 8-14).
The sinuses are lined by flattened endothelial-like reticular
cells that form a continuous lining in the proximal portion of the
sinus adjacent to the capsule and trabeculae. Near the parenchyma,
the sinus lining becomes more discontinuous. The lumina of the
sinuses are traversed by a dense network of interconnected reticular
cells attached to the sinus walls through numerous slender processes
(Fig. 8-16). Many macrophages are attached to this network. Lym-
phocytes, macrophages, and dendritic cells lie free within the stro-
mal mesh and also in the sinus lumen. The reticular cells probably
function as a baffle to slow lymph flow within the sinuses to facili-
tate both antigen-cell interactions and phagocytic activities of
macrophages. Lymph then percolates into the parenchyma through
 gaps in the sinus walls, thereby giving the parenchymal cells access
to lymphborne antigens, cells, and particulate matter.
Cortex
Most of the outer cortex of the lymph node consists of primary
and secondary lymphatic nodules separated by diffuse lymphatic
tissue (Fig. 8-15). The deep cortex is composed of diffuse lym-
phatic tissue and is drained by lymphatics (Fig. 8-15). Because
FIGURE 8-15 Lymph node (cow). The dark cortex with
most lymphocytes in the deep cortex originate from the thymus,
lymphatic nodules lies adjacent to the lighter-appearing medulla
this area is referred to as a T-cell area or thymus-dependent zone.
Subcapsular (S) and trabecular (T) sinuses are continuous with
medullary sinuses (M) that drain toward the hilus (H) containing
The term paracortex has been applied variously to the deep cor-
efferent lymph vessels (E). Hematoxylin and eosin (×I O). (Courtesy of
tex or to the diffuse lymphatic tissue of both the deep and outer
A. Honsen.)
regions of cortex.
146
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
FIGURE 8-I6 Lymph node (dog). Beneath the connective
FIGUrE 8-17
Lymph node, medulla (dog). Flattened
tissue capsule (C) is the subcapsular sinus (S) lined by flattened
endothelial-like reticular cells (arrows) line the medullary sinus
endothelial-like reticular cells (E). Reticular cells (R) and lymphocytes
containing lymphocytes (L), macrophages (M), plasma cells (P), and
(L) are present in the sinus. Crossman's trichrome (x600).
reticular cells (R). Medullary cords (C) are composed of lymphocytes
ma.crophages, and plasma cells. Crossman's trichrome (x600).
Medulla
The medulla of the lymph node is much less organized than the
sinus and then continue inward to the deep cortex to form post-
cortex. The lymphatic tissue extends from the cortical T-cell areas
 capillary venules lined by a cuboidal endothelium in most spe-
as medullary cords, which branch and anastomose throughout
cies (Fig. 8-18). The postcapillary venules join veins in the
the medulla (Fig. 8-14). The medullary cords are separated by a
medullary trabeculae, which in turn empty into veins that leave
network of sinuses and connective-tissue trabeculae. Plasma cells
at the hilus.
are prominent in the stromal mesh of the medullary cords, which
Nerve fibers supply the capsule and trabeculae, and vasomotor
also contain lymphocytes and macrophages (Fig. 8-17).
nerves form perivascular networks throughout the lymph node.
Blood Vesseis and Nerves
Species Differences
The major arteries enter the lymph node at the hilus, whereas
Porcine lymph nodes are different from those of most other
smaller vessels penetrate the capsule at various sites. Upon enter-
mammals (Fig. 8-19). The majority of nodules occupy a deep
ing the hilus, some arteries branch to supply the medullary
position in the center of the node along trabecular sinuses.
cords directly while other branches enter the trabeculae to sup-
Areas similar to the deep cortex in conventional lymph nodes
ply the connective tissue and capsule. Vessels supplying the
medullary cords distribute capillaries along their course, and the
nodules, but the periphery of the node is occupied primarily by
main vessels continue into the cortex where branches feed cap-
loose lymphoreticular tissue containing macrophages and only
illary networks between and within the nodules. The inter-
a few plasma cells. Afferent lymph vessels enter the capsule at
nodular branches form capillary arcades below the subcapsular
one or more sites and penetrate via the trabeculae deep into the
Immune System ● Oharles McL. Press ond Thor Londsverk
147
ferent lymph vessels enter. Many small lymph nodes may fuse,
thereby forming a large cluster of nodes, which often contributes
to the difficulty in locating a hilus in porcine lymph nodes.
Spleen
The spleen is the major secondary lymphatic organ involved in fil-
tering the blood and mounting immune responses against blood-
borne antigens. Erythrocytes are stored in the red pulp ofthe spleen,
and platelets are stored in the splenic cords. The major hemopoietic
activity of the spleen in adult animals is lymphopoiesis. In contrast,
erythropoiesis is a major function of the fetal spleen, and splenic
erythropoiesis persists in newborn horses and ruminants for several
weeks postpartum.
Erythrocyte cell membrane elasticity declines with age. Old
FIGURE 8-18
Lymph node (goat). High endothelium in
erythrocytes are identified when they can no longer pass through
postcapillary venules with many migrating lymphocytes (arrows)
the narrow spaces of the splenic cords and the interendothelial
Vascular perfusion. Epon. Toluidine blue (×l000)
 slits of venous sinuses or venules in the red pulp. Macrophages
then remove the damaged erythrocytes from circulation.
The ability of the spleen to filter the blood is enhanced by a
reticular fiber network filled with reticular cells and macrophages.
area occupied by the lymphatic nodules, where they join the
Almost any section of red pulp contains numerous macrophages
trabecular sinuses. The lymph then filters into the peripheral
sinuses that converge and form several efferent vessels at the
flled with engulfed red blood cell fragments and an iron pigment
periphery of the node. Functionally, the flow of the lymph in the
called hemosiderin.
porcine lymph node is identical to that in other animals because
the incoming lymph first reaches the area of the node that is
Capsule and Supportive Tissue
rich in lymphatic nodules. The efferent lymph, however, is poor
The spleen is surrounded by a thick connective tissue capsule in-
in lymphocytes compared with that of other species, and recir-
vested by the peritoneum. The capsule consists of two layers: a
culating lymphocytes are believed to leave the porcine lymph
layer of dense irregular connective tissue and a layer of smooth
node via the blood.
muscle. The total thickness and relative amount of smooth mus-
Arteries enter the porcine lymph node with the afferent
cle vary with the species. Trabeculae composed of collagen and
lymph vessels and veins exit with the efferent lymph vessels
elastic fibers and smooth muscle cells extend from the capsule
As a result, a definitive hilus may not always be seen; instead,
and the hilus into the parenchyma. The trabeculae contain arter-
microscopic hiluslike indentations are apparent wherever af-
ies, veins, lymph vessels, and nerves. The capsule, trabeculae, and
FIGURE 8-I9 Lymph node (pig). A. Afferent lymphatic vessels (v) enter the node at a hilus (H) and accompany trabeculae (t) to
penetrate deeply into the parenchyma to reach central tissue containing lymphatic nodules (n). Capsule {arrowhead). Loose peripheral tissue
(L). Hemataxylin and eosin. B. Higher magnification showing arrangement of lymphatic nodules (n) along trabeculae (t). Loose peripheral
tissue (L). Capsule (arrowhead). Hematoxylin and eosin.
148
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
reticular fibers support the splenic parenchyma composed of a red
ent. Their wide lumina are lined by a thin endothelium with
pulp involved in the storage of red blood cells and a white pulp
a discontinuous basal lamina supported by reticular cells and fi-
rich in lymphocytes and active in im mune responses.
bers. Openings between endothelial cells in this wall are com-
mon (Fig. 8-21).
Red Pulp
 The narrow splenic cords situated between the sinuses form
a vast three-dimensional network composed of reticular fibers with
Most of the splenic parenchyma is red pulp, owing its name to the
enmeshed reticular cells, erythrocytes, macrophages, lymphocytes,
vast amount of blood held within the reticular network (Fig. 8-20).
plasma cells, and other leukocytes. The membranous processes of
The red pulp is composed of venous sinuses or venules and splenic
the reticular cells tend to form channel-like structures that may
cords. Two main types of red pulp are present in mammalian
function to conduct blood toward the endothelial slits in the sinus
spleens, depending on the type of postcapillary vessels: sinusal or
walls. In nonsinusal spleens, the splenic cords are wider than in
nonsinusal. Among the domestic animals, only dogs have typical
sinusal spleens. The red pulp of ruminant and porcine spleens con-
venous sinuses, similar to those in human and rat spleens.
tains numerous smooth muscle cells, whereas that of horses and
The splenic sinuses are wide vascular channels lined with
dogs has myofibroblasts, which are cells that resemble fibroblasts
elongated, longitudinally oriented endothelial cells that contain
but have some features of smooth muscle (e.g., actin filaments and
contractile microfilaments aligned in bands parallel and adjacent
dense bodies).
to the lateral cell margins. Gaps or slits in the sinus wall are created
upon contraction of these filaments, thus allowing erythrocytes
White Pulp
to migrate from the surrounding splenic cords into the sinus
lumen. The lining cells rest on a fenestrated basal lamina and are
White pulp is lymphatic tissue that is distributed throughout
supported by reticular fibers, some of which form hooplike struc-
the spleen and is comprised of lymphatic nodules and diffuse lym-
tures encircling the sinus at right angles to the long axis. In most
phatic tissue called periarterial lymphatic sheaths (PALS)
domestic mam mals, venules rather than venous sinuses are pres-
(Figs. 8-22 and 8-23). Nodules of the white pulp are B-cell zones
B
FIGURE 8-20 A. Spleen (sheep). An artery of the white pulp
(a) is ensheathed with lymphocytes that constitute the periarterial
lymphatic sheath (PALS; P). A nodule (n) is embedded within the
 PALS. Sheathed capillaries, or ellipsoids, are surrounded by a.
wide ma.crophage sheath (e). Red pulp (R). Hematoxylin and eosin.
B. Spleen (horse). A line has been drawn to indicate the extent of
the marginal zone (mz), which lies between the white pulp (P) and
the red pulp (R). A marginal sinus {arrowheads) is immediately
adjacent to the PALS. C. Spleen (dog). A narrow vessel (v) courses
through a wide ma.crophage sheath (e). Periarterial lymphatic
sheath (P); red pulp (R). Hematoxylin and eosin.
Immune System ● Chorles Mcl. Press ond Thor Lardsverk
149
FIGURE 8-21  9
 Spleen (sheep). Electron micrograph of a venule with erythrocytes (B) passing through
an opening in the wall. Lumen (V); endothelium (E); reticular cells (R): lymphocyte (L). Arrows indicate
the edges of the endothelial opening (x8000).
and may or may not have germinal centers, depending on their
dimensional stroma containing lymphocytes, macrophages, and
functional state. The PALS are organized along the artery of the
dendritic cells similar to those seen in lymph nodes.
white pulp. Within the PALS, T cells are concentrated adjacent
to the tunica media of the artery, whereas the peripheral region
Marginal Zone
of the sheaths contains a more diverse mixture of T cells and B
The marginal zone lies between the white pulp and the red
 cells, macrophages, and dendritic cells. Throughout the white
pulp. The periphery of the white pulp is bounded by a circumfer-
pulp, reticular cells and associated reticular fibers form a three-
ential reticulum, the reticular cells of which branch into the mar-
ginal zone. The marginal zone blends into the splenic cords of the
red pulp (Figs. 8-22 and 8-23). The reticular network of the mar-
ginal zone receives capillaries from the white pulp and some ter-
ellipsoid
minal capillaries of the red pulp. The capillaries empty into a
marginal sinus, which is a series of anastomosing channels,
macrophages
not equally apparent in all species (Fig. 8-23). From here, the
blood is drained slowly toward the venous sinuses or venules of the
red pulp. Many macrophages and B cells are in the marginal
reticular cells
marginal zone
zone. All elements of the blood, as well as antigens and parti-
macrophage
cles, are brought into contact with the local macrophages and
Bcells
lymphocytes, facilitating phagocytosis and the initiation of an
immune response. Bloodborne antigens trapped within the mar-
marginal
ginal zone are transported by marginal zone macrophages to the
zone
 PALS, an environment rich in recirculating lymphocytes and
dendritic cells
Blood Vesseis
The circulation of blood through the spleen has important func-
PALS
tional implications, particularly with respect to antigenic stim-
ulation and the extraction of hemoglobin and iron from red blood
FIGUrE 8-22
 Schematic drawing of the marginal zone and an
cells (Fig. 8-23). Branches of the splenic artery enter the capsule
ellipsoid. Blood vessels leave the periarterial lymphatic sheath (PALS)
and extend into the large trabeculae as trabecular arteries. As
to pass through a rim of ma.crophages and empty into the marginal
the artery leaves the trabecula, it is called the artery of the w hite
sinus, which represents the inner limit of the marginal zone. The
pulp. As the artery of the white pulp becomes smaller,the PALS
marginal zone is composed of reticular cells, B cells, and marginal 
zone macrophages. Some blood vessels pass through the marginal
and marginal zone attenuate and eventually the surrounding
zone and terminate in the red pulp as sheathed capillaries or
reticulum disappears. Strands of white pulp stretch across the at-
ellipsoids. These structures are surrounded by a meshwork of
tenuated marginal zone to the red pulp, forming bridging chan-
reticular cells and macrophages.
 nels. Branches of the white pulp artery continue to feed capillary
150
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
nodule
marginal zone
artery of the
marginal sinus
white pulp
PALS
trabecular
artery
nodular
artery
dind
arteriole
venous sinus
terminal capillary
terminal capillary
trabecular vein
orvenule
sheathed capillary
(closed circulation)
(open circulation)
(ellipsoid)
fiGUre 8-23
 Schematic drawing of the splenic parenchyma with emphasis on the vasculature. Trabecular artery; artery of the white pulp
with lymphatic sheath; nodular artery; pulp arteriole; sheathed capillary (ellipsoid); terminal capillaries emptying into reticular mesh (open
circulation); terminal capillaries emptying into venous sinus or venule (closed circulation); venous sinus or venule; trabecular vein. Arrows
indicate openings in the wall of sinuses or venules. Periarterial lymphatic sheath (PALS).
beds in the nodule and terminate in the marginal zone or enter
their walls. The third theory proposes the existence of both an
 the red pulp, forming a penicillar artery (brushlike tuft). Each
"open" and “closed" circulation, depending on the physiologic
branch of the penicillar artery continues into the red pulp as a
state. When the spleen is distended, the spaces between the en-
pulp arteriole. Each pulp arteriole continues into a distinctive
dothelial cells lining the sinuses or venules are pulled apart, and
structure called a sheathed capillary or ellipsoid (Fig. 8-23).
the blood leaks through the open meshwork from the terminal
capillaries to the sinuses or venules. In a contracted spleen, the
cells in the venous sinuses or venules are pushed together to form
a continuous uninterrupted connection with the terminal capil-
meshwork of reticular cells and fibers, called a pericapillary
laries. Thus, the circulatory flow is closed. The third theory is
macrophage sheath. The sheathed capillary continues as an un-
widely accepted for sinusal spleens, but nonsinusal spleens seem 
sheathed terminal capillary.
to have an open circulatory flow. Whatever the exact nature of
The junction of the terminal capillaries with the venous sys-
the capillary-venous junction, the blood in the small vessels
tem is controversial, and
eventually drains into the trabecular veins and leaves by the
splenic vein.
llaries expand, form an ampulla,
 and open directly into the
splenic sinuses or venules. This is called the “closed" theory be-
Lymph Vesseis and Nerves
cause the connection forms a continuous tubular structure. The
The spleen has no afferent lymph vessels. Efferent capsular and
saden aun ieun sisagns 'aioaun uado, ro 'Aroaun puos
trabecular lymph vessels originate in the white pulp and are an
open into the spaces between the reticular cells of the red pulp
exit route from the white pulp for some lymphocytes. The effer-
and the blood, then enters the venous sinuses through the slits in
ent lymph vessels drain into the splenic lymph nodes.
Immune System · Orories McL. Press ond Thor Lordsverk
151
Species Differences
Hemal Nodes and *Milk Spots'"
The spleens of horses, dogs, and pigs have abundant lymphatic
Hemal nodes are only described in ruminants, where they are
nodules and periarterial lymphatic sheaths. In the cat and ru-
prevalent in the sublumbar area along the vena cava and ab-
minant spleens, lymphatic tissue is less abundant and occurs
dominal aorta. They are generally small, brown to dark red or-
mainly as lymphatic nodules; the periarterial lymphatic sheaths
gans, but their size, number, and histologic characteristics
are short.
 The size and number of the sheathed capillaries also vary
vary within wide limits. Hemal nodes develop during fetal life
'slassa ydual ziaqi asol ieun eipiound apou qduAl wuon
considerably among the domestic animals. In pigs and cats, the
Therefore, hemal nodes receive all their cells and antigens from
 pericapillary macrophage sheaths are large and abundant and
the blood. The functional significance of hemal nodes is not
 often particularly numerous near the white pulp. The pericapil-
clear, although it is probable that they respond to bloodborne
lary macrophage sheaths are smaller in horses and dogs than in
antigens.
other domestic animals, and small and narrow in ruminants.
In young animals, the lymphocytes in hemal nodes accu-
The ability to mobilize rapidly the reservoir of erythrocytes
mulate in a distinct region resembling the deep cortex of a lymph
stored in the spleen differs between and within species, as evi-
 node, but few nodules are present (Fig. 8-24). In healthy adults,
denced by the large increases in hematocrit following physical
the entire node is generally filled with red blood cells. As a re-
activity in thoroughbred horses and greyhounds. Only moderate
 sult of antigenic stimulation, many nodules may form, and only
or small changes in hematocrit occur in other domestic animal
species such as sheep.
a few red blood cells are present. The sinuses are wide, with few
 macrophages and few lymphocytes. The diffuse lymphatic tissue
saudoueu Aureu sey inq saikroudul maj Aaaieiau sureuon
S! elnpau lesidki y 'sananonuei pue sanksosuikia isagip ieul
lacking.
The vascular supply to hemal nodes is similar to that of
lymph nodes, but all venules have a thin endothelium. Many
lymphocytes and erythrocytes pass through this endothelium.
So-called "milk spots" are small aggregations of lympho-
cytes and macrophages that occur along the blood vessels of the
omentum.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Belisle C, Sainte-Marie G. Topography of the deep cortex of the
lymph nodes of vatious mammalian species. Anat Rec 1 98 1 ;201:
553-561
Blue J, Weiss L. Electron microscopy of the red pulp of dog spleen in-
cluding vascular arrangements, periarterial mactophage sheaths
(ellipsoids), and the contractile, innervated reticular mesh work.
Am J Anat 1981;161:189-218.
Griebel P, Hein W. Expanding the role of Peyet's patches in B-cell
ontogeny. Immunol Today 1996;17:30-39.
Halleraker M, Landsverk T, Press C. Development and cell phenotypes of 
primary follicles in sheep fetal lymph nodes. Cell Tissue Res 1994;
275:51.
Janeway CA, Travers P, Walport M, et al. Immunobiology: The Immune
System in Health and Disease. 4th Ed. New York: Elsevier Science
Ltd/Garland Publishing, 1999.
Kraal G. Cells in the marginal zone of the spleen. Int Rev Cytol 1992;
132:3 1-74.
Landsverk T, Halleraker M, Aleksandersen M, et al. The intestinal
habitat for organized lymphoid tissues in ruminants; comparative
aspects of structure, function and development. Vet Immunol 
Immunopathol 1991;28:1-16.
FIGURE 8-24 Hemal node (young goat). Wide sinuses (S)
Lanzavecchia A, Sallusto F. Regulation of T cell immunity by dendritic
under capsule (C) and around central veins (V). There are many
cells. Cell 2001;106:263-266.
small venules (arrows) in the lymphatic tissue. Vascular perfusion.
Morris B. The ontogeny and comportment of lymphoid cells in fetal and
Hematoxylin and eosin (x35).
neonatal sheep. Immunol Rev 1986;9l:219-233.
152
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Nicander L, Halleraker M, Landsverk T. Ontogeny of reticular cells in
Reyhaud C, Weill J. Postreafrangement diversification processes in gut-
the ileal Peyet's patch of sheep and goats. Am J Anat 199l;
associated lymphoid tissues. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 1996;
191:237-249.
212:7-15.
 Nicander L, Nafstad P, Landsverk T, et al. A study of modified lym-
Rothkotter HJ, Pabst R, Bailey M. Lymphocyte migration in the intes-
phatics in the deep cortex of ruminant lymph nodes. J Anat
tinal mucosa: entry, transit and emigration of lymphoid cells and
1991;178:203-212.
the influence of antigen. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 1999;72:
 Pabst R, Gehrke I. Is the bronchus-associated lymphoid tissue (BALT)
157-165.
an integtal structure of the lung in hormal mammals, including
Tizard IR. Veterinary Immunology. An Introduction. 6th Ed. Phila-
humans? Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 1990;3:131-135.
delphia: WB Saunders, 2000.
Pastoret P-P, Griebel P, Bazin H, et al. Hand book of Vertebrate Immu-
Van Rooijen N, Claassen E, Kraal G, et al. Cytological basis of
hology. San Diego: Academic Press, 1998.
immune functions of the spleen. Immunocytochemical character-
Rajewsky K. Clonal selection and learning in the antibody system.
ization of lymphoid and non-lymphoid cells involved in the “in
Nature 1996;381:751-758.
situ' immune response. Prog Histochem Cytochem 1989; 19: 1-71.
Respiratory System
CHARLES G. PLOPPER
DONALD R. ADAMS
Nasal Cavity, Vomeronasal Organ, and Paranasal Sinuses
Intrapulmonary Conducting Airways
 Nasal Cavity
Bronchi
Cutaneous region
 Bronchioles
Respiratory region
Gas Exchange Area
 Olfactory region
Respiratory bronchioles
Vomeronasal Organ
Alveolar ducts and alveolar sacs
Paranasal Sinuses
Alveoli
 Nasopharynx
 Pleura
Larynx
Blood Vessels and Lymphatics
Trachea and Extrapulmonary Bronchi
Innervation
Lung
Avian Respiratory System
og apiaond oi st luaiss Aioenrdsan aui jo uoninuny Areuind au
capillary bed receives the entire output of the right ventricle of
the exchange of respiratory gases (oxygen and carbon dioxide)
the heart.
between the organism and the environment. The conducting air-
ways provide a series of air passages for moving air to and from
the gas exchange area in the lungs. The conducting airways also 
NASaL CaVITY,VOMEroNaSaL
serve a protective function by conditioning incoming (inspired)
OrGan,and ParanasaL
air. This conditioning includes heating the air to body tempera-
SINUSES
ture, saturating it to 100% relative humidity, and filtering out
noxious gases and particulates. The conducting airways also con-
Nasal Cavity
serve body heat and water by extracting them from the air during
expiration. The mucociliary blanket, which covers the mucosal
Each nasal cavity is divided into a cutaneous region, a respira-
surface of conducting airways, serves to trap inhaled particles and
tory region, and an olfactory region. The skin of the nasal apex is
conveys them and cellular debris out of the system. Other struc.
continuous through a tissue gradient with the mucous mem-
 brane of the caudal nasal cavity proper.
tures, such as the nasolacrimal duct, vomeronasal organ, paranasal
recesses and sinuses, auditory tube, and equine guttural pouch,
connect to the conducting airways.
Cutaneous Region
The distal, smallest conducting airways connect to the gas
Rostrally, the cutaneous region (nasal vestibule) is lined by a rel-
exchange area, which includes the respiratory bronchioles, alve-
atively thick keratinized stratified squamous epithelium (Fig. 9-1).
olar ducts, and alveolar sacs. Gas exchange occurs in alveoli,
At midvestibule, the epithelium is thinner and nonkeratinized.
where only a thin blood-air barrier is present between pulmo-
Superficial cells have microridges on their free surface. The caudal
nary capillary blood and respired air. An extensive pulmonary
portion of the cutaneous region and the rostral third of the nasal
153
154
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
A
FIGURE 9-2Stratified cuboidal epithelium in the transitional
zone of the canine nasal cavity. Airway lumen (A); connective-tissue
papilla (B). I μm. Azure Il (×385). (With permission from Adoms DR,
Hotchkiss DK. The conire nasal mucosoa. Zentraibi Veterinarmed C Anat
Histol Embryol 1 983;12:1 13.)
FIGURE 9-I Stratified squamous epithelium in the cutaneous
region of the canine nasal cavity. Airway lumen (A); dermal papilla (B).
ratory epithelium (i.e., ciliated pseudostratified columnar); that
I μm. Azure Il (×385). (With permission from Adams DR, Hotchkiss DK.
lining the middle nasal meatus is thinner and contains fewer cil-
The canine nasal mucoso. Zentraibi Veterinarmed C Anat Histol Embryol
iated and goblet cells. The ciliated pseudostratified epithelium of
1983;1 2:11 1.,)
the nasal cavity contains several cell types, including ciliated,
secretory, brush, and basal cells (Figs. 9-3, 9-4, and 9-5).
Individual ciliated cells are columnar and have 200 to 300
cavity proper are a transitional zone lined by an epithelium that
motile cilia and numerous microvilli projecting into the nasal
varies from stratified cuboidal to nonciliated pseudostratified
lumen. The supranuclear portion of the cell contains basal bod.
columnar. Surface epithelial cells in the transitional zone contain
ies, a Golgi complex, and numerous mitochondria; small strands
multilobated nuclei, have microvilli on their free surface, and are
of rough endoplasmic reticulum (rER) are scattered throughout
frequently spherical (Fig. 9-2).
the cell. Defects in the fine structure of cilia may result in in-
The propria-submucosa of the cutaneous region interdigi-
effective ciliary beat or immotility. Immotile cilia syndrome is a
 tates via papillae with the epithelium. The papillae contain small
condition associated with congenital ciliary abnormality, result-
vessels, nerves, and numerous migratory cells, including mast
ing in respiratory tract infections.
cells, plasma cells, lymphocytes, macrophages, and granulocytes.
Secretory cells of the respiratory epithelium extend from the
Lymphocytes and other migratory cells are also frequently ob-
basal lamina to the epithelial surface. Their luminal surface bears
served in the basal portion of the epithelium. Bundles of colla-
microvilli. The morphologic and histochemical appearance of these
gen fibers, larger blood vessels and nerves, and serous glands are
cells is both species and regionally variable. Their description as
located deep in the propria-submucosa.
mucous or serous is based on their glycoprotein content. Granules
 In horses, a nasal diverticulum lined with skin opens into the
of mucous epithelial cells are relatively electron-lucent and con-
cutaneous region of the nasal vestibule; this region is lined by an
tain sialated or sulfated acid glycoproteins. The supranuclear por-
integument containing vibrissae, sebaceous glands, and sweat
tion of mucous epithelial cells varies in appearance with the
glands. The papillary layer of the vestibular propria-submucosa in
secretory phase from tall and slender with few granules to wide and
dogs has particularly numerous papillae and capillary loops.
globular with numerous mucous granules. Globular mucous cells
known as goblet cells, have nuclei pressed to the base of the cell
Respiratory Region
 by the supranuclear mass of large mucous granules. Organelles
Epithelium lining the caudal two thirds of the nasal cavity proper,
usually present in the perinuclear region of the goblet cell include
with the exception of the olfactory region, is classified as respi
a Golgi complex, rER, and mitochondria. Goblet cells of most
Respiratory System ● Charles G. Plopper ond Donald R. Adams
155
species secrete primarily sulfated glycoprotein as a major compo-
nent of mucus.
Granules of serous epithelial cells have electron-dense
cores, contain neutral glycoproteins, and are smaller than those
of mucous cells
Brush cells have long, thick microvilli and a cytoplasm
containing mitochondria and many filaments. These cells may be
sensory receptors associated with endings of the trigeminal nerve.
Basal cells are small polyhedral cells located along the basal
lamina. The cytoplasm of basal cells contains numerous bundles
of tonofilaments and free ribosomes. Basal cells are characterized
by anchoring attachments (desmosomes) to other cell types and
to the basal lamina (hemidesmosomes). While basal cells appear
to have some role in replacing other cell types, the rate of cell pro-
liferation is very low and most of the replacement cells are derived
FIGURE 9-3Ciliated pseudostratified columnar epithelium with
from the other cell types in the epithelium.
goblet cells lining the respiratory region of the nasal cavity. Goblet 
Another unnamed cell in the nasal mucosa has surface mi-
cells (A); basal cells (B); ciliated cells (C). I μm. Azure Il (x590)
crovilli and contains much smooth endoplasmic reticulum (sER)
and little secretory material; this cell type is believed to function 
in the metabolism of xenobiotic compounds (see below).
The respiratory mucosa (respiratory epithelium plus under-
lying propria-submucosa) of the nasal cavity is more vascular than
the mucosae of the cutaneous, transitional, or olfactory regions.
The highly vascular propria-submucosa, in which arteries and
large, thin-walled veins are oriented rostrocaudally, is called the
cavernous stratum (Fig. 9-6). The veins anastomose profusely
and are referred to as capacitance vessels because they determine
the degree of mucosal congestion and, inversely, nasal patency.
Constriction of nasal blood vessels is effected by O-adrenergic
stimulation via the sympathetic nervous system. Periods of vas-
cular engorgement varying from 30 minutes to 4 hours followed
by periods of decongestion normally occur in the cavernous stra-
tum of mammals; during this nasal cycle, the vascular activity in
one side of the nose alternates with that in the other side.
Serous or mixed nasal glands are present between the nu-
merous veins of this stratum (Fig. 9-7). Acini of nasal glands also
secrete secretory immunoglobulin A, lysozyme, and odorant-
binding protein.
Nerves in the nasal mucosa include sensory fibers arising
from the terminal, olfactory, vomeronasal, and maxillary division
of the rigeminal nerves and efferent fibers of the autonomic
nervous system. Nerves are distributed throughout all compart-
ments of the nasal mucosa, including within epithelium.
Lymphatic nodules are commonly present in the caudal part
 of the nasal cavity, adjacent to the choana, the opening between 
the nasal cavity and nasopharynx.
Metabolically active exogenous compounds (xenobiotics)
that reach nasal tissues via air or blood pathways may remain
firmly bound to tissue elements unless degraded. Cytochrome
P-450-dependent monooxygenase enzymes in surface epithe-
lium and in acinar cells of the lateral nasal gland (see below) ac-
tively metabolize endogenous compounds (e.g., progesterone and
FIGURE 9-4 SCcanning electron micrograph of respiratory
testosterone) and exogenous compounds. These enzymes convert
epithelium (ciliated pseudostratified columnar epithelium). Ciliated
lipid-soluble exogenous compounds, some of which are highly
cells with cilia and microvilli (A); secretory cells with apical microvilli
toxic (e.g., formaldehyde and acetaldehyde), to water-soluble
(B) (x3500).
me tabolites.
156
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Bs
neuroendocrine
goblet cell
basal cell
ciliated cell
cell
brush cell
FIGURE 9-5 Drawing of the fine structural characteristics of respiratory epithelial cells
Oifactory Region
eral doublets (fused pairs of microtubules) plus two single central
The olfactory region comprises the dorsocaudal portion of the
microtubules in the basal portion to singlets of one to four micro-
nasal cavity, including some of the surfaces of the ethmoid con-
tubules distally. The perikaryon has typical neuronal structural
chae, dorsal nasal meatus, and nasal septum. Olfactory mucosa
-ue au oui sed Aaql se aiauos suoxe[enpiaipul 'ssjslanseieu
may be discerned from adjacent respiratory mucosa because it has 
ina propria, thereby forming bundles of nonmyelinated nerve fibers.
a thicker epithelium, numerous tubular glands, and many bun-
Neurosensory cells are continuously replaced during the life of the
 dles of nonmyelinated nerve fibers in the lamina propria.
animal by cells derived from basal cells.
The olfactory mucosa is lined by a ciliated pseudostratified
Sustentacular cells are columnar cells with a narrow base
columnar epithelium, the olfactory epithelium, consisting of
and a wide apical portion. Their oval nuclei form the most super-
three primary cell types neurosensory, sustentacular, and basal
ficial nuclear layer in the epithelium. Microvilli, often branched,
(Fig. 9-8).
cover the luminal surface of sustentacular cells. Juxtaluminal
Neurosensory olfactory cells are bipolar neurons with
junctional complexes occur between sustentacular cells and the
perikarya in a wide basal zone of the epithelium, dendrites ex-
adjacent dendrites of neurosensory cells. Pigment granules are
tending to the lumen, and axons reaching the olfactory bulb of the
present in the infranuclear cytoplasm. Sustentacular cells are also
brain. A club-shaped apex, the dendritic bulb, protrudes from
replaced by basal cells.
each dendrite into the lumen (Fig. 9-9), from which 10 to 30 cilia
 Basal cells of the olfactory mucosa are similar in structure
emanate. Each cilium is 50- to 80-um long and consists of a wide,
to those of the nonolfac tory epithelium.
short basal portion and a long, thin, tapering distal portion. The
Olfactory glands, the cells of which contain pigment gran-
number of microtubules decreases from the typical nine periph-
ules, are located in the propria-submucosa. The intraepithelial
Respiratory System ● Charles G. Plopper ond Donald R. Adams
157
FIGURE 9-6 Scanning electron micrograph of a section of
the respiratory mucosa of the bovine nasal cavity. Epithelium
(A); perichondrium (B); lumina of blood vessels (C) in the
cavernous stratum (×40)
B
FIGURE 9-8 Mucosa of the canine olfactory region. Nuclei of
neurosensory cells (A);: nuclei of sustentacular cells (B); olfactory
glands (C); olfa.ctory nerves (D). I μm. Azure Il (x410).
portion of their ducts is lined by squamous cells. The glands se-
Crete a watery product, which may serve to enhance the solubil-
ity of airborne odorants and cleanse the cilia, facilitating access
B
for new odora nts.
The olfactory mucosa also has very high levels of cytochrome
P-45O-monooxygenase activity and is the primary site for chem-
ically induced nasal tumors.
Vomeronasal Organ
Located in the mucosa of the ventral portion of the nasal septum,
the tubular, blind-ended bilateral vomeronasal organ consists
B
ofan internal epithelial duct (vomeronasal duct), a middle propria-
submucosa, and an external cartilaginous support. Rostrally, the
vomeronasal duct joins the incisive duct, which connects the
nasal cavity with the oral cavity, except in horses, in which the
ventral end is blind.
The vomeronasal duct is crescent-shaped in transverse sec-
tion with a lateral convex and a medial concave mucosal wall. The
FIGURE 9-7 Nasal gland acini (A) occupy the connective tissue
epithelium transitions from a stratified cuboidal lining rostrally
between the veins of the cavermous stratum (B) of the respiratory
 near the incisive duct toa ciliated pseudostratified columnar epi-
mucosa. I μm. Azure ll (x425).
thelium over much of the caudal portion of the vomeronasal duct.
158
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
F
FIGURE 9-I0 Canine vomeronasal duct. The lateral epithelium
(A) includes ciliated and nonciliated cells, whereas the medial
epithelium (B) contains neurosensory and sustentacular epithelial
cells (×158). (Courtesy of A. W. Stirsor.)
FIGURE 9-9 Schematic drawing of the olfactory epithelium.
Sustentacular cells (A); basal cell (B); axon of the receptor cell 
 pounds is believed to function in sexual behavior of both the
(C); dendritic bulb (D);: thin distal portion of cilium (E); thick
female and the male, in maternal behavior, and in the interaction
proximal portion of cilium (F); junctional complex between
of the fetus with its amniotic environment. In several mam mals,
receptor and sustentacular cells (G).
vomeronasal detection of the odor of a female results in an eleva-
tion of plasma testosterone in the male. The vomeronasal organ
The medial pseudostratified columnar epithelium has neurosen-
5a55
ciated with the lip-curl type of facial grimace (Flehmen re-
sory, sustentacular, and basal cells (Fig. 9-10). The dendritic por-
sponse) used by some male mammals to sample substances in the
tions of vomeronasal neurosensory cells lack dendritic bulbs and,
urine of the female; odorant particles may reach the incisive duct
with inhaled air, through contact with the tongue, or during
with the exception of those in dogs, have microvilli instead of cilia
 on their apical surfaces. Neurosensory cells are periodically re-
passage through the mouth with food or water. These substances,
dissolved in fluid in the incisive duct, are sucked into the
placed in the adult mammal. The lateral pseudostratified colum-
nar epithelium has ciliated and nonciliated columnar, goblet, and
vomeronasal duct by constriction of blood vessels within the
 propria-submucosa of the vomeronasal organ. Upon dilation of
basal cells.
Vomeronasal glands, located in the highly vascular propria-
these vessels, the dissolved substances are expelled from the
submucosa, secrete into the vomeronasal duct most commonly
vomeronasal lumen.
through the commissures between lateral and medial mucosal
walls. Secretory granules of the acinar cells contain neutral glyco-
Paranasal Sinuses
proteins. The hyaline vomeronasal cartilage is J-shaped, enclos-
ing all but the dorsolateral portion of the organ.
The mucosae of the paranasal sinuses are thinner than those of the
The vomeronasal organ functions in the chemoreception of
liquidborne compounds of low volatility. Sensing of these com-
tinuous. Glands and blood vessels in the propria-submucosa are
Respiratory System ● Chorles G. Plopper ond Donoid R. Adoms
159
scant. The epithelium is ciliated pseudostratified columnar, con-
LARYNX
taining a few goblet cells. The ciliary beat carries mucus toward
openings connecting the sinuses with the nasal cavity.
The larynx opens rostrally into the laryngopharynx and is con-
The lateral nasal gland (Fig. 9-11) is a relatively large com-
tinuous caudally with the trachea (Fig. 9-12). It is lined by
pound gland that secretes neutral glycoproteins via a long duct
mucosa and supported by cartilage.
into the nasal vestibule. The lateral nasal gland is present in the
The epithelium lining the epiglottis, laryngeal vestibule, and
maxillary recess of carnivores, in the maxillary sinus of pigs, and
[esurel aun isnotuenbs pajeis paziuieiauou st sioy ieooa
at the nasomaxillary aperture in horses and small ruminants; it is
epithelium caudal to the vocal fold gradually changes into respi-
absent in cattle. In addition, separate maxillary recess glands are
ratory epithelium (Fig 9-3). Respiratory epithelium also lines the
present in carnivores.
equine laryngeal ventricle. The epithelium on the laryngeal sur-
face of the epiglottis, aryepiglottic folds, and arytenoid cartilages
NASOPHARYNX
tors of the cranial laryngeal nerve in the epithelium respond to the
presence of fluids, such as water, milk, gastric fluid, and saliva;
The nasopharynx is the portion of the pharynx located dorsal to
stimulation of these receptors results in reflex apnea.
the soft palate, extending from the nasal cavity to the laryngo-
The propria-submucosa beneath the stratified squamous
pharynx. The lining of the nasopharynx consists mostly of respi-
epithelium is a dense, irregular connective tissue; the propria-
submucosa beneath the respiratory epithelium is a loose connec-
caudodorsal portion of the soft palate makes contact either with
tive tissue rich in elastic fibers, leukocytes, plasma cells, and mast
the dorsal wall of the nasopharynx during deglutition or with the
cells. Diffuse lymphatic tissue or solitary lymphatic nodules are
epiglottis. The propria-submucosa is loose connective tissue con-
frequently observed. In pigs and small ruminants, a paraepiglot-
taining mixed glands. Lymphatic nodules are prominent in the
tic tonsil is present on either side of the base of the epiglottis; this
dorsal portion of the nasopharynx, where they aggregate as the
tonsil occurs occasionally in cats. Mixed glands (Fig. 9-13) occur
pharyngeal tonsil.
in the propria-submucosa but are absent in the vestibular and
vocal folds. Numerous elastic fibers are present in the vocal lig-
ament and, to a lesser extent, in the vestibular ligament.
trachea, and to the hyoid apparatus by ligaments. Extrinsic skele-
tal muscles move the larynx during swallowing; intrinsic skeletal
muscles move individual laryngeal cartilages during respiration
type. The epiglottis, the cuneiform and corniculate cartilages or
elastic cartilage. The epiglottis of carnivores often consists of a
peripheral cartilaginous wall enclosing white adipose tissue,
FIGURE 9-12
Horizontal section through a feline larynx.
Epiglottis cartilage (A); vestibular fold (B);: vocal ligarment (C)
FIGURE 9-11
Two striated ducts (A), an intercalated duct (B)
thyroid cartilage (D); cricoid cartilage (E); thyrohyoid bone (F).
and acinar cells (C) in the canine lateral nasal gland. I μm. Azure Il
Hematoxylin and eosin (x8.3). (From Dellrmarn HD. Veterinary
(×425)
Histology: An Outline Text—Atlas. Philodelphio: Leo & Febiger, 1 971.)
160
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
cells, secretory cells, bronchiolar exocrine cells, basal cells, and
neuroendocrine cells. Ciliated cells, brush cells, and secretory
cells of the trachea are similar to those of the upper respiratory
system (see Respiratory Region earlier in this chapter). Goblet
cells are the predominant secretory cell type in domestic mam-
mals. Bronchiolar exocrine cells are relatively scarce or even ab-
sent in the larger airways; they are described on page 162.
Neuroendocrine cells are APUD cells; that is, they are charac-
terized by amine precursor uptake and decarboxylation. They are
'eujuel leseq aui uo saseq iaul yiim padeus-pueiad Aedai
The neuroendocrine cells are identified with histochemical meth-
ods and, at the fine-structural level, contain dense-cored, ar-
gyrophilic granules, abundant ER, Golgi complex, ribosomes,
and many filaments. These cells are most abundant in young
B
animals and are sometimes associated with nerves.
A variety of migratory cells are also observed in the epithe-
lium. These include lymphocytes, globule leukocytes, and mast
cells. Globule leukocytes are cells of unknown function that con-
tain relatively large acidophilic, metachromatic granules.
The tracheal propria-submucosa consists of loose connective
tissue and a subepithelial layer of longitudinally oriented elastic
fibers; cells include fibrocytes, lymphocytes, plasma cells, glob-
ule leukocytes, and mast cells. The propria-submucosa contains
tubuloacinar seromucous glands that open into the lumen via
ducts that are lined with ciliated cells, mucus-secreting cells, and
various intermediate cells. The tubular portions of the tracheal
glands are lined by mucus-secreting cells, and their acinar por-
tions are lined primarily by serous secretory cells. The mucus-
secreting cells generally secrete sulfated acid glycoproteins. Serous
cells are the major secretory cells of the glands in most species;
their secretory product is a neutral glycoprotein that is sometimes
FlGURE 9-13 Horizontal section through the caudal portion of
sulfated. Tracheal glands provide most of the secretory material
a feline vocal fold. Vacal ligament (A);: vocal muscle (B). Note the
thick stratified squamous epithelium on the vocal fold and its gradual
that covers the ciliated surface in the trachea. These glands are
decrease in height toward the trachea. After a short transitional
abundant in the proximal portions of the trachea of virtually all
domestic mammalian species.
nature. Hematoxylin and eosin (×39).
The most distinctive feature of the trachea is hyaline carti-
lage (Fig. 9-15), which in most species occurs as roughly C- or
U-shaped separate pieces. In some individuals, however, the car-
tilage is fused in places to form a continuum. The dorsal free ends
strands of elastic fibers, and small areas of elastic cartilage. A
loose connective tissue forms the tunica adventitia surrounding
of the cartilages are bridged by the trachealis muscle, a band of
smooth muscle. In most species, the muscle attaches to the peri-
the laryngeal cartilages and muscles.
chondrium on the internal side of the cartilage. In carnivores,
this attachment is on the external surface of the cartilage. Nerves
and large blood vessels are generally associated with the smooth
TrACHEA AND
muscle band. The external perichondrium is surrounded by the
EXTRAPULMONARY
loose connective tissue of the adventitia.
BRONCHI
Within the thoracic cavity, the trachea terminates by bifur-
cating into two primary bronchi. Distal to the bifurcation, the
Distal to the larynx, the respiratory system consists of a series of
primary bronchi provide branches that enter the lungs. The struc-
branching tubes (Fig. 9-14),the tracheobronchial airways, which
tural characteristics of primary bronchi are the same as those of
open into the large (approximately 25 times the body surface)
the trachea, except that cartilage is in the form of irregular plates.
alveolar gas exchange area. The trachea, the largest in diameter
and length of these tubes, provides the air passageway between
the larynx and the bronchi. It is a semiflexible and semicollapsi-
LUNG
ble tube that extends from the larynx into the thoracic cavity.
The lining epithelium of the tracheobronchial tree is respi-
Most of the thoracic cavity is occupied by right and left lungs. The
ratory epithelium (Fig. 9-15), containing ciliated cells, brush
 lung of mammals may be divided into intrapulmonary conducting
Respiratory System · Chorles G. Plopper ond Donaid R. Adoms
161
ntrapulmo
Acir
arDuct
Bronchiol
FIGURE 9-I4 Comparison of a schematic drawing of the organization of the tracheobronchial airways and gas exchange area (left) and a
cast of the air space in the tra.cheobronchial airways (right). In many species, terminal bronchioles have
(inset, lower right), while in other species the transition is extensive with many generations of bronchioles containing alveolar outpocketings
and called respiratory bronchioles (inset, lower left)
airways, gas exchange area (parenchyma), and pleura. The intra
Intrapulmonary Conducting Airways
pulmonary conducting airways (bronchi and bronchioles) compose
Bronchi
approximately 6% ofthe lung. The gas exchange area, consisting of
respiratory bronchioles (also referred to as transition zone), alveolar
The bronchial tree is formed by a primary bronchus and the var-
ducts, alveolar sacs, and alveoli, comprises approximately 85% of
ious orders of airways that it supplies (Fig. 9-14). The largest seg-
the lung. The lung is encapsulated by a layer of connective tissue
ments of the intrapulmonary conducting airways are called lobar
covered by mesothelial cells termed the visceral (pulmonary)
bronchi, each of which enters a lobe of the lung at its hilum. The
pleura. Along with the pleura, the intrapulmonary nervous and
lobar bronchi divide into two smaller branches, which divide
vascular tissue (pulmonary arteries, pulmonary veins, and bronchial
again, and this process continues until the gas exchange area is
arteries) comprise the remaining 9 to 10% of the lung.
reached. The first two or three generations of branching from a
二
trachea
bronchus
FIGURE 9-I 5  Schematic drawing of a cross section of the trachea and detailed sections through parts of the wall of the trachea and a.
bronchus. Note the differences in the height of the epithelium (A), the glandular density (B), the thickness of the sof tissue in the propria-
submucosa (C), the presence of hyaline cartilage as rings in the trachea versus plates in the bronchus (D), and the location of smooth muscle (E).
162
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
lobar bronchus supply portions of the lung lobe called broncho-
pulmonary segments. Each succeeding generation of branch-
ing is made of a greater number of airways and has a larger total
cross-sectional area than the generation before it.
The histologic appearance of a bronchus is generally similar
to that of the trachea, except that the various layers are thinner
B
(Fig. 9-15). Bronchi are lined by a respiratory epithelium com-
posed primarily of ciliated cells, secretory cells, and basal cells.
A
Proximodistally, the composition of the epithelium changes; mu-
cous cells and basal cells decrease and bronchiolar exocrine cells
increase in number. At the same time, the epithelial height and
 the thickness of the propria-submucosa progressively decrease.
The propria-submucosa is loose connective tissue contain-
ing mixed glands (bronchial glands) in all species except goats;
bronchial glands are less abundant in distal bronchi. The hyaline
cartilage of the proximal bronchi is in the form of irregular
FIGURE 9-16(
 Cross section of a bronchiole. The airway lumen
plates, and the smooth muscle is interspersed either between or
(A) is lined by simple cuboidal epithelium (B) followed by a thin
layer af smooth muscle (C). Alveoli (D) surround the bronchiole.
on the luminal side of the plates. The muscle cells are generally
Toluidine blue (×135).
arranged in a circular fashion, perpendicular to the long axis of
the airway. The amount of cartilage decreases proximodistally,.
whereas smooth muscle becomes relatively more abundant. The
adventitial connective tissue is primarily loose, with many colla-
ventitia is attached to the alveolar gas exchange area and is lined
 gen fibers and variable numbers of elastic fibers. Many of the
by alveolar epithelial cells and a pulmonary capillary bed.
fibers are oriented longitudinally, whereas others are oriented
 perpendicularly to the long axis of the airway. Adventitial and
Gas Exchange Area
submucosal nerve plexuses and intraepithelial nerve endings are
present. In most domestic species, the extensive vascular supply
The gas exchange area, also referred to as parenchyma, can be or-
derives from the systemic circulation via the bronchial artery.
 ganized into either functional or structural units. The functional
unit of the gas exchange area is called the acinus, or terminal res-
Bronchioles
piratory unit (Figs. 9-14 and 9-17). The acinus includes all air
spaces distal toa single terminal bronchiole, including branching
 Bronchioles arise from bronchi, branch into several generations,
respiratory bronchioles, alveolar ducts, alveolar sacs, and alveoli.
and terminate as terminal bronchioles (Fig. 9-14). Several genera-
The lobule is a structural unit rather than a functional unit.
tions of terminal bronchioles are present in horses, cattle, and
It comprises a cluster of acini that is separated from adjacent clus-
ters by connective-tissue septa. These connective-tissue septa are
in carnivores
termed interlobular septa and are composed of collagen and
Bronchioles have roughly circular cross-sectional profiles
elastic fibers and blood vessels. Both bronchial arteries and pul-
and are lined with simple columnar or cuboidal epithelium
monary veins are located in interlobular septa. The lungs of cat-
(Fig. 9-16) composed of ciliated cells and bronchiolar ex-
tle, sheep, and pigs are highly lobulated and have complete septa.
ocrine cells (Clara cells). These cells have characteristics of
The lungs of horses have incomplete septa and are considered
both secretory cells and cells capable of metabolizing xenobi-
 poorly lobulated. Carnivores do not have interlobular septa.
otic compounds. The secretory granules contain either neutral
glycoprotein or low-molecular-weight protein. Smooth endo-
 plasmic reticulum is abundant in cells from horses and sheep
Respiratory Bronchioles
but is minimally present in those from carnivores, cattle, and
Bronchioles in which the walls possess outpocketings of gas ex-
pigs. Glycogen is the predominant feature of bronchiolar ex-
change tissue (i.e., alveoli) are termed respiratory bronchioles.
ocrine cells in carnivores and cattle and is rarely observed in
They are also called the transition zone, which is the focus of
most other species. In carnivores, the epithelium of terminal
 most lung disorders. The histologic appearance of respiratory
bronchioles consists primarily of bronchiolar exocrine cells
bronchioles is similar to that of terminal bronchioles, with the ex-
The propria-submucosa is sparse loose connective tissue;
Ia s oaaie Aq padnau si unuda un u una
glands and cartilage are absent. The smooth muscle is arranged
and 9-18). The smooth muscle is arranged in fascicles that under-
in separate circular and oblique fascicles. Numerous nerve fibers
lie the simple columnar or cuboidal epithelium. The alveoli open
occur in the area immediately below the epithelium and inter-
between these muscle bundles.
spersed between muscle fascicles.
In respiratory bronchioles of carnivores, extensive alveolar-
The adventitia is loose connective tissue, including elastic
ization occurs (Fig. 9-18); generally, there are fewer alveoli in the
fibers oriented circularly or obliquely. The outer border of the ad-
proximal generation of branching. The epithelium consists almost
Respiratory System · Chorles G. Plopper and Donald R. Adams
163
terminal bronchiole
respiratorybronchiole
alveolarduct
alveolar
/sac
alveolus
interalveolarpores
FIGURE 9-17
 Schematic illustration of the gas exchange area originating from a terminal bronchiole.
entirely of bronchiolar exocrine cells. In horses, cattle, sheep, and
pigs, respiratory bronchioles are short or absent (Fig. 9-19).
Alveolar Ducts and Alveolar Sacs
Respiratory bronchioles branch into tubular structures termed
alveolar ducts (Figs. 9-14, 9-17, 9-18, and 9-19). The ducts are
comparable to hallways lined by doorless rooms on all sides. Each
of these doorless rooms is an alveolus. Between one and five gen-
erations of alveolar ducts are supplied by a single respiratory
bronchiole. The walls of an alveolar duct are composed of the
open sides of alveolar air spaces and the terminations of the inter-
alveolar septa that separate these alveoli. Spiraling bands of smooth
muscle and elastic fibers oriented perpendicular to the long axis
of the alveolar ducts lie underneath the epithelium at the termi-
nations of the interalveolar septa.
The alveolar ducts terminate in clusters of alveoli called
alveolar sacs (Figs. 9-14 and 9-17). A shared space into which
FIGUre 9-18
3 Light microscopic and scanning electron micra-
 several alveolar sacs open is called an atrium.
scopic appearance of a terminal bronchiole and gas exchange area in
the feline lung. Terminal bronchiole (A), respiratory bronchiole into
Alveoli
which open a few alveoli (B), alveolar duct completely surrounded
by alveoli (C), alveoli (D). Methylene blue-Azure Il (top: x55;
The basic unit for gas exchange in the pulmonary parenchyma is the
bottom: ×70)
alveolus (Figs. 9-14, 9-20, and 9-21). Alveoli are epithelium-lined
164
interalveolar
type I cell
septum
type I cell
pulmonary
capillary
type Il cell
type ll cell
interalveolar
septum
interalveolar
septum 
typelcell
type Il cell
alveolarmacrophage
FIGURE 9-20
 Schematic illustration of parts of three adjacent
alveoli, as outined in the rectangle (inset): type I alveolar epithelial
cell; type ll alveolar epithelial cell; interalveolar septum; pulmonary
capillary; alveolar macrophage. Note the merger of the basal laminae
of the pulmonary capillary and adjacent alveolus (*).
 The type II or granular (great) alveolar epithelial cell
(Fig. 9-22) is a cuboidal cell with a central nucleus. This cell type
covers the remainder of the interalveolar septal surface area (ap-
proximately 3%). Its alveolar surface bears microvilli and ranges
from 100 to 280 μm? per cell. This cell contains mitochondria,
rER, microvesicles, a Golgi complex, and multiple characteristic
osmiophilic vesicles called lamellar bodies. These lamellar bod-
ies are believed to be primarily phospholipid and are the source
FIGUrE 9-19
 Light microscopic and scanning electron micro-
 of phospholipids in pulmonary surfactant that lines the air
scopic appearance of the terminal air spaces of the mouse (top) and
the rat (bottom). Terminal bronchiole (A); alveolar duct that is com-
pletely sumounded by alveoli (B); alveoli (C); pulmonary arteriole (D)
type I and type I cells.
pulmonary venule (E). Toluidine blue (top: x85; bottom: ×l 10).
 Pulmonary alveolar macrophages are likewise present on
the air side of the interalveolar septa (Fig. 9-23). As active phago-
cytic cells, they are part of the mononuclear phagocyte system
spheroid air spaces that open into an alveolar sac, alveolar duct, or
distributed throug hout the body.
respiratory bronchiole; they are separated by interalveolar septa.
Interalveolar septa are thin sheets of connective tissue con-
The alveolar epithelial lining, located adjacent to the air
taining a capillary plexus (Fig. 9-20). The interalveolar intersti-
space, comprises two epithelial celltypes: type I and type I alve-
tial connective tissue contains collagen and elastic fibers and
olar epithelial cells. The type I or squamous alveolar epithe-
fibrocytes; pericytes, macrophages, lymphocytes, and plasma
lial cell (respiratory epithelial cell) is flat with a central nucleus
cells may also be present.
and rests on a continuous basal lamina (Fig. 9-20). The thin cyto-
The capillary bed of the interalveolar septa is an intermeshed
plasm has few mitochondria, minimal amounts of rER, and a
network of short, branching vessels. Individual capillary beds tra-
 moderate number of endocytotic vesicles. This cell type covers
verse the walls of three to seven alveoli when passing from a pul-
approximately 97% of the interalveolar septal surface in all the
monary arteriole to a pulmonary venule. Most endothelial cells
an I adi ejo eare arejins areiaae aui'iej snul paipnis sainads
oaie I adi oi uaneipe uonoai aun ui useldoi paienuaiie aaeu
ranges from 5000 to 7000 μm?.
lar epithelial cells. In these attenuated areas, the basal laminae of
Respiratory System · Charles G. Plopper and Donald R. Adams
165
e d e s al au u (  au oi ng sla aia eae (ea)
macrophage (A). Note the pores in the interalveolar septum (B) (×I232). (Courtesy of W. 5. Tyler.)
alveolar epithelial cells and endothelial cells fuse. Capillary en-
Pleura
dothelial cells (Fig. 9-20) are characterized by few organelles and
The visceral, or pulmonary, pleura is a serous membrane that
relatively numerous endocytotic vesicles. The intercellular junc-
completely covers both lungs, except at the hilum and pulmo-
tions tend to be loose or leaky; the tight junctions have few anas-
nary ligament. This covering layer consists of squamous to
tomosing ridges. The surface area of the gas exchange capillary
 cuboidal mesothelial cells overlaying varying amounts of elas-
bed is between 66 and 75% of the surface area of the air side of
the interalveolar septa.
tic fibers and dense irregular connective tissue. Pleural meso-
thelial cells contain large amounts of rER and mitochondria;
The alveoli contain a small amount of fluid, consisting of a
biphasic layer of plasma filtrates overlaid by a thin layer of phos
their free surfaces are covered by microvilli. At its thickest, the
pholipids. This phospholipid layer or pulmonary surfactant
connective-tissue elements of the pleura consist of two or more
reduces the intraalveolar surface tension, preventing alveolar
layers of elastic laminae, many dense irregular bundles of col-
lagen fibers, pulmonary capillaries, and two additional sets of
collapse.
The blood-air barrier consists of the surface-lining layer
vessels. These two sets of vessels include capillaries and small
arterioles from the bronchial circulatory system and lymph ves-
of pulmonary surfactant and fluid, the alveolar type I cell, fused
 basal laminae of the alveolar epithelial cell and the underlying
sels. The pulmonary capillaries supply the superficial portion
of the gas exchange area. The connective tissue of the pulmo-
capillary endothelial cell, the capillary endothelial cell, and the
 plasmalemma ofa red blood cell (Fig. 9-20). The average thick-
nary pleura is continuous with that of the interalveolar septa. The
thickness of the pulmonary pleura varies from species to species
ness of this barrier is 1.5 μm in most species, with the thinnest
 and within different regions of the same species. The pleura is
areas ranging from O.2 to 0.7 μm. At its thickest, this barrier
thinnest in the dog and cat. In these species, the submesothelial
consists of the above-mentioned layers and interstitial connec-
connective tissue is minimal, and the only blood supply is derived
tive tissue and cells between the basal laminae of epithelial and
from the pulmonary artery. The pleura is thick in large domestic
endothelial cells. The blood-air barrier prevents the massive re
mammals
lease of fluid filtrate from capillaries into the air space while
permitting diffusion of oxygen and carbon dioxide between
Blood Vessels and Lymphatics
blood capillaries and alveoli (Figs. 9-20 and 9-23)
Openings in the interalveolar septa interconnect adjacent
Blood is supplied to the lungs through two different circulatory
alveoli These openings, called septal pores (alveolar pores)
systems: pulmonary and bronchial. Pulmonary arteries carry
(Figs. 9-21 and 9-23), are lined by epithelial cells and permit air
the entire output of unoxygenated blood from the right ventricle.
Pulmonary arteries and their branches are under low pressure;
166
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
endothelial cell (C) (x8200). (From Tyler WS, Gillespie JR, Nowell JA. Modem functional morphology
of the equine lung. Equine Vet J 197l;3:84-94.)
thus, their walls have fewer elastic and collagen fibers and fewer
lar septa. In cattle, horses, pigs, and sheep, the pulmonary veins
smooth muscle cells than vessels of comparable size in the sys-
accompany the bronchial tree on the side opposite that of pulmo-
temic circulatory system. Pulmonary arteries and the tracheo-
nary arteries.
bronchial tree have a common adventitia.
The pulmonary lymphatics begin as lymph capillaries, lo-
The bronchial arteries are under high pressure as a part of
cated throughout the interstitium, except for the interstitium of
the systemic arterial circulatory system. The blood vessels in this
interalveolar septa. Collecting lymph vessels are found through-
system have the same wall structure as those of other systemic ar-
out the connective tissue of the lung, with the exception of that
teries of the same size. Inallspecies,the bronchial artery supplies
surrounding alveoli, alveolar sacs and ducts, and respiratory
blood to the large bronchi, the major pulmonary vessels, and the
bronchioles.
pulmonary lymph nodes. Anastomoses between bronchial and
pulmonary arterial circulatory systems have been identified in
Innervation
the walls of medium-sized bronchi and bronchioles of horses, cat-
tle, and sheep.
 The innervation is from two sources: the parasympathetic sys-
 All blood from the lungs is carried back to the heart by pul-
tem (via the vagus nerve) and the sympathetic system (via the
monary veins, a low-pressure system. The pulmonary veins have
middle cervical and cervicothoracic ganglia). General visceral af-
thin walls with little smooth muscle in dogs, cats, horses, and
ferent sensory fibers from pulmonary tissue are also contained in
goats. Pulmonary veins with large muscle bundles are present in
the vagus nerve. Fibers from vagus nerves intermingle to form
cattle and pigs. In most species, the pulmonary veins are located
a plexus along the walls of the airway tree and the pulmonary
at the periphery of lobules and course to the hilum in interlobu-
vasculature, with ganglia present in the adventitia of large air-
Respiratory System ● Chorles G. Plopper ond Doraid R. Adoms
167
FIGURE 9-23 Eectron micrograph of an alveolar macrophage projecting through a septal pore. The
macrophage has numerous filopodia, phagosomes, and phagolysosomes. The thin layer of cytoplasm of
the type I (squamous) alveolar epithelial cells (A) is separated by a basal lamina from the capillary
endothelium (B). Erythrocytes (C) are in the capillary lumen. The dark lines (arrows) are tight junctions
between adjacent squamous alveolar epithelial cells (x8 I0O). (From Tyler W5, Gillespie JR, Nowell JA.
Moderm fLunctional morphology of the equirne lung. Equinre Vet J 1 97 1;3:8494.)
ways. Individual nerve fibers are distributed irregularly over the
ofbirds remains relatively constant while the volume of their air
wall of arteries, veins, and airways. Free nerve endings are pres-
sacs changes during ventilation.
ent near glands, within smooth muscle bundles,and in the inter-
The nasal cavity is lined by epithelia similar to those of
alveolar septa.
mammals, with stratified squamous epithelium rostrally, ol-
factory epithelium dorsocaudally, and respiratory epithelium
lining most of the remaining areas. In the respiratory epithe-
AVIAN RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
lium, groups of goblet cells form intraepithelial glands. Large
air spaces, the paired infraorbital sinuses, are often clinically in-
In contrast to the mammalian respiratory system, the respira-
volved in respiratory infections; these sinuses, which drain into
tory system of birds contains a simpler larynx, a syrinx, only four
the nasal cavity, are lined by respiratory epithelium.
orders or generations of conducting airways, a compact spongy
The larynx, devoid of vocal folds, produces little sound. The
lung, and air sacs. The highly effcient avian respiratory system
trachea is similar in structure to that in mammals, except that
comprises lung tissue positioned between conducting airways
the tracheal cartilages form complete rings encircling the airway;
and air sacs. During inspiration, air is drawn into the nasal cav-
the cartilage rings overlap and interlock with adjacent rings. The
ity and through the lung tissue to the air sacs; during expira-
trachealis muscle is absent, and intraepithelial mucous glands are
tion, the reverse occurs. Birds breathe more slowly and deeply
numerous (Fig. 9-24). As a result of differences in cartilage struc-
than mammals, and unlike that of mammals, the lung volume
ture and smooth muscle content, the trachea of birds, unlike that
168
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
A
FlGURE 9-24 Epithelium from the trachea of a chicken. Most
FIGURE 9-25 Tertiary bronchus (parabronchus) of a chicken
epithelial cells (A) that line the surface of the conducting airways of
lung. An atrium (B) opens into the lumen (A) of the tertiary
birds are ciliated. Intraepithelial mucous glands (B) that open onto
bronchus. Air capillaries (C) open into the atria. Hematoxylin
the luminal surface. Hematoxylin and eosin (x270).
and eosin (×l 10)
of mammals, does not undergo phasic changes in diameter dur-
SUGGESTED READINGS
ing breathing.
Vocalization occurs in the avian syrinx, a specialized region of
Adams DR, Hotchkiss DK. The canine hasal mucosa. Zentralbl
the tracheobronchial junction with considerable species-dependent
Veterinarmed C Anat Histol Embryol 1983;12:109-125.
structural variation. The intrasyringeal (tympaniform) membranes,
Adams DR, Wiekamp MD. The canine vomeronasal organ. J Anat
which vibrate during production of sound, are lined by stratified
1984;138:771787.
squamous epithelium.
Berendsen PB, Ritter AB, DeFouw DO. An ultrastructural morphomet-
The lungs comprise primary, secondary, and tertiary bronchi,
ric comparison of the peripheral with the hilar air-blood barrier of
dog lung. Anat Rec 1 984;209:5 35-540.
atria, and air capilaries. Extrapulmonary primary bronchi con-
Frasca JM, Auerbach O, Parks VR, et al. Electron microscopic observa-
tinue as intrapulmonary primary bronchi or mesobronchi, each
tions of the bronchial epithelium of dogs. I. Control dogs. Exp Mol
-idg 'ses aie ieuuopqe ue oiu Sujuado Aq saeuuan uoum jo
Pathol 1968;9:363-379.
thelium of the primary bronchi is similar to that of the trachea.
Glad ysheva O, Martynova G. The morphofunctional organization of the
The bronchial cartilages are incomplete medially in the proximal
bovine olfactory epithelium. Gegenbaurs Morphol Jahrtb 1982;
portion of the bronchi and are patchlike more distally. Secondary
128:78.
bronchi arise from each intrapulmonary primary bronchus, and
Gross EA, Morgan KT. Architecture of nasal passages and larynx. In:
many open into other air sacs. Tertiary bronchi or parabronchi
Parent RA, ed. Comparative Biology of the Normal Lung. Boca
approximately 100 to 150 μm in diameter, interconnect the sec-
Raton: CRC Press, 1991.
-auida Aioedsan uoy salea unauda aui youoiq Arepuo
Harkema JR. Epithelial cells of the nasal passages. In: Parent RA, ed.
Comparative Biology of the Normal Lung. Boca Raton: CRC Press,
lium in the secondary bronchi to simple cuboidal or squamous
1991.
epithelium in the tertiary bronchi. A network of spiraling bun-
Jacobs VL, Sis RF, Chenoweth PJ, et al. Structure of the bovine vomero-
dles of smooth muscle occurs in the lamina propria of the sec-
 hasal complex and its relationships to the palate: tongue manipula-
ondary and tertiary bronchi. Numerous smallair spaces, or atria,
tion. Acta Anat 1981;110:48-58.
open into tertiary bronchi; the projecting tips of the interatrial
Kay JM. Blood vessels of the lung. In: Parent RA, ed. Comparative
sllan snouuenbs Aq pau!l are pue alpsnu qnoous ureiuon eidas
Biology of the Normal Lung. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 1991.
(Fig. 9-25).
Mariassy AT. Epithelial cells of trachea and bronchi. In: Parent RA, ed.
Gas exchange in the avian lung occurs between blood and air
Comparative Biology of the Normal Lung. Boca Raton: CRC
capillaries. These capillaries, 5 to 15 μm in diameter, open into the
Press, 1991.
atria. Simple squamous epithelium lines the greater portion of the
Mariassy AT, Plopper CG. Tracheobronchial epithelium of the sheep.
atria and air capillaries. The epithelial portion of the gas exchange
 I. Quantitative light microscopic study of epithelial cell abundance
area consists ofboth type I and type II cells similar to those of mam-
and distribution. Anat Rec 1983;205:263-275.
Mariassy AT, Plopper CG. Tracheobronchial epithelium of the sheep.
mals;a biphasic fuid lining layer, similar to surfactant of mammals,
II. Ultrastructural and morphometric analysis of the epithelial
is also observed in birds.
The terminal air sacs are lined by a simple squamous to cuboi-
Matiassy AT, Plopper CG, Dungworth DL. Characteristics of bovine
dal epithelium; epithelial surfaces adjacent to ostia of bronchi are
lung as observed by scanning elecron microscopy. Anat Rec 1975;
ciliated.
183:13-26.
Respiratory System · Chorles G. Plopper ond Donaid R. Adoms
169
MeBride JT. Architecture of the tracheobronchial tree. In: Parent RA, ed.
Tandler B, Sherman JM, Boat TF. Surface architecture of the mucosal
Comparative Biology of the Normal Lung. Boca Raton: CRC Press,
epithelium of the cat trachea. I. Cartilaginous portion. Am J Anat
1991.
1983;168:119-131.
Mercer RR, Crapo JD. Architecture of the acinus. In: Parent RA, ed.
Tandler B, Sherman JM, Boat TF, et al. Surface architecture of the
Compatative Biology of the Notmal Lung. Boca Raton: CRC Press,
mucosal epithelium of the cat trachea. Il. Structure and dynamics
1991.
of the membranous portion. Am J Anat 1983;168:133-144.
 Pinkerton KE, Gehr P, Crapo JD. Architecture and cellular composition 
Tyler WS, Julian MD. Subgross anatomy of lungs, pleura, connective
of the air-blood barrier. In: Parent RA, ed. Comparative Biology of
tissue septa, distal airways and structural units. In: Parent RA, ed.
the Normal Lung. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 1991.
Comparative Biology of the Normal Lung. Boca Raton: CRC
Plopper CG, Hyde DM. Epithelial cells of bronchioles. In: Parent RA,
Press, 1991.
ed. Comparative Biology of the Normal Lung. Boca Raton: CRC
Wysocki CJ. Neurobehavioral evidence for the involvement of the vomero-
Press, 1991.
nasal system in mammalian reproduction. Neurosci Biobehav Rev
 Plopper CG, Matiassy AT, Wilson DW, et al. Compatison of noncili-
1979:3:301-341.
ated tracheal epithelial cells in six mammalian species: ultrastruc-
Zorychta E, Richardson JB. Innervation of the lung. In: Parent RA, ed.
ture and population densities. Exp Lung Res 1983;5:281-294.
Comparative Biology of the Normal Lung. Boca Raton: CRC Press,
Reid L, Jones R. Bronchial mucosal cells. Fed Proc 1979;38:191-196.
1991.
Robertson B, Van Golds LMG, Batenberg JJ, eds. Pulmonary Surfactant.
Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers, 1984.
10
Digestive System
BRIAN L. FRAPPIER
Species Differences 
Tunica Mucosa
Ruminant Stomach
Tela Submucosa
 Rumen
Tunica Muscularis
 Reticulum and reticular sulcus
Tunica Serosa/Adventitia
Omasum
Oral Cavity
Abomasum
Lips
 Small Intestine
Cheeks
Tunica Mucosa
Hard Palate
Tela Submucosa
Soft Palate
Tunica Muscularis
Tongue
Tunica Serosa
Special lingual structures
 Blood Supply
Teeth
General Identifying Features
 Brachydont and hypsodont teeth
Large Intestine 
Structure
Cecum
Development
Colon
Salivary Glands
Rectum
General Characteristics
Anal Canal
Parotid Salivary Gland
Liver
Mandibular Salivary Gland
Capsule and Stroma
Sublingual Salivary Gland 
Parenchyma
 Minor Salivary Glands 
Bile Canaliculi and Bile Ducts
 Pharynx
Blood Supply
Esophagus
Lymph and Lymph Vessels 
 Esophagus-Stomach Junction
The Classic Liver Lobule—The Anatomic Unit of the Liver
Stomach
The Portal Lobule and the Liver Acinus—Functional Units
Nonglandular Region of the Tunica Mucosa
of the Liver
Glandular Region of the Tunica Mucosa
Gallbladder
 Cardiac gland region 
Pancreas
Proper gastric (fundic) gland region 
 Avian Digestive System
Pyloric gland region
170
Digestive System · Brion L. Froppier
171
The digestive system consists of a series of tubular organs and as-
tions from the digestive tube. Their ducts penetrate the walls of
sociated glands, the main function of which is to break down the
the tubular organs and discharge their secretory products into the
ingested food into smaller units that can be absorbed into the
lumina.
circulation and used for the maintenance of the organism.
Morphologic adaptations for specialized functions are char-
acteristic of the digestive systems of the domestic species. Con-
siderable variations in the teeth, stomachs, and large intestines
GENERAL STRUCTURe
result mainly from the variety of food consumed. For example, the
OF TUBULAR ORGANS
teeth of carnivores are adapted for tearing flesh, whereas those of
herbivores are specialized for grinding roughage. The forestom-
A general structural pattern exists for all tubular organs of the di-
ach of ruminants and the cecum and colon of horses reflect struc
 gestive, respiratory, urinary, and reproductive systems (Fig. 10-1).
tural variations that facilitate the microbial digestion of rough,
Familiarity with this general pattern is helpful in understanding
fibrous food.
the specific characteristics of each organ. The wall of a typical tu-
Although the large accessory digestive glands-
-salivary
 bular organ is composed of four coats. Each coat is called either a
glands, liver, and pancreas-
-are located outside the tubular por-
tunic or a tela. A tela has a delicate weblike structure while a tunic
tion of the digestive system, they originate as epithelial evagina-
is comprised of denser tissue.
FIGURE Io-I Schematic drawing of cross sections through various portions of the digestive tra.ct.
Esophagus without submucosal glands (A). Esophagus with submucosal glands (B). Small intestine with
and without submucosal glands and with aggregated lymphatic nodules (C). Large intestine {D). Tunica
mucosa: epithelium (E), lamina propria (F), lamina muscularis (G). Tela submucosa (H). Tunica muscularis:
circular layer (l), longitudinal layer (I). Tunica serosa (K). Tunica adventitia (L)
172
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Tunica Mucosa
nerve plexus of the autonomic nervous system, the myenteric
(Auerbach's) plexus.
The tunic next to the lumen is the tunica mucosa. The tunica
mucosa is also referred to as a mucous membrane or simply, the
-no an oi aieio iun so le sa eso y so
Tunica Serosa/Adventitia
side ofthe body and is protected by a layer of mucus, aviscous ma-
The outermost tunic may be either a tunica serosa or tunica adven-
terial containing cast-off epithelial cells and leukocytes, in addition
titia. The tunica serosa (serosa or serous membrane) is composed
to mucin, a product of specialized glands. Structures associated
of a layer of connective tissue with a covering of mesothelium.
with, or located within, the oral cavity, such as the lips, cheeks, and
Organs that border the pleural, pericardial, and peritoneal cavi-
tongue, have a mucosa, even though they are not typical tubulan
ties are covered by a serosa. In each of these locations, the serosa is
 given a special name: pleura, epicardium, and peritoneum, respec-
epithelium, a lamina propria, and a lamina muscularis.
tively. All organs not bordering these cavities, such as the cervi-
The mucosal epithelium is constantly present and may con-
al e aay Aaui 'uniauosau e yel 'sngeudosa aul jo ired ie
sist of any of the types of surface epithelia, depending on the func-
of connective tissue, called a tunica adventitia, or simply adven-
 tion of the specific organ. The epithelium rests on a basement
titia, which blends with the surrounding fascia (Fig. 10-1).
membrane.
The lamina propria is a layer of connective tissue immedi-
ately beneath the epithelium. In most organs, this is a loose con-
OrAl CAVITY
nective tissue containing fine collagen, elastic, and reticular
fibers as well as all of the cells typical of loose connective tissue
Lips
(see Chapter 3). The lamina propria is also classified as diffuse
 lymphatic tissue because it contains immunocompetent T and B
 The junction between the integument and the digestive system
lymphocytes. The lym phocytes initiate the imm une response to
occurs on the lips, which are covered on the outside by skin and
injurious agents that have penetrated the epithelium. Blood ves-
on the inside by a mucosa. Near the mucocutaneous junction,
sels essential for the nourishment of the epithelium, along with
the skin is devoid of hair follicles and the epidermis is thicker,
with a more elaborate interdigitation with the underlying con-
lymph capillaries and nerves, are also present in the lamina pro-
e in s suiion dod ur aun 'suo auos un 'eid
nective tissue (Fig. 10-2). The mucosa of the lips is covered by
referred to as mucosal glands because they are confined to the
stratified squamous epithelium that is keratinized in ruminants
mucosa.
and horses, but nonkeratinized in carnivores and pigs. The lam-
The lamina muscularis is inconstantly present. It consists of
ina propria and submucosa blend without a clear line of demarca-
one to three layers of smooth muscle. The lamina muscularis al-
tion. Aggregates of serous or seromucous minor salivary glands,
lows independent movement of the mucosa, possibly to facilitate
referred to as labial glands, are distributed throughout the
the movement of luminal contents or to assist in the expression of
propria-submucosa. The tunica muscularis consists of skeletal
secretions from mucosal glands.
muscle fibers of the orbicularis oris muscle.
Cheeks
Tela Submucosa
The tela submucosa, or simply submucosa, is a layer of con-
The cheeks, like the lips, are composed of an external covering
nective tissue that may contain glands (submucosal glands). In
of skin, a middle muscular layer (the buccinator muscle), and an
most organs, the connective tissue of the submucosa is more
dense than that of the lamina propria. Also present are blood ves-
sels, lymph vessels, and the submucosal (Meissner's) plexus, a
ganglionic nerve plexus of the autonomic nervous system. In or-
 gans without a lamina muscularis, the lamina propria and sub-
mucosa blend without a clear line of demarcation, forming a
propria-submucosa.
Tunica Muscularis
The tunica muscularis is the coat of smooth muscle or skeletal
muscle responsible for moving the ingesta through the tract and
for mixing the ingesta with glandular secretions. Usually, two
layers of muscle are present in the tunica muscularis of the tu-
bular organs of the digestive system. The muscle fibers of the
FIGURE I0-2 Lip (cat). Junction of keratinized stratified
'ued pa Aui e u no Aen paua aie ia i
squamous epithelium of skin and mucosa (A); junction of dermis and 
whereas those of the outer layer are arranged longitudinally or in
lamina propria of lip (B); orbicularis oris muscle (skeletal) of lip
a loosely coiled pattern. Between these two layers is a ganglionic
(C). Hematoxylin and eosin (x45).
Digestive System · Brion L. Froppier
173
internal mucosa lined by stratified squamous epithelium that may
or may not be keratinized, depending on the particular area or
species. In ruminants, the mucosa is studded with macroscopic,
caudally directed, conical buccal papillae that facilitate the pre-
hension and mastication of food (Fig. 10-3). The buccal glands
are minor salivary glands located in the propria-submucosa and
among the skeletal muscle bundles of the cheek, with some secre-
tory units extending into the dermis. The glands are compound
tubuloacinar glands and may be serous, mucous, or seromucous,
depending on the location and the species.
Hard Palate
The bones of the hard palate are covered by a mucosa, which ex-
FIGURE I0-4 Hard-palate mucosa (large ruminant). Propria-
hibits a series of transverse ridges called rugae. The mucosa is cov-
submucosa (A); keratinized stratified squamous epithelium (B); caudal
ered by a keratinized stratified squamous epithelium, which is
surface of ruga (arrow). Hematoxylin and eosin (×22).
 particularly thick in ruminants (Fig. 10-4). The lamina propria has
a well-developed papillary layer that blends with the submucosa
without an intervening lamina muscularis, forming a propria-
submucosa. The propria-submucosa is composed of a dense net-
work of collagen and reticular fibers and blends with the adjacent
periosteum. A dense network of capillaries and veins, especially well
developed in horses, permeates the propria-submucosa. Branched
tubuloacinar mucous and seromucous minor salivary glands (pala-
tine glands)are located in the caudal part of the hard palate in all
domestic mammals, except pigs. The rostral portion of the mucosa
of the hard palate is especially thick in ruminants and forms the
dental pad (pulvinus dentalis). The dental pad consists of a heav.
ily keratinized stratified squamous epithelium overlying a thick
layer of dense irregular connective tissue (Fig. 10-5). The lower (in-
 ferior) incisor teeth press against the pad, forming a tight grip on
forage during grazing.
FIGURE I0-3 Cheek (large ruminant). Conical buccal papilla
covered with keratinized stratified squamous epithelium (A); lamina
FIGURE I0-5 Dental pad (sheep). Propria-submucosa (A) with
propria (B); skeletal muscle (C); buccal glands (D). Hematoxylin and
papillae interdigitating with stratified squamous epithelium (B); stratum
eosin (×1 2).
comeum (C). Trichrome (x48).
174
Dellman's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Soft Palate
The soft palate consists of a core of skeletal muscle fibers with a
mucosa covering both surfaces. The oropharyngeal (ventral) sur-
face is covered by a stratified squamous epithelium. The naso-
pharyngeal (dorsal) surface is covered by a stratified squamous
epithelium caudally and a ciliated, pseudostratified columnar epi-
thelium rostrally. Between the two types of epithelium, a narrow
transition zone consisting of transitional epithelium is present.
The propria-submucosa contains branched tubuloacinar mucous
and seromucous palatine glands. Lymphatic tissue occurs in the
mucosa ofboth the oropharyngealand the nasopharyngeal surfaces;
in pigs and horses, a macroscopically visible tonsil is present on
the oropharyngeal surface. Longitudinally oriented skeletal mus-
cle fibers (the palatinus muscle) and connective tissue are located
between the two mucous membranes.
Tongue
The tongue is a muscular organ covered by a mucosa. It is im-
FIGURE 10-6
Tongue (horse). Filiform papillae are keratinized 
portant in the prehension, mastication, and deglutition of food.
The epithelium covering the tongue is stratified squamous.
threads extending from the surface of the stratified squamous
epithelium on the dorsum of the tongue (A); submucosa propria.
It is keratinized and thick on the dorsum, and nonkeratinized
(B); skeletal muscle (C). Hematoxylin and eosin (×26).
and thin on the ventral surface. The dorsum bears numerous
macroscopic lingual papillae. These papillae differ somewhat in
Lenticular papillae are flattened, lens-shaped projections
shape, are named according to their morphologic characteristics,
that are found on the torus linguae of ruminants. They are cov-
and serve either a mechanical or a gustatory function. The fili-
ered by keratinized stratified squamous epithelium and have a
form, conical, and lenticular papillae are purely mechanical; they
core of dense irregular connective tissue.
facilitate the movement of ingesta within the oral cavity. The
The fungiform papillae are scattered among the filiform
fungiform, vallate, and foliate papillae are gustatory, that is, they
papillae and have a dome-shaped upper surface in horses and pigs
 Contain the taste buds, which are responsible for perception of the
(Fig. 10-9). The shape is suggestive of a mushroom, and thus the
sense of taste.
name fungiform. The papillae are covered by a nonkeratinized
The filiform papillae are the most numerous type. They are
stratified squamous epithelium containing one or more taste buds
slender, threadlike structures that project above the surface of the
on the upper surface. The taste buds are sparse in these papillae in
tongue and are covered by a keratinized stratified squamous epi-
the tongues of horses and cattle, more numerous in those of sheep
thelium with a thick stratum corneum. They are supported by a
and pigs, and abundant in those of carnivores and goats. The con-
highly vascularized connective tissue core. Equine filiform papil-
nective tissue core is rich in blood vessels and nerves.
lae consist of very fine keratinized threads projecting above the
surface (Fig. 10-6). The connective tissue core ends at the base of
the thread. In ruminants, a keratinized cone projects above the
surface, and the connective tissue core has several secondary papil-
lae. Cats have large papillae with two prominences of unequal
size (Fig. 10-7). The caudal prominence is especially large and
gives rise to a caudally directed keratinized spine, supported by
a more rounded rostral papilla with a thinner stratum corneum.
The filiform papillae of dogs may have two or more apices; the
caudal apex is largest and has a stratum corneum thicker than
that of the other(s) (Fig. 10-8).
Conical papillae occur on the root of the tongue in dogs,
cats, and pigs, and on the torus linguae of ruminants (see Special
Lingual Structures section below). They are larger than the fili-
form papillae and usually are not highly keratinized. They con-
tain both primary and secondary connective tissue papillae. In
FIGURE I0-7 Tongue (cat). Fliform papilla with a caudally
pigs, the conical papillae are more correctly referred to as tonsil-
directed keratinized spine arising from the caudal prominence
lar papillae, because they contain a core of lymphatic tissue and,
(A); lamina propria (B); supporting rostral papilla (C). Hematoxylin
therefore, collectively constitute the lingual tonsil.
and eosin (×35)
Digestive System · Brion L. Froppier
175
FIGURE I0-8 Tongue (dog). Filiform papillae with caudall)
directed apices (A); lamina propria (B). Hematoxylin and eosin (×75).
FIGURE I0-10
Tongue (large ruminant). Vertical section of a
vallate papilla with a surrounding sulcus (A); taste buds in the
The vallate papillae are located on the dorsum of the tongue,
epithelium (B); a gustatory gland duct opening into the sulcus
(C); gustatory gland (D). Hematoxylin and eosin (×30). (From
just rostral to the root. They are large, flattened structures com-
Stirsor AW, Brown EM. Veterirary histology slide sets. East Lonsing, Ml:
pletely surrounded by an epithelium-lined sulcus (Fig. 10-10).
Michigan State University, Instructional Media Center, 1 970.)
They extend only slightly, if at all, above the lingual surface and
are covered by a stratified squamous epithelium. The epithelium
 on the papillary side of the sulcus contains many taste buds. Groups
The taste buds are ellipsoid clusters of specialized epithe-
of serous gustatory glands are located deep to the sulcus and have
lial cells embedded in the stratified squamous epithelium of the
ducts that open into the sulcus at various levels (Fig. 10-10).
fungiform, vallate, and foliate papillae of the tongue (Fig. 10-
Mucous glands may also be found beneath the papillae, but their
12). They also occur widely dispersed in the soft palate, epiglot-
secretory products are emptied directly onto the lingual surface.
tis, or other areas of the oral cavity and pharynx. The taste bud
The connective tissue core is rich in blood vessels and nerves. The
consists of a cluster of spindle-shaped epithelial cells that extend
number of vallate papillae varies with the species; horses and pigs
from the basement membrane to a small opening, the taste pore,
typically have one pair, carnivores have four to six pairs, and rumi-
at the epithelial surface (Fig. 10-12). In most mammalian species,
nants have eight to 24 pairs.
The foliate papillae are parall folds of the lingual mucosa
I cells, type II cells, and type III cells. Type I and type II cells
located on the margin of the tongue just rostral to the palatoglos-
sal arch. Taste buds are located in the epithelium on the sides of
the folds. The folds are separated by gustatory sulci (Figs. 10-11
and 10-12). Deep to the sulci lie serous gustatory glands, the ducts
of which empty into the sulci. Foliate papillae are absent in rumi-
nants; they are rudimentary and lack taste buds in cats
FIGURE I0-9 Tongue (pig). Fungiform papilla (A) with taste
FIGURE I0-II  Tongue (rabbit). Foliate papillae with prominent
buds (arrows). Hematoxylin and eosin (×75).
taste buds (A). Hematoxylin and eosin (×l I0).
176
Scattered among the muscle fibers and in the propria-
submucosa of the tongue are clusters of seromucous minor salivary
glands, which are collectively referred to as the lingual glands.
Specia! Lingua! Structures
The lyssa of the tongue of carnivores is a cordlike structure en-
closed in a dense irregular connective tissue capsule and extends
longitudinally,in the midline, near the ventral surface of the apex
of the tongue. The lyssa of dogs is filled with white adipose tis-
sue, skeletal muscle, blood vessels, and nerves, but that of cats
contains mainly white adipose tissue (Fig. 10-13). The tongue of
pigs contains a similar structure. A middorsal fibroelastic cord
with hyaline cartilage, skeletal muscle, and white adipose tissue
is present in the tongue of horses. It is termed the dorsal lingual
cartilage.
The ruminan
nt tongue has a large prominence, the torus lin-
e, covering the caudal portion of the dorsum and character-
FIGURE I0-I2 Taste buds (rabbit). Gustatory sulcus (A); taste
pore (B); nonmyelinated nerve fibers (C). Hematoxylin and eosin
(×615).
have apical microvilli that project into the taste pore; type III
cells have a club-shaped apex that also projects into the taste
pore. The type II cell is characterized by clusters of cytoplasmic
vesicles, resembling synaptic vesicles, adjacent to intraepithelial
nonmyelinated afferent nerve fibers. Therefore, the type III cell is
considered to be the chemoreceptor (taste) cell, whereas the
type I and type II cells are believed to serve a sustentacular (sup-
portive) role. The average life span of the cells is approximately
10 days. New cells are recruited from mitotically dividing cells in
the perigemmal region (Latin gemma, meaning “"bud").
The proper (intrinsic) lingual muscles consist of longitudi-
nally, transversely, and perpendicularly arranged bundles of skele-
tal muscle (Fig. 10-6). Because of the diverse arrangement of these
muscle fibers, the tongue has extensive mobility to facilitate move-
ment of food into and within the oral cavity.
The ventral surface of the tongue is covered by nonkeratinized
FIGURE I0-13 Lyssa (dog) Skeletal muscle (A); white adipose
stratified squamous epithelium. The mucosa contains an abun-
tissue (B); dense irregular connective tissue capsule (C);: intrinsic
lingual muscles (D); ventral surface of tongue (E). Hematoxylin and
lingual artery and vein. They participate in thermoregulation.
eosin (x28).
Digestive System · Brion L. Froppier
177
ized by a thickened mucosa. Connective tissue papillae extend al-
called the alveolus. Brachydont teeth include all those of carni-
most to the surface of the epithelium, which is thicker than that
vores (and human beings), the incisor teeth of ruminants, and the
on other regions of the tongue. Lenticular papillae and conical
teeth of pigs, except for the canine teeth.
papillae are scattered over the surface of this area.
Hypsodont teeth are much longer than brachydont teeth
and continue their growth throughout a portion, if not all, of the
adult life of the animal (Fig. 10-15). They do not have a crown
Teeth
and neck but, instead, have an elongated body; in some species,
Teeth are highly mineralized structures in the oral cavity that serve
the roots and neck form only after a delayed period. The tusks of
domestic mammals during the procuring, cutting, and crushing
the boar continue to grow throughout life and never develop
of food and as weapons of offense and defense. The tooth consists
roots. Hypsodont teeth include all those of horses, the cheek
of a highly mineralized outer part surrounding the pulp cavity,
teeth of ruminants, and the canine teeth of pigs.
which contains the dental pulp, a core of connective tissue, blood
vessels, lymph vessels, and nerves (Fig. 10-14).
Structure
The mineralized tissues of the teeth are enamel, dentin, and ce-
Brachydont and Hypsodont Teeth
mentum. Each of these has a separate origin and differs morpho-
Two types of teeth occur in the domestic mammals: brachydont
logically and in degree of mineralization.
and hypsodont. These teeth differ in their rates of growth and
Enamel covers the external surface of the crown of brachy-
in the arrangement of the layers of mineralized tissue.
dont teeth and lies beneath a layer of cementum in hypsodont
Brachydont teeth are short and cease to grow after erup-
teeth. It is the hardest substance in the body, composed of 99%
tion is completed (Fig. 10-14). They have a crown (the portion
mineral (hydroxyapatite) and 1% organic matrix by weight.
above the gingiva), a neck (the constricted region just below the
Histologically, enamel is composed of long, slender rods, enamel
gingival line), and one or more roots embedded in a bony socket
prisms, held together by interrod enamel. Parallel bundles of
laino aui oi iauui aui uonj asinon anbiiqo io Aaem e ansind spoi
surface of the enamel layer (Fig. 10-16). Curved lines (incremen-
tal lines) appear where these bundles change directions. Enamel
enamel
dentin-
enamel
interglobular
gingiva
dentin
dentin
periodontal
stratum
ligament
 granulosum
of the root
dental
cementum
gingiva
pulp
acellular
cementum
UR
alveolar
cellular
dental pulp
bone
K
 alveolar
cementum
bone
periodontal
ligament
FIGURE 10-14 S
 Schermatic drawing of a longitudinal section
through a bra.chydont tooth in situ. The dental pulp flls the pulp cavity
of the tooth. The location of the odontoblasts, at the periphery of the
dental pulp, is indicated by arrows. (From Dellmann HD). Veterinary 
FIGURE I0-15
Schematic drawing of a longitudinal section
through a hypsodont tooth in situ.
178
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
A
FIGURE I0-I6 Ground tooth (human). Junction of enamel (A)
and dentin (B) with the odontoblastic processes penetrating the
dentinal tubules; interglobular dentin (C). Unstained (×235)
is produced by ameloblasts that differentiate from the inner
enamel epithelium of the enamel organ (see Development section
below). Ameloblasts disappear from the fully developed brachy-
dont tooth, but a small population of columnar cells remains at
FIGURE I0-I7 Ground tooth (human). Lamellae of acellular
the base of the hypsodont tooth to continue enamel production.
cementum (A) oriented parallel to the surface of the root. Cellular
cementum with cementocytes (B) (×185). Inset: cementoalveolar
Cementum resembles bone in all its structural features.
(Sharpey's) fibers (arrow) embedded in the cementum. Unstained
Acellular cementum is composed of lamellae oriented parallel
(×185).
to the surface of the tooth (Fig. 10-17). Cellular cementum has
cementocytes, which occupy lacunae and canaliculi similar to
those of bone. Bundles of collagen fibers, called ceme ntoalveo.
lar (Sharpey's) fibers, extend from the alveolar bone into the ce-
the enamel of the body in hypsodont teeth. Dentin also forms the
mentum of the tooth (Fig. 10-17). Collectively, these fibers form
wall of the pulp cavity. It consists of a matrix of organic material,
the periodontal ligament, which anchors the tooth in the alve-
mainly randomly oriented collagen fibrils and glycoproteins, upon
olus. Cementoblasts at the junction of the cementum and the pe-
which is deposited minerals including primarily hydroxyapatite
riodontal ligament produce the fibrous matrix of the cementum,
with some carbonate, magnesium, and fluoride. The composition
and then later mineralize the cementum by depositing hydro-
is approximately 70% mineral and 30% organic matter. Dentin is
xyapatite crystals within the matrix. Once the cementoblasts are
 produced by a columnar layer of cells, called odontoblasts, which
surrounded by matrix, they are known as cementocytes. The
are located adjacent to the interior surface of the dentin in the outer
roots of brachydont teeth are covered by a layer of cementum that
layer of the dental pulp. Odontoblast processes lie in roughly
may slightly overlap the enamel on the neck. Cementum covers
 parallel anastomotic channels, the dentinal tubules, that extend
the outside surface of equine and ruminant hypsodont teeth, both
from the inner to the outer surface of the dentin. Peritubular
above and below the gingiva. It begins just above the area at the
dentin immediately surrounds the odontoblast processes and is
base of the tooth where the ameloblasts produce enamel. Equine
more highly mineralized than intertubular dentin, which con-
stitutes the remainder of the dentin. Unmineralized organic ma-
dont equivalent of acellular cementum. Equine cementum is also
terial, termed predentin, lies between the apex of the cell body of
unique in that it is vascular and innervated.
the odontoblasts and the mineralized dentin. Interglobular
Dentin is a highly mineralized tissue that constitutes the
dentin is composed of small, unmineralized or incompletely min-
eralized areas within the dentin at its periphery, immediately ad-
the cementum of the root in brachydont teeth, and also underlies
jacent to the enamel or cementum. These areas are more numerous
Digestive System · Brion L. Froppier
179
in the root of the tooth and form the stratum granulosum of the
stance. The most peripheral part of the pulp is the layer of odon-
dental root at the dentinocementum junction (Fig. 10-18). The
toblasts, from which the odontoblast proceses extend into the
odontoblasts continue to produce dentin throughout the life of
dentinal tubules. Basal processes from the odontoblasts extend
the tooth, although at a slower rate after the tooth erupts
into the amorphous ground substance or unite with similar
Unlike brachydont teeth, the hypsodont cementum and
enamel layers invaginate into the dentin. The invaginations that
deposited on the inside of the tooth, the size of the pulp cavity is
extend from the occlusal surface down into the tooth are known
gradually reduced as the animal ages.
as infundibula, whereas similar invaginations along the sides of
the tooth form enamel plicae. These invaginations are common
Development
in the cheek teeth (premolars and molars) of horses and rumi-
In the embryo, an invagination of the oral ectoderm into the under-
nants. Because enamel is the hardest of the mineralized tissues,
lying mesenchyme forms the dental lamina (Fig. 10-19), a con-
it is most resistant to wear and projects above the occlusal sur-
tinuous, arch-shaped sheet of epithelial cells extending along the
face as sharp enamel crests; dentin and cementum are less re-
future site of the gingiva in both the upper and lower jaws. Isolated
sistant and wear away more readily. The uneven wearing of the
thickenings arise on the labial side of the dental lamina, where
mineralized tissues creates a corrugated surface, which is highly
effective for grinding food.
Dental pulp occupies the pulp cavity of the tooth. It is com-
posed of connective-tissue cells and fibers, amorphous ground
oralectoderm
substance, numerous blood and lymph vessels, and nerves. It re-
sembles embryonic connective tissue in texture, with delicate
collagen fibers coursing through the amorphous ground sub-
dentallamina
dentallamina
outerenamel
enamelorgans
epithelium
innerenamel
epithelium
stellatereticulum
outerenamelepithelium
stellatereticulum
dental papilla
FIGURE I0-I8 Ground tooth (human). Dentinocemental
innerenamelepithelium
junction. Dentin (A) containing dentinal tubules (the dark lines):
stratum granulosum of the root (B); cementum (C) with lacunae.
FIGURE 10-19
Stages in the development of the tooth. The
Unstained (×185).
dental lamina degenerates (holes) as the teeth mature
180
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
each deciduous and permanent tooth develops. These thickenings
are the primordia of the enamel organ, which eventually gives
rise to the enamel. As the enamel organ develops, it takes on the
appearance of an inverted cup, attached to the dental lamina by
a thin stem (Figs. 10-19 and 10-20). The epithelial cells lining
the inside of the cup form the inner enamel epithelium, and
those covering the outside form the outer enamel epithelium.
The epithelial cells between these two layers become stellate and
take on the appearance of connective tissue, thus forming the
stellate reticulum of the enamel organ. The mesenchyme (derived
from neural crest ectoderm) enclosed by the cup of the enamel
organ condenses to form the dental papilla, the future dental pulp.
The internal contour of the cup isa replica of the shape of the tooth
crown to be produced (Fig. 10-21).
As the enamel organ enlarges, the cells of the inner enamel
epithelium take ona distinct columnar shape and diferentiate into
ameloblasts, which later produce the enamel. The neural crest-
derived mesenchymal cells of the dental papilla immediately ad-
FIGURE I0-2I Developing permanent tooth (dog).
(ep (a) siseooo () uuap (a) aa (v) siseo
pulp (E); outer enamel epithelium (F) (×25). (Courtesy of A. Hansen.)
jacent to the ameloblasts differentiate into odontoblasts, which
produce dentin. Dentin is deposited as sheaths of mineralized ma-
basement membrane of the inner enamel epithelium. As more
dentin is produced, the cell body of the odontoblast recedes to-
ward the developing pulp cavity. Shortly after the first dentin is
deposited, the ameloblasts begin to produce the enamel matrix
(Figs. 10-21 and 10-22). The deposition of the dentin and enamel
begins at the apex of the crown and continues down the sides of
the crown to the neck of the tooth.
FIGURE I0-20 Developing tooth (dog). Oral ectoderm
(A); dental lamina (B);: outer enamel epithelium of enamel organ
The formation of the root of the tooth begins shortly before
(C); stellate reticulum of enamel organ (D); inner enamel epithelium
eruption. The root is formed by a downward growth of a sheet of
of enarmel organ (E); dental papilla (F) with peripheral odontoblasts
cells originating from the enamel organ at the junction ofthe inner
(arrowheads); developing dental sac (G). Hematoxylin and eosin
 and outer enamel epithelia. This downward-growing sheet of cells
(x85)
the epithelial sheath of Hertwig, surrounds the connective tis-
Digestive System ·Brion L. Frappier
181
FIGURE I0-22 Developing tooth (dog). I. Odontoblasts (A);: predentin (B); dentin (C); enamel
(D); ameloblasts (E);: stellate reticulum (F) (×200). 2. Area marked in I. Trichrome (×300).
sue of the dental papilla and induces the formation of odontoblasts.
units may occur in dogs and cats. Structurally, it is a compound
The dentin of the root is produced by these odontoblasts.
acinar gland composed of numerous lobules separated by thin
The entire enamel organ and developing tooth are enclosed
connective tissue septa. The lobule consists of acini formed by
by the dental sac, a thickened connective tissue layer that com-
 pyramid-shaped cells with basal nuclei surrounded by basophilic
pletely surrounds the developing tooth (Fig. 10-20). In brachy-
cytoplasm (Fig. 10-23). The apex of each cell is filled with se-
dont teeth, the crown erupts through the dental sac, which then 
Sujuriuon 'sajnuene uasouiz se oi paiajan sajnueig Aionan
collapses against the dentin of the root. The cells of the collapsed
precursors of digestive enzymes. Myoepithelial cells are located
dental sac then differentiate into cementoblasts, which deposit a
between the secretory cells and the basement membrane.
covering of cementum over the roots. In hypsodont teeth, the den-
 The narrow lumen of the acinus opens into a short inter-
tal sac collapses before the tooth erupts, and therefore, cementum
calated duct lined by low cuboidal epithelium (see Fig. 2-18).
covers the entire tooth.
The intercalated duct joins a large striated or salivary duct lined
by simple columnar epithelium that is characterized by striations
in the basal portion of the cells (see Figs. 2-18 and 10-24). This
SAlIVaRY GLANdS
appearance results from perpendicularly oriented mitochondria
-ui daap q pauy siuaueduo susdo snamnu um
General Characteristics
foldings of the basal cell membrane. This arrangement creates a
The salivary glands comprise a series of secretory units (glandular
large basal membrane surface area containing energy-requiring
epithelium) that originate from the oral ectoderm and grow into
ion pumps located near energy-producing mitochondria, thus fa-
the underlying mesoderm as large aggregates of compound glands
cilitating active transport of substances between the cells and the
(see Chapter 2). The major salivary glands include the parotid,
underlying tissue. The striated ducts are easily recognized as the
mandibular, and sublingual glands. The minor salivary glands 
largest structures within the lobule and participate in the secre-
are named according to their location, for example, labial, lingual,
tory proces. The striated ducts extend to the edge of the lobule,
buccal, palatine, molar (cats), and zygomatic (carnivores).
where they join interlobular ducts located in the connective tis-
 Saliva is a mixture of both serous and mucous secretory prod-
sue septa between lobules (see Fig. 2-18).
ucts of salivary glands. It is important in the moistening of the in-
 Interlobular ducts are lined by simple columnar epithelium,
gested food and the lubrication of the surface of the upper digestive
which changes to stratified columnar epithelium as the ducts be-
organs, thus enhancing the flow of ingesta into the stomach. Saliva
come larger and fuse with similar ducts draining other lobules
dissolves water-soluble components of food, thereby facilitating
The interlobular ducts converge to form the parotid duct. The ep-
access to the taste buds. Consequently, the sense of taste is some-
ithelium changes from stratified columnar to stratified squamous
what dependent on the saliva. Saliva in domestic mammals is con-
where the parotid duct opens into the vestibule of the oral cavity.
sidered to play only a minor role in the digestion of food before it
reaches the stomach. Ruminants, however, producea large volume
Mandibular Salivary Gland
of saliva, which is an important source of fluids in the rumen
The mandibular salivary gland is a seromucous (mixed) compound
tubuloacinar gland. The morphologic structure of the secretory
Parotid Salivary Gland
unit is somewhat variable from one species to another but gener-
The parotid salivary gland in domestic mammals is predomi-
ally consists of a tubular unit with an enlarged terminal acinus.
nantly serous, although occasional isolated mucous secretory
Mucus-secreting cells border the lumen of the tubule and acinus,
182
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
and serous demilunes occur at the periphery (Fig. 10-25). The
 serous secretory product reaches the lumen through intercellular
canaliculi between the mucous cells. Variations in this basic pat-
tern may include separate serous and mucous acini or mucous tu-
bular units with enlarged, serous, acinar end pieces. In dogs and
cats, the mucous elements predominate. Myoepithelial cells are
present around the secretory units (see Fig. 2-19). The duct sys-
tem is like that of the parotid salivary gland. In the epithelium
of the main duct, goblet cells may occur.
Sublingual Salivary Gland
Like the mandibular salivary gland, the sublingual salivary gland
a seromucous (mixed) compound tubuloacinar gland (Fig .
10-26). The number of mucous acini and serous demilunes and
the seromucous nature of their secretory product vary among
species. Sublingual glands of cattle, sheep, and pigs are almost en-
tirely mucous, with relatively few serous demilunes. In addition
ical mucous acini and demilunes, the glands of dogs
FIGURE 10-23 Parotid salivary gland (horse). Serous acini
(A) opening into intercalated ducts (arrows); serous acinus (B).
Hematoxylin and eosin (x440). Inset: serous acinus. Hematoxylin
and eosin (×1 382).
FIGURE I0-25
Mandibular salivary gland (horse). Capsule (A);
mucous acinus (B) and serous demilunes (C); intercalated duct (D);
FIGURE I0-24 Parotid salivary gland (horse). Intercalated ducts
striated duct (E). Hematoxylin and eosin (x384). Inset: serous acinus
(A) joining striated duct (B). Hematoxylin and eosin (x425).
(F); mixed acinus (G). Hematoxylin and eosin (x530).
Digestive System ·Brion L. Frappier
183
Sublingual salivary gland (dog). Serous acini (A)
(C) on tubular mucous secretory unit.
FIGURE 10-26 Sublingual salivary gland (dog). Mucous acini
open into the sulcus at the base of the papillae. The labial, buc-
with lumina (arrows) emptying into intercalated duct (A); serous
cal, palatine, and pharyngeal glands also contribute mucous
demilunes (B). Hematoxylin and eosin (×280)
and serous secretory products to the saliva. Histologically, the se-
cretory units resemble those of the major salivary glands and
occur in a variety of forms (i.e., acinar, tubuloacinar, or tubular)
and cats contain clusters of serous acini with periodic acid-Schiff
Mucous tubules and acini frequently have serous demilunes
(PAS)-positive granules in their basal portion (Fig. 10-27). The
associated with them; however, striated ducts are not character-
mucous cells form tubular secretory units that connect the serous
istic of the minor salivary glands. The duct system is lined with
acini with intercalated ducts. Striated and intercalated ducts are
simple cuboidal epithelium within the lobules and two-layered
present, but not prominent, in cats and dogs. In horses, rumi-
uboidal epithelium in the larger interlobular ducts. The strati-
nants, and pigs, however, they are well developed. The interlobu-
fication of the duct epithelium increases as it reaches the oral cav-
lar ducts have, at their origin, a low simple columnar epithelium
itcha
that increases in height and becomes two-layered in larger ducts.
Among the domestic species, the zygomatic salivary gland
The main duct is lined with stratified cuboidal epithelium, and
is present only in carnivores. The parenchyma is composed of
goblet cells occur in cattle and pigs.
long, branched tubuloacinar secretory units that are predomi-
nantly mucus-secreting (Fig. 10-28). Intercalated and striated
ducts are almost nonexistent. The interlobular and main ducts
Minor Salivary Glands
are similar to those of the other glands.
The molar salivary gland of cats is histologically similar to
occurring throughout the oral cavity, are generally named accord-
the zygomatic salivary gland. It is a compound tubuloacinar
ing to their location. The lingual glands are located in the pro-
pria-submucosa and between the intrinsic muscle bundles of the
striated ducts are not present, and the interlobular ducts have a
tongue. The gustatory glands, associated with the vallate and
foliate papillae (Fig. 10-10), are entirely serous and their ducts
the vestibule of the oral cavity opposite the molar teeth.
184
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
tunica muscularis consists entirely of skeletal muscle. The ad-
ventitia is dense irregular connective tissue that attaches the phar-
ynx to the surrounding tissue.
ESOPHAGUS
The esophagus (Table 10-1) joins the laryngopharynx with the
stomach and contains all the layers of a typical tubular organ of
the digestive system (Fig. 10-1). An internal annular fold, the
pharyngoesophageal limen, marks the junction of the laryn-
gopharynx and esophagus in carnivores.
The mucosa is composed of three layers: a stratified squa-
mous epithelium, a lamina propria, and a lamina muscularis. The
FIGURE I0-28 Zygomatic salivary gland (dog). Mucous tubules
degree of keratinization of the stratified squamous epithelium
(A): mucous acini (B). Hematoxylin and eosin (x300)
varies with the species. It is usually nonkeratinized in carnivores,
 slightly keratinized in pigs, more so in horses, and keratinized to
a high degree in ruminants. The lamina propria consists largely
PHARYNX
of a dense feltwork of fine collagen fibers with an abundance of
The pharynx connects the oral cavity with the esophagus and the
evenly distributed elastic fibers; the esophagus is atypical in that
nasal cavity with the larynx. It contains openings to the oral cav-
the connective tissue of the lamina propria is more dense than the
ity (oropharynx), nasal cavity and auditory tubes (nasopharynx),
connective tissue of the submucosa (Fig. 10-29). The lamina
and the larynx and esophagus (laryngopharynx). A mucosa, a
muscularis contains only longitudinally oriented smooth muscle
tunica muscularis of skeletal muscle, and an adventitia form the
 bundles. It is absent in the cranial end of the esophagus of pigs
wall. The mucosa is lined by a stratified squamous epithelium,
 and dogs, but cats, horses, and ruminants have isolated smooth
except for a portion of the nasopharynx, which is lined by a cili-
muscle bundles near the pharynx that increase in number and be-
ated, pseudostratified columnar epithelium. A lamina muscularis
come confluent toward the stomach. In pigs, the lamina muscu-
is absent. The propria-submucosa contains collagen and elastic
laris is especially well developed in the caudal end, where it is as
fibers intermingled with lymphatic tissue and mucous glands. The
thick as the outer layer of the tunica muscularis.
TABLE I0-I
Characteristics of the Esophagus
Horses
Pigs
Cattle
Goats
Sheep
Dogs
Cats
Stratified squamous
 Keratinized
Keratinized
Keratinized
 Keratinized
Keratinized
 Nonkeratinized
Nonkeratinized
epithelium?
Lamina muscularis 
 Absent in
Absent in
 cranial part
 cranial part
 Highly developed 
Interrupted in
in caudal part
middle part
 Submucosal glands
 Present only in
Present
 cranial half
throughout
and extend 
into stoma.ch
Tunica muscularisd
 Cranial two thirds 
 Cranial part
 Striated throughout and extends into
 Striated 
 Cranial part
striated
striated
the reticular sulcus
throughout
striated
Caudal one third
 Middle part
Caudal
smooth
mixed
one third to 
 Caudal part
 one fifth
smooth
smooth
Tunica adventitia
Loose connective tissue cells and fibers with blood and lymph vessels and nerves surround the esophagus. A tunica.
 serosa may be present in the thoracic cavity (mediastinal pleura) or near the stomach (visceral peritoneum).
oRelated to chararter of food: coarse food. highly keratinized; soft food. slightly keratinized to nonkeratinized.
elsolated bundles of smooth muscle near pharynx, increases in thickness near stomach.
* Present only at the pharyngoesophageal junction.
lnner circular muscle layer becomes thicker at the cardiac ostium of the stomach (forming the cardiac sphincter muscle). especiall in horses.
Digestive System · Brion L. Froppier
185
The tunica muscularis of the esophagus consists of two layers
of muscle. In ruminants and dogs, the tunica muscularis consists
entirely of skeletal muscle (Fig. 10-29). In horses, skeletal mus-
cle comprises the cranial two thirds of the tunica muscularis but
gradually changes to smooth muscle in the caudal third. The tu-
nica muscularis of pigs is similar to that of horses except that the
middle third has mixed smooth and skeletal muscle. In cats, the
skeletal muscle may extend four fifths of the length of the esoph-
agus before changing to smooth musle. At the cranial end of the
esophagus, there is some interdigitation and spiraling of the two
muscle layers, but more caudally, these layers change orientation
to inner circular and outer longitudinal. The inner circular mus-
lelay
yer thickens at the cardiac ostium of the stomach in all do
mestic mammals, forming the cardiac sphincter muscle. This
muscle is especially prominent in horses, where it is 10 to 15 mm
thick. In ruminants, skeletal muscle extends from the esophagus
into the wall of the reticular sulcus (groove).
In the cervical part of the esophagus, the tunica muscularis
is surrounded by an adventitia, a loose connective tissue contain-
ing blood vessels, lymph vessels, and nerves (Fig. 10-29). The tho-
racic part of the esophagus is largely invested by a serosa (the
mediastinal pleura) in most species. In horses, the abdominal part
of the esophagus is approximately 2.5 cm in length and is also
dominal part is shorter but is also covered by visceral peritoneum,
whereas in other species, the esophagus-stomach junction is at or
near the diaphragm, and a mesothelial covering is lacking.
Esophagus-Stomach Junction
The morphologic characteristics of this junction vary considerably
among species. In the carnivores, the junction of the stratified
 squamous epithelium of the esophagus with the simple colum nar
H
epithelium of the cardiac gland region is abrupt (Fig. 10-30). In
cats, the junction is 3 to 5 mm cranial to the cardiac part (cardia)
FIGURE I0-29  Esophagus, midcervical region (dog)
Nonkeratinized stratified squamous epithelium of the tunica mucosa.
(A); lamina propria of the tunica mucosa (B); submucosa (C):
submucosal glands (D); submucosal gland duct (E); inner circular layer
of the tunica musculanis (F); outer longitudinal layer of the tunica.
muscularis (G); adventitia (H). Note that a lamina muscularis is absent
in this region of the canine esophagus. Hematoxylin and eosin (x88)
The submucosa is loose connective tissue containing large
longitudinally oriented arteries, veins, large lymph vessels, and
nerves. Seromucous glands containing mucous acini with serous de-
milunes are present in this layer in pigs and dogs (Fig. 10-29). In
pigs, the glands are abundant in the cranial half but do not extend
into the caudal half, whereas in dogs, they are present throughout,
extending into the cardiac gland region of the stomach. Density
of the glands may be as much as four times greater near the stom-
ach (caudally) than at the beginning of the organ (cranially).
FIGURE I0-30 Esophagus—stomach junction (dog)
Glands are present only at the pharyngoesophageal junction in 
Epithelium of esophagus (A); epithelium of stomach (B); junction of
horses, cats, and ruminants. Mixed acini with serous demilunes
nonkeratinized stratified squamous epithelium with simple columnar
occur in cattle. The loose nature of the submucosa allows the
epithelium (arrowhead); cardiac glands (C); lamina propria (D)
mucosa of the relaxed esophagus to form longitudinal folds
Hematoxylin and eosin (×180).
186
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
of the stomach, whereas in dogs, it is l to 2 cm cranial to the car-
muscularis. The submucosa contains collagen fibers, white adipose
diac part. In horses and pigs, the stratified squamous epithelium
tissue, blood vessels, and the submucosal nerve plexus. The tunica
extends throughout the nonglandular portion of the mucosa of the
muscularis has three layers: inner oblique, middle circular, and
stomach, whereas in ruminants, it lines the entire forestomach.
outer longitudinal. The myenteric plexus is located between the
The glands of the esophagus may extend a short distance into the
middle and outer muscle layers. The serosa is composed of meso-
submucosa of the stomach in species in which they are present
thelium overlying a layer of loose connective tissue.
throughout the length of the esophagus. In species in which the
skeletal muscle of the esophagus extends to the stomach (carni-
yioous oi [ealays uonj aueu? ienpeig e (sueuuni pue sanoa
Nonglandular Region of the Tunica Mucosa
muscle occurs.
The nonglandular region of the mucosa is absent in carnivores and
is small in pigs. In horses, the nonglandular region extends a con-
STOMACH
siderable distance from the esophagus and ends at the margo pli-
catus. The nonglandular region reaches its greatest development
The stomach is an enlarged part of the digestive tube specialized
in the ruminant stomach, where it lines the entire forestomach
for initiating the enzymatic and hydrolytic breakdown of food
(rumen, reticulum, and omasum) (Fig. 10-32). These parts are de-
into digestible nutrients. The tunica muscularis aids in mixing
scribed in detail later in this chapter.
the ingesta with gastric secretions. The stomach is lined exclu-
The lining epithelium of the nonglandular region of the mu-
sively by a glandular mucosa in carnivores, whereas herbivorous
cosa is stratified squamous and may be keratinized, depending on
animals have, in addition to a glandular region, a nonglandular
 species and diet. The lamina propria is composed of typical loose
region of the mucosa lined with stratified squamous epithelium.
connective tissue. The lamina muscularis is distinct. The junction
The wall of the stomach has allthe layers ofa typical tubular
between the epithelial linings of the nonglandular and glandular
organ (Fig. 10-31). The mucosa is composed of an epithelium, a
regions of the mucosa is abrupt, with stratified squamous epithe
lamina propria (of typical loose connective tissue), and a lamina
lium joining simple columnar epithelium.
2.
3.
4.
FIGURE I0-31 Proper gastric (fundic) gland region of tunica mucosa, stomach (dog). I. Section
through proper gastric gland region. Trichrome (x48). 2. Gastric pit. Hematoxylin and eosin (x450).
3. Neck of proper gastric gland with mucous neck cells. Hematoxylin and eosin (x210). 4. Fundus of
at ) esonw euni (ostx) usoa pue ukxoewah 'sllao eaued pue yayo yrm pueg susa adaid
pea ouse () tid ouisea isuenosn eunt jo sakel (a) euipnauol pue () yenuio (a) esonwgns
umen opening into gastric pit (arrows); mucous neck cells (F);: fundus of gastric gland (G); chief cells
(H); parietal cells (l); gland lumen ().
Digestive System · Briorn L. Froppier
187
Du
Es
cat
dog
ruminant
pig
horse
FIGURE I0-32
 Schematic drawing illustrating the regions of the gastric tunica mucosa.
Nonglandular region of the mucosa lined by stratified squamous epithelium (A), including the rumen
(Ru), reticulum (Re), and omasum (Om); cardiac gland region (B); fundic gland region (C), with light (CI)
and dark (C2) zones in the dog: pyloric gland region (D); esophagus (Es); duodenum (Du).
Glandular Region of the Tunica Mucosa
Cardiac Gland Region
The cardiac gland region of the mucosa occupies a narrow strip
The structure of the glandular region of the mucosa conforms to
the general pattern described earlier. The mucosa has extensive
at the junction of the glandular and nonglandular mucosae in all
 domestic mammals except pigs, in which it covers nearly half 
folds (gastric folds), which flatten as the stomach fills. The sur-
face is covered with small invaginations called gastric pits, which
the stomach, including most of the diverticulum ventriculi
are continuous with the gastric glands and receive their secre-
(Fig. 10-32). The cardiac glands are relatively short, simple,
branched, coiled tubular glands that release a mucous secretory
tory products (Figs. 10-31[2], 10-31[3], and 10-33). The mu-
cosal surface, including the gastric pits, is lined with tall simple
product (Fig. 10-35). The cells of the cardiac glands are cuboidal,
and the nuclei are located in the basal portion of the cells. The car-
columnar epithelial cells, the mucous secretory product of which
 is released continuously and serves as a protective coat that pre-
diac glands empty into relatively shallow gastric pits (Fig. 10-35).
vents digestion of the mucosa. The surface epithelial cells have a
Parietal cells (described below) may occur at the junction of the
rapid turnover rate; within approximately 3 to 4 days, they are
cardiac and proper gastric (fundic) gland regions.
replaced by cells originating from mitosis in the gastric pit. The
Bdond eurei aun uum pared Aiasuap are spui siss
Proper Gastric (Fundic) Gland Region
(Figs. 10-31[3] and 10-33). The loose connective tissue in this
The proper gastric (fundic) gland region of the mucosa is well de-
area is often difficult to visualize because of the large amount of
veloped in all domestic mammals (Fig. 10-32). In carnivores, it
glandular epithelium. In carnivores, a layer of densely packed
 occupies more than one half of the stomach mucosa; in horses, it
-au! aq Aeu uneduon uniens aul pale siaqy uageion
-jxoidde sadnsso i! ssid u! pue pujqi auo ueui anou sardnsso
 posed between the bases of the gastric glands and the lamina mus-
mately one fourth. Two thirds of the mucosa of the abomasum in
 oi aq   se go uy a (-ot ) s
ruminants is occupied by proper gastric glands. Also note in Fig-
penetration of the stomach wall by sharp bones in the gastric
ure 10-32 that this gland region actually occupies the fundus of
contents.
the stomach only in dogs and cats, as in human beings; there-
The lamina muscularis is relatively thick, usually compris-
fore, the term proper gastric is used to eliminate confusion as to
ing three layers (Fig. 10-34). Small bundles of smooth muscle
location within the stomach.
cells extend into the lamina propria, coursing between the gas-
 Proper gastric glands are simple, branched, straight tubular
tric glands (Fig. 10-33).
glands that extend to the lamina muscularis (Figs. 10-31[4] and
The glandular region of the mucosa of the stomach is divided
10-33). The gland consists of a short neck, a long body, and a
slightly dilated blind end, the fundus. Four structurally and
ous glandular types present: cardiac, proper gastric (fundic),
functionally distinct cell types comprise the secretory epithelium
and pyloric. The extent of the various glandular regions of the
of the proper gastric gland: mucous neck cells, chief cells, parietal
mucosa in the domestic mammals is illustrated in Figure 10-32.
cells, and endocrine cells.
188
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
FIGURE I0-34 Proper gastric gland region of tunica mucosa,
stomach (cat). Stratum compactum of lamina propria (A); fundus of
proper gastric gland (B); lamina muscularis (C); parietal cells
(arrowheads). Hematoxylin and eosin (×355)
FlGURE I0-33 Proper gastric gland region of tunica mucosa,
gen granules occupy these vacuoles and are demonstrable with
stomach (dog). Gastric pits (A); mucous neck cells (B); chief cells
special fixation and staining. Thus, chief cells are also referred to
(C); lamina muscularis (D); smooth muscle cells entering lamina.
as zymogen cells. The basal area of the chief cell has an extensive
propria (E): lamina propria (F);: parietal cells (arrowheads).
rough endoplasmic reticulum (rER), resulting in a basophilic
Hematoxylin and eosin (xl 80).
staining reaction. Chief cells secrete pepsinogen, which is trans-
formed into pepsin by hydrochloric acid.
The parietal cells are larger and less numerous than the chief
The mucous neck cells occupy the neck of the proper gas-
cells. They have a tendency to occur singly and are peripheral to
tric gland (Figs. 10-31[3] and 10-33). They are typical mucous
the chief cells (Figs. 10-31[4] and 10-33). Usually, only a narrow
cells, with a flat nucleus located toward the cell base. They appear
apex of the cell borders the gland lumen. Frequently, the base of
similar to the mucus-producing surface epithelial cells but have
the cell bulges outward from the external surface of the gland. The
cytoplasm that is more basophilic. In addition, when treated with
parietal cell has a spherical nucleus. The cytoplasm stains deeply
PAS, the mucous neck cells are intensely positive throughout,
with eosin and has a granular appearance due to the presence of
whereas the surface cells have PAS-positive material only in the
numerous mitochondria. At the apex, the cell membrane invagi-
upper two thirds of the cell.
nates to form a branching intracellular canaliculus that extends
The chief cells are the most numerous of the gastric gland
toward the center of the cell and communicates with the lumen
cells (Figs. 10-31[4] and 10-33). They are cuboidal or pyrami-
of the gastric gland. Numerous microvilli of varying lengths
dal, with a spherical nucleus near the base of the cell. The area
project into the canaliculus, thereby providing an extensive sur-
clear spaces that remain after fixation. In the living state, zymo
the production of free hydrochloric acid. Parietal cells form car-
Digestive System · Brion L. Froppier
681
the release of hormones. At least 12 different endocrine cell types
have been identified by electron microscopy in the gastrointesti-
nal tract. They all have numerous small membrane-bounded
granules, mostly within the basal cytoplasm, and also contain rel-
atively little rER and small Golgi complexes. The endocrine cells
of the gastrointestinal ract are part of a larger group of cells des-
ignated as the diffuse neuroendocrine system (DNES) (see
Chapter 15).
Pyloric Gland Region
The pyloric gland region occupies approximately one half of the
gastric mucosa in carnivores, but only one third of the gastric mu-
cosa in horses and one third of the abomasal mucosa in ruminants.
In pigs, the pyloric gland region is small, representing approxi-
mately one fourth of the mucosa (Fig. 10-32).
 Pyloric glands are simple, branched, coiled tubular glands
that are relatively short compared to the other gastric glands
(Fig. 10-36). The gastric pits are considerably deeper than those
in the cardiac and proper gastric gland regions. The cells of the
pyloric glands have the appearance of typical mucus-secreting
cells with flat nuclei located at the base of the cell and a lightly
stained apical cytoplasm.
At the pylorus-duodenum junction, submucosal intestinal
glands extend into the submucosa of the pyloric gland region
from the duodenum. The middle circular layer of the tunica mus-
D
cularis thickens at the pylorus to form the pyloric sphincter
muscle, which causes the submucosa and mucosa to bulge into
FIGURE I0-35 Cardiac gland region of tunica mucosa,
the lumen. In ruminants and pigs, this protuberance, called the
stomach (pig). Gastric pits (A);: cardiac glands (B): lamina propria.
torus pyloricus, is especially prominent (Fig. 10-37)
(C); lamina muscularis (D). Hematoxylin and eosin (x80).
Species Differences
bonic acid through the action of the enzyme, carbonic anhydrase.
In carnivores, the cardiac gland region is a relatively narrow area,
Carbonic acid dissociates into bicarbonate ions, which remain in
with the proper gastric and pyloric gland regions occupying the
the cell, and hydrogen ions, which are transported across the cell
remainder of the stomach. In dogs, the proper gastric gland re-
membrane into the intracellular canaliculus, where they combine
gion is divided into two zones. The light zone has a thinner mu-
with chloride ions. Thus, free hydrochloric acid is formed within
cosa with deep gastric pits and short tortuous glands that appear
the canaliculus and lumen of the gastric gland.
in groups and do not reach the lamina muscularis. The dark zone
Throughout the glandular regions of the gastric mucosa and
is adjacent to the pyloric gland region and has a thicker mucosa,
continuing into the small and large intestines is a series of en-
 shallow gastric pits, and proper gastric glands that more closely
docrine cells (enteroendocrine cells) responsible for the pro-
resemble those of the other species (Fig. 10-32).
duction of gastrointestinal hormones, such as gastrin, secretin,
The stomach of the pig has a very large cardiac gland region
cholecystokinin, and gastric inhibitory polypeptide. The hormone
that contains numerous lymphatic nodules in the lamina propria.
is released either into the blood or lymph vascular systems, where
The parietal cells in the proper gastric gland region tend to occur
it circulates throughout the body or diffuses locally to its target
in clusters.
cells (i.e., a paracrine mode of secretion). These cells are difficult to
The stomach of the horse has an extensive nonglandular re-
identify in routine hematoxylin and eosin sections and generally
gion of the mucosa that terminates abruptly, forming the margo
appear clear or poorly stained. Many of these cells demonstrate an
plicatus. The cardiac gland region is almost nonexistent, whereas
affinity for silver stains and therefore have been referred to as ar-
the proper gastric and pyloric gland regions follow the normal
gentaffin cells or argyrophilic cells (see Fig. 10-53). Some of
pattern.
these cells can also be demonstrated with potassium dichromate
solutions and are therefore referred to as enterochromaffin cells.
Ruminant Stomach
Most frequently, these cells are wedged between the basement
membrane and the chief cells and do not reach the surface of the
The stomach of ruminants is composed of four structurally dis-
epithelium. Some of these cells, however, do extend to the lumen
tinct parts. The first three parts (the rumen, reticulum, and oma-
and are believed to monitor the luminal contents and respond with
sum) are collectively called the forestomach or proventriculus
061
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
FIGURE I0-37 Torus pyloricus, stomach (pig). Hematoxylin
Text—Atlas. Philadelphio: Lea & Febiger, 1 971.)
masum further degrade the ingesta, along with accompanying
microorganisms, to such substances as glucose and amino acids
in a manner similar to that of the stomach of nonruminants.
Rumen
The mucosa of the rumen is characterized by small tongue-
shaped papillae (Figs. 10-38 and 10-39), the size and shape of
which vary considerably from one region of the rumen to another.
The papillae develop prenatally and remain small as long as the
animal is on a milk diet. When roughage is included in the diet
and fermentation begins in the rumen, the papillae increase rap-
D
idly in size (Fig. 10-39)
The ruminal epithelium is keratinized stratified squamous
FIGURE I0-36 Pyloric gland region of tunica mucosa, stomach
nd
performs at least three important functions: protection,
(pig). Gastric pits (A); lamina propria (B): pyloric glands (C); lamina
metabolism, and absorption (Figs. 10-40 and 10-41). The stra-
muscularis (D). Hematoxylin and eosin (x80).
Ctive shield against the rough, fibrous
ingesta, whereas the deeper strata metabolize short-chain, volatile
(Fig. 10-32). The forestomach is lined entirely by a nonglandular
fatty acids, particularly butyric, acetic, and propionic acids, the
mucosa having a keratinized stratified squamous epithelium. The
fourth part of the ruminant stomach (the abomasum) is lined by
urea, and many other products are also absorbed from the rumi-
a glandular mucosa that is similar to the stomach of other species.
nal contents
The forestomach is effective in breaking down the coarse,
The stratum corneum varies in thickness from one to two
fibrous ingesta into absorbable nutrients by both mechanical
cells to as many as 10 to 20 cells. Stainable nuclei may or may
and chemical action. The rumen acts as a fermentation vat where
 not be present. The stratum granulosum is usually one to three
a large population of bacteria and protozoa act on the ingesta,
cells thick. The cells are distinctly flattened, and keratohyalin
thereby producing short-chain, volatile fatty acids, which are
then absorbed through the mucosa into the blood. The reticulum
ulosum near
r the stratum corneum are frequently swollen and are
and omasum exert a mechanical action on the ingesta that re
characterized by a pyknotic nucleus surrounded by clear, electron
lucent cytoplasm. The peripheral cytoplasm of these cells contains
cially well adapted for this function. In addition to fermentation
keratohyalin granules, tonofilaments, and numerous membrane
and mechanical activities, considerable absorption occurs across
bounded, electron-dense granules (Fig. 10-41). The stratum
 rs a r sn iod go sii s
of the forestomach. The enzym
aticdigestiveprocessesintheabo
than the basal cells (Fig. 10-41). The thickness of this layer varies
Digestive System ·Briorn L. Frappier
191
B
FIGURE I0-38 Rumen (large ruminant). Papillae (A); propria
E
F
submucosa (B); tunica muscularis (C); tunica serosa
(D). Hematoxylin and eosin (×7). (From Stinson AW, Brown EM.
FIGURE I0-39  Changes in ruminal papillae caused by age and
Veterinory Histology Slide Sets. East Lansing Ml: Michigan State
diet (same steer) (×2). A. Six months of age, milk since birth.
University, Instructional Media Certer, 1 970.)
Papillae are rudimentary. B. Hay and grain for 3 weeks. Papillae are
enlarged. C. Hay and grain for 2 months. D. Hay and grain for 3
months. Papillae have reached maximal length. E. After retum to
from one to l0 cells. Cytologic features of these cells include nu-
milk diet for 3 days. Papillae are smaller. F. After return to milk diet
merous mitochondria and ribosomes distributed throughout the
for I0 days. Papillae are strikingly reduced. (From Stirsorn AW, Browr 
cytoplasm. Adjacent cells are connected through numerous
EM. Veterirary Histoiogy Slide 5ets. East Lonsing, Ml: Michigon 5tate
University, Instructional Media Certer, I 970.)
desmosomes (Fig. 10-41). The cells of the stratum basale are
columnar and extend numerous processes to the basement mem-
brane, which greatly increases the basal cell membrane surface
area. The cytologic features of the basal cells are similar to those
papilla has a core (an extension of the propria-submucosa) con-
of the stratum spinosum.
taining a dense feltwork of collagen, elastic, and reticular fibers.
The intercellular spaces throughout the entire epithelium
 A dense network of fenestrated capillaries lies just beneath the
are distended to varying degrees. The spaces may be wide and
basement membrane of the epithelium. Near the tunica muscu-
contain flocculent material that is passing through the epithe-
laris, the connective tissue of the propria-submucosa is more
lium (Fig. 10-41), or in other areas, they may be collapsed with
loosely arranged. A network of blood vessels and the submucosal
no flocculent material present, thus reflecting a period of little
 nerve plexus is located within this layer.
or no movement of material across the epithelium.
The tunica muscularis is composed of inner circular and
A lamina muscularis is absent; thus, the lamina propria
outer longitudinal layers of smooth muscle. The myenteric plexus
blends with the submucosa, forming a propria-submucosa. Each
 is located between the layers.
192
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
FIGURE 10-40 Tip of ruminal papilla (large ruminant)
Keratinized stratified squamous epithelium (A); lamina propria
(B). Hematoxylin and eosin (×250). (From Stinson AW, Brown EM.
Veterinary Histology Slide Sets. East Lansing, Ml: Michigan State
University, Instructional Media Cernter, I 970.)
10um
FIGURE I0-4I Drawing from an electron micrograph of
The serosa of the rumen is a loose connective tissue covered
ruminal epithelium. Stratum comeum (A); swollen cells of the
by a mesothelium. Varying amounts of white adipose tissue, as
stratum granulosum (B); flat cells of the stratum granulosum
well as blood vessels, lymph vessels, and nerves, are located in the
(C); intercellular canaliculi (D); stratum spinosum with desmosomes
loose connective tissue of the serosa.
(E); stratum basale (F); lamina propria (G); capillary in lamina propria
(H). (From Stinson AW,Brow EM.Veterinary Histolgy Slide Sets. East
Reticulum and Reticular Suicus
Lonsing, Ml: Michigan 5tate University, Irnstructional Media Center, 1 970.)
The reticulum has a mucosa with permanent interconnecting folds,
the reticular crests, giving it the appearance of a honeycomb
(Fig. 10-42). These crests are of two different heights. The taller
The keratinized stratified squamous epithelium resembles
crests separate the mucosal surface into shallow compartments,
that of the rumen. The propria-submucosa consists predomi-
the reticular cells, which are further divided into smaller areas
nantly ofa feltwork of collagen and elastic fibers. A lamina mus-
by the shorter crests. The sides of the crests have vertical ridges,
cularis is located only in the upper part of the larger reticular
and the mucosa between the crests is covered by conical reticu-
crests; therefore, the lamina propria and the submucosa blend
lar papillae that project into the lumen.
imperceptibly (Fig. 10-43). The lamina muscularis is continuous
Digestive System · Brion L. Froppier
61
FIGURE I0-42 Surface view of the reticulum mucosa. Primary
crests (A) delineating the reticular cells; secondary crests (B)
(Courtesy of A. Hansern.)
with that of the esophagus. The smooth muscle bundles pass
from one crest into another where the crests intersect, thus form-
ing a continuous network of smooth muscle throughout the reti-
cular mucosa.
The tunica muscularis consists of two layers of smooth mus-
cle cells that follow an oblique course and cross at right angles.
The serosa is like that of the rumen.
The reticular sulcus (groove) begins at the cardiac ostium
and passes ventrally on the medial wall of the reticulum to end at
the reticulo-omasal ostium. The sulcus is bordered by two thick
folds, the labia (lips). The entire sulcus is lined by keratinized strat-
ified squamous epithelium (Fig. 10-44). The propria-submucosa
consists predominantly of collagen and elastic fibers. The lamina
muscularis, an extension of the esophageal lamina muscularis, is
incomplete and is most conspicuous in the labia of the sulcus. It
forms a complete layer near the omasum.
The tunica muscularis of the reticular sulcus is composed
largely of smooth muscle fibers. Skeletal muscle fibers from the
tunica muscularis of the esophagus are present near the cardiac os-
tium but fade out rapidly in the sulcus. Both longitudinally and
FiGUre 10-43
3Reticulum (large ruminant). Cross section
transversely oriented smooth muscle fibers are found in the floor
through a primary crest with condensed lamina muscularis (arrow)
in the upper portion. Hematoxylin and eosin (x9.5). (From Dellmonn
of the sulcus, whereas the labia contain mainly longitudinally ori-
HD. Veterinory Histology: An Outline Text——Atlos. Philodelphio: Lea &
ented smooth muscle fibers. The longitudinal muscle fibers in the
Febiger. 1 971.)
labia form a loop around the cardiac ostium corresponding to the
cardiac loop of animals with simple stomachs. At the ventral end
of the reticular sulcus, the muscle fibers pass into the sphincter
Second, third, fourth, and fifth orders of shorter laminae progres-
of the reticulo-omasal ostium. In the young animal, the smooth
sively decrease in length. The omasal contents are pressed into thin
muscle layers of the labia contract reflexly during suckling. As a
layers in the narrow spaces between the laminae (interlaminar re-
result, the edges of the labia come together tocreate a channel that
cesses) and are reduced to a fine pulp by the numerous rounded,
allows milk to bypass the reticulum and rumen. The milk passes
horny omasal papillae that stud the surface of the mucosa. The
through a very short omasal groove directly into the abomasum.
papillae are directed so that the movement of the laminae works
the solid contents from the reticulo-omasal ostium into the inter-
Omasum
laminar recesses and out at the omaso-abomasal ostium.
The omasum is nearly filled with approximately 100 longitudinal
The lining is keratinized stratified squamous epithelium, and
folds, the laminae, that arise from the internal surface of the
the aglandular lamina propria contains a dense subepithelial cap-
greater curvature and sides of the organ (Fig. 10-45). The largest
illary network. A lamina muscularis forms a thick layer just be-
laminae, approximately 12 in number, have a thick, concave, free
neath the lamina propria on both sides of the laminae. The
edge that reaches to within a short distance of the lesser curvature.
submucosa is very thin.
194
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
FIGURE I0-44 Cross section of the reticular sulcus {large
ruminant). Keratinized stratified squamous epithelium covering the
reticular papillae (A); lamina propria blending with the submucosa
between scattered small bundles of the lamina muscularis
(B); longitudinal musculature of the labia (C); transverse musculature
of the floor (D). Hematoxylin and eosin (x12). (From Delimann HD.
Veterinory Histology: An Outline Text——Atlos. Philodelphio: Lea &
Febiger, 1 971.)
FIGURE I0-45 Omasum (large ruminant). Portion of the wall
including laminae of different sizes (A); tunica muscularis (B). Large
laminae are penetrated by an extension of the tunica muscularis
whereas the smaller laminae have muscle originating from the lamina.
The tunica muscularis is composed of a thin, outer longitu-
muscularis only. Hematoxylin and eosin (x6.5)
dinal layer and a thicker, inner circular layer of smooth muscle.
The innermost fibers of the circular layer are continued into the
large omasal laminae (first through third orders) as the intermedi-
ate muscle sheet (Fig. 10-46).
 produced by the columnar absorptive cells are membrane-bound at
the microvillous luminal surface, while those produced by the
Abomasum
pancreas mix freely with the luminal contents. Mucus is pro-
duced by submucosal glands in the small intestine (Figs. 10-47
The omaso-abomasal ostium is marked by two mucosal folds, the
and 10-48) and by goblet cells, which are intermingled with
vela abomasica, where the epithelium changes abruptly from
the columnar absorptive cells throughout the entire intestine
keratinized stratified squamous to simple columnar. In cattle, this
(Figs. 10-49 and 10-50).
change is on the apex of the folds, whereas in small ruminants, the
change occurs on the omasal side. The lamina propria becomes
less dense on the abomasal side of the folds and frequently exhibits
a lymphatic nodule beneath the epithelial junction. The mucosa
of the abomasum has all the characteristic glandular regions of the
stomach described previously (Fig. 10-32).
SMALL INTESTINE
The small intestine is divided into three parts: the duodenum,
jejunum, and ileum. Intestinal digestion, or reduction of food
to an absorbable form, begins when the contents from the stom-
ach are acted on by the pancreatic secretions, bile, and intestinal
secretions, and it continues throughout the length of the small
intestine.
The digestive and absorptive functions of the small intestine
are facilitated by several specialized structures. The digestive func-
FIGURE I0-46 Omasum (large ruminant). Portion of a large
tions require voluminous amounts of digestive enzymes in addition
lamina containing three layers of muscle. Keratinized stratified 
to a copious supply of mucus to protect the lining cells from me-
squamous epithelium (A): lamina propria (B);: lamina muscularis (C);
chanical injury and irritating compounds. The enzymes originate
extension of inner circular layer of tunica muscularis (D)
from the columnar absorptive cells and the pancreas. The enzymes
Hematoxylin and eosin (x47)
Digestive System · Brion L. Froppier
195
FIGURE I0-47 Longitudinal section of the duodenum, large
ruminant. Circular folds (plicae circulares) (arrows). Mucosa
(A);: submucosal glands (B); tunica muscularis (C). Hematoxylin and
eosin (x42)
The efficiency of the absorptive function is enhanced by
three structural features that increase the surface area exposed to
the intestinal contents: (l) the upper two thirds of the small in-
testine has circularly disposed mucosal folds (plicae circulares)
extending approximately two thirds of the way around the lumen.
In ruminants, these folds are permanent, but in all other do-
mestic mammals, they disappear when the organ is distended
(Fig. 10-47); (2) the surface of the mucosa is covered with finger-
like projections, the intestinal villi (Figs. 10-49 and 10-51).
The villi vary in length, depending on the region of the small
intestine and the species. They are long and slender in carnivores
and short and wide in cattle; and (3) microvilli are present on the
free surface of the simple columnar epithelial cells of the villi
2
(Fig.10-50).
FIGURE I0-48 Duodenum (dog). I. Area near pylorus with
submucosal glands. 2. More caudal area without submucosal glands.
Tunica Mucosa
Tunica mucosa with villi and intestinal (mucosal) glands (A); tela
The mucosa includes the lining epithelium, a lamina propria
submucosa (B); tunica muscularis (C); lamina muscularis
(D). Hematoxylin and eosin (×28). (From Adom W5, Calhoun ML,
with glands, and a lamina muscularis. The villi are mucosal pro-
Smith EM, et al. Microscopic Anatomy of the Dog: A Photographic Atlas.
jections and are the most characteristic feature of the small in-
Springfieid, IL: Charles C. Thomos, I 970.)
testine. The intestinal glands (crypts of Lieberkihn), which
open between the bases of the villi, penetrate the mucosa as far
as the lamina muscularis. These simple tubular glands are some-
the lamina propria without going through the cells. The colum-
times referred to simply as mucosal glands (Fig. 10-48).
nar absorptive cells have ovoid nuclei situated near the cell base
The lumen of the small intestine is lined by a simple colum-
and prominent microvilli that form a striated border. In electron
nar epithelium containing numerous goblet cells interspersed
micrographs, mitochondria are seen near the nucleus and in the
among columnar absorptive cells (Fig. 10-50). Junctional com-
basal region (Fig. 10-50). The apical cytoplasm contains a termi-
plexes, located between the epithelial cells at the luminal surface,
nal web and extensive smooth endoplasmic reticulum (sER) nec-
prevent the fluid of the intestinal contents from diffusing into
essary for the synthesis of triglycerides. A prominent supranuclear
196
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
they slough off into the lumen. Because of this continuous cell
renewal, many mitotic figures occur among the cells lining the
glands. The mitotic activity is constant and bears no relation to
-ai s uniauida aul 'Ailse auAzua io eisagul jo junoue aui
newed approximately every 2 to 3 days.
Near the base of the intestinal glands, acidophilic granular
cells (of Paneth) are present in ruminants and horses (Fig. 10-52).
They are pyramid-shaped cells with prominent spherical, acido-
philic granules located between the nucleus and the cell apex.
The acidophilic granular cells have all the characteristics of
enzyme-producing cells, and substantial evidence shows that they
produce peptidases, which hydrolyze peptide bonds, and lyso-
zyme, an antibacterial compound. These cells also contain zinc,
which has been reported to be important in the activation of pep-
tidases. Enteroendocrine cells are also present in the intestinal
glands and were described earlier in the Proper Gastric (Fundic)
Gland Region section (Fig. 10-53).
The lamina propria forms the cores of the villi and surrounds
the intestinal glands. It is composed of loose connective tissue
with a prominent reticular fiber framework. Within this exten-
sive fiber network are blood and lymph vessels, leukocytes, fibro-
cytes, smooth muscle cells, plasma cells, and mast cells. Globule
leukocytes are found in the intestinal mucosa of most domestic
species. They contain large eosinophilic globular material sur-
rounding a small nucleus. Their function is unknown. Diffuse
lymphatic tissue and solitary lymphatic nodules are present
throughout the lamina propria of the small intestine. The num-
ber of lymphatic nodules increases toward the ileum. A stratum
FIGURE I0-49  Villi of the small intestine (dog). Simple
compactum similar to that found in the stomach may be found
columnar epithelium with goblet cells (A); lamina propria (B):
between the bases of the intestinal glands and the lamina mus-
lymphatic capillary (lacteal) (C); smooth muscle (arrows).
cularis of carnivores.
Hematoxylin and eosin (×l i5). (From Titkemeyer CW, Colhoun ML. A
A single lymphatic capillary, the lacteal, is located in the
comporative study of the structure of the small intestine of domestic
center of the lamina propria within the villus (Fig. 10-49). This
onimois. Am J Vet Res 1 955; 1 6: 1 52.)
vessel has a blind terminal end at the tip of the villus and is the
origin of the lymph vessels that form a plexus at the bases of the
villi. This basal plexus gives rise to a larger plexus surrounding
Golgi complex functions in digestive enzyme secretion as well as
the intestinal glands and the lymphatic nodules. Longitudinally
in the transformation of emulsified fats into chylomicrons, small
oriented smooth muscle cells that originate from the lamina mus-
droplets of fat transported by the blood. Free ribosomes and rER
cularis extend to the tip of the villus (Fig. 10-49). Contraction of
are located in the basal part of the cell.
these muscle cells causes the villus to shorten and undoubtedly
Goblet cells are dispersed among the columnar absorptive
is responsible for lateral movements as well. Muscle contraction
cells (Fig. 10-50). As mucinogen is produced within the cell,
also aids in pumping the lymph out of the lacteal into the plexus
the apical portion of the cell becomes distended, mucinogen
below. A single arteriole from an arterial plexus in the submu-
 droplets accumulate, and the nucleus and remaining cytoplasm
cosa penetrates the lamina muscularis and courses into the villus,
are pushed into the narrow cell base that rests on the basement
where it forms an arteriovenular loop and a capillary network im-
membrane (Fig. 10-50). (For more details, see Chapter 2.) The
mediately beneath the surface epithelium. As a result of diges-
number of goblet cells is decreased at the tips of the villi; how.
tive activity, the vascular network becomes engorged with blood,
 ever, the density of the goblet cells is two to three times greater
causing the villus to lengthen. During muscular contraction, the
in the ileum than in the duodenum.
blood is pumped out as the villus shortens. Thus, the villi act as
The simple tubular intestinal glands (crypts of Lieberkihn)
pumping stations for moving blood and lymph into the general
are lined by a variety of cell types. The principal cell type of the
circulation.
intestinal glands is the undifferentiated columnar cell. These
The lamina muscularis is composed of inner circular and
cells multiply, differentiate, and migrate onto the villus, giving
outer longitudinal layers of smooth muscle that tend to be thin
rise to the columnar absorptive cells and the goblet cells. They
and incomplete, except in dogs. The lamina muscularis may vary
are pushed toward the tip of the villus by succeeding cells, where
with the species, the individual animal, and the region.
Digestive System ·Brion L. Frappier
197
FIGURE I0-50   Transmission electron micrograph of jejunum surface epithelium (calf). Simple
columnar epithelial cells (A) with microvilli (B). One goblet cell (C) and a migrating lymphocyte (D) are
also present. Immediately below the epithelium is a capillary (E) (x5000). (Courtesy of j. F. Pohlenz.)
Tela Submucosa
Solitary (isolated) lymphatic nodules are present in the
 submucosa throughout the small intestine. Large aggregated
The submucosa is a layer of connective tissue that is more dense
lymphatic nodules (Peyer's patches) occur in all three seg-
than that of the lamina propria. Tubuloalveolar submucosal
ments of the small intestine, but they are usually considered to be
glands (Brunner's glands), located within this connective tissue,
more characteristic of the ileum (Figs. 10-54 and 10-55). These
open into the base of the intestinal mucosal glands (Fig. 10-48).
masses of lymphatic tissue can be located grossly, except in cats,
The submucosal glands are mucous in dogs and ruminants, serous
because they create well-delineated elevations of the mucosal sur-
in pigs and horses, and seromucous in cats. The serous (protein-
face. Aggregated lymphatic nodules are largest in cattle and most
aceous) or mucous secretory product of these glands lubricates
numerous in horses. The intestinal glands may extend into the
the surface epithelium and provides protection from the acidic
submucosa in areas of the small intestine where the lamina mus-
gastric chyme. The glands are present in all domestic mammals,
aas) 'sanpou sieuduAl paieoaigle aul Aq pandnisip s! slieins
but their distribution varies with the species. For example, they
Chapter 8 for details on this gut-associated lymphatic tissue.)
are confined to the proximal portion of the duodenum in dogs,
The submucosa also contains the submucosal nerve plexus.
whereas in horses, they extend well into the jejunum.
Nerve fibers from this plexus extend into the villi.
198
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
FIGURE I0-53 Mucosal glands, smallintestine (cat). Lumen of
intestinal mucosal gland (A); enteroendocrine cells (arrows). Silver
stain (×320).
FIGURE I0-51  Scanning electron micrograph of intestinal villi
ileum (calf). These villi are in a contracted state (x85). (Courtesy of
1. F. Pohlenz.)
Tunica Muscularis
In all species, the tunica muscularis of the small intestine con-
sists of inner circular and outer longitudinal smooth muscle lay-
ers. The tunica muscularis is thickest in horses, in which the two
layers are nearly equal in thickness. The connective tissue be-
tween the two muscle layers contains the myenteric plexus.
Tunica Serosa
A serosa covers the entire small intestine. It consists of a layer of
loose connective tissue covered by mesothelium.
FIGURE I0-54 Mucosa of small intestine with aggregated
FIGURE I0-52 Mucosal glands, smallintestine (horse).
lymphatic nodules (pig). Villi (A); surface depressions over lymphatic
Acidophilic granular cells (of Paneth) (A) in the base of an intestinal
nodules (arrows) (x6). (From Titkermeyer CW, Calhoun ML. A
mucosal gland; lamina propria (B); lumen of intestinal mucosal gland
comporative study of the structure of the smmall intestire of dormestic
(C). Hematoxylin and eosin (x560).
onimols. Amm / Vet Res / 955; 1 6:1 52.)
Digestive System · Brion L. Froppier
199
digestive process is inactive, these AV anastomoses are open and
a partial bypass of the villus circulation is created.
General Identifying Features
The various regions of the small intestine in the domestic mam-
mals are not clearly defined microscopically, as they are in human
beings. For example, the submucosal glands do not extend the full
length of the duodenum in sheep, goats, and carnivores, whereas
in horses, cattle, and pigs, these glands extend into the jejunum.
Likewise, the aggregated lymphatic nodules (Peyer's patches),
often considered an identifying feature of the ileum, may be seen
anywhere along the small intestine of domestic mammals.
Because the length of the villi varies with physiologic acti-
vities and with species, it is not a reliable characteristic for the
identification of the various segments.
LARGE INTESTINE
The large intestine is composed of the cecum, colon, rectum, and
anal canal. It is a site for microbial action on the ingesta; absorp-
tion of water, vitamins, and electrolytes; and secretion of mucus
Many gross and functional variations in the large intestine relate
to the necessity of breaking down the large masses of cellulose-
containing material consumed by the herbivores. However, de-
spite gross anatomic differences, the cecum, colon, and rectum
are difficult to differentiate in histologic sections. Characteristics
FIGURE I0-55 Ileum (cat). Tunica mucosa (A); submucosa (B)
common to these three seg ments of the large intestine are the ab-
tunica muscularis (C); aggregated lymphatic nodules (D); dome (E)
sence of villi; longer, less-coiled, simple tubular intestinal glands
(see Chapter 8). Hematoxylin and eosin (x48).
with many goblet cells (Fig. 10-56); the absence of acidophilic
Blood Supply
Branches of the celiac and cranial mesenteric arteries, coursing in
the mesoduodenum and mesentery (mesojejunum and mesoileum),
penetrate the tunica muscularis along the line of mesenteric at.
tachment. These arteries give off branches to supply the tunica
muscularis and continue into the submucosa, where they form a
submucosal arterial plexus. The plexus gives rise to short arteri-
oles, which supply capillary beds around the lamina muscularis
and intestinal (mucosal) glands, and long arterioles, which ex-
tend to the tips of the villi. In the villus, the single arteriole sup-
plies a capillary network and continues to the tip of the villus
where it is continuous with a venule, forming an arteriovenular
loop. Venules from the villi and the periglandular capillary bed
combine to form a submucosal venous plexus. This plexus gives
rise to veins that traverse the tunica muscularis parallel to the ar.
tem in the small intestine of horses, carnivores, and pigs differs
arteriovenular loops in the villi but have arteriovenous (AV) anas-
tomoses in the submucosa preceding the villous circulation.
FIGURE I0-56 Cecum (cat).Tunica mucosa (A)containing
During digestion, circularly arranged smooth muscle cells in the
simple tubular glands; lymphatic nodule in submucosa (B). Trichrome
AV anastomoses contract, shunting blood to the villi. When the
(×45).
200
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
granular (Paneth) cells; and an increased number of lymphatic
Colon
nodules. Plicae circulares are absent in the large intestine, but
The mucosa of the colon is substantially thicker than that of the
longitudinal folds are present. Animals fattened for slaughter tend
small intestine because of the increased length of the intestinal
to accumulate white adipose tissue in the submucosa (Fig. 10-5 7).
glands. Because villi are absent, the mucosal surface is smooth
(Fig. 10-58). The number of goblet cells is increased compared
Cecum
to the small intestine. The submucosa is often distended by lym-
phatic tissue, which also disrupts the lamina muscularis. In such
The cecum varies in size among the different species. In her-
instances, intestinal glands may extend into the submucosa.
bivores with simple stomachs (e.g., horses), the cecum is large
 In pigs and horses, the outer longitudinal layer of the tunica
and is an important bacterial fermentation reservoir, but in car-
muscularis of the cecum and colon forms large, flat muscle bands
nivores, it is small. In all domestic mammals, the cecum has a
containing numerous elastic fibers, the taenia ceci and taenia
substantial number of lymphatic nodules scattered throughout
coli. Those of the cecum and ventral colon of horses have more
its length (Fig. 10-56). Lymphatic nodules are especially nu-
elastic fibers than smooth muscle cells.
merous around the ileal ostium (the opening of the ileum into
the cecum or colon) in pigs, ruminants, and dogs; however, in
Rectum
horses and cats, lymphatic nodules are concentrated near the
apex of the cecum.
Like that
of the cecum and colon, the mucosa of the rectum is
smooth, and except for the increas
ised number of goblet cells, the
FIGURE I0-57 Cecum (pig). Tunica mucosa (A); submucosa
filled with white adipose tissue (B); inner circular (C) and outer
FIGURE10-58
 Colon (pig). Tunica mucosa with intestinal
longitudinal (D) layers of the tunica muscularis; serosa.
glands containing numerous goblet cells (A); lamina propria (B);
(E). Hematoxylin and eosin (x48).
lamina muscularis (C). Hematoxylin and eosin (x200).
Digestive System ·Brion L. Frappier
201
basic structures are similar as well. In horses and cattle, the rec-
The mucosa of the anal canal is smooth and lacks glands in ru-
tal wall is thicker than the wall of the colon. In carnivores, the
minants and horses. In pigs and carnivores, the anal mucosa is di-
outer longitudinal layer of the tunica muscularis is thickened.
vided into three distinct zones:(l)columnar zone (zona columnaris
Elastic fibers are most prominent in the rectum of horses and cat-
ani), (2) intermediate zone (zona intermedia), and (3) cutaneous
tle and least prominent in the rectum of sheep and goats. The
zone (zona cutanea). The columnar zone contains longitudinal
outer longitudinal layer of the tunica muscularis contains more
folds, the anal columns, between which are grooves, the anal
elastic fibers than does the inner circular layer. The cranial por-
sinuses. The intermediate zone is a narrow strip between the
tion of the rectum is covered by a serosa, whereas the retroperi-
columnar zone and the cutaneous zone. The mucosa of both the
toneal portion is surrounded by an adventitia, which blends with
columnar and intermediate zones is lined with nonkeratinized
the pelvic fascia.
 stratified squamous epithelium, and modified tubuloalveolar
Near its junction with the anal canal, the rectal mucosa in
sweat glands, the anal glands, occupy the propria-submucosa. The
ruminants is thrown into longitudinal folds, the rectal columns
anal glands produce a lipid secretion in cats and dogs (Fig. 10-59)
(columnae rectales). All domestic mammals have an extensive
and a mucous secretion in pigs. The cutaneous zone begins at
venous plexus in the lamina propria of this region of the rectum.
the anocutaneous line, at which the nonkeratinized stratified
In dogs, approximately 100 solitary lymphatic nodules are a
squamous epithelium of the intermediate zone changes abruptly
prominent feature of the rectum. They are visible grossly because
to a keratinized form, marking the beginning of the cutaneous
of pitlike depressions, rectal pits, in the mucosa overlying the
 zone. The cutaneous zone is lined by keratinized stratified squa-
lymphatic nodules.
mous epithelium. In carnivores, the ducts from the anal sacs
(paranal sinuses) open at the junction of the intermediate and
cutaneous zones. The anal sacs and ducts are bilateral evagina-
Anal Canal
tions of the anal mucosa. In dogs, the mucosa of the outermost
The anal canal is the terminal segment of the digestive tract, and
part of the cutaneous zone, near the junction with the skin, con-
at the anorectal line, the simple columnar epithelium of the rec-
tains large, modified sebaceous glands, the circumanal glands.
-ida snouenbs pay!eus pazueiaxuou oi Andnsqe saSueup un1
The anal sacs and their associated glands and the circumanal
thelium (Fig. 10-59). Also at the anorectal junction, the lamina
 glands are discussed with the integument in Chapter 16.
muscularis of the rectum terminates.
The outer longitudinal layer of the tunica muscularis of the
rectum terminates at the anorectal junction. The inner circular
layer continues into the anal canal and terminates as the internal
anal sphincter muscle. The external anal sphincter muscle, which
is circularly disposed skeletal muscle, covers the internal anal
DC
LIVER
The liver is the largest gland in the body and is characterized by
multiple, complex functions: excretion (waste products), secretion
(bile), storage (lipids, vitamins A and B, glycogen), synthesis
(fibrinogen, globulins, albumin, clotting factors), phagocytosis
(foreign particulate matter), detoxification (lipid-soluble drugs),
conjugation (toxic substances, steroid hormones), esterification
(free fatty acids to triglycerides), metabolism (proteins, carbohy-
drates, lipids, hemoglobin, drugs), and hemopoiesis (in the embryo
and potentially in the adult). An understanding of the structure of
the liver is vital to the interpretation of these processes.
Capsule and Stroma
Each lobe of the liver is covered by a typical serosa (visceral peri-
toneum) overlying a thin connective-tissue capsule. Connective
FIGURE I0-59 Rectum and anal canal (dog). Rectum (A); ana
tissue from the capsule extends into the liver lobes, as interlobular
canal (B);: skin (C) with sweat and sebaceous glands (D); veins
connective tissue, to surround individual liver lobules and sup-
(E); anal glands (arrows). Hematoxylin and eosin (x66). (From Adom
port the vascular and bile duct systems. A fine network of retic-
WS, Calhoun ML, 5mith EM, et ol. Microscopic Anatomy of the Dog: A
ular fibers surrounds the cells and sinusoids. Smooth muscle cells
Photogrophic Atlas. 5pringfieid, IL: Chorles C. Thomos, 1 970.)
may be present in the capsule and interlobular connective tissue.
202
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Interlobular connective tissue is scant and difficult to see (Fig.
10-60), except in pigs, which have distinct interlobular connec-
tive tissue septa (Fig. 10-6l). This difference accounts for the
tougher nature of pork liver as a food, as opposed to beef liver.
 Expanded areas of interlobular connective tissue supporting
(a) a lymph vessel, (b) branches of the hepatic artery, (c) branches 
of the portal vein, and (d) a bile duct appear throughout any sec-
 tion of liver. These groups of vessels and ducts, together with the
supportive connective tissue, are called portal canals or portal
areas (Figs. 10-60 and 10-62).
Parenchyma
The hepatic laminae consist of rows of hepatocytes. Hepatocytes
have six or more surfaces that are of three different types: (1) micro-
villous surfaces that face the perisinusoidal space; (2) canalicular
surfaces that border the bile canaliculi; and (3) contact surfaces
between adjacent hepatocytes where apposed cell membranes may
FIGURE I0-6I Liver (pig). Liver lobules (A); portal canal
(B); branch of the portal vein (C); interlobular connective
tissue (arrows). Trichrome {X30). (Frorm Stinsor AW, Brown
EM. Veterirory Histology Slide 5ets. East Lansing, Ml: Michigor
Stote University, Instructional Media Certer, 1 970.)
have tight junctions and desmosomes (Fig. 10-63). Hepatocytes
are further characterized by a centrally located spherical nucleus
with one or more prominent nucleoli and scattered clumps of
heterochromatin. Occasionally, binucleated cells are seen. The
appearance of the cytoplasm of hepatocytes varies within wide
limits, depending on nutritional and functional changes. Mito-
A
D
B
FIGURE I0-60 Liver (calf). Lobule (A) with central vein (B) is
not separated from adjacent lobules by connective tissue as is that
FIGURE 10-62
Liver (pig). Portal canal (area). Branch of the
of the pig in Figure I0-6l.Interlobular portal venules (C) in portal
hepatic artery (A); branch of the portal vein (B); bile duct (C);: lymph
canals (areas). Hematoxylin and eosin (x80)
capillary (D). Hematoxylin and eosin (×200).
Digestive System · Brion L. Froppier
203
endothelial cell
sinusoid
reticular fiber
oerisinusoidal
microvillus
space
mitochondrion
smooth ER-
bile
microvillus
canaliculus
tight junction
glycogen
desmosome
Bi=c=
rough ER
lipid droplet
Golgicomplex
FIGUre 10-63
Drawing of an electron micrograph of a hepatocyte and adjacent structures
chondria are abundant and the Golgi complex is usually near the
Bile is secreted into bile canaliculi, which are minute canals
bile canaliculus but may be juxtanuclear. There are numerous
(0.5 to 1.0 μm in diameter) between apposed hepatocytes (Figs.
lysosomes, clusters of free ribosomes, and well-developed rER
10-63 and 10-64). The canaliculi are expanded intercellular spaces
and sER, which are often continuous with each other. At the ultra-
bordered by cell membranes with short microvilli that project into
structural level, glycogen is seen as dense granules in a rosette
the lumen. Tight junctions prevent bile from escaping into the
configuration. In ordinary histologic preparations, glycogen-rich
narrow intercellular space adjacent to the canaliculus.
areas appear grainy or as irregularly shaped empty spaces, whereas
Bile flows in the bile canaliculi toward the periphery of the
sites occupied by lipids appear as round vacuoles. Bile pigments
classic lobule, where it enters small bile ductules lined by low
may be seen as fine yellow granules throughout the cytoplasm of
simple cuboidal epithelium. The bile ductules join interlobular
normal hepatocytes. In cytology preparations stained with Wright's
bile ducts located in the portal canals. These ducts are lined by
stain, bile pigments are blue-green granules located both inside
a simple cuboidal or simple colum nar epithelium. Interlobular
and outside the hepatocytes.
 bile ducts converge to form progressively larger intrahepatic
Considerable evidence indicates that all hepatocytes may not
ducts, which finally leave the liver lobes through the hepatic
be functionally identical, but instead, certain enzyme patterns
ducts. The extrahepatic biliary passages are composed of the he-
and metabolic systems may be related to the position of the cell
patic ducts, the cystic duct, the bile duct, and the gallbladder
within the lobule. Although metabolic activity of the hepato-
Hepatic ducts drain the individual liver lobes. The cystic duct
cytes is generally believed to be closely associated with blood
 drains the gallbladder (absent in horses). The hepatic ducts and
supply, the extent to which hepatocytes are similar or dissimilar
the cystic duct unite to form the bile duct, which empties into
with respect to metabolic systems, susceptibility to insults, and
the duodenum. All of the extrahepatic biliary passages are lined
nutritional needs remains to be resolved.
by a tall simple colum nar epithelium.
Bile Canaliculi and Bile Ducts
Blood Supply
Hepatocytes absorb bilirubin (the principal bile pigment) from
The vascularity of the liver is directly related to its multiple func.
the blood, conjugate it, and secrete it as one component of bile.
tions. The liver has a dual blood supply. The portal vein brings
Bile salts, protein, and cholesterol are the other components.
blood from the intestines and associated organs, and the hepatic
204
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
have at least one surface adjacent to a sinusoid. Sinusoids are lined
 by two types of cells: endothelial cells and stellate macrophages
(Kupffer cells) (Fig. 10-65).
The porous sinusoidal endothelium rests on a discontinuous
basal lamina (Fig. 10-63). The endothelial cells contain small
pores that lack diaphragms. The pores are too small to allow the
passage of blood cells, but blood plasma can flow through them
freely. The endothelium is separated from the hepatocytes by a
space, the perisinusoidal space (of Disse). Hepatocyte micro-
villi extend into the perisinusoidal space, where they are bathed
in plasma, allowing a direct exchange of substances between blood
and hepatocytes. The sinusoids of the ruminant liver differ from
those described above in that the endothelium is nonporous and
the basal lamina is continuous.
Stellate macrophages are scattered among the sinusoidal
endothelial cells, often sending long pseudopodia through the
endothelial pores or between the cells. These highly phagocytic
FIGURE I0-64 Liver (pig). Sinusoids (A); central vein (B); liver
laminae with bile canaliculi between the cells (C). Silver stain (×300)
Inset: bile canaliculi surrounding a hepatocyte (D) and a cross
section of a bile canaliculus (E). Silver stain (×768)
sels enter the liver at a hilus, called the porta, on its visceral sur.
face. Branches (rami) of these two vessels enter the lobes, where
they ramify and follow the interlobular connective tissue. The
small branches within the portal canal are termed the inter-
 lobular portal venule and the interlobular hepatic arteriole
(Fig. 10-62).
The interlobular portal venules give rise to small branches,
sometimes referred to as distributing venules, which form the
axis of the liver acinus. Short terminal venules arise from the dis-
tributing venules and end directly in the sinusoids. Most of the
blood from the interlobular hepatic arterioles enters a capillary
plexus within the portal canal and interlobular connective tissue;
only a small portion of the blood reaches the sinusoids directly
by way of terminal arterioles.
The hepatic sinusoids are blood capillaries, located be-
tween hepatic laminae, that course through the lobule carrying
 blood from terminal branches of the interlobular hepatic arteri-
FIGURE I0-65 Liver laminae and sinusoids (cat). Two stellate
ole and interlobular portal venule to the central vein. The sinu-
macrophages (Kupffer cells) (A) and one endothelial cell (B) comprise
soids often comm unicate with each other via interruptions in the
the sinusoidal lining cells. Notice the erythrocytes (lower left) and
laminae. This ramifying arrangement ensures that hepatocytes
one neutrophil (arrow). Epon. Toluidine blue (×l600).
Digestive System · Brion L. Froppier
205
cells are derivatives of blood monocytes and, as such, are compo
Here, it diffuses into lymph capillaries within the portal canals
nents of the monocyte-macrophage system.
The lymph is carried from the portal canals by larger lymph ves-
 In addition to the hepatocyte microvilli, the perisinusoidal
sels that ultimately leave the liver at the porta. These lymph ves-
space contains reticular fibers as well as perisinusoidal
sels drain to the hepatic lymph nodes.
adipocytes. These cells are believed to store vitamin A and syn-
thesize type IlI collagen after injury to the liver.
The Classic Liver Lobule-The Anatomic
Blood in the sinusoids leaves the lobule via the central vein
Unit of the Liver
(Figs. 10-60 and 10-66). Central veins are lined by endothelium
resting on a thin adventitia. The central veins connect with
The clear delineation afforded by abundant interlobular connec-
sublobular veins at the periphery of the lobules. Sublobular
au jo uoiiuonan aul on pal sey soid jo iaa!l aun ui anssi aai
patic lobules (classic liver lobules). This morphologic unit is
the hepatic veins, which drain directly into the caudal vena
organized around the central vein (Figs. 10-60, 10-61, and 10-
cava.
67). The lobule consists of a polyhedral prism of hepatic tissue
wu I Alaeujxondde pue Suol uu 7 Ajaneuixondde Sujnseau
wide. Cross-sectional profiles of this lobule are roug hly hexagon-
Lymph and Lymph Vessels
shaped, with the sinusoids converging from the periphery to the
Lymph in the liver is formed in the perisinusoidal space. It flows
central vein, into which they empty. Portal canals are present at
toward the periphery of the lobule and enters the intercellular
approximately three of the six angles of the lobule. The
spaces of the portal canal and interlobular connective tissue
parenchyma located between the portal canals and the central
vein consists of cells arranged in branching plates or laminae
(Fig. 10-66). The laminae are one cell thick and the free surfaces
of the cells face the sinusoids. An anastomosing network of bile
canaliculi,formed by the apposed cell membranes of hepatocytes,
is present throughout the laminae (Fig. 10-64).
The Portal Lobule and the Liver Acinus-
Functional Units of the Liver
The portal lobule is a functional unit developed to emphasize
ule is defined as a triangular area consisting of the parenchyma
rtalcone
FIGURE I0-67 Schematic drawing of the functional units of the
liver in relation to the anatomic unit (classic lobule). I. Liver acinus
with three zones on each side of the vascular backbone. 2. Portal
FIGURE 10-66  L
Liver (calf). Hepatic sinusoids (A); central vein
lobule with an interlobular bile ductule (in the portal area) as the
(B); stellate ma.crophages (Kupffer cells) (arrows). Hematoxylin and
axis and one central vein at each point of the triangle. 3. Classic
eosin (×384).
hepatic lobule (anatomic unit) with the central vein as its axis.
206
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
of three adjacent classic lobules that is drained by the bile duc-
tule in the portal canal. Thus, the axis (center) of the portal lob-
ule is the interlobular bile ductule in the portal canal and the
peripheral angles are the central veins of the three adjacent lob-
ules (Fig. 10-67)
The liver acinus is a functional unit that describes the vas-
amond-shaped area made of parts of two classic lobules supplied
by terminal branches of the interlobular portal venule and inter-
from a portal canal between two hepatic lobules to form the axis
of the acinus, and the two central veins are at the two opposing
points of the diamond (Fig. 10-67). Three ill-defined zones have
been identified in the liver acinus. Zone 1 is the nearest to the
vascular axis of the acinus. In this zone, hepatocytes receive an ex-
cellent nutrient and oxygen supply and are metabolically most ac-
tive. Cells in this zone may also be the first to be exposed to toxic
substances entering the liver. Zone 2 is one of intermediate ac.
tivity, whereas zone 3 borders the central vein and is the least fa-
vorably situated with respect to oxygen and nutrient supply.
GALLBLADDER
Bile produced by the liver is stored in the gallbladder and concen-
trated by the reabsorption of water and inorganic salts. In the con-
tracted (empty) state, the gallbladder mucosa is thrown into
numerous folds (plicae). As it fills and expands, the folds have a
tendency to flatten, resulting in a smoother mucosal surface. A
tall simple columnar epithelium lines the luminal surface of the
gallbladder and extends into mucosal crypts, which are small ep-
ithelial diverticula that sometimes give the impression of being
FIGURE 10-68
Gallbladder (dog). Simple columnar epithelium
glands (Fig. 10-68). T'wo types of columnar cells are located in the
(A); goblet cells (B); cross sections of mucosal crypts (C); propria-
"ua!l, aui s! adi snoraunu isou aui "unauda iappeiqieg
submucosa (D);: tunica muscularis (E). Hematoxylin and eosin (×120)
cell, which has a pale cytoplasm of uniform density. The cyto-
Inset: simple columnar epithelial lining. Hematoxylin and eosin (×768).
plasm of the apical region contains vesicles but is devoid of or-
ganelles. Electron-dense bodies with smooth outlines occur in the
circular direction. The muscle is supplied by both sympathetic
cells are scattered among the light cells. They have a narrow pro-
and parasympathetic axons.
file and contain a dark, dense cytoplasm with few organelles and
The walls of the hepatic, cystic, and bile ducts are composed
a nucleus that is more heterochromatic than that of the light cells.
of the same tunics as the gallbladder.
The epithelial cell surface is covered with microvilli, and tight
junctions (zonulae occludens) between adjacent cells prevent the
intercellular passage of fluids from the lumen of the organ. Goblet
PANCREAS
cells are characteristic of the epithelium of some species, such as
cattle, and globule leukocytes may be found in the epithelium of
The pancreas is an encapsulated, lobulated, compound tubu-
cats. Endocrine cells, possibly of the APUD system (characterized
loacinar gland containing both exocrine and endocrine parts (Fig.
by amine precursor uptake and decarboxylation), have been de-
10-70). The function of the exocrine part is to produce a variety
scribed in the epithelium of the gallbladder of cattle
of enzymes, including amylase, lipase, and trypsin, which act on
The propria-submucosa (a lamina muscularis is absent) is
the products of gastric digestion as they reach the duodenum
com posed of loose connective tissue. Lymphatic tissue, either dif-
 The endocrine part, pancreatic islets (Fig. 10-71), produces mainly
fuse or nodular,is often present. In some species, particularly ru-
insulin and glucagon. The histologic structure of the islets is dis-
minants, glands are present in the propria-submucosa. They may
cussed in Chapter 15
be serous or mucous, depending on the species, individual, or lo-
The parenchyma of the pancreas is separated into distinct
cation in the mucosa (Fig. 10-69). The tunica muscularis consists
lobules by a connective tissue stroma. Each lobule is composed
of thin bundles of smooth muscle cells that generally course in a
of secretory units and intralobular ducts.
Digestive System · Brion L. Froppier
207
FIGUrE 10-70
Pancreas (pig). Pancreatic islet (A)
pancreatic acini (B); interlobular duct (C) in interlobular
connective tissue (D): intralobular duct (E). Hematoxylin and
FIGURE 10-69
9 Gallbladder (large ruminant). Simple columnar
eosin (×120). Inset: capsule of sheep pancreas (F)
epithelium (A); propria-submucosa (B);: mucous glands (C); serous
Hematoxylin and eosin (×192)
gands (D). Hematoxylin and eosin (×120).
The secretory units of the pancreas are tubuloacinar, with a
small lumen. The tubular portion is more prominent in rumi-
nants. The glandular epithelial cells are generally pyramid-
shaped, with a spherical nucleus near the base of the cells (Figs.
10-72 and 10-73). The cytoplasm surrounding the nucleus is in-
tensely basophilic and contains an extensive rER and numerous
mitochondria. The apical region of the cells contains eosin-
ophilic, membrane-bounded zymogen granules, which are filled
with the proenzymes synthesized in the rER. An extensive Golgi
complex is located between the nucleus and the zymogen gran-
ules. The acinar cells have receptors for cholecystokinin, which 
is produced by endocrine cells in the small intestine and stimu-
lates the release of pancreatic enzymes as well as the contraction
of the tunica muscularis of the gallbladder.
The tubuloacinar secretory unit is continuous with a short
intercalated duct. This duct begins with flattened cells that ex-
tend into the lumen of the acinus; therefore, they are referred to
as centroacinar cells (Fig. 10-73). Centroacinar cells and inter-
calated duct cells secrete bicarbonate and water when stimulated
fiGure 10-71
 Pancreatic islet surrounded by pancreatic
by the polypeptide, secretin. Bicarbonate raises the pH of the
acini (dog). A cells (arrows); B cells (1). Trichrome (x450).
208
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
FIGURE I0-73 Pancreatic acinus with three centroacinar cells
at arrows. Zymogen granules (A). Hematoxylin and eosin (x1200).
FIGURE I0-72 Pancreas (dog). Pancreatic acini (A): intercalated
erable diffuse lymphatic tissue and salivary glands. The tongue
duct (B); centroacinar cells (arrows). Hematoxylin and eosin (×768).
is covered by a keratinized stratified squamous epithelium and
contains bundles of skeletal muscle, lingual salivary glands, and
a bone, the entoglossal bone. Taste buds are found only on the
intestinal contents, thereby facilitating the action of intestinal
base of the tongue and the floor of the oral cavity. All salivary
digestive enzymes. Intercalated ducts join intralobular ducts,
which are lined by low simple cuboidal epithelium. The in-
a common cavity from which an excretory duct leads to the oral
tralobular ducts of the pancreas are not “striated,”" as are the in-
cavity.
tralobular ducts of the parotid salivary gland. The intralobular
The esophagus is similar in structure both cranial and
ducts continue into interlobular ducts that are lined by simple
columnar epithelium (Fig. 10-74). Interlobular ducts converge
stratified squamous epithelium. The lamina propria is a loose
to eventually form the pancreatic duct and the accessory pan-
 connective tissue containing large mucous glands. The lamina
creatic duct, both of which empty into the duodenum. Goblet 
muscularis consists of longitudinally arranged smooth muscle
cells may be present in the epithelium of larger ducts.
fibers. The submucosa consists ofa thin layer of loose connective
The stroma of the pancreas consists ofa thin capsule that gives
tissue. The tunica muscularis is composed of a thick inner circu-
rise to delicate connective tissue septa separating the lobules.
lar layer and a thin outer longitudinal layer of smooth muscle
Frequently, lamellar (Pacini's) corpuscles are present in the in-
(Fig. 10-75).
terlobular connective tissue of the pancreas of cats.
The crop is a saclike diverticulum of the esophagus. It is a
storage organ where the ingested food is moistened by the mu-
cous secretions of the esophageal glands. The histologic structure
AVIaN DIGESTIVe SYSTeM
of the crop is similar to that of the esophagus, except that glands
are restricted to an area near its junction with the esophagus
The oral cavity is lined throughout by a keratinized stratified
The bird does not have a glandular stomach similar to that of
squamous epithelium. The propria-submucosa contains consid-
mammals, but instead has two separate organs between the esoph-
Digestive System · Brion L. Froppier
209
agus and the duodenum. The proventriculus, or "glandular"
stomach, and the ventriculus, or “muscular" stomach, perform
many of the functions of the mammalian stomach.
The mucosa of the proventriculus is characterized by macro-
scopic papillae with numerous microscopic folds (plicae) of vary-
ing height that are arranged concentrically around the single duct
opening at the apex of each papilla (Fig. 10-76). Simple columnar
epithelium covers the plicae and continues into three generations
of ducts of the proventricular glands (Fig. 10-76). The glands
are lined by a simple cuboidal to low columnar epithelium in
which the adjacent cells are in direct contact only on their basal
half, thereby giving a serrated appearance to the luminal surface.
Only one cell type is identifiable (oxynticopeptic cells), and this
type produces both pepsinogen and hydrochloric acid. The lamina
propria is typical loose connective tissue. The lamina muscularis is
split into a very thin inner layer and a thick outer layer inner by
the proventricular glands. A typical two-layered tunica muscu-
laris consisting entirely of smooth muscle underlies the loose
connective tissue of the very thin submucosa (Fig. 10-76). The
proventriculus is covered by a typical serosa.
FIGURE 10-74 Pancreas (goat). Pancreatic lobule
(A); pancreatic islet (B);: intralobular duct (C); interlobular duct
(D); pancreatic duct (E). Hematoxylin and eosin (×145).
FIGURE I0-75 Esophagus (chicken). Keratinized stratified
squamous epithelium (A): lamina. propria (B); mucous glands 
FIGURE I0-76 Proventriculus (chicken). Papilla (A) with plicae
(C);: lamina muscularis (D); submucosa (E); tunica muscularis
(arrows); tunica muscularis (B); proventricular glands (C). Hematoxylin
(F). Hematoxylin and eosin (x45).
and eosin (×23).
210
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
The ventriculus (gizzard) is a highly muscular organ re-
sponsible for grinding and macerating the ingesta (Figs. 10-77
and 10-78). The lining of the ventriculus is referred to as the cu-
ticle or koilin membrane. Koilin is a secretory product pro.
duced by mucosal glands and surface epithelial cells; it is not a
stratum corneum. The glands form hard koilin rod clusters,
-ond uoy yos Aq paieiedas are pue aueiquau aul iaua yr
duced by the surface epithelial cells. The surface epithelium is
simple columnar while that of the simple, branched tubular mu-
cosal glands is simple cuboidal. The lumina of the glands are
filled with secretory product, which stains bright red with kera-
tohyalin stains. The lamina propria and submucosa are both com-
posed of loose connective tissue. The lamina muscularis is very
discontinuous. The tunica muscularis is a single thick layer of
parallel smooth muscle cells that spreads from two aponeuroses
at the center of the organ. It is crisscrossed by bands of dense con-
nective tissue. The outermost tunic is a typical serosa.
The histologic structure of the small intestine is similar to
that of the mammalian small intestine. The lamina propria and
submucosa contain large amounts of diffuse and nodular lym-
FIGURE I0-78 Ventriculus, gizzard (chicken). Cuticle (A); lamina
propria between the ventricular glands (B); submucosa (C). Trichrome
(88x)
phatic tissue. Submucosal glands of the duodenum are generally
absent. The tunica muscularis is composed of inner circular and
outer longitudinal layers of smooth muscle. The outermost tunic
is a typical serosa.
Two ceca open into the digestive tract at the junction of the
ileum and rectum. Three regions of this organ present slightly
different histologic features. The proximal portion contains promi-
nent villi. In the adult bird, large masses of diffuse and nodular
lymphatic tissue infiltrate the lamina propria and submucosa of
this portion, forming grossly visible cecal tonsils. In the mid-
portion, the villi are shorter and broader and mucosal folds are
present. The distal ceca are devoid of villi. The surface epithe-
lium of the mucosa is simple columnar with goblet cells.
The rectum, a part of the large intestine, extends from the
ileum to the coprodeum of the cloaca. It resembles the small in-
testine in that villi are present. Scattered diffuse and nodular
lymphatic tissues occur in the lamina propria and submucosa.
The cloaca is divided into three parts—the coprodeum,
urodeum, and proctodeum—-by transverse folds. All three parts
have a similar structure. Villi are present and the epithelium of
the mucosa is simple columnar. The cloacal bursa opens into
the proctodeum.
FIGURE I0-77 Ventriculus, gizzard (chicken). Lumen (A); cuticle
Histologic features of the liver, gallbladder, and exocrine
(B); smooth muscle of tunica muscularis (C); simple branched
 pancreas of the bird are not significantly different from those of
tubular ventricular glands (D). Hematoxylin and eosin (×10).
the same organs in ma mmals.
Digestive System ·Brion L. Froppier
211
SUGGESTED READINGS
Herdt T. Regulation of gastroi ntestinal function. In: Cunningham JG.
ed. Textbook of Veterinary Physiology. 3rd Ed. Philadelphia: WB
Adam WS, Calhoun ML, Smith EM, et al. Microscopic Anatomy of the
Saunders Company, 2002.
Dog: A Photographic Atlas. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas,
International Committee on Veterinary Gross Anatomical Nomenclature.
1970:102.
 Nomina Anatomica Veterinatia. 4th Ed. Ithaca, NY: International
Akester AR. Structure of the glandular layer and koilin membrane in
Committee on Veterinary Gross Anatomical Nomenclature, 1994.
the gizzard of the adult domestic fowl (Gallus gallus domesticus).
International Committee on Veterinary Histological Nomenclature.
J Anat 1986;147:1-25.
Nomina Histologica, 2nd Ed. revised. Ithaca, NY: International
Boshell JL, Wilborn WH. Histology and ulttastructure of the pig
Committee on Veterinary Histological Nomenclature, 1994.
parotid gland. Am J Anat 1978;1 52:447-465.
Krstic RV. General histology of the mammal. New York: Springer-
Budsberg SC, Spurgeon TL. Microscopic anatomy and enzyme histo-
Verlag, 1985.
chemistry of the canine anal canal. Anat Histol Embryol 1983;
Krstit R V. Ultrastructure of the mammalian cell. New York: Springer-
12:295-316.
Verlag, 1979.
Chu RM, Glock RD, Ross RF. Gut-associated lymphoid tissue of young
Madara JL, Trier JS. The functional morphology of the mucosa of the small
 swine with emphasis on someepithelium ofaggregated lymph nod-
intestine. In: Johnson LR, ed. Physiology of the Gastrointestinal
ules (Peyet's patches) of the small intestine. Am J Vet Res 1979;
Tract. 3rd Ed. New Yotk: Raven Press, 1994;2: 1577.
40: 1720.
McLelland J. A Color Atlas of Avian Anatomy. Philadelphia: WB
Dyce KM, Sack WO, Wensing CJG. Textbook of Veterinary Anatomy.
Saunders Company, 1991.
3rd Ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders Company, 2002.
Noden DM, deLahunta A. The Embryology of Domestic Animals.
Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1985.
ies in the liver of adult sheep and the hewborn lamb. Anat Rec
Titkemeyer CW, Calhoun ML. A comparative study of the structure of
1972;172:57-70.
the small intestines of domestic animals. Am J Vet Res 1955;16:
Gershon MD, Kirchgessher AL, Wade PR. Functional anatomy of the en-
152-157.
teric nervous system. In: Johnson LR, ed. Physiology of the
Winsche A. Anatomy of the liver lobule of pig. Anat Histol Embryol
Gastrointestinal Tract. 3rd Ed. New York: Raven Pres, 1994;1 :381
1981;10:342.
Urinary System
HLL W. VERLANDER
Kidney
Distal convoluted tubule
General Organization
 Connecting segment 
Superficial anatomic features
Collecting ducts 
Cortex and medulla
Vasculature of the Kidney
Parts of the renal corpuscle and the renal tubule
Interstitium, Lymphatics, and Nerves
Nephron
Juxtaglomerular Apparatus
Renal Corpuscle
Structure-Function Relationships in the Kidney
 General structure
General function
 Glomerular capillaries
Filtration and regulation of blood pressure
Mesangium
Tubule function
 Glomerular capsule
Proximal tubule
Renal Tubule
Thin limbs and thick ascending limb of the loop of
 Proximal tubule
Henle
The loop of Henle
Distal convoluted tubule
Thin limbs of the loop of Henle
 Collecting duct
Thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle
Urinary Passages
The urinary system is composed of two kidneys, two ureters, a
the ureter pass through a single indentation or hilus. The surface
urinary bladder, and a urethra. The kidneys excrete nitrogenous
of the kidney is covered by a fibrous capsule, which is composed
wastes and regulate the volume and composition of body fluids
 primarily of collagen fibers, but which also may contain smooth
by filtration of the blood, reabsorption of filtered solutes and water,
muscle and blood vessels.
and secretion of electrolytes. The ureters conduct urine from the
The kidneys of domesticated animals have various shapes
kidneys to the urinary bladder, which stores the urine and expels
(Fig. 11-1). In dogs, cats, sheep, and goats, the external surface
it via the urethra.
of the kidney is smooth and bean-shaped. In pigs, the kidneys
are smooth, elongated, and flattened. In horses, the kidneys are
smooth, but only the left kidney is bean-shaped whereas the right
KIDNEY
kidney is heart-shaped. In large ruminants, the overall shape is
oval, but multiple lobes are visible on the surface.
General Organization
The simplest form of the mammalian kidney is the unipap
illary kidney, with a single renal pyramid that includes the base
Superficia! Anatomic Features
next to the cortex and an apex or papilla. The unipapillary kidney
In all species, the two kidneys are retroperitoneal and positioned
is common in laboratory animals and represents the basic unit of
either flat against the lumbar muscles or suspended from the dor-
more complex kidneys, which are formed of multiple lobes that
sal abdomen. The right kidney is usually slightly more cranial
are fused to a variable extent. Cats, dogs, horses, sheep, and goats
than the left. The renal artery and vein, lymphatics, nerves, and
have unilobar kidneys with papillae that are fused to form a sin-
212
Urinary System ·Jill W. Verlonder
213
C
FIGURE II-I   Schematic drawing of the gross structure and lobation patterm in three different
kidneys. A. Unilobar kidney typical of camivores. B. Multilobar kidney typical of large ruminants. On the
surface of the kidney, each lobe is distinctly outined by deep grooves. Note that this kidney lacks a renal
pelvis. C. Multilobar kidney of the pig. Note the smooth surface. In the bovine kidney, the lobes are
clearly demarcated (bracket in B.), while in the porcine kidney, cortical portions of the lobes fuse
(bracket in C.). In the camivore kidney (as well as in equine and small ruminant kidneys) lobes fuse
extensively (bracket in A.) to give the appearance of a single lobe ("unilobar"). (Redrown from Dellmorr
gle renal crest that empties into the renal pelvis (Fig. 11-1). Pigs,
distal thick ascending limb (which diverges from the medullary
large ruminants, and humans have a multilobar (multipyrami-
ray to contact the juxtaglomerular apparatus of the glomerulus),
dal) kidney with numerous medullary pyramids and papillae.
and initial collecting tubule.
The papillae discharge into extensions of the renal pelvis or ureter
The outer medulla is located deep to the cortex; the arcu-
called calices (minor or major) or into the pelvis directly.
ate blood vessels mark the border between the cortex and the
outer medulla (Fig. 1l-4). The outer medulla is subdivided into
outer and inner stripes. The outer stripe is the outermost re-
Cortex and Medulla
gion of the outer medulla and contains proximal straight tubules
A longitudinal or transverse section through the kidney reveals
(Ss segments), thick ascending limbs, and collecting ducts. The
the parenchyma, which is divided into the outer, dark red cortex
inner stripe is the inner portion of the outer medulla. The inner
and the inner,lighter-colored medulla(Figs. 11-1 and 11-2). The
 stripe contains no proximal tubules; the transition from proxi-
structures within the renal cortex are arranged in medullary rays
mal straight tubules to thin descending limbs of Henle's loop
and the cortical labyrinth (Figs. 11-2 and 11-3). These terms
marks the border between the outer and inner stripes. Thus, the
arose because, unlike the medulla, which is composed entirely of
inner stripe contains the collecting ducts, thick ascending limbs,
straight tubule seg ments, the renal cortex contains both straight
 and thin descending limbs of Henle's loop.
tubule segments and convoluted tubule segments. In a transverse
The inner medulla is located deep to the outer medulla.
section, the medulla appears striated throughout and the straight
Transitions between the thin limbs and thick ascending limbs of
segments in the cortex, which are aligned more or less in paral-
Henle's loop mark the border between the inner and outer
lel bundles, appear to radiate from the medulla out toward the
medulla. Thus, the inner medulla contains no thick ascending
fibrous capsule, thus “medullary rays." The medullary rays con-
limb segments, only collecting ducts and descending and ascend-
tain the cortical collecting ducts, cortical thick ascending limbs
 ing thin limbs of Henle's loop in addition to capillaries and lym-
of the loop of Henle, and the proximal straight tubule. Sections
 phatics. Macroscopically, the inner medulla can be subdivided into
of the cortical labyrinth contain irregular profiles of convoluted
the base and the papilla or renal crest. The base is adjacent to the
tubules including proximal convoluted tubule, distal convoluted
outer medulla. The papilla, or renal crest, is the terminal portion
tubule and connecting segment, as well as renal corpuscles, the
of the inner medulla, which extends into the renal pelvis or calices
214
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
TV
FIGURE II-3 Kdney (horse). Section cut parallel to the
surface of the kidney, deep in the cortex. The medullary rays (MR)
are cut in cross section and contain roughly circular profles of
FIGURE II-2 Kdney (cat). Cortex (C) and small part of
straight tubules. The cortical labyrinth (CL) surrounds the medullary
medulla (M). The cortex is composed of the cortical labyrinth (CL)
rays. Note the interlobular artery (llA) and vein (lIV) in the cortical
ao pue sapsndioo euau aul () ske Aenpaw pue
labyrinth. Hematoxylin and eosin (×55)
tubules are in the cortical labyrinth. The medullary rays contain long 
straight tubules, including proximal straight tubules, thick ascending 
limbs of Henle's loop, and cortical collecting ducts. Note the capsular
veins (V) at the surface of the kidney. Hematoxylin and eosin (×30)
2. Glomerular capsule (Bowman's capsule)
B. Proximal tubule
1. Proximal convoluted tubule, including both S,
and S, epithelia
Parts of the Renal Corpuscle
2. Proximal straight tubule, including both S, and
and the Renal Tubule
Ss epithelia
The following lists the components of the renal corpuscle and the
C. Thin limbs of Henle's loop
segments of the renal tubule in sequence from where the filtrate
1. Descending portion
is formed to where it is released as urine:
2. Ascending portion
1. Nephron
 D. Thick ascending limb of Henle's loop
A. Renal corpuscle
E. Distal convoluted tubule
1. Glomerulus
F. Connecting segment
 a. Glomerular capillaries
II. Collecting duct
b. Mesangium
A. Arcade—initial collecting tubule
Urinary System· jill W. Verlonder
215
B. Straight portions
1. Cortical collecting duct
 2. Outer medullary collecting duct
CNT
CORTEX
3. Inner medullary collecting duct
CCI
PCT
Nephron
CTAL
Traditionally, the nephron is considered the structural and func-
tional unit of the kidney and includes the glomerulus and all
renal tubule segments through the connecting segment. The
PST
number of nephrons varies among species. Dogs have approxi-
  s s   oo 
MTAL
aui uum u salads sid pue saoaiue ul Aaupiy iad ooo'oo7
young are fairly immature when born, the formation of nephrons
OMCD
may continue for several weeks after birth. After renal maturity,
ER
no new nephrons can be formed.
OUTE
Nephrons can be classified either by the location of their
glomeruli in the cortex as superficial (near the capsule), mid-
cortical, or juxtamedullary (near the medulla), or by the length
of their loop of Henle as short-looped or long-looped (Fig. 11-4).
Short-looped nephrons generally have superficial or midcorti-
cal glomeruli and tubules that extend only into the outer medulla
-IMCDi
 before reflecting back into the cortex. In pigs, the loops turn in
the medullary ray in the cortex. Long-looped nephrons have
TL
juxtamedullary glomeruli and tubules that extend into the inner
LA
medulla before reflecting back into the cortex. Most species have
both short- and long-looped nephrons. However, cats, dogs, and
ME
-qdau padool-tuol Aluo aaeq saiei Pire oi aalieu sainads aue
ER
rons, which conserve water more efficiently than short-looped
nephrons. Conversely, beavers, which live in fresh water, have only
short-looped nephrons.
-IMCD
Renal Corpuscle
Genera! Structure
The renal corpuscle is composed of the glomerular capillary
FIGURE II-4  Schematic drawing of the relationships between
tuft, the mesangium, and the glomerular capsule, also known as
various segments of the nephron and collecting duct and regions of
Bowman's capsule (Figs. 11-5 and 11-6). Although the term
the kidney. Long-looped (left) and short-looped (right) nephrons are
glomerulus formerly referred to only the glomerular capillary
illustrated. Cortical collecting duct (CCD); connecting segment
tuft and mesangium, the term is now widely used to refer to the
(CNT); cortical thick ascending limb (CTAL); distal convoluted
entire renal corpuscle. The renal corpuscle is spherical and varies
tubule (DCT); initial inner medullary collecting duct (IMCD)
in size among species. Larger animals tend to have larger cor-
oyt Aelinpaw (al inp sunralloo Aenpaw jauu! euat
puscles. For example, horse corpuscles average 220 μm in diam-
ascending limb (MTAL); outer medullary collecting duct (OMCD);
 eter, whereas cat corpuscles average 120 μm in diameter. Blood
proximal convoluted tubule (PCT); proximal straight tubule (PST);
vessels enter and exit the glomerulus at the vascular pole. The
thin limb of the loop of Henle (TL). Glomeruli, PCT, DCT, terminal
urinary pole is opposite the vascular pole where the glomerular
segments of the CTAL, and CNT are located in the cortical
labyrinth; PST, CTAL, and CCD are located in the medullary rays in 
capsule opens into the proximal convoluted tubule.
the cortex. (Frorm Madser KM, Verlonder /W. Rerral structure ir relotior
to functior. In: Wilcox CS, Tisher CC, eds. Hardbook of Nephrology ond 
Glomerular Capillaries
Hypertension. 5th Ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Wilims ond Wilkins, 2004.)
The glomerular capillary tuft, or glomerular rete, is a network
of branching and anastomosing capillaries. These capillaries are
lined by an extremely thin layer of fenestrated endothelium; the
diameter of the endothelial fenestrations or pores ranges from
50 to 150 nm (Fig. 11-7). Blood enters via the afferent arteriole
and leaves via the efferent arteriole at the vascular pole (Fig. 11-6).
216
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
TAL
E
NE
SM
EMC
GBM
PGC
US
FlGURE II-6 Schematic drawing of the renal corpuscle and
juxtaglomerular apparatus. The afferent arteriole (AA) supplies the
glomerulus, and the efferent arteriole (EA) carries blood away. The
endothelial cells (E) lining the arterioles are not porous, whereas
those of the glomerulus have endothelial pores (EP). The mesangial
cells (MC) of the glomerulus are on the same side of the
glomerular basement membrane (GBM) as the endothelial cells. The
glomerular capsule surrounds the glomerulus; the complex
podocytes (P) cover the capillaries and form the visceral layer that
FIGURE II-5
 Renal corpuscle (horse). The glomerulus,
reflects at the vascular pole and is continuous with the parietal layer
composed of numerous capillary loops (C) and mesangial cells (not
of simple, squamous epithelial cells (PGC). The podocyte foot
easily distinguished here), is surrounded by the glomerular capsule
processes contact the GBM; the spaces between the foot processes
made up of a visceral layer of podocytes (P) and a parietal layer of
are the filtration slits (FS). The urinary space (US) is continuous with
squamous cells (arrow). The glomerular filtrate collects in the urinary
the lumen of the proximal convoluted tubule (PCT). The
space (US) of the glomerular capsule. The macula densa (MD) of
juxtaglomerular apparatus includes the macula densa (MD) within
the juxtaglomerular apparatus is located in the thick ascending limb
the thick ascending limb (TAL), the extraglomerular mesangial cells
of the vascular pole of the renal corpuscle. JB-4 plastic. Hematoxylin 
(EMC), the juxtaglomerular cells (JGC), and the afferent and efferent 
and eosin and phloxine (×335)
arterioles which contain smooth muscle (SM) in the tunica media.
Nerve endings (NE) are found near the juxtaglomerular cells
(Redrawr from Koushonpour E, Kriz W. Rernal Physiology. Principles,
Structure ond Function. New York: 5pringer-Verlog, 1 986.)
The glomerular basement membrane (GBM) separates the
endothelial cells on its inner surface from the visceral epithelial
cells, or podocytes, which cover its outer surface (Fig. 11-7). The
thick in dogs and is composed largely of type IV collagen, he-
n ai en eu ai sa aau jo pasod s 
paran sulfate proteoglycans, and the glycoproteins laminin, fi-
layer adjacent to the endothelium; the lamina rara externa,
bronectin, and entactin. The GBM is stained by the periodic
the layer adjacent to the podocytes; and the lamina densa, the
acid-Schiff (PAS) reaction, which facilitates the microscopic eval-
layer between the laminae rara. The terms lamina rara and lamina
uation of the glomeruli in renal biopsies.
densa refer to the electron density of the layers when viewed with
Mesangium
a transmission electron microscope, lamina rara being electron-
lucent and thus pale, and lamina densa being electron-dense, and
The mesangium forms the core of the glomerulus and is com-
thus dark on electron micrographs. The GBM is 100- to 250-nm
posed of specialized contractile cells embedded in an acellular
Urinary System · Jill W. Verlonder
217
US
LRI
C
FIGURE I1-7  Transmission electron micrograph of glomerular
basement membrane (rat). The blood within the glomerular
capillary (C) is selectively fltered as it passes through the endo-
thelial pores (EP), the three layers of the glomerular basement 
membrane {lamina rara intema [LRI], lamina densa [LD], and lamina.
rara externa [LRE]) and the filtration slits (FS) between the podo-
cytic foot processes to enter the urinary space (Us). Note the
FIGURE II-8  Scanning electron micrograph of glomerulus (rat)
fltration diaphragms (arrows), which bridge adjacent foot
as seen from the urinary space. The parietal layer of the glomerular
processes (x67,000).
capsule has been removed, revealing the visceral layer of podocytes
embracing the glomerular capillaries. The large, smooth-surfaced cell
bodies of the podocytes extend primary processes that branch into
secondary and tertiary processes (pedicels). (×l 300).
matrix (Fig. 11-6). Mesangial cells have elongated, irregular cell
processes, contain bundles of microfilaments made up of contrac-
tile proteins, and are joined to adjacent mesangial cells by gap
transition at the urinary pole to the cuboidal proximal tubule
junctions. The functions of mesangial cells include phagocytosis,
epithelium (Fig. 11-11).
production of the mesangial matrix, maintenance of the coherence
An additional epithelial cell in Bowman's capsule is the
of the capillary loops, and regulation of glomerular blood flow
 peripolar cell. Peripolar cells are located at the vascular pole of
through regulation of capillary resistance. The mesangial matrix
the glomerulus at the junction between the parietal and visceral
is characterized by a dense network of microfibrils surrounded by
epithelia facing the urinary space and are largest and most
an amorphous material that is similar to the GBM.
Glomerular Capsule
The glomerular capsule (Bowman's capsule) surrounds the
glomerulus (Figs. 11-5 and 11-6). The relationship of the glo-
merular capillary tuft to the glomerular capsule has been com-
pared to a fist pushed into a partially inflated balloon. The fist
represents the glomerular capillary tuft, the part of the balloon
directly covering the fist represents the visceral epithelium, and
the outer layer of the balloon not touching the fist represents
the parietal epithelium. The space between the visceral and pari-
etal layers is the urinary space (Bowman's space) (Figs. 11-6
and 11-7).
The visceral epithelial cells, or podocytes, cover the outer
surface of the glomerular capillaries (Figs. 11-8, 11-9, and 11-
10). The visceral epithelial cell body contains the nucleus and is
aus ym uoy sassaoid ard aiei aaas o uio au
secondary and tertiary processes emanate. The smallest of these
are called foot processes or pedicels. The secondary and terti-
ary foot processes of one cell interdigitate with those of adjacent
FIGURE Il-9  Scanning electron micrograph of podocyte (rat).
cells. The narrow spaces (25 to 60 nm) between the foot processes
The cell body (C) of one podocyte is in the center of the field.
are called filtration slits, which are bridged by the slit di-
Numerous processes of varying size extend from the cell body.
aphragm (Fig. 11-7). The parietal epithelium, a layer of sim-
wrap around the glomerular capillaries, and interdigitate with
ple squamous epithelium that lines the capsule, makes an abrupt
218
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
US
EF
GBM
EI
FIGUre II-10 
 Schematic drawing of the components of the fltration barrier of the kidney
The capillaries consist of the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) lined by the endothelium
(E), which contains numerous endothelial pores (EP) or fenestrations. Podocytes (P) cover the
outer side of the GBM; the primary processes (PP) branch into secondary and tertiary processes,
forming small foot processes (FP). Components of the plasma pass through the endothelial pores,
the GBM, and the filtration slits (FS) and form the glomerular filtrate in the urinary space {US)
numerous in sheep and goats. Peripolar cells contain dark-
staining, membrane-bounded granules that contain albumin,
transthyretin, immunoglobulins, neuron-specific enolase, and
kallikrein, but not renin. The cells also contain adseverin, a pro-
tein involved in exocytosis in secretory cells. Thus, it is believed
that the peripolar cell is a secretory cell, but its specific function
is unknown.
Renal Tubule
Proxima! Tubule
The proximal tubule begins at the urinary pole of the renal
corpuscle (Figs. 11-11 and 11-12 and Table 11-1). The proxi-
mal tubule is by far the longest cortical tubule segment and
FIGURE II-12
 Cortical labyrinth (perfused rat kidney). The
cortical labyrinth contains the renal corpuscles, proximal convaluted
FIGURE II-II Scanning electron micrograph of the parietal
tubules (P), distal convoluted tubules (D), connecting segments,
aut jo stuauodwo aut ll (te) ansden reinawoe aut jo lake)
initial collecting tubules, and the terminal segment of the thick
renal corpuscle have been removed except the parietal layer. Each
ascending limb. Two of the three renal corpuscles visible here show
squamous cell of the parietal layer is distinctly outlined and projects
the continuity with proximal convoluted tubules. The periodic acid-
a single, centrally located cilium. The opening into the proxima
Schiff (PAS) stain used on this section enhances the staining of the
convoluted tubule (P) is surrounded by cells with a brush border.
glomerular basement membrane, the basement membrane around
demonstrating the abrupt transition from the parietal epithelium to
the tubules, and the cell coat associated with the brush border of
proximal tubule epithelium (× I 200).
the proximal convoluted tubules. PAS (×335)
Urinary System · Jill W. Verlonder
219
TABLE I I-I Names of the Renal Tubule Segments With Corresponding Nomina Histologica Terminology
Anatomic Terms in Common Use
Corresponding Nomina
in Renal Literature
Synonyms
Histologica Terminology
Proximal tubule
Proximal tubule
 Proximal convoluted tubule (Includes S, segment and
Proximal convoluted tubule
first part of S2 segment) (PCT)
Proximal straight tubule {Includes latter part of S2
Thick descending limb
Proximal straight tubule
segment and Ss segment) (PST)
 of Henle's loop
Thin limbs of Henle's loop (TL)
Thin tubules
 Thin descending limb
Thin descending tubule
 Thin ascending limb
Thin ascending tubule
Distal tubule
Thick ascending limb of Henle's loop (MTAL and CTAL)
Distal straight tubule
Distal convoluted tubule (DCT)
Distal convoluted tubule
Connecting segment (CNT)
Collecting duct
Initial collecting tubule
Arched collecting tubule
Cortical collecting duct (CCD)
Straight collecting tubule
Outer medullary collecting duct (OMCD)
Straight collecting tubule
Inner medullary collecting duct (IMcD)
Initial IMCD (IMCD,)
Straight collecting tubule
Terminal IMCD (includes IMCDz and IMCD3)
Papillary collecting duct
ponp Aureided
thus proximal tubule profiles dominate histologic sections of
Near the apical surface, the lateral sides of the cells are
the cortex. The first portion of the proximal tubule is called the
joined together by tight junctions (zonulae occludens), zonulae
proximal convoluted tubule (PCT), because it twists and turns
adherens, and desmosomes (maculae adherens) Occasional gap
in the cortical labyrinth untilit enters the medullary ray, where it
junctions also link the cells. The tight junctions form continu-
becomes the proximal straight tubule (PST). The PST runs
ous bands around the cells, but in the proximal tubule the tight
through the medullary ray and extends into the outer stripe of the
junctions are relatively permeable to solutes and water, compared
outer medulla. Proximal tubule segments are also classified as seg-
to the tight junctions of distal tubule and collecting duct seg-
ments S, Sz, and S, based on differences in the length or abun-
ments. The single nucleus is spherical and situated in the mid-
dance of features that are common to all proximal tubule cells.
dle to basal part of the cell. Proximal tubule cells contain an
 In general, the apical surface of the proximal tubule is cov-
extensive endocytotic apparatus including numerous apical vesi-
ered by a brush border formed by extensive projections of the api-
cles, endosomes, and lysosomes. Peroxisomes, organelles that
contain oxidative enzymes for metabolism of toxic substances are
cal plasma membrane called microvilli (Figs. 11-13 and 11-14).
The lateral borders of the epithelial cells are characterized by
abundant in the PST. In cats, the PCT cells contain numerous
lipid droplets (Fig. 11-15). In dogs, PST cells contain similar
elaborate interdigitation of lateral cell processes. In addition, the
lipid droplets and thus the medullary rays appear lighter than the
basal surface of the cells has a remarkably folded membrane with
surrounding parenchyma (Fig. 11-16).
processes from adjacent cells located between the folds. The
Unfortunately, the distinctive structural features of proxi-
arrangement of the epithelial cells is like a group of buttressed
mal tubules are not evident in many histologic sections because
tree stumps packed closely together with their roots growing be-
interruption of blood flow to the kidney causes collapse of the
neath one another. The apical brush border and the basolateral
tubules, swelling of the epithelial cells, obliteration of the tubule
plasma membrane infoldings significantly increase the surface
lumens, and disintegration of the brush border. Many of the struc-
 area of the cell and thus permit the high rates of transepithelial
tural features that exist in the live animal can only be preserved
transport that occur in this segment.
with careful perfusion fixation techniques.
 Numerous long mitochondria are interposed among the lat-
The PST extends into the outer medulla and typically makes
eral plasma membrane folds, creating vertical striations that are
an abrupt transition to the simple squamous epithelium of the
visible by light microscopy. The close association of the mito-
 thin descending limb (Fig. 11-17)at the border between the inner
chondria with the plasma membrane provides a ready source of
and outer stripes of the outer medulla. In dogs, the change occurs
lodsui suapuadap-(div) aieudsoudi auisouape roy Aiaa
at the corticomedullary junction; therefore, the dog kidney lacks
proteins located in the basolateral plasma membrane.
an outer stripe
220
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
FIGURE II-14
1 Transmission electron micrograph of proximal
straight tubule (Ss) cell (rat). Numerous microvilli cover the apical 
surface. Small endocytotic vesicles are present in the apical region;
large endosomes with unstained contents and densely staining
lysosomes are also visible. Numerous mitochondria are present
(x8800).
FIGURE II-I3 Proximal convoluted tubule (dog). The brush
border composed of microvilli covers the apical surface of the cells.
White vacuoles near the lumen and dark, round granules deeper in
the cytoplasm are endocytotic vacuoles and lysosomes, respectively.
The elongated dark structures oriented perpendicular to the 
basement membrane are mitochondria. Epon-Araldite. Azure ll,
methylene blue (×I 320).
The Loop of Henle
The structure known as the loop of Henle includes four tubule
segments: the descending thick limb, now more commonly
called the proximal straight tubule; the descending thin
limb; the ascending thin limb, which is present in long-looped
nephrons; and the thick ascending limb, which is sometimes
called the distal straight tubule.
Thin limbs of the loop of Henle
FIGURE II-I5 Cortical labyrinth (cat). In cats, the proximal con-
The thin portion of the loop of Henle (TL) begins at the end of the
voluted tubules (P) contain numerous lipid droplets. Distal convoluted 
proximal tubule (Figs. 11-4 and 11-17) and extends a variable
tubule (D) profles are relatively rare. Hematoxylin and eosin (×335).
Urinary System · jill W. Verlonder
221
CD
CD
FIGURE II-I6 Medullary ray (dog). The three major com-
ponents of the medullary ray are the proximal straight tubules (P).
FIGURE II-I7Proximal straight tubule to thin descending
distal straight tubules {D), and the collecting ducts (CD). In dogs, the
[enide yrm wnaunida jepiogno au1 (aop) dool saluah jo qw!!
proximal straight tubules contain numerous lipid droplets, which 
brush border of the proximal straight tubule (PST) abruptly changes
appear as unstained vacuoles in this image. JB-4 plastic. Hematoxylin
to the simple squamous epithelium with a smooth apical surface in
and eosin and phloxine (x530).
the thin tubule (TT). Note that the transition occurs at different
points (arrows) around the circumference of the tubule. JB-4 plastic.
Hematoxylin and eosin and phloxine (×510).
distance in the medulla before making a hairpin turn (Fig. 1l-18)
and continuing out to the border of the inner and outer medulla.
In long-looped nephrons, the thin epithelium extends into the
a greater degree than do the nuclei of the endothelial cells of ad-
inner medulla. The portion from the PST to the hairpin turn is
jacent capillaries. In addition, the nuclei are round as viewed
called the thin descending limb; the portion from the hairpin
from the lumen, whereas endothelial nuclei are elongated in the
turn out to the inner/outer medulla border is called the thin as-
direction of the longitudinal axis of the vessel.
cending limb. Four distinct parts of the thin tubule have been
described, based on ultrastructural differences in the height of
Thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle
the epithelium, the amplification of the apical and basolateral
The thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle originates at the
cell membranes, the number of mitochondria, and the complex-
border of the inner and outer medulla and ascends into the renal
ity of the tight junctions, all of which relate to functional differ-
cortex in the medullary ray (Fig. 11-19). The medullary thick as-
ences along its length. In general, the thin limbs have a simple
cending limb (MTAL) epithelium is taller than the cortical thick
ascending limb (CTAL) epithelium. In short-looped nephrons, the
low cuboidal epithelium at the two ends of the thin segments,
 thick ascending limb begins at the hairpin turn of Henle's loop at
depending on the species. The nuclei protrude into the lumen to
various depths in the outer medulla. In long-looped nephrons, the
222
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
the high rate of active transport that occurs in this segment. The
mitochondrial density and vertical orientation are so distinctive
that they appear as dark vertical striations in the tubule even by
light microscopy.
Dista! Convoluted Tubule
The distal convoluted tubule (DCT) is much shorter than the
proximal convoluted tubule; therefore, its profiles are relatively
rare in the cortical labyrinth. Distal convoluted tubule cells are
taller than cortical thick ascending limb cells and the apical cell
borders are simple, not undulating. However, like the thick as-
cending limb, the apical surface is covered by short microprojec-
tions and the cells have a high mitochondrial density. The nucleus
is located in the apical region of the cell, and extensive basolateral
plasma membrane infoldings with vertically oriented mitochon-
dria arrayed among them fill the entire basal region (Fig. 11-20)
Although the distal convoluted tubule is largely composed of a
uniform cell population, in some species occasional intercalated
cells are present. Intercalated cells are described in detail below.
Connecting Segment
 The epithelium of the connecting segment (CNT) is approxi-
mately the same height as the distal convoluted tubule. However,
unlike the distal convoluted tubule, the connecting segment con-
tains a variety of epithelial cell types, which may include distal
convoluted tubule cells, connecting segment cells, intercalated
cells, and principal cells. The mixture ofa variety of cell types with
different cell heights, staining density, and shape produces an ir-
regular appearance to the connecting segment profile by light mi-
yoous pue anueieadde snoauaouou aul oi pareduon Adonson
luminal surface of the distal convoluted tubule. Connecting seg-
ment cells are similar in morphology to distal convoluted tubule
cells, with prominent basolateral plasma membrane infoldings,
vertically oriented mitochondria, few short apical plasma mem-
FIGURE II-I8 Hairpin tum of Henle's loop (horse). The thin
brane microprojections, and an apical nucleus. Differences between
tubule of long-looped nephrons makes a hairpin tum in the inner
the connecting segment cell and the distal convoluted tubule cell
medulla. It is not possible to distinguish the thin descending limb
are appreciable by electron microscopy; there are usually fewer api-
from the thin ascending limb in this image. Hematoxylin and
cal microprojections, a lower mitochondrial density, and a rounder
eosin (×530)
nucleus in the connecting segment cells. However, definitive iden-
tification of individual profiles of these two cell types in the con-
 necting segment may require immunocytochemical localization of
hairpin turn occurs in the inner medulla and the thin ascending
cell-specific transporters, which highlights the fact that although
 the structure of the distal convoluted and connecting segment cells
limb extends from the turn to the transition to the thick ascend-
ing limb at the border of the inner and outer medulla. The thick
may be similar, their functions are quite distinct. Principal cells
ascending limb of each nephron returns to the vascular pole of its
and intercalated cells are structurally distinct and will be described
own glomerulus. At this site the thick ascending limb contains
in the section on collecting ducts.
a specialized cluster of epithelial cells, the macula densa, which
is part of the juxtaglomerular apparatus, described below. The
Collecting Ducts
transition from the thick ascending limb to the distal convoluted
ponp suaos jeon aluis e oiu! Adua suoudau ieiaas
tubule occurs at a variable distance beyond the macula densa.
(CCD), a straight tubule segment in the medullary ray. The col-
Cells of the thick ascending limb are cuboidal with short,
lecting ducts descend through the medulla and repeatedly merge.
stubby apical microprojections, undulating cell borders, and a
The terminal inner medullary, or papillary, collecting ducts ter-
single central cilium on the apical surface. The cells have an im-
minate at the apex of the papilla or along the renal crest and form
pressive array of vertically oriented mitochondria and basolateral
a perforated area on the surface called the area cribrosa, where
plasma membrane infoldings, which are necessary to accomplish
the tubule fluid, now considered urine, is emitted.
Urinary System ·Jill W. Verlonder
223
CD
FIGURE I I-I9 Thin ascending limb to thick ascending limb of Henle's loop (horse). The transition
between the simple squamous epithelium of the thin ascending limb (tAL) and the simple cuboidal
epithelium of the medullary thick ascending limb of Henle's loop (mTAL) defines the border between
the inner and outer medulla. The inner medullary collecting duct (CD) shown has a tall cuboidal
epithelium. JB-4 plastic. Hematoxylin and eosin and phloxine (×530).
The collecting duct is not considered part of the nephron be-
Cortical and outer medullary collecting ducts (OMCD)
cause it has a separate origin during development. In fact, the ini-
 contain both principal cells and intercalated cells (Fig. 11-22).
tial collecting tubule and the collecting duct arise from the
 Principal cells account for approximately two thirds of the cells;
ureteric bud, whereas all of the components of the nephron develop
they are low in profile and have a smooth apical surface, with few
from the metanephric blastema. During development, these two
short apical microprojections, and a single central cilium. Principal
components fuse to form a continuous tubule. The term renal
 cells contain relatively few organelles and the mitochondria are
tubule encompasses both the nephron and the collecting duct.
small and randomly oriented. They have prominent basolateral
In the past, the collecting duct was thought to be simply a con-
duit for urine. It is now well known that the collecting duct has
major roles in the regulation of salt, water, and acid-base excre-
and sodium, chloride, and antidiuretic hormone-regulated water
tion. Thus, the classic definition of the nephron as the “func
reabsorption. Intercalated cells are found throughout most of
tional unit" of the kidney is somewhat misleading, since the
the collecting duct. In the connecting segment, initial collecting
collecting duct, although not part of the nephron, contributes
tubule, and cortical collecting duct, there are at least three dis-
significantly to renal function.
tinct types of intercalated cells: type A, an acid-secreting cell
Connecting segments merge with the initial collecting
type; type B, a bicarbonate-secreting cell type; and non-A, non-B
tubule in the cortical labyrinth, and these merge with the cor-
intercalated cells, the function of which is not fully characterized.
tical collecting duct in the medullary ray. The initial collecting
The intercalated cell subtypes are distinguishable both by their
tubule is made up of principal cells and intercalated cells, and
ultrastructural characteristics and by the subcellular location of
thus is a heterogeneous epithelium. The height of the initial col-
specific transporters involved in acid-base regulation. The loca-
lecting tubule epithelium is typically intermediate between that
tions of specific transporter proteins in intercalated cell subtypes
of the connecting segment and the cortical collecting duct.
will be described in the section describing structural-functional
The collecting duct descends through the medullary ray,
relationships.
passes through the outer and inner medulla, and after merging
Under basal conditions, type A intercalated cells contain
several times with other collecting ducts, opens at the apex of the
numerous mitochondria, moderate apical plasma membrane
papilla or the edge of the renal crest. For most of their length, the
microprojections, prominent apical cytoplasmic tubulovesicles
collecting ducts are lined with simple cuboidal epithelium (Figs.
 moderate basolateral plasma membrane infolding, and a central
11-19, 11-21, and 11-22). In carnivores, the epithelium remains
 nucleus. Type B intercalated cells have a denser cytoplasm and
low throughout, whereas in ungulates, the epithelium in the
medullary portions can be simple columnar or even transitional
surface, small cytoplasmic vesicles throughout most of the cell
near the papillary apex.
with a vesicle-free band of cytoplasm beneath the apical plasma
224
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
DCT
CD
CD
CD
PCT
FIGURE II-20 Distal convoluted tubule (dog). The cells of the
distal convoluted tubule (DCT) lack a brush border, contain
numerous mitochondria, and have nuclei in the apical region. Note
the proximal convoluted tubule (PCT) with its distinct brush border.
Epon-Araldite. Azure Il, methylene blue (×1320).
FIGURE II-2IConfluence of inner medullary collecting ducts
(horse). Illustrated are six smaller collecting ducts coalescing to form
three larger ones (CD). A few blood vessels (B) and a relatively
extensive interstitium are also present. Hematoxylin and 
membrane, prominent basolateral plasma membrane infoldings,
eosin (×I 70).
 and an eccentric nucleus. The non-A, non-B cells are most easily
yy Aiaa e aaey Aaul uamugas Sunnauuon aui u! paguap!
mitochondrial density, prominent apical plasma membrane mi-
Vasculature of the Kidney
croprojections that bulge into the tubule lumen, and relatively
few cytoplasmic vesicles.
Each kidney is supplied by a single renal artery that arises from
 The outer medullary and initial inner medullary collecting
the abdominal aorta. Branching of the renal artery can occur near
duct segments contain principal cells and acid-secreting interca-
the hilus or within the renal sinus. These branches divide into
lated cells similar to the type A intercalated cells. The prevalence
interlobar arteries, which ascend in the renal parenchyma to the
of intercalated cells gradually diminishes in the distal collecting
corticomedullary junction (Fig. 11-23). Here, the interlobar ar-
duct segments, and they are essentially absent in the terminal
teries form variably arched vessels called arcuate arteries.
inner medullary collecting duct.
The arcuate arteries give off interlobular arteries, which
 In the terminal inner medullary collecting duct (IMCD),
course within the cortical labyrinth and give rise to the afferent
principal cells also disappear and the predominant cell type,
arterioles that supply the glomeruli. The wall of the afferent ar-
called the inner medullary collecting duct cell, is a taller epithe-
teriole is the major location of renin-producing juxtaglomerular
lial cell with short, stubby apical microprojections with a promi-
cells. The glomerular capillary tufts are drained by efferent ar-
nent glycocalyx, relatively little basolateral plasma membrane,
terioles. Eferent arterioles from glomeruli located in the super-
and few cytoplasmic organelles.
ficial or middle cortex distribute to peritubular capillary
Urinary System· jill W. Verilonder
225
SY
MG
CORTEX
Iv
IlA
ArV
EA
FIGURE II-22 
 Collecting duct in medullary ray (horse). This
-VB
collecting duct is lined by two cell types. The principal cell stains 
lightly and contains relatively few irregularly shaped mitochondria.
-DVR
The intercalated cells are the dark-staining cells protruding into the
MEDULLA
AVR
lumen. The apical surface of the intercalated cells appears irregular
due to numerous apical microprojections. JB-4 plastic. Hematoxylin
PCN
and eosin and phloxine (×1320)
networks of fenestrated capillaries. Strong evidence suggests
that endothelial cells of cortical peritubular capillaries synthesize
the hormone erythropoietin, which stimulates the production of
red blood cells
 Efferent arterioles from juxtamedullary glomeruli supply
blood to the entire medulla. These arterioles divide in the outer
FIGURE II-23  Schematic drawing of the vasculature of the
stripe of the outer medulla into descending vasa recta (straight 
vessels). The descending vasa recta supply adjacent peritubular
arteries (IA), arcuate arteries (ArA), interlobular arteries (llA).
capillary networks throughout the medulla. The capillaries drain
afferent arterioles (AA), glomeruli and efferent arterioles (EA). The
into ascending vasa recta, which ascend in the medulla. The
efferent arterioles from the superficial glomeruli (SG) and the
descending vasa recta are arterioles with a continuous endothe-
midcortical glomeruli (MG) supply the peritubular capillary network
lium, whereas the ascending vasa recta are venules with a fenes-
(PCN) in all parts of the cortex. The efferent arterioles from the
trated endothelium. Many of the descending and ascending vasa
juxtamedullary glomeruli (IG) supply the descending vasa recta.
recta come together to form vascular bundles that are evenly dis-
(DVR) and the peritubular capillary networks (PCN) of the medulla.
tributed throughout the medulla (Fig. 11-24).
Venous drainage of the peritubular capillary networks in the cortex
aueu aues au areus pue salaire Aueduosne Aedi suiaa
involves the stellate veins (SV), the interlobular veins (llV), and/or
the arcuate veins (Ar/). Venous drainage of the peritubular capillary
Venous drainage of the medulla is accomplished by the ascend-
networks in the medulla is primarily through the ascending vasa.
ing vasa recta that enter the arcuate or occasionally the inter-
recta (AVR). The interlobular veins of the cortex and the ascending
lobular veins. Venous drainage of the cortex is primarily from the
vasa recta of the medulla converge on the arcuate veins at the
peritubular capillaries into the stellate veins, interlobular veins,
corticomedullary junction. The arcuate veins are drained by the
or arcuate veins. The arcuate veins empty into the interlobar
interlobar veins (IV), which empty into the renal vein. The
veins, which coalesce to form a single renal vein, which exits the
descending and ascending vasa recta often form vascular bundles
hilus and enters the caudal vena cava. In carnivores, a system of
(VB). (Redrawn from Koushanpour E, Kriz W. Renal Physiology.
superficial and deep cortical veins connects the capillaries in
Principles, 5tructure ond Function. New York: 5pringer-Verlog. 1 986.)
these regions to larger veins. The superficial cortical veins empty
into the stellate veins near the cortical surface, whereas the deep
cortical veins empty into the arcuate veins. The stellate veins are
226
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Interstitium, Lymphatics, and Nerves
The interstitium between the renal tubules and the blood vessels
is normally sparse, particularly in the cortex, where the tubules 
and vessels are packed tightly together. More interstitium is
present in the medulla, particularly in the inner medulla. The in-
terstitium contains several types of interstitial cells and the extra-
cellular matrix, which is made up of collagen fibrils, glycoproteins,
and proteoglycans. Interstitial cells include fibroblasts, bone
marrow-derived cells, and a unique lipid-laden interstitial cell
that is especially prominent in the inner medulla. The lipid-
laden cells are stellate-shaped and produce prostaglandin E2.
Lymphatics are found in the interstitium surrounding in-
trarenal arteries; they begin at the vascular pole of the glomeru-
lus or more distally along the afferent arteriole and continue to
the renal hilus.
The kidney has efferent innervation to the smooth muscle of
arteries, afferent and efferent arterioles, and descending vasa recta;
the nerves run in the interstitium surrounding the vessels. Nu-
merous axons and nerve terminals are also present in the area of
the juxtaglomerular apparatus and contact the renin-producing
juxtaglomerular cells of the afferent arteriole.
Juxtaglomerular Apparatus
The juxtaglomerular apparatus is located at the vascular pole
of the glomerulus (Figs. 11-6 and 11-25). Its components in-
clude the macula densa, the extraglomerular mesangial cells, and
the juxtaglomerular cells. The macula densa is a patch of spe-
cialized epithelial cells in the cortical thick ascending limb where
it passes between the afferent and efferent arterioles (Figs. 11-5 ,
1 1-6, and 11-25). The cells are tall and narrow compared to typ-
ical thick ascending limb cells, and the intercellular spaces be-
tween them appear dilated. The basal region of the macula densa
is adjacent to the extraglomerular mesangial cells. The extra-
FIGURE II-24 Vascular bundle in outer medulla (dog). The
glomerular mesangial cells (Polkissen cells, lacis cells, Goor-
descending vasa recta (D) are the small, round arterioles in the
maghtigh cells) are found between the macula densa and the two
vascular bundle, and the ascending vasa recta (A) are the large.
arterioles and are continuous with the mesangial cells within the
irregularly shaped, venous capillaries in the bundle. These vessels
glomerulus. The cells are flattened and arranged into several lay-
are the primary supply and drainage of the medulla. JB-4 plastic.
ers. Gap junctions connect extraglomerular mesangial cells with
Hematoxylin and eosin and phloxine (×530)
each other, with intraglomerular mesangial cells, and with jux-
taglomerular cells, but not with macula densa cells. Juxtaglo-
 merular (JG or granular) cells are primarily found in the afferent
arteriole and are derived from smooth muscle (Fig. 11-25). They
contain membrane-bounded renin granules of irregular size and
 shape. Sympathetic nerve endings found near the JG cells are
large in carnivores. In dogs, they are embedded in the cortical tis-
sue near the surface ofthe kidney, whereas in cats, they are super-
consistent with sympathetic stimulation of renin release.
ficial and are called capsular veins. The stellate veins in most
species empty into the interlobular veins, but the capsular veins in 
Structure-Function Relationships
cats converge toward the hilus of the kidney to join the renal vein.
in the Kidney
The intrarenal arterial system does not provide a good col-
lateral circulatory system. As a result, whena major artery is oc-
Genera! Function
cluded, death of the tissue supplied by that artery results. For
The kidney excretes metabolic wastes, regulates the volume and
example, when an arcuate artery becomes occluded, a wedge-
composition of body fluids, and regulates systemic blood pres-
shaped piece of the kidney, including both cortex and medulla,
sure. Elimination of nitrogenous wastes, such as creatinine, urea,
becomes damaged.
and uric acid, occurs largely by filtration of these substances at
Urinary System·jill W. Verlonder
177
TAL
by plasma proteins; the hydrostatic pressure in the urinary space
also opposes filtration, but this is negligible under normal cir-
Cumstances. The filtration barrier created by the glomerular cap-
illary wall is both size and charge selective. Thus, substances over
approximately 40,000 kD molecular weight are typically re-
IGC
tained within the capillary lumen. Smaller anionic macromole-
AA
cules are retained more effectively than cationic macromolecules
due to the anionic charges of the filtration barrier.
The endothelium blocks filtration of blood cells and plate-
lets. Water and filterable solutes move through the endothelial
pores, across the GBM, and through the filtration slits between
the podocyte foot processes into the urinary space. The size selec-
tivity of the filtration barrier is primarily created by the tightly
knit proteins in the GBM lamina densa. The charge selectivity is
created by the anionic molecules coating the endothelial cells and
 podocytes and in the GBM. These elements repel and block fil-
tration of small anionic plasma proteins, even though neutral or
cationic molecules of the same size and shape could be filtered.
Normal filtration also requires clearance of macromolecules
trapped by the filtration barrier; mesangial cells phagocytose
molecules trapped in the GBM and podocytes phagocytose or
GC
endocytose molecules trapped at the podocyte surface and slit
membrane.
FIGURE II-25 Transmission electron micrograph of juxta-
Mesangial cells and podocytes maintain the structural in-
glomerular apparatus (rat). The macula densa (MD) is located in the
tegrity of the capillary tuft. Mesangial cells also contribute to
thick ascending limb (TAL) where it passes between the afferent
regulation of glomerular capillary perfusion. Largely in response 
and efferent arterioles. Macula densa cells are typically taller and
narrower than surrounding thick ascending limb cells and have 
to signals from the macula densa, mesangial cells contract or
dilated intercellular spaces. Two juxtaglomerular cells (JGC) with
relax and thus alter resistance within the capillary loops, thereby
electron-dense granules are present in the wall of the afferent
altering glomerular blood flow. Filtration is also regulated by the
arteriole (AA). Extraglomerular mesangial cells lie between the
resistance in the afferent and efferent arterioles.
macula densa and the vascular pole of the glomerulus. A parietal
 Finally, the juxtaglomerular apparatus (Fig. 11-25) not only
epithelial cell (arrow) and portion of a glomerular capillary (GC)
regulates the rate of flow and perfusion pressure in individual
are also visible (×3700)
glomeruli, but also contributes to the regulation of systemic
blood pressure. Juxtaglomerular cells release renin in response
to reduced renal perfusion pressure, sympathetic nerve stimula-
tion, or signaling from the macula densa. Renin catalyzes plasma
the glomerulus. Renal regulation of the volume and composition
angiotensinogen conversion to angiotensin I, which is converted
of body fluids is accomplished by changes in both the glomeru-
to angiotensin II in many tissues. Angiotensin II increases sys-
lar filtration rate and the transport processes of the various renal
temic blood pressure by vasoconstriction and by increasing in-
tubule epithelia. The kidney responds to local and systemic fac-
travascular volume. Angiotensin II increases intravascular fluid
tors to maintain fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base homeostasis.
Uondiosqean (iaiem shun pue) unipos Suneinuiis Aq aunioa
in the proximal tubule and by stimulating adrenal aldosterone
Fiitration and Regulation of Blood Pressure
secretion, which enhances sodium uptake in the collecting duct.
Although the kidneys account for only a small percentage of the
 body weight of domestic animals, ranging from at most 1% in
Tubule Function
cats to 0.2% in cattle, they receive a phenomenal 20 to 25% of
The glomerular filtrate traverses the renal tubules where solute
the cardiac output. Approximately 20% of the volume of blood
and water reabsorption and solute secretion take place. Solute
delivered to the kidney filters across the glomerular capillary wall
and water reabsorption across the renal tubular epithelium into
and forms the glomerular filtrate. However, about 99% of the
the peritubular capillaries occurs by transcellular and paracellu-
glomerular filtrate is reabsorbed by the renal tubules, and thus
lar pathways.
only about 1% of the filtrate volume is excreted as urine. Filtration
The transcellular pathway uses active and passive processes
across the glomerular capillary wall is primarily driven by the
to move substances through the plasma membranes and cyto-
hydrostatic pressure of the intracapillary blood; both the systemic
plasm. Active transport requires plasma membrane transport
blood pressure and the resistance in the afferent and efferent
proteins and energy from ATP to move specific ions across the
arterioles contribute to the intracapillary hydrostatic pressure.
membrane, often against an electrochemical gradient. Plasma
228
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
membranes also contain channel proteins and carrier proteins
blood and secretion into the lumen can concentrate the organic
that do not use ATP; these facilitate ion or water movement
ion in the proximal tubule, sometimes to toxic levels. Proximal
tubule damage is often the first sign of toxic injury and may lead
by active transporters.
 to renal failure. An example in clinical settings is renal failure
The paracellular pathway involves passive movement of
produced by administration of the antibiotic gentamicin, which
water and solute from the tubule lumen to the interstitium
is secreted by the proximal tubule.
through epithelial cell junctions and lateral intercellular spaces.
Thin Limbs and Thick Ascending Limb
gradients produced by active transporters, but is limited by the
of the Loop of Henle
permeability of the tight junctions joining the cells. Proximal
The physical arrangement and transport characteristics of the
tubules have permeable tight junctions; significant paracellular
thin limbs (Figs. 11-4, 11-17, 11-18, and 11-19) and thick as-
cending limb of Henle's loop (Fig. 11-19) allow the kidney to
gradients. In the thick ascending limb, distal convoluted tubule,
produce concentrated urine with minimal energy expenditure. A
and collecting duct, the tight junctions are relatively imperme-
countercurrent system is created by the close apposition of the
able; little paracellular transport occurs, but high salt and water
descending and ascending thin limbs and the opposite direction
gradients can be sustained.
of tubule fluid flow in these tubules. The descending and as-
The structure of renal tubule epithelial cells reflects their
function. For example, transmembrane transport depends on
The countercurrent mechanism, along with the active reabsorp-
 plasma membrane surface area and mitochondrial ATP genera-
tion of NaCl by the thick ascending limb and the selective per-
tion. The high capacity for transcellular transport in the proxi-
meabilities of the thin limbs to water, salt, and urea, generates
and maintains a hypertonic medullary interstitium and permits
basolateral plasma membranes and high mitochondrial density.
production of concentrated urine.
At the other extreme, only limited transcellular transport occurs
The tubule fluid leaves the proximal straight tubule, trav-
in the thin limbs of Henle's loop, which have relatively simple
erses the thin descending limb through deeper regions of the
plasma membranes and few mitochondria.
medulla, makes a hairpin turn, and then ascends through the thin
 ascending limb and thick ascending limb in long-looped nephrons,
Proxima! Tubule
or the thick ascending limb in short-looped nephrons. The de-
The proximal tubule (Figs. 11-13 and 11-14) normally reab-
scending and ascending thin limbs, although structurally similar,
sorbs about 85% of the water and salts in the glomerular filtrate
have distinct permeabilities that are necessary elements of the
and 100% of filtered glucose, amino acids, peptides, and low-
countercurrent concentrating mechanism. Also fundamental to
molecular-weight proteins. Solute and water uptake are driven
this system are the progressively increasing interstitial osmolar-
by the lumen-to-blood sodium gradient created by active sodium
ity in the medulla and the countercurrent arrangement of the de-
transport across the basolateral plasma membrane. The extensive
scending and ascending vasa recta. These components function
apical plasma membrane surface area created by the brush border
adnon ieun suaiond jodsuen juiads snoiunu sueiuon
together as follows. The thin descending limb of long-looped
nephrons is permeable to water, but impermeable to sodium and
sodium uptake with other transport processes, such as bicarbon-
urea. Isosmotic tubule fluid enters the thin descending limb and
ate and glucose uptake. Water reabsorption follows the chemical
passes through increasing ambient osmolarity in the medulla;
gradient created by active sodium reabsorption; water channels
water is reabsorbed by passive mechanisms, and by the hairpin
membrane. The proximal tubule is not a tight epithelium and
turn, luminal fluid tonicity is high. The thin tubule turns and as-
can not generate large electrochemical gradients. Thus, although
cends through progressively lower interstitial osmolarity. The
the majority of filtered water and solute is reabsorbed in the
thin ascending limb is permeable to sodium, but relatively im-
proximal tubule, the tubule fluid that enters the thin descend-
permeable to water. Thus, sodium moves down its concentration
ing limb is essentially isotonic.
gradient to the interstitium and is reabsorbed without water;
Low-molecular-weight proteins and peptides are filtered
when the tubule fluid reaches the thick ascending limb it is nearly
but normally are entirely reabsorbed in the proximal tubule. These
isotonic. These processes occur almost entirely by passive mecha-
molecules are taken up from the lumen by receptor-mediated en-
nisms. The low level of active transport and the selective perme-
docytosis into endocytic vesicles and are metabolized in endo-
abilities of the thin limbs correlate with their structure, including
somes and lysosomes. A hallmark of glomerular disease is an
uncomplicated plasma membranes, few mitochondria, and com-
increase in the amount and size of filtered proteins, with a con-
plex tight junctions that do not allow leaks.
si ien aisas ieososi anqnn ieixoid au ui asaiu iuan
The vasa recta (Figs. 11-23 and 11-24) are arranged in a
visible by light microscopy. When the capacity of the lysosomal
similar pattern as the thin limbs, with descending and ascending
au uano s siun iaun aui ui sieadde uaioid papaaxa s aisas
 portions connected by a hairpin turn. The plasma osmolarity en-
earliest sign of renal disease.
tering the descending vasa recta (DVR) is approximately that of
The proximal tubule also secretes organic ions, which in-
the cortical interstitium. The DVR pass through progressively
clude many drugs and toxins. Uptake of such substances from the
higher interstitial concentrations of NaCl and urea. DVR are not
Urinary System · Jil W. Verlonder
229
fenestrated, but they permit paracellular diffusion of NaCl and
 eral proton pumps. The function of non-A, non-B intercalated
transcellular movement of urea and water into the medullary in-
cells is not clear. They have apical pendrin, which suggests they
terstitium via specific proteins. Ascending vasa recta (AVR) are
 may secrete bicarbonate; they also have apical H-ATPase, which
fenestrated and thus are permeable to water, NaCl, and urea, al-
suggests they may secrete protons. Medullary collecting ducts
lowing equilibration nearly to isotonicity when the AVR leaves
can secrete acid, but not bicarbonate. These segments contain
the hypertonic medulla. This system permits adequate blood
only acid-secreting intercalated cells similar to the type A inter-
supply to the inner medulla without degradation of the intersti-
calated cells in the CCD.
tial hypertonicity.
Acid-secreting intercalated cells undergo structural changes
The thick ascending limb also generates medullary hyper.
to enhance acid secretion. The apical cytoplasmic tubulovesicles
tonicity by salt reabsorption without water. The thick ascending
 contain proton pumps. During acidosis, these vesicles fuse with
limb epithelium has extensive basolateral plasma membrane in-
the apical plasma membrane, amplifying the apical plasma mem-
foldings that contain abundant Na+-K+ ATPase (adenosine
onu! pie dund ue Aaun aiaum sdund uonoud Sulaou pue aueiq
triphosphatase), which actively pumps sodium from the cell into
the tubule fluid. Activation of bicarbonate secretion causes sim-
the interstitium; the numerous mitoc hondria interposed among
ilar structural changes in type B intercalated cells; vesicles con-
the plasma membrane infoldings produce the necessary energy.
taining the anion exchanger pendrin are inserted into the apical
The electrochemical gradients created by the basolateral Na+-K+
plasma membrane.
ATPase drive ion uptake from the lumen via the NaK2Cl co-
Principal cells and inner medullary collecting duct (IMCD)
transporter in the apical plasma mem brane. This transporter is
cells regulate sodium and water excretion. Principal cells reabsorb
exclusive to the thick ascending limb; it is inactivated by the
sodium via Na+-K+ ATPase in the basolateral plasma membrane
drugs furosemide and bumetanide, which are known as “loop di-
and sodium channels in the apical plasma membrane. Both of
uretics," because they enhance salt and water excretion in Henle's
these avenues of sodium uptake are enhanced by the adrenal hor-
loop. The thick ascending limb is impermeable to water; thus,
mone aldosterone.
the avid ion uptake reduces the tubular fluid tonicity and in-
Principal cells and IMCD cells regulate renal water excre-
creases the medullary interstitial tonicity.
tion, but this depends on a hypertonic medullary interstitium
and antidiuretic hormone (ADH). Principal cells contain api-
Dista! Convoluted Tubule
cal and basolateral water channels (aquaporins). The apical water
channel, aquaporin 2, is regulated by ADH. When water must
In the distal convoluted tubule (DCT) (Fig. 11-20), active trans-
be conserved, ADH released from the pituitary activates the api-
port drives sodium and chloride reabsorption. Because the DCT
 an  i     s
is impermeable to water, the tubule fluid osmolarity falls to ap-
fluid and the interstitium drives water through the water chan-
proximately 100 mOsm/kg; thus, the DCT has been called the
nels in the plasma membranes to the interstitium. The gradient
"diluting segment." Basolateral Na+-K+ ATPase transports sodium
is sustained despite progressive concentration of the tubule fluid
to the interstitium; a NaCl cotransporter in the apical plasma
adaq arou Aiaaissaioid s uniisiaiu Arenau aun asniiag
membrane, the site ofaction of thiazide diuretics, mediates sodium
tonic. When exces water must be excreted, ADH is absent, the
and chloride uptake from the lumen. The DCT reabsorbs calcium
apical water channels are not functional, and water stays in the
via active transport by basolateral Ca-ATPase and secondary ac-
tubule lumen.
tive transport through apical calcium channels and a basolateral
 In the IMCD, principal cells and IMCD cells also contain
sodium/calcium exchanger. The complex basolateral plasma mem-
 brane infoldings accommodate the many ion transport proteins
urea transporters. Urea transporters in the apical plasma mem-
brane (UT-Al and UT-A3) facilitate urea uptake. Basolateral facil-
and the abundant mitochondria produce the energy necessary for
itated urea transport is also present, but the specific transporters
high rates of active transport.
are not yet known. Urea uptake via these transporters is stimu-
Collecting Duct
medullary interstitium and thus water conservation.
The collecting duct (Figs. 11-19, 11-21, and 11-22) regulates
 Both intercalated cells and principal cells participate in reg-
the final composition of urine and maintains systemic acid-base,
ulation of potassium excretion. Principal cells secrete potassium
sodium, potassium, and water homeostasis. The various epithe-
via the basolateral Na+-K+ ATPase and apical potassium chan-
lial cell types in the collecting duct perform these specific phys-
nels. Intercalated cells are capable of potassium reabsorption via
iologic functions.
apical H,K+-ATPase and basolateral potassium channels.
Intercalated cells are involved in acid-base regulation. The
cortical collecting duct (CCD) can secrete both acid and bicar-
bonate; this is accomplished by different intercalated cell sub-
URINARY PASSAGES
types. Type A intercalated cells actively secrete acid via apical
H-ATPase and H,K-ATPase; bicarbonate is reabsorbed by the
The urinary passages include the calyces (large ruminant and pig
 basolateral Cl/HCOs- anion exchanger, AE1. Type B interca-
[Fig. 11-26]), renal pelvis (horse [Fig. 11-27], carnivores, small
lated cells secrete bicarbonate via a distinct apical anion exchanger,
ruminants and pig), ureters (Fig. 11-28), urinary bladder (Fig.
pendrin; protons are transported to the interstitium by basolat-
11-29), and urethra (Fig. 11-30). These structures have a similar
230
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
FIGURE 1I-27
Renal pelvis (horse). Mucous glands (M) are
FIGUREII-26(
 Calyx (pig). Transitional epithelium lines the
found in the mucosa just beneath the transitional epithelium of the
inner surface of the calyx. The propria-submucosa is a loose
renal pelvis and the proximal ureter in horses, mules, and donkeys.
connective-tissue layer with numerous small vessels. A few widely
Ducts, not seen in this section, penetrate the overlaying epithelium
separated smooth muscle fibers form the tunica muscularis.
Hematoxylin and eosin (×335).
and carry the secretion to the lumen. Hematoxylin and eosin (x335)
histologic organization that includes a tunica mucosa of transi-
lumen a stellate appearance in cross section. In horses, mu-
tional epithelium up to eight cells deep; an underlying loose
cous glands are present in the proximal ureter.
connective-tissue layer (propria-submucosa); a tunica muscularis
3. Urinary bladder: Superficial cells are large transitional
of smooth muscle forming inner longitudinal, middle circular,
epithelial cells that line the lumen. When the urinary blad-
and outer longitudinal layers; and a tunica adventitia of loose
der is relaxed, the superficial cells contain extensive intra-
connective tissue or a tunica serosa of mesothelium and connective
Cytoplasmic membrane tubulovesicles that are believed to
tissue when a visceral peritoneal covering is present. Variations of
be inserted into the plasma membrane when the bladder is
 this general pattern include the following:
distended. The superficial transitional cells have extensive
 basolateral plasma membrane infoldings that interdigitate
1. Renal pelvis: In horses, mucous glands (simple branched
with the plasma membrane of underlying transitional cells
tubuloalveolar glands) present in the mucosa contribute to
Adjacent transitional cells are connected by numerous desmo
the viscous, stringy nature of equine urine (Fig. 11-27). The
somes with long intermediate filaments that extend into the
transitional epithelium is only a few cells deep.
cytoplasm; the desmosomes and intermediate filaments are
2. Ureter: The ureter has a narrow lumen. When the ureter is
believed to maintain the epithelial integrity as it stretches
not distended, the mucosa folds longitudinally, giving the
and flattens during bladder distention. A lamina muscularis
Urinary System· Jill W. Verlonder
231
FIGURE II-28 Ureter (dog) Longitudinal mucosal folds create
a stellate-shaped lumen. The epithelial (E), connective tissue (C).
FIGURE II-30 Urethra (bitch). The mucosa has longitudinal
muscular (M) and adventitial (A) layers are distinguishable.
folds. Within the loose connective tissue of the propria-submucosa
Hematoxylin and eosin (x50)
are numerous irregularly shaped, cavermous blood spaces (CS). The
tunica muscularis (TM) is made up primarily of circularly arranged
smooth muscle. An adventitia (A) of loose connective tissue
 surrounds the tunica muscularis. Masson's trichrome (×21)
of small, isolated bundles of smooth muscle is present in
horses, ruminants, dogs, and pigs, but is absent in cats. The
 lamina muscularis divides the loose connective-tissue layer
into an inner lamina propria and an outer submucosa. The
smooth muscle of the tunica muscularis, called the detrusor
muscle, is composed of three sometimes ill-defined layers of
smooth muscle.
4. Urethra (female): The epithelium is primarily transitional,
 but near the external urethral orifice the epithelium changes
to stratified squamous. Vessels described as endothelial-
lined cavernous spaces are scattered in the connective tissue
of the propria-submucosa, giving it the appearance of erec-
tile tissue. The amount and distribution of cavernous tissue
in the urethra are species-dependent. A few bundles of lon-
gitudinally oriented smooth muscle may form a rudimen-
tary lamina muscularis. The smooth muscle in the tunica
muscularis includes irregularly arranged circular and longi-
tudinal components. In the distal urethra, bundles of longi-
tudinally and circularly oriented skeletal muscle are mixed
with, or replace, the smooth muscle in the tunica muscu-
laris. A suburethral diverticulum lined by transitional ep-
ithelium and an underlying loose connective-tissue layer is
 present ventral to the external urethral orifice in pigs and in
ruminants. The male urethra is described in Chapter 12.
These passageways provide a conduit and reservoir for urine
plus a mechanism for bladder filling and urine release. Urine is
moved from the kidney to the bladder by peristaltic contractions
of the smooth muscle of the calices renal pelvis and ureter. The
ureters enter the bladder at an acute angle. This angle acts as a
FIGURE II-29 Urinary bladder (dog). The mucosa is exten-
valve that prevents reflux of urine back into the ureter. The nerv-
sively folded and the transitional epithelium and propria-submucosa.
(P-S) are thick. These are all characteristic features of an empty
ous system controls the muscular components of the bladder and
bladder. The three layers of the tunica muscularis {TM) are not
urethra while the bladder fills and is emptied. Bladder filling re-
identifiable in this section. A serosa (S) covers the outer surface of the
quires both restriction of outflow and relaxation of the bladder
bladder. Hematoxylin and eosin (x50).
wall. Restriction of outflow results from (a) urethral sphincter
232
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
constriction via pudendal nerve stimulation of urethral skeletal
Kriz W, Kaissling B. Structural organization of the mammalian kidney.
 muscle and (b) sympathetic (hypogastric nerve) stimulation of
In: Seldin DW, Giebisch G, eds. The Kidney: Physiology and
 bladder neck smooth muscle (O-receptors). Bladder relaxation re-
 sults from (a) inhibition of parasympathetic innervation (pelvic
Wilkins, 2000.
Madsen KM, Brenner BM. Structure and function of the renal tubule and
nerve) to the detrusor muscle and (b) inhibition of detrusor mus-
 cle contraction by sympathetic nerve stimulation (β-receptors).
interstitium. In: Tisher CC, Brenner BM, eds. Renal Pathology
with Clinical and Functional Correlations. 2nd Ed. Philadelphia:
Voiding of urine is called micturition. Voluntary micturition is
Lippincott, 1994.
mediated by the caudal brainstem under cortical and cerebellar
Madsen KM, Verlander JW. Renal structure in relation to function. In:
control. Normal micturition requires essentially the reverse of
Wilcox CS, Tisher CC, eds. Handbook of Nephrology and Hyper-
bladder filling, that is, relaxation of the urethral sphincter and
tension. 5th Ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins,
 bladder neck and bladder contraction. Thus, urine outflow is per-
2004.
[ain on uonaiauu! ipuapnd jo uonqiu! (e) Aq paii
Sands JM, Verlander JW. Functional anatomy of the kidney. In:
skeletal muscle and (b) inhibition of sympathetic innervation to
Goldstein RS, ed. Comprehensive Toxicology, Vol. 7, Renal Toxi-
the bladder neck smooth muscle. Bladder contraction results from
cology. New York: Pergamon Press, 1 997.
(a) parasympathetic stimulation of the detrusor muscle and (b)
Tisher CC, Brenner BM. Structure and function of the glomerulus. In:
Tisher CC, Brenner BM, eds. Renal Pathology with Clinical and
inhibition of sympathetic innervation to the detrusor.
Functional Correlations. 2nd Ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott,1994.
Tisher CC, Madsen KM. Anatomy of the kidney. In: Brenner BM, ed.
The Kidney. 7th Ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2004.
SUGGESTEd rEAdINGS
Verlander JW. Physiology of the kidney. In: Cunningham JG, ed.
Textbook of Veterinary Physiology. 3rd Ed. Philadelphia: WB
Bulger RE, Cronin RE, Dobyan DC. Survey of the morphology of the
Saunders, 2002.
dog kidney. Anat Rec 1979;194:41.
Getty R, ed., with editorial coordination and completion by Rosenbaum
Pathol 1998;26(1): 1-17.
CE, Ghoshal NG, Hillman D. Sisson and Grossman's Anatomy of
Yadava RP, Calhoun ML. Comparative histology of the kidney of
the Domestic Animals. 5th Ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1975.
domestic animals. Am J Vet Res 1958;19:958.
Male Reproductive System
KARL-HEINZ WROBEL
MARTIN BERGMANN
Testis
Rete testis
Stroma and Interstitium
 Testicular blood supply and testicular innervation
Tunica vaginalis 
Epididymis
Tunica albuginea 
Ductuli Efferentes
Septula testis and mediastinum testis
 Ductus Epididymidis 
Interstitial endocrine cells
Ductus Deferens
Convoluted Seminiferous Tubules
Accessory Glands
Lamina propria
Vesicular Gland
Sustentacular cells
Species differences
Spermatogenic cells
Prostate
Spermatocytogenesis
Species differences
Meiosis
Bulbourethral Gland 
Spermiogenesis
Species differences
Spermatozoon
Urethra
Head
Penis
Neck
Corpora Cavermosa Penis
 Middle piece 
Glans Penis
 Principal piece
Species Differences
End piece
Mechanism of Erection
Cyclic events in the seminiferous tubules
Prepuce
Straight Testicular Tubules
TESTIS
The male reproductive system consists of (a) the testes surrounded
 Stroma and Interstitium
by the tunica vaginalis and the testicular tunics, (b) the epididy-
Tunica Vaginalis
mides, (c) the ductus deferens, (d) the accessory glands (glandu-
lar portion of the ductus deferens, vesicular and bulbourethral
The tunica vaginalis consists of mesothelium and a connective
glands, prostate), (e) the urethra, and (f) the penis surrounded by
tissue layer that blends with underlying connective tissue of the
the prepuce.
scrotum (described in Chapter 16) and testis. When the testis is
233
234
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
removed from the scrotum, the parietal layer of the tunica vagi-
in dogs and boars, whereas in the other domestic animals, they
nalis remains attached to the inner surface of the scrotum, whereas
the visceral layer, the peritoneal covering of the testis (and epi-
intratesticular vessels. The septula testis divide the testicular
 didymis), remains intimately associated with the underlying cap-
parenchyma into a varying number of testicular lobules, each con-
sule (tunica albuginea) of the testis. A space, the vaginal cavity,
taining one to four convoluted seminiferous tubules (Fig. 12-2).
separates the parietal and visceral layers.
The septula testis are continuous with the mediastinum testis
Tunica Aibuginea
the rete testis and large blood and lymph vessels. The medi-
The tunica albuginea (Fig. 12-1) is a solid capsule of dense ir-
astinum testis of stallions and many rodents is relatively small
and located in a marginal position, whereas in ruminants, pigs,
regular connective tissue. It consists predominantly of collagen
fibers, a few elastic fibers, and myofibroblasts. Intratunical inter-
cats, and dogs, it occupies a central position along the longitu-
stitial endocrine cells occur in the cat. Meandering branches of the
dinal axis of the gonad.
testicular artery and a network of anastomosing veins constitute
the vascular layer (tunica vasculosa) of the tunica albuginea.
Interstitia! Endocrine Cells
The intertubular spaces of the testis contain loose connective tis-
Septula Testis and Mediastinum Testis
sue, blood and lymph vessels, fibrocytes, free mononuclear cells,
The tunica albuginea is continuous with connective-tissue tra-
and interstitial endocrine (Leydig) cells (Fig. 12-4). Interstitial
beculae, the so-called septula testis, which converge toward the
endocrine cells constitute approximately 1% of the entire testi-
mediastinum testis. These trabeculae are rather complete septa
cular volume in adult rams, approximately 5% in bulls, and 20
to 30% in boars. In seasonally breeding males (e.g., camel), in-
 terstitial endocrine cell volume and number may change during
head of
spermatic cord
the year. The interstitial endocrine cell is a large polymorphous
epicidymis
cell with a spherical nucleus. The cell occurs in cords or clusters,
and not every interstitial endocrine cell is in close contact with a
capillary. Smooth endoplasmic reticulum (sER) (in bulls, a gran-
ular endoplasmic reticulum) is the dominating organelle in in-
ells.sERm
nt
:involved in
efferent
the first 
ductules
rete
veins
testis
arteries
septula
lobule
body of
epididymis
tunica -
albuginea
ductus
deferens
tail of 
epididymis
FIGURE I2-1 S
 Schematic drawing of a bovine testis, epididymis.
ductus deferens, and spermatic cord. The testicular lobules contain
seminiferous tubules. Branches of the arteries and veins in the vascular
FIGURE I2-2
 Seminiferous tubules (S) and intertubular tissues
layer supply and drain the testicular parenchyma and stroma.
(IT) of the canine testis. Hematoxylin and eosin (xl40).
Male Reproductive System ●Kori-Heirz Wrobel ond Mortin Bergrmonn
235
FIGVRE 2-4
Intertubular region of the cat testis. The
interstitial endocrine cells (IC) have round nuclei and many lipid
ons. The small artery (A) with loosely arranged muscle cells
nts the type with dual innervation by noradrenergic and
cholinergic fibers. Semithin section (x450).
ack action on the hypophysis and hypothalamus; (e) general
anabolic effects; and (f) the prenatal maintenance of the meso-
nephric (wolffian) duct and its differentiation into the epididy.
FIGURE I2-3 The mediastinum testis (A) of the cat is a
mis and ductus deferens.
connective-tissue area in the central longitudinal axis of the gonad
and contains the anastomosing channels of the rete testis (B).
Convoluted seminiferous tubules (C) empty into straight testicular
Convoluted Seminiferous Tubules
tubules (D), which connect with the rete. The septula testis (E) are
located between testicular lobules (F). Masson-Goldner (×35).
The convoluted seminiferous tubules (tubuli seminiferi con-
voluti) in most mammals are tortuous two-ended loops with a di-
ameter between 150 and 300 μm (Fig. 12-3). They are lined by
the stratified spermatogenic epithelium (germinal epithe-
of cholesterol to pregnenolone). The relatively small Golgi com
lium), surrounded by a lamina propria, and connected at both
plex does not participate in secretion of androgen. Release of
ends to straight testicular tubules by a specialized terminal seg-
androgen from interstitial endocrine cells is morphologically
ment (see Fig. 12-12). The length of all seminiferous tubules in
inconspicuous. Lipid inclusions are found in all species, but are
the testis of the adult bovine amounts to approximately 5000 m.
particularly abundant in cats (Fig. 12-4). Between adjacent cells
are intercellular canaliculi and gap junctions.
Histologically, the seminiferous tubules have three components:
Two generations of interstitial endocrine cells, fetal and pu.
lamina propria, sustentacular cells (somatic, supporting, or Sertoli
bertal, develop from mesenchymelike precursors. In some species
cells), and spermatogenic cells.
(e.g., bovine and porcine), a third generation of interstitial en-
Lamina Propria
docrine cells (early postnatal) is encountered.
Interstitial endocrine cells produce testicular androge
The lamina propria surrounds the seminiferous tubule. Its in-
(testosterone) and, in boars, large amounts of estrogen as well.
nermost layer is a basement membrane, often with club-shaped
projections that extend into basal infoldings of sustentacular cells
and spermatogonia. Collagen and elastic fibers connect the base.
sues, to be effective, test
must be converted by the er
ment membrane to the flat peritubular cells, which form a stra-
tum of one to five layers, depending on the species. At birth,
normal sexual behavior (libido); (b) triggering of the growth and
these peritubular cells resemble mesenchymal cells, which grad-
maintenance of the function of the penis, male accessory glands,
cells; in other species (e.g ., bulls), they represent myofibroblasts.
236
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
The peritubular cells contain actin filament bundles that are
arranged in both circular and longitudinal directions and are
 responsible for tubular contractions. Thus, the peritubular cells
participate in transport of tubular content and in spermiation,
that is, the release of spermatozoa into the tubular lumen. The
outermost layer of the tubular lamina propria consists of fibro-
cytes and collagen fibrils. Lymphocytes and monocytes invade
the lamina propria but never the intact tubular epithelium.
Sustentacular Cells
Sustentacular (Sertoli) cells are derived from undifferentiated
supporting cells of the prepubertal gonad. The undifferentiated
C
cells are mitotically active, contain large amounts of rough endo-
plasmic reticulum (rER), and produce antiparamesonephric
hormone, a glycoprotein that suppresses development of uter-
ine tubes, uterus, and vagina in the male. During puberty, sus-
Jigojoydiou e Aq paueduosse s! uoeiuaia!p lan ienseiual
8
transformation and loss of mitotic capability
The adult sustentacular cells are irregularly outlined, elon-
gated cells (Fig. 12-5). Their broad base rests on the basement
membrane, and the remaining cytoplasm extends upward to the
tubular lumen. They are rather evenly spaced; approximately 20
sustentacular cells are seen in a cross section of an adult seminif-
erous tubule. Lateral and apical cytoplasmic processes of the sus-
tentacular cells fill all the spaces between adjacent spermatogenic
cells. The oval or pear-shaped nucleus is generally located in the
broad basal portion of the cell, is often deeply infolded, and con-
tains a large nucleolus. The basal portion and the central trunk 
10
region of the sustentacular cell contain mitochondria, an incon-
11-
spicuous Golgi complex, abundant sER, little rER, free ribo-
somes, microtubules, actin and vimentin filaments, lysosomes,
and lipid inclusions. Only a few organelles are found in the lateral
and apical sustentacular cell processes.
FIGURE I2-5
 Diagrammatic representation of sustentacular
The shape of the cell, the surface area, volume percentages
cellgerm cell interrelationships in the bull. I. Sustentacular cell
of the nucleus and organelles (sER, lysosomes, lipid inclu-
nucleus. 2. Smooth endoplasmic reticulum. 3. Tight junctions
sions), and the amount, and organization of the cytoskeleton
between adjacent sustentacular cells constituting the morphologic
equivalent of the blood-testis barrier. 4. Phagolysosomes. 5. Golgi
change in accordance with spermatogenic events (sustentacular
cell cycle) (Fig. 12-6). Sustentacular cells form hemidesmosomes
occupied by a primary spermatocyte. 8. Space occupied by a
with the basement membrane. Temporary junctions with adja-
spherical spermatid. 9. Eongated spermatid within apical recess of
cent germ cells play a part in vertical displacement and release
sustentacular cell. I0. Basement membrane. I I. Peritubular cell
(spermiation) of the germ cells into the lumen of the tubule.
(myofibroblast). (With permission fro Mosiman M, Kohier T. Zytologie.
Adjacent sustentacular cells are joined by tight junctions associ-
Histologie und mikroskopische Anatomie der Hauss?ugetiere. Hamburg:
ated with actin filaments and subsurface cisternae of the ER.
Poul Parey, I 990.)
These junctions separate a basal compartment from an adlu-
minal (apical) compartment, and constitute a diffusion bar-
rier, also referred to as the blood-testis barrier. Renewal of
joining sustentacular cells without interrupting the physiologic
spermatogenic stem cells and multiplication of spermatogonia
blood-testis barrier. Such passage is probably accomplished by a
take place in the basal compartment, to which intertubular tis-
zipperlike opening of these junctions, which closes again below
sue fluid has relatively free access. The blood-testis barrier selec-
tively prevents many substances from entering the adluminal
Sustentacular cells have nutritive, protective, and support-
compartment, where the vital processes of meiosis and spermio-
ive functions for the spermatogenic cells. In addition, they phago-
genesis take place in a controlled microenvironment. Another
 cytize degenerating spermatogenic cells and detached residual
function of the blood-testis barrier is to prevent autoimmune re-
bodies of spermatids. Sustentacular cells release the spermatozoa
actions against postspermatogonial germ cells. Early spermato-
into the lumen of the seminiferous tubules (spermiation). They
cytes must pass through these specialized intercellular junctions
Male Reproductive System ● Kor-Heinz Wrobel ond Martir Bergmann
237
larly observed within the lumen of the testicular excurrent duct
system (see Fig. 12-15).
 In addition to the cell population involved in spermatogen-
esis (cycling population), the spermatogenic epithelium contains
a separate spermatogonia stem and precursor celline, which guar-
 antees uninterrupted spermatogenesis and can adapt to changing
demands. Spermatogonia stem and precursor cells are morpho-
logically similar to cycling spermatogonia and are also located in
the basal tubular com partment.
Spermatocytogenesis
 During spermatocytogenesis, spermatogonia multiply mitoti-
cally, resulting in A-, I- (intermediate), and B-spermatogonia
and finally in preleptotene primary spermatocytes (Figs. 12-7
and 12-8). Primary spermatocytes no longer divide mitotically,
 but instead undergo two meiotic divisions, which result in a four-
fold increase in the number of germ cells. Therefore, the number
 of spermatozoa that originate from one A-spermatogonium is
FIGURE 12-6 Shape and size of the sustentacular cells (ovine;
dark cells) vary characteristically in accordance with the stages of the
 spermatocytogenesis. In most mammals, a variable number of
seminiferous epithelial cycle. I. Stage 2. 2. Stage 4. 3. Stage 8.
generations of A-spermatogonia are followed by one generation
Alpha-tubulin reaction (×560)
 each of I- (intermediate) and B-spermatogonia, respectively In a
given tubular segment, the few A-spermatogonia are irregularly
participate in the synchronization of spermatogenic events, and
distributed. Daughter cells of A- and I-mitoses drift apart to
secrete constituents of the intratubular fluid such as transferrin,
achieve an even distribution. A-spermatogonia are the largest
androgen-binding protein, and inhibin. Inhibin is reabsorbed
spermatogonia and share an extensive contact area with the tubular
from the lumen of the efferent ductules and the initial segment of
basement membrane. They possess prominent nucleoli and nuclei
ductus epididymidis; it then reaches the bloodstream and exerts
adsi ls i   o aid e u
have spherical nuclei containing numerous chromatin particles
nals from sustentacular cells modulate the activity of nearby in-
and less prominent nucleoli. Most spermatogonia of a given
terstitial endocrine cells. Although normal sustentacular cells have
tubular seg ment are interconnected by cytoplasmic processes and
minimally proven steroidogenic fuinction, sustentacular cell tumors
form a network composed of individual cells (Fig. 12-7). The
may produce large amounts of estrogen, leading to feminization
mitotic division of B-spermatogonia results in the formation
of the animal.
of preleptotene primary spermatocytes. These cells and their
descendents are interconnected by true cytoplasmic bridges and
Spermatogenic Cells
form a syncytium until shortly before spermiation. Preleptotene
 primary spermatocytes gradually lose contact with the basement
Various spermatogenic cells, representing different phases in the
membrane and are passively translocated into the adluminal tu-
development and differentiation of the spermatozoon, are located
 bular compartment across the intercellular junctions between the 
between the sustentacular cells. The sequence of events in the
development of spermatozoa from spermatogonia is referred to as
nuclear deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) is replicated and all
spermatogenesis and is subdivided into three phases: (a) sper-
chromosomes consist of two sister chromatids
matocytogenesis, the process during which spermatogonia di-
vide mitotically several times and finally develop into primary
spermatocytes; (b) meiosis, the maturation division of spermato-
Meiosis
 cytes that results in spermatids with a reduced (haploid) number
During meiosis, two successive nuclear divisions occur, result-
of chromosomes; and (c) spermiogenesis, the process of trans-
ing in the formation of four haploid spermatids from one primary
formation of spermatids into spermatozoa. The duration of sper-
-ads isa au ae sanoeads ied 'iaads
'snq ui saep os isieoq u saep 6 Aaneurxoidde s! sisauaoieu
togenic cells in the tubular epithelium and are located in the inter-
rams, and stallions; and 55 days in dogs.
mediate position between spermatogonia and spermatids. Because
Germ cell loss by apoptosis or degeneration is low during
the prophase of the first maturation division is extremely pro-
spermatocytogenesis, but affects between 6% and 18% of the
 longed, two generations of primary spermatocytes are present
cells during the two meiotic divisions in the ruminant spermato-
in many tubular sections (Fig. 12-8; see also Fig. 12-11). The
genic epithelium. The main reason for this numerical decrease is
prophase of the first maturation division is subdivided into the
an escape of cells into the tubular lumen during the second mei-
leptotene, zygotene, pachytene, diplotene, and diakinesis stages
otic division. As a consequence, exfoliated germ cells are regu-
according to characteristic changes in nuclear chromatin. During
238
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
ably. For instance, between preleptotene and diplotene, ovine
primary spermatocytes increase in volume 4.8 times and their
nuclei increase in volume 3.3 times. During diakinesis, the
chromosomes shorten and broaden and the four separate chro-
matids are clearly evident. At the end of prophase, the nuclear
The metaphase, anaphase, and telophase of the first matura-
tion division occur rapidly. During these phases, the paired chro-
mosomes are first arranged at the equatorial plate. Subsequently,
homologous chromosomes move to opposite poles of the cell to
Auo aaeu uum sankroeuads Arepuonas aui o panqusip aq
half the number of chromosomes, but two chromatids each (dyads).
e sands Ard aud uaamiaq azis u aa
spherical spermatids, and occur exclusively in phase 4 of the semi-
niferous epithelial cycle (Fig. 12-8).
After a short period of interphase, during which no dupli-
cation of genetic material occurs, the secondary spermatocytes
undergo the second maturation division, with a short prophase
followed by metaphase, anaphase, and telophase, which are essen-
tially similar to those of mitotic divisions. During this division,
the centromeres divide and the sister chromatids of the second-
ary spermatocytes separate and are distributed to each of the sper-
matids resulting from that division. Thus, these cells possess a
haploid set of chromosomes with 1N DNA each.
Spermiogenesis
The process by which interconnected clones of newly formed
spermatids differentiate into individual testicular spermatozoa is
referred to as spermiogenesis. The most important morphologic
changes during spermiogenesis are formation ofthe acrosome, con-
FIGURE 12-7
I. Surface of a tubular whole mount (bovine)
densation of the nuclear chromatin, outgrowth ofa motile tail,
showing evenly distributed small B-spermatogonia and iregularly
and loss of excess spermatid material (cytoplasm, water, organelles)
spaced larger A-spermatogonia. Protein gene product 9.5 reaction
 not necessary for the later spermatozoon.
(×225). 2. Surface of tubular whole mount at higher magnification
Spermiogenesis is divided into the Golgi phase, cap phase,
(×560). The small B-spermatogonia and the large future
 A-spermatogonia for the next round of spermatocytogenesis are
acrosomal phase, and maturation phase (Fig. 12-9). In histologic
 sections, the Golgi and cap phases are characterized by spherical
both members of a common cellular network and are
interconnected by narrow mutual processes (arrows) but remain
nuclei, whereas the acrosomal and maturation phases have elon-
individual cells. On the contrary, postspermatogonial germ cells 
gated nuclei (Fig. 12-8; see also Fig. 12-11).
 undergo incomplete cell divisions and fomm true syncytia.
 During the Golgi phase, proacrosomal granules appear in
Golgi vesicles and eventually fuse to form a single acrosomal gran-
ule within a single acrosomal vesicle. Both structures make con-
the leptotene stage, the chromosomes become arranged in thin
tact with an indentation of the nucleus, thus marking the anterior
threadlike strands. In the zygotene stage, homologous chromo-
pole of the future sperm head.
aq!sla 'aaiaua spieuouo inoy jo speial pue aed oi ugaq sauos
 During the cap phase, the acrosomal vesicle grows and forms
evidence of pairing is the synaptic complexes seen under the elec-
the head cap that covers the anterior two thirds of the nucleus. In
tron microscope. Completion of pairing initiates the pachytene
the late cap phase, the still spherical spermatid becomes polarized,
phase, during which crossing over occurs between the nonsister
and the nucleus and head cap are shifted to an eccentric position
chromatids of the paired chromosomes. In microscopic prepa-
The two centrioles assemble at the posterior pole of the nucleus,
and the distal centriole gives rise to the outgrowing flagellum
in this phase of meiosis (Fig. 12-8; see also Fig.12-11). During
In the early acrosomal phase, the nucleus and cell body
the diplotene phase, the paired chromosomes pull away from
start to elongate in a craniocaudal direction. At the same time,
each other, but sister chromatids remain attached through chias-
the spermatids rotate so that the nucleus is directed toward the
mata (i.e., sites where crossing over has occurred). During the
periphery of the tubule and the developing tail is directed toward
prophase of the first meiotic division, the cells grow consider-
the lumen. The spermatids, formerly separated by lateral susten-
Male Reproductive System ●Korl-Heinz Wrobel ond Mortir Bergrmonn
239
FIGURE I2-8
correspond to the stages of the 6
togonia (S);: preleptotene primary spermatocytes (PL);
eptotene primary sperrmatocytes
2s entering pachytene (Z/P); pachytene primary
atocytes (ll); Golgi-phase spermatids (G); cap-phase spermatids (C);
early acrosome-phase sperrmatids {EA); ac
uration-phase spermatids (M). Semithin sections (×1 560)
tacular cell processes, are now embedded in apical recesses of
plasm, the cytoplasmic droplet of young spermatozoa, is lost dur-
these cells. As the nucleus begins to elongate, nuclear histones,
which are responsible for the normal spatial nucleosomal arrange-
ment of nuclear DNA, are gradually replaced by basic proteins
Spermatozoon
(protamines), which allow dense packing of the chromatin. After
(sioq) ur o Ajanuixondde uoy ysual ui Ara ozojeuads
this condensation, the DNA is transcriptionally inactive and re-
stallions) to 75 μm (ruminants). Under the light microscope, the
sistant to noxious influences. During fertilization, protamines must
spermatozoon consists of two portions: the head and the tail. With
be replaced by histones before decondensation of the chromatin.
the electron microscope, the tail is subdivided further into the 
These histones are provided by the oocyte.
neck, middle piece, principal piece, and end piece (Fig. 12-10).
During the maturation phase, nuclear condensation is
Head
in a helicoidal manner. The systen
ofthe ol
fbe
and the
The shape of the nucleus and acrosome determines the shape of
fibrous sheath of the future principal piece develop. The volume
the head. of the spermatozoon, which is species-dependent and
of a spermatid in the late maturation phase
subject to great variations. The anterior pole of the nucleus is
covered by the acrosomal cap, with an outer and an inner acro-
generally responsible for this redu
somal membrane that fuse a
at the caudal end. The acrosomal cap
acular cell processes conta
olasmicbridgesbetwe
edis
osomal enzymes are needed
torthe
ellucida during fertilization. The
Residual bodies have different fates
by sustentacular cells, lost into the
 tubular lumen, or subjected
 of its contents. This area is the equa
ortionofspermatidcytc
240
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Middle piece
The core of the middle piece has the characteristic structure of
a flagellum: two central microtubules and nine peripheral dou-
 blets (microtubules) making up the axial filament complex. They
are surrounded by nine longitudinally oriented, tapered outer
fibers that are connected to the fibers of the connecting piece in
the neck. These, in turn, are surrounded by the mitochondria in
a helicoid arrangement. In ruminants, the mitochondrial helix 
B
3
consists of approximately 40 turns. A ring-shaped thickening of
the plasma membrane (annulus) of the middle piece marks the
limit between the middle piece and the principal piece.
Principal piece
The principal piece is the longest portion of the spermatozoon.
The axial filament complex has a structure identical to that of the
middle piece and is surrounded by the continuing outer fibers of
the middle piece. The fibers are subject to variations in size and
shape and gradually taper toward the end of the principal piece.
Semicircular ribs of structural proteins in a helicoid arrangement
fuse to two of the outer fibers to form the characteristic periph-
eral fibrous sheath of the principal piece.
End piece
The termination of the fibrous sheath marks the beginning of
the end piece, which contains only the axial filament complex.
Proximally, in the end piece, this complex has its characteristic
C
D
 nine peripheral doublets; distally, these doublets gradually be-
FIGURE I2-9 Spermiogenesis (bull). A. Spherical spermatid,
come reduced to singlets and terminate at various levels.
Golgi phase. 1. Golgi complex; 2. Golgi vesicle; 3. acrosomal vesicle
containing acrosomal granule; 4. nucleus; 5. developing tail
Cyclic Events in the Seminiferous Tubules
B. Spherical spermatid, cap phase. 1. Golgi complex; 2. head cap
Before one spermatogenic series is completed several (generally
containing acrosome; 3. developing tail C. Eongated spermatid,
four) new spermatogenic series are initiated at the same level
acrosomal phase. I. acrosomal cap containing acrosome; 2. nucleus;
3. manchette; 4. Golgi complex. D. Elongated spermatid,
within the seminiferous tubule. As all the descendents of each
maturation phase. I. nucleus (condensation completed); 2. middle
 B-spermatogonium develop synchronously, successive cell gener-
piece with mitochondrial sheath; 3. annulus; 4. principal piece; 5.
 ations follow each other with cyclic regularity, from the periph-
Golgi complex. (With permissiorn from Mosimmann W, Kohler T.
ery toward the center of the seminiferous tubule (seminiferous
Zytologie, Histologie und mikroskopische Anatomie der Houss?ugetiere.
epithelial cycle).
Hamburg: Poul Parey, I 990.)
Changes in the shape and staining of the nuclei during cell
division and release of spermatozoa into the tubular lumen pro-
vide a basis for dividing the spermatogenic cycle into stages. In
proteins rich in sulfur. In dead spermatozoa, the sheath stains
testes of bulls, rams, and boars, eight stages can be identified
intensely with certain dyes, such as eosin or bromophenol blue.
(Fig. 12-11):
This reaction is used to evaluate the quality of an ejaculate. The
plasma membrane of the postacrosomal head region contains re-
Stage 1. After spermiation, spherical spermatids lie nearest to the
ceptor molecules necessary for the recognition of a homologous
lumen, followed basally by two generations of primary sper-
oocyte. At the posterior surface of the sperm head, the nuclear en-
 matocytes, that is, old pachytenes and young preleptotenes/
velope lines an implantation groove where the tail is inserted in
leptotenes (Fig. 12-11-1).
a jointlike manner.
Stage 2. The spermatids and their dark-stained nuclei are elon-
gated. The two generations of primary spermatocytes are old
Neck
pachytenes and young leptotenes/zygotenes (Fig. 12-11-2).
The neck is a relatively short and narrow structure between the
Stage 3. Elongated spermatids are arranged in bundles and lie in
head and middle piece. It consists of a centrally located centri-
deep apical recesses of the sustentacular cells (Fig. 12-1l-3).
ole and nine peripheral, longitudinally oriented coarse fibers
The pachytenes of stage 2 have reached diplotene. A second
(connecting piece) continuous with the outer dense fibers of the
luasaid si auaioz ui saiooieuads Areud jo uonneiauag
middle piece.
in the basal region.
Male Reproductive System ● Korl-Heinz Wrobel ond Martinr Bergmonr
241
D
FIGURE I2-10 
Schematic drawing of a spermatozoon. Left,
Longitudinal section. Right, Cross sections located at the levels 
from which they are taken. A. Head containing the nucleus covered
by the acrosome. Note the equatorial segment of the acrosome and 
postacrosomal sheath. B. Neck. C. Middle piece with central axial 
filament complex, nine outer dense fibers, and the surrounding 
mitochondria. The middle piece terminates at the annulus (arrow).
D. Principal piece in which the outer dense fibers are surrounded by
the fibrous sheath; they terminate before the end of the principal
piece. E. In the end piece, the microtubules of the axial flament 
complex terminate at various levels.
242
Dellman's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
8
FIGURE I2-I1
The eight stages of the spermatogenic cycle (boar). B spermatogonia (B); elongated
wud auauod () spads paoy au ( soads eud auaoidal (s spads
and entering pachytene (P/Z); zygotene (Z); residual bodies (RB); sustentacular cell (S); spermatozoa in 
spermiation (Sp); spherical spermatids (SS); secondary spermatocytes (ll). Periodic acid-Schiff (x500)
Male Reproductive System · Korl-Heinz Wrobel ond Mortir Bergmorr
243
Stage 4. The first and second maturation divisions take place. In
addition to bundles of maturing spermatids and zygotene
primary spermatocytes, either diplotenes, secondary sper-
matocytes, or spherical spermatids are seen (Fig. 12-11-4).
Stage 5. Two generations of spermatids are present: older elongated
spermatids and newly formed spherical spermatids. The zy-
gotenes of stage 4 enter the pachytene stage and are displaced
in the direction of the tubular lumen (Fig. 12-11-5).
Stage 6. The bundles of older spermatids have moved away from
the vicinity of the sustentacular cell nuclei. In addition to
 spherical spermatids, pachytenes and numerous spermato-
gonia (I- or B-) are present (Fig. 12-11-6).
Stage 7. The maturation-phase spermatids achieve a position
close to the tubular lumen. All other cells are as in stage 6
(Fig. 12-11-7).
Stage &. Spermatozoa leave the tubular epithelium (spermiation)
after separation from their residual bodies. Remaining within
the epithelium are spherical spermatids and two genera-
tions of primary spermatocytes (older pachytenes and young
preleptotenes) (Fig. 12-11-8).
 In all domestic animals, not only are the descendents of one
spermatogonium all more or less at the same stage of develop-
ment, but identical cellular associations are found over a certain
distance in cross and longitudinal sections of seminiferous
tubules. These spermatogenic segments (portions with syn-
chronized development of germ cells) are usually arranged so that
one specific segment is located between the preceding and fol-
lowing stages of the spermatogenic cycle. If stages 1 through 8
succeed each other along the length of the seminiferous tubule,
the sequence is referred to as a regular spermatogenic wave,
which is approximately 10 mm long in bulls. Variations, such 
as repetition of wave fragments (1-2-3-4-1-2-3-4) or inversions
(1-2-3-4-5-4-3-2), seem to occur more frequently, however.
FIGURE 12-I2
Convoluted seminiferous tubule (A), terminal
Exactly what determines the spermatogenic cycles, segments,
segment (B) surrounded by a vascular plexus, and straight testicular
tubule (C) in the bovine testis. Iron hematoxylin (×I 40).
and waves is not known at this time.
Straight Testicular Tubules
lium lines the proximal portion of the straight tubules, and a sim.
In all domestic mammals, most of the convoluted seminiferous
ple columnar epithelium lines the distal portion (Fig. 12-13).
tubules terminate into the straight testicular tubules (tubuli
 This epithelium contains numerous macrophages and lympho-
recti), which are connected to the rete testis (Fig. 12-1). Straight
cytes and is able to phagocytize spermatozoa.
testicular tubules are generally short and have a straight course. In
stallions and boars, some of the convoluted seminiferous tubules
Rete Testis
Aq sisan aiau aun uio! pue sisan au jo Aiaudad aui ie aieuan
long, straight testicular tubules situated within the septula testis.
Irregularly anastomosing channels, surrounded by loose connec-
The terminal segment of the convoluted seminiferous tubule is
tive tissue, form the rete testis (Figs. 12-1 and 12-14). Most of
composed of modified sustentacular cells that occlude the tubular
the rete is situated within the mediastinum testis, but smaller
lumen and project their apices into the cup-shaped initial portion
intratunical and extratesticular portions are generally also pres-
ofthe straight testicular tubule (Fig. 12-12). All spermatozoa must
ent. The rete testis is lined by a simple squamous to columnar
pass through the narrow intercellular slits between adjacent mod-
epithelium. Elastic fibers and contractile cells are present under
ified sustentacular cells on their way to the straight tubule. The
the epithelium. Most of the testicular fluid, which is reabsorbed
-au siuaaaid ieul aaiea e se uoouny iauny Aeuu iuatugas ieual
in the head of the epididymis, is produced in the rete testis (in
flux of rete testis fluid into the seminiferous tubules.
the ram, approximately 40 mL/day). Rete testis fluid differs in
The straight testicular tubules are lined with a simple squa-
composition from seminiferous tubular fluid, testicular lymph,
mous to columnar epithelium. In bulls, a simple cuboidal epithe-
and blood plasma.
244
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
A
B
FIGURE I2-13F
Proximal (A) and distal (B) portions of the straight testicular tubules in the bovine
testis. Note the differences in tubule diameter and the lining epithelium. Masson-Goldner (x350)
Testicular Blood Supply
these convolutes or from the septal arteries, smaller arterial ves-
and Testicular Innervation
sels deviate to supply the testicular parenchyma (Fig. 12-1). Most
of the testicular veins empty into superficial veins situated in the
The testicular artery has a straight abdominal portion and becomes
vascular layer of the tunica albuginea. The albugineal veins con-
highly coiled after reaching the spermatic cord. Small nutritive
verge at the base of the spermatic cord to form the pampiniform
twigs and larger epididymal arteries branch from the coiled por-
plexus, which completely surrounds the windings of the testicu.
tion. As the artery reaches the testis, it courses parallel to the epi-
lar artery. This remarkable vascular topography in the mam-
didymis and is embedded in the tunica albuginea. The testicular
malian spermatic cord is believed to allow venous-arterial steroid
hormone transfer and cooling of the arterial blood entering the
tributions to the vascular layer of the tunica albuginea. Within the
testis. Thus, testicular androgen levels are increased and testicu-
septula testis, centripetal septal arteries course to the mediastinum
testis, where they form very convoluted coils in ruminants. From
ments for spermatogenesis. Valves are present in the veins of the
the porcine testis.
The sens
 of pain and touch in the scrotal area involve pri-
arilvth
rings, which are innervated by myelinated
ofthelumbosac
cral plexus. The in-
rinsio
nonmyelinated, mainly va5
s:[a]with
tous bridge (proper ligament of the testis) between the epididy-
O the epididymalborder of the testis.Considerable
ificdiffere
in the
testicular innervation pattern
a albuginea, septula, mediastinum, and lobuli testis, the
large testis of the adult boar is not innervated at all. Also, in the
testis of the bull and donkey, large areas of the testicular interior
e fibers. The majority of the intrinsic testicular
nglionic sympathetic fibers. Only in the
and testicular lobules receive a dual innervation by noradrener-
FIGUREI2-I4
Bovine rete testis lined with simple cuboidal
gic and cholinergic axons (Fig. 12-4). Besides vasomotor fibers,
epithelium and surrounded by a relatively large amount of
connective tissue. Masson-Goldner (x140).
Male Reproductive System ●Korl-Heinz Wrobel ond Mortir Bergrmonr
245
run independently from blood vessels in the connective tissue
 and seem to be the most important sensory nerves in the male
gonad. The autonomous innervation of testicular interstitial
endocrine cells and the functional correlations between neural
and endocrine regulations in the testis are still a matter of debate.
 In the camel testis, which displays distinct volume changes over
the year, an inverse relation between neural and endocrine activ-
ities has been reported as follows: the greatest volume and high-
est 3-β-hydroxysteroid-dehydrogenase (3-β-HStDH) content of
the interstitial endocrine cell compartment seen in the winter is
paralleled by a regression of testicular innervation. A weak or
absent 3-β-HStDH activity and a decreasing volume of the inter
stitial endocrine cells in summer is accompanied by an increase
in intertubular nerve fibers.
EPIDIDYMIS
The mammalian epididymis is a dynamic accessory sex organ that
is dependent on testicular androgens for the maintenance of a dif-
 ferentiated state of its epithelium. It comprises several (8 to 25)
ductuli efferentes and a long, coiled ductus epididymidis (Fig.
12-1). Macroscopically, the epididymis is divided into a head,
body, and tail. It is surrounded by a thick tunica albuginea of
dense irregular connective tissue covered by the visceral layer of the
tunica vaginalis. In stallions, the tunica albuginea has a few smooth
muscle cells scattered throughout the dense connective tissue.
Ductuli Efferentes
diameters connect the rete testis to the ductus epididymidis
(Figs. 12-1 and 12-15-1). The ductules are gathered in small lob-
ules (coni vasculosi) with distinct boundaries of connective tis-
FIGURE I2-I5 I. Ductuli efferentes of the cat. The lumen
sue. There is generally an abrupt border between the epithelia of
decreases from the initial portion toward the epididymidis. A
rete testis and efferent ductules (Fig. 12-15-2). The epithelium
segment of the ductus epididymidis is seen at the upper left
of the efferent ductules is simple columnar and consists of cili-
(tubular profles with thick walls and small lumina). Masson-Goldner
ated and nonciliated principal cells (Fig. 12-16-1). Scattered free
(×55). 2. Transition (arrow) of the simple cuboidal epithelium of the
mononuclear cells that have invaded the basal epithelial area have
rete testis into the columnar epithelium of the ductuli efferentes
been misinterpreted as a third genuine cell type. The ciliated
aut yo uawn aut (sllao ep 'lews) eozoads o uoppe ul (ie)
cells (apical row of nuclei) help to move the spermatozoa toward
testicular excurrent duct system contains many exfoliated
the ductus epididymidis. The nonciliated principal cells (basal row
spermatocytes and spermatids. Semithin section (x350).
of nuclei) display a brush border of microvilli and morphologic
characteristics of fluid-phase endocytosis with membrane recy-
cling, such as coated pinocytotic invaginations, coated and trans-
ers of myofibroblasts and connective tissue. The ductuli efferentes
port vesicles, and endosomes. Besides generating an osmotically
and the initial portions of the ductus epididymidis constitute the
driven water flow by transcellular transport of ions, most of the
head of the epididymis.
nonciliated principal cells are involved in resorptive processes and,
after resorption and digestion of ductular fluid and macromole-
Ductus Epididymidis
cules, may contain globular periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-positive
residual bodies (Fig. 12-16-2); others may have a secretory activ-
The ductus epididymidis is extremely tortuous and coiled. The
ity. Intermediate forms between ciliated and nonciliated epithelial
length of the duct varies considerably among species and has
cells are occasionally observed. The ratio between ciliated and
been estimated to be 40 m in bulls and boars and 70 m in stal-
nonciliated principal cells varies along the ductule, but ciliated
lions. Despite these differences, transport of sperm through the
cells increase in number toward the epididymal duct. The ductu-
epididymis seems to require 10 to 15 days in most mammalian
lar epithelium is surrounded by three to six loosely arranged lay-
species.
246
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
2
FlGURE I2-I6 I. The simple columnar epithelium of the efferent ductules consists of secretory and resorptive cells (light spherical
nuclei) and ciliated cells (dense ovoid nuclei). Masson-Goldner (x560). 2. Selective staining of nonciliated cells. Periodic acid-Schiff reaction
after digestion by diastase (×350).
The ductus epididymidis is lined by a pseudostratified colum-
 cells. In many species, additional cell types, such as apical cells and
nar epithelium, surrounded by a small amount of loose connective
 clear cells, are present. Macrophages and lymphocytes also occur
tissue and circular smooth muscle fibers, the number of which in-
within the epithelium.
creases significantly toward the tail of the epididymis (Fig. 12-17).
The principal cells are generally taller in the head of the epi-
In seasonal breeders such as the camel, the height of the epididy-
didymis than in the remainder of the organ. The apical surfaces of
mal epithelium and the innervation density of the muscular layer 
these columnar cells bear long and sometimes branching mi-
display characteristic changes over the year. Two cell types are
crovilli (stereocilia) that become gradually shorter toward the tail.
invariably present in the epididymal epithelium of all domestic
The occurrence of pinocytotic invaginations at the base of the mi-
mammals: columnar principal cells and small, polygonal basal
 Crovilli and the presence of coated vesicles and multivesicular bod-
FIGURE I 2-I7Sections through the wall of the feline ductus epididymidis taken at the level of the
head (I), body (2), and tail (3) of the epididymis. Note the variations in the position of the nuclei, height
of the pseudostratified columnar epithelium, length of the microvilli, and thickness of the muscular coat.
Hematoxylin and eosin (×435).
Male Reproductive System ● Korl-Heinz Wrobel ond Martinr Bergmanr
247
ies in the apical cytoplasm indicate that the epididymal epithe-
an effective blood-epididymal barrier whose morphologic equiv.
Ueu anou) pimu aui jo iso Aede andiosai y!y e sey un!
alent is represented by the apical epithelial junctional complex
90%) that leaves the testis is reabsorbed in the ductuli efferentes
containing one of the best developed tight junctions anywhere.
 and the proximal part of the epididymal duct. Androgen-binding
protein and inhibin produced by the sustentacular cells of the
seminiferous tubules are also reabsorbed in the initial segment of
DUCTUS DEFERENS
the ductus epididymidis. The secretion of various substances, such
as glycerophosphoryl choline, and glycoproteins, such as phos-
The ductus epididymidis, after a sharp bend at the end of the tail
phatase and glycosidase, is also well established.
gradually straightens and acquires the histologic characteristics of
On the basis of histologic, histochemical, and ultrastructural
the ductus deferens. In stallions and ruminants, the ductus def-
criteria, the ductus epididymidis may be subdivided into several
erens unites with the excretory duct of the vesicular gland to form
seg ments, the distribution and number of which (six in bulls) are
a short ejaculatory duct, which opens at the colliculus seminalis
characteristic for each species. Generally, the proximal parts of
into the urethra. The pseudostratified lining epithelium of the
the duct (head and body) are involved in the maturation process
bovine ejaculatory duct contains engulfed spermatozoa. In boars,
of spermatozoa. The tail of the epididymis serves as their main
the ductus deferens and the excretory duct open separately into
storage place (e.g., 45% of bovine epididymal spermatozoa are
the urethra. In carnivores, the ductus deferens joins the urethra
stored here). Spermatozoa leaving the testis are both immotile and
alone because the vesicular gland is absent.
infertile, whereas spermatozoa leaving the epididymis have gained
The mucosa of the ductus deferens is lined by a pseudo-
motility and fertility. During their passage through the ductus
stratified columnar epithelium (Fig. 12-18) similar to that of the
epididymidis, spermatozoa undergo a series of morphologic and
ductus epididymidis, but with a higher amount of basal cells; to-
functional changes that lead to the acquisition of full fertilizing
ward the end of the duct, it may become a simple columnar ep-
capacity by the time they reach the tail. The change in the func-
ithelium. In the proximity of the epididymis, the columnar cells
tional status of the spermatozoa is reflected in (a) development of
possess short, branched microvilli. In bulls, small lipid droplets are
progressive motility,(b) modification of their metabolism,(c) al-
present in the basal cells. The loose connective tissue of the pro-
teration of the plasma membrane surface characteristics (activa-
 pria-submucosa is highly vascularized, is rich in fibroblasts and
tion of membrane-bound molecules necessary for recognition
elastic fibers, and contains a network of cholinergic nerves, whereas
processes during fertilization), (d) stabilization of plasma mem-
the tunica muscularis is densely innervated by postganglionic sym-
brane by oxidation of incorporated sulfhydryl groups, and (e) cau-
pathetic fibers. In stallions, bulls, and boars, the tunica muscularis
 dad movement and eventual loss of the cytoplasmic droplet, a
consists ofintermingled circular, longitudinal, and oblique layers;
remnant of the spermatid cytoplasm. Spermatozoa with persist-
in small ruminants and carnivores (Fig. 12-18-1), an inner circu-
ing droplets are probably infertile. Once fully mature, sperma-
tozoa can be stored in the tail of the epididymis for a remarkably
with its usual components covers the organ.
long period; much longer than if they were maintained at a sim-
The terminal portion of the ductus deferens is one of the
ilar temperature in vitro. Epididymal spermatozoa can carry a
male accessory glands, regardless of whether it forms an ampulla
wide range of potent antigens and easily trigger an autoimmune
(stallions, ruminants, dogs) (Fig. 12-19-1) or does not (boars, cats);
response by antisperm antibodies. This is generally prevented by
it contains simple branched tubuloalveolar glands in the propria-
FIGURE 12-18
I. Cross section through the intraabdominal portion of the feline ductus deferens
Hematoxylin and eosin (xl30). 2. Pseudostratified columnar epithelium of the canine ductus deferens
taken at the same level. Hematoxylin and eosin (x435)
248
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
FIGURE I2-I9  I. Cross section through the glandular portion of the canine ductus deferens. The
the glandular portion of the ductus deferens of a buck. Basal (white arrows) and columnar cells are
present and heads of spermatozoa (black arrow) are seen in the lumen. Weigert's hematoxylin (x560).
3. In this secretory alveolus of the glandular portion of the ductus deferens of a bull, some of the basal
cells contain a huge lipid droplet (vacuole). Weigert's hematoxylin (×350).
submucosa. In stallions, bulls, and rams, these glands occupy
nants, and boars; the vesicular glands are absent in carnivores
practically the entire propria-submucosa, which is rich in smooth
and the bulbourethral gland is absent in dogs.
muscle cells. In dogs and bucks, the glands are surrounded by
periglandular connective tissue devoid of smooth muscle cells.
Vesicular Gland
The glands are lined by cells that vary from tall columnar cells
with ovoid nuclei to cuboidal cells with spherical nuclei (Figs.
The paired vesicular glands are compound tubular or tubu-
12-19-2 and 12-19-3). Apical, bleblike protrusions suggestive of
loalveolar. The glandular epithelium is pseudostratified with
secretory activity are often observed. Spherical or polyhedral basal
tall columnar cells and often sparse, small, spherical, basal cells
cells are distributed irregularly between the columnar cells (Fig .
(Fig. 12-20-1). The intralobular and main excretory ducts are
12-19-2). In ruminants, the glandular epithelium is rich in glyco-
lined by a simple cuboidal epithelium, or by a stratified colum-
gen and the basal cells contain lipid droplets of variable size. Lipid
nar epithelium in horses
The highly vascularized loose connective tissue of the propria-
droplets are also present in the columnar cells of bulls. The lipids
in bovine basal cells may coalesce, thereby giving these cells the
submucosa is continuous with the denser connective tissue of the
appearance of fat cells (Fig. 12-19-3). The tunica muscularis of
trabeculae, which may subdivide the organ into lobes and lobules.
the terminal portion of the ductus deferens consists of variably
A tunica muscularis of varying width and arrangement surrounds
arranged smooth muscle bundles surrounded by the highly vas-
the organ, covered by a tunica serosa or a tunica adventitia.
cularized loose connective tissue of the tunica adventitia.
The lumen of the glandular portion of the ductus deferens 
Species Differences
and the wide openings of the glands into the lumen contain a
In stallions, the vesicular glands are true vesicles, with short,
considerable number of spermatozoa in all domestic animals. In
branched tubuloalveolar glands that open into wide central lu-
the bull, the number is sufficient for at least one normal ejacu-
late after recent castration or vasectomy.
beculae with irregularly arranged smooth muscle cells.
 In boars, the two vesicular glands possess a common con-
nective-tissue capsule; the tunica muscularis is thin. The inter-
ACCESSORY GLANDS
lobular septa consist predominantly of connective tissue and a
few smooth muscle cells. The tubular lumina are wide and the
The ejaculate consists of spermatozoa and seminal plasma, which
secretory epithelium is folded (Fig. 12-21).
is composed of secretions from the epididymis and male acces-
In bulls, the vesicular gland is a compat, lobulated organ.
sory glands. These glands are (a) the glandular portion of the duc-
Intralobular secretory ducts drain the slightly coiled tubular por-
tus deferens, which has been described together with the ductus
tions of the tubuloalveolar gland and, in turn, are drained by the
deferens; (b) the vesicular gland; (c) the prostate; and (d) the bulbo-
main excretory duct. The secretory columnar cells have small
urethral gland. All accessory glands are present in stallions, rumi-
lipid droplets and glycogen (Figs. 12-20-2 and 12-20-3) and
Male Reproductive System·Karl-Heinz Wrobel ond Mortir Bergmann
249
FIGURE I2-20
Vesicular gland {bull). I. The basal cells in the 
lining of the alveoli are characterized by large vacuoles containing lipid in vivo. Masson-Goldner {x560)
2.Lipids
were specifically stained with Sudan black B. Note the large lipid droplets in the basal cells and
srmall lipid droplets in the secretory columnar cells {x560). 3. The apices of the secretory columnar cell
contain large amounts of glycogen. Periodic acid-Schiff (×560).
react positively for alkaline phosphatase. Some of the columnar
the nonbreeding season. The gelatinous, white, or yellowish-white
cells possess light, bleblike apical projections. The basal cells are
secretory product of the vesicular gland amounts to approxi-
characterized by large lipid droplets (Fig. 12-20-1). Approx-
mately 25 to 30% of the total ejaculate in bulls, 10 to 30% in
imately 50% of the lipid material in the bovine vesicular gland
boars, and 7 to 8% in rams and bucks. It is rich in fructose, which
is cholesterol and its esters, approximately 25% is triglycerides,
serves as an energy source for ejaculated spermatozoa.
and approximately 10% is phospholipids. The interlobular septa
are predominantly muscular, derived from the thick tunica mus
Prostate
cularis, which is surrounded by a capsule of dense irregular con
nective tissue with a few smooth muscle cells.
The prostate consists of a varying number of individual tubulo-
The vesicular gland of rams and bucks is similar to that of
alveolar glands (Fig. 12-22) derived from the epithelium of the
bulls. Lipid droplets in the basal cells are absent in rams but may
pelvic urethra. Two portions may be distinguished, according
F
ent in bucks. The epithelium of the vesicular gland of bucks
more to topographic than to histologic features: the body (corpus
is considerably higher during the breeding season than during
FIGURE I2-22 This figure illustrates the general organization of
are present in the capsule and the septa. The striated urethralis
FIGURE I2-21Vesicular gland (boar). Epithelial folds project
muscle {U) is visible in the lower right cormer. β-D-galactosidase
into the secretory alveoli. Hematoxylin and eosin (xl 30).
reaction (×I00)
250
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
prostatae) and the disseminate part (pars disseminata prostatae)
The body either entirely surrounds the pelvic urethra at the level
of the colliculus seminalis or covers part of its dorsal aspect. The
disseminate part is located in the propria-submucosa of the pelvic
urethra.
 The secretory tubules, alveoli, and intraglandular ducts of
the prostate are lined by a simple cuboidal or columnar epithe-
lium, with occasional basal cells (Fig. 12-23). The simple epithe-
lium changes to stratified columnar or transitional epithelium
toward the terminal portions of the ducts. Some of the epithelial
cells give a positive mucous reaction; most contain proteinaceous
letimes bleblike apical protr
rusions. Occasionally, concentri-
lacea) are found in the tubules and alveoli. The duct system of the
prostate possesses saccular dilations in which secretory material
may be stored.
The prostate is surrounded by a capsule of dense irregular
connective tissue that contains many smooth muscle cells around
the disseminate part, which is also surrounded by the striated
urethral muscle (Figs. 12-22 and 12-24). Large trabeculae orig-
inate from the capsule and separate the body and the disseminate
part into individual lobules. They are predominantly muscular
in the body of the gland
FIGURE I2-24 In this cross section through part of the bovine
prostatic urethra, note the large veins () of the spongiose stratum
and the disseminate prostate (P) in the propria-submucosa
surrounded by the urethral muscle (M). Lumen (L). Hematoxylin
and eosin (×35)
Secretory portions and ducts of the prostate are surrounded
by loose connective tissue containing smooth muscle cells, which
are particularly abundant in the body of the gland.
Species Differences
In carnivores, the body of the prostate is particularly well devel-
oped and separated into two distinct bilateral lobes. In dogs,
these lobes completely surround the proximal portion of the pelvic
urethra. In cats, they are located on the lateral and dorsal aspects
of the urethra. The disseminate part in dogs consists of a few
 glandular lobules. In cats, individual lobules of the disseminate
Nt
QOD·
B
part are found scattered between the colliculus seminalis and the
bulbourethral glands. Lamellar corpuscles may be observed in
 Ruminant prostatic epithelium. The cell (P) on
the interstitium.
FIGURE I2-23
the left side is a specific secretory cell containing proteinaceous
In stallions, only the body of the prostate is present and con-
granules. The cell (M) on the right secretes mucus. Basal cell (B);
sists of right and left lobes, both connected by a narrow dorsal
intraepithelial autonomic nerve terminals (Nt).
isthmus. The individual lobes empty through 15 to 30 ducts into
Male Reproductive System + Korl-Heinz Wrobel ond Mortir Bergmonn
251
the pelvic urethra. The capsule, trabeculae, and interstitial con-
the capsule, consist of dense irregular connective tissue and some
nective tissue are rich in smooth muscle.
smooth and striated muscle fibers. The interstitium consists of
The body of the prostate gland of the bull is relatively in-
loose connective tissue and a few smooth muscle fibers.
conspicuous; it is absent in small ruminants. The disseminate
portion (Fig. 12-24) encircles the urethra in buls and bucks; in 
Species Differences
rams, it is U-shaped, and the midline of the ventral aspect of the
In cats, the gland consists of spacious, sinuslike intraglandular
urethra is free of glandular tissue.
ducts and short, narrow, mostly unbranched tubular end pieces.
 In boars, the body of the prostate is a platelike organ; the
The secretory surface of the cells is increased by a well-developed
disseminate part is well developed and completely encircles the
system of intercellular canaliculi.
pelvic urethra.
In stallions, the bulbourethral gland is completely sur-
The contribution of the prostatic secretions to the total
rounded by the bulboglandularis muscle. Three to four individ-
volume of the ejaculate varies with the species. In ruminants,
ual bulbourethral ducts are present.
it is 4 to 6%; in stallions, 25 to 30%; and in boars, 35 to 60%.
The exceptionally large bulbourethral gland of boars is also
One of the functions of the prostate is to neutralize the seminal
surrounded by the bulboglandularis muscle. Only a few smooth
plasma, made acidic by accumulation of metabolic carbon diox-
muscle cells are present in the interstitium. The collecting ducts
ide and lactate, and to initiate active movements of the ejacu-
lated spermatozoa.
are lined by simple columnar epithelium.
In ruminants, the gland is surrounded by the bulbospon-
giosus muscle. In bulls and rams, short connecting pieces link
Bulbourethral Gland
the secretory portions to the collecting ducts, lined by a simple
The paired bulbourethral glands are located dorsolateral to the
cuboidal epithelium that is sometimes also secretory. In bucks,
penile portion of the urethra, at the bulb of the penis. The gland
the secretory portions empty directly into these ducts. Smooth
is compound tubular (boars, cats, bucks) or tubuloalveolar (stal-
muscle cells are particularly abundant within the interstitium.
lions, bulls, rams) (Fig. 12-25); it is absent in dogs.
The mucous and proteinaceous secretory product of the
The secretory portions of the bulbourethral gland are lined
bulbourethral gland is discharged before ejaculation in rumi-
with a tall simple columnar epithelium and occasional basal cells
nants (Fig. 12-25-2), where it apparently serves to neutralize the
(Fig. 12-25-1). They open into collecting ducts either directly or
urethral environment and to lubricate both the urethra and the
through connecting pieces lined by simple cuboidal epithelial
vagina. In boars, the exclusively mucous, sialic acid-rich secre-
cells with dark cytoplasm. The collecting ducts, lined by a
tory product is part of the ejaculate (15 to 30%). The secretion
simple cuboidal or columnar epithelium, unite to form larger
is possibly involved in the occlusion of the cervix to prevent loss
intraglandular ducts lined by a pseudostratified columnar ep-
of sperm following insemination. In cats, the secretory product
ithelium. These, in turn, open into a single (or multiple) bulbo-
is mucus and also contains glycogen. In the absence of a vesicu-
urethral duct with a lining of transitional epithelium
lar gland, this bulbourethral glycogen may be the source of
The gland is sheathed by a fibroelastic capsule containing a
feline seminal fructose, providing energy for the metabolism
variable amount of striated muscle. Trabeculae, extending from
of the spermatozoa.
FlGURE I2-25 Bulbourethral gland (bull). I. The light tall columnar secretory epithelial cells are
almost entirely flled with mucous secretory product; the heterochromatic nuclei are located in the cell
base. Masson-Goldner (xI00). 2. Positive periodic acid-Schiff mucin reaction in the parenchyma and
some of the lining cells of the central duct (×l 00)
252
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
URETHRA
The tunica muscularis of the pelvic part of the urethra con-
sists of smooth muscle in the vicinity of the bladder or striated
The male urethra is divided into the prostatic, pelvic, and penile
muscle in the remainder of the urethra. It is surrounded by a tu-
portions. The prostatic portion extends from the urinary bladder
nica adventitia of loose or dense irregular connective tissue.
to the caudal edge of the body of the prostate. The pelvic portion
In ruminants and stallions, the terminal portion of the ure-
begins here and terminates where the urethra enters the bulb of the
thra protrudes incompletely (bulls) or completely (stallions, rams,
penis, from which level the penile portion continues to the exter-
 and bucks) above the glans penis to form the urethral process.
 nal urethral opening.
The transitional or stratified squamous epithelial lining is sur-
The entire urethral mucosa is thrown into longitudinal folds
snouiaaen Aueu Suuieiuon unsonguods sndon e Aq papunon
that flatten or disappear during erection and micturition. In the
 spaces in stallions, and fewer, smaller spaces in ruminants. Two
prostatic urethra, a prominent, perma nent dorsomedian fold, the
longitudinal fibrocartilaginous cords flank the urethra in bucks
urethral crest, is present. It terminates as a slight enlargement,
and rams. The urethral process is covered by a cutaneous mucous
the colliculus seminalis. There, the following ducts open into
membrane.
the urethra: the ejaculatory ducts in ruminants and stallions, the
ductus deferentes and the excretory ducts of the vesicular glands
PENIS
in boars, and the deferent ducts in carnivores. Between these ducts,
vestiges of the fused paramesonephric ducts, the uterus masculi-
'sid esoiaain eiodon an (e) go Aeiuassa sisiso stuad au
nus, may be found as either a solid epithelial cord or a short canal.
The predominant lining of the urethra is a transitional epi-
and (c) the glans penis.
thelium with variably sized patches of simple columnar epi-
thelium or stratified cuboidal or columnar epithelium. The
Corpora Cavernosa Penis
propria-submucosa consists of a loose connective tissue with many
elastic fibers and smooth muscle cells and frequent diffuse lym-
 The paired corpora cavernosa penis arise from the ischiadic
phatic tissue or lymphatic nodules (dog). In stallions and cats,
tuberosities and merge with the corpus spongiosum to form the
simple tubular mucous (urethral) glands are present. Regulatory
body of the penis. They are surrounded by the tunica albuginea,
 peptide-containing cells of the diffuse neuroendocrine system are
a thick layer of dense irregular connective tissue containing vari-
able numbers of elastic fibers and smooth muscle cells. A con-
regularly found in the epithelia of the urethra and the glands de-
rived from the urogenital sinus (i.e., prostate and bulbourethral).
nective-tissue septum completely (dogs) or partially divides the
Throughout the entire length of the urethra, the propria-
corpora cavernosa penis.
The spaces between the tunica albuginea and the trabecular
submucosa possesses erectile properties by virtue of endothelium-
lined caverns of variable size that constitute the so-called vascular
network arising from the tunica albuginea are filled with erectile
tissue. In stallions (Fig. 12-27-1) and carnivores (Fig. 12-27-2),
stratum in the prostatic (Fig. 12-24) and pelvic urethra. Around
this tissue consists ofcaverns lined by endothelium and surrounded
the penile urethra, the quantity and size of the cavernous spaces
by connective tissue, the appearance of which varies between loose
are greatly increased (Fig. 12-26); here, the vascular stratum is re-
and dense irregular, and by smooth muscle cells (Fig. 12-27-1). In
ferred to as the corpus spongiosum, which begins at the ischiadic
arch with a bilobed expansion, the bulb of the penis.
stallions, these muscle bundles are oriented with the longitudinal
axis of the penis, often causing a virtually complete obturation of
the lumina of the cavernous spaces. Relaxation of these musle cells
causes the penis to elongate and emerge from the prepuce, which
usually happens during micturition. In boars (Fig. 12-27-3) and
ruminants (Fig. 12-27-4), the connective tissue surrounding the
caverns contains few, ifany, smooth muscle cells.
The cavernous spaces receive their main blood supply from
arteries with a helical arrangement that are referred to as helicine
arteries (arteriae helicinae). Characteristically, they have epithe-
lioid smooth muscle cells in the tunica intima that protrude into
the lumina of these vesels as ridges or pads, causing partial oblit-
eration. As the smooth muscle cells relax, the blood flow into the
caverns increases considerably and causes erection. The cavernous
spaces are drained by venules, several of which give origin to
thick-walled veins.
The penis of stallions is classified as a vascular penis because
 of the predominance of caverns in the corpus cavernosum. In ru-
FIGURE I2-26 Penile urethra {cat). The urethra (U) is
minants and boars, the caverns are less extensive and connective
surrounded by the cavermous spaces of the corpus spongiosum.
tissue prevails, thus the designation of the penis as fibroelastic. The
Hematoxylin and eosin (×35)
 penis of dogs and cats is best classified as an intermediate type.
MaleRerr
Kor-Heirz Wrobel ond Mortin Bergmonn
253
FIGURE I2-27
I. Corpus cavermosum (stallion). Bundles of smooth muscle (arrows) and a helicine
artery (A) are present within the connective-tissue trabeculae between the cavermous spaces. 2. Corpus
cavermosum (cat). Connective-tissue trabecula (c) between cavermous spaces, adipose cells (arrows), and
numerous helicine arteries (A). 3. Corpus cavernosum (boar). Cavermous spaces contain coagulated
blood (b) between abundant connective-tissue trabeculae. 4. Corpus cavermosum (bull). Note the
Glans Penis
Species Differences
A well-developed glans penis is present only in stallions and
Aq paieiedas Aianaldiuon aie sop jo siuad esouaaen eiodion au
dogs. The glans is surrounded by a tunica albuginea rich in elas-
a connective-tissue septum and are continued cranially by the os
tic fibers. The tunica albuginea continues into trabeculae that de-
penis, which terminates in a fibrocartilaginous tip. The glans
lineate spaces containing erectile tissue similar to that of the
penis consists of the bulbus glandis and the pars longa glandis.
corpus spongiosum penis (stallions) or a plexus of large caverns
Both almost completely surround the os penis and the distal por-
(dogs) (Fig. 12-28). The glans penis is covered by the prepuce
tion of the penile urethra and its associated corpus spongiosum
(see section later in this chapter).
 The bulbus glandis consists of large venous caverns separated
254
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
the level of the glans, the bulbospongiosus muscle bundles are
interrupted by the retractor penis muscle.
A corkscrewlike, left spiral characterizes approximately the
cranial third of the penis of the boar. The structure of the rest of
the porcine penis is similar to that of the penis of the bull.
The corpus cavernosum penis of bulls contains a central
connective-tissue strand formed by the converging trabeculae. The
tip of the penis (glans) consists of mucous (gelatinous) connective
tissue, adipose cells, and large intercellular spaces (Fig. 12-29).
An extensive, erectile venous plexus is present. The penis of
bucks and rams is similar to that of bulls. The glans is a large cap-
like enlargement that is similar to that of bulls. The urethra pro-
jects from the glans as a twisted urethral process.
Mechanism of Erection
 In animals with either a vascular- or an intermediate-type penis,
erection causes an increase in size and a stiffening of the organ.
Relaxation of the smooth muscle cells in the helicine arteries re-
sults in increased blood flow into the spaces of the corpora cav-
ernosa. The increased blood volume compresses the veins and
subsequently decreases the outflow, eventually filling the erec-
tile tissue spaces in the corpora cavernosa and spongiosa penis
and in the glans penis.
Detumescence is initiated by contraction of the musculature
of the helicine arteries and thus by a decrease in arterial inflow
The contraction of the smooth muscle cells of the tunica albu-
ginea, the trabeculae, and the erectile tissue causes the penis to
return to the flaccid state.
 In animals with a fibroelastic penis, erection results essen-
tially in an increase in the length of the penis that emerges from
the prepuce. In ruminants and boars, the retractor penis muscle
plays an essential role during detumescence in retracting the
penis into the prepuce.
During copulation, the constrictor vestibuli muscle of bitches
constricts the veins that drain the entire glans and especially the
FIGURE 12-28 Glans penis, pars longa (dog) Note the large
cavemous spaces (C) in the erectile tissue. Hematoxylin and
eosin (xl I).
 by connective-tissue trabeculae rich in elastic fibers. The pars
longa glandis forms the cranial portion of the glans penis; its
structure is identical to that of the bulbus.
In cats, many adipose cells are present between the caverns
of the corpus cavernosum penis. They increase in number toward
the tip of the corpus cavernosum, which contains little erectile
tissue. A small os penis surrounded by the corpus spongiosum of
the glans is present.
The connective tissue of the corpus cavernosum of stallions
contains many elastic fibers and smooth muscle cells. The glans
B sassassod pue Aieiuein siuad unsouiaan sndion aun siaao
long, caudally directed, dorsal process and an enlargement, the
corona glandis, the epithelial covering of which bears cylindric
FIGURE I2-29
 In the bovine glans penis, the urethra is
papillae. An indentation of the glans, the fossa glandis, contains
surrounded by relatively little subepithelial erectile tissue and a thick
the slightly protruding end of the urethra (urethral process). At
connective-tissue layer (CT). Hematoxylin and eosin (x40).
Male Reproductive System ● Kori-Heinz Wrobel ond Mortir Bergmonn
255
bulbus glandis. This constriction causes the bulbus to enlarge to
flects inward at the preputial opening to form the internal layer
such a degree that immediate withdrawal of the penis from the
of the prepuce. It reflects on the cranial portion of the penis and
vagina is impossible; consequently, coitus is prolonged.
is securely attached cranially to the glans penis.
The external layer is typical skin. Numerous sebaceous glands,
not always related to hairs, are present at the preputial opening.-
PREPUCE
In addition, long, bristlelike hairs are found in ruminants and
boars. In stallions, ruminants, boars, and dogs, fine hairs and seba-
The cranial portion of the body of the penis and the glans penis
ceous and sweat glands are located over a variable distance in the
are located in a tubelike reflection of the skin, the prepuce, com-
internal layer. In stallions, occasional hairs occur in the penile skin,
posed of an external and an internal layer. The external layer re-
which is also rich in sebaceous and sweat glands (Fig. 12-30). In
dogs and ruminants, both the internal layer of the prepuce and
the skin covering the penis contain solitary lymphatic nodules;
in boars, they are present only in the internal layer. In cats, the 
mucosa covering the glans has numerous keratinized papillae.
In boars, a dorsal evagination of the internal layer of the pre-
-uoui s! il "unjnsaaip iendand aui se on paiajan s! and
'unidas ueipau e Aq suood leiaiel omi ou! paeidas Ajanad
Frequently, the keratinized cutaneous mucous membrane is
folded. A mixture of desquamated epithelial cells and urine forms
 smegma, which collects in the diverticulum and is odiferous.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Aumiller G. Prostate gland and seminal vesicles. In: Handbuch der
 mikroskopischen Anatomie des Menschen. Berlin: Springer-Verlag,
1979;7(6).
Cole HH, Cupps PT. Reproduction in Domestic Animals. 3rd Ed. New
Yotk: Academic Press, 1977.
Fa wcett DW, Bedford JM, eds. The Spermatozoon. Maturation, Motility,
Sufface Properties and Compatative Aspects. Batimore: Urban and
Schwarzenberg, 1979.
Guraya SS. Biology of Spermatogenesis and Spermatozoa in Mammals.
New York: Springer-Verlag, 1987.
Knobil E, Neill JD, eds. The Physiology of Reproduction. New York:
Raven Press, 1988.
Russell LD, Griswold MD, eds. The Sertoli Cell. Clearwater, FL: Cache
River Press, 1 993.
Setchell BP. The Mammalian Testis. London: Paul Elek, 1978.
 Steinberger A, Steinberger E. Testicular Development, Structure and
FIGURE I2-30 Skin with hair follicles (H) and sebaceous (S)
Function. New York: Raven Press, 1980.
and sweat (Sw) glands covering the corpus penis (stallion).
Van Blerkom J, Motta P, eds. Ultrastructure of Reproduction. Boston:
Hematoxylin and eosin (x40).
M. Nijhoff, 1984.
Female Reproductive
System
JANIS PRIEDKALNS
RUDOLF LEISER
Ovary
Vestibule, Clitoris, and Vulva
Cortex
The Estrous Cycle
Follicular development
Hormones of the Ovary
Ovulation
Phases of the Estrous Cycle
Follicular atresia and interstitial endocrine cells
Cyclic Changes of the Endometrium
 Corpus luteum
Cow
Medulla
Bitch
Blood Vessels, Lymphatics, and Nerves
Primates
Uterine Tube (Oviduct)
Cyclic Changes of the Vaginal Epithelium
Histologic Structure
Cow
 Blood Vessels, Lymphatics, and Nerves
Bitch
Histophysiology
Avian Female Reproductive System
Uterus
Ovary
Histologic Structure
Endometrium 
Infundibulum 
Myometrium 
unul
Perimetrium
Isthmus
 Blood Vessels, Lymphatics, and Nerves
Uterus
Cervix
Vagina
Histologic Structure
Cloaca
Vagina
Histologic Structure
The female reproductive system consists of bilateral ovaries and
OVARY
uterine tubes (oviducts), a usually bicornuate uterus, cervix,
vagina, vestibule, vulva, and associated glands. It is concerned
The ovary is a combined exocrine and endocrine gland; that is, it
with the production and transport of ova, the transport of sper-
produces both ova (exocrine "secretion") and ovarian hormones,
matozoa, fertilization, and the accommodation of the conceptus
chiefly estrogens and progesterone (endocrine secretion). The
until birth.
 structure of the normal ovary varies greatly with the species, age,
256
Female Reproductive System · Jonis Priedkains ond Rudolf Leiser
257
and phase of the sexual cycle. It is an ovoid structure divided into
 stroma cells and a fluid-filled cavity develops among the ep-
an outer cortex and an inner medulla (Fig. 13-1). In the mature
ithelial cells.
mare, these areas become reversed, and the cortical tissue remains
Primordial (unilaminar, preantral, resting) follicles are
on the surface only in the ovulation fossa, which is the site of all
shouenbs anduis e Aq papunouns annoo Aneuud e jo pasodiuon
ovulations.
epithelium of follicular cells (Figs. 13-1 and 13-2). Primordial fol-
licles arise prenatally by mitotic proliferation of internal epithelial
Cortex
cell masses in the ovarian cortex. In some species (e.g., bitches)
 they may arise also postnatally. The internal epithelial cell masses
The cortex is a broad peripheral zone containing follicles in var-
are believed to arise after interaction of cortical stroma, ovarian
 B u! pappaqua eaini eiodion pue iuaudonaaap jo sageis sno!
surface epithelium, or irregular epithelioid cell cords or channels,
loose connective tissue stroma (Fig. 13-1). It is covered by a low
termed rete ovari, with primordial germ cells (PGCs); the
cuboidal surface epithelium. A thick connective tissue layer,
PGCs arrive in the gonadal ridge from the wall of the yolk sac
the tunica albuginea, lies immediately beneath the surface ep-
During proliferation, the internal epithelial cell masses become
ithelium. It is disrupted by the growth of ovarian follicles and
 separated into cell clusters. The central cell of a cluster becomes
corpora lutea and may be inconspicuous during increased ovar-
the cogonium. The oogonia enlarge, enter the prophase of the first
ian activity. In the ovary of rodents, bitches, and queens, the cor-
meiotic division, and are then termed primary oocytes, approxi-
tical stroma contains cords of polyhedral interstitial endocrine
mately 20 μm in diameter in most species. The primary oocytes
cells. In the ovary of bitches, cortical tubules are also promi-
then go through the leptotene, zygotene, pachytene, and diplotene
nent; these are narrow channels lined by a cuboidal epithelium
stages and then remain in the dictyotene stage. As the primary
that, in some sites, are continuous with the surface epithelium.
Oocyte forms, the surrounding cells form a single layer of flat fol-
licular cells resting on a basal lamina. Together, these components
Follicular Development
constitute the primordial follicle, approximately 40 μm in diam-
An ovarian follicle is a structure composed of an oocyte sur-
eter. Primordial follicles are located mainly in the outer cortex.
 They are evenly distributed in ruminants and the sow and occur in
opment, the epithelial cells become surrounded by specialized 
clusters in carnivores
e
d
b
C
FlGURE I3-I  Ovary of queen showing the development and the regression of follicles and corpora lutea in the ovarian cortex. The
ovarian medulla contains blood vessels (a) that enter the ovary at the hilus from the mesovarium (a'). Surface epithelium with adjacent tunica.
albuginea (b); subtunical layer with primordial follicles (c); primary follicles (d); secondary follicle (e); tertiary follicles, in one case containing an
oocyte within the cumulus oophorus (f); early atretic follicle (g); corpora lutea (h);: corpus regressivum (i); interstitial endocrine cells (k) (x56)-
258
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
FIGURE I3-3 Ovary of queen showing a secondary follicle, in
which the primary oocyte (a) is surrounded by a thin (initially) zona
pellucida (b) and a stratified epithelium of polyhedral cells (c), of
which the inner cell layer forms the corona radiata (d). Call-Exner
bodies (e) are present in some cells. The connective tissue cells that
surround the follicle will form the theca interma (f). Interstitia
endocrine cells (g) are located in the connective tissue outside the
follicle (×175)
FIGURE I3-2Ovary of queen showing primordial follicles (a),
follicle is approximately 120 μm in diameter and contains an
which consist of primary oocytes surrounded by a simple squamous
ae sally Arepuonas aaueip u ut o Aiaiuixodde anoo
epithelium. Nucleus with nucleolus (b). Primary follicle (c), in which a
marked by the development ofa 3- to 5-μm-thick glycoprotein
(a) aoo ud aea ue sasa () wnauia eion
layer, the zona pellucida, around the plasma membrane of the
Interstitial endocrine cells containing granules (f) are seen near
oocyte (Fig. 13-3). The zona pellucida is secreted by the granu-
capillaries (g) (x300)
losa cells immediately surrounding the oocyte and, in part, by
the oocyte itself. There is partial penetration of this zone by the
oocyte microvilli. Cytoplasmic extensions of the granulosa cells
Primary (unilaminar, preantral, growing) follicles are
situated around the oocyte penetrate the zona pellucida and asso.
composed of a primary oocyte surrounded by a simple cuboidal
ciate closely with these microvilli. As follicular development con-
epithelium of follicular cells (Figs. 13-1 and 13-2). The primary
tinues, small fluid-filled clefts are formed among the granulosa
oocytes begin the first meiotic division before birth, but the com-
cells. A vascularized multilaminar layer of spindle-shaped stroma
pletion of prophase does not occur until the time of ovulation. The
cells, termed theca cells, begins to form around the granulosa cell
aunoinip) aseudond papuadsns u ueuan shu sano Areud
layer in late secondary follicles.
stage) until after puberty. Several hundred thousand to l million
Tertiary (multilaminar, antral, growing) follicles, also
-ia u Aiao alous e u yiaq ie nuasand aq Aeu saio ieiuaiod
termed vesicular or Graafian follicles, are composed of a pri-
ious species. Most of these regress before or after birth, and only
mary oocyte (or, immediately before ovulation, a secondary
several hundred ovulate during a normal lifetime. The processes 
 oocyte in most species) surrounded by a stratified epithelium of
involved in the selection of follicles for growth from a pool of non-
granulosa cells; the granulosa cells are surrounded by a multi-
proliferating primordial follicles are poorly understood
laminar layer of specialized stromal cells, termed the theca, and a
Secondary (multilaminar, preantral, growing) follicles
fluid-filled cavity, the antrum, develops among the granulosa cells
are composed of a primary oocyte surrounded by a stratified epi-
(Figs. 13-1, 13-4, and 13-5). The antrum, which characterizes ter-
thelium of polyhedral follicular cells, termed granulosa cells
tiary follicles, is formed when the small, fluid-filled clefts among
(Figs. 13-1 and 13-3). The multilaminar stratum of granulosa
 the granulosa cells of secondary follicles coalesce to form a single
cells arises from proliferating follicular cells of the primary folli-
large cavity containing liquor folliculi. Late tertiary follicles, just
cle. In carnivores, sows, and ewes, polyovular follicles, which con-
before ovulation, are termed mature follicles (Fig. 13-6). In ma-
tain several oocytes, may develop. In cows, the late secondary
ture follicles, just before or just after ovulation, depending on the
Female Reproductive System · Jonis Priedkains ond Rudolf Leiser
259
P
B
FIGURE 13-5
A. A bovine oocyte, surrounded by the zona
 pellucida (a), the corona radiata (b), and cells of the cumulus 
oophorus (c), is separated from the stratum granulosum of the
follicular wall (e) by a gap (d) that developed during oocyte
detachment from the follicle wall during the beginning stages of
Ovulation. Basal lamina of stratum granulosum (f); theca intema (g)
(×220). B. An electron micrograph from the bovine ovary showing
projections of a corona radiata cell (top) and of an oocyte
(bottom), traversing a homogeneous zona pellucida, being in gap-
junctional contact (arrow) with each other (x9000). (Courtesy of P.
Hyttel. Fro Leiser R. Weibliche Geschiechtsorgone. In: Mosirmanr W.
Kohler T, eds. Zytologie, Histologie und mikroskopische Anatommie der
Houss?ugetiere. Berin: Verlog Poul Parey, 1 990:232.)
FIGURE I3-4  Ovary of queen showing a tertiary follicle, which
contains an antrum (a) and a multilayered epithelium, the stratum
culi, the oocyte is displaced eccentrically, usually in a part of the
granulosum (b);: a cumulus oophorus (c) enclosing the primary
follicle nearest to the center of the ovary (Fig. 13-1). The oocyte
oocyte (d) forms in the stratum granulosum. The antrum contains a
then lies in an accumulation of granulosa cells, the cumulus
flocculent liquor folliculi. A connective tissue layer, the theca, which
oophorus (Fig. 13-4). In large tertiary follicles, the granulosa cells
surrounds the stratum granulosum, can be divided into an inner
theca interna, with light voluminous cells (e), and an outer theca.
immediately surrounding the oocyte become columnar and radially
exterma, with dark fibrocytes (f). Marginal cells of the corpus luteum
disposed; they are termed the corona radiata (Fig. 13-5A). The
(g) have features of interstitial endocrine cells (h) (xlI 0).
corona radiata cells are believed to provide nutrient support for
the oocyte. They are lost at the time of ovulation in ruminants but
generally persist until just before fertilization in other species.
species, the primary oocyte completes the first meiotic division,
In tertiary follicles, the granulosa cells form a parietal fol-
thereby giving rise to a secondary oocyte and the first polar body.
licular lining, the stratum granulosum (Figs. 13-4 and 13-5A).
The primary oocyte in tertiary follicles measures 150 to 300
Most of the parietal granulosa cells are polyhedral, but the basal
μm in diameter, depending on the species. It has a spherical, cen-
layer may be columnar. Some of the granulosa cells in secondary
trally located nucleus with a sparse chromatin network and a
and tertiary follicles may contain large periodic acid-Schiff(PAS)
prominent nucleolus. The Golgi complex, initially dispersed in
positive inclusions, the Call-Exner bodies, which represent in-
the cytoplasm, becomes concentrated near the plasma membrane.
tracellular precursors of liquor folliculi (Fig. 13-3). In the large
Lipid granules and lipochrome pigment occur in the cytoplasm.
tertiary follicle, the granulosa cells have the fine structural char-
As the antrum enlarges through the accumulation of liquor folli-
acteristics of protein-secreting cells, notably an extensive granu-
260
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
d
A
B
FIGURE 13-6
A. Ovary of sow with mature tertiary follicles immediately before ovulation (a) and one just ovulated as indicated by the
stigma (b). A subepithelial vein (g) (×2.7). B. A schematic drawing of the follicle in A (left) shows the oocyte ready to disengage itself from the
stratum granulosum at a site opposite the thinned, protruding follicular wall at the ovulation site, the stigma. Note the theca interma (c), theca
extema (d), primordial fliles (e), primary follicle (f), and blood vessels (g).
lar endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Before ovulation, the granulosa
first meiotic division to become a secondary oocyte (containing
cells of the mature follicle assume the characteristics of steroid-
a haploid number of chromosomes). During the first meiotic
secreting cells, especially an agranular ER and mitochondria with
division, chromosome pairs are established and a mixture of
tubular cristae.
parental genetic material occurs. Separation of the pairs and the
The stratum granulosum is surrounded by the theca, which
production of the secondary oocyte and the first polar body (also
in tertiary follicles differentiates into two layers: an inner vascular
containing a haploid number of chromosomes but little cyto-
theca interna and an outer supportive theca externa (Fig. 13-6).
plasm) follow as the division is completed. In domestic animals,
The theca interna cells are spindle-shaped in early tertiary fol-
the first meiotic division is completed shortly before ovulation,
licles and located in a delicate reticular fiber network. An exten-
except in the bitch and the mare,in which it is completed shortly
sive blood and lymph capillary network is present in the theca
after ovulation (i.e., a primary oocyte is ovulated in the bitch and
interna, but it does not penetrate the stratum granulosum. Sym-
the mare). The second meiotic division begins immediately
pathetic nerve endings are present around the larger follicles. In
after the first meiotic division is completed but is arrested in
mature follicles, many of the spindle-shaped theca interna cells
metaphase; it is not completed unless fertilization occurs. At fer-
adjacent to the stratum granulosum increase in size and become
tilization, the second meiotic division is completed, the second-
polyhedral and epithelioid. The nuclei of the epithelioid cells
ary oocyte becomes an ovum, and a second polar body (also
have a lighter chromatin pattern and more distinct nucleoli than
with little cytoplasm) is given off. The ovum becomes a zygote
those of the spindle-shaped cells. Cytoplasmic organelles in the
when the male and female chromosomes come together, estab-
epithelioid cells become typical of steroid-secreting cells: the
lishing a diploid number of chromosomes.
mitochondria with tubular cristae, agranular tubular ER, and
 lipid inclusions are present. The epithelioid cells are abundant in
Ovulation
mature follicles during proestrus and estrus and during their
When the follicle is fully developed, it protrudes from the surface
early regression.
 of the ovary. Abundant blood and lymph vessel networks surround
The theca externa consists of a thin layer of loose connec-
the follicle and an increased rate of secretion of a thin liquor folli-
tive tissue with fibrocytes arranged concentrically around the
culi occurs. The increased secretion rate is facilitated by increases
theca interna. Blood vessels of the theca externa supply capillar-
in the follicular blood capillary pressure and permeability during
ies to the theca interna.
 proestrus and estrus. The increased accumulation ofliquor folliculi
One or more mature follicles reach maximal development
causes the follicles to swell, but intrafollicular pressure does not
near the time of ovulation. The primary oocyte (containing a
significantly increase. Small hemorrhages occur in the follicular
diploid number of chromosomes) in these follicles completes the
wall. The follicular wall becomes thin and transparent at the future
Female Reproductive System ·Jonis Priedkains ond Rudolf Leiser
261
site of follicular rupture, the stigma. The mature ovulatory folli-
cles attain a size of 15 to 20 mm in cows; 50 to 70 mm in mares;
approximately 10 mm in ewes, goats, and sows (Fig. 13-6A); and
 approximately 2 mm in bitches and queens.
Changes in the wall of the follicle preceding rupture are
caused by the release of collagenases. Luteinizing hormone (LH)
stimulates the production of prostaglandins (PG) F and E. PGF,
is believed to release collagenases from follicular cells, causing
digestion of the follicular wall and its distension at the stigma.
The process of digestion also releases proteins that provoke an in-
a
flammatory response with leukocytic infiltration and the release
of histamine. All of these processes degrade the connective tis-
sue of the follicular wall and the ground substance of the cumu-
lus oophorus, so that the follicle ultimately ruptures at the
stigma and the oocyte is released. The oocyte, usually surrounded
by the corona radiata, escapes into the peritoneal cavity, from
A
which it is swept directly into the infundibulum of the uterine
tube. On rare occasions, an oocyte may fail to enter the uterine
tube and, if fertilized, may establish ectopic pregnancy. In most
species, the corona radiata cells disperse in the uterine tube in the
presence of spermatozoa; in ruminants, they already are lost at
the time of ovulation. The oocyte generally remains fertilizable
for less than 1 day; when not fertilized, it degenerates and is
resorbed. Most domestic animals ovulate spontaneously, but ovu-
lation in queens is induced by a copulatory stimulus.
Follicular Atresia and Interstitial Endocrine Celis
Most follicles regress at some time during their development, and
 only a small percentage of all potential oocytes is ovulated from
the ovary. This regression is called atresia; many more follicles
become atretic than ever attain maturity. Prominent signs of atre-
sia in follicular wall cells are nuclear pyknosis and chromatolysis.
FIGURE I3-7 A. Atretic tertiary follicle (mature bitch). The
aut aut pue paieauaap aey (a) akel esonue pue (e) aikooo
During atresia, the basal lamina of the granulosa layer may fold,
layer (c) has fibrosed. "Glassy membrane" (d) (xI 70). (With
thicken, and hyalinize; it is then called the glassy membrane
permission from Adam WS, Calhoun ML, Smith EM, et al.
(Fig. 13-7A). Eventually, atretic follicles are resorbed, except that
Microscopic Anatomy of the Dog: A Photographic Atlas. Springfield,
small fibrous tissue scars may remain after atresia of large follicles.
IL: Charles C. Thomas, 1970.) B. Atresia ofa large tertiary ovarian
In cows, in atresia of primary and secondary follicles, the
follicle (cow). Extensive hyalinization of theca interma (a) and loss or
oocyte commonly degenerates before the follicular wall, whereas
pyknosis of granulosa cells (b). Theca exterma (c) (xI00). (From
in tertiary follicles, the reverse is true. Atretic changes in bovine
Priedkoins J. Effect of melergestrol ocetote on the bovire ovary. Z
tertiary follicles may result in the formation of two different
Zelforsch 1 971; 1 22:85.)
morphologic types of atretic follicles: obliterative and cystic. In
obliterative atresia, the granulosa and theca layers both infold,
hypertrophy, and extend inward to occupy the antrum. In cystic
atresia, both the granulosa and theca layers may atrophy, or only
ithelioid and contain lipid droplets. In species such as rabbits and
the granulosa layer may atrophy and the theca layer may luteinize,
hares, they show an abundance of steroid-synthesizing organelles.
become fibrotic, or hyalinize around the antrum (Fig. 13-7B). In
cystic atretic follicles, the theca interna cells containing LH re-
Corpus Luteum
At ovulation, the follicle ruptures, collapses, and shrinks as the
of the granulosa cells, which converted the androgens to estrogens.
liquor pressure is reduced. Folding of the follicular wall is exten-
 In the ovaries of the bitch, the queen, and rodents, interstitial
sive. The ruptured follicle is referred to as a corpus hemorrhag-
endocrine cells are prominent; they arise chiefly from the epi-
icum because of the blood that may fill the antrum. Bleeding
 thelioid theca interna cells of atretic antral follicles or from hyper-
after rupture of the follicle in mares, cows, and sows is greater
trophied granulosa cells of atretic preantral follicles (Fig. 13-8).
than that in carnivores and small ruminants. Immediately before
They are usually absent from the ovaries of other adult domestic
ovulation, some cells of the stratum granulosum exhibit signs of
animals. The interstitial endocrine cells are polyhedral and ep-
pyknosis. After ovulation, the stratum becomes vascularized by
262
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
nisms have a role in progesterone production. In cows, the cor-
pus luteum is fully developed and vascularized 9 days after ovu-
lation but continues to grow until day 12, when it attains a
 diameter of approximately 25 mm.
The first sign of luteal regression is seen in late diestrus and
involves the condensation of lutein pigment, which then appears
reddish, followed by fibrosis and resorption of most of the corpus
luteum. In cows, these signs are first observed 15 days after ovu-
lation; further shrinkage of the corpus luteum occurs rapidly after
day 18, and regression is complete 1 to 2 days after estrus. Large
lipid droplets and crystalloid inclusions are typical of regressing
luteal cells (Figs. 13-10 and 13-11). The vascular connective tis-
sues of the corpus luteum become conspicuous in regression,
with muscle cells in the walls of luteal arteries transformed by
cellular hypertrophy and sclerosis. The connective tissue scar re-
maining after luteal regression is called the corpus albicans. In
FIGURE I3-8 Atretic tertiary follicle (queen). The former
older ovaries, there is an abundance of such scars.
antrum (a) and the stratum granulosum (b) have fibrosed, and the
theca (c) has been replaced by epithelioid interstitial endocrine
Medulla
cells (×230)
The medulla is the innerarea of the ovary containing nerves, many
large and coiled blood vessels, and lymph vessels (Fig. 13-1). It
consists of loose connective tissue and strands of smooth muscle
 an extensive capillary network originating from blood vessels in
continuous with those in the mesovarium. Retia ovarii are lo-
the theca interna. The granulosa cells enlarge, luteinize, and con-
cated in the medulla; they are solid cellular cords or networks of
tribute to the large luteal (lutein) cell population of the corpus
irregular channels lined by a cuboidal epithelium. They are pro-
luteum. Simultaneously, folding of the follicular wall results in
minent in carnivores and ruminants. It is claimed that the cells
the incorporation of the theca interna into the corpus luteum,
of the rete may differentiate into follicular cells when in juxta-
and, in most species, the theca interna cells contribute initially
position to an oocyte.
to the small luteal (lutein) cell population of the corpus luteum.
Luteinization is the process by which the granulosa and theca
Blood Vessels, Lymphatics, and Nerves
cells transform into luteal cells. It includes hypertrophy and hyper-
plasia of both cell types. A yellow pigment, lutein, appears in the
Arteries enter the ovary at the hilus. In the medulla, they form
luteal cells in cows, mares, and carnivores; it is absent in ewes,
plexuses and give off branches to the follicular thecae, corpora
goats, and sows. A black pigment has been observed in the luteal
lutea, and stroma. Around the larger follicles, arterial branches
cells of mares. In cows, postovulatory mitosis lasts for approx-
 form a capillary wreath. During cyclic regression of the corpora
imately 40 hours in the granulosa luteal cells and for approxi-
lutea and the follicles, muscle hypertrophy and sclerosis occur in
mately 8O hours in the theca luteal cells. The increase in size of the
the walls of the arteries supplying these structures. The venous re-
corpus luteum, after the period of mitotic activity, results mainly
turn is parallel to the arterial supply. Lymph capillaries accompany
from hypertrophy of the large luteal cells. The small luteal cells
blood vessels in the follicular thecae and in the corpus luteum.
make up a minor part of the corpus luteum and occupy mainly tra-
The nerves that supply the ovary are generally nonmy-
becular and peripheral areas.
elinated. They are vasomotor in nature but include some sensory
 The large luteal cells are polygonal, measure approximately
fibers. The nerves follow blood vessels and terminate in the walls
 40 μm in diameter, and have a large spherical vesicular nucleus.
of the vessels and around the follicles, in the corpora lutea, and in
They contain numerous metabolic lipid inclusions (Fig. 13-9).
the tunica albuginea. They are derived mainly from the sympa-
During metestrus and diestrus, the cells contain organelles char-
thetic system through renal and aortic plexuses, but vagal supply
acteristic of steroid-synthesizing cells, such as mitochondria with
of the ovary also has been claimed.
tubular cristae and abundant tubular agranular ER (Fig. 13-
9C). The small luteal cells have more lipids but fewer steroid-
s pii ail aun op un saauo jo sad Suzisauuss
UterIne tube (OvIDuCt)
(Fig. 13-9A and B). The two luteal cell types eventually become
mixed in the corpus luteum and are then difficult to distinguish.
The uterine tubes are bilateral, tortuous structures that extend
They both produce progesterone. Progesterone receptor expres-
from the region of the ovary to the uterine horns and convey ova,
sion and associated messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) activity
 spermatozoa, and zygotes. Three segments of the uterine tube
are evident in luteal cells, especially during metestrus and diestrus
uuny ai e rnaunui aun (e) ausingunsi aq u
and in pregnancy, suggesting that luteal autoregulatory mecha-
shaped portion (Fig. 13-12); (b) the ampulla, a thin-walled
Female Reproductive System·Jonis Priedkolns ond Rudolf Leiser
263
B
C
FIGURE 13-9
A. Part of a mature corpus luteum (sow). The corpus luteum consists of large luteal cells (a) intermingling with groups of
small luteal cells (b). The corpus luteum is supplied with blood vessels (c) entering from the periphery by the trabeculae (arrows). Ovarian 
surface epithelium (d);: adjacent tunica albuginea (e) (xl 20). B. Enlarged segment of A showing large (a) and small (b) luteal cells containing 
fine granular inclusions and lipid droplets (f). Nuclei (g); capillaries (h); strand of connective tissue (i) (x830). C. Large luteal cell from a corpus
luteum from the same ovary of the sow as in A and B. Nucleus (a); granular endoplasmic reticulum (b); tubular and smooth endoplasmic
reticulum (c); Golgi complex (d); secretory granules (e); mitochondria with tubular cristae (f) (x15,700).
264
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
section extending caudally from the infundibulum (Fig. 13-
13A); and (c) the isthmus, a narrow muscular segment joining
the uterus (Fig. 13-13B).
Histologic Structure
The epithelium is simple columnar or pseudostratified columnar
with motile cilia on most cells (Fig. 13-12). Both ciliated and
nonciliated cell types possess microvilli. Morphologic signs of
secretory activity are evident only in the nonciliated cells. During
the luteal phase, the secretory cells become taller than the cili-
ated cells. Their secretion provides the ovum and zygote with the
necessary nutrients.
The mucosa is continuous with the submucosa in the female
reproductive tract because the thin lamina muscularis (which sep-
arates these tunics in other tubular structures) is absent. In the uter-
ine tube, the propria-submucosa consists of loose connective tissue
with many plasma cells, mast cells, and eosinophils. The tunica
mucosa-submucosa of the ampulla is highly folded, especially in
[unauol Aiuid ot Aianunxondde smon un saru pue smos
folds are present in the ampulla, each with secondary and tertiary
folds (Fig. 13-13A). In the isthmus, with increasing distance from
 the ampulla, secondary and tertiary folds gradually disappear, and
at the isthmus-uterus junction, where the isthmus is embedded
FIGURE I3-I0 Corpus luteum (queen) in regression (corpus
in the uterine wall, only four to eight primary folds and no sec-
regressivum) (a) with adjacent connective tissue of theca origin (b)
and ovarian interstitial endocrine cells (c). Lipid droplets of varying 
ondary or tertiary folds are present.
sizes are typical of regressing luteal cells. Connective tissue in the
The tunica muscularis consists chiefly of circular smooth
corpus regressivum (d) (x420)
muscle bundles, but isolated longitudinal and oblique bundles also
A
B
FIGURE I3-II  A. Eectron micrograph of a regressed luteal cell, ovary (cow). Note the characteristic large remnant lipid droplets (a)
granular bodies (b), and crystalloid inclusions (c) (x8725). (From Priedkalns J, Weber AF. Ultrastructural studies of the bovine Graafian follicle
ansst agoauuo suaoepe yhm (e) (wnaissaeau sndios) uoissaaai ui (mos) wnainl sndio *a (tss:1esgh1 yosollaz Z wnainl sndioo pue
of theca origin (b) and interstitial endocrine cells (c) (x100).
Female Reproductive System • Jonis Priedkains ond Rudolf Leiser
265
The caudal ampulla is the site of fertilization. In the am-
pulla, ciliary activity is the primary force propelling the oocyte
or zygote toward the isthmus, but in some species, muscle con-
tractility is also involved. In the isthmus, muscle contractility is
the primary force propelling the zygote toward the uterus, with
ciliary activity involved in some species. The directionality of
isthmus contractions varies according to the phase of the estrous
cycle. In the follicular phase, antiperistaltic contractions of the
isthmus tend to move the luminal contents toward the ampulla,
whereas in the luteal phase, segmental contractions gradually
propel the zygote toward the uterus. Zygotes require 4 to 5 days
to traverse the isthmus. This length of time is independent of the
isthmus length or of the gestation time in various species.
The passage of spermatozoa to the ampulla is accounted for
by muscular contractions of the uterine and tubal walls. Inert par-
ticles and nonmotile spermatozoa can ascend the uterine tube at
the same speed as motile spermatozoa, suggesting that the ascent
of spermatozoa is not primarily the result of their innate motility.
after mating. Ascent at this rate is too fast to be accounted for by
the motility of spermatozoa and/or by the ciliary movement of
tubal cells.
FIGURE I3-12  Columnar epithelium of the infundibulum of
Although spermatozoa develop in the male reproductive
the uterine tube (queen) in estrus. Ciliated cells (a) are more
tract, their ability to fertilize is attained in domestic animals only
numerous than dark-stained nonciliated cells (b) (x470).
after capacitation in the uterine tube.
occur. The muscle layer gives off radial strands into the mucosa-
UTERUS
submucosa. In the infundibulum and ampulla, the tunica mus-
cularis is thin (Fig. 13-13A). In the isthmus, the inner muscle
The uterus is the site of attachment of the conceptus. It undergoes
a definite sequence of changes during the estrous cycle and preg-
layer is prominent and blends with the uterine circular muscle
(Fig. 13-13B).
nancy. In most species, it consists of bilateral horns (cornua)
 A tunica serosa is present and contains many blood vessels
connected to the uterine tubes and an unpaired body (corpus) and
and nerves.
a neck (cervix), which joins the vagina. The cervix is considered
 separately in this chapter. In primates, the entire uterus is a sin-
gle tube, called the uterus simplex.
Blood Vessels, Lymphatics, and Nerves
The blood vessels form subepithelial vascular plexuses and pro-
Histologic Structure
miau ea sssau ad pa
The uterine wall consists of three layers (Figs. 13-14 and 13-15):
in the mucosal and serosal layers and drain into the lumbar lymph
nodes.
(a) the mucosa-submucosa or endometrium, (b) the muscu-
 Both myelinated and non myelinated nerve fibers with many
laris or myometrium, and (c) the serosa or perimetrium. The
subepithelial branches are present. They are derived mainly from 
 perimetrium, the longitudinal layer of the myometrium, and
the sympathetic system.
the vascular layer of the myometrium are all continuous with
corresponding structures in the broad ligament of the uterus
(Fig. 13-14A).
Histophysiology
Endometrium
s! lI Aieao au uo papnixa saiao sainas unjnqipunyu aui
enclosed in the ovarian bursa or, in species without a definite ovar-
The endometrium is composed of two zones that differ in struc-
ian bursa (e.g., the mare), it is applied partly around the ovary at
ture and function. The superficial layer, called the functional
estrus. It has fingerlike projections called fimbriae. At the time
-sa ane io Auuaid ialje Aiy ro Aliied saieiauaap auoz
of ovulation in most species, blood vessels in the fimbriae become
trus. A thin deep layer, the basal zone, persists after these
engorged. The turgid fimbriae move over the surface of the ovary
events, and the functional zone is restored from this layer.
due to rhythmic smooth muscle contractions. At the same time,
The surface epithelium of the functional zone is simple colum-
cilia of the infundibular epithelial cells, mostly beating toward
nar in the mare, the bitch, and the queen. It is pseudostratified
the uterus, transport the oocyte into the ampulla
columnar and/or simple columnar in sows and ruminants. In iso-
A
B
FIGURE I3-I3 Cross sections of the ampulla (A) and isthmus (B) of the uterine tube (cow). Tunica serosa (a); longitudinal muscle layer
(b); stratum vasculare (c); circular muscle layer (d); mucosal-submucosal folds (e); mesosalpinx with blood vessels (f) (×25).
B
FIGURE I3-I4 A. Cross section of the uterine hom (cow). Endometrium (a) forms four caruncles
(b) with a distinct (dark) stratum cellulare (c) and a (clear) stratum reticulare (d). Glands (e) are present
between the caruncles. Myometrium (f) consists of an inner muscle layer (g), a stratum vasculare (h), and
R. Weibliche Geschlechtsorgane In: Mosimann W, Kohler T, eds. Zytologie, Histologie und
mikroskopische Anatomie der Haussaugetiere. Berlin: Verlag Paul Parey, 1990:232.) B. Endometrium,
cow, I0 days postestrum. Uterine lumen (a); pseudostratified columnar epithelium (b); tubular uterine
glands (c); caruncle (d) with a stratum cellulare (e) and a stratum reticulare (f); blood vessels (g) (x44).
Female Reproductive System •Jonis Priedkoins ond Rudolf Leiser
267
B
(×22). B. Magnification of A with uterine Iumen (a), endometrial epithelium (b), and tubular glands (c) (x90)
lated areas, the epithelium may be simple cuboidal. The height
15 caruncles in each of four row
ws are present in each uterine horn
and structure of the epithelial cells are related to the secretion of
pades-dnn pue smon ut padeus-aop are Aaui 'snuuunu u
ovarian hormones throughout the cycle. The subepithelial, su-
(i.e., a dome with a central depression) in ewes. Caruncles are the
perficial part of the functional zone consists of a richly vascular,
endometrial structures providing attachment of the maternal
loose connective tissue with many fibrocytes, macrophages, and
placenta to the corresponding structures of the fetal placenta, the
mast cells. Neutrophils, eosinophils, lymphocytes, and plasma
cotyledons (see Chapter 14).
deep part of the functional zone C
onsists of loose connective tis-
Myometrium
The myometrium consists of a thick inner layer, which is mostly
nants, during estrus, large irregular fluid-filled tissue spaces are
circular, and an outer longitudinal layer of smooth muscle cells
present in the functional zone; this is termed endometrial
that increase in number and size during pregnancy. Between the
edema.
two layers, or within the inner layer, is a vascular layer (stratum
Simple coiled, branched tubular glands are present through.
vasculare).
out the endometrium in most species (Fig. 13-15). The glands are
absent from the caruncles of ruminants (Fig. 13-14). The simple
Perimetrium
columnar glandular epithelium includes secretory and nonsecre-
tory ciliated cells (Fig. 13-16). Rising estrogen levels stimulate
The perimetrium consists of loose connective tissue covered by the
the growth and branching of the glands, but coiling and a copious
-ad au u nno san asnu yoous 'unauosau ieaoid
secretion from the glands generally do not occur until progesterone
 metrium. Numerous lymph and blood vessels and nerve fibers are
stimulation occurs. The branching a
present in this layer.
tensive in mares, whereas less branching is seen in carnivores
(Fig. 13-15B). Endometrial cups
Blood Vessels, Lymphatics, and Nerves
nancy after endometrial invasion by fetal cells (see Chapter 14).
In ruminants, circumscribed thickenings ofthe endometrium,
Between the inner and outer layers of the myometrium, or deep in
the inner layer, is a vascular layer consisting of large arteries, veins
and lymph vessels that supply the endometrium (Fig. 13-14).
268
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
FIGURE I3-16 Eectron micrograph of a section through a uterine gland (sow) in estrus. Columnar
cells (pale appearance) (a) are iliated with the cila flling the gland lumen (b). Dark cells with microvili
and containing secretory granules (c);: macrophage (d); and mitotic cell (e) (×2700)
They are especially large in the caruncular regions in ruminants.
quantities of mucus are secreted during estrus, and much of the
Numerous lymph and blood vessels and nerve fibers are present in
mucus passes to the vagina. In pregnancy, the mucus thickens to
the perimetrium.
form the cervical seal. A small proportion of the epithelial cells is
The nerves are derived mainly from the sympathetic system
ciliated in some species. Intraepithelial and simple tubular glands
through the uterine and pelvic plexuses. They branch in all of the
XIaian auiyo yo6 ueu aiou 'smos ul 'siueuuni u! uasaid aq Aeu
tunics. Parasympathetic supply from the sacral spinal cord seg-
-Ida snotuenbs payjeins uiim esonnu jo ad ieuoea e aaeq Aeu
ments reaches the uterus through the pelvic plexus.
thelium that undergoes cyclic alterations as in the vagina. These
features and alterations have relevance for the porcine copulatory
mechanism.
CERVIX
The propria-submucosa consists of dense irregular connec-
tive tissue, which becomes edematous and assumes a loose areo-
The cervix or the neck of the uterus is thick-walled, muscular, and
lar structure during estrus. In mares and bitches, venous plexuses
rich in elastic fibers. The mucosa-submucosa forms high primary
 are present in the deep part of the propria-submucosa.
 folds with secondary and tertiary folds. In cows, four large circular
The tunica muscularis consists of inner circular and outer
and 15 to 25 longitudinal primary folds, each with many second-
longitudinal smooth muscle layers. Elastic fibers are prominent
ary and tertiary folds, are present (Fig. 13-17A). The folding may
in the circular layer. Both muscle and elastic fibers are important
give a false impression of glandular structure. The glandular ele-
in reestablishing cervical structure after parturition. The muscle
ments present in the cervix are mostly mucigenous (Fig. 13-17B).
layers of the cervix are continuous with those of the body of the
Uterine glands do not extend into the cervix.
uterus and the vagina. The cervical circular muscle layer is vari-
ously modified in different species. Thickening and infolding of
Histologic Structure
the circular layer occurs in the region of the circular folds or
prominences in the small ruminants and sows. In mares and
In most species, the epithelium is of the simple columnar type
cows, the thickened circular layer forms the body of the vaginal
with many mucigenous cells, including goblet cells. Increasing
portion of the cervix. The orifice (external uterine ostium) of the
Female Reproductive System  Jonis Priedkains ond Rudolf Leiser
269
A
B
FIGURE I3-I7 Cervix uteri (cow). A. Section of a large primary mucosal-submucosal fold with small secondary and tertiary folds
projecting into the cervical lumen {x46). B. Note the mucous secretory activity of the epithelial cells as evidenced by the coagulated mucus in
the cervical lumen (×430)
vaginal portion of the cervix in bitches is surrounded by a loop
layers of flattened cells on the surface. The propria-submucosz
of the vaginal muscle.
consists of loose or dense irregular connective tissue, containing
The tunica serosa of the cervix consists of loose connective tis-
 lymphatic nodules in the caudal part of the vagina.
sue covered by mesothelium. A longitudinal duct ofthe epoophoron
The tunica muscularis consists of two or three layers. A
(Gartner's duct) may be present in this layer on one or both sides.
dles by connective tissue and is surrounded by a thin outer longi-
tudinal smooth muscle layer. In sows and bitches, and to a small
VAGINA
 extent in queens, an additional thin layer of longitudinal smooth
muscle is present inside the circular layer.
The vagina is a muscular tube extending from the cervix to the
Cranially, the vagina is covered by a typical tunica serosa
vestibule. Flat longitudinal mucosal-submucosal folds extend
(loose connective tissue covered by mesothelium), while caudally,
throughout the length of the vagina. In cows, prominent circular
a tunica adventitia, consisting of loose connective tissue, is pres-
folds are also present in the cranial portion of the vagina. Cyclic
ent. Both the serosa and adventitia contain large blood vessels and
variations occur in epithelial height and structure. Intraepithelial
extensive venous and lymph plexuses. Numerous nerve bundles
glands are present in some species. The increased amounts of vagi-
and ganglia occur in the tunica serosa and adventitia. The inner
nal mucus during estrus originate mainly in the cervix.
vation is primarily sympathetic, derived from the pelvic plexus
Histologic Structure
The vaginal mucosa is lined mostly by a stratified squamous epi-
VeStIbUle, ClItorIS,
 thelium that increases in thickness during proestrus and estrus 
AND VULVA
(Fig. 13-18). In the cranial part of the bovine vagina, a surface
layer of columnar and goblet cells containing PAS-positive mu-
The wall of the vestibule is similar to that of the caudal portion
of the vagina, except for the presence of more subepithelial lym-
mares, the epithelial cells are generally polyhedral, with a few
 phatic nodules, especially in the region of the clitoris. Blood ves-
270
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
a
b
A
B
C
D
FIGURE I3-I8 Stratifed squamous epithelium of the vagina in the bitch. Proestrus (A): the epithelium has a thin layer of keratinized cels
(a). Early estrus (B): a thick layer of keratinized cells (b) is present. Metestrus (C): the epithelium is nonkeratinized and leukocytes (c) are
present within the relatively thin epithelium. Diestrus/anestrus (D): the epithelium comprises only a few layers of epithelial cells (X240).
sels, erectile cavernous tissue, venous plexuses, and small lymph
Striated muscle fibers of the constrictor vulvae are found in the
vessels are abundant in the vestibular wall. They become con-
hypodermis. The labia are well supplied with small blood and
gested during estrus. A discrete mass of erectile tissue, called the
lymph vessels, which become congested during estrus, especially
bulbus vestibuli, is present on each side beneath the vestibular
in sows and bitches.
-uods sndion aui salquasau al uoiq aul pue areu aui ul esosnu
giosum penis.
 Major vestibular glands are bilateral compound tubu-
The estrouS cycle
loacinar mucous glands located in the deep part of the propria-
submucosa. They occur in cows, sheep, and queens. The terminal
Hormones of the Ovary
secretory acini contain large mucigenous cells. The small ducts
draining the acini are lined by columnar mucous cells, with iso-
The ovary has important endocrine functions. It secretes the female
lated areas of goblet cells. The large ducts leading to the vestibule
sex hormones, mainly estrogens and progesterone. Estrogens are
produced primarily during estrus by the granulosa cells, which
or aggregated lymphatic nodules may surround the large ducts.
convert androgens, secreted by the theca interna cells, to estrogens.
The glands provide mucous lubrication of the vestibule. They
Progesterone is produced primarily by the large luteal cells dur-
may be compressed during coitus and secrete mucus, thereby
ing metestrus, diestrus, and pregnancy and by the placenta. In cer-
 providing mucous lubrication also of the caudal vagina. They are
tain species, the interstitial endocrine cells secrete large amounts
homologous with the male bulbourethral glands
of steroid sex hormones. Estrogen induces the growth and devel-
Minor vestibular glands are bilateral small, branched, tu-
opment of the female reproductive tract and estrous behavior.
bular mucous glands scattered in the vestibular mucosa in most
 Progesterone stimulates the development of uterine glands, induces
domestic animals. They are homologous with the male urethral
 them to secrete, and renders the endometrium receptive to the
glands.
implantation of the blastocyst. It also prevents follicular matura-
 The clitoris consists of paired, joined erectile corpora cav-
 tion and estrus and promotes behavior appropriate to pregnancy.
ernosa clitoridis, a rudimentary glans clitoridis, and a preputium
Estrogens and progesterone promote the development of the mam-
clitoridis. The corpus cavernosum clitoridis, homologue of the cor-
mary gland.
pus cavernosum penis, is well developed in mares. The glans cli-
The growth and maturation of ovarian follicles and their es-
toridis, homolog of the glans penis, is functionally erectile only in
mares. A nonerectile fibroelastic tissue cover replaces the glans cli-
the granulosa and theca cells of late secondary or early tertiary
toridis in queens, sows, and ewes; in ewes, the cover contains a ve-
follicles become responsive to gonadotropic hormones. The gran-
nous plexus. The clitoris contains many lymphatic nodules and is
ulosa cells develop follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) receptors,
richly supplied with sensory and autonomic nerve endings.
 and the theca cells develop LH receptors. In mature tertiary fol.
The vulva is formed by the labia vulvae, which are covered
licles,the granulosa cells are induced by FSH also to develop LH
by skin that is richly supplied with apocrine and sebaceous glands.
receptors.
Female Reproductive System * Jonis Priedkairs ond Rudolf Leiser
271
In tertiary follicles, LH interacts with receptors on the theca
out gestation. The corpus luteum of pregnancy is supported by lu-
interna cells to stimulate the production of androgens and small
amounts of estradiol. The androgens either are secreted into
and by local luteal autoregulatory mechanisms. The embryo in
 capillaries or traverse the basal lamina to reach the granulosa cell
ewes provides, in addition to luteotropic hormones, an antilute-
layer. Receptors on the granulosa cells interact with FSH to ac-
olytic factor that overcomes the luteolytic effect of the uterus. In
tivate the aromatase enzyme system, which converts the thecal
later stages of pregnancy in most species, the corpus luteum is not
androgens (testosterone, androstenedione) to estrogens (estra-
important because the placenta secretes the progesterone required
diol-17, estrone). Granulosa cells themselves are unable to pro-
for the successful maintenance of pregnancy. Ovarian and placen-
duce the androgens. The estrogens are secreted into the follicular
tal steroid hormones in turn influence pituitary gonadotropin
fluid and also enter capillaries. The antral concentration of estra-
secretion by a feedback effect on the hypothalamus, regulating
diol-17 is some I ,0o0 times greater than that of the bloodstream.
mainly the release of the hypothalamic gonadotropin-releasing
The high local concentration of estrogens maintains a favorable
hormones. Other diencephalic structures, such as the pineal gland,
environment for follicular maturation. The action of FSH, as well
 also influence gonadotropic functions.
as of LH, on follicular cells is mediated by an increased produc-
tion of cyclic adenosine-3',5'-monophosphate (cAMP), which
Phases of the Estrous Cycle
acts as an intracellular “second messenger."
Immediately before ovulation, the ovulatory surge of LH
The estrous cycle is regulated by an intrinsic hypothalamo
interacts with the LH receptors on the granulosa cells to induce
hypophysial-ovarian rhythm that is modulated by environmen-
events leading to ovulation. In addition, the LH surge seems to
tal and internal neuroendocrine factors. In domestic animals, the
inhibit the aromatase activity of granulosa cells and thus to di-
estrous cycle is generally divided into the following sequential
 minish estrogen secretion. In the mature preovulatory follicle, LH
phases.
is involved also in the induction of oocyte maturation (i.e., the
1. Proestrus is the phase of follicular maturation and endo-
completion of the first meiotic division). Several other physiolog-
metrial proliferation following regression of the corpus luteum
ically active substances accumulate in the fluid of the mature pre-
 of the previous cycle. During this phase, the progesterone level
ovulatory follicle, including inhibin, a large protein that selectively
falls, thus allowing release of FSH. Rising estrogen levels lead
suppresses pituitary FSH secretion.
to estrus.
Ovarian secretion of estrogens triggers the release of an ovu-
2. Estrus is the phase of sexual receptivenes, during which
latory surge ofLH, usually on the day of estrus, thereby inducing
ovulation occurs in most species. Ovulation is preceded by
the processes leading to ovulation. The peak level of FSH occurs
a surge of LH. At the end of estrus, estrogen levels decline.
on the day before estrus; the peak level of LH, like that of estro-
 3. Metestrus is the phase of corpus luteum development and
gens, occurs on the day of estrus. Pituitary LH also initiates the
initial progesterone secretion.
formation of the corpus luteum. LH interacts with receptors on
 4. Diestrus is the phase of the active corpus luteum in which
the cells of the ruptured follicular wall to initiate luteinization
 the influence ofluteal progesterone on accessory sex structures
and progesterone secretion. In some species, such as rats and mice,
predominates. Endometrial glandular hyperplasia and secre-
luteotropic hormone (LTH) is needed to maintain the corpus lu-
tion are maximal during diestrus. Toward the end of diestrus,
teum and its progesterone secretion. The expression of proges-
however, the corpus luteum regresses and endometrial invo-
terone receptors in and on luteal cells in metestrus, diestrus, and
lution, including glandular regression, sets in. Diestrus can
pregnancy suggests that local luteal autoregulatory mechanisms
 be prolonged into pseudopregnancy or gestational and lacta-
may also control progesterone production.
tional diestrus.
Luteal cells produce progesterone during late metestrus and
 5. Anestrus is the prolonged period of sexual inactivity.
most of diestrus. Secretion peaks in late diestrus shortly before
luteal regression sets in. Luteal cells also secrete estrogens and
The average duration (in days) of the phases of the estrous
relaxin. In cells of the developing and the mature corpus luteum,
cycle in cows and sows, respectively, is as follows: proestrus—3, 3;
the lipids are mostly phospholipids with traces of triglycerides and
estrus—1, 2; metestrus—3, 3; and diestrus—14, 12. Thus, dur-
 cholesterol and its esters. During regresion, cholesterol accumu-
ing proestrus and estrus, large ovarian follicles produce estrogens,
lates in the luteal cells, suggesting decreased cholesterol utilization
whereas during metestrus and diestrus, the corpus luteum pro-
for steroid hormone synthesis. In active luteal cells, the lipid
 duces mainly progesterone.
droplets are small and even in size and distribution, whereas dur-
ing regression, they are large and unevenly distributed. With the
Cyclic Changes of the Endometrium
light microscope, they appear as large vacuoles (Fig. 13-10)
Regression of the corpus luteum is triggered by a uterine luteolytic
The cyclic changes in the endometrium (Fig. 13-19 and 13-20)
factor reaching the ovary by local blood supply in the ewe, the cow,
are, to a large extent, caused by the ovarian hormones estrogens
and the sow. The main luteolytic factor is PGFzα. If pregnancy oc-
and progesterone. During pregnancy, these hormones are pro-
Curs, the corpus luteum persists as the corpus luteum of pregnancy
duced chiefly by the placenta.
for different periods of time in various species. In cows and does,
Some animals (e.g., bitches) are monestrous and have one or
-unou sanunuos unaini sndon aun Aq uoionpoid auoiaisaod
272
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
A
B
C
D
E
FIGURE I3- I9 Endometrial epithelium through the estrous cycle (sow). Estrus (A); metestrus (B); early diestrus (C);: late diestrus (D):
proestrus (E) (×250)
Continuously cycling animals, without an anestrous period (e.g.,
mainly lymphocytes, occurs from day 3 to 5 after estrus. These cells
cows and sows), or seasonally cycling animals (e.g., queens, mares,
are especially abundant in the basal zone of the endometrium. An
ewes, and goats) are polyestrous. The endometrium of mon-
eosinophilic invasion may occur from estrus to midcycle. Mast cells
estrous animals degenerates and regenerates to a much greater ex-
increase in number at the time of maximal edema, especially in the
tent than that of polyestrous animals. The immediate factor
caruncular areas. Metrorrhagia refers to the microscopic hemor-
rhages in the functional zone ofthe endometrium that begin shortly
mia. Uterine regenerative changes are induced by estradiol and
 before the time of ovulation in the cow. At ovulation, metrorrhagia
continued by progesterone, which induces glandular secretory ac-
becomes widespread and is prominent in the pitted central areas of
tivity and causes the endometrium to produce a maternal placenta
the caruncles. Metrorrhagia is greatest immediately after maximal
when stimulated by the presence of the blastocyst. A detailed de-
endometrial edema. Capillaries rupture in the mucosa and blood ac-
scription of the cyclic changes in the cow and the bitch follows.
cumulates in “blisters" beneath the surface epithelium. The blisters
rupture, and blood and shreds ofmucosa are liberated intothe uter-
Cow
ine lumen. Blood in the caruncular areas is mainly phagocytized and
In the cow, the estrous cycle lasts 21 days (Fig. 13-20). Ovulation
resorbed and generally does not reach the uterine lumen. Tissue
fluid, as well as blood, may be lost at points of rupture in the inter-
aun ianje sino o Aianeuixoidde no 'snnsa iaije Aep aun uo sinooo
onset of estrus. The day of estrus may be called “day O" or "day 21"
caruncular areas. Metrorrhagia ends abruptly near the end of day 2
of the cycle, and the last day of proestrus may be referred to as
after estrus. A bloody vulvar discharge occurs at this time.
"day 20." During the last 3 to 4 days of diestrus, the endo-
metrial stroma shrinks and the epithelium becomes lower. The
Bitch
glands become shorter, their epithelium becomes lower, and their
pue Aueuaidopnasd 'snisa mony nou saop Aouuand j 'uoi
gens, the endometrium is restored; the mucosa becomes thickened,
 anestrus ensue. Endometrial edema, congestion, and hemorrhages
congested, and edematous with a predominance of mucin-filled
occur during proestrus. Ovulation occurs soon after the onset of
epithelial cells. Glandular proliferation, however, is limited to
estrus. On approximately day 6 of estrus, corpora lutea become
straight lumen growth without significant branching or coiling.
functional, and uterine glands and interstitial elements begin to
During estrus, endometrial edema and hyperemia are maximal.
proliferate. The glandular epithelium becomes high columnar, and
During metestrus, the edema lessens, and a breakdown occurs 
the glands become coiled. In the nonpregnant state, involution of
in some of the congested endometrial blood vessels. With the on-
the endometrial glands and stroma begins approximately 20 to
set of diestrus, under the influence of progesterone, the endo-
 30 days after the onset of estrus. During anestrus, the endometrium
metrium transforms from a proliferative to a secretory type, with
is thin and regressed, and the epithelium is mainly cuboidal. A
glandular epithelial growth and glandular branching, coiling.
prolonged and incomplete endometrial regression may occasion-
and secretion. During the first ll days of diestrus, endometrial
ally result in pyometra.
glandular secretion is greatest. If pregnancy does not occur, the
glands again regress along with the corpus luteum during the
Primates
last 3 days of diestrus.
 Menstruation in primates is an entirely different phenomenon
Mitotic activity begins in the surface and glandular epithelia
from the uterine bleeding seen in the bovine and the canine
and in the interstitial elements during estrus and continues for
species. The uterine hemorrhages in the cow and the bitch occur
approximately 6 days after estrus. Neutrophils invade the lamina
during a regenerative phase of the endometrium near estrus.
 propria, epithelia, and uterine lumen from late proestrus to ap-
Menstruation, on the other hand, occurs during a degener-
proximately day 3 or 4 after estrus. An invasion of agranulocytes,
ative phase of the endometrium, precipitated by the withdrawal
Fermale Reproductive Systerm
+Jonis Pnedkoins ond Rudolf Leiser
273
FSH,LH
LH
LH
FSH
↑
+
mature
developing
mature
regressing
growing
tertiary follicle
ovulating follicle
corpus luteum
corpus luteum
corpusuteum
tertiary
follicle
luteal
regression
triggered
byuterine
PGF2a
progesterone
follicuiar
estrogen
secondary
progesterone
oocyte
and estrogen
and estrogen
growth
days19-21
day1
days 2-8
days 9-14
days 15-18
Endometrial
Metror
Endometrialtransformationfromproliferativeto
cretorytype:
Endometrial,including
glandular,involution
Proestrus
Estrus
Metestrus
Diestrus
18
19
20
21
2
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
FIGUre 13-20
15-21) and luteal (days I-|4) phases; the endometrial proliferativ
and secretory stages, with maximal glandular branching and activity on
days 8-1 2; and endometrial involution (triggered by local pro
ostaglandin F2a) are indicated. The relative blood levels of the following hormones
are shown:
progesierone
esirogens
folicle-stimulationg hormone (FSH)
huieinizing hormome (LH)
The scate indicates days1-21 ofthe esirous cycte.
of estrogens and, more importantly, of progesterone after the in-
no external bleeding occurs in bitches at this time, microscopic
volution of the corpus luteum. The occurrence of hemorrhage in
hemorrhages of the endometrium have been observed.
primates has been related to special coiled arteries in the endo-
metrial functional zone that periodically constrict and dilate as
Cyclic Changes of the Vaginal Epithelium
Cow
constriction causes ischemia and necrosis of tissue, and the dila-
tion that follows leads to the rupture of the blood vessels, hem-
The epithelium varies with the site and hormonal status of the ani-
orrhage, and loss of tissues of the functional zone.
mal. Under the influence of progesterone, the epithelium in the
In certain animal species, the period most analogous to the pe-
 Cranial part of the vagina consists of approximately three layers of
-opnasd jo uonieuuan aun st uorssaoan iensuau ueunu jo po
cells and increases to approximately 10 layers in the caudal part.
pregnancy. In bitches, pseudopregnancy invariably follows estrus
 Under the influence of estrogens, the rate of epithelial cell 
n if th
come pregnant.
sed throughout the vagina and the epithe-
In other animals, ps
and ovulation
lium thickens.
 estrus, the superficial layer of columnar
only if a mating stimulus r
ulti:
is luteum of pseudo-
and goblet cells in the 
cranial part of the vagina attains maximal
pregnancy has occurred (i.e., 
sometimes greater activity than that of the corpus luteum of
part is at maximal height from 2 days after estrus until midcycle,
diestrus). Regression of the corpus luteum results in decreased
during which period the surface cells are more squamous than at
progesterone and estrogen supply, and consequent regression of the
endometrium and the termination of pseudopregnancy. Although
fication) of the superficial epithelial cells is not observed, however.
274
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Neutrophils invade the vaginal epithelium from estrus until
 progresses, the keratinized cells become wrinkled and dis-
2 days after estrus. Lymphocytes and plasma cells are more com-
torted and are frequently invaded by bacteria.
mon under the influence of progesterone. (Attempts to identify
3. Metestrus-diestrus (approximately 3 months in dura-
the stage of the estrous cycle by the vaginal smear method are not
tion). Epithelial cells are less keratinized and appear more
as successful as in the bitch.)
like unstained living cells. Neutrophils are numerous on
day 3 of metestrus and gradually disappear until day 10 to
Bitch
20 of metestrus.
Cyclic cellular changes that occur in the vaginal epithelium of
4. Anestrus (approximately 2 months in duration). Numerous
the bitch are clinically useful and important for estimating the
unstained nonkeratinized epithelial cells, a few large stained
times of estrus and breeding (Fig. 13-21). The assessment of cel-
cells with pyknotic nuclei, and a few neutrophils and lym-
lular changes by the vaginal smear method is widely used. After
phocytes are present.
staining, vaginal smears appear as follows:
The cyclic histologic changes in the vaginal epithelium in the
1. Proestrus (approximately 9 days in duration). Numerous
 bitch are shown in Figure 13-18. Although the epithelial lining
erythrocytes (of uterine origin) and many large flat kera-
of the vagina is thin in anestrus, with only approximately two to
tinized cells are present.
three layers of cells, it proliferates during proestrus and may be 12
2. Estrus (approximately 9 days in duration). Some erythro-
to 20 cells thick at the beginning of estrus, with keratinization of
cytes and numerous keratinized cells are present. As estrus
the surface layers (Fig. 13-22). By late estrus, desquamation of the
Q
中
C
C
g
A
D
E
FIGURE I3-2I  A. Cyclic cellular changes of the vaginal epithelium in the bitch illustrated by a scheme of epithelial cells. Parabasal cells
(a); small intermediate cells (b); large intermediate cells (c); superficial cells (d); keratinized cells (e, without nuclei). Vaginal smears (epithelial
and blood cells): B. Proestrus; note smallintermediate cells (b), large intermediate cells (c, centrally keratinized), and erythrocytes (f). C.
Estrus; note superficial cells (d, keratinized, pyknotic nuclei). D. Metestrus, note small intermediate cells (b), large intermediate cells (c)
undergoing disintegration (c'), and granulocytes (g). E. Anestrus, note parabasal cells (a), and cell debris (h) (x680).
Female Reproductive System  Jonis Priedkains ond Rudolf Leiser
275
metestrus
chie strus/
ae shan aunoua isiaiun unaini sndion iuaisuei e o
anestrus
found at the periphery of the ovary.
↑cornified
Formation of follicles usually begins in the posthatching pe-
riod, during which time the oogonia enlarge and become primary
oocytes surrounded by follicular cells. The primary oocytes then
enter the first meiotic division. At the time of sexual maturity
(5 to 6 months in hens), secondary oocytes are ovulated. The sec-
 ond meiotic division is completed at fertilization, and an ovum,
 Schematic drawing of the cyclic changes of the
then a zygote, results. While the primary oocyte is primarily pro-
FIGURE 13-22S
toplasmic,the secondary oocyte contains mainly yolk. Abundant
vaginal epithelium in the bitch. (Modified from Tammer l, Blendinger
K, Sobiraj A, et al. Uber den Einsatz der exfoliativen Vaginalzytologie
yolk is accumulated at one end of the cell; the nucleus is at the
im Rahmen der gynoekologischen Befunderhebung bei der Hundin.
other end. The secondary oocyte and ovum are thus termed macro-
Tierarztl Praxis 1994;22: 199.)
lecithal, telolecithal cells. The yolk contains lipids, such as
lecithin, cholesterol, and carotene, arranged in concentric layers.
The oocyte is surrounded by a plasma membrane, termed the
vitelline me mbrane. After ovulation, other layers are added to
keratinized layers begins (Fig. 13-23). Intraepithelial glands are
the outside of the oocyte during passage through the female re-
common during estrus.
productive tract.
AVIAN FEMALE
Oviduct
reProdUCTIVe SYSTeM
The term oviduct in the bird is used to describe the entire re-
Ovary
productive duct. It is present in the adult only on the left side.
The left oviduct consists of the infundibulum, magnum,
 In adult birds, only the left ovary is present. The ovarian cortex
isthmus, uterus, and vagina (Fig. 13-24). Although each of
and medulla are distorted by the presence of large “follicles" in
these divisions has special structural and functional features,
various stages of development or atresia. Each is attached to the
ovary by a peduncle. True follicles are not present in the avian
tion: (a) a muscle layer, which supports the oviduct and propels
 ovary because a fluid-filled follicular antrum does not develop.
 the egg, and (b)a glandular epithelial lining, which secretes all
In the follicle, the oocyte is surrounded by one or several layers
the parts of the egg outside the yolk-filled oocyte/zygote. More-
of granulosa cells. The granulosa cells are surrounded by cells of
 over, the mucous membrane produces a slimy secretion that
the theca interna and theca externa. The granulosa cells are shed
forms a soft resilient cushion for the egg as it passes through the
with the oocyte at ovulation, whereas the theca cells remain to
oviduct.
The following secretions of the oviduct are added onto the
oocyte/zygote:
1. Four layers of albumen are added in the magnum (the cra-
nial part of the oviduct).
2. A shell membrane, consisting ofa thin inner anda thick outer
layer of protein (mainly keratin) filaments, is added in the
 isthmus; the two layers become separated in the air chamber
at the blunt end of the egg.
3. A porous shell is formed in the uterus. This shell consists of
an inner layer of conical calcareous masses, surrounded by a
spongy organic layer, and an outer shell cuticle. An organic
pigment layer may be added externally in some breeds.
Infundibulum
 The cranial extremity of the infundibulum is dilated and has long
fimbriae that grasp the secondary oocyte as it is released from the
 ovary. The infundibulum is the usual site of fertilization. The
mucosa-submucosa is thrown into low longitudinal ridges or pri-
FIGURE 13-23 Scanning electron micrograph showing the
mary folds; in addition, secondary mucosal-submucosal folds are
desquamation of keratinized superficial cells from the vaginal
present in the caudal infundibulum. The egg remains in the in-
epithelium in the bitch in estrus (x650).
fundibulum for approximately 25 minutes.
276
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Oviduct
INFUNDIBULUM
MAGNUM
ISTHMUS
UTERUS
VAGINA
segments
Period of 
time in
 20-25 min
3h
1 1/4 h
20 h
 5-10 min
segment
Segmental
lengths and 
79 cm
 30-40 cm
9-10 cm
8-9 cm
scheme of
6-8 cm
oviduct
(longitudinal)
Scheme of
oviduct
(transverse)
Luminal
epithelium of 
segments
Segmental 
CH
secretory
products and
development
of the egg
 Site of fertilization.
 Four layers albumen
More albumen and a
A porous shell is
Thetwolayers
 Bilaminar glycoprotein 
added to the oocyte/
semipermeable shell
formed, consisting of 
of the shell
coat formed around the
 zygote. Na, Ca, and Mg membrane, consisting of a
 an inner layer of
membrane have
yolk-filled oocyte/zygote.
secreted by the
 thin inner and a thick outer
calcareous masses,
become
magnum epithelium.
layer of protein (mainly
surrounded by a
separated in the
keratin), is added in this
spongy organic layer
air chamber at 
segment.
and an outer shell 
the blunt end of
cuticle. An external 
the egg.
pigment layer is
 Expuision of the 
added in some
egg.
breeds. Chalazae
(CH) develop.
FIGURE I3-24  Egg development in the laying domestic hen: structural changes of the egg in the various segments of the oviduct. Luminal
epithelium of oviduct segments (x51 O). (Modified from Salomon F-V. Lehrbuch der Geflugelanatomie. Stuttgart: Gustav Fischer Verlag Jena, I993).
Female Reproductive System •Jonis Priedkains ond Rudolf Leiser
277
The epithelium is ciliated pseudostratified columnar. It
Vagina
contains occasional goblet cells, except at the bottom of the folds,
The vaginal wall is thick and has low primary and secondary lon-
where the epithelium is nonciliated simple columnar. Toward
 gitudinal folds. The egg remains in the vagina fora short time, and
the caudal portion of the infundibulum, glandular cells increase
Si a a an jo uoiy aui ui aidied iou sap a u
in number and become aggregated in glandular grooves that 
glandless, except for the so-called sperm-host glands at the utero-
resemble the tubular glands of the magnum.
vaginal junction that are used for the storage of spermatozoa.
The propria-submucosa consists of loose connective tissue
The epithelium is ciliated pseudostratified columnar with
 Containing many lymphocytes and plasma cells. The tunica mus-
few goblet cells. The propria-submucosa is loose connective tis-
cularis is composed of scattered bundles of longitudinal smooth
sue, frequently containing lymphocytes, plasma cells, and gran-
muscle. The tunica serosa consists of loose connective tissue and
ulocytes. The tunica muscularis is functional in expelling the egg
mesothelium.
and consists of a thick inner circular layer and an outer longitu-
dinal layer. The tunica serosa consists of loose connective tissue
Magnum
 and mesothelium.
The magnum has a thick walland tall thick longitudinal primary
and secondary mucosal-submucosal folds. Albumen is added to
og wnugeu aui ui suieua gga aui 'unueu aqi ui ga aui
Cloaca
approximately 3 hours.
The epithelium of the magnum is simple columnar with
The vagina, colon, and ureters open into the cloaca. The epithelium
close to equal numbers of ciliated cells and goblet cells. The loose
of the cloaca is simple columnar and contains many goblet cells.
connective tissue of the propria-submucosa is packed with many
long, branched, coiled tubular glands. The cells are pyramidal and
contain coarse basophilic granules. An inner circular and an outer
SUGGESTED READINGS
longitudinal smooth muscle layer are present. A thin tunica serosa
Consists of loose connective tissue and mesothelium. The magnum
Baird DT. The ovary. In: Austin CR, Short RV, eds. Reproduction
is sharply divided from the next portion of the oviduct, the isth-
in Mammals, Vol. 3. 2nd Ed. Cambtidge: Cambridge University
mus, by a l- to 3-mm segment devoid of glands.
Press, 1984:91.
Byskov AGS. Primordial germ cells and regulation of meiosis. In:
Isthmus
Austin CR, Short RV, eds. Reproduction in Mammals, Vol. 1. 2nd
Ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982: 1.
 The isthmus has pronounced longitudinal ridges. The egg re-
Goodman RL, Karsch FJ. The hypothalamic pulse generator: a key de-
mains in the isthmus for approximately 1.25 hour. The bilami-
tetminant of reproductive cycles in sheep. In: Follett BK, Follett
nar shell membrane is formed in this region.
DE, eds. Biological Clocks and Seasonal Reproductive Cycles.
The epithelium is simple columnar with close to equal num-
Colston Papers No. 32. Btistol: John Wright, 1981:223.
bers of ciliated and goblet cells.
Juengel JL, Niswender GD. Molecular regulation of luteal progesterone
The propria-submucosa is filled with distended branched tu-
syhthesis in domestic fuminants. J Reprod 1999;Suppl 54: 193.
 bular glands. The glands are lined by pyramidal cells with cyto-
Leiser R. Weibliche Geschlechtsorgane. In: Mosimann W, Kohler T, eds.
plasm that contains many acidophilic secretory granules. The
Zytologie, Histologie und mikroskopische Anatomie der Haussau-
tunica muscularis consists of circular and longitudinal smooth
getiere. Berlin: Velag Paul Patey, 1990:232.
muscle layers. The tunica serosa consists of loose connective tis-
Liebig H-G. Funktionelle Histologie der Haussaugetiere. Stuttgart:
Schattauer, 1990:255.
sue and mesothelium.
Liggins GC. The fetus and birth. In: Austin CR, Short RV, eds. Repro-
duction in Mammals, Vol. 2. 2nd Ed. Cambridge: Cambridge
Uterus
University Press, 1983:114.
The uterus, or shell gland, is thick-walled, saclike, and distensi-
Knobil E, Neill JD. The Physiology of Reproduction. 2nd Ed. New
 ble. Primary and secondary longitudinal folds are obscured by a
York: Raven Press, 1 994:11.
series of primaryand secondary circular folds Rotationoftheeg.
McDonald LE. Veterinary Endocrinology and Reproduction. 3rd Ed.
associated with twisting of the chalazae, occurs here. The egg re-
Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1 982.
mains in the uterus for approximately 20 hours. Shell components,
Milvae RA, Hinckley ST, Carlson JC. Luteotropic and luteolytic mecha-
such as organic matrix, shell cuticle, and inorganic material, are
nisms in the bovine corpus luteum. Theriogenology 1996;45: 1 327.
Moore RM, Seamark RF. Cell signaling, permeability and microvascular-
formed here.
ity changes during antral follicle development in mammals. J Dairy
The epithelium is ciliated pseudostratified columnar. The
propria-submucosa contains branched, coiled tubular glands.
Sci 1986;69:927
Priedkalns J. Preghancy and the central nervous system. In: Steven
The cells of these glands are pyramidal and have a diffusely gran-
DH, ed. Comparative Placentation: Essays in Structure and
ular and vacuolated cytoplasm. Loose connective tissue is sparse
Function. London: Academic Press, 1975:189.
between the glands. The tunica muscularis consists of two layers
Pried kalns J, Weber AF, Zem janis R. Qualitati ve and quantitative mor-
of smooth muscle. The inner circular layer is thick and forms a
phological studies of the cells of the membrana granulosa, theca in-
sphincter at the boundary with the vagina. The tunica serosa con-
terha, and corpus luteum of the bovine ovary. Z Zellforsch 1968;
sists of loose connective tissue and mesothelium.
85:501.
278
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Rajakoski E. The ovatian follicular system in sexually mature heifers
Van Blerkom J, Bell H, Weipz D. Cellular and developmental biologi-
with special reference to seasonal, cyclical and left-right vatiations.
cal aspects of bovine meiotic maturation, fertilization and pre-
Acta Endocrinol (Kbh.) 1960;34(Suppl 52): 1.
inmplan tation embryogenesis in vitro. J Electron Microsc Tech 1 990;
Salomon F-V. Weibliches Geschlechtssystem. In: Lehrbuch der Gefligel-
16:298.
anatomie. Stuttgart: Gustav Fischer Verlag Jena, 1993:197.
Wrobel K-H, Laun G, Hees H, et al. Histologische und ultrastruk-
Sjoberg N-O, Hamberger L, Janson PO, et al., eds. Local Regulation of
turelle Untersuchungen am Vaginalepithel des Rindes. Anat
Ovatian Function. Carnforth, UK: Parthenon, 1992.
Histol Embryol 1986; 1 5:303.
4
Placentation
VIBEKE DANTZER
RUDOLF LEISER
Embryology
Nourishment of the Embryo
Classification
Placental Vascularity and Circulation
Fetal Extraembryonic Membrane Contributions
Specialized Cells of the Placenta
Choriovitelline placenta
Changes During Placentation
Chorioallantoic placenta
 Function-Structure Relationships
Macroscopic Structure of the Placenta
Species Differences
Three-Dimensional Structure of the Interface Between
Sow
Matermal and Fetal Tissues
Mare 
Tissue Layers of the Fetal-Matermal Interhemal Barrier
Cow
Fetal-Matemal Anchoring and Fate of
Ewe and Goat
Matermal Tissues at Birth
Bitch, Queen, and Mink 
EmbryoloGy
The first events in placentation occur in the blastocyst stage.
The trophoblast is essential for the transfer of nourishment to the
The fusion of a female and male gamete results in a zygote. After
 offspring during intrauterine life but has no function after birth
repeated cleavage during the transport through the uterine tube
 of the young and is expelled with the afterbirth (secundinae). The
to the uterine cavity in higher mammals (Eutheria), the zygote
inner cell mass differentiates into three germ layers in two stages,
develops into a fluid-filled vesicle, the blastocyst, with a wall of
initially forming ectoderm and endoderm and then mesoderm
simple epithelium, the trophoblast. An eccentrically located
 between the two original layers. These three germ layers form the
inner cell mass extends from the wall into the blastocyst cav-
embryo, but they also participate in the formation of the fetal
ity. The free-floating blastocyst is nourished by secretions from
membranes. The ectoderm contributes to a vesicle enclosing the
the endometrium. Because the increasing demand from the grow-
oy aneds paioaioid pue Aoueonq sapiaond a ruouue aun 'oaiqua
ing embryo necessitates a more efficient nutritive arrangement
 development for the embryo. The amnion contains antiangiogenic
(i.e., a vascular transport system), the embryo produces mem-
factors and is used for eye surgery to prevent unwanted vascular-
branes that, in a process called implantation, gradually attach
ization. The endoderm contributes to the yolk sac, communi-
to the endometrium. A close relationship is established between
cating with the midgut, and to the allantois, a diverticulum
fetal and maternal circulatory systems for physiologic exchange.
from the hindgut (Fig. 14-1).
As a result, a combined organ, the placenta, is formed. A fetal
The further development of the fetal membranes is directed
part (pars fetalis) and a maternal part (pars uterina) are recog-
by the mesoderm. Lateral mesoderm splits into a somatic and a
nized. The fetus and fetal membranes, including the fetal part of
 splanchnic layer. The resulting intramesodermal cleft gives rise
the placenta, are known as the conceptus. The manner of at-
to the body cavity (intraembryonic coelom), which, at this stage,
tachment and subsequent formation of the placenta is termed
extends to form an extraembryonic cavity called the exocoelom.
placentation.
Somatic mesoderm combines with the trophoblast layer to form
279
280
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
allantoamnion
systems of classification, based on five main criteria: (a) fetal ex-
traembryonic membrane contributions, (b) macroscopic structure
of the placenta, (c) three-dimensional structure of the maternal-
amnion
chorioallantoic
fetal interface, (d) tissue layers of the fetal-maternal interhemal
placenta
barrier, and (e) degree of fetal-maternal anchoring and fate of
maternal tissues at birth.
chorion-
Fetal Extraembryonic
exocoelom
Membrane Contributions
Two types of placentae occur in domestic mammals: the chorio-
vitelline placenta (omphaloid or yolk sac placenta) and the chorio-
allantoic placenta. The yolk sac, and hence the choriovitelline
placenta, develops before the allantois and subsequent chorio-
allantoic placenta. Early during gestation, the choriovitelline and
choriovitelline
chorioallantoic placentae coexist temporarily, and then the chorio-
placenta
vitelline placenta regresses.
FIGURE I4-I Diagram of fetal membranes. The arrangement is
subject to wide variation in different species. The amnion encloses
Choriovitelline Placenta
the amniotic cavity and embryo. Ectoderm and somatic mesoderm
(somatopleure) form the amnion and chorion, while the yolk sac
The choriovitelline or yolk sac placenta is formed when the yolk
and allantois consist of endoderm and splanchnic mesoderm
sac wall (splanchnopleure) combines with the chorion and then
(splanchnopleure). (From Dellmann H-D, Canithers jR. Cytology ond 
contacts the endometrium (Figs. 14-1 and 14-16). It may be fully
Microscopic Arnatomy. Philadelphia: Wiliams & Wikins, 1 996.)
or partially vascularized by the vitelline plexus, which connects
with the omphalomesenteric vein leading to the developing heart.
 Blood returns from the embryo to the vitelline circulation in the
yolk sac via the omphalomesenteric artery, which branches from
the dorsal aorta.
the chorion or with the ectoderm of the amnion. These membranes
 In sows and ruminants, the yolk sac wall is simply apposed
constitute the extraembryonic somatopleure. Splanchnic meso-
derm fuses with the endoderm of the yolk sac and the allantois,
to the uterine epithelium, and the yolk sac begins its involution
3 to 4 weeks after conception. However, in carnivores and mares,
and together these layers form the extraembryonic splanch-
the yolk sac is well developed early in gestation and persists
nopleure.
 Somatic mesoderm, and hence the chorion, is initially avas-
throughout gestation. In carnivores, a temporary lamellar chori-
cular. Blood islands and vessels first arise in the splanchnic meso-
ovitelline placenta develops (see Fig. 14-16). In all domestic
 mammals, the choriovitelline placenta is of minor importance in
derm of the yolk sac and later in the splanchnic mesoderm of the
allantois. Eventually, the avascular mesoderm of the chorion fuses
physiologic fetal-maternal exchange.
with the mesoderm of the allantois, forming the allantochorion,
In the inverted yolk sac placenta, the endoderm of the yolk
which then becomes vascularized and filled with allantoic fluid. At
sac is directly exposed to the uterine luminal content. It occurs in
birth, the allantoamnion, a fusion of the allantois and amnion,
 mice, rats, rabbits, and guinea pigs and participates in selective
protrudes through the ruptured allantochorion and assists in dila-
absorption and transmission of maternal immunoglobulins for
tion of the cervix at parturition. The placental vessels, together
fetal immunoprotection.
with the vitelline and allantoic ducts, are contained in the body
stalk and later develop into the umbilical cord (see Fig. 14-10A).
Chorioallantoic Placenta
 Secretions from the fetal membranes play an important role
 in the maternal recognition of pregnancy and its continuation.
When the allantois fuses with the chorion, an allantochorion is
formed. The allantochorion contacts the endometrium, resulting
The secretions result in an alteration of the endometrial signal to
 the ovary, leading to the preservation of the corpus luteum. In
in a chorioallantoic placenta (Fig. 14-1). This organ is the most
the pig, estrogen secreted by the blastocyst is antiluteolytic,
efficient for mediating physiologic exchange between mother
while in ruminants, interferon T (IFNt) exerts a similar effect.
Saie ieqn q paziena  Aaa si in do pue
and vein.
The principle of providing a vast area of fetal-maternal inter-
CLASSIFICATION
change determines the placental structure at the gross and micro-
scopic anatomic levels. The structural variations of the placenta are
The placenta is subject to great variation in structure, which is
numerous. Intermediate forms exist, and the placenta also changes
species-dependent. The variation has given rise to many different
its internal structure during the period of gestation.
Placentation·Vibeke Dontzer ond Rudolf Leiser
281
Macroscopic Structure of the Placenta
counterpart, four types of placentae are recognized macroscopi-
cally. In domestic mammals, diffuse, cotyledonary,and zonary pla-
The region of the chorion where folds, lamellae, or villi increase the 
centae are present (Fig. 14-2), whereas in humans and some other
surface area is called the frondose chorion (chorion frondosum);
species, the discoid type develops.
the region without projections is the smooth chorion (chorion
 In the diffuse placenta (placenta diffusa), most of the chori-
laeve). Considering the frondose chorion region and its uterine
onic sac forms a frondose chorion attached to the endometrial
A
C
FIGURE I4-2Schematic drawings of the fetus in the fetal membranes to show differences in
placental shape and intemal structure among species. Horse with a diffuse villous (microcotyledonary)
placenta (A); ruminants (cow), with a cotyledonary villous placenta (B); pig with a diffuse folded
placenta provided with macroscopically visible areolae (C); carmivores {here, cat) with a zonary
(girdle) lamellar or tightly folded placenta (D). Allantoic cavity (l); amnionic cavity (2); yolk sac
(3); allantochorion (4). In the higher magnification views, the matermal side is dark, the fetal side is
bright, and the areola-gland complex (5) in horse and pig and the endometrial glands (6) in bovine
and cat are black
282
 Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
epithelium (sows, mares, camels) (Figs. 14-2A and C; see also
endometrial surface epithelium, connective tissue, and en-
Figs. 14-5 and 14-11A).
dothelium.
 In the cotyledonary placenta (placenta multiplex), tufts of
 Although the number of tissue layers of the fetal component
chorionic protrusions (cotyledons) attach to preformed endo-
is constant, the number of maternal layers varies with the species.
metrial prominences (caruncles) (Fig. 14-2B). Cotyledons and
Therefore, placentae are further classified on the basis of the
caruncles combine to form placentomes. In the intercaruncular
number of uterine tissue layers.
area, a smooth chorion is apposed to the endometrial epithelium
In the epitheliochorial placenta (placenta epitheliochorialis),
(ruminants) (see Fig. 14-13).
all three layers of the maternal component are present. This type
In the zonary placenta (placenta zonaria), the frondose
of placenta occurs in sows, mares, and ruminants (see Figs. 14-8,
chorion forms a band or girdle around the equator of the chori-
14-12A, and 14-15). In ruminants, however, binucleated tropho-
onic sac (Fig. 14-2D; see also Fig. 14-17). Outside the girdle, the
blast cells migrate and fuse with the endometrial surface epithe.
smooth chorion apposes to the endometrial epithelium (carnivores
lium, and the placenta is designated as synepitheliochorial.
and minks) (see Fig. 14-17).
In the endotheliochorial placenta (placenta endotheliocho-
 In the discoid placenta (placenta discoidalis), the frondose
rialis), the endometrial surface epithelium and the underlying ma-
chorion forms a disc-shaped area of fusion with the endometrium
ternal connective tissue are absent, and endothelium alone separates
(e.g., humans, apes, mice, rats, rabbits, guinea pigs).
the maternal blood from the trophoblast. This type of placenta is
primarily present in carnivores and minks (see Fig. 14-18B).
In the he mochorial placenta (placenta hemochorialis), all
Three-Dimensional Structure of the
three maternal layers are absent, rendering the trophoblast freely
Interface Between Maternal
exposed to maternal blood. Up to three layers of trophoblast may
and Fetal Tissues
be present (hemotrichorial), of which at least one is composed of
syncytiotrophoblast (fusion of trophoblast cells into a sym-
The capacity for exchange between maternal and fetal tissues is
plasm). This type of placenta is present in humans, rats, mice,
enhanced by the increased surface area of a folded, villous, or
rabbits, and guinea pigs.
lamellar interface (Fig. 14-2). This vast fetal-maternal contact
area is further increased by an irregular cell surface or microvilli
on both cells of the trophoblast and endometrial epithelial cells
Fetal-Maternal Anchoring and Fate of
(see Figs. 14-8, 14-9, and 14-12B).
Maternal Tissues at Birth
In the folded placenta, the fetal-maternal contact surface
The degree to which the endometrium is changed and the fetal
membranes are anchored into the maternal tissue determines the
(plicae) of varying magnitude and microscopic ridges (rugae) of
amount of uterine tissue lost at parturition. On this basis, two
varying height (sows) (see Figs. 14-5 through 14-7)
types of chorioallantoic placentation, nondeciduate and decidu-
In the villous placenta, the allantochorion forms cotyle-
ate, are recognized (Fig. 14-3).
dons (i.e., arborizing chorionic villi with vascular mesenchymal
 In the nondeciduate placenta, the fetal components inter-
cores that fit into corresponding caruncular crypts). Together,
lock with relatively intact uterine tissue, from which they separate
the villi and crypts form macroscopic (ruminants) or microscopic
without much loss of endometrium. Epitheliochorial placentation
placentomes (mares) (see Figs. 14-11 through 14-13), or inde-
(ungulates) is an example of nondeciduate placentation.
pendently, the villous tree extends into the maternal intervillous
In deciduate placentae, the transformed part of the endo-
blood space (humans).
metrial stroma, the decidua, is shed with the fetal membranes
 In lamellar placentation, the trophoblast of the allanto-
after parturition.
chorion forms an intercommunicating network that envelopes the
endothelium of maternal blood vessels (carnivores) (see Fig. 14-18),
or it is in direct contact with maternal blood in trophoblast-lined
NOURISHMENT OF
vascular channels (rats, mice, rabbits).
ThE EMBRYO
The main physiologic principle of the chorioallantoic placenta is
Tissue Layers of the Fetal-Maternal
the substantial exchange between maternal and fetal blood. The
Interhemal Barrier
substance that nourishes the developing offspring is termed em-
The fetal and maternal placental circulations are separated by
bryotroph. The portion of embryotroph contributed from ma-
tissue layers that form the placental or fetal-maternal inter
ternal blood is hemotroph, while the uterine glandular secretions
hemal barrier. The barrier is a highly selective transport avenue
and cell fragments form histotroph. Nutrients from both the
in fetal-maternal exchange (Fig. 14-3). The fetal component
 hemotroph and histotroph are taken up by the trophoblast
of the barrier is chorionic tissue that is vascularized by allan-
Histotroph nourishes the offspring before implantation.
toic vessels; it consists of three tissue layers: endothelium,
 During gestation, histotroph is present in areolae, which are in-
mesenchyme, and trophoblast. The maternal counterpart
dentations of the chorion opposite the openings of endometrial
consists basically of three corresponding layers in reverse order:
 glands. The areolae are scattered in the diffuse placenta of pigs and
Placentation·Vibeke Dontzer ond Rudolf Leiser
283
FIGURE I4-3
Schermatic drawings of the tis
 of the fetal-matermal interhemal barmier of placenta, including fetal
uatew aut jo uotonpa e saiads uo juapuadaa (w) stuauodwoo jewatew pue () uououootuele aut jo stuauodwo
components takes place, illustrated here by steps (A-F) until the trophoblast of the chorion comes into direct contact with
matermal blood. Species differences in the trophoblast are also shown. The different placental types and corresponding
species are: A. Epitheliochorial—sow, mare. B. Synepitheliochorial—ruminants (a-e show migration of binucleate trophoblast
cells [a,b], fusion of binucleate cell with uterine epithelial cell [c], matemal-fetal hybrid cell [d], which secretes granular
content [arrows] into matermal stroma, and degenerating hybrid cell [e]). C. Endotheliochorial—-camivores (bitch, queen).
D. Hemotrichorial—rat, mouse. E. Hemodichorial—rabbit. F. Hemomonochorial—human, guinea pig. (Modified from Leiser
R, Kaufmann P. Placental structure: in a comparative aspect. Exp Clin Endocrinol I 994;102:1 22-134.)
284
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
mares, or they are located in the smooth chorion of the ruminant
intervillous spaces (lacunae). Regardless of the type of chorio-
-ouni au u punoy si qdonisty 'uand anaur au un iuaed
allantoic placentation, trophoblast and fetal endothelium are
tional zone; it is typically seen in the areola-gland complex in the
always present in the placental interhemal barrier (Fig. 14-3)
diffuse placenta, as well as in relation to the smooth chorion in the
In the maternal part of the placenta, circulating blood is
cotyledonary placenta (Fig. 14-2).
either contained in vessels or bathes the trophoblast directly.
After successful implantation, the embryo is nourished by
Uterine vessels also form placental hematomas, due to local de-
hemotroph, metabolites that c
oss the placental barrier from ma-
 generation of endometrial tissue. The hematomas are deposits of
ternal circulation.
stagnant maternal blood between endometrial epithelium and
the trophoblast in carnivores and ruminants (see Fig. 14-17).
The fetal placental capillaries have smaller lumina than the
PLACENTAL VASCULARITY
maternal capillaries (see Fig. 14-8); both are partially fenestrated
AND CIRCULATION
and surrounded by basal laminae (Fig. 14-3; see also Fig. 14-18B).
The supply of oxygenated blood to the maternal part of the
The two blood circulatory systems of the epitheliochorial and en-
placenta is derived from the uterine artery and anastomoses from
dotheliochorial placentae always remain morphologically sepa-
the ovarian and vaginal arteries. The arteries are enlarged during
rated by a species-dependent number of tissue layers (see Tissue
 pregnancy, and their placental capillaries develop into a species-
Layers of the Fetal-Maternal Interhemal Barrier above). In hemo-
specific architecture reflecting the internal three-dimensional
chorial placentae, the uterine vessels are absent from the placen-
structure of the placenta (Fig. 14-4; see also Fig. 14-11B). The
tal barrier, and the blood flows through trophoblastic tubules or
maternal part of the placenta is drained by uterine veins.
concurrent
multivillous
crosscurrent
countercurrent
FIGURE I4-4 Combined matermal and fetal vascular cast (A), coresponding schematic of blood vessels from the placenta of the pig at
day 99 of pregnancy (B), and idealized patterms of placental blood flow (C). The matermal arterioles (l) run to the top of matermal ridges,
where they branch into the matermal capillary networks (2), which are drained by venules (2a). The fetal arterioles (3) can be followed into
the fetal capillary networks (4), which have outlets through the fetal venules (4a). The large arrows in B demonstrate a mixture of
crosscurrent (black/vertical versus white/horizontal arrows) and countercurrent (black/vertical versus white/vertical arrows) matermal-fetal
blood flow interrelationship in the pig. The schematic C demonstrates, from left to right, blood flow of four different placental exchange types
linked to typical species, including concurrent (theoretical), multivillous (human), crosscurrent (queen), and countercurrent (guinea pig). The
density of dots in the fetal venules (4a) illustrates the efficiency of the various exchangers in diffusional exchange (e.g. oxygen). A: x260.
(C: From Dantzer V, Leiser R, Koufmann P, et al. Comparative morphological aspects of placental vascularizatior. Trophobiast Res I 988;3:235.)
Placentation ·Vibeke Dontzer ond Rudolf Leiser
285
Fetal placental vessels take up oxygen and nutrients from
ChANGES dURING
maternal circulation and deliver waste products. To facilitate ex-
PLACENTATION
change, the different placental circulatory systems have multi-
villous, crosscurrent, or countercurrent flows between allantoic
The placenta continuously changes in size, shape, and internal
and uterine vessels; although the least efficient, the concurrent
 structure throughout gestation. After implantation, it grows at
exchange system is only theoretical (Fig. 14-4). It is also note-
a rapid, although gradually decreasing, rate and may be subject
worthy that the fetal veins leave the placenta apposed to the
to minor involution before term. Rearrangements at the cellular
origin of uterine arterioles, thus enhancing the capability of ex-
level are reflected in apoptosis (regulated cell death) and mitotic
change. The capillaries underlying maternal epithelium and the
activity. In addition, the physical barrier between the maternal
trophoblast bend and dilate. The bending of the vessels provides
and fetal circulatory systems progressively attenuates with time
a flow stress that enhances vascular growth through interaction
(for details see Function-Structure Relationships below).
with hormones and cytokines. Dilation of blood vessels slows
 blood flow, enhancing the possibility for the active exchange of
nutrients.
FUNCTION-STRUCTURE
The yolk sac placenta, when present, receives deoxygenated
RELATIONSHIPS
blood from the omphalomesenteric arteries, which arise from the
abdominal aorta. Oxygenated blood is then returned to the heart
Structural differences in the various placental types do not neces-
by the om phalomesenteric veins.
sarily indicate differences in function. The transfer mechanism of
The fetal part of the chorioallantoic placenta receives deoxy-
the respiratory gases (i.e., oxygen and carbon dioxide under gra-
genated blood from the paired umbilical arteries, which originate
dient pressure) is essentially simple diffusion. Therefore, the
from the caudal aorta, and returns oxygenated blood through the
 diffusion distance across the interhemal barrier is of major impor-
umbilical veins. The left umbilical vein carries blood to the heart 
tance. Capillaries from both fetal and uterine sides of the placenta
via the liver and the caudal vena cava, whereas the right vein
approach and indent the respective epithelia during gestation
undergoes involution in the fetus.
(Fig. 14-3; see also Fig.14-8). Consequently, despite a varying
number of layers in the interhemal barrier, the diffusion barrier
thins to 2 μm, which is similar for most species.
SPECIALIZED CELLS
The plasma membrane, with its variety of receptors, is an im-
OF THE PLACENTA
portant structure in cellular transport. The membrane regulates
cellular uptake and transfer of nutrients as well as export of unus-
Decidual cells are specialized cells derived from fibroblasts in the
able metabolic components. As parts of the placental barrier, the
endometrium. They may develop in the endotheliochorial pla-
plasma membranes are present only in epithelium and endothe-
centa of carnivores (see Fig. 14-18A) and are always present in
lium. To traverse a cell (or syncytium), a substance must pass both
hemochorial placentae. Decidual cells are enlarged and rounded
the apical and basal plasma membrane. Therefore, placental se-
or polyhedral; they are subject to considerable species variations
lective barrier and transport functions are critically dependent on
in size, contents (lipid, glycogen, hormones, and growth factors),
 the number and activity of plasma membranes to be traversed.
and structure.
A directional preference from mother to fetus generally exists
The trophoblast (simple epithelium that forms the wall of
for important inorganic elements (e.g., calcium, phosphorus, io-
the blastocyst) performs many different functions including ab-
dine, and iron). This characteristic is especially true of iron, as no
sorption, exchange of metabolites, and synthesis of hormones and
 retrograde transfer of iron from fetus to mother occurs. In differ-
other signal transmitter substances. This diversity is reflected in
ent species, however, the iron transfer takes place by different
the complex structure of individual cells and the cell types de-
mechanisms. In carnivores, and to a lesser extent in ruminants,
veloped by differentiation (see Sow Placenta below, as a species
iron is absorbed from blood hemoglobin in maternal hemorrhages.
example). The discrete cell of the trophoblast is termed a cyto-
In the sow and mare, and also to some extent in ruminants, the
trophoblast (Fig. 14-3). Another form of differentiation is the
source of iron is a glycoprotein complex secreted by the endome.
binucleate trophoblast cell, or giant cell, found in ruminants
trial glands. The trophoblast takes upiron from circulating mater-
and mares (see Figs. 14-14 and 14-15). If multiple trophoblast
 nal transferrin in hemochorial placentation. Calcium is transferred
cells fuse, they form a syncytiotrophoblast (Fig. 14-3; see also
in different regions of the fetal membranes, depending on the
Fig. 14-18). When both cytotrophoblasts and syncytiotrophoblasts 
species. In sows, the transfer occurs across the folded interhemal
 are present (carnivores), the cellular form is primitive, whereas
barrier of the interareolar region, whereas in cows, it occurs at the
the syncytial form is more differentiated with respect to the de-
intercotyledonary region, and in the mare, across the areolar-gland
velopment of organelles. The presence of binuclear or multinuclear
 complexes by a different mechanism than for iron.
trophoblast cells corresponds to increasing invasion of the en-
The hemoglobin of the growing offspring contains different
dometrium. In ruminants and mares, a relatively low degree of
types of polypeptide chains during different phases of develop-
invasion occurs in the presence of binucleate cells, compared to
ment. The earliest (nucleated) erythrocytes from the yolk sac
the extensive endometrial invasion of multinucleated syncytio-
mesoderm contain embryonic hemoglobin. Later in intrauterine
trophoblasts in carnivores, rodents, and primates.
life, hepatic and splenic erythrocytes carry fetal hemoglobin, and
286
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
near the time of birth, a gradual change to bone marrow cells
with adult hemoglobin takes place. Embryonic and fetal hemo-
globins have a higher affinity for oxygen than adult hemoglobin,
and thus, they are able to more efficiently extract oxygen, which
diffuses across the placental barrier. This difference is an adapta-
tion for intrauterine life with low oxygen pressure.
Maternal proteins of high molecular weight, such as im-
munoglobulin G, which protects newborns against infectious dis-
eases, sufficiently bypass some placental barriers. Proteins cross
over in endotheliochorial placentae with hematomas and hemo-
chorial placentae, but they do not cross in epitheliochorial pla-
centae, although some proteins .
edathematomas
in ruminants. There
with epitheliochor
ial placentae are totally d
oglobulinsinthe
colostrum ingested immediately after parturition when the epi-
thelium in the intestinal tract is temporarily permeable for these
large molecules.
Placental tissues show a very high degree
of expression of
various genes. The placental trophoblast secret
tes hormones, for
example, chorionic gonadotropin (mares), placental lactogen
(ruminants), estrogens, and progesterone. During pregnancy,
the placenta also produces a wide spectrum of other factors for
the regulation of metabolic activity, growth, and structural
5
successful placentation.
SPECIES DIFFERENCES
Ammm
The beginning of placentation and length of gestation vary con-
FIGURE I4-5 Longitudinal section of uterine hom with
siderably in different species (Table 14-1).
placenta (sow), late midpregnancy. Primary fold (plica) of
endometrium (1 ); rugae (2); plica of allantochorion (3):
Sow
endometrium with glands (4); myometrium (5); allantoic cavity (6)
{×20). (Courtesy of A. Hansen.)
In early stages, the yolk sac is unusually large and well vascular-
ized; its maximal development occurs at approximately day 20.
A choriovitelline placenta of insignificant extent is formed, but
disappears as the yolk sac rapidly decreases in size.
 avascular extremities and over the uterine gland openings, where
The chorioallantoic placenta is diffuse, folded, epithelio-
areola-gland complexes are formed (Figs. 14-2, 14-6, and 14-7).
chorial, and nondeciduate (Fig. 14-5). The fusiform chorionic sac
The blastocyst undergoes extremely rapid elongation from
adheres to the endometrium over its entire area, except at the
u Z Alaieuixoidde jo anauds e luoy saueo in Zl Aep oi ol Aep
Aaneurxodde peanui, mooq snouequau e oi ianaueip u!
100 cm in length. At days 12 to 14, the migration of multiple
TABLE I4-I   Implantation and Gestation in
 blastocysts is fulfilled and they are evenly distributed in both
Domestic Animals
uterine horns along the mesometrial side. Placentation begins close
Beginning of
to the embryo, where the endometrium forms epithelial prolifer-
Gestation
Implantation (day)
Time (days)
ations covered with corresponding caplike formations of the cho-
rion at days 13 to 14, thus giving an anchoring effect until
Bitch
17-18
58-63
interdigitating microvilli begin to develop between the uterine
Queen
12.5-14
63-65
epithelium and the trophoblast at day 15.
Mare
35-40
329-345
The chorionic-endometrial contact area is increased approx-
Sow
13-14
112-115
imately three times by macroscopic primary and split circular
Cow
16-18
279-285
folds (plicae). The folds are stable on the maternal side but unsta-
 ble on the fetal side as they passively follow the existing endo-
Ewe
15-20
1 44-152
metrial folds (Figs. 14-2C and 14-5). When the whole chorionic
Placentation
Vibeke Dontzer ond Rudolf Leiser
287
FIGURE I4-6
Matermal part of porcine placenta from
FIGURE I4-7
midgestation after separation from the fetal side to illustrate the
porcine allantochorion from midgestation with a medium-sized fetal
matermal side of an areola (l) with some accumulation of uterine
areola (l) with villi. The chorionic rugae radiating from its periphery
milk covering the opening of the uterine gland. The matermal rugae
fuse with parallel chorionic rugae after a short distance (x50). (From
radiate around the areola and the parallel arrangement can be
Dantzer V. Scarning electror microscopy of exposed surfaces of the
discemed at the top of the picture. These rugae are complementary
porcire placerto. Acta Anat 1 984; 1 1 8:96.)
to the fetal fossae between the fetal rugae (see Fig. 14-7) (x90).
(From Dartzer V. Sconring electror microscopy of exposed surfoces of
the porcire piacento. Acta Anot I 984; 1 1 8:96.)
The uterine epithelial cells differentiate as the trophoblast
lining the chorionic fossae forms arcades of high columnar epi-
sac is spread out, it meas
sures approximately three times the length
thelium apposed to the low columnar epithelium on the summit
of the corresponding permanently folded endometrium. The mi-
 of the endometrial rugae. The remaining chorionic and uterine
luaueuad aie eul assoy Aq paeiedas aeni uioy sploy sdosonn
epithelial cells are cuboidal or flattened (Fig. 14-8).
on both maternal and fetal sides. They are irregular at first and
As gestation proceeds, allantoic and uterine capillaries in-
later develop into more regular circular rugae (Figs. 14-5, 14-6,
 dent those parts of the respective rugae where the trophoblast
and 14-7). In late gestation, the circular rugae become further
and endometrial epithelium are low. Thus, the connective tissue
subdivided, thereby changing into bulbous protrusions. The
interposed between the capillaries and epithelia is reduced to
microscopic foldings increase the exchange area approximately
basal laminae (Figs. 14-3A and 14-9). In advanced stages, the
four times. The trophoblastic and uterine epithelial cells have in-
thickness of the interhemal membrane can be less than 2 μm,
terdigitating microvilli, which further increase the exchange area
consisting of six layers, four of which are cellular (Fig. 14-8).
bya factor of approximately 10 (see Fig. 14-9). Overall, with fold-
The uterine epithelial cells contain spherical nuclei with small
ing and surface modifications, the total surface area is increased
nucleoli. Rough endoplasmic reticulum (rER) predominates, the
approximately 120 times.
Golgi complex is extensive, and small mitochondria are scattered
288
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
20um
FIGURE I4-8 Detail of placental fold (sow) day 99 of
pregnancy; perfusion fixation from matemal side. The distance of the
placental barrier is shortened by endometrial capillaries (l) indenting
the uterine epithelium (2) and fetal capillaries (3) indenting the
trophoblast (4). Uterine connective tissue (5); border of
interdigitating microvilli (6); characteristic dense bodies in
trophoblast cells (7); fetal mesenchyme (8). Epon section, perfusion-
fixed from the matemal side (X660).
in the cytoplasm (Fig. 14-9). Numerous lysosomes are charac-
teristic in the maternal epithelial cells
The cells of the trophoblast have rounded nuclei with distinct
nucleoli. The rER occurs mainly in the basal part of the cells inter-
mingled with electron-dense, periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-positive
bodies and lysosomes, indicating high metabolic and secretory
activities. Soon after day 80 of gestation, aggregations of smooth
endoplasmic reticulum (sER) are also seen basally and laterally
in the cells; their occurrence is correlated with high estrogen syn-
thesis. Evidence of high endocytic activity is indicated by apical
mitochondria located among coated pits and vesicles, tubular
FIGURE 14-9  Transmission electron micrograph from the
endosomes, and multivesicular bodies (Fig. 14-9).
placenta of the sow illustrates the interdigitating microvilli between
The areola-gland complex is macroscopically visible as small
the matermal epithelium and the trophoblast, as well as the
opalescent vesicles, the areolae, which contain histotroph (Figs.
accumulation of mitochondria in the trophoblast close to the apical
14-2C, 14-6, and 14-7). The maternal areolae are smooth-
exchange area. Nucleus of a matermal epithelial cell (l); Golgi
surfaced shallow cups surrounding the openings of uterine glands
complex (2): interdigitating microvilli (3); trophoblast
(Fig. 14-6). The fetal areolae are rosettelike structures composed
(4);: mitochondria (5); endothelium of fetal capillary (6); basal
of villi (Fig. 14-7). Histotroph, composed of secretory products 
laminae (7) (×21,000).
and degenerating cell material, accumulates in the areolae be-
tween the uterine and fetal epithelia in the intermicrovillous
space. The main transfer of iron from mother to fetus takes place
via the areola-gland complex. The uterine glands of the complex
The blood flow relationship between maternal and fetal cir-
secrete an iron-containing glycoprotein, uteroferrin, which is
culation in the sow is a mixture of crosscurrent and counter-
subsequently taken up by the areolar trophoblast and transferred
current (Fig. 14-4). Exchange across the porcine placental barrier
to the underlying fetal capillary network. The areola-gland com-
is midrange in efficiency compared to other species described in
plexes also participate in the transfer of vitamin A (retinoids).
this text.
Placentation·Vibeke Dontzer ond Rudolf Leiser
687
Mare
centomes (Fig. 14-11A). The areola-gland complexes are located
between these microplacentomes, with the areolae surrounding
A large yolk sac is present in the mare 3 weeks after insemina-
the base of the fetal portion of the microplacentomes. Uterine
tion and becomes an important fetal-maternal interchange
glandular secretory products are released into the areolar cavity
medium. The temporary placenta is composed of an avascular
 between endometrial epithelium and trophoblast cells covering
portion of the yolk sac wall and, in the marginal zone, a chori-
the areolar villi; consequently, these epithelia are not in close
ovitelline placenta. About the end of week 6, the change from
contact (Fig. 14-11A). Transfer of iron and calcium from mother
vitelline to allantoic circulation is effected in the placenta, and
to fetus takes place in the areolar-gland complexes.
the yolk sac, although persisting until term, undergoes gradual
In the microcotyledons, the fetal villi consist of vascular
involution (Fig. 14-10A).
mesenchyme covered with trophoblast (Fig. 14-12A). The villi
The chorioallantoic placenta of the mare is diffuse, villous,
epitheliochorial, and nondeciduate. The embryo emerges from
varying height. The crypts are separated by septa consisting of
the zona pellucida at days 8 to 9 and then becomes completely
vascular uterine connective tissue. Indentations of capillaries
encapsulated in an acellular glycoprotein capsule, which persists
into the trophoblast and maternal epithelium are seen in later
until at least day 21.
pregnancy.
Although the equine blastocyst becomes fixed in position
 Uterine epithelial cells are light staining (Fig. 14-12A). The
in the uterus at approximately day 16, the allantochorionic villi
trophoblast cells are slightly darker and have a more compact
are not aggregated into tufts, called microcotyledons, until
rER. The sER is well developed in the cells of both epithelia, but
 approximately day 6o. The conceptus thus remains spherical
most prominent in the trophoblast, reflecting the high synthesis
and lies unattached in the uterine lumen, held in place merely
of steroids, especially estrogens and progesterone. The apical sur-
by a pronounced increase in uterine tone until day 50.
face of the trophoblast and uterine epithelial cells bear microvilli
At the junction of the developing allantochorion and the
that interdigitate and form a dark border as seen with light and
regressing yolk sac, the chorion forms an annulate chorionic gir-
electron microscopy (Fig. 14-12). In the later stages of gestation
dle consisting of projections of the rapidly proliferating tropho-
 before placental detachment after delivery, local apoptosis of the
blast. Between days 36 and 38, the trophoblast cells of the girdle
trophoblast and cryptal epithelium is indicated by dark-staining
become binucleate and begin to invade the endometrium by
epithelial cytoplasm and the presence of cellular debris.
ameboid movements. They destroy the uterine epithelium al-
most completely and implant themselves in the endometrial
stroma, where they form endometrial cups (Fig. 14-10). The
Cow
cups measure a few millimeters to approximately 5 cm in diam-
Initially, the yolk sac has a rather large vascular area and forms a
eter. Endometrial epithelium regenerates quickly, and the un-
functional choriovitelline placenta. The yolk sac is rapidly out-
derlying cup cells become densely packed among uterine glands,
 grown by the allantois, and after 3 weeks, it begins to degenerate.
supplied by the relatively sparse endometrial vasculature. The
The chorioallantoic placenta is cotyledonary, villous, epi-
 cup cells grow to large polyhedral cells with two nuclei and pre-
theliochorial of the subtype synepitheliochorial, and nondecidu-
dominant rER. Cup cells act as an endocrine gland and elaborate
ate. The elongated blastocyst implants close to the embryo at
equine chorionic gonadotropin (eCG), which helps to stabilize
days 18 to 19 and gradually proceeds peripherally. In the inter-
the hormonal function of the corpora lutea and can be used in di-
cotyledonary areas, the trophoblast layer develops papillae that
agnosis of pregnancy.
extend into the uterine gland openings, possibly functioning as
 The endometrial cups eventually become surrounded by leu-
an anchor. The attachment by papillae occurs until day 21. At
kocytes, which invade and destroy the cup cells as they begin to
day 22, the blastocyst extends equally into both uterine horns,
degenerate after approximately 80 days of gestation. From days
and by day 27, an overall intimate contact between trophoblast
120 to 150, the cellular remnants are rejected. This process co-
cells and maternal epithelium by interdigitating microvilli is es-
incides with regression of the primary and secondary corpora lutea
tablished. A firm fetal-maternal connection is initiated at days
(formed concurrently with the cup formation), after which the
32 to 34. Simple villi develop from areas of the chorionic sac in
placenta takes over the production of progesterone at a reduced
 contact with elevated, convex structures of the maternal endo-
level. After detachment from the uterine wall, the cups are en-
metrium (caruncles). The simple chorionic villi ramify to form
capsulated by chorionic folds and form allantochorionic pouches.
 branching cotyledons (Fig. 14-13B), which projet into crypts
Also, flattened oval bodies of disputed origin, hippomanes, float 
of the caruncle (Fig. 14-13A). The anchoring stalk of the carun-
freely in the allantoic fluid.
cle contains maternal blood vessels. No uterine glands open at
Fetal allantochorionic tufts (microcotyledons) and comple-
the caruncle. Together, the fetal cotyledon and maternal carun-
u ae donaaa o uaq sidi iiaua iaiiu Ariua
cle form the collective structure, the placentome (Fig. 14-13A)
initiation of endometrial cups (days 38 to 40), and at approxi-
 During gestation, the placentomes grow approximately 5,000-
mately day 150, the typical microcotyledonary placenta has been
fold, but undergo a slight involution toward term.
formed over the entire surface of the endometrium (Fig. 14-2A).
The chorionic villi of the cotyledon consist of vascular mes-
The fetal tufts, with a dense capillary system (Fig. 14-11B), and
enchyme covered with a simple layer of trophoblast cells. The tro-
corresponding crypts form placental units known as micropla-
phoblast includes columnar or irregularly shaped mononuclea1
290
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
FIGURE I4-I0 Endometrial cups (mare) 47 days of pregnancy.
A. Schematic overview drawings of conceptus with its chorionic
girdle (top) and detail with the chorion partly separated from the
endometrium (bottom). Formation of endometrial cups {l) is due to
trophoblast cell migration (2) from the chorionic girdle (3)—located
between allantois (4) and yolk sac (5)—into the endometrial stroma
(6). Uterine lumen (7); young fetus (8); allantoamnion (9);
choriovitelline placenta {10) bordered by sinus terminalis {lI);
umbilical cord (12). B. Histologic section from a later stage of the
endometrial cup showing the large endometrial cup cells (13),
uterine glands {14), and few matemal vessels {15) (×330). (Courtesy
Of A. C. Enders.)
Placentation·Vibeke Dontzer ond Rudolf Leiser
291
200μum
A
FIGURE I4-IIHistologic cross section of mare placenta (A) and scanning electron microscopy of corresponding vascular cast showing
mesenchyme (4). B. The fine capillary network of the fetal villi of a microcotyledon (2) and the more loose network at the fetal areola (3)
A: x40; B: X60. (A: From Bjorkmon N. An Atias of Plocental Fine 5tructure. Baltirmore: Willioms ond Wilkins, I 970. B: From Dontzer V, Leiser R.
Areola-glond subunits in the epitheliochorial types of placertoe fromm horse ond pig. Micror Microscopa Acta I 992;23:7980.)
20μm
A
B
FIGURE I4- I2 Light microscopy of epon section of microplacentome (A) and transmission electron microscopy (B) of interhemal
barrier (mare). A. Endometrial connective tissue {l ); matermal capillary (2); matemal septum (3); uterine epithelium (4); chorionic villi (5);
trophoblast (6); fetal capillary (7); fetal mesenchyme (8); border of microvilli (9). The dark parts of trophoblast and uterine epithelium (arrows)
are apparently undergoing apoptosis. B. Detail of the uterine epithelium (4) and trophoblast (6) showing the complementary interdigitating
endosomes, multivesicular bodies and mitochondria (10), are present. A: x630; B: x15,000.
292
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
2mm
A
() sassaa aan a sae o ou paedas wna aidu (mo) aaed eo uas ss  ii ai
endometrium with glands (2); stalk of placentome (3);: placentome (4); chorion laeve (5) (x8). (Courtesy of A. Hansen.) B. Vascular cast of a.
vllus from a fetal cotyledon, day 220 of pregnancy. Note the rich branching (×50). (Leiser R, Krebs C, Klisch K et ol. Fetal villosity ond
microvasculature of the bovire placertome ir the second half of gestotion. J Anot I 997: 1 91:5 1 7-527.)
cells, and large binucleate cells (Fig. 14-14). The mononuclear
cleate cells. Most uterine epithelial cells also contain lipid inclu-
cells have spherical or irregularly shaped nuclei with large nucle-
 sions in the infranuclear region.
oli. In addition, the cells have sparse rER and relatively numerous
The apical borders of both the trophoblast and the cryptal
apical mitochondria. Binucleate cells (trophoblast giant cells)
epithelial cells have interdigitating microvilli that are more irre-
have spherical, separated nuclei with conspicuous nucleoli, and the
gular in cows than in mares or sows. The narrow space between
cytoplasm is voluminous. At the ultrastructural level, the cell sur-
the microvilli contains dense granular material.
face lacks microvilli. The cytoplasm contains a great diversity of
Regressive changes occur frequently in the placentome.
organelles and inclusions. The Golgi complex is well developed
 Both trophoblast cells and cryptal epithelial hybrid cells undergo
and mitochondria are numerous but moderate in size. The cells
apoptosis. In the latter case, functionally insignificant, small
synthesize progesterone, prostaglandin, and placental lactogen. In
 areas of tem porary syndesmochorial placenta are formed.
contrast to the mononuclear cells, giant cells show no morphologic
Hematomas develop at the convex side of the placentome
evidence of absorption. Furthermore, the giant cells lack desmo-
between the fetal side of the caruncular crypt walls and the base
somes and are mobile within the chorionic epithelium. They mi-
of the chorionic villi. They are formed in the later part of gesta
grate into the cryptal epithelium, where they fuse with uterine
tion. Blood collects in the fetal tissues surrounding leaky vessels
epithelial cells to form tri- or multinucleate hybrid cells, thus trans.
Erythrocytes are phagocytized by the trophoblast and broken
ferring hormone-containing granules from the fetal to the maternal
down by lysosomes. Hemoglobin from the erythrocytes is di-
compartment (Figs. 14-3B and 14-14).
 gested and iron is released. These areas may be subject to bacte-
The maternal uterine epithelium of the caruncle is cuboidal
 rial infections during pregnancy.
or flattened (Fig. 14-14). The cells have spherical nuclei with dis-
After parturition, the chorionic villi are released from the
tinct nucleoli. Among them are cryptal giant cells with three or
Crypts. Normally, the separation occurs between the interdigitat-
ing microvilli and the crypt, and the trophoblast layer and cryptal
Placentation ·Vibeke Dontzer ond Rudolf Leiser
293
Is well as changes in placental development and activity. In cloned
embryos, this condition is even more pronounced and often
leads to an overproduction of fetal fluid, hydrallantois. Insulin-
like growth factor (IGF) is one of the supposed key factors in-
volved in this condition.
Ewe and Goat
The placentae of ewes and goats are similar to bovine placentae but
differ in some respects. Implantation, occurring as in cows, begins
at days 14 to 15, with development of interdigitating microvilli
between trophoblast cells and maternal epithelium at days 16 to
18. Chorionic villi are seen from day 13 to day 20. Grossly, the pla-
ntome has a concave surface. The placentome of goats is flatter
than that of ewes but has a similar internal structure.
Microscopically, the chorionic villi are more irregular than
 of the bovine placenta (Fig. 14-15). The cryptal lining con-
 mainly of multinucleated cell masses arranged as a sym-
 syncytium, which was generated by fusion of binucleate
trophoblast cells (hybridization) (Fig. 14-3B), after migration
across the fetal-maternal microvillous junction. In contrast to
the bovine, the hybridization in the ewe and goat is much more
active. The trophoblast layer also has mononuclear cells, which
gives rise to the typical ovoid binucleate cells (Fig. 14-15)
FIGURE 14-I4 Detail of placentome {cow) midpregnancy
(compare to Fig. 14-3B). Matemal septal stroma with capilaries (1);
uterine epithelial cells (2); lipid droplets (3); trophoblast-uterine
epithelial hybrid cells (4); mononuclear trophoblast cells (5);:
binuclear trophoblast giant cells with granules (6); fetal capillaries (7):
matermal-fetal contact line (8) (x560).
epithelium remain intact. A common complication of parturition
in cattle, however, is retained afterbirth (retentio secundi-
-pe aui pue sidi aui u! paddei aie ila aui yiym u! (unieu
hesiveness between the fetal and maternal tissues remains high
In the intercotyledonary area, a smooth chorion adheres to
the endometrium, except over the glandular openings, where are
olae are formed. The simple columnar cells of the trophoblast and
the uterine epithelium both have interlocking brush borders (mi-
crovilli). Interdigitations are tight during early pregnancy and
iui aun un 'sanuape Auuard se panunouond ssal aosaq
cotyledonary area, binucleate trophoblast cells are also frequent
Amniotic plaques are yellow irregular elevations of strati-
fied ectodermal epithelium on the inner surface of the amnion.
They measure from a fraction ofa millimeter to a few millimeters
in diameter and contain large quantities of glycogen.
The interrelationship of the maternal and fetal capillary sys-
tem is predominantly countercurrent with some crosscurrent
flow, making it the most efficient system of the species described 
in this text.
FIGURE I4-I5 Section of placentome (ewe) midpregnancy.
 In vitro fertilization may often lead to large offspring syn-
Matermal capillaries (1); matermal syncytium of trophoblast-uterine
drome in cattle and sheep. This condition is due to in vitro han-
epithelial hybrid cells (2); matermal-fetal contact border of microvilli
dling and also the composition of growth media, both of which
(3); trophoblast (4) with a binucleate cell with typical granules (5);:
give a slight imbalance in the timing of gene activation. There
fetal capillaries, which often deeply indent the trophoblast (6). Silver
is also a high degree of polyploidy in the trophoblast giant cells
staining (×8 1 0).
294
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Hematomas are more pronounced and are located in the cen-
nal parts of placental lamellae, maternal vessels, cell debris, and
tral concave area of the placentome; they occur earlier than in
glandular secretions is located beneath the lamellar zone. The
cows. Amniotic plaques are also present in ewes.
junctional zone is specifically enlarged in bitches and located ad-
jacent to the dense connective tissue of the supraglandular zone
(Fig. 14-17A). The glandular zone, which is formed by the di-
Bitch, Queen, and Mink
lated lower parts of the uterine glands, lies just above the myo-
The yolk sac forms a choriovitelline placenta, with trophoblastic
metrium (Fig. 14-17A). In the late stages of gestation, the invasion
villi invading eroded uterine mucosa. This transient lamellar
into the glandular zone progresses almost to the deep part of the
placenta is originally extensive (Fig. 14-16), but eventually dis-
glands where histotroph and cell debris accumulate (Fig. 14-2D).
appears. The yolk sac, however, persists until term.
Remnants of the glandular zone are left at parturition. Outside the
The chorioallantoic placenta is zonary, lamellar, endothelio.
girdle, a chorion laeve is apposed to the uterine surface epithelium,
chorial, and deciduate. Implantation occurs at day 17 in bitches,
and here the glandular development is restricted.
whereas it is delayed in minks. In queens, implantation begins at
Hemorrhage of uterine blood within and outside the pla-
day 13 with the formation of gap junctions between the tro-
cental girdle gives rise to hematomas. In bitches, distinct mar-
phoblast and maternal epithelium. At day 14, the trophoblast cells 
 ginal hematomas with large blood compartments are formed
of the girdle area have intruded into the endometrium, thereby
(Fig. 14-17A). In queens, smaller hemorrhages occur in irregu-
forming an endotheliochorial placenta with cytotrophoblast and
lar positions in the placental girdle and between the smooth
syncytiotrophoblast. Here, the frondose chorion and uterine cap-
chorion and the endometrium along the girdle. In minks, the
illaries form tightly arranged lamellae (Figs. 14-2D, 14-17A, and
hematoma is located centrally and antimesometrially. The colum-
14-18A), which are localized in a girdle around the equator of the
nar trophoblast cells lining the compartments of the hematoma
chorionic sac. In the girdle, a junctional zone containing termi-
have phagocytic characteristics and are believed to be involved in
5mm
FIGURE I4-I6  Cross section of a uterine hom (bitch) 3 weeks pregnant. Embryo (1); amnion (2);
exocoelom (3);: yolk sac cavity (4); yolk sac wall (splanchnopleure) (5); hypertrophied epithelial surface of
the endometrium containing chorionic villi (choriovitelline placenta) (6); junctional zone (7); glandular
zone (8); myometrium (9) (×5). (Courtesy of A. Hansen.)
Placentation·Vibeke Dontzer ond Rudolf Leiser
295
FIGURE I4-17 A. Cross section of placental girdle (bitch) midpregnancy. Myometrium (1); glandular zone (2): junctional zone (3):
placental lamellae/labyrinth (4); marginal hematomas (5); fetal vessels in mesenchyme (6); the supraglandular layer (7), above which the
placenta is separated from the endometrium at parturition (x2.7). (Courtesy of A. Hansen.) B. Double cast from cat placenta late gestation.
Matermal arterioles (MAl) branch into matermal capillaries (M); fetal arterioles (FAl) branch into fetal capillaries (F). Note that matermal
capillaries are wider than the fetal capillaries. Matermal stem artery (MA); fetal vein (FVI1).
A
B
FlGURE I4-I8  Histology of placental lamellae (A) and transmission electron microscopy of interhemal barrier (B) (queen) late
pregnancy. Matemal capillaries (I1); matemal endothelium (Il a); matemal interstitil layer (Ib); decidual cells(2); syncytiotrophoblast (3); fetal 
distance of about I.5 μm (arrow). No distinct cytotrophoblasts are seen due to the late stage of gestation. A: xl,000; B: ×l 2,500. (B: From
Leiser R, Koob B. Developmernt and characteristics of placentation ir α commivore, the domestic cat. J Exp Zool 1 993;266:642656.)
296
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
the absorption of large molecules and iron from destroyed mater-
Bjorkman N. An Atlas of Placental Fine Structure. Baltimore: Williams
nal erythrocytes. After breakdown of the blood, the hematomas be-
and Wilkins, 1970.
come brown (in queens) or green (uteroverdin in bitches) because
Bjorkman N, Dantzer V, Leiser R. Comparative placentation in labora-
of degradation of the hemoglobin.
toty animals. A review. Scand J Lab Anim Sci 1989;16:129.
Burton GJ. Review article. Placental uptake of maternal erythrocytes: a
The fetal part of the placenta is composed of trophoblast-
comparative study. Placenta 1 982;3:407.
covered mesenchymal lamellae, which contain small thin-walled
Dantzer V. An extensive lysosomal system in the maternal epithelium
capillaries (Fig. 14-17B). In bitches, the lamellae are branched,
of the porcine placenta. Placenta 1984;5:117.
whereas in queens, the lamellae are more regularly stacked
Dantzer V. Electron microscopy of the initial stages of placentation in
(Figs. 14-17A and 14-18), and in minks, they are rigorously
the pig. Anat Embryol 1985;172:281.
twisted villi giving a labyrinthine appearance. Relatively wide
Dantzer V. Endomettium of epitheliochorial and endotheliochorial pla-
and thick-walled maternal capillaries are enclosed by tropho-
centae. In: Glasser SR, Aplin JD, Guidance LC, et al., eds. The
blast and surrounded by a mesh of fetal capillaries (Fig. 14-18A)
Endometrium. London, New York: Taylor and Francis, 2002;
which gives a labyrinthine appearance in histologic sections.
25:352-364.
The maternal capillaries are surrounded by a thick, basal lami-
Dantzer V. Endotheliochorial placentation. In: Knobil E, Neill JD, eds.
nalike amorphous layer, the interstitial layer, which is espe-
Encyclopedia of Reproduction. San Diego: Academic Press,
cially irregular in queens (Figs. 14-3C and 14-18B). Giant
1998;1:1078-1084.
decidual cels occur in queens (Fig. 14-18A) and, lessfrequently,
Dantzer V. Epitheliochorial placentation. In: Knobil E, Neill JD, eds.
In Encyclopedia of Reproduction. San Diego: Academic Press,
in bitches. In minks, the maternal stem arteries lack smooth
1998;2:18-28.
muscle cells, but some periendothelial cells do show intense
Dantzer V, Leiser R, Kaufmann P, et al. Comparative morphological as.
 staining for actin, thus providing some contractility for blood
pects of placental vascularization. Trophoblast Res 1988;3:235.
flow regulation.
Dantzer V, Svenstrup B. Relationship between ultrastructure and oestro-
The trophoblast layer originally consists of discrete cells. A
 gen levels in the porcine placenta. Anim Reprod Sci 1986;1l:139.
syncytium is formed by the coalescence of some cells. Thus, the
Dantzer V, Winther H. Histological and immunohistochemical
trophoblast includes cytotrophoblast (discrete cells) and syncytio-
(lddns)s: Iooz uonpoiday said ut uoeeuaeid funp seuaaa
trophoblast (fused cells). The syncytium constitutes the major part
209-222.
Dellmann H-D, Catithers JR. Cytology and Microscopic Anatomy.
of the lamellae and forms a continuous interhemal barrier. The
cytotrophoblast is discontinuous, and the cells occur mainly along
Media, PA: Williams & Wilkins, 1996.
Enders AC, Lantz KC, Schlafke S, et al. New cells and old vessels: the
the mesenchymal parts of the lamellae (Figs. 14-3C). The discrete
remodeling of endometrial cups. Biol Reprod 1995:(Suppl 1):
cells contain free ribosomes and a poorly developed ER. The syn-
181-190.
cytium possesses a conspicuous ER, numerous mitochondria, and
Enders AC, Liu IKM. Trophoblast-uterine interactions during equine
dense bodies, which appear to be lysosomes. In queens, the syn-
chorionic girdle cell maturation, migration and transformation.
cytium contains numerous lipid droplets (Fig. 14-18A)
Am J Anat 1991;192:366.
 In queens, in the placental girdle, the maternal and fetal 
Engelhardt H, King GJ. Uterine natural killer cells in species with epi-
 capillary systems meet in a simple crosscurrent blood flow inter-
theliochorial placentation. Nat Immun 1997;15:53-69.
relation. Therefore, transplacental diffusion in the queen is of low
Friess AE, Sinowatz F, Skolek-Winnisch R, et al. The placenta of the
pig. Anat Embryol 1980;158:179.
Friess AE,SinowatzF, Skolek-WinnischR, etal. The placenta oftheig.
At parturition, the placenta separates from the endometrium
through the junctional zone above the supraglandular layer
I1. The ultrastructure of the areolae. Anat Embryol 198 1;163:43.
Guillomot M, Flechon J-E, Wintenberger-Torres S. Conceptus attach-
(Fig. 14-17A).
ment in the ewe: an ultrastructural study. Placenta 198l;2: 169.
Guillomot M, Guay P. Ultrastructural features of the cell surfaces of
uterine and trophoblastic epithelia during embryo attachment in
SUGGESTED READINGS
the cow. Anat Rec 1982;204:315.
Johansson S, Denker L, Dantzer V. Immunohistochemical localization
Abd-Elnaeim M, Pfarrer C, Saber AS, et al. Feto-maternal attachment
of retinoid binding proteins at the materno-fetal interphase of the
in the early diffuse epitheliochorial placenta of the camel (Camelus
porcine epitheliochotial placenta. Biol Reprod 2001;64:60-68.
dromerarius). Light, transmission, and scanning electron micro-
King BF, Enders AC. Compatative development of mam malian yolk sac.
scopy study. Cells Tissues Organs 1999;164:141-154.
In: Nogales FF, ed. The Human Yolk Sac and Yolk Sac Tumors.
Allen WR. Immunological aspects of the endometrial cup reaction and
Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 1 993: 1.
the effect of xenogeneic preghancy in horses and donkeys. J Reprod
King GJ, Atkinson BA, Robertson HA. Implantation and early placen-
Fertil 1982;31(Suppl):57.
tation in domestic ungulates. J Reprod Fertil 1982;31(Suppl): 17.
Amoroso EC. The mammalian placenta. In: Parkes AS, ed. Marshall's
Klisch K, Hecht C, Pfarrer C, et al. DNA content and ploidy level of
Physiology of Reproduction. 3rd Ed. London: Longmans, Green
bovine placentomal trophoblast giant cells. Placenta 1999;20:
and Co., 1952;11:138.
45 1-458.
Anderson JW. Ultrastructure of the placenta and fetal membranes of the
Krebs C, Winther H, Dantzer V, et al. Vascular interrelationship of heaf
dog. 1. The placental labyrinth. Anat Rec 1969;165:15.
term mink placenta: light microscopy combined with scanning
Bertolini M, Anderson GB. The placenta as a contributor to production
electron microscopy of corrosion casts. Microscop Res Tech 1997;
of large calves. Thetiogenology 2002;57:181-187.
38:7687.
Placentation ·Vibeke Dontzer ond Rudolf Leiser
297
Leiser R, Dantzer V. Structural and functional aspects of porcine pla-
tron microscopical morphometry of maternal vascular casts. Anat
cental microvasculature. Anat Embryol 1988;177:409.
Embryol 1999;199:63-74.
Leiser R, Kaufmann P. Placental structure: in a comparative aspect. Exp
Ramsey EM. The Placenta. Human and Animal. New York: Praeger
Cli n Endocrinol 1994; 1 02: 122.
Publishers, 1982.
Leiser R, Koob B. Development and characteristics of placentation in a
Reimers TJ, Ullmann MB, Hansel W. Progesterone and prostanoid pro-
carnivore, the domestic cat. J Exp Zool 1993;266:642.
duction by bovine binucleate trophoblastic cells. Biol Reprod 1 985;
Leiser R, Koob B. Structural and functional aspects of placental micro-
33:1227.
vasculature studies from corrosion casts. In: Motta PM, Murakami
 Steven DH. Comparative Placentation. New York: Academic Press, 1975.
T, Fujita H, eds. Scanning Electron Microscopy of Vascular Casts:
Stewart F. Roles of mesenchymal-epithelial interactions and hepatocyte
 Methods and Applications. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers,
growth factor-scatter factot (HGF-SF) in placental development.
1992:261.
Rev Reprod 1996;1: 144.
Leiser R, Krebs C, Klisch K, et al. Fetal villosity and microvasculature
of the bovine placentome in the second half of gestation. J Anat
ment during early pregnancy in pigs. J Reprod Fertil 1990;
1997;191:517-527.
40(Suppl):261.
Leiser R, Pfarrer C, Abd-Elnaeim M, et al. Feto-maternal anchorage in
Winther H, Dantzer V. Co-localization of vascular endothelial growth
epitheliochorial and endotheliochorial placenta types studied by
factor and its two receptors Flt-l and KDR in the mink placenta.
histology and microvasculat cofrosion casts Trophoblast Research
Placenta 2001;22:457-465.
1998;12:21-39
Winther H, Leiser R, Pfarrer C, et al. Localization of micro and inter-
Lennard SN, Stewart F, Allen WR, et al. Growth factor production in
mediate filaments in hon-preghant uterus and placenta of the
pregnant equine uterus. Biol Reprod Mono 1995;1:161.
mink suggests involvement of maternal endothelial cells and peti-
Morgan G, Whyte A, Wooding FBP. Characterization of the synthetic
endothelial cells in blood flow regulation. Anat Embryol 1999;
capacities of isolated placental binucleate cells from sheep and
200:253.
goats. Anat Rec 1990;226:27.
Wooding FBP. Frequency and localization of binucleate cells in placen-
Morgan G, Wooding FBP, Care AD, et al. Genetic regulation of placen-
tomes of ruminants. Placenta 1983;4:527.
Wni es jo Apnas uoraezipiqAq nzs ui aieiauenb e uoaoung [en
Wooding FBP. The synepitheliochorial placenta of ruminants: binucle-
binding protein (Calbindin-Dgk) and calcium ATPase mRNA in
ate cell fusions and hormone production. Placenta 1992;13:101.
sheep placenta. Placenta 1997;18:211.
Wooding FBP, Flint APF. Placentation. In: Lam ming GE, ed. Marshall's
Mossman HW. Vertebrate Fetal Membranes: Comparative Ontogeny and
Physiology of Reproduction. 4th Ed. London: Chapman and Hall,
Morphology, Evolution, Phylogenetic Significance, Basic Functions,
1994;11:233.
Research Opportunities. New York: Macmillan Press, 1 987.
Wooding FDB, Morgan G, Fowden AL, et al. Sepatate sites and mech-
Pfarrer C, Winther H, Leiser R, et al. The development of the endothe-
anisms for placental transport of calcium, iron and glucoses in the
liochorial mink placenta: Light microscopical and scanning elec-
equine placenta. Placenta 2000;21:635-645.
15
Endocrine System
RONALD L. HULLINGER
OURANIA M. ANDRISANI
Endocrine Organs
Parathyroid Gland
Hypothalamus 
Adrenal Gland
Hypophysis Cerebri (Pituitary Gland)
Adrenal cortex
Adenohypophysis
Adrenal medulla
 Pars distalis
Endocrine Tissues and Cells
Acidophils
 Pancreatic Islets
Basophils
Paraganglia
 Chromophobes
 Difuse Neuroendocrine System Cells
Pars intermedia
Other Endocrine Cells
 Pars tuberalis 
Adipocytes
Neurohypophysis
Endocrine cells of the heart
Hypothalamo-neurohypophyseal tract
Juxtaglomerular cells of the kidney
Hypothalamo-adenohypophyseal axis
 Endocrine cells of the ovary
Epiphysis Cerebri (Pineal Gland)
Endocrine cells of the placenta
Thyroid Gland
Endocrine cells of the testis
The endocrine system is the ductless gland system (Greek endo,
diluted by interstitial fluid and plasma to relatively low concen-
meaning “within"; Greek krino, meaning “toseparate"), that is, the
yy uiim sioidanau uaui oi puiq pue (Wt-Oi oi 6-Oi) suoie1l
glands of nternal secretion. Endocrine secretions are released into the
affinity. The endocrine system plays a major role in the main-
intercellular compartment rather than onto a surface or into a duct
tenance of homeostasis, the dynamic steady state of the body,
leading to a surface (as is the case with exocrine glands). Most
 ensuring minimum variability of the organism's internal environ-
organs and tissues of the endocrine system are characterized by a
ment. Hormones modulate target cell function by up-regulating
dense epithelioid parenchyma and a sparse, delicate, interstitial
(stimulating) or down-regulating (inhibiting) processes in a dyna-
stroma. The reticular fiber stroma supports individual parenchy-
mic fashion. Functions of the endocrine system are integrated and
mal cells and conveys blood and lymph capillaries and the distal
regulated by complex neural, endocrine, and immune molecular
arborizations of neurons. Endocrine cells are typically nonpolar, re-
signaling and feedback mechanisms.
[siaui aui oiu 'sauooq sinpoid Aonaias aaun fuisal
The endocrine system is composed ofendocrine organs,as well
space from the entire cellsurface. Hormones may diffuse locally in
as tissues and cells found in small numbers in nonendocrine organs.
the interstitial fluid, binding to their specific cellular receptors,
Classically, the endocrine organs include the hypophysis cerebri
signaling adjacent cells in an autocrine or paracrine mode. Alter-
natively, they may enter the blood or lymph capillaries, signaling
parathyroid glands, and adrenal glands. Endocrine tissues typi-
target cells located ata greater distance. Circulating hormones are
cally have well-differentiated epithelial/epithelioid cells. The or-
298
Endocrine System ●Ronaid L. Hullinger ond Ouronia M. Andrisoni
667
ganelles and inclusions are indicative of secretory activity, and the
ENDOCRINE ORGANS
cells have an intimate association with large, highly permeable
blood capillaries (sinusoids) as well as lymphatics. In addition to
Hypothalamus
dense vascularity, other characteristics of endocrine tissue include
The hypothalamus is the most ventral part of the diencephalon and
sparse stroma, high metabolic activity ofthe parenchyma, and a po-
forms a significant portion of the expansive circumventricular re-
tent ability to stimulate angiogenesis. Interestingly, endocrine tis-
gion (Fig. 15-1). The hypothalamus contains neurons that inte-
sues are found in organs having additional, nonendocrine functions,
grate and regulate vital body functions (e.g., temperature, blood
for example, neurosecretory neurons of the hypothalamus; pancre-
volume, blood osmolarity, and food intake). Clusters of neurons of
atic islet cells; adipocytes; cardiac myocytes; juxtaglomerular cells
the hypothalamus are referred to as nuclei, including the paired
of the kidney; internal theca cells, follicular epitheliocytes, inter-
supraoptic, paraventricular, and arcuate nuclei. Aferent neural
stitial cells, and corpus luteal cells of the ovary; hormone-
Jo suoigau Aueu uoy sauon suoinau sjueleuodAy aui oi indu!
producing cells of the placenta; interstitial and sustentacular cells
the brain, spinal cord, and special senses. The hypothalamic neu-
of the testis; and paraganglia associated with blood vessels.
rons receive signals that reflect the status of the internal and ex-
Relatively isolated endocrine cells are dispersed in the epithelium
 ternal environments of the body, and respond with signals to the
of the digestive,urinary, reproductive, and respiratory systems; to-
-ss snoaiau aul jo uoinod oruouoine aun pue aisis auropua
gether these cells constitute the diffuse neuroendocrine system.
tem. In the circumventricular region, the blood-brain barrier is
All embryonic germ layers contribute parenchyma to endo-
crine organs and tissues. For example, ectoderm gives rise to hypo-
 spond to ionic and molecular signals (importantly, hormonal sig-
thalamic nuclei, the hypophysis cerebri, the epiphysis cerebri, and
 nals) in the blood. This combined input from the nervous system
the neural crest, the latter providing precursor cells to multiple
and the vascular system provides the basis for both a hormonal
endocrine cells and tissues; differentiation of mesoderm forms the
feedback syste m and neuroendocrine integration.
adrenal cortex and endocrine tissues of the ovary and testis; and en-
Peptidergic neurons of the hypothalamus (e.g., neurons of
doderm contributes the parenchyma of the thyroid and parathyroid.
the supraoptic, suprachiasmatic, paraventricular, or arcuate nu-
RC
PN
PT
PCP
HPV
PD
SCP
FIGURE I5-I Schematic drawing of the hypothalamo-adenohypophysial and the hypothalmo-
neurohypophysial systems. Optic chiasm (O); rostral commissure (RC). Axons from the parvicellular
 yo (d) snxald elide Ad e y puo ui aeuat sneodu aun yo (d) suna
hypophysial portal system in the extermal zone of the median eminence, into which they secrete releasing
hormones; in the case of prolactin, dopamine-producing neurons of the hypothalarmus inhibit its release
from the lactotrophs. These hormones are conveyed to the pars distalis (PD) through the hypophysial 
portal venules (HPV) and gain access to the cells of the pars distalis via a secondary capillary plexus
(SCP). Pars intermedia (Pl); pars tuberalis (PT). Axons oniginating from the magnocellular hypothalamic
supraoptic (SO) and paraventricular (PV) nuclei course through the median eminence (ME) and the
infundibular stalk (IS) to terminate in the neural lobe (NL), where oxytocin and vasopressin are stored
and released.
000
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
clei, which have peptides as neurotransmitters) contribute axons
the neural evagination, and forms a double-layered envelope.
to the neurohypophysis and secrete releasing hormones (re-
Together these primordia form the hypophysis cerebri, with the
leasing factors) to the adenohypophysis (Table 15-1). These axons
neurohypophysis remaining attached to the developing hypothala-
-ouou au asn soy aun uy ualond
mus (Fig. 15-2A). This organogenesis brings the adenohypophysis
neurohypophyseal tract described below. Releasing hormones are
near the hypothalamus, creating a structural proximity that is im-
distributed to the hypophysis cerebri through a blood circulation
portant for the hypothalamic regulation of hypophyseal function.
system (hypothalamo-hypophyseal portal system) described below.
The adenohypophyseal (Latin adeno, meaning “gland"; Greek
-Bd (umois, guueau 'sslqd yaaig .yeauaq, Suueau 'odg
Hypophysis Cerebri (Pituitary Gland)
renchyma differentiates, forming three parts: pars distalis, pars
intermedia, and pars tuberalis. The relative size and orientation
Adenohypophysis
of each part depends upon the species (Fig. 15-3). As the pouch
The hypophysis cerebri is composed of the adlenohypophysis and
 contacts and envelops all but the distal aspect of the developing
neurohypophysis (in humans, the anterior lobe and posterior 
 neurohypophysis, those cells contacting the neural tissue form
lobe, respectively). During development, the adenohypophysis
the pars intermedia (Fig. 15-2B and D). The pars distalis forms the
 forms from a midline epithelial evagination (Rathke's pouch) of
most diverse cell population and largest part of the adenohy-
the roof of the stomodeum, eventually losing the stomodeal con-
 pophysis (Fig. 15-2B and E), and constitutes the majority of the
nection. Simultaneously, the neurohypophysis forms as a midline
outer envelope formed by the embryonic stomodeal pouch. The
evagination of neural tissue from the floor of the hypothalamus
 pars tuberalis is the portion of the pouch that contacts the base of
(diencephalon). As the oral epithelial pouch advances, it surrounds
the brain (median eminence/tuber cinereum), forming a collarlike
TABLEI5-IF
 Relationship of Hypothalamic Releasing Hormones, Hormones Released From Adenohypophysis, and
Hormones Released by Target Cells
Hormone From
Hypothalamus
 Cell of Origin in 
Adenohypophysis,
Cell of Origin in
Hormone Released
Secretion
Hypothalamus
Pars Distalis
Adenohypophysis
Chief Target Cell
by Target Cell
Growth
Hypothalamic
Growth hormone
 Somatotroph
All cells 
hormone-
 neuron
(GH)
Hepatocyte
Insulinlike growth 
releasing
factorI (IGF-l)
hormone
(GHRH)
 Prolactin-
Hypothalamic
Prolactin (PRL)
Lactotroph
Mammary ductal/alveolar
releasing
neuron
epitheliocyte
factor (PRF)
Hypothalamic
Thyroid-stimulating
Thyrotroph
Thyroid follicular
Triodothyronine (T3)
releasing 
 neuron
hormone (TSH)
epitheliocyte
and tetraiodothy-
hormone
ronine (T4)
(TRH)
Gonadotropin-
Hypothalamic
Follicle-stimulating
Gonadotroph*
Ovarian follicular
 Estrogen, inhibin,
releasing
 neuron
hormone* (FSH)
epitheliocyte
activin 
hormone
Testicular susten-
Estrogen, inhibin,
(GnRH)
tacular cell
activin 
 Luteinizing hormone
Gonadotroph*
 wnani snduo 
Progesterone
*(H7)
epitheliocyte
 Ovarian intemal
Testosterone
thecal cell
Testicular intersti-
Testosterone
tial cell
Corticotropin-
Hypothalamic
Adrenocorticotropin
Corticotroph
Zona glomerulosa.
Mineralocorticoid
releasing
 neuron
(ACTH)
epitheliocyte**
homone
Zona fasciculata
Glucocorticoid
(CRH)
epitheliocyte 
 Zona reticulans
 Androgen
epitheliocyte
*FSH and LH are coexpressed by the same gonadotroph.
$Cells of the zona glomerulosa are IO-fold less responsive than those of the zona fasciculata.
Endocrine System · Ronoid L. Hullinger ond Ouronio M. Andrisoni
105
B
 infundibulum
ventricle Ill
neurohypophysis
recess
 adenohypophysis
neural
lobe,
pars tuberalis
 pars intermedia
pars distalis
C
hypophyseal cavity
axon of
caudal
rostral
hypothalamic
neuron
pars distalis
adenohypophysis
thyrotroph
neural lobe
neurohypophysis
somatotroph
astrogliocyte
blood capillary
lactotroph
sinusoid
hypophysealcavity
pars intermedia
corticotroph
gonadotroph
D
pars distalis
E
FIGURE I5-2 A. Midsagital (median) section of the hypophysis cerebri, hypothalamus, and thalamus of a puppy (x2). B. Blood arrives in
neurohypophyseal tract (×l00). D. Adenohypophysis contacting neural lobe (x40). E. Parenchyma of the adenohypophysis (×I 00).
Hematoxylin and eosin.
investment of the stalk of the neurohypophysis (Fig. 15-2B), and
basisphenoid bone, the sella turcica (Latin ella, meaning “saddle";
links the pars distalis and pars intermedia proximally. The lumen
-ap siua yum u saioads un '(usiini, uuea 'sa uit
of the pouch may remain in some species/individuals as the hypo-
pression is deep, the meninges, including the dura mater, extend
physeal cavity between the pars intermedia and the pars distalis
as a diaphrag m (the diaphragma sellae) from the lateral margins
(Fig. 15-2B and D).
of the saddle at the level of the infundibular stalk. Due toits cryp-
As an extension of the ventral aspect of the hypothalamus,
st sisydody aua on yoeondde iens uouuon aun uo 
 the neurohypophysis is a continuation of the median eminence.
transpharyngeal. At necropsy, meningeal adhesions with the pe-
Proximally, the third ventricle extends as a recess into the neu-
riosteum (and the diaphragm in some species) make it difficult to
rohypophysis (Fig. 15-2A and B). The proximal segment of the 
remove the hypophysis intact and still attached to the brain.
neurohypophysis is a funnel-shaped stalk, the infundibulum,
which attaches to the median eminence. The infundibulum is
Pars Distalis
continued distally as the neural lobe (pars nervosa) (Fig. 15-2B).
The pars distalis comprises parenchymal cell clusters perfused
-odAy au uoy Aepneouuaa pauao s! sisAqdody aul
with sinusoidal capillaries (Fig. 15-2E). The sinusoidal capillar-
 thalamus, straddling the midline (Fig. 15-2B). Like the brain, the
ies of the pars distalis form the secondary capillary plexus of the
hypophysis is invested by the pia-arachnoid; distally, these lepto-
hypothalamo-hypophyseal portal system. Based on routine stain-
 meninges are fused with the periosteum in a depression of the
ing of their stored secretions, the cells of the pars distalis have
302
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
FIGURE I5-3 Schematic drawings of midsagittal sections of the hypophysis cerebri. A. Horse. B. Cow. C. Dog. D. Pig. E. Cat. F. Sheep
White: neurohypophysis with infundibular recess; small dots: pars tuberalis adenohypophysis; large dots: pars distalis adenohypophysis; black:
been classified as acidophils, basophils, or chromophobes. These
duce adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and are uniformly
cell types vary in size, shape, number, and position depending on 
dispersed in the pars distalis. These cells are less conspicuous
species, gender, age, and physiologic status (e.g., during preg-
within the parenchymal cell clusters and are difficult to identify
nancy and lactation or after gonad removal). Five subtypes of cells
with the light microscope. Corticotrophs may be spherical, ovoid,
have been further identified with immunohistochemistry. Each
or stellate, depending on the species. Their basophilic granules
cell type (called a “-troph") expresses a peptide, protein, or glyco-
iim uieis pue ianaue ui uu oo oi os I Aiaieuixondde ansia
protein hormone (called a tropin [Greek troph, meaning “food"])
(HdT-g) auooy udoodtd pue Hiov yoq roy Apoqiue
(Fig. 15-2E) and represents a definitive and terminal differentia-
These peptide hormones are derived from the posttranslational
Jod useidois aui ui suoainas au aiois saiisan Aoaiag 
 processing of proopiomelanocortin (POMC). All three baso-
to signals for their exocytosis (Fig. 15-4). Secretions include soma-
philic cell types stain with periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) and Alcian 
-ouueu) ujdonoiel (auouoy yimoio) auouioq udonnol
blue dyes.
tropin, prolactin); thyrotropin (thyroid-stimulating hormone);
two gonadotropins (follicle-stimulating hormone and luteiniz-
Chromopbobes. Chromophobes stain poorly with dyes used to
ing hormone); and corticotropin (adrenocorticotropic hormone)
identify acidophils and basophils. Some are considered postsecre-
(see Table 15-1).
tory acidophils and basophils. Other chromophobes occasionally
form the simple epithelium that lines cysts of unknown signifi-
Acidophils.
. Specifically, somatotrophs that synthesize and
cance. Still other stellate-shaped chromophobes are interspersed
secrete growth hormone (GH) are concentrated laterally in the
between the other cells of the pars distalis, and it has been sug-
pars distalis; their abundant acidophilic secretory granules stain
 gested that they may represent an undifferentiated stem cellof the
with orange G dye and are approximately 300 to 400 nm in di-
adenohypophyseal parenchyma.
ameter. Lactotrophs, which produce prolactin (PRL), stain
lightly with erythrosin and carmine dyes. Lactotroph cell size and
Pars Intermedia
dye affinity increase during pregnancy and lactation. The acido-
In some species, the parenchyma of the pars intermedia is
philic secretory granules of lactotrophs may be as large as approx-
arranged as a simple columnar epithelium; in others, it is a pseudo-
imately 80O nm in diameter.
stratified columnar epithelium that invades the neural lobe; while
in others (e.g., horse), the parenchyma is extensively developed.
Basophils. Thyrotrophs produce thyroid-stimulating hor-
Melanotrophs are the most abundant parenchymal cell of the pars
mone (TSH), are more numerous midventrally, and may be de-
intermedia, secreting Q-melanocyte-stimulating hormone
tected with aldehyde-fuchsin dye; their basophilic secretory
ssaoid are sauouy apidad asaui 'HdTd pue (HS-o)
granules measure approximately 150 nm in diameter. Gonado-
products of POMC expressed by the melanotrophs. Other paren-
trophs coexpress follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and
chymal cells include those lining cysts, corticotrophs, stellate cells
luteinizing hormone (LH), are relatively small, and stain with
and simple epithelium lining the hypophyseal cavity. Blood capil-
aldehyde-thionine dyes; their stored basophilic secretory gran-
laries are not as extensive as in the pars distalis. Hypothalamic
ules are approximately 2o0 nm in diameter. Corticotrophs pro-
axons terminate in the pars intermedia and include dopaminergic,
Endocrine System ● Ronaid L. Hullinger ond Ouronia M. Andrisani
00
FIGURE I5-4  Organelles typical of an adenohypophyseal cell: granular (rough) endoplasmic reticulum (rER); Golgi complex (Go)
mitochondria (M); secretory granules (SG) of varying maturational stages (×28,000)
serotoninergic, adrenergic, and GABAergic (Y-aminobutyric acid)
eminence, infundibulum, and neural lobe of the neurohypoph-
axons that modulate the activity of the parenchyma.
ysis (Fig. 15-2B), together forming a major portion of a tractlike
extension of the hypothalamus known as the hypothalamo-
Pars Tuberalis
neurohypophyseal tract. The neurohypophysis contains the axons
The pars tuberalis is composed of cell clusters that form a folded
of hypothalamic neurons and central gliocytes ("pituicytes"), but
no neuron cell bodies. The neuron cell bodies in the hypothala-
tissue with occasional small cysts (Figs. 15-2B and 15-5). This re-
 mus and secretory granules in their axons stain positively with
gion of the pituitary is traversed by hypophyseal portal venules
that carry blood from the primary capillary plexus in the median
antibody to oxytocin (OT) and antidiuretic hormone (ADH)
eminence to the secondary capillary plexus in the pars distalis. The
(Figs. 15-6 and 15-7), also called arginine vasopressin (AVP). In
parenchymal cells of the pars tuberalis have melatonin receptors
the pig, lysine is substituted for arginine, producing lysine va
and are believed to regulate the seasonal reproductive cycle of
sopressin (LVP). ADH-producing neurons and OT-producing
some domesticated mammals (see Epiphysis Cerebri below).
neurons are present in both the supraoptic nuclei and the para-
ventricular nuclei. Secretory vesicles containing the hormone are
Other cells include those lining cysts, as well as a few gonado-
transported along microtubules to axon terminals near blood cap-
trophs and thyrotrophs.
illaries in the neural lobe. Along the course of the axon, secretory
vesicles form focal accumulations (Herring bodies); when stained
Neurohypophysis
with aldehyde-fuchsin, these can be resolved by light microscopy
Hypothalamo-Neurohypophyseal Tract
(Fig. 15-8).
Large (magnocellular) neurons clustered in the hypothalamus make
 In the hypothalamic nuclei, neurons synthesize preprooxy
up the majority of the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei.
tocin, which is processed to oxytocin and neurophysin and pack-
These neurons receive afferent synaptic input that signals the ex-
aged in secretory granules. Exocytosis of the secretory granules is
ocytosis of secretory vesicles from their axons. Bundles of these
via a calcium-mediated mechanism, initiated by a neural synapse
axons and their supporting astroglial cells constitute the median
304
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
FIGURE I5-5 Section in the dorsal plane through the median
eminence (large ruminant). Infundibular recess (A): intemal zone 
FIGURE I5-6 Neurosecretory neurons of hypothalamic
(B); extermal zone (C); pars tuberalis of the adenohypophysis with
 paraventricular nucleus labeled with antibodies directed against
numerous portal venules (D). Masson's trichrome {(x2).
antidiuretic hormone. Transverse section (×20).
FIGURE I5-7 Axons of neurosecretory neurons (A) adjacent to a basal lamina, interstitial 
connective tissue (B), and a fenestrated capillary (C) in the neural lobe of neurohypophysis. Axon
terminals have large electron-dense, hormone-containing secretory vesicles; upon depolarization of the
neuron, the contents of the vesicles are released by exocytosis (x31,500).
Endocrine System ● Ronaid L. Hullinger ond Ouronia M. Andrisoni
305
thesizes hormones, which target the cells of the pars distalis.
These hormones are termed releasing hormones (factors); they
effect the release, by exocytosis, of the specific hormones ex-
pressed and synthesized in the pars distalis. In contrast, functions
of the pars intermedia are regulated by innervation, whereas reg-
ulation of cells in the pars tuberalis remains unclear.
The releasing hormones from the hypothalamus are trans-
ported within axons of hypothalamic neurons to the periphery of
the median eminence, where they are released near the primary
-ss pd pasrdodr-o a yo snxad Ad
by hypophyseal venules that flow through the pars tuberalis
to the secondary capillary plexus in the pars distalis. This por-
tal vascular system establishes the anatomic basis ofa functional
hypothalamo-adenohypophyseal axis.
 In the pars distalis, the hypothalamic neurosecretions leave 
the secondary capillary (sinusoidal) plexus and bind specific re-
ceptors on their respective adenohypophyseal target cells. Hor-
59
2
mones are then released from the target cells and affect other target
cells in the periphery. In turn, peripheral target cells synthesize
 and release hormones intothe circulation that mediate either neg-
FiGUre 15-8
3Hypophysis cerebri of cat. Dark staining within
ative feedback in other target cells or positive feedback to the
the neural lobe (NL) marks accumulations of neurosecretory
hypothalamic neurons and cells of the pars distalis.
 granules (Herring bodies). Pars intermedia of the adenohypophysis
Growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH) (somato-
(Pl). Aldehyde-fuchsin (x40)
tropin-releasing hormone [SRH]) is released from neurons of the
arcuate nucleus in response to neural stimulation (e.g., during
sleep and exercise). It binds to its receptor on the somatotrophs of
washing the cow's udder in the milking parlor or sounds from
the pars distalis. The GHRH receptor is a G protein-coupled re-
the sow's litter). When released, oxytocin binds to its receptor on
ceptor (GPCR) that, when activated, elevates intracellular con-
myoepithelial cells of the mammary alveoli and ducts, causing
centration of 3', 5'-cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP),
myofilament-driven cell contraction, thereby resulting in “milk
triggering calcium-mediated exocytosis of secretory vesicles con-
yioous uo aoidasan sii on spuq uioiixo ‘uorppe u ."umopial
taining growth hormone. Growth hormone (GH) is a 22 Kda
myocytes of the myometrium, causing uterine contraction and
protein. The GH receptor is a tyrosine kinase (cytokine receptor
parturition, and to its receptor in the brain, initiating species-
family) that, upon binding GH, forms a dimer, leading to tyro-
specific maternal behaviors (e.g., sheep).
 sine phosphorylation of downstream signaling molecules (tran-
Other neurons in the hypothalamus synthesize preprovaso-
scription factors). GH targets all cells, but especially hepatocytes,
pressin, which is processed to ADH and neurophysin. Secretory
 skeletal myocytes, adipocytes, and growth plate chondrocytes.
granules for ADH are stored and released similar to oxytocin gran-
GH induces an anabolic effect in muscle; in liver and cartilage,
ules. The release is signaled by sensory synapses from neurons
GH induces synthesis and release of insulinlike growth factor I
monitoring properties of the internal environment, for example,
(IGF-I; somatomedin). IGF-I mediates additional GH effects
increased plasma osmolality or decreased blood volume (hypo-
 by acting on chondroblasts, promoting their proliferation and
volemia). ADH acts on the kidney by binding to the V2 recep-
-Umop umo si sasnen H 'uoiaaas aun jo yioia suisni snu
[ide aun u! ( uodnb) sauuu iam unaiie pue 1o
regulation (negative feedback) by stimulating somatostatin-
membrane of the collecting tubule cells, decreasing water loss
 producing neurons in the hypothalamus. Somatostatin binds to
through the urine (an antidiuretic effect). ADH also binds to its
its GPCR on the GH-producing somatotrophs, uncoupling cAMP
 V1 receptor on vascular smooth muscle, causing increased myo-
 production and suppressing release of GH.
cyte tone, vascular constriction, and elevated blood pressure. In
Prolactin-releasing factor (PRF) remains poorly under-
addition, binding of ADH to the V3 receptor on hypophyseal
stood. Prolactin (PRL) is principally regulated by tonic inhibition
corticotrophs causes release of ACTH and a rise in aldosterone
spuq auruedoq snueieunodAy aun uony auruedop Aq papiaond 
secretion. Insufficient production of ADH results in diabetes
 to its D2 membrane receptor on lactotrophs of the pars distalis, un-
insipidus, characterized by an increased volume of dilute urine.
coupling cAMP, lowering intracellular calcium, and inhibiting
release of prolactin. Several stimuli result in PRL release from the
Hypothalamo-Adenohypophyseal Axis
lactotrophs (e.g., TRH, OT, ADH, angiotensin II). Neurogenic
Neurons of the hypothalamus also regulate the neuroendocrine
stress and sensory stimuli of suc kling can override the dopamine
inhibition. PRL is a 23 Kda protein; the PRL receptor is a tyro-
-us suoinau (reinlaniaied) leus jo uoniendod asnp Aleiauag
sine kinase. PRL targets its receptor on epithelial cells of the
306
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
in the hypothalamus to enhance CRH production. ACTH is one
molecules that stim ulate proliferation and differentiation of the
of the posttranslational cleavage products of the prohormone
epitheliocytes as milk-synthesizing cells. Further, PRL binds to
 POMC, processed in corticotrophs to form ACTH, o-MSH, and
its receptor on dopaminergic neurons of the hypothalamus, in-
β-LPH. ACTH binds to its GPCR on adrenal cortical parenchy-
creasing dopamine synthesis and release, thus causing inhibition
mal cells and, via adenylate cyclase and cAMP, activates proteins
of PRL release in the pars distalis. Together with GH, PRL also
that increase transcription of the enzymes involved in steroid
stimulates the immune system, specifically the proliferation and
hormone biosynthesis (e.g. glucocorticoids). Glucocorticoids neg-
differentiation of lymphocytes.
atively regulate CRH production in the hypothalamus and neg-
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) is released from
 atively regulate POMC synthesis and ACTH release in the pars
small neurons in the paraventricular nucleus and binds to its
 distalis. In response to stress, signals creating increased neuro-
GPCR on thyrotrophs (see Fig. 15-13). The binding results in
genic input to the hypothalamus overcome this inhibition of
the activation of phospholipase C and PI3-kinase and the eleva-
ACTH by glucocorticoid.
tion of intracellular calcium concentration, which is involved in
exocytosis of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH; thyrotro-
pin). TSH is a glycoprotein that is transported in the blood to the
Epiphysis Cerebri (Pineal Gland)
thyroid epithelial cells where it binds to its GPCR, stimulating
The pineal gland is a midline evagination of the dorsocaudal as-
the synthesis and storage of thyroglobulin and the release of thy-
pect of the epithalamus of the diencephalon,to which it remains
roid hormones, triodothyronine (Ts) or tetraiodothyronine
attached by a stalk that contains a small recess of ventricle III
(T4). In turn, negative feedback of T or T4 to the hypothalamus
(Fig. 15-9A). The pineal (Latin pinus, meaning “pine, pine cone")
 and the pars distalis regulates the production of TRH and TSH,
is enveloped by pia-arachnoid from which the blood supply to
respectively.
the gland originates. As a derivative of neural epithelium, the
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) is a protein
parenchyma is composed of pinealocytes and astrocytelike, cen-
tral gliocytes; the processes of both cell types form the neuropil
thalamus; it binds to its GPCR on the gonadotroph, elevating the
between the cells (Fig. 15-9B). The blood-brain barrier is not
intracellular concentration of calcium and activating protein ki-
functional in this circumventricular organ and pinealocyte secre-
nase C. Protein kinase C signals the coexpression, synthesis, and
tions have easy access to blood capillaries; pineal secretions also
release of the glycoprotein hormones follicle-stimulating hor-
mone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH). In the female, FSH
deposits (concretions) termed corpora arenacea (brain sand) may
binds to its GPCR on the follicular epithelial cells; in the male,
be present. The deposits are easily resolvable in the intercellular
FSH binds to its GPCR on sustentacular cells (Sertoli cells) of
neuropil, but are of no known functional significance.
the testis. In both sexes, production of estrogen is signaled by
Pinealocytes share gap junctions and extend axons to multi-
FSH. In the female, LH binds to its GPCR on internal thecal
ple sites, including other pinealocytes, adjacent capillaries (Fig.
cells, signaling the production of testosterone, and on follicular
15-9C), and the base of the ependymal lining of the ventricular
and thecal cells of the postovulatory follicle, signaling production
of progesterone. Cells of the ovarian interstitial stroma in the pig,
axons coursing in the adventitia of arterioles supplying the
dog, cat, rabbit, and human also produce testosterone. In the male,
 pineal. Sympathetic neurons from which these axons arise are in
LH (also called interstitial cell-stimulating hormone [ICSH])
the cranial cervical ganglia. These neurons receive input from
binds to its GPCR on the interstitial cells (Leydig cells) and sig-
 preganglionic neurons in the intermediate gray matter of the first
nals production of testosterone. In addition to effects on other
thoracic segment of the spinal cord. The thoracic neurons are
target cells, these gonadal steroids bind to cells of the hypothal-
linked to optic input via a reticulospinal tract to the trigeminal
amus and the pars distalis, negatively regulating production of
reticular nucleus and, in turn, axonal projections from the supra
GnRH and gonadotropins. FSH also stimulates follicular cells,
chiasmatic nucleus of the hypothalamus. The optic nerve sends
corpus luteal cells, and sustentacular cells to synthesize inhibin
projections to synapses in the suprachiasmic nucleus.
and activin. As members of the TGF-β superfamily of growth
Pineal function is linked to visual signals relaying informa-
factors, inhibin and activin either inhibit or activate, respec-
tion about environmental light. Most understanding of the mech-
tively, production of FSH from the hypophysis.
 anism of pineal function is based on data from the rat, sheep, and
Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) is a protein hor-
horse. A biorhythm, also known as circadian rhythm, has been
mone released from small neurons in the paraventricular nucleus
linked to the intensity of yellow-green light in the environment
in response to neural signaling (see Fig. 15-20). CRH binds to its
and characterizes the secretory activity of the pinealocyte. The pri-
GPCR on the corticotrophs, elevating intracellular concentration
mary signal to the pinealocyte is norepinephrine, released from the
of cAMP and triggering calcium-mediated exocytosis of secre-
 sympathetic axon, which binds to its β-adrenergic receptor. Light
tory vesicles containing adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH).
received by an intact visual system inhibits this adrenergic stim-
ADH potentiates the release of ACTH from corticotrophs; ADH
ulation, and the pinealocyte releases serotonin. In the dark phase,
and CRH are coexpressed in neurons of the paraventricular nu-
the adrenergic stimulation is operational, resulting in activation
cleus that terminate in the median eminence, near the primary
of the β-adrenergic GPCR on the pinealocyte. The resulting ele-
capillary plexus of the portal system. IL-1 β, IL-6, and TNF-0 act
vation of cAMP induces the expression of N-acetyltransferase,
Endocrine System · Ronoid L. Hullinger ond Ouronia M. Andrisoni
100
epithalamus
epner
Thyroid Gland
 epiphysis cerebri
(pineal)
The thyroid (Greek thyreos, meaning “"oblong shield"; Greek
eidos, meaning “form") parenchyma is derived from the pharyn-
geal endoderm as a ventral, tubular extension caudally along the
midline, beginning at the root of the tongue. Initially the thyroid
develops as an exocrine gland; however, the duct is lost, and the
 parenchyma develops as many follicles supported by a delicate in-
terstitial stroma (mesodermal) of reticular or loose collagenous
connecting tissue (Fig.15-10B). The stroma bears a profuse plexus
 thyroid follicle
-blood capillary
colloid
pinealocyte
neuropil
gliocyte
interstitium
B
blood capillary
axonal process of
/ pinealocyte extending
toward capillary
 parafollicular cell
follicularepithelium
B
Calcitonin is released from parafollicular cells
nucleus of
cytoplasm of pinealocyte
C endotheliocyte
blood capillary
Adrenergic stimulation of pinealocyte
parafollicular cell
results in serotonin conversion to melatonin;
melatonin is released near capillaries.
follicular epithelium
FIGURE I5-9 Midsagital section, pineal and epithalamus of
puppy. A: ×2; B: x40; C: ×I00. Saffron-modified Masson's trichrome.
which converts serotonin to melatonin. Melatonin is released as
it is synthesized, rather than stored. Melatonin, released from
colloid/thyroglobulin
axons terminating near capillaries, circulates via the blood. At the
C
target cells, melatonin binds to its GPCR, inhibiting neurons in 
 the suprachiasmatic nucleus; it also inhibits gonadotropin release
from the pars distalis by an unknown mechanism. In domesticated
 Tsand T4are stored within thyroglobulin of the follicle;
Sunsan aianne ieauid snnsaod aleuss are in sieue
proteolysis releases T3 and T4 from the epitheliocyte;
T3 and T4enter target cells; T3 binds to its nuclear receptor.
in melatonin synthesis is linked to species-dependent, seasonal
(circannual) variation in ambient photoperiod, blocking release of
FIGURE I5-I0 Random sectional plane, thyroid of dog. A:
gonadotropins and having an "“antigonadotrophic effect."
x4.5; B: x40; C: xI 00. Hematoxylin and eosin.
800
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
of blood sinusoids, lymph capillaries, and adrenergic axons. A later
peroxidase (Fig. 15-12). At its basolateral membrane, the epi-
migration of cells from pharyngeal pouch IV forms the ultimo-
 thelial cell expresses an integral membrane protein, the sodium
branchial body. As this body advances to fuse with the develop-
iodide symporter, that actively imports sodium and iodide and
asaul 'sllan isan lenau Sueiau Aq pazjuolos s! a! 'poiaun Su!
effectively concentrates iodide in the epitheliocyte. Thyroid.
neural crest cells differentiate in the thyroid as parafollicular (cal-
 peroxidase is also expressed and incorporated in the apical mem-
citonin-producing, "C") cells (Fig. 15-10B and C).
brane. In the presence of hydrogen peroxide, iodide is converted
The thyroid follicle is delineated by a simple epithelium,
to iodine and one or two ions are incorporated into each tyrosyl
the cells of which are joined by junctional complexes near the
residue, forming mono- or diodotyrosine (T, or T). The per-
lumen. The size of follicles varies from a few to several hundred
oxidase catalyzes the coupling of iodotyrosyl residues within the
micrometers in diameter (Fig. 15-10A). Interestingly, in contrast 
thyroglobulin dimer, forming tri- or tetraiodothyronine (T or
to other endocrine tissues, the follicular epithelium displays po-
T4). T4 is commonly called thyroxin. Should production of thy-
larity. The polarized follicular epithelial cells (Figs. 15-10C and
roid hormones decline, stored thyroglobulin can provide required
15-1l) vary in height (columnar, cuboidal, squamous), depend-
hormone for many days.
ing upon their synthetic activity. Columnar cells indicate highly
The release of stored thyroglobulin is effected by endocyto-
secretory follicles, whereas squamous cells are linked to follicles in
sis of colloid via the extension of microvilli and lamellipodia of
a resting state. Follicular cells display an elaborate granular endo-
the follicular cells. Endocytotic vesicles containing colloid fuse
plasmic reticulum, Golgi complex, and secretory vesicles, charac-
with lysosomes, and proteolysis of the thyroglobulin releases T, ,
teristic of cells active in the synthesis of protein. Thyroglobulin,
T2, T, or T4. Only T, and T4 are released into the blood from the
a glycoprotein, is exocytosed at the apical surface of the follicular
basolateral cell surface, by diffusion through the membrane.
epithelial cell; this iodinated glycoprotein, accumulating in the
The synthesis, iodination, and proteolysis of thyroglobulin
follicular lumen, is also called colloid. Furthermore, these follic-
occur simultaneously in the same cell, and are regulated by TSH
ular epithelial cells are simultaneously active in the endocytosis of
(Fig. 15-13). Gap junctions provide for a synchronized activity
the colloid from the follicular lumen via apical cell processes and
of all cells lining a given follicle.
the proteolysis of thyroglobulin, as evidenced also by the presence
T, and T4 are soluble in the membrane of target cells. T, is
of lysosomes and phagolysosomes (secondary lysosomes)
the active form of the hormone; T4, which enters the cytoplasm of
Both TSH and adrenergic input stimulate GPCRs, lead-
 a target cell,is deiodinated to form T3. T3 target cells express the
ing to elevation of intracellular cAMP, which mediates both
T, receptor, a member of the steroid nuclear receptor family. T3
the synthesis of thyroglobulin and the release of thyroid hormone.
acts in target cells by entering the nucleus and binding to its re-
Thyroglobulin is a glycosylated dimer containing tyrosyl sites ca-
ceptor. In the absence of T, the receptor is already in the nucleus,
pable of being iodinated. The enzymes participating in the iodi-
bound to the hormone response element (HRE) of the DNA, and
nation of thyroglobulin include the iodide sym porter and thyroid
 acting as a repressor of transcription. Binding of the T, ligand to
PV
8
FIGURE I5-II  Thyroid parenchyma, dog. Follicular epitheliocytes (FE) form lining of follicle.
Microvlli (arrows) praject into colloid; calcitonin-producing, parafollicular cells (P) lie near a pericapillary 
space (PV) (×7,900). (Courtesy of K. R. Moore and 5. L. Teitelbaum.)
Endocrine System ● Ronaid L. Hullinger ond Ouronia M. Andrisoni
60
iodinated thyroglobulin
(colloid) storage
thyroglobulin
thyroglobulin
exocytosis
endocytosis
phagolysosome
conjugation of
carbohydrate
moieties
proteolysis of
关
thyroglobulin
peptide
lysosomal
synthesis
enzyme
(rER)
synthesis
amino acid
amino acids
iodide
uptake and
3.4
Iuptake
lumen of blood sinusoid
FIGURE I5-I2 
 Schematic drawing of the biosynthesis of thyroglobulin (left) and its resorption and proteolysis (right). For didactic
purposes, events are depicted in two cells but they occur simultaneously in the same cell. Rough endoplasmic reticulum (rER).
its nuclear hormone receptor displaces transcriptional corepres-
calcium-sensing GPCRs on the parafollicular cell detect the cal-
sor complexes and allows the T,-bound receptor to activate tran-
cium increase and trigger calcitonin release. Gastrin also promotes
scription. Thus, the T, receptor is a ligand-induced transactivator;
calcitonin release (see Enteroendocrine Cells). Calcitonin binds to
genes transcribed affect basal metabolic rate, thermogenesis, and
its GPCR on osteoclasts and kidney epithelium, lowering calcium
gluconeogenesis. In the median eminence and pars distalis, T, acts
concentration in blood and interstitial fluid by inhibiting osteoclast
to negatively regulate the release of TRH and TSH, respectively.
activity and lowering tubular resorption of calcium, respectively.
The parafollicular cells often are positioned in the basolat-
eral compartment between follicular epithelial cell and within the
Parathyroid Gland
basal lamina, while others form clusters between the follicles (Figs
15-10B and C). These large epithelioid cells (prominent in the dog)
Parathyroid glands are derived from endoderm of pharyngeal
synthesize calcitonin and are APUD (amine precursor uptake and
pouches II and IV. As the thyroid primordium is displaced cau-
decarboxylation) cells (see Diffuse Neuroendocrine System Cells
doventrally from the root of the tongue into the neck, clusters of
below). Synthesis and release of calcitonin is regulated, not by the
endodermal cells from the pouches join the thyroid tissue to form
pars distalis, but by the concentration of calcium in the intercellu-
the parathyroids. The cranial external parathyroid (Fig. 1 5-14A)
lar fluid. When the intercellular calcium concentration rises, the
forms from pouch Ill, while the caudal internal parathyroid
015
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
TRH exocytosed from hypothalamic neurons
B
enters primary plexus of portal system
ventricle Ill
en route to pars distalis.
hypothalamus
pituitary
thyrotropin-
releasing
pars distalis
hormone (TRH)
C
 hepatocytes with
thyrotroph
glycogen engorging
(x100)
cytoplasm (x100)
D
thyroid tissue
C
thyroid
triiodothyronine (T3 )and
stimulating
tetraiodothyronine (T4)
hormone (TSH)
 two unilocular adipocytes
(lipid is black); nerve lies
between cells (x100)
H
TSH binds to its GPCR, signaling via cAMP,
thyroid parenchyma
thyrogiobulin synthesis, and T, and T release.
one skeletal myocyte (x100)
defining follicles 
T3 and T4 circulate to peripheral target cells.
with colloid stores (x100)
T3 and T4 enter cells by diffusion; T 4 is converted to T3; T3 enters the nucleus, binds
to its receptor (bound to the hormone response element), and initiates transcription.
FIGURe 15-13
 Cartoon summarizing molecular, cellular, and tissue biology of thyroid. A., Hypothalamus and hypophysis cerebri.
Hematoxylin and eosin (x2). B., Parenchyma of hypothalamus. Saffron-modified Masson's trichrome (×I00). C., Parenchyma of pars distalis.
Hematoxylin and eosin (×I 00). D., Thyroid tissue. Hematoxylin and eosin (x4.5). E., Parenchyma of thyroid. Hematoxylin and eosin (×I 00).
F., Parenchyma of liver. Periodic acid-Schiff (×IOO). G., Interstitial unilocular adipocytes. Sudan black B (×IOO). H., Skeletal muscle. Saffron-
modified Masson's trichrome (×I 00)
forms from pouch IV. Each gland is separated from the thyroid
blood and interstitial fluid. PTH synthesis and release is regu-
by a stroma forming a capsule (Fig. 15-14B); the parenchyma is
lated by calcium concentration in the intercellular fluid. The
supported by a delicate interstitium that bears an extensive cap-
 principal cell has calcium-sensing GPCRs that monitor decreased
illary plexus (Fig. 15-14D). The parenchyma is arranged as a
extracellular calcium concentration. When stimulated, the re-
large, uniform, and tightly packed cluster of small principal
Ceptor activates phospholipase C and PI3-kinase, leading toa rise
cells (chief cells) (Fig. 15-14C and D). Slight variations in the
in concentration of intracellular calcium. The increased calcium
-a aa o iun a sn idid a jo ue iis
flect differences in the secretory cycle. The parathyroid glands of
channels, increased intracellular calcium, and exocytosis of PTH.
the horse, cow, and human have a few scattered, large oxyphilic
PTH binds to its GPCR on target cells, elevating the concentra-
cells (acidophils) of unknown function.
tion of cAMP and enhancing the activity of enzymes in osteocytes
 The principal cell synthesizes parathyroid hormone (PTH),
and osteoclasts, kidney epithelium, and intestinal epithelium.
which elevates and maintains normal calcium concentration in
PTH enhances the resorption of calcium from bones (activation
Endocrine System ● Ronaid L. Hullinger ond Ouronia M. Andrisoni
3 11
icate connective tissue envelope separates the cortex and medulla.
 capsule/fascia
The stroma is sparse in both the cortex and medulla, with a few
trabeculae extending from the capsule to the medulla bearing
arterioles and preganglionic sympathetic axons. The dual blood
 parathyroid
supply of the cortex and medulla is from an arteriolar plexus in
the capsule that supplies the fenestrated sinusoids of the cortex,
as well as arterioles passing directly to the medulla. These circu-
thyroid
lations merge in the medulla, forming medullary sinusoids, venous
sinuses, and eventually the medullary vein.
parathyroid
 parenchymal cells
Adrena! Cortex
The tissue architecture and staining affinities of the adrenal corti-
cal parenchyma give rise to a pattern of zonation (from the outer-
most to innermost): zona glomerulosa (arcuata), zona fasciculata,
and zona reticularis (Fig. 15-15A and B). The zona glomerulosa
(arcuata) constitutes the outer cortex; the zonae fasciculata and
reticularis form the inner cortex. At the interface of the outer and
inner cortices, there is a narrow band, the zona intermedia, of
small, undifferentiated cells that make up the blastemic stem cells,
unilocular
which generate replacement parenchyma for both the inner and
fat
thyroid
outer cortex (Fig. 15-15D).
follicles
Arranged as tufts of epithelial cells (zona glomerulosa in
C
ruminants and humans) (Fig. 15-16A) or as arches of columnar
interstitium bearing
cells (zona arcuata in horses, pigs, and carnivores) (Figs. 15-15B
blood capillary
and 15-16B), the outer cortex is the source of mineralocorti-
endotheliocyte
coids (aldosterone and corticosterone). This zone develops in
the perinatal period as the last of the cortical zones to appear. The
organelles and inclusions of the outer cortical parenchyma are
erythrocyte
those of steroidogenesis, but, unlike the rounded mitochondria
in the inner cortex, the mitochondria are elongated with lamel-
lar cristae. When present, columnar cells are bipolar with lipid
droplets at both poles (Fig. 15-15C). Arising from the zona in-
principal cells (chief cells)
termedia, cells of the zona glomerulosa (outer cortex) differenti-
 ate and, in turn, undergo apoptosis in this zone.
 Receptors on the surface of principal cells sense lowered 
The zona fasciculata is composed of radiating columns
levels of interstitial (Ca+), signaling exocytosis of
(cords) of spherical cells, separated by sinusoids and bundled as
parathyroid hormone; parathyroid hormone affects target
tissue to increase (Ca²+).
fascicles; these cells produce glucocorticoids (cortisol and cor-
tisone) (Figs. 15-15E and 15-17). The zona reticularis is formed
FIGURE I5-14 Random sectional plane parathyroid of dog. A.
 by polyhedral cells, arranged as a network of anastomosing cords
Parathyroid with thyroid (x4.5). B. ×10. C. Parenchyma and vascular
and plates, separated by large sinusoids (Figs. 15-15F and 15-18).
stroma (x40). D. Parenchyma and blood capillaries (×100).
These cells synthesize small amounts of androgens. Cells of the
Hematoxylin and eosin.
zona reticularis are the oldest of the inner cortex, and apoptotic
cells are frequently observed. Cells of the inner cortex migrate
of osteoclasts) and the absorption of calcium across kidney and
from the zona intermedia, in turn forming the zona fasciculata
intestinal epithelia.
and then the zona reticularis. As they migrate, the cells differen-
tiate, initially expressing the enzymes of glucocorticoid synthe-
sis, and later, those of sex steroid synthesis. The organelles and
Adrenal Gland
inclusions of the inner cortical parenchyma are those of most
The adrenal (Latin ad, meaning “near"; Latin rene, meaning “kid-
steroidogenesis, namely, profuse smooth endoplasmic reticulum ,
ney") glands are composed of an outer cortex, derived from inter-
large and rounded mitochondria with tubulovesicular cristae,
mediate mesoderm, and an inner medulla, derived from neural
and numerous lipid droplets. Regarding lipid storage, pigs are
crest ectoderm. The differentiation of the medullary cells results
an exception in that they do not store lipid in their cortical
from signals available along the migratory path during develop-
 parenchymal cells. Cells in the reticularis often have lipofuscin
ment and is maintained by exposure to glucocorticoids leaving
 granules and the pyknotic nuclei indicative of apoptosis.
the cortex through the medulla. A robust capsule of dense irreg-
Aldosterone is released from cells in the outer adrenal cor-
ular collagenous connective tissue envelops the cortex, and a del-
tex as a consequence of angiotensin II signaling. Angiotensin II
312
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
A
capsule
adrenal cortex
zona fasciculata
zona arc
zona reticularis
proliferate, differentiate, and
migrate peripherally, adding
B
zonainter
media
D
capsule
zona arcuata
(glomerulosa)
zona intermedia
zona intermedia
Stem cells of zona infermedia
proliferate, differentiate, and
migrate cenirally, adding
parenchy ma to zona fasciculaia.
zona fasciculata
8
Stem cells ofzonafasciculafa
differentiate and are displaced,
forming parenchyma of zona
reficularis.
zona reticularis
zona reticularis
medulla
FIGURE I5-I5 Adrenal gland of dog. A. (×l ). B. Parenchyma and stroma, adrenal cortex (×l 0)
C. Parenchyma zona arcuata (×I OO). D. Parenchyma, zona intermmedia (×I 0O). E. Parenchyma, zona.
fasciculata (×I 0o). F. Parenchyma, zona reticularis (×I OO). Hematoxylin and eosin.
A
B
FlGURE I5-I6 In the bovine adrenal cortex (A), the outermost zone is formed of cellclusters or tufts (glomeruli), whereas in the
donkey (B), the cells are arranged in arcs. Hematoxylin and eosin (×20). (From Dellmonn H-D. Veterinary Histology: An Outlire Text-Atlaos.
Philodelphio: Leo & Febiger, 1 971.)
Endocrine System · Ronoid L. Hullinger ond Ouronia M. Andrisoni
synthesis involves the enzyme renin. Renin is synthesized in
juxtaglomerular cells (modified smooth muscle cells, see Juxta-
glomerular Cells of the Kidney below), especially prominent in
the tunica media of afferent arterioles of the renal glomerulus;
renin release is triggered by lowered blood perfusion pressure
(pressoreceptor signal) in the arteriole. The substrate for renin
is a plasma protein, angiotensinogen, that is converted to an-
giotensin I, which then is converted enzymatically to angio-
tensin I. Cells of the zona glomerulosa express the angiotensin
(AT1) receptor. The AT1 is a GPCR that, when ligated, activates
phospholipase C and PI3-kinase, resulting in increased intra-
cellular calcium concentration, transcription of the aldosterone
synthase gene, and synthesis of aldosterone. Essentially, within
these steroidogenic cells, cholesterol is converted by a series of the
cytochrome P450 family of enzymes to the mineralocorticoid cor-
ticosterone, which is then converted by aldosterone synthase to
aldosterone. The cells of the zona glomerulosa have extensive
smooth endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria that harbor the
dehydrogenases and hydroxylases of this synthetic sequence. (The
outer zone does not express a 17o-hydroxylase and therefore can-
angiotensin II, the outer zone is also signaled to synthesize and re-
lease mineralocorticoids (aldosterone or corticosterone) in response
to elevated potassium (a chemoreceptor signal) and ACTH. The
release of the steroid hormone from the parenchymal cell is by dif-
fusion through the cell membrane. Chronic stimulation of the zona
glomerulosa (e.g., kidney disease) leads to cell proliferation within
FIGURE 15-I7 Cells in the zona fasciculata are amanged as
the zona intermedia, growth of the zona glomerulosa, invasion of
parenchyma into and through the capsule, and formation of acces-
radiating, anastomosing columns separated by sinusoids. The cells
appear vesiculated due to extraction of lipid droplets during
sory nodules of the parenchyma (Fig. 15-19).
processing. Hematoxylin and eosin (x40).
membrane into epithelial cells of the distal convoluted and col-
FIGURE I5-I9 Adrenal gland of cow. Clusters of parenchymal
FIGURE I5-I8Cells of zona reticularis appear as irregular plates
cells within a hyperplastic nodule in the capsule (A). Note that cells
("cords") of polyhedral cells separated by sinusoidal capillaries (arrows)
in the small cluster (B) resemble those of the zona glomerulosa
Hematoxylin and eosin (X40). (Fro Delmann H-D. Veterinory Histology:
(C). Hematoxylin and eosin (×I O). (From Dellmann H-D. Veterinary
An Outline TextAtlas. Philodelphio: Lea & Febiger, 1 97 1.)
Histology: An Outline TextAtlos. Philadelphio: Lea & Febiger, 1 971.)
314
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
lecting tubules of the kidney and epithelial cells of the colon. The
In the zona fasciculata, synthesis of glucocorticoids is pro-
hormone binds to its cytosolic receptor and is transported into the
moted by ACTH. ACTH is released from the corticotrophs in re-
nucleus to its specific hormone response elements on target genes.
sponse to “stress signals" affecting the hypothalamus. ACTH binds
The increased expression of these genes in the distal convoluted
to its GPCR and, via adenylate cyclase and elevated concentra-
and collecting tubule cells produces more Na+-K+ ATPase (adeno-
tions of cAMP, activates proteins that increase transcription of the
sine triphosphatase) transporters in the basolateral cell membrane
enzymes of steroid hormone synthesis. Synthesis proceeds as in the
and more sodium channels in the apical mem brane. These mem-
zona glomerulosa, except that the parenchymal cells also express
brane changes cause increased release of potassium in the urine
17α-hydroxylase. Progesterone is modified by a series of hydroxy-
and increased sodium retention, resulting in increased blood vol-
lations that form cortisol, the principal glucocorticoid.
ume. Negative feedback, due to the increased fluid volume and
Cortisol is bound to a carrier protein as it circulates in the 
-Ie pue ujuan sassaiddns uoeiuanuon unisseiod jo uosnpai
plasma. When freed from the carrier, cortisol diffuses into the tar-
dosterone release. (Glucocorticoids are also able to bind the same
cytosolic receptor, potentially exacerbating the mineralocorticoid
response. However, specificity of action for mineralocorticoids is
-ue auag guiealine 'sauag 1agiel uo siuauala asuodsai auou
accomplished by the epithelial target cells in the distal nephron
 scription. The effects are marked in hepatocytes, skeletal myocytes,
-piosinososn e Suissaidxa iaui yonosun ajnqni Susallon pue
and adipocytes (Fig. 15-20). In hepatocytes, glucocorticoids act to
degrading enzyme, hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase.)
 favor glycogen storage and gluconeogenesis, whereas in myocytes,
Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH),
exocytosed from hypothalamic 
ventricle Ill
neurons, enters primary
 plexus of portal system,
B
 en route to pars distalis
hypothalamus
pituitary
CRH, delivered to corticotrophs by the
secondary plexus, binds its GPCR 
pars distalis
on corticotrophs and signals
exocytosis of ACTH.
three hypothalamic neurons
C
near blood capillaries (x1 00)
corticotroph-
hepatocytes with
(x100)
 glycogen engorging 
G
cytoplasm (x100)
D
capsule
zona arcuata
adrenocorticotrophic
hormone (ACTH)
two unilocular
xa
adipocytes
(lipid is black):
nafasclculata
 nerve lies between cells
gfucocorticoids
(x100)
H
 ACTH binds to its GPCR, signaling via
cAMP, glucocorticoid synthesis; these
zona reticularis
hormones diffuse from cortical cells
steroidogenic cells
 into peripheral target cells.
medulla
with cholesterol
ester droplets;
 one skeletal myocyte (x100)
erythrocytes in.
sinusoids (x100)
Glucocorticoids enter cells by diffusion, bind to their cytoplasmic receptor, enter the nucleus,
 bind to their hormone response element, and effect transcription of responsive genes.
FIGURE 15-20
 Cartoon summarizing molecular, cellular, and tissue biology of adrenal cortex (zona fasciculata). A. Hypophysis cerebri.
Hematoxylin and eosin (x2). B. Parenchyma, hypothalamus. Saffron-modified Masson's trichrome (xI00). C. Parenchyma, pars distalis.
Hematoxylin and eosin (xl 00). D. Adrenal cortex. Hematoxylin and eosin (x4.5). E. Parenchyma, zona fasciculata. Hematoxylin and eosin
Masson's trichrome (×100).
Endocrine System ● Ronaid L. Hullinger ond Ourania M. Andrisani
315
they inhibit glucose uptake; in adipocytes, they inhibit glucose
glion. They synthesize epinephrine and norepinephrine, and
uptake, stimulate lipolysis and fatty acid release, and stimulate
adipogenesis (by stimulating proliferation and differentiation of
to chromium salts, the cells containing the granules stain boldly
adipocytes). Catabolic effects of glucocorticoids result in skeletal
brown; accordingly, these and other similarly staining cells are
muscle breakdown and atrophy and a generalized wasting of con-
referred to as chromaffin cells. The epithelioid cells form clus-
nective tissues, including bone. Glucocorticoids also exert anti-
ters separated by sinusoids (Fig. 15-21A and B); although they
inflammatory effects by stimulating apoptosis of lymphocytes
represent modified neurons, the medullary endocrine cells do not
extend axonal projections. Occasionally sympathetic neurons are
exert negative feedback to the pars distalis and inhibit POMC
found among the endocrine cells (Fig. 15-21C). At the periph-
synthesis. In the hypothalamus, they inhibit CRH and ADH
ery of the medulla and adjacent to medullary sinusoids, colum-
synthesis. Hyperactivity of the adrenal cortex is clinically recog-
nar cells (in horses, ruminants, and pigs) produce epinephriney
nized as Cushing's disease; hypoactivity (insufficiency) is termed
rounded, epithelioid cells of the medulla produce norepinephrine
Addison's disease.
Epinephrine is formed by the columnar cells from norepinephrine
In the zona reticularis, ACTH stimulates androgen synthe-
by the action of a methyltransferase; the cytodifferentiation of the
sis, depending on the relative activities of cytochrome P450 fam-
columnar cell and synthesis of this enzyme is induced by gluco
ily enzymes, forming androgen. Androgens of the adrenal cortex
corticoids flowing into the medulla from the cortex.
are relatively more important in the female than the male.
Connective tissue trabeculae extend from the capsule, be
Adrenal Medulla
The adrenal medullary parenchymal cells are modified sympa
norepinephrine
rs in response to acetylcholine that binds to
thetic neurons, essentially constituting a large sympathetic gan-
B
FIGURE 15-21
"'outer zone" of the medulla (A) and also next to the sinusoids; the smaller, norepinephrine-producing cells are located in the “inner zone'
(B), having less direct contact with the venous drainage of the adrenal cortex; parenchymal cells may coexist with clusters of neurons (C)
Hematoxylin and eosin (A, B: x40; C: x20).
316
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
leads to depolarization of the cell membrane, increases calcium
influx, and results in exocytosis of catecholamines from the se-
cretory vesicles. Epinephrine and norepinephrine both bind to
exocrine pancreas
O- and β-adrenergic receptors, differentially expressed in many tis-
Sues of the body. These receptors are members of the GPCR fam-
endocrine pancreas
 ily, and the tissue-specific hormone effect depends on the receptor 
subtype activated (e.g., activating phospholipase C and PI3-kinase,
which increases intracellular calcium concentration; activating
endocrine
adenylate cyclase, leading to increased concentrations of cAMP;
islet
or inhibiting [uncoupling] adenylate cyclase and reducing con-
B
centrations of cAMP). Epinephrine and norepinephrine are the
immediate physiologic response to fear and stress, resulting in
exocrine
increased heart rate and the breakdown of glycogen in skeletal
acinus
muscle and liver.
acinar cell
ENDOCRINE TISSUES
islet cells
AND CELLS
Pancreatic lslets
Endocrine cells of the pancreas form islets within the exocrine
D
Hyperglycemia induces β cell
pancreatic tissue. These islets vary in size from a few endocrine
release of insulin, signaling
glucose uptake by hepatocytes
cells to clusters of a few hundred cells (Fig. 15-22A, B, and C).
skeletal myocytes, and
The exocrine pancreas is derived from endoderm. Some evidence
adipocytes, and lowering blood
suggests that the islet cells arise from endoderm and then sepa-
sugar.
rate from ducts. However, the shared APUD characteristics of
insulin-producing
islet cells (see Diffuse Neuroendocrine System Cells below) and
βcells
enteroendocrine cells in the epithelium of the gut are intriguing,
suggesting that these cells arise from a common precursor. This
E
question is of clinical importance as it relates to the potential for
regeneration of islet cells. The principal cells of the islets include
alpha (o) cells, beta (β) cells, and delta (6) cells; small num-
glucagon-producing
bers of other enteroendocrine cells may also appear in the islets.
α cells
Alpha cells synthesize and store glucagon and represent 5 t0
30% of the islet cell population (Figs. 15-22D and E and 15-23).
In the pig, the number of o. cells decreases from nearly 50% at
birth to 8 to 20% in the adult. In the horse, O cells are located in
capillary
the center of the islet, but in cattle, they tend to be peripheral.
Responding to hypoglycemia, α cells
release glucagon, signaling release of
 Islets in the ventral area of the right lobe of the canine pancreas
gucose from hepatocytes, skeletal
lack O cells (perhaps reflecting the different site of origin of this
 myocytes, and adipocytes and elevating
 lobe). Glucagon release occurs in response to hypoglycemia (low
blood glucose.
blood sugar). Glucagon binds its GPCR on hepatocytes, skeletal
FIGURE I5-22
2Random sectional plane pancreas of dog. A.
myocytes, and adipocytes, activating adenylate cyclase and elevat-
x4.5. B. Endocrine islet and exocrine acini (xl0). C. Endocrine islet
ing the concentration of cAMP, thus promoting glycogenolysis
parenchyma with exocrine acini (x40). D. E. Islet parenchyma and
and gluconeogenesis and opposing hypoglycemia. (This influence
blood capillaries (×I 00). Saffron-modified Masson's trichrome.
is augmented by cortisol, GH, epinephrine, and norepinephrine.)
Beta cells synthesize and store insulin, constituting 60 to
in increased intracellular calcium concentration and triggering
80% of the islet cells (98% in sheep) (Figs. 15-22D and E and
exocytosis of insulin. Insulin binds to its receptor, a tyrosine ki-
15-23). The β cell is signaled by hyperglycemia (elevated blood
nase on hepatocytes, skeletal myocytes, and adipocytes. The acti-
sugar), the principal signal for insulin release. Glucose is trans-
vated receptor autophosphorylates and initiates phosphorylation
 ported by GLUT-2 into the β cell. Within the cell, glucose is
of the insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1), signaling downstream
utilized to generate ATP, which closes the ATPase-sensitive
via protein kinases and phosphatases. Insulin promotes synthesis
potassium channel, leading to depolarization of the cell mem-
 of enzymes that favor anabolism and oppose hyperglycemia.
brane. The depolarization activates calcium channels, resulting
Insufficient secretion of insulin causes diabetes mellitus, a clini-
Endocrine System ● Ronaid L. Hullinger ond Ourania M. Andrisani
317
is surrounded by exocrine acini. The acinar cells have dark-staining zymogen granules. The proinsulin
granules of β cells (arrows) within the islet stain while other islet cells (e.g. ox, 8) are not selectively
stained by this dye. The endocrine islet is perfused by blood sinusoids (double arrows). Saffron-modified
Masson's trichrome (×I 00).
cal condition that results in many signs including the production
tery. The sinusoids provide the glomus cells witha continual sam-
of a large volume of urine with high levels of sugar.
ple of arterial blood en route to the brain. Glomus cells have se-
 Delta cells synthesize and store somatostatin (SST) and rep-
cretory vesicles that store epinephrine, dopamine, and serotonin.
resent a relatively small percentage of the islet parenchyma. SST
 Evidence suggests that glomus cells, sensing lowered blood oxy-
exerts broad endocrine and neural effects. Acting in an autocrine
 gen, stimulate the output from the carotid body via afferent axons
mode, SST inhibits its own secretion; acting in a paracrine mode ,
 of the carotid sinus branch of the glossopharyngeal nerve to the
SST inhibits secretion of insulin and glucagon within the islet.
distal (petrosal) ganglion, and then to the brainstem. Parasympa-
 Furthermore, ST expressed in neurons of the hypothalamus in-
thetic and sympathetic axons terminate near the sinusoids; sensory
hibits the release of GH and TSH; SST serves as a neurotransmit-
-0l8 II adk1 pue silan snuol8 1 adAi aluos ioeiuos oi inafoud suoxe
ter centrally and acts as a paracrine regulator ofthe enteroendocrine
mus cells serve as support cells. Synaptic contacts exist between
cells peripherally. SST binds its GPCR, uncoupling cAMP, low-
 some glomus cells and also between them and sensory and sympa
ering intracellular calcium concentration, and inhibiting release
thetic axons. Functioning as chemoreceptors, the type I glomus
of the relevant hormones. By the same mechanism, SST also down-
cells monitor the concentration of oxygen in the blood. Potassium
regulates mitogen-activated kinases in target cells and suppresses
-dns eixody pue aaisuas uaxo ane an osuas au u siauu
entry of these cells into the mitotic cycle.
Suuado pue auequau lanau fuizeiodap Aae aaui sassaid
voltage-gated calcium channels. The influx of calcium triggers ex-
Paraganglia
ocytosis of secretory vesicles from the glomus cell. The secretions
released as neurotransmitters (epinephrine, dopamine, serotonin)
Small clusters of extraadrenal medullary, catecholaminergic cells
bind to their receptors on the adjacent sensory axons. Depolariza
are called paraganglia. The paraganglia are composed of paren-
tion of these sensory axons results in afferent signals traversing to
chymal cells, glomus cells, nested within a small plexus of sinu-
the nuclei of the brainstem, which regulate respiration, increasing
soidal capillaries called a glomus.
 respiratory rate and the blood oxygen.
Of the several glomera, the most studied is the carotid body,
Glomera are also found in the aortic body and coccygeal
found in the fascia at the bifurcation of the common carotid ar
body and along some arteriovenous anastomoses, and have a sim-
81
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
ilar structure to that of the carotid body. The mechanism of the
sine 3', 5'-monophosphate (cGMP). cGMP activates a phospho.
function of these glomera remains unclear.
diesterase that deactivates cAMP, inhibiting cell functions driven
by cAMP. In the kidney, ANP acts in the collecting tubule to an-
tagonize the effect of ADH and upon juxtaglomerular cells to in-
Diffuse Neuroendocrine System Cells
hibit release of renin. In the brain, ANP inhibits ADH release.
Diffuse neuroendocrine system (DNES) cells are scattered in
Juxtaglomerular Celis of the Kidney
tive, and digestive systems. More than 30 DNES cell types have
At the vascular pole of the renal corpuscle, the tunica media of the
afferent arterioles contain rounded smooth myocytes, called juxta-
tide hormones (se below) or biogenic amines (e.g., epinephrine,
glomerular (JG) cells (see Chapter 1l). These modified smooth
norepinephrine, and serotonin). A subcategory of DNES cells are
myocytes synthesize and store renin granules, which are an im-
amine precursor uptake and decarboxylation (APUD) cells,
portant element of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system dis-
which are able to take up and decarboxylate amines. Some DNES
Cussed above. JG cells release renin in response to a baroreceptor
cells stain with silver and are therefore called argentaffin cells.
signal, initiated by lowered blood perfusion pressure. This signal
About 1% of the epitheliocytes (enterocytes) in the gastro.
arises from either a mechanical perturbation of the myocyte mem-
intestinal lining are DNES cells and constitute the entero-
brane (in the wall of the arterioles) or a chemoreceptor signal
endocrine cells (system). Some evidence shows that these cells
(e.g., elevated [K+], synthesis of prostaglandin E,release of ATP)
are not derived from endoderm, but from neural crest ectoderm.
response by the macula densa cells (in the distal tubule). Renin
Enteroendocrine cells are dispersed among the absorptive and se-
release triggers a cascade of enzymatic reactions creating angio-
Cretory enterocytes and adhere to the basal lamina. Most are pyra-
midal in shape with a narrow projection to the lumen; secretory
tensin II that binds the AT1 receptor in the zona glomerulosa of
granules are stored nearer to the base. With specific antibody
the adrenal cortex, releasing aldosterone. Aldosterone, in turn,
staining of their secretions, these cells can be identified as pro-
increases expression of Na+-K+ ATPase transporters and Na+ chan-
ducing one of these hormones: gastrin, secretin, motilin, pancre-
nels in distal tubule and collecting duct epitheliocytes, and in-
Creases fluid volume and reduction of K+ levels. Accordingly, the
atic polypeptide (PP), glucagon, insulin, vasoactive intestinal
polypeptide (VIP), somatostatin, ghrelin, neuropeptide Y (NPY),
stimulus for renin release is obviated.
neurotensin, peptide YY, or cholecystokinin (CCK). Secretions
of enteroendocrine cells bind to specific receptors on target cells
Endocrine Celis of the Ovary
and signal by paracrine and endocrine modes, effecting epithelial
The endocrine tissues of the ovary are derived from mesoderm
cell secretion, contraction of smooth myocytes, and conduction
Oogonia develop from primordial germ cells, which migrate into
in enteric and central neurons. Their effects primarily inhibit, or
the gonadal ridge during the genesis of the ovary and are enveloped
 alternatively stimulate, processes affecting food intake, digestion,
by a single layer of mesenchymal cells, defining a follicle. As fol.
and absorption of nutrients, and basal metabolism.
licles develop, the mesenchymal cells become the follicular epi-
thelial cells (granulosal cells). The stromal cells adjacent to the
Other Endocrine Cells
growing follicle, called internal theca cells, are transformed
from fibroblasts to epithelioid, steroidogenic cells. Upon ovula-
Adipocytes
tion, the follicular epithelial cells and the internal thecal cells
Unilocular (white) adipocytes secrete leptin, a 16 Kda protein
proliferate, forming the corpus luteum.
hormone that is an afferent signal to the hypothalamus, regulat-
Follicular epithelial cells express the FSH receptor, a GPCR,
-u aun jo auo si undag siuio aun roy sisisoaq Aiaua Sui
and FSH signaling results in follicular cell proliferation and dif-
feeding behavior. Leptin binds to its cytokine receptor on neurons
matase P450 and additional FSH receptors. In larger follicles,
of the hypothalamus and inhibits food intake, for example, by in-
 FSH also induces the expression of LH receptors on the same fol-
hibiting the release of the food intake-stimulating (orexigenic)
 licular epitheliocytes. Follicular epitheliocytes take up androgen,
hormones neuropeptide Y and agouti-related peptide (AgR P).
 synthesized and released from the adjacent internal theca cells;
the aromatase P450 expressed by these cells converts the andro-
Endocrine Cells of the Heart
gen to estrogen. In addition, follicular cells also release a pep-
In the atrial myocardium, some cardiac myocytes synthesize and
tide hormone, inhibin.
store in secretory vesicles a peptide hormone known as atrial na.
Internal thecal cells express the LH receptor, a GPCR, and
triuretic peptide (ANP) (see Chapter 7). When blood volume is
via adenylate cyclase and elevated concentrations of cAMP acti-
increased, the stretch of the atrial myocytes during the filling of
vate transcription of the steroidogenic enzymes and the conver-
the atrium causes membrane calcium channels to open, increas-
sion of cholesterol to androgen. In some species (e.g., rodents doe
ing intracellular calcium concentration and triggering exocytosis
rabbit, bitch, and queen), the thecal cells of atretic tertiary folli-
of ANP. ANP binds to its receptor on target cells, activating
cles remain viable as steroidogenic interstitial endocrine cells
guanylylcyclase and increasing the concentration of cyclic guano-
saiy go suapuadaput (uego ieons, au)
Endocrine System ● Ronaid L. Hullinger ond Ourania M. Andrisani
319
Following ovulation, follicular epithelial cells and thecal
GnRH release from hypothalamic neurons and FSH and LH re-
cells proliferate, forming a corpus luteum. Under the influence
lease from the hypophyseal gonadotrophs. Inhibin targets the
of LH, the lutein cells are able to utilize cholesterol to synthesize
gonadotroph, selectively inhibiting FSH release.
progesterone. Small (theca) lutein cells continue the synthesis
of androgen, which then is converted to estrogen by the large
(granulosa) lutein cells. With the decline of LH and in the ab-
SUGGESTED READINGS
sence of a signal from an implanting trophoblast (i.e., chorionic
gonadotropin), the corpus luteum cyclicum regresses and
Andreoli TE, Reeves WB, Bichet DG. Endocrine control of water bal-
progesterone declines. The corpus luteum is also a source of in-
ance. In: Goodman HM, ed. Handbook of Physiology Vol 3. New
hibin. With development of a conceptus, cells of the extraem-
York: Oxford University Press, 2000.
bryonic trophoblast synthesize chorionic gonadotropin, which
Bringhurst FR, Demay MB, Kronenberg HM. Hormones and disorders
binds the same LH receptors found in the corpus luteum, main-
of mineral metabolism. In: Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM, Melmed S,
taining its viability and steroidogenesis. This is the corpus lu-
et al., eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology. 1Oth Ed. Phila-
teum graviditas (corpus luteum of pregnancy).
delphia: Saunders, 2002.
 The ovarian hormones affect uterine and mammary gland tar-
Chester-Jones I, Ingleton PM, Phillips JG. Fundamen tals of Comparative
get tissues and exert a negative feedback on GnRH release from
Vertebrate Endocrinology. New York: Plenum Press, 1987.
hypothalamic neurons and FSH and LH release from the hypo-
Cone RD. Neuroendocrinology. In: Larsen PR, Kronenberg HM,
Melmed S, et al., eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology.
physeal gonadotrophs. Inhibin targets the gonadotroph, effecting
a selective inhibition of FSH release.
10th Ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2002.
Constanti A, Bartke A, Khardori R. Basic Endocrinology for Students
Endocrine Celis of the Placenta
of Pharmacy and Allied Health Sciences. Amsterdam: Harwood
Academic Publishers, 1998.
Like the corpus luteum, the placenta is also a transient endocrine
 De Bold AJ, Bruneau BG. Natrurietic peptides. In: Goodman HM, ed.
organ (see Chapter 14). Marked species differences of the placen-
Handbook of Physiology. Vol 3. New York: Oxford University
tal endocrine role are correlated with the intimacy of the fetal-
Press, 2000.
maternal tissue contact (e.g., porcine versus carnivore versus pri-
Denef C. Autoctine/paracrine intermediates in hormone action and
mate),the structure of the trophoblast, and the molecular weight
modulation of cellular responses to hormones. In: Goodman HM,
 of the hormones. Trophoblast cells of the fetal placenta syn-
ed. Handbook of Physiology. Vol 1. New York: Oxford University
thesize estrogen, progesterone, and equine chorionic gonado-
Press, 1998.
tropin (ECG, pregnant mare's serum gonadotropin [PMSG]),
Ganguly A. Aldosterone In: Goodman HM, ed. Handbook of Physiology.
prolactin, and POMC derivatives. In the mare, some trophoblast
Vol 3. New Yotk: Oxford University Press, 2000.
cells of the foal placental membranes migrate into the endo-
Halasz B. The hypothalamus as an endocrine organ. In: Conn PM,
metrium where they proliferate, forming large clusters ("endome-
Freeman ME, eds. Neuroendocrinology in Physiology and Medicine.
Totowa, NJ: Humana Press, 2000.
trial cups") that synthesize PMSG. Additional targets of placental
hormones include the fetal gonads and the maternal uterus,
Hullinger RL. The endocrine system. In: Evans HE,ed. Miller's Anatomy
of the Dog. 3rd Ed. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders, 1993.
ovary, mam mary tissue, and immune system.
Kaplan NM. The adrenal glands. In: Griffin JE, Ojeda SR, eds. Textbook
of Endocrine Physiology. 4th Ed. New York: Oxford University
Endocrine Cells of the Testis
Press, 2000.
The endocrine cells of the testis are derived from mesoderm.
Lavine JE. The hypothalamus as a major integrating center. In: Conn
Spermatogonia arriving at the developing testis are enveloped by
PM, Freeman ME, eds, Neuroendocrinology in Physiology and
mesenchyme that differentiates, forming a simple columnar
Medicine. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press, 2000.
epithelium of sustentacular cells (Sertoli cells). Organized as
Melmed S, Kleinberg D. Anterior pituitary. In: Larsen PR , Kronenberg
tubules, they are separated by a basal lamina from the interstitial
HM, Melmed S, et al.,eds. Williams Textbook of Endocrinology.
connecting tissues. Some stromal cells adjacent to the tubules
10th Ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2002.
differentiate as the steroidogenic interstitial cells (Leydig cells)
Mendelson CR. Mechanisms of hormone action. In: Griffin JE, Ojeda
and other stromal cells provide support for the many blood and
SR, eds. Textbook of Endocrine Physiology. 4th Ed. New York:
lymph capillaries.
Oxford University Press, 2000.
Robinson AG, Verbalis JG. Postetior pituitary gland. In: Larsen PR,
 The interstitial cells of the testis (see Chapter 12) express the
Kronenberg HM, Melmed S, et al., eds. Williams Textbook of
LH receptor and, upon binding the LH (ICSH) ligand, activate
Endocrinology. 1 Oth Ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2002.
transcription of the steroidogenic enzymes and conversion of cho-
Sehgal A. Molecular Biology of Circadian Rhythms. Hoboken, NJ: John
lesterol to androgen. FSH receptors on the sustentacular cell bind
Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2004.
the FSH ligand, resulting in the expression ofaromatase P450 and
Tucker HA. Neuroendocrine regulation of lactation and milk ejection.
the synthesis of estrogen from androgens released by the intersti-
In: Conn PM, Freeman ME, eds. Neuroendocrinology in Physiology
tial cells; the sustentacular cells also release the peptides inhibin
and Medicine. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press, 2000.
and androge n-binding protein.
Zeidel ML. Physiologic responses to hatriuretic hormones. In: Goodman
The testicular hormones target secondary sex tissues (e.g.,
HM, ed. Handbook of Physiology. Vol 3. New York: Oxford
prostate, skeletal muscle) and also exert a negative feedback on
University Press, 2000.
Integument
NANCY A. MONTEIRO-RIVIERE
Epidermis
Infraorbital Sinus 
Epidermal Keratinocytes
Nose
Epidermal Nonkeratinocytes
Mental Organ
Melanocytes
 Submental Organ
Tactile epithelioid cells (Merkel cells)
Carpal Glands
Intraepidermal macrophages (Langerhans cells)
Interdigital Sinus
Layers of the Epidermis
Inguinal Sinus 
 Stratum basale
Scrotum
wnsouids unensm
Anal Sacs
 Stratum granulosum
Circumanal Glands
Stratum lucidum
Supracaudal Gland 
Stratum comeum
Mammary Gland 
Keratinization
Alveoli
Epidermal-Dermal Junction
Interstitium
Dermis
Ducts
Hypodermis
Teat
 Skin Appendages
 Mammary gland involution 
H
Digital Organs and Hom
Hair Follicles
Equine Hoof
Structure
Wall
Types of hair follicles
Sole
Hair cycle
Frog
 Skin Glands 
Ruminant and Swine Hoofs
Sebaceous glands
Claw
 Sweat glands
 Digital Pads
 Blood Vessels, Lymph Vessels, and Nerves
Chestnut and Ergot
Special Structures of the Integument
Hom
Extermal Ear
Avian Integument
Eyelids
320
Integument ● Nancy A. Monteiro-Riviere
321
cialized to form various skin appendages such as hair; sweat and
far beyond its role as a barrier to the environment (Table 16-1).
sebaceous glands; digital organs (hoof, claw, digital pads); feath-
The skin, or integument (derived from the Latin word meaning
ers; horn; and specialized glands.
"to cover"), is the largest organ system of the body and consists
The cells of the epidermis are categorized into two major
of a superficial epidermis and an underlying dermis (Fig. 16-1).
 groups: keratinocytes and nonkeratinocytes. The epidermal layers
In general, the basic architecture of the integument is sim-
can be classified from the basement membrane to the outer sur-
ilar in all mammals. However, differences in the thickness of the
face as follows: stratum basale (basal layer), stratum spinosum
epidermis and dermis in various regions of the body exist be-
( renui) unsonig uis (a aid no snouds)
tween species and within the same species. Because dermatolo-
stratum lucidum (clear layer), and stratum corneum (horny layer)
gic, cutaneous pharmacologic, and toxicologic studies use skin
from different animal species and body sites, species differences
Epidermal Keratinocytes
in cutaneous structure must be taken into consideration
Usually, the skin is thickest over the dorsal surface of the body
Keratinocytes comprise about 85% of the epidermal cells and are
and on the lateral surfaces of the limbs. It is thinnest on the ven-
pue azis ui Area Aaui onoudrou uo paseq siasel ou! payss
tral surface of the body and medial surfaces of the limbs. The sur-
shape and differentiate as they migrate upward to form keratin.
face of the skin may be smooth in some areas but has ridges or folds
in other regions that reflect the contour of the underlying connec-
Epidermal Nonkeratinocytes
tive tissue layer (Fig. 16-2).
Nonkeratinocytes are scattered throughout the epidermis and
include melanocytes, tactile epithelioid cells, and intraepidermal
EPIDERMIS
macrophages.
The epidermis is a keratinized stratified squamous epithelium
Melanocytes
derived from ectoderm and is the outermost layer of the skin
 Melanocytes are derivatives of neural crest ectoderm and are lo-
(Fig. 16-2). In regions with a heavy protective coat of hair, the
cated in the basal layer of the epidermis (Fig. 16-1). They also
epidermis is thin; in nonhairy skin, such as that of the mucocu-
 Occur in the external epithelial root sheath and hair matrix of hair
taneous junctions, the epidermis is thicker. Cells of the epider- 
follicles, in sweat gland ducts, and in sebaceous glands. Melano-
mis undergo an orderly pattern of proliferation, differentiation,
cytes have several dendritic processes that either extend between
and keratinization, the processes of which are not completely un-
adjacent keratinocytes or run parallel to the basement membrane.
derstood. During development, the epidermis can become spe-
The melanocyte has a spherical nucleus and contains typical or-
ganelles (ribosomes, endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi, etc.). The cyto-
plasm is clear except for pigment-containing ovoid granules, which
TABLE I6-I  Functions of the Skin
are referred to as melanosomes. The melanosomes impart color to
 skin and hair. Dark brown pigment in skin is called eumelanin,
Environmental barrier
while yellowish-red pigment is called pheomelanin. The enzyme
Diffusion barrier
tyrosinase is needed to produce melanin within the melanocytes,
Metabolic barrier
and the reaction involves the following series of steps, in short:
Temperature regulation
tyrosine=→dopa→dopaquinone=→melanin. Albino animals lack
Regulation of blood flow
tyrosinase; therefore, they cannot produce melanin, even though
Hair and fur
they have a normal number of melanocytes. After melanogenesis,
 Sweating
the melanosomes migrate to the tips of the dendritic processes of
Immunologic affector and effector axis
 the melanocyte; the tips then become pinched off and are phago-
Mechanical support
cytized by the adjacent keratinocytes. They remain as discrete
 Neurosensory reception
membrane-bounded organelles or become aggregated and sur-
Endocrine (eg., vitamin D)
rounded by a membrane to form a melanosome complex. Melano.
Apocrine/eccrine/sebaceous glandular secretion
somes are randomly distributed within the cytoplasm of the
Metabolism
keratinocytes, although they often become localized over the nu-
Keratin
cleus, thereby forming a caplike structure that presumably protects
Collagen
the nucleus from ultraviolet radiation (Fig. 16-3). Skin color is de-
 Melanin 
termined by several factors, such as the number, size, distribution ,
Lipid 
and degree of melanization of melanosomes.
Carbohydrate
Tactile Epithelioid Cells (Merkel Celis)
Respiration
Tactile epithelioid cells, also known as Merkel cells, are located
Biotransformation of xenobiotics
in the basal region of the epidermis in both hairless and hairy
322
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Meissner's corpuscl
melanocyte
Merkel cell
Langerhans cell
epidermis
stratum corneum
stratum lucidum
papillary
stratum granulosum
ayer
stratum spinos
stratum basale
dermis
sebaceous gland
arrectorpili
eticular
muscle
ayer
dermal root
sheath
external epithelial
root sheath
internal epithelial
root sheath
apocrine sweat
gland
matrix
connective-
tissue papilla
endings
opening of sweat duct
pacinian corpuscle
herve
eocrinesweatglano
irtery
vein
FIGURE I6-1 
oq aut jo suau snoea ui uas eidk u punoy suawnaui au jo aunns au uuasaidau sup yeauos
(Adapted from Monteiro-Riviere NA. Comparative onatomy, physiology, ond biochermistry of mammalian skirn. In: Hobson DW, ed. Dermal and Ocular
Toxicology: Furdomerntals ond Methods. Boco Raton, FL: CRC Press, I 99 1;1:3).
skin. Their long axis is usually parallel to the surface of the skin
ulate keratinocyte growth. In addition, tactile epithelioid cells
 and, thus, perpendicular to the columnar basal epithelial cells 
can function as slow-adapting mechanoreceptors for touch.
above (Figs. 16-1 and 16-4). The nucleus is lobulated and irreg-
Intraepiderma! Macrophoges (Langerhans Cells)
ular, and the cytoplasm is clear and lacks tonofilaments. These
cells have a characteristic region of vacuolated cytoplasm near the
The dendritic cells located in the epidermis are called intra-
dermis, which has spherical electron-dense granules containing
epidermal macrophages (Langerhans cells). They have been re-
species-specific chemical mediators (e.g., serotonin, serotoninlike
ported in adult pigs, cats, and dogs and are well characterized in 
substances, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, peptide histidine-
rodents and humans. However, the specific phenotype (membrane
isoleucine, and substance P). Tactile epithelioid cells are con-
receptors and antigens related to immune function) can vary be-
nected to adjacent keratinocytes by desmosomes. When associated
tween species. Intraepidermal macrophages are most commonly
with an axon, a tactile epithelioid cell-neurite complex or nonen-
found in the upper spinous layer of the epidermis (Figs. 16-1 and
capsulated tactile corpuscle is formed, and specialized areas of
16-5). These cells have also been identified in the stratified squa-
skin containing these complexes are known as tactile hair discs
mous epithelium of the upper digestive tract, female genital tract,
(Haarscheiben, hair discs, tactile pads, or tylotrich pads). The
and sheep rumen. In addition, the cells are present in dermal
axon associated with a tactile epithelioid cell is myelinated, but
sapou ydual u! (.slan paliaa, se aay oi pairayan) sassa ydual
 as it approaches the epidermis, the axon loses its myelin sheath
(interdigitating cells), and in the dermis. Further, they have been
and terminates as a flat meniscus on the basal aspect of the cell
reported in the lung in fibrotic disorders, mycosis fungoides,
(Fig. 16-4). Tactile epithelioid cells can release trophic factors
atopic dermatitis, and the nondermatologic disorder eosinophilic
that attract nerve endings into the epidermis and can also stim-
granulomatosis.
Integument ● Nancy A. Morteiro-Riviere
323
A
B
C
FIGURE I6-2 Skin (cat). A. Thin skin with one to two viable epidermal cell layers, abdomen. B. Skin with thin epidermis, lumbar region.
C. Skin with thick stratum comeum and epidermis, foot pad. Stratum disjunctum (D); stratum comeum (C); stratum lucidum (L); stratum
granulosum (G); stratum spinosum (S);: stratum basale (B); superficial (papillary) layer of the dermis (P); hair follicle cluster in dermis (HF)
Hematoxylin and eosin (×I 20).
lamina (Fig. 16-6). The cells are attached laterally to each
other and to the overlying stratum spinosum cells by desmo-
dermis. They can only be positively identified with special stains.
somes and to the underlying basal lamina by hemidesmosomes
At the ultrastructural level, intraepidermal macrophages have an
The nucleus is large and ovoid and occupies most of the cell.
indented nucleus and the cytoplasm contains typical organelles;
These basal cells are heterogeneous functionally. Some basal
they lack tonofilaments and desmosomes. A unique feature of this
cells can act as stem cells, with the ability to divide and pro-
duce new cells, whereas others primarily serve to anchor the
that are known as intraepidermal macrophage (Birbeck) granules.
epidermis.
Depending on the species, these granules can contain Langerin, a
Caft-dependent type I lectin. Intraepidermal macrophages have
long dendritic proceses that traverse the intercellular space up
Stratum Spinosum
to the granular cell layer. The cells a
bone marrow
 The succeeding outer layer is the stratum spinosum, or “prickle
and are part of the mononuclear
1(monocyte-
cell layer," which consists of several layers of irregular polyhedral
macrophage system).They are
senting antigen to
cells (Figs. 16-2C and 16-7). Desmosomes connect these cells to
 adjacent stratum spinosum cells and to the stratum basale cells
below. Tonofilaments are more prominent in this layer than in
the stratum basale. The large intercellular space usually seen in
Layers of the Epidermis
this layer is a shrinkage artifact, which occurs in preparing the
aui jo siaael souaddn aui apns srdosoiu iu oy adues
Stratum Basale
stratum spinosum contain small membrane-bounded organelles
The stratum basale (stratum germinativum) consists ofa sin-
known as lamellar granules (Odland bodies, lamellated bodies,
gle layer of columnar or cuboidal cells that rests on the basal
or membrane-coating granules).
324
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Stratum Granulosum
The third layer is the stratum granulosum, which consists of
several layers of flattened cells lying parallel to the epidermal-
dermal junction (Figs. 16-2C and 16-8). This layer contains irre-
gularly shaped, nonmembrane-bounded, electron-dense kerato-
hyalin granules. These granules contain profilaggrin, a structural
protein and a precursor of filaggrin, and are believed to play a role
in keratinization and barrier function. The stratum granulosum
aun u! se qons eiauiida snoiuenbs payjieiis ie ui iuasaid iou s!
mucous membranes of the mouth (buccal mucosa). Another char-
acteristic feature of the stratum granulosum is the presence of the
lamellar granules. These granules are smaller than mitochon-
 dria and occur near the Golgi complex and smooth endoplasmic
reticulum (sER). Higher in the epidermis, these granules in-
crease in number and size, move toward the cell membrane, and
release their lipid contents by exocytosis into the intercellular
space between the stratum granulosum and stratum corneum
thereby coating the cell membrane of the stratum corneum cells
(Fig. 16-8). As one can now appreciate, the term "membrane-
coating granule" is appropriate. The major components of lamel-
are lipids (ceramides, cholesterol, fatty acids, and
phosphate
s, lipases, and glycosidases). The content and
mixture of lipids can vary between species.
Stratum Lucidum
FIGURE I6-3 Melanin granules (arrows) highly
concentrated in the stratum basale cell layer and forming
The stratum lucidum (clear layer) is only found in specific areas
apical caps in the upper layers of the horse abdominal skin
of exceptionally thick skin and in hairless regions (e.g., plantar
Hematoxylin and eosin (x800).
and palmar surfaces, planum nasale) (Fig. 16-2C). It is a thin,
FIGURE I6-4Schematic drawing of a tactile epithelioid cell-neurite complex from a foot
pad of a cat. Irregular nucleus (N); Golgi (GO);: desmosomes (D) glycogen (GY); cytoplasmic
 () oxe ) saa ao asap la a a) aa aas () ss
plate or disc (NP).
Integument·Noncy A. Morteiro-Riviere
325
FIGURE 16-5Schematic of anintraepidermal macrophage (L)
Heavy black areas represent the intercellular space. The racket
FIGUre 16-6 
Transmission electron micrograph of pig skin.
shape granules (arrow) can be found in the dendritic processes
Area depicting the epidermis (E); dermis (D);: epidermal-dermal
Note the indented nucleus and electron-lucent cytoplasm. (From
junction (); stratum basale cell (SB); tonofilaments (T); and
Monteiro-Riviere NA. Ultrastructural evaluatiorn of the porcine
desmosome attachments (arrow) (×I 0,700).
integumernt. In: Tumbleson ME, ed. 5wine in Biomedical Reseorch. New
York: Plernum Press, 1 986; 1:64 1.)
 stratum corneum cells are highly organized and stacked one upon
another to form vertical interlocking columns with a flattened
translucent, homogeneous line between the stratum granulosum
tetrakaidecahedron shape. This 14-sided polygonal structure pro-
and stratum corneum. This stratum consists of several layers of
vides a minimum surface:volume ratio, which allows for space to
fully keratinized, closely compacted, dense cells devoid of nuclei
be filled by packing without interstices. This spatial arrangement,
and cytoplasmic organelles. The cell cytoplasm contains protein-
typical of hairy skin, helps one to understand that transepidermal
bound phospholipids and eleidin, which is a protein that is sim-
water loss is a function of the integrity and permeability of this
ilar to keratin but has a different staining affinity.
layer. The intercellular substance derived from the lamellar gran-
ules is present between the stratum corneum cells and forms the
Stratum Corneum
intercellular lipid com ponent of a complex stratum corneum bar-
The stratum corneum is the outermost layer of the epidermis
rier, which prevents both the penetration of substances from the
and consists of several layers of completely keratinized dead cells,
environment and the loss of body fluids. The keratinized cells are
which are constantly being shed. This layer appears clear and con-
surrounded by a
e and a thick submembranous
tains no nuclei or cytoplasmic organelles (Figs. 16-2 and 16-8).
The most superficial layers of the stratum corneum that undergo
sized in the st
um and cross-linked in the stratum
constant desquamation are referred to as the stratum disjunc-
tum. The stratum corneum varies in thickness in different areas
involucrin provides structural support to the cell, thereby al-
(i.e., abdomen versus back) of the body and between species. On
lowing the cell to resist invasion by microorganisms and destruc-
the palmar and plantar surfaces, where considerable abrasive
tion by environmental agents, but it does not seem to regulate
action occurs, the stratum corneum is thickest (Fig. 16-2C). The
permeability
326
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
FIGUrE 16-7
Area shows the nuclei of two stratur
1 spinosum (SS) cells attached by desmosomes(arrows)
(×23,500)
Keratinization
Keratinization is the process by which epidermal cells (keratin-
ocytes) differentiate. After the basal epithelial cells undergo mito-
sis, they migrate upward. The volume of the cytoplasm increases 
and the differentiation products (tonofilaments, keratohyalin
granules, and lamellar granules) are formed in large amounts. The
tonofila ments and the amorphous material, keratohyalin, form a
meshwork. As the cellular contents increase, the nuclei disinte-
grate and the lamellar granules discharge their contents into the
intercellular space, coating the cells. The remaining organelles 
such as mitochondria and ribosomes disintegrate, and the flat-
tened cells become filled by filaments and keratohyalin, which
then form bundles. The final product of this epidermal differen-
tiation and keratinization process is the stratum corneum, which
consists of protein-rich cells containing fibrous keratin and ker-
atohyalin surrounded by a thicker plasma membrane coated by
the exterior lipid matrix. This forms the commonly known “brick
and mortar" structure in which the lipid matrix acts as the mor-
tar between the cells, which are the bricks.
Epidermal-Dermal Junction
The epidermal-dermal junction (or skin basement membrane
zone) is a complex and highly specialized structure recognized
FIGUrE 16-8
Transmission electron micrograph of the
with the light microscope (periodic acid-Schiff stain) as a thin,
upper stratum granulosum (SG) and stratum comeum (SC)
homogeneous band. When viewed with the transmission elec-
of pig skin. Membrane-coating granules or lamellar bodies
tron microscope, however, the epidermal-dermal junction con-
(arrows) are present in the stratum granulosum, with some
sists of four components: (a) the cell membrane of the basal
fusing to the plasma membrane to release their contents
epithelial cell, which includes the hemidesmosomes; (b) the lam-
Keratohyalin granules (K) and numerous desmosomes (D) are
ina lucida (lamina rara); (c) the lamina densa (basal lamina); and
present (×14,900).
Integument ●Nancy A. Morteiro-Riviere
327
basal cells
hemidesmosomes
BPA
lamina lucida.
anchoring filaments 
-laminin, fibronectin, GB3,
and 19-DEJ-1
lamina densa
type IV collagen,
EBA, and GB3
sublamina.
anchoring fibrils
X
densa
-L3d
FIGURE 16-9
macromolecular components. (Frorm Monteiro-Riviere NA, Irmar AO. Irdirect immurohistochermistry ond 
perfused skir treated with bis (2-chloroethyl) sulfide. Toxicol Pathol I 995;23:3 1 3325.)
(d) the subbasal lamina (sublamina densa or reticular lamina)
with a variety of fibrous structures (anchoring fibrils, dermal
microfibril bundles, microthreadlike filaments) (Fig. 16-9). The
basement membrane has a complex molecular architecture with
numerous components that play a key role in adhesion of the epi-
dermis to the dermis. The macromolecules that are ubiquitous
uaseos Al adki apniou saueiquau juauaseq llejo siuauoduon
laminin, entactin/nidogen, and heparan sulfate proteoglycans.
Other basement membrane components such as bullous pem-
 phigoid antigen (BPA), epidermolysis bullosa acquisita (EBA),
fibronectin, GB3, L3d, and 19DEJ-1 are limited in their distri-
bution to the epithelial basement membrane of skin. The basal
cell membrane of the epidermal-dermal junction is not always
smooth. It may be irregular, forming fingerlike projections into
the dermis. The basement membrane (a) plays a role in mainte-
nance of epidermal-dermal adhesion, (b) acts as a selective barrier
between the epidermis and dermis by restricting some molecules
and permitting the passage of others, (c) influences cell behavior
and wound healing, and (d) serves as a target for both immuno-
logic (bullous diseases) and nonimmunologic injury (friction- or
chemical-induced blisters).
DERMIS
The dermis, or corium, lies beneath the basement membrane and
extends to the hypodermis. This layer is of mesodermal origin and
consists primarily of dense irregular connective tissue with a felt-
work of collagen, elastic, and reticular fibers embedded in amor-
phous ground substance. Predominant cell types of the dermis are
fibrocytes, mast cells, and macrophages. Plasma cells, chromato-
RD
phores, fat cells, and extravasated leukocytes are often found. The
dermis is traversed by blood vessels, lymph vessels, and nerves.
Sebaceous and sweat glands are also present, along with hair fol-
licles and arrector pili muscles.
FIGURE 16-10
Pig skin from the abdomen. Epidermis (E);
The dermis can be divided into a superficial papillary layer
 stratum corneum (C);: superficial papillary dermis (PD); epidermal
that blends into a deep reticular layer without a clear line of de-
peg (EP); dermal papilla (DP); deep reticular dermis (RD)
marcation (Fig. 16-10). The papillary layer is the thinnest layer,
Hematoxylin and eosin (×250).
328
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
consists of loose connective tissue, is in contact with the epider-
mis, and conforms to the contour of the stratum basale. The pap-
illary layer can protrude into the epidermis, thereby giving rise to
the dermal papilla. When the epidermis invaginates into the der-
mis, epidermal pegs are formed. The reticular layer is thicker
and consists of dense irregular connective tissue. Connective tis-
sue cells are fewer in the deeper layers of the dermis.
In the dermis, smooth muscle fibers are located near hair fol-
licles and are referred to as arrector pili muscles. In addition,
dermal smooth muscle fibers are present in specialized areas such
as the scrotum, penis, and teat. Skeletal muscle fibers of the cuta-
 neous trunci penetrate the dermis and allow voluntary movement
of the skin. Also, skeletal muscle fibers are associated with the
large sinus hairs of the facial region.
HYPODERMIS
Beneath the dermis is a layer of loose connective tissue, the hypo
dermis (subcutis), which is not part of the skin but rather the
dermis anchors the dermis to the underlying muscle or bone. The
loose arrangement of collagen and elastic fibers allows the skin
flexibility and free movement over the underlying structures.
Adipose tissue is present in this layer and may form small clus-
ters of cells or large masses that create a cushion or pad of fat
called the panniculus adiposus (Fig. 16-1l1). Pork bacon and
fatback are derived from the panniculus adiposus. Large fat de-
FIGUrE 16-11
1Hypodermis with three large primary hair
 posits (structural fat) in the hypodermis are characteristic of the
follicles (H) extending into the subcutaneous fat (F) (dog). Note the
carpal, metacarpal/metatarsal, and digital pads, where they act as
sebaceous glands (arrows) and apocrine gland ducts (A).
shock absorbers.
Hematoxylin and eosin (x35)
SKIN APPENDAGES
filled with cuboidal or flattened cells (Fig. 16-12). In the root,
the medulla is solid, whereas in the shaft, it contains air-filled
Hair
spaces. The pattern of the surface of the cuticular cells, together
In domestic mammals, hair covers the entire body, with the ex-
with the cellular arrangement of the medulla, is characteristic for
ception of the foot pads, hoofs, glans penis, mucocutaneous junc-
eac h species.
tions, and teats of some species. Hair is a flexible, keratinized
The hair or fleece of sheep is referred to as fibers. The three
structure produced by a hair follicle. The distal or free part of the
types of fibers are (a) wool fibers, tightly crimped fibers of small
hair above the surface of the skin is the hair shaft. The part
diameter lacking a medulla; (b) kemp fibers, coarse and with a
within the follicle is the hair root, which has a terminal, hollow
characteristic medulla; and (c) coarse fibers of intermediate size
knob called the hair bulb, which is attached to a dermal papilla.
relative to wool and kemp fibers. The various breeds of sheep pro-
The hair shaft is composed of three layers: an outermost cu-
duce wools with different characteristics, and these various kinds
ticle, a cortex of densely packed keratinized cells, and a medulla
of fleece are used for different purposes.
of loose cuboidal or flattened cells (Fig. 16-12). The cuticle is
formed by a single layer of flat keratinized cells in which the free
Hair Follicles
edges, which overlap like shingles on a roof, are directed toward
the distal end of the shaft. The cortex consists of a layer of dense,
Structure
compact, keratinized cells with their long axes parallel to the hair
The hair follicle is formed by growth of the ectoderm into the
 shaft. Nuclear remnants and pigment granules are present within
underlying mesoderm of the embryo. The epithelial downgrowth
the cells. Desmosomes hold the cells firmly together. Near the
becomes canalized, and the surrounding cells differentiate into
bulb, the cells are shorter and more oval and contain spherical
several layers or sheaths that surround the hair root. The follicle
nuclei. The medulla forms the center of the hair and is loosely
is embedded in the dermis, usually at an angle, and the bulb may
Integument ●Nancy A. Morteiro-Riviere
329
medulla
cortex
hair
cuticle
cuticle
internal
 granular epithelial layer
epithelial
(Huxley's)
root
sheath
pale epithelial layer
(Henle's)
external epithelial root sheath
glassy membrane
dermal root sheath
FIGURE I6-I2 Schematic of a cross section of a hair follicle
extend as deep as the hypodermis (Figs. 16-11 and 16-13). The
corrugated, forming several circular or follicular folds. The sheath
hair follicle consists of four major components: (a) internal epi-
then becomes thinner, and the cells fuse, disintegrate, and become
thelial root sheath, (b) external epithelial root sheath, (c) dermal
part of the sebum.
papilla, and (d) hair matrix.
The external epithelial root sheath is composed of several
The innermost layer, next to the hair root, is the internal
layers of cells similar to the epidermis with which it is continu-
epithelial root sheath, which is composed of three layers: (a) in-
ous in the upper portion of the follicle. External to this layer is a
ternal root sheath cuticle, (b) middle granular epithelial layer
-el iesq aun on Supuodsaion aueiqmau Asslg snoauagonuoy
(Huxley's layer), and (c) outer pale epithelial layer (Henle's layer)
ina of the epidermis (Fig. 16-12). The entire epithelial root sheath
(Fig. 16-12). The cuticle of the internal epithelial root sheath is
(internal and external) is enclosed by a dermal root sheath com-
formed by overlapping keratinized cells similar to those of the
 posed of collagen and elastic fibers richly supplied by blood vessels
cuticle of the hair, except that the free edges are oriented in the
and nerves, especially in the dermal papilla.
opposite direction or toward the hair bulb. This arrangement re-
The dermal papilla of the hair follicle is the region of con-
sults in a solid implantation of the hair root in the hair follicle.
nective tissue directly underneath the hair matrix. The cells cov-
The granular epithelial layer is composed of one to three layers
ering the dermal papilla and composing most of the hair bulb are
of cells rich in trichohyalin (keratohyalin in hair) granules. The
the hair matrix cells. These are comparable to stratum basale cells
pale epithelial layer is the outermost layer of the internal epi-
of regular epidermis and give rise to the cells that keratinize to
thelial root sheath and is composed of a single layer of keratinized
form the hair (Fig. 16-13). They differ from the keratinocytes of
cells. Immediately below the opening of the sebaceous glands,
the surface epidermis with respect to the type of keratin pro.
the internal epithelial root sheath of the large follicles becomes
duced. The surface keratinocytes produce a “soft" form of keratin
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
medulla
cortex
hair
cuticle
dermal root sheath
sebaceous gland
external epithelial
root sheath
arrectorpilimuscle
internal epithelial
root sheath
connective tissue
hair matrix
dermal papilla
capillaries
FIGURE 16-13S
 Schematic of a longitudinal section of a hair follicle.
that passes through a keratohyalin phase. The cells containing
arrector pili muscles are especially well developed along the back
"soft" keratin have a high lipid content and a low sulfur content
of dogs, where they cause the hair to "bristle" when they contract.
and desquamate when they reach the surface of the epidermis. In
The contraction of the arrector pili muscles during cold weather
contrast, the matrix cells of the hair follicle produce a "hard" ker-
elevates the hairs, thus allowing minute air pockets to form in the
atin, which is also characteristic of horn and feather. The ker-
coat. This dead-air space provides significant insulation that helps
atinocytes of the follicle do not go through a keratohyalin phase,
to maintain internal body temperature. The contraction of this
do not desquamate, and have a low lipid and high sulfur content.
 muscle not only erects the hairs but also may play a role in emp-
 Hair pigment is derived from the epidermal melanocytes lo-
tying the sebaceous glands. In addition to the arrector pili mus-
cated over the dermal papilla. Gray hair results from the inabil-
cle, the interfollicular muscle, which spans the triad of hair
ity of melanocytes in the hair bulb to produce tyrosinase. Hair
follicles, has been described in pigs (Figs. 16-15 and 16-16). It
color is determined by the amount and distribution of pigment
is located midway between the level of the sebaceous gland and
and by the presence of air, which appears white in reflected light.
the apocrine sweat gland. Upon contraction, the interfollicular
Silvery white hair is the result when the pigment has faded and
muscle draws the three follicles close together and rotates the
the medulla becomes filled with air.
outer follicles of the triad into a new relationship. Adjustment of
Associated with most hair follicles are bundles of smooth
 the hair follicle and hair may play a part in thermoregulation,
muscle called the arrector pili muscle. This muscle attaches to
sensory function, emptying of the skin glands, or self defense.
the dermal root sheath of the hair follicle and extends toward the
Types of Hair Follicles
epidermis, where it connects to the papillary layer of the dermis
(Fig. 16-14). These muscles are anchored by elastic fibers at their
Hair follicles are classified into several types. A primary hair fol-
attachments and are innervated by autonomic nerve fibers. The
licle has a large diameter, is rooted deep in the dermis, and is usu-
Integument ● Nancy A. Morteiro-Riviere
331
H
FIGURE 16-16  Scanning electron micrograph of pig skin
depicting hairs (H) occurming in groups of three emerging from the
stratum corneum. Note the flaky appearance of the stratum
corneum (SC) cells (X60). (From Monteiro-Riviere NA. Comporative
onatomy, physiology, ond biochemistry of mammalion skin. In: Hobsor
FIGURE I6-14 Longitudinal section of a hair follicle (HF)
DW, ed. Dermal ond Oculor Toxicology: Fundomentals ond Methods.
showing an attached arrector pili muscle (P), cross section of the
Boco Roton, FL: CRC Press, 1 991; 1:3)
interfollicular muscle (M), epidermis (E), hair (H), and hypodermis
(D) (pig). Hematoxylin and eosin (x50).
ally associated with sebaceous and sweat glands and an arrecton
pili muscle (Fig. 16-11). The hair that emerges from such a folli-
cle is called a primary hair (guard hair). A secondary follicle is
smaller in diameter than a primary follicle, and the root is nearer
the surface. It may have a sebaceous gland but lacks a sweat gland
and an arrector pili muscle. Hairs from these follicles are second-
ary hair, or underhairs. Secondary hairs lack a medulla
HF
Follicles with only one hair emerging to the surface are
called single or simple follicles. Compound follicles are com-
posed of clusters of several hair follicles located in the dermis. At
the level of the sebaceous gland opening, the follicles fuse and the
various hairs emerge through one external orifice. Compound
hair follicles usually have one primary hair follicle and several
secondary hair follicles.
Many differences exist in the arrangement of the hair folli-
cles among the domestic animals. Horses and cattle have single
hair follicles that are distributed evenly. Pigs have single follicles
grouped in clusters of two to four follicles; clusters of three are
FIGURE I6-15 Hair follicle triad (pig). Note the hair follicles
most common in young pigs (Figs. 16-15 and 16-16). This clus-
(HF) occurring in groups of three, typical of young pigs. The
ter is usually surrounded by dense connective tissue. The com-
interfollicular muscle (M) and arrector pili muscle (P) can be seen.
pound follicle of dogs consists ofa single large primary hair and a
Hematoxylin and eosin (xl 00).
group of smaller secondary underhairs (Fig. 16-17). A diversity of
332
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
FIGURE 16-17
 Compound hair follicle (dog). Primary hair
follicle (HF); sebaceous gland (G); sweat glands (SG). The other
pue ukxoieah (s) sapllo Aepuooas le ae saunonis puna
eosin (×1 50).
FIGURE I6-18 Hair follicle cluster (cat). Primary hair follicle
(HF) surrounded by groups of compound follicle clusters (C) that
contain primary and secondary hairs (arrow). Hematoxylin and eosin
hair types are found in different breeds of dogs. For example, in
(×160).
the German Shepherd, a greater number of secondary hairs exist,
whereas in the short-coat breeds such as Rottweilers and terriers.
of the follicles in cats consists of a single large primary (guard) hair
is traversed by fibroelastic trabeculae throughout its length. In
follicle surrounded by clusters of two to five compound follicles
pigs and carnivores, in the upper portion of the sinus hair folli-
cles, the inner layer of the dermal root sheath thickens, forming
(Fig. 16-18). Each compound follicle has 3 coarse primary hairs
and 6 to 12 secondary hairs. The skin of sheep has hair-growing
a sinus pad, and this pad is surrounded by an annular sinus free
regions, such as the face, the distal part of the limbs, and the
of trabeculae (Fig. 16-19). Skeletal muscles are attached to the
outer layer of the dermal root sheath of the follicle, allowing
pinna of the ear, and has wool-growing regions that cover most
-lj alus Asou ureiuos suoigai uimoia-ieu aui Aoq auijo
some voluntary control of hair move ment. Numerous nerve bun-
 licles, whereas the densely covered wool-growing regions have
dles penetrate the outer layer of the dermal root sheath and ram-
many compound follicles. The typical follicle cluster contains
ify in the trabeculae and inner layer of the dermal root sheath.
three single primary hair follicles and several secondary hair fol-
licles. In goats, the single primary hair follicles occur in groups
Hair Cycle
of three; three to six secondary hair follicles are associated with
In the surface epidermis, the proces of keratinization is contin-
each group.
uous because of the uninterrupted production of new keratino-
Sinus or tactile hair follicles of the head (e.g., the vibris-
cytes, but in the hair follicle, the matrix cells undergo periods of
sae [whiskers] of a cat) are highly specialized for tactile sense
quiescence during which no mitotic activity occurs. When the
They are very large single follicles characterized by a blood-filled
matrix cell proliferation is reinstituted, a new hair is formed.
sinus between the inner and outer layers of the dermal root sheath
This cyclic activity of the hair bulb allows for the seasonal change
(Fig. 16-19). The sinus is divided into an upper annular sinus
in the hair coat of domestic animals. Hair requires approximately
(nontrabecular, not separated by connective tissue) and a lower
3 to 4 months to regrow after shaving for normal or short coats
cavernous sinus (trabecular, separated by connective tissue) (Fig.
and up to 18 months for long coats. The length of time varies,
16-20) except in horses and ruminants, in which the annular sinus
depending on the growth stage of the hair follicle.
Integument·Noncy A. Morteiro-Riviere
E
FIGURE I6-I9 Sinus hair follicle (cat). Outer layer of the
FIGURE 16-20
Cross section of a sinus hair follicle (cat). Outer
dermal root sheath (D): inner layer of the dermal root sheath (l);
layer of the dermal root sheath (A);: lower cavermous blood sinus
upper annular sinus fled with blood (nontrabecular) (A);: cavemous
with trabeculae (B); inner layer of the dermal root sheath (C); glassy
blood sinus with trabeculae (C); glassy membrane (arrow); extermal
membrane (arrow); extermal epithelial root sheath (E); hair (F).
epithelial root sheath (E); hair (F); sinus pad (P); sebaceous glands 
Hematoxylin and eosin (x60).
(S) opening into the pilosebaceous canal. Hematoxylin and eosin
(x50).
Skin Glands
The period during which the cells of the hair bulb are mitot-
Sebaceous Glands
ically active is called anagen (Fig. 16-21). After this growth
Se baceous glands may be simple, branched, or compound alveo-
phase, the hair follicles go through a regressive stage, referred to
lar glands that release their secretory product, sebum, by the holo-
as catagen. During this period, metabolic activity slows down,
crine mode. Sebum, an oily secretion containing a mixture of
and the base of the follicle migrates upward in the skin toward the
lipids and disintegrated cells, acts as an antibacterial agent and, in
epidermal surface, until all that remains of the bulb is a flimsy,
hairy mammals, as a waterproofing agent. The sebaceous glands
disorganized column of cells, or club hair. The hair follicle then
are most frequently associated with hair follicles, into which their
sdois qimoia yim ui aseud suansaimb o guiisaie duaoai siaiua
ducts empty to form the pilosebaceous canal of the hair follicle
and the base of the bulb is at the level of the sebaceous canal. After
(Fig. 16-19). In certain hairless areas, such as the anal canal, the
the resting phase, mitotic activity and keratinization start again
teat of horses, and the internal layer of the prepuce of some species,
in the renewed anagen phase and a new hair is formed. As the new
sebaceous glands empty directly onto the skin surface through a
hair grows beneath the telogen follicle, it gradually pushes the old
duct lined with stratified squamous epithelium. The secretory unit
hair upward toward the surface, where it is eventually shed. This
consists of a solid mass of epidermal cells, enclosed by a connec-
intermittent mitotic activity and keratinization of the hair matrix
tive-tissue sheath that blends with the surrounding dermis. At the
cells constitute the hair cycle, which is controlled by several fac-
periphery of the glandular mass, asingle layer oflow cuboidal cells
tors, including length of daily periods of light, ambient tempera.
rests on a basal lamina (Fig. 16-22). Most of the mitotic activity
ture, nutrition, and hormones, particularly estrogen, testosterone,
takes place in this layer, an
d as the cells move inward, they enlarge,
adrenal steroids, and thyroid hormone
become polygonal, and accumulate numerous lipid droplets. The
334
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
keratinizing
cur
hair
cells
replacement
hair
hair
matrix
anagen
catagen
telogen
renewed anagen
FlGURE I6-2I Schematic of the three main stages of hair follicle growth and replacement.
cells near the duct contain pyknotic nuclei. The sebum passes into
the base of the horn of goats, anal sacs of cats,and the prepuce and
the lumen of the hair follicle through a short duct lined with strat-
circumanal region of dogs, and are described later in this chapter.
ified squamous epithelium. Many areas of the body of certain
Some areas of the skin, such as the foot pads, hoofs, claws, and horn,
species have especially well-developed accumulations of sebaceous
lack sebaceous glands.
glands, some of which are associated with sweat glands. These sites
include the infraorbital, inguinal, and interdigital regions of sheep,
Sweat Glands
 Based on their mode of release of the secretory product,sweat (su-
doriferous) glands are classified into two types: apocrine and me-
  ae  a a  (ia) n
developed in the domestic mammals. The structure of apocrine
 sweat glands varies considerably among species, and whether the
apocrine mode of secretion occurs in all sweat glands designated
as apocrine and in all domestic species is uncertain. Nevertheless,
the term apocrine is retained, primarily for didactic reasons.
The apocrine sweat glands are simple saccular or tubular
glands with a coiled secretory portion and a straight duct (simple
coiled tubular glands). The secretory portion has a large lumen
lined with flattened cuboidal to low columnar epithelial cells, de-
pending on the stage of their secretory activity (Fig. 16-23). The
cytoplasm may contain glycogen, lipid, or pigment granules. The
free surface of cells in apocrine sweat glands has varying cytoplas-
mic protrusions, indicative of secretory activity. Myoepithelial cells
are located between the secretory cells and the basal lamina. The
It has a narrow lumen and two layers of flattened cuboidal cells
Most frequently, the duct penetrates the epidermis of the hair fol-
licle just before it opens onto the surface of the skin. The apocrine
FlGURE I6-22 Multilobular sebaceous glands (G) of the
glands in the domestic animals are located throughout most of
labium (horse). Hematoxylin and eosin (xl 10).
the skin. This characteristic contrasts with their distribution in
Integument ·Nancy A. Morteiro-Riviere
335
FIGURE I6-23 Apocrine sweat gland from a dog illustrating
myoepithelial cells (arrows) and apical secretory caps (A).
Hematoxylin and eosin (x660).
humans, in which they are mainly in the axillary, pubic, and pe-
 rianal regions. In horses, these glands secrete abundantly and pro-
duce visible sweat during exercise and at high temperature. In
other species, the secretion is scant and rarely perceptible. In dogs
and cats, the glands may be tortuous or serpentine, and in rumi-
FIGURE I6-24 Merocrine sweat glands (M) and ducts (D)
nants, the lumen is dilated, giving the appearance of large sac-
from the nasolabial plane (cow). Hematoxylin and eosin (×300)
cules. The apocrine glands are least active in goats and cats. The
function of apocrine glands is to produce a viscous secretion that
contains a scent that is related to communications between species,
probably as a sex attractant or as a territorial marker. Apocrine
Blood VeSSelS. LYmPh
glands in several areas of the body are specialized in structure and
VeSSelS,And NerVeS
function and are described later in this chapter.
The merocrine (eccrine) sweat glands are found mainly in
Terminal branches of the cutaneous arteries give rise to three
special skin areas, such as the foot pads of dogs and cats, the frog
plexuses: (a) the deep or subcutaneous plexus, which in turn
of horse hoofs, the planum rostrale of pigs, the carpal glands of
gives off branches to the (b) middle or cutaneous plexus, which
swine, and the bovine planum nasolabiale (Fig. 16-24). They are
provides branches to make up the (c) superficial or subpapillary
simple tubular glands that open directly onto the skin surface
plexus (Fig. 16-1). The reverse applies for venous return to the
pasoduon si uod Aionaias ai 'sal ae ou uui aii
Cutaneous veins. By this arrangement, all components of the skin
of cuboidal epithelium with rwo distinct cell types. Dark cells
are ensured an adequate blood supply. The superficial plexus also
have more ribosomes than the clear cells, and numerous mucin
furnishes the capillary loops that extend into the dermal papillae
droplets occur in the apical part of the cell. In contrast, clear
when present. Lymph capillaries arise in the superficial dermis
cells lack cytoplasmic basophilia, contain lipid inclusions, and
 and form a network that drains into a subcutaneous plexus
produce aqueous sweat. At the base of these cells, there is an in-
The nerve supply to the skin varies in different parts of the
folding of the plasma membrane, which suggests that they play
body. Small subcutaneous nerves give rise to a nerve plexus that
a role in electrolyte transport. Intercellular canaliculi occur be-
 pervades the dermis and sends small branches to the epidermis.
tween adjacent clear cells and course from the lumen to the base
Several kinds of endings are present: free afferent nerve endings
of the epithelium. Myoepithelial cells surround the secretory
in the epidermis and dermis (encircle hair follicles); free efferent
units and aid in emptying the gland of secretion. The duct, which
endings in the hypodermis (at arrector pili muscles, glands, and
is composed of two layers of cuboidal epithelial cells, is relatively
blood vessels); nonencapsulated tactile corpuscles (Merkel cells);
straight and opens directly onto the surface of the epidermis
and encapsulated tactile (Meissner's) corpuscles (see Chapter 6).
336
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Lamellar (pacinian) corpuscles have been observed in the frog of
mous epithelium forms the cerumen or ear wax. The external
the equine hoof, the digital cushion of the dog and cat, and the
acoustic meatus is supported by elastic cartilage in the outer por-
anal sac wall of the cat.
tion and by bone near the tympanic membrane.
Eyelids
SPeCIAl STrUCTUreS
OF THE INTEGUMENT
The outermost covering of both upper and lower eyelids is typi-
cal skin containing sweat and sebaceous glands and hair follicles
External Ear
(Fig. 16-26). The cilia, also known as eyelashes, and their asso-
ciated sebaceous glands (glands of Zeis) are numerous in the
The pinna (auricle) of the ear is covered on both sides by thin
upper lid of all species except cats. In the lower eyelid, the cilia
skin containing sweat and sebaceous glands and hair follicles
are fewer in number in ruminants and horses and are generally
(Fig. 16-25). The convex surface of the pinna usually has more
10 uo suasaid aq Aeu suiey asei 'said pue 'soop 'sies u nuasqe
hair follicles per unit area than does the concave surface. Blood
near the eyelids. The inner surface of the eyelids, the palpebral
conjunctiva, is a mucous membrane and contains lymphatic tis-
the core of the pinna. Trauma to or even bending of the carti-
sue at its base (conjunctival fornix). Its epithelial covering varies
lage can damage the blood vessels and may cause subcutaneous
with the area and species from stratified squamous epithelium
hematomas in ears of dogs.
near the edge of the eyelid to various combinations of columnar,
The lumen of the external acoustic meatus is irregular in
cuboidal, polyhedral, and squamous cells. As a result, it is vari-
contour, the result of several permanent skin folds. The skin that
ously described as stratified squamous, stratified cuboidal, strat-
lines the canal contains small hair follicles, sebaceous glands, and
ceruminous glands. Ceruminous glands are simple coiled tubu-
lar apocrine sweat glands. The ceruminous glands open either
into hair follicles or onto the surface. They increase in number in
the lower third of the meatus. The combination of sebum, ceru-
minous gland secretion, and the desquamating stratified squa-
FIGURE I6-25 Auricula of the ear (cow). Outer surface (O):
FIGURE I6-26 Upper eyelid (dog), anterior or skin surface (E)
inner surface (); auricular elastic cartilage (C). Masson's Trichrome
Numerous hairs (H) and sebaceous glands (G) are present.
(×30)
Hematoxylin and eosin (x50).
Integument ●Nancy A. Morteiro-Riviere
ified columnar, and transitional or pseudostratified. Goblet cells
are often present (Fig. 16-27).
The most characteristic feature of the eyelids is the tarsal
glands (meibomian glands), which are better developed in the
upper lid (Fig. 16-28). They are multilobular sebaceous glands
with a central duct, which opens at the margin of the eyelid. These
glands are most highly developed in the cat and poorly developed
in swine. The tarsal glands are surrounded by the tarsal plate, a
compact layer of collagen and elastic fibers. Skeletal muscle
fibers from the orbicular muscle (orbicularis oculi) penetrate the
eyelid, and scattered bundles of smooth muscle fibers are also 
present.
Apocrine sweat glands, referred to as ciliary glands (glands
of Moll), open rostrally to the tarsal glands and near the cilia or
into the follicles of the cilia. Unlike ordinary sweat glands, the
terminal portions of ciliary glands are only slightly coiled, and
cylindric secretory and myoepithelial cells. Their structure and
location are similar in all domestic animals, but their function is
obscure.
FIGURE I6-28 Tarsal gland in the upper eyelid (dog)
Multilobular sebaceous tarsal gland (TG) in longitudinal section
surrounded by the tarsal plate (T), skeletal muscle (M), and hair
follicles (F). The conjunctival surface (C) is nonkeratinized stratified
squamous epithelium. Hematoxylin and eosin (x40)
Infraorbital Sinus
The infraorbital sinus of sheep, located medially and rostrally to
the eye, is lined with thin skin that contains few hairs, large se-
baceous glands that form a continuous layer around the sinus,
and a few peripherally located apocrine sweat glands. The secre-
tions of these glands are responsible for the sticky, yellow fatty
substance on the skin.
Nose
The skin around the external openings (nares) of the nasal cavity
is slightly modified in each species. The planum nasolabiale of
cattle has a smooth, thick keratinized epidermis (Fig. 16-29),
whereas the planum nasale of dogs and cats is composed ofa thick,
keratinized epidermis with distinct elevations and grooves. These
FIGURE I6-27 Upper eyelid (dog). Posterior or conjunctival
characteristics provide the basis for identification by nose print-
surface (C) with pseudostratified epithelium with many goblet cells.
ing, similar to fingerprinting. Neither sweat nor sebaceous glands
Hematoxylin and eosin (×150).
are associated with the planum nasale. The skin around the nos-
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
K
FIGURE 16-30 Merocrine glands (M) of the nasolabial regior
FIGURE I6-29 Planum nasolabiale (cow). Notice the
(cow). Hematoxylin and eosin (x780)
thickened keratinized stratified squamous epithelium (K).
Hematoxylin and eosin (x50).
tril of horses is usually thin and contains fine hairs and numerous 
a central collecting space. These lobules are surrounded by ske-
sebaceous glands. The planum rostrale of pigs has tactile (sinus)  letal muscle. Cats rub this gland on specific items during olfac-
hairs distributed over the surface and numerous large merocrine  tory marking and the sebaceous scent is transferred to the rubbed
num nasolabiale of large ruminants contain no hair follicles but 
have large merocrine glands (Fig. 16-30) with the same morpho-
Carpal Glands
logic characteristics as salivary glands. The secretion from these
glands aids in keeping the nasolabial plane moist.
The carpal glands of pigs are accumulations of numerous lob-
ules of densely packed merocrine sweat glands on the medial sur-
face of the carpus. They open to the skin surface through three tO
Mental Organ
five diverticula lined with stratified squamous epithelium. Each
The mental organ of pigs consists of a large spherical mass of
lobule is drained by a duct lined with a bilayered cuboidal epi-
apocrine and sebaceous glands with a few tactile hairs located
 thelium, which pursues a tortuous course through the dermis and
midway between the mandibles behind the angle of the chin.
 epidermis and then opens into a diverticulum.
Tactile (Meissner's) corpuscles and nerve fibers are present in the
dermis and, therefore, are believed to play a role in transmitting
Interdigital Sinus
mechanical stimuli
The interdigital sinus of sheep is located between the digits just
Submental Organ
above the hoofs. The opening of the sinus is at the dorsal tip of the
interdigital space. The skin of the sinus contains a few hair folli-
The submental organ of cats, located in the intermandibular
cles, associated sebaceous glands, and numerous large apocrine
space, is composed of sebaceous gland lobules, each containing
glands collectively referred to as the interdigital glands.
Integument ●Nancy A. Morteiro-Riviere
65
Inguinal Sinus
sacs are lined by keratinized stratified squamous epithelium. The
glands of the anal sac, modified sweat glands located beneath
The inguinal sinus of sheep is a cutaneous diverticulum in the
the epithelium, empty into the lumen of the anal sac. Both se-
inguinal region of both sexes that contains scattered small hair
baceous and apocrine sweat glands are present in the wall of the
follicles, sebaceous glands, and apocrine glands.
anal sac in cats (Fig. 16-32), but dogs have only large apocrine
sweat glands. The anal sac duct of dogs is prone to occlusion,
Scrotum
and detritus. The infection that frequently follows this occlusion
Generally, scrotal skin is thinner than skin on other parts of the
necessitates either the expression of the content of the sac or the
body. Sebaceous and apocrine sweat glands are present but differ
surgical removal of the sac. This problem is rare in cats, proba-
in size and number in various species. Boars have only a few small
bly because the sebaceous glands within the wall of the sac add
apocrine sweat glands in the scrotal skin, whereas stallions have
sufficient amounts of lipid to the secretory material, consequently
both large sebaceous glands and well-developed apocrine sweat
decreasing the possibility of occlusion of the duct. The secretion
glands. The amount of pigment varies with species and breed.
of these glands is a brownish and oily fluid that may function in
Short, fine hair is characteristic of scrotal skin of all species. The
social recognition in dogs and can have a pungent odor with im-
tunica dartos is a unique layer of smooth muscle and fibroelastic
 paction and infection. Anal glands, which empty into the anal
connective tissue within the subcutaneous tissue of the scrotum.
canal, are discussed in Chapter 10.
These muscle fibers play an important role in the regulation of
testicular temperature.
Circumanal Glands
Anal Sacs
The circumanal glands of dogs are lobulated, modified sebaceous
glands located around the anus in the cutaneous zone (Fig. 16-33).
The anal sacs (sinus paranales) of domestic carnivores are paired
They extend from the mucocutaneous junction peripherally for
cutaneous diverticula, the ducts of which open into the anal canal
approximately 1 to 3 cm in all directions. Similar glands have
at the level of the anocutaneous line (Fig. 16-31). The ducts and
been described in the skin of the prepuce, tail, loin, and groin
FIGURE I6-3 I Anal sac and associated glands (cat). Duct (A) and lumen (B) of the anal sac filled
with keratinized epithelial fragments and secretory material. Sebaceous gland masses (C); apocrine anal
sac glands (D);: linea anocutanea (E). Hematoxylin and eosin (×17). (From Greer MB, Calhoun ML. The onol
SOCs of the dormestic cot—Felis dormesticus. Amm J Vet Res 1 966;27:773.)
340
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
FIGURE I6-32 Higher magnification of the anal sac (cat). Note
the large apocrine glands (A) and sebaceous glands (G)
Hematoxylin and eosin (×l 00)
These glands are present shortly after birth, increase in size
throughout adult life, and tend to atrophy at senility. The super-
ficial portion of the circumanal glands consists of typical seba-
ceous glands, whereas the deep portion is ductless and composed
of solid, compact masses of polygonal cells arranged in lobules.
The cells have granular eosinophilic cytoplasm and intercellular
canaliculi (Fig. 16-33). The term hepatoid has been used to de-
scribe the glandular parenchyma of each lobule because it re-
sembles closely packed liver cells. A precise function for these
glands has not been determined; however, they may be involved
in the metabolism of a steroid hormone. The circumanal glands
FIGURE I6-33 Circumanal glands (dog). Cutaneous zone (A);
are clinically important because they rank third in frequency as
hepatoid circumanal gland (B); duct (C). Hematoxylin and eosin
a site of canine tumors.
(×20). Inset, peripheral cells (D); nonsebaceous gland cells (E);
Supracaudal Gland
The supracaudal gland (tail gland or preen gland), located in an
oval circumscribed area on the dorsum of the tail (3 to 9 cm from
base of the tail) in dogs and cats, is an accumulation of large se-
and mammary tumors in small animals. Mastitis is inflammation
baceous glands that empty into single hair follicles (Fig. 16-34).
of this gland and is one of the most common and economically
The apocrine sweat glands in this region are rudimentary. Well-
significant clinical diseases in the cow. In response to bacterial
developed arrector pili muscles appear as large bundles of smooth
infection, inflammatory changes occur in the gland with influx
muscle. The epidermis above this gland is extremely thin, and
of many bloodborne neutrophils
the structure of this gland is similar to the superficial portion of
The mammary gland is a compound tubuloalveolar gland
the circumanal glands. The secretion may aid in olfactory recog-
(Fig. 16-35). Groups of tubuloalveolar secretory units form lob-
nition, and it can cause a matting of the hair of the region, espe-
ules separated by connective-tissue septa.
cially if the glands are overactive. This matting can present a
Alveoli
problem in show cats, because the appearance of the hair coat of
the tail is affected.
Secretory alveoli of the mammary gland are spherical to ovoid in
shape with a large lumen (Figs. 16-35 and 16-36). Continuous
Mammary Gland
milk production enlarges the lumen, and adjacent alveoli may
fuse partially (Fig. 16-36). Shortly after milking, as the alveolus
Knowledge of the micros
 begins a new secretory cycle, the lumen is partially collapsed and
is important to the understanding of mastitis in large animals
irregular in outline.
Integument ●Nancy A. Mornteiro-Riviere
341
FIGURE 16-34 Supracaudal gland, tail region (cat). Thin
epidermis (E), sebaceous glands (S), and ducts opening into hair
FIGURE 16-36 Lactating mammary gland filled with colostrum
follicles (F), and large bundles of smooth muscle (M). Hematoxylin
(sheep). Alveolus (A); interlobular septum (S). Hematoxylin and
and eosin (x80).
eosin (×l 20)
Clusters of alveoli form lobules within the gland. All the lob-
lobules may complete their secretory cycle and be filled with milk
before others begin. Therefore, a single histologic section may
contain lobules in various stages of activity. Usually, all of the
secretory alveoli within a lobule are in approximately the same
secretory phase.
The epithelium of the alveoli varies markedly in height dur-
ing various stages of secretory activity. During active secretion,
the basal portion of the columnar epithelial cells contains a well-
developed rough endoplasmic reticulum. The spherical nuclei are
located near the center of the cell. Lipid droplets, in close asso-
ciation with mitochondria, and vesicles, filled with micelles of
milk protein, occur throughout the cell apex. As the secretory
cycle continues, the lipid droplets move toward the cell surface
that protrudes into the alveolar lumen. The lipid droplets are re-
leased from the cell, surrounded by varying amounts of cyto-
plasm and the plasmalemma. The protein-filled vesicles also move
toward the cell surface, where they are released by exocytosis.
FIGURE I6-35 Nonlactating mammary gland (cow). Gland
lobules with alveoli (A): large irregular openings representing
Milk is thus produced by both apocrine and merocrine secretion.
intralobular ducts (L); and loose connective tissue (C). Hematoxylin
At the end of the secretory cycle, the epithelial cells are low
and eosin (xl 00).
cuboidal in shape.
342
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Myoepithelial cells, surrounding the alveolar epithelial cells,
The teat sinus empties into one or more papillary ducts
(teat canal, streak canal) leading to the external surface of the
ysis. The contraction forces the milk from the secretory units into 
teat. A single papillary duct is present in ruminants while multi-
the duct system. This phenomenon is called milk letdown.
species. Horses have 2 papillary ducts, pigs have 2 to 3, cats have
Interstitium
ym pau!l s! ionp Aielded au1 9l oi / aaey ssop pue '/ 01 y
The interstitial tissue of the mammary gland provides important
 stratified squamous epithelium. Circularly oriented bundles of
structural support for the secretory units and contains the blood
smooth muscle in the mucosa form a sphincter to hold the milk
vessels, lymph vessels, and nerves. Each secretory unit is sur-
 in the teat sinus above the duct until it is forced out by milking
rounded by loose connective tissue with an extensive plexus of
or suckling .
 blood and lymph capillaries. Plasma cells and lymphocytes are
The skin of the teat in cows and sows is composed ofa thick,
 common, particularly at parturition when the immunoglobulin-
keratinized stratified squamous epithelium and dermis without
rich colostrum is secreted. The interlobular connective tissue is
hair follicles and sweat or sebaceous glands. However, in some
thick and contains the interlobular ducts and larger blood and
 domestic species, such as sheep and goats, the teat may contain
lymph vessels.
fine hairs and sweat and sebaceous glands.
Ducts
Mammary Gland Involution
The duct system begins with an intralobular duct (Fig. 16-35),
After the lactation period or sudden arrest of suckling or milking :
which drains into an interlobular duct. The interlobular duct, in
glandular involution begins. The alveoli are distended by accu-
turn, drains into a lactiferous duct, which is the primary excre-
-dua ae Aau un sino uoaias iauy ou pue yiu paeinu
tory duct for a lobe. The intralobular duct epithelium is simple
cuboidal. Spindle-shaped myoepithelial cells may be associated
removed for several days, the epithelial cells would degenerate and
with these ducts. Interlobular ducts are lined proximally by a sim-
the residual milk in the lumen would be absorbed gradually. How-
ple cuboidal epithelium and, more distally, by two layers of
ever, recent research has suggested less loss of mammary epithelial
cuboidal cells. Longitudinal smooth muscle fibers become associ-
cells than previously believed. Characteristically, the involuted
ated with these ducts as they merge with other interlobular ducts
mammary gland has more interstitial tissue than glandular ele-
to form the large lactiferous ducts. The two-layered cuboidal epi-
ments, and isolated clusters of branched tubules with a few small
thelium continues in these larger ducts, and smooth muscle be-
alveoli are all that remain of the parenchyma (Fig. 16-35). The
comes more prominent. Sacculations result from variations in the
 alveoli are lined by a low cuboidal epithelium with prominent
diameter of the lumen. The constrictions between these saccula-
underlying myoepithelial cells. The connective-tissue septa are
tions may have an annular fold containing smooth muscle. Several
thicker, and fat cells may occur singly or in clusters. Lymphocytes
lactiferous ducts empty into a lactiferous sinus (gland sinus) at
and plasma cells are present in significant numbers. Small, dark-
the base of the teat.
staining bodies of casein (corpora amylacea) may be found in the
alveoli , ducts, or interstitial tissue.
Teat
The teat, or nipple, contains the terminal part of the duct sys-
tem. The lactiferous sinus is continuous with the teat sinus (teat
cistern, cavity of the teat), which is lined by stratified cuboidal
DIGITAL ORGANS AND HORN
epithelium. The lamina propria of the teat sinus may contain
The digital organ consists ofa keratinized epidermis, underlying
small clusters of mammary gland tissue. Smooth muscle bundles,
dermis, and a hypodermis of variable thickness. Hard keratin, or
oriented parallel to the long axis of the teat, are prominent in
horn, forms the keratinized portion of the hoofs of horses, rumi-
some species and form the boundary between the teat mucosa and
nants, and pigs and the claws of carnivores. The dermis (corium)
the surrounding dermis of the skin. Numerous blood vessels in
 the dermis form a vascular stratum, which becomes engorged
contains blood vessels and nerves. The hypodermis is absent in
some regions of the digit (hoof wall, sole, claw), but in the ground
with blood during the milking or suckling process; thus, the
 Overlying skin of the teat is stretched, resulting in a smooth sur-
contact region, the hypodermis is modified to form the digital
cushion located deep to the dermis. Bones and their associated lig-
face. After milking, when the blood has drained from the teat
vessels and the longitudinal smooth muscle has contracted, the
aments and tendons form the supportive structure of the digit.
auieadde paienion ieid sii oi suai arens ieai
An annular fold of the mucosa extends into the opening be-
Equine Hoof
tween the lactiferous sinus and teat sinus. The size of this opening
 is somewhat variable from one animal to another. Occasionally,
The epidermis of the skin on the equine limb continues distally
trabeculae of connective tissue may extend across the opening, re-
 as the periople, a ring of epidermis that produces soft, nonpig-
sulting in reduction of milk flow from the lactiferous sinus to the
mented tubular and intertubular horn above the coronary border
teat sinus. These trabeculae are called “spiders," and frequently,
of the hoof. Toward the back of the foot, the periople widens into
veterinarians must cut them surgically.
a broad keratinized layer or bulb (heel). From the periople, the
Integument ·Nancy A. Morteiro-Riviere
343
epidermis angles internally to line the coronary groove. Finally,
The stratum externum is a thin layer of tubular and inter-
epidermal laminae extend vertically from the coronary groove
tubular horn, which is a continuation of the stratum corneum of
to the ground surface of the hoof.
the perioplic epidermis. This layer covers the outer surface of the
The dermis of the hoof is usually referred to as the corium.
hoof wall.
 Perioplic corium is continuous with coronary corium, anchor-
ing epidermal structures (periople and coronary epidermis) to
"hard" horn and is the main supportive structure of the wall
underlying tissues. The laminar corium interdigitates with the
(Fig. 16-38). The horny tubules are solid rods and are oriented
epidermal laminae and fills the space between the laminae and the
parallel to the outer surface of the hoof, and their keratinized cells
distal phalanx. The corium is composed of bundles of coarse colla-
have a highly ordered arrangement. The cross-sectional profiles
gen fibers and a massive network of large arteries and veins with-
of the tubules may be circular, oval, or wedge-shaped and have
out valves. This vascular bed helps to dampen the compressive
a central region (medulla) of loose keratinized cells similar to
forces transmitted from the hard inflexible hoof to the phalanx.
the medulla of a hair shaft and a peripheral cortex of more com-
The keratinized portion of the equine hoof is composed of
three main parts. The wall (paries) is that portion that is visible
(Fig. 16-39). The inner zone contains keratinized cells oriented
when the foot is placed on the ground. The sole (solea) forms the
around the medulla in fairly tight coils; the cells of the middle
greatest part of the ventral surface of the foot; the frog (cuneus
zone form loose spirals; and the cells of the outer zone form an-
ungulae) is a wedge-shaped structure that projects into the sole.
other layer of tight coils. This coiled, springlike arrangement of
the cells of tubular horn helps dampen the compression of the
Wal!
hoof when it strikes a hard surface. The intertubular horn fills
The wall of the hoof is composed of three layers (Fig. 16-37).
the spaces between the tubular horn.
 From the outside inward, they are the stratum externum (tecto-
The stratum medium is produced by the stratum basale and
rium), the stratum medium, and the stratum internum (lamel-
stratum spinosum of the epidermis lining the coronary groove.
latum). Each of these is structurally distinct and is described
This epidermis covers the coronary corium, a bed of vascularized
separately in the following paragraphs.
 Connective tissue with long papillae. The germinal cells covering
P1
fig. 16.38
val
1
2
PI
P
laminar
corium
P
(dermis)
e
(2), stratum intemum (3). Proximal (Pl), middle (Pll), distal (Pll) phalanges; cartilage of the hoof (4) and (4'). (From Stump JE. Anotomy of the
rormol equire foot,including microscopic features of the lomiror region.J Am Vet Med Assoc 1 967; 1 51:1 588.)
344
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
FIGURE 16-39
Stratum medium showing the cellular
arrangement of tubular horn, hoof (horse). Medulla (A); inner zone
of cortex (B); middle zone of cortex (C); outer zone of cortex (D);
FIGURE I6-38 Wall of hoof (horse) from the area marked in
intertubular hom (E). Trichrome (×250)
Figure 16-37. Stratum intermum (A);: stratum medium (B): primary
dermal lamina (C);: primary epidermal lamina (D); secondary
epidermal and dermal laminae (E); tubular hom (F); intertubular
hom (G). Area in box is Figure I 6-40. Hematoxylin and eosin (×38).
nae at the deep edge of the coronary groove. The cells keratinize
as they move downward toward the ground surface of the hoof,
accompanying the lengthening stratum medium. The second-
the tips of the papillae give rise to loose cells of the medulla of the
ary epidermal laminae are cellular and are composed of stratum
tubule, whereas those over the sides and base of the papillae pro-
 germinativum. The stratum basale of each secondary epidermal
liferate to form the keratinized cells of the cortex. The germinal
lamina rests on the connective tissue of each secondary dermal
cells covering the interpapillary part of the coronary corium give
lamina, forming the interdigitation between the two laminae.
rise to the intertubular horn. The layers of the intertubular horn
The central core of each secondary epidermal lamina is composed
consist of hard keratin that helps hold the tubules together. The
of stratum spinosum, one to three cell layers in thickness, that
hypodermis deep to the coronary corium is referred to as the coro-
attaches to the sides of the keratinized primary epidermal lam-
nary cushion. It is composed of dense collagen fibers and numer-
ina (Fig. 16-40). The germinal cells of the secondary epidermal
ous large blood vessels.
laminae multiply throughout the length of the laminae only at a
The stratum internum (lamellatum) consists of approxi-
rate to keep up with the downward growth of the horny primary
mately 600 vertically oriented, keratinized primary epidermal
laminae. The wall grows in length at the rate of 6.4 mm per
laminae extending inward from the stratum medium, with which
month; 9 to 12 months are required for the hoof to grow from
they are continuous (Fig. 16-38). One hundred to 200 second-
the coronary border to the ground at the toe region. Growth is ac-
ul Aied qea uo salue ainne ie inafond aeuil A1e
id pue unipau unieis aun jo fupis leisip aun Aq pausduon
(Fig. 16-40). These laminae interdigitate with similar laminae of
 mary epidermal laminae over the stationary secondary epidermal
the lamellar corium and form a complex epidermal-dermal asso-
laminae. The interdigitation between the nonpigmented wall
ciation that anchors the keratinized hoof to the underlying con-
laminae with the pigmented tubular and intertubular horn of the
nective tissue. The primary epidermal laminae are part of the
sole is referred to as the white line.
stratum corneum (hard keratin) produced by the stratum germi-
Knowledge of the structure of the tissues of the hoof is im-
nativum located between the proximal ends of the dermal lami-
portant to the understanding of the pathophysiology of laminitis,
Integument · Noncy A. Monteiro-Riviere
345
Sole
The epidermis of the sole produces tubular and intertubular horn.
Its superficial layers are not firmly attached and can be peeled off
in the form of small flakes. The corium (dermis) of the sole bears
long papillae, the epidermal covering of which gives rise to the
tubular horn of the sole. In addition, the corium blends with the
periosteum of the ventral surface of the distal phalanx.
Frog
The epidermis of the frog produces tubular and intertubular horn
that is softer than that of the wall and sole. The corium (dermis)
of the frog forms small short papillae. The corium blends with
the digital cushion, which is a wedge-shaped mass of collagen
and elastic fibers among masses of fat that acts as a shock ab-
sorber. Branched coiled merocrine sweat glands occur chiefly in
the part that overlies the central sulcus of the frog.
Ruminant and Swine Hoofs
The hoofs of ruminants and pigs are similar to those of horses,
with a few exceptions. The stratum internum and corresponding
laminar corium consists of only primary laminae (Fig. 16-41).
FIGURE I6-40  Secondary laminae, hoof (horse). See area
marked in Figure 16-38. Primary epidermal lamina of the wall (A);:
secondary epidermal lamina (B); primary dermal lamina (C);:
secondary dermal lamina (D). Hematoxylin and eosin (×435)
the most devastating clinical disease syndrome of the equine hoof.
 A disturbance in the physical and physiologic (nutritional blood
supply) influences on various parts of the hoof results in inflam-
FIGURE I6-4I Stratum intemum, hoof (sheep).
joou aui jo uojeiedas u sujnsan uajo ‘euuel al jo uoneu
 Stratum medium (A);: primary laminae (B);: laminar corium 
from the digit and loss of the horse.
with numerous capillaries (C). Hematoxylin and eosin (x120).
346
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
The sole consists of a narrow rim next to the angle of inflection
The claw fold is a fold of skin, similar to the periople of the
of the wall. There is no frog, but a prominent bulb of soft thin
hoof, that covers the claw plate for a short distance on its dorsal
horn that is continuous with the skin makes upa large part of the 
and lateral margins. As the plate grows, it carries with it a thin
ventral surface of the hoof.
n A ad si shan jo a   paziua yo ia
epidermis of the inner surface of the claw fold.
Claw
Digital Pads
The claws, or nails, of dogs and cats are specialized structures that
are continuous with the epidermis and dermis of the skin of the
The digital pads of the dog and cat are covered by a thick hair-
foot. Claws consist of shields of hard keratin that cover the distal
 less epidermis that contains all epidermal cell layers, including a
phalanges and possess both a wall and a sole (Fig. 16-42)
stratum lucidum. The surface is smooth in the cat (Fig. 16-43)
The wall or claw plate covers the coronary corium and the
 and roughened by keratinized conical/rounded papillae in the dog
wall corium. It is thickest in the area of the dorsal ridge and grad-
(Fig. 16-44). The dermis has prominent papillae that interdigi-
ually thins out along the side. Its thin ventral margins extend be-
tate with the epidermal pegs and contains coiled merocrine sweat
yond the junction of the wall with the sole. The epidermis of the
glands that extend into the digital cushion, the hypodermis.
dorsal ridge forms a few short laminae that interdigitate with
 Subcutaneous masses of adipose tissue are separated and enclosed
similar dermal laminae.
by collagen and elastic fibers.
The epidermis of the sole is thick and produces a softer form
of keratin than that of the wall. A stratum granulosum and a stra-
Chestnut and Ergot
tum lucidum are present.
The dermis of the claw is composed of dense irregular con-
The equine chestnut and ergot have a thick epidermis com-
nective tissue that forms a thick ridge over the dorsal surface of the
posed of tubular and intertubular horn interdigitating with long
distal phalanx. It is rich in blood vessels and prone to hemorrhage
dermal papillae (Fig. 16-45). Arrector pili muscles, glands, and
if the nail is cut too short.
hairs are absent in both of these structures.
FIGURE I6-42 Claw (dog). Proximal phalanx (A): middle
phalanx (B); distal phalanx (C); tendons (D); joint cavities with
accompanying joint capsules and articular cartilages (E); fold of skin 
overlying claw (F); ungual crest (G); nonkeratinized epiderrmal layers
of the claw (H); dorsal ridge (l); stratum corneum of the claw
epidermis (I);: dermis (K); sole (L): limiting furrow (M) between the
sole and digital pad (N); dermis of the digital pad with clusters of
coiled merocrine sweat glands and fat (O). Hematoxylin and eosin
{×4). (Fromm Adarm W5, Calhoun ML, 5rmith EM, et ol. Microscopic
FIGURE I6-43 Foot pad (cat). The keratinized
Anatomy of the Dog: A Photographic Atlas. Springfieid, IL: Charles C.
epidermis (E) is smooth and the dermis (D) is papillated.
Thomos, 1 970.)
Hematoxylin and eosin (×130).
Integument ·Nancy A. Monteiro-Riviere
347
FIGURE I6-45 Chestnut (horse). Epidermal peg (E): stratum
FIGURE I6-44 Foot pad (dog). The keratinized epidermis (E)
granulosum (G); dermal papillae (D); homy tubules (T).
is rough and the dermis (D) is papillated. Hematoxylin and eosin
Hematoxylin and eosin (×25)
{x50)
Horn
 basale, a stratum intermedium (actually stratum spinosum), a
Horns of the ruminant species are actually coverings of the cor-
stratum transitivum (actually stratum granulosum but lacks
nual processes of the frontal bone of the skull. The horns consist
keratohyalin granules), and a stratum corneum. The term stra-
of a hard keratinized epidermis, a dermis, and a hypodermis.
tum germinativum is also used to represent all the cell layers ex-
The epidermis has a thick stratum corneum composed of
 cept for the stratum corneum. The avian integument is sometimes
hard tubular and intertubular horn. A thin outermost layer of
referred to as an organ of lipogenesis because of the extensive
soft keratin, the epikeras, forms at the root of the horn and is
amount of lipid found in the epidermal cells in most avian species.
similar to the epidermis of the periople. It desquamates as kera-
The epidermis synthesizes triacylglycerols, phospholipids, wax
tinized scales, similar to the stratum externum of the hoof. The
esters, free fatty acids, monoglycerols, and diacylglycerols
dermis is papillated and, together with the thin hypodermis, fills 
The skin of birds, unlike that of mammals, is completely
the space between the epidermis and the periosteum of the bone.
aglandular, with the exception of the uropygial gland or preen
 gland (Figs. 16-48 and 16-49). This gland is a bilobed structure
(Fig. 16-48) that lies dorsally at the base of the tail and opens
AVIAN INTEGUMENT
through a papilla to the surface of the skin. This gland is con-
sidered to be analogous to the sebaceous gland in mammals be-
The avian epidermis is composed of keratinized stratified squa-
cause it produces a fatty and oily substance that is released by the
mous epithelium that is similar to but thinner than that of mam-
holocrine mode of secretion and is regulated by hormonal influ-
mals (Fig. 16-46). The epidermis of feathered skin consists of only
ences (Fig. 16-49). The combination of both the uropygial gland
a few cell layers (Fig. 16-47), whereas unfeathered skin is much
sebum and the lipid from the epidermal cells acts as an anti-
thicker. The terminology of the epidermal cell layers is differ-
bacterial agent, prevents the feather keratin from drying out,and
ent from that in mammals. The avian layers include a stratum
acts as a waterproofing agent
FIGURE 16-46 Unfeathered chicken skin. Note the
 FIGURE 16-48 Uropygial gland. Note the bilobed 
stratum basale (B), stratum intermedium (l), stratum transitivum
structure separated by connective tissue (C). Hematoxylin
(T), and stratum comeum (C) cell layers. The dermis (D) is
and eosin (x35).
subdivided into layers. Hematoxylin and eosin (X250).
FIGURE 16-47
Feathered chicken skin. Note two
FIGURE 16-49
Higher magnification of the uropygial 
developing follicles (D) and a mature follicle (F). Hematoxylin
 gland in Figure 16-48. Note the large sebaceous glands (G)
and eosin (×35)
Hematoxylin and eosin (×350).
Integument · Nancy A. Morteiro-Riviere
349
Feathers are structurally similar to hair, are of epidermal ori-
mating, the vessels become congested, thereby giving a bright
gin, and develop within a follicle (Fig. 16-47). The feather con-
red appearance to the comb and wattles.
sists primarily of keratin and remains in the follicle until it is
plucked or molted and then a new feather develops in its place.
Interfollicular muscles are common in birds and are believed to
SUGGESTEd rEAdINGS
 play a significant role in governing the radiative heat load by
Anderson RR. Mammary gland In: Latson BL, ed. Lactation. Ames, IA:
adjusting the angle of the feather.
The dermis is subdivided into the stratum superficiale (su-
Iowa State University Press, 1985:3.
 a  da d s  d
Briggaman RA. Epidermal-dermal junction: structure, composition,
function and disease relationships. In: Moshnell AN, ed. Progress
the stratum compactum (dense layer) and the stratum laxum
in Dermatology, Part II. Evanston, IL: Dermatology Foundation,
(loose connective tissue containing fat, large vessels, smooth mus-
1990: 1.
cle, and follicles); and lamina elastica (elastic lamina of the der-
Budras KD, Hullinger RL, Sack WO. Light and electron microscopy of
mis). In addition, several smooth muscles with elastic tendons are
keratinization in the laminar epidermis of the equine hoof with ref-
associated with each feather follicle, and cutaneous striated mus-
erence to laminitis. Am J Vet Res 1989;50:1150.
cles function in voluntary movement of the skin in response to
Elias PE. Epidermal lipids, barrier function, and desquamation. J Invest
stimuli.
Dermatol 1983;80:44s.
The avian plantar skin does not possess all cell layers like the
Hodges RD. The Histology of the Fowl. New York: Academic Press,
plantar skin of dogs and cats (Fig. 16-50). Skin from this region
1974:1.
 lacks a true stratum granulosum and has a thick smooth surface
Lavker RM, Sunt TT. Heterogeneity in basal keratinocytes: morpho-
logical and functional correlations. Science 1982;215:1239.
consisting of ridges of keratin.
Lucas AM, Stettenheim PR. Avian Anatomy. Integument. Agricultural
The comb, paired wattles, and ear lobes consist of a double
Handbook 362, Part II. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
layer of skin with numerous blood vessels in the dermis. During
Agriculture, 1972.
Marcatian HQ, Calhoun ML. The microscopic anatomy of the integu-
ment of the adult swine. Am J Vet Res 1966;27:765.
 Menton DN. A liquid film model of tetrakaidecahedral packing to
account for the establishment of epidermal cell columns. J Invest
Dermatol 1976;66:283.
Monteiro-Riviere NA. Comparative anatomy, physiology, and bio-
chemistry of mammalian skin. In: Hobson DW, ed. Dermal and
Ocular Toxicology: Fundamentals and Methods. Boca Raton, FL:
K
CRC Press, 1991;1:3.
Monteiro-Riviere NA. Integument. In: Pond WG, Mersmann HJ, eds.
Biology of the Pig. Ithaca, NY: Cotnell University Press, 2001;
14:653.
Monteiro-Riviere NA. Ultrastructural evaluation of the porcine in-
tegument. In: Tumbleson ME, ed. Swine in Biomedical Research.
New York: Plenum Press, 1986;1:641.
Monteiro-Riviere NA, Bristol DG, Manning TO, et al. Interspecies and
interregional analysis of the comparative histologic thickness and
laser Doppler blood flow measurements at five cutaneous sites in
nine species. J Invest Dermatol 1990;95:582.
Monteiro-Riviere NA, Inman AO. Indirect immunohistochemistry and
immunoelectron microscopy distribution of eight epidermal-dermal
pareais us pesnuad parelosi u! pue Hid aue ui sadosida uoioun!
with bis (2-chloroethyl) sulfide. Toxicol Pathol 1 995;23:313.
Monteiro-Rivere NA, Stromberg MW. Ultrastructure of the integu-
ment of the domestic pig (Sus scrofa) from one through fourteen
weeks of age. Anat Histol Embryol 1 985; 14:97.
Smith JL, Calhoun ML. The microscopic anatomy of the integument of
the newborn swine. Am J Vet Res 1964;24: 165.
Stromberg MW, Hwang YC, Monteiro-Riviere NA. Interfollicular
smooth muscle in the skin of the domesticated pig (Sus scrofa).
Anat Rec 1981;201:455.
Talukdar AH, Calhoun ML, Stinson A W. Sweat glands of the horse: a
histologic study. Am J Vet Res 1970;3 1:2179.
Webb AJ, Calhoun ML. The microscopic anatomy of the skin of mon-
grel dogs. Am J Vet Res 1954;15:274.
FIGURE I6-50 Avian plantar skin. Note that the thickened
Wolff-Schreiner EC. Ultrastructural cytochemistry of the epidermis. Int
keratinized region (K) is smooth. Hematoxylin and eosin (×250)
J Dermatol 1977;16:77.
Eye
RALPH E. HAMOR
 EHRHART
Fibrous Tunic
Ciliary muscle
Sclera
Aqueous humor
Comea
Iris
Anterior epithelium
Iridial stroma
Subepithelial basement membrane
Iridial muscles
 Substantia propria (stroma)
Iridial epithelium
 Posterior limiting lamina (Descemet's membrane)
Iridocomeal Angle
 Posterior epithelium (cormeal endothelium)
Pectinate ligament
Cormeoscleral Junction (Limbus)
Trabecular meshwork
Vascular Tunic
Venous drainage
Choroid
Neuroepithelial Tunic—Retina
Suprachoroid layer
Refractive Media
Vascular layer
Lens and Zonular Fibers
Tapetum lucidum
Vitreous Body
Choriocapillary layer
Accessory Organs
Basal complex
 Eyelids
Ciliary Body
Third Eyelid and Conjunctiva
Cliary epithelium 
Lacrimal Apparatus
Vascular layer
Species Variations
The eye is located in the bony orbit, along with extraocular mus-
referred to as the uvea, composed of (a) the choroid, (b) the cil-
cles, ligaments, adipose tissue, blood vessels, nerves, and glands.
jary body, and (c) the iris and (3) the neuroepithelial, or inner,
The lacrimal apparatus, the eyelids, and the third eyelid provide
tunic (tunica interna bulbi) with (a) an optic portion, the retina
protection to the eye. The globe consists of thre tunics that enclose
(pars optica retinae), containing the sensory receptors, and (b) a
chambers containing refractive media.
blind portion (pars caeca retinae) that is epithelial in nature and
The three tunics of the eye are (Fig. 17-1): (l) the fibrous,
covers the ciliary body (pars ciliaris retinae) and the posterior sur-
or outer, tunic (tunica fibrosa bulbi), which is in turn subdivided
face of the iris (pars iridica retinae).
into (a) the sclera, the white tough posterior portion of the globe,
The anterior chamber (camera anterior bulbi) is located
and (b) the cornea, the transparent portion of the fibrous tunic,
 between the cornea and the iris. The posterior chamber (cam-
which bulges slightly in the center of the anterior pole of the eye;
era posterior bulbi) is located between the iris and the vitreous
(2) the vascular, or middle, tunic (tunica vasculosa bulbi), also
body and contains the lens. Both the anterior and posterior
350
Eye ● Ralph E. Hamor ond E.j. Ehrhart
351
 sclera
anterior chamber
ciliarybody
 choroid
posterior chamber
zonular fibers
retina
iris
vitreous body
cornea
optic nerve
lens
oraserrata
FIGURE I7-I  Schematic drawing of a longitudinal section through the eye
chambers are filled with aqueous humor. The vitreous cham-
Cornea
ber (camera vitrea bulbi) of the eye, located between the lens
The transparent cornea is a convex-concave lens, slightly thicker
and the retina, is filled with the vitreous body.
at the periphery than at the center, and with a smaller radius of cur-
vature centrally than peripherally. Because the cornea also has a ra-
dius of curvature smaller than that of the sclera, it is more curved
FIBROUS TUnIC
than the sclera. The horizontal corneal diameter is greater than the
vertical corneal diameter, resulting in a mildly elliptical shape.
Sclera
 The cornea is composed of five layers: (a) anterior epithelium,
The sclera is a layer of dense irregular connective tissue that pro-
(b) subepithelial basement membrane, (c) substantia propria, or
tects the eye and maintains its form (shape). While the size of the
stroma, (d) posterior limiting lamina (Descemet's membrane),
globe can be quite variable in different species, the shape is es-
and (e) posterior epithelium (corneal endothelium).
sentially spherical. Some ungulates, such as the horse and large
ruminant, have globes that are slightly compressed in the antero.
Anterior Epithelium
posterior axis. Thickness of the sclera varies in different parts of
The anterior (corneal) epithelium is nonkeratinized stratified
the eye and among species. The sclera is thinnest at the equator of
squamous, between 4 and 12 layers in thickness (Fig. 17-2).
the globe. The sclera is thickest at the limbus (junction of the
In the dog, cat, and bird, the corneal epithelium consists of
cornea and sclera) in dogs and cats and in the region of the optic
a single layer of basal cells, two to three layers of polyhedral
 n ad s as a 'n u aa
(wing) cells, and two to three layers of nonkeratinized squamous
but elastic fibers, fibrocytes, and melanocytes (anteriorly) are in-
cells. Large animals have more layers of polyhedral and squamous
terlaced among the collagen fibers. These fibers are arranged
-od aeiaiu ayred aui are slan rauda aui 'sn
meridionally, obliquely, and radially in an irregular pattern. In
fusely, and adhere through numerous desmosomes. The numer-
 the layer of the sclera adjacent to the choroid, elastic fibers pre-
ous microvilli on the surface of the superficial cells function to
dominate, and fibroblasts and melanocytes are more numerous;
retain the tear film on the corneal surface. Numerous free nerve
this layer is referred to as the lamina fusca sclerae.
 endings are present among the epithelial cells.
The orbital fasciae, located outside the sclera, consist of the
The regenerative capability of injured corneal epithelium is
periorbita (connected to the external or dural sheath of the optic
 pronounced; mitotic divisions, along with cell movements, ensure
nerve), the bulbar sheath (Tenon's capsule), and the fascial
 a rapid return of injured epithelium to normal structure. An intact
sheaths of the extraocular muscles. A firm attachment to the
auaiedsue leauon jo anuuanuieu ioy aressanau s unuda
sclera is provided for the tendons of the extraocular muscles
through the interweaving of tendon and scleral fibers. The optic
Subepithelia! Basement Membrane
nerve leaves the eye through numerous perforations in a sievelike
The subepithelial basement membrane consists of a basal lam-
area of the sclera referred to as the area cribrosa.
ina and a layer of reticular fibers. The basal cell layer of the epi-
352
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
B
A
C
B
D.
C
1
3
FIGURE I7-2  Cormea (dog). I. Cormeal epithelium (A); substantia propria (B); posterior limiting
lamina (C); posterior epithelium (D). Hematoxylin and eosin (x250). 2. The comeal nonkeratinized 
stratified squamous epithelium is separated from the substantia propria by a rather thick basement
membrane (arrowhead). Hematoxylin and eosin (x500). 3. Substantia propria with fibrocytes and collagen
fibers (A), posterior limiting lamina (B), and the posterior epithelium (C). Hematoxylin and eosin (x500).
thelium is firmly attached to the basal lamina by numerous
layers rather than within them. These cells are elongated and
hemidesmosomes, collagen fibrils, and laminin (a glycoprotein).
branched, with little cytoplasm (Fig. 17-2). If the cornea is in-
Frequently, this layer can be distinguished with the light micro-
jured, the fibrocytes can transform into fibroblasts and form scar
scope (Fig. 17-2). It should not be confused with the anterior lim-
tissue.
 iting lamina (Bowman's membrane), a modified outermost layer
There are at least five different types of collagen in the stroma,
of the substantia propria that is present in primates and avians.
with type I being the most common. The amorphous ground sub-
stance stains metachromatically owing to the presence of sulfated
Substantia Propria (Stroma)
glycosaminoglycans (chondroitin sulfate, keratan sulfate). The
The corneal substantia propria, or stroma, consists of varying
 ground substance plays an essential role in the transparency of
numbers (approximately 100 in the cat) of layers or lamellae and
the cornea by maintaining an optimal degree of hydration; exces-
constitutes 90% of the corneal thickness (Fig. 17-2). Within one
sive water content causes opacification of the cornea.
layer, the collagen fibers are always parallel with the corneal sur-
face and traverse the entire diameter of the cornea; in successive
Posterior Limiting Lamina
(Descemet's Membrane)
layers, the fibers cross each other at right angles. Adjacent lamel-
lae are held together firmly by fibers that deviate from their par-
With the light microscope, the posterior limiting lamina
allel course. Occasional elastic fibers are observed at the periphery
(Descemet's membrane) appears as a highly refractile, thick
of the cornea. The precise arrangement (periodicity of 620 to
amorphous layer that gives a positive periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)
 640 angstroms) of the lamellae in the corneal stroma allows 99%
reaction (Fig. 17-2). At the fine structural level, the lamina con-
of the light entering the cornea to pass into the globe without
sists of three regions: an anterior unbanded zone, an anterior
scatter. This accounts for the transparency of the cornea.
banded zone, and a posterior unbanded zone. The anterior un-
The predominant cell type of the corneal substantia propria
banded zone has types V and VI collagen, the anterior banded
is the fibrocyte (keratocyte), located mainly between the collagen
papuequn iolaisod aun pue 'uagellos illA pue Al sadAi seq auoz
Eye ● Ralph E. Hamor ond E.j. Ehrhart
353
 zone has types II and IV collagen. The posterior limiting lam-
associated with elastic fibers, and are continuous with the equa-
ina is continually produced throughout life by the posterior epi-
torial bundles of the sclera. The posterior limiting lamina of the
thelial cells, resulting in a thicker membrane in aging animals.
posterior epithelium ends at the limbus near the apex of the tra-
becular meshwork.
Posterior Epithelium (Cornea! Endothelium)
 The only blood vessels supplying the cornea are located at
A single layer of flat hexagonal cells covers the posterior surface
the level of the limbus; the normal cornea is completely devoid
of the cornea as the posterior epithelium and is often referred
of blood vessels. Corneal nerves originate from a dense, marginal
to as the corneal endothelium (Fig. 17-2). The cells interdigitate
nerve fiber plexus at the same level as the blood vessels or from
 heavily and contain numerous mitochondria and pinocytotic
the ciliary plexus of the vascular tunic.
vesicles. The epithelium functions in the maintenance of the
transparency of the cornea. Both the anterior and posterior ep-
ithelial cells actively move water out of the stroma by Na+-K+
ATPase (adenosine triphosphatase) and carbonic
C anhydrase
VASCULAR TUNIC
pumps. Defects in the epithelium can cause edema and opacifi-
The vascular tunic, or uvea, comprises three portions: the choroid,
cation of the cornea. The regenerative ability of the posterior ep-
ithelium is limited and varies with species and age. It is generally
the ciliary body, and the mesenchymal components of the iris.
accepted that active mitosis only occurs in immature animals.
Choroid
Corneoscleral Junction (Limbus)
The choroid is a thick, highly vascularized layer that is contin-
At the corneoscleral junction or limbus, the sclera overlaps the
uous with the stroma of the ciliary body anteriorly and extends
cornea. The corneal epithelium gradually changes into conjunc-
 posteriorly around the globe (Figs. 17-3 and 17-4). The external
 tival epithelium, which rests on a lamina propria of loose con-
surface of the choroid is connected to the sclera; the internal sur-
nective tissue. The characteristically layered collagen fibers of the
face is adjacent and intimately attached to the pigmented epi-
substantia propria assume a more irregular arrangement, become
 thelium of the retina. The choroid is subdivided into five layers.
FlGUre 17-3
Schematic
 internal limiting membrane
drawing of the organization of the
optic nerve fiber layer
retina and choroid. The rod
Cp
spherules (r) have synaptic
rg
ganglion celllayer
contact with rod bipolar cells
(rb), which synapse with ganglion
iner plexiform layer
cells. The cone pedicles (c) have
synaptic contact with midget
bipolar cells (mb), which contact 
-rb
a single cone, and flat bipolar cells
nner nuclear layer
(fb), the dendrites of which
contact several cones and the
axon of which then synapses with
iter plexiform layer
retina
amacrine (a) and ganglion cells
(g). Horizontal cell (h) processes 
contact rod spherules and cone
outernuclearlayer
pedicles. Amacrine cells (a)
level of external limiting
contact the axons of bipolar cells 
membrane
and dendrites and perikarya of
inner segments of rods and cones
ganglion cells. Radial glial (Muller)
cells rg) provide support to the 
 segments of rods and cones
retina:; their cytoplasmic
 processes extend between and
 retinal pigment epithelium (RPE)
around the other cells, and their
foot processes participate in the
basal lamina of RPE
formation of the intemal limiting 
membrane. Retinal capillaries (cp)
choriocapillary ayer
are located in the inner nuclear.
tapetum (L} or choroid ct (R)
choroid
 ganglion cell, and nerve fiber
layers. A cellular tapetum lucidum
ascular layer of choroid 
(t) is shown in the left half of the
schematic drawing.
]suprachoroid
354
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
FIGURE I7-4 The choroid layer (C) is located between the
retina (R) and sclera (S). The choroid is highly vascularized and many
pigmented cells are present.
Suprachoroid Layer
The suprachoroid layer is the most external layer (Fig. 17-3) of
the choroid and is the transition between the sclera and the
choroid. It consists of bundles of collagen and some elastic fibers,
fibrocytes, and numerous melanocytes.
Vascular Layer
Numerous large arteries and veins, separated bya stroma similar
to that of the suprachoroid layer, make up the vascular layer
(Fig. 17-3). These vessels provide a major source of oxygen and
nutrients to the retina.
FIGURE I7-5 Eectron micrograph of the feline tapetum
Tapetum Lucidum
lucidum illustrating the bricklike arrangement of cells and bundles of
parallel rods (arrows) oriented in various directions with their long
A layer of medium vessels and connective tissue lies internal to
axes perpendicular to the angle of incident light and a tapetal cell
the vascular layer. The dorsal portion of this layer contains the
nucleus (n) (×3780). (Courtesy of E. j. King.)
tapetum lucidum, which acts as a light-reflecting layer, sup-
posedly increasing light perception under conditions of poor il-
lumination. In herbivores, the tapetum is fibrous (tapetum
layered at its center (up to 15 cell layers thick in dogs and 35 cell
fibrosum), consisting of intermingling collagen fibers and a few
layers thick in cats) and thinning to a single cell at its periphery.
fibrocytes. In carnivores, the tapetum consists of a varying num-
The tapetal cells are packed with bundles of parallel small rods,
ber of layers of flat polygonal cells (tapetum cellulosum) that
all of which are oriented with their long axes parallel to the retinal
appear bricklike in cross section (Figs. 17-3 and 17-5; see also
surface. In cats, the rods in the inner tapetal cells may be modified
Fig. 17-9). The thickness of the tapetum varies, being multi-
melanosomes, which are present along with typical melanosomes
Eye · Ralph E. Hamor ond E.j. Ehrhart
355
the rods in dogs and riboflavin with the rods in cats. Diffraction
of light as a result of the spatial orientation of the rods (or of the
collagen fibrils in herbivores) is probably responsible for produc-
ing the light reflection of the tapetum. In swine and camelids,
the tapetum is absent.
Choriocapillary Layer
The choriocapillary layer (lamina choroidocapillaris) is a dense
network of capillaries immediately adjacent to the pigmented epi-
thelium of the retina (Fig. 17-3). Wide capillaries often deeply
indent the pigmented epithelial cells. The endothelium is fenes-
trated, and endothelial nuclei and pericytes are located toward the
choroidal side of the capillaries only. The basal laminae of the
capillary and pigmented epithelial are fused. Capillaries provide
nutrients to the pig mented epithelium and photoreceptors (rods
and cones).
Basal Complex
The basal complex (complexus basalis) is also referred to as
 Bruch's membrane. The complex serves as a barrier between the
 blood in the choriocapillary vessels and the retinal pigmented
epithelium. Species variation occurs among domestic animals
with respect to the degree of development and thickness of the
basal complex. In species without a tapetum, the basal complex
has five layers: basal lamina of the retinal pigmented epithelium,
two layers of collagen with an intervening band of elastic fibers,
FIGURE 17-6 This canine ciliary process is covered by
and the basal lamina of the choriocapillary endothelium. In species
with a tapetum, the complex has three layers: the two basal lam-
 pigmented and nonpigmented epithelial cels. Remnants of zonular
inae separated by a layer of collagen.
suss lao atsod an uiuasd ae (o) sa
trichrome (x600).
Ciliary Body
The ciliary body is the direct anterior continuation of the choroid
The outer pigmented epithelial layer is continuous with the
(Fig. 17-1). It begins posteriorly at the ora serrata, a sharply out-
 pigmented epithelium of the optic part of the retina. It consists of
heavily pigmented, simple cuboidal epithelium (Fig. 17-6) on a
lined dentate border that marks the transition between the optic
jo (aeuai eae sied) led puq al pue (aeual edo sed) iued
basal lamina next to the stroma. These cells have deep basal in-
the retina. Anteriorly, the ciliary body is continuous with the iris
vaginations of the plasma membrane.
and participates in the formation of the trabecular meshwork of the
The inner nonpigmented epithelial laye r consists of cuboi-
iridocorneal angle. Alayers of the choroid extend into the ciliary
dal or columnar cells (Fig. 17-6) with a basal lamina, which sep-
 body, except the tapetum lucidum and the choriocapillary layer.
arates it from the posterior cha mber. Nonpigmented epithelium
Anteriorly, the ciliary body projects ciliary processes into
is continuous with the neurosensory layers of the retina and with
the posterior chamber (Fig. 17-1). Collectively, the ciliary pro-
the pigmented epithelium of the iris. The cells posses numerous
-d sied aui e oi paiaan Apoq Arei aue o uoian e uoy sas
deep plasmalemmal invaginations and associated mitochondria.
cata (corona ciliaris). The processes greatly increase the surface
Extensive rough endoplasmic reticulum (rER) and Golgi com-
area for production of aqueous humor and also serve as the origin
 plexes are present in the cell apices. The lateral surfaces of the
for zonular fibers, which attach to the lens. The posterior portion 
epithelial cells are joined by tight junctions, resulting ina blood-
of the ciliary body is flat and smooth and is referred to as the pars
aqueous barrier. The pigmented and nonpigmented epithelial
plana (orbiculus ciliaris). Histologically, the ciliary body consists
layers of the ciliary body form the pars ciliaris retinae. The pars
 of ciliary epithelium, a vascular layer, and the ciliary muscle.
ciliaris retinae and the pars iridica retinae form the blind part of
the retina (pars ceca retinae).
Ciliary Epithelium
Vascular Layer
The ciliary body is covered by two layers of cuboidal epithelial
cells of neuroepithelial origin. Cells of the epithelial layers are
The ciliary body and the ciliary processes have a core of loose con-
joined apex to apex by cell junctions, with the basal laminae fac-
nective tissue permeated by a dense network of capillaries. Blood
ing toward the outsides of the fused epithelial layers.
vessels are derived from the anterior and posterior ciliary arter-
356
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
ies, which form the major arterial circle that supplies the ciliary
body and processes.
Ciliary Muscie
The ciliary muscle is located peripherally in the ciliary body. It
consists of smooth muscle fibers, which are primarily oriented
meridionally in most species. The meridional fibers originate
from the corneal stroma, the connective tissue of the trabecular
meshwork of the iridocorneal angle, and the sclera. They are at-
tached by elastic tendons to the basal complex of the choroid. In
addition, radiate and circular fibers are present; the latter pre-
dominate in the nasal portion of the ciliary body. Contraction of
the ciliary muscle during accommodation reduces tension of the
zonular fibers of the lens and the lens becomes more convex,
whereas relaxation has the opposite effect.
Aqueous Humor
The aqueous humor is a thin, clear fluid similar to blood plasma,
 but it has considerably lower protein content. The aqueous humor
is produced in the ciliary proceses and is transported via the ep-
 ithelial layers into the posterior chamber. The enzyme carbonic
anhydrase (necessary to the formation of aqueous humor) has been
localized to the nonpigmented epithelium of the ciliary processes.
D
The transport of aqueous humor is selective in that certain mol-
ecules are excluded from transepithelial passage. The aqueous
humor flows from the posterior chamber through the pupil to the
anterior chamber, where it drains via the iridocorneal angle (de-
scribed below).
FIGURE I7-7  In this canine iris, the stroma (A) is the thickest
layer containing many blood vessels and melanocytes; toward the
anterior chamber, a nonvascular layer (B) is present This section of
Iris
the iris was taken near the pupillary opening: the fibers of the sphincter
muscle (C) were cut longitudinally. Dilator muscle (D); posterior
The iris is located anterior to the lens and separates the anterior
pigmented epithelial cell layer (E). Hematoxylin and eosin (×175).
and posterior chambers, which communicate through the central
opening, the pupil. The iris consists of a stroma of pigmented,
highly vascularized loose connective tissue, the sphincter and
dilator muscles, and a posterior epithelium.
The arterial blood vessels originate from the major arterial
circle (circulus arteriosus major) at the periphery of the iris and
Iridia! Stroma
radiate, spirally wound, into the stroma, forming capillary loops
Epithelium is lacking on the anterior surface of the iris. Toward
in the vicinity of the pupillary margin. In nonprimates, the major
arterial circle is incomplete. The veins have a straighter arrange-
the anterior chamber, fibrocytes, separated by large intercellular
spaces, form an almost continuous covering over dense melano-
ment than the arteries and return to the base of the iris and the
cytes. This layer of fibrocytes and melanocytes is known as the
ciliary body.
nonvascular layer (or anterior border layer) (Fig. 17-7). The
Eye color is determined by the amount of pigmentation
layer lacks a basal lamina and blood vessels; however, it is rich in
within the pigment-containing cells of the stroma.
proteoglycans. Channel-like spaces or crypts frequently pene-
trate deep into the underlying stroma, especially at the pupil-
Iridial Muscles
lary margin. These spaces often communicate with the anterior
Two muscles that regulate the size of the pupil are present in the
chamber.
iris. They are both of neuroepithelial (pigmented epithelium)
The deep vascular layer of the stroma consists of regular,
origin. In domestic animals, these muscles are smooth, while in
 arcuate bundles of collagen fibers and fibrocytes supported by
birds, they are striated.
highly vascularized loose connective tissue containing many
The sphincter muscle (musculus sphincter pupillae) is com-
 melanocytes. Spiral collagen fiber bundles derived from several
posed ofa network of smooth muscle cells, circularly arranged near
arcuate collagen fiber bundles surround each stromal blood ves-
the pupillary margin (Fig. 17-7). The fibers encircle the pupil in
sel. Through this arrangement, blood vessels change their posi-
 animals with circular pupils (dogs, pigs, primates, and avians). The
tion in synchrony with the fiber bundles during contraction or
muscle fibers are oriented dorsoventrally around the pupil in ani-
dilation of the iris, thereby eluding compression and kinking.
mals with slitlike pupils (cat) or horizontally around the pupil in
Eye ● Rolph E. Hamor ond E.j. Ehrhart
357
ruminants and horses. The arches of the collagen fiber bundles of
dorsal pupillary margin are much larger than those originating
the iris stroma loop through the muscle network, thus enabling
from the ventral margin. Iridial granules are focal proliferations
the muscle fibers to act on them. The sphincter muscle receives
of the two epithelial layers that project into the anterior cham-
parasympathetic innervation through the oculomotor nerve (nu-
 ber at the dorsal and ventral pupillary margins.
cleus of Edinger- Westphal; synapses in the ciliary ganglion).
The dilator muscle (musculus dilator pupillae) is a partial
Iridocorneal Angle
 differentiation of the anterior epithelial layer, a continuation of
the pigmented epithelial layer of the ciliary body (Fig. 17-7).
The iridocorneal angle (or iris, filtration, or drainage angle)
Whereas the basal portions of the epithelial cells possess the struc-
(Fig. 17-8) is a region located at the periphery of the anterior
tural characteristics of smooth muscle cells, the apical portions
chamber, where the corneoscleral junction, the ciliary body, and
-o) sian rauida panuaid peid jo au pauiai aar
the iris converge. Structurally, the iridocorneal angle is a mesh-
pigmentocytes) The dilator muscle is innervated by sympathetic
 postganglionic neurons located in the cranial cervical ganglion.
work, and trabecular (aqueous) veins. Aqueous humor from the
anterior chamber drains into the blood vessels of the angle.
Iridial Epithelium
Pectinate Ligament
The posterior pigmented epithelial layer (Fig. 17-7) of the iris
is a continuation of the nonpigmented epithelial layer of the cil-
 The pectinate ligament consists of numerous long, thin primary
iary processes, which gradually becomes pigmented toward the
and accessory strands extending between the corneoscleral junc-
base of the iris. Frequently, the epithelial cells are separated by
tion and the base of the iris (Fig. 17-8). Each strand comprises a
wide intercellular spaces. On its posterior (inner) surface, the epi-
 core of collagen fibrils covered by simple squamous epithelium
thelium is covered by a basal lamina.
(continuous with the corneal endothelium). The spaces between
In ungulates, several dark masses, called iridial granules
the strands of the pectinate ligament are known as the spaces of
(granulae iridica or corpora nigra) are found at the dorsal and
Fontana. It is through these spaces that aqueous humor leaves the
ventral pupillary margins. The granulae originating from the
anterior chamber.
ciliary body
cilliary processes
zonular fibers
cornea
lens
iris
pectinate ligament
FIGURE I7-8 Schematic of the anterior
 portion of the eye, illustrating the drainage 
route of aqueous humor from the anterior
iridocorneal angle
chamber of the eye (between comea and
iris), through the strands of the pectinate
ligament, into the spaces of the uveal and
uveal and corneoscleral
 trabecular meshworks
cormeoscleral trabecular meshworks, into
aqueous collecting veins and the scleral
venous plexus. The inset shows a higher
aqueous collecting vein
magnification of the rectangular area of the
inidocomeal angle.
scleral venous plexus
358
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Trabecular Meshwork
nel present in the human eye, is absent in domestic mammals
The nonconventional outflow consists of"percolation" of aque-
The uveal trabecular meshwork is continuous  with the
pectinate ligament and is a dense network of simple squamous
 ous humor through the uvea into the supraciliary and supra
epithelium-covered collagen fibrils (Fig. 17-8). The uveal tra-
choroidal space and then into the adjacent sclera.
becular meshwork gradually becomes the structurally identical
but tighter-meshed corneoscleral trabecular meshwork (ad-
jacent to the cornea and sclera).
NEUROEPIThELIAL TUNIC-
Venous Drainage
RETINA
Aqueous humor is removed from the eye by two methods: con-
The neuroepithelial tunic, or retina, consists of three parts. The
ventional or nonconventional (uveoscleral) outflow. In most spe-
sensory portion (pars optica retinae) contacts the choroid. The
cies, conventional outflow accounts for most of the drainage of
nonsensory portion of this tunic, which begins at the ora serrata,
aqueous humor. With conventional outflow, the aqueous humor
covers the ciliary body (pars ciliaris retinae) and the iris (pars
juaueai areursad aul jo eueiuog jo saeds aun yonoui suienp
iridica retinae) as a double epithelial layer.
into the trabecular meshwork, where it gains access to aqueous
Except at the optic disk, the sensory portion of the retina
collecting veins. It then passes into the scleral venous plexus 
consists of the following layers (Figs. 17-3 and 17-9): (1) retinal
(plexus venosus sclerae), two to four large vessels located in the
pigment epithelium, (2) layer of rods and cones, (3) external lim-
sclera posterior to the limbus (Fig. 17-8). The aqueous humor 
iting membrane, (4) outer nuclear layer, (5) outer plexiform layer,
then passes into the vortex veins and enters the blood circulation.
(6) inner nuclear layer, (7) inner plexiform layer, (8) ganglion cell
The canal of Schlemm, a circumferential endothelium-lined chan-
layer, (9) nerve fiber layer, and (10) internal limiting membrane.
ILM
ONF
ILM
ONE
LP
ELM
FIGURE I7-9  Canine nontapetal retina (left) and feline tapetal retina (right). Layers of the retina include the intemal limiting membrane
(do) lake woxald Jano (i) akel yeanu lauu (d Jakel wioald auu () Jakel lin uoue (No) Jakel yaqy aau ydo (w))
outer nuclear layer (ON); extermal limiting membrane (ELM);: photoreceptors (P); and retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). The RPE is not
pigmented in the region of the retina where it overlies the tapetum (T) (right image). Many of the cells of the choroid (C) are heavily
pigmented. Hematoxylin and eosin (left, x950; right, x500).
Eye ● Ralph E. Hamor ond E.j. Ehrhort
359
The retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) is a layer of flat,
horizontal, amacrine, and radial glial cells. Most of the nuclei in
 polygonal cells resting on a basal lamina (Figs. 17-3 and 17-9).
the center of this layer belong to the rod and cone bipolar cells
Capillaries of the choriocapillary layer frequently deeply indent
(the second neuron of the visual pathway). The dendrite of the rod
the cells. The base of the cellis characterized by deep infoldings
bipolar cell contacts several rods, and the axon synapses with
of the plasma membrane and numerous associated mitochondria.
amacrine and/or ganglion cells (Fig. 17-3). The cone bipolar cells
Cell apices are connected by zonulae adherens and occludens.
are either midget bipolar cells that contact a single cone or flat
 Numerous melanin granules are present,except in the cells over-
bipolar cells in which dendrites contact several cones while their
lying the tapetum. Microvillous apical processes partially surround
axons synapse with amacrine and ganglion cells. Nuclei located
the outer segments of the photoreceptors (Fig. 17-3).
in the outer portion of this layer belong to horizontal cells, the
The functions of the RPE are complex. They include trans-
processes of which synapse with rod and cone axon terminals in
port of nutrients and metabolites from the capillaries in the chori-
the outer plexiform layer. Nuclei located in the inner portion be-
ocapillary layer to the rods and cones, phagocytosis, lysosomal
long to amacrine cells. Their cell processes extend into the inner
degradation and recycling of the shed outer segments of the
plexiform layer and establish contact with the dendrites and
photoreceptors, and absorption of light by the melanin.
perikarya of ganglion cells and with the axons of bipolar cells.
 Rods and cones are the first neurons of the visual pathway.
Amacrine cells also seem to be interconnected (Fig. 17-3). The
Each cell has an outer segment connected by a cilium to an inner
 nuclei of the radial glial (Miller) cells are interspersed among
segment. The cells are so named because the inner segment of
the other nuclei. The radial glial cells are elongated, fibrous as-
rods is long and thin, while the inner segment of cones has a
trocytes extending between the internal and external limiting
broad base. These photoreceptive cells form the distinct photo-
membranes (Fig. 17-3). They provide mechanical support and
sensory layer adjacent to the RPE (Figs. 17-3 and 17-9).
nutrition to the retina.
The outer segment of the photoreceptors consists of stacks
The inner plexiform layer is the region of synaptic con-
of membranous disks, which are actually flattened membrane
tacts between bipolar and ganglion cells, between amacrine and
spheres. The disks are surrounded by the cell membrane in rods,
 ganglion cells, and between adjacent amacrine cells (Figs. 17-3
whereas in cones, the disks are occasionally open to the extracel-
and 17-9).
lular space. Molecules of visual pigments (rhodopsin in rods,
The ganglion cell layer (third neuron of the visual path-
iodopsins in cones) are present in the membranes. Each day, trig-
way) is composed of large neuronal perikarya. Recently, it has
gered by onset of morning light, short stacks of the oldest disks
are shed from the outer ends of the photoreceptors and are sub-
tain melanopsin, a photopigment that can sense light. Axons of
sequently phagocytized and degraded by the RPE cells. New
the ganglion cells form a separate layer, the nerve fiber layer
-as iano aun jo spua iauui aul oi pappe Aenunuon are sis
(Figs. 17-3 and 17-9). The axons converge and exit at the optic
ments. Each outer segment is connected to its inner segment by
disk (papilla) of the retina and form the optic nerve. Some of
a cilium.
the axons have been traced to the suprachiasmatic nuclei, where
The inner segment includes an outer portion, or ellipsoid,
they may play a role in regulating circadian rhythm.
 and an inner portion, or myoid. The ellipsoid is densely packed
The internal limiting membrane is formed by the ex-
with mitochondria. A large oil droplet, which is thought to en-
panded processes of the radial glial cells, which unite to form a
hance visual acuity, is present in the avian ellipsoid. The myoid
contains smooth endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi complex, and
the central nervous system (Figs. 17-3 and 17-9), and a basal
microtubules. Myofilaments are present in the myoid of lower
lamina. Occasional astrocytes, microglial cells, and oligodendro-
vertebrates but are absent in domestic animals.
cytes are present in the retina in the inner plexiform, ganglion
 The rod cells are responsible for vision in dim light, whereas
 cell, and optic nerve fiber layers.
the cone cells function in bright light and are responsible for
The area centralis retinae is a small round or oval area of
color vision. Thus, animals that are mainly active at night have
the retina located dorsally and laterally to the optic disk. This
retinas with fewer cone cells than those of animals active during
area differs from the remainder of the retina in that it is charac-
the day.
terized by an increased number of cones, a thickening of the inner
The external limiting membrane is formed by zonulae
plexiform layer, an increased number of ganglion cells, thinning
adherens between processes of adjoining radial glial (Miller)
 of the nerve fiber layer, and absence of large blood vessels. The
and photoreceptor cells. The microvilli of the radial glial cells
area centralis retinae is the area of most acute vision and corre-
 project peripherally between the inner segments of the rods and
 sponds to the area of the macula and fovea in primates.
cones (Figs. 17-3 and 17-9).
The retinal vascular pattern varies greatly among species
The outer nuclear layer contains the perikarya of the rods
In the holangiotic pattern (cats, dogs, cattle, pigs, and sheep)
and cones (Fig. 17-3). The outer plexiform layer is composed of
blood vessels occur in the optic nerve fiber layer. Wide capillar-
the axon terminals of the photoreceptor cells, that is, rod spherules
ies are found at the periphery of the retina, and venules and ar-
and cone pedicles, forming synapses with the processes of the hor-
terioles are present toward the optic disk. Numerous capillaries
izontal cells, and the dendrites of the bipolar cells (Fig. 17-9).
are present in the inner nuclear, ganglion cell, and nerve fiber
As many as four (in dogs) layers of nuclei make up the inner
layers (Fig. 17-3). In the paurangiotic pattern (horses), the ves-
nuclear layer (Figs. 17-3 and 17-9), which comprises bipolar,
sels radiate only a short distance from the optic disk. In the
360
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
merangiotic retina (rabbits), the vessels migrate medially and
laterally. Anangiotic retinas (birds and reptiles) are devoid of
blood vessels.
lens fiber
ReFrACTiVe MeDIA
posterior-
suture
Lens and Zonular Fibers
anterior
suture
The lens is a transparent, biconvex structure that is situated be-
tween the iris and the vitreous body and suspended by the zonu-
lar fibers from the ciliary body (Fig. 17-8). It consists of the lens
capsule, lens epithelium, and lens fibers.
The lens is entirely surrounded by the lens capsule
(Fig. 17-10), which consists of several layers of collagen fibrils
FIGURE I7-II Three-dimensional schematic of the outer layer
alternating with basal lamina material. It is much thicker on
of lens fibers. The capsule and lens epithelium have been removed.
the anterior lens surface than on the posterior surface.
Lens fibers form Y-shaped sutures where the ends of the fibers
 Beneath the anterior lens capsule is the lens epithelium
meet. The "Y" is upright in the anterior region of the lens and
(Fig. 17-10), a layer of simple cuboidal epithelial cells. The basal
 inverted in the posterior region of the lens.
region of the cells faces the lens capsule, while the apical region
is toward the lens fibers. At the equator, the cells elongate and
differentiate into lens fibers, which make up the bulk of the
elastic fibers (see Chapter 3) and are attached to the lens capsule
lens (Figs. 17-10 and 17-11). Fully differentiated lens fibers are
by fusion with its outermost layers.
U-shaped prism-shaped cells that extend toward the anterior
When the ciliary muscle contracts during accommodation,
and posterior poles of the lens. They lack a nucleus and are vir-
the zonular fibers slacken, the elastic lens fibers then shorten, and
tually devoid of organelles. Lens fibers interdigitate extensively
the lens assumes a more spherical shape, focusing the image on the
(especially where fibers from opposite sides of the equator meet
retina. During ciliary muscle relaxation, the zonular fibers tense
to form lens sutures [Fig. 17-11]) and are connected through
and the lens becomes more discoid with decreased axial thickness.
 gap junctions and desmosomes. Through continuous diffrenti-
ation of lens epithelial cells and addition of fibers, the lens grows
Vitreous Body
throughout life.
The zonular fibers originate from the basal lamina of the
The vitreous body occupies the vitreous chamber, the space be-
inner layer of the ciliary epithelium (Figs. 17-6 and 17-12). The
tween the lens and the retina, or about two thirds of the volume
fibers are composed of noncollagenous glycoproteins similar to
of the globe (Fig. 17-1). The primary vitreous forms first and is
A
B
2
FIGURE I7-10 Canine lens. I., The lens capsule (A) covers the anterior lens epithelium (B) undemeath
which are the lens fibers (C). 2., Cross section through lens fibers. Hematoxylin and eosin (x660).
Eye + Ralph E. Hamor ond E.j. Ehrhort
361
Third Eyelid and Conjunctiva
A
The third eyelid (nictitating membrane) is a conjunctival fold for-
tified by hyaline (ruminants, dogs) or elastic (horses, pigs, cats) car-
tilage. The conjunctiva consists of a conjunctival epithelium
covering a connective-tissue lamina propria. The conjunctival ep-
ithelium is either a pseudostratified columnar or transitional ep-
ithelium that becomes stratified squamous near the eyelid margin
(Fig. 17-13-1). Goblet cell are scattered throughout the conjunc-
tiva, with the highest cell densities in the dog found in the lower
nasal to middle fornix region of the conjunctiva (Fig. 17-13-2).
Goblet cells produce the inner layer of the tear film. The conjunc-
tival epithelium lies over a lamina propria of highly vascularized
loose connective tissue rich in fibrocytes, lymphocytes, and plasma
cells, with some mast cells and macrophages also present. It also
 may contain solitary and aggregated lymphatic nodules.
The superficial gland of the third eyelid surrounds the
base of the shaft of the T-shaped cartilage plate. It is similar in
structure to the lacrimal gland and likewise contributes secretion
to the tear film; it is serous in horses and cats, seromucous in cat-
tle and dogs and mucous in the pig. Frequently, acinar cells se-
crete lipid. A deep gland of the third eyelid (Harderian gland)
is present in cattle and pigs.
FIGURE I7-12 Scanning electron micrograph illustrating a
posterior view of ciliary processes and attachment of zonular fibers
to the lens (cat). Posterior lens (A); ciliary process (B); posterior
Lacrimal Apparatus
zonular fibers (C); anterior zonular fibers (D). Notice that the
The lacrimal gland is a compound tubuloacinar or tubuloalve-
zonular fibers extend from between the bases of the ciliary
olar gland (Fig. 17-14). It is serous in cats and seromucous in
processes and aggregate at their lenticular insertion. (From Gelatt
KM. Textbook of Veterinory Ophthalmology. Philodelphia: Lea &
 dogs and ungulates. The acinar cells frequently contain lipid in-
Febiger. 1 981.,)
clusions and are surrounded by myoepithelial cells (Fig. 17-14).
The intercalated and secretory ducts are lined with simple
and stratified cuboidal epithelia, respectively (Fig. 17-14). The
mostly fibrovascular tissue that functions to nourish the develop-
lacrimal ductules are lined with stratified cuboidal epithelium.
ing globe. The primary vitreous regresses (usually completed by
The glands of the third eyelid (see above) are likewise in-
cluded in the lacrimal apparatus. The lacrimal gland and the
birth) and is replaced by secondary vitreous that is seen in normal
superficial gland of the third eyelid produce approximately 60%
patients. The zonular fibers are termed the tertiary vitreous, but
their exact origin is uncertain. Vitreous is a hydrogel containing
and 35%, respectively, of the aqueous portion of the tear film.
99% water, and the remaining 1% is primarily hyaluronic acid.
Excess tears accumulate in the lacrimal lake (lacus lacrimalis),
It adheres tightly to the optic disk (papilla) and the ora serrata; it
a medially located widening of the conjunctiva lined by a strati-
 also attaches to the internal limiting membrane of the retina and
fied squamous and columnar epithelium. They enter the lacrimal
-sauop isou ul Apoq Are! aul jo (eueld sied) ired noasod au
canaliculi, which are lined with stratified squamous epithelium,
tic mammals, the vitreous body is firmly attached to the posterior
through the lacrimal puncta to reach the lacrimal sac and its con-
lens capsule as well (hyaloideocapsular ligament).
tinuation, the nasolacrimal duct.
The vitreous body contains a network of sparse collagen fib-
The nasolacrimal duct is lined by a stratified columnar ep-
rils. Fibrils are concentrated peripherally, forming a layer called
ithelium with goblet cells or by transitional epithelium (pigs). It
the hyaloid membrane or cortex. These collagen fibrils connect
 begins with an ampullar widening, the lacrimal sac, the lamina
to the radial glial (Miller) cells of the retina. In the cortex, a few
 propria of which contains lymphatic tissue. Toward the nasal end
fibrocytes and macrophages are also present.
of the duct, simple branched tubuloacinar mucous (or seromu-
cous in sheep and goats) glands are present
ACCESSOrY ORGANS
Eyelids
SPECIES VARIATIONS
The eyelids are movable folds of skin that protect the eyes. Their
Many ocular anatomic and histologic variations occur among
structure is described in Chapter 16.
species. In mam mals, differences include size and shape of the
362
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
FIGURE 17-13
I. Transitional epithelium of the porcine conjunctiva. Hematoxylin and eosin (x540). 2. Many goblet cells in
2
FIGURE I7-14 Porcine lacrimal gland. I. Acini (A) and a secretory duct (B). Trichrome (xl85). 2. The light staining of the acinar cells is
due to dissolution of lipid inclusions. Trichrome (x600).
Eye ● Rolph E. Hamor ond E.j. Ehrhart
363
globe; size and shape of the cornea; thickness of the cornea and
ip uoeie Aienioe sassanoid Are aun 'saiads asaul yo aos
sclera; point of optic nerve exit; shape and orientation of the pupil; 
rectly to the lens to allow for more accom modation. For details
shape and distribution of melanin granules; degree of develop-
of the structure of many nonmam malian eyes and of species dif-
ment of the ciliary muscle; shape, relative size, and color of the
ferences among mammals, the reader is referred to the suggested
lens; thickness of various retinal layers; retinal vascular patterns;
readings list.
absence of or location and type of tapetum; thickness of choroid;
and types of lacrimal glands.
The differences between mammals and other vertebrates are
SUGGESTED READINGS
 much more striking. For example, eyes of birds vary greatly in
'saiads Aueu u! 'pue aien ureiuon seiais naul pue 'adeys
Dowling JA. The Retina: An Approachable Part of the Brain.
ossicles. The avian cornea has an anterior limiting lamina, unlike
Cambtidge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1 987.
Duke-Elder S. The Eye in Evolution. Vol. 1, System ofOphthalmology.
other domestic animals. In birds and some other vertebrates, such
 as snakes and lizards, a highly vascular structure called the pecten
London: Henty Kimpton, 1958.
Fine BS, Yanoff M. Ocular Histology, a Text and Atlas. 2nd Ed.
extends from the optic disk into the vitreous body. The pecten
Hagerstown, MD: Harper and Row, 1 979.
is responsible for nourishment of the inner eye and retina. These
Samuelson DA. Ophthalmic anatomy. In: Gelatt KN, ed. Veterinary
species also have skeletal muscle within their iris and ciliary
Ophthalmology. 3td Ed. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1999.
body rather than smooth muscle. Several other differences exist
Walls GL. The Vertebrate Eye and its Adaptive Radiation. Bloomfield
between mammalian eyes and those of other vertebrates. In
Hills, MI: The Cranbrook Press, 1942.
18
Ear
O ANN EURELL
Extermal Ear
Stria vascularis
Middle Ear
Vestibular Apparatus
Tympanic Membrane
Crista ampullarnis 
Tympanic Cavity
Maculae of the utricle and saccule
Auditory Ossicles and Muscles of the Middle Ear
Vestibular mechanism
Auditory Tube
Auditory Apparatus
Intemal Ear
Spiral organ (organ of Corti)
Bony Labyrinth
Sensory cells
Membranous Labyrinth
Supporting cells
Semicircular ducts
 Tectorial membrane
Utricle and saccule
Spiral ganglion
Cochlear duct
 Auditory mechanism
The ear is composed of three divisions: the external ear, the mid-
squamous epithelium continuous with that of the tympanic cav-
dle ear, and the internal (inner) ear. Structured for sound collec-
ity. Between these two epithelial sheets is a connective-tissue layer
tion, the external ear is composed of the auricle and the external
Composed ofa central region ofcircularly arranged collagen fibers
acoustic meatus. The middle ar consists of the tympanic mem-
 anda peripheral region of radially arranged collagen fibers. Where
brane, tympanic cavity, and three auditory ossicles plus their as-
the manubrium of the malleus attaches to the tympanic mem-
sociated muscles and ligaments. The air-filled tympanic cavity
brane, the connective tissue is somewhat thicker and contains
of the middle ear is connected to the nasopharynx by the audi-
blood vessels and nerves that course along the manubrium and
tory tube. Sound conduction is the primary function of the mid-
 spread radially. Collagen fibers are sparse or even absent in the
dle ear. The inner ear, consisting of the membranous labyrinth
dorsal portion of the membrane, referred to as the flaccid part.
enclosed within the osseous (bony) labyrinth in the petrous tem-
poral bone, plays a role in both hearing and equilibrium.
Tympanic Cavity
The air-filled tympanic cavity contains small bones, the auditory
EXTERNAL EAR
ossicles, and their muscles and ligaments (Fig. 18-1). The cavity
is lined with simple squamous or simple cuboidal epithelium,
The microscopic description of the auricle, or pinna, and the ex-
which covers the ossicles. The epithelium rests on a thin layer of
ternal acoustic meatus is included in Chapter 16.
connective tissue. A few epithelial cells are ciliated, particularly
those on the floor of the cavity.
MIdDLE EAR
Auditory Ossicles and Muscles
Tympanic Membrane
of the Middle Ear
The thin tympanic membrane delimits the external acoustic
The three auditory ossicles (malleus, incus, and stapes) traverse the
meatus from the tympanic cavity (Fig. 18-1). It is covered exter-
middle ear, connecting the tympanic membrane to the membrane
 nally by stratified squamous epithelium and internally by simple
of the vestibular (oval) window of the internal ear (Fig. 18-1).
364
Ear • Jo Ann Eurell
365
lateral
anterior
auricle
semicircular
 semicircular
canal
canal 
posterior
temporal
incus
 semicircular 
vestibule
bone
malleus
canal
cochlea
vestibular nerve
cochlear nerve
scala tympani
cochlear duct
external
scala vestibuli
acoustic
meatus
tympanic
membrane
stapes
vestibular
tympanic
window
coochlear
cavity
window
auditory
tube
nasopharynx
FIGURE I8-ISchematic drawing of the right ear (dog), rostral aspect, showing the extemal ear with the auricle and extermal acoustic
meatus; middle ear with the tympanic membrane; auditory ossicles comprising the malleus, incus, and stapes; tympanic cavity; auditory tube with
connection to the nasopharynx; cochlear window; vestibular window, where the footplate of the stapes is located; intermal ear with the bony
labyrinth (bone cut away for easier viewing of the membranous labyrinth) comprising the anterior, lateral, and posterior semicircular canals, each
with an osseous ampulla; vestibule; cochlea with the scala vestibule and the scala tympani; membranous labyrinth (dotted lines) comprising the
anterior, lateral, and posterior semicircular ducts (each with a membranous ampulla), utricle, saccule, and cochlear duct Moreover, the vestibulo-
cochlear nerve, comprising the vestibular nerve and the cochlear nerve, is depicted entering the cranial cavity through the temporal bone.
These compact bones transmit vibrations across the middle ear
fied columnar epithelium (with goblet cells) resting on loose con-
cavity. The manubrium of the malleus is firmly attached to the
nective tissue. The lamina propria of the tube is thin and lacks
tym panic membrane, and the small hooklike process on the neck
glands in the osseous region of the tube; it becomes thicker in the
of the malleus serves as an attachment for the tendon of the ten-
cartilaginous region, containing seromucous glands and lym-
sor tympani muscle. The head of the malleus articulates with the
phatic nodules. Aggregated lymphatic nodules (the tubal tonsil)
incus, which, in turn, articulates with the stapes. Ligaments hold
are present near the pharynx. The auditory tube is surrounded
these synovial articulations in place.
either by bone near the tympanic membrane and or by an in-
Muscles of the middle ear (tensor tympani and stapedius) are
complete cartilaginous tube toward the pharynx (Fig. 18-1). Hya-
composed of skeletal muscle and function to dampen ossicle
line cartilage is present in the proximal portion of the tube near
movement, protecting the inner ear structures from excessive vi-
the bone, but the tissue transitions to elastic cartilage toward the
bration. The stapedius muscle attaches to the rostral crus of the
pharynx.
 stapes, and the footplate (base) of the stapes is attached to the
In the horse, the auditory tube expands ventrally to form the
vestibular window by an annular ligament.
 guttural pouch. The pouch has the same histologic features as
the pharyngeal portion of the auditory tube but lacks cartilagi-
Auditory Tube
nous support.
 The function of the auditory tube is to ensure equal air pres-
The auditory tube connects the tympanic cavity to the naso-
sure on both sides of the tympanic membrane. Usually, the audi-
pharynx (Fig. 18-1). The tube is lined by ciliated pseudostrati-
tory tube is closed, but it opens during yawning and swallowing.
366
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
INTERNAL EAR
ral canal of the cochlea makes several turns around an axis of
 spongy bone, the modiolus. The modiolus is a cone-shaped hol-
The structural divisions of the inner ear comprise the bony laby-
low osseous structure in which the cochlear nerve and its spiral
rinth and the membranous labyrinth. The functional divisions of
ganglion are located. The number of coils varies from species to
the internal ear are the vestibular apparatus and the auditory
species (e.g., dog, 3′4; cat, 3; horse, 2′4; pig, 4; guinea pig, 4′%;
apparatus.
cow, 3/; man, 2’4). The base of the modiolus forms the rostral
part of the internal acoustic meatus, where the cochlear nerve and
blood vessels enter the cochlea. The bony canal is partially di-
Bony Labyrinth
vided by a hollow bony projection, the osseous spiral lamina,
The bony labyrinth is a system of canals and cavities within the
which contains the branches of the cochlear nerve coursing to the
petrous temporal bone. Bone of the labyrinth is very dense and
spiral organ. The width of this lamina is largest at the cochlear
lamellar.
window and diminishes toward the apex of the cochlea.
The cavities of the labyrinth include the vestibule, three
The canals and cavities of the bony labyrinth are lined by
semicircular canals, and the cochlea (Fig. 18-1). The vestibule
periosteum. A clear fluid, perilymph, fills the perilymphatic
is a small oval space connecting the cochlea with the semicircular
space between the periosteum and the membranous labyrinth
canals located near the medial wall of the tympanic cavity. Three
(Figs. 18-2 and 18-3). Perilymph is similar in ionic composition to
semicircular canals (anterior, posterior, and lateral) lie at right
cerebrospinal fluid and plasma, with sodium as the main cation.
angles to each other and all communicate with the vestibule. The
 Perilymph flows from the subarachnoid space through the cochlear
cochlea is a bony tube wound in the shape of a spiral. The spi-
canaliculus into the cavities of the bony labyrinth. The vestibular
dura mater
endolymphatic
sac
utriculosaccular duct
endolymphatic
duct
anterior
semicircular
vestibular
canal
aqueduct
subarachnoid
ampulla of
space
semicircular
duct
cochlear canaliculus
scala tympani
cochlear duct
utricle
scala vestibuli
helicotrema
stapes in .
vestibular window
cochlea
cochlear
ductus
window
reuniens
saccule
FIGURE I8-2 Schematic drawing of the right intemal ear with its connections to the cranial cavity.
intradural space, and subara.chnoid space (rostral aspect). The cochlea with its contents is drawn uncoiled
to show the helicotrema, where there is an open connection between the scala vestibuli and scala tympani.
 Note especially that the cochlear canaliculus connects with the subara.chnoid space, which contains
cerebrospinal fluid (light gray), and the scala tympanil. Perilymph (dark gray) fls the space between the
membranous labyrinth and the bony labyrinth. The other connection to the cranial cavity is the vestibular
aqueduct, which houses portions of the endolymphatic duct and endolymphatic sac. Structures of the
membranous labyrinth containing endolymph are shown in white. Dura mater, the utriculosa.ccular duct 
paeipui osle aue mopuim seingisan au ui sades pue 'alpuin anores suaunau snonp
Ear •Jo Anr Eurell
367
osteum of the bony wall. The periosteum and the spaces between
the trabeculae are lined by flattened mesothelial cells.
Semicircular Ducts
The semicircular ducts lie within the semicircular canals
(Fig. 18-1). One end of each duct is enlarged as an ampulla. The
ducts are lined by simple squamous epithelium. Connection of
the ducts with the utricle is shown in Figure 18-2.
Utricle and Saccule
The medial wall of the vestibule has two depressions in which the
utricle (caudodorsal) and the saccule (rostroventral) are housed
(Fig. 18-2). Two parts of the utriculosaccular duct extend from
the utricle and saccule respectively and converge to form the endo-
lymphatic duct, which terminates as the endolymphatic sac.
 Part ofthe endolymphatic duct lies within the vestibular aqueduct
The endolymphatic sac lies partially within the vestibular aque-
duct, and partially between two laminae of the dura. The function
of the sac is to regulate the pressure and volume of endolymph.
Cochlear Duct
The cochlear duct is connected to the saccule by a small duct, the
ductus reuniens, and ends as a blind sac at the apex of the cochlea.
The triangular cochlear duct lies between two additional com-
partments of the cochlea (Fig. 18-4). The dorsal compartment, or
scala vestibuli, extends from the region of the vestibular (oval)
window to the apex of the cochlea, where it becomes confluent
with the ventral compartment, the scala tympani, through an
FIGURE I8-3 Semicircular canal (cat). The semicircular duct, an
opening called the helicotrema (Fig. 18-2). The scala tympani
epithelium-lined membranous tube (A), lies within the semicircular
ends at the cochlear (round) window. The cochlear duct is sep-
canal of the osseous labyrinth (B). The perilymphatic space (C)
arated from the scala vestibuli by the vestibular membrane
contains delicate connective tissue trabeculae {arrowhead). The
spaces between the trabeculae are lined with mesothelium.
(Reissner's membrane) and from the scala tympani by the basi-
Hematoxylin and eosin (x400).
lar membrane (Figs. 18-4 and 18-5). Scant collagen fibers form
the vestibular membrane, which is covered with simple squa-
 mous epithelium on both surfaces. Basement membranes sepa-
rate the epithelia from the connective tissue. The basilar membrane
is attached to the outer osseous cochlea by the spiral ligament
aqueduct, a space surrounding the endolymphatic duct, also
and extends to the spiral lamina of the modiolus. The mem-
contains perilym ph.
 brane is composed of collagen fibers embedded in homogeneous
ground substance; it increases in thickness as it progresses from
Membranous Labyrinth
the cochlear window to the helicotrema. Width of the basilar
membrane increases continuously from the cochlear window,
The membranous labyrinth comprises the semicircular ducts,
where it is narrowest, to the helicotrema, where it is widest. On
utricle, saccule, cochlear duct, endolymphatic duct, and endo-
the side facing the scala tympani, the basilar membrane is cov-
lymphatic sac (Fig. 18-2). The membranous labyrinth is lined
ered with simple squamous epithelium, while the spiral organ
with simple squamous epithelium and filled with a fluid called
(organ of Corti) is present on the cochlear duct surface.
endolymph, which is more viscous than perilymph. Endolymph
contains high levels of potassum and low to minimal levels of
sodium when compared to perilymph. The protein profile of en-
Stria Vascularis
 dolymph is similar to that of perilymph but different from pro-
The third wall of the triangular-shaped cochlear duct contains the
teins found in plasma. Epithelial cells of the vestibule and the stria
stria vascularis, which contributes to the production of endo-
vascularis, which is described later in this chapter, are thought to
lymph and regulates its unique ion content (Figs. 18-4, 18-5,
produce endolymph. The connective tissue underlying the epi-
and 18-6). Stratified cuboidal cells of the stria rest directly on a
thelium of the membranous labyrinth forms fine trabeculae
layer of connective tissue without an intervening basal lamina
(Fig. 18-3). The trabeculae span the adjacent perilymphatic space
(Fig. 18-7). Three epithelial cell types (basal, intermediate, and
and anchor the suspended membranous labyrinth to the peri-
marginal cells) appear similar with electron microscopy. Dark-
368
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
bone
vestibular
 membrane
SCALA VESTIBULI
stria vascularis
COCHLEAR DUCT
inner
reticular
spiral 
tunnel
lamina
 prominence
border
interdental
cell
inner
outer
external 
tectorial
hair
hair
outer
cells
supporting
membrane
cell
tunnel
cell
cells
(Claudius and
Bottcher)
 spiral
 inner
O
 spiral
tunnel
O
osseous
Q
spiral
tympanic lip
 spiral
lamina
ligament
spiral
 inner
outer
inner
outer
 ganglion
 pillar 
 outer phalangeal
limiting
 phalangeal
cell
 pillar 
cochlear
cell
cell
cell
nerve
cell
basilar
membrane
SCALA TYMPANI
FIGURE I8-4 Schematic representation of the structure of the scala vestibuli, cochlear duct, and scala tympani. Note the structure of the
spiral organ, which includes many cell types that lie under the tectorial membrane above the basilar membrane. Other major structures include
 the stria vascularis, vestibular membrane, spiral ligament, cochlear nerve, and spiral ganglion.
staining marginal cells lie adjacent to the cochlear duct lumen
these structures are specialized neuroepithelial areas, the crista
 and are known to pump Nat out of the endolymph. Light-staining
ampullaris, macula utriculi, and macula sacculi, which function
intermediate and basal cells are found between the marginal cells
to detect motion and maintain equilibrium.
and the spiral ligament. The intermediate cells contain melanin
and also play a role in the generation of electrical potentials in the
Crista Ampullaris
inner ear. Basal cells are flat cells that form a barrier between the
The membranous ampulla of each semicircular duct contains a
 crista ampullaris, which is sensitive to rotary movements (an-
 gular acceleration and deceleration) (Figs. 18-8 and 18-9). The
tween the epithelial cells of the stria vascularis (Fig. 18-6). At the
crista ampullaris is composed of a ridge of sensory epithelium
junction of the stria vascularis with the spiral organ, the strati-
resting on thickened connective tissue, which projects into the
fied epithelium changes abruptly to simple cuboidal. This region
lumen of the ampulla.
is called the spiral prominence (Fig. 18-4).
Sensory epithelium of the crista ampullaris consists of hair
cells and supporting cells (Figs. 18-8 and 18-10). Two types of
hair cells are recognized at the ultrastructural level. The type I
Vestibular Apparatus
hair cell has a narrow neck and a rounded base that fits into a
The vestibular apparatus includes the organs of equilibrium,
cup-shaped afferent nerve terminal (nerve chalice). Efferent nerve
composed of the semicircular ducts, saccule, and utricle. Within
fibers contact the chalice and may be inhibitory in function. The
Ear • Jo Anr Eurell
369
SCALA VESTIBULI
vestibular
membrane
tectorial
stria
membrane 
COCHLEAR
vascularis
DUCT
 spiral
basilar
 organ
membrane
SCALA TYMPANI
spiral
ganglion
FlGURE I8-5 A section through one turm of the cochlea with the modiolus to the left. The
vestibular membrane separates the scala vestibuli from the cochlear duct. The tectorial membrane lies
over cells of the spiral organ (circled), which are located above the basilar membrane. Nerve fibers from
the spiral ganglion innervate the hair cells of the spiral organ. Hematoxylin and eosin (x75).
type II hair cellis cylindrical and is innervated by both afferent
The orientation of the stereocilia and the single kinocilium
 and efferent nerve endings at its base. The nerve endings are
gives each hair cell a functional polarization. Whenever the stereo-
branches of the vestibular portion of the vestibulocochlear nerve
cilia bend toward the kinocilium, the afferent nerve fiber in
(cranial nerve VIII).
Contact with the cell is excited. Conversely, movement in the op-
A single kinocilium and 40 to 80 stereocilia are present on
 posite direction causes inhibition of neural transmission.
the apical surface of each hair cell. In the crista ampullaris of the
 The sensory hair cells of the crista ampullaris project into an
lateral semicircular duct, the kinocilium of each hair cell is ori-
 overlying gelatinous cupula. The cupula contacts the opposite
ented toward the utricle. In contrast, in the anterior and poste-
wall of the ampulla and deflects in the direction of endolymph
rior semicircular ducts, the hair cell kinocilium is oriented away
movement, much like an elastic diaphragm. This deflection
from the utricle. Each kinocilium has the typical ciliary micro-
causes the hair bundles (stereocilia and the kinocilium) to bend,
tubule arrangement of nine peripheral pairs and one central pair;
thereby generating neural impulses.
however, the hair cell kinocilium is incapable of independent
The supporting cells of the epithelium are tall and colum-
motion. The stereocilia are arranged in four or five rows and tilt
nar with microvilli. They synthesize the matrix of the cupula and
toward the kinocilium, forming a cone-shaped bundle. Stereo-
therefore contain numerous secretory vesicles.
aul jo uoigai aul premoi Ajaissaigoid sasaiou! yigual uni
cell where the kinocilium is located. The tip of each stereocilium
is linked to its neighbor in the adjacent row by a fine protein strand
Maculae of the Utricle and Saccule
called tip link, composed of cadherin 23. Within each stereo-
Two receptor organs, the macula utriculi and macula sacculi,
cilium, numerous actin filaments anchor in a complex terminal
lie perpendicular to each other, located on the lateral wall of the
web called the cuticular plate.
utricle and the floor of the saccule, respectively.
370
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Endolymph in cochlear duct
FIGURE I8-6 The epithelium of the stria vascularis (A) is
traversed by numerous capillaries (B) and rests on loose connective
tissue (C) (guinea pig). Crossmon's trichrome (x600)
FIGURE I8-7Three different cell types {marginal, intermediate,
The sensory epithelium of both maculae rests on loose con-
and basal) surround a capillary in the stria vascularis epithelium
nective tissue containing blood vessels and nerves (Figs. 18-10
(squirrel monkey). Transmission electron micrograph, (×3752).
(From Schukecht HF. Anatomy. Ir: Schukrecht HF, ed. Pathology
and 18-11). The cells of the sensory epithelium of the maculae
of the Eor. 2nd Ed. Philodelphio: Lea & Febiger, 1 993:31.,)
are essentially the same as those of the crista ampullaris, that is,
type I and II sensory cells and supporting cells (Figs. 18-10 and
18-1l). The arrangement of the sensory cells differs between the
two maculae. In the macula utriculi, the kinocilium of each cell
Linear movements of the head are detected by the maculae.
faces toward a stripe, the striola, which divides the sensory cell
As endolymph moves in the utricle and saccule, the statoconia
population into two oppositely polarized groups (Fig. 18-10). In
shift in the gelatinous material over the sensory epithelium, thus
the macula sacculi, the hair cells polarize such that the kinocil-
stimulating underlying hair cells.
ium of each cell faces away from the striola.
Neural impulses from the hair cells in the crista ampullaris
Hair bundles of the sensory cells of the maculae penetrate
and the maculae are transmitted to the brain via the axons of the
vestibular nerve, a branch of cranial nerve VIII (vestibulocochlear
called statoconia (otoliths). Together, the hair bundles, gelati-
nerve)
nous material, and statoconia form the statoconial (otolithic)
membrane.
Auditory Apparatus
The auditory apparatus comprises the organ of hearing, which in-
Vestibular Mechanism
cludes the scala tympani, scala vestibuli, and cochlear duct.
With rotation of the head, the endolymph flows through the
Within the cochlear duct is the epithelial spiral organ, which
semicircular ducts. In the ampulla of each duct, the movement of
functions in hearing
the fluid displaces the cupula, which then bends the underlying
stereocilia of the hair cells of the crista ampullaris. As the stereo-
cilia bend toward the kinocilium, each hair cellincreasingly stim-
Spira! Organ (Organ of Corti)
ulates neural impulses. The neural stimulus decreases as the
The sensory portion of the spiral organ is a complex structure that
stereocilia bend away from the kinocilium.
rests on the cochlear duct side of the basilar membrane (Figs. 18-4
Ear ·Jo Ann Eurell
371
 ampulla
SEMICIRCULAR
DUCT
cupula
 kinocilium
stereocilia
hair cells
vestibularnerve
CRISTAAMPULLARIS
FIGURE I8-8 Schematic drawing of the ampulla of the semicircular duct, open to show the crista.
ampullaris within. The enlarged drawing of the crista shows the hair cells beneath the cup-shaped
gelatinous cupula. Each hair cell has one kinocilium and several stereocilia of different lengths on the
apical surface. Processes of the vestibular nerve contact the basal region of the hair cells.
and 18-5). This receptor organ has three major components: (a) the
to five rows of increasing height toward the spiral ligament. Thus,
sensory cells that transform mechanical energy of sound vibra-
the outer hair cells are morphologically polarized, much like the
tions into electrical energy, (b) a supportive structure for the
vestibular hair cells. The longest stereocilia are embedded in the
sensory cells, and (c) the afferent and efferent nerve terminals of
tectorial membrane. The tips of the stereocilia are connected to
the cochlear nerve, a branch of cranial nerve VIlI (Fig. 18-4).
their adjacent taller neighbors by means of tip link. At the base
of the outer hair cells, a few afferent nerve endings and many ef-
ferent terminals containing vesicles are present. Both the inner and
Sensory Cells
outer hair cells have synaptic ribbons where afferent synapses occur.
The sensory cells are arranged in two groups: the outer hair cells
The inner hair cells are pear-shaped. Each cell has 50 to
that form three to four rows adjacent to the outer pillar cells,
 60 stereocilia that form three straight, parallel rows that increase
and the inner hair cells that form a single row just outside the
in height toward the inner tunnel. The stereocilia are not em-
inner pillar cells.
 bedded in the tectorial membrane; however, the longest stereo-
The cylindrical outer hair cells are slanted toward the inner
cilia do touch it. Tip links connect the stereocilia of inner hair
tunnel (Figs. 18-4 and 18-12). From the apex of each cell, a bun-
cells in a fashion similar to that seen in outer hair cells. In con-
dle of approximately 100 stereocilia projects in a W pattern (V or
trast to outer hair cells, many afferent nerve endings and a few ef-
U pattern in some mammals). The stereocilia of each cell form four
ferent terminals are present at the base of the inner hair cells.
372
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
cells and then send long cytoplasmic processes toward the surface.
 Phalangeal cells have a bundle of filaments originating from the
 basal cell membrane and extending to the apex. The phalangeal
processes expand into a flat plate held to the hair cells by junc-
tional complexes. Inner hair cells are almost totally enveloped by
inner phalangeal cells, while the outer hair cells are partially sur-
rounded by outer phalangeal cells. The free surface of phalangeal
cells and hair cells, with its massive terminal web and inter-
cellular junctions, forms the reticular lamina, which holds the
apical part of the hair cells rigid.
The outer limiting cells and the external supporting cells
complete the cellular component of the spiral organ. The outer
limiting cell (Hensen's cell) is very tall and the presence of micro-
villi suggests that these cells may be engaged, to some extent, in
fluid absorption. Outer limiting cells are separated from the outer
 phalangeal cells by a space, the outer tunnel (Fig. 18-12).
External supporting cells (Claudius and Bottcher's cells)
minence, a projection into the cochlear duct. The supporting
cells are similar in their cytoplasmic characteristics, although
their sizes and shapes vary. Large cuboidal cells (Claudius' cells)
overlay smaller basal cells (Bottcher's cells). The function of these
cells is unknown.
Tectorial Membrane
Overlying the spiral organ is the tectorial membrane, a gelati-
nous structure containing glycoprotein and extending from the
 spiral limbus over the hair cells (Figs. 18-4 and 18-5). The lower
surface of this membrane rests on the tips of the tallest stereocilia
in each bundle of the inner hair cells, whereas the tallest stereocilia
of the outer hair cells are embedded in the membrane. Interdental
cells, located where the tectorial membrane attaches to the spiral
 limbus, secrete the gel-like substance of the membrane.
FIGURE I8-9 The sensory and supporting cells (A) and the
Spira! Ganglion
underlying connective tissue (B) form the crista ampullaris within the
Bipolar neurons in the spiral ganglion at the base of the modi-
ampulla. The gelatinous cupula (arrowhead) on top of the
olus project to either the inner hair cells (type I spiral ganglion
aisoddo ayt ot endwe aut jo uawnl aut ssouoe spuaxa wnautida
cells) or the outer hair cells (type II spiral ganglion cells) of the
wall (guinea pig). Hematoxylin and eosin (x400).
spiral organ (Fig. 18-4). The spiral ganglion neurons project in
the opposite direction to form the cochlear nerve, a branch of the
vestibulocochlear nerve (cranial nerve VIII).
Supporting Cells
The supporting cells of the spiral organ include the border cells,
Auditory Mechanism
inner and outer pillar cells, inner and outer phalangeal cells,
Sound is composed of vibrations that alternately compress the air
outer limiting cells, and external supporting cells (Fig. 18-4).
and then allow it to expand in successive waves. The simplest
The columnar border cells rest on the tympanic lip of the
sound wave, a pure tone, is characterized by frequency and am-
spiral limbus, forming a single row on the inner side of the inner
plitude. Extrapolated from human hearing, the frequency and
hair cells. The inner and outer pillar cells line a prominent tri-
amplitude of sound waves correspond to perception of pitch and
 angular space, the inner tunnel (Corti's tunnel). They have a
loudness (intensity).
broad base containing the nucleus and an elongated body packed
The ear is constructed as a receptor of sound waves in air.
with tonofilaments that fan out to form the cuticular plate in the
The outer ear captures sound waves with varying efficiency, de-
cell apex.
 pending on the size of the auricle. In mammals, sensitivity of
The inner and outer phalangeal cells (outer cells were for-
hearing also relates to the ability to either raise or close the outer
 merly known as Deiter's cells) are supportive cells that rest on the
ear (auricle). Animals raise the outer ear in an attempt to sharpen
 basilar membrane and extend upward to cradle the base of the hair
their hearing or cover the ear canal to block sound.
Ear ·Jo Ann Eurell
373
striola (dashed line)
kinocilium
statoconia
ereocilia
gelatinous
layer
kinocilium
MACULA
UTRICULI
type
typell
cell
cell
nerve
chalice
crista
macula
efferent 
ampullaris
sacculi
nerve ending
efferent
basal
afferentnerve
lamina
nerve
 afferent 
supporting
nerve
cell
ending
FIGUrE 18-10
The lower left drawing of the membranous labyrinth indicates the location of the macula utriculi, macula sacculi, and
cristae ampullaris with gray shading. The larger schematic drawing of the macula utriculi illustrates the sensory epithelium. The statoconial
membrane has been cut away to better illustrate the underlying cells. The numerous stereocilia and single kinocilium of each sensory cell form
a conelike arrangement; each kinocilium faces the striola, represented as a dashed line. Note the change in the morphologic polarization of the 
sensory cells at the striola. Afferent nerve fibers are white, while efferent nerve fibers are hatched gray. In the lower right corner a schematic
drawing illustrates the general structure of the vestibular sensory epithelium. The type I hair cell has a constricted neck and a rounded base
and is almost completely surrounded by a nerve chalice. The more cylindrical type Ill cell is innervated by two types of bud-shaped nerve
endings: sparsely vesiculated afferent {white) and richly vesiculated efferent (hatched). (Modified ond redrown ofter Linderorn HH. Anatomy of
the otolith orgons. Adv Otorhirnoloryngol 1 973;20:405.)
The tympanic membrane acts as a transmitter of sound
 basilar membrane on the opposite side of the cochlear duct bulges
wave-generated vibrations from the air in the external acoustic
outward into the scala tympani. As the pressure varies within the
meatus to the middle ear (Fig. 18-13). The bridge of the malleus.
cochlear duct fluid, regions of the basilar membrane begin to
incus, and stapes transports the vibrations across the middle ear
vibrate with different maximum amplitudes along the length of
to the perilymph on the medial side of the stapes footplate. In ad-
the duct. Vibration of the basilar membrane causes the hair cells
dition to transporting vibrations, the middle ear mechanism also
of the spiral organ to contact the overlying tectorial membrane.
protects the inner ear from receiving too much energy by damp
Contact ultimately generates neural impulses that pass via the
ing excessive vibration.
cochlear branch of the vestibulocochlear nerve (cranial nerve VIII).
 Sound vibrations in the middle ear are transferred by the stapes
Residual vibration within the scala tympani is released through
footplate through the vestibular window to the perilymph of the
the cochlear window.
scala vestibuli and eventually the scala tympani. Simultaneously,
The variation of width, thickness, and elasticity of the basi-
the pressure waves push the vestibular membrane into the endo-
lymph within the cochlear duct. As a result of the pressure, the
sounds cause the basilar mem brane to vibrate in the apical end of
374
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
outer hair cells
 stereocilia
H
outer
tunnel
SC
HCⅡ
HCI
FIGURE I8-I2 Outer hair cells with rows of stereocilia on
their apical surface are shown in this scanning electron micrograph
of a portion of the spiral organ. (From Weiss L, ed. Cell ond Tissue
NO
Biology, α Textbook of Histology. 6th Ed. Baltimore: Urbon &
Schworzenberg. 1 988:1 1 18.)
The site of transduction of mechanical energy to electrical
Ne
signals seems to be the tip of the stereocilia of the hair cells, where
the receptor current enters the sensory cell in response to dis-
placement of the hair bundle. The tip links and the ionic channels
NS
situated in the plasma membrane covering the terminal ends of
the stereocilia are believed to be involved in the transduction.
When pushed in the excitatory direction, tip links are stretched
and ionic channels in the terminal membrane of the stereocilium
are in the open state. The channels close when the stereocilium is
pushed in the opposite direction. The ionic currents regulate
neurotransmitter release at the afferent synapse located at the base
of the hair cell. The speed of hair cell response is faster than in any
other sensory receptor cells, including neurons. The result is elec-
trical signals that are transferred to the brain via afferent nerve
FIGURE I8-II The type I (HC I) and type Il (HC Il) sensory
fibers.
hair cells of the epithelium of the macula utriculi are separated by
The function of the efferent nerve fibers at the base of the
supporting cells (SC). Stereocilia (H) of varying length are present
hair cells is not yet completely understood. The innervation may
on the surface of the hair cells. The nuclei (Ns) of the supporting
have a regulating function in noisy environments, which allows
cells are located in the basal region of the epithelium. An efferent
filtering of unwanted sounds to focus on a particular sound. The
nerve ending (Ne) is located near the basal surface of a type Il
efferent system is also believed to play a role in otoacoustic
sensory cell. A type I cell is surrounded by an afferent nerve chalice
ending (NC) (cat). Transmission electron micrograph (×2331). (From
emissions (OAE), the recording of a tone that has radiated into
Schukrnecht HF. Aratomy. In: Schukrnecht HF, ed. Pathology of the Ear.
the ear canal from the inner ear in response to a sound stimulus.
2nd Ed. Philode(phio: Leo & Febiger, 1 993:3 1.)
OAE is currently the most important diagnostic test to deter-
mine inner ear status in humans, especially in babies and small
the cochlea, whereas high frequencies cause vibration in the re
children. The existence of OAE in animals has been proven in
gion close to the cochlear window
 several species, but diagnostic test results do not agree.
At low-vibration amplitudes, only the outer hair cells are
Loss of hearing may be related to any condition that inter-
stimulated. At greater amplitudes, the inner hair cells are also
feres with the conduction of sound through the structure of the
activated. Stimulation of the outer hair cells results in determi-
ear. External or internal ear infections, changes in the bones of the
nation of sound intensity (loudness), whereas stimulation of inner
middle ear, or conditions that affect nerve impulse transmission
hair cells results in frequency (pitch) determination.
can all affect hearing.
Ear • Jo Anr Eurell
375
cochlear
 tectorial
cochlear
[1onp
membrane
nerve
scala
vestibuli
ossicles in the
middle ear
vestibular
window
tympanic
membrane
vestibular
membrane
 basilar
membrane
spiral
organ
auditory
scala
cochlear
tube
tympani
window
FIGURE I8-I3 Schematic diagram of the events of sound transmission in the ear. The cochlea has been uncoiled to more easily visualize
the process. Sound waves impinge on the tympanic membrane, causing it to vibrate. The ear osscles vibrate as a unit; the range of position of 
ear ossicles is indicated by dashed lines. The footplate of the stapes moves in and out of the vestibular window, causing changes in fluid
Jeayoos ayt sll (kea suai) yduwkiopua alym luedukt erens pue ynqsan eens ayt sll (kea aep) ydwkuad nqasan elens ayt uuhm aunssaud
duct. The thickness of the white arrows in the scala vestibuli and the black arrows in the scala tympani indicates increased (thick arrow) or
decreased (thin arrow) fluid pressure. Because fluid is incompressible, pressure changes cause distortion of the vestibular and basilar
membranes. Deflection of the basilar membrane pushes the hair cells of the spiral organ into the overlying tectorial membrane, generating
neural impulses in the cochlear nerve. Short sound waves (high frequency, high pitch) affect the base of the cochlea, while long waves {low
frequency, low pitch) affect the apex of the cochlea. Waves may also travel around the helicotrema at the apex of the cochlea. Impact of the
waves on the secondary tympanic membrane covering the cochlear window causes it to move in and out in opposite phases to the vestibular
window.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Fay RR. Heating in Vertebrates: A Psychophysics Databook. Winnetka,
IL: Hill-Fay Associates, 1988.
Bekesy GV. Zur Theorie des Hohrens; die Schwingungsform der
Flock A. The ear. In: Weiss L, ed. Cell and Tissue Biology. A Textbook
Basilarmembran. Physik Zeits 1928;29:793.
of Histology. 6th Ed. Baltimore: Urban & Schwarzenberg, Inc.,
 Berty MM, Standring SM, Bannistet LH. Auditory and vestibular appa-
1988:1107.
fatus. In: Williams PL, ed. Gray's Anatomy. 38th Ed. Edinburgh:
Flock A, Wersall J, eds. Cellulat mechanisms in heating. Proceedings of
Churchill Livingstone, 1995: 1 367.
Nobel Symposium 63. Heat Res 1 986;22: 1.
Couloigner V, Teixeita M, Sterkers O, et al. The endolymphatic sac: its
Flottorp G. Pure-tone tinnitus evoked by acoustic stimulation: the idio-
roles in the inner eat. Med Sci (Patis) 2004:20(3): 304
phonic effect. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 195 3;43:396.
Erway LC, Mitchell SE. Prevention of otolith defect in pastel mink by
Flottorp G, Foss I. Development of hearing in hereditarily deaf white
manganese supplementation. J Hered 1973;64: 111.
mink (Hedlund) and normal mink (Standard) and the subsequent
376
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
deterioration of the auditory response in Hedlund mink. Acta
 Metz O. The acoustic impedance measured on normal and pathological
Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1979;87:16.
eatrs. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh) 1946;(Suppl 63): 1.
Foss I. Development of hearing and vision, and morphological exami-
Osborne MP, Comis SD, Pickles JO. Morphology and cross linkage of
nation of the inner ear in hereditarily deaf white Norwegian
stereo-cilia in the guinea-pig labyrinth examined without the use
 Dunkerhounds and notmal dogs (black and dappled Norwegian
of osmium as a fixative. Cell Tissue Res 1984;237:43.
Dunkerhounds). Master's thesis. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University,
Pitovski DZ, Kerr TP. Sodium- and potassium-activated ATPase in the
1981.
mammalian vestibular system. Hearing Research 2002;171(1 -2):5 1.
Foss I, Flottorp G. A comparative study of the development of hearing
Probst R. Otoacoustic emissons: an overview. In: Pfaltz CR, ed. New
Aspects of Cochlear Mechanics and Inner Ear Pathophysiology.
and vision in vatious species commonly used in experiments. Acta
Otolatyngol (Stockh) 1974;77:202.
Adv Otorhinolaryngol 1990;44;1.
Rabinowitz J. Les effets physiologiques du bruit. Recherche 1991;
Friedmann I, Ballantyhe J. Ultrastructural Atlas of the Inner Ear.
London: Butterworths & Co., 1984.
22(229): 178.
Raphael Y, Altschuler RA. Structure and innervation of the cochlea.
Gacek RR. Efferent innervation of the labyrinth. Clinical review. Am J
Brain Res Bull 2003;60:397.
Otolaryngol 1984;5:206.
Ross MH, Romrell LJ, Kaye G1. Ear. In: Ross MH, Romrell LJ, Kaye
Hudspeth AJ. How the eat's works work. Review article. Nature 1989;
GI, eds. Histology: A Text and Atlas. 3rd Ed. Baltimore: Williams
341:397.
& Wilkins, 1995:768.
Kemp DT. Stimulated acoustic emissions from within human auditory
Schuknecht HF. Anatomy. In: Schuknecht HF, ed. Pathology of the Ear.
system. J Acoust Soc Am 1978;64:1386.
2nd Ed. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1993:31.
Kimura Rs. Distribution, stfucture, and function of dark cells in
Thalmann R, Thalmann, I. Source and role of endolymph macromole-
the vestibular labyrinth. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 1969;48:
cules. Acta Otolaryngol 1999;1 19(3):293.
542.
Tortora GJ, Grabowski SR. Auditory sensations and equilibrium. In:
Lagardre F, Chaumillon G, Amata R, et al. Examination of otolith mor-
Tortora GJ, Grabowski SR, eds. Principles of Anatomy and Phy-
phology and microstructure using laset scanning microscopy. In:
siology. 7th Ed. New York: HarperCollins College Publishers,
Secot DH, Dean JM, Campana SE, eds. Recent Developments in
1993:487.
Fish Otolith Research. Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina
Zwislocki J. Theorie der Schnecken mechanik. Acta Otolaryngol (Stockh)
Press, 1995:7.
1948;(Suppl 72): 1.
A band, 82
Aggregated lymphatic nodules, 143, 144f
Abomasum, 190, 194
in distal small intestine, 139-140, 139f
Accessory glands, 248-251, 249f-251f
Agouti-related peptide (AgR P), 318
Accessory pancreatic duct, 208, 209f
Agranulocyte(s),63
Acellular cementum, 178, 178f
AgRP. See Agouti-related peptide (AgR P)
Acetylcholine, release of, 84
Air capillaties, avian, 168
Acidophil(s), 302
Air sacs, avian, 168
Acidophilic, 2
Airway(s), intrapulmonary conducting, 161-162, 161f, 162f
Acidophilic granular cells, 196, 198f
Albumen, 277
Acinus, 24, 27f, 161f, 162, 163f
Aldosterone, 311, 313
Acrosomal cap, 239
Allantoamnion, 280
Acrosomal phase, 238-239
Allantochorion, 280
Acrosome reaction, 239
Alveolar ducts, 161f, 163, 163f, 164f
ACTH. See Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
Alveolar epithelial cells
O-Actinin, 84
gtanular, 164,166f
Activin, 306
squamous, 164, 164f
Adenohypophysis, 300-303, 301f-304f
Alveolat mactophages, 164, 167f
pars distalis of, 301-302, 301f-303f
Alveolar sacs, 161f, 163, 163f, 164f
parts of, 300-303, 301f-304f
Alveolus, 24, 27f, 177
Adenosine ttiphosphate (ATP), 10
Alveolus(i), 161f, 163-164, 164f-167f
ADH. Se Antidiuretic hotmone (ADH)
Amacrine cells, 359
Adhesion(s), focal, 16
Amine precursor uptake and decatboxylation (APUD) cells, 24, 160,
Adipocyte(s), 33-34, 33f, 34f, 318
309, 318
multilocular, 34, 34f
Amnion, 279
perisinusoidal, 205
Amniotic plaques, 293
unilocular, 33-34, 33f
Ampulla, 262, 264, 265f, 266f
Adipose tissue, 33, 34f, 43
Anagen,333,334f
brown, 43
Anal canal, of large intestine, 20l, 201f
white, 43
Anal glands, 201, 339
Adrenal cortex
Anal sacs, 201, 339, 339f, 340f
inner cortex of, 311
glands of, 339, 340f
outer cortex of, 311
Anaphase, of cell cycle, 13, 14f
Adrenal gland, 311-316, 312f-315f
Anastomosis(es), arteriovenous, 1 25-126
adrenal cortex of, 311-315, 312f-314f
Androgen(s), 311, 319
Adrenal medulla, 315-316, 315f
Androgen-binding protein, 319
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), 302, 306
Anestrus, 271, 274, 274f
Adventitial cells, 75
Angiogenesis, 123
Afferent arterioles, 224, 225f
Angiotensin I, 313
Afferent fibers, 104
Angiotensin I1, 227, 313
Afterbirth, retained, 293
Angiotensinogen, 313
Agglutination,63
Anisocytosis, 63
Aggrecan(s), 44
Annulospiral ending, 109, 109f
377
378
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Annulus fibrosus, 58, 58f
Atrial granules, 130
Anorectal line, 201
Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), 88-89, 130, 318
ANP. See Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP)
Attioventricular bundle, 130
Anterior epithelium, of cornea, 351, 352f
Atrioventticular node, 130
Antetior lamina, 352
Atrioventticular valves, 129, 129f
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH), 229, 303, 304f
Atrium(a), 163
Antigen(s), 135
avian, 168, 168f
Antigen receptors, 135, 135f
Atrophy, of skeletal muscle, 86
Antigen-presenting cells, 136137, 136f
Auditory aparatus, of internal ear, 370-374, 374f, 375f
Antiparamesonephric hormone, 236
Auditory mechanism, of internal ear, 372-374, 375f
Antrum, 257f, 258, 259f, 260f
Auditory ossicles, 364 365, 365f
Apocrine mode of secretion, 29, 29f
Auditory tube, 365, 365f
Apocrine sweat glands, 334 335, 335f
Autocrine signaling, 16
Apoptosis, 14
Autonomic ganglia, 10lf, 106
Apoptotic bodies, 14
Autonomic nervous system, 104
Appositional growth, 46
Autonomic neurons
APUD cells, 24, 160, 309, 318
postganglionic, 106
APUD (amine precursor uptake and decarboxylation) cells, 24, 160,
preganglionic, 106
309, 318
Autophagosome(s), 9
Aquaporin(s), 228, 229
Alveolus(i), of mammaty gland, 340-342, 341f
 Aqueous humor, 356
Avian. See Bird(s)
Arachnoid,113
AVP. See Arginine vasopressin (AVP)
Arachnoid trabeculae, 113-114, 114f
Axodendritic syhapse, 93. 93f
Arachnoid villi, 114, 114f
Axon(s), 94, 96
Arcuate arteties, 224, 225f
efferent, 104
Area centralis retinae, 359
Axonal reaction, 93, 93f
Area cribrosa, 351
Axoplasm, 94
Areola-gland complexes, 281f, 286, 287f
Argentaffin cells, 189, 318
B cells, 135, 135f, 136f, 137
Argentaffin fibers, 39, 39f
effector, 135
Arginine vasopressin (AVP), 303
B lymphocytes, 75
Argyrophilic cels, 189
BALT. See Bronchus-associated lymphatic tissue (BALT)
Argyrophilic fibers, 39, 39f
Band neutrophil, 64
Arrector pili muscles, 328, 330, 331f
Barr body, 5, 92
Arteriole(s), 118, 122, 122f, 123f
Basal cells, 20, 155, 156
afferent, 224, 225f
Basal complex, of choroid, 355
efferent, 224, 225f
Basal lamina, 18
interlobular hepatic, 202f, 204
Basal zone, of endothelium, 265
pulp, 150
Basilar membrane, 367, 368f, 369f
Arteriovenous anastomoses, 125-126
Basophil(s), 65,72, 302
Artery(ies), 120-121, 121f, 122f
Basophilic, 2
arcuate, 224, 225f
Basophilic rubticyte, 72
bronchial, 166
Bile canaliculi, 203, 204f
elastic, 118, 120, 122f
Bile ducts, 203, 204f
interlobar, 224,225f
Binucleate cells, 292
interlobular, 224, 225f
Binucleate trophoblast cell, 285
muscular, 118, 119f, 120-121, 122f
Bird(s)
penicillar, 150
cloacal bursa of, 140, 140f
pulmonary, 165-166
digestive system of, 208-210, 209f, 210f
trabecular, of spleen, 149-150, 150f
female reproductive system of, 275-277, 276f
Artery of the white pulp, 149, 150f
integument of, 347-349, 348f, 349f
Articular cartilage, 48, 58, 59f, 60f
respiratory system of, 167-168, 168f
Ascending vasa recta, 225, 226f
Bitch(es)
A-spermatogonia, 237, 238f, 239f
cyclic changes in endomettium in, 272
Astrocyte(s), 98-99, 99f
cyclic changes of vaginal epithelium in, 274-275, 274f, 275f
fibrous, 98, 99f
placentation in, 294-296, 294f, 295f
 protoplasmic, 98, 99f
Bladder, urinary, 230-231, 231f
ATP. See Adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
Blastocyst(s), 279
Atresia, 261, 261f
Blood, 61-66, 62f-66f
cystic, 261, 261f
before and after sedimentation, 61-62, 62f
follicular, 261, 261f, 262f
basophils, 65
Index
379
composition of, 61-66, 62f-66f
Bone cells, 46-48, 47f
eosinophils, 6465, 64f
Bone lining cells, 47
erythrocytes, 62-63, 62f
Bone marrow, 66-74, 67f, 68f, 70f-74f, 138
functions of, 61
cells in, 66-74, 67f, 68f, 70f-74f
leukocytes, 63-66, 63f-66f
cellular compartments of, 67-68, 67f
lymphocytes, 66, 66f
function of, 67-68, 68f
monocytes, 65, 65f
granulopoiesis in, 70-72, 71f
neutrophils, 63-64, 63f
HSCs in, 69-70, 70f
 plasma, 61-62, 62f
lymphopoiesis of, 75
platelets, 66, 67f
microcirculation of, 68, 68f
Blood pressure, regulation of, kidneys in, 227, 227f
monocytopoiesis of, 72
Blood supply
red, 76
to liver, 203-205, 204f, 205f
structure of, 66-68, 67f, 68f
to small intestine, 199
thrombopoiesis of, 75, 75f
to testis, 244245
vascular compartments of, 67-68, 67f
Blood vascular system, 117
yellow,76
Blood vessels, 114115, 115f, 117129. See afso Ve(r); specifec typer,
Bone marrow smears, 76, 76f
e.g, Artery(ies)
Bone matrix, 48
arterioles, 122, 122f, 123f
Bony labyfinth, of internal ear, 366-367, 366f, 367f
arteriovenous anastomoses, 125-126
Bottchet's cells, 372
capillaties, 122-125, 123f127f
Bowman's capsule, 216f-218f, 217-218
cardiac, 131
Bowman's membrane, 352
general structural organization of, 118, 119f, 120f
Bowman's space, 216f, 217, 217f
of immune system, 141-142
Brachydont teeth, 177, 177f
of integument, 335-336
Bronchial arteries, 166
of lung, 165-166
Bronchial glands, 162
of lymph nodes, 146, 147f 
Bronchiolar exoctine cells, 162
microvasculature, 122-126, 122f-127f
Bronchiole(s), 16lf, 162, 162f
of ovary, 262
respiratory, 162-163, 163f, 164f
specialized, 128, 128f
terminal, 162-163, 163f, 164f
of spleen, 149-150, 150f
Bronchus(i), 161-162, 161f
structure-function relationships of, 1 17-118
avian,168,168f
of uterine tube, 265
of uterus, 266f, 267-268, 267f
exttapulmonary, 160, 161f
vasculat endothelium, 119-120, 121f
primary, 160
Bronchus-associated lymphatic tissue (BALT), 143
veins, 126-128, 128f
venules, 125, 127f
Brown adipose tissue, 43
Blood-air barrier, 165
Brunnet's glands, 197, 198f
Blood-brain barrier, 115
Brush cells, 155
Blood-CSF barrier, 115
B-spermatogonia, 237, 238f, 239f
Blood-nerve barrier, 105
Buccal glands, 173
Blood-testis barrier, 236
Buccal papillae, 173, 173f
Blood-thymus barrier, 142
Bud(s), periosteal, 51
Bulb, 342
Body stalk, 280
Bone(s), 46-58, 47f, 49f-57f
Bulbourethral glands, 251, 25 1f
Bulbous corpuscles, 108, 108f
cells of, 46-48, 47f
classification of, 50, 53f
Bulbous vestibuli, 270
compact, 48
Bursa, cloacal, of birds, 140, 140f
entoglossal, 208
fracture of, repair of, 57-58
C protein, 83
function of, chatacteristics of, 48-50, 49f5 3f
Ca-ATPase, 229
histologic preparation of, 48, 49f, 53f
Cadherin(s), 15
lamellar, 49f, 50
Calcitonin, 309
modeling of, 56, 56f
Call-Exner bodies, 258f, 259
osteogenesis, 50-58, 53f57f. See αafro Osteogenesis
Callus(i)
remodeling of, 56-57, 57f
external, 57
spongy,48
internal, 57
stfucture of
Calmodulin, 80
charactetistics of, 48-50, 49f-53f
Camera antetior bulbi, 350
macroscopic, 48, 50f-52f
Camera posterior bulbi, 350
microscopic, 49-50, 49f, 51f
Camera vitrea bulbi, 351
woven, 50, 53f
cAMP. See Cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Canaliculus(i)
adventitial, 75
bile, 203, 204f
amactine, 359
intracellular, 188
antigen-presenting, 136-137, 136f
lacrimal, 361
APUD, 24, 160, 309, 318
Cap phase, 238
atgentaffin, 189, 318
Capillary(ies), 118, 122-125, 123f-127f
argyrophilic, 189
aif, avian, 168
B, 135, 135f, 136f, 137
continuous, 123f125f, 124
effector, 135
fenestrated, 123f, 124, 125f
basal, 155, 156
peritubular capillary networks of, 224-225
binucleate, 292
glomerular, 215-216, 216f, 217f
bone, 46-48, 47f
lymph, 131-132, 131f, 132f
bohe lining, 47
sheathed, 150, 150f
in bone marrow, 66-74, 67f, 68f, 70f-74f
terminal, 150, 150f
Bottchet's, 372
Capillary beds, 123
brush, 155
Capitance vessels, 155
cartilage, 43-44, 44f
Capsule(s), 27
centroacinat, 207, 208f
of liver, 201-202, 202f
chemoreceptor, 176
splenic, 147-148
chief, 188, 188f, 310, 311f
Cardiac conduction fibers, 130
chromaffin, 315, 315f
Cardiac conduction system, 130-131
ciliated, 154
Cardiac glands, 187, 189f
Claudius', 372
Cardiac muscle, 86-90, 87f-90f
clear, 335
conttaction of, 89
columnar, undifferentiated, 196
fine structure of, 87-89, 88f90f
cohe bipolar, 359
hypertrophy of, 89-90
cytotoxic,T,135
light microscopic structure of, 86-87, 87f, 88f
datk, 335
myogenesis of, 89-90
Deitef's, 372
regeneration of, 89-90
dendritic. See Dendritic cells
T tubules of, 87, 88f
desctibed, 1, 17. Seealo pecific compoment of, eg, Nucleus(i)
Cardiac nodes, 89, 90f
basal, 20
Cardiac skeleton, 130
cell membrane, 24, 3f
Cardiac sphincter muscle, 185
cytoskeleton of, 10-12, 1lf, 12f
Cardiac valves, 129, 129f
cytosol in, 6
Cardiovascular system, 117-133
epithelial, nonciliated, 20
blood vessels of, 117129. See a/ro Blood vessels
goblet, 20, 21f
Carotid body, 128, 128f, 317
inclusions of, 12
Carotid sinus, 128-129
nucleus of, 46, 4f, 5f
Carpal glands, 338
organelles of, 6-10, 6f-9f
Cartier proteins, 228
organization of, 1, 2f
Cartilage, 43-46, 44f-46f
prokar yotic, 1
articulat, 48, 58, 59f, 60f
tissues ffom, 14-16, 15f, 16f
cells of, 43-44, 44f
DNES, 318
classification of, 4445, 44f
endocrine. See Endocrine cells
development of, 45-46
enterochromaffin, 189
elastic, 45, 45f
enteroendocrine, 189, 196, 198f, 318
hyaline, 44-45, 44f
ependymal cells, 99-100, 100f
nutrition of, 46
epithelial. See Epithelial cells
vomeronasal, 158
epithelioid, 35
zohes of, 58, 59f
perineural, 105
Cartilage canals, 53, 54f
tactile, 321-322, 324f
Cartilage cells, 43-44, 44f
exocrine, bronchiolar, 162
Cartilage matrix, 40f, 44
follicular, 257, 257f, 258f
Cartilaginous joints, 58, 58f
germ, primordial, 257
Caruncle(s), 267, 267f, 282, 289, 292f
giant, multinucleated, 35, 36f
Caruncular crypts, 282
glomus, 317
Catagen, 333, 334f
goblet, 24,154,160,196,197f
Cavernous stratum, 155, 157f
gtanular,226,227f
CDKs. See Cyelin-dependent kinases (CDKs)
acidophilic, 196, 198f
Cecum, of large intestine, 200
granule, 111
Cell(s)
gtanulosa, 258, 318
Index
381
hair. See Hair cells
trophoblast, binucleate, 285
hair matfix, 329, 330f
veiled, 137
Hensen's, 372
Cell body, 96
horizontal, 359
of neuron, 92-93, 92f, 93f
of immune system, 134-137, 135f, 136f See afro rpecific cellr and
Cell body cytoplasm, of neuron, 93f, 93-94
Immune system, cells of
Cell communication, 16
intetcalated, 223
Cell cycle, 13-14, 14f
internal thecal, 306
Cell division, 13-14, 14f
interstitial, 306, 319
Cell membrane, 1, 2-4, 3f
juxtaglomerular, 226, 227f
otganization of, 3, 3f
of kidney, 318
proteins associated with, 3, 3f
Kupffer, 204, 204f
size of, 2-3, 3f
Langerhans, 322-323, 325f
Cell nests, 45
Leydig, 306, 319
Cell sufface, modifications of, 12-13, 12f
of loose connective tissue, 37
Cell-mediated immune response, 135
M, 143, 144f
Cellular cementum, 178, 178f
macrolecithal, telolecithal, 275
Cement lines, 49f, 55
mast, 3435, 34f
Cementoalveolar (Sharpey's) fibers, 178
connective tissue, 34 35
mucosal, 34
Cementoblast(s), 178
memory, 135
Cementum, 178,178f
Merkel, 108, 321-322, 324f
Central canal, 49, 49f, 112, 114f
mesangial, extraglomerular, 226, 227f
Central channel, 125
mesenchymal, 32, 32f
Central gliocytes, 303, 306, 309
migratory, 160
Central nervous system (CNS)
mononuclear, 292
gliocytes of, 98-100, 99f, 100f
mucous neck, 188, 188f
tissue of, 109-112, 110f114f
Miller, 359
cerebellum, 111-112, 11lf-113f
myoepithelial, 29, 29f
cerebral cortex, 1l0-11l, 1l0f, 111f
heuroendoctine, 160
spinal cord, 112, 114f
NK, 135
Centriole(s), 10
olfactory, neurosensory, 156
Centroacinar cells, 207, 208f
osteoprogenitor, 47
Centromete(s), 13, 14f
oxyniticopeptic, 209, 209f
Cerebellar cortex, lll, 11lf
parafollicular, 307f, 309
Cerebellum, 111-112, 11lf-113f
patietal, 188, 188f
Cerebral cortex, 110-111, 110f, 111f
peripolar, 217, 218f
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), 115-116
peritubular, 235
Ceruminous glands, 336
phalangeal, of internal ear, 372, 374f
Cervix, 268-269, 269f
pigment,36-37,37f
histologic structure of, 268-269
of placenta, 295
CFU-GEMM. See Colony-forming unit-granulocyte, erythrocyte,
plasma, 36, 36f, 135
monocyte/macrophage, and megakaryocyte (CFU-GEMM)
principal, 223, 310, 311f
CFU-L. See Colony-forming unit-lymphoid (CFU-L)
Purkinje, 11l, 112f
CGP. See Circulating granulocyte pool (CGP)
radial glial, 359
Channel proteins, 228
reticular. See Reticular cells
Cheeks, 172-173, 173f
rod bipolar, 359
satellite, 82
Chemoreceptor(s), 108
Chemoreceptor (taste) cells, 176
Schwann, 100-101, 101f, 102f
Chesthut, 346, 347f
sectetory,154
sensory, of internal ear, 368f, 37l, 374f
Chief cells, 188, 188f, 310, 311f
Sertoli, 236-237, 236f, 237f, 319
Cholecystokinin, 207
SIF, 106
Chondroblast(s), 43, 44f
spermatogenic, 237
Chondrocyte(s), 43-44, 44f, 45
stromal, 136
Chondroitin-4-sulfate, 40, 40f
supporting, of internal ear, 368f, 372, 374f
Chordae tendineae, 129
sustentacular, 128, 156, 236237, 236f, 237f, 306, 319
Chorioallantoic placenta, 280, 280f
T, 135, 135f, 136f
Chorion
effector, 135, 136f
frondose, 281
T helper, 135
smooth, 281
theca, 258
Chorionic girdle, 289
internal, 318
Choriovitelline placenta, 280, 280f
382
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Choroid, 350, 351f, 353-355, 353f, 354f
Colon, of latge intestine, 200, 200f
basal complex of, 355
Colony-forming unit-granulocyte, erythrocyte,
choriocapillary layer of, 35 3f, 355
monocyte/macrophage, and megakaryocyte (CFU-GEMM), 69,
suprachoroid layet of, 353f, 354
70f
tapetum lucidum of, 353f, 354355, 354f
Colony-forming unit-lymphoid (CFU-L), 69
vasculat layer of, 35 3f, 354
Colony-stimulating factor (CSF), 70
Choroid plexus epithelium, 100, 115
Columnae rectales, 201
Chromaffin cells, 315, 315f
Columnar cell, undifferentiated, 196
Chromatid(s), 13, 14f
Communication
Chromatin(s), 4-5, 4f 
cell, 16
sex, 5, 5f
heuronal, 96-98
Chromatin fibers, 5
Complement system, 135
Chromatolysis, 93
Compound follicles, 331
Chromophobe(s), 302
Compound glands, 24, 24t, 25-27, 28f
Chtondroitin-6-sulfate, 40, 40f
Compound tubular glands, 24t, 26, 28f
Ciliary body, 350, 351f, 355-356, 355f
Compound tubuloacinar gland, 24t, 26, 28f
aqueous humor of, 356
Conceptus, 279
vascular layet of, 355-356
Conduction, saltatory, 103
Ciliary epithelium, 355, 355f
Conduction fibers, impulse, 89, 90f
Ciliary glands, 337, 337f
Cone(s), 359
Ciliary muscle, 356
Cone bipolar cells, 359
Ciliary processes, 35 1f, 355
Conical papillae, 174
Ciliated cells, 154
Conjunctiva, 361, 362f
Circulating granulocyte pool (CGP), 71
Conjunctival epithelium, 361
Circulation, in placenta, 284-285, 284f
Connecting and anchoting collagen, 38
Circulus arteriosus major, 356
Connecting segment, 219t, 220
Circumanal glands, 339-340, 340f
Connective tissue(s), 32-43
Cisterna(ae), terminal, 84
adult, 41-43, 42f
Cittic acid cycle, 10
cells of, 32-37, 32f-37f. See α/ro Connective tissue cells
Clathrin,7
dense, 41-43, 42f
Claudin, 15
embryonic, 41, 41f
Claudius' cells, 372
fibers of, 37-40, 38f-40f. See alro Connective tissue fibers
Claw, 346,346f
interstitial, 164
Claw fold, 346
ifregular, dense, 42, 42f
Claw plate, 346
loose, 41, 42f
Clear cells, 335
Cleavage furrow, 13
cells of, 37
Cleft(s), synaptic, 93,97
mucous, 41, 41f
Clitoris, 270
regular, dense, 42-43, 42f
reticular, 39f, 43
Cloaca, of birds, 277
Cloacal bursa, of birds, 140, 140f
Connective tissue cells, 32-37, 32f-37f
"Closed" theory, 150, 150f
adipocytes, 33-34, 33f, 34f
Closing cone, 57, 57f
fibroblasts, 32-33, 33f
CNS. See Central nervous system (CNS)
fibrocytes, 32, 33f
Coated pits, 8, 8f
macrophages, 35-36, 35f, 36f
Cochlear duct, of internal ear, 366f, 367, 368f, 369f
mesenchymal, 32, 32f
Cochlear window, 367
pericytes, 34
Collagen(s)
pigment cells, 36-37, 37f
anchoring, 38
plasma cells, 36, 36f
connecting, 38
reticular cells, 33, 33f
FACIT,37
Connective tissue fibers, 37-40, 38f40f
fibril-forming, 37, 38f
collagen fibers, 37-38, 38f
sheet-forming,37
elastic fibers, 39, 39f, 40f
ttansmembrane, 38
reticular fibers, 38-39, 39f
Collagen fibers, 37-38, 38f
Connective tissue mast cell (MCrc), 34-35
Collagen fibtils, 37, 38f
Connexon(s), 16
Collagenous ligaments, 42
Constitutive secretion, 8
Collagehous tendons, 38f, 42
Continuous capillaties, 123f-125f, 124
Collateral branches, 94
Contraction
Collecting ducts, 132, 132f, 219t, 222-224, 223f-225f
of cardiac muscle, 89
renal, 229
of skeletal muscle, 84, 86
Collecting venules, 125, 127f
of smooth muscle, 80
Index
Convoluted semniferous tubules, 235-243, 236f-242f
Cotyledon(s), 281f, 282, 289, 292f
lamina propria of, 235-236
Cotyledonary placenta, 282
meiosis of, 237-238
Countercurrent system, 228
spermatocytogenesis of, 237, 238f, 239f
Cow(s)
spermatogenic cells of, 237
cyclic changes in endometrium in, 272, 273f
spermatozoa of, 239-240, 241f
cyclic changes of vaginal epithelium in, 273-274
spermiogenesis of, 238-239, 240f
placentation in, 289, 292-293, 292f, 293f
sustentacular cells of, 236-237236f, 237f
Cranial dura mater, 1l3, 114f
Corium, 327-328, 327f, 343
Creatine phosphokinase, 83
coronaty, 343-344
Crenated RBCs, 63
Corhea, 350, 351-353, 351f, 352f
CR H. See Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CR H)
anterior epithelium of, 351, 352f
Crista ampullaris, of internal ear, 368-369, 371f373f
Descemet's membrane of, 352-353, 352f
Cristae, 9, 9f
posterior epithelium of, 352f, 353
Crop,208
posterior limiting lamina of, 352-353, 352f
Crown,177
stroma of, 352, 352f
Crypt(s), caruncular, 282
subepithelial basement membrane of, 351-352, 352f
Crypts of Lieberkihn, 195, 195f, 196
substantia propria of, 352, 352f
CSF. See Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF); Colony-stimulating factor (CSF)
Corneal endothelium, 352f, 353
Cumulus oophorus, 259, 259f
Corneoscleral junction, 353
Cupula, 369
Corneoscleral trabecular meshwork, 358
Cutaneous plexus, 335
Corona ciliatis, 355
Cuticular plate, 369
Corona tadiata, 259, 259f
Cutting cone, 56, 57f
Coronary cotium, 343-344
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), 80
Corpora atenacea, 306
Cyclin(s), 13
Corpora cavernosa penis, 252, 25 3f
Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs), 13
Corpora lutea, 257, 257f
Cystic atresia, 261, 261f
Corpota nigra, 357
Cytocrine mode of secretion, 29
Corpus albicans, 262
Cytokeratin, 17
Corpus hemorthagicum, 261
Cytokeratin filaments, 22
Corpus luteum, 261-262, 263f, 264f, 318, 319
Cytokinases, of cell cycle, 13, 14f
Corpus luteum cyclicum, 319
Cytokine(s), 135
Corpus luteum graviditatis, 319
of hematopoiesis, 69-70, 70f
Corpus luteum of preghancy, 319
Cytology, 1-16
Corpuscle(s)
Cytoplasm, 1
bulbous, 108, 108f
cell body, of neuron, 93f, 93-94
Hassall's, 140, 142f
Cytoskeleton, 10-12, 1lf, 12f
lamellar, 108, 108f
intermediate filaments in, 12
Pacini's, 208
microfilaments in, 1l-12, 12f
renal, 214-218, 216f-218f
microtubules in, 10-1l, 11f 
salivary, 142-143, 143f
Cytosol, 1, 6
tactile
Cytotoxic cells, T, 135
encapsulated, 108, 108f
Cytotrophoblast(s), 283f, 285
honencapsulated, 108, 108f
thymic, 140, 142f
Dark cells, 335
Cortex, 140, 141f, 361
Dark zones, 137, 138f
adrenal, outer cortex of, 311
DCT. See Distal convoluted tubule (DCT)
of kidney, 213, 214f, 215f
Deciduate placenta, 282
of lymph nodes, 145, 145f
Deitet's cells, 372
of ovaries, 257-262, 258f264f
Demilune(s), serous, 28f, 29
of tubule, 343, 344f
Dendrite(s), 93-94, 93f, 94f
Cortical labytinth, 213, 214f
Dendritic bulb, 156
Cortical remodeling units, 56, 57f
Dendritic cells, 136-137, 136f
Cortical sinuses, 145, 145f
follicular, 136, 137
Corticosterone, 311,313
integrating, 136f, 137
Corticotroph(s), 302
interdigitating, 136f, 137
Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), 306
interstitial, 136f, 137
Corti's tunnel, 372
 Dendritic spines, 94, 94f
Cortisol, 311
Dendritic zone, 96
Cortisone, 31l
Dense bodies, of smooth muscle, 80, 81f
Costamere(s), 84
Dense connective tissue, 41-43, 42f
384
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Dense irregulat connective tissue, 42, 42f
Dohle bodies, 64
Dense regular connective tissue, 42-43, 42f
Dorsal funiculus, 112, 114f
Dense tubular system (DTS), 66
 Dorsal gray column, 112
Dental lamina, 179, 179f
Dorsal median septum, 112, 114f
Dental papilla, 180, 180f
DTS. See Dense tubular system (DTS)
Dental pulp, 179
Duct(s)
Dental sac, 180f, 181
alveolar, 161f, 163, 163f, 164f
Denticulate ligament, 114, 114f
bile, 203, 204f
Dentin, 178
cochlear, of internal ear, 366f, 367, 368f, 369f
interglobular, 178, 179f
collecting, 132, 132f, 219t, 222-224, 223f-225f
intertubular, 178
tenal, 229
peritubular, 178
excretory, 26-27,28f
Dentinal tubules, 178
intercalated, 26, 28f, 207, 208f
Dermal laminae, secondary, 344, 345f
interlobular, 26, 28f, 208, 209f
 Dermal papilla, 328
intralobular, 26, 28f, 208, 209f
of hair follicle, 329, 330f
lobar, 26, 28f
Dermal root sheath, of hait follicle, 329, 329f, 330f
of mammary gland, 342
Dermatan sulfate, 40
hasolactimal, 361
Dermis, 327-328, 327f
pancreatic, 208, 209f
Descemet's membrane, 352-353, 352f
accessory, 208, 209f
Descending vasa recta, 225, 226f
sectetory, 26, 28f
Desmin filaments, 84
semicircular, of internal ear, 365f, 366f, 367
Diakinesis, 238
sttiated, 26, 28f
Diaphragm, slit, 217, 217f
utriculosaccular, 367
Diaphysis, 48, 50f
vomeronasal, 157-158, 158f
Diestrus, 271, 272, 272f
Diffuse lymphatic tissues, 137
Ductuli efferentes, 245, 245f
Ductus deferens, 247-248, 247f, 248f
 Diffuse neuroendocrine system (DNES), 189
Ductus epididymidis, 245-247, 246f
 Diffuse heuroendocrine system (DNES) cells, 318
Duodenum, 194, 195f
Diffuse placenta, 28 1-282
Dura mater, 113, 114f
Digestive system, 170-211
cranial, 113, 114f
avian, 208-210, 209f, 210f
bile canaliculi, 203, 204f
spinal, 113
Dural venous sinuses, 113
esophagus, 184-186, 184t, 185f
gallbladder, 206, 206f
Dyhein, 13
Dystrophin, 84
large intestine, 199-201, 199f-201f
liver, 201-206, 202f-207f
Ear(s), 364-376
oral cavity, 172-181, 172f-181f
pancreas, 206-208,207f-209f
components of, 364
external, 336,336f, 364
pharynx, 184
salivary glands, 181-183,182f-184f
internal, 366-374, 366f-375f
small intestine, 194 199, 195f199f
auditory apparatus of, 370-374, 374f, 375f
stomach, 186-194, 186f-194f
auditory mechanism of, 372-374, 375f
tubular organs, 171-172, 171f
bony labyrinth of, 366-367, 366f, 367f
 Digestive tract, cross sections through portions of, 171f
cochleat duct of, 366f, 367, 368f, 369f
Digital cushion, 345
ctista ampullaris of, 368-369, 371f373f
Digital organs, 342-347, 343f-347f
hair cells of, 371, 374f
Digital pads, 346, 346f, 347f
macula sacculi of, 369-370, 373f, 374f
Diiodotyrosine, 308-309
macula utriculi of, 369-370, 373f, 374f
Dilatot muscle, 356f, 357
membranous labyrinth of, 367-368, 367f
 Diplotene phase, 238
phalangeal cells of, 372, 374f
Discoid placenta, 281f, 282
saccule of, 366f, 367
Disk(s), intercalated, 87, 88f
semicircular ducts of, 365f, 366f, 367
Disse, perisinusoidal space of, 204
sensory cells of, 368f, 371, 374f
Distal convoluted tubule (DCT), 219t, 220f, 222, 224f, 229
spiral ganglion of, 368f, 372
 Distal smallintestine, aggregated lymphatic nodules in, 139-140,
sttia vasculatis of, 367-368, 368f-370f
139f
supporting cells of, 368f, 372, 374f
Diverticulum(a), suburethral, 23 1
tectorial membrane of, 368f, 369f, 372
Diverticulum ventriculi, 187, 187f
utricle of, 366f, 367
DNES. Se Diffuse heuroendocrine system (DNES)
vestibular apparatus of, 368-370, 371f374f
DNES cells. See Diffuse heuroendocrine system (DNES) cells
vestibular mechanism of, 370
Index
385
middle, 364-365, 365f
pars tuberalis of, 301f, 303, 304f
auditory ossicles of, 364-365, 365f
thyroid gland, 307-309, 307f-310f
auditory tube of, 365, 365f
types of, 298
muscles of, 364-365, 365f
Endocrine signaling, 16
spiral otgan of, 368f, 369f, 370-372, 374f
Endocrine system, 298-319. See alro rpecifec ogan and Endocrine
tympanic cavity of, 364, 365f
otgans
tympanic membrane of, 364, 365f
adenohypophysis, 300-303, 301f-304f
sound transmission in, schematic diagram of events of, 375f
described, 298
Early endosomes, 8
endoctine cells, 316-319, 316f, 317f
Eccrine mode of secretion, 29, 29f
endocrine otgans, 299-316. See αlro Endocrine ofgans
ECM. See Extracellular matrix (ECM)
endocrine tissues, 316-319, 316f, 317f
Ectoderm, 18, 19f, 279
neurohypophysis, 301f, 303-306, 304f, 305f
Edema, endomettial, 267
Endocrine tissues, 298-299, 316-319, 316f, 317f
Effector B cells, 135
Endocytosis, 8, 8f
Effector T cells, 135, 136f
Endoderm, 279, 280f
Efferent arterioles, 224, 225f
Endogenous agents, 135
Efferent axons, 104
Endolymphatic sac, 366f, 367
Efferent neurons, 106-108, 107f
Endometrial cups, 267, 289, 290f
Elastic arteries, 118
Endometrial edema, 267
Elastic cartilage, 45, 45f
Endomettium, 265-267, 266f-268f
Elastic fibers, 39, 39f, 40f
cyclic changes of, 271-273, 272f, 273f
Elastic ligaments, 39f, 43
degenerative phase of, 272-273
Elastic membrane, external, 1l8, 119f
regenerative phase of, 272
Elastin, 39
Endomitosis, 75
Elaunin, 39
Endomysium, 83
 Electron-dense granules, 66, 67f
Endoneutium, 105
Eleidin, 22
Endosome(s)
Ellipsoid, 150, 150f, 359
eafly, 8
Embryo, nourishment of, 281f, 282, 284, 284f
late, 8
Embryology, 279-280, 280f
Endosteum, 50
Embryonic connective tissues, 41, 41f
Endotendineum,38f, 42
Embryotroph, 282
Endothelial venules, high, 125, 135
EMH. See Extramedullary hematopoiesis (EMH)
Endotheliochotial placenta, 282
Enamel
Endothelium(a), 118
interrod, 177, 177f
corheal, 352f, 353
tooth, 177-178,178f
of uterus, 265-267, 266f-268f
Enamel crests, 179
vascular, 119-120,121f
Enamel epithelium, 180, 180f
Enteroceptor(s), 108
outer, 180, 180f
Enamel organ, 180, 180f
Enterochromaffin cells, 189
Enteroendocrine cells, 189, 196, 198f, 318
Enamel plicae, 179
Enamel prisms, 177
Entoglossal bone, 208
Encapsulated tactile corpuscles, 108, 108f
Eosinophil(s), 64-65, 64f
End feet, 98
Ependymal cells, 99-100, 100f
Endocardium, 129, 129f
Epicardium, 130
Endochondral ossification, 51-53, 53f
Epidermal laminae
primary center of, 51-52, 53f
primary, 344, 345f
secondary centers of, 53, 54f
secondary, 344, 345f
Endocrine cellos, of heart, 318
Epidermal pegs, 328
Endocrine cells, 189, 299, 316-319, 316f, 317f
Epidermal-dermal junction, 326-327, 327f
granular,128
Epidermis, 321-327, 322f327f
interstitial, 234-235, 235f, 261, 262f, 318
described, 321, 323f
of ovary, 318-319
keratinization of, 326
of placenta, 319
keratinocytes of, 321
of testis, 319
Langerhans cells of, 322-323, 325f
Endocrine glands, 24, 24t
layers of, 323-325, 325f, 326f
Endocrine otgans, 299-316. See afro pecific rgan and Endocrine
melanocytes of, 321, 322f, 324f
system
nonkeratinocytes of, 321-323, 324f
epiphysis cerebri, 306-307, 307f
tactile epithelioid cells of, 321-322, 324f
hypothalamus, 299-300, 299f, 300t
Epididymis, 245-247, 245f, 246f
neurohypophysis, 301f, 303-306, 304f, 305f
ductuli efferentes, 245, 245f
pars intermedia of, 302-303, 305f
ductus epididymidis, 245-247, 246f
386
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Epikeras, 347
Erythrocyte(s), 62-63, 62f
Epimysium, 83,84f
size of, 62, 63
Epinephrine, 315, 315f
Erythroid precursors, 72-73, 72f
Epineutium, 105
Erythropoiesis, 72-73, 72f
Epiphysis(es), 48, 50f
Erythropoietin, 72
Epiphysis cerebri (pineal gland), 306-307, 307f
Esophagus, 184-186, 184t, 185f
Epitendineum, 42
characteristics of, 184, 184t
Epithelial cells
Esophagus-stomach junction, 185-186, 185f
alveolar
Estrogen(s), 306, 318
granular, 164, 166f
in estrous cycle, 270
squamous, 164, 164f
Estrous cycle, 270-275, 272f-275f
follicular, 307f, 308, 308f, 318
cyclic changes of endometrium in, 271-273, 272f, 273f
mucous, 154
estrogens in, 270
nonciliated, 20
gonadotropins in, 270
phases of, 271
serous, 155
Epithelial reticular cells, 136, 140, 141f
progesterone in, 270
Epithelial sheath of Hertwig, 180-181
Estrus, 271, 272, 272f, 274, 274f
Epithelial tissue, classification of, 18, 19f
Eukaryotic organisms, 1
Epitheliochorial placenta, 282
Eumelanin, 321
Epithelioid cells, 35
Ewe(s), placentation in, 293-294, 293f
perineural, 105
Excretory ducts, 26-27, 28f
tactile, 321-322, 324f
Exocoelom, 279, 280f
Epithelium(a), 17-30
Exocrine cells, bronchiolar, 162
anterior, of cornea, 351, 352f
Exocrine glands, 24, 24t
characteristics of, 17-18, 18t,19f
simple, 24, 24t, 25f, 26f
choroid plexus, 100, 115
Exocytosis, 7
Exogenous agents, 135
ciliary, 355, 355f
External callus, 57
columnar
External ear, 336,336f, 364
pseudostratified, 19f-21f, 20
External elastic membrane, 118, 119f
simple, 19, 19f21f
External epithelial root sheath, of hair follicle, 329, 329f, 330f
stratified, 20f, 23, 23f
External limiting membrane, 359
conjunctival, 361
Exteroceptor(s), 108
cuboidal
Extracellular matrix (ECM), 1
simple, 19, 19f-21f
Extraepithelial glands, 24, 24t
stratified, 20f, 23, 23f
Extraglomerular mesangial cells, 226, 227f
enamel, 180, 180f
Extramedullary hematopoiesis (EMH), 69
outer,180,180f
Extrapulmonary bronchi, 160, 161f
glandular, 23-29, 24t, 25f-29f. See alro Gland(s)
Eye(s),350-363
iridial, 356f, 357
accessory organs of, 361, 362f
lens, 360, 360f
choroid of, 351f, 353-355, 353f, 354f
olfactory, 156, 157f
ciliary body of, 351f, 355-356, 355f
parietal, 217-218
conjunctiva of, 361, 362f
posterior, of cornea, 352f, 353
corhea of, 351-353, 351f, 352f
pseudostratified, 19-22, 19f-22f
corheoscleral junction of, 353
respiratory, 154, 155f, 156f
eyelids of, 361
retinal pigment, 358f, 359
fibrous tunic of, 351-353, 352f
sensoty, 23
itidocorneal angle of, 357-358, 357f
simple, 18
iris of, 351f, 356-357, 356f
spermatogenic, 235
lacrimal appararus of, 361, 362f
snouenbs
lens of, 360, 360f
simple, 18-19, 19f-21f
heuroepithelial tunic of, 351f, 358-360, 358f
stratified, 19f, 20f, 22-23, 22f
reffactive media of, 360-361, 360f, 361f
keratinized, 22-23,22f
sclera of, 351, 351f
nonkeratinized, 22-23, 22f
species variations, 361, 363
structure of, microscopic, 18-23, 19f-23f
third eyelid of, 361, 362f
surface, 18-23, 19f-23f
tunics of, 350-360
transitional, 19f, 20-22, 20f, 22f
vascular tunic of, 353-358, 353f-357f
vaginal, cyclic changes of, 273-275, 274f, 275f
vitreous body of, 35 1f, 360-361
Equine hoof, 342-345, 343f345f
zonular fibers of, 360, 360f
Eretion, penile, 254255
Eyelid(s), 336-337, 336f, 337f, 361
Ergot,346,347f
third, 361, 362f
Index
387
FACIT collagens, 37
Filopodia, 11
Fascia adherens, 88, 90f
Filtration slits, 217, 217f
Fascicle(s), nerve, 105, 105f
Fimbriae, 265
 Fast muscle fibers, 86
Fissure(s), ventral median, 112, 114f
Fenestrated capillaries, 123f, 124, 125f
Fluid(s), syhovial, 59
peritubular capillary networks of, 24225
Focal adhesions, 16
 Fetal membranes, diagram of, 280f
Folded placenta, 282
 Fetal tissues, three-dimensional structure of intefface between fetal 
Foliate papillae, 175, 175f, 176f
tissues and, in placentation, 28 1f, 282
Follicle(s)
 Fetal-maternal anchoring, fate of maternal tissues at birth due to,
Graafian, 257f, 258-260, 259f, 260f
281f, 282
hair, 328-333, 330f334f. See α/ro Hait follicles
 Fetal-maternal interhemal barrier, tissue layers of, in placentation,
mature, 258, 260f
282, 283f
ovatian, development of, 257-260, 258f-260f
Fiber(s)
primary, 257f, 258, 258f
afferent, 104
primordial, 257, 258f
argentaffin, 39, 39f
secondary, 257f, 258, 258f
argyrophilic, 39, 39f
tertiary, 257f, 258-260, 259f, 260f
cardiac conduction, 130
thyroid, 308, 308f
cementoalveolar, 178
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), 302, 306
chromatin, 5
Follicular atresia, 261, 261f, 262f
collagen, 37-38, 38f
Follicular cells, 257, 257f, 258f
conduction, impulse, 89, 90f
Follicular dendritic cells, 136f, 137
connective tissue, 37-40, 38f40f. See α/ro Connective tissue fibers
Follicular epithelial cells, 306, 307f, 308, 308f, 318
elastic, 39, 39f, 40f
Folliculus(i), liquor, 258, 260f
hair, 328
Foot processes, 217
lens, 360, 360f
Fracture(s), repair of, 57-58
hetve, 104
Free nerve endings, 108, 108f
nuclear bag, 109, 109f
Ftog,345
nuclear chain, 109, 109f
Frondose chotion, 281
perforating, 42, 50, 51f
FSH. See Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
Purkinje, 130
Functional zone, of endothelium, 265
reticular, 27, 38-39, 39f
Fundic gland region, of stomach, 187-189
Sharpey's, 42, 50, 51f, 178
Fundus, 187
skeletal muscle, classification of, 86
Fungiform papillae, 174, 175f
somatic, 104
Funiculus
visceral, 104
lateral, 112, 114f
zonular, 360, 360f
ventral, 112, 114f
of eyes, 360, 360f
 Fusimotor motor neuron, 106
Fibril(s)
collagen, 37, 38f
G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR), 305
glial, 98
GAGs, 58, 59
Fibril-forming collagen, 37, 38f
Gallbladder, 206, 206f
Fibrillin, 39
GALT. Se Gut-associated lymphatic tissue (GALT)
Fibroblast(s), 32-33, 33f
Ganglion(a), 100f, 106
Fibrocartilage, 45, 46f
autonomic, 10lf, 106
Fibrocyte(s), 32, 33f
sensory, 100f, 106
Fibronectin, 39
spiral, of internal ear, 368f, 372
 Fibrous adhesive proteins, 39-40
Ganglionic gliocytes, 100, 101f, 102f
Fibrous asttocytes, 98, 99f
Gap junctions, 16
Fibrous joints, 58
Gas exchange area of lung, 162-165, 163f-167f
 Fibrous pericardium, 130
GBM. See Glomerular basement membrane (GBM)
Fibrous perineurium, 105
Germ cells, primordial, 257
Fibrous fings, cardiac, 130, 130f
GH. See Growth hormone (GH)
Fibrous ttiangles, cardiac, 130, 130f
GHRH. See Growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH)
Fight or flight mechanism, 316
Giant cells, multinucleated, 35, 36f
Filament(s)
Gizzard, 210, 210f
cytoketatin, 22
Gland(s), 23-29, 24t, 25f-29f
desmin, 84
accessory, 248-251, 249f-251f
glial, 98
acinat
intermediate, in cytoskeleton, 12
branched, simple, 2425, 24t, 25f
Filiform papillae, 174, 174f, 175f
simple, 24, 24t, 25f, 27f
388
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Gland(s) (continued)
uropygial, 347, 348f
adrenal, 311-316, 312f-315f
vesicular, 248-249, 249f
alveolar
vestibular
branched, simple, 24-25, 24t, 25f
major,270
simple, 24, 24t, 25f, 27f
minor, 270
anal, 201, 339
vomeronasal,158
of anal sac, 339, 340f
Glandular epithelium, 23-29, 24t, 25f-29f
bronchial, 162
Glans penis, 253, 254f
Brunner's, 197, 198f
Glassy membrane, 261, 261f
buccal, 173
Glial fibrillar acidic protein, 12
bulbourethral, 251, 25 1f
Glial fibrils, 98
cardiac, 187, 189f
Glial filaments, 98
carpal, 338
Glial-limiting membrane, 98
cetuminous, 336
Gliocyte(s)
ciliary, 337, 337f
central, 303, 306, 309
circumanal, 339-340, 340f
CNS, 98-100, 99f, 100f
classification of, 2429, 24t, 25f29f
ganglionic, 100,101f,102f
compound, 24, 24t, 25-27, 28f
PNS, 100-101, 100f-102f
endocrine, 24, 24t
Globule leukocytes, 37, 160, 196
exocrine, 24, 24t
Glomerular basement membrane (GBM), 216
extraepithelial, 24, 24t
Glomerular capillaries, 215-216, 216f, 217f
gustatory, 175, 175f, 183
Glomerular capillary tuft, 215, 216f
Harderian, 361
Glomerular capsule, 216f-218f, 217-218
intestinal, 195, 195f, 196
Glomerulus(i), 112, 215
submucosal, 189
Glomus, 317
intraepithelial, 24, 24t
Glomus cells, 317
labial, 172
Glucagon, 316, 316f
lacrimal, 361, 362f
Glucocorticoid(s), 311
lingual, 183
Glycogen deposits, 12
mammary, 340-342, 341f
Glycosaminoglycan(s), 40
morphologic characteristics of, 24-27, 24t, 25f-28f
GnRH. See Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)
mucous, 27, 28f
Goat(s), placentation in, 293-294, 293f
multicellular, 24, 24t
Goblet cells, 20, 21f, 24, 154, 160, 196, 197f
olfactory, 156-157
Golgi complex, 259
palatine, 173, 174
in vesicular transport, 7-9, 7f-9f
parathytoid, 309-311, 311f
Golgi phase, 238
pineal, 306-307, 307f
Gonadotroph(s), 302
pituitaty, 300-306, 301f-305f
Gonadotropin(s), in estrous cycle, 270
proventricular,209, 209f
pyloric, 189, 190f
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), 306
GPCR. See G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR)
salivary, 181-183, 182f184f. See α/ro Salivary glands
sebaceous, 333-334, 334f
Graafian follicles, 257f, 258-260, 259f, 260f
setous, 27, 28f
Granulae itidica, 357
shell, 277
Granular alveolar epithelial cells, 164, 166f
simple, 24-25, 24t, 25f-27f
Granular cells, 226, 227f
skin,333-335,334f, 335f
Granular endocrine cells, 128
sperm-host, 277
Granular epithelial layer, of hair follicle, 329, 329f, 330f
submucosal, 172, 197, 198f
Granule(s)
supracaudal, 340, 341f
%, 66
sweat, 334335, 335f
atrial, 130
tarsal, 337, 337f
electron-dense, 66, 67f
tracheal, 160
iridial, 357
tubular
keratohyalin, 22,23f,324
branched, simple, 24, 24t, 25f, 27f
lamellar, 22, 23,323, 324
coiled, simple, 24, 24t, 25f, 26f
lipofusion, 93
compound, 24t, 26,28f
mattix, 45
straight, simple, 24, 24t, 25f, 26f
membrane-coating, 23
tubuloacinat
primary, 63, 63f, 64
compound, 24t, 26, 28f
secondary, 63, 63f, 64
simple, 24t, 25
secretory, 7, 8f
tubuloalveolar, simple, 24t, 25
zymogen, 27, 181
unicellular, 24, 24t
(-Granule(s), 66
Index
Granule cells, 111
Hematoma(s)
Granulocyte(s)
marginal, 294,295f
basophilic, 71-72
placental, 284
eosinophilic, 71-72
Hematopoiesis, 67, 69-70, 70f
Granulopoiesis, 70-72, 71f
cytokines of, 69-70, 70f
mast cells in, 72
extramedullary, 69
neutrophilic precursors to, 71
granulocytes in,71-72
Granulosa cells, 258, 318
regulation of, 69-70, 70f
Ground substance, 40-41, 40f
Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), 69-70, 70f
Growth
in bone marrow, 69-70, 70f
appositional, 46
Hemidesmosome(s), 15-16, 15f
interstitial, 46
Hemochotial placenta, 282
Growth hormone (GH), 305
Hemoglobin, 62
Growth hotmone-releasing hormone (GHRH), 305
Hemosiderin, 12
Guard hair, 328f, 331
Hemotroph, 282
Gustatory glands, 175, 175f, 183
Hensen's cell, 372
Gut-associated lymphatic tissue (GALT), 143, 144f
Heparan sulfate, 40
Guttural pouch, 365
Hepatin, 34, 40
Hepatic lobules, 205, 205f
Hepatic sinusoids, 204, 205f
H band, 83
Hair,328,328f
Hepatic veins, 205
Hepatoid, defined, 340
primary, 328f, 331
secondaty, 331
Heterophil(s), 63
High endothelial venules, 125, 135
Hair cells
Hilus, 143, 145f
inner, of internal ear, 371
Hippomane(s), 289
outer, of internal ear, 37l, 374f
Histamine, 34
type I, 368
Histiocyte(s), 35
type I1, 369
Histology, 1
Hair cycle, 332-333, 335f
Histotroph, 282
Hait follicle(s), 328-333, 330f-334f
H,K-ATPase, 229
compound, 331
Holangiotic pattern, 359
diffetences among species, 331-332, 331f, 332f
Holoctine mode of sectetion, 29, 29f
fotmation of, 328-329
Homeostasis, defined, 298
primary, 328f, 330
Hoof(s)
secondary, 331
equine, 342-345, 343f-345f
simple, 331
ruminant, 345-346, 345f
single, 331
swine, 345-346, 345f
sinus, 332, 333f
wall of, 343-345, 343f-345f
stfuctures of, 328-330, 330f, 331f
Horizontal cells, 359
tactile, 332, 333f
Hormone(s)
types of, 328f, 330-332, 332f, 333f
adrenocorticotropic, 306
Hair follicle terminals, 108
antiparamesonephtic, 236
Hair mattix cells, 329, 330f
follicle-stimulating, 302
Hard palate, 173,173f
gtowth,305
Harderian gland, 361
β-lipotropin, 302
Hassall's corpuscles, 140, 142f
of ovary, 270-271
H-ATPase, 229
releasing, 305
Haversian canal, 49, 49f
thyroid-stimulating, 302, 306
Haversian systems, 49, 49f
Horn(s), 112, 347
Heart, 129-131, 129f, 130f. See aiso wnder Cardiac
Horny tubules, 343, 344f
blood vessels of, 131
Howell- Jolly bodies, 62
collecting ducts of, 132, 132f
HSCs. See Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs)
endocardium of, 129, 129f
Humoral immune response, 135
endoctine cells of, 318
Hyaline cartilage, 44 45, 44f
epicardium of, 130
Hyaloid membrane, 361
lymph capillaries, 131-132, 131f, 132f
Hyaluronan, 40, 40f
myocardium of, 129-130, 130f
Hypertrophy
 pericardium of, 130
of cardiac muscle, 89-90
Heel, 342-343
of skeletal muscle, 86
Helicotrema, 366f, 367
of smooth muscle, 80
Hemal nodes, 15l, 151f
zone of, 54
065
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Hypodermis, 328, 328f
circumanal glands, 339-340, 340f
Hypophyseal cavity, 301, 301f
claw, 346, 346f
Hypophysis cerebri (pituitary gland), 300-306, 301f-305f
digital otgans, 342-347, 343f-347f
Hypothalamo-adenohypophyseal axis, 305-306
digital pads, 346, 346f, 347f
Hypothalamo-hypophyseal portal system, 305
equine hoof, 342-345, 343f-345f
Hypothalamo-neurohypophyseal tract, 301f, 303-305, 304f, 305f
ergot, 346, 347f
Hypothalamus, 299-300, 299f, 300t
external ear, 336, 336f
Hypsodont teeth, 177, 177f
eyelids, 336-337, 336f, 337f
hair, 328, 328f
I band, 82
horns, 347
Ileal Peyert's patch, 139-140, 139f
infraorbital sinus, 337
Ileum,194
inguinal sinus, 339
ILs. See Interleukin(s) (ILs)
interdigital sinus, 338
Immune response
lymph vessels of, 335-336
cell-mediated, 135
mammary gland, 340-342, 341f
humoral, 135
mental otgan, 338
Immune system, 134-152
herves of, 335-336
BALT, 143
nose, 337-338, 338f
blood vessels of, 141-142, 146, 147f
ruminant hoofs, 345-346, 345f
bone matrow, 138
sctotum, 339
cells of, 134137, 135f, 136f
skin glands, 333-335, 334f, 335f
antigen-presenting cells, 136-137, 136f
special sructures of, 336342, 336f341f
dendritic cells, 136-137, 136f
submental otgan, 338
lymphocytes, 135-136, 135f, 136f
supracaudal gland, 340, 341f
otganization of, to form lymphatic tissues and organs, 137, 138f
swine hoofs, 345-346, 345f
stromal cells, 136
Interalveolar septa, 164, 164f
cloacal bursa of birds, 140, 140f
Interatrial septa, avian, 168, 168f
cortex, 140, 141f, 145, 145f
Intercalated cells, 223
GALT, 143,144f
Intercalated disks, 87, 88f
hemal nodes, 151, 151f
Intercalated ducts, 26, 28f, 181, 207, 208f
lymph vessels of, 141-142, 143, 145, 145f
Intercellular junctions, 15-16, 15f, 16f
lymphatic organs of
Interdigital sinus, 338
primary, 137-142, 139f-142f
Interdigitating dendritic cells, 136f, 137
secondary, 142-151, 154f151f
 Interferon-gamma, 70
MALT, 142-143, 143f, 144f
Interfollicular muscle, 330, 331f
medulla, 140-141, 142f, 145f, 146, 146f
Interglobular dentin, 178, 179f
"milk spots," 151
Interleukin(s) (ILs), 70
nerves of, 141-142, 146, 147f
Interlobar arteries, 224, 225f
sinuses, 143, 145, 145f
Interlobular arteries, 224, 225f
spleen, 147-151, 148f-150f
Interlobular ducts, 26, 28f, 181, 208, 209f
thymus, 140-142, 141f, 142f
Interlobular hepatic arteriole, 202f, 204
tonsils, 142-143, 143f
Interlobular portal venule, 202f, 204
Impulse conduction fibers, 89, 90f
Interlobular septa, 162
Infraorbital sinus, 337
Intermediate filaments, of smooth muscle, 80
Infundibulum(a), 179, 262, 264, 265f, 301, 301f
Intermembrane space, 9, 9f
of birds, 275, 276f, 277
Internal callus, 57
Inguinal sinus, 339
Internal ear. See Ear(s), internal
Inhibin, 306, 318
Internal elastic membrane, 118, 119f
Inner cell mass, 279
Internal epithelial root sheath, of hair follicle, 329, 329f, 330f
Inner hair cells, of internal ear, 371
Internal parathyroids, 309-310, 311f
Inner medulla, 213
Internal theca cells, 306, 318
Innet mesaxon, 101
 Interneuronal chemical synapses, 97
 Inotropic membrane receptors, 97
Internode, 103
Integral proteins, in cell membrane, 3, 3f
Interrod enamel, 177, 177f
Integrating dendritic cells, 136f, 137
Interstitial cells, 306, 319
Integument, 320-349. See a/ro Skin
Interstitial connective tissue, 164
anal sacs, 339, 339f, 340f
Interstitial dendritic cells, 136f, 137
avian, 347-349,348f, 349f
Interstitial endocrine cells, 261, 262f, 318
blood vessels of, 335336
of testis, 234-235, 235f
carpal glands, 338
Interstitial growth, 46
chesthut, 346, 347f
Interstitial lamellae, 49f, 55
Index
165
Interstitium
cortex of, 213, 214f, 215f
of kidney, 226
distal convoluted tubule of, 229
of mammary gland, 342
filtration of, 227, 227f
of testis, 233-235
function of, 226-227
Interterritotial mattix, 45
general otganization of, 212-215
Intertubular dentin, 178
interstitium of, 226
Intertubular horn, 343
 juxtaglomerular cells of, 318
Interventticular septum, fibrous part of, 1 30
juxtaglomerular apparatus of, 226, 227f
Intestinal glands, 195, 195f, 196
loop of Henle, thick ascending limb of, 228-229
Intestinal villi, 195, 196f, 198f
lymphatics of, 226
Intestine(s)
medulla of, 213, 214f, 215f
latge, 199-201, 199f-201f. See afro Large intestine
multilobar, 213, 213f
small, 194199, 195f-199f. See α/ro Small intestine
hephron of, 215, 215f
Intracellular canaliculus, 188
netves of, 226
Intaepidermal macrophages, 136f, 137, 322-323, 325f
renal corpuscle of, 214-215
Intraepithelial glands, 24, 24t
renal corpuscles, 215-218, 216f-218f 
Intralobular ducts, 26, 28f, 208, 209f
renal tubules, 214-215, 218-224, 218f, 219t, 220f225f
of mammaty gland, 341f, 342
structure-function relationships in, 226-229
Intramembranous ossification, 51, 53f
thin limbs of, 228-229
Intraperiod line, 101
tubule function of, 227-228
 Intapulmonary conducting aifways, of lungs, 161-162, 161f, 162f
unilobar, 213, 213f
Inverted yolk sac placenta, 280
unipapillary, 212-213, 213f
Iridial epithelium, 356f, 357
vasculature of, 224226, 225f, 226f
Iridial granules, 357
Kinase(s), cyclin-dependent, 13
Iridial muscles, 356f, 367-367
Kinetochore, 13
Iridial stroma, 356, 356f
 Koilin membrane, 210
Iridocorneal angle, 357-358, 357f
Kupffer cells, 204, 204f
pectinate ligament of, 357, 357f
trabecular meshwork of, 357f, 358
Labial glands, 172
venous drainage from, 358
Labyrinth, cortical, 213, 214f
Iris, 350, 351f, 356-357, 356f
Lactimal apparatus, 361, 362f
Isogenous cell groups, 45
Lacrimal canaliculi, 361
Isthmus, 264, 266f
Lactimal gland, 361, 362f
of birds, 276f, 277
Lactimal puncta, 361
Lacrimal sac, 361
Jejunum,194
Lacteal, 196, 196f
Joint(s), 58-59, 58f-60f
Lactiferous sinus, 342
cartilaginous, 58, 58f
Lactotroph(s), 302
described, 58
Lamella(ae), 294
fibrous, 58
ci tcumferential
function of, 58
inner, 49, 49f
phalangeal,60f
outer, 49, 49f
syhovial, 58-59, 59f, 60f
interstitial, 49f, 55
Juxtaglomerular apparatus, 226, 227f
Lamellar bodies, 164
Juxtaglomerular cells, 226, 227f
Lamellar bone, 49f, 50
of kidney, 318
Lamellar cofpuscles, 108, 108f, 208
Lamellar granules, 22, 23f, 323, 324
Karyorthexis, 14
Lamellar placentation, 282
Keratan sulfate, 40, 40f
Lamellipodia, 1 1
Keratin(s), 12, 326
Lamina(ae), 12, 193, 194f
Keratinization
anterior, of corhea, 352
desctibed, 22-23
basal, 18
of epidermis, 326
dermal, secondary, 344, 345f
Keratinized stratified squamous epithelium, 22-23, 22f
epidermal
Keratinocyte(s), 321
primary, 344, 345f
Keratohyalin granules, 22, 23f, 324
secondaty, 344, 345f
Keratohyalin phase, 330
posterior limiting, of corhea, 352-353, 352f
Kidney(s), 212-229
reticular, 372
anatomic features of, 212-213, 213f
spiral, 367
in blood pressure regulation, 227, 227f
subbasal, 18
collecting duct of, 229
Lamina basalis, 18
392
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Lamina choroidocapillaris, 353f, 355
blood supply to, 203-205, 204f, 205f
Lamina densa, 18, 216
capsule of, 201-202, 202f
Lamina fibroreticularis, 18
functional units of, 205-206, 205f
Lamina fusca sclerae, 351
lobules of, 205, 205f
Lamina lucida, 18
portal, 205-206, 205f
Lamina musculatis, 172
lymph in, 205
Lamina propria, 172, 235-236
lymph vessels of, 205
Lamina rara externa, 216
parenchyma of, 202-203, 203f
Lamina rara interna, 216
portal lobule of, 205-206, 205f
Laminar cotium, 343
stroma of, 201-202, 202f
Laminin(s), 39
Liver acinus, 205f, 206
Langethans cells, 322-323, 325f
Lobar ducts, 26, 28f
 Large granular lymphocytes (LGLs), 75
Lobar lactiferous duct, of mam mary gland, 341f, 342
Large intestine, 199-201, 199f-201f
Lobe(s), 26, 28f
anal canal of, 201, 201f
neural, 301, 301f
cecum of, 200
Lobular duct, of mam maty gland, 341f, 342
colon of, 200, 200f
Lobule(s), 26, 28f, 162
rectum of, 200-201
liver, 205, 205f
Large motor units, 106
portal, of liver, 205-206, 205f
Laryngopharynx, 184
Loop of Henle, 219t, 220-222, 221f-223f
Larynx, 159-160,159f, 160f
thick ascending limb of, 221-222, 223f, 228-229
Late endosomes, 8
thin limbs of, 219t, 220-221, 222f
Lateral funiculus, 112, 114f
Loose connective tissue, 41, 42f
Lens, 360, 360f
-β-LPH. Se β-Lipotropin hormone (β-LPH)
Lens capsule, 360, 360f
Lung(s), 160-167, 161f-167f
Lens epithelium, 360, 360f
alveolar ducts of, 161f, 163, 163f, 164f
alveolar sacs of, 161f, 163, 163f, 164f
Lens fibers, 360, 360f
 Lenticular papillae, 174
alveoli of, 161f, 163-164, 164f-167f
blood vessels of, 165-166
Leptin, 318
bronchi of, 161-162, 161f
Leptomeninges, 113
gas exchange atea of, 162-165, 163f-167f
Leptotene stage, 238
innervation of, 166-167
Leukocyte(s), 63-66, 63f66f
intrapulmonaty conducting airways of, 161-162, 161f, 162f
basophils, 65
lymphatics of, 165-166
eosinophils, 6465, 64f
pleura of, 165
globule,37,160,196
respiratory bronchioles of, 162-163, 163f, 164f
lymphocytes, 66, 66f
Luteinization, 262
monocytes, 65, 65f
Luteinizing hormone (LH), 302, 306
neutrophils, 63-64, 63f
LVP. See Lysine vasopressin (LVP)
Leydig cells, 306, 319
Lymph, in liver, 205
 LGLs. Se Large granular lymphocytes(LGLs)
Lymph capillaries, 131-132, 131f, 132f
LH. See Luteinizing hormone (LH)
Lymph nodes, 143, 145-147, 145f147f
Ligament(s)
differences among species, 146-147, 147f
collagenous, 42
Lymph vascular system, 117
denticulate, 114, 114f
Lymph vessels, 131-132, 131f, 132f
elastic, 39f, 43
of immune system, 141-142
petinate, of iridocorneal angle, 357, 357f
of integument, 335-336
periodontal, 178
of liver, 205
spiral, 367
of lymph nodes, 143, 145, 145f
Limbus, 353
of spleen, 150
Lingual glands, 183
Lymphatic(s)
Lingual papillae, 174
of kidney, 226
Link proteins, 44
of ovary, 262
Lip(s), 172, 172f
pulmonary, 165-166
Lipid droplets, 6f, 12
of utetine tube, 265
Lipofuscin, 12
of uterus, 266f, 267-268, 267f
Lipofusion granules, 93
Lymphatic nodules, 137, 138f
β-Lipotropin hormone (B-LPH), 302
aggregated,143,144f
Liquor folliculi, 258, 260f
in distal small intestine, 139-140, 139f
Liver, 201-206, 202f-207f
primary,137,138f
anatomic unit of, 205, 205f
secondary, 137, 138f
bile ducts of, 203, 204f
solitary, 197, 198f, 199f
Index
Lymphatic organs
Maternal tissues
primary, 137-142, 139f142f
fate at birth of, fetal-maternal anchoting effects on, in placentation,
secondary, 142-151, 151f-154f 
28 1f, 282
Lymphatic tissues
thtee-dimensional structure of intefface between fetal tissues and,
bronchus-associated, 143
in placentation, 281f, 282
diffuse, 137
 Martrix granules, 45
gut-associated, 143, 144f
Matrix vesicles, 50
mucosa-associated, 142-143, 143f, 144f
Maturation phase, 239
organized, 137
Mature follicles, 258, 260f
Lymphoblast(s), 75
Mature neutrophil, 64
Lymphocyte(s), 66, 66f, 135-136, 135f, 136f
MC. See Mucosal mast cell (MC)
B,75
MCrc. See Connetive tissue mast cell (MCrc)
mature, 75
Mechanoreceptor(s), 108
T, 75
Median eminence, 30l, 301f
Lymphocyte recirculation, 135
Mediastinum testis, 234, 235f
"Lymphoepithelial organ," 140
Medulla, 140-141, 142f
Lymphoid precursors, 75
adrenal, 315-316, 315f
Lymphopoiesis, 75
inner, 213
Lysine vasopressin (LVP), 303
of kidney, 213, 214f, 215f
Lysosome(s)
of lymph nodes, 145f, 146, 146f
ptimary, 9
outer, 213,215f
secondaty, 8, 9
of ovary, 257f, 262
Lysozyme(s), 106
Medullary cords, 145f, 146
Lyssa, of tongue, 176, 176f
Medullary rays, 213, 214f
Medullary sinuses, 145, 145f
M cells, 143, 144f
Megakaryoblast(s), 75,75f
M line, 83
Megakaryocyte(s), 75
Macrolecithal, telolecithal cells, 275
Meiosis, 237-238
Macrophage(s), 35-36, 35f, 36f, 136f, 137
Meissnet's plexus, 172
alveolar, 164, 167f
Melanin, 12
inttaepidermal, 136f, 137
Melanocyte(s), 321, 322f, 324f
intraepithelial, 322-323, 325f
C-Melanocyte stimulating hormone (O-MSH), 302
stellate, 204-205, 204f, 205f
Melanosome(s), 321
tingible body, 140, 141f 
Macrovasculature, blood vessels of, 117
Melanotroph(s), 302
Melatonin, 307
Macula densa, 226
Membrane-coating granules, 23
Macula sacculi, of internal ear, 369-370, 373f,374f
Macula utriculi, of internal ear, 369-370, 373f, 374f
Membranous disks, 359
Maculae adherens, 15, 16f
Membranous labytinth, of internal ear, 367-368, 367f
Magnum, avian, 276f, 277
Memory cells, 135
Meninges, 112-114, 114f
Major arterial cirele, 356
Major salivary glands, 181
Meniscus(i), 59, 59f
Major vestibular glands, 270
Mental organ, 338
Merkel cells, 108, 321-322, 324f
MALT (mucosa-associated lymphatic tissue), 142-143, 143f, 144f
Mammary gland, 340-342, 341f
Merocrine mode of sectetion, 29, 29f
alveoli of, 340-342, 341f
Meroctine sweat glands, 335, 335f
described, 340, 341f
Mesangial cells, extraglomerular, 226, 227f
ducts of, 342
Mesangium, 216-217, 216f
interstitium of, 342
Mesaxon(s), 101,102f
involution of, 342
inner, 101
teat of, 342
outer, 101
Mandibular salivary gland, 181-182, 182f
Mesenchymal cells, 32, 32f
Mantle, 137, 138f
Mesenchyme, 41
Mare(s), placentation in, 286t, 289, 290f, 291f
Mesobronchus(i), avian, 168
 Marginal granulocytic pool (MGP), 71
Mesoderm, 279, 280f
Marginal hematomas, 294, 295f
Mesotendineum, 42
Marginal sinus, 149, 150f
Messenger ribonucleic acids (mRNAs), 7
Marginal zone of spleen, 149, 149f, 150f
Metabotropic receptors, 97
Margo plicatus, 189
Metamyelocyte(s), 71, 71f
Mast cells, 34-35, 34f, 72
Metaphase, of cell cycle, 13, 14f
connective tissue, 34 35
Metaphysis, 48, 52f
mucosal, 34
Metarteriole(s), 125
394
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Metarubricyte(s), 72
arrector pili, 328, 330, 331f
Metestrus, 271, 272, 272f
cardiac, 86-90, 87f-90f
Metestrus-diestrus, 274, 274f
ciliary, 356
Metorthagia, 272
dilator, 356f, 357
MGP. See Marginal granulocytic pool (MGP)
inteffollicular, 330, 331
Microcotyledon(s), 289
iridial, 356f, 367-367
Microfilament(s), in cytoskeleton, 1l-12, 12f
of middle ear, 364 365, 365f
Microglia, 99, 99f
skeletal, 80, 82-86, 82f-87f. See α/ro Skeletal muscle
Microplacentome(s), 289, 291f
smooth, 79-80, 80f-82f. See α/ro Smooth muscle
Microtubule(s), in cytoskeleton, 10-1l, 11f
sphincter, 356f, 367-367
Microtubule organizing center (MTOC), 10
cardiac, 185
Microvasculature, 122-126, 122f127f
pyloric, 189, 190f
blood vessels of, 117
trachealis, 160
Micturition, 232
Muscular arteries, 118, 119f, 120-121, 122f
Middle eat. See Ear(s), middle
Muscular tissues, 79
Migratory cells, 160
Muscular venules, 125, 127f
Milk letdown, 342
MVBs. See Multi vesicular bodies (MVBs)
"Milk spots," 151
Myelin sheath, 101-104, 102f-105f
Myeloblast(s), 71, 71f
Mineralocorticoid(s), 311
Mink(s), placentation in, 294-296, 294f, 295f
Myelocyte(s), 71, 71f
Minor salivaty glands, 181, 183, 184f
Myoblast(s), of skeletal muscle, 86
 Minor vestibular glands, 270
Myocardium, 129-130, 130f
Mitochondria, 9-10, 9f
Myocyte(s), 79
Mitosis, 13, 14f
Myoepithelial cells, 29, 29f
Modeling, bone, 56, 56f
Myofiber(s), 79
Molar salivary gland, 183
Myofibril(s), of skeletal muscle, 82, 83f
Myofibroblast(s), 32-33
Molecule(s)
Myofilament(s)
procollagen, 37
intermediate, of smooth muscle, 80
tropomyosin, 83
of skeletal muscle, 82
Monestrous, defined, 271
thick
Monoblast(s), 72
of skeletal muscle, 83, 86f
Monocyte(s), 65, 65f
of smooth muscle, 80, 81f
Monocytopoiesis, 72
thin
 Mononuclear cells, 292
of skeletal muscle, 83, 85f
Mononucleat phagocyte system (MPS), 35, 65
of smooth muscle, 80, 81f
Motor end plate, 84, 106
Myogenesis
Motor heuron, fusimotor, 106
of cardiac muscle, 89-90
Motor unit, 84, 106
of skeletal muscle, 86
MPS. Se Mononucleat phagocyte system (MPS)
Myoid, 359
 mRNAs. See Messenger fibonucleic acids (mR NAs)
Myomesin, 83
O-MSH. See C-Melanocyte stimulating hormone (C-MSH)
Myometrium, 267
MTOC. See Microtubule organizing center (MTOC)
Myosin-I1, 80
Mucin, 27, 172
Myotube(s), of skeletal muscle, 86
Mucinogen, 27, 196
Mucocutaneous junction, 172
NaCl cotransporter, 229
Mucosa-associated lymphatic tissue (MALT), 142-143, 143f, 144f
Na+-K+ ATPase, 229
Mucosal mast cell (MCT), 34
NaK2Cl cotransporter, 229
Mucous connective tissue, 41, 41f
Nasal cavity, 153-157, 154f158f
Mucous epithelial cells, 154
cutaneous region of, 153-154, 154f
Mucous glands, 27, 28f
olfactory region of, 156-157, 157f, 158f
Mucous neck cells, 188, 188f
respiratory region of, 154155, 155f
Mucus, 24
Nasolactimal duct, 361
Miller cells, 359
Nasopharynx, 159, 184
Multicellular glands, 24, 24t
Natural killer (NK) cells, 135
Multilobar kidney, 213, 213f
Nephron(s), 215, 215f
Multilocular adipocytes, 34, 34f
long-looped, 215, 215f
Multinucleated giant cells, 36f, 235
short-looped, 215, 215f
Multiplexin(s), 37
Nerve(s)
Multiunit smooth muscle, 80
of immune system, 141-142
Multivesicular bodies (MVBs), 8
of integument, 335-336
Muscle(s), 79-90. See afro rpecifec typer, e.g., Smooth muscle
of lymph nodes, 146, 147f
Index
395
of ovary, 262
Node(s)
peripheral, 105-106, 105f
atrioventricular, 130
described, 105
cardiac, 89, 90f
renal, 226
hemal, 151, 151f
of spleen, 150
lymph, 143, 145-147, 145f-147f
of uterine tube, 265
differences among species, 146-147, 147f
of uterus, 266f, 267-268, 267f
sinatrial, 130
Nerve endings, free, 108, 108f
Node of Ranvier, 103
Nerve fascicle, 105, 105f
Nodule(s), lymphatic. See Lymphatic nodules
Nerve fiber(s), 104
 Nonciliated epithelial cells, 20
Nervi vasorum, 118, 120f
Nondeciduate placenta, 282
Nervous tissue, 91-1 16. See αfiro Neuroglia;, Neuron(s)
Nonencapsulated tactile corpuscles, 108, 108f
Neural lobe, 301, 301f
Nonkeratinized stratified squamous epithelium, 22-23, 22f
 Neurocrine signaling, 16
Nonkeratinocyte(s), 321-323, 324f
 Neuroendoctine cells, 160
Norepinephrine, 315, 315f
Neurofilament(s), 93
NORs. Se Nucleolar organizing regions (NORs)
 Neuroglia, 98-104
Nose, 337-338, 338f
astrocytes in, 98-99, 99f
 Nuclear bag fibers, 109, 109f
described, 98
Nuclear chain fibers, 109, 109f
ependymal cells in, 99-100, 100f
Nuclear envelope, 4, 4f 
 gliocytes in
Nuclear matrix, 5
CNS, 98-100, 99f, 100f
Nuclear pulposus, 58, 58f
ganglionic,100,101f,102f
Nucleation theory, 50
PNS, 100-101, 100f-102f
Nucleolar ofganizing regions (NOR s), 5-6
microglia in, 99, 99f
Nucleolus(i), 5-6, 5f
neurolemmocytes in, 100-101, 101f, 102f
Nucleoplasm, 4-5, 5f
oligodendrocytes in, 99, 99f
Nucleus(i), 46, 4f, 5f
Neurohypophysis, 300, 301f, 303-306, 304f, 305f
of neuron, 92
hypothalamo-adenohypophyseal axis of, 305-306
pyknotic, 14
Neurolemmocyte(s), 100-101, 101f, 102f, 106, 107f
Nutrition, of cartilage, 46
 Neuromuscular spindles, 109, 109f
Neuromuscular synapse, 106, 107f
OAE. See Otoacoustic emissions (OAE)
Neuron(s), 91-98
Occludin, 15
autohomic
OCS. See Open canicular system (OCS)
postganglionic, 106
Odontoblast(s), 178
preganglionic, 106
Odontoblast processes, 178
bipolat, 95, 96f
Olfactory cells, heurosensory, 156
cell body cytoplasm of, 93f, 93-94
Olfactory epithelium, 156, 157f
cell body of, 92-93, 92f, 93f
Olfactory glands, 156-157
classification of, 95-96, 96f
Olfactory region, of respiratory system, 156-157, 157f, 158f
communication among. 96-98
Oligodendrocyte(s), 99, 99f
defined, 91
Omasal papillae, 193
efferent, 106-108, 107f
Omasum, 193-194, 194f
morphology of, 92, 92f
Oocyte(s), 258
motor, fusimotor, 106
primary, 257f, 258, 258f
multipolar, 96, 96f
Oogonium,257
myelin sheath in, 101-104, 102f-105f
Open canicular system (OCS), 66
nucleus of, 92
"Open" theory, 150, 150f
piriform,11l,112f
Oral cavity, 172-181, 172-181f
processes of, 92f95f, 93-95
cheeks, 172-173, 173f
regions of, 92f, 96
hard palate, 173, 173f
sttucture of, 92-95, 92f95f
lips, 172, 172f
unipolar, 95, 96f
soft palate, 174
Neuropeptide Y, 318
teeth, 177-181, 177f-181f
 Neurosensory olfactory cells, 156
tongue, 174-177, 174f-176f
Neurotendinous spindles, 108-190, 108f
Orbiculus ciliaris, 355
Neurotransmitter(s), 97
Organ(s), 17, 18f
Neutrophil(s), 63-64, 63f
Organ of Corti, 368f, 369f, 370-372, 374f
band, 64
Organelle(s), 1, 6-10, 6f-9f
mature, 64
Golgi complex, 7-9, 7f-9f
segmented, 64
mitochondria, 9-10, 9f
NK cells. See Natural killer (NK) cells
peroxisomes, 10
396
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Organelle(s)(continued)
Palatine gland, 173,174
ribosomes, 6-7
Pale epithelial layer, of hair follicle, 329, 329f, 330f
rough and smooth endoplasmic reticulum, 6-7, 6f
PALS. See Periarterial lymphatic sheaths (PALS)
Organized lymphatic tissues, 137
Pancreas, 206-208,207f-209f
Orophatynx,184
Pancreatic duct, 208, 209f
Ossification
accessory, 208, 209f
endochondral, 51-53, 53f. See α/ro Endochondral ossification
Pancreatic islets, 316-317, 316f, 317f
intramembranous, 51, 53f
Panniculat adiposus, 328, 328f
zone of, 52f, 54, 56f
Papilla(ae)
Osteoblast(s), 4647, 47f, 76, 76f
conical, 174
Osteoclast(s), 47-48, 47f, 76, 76f
dental, 180, 180f
Osteocyte(s), 47, 47f
dermal, 328
Osteocytic osteol ysis, 47
of hair follicle, 329, 330f
Osteogehesis, 50-58, 53f-57f
filiform, 174, 174f, 175f
bone modeling in, 56, 56f
foliate, 175, 175f, 176f
bone remodeling in, 56-57, 57f
fungiform, 174, 175f
endochondral ossification in, 51-53, 53f
fracture repair in, 57-58
lenticular, 174
growth in length in, 5455, 54f, 55f
lingual, 174
growth in width and circumference in, 55-56
omasal, 193
inttamembranous ossification, 51, 53f
reticular,192
Osteolysis, osteocytic, 47
rumen, 190, 191f
Osteon(s), 49, 49f
tonsillar, 174
primary, 55
vallate, 175, 175f
secondary, 55
Patacellular pathway, 228
Osteoprogenitot cells, 47
Parachonchus(i), avian, 168
Otoacoustic emissions (OAE), 374
Paractine secretion, 16
Outer enamel epithelium, 180, 180f
Parafollicular cells, 307f, 309
Outer hair cells, of internal ear, 371, 374f
Paraganglia, 317-318
Outer medulla, 213, 215f
Paranasal sinuses, 158-159, 159f, 201
Outer mesaxon, 101
Paranode, 103, 104f
Ovarian follicle, development of, 257-260, 258f-260f
Parathyroid(s), internal, 309-310, 311f
Ovary(ies), 256-262, 257f-264f
Parathyroid gland, 309-311, 311f
of birds, 275-277, 276f
Parathyroid hormone (PTH), 310
blood vessels of, 262
Parenchyma, 26-27, 28f
cortex of, 257-262, 258f-264f
of liver, 202-203, 203f
corpus luteum and, 261-262, 263f, 264f
Patietal cells, 188, 188f
follicular atresia and, 261, 261f, 262f
Parietal epithelium, 217-218
follicular development of, 257-260, 258f-260f
Patietal serous pericardium, 130
interstitial endoctine cells and, 261, 262f
Parotid salivary gland, 181, 182f
endocrine cells of, 318-319
Pars caeca fetinae, 350
hormones of, 270-271
Pars ciliaris retinae, 350
lymphatics of, 262
Pars distalis, 301-302, 301f303f
medulla of, 257f, 262
herves of, 262
Pars fetalis, 279
Pars intermedia, 302-303, 305f
in ovulation, 260-261
Pars iridica retinae, 350
structure of, 256-257, 257f
Oviduct(s), 262, 264265, 265f, 266f. See a/ro Uterine tube (oviduct)
Pars optica retinae, 350
Pars plana, 355
of birds, 275-277, 276f
Ovulation, 260-261
Pars plicata, 355
Oxidative phosphorylation, 10
Pars tuberalis, 301f, 303, 304f
Paurangiotic pattern, 359-360
Oxyniticopeptic cells, 209, 209f
Oxytalan, 39
PCT. See Proximal con voluted tubule (PCT)
Oxytocin, 303
PCV. See Packed cell volume (PCV)
Pecten, 363
Pachymeninx, 113
Petinate ligament, of iridocorneal angle, 357, 357f
Pachytene phase, 238
Pedicels, 217
Pacini's corpuscles, 108, 108f, 208
Pelvis, renal, 230, 230f
Packed cell volume (PCV), 62
Pendtin, 229
Palate(s)
Penicillar artery, 150
hard, 173, 173f
Penis, 252-255, 253f, 254f
soft, 174
corpora cavernosa, 252, 253f
Index
165
erection of, mechanisms of, 254255
Pinealocyte(s), 306
glans,253,254f
Piriform neurons, 1ll, 112f
Peptidase(s), 106
Pituitaty gland, 300-306, 301f-305f
Perforating canals,49,49f
Placenta, 279
Perforating fibers, 42, 50, 51f
chorioallantoic, 280, 280f
Periarterial lymphatic sheaths (PALS), 148-149, 149f, 150f
chotiovitelline, 280, 280f
Pericapillary macrophage sheath, 150, 150f
circulation in, 284-285, 284f
Pericardial cavity, 130
cotyledonary, 282
Pericardium, 130
deciduate, 282
fibrous, 130
diffuse, 281-282
patietal serous, 130
discoid, 281f, 282
Pericellular matrix, 45
endoctine cells of, 319
Perichondtium, 44f, 45
endotheliochorial, 282
Pericyte(s), 34, 122-123
epitheliochorial, 282
Pericytic venules, 125, 127f
folded, 282
Perilymph, 366
hemochotial, 282
 Perilymphatic space, 366
macroscopic structure of, 281-282, 281f
Perimettium,267
hondeciduate, 282
Perimysium, 83, 84f
specialized cells of, 295
Perineural epithelioid cells, 105
vascularity of, 284-285, 284f
Perineutium, 105
villous, 282
fibrous, 105
yolk sac, 280, 280f
 Periodontal ligament, 178
inverted, 280
Periople, 342-343
zonary, 281f, 282
 Perioplic cotium, 343
Placenta endotheliochorialis, 282
 Periosteal bud, 51
Placenta hemochotialis, 282
Petiosteum, 48,49f, 51f
Placenta zonatia, 281f, 282
Peripheral nerves, 105-106, 105f
Placental hematomas, 284
 Peripheral nervous system (PNS), gliocytes of, 100-101, 100f-102f
Placentation, 279-297
Peripheral nervous tissue, 104109, 105f, 107f-109f
in bitches, 294-296, 294f, 295f
efferent neurons of, 106-108, 107f
changes during, 285
ganglia of, 100f, 106
chotiovitelline placenta in, 280, 280f
nerves of, 105-106, 105f
classification in, 280-282, 280f, 281f
 Peripheral proteins, in cell membrane, 3, 3f
in cows, 289, 292-293, 292f, 293f
Peripolar cells, 217, 218f
defined, 279
Perisinusoidal adipocytes, 205
embryology, 279-280, 280f
 Perisinusoidal space (of Disse), 204
in ewes, 293-294, 293f
Periosteum, 49, 49f, 51f
fate of maternal tissues at birth due to fetal-maternal anchoring in,
Peritendineum, 38f, 42
281f, 282
 Peritubular capillary networks, of fenestrated capillaries, 224-225
fetal exttaembryonic membrane contributions to, 280, 280f, 281f
Peritubular cells, 235
fetal-maternal interhemal batrier, tissue layers of, 282, 283f
Peritubular dentin, 178
function-structute relationships in, 285-286
Perivascular space, 114, 115f
in goats, 293-294, 293f
Peroxisome(s), 10
lamellar, 282
Peyet's patches, 143, 144f, 197, 198f, 199f
in mates, 286t, 289, 290f, 291f
ileal, 139-140, 139f
in minks, 294-296, 294f, 295f
 PGCs. See Primordial germ cells (PGCs)
hourishment of embryo in, 281f, 282, 284, 284f
Phagocytosis, 8
placental vascularity and circulation in, 284-285, 284f
Phagolysosome(s), 9
in queens, 294-296, 294f, 295f
Phalangeal cells, of internal ear, 372, 374f
in sows, 286-288, 286f-288f, 286t
 Phalangeal joint, 60f
species differences in, 286-296, 286f288f, 286t, 290f-295f
 Pharyngoesophageal limen, 184
three-dimensional structure of intefface between maternal and fetal
 Phatynx, 184
tissues in, 281f, 282
Phenomelanin(s), 321
Placentome(s), 281f, 282, 289, 292f
 Phospholipid(s), in cell membrane, 3, 4f
Plaque(s), amniotic, 293
 Phosphorylation, oxidative, 10
Plasma, 61-62, 62f
Physeal-metaphyseal region, 48, 52f
Plasma cells, 36, 36f, 135
Physis, 48, 52f
Platelet(s), 66, 67f, 75
Pia mater, 113
precursors to, 75
Pigment cells, 36-37, 37f
size of, 66
Pineal gland, 306-307, 307f
structure of, 66, 67f
865
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Pleura, 165
C, 83
visceral, 161
cafrier, 228
PNS. See Peripheral nervous system (PNS)
in cell membrane, 3, 3f
Podocyte(s), 217, 217f, 218f
channel, 228
Poikilocytosis, 63
fibtous adhesive, 39-40
Polychromatophilic RBCs, 63
glial fibrillar acidic, 12
Polychromatophilic rubricyte, 72
integral, in cell membrane, 3, 3f
Polyestrous, defined, 272
link, 44
 POMC. See Proopiomelanocortin (POMC)
 peripheral, in cel membtane, 3, 3f
Pore(s),septal, 165, 165f, 167f
transmembrane, in cell membrane, 3, 3f
Portal lobule, of liver, 205-206, 205f
transport, 228
Postcapillary venules, 125, 127f
Proteoglycan(s), 40-41, 40f
Posterior epithelium, of corhea, 352f, 353
Protoplasm, 1
Posterior limiting lamina, of cornea, 352-353, 352f
 Protoplasmic astrocytes, 98, 99f
 Postganglionic autonomic neurons, 106
Proventricular glands, 209, 209f
Postsynaptic density, 97
Proventriculus, 209, 209f
 Postsynaptic somatodendritic membrane, 97
Proximal convoluted tubule (PCT), 219, 219t, 220f, 221f
Precapillary sphincter, 125
Proximal straight tubule (PST), 219, 219t, 220f, 221f
Predentin, 178
Proximal tubule, 218-219, 218f, 219t, 228
 Preganglionic autonomic heurons, 106
Pseudo-H zone, 83
Preghancy, corpus luteum of, 319
Pseudostratified columnat epithelium, 19f-21f, 20
 Preleptotene primary spermatocytes, 237
Pseudostratified epithelium, 19-22, 19f-22f
Prepuce, 255, 255f
PST. See Proximal straight tubule (PST)
Presynaptic element, 93f, 97
PTH. See Parathyroid hormone (PTH)
PRF. See Prolactin-releasing factor (PR F)
Pulmonary arteries, 165-166
Primary bronchi, 160
Pulmonary lymphatics, 165-166
Primary ending, 109, 109f
Pulmonary surffactant, 165
 Primary epidermal laminae, 344, 345f
Pulmonary veins, 166
Primary follicles, 257f, 258, 258f
Pulp, dental, 179
Primary granules, 63, 63f, 64
Pulp arteriole, 150
Primary hair, 328f, 331
Pulp cavity, 178
Primary hair follicle, 328f, 330
Pulvinus dentalis, 173
 Primary lymphatic nodules, 137, 138f
Pupil(s), 356
 Primary lysosomes, 9
Purkinje cells, 11l, 112f
Primaty oocytes, 257f, 258, 258f, 260
Purkinje fibers, 130
Primary osteons, 55
 Primary spongiosa, 52f, 54, 56f
Pyknotic, 14
Pyloric gland(s), 189, 190f
 Primate(s), cyclic changes in endometrium in, 272-273
Pyloric gland region, of stomach, 187f, 189, 190f
Primordial follicles, 257, 258f
Primordial germ cells (PGCs), 257
Pyloric sphincter muscle, 189, 190f
Principal cells, 223, 310, 311f
PRL. See Prolactin (PRL)
Queen(s), placentation in, 294-296, 294f, 295f
 Procollagen molecules, 37
Radial glial cells, 359
Proestrus, 271, 272, 272f, 274, 274f
Progesterone, 306, 319
RBCs. See Red blood cells (RBCs)
in estrous cycle, 270
Receptor(s), 97, 108-190, 108f, 109f
Prokaryotic cells, 1
antigen, 135,135f
Prolactin (PRL), 302, 305, 306
encapsulated, 108-190, 108f, 109f
Prolactin-releasing factor (PRF), 305, 306
inotropic membrane, 97
Proliferation, zone of, 54, 55f
metabotropic, 97
Prolymphocyte(s), 75
honencapsulated, 108, 108f
Promoncyte(s), 72
sensory, 128-129, 128f
Promyelocyte(s), 71, 71f
SRP,7
 Proopiomelanocortin (POMC), 302
Recirculation, lymphocyte, 135
Proper gastric gland region, of stomach, 187-189
Rectal columns, 201
Prophase, of cell cycle, 13, 14f
Rectal pits, 201
Proplatelet(s),66
Rectum, of large intestine, 200-201
Proprioceptor(s), 108
Red blood cells (RBCs), 62-63, 62f
Prorubricyte(s), 72, 72f
Red mafrow, 76
Prostate, 249-251, 249f, 250f
Red pulp, 148, 148f, 149f 
Protein(s)
Red skeletal muscle fibers, 86
androgen-binding, 319
Refractive media of eye, 360-361, 360f, 361f
Index
665
Regeheration
trachea, 160, 161f
of cardiac muscle, 89-90
vomeronasal otgan of, 157-158, 158f
of skeletal muscle, 86
Retained afterbirth, 293
of smooth muscle, 80
Rete ovarii, 257
Regulated secretion, 7
Rete testis, 243, 244t
Reissnet's membrane, 367
Reticular fibers, 38-39, 39f
Releasing hormones, 305
Reticular cells, 33, 33f, 75-76, 136, 146f, 192
Remodeling, bone, 56-57, 57f
epithelial, 136,140,141f
Renal corpuscles, 214-218, 216f-218f
Reticular crests, 192, 193f
glomerular capsule of, 216f-218f, 217-218
Reticular fibers, 27
mesangium, 216-217, 216f
Reticular lamina, 372
structure of, 215, 216f
Reticular layer, of dermis, 328
Renal pelvis, 230, 230f
Reticular papillae, 192
Renal tubules, 214215, 218-224, 218f, 219t, 220f-225f
Reticular sulcus, 193, 194f
collecting ducts, 219t, 222-224, 223f-225f
Reticulocyte(s), 63, 72, 72f
connecting segment, 219t, 220
Reticulum, 192-193, 193f, 194f
distal convoluted tubule, 219t, 220f, 222, 224f
rough endoplasmic, 6-7, 6f
function of, 227-228
smooth endoplasmic, 6-7, 6f
loop of Henle, 219t, 220-222, 221f-223f
stellate, 180,180f
proximal tubule, 218-219, 218f, 219t, 228
Retina, 350, 351f, 358-360, 358f
Renewed anagen phase, 333, 334f
Retinal pigment epithelium (RPE), 358f, 359
Reversal zone, 56, 57f
Renin,313
 Reproductive system
Ribosomal RNA (rRNA), 5
female, 256-278
Ribosome(s), 6-7
of birds, 275-277, 276f
Rod(s), 359
 Rod bipolar cells, 359
cervix, 268-269, 269f
clitoris, 270
Rough endoplasmic reticulum (rER), 6-7, 6f
Rouleau fotmation, 63
estrous cycle, 270-275, 272f-275f
RPE. See Retinal pigment epithelium (RPE)
ovaries, 256-262, 257f-264f
tRNA. See Ribosomal RNA (rRNA)
uterine tube, 262, 264-265, 265f, 266f
Rubriblast(s), 72, 72f
uterus, 265-268, 266f-268f
Rubticyte(s)
vagina,269, 270f
basophilic, 72
vestibule, 269-270
polychromatophilic, 72
vul va, 270
Rugae, 173
male, 233-255
Rumen, 190-192, 191f, 192f
accessoty glands, 248-251, 249f-25 1f
Ruminant(s)
bulbourethral glands, 251, 251f
hoofs of, 345-346, 345f
con voluted seminiferous tubules, 235-243, 236f-242f
stomach of, 189-194, 191f194f
ductus deferens, 247-248, 247f, 248f
abomasum,194
epididymis, 245-247, 245f, 246f
omasum,193-194, 194f
penis, 252-255, 253f, 254f
reticular sulcus, 193, 194f
prepuce, 255,255f
reticulum, 192-193, 193f, 194f
prostate, 249-251, 249f, 250f
rumen, 190-192, 191f, 192f
straight testicular tubules, 243, 243f, 244f
Russell bodies, 36, 36f
testis, 233-245
urethra, 252, 252f
Saccule(s)
vesicular gland, 248-249, 249f
of internal ear, 366f, 367
neurohypophysis of, 301f, 303-306, 304f, 305f
macula of, 369-370, 373f, 374f
fER. See Rough endoplasmic reticulum (rER)
Sensory receptors, 128-129, 128f
Reserve zone, 54, 55f
Salivary corpuscles, 142-143, 143f
Residual body, 8f, 9
Salivary duct, 181
Resorption, zone of, 52f, 54, 55f
Salivary glands, 181-183, 182f-184f
Respiratory bronchioles, 162-163, 163f, 164f
general chatacteristics of, 191
Respiratory epithelium, 154, 155f, 156f
Mandibular, 181-182, 182f
Respiratory system, 153-169
major, 181
avian, 167-168, 168f
minor,181,183,184f
extrapulmonary bronchi, 160, 161f
molar, 183
larynx, 159-160, 159f, 160f
parotid, 181, 182f
lungs, 160-167, 161f-167f
sublingual, 182-183, 183f
nasopharynx, 159
zygomatic,183,184f
paranasal sinuses, 158-159, 159f
Saltatory conduction, 103
400
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Sarcomere(s), 84
Sharpey's fibers, 42, 50, 51f, 178
Satellite cells, 82
Sheathed capillary, 150, 150f
Scala tympani, 367
Sheet-forming collagen, 37
Scala vestibuli, 367
Shell gland, 277
Schwann cells, 100-101, 101f, 102f
Shell membrane, 277
Sclera, 350, 351, 351f
 SIF cells. See Small intensely fluorescent (SIF) cells
Scleral venous plexus, 357f, 358
Signal peptide sequence, 7
Scrotum,339
Signal recognition particle (SR P), 7
Sebaceous glands, 333-334, 334f
Signal recognition particle (SR P) receptor, 7
Sebum, 333
Signaling
Second maturation division, 238
autocrine, 16
Second messengers, 4
endoctine, 16
Secondaty capillary plexus, 301, 301f, 305
neurocrine, 16
Secondary dermal laminae, 344, 345f
Simple acinat glands, 24, 24t, 25f, 27f
Secondary ending, 109, 109f
Simple alveolar glands, 24, 24t, 25f, 27f
Secondary epidermal laminae, 344, 345f
Simple branched acinat glands, 24-25, 24t, 25f
Secondary follicles, 257f, 258, 258f, 331
Simple branched alveolar glands, 2425, 24t, 25f
Secondaty granules, 63, 63f, 64
Simple branched tubular glands, 24, 24t, 25f, 27f
Secondaty hair, 331
 Simple coiled tubular glands, 24, 24t, 25f, 26f
Secondary lymphatic nodules, 137, 138f
Simple columnat epithelium, 19, 19f-21f
Secondaty lysosomes, 8, 9
Simple cuboidal epithelium, 19, 19f-21f 
Secondary osteons, 55
 Simple follicle, 331
Secondaty spermatocytes, 238
Simple glands, 24-25, 24t, 25f-27f
Secondary spongiosa, 55
Simple squamous epithelium, 18-19, 19f-21f
Secretin, 207-208
Simple straight tubular glands, 24, 24t, 25f, 26f
Secretion
Simple tubuloacinar glands, 24t, 25
cohstitutive, 8
 Simple tubuloalveolar glands, 24t, 25
modes of, 29, 29f
Single follicle, 331
paractine, 16
Sinoatrial node, 130
tegulated,7
Sinus(es), 143, 145, 145f
Secretory cells, 154
carotid, 128-129
Secretory ducts, 26, 28f
cortical, 145, 145f
Secretory granules, 7, 8f
inffaorbital, 337
Secretory product
inguinal, 339
nature of, 27, 28f, 29
interdigital, 338
release of, mode of, 29, 29f
lactiferous, 342
Secretory units, 26, 28f
matginal, 149,150f
types of, 27f29f
medullary, 145, 145f
Secretory vesicles, 93
paranasal, 158-159, 159f, 201
Segmented neutrophil, 64
trabecular, 145,145f
Semicircular ducts, of internal ear, 365f, 366f, 367
vehous, dural, 113
Seminiferous tubules
Sinus hait follicles, 332, 333f
convoluted, 235-243, 236f-242f
Sinusoid(s), 118, 123f, 124-125, 127f
cyclic events in, 240, 242f, 243
hepatic, 204, 205f
Sensory cells, of internal ear, 368f, 371, 374f
Sister-chromatids, 13, 14f
Sensory epithelium, 23
Skeletal muscle, 80, 82-86, 82f-87f
Sensory ganglia, 100f, 106
atrophy of, 86
Septa, 27
contraction of, 84, 86
Septal pores, 165, 165f, 167f
fine sttucture of, 83-84, 85f-87f
Septula testis, 234, 234f
hypertrophy of, 86
Septum(a)
light microscopic structure of, 80, 82-83, 82f-84f
dorsal median, 112, 114f
myogenesis of, 86
interalveolar, 164, 164f
regeneration of, 86
interatrial, avian, 168, 168f
 Skeletal muscle fibers
interlobular, 162
classification of, 86
sER. See Smooth endoplasmic reticulum (sER)
fast, 86
Serous demilunes, 28f, 29
slow, 86
Serous epithelial cells, 155
red, 86
Serous glands, 27, 28f
Skin, 320-349. See afro rpecifc layer, e.g, Epidermis
Sertoli cells, 236-237, 236f, 237f, 319
anal sacs, 339, 339f, 340f
Sex chromatin, 5, 5f, 92
appendages, 328-335, 329f-335f
Index
10t
blood vessels, 335-336
Somatopleure, 280
carpal glands, 338
Somatostatin (SST), 317
chesthut, 346, 347f
 Sound transmission, in eat, schematic diagram of events of, 375f
circumanal glands, 339-340, 340f
Sow(s), placentation in, 286-288, 286f-288f, 286t
claw, 346, 346f
Spaces of Fontana, 357
dermis, 327-328, 327f
Spermatocyte(s)
digital otgans, 342-347, 343f347f
preleptotene ptimary, 237
digital pads, 346, 346f, 347f
secondary, 238
epidermis, 321-327, 322f-327f
Spermatocytogenesis, 237, 238f, 239f
equine hoof, 342-345, 343f-345f
Spermatogenic cells, 237
ergot, 346,347f
Spermatogenic cyle, stages of, 242f
external ear, 336,336f
Spermatogenic epithelium, 235
eyelids, 336-337,336f, 337f
Spermatogenic segments, 243
functions of, 321t
Spermatogenic wave, 243
glands, 333-335, 334f, 335f
Spermatozoon(a), 239-240, 241f
hair,328,328f
Sperm-host glands, 277
horns, 347
Spermiation, 236
hypodermis, 328, 328f
Spermiogenesis, 237, 238-239, 240f
inffaorbital sinus, 337
Sphincter(s), precapillary, 125
inguinal sinus, 339
Sphinctet muscle, 356f, 367-367
interdigital sinus, 338
cardiac, 185
lymph vessels, 335-336
pylotic, 189, 190f
mammaty gland, 340-342, 341f
Spinal cord, 112, 114f
mental organ, 338
Spinal dura mater, 113
nerves, 335-336
Spindle(s)
nose, 337-338, 338f
heuromuscular, 109, 109f
fuminant hoofs, 345-346, 345f
heurotendinous, 108-190, 108f
sctotum, 339
Spine, dendritic, 94, 94f
special structures of, 336-342, 336f341f
Spine apparatus, 94
submental otgan, 338
 Spiral ganglion, of internal ear, 368f, 372
supracaudal gland, 340, 341f
Spiral lamina, 367
swine hoofs, 345-346, 345f
Spiral ligament, 367
Slit diaphragm, 217, 217f
Spiral organ, of internal ear, 368f, 369f, 370-372, 374f
Slow muscle fibers, 86
Spiral prominence, 368, 368f
Small intensely fluorescent (SIF) cells, 106
Splanchnopleure, 280
Small intestine, 194-199, 195-199f
Spleen, 147-151, 148f-150f
blood supply to, 199
blood vessels of, 149-150, 150f
distal, aggtegated lymphatic nodules in, 139-140, 139f
capsules of, 147-148
tela submucosa of, 197, 198f, 199f
differences among species, 151 
tunica mucosa of, 195-196, 195f, 197f-199f
lymph vessels of, 150
tunica muscularis of, 198
marginal zone of, 149, 149f, 150f
tunica serosa of, 198
netves of, 150
Smooth chotion, 281
red pulp of, 148, 148f, 149f
Smooth endoplasmic reticulum (sER), 6-7, 6f
supportive tissue of, 147-148
Smooth muscle, 79-80, 80f-82f
white pulp of, 148-149, 149f, 150f
conttaction of, 80
 Spongiosa
fine structure of, 80, 81f, 82f
primary, 52f, 54, 56f
hypertrophy of, 80
secondary,55
light microscopic structure of, 79-80, 80f
Squamous alveolar epithelial cell, 164, 164f
multiunit, 80
SRP. See Signal recognition particle (SR P)
myogenesis of, 80
SST. See Somatostatin (SST)
regenetation of, 80
Statoconial membtane, 370, 373f
unitaty, 80
Stellate macrophages, 204-205, 204f, 205f
 SNARE (Soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive fusion protein
Stellate reticulum, 180, 180f
Attachment protein REceptors), 7
Stomach, 186-194, 186f-194f
 Sodium iodide symporter, 308
cardiac gland region of, 187, 189f
Soft palate, 174
fundic gland region of, 187-189
Sole, 345
proper gastric gland region of, 187-189
Sole plate, 106
pyloric gland region of, 187f, 189, 190f
Solitaty (isolated) lymphatic nodules, 197, 198f, 199f
ruminant, 189-194, 191f-194f
Somatic fibers, 104
species differences, 187f, 189
402
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Stomach(continued)
heuromuscular, 106,107f
tunica mucosa of
ultrastructure of, 97-98
glandular region of, 187-189, 188f-190f
Synaptic cleft, 93,97
nonglandulat region of, 186, 187f
Synaptic vesicles, 93
Sttaight testicular tubules, 243, 243f, 244f
Synchondrosis(es), 58
Stratified columnat epithelium, 20f, 23, 23f
Syncytiotrophoblast(s), 282, 283f, 285
Stratified cuboidal epithelium, 20f, 23, 23f
Synepitheliochorial, 282
Stratified squamous epithelium, 19f, 20f, 22-23, 22f
Synovial fluid, 59
Stratum basale, 20f, 22, 22f, 19l, 323, 325f
Synovial joints, 58-59, 59f, 60f
Sttatum cerneum, 323f, 325, 326f
Synovial membrane, 59, 59f, 60f
Stratum compactum, 196
Sytinx, avian, 168
Stratum corneum, 22, 22f, 190
Stratum disjunctum, 23, 323f, 324f, 325
T cells, 135, 135f, 136f
Stratum externum, 343
effector, 135, 136f
Stratum granulosum, 22, 22f, 190, 192f, 259, 259f, 324, 326f
T cytotoxic cells, 135
Sttatum internum, 343, 344, 345f
T helper cells, 135
Stratum lucidum, 22, 22f, 323f, 324 325, 324f
T lymphocytes, 75
Stratum medium, 343
T tubules, 84, 87f
Stratum spinosum, 22, 22f, 190-191, 192f, 323, 326f
of cardiac muscle, 87, 88f
Stratum spongiosum, 129, 129f
Tactile corpuscles
Stria vascularis, of internal ear, 367-368, 368f-370f
encapsulated, 108,108f
Striated ducts, 26, 28f
nonencapsulated, 108, 108f
Striola, 370, 373f
Tactile epithelioid cells, 321-322, 324f
Stroma, 26, 27, 352, 352f
Tactile hait discs, 322
iridial, 356, 356f
Tactile hait follicles, 332, 333f
of liver, 201-202, 202f
Taenia ceci, 200
of testis, 233-235, 234f, 235f
Taenia coli, 200
Stromal cells, 136
Tancyte(s), 100
Stromal organ, 318
Tapetum fibrosum, 354
Subarachnoid space, 113, 114f
Tapetum cellulosum, 354
Subbasal lamina, 18
Tapetum lucidum, 353f, 354355, 354f
Subcutaneous plexus, 335
Target membrane SNAREs (tSNAREs), 8
Subendothelial layer, 118
Tarsal glands, 337, 337f
Subepithelial basement membrane of corhea, 351-352, 352f
Tarsal plate, 337, 337f
Sublingual salivary gland, 182-183, 183f
Taste buds, 175-176, 176f
Sublobular veins, 205
Submental organ, 338
Taste cells, 176
Teat, of mammary gland, 342
Submucosal glands, 172, 197, 198f
Submucosal intestinal glands, 189
Tectorial membrane, of internal ear, 368f, 369f, 372
Submucosal plexus, 172
Teeth. See Tooth (teeth)
Tela choroidea, 115
Subpapillary plexus, 335
Substantia propria, 352, 352f, 361
Tela submucosa
Suburethral diverticulum, 231
of small intestine, 197, 198f, 199f
Sulcus(i), reticular, 193, 194f
structure of, 17lf, 172
Telodendrite(s), 92f, 93f, 9495, 95f
Supporting cells, of internal ear, 368f, 372, 374f
Telodendritic (axon terminal) zone, 96
Supportive tissue(s), 43-58
Telogen, 333, 334f
adult, 43-58
bones, 46-58, 47f, 49f-57f
Telophase, of cell cycle, 13, 14f 
cartilage, 43-46, 44f46f
Tendon(s), collagenous, 38f, 42
joints, 58-59, 58f-60f
Tendon sheath, 38f, 42
splenic, 147-148
Terminal branches, of neuron, 92f, 93f, 94-95, 95f
Supracaudal gland, 340, 341f
Terminal bronchioles, 162-163, 163f, 164f
Surface epithelium, 18-23, 19f-23f
Terminal capillary, 150, 150f
Sufactant(s), pulmonary, 165
Terminal cisternae, 84
Sustentacular cell(s), 128, 156, 236-237, 236f, 237f, 306, 319
Terminal synaptic bulb, 94
Sustentacular cell cycle, 236, 237f
Territorial matrix, 45
Sweat glands,334335,335f
Tertiary follicles, 257f, 258-260, 259f, 260f
Swine hoofs, 345-346, 345f
Testicular tubules, straight, 243, 243f, 244f
Synapse(s)
Testis(es), 233-245
axodendritic, 93, 93f
 blood supply to, 244-245
chemical, interneuronal, 97
endocrine cells of, 319
function of, 97-98
innervation of, 244 245
Index
50t
interstitial endocrine cells of, 234-235, 235f
three-dimensional structure of interface between fetal tissues
interstitium of, 233-235, 234f, 235f
and, in placentation, 281f, 282
lamina propria of, 235-236
muscular, 79
mediastinum, 234, 235f
PNS, 104 109, 105f, 107f109f. See a/ro Peripheral nervous tissue
meiosis of, 237-238
supportive, 43-58. See aln Supportive tissue(s)
rete,243,244t
types of, 18t
septula, 234,234f
TNF-O. See Tumor necrosis factot-α (TNF-0x)
spermatocytogenesis of, 237, 238f, 239f
Tongue, 174177, 174f-176f
spermatogenic cells of, 237
lyssa of, 176, 176f
spermatozoa of, 239-240, 241f
Tonofibril(s), 23
spermiogenesis of, 238-239, 240f
Tonofilament(s), 22, 23
stroma of, 233-235, 234f, 235f
Tonsil(s), 142-143, 143f
sustentacular cells of, 236-237236f, 237f
Tonsillar papillae, 174
tunica albuginea of, 234, 234f
Tooth (teeth), 177-181, 177f-181f
tunica vaginalis of, 233-234
brachydont, 177,177f
Testosterone, 306
development of, 179-181, 179f-181f
Tetraiodothyronine, 308-309
hypsodont, 177,177f
TGF-β. See Transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β)
structure of, 177-179, 178f, 179f
TGN. See Trans-Golgi network (TGN)
Torus linguae, 174
Theca cells, 258
Trabecula(ae), 27
internal,318
arachnoid,113-114, 114f
Theca externa, 260, 260f
Trabecular arteries, of spleen, 149-150, 150f
Theca interna, 260, 260f
Trabecular meshwork
 Thermogenin, 10
corneoscleral, 358
Thermoreceptor(s), 108
of iridocorneal angle, 357f, 358
Third eyelid, 361, 362f
Trabecular sinuses, 145, 145f
Thrombocyte(s), 66
Trachea, 160, 161f
Thrombopoiesis, 75, 75f
Tracheal glands, 160
Thrombopoietin, 75
Trachealis muscle, 160
Thymic corpuscles, 140, 142f
Transcellular pathway, 227
Thymus, 140-142, 141f, 142f
Transcytosis, 8, 9f
Thyroglobulin, 308
Transfer RNA (tRNA), 7
biosynthesis of, 308, 309f
Transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), 70
synthesis, iodination, and proteolysis of, 308, 310f
Trans-Golgi network (TGN), 7, 8f
Thyroid follicle, 308, 308f
Transition zone, 162
Thyroid gland, 307-309, 307f-310f
Transitional epithelium, 19f, 20-22, 20f, 22f
Thyroid peroxidase, 308
Transmembrane collagens, 38
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), 302, 306
Transmembrane proteins, in cell membrane, 3, 3f
Thyrotroph(s), 302
Transport proteins, 228
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TR H), 306
TR H. See Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TR H)
Thyroxin, 308
Ttiad, 84
Tidematk, 58
Trilaminat plasma membrane, 3f
Tingible body macrophages, 140, 141f
tRNA. See Transfer RNA (tRNA)
Tip link, 369
Trophoblast(s), 279
Tissue(s), 17, 18f, 18t. See alro rperifac bype, e.g, Central nervous system
Trophoblast cell, binucleate, 285
(CNS), tissue of
Tropomyosin molecules, 83
adipose,33,34f, 43
Troponin, 83
btown, 43
TSH. See Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
white, 43
Tubular organs, structure of, 171-172, 171f
cells to, 14-16, 15f, 16f
Tubule(s)
CNS, 109-112, 110f-114f
coftex of, 343, 344f
connective, 32-43. See afro Connective tissue(s)
dentinal, 178
endoctine, 298-299, 316-319, 316f, 317f
distal convoluted, 219t, 220f, 222, 224f, 229
epithelial, classification of, 18, 19f
horny, 343, 344f
fetal, three-dimensional structure of interface between fetal tissues
proximal, 218-219, 218f, 219t, 228
and, in placentation, 281f, 282
proximal convoluted, 218-219, 218f, 219t
lymphatic
proximal straight, 219, 219t, 220f, 221f
diffuse, 137
tenal, 214215, 218-224, 218f, 219t, 220f-225f
organized, 137
function of, 227-228
maternal
seminifetous
fate at birth of, fetal-maternal anchoring effects on, in
convoluted, 235-243, 236f-242f
placentation, 281f, 282
cyclic events in, 240, 242f, 243
404
Dellmann's Textbook of Veterinary Histology
Tubule(s) (continxed)
myomettium of, 267
T, 84, 87f
nerves of, 266f, 267-268, 267f
of cardiac muscle, 87, 88f
perimetrium of, 267
testicular, straight, 243,243f, 244f
Utricle(s)
Tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-0), 70
of internal ear, 366f, 367
Tunica ad ventitia, structure of, 17lf, 172
macula of, 369-370, 373f, 374f
Tunica albuginea, 234, 234f, 257, 257f
Utticulosaccular duct, 367
Tunica dartos, 339
Uvea, 350
Tunica externa, 118, 119f
Tunica fibrosa bulbi, 350
Vagina, 269, 270f
Tunica interna, 118, 119f
histologic structure of, 269, 270f
Tunica interna bulbi, 350
Vagina(s), avian, 276f, 277
Tunica media, 118, 119f
Vaginal epithelium, cyclic changes of, 273-275, 274f, 275f
Tunica mucosa
Vallate papillae, 175, 175f
glandular region of, 187-189, 188f190f
Valve(s), 118, 126, 128f
nonglandular region of, 186, 187f
atrioventricular, 129, 129f
of small intestine, 195-196, 195f, 197f-199f
cardiac, 129, 129f
structure of, 17lf, 172
Vasa nervorum, 105
Tunica muscularis, 198
structure of, 171f, 172
Vasa recta, ascending, 225, 226f
Vasa recta descending, 225, 226f
Tunica serosa
of small intestine, 198
Vasa vasorum, 1l8, 120f
structure of, 171f, 172
Vascular endothelium, 119-120, 121f
Tunica vaginalis, 233-234
Vascular pole, 215
Tunica vasculosa bulbi, 350
Vascular system
Tympanic cavity, 364, 365f
blood, 117
Tympanic membrane, 364, 365f
lymph, 117
Type I hair cells, 368
Vasculogenesis, 122-123
Type I hair cells, 369
Veiled cells, 137
Vein(s), 118, 126-128, 128f
Umbilical cord, 280
hepatic, 205
Undifferentiated columnat cell, 196
large, 127-128, 128f
Unicellular glands, 24, 24t
medium, 126-127
Unilobar kidneys, 213, 213f
pulmonary, 166
Unilocular adipocytes, 33-34, 33f
small, 126
Unipapillary kidney, 212-213, 21 3f
sublobular, 205
Unitary smooth muscle, 80
Venous sinuses, dural, 113
Ureter, 230, 231f
Ventral funiculus, 1l2, 114f
Urethra, 231, 231f
Ventral gray column, 112
male, 252,252f
Ventral median fissure, 112, 114f
Utinary bladder, 230-231, 231f
Ventriculum(i), diverticulum, 187, 187f
Urinary passages, 229-232, 230f, 231f
Ventriculus, 210, 210f
Utinary pole, 215
Venule(s), 125, 127f
Urinary space, 216f, 217,217f
collecting, 125, 127f
Urinary system, 212-232
endothelial, high, 125, 135
kidneys, 212-229
interlobular portal, 202f, 204
Uropygial gland, 347,348f
muscular, 125, 127f
Uterine tube (oviduct), 262, 264-265, 265f, 266f
pericytic, 125, 127f
blood vessels of, 265
histologic structure of, 264-265, 265f, 266f
postcapillary, 125, 127f
histophysiology of, 265
Vesicle(s)
lymphatics of, 265
mattix, 50
nerves of, 265
sectetory, 93
Uterofertin, 288
syhaptic,93
Uterus, 265-268, 266f-268f
Vesicle SNAREs (vSNAREs), 7-8
avian, 276f, 277
Vesicular gland, 248-249, 249f
blood vessels of, 266f, 267-268, 267f
Vesicular transport, Golgi complex in, 7-9, 7f-9f
desctibed, 265
Vestibular apparatus, of internal ear, 368-370, 371f-374f
endometrium of, 265-267, 266f-268f
Vestibular aqueduct, 365f, 367
endothelium of, 265-267, 266f-268f
Vestibular glands
histologic structure of, 265-267, 266f-268f
majot,270
lymphatics of, 266f, 267-268, 267f
minor, 270
Index
405
Vestibular mechanism, of internal ear, 370
Yolk sac placenta, 280, 280f
Vestibular membrane, 367
inverted, 280
Vestibule, 269-270
Villous placenta, 282
Z line, 84
Villus(i)
Zona afcuata, 31l, 312f
atachnoid,114,114f
Zona fasciculata, 31l,312f
intestinal, 195, 196f, 198f
 Zona glomerulosa, 31l, 312f
Vimentin, 12
Zona intermedia, 31l, 312f
Visceral fibers, 104
Zona pellucida, 258, 258f
Visceral pleura, 161
Zonary placenta, 281f, 282
Visual pigments, 359
Zone(s)
Vitelline membrane, 275
of cartilage, 58, 59f
Vitreous body, 351f, 360-361
dark, 137, 138f
Vitreous chamber, 351
dendritic, 96
Volkmann's canals, 49, 49f
marginal, of spleen, 149, 149f, 150f
Vomeronasal cartilage, 158
reserve, 54, 55f
Vomeronasal duct, 157-158, 158f
reversal, 56, 57f
Vomeronasal glands, 158
telodendritic (axon terminal), 96
Vomeronasal otgan, 157-158, 158f
transition,162
Vulva, 270
Zone of hypertrophy, 54
Zone of ossification, 52f, 54, 56f
Wall of hoof, 343-345, 343f-345f
Zone of proliferation, 54, 55f
Weibel-Palade bodies, 120, 121f
Zone of resorption, 52f, 54, 55f
White adipose tissue, 43
Zonula adherens, 15, 15f
White line, 344
Zonula occludens, 15, 15f
White pulp, 148-149, 149f, 150f
Zonular fibers, 360, 360f
artery of, 149, 150f
Zygomatic salivary gland, 183, 184f
Zygote(s), 260, 265, 279
Yellow marrow, 76
Zygotene stage, 238
Yolk sac, 279, 280f
Zymogen granules, 27, 181