ECG
Interpretation
in the
Critically Ill Dog and Cat
THOmAS K. BAY
Blackwell
Publishing
小尾巴宠物健康中心http:/ttahc.taobao.com
ECG Interpretation in the
Critically Ill Dog and Cat
Thomas K. Day, DVM, MS, DACVA, DACVECC
Blackwell
Publishing
Thomas K. Day received his DVM from The Ohio State University.
Authorization to photocopy items for intermal or personal use, or
Dr. Day is a Diplomate of the American College of Veterinary Anes-
the internal or personal use of specific clients, is granted by
thesiologists and a Diplomate of the American College of Veterinary
Blackwell Publishing, provided that the base fee of $.10 per copy
Emergency and Critical Care. Dr. Day presently practices at
is paid directly to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood
Lonisville Veterinary Specialty and Emergency Services, Louisville,
Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those organizations that have
Kentucky.
been granted a photocopy license by CCC, a separate system of
payments has been afranged. The fee code for users of the Trans-
actional Reporting Service is ISBN-13:978-0-8138-0901-4;
@2005 Blackwell Publishing
ISBN-10:0-8138-0901-0/2005$.10.
All rights reserved
First edition, 2005
Blackwell Publishing Professional
2121 State Avenue,Ames,Iowa 50014,USA
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Day, Thomas K., 1960-
1-800-862-6657
ECG interpretation in the critically ill dog and cat /
Orders:
1-515-292-0140
Thomas K. Day.
Office:
1-515-292-3348
Fax:
P.cm.
Web site:
www.blackwellprofessional.co
Includes index
12
ISBN-13: 978-0-8138-0901-4 (alk. pape)
Blackwcll Publishing Ltd
ISBN-10: 0-8138-0901-0 (alk. paper)
9600 Garsington Road,Oxford OX4 2DQ,LR
1.Dogs--Diseases-
-Diagnosis.
2.
DREases
BIDAIOCHKH
Tel.:+44(0)1865 776868
Diagnosis.
3.Veterinary electrocardi
Critical
care medicine.
[.Title
APIE!
Blackwell Publishing Asia
550 Swanston Street, Carlton, Victoria 3053, Australia
SF992.C37.D39 2005
Tel.: +61 (0)3 8359 1011
636.7'0896075—dc22
0595244
The last digit is the print number: 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2
Dedication
This book is dedicated to allof the past, present and future students, technicians,inters,
residents,practitioners,and colleagues who provided encouragement and support for this
project.Thevastmajoriry of the casepresentations in this book arrived from patients in the
ICU or on the emergency room floor during the training of future clinicians.The inspiration
towrite this bookis certaintyallof the students andveterinariansI haveandwill encounter
However thecompletionof thisbookisentirely dedicatedtomywife,Deborah,who
has providedsupport andenduring love thatwords are unableto describe.
0611048
Contents
Cor
ntents
Preface
议
Case 22
57
How to Use This Book
xi
Case 23
59
Case 24
61
Anesthesia
Case 25
63
Case 26
67
Case 1
3
Case 2
Case 27
69
5
Case 3
8
Endocrine
Case 4
10
Case 5
12
Casc 28
75
Case 6
14
Case 29
77
Case 7
17
Case 8
19
Environmental
Case 30
81
Cardiovascular
Case 31
86
Case 9
23
Case 32
88
Case 10
25
Case 33
90
Case 11
28
Case 12
30
Medicine
Case 13
33
Case 14
Case 34
95
37
Case 35
98
Case 15
39
Case 36
100
Case 16
42
Case 37
102
Case 17
45
Case 38
104
Case 18
48
Case 19
50
Perioperative
Case 20
52
Case 21
55
Case 39
109
vif
rts
Case 40
111
Trauma
ter
Case 41
113
Cont
Case 49
133
Case 42
115
Case 43
Case 50
136
117
Case 51
138
Case 44
119
Case 52
142
Case 45
121
Case 53
123
144
Case 46
Intlex
147
Renal
Case 47
127
Case 48
129
vii
Preface
face
tion on how to interpret the electrocardiogram (ECG). You are en-
You will find that the emphasis on therapy for an ECG abnor-
couraged to studly these texts to acquire a base knowledge of the
was designed to emphasize ECG abnormalities based on case prc-1
the multitude of causes of ECG abnormalities, as well as the ability
sentations and the indications to perform an ECG. The ECG can  to recognize all possible therapeutic interventions, including an-
then be interpreted based on the abnormalities of the patient and
tiarrhythmic drugs.
ix
How to Use This Book
How
to
Use
The electrocardiograms (ECGs) presented in this book represent a
The normal ECG in the dog consists of the P-wave, P-R interval,
This
diagnostic “piece" of information regarding the status of the car-
QRS complex, T-wave, and Q-T interval (Figure FM3).
dliac conduction system in dogs or cats. A brief case is presented
Book
The P-wavc represents electrical conduction from the sinus
witlh pertinent information needed to provide an assessment of the
node to the atrioventricular (AV) node. Discharge from the sinus
ECG that follows the case on the same pagc. You are asked to make
node is synonymous with the sinus rate.
the ECG diagnosis and provide therapy for the patient that will cor-
The P-R interval represents conduction through the AV node.
rect the ECG abnormality. The ECG interpretation and approaches
Conduction through the AV node is the rate-limiting, or slowest,
to therapy of the patient and the ECG begin on the following page.
conduction within the cardiac electrical system.
You will benefit the most by providing the best answer possible
The QRS complex represents conduction from the AV node,
prior to looling at the answer that follows the case presentation.
through the Bundle of His and through the ventricle via the Purk-
Each case is presented in a randoin fashion, with no regard to the
inje fibers. The R-wave is positive in lead II of the ECG.
type of ECG abnormality. The categories of disease processes that
 The T-wave represents repolarization of the ventricle and can be
can result in an ECG abnormality have becn organized in a general
positive, negative, or biphasic
fashion without the prcsentation of a diagnosis.
S s! paads iaded aun pue l peal ane sauoen Dog IIv saoN
mm/s with 1 mV equal to 10 mm (1 cm).
Continuous monitoring of the ECG during anesthesia or during
hospitalization can provide the clinician witlh valuable information
that may be missed with intermittent ECG monitoring. Thcre are
many manufacturers of ECG monitors including bedlside monitors
(Figure FM.1) and telemetry units (Figure FM.2). Telemetry unils
afford the advantage of continuous ECG evaluation without having
the ECG monitor near the cage. Most telemetry unis can detect the
ECG up to l0o0 feet from the main monitor.
Knowledge of the normal P-QRS-T complex is cssential to de-
termine abnormal ECG complexes.
Figure FM.1. Bedside ECG monitor.
xi
How to Use This Book
The Q-T interval represents the relative time of ventricular repo-
larization.
The normal sinus discharge in dogs depends somewhat on size of
the dog. Small dogs (< 5 kg) have normal sinus rates of 100-140
bpm. Large dogs (> 30 kg) have a noimal sinus rate of 80-100 bpm.
The intrinsic rate of the ventricle in dogs is 40-80 bpm.
The normal feline ECG has several differenccs compared to the
canine ECG (Figure FM.4). The rale of sinus node discharge is
more rapid, and the QRS complexes are relatively smaller. The
sarme electric physiology that occurs in the canine occurs in the fe-
line. The intrinsic sinus node discharge rate is 160-200 bprm. The
intrinsic ventricular discharge rate is 130-150 bpm.
Figure FM.2.Telemetry unit
xii
How to Use This Book
Figure FM.3. Normal canine ECG.
Figure FM.4. Normal feline ECG.
xil
Anesthesia
Case 1
A healthy 3-year-old M Wiemaraner (30 kg) has becn sedated with
Describe the arrhythimia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
acepromazine (0.05 mg/kg, IV) and hydromorphone (0.1 mg/kg, IV)
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the next
to repair a laceration on the right forelimb. A local anesthetic (lido-
page.
caine, 5 ml) has been infiltrated around the wound. The heart rate
has decrcased, and the mucous membranes are pale. An ECG is per-
formed.
interpretation
(0.025 mg/kg, IV) can be administered to increase the rate of sinus
esthesia
node discharge, which will eliminate the ventricular escape
The rhythm is sinus bradycardia (60 bpm) with a ventricular escape
rhythm. The decision to adiminister the atropine or glycopyrolate
rhythm.A normal PQRS-T complex occurs in the middle of the
is not necessarily based on the ECG, but on whether perfusion is
1hythm strip (thin arrow).The intrinsic ventricular rate in the dog is
being compromised. The clinical finding of pale mucous mem-
40-60 bpm. A ventricular escape rhythm occurs when there is a de-
branes indicates that perfusion has decreased and that a parasympa-
lay in ventricular conduction from the sinus node. The primary
tholytic agent is indicated. An antiarrhythimic agent such as lido-
cause of the rhythm in this dog is likely increased parasympathetic
caine or procainamide will eliminate the ventricular escape rhythm
-daserd y suoudouoipy isuose piodo a Aa panuy auot
and is therefore contraindicated.
tholytic agent such as atropine (0.02 mg/kg, IV) or glycopyrrolate
Case 2
asé
八
An 8-month-old F Labrador (25 kg)is anesthetized for an ovario-
you that the ECG looks abnormal. Mucous membranes are pink
hysterectomy. Accpromazine (0.05 mg/kg,IM) and butorphanol
and the lingual pulse is strong. Indlirect blood pressure is normal.
(0.2 mg/kg,IM) were administered as prcanesthetic medication,
 Describe thc arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
propofol (4 mg/kg, IV) was administered as the induction agent,
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the next
alnd sevoflurane is the inhalation anesthetic. An esophageal ECG is
page
used to monitor the heart rate and rhythm.The technician alerts
lnterpretation
the venuricular rate is not rapid. The overall ventricular rate (90 bpmt)
Anesthesta
is not affected by the atrial flutter. There is no therapy for atial flut-
The rhythm disturbance is atrial futter with irregular conduction to
ter, as spontaneous resolution usually occurs (star, lower fgure).
the ventricle. There are numerous Pwaves that occur in a regular
Normal sinus rhythrm occurs following atrial futter (following
pattern between each normal QRS complex. The ventricular com-
page). The overall ventricular rate (70 bpm) is slower than during
plexes occur at an inregular rate due to the linited conduction
atrial fiutter but is still considered normal in this dog and joes not
through the atrioventricular (AV) node. Atrial futter can occur as a
require therapy.
tachyarrhythmia when the AV nodal conduction is normal. The influ-
ence of anesthctic agenis on the AV node is an explanation as to why
Case 2
Case 3
A 6-month-old F Yorkshire terrier (3 kg) is anesthetized for an
mmHg. A dose of atropine (0.02 mg/kg. IM) is adiministered. The
ovariohysterectomy.Preanestheticmedication consistedof di-
technician reports that the heart rate is now 70 bpm, and the ECG
azepam (0.2 mg/kg, IM) and butorphanol (0.4 mg/kg, IM), induc-
appears abnormal.
tion was with propofol (4 mg/kg,IV), and maintenance is with
Describe the arrbythmia or conduction disturbanceandyour ap-
isofurane. The technician notifes you that the heart rate has  proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the next
dropped to 80 bpm, and the indirect systolic blood pressure is 80  page.
8
Interpretation
the sinus node before the AV node, resulting in relativcly more P-
Case
waves than concurrent QRS complexes. The second is that there
The ECG shows an accelerated sinus response noted by P-waves
may be more parasympalhetic innervation Io the AV node, which
that are not followed by QRS complexes. The normal P-QRS-T
3
will result in the same imbalance between P-waves and QRS com-
complex is a first-degree atrioventricular (AV) block that is indi-
plexes. Regardless of the cause, bradycardia may occur before the
nations for the increased sinus node discharge without a concurrent
several minutes and not administer more atropine.
increase in ventricular activity. One is that there is more blood flow
to the sinus node relative to the AV node and the atropine affects
9
Anesthesia
Case 4
A 6-month-old F doimestic shorthair cat (3.5 kg) is anesthetized for
nipulated, and the systolic blood pressure increases to 150 mmHg.
The jaw tone is tense and the cat begins lo move. The ECG be-
of ketamine (15 mg/kg). acepromazine (0.1 mg/kg), and butor-
comes crratic aswell.
phanol (0.2 mg/kg), all administered IM prior to induction of anes-
Describe the arthythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
thesia with propofol (4 mg/kg, IV). The cat is receiving isoflurane
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the next
in oxygen. The doppler begins to sound erratic as the ovary is ma-
page.
10
Interpretation
Case
The rhythm diagnosis is sinus tachycardia with premature ventric-
while the depth of anesthesia is increased, by increasing the
ular complexes (thick arrows). The sinus complexes (circles) can
amount of isoflurane and/or administration of a more potent anal-
gesic agent such as hydromorphone (0.1 mg/kg, IV). Antiarrhyth-
likely causc of the arrhythmia is inadequate anesthetic depth result-
mic therapy may not be warranted, based on the results of increas-
jng in an increase in catecholamine release secondary to pain. The
ing anesthetic deptli and providing additional analgesia.
11
Case 5
A 10-year-old'F Poodle (5 kg) has been diagnosed with pyometra
ture/10 kg). Maintenance anesthesia is with isoflurane and oxy-
and surgery is underway. All chemistries were within normal lini-
gen. An ECG and doppler have been in piace since induction.
its, and fuid therapy had been administered for several hours, in-
Shortly after induction, you notice that the doppler rate suddenly
cluding hetastarch and lactated Ringer's solution (LRS) with
decreases.
potassium supplementation. Diazeparm (0.2 mg/kg, IV) and hydro-
Describe the atrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
morphone (0.1 ng/kg, IV) were administered prior to anesthetic
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the next
induction with ketamine and diazepam (1 ml of a 50:50 mix-
page.
12
Interpretation
have discharged prior to the continuation of the sinus electrical ac-
The initial rhythm is sinus tachycardia.Premature ventricular com-
tivity to the ventricle.Anesthetic depth must be assessed and blood
pressure deterrnined to decide whcther or not an antiarrhythmic
 plexes (arrows) occur in a bigeminal pattern. The presence of P.
agent is required.
waves preceding the premature ventricular complexes (PVCs) is of
no consequence. The sinus node and the abnormal QRS complex
13
Case 6
5
stf
A 16-year-old FS domestic shorthair cat (6 kg) presents for evalua-
IV) and placed on isoflutane. The heart rate drops dramatically, hy-
tion of chronic vomiting and an endoscopy is scheduled. Physical
potension occurs, and the ECG is reexamined (ECG, page 15).
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
examination is unremarkable.Thoracic auscuitation is unremark-
able, and the heart rate is 150 bpm. A preoperative ECG is per-
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on page 16.
formed and evaluated as normal
The cat is anesthetized with diazepam (0.4 mg/kg) and butor-
phanol (0.2 mg/kg) administered IV prior to propofol (5 mg/kg,
14
Case 6
15
Anesthesia
interpretation
Reexamination of the initial ECG revcals a third-degree block as
well (lower figure). The sinus rate is rapid (200 bpm), yet the ven-
The rhythm is a third-degree or complete atrioventricular (AV)
tricular rate is slower (150 bpm). There is no association between
block. The sinus node discharge is normal (165 bpm) and is repre-
the P-waves and QRS cormplexes.
sented by the P-waves (thin lines). The ventricular rate is slow (80
Third-degree AV block can be a spontaneous occurrence in cats.
bpm) and has no association with the P-waves (thick lines). The hy-
However, an echocardiogram is indicated to investigate the possi-
potension resuits in termination of the procedure, and anesthesia is
bility of primary heart disease.
discontinued.
16
Case 7
) 
medetomidine (0.02 mg/kg) and hydromorphone (0.1 mg/kg), both
non-weight-bearing lameness of the front right limb. The owners
administered IM. The mucous membranes become pale, the heart.
are unsure of the cause, though the dog runs in their 3/4-acre,
rate is slow, and the pulse is weak.An ECG is performed.
fenced-in yard with the other family dog, which is much larger.
IDescribe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
Physical examination is difficuit due to severe pain. You are able to
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the next
confirm norinal thoracic auscultation. You dccide to administer
page.
17
phone. Both anesthetic drugs increase parasympathetic tone, which
Interpretation
will decrease sinus node discharge (bradycardia) and slow conduc.
The rhythm is sinus bradycardia (thin lines), and the ventricular
tion through the AV node (first- and second-degree AV block).
rate is slow (40 bpum) and irregular. There are two conduction dis-
Therapy would consist of atropine acministration (0.02 mg/kg, IV)
turbances. The P-R interval is prolonged (bars), which defines a
or reversal of medetomidine with alipamezole (same volume as
first-degree atrioventricular (AV) block. There are P-waves with no
medetomidine, IM) and/or reversal of hydromorphone with nalox-
QRS complex (thick lines), which defines a second-degree AV
One (0.04 mg/kg, IV). Reversal of both anesthetic drugs will result
block. The likely cause of the bradycardia and the conduction dis-
in the reversal of the effects of the analgesia.
turbances is the combination of medetomidine and hydromor-
18
Case 8
ase
A 3-year-old MN domestic shorthair cat (3.5 kg) is anesthetized for
with isoflurane in oxygen. The doppler blood pressure is normal.
removal of a gastric foreign object. The physical examination and
yet the ECG appears unusual.
laboratory parameters were withiu normal lirnits.Anesthesia con-
Describe the arhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
sists of diazepam (0.3 mg/kg) and butorphanol (0.2 mg/kg) IV
proach to therapy. Thc answer and dliscussion appear on thc next
prior to induction with propofol (4 mg/kg, 1V) and maintenance
page.
19
the P-waves appear to move in and out of the QRS complexes. The
interpretation
ventricularrate is likely a ventricular arrhythmia that has originated
The arrhythmia is isorhythmic atrioventricular dissociation (nodal
high in the ventricle, resulting in a normal QRS complex.The
blood pressure is normal, and the overal ventricular rate is accept-
ventricular rate is slightly lower than normal (110 bpm), and the
able for an anesthetized cat. No antiarrhythmic therapy or alter-
QRS complexes are normal. The sinus rate is also near normal (110
ation of anesthetic depth is indicated. The arrhythmia resolves after
bpm) and is similar to the ventricular rate (thin lines). There is no
anesthesia.
association between the P-waves and the QRS cormplexes.In fact,
人人人人人
20
Cardiovascular
Case 9
D
An 11-year-old FS Comish Rex cat (4 kg) presenis in respiratory
gram reveals dilated cardiomyopathy. The heart rate is slow and
distress. Thoracic auscultation reveals muffed lung sounds ven-
regular. An ECG is performed.
trally, though lung sounds can be heard dorsaily. The heart sounds
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
e mufled. Pleural effusion is diagnosed. A total of 175 ml of chy-
proach to therapy、 The answer and discussion appear on the next
lous effusion is removed via thoracocentesis,and an echocardio-
page.
23
Interpretation
rhythm is an escape chythm that occurs when no electrical activity
enters the ventricle from the sinus node.The intrinsic ventricular
The ECG diagnosis is third-degree arioventricular (AV) block. P-
ratc of the feline ventricle is 130-150 bpm. Thc ventricular com-
waves (thin lines) occasionally appear throughout the rhythm strip
plexes are not premature in origin, and lidocaine or other antiar-
and have no association with the ventricular complexes. The sinus
rhythmic therapy is not indicated. Administration of an antiarrhyth-
rate (P-waves) is normal at 180 bpm. The ventricuiar complexes
mic agent could result in elimination of any ventricular activity and
Originale from three different foci within the ventricle (thick ar-
death of the cat. Definitive therapy for third-degree AV block is
Iows), as deteimmined by three different shapes of the QRS com-
placenent of aventricular pacemaker
plex. The ventricular rate is 140 bpm and regular. The ventricular
24
Case 10
ase
A 6-year-old MN Scottish deerhound (45 kg) presents for evalua-
mild pleural effusion, and generalized cardiomegaly. Dilated car-
tion of lethargy and exercise intolerance. Physical examination re-
diomyopathy is diagnosed via echocardiography. An ECG is per-
veals a grade 3/6 systolic apical heart murmur that is most promi-
nent at the ventral left hemithorax. The heart rate is rapid and
 Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
irregular. The femoral pulscs are weak and irregular with pulse
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the next
deficits. Tlhcre are mild crackles, bilaterally, and slightly muffled
page.
heart sounds. Thoracic radiography reveals hilar pulmonary edema.
25
and a reduced ventricular rate. A loading dose of digoxin can be ad-
yascular
Interpretation
ministered orally. The daily dose of digoxin is 0.22 mg/m² (body
The ECG rbythin diagnosis is atuial fbrillation. Cniteria for atrial
surface area) twice daily. The conversion from kilograms to body
Cardiova
fibrillation include a rapid, iregular ventricular rate, normal QRS
surface area must be made prior to dose calculation and administra-
complexes,lack of P-waves, and the presence of fibrillation waves
lion of the digoxin. If the dog's body surface area is 1.25 m², the
(f-waves). F-waves (thin lines) occur instead of P-waves as sinus
daily dose is approximately 0.5 mg. The entire calculated daily dose
node discharge has been replaced by chaotic atrial conduction. The
(0.55 mg) should be administered twice on the first day of thcrapy.
QRS complexes are normal in appearance and occur in a rapid, ir-
The dose of digoxin can then be administered at the appropriate
regular rhythm (240 bpm). Fibrillation of the atria results in con-
dose (0.25 mg) twice daily on the second day.
stant electric stimulation of the atrioventricular (AV) node. The AV
The congestion has resolved 48 hours later, and the fermoral
 node conducts electrical activity to the ventricle in a rapid, iregular
pulse rate is slower than on presentation.
pattem,resulting in normal,rapid,and irregular QRS complexes
A second ECG is performed (next page).
Therapy for cardiogenic failure (furosemide, 2 mg/kg. IV; digoxin;
The ventricular rate has decreased to near normal (100 bpm) and
and enalapril, 0.25 mg/kg, PO BID) is instituted. Digoxin is the ini-
remains irregular. The f-waves are mote evident as the ventricular
tial drug of choice for atrial fibrillation. Digoxin slows conduction
late decreases.
through the AV node, resulting in slower discharge to the ventricle
26
Case 10
27
Case 11
cles. The diagnosis of dilated cardiomyopathy is made.An ECG is
Physical cxamination is unremarkable except for a very slow and
performed.
regular heart rate and femoral pulse rate with no pulse deficits.
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap
Thoracic auscultation reveals a 3/6 systolic murrnur, heard best at
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the next
the left apex, and normal lung sounds. Echocardiography revcals
page.
bilateral atrial enlargement and dilated, poorly contracting ventri-
28
Interpretation
within the ventricle because the shapc of the QRS complex is dif-
Case
ferent than that of the ventricular escape complcxes. These likely
The rhyihm indicaies a third-degree or complete atrioventricular
developed as a result of poor perfusion to the ventricular my
(AV) block. The line graph demonstrates the lack of association
ocardium because of the heart disease. Administration of an antiar
between P-waves (short lines) and QRS complexes (long lines).
thythmic agent such as lidocaine to control the R-on-T is not rec-
The small lines represent normal discharge of the sinus node (250
ommended. Lidocaine will result in termination of the ventricular
bpm). The large lines demonstrate the intrinsic ventricular rate for
escape rhythm. Laboratory tests should commencc to deterimine if
the cat (70-130 bprn). The cat clinically is not in congestive heart
there is another cause of the ventricular arrhythmia (hypokalemia,
failure. Definitive therapy wouid consist of a ventricular pace-
maker.
hypercalcemia, etc.). The R-on-T phenomcnon is not a contraindi-
There are two ventricular complexes with R-on-T phenomena
cardiomyopathy would include a positive inotrope such as digoxin.
(circle). The ventricular complexes originate from a different site
29
Cardiovascular
Case 12
A 7-year-old MN Great Dane mix (35 kg) presents for lethargy and
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your im-
exercise intolerance. Physical examination reveals a very lethargic
mediate approach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on
dog. Thoracic auscultation reveals a very rapid, irregular heart rate
the followingpages.
with no cardiac murmur. Femoral pulses are weak, rapid, and irreg-
ular with many pulse deficits.An ECG is performed.
30
Initial Interpretation
docaine (2 mg/kg. IV) is administered as a slow bolus. Other op-
Case
lions include procainanide (6 mg/kg, IV, over 5 minutes) and mag-
The rhythm diagnosis is sustained ventricular tachycardia with a
nesium sulfate (30 mg/kg, IV). The ECG (lower figure) appears to
rate of 360 bpm, The specific term for this type of sustained ven-
have converted out of sustained ventricular tachycardia.
tricular tachycardia is torsade de pointes.
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
The primary cause of the lethargy and cxercise intolerance is
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the next
likely the extremely high ventricular rate, as therc are lo clinical
page.
signs of congestive heart failure. Innediate cessation of the
rhythm is indicated. An IV catheter is placed in a cephalic vein. Li-
31
Follow-up Interpretation
channel antagonists (diltiazem) and beta-blockers (atenolol).
/ascular
Other considerations include digoxin to treat the atrial fibrillation
The rhythm diagnosis is paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia with
R-on-T phenomena (circle). There is a second arrhythmia in the
rhythmias.An echocardiogram provides the diagnosis of dilated
ECG that is atrial fibrillation. Considerations for therapy of both
cardiomyopathy.
ventricular and supraventricular arrhythmias include calcium
32
Case 13
Case
A 15-year-old MN domestic longhair cat presents in respiratory
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
distress. The history is unremarkable. Thoracic auscultation reveals
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appcal on the next
bilateral fine crackles and a grade 4/6 systolic murmur, heard loud-
page.
est at the left apex.The femoral pulse rale is very erratic,and therc
arc pulse deficits. You perform an ECG during initial therapy of
oxygen administration.
33
Initial Interpretation
dermally). The cat is able to have an echocaidiogram, which re-
veals hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with enlargement of the left
The rhythm is rapid (360 bpm) and regular. The QRS complexes
atriurn. The respiratory distress resolves with medical therapy in
P
24 hours and the ECG is reexamined (page 35).
gin. However, it is difficult to determnine if the rhythm is supraven-
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
tricular or ventricular as the rate is too rapid and there is no normal
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the follow-
P-QRS-T complex for comparison.‘Therapy is initiated with
ingpages.
furosemide (2 mg/kg, IM) and nitroglycerine paste (1/4 inch trans-
34
Case 13
35
Follow-up Interpretation
dia. The decision to institute antiarhythmic therapy on initial pres
entation is usually determined after congestion is relieved. Dilti
The rhythm diagnosis is normal sinus rhythm with occasional ven-
azem is a calcium channel antagonist that is a recommended ther-
tricular premature complexes (circles). The QRS complexes of the
apy for cats with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Diltiazerm could
initial ECG are similar to those of the normal QRS complexes.
also be used to control supraventricular tachycardia.
Therefore, the initial ECG diagnosis is supraventricular tachycar-
36
Case 14
5e
的
A 14-year-old FS Beagle (10 kg) is presented for evaluation of acute
weak and rapid femoral pulse.An ECG is performed while acute
cardiogenic failure therapy is instituted with furosemide (2 rmg/kg.
thc last 4 years and is curently recciving enalapril. The dog acutely
IV) and nitroglycerine (l/4 inch transdermally).
wen1 into respiratory distress after running through the house. Phys-
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
ical examination reveals fulminate pulmonary edema (pink,foamy
jxau au uo ieadde uoissnosip pue remsue aul Aderaui 0i qoeond
fluid from the nostrils and bilateral fine crackles), a grade 5/6 sys-
page.
tolic murmur heard loudest over the left hemithorax, and a very
37
Interpretation
years of normal activity can be caused by chordae tendinae rupture
司
or development of an arrhythmia. Acute onset of atrial fibrillation
The rhythm diagnosis is atrial fibrillation. The QRS complexes are
or supraventricular tachycardia can resull in acute dccompensation
normal in appearance, rapid, and irregular. There is no consistent
in dogs with mitral valve discase.Acute therapy for the atrhythmia
R-R interval (bars), and there are no discernible P-waves. Rapid
could consist of digitalis glycosides (oral-loading dose or intra-
atrial fibrillation can be mistaken for supraventricular tachycardia
venous administration) or calcium channel blockers (verapamil,
(Eormal appearance of QRS complexes, rapid and regular rate).
0.5 rng/kg, IV; diltiazem, 0.1 mg/kg,IV, over 5 minutes).
Acute decompensation to congestive heart failure after several
38
Case 15
Sé
A 6-year-old MN domestic shorthair cat (6 kg) presents in acute
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
fespiratory distress. Pleural cffusion has been identified, and 200
ml of a transudate has been removed. Thoracic auscultation reveals
ingpages.
a very irregular heart rhythm with corresponding pulse deficits. You
perform an ECG as part of your diagnostics plan.
6
initial Interpretation
Increasing the paper speed to 50 mm/s can be helpful in determil-
ing if P-waves are present (lower figure).
The initial rhythm diagnosis is ventricular tachycardia. The QRS
 More discussion and ECG on the next page
complexes arc wide and bizarre, and the ventricular rate is regular.
40
Follow-upInterpretation
responding QRS complex is helpful in determining the diagnosis of
Case
ventricular tachycardia. Lidocaine (0.25 mg/kg, IV) would be indi-
P-waves are identified (short vertical lines), which indicates that
cated in this cat.
the sinus node has function. Identification of P-waves with no cor-
41
Case 16
A 4-year-old MN Boxer prcsents for acute syncope.Physical ex-
Describe the airhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
amination reveals a dog in good conformation and no other obvious
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the follow-
problerms. Thoracic auscultation reveals an extremely rapid and ir-
ing pages.
regular heart rate and a normal pulmonary system. Femoral pulses
are weak, rapid, and iregular, with many pulse deficits. An ECG is
perforned irmmediately.
42
Initial Interpretation
An intravenous catheter is placed, and lidocaine (2 mg/kg, IV) or
The rhythm diagnosis is sustained ventricular tachycardia. Torsade
procainamide (6 mg/kg. IV) could be adliministered. Several min-
de pointes is the specific type of sustained ventricular tachycardia.
utes later, the ECG changes (lowcr figure).
43
Follow-up Interpretation
An echocardiogram is indicated to deteimine if this dog has un-
rdiovascular
derlying heart disease (dilated cardiomyopathy) or Boxer car-
The ventricular tachycardia has been convertcd to sinus tachycar-
diomyopathy (arthythmias only).
dia. There is a compensatory delay in sinus node activity following
the ventricular tachycardia due to repolarization of the sinus node.
Haneaect
44
Case 17
A 10-year-old FS Poodle presents for a 4-week history of coughing
tion also reveals irregular heart rate with occasional pulse deficits.
that occurs prinarily at night and after exercise. Otherwise, the dog
Radiographs reveal left-sided cardiomegaly.
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
grade 4/6 apical systolic murmur, heard loudest on the left
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appcar on the follow-
hemithorax, but audible on the right hemithorax as well. Ausculta-
ingpages.
45
initital Interpretation
Continued observation of an ECG reveals another abnormality
(lower figure)
The rhythm is sinus with atrial premature complexes occurring in a
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
bigeminal pattem. An abnormai, premature P-wave and a normal
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the next
QRS complex followed by a compensatory delay in conduction
page
identify atrial premature complexes (circles)
46
Follow-up Interpretation
sist of slowing conduction through thc AV node to allow appropii-
 A period of paroxysmal atrial tachycardia occurs at the begining
atc ventricular activity with digitalis glycosides, calcium channel
blockers, or beta-blockers. Therapy for the arrhythimia would not
of the ECG strip with the unusual presence of a nonconducted, ab-
normal atrial P-wave (circles) that defines secondl-degree atrioven-
be indicated in this dog because the rhythm does not result in clini-
tricular block. This may occur due to the refractive nature of the
cal signs of syncope or exercise intolerance.
ventriclc during the rapid rate. Therapy for atrial arhythmias con-
47
Cardiovascular
Case 18
A 14-ycar-old Cocker spaniel presents for episodes of syncope dur-
 Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
ing exertion. Physical examination is unremarkable. Auscultation
jxau sun no jeadde uoissnos pue rmsue au adenaun on yoeond
is within norrmal limits except for a slow,regular heart rate and
page.
femoral pulse. An ECG is performed.
48
Interpretation
(thick lines) is 40-60 bpm. Thc QRS complexes do not have the
Case
typical appearance of a wide and bizarre complex. The QRS com-
The thythm diagnosis is third-degree or complele atrioventricular
(AV) block. The AV node is nonfunctional in this dog and could be
plexes appear more normal in configuration because the origin is
high in the ventricle near the AV node. Definitive therapy is place-
due to an aging change of the AV node. The sinus rate (P-waves;
ment of a ventticular pacemaker.
(hin lines) is normal (120 bpm). The venticular escape rhythm
49
Cardiovascular
Case 19
A 4year-old Great Dane (55 kg) presents for syncopal episodes.
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
Physical examination reveals a very weak dog with pale mucous
 proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the next
membranes and weak, irregular femoral puises. Thoracic ausculta-
page.
tion reveals a rapid, irregular heart rate and no cardiac muimmur. An
ECG isperformmed.
50
Interpretation
ers (verapamil, 0.5 mg/kg, IV; diltiazeim, 0.1 mg/kg, IV, over 5
Case
mirutes). Adenosine (0.05 mg/kg, IV, over 5 minutes) is also an op-
The ECG diagnosis is supraventricular tachycardia. The heart rate
tion, though the effectiveness has not been determined in dogs. Pri-
is rapid (240 bpm) and regular. The QRS complexes are normal in
appearance. There is one premature ventricular complex (aitow).
mary heart disease inust be ruled out as a cause of the airhyihmia.
Vagal maneuvers such as compression of the globes of the eye and
Primary therapy is directed to slowing the heart rate. Oplions in-
carotid artery massage could be attermpted to increase parasympa-
chude digitalis glycosides, beta-blockers (esmolol, 0.25 mg/kg, IV,
thetic tone and possibly convert the rhythrm to sinus rhythm.
slow bolus; atenolol, 0.5 mg/kg, PO), and calcium channel block-
51
Case 20
A 12-year-old MN cat (4 kg) had a ventricular pacemaker placed
Describe thc arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
several years ago for treatment of a third-degree atrioventricular
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the follow-
(AV) block. The cal presents for acute onset of lethargy.You are able
ing pages.
to observe the batlery under the skin in the right cervicothoracic
area, and it appears to be discharging properly. Auscultation reveals
an irregular heart rate compared to the discharge of the battery.
52
Initial Interpretation
compensatory delay in conduction. There is one pacemaker spike
Case
The normal ventricular complexes generated by the pacemaker are
that does not result in a ventricular complex (thin arrow). The cat is
Iocated in the latter half of the ECG strip (stars). The pacemaker is
placed on atenolol (6.25 mg, PO, SID) for control of the ventricular
embedded in the ventricle. Therefore, the QRS compiex that is gen-
arrhythmias and an ECG is reevaluated in one week (lower figure).
 Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
erated is ventricular in origin. Ventricular premature complexes oc-
cur immcdiately following a pacemaker-generated QRS complex
proach to therapy.
in the beginning of thc ECG strip (thick arrows), resulting in a
53
Cardiovascular
Follow-up interpretation
Dot be able to detect ventricular activity and may be rnalfunction
ing. The beginning of a pacemaker spike on the T-wave of a prema-
Thcre are nore norinal pacermaker-generated QRS complexes, with
ture ventricular complex could lead to ventricular fibrillation. The
only one pacemaker spike that does not generate a complex (thin
pacemaker requires reevaluation.
arrow). However, two pacemaker spikes (circle) occur soon after a
ventricular premature complex (thick arrow). The pacemaker inay
54
Case 21
ase
A 7-year-old MN Doberman (35 kg) presents for a history of pro-
hemithorax. Pulse deficits are also present and an ECG is per-
gressive lethargy. Physical examination reveals depression; a rapid,
fomed.
very weak and irregular femoral pulse; and a grade 2/6 systolic
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
  o        
proach to thcrapy.
55
Interpretation
conduction through thie AV node and permit slowing of the ventric-
iovascular
ular rate.Other options include calcium channel blockers (vera-
The rhytlhm is supraventicular tachycardia (SVT). The QRS com-
pamil, 0.5 mg/kg, IV; diltiazem, 0.1 mg/kg, IV, over 5 minutes) and
beta-blockers (atenolol, 0.5 mg/kg, PO, SID), though each can re-
(290 bpm).Normal QRS complexes classify this rhythin as
sult in decreased contractility. Adenosine (0.05 mg/kg, IV, over 5
supraventicular in origin.It is not possible to differentiate atrial
minutes) can be used in people with spontaneous occurrence of
from junctional tachycardia with a rate this rapid. Atrial tachycar-
SVT (no underlying heart disease).Adenosine does not have the
same success in dogs with DC'M
diography reveals dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). Primary ther-
apy for this rhythm1 would consist of digitalis glycosides to slow
56
Case 22
ase
22
A 12-year-old FS Himalayan (3.5 kg) presents for evaluation of an
 Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
irregular heart rhythm. The cat has a normal physical examination
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the next
except for irregularity of the heart rhythim and pulsc deficits. The
page.
cat is normal at home, You perform an ECG.
57
Interpretation
abnormalities. The ventricular complexes are interpolated, which is
ascual
described as a consistent discharge of a ventricular complex with-
The rhythm is sinus with occasional premature ventricular com-
plexes (PVCs)(thick arrows) that occur at a regular interval. Note
ered benign. No therapy is indicated, though frequent reevaluations
that the P-QRS-T comploxes of the normal feline ECG can he very
of the echocardiogram are recommended.
small. A complete cardiovascular diagnostic evaluation reveals no
58
Case 23
Case
A 6-year-old Irish wolfhound (45 kg) presents for an occasional
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
cough and syncope. Physical examination reveals depression;
rapid, slightly weak, and irregular femoral pulse; a grade 2/6 sys-
page.
tolic murmur, most prominent over the apical portion of the left
hemithorax; and muliple pulse deficits. An ECG is performed to 
begin the evaluation of syncope.
59
ascular
interpretation
lated cardiomyopathy. The rhythm is likely a prelude to the devel.
opment of atrial fbrillation. Therapy would consist of slowing con-
The rhythm is paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia (SVT).
duction through the AV node to allow a slower ventricular rate.
There are occasional normal P-QRS-T complexes (circles) that are
Therapeutic options include digitalis glycosides, calcium channel
followed by short bursts (paroxysyms) of SVT (bars). The normal
blockers (verapamil, 0.5 mg/kg. IV; ditiazem, 0.1 mg/kg, IV, over
complexes that occur are terrned capture complexes, us the sinus
5 minutes), and beta-blockers (atenolol, 0.5 mg/kg, PO, SID)
node captures the normal rhythm. Echocardiography reveals di-
60
Case 24
Case24
An 8-year-old MN Maine Coon (7 kg) has been treated for hyper-
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
trophic cardiomyopathy for the last 4 ycars and is currently receiv-
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the nexl
ing diltiazem twice daily. Recently, the owner has noticed lethargy
Page.
after exertion. Physical examination is unremarkable, and thoracic
auscultation reveals clear lungs with a slow, regular heart rate. You
perforni an ECG.
61
nterpretation
of the diltiazem. The sius rate is nornal, so a side effect due to dil-
tiazem is unlikely since the calcium channel blockers also can de-
The rhythm is third-degree atrioventricular (AV) block. The sinus
crease sinus node discharge. The cat is not showing signs of con-
rate (thin lines) is regular and normal (180 bpm). The ventricular
 gestive heart failure. Therapy at this point in lime is not indicated.
rate (thick lines) is regular and occurs at the normal intrinsic rate of
However, placement of a ventricular pacemaker may be a viable
the ventricle (l60 bpm). There is no association between the sinus
option.
and ventricular complexes. The cause of the rhythm disturbance
could be related to progression of the heart discase or to side effects
62
Case 25
ase
A 13-year-old MN Persian cat (3.5 kg) has been treated for hyper-
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction clisturbance and your ap-
trophic cardiomyopathy for the past 2 years. He is currently receiv-
proach to thcrapy. The answer and discussion appear on the follow-
ing diltiazem and enalapril. The owner has noticed that the cat is
ing pages.
more lethargic, and a syncopal episode occured today. Ausculta-
tion reveals a very irregular heart rate with corresponding pulse
deficits. You perform an ECG.
63
Initial Interpretation
reveals iregularity and the appearance of P-waves. A second ECG
rhythn strip is examined (page 65).
The initial ECG diagnosis is sustained ventricular tachycardia. The
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
QRS complexes appear abnormal in configuration, and the rate is
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on page 66.
rapid (240 bpm) and regular. Continucd examination of the ECG
64
Case 25
65
Follow-up Interpretation
plex. The conduction of the QRS complex is described as a right
bundle branch block.Therefore, the tachycardia is likely junctional
品
Examination of the second ECG strip reveals P-waves with what ap-
品
Or' supraventricular in origin. The ECG diagnosis is then described
pears to be a norrmal P-R interval and conduction through the ventri-
as paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia (bars) with junctional
cle (circles). The QRS complex does not change, Cats with hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy can develop abnormal conduction through
agent such as a beta-blocker should be considered.
the ventricle, resulting in an abnorimal appearance of the QRS com
66
Case 26
Case 26
A 12-year-old M Schnauzer (10 kg) presents for evaluation of syn-
inregular, with the same pauscs noted on auscultation. An ECG is
 i a     s   
perforned.
examinalion reveals a dog in good conformation with no obvious
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
abnormalities. Auscultation reveals no cardiac murmur, but a very
irregular rhythm with lengthy pauses. Femoral pulse is strong, yet
page.
67
Interpretation
as the paroxysmal SV'T is the rhythm that is preventing asystole
and likely death. The paroxysmal SVT may also be a contraindica-
The primary disturbance is sinus arrest. There is a junctional es-
tion for atropine therapy in this dog Definitive therapy is a ransve-
cape complex (ihick arrow) that is followed by paroxysmal
nous atrial pacemaker,
supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) (bars). There is one normal
P-QRS-T complex (circle). No antiarrhythmic therapy is indicated
68
Case 27
Ca
ase
Z
A 10-year-old MN Anstralian shepherd (25 kg) presents for
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
lethargy and exercise intolerance. Physical examination reveals
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion begin on the next
jugular vein distension with jugular pulsation. Thoracic ausculta-
page.
tion reveals normal lung sounds and rapid, muffed heart sounds.
The fermoral pulse is weak and rapid and an ECG is performed.
69
Cardiovascular
Initial lnterpretation
reveals pericardial effusion with tamponade of the right ventricle
Pericardiocentesis is the treatment of choice.
The rhythm is sinus tachycardia with electrical altemans. The QRS
complexes are smaller than normal and vary in size (circle). Peri-
cardial effusion with tamponade should be suspected. Ultrasound
70
Follow-up Interpretation
Case27
Pericardiocentesis results in an irmmediate decrease in heart rate
and respiratory sinus arrhythmia. The electrical alternans has re-
solved, and the QRS complex is larger (circles).
71
Endocrine
Case 28
Case28
A 7-year-old M Sanoyed (30 kg) presents for evaluation of ven-
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
tricular tachycardia. Mucous membranes are palc, and the femoral
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the next
pulse is weak, rapid, and irregular. Blood pressure is unable to be
page.
obtained. An ECG is performed.
75
Interpretation
cium gluconate (0.5--1.0 ml/kg, IV, over 10 minutes) to establish a
more normal ECG.Fluid therapy and insulin (0.5 unit/kg) followed
The rhythm diagnosis is ventricular tachycardia with a rate of 240
by dextrose (1-1.5 g/unit administered insulin) would also be indi-
bpm. Fluid therapy (crystalloids and colloids) is instituted until di-
cated to correct the ECG. Definitive therapy for Addison's disease
agnostics are completed. Electrolytes reveal hyponatremia (Na+ =
with fudrocortisone acetate (Florinef) or desoxycorticosterone
125 mEq/L) and hyperkaleinia (K+ = 9.7 mEq/L). Addison's dis-
pivulate (Percorten) will correct the hyperkalemia.
ease is suspected and confirmed with an ACTHI stimulation test.
Therapy for the ventricular tachycardia would include 10% cal-
76
Case 29
Case 29
A 3-yeal-old MN Australian shepherd (25 kg) presents in lateral re-
pulse is slow and irregular An ECG is placed as part of the initial
Cumbency. The owners report a history of vomiting and bloody di-
diagnosticworkup.
arrhea for 3 days. The owners also report a similar presentation 3
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
i j s   p q o  o s
fluid therapy. The mucous membranes are pale, and the femoral
page.
77
Interpretation
ACTH stimulalion test. Therapy for the junctional escape rhythm
should first consist of 10% calcium gluconate (0.5-1.0 ml/kg,IV,
The rhythm is atrial standstill with junctional escape complexes
 over 10 minutes) with the goal of reestablishing a more normal dif-
(thick arrow). Two sinus complexes appear (small arrows) near the
ference between resting membrane and threshold potential. Ac-
end of the ECG rhythm stip. Fluid therapy (crystalloids and col-
complishment of this goal will result in a more rapid heart rate. At-
loids) is instituted until diagnostics are completed. Electrolytes re-
ropine would likely be ineffective in this dog.
veal hyponatremia (Na+ = 135 mEq/L) and hyperkalemia (K+ :
11.2 mEq/L). Adelison's discase is suspected and confirmed with an
78
Environmental
Case 30
ase
A 5-year-old spayed female (FS) Saint Bermard mix (65 kg) is
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
found collapsed outdoors in subfreezing weather. The rectal tem-
proach to therapy. The answcr and discussion begin on the next
perature is below the lower limits of the thermometer (< 90°F).
page.
The dog is minimally responsive. The mucous membranes are pale,
and the femoral puise is slow, weak, and irregular. Systolic blood
pressure cannot bc obtained and an ECG is performed.
8f
Initial Interpretation
The prinary therapy for atrial fibrillation in this dog is aggres-
sive external rewarming and fuid therapy with crystalloids and col-
vironmer
The rhythm is atrial fbrillation. The ventricular rate is 80 bpm and
loids.
irregular. There are no discernible P-waves, and the QRS coim-
Aggressive rewarming has resulted in a rectal temperature of
plexes appear to be conducted in a normal fashion. Hypothermia
AU
98°F. The femoral pulse is much stronger and remains irregular
can result in atrial fibrillation in people and dogs. The main differ-
(page 83).
ence between atrial fibrillation caused by heart disease and that
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
caused by hypothermia is that the ventricular rate is much slower
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on page 84.
during hypothermia. A second differential diagnosis for atrial fib-
rillation not caused by heart discase is hypothyroidism.
82
Case 30
83
Follow-up Interpretations
Atrial fibrillation has spontaneous converted to normal sinus
F
rhythm (page 85). Resolution of hypothermia-induced atrial fibril-
The rhythm remains atrial fibrillation.The ventricular rale is higher
lation has been reported in the dog.
(170 bpm) and iegulat, with normal QRS complexes. There are
no P-waves, although the ventricular rate appcars more regular.
Several hours later, the heart rate becomes fnore regular.
84
Case 30
85
Case 31
An 8-month-old MN domestic shorthair cat (3 kg) presents after
pressure is 5O mmHg.'The heart rhythm and pulse are weak and ir-
being inadvertently caught in a dryer. The owner reports that thie
regular. An ECG is performed as part of the initial diagnostic plan.
dryer was on several minutes before the problem was recognized.
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
The cat is extremely tachypneic,with open-mouth breathing, and
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the next
the rectal teinperature is 107.8°F. Indirect doppler systolic blood
page.
86
Interpretation
The initial approach to therapy is to recstablish perfusion lo the
Case
The rhythm is multiforme ventricular tachycardia wjth R-on-T
 r   r i y    
crystalloids and colloids, administration of an effective analgesic
phenomena (circle). All of the complexes are of ventricular origin.
The various shapes of the QRS complexes (stars) indicate origins
agent (hydromorphone or morphine) intravenously, and extermal
from different areas of the ventricle. Ventricular complexes arising
cooling. Blood gas analysis will provide infornation on the acid-
base status. All of the previously mentioned causes of ventricular
myocardium, direct effects of hyperthermia, pain, anemia, direct
arrhythunias need to be corrected prior to administration of an an-
trauma, acid-base disturbances,underlying heart disease, or a com-
tiarrhythmic drug such as lidocaine_ Potential detrimental effects of
bination of factors. The rate is rapid (200 bpm), and overall perfu-
lidocaine prior to correction of the clinical abnormalities inchude
sion has been affected (hypotension). The R-on-T phenomenon is a
hypotension, seizure activity, and possible worsening of the ar-
prefibrillatory event that requires immediate therapy.
rhythrmia.
87
nmental
Case 32
A 12-year-old FS cat (3 kg) presents after disappearing for 4 days
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
in very cold weather. The cat is very thin and presents in lateral re-
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the next
cumbency. The rectal temperarure docs not register on your ther-
page.
mormeter (< 90°F) and you are unable to palpatc a femoral pulse.
The heart rate on auscultation appears to be slow and regular. An
ECG is performed.
88
Interpretation
velopment of a ventricular escape rhythm. Primary therapy consists
Of external rewarming. The ECG can be reexamined after normal
ase
The rhythm is conplete atrioventricular dissociation with sinus
bradycardia (thin lines). There are three different ventricular foci of
rectal temperature is established. Administration of an antiarrhyth-
the QRS complexes. Hlypothermia can 1esult in decteased sinus
mic such as lidocaine is contraindicated and will likely result in
node discharge (P-waves), atrioventricular node inactivity, and de-
termination of the ventricular escape rhythm.
89
Case 33
A 2-year-old MN mixed breed dog (25 kg) is being treated for
Glasgow coma score increased to a near normal value. The dog
head trauma after being hit by a car. Adequate volume resuscita-
has deteriorated and is now comatose,the systolic blood pressure
tion has been established with hypertonic saline and hetastarch,
is 190 mmHg, and there is a very slow and irregular heart rate. An
based on clinical parameters of pink mucous membranes, norimal
ECG is performed.
capillary refill time, and blood pressure. Furosemide and mannitol
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
were administered 3 hours previous. The initial response to fuid
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the next
resuscitation and diuretic therapy was encouraging as the modified
page.
90
Interpretation
tension. Therapy would consist of a second adiministration of di-
Case
The primary rhythm is sinus arrest. The primary cause of the al-
uretic therapy, intubation, and ventilation. Atropine could be ad
ministered, though there is the potential for a detrimental increasc
in cerebral blood fow.
bly due to hermiation of the brain. The Cushing's reflex resulis in
91
Medicine
Case 34
Case
A 4-year-old MN Rottweiler (40 kg) presents for evaluation of
lar heartbeat. Indirect blood pressure is within normal limits. An
chronic vomiting and is scheduled to undergo diagnostic en-
ECG is perforimed.
doscopy. Physical examination reveals a very healthy looking dog
IDescribe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
that is bright, alert, and responsive. The femoral pulse is strong but
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the next
irregular. Auscultation is within normal linits except for the irregu-
page.
95
Interpretation
IM), induction with a combination of ketamine and diazepam
edicin
(50:50 mixture, 1 ml/10 kg, IV; 2 ml each of diazepam and keta-
The rhythm is atrial fibrillation. The ventricular rale is I50 bpm
mine), and maintenance with isoflurane. The atrial fibrillation re-
and irregular, and there are fibrillation waves (thin lines). An
mains, and the heart rate and blood pressure are normal during
echocardiogram is performed and is within normal limits. No ani-
anesthesia (page 97),
Inflammatory bowel disease is diagnosed. Prednisone (I mg/kg
tion either is related to chronic intestinal disease or is considered a
PO daily) is prescribed. Two weeks later the ECG is within normal
lone atrial fbrillation. Anesthesia consists of preanesthetic medica-
limits.
tion with diazepam (0.2 mg/kg, IM) and butorphanol (0.2 mg/kg,
Norna! tteguar ORScomplexesfl!
96
Case 34
97
Case35
dicin
A 10-year-old MN Maltese (5 kg) presents for acute onset of vom-
systolic murmur and normal pulmonary sotunds. Indirect systolic
iting after cating chicken skin. The dog has been treated for mitral
blood pressure is within normal limits. An ECG is performed.
valve insufficiency for the last 3 years and is receiving cnalapril
Describe the arhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
(1.25 mg twice daily). Physical examination reveals a painful cra-
proach to therapy. How will the ECG and underlying heart disease
nial abdomen, fever, and bile-stained vomitus. The femoral pulses
 affect therapy? The answer and discussion appear on thc next page
are strong, rapid, and irregular. Thoracic auscultation reveals 3/6
86
Interpretation
The elevated heart rate is rnost likely due to pain and changes in
Case
The rhythm diagnosis is alrial fbrillation. The venticular rate is
plasma volume as a fesult of vomiting. The elevated heart rate is
likely not a sign of cardiac decompensation due to heart disease.
180 bpm and irregular. The QRS complexes are normal in appear-
35
ance. Ihere is an absence of P-waves. The fibrillation waves thal
invasive procedures such as central venous catheterization to mon-
are commonly seen with atrial fibrillation are not present and have
itor central venous pressure.
beenreplacedwithatnial standstifl.
50
99
Case 36
A 10-year-old FS Siamese cat presents depressed and in lateral re-
glycemia (blood glucose = 695 mg/dL), azotemia (creatinine 
cumbency after a 3-week history of increased water consumption
3.4 mg/dL), and ketonuria. An ECG is performed
and increascd urination. Mucous membranes are pale, rectal tem-
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
perature is 93°F, fenoral pulses are weak and irregular, thoracic
proach to therapy. fhe answer and discussion appear on the next
auscultation is unremarkable, and the cat is hypotensive (systolic
page.
blood pressure = 50 mmHg). Initial diagnostics reveal hyper-
100
Interpretation
ketoacidosis) and hypokalemia are common causes of ventricular
Case
arrhytlhmias. The ECG may not respond to antiarrhythnic therapy
The ECG diagnosis is multiforme ventricular tachycardia with R-
without resolution of either abnorimality. However,perfusion is
on-T phenomena (circle). The ventricular rate is 300 bpm, and
poor, and the arrhythmia is considered a malignant arrhythmia. Li-
there is evidence of poor perfusion (hypotension, lateral recum-
docaine is administered at a low dose (0.25-0.5 mg/kg, IV). Perfu-
bency, pale mucous membranes). Immediate therapy consists of
sion paramelers are monitored closely,external rewarming is ap-
oxygen, conservative Huid therapy with crystalloids (15 ml/kg, IV)
plied, and diagnostics are performed. The arrhythmia may not
and colloids (5 ml/kg, IV), and analgesia (butorphanol, 0.2 mg/kg,
improve with lidocaine therapy, and consecutive doscs are not 1cc-
ommended until other causes of the arhythmia are corrected.
mic agcnt should be administered prior to evaluation of acid-base
status and electrolytes. Metabolic acidosis (poor perfusion, diabetic
101
Medicine
Case 37
An 18-month-old unaltered female Chihuahua (1.5 kg) presents for
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
cvaluation of seizure activity that began at 8weeks of age.Physical
examination reveals a large,domed skull, open fontanelle,ventro-
Page.
lateral strabismus of both eyes,and decreased mentation.Ausculta-
tion is normal cxcept for a slow, inregular heart rate. The systolic
doppler blood pressure is I80 mmHg, and an ECG is performed.
102
Interpretation
reffex). Primary therapy would be to decrease intracranial pressure
with prednisone (decreases cerebrospinal fuid production) and
There is first-degree attioventricular (AV) block (short, thin vertical
furosemide. Administration of atropine could result in detrimental
line) and second-degree AV block (thick vertical line). The overall
S
increases in cerebral blood fow and further increases in intracra-
ventricular rate is slow (60 bpm), and the QRS complexes are nor-
nial presslre.
mal. The likely cause of the arrhythmia is increased intracranial pres-
sure resulting in systemic hypertension and bradycardia (Cushing's
103
Medicine
Case 38
A 2-year-old MN domestic shorthair cat (4.5 kg) presents in respi-
ministration results in some improvenent of the respiratory dis-
ratory distress. There has been a long history of asthma, and ther-
tress, though mucous membranes are minimally improved. The
apy has consisted of prednisone as needed for an acute crisis. The
femoral pulse is slow and irregular:
cat is currently not receiving prednisone. The cat is open-mouth
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap--
breathing with an increased inspiratory effort and an exaggerated
   e s e r u  n 
expiralory effort. Expiratory wheezes are auscultated, and there is
page.
no heart murmnur. Mucous membranes are cyanotic. Oxygen ad-
104
Interpretation
tion. Capturing the airway by intubation may be required. Antiar-
The rhythm is sinus bradycardia with paroxysmal junctional tachy-
rhythmic drugs are unlikely to be effective without adequate oxy-
8
cardia (circle). The bradycardia is likely due to severe hypoxemia.
genation.
The junctional arrhythmias are also likely due to hypoxemia and
105
Perioperative
h
E
[1
Case 39
Case
A 7-year-old MN Great Dane (50 kg) is being monitored for 24
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the next
(GDV).Anesthesia and surgery were unconplicated. A continuous
page.
ECG is being monitored during the postoperative period. The tech-
nician observes what appears to be an abnormality.
109
Interpretation
 acid-base disturbances including 1netabolic and respiratory
Perioperative
acidosis;
'The ECG begins as sinus rhythm with a heart rate of l10 bpm. An
accelerated ventricular rhythm appears in the latter half of the ECG
tracing with a ventricular rate of 110 bpm. Fusion complexes (ar-
magnesemia;
rows) occur prior to the accelerated ventricular rhythm. A fusion
·anemia due to blood loss;
complex is described as a complex that is the combination of the
*pain; and
normal sinus complex and the ventricular complex. A fusion com-
primary heart disease.
plex has no clinical significance, and no therapy is required. The
accelerated ventricular rhythm occurs at a rate that is very similar
A decision on the need for antiarrhythmic therapy is based on
to the normal sinus rate.
the collection of clinical and laboratory data. Therapy is usually not
Gastric dilatation-volvulus is a multisystenic disorder that can
warranted if clinical and laboratory values are normnal. An acceler-
result in several disorders that predispose the heart to ventricular
ated ventricular rate below 150--170 bpm does not require antiar-
arrhythmias. These include
rhythmic therapy. The acceleraled ventricular thythm with a rate
similar to the sinus rate typically results in normal cardiac output
·poor perfusion resulting in tissue hypoxia, reperfusion in-
and a clinically normal patient.
jury, and metabolic acidosis;
1t0
Case 40
A 5-year-old MN Bulldog (20 kg) is recovering from an entero-
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
tomy performed the previous day to removc a foreign object. Hy-
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the next
dromorphone (0.1 mg/kg, IV; 2 mg; every 4 hours) is being admin-
page.
istered for postoperative anaigesia, and the dog is resting
comfortably. The technician notes that the heart rate is slower than
the previous day and is more irregular. An ECG is performed.
t11
Interpretation
mal QRS cornplexes. Therefore, the origin of the escape complexes
is in or very close to the atrioventricular node. No therapy is war
T'he rhythm is respiratory sinus arrhythmia. There are junctional
ranted in this dog. Clinical parameters of perfusion (mucous mem-
escape complexes (arrows) that occur during the expiratory phase
branes, blood pressure, femoral pulse) indicate no detrimental ef-
of respiration. The heart rate increases during inspiration and de-
fect of the arrhythmia on the cardiovascular system. Administration
creases during expiration due to normal parasympathetic re-
Of a parasympatholytic agent (atropine or glycopyrrolate) could re-
sponses、 Hydromorphone is an opioid agonist that can increase
sult in sinus tachycardia and the possibility of tachyarrhythmias.
parasympathetic tone and exacerbate the respiratory sinus arrhyth-
mia. The escape complexes are identical in appearance to the nor-
112
Case 41
Case
a splenectomy. The dog presented in severe hemorthagic shock.t
the time of theECG include hypotension (indirect Doppler systolic
Initialstabilization was withhypotensiveresuscitation using het-
blood pressure = 75 mmHg), pale mucous membranes, and a
astarch (5 ml/kg) and lactated Ringer's solutiuon (LRS) (45 ml/kg)
rapid, irregular, and wcak femoral pulse.
intravenously until the systolic blood pressure was above 60
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
mmHg. The dog was hypotensive throughout anesthesia despite
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the next
therapy with Oxyglobin (4 ml/kg, IV bolus) during surgery. The
page.
113
Interpretation
combination of factors.A jugular venous catheter should be placed
erati
to monitor central venous pressure (CVP), which would provide in-
The rhythm is multiforme ventricular tachycardia with R-on-T
formation regarding the intravascular volume status. Once CVP is
00
phenomena (circle) that progresses to sustained ventricular tachy-
determined, decisions could be made regarding the use of antiar-
cardia. Hypotension may be the primary factor in the development
rhythimic dxugs. Administration of lidocaine or procainamide in a
of this arhythmia. Hypotension could be due to continued bleed-
patient with poor volume could result in severe hypotension.
ing, anemia, reperfusion injury, pain, electrolyte disturbances, or a
114
Case 42
A 6-year-old FS Bull mastiff prescnts for nonproductive vomiting
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
and abdominal distension of 4-6 hours duration. Initial diagnosis is
proach to therapy. The answer and dliscussion appear on the next
gastric dilatation-volvulus and is confirmed with a right lateral ra-
page.
diograph. Indirect systolic blood pressure is low (60 mmHg), mu-
cous membranes are pale, and the fenoral pulse is weak and irreg-
ular. An ECG is performed.
Bpecelabe,Inc.
MEDICAL.SUPPLIE
（00日)
115
Interpretation
correction of hypotension (fluid support), decompression of the
distended stomach, and analgesia (opioid agonist) prior to the ad-
ele
The ECG begins with sinus tachycardia and proceeds to paroxys-
ministration of antiarriythmic drugs.Administration of lidocaine
mal multiforme ventricular tachycardia with R-on-T phenoimena
 or procainarmide could result in worsening of the hypotension if
(sinall circle). The causes of sinus tachycardia followed by the ven-
there is not adequate intravascular volume.
tricular arrhythmia in this dog include hypotension as a result of
There are two areas of arlifact on the ECG related to movement
obstruction of venous return, blood loss, pain, electrolyie distur-
of the palient (arrow and large oval). The moverment artifact during
bances (low potassium), acid-base disturbances (metabolic acido-
paroxysmal multiforme tachycardia has resulted in the complexes
sis), and hypoxemia secondary to ventilation perfusion imbalances
being cut off at the bottom of the ECG strip.
公
as a result of the distended abdomen. Therapy includes oxygen,
,Lnc
客008]
116
Case 43
Case
A 9-year-old MN Labrador retriever is being monitored 12 hours
Describe the arrhythimia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
after successlul surgery to correct a gastric dilatation-volvulus. A
continuous ECG has been monitored since the end of surgery, and
page.
abnormalities are noticed. Physical examination reveals thc dog is
more pale than normal,cspecjally during the airhythmia.
117
perative
Interpretation
*anemia due to blood loss;
Multiforme prernature ventricular complexes (arrows) occur with a
pain; and
sinus rhiythm (circles). Several diagnostic tests are necessary to de-
· primary heart disease.
termine the approach to therapy. Gastric dilatation-volvulus is a
Laboratory results for this dog reveal normal packed cell vol-
multisystemic disorder that can result in several abnormalities that
ume and total solids, adequate analgesia, and normal artenial and
A
can predispose the heart to ventricular airhythmias including
central venous blood gas. Electrolytes reveal hypokalermia (2.6
1S
* poor perfusion resulting in tissue hypoxia, reperfusion in-
mEq/L) and normal magnesium.
b:
jury, and metabolic acidosis;
Hypokalemia can result in ventricular arrhythmias and should
al
· acid-base disturbances including metabolic and respiratory
be corrected with potassium supplementation prior to administra-
A
acidosis;
tion of antiarrhtyhmic agents.
· electrolyte disturbances such and hypokalemia and hypo-
Cr
magnesemia;
118
Case 44
Ca
ase
An 8-year-old MN Rotrweiler (45 kg) is bcing monitored following
rameters including blood pressure (110 mmHg systolic) and mu-
cous membrane color with capillary refill time (pale/pink, 2 sec-
bleeding was found on physical examination after a presentation of
onds) are within normal limits. The dog is uncomfortable in the
anorexia, lethargy, and occasional vomiting for the past 3 days.
cage and changes positions often.
Anesthesia and surgery were uneventful, and an ECG has been
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
monitored since the end of surgery 2 hours previous. Analgesia
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the next
consists of intermittent butorphanol administralion. Clinical pa-
page.
119
.1
Interpretation
+electrolyte disturbances such and hypokalemia and hypo-
magnesemia; and
The rhythm is sinus with one premature ventricular complex (thin
arrow) and a fusion complex (thick arrow) followed by paroxysmal
·primary heart disease
ventricular tachycardia. The paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia is
Immediate therapy with lidocaine (2 mg/kg, IV bolus) would be
very rapid and contains R-on-T complexes (circle)
indicated due to the rapid ventricular rate and R-on-T complexes
and normal cardiovascular parameters.
heart to ventricular arrhythmias.These include
Physical examination reveals inadequate analgesia. Butorphanol
*poor perfusion from postoperative blood loss, which can re-
is an opioid agonist-antagonist with mild to moderate analgesia. A
sult in myocardial tissue hypoxia, reperfusion injury, and
metabolic acidosis;
hours) should be administered. Reassessment of analgesia should
' pain;
commence prior to the continued administration of lidocaine Or
other antiarrhythmic agents.
· anemia;
All other laboratory diagnostics were within normal limits.
· acid-base disturbances including metabolic and respiratory
acidosis;
120
Case 45
Case
A 2-year-old FS Great Dane (40 kg) is being monitored 16 hours
time of 2 seconds, and Doppler systolic blood pressure of 120
mmHg.
continuous ECG has been monitored since the end of surgery, and
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
today you notice some abnormalities. The dog has a normal physi-
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the next
page.
121
Perioperative
Interpretation
· anemia due to blood loss;
There is sinus rhythm with an accclerated ventricular rhythm. The
*pain; and
rate of the sinus rhythm and ventricular rhythm is similar and nor-
primary heart discase.
mal. 'There is no physical evidence of perfusion abnormalities. Gas-
tric dilatation-volvulus is a multisystemic disorder that can result in
Determination of the causcs of ventricular arrhythmias will re
several disorders that predispose the heart to ventricular arrhyth-
veal thc approach to therapy. All laboratory tests are normal. There
mias. These include
is no indication for antiarrhythmic therapy in this dog unless thie
* poor perfusion resulting in tissue hypoxia, reperfusion in-
or imore rapid. Most accelerated ventricular rhythms do not require
jury, and metabolic acidosis;
therapy unless the rate is above 150-170 bpm or there is a clinical
+acid-base disturbances including metabolic and respiratory
effect as a result of the arrhythmia (poor perfusion)
acidosis;
magnesemia;
122
Case 46
Case
46
A 15-year-old FS Shih Tzu (6 kg) is recovering from a thoraco
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
tomy to perform a right pneumonectomy. Surgery and anesthesia
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the next
were uncomplicated. Analgesia consists of intraplcural bupiva-
page.
caine, transdermal fentanyl, and an infusion of morphine, lido-
caine, and ketamine. Blood pressure is normal, mucous membranes
are pink, and respirations are normal. The ECG appears abnormal.
123
Interpretation
rate increases. Atropine could be administered if the sinus rate de
erafiv
The ECG diagnosis sinus bradycardia that results in ventricular es-
fusion. Antiarrhythmic therapy with lidocaine or procainamide is
cape complexes (thick arrows). Tlherapy would consist of arousing
not indicated and could be detrimental.
the dog to deternine if the escape complexes resolve as the heart
124
Renal
Case 47
Se
A 1-year-old MN domestic shorthair cat (5 kg) presents in lateral
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
   q   a  n o  g
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the next
out of the litter box for 3 days. A large, firm bladder is palpated.
'2ed
The femoral pulse is slow and regular, and an ECG is placed.
127
Interpretation
ing membrane and threshold potential that potassium has nar-
'The ECG depicts an extremely slow idioventricular rhythm. The
Iowed. Thercfore, the action potential can act in a more normal
fashion until the potassium can be lowered. Adnninistration of in-
QRS complexes are described as sinusoidal in appearance. Hyper-
sulin (1 unit) followed immediately by 50% dextrose (5 ml) will
kalemia should be suspected. The potassium of this cat (12.1
 mEq/L) is very high, and intravenous calcium gluconate therapy
drive potassium into the cell. Fluid therapy will also decrease the
potassium. Calcium gluconate, insulin and dextrose, and fuid ther-
(0.5-1 ml/kg, IV, over 5 minutes) should be administered imrnedi-
apy should commence prior to placing a urethral cathetcl.
ately. Calcium will reestablish the normal difference between rest-
128
Case 48
Case 48
A 5-year-old MN domestic shorthair cat (5.5 kg) presents for in-
Dcscribe the arhythrmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
ahility to urinate. The owners report that the cat has been going in
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the next
and out of the lilter box for 3 days. A large, fim bladder is pal-
page.
pated. The cat is depressed but aware of its surroundings. The
femoral pulse is regular, and an ECG is placed.
129
Rena
interpretation
ECG other than potassium concenuration. Sedation or anesthesia in
The rhythm is normal sinus rhythm with a normal rate of 180 bpm.
a patient with hyperkalemia and a normal ECG could still result in
Electrolytes reveal hyperkalemia (K + = 7.5 mEq/L). Hyperkalemja
detrimental effects if the potassium is not decreased prior to the ad
ministration of anesthetic drugs.
does not necessarily produce expecled ECG changes in every pa-
tient, as there are mulriple factors involved with generation of the
130
Trauma
Case 49
Case 49
A 2-year-old MN Labrador retriever (45 kg) presents immediately
 by mask is administered. An ECG is placed as venous access is ob-
after being hit by a car. The owner reports that the dog has had dif-
tained.
ficulty breathing since the accident. Physical examination reveals
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
severe respiratory diistress with muffled pulmonary and cardiac
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the follow-
sounds. Blood is being expelled from the nose and mouth. Oxygen
ing pages.
133
Initial Interpretation
have becorne cyanotic.The ECG has also changed dramatically
The rhythm is sinus tachycardia. Potential causes include hypox-
(lower figure).
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
cmia secondary to pulmonary contusions and/or pneumothorax,
 proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the next
hypovolermia (relative or absolute), or pain.
The dog's condition worsens as Huid therapy is being adminis-
page.
tered. The respiratory rate has slowed, and the mucous membranes
134
Follow-up Interpretation
and open-chest cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) is indicated
Case
immediately. The injury to the thorax may be revealed and be re-
The rhythm is multiforme sustained ventricular tachycardia with
lieved upon entering the chest. Closed-chest CPR would be much
R-on-T phenomena (circles). The second cpisode of R-on-T results
less effective in this dog.
in ventricular fibrillation and cessation of respirations. Intubation
135
Case 50
A 2-year-old male cat (5 kg) presents after being attacked by rwo
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
dogs. The cat is recumbent with an open fracture of the right radius.
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the next
Mucous membranes are pale, no femoral pulse is palpated, and
Page.
the cat is hypothermic. You place an ECG and begin resuscitalive
tlhierapy
136
Interpretation
bated by pain. Intravascular volume therapy is instituted on a con-
servative basis during external rewarming by using crystaloids (15
The rhythm begins as sinus tachycardia (240 bpm). Several multi-
ml/kg, IV) and colloids (5 ml/kg, IV). The decision to administer
forme ventricular premature complexes occur (arrows), and there
an antiarrhythmic agent is made after rewarming and reassessment
are several episodes of R-on-T (circle).
of the cardiovascular status.Immedjate administration of an antiar-
Intravenous analgesia (hydromorphone, 0.1 mg/kg) is adminis-
rhythmic agent such as lidocaine could result in hypotension.
tered as the airhythmias could be result of pain or may be exacer-
137
Case 51
A 15-rnonth-old F mixed-breed dog (15 kg) is being treated for in-
pressure is normal, and the mucous membranes are pink with a
juries associated with being hit by a car. There is a simple, closed,
capillary refill time of 2 seconds. The femoral pulse is surong, yet
left tibial fracture that has been splinted. Initial signs of shock were
irregular. There arc no pulse deficits. Continuous ECG is being
successfully treated with colloids and analgesia. A continuous fate
monitored by telemetry
infusion (CRI) of morphine (0.12 mg/kg/hr) is being administered,
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
and a transdermal fentanyl patch (25 μg/kg/hr)has been placed.
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion begin on the next
The technician totes that while the dog is sleeping the heart rate
page.
decreases, and there appear to be pauses in the rhythm. The blood
138
Initial Interpretation
AV block. There is one junctional escape complex (thick arrow)
Case
The underlying rhythm is respiratory sinus arrhythmia as the sinus
that occurs after a nonconducted P-wave,
The dog awakens as the cage door is opened. The ECG is noted
[ate (P-waves) increases and decreases with respiration. The P-R
interval is prolonged (bars) and is described as first-degree atri-
to become more regular (page 140).
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
Oventricular (AV) block. There are occasional P-waves with no cor-
 proach to therapy The answer and discussion appear on page 141.
responding QRS complex (thin line), which defines sccond-degree
139
Trauma
140
Follow-up Interpretation
fects of the morphine. Mild stimulation (awakening) results in a
Case
relativc increase in sympathetic tone. The result is an increase in si-
The overall rhythm is normal sinus rhythm. The fist-degree AV
nus node discharge and resolution of the secondl-degree AV block
block persists (bars), and there is a movement artifact (circle). The
5
(increased conduction though thc AV node). No therapy is war-
second-degree block has resolved. The scenario is comumon with
fanted because hemodynamic variables are normal during the ar-
continuous rate infusion of opioids in stable animals. The morphine
rhythmia. Atropine could be administered as the dog sleeps. How.
can decrease sinus node discharge and can exacerbate respiratory
ever, an increase in heart rate could result in unnecessary increased
sinus arrhythmia as a result of increased parasympathetic tone.
myocardialwork.
Second-degree AV block can also occur. Sleep can intensify the ef-
141
Case52
A 6-week-old M kitten (1 kg) presents after being found outside in
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
the snow. The kitten is recumbent and has a rectal temperature that
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the next
does not register on the thermometer (< 90°F).The heart is diff-
page.
cult to auscultate, and a femoral pulse is not palpated. Blood pres-
sure is unable to be obtained.
142
Interpretation
in decreascd electrical activity of the heart.Atropine administration
would be ineffective for therapy of this rhythm as increased
The rhythm is periods of sinus arest with junctional escape com-
parasyinpathetic tone is not the cause of the conductiou distur-
plexes (thick arrows). There are two P-waves that appear to con-
bance. Aggressive cxternal and internal warning is indicated as the
duct to the ventricle in a norimal fashion (circle). The Q-T interval
primarytherapy.
(bars) is prolonged as a result of hypothermia. Hypothermia results
143
Case 53
In
Th
ve
vC
A 6-year-old MN Labrador retriever (30 kg) presents after being hit
with initial therapy, and the dog appears to be stable. Continuous
by a car. initial hemodynamic parameters included hypotension,
ECG monitoring 2 hours later reveals an abnormality.
tachycardia, pale mucous membranes, and weak fenoral pulse.
Describe the arrhythmia or conduction disturbance and your ap-
Physical examination revealed a fracture of the left femur. Initial
proach to therapy. The answer and discussion appear on the next
resuscitation consisted of oxygen, hetastarch, and analgesia with
page.
butorphanol (0.2 mg/kg, IV). Hemodynamic pararmeters improved
144
Interpretation
Determination of the causes of ventricular airhythmias will re
Case
veal the approach to therapy. Laboralory tests do not revcal severe
The underlying rhythm is respiratory sinus arrhythmja. Paroxysmal
bleeding, blood gas examination is normal, and hemodynarmic pa-
ventricular tachycardia (circles) occurs with R-on-T phenomena.
rameters are normal.
Trauma can result in several disorders that predispose the heart to
Analgesia for a femoral fracture should consist of more potent
ventricular arrhythmias. These include
agents than butorphanol. Administration of an opioid agonist such
* poor perfusion resulting in tissue hypoxia, reperfusion in-
as morphine as a continuous rate infusion (with or without lido-
jury, and metabolic acidosis;
caine and ketamine),administration of an intermittent bolus of
morphine or hydromorphone, and addition of a potent nonsteroidal
·anernia due to blood loss (intemal or at the fracture site);
anti-inflammatory agent would be recomimended prior to adminis-
·pain (inadequate analgesia);
tration of an antiarrhythmic agent. lf analgesia were assessed to be
· acid-base disturbances including metabolic acidosis;
normal, then administration of an antiarrhythmic such as lidocaine
  r  s s  s
(2 mg/kg, IV) or procainamide (6 mg/kg, IV) would be warranted.
magnesemia; and
· primary heart disease
145
Ir
Ac
Ac
Ac
AC
Ad
PV
An
An
An
Ast
Asj
Index
D
Acceleratcd ventricular rhythm,110.
Atenolol, 32. 51,53,56,6[1
Butorphanol,5,8,10,14,19.91,101,
canine, 28, 29,32, 44, 56, 60
122
Atipamezole,18
119
feline, 23
Acepromazine, 3. 5
Atrial arrhythmias
Dilliazem, 32, 36, 38. 51, 56, 60-63
Acid-basc disturbances, 87. 116, 118,
fibrillation, 26, 38, 60, 82, 84, 96. 99
Calcium channel blockers/antagonists,
Digitalis glycosides, 38, 47, 51, 56, 60.
120,122,145
futter, 6
36, 38, 47, 51, 56, 60
See also Digoxin
Acidosis
premature complexes, 46
Calcium gluconute. 76. 78, 128
Digoxin, 26, 29, 32. See aiso Digitalis
mctabolic, 101, 110 116, 118, 120,
tachycardia
Cardiogenic failure, 37. See also
glycosides
122,145
paroxysmal, 47
Congestive heart failure, 37
respiratory, 110, 118,120, 122.145
Atrial fbrillation, 26, 38, 60, 82, 84, 96,
Cardiomegaly, 25
Echocardiogram, 16, 23, 32, 34, 44, 58
Addison's disease, 76, 78
99. See aiso Atrial arrhythmias
Cardionyopathy
Echocardiography.25,28,60
Adenosine, 51, 56
Atrial futter, 6. See ulso Airial
canine
Electrical altemans, 70, 71
Analgesia, 101, 119, 120, 138, 144, 145
arrhythmias
Boxer, 44
Electrolyte disturbanccs,114, 116, 118,
Anemia, 87, 110, 114, 118, 120, 122
Atrial premature complexcs. 46
dilated, 28, 29, 32, 44, 56, 60
120, 145
Antiasrhythmic drugs
Atrial standstill, 78, 99
feline
Enalapril,37,63.98
adenosinc.51,56
Atnial tachycardia, 56
dilated,23
Endoscopy, 14, 95
beta blockers, 47, 51.56, 60, 66
Atrioventricular (AV) block
hypertrophic, 34. 36, 61. 63
Enterotomy, 11
atenolol, 32, 51, 53, 56, 60
first-degree, 9, 18,103
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR),
Escape complex/rhythnl
esmolol,51
second-degree, 18, 47, 103
135
juuctional. 68, 78, 112. 139, 143
calcium channel blockcrs/antagonists,
third-degree, 16, 24, 29, 49, 52.62
Central venous pressure, 99, 114
ventricular, 4, 24, 49, 89, 124
36,38,47, 51, 56, 60
Atrioventricular dissociation, 89
Cerebrsl blood flow, 91
Esmolol,51
diltiazem, 32,36, 38,51,56,60~63
Atrioventricular (AV) node, 6, 26
Chylous effusion, 23
Esophageal ECG, 5
verapamil, 38, 51, 56,60
Atropine, 4, 8, 9, 18, 68, 91, 103, 112,
Colloids, 87, 137, 138
Excrcise intoletancc, 30,69
digitalis glycosides, 38, 47, 51, 56, 60
124,141,143
Congestive heart Failre,29,38.See
digoxin.26,29,32
aiso cardiogenic failure
Fludrocortisone acetate (Flurinef), 76
lidocaine, 3,4, 24, 29, 31, 41, 43, 87,
Beta blockers, 47, 51, 56, 60, 66
Crystalloids, 87, 137
Furosemide, 37,90
89, 101, 114, 116, 120, 124, 137,
Blood pressure
Cushing's refex, 91, 103
Fusion complexcs, 110, 120
145
indirect, 10, 95, 115
magnesium sulfalc, 31
doppler, 19, 86. 113, 121
Desoxycorticosterone pivulate
Gastric dilatation-volvulus (GIDV), 109,
procainamide,31,32,43.114,116,
Boxer cardiomyopathy, 44. See also
(Percorten), 76
115, 117,121
120,124
Cardiomyopathy
ext1ose (50%), 76, 128
Glasgow cona score, 90
Artifact, 116, 141
Bradycardia,4,9,18,89,91,103,124
Diazepam, 8, 12, 14, 19, 91
Glycopyrolatc, 4, 112
Asthma, 104
See also Sinus bradycardia
Filated cardiomyopathy. See aiso
Asystole, 68
Bupivacaine, 123
Cardiomyopathy
Head trauma, 90
147
Hermacrhagic shock, 113
Junctional premature complcxcs. 66
Paccrraker
Reperfusion injury, 1 10, 114, 118, 122
pu
Hctastarch, 90, 144
Junctional tachycardia, 56, 66
atrial,68
Respiratory acidosis, I10, 1l8, 120,
Hydtomorphane, 3, 4, 11, 12, 17, 18.
ventricular,24,29,49, 52.62
122, 145
87,110,112,120,137
Ketamine, 10, 12,91. 123, 145
Pain, 87, 110, 114, 18, 120, 122, 134,
Respiratory distress, 23, 33, 37,39,104,
Hypercalcenaia, 26
Ketonuria, 100
137
EEE
Hyperglycemia, 100
Parasyinpathetic,4,9, 18, 51,143
Respiratory sinus arhythmia, 71, 112,
Hyperkalemia, 76. 78, 128, 130
Lidocaine, 3,4, 24, 29, 31, 41, 43. 87.
Parasympatholytic agent, 4, 112
139, 145
Hypertension, 91, 103
89, 101, I14,116, 120, 124, 137,
Paroxysmal atrial tachycardia, 47
Riglht bundle branch block, 66
Hyperthcrmia,87
145
Paroxysmal junctional tachycardlia, 105
Hlypertonic saline, 90,
Paroxysmal supraventricular
Sevoflurane,5
Hypertroplhiccardionyopathy, 34. 36.
Magnesium sulfate, 31
tachycardia, 60, 66, 68
Sinus afrest, 68, 91, 143
61,63
Mannitol, 90
Paraxysmal ventricular tachycardia. 32,
Sinus atrhythmias
Hypokalemia, 29, 101, 110, 118. 120,
Medetomidine, 17, 18
116, 120, 145
aTest, 68, 91, 143
122,130,145
Metabolic aciclosis, 10l, 110, 116, 118,
Perfusion, 112, 120, 122
bradycardia, 4, 9, 18, 89, 91, 105.
Hypomagnesemta.110, 118,120,122,
120, 122, 145
Pericardial effusion, 70
124
130,145
Mitral valve insufficiency, 37, 98
Pericardial tamponade, 70
respiratory, 71,112, 139,145
Hypotension:74,16,87,100,101,113,
Morphine, 87, 123, 138, 145
Pericardiocentesis, 70, 71
tachycarwia,11, 13,44,112, 116,
114,116.137.144
Multiforme premature ventricular
Pleural effusion, 25, 39
134,137
Hypotensive resuscitation, 1 13
complexes, 118, 137
chylous, 23
Sinus bradycardia,4,9, 18, 89. 91,105.
Hypothermia, 82, 89, 136,143
Multiforme ventricular tachycardia, 87,
Pneumothorax, 34
124
Hypothyroidism, 82
101, 114, 116, 135
Preduisone, 103, 104
Sinus tachycardia,11,13,44,112,116,
Hypovolemia, 134
Premature complexes
134,137
Hypoxemia, 116.134
Naloxone,18
atrial, 46
Sotalol,32
Hypoxia, 118, 122
Nitroglycerine, 37
inte1polated, 58
Splenectomy, 113, 119
Nodal tachycardia, 20
junctional, 66
Supraventricular tachycardia, 36, 38, 51
Idioventricular rhythm, 128
Normal simus rhythm, 6, 36, 51, 58, 110,
ventricular, 11. 13.36, 51, 53, 58,
paroxysmal.60,66,68
Inflammatory bowel disease, 96
122, 130, 141
120,137
Syncopal episodes, 28, 50, 63, 67.
Insulin, 76, 128
multifornc, 118, 137
See also Syncope
Interpolaterl premature ventricular
Onychectomy,10
Procainanide, 31,32, 43, 114,116,120,
Syncope, 42, 48, 59. See afso Syncopal
complexes,98
Opioids
124
episodes
Intracranial pressure, 91,03
butorphanol, 5,8, 10, 14, 19, 91, 101,
Propofol, 5,8, 14, 19
Isoflurane, 8, 10-12, 14, 19, 20, 96
119
Palrmonary contusions, 134
Tachycardlia
Isorhythmic atrioventricular
hydromorphone,3,4, 11.12, 17, 18,
Puhmonary edema, 25, 37
atrial,56
dissociation, 20
87,110, 112.120, 137
Pyometra, 12
paroxysnal,47
morphine, 87, 123, 138, 145
junctional,56,66
Junctional escape complexes, 68,78.
Ovariobysterectomy, 5, 8, 10
R-on-T phenomena,29,32,87,101,
paroxysmal, 105
112, 139, 143
Oxyglobin°, 113
116, 120, 135
sinus, 11, 13, 44, 112, 116, 134, 137
148
supraventricular.36, 38, 51,56, 66
Transdermmal fentanyl, 123
multiforme, 118, 137
Ventricular tachycardia, 40, 41, 44, 74.
paroxysmai,60,66.68
tachycardia, 40, 41, 44, 75. 76
76
vcntricular, 40,41, 75,76
Vagal maneuver, 51
multiforme,87,101,114,116,135
muitiforme,87,101,114,116,135
multiforme,87,101,114,116,135
Ventriculaur amhythumas, 20, 29, 32
paroxysmal, 32, 116, 120, 145
paroxysmal, 32, 116, 120, 145
paroxysmal, 32, 116, 120
bigeminy, 13
sustained,31,43,64,114,135
sustuined, 31,43,64, 114, 135
sustaited, 31, 43, 64, 114
Escape rhythm, 4,24,49, 89, 124
Ventricular escape thythm, 4, 24, 49, 89,
torsade de pointes, 31, 43
Thoracocentesis, 23
fibnillation, 54, 135
124
Verapamil, 38, 51, 56, 60
Thoracotomy, 123
premalure ventricular complexcs, 11.
Ventricular fbrillalion, 54, 135
Tursade de pointes, 31, 43
13, 36, 51,53, 58, 120, 137
?
KTHIATPIKH
EXCA
BIBAIOCHKH
149
ECG Interpretation in the Critically ll Dog and Cat is a clinical reference on the diagnosis and management of
arrhythmias occurring in critically ill canine and feline patients. Using a case-oriented approach, it provides
This book details the types of case scenarios in which arrhythmias can occur, how these arrhythmias can be diagnosed,
and what therapeutic interventions are available. The emphasis on the case scenario approach is perfcctly suited to
veterinarians and veterinary techmicians dealing with emergency events in critically ill small animal patients.
· 'The first book to cover arrhythmias caused by conditions outside the realm of cardiac disease
● Innovative case-orientated approach, providing therapeutic and management options for the arrhythmia paticnt
● An essential referencc text for all those involved with critically ill small animal patients
About the Author:
Dr. Thomas K. Day is a Diplomate, American College of Veterinary Anesthesiologists and College of Veterinary
Emergency and Critical Care. He is a consultant for the Emergency Folder of the Veterinary Information Network
IS8N0-8138-0901-0
Blackwell
Publishing
7808
A.1